Oncotarget, Vol. 7, No. 2

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Fisetin, a dietary flavonoid, augments the anti-invasive and
anti-metastatic potential of sorafenib in melanoma
Harish C. Pal1, Ariana C. Diamond1, Leah R. Strickland1, John C. Kappes2, Santosh
K. Katiyar1,3, Craig A. Elmets1,3, Mohammad Athar1,2, Farrukh Afaq1,3
1

Department of Dermatology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, Alabama, USA

2

Department of Medicine, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, Alabama, USA

3

Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, Alabama, USA

Correspondence to: Farrukh Afaq, e-mail: farrukhafaq@uabmc.edu
Keywords: melanoma, fisetin, sorafenib, EMT, invasion
Received: August 23, 2015	

Accepted: October 11, 2015	

Published: October 26, 2015

ABSTRACT
Melanoma is the most aggressive and deadly form of cutaneous neoplasm
due to its propensity to metastasize. Oncogenic BRAF drives sustained activation
of the BRAF/MEK/ERK (MAPK) pathway and cooperates with PI3K/AKT/mTOR
(PI3K) signaling to induce epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT), leading to
cell invasion and metastasis. Therefore, targeting these pathways is a promising
preventive/therapeutic strategy. We have shown that fisetin, a flavonoid, reduces
human melanoma cell invasion by inhibiting EMT. In addition, fisetin inhibited
melanoma cell proliferation and tumor growth by downregulating the PI3K pathway.
In this investigation, we aimed to determine whether fisetin can potentiate the antiinvasive and anti-metastatic effects of sorafenib in BRAF-mutated melanoma. We
found that combination treatment (fisetin + sorafenib) more effectively reduced
the migration and invasion of BRAF-mutated melanoma cells both in vitro and in
raft cultures compared to individual agents. Combination treatment also effectively
inhibited EMT as observed by a decrease in N-cadherin, vimentin and fibronectin
and an increase in E-cadherin both in vitro and in xenograft tumors. Furthermore,
combination therapy effectively inhibited Snail1, Twist1, Slug and ZEB1 protein
expression compared to monotherapy. The expression of MMP-2 and MMP-9 in
xenograft tumors was further reduced in combination treatment compared to
individual agents. Bioluminescent imaging of athymic mice, intravenously injected with
stably transfected CMV-luciferase-ires-puromycin.T2A.EGFP-tagged A375 melanoma
cells, demonstrated fewer lung metastases following combination treatment versus
monotherapy. Our findings demonstrate that fisetin potentiates the anti-invasive and
anti-metastatic effects of sorafenib. Our data suggest that fisetin may be a worthy
adjuvant chemotherapy for the management of melanoma.

INTRODUCTION

as MEK and ERK leading to cell proliferation, invasion,
and metastasis [2, 3]. BRAF also cooperates with the
PI3K/AKT/mTOR (PI3K) signaling pathway, enhancing
melanoma cell invasion and metastasis [4, 5].
To acquire invasive capabilities, primary tumor
cells undergo several morphological and molecular
transformations collectively known as the epithelialmesenchymal transition (EMT). During the process of
EMT, tumor cells lose their epithelial characteristics and
acquire mesenchymal characteristics to become invasive
[6, 7]. These morphological and molecular changes are

Over 90% of cancer-related deaths are attributable
to metastasis instead of primary tumors [1]. Metastatic
disease represents a major clinical challenge in the
treatment of cancer. Melanoma is the deadliest form
of skin cancer due to its high likelihood of producing
metastatic disease. Gain of function mutations in oncogene
BRAF has been observed in approximately 60% of
melanoma tumors. Mutational activation of BRAF results
in constitutive activation of downstream molecules such
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

1227

Oncotarget

RESULTS

regulated by a set of pleiotropically acting transcription
factors (Snail1, Twist1, Slug and ZEB1) that are
frequently expressed during EMT, leading to invasion,
dissemination, and metastasis [8, 9]. Loss of E-cadherin
and gain of N-cadherin is considered a hallmark of
melanoma metastasis [10]. Upregulated expression
of these EMT-inducing transcription factors has been
associated with poor clinical prognosis [9, 11]. During
metastatic melanoma progression, increased Twist1
and ZEB1 expression has been strongly correlated with
a loss of E-cadherin expression. In addition to Twist1/
ZEB1, Snail1 and Slug transcription factors also repress
E-cadherin expression, promote N-cadherin expression,
enhance MMPs expression, and increase cell survival.
Furthermore, during melanoma progression transcriptional
activity of ZEB1 is increased by Snail1 and Slug [12].
During melanoma progression, EMT-inducing
transcription factors (Snail1, Twist1, ZEB1 and Slug)
are regulated by BRAF/MEK/ERK (MAPK) and PI3K
signaling [2, 11]. Activation of these EMT regulators also
contributes to development of resistance to chemotherapy
[8]. Since both the MAPK and PI3K pathways induce EMT
and enhance cell invasion and metastasis, targeting these
pathways simultaneously is a promising strategy. Sorafenib
is a potent inhibitor of RAF (BRAF and CRAF) [13].
Studies have demonstrated that sorafenib induces apoptosis
in cancer cells by targeting PDGFR, FGFR, c-KIT, MET,
MAPK and other signaling pathways. Sorafenib also
inhibits cell migration and invasion through suppression
of EMT, c-MET, and MAPK pathways in different cancer
cells [14, 15]. Sorafenib also inhibits in vivo tumor growth
of different cancers implanted in nude mice by inhibiting
VEGFR and angiogenesis [16, 17]. Phase II clinical
studies have revealed that sorafenib is not effective as a
monotherapy in patients with metastatic melanoma [16, 17].
Phytochemicals offer promising options for the
management of melanoma since they can be used in
combination with lower doses of existing chemotherapeutic
drugs. Earlier, we demonstrated that fisetin, a naturally
occurring flavonoid present in fruits and vegetables possess
anti-inflammatory, anti-proliferative, pro-apoptotic and
anti-tumorigenic activities against different cancers [18˗23].
Treatment of human melanoma cells with fisetin decreased
melanoma cell invasion and EMT progression [19]. In
addition, fisetin inhibited melanoma cell proliferation and
tumor growth by downregulating the PI3K/AKT/mTOR
signaling pathway [24]. In the present study, we evaluated
the effect of fisetin (which targets PI3K signaling) in
combination with sorafenib, a multi-kinase inhibitor
of mutant and wild-type BRAF and CRAF kinases, on
melanoma cell invasion and metastasis. We found that
a combination of fisetin and sorafenib inhibited cell
migration and invasion, while abrogating EMT progression
and metastasis more effectively than individual agents
by modulating expression of EMT marker proteins and
reducing expression of EMT-inducing transcription factors.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Combination of fisetin and sorafenib effectively
inhibited migration and invasion of BRAFmutated melanoma cells
In order to invade and metastasize to internal organs,
active migration of tumor cells is an essential step [25].
Therefore, we determined the migratory ability of BRAFmutated A375 and SK-MEL-28 melanoma cells treated
with fisetin, sorafenib and their combination at relatively
non-toxic doses. Pictures were taken at 0 hr and 48 hrs after
treatment as shown in Figure 1 A. Treatment of A375 and
SK-MEL-28 cells with fisetin (10 μM) or sorafenib (2 μM)
for 48 hrs demonstrated that both fisetin and sorafenib
inhibited cell migration compared to their respective
control groups. Combination treatment was more effective
in inhibiting cell migration compared to single agents
(Figure 1A). Tumor cell dissemination starts with invasion
of the basement membranes, followed by surrounding
tissue, intravasation into blood vessels, extravasation
at different organ sites, and finally colonization [6, 25].
Chemotaxis, which is mediated through various growth
factors and their receptors, is considered as a crucial
step during tumor cell dissemination [7, 8]. Therefore,
we next determined the effect of fisetin, sorafenib and
their combination on invasion of BRAF-mutated A375
and SK-MEL-28 melanoma cells by employing Boyden
chambers in which cells were separated by matrigel
coated membranes into two chambers containing different
concentrations of growth factors. Assessment of density
and number of invaded cells on the membrane clearly
demonstrated that fisetin and sorafenib significantly
inhibited melanoma cell invasion at 10 µM and 2 µM
respectively after 24 hrs. Based on the number of invaded
cells, fisetin (10 µM) inhibited invasion of A375 cells
by 32.60% (p < 0.05) and sorafenib (2 µM) by 27.58%
(p < 0.05) as compared to control. Combination treatment
was more effective in reducing A375 cell invasion with
a 55.79% (p < 0.01) reduction when compared with
control. Moreover, the percentage of invaded cells was
significantly lower in combination treatment compared to
fisetin or sorafenib alone (Figure 1B). Similarly, in SKMEL-28 cells combination treatment was more effective in
reducing invasion (62.57%; p < 0.01) than fisetin (26.38%;
p < 0.05) or sorafenib (28.83%; p < 0.05) treated cells
(Figure 1B). The anti-invasive effects of a combination of
these agents was significantly higher (p < 0.01) than with
fisetin (10 µM) or sorafenib (2 µM) alone. Results of the
Boyden chamber invasion assay clearly demonstrated that
fisetin potentiated the anti-invasive potential of sorafenib
in BRAF-mutated melanoma cells. The anti-invasive
potential of the combination was further validated in threedimensional human melanoma skin raft culture A375
cells admixed with normal human keratinocytes that were
embedded onto a collagen-constricted fibroblast matrix.
1228

Oncotarget

Combination of fisetin and sorafenib effectively
modulated the expression of EMT marker
proteins in xenograft tumors implanted with
BRAF-mutated melanoma cells

Development of vertical invasive nodes at the epidermaldermal junction in raft cultures treated with 20 µM fisetin
and 5 µM sorafenib for 7 days was reduced as compared
to control. Moreover, when raft cultures were treated with
a combination of fisetin and sorafenib, the anti-invasive
effects were greatly enhanced compared to single agents
(Figure 1C).

We have shown that athymic nude mice implanted
with BRAF-mutated A375 and SK-MEL-28 melanoma
cells treated with fisetin (45 mg/kg, body weight) and
sorafenib (45 mg/kg, body weight) in combination
more effectively reduced tumor growth compared to
the individual agents alone [24]. The dosing for these
agents was safe and showed no apparent signs of toxicity
in these mice when the agents were used alone and in
combination. A representative picture of these tumors
is shown in Figure 3A and 3B. When sections of these
archival tumor samples were stained with EMT-related
antibodies, we found that fisetin and sorafenib enhanced
the expression of E-cadherin (an epithelial marker protein)
in xenograft tumors implanted with A375 and SK-MEL-28
melanoma cells. The combination treatment was more
effective in inducing the expression of E-cadherin than
individual agents (Figure 3C and 3D). Furthermore, the
combination treatment was more effective than individual
agents in reducing expression of N-cadherin, vimentin and
fibronectin mesenchymal marker proteins in melanoma
xenografts implanted with A375 and SK-MEL-28 cells
(Figure 3C and 3D).

Combination of fisetin and sorafenib effectively
modulated EMT marker proteins and decreased
expression of EMT-inducing transcription factors
in BRAF-mutated melanoma cells
During metastasis, highly proliferative and
relatively non-invasive cancer cells are transformed
into highly invasive mesenchymal cells via EMT
[7, 8]. Downregulation of epithelial protein such as
E-cadherin and upregulation of mesenchymal proteins
such as N-cadherin, vimentin and fibronectin are
considered as hallmarks of EMT progression [10, 11].
Activated MAPK and PI3K signaling pathways are
known to enhance EMT progression. Recently, we
showed that fisetin inhibited the expression of PI3K
and phosphorylation of AKT and mTOR in melanoma
cell lines and xenograft tumors [24]. We determined
the effects of fisetin (which targets PI3K signaling),
sorafenib (an RAF inhibitor) and their combination
on EMT marker proteins in BRAF-mutated melanoma
cells. Western blot analysis demonstrated that fisetin
and sorafenib treatment reduced the expression of
mesenchymal proteins (N-cadherin, vimentin and
fibronectin) and increased the expression of E-cadherin,
an epithelial marker protein. Combination treatment
(fisetin and sorafenib) was more effective in decreasing
the expression of mesenchymal proteins as compared to
individual agents (Figure 2A). In addition, combination
treatment was more effective in enhancing expression
of the epidermal marker protein E-cadherin when
compared to individual agents (Figure 2A). During EMT
progression, transcriptional repression of E-cadherin is
regulated by a subset of E-box binding transcriptional
factors including Snail1, Twist1, Slug and ZEB1 [9, 11].
These transcription factors are potent enhancers of
melanoma cell migration and invasion and mediate
resistance to apoptosis. Expression of these EMTinducers is regulated by MAPK and PI3K signaling,
therefore, the effect of fisetin, sorafenib and their
combination on the expression of these EMT-inducing
transcription factors in BRAF-mutated melanoma cells
was also determined. As shown in Figure 2B, fisetin
and sorafenib reduced the expression of Snail1, Twist1,
Slug and ZEB1 in BRAF-mutated melanoma cells.
Combination treatment was more effective in reducing
expression of Snail1, Twist1, Slug and ZEB1 proteins
when compared to individual agents (Figure 2B).

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Combination of fisetin and sorafenib resulted
in greater reduction in the expression of EMTinducing transcription factors
Since combination treatment effectively reduced
melanoma cell invasion and modulated the expression
of EMT marker proteins in vitro as well as in melanoma
xenografts, we next determined the effect of combination
treatment on EMT-inducing transcription factors. Studies
have shown that EMT-related transcription factors such
as Snail1, Twist1, Slug and ZEB1 are also regulated by
MAPK and PI3K signaling. Co-targeting of MAPK and
PI3K by sorafenib and fisetin resulted in greater reduction
in mesenchymal marker proteins, so tumor sections
were further evaluated for expression of EMT-inducing
transcription factors. We found that fisetin and sorafenib
treatment reduced the expression of Snail1, Twist1, Slug
and ZEB1 proteins. More importantly, their expression
was greatly reduced in combination treatment as compared
to treatment with individual agents (Figure 4A and 4B).

Combination of fisetin and sorafenib effectively
reduced MMPs expression in xenograft tumors of
BRAF-mutated melanoma cells
During cell migration, extracellular matrix
(ECM) remodeling or degradation is an essential step

1229

Oncotarget

Figure 1: Effect of fisetin, sorafenib and their combination on migration and invasion of BRAF-mutated melanoma
cells. [A] After scratching, BRAF-mutated A375 and SK-MEL-28 cells were treated with 10 µM fisetin, 2 µM sorafenib and a combination

of 10 µM fisetin and 2 µM sorafenib for 48 hrs. Images were acquired at 0 and 48 hrs under the microscope. The red lines define the areas
lacking migratory cells. A representative picture from three independent experiments is shown here. Bar = 50 μm [B] BRAF-mutated A375
and SK-MEL-28 cells were incubated with 10 µM fisetin, 2 µM sorafenib and a combination of 10 µM fisetin and 2 µM sorafenib in a
serum-reduced medium for 24 hrs in the upper chamber of a Boyden chamber while the lower chamber separated with matrigel coated
polycarbonate membrane was filled with a medium supplemented with 10% FBS. After incubation, cells were fixed and stained with crystal
violet and imaged under a microscope. A representative picture from three independent experiments is shown here. Bar = 5 μm. Average
numbers of invaded cells were determined after counting four randomly selected microscopic fields on the membrane. *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01
significant difference versus control group. #P < 0.05, ##P < 0.01 significant difference versus fisetin. $P < 0.05, $$P < 0.01 significant
difference versus sorafenib. [C] The three-dimensional human melanoma skin equivalents containing A375 cells were treated with 20 µM
fisetin, 5 µM sorafenib and a combination of 20 µM fisetin and 5 µM sorafenib for 7 days. After treatment, skin samples were collected and
H&E was performed on 5 µm thin sections. A representative picture from three independent experiments is shown. Bar  = 50 μm.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

1230

Oncotarget

Figure 2: Effect of fisetin, sorafenib and their combination on protein expression of EMT-markers and EMT-inducers
in BRAF-mutated melanoma cells. BRAF-mutated A375 and SK-MEL-28 melanoma cells were treated with fisetin (20 µM),

Sorafenib (5 µM) and a combination these agents (fisetin 20 µM + sorafenib 5 µM) for 48 hrs. 40–50µg protein from total cell lysates
was resolved over 12% Tris-glycine gels and transferred onto a PVDF membrane followed by incubation with primary antibodies of [A]
EMT marker proteins, [B] EMT-inducer proteins followed by chemiluminescence detection. After stripping, membranes were analyzed for
β-actin to confirm equal loading of protein. The immunoblots shown here are from a representative experiment repeated three times with
similar results.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

1231

Oncotarget

Figure 3: Effect of fisetin, sorafenib and their combination on expression of EMT marker proteins in BRAF-mutated
melanoma xenograft tumors. Athymic nude mice implanted with A375 or SK-MEL-28 cells were treated with fisetin 45 mg/kg

p.o., sorafenib 45 mg/kg p.o., and their combination (fisetin 45 mg/kg + sorafenib 45 mg/kg) p.o. three times/week. All the mice were
euthanized when tumor size reached 1200 mm3 in control group. [A] & [B] Images show representative tumors excised from the mice. [C]
& [D] Tumor tissues were collected in 10% formalin and blocks were prepared in paraffin and immunostaining of EMT marker proteins
(N-Cadherin, Vimentin and E-Cadherin) was performed. Images shown here are representative pictures taken from three independent tumor
samples. Bar = 20 μm.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

1232

Oncotarget

[26]. MMPs are a family of proteinases that play an
important role in remodeling or degradation of ECM
and basement membranes. Their dysregulation leads
to invasion, angiogenesis and tumor metastasis [27]. In
melanoma, MMP-2 and MMP-9 overexpression has
been associated with EMT, invasion, and metastasis
[28, 29]. In particular, MMP-2 overexpression has been
correlated with tumor progression and poor survival in
melanoma patients [30, 31]. Therefore, we determined the
expression of MMP-2 and MMP-9 in tumor sections. We
found that fisetin and sorafenib alone were able to reduce
MMP-2 and MMP-9 expression, but the combination of
fisetin and sorafenib was more effective than individual
agents in reducing the expression of these proteins
(Figure 5A and 5B).

For this, athymic nude mice were intravenously injected
with stably transfected CMV-luciferase-ires-puromycin.
T2A.EGFP-tagged BRAF-mutated A375 human
melanoma cells. The progression of lung metastasis
was monitored and quantified using a non-invasive
bioluminescence technique [32]. Bioluminescence data
at weeks 2 to 4 revealed that after tail vein injection of
melanoma cells, lung metastasis was established and
progressed exponentially in number and size in the
control group (Figure 6A and 6B). Whereas in the fisetin
or sorafenib treated group, rate and number of lung
metastases formation were slower compared to the control
group. Combined treatment with fisetin and sorafenib was
the most effective, as it almost halted progression of the
lung metastases (Figure 6C). Bioluminescence data was
further verified by necropsy at the end of the experiment
at week 4. As shown in the representative images of the
lungs, combination treatment more effectively inhibited
formation of lung metastases when compared to the lungs
of control mice. Fisetin and sorafenib alone treatment also
reduced lung metastases but not to the extent that was
observed in combination treatment (Figure 6C).

Combination of fisetin and sorafenib effectively
reduced lung metastasis of BRAF-mutated
melanoma cells injected intravenously
Lungs are the most frequent site of malignant
melanoma metastasis. Lung tumor formation after
intravenous tail vein injection of melanoma cells is the
most frequently used model to study melanoma metastasis
and to evaluate the anti-metastatic potential of therapeutic
agents [32]. Therefore, we utilized this experimental
metastasis model to test whether fisetin, sorafenib and their
combination inhibits melanoma metastasis progression.

DISCUSSION
Despite advancement in melanoma diagnosis along
with revolutionary progress in targeted therapies, treatment
of malignant melanoma after distant organ metastasis

Figure 4: Effect of fisetin, sorafenib and their combination on expression of EMT-inducing protein in BRAF-mutated
melanoma xenograft tumors. Tumor sections from the [A] A375 or [B] SK-MEL-28 xenografts of control and treated mice were

stained with antibodies of EMT-inducing transcription factors (ZEB1, Snail1, Twist1 and Slug). Images shown here are representative
pictures taken from three independent tumor samples. Bar = 20 μm.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

1233

Oncotarget

remains challenging [3, 33]. Melanoma incidence is
increasing at an alarming rate. According to a recent
estimate, 73,870 people will be diagnosed with cutaneous
melanoma and 9,940 people will die from this disease
in the USA in 2015 [34]. Caucasian populations are
approximately 10-fold more likely to develop melanoma
than deeply pigmented skin populations [34]. The 5-year
survival rate for localized melanoma patients is over 90%;
however, if the tumor metastasizes to distal organs the
survival rate drops to ~10% [3]. Relapse and aggressive
progression of melanoma occurs in most of the patients
after 5–7 months of treatment with BRAF inhibitors due
to re-activation of MAPK and/or cooperation of PI3K
and other alternative signaling pathways [4, 5, 35]. In the
present study we investigated sorafenib, a RAF inhibitor
in combination with fisetin on cell invasion, EMT and
lung metastasis of BRAF-mutated melanoma cells. Our

results demonstrate that simultaneous targeting of MAPK
by sorafenib and PI3K signaling by fisetin in melanoma
cells more effectively inhibited cell migration and invasion
when compared to treatment with individual agents.
Transformation of a non-motile polarized epithelial
phenotype to a motile and invasive mesenchymal
phenotype is frequently associated with poor prognosis
and high risk of metastasis [9, 11]. The cadherin switch
during EMT in melanoma is considered a hallmark of
invasiveness and metastatic progression [10]. Furthermore,
oncogenic BRAF signaling has been shown to suppress
E-cadherin expression and enhance melanoma cell
invasion by inducing T-Box3 transcriptional repressor of
E-cadherin expression [36]. In addition, the PI3K/PTEN
pathway also plays an important role in the cadherin switch
by suppressing E-cadherin expression and enhancing
N-cadherin expression [35]. It has been shown that

Figure 5: Effect of fisetin, sorafenib and their combination on MMP-2 and MMP-9 expression in BRAF-mutated
melanoma xenograft tumors. Tumor sections from the [A] A375 or [B] SK-MEL-28 xenografts of control and treated mice were

stained with antibodies of MMP-2 and MMP-9. Images shown here are representative pictures taken from three independent tumor
samples. Bar = 20 μm.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

1234

Oncotarget

Figure 6: Effect of fisetin, sorafenib and their combination on lung metastasis (colonization) assay in nude mice intravenously
injected with BRAF-mutated melanoma cells. Athymic nude mice were intravenously injected with 2x106 A375 cells in 0.2 ml PBS in

the tail vein. Mice were treated with fisetin 45 mg/kg p.o., sorafenib 45 mg/kg p.o., and their combination (fisetin 45 mg/kg + sorafenib 45 mg/kg)
p.o. three times/week as described in “Methods” section. [A] Mice (n = 4) were imaged to record photon emission from tumors using a
cooled CCD camera apparatus (IVIS, Xenogen) after i.p. injection of 100 µl of D-luciferin (30 mg/ml) (Xenogen, Alameda, CA, USA).
[B] Living Image software (Xenogen) was used to analyze the data. [C] At the end of the experiment, all mice were euthanized, lungs were
removed, and images were taken by digital camera. Images shown here are representative pictures taken from three mice of the same groups.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

1235

Oncotarget

sorafenib inhibits cell migration and invasion of various
cancer cells by reducing EMT [14, 15]. Our previous study
demonstrated that fisetin inhibits melanoma cell invasion
by reducing expression of mesenchymal marker proteins
and upregulating expression of epithelial marker proteins
[19]. In this investigation when a low dose of fisetin
and sorafenib were combined, combination treatment
exhibited greater reduction in mesenchymal marker
protein expression (N-cadherin, vimentin and fibronectin)
and potentiated upregulation of epithelial marker protein
expression (E-cadherin) in BRAF mutated melanoma cells
in both in vitro and in vivo xenograft tumors.
The process of EMT is driven by several transcription
factors such as Snail1, Twist1, Slug and ZEB1. Aberrant
expression of these transcription factors in melanoma
has been associated with progression of metastasis and
poor prognosis [9, 11, 37]. The transcription factor Snail1
has been associated with EMT induction, enhanced
migratory potential, and metastasis of melanoma cells
via transcriptional repression of E-cadherin expression
[38, 39]. Oncogenic BRAF in melanoma cells induces EMT
through upregulation of Snail1 expression [40]. Moreover,
cooperation of PI3K/AKT signaling also upregulates
Snail1 expression leading to PTEN downregulation in
melanoma cells [2, 41]. A growing body of evidence has
shown that sorafenib inhibits EMT, Snail1 expression,
and E-cadherin to N-cadherin switching in various tumors
[14, 42, 43]. In the present study, analysis of sorafenib
treated BRAF-mutated melanoma cells and xenograft
tumor tissues showed reduced protein expression of
mesenchymal marker proteins (N-cadherin, vimentin
and fibronectin). The protein expression of E-cadherin
(a marker of epithelial characteristics) was increased in
sorafenib treated melanoma cells as well as in xenograft
tumor tissues. Moreover, sorafenib treatment reduced the
protein expression of EMT-related transcription factors
Snail1, Twist1, Slug and ZEB1 in these samples. We found
that fisetin also inhibited expression of Snail1 in BRAFmutated melanoma cells in vitro as well as in xenograft
tumors. Moreover, a combination of fisetin and sorafenib
effectively reduced the Snail1 expression, resulting in a
marked increase in E-cadherin expression in BRAF-mutated
melanoma cells, suggesting that fisetin potentiated the EMTinhibitory potential of sorafenib. E-cadherin expression is
down regulated by Twist1, ZEB1 and Slug transcription
factors [9, 11]. Twist1 is crucial for EMT and melanoma
cell migration. Enhanced expression of Twist1 has been
associated with poor prognosis and metastasis. Twist1 can
suppress E-cadherin expression and promote upregulation
of N-cadherin and fibronectin independently of Snail1 by
ERK1/2 signaling [44, 45]. Furthermore, activated PI3K
signaling overcomes BRAF mediated senescence and
potentiates environmental escape by inducing EMT in
melanoma cells [46]. In the present investigation, when
sorafenib was combined with fisetin, fisetin potentiated the
EMT inhibitory effect of sorafenib and effectively down
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

regulated the expression of Twist1 transcription factor
in BRAF-mutated melanoma cells in vitro as well as in
xenograft tumors. ZEB1, another oncogenic transcription
factor similar to Twist1, also cooperates with BRAF
signaling and is also implicated in E-cadherin suppression,
EMT induction, and metastasis [9, 11, 47]. Expression of
ZEB1 is enhanced by another EMT-inducing transcription
factor, Slug. Slug is a direct repressor of E-Cadherin
expression through E-box interaction and promotes tumor
cell invasion and metastasis [48]. In melanoma cells, Slug
also acts as a direct transcriptional activator of E-box at the
ZEB1 promoter, and cooperatively repressed E-cadherin
expression resulting in increased migration and metastasis
of melanoma cells [12]. Slug induced upregulation of
cell invasion is AKT dependent [49]. In this study, when
fisetin was combined with sorafenib, the combination
produced greater inhibition of Slug and ZEB1 protein
expression. This demonstrate that fisetin further potentiated
the inhibitory effects of sorafenib against EMT-related
transcription factors both in vitro and in vivo.
Expression of MMP-2 and MMP-9 has also been
shown to promote cell invasion and metastasis of melanoma.
Overexpression of MMP-2 has been implicated in melanoma
progression and survival. In addition to degradation of the
extracellular matrix, MMPs expression also promotes EMT
progression [28]. Furthermore, MMPs play a critical role in
the development of malignant angiogenesis. A growing body
of evidence has demonstrated that MMPs are implicated in
the release of the proangiogenic factor VEGF [50–52]. It
has been demonstrated that sorafenib inhibits in vivo tumor
growth by inhibiting VEGFR signaling and angiogenesis
[16, 17]. This fact has also been validated by our previously
published study in which we found that sorafenib inhibited
protein expression of angiogenesis markers VEGF and
CD31 in melanoma xenograft tumor tissues. Moreover,
anti-angiogenic effect of sorafenib was greatly enhanced
when combined with fisetin [24]. It has also been shown that
EMT transcription factors activate MMPs expression. This
then leads to upregulated MMPs, which further activates
EMT transcription factors in a feed-forward loop [53].
Treatment with single agents or a combination of fisetin and
sorafenib both effectively modulated markers of EMT and
reduced transcription factors related to EMT progression and
expression of MMP-2 and MMP-9. In combination treatment
however, more significant reduction in MMP-2 and MMP- 9
levels demonstrated that the expected inhibitory effect of
sorafenib was augmented due to combination with fisetin.
More importantly, the in vitro anti-invasive effects
of fisetin and sorafenib against BRAF-mutated melanoma
were translated under in vivo conditions. Simultaneous
targeting of MAPK and PI3K, two parallel signaling
pathways involved in EMT induction, invasion and
metastasis, resulted in greater inhibition in lung metastases
of melanoma cells by sorafenib and fisetin compared to
individual agents alone. These data suggest that fisetin
further potentiated the anti-metastatic effect of sorafenib.
1236

Oncotarget

Our findings demonstrated that fisetin inhibits
melanoma cell invasion, EMT progression and metastasis
of BRAF-mutated melanoma cells by modulating
the expression of EMT marker proteins and reducing
transcription factors related to EMT. Furthermore, our
findings demonstrated fisetin’s ability to potentiate the
anti-invasive and anti-metastatic effects of sorafenib
against BRAF-mutated melanoma cells under in vitro as
well as in vivo conditions. Based on our data we suggest
that the use of the dietary compound fisetin, along with
other such cell-signaling targeted therapies may be a
promising strategy for the management of metastatic
melanoma.

PBS to remove detached cells from the plates. Cells were
then incubated in a medium containing fisetin (10 µM),
Sorafenib (2 µM) and a combination these agents (fisetin
10 µM + sorafenib 2 µM) for 48 hrs. Fisetin and sorafenib
were dissolved in DMSO and final concentration of
DMSO in each treatment was <0.1% (v/v). Cell migration
was determined by imaging the scratch under phasecontrast microscope.

Invasion assay
To evaluate the anti-invasive potential of fisetin,
sorafenib and their combination, we performed
transmembrane invasion of A375 and SK-MEL-28
melanoma cells using a Boyden chamber assay. In this
assay, two chambers were separated by matrigel coated 8
µm porous membranes. Approximately 3x104 melanoma
cells were placed in the upper chamber of the Boyden
chamber containing 10 µM fisetin, 2 µM sorafenib or
combination of 10 µM fisetin and 2 µM sorafenib in a
serum reduced medium (containing 1% FBS). The lower
chamber was filled with 110µl medium supplemented
with 10% FBS. Chambers were incubated at 37oC in a
95% humidified incubator with 5% CO2. After 24 hrs of
incubation, cells from the upper surface of the membranes
were removed with gentle swabbing. Invaded cells on the
lower surface of the membranes were fixed with chilled
methanol and stained with crystal violet (0.5% crystal
violet in 25% methanol). The membranes were then
washed with distilled water three times and mounted onto
glass slides and were examined microscopically.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Reagents and antibodies
Fisetin (purity ≥ 98%) and β-actin mouse
monoclonal antibody were obtained from Sigma-Aldrich
(St. Louis, MO, USA). Sorafenib Tosylat N Mikron (BAY
43– 90006) was obtained as a gift from Bayer Health Care
(Bayer Pharma AG, Berlin, Germany). Antibodies for
E-Cadherin, N-Cadherin, Vimentin, Snail1, Slug, Twist1,
ZEB1, Fibronectin, MMP-2 and MMP-9 were obtained
from Cell Signaling Technology (Danvers, MA, USA).
Goat anti-rabbit, rabbit anti-goat and rabbit anti-mouse
antibodies conjugated with horseradish peroxidase were
purchased from Millipore Corporation (Billerica, MA,
USA). Fluorchrome Alexa Fluor 488/594 conjugated
goat anti-rabbit, rabbit anti-goat, and rabbit anti-mouse
were purchased from Life Technologies (Grand Island,
NY, USA). Three-dimensional human melanoma skin
equivalents of A375 cells (MLNM-FT-A375) were obtained
from MatTek Corporation (Ashland, MA, USA).

Treatment of three-dimensional human melanoma
skin equivalents
The three-dimensional human melanoma skin
equivalents of A375 cells (MLNM-FT-A375) admixed
with normal human keratinocytes at a ratio of 1:5 that
were embedded onto a collagen-constricted fibroblast
matrix were purchased from MatTek Corporation
(MatTek, Ashland, MA). Inserts were cultured in MLNMFT-MM medium at 37oC and 5% CO2 in a humidified
chamber to form highly differentiated human melanoma
three-dimensional skin equivalents. The three-dimensional
skin equivalents were maintained at air-liquid interface
with the lower dermal side of the tissue exposed to media
and the upper epidermal stratum corneum exposed to
air. These skin raft cultures were treated with 20 µM
fisetin, 5 µM sorafenib or combination of 20 µM fisetin
and 5 µM sorafenib in 5 ml MLNM-FT-MM medium for
7 days. Treatment was replaced every alternate day with
freshly prepared treatment. At the end of the treatment
duration, skin from the inserts were collected, fixed in
10% neutralized formalin and embedded in paraffin.
Hematoxylin and eosin staining was performed on
5 µm thin sections after deparaffinization in xylene and

Cell culture
Human malignant melanoma cells (A375) were
obtained from American Type Culture Collection
(Manassas, VA, USA) and cultured in DMEM medium.
SK-MEL-28 cells were obtained from Alan Houghton,
Sloan-Kettering Institute for Cancer Research (New
York, NY, USA) and cultured in PRMI-1640 medium.
DMEM and RPMI-1640 medium were supplemented with
10% heat inactivated fetal bovine serum and 100 mg/ml
penicillin-streptomycin solution. Cells were maintained at
37oC and 95% humidified incubator with 5% CO2.

Migration assay
To test the anti-migratory potential of fisetin,
sorafenib and their combination, melanoma cells were
seeded in 35 mm cell culture dishes and incubated
overnight. The monolayer of the cells was scratched with a
sterile 10 µl pipette tip. Cells were then washed twice with
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

1237

Oncotarget

rehydration through graded ethanol. The skin sections
were examined microscopically for development of nodes
at the epidermal-dermal junction and vertical invasion of
metastatic melanoma A375 cells into the dermis.

then washed with TBST washing buffer and detected
by chemiluminescence using a Pierce ECL Western
Blotting Substrate (Thermo Scientific, Rockford, IL) and
autoradiography using a HyBlot CL Autoradiography Film
obtained from Densville Scientific Inc., (Metuchen, NJ).
The ImajeJ scientific software program (http://rsbweb.nih.
gov/ij/index.html) was used to measure band density.

In vivo tumor growth
Female athymic nude mice of five weeks age were
subcutaneously transplanted with A375 or SK-MEL-28
cells (2.5 × 106  A375 cells  in 50 µl DMEM + 50 µl
matrigel or 5 × 106 SK-MEL-28 cells in 50 µl RPMI +
50 µl matrigel) in each flank and divided into four groups
with six mice in each group. Mice of groups II, III and
IV were treated orally three times a week with fisetin
45 mg/kg, sorafenib 45 mg/kg, and with their combination
(fisetin 45 mg/kg + sorafenib 45 mg/kg) suspended in 5%
cremophor + 2% ethanol in water respectively. Mice of the
first group received an equal volume of the vehicle orally,
and served as control. Tumor size was recorded and the
animals were sacrificed when tumors reached a volume of
~1200 mm3 in the control group as described earlier [24].

Immunohistochemistry and immunofluorescence
staining
After harvesting, the melanoma xenograft tumors were
fixed in formalin and embedded in paraffin. Five micrometer
sections of these tumors were deparafinized in xylene and
then hydrated through a series of xylene and ethanol washes.
Sections were incubated in a citrate buffer (pH 6.0) for 30
min at 95°C for antigen retrieval. Endogenous peroxidase
activity was quenched by incubating sections with 3% H2O2
for 20 min at room temperature. After blocking, sections
were incubated overnight with appropriate dilatation of
primary antibodies followed by incubation with a secondary
antibody either conjugated with HRP or fluorochrome.
Sections were washed three times with PBS for incubation
with diaminobenzidene peroxidase substrate (DAB) or
Vectashield mounting media containing DAPI.

Preparation of cell lysates
A375 and SK-MEL-28 melanoma cells were treated
with 20 µM fisetin, 5 µM sorafenib or combination of 20
µM fisetin and 5 µM sorafenib for 48 hrs. After incubation,
the medium was aspirated and the cells were washed with
PBS (10mmol/l, pH 7.45). The cells were then incubated
in an ice cold lysis buffer containing 10 mM HEPES
(pH 7.9), 100 mM KCl, 10 mM EDTA, 20 mM EGTA,
100 mM DTT, 20 mM PMSF, 0.5% NP-40 with a freshly
added protease inhibitor cocktail containing leupeptin,
aprotinin and benzamidine for 20 min. Lysates were
collected by scraping and passed through a 21.5-G needle
to break up the cell aggregates. The lysates were cleared
by centrifugation at 14,000 g for 10 min at 4oC, and the
supernatant was collected, aliquoted, and used on the day of
preparation or immediately stored at –80oC for future use.

Generation of EGFP/luciferase reporter A375
melanoma cells
To facilitate detection and quantification of
experimental metastasis in vivo, A375 cells were transduced
with a vesicular stomatitis virus G envelope (VSV-G)
pseudotyped lentiviral vector for constitutive expression
of both firefly luciferase and enhanced green fluorescence
protein (EGFP). The vector (designated K2947) comprised
the mouse CMV promoter, followed by fire fly luciferase, the
encephalomyocarditis internal ribosomal entry site (IRES),
a puromycin resistance gene (puro) and the enhanced green
fluorescence protein (EGFP), wherein puro and EGFP were
fused in-frame at their 3′ and 5′ ends, respectively, with
the “self-cleaving” T2A peptide-coding sequence (CMVluciferase-IRES-puro.T2A.EGFP) [54]. The lentiviral
vector, the packaging construct, and the VSV-G plasmid
DNAs were cotransfected into 293T human embryo kidney
cells to create infectious, replication defective, lentiviral
vector-containing particles as described earlier [55]. A375
cells were transduced with the vector using a multiplicity
of infection of approximately 5. Stable, expression-positive
A375 cells were selected by supplementing the culture
medium with 5 µg/ml of puromycin for five days.

Western blot analysis
To perform Western blot analysis of cell lysates
prepared after 48 hrs of treatment with 20 µM fisetin, 5 µM
sorafenib or a combination of 20 µM fisetin and 5 µM
sorafenib, 40–50 µg protein was resolved over 8–12%
Tris–glycine gels and transferred onto polyvinylidene
fluoride (PVDF) membranes. The membranes were
incubated with a blocking buffer containing 5% non-fat
dry milk/0.1% Tween-20 in Tris-Buffered Saline (TBS),
pH 7.6 for 1 hr at room temperature. Membranes were
incubated over night at 4oC with appropriate primary
antibodies in a blocking buffer. After washing with TBST
for 5 mins, membranes were incubated with anti-mouse
or anti-rabbit secondary antibody horse-radish peroxidase
conjugate for 1 hr at room temperature. Membranes were
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Lung metastasis (colonization) study
Athymic nude mice (6 week old) were obtained from
the National Cancer Institute-Frederick National Laboratory
for Cancer Research and housed in animal facility of
1238

Oncotarget

University of Alabama at Birmingham under pathogenfree conditions with 12 hrs light/12 hrs dark schedule at
24 ± 2°C temperature, 50% ± 10% relative humidity.
Lung metastasis experiments in mice were performed in
accordance with the guidelines and animal protocol number
(IACUC-09709) approved by the Institutional Animal Care
and Use Committee (IACUC) of University of Alabama at
Birmingham. Mice were fed with phytochemical free diet
AIN-76 SEMI PD (Test Diet, Richmond, IN, USA) and
water ad libitum. For in vivo lung metastasis studies, on the
day of inoculation, mice were warmed briefly under a heat
lamp to dilate their veins. Each mouse was then injected
with 2 × 106 stably transfected A375 cells in 0.2 ml PBS
via lateral tail vein. Mice were randomly divided in to
four groups (n = 6 each group). Twenty-four hours after
cell implantation, mice of the first group received 100 µl of
vehicle orally and served as control. Mice of the Group II,
III and IV were treated orally with fisetin (45 mg/kg b.wt),
sorafenib (45 mg/kg b.wt.), and with their combination
(fisetin 45 mg/kg b.wt.  +   sorafenib 45 mg/kg  b.wt.)
suspended in 5% cremophor + 2% ethanol in water
respectively, three times a week. At different time points,
mice were imaged by i.p. injection of 100 µl of D-luciferin
(30 mg/ml) (Xenogen, Alameda, CA, USA). Prior to
imaging mice were anesthetized and then placed in a light
tight chamber and a cooled CCD camera apparatus (IVIS,
Xenogen) was used to detect photon emission from tumor
bearing mice at different acquisition time periods. Imaging
data was analyzed on Living Image software (Xenogen)
by drawing the region of interest over the tumor region to
obtain maximum photons per second per cm2 per steradian
as described earlier [56]. At the end of the experiment, all
mice were euthanized and lungs were removed for imaging
and further analysis.

2.	 Lin K, Baritaki S, Militello L, Malaponte G, Bevelacqua Y,
Bonavida B. The Role of B-RAF Mutations in Melanoma
and the Induction of EMT via Dysregulation of the NF-κB/
Snail/RKIP/PTEN Circuit. Genes Cancer. 2010; 1:409–420.
doi: 10.1177/1947601910373795.
3.	

4.	 Dankort D, Curley DP, Cartlidge RA, Nelson B, Karnezis
AN, Damsky WE Jr, You MJ, DePinho RA, McMahon M,
Bosenberg M. Braf (V600E) cooperates with Pten loss to
induce metastatic melanoma. Nat Genet. 2009; 41:544–552.
5.	 Silva JM, Bulman C, McMahon M. BRAFV600E
cooperates with PI3K signaling, independent of AKT, to
regulate melanoma cell proliferation. Mol Cancer Res.
2014; 12:447–463.
6.	 Thiery JP, Sleeman JP. Complex networks orchestrate
epithelial-mesenchymal transitions. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol.
2006; 7:131–142.
7.	

Yang J, Weinberg RA. Epithelial-mesenchymal transition: at
the crossroads of development and tumor metastasis. Dev
Cell. 2008; 14:818–829.

8.	 Thiery JP, Acloque H, Huang RY, Nieto MA. Epithelialmesenchymal transitions in development and disease. Cell.
2009; 139:871–890.
9.	 Puisieux A, Brabletz T, Caramel J. Oncogenic roles of
EMT-inducing transcription factors. Nat Cell Biol. 2014;
16:488–494.
10.	 Alonso SR, Tracey L, Ortiz P, Pérez-Gómez B, Palacios J,
Pollán M, Linares J, Serrano S, Sáez-Castillo AI,
Sánchez  L, Pajares R, Sánchez-Aguilera A, Artiga MJ,
et al. A high-throughput study in melanoma identifies
epithelial-mesenchymal transition as a major determinant of
metastasis. Cancer Res. 2007; 67:3450–3460.

Statistical analysis
Data are shown as mean ± SEM. Levels of
significance of differences among the groups were
calculated using Student’s t-test. p < 0.05 was considered
to be statistically significant.

11.	 Caramel J, Papadogeorgakis E, Hill L, Browne GJ,
Richard  G, Wierinckx A, Saldanha G, Osborne J,
Hutchinson P, Tse G, Lachuer J, Puisieux A, Pringle JH,
et al. A switch in the expression of embryonic EMTinducers drives the development of malignant melanoma.
Cancer Cell. 2013; 24:466–480.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS AND FUNDINGS
This study was supported by NIH Grant
R21CA173043.

12.	 Wels C, Joshi S, Koefinger P, Bergler H, Schaider H.
Transcriptional activation of ZEB1 by Slug leads to
cooperative regulation of the epithelial-mesenchymal
transition-like phenotype in melanoma. J Invest Dermatol.
2011; 131:1877–1885.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
The authors disclose that there is no conflict of interest.

13.	 Wilhelm S, Carter C, Lynch M, Lowinger T, Dumas J,
Smith RA, Schwartz B, Simantov R, Kelley S. Discovery
and development of sorafenib: a multikinase inhibitor for
treating cancer. Nat Rev Drug Discov. 2006; 5:835–844.

REFERENCES
1.	 Zheng H, Kang Y. Multilayer control of the EMT master
regulators. Oncogene. 2014; 33:1755–1763.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Wagle N, Van Allen EM, Treacy DJ, Frederick DT, Cooper
ZA, Taylor-Weiner A, Rosenberg M, Goetz EM, Sullivan
RJ, Farlow DN, Friedrich DC, Anderka K, Perrin D
et al. MAP kinase pathway alterations in BRAF-mutant
melanoma patients with acquired resistance to combined
RAF/MEK inhibition. Cancer Discov. 2014; 4:61–68.

14.	 Nagai T, Arao T, Furuta K, Sakai K, Kudo K, Kaneda H,
Tamura D, Aomatsu K, Kimura H, Fujita Y, Matsumoto K,
1239

Oncotarget

Saijo N, Kudo M, et al. Sorafenib inhibits the hepatocyte
growth factor-mediated epithelial mesenchymal transition in
hepatocellular carcinoma. Mol Cancer Ther. 2011; 10:169–177.

26.	 Deryugina EI, Quigley JP. Matrix metalloproteinases and
tumor metastasis. Cancer Metastasis Rev. 2006; 25: 9–34.
27.	 Bae SY, Kim HJ, Lee KJ, Lee K. Translationally controlled
tumor protein induces epithelial to mesenchymal transition
and promotes cell migration, invasion and metastasis. Sci
Rep. 2015; 5:8061.

15.	 Ha TY, Hwang S, Moon KM, Won YJ, Song GW, Kim N,
Tak E, Ryoo BY, Hong HN. Sorafenib inhibits migration
and invasion of hepatocellular carcinoma cells through
suppression of matrix metalloproteinase expression.
Anticancer Res. 2015; 35:1967–1976.

28.	 Redondo P, Lloret P, Idoate M, Inoges S. Expression and
serum levels of MMP-2 and MMP-9 during human melanoma
progression. Clin Exp Dermatol. 2005; 30:541–545.

16.	 Eisen T, Ahmad T, Flaherty KT, Gore M, Kaye S, Marais R,
Gibbens I, Hackett S, James M, Schuchter LM, Nathanson
KL, Xia C, Simantov R et al. Sorafenib in advanced
melanoma: a Phase II randomised discontinuation trial
analysis. Br J Cancer. 2006; 95:581–586.

29.	 Shaverdashvili K, Wong P, Ma J, Zhang K, Osman I, Bedogni
B. MT1-MMP modulates melanoma cell dissemination and
metastasis through activation of MMP2 and RAC1. Pigment
Cell Melanoma Res. 2014; 27:287–296.

17.	 Wilhelm SM, Adnane L, Newell P, Villanueva A, Llovet JM,
Lynch M. Preclinical overview of sorafenib, a multikinase
inhibitor that targets both Raf and VEGF and PDGF
receptor tyrosine kinase signaling. Mol Cancer Ther. 2008;
7:3129–3140.

30.	 Hofmann UB, Westphal JR, Van Muijen GN, Ruiter DJ.
Matrix metalloproteinases in human melanoma. J Invest
Dermatol. 2000; 115:337–344.
31.	 Malaponte G, Zacchia A, Bevelacqua Y, Marconi A,
Perrotta R, Mazzarino MC, Cardile V, Stivala F. Coregulated expression of matrix metalloproteinase-2 and
transforming growth factor-beta in melanoma development
and progression. Oncol Rep. 2010; 24:81–87.

18.	 Pal HC, Sharma S, Elmets CA, Athar M, Afaq F. Fisetin
inhibits growth, induces G2/M arrest and apoptosis of human
epidermoid carcinoma A431 cells: role of mitochondrial
membrane potential disruption and consequent caspases
activation. Exp Dermatol. 2013; 22:470–475.

32.	 Craft N, Bruhn KW, Nguyen BD, Prins R, Liau LM,
Collisson EA, De A, Kolodney MS, Gambhir SS, Miller JF.
Bioluminescent imaging of melanoma in live mice. J Invest
Dermatol. 2005; 125:159–165.

19.	 Pal HC, Sharma S, Strickland LR, Katiyar SK, Ballestas
ME, Athar M, Elmets CA, Afaq F. Fisetin inhibits human
melanoma cell invasion through promotion of mesenchymal
to epithelial transition and by targeting MAPK and NFκB
signaling pathways. PLoS One. 2014; 9:e86338.

33.	 Valastyan S, Weinberg RA. Tumor metastasis: molecular
insights and evolving paradigms. Cell. 2011; 147: 275–292.
34.	 Siegel RL, Miller KD, Jemal A. Cancer statistics, 2015. CA
Cancer J Clin. 2015; 65:5–29.

20.	 Pal HC, Athar M, Elmets CA, Afaq F. Fisetin inhibits
UVB- induced cutaneous inflammation and activation of
PI3K/AKT/NFκB signaling pathways in SKH-1 hairless
mice. Photochem Photobiol. 2015; 91:225–234.

35.	 Hao L, Ha JR, Kuzel P, Garcia E, Persad S. Cadherin
switch from E- to N-cadherin in melanoma progression is
regulated by the PI3K/PTEN pathway through Twist and
Snail. Br J Dermatol. 2012; 166:1184–1197.

21.	 Syed DN, Afaq F, Maddodi N, Johnson JJ, Sarfaraz S,
Ahmad A, Setaluri V, Mukhtar H. Inhibition of human
melanoma cell growth by the dietary flavonoid fisetin
is associated with disruption of Wnt/β-catenin signaling
and decreased Mitf levels. J Invest Dermatol. 2011;
131:1291– 1299.

36.	 Boyd SC, Mijatov B, Pupo GM, Tran SL, Gowrishankar K,
Shaw HM, Goding CR, Scolyer RA, Mann GJ, Kefford RF,
Rizos H, Becker TM. Oncogenic B-RAF(V600E) signaling
induces the T-Box3 transcriptional repressor to repress
E-cadherin and enhance melanoma cell invasion. J Invest
Dermatol. 2013; 133:1269–1277.

22.	 Suh Y, Afaq F, Johnson JJ, Mukhtar H. A plant flavonoid
fisetin induces apoptosis in colon cancer cells by inhibition
of COX2 and Wnt/EGFR/NF-kappaB-signaling pathways.
Carcinogenesis. 2009; 30:300–307.

37.	 Tulchinsky E, Pringle JH, Caramel J, Ansieau S. Plasticity
of melanoma and EMT-TF reprogramming. Oncotarget.
2014; 5:1–2. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.1662.

23.	 Strickland LR, Pal HC, Elmets CA, Afaq F. Targeting
drivers of melanoma with synthetic small molecules and
phytochemicals. Cancer Lett. 2015; 359:20–35.

38.	 Kim JE, Leung E, Baguley BC, Finlay GJ. Heterogeneity of
expression of epithelial-mesenchymal transition markers in
melanocytes and melanoma cell lines. Front Genet. 2013;
4:97.

24.	 Pal HC, Baxter RD, Hunt KM, Agarwal J, Elmets CA,
Athar M, Afaq F. Fisetin, a phytochemical, potentiates
sorafenib-induced apoptosis and abrogates tumor growth
in athymic nude mice implanted with BRAF-mutated
melanoma cells. Oncotarget. 2015; 6:28296–28311.
doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.5064.

39.	 Cano A, Perez-Moreno MA, Rodrigo I, Locascio A, Blanco
MJ, del Barrio MG, Portillo F, Nieto MA. The transcription
factor snail controls epithelial-mesenchymal transitions
by repressing E-cadherin expression. Nat Cell Biol. 2000;
2:76–83.

25.	 van Zijl F, Krupitza G, Mikulits W. Initial steps of
metastasis: cell invasion and endothelial transmigration.
Mutat Res. 2011; 728:23–34.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

40.	 Massoumi R, Kuphal S, Hellerbrand C, Haas B, Wild P,
Spruss T, Pfeifer A, Fässler R, Bosserhoff AK. Downregulation of CYLD expression by Snail promotes tumor
1240

Oncotarget

progression in malignant melanoma. J Exp Med. 2009;
206:221–232.

48.	 Bolos V, Peinado H, Pérez-Moreno MA, Fraga MF,
Esteller M, Cano A. The transcription factor Slug
represses E-cadherin expression and induces epithelial to
mesenchymal transitions: a comparison with Snail and E47
repressors. J Cell Sci. 2003; 116:499–511.

41.	 Shtivelman E, Davies MQ, Hwu P, Yang J, Lotem M, Oren
M, Flaherty KT, Fisher DE. Pathways and therapeutic
targets in melanoma. Oncotarget. 2014; 5:1701–1752.
doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.1892.

49.	 Fenouille N, Tichet M, Dufies M, Pottier A, Mogha A,
Soo JK, Rocchi S, Mallavialle A, Galibert MD, Khammari
A, Lacour JP, Ballotti R, Deckert M, et al. The epithelialmesenchymal transition (EMT) regulatory factor SLUG
(SNAI2) is a downstream target of SPARC and AKT in
promoting melanoma cell invasion. PLoS One. 2012;
7:e40378.

42.	 Chen YL, Lv J, Ye XL, Sun MY, Xu Q, Liu CH, Min LH, Li
HP, Liu P, Ding X. Sorafenib inhibits transforming growth
factor β1-mediated epithelial-mesenchymal transition
and apoptosis in mouse hepatocytes. Hepatology. 2011;
53:1708–1718.
43.	 Chen YL, Zhang X, Bai J, Gai L, Ye XL, Zhang L, Xu Q,
Zhang YX, Xu L, Li HP, Ding X. Sorafenib ameliorates
bleomycin-induced pulmonary fibrosis: potential roles in
the inhibition of epithelial-mesenchymal transition and
fibroblast activation. Cell Death Dis. 2013; 4:e665.

50.	 Yoon SO, Park SJ, Yun CH, Chung AS. Roles of matrix
metalloproteinases in tumor metastasis and angiogenesis.
J Biochem Mol Biol. 2003; 36:128–137.
51.	 Rundhaug JE. Matrix metalloproteinases and angiogenesis.
J Cell Mol Med. 2005; 9:267–285.

44.	 Weiss MB, Abel EV, Mayberry MM, Basile KJ, Berger AC,
Aplin AE. TWIST1 is an ERK1/2 effector that promotes
invasion and regulates MMP-1 expression in human
melanoma cells. Cancer Res. 2012; 72:6382–6392.

52.	 Deryugina EI, Quigley JP. Pleiotropic roles of matrix
metalloproteinases in tumor angiogenesis: contrasting,
overlapping and compensatory functions. Biochim Biophys
Acta. 2010; 1803:103–120.

45.	 Yang J, Mani SA, Donaher JL, Ramaswamy S, Itzykson RA,
Come C, Savagner P, Gitelman I, Richardson A, Weinberg
RA. Twist, a master regulator of morphogenesis, plays an
essential role in tumor metastasis. Cell. 2004; 117:927–939.

53.	 De Craene B, Berx G. Regulatory networks defining EMT
during cancer initiation and progression. Nat Rev Cancer.
2013; 13:97–110.

46.	 Vredeveld LC, Possik PA, Smit MA, Meissl K, Michaloglou
C, Horlings HM, Ajouaou A, Kortman PC, Dankort
D, McMahon M, Mooi WJ, Peeper DS. Abrogation of
BRAFV600E-induced senescence by PI3K pathway
activation contributes to melanomagenesis. Genes Dev.
2012; 26:1055–1069.

54.	 Szymczak AL, Workman CJ, Wang Y, Vignali KM,
Dilioglou S, Vanin EF, Vignali DA. Correction of multigene deficiency in vivo using a single ‘self-cleaving’ 2A
peptide-based retroviral vector. Nat Biotechnol. 2004;
22:589–594.
55.	 Zufferey R, Nagy D, Mandel RJ, Naldini L, Trono D.
Multiply attenuated lentiviral vector achieves efficient gene
delivery in vivo. Nat Biotechnol. 1997; 15:871–875.

47.	 Aigner K, Dampier B, Descovich L, Mikula M, Sultan A,
Schreiber M, Mikulits W, Brabletz T, Strand D, Obrist P,
Sommergruber W, Schweifer N, Wernitznig A, et al. The
transcription factor ZEB1 (deltaEF1) promotes tumour
cell dedifferentiation by repressing master regulators of
epithelial polarity. Oncogene. 2007; 26:6979–6988.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

56.	 Zinn KR, Chaudhuri TR, Szafran AA, O’Quinn D,
Weaver C, Dugger K, Lamar D, Kesterson RA, Wang X,
Frank SJ. Noninvasive bioluminescence imaging in small
animals. ILAR J. 2008; 49:103–115.

1241

Oncotarget

