Oncotarget, Vol. 7, No. 6

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Novel strategies to target the ubiquitin proteasome system in
multiple myeloma
Susanne Lub1, Ken Maes1, Eline Menu1, Elke De Bruyne1, Karin Vanderkerken1 and
Els Van Valckenborgh1
1

Laboratory of Hematology and Immunology, Myeloma Center Brussels, Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Brussels, Belgium

Correspondence to: Els Van Valckenborgh, email: Els.Van.Valckenborgh@vub.ac.be
Keywords: ubiquitin proteasome system, multiple myeloma
Received: September 11, 2015	

Accepted: November 23, 2015	

Published: December 18, 2015

ABSTRACT
Multiple myeloma (MM) is a hematological malignancy characterized by the
accumulation of plasma cells in the bone marrow (BM). The success of the proteasome
inhibitor bortezomib in the treatment of MM highlights the importance of the ubiquitin
proteasome system (UPS) in this particular cancer. Despite the prolonged survival of
MM patients, a significant amount of patients relapse or become resistant to therapy.
This underlines the importance of the development and investigation of novel targets
to improve MM therapy. The UPS plays an important role in different cellular processes
by targeted destruction of proteins. The ubiquitination process consists of enzymes
that transfer ubiquitin to proteins targeting them for proteasomal degradation. An
emerging and promising approach is to target more disease specific components of
the UPS to reduce side effects and overcome resistance. In this review, we will focus
on different components of the UPS such as the ubiquitin activating enzyme E1,
the ubiquitin conjugating enzyme E2, the E3 ubiquitin ligases, the deubiquitinating
enzymes (DUBs) and the proteasome. We will discuss their role in MM and the
implications in drug discovery for the treatment of MM.

THE UBIQUITIN PROTEASOME SYSTEM
(UPS)

amino acids and contains seven lysine residues on which
other ubiquitin molecules can be conjugated (Figure
1A). As illustrated in figure 1B: the substrate protein
can be modified by: i) mono-ubiquitination: a single
ubiquitin is linked to the protein; ii) multi-ubiquitination:
multiple single ubiquitins are linked to the protein or
iii) poly-ubiquitination: a poly-ubiquitin chain is linked
to the protein [4]. The type of ubiquitination determines
the fate and functional outcome of the protein. Monoubiquitination is involved in different cellular processes
such as endocytosis, DNA repair, histon regulation and
protein transport. Multi-ubiquitination is also implicated
in endocytosis. By contrast, poly-ubiquitin chains formed
on lysine 48 (K48) of ubiquitin have a well-known role
in targeted protein degradation by the 26S proteasome,
whereas poly-ubiquitin chains formed through lysine 63
(K63) are involved in DNA repair and endocytosis [1,
2, 4, 5]. This ubiquitination process can be reversed by
deubiquitinating enzymes (DUBs). The balance between
ubiquitination and deubiquitination activities regulates
the level and activity of the protein substrates and thus
cell homeostasis [2]. A schematic overview of the
ubiquitination process is presented in Figure 2.

The UPS is responsible for regulated proteolysis and
therefore plays a key role in different biological processes
such as cell cycle progression, receptor down-regulation,
gene transcription and apoptosis by selectively targeting
cellular proteins for degradation [1]. This process includes
two specific and sequential steps: ubiquitination and
proteasomal degradation.

Ubiquitination
Ubiquitination is a stepwise cascade of enzymatic
reactions and requires the ubiquitin activating enzyme
(E1), ubiquitin conjugating enzyme (E2) and the
ubiquitin ligase (E3). First E1 activates ubiquitin in an
ATP-dependent manner and connects it to E2, which
subsequently forms a complex with E3 and the target
protein (or substrate) [2, 3]. The activated ubiquitin
is then transferred to a lysine (K) residue on the target
protein. Ubiquitin is a small protein composed of 76
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

6521

Oncotarget

Proteasomal degradation

Ciechanover and Irwin Rose received a Nobel prize in
chemistry for the discovery of ubiquitin-mediated protein
degradation, emphasizing the importance of this pathway
in cell physiology [8].

Proteins with a poly-ubiquitination at K48 of the
ubiquitin will be degraded by the 26S proteasome [4].
The 26S proteasome also known as the “proteasome”
is a large (more than 2000 kDA) multi-protein complex
present in the nucleus and cytoplasm of all eukaryotic
cells [4, 6]. It is composed of one 20S core particle and
two 19S regulatory particles. The 20S core particle is
composed of four rings creating a proteolytic cylinder.
The two outer rings, also called α-rings, are each formed
by seven distinct α-subunits and serve as a docking
domain for the 19S regulatory particle. The two inner
β-rings are each formed by seven distinct β-subunits
and are responsible for proteolysis. Three of these
β-subunits (β1, β2 and β5) contain a catalytic activity
with specific substrate specificity: a chymotrypsin-like,
trypsin-like and peptidylglutamyl-peptide hydrolyzing
activity, respectively [7]. In Figure 3 the composition
of the proteasome is illustrated. The 19S regulatory
particle binds a polyubiquitin chain and cleaves it from
the substrate and recycles the ubiquitin. The substrate is
then denaturated/unfolded and subsequently degraded into
small peptides [6]. Interestingly, Avram Hershko, Aaron

Ubiquitin-like proteins (UBLs)
In the early eighties the ubiquitin-like proteins
(UBLs) were discovered [9]. UBLs are molecules that
modify molecular targets in a similar way as ubiquitin.
All the UBLs have basically the same three-dimensional
structure and are attached to substrates via related
enzymatic pathways as ubiquitin. The UBLs conjugation
pathways have their own specific E1, E2, E3 and
deconjugating enzymes. UBLSs such as NEDD8, SUMO,
ISG15 and Atg8 regulate many cellular processes including
transcription, DNA repair, signal transduction, autophagy,
and cell-cycle control [9, 10]. Therefore it is not surprising
that the (mal)function of UBLs are associated with various
human diseases. There is a functional crosstalk between
the UBL and ubiquitin conjugating pathway. For instance,
the activation of the cullin-RING ligases (CRLs), an E3
ubiquitin ligase, requires the modification of cullin with
NEDD8 [11, 12].

Figure 1: different forms of ubiquitin modification. A. Ubiquitin is composed of 76 amino acids and contains seven lysine residues

on which other ubiquitin molecules can be conjugated. B. A single ubiquitin is linked to a lysine (K) residue on the protein during monoubiquitination. Mono-ubiquitination is involved in endocytosis, DNA repair, histon regulation and protein transport. Multi-ubiquitination
is obtained when multiple single ubiquitins are linked to different lysine residues on the protein and is implicated in endocytosis. However
poly-ubiquitination is obtained when a poly-ubiquitin chain is linked to the protein. Poly-ubiquitin chains formed on lysine 48 (K48) of
ubiquitin have a well-known role in targeted protein degradation by the 26S proteasome, whereas poly-ubiquitin chains formed through
lysine 63 (K63) are involved in DNA repair and endocytosis.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

6522

Oncotarget

TARGETING
THE
UBIQUITIN
PROTEASOME SYSTEM IN MM

1% of all cancers and 13% of all hematological cancers
[15]. In 2012, the incidence rate per 100.000 citizens
was 5.3 and 3.8 in respectively Belgium and Europe
[16]. It primary affects elderly people with a median age
of 65 years at diagnosis and is slightly more common
in men than in women [17]. There are racial differences
observed in the incidence of MM. It is twice as common
in African Americans compared to Caucasians which
makes it the most frequent hematological malignancy in
this racial group [13, 18]. MM usually evolves from an
asymptomatic plasma cell dyscrasia called monoclonal
gammopathy of undetermined significance (MGUS) [19].
MGUS is defined by the presence of serum M-protein (<
3g/dL), less than 10% clonal plasma cell in the BM and
importantly the absence of the typical MM-related endorgan damage [20]. The risk of MGUS patients to progress
to MM (or other related diseases) is approximately 1%
per year [19, 21]. In some patients MM is preceded by

Multiple myeloma
Multiple myeloma is a malignant disease of
neoplastic plasma cells with a strong tropism for the bone
marrow (BM) and is characterized by the presence of
monoclonal immunoglobulins in the blood and/or urine
[13]. The disease typically involves end-organ damage also
referred to as the CRAB criteria: hyperCalcemia, Renal
failure, Anemia and Bone lesions. MM is characterized
by the presence of M-protein in serum or urine, more
than 10% monoclonal plasma cells in the BM and the
presence of end-organ damage [14]. MM is the second
most common hematological malignancy and accounts for

Figure 2: illustration of the ubiquitin proteasome system (UPS). The ubiquitin (Ub) is first activated by E1 in an ATP-dependent

manner. The activated ubiquitin is then transferred to E2. E3 forms a complex with the target protein (or substrate) and recruits the E2ubiquitin complex. The activated ubiquitin is then transferred from E2 to the target protein. This ubiquitination process can be reversed
by deubiquitinating enzymes (DUBs). Finally, the ubiquitinated target gets recognized and degraded by the 26S proteasome. Several
compounds targeting E1, E2, E3, DUBs and the proteasome have been studied, from which some of them are currently approved for the
treatment of MM, while others are still under (pre)-clinical investigation.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

6523

Oncotarget

an intermediate, asymptomatic but more advanced stage
known as smoldering MM (SMM). SMM is characterized
by a high serum M-protein (≥ 3g/dL), ≥ 10% monoclonal
plasma cells in the BM and importantly the absence of the
typical MM-related end-organ damage [22]. Up till now
SMM patients were closely monitored until the disease
progresses to symptomatic MM, after which treatment
was initiated [15, 22]. However, recently the International
Myeloma Working Group (IMWG) added additional
features as criteria of clinical diagnosis of treatment
requiring MM. This other myeloma defining events were
associated with an 80% risk of disease progression within
2 years and include: clonal BM plasma cell percentage
≥ 60; an involved/uninvolved free light chain (FLC)
ratio of ≥100; more than one focal BM lesion detected
by MRI. This novel myeloma defining events identify a
subset of patients previously viewed as SMM that are now
considered as MM [23]. This was based on a recent study
that demonstrated that treatment of high-risk SMM with
lenalidomide/dexamethasone delays progression to active
disease and increases overall survival [24].
In some advanced cases, MM cells become
independent of the BM stroma cells which results in

extramedullary disease and secondary plasma cell
leukemia [25]. The BM microenvironment plays an
important role in the survival and progression of MM
cells. The BM niche consists of cell-cell and cell-matrix
interactions, growth factors and cytokines. Osteoclasts,
osteoblasts, endothelial cells, fibroblast, immune cells
and adipocytes all constitute to the cellular compartment
of the BM. A complex network of fibronectin, laminin
and collagen form the extracellular compartment. There
is a bidirectional signaling loop between MM and the
BM microenvironmental cells, thereby promoting tumor
proliferation and growth, drug resistance, homing of the
MM cells, angiogenesis and bone lesions [13, 26]. MM
is a very heterogeneous disease with variable clinical
and biological characteristics, response to treatment and
survival outcomes among patients. This has mainly been
attributed to alterations in molecular characteristics of the
plasma cells. Some recurrent genetic abnormalities can
be found in MM such as hyperdiploidy (associated with
multiple trisomies), loss of chromosome 13, translocations
affecting the Ig heavy chain (IgH) locus (14q32) [27, 28].
An essential part of the management of MM disease
is high-dose therapy (melphalan) followed by autologous

Figure 3: composition of the proteasome. The proteasome consists of a 20S core particle and two 19S regulatory particles. The 20S

core particle is composed of four rings creating a cylinder where the proteolysis occurs. The two α-rings are each formed by seven distinct
α-subunits and serve as a docking domain for the 19S regulatory particle. The catalytic chamber is formed by the two inner β-rings, which
are each formed by seven distinct β-subunits. The 19S regulatory particle binds a polyubiquitin chain and cleaves and recycles the ubiquitin.
The substrate is then denaturated or unfolded and fed into the catalytic chamber where it is degraded into small peptides.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

6524

Oncotarget

stem cell transplantation. MM patients are considered
eligible for transplantation when they are younger than 6570 years, their organs are functioning adequate and they
have no comorbidities. A major advance in the treatment
of MM this past two decades is the use of novel drugs
like the immunomodulatory drugs (thalidomide and
lenalidomide) and the proteasome inhibitors (bortezomib
and carfilzomib) as frontline therapy in transplant as well
as in non-transplant candidates. The introduction of these
agents have considerably improved complete response
rates, time to progression, progression-free survival and
overall survival [13, 15].

that bortezomib could be promising in especially MM and
therefore phase 1-3 clinical trials were quickly initiated
[38-41]. In 2003, bortezomib was FDA approved for
the treatment of relapsed/refractory MM [42]. Later on,
it was approved for relapsed and newly diagnosed MM
patients in respectively 2005 and 2008 [41, 43]. Although
bortezomib significantly improved the survival of MM
patients, there are still some challenges to overcome.
First of all, bortezomib is associated with peripheral
neuropathy in 37-44% of the MM patients. Bortezomibinduced peripheral neuropathy (BIPN) can really
affect the quality of life of the patient due to the severe
pain. There have been many attempts to manage the
BIPN, such as co-treatment with the heat shock protein
inhibitor tanespimycin which appears to reduce the
incidence of BIPN [44]. Moreover subcutaneous instead
of intravenous administration of bortezomib has shown
to reduce the incidence of BIPN [45]. Also the second
generation proteasome inhibitors carfilzomib and NPI0052 showed reduced incidence of peripheral neuropathy
[44]. A second challenge is the fact that bortezomib is not
universally effective. Not all patients are responsive and
the responders eventually relapse [46]. This has led to
many clinical trials in MM combining bortezomib with
other agents to enhance efficacy [47].
Ixazomib citrate (MLN9708) is the first oral
proteasome inhibitor under clinical investigation in
MM. MLN9708 is also a boronate proteasome inhibitor
but with a different physicochemical profile. MLN9708
(ixazomib citrate) is directly hydrolyzed in plasma to the
biologically active form MLN2238 (ixazomib). MLN2238
preferentially and reversibly inhibits the β5 chymotrypticlike subunit of the proteasome with similar potency and
selectivity as bortezomib; but it has a significantly shorter
dissociation half-life. This shorter half-life is thought to
improve tissue distribution [48]. Ixazomib has potent
in vivo and in vitro anti-MM effects and has evidenced
clinical anti-MM activity in patients [49-52]. In Phase
1/2 clinical studies ixazomib had a good safety profile
with limited peripheral neuropathy. These trials showed
that ixazomib exerted anti-MM activity as a single agent
in relapsed/refractory MM and in combination with
lenalidomide and dexamethasone in newly diagnosed
patients [50, 52]. Ixazomib is currently entering phase 3
clinical trial for the treatment of MM (https://clinicaltrials.
gov).
Delanzomib (CEP-18770) is an orally bioavailable
boronic-acid containing proteasome inhibitor that similar
to bortezomib reversibly inhibits the chymotrypsin
activity of the proteasome. Delanzomib has potent in vitro
anti-MM effects as a single agent and in combination
with bortezomib or melphalan [53, 54]. Importantly
delanzomib showed favorable cytotoxicity against other
cell types from the BM, inhibited angiogenesis and
repressed RANKL-induced osteoclastogenesis [54]. In
different in vivo studies delanzomib reduced tumor growth

Targeting proteasomal degradation in MM:
proteasome inhibitors
The final step in the UPS pathway is the protein
degradation by the proteasome. The proteasome was the
first element of the UPS demonstrated to be a therapeutic
target. Proteasome inhibitors were first created to
investigate the function of the proteasome catalytic
activity but were soon to be found interesting agents for
cancer therapy [2]. MM cells were particularly found
to be susceptible to proteasome inhibition because they
are proliferative, they over-produce defective proteins
which need to be degraded by the proteasome and they
up-regulate signaling pathways dependent on the 26S
proteasome [29]. Different proteasome inhibitors are
currently used for the treatment of MM and several
new generation proteasome inhibitors are under clinical
investigation. Here below we will discuss the different
classes of proteasome inhibitors.
Boronates
Bortezomib is a dipeptide boronic acid proteasome
inhibitor. It reversibly inhibits the chymotrypsin-like
activity of the 20S proteasome. The first in vitro study
with bortezomib in MM demonstrated that numerous
cellular processes were affected by the accumulation of
intracellular proteins. Moreover bortezomib treatment of
MM inhibited growth, induced apoptosis and overcame
drug resistance [30]. The anti-tumor effect of bortezomib
has been attributed to alterations of the NF-κB activity
[31], accumulation of cell cycle proteins [30], a disturbed
balance between pro- and anti-apoptotic proteins [32, 33],
stimulation of endoplasmic reticulum stress [34], and
impairment of the DNA repair pathway in the MM cells
[35]. Bortezomib also inhibited the paracrine growth of
MM cells by decreasing the adherence of MM cells to
BMSCs and inhibiting NF-κB dependent IL-6 secretion
by the stromal cells [30]. Moreover bortezomib also
induced apoptosis in endothelial cells and decreases
VEGF secretion, resulting in reduced angiogenesis
[36]. Osteoblast differentiation and activity increased
upon bortezomib treatment leading to increased bone
formation [37]. These preclinical studies demonstrated
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

6525

Oncotarget

resistant MM cell lines and in an in vivo mouse model
[65]. Moreover it acts synergistically with bortezomib and
lenalidomide [66, 67]. Marizomib is currently in phase
1/2 clinical trial for the treatment of relapsed or relapsed/
refractory MM (https://clinicaltrials.gov).
Despite the promising clinical advances, most of the
MM patients relapse and die of the disease. This highlights
the importance of the development and investigation of
novel targets and treatment options for MM patients.
The increased survival of MM patients by the addition
of the proteasome inhibitor bortezomib to the treatment,
underlines the importance of the UPS in MM cells. An
emerging and promising approach is to target more disease
specific components of the UPS to reduce side effects and
overcome resistance. The following section will link UPS
components with MM and emphasize their therapeutic
potential.

as a single agent or in combination with bortezomib,
melphalan, lenalidomide and dexamethasone [53-55].
Delanzomib showed a favorable safety profile with lack
of neurotoxicity in relapsed/refractory MM patients during
a phase 1 trial. However a dose-limiting skin rash was
observed in approximately half of the patients [56]. A
second phase 1/2 trial has been started but terminated due
to unmanageable toxicity [57].
Epoxyketones
Carfilzomib is a tetrapeptide epoxyketone that
unlike bortezomib irreversibly binds and selectively
inhibits the chymotrypsin-like activity of the 20S
proteasome leading to a more sustained proteasome
inhibition [58]. Carfilzomib has shown to induce apoptosis
and growth arrest in human MM cells [58, 59]. Moreover
it was effective in bortezomib resistant MM cells and
acted synergistically with dexamethasone to induce
cell death [59]. Carfilzomib has been FDA approved
under accelerated procedure in 2012 for the treatment of
MM patients who received at least two prior therapies,
including bortezomib and an immunomodulatory drug,
and who have disease progression on or within 60 days
after the completion of the last therapy [60]. Currently
carfilzomib is under extensive investigation in different
clinical trials in relapsed/refractory and previously
untreated MM and many other cancer types (https://
clinicaltrials.gov).
Because of the poor oral bioavailability of
carfilzomib, it is administrated intravenously. To
increase the flexibility of dosing and the convenience for
patients an orally bioavailable derivate of carfilzomib,
oprozomib (ONX0912) was developed [61]. Oprozomib
is an epoxyketone-based proteasome inhibitor and was
as potent as carfilzomib to kill MM cells. Moreover
oprozomib increased the anti-MM activity of bortezomib,
lenalidomide, dexamethasone, and a pan-histone
deacetylase inhibitor. Animal studies showed that
oprozomib was able to reduce tumor progression and
increase survival [62]. In addition to the anti-MM effect,
oprozomib decreased the myeloma-associated bone
disease [63]. Currently oprozomib is in phase 1/2 trial for
relapsed/refractory, relapsed and newly diagnosed MM
patients as single agent or in combination with other antiMM drugs (https://clinicaltrials.gov).

UBIQUITIN AND DEUBIQUITINATING
ENZYMES IN MM: NOVEL THERAPEUTIC
OPPORTUNITIES
E1 ubiquitin activating enzymes
The first step in the ubiquitin conjugation pathway
is the activation of ubiquitin in an ATP-dependent manner.
Initially E1 ubiquitin activating enzyme binds ATP and
adenylates the C-terminal glycine of ubiquitin, which then
forms a covalent enzyme-ubiquitin thioester bond between
the catalytic cysteine of E1 and ubiquitin [68]. Currently
there are two human ubiquitin E1 enzymes identified,
UBA1 and UBA6, of which UBA1 is the principle
isoform for protein degradation [69, 70]. Knockdown of
E1 resulted in a decreased viability of MM and leukemia
cells suggesting that it could be an interesting target [70].
There are three possible approaches to inhibit ubiquitin
activation. First the binding of ATP to the E1 enzyme
may be blocked by an ATP-competitive small molecule
inhibitor. Second the binding of ubiquitin to E1 could be
blocked by targeting the active thiol site. Finally the E1E2 interaction can be blocked [68, 71]. Up till now four
inhibitors of E1 ubiquitin activating enzyme have been
identified, Pyr-41, NSC624206, JS-K and PPZD-4409 [70,
72-74]. Pyr-41 and NSC624206 were initially discovered
as inhibitors of respectively p53 and p27 ubiquitination
and specifically block ubiquitin-thioester formation [73,
74]. JS-K is a nitric oxide (NO) prodrug that releases NO
when metabolized by gluthatione S-transferase. It inhibits
the ubiquitin-E1 thioester formation by binding of NO
to the active cysteine residue on E1. In addition, it also
seems to affect other signaling pathways like MAPK,
Wnt and β-catenin/TCF signaling pathway [72, 75-77].
PPDZ-4409 is structurally related to Pyr-41 and showed
similar E1 inhibitory effects [70]. To our knowledge Pyr-

Salinosporamides
The proteasome inhibitors carfilzomib and
oprozomib are peptides and therefore susceptible for
degradation by endogenous proteases and peptidases in the
plasma, reducing their bioavailability. The bioavailability
could be increased by non-peptidic proteasome inhibitors
such as marizomib (NPI-0052) [61]. Marizomib is an oral
β-lactone proteasome inhibitor derived from the marine
bacterium Salinospora tropica and irreversibly binds
to the three catalytic activities of the proteasome [64,
65]. Marizomib is effective in bortezomib sensitive and
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

6526

Oncotarget

41 and NSC624206 have so far not been tested in MM.
JS-K has been described to induce DNA double-strand
breaks, activate the DNA damage response pathway and
induce apoptosis in human MM cells in vitro and in vivo
[78]. Moreover, in another study, JS-K demonstrated antiangiogenic activity in vitro and in vivo [79]. Whether the
effect of JS-K on MM cells is due to E1 inhibition has not
been studied yet. PYZD-4409 has been shown to induce
cell death in MM cell lines and preferentially inhibited
the growth of leukemia cells over normal hematopoietic
cells. The underlying mechanism of the observed cell
death has been attributed to ER stress, but this was only
studied in leukemia cells [70]. These studies highlight that
the E1 enzyme could be a novel therapeutic target in the
treatment of MM, however, the underlying mechanisms
should be confirmed.

MM patients and other malignancies (https://clinicaltrials.
gov).

E2 conjugating enzymes
To date, 35 active E2 ubiquitin-conjugating
enzymes (UBC) have been described in humans. E2s are
characterized by the presence of an ubiquitin-conjugating
domain (UCD). E1 transfers the activated ubiquitin E2
through the thioester bond on the catalytic cysteine on
E2. Next the ubiquitin is transferred to the substrate with
help of the E3 ubiquitin ligase. E2s determine the fate of
the proteins by regulating whether the protein is multi-,
mono- or polyubiquitinated and on which site ubiquitin
is conjugated. There are several studies suggesting that
E2s are involved in cancer and other diseases [85]. The
UBC CDC34 (also known as UBC3) is highly expressed
in primary MM cells and MM cell lines compared to
normal cells. CDC34 regulates the ubiquitination of
proteins involved in cell cycle regulation, such as p27,
a cell cycle inhibitor. Blocking CDC34 by the use of a
dominant-negative strategy enhanced the cytotoxic effect
of bortezomib, dexamethasone and 2-methoxyestradiol
in MM cells. Moreover, IL-6 mediated protection against
dexamethasone-induced cell death was abrogated by
blocking CDC34 [86]. CC0651, a small molecule
inhibiting CDC34, inhibited proliferation of human
cancer cell lines [87]. Since the study of Chauhan et al.
[86] demonstrated enhanced cytotoxicity of anti-MM
agents when blocking CDC34, combining CC0651 with
commonly used anti-MM agents could be a promising new
treatment approach.

NEDD8 activating enzyme (NAE)
The activity of the cullin-RING ligases (CRLs), a
family of E3 ubiquitin ligases, is regulated by the covalent
attachment of NEDD8. The neddylation of proteins is
mediated by an enzymatic process similar to the ubiquitin
conjugating pathway. The first step is the activation
of NEDD8 by NEDD8 activating enzyme (NAE).
Consequently inhibiting the NAE indirectly inhibits the
activation of the CRL E3s [12, 80, 81]. CRL E3s play
an important role in many biological processes such as
cell cycle progression, apoptosis, signaling transduction
and DNA replication. Known substrates of the CRL E3s
are oncoproteins (Myc), tumor suppressors such as p21,
p27, cell cycle promoters like cyclin D/E, regulators of
apoptosis including Mcl-1 and signaling molecules such
as the NF-κB inhibitor IκB [80]. Recently a novel small
molecule inhibitor of the NAE, MLN4924, has been
discovered. The NAE enzymatic activity is blocked by
the binding of MLN4924 to NAE that creates a covalent
NEDD8-MLN4924 adduct, preventing subsequent
intraenzyme reactions [82]. The observation that MM
patients with high NEDD8 transcript levels had a shorter
progression free survival upon bortezomib treatment
emphasizes the importance of therapeutically targeting
the NEDD8 pathway. Treatment of MM cell lines and
primary cells with MLN4924 resulted in an upregulation
of known targets of the NEDD8 pathway and a decreased
viability of MM cells. MLN4924 was as potent in a
bortezomib-resistant cell line as in the parental cell line
[83]. Its cytotoxic effect was assigned due to increased
REDD1 expression leading to the suppression of AKT and
mTOR signaling pathways [81]. Two studies demonstrated
that combining MLN4924 with bortezomib enhanced the
cytotoxic effect of MLN4924 [81, 83]. Interestingly, cells
resistant to bortezomib due to elevated CKS1B expression
were sensitive to MLN4924 through the stabilization of
p21 [84]. MLN4924 has shown its potency in different
MM in vivo models and is currently in phase 1 trial for
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

E3 ubiquitin ligases
The E3 ubiquitin ligases mediate the last step of
the ubiquitination pathway. Because E3 interacts both
with E2-Ub and the substrate to be ubiquitinated, they
determine the selectively of the ubiquitination process
[68]. In humans there are about 1000 E3s that can be
divided into three types characterized by their conserved
structural domain and substrate recognition [88]. The first
and largest type of E3s are the really interesting new gene
(RING) finger family. The RING finger E3 functions as
an adapter of the E2-Ub thioester and the substrate and
catalyzes the transfer of ubiquitin from the E2 enzyme to
the substrate [71, 89]. RING finger E3s can exist and act as
a single protein such as human double minute 2 (HDM2)
or be part of a multisubunit compex such as the anaphase
promoting complex/cyclosome (APC/C) [88, 90]. The
second type of E3, the homology to E6AP C terminus
(HECT) family E3s, ubiquitinate substrates in two steps:
first ubiquitin is transferred from E2 to E3 and then from
E3 to the substrate [71, 89]. The U-box E3s, a third type,
act as adopter proteins that recruit the E2 enzyme and the
6527

Oncotarget

substrate for ubiquitin transfer just as RING finger E3s
[90]. Some E3s have been linked to the pathogenesis of
MM. In the next section we will discuss these E3s and
their small molecule inhibitors in MM.

p53 resulting in an accumulation of p53, expression of
p53 target genes and induction of apoptosis in different
cancer cell lines [102]. RITA has shown potent anti-MM
activity, it activates the p53 pathway and induces apoptosis
in MM cell lines and primary MM samples with wt-p53.
The activation of the p53 pathway was accompanied with
upregulation of the proapoptotic protein Noxa, downregulation of the anti-apoptotic protein Mcl-1 and cleavage
of caspase-3 and -8. These data were further validated in a
mouse xenograft model of MM. A clear tumor regression
and increase in survival was observed when these mice
were treated with RITA. Moreover combination of RITA
with nutlin-3 synergistically inhibited the growth of MM
cells [103]. However important to mention is that the
activities of RITA are not restricted to p53. Although
HDM2 inhibitor resistant cells have mutations in p53,
RITA was able to induce a G2/M arrest and upregulated
p53 targets like HDM2, Puma, Noxa and PARP cleavage
[104]. A recent study demonstrated that RITA was efficient
against p53 mutated MM cells independently of the p53
pathway [105]. This is in line with the discovery of the
novel role of RITA as activator of the JNK pathway.
Combining RITA with the JNK activator dexamethasone
resulted in a synergistic anti-MM effect [106]. This
compound could function as a multi-target molecule and
provides the rationale for further clinical investigation
of RITA as a single agent or in combination with
dexamethasone for the treatment of MM patients [106].

Human double minute 2 (HDM2)
HDM2 (also known as mouse double minute
2, MDM2), is an E3 ubiquitin ligase responsible for
the proteasomal degradation and inhibition of the
transcriptional activation of wild-type p53 (wt-p53),
a tumor suppressor protein [91]. HDM2 is highly and
constitutively expressed in MM cell lines, in cells of
patients with plasma cell leukemia but not in mononuclear
cells from normal BM. This overexpression has been
shown to contribute to growth and survival of MM cells
[92]. Several HDM2 inhibitors are identified the last years.
Nutlin-3
The first reported HDM2 inhibitor, nutlin-3 is a
cis-imidazole analog with a strong affinity for the p53binding pocket of HDM2. So, nutlin-3 binds to HDM2
thereby inhibiting the interaction between HDM2 and p53
and resulting in an accumulation of p53 and activation
of the p53 signaling pathway [91, 93]. Therapeutic
activation of p53 requires wt-p53. Since mutations or
deletions of p53 are rarely detected at diagnosis of MM,
HDM2 inhibition could be particularly interesting for
MM patients [94-97]. Indeed, it has been demonstrated
that nutlin-3 treatment of primary MM samples and cell
lines with or without the presence of bone marrow stromal
cells (BMSC), resulted in apoptotic cell death. Moreover
the p53 pathway was reactivated in wt-p53 cells by the
transcription of the downstream targets such as p21 and
HDM2. In MM cell lines with mutant p53, no reactivation
of the p53 pathway was observed upon nutlin-3 treatment
[97, 98]. Apoptosis induced by nutlin-3 was associated
with increased expression of downstream transcriptional
targets of p53 such Puma, Bax and Bak. However, also
p53 transcriptional independent pathways are activated
[98]. Importantly, nutlin-3 was not toxic for normal
BMSCs [97]. Taken together these data demonstrate that
the nongenotoxic activation of the p53 pathway could be a
potential new treatment strategy for MM patients. This is
strengthened by the fact that nutlin-3 acts synergistically
with anti-MM drugs currently used in the treatment of
MM such as bortezomib and melphalan [97, 99, 100]. For
the potential clinical use of nutlin-3, we have to take into
account that nutlin-3 treatment can cause the acquisition of
somatic mutations in p53. Therefore prolonged treatment
with nutlin-3 could potentially lead to resistance to the
drug [101].

MI-63
Similar to nutlin-3, MI-63 binds to the p53 binding
site of HDM2 in cells with wt-p53 [107]. In MM, it has
been shown that MI-63 was effective in the induction
of apoptosis and activation of p53-mediated cell death.
Moreover MI-63 was able to overcome adhesion-mediated
resistance, lenalidomide resistance and enhances the antiMM effect of bortezomib and lenalidomide. At higher
concentrations MI-63 was also able to induce apoptosis
in cells with mutant p53 and this was associated with
autophagy. The combination of MI-63 with the BH3mimetic, ABT-737 (Bcl-2 and Bcl-xl inhibitor), had
synergistic anti-MM effect both in MM cells with mutant
or wt-p53. Since MI-63 showed potency in vivo and in
primary plasma cells from patients with newly diagnosed
and relapsed-refractory MM, further clinical investigation
is desirable [108].
JNJ-26854165 (Serdemetan)
Serdemetan, another HDM2-p53 inhibitor,
specifically binds to the ring domain of HDM2, thereby
inhibiting the binding of the HDM2-p53 complex to the
proteasome and preventing the degradation of p53 [109].
In MM, serdemetan was able to inhibit proliferation and
induce an S-phase arrest, both in cells with wt and mutant
p53. Caspase-3 activation was mainly observed in cells
with wt-p53 but caspase-3 was also activated in cells with
mutant p53 although at a lesser extent. It was shown that

RITA
Another p53-HDM2 interaction inhibitor has
been identified in 2004 by Issaeva et al. named RITA
(reactivation of p53 and induction of tumor cell apoptosis).
RITA prevents the p53-HDM2 interaction by binding to
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

6528

Oncotarget

Table 1: pharmacological agents targeting the ubiquitin proteasome system
Drug
Molecular target
Status
Proteasome/boronates
Bortezomib
20S proteasome (chymotrypsin activity)
FDA approved for MM
Ixazomib
20S proteasome (chymotrypsin activity)
Phase 3
Delanzomib
20S proteasome (chymotrypsin activity)
Phase 1/2
Proteasome/epoxyketones
Carfilzomib
20S proteasome (chymotrypsin activity)
FDA approved for MM
Oprozomib
20S proteasome (chymotrypsin activity)
Phase 1/2
Proteasome/salinosporamides
20S proteasome
Marizomib
(chymotrypsin, trypsin, caspase activity)
Phase 1/2
E1 ubiquitin activating enzyme
PYR-41
UBA1
NSC624206
UBA1
JS-K
UBA1
PYZD-4409
UBA1
NEDD8 activating enzyme
MLN4924
NAE
E2 conjugating enzyme
CC0651
CDC34
E3 ubiquitin ligase/p53 potentiators
Nutlin-3
HDM2
RITA
HDM2
MI-63
HDM2
Serdemetan
HDM2
E3 ubiquitin ligase/smac mimetics
LBW242
IAPs
LCL161
IAPs
AT-406
IAPs
E3 ubiquitin ligase/others
Compound A
SCFSkp2
IMiDs
Cereblon
proTAME
APC/C
Deubiquitinating enzyme
WP1130
Usp9x
EOAI3402143
Usp9x and Usp24
P5091
Usp7

Preclinical (not in MM)
Preclinical (not in MM)
Preclinical
Preclinical
Phase 1
Preclinical (not in MM)
Preclinical
Preclinical
Preclinical
Phase 1 (not for MM)
Preclinical
Phase 2
Phase 1 (not for MM)
Preclinical
FDA approved for MM
Preclinical
Preclinical
Preclinical
Preclinical

serdemetan exerted its anti-MM effect through inhibition
of cholesterol transport by degradation of the ABCA1
transporter [110]. Currently serdemetan is in phase 1
clinical trial for advanced stage and/or refractory solid
tumors (https://clinicaltrials.gov).

like protein), BRUCE, survivin and livin [112]. Some
family members (cIAP1, cIAP2, XIAP, ILP2 and livin)
also contain a RING finger domain allowing them to
ubiquitinate and degrade caspases and SMAC. Moreover
it allows them to autoubiquitinate themselves resulting
in their degradation [113]. In apoptotic cells, the proapoptotic protein SMAC is released in the cytosol and
binds to the IAPs. This prevents the interaction with
caspases and results in cell death [114-116]. Alterations
of IAPs have been frequently reported in various human
cancers, including hematological malignancies, leading
to aberrant apoptosis-signaling pathways [117]. These
alterations contribute to tumor cell survival, chemo-

Inhibitor of apoptosis proteins (IAPs)
IAPs are a family of endogenous inhibitors of
programmed cell death and are characterized by the
presence of one to three baculovirus IAP repeat (BIR)
domains [111]. Eight human homologues of IAPs have
so far been identified, NAIP (Baculoviral IAP repeatcontaining protein 1), XIAP (X-chromosome linked IAP),
cIAP1 (cellular IAP1), cIAP2 (cellular IAP2), ILP2 (IAP
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

6529

Oncotarget

resistance, disease progression and poor patient prognosis
[118]. IAPs are therefore considered as potential
therapeutic targets and different inhibitors of IAPs have
been developed in recent years. In MM, expression of
cIAP1, cIAP2 and XIAP has been correlated with poor
outcome and associated with drug resistance [119]. Three
different SMAC mimetics have so far been preclinically
tested in MM. Chauhan et al. demonstrated that the SMAC
mimetic LBW242 induced apoptosis in cells resistant to
conventional therapy. This LBW242-induced apoptosis
is associated with cleavage of caspase-3, -8, -9 and
PARP. Combining LBW242 with TRAIL, bortezomib
and melphalan resulted in an additive/synergistic antiMM effect. Moreover LBW242 was cytotoxic against
primary MM cells from patients but not against normal
lymphocytes and BMSCs. Importantly, LBW242 inhibited
tumor growth and prolonged survival in a human
xenograft mouse model [120]. Another SMAC mimetic,
LCL161 was only cytotoxic in a subset of MM cell lines.
It was shown that the resistance to LCL161 was due to the
lack of cIAP2 down-regulation upon LCL161 treatment.
Moreover the Jak2/Stat3 pathway was upregulated in MM
cells resistant to LCL161. The combination of LCL161
and a Jak2 specific inhibitor resulted in a synergitic antiMM effect in cell lines and in patient cells. Additionally,
LCL161 sensitized cells to death inducing ligands such
as TRAIL and FasL [121]. We studied the role of cIAP2
in TRAF3 deleted/mutated MM cell lines and found that
overexpression of cIAP2 was associated with resistance
to proteasome inhibitors [122]. In addition the SMAC
mimetic AT-406 sensitized MM cells to the proteasome
inhibitors bortezomib and carfilzomib. Taken together
these data provide evidence for further clinical evaluation
of SMAC mimetics, alone and in combination, especially
in MM patients with TRAF3 deletion/mutation [122].
Currently LCL161 is in phase 2 clinical trial for patients
with MM and breast cancer. AT-406 is in phase 1 clinical
trial for patients with solid tumors, lymphoma or acute
myelogenous leukemia (AML) (https://clinicaltrials.gov).

MM [128, 129]. Inhibition of the SCFSkp2 with Compound
A (CpdA) in MM cells resulted in accumulation of the
SCFSkp2 substrate p21 without activating the heat shock
protein response. Moreover CpdA treatment resulted in a
G1/S cell cycle arrest and SCFSkp2 and p27 dependent cell
death. This observed cell death was caspase independent
and mediated through activation of autophagy. CpdA was
able to overcome drug resistance to conventional anti-MM
drugs and even acted synergistically with bortezomib.
Importantly, the anti-MM effect of CpdA was confirmed
on primary MM cells of patients. Other cells from the BM
compartment were not affected by CpdA [130]. These data
indeed provide evidence for further clinical evaluation of
CpdA in the treatment of MM.
Another F-box protein is Fbxo9 and has shown to be
highly expressed in MM cells compared to normal plasma
cell in 30% of the cases. Higher expression of Fbxo9 in
MM patients correlated with a higher progression-free
survival and better response to bortezomib, confirming
the idea that in these cases Fbxo9 promotes survival of
MM cells. Moreover knockdown of Fbxo9 resulted in
apoptosis in MM cells with high Fbxo9 expression. This
study underscores the potential use of Fbxo9 as a target
in MM with high Fbxo9 expression and suggests that
Fbxo9 could be useful in predicting clinical response to
proteasome inhibition [131]. To our knowledge no Fbxo9
inhibitors have been identified.
Cereblon
Currently the standard treatment regimen of
MM includes the immunomodulatory drugs (IMiDs)
thalidomide or the more novel analogues lenalidomide
or pomalidomide [13]. Thalidomide was initially used
for hyperemesis gravidarum in pregnant women but
was found to cause serious birth defects [132]. At that
time the working mechanism was largely unknown but
recent studies demonstrated that the specific target for
thalidomide is the E3 ubiquitin ligase cereblon (CRBN)
[133]. It was confirmed that CRBN was the principal
target for the observed anti-MM effect of the IMiDs [134,
135]. Depletion of CRBN caused cell death in human MM
cells, but a subset of cells survived despite stable depletion
of CRBN. These cells have been found to be resistant to
lenalidomide and pomalidomide but sensitive to other
anti-MM agents such as bortezomib and melphalan. In
MM cells resistant to lenalidomide they found an acquired
deletion of CRBN. Moreover, the genetic changes upon
lenalidomide treatement were drastically abolished when
CRBN was depleted, suggesting that CRBN is essential
for the anti-MM effect of lenalidomide. Importantly
patients with lenalidomide resistance had reduced CRBN
expression levels [135]. Taken together, CRBN is required
for the anti-MM activity of lenalidomide and moreover
could be used as a biomarker for clinical evaluation of
anti-MM efficacy. Currently many combinations of
immunomodulatory drugs with other agents are under

Skp1-Cullin-Fbox complex (SCF-complex)
The SCF-complex type E3 ubiquitin ligase is a
multiprotein complex consisting of three core components
(Skp1, Cullin-1, Roc1) and one variable component,
the F-box protein. The F-box protein is considered as a
potential target with great specificity since they function
as a substrate receptor and thereby determine the substrate
to be ubiquitinated. So far 69 F-box proteins have been
identified [123, 124]. Skp2 is an F-box protein that
regulates the ubiquitination of several targets such as,
p27Kip1, p21Cip1 and p57Kip2. P27 is an important cell cycle
regulator that induces a cell cycle arrest and inhibits the
G1/S transition [125-127]. In MM it has been shown that
patients with low p27 expression had a shorter overall
survival, suggesting that targeting the SCFSkp2 complex to
restore p27Kip1 levels could be a new treatment strategy in
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

6530

Oncotarget

clinical evaluation (https://clinicaltrials.gov).

Depletion of Usp24 did result in significant induction of
apoptosis and reduction in Mcl-1 levels in MM cells.
Usp24 was able to sustain myeloma survival and regulate
Mcl-1 in the absence of Usp9x. Interestingly both Usp9x
and Usp24 were expressed and activated in primary MM
cells. A more novel inhibitor EOAI3402143 inhibited
Usp9x and Usp24 activity in a dose-dependent manner
and resulted in the induction of apoptosis. Importantly,
EOAI3402143 was able to suppress tumor growth in vivo
[143]. Another DUB that has been shown to be highly
expressed and correlated with poor overall survival
in MM is Usp7. Inhibition of Usp7 with the selective
inhibitor P5091 induces apoptosis in MM cells resistant
to conventional therapy and acts synergistically with the
HDAC inhibitor SAHA, lenalidomide and dexamethasone.
The underlying mechanism of the induced cell death
was attributed to the activation of the HDM2/p53/p21
signaling axis. Usp7 deubiquitinates and stabilizes the E3
ubiquitin ligase HDM2 leading to increased degradation
of p53. P5091 was potent in inhibiting tumor growth and
prolonged survival in a xenograft mouse model [144].
These studies suggest that Usp9x, Usp24 and Usp7 could
be potential new therapeutic targets in MM. Moreover
it gives the rationale for further clinical investigation
of these compounds, alone or in combination, for the
treatment of MM.
A summary of the compounds targeting the different
components of the UPS and their current clinical status
can be found in Table 1. Moreover Figure 2 illustrates the
interference of each compound in the UPS pathway.

Anaphase promoting complex /cyclosome (APC/C)
Another multisubunit RING E3 ubiquitin ligase is
the APC/C. The APC/C regulation is dependent on 2 coactivators: Cdc20 during metaphase-anaphase transition
and Cdh1 during mitotic exit and early G1 phase [136].
When the APC/C is activated by Cdc20, cell cycle proteins
such as securin and cyclin B are targeted for degradation
by the proteasome leading to onset of the anaphase [137].
We showed based on gene expression analysis that the
co-activator Cdc20 is highly expressed in high-risk MM
patients. Moreover, high Cdc20 expression correlated
with poor prognosis in MM patients. The APC/C inhibitor
proTAME induced an accumulation of the APC/Ccdc20
substrate cyclin B1 in MM cells and caused MM cells to
accumulate in metaphase. Moreover proTAME induced
a significant dose-dependent decrease in viability and
increase in apoptosis in MM cells. The induction of
apoptosis was associated with caspase 3, 8, 9 and PARP
cleavage. Moreover, we demonstrated that the observed
cell death was due to accumulation of the pro-apoptotic
molecule Bim. The combination of proTAME and another
APC/C inhibitor, apcin, or melphalan resulted in an
increased anti-MM activity. Our study suggests that the
APC/C and its co-activator Cdc20 could be a novel and
promising target especially in high-risk MM patients
(unpublished results).

Deubiquitinating enzymes (DUBs)

CONCLUDING REMARKS AND FUTURE
PERSPECTIVES

The ubiquitination process can be reversed by
a group of proteases called DUBs, which recognize
ubiquitinated proteins and remove their ubiqtuitin tags
by cleavage of the isopeptide bond at the C-terminus
of ubiquitin [138]. At the moment, 79 functional DUBs
with 5 different subfamilies have been identified in the
human genome. Most of the subfamilies are cysteine
proteases and one of the families consists of zinc
metalloproteases [139]. DUBs are considered to have
three major functions: processing inactive ubiquitin
precursors, removing ubiquitin chains from modified
substrates to prevent proteasomal degradation and editing
of ubiquitin chains [140]. DUBs are direct antagonists
of E3 ubiquitin ligases and are increasingly suggested as
potential targets in various malignancies [141]. In MM, it
has been shown that high expression of the DUB Usp9x
is correlated with poor prognosis and is proposed to be
involved in the stabilization of the survival protein, Mcl-1
[142]. Moreover in another study they demonstrated that
the partially selective Usp9x inhibitor WP1130 induced
apoptosis and reduced Mcl-1 levels in human MM
cells. When Uspx9 was depleted with shRNA, transient
induction of apoptosis was achieved followed by a
sustained cell growth inhibition. Remarkably the closely
related Usp24 was upregulated when Usp9x was depleted.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

The UPS consists of ubiquitin, ubiquitin-activating
enzymes, ubiquitin-conjugating enzymes, ubiquitin
ligases, deubiquitinases and the proteasome. All of these
components are involved in the pathogenesis of MM and
are therefore considered as potential therapeutic targets in
MM. The success of bortezomib in the treatment of MM
sets the precedent for this direction. A second generation
of proteasome inhibitors is currently under development
and clinical investigation with the ambition to increase
efficacy, enhance anti-MM activity, decrease toxicity,
increase the flexibility of dosing and improve convenience
for patients. Preclinical and clinical studies with second
generation proteasome inhibitors are promising and
are certainly warranted for further studies. Since the
proteasome is also essential in normal cells, scientists
are now investigating upstream enzymes of the UPS that
are aberrantly expressed in MM. This will affect fewer
proteins and could potentially lead to less toxicity. Most
of the agents targeting components upstream of the
proteasome are still under preclinical research, while a few
are currently under clinical investigation for the treatment
of MM or other malignancies. Advances in our knowledge
6531

Oncotarget

of the role of the different components of the UPS in the
pathogenesis of MM are necessary. Moreover great efforts
should be put in the optimization and development of new
molecules targeting UPS components. Persistent research
in this area will certainly lead to an improvement in the
treatment of MM patients.

of proteins by ubiquitin and ubiquitin-like proteins. Annu
Rev Cell Dev Biol. 2006;22:159-80.
11.	 Bedford L, Lowe J, Dick LR, Mayer RJ, Brownell JE.
Ubiquitin-like protein conjugation and the ubiquitinproteasome system as drug targets. Nat Rev Drug Discov.
2011;10:29-46.
12.	 Soucy T a, Dick LR, Smith PG, Milhollen M a, Brownell
JE. The NEDD8 Conjugation Pathway and Its Relevance in
Cancer Biology and Therapy. Genes Cancer. 2010;1:70816. doi: 10.1177/1947601910382898.

GRANT SUPPORT
This work was supported by European
Commission’s Seventh Framework Programme (EU FP7)
OVER-MyR, Universitaire Stichting van België’ between
OVER-MyR and Vlaamse Liga tegen Kanker. S. Lub has
a PhD fellowship from FWO-VI. E. De Bruyne and E.
Van Valckenborgh are post-doctoral fellows of FWO-VI.
E. Menu is an AXA research fund post-doctoral fellow.

13.	 Röllig C, Knop S, Bornhäuser M. Multiple myeloma.
Lancet. 2014;385:2197-208.
14.	 Maes K, Menu E, Van Valckenborgh E, Van Riet I,
Vanderkerken K, De Bruyne E. Epigenetic modulating
agents as a new therapeutic approach in multiple myeloma.
Cancers (Basel). 2013;5:430-61.

Authorship contributions

15.	 Moreau P, Attal M, Facon T. Frontline therapy of multiple
myeloma. Blood. 2015;125:3076-85.

S.L. and E.V.V, wrote the manuscript, S.L., K.M.,
E.M., E.D.B., K.V., E.V.V. provided crucial suggestions
and revised the manuscript.

16.	 Ferlay J, Steliarova-Foucher E, Lortet-Tieulent J, Rosso
S, Coebergh JWW, Comber H, Forman D, Bray F. Cancer
incidence and mortality patterns in Europe: Estimates for 40
countries in 2012. Eur J Cancer. 2013;49:1374-403.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST

17.	 Rajkumar SV. Multiple Myeloma : 2014 update on
diagnosis, risk-stratification and management. Am J
Hematol. 2014;89:998-1009.

The authors declare no competing financial interest.

18.	 Waxman AJ, Mink PJ, Devesa SS, Anderson WF, Weiss
BM, Kristinsson SY, Mcglynn KA, Landgren O. Racial
disparities in incidence and outcome in multiple myeloma :
a population-based study. Blood. 2010;116:5501-7.

REFERENCES
1.	

Hoeller D, Dikic I. Targeting the ubiquitin system in cancer
therapy. Nature. 2009;458:438-44.

2.	

Crawford LJ, Irvine AE. Targeting the ubiquitin proteasome
system in haematological malignancies. Blood Rev.
2013;27:297-304.

19.	 Landgren O, Kyle RA, Pfeiffer RM, Katzmann JA,
Caporaso NE, Hayes RB, Dispenzieri A, Kumar S,
Clark RJ, Baris D, Hoover R, Rajkumar SV. Monoclonal
gammopathy of undetermined significance (MGUS)
consistently precedes multiple myeloma : a prospective
study. Blood. 2009;113:5412-8.

3.	 Hershko A. The ubiquitin system for protein degradation
and some of its roles in the control of the cell division cycle.
Cell Death Differ. 2005;12:1191-7.
4.	

20.	 Kyle R a, Durie BGM, Rajkumar S V, Landgren O,
Blade J, Merlini G, Kröger N, Einsele H, Vesole DH,
Dimopoulos M, San Miguel J, Avet-Loiseau H, Hajek R, et
al. Monoclonal gammopathy of undetermined significance
(MGUS) and smoldering (asymptomatic) multiple
myeloma: IMWG consensus perspectives risk factors for
progression and guidelines for monitoring and management.
Leukemia. 2010;24:1121-7.

Cao B, Mao X. The ubiquitin-proteasomal system is critical
for multiple myeloma : implications in drug discovery. Am
J Blood Res. 2011;1:46-56.

5.	 Haglund K, Di Fiore PP, Dikic I. Distinct monoubiquitin
signals in receptor endocytosis. Trends Biochem Sci.
2003;28:598-604.

21.	 Weiss BM, Abadie J, Verma P, Howard RS, Kuehl WM.
A monoclonal gammopathy precedes multiple myeloma in
most patients. Blood. 2009;113:5418-23.

6.	 Adams J. The proteasome: structure, function, and role in
the cell. Cancer Treat Rev. 2003;29:3-9.
7.	 Groll M, Bajorek M, Köhler A, Moroder L, Rubin DM,
Huber R, Glickman MH, Finley D. A gated channel into
the proteasome core particle. Nat Struct Biol. 2000;7:10627.
8.	

22.	 Kyle RA, Remstein ED, Therneau TM, Dispenzieri A,
Kurtin PJ, Hodnefield JM, Larson DR, Plevak MF, Jelinek
DF, Fonseca R, Melton III JL, Rajkumar SV. Clinical
Course and Prognosis of Smoldering (Asymptomatic)
Multiple Myeloma. N Engl J Med. 2007;356:2582-90.

A prize for protein degradation. Nat Cell Biol. 2004;6:1011.

9.	 Hochstrasser M. Origin and Function of Ubiquitin-like
Protein Conjugation. Nature. 2009;458:1-19.

23.	 Rajkumar SV, Dimopoulos M a, Palumbo A, Blade J,
Merlini G, Mateos M-V, Kumar S, Hillengass J, Kastritis
E, Richardson P, Landgren O, Paiva B, Dispenzieri A, et

10.	 Kerscher O, Felberbaum R, Hochstrasser M. Modification

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

6532

Oncotarget

al. International Myeloma Working Group updated criteria
for the diagnosis of multiple myeloma. Lancet Oncol.
2014;15:e538-48.

Dammacco F, Richardson PG, Anderson KC. Bortezomib
mediates antiangiogenesis in multiple myeloma via direct
and indirect effects on endothelial cells. Cancer Res.
2006;66:184-91.

24.	 Mateos M-V, Hernández M-T, Giraldo P, de la Rubia J,
de Arriba F, Corral LL, Rosiñol L, Paiva B, Palomera L,
Bargay J, Oriol A, Prosper F, López J, et al. Lenalidomide
plus Dexamethasone for High-Risk Smoldering Multiple
Myeloma. N Engl J Med. 2013;369:438-47.

37.	 Heider U, Kaiser M, Müller C, Jakob C, Zavrski I, Schulz
C-O, Fleissner C, Hecht M, Sezer O. Bortezomib increases
osteoblast activity in myeloma patients irrespective of
response to treatment. Eur J Haematol. 2006;77:233-8.

25.	 Furukawa Y, Kikuchi J. Molecular pathogenesis of multiple
myeloma. Int J Clin Oncol. 2015;20:413-22.

38.	 Richardson PG, Sonneveld P, Schuster MW, Irwin D,
Stadtmauer EA, Facon T, Harousseau J, Ben-yehuda D,
Lonial S, Goldschmidt H, Reece D, San-miguel JF, Bladé
J, et al. Bortezomib or High-Dose Dexamethasone for
Relapsed Multiple Myeloma. N Engl J Med. 2005;24:248798.

26.	 Lemaire M, Deleu S, De Bruyne E, Van Valckenborgh
E, Menu E, Vanderkerken K. The microenvironment and
molecular biology of the multiple myeloma tumor. Adv
Cancer Res. 2011;110:19-42.

39.	 Richardson P, Barlogie B, Berenson J, Singhal S,
Jagannath S, Irwin D, Rajkumar SV, Srkalovic G, Alsina
M, Alexanian R, Siegel D, Orlowski RZ, Kuter D, et al.
A Phase 2 Study of Bortezomib in Relapsed, Refractory
Myeloma. N Engl J Med. 2003;348:2609-17.

27.	 Chng WJ, Glebov O, Bergsagel PL, Kuehl WM. Genetic
events in the pathogenesis of multiple myeloma. Best Pr
Res Clin Haematol. 2007;20:571-96.
28.	 Munshi NC, Avet-Loiseau H. Genomics in Multiple
Myeloma. Clin Cancer Res. 2011;17:1234-42.

40.	 Orlowski R, Stinchcombe T, Mitchell B, Shea T, Baldwin
A, Stahl S, Adams J, Esseltine D, Elliott P, Pien C,
Guerciolini R, Anderson J, Depcik-Smith N, et al. Phase
I trial of the proteasome inhibitor PS-341 in patients
with refractory hematologic malignancies. J Clin Oncol.
2002;20:420-4427.

29.	 Mcbride A, Ryan PY. Proteasome inhibitors in the
treatment of multiple myeloma. Expert Rev Anticancer
Ther. 2013;13:339-58.
30.	 Hideshima T, Richardson P, Chauhan D, Palombella
VJ, Elliott PJ, Adams J, Anderson KC. The Proteasome
Inhibitor PS-341 Inhibits Growth , Induces Apoptosis , and
Overcomes Drug Resistance in Human Multiple Myeloma
Cells. Cancer Res. 2001;61:3071-6.

41.	 San Miguel J, Schlag R, Khuageva NK, Dimopoulos MA,
Shpilberg O, Kropff M, Spicka I, Petrucci MT, Palumbo A,
Samoilova OS, Dmoszynska A, Abdulkadyrov KM, Cakana
A, et al. Bortezomib plus Melphalan and Prednisone for
Initial Treatment of Multiple Myeloma. N Engl J Med.
2008;359:906-17.

31.	 Hideshima T, Ikeda H, Chauhan D, Okawa Y, Raje N,
Podar K, Mitsiades C, Munshi NC, Richardson PG,
Carrasco RD, Anderson KC. Bortezomib induces canonical
nuclear factor-kappaB activation in multiple myeloma cells.
Blood. 2009;114:1046-53.

42.	 Kane RC, Bross PF, Farrell AT, Pazdur R. U.S. FDA
approval for the treatment of Multiple Myeloma Progressing
on Prior Therapy. Oncologist. 2003;8:508-13.

32.	 Hideshima T, Mitsiades C, Akiyama M, Hayashi T,
Chauhan D, Richardson P, Schlossman R, Podar K, Munshi
NC, Mitsiades N, Anderson KC. Molecular mechanisms
mediating antimyeloma activity of proteasome inhibitor
PS-341. Blood. 2003;101:1530-4.

43.	 Kane RC, Farrell AT, Sridhara R, Pazdur R. United
States Food and Drug Administration approval summary:
bortezomib for the treatment of progressive multiple
myeloma after one prior therapy. Clin cancer Res.
2006;12:2955-60.

33.	 Gomez-Bougie P, Wuillème-Toumi S, Ménoret E, Trichet
V, Robillard N, Philippe M, Bataille R, Amiot M. Noxa upregulation and Mcl-1 cleavage are associated to apoptosis
induction by bortezomib in multiple myeloma. Cancer Res.
2007;67:5418-24.

44.	 Cavaletti G, Jakubowiak A. Peripheral neuropathy during
bortezomib treatment of multiple myeloma: a review of
recent studies. Leuk Lymphoma. 2010;51:1178-87.
45.	 Moreau P, Pylypenko H, Grosicki S, Karamanesht
I, Leleu X, Grishunina M, Rekhtman G, Masliak Z,
Robak T, Shubina A, Arnulf B, Kropff M, Cavet J, et
al. Subcutaneous versus intravenous administration of
bortezomib in patients with relapsed multiple myeloma: a
randomised, phase 3, non-inferiority study. Lancet Oncol.
2011;12:431-40.

34.	 Obeng EA, Carlson LM, Gutman DM, Jr WJH, Lee KP,
Boise LH. Proteasome inhibitors induce a terminal unfolded
protein response in multiple myeloma cells. Blood.
2006;107:4907-17.
35.	 Mitsiades N, Mitsiades CS, Richardson PG, Poulaki V,
Tai Y, Chauhan D, Fanourakis G, Gu X, Bailey C, Joseph
M, Libermann TA, Schlossman R, Munshi NC, et al. The
proteasome inhibitor PS-341 potentiates sensitivity of
multiple myeloma cells to conventional chemotherapeutic
agents : therapeutic applications. Blood. 2003;101:2377-80.

46.	 Murray MY, Auger MJ, Bowles KM. Overcoming
bortezomib resistance in multiple myeloma. Biochem Soc
Trans. 2014;42:804-8.
47.	 Kapoor P, Ramakrishnan V, Rajkumar S. Bortezomib
Combination Therapy in Multiple Myeloma. Semin

36.	 Roccaro AM, Hideshima T, Raje N, Kumar S, Ishitsuka
K, Yasui H, Shiraishi N, Ribatti D, Nico B, Vacca A,
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

6533

Oncotarget

Hematol. 2012;49:228-42.

58.	 Demo SD, Kirk CJ, Aujay M a, Buchholz TJ, Dajee M, Ho
MN, Jiang J, Laidig GJ, Lewis ER, Parlati F, Shenk KD,
Smyth MS, Sun CM, et al. Antitumor activity of PR-171, a
novel irreversible inhibitor of the proteasome. Cancer Res.
2007;67:6383-91.

48.	 Kupperman E, Lee EC, Cao Y, Bannerman B, Fitzgerald M,
Berger A, Yu J, Yang Y, Hales P, Bruzzese F, Liu J, Blank
J, Garcia K, et al. Evaluation of the proteasome inhibitor
MLN9708 in preclinical models of human cancer. Cancer
Res. 2010;70:1970-80.

59.	 Kuhn DJ, Chen Q, Voorhees PM, Strader JS, Shenk KD,
Sun CM, Demo SD, Bennett MK, Van Leeuwen FWB,
Chanan-Khan A a., Orlowski RZ. Potent activity of
carfilzomib, a novel, irreversible inhibitor of the ubiquitinproteasome pathway, against preclinical models of multiple
myeloma. Blood. 2007;110:3281-90.

49.	 Chauhan D, Tian Z, Zhou B, Kuhn D, Orlowski R, Raje N,
Richardson P, Anderson KC. In vitro and in vivo selective
antitumor activity of a novel orally bioavailable proteasome
inhibitor MLN9708 against multiple myeloma cells. Clin
cancer Res. 2011;17:5311-21.

60.	 Herndon TM, Deisseroth A, Kaminskas E, Kane RC, Koti
KM, Rothmann MD, Habtemariam B, Bullock J, Bray JD,
Hawes J, Palmby TR, Jee J, Adams W, et al. U.s. Food and
Drug Administration approval: carfilzomib for the treatment
of multiple myeloma. Clin cancer Res. 2013;19:4559-63.

50.	 Richardson PG, Baz R, Wang M, Jakubowiak AJ,
Laubach JP, Harvey RD, Talpaz M, Berg D, Liu G,
Yu J, Gupta N, Bacco A Di, Hui A. Phase 1 study of
twice-weekly ixazomib, an oral proteasome inhibitor, in
relapsed/refractory multiple myeloma patients. Blood.
2014;124:1038-47.

61.	 Allegra A, Alonci A, Gerace D, Russo S, Innao V, Calabrò
L, Musolino C. New orally active proteasome inhibitors in
multiple myeloma. Leuk Res. 2014;38:1-9.

51.	 Lee EC, Fitzgerald M, Bannerman B, Donelan J, Bano K,
Terkelsen J, Bradley DP, Subakan O, Silva MD, Liu R,
Pickard M, Li Z, Tayber O, et al. Antitumor activity of the
investigational proteasome inhibitor MLN9708 in mouse
models of B-cell and plasma cell malignancies. Clin cancer
Res. 2011;17:7313-23.

62.	 Zhou HJ, Aujay M a., Bennett MK, Dajee M, Demo SD,
Fang Y, Ho MN, Jiang J, Kirk CJ, Laidig GJ, Lewis ER, Lu
Y, Muchamuel T, et al. Design and synthesis of an orally
bioavailable and selective peptide epoxyketone proteasome
inhibitor (PR-047). J Med Chem. 2009;52:3028-38.

52.	 Kumar SK, LaPlant B, Roy V, Reeder CB, Lacy MQ, Gertz
M a, Laumann K, Thompson M a, Witzig TE, Buadi FK,
Rivera CE, Mikhael JR, Bergsagel PL, et al. Phase 2 trial
of ixazomib in patients with relapsed multiple myeloma not
refractory to bortezomib. Blood Cancer J. 2015;4:e338.

63.	 Hurchla M a, Garcia-Gomez A, Hornick MC, Ocio EM,
Li A, Blanco JF, Collins L, Kirk CJ, Piwnica-Worms D,
Vij R, Tomasson MH, Pandiella A, San Miguel JF, et al.
The epoxyketone-based proteasome inhibitors carfilzomib
and orally bioavailable oprozomib have anti-resorptive and
bone-anabolic activity in addition to anti-myeloma effects.
Leukemia. 2013;27:430-40.

53.	 Sanchez E, Li M, Steinberg J a., Wang C, Shen J, Bonavida
B, Li ZW, Chen H, Berenson JR. The proteasome inhibitor
CEP-18770 enhances the anti-myeloma activity of
bortezomib and melphalan. Br J Haematol. 2010;148:56981.

64.	 Feling RH, Buchanan GO, Mincer TJ, Kauffman CA,
Jensen PR, Fenical W, John D. Salinosporamide A: A
Highly Cytotoxic Proteasome Inhibitor from a Novel
Microbial Source, a Marine Bacterium of the New Genus
Salinospora. Angew Chemie Int Ed. 2003;42:355-7.

54.	 Piva R, Ruggeri B, Williams M, Costa G, Tamagno M,
Ferrero D, Giai V, Coscia M, Peola S, Massaia M, Pezzoni
G, Allievi C, Pescalli N, et al. CEP-18770: A novel,
orally active proteasome inhibitor with a tumor-selective
pharmacologic profile competitive with bortezomib. Blood.
2008;111:2765-75.

65.	 Chauhan D, Catley L, Li G, Podar K, Hideshima T,
Velankar M, Mitsiades C, Mitsiades N, Yasui H, Letai
A, Ovaa H, Berkers C, Nicholson B, et al. A novel orally
active proteasome inhibitor induces apoptosis in multiple
myeloma cells with mechanisms distinct from Bortezomib.
Cancer Cell. 2005;8:407-19.

55.	 Sanchez E, Li M, Li J, Wang C, Chen H, Jones-Bolin
S, Hunter K, Ruggeri B, Berenson JR. CEP-18770
(delanzomib) in combination with dexamethasone and
lenalidomide inhibits the growth of multiple myeloma.
Leuk Res. 2012;36:1422-7.

66.	 Chauhan D, Singh A V, Ciccarelli B, Richardson PG,
Palladino MA, Anderson KC. Combination of novel
proteasome inhibitor NPI-0052 and lenalidomide trigger
in vitro and in vivo synergistic cytotoxicity in multiple
myeloma. Blood. 2010;115:834-46.

56.	 Gallerani E, Zucchetti M, Brunelli D, Marangon E,
Noberasco C, Hess D, Delmonte A, Martinelli G, Böhm S,
Driessen C, De Braud F, Marsoni S, Cereda R, et al. A first
in human phase I study of the proteasome inhibitor CEP18770 in patients with advanced solid tumours and multiple
myeloma. Eur J Cancer. 2013;49:290-6.

67.	 Chauhan D, Singh A, Brahmandam M, Podar K, Hideshima
T, Richardson P, Munshi N, Palladino MA, Anderson KC.
Combination of proteasome inhibitors bortezomib and NPI0052 trigger in vivo synergistic cytotoxicity in multiple
myeloma. Blood. 2008;111:1654-65.

57.	 Kubiczkova L, Pour L, Sedlarikova L, Hajek R, Sevcikova
S. Proteasome inhibitors - molecular basis and current
perspectives in multiple myeloma. J Cell Mol Med.
2014;18:947-61.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

68.	 Zhang W, Sidhu SS. Development of inhibitors in the
ubiquitination cascade. FEBS Lett. 2014;588:356-67.

6534

Oncotarget

69.	 Pelzer C, Kassner I, Matentzoglu K, Singh RK, Wollscheid
H-P, Scheffner M, Schmidtke G, Groettrup M. UBE1L2,
a novel E1 enzyme specific for ubiquitin. J Biol Chem.
2007;282:23010-4.

81.	 Gu Y, Kaufman JL, Bernal L, Torre C, Matulis SM, Harvey
RD, Chen J, Sun S, Boise LH, Lonial S. MLN4924, an
NAE inhibitor, suppresses AKT and mTOR signaling via
upregulation of REDD1 in human myeloma cells. Blood.
2014;123:3269-76.

70.	 Xu GW, Ali M, Wood TE, Wong D, Maclean N, Wang X,
Gronda M, Skrtic M, Li X, Hurren R, Mao X, Venkatesan
M, Zavareh RB, et al. The ubiquitin-activating enzyme E1
as a therapeutic target for the treatment of leukemia and
multiple myeloma. Blood. 2010;115:2251-60.

82.	 Brownell JE, Sintchak MD, Gavin JM, Liao H, Bruzzese FJ,
Bump NJ, Soucy T a, Milhollen M a, Yang X, Burkhardt
AL, Ma J, Loke H-K, Lingaraj T, et al. Substrate-assisted
inhibition of ubiquitin-like protein-activating enzymes: the
NEDD8 E1 inhibitor MLN4924 forms a NEDD8-AMP
mimetic in situ. Mol Cell. 2010;37:102-11.

71.	 Nalepa G, Rolfe M, Harper JW. Drug discovery in the
ubiquitin-proteasome system. Nat Rev Drug Discov.
2006;5:596-613.

83.	 McMillin DW, Jacobs HM, Delmore JE, Buon L, Hunter
ZR, Monrose V, Yu J, Smith PG, Richardson PG, Anderson
KC, Treon SP, Kung AL, Mitsiades CS. Molecular and
cellular effects of NEDD8-activating enzyme inhibition in
myeloma. Mol Cancer Ther. 2012;11:942-51.

72.	 Kitagaki J, Yang Y, Saavedra J, Colburn N, Keefer L,
Perantoni A. Nitric oxide prodrug JS-K inhibits ubiquitin
E1 and kills tumor cells retaining wild-type p53. Oncogene.
2010;28:619-24.

84.	 Huang J, Zhou Y, Thomas GS, Gu Z, Yang Y, Xu H,
Tricot G, Zhan F. NEDD8 inhibition overcomes CKS1B
induced drug resistance by upregulation of p21 in multiple
myeloma. Clin Cancer Res. 2015;[Epub ahead of print].

73.	 Yang Y, Kitagaki J, Dai R-M, Tsai YC, Lorick KL, Ludwig
RL, Pierre S a, Jensen JP, Davydov I V, Oberoi P, Li
C-CH, Kenten JH, Beutler J a, et al. Inhibitors of ubiquitinactivating enzyme (E1), a new class of potential cancer
therapeutics. Cancer Res. 2007;67:9472-81.

85.	 Van Wijk SJL, Timmers HTM. The family of ubiquitinconjugating enzymes (E2s): deciding between life and death
of proteins. FASEB J. 2010;24:981-93.

74.	 Ungermannova D, Parker S, Nasveschuk C, Chapnick D,
Phillips A, Kuchta R, Liu X. Identification and mechanistic
studies of a novel ubiquitin E1 inhibitor. J Biomol Screen.
2012;17:421-34.

86.	 Chauhan D, Li G, Hideshima T, Podar K, Shringarpure R,
Mitsiades C, Munshi N, Yew PR, Anderson KC. Blockade
of ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme CDC34 enhances antimyeloma activity of Bortezomib/Proteasome inhibitor PS341. Oncogene. 2004;23:3597-602.

75.	 Laschak M, Spindler K-D, Schrader AJ, Hessenauer
A, Streicher W, Schrader M, Cronauer M V. JS-K, a
glutathione/glutathione S-transferase-activated nitric oxide
releasing prodrug inhibits androgen receptor and WNTsignaling in prostate cancer cells. BMC Cancer. 2012;12.

87.	 Ceccarelli DF, Tang X, Pelletier B, Orlicky S, Xie W,
Plantevin V, Neculai D, Chou YC, Ogunjimi A, Al-Hakim
A, Varelas X, Koszela J, Wasney G, et al. An allosteric
inhibitor of the human Cdc34 ubiquitin-conjugating
enzyme. Cell. 2011;145:1075-87.

76.	 Nath N, Chattopadhyay M, Pospishil L, Cieciura
LZ, Goswami S, Kodela R, Saavedra JE, Keefer LK,
Kashfi K. JS-K; a nitric oxide-releasing prodrug,
modulates ??-catenin/TCF signaling in leukemic Jurkat
cells: Evidence of an S-nitrosylated mechanism. Biochem
Pharmacol. 2010;80:1641-9.

88.	 Sun Y. E3 ubiquitin ligases as cancer targets and
biomarkers. Neoplasia. 2006;8:645-54.
89.	 Berndsen CE, Wolberger C. New insights into ubiquitin E3
ligase mechanism. Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2014;21:301-7.

77.	 Ren Z, Kar S, Wang Z, Wang M, Saavedra JE, Carr BI.
JS-K, a Novel Non-Ionic Diazeniumdiolate Derivative,
Inhibits Hep 3B Hepatoma Cell Growth and Induces c-Jun
Phosphorylation via Multiple MAP Kinase Pathways. J Cell
Physiol. 2003;197:426-34.

90.	 Hatakeyama S, Nakayama KI. U-box proteins as a new
family of ubiquitin ligases. Biochem Biophys Res Commun.
2003;302:635-45.
91.	 Teoh PJ, Chng WJ. p53 Abnormalities and Potential
Therapeutic Targeting in Multiple Myeloma. Biomed Res
Int. 2014;2014.

78.	 Kiziltepe T, Hideshima T, Ishitsuka K, Ocio EM, Raje N,
Catley L, Li C, Trudel LJ, Yasui H, Vallet S, Kutok JL,
Chauhan D, Mitsiades CS, et al. JS-K, a GST-activated
nitric oxide generator, induces DNA double-strand breaks,
activates DNA damage response pathways, and induces
apoptosis in vitro and in vivo in human multiple myeloma
cells. Blood. 2007;110:709-19.

92.	 Teoh BG, Urashima M, Ogata A, Chauhan D, Decaprio JA,
Treon SP, Schlossman RL, Anderson KC. MDM2 Protein
Overexpression Promotes Proliferation and Survival of
Multiple Myeloma Cells. Blood. 1997;90:1982-92.
93.	 Vassilev LT, Vu BT, Graves B, Carvajal D, Podlaski F,
Filipovic Z, Klein C, Fotouhi N, Liu EA. In Vivo Activation
of the p53 Pathway by Small-Molecule Antagonists of
MDM2. Science. 2004;303:844-9.

79.	 Kaur G, Kiziltepe T, Anderson KC, Kutok JL, Jia L. JS-K
has potent anti-angiogenic activity in vitro and inhibits
tumour angiogenesis in a multiple myeloma model in vivo.
J Pharm Pharmacol. 2010;62:145-51.

94.	 Portier M, Molès J, Mazars G, Jeanteur P, Bataille R, Klein
B, Heillet C. p53 and RAS gene mutations in multiple
myeloma. Oncogene. 1992;7:2539-43.

80.	 Zhao Y, Sun Y. Cullin-RING Ligases as attractive anticancer targets. Curr Pharm Des. 2013;19:3215-25.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

6535

Oncotarget

95.	 Drach BJ, Ackermann J, Fritz E, Kro E, Schuster R,
Gisslinger H, Desantis M, Zojer N, Fiegl M, Roka S,
Schuster J, Heinz R. Presence of a p53 Gene Deletion
in Patients With Multiple Myeloma Predicts for Short
Survival After Conventional-Dose Chemotherapy. Blood.
1998;92:802-9.

106.	Saha MN, Jiang H, Yang Y, Zhu X, Wang X, Schimmer
AD, Qiu L, Chang H. Targeting p53 via JNK pathway:
a novel role of RITA for apoptotic signaling in multiple
myeloma. PLoS One. 2012;7:e30215.
107.	Ding K, Lu Y, Nikolovska-Coleska Z, Wang G, Qiu
S, Shangary S, Gao W, Qin D, Stuckey J, Krajewski K.
Structure-Based Design of Spiro-oxindoles as Potent,
Specific Small-Molecule Inhibitors of the MDM2 - p53
Interaction. J Med Chem. 2006;49:3432-5.

96.	 Chang H, Qi C, Yi Q, Reece D, Stewart AK. p53 gene
deletion detected by fluorescence in situ hybridization
is an adverse prognostic factor for patients with multiple
myeloma following autologous stem cell transplantation.
Blood. 2005;105:358-61.

108.	Gu D, Wang S, Kuiatse I, Wang H, He J, Dai Y, Jones RJ,
Bjorklund CC, Yang J, Grant S, Orlowski RZ. Inhibition
of the MDM2 E3 Ligase induces apoptosis and autophagy
in wild-type and mutant p53 models of multiple myeloma,
and acts synergistically with ABT-737. PLoS One.
2014;9:e103015.

97.	 Stuhmer T, Chatterjee M, Hildebrandt M, Herrmann P,
Gollasch H, Gerecke C, Theurich S, Cigliano L, Manz
RA, Daniel PT, Bommert K, Vassilev LT, Bargou RC.
Nongenotoxic activation of the p53 pathway as a therapeutic
strategy for multiple myeloma. Blood. 2005;106:3609-18.

109.	Chargari C, Leteur C, Angevin E, Bashir T, Schoentjes
B, Arts J, Janicot M, Bourhis J, Deutsch E. Preclinical
assessment of JNJ-26854165 (Serdemetan), a novel
tryptamine compound with radiosensitizing activity in vitro
and in tumor xenografts. Cancer Lett. 2011;312:209-18.

98.	 Saha MN, Jiang H, Chang H. Molecular mechanisms of
nutlin-induced apoptosis in multiple myeloma. Cancer Biol
Ther. 2010;10:567-78.
99.	 Saha MN, Jiang H, Jayakar J, Reece D, Branch DR, Chang
H. MDM2 antagonist nutlin plus proteasome inhibitor
velcade combination displays a synergistic anti-myeloma
activity. Cancer Biol Ther. 2010;9:936-44.

110.	Jones RJ, Gu D, Bjorklund CC, Kuiatse I, Remaley AT,
Bashir T, Vreys V, Orlowski RZ. The Novel Anticancer
Agent JNJ-26854165 Induces Cell Death through Inhibition
of Cholesterol Transport and Degradation of ABCA1. J
Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2013;346:381-92.

100.	Ooi MG, Hayden PJ, Kotoula V, McMillin DW,
Charalambous E, Daskalaki E, Raje NS, Munshi NC,
Hideshima T, Buon L, Clynes M, Gorman PO, Paul G, et
al. Interactions of the Hdm2/p53 and Proteasome Pathways
May Enhance the Antitumor Activity of Bortezomib. Clin
Cancer Res. 2009;15:7153-60.

111.	Srinivasula S, Ashwell J. IAPs : What ’ s in a name ? Mol
Cell. 2008;30:123-35.
112.	Fulda S, Vucic D. Targeting IAP proteins for therapeutic
intervention in cancer. Nat Rev Drug Discov. 2012;11:10924.

101.	Aziz MH, Shen H, Maki CG. Acquisition of p53 mutations
in response to the non-genotoxic p53 activator Nutlin-3.
Oncogene. 2011;30:4678-86.

113.	Vaux D, Silke J. IAPs, RINGs and ubiquitylation. Nat Rev
Mol Cell Biol. 2005;6:287-97.

102.	Issaeva N, Bozko P, Enge M, Protopopova M, Verhoef
LGGC, Masucci M, Pramanik A, Selivanova G. Small
molecule RITA binds to p53, blocks p53-HDM-2
interaction and activates p53 function in tumors. Nat Med.
2004;10:1321-8.

114.	Chai J, Du C, Wu J, Kyin S, Wang X, Shi Y. Structural
and biochemical basis of apoptotic activation by Smac/
DIABLO. Nature. 2000;406:855-62.
115.	Liu Z, Sun C, Olejniczak ET, Meadows RP, Betz SF,
Oost T, Herrmann J, Wu JC, Fesik SW, Division PD,
Laboratories A, Park A. Structural basis for binding
of Smac/DIABLO to the XIAP BIR3 domain. Nature.
2000;408:1004-8.

103.	Saha MN, Jiang H, Mukai a., Chang H. RITA Inhibits
Multiple Myeloma Cell Growth through Induction of p53Mediated Caspase-Dependent Apoptosis and Synergistically
Enhances Nutlin-Induced Cytotoxic Responses. Mol Cancer
Ther. 2010;9:3041-51.

116.	Wu G, Chai J, Suber TL, Wu J, Du C. Structural
basis of IAP recognition by Smac/DIABLO. Nature.
2000;408:1008-12.

104.	Jones RJ, Bjorklund CC, Baladandayuthapani V, Kuhn DJ,
Orlowski RZ. Drug resistance to inhibitors of the human
double minute-2 E3 ligase is mediated by point mutations
of p53, but can be overcome with the p53 targeting agent
RITA. Mol Cancer Ther. 2012;11:2243-53.

117.	Fulda S. Inhibitor of Apoptosis (IAP) proteins in
hematological malignancies: molecular mechanisms and
therapeutic opportunities. Leukemia. 2014;28:1414-22.
118.	Silke J, Meier P. Inhibitor of Apoptosis ( IAP ) Proteins Modulators of Cell Death and Inflammation. Cold Spring
Harb Perspect Biol. 2013;5:a008730.

105.	Surget S, Descamps G, Brosseau C, Normant V, Maïga
S, Gomez-Bougie P, Gouy-Colin N, Godon C, Béné MC,
Moreau P, Le Gouill S, Amiot M, Pellat-Deceunynck
C. RITA (Reactivating p53 and Inducing Tumor
Apoptosis) is efficient against TP53abnormal myeloma
cells independently of the p53 pathway. BMC Cancer.
2014;14:437.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

119.	Nakagawa Y, Abe S, Kurata M, Hasegawa M, Yamamoto
K, Inoue M, Takemura T, Suzuki K, Kitagawa M. IAP
Family Protein Expression Correlates With Poor Outcome
of Multiple Myeloma Patients in Association With
Chemotherapy-induced Overexpression of Multidrug
6536

Oncotarget

Resistance Genes. Am J Hematol. 2006;81:824-31.

2013;15:72-81.

120.	Chauhan D, Neri P, Velankar M, Podar K, Hideshima T,
Fulciniti M, Tassone P, Raje N, Mitsiades C, Mitsiades
N, Richardson P, Zawel L, Tran M, et al. Targeting
mitochondrial factor Smac/DIABLO as therapy for multiple
myeloma (MM). Blood. 2007;109:1220-8.

132.	Bartlett JB, Dredge K, Dalgleish AG. The evolution of
thalidomide and its IMiD derivatives as anticancer agents.
Nat Rev Cancer. 2004;4:314-22.
133.	Ito T, Ando H, Suzuki T, Ogura T, Hotta K, Imamura Y,
Yamaguchi Y, Handa H. Identification of a Primary Target
of thalidomide teratogenicity. Science. 2010;327:1345-51.

121.	Ramakrishnan V, Painuly U, Kimlinger T, Haug J,
Rajkumar S, Kumar S. Inhibitor of apoptosis proteins
as therapeutic targets in multiple myeloma. Leukemia.
2014;28:1519-28.

134.	Lopez-Girona A, Mendy D, Ito T, Miller K, Gandhi a
K, Kang J, Karasawa S, Carmel G, Jackson P, Abbasian
M, Mahmoudi A, Cathers B, Rychak E, et al. Cereblon
is a direct protein target for immunomodulatory
and antiproliferative activities of lenalidomide and
pomalidomide. Leukemia. 2012;26:2326-35.

122.	Duvefelt CF, Lub S, Agarwal P, Arngården L, Hammarberg
A, Maes K, Valckenborgh E Van, Vanderkerken K.
Increased resistance to proteasome inhibitors in multiple
myeloma mediated by cIAP2 - implications for a
combinatorial treatment. Oncotarget. 2015;6:20621-35.
Doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.4139.
123.	Wang Z, Liu P, Inuzuka H, Wei W. Roles of F-box proteins
in cancer. Nat Rev Cancer. 2014;14:233-47.

135.	Zhu YX, Braggio E, Shi C, Bruins LA, Schmidt JE, Wier
S Van, Chang X, Bjorklund CC, Fonseca R, Bergsagel
PL, Orlowski RZ, Stewart AK. Cereblon expression is
required for the antimyeloma activity of lenalidomide and
pomalidomide. Blood. 2011;118:4771-80.

124.	Cardozo T, Pagano M. The SCF ubiquitin ligase: insights
into a molecular machine. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol.
2004;5:739-51.

136.	Penas C, Ramachandran V, Ayad NG. The APC/C
Ubiquitin Ligase: From Cell Biology to Tumorigenesis.
Front Oncol. 2011;1.

125.	Tsvetkov LM, Yeh K, Lee S, Sun H, Zhang H. p27 Kip1
ubiquitination and degradation is regulated by the SCF
Skp2 complex through phosphorylated Thr187 in p27. Cur
Biol. 1999;9:661-4.

137.	Peters J-M. The anaphase promoting complex/cyclosome:
a machine designed to destroy. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol.
2006;7:644-56.
138.	Colland F. The therapeutic potential of deubiquitinating
enzyme inhibitors. Biochem Soc Trans. 2010;38:137-43.

126.	Bornstein G, Bloom J, Sitry-Shevah D, Nakayama K,
Pagano M, Hershko A. Role of the SCFSkp2 ubiquitin
ligase in the degradation of p21Cip1 in S phase. J Biol
Chem. 2003;278:25752-7.

139.	Nijman SMB, Luna-Vargas MP a, Velds A, Brummelkamp
TR, Dirac AMG, Sixma TK, Bernards R. A genomic and
functional inventory of deubiquitinating enzymes. Cell.
2005;123:773-86.

127.	Kamura T, Hara T, Kotoshiba S, Yada M, Ishida N, Imaki
H. Degradation of p57 Kip2 mediated by SCF Skp2
- dependent ubiquitylation. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA.
2003;100:10231-6.

140.	Amerik AY, Hochstrasser M. Mechanism and function
of deubiquitinating enzymes. Biochim Biophys Acta.
2004;1695:189-207.

128.	Filipits M, Pohl G, Stranzl T, Kaufmann H, Ackermann J,
Gisslinger H, Greinix H, Chott A, Drach J. Low p27 Kip1
Expression Is an Independent Adverse Prognostic Factor
in Patients with Multiple Myeloma. Clin Cancer Res.
2003;9:820-6.

141.	Nicholson B, Marblestone JG, Butt TR, Mattern MR.
Deubiquitinating enzymes as novel anticancer targets. Futur
Oncol. 2007;3:191-9.
142.	Schwickart M, Huang X, Lill JR, Liu J, Ferrando R, French
DM, Maecker H, O’Rourke K, Bazan F, Eastham-Anderson
J, Yue P, Dornan D, Huang DCS, et al. Deubiquitinase
USP9X stabilizes MCL1 and promotes tumour cell survival.
Nature. 2010;463:103-7.

129.	Shaughnessy J. Amplification and overexpression of
CKS1B at chromosome band 1q21 is associated with
reduced levels of p27Kip1 and an aggressive clinical course
in multiple myeloma. Hematology. 2005;10:117-26.

143.	Peterson LF, Sun H, Liu Y, Potu H, Kandarpa M, Ermann
M, Courtney SM, Young M, Showalter HD, Sun D,
Jakubowiak A, Malek SN, Talpaz M, et al. Targeting
deubiquitinase activity with a novel small-molecule
inhibitor as therapy for B-cell malignancies. Blood.
2015;125:3588-98.

130.	Chen Q, Xie W, Kuhn DJ, Voorhees PM, Lopez-girona A,
Mendy D, Corral LG, Krenitsky VP, Xu W, Parseval LM,
Webb DR, Mercurio F, Nakayama KI, et al. Targeting the
p27 E3 ligase SCF Skp2 results in p27- and Skp2-mediated
cell-cycle arrest and activation of autophagy. Blood.
2008;111:4690-700.

144.	Chauhan D, Tian Z, Nicholson B, Kumar KGS, Zhou
B, Carrasco R, Mcdermott JL, Leach CA, Fulcinniti M,
Kodrasov MP, Weinstock J, Kingsbury WD, Hideshima
T, et al. A small molecule inhibitor of ubiquitin-specific
protease-7 induces apoptosis in multiple myeloma cells
and overcomes bortezomib resistance. Cancer Cell.
2012;22:345-58.

131.	Fernández-Sáiz V, Targosz B-S, Lemeer S, Eichner R,
Langer C, Bullinger L, Reiter C, Slotta-Huspenina J,
Schroeder S, Knorn A-M, Kurutz J, Peschel C, Pagano M,
et al. SCFFbxo9 and CK2 direct the cellular response to
growth factor withdrawal via Tel2/Tti1 degradation and
promote survival in multiple myeloma. Nat Cell Biol.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

6537

Oncotarget

