Oncotarget, Vol. 7, No. 6

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

DANGER is involved in high glucose-induced radioresistance
through inhibiting DAPK-mediated anoikis in non-small cell lung
cancer
TaeWoo Kwon1,*, HyeSook Youn2,3,*, Beomseok Son1,*, Daehoon Kim1, Ki Moon
Seong4, Sungkyun Park5, Wanyeon Kim2,3, BuHyun Youn1,2,3
1

Department of Integrated Biological Science, Pusan National University, Busan, 609-735, Republic of Korea

2

Department of Biological Sciences, Pusan National University, Busan, 609-735, Republic of Korea

3

Nuclear Science Research Institute, Pusan National University, Busan, 609-735, Republic of Korea

4

 ational Radiation Emergency Medical Center, Korea Institute of Radiological & Medical Sciences, Seoul, 139-706, Republic
N
of Korea

5

Department of Physics, Pusan National University, Busan, 609-735, Republic of Korea

*

These authors have contributed equally to this work

Correspondence to: BuHyun Youn, e-mail: bhyoun72@pusan.ac.kr
Wanyeon Kim, e-mail: wykim8282@gmail.com
Keywords: radioresistance, high glucose, DANGER, DAPK, anoikis
Received: September 13, 2015     Accepted: January 05, 2016     Published: January 12, 2016

ABSTRACT
F-labeled fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) uptake during FDG positron emission
tomography seems to reflect increased radioresistance. However, the exact molecular
mechanism underlying high glucose (HG)-induced radioresistance is unclear. In
the current study, we showed that ionizing radiation-induced activation of the
MEK-ERK-DAPK-p53 signaling axis is required for anoikis (anchorage-dependent
apoptosis) of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cells in normal glucose media.
Phosphorylation of DAPK at Ser734 by ERK was essential for p53 transcriptional
activity and radiosensitization. In HG media, overexpressed DANGER directly bound to
the death domain of DAPK, thus inhibiting the catalytic activity of DAPK. In addition,
inhibition of the DAPK-p53 signaling axis by DANGER promoted anoikis-resistance
and epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), resulting in radioresistance of HGtreated NSCLC cells. Notably, knockdown of DANGER enhanced anoikis, EMT inhibition,
and radiosensitization in a mouse xenograft model of lung cancer. Taken together,
our findings offered evidence that overexpression of DANGER and the subsequent
inhibitory effect on DAPK kinase activity are critical responses that account for HGinduced radioresistance of NSCLC.
18

A profound understanding of molecular events associated
with therapeutic resistance would greatly advance the
discovery of drugs that suppress radioresistance signaling
to improve NSCLC prognosis [5, 6].
Since 18F-labeled fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG)
was first synthesized in 1978, FDG positron emission
tomography (FDG-PET) has been one of the most useful
oncological imaging modalities [7]. Due to the fact that
glucose uptake and consumption of malignant tumors is
elevated, FDG-PET is based on a close glucose chemical
analogy and produces valuable data for detecting
malignancies, searching for targets, and observing
responses [8]. Although the use of FDG can provide

INTRODUCTION
Radiotherapy can be a preferential management
strategy for patients with inoperable cancer, including
advanced stages of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC),
in the absence of more effective targeted therapies
[1]. Nevertheless, therapeutic outcomes are not fully
satisfactory due to the emergence of radioresistance that
is a critical obstacle which causes failure of radiotherapy
and increased mortality of patients with NSCLC [2]. So
far, a large number of studies have been conducted to
find a way to control radioresistance and develop potent
adjuvants that enhance radiotherapy efficacy [3, 4].
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

7193

Oncotarget

information about prognosis associated with radiation
therapy, high glucose (HG) uptake, which correlates
with high FDG uptake, may increase radioresistance [9].
Moreover, GLUT1 which is the major glucose transporter
is highly expressed in NSCLC. FDG uptake and the
GLUT1 expression level correlated with the tumor size
[10]. Several clinical meta-analyses suggest that high FDG
uptake in a tumor is associated with increased local failure
for many tumor sites and reduced patient survival rates
[11, 12]. FDG-avid regions of a tumor are accordingly
considered as a potential target for the application of
radiation-dose escalation to counteract radioresistance
[13]. A recent meta-analysis study showed that FDG-avid
tumors in patients with head and neck carcinomas require
a radiation dose increased 20% to match the local response
rate of non-FDG avid tumors [14].
Glycolysis in tumor cells exposed to hypoxic
environments is escalated because cells produce ATP
through glycolysis, a process that does not need oxygen.
However, tumor cells exhibit a higher rate of glycolysis
than normal cells even under normoxic conditions;
this is known as the “Warburg effect” [15]. Genetic or
epigenetic alterations are thought to alter glycolysis
levels in a manner that drives tumor malignancy [16]. As
energy production of glycolysis is far less efficient than
that of oxidative phosphorylation in mitochondria, a set
of genes that govern glucose uptake and utilization are
frequently overexpressed in cancer cells. Although several
studies have shown a relationship between HG uptake and
characteristics of tumor cells, the mechanism underlying
cancer cell resistance to cell death is still unclear.
DANGER (also known as ITPRIP, inositol
1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor (IP3R) interacting protein)
is identified to bind to IP3R and contains a partial MAB21 domain [17]. After binding to IP3R, DANGER
accelerates the calcium-inhibitory function of the IP3R
channel, leading to regulation of the neuronal process. A
previous biochemical study demonstrated that DANGER
physically associates with death-associated protein kinase
(DAPK) and impedes the catalytic activity of DAPK [18].
Mouse embryonic fibroblasts and neurons deficient in
DANGER have elevated DAPK activity and increased
responses to cell death signals compared to control cells
and DANGER-deficient mice are more sensitive to brain
damage after neuronal injury [18]. In addition, a previous
RNA-sequencing analysis showed that ITPRIP expression
is up-regulated in monocytes treated with high levels of
glucose [19].
DAPK is a Ser/Thr protein kinase that was
originally characterized as a tumor suppressor owing
to its ability of promoting cell death [20]. DAPK is upregulated in response to various signals such as those
associated with interferon-γ, TGF-β, TNF-α, and Fas [21].
In the gut, TNF-α promotes DAPK-induced apoptosis
in tumor cells, whereas normal intestinal epithelial cells
are resistant to TNF-α, but are subject to remarkable
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

DAPK-induced inflammation [22, 23]. However, little
is known about its effects on ionizing radiation (IR)induced cell death. Multi-domain structure of DAPK
includes a catalytic domain, a Ca2+/calmodulin-binding
region, eight ankyrin repeats, two putative nucleotidebinding domains (P-loops), a cytoskeleton/Ras of complex
proteins (ROC) domain, and a C-terminal death domain
(DD). This structure is responsible not only for direct
protein phosphorylation of DAPK substrates but also
stabilization of multi-protein complexes in a cell [24]. A
cluster of DAPK interaction partners includes proteins
that act upstream of DAPK and affect its kinase activity,
stability, or subcellular localization; this includes proteins
that function as DAPK downstream effectors [25].
Interaction of ERK with the DD of DAPK enhances the
ability of DAPK to promote apoptosis [26]. ERK binds
a canonical docking sequence within the DD of DAPK,
and phosphorylates DAPK on Ser734 within the ROC
domain. This modification enhances the catalytic activity
of DAPK towards its substrate, myosin regulatory light
chain (MLC). This is reflected by a lower Km value, while
Kcat and Vmax remain unchanged, suggesting that Ser734
modification may stimulate substrate binding [26]. The
mechanism by which this occurs is unclear.
The purpose of this study was to elucidate the
mechanisms and key molecules that confer HG-induced
radioresistance in NSCLC cells. We demonstrated that
HG-induced overexpressed DANGER bound to the DD
of DAPK and subsequently inhibited ERK/DAPK-induced
death of NSCLC cells. Our findings provide a possible
explanation of how FDG uptake increases radioresistance
in NSCLC cells. Furthermore, we suggest that DANGER
and DAPK could be attractive pharmaceutical targets for
overcoming HG-induced radioresistance of NSCLC and
ultimately contribute to the effective treatment of lung
cancer with radiation.

RESULTS
HG induces DANGER overexpression in NSCLC
cells
To confirm HG-induced radioresistance in NSCLC
cells, NCI-H460 and A427 cells were used because these
cell lines have relatively high levels of radiosensitivity
[4, 27]. We first cultured NCI-H460 and A427 cells in
medium containing different concentrations of glucose
and measured radiosensitivity using a colony forming
assay. As shown in Figure 1A, NCI-H460 and A427 cells
cultured with 30 mM glucose showed higher resistance to
a pro-apoptotic dose of radiation (5 Gy) than ones grown
in normal glucose (NG) medium (5.5 mM glucose). The
30 mM of glucose was used as HG, since previous studies
investigating metabolic disorders with abnormal glucose
metabolism commonly applied 30 mM of glucose for
high concentration of glucose to cellular systems [28, 29].
7194

Oncotarget

Colony formation of HG-treated cells was greater by
approximately 6-fold for NCI-H460 cells and 4-fold for
A427 cells compared to NG-treated cells. These findings
led us to confirm that HG uptake might be associated with
radioresistance in NSCLC cells. We next investigated key
factor(s) associated with HG-induced radioresistance of
NSCLC cells. A previous transcriptome analysis showed
that DANGER expression is up-regulated in HG-treated
monocytes [19]. Based on the information, we measured
the expression of DANGER in HG-treated NCI-H460
and A427 cells. HG treatment dramatically induced
mRNA and protein expression of DANGER in both
cell lines in a time-dependent manner (Figure 1B-1E).

HG-induced increase of DANGER mRNA and protein
levels were verified in additional four NSCLC cell lines,
NCI-H157, NCI-H23, NCI-H1299, and NCI-H358
(Supplementary Figure S1A, S1B) and we confirmed that
elevated DANGER protein expression was sustained for
at least 48 h after HG treatment (Supplementary Figure
S1C). Next, molecular modification of DANGER by
HG treatment was examined because DANGER was
known to be phosphorylated at Ser547 [30]. However,
HG-induced DANGER phosphorylation at Ser residues
was not detected in either NSCLC cell line (Figure 1F).
To determine whether HG can change the expression of
DANGER in the presence of IR, the protein levels of

Figure 1: HG induces DANGER overexpression in NSCLC cells. A. Survival curves for NG- or HG-treated NCI-H460 and A427

cells exposed to IR were assessed with a colony forming assay. Data are represented as mean ± SEM (n = 3). B. Expression of ITPRIP
in HG-treated NCI-H460 and A427 cells was analyzed by qRT-PCR. After treatment with specific media (NO, no glucose; NG, normal
glucose; HG, high glucose; or MC, mannitol control) for 24 h, relative mRNA levels of DANGER were monitored. Data are represented
as mean ± SEM (n = 3); *p < 0.05 compared to the NG-treated cells. C. Time-dependent expression of ITPRIP in HG-treated NCI-H460
and A427 cells was analyzed by qRT-PCR. Data are represented as mean ± SEM (n = 3); *p < 0.05 compared with cells after 0 h of HG
treatment. D. and E. Expression of DANGER and time-dependent changes in HG-treated NCI-H460 and A427 cells were analyzed by
Western blotting. F. HG-induced phosphorylation of DANGER was evaluated with an in vivo kinase assay. After HG treatment for the
indicated time, the cells were harvested and cell lysates were subjected to an IP assay with an anti-DANGER antibody followed by Western
blotting for pSer/Thr. G. Effect of IR on HG-induced overexpression of DANGER was analyzed by Western blotting.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

7195

Oncotarget

DANGER were measured in HG-treated and irradiated
NCI-H460 or A427 cells. As shown in Figure 1G, the
levels of DANGER were increased in the HG-treated
NSCLC cells. Elevated DANGER expression was not
observed with IR in either cell line. Collectively, these data
suggest that HG induces the overexpression of DANGER
in NSCLC cells.

of DANGER and DAPK in live cells by a bimolecular
fluorescence complementation (BiFC) assay (Figure 3D).
The immunostaining results of DAPK and DANGER in
NSCLC cells also suggested co-localization of the two
proteins (Supplementary Figure S3). Taken together, these
results indicated that DANGER physically associates with
DAPK in HG-treated NSCLC cells.

Down-regulation of DANGER expression
reduces HG-induced radioresistance in NSCLC
cells

DANGER inhibits the catalytic activity of DAPK
in NSCLC cells
Given the physical interaction between DANGER
and DAPK, we next focused on the functional relationship
of these proteins. A previous study revealed that the
catalytic activity of DAPK is increased in response
to serum stimulation [31]. A DAPK kinase assay
was conducted by measuring the phosphorylation of
MLC, a DAPK substrate, after transfection of HADANGER followed by serum stimulation. We observed
that DANGER overexpression led to decreased MLC
phosphorylation, indicating that DANGER inhibited
serum-induced DAPK activation (Figure 4A). Analysis
of the kinetics indicated that MLC phosphorylation by
DAPK was increased in a time-dependent manner and
this activity was significantly reduced by DANGER
overexpression in NSCLC cells (Figure 4B). Since
many proteins interact with the DD of DAPK [25], we
determined the function of the DAPK DD in the context
of an association between DANGER and DAPK using a
BiFC assay. Fluorescence was observed in cells expressing
DAPK (WT or DD-only) and DANGER, but not in those
that expressed DAPK-ΔDD and DANGER (Figure 4C).
This result was confirmed by a binding assay (Figure 4D).
Taken together, these findings indicated that DANGER
inhibits the catalytic activity of DAPK through a direct
interaction with the DD of DAPK in NSCLC cells.

To determine whether DANGER is responsible
for HG-induced radioresistance in NSCLC cells, two
DANGER siRNAs were used to suppress DANGER
expression. The short-term effect of DANGER knockdown
on irradiated cell growth was evaluated with an MTT assay
in NCI-H460 and A427 cells. Knockdown of DANGER
expression had no significant effect on cell proliferation
with HG-alone (Figure 2A and Supplementary Figure
S2A). However, DANGER knockdown significantly
reduced HG-induced growth of irradiated NSCLC cells,
suggesting that DANGER protects cancer cell from IRinduced cell death. To evaluate the long-term effect of
DANGER knockdown on cell proliferation, a colony
formation assay was conducted. The formation of colonies
by both cell lines after DANGER knockdown was slightly
reduced in the presence of HG-alone. In contrast, the HGinduced increase of colony formation in the presence of IR
was greatly diminished by DANGER knockdown, which
was reversed by overexpressed DANGER (Figure 2B,
2C, Supplementary Figure S2B, and S2C). These results
suggest that DANGER knockdown reduces HG-induced
radioresistance of NSCLC cells.

HG-induced DANGER physically interacts with
DAPK in NSCLC cells

DANGER inhibits DAPK-induced anoikis in
irradiated NSCLC cells

Since we found that DANGER was overexpressed
with HG treatment and involved in radioresistance of
NSCLC cells, we attempted to identify a DANGERinteracting proteome in HG-treated and irradiated NSCLC
cells to elucidate the molecular functions of DANGER.
Based on the information from a published literature
of physical and functional interactions, we focused on
DAPK, a key regulator of stress-induced apoptosis [25].
Importantly, a previous functional study demonstrated
that DANGER directly binds to DAPK and inhibits
the kinase activity of DAPK, consequently increasing
neuron viability [18]. We subsequently assessed the
binding of DANGER and DAPK in NSCLC cells by
a reciprocal immunoprecipitation (IP) assay (Figure
3A, 3B). HG-induced overexpression of DANGER
and subsequent binding of endogenous DANGER to
endogenous DAPK was detected in NSCLC cells (Figure
3C). In addition, we confirmed the subcellular binding
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

We further set out to identify the physiological
relevance of DANGER-DAPK interactions since we
found that DANGER inhibited the catalytic activity
of DAPK through direct interaction in HG-treated and
irradiated NSCLC cells. First, we evaluated HG- and IRinduced biochemical modification of DAPK based on
information about DAPK-mediated signaling dependent
on its phosphorylation [26]. In both cell lines, IR-induced
DAPK phosphorylation on Ser/Thr sites was observed,
whereas HG-dependent phosphorylation of Ser/Thr and
Tyr residues was not detected (Figure 5A). Based on data
from the literature, we used different DAPK mutants
(S289A, S308A, or S734A) as a substrate for a kinase
assay to further determine which residues are the targets
of phosphorylation by IR [26, 32, 33]. Phosphorylation
was completely absent in the DAPK-S734A mutant
7196

Oncotarget

(Figure 5B). These findings indicated that Ser734 of
DAPK is required for phosphorylation in irradiated
NCI-H460 or A427 cells. It has been reported that ERK
phosphorylates DAPK at Ser734, which consequently
promotes cytoplasmic retention of ERK and DAPKinduced apoptosis [26]. In this study, we observed that
DAPK was phosphorylated at Ser sites by ERK1-WT
but not ERK1-kinase-dead (KD) after irradiation (Figure
5C). Direct phosphorylation of DAPK by ERK was
confirmed by treating NCI-H460 and A427 cells with an
ERK-specific inhibitor, PD98059, and a MEK inhibitor,
GDC-0973. IR-induced DAPK phosphorylation by ERK
was significantly diminished following treatment with the
two inhibitors (Supplementary Figure S4A). Moreover,

DAPK phosphorylation was not essential for interaction
with DANGER as shown in Supplementary Figure S4B.
Taken together, these results indicated that DAPK is
phosphorylated at Ser734 by ERK in irradiated NSCLC
cells.
Notably, the phosphorylation of DAPK at Ser734
by ERK has been reported to be essential for the proanoikis function of DAPK [26]. Based on a previous
study demonstrating that DAPK inhibits cell adhesion
and induction of anoikis [34], we assessed the effect of
DANGER on the adhesion-inhibitory activity of DAPK.
As shown in Figure 5D and Supplementary Figure S4C,
activation of ERK by IR further potentiated this antiadhesion effect in a dose-dependent manner in cells

Figure 2: Down-regulation of DANGER expression reduces HG-induced radioresistance in NSCLC cells. A. Short-

term effects of DANGER knockdown on cell growth in both NCI-H460 and A427 cells following IR exposure were assessed with an
MTT assay. Data are represented as mean ± SEM (n = 3); *p < 0.05 compared to non-irradiated cells, **p < 0.05 compared to cells treated
with irradiation-alone, ***p < 0.05 compared to HG-treated and irradiated cells. Inset: SiRNA knockdown efficiency of DANGER in HGtreated NCI-H460 and A427 cells was analyzed by Western blotting. B. Long-term effects of DANGER knockdown on cell growth in
both NCI-H460 and A427 cells following IR exposure were assessed with a colony forming assay. C. Quantitative analysis of the number
of NCI-H460 and A427 cell clones after DANGER knockdown with or without HG treatment was performed with Image J. Data are
represented as mean ± SEM (n = 3); *p < 0.05 compared to non-irradiated cells, **p < 0.05 compared to cells treated with irradiation-alone,
***
p < 0.05 compared to HG-treated and irradiated cells.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

7197

Oncotarget

Figure 3: HG-induced DANGER physically interacts with DAPK in NSCLC cells. A. and B. Binding of DANGER and DAPK

was measured by a reciprocal IP assay. C. HG-induced overexpression of DANGER and subsequent interaction of endogenous DANGER
with endogenous DAPK was detected using an IP assay. D. A BiFC assay was performed to evaluate the interaction of DAPK-DANGER in
live cells. Cells were transiently transfected with pBiFC-DAPK-VN, pBiFC-DANGER-VC, pBiFC-EGFR-VN, and/or pBiFC-EGFR-VC.
Fluorescence indicative of DANGER-DAPK binding was measured in NCI-H460 or A427 cells. Scale bars, 10 μm.

Figure 4: DANGER inhibits the catalytic activity of DAPK in NSCLC cells. A. Effects of DANGER overexpression on DAPK

activity were measured with a kinase assay. B. Effects of DANGER on kinetics of MLC phosphorylation by DAPK were measured with
a kinetic analysis. The extent of phosphorylation was quantified and expressed as a percentage with 100% representing the maximum
phosphorylation of MLC. C. A BiFC assay was performed to determine the interaction of DAPK with DANGER in live cells. NCI-H460
or A427 cells were transiently transfected with pBiFC-DAPK (WT, DD-only, or ΔDD)-VN and/or pBiFC-DANGER-VC. Fluorescence
indicative of DANGER-DAPK binding was measured in the cells. Scale bars, 10 μm. D. Involvement of the DAPK DD in binding to
DANGER was confirmed with an IP assay.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

7198

Oncotarget

expressing DAPK-WT but not DAPK-S734A. However,
the diminished anti-adhesion function was restored by
DANGER overexpression with HG treatment; this effect
was offset by DANGER knockdown. Since it has been

reported that p53 induction and apoptosis is stimulated by
the adhesion-inhibitory activity of DAPK [35], we next
evaluated the effect of DANGER on DAPK-induced p53
activation and apoptosis. We observed that DANGER

Figure 5: DANGER reduces DAPK-dependent anoikis in irradiated NSCLC cells. A. HG- and IR-dependent phosphorylation of

DAPK was assessed. B. IR-induced DAPK phosphorylation of Ser residues was confirmed using DAPK mutants (S289A, S308A, or S734A).
C. Phosphorylation of DAPK by ERK1 was measured using an ERK1-KD (K71R) mutant. pERK1 indicates phosphorylated ERK1. D. Effects of
DANGER knockdown on the anti-adhesion effect of DAPK were measured with an adhesion analysis. The cells were irradiated and cell adhesion
on fibrinogen was measured. Data are represented as mean ± SEM (n = 3); *p < 0.05 compared to non-irradiated cells transfected with DAPKWT, **p < 0.05 compared to irradiated cells transfected with DAPK-WT, ***p < 0.05 compared to HG-treated and irradiated cells transfected with
DAPK-WT. E. Effects of DANGER knockdown on HG- and IR-induced p53 transcriptional activation were measured with a luciferase assay.
Data are represented as mean ± SEM (n = 3); *p < 0.05 compared to non-irradiated cells, **p < 0.05 compared to cells treated with irradiationalone, ***p < 0.05 compared to HG-treated and irradiated cells. F. Effects of DANGER knockdown on HG- and IR-induced Caspase 3/7 activation
in NSCLC cells were measured with a Caspase 3/7 activity assay. Data are represented as mean ± SEM (n = 3); *p < 0.05 compared to nonirradiated cells, **p < 0.05 compared to cells treated with irradiation-alone, ***p < 0.05 compared to HG-treated and irradiated cells. G. Functional
involvement of DANGER knockdown in HG- and IR-induced DNA damage responses was measured with a DNA fragmentation assay. Data
are represented as mean ± SEM (n = 3); *p < 0.05 compared to non-irradiated cells, **p < 0.05 compared to cells treated with irradiation alone,
***
p < 0.05 compared to HG-treated and irradiated cells. (Continued)
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

7199

Oncotarget

Figure 5: (Continued) DANGER reduces DAPK-dependent anoikis in irradiated NSCLC cells. H. The inhibitory effects of
DANGER knockdown on HG- and IR-induced NSCLC cell migration were measured using a Transwell migration assay. Data are represented as
mean ± SEM (n = 3); *p < 0.05 compared to non-irradiated cells, **p < 0.05 compared to cells treated with irradiation-alone, ***p < 0.05 compared
to HG-treated and irradiated cells. I. Effects of DANGER knockdown on the protein expression of E-cadherin, Vimentin, and Fibronectin in
HG-treated NSCLC cells were analyzed by Western blotting.

reduced DAPK-mediated transcriptional activation of
the p53-promoter reporter constructs (Figure 5E and
Supplementary Figure S4D) and expression of p21 which
is a known target of p53 activity (Supplementary Figure
S4E). Additionally, IR-induced pro-apoptotic activity
of DAPK was markedly decreased by HG treatment.
However, depleting DANGER expression significantly
increased radiosensitivity of irradiated NSCLC cells
(Figure 5F, 5G, Supplementary Figure S5A, and S5B).
These results indicate that DANGER reduced DAPKinduced anoikis in irradiated NSCLC cells.
Several lines of evidence have demonstrated that
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) status including
loss of cell-cell contact increases scattering migration/
invasion and resistance to anoikis [36, 37]. Having
identified the effect of DANGER on IR-induced anoikis,
we next measured cell migration capacity and EMT
marker expression. Reduced motility in NSCLC cells was
shown by treatment of DANGER siRNAs (Figure 5H and
Supplementary Figure S6A). HG treatment promoted IRinduced EMT by decreasing the expression of E-cadherin
(an epithelial marker) while increasing the expression
of Vimentin and Fibronectin (mesenchymal markers)
(Figure 5I and Supplementary Figure S6B). Reduced EMT
was also observed in NSCLC cells in which DANGER
expression was knocked-down. Taken together, these
results suggest that the inhibition of DANGER expression
suppresses HG-activated EMT in NSCLC cells.

To evaluate the combined effects of DANGER and IR
on tumor growth in vivo, a xenograft mouse model was
established (Figure 6A). The data from nude mice bearing
tumors formed by NCI-H460 and A427 cells indicated that
HG induced radioresistance in vivo (Figure 6B). Tumor
volumes of the mice treated with HG were significantly
increased by approximately 76.2% (the group injected with
NCI-H460 cells) or 78.8% (the group injected with A427
cells) on day-30 compared to mice receiving radiationalone. We also confirmed that DANGER overexpression
by lentiviral transduction in NSCLC cells made them more
radioresistant (Supplementary Figure S7A). Compared
to mice receiving radiation-alone, tumor volumes of the
mice injected with DANGER-overexpressed NSCLC
cells were significantly elevated by 97.4% (NCI-H460
cells) or 103% (A427 cells). Increased radioresistance
due to HG treatment was offset by DANGER knockdown.
Moreover, the expression of DANGER and EMT-related
mesenchymal marker proteins was significantly elevated
in the extracted tumor tissue lysates when HG-treated or
DANGER-overexpressed cells were administered to the
mice (Figure 6C and Supplementary Figure S7B). Thus,
we suggest that DANGER knockdown significantly
increased in vivo radiosensitization while inhibiting the
EMT.

DISCUSSION
For decades, it has been documented that cancer
cells largely rely on glycolysis for their energy metabolism
even under aerobic conditions; this is known as the
Warburg effect [15]. Because significant glucose uptake
and consumption for elevated glycolysis have been
observed in many cancer types, these alterations of energy
metabolism have been recently considered as an emerging
hallmark of cancer [38]. High levels of glycolysis may be

DANGER knockdown enhances in vivo
radiosensitization and decreases in vivo EMT in
a xenograft mouse model
In our cell death assays, we observed that DANGER
reduced DAPK-induced anoikis in irradiated NSCLC
cells (Figure 5, Supplementary Figures S4, S5, and S6).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

7200

Oncotarget

beneficial not only to cancer cells by supplying ATP and
metabolic byproducts [39], but also for diagnosing cancer
using FDG-PET [8, 40]. Recent studies have suggested
that FDG uptake reflects increased radioresistance and
poor treatment outcomes due to the persistence of cancer
cells [11, 12, 41]. Consistently, data from the current study
showed that NSCLC cells were more radioresistant in HG
media compared to ones maintained in NG media. These
observations underscore the importance of glucose not
only as an essential nutrient for cancer cells, but also as
a reagent which can induce resistance to genotoxic stress
such as IR. Although the relevance between glucose levels
in tumor tissue niches and the viability of cancer cells has
been recognized in recent years, the mechanism and key
molecules of glucose-induced radioresistance remain
largely unknown.
We found that DANGER expression was
specifically induced by HG. It was also observed that
DANGER knockdown was effective on just IR response
(Figure 2B). We believed that DANGER can help cancer
cells to be resistant to radiotherapy similar to oncogenes.
However, DANGER is usually expressed at low levels
in lung cancer tissues compared with normal lung

according to the Oncomine database (www.oncomine.
org, Supplementary Figure S8A) [42, 43]. This implies
that DANGER itself does not possess oncogenic functions
that promote tumorigenesis. We hypothesized that
DANGER is indirectly associated with the induction of
radioresistance through interplay with signaling pathways
of stress-induced cell death. DAPK which promotes
apoptosis and functions as a tumor suppressor was found
as an interaction partner of DANGER. Data from the
Oncomine database showed lower expression of DAPK
in lung cancer than normal lung (Supplementary Figure
S8B) [44]. We attempted to provide explanations for how
DAPK-DANGER interaction and their relevant signaling
pathways could increase radioresistance of NSCLC cells
in which DAPK is moderately expressed.
We observed that DANGER inhibits the catalytic
activity of DAPK through direct binding to the DD of
DAPK in NSCLC cells (Figure 4). The DD is a proteinprotein interaction-mediating domain that is common to
many pro-apoptotic proteins, such as Fas, TNF receptor,
TNF receptor type 1-associated death domain protein, and
Fas-associated death domain protein. Although no crystal
structure of the DD of DAPK has been produced, the

Figure 6: Knockdown of DANGER enhances in vivo radiosensitization and decreases in vivo EMT in a xenograft mouse
model. A. The experimental protocol for determining whether DANGER knockdown increases in vivo radiosensitization and EMT in a xenograft

mouse model (control or DANGER-specific shRNA encapsulated into DOTAP-cholesterol, DC-shRNA).B. The effects of DANGER knockdown
by DANGER shRNA-1 on in vivo radiosensitization were measured in a xenograft mouse model. Data are represented as mean ± SEM
(n = 3 with three animals/group); *p < 0.05 compared to tumor volume on day-30 in mice treated with radiation, HG, and Scrambled shRNA. C.
The in vivo effects of DANGER knockdown by DANGER shRNA-1 on the expression of DANGER and EMT-related proteins were evaluated
by Western blot analysis.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

7201

Oncotarget

DD was previously shown to be involved in interactions
between DAPK and several proteins including UNC5H2,
TSC2, and kelch-like protein-20 [25]. The DD of DAPK
was also found to be necessary to a physical interaction
with ERK. ERK phosphorylates DAPK at Ser734,
thereby increasing DAPK catalytic activity both in vitro
and in vivo [26]. We found that the pro-apoptotic activity
of IR-exposed DAPK, but not the S734A mutant, was
markedly reduced by DANGER, and the DD is critical for
interaction between DAPK and DANGER (Figure 5). Our
results demonstrating enhanced recruitment of DANGER
to the ERK-DAPK complex in HG-treated cells compared
to NSCLC cells in NG media suggest a specific mode
of binding. We propose that ERK and DANGER may
compete for binding to the DD of DAPK in HG-treated
cells following irradiation. In the HG microenvironment,
overexpressed DANGER is able to bind to DAPK and
results in decreased ERK-mediated death of IR-irradiated
NSCLC cells. Thus, there may be two different modes
of complex formation with DAPK based on glucose
concentration.
We also found that HG induced anoikis-resistance
and EMT activation (Figure 5). Anoikis, a type of
programmed cell death caused by detachment of cells
from the extracellular matrix, is a defensive mechanism
for suppressing anchorage-independent cell growth and
EMT involved in cancer metastasis [45, 46]. Although
targeting anoikis-resistance is a promising strategy for
inhibiting tumor progression, searching for relevant
factors and identifying their mechanistic implications
would be important for counteracting anoikis-resistance
and preventing metastasis. Our data not only provide
new evidence that DAPK induces IR-activated anoikis in
NSCLC cells, but also demonstrate the presence of an HGinduced anoikis-resistance signaling through which DAPK

is inhibited by DANGER. Suggested roles of DAPK
and DANGER on potentially influencing metastasis in
our results may have significant clinical implications
since the EMT and metastasis represent impediments to
effective cancer therapy. In addition, we observed that
migration of NSCLC cells was significantly induced by
irradiation (Figure 5H and Supplementary Figure S6)
with which a high level of anoikis-dependent apoptosis
was also observed. It has been suggested that IR increases
the expression of EMT-inducing proteins to facilitate
primary cancer cell survival [47]. The dose of IR used
in our study was possibly lethal and activated apoptotic
pathways, including the ERK-DAPK-p53 axis. Thus,
irradiation-alone could cause a significant level of cell
death and increased migration capacity of NSCLC cells
which survived after irradiation. However, HG can inhibit
DAPK-induced apoptotic signaling through DANGERDAPK interaction, leading to EMT acceleration and
acquisition of radioresistance in NSCLC cells.
Although FDG-PET plays a key part in oncological
imaging, radioresistance caused by FDG uptake in tumors
is a barrier for efficient radiotherapy. Results of the current
study showed that DANGER is a HG-associated biomarker
and we subsequently performed in vitro/in vivo analyses to
investigate the underlying mechanism of radioresistance
induced by DANGER in HG-treated NSCLC. Our results
showed that DANGER helps prevent the development of
an IR-induced apoptotic phenotype by blocking the MEKERK-DAPK-p53 axis (Figure 7). DANGER was found to
bind with DAPK, leading to inhibition of DAPK kinase
activity, induction of anoikis-resistance, and promotion of
EMT in vitro and in vivo. In addition, we provided the first
evidence of a novel regulatory mechanism of radioresistance
including the functional involvement of DAPK/ERK or
DAPK/DANGER in irradiated NSCLC cells depending

Figure 7: A schematic diagram illustrating MEK-ERK-DAPK-p53 signaling in IR-induced anoikis and the
radioresistant effect of DANGER in HG-treated NSCLC cells. With NG media, DAPK is phosphorylated on Ser734 by ERK

after radiation exposure, consequently leading to the activation of p53 and radiosensitization. IR-induced activation of the MEK-ERKDAPK-p53 signaling axis is required for anoikis in NSCLC cells. DANGER is overexpressed in NSCLC cells cultured in HG medium, but
not in ones maintained under NG conditions. In HG media, overexpressed DANGER directly binds to the DD of DAPK, thus inhibiting
the catalytic activity of DAPK. In addition, inhibition of the DAPK-p53 signaling axis by DANGER promotes anoikis-resistance and
EMT induction, resulting in radioresistance of HG-treated NSCLC cells. Knockdown of DANGER expression can enhance anoikis, EMT
inhibition, and radiosensitization both in vitro and in vivo.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

7202

Oncotarget

on glucose concentration. Taken together, our results
demonstrated that suppression of DANGER expression
and/or DAPK-DANGER interaction through treatment of
specific agents in combination with radiotherapy in FDGavid tumors could improve the therapeutic efficacy for
treating NSCLC by overcoming radioresistance.

Dr. Chang-Deng Hu (Purdue University, West Lafayette,
IN) and Dr. Ichi N. Maruyama (Okinawa Institute of
Science and Technology Graduate University, Okinawa,
Japan). To construct pBiFC-DAPK-VN, a DAPKencoding DNA fragment was amplified by PCR and then
inserted into the KpnI site of pBiFC-EGFR-VN, where
the region encoding EGFR had been located. To construct
pBiFC-DANGER-VC, a DNA fragment encoding
DANGER was amplified and inserted between the SalI
and XhoI sites of pBiFC-EGFR-VC, thus eliminating the
EGFR DNA fragment. NCI-H460 or A427 cells were
transiently transfected with pBiFC-DAPK-VN and pBiFCDANGER-VC, and fluorescence was measured with an
Olympus IX71 fluorescence microscope (Olympus Optical
Co. Ltd., Tokyo, Japan).

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Cell lines, cell culture, and irradiation
NCI-H460 and A427 cells were obtained from
American Type Culture Collection (Manassas, VA),
authenticated, and maintained in early passages, no more
than 6 mo after receipt. The cells were grown at 37°C in
RPMI-1640 medium containing 10% fetal bovine serum,
100 U/mL penicillin, and 100 μg/mL streptomycin.
For glucose treatment, the cells were divided into the
following groups: no glucose (NO), NG (5.5 mM),
mannitol control (MC, 5.5 mM D-glucose + 24.5 mM
mannitol), and HG (30 mM). The cells were then exposed
to a single dose of γ-rays using a Gamma Cell-40 Exactor
(Nordion International, Inc., Kanata, Ontario, Canada) at
a dose rate of 0.81 Gy/min. Flasks containing the control
cells were put in the irradiation chamber but not irradiated.

DAPK kinase assay
DAPK kinase activity in cells transfected
with FLAG-DAPK and HA-DANGER was assayed
as described [31]. DAPK-WT proteins (0.5 mg)
immunoprecipitated with anti-FLAG antibody and
recombinant GST-MLC at kinase:substrate molar ratios of
~1:5 were incubated with kinase buffer containing 50 mM
HEPES (pH 7.5), 8 mM MgCl2, 2 mM MnCl2, 0.5 mM
CaCl2, 50 mM ATP, 10 mCi [γ-32P]ATP, 0.1 mg/mL bovine
serum albumin, and 1 mM bovine CaM (Sigma, St. Louis,
MO) at 25°C. For stoichiometric analysis, kinase assays
were performed over a time course ranging from 0 to 40
min. Reactions were terminated by boiling in SDS loading
buffer and the proteins were separated on 7.5% acrylamide
gels that were stained and dried. Levels of incorporated
ATP were measured by phosphorimaging relative to a
standard curve of known ATP concentrations.

MTT assay
The effect of DANGER knockdown on cell growth
was assessed with an MTT assay as previously described
[48]. Cells were cultured in 96-well plates (1,000 cells
per well). Cells were transfected with Scrambled or
DANGER-specific siRNA for 24 h and then treated with
HG for 24 h. After 6 h being exposed to IR, the cells
were subjected to an MTT assay. Media were removed
and 0.05% MTT solution was added before the cells
were incubated at 37°C for 2 h. The MTT solution was
subsequently replaced with dimethyl sulfoxide and the
plates were incubated for 10 min. After incubation, the
solution was aliquoted into 96-well plates in duplicate and
absorbance was measured at 570 nm.

Luciferase reporter gene assay
A luciferase assay was performed as previously
described [50]. Following HG treatment and cotransfection with 3 μg of a p53 luciferase reporter gene
(pGL3-luc) or DANGER siRNA, the medium was
changed and cells were irradiated. After 3 h, the cells
were washed twice with cold PBS and lysed in reporter
lysis buffer (Promega, Madison, WI). The lysates were
then washed and centrifuged at 12,000 g for 1 min at 4°C.
20 μL of the cell extract and 100 μL of luciferase assay
reagent were mixed at room temperature. Samples were
placed in Glomax multi-detection system (Promega) to
measure luciferase activity in the solution.

Colony forming assay
Cells were plated at a density of 300 cells in 6-well
dishes. After 24 h of glucose treatment, the cells were
exposed to a specific dose of radiation, and subsequently
grown for 14 d. Next, the cells were fixed with 10% methanol
and 10% acetic acid, and stained with 1% crystal violet.
Colonies containing more than 50 cells were identified using
densitometric software and scored as survivors [49].

Tumor xenograft in nude mice
For in vivo delivery of shRNA into tumors, control
or DANGER-specific shRNA were first encapsulated
into DOTAP-cholesterol (DC; Avanti Polar Lipids, Inc.,
Alabaster, AL) nanoparticles by dissolving in sterilized
NG or HG media and mixing with the nanosomes [51].

BiFC assay
N-terminal Venus-conjugated EGFR (pBiFCEGFR-VN) and C-terminal Venus-conjugated EGFR
(pBiFC-EGFR-VC) constructs were kindly provided by
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

7203

Oncotarget

NG- or HG-adapted 2 × 106 NCI-H460 or A427 cells were
then injected into the flank of 6-wk-old male BALB/c
athymic nude mice and tumors were allowed to develop.
Upon identification of a palpable tumor (with a minimum
volume of 200 mm3), the DC nanoparticle-encapsulated
shRNA duplexes were injected into the tumors every
4 d using insulin syringes at a concentration of 20 μg
shRNA/100 mm3 of tumor volume. To produce sufficient
lentiviral particles for transfection of NSCLC cells, the
Lenti-vpak packaging kit (Origene) was used according
to the manufacturer's instructions. The untreated control
groups were injected with NG or HG media as indicated.
The animals were also irradiated with 10 Gy once a week
for 4 wk. Tumor length (L) and width (l) were measured
with a caliper and tumor volumes were calculated using
the formula (L × l2)/2. At the end of the treatment period,
the animals were euthanized and the tumors were used for
biochemical studies.

trial of sequential chemoradiotherapy using a novel hypoxic
cell radiosensitizer, doranidazole (PR-350), in patients with
locally advanced non-small-cell lung Cancer (WJTOG0002). Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2007; 69:786–792.
4.	 Yang HJ, Youn H, Seong KM, Jin YW, Kim J, Youn B.
Phosphorylation of ribosomal protein S3 and antiapoptotic
TRAF2 protein mediates radioresistance in non-small cell
lung cancer cells. J Biol Chem. 2013; 288:2965–2975.
5.	 Kim E, Youn H, Kwon T, Son B, Kang J, Yang HJ, Seong
KM, Kim W, Youn B. PAK1 tyrosine phosphorylation is
required to induce epithelial-mesenchymal transition and
radioresistance in lung cancer cells. Cancer Res. 2014;
74:5520–5531.
6.	 Kim W, Youn H, Kwon T, Kang J, Kim E, Son B, Yang HJ,
Jung Y, Youn B. PIM1 kinase inhibitors induce radiosensitization in non-small cell lung cancer cells. Pharmacol Res.
2013; 70:90–101.
7.	 Deppen SA, Blume JD, Kensinger CD, Morgan AM,
Aldrich MC, Massion PP, Walker RC, McPheeters ML,
Putnam JB, Jr., Grogan EL. Accuracy of FDG-PET to diagnose lung cancer in areas with infectious lung disease: a
meta-analysis. JAMA. 2014; 312:1227–1236.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported by Radiation Technology
R&D program through the National Research Foundation
of Korea funded by the Ministry of Science, ICT &
Future Planning (2013M2A2A7042502), a grant from the
National R&D Program for Cancer Control, Ministry of
Health and Welfare, Republic of Korea (1320100), and
Basic Science Research Program through the National
Research Foundation of Korea funded by the Ministry
of Education (2014R1A1A2004061 to H Youn and
2013R1A1A2059832 to W Kim).
The authors thank Dr. Chang-Deng Hu (Purdue
University, West Lafayette, IN) and Dr. Ichi N. Maruyama
(Okinawa Institute of Science and Technology Graduate
University, Okinawa, Japan) for providing the constructs
for pBiFC-EGFR-VN and -VC.

8.	 Ben-Haim S, Ell P. 18F-FDG PET and PET/CT in the
evaluation of cancer treatment response. J Nucl Med. 2009;
50:88–99.
9.	 Abramyuk A, Tokalov S, Zophel K, Koch A, Szluha
Lazanyi K, Gillham C, Herrmann T, Abolmaali N. Is pretherapeutical FDG-PET/CT capable to detect high risk
tumor subvolumes responsible for local failure in non-small
cell lung cancer? Radiother Oncol. 2009; 91:399–404.
10.	 Brown RS, Leung JY, Kison PV, Zasadny KR, Flint
A, Wahl RL. Glucose transporters and FDG uptake in
untreated primary human non-small cell lung cancer. J Nucl
Med. 1999; 40:556–565.
11.	 Ghooshkhanei H, Treglia G, Sabouri G, Davoodi R,
Sadeghi R. Risk stratification and prognosis determination using (18)F-FDG PET imaging in endometrial cancer
patients: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Gynecol
Oncol. 2014; 132:669–676.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
The authors declare no conflict of interest.

12.	 Wang Z, Chen JQ, Liu JL, Qin XG, Huang Y. FDG-PET in
diagnosis, staging and prognosis of pancreatic carcinoma: a
meta-analysis. World J Gastroenterol. 2013; 19:4808–4817.

REFERENCES
1.	 Koh PK, Faivre-Finn C, Blackhall FH, De Ruysscher D.
Targeted agents in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC):
clinical developments and rationale for the combination with thoracic radiotherapy. Cancer Treat Rev. 2012;
38:626–640.

13.	 Feng M, Kong FM, Gross M, Fernando S, Hayman JA, Ten
Haken RK. Using fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission
tomography to assess tumor volume during radiotherapy
for non-small-cell lung cancer and its potential impact on
adaptive dose escalation and normal tissue sparing. Int J
Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2009; 73:1228–1234.

2.	 Bussink J, van der Kogel AJ, Kaanders JH. Activation of
the PI3-K/AKT pathway and implications for radioresistance mechanisms in head and neck cancer. Lancet Oncol.
2008; 9:288–296.

14.	 Jeong J, Setton JS, Lee NY, Oh JH, Deasy JO. Estimate of
the impact of FDG-avidity on the dose required for head
and neck radiotherapy local control. Radiother Oncol. 2014;
111:340–347.

3.	 Nishimura Y, Nakagawa K, Takeda K, Tanaka M, Segawa
Y, Tsujino K, Negoro S, Fuwa N, Hida T, Kawahara M,
Katakami N, Hirokawa K, Yamamoto N, et al. Phase I/II
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

15.	 Gatenby RA, Gillies RJ. Why do cancers have high aerobic
glycolysis? Nat Rev Cancer. 2004; 4:891–899.
7204

Oncotarget

16.	 Vander Heiden MG, Cantley LC, Thompson CB.
Understanding the Warburg effect: the metabolic requirements of cell proliferation. Science. 2009; 324:1029–1033.

ADAM17 through HIF-1alpha in Mesangial Cells. J Biol
Chem. 2015; 290:21603–21614.
29.	 Kim JJ, Tan Y, Xiao L, Sun YL, Qu X. Green tea polyphenol epigallocatechin-3-gallate enhance glycogen synthesis
and inhibit lipogenesis in hepatocytes. Biomed Res Int.
2013; 2013:920128.

17.	 van Rossum DB, Patterson RL, Cheung KH, Barrow RK,
Syrovatkina V, Gessell GS, Burkholder SG, Watkins DN,
Foskett JK, Snyder SH. DANGER, a novel regulatory protein of inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate-receptor activity. J Biol
Chem. 2006; 281:37111–37116.

30.	 Dephoure N, Zhou C, Villen J, Beausoleil SA, Bakalarski
CE, Elledge SJ, Gygi SP. A quantitative atlas of mitotic
phosphorylation. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2008;
105:10762–10767.

18.	 Kang BN, Ahmad AS, Saleem S, Patterson RL, Hester L,
Dore S, Snyder SH. Death-associated protein kinase-mediated cell death modulated by interaction with DANGER. J
Neurosci. 2010; 30:93–98.

31.	 Kuo JC, Lin JR, Staddon JM, Hosoya H, Chen RH.
Uncoordinated regulation of stress fibers and focal adhesions by DAP kinase. J Cell Sci. 2003; 116:4777–4790.

19.	 Miao F, Chen Z, Zhang L, Wang J, Gao H, Wu X,
Natarajan R. RNA-sequencing analysis of high glucosetreated monocytes reveals novel transcriptome signatures
and associated epigenetic profiles. Physiol Genomics.
2013; 45:287–299.

32.	 Shohat G, Spivak-Kroizman T, Cohen O, Bialik S, Shani
G, Berrisi H, Eisenstein M, Kimchi A. The pro-apoptotic
function of death-associated protein kinase is controlled by
a unique inhibitory autophosphorylation-based mechanism.
J Biol Chem. 2001; 276:47460–47467.

20.	 Bialik S, Kimchi A. The death-associated protein kinases:
structure, function, and beyond. Annu Rev Biochem. 2006;
75:189–210.

33.	 Anjum R, Roux PP, Ballif BA, Gygi SP, Blenis J. The
tumor suppressor DAP kinase is a target of RSK-mediated
survival signaling. Curr Biol. 2005; 15:1762–1767.

21.	 Lin Y, Hupp TR, Stevens C. Death-associated protein
kinase (DAPK) and signal transduction: additional roles
beyond cell death. FEBS J. 2010; 277:48–57.

34.	 Chang CC, Yang MH, Lin BR, Chen ST, Pan SH, Hsiao
M, Lai TC, Lin SK, Jeng YM, Chu CY, Chen RH, Yang
PC, Chin YE, et al. CCN2 inhibits lung cancer metastasis
through promoting DAPK-dependent anoikis and inducing
EGFR degradation. Cell Death Differ. 2013; 20:443–455.

22.	 Bajbouj K, Poehlmann A, Kuester D, Drewes T, Haase K,
Hartig R, Teller A, Kliche S, Walluscheck D, Ivanovska J,
Chakilam S, Ulitzsch A, Bommhardt U, et al. Identification
of phosphorylated p38 as a novel DAPK-interacting partner during TNFalpha-induced apoptosis in colorectal tumor
cells. Am J Pathol. 2009; 175:557–570.

35.	 Wang WJ, Kuo JC, Yao CC, Chen RH. DAP-kinase induces
apoptosis by suppressing integrin activity and disrupting
matrix survival signals. J Cell Biol. 2002; 159:169–179.

23.	 Chakilam S, Gandesiri M, Rau TT, Agaimy A,
Vijayalakshmi M, Ivanovska J, Wirtz RM, SchulzeLuehrmann J, Benderska N, Wittkopf N, Chellappan A,
Ruemmele P, Vieth M, et al. Death-associated protein
kinase controls STAT3 activity in intestinal epithelial cells.
Am J Pathol. 2013; 182:1005–1020.

36.	 Guadamillas MC, Cerezo A, Del Pozo MA. Overcoming
anoikis--pathways to anchorage-independent growth in cancer. J Cell Sci. 2011; 124:3189–3197.
37.	 Huang RY, Wong MK, Tan TZ, Kuay KT, Ng AH, Chung
VY, Chu YS, Matsumura N, Lai HC, Lee YF, Sim WJ,
Chai C, Pietschmann E, et al. An EMT spectrum defines
an anoikis-resistant and spheroidogenic intermediate mesenchymal state that is sensitive to e-cadherin restoration by
a src-kinase inhibitor, saracatinib (AZD0530). Cell Death
Dis. 2013; 4:e915.

24.	 Ivanovska J, Tregubova A, Mahadevan V, Chakilam S,
Gandesiri M, Benderska N, Ettle B, Hartmann A, Soder
S, Ziesche E, Fischer T, Lautscham L, Fabry B, et al.
Identification of DAPK as a scaffold protein for the LIMK/
cofilin complex in TNF-induced apoptosis. Int J Biochem
Cell Biol. 2013; 45:1720–1729.

38.	 Hanahan D, Weinberg RA. Hallmarks of cancer: the next
generation. Cell. 2011; 144:646–674.

25.	 Bialik S, Kimchi A. The DAP-kinase interactome.
Apoptosis. 2014; 19:316–328.

39.	 Lunt SY, Vander Heiden MG. Aerobic glycolysis: meeting
the metabolic requirements of cell proliferation. Annu Rev
Cell Dev Biol. 2011; 27:441–464.

26.	 Chen CH, Wang WJ, Kuo JC, Tsai HC, Lin JR, Chang ZF,
Chen RH. Bidirectional signals transduced by DAPK-ERK
interaction promote the apoptotic effect of DAPK. EMBO
J. 2005; 24:294–304.

40.	 Janssen MH, Aerts HJ, Ollers MC, Bosmans G, Lee JA,
Buijsen J, De Ruysscher D, Lambin P, Lammering G, Dekker
AL. Tumor delineation based on time-activity curve differences assessed with dynamic fluorodeoxyglucose positron
emission tomography-computed tomography in rectal cancer
patients. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2009; 73:456–465.

27.	 Nakadate Y, Kodera Y, Kitamura Y, Tachibana T, Tamura
T, Koizumi F. Silencing of poly(ADP-ribose) glycohydrolase sensitizes lung cancer cells to radiation through the
abrogation of DNA damage checkpoint. Biochem Biophys
Res Commun. 2013; 441:793–798.

41.	 Xie P, Li M, Zhao H, Sun X, Fu Z, Yu J. 18F-FDG PET
or PET-CT to evaluate prognosis for head and neck cancer: a meta-analysis. J Cancer Res Clin Oncol. 2011;
137:1085–1093.

28.	 Li R, Uttarwar L, Gao B, Charbonneau M, Shi Y, Chan
JS, Dubois CM, Krepinsky JC. High Glucose Up-regulates
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

7205

Oncotarget

42.	 Garber ME, Troyanskaya OG, Schluens K, Petersen S,
Thaesler Z, Pacyna-Gengelbach M, van de Rijn M, Rosen
GD, Perou CM, Whyte RI, Altman RB, Brown PO, Botstein
D, et al. Diversity of gene expression in adenocarcinoma of
the lung. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2001; 98:13784–13789.

47.	 Feofanova N, Geraldo JM, de Andrade LM. Radiation
oncology in vitro: trends to improve radiotherapy
through molecular targets. Biomed Res Int. 2014;
2014:461687.
48.	 Yang HJ, Youn H, Seong KM, Yun YJ, Kim W, Kim YH,
Lee JY, Kim CS, Jin YW, Youn B. Psoralidin, a dual inhibitor of COX-2 and 5-LOX, regulates ionizing radiation (IR)induced pulmonary inflammation. Biochem Pharmacol.
2011; 82:524-534.

43.	 Hou J, Aerts J, den Hamer B, van Ijcken W, den Bakker M,
Riegman P, van der Leest C, van der Spek P, Foekens JA,
Hoogsteden HC, Grosveld F, Philipsen S. Gene expressionbased classification of non-small cell lung carcinomas and
survival prediction. PLoS One. 2010; 5:e10312.

49.	 Niyazi M, Niyazi I, Belka C. Counting colonies of clonogenic assays by using densitometric software. Radiat Oncol.
2007; 2:4.

44.	 Bhattacharjee A, Richards WG, Staunton J, Li C, Monti S,
Vasa P, Ladd C, Beheshti J, Bueno R, Gillette M, Loda
M, Weber G, Mark EJ, et al. Classification of human lung
carcinomas by mRNA expression profiling reveals distinct
adenocarcinoma subclasses. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A.
2001; 98:13790–13795.

50.	 Kang J, Kim E, Kim W, Seong KM, Youn H, Kim JW, Kim
J, Youn B. Rhamnetin and cirsiliol induce radiosensitization
and inhibition of epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT)
by miR-34a-mediated suppression of Notch-1 expression in
non-small cell lung cancer cell lines. J Biol Chem. 2013;
288:27343-27357.

45.	 Buchheit CL, Weigel KJ, Schafer ZT. Cancer cell survival
during detachment from the ECM: multiple barriers to
tumour progression. Nat Rev Cancer. 2014; 14:632-641.

51.	 Kundu AK, Chandra PK, Hazari S, Pramar YV, Dash S,
Mandal TK. Development and optimization of nanosomal
formulations for siRNA delivery to the liver. Eur J Pharm
Biopharm. 2012; 80:257-267.

46.	 Slattum GM, Rosenblatt J. Tumour cell invasion: an emerging role for basal epithelial cell extrusion. Nat Rev Cancer.
2014; 14:495–501.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

7206

Oncotarget

