Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No. 12

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Loss of Cbl and Cbl-b ubiquitin ligases abrogates hematopoietic
stem cell quiescence and sensitizes leukemic disease to
chemotherapy
Wei An1,2, Scott A. Nadeau1,2, Bhopal C. Mohapatra1,3, Dan Feng1, Neha Zutshi1,4,
Matthew D. Storck1, Priyanka Arya1,2, James E. Talmadge4, Jane L. Meza5, Vimla
Band1,2,6, Hamid Band1,2,3,4,6
1

Eppley Institute for Research in Cancer and Allied Diseases, University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE 68198, USA

2

Departments of Genetics, Cell Biology & Anatomy, University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE 68198, USA

3

Departments of Biochemistry & Molecular Biology, University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE 68198, USA

4

Departments of Pathology & Microbiology, College of Medicine, University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE 68198, USA

5

College of Public Health, University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE 68198, USA

6

Fred & Pamela Buffet Cancer Center, University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE 68198, USA

Correspondence to:
Hamid Band, e-mail: hband@unmc.edu
Keywords: Cbl, ubiquitin ligase, HSC, quiescence, tyrosine kinase
Received: February 14, 2015 	

Accepted: February 16, 2015 	

Published: March 19, 2015

ABSTRACT
Cbl and Cbl-b are tyrosine kinase-directed RING finger type ubiquitin ligases
(E3s) that negatively regulate cellular activation pathways. E3 activity-disrupting
human Cbl mutations are associated with myeloproliferative disorders (MPD) that
are reproduced in mice with Cbl RING finger mutant knock-in or hematopoietic
Cbl and Cbl-b double knockout. However, the role of Cbl proteins in hematopoietic
stem cell (HSC) homeostasis, especially in the context of MPD is unclear. Here we
demonstrate that HSC expansion and MPD development upon combined Cbl and Cbl-b
deletion are dependent on HSCs. Cell cycle analysis demonstrated that DKO HSCs
exhibit reduced quiescence associated with compromised reconstitution ability and
propensity to undergo exhaustion. We show that sustained c-Kit and FLT3 signaling
in DKO HSCs promotes loss of colony-forming potential, and c-Kit or FLT3 inhibition
in vitro protects HSCs from exhaustion. In vivo, treatment with 5-fluorouracil hastens
DKO HSC exhaustion and protects mice from death due to MPD. Our data reveal a
novel and leukemia therapy-relevant role of Cbl and Cbl-b in the maintenance of HSC
quiescence and protection against exhaustion, through negative regulation of tyrosine
kinase-coupled receptor signaling.

Many of these growth factors activate receptor
tyrosine kinases (RTKs) or protein tyrosine kinase (PTK)associated receptors, such as stem cell factor (SCF)/c-KIT,
FMS-related tyrosine kinase 3 ligand (FLT3L)/FLT3;
angiopoietin-1/TIE-2; and thrombopoietin (TPO)/cMPL [1, 2]. Genetic evidence supports their requirement
for HSC quiescence and maintenance [3–6]. Notably,
activating mutations of c-KIT, FLT3 or c-MPL, or their
downstream PTKs (e.g., JAK2), promote leukemogenesis
[7–10]. Yet, mechanisms that dictate the physiological
HSC quiescence versus proliferation outcomes
downstream of these receptors are undefined.

INTRODUCTION
Maintenance of a small pool of hematopoietic
stem cells (HSCs) in a quiescence state assures lifelong hematopoiesis [1]. Inability to maintain quiescence
leads to HSC exhaustion, seen as loss of the long-term
reconstitution ability. While our understanding of the
mechanisms that enforce and maintain HSC quiescence is
incomplete, a number of critical growth factors elaborated
by niche components and their specific receptors on HSCs
exemplify HSC quiescence regulation through integration
of cell extrinsic and intrinsic mechanisms [1].
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

10498

Oncotarget

The Casitas B-lineage Lymphoma (Cbl) family
RING finger ubiquitin ligases (E3s) are recruited to a
number of RTKs upon their activation and facilitate
their turnover [11, 12]. Phosphorylated Cbl proteins also
associate with signaling intermediates, e.g., PI3 kinase,
Crk and Vav, to further negatively regulate the level and/
or duration of activated receptor signaling [12]. Mammals
express three Cbl family members: Cbl and Cbl-b are
ubiquitously expressed but enriched in hematopoietic
cells, while Cbl-c expression is restricted to epithelial
cells. The evolutionarily-conserved N-terminal tyrosine
kinase-binding (TKB) domain, linker helical region and
RING finger domain, found in all three members, form the
basic PTK-directed E3 module [12].
Recently, missense mutations or small deletions of
Cbl have been identified in about 3–5% of all myeloid
malignancies and about 10% of juvenile myelomonocytic
and chronic myelomonocytic leukemias [13–16]. Cbl
mutations are clustered in the linker helical region and
RING finger domain [17, 18], impair the E3 function
[13, 19, 20], and are commonly duplicated through
acquired uniparental disomy [14, 15, 17]. While the exact
mechanism by which mutant Cbl induces leukemogenesis
in unclear, a prevailing hypothesis is that of dominantnegative inhibition, in which the mutant protein competes
with Cbl-b and the remaining wild type Cbl in rare
heterozygous mutant patients, thereby creating a complete
Cbl/Cbl-b null state in leukemic cells [13, 14, 21].
Association of Cbl mutations with leukemias
suggests an important physiological role of Cbl proteins
in HSCs. Studies in animal models also support this
possibility. Cbl knock-out (Cbl-KO) mice exhibit
expansion of HSCs and multipotent progenitors (MPPs)
in the bone marrow (BM) [13, 22] but no frank leukemia.
Knock-in mice with E3-inactivating Cbl RING finger
mutation (C379A) [23] on a Cbl-null background (referred
to as Cbl RF-KI) develop slow but severe MPD, with an
average lifespan of a year [24]. Cbl-b-KO mice develop
normally but their mature lymphoid cells exhibit hyperresponsiveness to antigenic challenges [25–27].
Early embryonic lethality of whole body Cbl/Cbl-b
double knockout (DKO) mice [28] suggested that Cbl and
Cbl-b function redundantly in certain biological processes.
We showed that MMTV-driven Cre expression in Cblflox/flox, Cbl-b-null mice produced a Cbl/Cbl-b DKO in
hematopoietic cell lineages (referred to as Cbl/Cbl-b DKO,
or DKO), and these mice developed an expanded HSC
pool and severe MPD with an average lifespan of only
eight weeks [21]. Ex vivo analyses showed that BMderived hematopoietic precursors from Cbl-KO [22], Cbl
RF-KI [24] and Cbl/Cbl-b DKO mice [21] exhibit hyperproliferation in response to cytokines, including SCF, FLT3
and TPO. Crossing of Cbl RF-KI mice with Flt3L-null mice
substantially ameliorated the MPD [24, 29]. Interestingly,
deletion of Cbl enhanced leukemogenesis in a BCR-Abl
transgenic model of chronic myeloid leukemia [13], a
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

disease thought to originate from HSCs [30]. Thus, several
lines of evidence support the idea of Cbl proteins as potential
brakes in growth factor-induced proliferation of HSCs.
How such anti-proliferative role of Cbl-family proteins is
integrated into HSC homeostasis remains unknown.
Here, we provide evidence for a previously
unknown requirement of Cbl and Cbl-b in the maintenance
quiescence and long-term repopulating ability of HSCs.
Mechanistically, Cbl and Cbl-b promote HSC maintenance
by negative regulation of c-KIT and FLT3. Loss of
quiescence due to deletion of Cbl and Cbl-b makes HSCs
susceptible to elimination with anti-mitotic therapy.
Our studies identify a basic switch that allows tyrosine
kinase-coupled receptors on HSCs to maintain quiescence
and self-renewal, and suggest that this switch could be
therapeutically exploited.

RESULTS
Cbl and Cbl-b are redundant but essential
regulators of hematopoietic stem and
progenitor compartments
Although we have demonstrated that hematopoietic
Cbl/Cbl-b deletion promotes MPD, a systematic analysis
of DKO vs. single KO mice in HSC regulation was not
carried out [21]. Therefore, to firmly establish that Cbl
and Cbl-b are redundant in the regulation of HSCs, we
examined the occurrence of lethal MPD in 8-week old
mice of the following strains: Cbl-KO [31], Cbl-b-KO
[25], hematopoietic Cbl/Cbl-b-DKO (MMTV-Cre-driven
Cbl deletion on a Cbl-b null background [11, 21], and wild
type (WT; control) (genotypes in Supplementary Table 1).
Based on peripheral blood (PB) observations of increased
total white cell counts, monocytes and granulocytes, extramedullary hematopoiesis and death of animals (Figure S1AS1C), development of MPD required the deletion of both
alleles of Cbl and Cbl-b. Analysis of BM hematopoietic
compartments demonstrated that expansion of HSCs and
specific progenitor compartments, including common
myeloid progenitors (CMP), granulocyte/macrophage
progenitors (GMP) and common lymphoid progenitor
(CLP) but not megakaryocyte/erythrocyte progenitors
(MEP), was only seen in DKO mice (Figure S1D). Lack of
MPD in Cblflox/flox, Cbl-bWT/del, MMTV-Cre mice (referred to
as Cre control) excluded any MMTV-Cre transgene effects.
Quantitative real-time PCR (qPCR) helped establish the
complete deletion of Cbl and Cbl-b in HSCs of DKO mice,
but not that of other controls (Figure S1E and S1F).

Cbl and Cbl-b function as intrinsic regulators
of HSCs
While transfer of MPD by DKO BM transplant [21]
supports a BM cell-intrinsic role of Cbl proteins, the precise
disease-initiating cell remains unknown. BM transplants
10499

Oncotarget

Figure 1: MPD in Cbl/Cbl-b DKO mice is cell autonomous and only LSK cells initiate disease. (A-B) Whole BM cells
were transplanted into lethally-irradiated syngeneic WT recipients; PB counts performed after 4 weeks A. and survival scored up to
16 weeks B. Data from two experiments are pooled. Dots represent individual mice. (C-D) FACS-sorted subpopulations from WT or Cbl/
Cbl-b DKO BM were transplanted with helper cells. C. MPD (granulocyte count > 104/ml or death before the study was terminated at
16-weeks) after transplantation. D. PB cell counts at 16-weeks. Data from two experiments are pooled (*p < 0.05).
(CD45.2+ donor to CD45.1+ lethally-irradiated syngeneic
recipients) confirmed that DKO BM but not the ­CblKO, Cbl-b-KO or Cre Control BM transplant produced
leukocytosis and myelomonocytosis (Figure 1A) with
rapid-onset lethality (Figure 1B) in recipients assessed at
4 weeks post-transplant. We next transplanted FACS-sorted
subpopulations from WT/DKO BM cells to determine
disease initiating cells. Notably, transplant of DKO HSCenriched LSKs but not that of a pool of CMP, GMP & MEP
myeloid progenitors, or Lin+ c-kit- mature hematopoietic
cells, led to features of MPD, identified by GRA counts > In
mRNA level, p57 is more enriched 104/mm3 (at 16 weeks)
or early death (Figure 1C). Leukocytosis in DKO LSK
(Figure 1D) and DKO BM cell recipients (Figure 1A) was
comparable. Comparable in vitro proliferation of FACSsorted LSK cells from WT or DKO mice when cultured
with DKO or control mouse sera added to growth media
(Figure S2) suggests that the phenotypes are unlikely due
to factors released by non-hematopoietic tissues impinging
on DKO LSKs. Overall, these results demonstrate an HSC
cell-intrinsic role of Cbl and Cbl-b whose abrogation allows
DKO HSCs to initiate MPD.

DKO mice succumb to lethal MPD [21] (and above
results), we examined the impact of Cbl/Cbl-b DKO
on HSC maintenance. In long term culture-initiating
cell assays (LTC-IC), DKO bone marrow mononuclear
cells (BMMNCs) co-cultured with OP-9 stromal cells
for 2 weeks predictably proliferated to a greater extent
compared to cells of other genotypes (Figure 2A); when
sorted and re-plated, the DKO BMMNCs showed a
significantly lower colony-forming ability vs. controls or
individual KO cells (Figure 2B). In a serial re-plating assay,
sorted control and DKO LSK cells showed comparable
colony-forming ability during initial plating, but DKO
LSK cells showed significantly lower colony formation
upon re-plating (Figure 2C). Minimal differences between
control and DKO LSK proliferation during initial plating
reflects the inclusion of 5 cytokines in media (Figure S3A).
In view of these in vitro results, we analyzed the
cell cycle status of HSCs freshly isolated from control and
Cbl/Cbl-b DKO mice using FACS (Figure 2D and 2E).
While WT control, Cbl-KO, Cbl-b-KO and Cre control
LSKs showed comparable cell cycle profiles, DKO
LSKs showed a significant decrease in the G0 (Ki-67-,
Hochest33342low) fraction, with an increase in the G1 (­Ki67+, Hochest33342low) and G2/S (Ki-67+, Hochest33342high)
fractions. Further analysis showed that the G0 fraction was
significantly reduced in all major subsets of DKO LSKs,
including the long-term HSCs (LT-HSC ; CD34-, FLT3-,
LSK), short-term HSCs (ST-HSC; CD34+, FLT3-, LSK)

Reduced quiescent HSC fraction in Cbl/Cbl-b
DKO mice
Cbl-KO HSCs were reported to have an improved
reconstitution ability [22]. As only the Cbl/Cbl-b
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

10500

Oncotarget

Figure 2: Increased cycling and reduced quiescent HSC fractions in Cbl/Cbl-b DKO mice. (A-B) LTC-IC assay – cell

counts after initial co-culture A. and subsequent colony-forming assays B. Results from three experiments are pooled; 2 replicates in
each experiment. C. Serial colony-forming assay. Results from three experiments are pooled; 3 replicates in each experiment. (D-F) Cell
cycle analysis. Representative FACS plots are shown in D. Quantification of cell cycle phases for total LSKs E. LT-HSC, ST-HSC and
MPP subpopulations F. Data from at least three experiments are pooled and shown as mean ± SD. G. qRT-PCR of p57, p27 and p21
mRNA in LT-HSCs normalized using GAPDH. Data from four independent repeats are pooled and shown as mean ± SD (*p < 0.05).

whether they are targets of Cbl proteins in HSCs is
unknown. We therefore assessed if Cbl and Cbl-b proteins
negatively regulate c-Kit and FLT3 signaling in HSCs.
Indeed, Cbl/Cbl-b DKO LSKs hyper-proliferate in the
presence of SCF or FLT3L, compared to control LSKs,
while single KO LSKs exhibit significantly less hyperproliferation (Figure 3A). Using FACS analysis with
surface markers and phospho-specific antibodies, we
quantified Akt, Erk and S6 kinase phosphorylation in
the LSK compartment following in vitro SCF or FLT3L
stimulation. While initial ligand-induced phosphorylation
signals were comparable between WT and DKO LSKs,
the signals were significantly more sustained (15 min
and beyond) in DKO LSKs (Figure S4), a trend seen
across multiple experiments (Figure 3B). Since Cbl
proteins mediate ligand-induced RTK downregulation
from the cell surface [12], we compared the cell surface
c-Kit and FLT3 levels using FACS on WT vs. DKO LSK
cells at various times after ligand stimulation. Slower
downregulation of both c-Kit and FLT3 was observed
across multiple experiments in DKO LSKs albeit only
the c-Kit downregulation differences were statistically

and multipotent progenitors (MPP; CD34+, FLT3+, LSK)
(Figure 2F). Use of alternate LT-HSC markers (CD48-,
CD150+, LSK) confirmed these findings (Figure S3B).
Cip/Kip family of CDK inhibitors, including
p57, p27 and p21, are critical cell cycle regulators that
enforce HSC quiescence [32–34]. At the mRNA level,
p57 is more enriched in LT-HSCs compared to ST-HSCs,
MPPs or committed progenitors, while p27 expression
does not differ [34]. Our real-time qPCR revealed
significantly reduced p57 and p21 expression in DKO
LT-HSCs compared to WT LT-HSC, which suggests loss
of quiescence in DKO LT-HSC (Figure 2G). Altogether,
our results demonstrate that Cbl/Cbl-b DKO HSCs
are defective in the maintenance of quiescence under
conditions of homeostasis.

Deregulation of c-Kit and FLT3 signaling in
DKO HSCs
c-Kit and FLT3 play essential roles in HSC
quiescence [3, 35]. Previous studies in model cell lines
have shown these RTKs to be targets of Cbl [12], but

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

10501

Oncotarget

Figure 3: Loss of Cbl and Cbl-b enhances c-Kit and FLT3 signaling in HSCs. A. Proliferation - LSK cells (50/well of 96-well
plate; 6 replicates in each experiment) were cultured with SCF or FLT3L (10 ng/ml) for 7 days and counted. Representative experiment of 2.
B. p-Akt, p-Erk and p-S6 in LSK cells after time-course ligand stimulation were analyzed by FACS. Data expressed as mean fluorescence
intensity (MFI) plots (mean ± SD of at least two independent experiments). (C-D) Cell surface c-Kit C. and FLT3 D. levels in LSKs
were quantified by FACS at various time points after SCF or FLT3L stimulation. Data from at least 2 independent experiments (*p < 0.05).

significant (Figure 3C and 3D). Together, these findings
establish that Cbl/Cbl-b proteins function as essential
negative regulators of c-Kit and FLT3 signaling in HSCs.

forming ability of unstimulated or SCF-expanded WT cells
was comparable, while imatinib-cultured cells showed
slightly higher colony-forming ability (Figure 4B). In
contrast, SCF-expanded DKO cells showed significantly
reduced colony-forming ability vs. the unstimulated DKO
cells, and imatinib pre-treatment restored it (Figure 4B).
Similar results were seen with growth in FLT3L +/- FLT3
inhibitor AC220 (Figure 4C and 4D), with the minor
difference that FLT3-treated control cells showed a
slightly reduced colony-forming ability.
As c-Kit or FLT3 inhibition markedly inhibited
DKO BMMNC proliferation, yet preserved their colony
forming ability in vitro, we assessed the effect of imatinib
treatment on MPD in Cbl/Cbl-b DKO mice (Figure S5A).
However, a 3-week course of imatinib failed to ameliorate

Modulating c-Kit and FLT3 signaling impacts
DKO HSC self-renewal ability
To link the Cbl/Cbl-b mediated negative regulation
of c-Kit and FLT3 to their role in maintaining HSC selfrenewal, we assessed the impact of growing BMMNC in
the presence of activating ligands or kinase inhibitors of
these RTKs on subsequent colony-forming ability in LTCIC assays. Both control and DKO cells proliferated in SCF
while c-Kit inhibitor imatinib abrogated (WT) or reduced
(DKO) proliferation (Figure 4A). The subsequent colonywww.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

10502

Oncotarget

Figure 4: Impact of modulating c-Kit or FLT3 signaling on DKO HSC exhaustion. (A-B) LTC-IC assays. Initial co-cultures

performed without growth factors (control), or with SCF (100 ng/ml) or Imatinib (1 uM), and cell numbers counted A. followed by colony
forming assay B. Data are from four independent experiments. (C-D) Assay was performed as in A and B, with primary co-culture without
(Control), or with FLT3L (FL, 100 ng/ml), AC220 (AC, 100 nM) or FLT3L (100 ng/ml) + AC220 (100 nM). Cell numbers after initial
culture C. and colony-formation assay D. are shown. Data are from four independent experiments. (E-G) Imatinib in vivo treatment.
E. Liver and spleen weights of mice with indicated treatment. F. WBC counts. Dots represent individual mice. G. BM analysis.% LSK cells
in Lin- cells is shown. Data from at least three mice are pooled and shown as mean ± SD. *p < 0.05.

the MPD in DKO mice, including hepatosplenomegaly
and PB counts (Figure 4E and 4F, Figure S5B and S5C).
Interestingly, analysis of BM in imatinib-treated DKO
mice showed a dramatic increase in the LSK compartment
(Figure 4G and Figure S5D), and increased colony
forming ability in vitro (Figure 4A and 4B). These features
are consistent with lack of an impact of imatinib treatment.
Collectively, our data indicate that negative regulation
provided by Cbl and Cbl-b is required for c-Kit and FLT3
dependent HSCs maintenance.

substantial reconstitution at 4 weeks; notably, several
DKO LSK recipients exhibited a decrease in donorderived WBCs with time, indicating impaired ability of
DKO LSK cells to maintain long-term reconstitution.
We further analyzed DKO LSK recipients that showed
high donor cell reconstitution (> 70%) at 16 weeks
post-transplant (to exclude mice that may have received
a transplant with predominantly ST-HSC and MPPs,
populations with only a short-term reconstitution ability)
(Figure S6A). Notably, these mice exhibited a significantly
smaller BM LSK compartment compared to WT LSK
recipients (Figure 5C and 5D). Thus, even in recipients
with robust reconstitution, DKO HSCs were unable to
maintain the HSC pool.
Since the absolute numbers of donor LSK cells
were comparable in primary WT and DKO LSK
transplant recipients (Figure S6B), we used secondary
HSC transplantation to further compare the WT vs.
DKO HSC reconstitution ability. 2000 LSKs from mice
transplanted 20 weeks earlier and showing 70% or higher
donor cell chimerism in PB, were transplanted together
with helper cells into secondary recipients. DKO LSK
recipients again showed robust reconstitution at 4 weeks;
however, the DKO donor-derived progeny had declined
by 8 weeks and became significantly lower by 16 weeks
(Figure 5E), suggesting the exhaustion feature of DKO
donor cells in secondary transplant. In contrast, control
LSK recipients maintained the level of donor cells.

DKO HSCs show impaired reconstitution
ability in vivo
Given our results that DKO HSCs exhibit
impaired colony forming ability in vitro, we assessed
the self-renewal ability of DKO vs. WT HSCs in vivo.
We transplanted limiting dilutions of freshly-sorted
WT or DKO LSKs, assessed engraftment at 16 weeks
using peripheral blood analyses, and calculated the
HSC frequency. Compared to a frequency of 1:100
for WT control, the HSC frequency of DKO LSK cells
was significantly reduced (1:300) (Figure 5A). Next,
we transplanted 2000 WT or DKO LSKs (sufficient for
engraftment) and assessed the proportion of donor cells
in PB at 4, 8 and 16 weeks post-transplant (Figure 5B).
Compared to expected sustained reconstitution with WT
LSKs, DKO LSK recipients showed a more variable albeit
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

10503

Oncotarget

Figure 5: Cbl/Cbl-b DKO HSCs show impaired in vivo reconstitution ability. A. HSC limiting-dilution transplantation.
Indicated numbers of LSKs were transplanted and mice with < 0.5% donor-derived chimerism at 16 weeks were considered non-responders.
Data from two experiments are pooled. B. 2000 LSKs were transplanted and donor-cell chimerism in PB analyzed at the indicated times.
Data from two experiments are pooled. (C-D) Donor LSK pool was analyzed in recipient BM at around 20 weeks. Representative FACS
plot C. and quantitation D. are shown only for recipients with > 70% donor cell reconstitution. Data from three experiments are pooled.
E-F. Secondary transplants with 2000 donor LSKs sorted from primary recipients transplanted 20 weeks earlier. Donor cell chimerism in
PB G. and WBC counts H. over time are shown. Data from two repeats are pooled (*p < 0.05).
Furthermore, leukocytosis in secondary DKO LSK
recipients was obvious compared to WT LSK recipients at
4 weeks but diminished by 8 weeks in a majority of mice,
and disappeared by 16 weeks (Figure 5F).
Altogether, these results further support the
conclusion that Cbl/Cbl-b are required for the maintenance
of HSCs by promoting quiescence, and abrogation of this
mechanism promotes HSC exhaustion.

developed a rapidly-lethal MPD (Figure 6A). In contrast,
5-FU treatment significantly improved the overall survival
of DKO transplant recipients (Figure 6A), and led to a
steady decrease in the proportion of DKO WBCs in PB
(Figure 6B). Furthermore, while untreated DKO recipients
showed a steady increase in the proportion of peripheral
blood WBCs of DKO origin relative to those of WT
origin, a reverse trend was observed in 5-FU treated
mice (Figure 6C). These results further support our
conclusion that Cbl and Cbl-b are essential to maintain
HSC quiescence and self-renewal.

5-Fluorouracil (5-FU) accelerates loss of DKO
HSC progeny and ameliorates MPD

DISCUSSION

Findings above indicated that Cbl/Cbl-b DKO
impairs HSC quiescence and self-renewal while expanding
the proliferative stem and progenitor compartments. The
anti-leukemic drug 5-FU selectively eliminates cycling
HSCs and progenitors [36]. Therefore, we reasoned that
5-FU treatment of Cbl/Cbl-b DKO mice will accelerate
DKO HSC exhaustion and ameliorate MPD. WT Control
and DKO BM cells were co-transplanted into lethallyirradiated recipients at a 1:1 ratio followed by treatment
of recipients with DMSO or 5-FU at 3 and 6 weeks
post-transplantation (Figure S7). DMSO-treated mice
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

PTK-coupled HSC receptors activated by nichederived growth factors are required to maintain HSC
quiescence and self-renewal [3, 6, 35, 37]. Yet mutational
activation of these receptors or their signaling components
is linked to leukemic disorders [7–10]. Regulatory
mechanisms that dictate such distinct outcomes of PTKassociated receptor signaling are unclear. Using a genetic
approach, we establish that PTK-directed ubiquitin ligases
Cbl and Cbl-b are essential for HSC quiescence and
10504

Oncotarget

Figure 6: 5-FU promotes DKO HSC exhaustion. A. Survival curve. B. Donor cell chimerism in recipients treated with DMSO
(upper) or 5-FU (lower) at the indicated time points post-transplantation. Each bar represent one individual mice. C. Peripheral WBC counts
in recipients corresponding to those derived from control or DKO donor cells after treatment with DMSO control (left) or 125 mg/kg 5-FU
(right) treatment at the indicated times post-transplantation. Data pooled from two experiments. n = 10, *p < 0.05.
maintenance. We also show that Cbl and Cbl-b provide
a key switch to determine HSC self-renewal versus
proliferative exhaustion outcomes of the activation of
c-Kit and FLT3, RTKs essential for HSC quiescence and
self-renewal. Notably, the ability of clinically used antileukemic drug 5-FU to accelerate exhaustion of Cbl/Cbl-b
DKO HSCs and to significantly ameliorate the associated
lethal MPD outcome raises the potential of a novel
“exhaustion” based therapy of certain malignancies such
as those associated with Cbl mutations.
We demonstrate that all HSC subsets express Cbl
and Cbl-b, and that MMTV-Cre induces Cbl deletion in
all subsets (Figure S1E). Notably, only Cbl/Cbl-b DKO
mice exhibit major functional perturbations of HSCs, with
a lethal MPD that can be transferred via BM transplant,
even though Cbl-KO (shown here and [22]), Cbl-b-KO, or
Cbl-KO/Cbl-b+/- (Cre control) mice show HSC expansion.
Furthermore, only the HSCs, and not the committed
progenitors of DKO mice can transfer the MPD. Thus,
Cbl and Cbl-b play a redundant but essential role as cellautonomous regulators of HSCs.
Notably, one feature of human MDS/MPN patients
is anemia, which is recapitulated in Cbl/Cbl-b DKO mice
(Figure S1A) but not in transplanted mice (Figure 1A).
Our current thinking is that anemia is a manifestation of
the late stage of MPD. Cbl/Cbl-b DKO mice (Figure S1A)
have had MPD for several weeks prior to analyses, which
leads to more obvious anemia. However, in transplanted
mice (Figure 1A), donor BM cells re-establish the
hematopoietic system around 3 weeks after transplantation
[38] and blood cells counts was obtained at 4 week after
transplantation. One week of MPD might only interfere
with erythropoiesis to a limited extent. Notably, even in
the transplant model (Figure 1A), albeit not significant,
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

DKO mice exhibit a slight decrease of RBC compared to
other controls.
By analyzing the cell cycle distribution in bone
marrow cell compartments, we identified a marked
increase in cycling (G1 and G2/M) LT-HSC, ST-HSC
and MMPs, and a marked reduction in their quiescent
(G0) fractions (Figure 2F) in DKO mice, thus revealing
a novel role of Cbl proteins to help maintain HSCs
quiescence under homeostasis. Aside from pathways that
restrict the cell cycle traverse, such as the Rb-family and
CDK inhibitor proteins [39], it is now clear that active
signals received from the microenvironment are required
to maintain HSC quiescence [1]. Relevant to the role of
Cbl proteins, activation of PTK-coupled receptors such as
Tie-2, c-Mpl, c-Kit and FLT3 [3–6] is involved in HSC
quiescence. Proximally-acting regulators of RTK signaling
in HSCs that dictate a quiescence outcome are unknown.
Impaired ligand-induced c-Kit and FLT3 downregulation
(Figure 3C and 3D) and sustained downstream signaling
(Figure 3B) in DKO HSCs provide the first evidence that
Cbl proteins negatively regulate RTKs in normal HSCs.
Notably, ligand-induced downregulation of FLT3 in DKO
HSC is less obvious compared to that of c-Kit (Figure 3D).
We speculate that FLT3 may be regulated in its trafficking
mechanism differently compared to c-KIT. For example,
other ubiquitin ligases may play some role or Cbl proteins
may function by primarily regulating downstream
signaling components which are known to interact with
Cbl proteins and be targeted for downregulation. The latter
idea is consistent with significant impact of Cbl/Cbl-b
deficiency on pAKT and pS6 levels over time (Figure 3B).
Consistent with the conclusion that Cbl proteins
negatively regulate RTKs in HSCs, Cbl and Cbl-b DKO
HSCs hyper-proliferate in response to SCF or FLT3L
10505

Oncotarget

(Figure 3A). Amelioration of MPD in Cbl RF-KI mice
by FLT3L gene deletion [24] is consistent with our
findings. Since Cbl proteins only target RTKs once these
have been activated [12], we suggest that Cbl and Cbl-b
serve to physiologically limit the duration of signaling
to a level sufficient for survival of HSCs but suboptimal
for their cell cycle entry. Hyperactive PI3K pathway
signaling, as seen with sustained p-AKT and p-S6 upon
ligand activation (Figure 3B), is one likely mediator of
reduced quiescence in DKO HSCs since PTEN, a direct
PI3K pathway attenuator, is required for efficient HSC
quiescence and self-renewal [40].
Loss of quiescence-promoting factors is known
to promote in HSC exhaustion, reflecting a tight linkage
between HSC quiescence and self-renewal [32–34].
Using both in vitro and in vivo models, we show that loss
of Cbl and Cbl-b promotes HSC exhaustion. In vitro,
colony-forming ability of BM cultures in SCF or FLT3L
was severely diminished in DKO HSCs (Figure 4A-4D).
The impaired self-renewal of DKO HSCs was a direct
consequence of exaggerated receptor signaling, as
demonstrated by the restoration of self-renewal with
c-KIT or FLT3 specific kinase inhibitors (Figure 4B, 4D).
Transplant studies demonstrated that Cbl/Cbl-b DKO HSCs,
which were competent for engraftment, were impaired in
maintaining hematopoiesis over time and during serial
transplantation (Figure 5E, 5F). Interestingly, HSCs from
Cbl-KO mice were shown to have increased self-renewal
ability [22]. Notably, Cbl-KO HSCs are distinctly less hyperproliferative to SFC or FLT3L (Figure 3A), suggesting that
Cbl-b expression in Cbl-KO mice is sufficient to maintain
HSC self-renewal. However, since Cbl and Cbl-b have
some unique biochemical interactions [12], the possibility
that Cbl-b preferentially regulates HSC quiescence and selfrenewal needs to be addressed in future studies.
Even though all HSC subpopulations expand and
show reduced quiescence in Cbl/Cbl-b DKO mouse BM,
they show skewed progenitor expansion with myeloid
and lymphoid cell expansion in the periphery while
platelets and RBCs are not increased (also seen upon
disease transfer). The mechanisms of skewing remain
unclear. The hyper-responsiveness of DKO (Figure 3A)
or Cbl-RF-KI [24] HSCs to FLT3L may promote such
skewing, since Flt3L was shown to instruct HSCs toward
myeloid-lymphoid lineage and not the megakaryocyteerythrocyte lineage [4]. Loss of Cbl was reported to
facilitate the transition of more primitive, c-Kit-low HSCs
into less primitive c-Kit-high HSCs [3]. This mechanism is
consistent with the restoration of in vitro colony forming
ability of DKO HSCs by imatinib or AC220 treatment
(Figure 4A-4D) and the poor outcome of imatinib treatment
in DKO mice (Figure 4E-4G). While we did not see an
increase in surface c-Kit expression in DKO HSCs, the
possible role of elevated c-Kit signaling in DKO HSCs as
a mechanism to promote HSC transition to a less primitive
and possibly less quiescent state needs further study.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

5-FU is a clinically used anti-leukemic DNA base
analog that is selectively cytotoxic to cycling cells [36].
Since more HSCs in DKO mice are actively cycling,
at the expense of the quiescent HSC pool, we reasoned
that elimination of these cycling HSCs with 5-FU will
ameliorate the MPD induced by DKO HSCs. Indeed,
5-FU treatment suppressed the MPD phenotype of DKO
bone marrow transplant recipients, with progressive loss
of the DKO donor cell progeny in PB, and significantly
increased their survival (Figure 6A). These results are in
contrast to the impact of imatinib treatment, which failed
to ameliorate the MPD in DKO mice, and in fact led to an
expansion of the HSC (LSK) compartment (Figure 4E-4G).
This result is consistent with our in vitro results showing
restoration of self-renewal ability of DKO HSCs in vitro
(Figure 2A and 2B). Recently, multi-kinase inhibitor
Dasatinib was reported to induce transient expansion of
quiescent HSCs in WT mice as well as in Cbl RING finger
knock in model of MPD [41]. These studies are consistent
with our observations, and the model that Cbl proteins
regulate HSC quiescence, although direct comparisons of
the different models are needed to establish this firmly.
Although gene deletions are absent in patients,
mutations in leukemic patients are commonly duplicated
and these are thought to effectively compete with the
endogenous Cbl-b (and remaining WT Cbl in rare
heterozygous patients), consistent with the failure of RFKI mouse model to develop MPD unless the WT Cbl allele
is deleted [24]. Thus, a hematopoietic stem cell knockout
of Cbl and Cbl-b functionally mimics this state, providing
a model to study mutant Cbl-associated leukemogenesis.
Indeed, the leukemic disease in Cbl/Cbl-b DKO mice
resembles that in human MPN/MDS and recapitulates
the consequence hypothesized for the dominant negative
inhibition of Cbl mutations [14, 21]. It will be of interest
to investigate whether or not the leukemias with mutant
Cbl are associated with reduced HSC self-renewal since
some juvenile myelomonocytic leukemia patients show
spontaneous resolution [15].
Notably, HSC exhaustion due to hyperproliferation
has been shown in BCR-Abl driven leukemia [42].
Our findings that 5-FU targeting of actively cycling
HSCs in DKO mice ameliorates the MPD and prolongs
survival is of considerable future interest. Should human
leukemia patients with Cbl mutations exhibit impaired
HSC quiescence and self-renewal, as shown with Cbl/
Cbl-b DKO mice here, targeting of their actively cycling
leukemogenic HSCs could provide a novel “exhaustion”
therapy for these patients.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Animals
Cbl-KO [31], Cbl-b-KO [25] and MMTVCre-based Cbl/Cbl-b-DKO (DKO) [21] strains
10506

Oncotarget

were maintained on a C57/Bl6 background and
genotyped using tail DNA PCR with specific primers
(Supplementary Table 2). WT and Cre control (Cbl flox/flox,
Cbl-b +/-; MMTV-Cre) mice were littermates identified
during breeding. B6.SJL-Ptprca Pepcb/BoyJ mice (The
Jackson Laboratory) were used as transplant recipients.
Mice were housed under specific pathogen-free
conditions and sacrificed for analysis around 8 weeks
of age, unless otherwise specified. Mouse studies were
approved by the UNMC IACUC.

later with donor cells from age/gender-matched mice
(CD45.2) together with helper BM cells (CD45.1 and
CD45.2 heterozygous). See supplementary information
for details.

Bone marrow preparation and FACS analysis

CONCLUSION

Bone marrow cells were harvested from femurs
and tibiae. Lin- cells were MACS-purified (Miltenyi)
and stained with fluorescent antibodies for cell analysis
or sorting. For cell cycle and phospho-Flow analyses by
flow cytometry, Lin- cells were fixed, permeablized and
stained with the indicated antibodies, and analyzed on a
BD LSRII or Aria II. Data were analyzed using FlowJo
software (Tree Star). Detailed procedures and reagents are
included in supplementary information.

Our studies, using inducible Cbl-KO on a Cblb-null background to induce Cbl/Cbl-b DKO in HSCs,
reveal a previously unknown yet physiologically
essential role of Cbl and Cbl-b in the maintenance of
HSC quiescence and self-renewal. Our studies provide a
mechanistic explanation for how certain growth factors,
working through PTK-coupled cell surface receptors, can
maintain HSC quiescence, while hyperactive signaling
downstream of the same receptors promotes hematopoietic
malignancies. We suggest that activation-dependent
recruitment of Cbl and Cbl-b serves to curtail PTK-coupled
receptor signaling to restrain HSCs from committing into
proliferation while allowing some functions such as cell
survival. Such a balance would favor HSC self-renewal,
and its abrogation can promote HSC exhaustion and
leukemic states. While we have focused on c-Kit and
FLT3 signaling, Cbl proteins may also regulate other PTKcoupled receptors, such as Tie-2 and c-Mpl [1], to fully
coordinate HSC quiescence maintenance by niche-derived
growth factors.

Statistics
Unpaired Student’s t test on Prism was used to
calculate the p values.

RNA isolation and quantitative real-time
PCR analysis
RNA extracted from FACS-sorted cells
(RNAqueous-Micro Kit, Life Technologies) was reversetranscribed (QuantiTect Reverse Transcription Kit,
Qiagen) and subjected to quantitative real-time PCR
(QuantiTect SYBR Green Kit, Qiagen) on a BioRad
CFX96 thermocycler, following the manufacturer’s
instructions. Primers are listed in Supplementary Table 3.

Histopathology

Acknowledgments

Organs were formalin-fixed, dehydrated in 70%
EtOH, paraffin-embedded and H&E stained. Whole blood
CBCs were performed on a Scil Vet abc Animal Blood
Counter (Scil Animal Care).

We thank the Band Lab members for discussion,
UNMC Flow Cytometry, Histology and Comparative
Medicine Core staff for assistance and Dr. Kay-Uwe
Wagner for use of cell analyzer. Supported by: NIH
grants CA87986, CA105489, CA99163 and CA116552
to HB and CA96844 and CA144027 to VB; Department
of Defense grants W81WH-11–1-0167 (HB),
W81XWH-07–1-0351 and W81XWH-11–1-0171 (VB);
the NE DHHS LB-506 (2014–01) and LB606 (18123Y3) grants (HB); and the NCI CCSG to Buffett Cancer
Center. WA, BM and NZ received UNMC graduate
assistantships. SN was a trainee under the NCI Cancer
Biology Training Grant.

Colony-forming assays
For long-term culture-initiating cell (LTC-IC)
assay, BM cells were co-cultured with pre-irradiated
OP-9 stromal cells (ATCC) followed by a colonyforming assay. For the serial-plating assay, FACS-sorted
LSK cells were cultured in MethoCult M3234 (Stemcell
Tech.) with 5-cytokines (SCF, TPO, IL-3, IL-6 and
FLT3-L; from Peprotech) for 7 days, followed by colony
counting. Cells were collected and plated for secondary
colony-forming assays. See supplementary information
for details.

Disclosure of ConflictS
of Interest

Bone marrow transplantation assays
8-week old B6.SJL-Ptprca Pepcb/BoyJ mice
(CD45.1) were lethally-irradiated and transplanted 24 h
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

All authors disclose no conflict of interest.
10507

Oncotarget

References

16.	 Bacher U, Haferlach C, Schnittger S, et al. Mutations
of the TET2 and CBL genes: novel molecular m
­ arkers
in myeloid malignancies. ANN HEMATOL. 2010;
89:643–652.

1.	 Trumpp A, Essers M, Wilson A. Awakening dormant
haematopoietic stem cells. NAT REV IMMUNOL. 2010;
10:201–209.

17.	 Loh ML, Sakai DS, Flotho C, et al. Mutations in CBL occur
frequently in juvenile myelomonocytic leukemia. BLOOD.
2009; 114:1859–1863.

2.	 Stirewalt DL, Radich JP. The role of FLT3 in
­haematopoietic malignancies. NAT REV CANCER. 2003;
3:650–665.

18.	 Muramatsu H, Makishima H, Jankowska AM, et al.
Mutations of an E3 ubiquitin ligase c-Cbl but not TET2
mutations are pathogenic in juvenile myelomonocytic
­leukemia. BLOOD. 2010; 115:1969–1975.

3.	 Shin JY, Hu W, Naramura M, et al. High c-Kit ­expression
identifies hematopoietic stem cells with impaired
­self-renewal and megakaryocytic bias. J EXP MED. 2014;
211:217–231.

19.	 Grand FH, Hidalgo-Curtis CE, Ernst T, et al. Frequent
CBL mutations associated with 11q acquired uniparental
disomy in myeloproliferative neoplasms. BLOOD. 2009;
113:6182–6192.

4.	 Tsapogas P, Swee LK, Nusser A, et al. In vivo
evidence for an instructive role of fms-like tyrosine
­
kinase-3 (FLT3) ligand in hematopoietic development.
HAEMATOLOGICA. 2014; 99:638–646.

20.	 Sargin B, Choudhary C, Crosetto N, et al. Flt3-dependent
transformation by inactivating c-Cbl mutations in AML.
BLOOD. 2007; 110:1004–1012.

5.	 Yoshihara H, Arai F, Hosokawa K, et al. Thrombopoietin/
MPL signaling regulates hematopoietic stem cell q­ uiescence
and interaction with the osteoblastic niche. CELL STEM
CELL. 2007; 1:685–697.

21.	 Naramura M, Nandwani N, Gu H, et al. Rapidly fatal
myeloproliferative disorders in mice with deletion of
Casitas B-cell lymphoma (Cbl) and Cbl-b in hematopoietic stem cells. PROC NATL ACAD SCI U S A. 2010;
107:16274–16279.

6.	 Arai F, Hirao A, Ohmura M, et al. Tie2/angiopoietin-1
­signaling regulates hematopoietic stem cell quiescence in
the bone marrow niche. CELL. 2004; 118:149–161.

22.	 Rathinam C, Thien CB, Langdon WY, et al. The E3
­ubiquitin ligase c-Cbl restricts development and f­ unctions
of hematopoietic stem cells. GENES DEV. 2008;
22:992–997.

7.	 Cancer Genome Atlas Research Network Genomic and
epigenomic landscapes of adult de novo acute myeloid
­leukemia. N ENGL J MED. 2013; 368:2059–2074.
8.	 Drake JM, Lee JK. Witte ON Clinical targeting of mutated
and wild-type protein tyrosine kinases in cancer. MOL
CELL BIOL. 2014; 34:1722–1732.

23.	 Thien CB, Blystad FD, Zhan Y, et al. Loss of c-Cbl RING
finger function results in high-intensity TCR signaling and
thymic deletion. EMBO J. 2005; 24:3807–3819.

9.	 Papaemmanuil E, Gerstung M, Malcovati L, et al.
Clinical and biological implications of driver mutations in
­myelodysplastic syndromes. BLOOD. 2013; 122:3616–27;
quiz 3699.

24.	 Rathinam C, Thien CB, Flavell RA, et al. Myeloid
­leukemia development in c-Cbl RING finger mutant mice
is dependent on FLT3 signaling. CANCER CELL. 2010;
18:341–352.

10.	 Steelman LS, Abrams SL, Whelan J, et al. Contributions of
the Raf/MEK/ERK, PI3K/PTEN/Akt/mTOR and Jak/STAT
pathways to leukemia. LEUKEMIA. 2008; 22:686–707.

25.	 Chiang YJ, Kole HK, Brown K, et al. Cbl-b regulates the
CD28 dependence of T-cell activation. NATURE. 2000;
403:216–220.

11.	 Naramura M, Band VBand H Indispensable roles of
­mammalian Cbl family proteins as negative regulators of
protein tyrosine kinase signaling: Insights from in vivo
models. COMMUN INTEGR BIOL. 2011; 4:159–162.

26.	 Paolino M, Thien CB, Gruber T, et al. Essential role of E3
ubiquitin ligase activity in Cbl-b-regulated T cell functions.
J IMMUNOL. 2011; 186:2138–2147.
27.	 Paolino M, Choidas A, Wallner S, et al. The E3 ligase Cbl-b
and TAM receptors regulate cancer metastasis via natural
killer cells. NATURE. 2014; 507:508–512.

12.	 Mohapatra B, Ahmad G, Nadeau S, et al. Protein tyrosine
kinase regulation by ubiquitination: critical roles of Cblfamily ubiquitin ligases. BIOCHIM BIOPHYS ACTA.
2013; 1833:122–139.

28.	 Naramura M, Jang IK, Kole H, et al. c-Cbl and Cbl-b
regulate T cell responsiveness by promoting ligandinduced TCR down-modulation. NAT IMMUNOL. 2002;
3:1192–1199.

13.	 Sanada M, Suzuki T, Shih LY, et al. Gain-of-function of
mutated C-CBL tumour suppressor in myeloid neoplasms.
NATURE. 2009; 460:904–908.

29.	 Taylor SJ, Dagger SA, Thien CB, et al. Flt3 inhibitor
AC220 is a potent therapy in a mouse model of myeloproliferative disease driven by enhanced wild-type Flt3 signaling.
BLOOD. 2012; 120:4049–4057.

14.	 Nadeau S, An W, Palermo N, et al. Oncogenic Signaling
by Leukemia-Associated Mutant Cbl Proteins. BIOCHEM
ANAL BIOCHEM. 2012; :7921.
15.	 Niemeyer CM, Kang MW, Shin DH, et al. Germline
CBL mutations cause developmental abnormalities and
­predispose to juvenile myelomonocytic leukemia. NAT
GENET. 2010; 42:794–800.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

30.	 Deininger MW, Goldman JM, Melo JV. The molecular
biology of chronic myeloid leukemia. BLOOD. 2000;
96:3343–3356.
10508

Oncotarget

31.	 Naramura M, Kole HK, Hu RJ, et al. Altered ­thymic
­positive selection and intracellular signals in ­Cbl-deficient
mice. PROC NATL ACAD SCI U S A. 1998;
95:15547–15552.

37.	 Tachibana K, Jones N, Dumont DJ, et al. Selective role of
a distinct tyrosine residue on Tie2 in heart d
­ evelopment
and early hematopoiesis. MOL CELL BIOL. 2005;
25:4693–4702.

32.	 Cheng T, Rodrigues N, Shen H, et al. Hematopoietic stem
cell quiescence maintained by p21cip1/waf1. SCIENCE.
2000; 287:1804–1808.

38.	 Zijlmans JM, Visser JW, Laterveer L, et al. The early phase
of engraftment after murine blood cell transplantation is
mediated by hematopoietic stem cells. PROC NATL ACAD
SCI U S A. 1998; 95:725–729.

33.	 Matsumoto A, Takeishi S, Kanie T, et al. P57 is Required
for Quiescence and Maintenance of Adult Hematopoietic
Stem Cells. CELL STEM CELL. 2011; 9:262–271.

39.	 Pietras EM, Warr MR, Passegue E. Cell cycle ­regulation
in hematopoietic stem cells. J CELL BIOL. 2011;
195:709–720.

34.	 Zou P, Yoshihara H, Hosokawa K, et al. p57(Kip2) and
p27(Kip1) cooperate to maintain hematopoietic stem cell
quiescence through interactions with Hsc70. CELL STEM
CELL. 2011; 9:247–261.

40.	 Zhang J, Grindley JC, Yin T, et al. PTEN maintains
­haematopoietic stem cells and acts in lineage choice and
leukaemia prevention. NATURE. 2006; 441:518–522.

35.	 Chu SH, Heiser D, Li L, et al. FLT3-ITD knockin impairs
hematopoietic stem cell quiescence/homeostasis, leading to
myeloproliferative neoplasm. CELL STEM CELL. 2012;
11:346–358.

41.	 Duyvestyn JM, Taylor SJ, Dagger SA, et al. Dasatinib
­targets B-lineage cells but does not provide an effective
therapy for myeloproliferative disease in c-Cbl RING finger
mutant mice. PLoS ONE. 2014; 9:e94717.

36.	 Longley DB, Harkin DP, Johnston PG. 5-Fluorouracil:
Mechanisms of Action and Clinical Strategies. NAT REV
CANCER. 2003; 3:330–338.

42.	 Schemionek M, Elling C, Steidl U, et al. BCR-ABL
enhances differentiation of long-term repopulating
­hematopoietic stem cells. BLOOD. 2010; 115:3185–3195.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

10509

Oncotarget

