Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No. 22

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Editorial

Fragments and hot spots in drug discovery
Sandor Vajda, Adrian Whitty and Dima Kozakov
of binding energy are called hot spots [4], and can be
identified experimentally through alanine scanning
mutagenesis or by their tendency to bind organic solvents
or fragments, or by computational methods. Our own
contributions have used the computational method FTMap
[5], in which small organic probes are positioned on a
dense grid around the surface of the protein, and those
probes that interact favorably are identified, subjected
to energy minimization, and clustered. This process is
repeated using multiple probe types, the results from
which are superimposed. Sites that bind a large number
of probe clusters coincide with binding energy hot spots.
The energetic importance of hot spots on a given protein
is determined by the number of probe clusters that overlap
at each site.
In recent years we have established that the hot
spots identified by FTMap agree with those identified
by experimental fragment screening, with the results
of alanine scanning mutagenesis studies, and with the
binding site locations of known inhibitors. Recently
we have shown that hot spot analysis can be used to
evaluate whether a protein is druggable by small molecule
inhibitors [6]. As might be expected, a protein without
a strong hot spot cannot bind any ligand with high
affinity. We have also shown that the top-ranked hot spot
dominates ligand binding, such that only fragments that
achieve good spatial overlap at this main hot spot are very
likely to maintain their binding mode as the fragment is
extended to form a larger, stronger-binding ligand [7]. A
consequence is that a target with a main hot spot that is too
large and diffuse to be encompassed by a fragment-sized
ligand may be a poor choice for FBDD, even though it is
potentially druggable using other methods. The locations
of other nearby hot spots provide important guidance as to
which directions to grow the fragment to increase affinity.
Overall, this recent work shows that the strengths
and arrangement of hot spots can be used to establish
whether a target is druggable, whether FBDD is an
appropriate approach for lead identification, to evaluate
fragment hits to identify those with the best potential
for advancement, and to suggest in which directions
fragments should be extended for increased affinity. For
targets that are not druggable using conventional druglike
compounds, hot spot analysis using FTMap provides
insight into whether they might be addressed using larger,
non-canonical drug chemotypes such as macrocycles [6].
Importantly, this information is obtained using the X-ray

Drug discovery requires finding a “plug” that fits
extremely well and with high specificity into a functional
site on a protein target. This difficult task often requires
screening of very large compound libraries, and on
occasion screening finds no useful compounds at all. For
many years, a failed screening effort left unanswered
whether this outcome resulted from the absence of suitable
compounds in the particular screening library used, or
instead indicated that the target contained no “druggable”
site, and was therefore intractable for small molecule
drug discovery. This dilemma was partly resolved by the
advent of fragment-based drug discovery (FBDD) [1],
a method that exploits the fact that it is easier to find a
very small, simple compound that complements just
a small region within a binding site than it is to find a
larger, more complex molecule that matches the entire site
[2]. In FBDD the target of interest is screened against a
library of low molecular weight (typically 150-250 Da)
compounds called “fragments”. Compared to conventional
high throughput screening, fragment screens give much
higher hit rates, and typically require testing of only 10002000 compounds to establish the druggability of the target
and to identify initial hits [1].
Due to their small size, fragments bind with very
low affinity, a KD of 1 mM being typical, and so require
extensive elaboration to achieve the high affinity and other
properties required for a useful lead compound. Selecting
which fragment hits provide the best starting points for
drug discovery is thus a critical decision. The concept
of Ligand Efficiency [3] has provided an important
quantitative tool for assessing fragment hit quality.
However, until recently it has been unclear how to tell
which fragment hits additionally have a binding mode that
is sufficiently robust to serve as a basis for growing into
a larger, higher affinity ligand. Moreover, although it has
been recognized for some time that the hit rate for a given
target in a fragment screen gives a good indication of the
potential to ultimately obtain a high affinity, druglike
ligand, the theoretical basis for this observation has been
unclear.
Recent work has shown that considering a
binding site in terms of the number, strength and spatial
arrangement of binding energy “hot spots” provides
answers to these questions. Different regions of a protein
surface have different abilities to interact with ligands,
depending on local concavity and physicochemical
composition. Regions that can contribute large amounts

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

18740

Oncotarget

crystal structure of the unbound protein, so is useful for
novel or highly challenging targets for which no ligands
are known. The hot spots of any protein can be easily
determined using the free FTMap server (http://ftmap.
bu.edu/) [5].
Sandor Vajda: Department of Biomedical Engineering and
Department of Chemistry, Boston University, Boston, MA,
USA
Correspondence to: Sandor Vajda, email vajda@bu.edu
Keywords: ligand design, fragment conservation, druggability
Received: July 05, 2015
Published: July 21, 2015

References
1.	

Erlanson DA. Topics Current Chem. 2012; 317: 1-32.

2.	 Leach AR, et al. Curr. Opin. Chem. Biol. 2011; 15: 489496.
3.	

Hajduk PJ. J. Med. Chem. 2006; 49: 6972-6976.

4.	

DeLano WL. Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 2002; 12: 14-20.

5.	

Kozakov D, et al. Nat. Protoc. 2015; 10: 733-755.

6.	 Kozakov D, et al. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 2011; 108:
13528-13533.
7.	 Kozakov D, et al. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 2015; 112:
E2585-2594.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

18741

Oncotarget

