www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Oncotarget, 2016, Vol. 7, (No. 51), pp: 84142-84154
Research Paper

Application of pharmacologically induced transcriptomic profiles
to interrogate PI3K-Akt-mTOR pathway activity associated with
cancer patient prognosis
Matthew H. Ung1, George L. Wang1, Frederick S. Varn1, Chao Cheng1,2,3
1

Department of Molecular and Systems Biology, Geisel School of Medicine at Dartmouth, Hanover, New Hampshire, 03755
USA

2

Department of Biomedical Data Science, Geisel School of Medicine at Dartmouth, Lebanon, New Hampshire, 03755 USA

3

Norris Cotton Cancer Center, Geisel School of Medicine at Dartmouth, Lebanon, New Hampshire, 03766 USA

Correspondence to: Chao Cheng, email: chao.cheng@dartmouth.edu
Keywords: pharmacogenomics, computational biology, PI3K, drug treatment
Received: May 16, 2016     Accepted: August 25, 2016     Published: August 31, 2016

ABSTRACT
The PI3K-Akt-mTOR signaling pathway has been identified as a key driver of
carcinogenesis in several cancer types. As such, a major area of focus in cancer
biology is the development of genomic biomarkers that can measure the activity level
of the PI3K-Akt-mTOR pathway. In this study, we systematically estimate PI3K-AktmTOR pathway activity in breast primary tumor samples using transcriptomic profiles
derived from drug treatment in MCF7 cell lines. We demonstrate that gene expression
profiles derived from chemically-induced protein inhibition allows us to measure PI3KAkt-mTOR pathway activity in patient tumor samples. With this approach, we predict
prognosis and response to chemotherapy in cancer patients, and screen for potential
pharmacological modulators of PI3K-Akt-mTOR pathway inhibitors.

INTRODUCTION

Due to the importance of this pathway, several
genomics-based approaches have been introduced to
assess the activity of the PI3K-Akt-mTOR pathway in cell
lines and in primary patient tumors. A common method
is to determine whether a gain-of-function mutation in
PIK3CA, which encodes the PI3K catalytic subunit, p110α
is present in patient tumors. However, conflicting results
have risen from these studies, with some suggesting that
PIK3CA mutations are associated with poor prognosis, and
others suggesting the opposite [8–11]. Reasons for this
inconsistency include varying effects of PIK3CA mutation
in different cancer types and the fact that PIK3CA
mutations can co-occur with molecular events that
modulate PIK3CA mutational effects. Other approaches
to assessing PI3K-Akt-mTOR pathway activity include
using signature-based approaches that capture the gene
expression change caused by PIK3CA mutations [12].
For instance, Loi et al. used gene expression profiles from
primary breast tumors containing PIK3CA mutations to
design a signature of PI3K activation to predict PI3KAkt-mTOR pathway activity in an independent dataset
[12]. In general, they found that patients with breast
tumors displaying a PIK3CA mutation-like expression
pattern exhibited poor survival. However, results were

In cancer, genomic lesions lead to constitutive
activation of signaling pathways that induce uncontrolled
cellular proliferation and confer a survival advantage upon
transformed cells. Thus, being able to accurately identify
the key molecular drivers underlying each patient’s
tumor would significantly accelerate the development
of precision medicine. Fortunately, studies have already
identified several signaling pathways that are recurrently
dysregulated, one of which is the PI3K-Akt-mTOR
pathway. The PI3K-Akt-mTOR pathway is composed of a
number of proteins including Ras, PTEN, PIP, PI3K, AKT
and mTOR. The pathway functions as part of a signaling
cascade initiated by the binding of growth factors to
receptor tyrosine kinases located on the cell membrane
[1, 2]. Importantly, the PI3K-Akt-mTOR pathway plays
a central role in cancer cell growth, proliferation, and
survival, and is overexpressed in numerous cancers
including breast, ovarian, and pancreatic [3–5].
Consequently, there have been significant efforts in
developing PI3K inhibitors that can abrogate tumor
growth and act synergistically with other targeted therapy
and chemotherapy [1, 6, 7].
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

84142

Oncotarget

inconsistent in ER+/HER2- breast tumors where they
found that a PIK3CA mutant gene signature was associated
with improved survival [12].
Despite the utility of such approaches, using
mutation-based analyses is subject to confounding by
co-occurring genomic lesions. Since mutations may not
always occur independently from each other, using a
signature that is associated with a single mutation (i.e.
PIK3CA) may also capture the effects of co-occurring
lesions that may yield unreliable results when the goal is
to specifically measure PI3K activity [13]. Therefore, in
this proof of concept study, we utilized the drug treatment
profiles of three PI3K-Akt-mTOR pathway inhibitors—
LY294002 (reversible PI3K inhibitor), wortmannin
(non-reversible PI3K inhibitor), and sirolimus (mTOR
inhibitor)—to develop expression-based markers of PI3KAkt-mTOR pathway activity. Since these three drugs
target the PI3K-Akt-mTOR pathway, we can directly
analyze the downstream effects of protein inhibition that
occur solely due to ablation of PI3K catalytic activity
while maintaining its non-catalytic biological functions
[14]. To our knowledge, there has been no other study
that has used pharmacological protein inhibition to probe
cancer driver pathways in primary tumors. Overall, our
analysis framework presents a novel method of utilizing
protein inhibition gene expression profiles achieved by
treating cell lines with targeted chemical inhibitors.

is induced by the drug. Conversely, a DRS < 0 indicates
that a tumor exhibits a gene expression pattern opposite
of what is induced by the drug. This is equivalent to
the concept that a high tumor DRS will be assigned if
genes upregulated by inhibitor treatment are also highly
expressed in the tumor and genes downregulated by
treatment are lowly expressed in the same tumor.
Moreover, we used these DRSs as estimators of
PI3K-Akt-mTOR pathway activity in TCGA patient
tumors and validated its accuracy using corresponding
patient Reverse Phase Protein Array (RPPA) data. After
validation, we performed survival analysis using patient
clinical information to determine if DRS could predict
patient prognosis and response to chemotherapy in
histological and molecular subtypes of breast cancer.
Finally, we repeated the analysis in cell lines
available from the Genomics of Drug Sensitivity (GDSC)
database given that they contained corresponding gene
expression profiles. By generating a DRS for each GDSC
cell line, were able to correlate DRS with drug sensitivity
to screen for potential therapeutic modulators of these
PI3K inhibitors.

PI3K-Akt-mTOR pathway inhibitor profiles
reveal PI3K-Akt-mTOR pathway activity in
breast cancer subtypes
The PI3K signaling pathway is strongly associated
with the development and/or progression of several
cancers. Thus, constitutive activation or ablation of
proteins in the PI3K-Akt-mTOR pathway can result in
uncontrolled cellular proliferation and tumor growth
(Figure 2A). As such, we generated DRS profiles
corresponding to each drug across patient tumors
in the TCGA breast cancer dataset to determine if
clinicopathological subgroups of patients differ in terms
of their DRS. Since tumor subtyping is standard clinical
protocol used to inform patients about prognosis and
potential treatment options, we hypothesized that DRS
could elucidate differences in PI3K-pathway activity in
histological and molecular subtypes of breast cancer.
In particular, we stratified breast cancer patient
tumors from TCGA on estrogen receptor (ER) status and
compared them based on DRSLY-294002, DRSwortmannin, and
DRSsirolimus. We found that ER+ tumors exhibited much
higher DRSLY-294002 (P = 2.4E-27, Wilcoxon rank-sum
test), DRSwortmannin (P = 2.1E-49, Wilcoxon rank-sum test)
and DRSsirolimus (P = 2.9E-36, Wilcoxon rank-sum test)
compared to ER- tumors (Figure 2B), indicating that ER+
tumors exhibit lower PI3K-pathway activity since it is
more similar to a PI3K/mTOR-inhibited profile. This is
consistent with previous studies demonstrating that PI3KAkt-mTOR pathway activity is inversely correlated with
ER expression, can function as a compensatory pathway
that drives anti-estrogen resistance, and is required for
hormone independence [20–22]. To validate the DRS

RESULTS
Overview of systematic analysis framework
First, in our systematic analysis, we generated drug
treatment profiles corresponding to three PI3K inhibitors:
LY294002 (reversible PI3K inhibitor), wortmannin (nonreversible PI3K inhibitor), and sirolimus (mTOR inhibitor)
using data from the Connectivity Map (CMap) (Figure 1).
Each drug treatment profile was generated by comparing
the gene expression profile of MCF7 cells treated with
one of these inhibitors to the gene expression profile of
untreated MCF7 cells. As such, we derived a total of three
drug treatment profiles that encode the change in gene
expression induced by each of the three inhibitors.
Second, we utilized the BASE algorithm to compare
each drug treatment profile to every patient cancer gene
expression profile in The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA),
METABRIC, van de Vijver, Loi, and Hatzis breast cancer
datasets [15–19]. The algorithm outputs a drug regulatory
score (DRS) which is a quantitative measure of similarity
between each drug treatment profile and each patient gene
expression profile. BASE uses entire gene expression
profiles to calculate the DRS from continuous values,
which obviates the need to set arbitrary cutoffs to define
binary gene sets. As such, a DRS > 0 indicates that a
tumor’s gene expression pattern resembles the pattern that
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

84143

Oncotarget

results, we compared Akt, pAktS473, and pAktT308 protein
expression levels between ER+ and ER- breast tumor
samples using TCGA RPPA data. (Figure 2C) [18].
Unexpectedly, we observed increased expression of Akt in
ER+ tumors suggesting enhanced PI3K-pathway activity.
However, after closer analysis, we found that pAktS473
and pAktT308 expression was significantly decreased in
ER+ tumors indicating that activated pAkt levels are
lowered in ER+ tumors suggesting decreased PI3KAkt-mTOR pathway activity (P = 0.008 and P = 0.009,
respectively, Wilcoxon rank-sum test). However, higher
pAkt levels only indicate that there is a higher amount
of phosphorylated Akt in a tumor, and does not directly
inform us of the overall proportion of activated pAkt
compared to un-activated Akt. For instance, if a tumor

typically has high basal expression of Akt, then it could
also harbor higher quantities of pAkt. Thus, we calculated
a ratio of phosphorylated pAkt to unphosphorylated Akt
and compared the ratios between ER+ and ER- tumors.
Tumors with a higher ratio would have a higher percentage
of the activated (phosphorylated) Akt, thus indicating
increased pathway activity. Confirmatively, we observed
that ER+ tumors contain less activated pAkt relative to
the pool of un-activated Akt for both pAktS473 (P = 8.1E-5,
Wilcoxon rank-sum test) and pAktT308 (P = 2.3E-5,
Wilcoxon rank-sum test) (Figure 2D), indicating that Akt
RPPA data are consistent with DRS. We extended this
analysis to other proteins downstream of Akt including
GSK3, S6K1, and 4E-BP1 and observed consistent trends
in protein expression (Supplementary Figure S1).

Figure 1: Overview of the analysis approach. (A) Drug treatment profiles were generated from MCF7 cell lines that were treated

with three different PI3K-Akt-mTOR pathway inhibitors (LY294002, wortmannin, sirolimus). Drug treatment profiles were used to
calculate a DRS for patient tumors in several breast cancer datasets and for GDSC cell lines. DRS was validated in the TCGA dataset using
RPPA data. After validation of DRS as estimator of PI3K-Akt-mTOR pathway activity, DRS was used to predict patient prognosis in breast
cancer datasets. DRS was also calculated for GDSC cell lines and correlated with drug IC50 of 139 compounds.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

84144

Oncotarget

In addition to ER status, we investigated differences
in DRSs between intrinsic subtypes of breast cancer. In
particular, we observed that luminal A breast cancers
had the highest DRSs while basal breast cancers had
the lowest DRSs (P = 5.7E-85, ANOVA) (Figure 2E),
indicating that luminal A and basal breast carcinomas
exhibit the lowest and highest PI3K-Akt-mTOR pathway
activity, respectively. Indeed, several studies have reported
basal breast carcinomas to be an aggressive subtype that
responds poorly to targeted therapy [23].

markers of PI3K-Akt-mTOR pathway activity. Several
studies have reported PIK3CA mutation status to be
associated with improved response to PI3K inhibitors
[24, 25]. PIK3CA encodes p110α, a catalytic subunit of
PI3K, and gain-of-function mutations in this gene have
been reported to elevate signaling of cellular proliferation,
growth, and metastasis [26–29]. To investigate the
consistency of DRS with these observations, we first
stratified TCGA breast cancer patient samples on
PIK3CA mutation status and compared their DRSLY-294002.
Surprisingly, we found no significant difference in
DRSLY-294002 between PIK3CA mutant and wild-type (WT)
tumor samples (Figure 3A). Since PI3K-Akt-mTOR
pathway activity is not solely determined by PI3K alone,
we postulated that genetic alteration of PIK3CA may be
correlated with another alteration to an inhibitory protein
of PI3K. Therefore, we investigated the most likely
candidate, PTEN, and its expression in PIK3CA mutant

DRS reveals confounding effect of PTEN
expression on PIK3CA mutation and PIK3CA
expression analysis
Since we used PI3K inhibitor profiles to delineate
PI3K-Akt-mTOR pathway activity, we reasoned that our
DRSs should be consistent with genetic and expression

Figure 2: Comparison of DRS between molecular and histological breast tumor subtypes. (A) Graphical overview of the
PI3K-Akt-mTOR pathway. (B) Comparison of DRSs between ER+ and ER- breast tumors. Each point represents a single primary tumor
sample. The black line within the boxes represent the median. The ER+ group had 598 samples and the ER- group had 178 samples.
(C) Akt, pAktS473, and pAktT308 protein expression differences between ER+ and ER– breast tumors. Protein expression levels were derived
from RPPA data. The ER+ group had 608 samples and the ER– group had 186 samples. (D) Differences in pAktS473/Akt and pAktT308/
Akt expression ratios between ER+ and ER– breast tumors. The ER+ group had 608 samples and the ER– group had 186 samples.
(E) Comparison of DRSs between Luminal A, Luminal B, Normal-like HER2, and Basal breast tumor subtypes. There were 231, 127, 97,
58, and 8 samples available for Luminal A, Luminal B, Basal-like, HER2-enriched, and Normal-like tumors, respectively. (The boxplot
boundaries represent the 25th (lower black line), 50th (center black line), and 75th (upper black line) percentiles respectively. The whiskers
are the upper and lower adjacent values.)
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

84145

Oncotarget

Together, these results suggest that PIK3CA
mutation and expression is associated with PTEN
expression, which again may be a reflection of the
competition that occurs between pro-cancer molecular
programs and anti-cancer cellular responses. Since DRS
captures the entire expression output that results from the
inhibition of a key PI3K-Akt-mTOR pathway regulator,
it is more representative of overall pathway activity than
PIK3CA mutation or PIK3CA expression alone, which
may be confounded by the activity of other proteins in
the pathway.

and WT samples We observed that PTEN expression
was significantly upregulated in PIK3CA mutant samples
(P  = 7E-3, Wilcoxon rank-sum test) (Figure 3B). This
lead us to suspect that PIK3CA mutations are intertwined
with PTEN transcriptional activity, which may indicate
that 1) upregulation of PTEN expression was a cellular
response to earlier cancer-driving events prior to PIK3CA
mutation, and positive selection for PIK3CA mutations
enabled tumors to ameliorate the suppressive effects of
PTEN upregulation, or 2) PIK3CA mutations initially
resulted in an early survival advantage but was eventually
suppressed by upregulated PTEN expression as part of
a protective cellular response. Moreover, either of these
events are possible depending on the individual tumor’s
evolutionary history.
To evaluate this postulation, we performed a
stratified analysis by categorizing patient tumors into high
and low PTEN expression groups using median PTEN
expression as the cutoff. We then compared DRSLY-294002
between PIK3CA mutant and wild-type samples in both
the high and low PTEN groups. We observed that in the
high PTEN expression group, there were no significant
differences in DRSLY-294002. However, we found that in the
low PTEN expressing group, PIK3CA mutant samples
had significantly lower DRSLY-294002 compared to wild-type
samples indicating that they had higher PI3K-Akt-mTOR
pathway activity (P = 5E-3, Wilcoxon rank-sum test)
(Figure 3C). These results suggest that PIK3CA mutants
do confer increased pathway activity but only in the
background of low PTEN expression. This demonstrates
that DRS, in general, is an indicator of overall pathway
activity, and not just PI3K activity. Furthermore, these
results imply that PIK3CA mutation status may not be
the most accurate indicator of PI3K-Akt-mTOR pathway
activity due to confounding effects by PTEN.
Furthermore, we evaluated concordance of DRSsirolimus
with PIK3CA gene expression by stratifying TCGA patient
samples into high and low PIK3CA gene expression groups
using median expression as the cutoff. Similar to the mutation
analysis, we found that DRSsirolimus was significantly higher in
tumors with high PIK3CA expression, which initially seemed
to suggest that high PIK3CA expression is correlated with
high DRS and decreased PI3K-Akt-mTOR pathway activity
(P = 6E-3, Wilcoxon rank-sum test) (Figure 3D). However,
we found that PTEN expression was also significantly
correlated with DRSsirolimus (PCC = 0.33, P = 1.4E-28)
(Figure 3E). Therefore, we stratified patient samples into high
and low PTEN expression groups and correlated PIK3CA
expression with DRS in both strata. Our analysis shows that
in low PTEN expression tumors, PIK3CA expression is anticorrelated with DRSsirolimus, indicating that increased PIK3CA
mRNA is associated with decreased DRSsirolimus and thus
higher PI3K-Akt-mTOR pathway activity (PCC = –0.15,
P = 8.3E-4) (Figure 3F). Moreover, we observed PIK3CA
expression to be correlated with DRSsirolimus in high PTEN
expression tumors (PCC = 0.09, P = 0.04).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

PI3K-Akt-mTOR pathway inhibitor profiles
predict prognosis for breast cancer patients
Since over-activation of the PI3K-Akt-mTOR
pathway has been reported to be associated with cellular
proliferation and patient prognosis, we investigated
the clinical implications of high and low DRS in breast
cancer patients. First, we investigated if DRSs were
associated with proliferation—a key indicator of patient
survival—and found that DRSwortmannin was significantly
anti-correlated with Ki67 mRNA expression in the
METABRIC dataset (PCC = –0.62, P = 1.4E-53). Ki67
is a well-established cellular marker of proliferation and
its correlation with DRSwortmannin shows that DRS captures
information about the proliferative state of the patient
tumor [30, 31]. Furthermore, this suggests that DRS is able
to capture the downstream proliferative signals associated
with varying levels of PI3K-Akt-mTOR pathway activity.
Second, we aimed to confirm the prognostic
significance of DRS by analyzing its association with
patient survival. After calculating a DRSwortmannin for each
sample, we stratified tumors into a high DRSwortmannin
(> 0) and a low DRSwortmannin (< 0) group and compared
their survival rates. In the METABRIC dataset, we
found that patients with DRSwortmannin > 0 exhibited
significantly improved survival compared to patients with
DRSwortmannin < 0 (P = 1.7E-18, Log-rank test) (Figure 4B).
This indicates that patient tumors with basal expression
similar to the gene expression profile that is induced by
wortmannin have better prognosis. Second, we aimed to
investigate if the observed differences in survival between
high and low DRSwortmannin patients vary according to ER
status. Interestingly, our analysis shows that DRSwortmannin
predicts prognosis in ER+ samples (P = 7.1E-13, Log-rank
test) but not in ER- samples (P = 0.49, Log-rank test),
which may suggest that there are interactions between ERα
and PI3K activity that affect patient survival (Figure 4C,
4D). To test reproducibility, we analyzed additional breast
cancer datasets published by van de Vijver et al. and Loi
et al. [12, 19]. In the van de Vijver dataset, we found
that patients with high DRSwortmannin presented improved
survival compared to low DRSwortmannin patients (P = 3E 6,
Log-rank test) [19]. Furthermore, we observed similar
results in the Loi dataset with high DRSwortmannin patients
84146

Oncotarget

impact the results of our survival analyses. Since CMap
contains gene expression profiles for PC3 (prostate
cancer) and HL60 (promyelocytic leukemia) cell lines,
we postulated that DRS derived from these drug treatment
profiles would be less prognostically significant when
applied to breast cancer [32]. As expected, we found

exhibiting favorable prognosis (P = 4E-3, Log-rank test)
[17]. Together, our results demonstrate that calculation
of DRSwortmannin in patient tumors allows us to distinguish
those patients with a more favorable prognosis.
Third, we investigated whether the cell line from
which our drug treatment profiles were derived could

Figure 3: Stratified analysis using drug regulatory scores. (A) Comparison of DRSLY-294002 between PIK3CA mutant and wild-

type breast tumors. Each point represents a single tumor sample. Plot shows 507 wild-type samples and 258 PIK3CA mutant samples.
(B) Differences in PTEN mRNA expression compared between PIK3CA mutant and wild-type breast tumors. Plot shows 507 wild-type
samples and 258 PIK3CA mutant samples (C) Comparison of DRSLY-294002 between PIK3CA mutant and wildtype samples in high and low
PTEN mRNA expression backgrounds (top 50% pTEN expression; left) and low PTEN mRNA expression (bottom 50% PTEN expression;
right). There were 179, 340, 79 and 440 samples in the Hi PTEN/PIK3CA Mutant, Hi PTEN/WT, Low PTEN/PIK3CA Mutant, and Low
PTEN/WT groups, respectively. (D) Differences in DRSsirolimus between breast tumors with higher vs. lower PIK3CA mRNA expression.
Each point represents a single tumor sample. The high PIK3CA mRNA group had 518 samples and the low PIK3CA mRNA group had
519 samples. (E) Correlation between breast tumor PTEN mRNA expression and DRSsirolimus across 1037 samples. (F) Correlation between
breast tumor PIK3CA mRNA expression and DRSsirolimus; segmented between high and low (top 50% and bottom 50%) PTEN mRNA
expression level. High PTEN group had 514 samples, and the Low PTEN group had 517 samples. (The boxplot boundaries represent the
25th (lower black line), 50th (center black line), and 75th (upper black line) percentiles respectively. The whiskers are the upper and lower
adjacent values. Red line indicates difference in mean between the two groups).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

84147

Oncotarget

that DRS calculated from MCF7-derived drug treatment
profiles were the most prognostic in the METABRIC
dataset (Supplementary Table S1). Since MCF7 is a
breast-derived cell line, our results support our claim
that using drug treatment profiles from matched cell lines
yields optimal results when evaluating patient survival.

First, we found that DRSLY-294002 was predictive of
patient distant relapse free survival, indicating that DRS
can serve as a predictive marker of patient response to
chemotherapy (P = 9.0E-7, Log-rank test) (Figure 5A).
Furthermore, we evaluated whether DRSLY-294002 could
predict residual cancer burden, another key indicator of
chemotherapy responsiveness in the Hatzis dataset [16].
In particular, we stratified patients into two groups, the
first corresponding to low residual cancer burden and the
second corresponding to high residual cancer burden.
We then trained a random forest classifier on patient
DRSLY-294002 and found that the model was able to predict
residual cancer burden with an AUC of 0.665 (Figure 5B).
Furthermore, we repeated the analysis in ER+ and ERpatient samples and found that classification accuracy was
higher in ER+ (AUC = 0.698) than in ER- (AUC = 0.535)
cancers. Since MCF7 is an ER+ cell line, these results
suggest that using matched cell lines yields improved
results. Together these results indicate that PI3K-AktmTOR pathway activity is a key predictor of response to
neoadjuvant chemotherapy and can be interrogated using
drug treatment profiles. Indeed, previous studies have
demonstrated that increased PI3K-Akt-mTOR pathway
activity is associated with chemoresistance in patients and
in breast cancer cell lines [29, 33].

PI3K-Akt-mTOR pathway inhibitor profiles
predict response to taxane therapy in breast
cancer
Although we confirmed that DRS was highly
prognostic in primary patient tumors, we acknowledge
that these gene expression profiles were collected from
patients who have not yet received chemotherapy. Thus,
drug treatment may substantially alter the basal expression
of pre-treated tumors leading to a change in prognosis. To
determine if DRS could also serve as a predictor of response
to taxane-anthracycline chemotherapy, we utilized a dataset
published by Hatzis et al. which contains gene expression
profiles from pre-treated primary tumors and survival
information of the patients as they receive neoadjuvant
taxane-anthracycline chemotherapy [16]. Additionally, this
dataset contains information about whether treated patients
had high or low residual cancer burden.

Figure 4: Survival analysis in breast cancer using DRS. (A) Correlation between breast tumor DRSwortmannin and Ki67 expression.

Each dot point represents a single tumor sample. (B) Kaplan-Meier survival curves of breast cancer patients with DRSwortmannin greater than
or less than 0. Each vertical line represents a censored patient. (C–D) Kaplan-Meier survival curves of ER+ and ER- breast cancer patients
with DRSwortmannin greater and less than 0. (E–F) Kaplan-Meier survival curves of breast cancer patients using two additional datasets from
van de Vijver et al. and Loi et al. (32,34).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

84148

Oncotarget

Systematic screening of therapeutics associated
with PI3K-Akt-mTOR pathway activity

such that as DRSwortmannin of the cell lines increased, the IC50
of the drug also increased (Figure 6B). We also found 37
drugs to be significantly anti-correlated with DRSwortmannin
at P < 0.05, suggesting that high DRSwortmannin cell lines
were more sensitive to these drugs (Figure 6B). To note,
we observed that the IC50 profiles of lapatinib, a dual
EGFR/HER2 inhibitor, and erlotinib, an EGFR inhibitor,
were among the most anti-correlated with DRSwortmannin
[36, 37]. Furthermore, these drugs are FDA approved for
use in the treatment of various cancers. This suggests that
targeting receptor tyrosine kinases upstream of PI3Ksignaling pathways may synergize with PI3K inhibition.
Indeed, studies have shown that PI3K inactivation results
in HER2 overexpression, or vice versa, and dual inhibition
of HER2 and PI3K yields more optimal anticancer activity
in breast cancer cell lines [38–40].
Furthermore, we postulated that groups of drugs
with shared pharmacological characteristics would be
correlated with DRSwortmannin in a similar manner. Indeed,
we found that chemotherapy drugs tend to be positively
correlated with DRS (Figure 6B). This indicates that
pharmacologically similar drugs could be grouped
together based on their association with DRS. As such,
this introduces new avenues for drug repositioning
whereby, new potential drug candidates can be identified
via correlation of their IC50 with DRS.

Because DRS is calculated using the gene expression
profile of a chemical inhibitor, we can also use DRS to
investigate if other potential compounds can modulate
that inhibitor’s activity. Thus, we carried out a systematic
screen of potential chemical modulators using GDSC data.
This dataset contains gene expression profiles and IC50
information corresponding to 139 drugs for 707 different
cell lines. As a proof of concept, we first calculated a
DRSwortmannin (MCF7) for each of the 39 breast-derived cell
lines available in the dataset, and correlated DRSwortmannin
with Akt Inhibitor VIII IC50 across these cell lines. We
found that DRSwortmannin was significantly anti-correlated
with the IC50 of Akt inhibitor VIII (PCC = –0.47, P = 2E-3)
(Figure 6A). This indicates that increased DRSwortmannin
(lower PI3K-Akt-mTOR pathway activity) is associated
with increased sensitivity to Akt inhibitor VIII. From
this result we speculate that dual inhibition of PI3K and
Akt may be more effective in decreasing the rate of cell
proliferation. Potentially, Akt can also be phosphorylated
in a PI3K-independent fashion suggesting that Akt activity
may not be completely shut off by inhibiting PI3K [34].
Thus, inhibiting both proteins may result in the blockade
of multiple downstream pathways that also play a role in
cell proliferation, evasion of apoptosis, and metastasis.
To extend this analysis to all drugs available in the
GDSC dataset, we systematically calculated a DRS for all
cell lines and correlated the DRSwortmannin with the IC50 of
all 139 GDSC drugs [35]. In total, we found 16 drugs to
be significantly correlated with DRSwortmannin at P < 0.05,

DISCUSSION
In this study, we describe an analysis framework that
utilizes protein inhibition gene expression profiles to probe
the activity of the PI3K-Akt-mTOR pathway in primary

Figure 5: DRS predicts response to taxane-anthracycline chemotherapy. (A) Kaplan-Meier survival curves of taxane-

anthracycline chemotherapy-treated breast cancer patients with DRSLY-294002 greater and less than 0. Each vertical line represents a
censored patient. (B) Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) curve for random forest classification predicting residual cancer
burden using DRSLY-294002. Random forest classification was conducted using (1) all breast tumors, (2) ER+ breast tumors only, and
(3) ER– breast tumors only.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

84149

Oncotarget

breast tumors. Several studies have utilized perturbation
gene expression profiles derived from primary tissue or
cell lines that contain mutations in a gene of interest to
probe activity of a pathway involving that gene in patient
tumors [12, 41]. Furthermore, perturbation profiles derived
from RNAi experiments have also been applied to study
pathway misregulation in cancer [42–44]. However, there
has been no systematic analysis that has utilized protein
inhibition profiles created through treatment with small
molecule inhibitors as an approach to measure cancerassociated pathway activity in primary tumors.
We argue that the use of protein inhibition gene
expression profiles is more informative compared
to mutation-based gene expression profiles in that
perturbation of the protein of interest is independent
of other molecular events. In our analysis, we showed
that PTEN expression can confound the use of PIK3CA
mutation as a marker for PI3K-Akt-mTOR pathway
activity. This suggests that there may be additional
mutations or molecular events that accompany, or may
even cause, the mutation of interest. Indeed, we did
not find any significant difference in pAkt-Akt ratio
between PIK3CA mutant and wild type samples in both
ER+ and ER- tumors, as we did when stratifying on
DRS (Supplementary Figure S2). Furthermore, protein
inhibition perturbation profiles encode information
different from that encoded in RNAi-based perturbation
profiles. The use of RNAi completely ablates protein
production resulting in gene expression profiles that
also capture information about the disruption of proteinprotein interactions and other non-catalytic functions,
which may affect the overall transcriptomic signature
and complicate downstream analyses. Therefore, small
molecular inhibitors may inhibit the catalytic activity of
a protein without interfering with its potential regulatory
functions, whereas this is not possible with RNAi [14].
Hence, we claim that protein inhibition profiles captures
only the downstream effects of protein catalytic activity
disruption, and not the effects caused by interfering with

protein-protein interactions. However, this postulation
remains to be directly tested in follow-up studies that
utilize RNAi treatment gene expression profiles.
Indeed, there exist several issues associated with
the use of small molecule inhibitors. First, there is the
possibility of off-target effects, which add noise to the
final drug treatment profile. Second, treatment with
varying concentrations of the chemical inhibitor can
result in differences in final gene expression output.
Third, the three inhibitors all have different mechanisms
by which they inhibit the PI3K-Akt-mTOR pathway.
Wortmannin is a non-reversible inhibitor of PI3K, LY294002 is a reversible inhibitor of PI3K, and sirolimus
targets mTOR further downstream of PI3K. Thus, the
gene expression output induced by pathway inhibition will
differ due to variation in mechanisms of drug action. As
such, we applied all three drug treatment profiles in our
analysis to achieve greater sensitivity. We reasoned that
using multiple drug treatment profiles to generate three
DRSs for each patient will enable greater sensitivity in
detecting significant differences in PI3K pathway activity
between different tumor subgroups. Thus, we use the most
significant DRS profile to estimate PI3K activity in tumor
samples.
In spite of these limitations, using drug treatment
profiles to probe activity of cancer-associated pathways
provides an opportunity to study the transcriptomic
effects of protein inhibition in the context of cancer.
Our analysis framework can be extended to study other
pathways in different cancers given that the appropriate
drug treatment profiles exist. On this note, we also used
drug treatment profiles from PC3 cell lines (available
in CMap data) to calculate patient DRS in a prostate
cancer dataset published by Taylor et al. [45]. We found
that patient DRSwortmannin and DRSsirolimus was significantly
anti-correlated with their Gleason scores indicating that
increased PI3K activity was associated with disease
severity (Supplementary Figure S3). Furthermore, we
utilized drug treatment profiles from HL60 cell lines to

Figure 6: Pharmacological correlates of PI3K-Akt-mTOR pathway activity. (A) Correlation of DRS with AKT Inhibitor
VIII IC50. Each point represents a single cell line. (B) Correlation between DRS and the IC50 of 53 drugs. Blue colored drug names are
chemotherapeutics and red colored drug names are targeted inhibitors.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

84150

Oncotarget

Pre-processing and generation of drug treatment
profiles

calculate patient DRS and predict prognosis in several
acute myeloid leukemia datasets. However, the survival
results were not consistent across datasets perhaps due
to the fact that the most differentially expressed genes
in the HL60 drug treatment profile were not enriched
for genes involved in the PI3K-Akt-mTOR pathway. A
possible reason may be that off-target effects were more
pronounced in HL60 cell lines leading to low quality drug
treatment profiles.
In summary, we performed a systematic proof-ofconcept study showing that drug treatment profiles are
valuable tools that can provide insight into breast cancer
pathway dysregulation. Our approach is novel in that we
utilize protein inhibition profiles that provide different
information that may not be present in RNAi- or mutationbased activity profiles. We validate the predictiveness of
the DRS metric using RPPA data and show that DRS can
predict patient prognosis, response to chemotherapy, and
provide insight into the action of other potential anticancer drugs.

Drug treatment gene expression profiles (.CEL)
corresponding to wortmannin, LY-294002, and sirolimus
from CMap were background corrected using Robust
Microarray Analysis (RMA) and quantile normalized.
Each probe set was fitted with a multichip linear model
and collapsed based on mean probe set intensity. All preprocessing steps were implemented in the R programming
environment using the Bioconductor package “affy”
[46]. After normalization, drug treatment profiles were
generated by: (1) Taking the log2 ratio of treatment
vs. control for all genes (2) Labelling values > 0 as the
“up-regulated” group and values < 0 as the “downregulated” group (3) z-transforming ratios into z-scores
to derive p-values for each gene (4) Implementing –log10
transformation to p-values, and (5) Trimming transformed
p-values to so that they fall within [–20, 20] to generate a
final gene expression profile. All replicate drug treatment
profiles were averaged and drug treatment profiles
corresponding to the highest treatment concentration
were used in subsequent analyses. RPPA data was log10transformed before analysis.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Data acquisition

Calculation of tumor sample DRS

Raw CMap drug treatment profiles (.CEL files) for
MCF7, HL60, and PC3 cell lines were downloaded from
the CMap data portal (https//www.broadinstitute.org/
cmap) [32]. Only drug treatment profiles that corresponded
to the highest treatment concentration were used, with
the reasoning that any changes in gene expression will
saturate at higher concentrations. Release 5.0 of the
GDSC gene expression and IC50 data was downloaded
from http://www.cancerrxgene.org/downloads/ [35].
The normalized METABRIC gene expression dataset
(n = 2136) was downloaded from the European GenomePhenome Archive (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/ega) under
the accession number EGAS00000000083 [15]. Level
3 TCGA breast cancer gene expression (RNA-seq,
n = 1037)) and RPPA data (n = 408) were downloaded
from the TCGA data portal (https://tcga-data.nci.nih.
gov/tcga/) [18]. Normalized gene expression data by van
de Vijver et al. was downloaded from the Netherlands
Cancer Institute’s data portal (n = 260) (http://ccb.nki.nl/
data) [19]. Normalized gene expression data from primary
breast tumors published by Loi et al. was downloaded
from GEO under accession number GSE6532 (n = 255)
[17]. Gene expression data and information about residual
cancer burden used to evaluate DRS as a predictive
marker was published by Hatzis et al. and downloaded
from GEO under the accession numbers GSE25065 and
GSE25066 (n = 508) [16]. Prostate cancer data by Taylor
et al. was downloaded from GEO under accession number
GSE21032 (n = 179) [45]. All gene expression datasets
contained time-to-event survival and clinicopathological
information on cancer patients.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

A DRS is calculated for each drug treatment profiletumor sample pair based on the IDEA framework [47].
Given the sorted tumor gene expression profile of a single
patient sample g = [g1, g2, g3…gi…gn] and a drug treatment
profile d = [d1, d2, d3…di…dn] (sorted according to g), we
generate a foreground function f(i) and a background
function b(i) for the up- and for the down-regulated group:

∑
f (i ) =
∑
∑
b(i ) =
∑

i
j =1
n
j =1

i
j =1
n
j =1

g jd j
g jd j

, 1 ≤ i ≤ n (1)

g j (1 − d j )
g j (1 − d j )

, 1 ≤ i ≤ n (2)

The pre-DRS (pDRS) is then calculated using the
following equations:
pDRSup+ / dn = max[ f (imax ) − b(imax ), 0], where 
imax = arg max i =1,2,3...n [ f (i ) − b(i )] (3A)
pDRSup− / dn = min[ f (i min) − b(i min), 0], where
imin = arg min i =1,2,3...n [ f (i ) − b(i )] (3B)
 pDRS + , pDRS + > pDRS −
(3C)
pDRSup / dn = 
−
 pDRS , otherwise

84151

Oncotarget

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We then normalize the pDRSs (of both the up- and
down-regulated profiles) first by permuting the genes in
the tumor expression profile 1000 times to yield a null
pDRS distribution. The pDRSs were then divided by the
null pDRSs to yield a DRSup and a DRSdn profile. The
difference between DRSup and DRSdn was computed to
yield the final DRS. Each patient sample was assigned
three DRSs, each corresponding to one of the three PI3KAkt-mTOR pathway inhibitors.

We thank A. Dalton for assistance with preliminary
data analysis.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
The authors declare no competing financial interests.

GRANT SUPPORT

Association of DRS with survival and clinical
phenotypes

This work was supported by the American Cancer
Society Research Grant, #IRG-82-003-30, the National
Center for Advancing Translational Sciences of the
National Institutes of Health under Award Number
KL2TR001088, the start-up funding package provided
to CC by the Geisel School of Medicine at Dartmouth
College, and the Rosaline Borison Memorial Pre-doctoral
Fellowship provided to MU.

Survival analysis was implemented by fitting
Kaplan-Meier estimators to patient survival information.
Patients were stratified at DRS = 0 and significant
differences in survival were evaluated using the log-rank
test. For the tissue-specific survival analysis, univariate
Cox proportional hazards models were fitted to patient
DRS to predict patient survival and significance was
calculated using the Wald test. P-values were adjusted for
multiple hypothesis testing using the Benjamini-Hochberg
procedure. Survival analysis was conducted using the
“survival” R package. Survival data in GSE21032 was
limited so DRS was correlated with the Gleason score of
the prostate tumors instead, using spearman correlation
across 150 patient samples [45].

REFERENCES
  1.	 Engelman JA. Targeting PI3K signalling in cancer:
opportunities, challenges and limitations. Nat Rev Cancer.
2009; 9:550–562.
 2.	 Cully M, You H, Levine AJ, Mak TW. Beyond PTEN
mutations: the PI3K pathway as an integrator of multiple
inputs during tumorigenesis. Nat Rev Cancer. 2006;
6:184–192.

Machine learning analysis
Machine learning analysis was performed in the
Hatzis dataset using MCF7/LY-294002 DRS as features to
classify patients into those with high residual cancer burden
(RCB-II/III) and low residual cancer burden (RCB-0/I)
[16]. The random forest learning method was used to
classify patients into the two cancer burden groups.
10-fold cross validation was used to calculate the AUC.
The random forest algorithm was implemented using the
R package “randomForest”.

 3.	 Courtney KD, Corcoran RB, Engelman JA. The PI3K
pathway as drug target in human cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2010;
28:1075–1083.

Correlation analysis and clustering of GDSC
drugs

  6.	 Yap TA, Bjerke L, Clark PA, Workman P. Proceedings:
Drugging PI3K in cancer: refining targets and therapeutic
strategies. Curr Opin Pharmacol. 2015; 23:98–107.

The GDSC dataset contained gene expression
data and drug IC50 information for 648 cell lines and
139 drugs, respectively [35]. The wortmannin drug
treatment profiles from CMap were used to calculate a
DRS for each cell line [32]. Correlation of DRS with Akt
Inhibitor VIII was calculated using Pearson correlation
across 39 breast-derived cell lines. Correlation of
DRS with IC50 of all GDSC drugs in the drug screen
was calculated using Spearman correlation across all
648 cell lines regardless of tissue type. Potential PI3K
inhibitor modulators were selected using an adjusted
P < 0.05 cutoff (Benjamini-Hochberg corrected) from
the correlation analysis.

 7.	Vlahos CJ, Matter WF, Hui KY, Brown RF. A
specific inhibitor of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase,
2-(4-morpholinyl)-8-phenyl-4H-1-benzopyran-4-one
(LY294002). J Biol Chem. 1994; 269:5241–5248.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

  4.	 Luo J, Manning BD, Cantley LC. Targeting the PI3K-Akt
pathway in human cancer: rationale and promise. Cancer
Cell. 2003; 4:257–262.
  5.	 Vivanco I, Sawyers CL. The phosphatidylinositol 3-Kinase
AKT pathway in human cancer. Nat Rev Cancer. 2002;
2:489–501.

  8.	 Kalinsky K, Jacks LM, Heguy A, Patil S, Drobnjak M, Bhanot
UK, Hedvat CV, Traina TA, Solit D, Gerald W, Moynahan
ME. PIK3CA mutation associates with improved outcome in
breast cancer. Clin Cancer Res. 2009; 15:5049–5059.
  9.	 Cizkova M, Susini A, Vacher S, Cizeron-Clairac G,
Andrieu C, Driouch K, Fourme E, Lidereau R, Bièche I.
PIK3CA mutation impact on survival in breast cancer
patients and in ERα, PR, ERBB2-based subgroups. Breast
Cancer Res. 2012; 14:R28.
84152

Oncotarget

10.	 Zardavas D, Phillips WA, Loi S. PIK3CA mutations in
breast cancer: reconciling findings from preclinical and
clinical data. Breast Cancer Res. 2014; 16:201.

Arteaga CL. Hyperactivation of phosphatidylinositol-3
kinase promotes escape from hormone dependence in
estrogen receptor-positive human breast cancer. J Clin
Invest. 2010; 120:2406–2413.

11.	 Maruyama N, Miyoshi Y, Taguchi T, Tamaki Y, Monden M,
Noguchi S. Clinicopathologic analysis of breast cancers
with PIK3CA mutations in Japanese women. Clin Cancer
Res. 2007; 13:408–414.

23.	 Rakha EA, Reis-Filho JS, Ellis IO. Basal-like breast cancer:
a critical review. J Clin Oncol. 2008; 26:2568–2581.
24.	 Weigelt B, Warne PH, Downward J. PIK3CA mutation, but
not PTEN loss of function, determines the sensitivity of
breast cancer cells to mTOR inhibitory drugs. Oncogene.
2011; 30:3222–3233.

12.	 Loi S, Haibe-Kains B, Majjaj S, Lallemand F, Durbecq V,
Larsimont D, Gonzalez-Angulo AM, Pusztai L, Symmans
WF, Bardelli A, Ellis P, Tutt ANJ, Gillett CE, et al. PIK3CA
mutations associated with gene signature of low mTORC1
signaling and better outcomes in estrogen receptorpositive breast cancer. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2010;
107:10208–10213.
13.	 Cui Q. A Network of Cancer Genes with Co-Occurring and
Anti-Co-Occurring Mutations. PLoS ONE. 2010; 5:e13180.

25.	 Janku F, Wheler JJ, Naing A, Falchook GS, Hong DS,
Stepanek VM, Fu S, Piha-Paul SA, Lee JJ, Luthra R,
Tsimberidou AM, Kurzrock R. PIK3CA mutation H1047R
is associated with response to PI3K/AKT/mTOR signaling
pathway inhibitors in early-phase clinical trials. Cancer Res.
2013; 73:276–284.

14.	 Weiss WA, Taylor SS, Shokat KM. Recognizing and
exploiting differences between RNAi and small-molecule
inhibitors. Nat Chem Biol. 2007; 3:739–744.

26.	 Ma CX, Reinert T, Chmielewska I, Ellis MJ. Mechanisms
of aromatase inhibitor resistance. Nat Rev Cancer. 2015;
15:261–275.

15.	 Curtis C, Shah SP, Chin S-F, Turashvili G, Rueda OM,
Dunning MJ, Speed D, Lynch AG, Samarajiwa S,
Yuan Y, Gräf S, Ha G, Haffari G, et al. The genomic and
transcriptomic architecture of 2,000 breast tumours reveals
novel subgroups. Nature. 2012; 486:346–352.

27.	 Ma YY, Wei SJ, Lin YC, Lung JC, Chang TC, WhangPeng J, Liu JM, Yang DM, Yang WK, Shen CY. PIK3CA
as an oncogene in cervical cancer. Oncogene. 2000; 19:
2739–2744.
28.	 Shayesteh L, Lu Y, Kuo WL, Baldocchi R, Godfrey T,
Collins C, Pinkel D, Powell B, Mills GB, Gray JW. PIK3CA
is implicated as an oncogene in ovarian cancer. Nat Genet.
1999; 21:99–102.

16.	 Hatzis C, Pusztai L, Valero V, Booser DJ, Esserman L,
Lluch A, Vidaurre T, Holmes F, Souchon E, Wang H,
Martin M, Cotrina J, Gomez H, et al. A genomic predictor
of response and survival following taxane-anthracycline
chemotherapy for invasive breast cancer. JAMA. 2011;
305:1873–1881.

29.	 Isakoff SJ, Engelman JA, Irie HY, Luo J, Brachmann SM,
Pearline RV, Cantley LC, Brugge JS. Breast cancerassociated PIK3CA mutations are oncogenic in mammary
epithelial cells. Cancer Res. 2005; 65:10992–11000.

17.	 Loi S, Haibe-Kains B, Desmedt C, Lallemand F, Tutt AM,
Gillet C, Ellis P, Harris A, Bergh J, Foekens JA, Klijn JGM,
Larsimont D, Buyse M, et al. Definition of clinically
distinct molecular subtypes in estrogen receptor-positive
breast carcinomas through genomic grade. J Clin Oncol.
2007; 25:1239–1246.

30.	 Urruticoechea A, Smith IE, Dowsett M. Proliferation
marker Ki-67 in early breast cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2005;
23:7212–7220.
31.	 Scholzen T, Gerdes J. The Ki-67 protein: from the known
and the unknown. J Cell Physio. 2000; 182:311–322.

18.	 Network TCGA. Comprehensive molecular portraits of
human breast tumours. Nature. 2012; 490:61–70.

32.	 Lamb J, Crawford ED, Peck D, Modell JW, Blat IC,
Wrobel MJ, Lerner J, Brunet J-P, Subramanian A, Ross KN,
Reich M, Hieronymus H, Wei G, et al. The Connectivity
Map: using gene-expression signatures to connect small
molecules, genes, and disease. Science (New York, NY).
2006; 313:1929–1935.

19.	 van de Vijver MJ, He YD, van’t Veer LJ, Dai H, Hart AAM,
Voskuil DW, Schreiber GJ, Peterse JL, Roberts C,
Marton MJ, Parrish M, Atsma D, Witteveen A, et al. A geneexpression signature as a predictor of survival in breast
cancer. N Engl J Med. 2002; 347:1999–2009.

33.	 Mukohara T. PI3K mutations in breast cancer: prognostic
and therapeutic implications. Breast Cancer (Dove Med
Press). 2015; 7:111–123.

20.	 Bosch A, Li Z, Bergamaschi A, Ellis H, Toska E, Prat A,
Tao JJ, Spratt DE, Viola-Villegas NT, Castel P, Minuesa G,
Morse N, Rodon J, et al. PI3K inhibition results in enhanced
estrogen receptor function and dependence in hormone
receptor-positive breast cancer. Sci Transl Med. 2015;
7:283ra251.

34.	 Mahajan K, Coppola D, Challa S, Fang B, Chen YA, Zhu W,
Lopez AS, Koomen J, Engelman RW, Rivera C, MuraokaCook RS, Cheng JQ, Schönbrunn E, et al. Ack1 mediated
AKT/PKB tyrosine 176 phosphorylation regulates its
activation. PloS One. 2010; 5:e9646.

21.	 Ciruelos Gil EM. Targeting the PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway
in estrogen receptor-positive breast cancer. Cancer Treat
Rev. 2014; 40:862–871.

35.	 Yang W, Soares J, Greninger P, Edelman EJ, Lightfoot H,
Forbes S, Bindal N, Beare D, Smith JA, Thompson IR,
Ramaswamy S, Futreal PA, Haber DA, et al. Genomics
of Drug Sensitivity in Cancer (GDSC): a resource for

22.	 Miller TW, Hennessy BT, Gonzalez-Angulo AM, Fox EM,
Mills GB, Chen H, Higham C, Garcia-Echeverria C, Shyr Y,
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

84153

Oncotarget

therapeutic biomarker discovery in cancer cells. Nucleic
Acids Res. 2013; 41:D955–961.

prognostic markers of breast cancer. Breast Cancer Res.
2007; 9:R30.

36.	 Ryan Q, Ibrahim A, Cohen MH, Johnson J, Ko C-w,
Sridhara R, Justice R, Pazdur R. FDA drug approval
summary: lapatinib in combination with capecitabine
for previously treated metastatic breast cancer that
overexpresses HER-2. The Oncologist. 2008; 13:
1114–1119.

42.	 Iorns E, Lord CJ, Turner N, Ashworth A. Utilizing RNA
interference to enhance cancer drug discovery. Nat Rev
Drug Discov. 2007; 6:556–568.
43.	 Peng G, Chun-Jen Lin C, Mo W, Dai H, Park YY, Kim SM,
Peng Y, Mo Q, Siwko S, Hu R, Lee JS, Hennessy B,
Hanash S, et al. Genome-wide transcriptome profiling of
homologous recombination DNA repair. Nat Commun.
2014; 5:3361.

37.	 Cohen MH, Johnson JR, Chen Y-F, Sridhara R, Pazdur R.
FDA drug approval summary: erlotinib (Tarceva) tablets.
The Oncologist. 2005; 10:461–466.

44.	 Singh A, Greninger P, Rhodes D, Koopman L, Violette S,
Bardeesy N, Settleman J. A gene expression signature
associated with “K-Ras addiction” reveals regulators of EMT
and tumor cell survival. Cancer Cell. 2009; 15:489–500.

38.	 Serra V, Scaltriti M, Prudkin L, Eichhorn PJA, Ibrahim YH,
Chandarlapaty S, Markman B, Rodriguez O, Guzman M,
Rodriguez S, Gili M, Russillo M, Parra JL, et al. PI3K
inhibition results in enhanced HER signaling and acquired
ERK dependency in HER2-overexpressing breast cancer.
Oncogene. 2011; 30:2547–2557.

45.	 Taylor BS, Schultz N, Hieronymus H, Gopalan A, Xiao Y,
Carver BS, Arora VK, Kaushik P, Cerami E, Reva B,
Antipin Y, Mitsiades N, Landers T, et al. Integrative
genomic profiling of human prostate cancer. Cancer Cell.
2010; 18:11–22.

39.	 Berns K, Horlings HM, Hennessy BT, Madiredjo M,
Hijmans EM, Beelen K, Linn SC, Gonzalez-Angulo AM,
Stemke-Hale K, Hauptmann M, Beijersbergen RL,
Mills GB, van de Vijver MJ, Bernards R. A functional
genetic approach identifies the PI3K pathway as a major
determinant of trastuzumab resistance in breast cancer.
Cancer Cell. 2007; 12:395–402.

46.	 Gautier L, Cope L, Bolstad BM, Irizarry RA. affy—
analysis of Affymetrix GeneChip data at the probe level.
Bioinformatics. 2004; 20:307–315.
47.	 Ung MH, Varn FS, Cheng C. IDEA: Integrated Drug
Expression Analysis-Integration of Gene Expression
and Clinical Data for the Identification of Therapeutic
Candidates. CPT Pharmacometrics Syst Pharmacol. 2015;
4:415–425.

40.	 Rexer BN, Chanthaphaychith S, Dahlman K, Arteaga CL.
Direct inhibition of PI3K in combination with dual HER2
inhibitors is required for optimal antitumor activity in HER2+
breast cancer cells. Breast Cancer Res. 2014; 16:R9.
41.	 Langerod A, Zhao H, Borgan O, Nesland JM, Bukholm IR,
Ikdahl T, Karesen R, Borresen-Dale AL, Jeffrey SS. TP53
mutation status and gene expression profiles are powerful

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

84154

Oncotarget

