Correspondence

Beta-Blockers in Epithelial
Ovarian Cancer
Watkins et al are to be congratulated on their study
highlighting the association between nonselective betablockers (NSBBs) and improved survival in patients with
epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC).1 The authors and the
editorialists2 have proposed multiple mechanisms such as
antiapoptotic, antimetastatic, antiangiogenic, antistress,
and proimmunity mechanisms. Increased drug exposure
by suppression of the drug efflux pump P-glycoprotein
(MDR1/ABCB1), a known property of propranolol,3 is
another possibility. However, it is not possible to narrow
down the principal mechanism(s) due to the lack of details
in the article.1 For example, an improved response rate in
those patients administered neoadjuvant chemotherapy
would suggest an effect on drug efficacy (increased exposure, antiangiogenic), whereas an improved disease-free
survival rate would be more in favor of an effect (possibly
immunological) on quiescent cancer stem cells.
It is important to know the primary method of action
because this will decide the point at which NSBBs will have
the maximum impact in the management of EOC:
upfront, as primary prevention; along with chemotherapy,
to improve drug activity; or after treatment, as an immune
stimulant, for secondary prevention. The arbitrary use of
NSBBs can be detrimental. As the editorialists state, these
drugs are not without side effects,2 and there is some experimental evidence that norepinephrine prevents DNA damage in ovarian surface epithelial cells4; therefore, the study

Cancer

January 1, 2016

findings that patients receiving beta-blockers had larger
tumors at the time of presentation dictates caution.
Retrospective data from a larger cohort regarding
details such as response rate and disease-free survival or a
well-designed prospective trial are needed before these
drugs are introduced into the management of EOC.
FUNDING SUPPORT
No specific funding was disclosed.

CONFLICT OF INTEREST DISCLOSURES
The authors made no disclosures.

REFERENCES
1. Watkins JL, Thaker PH, Nick AM, et al. Clinical impact of selective
and nonselective beta-blockers on survival in patients with ovarian
cancer [published online ahead of print August 24, 2015]. Cancer.
doi: 10.1002/cncr.29392.
2. Bunch KP, Annunziata CM. Are beta-blockers on the therapeutic horizon for ovarian cancer treatment [published online ahead of print
August 24, 2015]? Cancer. doi: 10.1002/cncr.29394.
3. Hamilton KO, Yazdanian MA, Audus KL. Modulation of P-glycoprotein
activity in Calu-3 cells using steroids and beta-ligands. Int J Pharm. 2001;
228:171-179.
4. Patel PR, Hegde ML, Theruvathu J, Mitra SA, Boldogh I, Sowers L.
Norepinephrine reduces reactive oxygen species (ROS) and DNA damage
in ovarian surface epithelial cells. J Bioanal Biomed. 2015;7:75-80.

Ajit Venniyoor, DM
Department of Medical Oncology
National Oncology Center
The Royal Hospital
Muscat, The Sultanate of Oman
DOI: 10.1002/cncr.29722, Published online October 9, 2015
in Wiley Online Library (wileyonlinelibrary.com)

161

