Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No. 9

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Bee venom inhibits growth of human cervical tumors in mice
Hye Lim Lee1,*, Sang Ho Park2,*, Tae Myoung Kim3, Yu Yeon Jung1, Mi Hee Park1,
Sang Hyun Oh1, Hye Seok Yun1, Hyung Ok Jun1, Hwan Soo Yoo1, Sang-Bae Han1,
Ung Soo Lee4, Joo Hee Yoon5, Min Jong Song6, Jin Tae Hong1
1

College of Pharmacy and Medical Research Center, Heungduk, Cheongju, Chungbuk, Republic of Korea

2

 linical Research Laboratory, Uijeonbu St. Mary’s Hospital, The Catholic University of Korea College of Medicine, Uijeongbu,
C
Republic of Korea

3

College of Veterinary Medicine, Chungbuk National University, Heungduk, Cheongju, Chungbuk, Republic of Korea

4

Department of Food Science & Technology, Korea National University of Transportation, Jeungpyeong, Republic of Korea

5

Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, St. Vincent’s Hospital, College of Medicine, The Catholic University of Korea,
Paldal-gu, Suwon, Gyeonggi-do, Republic of Korea

6

Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Daejeon St. Mary’s Hospital, College of Medicine, The Catholic University of
Korea, Jung-gu, Daejeon, Republic of Korea

*

These authors have contributed equally to this work

Correspondence to:
Jin Tae Hong e-mail: jinthong@chungbuk.ac.kr
Min Jong Song e-mail: bitsugar@catholic.ac.kr
Keywords: bee venom, apoptosis, death receptors, NF-κB, cervical cancer
Received: November 27, 2014    Accepted: January 08, 2015    Published: January 23, 2015

ABSTRACT
We studied whether bee venom (BV) inhibits cervical tumor growth through
enhancement of death receptor (DR) expressions and inactivation of nuclear factor
kappa B (NF-κB) in mice. In vivo study showed that BV (1 mg/kg) inhibited tumor
growth. Similar inhibitory effects of BV on cancer growth in primary human cervical
cancer cells were also found. BV (1–5 μg/ml) also inhibited the growth of cancer cells,
Ca Ski and C33Aby the induction of apoptotic cell death in a dose dependent manner.
Agreed with cancer cell growth inhibition, expression of death receptors; FAS, DR3
and DR6, and DR downstream pro-apoptotic proteins including caspase-3 and Bax
was concomitantly increased, but the NF-κB activity and the expression of Bcl-2 were
inhibited by treatment with BV in tumor mice, human cancer cell and human tumor
samples as well as cultured cancer cells. In addition, deletion of FAS, DR3 and DR6
by small interfering RNA significantly reversed BV-induced cell growth inhibitory
effects as well as NF-κB inactivation. These results suggest that BV inhibits cervical
tumor growth through enhancement of FAS, DR3 and DR6 expression via inhibition
of NF-κB pathway.

as leukemia cells [9]. However, there is a few available
information on the effect of BV on human cervical cancer
cells. Previous studies presented that simply inhibition of
cancer cell growth and angiogenesis in culture cervical
cancer cells [10, 11]. Therefore, our present study focused
on xenograft model, clinical data using human sample as
well as inhibition of human cancer cell growth. Cervical
cancer is the third most common cancer among women
and the second most frequent cause of cancer-related death
worldwide [12]. Human papillomavirus (HPV) infection is

INTRODUCTION
Bee venom (BV) therapy is the therapeutic
application to the treatment of various diseases. BV has
been used as an oriental medicine for the treatment of
chronic inflammatory diseases, such as rheumatoid arthritis
and pain [1–3]. Furthermore, it has been demonstrated that
BV inhibits mammary carcinoma cell proliferation in vitro
and tumor growth in vivo, such as prostate [4], ovarian
[5], liver [6], bladder [7] and renal cancer cells [8] as well

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

7280

Oncotarget

RESULTS

a major cause of cervical cancer, however, HPV infection
alone is not sufficient to cause cancer cells. Up-regulation
of oncogenes and aberrant activation of related signals
could be significant in cervical carcinogensis [13]. Thus,
blocking agents these signals might be applicable for
treatment of the development of cervical cancer.
Apoptotic cell death plays an important role in anticancer effects of chemotherapeutics. Stimulation of death
receptor (DR) expression is implicated in the induction
of apoptotic cell death in cancer cells and reduced
chemoresistance of cancer cells. Eight members of the
DR family have been characterized so far: tumor necrosis
factor receptor 1 (TNFR1; also known as DR1, CD120a,
p55 and p60), DR2 (also known as CD95, APO-1 and
Fas), DR3 (also known as APO-3, LARD, TRAMP and
WSL1), TNF-related apoptosis-inducing ligand receptor
1 (TRAILR1; also known as DR4 and APO-2), TRAILR2
(also known as DR5, KILLER and TRICK2), DR6,
ectodysplasin A receptor (EDAR) and nerve growth factor
receptor (NGFR) [14, 15]. When DRs bind to their ligands,
the death domains recruit the intracellular adaptor protein
FADD (Fas-associated death domain protein) which
results in the activation of caspases, including caspases-3,
-8 and -9, as well as increase of Bax and decrease of Bcl-2
[16, 17]. These extrisinc apoptotic signals are signigficant
in chemotherapeutic-induced selective apoptosis
of cervical cancer [18, 19]. Moreover, much higher
expression of DRs in cervical cancer cell lines and human
cervical tumor tissues compared to that in normal cervical
tissues have been reported [20]. Therefore, stimulation of
DR expression could be significant for chemotherapy as
well as reduced chemoresistance of cervical cancer cells.
The nuclear factor kappa B (NF-κB) family plays
an important role in several human cancer cell growth
[21, 22]. NF-κB activation participates at multiple steps in
tumor growth and its suppression leads to the suppression
of tumor development. NF-κB mediates the expression of
genes that are involved in tumor promotion, angiogenesis,
and metastasis [23, 24]. Several tumor types including
cervical cancer show a persistent constitutive activation
of NF-κB, and NF-κB activation has been shown to
induce resistance to various chemotherapeutic agents
[25, 26]. Cervical cancer also regulates cell growth
through the activation of NF-κB [27] and higher NF-κB
activity contributes to chemotherapeutic resistance of
cervical cancer cells [25, 28, 29]. NF-κB has been also
significantly associated with the up-regulation of proapoptotic DRs such as Fas, FasL and DR3-DR6 in several
cancer [30, 31]. We previously found that BV inhibited
prostate and ovarian cancer cell growth by inhibiting NFκB, but up regulation of DR pathways [4, 5]. In the present
study, we investigated whether BV has also anti-cancer
effect in cervical cancer cells through modification of NFκB and DR pathways in in vivo xenograft mice model,
human tumor tissues, human primary cervical cancer cells
as well as cervical cancer cell lines.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

BV inhibited tumor growth in vivo xenograft
To elucidate the anti-tumor effect of BV in vivo, the
tumor growth on cervical cancer cell xenograft bearing nude
mice following BV (1 mg/kg) treatments was investigated.
Since our previous studies in other cancer cells, 3 mg/kg
was effective [4], thus, we used 1 mg/kg BV in cervical
cancer. In Ca Ski xenograft studies, BV was administrated
intraperitoneally two times per week for 4 weeks to mice
which have tumors ranging from 100 to 300 mm3. Tumor
volume was measured weekly, and all mice were killed
at the end of experiment when tumors were dissected
and weighted. The inhibitory effect of BV on growth of
cervical tumor was significant in xenograft model mice
(Figure 1A upper panel). Tumor weight and volume were
significantly smaller in 1 mg/kg BV-treated compared with
those saline-treated Ca Ski bearing mice (Figure 1A middle
and lower panel). Expression of FAS, DR3 and DR6 and
DR downstream pro-apoptotic proteins including cleavaged
caspase-3, -8 and -9 was concomitantly increased (Figure
1B), but the NF-κB activity and expression of pI03BAB
and nucleus p50 and p65 were inhibited in tumor tissues by
treatment with BV (Figure 1C).

Expression of DR and cleaved caspases, as well
as NF-κB activity in human cervical tumor
tissues
To examine the relationship between human tumor
growth and DR expression and NF-κB activity, we
compared expression of FAS, DR3, DR6 and expression
of p21, p53, cleavaged 3, 8 and 9 as well as NF-κB activity
between normal human cervical tissues and human tumor
tissues. We found that much higher elevated expression
of FAS, DR3, DR6, p21 and p53 as well as cleavaged
caspase -3, -8 and -9 in cervical tumor tissues compared to
those in normal tissues detected either by Western blotting
and immunohistochemistry (Figure 2A and 2B).We also
found the NF-κB activity, pIκB expression and nucleus
expression of p50 and p65 was much higher in human
tumor tissues compared to that in normal cervical tissues
(Figure 2D).

Effect of BV on cultured primary human
cervical cancer cell growth, NF-κB activity
and DR expression
To investigate the inhibitory effect of BV (5 μg/ml)
on primary human cervical cancer cell growth, we cultured
primary human cervical cancer cells with or without BV.
Similar to cancer cell lines, we found that BV clearly
inhibited growth of primary cultured human cervical
cancer cells with IC50 value of 4.9 μg/ml (Figure 3A and
3B). Western blot analysis showed that BV treatment
7281

Oncotarget

Figure 1: Anti-tumor activity of BV in cervical cancer xenograft. Growth inhibition (as assessed by tumor volume) of
subcutaneously transplanted CA Ski xenografts mice treated with BV (1 mg/kg/ two times a week) for 4weeks. Xenografted mice (n = 10)
were administrated intraperitoneally with saline (1 ml/kg) or BV (1 mg/kg). Tumor burden was measured once per week using a caliper, and
calculated volume length (mm) × width (mm) × height (mm)/2. Tumor weight and volume are presented as means ± S.D. (A). The expression
of apoptotic proteins was detected by western blotting using specific antibodies; DR3, DR6, FAS, cleaved caspase-3 (B). β-actin protein was
used an internal control. Immunohistochemistry was used to determine expression levels of H&E, PCNA, DR3, DR6, p50 in nude mice
xenograft tissues by the different treatments as described in the Materials and Methods Section (C). NF-κB activity in tumor tissues (D). All
values represent mean ± SD from five animal tumor sections. *P < 0.05 indicates significantly different from the control group.

clearly increased FAS, DR3 and DR6 expression as well
as cleavaged caspase-3, -8 and -9 (Figure 3C). NF-κB was
also constitutively activated in primary human cervical
cancer cells. However, inhibition of NF-κB activity as
well as phosphorylation of IκB was also found in cultured
primary human cervical cancer cells by the treatment of
BV (Figure 3D).

C33A (Figure 4D) with IC50 values of 2.9 and 5.5 μg/ml
respectively. Morphologic observation indicated that the
cells were gradually reduced in size and showed a small
round single cell shape by the treatment of BV in Ca Ski
cells (Figure 4A) and C33A cells (Figure 4B). We also
found that BV inhibited other cancer cell growth such as
lung, ovarian and colon cancer cells with different IC50
values (Supplementary Figure 1).

Effect of BV on cervical cancer cell growth

Effect of BV on apoptotic cell death

To assess the inhibitory effect of BV on cell
growth of cervical cancer cells Ca Ski and C33A cells,
we analyzed cell viability by MTT assay. The cells were
treated with several concentrations of BV (1, 2, and
5 μg/ml) for 24 hr. As shown in Figure 1, BV inhibited
cell growth of cervical cancer cells in a concentrationdependent manner. BV (0–5 μg/ml) inhibited growth
of human cervical cancer cells; Cs Ski (Figure 4C) and
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

We performed DAPI staining followed by TUNEL
staining assays, and then the double labeled cells were
analyzed by fluorescence microscope to determine the
inhibition of cell growth by BV was due to the induction
of apoptotic cell death. Reversely consistant with cell
growth inhibitory effects, apoptotic cell death was
significantly increased in BV treated Ca Ski and C33A
7282

Oncotarget

Figure 2: Expression of apoptosis regulatory proteins and DRs, and NF-κB activity in human cervical tissues. The

expression of apoptotic proteins was detected by Western blotting using specific antibodies; DR3, DR6, FAS, p53, Bcl-2, cleaved caspase-3,
cleaved caspase-8, cleaved caspase-9, Bax and β-actin in the cervical cancer tissues and cervical normal tissues (A). β-actin protein was
used an internal control. Immunohistochemistry analysis of FAS, DR3 and DR6 confirmed that the intensities of nuclear staining for DR3,
DR6 and FAS were decreased in the cervical tissues (containing tumor tissues) of human (B). Activation of NF-κB in the cervical cancer
tissues and cervical normal tissues (C). Nuclear extract from cervical cancer tissues was incubated in binding interaction of 32P-end-labeled
oligonucleotide containing the κB sequence. The cervical tissues was incubated and were lysed, cytosolic proteins were used to determine
the expression of IκB, p-IκB (internal control) and nuclear proteins were used to determine the expression of p50, p65 and HistoneH1(internal control) in cervical tumor tissues.

Effect of BV on expression of apoptotic
regulatory proteins

cervical cancer cells, respectively (Figure 5). The number
of apoptotic cells (DAPI-positive TUNEL-stained cells) in
CA Ski and C33A human cervical cancer cell cultures was
increased to about 87% and 90% of cells, respectively at a
concentration of 5 μg/ml (Figure 5B).

To figure out the relationship between the induction of
apoptotic cell death, and the expression of their regulatory
proteins by BV, expression of apoptotic cell death related
proteins was investigated by Western blots. The expression
of anti-apoptotic protein Bcl-2 was decreased; however, the
expression of pro-apoptotic proteins, Bax, cleaved form of
caspases-3, -8, and -9 was increased by treatment of BV in
a concentration dependent manner (Figure 6B).

Effect of BV on expression of DR and
apoptotic regulatory proteins
Apoptotic cell death can be induced by increase
expression of DRs. Therefore, to investigate expression
of DRs in cervical cancer cells undergoing apoptotic
cell death, we performed Western blot analysis. Western
blot analysis showed that BV treatment clearly increased
DR3 and DR6 expression in a concentration dependent
manner in both cells, and expression of FAS in Ca Ski
and DR4 in C33A cancer cells was increased by BV
(Figure 6A).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Effect of BV on NF-κB activation
NF-κB is significant in cervical cancer cell growth. To
investigate whether BV inactivates NF-κB, we did EMSA
for detecting DNA binding activity of NF-κB. We found
that BV untreated cervical cancer cells showed highly
7283

Oncotarget

Figure 3: Effect of BV on cell viability and morphological changes of human primary cervical cancer cells. Morphologic

observation with the treatment of BV. Human primary cervical cancer cell changes were observed under phase contrast microscope
(A). The data (B) are expressed as the mean ± S.D. of three experiments. *(P < 0.05) indicates statistically concentration-dependent effect
of BV (A) on the MTT viability assay in human primary cervical cancer cell. Expression of apoptosis regulatory proteins related extrinsic
pathway was determined using Western blot analysis (C), NF-κB activity and expression of related proteins determined by EMSA or
Western blot (D) were determined as similar to the cancer cell lines. Each band is representative for three experiments.

constituted activation of NF-κB in both cervical cancer
cells. However, the treatment of BV dose dependently
inhibited DNA binding activity of NF-κB (Figure
7A). Agreed with the inhibition of NF-κB, cytosolic
phosphorylation of IκB as well as the nucleus expression
of p50 and p65 were inhibited by BV treatment in both
cervical cancer cells (Figure 7B).

DR3, DR6) almost completely reversed the cell growth
inhibitory effect of BV in Ca Ski (Figure 8A) and C33A
(Figure 8B). We also evaluated NF-κB activity. Inhibition
of NF-κB by BV was abolished by transfection with FAS,
DR3, DR6 siRNA both in Ca Ski (Figure 8C) and C33A
cells (Figure 8D).

DISCUSSION

Reversed effect of DR siRNAs on BV-induced
cell growth inhibition and NF-κB inactivation

In the present study, we found that BV clearly
inhibited growth of primary human cervical cancer cells
and tumor growth in xenograft female BALB/c nude
mice model accompanied with increased DR3 and DR6
expression and NF-κB inactivation. Moreover, we found
that significant higher expression of DR3, DR6 and
p50 as well as NF-κB activity in human cervical tumor
tissues. We also found that BV inhibited cell growth of

To determine the relationship between DR expres­
sion and cervical cancer cell growth inhibitory effect of
BV, we transfected Ca Ski and C33A cells with DR siRNA
using a transfection agent. The cells were transfected
with 100 nM siRNA of DRs for 24 hr, and then treated
with BV(5 μg/ml) for 24 hr. Knock down of DRs(FAS,
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

7284

Oncotarget

Figure 4: Effect of BV on cell viability and morphological changes of cervical cancer cells. Concentration-dependent effect

of BV on the MTT viability assay in Ca Ski and C33A after 24 hr. Morphologic observation with the treatment of BV. Ca Ski and C33A
cells morphological changes were observed under phase contrast microscope (A and B), respectively). The data were expressed as the mean
± S.D. of three experiments. *(P < 0.05) indicates statistically significant differences from the control group.

human cervical cancer cells; Ca Ski and C33A through
induction of apoptotic cell death via increase of DR3 and
DR6 expression. In addition, BV inhibited other cancer
cell growth with different efficacy. Thus, the present
data indicates that BV could be effective for treatment of
cervical cancer through up-regulation of FAS, DR3 and
DR6, but inactivation of NF-κB. It has been demonstrated
that BV inhibits cell growth in several types of cancer cells
including cancer, prostate [4], ovarian [5], liver [6] and
bladder cancers [7]. In addition to the inhibitory effect on
these cancer cells, our data indicate that BV has also anticancer effect in cervical cancer cells. The effectiveness
of BV in cervical cancer cells (dosage of anti-cancer
effect) are similar to the dosage in other cancer cells such
as colon, prostate [4] and ovarian [5]. Even though, the
cell growth inhibitory effect of BV in p53 positive Ca Ski
cells was much greater than p53 negative C33A cells, we
did not see any difference in the dosage to inhibit primary
human cervical cancer cell growth inhibition. Thus, the
p53 dependent intrinsic apoptosis pathway may not be
significant in BV-induced cervical cancer cell growth
inhibition. It is known that about 50% of human cancer
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

possess a p53 genomic mutation that may enable to
escape from death induced by conventional therapeutic
agents [32]. In the case of cervical cancer, it appears to
be significant because E6 HPV protein leads to down
regulation of p53, thereby the possibility that give some
cervical carcinomas escape from apoptosis via intrinsic
pathway. Thus, development of novel agents that exploit
the extrinsic apoptotic pathway become to be significant.
Several studies have demonstrated that natural
compounds-induced cell growth inhibition in cancer
cells could be related with increase of DR pathway, an
important extrinsic apoptotic pathway. Indomethacin
and sulindac sulfide, one of the major metabolites of
sulindac, activate caspase 8 and induce apoptosis by a fasassociating protein with death domain (FADD)-dependent
mechanism in Jurkat T cells [16]. Sulindac sulfide is also
believed to mediate its antitumorigenic effects by inducing
apoptosis through up-regulated DR5 and activated the
caspase 8 in colon and prostate cancer cell lines [17]. Our
previous study also showed that BV and Snake venom
toxin induced apoptotic cell death of colon, prostate, and
ovarian cancer cells through enhancement of DRs (DR3,
7285

Oncotarget

Figure 5: Effect of BV on apoptotic cell death. The cervical cancer cells were treated with BV for 24 hr, and then labeled

with DAPI and TUNEL solution. Total number of cells in a given area was determined by using DAPI nuclear staining (fluorescent
microscope). The green color in the fixed cells marks TUNEL-labeled cells. The apoptotic index was determined as the DAPI-stained
TUNEL-positive cell number/total DAPI stained cell number (magnification, 200 ×). Values were means ± S.D. of three experiments.
*(P < 0.05) indicates statistically significant differences from the control cells.

DR4, DR5 and DR6) expression. Our present results
showed that expression of DR proteins such as DR3
and DR6 in Ca Ski and C33A cervical cancer cell were
increased. However, treatment of DR3 and DR6 siRNA
in Ca Ski and C33A reversed BV-induced cervical cancer
cell growth inhibition. We also found that DR3 and DR6
expression was significantly higher in the BV treated
cultured human cervical cancer cells as well as cervical
tumor tissues and xenograft tumor tissues. Selective
triggering of DR expression is implicated in the induction
of cancer cell death and the expression of DR is varying
depending on cell types and stimuli conditions. These data
indicated that higher DR3 and DR6 expression could be
significant for anti-cancer effect of BV.
It is well known that NF-κB is constitutively
activated in cervical cancers [33]. Agreement with this
notion, our data demonstrated that activation of NF-κB
was elevated in human cervical tumor tissue, primary
human cervical cancer as well as cervical cancer cell lines.
However, treatment of BV inhibits cervical cancer cell
growth accompanied with the inhibition of DNA binding
activity of NF-κB. The decrease of NF-κB DNA binding
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

activity was associated with the inhibitory effect of BV
on the IκB phosphorylation and nuclear translocation of
p50 and p65 in Ca Ski and C33A cells. These inhibitory
effect of BV on NF-κB were agreed with other our studies
[2, 3]. In these studies, we showed that BV interacts with
p50 submit of NF-κB, thus decreased NF-κB DNA binding
activity.NF-κB activation and p50 expression were also
lowered in BV treated primary human cervical cancer
cells and xenografted tumor tissues treated by BV. Thus,
inactivation of NF-κB could be significant in BV-induced
cervical cancer cell growth inhibition. Death signaling
may be antagonized by anti-apoptotic modulator proteins
of the Bcl-2 family [25]. BV also repressed the expression
of anti-apoptotic proteins (Bcl-2), whereas it increased
the expression of pro-apoptotic proteins (Bax, cleaved
caspase-3, and cleaved caspase-9) which are regulated by
NF-κB. Thus, BV may induce an alteration of apoptosis and
anti-apoptosis regulatory protein expression that provide
the favorable circumstance of the cancer cells to go to a
death status by down regulation of NF-κB. It has been
demonstrated that DR up-regulation and NF-κB inactivation
reciprocally associated in cancer cell growth inhibition
7286

Oncotarget

Figure 6: Effect of BV on the expression of apoptosis regulatory proteins. Expression of apoptosis regulatory proteins related

exntrinsic pathway was determined using Western blot analysis with the antibodies against DR3, DR6, FAS, TWEAK, TRAIL, FAS ligand,
p53, caspase-3, caspase-8, caspase-9, Bax, bcl-2 and β-actin. β-actin protein was used an internal control. Each band is representative for
three experiments.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

by Fisetin in human pancreatic cancer cells [30] as well
as avidin treated human metastatic SW620 cells [31]. Our
previous studies found that BV increased DRs expression,
but inhibited NF-κB activity in prostate and ovarian cancer
cells [4, 5]. We also founded that treatment of BV with DR3
and DR6 siRNA reversed inactivation of NF-κB and cell
growth inhibitory effects of BV in cervical cancer cell lines.
Other studies also found that turmeric inhibits human colon
adenocarcinoma cells through increased expression of DRs
(DR4 and DR5) with suppression of NF-κB activation
[26]. Thus, reduced NF-κB activity could be associated
with the inhibition of cervical cancer cell growth through
up-regulation of DR3 and DR6.
It is reported that main side effects of BV has local
and systemic allergic reactions. In recent years, it is also
reported that BV cause uterine contractions as side effect
[34, 35]. The LD50 value for BV in mice is 7.4 mg/kg [36].
We reported that BV has safe therapeutic index (1.2–2.47)
[4]. BV (1 mg/kg) treatment did not cause any serious
health problems such as eruption, swelling body weight
loss or death. Eventhough these side effects were reported
in the specific cases and higher dose treated, it could be
safe by cautious practice. In conclusion, our results that
natural toxin BV could be useful as an anti-cancer agent
through activation of extrinsic apoptosis pathway by
overexpression of FAS, DR3 and DR6, and by inactivation
of NF-κB for treatment of cervical cancer cells.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Materials
BV was purchased from You-Miel BV Ltd. (Hwasoon,
Jeonnam, Korea). The composition of the BV was as
follows: 45–50% melittin, 2.5–3% mast cell degranulating
peptide, 12% phospholipase A2, 1% lysophospholipase
A, 1–1.5% histidine, 4–5% 6-pentyl a-pyrone lipids,
0.5% secarpin, 0.1% tertiapin, 0.1% procamine, 1.5–2%
hyaluronidase, 2–3% amine, 4–5% carbohydrate, and
19–27% of others, including protease inhibitor, glucosidase,
invertase, acid phosphomonoesterase, dopamine, nor­
epinephrine, and unknown amino acids, with 99.5% purity.

Animal xenografts
To conduct in vivo studies, female BALB/c nude
mice (aged 6–7 weeks, weighing 20–25 g) were used.
Nude mice were housed under specific pathogen free
conditions according to the guidelines of the Animal
Care Committee at the Chungbuk National University
(CBNU-278-11-01). On day 0, Ca Ski cells in PBS
(2 × 107 tumor cells/ 0.1 ml PBS/ani-mals) were injected
subcutaneously into nude mice. BV (1 mg/kg) was
administrated intraperitoneally twice per week for 4
weeks to mice which have tumors ranging from 100 to
7287

Oncotarget

Figure 7: Effect of BV on NF-κB activation. Nuclear extract from cervical cancer cells treated with BV (1, 2, and 5 μg/ml) for 2 hr

was incubated in binding interaction of 32P-end-labeled oligonucleotide containing the NF-κB sequence. The present EMSA results are
representatives of three experiments (A). The cells treated with BV (1, 2, and 5 μg/ml) for 2 hr was incubated and were lysed, cytosolic
proteins were used to determine the expression of IκB, p-IκB (internal control) and nuclear proteins were used to determine the expression
of p50, p65 and Histone-H1(internal control) in cervical cancer cells (B). Each band is representative for three experiments.

300 mm3. Tumor volumes were estimated by the formula:
length (mm) × width (mm) × height (mm)/2 at the end
of experiment.

nohistological staining, tumor sections were incubated
with primary antibody against FAS, DR3, DR6 and p50
(1:500, Abcam, Cambridge, UK). After rinse in phosphate
buffered saline (PBS), the sections were subject to
incubation in biotinylated secondary antibody. The tissue
was incubated for 1 hr in an avidin-peroxidase complex
(ABC, Vector Laboratories, Inc., Burlingame, CA). After
washing in PBS, the immunocomplex was visualized
using 3, 3-diaminobenzidine solution (2 mg/10 ml)
containing 0.08% hydrogen peroxide in PBS. Sections
were dehydrated in a series of graded alcohols, cleared in

Histopathology and immunohistochemistry
The cervical human tissues and animal tissues
were fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde and cut into 30 μm
sections using a freezing microtome (Thermo Scientific,
Germany). The sections were stained with hematoxylin
and eosin (H&E) for pathological examination. For immu­
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

7288

Oncotarget

Figure 8: Effect of siRNA of DR3, DR6 and FAS on the BV induced cancer cell growth inhibition, and NF-κB activity
in cervical cancer cells. The cervical cancer cells were transfected with the DR3, DR6 and FAS siRNA (10 nM) for 24 hr, the cells

were then and treated with BV (5 μg/ml) for 24 hr. After treatment, cell viability was measured by MTT assay (A, B) and NF-κB activity
(C, D) determined as described above. Cell growths are means ± S.D. of three experiments. *(P < 0.05) indicates statistically significant
differences from control group. #(P < 0.05) indicates statically significant differences from BV treated group.

xylene and coverslipped using Permount (Fisher Scientific,
Suwanee, GA).

from the department of obstetrics and gynecology of
the Daejeon St. Mary’s Hospital, Catholic University
of Korea, using a research protocol approved by our
Institutional review board (DC12TISI0044). Informed
consent was provided according to the declaration of
Helsinki. All patients underwent standardized treatment
for their disease, which included radical hysterectomy,
concurrent chemoradiation and chemotherapy. Samples
were collected at the time of diagnosis. In this study, we
examined 7 patients presenting with the international
federation of gynecology and obstetrics (FIGO) stages
IIA–IIB cervical cancers.

Primary human cervical cancer cell culture
After surgery, fresh tissue collected in cold phos­
phate buffered saline (PBS) and washed with PBS. Several
small pieces of minced tumor tissue were incubated in
phenol-red free DMEM/F12 (20 ml) containing type I
collagenase and DNase I for 3~5 hr at 37°C with shaking.
It was filtrated through a 100 μm nylon cell strainer (BD)
for 2 times and 70 μm nylon cell strainer for 1 times. After
filtration, cells remaining in the filtrate were collected by
centrifugation at 1500 rpm for 5 min and washed with
PBS. Primary cells were resuspended in phenol-red free
DMEM/F12, and plated into 100 mm2 dishes.
From July 2012 to July 2013, seven patients affected
with invasive cervical cancer (squamous cell carcinoma)
and one healthy control donor, were enrolled prospectively
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Cervical cancer cell culture
Ca Ski and C33A human cervical cancer cells were
obtained from the American Type Culture Collection
(Cryosite, Lane Cove NSW, Australia). Cells were grown
in DMEM (Gibco, Life Technologies, Grand Island, NY)
7289

Oncotarget

with 10% fetal bovine serum, 100 U/ml penicillin, and
100 μg/ml streptomycin at 37°C in 5% CO2 humidified
air. Primary human cervical cancer cells obtained from
patients cervical tumor were grown in DMEM/F12
(Gibco, Life Technologies, Grand Island, NY) with 10%
fetal bovine serum, 100 U/ml penicillin, and 100 μg/ml
streptomycin at 37°C in 5% CO2 humidified air.

primary antibodies: caspase-3, caspase-9, caspase-8,
TNF Receptor 1 and Bcl-2 (1:1000 dilutions; Cell
Signaling, Beverly, MA) and p65, p50, p53, DR3, DR6,
Fas, TWEAK, TRAIL, TNF Receptor 2, Fas Ligand and
(1:2000 dilutions; Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Santa Cruz,
CA). The blots were performed using specific antibodies
followed by second antibodies and visualization by
chemiluminescence (ECL) detection system.

Measurement of cell viability

Transfection of siRNA

Cervical cancer cells, Ca Ski and C33A cells were
plated in 96-well plates, and subsequently treated with
BV (0~5 μg/mL) for 24 hr. After treatment, cell viability
was measured by MTT [3-(4,5-Dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5Diphenyltetrazolium Bromide] assay (Sigma Aldrich, St.
Louis, MO) according to the manufacturer’s instructions.
Briefly, MTT (5 mg/mL) was added and plates were
incubated at 37°C for 4 hr before 100 μL dimethyl
sulfoxide (DMSO) was added to each well. Finally, the
absorbance of each well was read at a wavelength of
540 nm using a microplate reader.

Cervical cancer cells (1×104 cells/well) were plated
in 96-well plates and transiently transfected with siRNA,
using a mixture of siRNA and the WellFect-EX PLUS
reagent in OPTI-MEN, according to the manufacturer’s
specification (WelGENE, Seoul, Korea). The transfected
cells were treated with 5 μg/ml BV for 24 h or 2 hr and
then used for detecting cell viability, protein expression
and NF-κB activation.

Electrophoretic mobility shift assay

Evaluation of apoptotic cell death

The DNA binding activity of NF-κB was
determined using an electrophoretic mobility shift assay
(EMSA) performed as according to the manufacturer’s
recommendations (Promega). In short, Ca Ski and C33A
cells were cultured on 100-mm culture dishes. After
treatment with BV (1, 2, and 5 μg/ml) for 2 hr, the cells
were washed twice with PBS, followed by the addition
of 1 ml of phosphate buffered saline (PBS), and the cells
were scraped into a cold Eppendorf tube. Nuclear extracts
were prepared and processed for EMSA as previously
described [24]. The relative densities of the DNA–protein
binding bands were scanned by densitometry using
MyImage (SLB), and quantified by Labworks 4.0 software
(UVP, Inc., Upland, CA).

For in situ detection of apoptotic cells, TUNEL
assay was performed by using the in situ Cell Death
Detection Kit (Roche Diagnostics GmbH, Mannheim,
Germany) according to the manufacturer’s instructions.
Cervical cancer cells (1 × 104 cells/well) on 8-chamber
slides, and the cells were treated with BV. The cells
and tumor tissues were washed with PBS and fixed by
incubation in 4% paraformaldehyde in PBS for 1 h at room
temperature. Membrane was permeabilized by exposure to
0.1% Triton X-100 in PBS for 5 min at room temperature.
For DAPI staining, slides were incubated for 15 min at
room temperature in the dark with mounting medium for
fluorescence containing DAPI (Vector Laboratories, Inc.,
Burlingame, CA). The cells were then observed through
a fluorescence microscope (Leica Microsystems AG,
Wetzlar, Germany).

Data analysis
The data were analyzed using the GraphPad Prism
4 ver. 4.03 software (Graph-Pad Software, La Jolla, CA).
Data are presented as mean ± SD. The differences in
all data were assessed by one-way analysis of variance
(ANOVA). When the P value in the ANOVA test indicated
statistical significance, the differences were assessed by
the Dunnett’s test. A value of P ≤ 0.05 was considered to
be statistically significant.

Western blot analysis
Cultured cells or tumor tissues were washed twice
with 1 × PBS, followed by the addition of 1 ml of PBS,
and the cells were scraped into a cold Eppendorf tube.
Whole cell extracts and tissue proteins were mixed
with sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) sample buffer
and then subjected to 12% SDS-polyacrylamide gel
electrophoresis. The resolved proteins were transferred to
a polyvinylidenedifluoride (PVDF) membrane (GE Water
and Process technologies, Trevose, PA, USA). Blots were
blocked for 1 h at room temperature with 5% (w/v) skim
milk in Tris-Buffered Saline Tween-20 [TBST: 10 mM
Tris (pH 8.0) and 150 mM NaCl solution containing
0.05% Tween-20]. After a short washing in TBST, the
membranes were immunoblotted with the following
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the National Research
Foundation of Korea (NRF) Grant by the Korea
government (MEST; MRC, 2008-0062275). The authors
also wish to also acknowledge the financial support of the
Catholic Medical Center Research Foundation made in the
program year of 2012.
7290

Oncotarget

CONFLICT OF INTEREST

apoptosis are Bcl-2 and caspase-3 in human leukemic U937
cells through downregulation of ERK and Akt. International
immunopharmacology. 2006; 6:1796–1807.

The authors declare that they have no conflict of
interest.

10.	 Ip SW, Wei HC, Lin JP, Kuo HM, Liu KC, Hsu SC,
Yang JS, Mei D, Chiu TH, Han SM, Chung JG. Bee venom
induced cell cycle arrest and apoptosis in human cervical
epidermoid carcinoma Ca Ski cells. Anticancer research.
2008; 28:833–842.

REFERENCES
1.	 Son DJ, Lee JW, Lee YH, Song HS, Lee CK, Hong JT.
Therapeutic application of anti-arthritis, pain-releasing, and
anti-cancer effects of bee venom and its constituent compounds. Pharmacology & therapeutics. 2007; 115:246–270.

11.	 Shin JM, Jeong YJ, Cho HJ, Park KK, Chung IK, Lee  IK,
Kwak JY, Chang HW, Kim CH, Moon SK, Kim WJ,
Choi  YH, Chang YC. Melittin suppresses HIF-1alpha/
VEGF expression through inhibition of ERK and mTOR/
p70S6K pathway in human cervical carcinoma cells. PloS
one. 2013; 8:e69380.

2.	 Park HJ, Lee SH, Son DJ, Oh KW, Kim KH, Song HS,
Kim GJ, Oh GT, Yoon DY, Hong JT. Antiarthritic effect
of bee venom: inhibition of inflammation mediator generation by suppression of NF-kappaB through interaction
with the p50 subunit. Arthritis and rheumatism. 2004;
50:3504–3515.

12.	 Liao SJ, Deng DR, Zeng D, Zhang L, Hu XJ, Zhang WN,
Li L, Jiang XF, Wang CY, Zhou JF, Wang SX, Zhang HW,
Ma D. HPV16 E5 peptide vaccine in treatment of cervical
cancer in vitro and in vivo. Journal of Huazhong University
of Science and Technology Medical sciences = Hua
zhong ke ji da xue xue bao Yi xue Ying De wen ban =
Huazhong keji daxue xuebao Yixue Yingdewen ban. 2013;
33:735–742.

3.	 Park HJ, Son DJ, Lee CW, Choi MS, Lee US, Song HS,
Lee JM, Hong JT. Melittin inhibits inflammatory target
gene expression and mediator generation via interaction
with IkappaB kinase. Biochemical pharmacology. 2007;
73:237–247.

13.	 Szalmas A, Konya J. Epigenetic alterations in cervical carcinogenesis. Seminars in cancer biology. 2009; 19:144–152.

4.	 Park MH, Choi MS, Kwak DH, Oh KW, Yoon do Y, Han
SB, Song HS, Song MJ, Hong JT. Anti-cancer effect of bee
venom in prostate cancer cells through activation of caspase
pathway via inactivation of NF-kappaB. The Prostate. 2011;
71:801–812.

14.	 French LE, Tschopp J. Protein-based therapeutic
approaches targeting death receptors. Cell death and differentiation. 2003; 10:117–123.
15.	 Wajant H. Death receptors. Essays in biochemistry. 2003;
39:53–71.

5.	 Jo M, Park MH, Kollipara PS, An BJ, Song HS, Han SB,
Kim JH, Song MJ, Hong JT. Anti-cancer effect of bee
venom toxin and melittin in ovarian cancer cells through
induction of death receptors and inhibition of JAK2/STAT3
pathway. Toxicology and applied pharmacology. 2012;
258:72–81.

16.	 Han Z, Pantazis P, Wyche JH, Kouttab N, Kidd VJ,
Hendrickson EA. A Fas-associated death domain proteindependent mechanism mediates the apoptotic action of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs in the human leukemic
Jurkat cell line. The Journal of biological chemistry. 2001;
276:38748–38754.

6.	 Wang C, Chen T, Zhang N, Yang M, Li B, Lu X, Cao X,
Ling C. Melittin, a major component of bee venom, sensitizes human hepatocellular carcinoma cells to tumor
necrosis factor-related apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL)induced apoptosis by activating CaMKII-TAK1-JNK/p38
and inhibiting IkappaBalpha kinase-NFkappaB. The Journal
of biological chemistry. 2009; 284:3804–3813.

17.	 Huang Y, He Q, Hillman MJ, Rong R, Sheikh MS. Sulindac
sulfide-induced apoptosis involves death receptor 5 and the
caspase 8-dependent pathway in human colon and prostate
cancer cells. Cancer research. 2001; 61:6918–6924.
18.	 Zhang X, Hwang J, Jia X, Shin DS, You S, Kim DK.
A novel trifluoromethyl benzopyran induces G1 cell
cycle arrest and apoptosis in HeLa human cervical carcinoma cells. International journal of oncology. 2013;
43:469–476.

7.	 Ip SW, Chu YL, Yu CS, Chen PY, Ho HC, Yang JS,
Huang  HY, Chueh FS, Lai TY, Chung JG. Bee venom
induces apoptosis through intracellular Ca2+ -modulated
intrinsic death pathway in human bladder cancer cells.
International journal of urology: official journal of the
Japanese Urological Association. 2012; 19:61–70.

19.	 Kim EY, Kim AK. Combination effect of equol and TRAIL
against human cervical cancer cells. Anticancer research.
2013; 33:903–912.

8.	 Putz T, Ramoner R, Gander H, Rahm A, Bartsch G,
Bernardo K, Ramsay S, Thurnher M. Bee venom secretory
phospholipase A2 and phosphatidylinositol-homologues
cooperatively disrupt membrane integrity, abrogate signal transduction and inhibit proliferation of renal cancer
cells. Cancer immunology, immunotherapy: CII. 2007;
56:627–640.

20.	 Reesink-Peters N, Hougardy BM, van den Heuvel FA,
Ten  Hoor KA, Hollema H, Boezen HM, de Vries EG,
de Jong S, van der Zee AG. Death receptors and ligands
in cervical carcinogenesis: an immunohistochemical study.
Gynecologic oncology. 2005; 96:705–713.
21.	 Baud V, Karin M. Is NF-kappaB a good target for cancer
therapy? Hopes and pitfalls. Nature reviews Drug discovery. 2009; 8:33–40.

9.	 Moon DO, Park SY, Heo MS, Kim KC, Park C, Ko WS,
Choi YH, Kim GY. Key regulators in bee venom-induced
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

7291

Oncotarget

22.	 Nakshatri H, Bhat-Nakshatri P, Martin DA, Goulet RJ, Jr.,
Sledge GW, Jr. Constitutive activation of NF-kappaB
during progression of breast cancer to hormoneindependent growth. Molecular and cellular biology. 1997;
17:3629–3639.

30.	 Murtaza I, Adhami VM, Hafeez BB, Saleem M, Mukhtar H.
Fisetin, a natural flavonoid, targets chemoresistant human
pancreatic cancer AsPC-1 cells through DR3-mediated inhibition of NF-kappaB. International journal of cancer Journal
international du cancer. 2009; 125:2465–2473.

23.	 Sharma HW, Narayanan R. The NF-kappaB transcription factor in oncogenesis. Anticancer research. 1996;
16:589–596.

31.	 Maldonado ME, Bousserouel S, Gosse F, Lobstein   A,
Raul  F. Implication of NF-kappaB and p53 in the
expression of TRAIL-death receptors and apoptosis by
apple procyanidins in human metastatic SW620 cells.
Biomedica: revista del Instituto Nacional de Salud. 2010;
30:577–586.

24.	 Waddick KG, Uckun FM. Innovative treatment programs
against cancer: II. Nuclear factor-kappaB (NF-kappaB) as a
molecular target. Biochemical pharmacology. 1999; 57:9–17.

32.	 Ali A, Wang Z, Fu J, Ji L, Liu J, Li L, Wang H, Chen J,
Caulin C, Myers JN, Zhang P, Xiao J, Zhang B, Li X.
Differential regulation of the REGgamma-proteasome pathway by p53/TGF-beta signalling and mutant p53 in cancer
cells. Nature communications. 2013; 4:2667.

25.	 Wang CY, Cusack JC, Jr., Liu R, Baldwin AS, Jr. Control
of inducible chemoresistance: enhanced anti-tumor therapy
through increased apoptosis by inhibition of NF-kappaB.
Nature medicine. 1999; 5:412–417.
26.	 Wang CY, Guttridge DC, Mayo MW, Baldwin AS,
Jr. NF-kappaB induces expression of the Bcl-2 homologue A1/Bfl-1 to preferentially suppress chemotherapyinduced apoptosis. Molecular and cellular biology. 1999;
19:5923–5929.

33.	 Kim SH, Song SH, Kim SG, Chun KS, Lim SY, Na HK,
Kim JW, Surh YJ, Bang YJ, Song YS. Celecoxib
induces apoptosis in cervical cancer cells independent of
cyclooxygenase using NF-kappaB as a possible target.
Journal of cancer research and clinical oncology. 2004;
130:551–560.

27.	 Kuo SH, Chou CH, Cheng AL, Wang CW, Chen YH,
Chen  RJ. Expression of BCL10 in cervical cancer has a
role in the regulation of cell growth through the activation
of NF-kappaB-dependent cyclin D1 signaling. Gynecologic
oncology. 2012; 126:245–251.

34.	 Karakurt F, Kargili A, Bozkurt B, Kasapoglu B, Ikizek M.
Uterine contractions: an unusual side effect of venom
immunotherapy. Journal of investigational allergology &
clinical immunology. 2010; 20:431–432.

28.	 Antoon JW, White MD, Slaughter EM, Driver JL,
Khalili HS, Elliott S, Smith CD, Burow ME, Beckman BS.
Targeting NFkB mediated breast cancer chemoresistance
through selective inhibition of sphingosine kinase-2. Cancer
biology & therapy. 2011; 11:678–689.

35.	 Rueff F, Przybilla B. [Venom immunotherapy. Side effects
and efficacy of treatment]. Der Hautarzt; Zeitschrift fur
Dermatologie, Venerologie, und verwandte Gebiete. 2008;
59:200–205.
36.	 Chen CY, Chen WX, Sun X. [Comparison of antiinflammatory, analgesic activities, anaphylactogenicity
and acute toxicity between bee venom and its peptides].
Zhongguo Zhong xi yi jie he za zhi Zhongguo Zhongxiyi jiehe
zazhi = Chinese journal of integrated traditional and Western
medicine / Zhongguo Zhong xi yi jie he xue hui, Zhongguo
Zhong yi yan jiu yuan zhu ban. 1993; 13:226–227, 198.

29.	 Park JH, Yoon DS, Choi HJ, Hahm DH, Oh SM.
Phosphorylation of IkappaBalpha at serine 32 by
T-lymphokine-activated killer cell-originated protein kinase
is essential for chemoresistance against doxorubicin in cervical cancer cells. The Journal of biological chemistry.
2013; 288:3585–3593.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

7292

Oncotarget

