Research Article

Adrenomedullin Is Expressed in Pancreatic Cancer and Stimulates
Cell Proliferation and Invasion in an Autocrine Manner
via the Adrenomedullin Receptor, ADMR
1

1

3

Vijaya Ramachandran, Thiruvengadam Arumugam, Rosa F. Hwang, Joel K. Greenson,
5
1,2
Diane M. Simeone, and Craig D. Logsdon

4

Departments of 1Cancer Biology, 2Medical Oncology, and 3Surgical Oncology, University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston,
Texas; and Departments of 4Pathology and 5Surgery, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan

Abstract
The current study investigated adrenomedullin as a potential
autocrine regulator of pancreatic cancer cell function.
Adrenomedullin was localized in the neoplastic epithelium
of 90% (43 of 48) of human pancreatic adenocarcinomas
analyzed by immunohistochemistry and was expressed by
100% (8 of 8) of pancreatic cancer cell lines analyzed by
reverse transcription-PCR. Pancreatic cancer cell lines also
secreted adrenomedullin into the culture medium as determined by ELISA (5 of 5). Exogenous adrenomedullin treatment
of Panc-1, BxPC3, and MPanc96 cells in vitro stimulated
cell proliferation, invasion, and nuclear factor KB activity,
indicating the ability of the cells to respond to adrenomedullin. Treatment of the cell cultures with an adrenomedullin
antagonist inhibited basal levels of proliferation and nuclear
factor KB activity, supporting the autocrine function of this
molecule. Furthermore, increasing adrenomedullin levels by
gene transfer to Panc-1 cells increased, whereas adrenomedullin small hairpin RNA silencing in MPanc96 cells inhibited
tumor growth and metastasis in vivo. Adrenomedullin is able
to act through at least two different receptors, adrenomedullin receptor (ADMR) and calcitonin receptor–like receptor
(CRLR). Reverse transcription-PCR and Western blotting
indicated that pancreatic cancer cells expressed only ADMR
but not CRLR. In contrast, cells found in the tumor
microenvironment, primary human pancreatic stellate and
endothelial (HUVEC) cells, expressed both ADMR and CRLR.
Small hairpin RNA silencing of ADMR in pancreatic cancer
cells blocked adrenomedullin-induced growth and invasion,
indicating that this receptor is involved in the autocrine
actions of adrenomedullin. These data indicate that adrenomedullin acting via ADMR increases the aggressiveness of
pancreatic cancer cells and suggests that these molecules may
be useful therapeutic targets. [Cancer Res 2007;67(6):2666–75]

Introduction
Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma is an important cause of
malignancy-related deaths. In the United States, it ranks fourth
among the leading causes of cancer death, accounting for more
than 32,000 deaths annually (1). The mechanisms behind the

Requests for reprints: Craig D. Logsdon, Departments of Cancer Biology and
Medical Oncology, University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, Unit 905, 1515
Holcombe Boulevard, Houston, TX 77030. Phone: 713-563-3585; Fax: 713-563-8986;
E-mail: clogsdon@mdanderson.org.
I2007 American Association for Cancer Research.
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-06-3362

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (6). March 15, 2007

aggressiveness of this cancer are not fully understood. Using a
variety of profiling technologies, numerous cancer-related genes
have been identified in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (2–5).
However, the functional significance of the majority of these altered
genes remains unclear. Our previous microarray analysis suggested
that adrenomedullin is overexpressed in pancreatic cancer
compared with normal pancreas or chronic pancreatitis (6).
Considerable evidence suggests that adrenomedullin may play an
important role in cancer.
Adrenomedullin is a 52–amino acid peptide originally isolated
from a human pheochromocytoma (7) that has been found to be a
multifunctional regulatory peptide (8). Adrenomedullin is physiologically expressed in normal pancreatic islet cells, with predominant expression in the F cells, which also contain pancreatic
polypeptide (9). Pancreatic h-cells express receptors known to
respond to adrenomedullin including the adrenomedullin receptor
(ADMR, also known as L1-R) and the calcitonin receptor–like
receptor (CRLR), supporting its role in endocrine function (9–11).
Adrenomedullin has also been shown to have important effects in
vascular cell biology in which it regulates vascular tone and
permeability and promotes vasodilation (12–16). Adrenomedullin
is also a potent angiogenic molecule (15). The expression of
adrenomedullin is regulated, at least in part, by hypoxia, and
adrenomedullin is partially responsible for the angiogenic effects of
hypoxia (15). The angiogenic effects of adrenomedullin are likely
mediated through direct stimulation of endothelial cell proliferation (17) and protection of endothelial cells from apoptosis (18). In
cancer, adrenomedullin seems to have an important role in
angiogenesis and may have an additional trophic effect directly
on cancer cells (19–21).
Little is known about adrenomedullin in pancreatic cancer. The
frequency and distribution of adrenomedullin expression in tumors
has not been previously reported. Also, the role of adrenomedullin
in pancreatic cancer is not completely understood. Recent studies
have indicated that inhibition of adrenomedullin receptor activation by direct application of a partial adrenomedullin peptide that
acts as an antagonist (adrenomedullin antagonist, AMA; ref. 22), or
intratumoral or i.m. transfection with an AMA-expressing plasmid
(23), reduced microvascular density and growth of pancreatic
tumors. These studies provide strong evidence for the angiogenic
function of adrenomedullin. However, these studies did not
determine if adrenomedullin also has an autocrine role in
pancreatic cancer.
In our present study, we investigated the expression and possible
autocrine role of adrenomedullin in pancreatic cancer. We found
that adrenomedullin was highly expressed in pancreatic cancer
cells within tumor samples and in pancreatic cancer cell lines.
Pancreatic cancer cells also secreted adrenomedullin into the

2666

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Role of Adrenomedullin in Pancreatic Cancer

culture medium. Inclusion of AMA inhibited basal levels of
pancreatic cancer cell proliferation, invasion, and nuclear factor
nB (NFnB) activity in vitro. Furthermore, levels of cellular
adrenomedullin correlated with the rate of tumor growth and
metastasis in vivo. We also investigated the presence and function
of adrenomedullin receptors in pancreatic cancer. We observed
that ADMR, but not CRLR, is present in pancreatic cancer cells,
whereas both the receptors are present in cells in the surrounding
tumor microenvironment. We found that the autocrine effects of
adrenomedullin were mediated by the ADMR receptor, as silencing
of ADMR using small hairpin RNA (shRNA) blocked the effects of
adrenomedullin in vitro. Taken together with the previous studies,
these data suggest that adrenomedullin has both autocrine and
paracrine roles in pancreatic cancer. Therefore, interference with
the function of either adrenomedullin or ADMR might be useful as
a therapeutic approach to pancreatic adenocarcinoma.

Materials and Methods
Pancreatic tissues, cell lines, and adrenomedullin peptides. Paraffinembedded tissue slides of normal pancreas, pancreatic adenocarcinoma,
chronic pancreatitis, and a pancreatic cancer tissue microarray slide with 48
tumor samples were obtained from the Department of Pathology, University
of Michigan. Pancreatic cancer cell lines BxPC3, MiaPaCa-2, CFPAC-1,
HPAC, MPanc96, Panc-1, Aspc-1, and SU.86.86, as well as HUVEC cell lines
were obtained from the American Type Culture Collection (Manassas, VA).
BxPC3 cells were grown on 10% RPMI, whereas all other pancreatic cancer
cell lines were grown on 10% DMEM, and endothelial cells (HUVEC) were
grown on 15% MEM. All media contained 1% antibiotic. Human pancreatic
stellate cells (HPSC) were isolated using the outgrowth method for
pancreatic adenocarcinoma samples from patients undergoing surgical
resection. All human tissue samples were obtained in accordance with the
policies and practices of the Institutional Review Board of the University of
Michigan or the University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center. Briefly,
tumor samples were minced and seeded in six-well plates containing 15%
DMEM. After f5 days, cells were able to grow out from the tissue clumps.
Medium was changed every 3 days. The cells were confirmed to be
pancreatic stellate cells by immunohistochemical staining for a smooth
muscle actin and vimentin. All cells were maintained at 37jC in a
humidified atmosphere of 5% CO2. Adrenomedullin (AM 52) and AMA (AM
22-52) were purchased from Sigma (St. Louis, MO).
Immunohistochemical staining. Unstained 4 Am sections of clinical
specimens or a tissue microarray were deparaffinized with xylene and
rehydrated with ethanol. Immunohistochemistry was done using RTU
Vectastain Elite ABC Universal kit (Vector Laboratories, Burlingame, CA)
according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Primary antibody against
adrenomedullin (Phoenix Pharmaceuticals, Inc., Belmont, CA) diluted 1:250
in 2% bovine serum albumin/0.2% Triton in PBS was used. Finally, slides
were developed with 3,3-diaminobenzidine substrate counterstained with
hematoxylin, dehydrated with ethanol, fixed with xylene, and mounted.
Reverse transcription-PCR. Total RNA was isolated from normal
pancreas, pancreatic cancer, and chronic pancreatitis tissues, pancreatic
cancer cell lines, HUVEC, and HPSCs, and were used for reverse
transcription-PCR (RT-PCR). DNase was used to remove contaminating
genomic DNA after RNA purification. The quality of the RNA was confirmed
by running on a denaturing gel, in which we observed clear 28S and 18S
rRNA bands. A non–reverse-transcribed control was run to assure that no
genomic DNA was amplified. Primers designed for human adrenomedullin
(Genbank, NM_001124) were: forward, 5¶-CGG GAT CCA TGA AGC TGG
TTT CCG TC-3¶; and reverse, 5¶-CGG AAT TCC TAA AGA AAG TGG GGA
GC-3¶. Primers designed for human CRLR (Genbank, NM_005795) were:
forward, 5¶-TGC TCT GTG AAG GCA TTT AC-3¶; and reverse, 5¶-CAG AAT
TGC TTG AAC CTC TC-3¶. Primers designed for human RAMP1 (Genbank,
NM_005855) were: forward, 5¶-GAG ACG CTG TGG TGT GAC TG-3¶; and
reverse, 5¶-TCG GCT ACT CTG GAC TCC TG-3¶. Primers designed for

www.aacrjournals.org

human RAMP2 (Genbank, NM_005854) were: forward, 5¶-GGA CGG TGA
AGA ACT ATG AG-3¶; and reverse, 5¶-ATC ATG GCC AGG AGT ACA TC-3¶.
Primers designed for human RAMP3 (Genbank, NM_005856) were: forward,
5¶-TGG AAG TGG TGC AAC CTG TC-3¶; and reverse, 5¶-CAC GGT GCA GTT
GGA GAA GA-3¶. Primers designed for human RCP (Genbank, NM_014478)
were: forward, 5¶-GTC AAG GAT GCC AAT TCT GC-3¶; and reverse, 5¶-TTC
TTC TGC TCA GCC TCT GG-3¶. Primers designed for human ADMR
(Genbank, NM_007264) were: forward, 5¶-CAT CGC GGA CCT GGG CAT
TGT-3¶; and reverse, 5¶-TGA GAG GGA AGG GCA GCA GGA AGC-3¶. Primers
designed for h-actin (Genbank, BC_016045), which was used as a loading
control for the RT-PCR reactions, were: forward, 5¶ATG ATA TCG CCG CGC
TCG TCG TC-3¶; and reverse, 5¶-CGC TCG GCC GTG GTG GTG AA-3¶.
Amplified products were separated on 1.5% agarose gels and visualized by
ethidium bromide.
Adrenomedullin ELISA. Adrenomedullin was detected in conditioned
medium from pancreatic cancer cell lines using a commercial ELISA. For
collection of conditioned medium, wild-type cell lines including BxPC3,
SU.86.86, MPanc96, Panc-1, and Miapaca-2; Panc-1 cells stably transfected
with a control vector or an adrenomedullin expression vector and MPanc-96
cells stably transfected with a control shRNA or an adrenomedullin shRNA
vector; and MPanc96 cells stably transfected with shRNA against control
vector and ADMR, were equally plated with serum-free medium and after
overnight incubation, medium was collected and concentrated using
Centricon YM-3 filter devices (Millipore Corporation, Chicago, IL). Protein
concentrations were determined using Bio-Rad reagent (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Hercules, CA). Competitive ELISA was then conducted using an
adrenomedullin detection kit (Phoenix Pharmaceuticals) following the
manufacturer’s suggested protocol. Concentrated serum-free DMEM served
as a reagent control and these control absorbance values were subtracted
from those of all other samples. Calculations of adrenomedullin
concentration used the standard curve included in the kit and were done
according to the manufacturer’s protocol.
Cell growth studies. For all in vitro studies, adrenomedullin or AMA
was added freshly to culture medium on a daily basis. For initial studies,
wild-type BxPC3, MPanc96, and Panc-1 cells (1,000 cells) were plated on
96-well plates in 0.5% serum containing medium with and without
adrenomedullin (200 nmol/L) or AMA (1 Amol/L), and cell numbers were
estimated after 48 h by MTS assay. For a more detailed time course determination, wild-type Panc-1 cells (1,000 cells) were treated with adrenomedullin (200 nmol/L) or AMA (1 Amol/L) for 0, 12, 24, 48, and 72 h before cell
number estimation. For dose-dependence studies, wild-type Panc-1 cells
(5,000 cells) were treated with adrenomedullin (1–200 nmol/L) or AMA
(1 Amol/L) for 48 h before cell number estimation. For small interfering
RNA studies, wild-type BxPC3, MPanc96, and Panc-1 cells (5,000 cells) were
plated on 96-well plates and transfected with control and siADMR oligos
and cell numbers were estimated after 48 h. Cell growth was analyzed using
the MTS reagent (Promega, Madison, WI) added 1 h before taking the
spectrophotometric reading, according to the manufacturer’s directions.
NFKB activity (luciferase assay). Pancreatic cancer cell NFnB activity
was analyzed using a NFnB luciferase reporter assay. The NFnB luciferase
reporter was isolated from the pNFnB-Luc Vector (Clonetec, Mountain
View, CA) and cloned into the lentiviral vector FG9, which drives gene
expression with the cytomegalovirus/long terminal repeat and UBiC
promoter (24) to form Lenti-NFnB-Luc. Lentiviral plasmid vectors were
cotransfected with packaging vectors and lentivirus was produced in 293T
cells by the calcium transfection method as has previously been described
(24). Lenti-NFnB-Luc was titrated and pancreatic cancer cell lines were each
infected using (25 AL of viral supernatant per milliliter of medium) mixed
with polybrene (4 Ag/mL medium). Functional validation of the NFnB
reporter was conducted using tumor necrosis factor-a as a positive control.
Adrenomedullin (200 nmol/L) and AMA (1 Amol/L) were examined for their
effects on NFnB activity in BxPC3, MPanc96, and Panc-1 cells. After 4.5 h of
treatment, 150 Ag/mL of D-luciferin was added to cells and luciferase
activity was measured using an IVIS bioluminescence system (Xenogen
Corp., Alameda, CA).
Invasion assays. For studies of cell invasiveness, BIOCOAT Matrigel
invasion chambers (BD Biosciences, Chicago, IL) were used. Briefly, 2  105

2667

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (6). March 15, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research
cells in 100 AL of serum-free medium were added to the upper chamber and
different concentrations of adrenomedullin (1–200 nmol/L) in 0.5% serum
containing DMEM were added into the lower chamber. The cells were
allowed to invade the Matrigel for 12 h at 37jC in a 5% CO2 atmosphere.
DMEM containing 0.5% serum was used as a control. The noninvading cells
on the upper surface of the membrane were removed with a cotton swab
and the invading cells on the lower surface of the membrane were
estimated using a MTS reagent. The cells on the bottom surface were
incubated for 1 h with MTS reagent and color development was read
photometrically. For imaging, cells were fixed and stained with a Diff-Quick
stain kit (BD Biosciences), washed twice with water and air-dried. Invading
cells in three adjacent microscope fields for each membrane were imaged at
20 magnification.
Development of stable cell lines. We examined the effects of stable
overexpression and shRNA silencing of adrenomedullin in pancreatic
cancer cells. RT-PCR–amplified adrenomedullin products were cloned into
the pcDNA3.1+ vector (Invitrogen Corporation, Chicago, IL) using BamHI
and EcoRI restriction enzymes and confirmed by DNA sequencing. Panc-1
cells, which have a low endogenous expression of adrenomedullin, were
transfected using LipofectAMINE reagent (Invitrogen) with a control
plasmid or a plasmid encoding the complete coding sequence of human
adrenomedullin and selected for resistance to neomycin (3 mg/mL).
MPanc96 cells, which express relatively high levels of adrenomedullin,
were transfected with a shRNA designed for adrenomedullin or with a
mismatch control shRNA. Initially, two different shRNAs were created using
the Invitrogen’s BLOCK-iT RNAi Designer protocol (adrenomedullin target
sequence 1, ggc aca cca gat cta cca gtt; adrenomedullin target sequence 2,
gga ctc tgg tgt ctt cta agc). The shRNAs were annealed and cloned into a
BLOCK-iT U6 RNAi entry vector containing the human U6 pol III type
promoter. Effective silencing of adrenomedullin was verified in transient
transfection experiments in MPanc96 cells using LipofectAMINE and the
shRNA for target 1 was selected for further study. For stable silencing, the
adrenomedullin-silencing shRNA and control shRNA were cloned into DEST
vectors according to the manufacturer’s protocols. Stable expression of both
the adrenomedullin shRNA and the control shRNA were established in
MPanc96 cells by selecting for neomycin resistance (1 mg/mL).
Lentiviral silencing of ADMR. Silencing of ADMR was achieved in
pancreatic cancer cell lines using lentivirus infection. Lentiviral plasmid
vectors—control and ADMR shRNA (Open Biosystems, Huntsville, AL) were
cotransfected with packaging vectors and lentivirus was produced in 293T
cells by the calcium transfection method as has previously been described
(24). Lenti-ADMR shRNA was titrated and pancreatic cancer cell lines were
each infected using (25 AL viral supernatant/mL of medium) mixed with
polybrene (4 Ag/mL medium). Cells were then selected for resistance to
puromycin (1 mg/mL) and stable cell lines were developed thereafter.
Western blot. Cell lysates from MPanc96 cells stably silenced with
ADMR shRNA and control shRNA were prepared and protein concentrations were measured by Bio-Rad reagent. Protein (50 Ag) was loaded onto
10% SDS-PAGE gels and Western blotting was conducted using a primary
antibody against ADMR (MBL International Corporation, Woburn, MA) at a
1:1,000 dilution. The same blot was re-probed for h-actin (Sigma; 1:200
dilution), which served as a loading control for the experiment.
In vivo orthotopic tumor model. Growth of the adrenomedullinmodified pancreatic cancer cells were compared with wild-type control cells
in orthotopic tumors formed in 4-week-old male CB17 severe combined
immunodeficiency (SCID) mice according to the institutional animal
welfare guidelines. All animals were maintained in a sterile environment.
All animals were maintained on a daily 12-h light/12-h dark cycle. Briefly,
Panc-1 cells stably expressing adrenomedullin and control vectors were
grown to 80% confluence, harvested by trypsinization, washed twice in PBS,
and resuspended to a final concentration of 1  106 cells/mL in sterile PBS.
Cell suspensions (0.1 mL) were injected into the pancreas of six mice per
test group. Tumor volume (in mm3) was calculated using the formula for
the volume of a prolate ellipsoid, (w 2/2) (l), in which w and l are the width
and length of the tumor in millimeters, respectively. Tumors and other
organs were harvested from mice after 4 weeks of growth and fixed in
formaldehyde for further analysis.

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (6). March 15, 2007

The tumorigenic capability of the adrenomedullin shRNA-silenced
MPanc96 cells was compared with control shRNA–transfected cells in
orthotopic tumors formed in 4-week-old male CB-17 SCID mice. The
MPanc96 cells stably transfected with shRNA against adrenomedullin and
control shRNA were further modified to stably express the firefly
luciferase gene by lentivirus transfection (25). These cells were then
grown to 80% confluence, harvested by trypsinization, washed twice in
PBS, and resuspended to a final concentration of 1  106 cells/mL. Cell
suspensions (0.1 mL) were injected into the pancreas of six mice per test
group. Tumor growth was assessed by bioluminescence imaging at the
end of 6 weeks. Bioluminescence imaging was conducted using a
cryogenically cooled imaging system coupled to a data acquisition
computer running LivingImage software (Xenogen). Before imaging,
animals were anesthetized in an acrylic chamber with a 1.5%
isoflurane/air mixture and injected i.p. with 40 mg/mL of luciferin
potassium salt in PBS at a dose of 150 mg/kg body weight. A digital
grayscale animal image was acquired followed by acquisition and overlay
of a pseudocolor image representing the spatial distribution of detected
photons emerging from active luciferase within the animal. Signal
intensity was quantified as the sum of all detected photons within the
region of interest per second. After the final tumor imaging, the pancreas
was removed and the animals were re-imaged to visualize and count
cancer cell dissemination and metastases. Tissues were also fixed with
formaldehyde and histology was conducted to verify the accuracy of the
bioluminescence data.
Statistical analysis. All experiments were conducted in triplicate and
carried out on three or more separate occasions. Data presented are means
of the three or more independent experiments FSE. Statistically significant
differences were determined by two-tailed unpaired Student’s t test and
were defined as *P < 0.05.

Results
Adrenomedullin is specifically expressed in pancreatic
cancer tissues and cell lines. We previously reported that
adrenomedullin mRNA levels were 4-fold higher in pancreatic
cancer compared with normal pancreas and chronic pancreatitis
based on microarray analysis (6). In the current study, adrenomedullin expression in human tissues was evaluated by immunohistochemistry. As expected, adrenomedullin was present in normal
pancreatic islets (Fig. 1A). Adrenomedullin was also highly
expressed specifically in pancreatic cancer cells but not in normal
duct or acinar cells or in chronic pancreatitis tissues. A clinical
pathologist examined a pancreatic cancer tissue array and
observed that 90% of the tumors were positive for adrenomedullin
(43 of 48). RT-PCR for adrenomedullin mRNA indicated its
presence in eight of eight pancreatic cancer cell lines (Fig. 1B).
An ELISA for adrenomedullin confirmed the presence of adrenomedullin in cell lysates (data not shown) and also indicated that all
examined cell lines (5 of 5) secreted the protein into their tissue
culture medium (Fig. 1C).
Exogenous adrenomedullin stimulates pancreatic cancer
cell growth, invasion, and NFKB activity. The effects of
treatment with adrenomedullin were studied on pancreatic cancer
cell lines in vitro. Adrenomedullin (200 nmol/L) significantly (P <
0.05) stimulated the proliferation of BxPC3, MPanc96, and Panc-1
pancreatic cancer cell lines by 156 F 11.5%, 189 F 14.0%, and
241 F 24.3%, respectively, when compared with untreated cells
after 48 h. Panc-1 cells were selected for more detailed studies of
adrenomedullin time- (Fig. 2A) and concentration-dependence
(Fig. 2B). Adrenomedullin treatment increased Panc-1 cell numbers
significantly within 24 h and this stimulation was maintained for at
least 72 h. Adrenomedullin stimulated Panc-1 cell proliferation in a
concentration-dependent manner with a significant effect observed

2668

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Role of Adrenomedullin in Pancreatic Cancer

Figure 1. Adrenomedullin is expressed
in pancreatic cancer tissues and cell lines.
A, immunohistochemistry showing the
expression of adrenomedullin in
human normal pancreas, pancreatic
adenocarcinoma, and chronic pancreatitis
(n = 5; original magnification, 20).
Arrows, adrenomedullin staining in the
islets of the pancreas (normal tissue);
adrenomedullin staining in the cancer
epithelium (pancreatic cancer tissues).
B, RT-PCR showing the expression of
adrenomedullin mRNA in human
pancreatic cancer cell lines and h-actin as
control. C, ELISA showing the secretion of
adrenomedullin in conditional medium of
pancreatic cancer cell lines. Columns,
mean for three experiments; bars, SE.

with 10 nmol/L of adrenomedullin and a maximal effect observed
with 200 nmol/L of adrenomedullin.
We next analyzed the effect of exogenous addition of adrenomedullin on Panc-1 cell invasion. The addition of adrenomedullin
(1–200 nmol/L) to the bottom wells of the invasion chamber as a
chemoattractant for 24 h increased the number of invading cells in a
concentration-dependent manner (Fig. 2C). MTS assay showed that
significant effects on invasion were noted with 100 nmol/L of
adrenomedullin, and with 200 nmol/L of adrenomedullin, invasion
was increased by 272 F 15.6% compared with control. The same
results were documented photographically (Fig. 2D).
Finally, as a potential intracellular signal generated by treatment
with adrenomedullin, we investigated the level of NFnB activity in
the pancreatic cancer cells expressing an NFnB reporter (Table 1).
Exogenous addition of adrenomedullin (200 nmol/L) significantly
induced NFnB reporter activity compared with untreated cells in
all examined cell lines. Adrenomedullin also stimulated activation
of NFnB examined in electrophoretic mobility shift assays (data not
shown). These data indicate that pancreatic cancer cells are able to
respond directly to adrenomedullin.
Adrenomedullin acts in an autocrine manner to stimulate
pancreatic cancer cell growth and NFKB activity. To examine
the possibility that adrenomedullin influences pancreatic cancer
cells in an autocrine manner, we examined the effects of AMA on
basal pancreatic cancer cell functions. AMA (1 Amol/L) significantly (P < 0.05) reduced basal cell proliferation in BxPC3,
MPanc96, and Panc-1 pancreatic cancer cell lines by 41 F 4.0%,
57 F 5.5%, and 64 F 9.8%, respectively, when compared with
controls after 48 h. The effects of AMA treatment on Panc-1 cell
proliferation were significant within 48 h and were more
pronounced after 72 h (Fig. 2A). AMA (1 Amol/L) treatment also
significantly reduced basal NFnB activity compared with untreated

www.aacrjournals.org

cells in each of the examined pancreatic cancer cell lines (Table 1).
Basal levels of NFnB activity varied between the cell lines, but AMA
reduced basal levels compared with controls by at least 50% in all
cell lines examined.
Adrenomedullin levels correlate with rates of pancreatic
cancer growth and invasion in vitro and in vivo. To further
investigate the influence of adrenomedullin on pancreatic cancer
cell function, pancreatic cancer cell lines were genetically modified
to alter adrenomedullin levels. MPanc96 cells, with a relatively high
level of endogenous adrenomedullin, were stably transfected with a
shRNA to silence adrenomedullin. Panc-1 cells, with a relatively low
level of endogenous adrenomedullin, were stably transfected with
an adrenomedullin expression vector to increase adrenomedullin
levels. ELISA was used to verify alterations in cellular secretion of
adrenomedullin after transfections (Fig. 3). Genetic transfer of
adrenomedullin to Panc-1 cells resulted in an increase in secreted
levels of adrenomedullin. The level of adrenomedullin secretion in
the adrenomedullin-transfected Panc-1 cells was similar to the level
observed in wild-type MPanc96 cells. Adrenomedullin levels in
MPanc96 cells were significantly reduced after shRNA silencing.
The effects of these alterations in adrenomedullin expression
levels were evaluated on cell proliferation and invasion in vitro.
Panc-1 cells overexpressing adrenomedullin showed an increased
proliferation rate compared with empty vector–transfected cells
(263 F 19.5%, P < 0.05; Fig. 4A). In the complementary experiment,
MPanc96 cells showed a significant decrease in cell proliferation
after stable silencing of adrenomedullin expression (52 F 7.1%,
P < 0.05) when compared with that of MPanc96 cells stably
expressing control shRNA. Overexpression of adrenomedullin also
stimulated Panc-1 cell invasion (457 F 52.3%, P < 0.05) when
compared with empty vector (Fig. 4B and C). Furthermore,
silencing of adrenomedullin in MPanc96 cells decreased cell

2669

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (6). March 15, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

invasion (43 F 2.2%, P < 0.05) when compared with control
shRNA–transfected cells.
Based on our observations on the effects of adrenomedullin on
pancreatic cancer cell growth and invasion in vitro, we further
wished to analyze its effect on tumors developed in vivo in
immunodeficient mice. In one set of experiments, orthotopic
tumor formation following pancreatic injection of Panc-1 cells
expressing adrenomedullin and control vector was assessed. Tumor
growth measured after 4 weeks indicated that Panc-1 cells
overexpressing adrenomedullin showed a 2.5-fold increase in
tumor size when compared with vector control–transfected cells
(Fig. 5A). Also, tumor invasion to the peritoneum was increased by
53% in adrenomedullin-overexpressing animals (4.0 F 1.3 per
animal in the control group and 6.1 F 0.8 per animal in the
adrenomedullin-overexpressing group).
In another set of experiments, the effect of adrenomedullin on
pancreatic tumor growth in vivo was assessed in the orthotopic
pancreatic tumor model by injection of MPanc96 cells expressing
shRNA for adrenomedullin or control shRNA using bioluminescence
imaging. MPanc96 cells with silenced adrenomedullin expression
showed an 8-fold reduction in tumor volume compared with control
shRNA–transfected cells (Fig. 5B and C). We also observed that the
extent of disseminated cancer measured at the end of the 6 weeks
after the resection of the pancreas was significantly lower in
adrenomedullin-silenced animals (Fig. 5D). After removal of the

Table 1. Effect of adrenomedullin on pancreatic cancer
cells line NFnB activity in vitro

BxPC3
MPanc96
Panc-1

Adrenomedullin NFnBLuciferase (% control)

AMA NFnBLuciferase (% control)

133 F 7.9*
165 F 10.6*
130 F 9.1*

61 F 5.4*
69 F 2.7*
66 F 4.0*

NOTE: Pancreatic cancer cells stably infected with NFnB-LUC reporter
gene containing lentivirus (5,000 cells) were plated on 96-well plates
and adrenomedullin (200 nmol/L) and AMA (1 Amol/L) were added to
the cells; NFnB activity was determined at 4.5 h by bioluminescence
imaging method. Data shown are mean FSE for three experiments.
*P < 0.05 versus control.

primary tumor, cancer was found widely dispersed throughout the
peritoneum and liver metastasis was observed. Adrenomedullinsilenced animals showed a 98% reduction in the total volume of
disseminated cancer, and a 40% reduction in the number of
metastatic foci (3.0 F 0.9 foci per control animal versus 1.2 F 0.4
foci per adrenomedullin-silenced animal).

Figure 2. Exogenous adrenomedullin stimulates pancreatic cancer cell proliferation and invasion in vitro. A, adrenomedullin stimulates pancreatic cancer cell
growth in a time-dependent manner. Wild-type Panc-1 cells (1,000 cells) were plated on 96-well plates and adrenomedullin (200 nmol/L) or AMA (1 Amol/L) was added
to the cells and cell numbers were estimated at 0, 12, 24, 48, and 72 h by MTS assay. Points, mean for three experiments; bars, SE; *, P < 0.05 versus control.
B, adrenomedullin stimulates pancreatic cancer cell growth in a concentration-dependent manner. Wild-type Panc-1 cells (5,000 cells) were plated on 96-well plates and
adrenomedullin (1–500 nmol/L) or AMA (1 Amol/L) was added to the cells and cell numbers were estimated at 48 h by MTS assay. Columns, mean for three
experiments; bars, SE; *, P < 0.05 versus control. C, adrenomedullin stimulates pancreatic cancer cell invasion in a concentration-dependent manner. Wild-type Panc-1
cells (20,000 cells) were added into Biocoat Matrigel invasion upper chamber and different concentrations of adrenomedullin (1–200 nmol/L) were added into the
lower chamber, and after 12 h, noninvaded cells in the upper membrane were removed and cells invading into the lower membrane were quantified photometrically by
adding MTS reagent 1 h before taking the reading. DMEM containing 0.5% serum was used as control. Columns, mean for three experiments; bars, SE; *, P < 0.05
versus control. D, invading cells in three adjacent microscope fields for each membrane (original magnification, 20).

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (6). March 15, 2007

2670

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Role of Adrenomedullin in Pancreatic Cancer

Figure 3. Genetic manipulation alters cellular expression of adrenomedullin.
ELISA showing the effects of adrenomedullin overexpression (Panc-1 cells
stably transfected with either adrenomedullin or control vectors) or
adrenomedullin silencing (MPanc96 cells stably transfected with either
adrenomedullin or control shRNA vectors) on adrenomedullin levels in
conditioned medium. Columns, mean for three experiments; bars, SE;
*, P < 0.05 versus control.

Pancreatic cancer cell lines respond to adrenomedullin via
the adrenomedullin receptor ADMR. In order to identify the
receptor responsible for the autocrine effects of adrenomedullin on
pancreatic cancer cells, RT-PCR was conducted for known
adrenomedullin receptor mRNAs. Surprisingly, the well-known
adrenomedullin receptor, CRLR, was not amplified from mRNA
prepared from any of the pancreatic cancer cell lines. However,
CRLR mRNA was easily amplified from cell types similar to those
found in the tumor microenvironment, including endothelial cells
(HUVEC) or HPSC (Fig. 6A). Despite the lack of CRLR mRNA, the
mRNAs for the CRLR-associated binding proteins RAMP1, RAMP2,
and RCP, but not RAMP3, were present in pancreatic cancer cell
lines. All three RAMPs and RCP were present in HUVEC and
HPSCs. In contrast to the lack of CRLR, all pancreatic cancer cell
lines expressed mRNA for ADMR. This receptor was also present in
both HUVEC and pancreatic stellate cells. The presence of the
ADMR was confirmed in all of the examined pancreatic cancer cell
lines using Western blotting (Fig. 6B).
To determine whether ADMR might be responsible for the
observed stimulatory effects of adrenomedullin on pancreatic
cancer cells, ADMR was silenced using a lentiviral shRNA
technique. MPanc96 cells stably silenced with ADMR shRNA
showed a 95% reduction in the expression of ADMR when
compared with that of control shRNA–bearing cells (Fig. 6C).
Silencing of ADMR did not influence the cellular levels of
adrenomedullin measured by ELISA (data not shown). Control
shRNA–bearing cells showed a significant increase in adrenomedullin-stimulated growth, whereas silencing of ADMR significantly
reduced the basal growth as well as the adrenomedullin-stimulated
growth of pancreatic cancer cell lines at 48 h when compared with
control shRNA (Table 2). Also, ADMR-silenced cell lines showed a
significant reduction on adrenomedullin stimulated invasion.
MPanc96 cell lines stably silencing ADMR showed a significant

www.aacrjournals.org

Figure 4. Cellular expression levels of adrenomedullin correlate with pancreatic
cancer growth and invasion both in vitro and in vivo. A, Panc-1 cells stably
transfected with control or adrenomedullin expression vector and MPanc96 cells
stably transfected with control or adrenomedullin shRNA (5,000 cells) were plated
on 96-well plates and cell numbers were estimated at 48 h by MTS assay.
Columns, mean for three experiments; bars, SE; *, P < 0.05 versus control. B,
Panc-1 cells stably transfected with control or adrenomedullin expression vector
and MPanc96 cells stably transfected with control or adrenomedullin shRNA
vectors were added into Biocoat Matrigel invasion upper chamber and cells
invading the lower chamber were estimated using MTS reagent. Columns, mean
for three experiments; bars, SE; *, P < 0.05 versus control. C, invading cells in
three adjacent microscope fields for each membrane (original magnification, 20).

2671

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (6). March 15, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

Figure 5. Adrenomedullin increases
pancreatic cancer growth and metastasis
in vivo. A, tumor growth of Panc-1 cells
stably overexpressing adrenomedullin or
control vector were analyzed. Cells
(1  105) were inoculated orthotopically
into the pancreas of 4-wk-old CB-17 SCID
mice, and the mice were maintained in a
clean sterile environment for another
4 wks. At the end of the experiment, the
tumor was removed and weighed.
Columns, mean for six animals; bars, SE.
B, tumor growth of MPanc96 cells stably
expressing adrenomedullin shRNA or
control shRNA, as well as the luciferase
gene, were assessed in CB-17 SCID mice.
A representative image using pseudocolor
to indicate tumor size. Bioluminescent
imaging was used to estimate tumor
volume and dissemination (C and D ).
Columns, mean for six animals; bars, SE;
*, P < 0.05 versus control.

reduction in basal- and adrenomedullin-stimulated invasion (Fig. 6D).
Panc-1 cell lines also showed a significant reduction in invasion
when ADMR was silenced (data not shown).

Discussion
Pancreatic cancer is an oncological challenge with <4% 5-year
survival rates. The mechanisms responsible for the aggressive
nature of this cancer are not well understood. We previously
observed that the peptide regulatory factor adrenomedullin was
expressed in pancreatic cancer (6). In the current study, we further
investigated the expression of adrenomedullin in pancreatic cancer
and the potential role of this molecule as an autocrine factor in the
disease. We observed that adrenomedullin was present in nearly all
pancreatic tumors and cell lines and that adrenomedullin
stimulated pancreatic cancer cell growth and invasion both
in vitro and in vivo. Furthermore, an AMA was able to reduce
the basal levels of pancreatic cancer cell proliferation and NFnB
signaling in vitro. Genetic manipulations to increase or decrease
adrenomedullin expression in pancreatic cancer cells resulted in
increased or decreased proliferation and invasion in vitro and
tumor growth and dissemination in vivo. Thus, our observations
strongly suggest an involvement of adrenomedullin in the
regulation of pancreatic cancer progression and indicate the
presence of an autocrine component to this effect. These data
support the further investigation of adrenomedullin as a potential
therapeutic target in this deadly cancer.
We previously reported that adrenomedullin mRNA levels were
f4-fold higher in pancreatic adenocarcinoma compared with
normal pancreas and chronic pancreatitis using microarray data
analysis (6). In the current study, we extended this observation
to a large number of samples and found the presence of

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (6). March 15, 2007

adrenomedullin in the vast majority of pancreatic adenocarcinoma.
Immunohistochemical assays localized adrenomedullin in pancreatic islets as expected. Adrenomedullin was also present in
pancreatic cancer cells, but not in ductal or acinar cells from
normal or chronic pancreatitis. We also detected adrenomedullin
mRNA and protein in all pancreatic cancer cell lines that we
examined. Furthermore, we were able to detect adrenomedullin in
conditioned culture media from the pancreatic cancer cell lines,
indicating that the pancreatic cancer cells secrete adrenomedullin.
Thus, adrenomedullin is produced and secreted and therefore is
able to interact with receptors in the extracellular space, including
those on the cancer cells themselves as well as those on endothelial
cells or stellate cells in the tumor microenvironment.
To examine the possibility of an autocrine effect of adrenomedullin on pancreatic cancer cells, we determined the effect of
exogenous addition or genetic manipulation of adrenomedullin
in vitro. We observed that adrenomedullin significantly increased
pancreatic cancer cell proliferation, invasiveness, and NFnB
activity. These data indicate that pancreatic cancer cells are able
to respond to adrenomedullin in ways that would be expected to
further the aggressiveness of pancreatic cancer. Importantly, we
further found that inclusion of the adrenomedullin peptide
antagonist AMA (AM 22-52) inhibited the basal levels of pancreatic
cancer cell proliferation and invasion in vitro. These data indicate
that inhibition of the interaction of pancreatic cancer cell–secreted
adrenomedullin with cellular receptors reduces these cellular
functions. Combined with the observation that the cells normally
express and secrete adrenomedullin, these data strongly support
the conclusion that adrenomedullin can act in an autocrine
manner in pancreatic cancer.
Our conclusion that adrenomedullin can act as an autocrine
factor in pancreatic cancer is in agreement with the observations

2672

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Role of Adrenomedullin in Pancreatic Cancer

made previously in other forms of cancer that adrenomedullin may
act in this manner (19–21). However, our data showing that
adrenomedullin is an autocrine regulator in pancreatic cancer is in
disagreement with a previous report that did not find evidence for
an autocrine role of adrenomedullin in pancreatic cancer cells (22).
In that study, inclusion of AMA in tissue culture medium did not
inhibit the proliferation of two pancreatic cancer cell lines,
prompting the conclusion that it did not act in an autocrine
manner. In contrast, we observed that AMA inhibited the
proliferation, invasion, and basal NFnB levels of several pancreatic
cancer cell lines. The explanation for this difference may be a
technical issue. We found that adrenomedullin and AMA needed to
be added daily to the culture medium in order to observe
significant effects, likely due to the short half-lives of these proteins
in the tissue culture medium. Another possible explanation for the
divergent results observed between the two studies is the use of
different pancreatic cancer cell lines.
The current study did not directly address the role of adrenomedullin in the tumor microenvironment. The important role
of adrenomedullin in angiogenesis in other cancers has been
well established (26). Adrenomedullin signaling is of particular
significance in endothelial cell biology because the peptide protects
these cells from apoptosis (18), promotes angiogenesis (26), and
affects vascular tone and permeability (27). Both adrenomedullin
and its receptor (CRLR) are up-regulated under hypoxic conditions

Table 2. Effect of silencing ADMR on basal- and
adrenomedullin-stimulated pancreatic cancer cell proliferation in vitro

BxPC3
MPanc96
Panc-1

Control shRNA +
adrenomedullin
(% control)

ADMR shRNA
(% control)

ADMR shRNA +
adrenomedullin
(% control)

143 F 5.4*
175 F 4.2*
223 F 6.1*

76 F 3.9*
80 F 3.5*
71 F 22*

72 F 3.7*
80 F 2.8*
70 F 2.7*

NOTE: Pancreatic cancer cells stably infected with control or ADMR
shRNA (5,000 cells) were plated on 96-well plates and adrenomedullin
(200 nmol/L) was added to the cells and cell growth was determined
at 48 h by MTS assay. Data shown are mean FSE for three
experiments.
*P < 0.05 versus control.

in microvascular endothelial cells (28). In pancreatic cancer,
inhibition of adrenomedullin by direct intratumoral injection of
AMA (22) or by intratumoral or i.m. injection of a vector expressing
AMA (23) reduced tumor volume and vascularization. These data

Figure 6. Different adrenomedullin receptors and binding proteins are expressed in pancreatic cancer cells and cells of the tumor microenvironment, and small
interfering RNA can be used to silence ADMR in pancreatic cancer cells. A, RT-PCR expression of adrenomedullin receptors—ADMR and CRLR and its binding
proteins RAMP1-3 and RCP in pancreatic cancer cell lines, in endothelial cells and in stellate cells. h-Actin served as a control. B, Western blot showing the expression
of ADMR in pancreatic cancer cell lines. h-Actin served as control. C, cell lysates from MPanc96 cells stably silencing ADMR and control cells were prepared and
Western blotting was conducted for ADMR. D, MPanc96 cells stably silencing ADMR and control cells were added into Biocoat Matrigel invasion upper chamber,
whereas adrenomedullin (200 nmol/L) was added to the lower chamber and cells invading the lower chamber were estimated using MTS reagent. Columns, mean for
three experiments; bars, SE; *, P < 0.05 versus control.

www.aacrjournals.org

2673

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (6). March 15, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

strongly indicate that adrenomedullin has an important role in
pancreatic cancer angiogenesis. Adrenomedullin may also have an
important action on cells of the tumor stroma. In human hepatic
stellate cells, secretion of adrenomedullin and the existence of
CRLR, RAMP1, and RAMP2 have been reported (29). The current
study is the first to identify adrenomedullin receptors in pancreatic
stellate cells. Thus, it is likely that adrenomedullin secretion by
pancreatic cancer cells influences cancer cells themselves in an
autocrine manner and the tumor microenvironment in a paracrine
manner through effects on endothelial and stellate cells.
Among the biological actions of adrenomedullin on pancreatic
cancer cells, we noted that adrenomedullin influenced the invasiveness of the pancreatic cancer cells in a concentration-dependent
manner in vitro. Likewise, overexpression of adrenomedullin significantly increased, whereas silencing of adrenomedullin significantly decreased, invasion in vitro. Invasion is a critical component
of metastasis (30). Our in vivo data further showed that adrenomedullin silencing reduced total pancreatic cancer dissemination, which included peritoneal invasion and metastasis to liver
and lung. However, because adrenomedullin silencing had such
profound effects on cancer cell proliferation, it is difficult to determine from the current studies whether there were independent
effects on metastasis. We also observed a reduction in the numbers
of metastatic foci after silencing adrenomedullin, which is less
likely to be influenced by cell proliferation rates. Nevertheless,
further studies will be necessary to fully understand the role of
adrenomedullin in pancreatic cancer metastasis.
We also observed that adrenomedullin treatment of pancreatic
cancer cells activated the transcription factor NFnB. NFnB is a key
regulator of inflammation that also induces several antiapoptotic
mechanisms (31). NFnB is constitutively active in pancreatic cancer
(32) and has been considered an important component of
resistance to cancer therapy in this disease (33, 34). Adrenomedullin has previously been reported to activate NFnB in some
epithelial cells (35). In the current study, exogenous adrenomedullin stimulated pancreatic cancer cell NFnB activity. Furthermore, treatment of pancreatic cancer cells with an AMA led to a
reduction of basal NFnB activity. These data suggest that an
adrenomedullin autocrine loop contributes to basal NFnB activity
in these cells. Thus, interference with adrenomedullin or adrenomedullin receptors in pancreatic cancer may reduce NFnB
signaling and increase the sensitivity of pancreatic tumors to
therapy. The potential role of adrenomedullin in the chemoresistance of pancreatic cancer remains to be explored.
Adrenomedullin acts through at least two subtypes of G
protein–coupled receptors, CRLR (36) and ADMR (10). CRLR
functions as a calcitonin gene–related peptide receptor or an
adrenomedullin receptor depending on the expression of specific
receptor activity–modifying proteins (RAMP). In combination with
RAMP1, CRLR has the highest affinity for calcitonin gene–related

References
1. Jemal A, Siegel R, Ward E, et al. Cancer statistics 2006.
CA Cancer J Clin 2006;56:106–30.
2. Gress TM, Wallrapp C, Frohme M, et al. Identification
of genes with specific expression in pancreatic cancer by
cDNA representational difference analysis. Genes Chromosomes Cancer 1997;19:97–103.
3. Anderson KM, Alrefai WA, Bonomi P, et al. Altered
oncogene, tumor suppressor and cell-cycle gene expres-

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (6). March 15, 2007

peptides, and in combination with RAMP2 or RAMP3, it prefers
adrenomedullin (37). The levels of various adrenomedullin
receptors differ depending on the cell type. For example, in human
adrenal cortex and aldosteronomas, ADMR mRNA is present in
high levels when compared with CRLR and the three RAMPs (36).
Previously, it has been suggested that CRLR is the main mediator
of the effects of adrenomedullin on the vasculature (38). In the
current study, we did not detect mRNA for CRLR in any of the
pancreatic cancer cell lines despite the presence of mRNA for
RAMP1/2 and another binding protein of CRLR, RCP (38).
Therefore, it is unlikely that the autocrine effects of adrenomedullin in pancreatic cancer are mediated by CRLR. In contrast to
the lack of CRLR, ADMR was present on all of the pancreatic
cancer cell lines. Furthermore, silencing of ADMR inhibited basalas well as adrenomedullin-stimulated pancreatic cancer cell
proliferation and invasion. These data strongly suggest that the
autocrine effects of adrenomedullin are mediated through ADMR
on pancreatic cancer cells.
Although not the focus of our study, we also evaluated the
presence of adrenomedullin receptors on important cells in the
tumor microenvironment. We confirmed findings from previous
studies which indicated that endothelial cells express both CRLR
and ADMR (28, 39). We also showed for the first time that HPSCs
express these receptors. Thus, adrenomedullin could act via either
receptor type on cells of the tumor microenvironment. The
importance of CRLR for the effects of adrenomedullin on
endothelial cells has previously been reported (28). It is not known
whether adrenomedullin regulates pancreatic stellate cell function.
However, adrenomedullin has been suggested as a regulator of the
related hepatic stellate cell (29). Clearly, further studies to
determine the effects of adrenomedullin and the relative contribution of ADMR and CRLR receptors on pancreatic stellate cells
are warranted.
In summary, this study describes the presence and important
functional roles of adrenomedullin as an autocrine factor that
increases the aggressive characteristics of pancreatic cancer.
Furthermore, the ADMR receptor was identified as being critical
for these effects. These observations add significant new insight
into the multifaceted role of adrenomedullin in pancreatic cancer.
Combined with the known importance of adrenomedullin as an
angiogenic factor, these data support the further investigation of
adrenomedullin and/or its receptor (ADMR) as new and potentially
important targets for pancreatic cancer therapy.

Acknowledgments
Received 9/11/2006; revised 12/21/2006; accepted 1/3/2007.
Grant support: The Michigan Life Science Corridor and the Lockton Endowment.
The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of page
charges. This article must therefore be hereby marked advertisement in accordance
with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact.

sion in PANC-1 cells cultured with the pleiotrophic 5lipoxygenase inhibitor, MK886, assessed with a gene
chip. Anticancer Res 1999;19:3873–87.
4. Argani P, Rosty C, Reiter RE, et al. Discovery of new
markers of cancer through serial analysis of gene
expression: prostate stem cell antigen is overexpressed
in pancreatic adenocarcinoma. Cancer Res 2001;61:
4320–4.
5. Cao D, Hustinx SR, Sui G, et al. Identification of novel
highly expressed genes in pancreatic ductal adenocarci-

2674

nomas through a bioinformatics analysis of expressed
sequence tags. Cancer Biol Ther 2004;3:1081–9.
6. Logsdon CD, Simeone DM, Binkley C, et al. Molecular
profiling of pancreatic adenocarcinoma and chronic
pancreatitis identifies multiple genes differentially regulated in pancreatic cancer. Cancer Res 2003;63:2649–57.
7. Kitamura K, Kangawa K, Kawamoto M, et al.
Adrenomedullin: a novel hypotensive peptide isolated
from human pheochromocytoma. Biochem Biophys Res
Commun 1993;192:553–60.

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Role of Adrenomedullin in Pancreatic Cancer
8. Hinson JP, Kapas S, Smith DM. Adrenomedullin, a
multifunctional regulatory peptide. Endocr Rev 2000;21:
138–67.
9. Martinez A, Weaver C, Lopez J, et al. Regulation of
insulin secretion and blood glucose metabolism by
adrenomedullin. Endocrinology 1996;137:2626–32.
10. Martı́nez A, Kapas S, Miller MJ, Ward Y, Cuttitta F.
Coexpression of receptors for adrenomedullin, calcitonin gene-related peptide, and amylin in pancreatic hcells. Endocrinology 2000;141:406–11.
11. Pio R, Martinez A, Unsworth EJ, et al. Complement
factor H is a serum-binding protein for adrenomedullin,
and the resulting complex modulates the bioactivities of
both partners. J Biol Chem 2001;276:12292–300.
12. Nuki C, Kawasaki H, Kitamura K, et al. Vasodilator
effect of adrenomedullin and calcitonin gene-related
peptide receptors in rat mesenteric vascular beds.
Biochem Biophys Res Commun 1993;196:245–51.
13. Zhao L, Brown LA, Owji AA, et al. Adrenomedullin
activity in chronically hypoxic rat lungs. Am J Physiol
1996;271:622–9.
14. Cormier-Regard S, Nguyen SV, Claycomb WC.
Adrenomedullin gene expression is developmentally
regulated and induced by hypoxia in rat ventricular
cardiac myocytes. J Biol Chem 1998;273:1787–92.
15. Nakayama M, Takahashi K, Murakami O, Shirato K,
Shibahara S. Induction of adrenomedullin by hypoxia
and cobalt chloride in human colorectal carcinoma
cells. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 1998;243:514–7.
16. Hayakawa H, Hirata Y, Kakoki M, et al. Role of nitric
oxide-cGMP pathway in adrenomedullin-induced vasodilation in the rat. Hypertension 1999;33:689–93.
17. Miyashita K, Itoh H, Sawada N, et al. Adrenomedullin
promotes proliferation and migration of cultured
endothelial cells. Hypertens Res 2003;26:S93–8.
18. Kato H, Shichiri M, Marumo F, Hirata Y. Adrenomedullin as an autocrine/paracrine apoptosis survival
factor for rat endothelial cells. Endocrinology 1997;138:
2615–20.

www.aacrjournals.org

19. Miller MJ, Martinez A, Unsworth EJ, et al. Adrenomedullin expression in human tumor cell lines. Its
potential role as an autocrine growth factor. J Biol Chem
1996;271:23345–51.
20. Oehler MK, Norbury C, Hague S, Rees MC, Bicknell R.
Adrenomedullin inhibits hypoxic cell death by upregulation of Bcl-2 in endometrial cancer cells: a possible
promotion mechanism for tumour growth. Oncogene
2001;20:2937–45.
21. Rocchi P, Boudouresque F, Zamora AJ, et al.
Expression of adrenomedullin and peptide amidation
activity in human prostate cancer and in human
prostate cancer cell lines. Cancer Res 2001;61:1196–206.
22. Ishikawa T, Chen J, Wang J, et al. Adrenomedullin
antagonist suppresses in vivo growth of human
pancreatic cancer cells in SCID mice by suppressing
angiogenesis. Oncogene 2003;22:1238–42.
23. Miseki T, Kawakami H, Natsuizaka M, et al.
Suppression of tumor growth by intra-muscular transfer
of naked DNA encoding adrenomedullin antagonist.
Cancer Gene Ther 2007;14:39–44.
24. Qin XF, An DS, Chen IS, Baltimore D. Inhibiting HIV-1
infection in human T cells by lentiviral-mediated
delivery of small interfering RNA against CCR5. Proc
Natl Acad Sci U S A 2003;100:183–8.
25. Arumugam T, Simeone DM, Van Golen K, Logsdon
CD. S100P promotes pancreatic cancer growth, survival,
and invasion. Clin Cancer Res 2005;11:5356–64.
26. Kim W, Moon SO, Sung MJ, et al. Angiogenic role of
adrenomedullin through activation of Akt, mitogen
activated protein kinase, and focal adhesion kinase in
endothelial cells. FASEB J 2003;13:1937–9.
27. Hippenstiel S, Witzenrath M, Schmeck B, et al.
Adrenomedullin reduces endothelial hyperpermeability.
Circ Res 2002;91:618–25.
28. Nikitenko LL, Smith DM, Bicknell R, Rees MC.
Transcriptional regulation of the CRLR gene in human
microvascular endothelial cells by hypoxia. FASEB J
2003;17:1499–501.

2675

29. Gorbig MN, Gines P, Bataller R, et al. Human hepatic
stellate cells secrete adrenomedullin: potential autocrine factor in the regulation of cell contractility. J
Hepatol 2001;34:222–9.
30. Hanahan D, Weinberg RA. The hallmarks of cancer.
Cell 2000;100:57–70.
31. Baldwin AS, Jr. Series introduction: the transcription factor NfnB and human disease. J Clin Invest 2001;
107:3–6.
32. Wang W, Abbruzzese JL, Evans DB, Larry L, Cleary
KR, Chiao PJ. The nuclear factor-nB RelA transcription
factor is constitutively activated in human pancreatic
adenocarcinoma cells. Clin Cancer Res 1999;5:119–27.
33. Schmid RM, Adler G. NF-nB/Rel/InB: implications in
gastrointestinal diseases. Gastroenterology 2000;188:
1208–28.
34. Arlt A, Vorndamm J, Breitenbroich M, et al. Inhibition
of NF-nB sensitizes human pancreatic carcinoma cells
to apoptosis induced by etoposide (VP16) or doxorubicin. Oncogene 2001;20:859–68.
35. Pleguezuelos O, Hagi-Pavli E, Crowther G, Kapas S.
Adrenomedullin signals through NF-nB in epithelial
cells. FEBS Lett 2004;577:249–54.
36. Albertin G, Forneris M, Aragona F, Nussdorfer GG.
Expression of adrenomedullin and its receptors in the
human adrenal cortex and aldosteronomas. Int J Mol
Med 2001;8:423–6.
37. McLatchie LM, Fraser NJ, Main MJ, et al. RAMPs
regulate the transport and ligand specificity of the
calcitonin-receptor-like receptor. Nature 1998;393:333–9.
38. Evans BN, Rosenblatt MI, Mnayer LO, Oliver KR,
Dickerson IM. CGRP-RCP, a novel protein required for
signal transduction at calcitonin gene-related peptide
and adrenomedullin receptors. J Biol Chem 2000;275:
31438–43.
39. Sumanas S, Jorniak T, Lin S. Identification of novel
vascular endothelial-specific genes by the microarray
analysis of the zebrafish cloche mutants. Blood 2005;106:
534–41.

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (6). March 15, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Adrenomedullin Is Expressed in Pancreatic Cancer and
Stimulates Cell Proliferation and Invasion in an Autocrine
Manner via the Adrenomedullin Receptor, ADMR
Vijaya Ramachandran, Thiruvengadam Arumugam, Rosa F. Hwang, et al.
Cancer Res 2007;67:2666-2675.

Updated version

Cited articles
Citing articles

E-mail alerts
Reprints and
Subscriptions
Permissions

Access the most recent version of this article at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/67/6/2666

This article cites 34 articles, 13 of which you can access for free at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/67/6/2666.full#ref-list-1
This article has been cited by 9 HighWire-hosted articles. Access the articles at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/67/6/2666.full#related-urls

Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal.
To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications
Department at pubs@aacr.org.
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications
Department at permissions@aacr.org.

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

