Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No. 15

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Expansion of myeloid-derived suppressor cells with arginase
activity lasts longer in aged than in young mice after CpG-ODN
plus IFA treatment
María F. Harman1, Romina P. Ranocchia1, Carolina V. Gorlino1, María F. Sánchez
Vallecillo1, Sofía D. Castell1, María I. Crespo1, Belkys A. Maletto1, Gabriel Morón1,
María C. Pistoresi-Palencia1
1

C
 entro de Investigación en Bioquímica Clínica e Inmunología, Consejo Nacional de Investigaciones Científicas y Técnicas,
Facultad de Ciencias Químicas, Universidad Nacional de Córdoba, Córdoba, Argentina

Correspondence to:
María C. Pistoresi-Palencia, e-mail: cpistore@fcq.unc.edu.ar
María Florencia Harman, e-mail: mharman@fcq.unc.edu.ar
Keywords: aging, myeloid-derived suppressor cells, arginase, CpG-ODN, immunomodulation
Received: February 18, 2015     Accepted: March 15, 2015     Published: April 13, 2015

ABSTRACT
As we age, the homeostatic function of many systems in the body, such as the
immune function declines, which in turn contributes to augment susceptibility to disease.
Here we describe that challenging aged mice with synthetic oligodeoxynucleotides
containing unmethylated cytosine guanine motifs (CpG-ODN) emulsified in incomplete
Freund’s adjuvant (IFA), (CpG-ODN+IFA) an inflammatory stimulus, led to the
expansion of CD11b+Gr1+ myeloid cells with augmented expression of CD124 and CD31.
These myeloid cells lasted longer in the spleen of aged mice than in their younger
counterparts after CpG-ODN+IFA treatment and were capable of suppressing T cell
proliferative response by arginase induction. Myeloid cells from aged CpG-ODN+IFAtreated mice presented increased arginase-1 expression and enzyme activity. In
addition, we found a different requirement of cytokines for arginase induction according
to mice age. In myeloid cells from young treated mice, arginase-1 expression and
activity is induced by the presence of each IL-4 or IL-6 in their extracellular medium,
unlike myeloid cells from aged treated mice which need the presence of both IL-4 and
IL-6 together for arginase induction and suppressor function.

of MDSCs [1, 8]. MDSC exerts its suppressive activity
upregulating the expression of factors such as arginase-1 and
iNOS, as well as increasing the production of nitric oxide and
reactive oxygen species [1].
Aging impacts the homeostatic function of many
systems in the body, including the immune system, which
reduces the capacity to mount a robust immune response
[9–11]. As a result, elderly individuals experience a
higher incidence of various diseases, such as autoimmune
disorders, infections and cancer.
We have previously demonstrated that CpG-ODN
used as an adjuvant was able to induce a specific immune
response in aged mice comparable to that in young
mice [12–14]. We have also demonstrated that systemic
administration of CpG-ODN emulsified in incomplete
Freund’s adjuvant (CpG-ODN+IFA) induced transitory
expansion of splenic MDSCs with CD11b+Gr1+ phenotype

INTRODUCTION
Myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSCs) are a
heterogeneous population of cells that consist of myeloid
progenitors and immature myeloid cells [1]. Immature
myeloid cells with the same phenotype as MDSCs are
continually generated in the bone marrow of healthy
individuals and differentiate into mature myeloid cells:
granulocytes, macrophages or dendritic cells [1–2]. However,
under inflammatory conditions, MDSC levels are elevated
in peripheral secondary lymph organs in both human [3]
and murine [4–6] hosts. MDSCs regulate both innate and
adaptative immunity [7], and are responsible for suppressing
T-cell responses [1]. MDSCs are identified in mice by the coexpression of the myeloid-cell lineage differentiation antigen
CD11b and Gr1 [1]. A number of cytokines and transcription
factors were shown to modulate the expansion and activation
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

13448

Oncotarget

in young mice, which caused suppression of T-cell
proliferation mediated by arginase activity [15]. Thus,
CpG-ODN, besides being a powerful immunostimulatory
compound, is capable of inducing MDSCs as a counterregulatory response in young mice.
Based on all these considerations, we aimed to
investigate the effects of aging on the expansion and
suppressor function of myeloid cells in CpG-ODN+IFAtreated mice.
The data presented in this work show that CpGODN+IFA is capable of inducing the expansion of myeloid
cells in aged mice, which remain elevated for a longer
time than in their younger counterparts. Myeloid cells
from aged treated mice suppress the T cell proliferative
response by arginase induction. Here we found a different
requirement of cytokines for arginase induction according
to mice age. In myeloid cells from young treated mice,
arginase-1 expression and activity is induced by the
presence of each IL-4 or IL-6 in their extracellular
medium, unlike myeloid cells from aged treated mice
which need the presence of both IL-4 and IL-6 together
for arginase induction and suppressor function. Further
investigation of the functional consequences of elevated
MDSCs for more time facing an inflammatory stimulus
will provide valuable insight into the progression of agerelated pathologies.

to saline solution-treated mice. Although the expansion
of myeloid cells after treatment reached similar levels as
in their younger counterparts their induction was lower
because of their basal augmented number (Supplementary
Figure 1B).
In order to evaluate the expression of myeloid
lineage differentiation and maturation markers in myeloid
cells that accumulated in the spleen of aged mice after
CpG-ODN+IFA treatment, flow cytometry analysis was
performed. We observed upregulated expression of CD124
(IL-4Rα) and CD31; however, no significant differences
were found in the expression of PD-L1, PD-L2, MHC-II
and CD86 in these cells (Figure 1E).
Recent reports indicated that MDSCs can be divided
into two distinct subsets based on their expression of two
Gr1 epitopes, Ly6G and Ly6C: granulocytic MDSCs with
CD11b+Ly6G+Ly6Clow phenotype and monocytic MDSCs
with CD11b+Ly6G−Ly6Chigh phenotype [1, 6, 19]. After
CpG-ODN+IFA treatment, both monocytic and granulocytic
subpopulations were increased in spleen of aged and young
mice (Figure 1F); however, the granulocytic subset was
the predominant population of myeloid cells that expanded
(Figure 1F). As spleens of aged saline solution-treated mice
harbor higher numbers of myeloid cells the increase of both
subsets after treatment was lower in these animals than in
their younger counterparts.
Collectively our data indicate that secondary
lymphoid organs of aged mice harbor an elevated number
of CD11b+Gr1+ myeloid cells which are less sensitive to
spontaneous apoptosis than their younger counterparts.
Besides, after CpG-ODN+IFA-treatment of aged mice,
this myeloid cell population expanded and presented
phenotype characteristics of MDSCs.

RESULTS
CD11b+Gr1+ myeloid cells accumulate in the
spleen of CpG-ODN+IFA-treated aged mice
It is well known that human and murine
hematopoietic stem cells exhibit cell autonomous changes
during aging, showing attenuated lymphoid lineage
output, while myeloid lineage potential is maintained
or even increased [10–11, 16]. For this reason, we first
evaluated CD11b+Gr1+ myeloid cells in aged mice. Spleen,
blood and bone marrow compartments of aged mice
contained higher numbers of CD11b+Gr1+ cells compared
to young animals (Figure 1A and Supplementary Figure
1A). Similar results have been recently reported by other
authors [17–18] although we further observed a lower
percentage of apoptotic CD11b+Gr1+ cells from aged mice
compared to young animals indicating that they have a
prolonged life span (Figure 1B), which may be another
reason for their increased number in aged mice.
We have recently reported that the numbers of
CD11b+Gr1+ cells were increased in the spleen of young
BALB/c mice after a single administration of CpGODN+IFA [15]. With this in mind, we investigated
whether CpG-ODN+IFA could induce CD11b+Gr1+
cells expansion in aged mice. As shown in Figure 1C
and 1D, 10 days after CpG-ODN+IFA-treatment, the
percentage and absolute number of CD11b+Gr1+ cells were
significantly augmented in spleen of aged mice compared
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Myeloid cells from aged CpG-ODN+IFA-treated
mice suppress T cell proliferative response
MDSCs which accumulate during cancer, inflam­
mation and infection have a remarkable ability to
suppress T cell responses, and this function is their
defining characteristic [1]. First, we performed an in vitro
proliferative assay of splenocytes to evaluate the effect
of the expansion of myeloid cells by CpG-ODN+IFA
treatment. We observed a reduction in the proliferative
response to ConA of splenocytes from aged mice after
CpG-ODN+IFA treatment, similar to that occurring in
splenocytes from young treated mice (Figure 2A). To
examine if the lower proliferative response was due to the
expansion of the myeloid cell population with suppressor
function, we evaluated the suppressor activity of myeloid
cells isolated from spleen of aged CpG-ODN+IFA-treated
mice. T-cells from young syngeneic mice stimulated with
anti-CD3 plus anti-CD28 were used as responders. T cell
proliferative response was lower when they were cultured
with myeloid cells from aged CpG-ODN+IFA-treated
mice, compared to cultures with myeloid cells from saline
13449

Oncotarget

Figure 1: Myeloid cells accumulate in spleen of CpG-ODN+IFA-treated aged mice. (A–B) Splenocytes from young and
aged mice were stained with anti-CD11b and anti-Gr1 antibodies and analyzed by flow cytometry. (A) Percentage and absolute

number of CD11b+Gr1+ cells are presented. (B) Percentage of apoptotic myeloid cells determined by TMRE staining (TMRElow cells) on
CD11b+Gr1+ gated splenocytes from young and aged mice, after 18 h of culture without stimuli. Cells incubated with FCCP were used
as positive control. (C–E) Splenocytes were collected from mice ten days after CpG-ODN+IFA or Saline solution (S.S) treatment and
analyzed by flow cytometry. (C) Representative dot plots with percentages (***p < 0.001 young CpG-ODN+IFA vs S.S, **p < 0.01 aged
CpG-ODN+IFA vs S.S; mean ± SEM) and (D) absolute number of CD11b+Gr1+ cells in spleen from young and aged mice are presented.
(E) Mean Fluorescence Intensity (MFI) for the indicated molecules on CD11b+Gr1+ gated cells from spleen of aged mice after CpG-ODN+IFA
or S.S treatment. (F) Representative dot plots and percentages of CD11b+Ly6G−Ly6Chigh and CD11b+Ly6G+Ly6Clow cells are shown as mean
± SEM; granulocytic population: **p < 0.01 CpG-ODN+IFA vs S.S (young and aged), monocytic population: **p < 0.01 CpG-ODN+IFA
vs S.S (young and aged). Data are from (A, C–D) four and (B, E–F) three independent experiments; mean ± SEM (n = 4 mice/group)
*p < 0.05; **p < 0.01; ***p < 0.001.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

13450

Oncotarget

Figure 2: Myeloid cells from aged CpG-ODN+IFA-treated mice suppress T cell proliferation. Spleens were collected from

young and aged mice after ten days of CpG-ODN+IFA-treatment. (A) Splenocytes were stimulated with ConA or RPMI (unstimulated)
and cultured for 72 h. (B) Naïve T cells isolated from young mice were stimulated with anti-CD3 plus anti-CD28 and co-cultured, at a
1:1 ratio, with myeloid cells purified from young or aged S.S or CpG-ODN+IFA-treated mice for 48 h. (A–B) T cell proliferation was
measured by [3H]-Thymidine incorporation after 18 h pulse. Values are represented as c.p.m of stimulated minus unstimulated. (A–B) Data
are representative of three independent experiments; mean ± SEM (n = 4 mice/group) **p < 0.01; ***p < 0.001.

therefore investigated whether arginase activity was
induced in splenocytes of aged mice after CpG-ODN+IFA
treatment. As shown in Figure 3A, splenocytes from
aged treated mice exhibited greater arginase activity than
splenocytes from their saline solution-treated counterparts.
Intracellular staining showed increased arginase-1 protein
expression in CD11b+Gr1+ cells from aged and young mice
after CpG-ODN+IFA treatment (Figure 3B). To confirm
these results, myeloid cells from aged CpG-ODN+IFAtreated mice were isolated and cultured with stimulated T
cells from young mice. Arginase activity increased in these
myeloid cells and, as expected, no activity was detected
in the negative fraction (Figure 3C). Similar results
were obtained in cultures of myeloid cells from young
CpG-ODN+IFA-treated mice (Figure 3C). Interestingly,
myeloid cells from aged saline solution-treated mice

solution-treated aged mice (Figure 2B). Interestingly the
reduction of T cell proliferation was similar when the
co-cultures were performed with myeloid cells isolated
from young or aged treated mice.
The results indicate that myeloid cells from aged
CpG-ODN+IFA-treated mice are capable of suppressing
T-cell proliferative response as effectively as myeloid cells
from young treated mice.

Myeloid cells from aged CpG-ODN+IFA-treated
mice suppress T cell proliferation by arginase
We have previously shown that the T cell suppressor
ability of myeloid cells from young mice after CpGODN+IFA treatment was linked to a mechanism based
on L-arginine depletion by arginase activity [15]. We
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

13451

Oncotarget

Figure 3: Myeloid cells from aged CpG-ODN+IFA-treated mice suppress T cell proliferation by arginase. Spleens were
obtained from mice after ten days of CpG-ODN+IFA or S.S-treatment. (A) Splenocytes from young and aged mice were stimulated with ConA
or RPMI for 72 h, lysed and prepared for arginase activity analysis. (B) Mean Fluorescence Intensity (MFI) for arginase-1 on CD11b+Gr1+
gated splenocytes from young and aged mice after 48 h culture with ConA or RPMI. (C) Isolated myeloid cells from young and aged S.S or
CpG-ODN+IFA-treated mice were co-cultured with naïve T-cells isolated from young mice stimulated with anti-CD3 plus anti-CD28 and
then prepared for arginase activity analysis. CD11b− spleen cells from CpG-ODN+IFA-treated-mice (non-myeloid cells) were used as control.
(A and C) Results are expressed as mU of enzyme activity per mg of protein lysate (Stimulated minus unstimulated). (D) Isolated naïve
T-cells from young mice were stimulated with anti-CD3 plus anti-CD28 and co-cultured with purified myeloid cells, from aged S.S or CpGODN+IFA-treated mice, in the presence or absence of nor-NOHA, T-cell proliferation was measured by [3H]-Thymidine incorporation after 18
h pulse, values are represented as fold increase related to stimulated T-cell alone proliferative response (100%). Results are representative of
(A and C) three and (B and D) two experiments performed (mean ± SEM n = 4 mice/group) *p < 0.05; **p < 0.01; ***p < 0.001.
showed higher arginase-1 expression compared to their
younger counterparts (Figure 3B) although no arginase
activity was observed in these cells (Figure 3C).
Our results suggest that there is a close correlation
between arginase activity in myeloid cells from aged CpGODN+IFA-treated mice and their capacity to regulate
T-cell proliferation. To examine this issue, the arginase
inhibitor, nor-NOHA, was added to the co-cultures of
stimulated T-cells and myeloid cells isolated from aged
CpG-ODN+IFA-treated mice. As shown in Figure 3D,
T cell proliferative response was restored by nor-NOHA,
showing similar proliferation levels to that of T-cells
cultured with myeloid cells from saline solution-treated
mice or T cells alone.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

These findings demonstrate that the induction of
arginase is one of the major mechanisms involved in the
suppressive capacity of myeloid cells from aged CpGODN+IFA-treated mice.

Myeloid-derived suppressor cell expansion
lasts longer in aged than in young mice after
CpG-ODN+IFA treatment
We next asked how long it takes for myeloid cells to
return to basal levels in aged mice after CpG-ODN+IFA
treatment. We studied these cells at different time points
after treatment. As mentioned before, 10 days after
treatment there was a marked expansion of myeloid cell
13452

Oncotarget

population in young mice and as shown in Figure 4A,
they returned to basal levels on day 25. In contrast, the
population of myeloid cells that expanded on day 10 in
aged mice remained elevated at least 40 days after CpGODN+IFA-treatment (Figure 4A).
We next isolated myeloid cells from mice 40
days after CpG-ODN+IFA-treatment and cultured
them with stimulated T cells in order to evaluate the
preservation of their immunosuppressive capacity. At
this time point, myeloid cells obtained from aged mice
conserved high arginase activity whereas myeloid cells
from young animals presented the same levels as their
saline solution counterparts (Figure 4B). A similar

result was observed with total splenocytes (data not
shown). Moreover, T cell proliferative response was
reduced when myeloid cells isolated from aged mice 40
days after CpG-ODN+IFA-treatment were added to the
co-cultures, indicating that these cells were still
suppressive (Figure 4C). In contrast, myeloid cells
purified from young mice after 40 days of treatment did
not suppress T cell proliferation (Figure 4C).
Finally, myeloid cell levels in spleen of aged mice 80
days after CpG-ODN+IFA-treatment were the same as those
observed in their saline solution counterparts (Figure 4D),
indicating that the expanded population had already returned
to its basal levels by this time.

Figure 4: Myeloid suppressor cell expansion lasts longer in aged than in young mice after CpG-ODN+IFA treatment.

(A) Splenocytes from young and aged mice were obtained 0, 10, 25 and 40 days after treatment, stained with anti-CD11b and anti-Gr1 and analyzed
by flow cytometry. (B) Myeloid cells were isolated from young and aged mice 40 days after S.S or CpG-ODN+IFA- treatment and cultured with
naïve T cells from young mice stimulated with anti-CD3 and anti-CD28. Cells were prepared for arginase activity analysis. Results are expressed
as mU of enzyme activity per mg of protein lysate. (C) Ten and 40 days after treatment, myeloid cells were isolated from spleen of young and aged
treated mice and cultured with naïve T-cells from young mice stimulated with anti-CD3 and anti-CD28. T-cell proliferation was measured by [3H]Thymidine incorporation after 18 h pulse, (values are represented as c.p.m of stimulated minus unstimulated). (D) Zero or 80 days after treatment,
splenocytes were removed from mice, stained with anti-CD11b and anti-Gr1 and analyzed by flow cytometry. (A–D) Results are representative of
three experiments performed (mean ± SEM; n = 4 mice/group). *p < 0.05; **p < 0.01; ***p < 0.001.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

13453

Oncotarget

Environmental IL-4 and IL-6 are involved in
arginase induction in myeloid cells from
CpG-ODN+IFA-treated mice

CpG-ODN+IFA-treated mice at both ages (Figure 1E and
Supplementary Figure 2), which may be promoting IL-4
dependent activation of STAT6 in these cells.
In addition, recent studies showed that, among
others, IL-6 was responsible for the phosphorylation
of STAT3 and the expression of arginase-1 in myeloid
cells [20–22]. We observed increased IL-6 levels in
co-cultures of stimulated T cells with myeloid cells from
young or aged CpG-ODN+IFA-treated mice compared
to their saline solution counterparts (Figure 5C).
Consistent with these results, after 30 min of
co-culture, myeloid cells from young and aged CpGODN+IFA-treated mice presented increased STAT3
phosphorylation (Figure 5D). These results correlated
with the induced arginase activity and expression
in myeloid cells from CpG-ODN+IFA-treated mice
(Figure 3B and 3C).
To address the potential of IL-6 and IL-4 in the
induction of arginase-1 expression in myeloid cells from

Myeloid cells can be activated in response to local
environmental signals. It has been established that IL-4
activating STAT6 may be a pathway that induces the
expression of arginase-1 in MDSCs [1]. We found that
IL-4 levels were augmented when stimulated T cells were
co-cultured with myeloid cells from young or aged saline
solution or CpG-ODN+IFA-treated mice (Figure 5A). In
addition, although no significant differences were observed
in IL-4 levels between the co-cultures of myeloid cells
from saline solution and CpG-ODN+IFA-treated mice
(Figure 5A), we found that, after 240 min of co-culture,
myeloid cells from young and aged CpG-ODN+IFAtreated mice presented increased STAT6 phosphorylation
(Figure 5B). In line with these data, we found that CD124
(IL-4Rα) expression was upregulated in myeloid cells from

Figure 5: IL-4 and IL-6 in the extracellular medium of myeloid cells from CpG-ODN+IFA-treated mice. After 10 days

of S.S or CpG-ODN+IFA-treatment, myeloid cells were isolated from the spleen of young and aged mice and cultured with naïve T cells
isolated from young mice stimulated with anti-CD3 plus anti-CD28. (A and C) After 48 h of co-culture, supernatants were collected.
(A) IL-4 and (C) IL-6 levels were measured by ELISA. (B and D) After 30, 90 and 240 min of co-culture, cells were collected, fixed,
permeabilized, and stained with anti-CD11b, anti-Gr1, anti-STAT6(pY641) and anti-STAT3(pY705). (B) pSTAT6 and (D) pSTAT3 levels
were analyzed on gated CD11b+Gr1+ myeloid cells. Results represent the expression (MFI) of pSTAT3 and pSTAT6 at 30, 90 and 240
min by subtracting that measured at zero time (∆MFI). Data are shown from one representative experiment of (A–C) three, (B–D) two
performed (mean ± SEM n = 4 mice/group) *p < 0.05.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

13454

Oncotarget

showing a myeloid-based output of the hematopoietic
system with increasing age [11, 23–24], our results
suggest the accumulation of myeloid cells in aged mice is
likely to be related to an abnormally prolonged lifespan.
CpG-ODN were thought to be predominantly
proinflammatory molecules. We and others have
demonstrated the ability of CpG-ODN to act in aged
mice as a strong adjuvant, resulting in the induction
of a powerful antigen-specific immune response
[12–14, 25]. However, current studies have shown the
existence of CpG-ODN counter-regulatory mechanisms
that prevent pathological immune-mediated damage
[26–30]. Also, we have previously shown that
CpG-ODN combined with IFN-γ is able to stimulate
arginase, an anti-inflammatory enzyme, in murine
macrophages [31].
Besides this, in previous work we have shown that
CpG-ODN+IFA induces in young mice the expansion of
a myeloid cell population with high arginase-1 expression
and enzymatic activity, responsible for reduced T-cell
proliferation and CD3z chain downregulation in the TCR
complex in T-cells [15].
Here we describe for the first time that aged mice
present an expansion of a myeloid cell population with
immunoregulatory functions, compatible with MDSCs,
after CpG-ODN+IFA treatment. Interestingly, in young mice,
after reaching a peak on day 10 after treatment, myeloid cell
numbers and their regulatory function diminished, returning
to normal levels before day 25. However in aged animals,
the myeloid cell population expanded by day 10 after
treatment was maintained or even increased at least until day
40, conserving their suppressor function. This suggests that
the inflammatory stimulus of CpG-ODN+IFA may expand
MDSCs in spleen of aged mice for a longer period of time
than in young mice, and preserve their regulatory function,
probably as a way to prevent pathological inflammatory
damage. As evidence of inflammatory response we found
elevated levels of IL-6 in plasma of aged but not in young
mice after CpG-ODN+IFA treatment (data not shown).
Studies in aged mice and humans indicate that older adults
have elevated levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines, clotting
factors and acute phase reactants in the steady state, a
phenomenon referred to as ‘inflamm-ageing’ [11, 32]. Our
results showing that CD11b+Gr1+ myeloid cells from aged
mice are more resistant to spontaneous apoptosis may
suggest that the persistent expansion of these cells is due
to heir prolonged lifespan. Chornoguz et al. suggest that
inflammation protects MDSCs against extrinsic-induced
apoptosis, resulting in MDSCs with a longer in vivo half-life
[33] and similar results were observed by Ko et al. [34] in
tumor-bearing mice.
A recent publication from Shirota et al. showed that
intratumoral administration of CpG-ODN reduces the
immune suppressive activity and number of monocytic
MDSCs in a model of CT26 tumor-bearing mice [35].
Their study is based in a model of large, established

CpG-ODN+IFA-treated mice, we added neutralizing
antibodies against IL-6, IL-4, or both together, to cocultures. When neutralizing antibody against IL-4 or IL-6
was separately added to the culture, arginase-1 expression
in myeloid cells was substantially reduced at both ages
(Figure 6A and Supplementary Figure 3). Unlike, when
both neutralizing antibodies were present in the culture,
the expression of arginase-1 in the case of myeloid cells
from young mice was even more reduced (Figure 6A).
The neutralization of IL-4, IL-6 or both cytokines in the
cultures of myeloid cells from aged treated mice reduced
arginase-1 expression to lower levels than in their saline
solution counterparts.
We next analyzed whether IL-4 and/or IL-6
neutralization also affected arginase activity in myeloid
cells. The addition of neutralizing antibody against IL-4
or IL-6 alone substantially reduced arginase activity in
cultures of myeloid cells from young treated mice, but
only when both antibodies were added together was
arginase activity completely inhibited (Figure 6B). In
cultures of myeloid cells from aged mice, the addition
of neutralizing antibody against IL-4 or IL-6 alone
was sufficient to completely abrogate arginase activity
(Figure 6B). As expected, the same occurred when both
antibodies were added together.
As it has been well established that IL-4/STAT6
pathway is involved in arginase induction in myeloid
cells, we focused our studies on the participation of the
IL-6/STAT3 phosphorylation pathway. Interestingly,
when neutralizing antibody against IL-6 was added
to the cultures, we observed a reduction in STAT3
phosphorylation levels in myeloid cells from young
and aged CpG-ODN+IFA-treated mice (Figure 6C and
Supplementary Figure 4). We also found that the levels
of IL-10, another cytokine that may be responsible for
STAT3 activation, were significantly reduced in cultures
of T cells with myeloid cells from young or aged
CpG-ODN+IFA-treated mice compared to their saline
solution counterparts (data not shown). These results
demonstrate that arginase activity and expression
in myeloid cells from CpG-ODN+IFA-treated mice
depend on IL-4 and IL-6 present in the T cell-myeloid
cell extracellular microenvironment. Myeloid cells from
aged CpG-ODN+IFA-treated mice require the presence
of both cytokines for arginase induction, while IL-4
or IL-6 alone induces arginase in myeloid cells from
young CpG-ODN+IFA-treated mice.

DISCUSSION
We have found, in agreement with other authors
[17–18], that lymphoid tissues of aged mice harbor
increased numbers of myeloid cells CD11b+Gr1+. We
have also demonstrated that these myeloid cells are more
resistant to spontaneous apoptosis than their younger
counterparts. Besides the well established evidence
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

13455

Oncotarget

Figure 6: Environmental IL-4 and IL-6 are involved in arginase induction in myeloid cells from CpG-ODN+IFAtreated mice. (A–C) After ten days of S.S or CpG-ODN+IFA-treatment, myeloid cells were isolated from the spleen of young and aged

mice and co-cultured with naïve T cells isolated from young mice stimulated with anti-CD3 plus anti-CD28. Cytokine neutralizing antibodies
were added separately or together. (A) After 24 h of co-culture, cells were collected and stained with anti-CD11b and anti-Gr1 antibodies,
fixed, permeabilized and stained for arginase-1. Results represent the expression of arginase-1 on CD11b+Gr1+ gated cells. (B) After 48 h of
co-culture, cells were lysed and prepared for arginase activity analysis. Results are expressed as mU of enzyme activity per mg of protein
lysate. (C) Anti-mouse IL6 neutralizing antibody was added and, after 30 min culture, cells were collected, fixed, permeabilized, and
stained with anti-CD11b, anti-Gr1, and anti-pSTAT3. pSTAT3 levels were analyzed on CD11b+Gr1+ cells. Results represent the expression
of pSTAT3 (MFI) at 30 min by subtracting that measured at zero time (∆MFI). (A–C) Data are pooled from two independent experiments
(mean ± SEM; n = 3mice/group). *p < 0.05; **p < 0.01; ***p < 0.001.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

13456

Oncotarget

tumors, where the number and immunosuppressive
activity of MDSC was enhanced. The route of CpGODN administration also critically affects outcome, in
that local but not systemic delivery of CpG-ODN altered
the tumor microenvironment and was key to reducing the
number and suppressive activity of MDSC. Zoglmeier
et al. showed that CpG-ODN injection in tumor-bearing
mice induces the expansion of CD11b+Gr1+ cells but
does not increase their suppressive function [36]. They
administrated CpG-ODN alone, whereas in our model
CpG-ODN is combined with the slow-release delivery
system, IFA, which could be one of the reasons for the
differences observed in our study.
Among other factors, the age-related decrease
of immune function is explained by an impaired T cell
proliferative response [37–38]. Thus, our results show that
splenocytes from aged saline solution-treated mice presented
reduced proliferation levels, and, after CpG-ODN+IFA
treatment, they showed even lower proliferative response.
When myeloid cells isolated from spleen of aged-treated
mice were cultured with T-cells from young animals, they
suppressed their proliferation. On a per cell basis, myeloid
cells from aged treated mice present the same ability to
suppress T-cell proliferative response as those from their
younger counterparts. The suppression of T-cell proliferative
response exerted by splenic MDSCs from aged CpGODN+IFA-treated mice is mediated by arginase activity,
as the addition of the arginase inhibitor, nor-NOHA, to the
cultures almost completely restored T-cell proliferation.
These results correlate with the increased L-arginine uptake
in myeloid cells from young CpG-ODN+IFA-treated mice,
resulting in the depletion of this amino acid from the cell
microenvironment [15]. However, we cannot discard other
mechanisms activated in these cells that could, to a lesser
extent, also be responsible for the suppression.
Many reports established that factors and signals
present in MDSCs microenvironment may induce their
activation, up-regulating different suppressor mechanisms.
These factors are produced mainly by activated T-cells,
tumor stromal cells or induced by different bacterial and
viral products [1, 8]. Several studies have indicated that
the signaling pathway downstream of IL-4Rα (activated
by the binding of either IL-4 or IL-13) and STAT6
plays an important role in MDSC activation [1, 39–40].
In addition, Qualls et al. demonstrated that STAT3activating cytokines IL-6, IL-10, and G-CSF, produced
by mycobacteria-infected macrophages, are critical for
arginase-1 expression [20]. Similarly, many studies have
shown that STAT3 is one of the main transcription factors
that regulate the expansion of MDSCs [1, 41–42], but little
is known about the role of IL-6 and STAT3 in MDSCs
activation. We observed increased phosphorylation levels
of STAT3 and STAT6 in young and aged myeloid cells
from CpG-ODN+IFA-treated mice. Augmented STAT3
and STAT6 phosphorylation in MDSCs from CpGODN+IFA-treated mice correlated with their increased
arginase activity and arginase-1 expression at both ages.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

No significant difference was found in IL-4 levels
in cultures of myeloid cells isolated from young or aged
mice after CpG-ODN+IFA-treatment compared to their
saline solution counterparts. However, myeloid cells from
CpG-ODN+IFA-treated mice presented augmented STAT6
phosphorylation, correlating with higher expression of
CD124 (IL-4Rα), which could be involved in the elevated
response of these cells to IL-4 resulting in arginase
induction. Similarly, a recent report demonstrated that IL6, acting on a cell-autonomous level, directly induced the
expression of IL-4Rα, and therefore primed macrophages
for IL-4 dependent activation of STAT6 [43]. Interestingly,
we found elevated levels of IL-6 in cultures of myeloid
cells from CpG-ODN+IFA-treated mice along with
augmented STAT3 activation. Our observations that the
neutralization of each IL-4 or IL-6 in the culture medium
of myeloid cells from aged CpG-ODN+IFA-treated mice
lead to a reduction of arginase-1 expression and enzyme
activity, indicate that the presence of both cytokines
together is required for arginase induction in these cells,
whereas in myeloid cells from young treated mice, the
presence of IL-4 or IL-6 alone is sufficient to induce
arginase-1 expression and activity. IL-4 and IL-6 may be
synergizing for arginase induction in myeloid cells from
young treated mice, as arginase activity was completely
reduced when both cytokines were neutralized.
Several cellular signaling pathways involved in
eliciting immune responses have also been shown to be
defective in different cell types during aging [17, 44–46].
Therefore, the requirement of both IL-4/STAT6 and IL-6/
STAT3 pathways to elicit arginase induction in myeloid
cells from aged CpG-ODN+IFA mice, unlike the case
of their younger counterparts, might be linked to ageassociated changes in signal transduction functions,
although further studies are required to test this hypothesis.
In summary, this work adds more information to
the growing evidence suggesting that the expansion of
myeloid cells with suppressor function may represent a
common response to different forms of inflammation.
Aged mice harbor elevated numbers of myeloid cells,
possibly in response to their basal inflammatory conditions
which after an inflammatory stimulus such as CpGODN+IFA, expand for longer time than in young mice and
upregulate their suppressive abilities. These cells might be
contributing to the dysregulation of the immune system
during aging, to the inability to swiftly combat infection
and to an increased susceptibility to chronic disease states
and autoimmune conditions.

METHODS
Synthetic oligodeoxynucleotides
The synthetic oligodeoxynucleotide used was
CpG-ODN 1826; B-class oligodeoxynucleotide (5′-TC
CATGACGTTCCTGACGTT-3′)
synthesized
with
a nuclease-resistant phosphorothioate backbone and
13457

Oncotarget

containing no LPS contaminants (Operon Technologies.,
Alameda, CA, USA). CpG-ODN stock solution was
prepared in sterile apyrogenic 0.9% NaCl saline solution
(B. Braun Medical S.A, Mar del Plata, Buenos Aires,
Argentina). The endotoxin content in oligodeoxynucleotide
after reconstitution (1mg/mL), determined by a standard
Limulus amebocyte lysate assay (BioWhittaker Inc.,
Walkersville, MD, USA), was < 1 endotoxin U/mL.

antibodies for 30 min at 4ºC. Cells were washed twice and
7-AAD was then added to exclude dead cells. The antibodies
used against mouse CD11b (M1/70), Gr1 (RB6–8C5), Ly6G
(1A8), Ly6C (AL-21), CD31 (390), CD124 (mIL4R-M1),
CD86 (GL1), MHC class II (2G9), CD274 (PD-L1, clone
MIH5), CD273 (PD-L2, clone TY25) were purchased from
Becton Dickinson Argentina. For intracellular staining
of arginase-1, cells were first stained with fluorochromelabeled antibodies against mouse CD11b and Gr1. Then cells
were permeabilized with BD Cytofix/Cytoperm™ Plus kit
(Becton Dickinson Argentina), following the manufacturer’s
protocols, before being incubated for intracellular arginase-1
(8C9) (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Santa Cruz, CA, USA)
or isotype-matched control antibody (Becton Dickinson
Argentina).
For the apoptosis assay, mitochondrial depolarization
was measured using 50 nM tetramethylrhodamine
ethyl ester (TMRE; Invitrogen) [47]. Cells were stained
with fluorochrome-labeled antibodies against mouse
CD11b and Gr1 for 30 min at 4ºC and then incubated
with TMRE for 30 min at 37°C. Cells incubated with
100 μM FCCP (carbonyl cyanide 4-(trifluoromethoxy)
phenylhydrazone) were used as positive controls. Data
acquisition was performed on a FACS Canto II cytometer
(BD Biosciences) and analyzed using FlowJo software
(Tree Star Inc., Ashland, OR).

Laboratory animals and treatments
Six to 8-week-old (young) female BALB/c mice were
provided by the Veterinary School of the National University
of La Plata animal production area (La Plata, Argentina).
18–20-month-old (aged) female mice were received as 6to 8-weeks old and maintained in our animal facility until
use according to the terms of the Guide to the Care and
Use of Experimental Animals, published by the Canadian
Council on Animal Care (with the assurance number
A5802-01 assigned by the Office of Laboratory Animal
Welfare (NIH)). Our Institutional Experimentation Animal
Committee (authorization No. 15-01-44195 and HCD
resolution 450/07) also approved the animal handling and
experimental procedures. CpG-ODN, at 15.7 nmol/mouse,
emulsified in IFA (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO), was
injected subcutaneously (s.c) into 2 sites of each mouse (0.2
mL/site). Control mice received injections of saline solution
(S.S) alone. Splenocyte suspensions were obtained 10 days
or, when indicated, 25, 40 and 80 days after treatment.

Arginase activity assay
Cells were lysed with 0.1% Tritón X-100 (SigmaAldrich) plus protease inhibitors (Sigma-Aldrich) for 30
min. Arginase activity was measured in cell lysates by
colorimetric assay for the detection of urea, as described
by Corraliza et al. [48] with slight modifications [31].
One unit of enzyme activity was defined as the amount
of enzyme that catalyzed the formation of 1 μmol of
urea/min.

Spleen cells culture
Spleens were surgically removed and red blood
cells were lysed using RBC lysing buffer (SigmaAldrich). After washing, cell suspensions were cultured
in GIBCO® RPMI 1640 medium (Life Technologies,
Argentina) supplemented with 10% heat-inactivated fetal
bovine serum (PAA Laboratories GmbH, Linz, Austria),
2 mM GIBCO® Glutamax, 100 U/mL Penicillin and
100 μg/mL Streptomycin (all from Life Technologies)
and  50 μM 2-mercaptoethanol (Sigma-Aldrich) in a
humidified incubator at 37°C and 5% CO2 for the period
of time specified for each experiment.
When indicated, neutralizing antibodies were added
at the beginning of the cultures: NA/LE anti-mouse IL4
(11B11) at a final concentration of 1 μg/mL, NA/LE antimouse IL6 (MP5-20F3) 1 μg/mL, NA/LE anti-mouse IL10
(JES5-2A5) 1 μg/mL, and anti-mouse isotype-matched
control antibodies were obtained from Becton Dickinson
Argentina or eBioscience (San Diego, CA, USA). Cytokine
neutralization was controlled by measurement of their
respective levels by ELISA in culture supernatants.

Cytokine detection assay
Concentrations of different cytokines were measured
by standard sandwich ELISA following instructions from
the manufacturer and standardized with recombinant
murine cytokines. The antibody pairs used were as follows
(listed by capture/biotinylated detection): IL-6, MP520F3/MP5-32C11; IL-4, 11B11/BVD6-24G2; IL-10,
JES5-2A5/JES5-16E3. All antibodies were obtained from
Becton Dickinson Argentina or eBioscience (San Diego,
CA, USA). The concentrations were expressed in relation
to standard curves constructed by assaying serial dilutions
of the respective murine standard cytokine.

Cell isolation

Flow cytometry analysis

A single-cell suspension was prepared from the
spleen of mice and washed in MACS buffer. CD11b+
cells were isolated using corresponding MACS magnetic

Cells were pre-incubated with anti-CD16/32 (2.4G2)
for 15 min at 4ºC, and then stained with fluorochrome-labeled
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

13458

Oncotarget

Acknowledgments

microbeads (Miltenyi Biotec, Auburn, CA), and the purity
of CD11b+Gr1+ cells was routinely > 95% as assessed by
flow cytometry.
To purify T-cells, splenocytes from wild-type 6–8
week-old female mice were stained with APC-CD90.2
(53–2.1; Becton Dickinson Argentina) and isolated using
cell sorting on a FACSAria II cell sorter (BD Biosciences).
Purity was routinely > 98%.

M.C.P-P and G.M are Research Career Investigator
from CONICET. M.F.H, R.P.R, C.V.G, M.F.S.V, M.I.C and
S.D.C thank CONICET for the fellowships granted. We
thank Drs. P. Abadie and P. Crespo for valuable technical
assistance, and F. Navarro and L. Navarro for excellent
animal facility management. We appreciate A. Romero
for her help. We thank native speaker Joss Heywood, who
revised the manuscript.
This work was supported by grants from Consejo
Nacional de Investigaciones Científica y Técnicas
(PIP#11220120100420), Agencia Nacional de Promoción
Científica y Técnica (PICT 2013 #0019), and Secretaría
de Ciencia y Tecnología de la Universidad Nacional de
Córdoba.

T-cell stimulation and in vitro suppression assays
For mitogenic-induced cell proliferation,
splenocytes (2 × 106cell/mL) were cultured for 72 h
in round-bottomed 96-well plates in the presence or
absence of ConA (5 μg/mL) (Sigma-Aldrich). 1 μCi
[3H]-thymidine (Dupont NEN, Boston, MA, USA) was
added to each well and, 18 h later, plates were harvested
and then processed for measurement of incorporated
radioactivity.
For proliferation measurement in co-cultures,
CD11b+ cells were cultured in supplemented medium
in triplicate in round-bottomed 96-well plates at 1 ×
106/mL. In parallel, 1 × 106/mL splenic purified CD90+
T-cells from normal mice were stimulated with anti-CD3
(1 mg/mL) plus anti-CD28 (1 mg/mL) for 24 h. The
stimulated T-cells were then cultured with the CD11b+
cells (at a 1:1 ratio) for an additional 48 h. To block
arginase, 40 μM nor-NOHA inhibitor (NW-hydroxyl-norL-arginine) (Calbiochem, San Diego, CA, USA) was
added at the beginning of culture. T-cell proliferation
was tested by [3H]-thymidine incorporation in a liquid
scintillation counter.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
The authors declare no commercial or financial
conflict of interest.

REFERENCES
1.	 Gabrilovich DI, Nagaraj S. Myeloid-derived suppressor cells as regulators of the immune system. Nat Rev
Immunol. 2009; 9:162–174.
2.	 Gabrilovich DI, Ostrand-Rosenberg S, Bronte V.
Coordinated regulation of myeloid cells by tumours. Nat
Rev Immunol. 2012; 12:253–268.
3.	 Almand B, Clark JI, Nikitina E, van Beynen J, English NR,
Knight SC, Carbone DP, Gabrilovich DI. Increased production of immature myeloid cells in cancer patients: a mechanism of immunosuppression in cancer. J Immunol. 2001;
166:678–689.

Intracellular staining for STAT phosphorylation
After 30, 90, or 240 min of co-culture, cells
were stained for pSTAT3 and pSTAT6 according to
manufacturer’s instructions (Becton Dickinson Argentina).
Cells were first fixed with 2% paraformaldehyde for 10 min
at 37°C and permeabilized with 90% ice-cold methanol
for 30 min at 4°C. The cells were washed and stained
with anti-Stat6 (pY641) or anti-Stat3 (pY705) antibodies
(Becton Dickinson Argentina) for 30 minutes. Stimulated
myeloid cells with IL-6 (100 ng/mL), or with IL-4 (10 ng/
mL) were used as positive controls. Data acquisition was
performed on a FACS Canto II Cytometer.

4.	 Delano MJ, Scumpia PO, Weinstein JS, Coco D, Nagaraj S,
Kelly-Scumpia KM, O’Malley KA, Wynn JL, Antonenko S,
Al-Quran SZ, Swan R, Chung CS, Atkinson MA, et al.
MyD88-dependent expansion of an immature GR-1(+)
CD11b(+) population induces T cell suppression and Th2
polarization in sepsis. J Exp Med. 2007; 204:1463–1474.
5.	 Bronte V, Wang M, Overwijk WW, Surman DR, Pericle F,
Rosenberg SA, Restifo NP. Apoptotic death of CD8+ T
lymphocytes after immunization: induction of a suppressive population of Mac-1+/Gr-1+ cells. J Immunol. 1998;
161:5313–5320.
6.	 Movahedi K, Guilliams M, Van den Bossche J, Van
den Bergh R, Gysemans C, Beschin A, De Baetselier P,
Van Ginderachter JA. Identification of discrete tumorinduced myeloid-derived suppressor cell subpopulations
with distinct T cell-suppressive activity. Blood. 2008;
111:4233–4244.

Statistical analysis
Results are expressed as the mean ± SEM.
Data were analyzed using GraphPad Prism software
(GraphPad Software, San Diego, CA). Data analysis
included the unpaired Student t test, one-way ANOVA
and two-way ANOVA followed by a Bonferroni’s post
test. All data were considered statistically significant for
p values < 0.05.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

7.	 Ostrand-Rosenberg S, Sinha P. Myeloid-derived suppressor
cells: linking inflammation and cancer. J Immunol. 2009;
182:4499–4506.
13459

Oncotarget

8.	 Condamine T, Gabrilovich DI. Molecular mechanisms
­regulating myeloid-derived suppressor cell differentiation
and function. Trends Immunol. 2011; 32:19–25.

CD4(+) T cell dysfunction in tumor-bearing mice.
J Immunol. 2013; 190:812–820.
22.	 Vasquez-Dunddel D, Pan F, Zeng Q, Gorbounov M,
Albesiano E, Fu J, Blosser RL, Tam AJ, Bruno T, Zhang H,
Pardoll D, Kim Y. STAT3 regulates arginase-I in myeloidderived suppressor cells from cancer patients. J Clin Invest.
2013; 123:1580–1589.

9.	 Liscovsky MV, Ranocchia RP, Alignani DO, Gorlino CV,
Moron G, Maletto BA, Pistoresi-Palencia MC. CpGODN+IFN-gamma confer pro- and anti-inflammatory
properties to peritoneal macrophages in aged mice. Exp
Gerontol. 2011; 46:462–467.
10.	 Beerman I, Maloney WJ, Weissmann IL, Rossi DJ. Stem
cells and the aging hematopoietic system. Curr Opin
Immunol. 2010; 22:500–506.

23.	 Rossi DJ, Bryder D, Zahn JM, Ahlenius H, Sonu R,
Wagers AJ, Weissman IL. Cell intrinsic alterations underlie
hematopoietic stem cell aging. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A.
2005; 102:9194–9199.

11.	 Shaw AC, Goldstein DR, Montgomery RR. Age-dependent
dysregulation of innate immunity. Nat Rev Immunol. 2013;
13:875–887.

24.	 Woolthuis CM, de Haan G, Huls G. Aging of hematopoietic stem cells: Intrinsic changes or micro-environmental
effects? Curr Opin Immunol. 2011; 23:512–517.

12.	 Alignani D, Maletto B, Liscovsky M, Ropolo A, Moron G,
Pistoresi-Palencia MC. Orally administered OVA/CpG-ODN
induces specific mucosal and systemic immune response in
young and aged mice. J Leukoc Biol. 2005; 77:898–905.

25.	 Sen G, Chen Q, Snapper CM. Immunization of aged mice
with a pneumococcal conjugate vaccine combined with
an unmethylated CpG-containing oligodeoxynucleotide
restores defective immunoglobulin G antipolysaccharide
responses and specific CD4+-T-cell priming to young adult
levels. Infect Immun. 2006; 74:2177–2186.

13.	 Maletto BA, Ropolo AS, Liscovsky MV, Alignani DO,
Glocker M, Pistoresi-Palencia MC. CpG oligodeoxinucleotides functions as an effective adjuvant in aged BALB/c
mice. Clin Immunol. 2005; 117:251–261.

26.	 Wingender G, Garbi N, Schumak B, Jungerkes F, Endl E, von
Bubnoff D, Steitz J, Striegler J, Moldenhauer G, Tuting T,
Heit A, Huster KM, Takikawa O, et al. Systemic application
of CpG-rich DNA suppresses adaptive T cell immunity via
induction of IDO. Eur J Immunol. 2006; 36:12–20.

14.	 Maletto B, Ropolo A, Moron V, Pistoresi-Palencia MC.
CpG-DNA stimulates cellular and humoral immunity
and promotes Th1 differentiation in aged BALB/c mice.
J Leukoc Biol. 2002; 72:447–454.

27.	 Morecki S, Gelfand Y, Yacovlev E, Eizik O, Shabat Y,
Slavin S. CpG-induced myeloid CD11b+Gr-1+ cells efficiently suppress T cell-mediated immunoreactivity and
graft-versus-host disease in a murine model of allogeneic cell
therapy. Biol Blood Marrow Transplant. 2008; 14:973–984.

15.	 Ranocchia RP, Gorlino CV, Crespo MI, Harman MF,
Liscovsky MV, Moron G, Maletto BA, PistoresiPalencia MC. Arginase-dependent suppression by CpGODN plus IFA-induced splenic myeloid CD11b(+)Gr1(+)
cells. Immunol Cell Biol. 2012; 90:710–721.

28.	 Mellor AL, Baban B, Chandler PR, Manlapat A, Kahler DJ,
Munn DH. Cutting edge: CpG oligonucleotides induce
splenic CD19+ dendritic cells to acquire potent indoleamine
2, 3-dioxygenase-dependent T cell regulatory functions via
IFN Type 1 signaling. J Immunol. 2005; 175:5601–5605.

16.	 Pang WW, Price EA, Sahoo D, Beerman I, Maloney WJ,
Rossi DJ, Schrier SL, Weissman IL. Human bone marrow
hematopoietic stem cells are increased in frequency and
myeloid-biased with age. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011;
108:20012–20017.

29.	 Schwartz DA, Wohlford-Lenane CL, Quinn TJ,
Krieg AM. Bacterial DNA or oligonucleotides containing
unmethylated CpG motifs can minimize lipopolysaccharide-induced inflammation in the lower respiratory tract
through an IL-12-dependent pathway. J Immunol. 1999;
163:224–231.

17.	 Enioutina EY, Bareyan D, Daynes RA. A role for immature myeloid cells in immune senescence. J Immunol. 2011;
186:697–707.
18.	 Jackaman C, Radley-Crabb HG, Soffe Z, Shavlakadze T,
Grounds MD, Nelson DJ. Targeting macrophages rescues
age-related immune deficiencies in C57BL/6J geriatric
mice. Aging Cell. 2013; 12:345–357.

30.	 Samarasinghe R, Tailor P, Tamura T, Kaisho T, Akira S,
Ozato K. Induction of an anti-inflammatory cytokine,
IL-10, in dendritic cells after toll-like receptor signaling.
J Interferon Cytokine Res. 2006; 26:893–900.

19.	 Youn JI, Nagaraj S, Collazo M, Gabrilovich DI. Subsets
of myeloid-derived suppressor cells in tumor-bearing mice.
J Immunol. 2008; 181:5791–5802.

31.	 Liscovsky MV, Ranocchia RP, Gorlino CV, Alignani DO,
Moron G, Maletto BA, Pistoresi-Palencia MC. Interferongamma priming is involved in the activation of arginase by
oligodeoxinucleotides containing CpG motifs in murine
macrophages. Immunology. 2009; 128:e159–169.

20.	 Qualls JE, Neale G, Smith AM, Koo MS, DeFreitas AA,
Zhang H, Kaplan G, Watowich SS, Murray PJ. Arginine
usage in mycobacteria-infected macrophages depends on
autocrine-paracrine cytokine signaling. Sci Signal. 2010;
3:ra62.

32.	 Fagiolo U, Cossarizza A, Scala E, Fanales-Belasio E,
Ortolani C, Cozzi E, Monti D, Franceschi C, Paganelli R.
Increased cytokine production in mononuclear cells of
healthy elderly people. Eur J Immunol. 1993; 23:2375–2378.

21.	 Narita Y, Kitamura H, Wakita D, Sumida K, Masuko K,
Terada S, Nakano K, Nishimura T. The key role of IL-6arginase cascade for inducing dendritic cell-­
dependent
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

13460

Oncotarget

33.	 Chornoguz O, Grmai L, Sinha P, Artemenko KA,
Zubarev RA, Ostrand-Rosenberg S. Proteomic pathway analysis reveals inflammation increases myeloidderived suppressor cell resistance to apoptosis. Mol Cell
Proteomics. 2011; 10:M110. 002980.

41.	 Sumida K, Wakita D, Narita Y, Masuko K, Terada S,
Watanabe K, Satoh T, Kitamura H, Nishimura T. Anti-IL-6
receptor mAb eliminates myeloid-derived suppressor cells
and inhibits tumor growth by enhancing T-cell responses.
Eur J Immunol. 2012; 42:2060–2072.

34.	 Ko JS, Rayman P, Ireland J, Swaidani S, Li G, Bunting KD,
Rini B, Finke JH, Cohen PA. Direct and differential suppression of myeloid-derived suppressor cell subsets by
sunitinib is compartmentally constrained. Cancer Res. 2010;
70:3526–3536.

42.	 Wu L, Du H, Li Y, Qu P, Yan C. Signal transducer
and activator of transcription 3 (Stat3C) promotes
myeloid-derived suppressor cell expansion and immune
suppression during lung tumorigenesis. Am J Pathol.
­
2011; 179:2131–2141.

35.	 Shirota Y, Shirota H, Klinman DM. Intratumoral injection
of CpG oligonucleotides induces the differentiation and
reduces the immunosuppressive activity of myeloid-derived
suppressor cells. J Immunol. 2012; 188:1592–1599.

43.	 Mauer J, Chaurasia B, Goldau J, Vogt MC, Ruud J,
Nguyen KD, Theurich S, Hausen AC, Schmitz J,
Bronneke  HS, Estevez E, Allen TL, Mesaros A, et al.
Signaling by IL-6 promotes alternative activation of macrophages to limit endotoxemia and obesity-associated
­resistance to insulin. Nat Immunol. 2014; 15:423–430.

36.	 Zoglmeier C, Bauer H, Norenberg D, Wedekind G,
Bittner P, Sandholzer N, Rapp M, Anz D, Endres S,
Bourquin C. CpG blocks immunosuppression by myeloidderived suppressor cells in tumor-bearing mice. Clin Cancer
Res. 2011; 17:1765–1775.

44.	 Chelvarajan RL, Liu Y, Popa D, Getchell ML,
Getchell TV, Stromberg AJ, Bondada S. Molecular basis
of age-­associated cytokine dysregulation in LPS-stimulated
­macrophages. J Leukoc Biol. 2006; 79:1314–1327.

37.	 Haynes L, Linton PJ, Eaton SM, Tonkonogy SL, Swain SL.
Interleukin 2, but not other common gamma chain-binding
cytokines, can reverse the defect in generation of CD4
effector T cells from naive T cells of aged mice. J Exp Med.
1999; 190:1013–1024.

45.	 Sun L, Hurez VJ, Thibodeaux SR, Kious MJ, Liu A, Lin P,
Murthy K, Pandeswara S, Shin T, Curiel TJ. Aged regulatory T cells protect from autoimmune inflammation despite
reduced STAT3 activation and decreased constraint of
IL-17 producing T cells. Aging Cell. 2012; 11:509–519.

38.	 Haynes L, Eaton SM, Burns EM, Rincon M, Swain SL.
Inflammatory cytokines overcome age-related defects
in CD4 T cell responses in vivo. J Immunol. 2004;
172:5194–5199.

46.	 McKay BR, Ogborn DI, Baker JM, Toth KG,
Tarnopolsky MA, Parise G. Elevated SOCS3 and altered
IL-6 signaling is associated with age-related human muscle
stem cell dysfunction. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2013;
304:C717–728.

39.	 Bronte V, Serafini P, De Santo C, Marigo I, Tosello V,
Mazzoni A, Segal DM, Staib C, Lowel M, Sutter G,
Colombo MP, Zanovello P. IL-4-induced arginase 1
suppresses alloreactive T cells in tumor-bearing mice.
J Immunol. 2003; 170:270–278.

47.	 Reddy PV, Rao KV, Norenberg MD. The mitochondrial
permeability transition, and oxidative and nitrosative stress
in the mechanism of copper toxicity in cultured neurons and
astrocytes. Lab Invest. 2008; 88:816–830.

40.	 Rutschman R, Lang R, Hesse M, Ihle JN, Wynn TA,
Murray PJ. Cutting edge: Stat6-dependent substrate
­depletion regulates nitric oxide production. J Immunol.
2001; 166:2173–2177.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

48.	 Corraliza IM, Campo ML, Soler G, Modolell M.
Determination of arginase activity in macrophages: a micromethod. J Immunol Methods. 1994; 174:231–235.

13461

Oncotarget

