Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No. 27

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Editorial

Targeting brain estrogen receptor for binge eating
Pingwen Xu, Xuehong Cao and Yong Xu
Binge eating disorder (BED) is characterized by
the ingestion of a large amount of food in a short period
of time and the preferential choice of high palatable
food. BED is the most common eating disorder, which
is associated with other medical and psychiatric
complications, most notably obesity and depression [1].
The effective treatment for BED is urgently needed.
We adapted a recently developed training paradigm
that effectively induces a sustained binge-like eating
behavior in mice, which mimics many characteristics of
binge eating in BED patients [2]. We first showed that
estrogen replacement substantially suppresses bingelike eating behavior in ovariectomized female mice [3],
which is consistent with the previous reports that binge
eating in women is negatively associated with circulating
estrogen levels [4]. Our results prove the principle that
estrogen replacement therapy could be used to ameliorate
binge symptoms in women. However, the current estrogen
replacement therapy is often associated with detrimental
side effects, e.g. breast cancer. One solution for this
dilemma is to understand where and how the estrogen acts
to inhibit binge-like eating behavior, which may facilitate
the development of more specific anti-binge estrogenbased therapy that could avoid the side effects.
Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, which
enhance brain 5-hydroxytryptamine (5-HT) signals,
showed some anti-binge efficacy in clinical trials [5].
Interestingly, estrogen stimulates central 5-HT neuron
activities [6]. These findings led to a possibility that
estrogen acts upon brain 5-HT neurons to inhibit binge
eating. Current development of transgenic mouse lines
makes it possible for us to definitively test physiological
roles of complex neural networks in binge behavior. We
showed that the estrogen-induced inhibition on bingelike eating was blocked in female mutant mice lacking
estrogen receptor-α (ERα) only in 5-HT neurons in
dorsal raphe nuclei (DRN), indicating that estrogen acts
through ERα expressed by DRN 5-HT neurons to inhibit
binge-like eating behavior. Through electrophysiological
recordings in identified 5-HT neurons, we confirmed that
propylpyrazole triol (PPT, an ERα agonist) depolarizes
DRN 5-HT neurons and stimulates their firing activities.
We further demonstrated that a small conductance Ca2+activated K+ (SK) current is required for the stimulatory
effects of PPT on DRN 5-HT neurons. More importantly,
local inhibition of the SK current in the DRN remarkably
suppressed binge-like eating in female mice. Collectively,

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

our results support a model that estrogen acts upon ERα
to inhibit the SK current in DRN 5-HT neurons thereby
activating these neurons to suppress binge-like eating
behavior. These findings identify ERα and/or SK current
in DRN 5-HT neurons as potential targets for anti-binge
therapies.
Given the fact that estrogen replacement therapy
is associated with increased risk of breast cancer, our
collaborator, Dr. DiMarchi from Indiana University,
developed an estrogen-based conjugate named glucagonlike
peptide-1-estrogen
(GLP-1-estrogen).
This
conjugate uses GLP-1 as a “carrier” to deliver estrogens
preferentially to GLP-1 receptor-enriched regions, which
can produce profound body weight lowering effects but
with minimal uptake by the breast tissue [7]. We found
that this conjugate effectively delivers bioactive estrogen
to the DRN and substantially suppressed binge-like eating
in ovariectomized female mice. Together, our studies not
only demonstrated a mechanism by which estrogen may
regulate binge eating, but may also provide a strong case
for a new compound that targets ERα in the DRN 5-HT
neurons to treat binge eating.
Future directions include delineating the intracellular
mechanisms by which estrogen regulates 5-HT neurons,
and identifying the neural circuits downstream of 5-HT
neurons that are important for the regulation of binge-like
eating behavior. We hope these efforts will identify more
rational targets for the development of novel therapies that
can treat BED and other related eating disorders.
Yong Xu: Children’s Nutrition Research Center, Department
of Pediatrics and Department of Molecular and Cellular
Biology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA
Correspondence to: Yong Xu, email yongx@bcm.edu
Keywords: BED, estrogen, serotonin
Received: July 16, 2015
Published: August 22, 2015

REFERENCES
1.	

Hudson JI, et al. Biol Psychiatry. 2007; 61: 348-358.

2.	 Czyzyk TA, et al. Obesity (Silver Spring). 2010; 18: 17101717.

23044

3.	

Cao X, et al. J Clin Invest. 2014; 124: 4351-4362.

4.	

Klump KL, Psychol Med. 2008; 38: 1749-1757.

Oncotarget

5.	

Hughes PL, et al. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 1986; 43: 182-186.

6.	

Dalmasso C, et al. Physiol Behav. 2011; 104:398-407.

7.	

Finan B, et al. Nat Med. 2012; 18: 1847-1856.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

23045

Oncotarget

