Correspondence

Discrepancies in Drug Approvals:
A Global Dilemma
We read with great interest the article by Ezeife et al that
was published recently in Cancer.1 The delay in drug
approvals at an international level is challenging for both
the patient and physician. Regulatory agencies are responsible for deciding drug approval based on the balance
between safety and efficacy data.2,3 Different regulatory
agencies govern this process around the world, with
potentially different criteria underpinning the decision,
yet all with the goal of improving access to effective therapies. The approval of a drug in one country does not necessarily ensure approval globally, resulting in variability in
drug access and care.1,4
The article by Ezeife et al identified a median
3-month difference in the time required for drug approval
by Health Canada (HC) compared with the US Food and
Drug administration (FDA) (9 months vs 12 months;
P<.0006). This timeframe has improved compared with
earlier studies, with HC approval in the late 1990s taking
a median of 518 days compared with 369 days for the
FDA.5 However, these calculations do not incorporate
differences in submission timing between regulatory agencies. Demonstrating this, Ezeife et al found a significant
difference between time to drug availability based on formulary in Alberta, Canada from the initial FDA and HC
approvals of 30.1 months and 16.7 months, respectively.
Assuming a 3-month difference in the time required for
drug approval, one could assume the most significant
delay is the difference in the actual submission date. An
analysis of all drug submissions to HC found a mean delay
from first submission in a foreign jurisdiction (United
States or European Union) to submission in Canada of
540 days. In the United States and the European Union,
the majority of new drugs were submitted within 3 months
after their first submission to any of the 3 jurisdictions, in
contrast to Canada, in which 70% were submitted after 3
months and, more concerning, 40% were submitted after
1 year.6 These delays are likely to be longer in smaller markets, with even later submission dates noted in Australia.6
Furthermore, Ezeife et al demonstrated longer times
for approval of targeted therapies by HC compared with
the FDA (13.0 months vs 6.7 months).1 In patients with
some diseases, this time delay can be a matter of life or
death. Crizotinib was granted accelerated approval for
use in patients with anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK)positive non-small cell lung cancer by the FDA on August
26, 2011 and by HC on April 25, 2012. The median
3360

overall survival (OS) in patients with ALK-positive
non-small cell lung cancer was significantly improved
with crizotinib (1-year OS rate of 70% vs 44%; hazard
ratio, 0.36 [P5.004]). The median OS in the crizotinibnaive patients was only 6 months, thereby emphasizing
the importance this 8-month difference in approval can
have for the individual patient. In this example, there was
no significant difference in the submission dates between
the FDA and HC (March 30, 2011 for the FDA and June
8, 2011 for HC), but this was not the case for other agencies. Europe and Australia had even longer delays, with
approval only granted in October 2012 and September
2013, respectively.
Reasons for this delay have been explored, with the
affordability of simultaneous submissions and the desire
to obtain approval for first-in-class drugs identified as key
considerations.6 The cost of a drug submission can make
simultaneous submissions simply unaffordable for some
companies, leading to prioritization based on market
size.6 Applications from larger companies to HC were
20% more likely to occur within 6 months after submission to the FDA or the European Medicines Agency
(EMA). This is only part of the puzzle because submission
delays between Canada and the other jurisdictions cannot
be explained simply by the difference observed between
large and small company submission times.
Furthermore, even if a drug is approved by different
agencies, the indications may not be the same. Olaparib, a
poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) inhibitor, is a perfect example of this. On December 18, 2014, olaparib
was approved by the EMA as the first maintenance therapy for patients with platinum-sensitive, recurrent,
BRCA-mutated serous ovarian cancer. In contrast, the
next day, December 19, the FDA approved olaparib as
monotherapy for patients with germline BRCA-mutated
advanced ovarian cancer who have been treated with 3
prior lines of chemotherapy, resulting in different patient
populations. To the best of our knowledge, this drug has
not yet been submitted to HC.
The oncology community faces challenges in
addressing these inequalities at a global level. Is there
potential to explore harmonization or centralize the regulatory submission process between multiple jurisdictions,
thereby allowing concurrent assessment of a single application by multiple individual regulatory agencies? This
could potentially alleviate some of the delays, and may be
an initial step for the multidimensional problem. The
core evidence base necessary for decision-making would
appear relatively uniform to an informed bystander but,
Cancer

September 15, 2015

Correspondence
Amit M. Oza, MD (Lon), FRCP

as shown with olaparib, outcomes can vary. Although
many of these factors remain outside of clinician and
patient control, submission dates may be something we
can and should positively influence.

Division of Medical Oncology and Haematology
Princess Margaret Cancer Centre
Toronto, Ontario, Canada

DOI: 10.1002/cncr.29484, Published online June 16, 2015
in Wiley Online Library (wileyonlinelibrary.com)

FUNDING SUPPORT
No specific funding was disclosed.

CONFLICT OF INTEREST DISCLOSURES

Reply to Discrepancies in Drug
Approvals: A Global Dilemma

The authors made no disclosures.

REFERENCES
1. Ezeife DA, Truong TH, Heng DY, Bourque S, Welch SA, Tang PA.
Comparison of oncology drug approval between Health Canada
and the US Food and Drug Administration. Cancer. 2015;121:
1688-1693.
2. McKee AE, Farrell AT, Pazdur R, Woodcock J. The role of the U.S.
Food and Drug Administration review process: clinical trial endpoints
in oncology. Oncologist. 2010;15(suppl 1):13-18.
3. Martell RE, Sermer D, Getz K, Kaitin KI. Oncology drug development and approval of systemic anticancer therapy by the U.S. Food
and Drug Administration. Oncologist. 2013;18:104-111.
4. Downing NS, Aminawung JA, Shah ND, Braunstein JB, Krumholz
HM, Ross JS. Regulatory review of novel therapeutics–comparison of
three regulatory agencies. N Engl J Med. 2012;366:2284-2293.
5. Rawson NS. Time required for approval of new drugs in Canada,
Australia, Sweden, the United Kingdom and the United States in
1996-1998. CMAJ. 2000;162:501-504.
6. Shajarizadeh A, Hollis A. Delays in the submission of new drugs in
Canada. CMAJ. 2015;187:E47-E51.

Michelle K. Wilson, MBChB, FRACP
Katherine Karakasis, MSc

In response to our article,1 Wilson et al have highlighted
some compelling points. International variability in regulatory drug approval timelines is a global issue, exemplified by the 2-year difference in the regulatory approval
dates for crizotinib between the US Food and Drug
Administration (FDA) and Australia.
Our study found a median 3-month difference in
the time required from submission to drug approval by
Health Canada (HC) compared with the FDA (9 months
vs 12 months; P<.0006), and incorporated differences in
submission times (Fig. 1). Submission to the FDA
occurred before that to the HC for 87% of new oncology
drug indications. The median time from FDA submission
to HC submission was 3.7 months. Regulatory review
time was approximately 4 months longer for HC compared with the FDA, regardless of the timing of the

Figure 1. Oncology drug length of time in review by the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) versus Health Canada (HC).

TABLE 1. Impact of Submission Timing on Regulatory Review Time
Submission to
Regulatory Agency
Submitted to HC within
2 mo of FDA
Submitted to HC >2 mo
after FDA

No. of
Drugs

Median FDA Review Time From
Submission to Approval, Months

Median HC Review Time From
Submission to Approval, Months

Median Difference
in Time, Months

9

6.1

10.1

3.9

31

9.1

13.3

4.1

Abbreviations: FDA, US Food and Drug Administration; HC, Health Canada.

Cancer

September 15, 2015

3361

