Research Article

Vascular Endothelial Growth Factor Reduces Tamoxifen Efficacy
and Promotes Metastatic Colonization and Desmoplasia
in Breast Tumors
1,2

1

1

1

2

Zhican Qu, Sabrina Van Ginkel, Anshu M. Roy, Louise Westbrook, Mubina Nasrin,
1
2
2
2
1
Yulia Maxuitenko, Andra R. Frost, Delicia Carey, Wenquan Wang, Rongbao Li,
2
1,2
1,2
William E. Grizzle, Jaideep V. Thottassery, and Francis G. Kern
1

Southern Research Institute and 2Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, Alabama

Abstract
Clinical studies have shown that decreased tamoxifen effectiveness correlates with elevated levels of vascular endothelial
growth factor (VEGF)-A165 in biopsy samples of breast
cancers. To investigate the mechanisms underlying tamoxifen
resistance and metastasis, we engineered the estrogen
receptor (ER)–positive MCF-7 human breast cancer cell line
to express VEGF to clinically relevant levels in a doxycyclineregulated manner. Induction of VEGF expression in orthotopically implanted xenografts that were initially tamoxifen
responsive and noninvasive resulted in tamoxifen-resistant
tumor growth and metastasis to the lungs. Lung metastases
were also observed in a VEGF-dependent manner following
tail vein injection of tumor cells. At both primary and
metastatic sites, VEGF-overexpressing tumors exhibited extensive fibroblastic stromal content, a clinical feature called
desmoplasia. VEGF-induced metastatic colonies were surrounded by densely packed stromal cells before detectable
angiogenesis, suggesting that VEGF is involved in the
initiation of desmoplasia. Because expression of VEGF
receptors R1 and R2 was undetectable in these tumor cells,
the observed VEGF effects on reduction of tamoxifen efficacy
and metastatic colonization are most likely mediated by
paracrine signaling that enhances tumor/stromal cell interactions and increases the level of desmoplasia. This study
reveals new roles for VEGF in breast cancer progression
and suggests that combination of antiestrogens and VEGF
inhibitors may prolong tamoxifen sensitivity and prevent
metastasis in patients with ER-positive tumors. [Cancer Res
2008;68(15):6232–40]

Introduction
Antiestrogen therapy with tamoxifen is effective for women with
estrogen receptor (ER)–positive breast cancers in both metastatic
and adjuvant settings (1). Unfortunately, in most cases, cancers that
respond to tamoxifen in advanced disease settings will eventually
relapse and become tamoxifen resistant. Recurrence in patients
treated with tamoxifen in adjuvant settings is also a frequent event.
Over the years, a number of molecular mechanisms have been

Note: Present address for F.G. Kern: Dr. Miriam and Sheldon G. Adelson Medical
Research Foundation, Suite 1925, 10960 Wilshire Boulevard, Los Angeles, CA 90024.
Requests for reprints: Francis G. Kern and Zhican Qu, Southern Research
Institute, 2000 Ninth Avenue South, Birmingham, AL 35205. Phone: 205-581-2552;
Fax: 205-581-2093; E-mail: qu@sri.org.
I2008 American Association for Cancer Research.
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-07-5654

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (15). August 1, 2008

proposed for tamoxifen resistance. Both ER-independent alternative signaling pathways that support tumor cell growth and
ER-mediated mechanisms have been proposed (2). Although
several possibilities have been found to account for or contribute
to the resistant phenotype in patients, the precise mechanisms
responsible for acquired or intrinsic antiestrogen resistance of
breast tumors are still poorly understood.
Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF)-A occurs in a number
of isoforms, with the 165-amino-acid isoform being the most
common form secreted by tumor cells, which acts on endothelial
cells, and is responsible for tumor angiogenesis (3). Two important
VEGF receptors, VEGF-R1 (Flt-1) and VEGF-R2 (Flk-1/KDR)
membrane tyrosine kinases, mediate VEGF signaling (4). A third
VEGF receptor, neuropilin-1 (NP-1), which lacks an intracellular
tyrosine kinase domain, presumably facilitates signal transduction
as a coreceptor by associating with other membrane receptors (5).
Clinical studies have shown that elevated levels of VEGF-A165 are
associated with shorter progression-free survival and shorter
survival following relapse in patients with advanced breast cancer
receiving tamoxifen as a first line therapy (6). Elevated VEGF levels
are also associated with shorter relapse and overall survival in
patients with ER-positive, lymph node–positive disease receiving
adjuvant tamoxifen (7, 8). Although a number of studies have
shown the importance of VEGF as a prognostic indicator of the
severity of breast cancer, direct evidence showing the ability of
VEGF to enhance tamoxifen resistance is lacking.
As a stimulator of neoangiogenesis, VEGF plays an important role
in the expansion of the metastatic tumor mass (9). The initial steps of
metastasis (i.e., intravasation, accessing distant organs through
hematogenous circulation, and vascular bed adhesion in distant
organs) can be done by tumor cells with high efficiency. However, the
subsequent steps, extravasation at the distant site and proliferation
in the parenchyma of the target organ to develop macroscopic
metastatic lesions, are inefficient and limiting steps in the metastatic
process (10). Recent results have shown a role for VEGF in tumor cell
extravasation (11). Mobilization of VEGF-R1–expressing hematopoietic progenitor cells is also needed to establish a ‘‘premetastatic
niche’’ for the arriving tumor cells (12). Thus, VEGF might have
significant roles not only in the vascularization of the metastasis but
also in ‘‘preangiogenic’’ stages at these sites.
In human solid tumors, a high level of desmoplasia is also
commonly observed at both primary and metastatic sites, wherein
stroma composes the majority of the tumor mass, in some cases
accounting for more than 90% (13–15). The importance of the
stromal response in supporting tumor growth has now been
substantiated by a number of studies, although induction of
desmoplasia is still poorly understood (13, 16). Several mechanisms

6232

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

VEGF Reduces Tamoxifen Efficacy and Promotes Desmoplasia

that result in stromal fibroblast activation and collagen synthesis
have been proposed, including paracrine activation of fibroblast
proliferation by growth factors released by tumor cells (17). Various
growth factors secreted from cancer cells have been identified that
stimulate stromal cells including platelet-derived growth factor
(PDGF), transforming growth factor (TGF)-a, TGF-h, and insulinlike growth factors (IGF; refs. 18, 19). However, the role of VEGF in
the desmoplastic response has not been studied. In this report, we
show that VEGF overexpression was also able to increase the level
of desmoplasia in the primary tumors. Collectively, our findings
suggest that VEGF overexpression in ER-positive breast cancer cells
increases tumor-stromal interactions and facilitates a suitable
stromal environment at the metastatic site, where the cancer cells
thrive and form large nodules even in mice treated with tamoxifen.

Materials and Methods
Vector constructions. The construction of the pBTE bicistronic
expression vector for the reverse tet transactivator rtTA2S-M2 has
previously been described (20). The tet-responsive VEGF expression vector
pTRE-hVEGF was constructed by subcloning VEGF cDNA, including the
NH2-terminal secretory signal peptide sequences, into the pTRE vector
(Clontech) at the EcoRI site.
C9V cell lines and VEGF expression. Isolation of the MCF-7–derived
subline C9, which stably expresses the reverse tet transactivator rtTA2S-M2,
has been described before (20). C9 cells were retransfected with the pTREhVEGF and pZeo-SV (Invitrogen) plasmids. Zeocin-resistant cell clones,
designated as C9V cell lines, were isolated and expanded for evaluation of
doxycycline-induced VEGF induction by ELISA and Western blot analysis
and also for evaluation of their growth characteristics, which needed to be
similar to the parental MCF-7 clone ML20 under different stimulations,
including 17h-estradiol (E2), 4-hydroxytamoxifen, and 5% fetal bovine
serum (FBS).
Animal experiments. All studies were done according to the guidelines
of the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee of Southern Research
Institute. Ovariectomized athymic nude mice, f8 wk old, were obtained
from the National Cancer Institute-Frederick Cancer Research and
Development Center. For xenograft experiments, tumor volume (V t) was
determined by V t (mm3) = L  W 2/2, where L and W refer to the larger and
smaller dimensions of each tumor measurement, respectively. At the end of
the experiment, the tumor was excised and cut into two halves, one was
stored in liquid nitrogen for biochemical analyses and the other was fixed in
10% formalin and paraffin embedded for histologic analysis.
5-Bromo-4-chloro-3-indolyl-B-D-galactopyranoside staining. Mouse
tissues were fixed in 10% formalin for 4 to 5 h, stained with 5-bromo-4chloro-3-indolyl-h-D-galactopyranoside (X-gal) staining solution overnight
in the dark at room temperature, and then rinsed with PBS. After examining
the blue-stained metastatic lesions under a dissecting microscope, photographs were taken and the tissue samples were further fixed in 10% formalin
overnight and then paraffin embedded for histologic analysis. In some
experiments, lung and tumor samples were directly fixed and paraffin
embedded for immunohistologic analysis. The X-gal staining solution
contained 5 mmol/L potassium ferricyanide, 5 mmol/L potassium
ferrocyanide, 2 mmol/L MgCl2, 0.02% NP40, 0.01% sodium deoxycholate,
and 1 mg/mL X-gal.
Determination of tumor VEGF and fibroblast growth factor-2 levels.
Tumor samples stored in liquid nitrogen were thawed, dissected free of
surrounding fat tissue, and minced into small pieces. Cytosolic preparation
buffer [10 mmol/L Tris (pH 7.4), 1.5 mmol/L EDTA, 10 mmol/L sodium
molybdate, 1.0 mmol/L 1-thioglycerol] was added at 0.5 mL to every 100-mg
tissue sample. The tissue was homogenized on ice with a Polytron
homogenizer and disintegrated by sonication. The samples were spun at
12,000 rpm for 30 min at 4jC. The cytosol samples collected from the
supernatant were used for VEGF and fibroblast growth factor (FGF)-2
content determination by ELISA (R&D Systems). Protein concentration was
also determined by the modified Lowry protein assay (Pierce).

www.aacrjournals.org

Real-time quantitative reverse transcription-PCR analysis. For
quantitative reverse transcription-PCR (RT-PCR), mRNA was isolated using
mRNACatcher (Invitrogen) and first-strand cDNA was synthesized using the
SuperScript III kit (Invitrogen) according to the manufacturer’s protocols.
Aliquots of the cDNA combined in a 20-AL reaction mix containing
300 nmol/L 5¶ forward and 3¶ reverse primers of each receptors and
100 nmol/L double fluorescently labeled MGB (minor groove binding) probe
were subjected to quantitative PCR analysis on 384-plate (Applied
Biosystems). The PCR primers for VEGF-R1, VEGF-R2, and NP-1 are
described in ref. 21.
Statistical methods. Tumor volumes (in cubic millimeters) were
calculated for each treatment group and are represented as mean F SE.
The tumor growth pattern was characterized over time. These patterns
were analyzed using the growth curve modeling method (22). One-way
ANOVA, t test, and tests of repeated measures were used to compare the
mean tumor volumes between groups. All of the analyses were done using
SAS software (version 6.12; SAS Institute, Inc.). P < 0.05 was considered
statistically significant in all of the analyses.

Results
Induction of VEGF expression to clinically relevant levels
accelerates xenograft growth in a dose-dependent manner.
Doxycycline-inducible gene expression systems are useful for
controlling expression of targeted genes and for determining
functions of gene products both in vitro and in vivo. We generated
a bicistronic expression vector using a modified reverse tettransactivator (rtTA2S-M2), which showed homogeneous inducible
gene expression over long periods, high doxycycline sensitivity, and
minimal basal activity in the absence of doxycycline (20). Using this
system, we engineered the ER-positive MCF-7 breast cancer line to
overexpress the 165-amino-acid form of VEGF-A in a doxycyclineregulated manner. The resulting cell lines were designated as C9V
lines. Western blotting of conditioned media collected from two
C9V clones, C9V4 and C9V18, showed tightly controlled VEGF
secretion by addition of doxycycline (Fig. 1). Noninduced basal
VEGF levels are undetectable in this assay, which is similar to
untransfected parental MCF-7 cells and to the parental C9 cells
that are only transfected with the tet-transactivator expression
vector. The upper band of VEGF in Fig. 1 with a higher molecular
weight is most likely due to posttranslational modifications,
consistent with other studies. More sensitive ELISA assays done
with conditioned media showed that doxycycline at 0.2 Ag/mL

Figure 1. Doxycycline-inducible VEGF expression. Conditioned media were
collected from cell cultures of parental MCF-7, pBTE-transfected C9, C9V4,
and C9V18, treated with or without 0.2 Ag/mL doxycycline (Dox ) for 48 h and
Western blotted with a specific antibody against human VEGF (R&D Systems).
The upper band of VEGF with higher molecular weight is most likely due to
the posttranslational modifications. E. coli –expressed human recombinant VEGF
lacking posttranslational modifications was used as standard in the first two
lanes. Each lane contains the equivalent VEGF secreted by f500 cells over a
48-h period.

6233

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (15). August 1, 2008

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

Figure 2. VEGF expression increases tumor growth and vascularization. A, tumor growth in athymic nude mice. C9V4 cells (107), suspended in 200 AL of 50%
phenol red–free Matrigel (BD Biosciences), were inoculated into the inguinal mammary fat pad of four groups of ovariectomized athymic nude mice on day 0.
A slow-release 0.72-mg E2 pellet (Innovative Research) was implanted into each mouse the day before the cell inoculation. The control group was provided with drinking
water containing 2.5% sucrose only; three other groups were provided with 2.5% sucrose and 0.05 or 0.2 mg/mL of doxycycline (dox) starting the day before the
cell inoculation. Doxycycline was removed from one of 0.2 mg/mL groups on day 11. There were six mice for each group (n = 6). Tumor sizes were measured twice a
week. Symbols, mean tumor volume; bars, SE. B, relationship between tumor growth and VEGF levels. Cytosolic extracts were prepared from xenograft tumors
as described in ref. 6, and the amount of VEGF present was determined by ELISA (R&D Systems) and normalized to total protein concentration. The mean tumor
volume at the end of the study is indicated by the red columns and the average tumor VEGF level of each mouse group (n = 6) is indicated by the green columns.
C, VEGF overexpression is associated with increased tumor microvessel density. Paraffin-embedded tumor samples prepared from the animal study were sectioned
and immunostained with a rat monoclonal antibody against mouse PECAM-1 (BD Biosciences). Representative images of tumor microvessels from two tumors,
one with 0.2 mg/mL doxycycline induction of VEGF expression and the other without. Quantitative analysis, as shown in the histogram, was done by counting the number
of PECAM-1–positive blood vessels per microscopic field with five tumor samples for each condition and three microscopic fields per sample (10 magnification).

induced an f100-fold increase in VEGF secretion from both C9V4
and C9V18 cell cultures in 48 hours (data not shown).
C9V4 cells were then inoculated into the mammary fat pad of
ovariectomized nude mice on day 0. One day before the cell
inoculation, all mice were implanted with slow-release E2 pellet
and divided into four groups receiving different doses of
doxycycline in their drinking water. By day 50, tumors in control
group grew to a mean size of 400 mm3 (Fig. 2A). In contrast, the
average tumor volumes were about 730 and 1,200 mm3 in groups
that were supplied with a low (0.05 mg/mL) and high (0.2 mg/mL)
dose of doxycycline, respectively. Thus, doxycycline given in
drinking water significantly increased tumor growth in a dosedependent manner (P < 0.001). In another mouse group, when the
high dose of doxycycline was withdrawn at day 11, the tumor
growth rate was reduced significantly in comparison with the
tumor growth observed in the group that continued to receive the
same dose of doxycycline throughout the experiment (P < 0.01).
Tumor VEGF content was determined by ELISA of lysates
prepared from individual tumor samples collected at the end of the
animal study. The continuous low and high doses of doxycycline
increased average tumor VEGF content by 14- and 58-fold,
respectively. The mean tumor volumes in these groups correlated

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (15). August 1, 2008

with the VEGF levels and dosage of doxycycline (Fig. 2B). Most
importantly, the doxycycline-regulated tumor VEGF levels in these
groups fall within the range of cytosolic VEGF levels found in biopsy
samples from breast cancer patients with significantly shorter
progression-free survival and post-relapse survival times after firstline tamoxifen treatment for advanced disease (6). In this study of
618 breast cancer patients, tumors from the group of 78 patients
that were the least responsive to tamoxifen treatment had a high
level of VEGF ranging from 1.73 to 542 ng/mg of cytosolic protein
(6). The mean VEGF levels in our experimental system were 3 and
12 ng/mg, induced by the low-dose and high-dose doxycycline,
respectively. The basal level of tumor VEGF was 0.17 ng/mg in the
control group that did not receive doxycycline. Thus, the VEGF
levels in our model system are clinically relevant and correspond to
the range that is associated with tamoxifen resistance in breast
cancer patients with advanced disease.
Tumor microvessel density was characterized by immunohistochemical staining with an antibody against the mouse endothelial
cell–specific marker platelet/endothelial cell adhesion molecule 1
(PECAM-1). As expected, an increased microvessel density was
readily observed in xenografts where VEGF expression was induced
by doxycycline (Fig. 2C). This result is consistent with clinical

6234

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

VEGF Reduces Tamoxifen Efficacy and Promotes Desmoplasia

studies showing that human breast tumors with elevated VEGF
levels are associated with increased microvessel density (23) and is
also consistent with other reported in vivo studies (24–26).
Induction of VEGF expression is associated with reduced
tamoxifen efficacy in vivo and acquisition of metastatic
capability. We next studied C9V xenograft growth in nude mice
that were treated with tamoxifen. Four groups of ovariectomized
mice were supplemented with slow-release E2 pellets and then
inoculated with C9V18 cells on day 0. Two of four groups were
given doxycycline in their drinking water to induce VEGF
expression in the tumors starting one day before the inoculation.
Two groups of mice, one with doxycycline and the other without,
received tamoxifen treatment by replacing the E2 pellet with a
tamoxifen pellet on day 9 when the tumors were f200 mm3 in
size. Tumors in tamoxifen-treated mice that did not receive
doxycycline became static and eventually regressed (Fig. 3A). In
contrast, tumors in tamoxifen-treated mice that received doxycycline continued to grow. Induction of VEGF expression by
doxycycline increased tumor growth significantly in both tamoxifen-treated mice (group 3 versus group 1; P < 0.01) and
E2-suplemented mice (group 4 versus group 2; P < 0.01). Xenografts
established with another C9V cell line, C9V4, also showed similar
results (data not shown).
Tumor samples collected from this study were subjected to
immunostaining with a specific antibody against a cell proliferation
marker, Ki-67. VEGF expression increased the number of Ki-67–
positive cells in tamoxifen-treated tumors (Fig. 3B). On an average,
the number of Ki-67–positive cells was increased f2-fold when
VEGF expression was induced. Together, the results depicted in
Fig. 3A and B seem to be the first direct in vivo evidence that VEGF

expression drives ER-positive, tamoxifen-responsive breast cancer
to become less sensitive to tamoxifen treatment. Tumors in the
group where VEGF was induced and also received tamoxifen
treatment (group 3) seemed to grow even larger than those in the
group that received only continued E2 supplement (group 2),
although this trend did not quite meet statistical significance
(P = 0.1). Comparing tumor growth in two groups that continued
to receive E2 also indicates that the effect of VEGF expression
on tumor growth might be additive to that of estrogen on ERpositive breast tumors as has previously been reported by others
(24, 25, 27).
Although the MCF-7 cell line was originally isolated from a
metastatic breast cancer, it lacks the ability to form either
macroscopic or microscopic metastasis in vivo. We therefore
examined the effect of VEGF overexpression on the metastatic
potential of C9 cells, which are a derivative of a MCF-7 subline,
ML20, which was stably transfected with the bacterial lacZ gene
encoding h-galactosidase (28). This allows X-gal staining of mouse
tissues to detect metastatic lesions in different organs. X-gal
staining of mouse lungs showed that the induction of tumor VEGF
overexpression resulted in spontaneous lung metastases in the
orthotopically implanted xenograft-bearing mice (Fig. 3C). Lung
tissue H&E staining confirmed metastasis indicated by X-gal
staining. VEGF induced lung metastases were observed in both
E2-supplemented mice and mice that received tamoxifen treatment. Metastases in lymph nodes, liver, kidney, and femur were not
observed. The incidence of lung metastases detected by X-gal
staining in tumor-bearing mice is summarized in Table 1. When
doxycycline was given to induce VEGF expression, lung metastases
were observed in six of nine E2-supplemented mice and four of

Figure 3. Induction of VEGF expression
results in tamoxifen-resistant tumor
growth and spontaneous lung metastases.
A, tumor growth in tamoxifen-treated mice.
Four groups of E2-supplemented mice
were inoculated with 107 C9V18 cells
on day 0. The day before inoculation,
doxycycline was supplied at 0.2 mg/mL in
the drinking water for groups 3 and 4.
On day 11, when the average tumor size
in all groups reached f200 mm3, the
animals in groups 1 and 3 had their E2
pellet replaced with a tamoxifen pellet
(5-mg 60-day release; Innovative
Research). B, Ki-67 immunostaining.
Paraffin-embedded tumor samples
collected from tamoxifen (Tam )-treated
xenograft mice were sectioned and
immunostained with antibody against Ki-67
(Santa Cruz), a cell proliferation marker.
The number of Ki-67–positive cells per
microscopic view is approximately doubled
when VEGF was induced by doxycycline.
Quantitative analysis, as shown in the
histogram, was done by counting the
number of Ki-67–positive cells per
microscopic field. Three microscopic
fields (20 magnification) per tumor and
six tumors per group were analyzed.
C, macroscopic metastases. X-gal staining
of the lungs (top ) showed metastatic
deposits of LacZ-tagged tumor cells in the
tamoxifen-treated tumor-bearing mice that
also received doxycycline (group 3).
Top left, a mouse lung with a number of
metastatic deposits. Top right, an image
with higher magnification. Bottom, H&E
staining of lung samples confirming the
presence of metastatic lesions.

www.aacrjournals.org

6235

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (15). August 1, 2008

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

nine tamoxifen-treated mice (including both C9V4 and C9V18
xenografts). No lung metastases were observed in 18 mice that did
not receive doxycycline in their drinking water. There were also no
metastases detected in the group of six mice where VEGF
overexpression was down-regulated by removal of doxycycline on
day 11, although most of these tumors were of the same size or
larger than some of the primary tumors in the doxycycline- and
tamoxifen-treated groups that did give rise to metastases.
Therefore, the exclusive presence of metastases in mice that
underwent continued induction of VEGF expression is not simply a
function of the larger mean tumor size observed in these groups.
These results show that VEGF overexpression is sufficient to cause
a nonmetastatic breast tumor to become metastatic.
VEGF promotes in vivo growth through paracrine signaling
mechanisms associated with the induction of a desmoplastic
response. To determine if the reduced tamoxifen efficacy
observed in vivo with the VEGF-inducible transfected cell lines
was related to either a possible reduction of ERa expression levels
or reduction of in vitro sensitivity to antiestrogens, we examined
protein expression of ERa by Western blotting and the in vitro
growth characteristics of these lines. Protein expression levels
of ERa in C9, C9V4, C9V18, and the parental lacZ-transfected
MCF-7 cell lines were all similar (data not shown). In addition,
the in vitro growth characteristics of the C9V cell lines were
similar to their parental MCF-7 cell line in either estrogen- or
antiestrogen-containing conditions, and addition of doxycycline to
the cultures had no effect on estrogen responsiveness or
antiestrogen sensitivity (data not shown). These results indicate
that an alteration in ER status or function is not related to the
reduction of tamoxifen efficacy observed in vivo in this
experimental system.
Direct effects of VEGF on C9V cell proliferation and sensitivity
to tamoxifen were examined by an in vitro cell proliferation
assay. The results showed that in the presence and absence of
recombinant human VEGF, C9V18 and the parental ML20 cell line
grew at a similar rate and remained equally sensitive to
4-hydroxytamoxifen, an active metabolite of tamoxifen used for
in vitro studies (Fig. 4A). These experiments showed that VEGF
has no direct effect on C9V18 cells with respect to proliferation
and sensitivity to tamoxifen, consistent with our finding that the
MCF-7 derivative cell line ML20, C9V4, or C9V18 had nondetectable expression of VEGF receptor R1 and R2 proteins by
Western blotting and ELISA (data not shown) or quantitative
RT-PCR (Fig. 4B). The third VEGF receptor, NP-1, was found to be
expressed in both C9V cell lines and ML20 cell line. Because NP-1
lacks intracellular tyrosine kinase domain, it is likely that NP-1 by
itself is not a functional receptor for VEGF. Because VEGF was
able to stimulate C9V18 cell proliferation in vivo resulting in
tamoxifen-resistant tumor growth, and because VEGF had no
effect on the same cell line in vitro on the cell growth or
tamoxifen sensitivity, it can be concluded that the VEGF effect
observed in this experimental system is mediated by a paracrine,
rather than autocrine, signaling mechanism.
It is well known that VEGF activates endothelial cells in the
tumor environment. To study whether other cell types possibly
mediate the paracrine signaling of VEGF involved in tamoxifen
resistance and metastasis, the stromal content was delineated from
the epithelial component by immunohistologic staining with a
mixture of specific antibodies against the epithelial cell marker
keratin, which was able to specifically label the C9V cells present
within the tumor mass. The immunostaining results showed that

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (15). August 1, 2008

VEGF expression significantly increased the stromal content in the
tamoxifen-treated tumors. The stromal content associated with
VEGF expression encompassed f40% of tumor section areas as
compared with only 10% of tumor areas when VEGF was not
induced (Fig. 5A). Based on morphology, fibroblasts accounted for
most of the stroma, which resembled desmoplasia, a clinical
feature of human breast cancer. Activated stromal cells in the
tumor environment can provide additional mitogenic stimuli to
drive tumor growth.
To begin to identify which stromal derived factors may be
involved in promoting tamoxifen-resistant growth and metastasis,
we examined FGF-2 levels in tumors from tamoxifen-treated mice
by ELISA, as previous results from our laboratory linked FGF
signaling to paracrine mechanisms of tamoxifen resistance (29, 30).
The results showed that the FGF-2 level was also increased by
f40% when tumor VEGF expression was induced by doxycycline
(Fig. 5B), suggesting that the increase in FGF-2 levels possibly
attributes to the increased fibroblastic stromal content within the
xenografts. Because it has been reported that stromal cell–derived
factor 1 (SDF-1) is produced by carcinoma-associated fibroblasts
(16), which also mimics the mitogenic effect of estrogen when
added to MCF-7 cells in vitro (31), we also examined SDF-1 levels in
tumor lysates by ELISA. However, unlike FGF-2, the levels of SDF-1
did not change when tumor VEGF expression was induced by
doxycycline (data not shown), suggesting that SDF-1 levels were
most likely not correlated with the observed reduction of
tamoxifen efficacy in this experimental system.
Overexpression of FGF family members as well as their receptors
has been reported in a significant percentage of human breast
tumors. FGF-1 and FGF-4 are both able to stimulate MCF-7 cell
proliferation in the absence of the mitogenic stimulus provided by
estrogen (28, 30, 32). The effect of FGF-2 on C9V18 cells was

6236

Table 1. Continued VEGF overexpression in primary
tumors results in frequent spontaneous metastases to
the lung in either estrogen- or tamoxifen-treated mice
Treatment

Cell
line

No. of
mice

No. of mice
with lung
metastasis

C9V4
C9V18
C9V4
C9V18
C9V4

5
5
5
4
6

0
0
3
3
0

C9V4
C9V18
C9V4
C9V18

3
5
4
5

0
0
1
3

E2
Dox
+Dox (0.2 mg/mL)
+Dox to day 11 (0.2 mg/mL)
Tamoxifen
Dox
+Dox (0.2 mg/mL)

NOTE: Incidence of mouse lung metastases was summarized for
several animal studies, including the studies of Figs. 2A and 3A. Mouse
lung tissues were collected from C9V4 and C9V18 xenograft–bearing
mice at the end of each animal study, which typically occurred f50 d
after cell inoculation. Lung metastases were examined by X-gal
staining as described in ref. 33.
Abbreviation: Dox, doxycycline.

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

VEGF Reduces Tamoxifen Efficacy and Promotes Desmoplasia

Figure 4. Exogenous VEGF does not
affect the sensitivity of C9V18 cells to
estrogen or tamoxifen in vitro presumably
due to the lack of VEGF tyrosine kinase
receptor expression. A, in vitro cell
proliferation assay. C9V18 cells were
plated at a density of 104 per well in 24-well
plates in 10% FBS IMEM. After 24 h,
the culture media were exchanged with
phenol red–free IMEM containing 0.1%
charcoal-stripped calf serum to remove
the estrogens overnight. Then, three
wells were counted on day 0, and the
indicated reagents in 1% charcoal-stripped
calf serum, phenol red–free IMEM
were added to the cultures in triplicate.
The concentrations used were
VEGF, 20 ng/mL; FGF-2, 20 ng/mL;
4-hydroxytamoxifen, 10 7 mol/L; and E2,
10 8 mol/L. The media were exchanged
with the same conditions on day 4 and
the cell numbers were counted with a
Coulter counter on day 7. B, real-time
quantitative RT-PCR analysis. Expression
of VEGF receptors R1, R2, and NP-1
was examined with quantitative RT-PCR as
described in Materials and Methods.
The number of cells in each culture used
for mRNA isolation was determined to
allow calculation of the specific number of
mRNA molecules per cell. mRNAs of the
receptors R1 and R2 were determined to
be <1 molecule per cell in MCF-7 and
C9V cells, whereas about 200 R1 mRNAs
and 5,000 R2 mRNAs are expressed per
cell in human umbilical vein endothelial
cells (HUVEC ).

examined in the same experiment shown in Fig. 4A, which showed
that VEGF had no effect on the in vitro growth of C9V18 cells. In
contrast to VEGF, exogenous FGF-2 increased the proliferation of
both tamoxifen-treated (FGF-2 + tamoxifen versus tamoxifen
alone; P < 0.01) and estrogen-depleted (FGF-2 versus control;
P < 0.01) C9V18 cells. These results indicate that the stromalderived FGF-2 possibly reduces tamoxifen sensitivity of C9V18
cells in vivo similar to that previously reported for FGF-1 and
FGF-4. Tumor stroma is a rich resource of mitogenic growth
factors and cytokines, which can stimulate tumor growth and
confer drug resistance. The increased stroma content within
VEGF-overexpressing tumors could be responsible for the
observed reduction in tamoxifen efficacy.
VEGF promotes metastatic colonization and desmoplasia in
an experimental metastasis assay. The metastatic process
consists of series of steps, all of which must be successfully
completed to give rise to a metastatic lesion. A limiting step in
this process is one wherein a cell disseminated from the primary
tumor colonizes at a distant organ site. To investigate whether
VEGF influences the step of colonization of disseminated tumor
cells at a distant organ, C9V18 tumor cells were directly
introduced into the mouse circulation by tail vein injection in
an experimental metastasis assay. The presence of disseminated

www.aacrjournals.org

tumor cells in mouse lungs at various time points after the
injection was visualized by immunostaining with antibodies
against keratin. Two hours after the tail vein injection, many
single tumor cells were present in the lungs taken from mice
supplied either with or without doxycycline, confirming the
success of the tail vein injection (Fig. 5C). Four weeks later, no
tumor cells were detected in the lungs from the mice that did not
receive doxycycline (n = 6), whereas keratin-positive C9V18 cell
colonies were found in two of the three mice that were given
doxycycline. Most interestingly, the tumor cell colonies were found
to be densely surrounded by stromal cells. The small C9V18 cell
colonies and their surrounding stroma were negative by
immunostaining for the mouse endothelial cell marker PECAM1, consistent with the idea that metastatic colonization occurred
before angiogenesis. Histologic examination revealed that these
stromal cells were fibroblasts, indicating that initiation of
desmoplasia may precede angiogenesis.
At 10 weeks after tail vein injection, there were still no
disseminated tumor cells or metastatic lesions in six mice that
did not receive doxycycline, whereas two of the six mice treated
with doxycycline developed macroscopic lung metastases. A mixed
pattern of single tumor cells, tumor cell colonies, and metastatic
lesions with a high level of desmoplasia was observed in the mouse

6237

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (15). August 1, 2008

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

lungs (Fig. 5C). Blood vessels were easily observed within the
desmoplastic zone of metastatic lesions. Immunostaining with
keratin antibodies showed that the majority of the area in the
metastatic lesion was found to be occupied by desmoplastic stroma.
Desmoplasia accounted for 50% to 90% of the total area of the lung
metastatic lesions, similar to that found in the spontaneous
metastatic lesions from orthotopically implanted tumor-bearing
mice. These observations indicate that disseminated tumor cells
that do not overexpress VEGF either undergo apoptosis or are
cleared by macrophages and suggest that VEGF-overexpressing
tumor cells are able to activate fibroblastic stroma, which then
increases their potential for survival and colonization in a
secondary organ before angiogenesis.

Discussion
MCF-7 is an ER-positive breast cancer cell line that is unable to
grow as a xenograft in ovariectomized mice without E2 supplementation. MCF-7 tumors also do not grow in tamoxifen-treated
mice, are poorly invasive, and are unable to consistently

disseminate to distant sites. Many attempts to increase its
metastatic capabilities and to impart antiestrogen resistance have
been made to develop models for the progression of human breast
cancer. For instance, FGF-1 or FGF-4 overexpression in MCF-7 cells
confers these cells with the ability to form highly vascularized
tumors in tamoxifen-treated mice and also enhances their
metastatic capabilities in the mice bearing these xenografts,
exhibiting micrometastases in the lungs and lymph nodes (26, 28,
32, 33). Overexpression of heregulin in MCF-7 induces antiestrogen
resistance, promotes metastasis, and also induces preneoplastic
transformation of the adjacent mouse mammary tissue (34).
Whereas these cells exhibit lymphatic invasion and axillary lymph
node metastases, no lung metastases were reported. It is suggested
that heregulin imparts this aggressive phenotype on MCF-7, in part,
via an increase in the expression of VEGF (35). Recently,
angiopoietin-2 overexpression in MCF-7 tumors was also shown
to stimulate angiogenesis and confer on these cells the ability to
form lung metastases (36). As in the case of heregulin,
angiopoietin-2 has also been suggested to stimulate angiogenesis
via a VEGF-dependent mechanism (36).

Figure 5. VEGF expression increased
the extent of the desmoplastic response
observed at both primary and metastatic
sites and facilitates metastatic colonization
in an experimental metastasis assay.
A, cytokeratin immunostaining. Tumor
samples collected from tamoxifen-treated
mice were immunostained for an epithelial
specific cell marker using mixed antibodies
against cytokeratin (Keratin Pan Ab-1,
NeoMarkers) and counterstained with
hematoxylin. Because C9V tumor
cells were cytokeratin positive, the
cytokeratin-negative areas were
considered to be the stromal-enriched
compartment within the tumors. The
fraction of the cytokeratin-negative stromal
compartment within the total area of
the microscopic view was analyzed
microscopically with the aid of a counting
grid and determining the stromal areas
over the total areas for 5 primary tumors in
each group using three sections per tumor
separated by 100 Am. The results are
plotted as percentage of stromal area
over total counted areas. Increased
desmoplasia correlated with doxycycline
induction of VEGF expression. B, FGF-2
ELISA assay. Cytosolic tumor FGF-2 was
determined by ELISA and normalized by
protein concentration. Tumor FGF-2 levels
correlated with the induction of tumor
VEGF expression. C, experimental
metastasis assay. C9V18 cells (0.5  106)
were directly introduced into the blood
circulation by tail vein injection.
Doxycycline was provided in the
drinking water at 0.2 mg/mL to one of
two E2-supplemented mouse groups
starting the day before cell injection. Mouse
lung tissues were harvested at 2 h, 4 wk,
and 10 wk after the tail vein injection.
Paraffin-embedded lung samples were
sectioned and immunostained with
the cytokeratin antibodies to identify
C9V18 cells. Red arrows, disseminated
tumor cells; black arrows, fibroblastic
stromal cells that surrounded the
cytokeratin-positive C9V18 colonies.

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (15). August 1, 2008

6238

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

VEGF Reduces Tamoxifen Efficacy and Promotes Desmoplasia

To directly address the role of VEGF in metastatic and
antiestrogen resistance phenotypes, we developed a model system
where VEGF expression in MCF-7 xenografts can be induced to
clinically relevant levels for extended periods of time. This allowed
us to study the biological effect of VEGF on tamoxifen resistance
and metastasis in vivo. The results showed that overexpression of
VEGF caused ER-positive breast tumors to grow in tamoxifentreated mice, promoted metastatic colonization, and allowed the
establishment of macroscopic lung metastases. VEGF expression in
tumors also resulted in increased desmoplasia.
A highly interesting and intriguing aspect of these findings is that
VEGF imparts a more pronounced metastatic phenotype to these
cells than FGF-1, another angiogenic growth factor frequently
expressed in human breast cancer, which is as potent as VEGF in
stimulating endothelial cell proliferation. Whereas both FGF-1– and
VEGF-overexpressing MCF-7 xenografts are highly vascularized and
both are quite capable of growing in tamoxifen-treated nude mice,
the FGF-1–overexpressing cells are incapable of establishing distant
macrometastases owing to their inability to extravasate from blood
vessels and proliferate in the parenchyma of organs such as the
lungs (31, 37). One reason for such a difference could be related to
the critical role of VEGF receptor signaling in the establishment of a
‘‘premetastatic niche’’ and subsequent neovascularization of these
sites following tumor cell arrival (12). It has been shown that VEGFR1–expressing, bone marrow–derived hematopoietic precursor
cells home to sites in the target organ and precondition these sites
before the arrival of tumor cells (38). VEGF-R2–expressing
circulating endothelial precursor cells are recruited to the nascent
metastatic site as well (39). Preconditioning of these sites also
involves VEGF-R1 signaling–mediated production of matrix metalloproteinase-9 by activated macrophages and endothelial cells
in the lung thereby facilitating tumor cell invasion on their arrival
(40). Tumor-produced VEGF is also involved in the induction of
expression of the chemokines S100A8 and S100A9 by myeloid and
endothelial cells in the lung, which also facilitate the homing of
tumor cells to this tissue and the establishment of a permissive
environment for their docking and invasion (41). VEGF is also
unique when compared with other angiogenic factors in that it also
disrupts the endothelial barrier function, facilitating tumor cell
extravasation (11).
Although VEGF stimulates neovascularization, it is not clear how
adequate oxygen and nutrient supply and waste product removal
by blood circulation can be mechanistically linked directly with
tamoxifen resistance. Previously reported studies indicate that
mitogenic factors that can act in an autocrine as well as a paracrine
manner, such as FGFs, are able to confer a tamoxifen-resistant
phenotype to MCF-7 cells (28, 30, 32). In the present study, we have
shown the presence of high levels of fibroblastic desmoplasia in the
tumors from tamoxifen-treated mice only when VEGF expression is
induced. Desmoplasia is rarely observed in xenograft models
possibly due to the rapid overgrowth of epithelial tumor cells.
Previous studies with H-ras–transfected MCF-7 cells indicated that
the desmoplasia observed in that system was only seen when
estrogen was not provided and was related to PDGF production by
the transfected cells (19). Whereas the effect of VEGF expression on
PDGF production in MCF-7 cells remains to be determined, we
have shown herein an increased FGF-2 level in xenograft
tumors when VEGF expression was induced, concomitant with
increased stromal content. We have also shown that exogenous
FGF-2 can increase the growth of MCF-7 cells in vitro even when
4-hydroxytamoxifen is present. Therefore, the tamoxifen-resistant

www.aacrjournals.org

phenotype in this system could be, in part, a result of the direct
effects of FGF-2 on MCF-7 cells. In addition to FGF-2, other growth
factors, cytokines, or direct cell-cell interactions stimulated by
VEGF paracrine signaling may also play a role in conferring
tamoxifen resistance to breast tumor cells. Of particular interest is
the recent finding that fibroblast-induced tamoxifen resistance of
MCF-7 cells in a three-dimensional in vitro culture system that
mimics the epithelial-fibroblast interactions that can occur in vivo
is independent of IGF-I receptor and epidermal growth factor
receptor signaling (42).
Our investigation is the latest of a series of transfection studies
that have explored the role of expression of various VEGF
isoforms in ER-positive breast cancer cell lines (24–27). A
consistent finding throughout all the studies reported thus far is
the enhanced in vivo growth of VEGF-overexpressing xenografts
in estrogen-supplemented animals. However, the effects on
hormone dependence and antiestrogen sensitivity in vitro and
in vivo have been variable depending on the particular study.
Zhang and colleagues (24) found that VEGF-A121 overexpression
in MCF-7 tumors did not affect estrogen dependence or tamoxifen
sensitivity. We have also previously shown that constitutive
overexpression of VEGF in the same parental MCF-7 line that
was also used herein failed to affect estrogen dependence in vitro
or in vivo but did affect tamoxifen sensitivity in vivo (26). In
contrast, Guo and colleagues (25) recently reported that overexpression of either VEGF-A165 or VEGF-A121 in MCF-7 cells did
promote estrogen-independent tumor growth in vitro or in vivo.
Because additional transfected cell lines that produced less VEGF
failed to exhibit an estrogen-independent phenotype, these
authors attributed the phenotypic differences of their transfectants from those reported in other studies to differences in
expression levels of VEGF, although VEGF levels in tumors were
not measured. Owing to the lack of estrogen independence that
we previously observed with our MCF-7 cells overexpressing VEGF
in a constitutive manner (26), we did not directly address the
question of estrogen independence in vivo in our inducible model.
In addition, a direct comparison between our model and that
described by Guo and colleagues cannot be made because the
MCF-7 line used in their study expresses VEGF-R1 and VEGF-R2
mRNAs whereas our parental and transfected cells, MCF-7
derivative cell line, do not express detectable levels of these
mRNAs (25). Autocrine loops involving VEGF and both VEGF-R1
and VEGF-R2 have been shown to promote growth as well as
survival of breast cancer cell lines (43). Our cells do express mRNA
for a NP-1 that has been proposed to facilitate metastasis and
allow VEGF to act as a survival but not as a proliferation factor
in other breast cancer cell lines (44). It is therefore possible that
signaling through this receptor may be at least partially involved
in the in vivo phenotypes we observe when VEGF is induced.
Our study provides the first direct in vivo evidence that VEGF
plays an important role in metastatic colonization of ER-positive
breast cancer cells and suggests a new function of VEGF in
mediating the desmoplastic response. Based on the results, we
hypothesize that VEGF is involved in a ‘‘vicious cycle’’ of tumor/
stromal cell interactions, in which tumor-released VEGF interacts
with and recruits stromal cells, and stromal cells, in turn, provide
mitogenic and angiogenic growth factors that stimulate both
tumor cell and additional stromal cell growth. We anticipate that
blockade of VEGF signaling may restore tamoxifen sensitivity and
reduce metastatic potential. Combination of tamoxifen with an
anti-VEGF signaling agent may inhibit both ER-mediated signaling

6239

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (15). August 1, 2008

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

and VEGF-stimulated stromal activation and angiogenesis and may
be a more effective therapy for ER-positive breast cancer.

Disclosure of Potential Conflicts of Interest
No potential conflicts of interest were disclosed.

References
1. Early Breast Cancer Trialists’ Collaborative Group.
Tamoxifen for early breast cancer: an overview of the
randomised trials. Early Breast Cancer Trialists’ Collaborative Group. Lancet 1998;351:1451–67.
2. Schiff R, Massarweh S, Shou J, Osborne CK. Breast
cancer endocrine resistance: how growth factor signaling and estrogen receptor coregulators modulate
response. Clin Cancer Res 2003;9:447–54S.
3. Ferrara N. Vascular endothelial growth factor: basic
science and clinical progress. Endocr Rev 2004;25:
581–611.
4. Ferrara N, Gerber HP, LeCouter J. The biology of
VEGF and its receptors. Nat Med 2003;9:669–76.
5. Mamluk R, Gechtman Z, Kutcher ME, et al. Neuropilin-1 binds vascular endothelial growth factor 165,
placenta growth factor-2, and heparin via its b1b2
domain. J Biol Chem 2002;277:24818–25.
6. Foekens JA, Peters HA, Grebenchtchikov N, et al. High
tumor levels of vascular endothelial growth factor
predict poor response to systemic therapy in advanced
breast cancer. Cancer Res 2001;61:5407–14.
7. Gasparini G, Toi M, Miceli R, et al. Clinical relevance of
vascular endothelial growth factor and thymidine
phosphophorylase in patients with node positive breast
cancer treated with either adjuvant chemotherapy or
homone therapy. Cancer J Sci Am 1999;5:101–11.
8. Linderholm B, Grankvist K, Wilking N, et al. Correlation of vascular endothelial growth factor content with
recurrences, survival, and first relapse site in primary
node-positive breast carcinoma after adjuvant treatment. J Clin Oncol 2000;18:1423–31.
9. Liotta LA, Steeg PS, Stetler-Stevenson WG. Cancer
metastasis and angiogenesis: an imbalance of positive
and negative regulation. Cell 1991;64:327–36.
10. Chambers AF, Naumov GN, Varghese HJ, et al.
Critical steps in hematogenous metastasis: an overview.
Surg Oncol Clin N Am 2001;10:243–55, vii.
11. Weis S, Cui J, Barnes L, Cheresh D. Endothelial
barrier disruption by VEGF-mediated Src activity
potentiates tumor cell extravasation and metastasis.
J Cell Biol 2004;167:223–9.
12. Kaplan RN, Rafii S, Lyden D. Preparing the ‘‘soil’’: the
premetastatic niche. Cancer Res 2006;66:11089–93.
13. Orimo A, Weinberg RA. Stromal fibroblasts in cancer:
a novel tumor-promoting cell type. Cell Cycle 2006;5:
1597–601.
14. Iacobuzio-Donahue CA, Argani P, Hempen PM, Jones
J, Kern SE. The desmoplastic response to infiltrating
breast carcinoma: gene expression at the site of primary
invasion and implications for comparisons between
tumor types. Cancer Res 2002;62:5351–7.
15. Seemayer TA, Lagace R, Schurch W, Tremblay G.
Myofibroblasts in the stroma of invasive and metastatic
carcinoma: a possible host response to neoplasia. Am
J Surg Pathol 1979;3:525–33.
16. Orimo A, Gupta PB, Sgroi DC, et al. Stromal
fibroblasts present in invasive human breast carcinomas

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (15). August 1, 2008

Acknowledgments
Received 9/26/2007; revised 4/23/2008; accepted 5/17/2008.
Grant support: P50 CA089019 (F. Kern), Komen Foundation Grant 00-0456
(J. Thottassery), and a NCI Breast SPORE Developmental Project (J. Thottassery).
The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of page
charges. This article must therefore be hereby marked advertisement in accordance
with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact.

promote tumor growth and angiogenesis through
elevated SDF-1/CXCL12 secretion. Cell 2005;121:335–48.
17. Walker RA. The complexities of breast cancer
desmoplasia. Breast Cancer Res 2001;3:143–5.
18. Ronnov-Jessen L, Petersen OW, Bissell MJ. Cellular
changes involved in conversion of normal to malignant
breast: importance of the stromal reaction. Physiol Rev
1996;76:69–125.
19. Shao ZM, Nguyen M, Barsky SH. Human breast
carcinoma desmoplasia is PDGF initiated. Oncogene
2000;19:4337–45.
20. Qu Z, Thottassery JV, Van Ginkel S, et al. Homogeneity and long-term stability of tetracycline-regulated
gene expression with low basal activity by using the
rtTA2S-M2 transactivator and insulator-flanked reporter
vectors. Gene 2004;327:61–73.
21. Lacal PM, Failla CM, Pagani E, et al. Human
melanoma cells secrete and respond to placenta growth
factor and vascular endothelial growth factor. J Invest
Dermatol 2000;115:1000–7.
22. Littell RC, Henry PR, Ammerman CB. Statistical
analysis of repeated measures data using SAS procedures. J Anim Sci 1998;76:1216–31.
23. Toi M, Bando H, Kuroi K. The predictive value of
angiogenesis for adjuvant therapy in breast cancer.
Breast Cancer 2000;7:311–4.
24. Zhang H-T, Craft P, Scott PAE, et al. Enhancement of
tumor growth and vascular density by transfection of
vascular endothelial cell growth factor into MCF-7
human breast carcinoma cells. J Natl Cancer Inst 1995;
87:213–9.
25. Guo P, Fang Q, Tao HQ, et al. Overexpression of
vascular endothelial growth factor by MCF-7 breast
cancer cells promotes estrogen-independent tumor
growth in vivo . Cancer Res 2003;63:4684–91.
26. McLeskey SW, Tobias CA, Vezza PR, et al. Tumor
growth of FGF or VEGF transfected MCF-7 breast
carcinoma cells correlates with density of specific
microvessels independent of the transfected angiogenic
factor. Am J Pathol 1998;153:1993–2006.
27. Yoshiji H, Harris SR, Thorgeirsson UP. Vascular
endothelial growth factor is essential for initial but
not continued in vivo growth of human breast
carcinoma cells. Cancer Res 1997;57:3924–8.
28. McLeskey SW, Kurebayashi J, Honig SF, et al.
Fibroblast growth factor 4 transfection of MCF-7 cells
produces cell lines that are tumorigenic and metastatic
in ovariectomized or tamoxifen-treated athymic nude
mice. Cancer Res 1993;53:2168–77.
29. Zhang L, Kharbanda S, Hanfelt J, Kern FG. Both
autocrine and paracrine effects of transfected acidic
fibroblast growth factor are involved in the estrogenindependent and antiestrogen-resistant growth of MCF7 breast cancer cells. Cancer Res 1998;58:352–61.
30. McLeskey SW, Zhang L, El-Ashry D, et al. Tamoxifenresistant fibroblast growth factor-transfected MCF-7
cells are cross-resistant in vivo to the antiestrogen ICI
182,780 and two aromatase inhibitors. Clin Cancer Res
1998;4:697–711.

6240

31. Hall JM, Korach KS. Stromal cell-derived factor 1,
a novel target of estrogen receptor action, mediates the
mitogenic effects of estradiol in ovarian and breast
cancer cells. Mol Endocrinol 2003;17:792–803.
32. Zhang L, Kharbanda S, Chen D, et al. MCF-7 breast
carcinoma cells overexpressing FGF-1 form vascularized, metastatic tumors in ovariectomized or tamoxifentreated nude mice. Oncogene 1997;15:2093–108.
33. Kurebayashi J, McLeskey SW, Johnson MD, et al.
Quantitative demonstration of spontaneous metastasis
by MCF-7 human breast cancer cells cotransfected with
fibroblast growth factor 4 and lacZ. Cancer Res 1993;53:
2178–87.
34. Atlas E, Cardillo M, Mehmi I, et al. Heregulin is
sufficient for the promotion of tumorigenicity and
metastasis of breast cancer cells in vivo . Mol Cancer
Res 2003;1:165–75.
35. Xiong S, Grijalva R, Zhang L, et al. Up-regulation of
vascular endothelial growth factor in breast cancer cells
by the heregulin-h1-activated p38 signaling pathway
enhances endothelial cell migration. Cancer Res 2001;61:
1727–32.
36. Imanishi Y, Hu B, Jarzynka MJ, et al. Angiopoietin2 stimulates breast cancer metastasis through the
a5h1 integrin-mediated pathway. Cancer Res 2007;67:
4254–63.
37. Zhang L, Kharbanda S, McLeskey SW, Kern FG.
Overexpression of fibroblast growth factor 1 in MCF-7
breast cancer cells facilitates tumor cell dissemination
but does not support the development of macrometastases in the lungs or lymph nodes. Cancer Res
1999;59:5023–9.
38. Grunewald M, Avraham I, Dor Y, et al. VEGF-induced
adult neovascularization: recruitment, retention, and
role of accessory cells. Cell 2006;124:175–89.
39. Kopp HG, Ramos CA, Rafii S. Contribution of
endothelial progenitors and proangiogenic hematopoietic cells to vascularization of tumor and ischemic
tissue. Curr Opin Hematol 2006;13:175–81.
40. Hiratsuka S, Nakamura K, Iwai S, et al. MMP9
induction by vascular endothelial growth factor receptor-1 is involved in lung-specific metastasis. Cancer Cell
2002;2:289–300.
41. Hiratsuka S, Watanabe A, Aburatani H, Maru Y.
Tumour-mediated up-regulation of chemoattractants
and recruitment of myeloid cells predetermines lung
metastasis. Nat Cell Biol 2006;8:1369–75.
42. Shekhar MP, Santner S, Carolin KA, Tait L. Direct
involvement of breast tumor fibroblasts in the modulation of tamoxifen sensitivity. Am J Pathol 2007;170:
1546–60.
43. Wu Y, Hooper AT, Zhong Z, et al. The vascular
endothelial growth factor receptor (VEGFR-1) supports
growth and survival of human breast carcinoma. Int
J Cancer 2006;119:1519–29.
44. Bachelder RE, Crago A, Chung J, et al. Vascular
endothelial growth factor is an autocrine survival factor
for neuropilin-expressing breast carcinoma cells. Cancer
Res 2001;61:5736–40.

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Vascular Endothelial Growth Factor Reduces Tamoxifen
Efficacy and Promotes Metastatic Colonization and
Desmoplasia in Breast Tumors
Zhican Qu, Sabrina Van Ginkel, Anshu M. Roy, et al.
Cancer Res 2008;68:6232-6240.

Updated version

Cited articles
Citing articles

E-mail alerts
Reprints and
Subscriptions
Permissions

Access the most recent version of this article at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/68/15/6232

This article cites 44 articles, 18 of which you can access for free at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/68/15/6232.full#ref-list-1
This article has been cited by 2 HighWire-hosted articles. Access the articles at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/68/15/6232.full#related-urls

Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal.
To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications
Department at pubs@aacr.org.
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications
Department at permissions@aacr.org.

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

