Oncotarget, Vol. 7, No. 8

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Bufalin enhances antitumor effect of paclitaxel on cervical
tumorigenesis via inhibiting the integrin α2/β5/FAK signaling
pathway
Fei Liu1,3,*, Duo Tong2,3,*, Haoran Li1,3,*, Mingming Liu1,3, Jiajia Li1,3, Ziliang Wang1,2,3
and Xi Cheng1,3
1

Department of Gynecologic Oncology and Cancer Institute, Fudan University Shanghai Cancer Center, Shanghai, China

2

Department of Medical Oncology, Fudan University Shanghai Cancer Center, Shanghai, China

3

Department of Oncology, Shanghai Medical College, Fudan University, Shanghai, China

*

These authors have contributed equally to this work

Correspondence to: Ziliang Wang, email: huf_zlwang@126.com
Correspondence to: : Xi Cheng, email: cheng_xi1@hotmail.com
Keywords: cervical cancer, Bufalin, integrin α2/β5, FAK, paclitaxel
Received: August 01, 2015	

Accepted: December 31, 2015	

Published: January 07, 2016

ABSTRACT
While Bufalin restrains primary tumorigenesis, the role of Bufalin in cervical
cancer remains unclear. Here, we show that Bufalin can inhibit cervical cancer cell
proliferation, block cell cycle in G2/M phase, induce cellular apoptosis and reduce
cell metastasis through stimulation of p21waf/cip1, p27cip/kip, Bax and E-cadherin, and
suppression of cyclin A, cyclin B1, CDK2, Bcl-2, Bcl-xl, MMP9 and SNAIL1. Further
study suggests that Bufalin has no apparent damage to human normal cervical cells
at the low concentration (<20nM), but increases the chemotherapeutic efficacy of
paclitaxel. Mechanistic study reveals that Bufalin suppresses the integrin α2/FAK/
AKT1/ GSK3β signaling. Finally, in vivo studies show that Bufalin blocks the Sihainduced xenograft tumor growth without detectable toxicity in the animals at the
therapeutic doses, and the combination treatment of Bufalin and paclitaxel more
efficiently inhibits xenograft tumor growth. Thus, Bufalin may be developed as a
potential therapeutic agent to treat cervical cancer.

INTRODUCTION

lung, breast, liver and pancreatic cancer, by inhibiting cell
proliferation, inducing cell apoptosis and cell cycle arrest,
reversing multidrug resistance, and regulating the immune
response. It has been reported that Bufalin synergized
with akt inhibitor LY294002 to induce the apoptosis of
lung cancer A549 cells [11], which was associated with
the upregulation of Bax expression, the downregulation
of Bcl-2 and livin expression, and the activation of
Caspase-3. In addition, it was also found that gemcitabine
combined with Bufalin enhanced the antitumor efficacy
of gemcitabine in pancreatic cancer [12]. These studies
suggested that Bufalin may be a potential regimen for
combined chemotherapy. However, the effect of Bufalin
and its mechanism on cervical cancer cells have not yet
been thoroughly evaluated
Integrins are heterodimeric cell adhesion receptors,
which contain two different chains, α and β subunits
[13]. Integrins mediate a wide variety of cell-cell and
cell-matrix interactions that lead to cell migration,

Cervical cancer is one of the leading gynecological
malignancies worldwide and often diagnosed at an
advanced clinical stage [1]. The 5 year survival rate of
cervical cancer patients with stage III was 32.8%, but
those with stage IV was only 7.1% [2, 3]. Chemotherapy
and radiotherapy are the common therapeutic interventions
for cervical cancer either as primary treatment, or
adjuvant, or neoadjuvant therapy [4]. Now, drug-resistance
has been a major challenge in the treatment of recurrent
cervical cancer. Therefore, it is urgent to develop novel
therapeutic agents for relapsing cervical cancer patients,
especially for those resistant to paclitaxel- or platinumbased chemotherapy.
Bufalin is the major digoxin-like component of the
traditional Chinese medicine Chansu [5, 6] and increasing
evidences have demonstrated that Bufalin exerts its
anticancer effect on various cancer types [7-10], such as
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

8896

Oncotarget

proliferation, differentiation and survival [14-16], by
modulating the cell signaling pathways of transmembrane
protein kinases such as Focal Adhesion Kinase (FAK)
[17, 18]. Integrin/FAK signal pathway participates
in the activation of akt and the inhibition of GSK3β,
and then promotes tumorigenesis, cell metastasis and
chemoresistance [19-21]. For instance, the inhibition of
integrin α4 contributed to improving efficacy of current
therapies of acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) [22],
which was provided chemoprotection by bone marrow.
Recently, some studies showed that integrins have a close
association with cervical tumorigenesis and metastasis
[23-25]. Chatterjee et al. found that integrin α5β3 was one
of the most important cell surface molecules regulating
the invasive property of cervical tumor cells because of
its associated gelatinase/MMP-2 activity [25]. Therefore,
targeting the integrin/FAK signal pathway has emerged as
one of the major therapeutic strategies in the treatment of
cervical cancer.
In this study, we illustrated that Bufalin inhibited
cell proliferation, induced cell cycle arrest and
apoptosis, reducing cell metastasis via the suppression
of intergrin α2β5/FAK signaling pathway. Meanwhile,
we demonstrated that the combination of Bufalin and
paclitaxel more efficiently inhibited cervical cancer cell
proliferation in vitro and xenograft tumor growth in vivo,
but not affected normal cervical cells.

diluent, Siha and Hela cells were double stained by
Annexin V and PI and subjected to flow cytometry to
quantitatively analyze the apoptotic effects (Figure 1E). As
illustrated in Figure 1F, the percentage of total apoptotic
cells, including the early apoptotic portion (Annexin V
positive) and the late apoptotic portion (Annexin V and
PI positive), were dose-dependently increased with the
raising concentrations of Bufalin in both cervical cancer
cell lines. Besides, we also found that Bufalin treatment
increased the pro-apoptotic protein Bax, but decreased the
anti-apoptotic protein Bcl-2 and Bcl-xl in the both cancer
cell lines (Figure 1I).
Previous studies have shown that bufatin could
exert its anti-proliferative effect through blocking cell
cycle. Thus, we also investigated the effect of bufatin on
cell cycle regulation by flow cytometry analysis in the
two cervical cancer cell lines, Sina and Hela. As shown in
Figure 1G and 1H, We found that the cell population was
decreased at the G0-G1 and S phase but increased at G2-M
phases in both cell lines treated with Bufalin compared
with in control cells. To explore the potential mechanism,
we analyzed major proteins associated with cell cycle
progression by Western blotting. The results in Figure 1J
showed that p21 and P27, the essential negative regulators
of cell cycle suppressor involved in the G1-S cell cycle
transition, was dose-dependently increased in both cell
lines after Bufalin treatment. The cyclinA/CDK2 complex
plays a critical role in the transition of S/G2 phase. Our
data showed that the levels of cyclin A and CDK2 were
also reduced after Bufalin treatment, consistent with the
reduction in S phase and G2/M arrest in flow cytometry
analysis. Meanwhile, we found that Bufalin enhanced
the expression of cyclin B1 (Figure 1J), indicating that
cells was blocked at late stage of G2 phase and the
accumulation of cyclin B1 finally triggered programmed
cell death. Taken together, we provided strong evidence
that Bufalin possess anti-cancer activities by inducing cell
apoptosis and blocking cell cycle progression.

RESULTS
Bufalin suppresses cell proliferation by inducing
cell apoptosis and cell cycle arrest
To examine the anticancer effects of Bufalin
against cervical cancer, Siha and Hela cells were treated
with Bufalin (0, 0.02, 0.04, 0.08, 0.16, 0.32, 0.64 and
1.28 µM) for 24, 48 and 72 h, and cell proliferation was
assessed by CCK-8 assay. As shown in Figure 1A and
1B, the inhibition of the two cell lines increased with the
increasing concentrations and duration of exposure time,
which indicated that Bufalin suppressed cell proliferation
in a time- and dose-dependent manner.
Next, we conducted colony formation assays
to further determine Bufalin’s inhibitory effects on
cancer cell proliferation. The results clearly showed
that the exposure to Bufalin reduced numbers and sizes
of the colonies formed by the two tumor cell lines in
a concentration-dependent-manner (Figure 1C). The
numbers of colonies formed by cells treated with Bufalin
or diluent were counted as shown in Figure 1D.
To determine the possible mechanism of the anticancer effects of Bufalin, we studied the induction of
apoptosis after Bufalin treatment. After 24 hours of
treatment with different concentrations of Bufalin and
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Bufalin inhibits cervical cancer cell invasion and
migration
To evaluate the anti-metastatic potential of Bufalin,
we performed scratch assay to detect cell migration
speed and found that, compared with diluent, Bufalin
dose-dependent decreased the migration speed of Siha
and Hela cells (Figure 2A and 2B). We also found that
Bufalin reduced the cells invaded through Matrigel and
migrated through the membrane in the bottom chamber,
which indicated that Bufalin could reduce the invasive
and migratory abilities of the two cervical cancer cell lines
(Figure 2C and 2D). Further, we determined the expression
level of Epithelial-Mesenchymal Transition (EMT)
-related proteins, including matrix metalloproteinase 9
(MMP 9), E-cadherin, and Snail1. Compared with control
8897

Oncotarget

Figure 1: Bufalin inhibited cell proliferation and induces cell cycle arrest. A.-B. Bufalin inhibited the proliferation of cervical
cancer cell lines Siha and Hela. Cell viability determined by CCK8 assay. C. The apoptosis induced by Bufalin was detected by flow
cytometry. D. Quantitative analysis of apoptotic cells (P < 0.05). Error bars = 95% CIs. E. Representative images of cell colonies after
treatment with various concentrations of RY-2f for 48 h. F. Colony formation rate after treatment with RY-2f for 48 h. The experiments
were repeated three times, and a representative experiment is shown. * p < 0.05. G.-H. Quantitative analysis of cell cycle distribution. Data
from three independent experiments were analyzed (p < 0.05). Error bars = 95% CIs. I.-J. Immunoblotting analysis of apoptosis-associated
and cell cycle regulatory proteins.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

8898

Oncotarget

Figure 2: Bufalin suppressed cervical cancer cell migration and invasion by regulating EMT-associated proteins. A.

Detection of migration by scratching assay. B, Quantitative analysis of migration speed using migration index (P < 0.05). Error bars = 95%
CIs. C, Detection of cell migration and invasion by using a high throughput screening multi-well insert 24-well two-chamber plates. D-E,
Quantitative analysis of invaded cells (P < 0.05). Error bars = 95% CIs. F, Immunoblotting analysis of EMT-associated proteins. G-H,
Representative images showing Bufalin inhibited the expression of Snail1 in cell nucleus with immunofluorescence staining (×1000). Blue
dye DAPI indicates nucleus.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

8899

Oncotarget

Bufalin disrupts integrin α2/β5/FAK signal
pathway

cells, after 24 hours exposure to Bufalin, the expression
level of MMP 9 and Snail was dozes-dependent reduced,
while E-cadherin was increased in both cell lines (Figure
2E). The results from immunofluorescence staining
confirmed the down-regulation of snail1 in the cervical
cells treated with Bufalin (Figure 2G and 2H). Based on
these results, Bufalin appeared to halt cervical cancer
cell invasion and migration possibly by simulating the
expression of MMP9 and Snail1 and suppressing the
expression of E-cadherin.

In this study, we found that Bufalin interfered
in integrin α2/β5/FAK signaling pathway. As shown
in Figure 3A, the expression level of integrin α2 and
β5 was suppressed in Siha and Hela cells treated by
Bufalin. Moreover, we found that the expression of
FAK, p-FAK (Tyr397), p-GSK3β (Ser389), AKT1 and
p-AKT1(Ser473), which were downstream targets of
integrins, were also decreased by Bufalin treatment, but
the expression of GSK3β was enhanced. These results
showed that integrin α2/β5/FAK signaling pathway played
an important role in the anti-cancer effect of Bufalin.

Figure 3: Integrin α2 rescued Bufalin-induced effect on cervical cancer cells. A. Bufalin inhibited the expression levels of

the members of integrin/FAK signaling detected by western blotting. B. Induction of integrin α2 cDNA rescued the Bufalin-induced effect
on the expression of the members of integrin/FAK signaling detected by western blotting. C.-F. Induction of integrin α2 cDNA rescued
the Bufalin-induced effect on apoptosis, cell cycle and mastastasis in cervical cancer cells.G. Induction of integrin α2 cDNA rescued the
expression of apoptosis, cell cycle and mastastasis-associated proteins in Bufalin-treated cervical cancer cells.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

8900

Oncotarget

To further confirm the role of integrin α2 in Bufalininduced anti-cancer activities, we induced integrin α2
cDNA into Siha and Hela cells and subsequently treated
these cells with Bufalin. As shown in Figure 3B, induction
of integrin α2 cDNA could rescue restored the Bufalininduced reduction of integrin α2 and β5 in the both cell
lines. Correspondingly, Bufalin induced down-regulation
of FAK, p-FAK (Tyr397), p-GSK3β (Ser389), AKT1
and p-AKT1(Ser473), was significantly abolished by
over-expression of integrin α2 (Figure 3B), however, the
expression of GSK3β was decreased due to the induction
of integrin α2 cDNA(Figure 3B).
Next, we determined whether induction of integrin
α2 cDNA could rescue the anti-cancer activities of
Bufalin on the cervical cancer cells. Using a colonyformation assay, we found that the induction of integrin
α2 cDNA drastically increased colony-forming ability of
the cells upon exposure to Bufalin (Figure 3C and 3D).
Furthermore, we found that up-regulation of integrin α2
significantly decreased Bufalin-mediated cell apoptosis
(Figure 3E and 3F) and cell cycle arrest (Figure 3G

and 3H). Besides, in transwell assay, cell invasion and
migration suppressed by Bufalin was restored by integrin
α2 cDNA introduction as shown in Figure 3I and 3J. In
addition, we also found that, reduction of Bcl-2, cyclin
A, MMP9 and Snail 1 caused by Bufalin was restored by
introduction of integrin α2 cDNA, whereas, the increase
of Bax, cyclin B1 and E-cadherin was suppressed by
introduction of integrin α2 cDNA (Figure 3K). Taken
together, our results demonstrated that Bufalin exhibited
its anti-cancer activities through the inhibition of integrin
α2/β5/FAK signal pathway.

Bufalin sensitizes cervical cancer cells to paclitaxel
treatment
Combinative chemotherapy is the main mode of
clinical cancer therapy due to its significant advantages
such as lower development of drug resistance and lower
treatment failure rate. Platinum and paclitaxel currently is
the firstline chemotherapeutic drug for cervical cancer in

Figure 4: Bufalin sensitized cervical cancer cells to paclitaxel treatment. A. The concurrent administration of cells with Bufalin

and paclitaxel for 48 h results in synergistic inhibitory effect on the growth of Siha and Hela cells. B, Representative images and number of
colonies formed by Siha and Hela cells treated with Bufalin or paclitaxel alone, and Bufalin plus paclitaxel. The experiments were repeated
three times, and a representative experiment is shown. C, Western blot analysis showing that combination of RY-2f and cisplatin inhibited
the lower expression of integrin α2, integrin β4, FAK and GSK3β than each agent alone.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

8901

Oncotarget

clinic. We detected the combined antitumor effect between
platinum or paclitaxel and Bufalin in Hela and Siha cells.
However, we found that Bufalin cannot enhance the
anti-cancer effect of platinum paclitaxel in hela and siha
cells (Supplemental Figure 1A and 1B). To check the
combined effects of Bufalin and Paclitaxel on cervical
cancer cells, cell survival was detected by CCK-8 assay.
After combined treatment with Bufalin and Paclitaxel, the
survival of cells was significantly reduced in compared
with Bufalin or Paclitaxel alone treatment in both Siha and
Hela cells, CI values of combination were lower than 1
(Figure 4A). Surprisingly, this combinative effect between
Bufalin and Paclitaxel did not be observed in human
normal cervical cells (Figure 4A). The result from colonyformation assay also showed that combined treatment with
Bufalin and Paclitaxel decreased colony-forming ability
of the cells upon exposure to Bufalin or Paclitaxel alone
(Figure 4B and 4C). The combined treatment with Bufalin
and Paclitaxel more efficiently inhibited the expression of
integrin α2 /β5, FAK, GSK3β than Bufalin or Paclitaxel
alone treatment in both Siha and Hela cells (Figure
4D). The above results showed that suggesting Bufalin,
combined with paclitaxel, would be novel therapeutic
agents for cervical cancer patients resistant to paclitaxelbased chemotherapy.

of FAK, p-FAK(Tyr397) and p-GSK3β (Ser389) were
largely reduced in the combination treatment group, but
the expression of GSK3β was up-regulated. These results
in vivo findings demonstrated that Bufalin exhibited antitumor activities and enhanced the anti-cancer efficacy of
Paclitaxel through supressing integrin /FAK signaling
pathway in cervical cancer.

DISCUSSION
In this study, we fully described the anticancer role
of Bufalin in cervical cancer cells, which provides an in
depth understanding of cytotoxic mechanism of Bufalin in
genetic level and offers more potentially useful biomarkers
for diagnosis and treatment of cervical cancer in future.
The AKT/GSK3β pathway promotes cancer
progression, including cellular proliferation, growth,
survival, and drug resistance [28-32]. In the present study,
we found that the expression level of AKT1, p-AKT1
(Ser473), and p-GSK3β (Ser389) were decreased in
cervical cancer cells treated with Bufalin, but the
expression of GSK3β was increased. Further, we found
that the expressions of integrin α2, β5, FAK and p-FAK
(Tyr397), the upstream regulatory proteins of AKT/
GSK3β signal pathway, were simulated by the treatment
of Bufalin. Meanwhile, induction of ITGA2 cDNA into
cervical cancer cells could attenuate the anti-tumor effect
of Bufalin and rescue the expression of FAK, p-FAK
(Tyr397), AKT1, p-AKT1 (Ser473), GSK3β and p-GSK3β
(Ser389), which indicated that Bufalin exerted its antitumor effects through the regulation of integrinα2β5/
FAK/AKT1/ GSK3β signal cascade. Integrins mediate a
wide variety of cell-cell and cell-matrix interactions that
lead to cell migration, proliferation, differentiation and
survival. For instance, integrin β1 interacted with CUB
domain-containing protein-1 [33]and induced intracellular
phosphorylation signaling, involving FAK and PI3Kdependent AKT activation to affect the metastasis of
tumor cells. However, to our knowledge, it has not been
reported that Bufalin exerts its anticancer effect through
integrin/FAK signal pathway. Our results illustrated that
Bufalin could inactivate AKT1 and activate the GSK3β by
the suppression of the integrin/FAK signal pathway. These
results showed that the cell membrane receptors and/or
their coactivators might be new potential molecular targets
for Bufalin in the cancer therapy.
Increasing studies have shown that bufalin could be
used in combination with current clinical chemotherapeutic
drug regimens such as gemcitabine and/or akt inhibitors
to overcome drug resistance and improve the efficacy
of treatments for patients with locally advanced cancers
[11, 12]. Chen et al. found that the combination treatment
with gemcitabine and Bufalin enhanced tumor cell growth
inhibition compared with either agent alone in pancreatic
cancer [12]. Zhu et al. reported that Bufalin synergized
with Akt inhibitor LY294002 to induce the apoptosis

Bufalin synergizes with Paclitaxel to inhibit the
growth of cervical cancer in vivo
To test the synergistic antitumor effects of Bufalin
and Paclitaxel in vivo, we generated the subcutaneous
xenograft tumor models by transplanting Siha cells into
nude mice. As shown in Figure 5A-5C, Bufalin (10
mg/kg per 4 days) or Paclitaxel (10 mg/kg per 4 days)
treatment as single agent resulted in significant tumor
volume reduction compared with treatment with dilent as
control. In addition, compared with Bufalin or cisplatin
alone treatment, co-treatment with Bufalin and Paclitaxel
achieved further inhibition on the tumors growth by
reducing the volume and weight of tumors (Figure 5D).
The inhibition rates of tumor weight in the combined
group were 75.2%, which were significantly higher than
those in Bufalin (46.8%) or dinaciclib (41.3%) alone group
(Figure 5D). More surprisingly, the body weights of mice
in the combined group were slightly heavier than those in
Bufalin or Paclitaxel alone treated group, suggesting cotreatment of Bufalin and Paclitaxel at the indicated dose
caused certain side effects in mice (Figure 5D).
To determine whether the combination treatment
could also resulted in decreasing of integrain/FAK
signaling pathway in vivo, we performed IHC analyses on
tumor sections from all the experimental groups. As shown
in Figure 5E, compared with the single administration,
combinative treatment further decreased the expression
of integrin α2 and β5. Moreover, the expression levels
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

8902

Oncotarget

Figure 5: Inhibition of xenograft cervical cancer by Bufalin. A.-C. Nude mice bearing tumors formed by Siha cells were

administered with 10 mg/kg of Bufalin, 10 mg/kg of paclitaxel, and Bufalin (10 mg/kg) plus paclitaxel (10 mg/kg), respectively, or
vehicle as controls (n = 5). Treatments were done given through intraperitoneal once every four days. Figures showed the average tumor
volumes (A-C), red boxes showed the position of tumors in the nude mice. D. Figures showed tumor and body weights of mice at the
end of observation. E. Immunohistochemical staining of in xenograft tumor tissues. Tissues were stained with rabbit anti-integrin α2,
integrin β4, FAK, p-FAK(Tyr397), GSK3β and p- GSK3β (Ser389) antibodies and visualized with donkey anti-mouse secondary antibody
(Magnification×200).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

8903

Oncotarget

of lung cancer A549 cells [11]. In our study, we also
demonstrated that Bufalin synergized with paclitaxel
to inhibit the proliferation and induce the apoptosis of
cervical cancer cells at low concentrations, which had
little damage to normal cervical cells. Based on the above
studies, we suggest the combination with Bufalin and
other clinical chemotherapeutic drugs will have a greater
advantage in the treatment of the various types of cancers.
Recently, Calderon-Montano et al. proposed that
the key feature of an efficient anticancer drug is its ability
to kill (or inhibit the growth of) human cancer cells at
concentrations that do not significantly affect human
nonmalignant cells [34]. They further pointed out that it
was not suitable to use rodent nonmalignant TM4 Sertoli
cells to test the effect of Bufalin on nonmalignant cells
[35]. Therefore, in this study, we cultured the human
primary normal cervical cells from the patients in Fudan
University Shanghai Cancer Center, and used these normal
cervical cells to test the cytotoxicity of Bufalin. We found
that Bufalin, at the lower concentration ( < 20nM), had
no apparent damage to normal cervical cells, but could
inhibit the growth of cervical cancer cells, especially
combined with paclitaxel. These results indicated Bufalin
was a promising regimen for combined chemotherapy to
overcome the resistance of various cancer cells.
In summary, we have demonstrated that Bufalin can
induce cellular apoptosis and cell cycle arrest, reduce cell
metastasis, and inhibit xenograft tumor growth mainly
through repression of the integrin α2β5/FAK/ATK/GSK3β
signal pathway. Therefore, Bufalin may be developed as a
potential drug to treat human cervical cancer after further
validation.

Nuaillé, France) and incubated at 37°C in a humidified
atmosphere with 5% CO2.

Drugs
Bufalin was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (St
Louis, MO) and paclitaxel was purchased from BristolMyers Squibb Company (NY, USA).

Plasmids construction and viral infection
The recombinant plasmid pENTER-integrin
α2 (ITGA2), containing human full cDNA sequence
of ITGA2, was purchased from Vigene Biosciences
(Jinan,China), and then the cDNA sequence of ITGA2 was
subcloned into lentivirus vector pCDH-CMV-MCS-EF1PURO, generating the recombitant plasmid pCDH/ITGA2
cDNA. Lentivirus carrying ITGA2 cDNA were generated
and harvested as described previously. Briefly, Siha and
Hela cells were infected twice for a total of 4 days (2 days
for each infection) and the positive clones were selected
with puromycin (200ng/mL) for 7-10days. Control cell
lines were generated by infection with viruses containing
the empty vector by following the same protocol.

In vitro cytotoxicity
The in vitro cytotoxicity of Bufalin was measured
by Cell Counting Kit-8(CCK-8) (Dojindo Laboratories,
Kumamoto, Japan), as described in the literature. Briefly,
5×103 cells per well were plated in 96-well plates and
treated with Bufalin, paclitaxel, Bufalin plus paclitaxel or
DMSO (diluent) at various concentrations for 48 h. Then,
the medium with compounds or DMSO was replaced with
180 μL of fresh medium along with 20 μL CCK-8 solution
in each well and incubated at 37 ºC for 2 h. Last, the CCK8-containing medium was discarded and 150 μL of DMSO
per well was added to dissolve the newly formed formazan
crystals. Absorbance of each well was determined by a
microplate reader (Synergy H4, Bio-Tek) at a 450 nm
wavelength. Growth inhibition rates were calculated with
the following equation,Inhibition ratio = (ODDMSO-ODdrug)/
(ODDMSO-ODblank)×100%.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Cell lines and cell culture
The established human cervical cancer cell lines
SiHa and HeLa were obtained from American Type
Culture Collection (ATCC). All cells were maintained in
Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM, HyClone,
Thermo Scientific, USA) supplemented with 10% fetal
bovine serum (Gibco, Life technologies, USA), 100 U/
ml penicillin (Biowest, Nuaillé, France), and 100 U/ml
streptomycin (Biowest, Nuaillé, France) and incubated at
37°C in a humidified atmosphere with 5% CO2.
The primary human cervical cells were obtained
from the cervical cancer patients at Fudan University
Shanghai Cancer Center (FUSCC). The primary cells
were maintained in Gibco® Medium 199 (Gibco, Life
technologies, USA), supplemented with 1µg/ml epidermal
growth factor (EGF), 15% fetal bovine serum (Gibco,
Life technologies, USA), 100 U/ml penicillin (Biowest,
Nuaillé, France), and 100 U/ml streptomycin (Biowest,
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Colony formation assay
1×103 cells were seeded in six-well plates at a
single cell density and treated with Bufalin, paclitaxel,
Bufalin plus paclitaxel or DMSO (diluent) at various
concentrations for 24h, 48 h and 72h. Then the fresh
medium was added to allow cell growth for at least one
week. The colonies with more than 50 cells were counted
after staining with gentian violet (Solarbio).

8904

Oncotarget

Cell cycle analysis

repeated three times with duplicate.Scratch assay was also
used to examine cell migration and cells were incubated in
6-well plate over-night to yield monolayer confluence for
scratch assay. Scratches were made using a pipette tip and
photographed immediately (time 0) and 24 hours’ later.
The distance migrated by the cell monolayer to close the
scratch area during the time period was measured. Results
were analyzed as migration index, which was the ratio of
the cell migration distance at 24h to that at 0h.The assay
was carried out in triplicate and repeated three times.

Cell cycle status was detected by flow cytometry
according to a previously published method [26] and
analyzed by Multicycle AV (for windows, version 320)
software. Briefly, cells were first treated with RY-2f
or DMSO at various concentrations for 48 h, and then
harvested, washed twice with 1× PBS, and re-suspended
in 200 μL of 1× PBS. The cells were fixed in 4 mL of icecold 75% ethanol at 4°C overnight and stained with 200
μL of propidium iodide (50 μg/mL, Sigma-Aldrich) and 20
μL of RNase (1 mg/mL, Sigma-Aldrich) to remove RNA
in a 37°C water bath for 15 to 20 minutes. The cells were
then analyzed by flow cytometry (Cytomics FC 500 MPL,
Beckman Coulter). The results were indicated as mean
values from three independent determinations.

Western blot analysis
Western blot analysis was performed to determine
the expression levels of various proteins in cells.
Cells were treated with Bufalin or DMSO at different
concentrations for 48 h. Cells were harvested, washed with
cold 1×PBS, and lysed with RIPA lysis buffer (Beyotime)
for 30 min on ice, then centrifuged at 12,000 g for 15 min
at 4 ºC. The total protein concentration was determined by
BCA protein assay kit (Beyotime). Equal amounts (30 μg
per load) of protein samples were subjected to SDS-PAGE
electrophoresis and transferred on to polyvinylidene
fluoride (PVDF) membranes (Millipore). The blots were
blocked in 10% non-fat milk, and incubated with primary
antibodies, followed by incubation with secondary
antibodies conjugated with horseradish peroxidase
(HRP). The protein bands were developed with the
chemiluminescent reagents (Millipore). Antibodies to
p21waf/cip1, p27cip/kip, Bcl-2, Bax, Bcl-xl, cyclin A, cyclin B1,
CDK2, MMP9, E-cadherin, Snail1, pAKT(Ser437) and
AKT1 were from Santa Cruz Biotechnology. Antibodies
to integrin α2 (ITGA2), integrin β5 (ITGB5), FAK, p-FAK
(Tyr397), GSK3β and p- GSK3β (Ser389) were from
Cell Signaling Technology. The antibody to β-Actin was
purchased from Sigma-Aldrich.

Cell apoptosis analysis
To detect apoptosis, cells were incubated with
Bufalin or DMSO at different concentrations for 48 h.
The cells were harvested, washed twice with cold 1×PBS,
and re-suspended in 200 μL binding buffer at density of
1 × 105 cells / mL. The cells were then stained with 5 μL
Annexin-V and PI (BD Biosciences) for 15 min in dark
condition at room temperature and subjected to analysis
by flow cytometry (Cytomics FC 500 MPL, Beckman
Coulter). The early apoptosis was evaluated based on
the percentage of cells with Annexin V+/PI-, while the
late apoptosis was that of cells with Annexin V+/PI+.
The results were indicated as mean values from three
independent determinations.

Cell invasion and migration assay
A high throughput screening multi-well insert 24well two-chamber plate (BD Biosciences, San Jose, CA),
with an 8-µm (pore size) polycarbonate filter between
chambers were used to test cell invasion and migration.
To test cell invasion, 2.5 × 103 cells of Siha or Hela
treated with Bufalin at different concentrations and their
corresponding controls were added in upper chamber and
allowed to invade at 37°C for 24 hours toward a lower
reservoir containing medium plus fibronectin (20µg/mL).
To examine cell migration, 3 × 104 cells of Siha or Hela
treated with Bufalin at different concentrations and their
corresponding controls were added in upper chamber and
allowed to invade at 37°C for 24 hours toward a lower
reservoir containing medium without fibronectin. The
cells were then fixed in 100% methanol for 30 minutes
and stained with Giemsa solution for 10 minutes. The
invasive cells were counted as those passed through the
membrane separating the chamber. All cells were counted
at ×200 magnification under a microscope. The assay was
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Immunofluorescence
Immunofluorescence staining was done according
to a published protocol [27]. Primary antibodies against
Snail1 were obtained from Santa Cruz Technology
(California, US). DNA dye 4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole
(DAPI) was obtained from Molecular Probes. The
secondary antibodies used were the cy3-conjugated
donkey anti-rabbit IgG (Jackson ImmunoResearch
Laboratory). All stained cells were examined and
photographed with a Leica SP5 confocal fluorescence
microscope.

In vivo tumor growth assay
Female BALB/c nude mice at 4-5 weeks of age
were purchased from Shanghai Slac Laboratory Animal
8905

Oncotarget

Co. Ltd. and housed in a specific pathogen free facility.
Mice were subcutaneously inoculated with Siha cells
(3×106 suspended in 0.2 mL PBS for each mouse). After
reaching an average tumor volume of 100 mm3, the
animals were randomized into groups (n = 5) that were
treated intraperitoneally with either Bufalin (10 mg/kg),
paclitaxel (5 mg/kg), Bufalin (10 mg/kg) plus paclitaxel
(5 mg/kg), or vehicle control (0.2 mL olive oil) thereafter.
Administration of vehicle or agents and measurement
of tumor growth with a digital caliper were done once
every 4 days. Tumor volumes were calculated by the
two dimensional sizes of each tumor with the following
formula: V = L × W2 ×0.52, where V is the volume, L is
the length, and W is the width. At the end of experiment,
the mice were weighed and sacrificed, and the tumors
were weighed and dissected. The animal experimental
protocols were approved by the Animal Ethics Committee
of Fudan University Shanghai Cancer Center.

cancer 1982-2012. European journal of gynaecological
oncology. 2015; 36:252-254.
4.	 Shi JF, Canfell K, Lew JB and Qiao YL. The burden
of cervical cancer in China: synthesis of the evidence.
International journal of cancer. 2012; 130:641-652.
5.	 Zhao H, Zhao D, Tan G, Liu Y, Zhuang L and Liu T.
Bufalin promotes apoptosis of gastric cancer by downregulation of miR-298 targeting bax. International journal
of clinical and experimental medicine. 2015; 8:3420-3428.
6.	 Chang Y, Zhao Y, Zhan H, Wei X, Liu T and Zheng B.
Bufalin inhibits the differentiation and proliferation of
human osteosarcoma cell line hMG63-derived cancer stem
cells. Tumour biology. 2014; 35:1075-1082.
7.	

8.	 Gu W, Liu L, Fang FF, Huang F, Cheng BB and Li B.
Reversal effect of Bufalin on multidrug resistance in human
hepatocellular carcinoma BEL-7402/5-FU cells. Oncology
reports. 2014; 31:216-222.

Statistical analysis
The data in this study were calculated using Graph
Pad Prism and expressed as mean ± S.E. A nonlinear
regression model with a sigmoidal dose response was used
to fit the values of IC50.Comparisons between controls
and treated groups were determined by paired t test or oneway ANOVA followed by Tukey’s multiple comparison
tests. All results were considered statistically significant at
the level of p < 0.05 and combination index was calculated
by CompuSyn software.

9.	

11.	 Zhu Z, Sun H, Ma G, Wang Z, Li E, Liu Y and Liu Y.
Bufalin induces lung cancer cell apoptosis via the inhibition
of PI3K/Akt pathway. International journal of molecular
sciences. 2012; 13:2025-2035.

This work was supported by National Nature
Science Foundation of China ( NSFC1212) and by
traditional Chinese Medicine Research Fund of Shanghai
Municipal commission of Health and Family Planning
(WS-ZY1201 ) for Xi Cheng, and by Young fund of
Shanghai Municipal commission of Health and Family
Planning (20134Y092) for Z. Wang.

12.	 Chen Y, Guo Q, Zhang B, Kang M, Xie Q and Wu Y.
Bufalin enhances the antitumor effect of gemcitabine in
pancreatic cancer. Oncology letters. 2012; 4:792-798.
13.	 Iwamoto DV and Calderwood DA. Regulation of integrinmediated adhesions. Current opinion in cell biology. 2015;
36:41-47.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST

14.	 Duminuco R, Noble JW, Goody J, Sharma M, Ksander
BR, Roskelley CD, Cox ME and Mills J. Integrin-Linked
Kinase Regulates Senescence in an Rb-Dependent Manner
in Cancer Cell Lines. Cell cycle. 2015; 14:2924-37.

No potential conflicts of interests were disclosed.

REFERENCES

15.	 Walker JA, Beck GA, Campbell JH, Miller AD, Burdo TH
and Williams KC. Anti-alpha4 Integrin Antibody Blocks
Monocyte/Macrophage Traffic to the Heart and Decreases
Cardiac Pathology in a SIV Infection Model of AIDS.
Journal of the American Heart Association. 2015; 4. pii:
e001932.

Wright JD, Chen L, Tergas AI, Burke WM, Hou JY, Neugut
AI, Ananth CV and Hershman DL. Population-Level
Trends in Relative Survival for Cervical Cancer. American
journal of obstetrics and gynecology. 2015; 213:670.e1-7.

16.	 Tennant BR, Chen J, Shih AZ, Luciani DS and Hoffman
BG. Myt3 mediates laminin-V/integrin-beta1 induced isletcell migration via Tgfbi. Molecular endocrinology. 2015;
29: 1254-68.

2.	 Wang B, He M, Chao A, Engelgau MM, Saraiya M, Wang
L and Wang L. Cervical Cancer Screening Among Adult
Women in China, 2010. The oncologist. 2015; 20:627-634.
3.	

Garrido JL. 30 years of preventive studies of uterine cervical

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Jiang L, Zhao MN, Liu TY, Wu XS, Weng H, Ding Q, Shu
YJ, Bao RF, Li ML, Mu JS, Wu WG, Ding QC, Cao Y,
Hu YP, Shen BY, Tan ZJ, et al. Bufalin induces cell cycle
arrest and apoptosis in gallbladder carcinoma cells. Tumour
biology. 2014; 35:10931-10941.

10.	 Qiu YY, Hu Q, Tang QF, Feng W, Hu SJ, Liang B, Peng W
and Yin PH. MicroRNA-497 and Bufalin act synergistically
to inhibit colorectal cancer metastasis. Tumour biology.
2014; 35:2599-2606.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

1.	

Zhai XF, Fang FF, Liu Q, Meng YB, Guo YY and Chen Z.
MiR-181a contributes to Bufalin-induced apoptosis in PC-3
prostate cancer cells. BMC complementary and alternative
medicine. 2013; 13:325.

8906

Oncotarget

17.	 Xu CS, Wang ZF, Huang XD, Dai LM, Cao CJ and Li
ZQ. Involvement of ROS-alpha v beta 3 integrin-FAK/
Pyk2 in the inhibitory effect of melatonin on U251 glioma
cell migration and invasion under hypoxia. Journal of
translational medicine. 2015; 13:95.

34:3882-3883.
30.	Sokolowski KM, Koprowski S, Kunnimalaiyaan S,
Balamulurgan M, Gamblin C and Kunnimalaiyaan M.
Potential molecular targeted therapeutics: Role of PI3-K/
Akt/mTOR inhibition in cancer. Anti-cancer agents in
medicinal chemistry. 2015; 16:29-37.

18.	 Stromal Integrin beta1-FAK Activation Promotes BRAF
Inhibitor Resistance. Cancer discovery. 2015; 5:575.

31.	 Noh KT, Son KH, Jung ID, Kang TH, Choi CH and
Park YM. Glycogen Synthase Kinase-3beta (GSK-3beta)
Inhibition Enhances Dendritic Cell-based Cancer Vaccine
Potency via Suppression of Interferon-gamma-induced
Indoleamine 2,3-Dioxygenase Expression. The Journal of
biological chemistry. 2015; 290:12394-12402.

19.	 Ding J, Tasker C, Lespinasse P, Dai J, Fitzgerald-Bocarsly
P, Lu W, Heller D and Chang TL. Integrin alpha4beta7
Expression Increases HIV Susceptibility in Activated
Cervical CD4+ T Cells by an HIV Attachment-Independent
Mechanism. Journal of acquired immune deficiency
syndromes. 2015; 69:509-518.

32.	 Azoulay-Alfaguter I, Elya R, Avrahami L, Katz A and
Eldar-Finkelman H. Combined regulation of mTORC1 and
lysosomal acidification by GSK-3 suppresses autophagy
and contributes to cancer cell growth. Oncogene. 2015; 3
4:4613-23.

20.	 Jia Z. Role of integrin-linked kinase in drug resistance of
lung cancer. OncoTargets and therapy. 2015; 8:1561-1565.
21.	 Li W, Liu Z, Zhao C and Zhai L. Binding of MMP-9degraded fibronectin to beta6 integrin promotes invasion
via the FAK-Src-related Erk1/2 and PI3K/Akt/Smad1/5/8 pathways in breast cancer. Oncology reports. 2015;
34:1345-52.

33.	 Casar B, Rimann I, Kato H, Shattil SJ, Quigley JP and
Deryugina EI. In vivo cleaved CDCP1 promotes early
tumor dissemination via complexing with activated beta1
integrin and induction of FAK/PI3K/Akt motility signaling.
Oncogene. 2014; 33:255-268.

22.	 Shishido S, Bonig H and Kim YM. Role of integrin alpha4
in drug resistance of leukemia. Frontiers in oncology. 2014;
4:99.

34.	 Calderon-Montano JM, Burgos-Moron E, Orta ML, GarciaDominguez I, Maldonado-Navas D and Lopez-Lazaro M.
Bufalin is a steroid receptor coactivator inhibitor-letter.
Cancer research. 2015; 75:1156.

23.	 Wang HY, Chen Z, Wang ZH, Wang H and Huang LM.
Prognostic significance of alpha5beta1-integrin expression
in cervical cancer. Asian Pacific journal of cancer
prevention. 2013; 14:3891-3895.

35.	 Wang Y, Lonard DM, Yu Y, Chow DC, Palzkill TG, Wang
J, Qi R, Matzuk AJ, Song X, Madoux F, Hodder P, Chase P,
Griffin PR, Zhou S, Liao L, Xu J, et al. Bufalin is a potent
small-molecule inhibitor of the steroid receptor coactivators
SRC-3 and SRC-1. Cancer research. 2014; 74:1506-1517.

24.	 Maity G, Fahreen S, Banerji A, Roy Choudhury P, Sen T,
Dutta A and Chatterjee A. Fibronectin-integrin mediated
signaling in human cervical cancer cells (SiHa). Molecular
and cellular biochemistry. 2010; 336:65-74.
25.	 Chatterjee N and Chatterjee A. Role of alphavbeta3
integrin receptor in the invasive potential of human cervical
cancer (SiHa) cells. Journal of environmental pathology,
toxicology and oncology. 2001; 20:211-221.
26.	 Wang Z, Hou J, Lu L, Qi Z, Sun J, Gao W, Meng J,
Wang Y, Sun H, Gu H, Xin Y, Guo X and Yang G.
Small ribosomal protein subunit S7 suppresses ovarian
tumorigenesis through regulation of the PI3K/AKT and
MAPK pathways. PloS one. 2013; 8:e79117.
27.	 Wang Y, Wang Z, Qi Z, Yin S, Zhang N, Liu Y, Liu M,
Meng J, Zang R, Zhang Z and Yang G. The negative
interplay between Aurora A/B and BRCA1/2 controls
cancer cell growth and tumorigenesis via distinct regulation
of cell cycle progression, cytokinesis, and tetraploidy.
Molecular cancer. 2014; 13:94.
28.	 Nicolini A, Ferrari P, Kotlarova L, Rossi G and Biava PM.
The PI3K-AKt-mTOR Pathway and New Tools to Prevent
Acquired Hormone Resistance in Breast Cancer. Current
pharmaceutical biotechnology. 2015; 16:804-815.
29.	 Wu DW, Lee MC, Hsu NY, Wu TC, Wu JY, Wang YC,
Cheng YW, Chen CY and Lee H. FHIT loss confers
cisplatin resistance in lung cancer via the AKT/NFkappaB/Slug-mediated PUMA reduction. Oncogene. 2015;
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

8907

Oncotarget

