Oncotarget, September, Vol.3, No 9

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Bruton’s tyrosine kinase: oncotarget in myeloma
Yu-Tzu Tai and Kenneth C Anderson

Targeting Bruton’s tyrosine kinase (Btk), an
essential element of B cell receptor (BCR) signaling
pathway, has achieved remarkable efficacy with an
acceptable safety profile in B cell malignancies. Ibrutinib
(formally PCI-32765) is an orally available inhibitor
with excellent pharmacodyamics, which irreversibly
and selectively binds to Btk, since the cysteine residue
(Cys481) to which it binds is present in only 10 of >500
kinases in the human genome. It has achieved high
response rates in phase I/II clinical trials in relapsed non
Hodgkin’s lymphoma, and phase III clinial trials in mantle
cell lymphoma and chronic lymphocytic leukaemia (CLL)
are ongoing for FDA approval. Due to its efficacy and lack
of toxicity, it has great promise, either as a single agent or
in combination, in other B cell malignancies as well.[1]
As normal B cells mature to plasma cells, they lose
surface immunoglobulin, as is true for multiple myeloma
(MM) cells. Therefore, B cell receptor signaling and
Btk expression on normal plasma cells and MM cells is
unexpected.[2] However, our recent studies using gene
expression profiling and immunoblotting demonstrated
robust Btk expression in the majority (>85%) of patient
MM cells and in all tumor cells from patients with
Waldenstrom’s macroglobulinemia (WM).[3] Importantly,
Ibrutinib effectively blocked both baseline and induced
activation of Btk and downstream NFκB, STAT3,
ERK1/2, and Akt signaling pathways mediating tumor cell
proliferation and survival. Specifically, Ibrutinib-induced
inactivation of Btk and downstream NFκB and STAT3 is
correlated with tumor cell cytotoxicity. Intriguingly, Btk
is highly expressed and activated in dexamethasone (dex)resistant MM1R MM cells, but not in parental MM1S cells
that are dex sensitive, suggesting a role for Btk in drug
resistance. Our studies further show that WM cells express
CD19 and BCR, which mediate growth and survival,
whereas MM cells lack both, accounting, at least in part,
for the greater direct cytotoxicity of Ibrutinib against
WM than MM cells. Nonetheless, shBtk knockdown
in 3 Btk-expressing MM cell lines, including MM1R
cells, confirmed that Btk also directly regulates MM cell
viability.
Importantly, we also found that Ibrutinib is most
potent against IL-6- or stromal-dependent MM cells in
coculture with patient-derived bone marrow stromal
cells (BMSCs) or osteoclasts (OCs), suggesting that that
Ibrutinib-mediated cytotoxicity against MM cells was
indirect via targeting the MM BM microenvironment.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Indeed, Ibrutinib strongly reduced secretion of multiple
cytokines and chemokines in MM cocultures with
BMSCs, including IL-6, SDF-1, activin A, MIP-1α,
BAFF, IL-8, and M-CSF (Figure 1). In particular,
Ibrutinib decreased MIP1 and MIP-1β excretion in MM
and WM cells, as well as OCs. Of note, in our in vitro
models, Ibrutinib specifically blocked OC formation from
osteoclast precursor cells and bone resorption, without
affecting bone formation. These results are consistent
with previous reports of Btk expression in OC, but not
in osteoblasts (OB), in genetically manipulated mice.[4]
In addition, Ibrutinib blocked SDF-1 secretion from BM
accesory cells, as well as SDF-1-induced Btk activation
and migration in MM cells. Similar results were also
recently reported in CLL, which might partially explain
significant clinical responses.[5]
Most importantly, Ibrutinib suppressed tumor
growth and improved MM-induced bone lysis in our
SCID-hu mice model, in which MM cells implanted into
human bone chips both grow and cause bone lesions.
Not only was OC number and function reduced, but
osteoblastogenesis was also increased, evidenced by
greater alkaline phosphatase (ALP) activity (>1-log
difference), in Ibrutinib versus control-treated animals.
Thus, by inhibiting MM cell growth and survival in vivo,
Ibrutinib relieves the inhibition of new bone formation
by MM cells. Indeed our studies do confirm that slightly
increased bone mineral density in Ibrutinib-treated versus
control mice. These findings strongly support a novel
therapeutic strategy to target Btk and thereby improve
osteolytic bone disease in MM, analogous to therapies
targeting Btk to maintain cartilage integrity in autoimmune
arthritis.[6]
Our findings therefore provide a strong rationale for
investigating Btk inhibitors in MM and WM to target both
tumor cells and their supporting BM microenvironment
and thereby both suppress tumor cell growth and
abrogate MM-induced bone disease. Finally, the recently
identified MyD88 L265P mutation in 90% WM cells
promotes survival of WM cells by activation of Btk,[7,
8] along with Ibrutinib-inhibited IRF4 activity induced
by MyD88 mutation in diffuse large B cell lymphoma[1]
further suggest its clinical promise in a variety of B cell
malignancies.
Yu-Tzu Tai: LeBow Institute for Myeloma Therapeutics
and Jerome Lipper Multiple Myeloma Center, Dana-Farber
Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA,

913

Oncotarget 2012; 3: 913-914

USA
Kenneth C Anderson: LeBow Institute for Myeloma
Therapeutics and Jerome Lipper Multiple Myeloma Center,
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, MA, USA

6.	 Chang BY, Huang MM, Francesco M, et al. Arthritis Res
Ther. 2011; 13:R115.

Correspondence: Yu-Tzu Tai, email yu-tzu_tai@dfci.harvard.

8.	

7.	 Treon SP, Xu L, Yang G, et al. N Engl J Med. 2012;
367:826-833.
Yang G, Xu L, Zhou Y, et al. J Clin Oncol. 2012 30.

edu
Received: September 11, 2012;
Published: September 12, 2012;

References
1.	 Yang Y, Shaffer AL, 3rd, Emre NC, et al. Cancer Cell.
2012; 21:723-737.
2.	 Smith CI, Baskin B, Humire-Greiff P, et al. J Immunol.
1994; 152:557-565.
3.	

Tai YT, Chang BY, Kong SY, et al. Blood. 2012; 120:18771887.

4.	 Shinohara M, Koga T, Okamoto K, et al. Cell. 2008;
132:794-806.
5.	 de Rooij MF, Kuil A, Geest CR, et al. Blood. 2012;
119:2590-2594.

MM
Stem Cell

Ibrutinib

viability
colony formation

Btk activation by
IL-6, sDf-1

Osteoblast

Ibrutinib

Bone formation activity

IL-6
SDF-1
MIP-1α
MIP-1β
M-CSF
MCP-1

TRAP5b
SDF-1
Activin A
APRIL
MIP-1α
MIP-1β
TGFβ1
RANTES
BAFF
IL-8

Ibrutinib

MM

Tumor BM
microenvironment

Adhesion
Migration
Homing
Ibrutinib

MIP-1α, MIP-1β, IL-8, TGFβ1
RANTES, BAFF, TRAF2, CXCR4,
LAT, PLCγ2, MYD88, NFATc1

M-CSF, IL-6, MCP-1

M-CSF

Stromal cells

bone
resorption

RANK
fms

Osteoclast precursors

Osteoclasts

Figure 1: Btk inhibition by Ibrutinib/PCI-32765 in MM. Functional sequelae following Btk inhibition indicates that Ibrutinib
not only target tumor cells but also bone marrow microenvironment that support MM cell growth and survival, as well as MM-deteriorated
bone lysis. These results demonstrate Btk inhibitors are extremely attractive approach for the novel treatment of myeloma and related bone
disease. Data adapted.[3]

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

914

Oncotarget 2012; 3: 913-914

