off in calculations of median overall survival; therefore,
1- and 2-year survival data may offer additional
information about the drugs’ effectiveness in
comparison with median survival rates. Dr.
Brahmer also led an earlier multicenter
clinical trial of nivolumab in 2013, which
led to the current phase 3 trial of 260
patients at hospitals around the world.
Nivolumab, a checkpoint inhibitor,
alerts immune cells to cancer cells and
targets them for destruction. In this study,
researchers randomly selected 135 patients to
receive nivolumab, sold under the name Opdivo,
and 137 others to randomly receive the chemotherapy
drug docetaxel. Median overall survival for the nivolumab
group was 9.2 months, whereas it was 6 months for patients
who received docetaxel. At 1 year, 57 patients (42%) taking
nivolumab were alive, whereas 33 patients (24%) taking
docetaxel were.
Findings also showed that nivolumab reduced the relative
risk of dying of lung cancer by 41% among those who took the

immunotherapy drug versus those who took docetaxel.
In addition, severe side effects were more frequent
in the docetaxel group (55%) versus the
nivolumab group (6.9%). Side effects for the
former included hair loss, fatigue, nausea,
diarrhea, and low white blood cell counts.
For the latter, they were fatigue, decreased
appetite, weakness, and colon, kidney, and
lung inflammation.
Dr. Brahmer notes that approximately
20% to 25% of patients with lung cancer
respond to checkpoint blockade inhibitors. It
is important to determine which patients respond
well to these drugs because they tend to be extremely
expensive, she adds.

Reference
1. Brahmer J, Reckamp KL, Baas P, et al. Nivolumab versus docetaxel
in advanced squamous-cell non–small-cell lung cancer. N Engl J Med.
2015;373:123-135.
DOI: 10.1002/cncr.29700

Diastolic Dysfunction Common Among Breast Cancer Patients
Receiving Anthracycline

A

Echocardiogram.

dysfunction that persisted through the final follow-up visit. In
13 of the patients, diastolic dysfunction was reversed by the end
of the study.
Four patients with diastolic dysfunction developed overt
cardiac dysfunction, including left ventricle systolic dysfunction
(3) and sudden cardiac death (1). Patients older than 50 years
were 4 times more likely than younger patients to develop
diastolic dysfunction after anthracycline-based chemotherapy.
In addition, diastolic dysfunction was 3 times more likely in
overweight patients versus normal-weight patients, and it was
more than 7 times more likely in obese patients.
Dr. Serrano and his colleagues found that diastolic
dysfunction after treatment is common in older patients and
those with a higher body mass index. As a result, this knowledge
could lead to more intensive monitoring programs, he notes.

Reference
1. Serrano JM, Gonzalez I, Del Castillo S, et al. Diastolic dysfunction following
anthracycline-based chemotherapy in breast cancer patients: incidence and
predictors. Oncologist. 2015;20:864-872.
DOI: 10.1002/cncr.29701

© SEMNIC; SANTOL / SHUTTERSTOCK.COM

new study shows that 57% of breast cancer patients who
received anthracycline-based chemotherapy had changes
on their echocardiograms consistent with diastolic dysfunction
within 12 months of treatment.
The study, published in the July 16, 2015, issue of The
Oncologist, was led by Jose M. Serrano, MD, of Hospital
Universitario de Fuenlabrada in Madrid.1 Dr. Serrano and his
colleagues examined cardiac function before and after treatment
with anthracycline-based chemotherapy in an effort to quantify
the incidence of diastolic dysfunction and identify risk factors
for cardiovascular side effects related to this therapy.
Anthracyclines are a broad-spectrum class of chemotherapeutic agents commonly used in adjuvant and metastatic
breast cancer. Trastuzumab, a potent antibody against human
epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2), is used sequentially
after anthracycline chemotherapy in 20% of patients who are
HER2–positive.
Although the drugs are beneficial, trastuzumab is known to
exacerbate the cardiotoxicity of anthracycline, which can lead to
heart failure and left ventricular dysfunction. The risk of these
conditions from use of these therapies, however, is not well
understood.
The observational study involved 100 patients with breast
cancer who were treated with anthracycline-based chemotherapy
alone or in combination with trastuzumab. All patients underwent
an echocardiogram before they started anthracycline, at the end
of treatment, and 12 months after the last treatment dose.
Of the 85 patients who received anthracyclines, 49 (58%)
developed diastolic dysfunction during the median followup period of 12 months. Of those, 36 (73%) had diastolic

Content in this section does not reﬂect any ofﬁcial policy or medical opinion of the American Cancer Society or of the publisher unless otherwise noted. © American Cancer Society, 2015.

Cancer

October 15, 2015

3563

