Oncogene (2012) 31, 739–751

& 2012 Macmillan Publishers Limited All rights reserved 0950-9232/12
www.nature.com/onc

ORIGINAL ARTICLE

Regulated ATF5 loss-of-function in adult mice blocks formation and causes
regression/eradication of gliomas
A Arias1, MW Lamé1, L Santarelli2,4, R Hen2, LA Greene3 and JM Angelastro1
1
Department of Molecular Biosciences, University of California, Davis School of Veterinary Medicine, Davis, CA, USA; 2Department
of Neuroscience, Columbia University, New York, NY, USA and 3Department of Pathology and Cell Biology, Columbia University,
New York, NY, USA

Glioblastomas are among the most incurable cancers. Our
past ﬁndings indicated that glioblastoma cells, but not
neurons or glia, require the transcription factor ATF5
(activating transcription factor 5) for survival. However, it
was unknown whether interference with ATF5 function
can prevent or promote regression/eradication of malignant gliomas in vivo. To address this issue, we created a
mouse model by crossing a human glial ﬁbrillary acidic
protein (GFAP) promoter-tetracycline transactivator
mouse line with tetracycline operon-dominant negativeATF5 (d/n-ATF5) mice to establish bi-transgenic mice. In
this model, d/n-ATF5 expression is controlled by doxycycline and the promoter for GFAP, a marker for stem/
progenitor cells as well as gliomas. Endogenous gliomas
were produced with high efﬁciency by retroviral delivery
of platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF)-B and p53-short
hairpin RNA (shRNA) in adult bi-transgenic mice in
which expression of d/n-ATF5 was spatially and temporally regulated. Induction of d/n-ATF5 before delivery of
PDGF-B/p53-shRNA virus greatly reduced the proportion of mice that formed tumors. Moreover, d/n-ATF5
induction after tumor formation led to regression/
eradication of detectable gliomas without evident damage
to normal brain cells in all 24 mice assessed.
Oncogene (2012) 31, 739–751; doi:10.1038/onc.2011.276;
published online 4 July 2011
Keywords: ATF5; PDGF-B; tumorigenesis; glioma

Introduction
Glioblastomas are a particularly devastating form of
primary brain tumors; even after surgical resection with
subsequent radiation and chemotherapy, the survival
time is generally only 12–18 months (Stupp et al., 2005).
The highly inﬁltrative nature of such tumors into
normal brain tissue and their heterogeneity make them
Correspondence: Dr JM Angelastro, Department of Molecular
Biosciences, University of California, Davis School of Veterinary
Medicine, 2165 Haring Hall, One Shields Avenue, Davis, CA 95616,
USA.
E-mail: jmangelastro@ucdavis.edu
4
Current Address: Hoffmann-La Roche, Basel, Schweiz, Switzerland.
Received 13 February 2011; revised 29 April 2011; accepted 26 May
2011; published online 4 July 2011

especially difﬁcult to treat. It is thought that glioblastomas arise by transformation of neural progenitor/stem
cells present in the neonatal and adult brain and
evidence has been presented that the tumors contain a
subpopulation of treatment-resistant cancer stem cells
(Vescovi et al., 2006).
This study concerns the potential of activating
transcription factor 5 (ATF5), a member of the ATF/
CREB family (see Greene et al. (2009) for a review), as a
direct target for the treatment of glioblastomas. In the
normal developing brain, ATF5 is highly expressed in
neural progenitor/neural stem cells where it promotes
cell proliferation and inhibits neurogenesis and gliogenesis (Angelastro et al., 2003, 2005; Mason et al., 2005).
ATF5 downregulation is required to permit neural
progenitors to differentiate into neurons, astrocytes
and oligodendroglia. Conversely, constitutive ATF5
gain-of-function stimulates continued proliferation of
neural progenitor cells without differentiation. The
latter observation led us to examine ATF5 expression
in neural tumors and to the ﬁnding that it is highly
expressed in human and rat glioblastoma cell lines and
in resected human glioblastomas (Angelastro et al., 2006;
Monaco et al., 2007). Several studies also indicate that
ATF5 appears to be a prognostic marker for malignant
gliomas (Dong et al., 2005; Angelastro et al., 2006;
Monaco et al., 2007; Sheng et al., 2010). In addition,
ATF5 is co-expressed with CD133 (Angelastro et al., 2003;
Schrot et al., 2007), a marker for neural stem cells and
for at least some populations of glioblastoma stem cells
(Singh et al., 2003), and is expressed in stem cells derived
from human glioblastoma cell lines (Sheng et al., 2010).
As a preliminary approach to assessing the cellular
role of ATF5, we designed a dominant-negative form of
ATF5 (d/n-ATF5) as well as an ATF5 small interfering
RNA (Angelastro et al., 2003, 2005, 2006; Mason et al.,
2005). These caused massive apoptotic death of all eight
rat and human glioblastoma cell lines that were assessed
(Angelastro et al., 2006). In contrast, ATF5 loss-offunction did not affect survival of cultured neurons or
glial cells, but rather promoted the differentiation of
neural progenitor cells into neurons and glia and caused
cell cycle exit of proliferating cultured astrocytes. In an
in vivo study, we further observed that retroviral delivery
of d/n-ATF5 to tumors generated by injection of C6
glioma cells into rat brain resulted in the death of
essentially all tumor cells infected by the virus. In

Dominant-negative ATF5 inhibits gliomas
A Arias et al

740

contrast, non-neoplastic astrocytes outside the tumors
infected with d/n-ATF5 virus were unharmed (Angelastro et al., 2006). The differential effect of d/n-ATF5 on
survival of normal and malignant cells was also seen in a
study in which it promoted death of neoplastic, but not
of non-transformed human breast cell lines (Monaco
et al., 2007).
The aim of this study was to explore whether direct
manipulation of ATF5 function would affect the
formation as well as maintenance of gliomas generated
from endogenous neural stem/progenitor cells in adults
and do so without harm to other brain tissues. To this
end, we created bi-transgenic mice in which d/n-ATF5
expression is subject to both spatial and temporal
regulation by the human glial ﬁbrillary acidic protein
(hGFAP) promoter and the Tet-off system, respectively.
The hGFAP promoter directs d/n-ATF5 expression to
neural stem/progenitor cells and astrocytes (sites where
ATF5 is normally expressed) as well as to gliomas,
whereas the Tet-off system (controlled by the presence/
absence of doxycycline in the diet) permits the choice of
whether or not, as well as when, d/n-ATF5 is expressed.
Generation of gliomas in these mice was achieved by
retroviral delivery of platelet-derived growth factor
(PDGF)-B. In adult rodents, this approach is highly
efﬁcient in producing brain tumors that resemble human
glioblastomas (Assanah et al., 2006) and there is
evidence that PDGF may be involved in the pathogenesis of glioblastomas and other tumor types (Wang
et al., 2010). We report that regulated expression of
d/n-ATF5 suppresses the formation of new gliomas and
causes the eradication/regression of pre-existing gliomas
in mouse brain.
Results
ATF5 is expressed in the postnatal mouse brain
Although our earlier work with rats showed that ATF5
is expressed in embryonic neural progenitors and in 10day postnatal rat brain (Angelastro et al., 2003, 2005;
Mason et al., 2005), it was important for our studies to
establish that ATF5 is expressed in postnatal mouse
brain and in cell types that have the potential to give rise
to malignant gliomas. As shown by immunohistochemistry, ATF5 protein is expressed by cells within the
ependymal zone, subventricular zone (SVZ) and corpus
callosum of the 28-day postnatal mouse cerebral cortex
(Figures 1a–c), as well as in the hippocampal dentate
gyrus subgranular zone (Figure 1f). Comparable expression was seen in brains of 24-week-old mice (data not
shown). These areas contain niches for neural stem/
progenitor cells that give rise to neurons and glia in the
adult brain (Alvarez-Buylla and Lim, 2004; Riquelme
et al., 2008; Mu et al., 2010). Consistent with these
results, these ATF5 þ regions were also positive for the
neural stem/progenitor cell markers nestin (Figure 1d)
and Musashi-1 (Figure 1e). Signiﬁcantly, ATF5 was coexpressed in a subset of cells that express GFAP
(Figures 1b, c and f). Gliomas are thought to arise
from GFAP þ stem/progenitor cells and also express
Oncogene

GFAP (Jackson and Alvarez-Buylla, 2008). In contrast
to the neurogenic zones, other areas of the brain showed
little or no immunostaining for ATF5 (Supplementary
Figure S1).
Generation of mice with regulated spatial and temporal
expression of a d/n-ATF5 transgene
To study ATF5 function, we have created a speciﬁc
interfering d/n form of the protein that lacks the Nterminal acidic activation and DNA-binding domains
and that contains an enhanced bZip domain (Vinson
et al., 1993; Krylov et al., 1995; Moitra et al., 1998; Moll
et al., 2000; Angelastro et al., 2006). Flag-tagged d/nATF5 blocks ATF5 function and consequently accelerates differentiation of neural progenitors and induces
apoptosis of glioblastoma and other neoplastic cells
both in vitro and in vivo (Angelastro et al., 2003, 2005,
2006; Mason et al., 2005; Monaco et al., 2007). For the
current studies, we generated a transgenic mouse line
in which Flag-tagged-d/n-ATF5 and b-galactosidase
(b-gal) (product of LacZ) are driven as separate gene
products under the control of the pBi3-tetracycline
operon (TETO) operator (Baron et al., 1995). This line
was crossed with an hGFAP-tetracycline transactivator
(tTA) transgenic mouse line (Pascual et al., 2005; Sweger
et al., 2007) in which the hGFAP promoter drives the
tTA protein (Gossen and Bujard, 1992; Gossen et al.,
1994). This line has been successfully employed to
spatially and temporally regulate transgenes such as d/n
SNARE, GPCR Ro1 RASSL, Gq-coupled receptor and
ErbB2 in neural progenitors and astrocytes (Pascual
et al., 2005; Fiacco et al., 2007; Ghashghaei et al., 2007;
Sweger et al., 2007). In this ‘Tet-off’ system, in the
absence of doxycycline, the bi-transgenic mice should
express d/n-ATF5 and b-gal in cells such as neuroprogenitors and gliomas in which the hGFAP promoter is
active; conversely in the presence of dietary doxycycline,
d/n-ATF5 expression should be suppressed (Figure 2a).
Examination of the brains of adult bi-transgenic
mice exposed to doxycycline since conception revealed
no detectable expression of either Flag-d/n-ATF5 or
of b-gal (Figure 2b and Supplementary Figure S2a).
In contrast, brains of bi-transgenic animals raised from
conception without doxycycline or raised from conception with the drug for 5–29 weeks and then withdrawn
from it for 3–7 weeks showed robust expression of Flagd/n-ATF5 and b-gal in the cortex and subventricular
zone (Figures 2b–e and Supplementary Figure S2b), and
the hippocampus (Figure 2c). The co-expression of b-gal
with Flag-d/n-ATF5 (Figure 2c) permitted us to use the
former to detect cells where the d/n-ATF5 was induced.
Expression of d/n-ATF5/b-gal persisted in doxycycline
withdrawn bi-transgenics for at least 11 months after
birth (data not shown). Moreover, bi-transgenic mice
raised with doxycycline for 24–29 weeks following
conception and then withdrawn from the drug for 6–7
weeks showed co-expression of b-gal with endogenous
GFAP within the cortex (Figure 2d) and SVZ
(Figure 2e). In contrast, there was no or very weak
b-gal staining in non-neurogenic regions (Supplementary Figure S1b).

Dominant-negative ATF5 inhibits gliomas
A Arias et al

741

Figure 1 Cells within the neurogenic zones of postnatal mouse brain express ATF5. A parafﬁn-embedded 28-day postnatal mouse
brain was sectioned and immunostained for the following markers: (a) ATF5 (brown). (b) ATF5 (brown) and GFAP (red). The  2.33
magniﬁcation inset shows a subset of cells co-stained for GFAP and ATF5. (c) ATF5 (brown) and GFAP (red). Arrows show a subset
of cells along the ventricle and corpus callosum (CC) that co-stain for ATF5 and GFAP. (d) Nestin. (e) Musashi-1. In (a)–(e), note
staining within the ependymal zone (EZ), SVZ, CC and the junction between the corpus callosum and the striatum (S). (f) ATF5
(brown) and GFAP (red) in the subgranular zone (SGZ) of the hippocampal dentate gyrus. Arrows show cells co-stained for
ATF5 and GFAP. Scale bar ¼ 20 mm. Diagrams show locations in the brain of corresponding panel letter (adapted from http://
www.hms.harvard.edu/research/brain/atlas).

The long-term persistence of non-transformed brain
cells in which d/n-ATF5 is induced indicates that
transgene expression does not cause their death. To
further determine whether induced d/n-ATF5 expression affected survival of non-transformed brain cells, we
immunostained for cleaved caspase-3 in brain sections
from an animal in which doxycycline had been withdrawn for 45 days. No signal was observed in d/nATF5/b-gal-expressing cells within the ependymal zone,
SVZ, corpus callosum or subgranular zone (Supplementary Figure S3). In addition, there were no evident ill
effects or abnormal behavior caused by inducing d/nATF5 expression in the bi-transgenics and the brains of
animals raised without, or withdrawn from doxycycline
for extended periods all appeared grossly normal other
than apparent mild enlargement of the lateral ventricles
(perhaps due to reduction in the SVZ progenitor
population). Thus, the d/n-ATF5 could be safely
induced in adult animals and in GFAP þ cells that have
the potential to generate malignant gliomas.
Induction of ATF5 þ malignant glioma cells by ectopic
expression of PDGF-B and p53-shRNA
We next sought an adult mouse model for inducible
gliomas that resemble human glioblastomas. We elected

to employ an approach in which PDGF-B is delivered to
proliferating neuroprogenitor/neural stem cells by retroviral infection (Uhrbom et al., 1998, 2000; Dai et al.,
2001; Shih et al., 2004; Assanah et al., 2006, 2009). Such
cells possess PDGF-A receptors (Jackson et al., 2006;
Ogden et al., 2008) and constitutive induction of PDGF
signaling leads them to uncontrolled cell replication and
to the formation of invasive malignant gliomas (Uhrbom et al., 1998, 2000; Dai and Holland, 2001; Dai
et al., 2001; Shih et al., 2004; Assanah et al., 2006, 2009).
The advantages of this model are that: (1) a very high
percentage of the treated animals develop tumors;
(2) PDGF-B-induced tumors exhibit features of human
glioblastomas grades IV (2007 World Health Organization classiﬁcation of human nervous system tumors),
including dense cellularity, mitotic ﬁgures, nuclear
atypia, microvascular proliferation and necrotic foci
with surrounding pseudopalisading cells (Dai et al.,
2001; Shih et al., 2004; Hede et al., 2009); (3) unlike
other glioma models, the PDGF-B paradigm induces
tumors in the adult rodent brain (Assanah et al., 2006).
To accelerate tumor production (Hesselager et al.,
2003), we co-delivered a short-hairpin RNA interference
against the tumor suppressor p53 (p53-shRNA). Our
past work established that d/n-ATF5 kills cultured
Oncogene

Dominant-negative ATF5 inhibits gliomas
A Arias et al

742

Figure 2 Regulated expression of d/n-ATF5 in bi-transgenic hGFAP-tTA  pBi-TETO-3-Flag-d/n-ATF5/b-gal mice. (a) Scheme for
generation and utilization of bi-transgenic hGFAP-tTA  pBi-TETO-3-Flag-d/n-ATF5/b-gal mice. The hGFAP promoter drives the
tTA, and the tTA binds to TETO in the absence of doxycycline (Dox) to induce bi-directional co-expression of the Flag-d/n-ATF5 and
b-gal (LacZ) transgenes. (b) Regulated expression of Flag-d/n-ATF5 (left-hand panels) and b-gal (right-hand panels) in the cortex,
SVZ and CC of bi-transgenic mice. One bi-transgenic mouse was maintained on Dox at conception and killed 63 days after birth
( þ Dox), whereas the other was maintained on Dox from conception until 35 days after birth, and then withdrawn from the drug and
killed 28 days later (Dox). Colorimetric staining of Flag-tagged d/n-ATF5 in the cortex (sagittal section) was achieved with antiFLAG M2 antibody and Vulcan Fast Red. Scale bar ¼ 10 mm. X-gal substrate was used for b-gal colorimetric detection. V ¼ lateral
ventricle; CC ¼ corpus callosum; Cx ¼ cortex; SVZ ¼ subventricular zone. Scale bar ¼ 20 mm. (c) Coordinately regulated expression of
Flag-d/n-ATF5 and b-gal within the SVZ and near the CA1 region of the hippocampus (orthogonal view) in a 79-day-old bi-transgenic
mouse raised without Dox since conception. Immunoﬂuorescence staining was carried out with anti-Flag (for detection of Flag-d/nATF5; green) and b-gal (red). Arrows in the merged panel indicate cell colocalization. The confocal (2 mm) orthogonal section image
shows the x–y and y–z location of both b-gal and Flag-d/n-ATF5 within the same cell. (d) Regulated expression of b-gal in GFAP þ
cells within the cortex of a bi-transgenic mouse. The animal was maintained on Dox from conception until 204 days after birth and the
drug was then withdrawn until being killed 50 days later. Panels show immunostaining with anti-GFAP (red) and anti-b-gal (green)
and arrows show the locations of cells in which both are co-expressed. (e) Regulated expression of b-gal in GFAP þ cells within the SVZ
of a bi-transgenic mouse. The mouse was maintained on doxycycline from conception until 167 days after birth and the drug was then
withdrawn until being killed 42 days later. Panels show immunostaining with anti-GFAP (green) and anti-b-gal (red) and arrows show
the locations of cells in which both are co-expressed. Diagrams show the brain areas where photographs were taken (adapted from
BrainMaps.org and http://www.hms.harvard.edu/research/brain/atlas). Scale bar ¼ 20 mm (c–e).

glioblastoma cells irrespective of their expression of p53
(Angelastro et al., 2006).
For our study, we constructed one control retrovirus
that encoded short-hairpin-p53 RNA interference (p53shRNA) and the DsRed ﬂuorescent reporter, as well as
a tumorigenic retrovirus also encoding PDGF-B-HA
(hemagglutinin tagged), besides p53-shRNA and
DsRed. The human U6 pol III drives the expression of
p53-shRNA, whereas the cytomegalovirus promoter
drives DsRed for the control retrovirus and PDGF-BHA and DsRed for the tumorigenic retrovirus
(Figure 3a). The retroviruses were stereotactically
injected into the SVZ and corpus callosum of the left
Oncogene

cerebral hemispheres of the mice at about 10 weeks of
age. Injection of the left hemisphere permitted comparison with the unaffected right hemisphere. Brains were
harvested at 40–180 days after viral injection, ﬁxed,
serially sectioned and stained and examined for the
presence of tumors. In some cases, brains were parafﬁn
embedded before sectioning to enhance the detection of
tumor tissue.
A large proportion (32/34; see Figure 5 for detailed
breakdown) of wild-type (fed with doxycycline), monotransgenic (hGFAP-tTA and pBi3-TETO-Flag-d/nATF5/LacZ; also with or without doxycycline) and
bi-transgenic mice (continuously fed with doxycycline)

Dominant-negative ATF5 inhibits gliomas
A Arias et al

743

developed malignant gliomas in response to injection
with the PDGF-B-HA/p53-shRNA retrovirus. Approximately 50% of animals formed gliomas by 40–45 days
post-injection and 94% between 90 and 180 days
post-injection. In contrast, animals receiving retrovirus
encoding only p53-shRNA did not form gliomas (n ¼ 3)
and those injected with virus encoding PDGF-B, but
not p53-shRNA, failed to reliably form tumors within
90 days.
The glioma cells were typically diffuse with hyperchromatic irregular nuclei and a sharp reduction in
neuronal density (hematoxylin and eosin (H&E);
Figures 3b, c0 and e0 ); about 10% exhibited pseudopalisading cells around necrotic foci. The tumors were also
highly invasive as evidenced by one example in which
tumor cells migrated away from the injection site in the
septo-diencephalic region to the caudal mesencephalon
region (Figure 3e; see also Figures 3c and 4a, c and
Supplementary Figure S4 for additional examples). The
appearance of tumor cells far from the site of viral
injection was not due to diffusion of the virus. Injection
of control p53-shRNA/DsRed retroviruses generated
infected cells only at the injection site and these were not
invasive (Supplementary Figure S5; see also Assanah
et al. (2006)). The high proliferative activity (100%
index) of the gliomas was indicated by the presence of
marked Ki67 staining, which contrasted with the paucity
of such staining in the contralateral hemisphere (0%
index) (Figures 3j and k). As evidence that the tumor
cells were derived from cells that took up the virus, they
expressed the HA tag (Figures 3c, e and g) and were
negative for p53 immunostaining (Figure 3h). This
contrasted with normal cells on the contralateral side or
that were remote from the tumor cells, which were HA
and p53 þ (Figures 3d, f and i; distal to the tumor).
These results were corroborated by staining for DsRed
(data not shown). In contrast to normal contralateral
brain tissue that has only a small proportion of cells
immunoreactive for PDGF-A receptors (Supplementary
Figure S4A), the gliomas were strongly positive for
PDGF-A receptor expression (Supplementary Figure
S4B, C). The glioma cells were also positive for the
expression of GFAP (Figure 4c) and, signiﬁcantly, for
ATF5 (Figures 4a and b). Immunoﬂuorescent microscopy for b-gal expression in the tumors (as well as in
ipsilateral normal brain tissue) in the doxycyclinetreated bi-transgenics showed no immunoreactivity,
conﬁrming that the d/n-ATF5/LacZ transgene was not
activated in presence of the drug (Figures 4a and b).
Finally, another indication of tumor formation in
response to the p53-shRNA/PDGF-B-HA/DsRed retrovirus was moribund behavior. Within the 180-day
course of the study, six of the 16 virally injected bitransgenic animals treated with doxycycline since conception to suppress d/n-ATF5 were judged by veterinary
staff to have become moribund and were immediately
killed (Figure 5b). All of these were found to harbor
gliomas. Taken together, these data provide evidence
that the p53-shRNA/PDGF-B-HA/DsRed retrovirus
effectively and rapidly induces gliomas in bi-transgenic
mice and that this model provides an effective system in

which to assess the effects of activating d/n-ATF5 on
tumor formation and maintenance.
Induction of d/n-ATF5 prevents and eradicates/regresses
gliomas
We next queried whether induction of d/n-ATF5
(achieved by withdrawal of doxycycline) would affect
tumor formation and maintenance. As noted above,
a high proportion (32/34) of control animals without
d/n-ATF5 expression formed malignant gliomas within
90–180 days post-injection with p53-shRNA/PDGF-BHA/DsRed retrovirus. This included bi-transgenic and
wild-type mice continuously fed doxycycline, as well as
hGFAP-tTA and pBi (III)-Flag-d/n-ATF5/LacZ monotransgenic mice either continuously treated with the
drug, withdrawn from it following viral injection, or
raised without the drug (Figure 5c). Of particular
importance, for bi-transgenic animals treated with
doxycycline, 14/14 (100%) formed gliomas within 90–
150 days and 15/16 (94%) by 180 days of viral treatment
(Figure 5e).
We used two basic paradigms to monitor the effects of
d/n-ATF5 on induced gliomas (Figure 5a). In the ﬁrst, a
‘prevention’ paradigm, animals were withdrawn from
doxycycline between 15 and 30 days before or on the
day of injection with PDGF-B-HA/p53-shRNA/DsRed
retrovirus and then assessed approximately 120–150
days later for tumor formation. Examination of the
brains from bi-transgenic animals subjected to this
paradigm revealed that only one of seven harbored a
glioma (Figures 5d and e). This result contrasted with
the 15/16 bi-transgenic mice treated with doxycycline
from conception that formed tumors within this time
(Figure 5e). In the case of the one ‘prevention paradigm’
animal that formed a tumor, staining for d/n-ATF5
revealed that although this was expressed in the
expected generative areas such as the SVZ, the tumor
itself and surrounding areas did not have detectable
d/n-ATF5 expression (data not shown). This suggests
that the cells forming this tumor failed either to contain
or to induce the d/n-ATF5 transgene.
In the second approach, a ‘regression/eradication’
paradigm, animals treated with doxycycline since conception were injected with the virus and maintained with
the drug for an additional 90–120 days to permit tumor
development and growth. As an indication that this time
was sufﬁcient for tumor formation, assessment of eight
mice continuously raised with doxycycline until 90–95
days after retroviral injection revealed that all eight had
formed gliomas (Figure 5e). After subjection to the
initial tumor-forming period with doxycycline, a total
of 24 mice were then withdrawn from the drug for
approximately 40–60 days to allow drug clearance
(14–21 days) and for potential regression/eradication
of the pre-existing tumors. Analysis revealed that none
of the 24 mice treated in this manner either exhibited
moribund behavior up to the time of being killed or
harbored detectable tumors (Figures 5b, d and e). This
included eight mice that had been maintained for a total
of 160–180 days after injection with the PDGF-B/p53Oncogene

Dominant-negative ATF5 inhibits gliomas
A Arias et al

744

Figure 3 Retrovirus encoding PDGF-B-HA and p53-short hairpin RNA (shRNA) induces gliomas within mouse brains, and knocks
down p53. (a) Scheme of self-inactivating retroviral construct used to induce gliomas. The 50 -long terminal repeat is intact, but the 30 deleted long terminal repeat possesses a deletion to prevent self-replication. The U6 pol III promoter drives transcription of p53-shRNA,
whereas the cytomegalovirus promoter drives transcription of the bicistronic PDGF-B-HA-IRES-DsRed-Express reporter. (b) Frozen
section. H&E staining reveals a glioma induced in a doxycycline-treated hGFAP-tTA  pBi-TETO-3-Flag-d/n-ATF5/b-gal bitransgenic mouse 100 days after stereotactic injection of retrovirus expressing PDGF-B-HA and p53-shRNA. Area of glioma is enclosed
within black line. (c, c0 –f, f0 ) Tumor cells induced by PDGF-B-HA/p53-shRNA express the HA tag and have dark hyperchromatic
nuclei. The bi-transgenic mouse was continuously maintained with doxycycline from conception and was killed 135 days after injection
with PDGF-B-HA/p53-shRNA retrovirus. Parafﬁn-embedded brain sections of PDGF-B-HA/p53-shRNA were immunostained with
rabbit anti-HA antibody (red) and 40 ,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (blue) (c–f) or H&E (c0 –f0 ). c, c0 , e and e0 show PDGF-B-HA/p53shRNA-induced tumors, whereas d, d0 , f and f0 are from the corresponding tumor-free contralateral hemisphere. Scale bar ¼ 12 mm.
(g–i) Tumors induced by PDGF-B-HA/p53-shRNA express the HA tag, but not p53. Photos show immunostained (for HA and p53)
parafﬁn-embedded brain sections from a bi-transgenic mouse continuously exposed to doxycycline from conception and killed 135 days
after retroviral injection. The HA þ , p53 sections in (g) and (h) include tumor tissue, whereas the p53 þ (green) section in (i) was outside
the tumor margins. Scale bar ¼ 5 mm. (j, k) Gliomas induced by PDGF-B-HA/p53-shRNA have a proliferative index of 100% calculated
from Ki67 immunostaining. A monotransgenic hGFAP-tTA mouse was continuously fed with doxycycline from conception and killed
31 days after stereotactic injection with PDGF-B-HA/p53-shRNA retrovirus. Parafﬁn-embedded brain sections were immunostained
for Ki67 antiserum with visualization by immunoperoxidase (brown). (j) Ki67 þ cells in a glioma induced in the injected hemisphere,
whereas (k) shows the absence of Ki67 staining in normal tissue in the contralateral hemisphere. Scale bar ¼ 10 mm. Diagrams of brain
sections in (c)–(k) show sites of retroviral injection (arrows) and corresponding areas where photographs were taken (vertical lines and
letters). Diagrams are adapted from http://www.hms.harvard.edu/research/brain/atlas.

shRNA retrovirus (Figure 5e). This contrasted with 15/
16 doxycycline-treated control bi-transgenic mice and
17/18 monotransgenic or wild-type mice that formed
tumors between 90 and 180 days after viral treatment and 6/16 doxycycline- and virus-treated control
Oncogene

bi-transgenics that were judged to be moribund within
this time frame (Figures 5b–e).
The absence of tumors in mice in which d/n-ATF5
was induced was veriﬁed by examination of serial
sections of frozen and parafﬁn-embedded brains stained

Dominant-negative ATF5 inhibits gliomas
A Arias et al

745

Figure 4 Bi-transgenic hGFAP-tTA  pBi-TETO-3-Flag-d/n-ATF5/b-gal mice do not harbor detectable gliomas after induction of d/
n-ATF5. (a, b) PDGF-B-HA/p53-shRNA-induced glioma in a bi-transgenic mouse expresses ATF5, but not the d/n-ATF5/b-gal
transgene. The mouse was continuously maintained on doxycycline from conception to suppress d/n-ATF5 induction and was killed
135 days post-stereotactic injection with PDGF-B-HA/p53-shRNA retrovirus. Brain sections were stained with rabbit anti-ATF5
antibody (red) and chicken anti-b-gal antibody (green). Note strong immunostaining for ATF5 and lack of b-gal immunostaining in
tumor (a) and only weak scattered, low-level ATF5 immunoreactivity in the contralateral hemisphere (b). H&E staining for (a) is from
the same brain shown in Figure 3c0 , and H&E staining for (b) is from the same brain shown in Figure 3d0 . Scale bar ¼ 6 mm.
(c, d) Immunostaining for the HA tag (red) and GFAP (green) detects a glioma, as shown by H&E staining, in a mouse in which
expression of d/n-ATF5 was suppressed (c), but not in a mouse in which d/n-ATF5 was induced (d). The right-hand panels show H&E
staining to conﬁrm the presence or absence of a glioma. Boxes within the H&E photos show where the anti-HA and anti-GFAP
immunoﬂuorescence images were taken. Scale bar ¼ 40 mm for H&E photos and 12 mm for immunoﬂuorescence images in (c) and (d).
The bi-transgenic mouse in (c) was continuously maintained on doxycycline from conception to suppress d/n-ATF5 induction and was
killed 135 days post-stereotactic injection with PDGF-B-HA/p53-shRNA retrovirus. Note HA and GFAP immunostaining in tumor
remote from site of injection (c). The bi-transgenic mouse in (d) was maintained on doxycycline from conception to 90 days postinjection with PDGF-B-HA/p53-shRNA retrovirus. Doxycycline was then withdrawn from the diet for 45 days to induce d/n-ATF5
and the animal was killed. Examination of serial brain sections revealed scattered HA-stained cells as shown, only at the site of viral
injection. GFAP þ cells at upper right reﬂect astrocytic activation in response to the injection wound. Parafﬁn-embedded sections.
(e, f) Evidence for eradication of a pre-existing tumor by induction of d/n-ATF5. The bi-transgenic mouse was maintained on
doxycycline from conception to 92 days post-injection with PDGF-B-HA/p53-shRNA retrovirus. Doxycycline was then withdrawn
from the diet for 50 days to induce d/n-ATF5. (e) Normal cells in contralateral hemisphere, but (f) lesions in the neutrophil remote
from the viral injection site in the ipsilateral hemisphere. Scale bar ¼ 20 mm. (g) Co-expression of cleaved caspase-3 (CC-3) and d/nATF5 in a tumor remnant in the ‘eradication/regression’ paradigm. A bi-transgenic mouse was maintained on doxycycline from
conception to 90 days after injection with PDGF-B-HA/p53-shRNA retrovirus. Doxycycline was then withdrawn from the diet for
50 days to induce d/n-ATF5 and the animal was killed. Brain sections that contained a remnant of a glioma were co-stained for Flagtagged d/n-ATF5 (green) and cleaved-caspase-3 (red). Scale bar ¼ 20 mm. Diagrams show the brain areas for stereotactic injection site
(arrow) with corresponding panel letter (diagrams adapted from http://www.hms.harvard.edu/research/brain/atlas).

with H&E as well as by immunohistochemistry for
GFAP, HA (to detect virally delivered PDGF-B-HA),
and DsRed (also to detect retroviral infection), Ki67
and ATF5. In these tumor-free mice, staining for HA
and DsRed, when present, was conﬁned to cells (many
of which were GFAP þ ) in the area of the viral injections
and did not show the cellular density, invasiveness or
morphology typical of gliomas (Figure 4d). In about
half of the animals, H&E staining showed architectural
disruption and lesions that were conﬁned to the virally

injected hemisphere, suggestive of the previous presence
of tumors (Figures 4e and f). In one case, we co-stained
the apparent remnants of a regressed/eradicated tumor
for Flag-tagged-d/n-ATF5 þ and cleaved caspase-3. This
revealed a small number of co-stained cells indicating
that induction of d/n-ATF5 promoted death of tumor
cells by an apoptotic mechanism (Figure 4g). Otherwise,
induction of d/n-ATF5 showed no evident damage to
normal brain tissue in the injected and contralateral
hemispheres. The persistence of apparently non-transOncogene

Dominant-negative ATF5 inhibits gliomas
A Arias et al

746

Figure 5 Induction of d/n-ATF5 in pBi3-Flag-d/n-ATF5/LacZ  hGFAP-tTA bi-transgenic mice blocks formation and causes
regression/eradication of gliomas induced by PDGF-B-HA/p53-shRNA. (a) Overview of experimental approach to testing the effect of
d/n-ATF5 on glioma generation and regression/eradication in mice. (b) Moribund behavior in bi-transgenic mice injected with
retrovirus expressing PDGF-B-HA/p53-shRNA and its prevention by induction of d/n-ATF5 in the glioma prevention and regression/
eradication paradigms. Data show cumulative percentage of injected mice judged by veterinary staff to have moribund behavior as a
function of time after viral injection. All mice found to exhibit moribund behavior were immediately killed and all were found to be
tumor bearing. (c) Gliomas are induced with high efﬁciency in mice in which d/n-ATF5 is not expressed. Data show percentage of
glioma formation in response to cerebral injection with PDGF-B-HA/p53-shRNA retrovirus in bi-transgenic (all treated with
doxycycline from conception), monotransgenic hGFAP-tTA (three treated with doxycycline from conception, six treated with
doxycycline from conception and withdrawn from the drug after viral injection, and two raised entirely without doxycycline),
monotransgenic Flag-d/n-ATF5/LacZ (one treated with doxycycline from conception, one treated with doxycycline from conception
and withdrawn from the drug after viral injection and two raised entirely without doxycycline) and wild-type (WT) (all treated with
doxycycline from conception) mice. N indicates numbers of animals in each group. *Bi-transgenic mice versus monotransgenic mice,
no statistical difference (P ¼ 1.0). (d) Induction of d/n-ATF5 suppresses generation of new gliomas and causes regression/eradication of
pre-existing gliomas. Percent bi-transgenic mice with detectable gliomas is shown for the three treatment paradigms described in (a)
and in the text and Materials and methods. The doxycycline-treated bi-transgenic mice in the ‘tumor generation’ paradigm are those
described in (b). N indicates numbers of animals in each group. *Bi-transgenic Dox þ versus bi-transgenic prevention Dox, P ¼ 0.0005;
**bi-transgenic Dox þ versus bi-transgenic Dox regression/eradication, P ¼ 4  1010. (e) Percentage of bi-transgenic mice with tumors
at different times of assessment after injection with PDGF-B-HA/p53-shRNA retrovirus and subjected to the three treatment
paradigms described in (a). Between 118 and 180 days. *Bi-transgenic Dox þ versus bi-transgenic prevention Dox, P ¼ 0.01;
**bi-transgenic Dox þ versus bi-transgenic Dox regression/eradication, P ¼ 0.000002. Animals are those described in panels c and d.
N indicates the number of animals assessed in each group at each time.

formed HA þ /GFAP þ cells at the site of viral injection
(Figure 4d) is consistent with this interpretation.

Discussion
The aim of this study was to determine whether
induction of d/n-ATF5 in mouse brain cells could block
the de novo formation of gliomas and could cause the
regression/eradication of pre-existing tumors. This
approach was highly effective in both scenarios with
no evident harmful effect on surrounding normal brain
tissue.
We took advantage of a previously described model
in which neural progenitor/stem cells are efﬁciently
Oncogene

transformed by inﬂux of PDGF-A homodimer ligand or
by infection with PDGF-B retrovirus (Assanah et al.,
2006, 2009; Jackson et al., 2006). This is in line with
reports that neural progenitor cells in the SVZ and
oligodendrocyte precursors in the corpus callosum
express PDGF-A receptors (Canoll and Goldman, 2008).
The resulting tumors highly resemble human glioblastomas and oligodendromas (Uhrbom et al., 1998, 2000;
Dai et al., 2001; Shih et al., 2004). We additionally used
co-delivery of p53-shRNA to accelerate the efﬁciency of
tumor formation (Hesselager et al., 2003).
Past work has established that human glioblastomas
invariably appear to express ATF5 (Dong et al., 2005;
Angelastro et al., 2006; Monaco et al., 2007; Sheng
et al., 2010) and that the level of expression correlates

Dominant-negative ATF5 inhibits gliomas
A Arias et al

747

with disease prognosis (Dong et al., 2005; Sheng et al.,
2010). Here, we also found that PDGF-B/p53-shRNAinduced mouse gliomas also express high levels of
ATF5. In addition, multiple independent cell lines
derived from human and rodent glioblastomas express
ATF5 (Angelastro et al., 2006) and we have shown that
ATF5 small interfering RNA and d/n-ATF5 cause
massive apoptotic death of all tested human and rat
glioblastoma cell lines in culture. In addition, retrovirally delivered d/n-ATF5 also induces high-efﬁciency
death of glioblastoma cells formed in rat brain from
injected C6 glioblastoma cells (Angelastro et al., 2006).
These studies have signiﬁcantly extended such work to a
de novo malignant glioma model in adult animals and
have established that d/n-ATF5 very effectively blocks
both generation and maintenance of such tumors in vivo.
In the tumor ‘prevention’ paradigm, only 1/7 animals
formed detectable gliomas as compared with 14/14
control animals over the same time period. For the one
animal in the ‘prevention’ paradigm that did form a
glioma, expression of d/n-ATF5 was absent from the
tumor. In the ‘regression/eradication’ paradigm, none of
the 24 animals formed tumors and none showed
moribund behavior. This included eight animals maintained up to 160–180 days after viral treatment. In
contrast, 15/16 control bi-transgenic animals (in which
d/n-ATF5 expression was suppressed) formed gliomas
within 180 days or less and 6/16 of which had to be
killed owing to moribund behavior.
Although we did not image animals to verify tumor
formation before inducing d/n-ATF5 in the ‘regression/
eradication’ paradigm, our ﬁndings strongly support the
likelihood that the animals had developed gliomas by
this time. In our study, virally treated animals were
maintained with doxycycline for 90–120 days before
d/n-ATF5 induction. This should have provided ample
time for tumors to form. For example, for doxycyclinetreated bi-transgenic mice, 8/8 examined between 90–95
days after viral treatment had formed gliomas. On the
basis of the high proportion of animals that formed
tumors when d/n-ATF5 was not induced (32/34; 94%),
it also appears highly likely that most of the animals
in the ‘regression/eradication’ paradigm would have
formed tumors by the time that d/n-ATF5 was induced.
Such ﬁndings predict that 21–23 of the 24 animals in the
‘regression/eradication’ paradigm would have formed
tumors and that the probability that none of the 24
would have formed tumors is Po1.0  108 (Fisher’s
exact test). Furthermore, the presence of architectural
disruptions in brains of about half of the d/n-ATF5expressing mice in the ‘regression/eradication’ paradigm
further supports the previous formation of tumors.
One question that our study did not entirely address
and that remains to be determined is whether induction
of d/n-ATF5 fully eradicates tumors or whether it
causes them to regress to an undetectable size that will
ultimately grow back over a longer period of time than
covered in our experiments. It also remains to be
determined whether tumors will return upon retreatment with doxycycline to suppress d/n-ATF5 expression. Past studies indicate that tumor stem cells express

ATF5 (Schrot et al., 2007; Sheng et al., 2010), which
raises the possibility that d/n-ATF5 may interfere with
this potential source of tumor regrowth and expansion.
The precise mechanism by which d/n-ATF5 blocks
glioma formation or maintenance in our in vivo model
remains to be fully investigated. Our earlier studies
showed that d/n-ATF5 expression and ATF5-small
interfering RNA interference lead to massive caspasedependent apoptosis of cultured glioblastoma cell lines
(Angelastro et al., 2006). Likewise, breast cancer cell
lines exhibited condensed or fragmented chromatin,
indicative of apoptosis, after the expression of d/nATF5 (Monaco et al., 2007). Consistent with this, in
this, we detected co-expression of cleaved caspase-3 and
FLAG-d/n-ATF5 in the remnant of a tumor in an
animal in which d/n-ATF5 had been induced. Although
interference with ATF5 function causes cell cycle exit in
cells such as activated astrocytes and neuroprogenitor
cells (Angelastro et al., 2006), it did not do so in the case
of cultured glioblastoma cells (Angelastro et al., 2006)
or of HeLa or FL5.12 cells (Persengiev et al., 2002), and
so it seems highly likely that the elimination at least of
pre-existing gliomas by d/n-ATF5 is due to active
promotion of cell death rather than to stasis. The
induction of p53 can be an effective means to block
tumor progression; however, in our tumor eradication
experiments, p53 expression was suppressed in the
induced gliomas by p53-shRNA. Also, in cultured
glioblastoma lines, the capacity of d/n-ATF5 or ATF5
small interfering RNA to cause apoptotic death was
independent of whether the cells had intact or deﬁcient
p53 signaling (Angelastro et al., 2006).
The current literature identiﬁes several ATF5-responsive genes with the potential to have roles in glioma cell
survival and death. These include heat-shock protein 27
(Wang et al., 2007), which can protect neoplastic cells
from apoptosis (Concannon et al., 2001, 2003; Garrido
et al., 2003; Elstrand et al., 2009), EGR-1 (Li et al.,
2009), which is reported to govern both cell survival and
death (Thiel and Cibelli, 2002), the anti-apoptotic
myeloid cell leukemia sequence-1 (MCL1) gene (Sheng
et al., 2010) as well as the anti-apoptotic Bcl-2 gene
(Dluzen et al., 2011). Our model system is amenable to
testing these and other potential ATF5-regulated genes
for their roles in glioma survival and death.
An important feature of our ﬁndings was that while
d/n-ATF5 blocked formation of and eliminated gliomas,
it had no evident harmful effects on normal brain tissue.
There were no evident behavioral changes in animals
with long-term d/n-ATF5 induction and brain structure
appeared to be normal with the exception of an
apparent mild enlargement of the lateral ventricles. We
also failed to detect cleaved caspase-3 in any non-tumor
cells in which d/n-ATF5 was induced. As in our
previous studies of embryonic and neonatal brain
(Angelastro et al., 2003, 2005), ATF5 expression in
post-natal mouse brain appeared to be mainly limited to
neurogenic zones and to scattered glial precursors and
absent from post-mitotic neurons. In our past work,
we found that d/n-ATF5 caused premature cell cycle
exit and differentiation of neuroprogenitors and glial
Oncogene

Dominant-negative ATF5 inhibits gliomas
A Arias et al

748

precursors, but did not appear to affect their survival
either in vitro or in vivo (Angelastro et al., 2005; Mason
et al., 2005). We also noted that ATF5 is re-expressed in
astrocytes that were stimulated to proliferate by serial
passage in culture (Angelastro et al., 2006). Although
d/n-ATF5 caused such cells to exit the cycle, it did not
promote their death. In this study, we also observed the
long-term survival of normal GFAP þ cells in which d/nATF5 had been induced. In addition, while d/n-ATF5
caused death of multiple breast cancer cell lines, it was
without effect on survival of non-transformed breast cell
lines (Monaco et al., 2007). Taken together, current
ﬁndings thus indicate that interference with ATF5
function appears to spare the survival of normal brain
(and at least some other) tissues while leading to the
death of transformed glioma and breast cancer cells.
The one phenotypic response that we observed in
animals with long-term induction of d/n-ATF5 was an
apparent mild enlargement of the lateral ventricles. This
could be due to enhanced differentiation of neural
progenitors in the neurogenic niches along the lateral
ventricles into neurons and glia as seen in our embryonic
studies (Angelastro et al., 2003, 2005), and/or to
inhibited proliferation of such cells. Although reduction
of adult neuroprogenitor cell numbers may conceivably
inﬂuence cognition and/or mood (Santarelli et al., 2003;
David et al., 2009), the indications that d/n-ATF5 is not
lethal for normal neuroprogenitor cells and has static
actions on activated astrocytes raises the testable
possibility that its effects on these populations may be
readily reversible.
Our observation that d/n-ATF5 causes effective
regression/eradication of induced gliomas supports the
idea of targeting ATF5 to treat human glioblastomas.
This is bolstered by the apparent universal expression of
ATF5 in human gliomas (Dong et al., 2005; Angelastro
et al., 2006; Monaco et al., 2007; Sheng et al., 2010) and
by the effectiveness of interfering with ATF5 function
on promoting death of a wide variety of glioma cell lines
(Angelastro et al., 2006). Although targeting transcription factors is often considered as especially challenging,
several potential routes to this end are conceivable. For
instance, one approach would be to design pharmaceutical inhibitors of ATF5 function based on its structural
properties. Signiﬁcant progress has been made towards
expressing, refolding and structurally characterizing the
ATF5 bZip domain with this end in mind (Ciaccio et al.,
2008; Ciaccio and Laurence, 2009). Another approach
would be to target the pathway(s) responsible for ATF5
expression in gliomas. The human ATF5 promoter has
been described (Wei et al., 2010) and a recent genomewide RNA interference screen identiﬁed a RAS/MAPK/
PI3K/CREB3L2 signaling pathway responsible for
ATF5 expression in glioma cells (Sheng et al., 2010).
Signiﬁcantly, interference with this pathway by the
RafK inhibitor sorafenib inhibits ATF5 expression and
glioma growth in vitro and inhibited tumor formation in
a mouse orthotopic glioma model (Sheng et al., 2010).
A third approach would be to target downstream targets
of ATF5 responsible for tumor survival such as the heatshock protein 27, EGR-1, MCL-1 and Bcl-2 described
Oncogene

above. Finally, the ﬁndings regarding the efﬁcacy of d/nATF5 in causing regression/eradication of malignant
gliomas through an interfering peptide (based on the
sequence of d/n-ATF5) would be a potential therapy for
glioblastomas, delivered either systemically or locally
within the brain. Preliminary experiments with a cellpenetrant form of d/n-ATF5 lead us to believe that this
approach is both feasible and effective.
Materials and methods
Animals
Flag-tagged-NT-Azip-ATF5 (d/n-ATF5) was subcloned into
the Not1 and Sal1 sites of the bi-directional TETO (pBiTETO-3)
vector. The TETO element has one cytomegalovirus minimum
promoter on each end. Thus, the pBI-3 vector expresses the
d/n-ATF5 on one side of the TETO promoter, whereas
LacZ (b-gal) is expressed at the opposite side of the promoter (Baron et al., 1995). Pronuclear microinjection of the
linearized pBiTETO-d/n-ATF5 construct into B6CBA/F1
mouse embryos created two founder mice (Columbia University, New York, NY, USA). One pBiTETO-d/n-ATF5
transgenic B6CBA/F1 mouse was able to transmit the
transgene, and a new mouse line was established. Two male
TETO-d/n-ATF5/ þ mice were shipped to the University of
California Davis Mouse Biology Program, rederived and
backcrossed seven generations into a C57BL/6J background.
C57BL/6J male mice with the hGFAP-tTA transgene were
kindly provided by Dr Kenneth McCarthy, University of
North Carolina Chapel Hill (Chapel Hill, NC, USA) (10
generations C57BL/6 backcrossed). The hGFAP-tTA mice
were rederived into C57BL/6J background at University of
California Davis (Davis, CA, USA). TETO-d/n-ATF5/ þ male
mice were bred with homozygous hGFAP-tTA þ / þ C57BL/6J
female mice to produce litters with 50% bi-transgenic offspring. Monogenic TETO-d/n-ATF5/ þ mice were produced by
breeding TETO-d/n-ATF5/ þ with heterozygous hGFAP-tTA/ þ
mice. The hGFAP-tTA female mice were routinely harem
bred with one TETO-d/n-ATF5/ þ male to minimize genetic
variability. Doxycycline (200 mg/kg; Bio-Serve, Frenchtown,
NJ, USA) was administrated in the chow to inhibit transgene
expression, where indicated. The Institutional Animal Care and
Use Committee approved mouse protocol (13026) according to
strict Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee regulations
and guidelines at the University of California Davis and the
National Institutes of Health.
Stereotactic viral injection and killing of animals
Adult mice were anesthetized with 2% isoﬂurane/oxygen
mixture. The fur on top of their heads was shaved to expose
the skin for surgical incision. The mice were then placed into
the stereotactic apparatus with continuous ﬂow of isoﬂurane
(2–5%) and oxygen. The scalps were sagittally incised to expose
the skull, and a 1 mm burr hole was drilled in the skull.
A Hamilton syringe vertically attached to the apparatus injected
1.0–1.8 ml of Dulbecco’s modiﬁed Eagle’s medium containing
100 PDGF-B HA/p53-shRNA/DsRed or p53-shRNA/DsRed
Express retroviral particles per ml (0.2 ml/min) at stereotactic
coordinates (relative to Bregma) 1.0 mm anterior, 1.0 mm
lateral and at a depth of 2.3 mm from the skull. The scalps
were closed with Vetbond tissue adhesive and the mice were
then injected intraperitoneally with carporfen (5 mg/kg). The
animals were monitored throughout the following period,
which varied from 40 to 180 days. The mice were killed by
intraperitoneal injection of ketamine (intraperitoneally at

Dominant-negative ATF5 inhibits gliomas
A Arias et al

749
80–100 mg/kg) and xylazine (intraperitoneally at 5–10 mg/kg),
or by deep isoﬂurane/oxygen anesthesia followed by cervical
dislocation or transcardiac perfusion with 0.9% NaCl.
Tissue preparation
Mouse brains harvested after being killed were washed in
phosphate-buffered saline, ﬁxed in 4% paraformaldehyde and
incubated overnight in 30% sucrose. The brains were then
mounted in OCT media, frozen and cut into 14-mm coronal
sections. Alternatively, perfused brains were ﬁxed in 10%
formalin and then embedded in parafﬁn. Parafﬁn blocks were
cut as 5-mm sections. The parafﬁn sections were subjected to
antigen retrieval as described (Schrot et al., 2007). Slides
containing sections were stained with antibodies for the following: b-gal (LacZ: Abcam, Cambridge, MA, USA; 1:1000), mouse
GFAP (1:500), mouse nestin (1:500) and rabbit anti-Musashi
(1:500) (Millipore, Billerica, MA, USA). Anti-Flag M2 (1:200)
and 40 ,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole were from Sigma-Aldrich
(St Louis, MO, USA). Mouse anti-p53 C12 (1:1000) and rabbit
anti-cleaved caspase-3 (1:1600) were from Cell Signaling
(Danvers, MA, USA); rabbit anti-HA (4 mg/ml; sc-805) was
from Santa Cruz Biotechnology (Santa Cruz, CA, USA); rabbit
anti-PDGF-A receptor was from Spring Bioscience (Pleasanton,
CA, USA); and rabbit anti-Ki67 (1:1000) was from Leica
Microsystems Inc. (Buffalo Grove, IL, USA). Rabbit antiATF5 antiserum was used at 1:500 (Angelastro et al., 2006).
Sections were then visualized with immunoﬂuorescence (Alexa
488/568; Invitrogen, Eugene, OR, USA) or colorimetrically with
diaminobenzidine or fast red (Mach2; Biocare Medical,
Concord, CA, USA) and photographed on a Carl Zeiss
Axiovert 200 with Axiocam video capture or with Olympus
FV-1000 confocal microscope and the Fluoview software.
Tumor detection
Assessment for brain tumors was achieved through examination of sequential serial sections from each brain. Gliomas
were detected using 40 ,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole and H&E
staining and were observed as diffuse inﬁltrative hyperchromatic high-density cells with atypical nuclei. In areas where
gliomas occupied the cortex, neurons were greatly reduced in
number. All brains were immunostained with anti-GFAP.
There was an increase in GFAP staining in regions where
tumors developed. In addition, all brains were immunostained
with anti-b-gal. In all cases there was no detectable b-gal signal
in doxycycline þ brains, but all doxycycline– brains showed
detectable b-gal. For further identiﬁcation of tumor cells, we
immunostained a subset of brains with anti-HA, anti-Ki67 and

anti-PDGFR-A, and anti-ATF5 markers. All tumors were
immunopositive for all of the markers. Detection with DsRed
was also immunoreactive in the tumors, but not in normal
cells. Similar results were found in both parafﬁn-embedded
brains (13% of total) and frozen brains (87% of total). A
veterinary neuropathologist (RJH) examined 21% of the total
brains to conﬁrm the presence and absence of tumor cells.
Statistical analysis
A 2  2 contingency table was generated to determine the
likelihood ratio test statistic using the Fisher’s exact test
(http://www.matforsk.no/ola/ﬁsher.htm).
Conﬂict of interest
Columbia University, on behalf of inventors Drs Angelastro
and Greene, has been awarded a United States patent
(no.7 888 326 B2) for use of ATF5 inhibitors to promote death
of neoplastic cells. Dr Luca Santarelli is currently a full-time
employee of F Hoffmann-La Roche Ltd. However, his
contributions to this work were completed before his employment relationship with F Hoffmann-La Roche Ltd. Drs AA,
MWLé and RH declare no potential conﬂict of interest.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported in part by NIH Grant NS-33689
and an award from the Alexander and Margaret Stewart Trust
(to LAG); NIH-NCI F31 CA123711-01A1 (to ADA); and
in part support of the UCD Cancer Center Support Grant
5P30CA093373-06S1 (to JMA) and in full NIH-NCI
R21CA126924 (to JMA). We thank Benjamin Pyles for his
technical assistance in management of the mouse colony,
genotyping, surgeries and anesthesia, as well as planning
experimental end points. We thank Dr Stephen Noctor for the
use of the Olympus FV-1000 confocal microscope and
Fluoview software. We are indebted to Dr Robert Higgins
(Neuropathologist, DVM/PhD) for assessment and evaluation
of gliomas in mice with and without induced expression of
d/n-ATF5.
Author contributions: Conceived and designed the experiments: ADA, MWL, LS, RH, LAG, JMA. Performed the
experiments: ADA, MWL, JMA. Analyzed the data: ADA,
MWL, LAG, LS, JMA. Contributed reagents/materials/analysis
tools: RH, LS, LAG. Wrote the paper: ADA, LAG, JMA.

References
Alvarez-Buylla A, Lim DA. (2004). For the long run: maintaining
germinal niches in the adult brain. Neuron 41: 683–686.
Angelastro JM, Canoll PD, Kuo J, Weicker M, Costa A, Bruce JN
et al. (2006). Selective destruction of glioblastoma cells by interference
with the activity or expression of ATF5. Oncogene 25: 907–916.
Angelastro JM, Ignatova TN, Kukekov VG, Steindler DA, Stengren
GB, Mendelsohn C et al. (2003). Regulated expression of ATF5 is
required for the progression of neural progenitor cells to neurons.
J Neurosci 23: 4590–4600.
Angelastro JM, Mason JL, Ignatova TN, Kukekov VG, Stengren GB,
Goldman JE et al. (2005). Downregulation of activating transcription factor 5 is required for differentiation of neural progenitor cells
into astrocytes. J Neurosci 25: 3889–3899.
Assanah M, Lochhead R, Ogden A, Bruce J, Goldman J, Canoll P.
(2006). Glial progenitors in adult white matter are driven to form

malignant gliomas by platelet-derived growth factor-expressing
retroviruses. J Neurosci 26: 6781–6790.
Assanah MC, Bruce JN, Suzuki SO, Chen A, Goldman JE, Canoll P.
(2009). PDGF stimulates the massive expansion of glial progenitors
in the neonatal forebrain. Glia 57: 1835–1847.
Baron U, Freundlieb S, Gossen M, Bujard H. (1995). Co-regulation of
two gene activities by tetracycline via a bidirectional promoter.
Nucleic Acids Res 23: 3605–3606.
Canoll P, Goldman JE. (2008). The interface between glial progenitors
and gliomas. Acta Neuropathol 116: 465–477.
Ciaccio NA, Laurence JS. (2009). Effects of disulﬁde bond formation
and protein helicity on the aggregation of activating transcription
factor 5. Mol Pharm 6: 1205–1215.
Ciaccio NA, Moreno ML, Bauer RL, Laurence JS. (2008). Highyield expression in E. coli and refolding of the bZIP domain
Oncogene

Dominant-negative ATF5 inhibits gliomas
A Arias et al

750
of activating transcription factor 5. Protein Expr Purif 62:
235–243.
Concannon CG, Gorman AM, Samali A. (2003). On the role of Hsp27
in regulating apoptosis. Apoptosis 8: 61–70.
Concannon CG, Orrenius S, Samali A. (2001). Hsp27 inhibits
cytochrome c-mediated caspase activation by sequestering both
pro-caspase-3 and cytochrome c. Gene Expr 9: 195–201.
Dai C, Celestino JC, Okada Y, Louis DN, Fuller GN, Holland EC.
(2001). PDGF autocrine stimulation dedifferentiates cultured
astrocytes and induces oligodendrogliomas and oligoastrocytomas
from neural progenitors and astrocytes in vivo. Genes Dev 15:
1913–1925.
Dai C, Holland EC. (2001). Glioma models. Biochim Biophys Acta
1551: M19–M27.
David DJ, Samuels BA, Rainer Q, Wang JW, Marsteller D, Mendez I
et al. (2009). Neurogenesis-dependent and -independent effects of
ﬂuoxetine in an animal model of anxiety/depression. Neuron 62:
479–493.
Dluzen D, Li G, Tacelosky D, Moreau M, Liu DX. (2011). Bcl-2 is a
downstream target of ATF5 that mediates ATF50 pro-survival
function in a cell type-dependent manner. J Biol Chem 286:
7705–7713.
Dong S, Nutt CL, Betensky RA, Stemmer-Rachamimov AO, Denko
NC, Ligon KL et al. (2005). Histology-based expression proﬁling
yields novel prognostic markers in human glioblastoma.
J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 64: 948–955.
Elstrand MB, Kleinberg L, Kohn EC, Trope CG, Davidson B. (2009).
Expression and clinical role of antiapoptotic proteins of the bag,
heat shock, and Bcl-2 families in effusions, primary tumors,
and solid metastases in ovarian carcinoma. Int J Gynecol Pathol
28: 211–221.
Fiacco TA, Agulhon C, Taves SR, Petravicz J, Casper KB, Dong X
et al. (2007). Selective stimulation of astrocyte calcium in situ
does not affect neuronal excitatory synaptic activity. Neuron 54:
611–626.
Garrido C, Schmitt E, Cande C, Vahsen N, Parcellier A, Kroemer G.
(2003). HSP27 and HSP70: potentially oncogenic apoptosis
inhibitors. Cell Cycle 2: 579–584.
Ghashghaei HT, Weimer JM, Schmid RS, Yokota Y, McCarthy KD,
Popko B et al. (2007). Reinduction of ErbB2 in astrocytes promotes
radial glial progenitor identity in adult cerebral cortex. Genes Dev
21: 3258–3271.
Gossen M, Bonin AL, Freundlieb S, Bujard H. (1994). Inducible gene
expression systems for higher eukaryotic cells. Curr Opin Biotechnol
5: 516–520.
Gossen M, Bujard H. (1992). Tight control of gene expression in
mammalian cells by tetracycline-responsive promoters. Proc Natl
Acad Sci U S A 89: 5547–5551.
Greene LA, Lee HY, Angelastro JM. (2009). The transcription factor
ATF5: role in neurodevelopment and neural tumors. J Neurochem
108: 11–22.
Hede SM, Hansson I, Aﬁnk GB, Eriksson A, Nazarenko I, Andrae J
et al. (2009). GFAP promoter driven transgenic expression of
PDGFB in the mouse brain leads to glioblastoma in a Trp53 null
background. Glia 57: 1143–1153.
Hesselager G, Uhrbom L, Westermark B, Nister M. (2003).
Complementary effects of platelet-derived growth factor autocrine
stimulation and p53 or Ink4a-Arf deletion in a mouse glioma model.
Cancer Res 63: 4305–4309.
Jackson EL, Alvarez-Buylla A. (2008). Characterization of adult
neural stem cells and their relation to brain tumors. Cells Tissues
Organs 188: 212–224.
Jackson EL, Garcia-Verdugo JM, Gil-Perotin S, Roy M, QuinonesHinojosa A, VandenBerg S et al. (2006). PDGFR alpha-positive B
cells are neural stem cells in the adult SVZ that form gliomalike growths in response to increased PDGF signaling. Neuron 51:
187–199.
Krylov D, Olive M, Vinson C. (1995). Extending dimerization
interfaces: the bZIP basic region can form a coiled coil. EMBO J
14: 5329–5337.
Oncogene

Li G, Li W, Angelastro JM, Greene LA, Liu DX. (2009). Identiﬁcation
of a novel DNA binding site and a transcriptional target for
activating transcription factor 5 in c6 glioma and mcf-7 breast
cancer cells. Mol Cancer Res 7: 933–943.
Mason JL, Angelastro JM, Ignatova TN, Kukekov VG, Lin G,
Greene LA et al. (2005). ATF5 regulates the proliferation
and differentiation of oligodendrocytes. Mol Cell Neurosci 29:
372–380.
Moitra J, Mason MM, Olive M, Krylov D, Gavrilova O, MarcusSamuels B et al. (1998). Life without white fat: a transgenic mouse.
Genes Dev 12: 3168–3181.
Moll JR, Olive M, Vinson C. (2000). Attractive interhelical electrostatic interactions in the proline- and acidic-rich region (PAR)
leucine zipper subfamily preclude heterodimerization with other
basic leucine zipper subfamilies. J Biol Chem 275: 34826–34832.
Monaco SE, Angelastro JM, Szabolcs M, Greene LA. (2007). The
transcription factor ATF5 is widely expressed in carcinomas, and
interference with its function selectively kills neoplastic, but not
nontransformed, breast cell lines. Int J Cancer 120: 1883–1890.
Mu Y, Lee SW, Gage FH. (2010). Signaling in adult neurogenesis.
Curr Opin Neurobiol 20: 416–423.
Ogden AT, Waziri AE, Lochhead RA, Fusco D, Lopez K, Ellis JA
et al. (2008). Identiﬁcation of A2B5+CD133 tumor-initiating
cells in adult human gliomas. Neurosurgery 62: 505–514; discussion
514–515.
Pascual O, Casper KB, Kubera C, Zhang J, Revilla-Sanchez R, Sul JY
et al. (2005). Astrocytic purinergic signaling coordinates synaptic
networks. Science 310: 113–116.
Persengiev SP, Devireddy LR, Green MR. (2002). Inhibition of
apoptosis by ATFx: a novel role for a member of the ATF/CREB
family of mammalian bZIP transcription factors. Genes Dev 16:
1806–1814.
Riquelme PA, Drapeau E, Doetsch F. (2008). Brain micro-ecologies:
neural stem cell niches in the adult mammalian brain. Philos Trans
R Soc Lond Ser B 363: 123–137.
Santarelli L, Saxe M, Gross C, Surget A, Battaglia F, Dulawa S et al.
(2003). Requirement of hippocampal neurogenesis for the behavioral effects of antidepressants. Science 301: 805–809.
Schrot RJ, Ma JH, Greco CM, Arias AD, Angelastro JM. (2007).
Organotypic distribution of stem cell markers in formalinﬁxed brain harboring glioblastoma multiforme. J Neurooncol 85:
149–157.
Sheng Z, Li L, Zhu LJ, Smith TW, Demers A, Ross AH et al. (2010). A
genome-wide RNA interference screen reveals an essential
CREB3L2-ATF5-MCL1 survival pathway in malignant glioma
with therapeutic implications. Nat Med 16: 671–677.
Shih AH, Dai C, Hu X, Rosenblum MK, Koutcher JA, Holland EC.
(2004). Dose-dependent effects of platelet-derived growth factor-B
on glial tumorigenesis. Cancer Res 64: 4783–4789.
Singh SK, Clarke ID, Terasaki M, Bonn VE, Hawkins C, Squire J
et al. (2003). Identiﬁcation of a cancer stem cell in human brain
tumors. Cancer Res 63: 5821–5828.
Stupp R, Mason WP, van den Bent MJ, Weller M, Fisher B,
Taphoorn MJ et al. (2005). Radiotherapy plus concomitant and
adjuvant temozolomide for glioblastoma. N Engl J Med 352: 987–996.
Sweger EJ, Casper KB, Scearce-Levie K, Conklin BR, McCarthy KD.
(2007). Development of hydrocephalus in mice expressing the G(i)coupled GPCR Ro1 RASSL receptor in astrocytes. J Neurosci 27:
2309–2317.
Thiel G, Cibelli G. (2002). Regulation of life and death by the zinc
ﬁnger transcription factor Egr-1. J Cell Physiol 193: 287–292.
Uhrbom L, Hesselager G, Nister M, Westermark B. (1998). Induction
of brain tumors in mice using a recombinant platelet-derived growth
factor B-chain retrovirus. Cancer Res 58: 5275–5279.
Uhrbom L, Hesselager G, Ostman A, Nister M, Westermark B. (2000).
Dependence of autocrine growth factor stimulation in plateletderived growth factor-B-induced mouse brain tumor cells. Int J
Cancer 85: 398–406.
Vescovi AL, Galli R, Reynolds BA. (2006). Brain tumour stem cells.
Nat Rev Cancer 6: 425–436.

Dominant-negative ATF5 inhibits gliomas
A Arias et al

751
Vinson CR, Hai T, Boyd SM. (1993). Dimerization speciﬁcity of the
leucine zipper-containing bZIP motif on DNA binding: prediction
and rational design. Genes Dev 7: 1047–1058.
Wang H, Lin G, Zhang Z. (2007). ATF5 promotes cell survival
through transcriptional activation of Hsp27 in H9c2 cells. Cell Biol
Int 31: 1309–1315.
Wang Z, Ahmad A, Li Y, Kong D, Azmi AS, Banerjee S et al. (2010).
Emerging roles of PDGF-D signaling pathway in tumor development and progression. Biochim Biophys Acta 1806: 122–130.

Wei Y, Ge Y, Zhou F, Chen H, Cui C, Liu D et al. (2010).
Identiﬁcation and characterization of the promoter of human ATF5
gene. J Biochem 148: 171–178.

This work is licensed under the Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial-No
Derivative
Works 3.0 Unported License. To view a copy of this license,
visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/3.0/

Supplementary Information accompanies the paper on the Oncogene website (http://www.nature.com/onc)

Oncogene

