Oncotarget, Vol. 7, No. 29

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Research Paper

Methamphetamine-mediated endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress
induces type-1 programmed cell death in astrocytes via ATF6,
IRE1a and PERK pathways
Ankit Shah1, Anil Kumar1
1

Division of Pharmacology and Toxicology, School of Pharmacy, University of Missouri-Kansas City, Kansas City, MO 64108, USA

Correspondence to: Ankit Shah, email: shahank@umkc.edu
Keywords: methamphetamine, astrocytes, ER stress, CHOP, apoptosis
Received: December 29, 2015     Accepted: May 26, 2016     Published: June 14, 2016

ABSTRACT
Methamphetamine (MA), a psychostimulant drug has been associated with
a variety of neurotoxic effects which are thought to be mediated by induction of
pro-inflammatory cytokines/chemokines, oxidative stress and damage to bloodbrain-barrier. Conversely, the ER stress-mediated apoptosis has been implicated
in several neurodegenerative diseases. However, its involvement in MA-mediated
neurodegenerative effects remains largely unexplored. The present study was
undertaken to assess the effect of MA on ER stress and its possible involvement in
apoptosis. For this purpose, SVGA astrocytes were treated with MA, which induced the
expressions of BiP and CHOP at both, mRNA and protein levels. This phenomenon was
also confirmed in HFA and various regions of mouse brain. Assessment of IRE1a, ATF6
and PERK pathways further elucidated the mechanistic details underlying MA-mediated
ER stress. Knockdown of various intermediate molecules in ER stress pathways using
siRNA demonstrated reduction in MA-mediated CHOP. Finally, MA-mediated apoptosis
was demonstrated via MTT assay and TUNEL staining. The involvement of ER stress
in the apoptosis was demonstrated with the help of MTT and TUNEL assays in the
presence of siRNA against various ER stress proteins. The apoptosis also involved
activation of caspase-3 and caspase-9, which was reversed by knockdown with
various siRNAs. Altogether, this is the first report demonstrating mechanistic details
responsible for MA-mediated ER stress and its role in apoptosis. This study provides a
novel group of targets that can be explored in future for management of MA-mediated
cell death and MA-associated neurodegenerative disorders.

[13] and increased excitotoxicity [14]. Recently, the
data from our laboratory have also reported increase in
proinflammatory cytokines and involvement of cytochrome
P450 in MA-mediated oxidative stress as other possible
mechanisms for MA-mediated neurotoxicity. [15, 16].
Among various neurotoxic outcomes, MA abuse
also induces apoptosis in a variety of brain cells [16–18].
Apoptosis is a highly regulated process to induce cell
death, which involves complex signaling cascades and
stress responses [19]. Several studies have demonstrated
that increased oxidative stress, DNA damage, endoplasmic
reticulum (ER) stress, heat shock proteins and
mitochondrial stress serve as underlying mechanisms to
induce apoptotic cell death [20].
ER stress is a transient process that enables cells
to overcome the abnormal accumulation of unfolded/

INTRODUCTION
Methamphetamine (MA) is a potent psychostimulant
drug that is widely abused worldwide including United
States. A 2013 study by National Survey on Drug Use
and Health (NSDUH) has shown that over 12 million
people (4.7 percent of the population) have tried
methamphetamine at least once [1]. Its effect usually lasts
for 10-12 hours and it causes an increase in the release
of epinephrine, serotonin, and a decrease in dopamine as
well as dopamine transporter (DT) [2–7]. MA also causes
alterations in brain structure including gray matter loss,
neuronal damage and microgliosis in various regions of
the brain [8–10]. These changes in the brain have been
attributed to oxidative stress [11], alteration in blood-brain
barrier (BBB) integrity [12], mitochondrial dysfunction
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

46100

Oncotarget

misfolded proteins [21, 22]. It has been implicated in
several diseases such as Parkinson’s disease, ischemia,
atherosclerosis and diabetes [23–25]. In addition,
increased ER stress has been correlated with MAmediated neurotoxicity [13, 26–28]. Several reports have
demonstrated increased expressions of various ER stress
markers and chaperones due to MA leading to neuronal
death. However, the underlying mechanism responsible
for MA-mediated ER stress is not fully elucidated yet. The
ER stress is a complex process that involves activation
of 3 major signaling pathways: Activating transcription
factor 6 (ATF6), Inositol-requiring enzyme-1α (IRE1α)
and Protein kinase RNA-like endoplasmic reticulum
kinase (PERK). In response to the accumulation of
unfolded proteins in the ER, BiP is released from IRE1α,
PERK and ATF6 to chaperone the accumulated proteins
to degradation via ubiquitination [22]. The BiP-free ER
stress sensors are differentially activated to initiate their
downstream cascades leading to increase in C/EBP
homologous protein (CHOP), indicating increased ER
stress. Moreover, increased expression of CHOP has been
reported to activate apoptosis in various studies [23, 29–
31].
Among various cells in the brain, astrocytes perform
a variety of maintenance and regulatory functions such
as regulation of glutamatergic signaling, maintenance of
metabolites and extracellular ions, synaptic maintenance
and structural support [32]. Since astrocytes contribute
to about 40-60% of the cells in the brain, it is important
to understand the indirect neurotoxicity resulting from
astrocytes. Studies have demonstrated increased ER stress
in astrocytes via PERK activation, which further leads to
increase in oxidative stress and inflammation via various
signaling pathways [33, 34]. The increased ER stress in
astrocytes has been implicated in Alzheimer’s disease
[35] and Parkinson’s disease [36]. Thus, it is important to
understand the effect of MA on astrocytic ER stress.
In the present study, we sought to address the
underlying mechanism(s) responsible for MA-mediated
ER stress. We further extended our study to understand
the effect of MA-mediated ER stress on apoptosis.

MA for 3, 6 12 and 24 hours. Total RNA and whole
cell lysates were prepared and the mRNA and protein
levels of BiP and CHOP were quantified using real-time
RT-PCR and western blotting, respectively. As shown
in Figure 1A-1B, the mRNA levels of BiP and CHOP
increased over time and the peak levels were observed
at 6H for BiP (3.7 ± 0.2 fold) and at 12H for CHOP
(2.9 ± 0.2 fold). Similarly, the protein levels of BiP and
CHOP were measured using western blotting (Figure
1C-1D) and the peak levels of BiP (2.0 ± 0.1 fold) and
CHOP (1.8 ± 0.1 fold) were observed at 12H and 24H,
respectively. Having determined the optimum time for
the maximum response, we determined the increase in
the levels of BiP and CHOP at various concentrations
of MA. For the purpose, SVGA cells were treated with
50, 100, 250 and 500 μM of MA. The mRNA levels of
BiP and CHOP were measure at 6 H and 12 H posttreatment, respectively (Figure 1E-1F). The peak level
of BiP and CHOP RNA were observed in cells treated
with 500 μM MA (4.4 ± 0.2 fold for BiP and 2.6 ± 0.5
fold for CHOP). Similarly, the protein levels of BiP and
CHOP were assessed at 12 H and 24 H, respectively,
which showed peak expressions (2.1 ± 0.1 and 1.9 ± 0.1
fold for BiP and CHOP, respectively) with 500 μM MA
(Figure 1G-1H). Together, these results indicated a dose
and time-dependent increase in the expressions of BiP
and CHOP at both, mRNA and protein levels. Therefore,
all the following studies in SVGA cell-line were
conducted with these optimal time points (6 H for RNA
and 12 H for protein). To test the effect of single dose of
MA on ER stress, we chose 500 μM MA for rest of our
experiments. This dose of MA was based on the blood
concentrations and tissue/serum compartmentalization
as reported in literatures [38–40]. Furthermore, the
binge administration of MA in the range of 250 mg–1 g
has been found to produce brain concentrations of MA
between 164 and 776 μM [39].

MA-mediated ER stress involved activation of
ATF6 pathway
In order to determine whether ATF6 activation
was involved in MA-mediated ER stress, we measured
the levels of ATF6 in the MA-treated SVGA astrocytes.
As shown in Figure 2A, MA increased the cleaved
ATF6 while marginally reducing the full ATF6. Since
the activation of ATF6 involves translocation of ATF6
from the ER lumen to golgi, we determined whether
MA treatment would result in ATF6 accumulation in
the golgi. In order to do this, cells were treated with
MA for 6 hours and ATF6 was stained for its organelle
compartmentalization using GM130 as golgi marker.
As shown in Figure 2B, treatment with MA resulted in
increased accumulation of ATF6 in golgi as observed by
co-localization of ATF6 with GM130. Once transported

RESULTS
MA induced the expressions of ER stress
markers in astrocyte cell-line in time and dose –
dependent manner
As a response to the ER stress, cells produce
increased levels of BiP and CHOP, which are key
markers of ongoing ER stress [37]. The continuous
accumulation of these proteins lead to apoptosis.
Therefore, we decided to measure the levels of BiP and
CHOP over a period of 24 hours after MA treatment. For
this purpose, SVG astrocytes were treated with 500 μM

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

46101

Oncotarget

Figure 1: MA induced the expressions of ER stress markers in time and concentration-dependent manner. A-H. SVGA
cells were seeded in 12-well plates at 2.5 X 105 cells/well in complete DMEM medium. The cells were incubated overnight for adherence and
treatments with MA were performed. (A-D) Cells were treated with 500 μM MA for 3, 6, 12 and 24 H and RNA was isolated using QIAGEN
RNeasy kit. The levels of BiP (A) and CHOP (B) were measured using real time RT-PCR and the values represented in the bar graphs were
calculated with respect to untreated control. Similarly, whole cell lysates were prepared and the protein levels of BiP (C) and CHOP (D) were
measured at 6, 12 and 24 hours. The fold protein expressions were calculated with respect to untreated control. (E-H) Cells were treated with
50, 100, 250 and 500 μM MA and the RNA levels of BiP (E) and CHOP (F) were measured at 6 and 12 H, respectively. Similarly, protein levels
of BiP (G) and CHOP (H) were measured at 12 and 24 H, respectively. Fold RNA and protein expressions were calculated with respect to
untreated controls. The RNA and protein expressions in all the experiments were normalized with HPRT and GAPDH as housekeeping genes,
respectively. The results shown in bar graphs were obtained from at least 3 independent experiments with each treatment performed in triplicates.
The bar graphs shown in the figure are represented in mean ± S.E., while the western blots are representative images. Statistical significance was
calculated using one-way ANOVA with multiple comparisons and the values were considered significant if p-value ≤ 0.05 (*) or ≤ 0.01 (**).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

46102

Oncotarget

into golgi, ATF6 is proteolytically cleaved to release the
cytosolic ATF6, which then shuttles into the nucleus
to serve as a transcription factor [41] to increase the
levels of X-box binding protein 1 (XBP1) and CHOP. To
further confirm the activation of ATF6 in MA-mediated
ER stress, we determined the expressions of XBP1 at
mRNA and protein levels (Figure 2C-2D). MA treatment
increased the mRNA and protein levels of XBP1 by 3.0
± 0.3 fold (Figure 2C) and 1.6 ± 0.1 fold (Figure 2D),
respectively. Finally, we used siRNA to knockdown the
expressions of ATF6, which resulted in reduction of both,
XBP1 and CHOP at mRNA (Figure 2E-2F) and protein
(Figure 2G) levels. Altogether, these results demonstrated
that MA-mediated ER stress involved activation of

ATF6, which led to increase in the expressions of CHOP
and XBP1.

MA-mediated ER stress involved activation of
IRE1α pathway
Under stressed environment, IRE1α situated in
the ER transmembrane is activated via oligomerization
followed by its phosphorylation [22]. To assess whether
MA-mediated ER stress involved activation of IRE1α
pathway, we measured the levels of phosphorylated
IRE1α (Figure 3A), which was elevated upon treatment
of SVGA cells with MA. In order to confirm the
involvement of IRE1α in MA-mediated ER stress, we

Figure 2: MA-mediated ER stress involved activation of ATF6 pathway. SVGA cells were seeded in 12-well plates at 2.5 X
105 cells/well and treated with 500 μM MA for 12 H unless specified otherwise. For all the experiments involving siRNA transfection,
the cells were seeded in 6-well plate and transfected with various siRNA as described in materials and methods prior to treatment with
MA. A. The SVGA cells were treated with MA for 12 H and whole cell lysates were prepared. The levels of ATF6 were detected using
western blotting using appropriate antibody to detect the cleaved and full form of ATF6. B. Astrocytes were grown on glass coverslips
and immunocytochemistry was performed at 6 H after treatment with MA as described in materials and methods. Briefly, the cells were
fixed with methanol and stained with appropriate antibodies for ATF6 (red), GM130 (green) and the nuclei were counterstained with DAPI
(blue). The cells were also stained with GFAP as astrocyte marker (data not shown). The images were captured using confocal microscope
(Leica TCS SP5 II) at 40X zoom. Different channels were merged to obtain co-localization of ATF6 with golgi marker - GM130, to
demonstrate activation of ATF6. C. Cells were treated with MA for 3, 6, 12 and 24 H and RNA were isolated. The RNA expressions of
XBP1 were measured using real time RT-PCR and fold expressions were calculated with respect to untreated control. D. Similarly, whole
cell lysates were prepared at 6, 12 and 24 H and protein levels of XBP1 were measured. E-G. The ATF6 was knocked down using siRNA
(as mentioned in materials and methods) and the effect on XBP1 (E) and CHOP (F) RNA were measured using real time RT-PCR. Similarly,
the effect of ATF6 knock down was determined on cleaved ATF6, XBP1 and CHOP proteins using western blotting (G). The RNA and
protein expressions in all the experiments were normalized with HPRT and GAPDH as housekeeping genes, respectively. The results shown
in bar graphs were obtained from at least 3 independent experiments with each treatment performed in triplicates. The bar graphs shown in
the figure are represented in mean ± S.E., while the western blots are representative images. The numbers above the blots represent mean
intensity of the respective bands. Statistical significance was calculated using one-way ANOVA with multiple comparisons and the values
were considered significant if p-value ≤ 0.05 (*) or ≤ 0.01 (**).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

46103

Oncotarget

measured the expressions of CHOP after silencing IRE1α.
The knockdown of IRE1α resulted in reduction of MAmediated CHOP expressions at RNA (Figure 3B) and
protein (Figure 3C) levels. The IRE1α activation also
involves several downstream mechanisms leading to
production of CHOP, which include activation of c-Jun
N-terminal kinase (JNK)/activator protein 1 (AP-1),
activation of nuclear factor kappa B (NF-κB) and splicing
of XBP1 [22, 42, 43]. We found that MA treatment neither
resulted in activation of JNK via phosphorylation (data
not shown) nor increase in spliced XBP1 (Supplementary
Figure S2). Therefore we investigated whether NF-κB
activation was involved in downstream signaling of IRE1α
activation. Our results indicated that phosphorylated IκBα
levels were increased in MA-treated astrocytes (Figure
3A) suggesting NF-κB activation. In addition, when we
knocked down the expressions of IRE1α, we observed

reduction in the levels of pIκBα, which confirmed that
phosphorylation of IκBα resulted from the activation of
IRE1α (Figure 3C). To further confirm these findings,
we silenced p65 with specific siRNA, which resulted in
reduction of CHOP at mRNA and protein levels (Figure
3D-3E). Finally, the expressions of CHOP at mRNA
(Figure 3F) and protein (Figure 3G) levels were reduced
with siRNA against CHOP. These results clearly indicated
the involvement of IRE1α pathway in MA-mediated ER
stress, which also involved activation of NF-κB, which
then increased CHOP.

MA-mediated ER stress involved activation of
PERK pathway
Having demonstrated the involvement of ATF6
and IRE1α pathway in MA-mediated ER stress, we

Figure 3: Involvement of IRE1α pathway in MA-mediated ER stress. SVGA cells were seeded in 12-well plates at 2.5 X 105

cells/well and treated with 500 μM MA for 12 H. For all the experiments involving siRNA transfection, the cells were seeded in 6-well plate
and transfected with various siRNA as described in materials and methods prior to treatment with MA. A. Treatment with MA resulted in
increased levels of phosphorylated IRE1α and phosphorylated IκBα indicating their activation. B-G. To confirm their involvement in MAmediated ER stress, various siRNAs were employed to knockdown their target genes as mentioned in materials and methods. (B-C) The
effect of IRE1α knockdown using specific siRNA was determined on MA-mediated CHOP mRNA (B) and protein (C) expressions. (C)
Knockdown of IRE1α also reduced the expression of phosphorylated IRE1α and phosphorylated IκBα. (D-E) To confirm the activation of
NF-κB, p65 was knocked down using siRNA and the effect on CHOP mRNA (D) and protein (E) expressions. (F-G) The effect of CHOP
knockdown was assessed on CHOP mRNA (F) and protein (G) levels. The RNA and protein expressions in all the experiments were
normalized with HPRT and GAPDH as housekeeping genes, respectively. The results shown in bar graphs were obtained from at least 3
independent experiments with each treatment performed in triplicates. The bar graphs shown in the figure are represented in mean ± S.E.,
while the western blots are representative images. The numbers above the blots represent mean intensity of the respective bands. Statistical
significance was calculated using one-way ANOVA with multiple comparisons and the values were considered significant if p-value ≤ 0.05
(*) or ≤ 0.01 (**).

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

46104

Oncotarget

MA induced the expressions of ER stress
markers in primary human fetal astrocytes

sought to address whether PERK activation could also
serve as a mechanism for MA-mediated ER stress. In
order to demonstrate this, SVGA cells were treated
with MA and the expressions of phosphorylated
PERK were measured. As shown in Figure 4A, MA
treatment increased the expressions of phospho PERK,
and phospho eIF2α. In addition, earlier reports have
demonstrated increase in ATF4 in rat striatum due to MA
treatment [28]. Since ATF4 activation is downstream
of PERK pathway, we measured the levels of ATF4.
As shown in Figure 4A MA increased the expression
of ATF4, which was reduced by knocking down PERK
using siRNA (Figure 4F). Moreover, silencing of PERK
and ATF4 also reduced the expressions of CHOP at
mRNA (Figure 4B and 4D, respectively) and protein
(Figure 4C and 4E, respectively) levels. Altogether,
these results suggested that MA activated PERK,
which led to increase in ATF4 and thereby increased
expressions of CHOP.

To verify results obtained in SVGA cell-line, we
assessed the effect of MA treatment in HFA. Briefly,
HFA were treated with 500 μM MA for 1, 3, 6 and
12 hours for RNA and 6, 12 and 24 hours for protein
expressions of various ER stress markers. The RT-PCR
performed for RNA levels demonstrated (Figure 5A-5C)
marginal but significant increase in BiP (1.3 ± 0.1 fold)
and XBP1 (1.3 ± 0.1 fold) at 3 H, while considerable
increase in CHOP at 3-6 H with peak expressions at
6H (1.9 ± 0.4 fold) after MA treatment. Similarly, the
protein levels (Figure 5D) of BiP and XBP1 increased
after MA-treatment for 6 H (1.21 ± 0.06 fold for BiP and
1.22 ± 0.04 fold for XBP1) and CHOP levels increased
at 24 H (1.22 ± 0.07 fold). Moreover, we also tested
whether the increased levels of these molecules involved
the major ER-stress initiator proteins. As shown in

Figure 4: MA-mediated ER stress involved activation of PERK pathway. SVGA cells were seeded in 12-well plates at 2.5 X

105 cells/well and treated with 500 μM MA. For all the experiments involving siRNA transfection, the cells were seeded in 6-well plate and
transfected with various siRNA as described in materials and methods prior to treatment with MA. A. The levels of phosphorylated PERK,
phosphorylated eIF2α and ATF4 were increased as a result of MA treatment. B-C. Knockdown of PERK using siRNA reduced the levels of
MA-mediated CHOP mRNA (B) and protein (C). D-E. Similarly, knockdown of ATF4 also reduced the CHOP mRNA (D) and protein (E).
F. The levels of ATF4 were measured after knockdown of PERK to demonstrate a link between PERK activation and increase in ATF4 (F).
The RNA and protein expressions in all the experiments were normalized with HPRT and GAPDH as housekeeping genes, respectively. The
results shown in bar graphs were obtained from at least 3 independent experiments with each treatment performed in triplicates. The bar
graphs shown in the figure are represented in mean ± S.E., while the western blots are representative images. The numbers above the blots
represent mean intensity of the respective bands. Statistical significance was calculated using one-way ANOVA with multiple comparisons
and the values were considered significant if p-value ≤ 0.01 (**).

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

46105

Oncotarget

Figure 5D, MA treatment resulted in increased levels
of pIRE1α (1.35 ± 0.07 fold), pPERK (1.64 ± 0.13
fold) and ATF6c (1.28 ± 0.06 fold) at 6H, suggesting
involvement of all three activator proteins.

consistent results with respect to all the ER stress proteins.
In addition to PC, PFC and Hippocampus showed
significant changes in the BiP levels (Figure 6). The other
regions of the brain demonstrated moderate changes in the
ER stress protein, which were statistically insignificant
(Figure 6F). Overall, these results confirmed the results
obtained with the in vitro experiments suggesting ER
stress induction due to MA.

Acute treatment of MA induced the expressions
of ER stress markers in various brain regions of
mice

MA-mediated ER stress increased cell death in
astrocytes

To verify the results obtained with our in vitro
experiments, we determined the levels of various ER
stress proteins in the brains of C57BL/6 mice after MA
treatment. The mice were treated with four s.c injections
of 10 mg/kg MA with each injection 2 hour apart. This
dose of MA was chosen based on previously published
reports, where 10-40 mg/kg of MA was found to be
neurotoxic via various mechanisms [13, 44, 45]. The
brains of mice were collected after 24 hours from the
last MA injection and protein lysates were prepared from
PFC, PC, hippocampus, EC, and cerebellum (Figure 6A6E). Assessment of protein levels in different regions
demonstrated alteration of various ER stress proteins at
variable extents. Among various regions, PC showed most

In order to determine the functional implication
of MA-mediated ER stress, we assessed the effect of
siRNAs against various molecules in ATF6, IRE1α and
PERK pathway. To do so, we first measured the effect of
MA on cell death using MTT assay. MA increased the cell
death in astrocytes by 10.2 ± 1.2 % (Figure 7A). Having
demonstrated the effect of MA on cell survival, we sought
to determine whether ER stress was involved in MAmediated cell death. Therefore, we silenced ATF6, IRE1α,
p65, PERK, ATF4 or CHOP in astrocytes using siRNA.
These cells were then treated with MA to assess the effect

Figure 5: MA induced the expressions of ER stress markers in primary human fetal astrocytes. HFA were seeded at 1 x 106

cells/well in 12-well plates and treated with 500 μM MA for 1, 3, 6 and 12 hours. The RNA expressions of BiP A., CHOP B. and XBP1 C.
were measured using real time RT-PCR. Similarly, the protein levels D. of BiP, CHOP and XBP1 were measured after 6, 12 and 24 hours.
The levels of IRE1α, ATF6 and PERK were determined in the protein lysates (D). The expression values were normalized with GAPDH as
loading control and fold expressions were calculated with respect to untreated control for respective time. The results were obtained from at
least 3 different donors with each treatment performed in triplicates and the bar graphs shown in the figure are represented in mean ± S.E.
The western blots are representative images, which were obtained by cutting the membranes between the molecular weights of protein of
interest using molecular markers. Statistical significance was calculated using one-way ANOVA with multiple comparisons and the values
were considered significant if p-value ≤ 0.01 (**) or ≤ 0.05 (*).

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

46106

Oncotarget

on cell death. As shown in Figure 7B, all the siRNAs
reduced MA-mediated cell death at variable extents. This
results were further confirmed with TUNEL staining,
which demonstrated reduction in the TUNEL positive cells
after MA treatment, when various ER stress molecules
were silenced (Figure 7C). Altogether these results
demonstrate that MA-mediated ER stress resulted in cell
death in astrocytes, which was at least in part attributed to
IRE1α, PERK and ATF6 pathway. Moreover, inhibition of
either of these pathways could partially circumvent MAmediated cell death.

mediated ER stress, we employed naltrexone (a general
opioid receptor inhibitor) and nor-BNI (KOR inhibitor).
Astrocytes were pretreated with either 20 μM of nor-BNI
or 10 μM of naltrexone for 1 hour prior to MA treatment.
The mRNA levels of BiP (Figure 8A-8B) and CHOP
(Figure 8C-8D) were quantified using real-time RT-PCR,
which showed significant reduction for BiP (2.01 ± 0.12
vs 0.86 ± 0.11 fold for nor-BNI and 0.89 ± 0.12 fold for
naltrexone) and CHOP (2.42 ± 0.14 vs 1.72 ± 0.25 fold for
nor-BNI and 1.47 ± 0.12 fold for naltrexone). Moreover,
both, nor-BNI (Figure 8E) and naltrexone (Figure 8F)
reduced protein levels of cleaved ATF6, pIRE1α, pPERK
and CHOP. These results indicates towards a possible
interaction between opioid receptor and MA, which may
contribute to ER stress. Since both, KOR inhibitor and
general opioid inhibitor reduced MA-mediated ER stress,
we sought to address whether use of these inhibitors could
prevent MA-mediated cell death in astrocytes. Indeed,
when assessed with MTT assay (Figure 8G), both norBNI (13.8 ± 0.7 vs 6.6 ± 0.8 %) and naltrexone (13.8 ±

Role of opioid receptor in MA-mediated ER
stress and cell death
There is a huge body of literature demonstrating
involvement of opioid receptor in MA-mediated
dependence [46, 47]. In addition, κ-opioid receptor (KOR)
was found be responsible for MA-mediated autophagy
[48]. To assess whether opioid receptor contribute to MA-

Figure 6: MA induced the expressions of ER stress markers in various brain regions of mice. Male C57BL/6 mice at the
age of 14-16 weeks (n=4) were given 4 s.c. injections with each separated 2 hours apart of either saline or 10mg/kg MA. The brains of
the mice were isolated after 24 hours from the last injection and subdivided into PFC A., PC B., Hippocampus C., EC D., and Cerebellum
E. to prepare protein lysates. The proteins from each regions from the respective treatment groups were pooled in equal amounts and the
western blots were performed to determine the levels of BiP, CHOP, XBP1, ATF6, IRE1α, and PERK. The protein expressions in all the
experiments were normalized with GAPDH as housekeeping gene. The results shown in bar graphs F. were quantified from at least 3
independent experiments and expressed as mean ± S.E. The blots are representative images. Statistical significance was calculated using
one-way ANOVA with multiple comparisons and the values were considered significant if p-value ≤ 0.01 (**) or ≤ 0.05 (*).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

46107

Oncotarget

0.7 vs 5.4 ± 0.3 %) significantly reduced MA-mediated
cell death. Based on our findings in the present study, it
is plausible to consider KOR as an important receptor for
MA in astrocytes.

the underlying mechanism for the same. Since caspase
cascade is classically associated with apoptotic cell death
in variety of cells [49] and based on our previous finding
that MA-mediated cell death in astrocytes involved
caspase-3 [16], we assessed the involvement of various
caspases. Particularly, caspase-3 and caspase-9 were
increased as a result of MA treatment (Figure 9). Since
the cleaved forms of these caspases are known to be
more important in the event of apoptosis, we focused on
the cleaved caspase-3 & -9. As shown in Figure 9, the

Role of caspase-3 and caspase-9 in MA-mediated
cell death
Having demonstrated the involvement of MAassociated ER stress in cell death, we wished to determine

Figure 7: MA-mediated ER stress increased cell death in astrocytes. Cell death was measured at 48 hours after the treatment

with 500 μM MA. Briefly, SVGA cells were seeded at 6 × 105 cells in a 6-well plate and transfected with various siRNA as mentioned in
methods. After 48 hours, the cells were reseeded in 12-well plate and allowed to adhere overnight. Finally, these cells were treated with 500
μM MA for additional 48 H and MTT assay was performed to assess the effect of ATF6, PERK, ATF4, IRE1α, p65 and CHOP knockdown.
A. The % cell death was calculated considering the absorbance in untreated control as 100% viability. B. The involvement of ATF6, IRE1α
and PERK pathways and their respective intermediates leading to CHOP in cell death was assessed using MTT assay after knockdown
of each of the intermediates with siRNA, which demonstrated reduction in MA-mediated cell death at variable extents. C. Similarly, to
confirm these results, TUNEL staining was performed at 48 hours after MA treatment. The TUNEL staining was performed using TACS-XL
In Situ Apoptosis Detection Kit - DAB kit as described in materials and methods. The images were captured at 20X zoom using Labomed
iVu5100 camera. The results shown in bar graphs were obtained from at least 3 independent experiments with each treatment performed in
triplicates and presented in mean ± S.E. Statistical significance was calculated using one-way ANOVA with multiple comparisons and the
values were considered significant if p-value ≤ 0.05 (*) or ≤ 0.01 (**).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

46108

Oncotarget

expressions of both, pro- and cleaved forms of caspase-3
and -9 were increased due to MA treatment. Moreover,
silencing of ATF6 (Figure 9A), PERK (Figure 9B), ATF4
(Figure 9C), IRE1α (Figure 9D), p65 (Figure 9E) and
CHOP (Figure 9F) reduced the expressions of cleaved
caspase-3 and -9. These results agree with our observations
in Figure 7, where we also showed reduction in cell death
assessed via MTT assay and TUNEL staining. Together,
these results suggested that increased expressions of
cleaved caspase-3 and caspase-9 due to MA-mediated
ER stress led to apoptotic cell death in astrocytes and
this increase involved ATF6, IRE1α and PERK signaling
pathway.

inflammatory cytokines/chemokines [50]. In addition to
neurons, MA is also disturbs glial cell activity and thereby
exhibit neurotoxic and addictive effects [51]. Several
studies have demonstrated involvement of transcription
factors, cytokine receptors, excitatory amino acid
transporters (EAATs), glucose uptake mechanisms or
oxidative stress in MA-mediated astrocyte toxicity [15,
16, 52, 53]. Despite these findings, the underlying cause
for MA-mediated cell death in astrocytes is still unclear.
We have shown in our recent study that MA increased
oxidative stress and thereby led to caspase-3-mediated
cell death in astrocytes [16]. In the current report,
we further expanded our findings on MA-associated
apoptotic mechanisms that involved ER stress. Our results
demonstrated that MA-mediated activation of ATF6,
IRE1α and PERK pathways differentially contributed to
MA-mediated apoptosis.
As previously reported, MA is known to induce the
expressions of several of ER-stress molecules in various
regions of rat brains [28, 54]. Our findings are consistent
with these prior reports in that we observed increase in
various ER stress proteins in different brain regions of

DISCUSSION
Several studies have been undertaken to understand
MA-associated neurotoxicity. MA primarily targets
striatum and substantia nigra and disrupts dopaminergic
system leading to various CNS symptoms. The
neurotoxicity of MA is attributable to biochemical
processes such as oxidative stress, excitotoxicity or pro-

Figure 8: Role of opioid receptor in MA-mediated ER stress. SVGA cells were pre-treated with either 20 μM of nor-BNI, a selective
inhibitor for κ-opioid receptor or 10 μM of naltrexone, a general inhibitor for opioid receptor 1 H before the treatment with MA and the effect
was observed on the mRNA and protein expressions of BiP and CHOP. A, C. Pre-treatment with nor-BNI reduced the levels of BiP (A) and
CHOP (C) mRNA. B, D. Pre-treatment with naltrexone reduced the levels of BiP (B) and CHOP (D) mRNA. E-F. The involvement of opioid
receptor in MA-mediated ER stress was assessed by western blotting on PERK, IRE1α, ATF6, BiP and CHOP. Both, nor-BNI (E) and naltrexone
(F) reduced the levels of all these markers at variable extents. G. The effect of nor-BNI and naltrexone on MA-mediated cell death was assessed
by MTT assay at 48 H after MA treatment. The RNA and protein expressions in all the experiments were normalized with HPRT and GAPDH
as housekeeping genes, respectively. The results shown in bar graphs were obtained from at least 3 independent experiments with each treatment
performed in triplicates. The bar graphs shown in the figure are represented in mean ± S.E., while the western blots are representative images.
The numbers above the blots represent mean intensity of the respective bands. Statistical significance was calculated using one-way ANOVA
with multiple comparisons and the values were considered significant if p-value ≤ 0.01 (**).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

46109

Oncotarget

mice. In particular, we observed increase in all the key
ER stress regulators in parietal cortex, which largely
consist of astrocytes. This increase in ER stress due to
MA in the parietal cortex could directly disrupt cognitive
function and depressive like behavior [55, 56]. We also
demonstrated this phenomenon in astrocyte cell-line and
primary astrocytes, which is the first report showing cell
specific MA-mediated ER stress in the brain. Our in vitro
study demonstrated time-dependent increase in the RNA
and protein levels of BiP, CHOP and XBP1 after single
exposure. Physiologically, the accumulation of unfolded
proteins in the ER triggers a protective response, wherein
BiP chaperones the unfolded/misfolded proteins for
ubiquitination [21, 22]. However, prolonged exposure
to MA could produce sustained ER stress, which might
impair the cells beyond repair. In this study, a single MA
exposure triggered apoptosis (Figure 7), which suggests
that the transient increase in BiP and CHOP observed in
the present study was sufficient to generate a sustained ER
stress. In an earlier study, low-dose MA has been shown
to increase BiP but not CHOP in rat midbrains suggesting
its protective effects via suppression of oxidative stress
and apoptosis [54]. However, our study showed increase in
both BiP and CHOP at various concentrations of MA. This
difference could be partially explained by the fact that
our in vitro study focused on astrocytes alone, while the
earlier study utilized midbrain, which includes other cells
in addition to astrocytes. Further, our study was performed

over a period of time, while the previous study represents
a cross-sectional study at a given time.
The increase in CHOP is a result of an orchestrated
process, which involves activation of one or multiple of
the three ER stress pathways (Figure 10). In the present
study, we observed activation of all three pathways ATF6, IRE1α and PERK. Previously, MA was shown
to increase ATF6 mRNA via D1 receptor-dependent
mechanism [26, 28]. Our study is in accordance with
this report as we demonstrated increase in the protein
levels of ATF6. In addition, we also demonstrated
translocation of ATF6 and increase in cleaved ATF6
as a result of MA treatment (Figure 2). This confirmed
the activation of ATF6 pathway since translocation of
ATF6 from ER lumen to golgi signifies its activation.
The splicing of ATF6 can only take place in the golgi,
which is an important step for its transcriptional activity
to increase ER chaperones and ER-associated protein
degradation (ERAD) components [57–60]. We also
observed reduction in the expressions of XBP1 and
CHOP with ATF6 silencing, which further confirmed the
activation of ATF6 pathway. It is known that ATF6 is
responsible for transcriptional regulation of XBP1 [43]
and our observation is along the similar lines, where in
we demonstrated MA-mediated increase in XBP1 mRNA
and protein, which were reduced with ATF6 silencing.
Overall MA-mediated ATF6 activation is responsible for
increased ER stress in astrocytes.

Figure 9: MA-mediated ER stress involved caspase-3 and caspase-9 in astrocyte cell death. A-F. SVGA cells were seeded
at 6 × 105 cells in a 6-well plate and transfected with various siRNA as mentioned in methods. After 48 hours, the cells were reseeded in
12-well plate and allowed to adhere overnight. Finally, these cells were treated with 500 μM MA for additional 24 hours. The effect of
specific siRNA against ATF6 (A), PERK (B), ATF4 (C), IRE1α (D), p65 (E) and CHOP (F) were assessed on the levels of cleaved and
pro-caspase-3 and caspase-9 using western blotting. The western blots are representative images of at least 3 independent experiments. The
numbers above the blots represent mean intensity of the respective bands.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

46110

Oncotarget

Apart from ATF6, IRE1α also increases the
expressions of CHOP during ER stress. To our knowledge
there is no report demonstrating MA-mediated activation
of IRE1α pathway. In this study, we have demonstrated
increased phosphorylation of IRE1α, which further
activated NF-κB via phosphorylation of IκBα. In our
earlier reports, we demonstrated involvement of NF-κB
pathway in MA-mediated increase in pro-inflammatory
cytokine/chemokine, IL-6 and IL-8 suggesting its
involvement in neuroinflammation [15]. Our observation

in the present study further consolidates the role of NFκB pathway in MA-mediated cytotoxicity via induction of
ER stress. It is known that XBP1 expression is increased
via ATF6 but its splicing occurs via IRE1α [43]. It has
also been shown in a previously published study that MA
causes increase in XBP1 splicing in rat striatum [28].
However, we did not observe XBP1 splicing due to MA
in SVGA or primary HFA cells (Supplementary Figure
S2). It is possible that either neuron or microglia but not
astrocyte might have contributed to XBP1 splicing in rat

Figure 10: Schematic of signaling pathways involved in MA-mediated ER stress in astrocytes. The signaling pathway

sought in the present work is ER stress signaling cascade, which is responsible for MA-mediated cell death in astrocytes. The increase in the
levels of BiP and CHOP suggest increased ER stress. This results in activation of ATF6, IRE1α and PERK pathways. Activation of ATF6 is
signified by increased accumulation of ATF6 in golgi, where it is cleaved. The free cytosolic form of ATF6 then increases the transcription
of BiP, CHOP and XBP1 via ER stress-response element (ERSE). Activation of IRE1α leads to activation of NF-κB, which further increases
transcription of CHOP and engage various caspases to signal for apoptosis. Similarly, activation of PERK leads to increase in ATF4, which
can increased transcription of BiP and CHOP via unfolded protein response element (UPRE). Finally, the convergent effect of these three
mechanisms further accumulates CHOP leading to apoptosis via caspase cascades. Thus increase in ER stress due to MA activates the
intrinsic caspase cascade via caspase-3 and caspase-9 cleavage. The kappa opioid receptor serves as an anchor for MA, which allows for
the downstream activation of various events in the ER stress pathways. Finally, these cascades lead to cell death in astrocytes.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

46111

Oncotarget

striatum. Thus, although the XBP1 mRNA is increased via
ATF6 in our study, it is not spliced via IRE1α in response
to MA treatment. To our surprise, XBP1 protein was
slightly increased at 24 H (Figure 2D). Similar results
were observed in HFA as shown in Figure 5D, where
increase in spliced XBP1 was observed at 6 H. However,
the protein lysates obtained from mouse brains did not
show XBP1 splicing (Figure 6). The discrepancy between
the levels of XBP1s observed at protein and RNA levels
could be explained by possible role of post-translational
modification of XBP1 protein [61]. As demonstrated by
Yoshida et al., XBP1U forms a heterodimer with XBP1S
during prolonged UPR and decreases its activity. This
mechanism plays a significant role especially when UPRmediated splicing of XBP1 mRNA is weakly activated
[62]. Therefore, it is possible that slight increase in XBP1s
protein could be due to post-translational modification of
XBP1u. Apart from NF-κB activation and XBP1 splicing,
IRE1α is also known to activate JNK and subsequently
AP-1 [63–65]. In our present study, we did not observe
activation of JNK (data not shown). Therefore, MAmediated activation of IRE1α utilized activation of NF-κB
but not JNK and AP-1, to increase CHOP.
As mentioned earlier, ER stress is also associated
with activation of PERK pathway. Physiologically the
activation of PERK leads to phosphorylation of Eukaryotic
translation initiation factor 2A (eIF2α), which halts the
global translation except ATF4 expression [22, 66–69].
In our study, we observed activation of PERK and ATF4,
which further led to increased expressions of CHOP as
evident by knockdown studies for ATF4 and PERK.
This finding is in accordance with earlier study where
increased ATF4 at mRNA and protein levels was observed
in rat striatum after MA treatment [28]. Altogether, we
demonstrated that MA-associated ER stress involved all
three pathways leading to CHOP expression.
Opioid receptors have also been implicated in MAassociated neurotoxicity [46, 47]. KOR has been found
to increase MA-mediated autophagy in Human umbilical
vein cells (HUVECs) and thereby protect the cells from
apoptosis [48]. On the other hand, inhibition of KOR in
nucleus accumbence prevented MA self-administration
via negative reinforcement mechanism [46]. Our results
demonstrating suppression of CHOP and 3 major ER
stress activators; ATF6, IRE1α and PERK with naltrexone
and nor-BNI suggested that opioid receptors contributed in
MA-mediated ER stress. These inhibitors also prevented
MA-mediated cell death. Therefore, our study indicates
that KOR may serve as a receptor for MA in astrocytes,
and inhibition of KOR could prevent cytotoxic effects of
MA in astrocytes.
In general, increased ER stress is predominantly
a pro-survival mechanism [70], but prolonged stress
conditions lead to apoptosis. Sustained increase of CHOP
expression is known to induce cell death in a variety of
cells [23, 29-31, 71]. The overexpression of CHOP leads
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

to apoptosis [29, 30], whereas knockdown of CHOP has
been shown to reduce ER stress-associated apoptosis
[23, 31, 71]. Previously, we have also demonstrated that
increase in CHOP correlated with apoptosis in astrocytes
[65]. In spite of the fact that CHOP is induced via ATF6,
IRE1α and PERK, apoptosis is largely attributed to IRE1α
and PERK pathways [72]. Our results are in accordance
with this notion, where we demonstrated MA-mediated
cell death was reversed with siRNA against IRE1α, p65,
CHOP, ATF4 and PERK. Although ATF6 also induces
expressions of CHOP and XBP1 [73], the cytotoxic effects
of ATF6 has not been clearly reported. In our study, we
have observed suppression of MA-mediated CHOP with
ATF6 siRNA, which also inhibited MA-mediated cell
death (Figure 8). XBP1 is usually associated with cellsurvival and overexpression of spliced XBP1 induces
apoptosis [74]. Since we did not observe XBP1 spicing in
MA-treated astrocytes, we believe that the pro-apoptotic
nature of ATF6 in MA-mediated cell death could be
largely attributed to the increase in CHOP.
Apoptosis via MA has been well documented
in many studies in a variety of cells [75–78]. MA was
previously shown to activate caspase-3, caspase-6,
caspase-9 and caspase-12 resulting in neuronal apoptosis
[13]. We have demonstrated in our earlier study that
MA-mediated cell death involved caspase-3 activation
in astrocytes [16]. In the present report, we observed
increase in cleaved caspase-3 and caspase-9 but not
caspase-8. Since caspase-8 is activated during extrinsic
pathway (primarily associated with extracellular stimulus
via ligand binding to the death receptors such as TNF
receptor-1; TNFR1 and FAS-associated death domain;
FADD) and caspase-3 and caspase-9 are activated during
intrinsic pathway (primarily associated with mitochondrial
dysregulations due to a variety of stress including ER
stress) [49], we believe that MA-mediated apoptosis is
largely attributable to the intrinsic caspase pathway. Use
of various siRNA targeting ATF6, IRE1α and PERK
pathways reduced the MA-mediated increase in cleaved
caspase-3 and -9, which indicates that MA-mediated ER
stress was indeed responsible for apoptotic cell death. We
also observed reduction in MA-mediate apoptosis as a
result of p65 silencing, which consolidates the role of NFκB in MA-mediated toxicity. Since NF-κB activation leads
to increase in pro-inflammatory cytokine/chemokines [15],
cytotoxicity in brain microvascular endothelial cells via
redox imbalance [79] and induce BBB dysfunction [80,
81], it is evident that it plays a multi-factorial role in
MA-mediated cytotoxicity. The results presented in this
study further supports the notion that MA employs several
mechanisms that converge to NF-κB activation. Various
pathways of ER stress further compound its toxic effects
in astrocytes.
In summary, the results from our study provide
additional insights in MA-associated toxicity in astrocytes.
The detailed mechanism explained in the current study
46112

Oncotarget

provides novel targets in the management of MA-mediated
cytotoxicity. Especially, based on our results from opioid
receptor antagonists, it is likely that naltrexone could be
employed in MA-mediated ER stress. In future, the results
from our study may also provide a new direction for
development of therapeutic strategies to overcome MAmediated neurotoxicity, which has a direct implication for
MA abusers.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, US), while nor-binaltorphimine
hydrochloride (kappa opioid receptor) was obtained from
R & D systems (R&D Systems, Inc. Minneapolis, MN,
USA). Vectashield mounting medium with DAPI was
obtained from Vector Laboratories (Vector Laboratories,
Burlingame, CA). Specific primers for real-time RT-PCR
were obtained from IDT (Integrated DNA Technologies,
Coralville, IA, USA) and the 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide (MTT) reagent was
purchased from Fisher Scientific (Pittsburgh, PA, USA).

Cells and reagents

Primary astrocytes

All the experiments unless mentioned were
performed using SVGA cells, which is an astrocyte
cell line originally developed from human astrocytes
[82]. The cells were grown in complete Dulbecco’s
modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM) supplemented with
1% L-glutamine, 1% sodium bicarbonate, 1% nonessential amino acids, 10% heat-inactivated fetal bovine
serum and 50 μg/ml gentamicin sulfate and cultured
at 37 °C in a humidified chamber containing 5% CO2.
For experiments, cells were cultured in 12-well plates
at 2.5 X 105 cells/well in 1 ml medium to obtain a
monolayer and the treatments were performed after
overnight incubation. For experiments involving siRNA
transfections, SVGA were plated at 6 X 105 cells/well
with 2 ml medium in 6-well plates. For treatment with
MA, 500 μM was used as optimum concentration for
all the experiments. Specific siRNA (ON-TARGETplus
SMART pool) for BiP, CHOP, IRE1α, p65, PERK,
ATF4, ATF6 and control siRNA were purchased from
Dhramacon (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc., Waltham,
MA, USA). The antibody against p-PERK (Catalog # sc32577) was purchased from Santa Cruz Biotechnology
(Santa Cruz, CA, USA). Antibodies against
glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH)
(Catalog # 2118s), phosphor IκBα (Caspase # 2078s),
p65 (Catalog # 8242s), caspase-3 (Catalog # 9662s),
cleaved caspase-3 (Catalog # 9664s), caspase-9 (Catalog
# 9508s), cleaved caspase-9 (Catalog # 7237s), IRE1α
(Catalog # 3294s), CHOP (Catalog # 2895s & 5554s),
ATF4 (Catalog # 11815s) and BiP (catalog # 3177s) were
purchased from Cell Signaling Technology (Danvers,
MA, USA). The antibodies against phospho IRE1α
(Catalog # ab124945), GFAP (catalog # ab53554), XBP1
(Catalog # ab37152) and ATF6 (Catalog # ab203119 &
ab11909) were purchased from Abcam (Cambridge,
MA, USA). Antibody against GM130 (golgi marker)
(Catalog # 12480s) was obtained from Cell Signaling
Technology (Danvers, MA, USA). The secondary
antibodies against appropriate primary antibodies and
the fluorophore conjugated secondary antibodies were
purchased from Cell Signaling Technology (Danvers,
MA, USA). Methamphetamine, and naltrexone (general
opioid receptor) were obtained from Sigma (Sigma-

Human fetal astrocytes (HFA) were prepared as
mentioned earlier [83] from the aborted fetal tissues
obtained from Birth Defect Research Laboratory
(BDRL), Seattle, WA. Briefly, the tissues were shipped
on Hibernate®-E Medium (Catalog # A1247601, Thermo
Fisher Scientific Inc., Waltham, MA, USA), which was
processed in HBSS buffer until the astrocytes were
dissociated into single cell suspension. The larger tissues
were cleaned from blood contaminants while dissociating
them into smaller pieces. Upon 3-4 rounds of cleaning/
dissociation process, the tissues were passed through 25
ml pipettes followed by gradually smaller bore pipettes.
Finally, the smaller clusters of cells were passed through
70 μm and 40 μm strainer to dissociate the clusters into
single cell suspension. These cells were centrifuged at
300 X g for 10 minutes, the supernatants were removed
and the cells were mixed with complete DMEM-medium
with F12 supplement. These cells were then plated in
flasks for 7-10 days without disturbing them followed by
further passaging them into P1. HFA obtained from P1
were characterized by the expression of GFAP and >98%
cells were found to be positive (data not shown). For
experiments, HFA were used at 1 X 106 cells for 12-well
plates and the treatments were performed after 36 hours
once monolayer of adhered astrocytes was formed.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Animals and drug treatment
Male C57BL/6 at the age of 14-16 week were used
to study the effect of acute MA treatment on ER stress
proteins in various regions of the brain. These mice
were obtained from Jackson Laboratories and bred in
the UMKC-Laboratory Animal Research Core (LARC)
facility. All the mice in the study were housed in a group
of 3-5 animals per cage in a controlled environment with
12h light/dark cycle (lights off at 7:00 PM) and ad libitum
access to food and water. This study was in accordance
with the NIH guidelines and the experimental protocols
were approved by the institutional animal care and use
committee (IACUC) at UMKC. For the experiment, 4
age-matched mice each were grouped into saline and MA
treatment. For acute treatment with MA, 4 s.c. injections
of 10 mg/kg MA separated by 2 hours apart were given
46113

Oncotarget

Western blotting

as per previous report [44]. The mice were caged for 24
hours after the last injection and the brains were collected
after cardiac perfusion. The brain hemispheres were
dissected into prefrontal cortex (PFC), parietal cortex
(PC), hippocampus (Hippo), entorhinal cortex (EC) and
cerebellum (Cer) for protein lysates and western blots
were performed to estimate protein levels of various ER
stress proteins.

Detection of various signaling intermediates at
protein levels was performed using western blotting
in whole cell lysates. Briefly, upon termination of the
treatments, growth medium was removed and cells were
washed twice with phosphate buffer saline (PBS). The
cells were then lysed in radioimmunoprecipitation assay
(RIPA) buffer (Boston BioProducts, Ashland, MA, USA)
supplemented with Halt™ protease inhibitor cocktail
(Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc., Waltham, MA, USA) for
10 min at 4 °C. The lysates were then homogenized for
30 sec and centrifuged at 14000 Xg for 10 min at 4 °C to
remove debris. The lysates were stored at −80 °C until use.
The concentrations of protein lysates were measured
using BCA protein assay kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific
Inc., Waltham, MA, USA) and 20 μg protein was loaded
on 10-12% SDS-polyacrylamide gel. The proteins were
then resolved by electrophoresis at 80 V for 2.5 hours
followed by transfer onto PVDF membranes at constant
350 mA current for 75 min at 4 °C. Next, the membranes
were blocked in 5% nonfat milk in PBST (0.075% Tween
20 in PBS) overnight at 4 °C to reduce nonspecific signals.
Specific target proteins were detected by incubating the
membranes with appropriate concentrations of primary
antibodies at room temperature for 2 – 2.5 hours. Upon
incubation, the membranes were washed 5 times for
5 minutes each with PBST and again probed with
respective horse radish peroxidase conjugated secondary
antibodies for 2 hours at room temperature. Finally the
membranes were washed again 5 times for 5 minutes
each with PBST and target protein bands were visualized
using BM chemiluminescence western blotting substrate
(POD, Roche Applied Sciences; Indianapolis, IN, USA).
The band intensities were quantified with FluorChem
HD2 software (Alpha Innotech, San Leandro, CA,
USA). Relative expressions of various proteins were
calculated by normalizing the values of target proteins
with GAPDH as loading control followed by comparison
with control samples considered as baseline expressions.
All western blots were performed with same experimental
conditions and the loading controls were run for each blot
individually. To precisely identify only target molecule,
the membranes were cut between the molecular markers
above and below the protein of interest.

Transfection with siRNA
SVGA cells were transfected with siRNA as
mentioned previously [16, 84]. Briefly, monolayer of 6 X
105 cells in a 6-well plate was transfected with 20 nM of
siRNA using Lipofectamine2000™ (Life Technologies,
Carlsbad, CA, USA). The cells were washed twice with
PBS to remove serum and supplemented with serumfree medium containing transfection cocktail. The
transfected cells were incubated for 24 hours followed
by replacement of the growth medium containing
transfection cocktail with complete DMEM medium
containing serum for additional 10 hours. The cells
were then trypsinized, recounted and seeded at 2 X105
cells per well in 12-well plates. The following day,
cells were treated with or without MA to assess the
silencing effect of specific target on MA-mediated ER
stress. The efficiency of gene silencing was assessed
using western blotting and found to be between 40-70%
(Supplementary Figure S1).

Real-time reverse transcriptase-polymerase
chain reaction (RT-PCR)
The mRNA levels of BiP and CHOP expressions
were determined using real-time RT-PCR. Briefly, SVGA
cells were treated with MA for given time and upon
termination of the treatment, total RNA was isolated using
Qiagen RNeasy Mini Kit (Qiagen, Valencia, CA, USA).
Next, 100 ng RNA was reverse transcribed at 37°C for 60
min followed by amplification of the target mRNA. The
relative expressions of BiP was quantified using forward
primer: 5’-CGAGGAGGAGGACAAGAAGG-3’ and
reverse primer: 5’-AGTTCTTGCCGTTCAAGGTG-3’
with appropriate amplification conditions (Annealing
at 62 °C for 30 sec, denaturation at 95 °C for 15 sec).
Similarly, CHOP was measured using forward primer: 5’
GCACCTCCCAGAGCCCTCACTCTCC-3’ and reverse
primer: 5’-CGCAGGGGGAAGGCTTGGAGTAGAC-3’
using pre-optimized amplification conditions (Annealing
at 62°C for 30 sec, denaturation at 95 °C for 15 sec). The
levels of XBP1 were determined using primer sequences
and amplification conditions as described previously
[65]. All the expression values were normalized using
Hypoxanthine-guanine phosphoribosyltransferase (HPRT)
as a housekeeping gene. Relative fold expressions were
analyzed using the 2−ΔΔCt method.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Immunofluorescent staining
The ATF6 translocation from ER to golgi was
determined using immunocytochemistry. Briefly, 8 X 105
SVGA cells were cultured on 1.5 mm coverslips in 6-well
plates and treated with MA for 6 hours. After termination of
treatment, the cells were fixed with ice-cold solution of 1:1
methanol-acetone for 20 min at -20 °C. Next, the cells were
air-dried and permeabilized with 0.3% Triton X-100 (PBST)
for 10 min. Cells were rinsed thrice with PBS followed
by blocking with 1% BSA in PBST for 30 min at room
46114

Oncotarget

temperature. After blocking, the cells were incubated with
a cocktail of rabbit anti-GM130 antibody (1:2500), mouse
anti-ATF6 (1:500) and a goat anti-GFAP antibody (1:400)
overnight at 4 °C in humidified box. The cells were washed
thrice with PBST followed by incubation with a cocktail
of anti-mouse antibody conjugated with Alexa Fluor 555
(1:2000), anti-goat antibody conjugated with Alexa Fluor
647 (1:2000) and an anti-rabbit antibody conjugated with
Alexa Fluor 488 (1:2000) (Cell Signaling Technology,
Danvers, MA) in a dark chamber for 1 hour at room
temperature. Finally, the cells were washed three times with
PBS for 5 minutes each and the cover slips were mounted on
a glass slide with 10 μl Vectashield mounting medium with
DAPI. The images were captured using a 40X lens on Leica
TCS SP5 II Laser Scanning Confocal microscope.

+ TdT enzyme + cationic buffer + TdT labelling buffer)
for 1 hour. The labelled cells were washed twice and
incubated with Strep-HRP antibody solution for 30 min
at 37 °C. Next, cells were incubated for a reaction with
DAB solution for 15 min. The smear of cells was washed
with PBS to remove excess of labeling reagents and then
observed under light microscope. The images were taken
using Labomed iVu5100 (Labo America Inc., Fremont,
CA, USA).

Statistical analysis
The statistical analysis was performed and all the
data were reported in mean ± S.E. values. All the results
were confirmed in at least three separate experiments
unless specified, with each experiment performed in
triplicates. For the comparison between mock/control
group and different treatments, two-tailed Student’s t-test
was applied to calculate P-values, and P-value ≤0.05 (*)
or ≤0.01 (**) was considered statistically significant.
Experiments containing multiple variables such as
pharmacological inhibitor or siRNA were analyzed using
one-way ANOVA with multiple comparisons to address
whether the suppression was significant. The western blots
shown in each panel demonstrate a representative blot,
where each experiment was performed at least 3 times
and mean ± S.E. of band intensities were plotted in the
bar diagrams. No adjustments were made in the statistical
analysis for multiple comparisons.

Cell survival (MTT assay)
SVGA cells were seeded in 24-well plates at the
density of 2.5 X 104 cells/well and appropriate treatments
were performed. After 48 hours of MA treatment, cell
viability was determined using the colorimetric MTT
reagent, which is converted into purple formazan crystals
by mitochondrial dehydrogenase in the viable cells.
Briefly, upon treatments, cells were treated with 0.2
mg/ml MTT solution prepared in serum free medium
and incubated at 37 °C for 3-4 hours. The labeling
was terminated by carefully removing MTT reagent
followed by cell lysis with 300 μl dimethylsulfoxide,
which dissolves the formazan crystals to form a clear
purple solution. The color intensity was measured using
Benchmark Microplate Reader (Bio-Rad Laboratories,
Hercules, CA, USA) with absorbance at 570 nm with a
reference filter at 650 nm. Cell viability was calculated
with the absorbance in control cells as 100%.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We acknowledge the use of the confocal
microscope in the University Missouri, Kansas City
School of Dentistry Confocal Microscopy Core. This
facility is supported by the UMKC Office of Research
Services, UMKC Center of Excellence in Dental and
Musculoskeletal Tissues, and NIH grant S10RR027668.

Terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase dUTP
nick end labeling (TUNEL) based apoptosis
assay
The measurement of cell viability was correlated
with DNA damage using TUNEL based apoptosis
assay using TACS-XL In Situ Apoptosis Detection Kit
- DAB kit as per manufacturer’s protocol (Trevigen
Inc., Gaithersburg, MD, USA). Briefly, 2 X 105 cells/
well were seeded in 12-well plates and the cells were
exposed to the treatments with appropriate compounds.
For experiments involving siRNA, the transfections were
performed as mentioned earlier followed by treatment
with MA for 48 hours. After treatment termination, cells
were washed with PBS, air-dried for 5 min and fixed with
3.7% formalin in PBS for 10 min at room temperature.
After fixation, they were incubated for 10 min at RT with
Cytonin™ solution to permeabilize the cells. Next, cells
were blocked in 3% H2O2 in methanol for 5 min, washed
and labeled with 1x TdT labelling mixture (dNTP mix
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

CONFLICTs OF INTEREST
The authors declare no conflict of interest.

GRANT SUPPORT
This work was supported by grants from National
Institute on Drug Abuse (DA025528 and DA025011)
to AK.

REFERENCES
1.	 SAMHSA. Behavioral Health Trends in the United States:
Results from the 2014 National Survey on Drug Use and
Health. 2014.
46115

Oncotarget

mitochondria-dependent death cascades. FASEB J. 2004;
18:238-251.

2.	 Dluzen DE, McDermott JL. Estrogen, testosterone, and
methamphetamine toxicity. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2006;
1074:282-294.

14.	 Halpin LE, Northrop NA, Yamamoto BK. Ammonia
mediates methamphetamine-induced increases in glutamate
and excitotoxicity. Neuropsychopharmacology. 2014;
39:1031-1038.

3.	 Volkow ND. Drug abuse and mental illness: progress
in understanding comorbidity. Am J Psychiatry. 2001;
158:1181-1183.
4.	 Volkow ND, Chang L, Wang GJ, Fowler JS, Ding YS,
Sedler M, Logan J, Franceschi D, Gatley J, Hitzemann R,
Gifford A, Wong C, Pappas N. Low level of brain dopamine
D2 receptors in methamphetamine abusers: association with
metabolism in the orbitofrontal cortex. Am J Psychiatry.
2001; 158:2015-2021.

15.	 Shah A, Silverstein PS, Singh DP, Kumar A. Involvement
of metabotropic glutamate receptor 5, AKT/PI3K signaling
and NF-kappaB pathway in methamphetamine-mediated
increase in IL-6 and IL-8 expression in astrocytes. J
Neuroinflammation. 2012; 9:52.
16.	 Shah A, Kumar S, Simon SD, Singh DP, Kumar A. HIV
gp120- and methamphetamine-mediated oxidative stress
induces astrocyte apoptosis via cytochrome P450 2E1. Cell
Death Dis. 2013; 4:e850.

5.	 Volkow ND, Chang L, Wang GJ, Fowler JS, Franceschi
D, Sedler M, Gatley SJ, Miller E, Hitzemann R,
Ding YS, Logan J. Loss of dopamine transporters in
methamphetamine abusers recovers with protracted
abstinence. J Neurosci. 2001; 21:9414-9418.

17.	 Deng X, Wang Y, Chou J, Cadet JL. Methamphetamine
causes widespread apoptosis in the mouse brain: evidence
from using an improved TUNEL histochemical method.
Brain Res Mol Brain Res. 2001; 93:64-69.

6.	 Volkow ND, Chang L, Wang GJ, Fowler JS, Leonido-Yee
M, Franceschi D, Sedler MJ, Gatley SJ, Hitzemann R, Ding
YS, Logan J, Wong C, Miller EN. Association of dopamine
transporter reduction with psychomotor impairment
in methamphetamine abusers. Am J Psychiatry. 2001;
158:377-382.

18.	 Deng X, Cai NS, McCoy MT, Chen W, Trush MA, Cadet
JL. Methamphetamine induces apoptosis in an immortalized
rat striatal cell line by activating the mitochondrial cell
death pathway. Neuropharmacology. 2002; 42:837-845.

7.	 Colfax G, Guzman R. Club drugs and HIV infection: a
review. Clin Infect Dis. 2006; 42:1463-1469.

19.	 Ashkenazi A, Salvesen G. Regulated cell death: signaling
and mechanisms. Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol. 2014;
30:337-356.

8.	 Thompson PM, Hayashi KM, Simon SL, Geaga JA,
Hong MS, Sui Y, Lee JY, Toga AW, Ling W, London
ED. Structural abnormalities in the brains of human
subjects who use methamphetamine. J Neurosci. 2004;
24:6028-6036.

20.	 Fulda S, Gorman AM, Hori O, Samali A. Cellular stress
responses: cell survival and cell death. Int J Cell Biol. 2010;
2010:214074.
21.	 Braakman I, Bulleid NJ. Protein folding and modification
in the mammalian endoplasmic reticulum. Annu Rev
Biochem. 2011; 80:71-99.

9.	 Sekine Y, Ouchi Y, Sugihara G, Takei N, Yoshikawa E,
Nakamura K, Iwata Y, Tsuchiya KJ, Suda S, Suzuki K,
Kawai M, Takebayashi K, Yamamoto S, Matsuzaki H,
Ueki T, Mori N, et al. Methamphetamine causes microglial
activation in the brains of human abusers. J Neurosci. 2008;
28:5756-5761.

22.	 Ron D, Walter P. Signal integration in the endoplasmic
reticulum unfolded protein response. Nat Rev Mol Cell
Biol. 2007; 8:519-529.
23.	 Oyadomari S, Mori M. Roles of CHOP/GADD153 in
endoplasmic reticulum stress. Cell Death Differ. 2004;
11:381-389.

10.	 Thiriet N, Deng X, Solinas M, Ladenheim B, Curtis W,
Goldberg SR, Palmiter RD, Cadet JL. Neuropeptide Y
protects against methamphetamine-induced neuronal
apoptosis in the mouse striatum. J Neurosci. 2005;
25:5273-5279.

24.	 Zhou AX, Tabas I. The UPR in atherosclerosis. Semin
Immunopathol. 2013; 35:321-332.
25.	 Hetz C, Chevet E, Harding HP. Targeting the unfolded
protein response in disease. Nat Rev Drug Discov. 2013;
12:703-719.

11.	 Yamamoto BK, Raudensky J. The role of oxidative stress,
metabolic compromise, and inflammation in neuronal
injury produced by amphetamine-related drugs of abuse. J
Neuroimmune Pharmacol. 2008; 3:203-217.

26.	 Beauvais G, Atwell K, Jayanthi S, Ladenheim B,
Cadet JL. Involvement of dopamine receptors in binge
methamphetamine-induced activation of endoplasmic
reticulum and mitochondrial stress pathways. PLoS One.
2011; 6:e28946.

12.	 Mahajan SD, Aalinkeel R, Sykes DE, Reynolds JL,
Bindukumar B, Adal A, Qi M, Toh J, Xu G, Prasad PN,
Schwartz SA. Methamphetamine alters blood brain
barrier permeability via the modulation of tight junction
expression: Implication for HIV-1 neuropathogenesis in
the context of drug abuse. Brain Res. 2008; 1203:133-148.

27.	 Hayashi T, Justinova Z, Hayashi E, Cormaci G, Mori T,
Tsai SY, Barnes C, Goldberg SR, Su TP. Regulation of
sigma-1 receptors and endoplasmic reticulum chaperones
in the brain of methamphetamine self-administering rats. J
Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2010; 332:1054-1063.

13.	 Jayanthi S, Deng X, Noailles PA, Ladenheim B, Cadet
JL. Methamphetamine induces neuronal apoptosis
via cross-talks between endoplasmic reticulum and
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

46116

Oncotarget

28.	 Jayanthi S, McCoy MT, Beauvais G, Ladenheim B, Gilmore
K, Wood W, 3rd, Becker K, Cadet JL. Methamphetamine
induces dopamine D1 receptor-dependent endoplasmic
reticulum stress-related molecular events in the rat striatum.
PLoS One. 2009; 4:e6092.

processing, presentation, and phagocytosis. PLoS Pathog.
2008; 4:e28.
41.	 Ye J, Rawson RB, Komuro R, Chen X, Dave UP, Prywes
R, Brown MS, Goldstein JL. ER stress induces cleavage of
membrane-bound ATF6 by the same proteases that process
SREBPs. Mol Cell. 2000; 6:1355-1364.

29.	 Matsumoto M, Minami M, Takeda K, Sakao Y, Akira
S. Ectopic expression of CHOP (GADD153) induces
apoptosis in M1 myeloblastic leukemia cells. FEBS Lett.
1996; 395:143-147.

42.	 Urano F, Wang X, Bertolotti A, Zhang Y, Chung P, Harding
HP, Ron D. Coupling of stress in the ER to activation of
JNK protein kinases by transmembrane protein kinase
IRE1. Science. 2000; 287:664-666.

30.	 Maytin EV, Ubeda M, Lin JC, Habener JF. Stressinducible transcription factor CHOP/gadd153 induces
apoptosis in mammalian cells via p38 kinase-dependent
and -independent mechanisms. Exp Cell Res. 2001;
267:193-204.

43.	 Yoshida H, Matsui T, Yamamoto A, Okada T, Mori
K. XBP1 mRNA is induced by ATF6 and spliced by
IRE1 in response to ER stress to produce a highly active
transcription factor. Cell. 2001; 107:881-891.

31.	 Zinszner H, Kuroda M, Wang X, Batchvarova N, Lightfoot
RT, Remotti H, Stevens JL, Ron D. CHOP is implicated in
programmed cell death in response to impaired function of
the endoplasmic reticulum. Genes Dev. 1998; 12:982-995.

44.	 Sandoval V, Hanson GR, Fleckenstein AE.
Methamphetamine decreases mouse striatal dopamine
transporter activity: roles of hyperthermia and dopamine.
Eur J Pharmacol. 2000; 409:265-271.

32.	 Ransom BR, Ransom CB. Astrocytes: multitalented stars of
the central nervous system. Methods Mol Biol. 2012; 814:3-7.
33.	 Liu J, Du L. PERK pathway is involved in oxygen-glucoseserum deprivation-induced NF-kB activation via ROS
generation in spinal cord astrocytes. Biochem Biophys Res
Commun. 2015; 467:197-203.

45.	 Torres OV, Ladenheim B, Jayanthi S, McCoy MT,
Krasnova IN, Vautier FA, Cadet JL. An Acute
Methamphetamine Injection Downregulates the Expression
of Several Histone Deacetylases (HDACs) in the Mouse
Nucleus Accumbens: Potential Regulatory Role of HDAC2
Expression. Neurotox Res. 2015.

34.	 Meares GP, Liu Y, Rajbhandari R, Qin H, Nozell SE,
Mobley JA, Corbett JA, Benveniste EN. PERK-dependent
activation of JAK1 and STAT3 contributes to endoplasmic
reticulum stress-induced inflammation. Mol Cell Biol.
2014; 34:3911-3925.

46.	 Whitfield TW, Jr., Schlosburg JE, Wee S, Gould A, George
O, Grant Y, Zamora-Martinez ER, Edwards S, Crawford
E, Vendruscolo LF, Koob GF. kappa Opioid receptors
in the nucleus accumbens shell mediate escalation of
methamphetamine intake. J Neurosci. 2015; 35:4296-4305.

35.	 Alberdi E, Wyssenbach A, Alberdi M, Sanchez-Gomez
MV, Cavaliere F, Rodriguez JJ, Verkhratsky A, Matute C.
Ca(2+) -dependent endoplasmic reticulum stress correlates
with astrogliosis in oligomeric amyloid beta-treated
astrocytes and in a model of Alzheimer’s disease. Aging
Cell. 2013; 12:292-302.

47.	 Ray LA, Bujarski S, Courtney KE, Moallem NR, Lunny
K, Roche D, Leventhal AM, Shoptaw S, Heinzerling
K, London ED, Miotto K. The Effects of Naltrexone on
Subjective Response to Methamphetamine in a Clinical
Sample: a Double-Blind, Placebo-Controlled Laboratory
Study. Neuropsychopharmacology. 2015; 40:2347-2356.

36.	 Ledesma MD, Galvan C, Hellias B, Dotti C, Jensen PH.
Astrocytic but not neuronal increased expression and
redistribution of parkin during unfolded protein stress. J
Neurochem. 2002; 83:1431-1440.

48.	 Ma J, Wan J, Meng J, Banerjee S, Ramakrishnan S, Roy
S. Methamphetamine induces autophagy as a pro-survival
response against apoptotic endothelial cell death through
the Kappa opioid receptor. Cell Death Dis. 2014; 5:e1099.

37.	 Jager R, Bertrand MJ, Gorman AM, Vandenabeele P,
Samali A. The unfolded protein response at the crossroads
of cellular life and death during endoplasmic reticulum
stress. Biol Cell. 2012; 104:259-270.

49.	 McIlwain DR, Berger T, Mak TW. Caspase functions in
cell death and disease. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol.
2013; 5:a008656.
50.	 Moratalla R, Khairnar A, Simola N, Granado N, GarciaMontes JR, Porceddu PF, Tizabi Y, Costa G, Morelli M.
Amphetamine-related drugs neurotoxicity in humans and in
experimental animals: Main mechanisms. Prog Neurobiol.
2015.

38.	 Melega WP, Cho AK, Harvey D, Lacan G.
Methamphetamine blood concentrations in human abusers:
application to pharmacokinetic modeling. Synapse. 2007;
61:216-220.
39.	 Riviere GJ, Gentry WB, Owens SM. Disposition of
methamphetamine and its metabolite amphetamine in brain
and other tissues in rats after intravenous administration. J
Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2000; 292:1042-1047.

51.	 Loftis JM, Janowsky A. Neuroimmune basis of
methamphetamine toxicity. Int Rev Neurobiol. 2014;
118:165-197.
52.	 Cisneros IE, Ghorpade A. HIV-1, methamphetamine and
astrocyte glutamate regulation: combined excitotoxic
implications for neuro-AIDS. Curr HIV Res. 2012;
10:392-406.

40.	 Talloczy Z, Martinez J, Joset D, Ray Y, Gacser A, Toussi S,
Mizushima N, Nosanchuk JD, Goldstein H, Loike J, Sulzer
D, Santambrogio L. Methamphetamine inhibits antigen
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

46117

Oncotarget

66.	 Harding HP, Zhang Y, Zeng H, Novoa I, Lu PD, Calfon
M, Sadri N, Yun C, Popko B, Paules R, Stojdl DF, Bell
JC, Hettmann T, Leiden JM, Ron D. An integrated stress
response regulates amino acid metabolism and resistance to
oxidative stress. Mol Cell. 2003; 11:619-633.

53.	 Abdul Muneer PM, Alikunju S, Szlachetka AM, Haorah J.
Methamphetamine inhibits the glucose uptake by human
neurons and astrocytes: stabilization by acetyl-L-carnitine.
PLoS One. 2011; 6:e19258.
54.	 Takeichi T, Wang EL, Kitamura O. The effects of low-dose
methamphetamine pretreatment on endoplasmic reticulum
stress and methamphetamine neurotoxicity in the rat
midbrain. Leg Med (Tokyo). 2012; 14:69-77.

67.	 Blais JD, Filipenko V, Bi M, Harding HP, Ron D,
Koumenis C, Wouters BG, Bell JC. Activating transcription
factor 4 is translationally regulated by hypoxic stress. Mol
Cell Biol. 2004; 24:7469-7482.

55.	 Huang RR, Hu W, Yin YY, Wang YC, Li WP, Li WZ.
Chronic restraint stress promotes learning and memory
impairment due to enhanced neuronal endoplasmic
reticulum stress in the frontal cortex and hippocampus in
male mice. Int J Mol Med. 2015; 35:553-559.

68.	 Lu PD, Harding HP, Ron D. Translation reinitiation at
alternative open reading frames regulates gene expression
in an integrated stress response. J Cell Biol. 2004;
167:27-33.

56.	 Wu J, Zhao Z, Kumar A, Lipinski MM, Loane DJ, Stoica
BA, Faden AI. ER stress and disrupted neurogenesis
in the brain are associated with cognitive impairment
and depressive-like behavior after spinal cord injury. J
Neurotrauma. 2016.

69.	 Vattem KM, Wek RC. Reinitiation involving upstream
ORFs regulates ATF4 mRNA translation in mammalian
cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2004; 101:11269-11274.
70.	 Kim R, Emi M, Tanabe K, Murakami S. Role of the
unfolded protein response in cell death. Apoptosis. 2006;
11:5-13.

57.	 Shen J, Chen X, Hendershot L, Prywes R. ER stress
regulation of ATF6 localization by dissociation of BiP/
GRP78 binding and unmasking of Golgi localization
signals. Dev Cell. 2002; 3:99-111.

71.	 Tajiri S, Oyadomari S, Yano S, Morioka M, Gotoh T,
Hamada JI, Ushio Y, Mori M. Ischemia-induced neuronal
cell death is mediated by the endoplasmic reticulum
stress pathway involving CHOP. Cell Death Differ. 2004;
11:403-415.

58.	 Chen X, Shen J, Prywes R. The luminal domain of ATF6
senses endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress and causes
translocation of ATF6 from the ER to the Golgi. J Biol
Chem. 2002; 277:13045-13052.

72.	 Hetz C. The unfolded protein response: controlling cell fate
decisions under ER stress and beyond. Nat Rev Mol Cell
Biol. 2012; 13:89-102.

59.	 Haze K, Yoshida H, Yanagi H, Yura T, Mori K.
Mammalian transcription factor ATF6 is synthesized as
a transmembrane protein and activated by proteolysis in
response to endoplasmic reticulum stress. Mol Biol Cell.
1999; 10:3787-3799.

73.	 Yoshida H, Okada T, Haze K, Yanagi H, Yura T, Negishi
M, Mori K. ATF6 activated by proteolysis binds in the
presence of NF-Y (CBF) directly to the cis-acting element
responsible for the mammalian unfolded protein response.
Mol Cell Biol. 2000; 20:6755-6767.

60.	 Hiramatsu N, Chiang WC, Kurt TD, Sigurdson CJ, Lin
JH. Multiple Mechanisms of Unfolded Protein ResponseInduced Cell Death. Am J Pathol. 2015; 185:1800-1808.

74.	 Zeng L, Zampetaki A, Margariti A, Pepe AE, Alam S,
Martin D, Xiao Q, Wang W, Jin ZG, Cockerill G, Mori K,
Li YS, Hu Y, Chien S, Xu Q. Sustained activation of XBP1
splicing leads to endothelial apoptosis and atherosclerosis
development in response to disturbed flow. Proc Natl Acad
Sci U S A. 2009; 106:8326-8331.

61.	 Byrd AE, Brewer JW. Intricately Regulated: A Cellular
Toolbox for Fine-Tuning XBP1 Expression and Activity.
Cells. 2012; 1:738-753.
62.	 Yoshida H, Oku M, Suzuki M, Mori K. pXBP1(U) encoded
in XBP1 pre-mRNA negatively regulates unfolded protein
response activator pXBP1(S) in mammalian ER stress
response. J Cell Biol. 2006; 172:565-575.

75.	 Silverstein PS, Shah A, Gupte R, Liu X, Piepho RW,
Kumar S, Kumar A. Methamphetamine toxicity and its
implications during HIV-1 infection. J Neurovirol. 2011;
17:401-415.

63.	 Szegezdi E, Logue SE, Gorman AM, Samali A. Mediators
of endoplasmic reticulum stress-induced apoptosis. EMBO
Rep. 2006; 7:880-885.

76.	 Krasnova IN, Cadet JL. Methamphetamine toxicity and
messengers of death. Brain Res Rev. 2009; 60:379-407.

64.	 Nishitoh H, Matsuzawa A, Tobiume K, Saegusa K, Takeda
K, Inoue K, Hori S, Kakizuka A, Ichijo H. ASK1 is
essential for endoplasmic reticulum stress-induced neuronal
cell death triggered by expanded polyglutamine repeats.
Genes Dev. 2002; 16:1345-1355.

77.	 Davidson C, Gow AJ, Lee TH, Ellinwood EH.
Methamphetamine neurotoxicity: necrotic and apoptotic
mechanisms and relevance to human abuse and treatment.
Brain Res Brain Res Rev. 2001; 36:1-22.
78.	 Yu S, Zhu L, Shen Q, Bai X, Di X. Recent advances
in methamphetamine neurotoxicity mechanisms and
its molecular pathophysiology. Behav Neurol. 2015;
2015:103969.

65.	 Shah A, Vaidya NK, Bhat HK, Kumar A. HIV-1 gp120
induces type-1 programmed cell death through ER stress
employing IRE1alpha, JNK, AP-1 pathway. Sci Rep. 2016;
6:18929.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

46118

Oncotarget

79.	 Lee YW, Hennig B, Yao J, Toborek M. Methamphetamine
induces AP-1 and NF-kappaB binding and transactivation
in human brain endothelial cells. J Neurosci Res. 2001;
66:583-591.

82.	 Major EO, Miller AE, Mourrain P, Traub RG, de Widt E,
Sever J. Establishment of a line of human fetal glial cells
that supports JC virus multiplication. Proc Natl Acad Sci U
S A. 1985; 82:1257-1261.

80.	 Coelho-Santos V, Leitao RA, Cardoso FL, Palmela I,
Rito M, Barbosa M, Brito MA, Fontes-Ribeiro CA, Silva
AP. The TNF-alpha/NF-kappaB signaling pathway has
a key role in methamphetamine-induced blood-brain
barrier dysfunction. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab. 2015;
35:1260-1271.

83.	 Gardner J, Borgmann K, Deshpande MS, Dhar A, Wu
L, Persidsky R, Ghorpade A. Potential mechanisms for
astrocyte-TIMP-1 downregulation in chronic inflammatory
diseases. J Neurosci Res. 2006; 83:1281-1292.
84.	 Shah A, Silverstein PS, Kumar S, Singh DP, Kumar A.
Synergistic cooperation between methamphetamine and
HIV-1 gsp120 through the P13K/Akt pathway induces IL-6
but not IL-8 expression in astrocytes. PLoS One. 2012;
7:e52060.

81.	 Wang T, Chen X, Wang Z, Zhang M, Meng H, Gao Y,
Luo B, Tao L, Chen Y. Poloxamer-188 can attenuate bloodbrain barrier damage to exert neuroprotective effect in mice
intracerebral hemorrhage model. J Mol Neurosci. 2015;
55:240-250.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

46119

Oncotarget

