HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Author Manuscript

Oncogene. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 April 20.
Published in final edited form as:
Oncogene. 2016 January 7; 35(1): 1–11. doi:10.1038/onc.2015.99.

Emerging strategies to effectively target autophagy in cancer
VW Rebecca and RK Amaravadi
The Department of Medicine and Abramson Cancer Center; University of Pennsylvania School of
Medicine, Philadelphia, PA USA

Abstract
Author Manuscript

Autophagy serves a dichotomous role in cancer and recent advances have helped delineate the
appropriate settings where inhibiting or promoting autophagy may confer therapeutic efficacy in
patients. Our evolving understanding of the molecular machinery responsible for the tightly
controlled regulation of this homeostatic mechanism has begun to bear fruit in the way of
autophagy-oriented clinical trials and promising lead compounds to modulate autophagy for
therapeutic benefit. In this manuscript we review the recent preclinical and clinical therapeutic
strategies that involve autophagy modulation in cancer.

INTRODUCTION

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

The impact autophagy has on human health and disease are far and wide, with reports
demonstrating important functions in bacterial1 and viral infections,2 suppression of
inflammation,3 adaptive immune responses4 and immunosurveillance,5 neurodegeneration,6
heart disease7 and cancer.8 Aberrant autophagic activity is an emerging hallmark of cancer,9
serving a critical function in the pathogenesis, survival and response to therapy in a growing
number of cancers. In general, autophagy provides the means by which cells mitigate
metabolic and therapeutic stresses, remove waste and manage toxic byproducts of anabolism
and catabolism, such as reactive oxygen species.10 The role autophagy serves specifically in
cancer has been controversial, with some reports indicating autophagy suppresses tumor
development, whereas other reports providing evidence that autophagy promotes the growth
of established tumors.11 The overarching question is whether or not autophagy can be
effectively modulated to impair cancer initiation or progression. Recent advances in the
fundamental understanding of the context-dependent consequences of autophagy defects in
the setting of activated oncogenes will likely pave the way for new strategies to either induce
or impair autophagy therapeutically. Meanwhile, the first deliberate attempt to modulate
autophagy therapeutically has been accomplished through the publication of the first seven
clinical trials involving hydroxychloroquine (HCQ) in cancer patients.12–18 Lessons learned
from these clinical trials have raised new questions that can be answered in the laboratory.
Finally, a deeper understanding of how autophagy is regulated at the genetic, epigenetic and
posttranslational level, and how autophagy can regulate itself and be regulated by drugs,

Correspondence: Dr RK Amaravadi, The Department of Medicine and Abramson Cancer Center, University of Pennsylvania School
of Medicine, 16 Penn Tower, 3400 Spruce Street, Philadelphia, PA 19063, USA. ravi.amaravadi@uphs.upenn.edu.
CONFLICT OF INTEREST
The authors declare no conflict of interest.

Rebecca and Amaravadi

Page 2

Author Manuscript

extracellular components and metabolites, may point to new therapeutic targets that can
directly or indirectly modulate autophagy. Here we discuss the latest developments in the
field’s understanding of autophagy in cancer and novel strategies to effectively modulate
autophagic activity.

AUTOPHAGY FORM AND FUNCTION

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

The dissection of the autophagy pathway was first described in yeast19 where it clearly
serves as an intracellular, self-preservation mechanism providing internal nutrients to cells in
times of stress.20 Although autophagy is evolutionarily conserved across organisms, its role
in multicellular organisms is more nuanced than it is in yeast. Recent evidence indicates
autophagic flux is not only dependent on the expression of the canonical autophagy
machinery, but through genetic, epigenetic, metabolic, posttranslational and extracellular
regulation of this machinery. This complex regulation of autophagy may enable its multiple
roles in cancer. Autophagic flux occurs at a basal rate in all eukaryotic cells to maintain
equilibrium through the recycling of nonessential components within the cell.8 Under
challenging conditions such as nutrient deprivation,21 hypoxia22 or targeted therapy,23
autophagic flux can be increased via multiple stimuli to elicit homeostatic regulation over
critical metabolic building blocks including amino acids, nucleic acids and monosaccharides
necessary for cell survival (Figure 1). Multiple forms of autophagy exist in mammalian cells,
each with well-characterized mechanisms that differ in the way material destined for
degradation is sequestered and transported to the lysosome (micro, chaperone mediated and
macroautophagy).24 Macroautophagy represents the most multifunctional and best-described
form of autophagy, comprising a complex, tightly regulated process where doublemembrane autophagic vesicles (termed autophagosomes) are generated. Autophagosomes
function by sequestering damaged or misfolded proteins, engulfing mitochondria (termed
mitophagy) and internalizing endoplasmic reticulum (ER; amongst other cytoplasmic
components) through the aid of cargo adaptor proteins before ultimately fusing to the
lysosome for degradation and recycling of internal contents to sustain cellular viability.25,26

Author Manuscript

Autophagy can be characterized as canonical or non-canonical, depending upon the
molecular machinery involved in the biogenesis of autophagosomes. Canonical autophagy is
regulated by a number of autophagy-related (ATG) proteins and non-ATG proteins (such as
class III phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3KIII), p150 and (activating molecule in Beclin-1regulated autophagy) Ambra1) that choreograph the initiation, elongation, maturation and
fusion stages of the pathway.27 Non-canonical autophagy is not as well understood, where
autophagosomes can be created independently of Atg5 or Atg7.28 Recently, ferritin clusters
have been reported to accumulate at the site of autophagosome formation along with p62 in
cells lacking Atg5, possibly shedding insight regarding non-canonical autophagosome
biogenesis dynamics.29 The classical and perhaps best-characterized environmentalmediated regulation of canonical autophagy occurs via the growth factor/receptor tyrosine
kinase/phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K)/protein kinase B (also known as AKT)/mechanistic
target of rapamycin complex 1 (mTORC1) signaling axis, which directly controls
autophagic activity through the phosphorylation and inhibition of Unc-51-like kinase 1
(ULK1), part of the first protein complex involved in autophagic vesicle formation.30 Under
conditions in which growth factors and nutrients such as amino acids are rich in the
Oncogene. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 April 20.

Rebecca and Amaravadi

Page 3

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

extracellular space, the PI3K/AKT/mTORC1 pathway is highly active and mTORC1 inhibits
ULK1 through the phosphorylation at its serine-757 residue.31 However, when growth
factors become limited, mTORC1 becomes inactive and can no longer repress the complex
consisting of ULK1, focal adhesion kinase family-interacting protein 200 kDa, ATG13 and
ATG101, which favors the initiation of autophagy (the first phase of autophagy).32 AMPactivated protein kinase, in response to either glucose starvation or amino-acid deprivation,
can also regulate ULK1 activity via fine-tuning of the phosphorylation status of ULK1.33
Once activated, ULK1 forms a complex with Beclin-1 via assistance from TRIM5α, acting
as a protein platform, leading to the phosphorylation and activation of Beclin-1.34 Once
active, Beclin-1 activates the class III PI3K vacuolar sorting protein 34 (Vps34), a
component necessary both for endocytic sorting and in the ability of cells to respond to
fluctuations in nutrients such as amino acids and insulin. Vps34 activity has also been
demonstrated to not be inhibited by the TORC1 inhibitor rapamycin, suggesting that Vps34
can also function upstream of mTOR, serving as a vehicle for mTOR to monitor the levels of
a wider net of critical nutrients for cell survival.35 Following Vps34 activation, autophagy
cytoplasmic machinery is recruited onto the phospholipid membranes derived from various
sources including the endoplasmic reticulum,36 plasma membrane,37 mitochondria38 and
Golgi apparatus.39 The second phase of autophagy (nucleation) marks the beginning of
autophagosome formation with the nucleation of membranes by Beclin-Vps34 and either
ATG14L, Rubicon, Ambra, among other proteins. The third phase (elongation and
maturation) allows for the maturation of autophagosomes and requires a ubiquitin ligase-like
ATG5-ATG12-ATG16L complex (formed with the aid of ATG7 and ATG10).40 ATG4 can
also contribute to the elongation phase, and has recently been implicated as a biomarker and
potential therapeutic target for chronic myeloid leukemia stem/progenitor cells (Figure 1).41
The ubiquitin-like protein LC3/Atg8 is subsequently conjugated to the lipid
phosphatidylethanolamine on the surface of autophagosome membranes. Once integrated in
the lipid bilayer, LC3 interacts with adaptor proteins (autophagy receptors) such as p62,
Nbr1, TRIM5α and NIX, which recruit cargo from the cytoplasm and promote
autophagosome closure.34,42 Proteomic network analysis in cells undergoing autophagy
reveal high connectivity between LC3/Atg8 and upstream autophagy components such as
ULK1, Vps34 and ATG2A, suggesting that LC3/Atg8 may serve a more significant role in
regulating autophagosome formation than was previously appreciated.43 Once
autophagosomes have engulfed cargo and closed, they are ultimately trafficked and fused to
lysosomes forming autophagolysosomes. This fusion allows for the pH-dependent
degradation of cytosolic cargo via hydrolases located within the acidic environment of the
autophagolysosome.44 Lysosomal permeases such as spinster permit the release of
degradation products ranging from sugars, amino acids and nucleic acids into the cytosol for
reuse by the cell45 (Figure 1). Our growing understanding of how autophagy is regulated has
shed light on the potential novel druggable components for autophagy inhibition, which will
be discussed later (see Figure 1 and below).

Oncogene. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 April 20.

Rebecca and Amaravadi

Page 4

Author Manuscript

MOUSE MODELS ADDRESS THE ROLE OF AUTOPHAGY IN TUMOR
INITIATION AND MAINTENANCE

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

A major breakthrough in understanding the role of autophagy in tumorigenesis was made
when spontaneous lung and liver tumors were found to arise in Beclin-1 +/− mice.46
Monoallelic deletion of the human homolog of Beclin-1 (BECN1) was initially reported to
occur in 40–75% of cases of human sporadic ovarian, breast and prostate cancer.47 Taken
together these results established BECN1 as the first autophagy-associated tumor suppressor
gene.47,48 However, the proximity of BECN1 to the ovarian and breast tumor suppressor
gene BRCA1 on chromosome 17q21 has decreased the certainty of Beclin-1’s role as a bona
fide tumor suppressor gene. A recent report demonstrated Beclin-1 allele loss to be a rare
event, assessed in human prostate, breast and ovarian tumor sequencing data from The
Cancer Genome Atlas and other databases, except in the setting of loss of neighboring gene
BRCA1.49 Further, a larger panel of cancers was analyzed with no evidence for BECN1
mutation or loss, leaving the function of BECN1 as a tumor suppressor in human cancer
unclear. Adding more complexity to the role Beclin-1 serves in malignancy is a report
showing Beclin-1 to share regulation with p53 at the level of proteasomal degradation in an
ubiquitin-dependent manner; therefore suggesting that the spontaneous malignancy in
Beclin-1 +/− experimental systems may be due to lower p53 levels.50 Along a similar vein,
Beclin-1 and the antiapoptotic Bcl-2 family member myeloid cell leukemia (Mcl-1) protein
are both stabilized by binding to the deubiquitinase USP9X (ubiquitin-specific peptidase 9
X-linked), and negatively modulate the expression of each other through competitive
displacement of USP9X.51 Beclin-1 expression levels were discovered to decrease in
patient-derived melanoma tissues as Mcl-1 levels increased in a significant interdependent
manner, independent of autophagy.51 Though Beclin-1 has recently been demonstrated to
have a role in the response of lung cancer to epidermal growth factor receptor inhibition,52
further experimental validation is needed to determine the practical consequences of BECN1
heterozygosity in human tumors and to delineate whether the observations involving
Beclin-1 are indeed dependent on the role autophagy serves in each of these experimental
systems, or rather due to the confounding implications BRCA1, p53 and Mcl-1 each provide
on cancer cell viability and disease progression.

Author Manuscript

Beyond Beclin-1, mouse models with mosaic deletion of Atg5 and liver-specific deletion of
Atg7 also resulted in a greater incidence of spontaneous liver adenomas; however, the
tumors were benign suggesting autophagy may be necessary for the progression beyond the
benign state.53 Deletion of Fip200 also prevented the development of breast cancer.54,55
Numerous mouse models have demonstrated autophagy to serve a critical capacity in disease
progression in established oncogene-driven tumors, where inhibition of autophagy results in
a reduction in tumor volume in established tumors. In a mouse xenograft model utilizing
immortalized baby mouse kidney epithelial cell lines engineered to express constitutive
activity of RAS (H-rasV12) while also possessing defects in apoptotic machinery (Bax/Bakdeficient), autophagy was found to support survival of cancer cells undergoing metabolic
stress and was localized to the poorly vascularized, hypoxic cores of tumors.56 Further, cell
lines engineered with constitutive activity of AKT (myr-AKT) along with apoptotic defects

Oncogene. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 April 20.

Rebecca and Amaravadi

Page 5

Author Manuscript

displayed high levels of necrosis, mechanistically due to the coordinate inhibition of
apoptosis (via Bax/Bak deficiency) and autophagy (inhibited by AKT activity).
Although these data were critical, what were sorely needed were genetically engineered
mouse models of oncogene-driven cancers with and without defects in autophagy genes.
These models have emerged recently (Table 1) and reveal a theme where the majority of
mice with defects in key autophagy machinery display accelerated the development of
benign tumors, however, autophagy appears to be essential for the progression of benign
tumors to a more malignant state. Once a tumor is established, autophagy has been clearly
demonstrated to also have a role in promoting the survival of existing tumor cells within the
tumor microenvironment.57

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Two models of spontaneous Kras-driven lung cancer, one with tumor cell deletion of Atg758
and one with tumor cell deletion of Atg5,59 explored the importance of autophagy in the
context of Ras oncogenes (Table 1). In the KrasG12D/Atg7fl/fl model, the deletion of Atg7
resulted in a significant reduction in tumor burden and an increase in tumor lipid
accumulation; however, no difference in the overall survival could be noted due to an
increase in death by inflammation in mice with Atg7-deficient tumors.58 In the KrasG12D/
Atg5fl/fl model, the deletion of Atg5 resulted in increased tumor initiation; however, tumor
cells exhibited decreased mitochondrial bioenergetics, and the deletion of Atg5 also
enhanced survival of mice.59 Each of these mouse models revealed autophagy to be
necessary for cancer cell proliferation and progression of lung tumors from adenomas to
carcinomas. These findings strengthen the concept that Ras-driven cancers rely on
autophagy for sustained metabolism and growth. A mouse model with Cre-activatable
BRAF (BrafV600E) driven lung cancer, with and without the conditional knockout of Atg7
was generated to determine the role of autophagy in BRAF-driven lung cancers. Autophagy
was required for the growth of established BrafV600E-driven lung cancers via the
preservation of mitochondrial function and the supply of metabolic substrates critical for
sustained tumorigenesis.60 Atg7-deficient mice experienced increased early tumorigenesis in
an oxidative stress-dependent manner compared with mice with intact Atg7; however, as in
the Kras-driven lung cancer model, Atg7 deletion converted BrafV600E-driven adenomas to
tumors that had the histological appearance of benign oncocytomas rather than
carcinomas.60

Author Manuscript

In mouse models of pancreatic cancer, autophagy was discovered to be vital and essential for
tumorigenic growth of pancreatic cancers de novo.61 Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma
(PDAC) cell lines and primary tumor possess constitutively activated autophagy (as seen by
GFP-LC3 puncta and cleaved LC3-A IHC (LC3-II)) and a unique dependence upon
autophagy. Importantly, the genetic (suppression of ATG5 expression by shRNAs) or
chemical inhibition (chloroquine) of autophagy leads to robust tumor regression and
prolonged survival in pancreatic cancer xenografts and genetic mouse models.61 KRAS
mutations are one of the known drivers in PDAC, and a recent report leveraging an inducible
mouse model of mutated Kras (KrasG12D) in a p53Lox/WT background shed further light on
the role autophagy serves in pancreatic cancer. In a temporal and pancreas-specific manner,
the authors ablated KRAS activity, which resulted in pancreatic tumor regression within 2–3
weeks followed by relapse a few months thereafter. The cancer cells surviving KRAS
Oncogene. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 April 20.

Rebecca and Amaravadi

Page 6

Author Manuscript

ablation were studied with transcriptome analysis and gene set enrichment analysis revealing
a significant enrichment of genes involved in lysosomal activity, mitochondrial electron
transport chain and autophagy, among other cellular processes.62

Author Manuscript

Although the genetically engineered mouse models described above were incredibly useful
in shedding light on the effects of autophagy defects on the tumorigenesis of oncogenedriven cancer, they did not effectively model the therapeutic ablation of autophagy. With
cancer therapy, drugs will typically impact the pathway throughout the body and are often
administered only after the tumor becomes apparent (stage IV) or in a high-risk (stage III)
setting. Although tumor xenografts address this to some degree, those models are artificial
because mice lack immune systems and the tumor is typically grown out of context in the
flanks of the mice. To address all of these concerns, a genetically engineered mouse model
of an inducible Kras-driven lung cancer was generated where Atg7 could be systemically
deleted in a conditional manner. When systemic Atg7 deletion was engaged in adult mice,
mice initially were asymptomatic, but eventually died of neurodegeneration at roughly 3
months.63 However, when Atg7 was systemically ablated in mice before the induction of
Kras-driven lung cancer, the rate of lung nodules appeared to increase, but the nodules failed
to progress to cancer before the mice succumbed to the effects of systemic Atg7 depletion.
When Atg7 was systemically deleted in mice after Kras-driven tumors were allowed to form,
massive tumor regression and apoptosis was observed before the toxicity of Atg7 depletion
on normal tissue was evident. These observations are valuable as they reveal that chronic
autophagy inhibition may yield toxicities, supporting the exploration of optimal treatment
regimens that minimize exposure to autophagy inhibitors while still maximizing the
antitumor benefit conferred from autophagy inhibition.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

In general, mouse models show that autophagy is critical in the transition from premalignant
to malignant, however, autophagy promotes growth of established tumors. These recent
results partially reconcile the dichotomy of autophagy in tumorigenesis, and support a role
for the inhibition of autophagy as a therapeutic strategy in certain advanced cancers. There
was an exception reported, where a model of pancreas-specific Kras-mutant, Trp53−/−
tumors was treated with autophagy inhibition with either genetic ablation of Atg5 or Atg7,
or chemically with HCQ, resulting in the promotion of tumorigenesis (Table 1).64 From both
the strategies, autophagy inhibition was found to accelerate the formation of PDAC in mice
due to enhanced glucose uptake and enrichment of anabolic pathways.65 A wrinkle in this
model is its use of an embryonic pancreas-specific homozygous deletion of Trp53 in the
context of Kras mutation, which results in advanced cancers in early development. In nature,
p53 is most frequently found as missense mutations in Kras-mutant pancreatic cancers.66
The heterozygous expression of mutant Trp53 in the context of oncogenic Kras is postulated
to give rise to precancerous lesions called pancreatic intraepithelial neoplasias, with the
subsequent loss of heterozygosity of the wild-type TP53 allele driving the progression from
pancreatic intraepithelial neoplasias to PDAC.65 Thus, the model64 utilizing homozygous
deletion of Trp53 did not fully recapitulate the step-wise progression of pancreas cancer as is
found in humans. To address this important issue, a pancreas-specific Kras-mutant Trp53+/−
mouse model was generated that experiences loss of heterozygosity of the wild-type Trp53
allele during PDAC progression, therefore mirroring the step-wise development of human
pancreas cancer.67 Within this model with Trp53 (loss of heterozygosity), autophagy
Oncogene. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 April 20.

Rebecca and Amaravadi

Page 7

Author Manuscript

inhibition via ablation of Atg5 or with HCQ was found to increase the overall survival in a
mouse preclinical trial leveraging cohorts of genetically characterized, patient-derived
xenografts. Trp53 status was not found to correlate with the response in tumor cell lines or
patient-derived xenograft models, and although autophagy inhibition in the pancreas lead to
an increase in tumor initiation, few of these premalignant lesions could develop into invasive
tumors and the mice treated with autophagy inhibition lived longer overall.67 These findings
are of the upmost importance, as conclusions drawn from the Trp53 model that did not
recapitulate human pancreas cancer development64 lead to premature recommendations that
patients with Trp53 mutations should not receive treatment with HCQ.68 Due to the high
profile of the Journal in which this opinion piece was published, it is possible that patients
who may have benefited from clinical trials utilizing HCQ may have been directed to other
therapies by their physicians.

Author Manuscript

Insight from these studies will also help design therapy regimens, where exposure to
autophagy inhibitors will be strategically timed to allow for optimal therapeutic benefit in
the absence of potential hazards from the chronic inhibition of autophagy. It appears that in
most cases autophagy defects lead to accelerated tumor initiation, but impaired tumor
maintenance. It is for these reasons why much effort in developing therapeutics targeting
autophagy is focused on advanced cancers where concerns about developing secondary
benign tumors will be less problematic if the advanced cancer that is putting the patient’s
life immediately at risk can be halted or regressed. A deeper understanding of how
autophagy is regulated on multiple levels could unravel the switch that turns autophagy from
a tumor suppressor to a tumor promoter.

CANCER THERAPY CAN PRODUCE AUTOPHAGIC/IMMUNOGENIC CELL
Author Manuscript

DEATH: THE ARGUMENT TO INDUCE AUTOPHAGY

Author Manuscript

Observations that therapy-induced autophagy can have a role in tumor cell cytotoxicity have
been reported; however, they commonly depend upon pre-existing defective apoptotic
machinery in order for the autophagic cell death to manifest. Bcl-2 homology 3 mimetics
such as gossypol have been demonstrated to elicit autophagic cell death in apoptosisdeficient malignant glioma and prostate cancer, by way of disrupting physical interactions
between Bcl-2 family members and Beclin-1.69 Autophagic cell death refers to cell death
that is accompanied by extensive cytoplasmic vacuolization, often correlated to increased
autophagic flux.70 The use of the term autophagic cell death is controversial, as since its
conception the phrase is commonly misused to suggest that autophagy actively contributes
to cell death. Although autophagy frequently occurs concurrently with regulated cell death,
autophagy is directly responsible for the death of tumor cells in only a few cases.71 To date,
there have been no deliberate attempts to induce autophagy specifically in a cancer model.
Autophagy appears to be responsible for the death of some cancer cells with defective
apoptotic machinery, such as inhibited caspase-8, in an ATG7 and Beclin-1-dependent
manner in vitro.72 Another study reported re-expression of (ARHI) aplasia Ras homolog I in
human ovarian cancer cell lines resulted in autophagic cell death in vitro.73 However, in vivo
autophagy enabled these cells to remain dormant in the context of ARHI re-expression, with
chloroquine treatment markedly reducing the regrowth of xenografts. Similar results were

Oncogene. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 April 20.

Rebecca and Amaravadi

Page 8

Author Manuscript

also observed in vitro when cells were cultured with factors found in vivo such as IGF-I, MCSF and IL-8, suggesting autophagy serves a protective role when experimental conditions
recapitulate those found within the tumor microenvironment. A recent consensus statement
on cell death nomenclature warned about the fact that regulated cell death mechanisms
frequently interact with each other and it may be that in many cases persistent autophagy can
activate other forms of cell death that are actually responsible for the death that ensues.71
There may exist multiple checkpoints that limit autophagic cell death from occurring in
vivo, such as growth factor availability and functional apoptotic machinery.

Author Manuscript

Interestingly, autophagy has also been reported to serve a role in the recruitment of immune
system effectors. Chemotherapy in autophagy-competent cancers recruited dendritic cells
and T lymphocytes to the tumor bed in an ATP-dependent fashion.74 Inhibiting autophagy
suppressed the release of ATP and attenuated the recruitment of immune cells. Similar
results were observed in melanoma where chemotherapy75 or radiotherapy76 each led to an
increase in mannose-6-phosphate receptor on the tumor cell surface, making tumor cells
more susceptible to lysis by cytotoxic T cells, in an autophagy-dependent manner. The
implications these findings hold in regard to the clinical utilization of autophagy inhibitors
moving forward remain to be determined. A potential combination of an immune checkpoint
inhibitor, such as anti-PD-1 antibody,77 with an autophagy inhibitor can be envisioned to
ensure potential secondary effects on the immune response to cancer cells do not blunt the
antitumor effect of autophagy inhibition.

CANCER THERAPY CAN PRODUCE CYTOPROTECTIVE AUTOPHAGY: THE
ARGUMENT TO INHIBIT AUTOPHAGY
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Autophagy was convincingly shown as a key survival mechanism in apoptosis-defective
transformed cells subjected to growth factor withdrawal. Cells that survived growth factor
withdrawal or other modes of starvation could be killed when autophagy was inhibited with
either 3-methyladenine or CQ, and the autophagic phenotype was reversible once growth
factors were replenished.21 Utilizing a Myc-induced model of lymphoma, the role of
autophagy in the survival of tumor cells in vivo was demonstrated where treatment with
either CQ or ATG5 shRNAs enhanced the ability of alkylating drug therapy to induce tumor
cell death.78 Since then, a multitude of papers have been published demonstrating utility in
combining autophagy inhibitors with cancer therapy.11 In addition to autophagy serving a
critical role in tumorigenesis, many cancer drugs have been reported to induce autophagy
that can be cytoprotective. Traditional cytotoxic chemotherapeutics and targeted therapies
induce autophagy through a number of signaling pathways including the DNA damage
response, mTOR and AMP-activated protein kinase signaling, the ER stress response and
others.11 Inhibition of autophagy with chloroquine in preclinical models improves the
response of tumor cells to alkylating agents, suggesting that autophagy promotes survival.79
Another report observed cytoprotective autophagy to serve a critical resistance mechanism
to BRAF inhibition in BRAF-mutant melanoma.23 This finding was of particular interest, as
the role autophagy has in resistance to targeted therapies that target PI3K/AKT/mTOR
signaling have been well studied;80,81 however, the function of autophagy in the context of
MAPK pathway inhibition has not been well characterized. Mechanistically, BRAF

Oncogene. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 April 20.

Rebecca and Amaravadi

Page 9

Author Manuscript

inhibition leads to a physical interaction between mutant BRAF and GRP78, a master
regulator of ER stress activity, which results in the downstream activation of the ER stress
pathway effector PERK. PERK activation results in an induction of cytoprotective
autophagy. BRAF inhibitor-induced autophagy was observed at a high rate in tumors
obtained at the time of progression on BRAF inhibitor therapy.23 Targeting autophagy with
HCQ concurrently with BRAF inhibitor therapy resulted in significant tumor regression in
mouse xenografts studies. This finding was reproduced in in vitro and in vivo studies in
pediatric gliomas that harbor BRAFV600E mutations, and the addition of HCQ to a BRAF
inhibitor overcame the resistance to BRAF inhibition in a patient with pediatric glioma.82
Many other examples exist supporting the concept of combining chemotherapy or targeted
therapy with a chloroquine derivative, providing rationale for launching cancer clinical trials
involving HCQ.

Author Manuscript

CLINICAL TRIALS OF HCQ, THE FIRST AUTOPHAGY INHIBITOR

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

The seminal discoveries of these recent mouse models and preclinical investigations dovetail
nicely with the publishing of the first set of HCQ clinical trials in patients with advanced
cancers (Table 2). Six phase I/II trials were performed in human patients diagnosed with
glioblastoma multiforme,16 relapsed/refractory myeloma17 and melanoma in addition to
other advanced tumors.13–15 One additional clinical trial was published wherein pet dogs
diagnosed with spontaneously occurring lymphoma were also treated with HCQ-based
combination therapies.12 Each trial involved a combination therapy that had preclinical
studies to justify clinical translation.78,83–86 The major finding from these trials is that,
based on electron microscopy-based pharmacodynamic assays, autophagy can be modulated
therapeutically with chloroquine derivatives. Remarkably, across all of the trials <10% of
patients had severe non-hematological toxicity. Specifically, there was no evidence of
extensive metabolic toxicity, liver injury or neurologic impairment in these trials despite
some evidence that chronic modulation of autophagy was achieved in patients, as seen by
the accumulation of autophagic vesicles in peripheral blood mononuclear cells and tumor
cells. When combined with radiation therapy and concurrent and adjuvant temozolomide,
HCQ produced dose-limiting myelosuppression at doses above 600 mg HCQ. At these doses
only a subset of patients had evidence of autophagy modulation detectable in their peripheral
blood mononuclear cells, which may be one reason there was no significant improvement in
the overall survival compared with the historical controls of temozolomide and radiation
alone.16 Significant therapy-associated increases in AVs and LC3-II were observed in
peripheral blood mononuclear cells in a concentration-dependent manner, demonstrating
HCQ could modulate autophagy in vivo. Combined treatment with the proteasome inhibitor
bortezomib and HCQ resulted in a greater perturbation of tumor cell autophagy compared
with peripheral blood mononuclear cell autophagy, arguing that HCQ may selectively
accumulate in tumor cells.17 Similar results were observed in the phase I trial of vorinostat
and HCQ13 and in the canine lymphoma trial using doxorubicin with HCQ.12 Although
these phase I studies were not powered to determine efficacy, response rates in unselected
patient populations were generally low. However, there were a number of striking responses
and prolonged stable disease observed in patients with melanoma, renal cell carcinoma,
colon cancer and myeloma, that suggest that a specific subset of cancers may be susceptible

Oncogene. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 April 20.

Rebecca and Amaravadi

Page 10

Author Manuscript

to regimens containing chloroquine-based autophagy inhibitors. Critical to the future success
of autophagy-oriented clinical trials are biomarkers that may aid in patient selection. Current
biomarkers to assess autophagy modulation in clinical trials consist of monitoring the
accumulation of autophagic vesicles in peripheral blood mononuclear cells and tumor cells
by electron microscopy, as well as checking for changes in LC3 lipidation by western
blotting and total LC3 protein by immunohistochemistry. Interestingly, a recent study
profiled the secreted factors unique to tumor cells with high levels of autophagy relative to
those with low levels of autophagy, suggesting the measurement of these autophagyassociated secreted proteins in plasma may serve as surrogates for intratumoral autophagy
levels.87

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

An additional phase II trial was recently published where patients with previously treated
metastatic pancreatic cancer were administered HCQ as a single agent.18 Although HCQ
monotherapy did not demonstrate significant therapeutic efficacy, high-dose HCQ was well
tolerated. HCQ has also been demonstrated to synergize with chemotherapeutics and
targeted agents, which may explain the lack of efficacy as a single agent. There are
numerous ongoing trials utilizing HCQ in combination therapies, a summary of which can
be found in Table 3. More potent inhibitors of autophagy possessing greater in vivo activity
relative to what is currently achievable by HCQ are urgently needed. Inhibitors such as
Lys05 (see below) have been developed and are in the steps of optimization for clinical use,
which should result in an increase in detectable autophagy inhibition in patients and an
increase in clinical benefit. A definitive test of the role that autophagy serves in the setting of
anticancer therapy for patients awaits randomized studies of HCQ and the new generation of
autophagy inhibitors where autophagy can be more robustly inhibited in vivo. Insight gained
from recent preclinical and clinical studies identify potential side-effects from autophagy
inhibition in vivo including myelosuppression, lymphopenia and Paneth cell dysfunction, a
characteristic resembling the intestinal phenotype of humans with genetic defects in
ATG16L1.88 Ongoing trials utilizing HCQ in combination therapy will expand our
knowledge regarding the proper context where autophagy inhibition may elicit the greatest
clinical activity (Table 3).

OTHER AGENTS BEING DEVELOPED AS AUTOPHAGY INHIBITORS FOR
CLINICAL TRIALS

Author Manuscript

Our understanding of the autophagic pathway and its importance in cancer has increased
exponentially within the last decade, providing new promising molecular targets for cancer
therapy. Druggable autophagy targets include Beclin-1, ULK1, ATG4, ATG7 and recently
Vps34 (Figure 1). To date, no kinase inhibitors against ULK1 have entered clinical trials,
however, a peptide has been described that may have utility in modulating autophagy. Highthroughput screening efforts to identify novel autophagy inhibitors resulted in the
development of SAR405, a low-molecular mass kinase inhibitor of Vps34. SAR405 was
recently described to possess a unique binding mode and molecular interaction within the
ATP-binding cleft of human Vps34.89 Inhibition of Vps34 with SAR405 led to significant
impairment of lysosomal function and could prevent the autophagy induced by starvation
conditions or the inhibition of mTOR with everolimus. This study revealed synergy between

Oncogene. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 April 20.

Rebecca and Amaravadi

Page 11

Author Manuscript

SAR405 and everolimus in renal cell carcinoma studies. Another study utilizing the selective
Vps34 inhibitor PIK-III, demonstrated PIK-III potently inhibited the formation of mCherrypositive autolysosomes (in cells expressing the mCherry-GFP-LC3 reporter), and prevented
the clearance of mitochondria in a carbonyl cyanide m-chlorophenylhydrazone-induced
mitophagy model.90 These findings reveal Vps34 to have a pivotal role in the initiation of
autophagy and degradation of substrates, and encourage further studies to establish whether
Vps34 inhibitors should be explored in future clinical trials.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Although it is clear that HCQ exerts part of its effects through its action on autophagy,
chloroquine derivatives likely harm cancer cells by engaging other targets. This observation
is reverberated with a recent report demonstrating the efficacy of CQ in vivo relied upon its
ability to normalize tumor vessel structure and increase perfusion, consequently reducing
hypoxia, cancer cell invasion and metastasis, irrespective of autophagy inhibition.91 In
addition, clinical trials indicate that high doses of HCQ produce only modest autophagy
modulation in surrogate tissues. Efforts to identify more potent autophagy inhibitors have
commenced. The existence of non-canonical autophagy brings up the possibility that any
therapeutic strategy poised at modulating a canonical autophagy protein can be
circumvented by an increase in the function of non-canonical autophagy; however, both
canonical and non-canonical autophagy ultimately rely on the lysosome for final
degradation, providing a potentially ideal target, which is currently being investigated.
Lys05, a novel dimeric derivative of chloroquine was shown to have significant in vivo
activity both as a single agent88 and in combination with a BRAF inhibitor.23 Efforts are
underway to optimize Lys05 for clinical trials. VATG-027, a potent autophagy inhibitor
identified through a high-throughput screen of anti-malarial compounds was found to have
activity in melanoma cells.92 The interesting observation was made that the ability to inhibit
autophagy was separate from the cytoxicity profiles of the compounds tested.

CELL INTRINSIC REGULATION OF AUTOPHAGY POINTS TO NEW
THERAPEUTIC TARGETS

Author Manuscript

Recent work has increased our understanding of the cell intrinsic regulation of autophagy in
cancer cells, and by doing so may point the way toward better therapeutic targets. Oncogene
and tumor suppressor-dependent gene regulation has been investigated leveraging the mouse
models mentioned above, which possess Kras mutations and p53 deletions to understand
how each may regulate autophagy. These experiments may not recapitulate the human
condition where oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes are mutated in the context of
innumerable other genetic and epigenetic alterations in cancer that may convert a signal that
suppresses autophagy into one that promotes it.93,94 Adding to the complexity of predicting
autophagy regulation by studying recurrent somatic mutations associated with cancer, it is
increasingly evident that besides genetic regulation of autophagy, transcriptional, epigenetic
and posttranslational regulation of autophagy has a major impact on the eventual role of
autophagy within a given cancer cell.
Transcriptional regulation of autophagy has been demonstrated through Foxk proteins
(Foxk1 and Foxk2) acting as transcriptional repressors of autophagy genes.95

Oncogene. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 April 20.

Rebecca and Amaravadi

Page 12

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Mechanistically, mTOR promotes the transcriptional activity of Foxk1 in nutrient-rich
conditions, resulting in the co-localization of Foxk1 with Sin3A at the promoters of 79
known autophagy-associated genes. Interestingly, ablation of Foxk1 with siRNA resulted in
the upregulation of critical components of the Ulk1 and Vps34 machinery, reinforcing the
negative impact on autophagy served by Foxk1 transcriptional activity.95 Autophagy has
been linked to lysosomal biogenesis through observations that starvation activates a
transcriptional program largely coordinated by the transcription factor EB (TFEB), which
results in the upregulation of autophagy and lysosomal genes to enable the cell to survive.96
TFEB, when overexpressed, significantly increases the number of autophagosomes in cells,
and was found to be regulated through the phosphorylation of its serine 142 residue by
ERK2, belonging to the MAPK pathway. P53 has also been shown to have a role in the
transcription of autophagy genes, which compliment the mouse models described
investigating the role mutant p53 may serve on the sensitivity to autophagy-based therapy.
Global genomic profiling in mouse embryo fibroblasts revealed p53 to transcriptionally
regulate a multitude of autophagy genes, where in response to DNA damage, an induction of
autophagy relied on p53 transcriptional activity.97 It is worth noting that autophagy has been
demonstrated to still occur in the absence of functional p53, suggesting that p53 does not
solely regulate autophagy but rather has a part in the highly orchestrated symphony that is
autophagy.63 ER stress also results in the upregulation of autophagy via activating
transcription factor 4 increasing ULK1 mRNA and protein expression in cells undergoing
severe ER stress,98 and has recently represented a significant resistance mechanism in
melanoma cells treated with BRAF inhibitor therapy.23 Although transcription factors are
not traditionally thought of as druggable targets, efforts are underway to develop strategies
to activate or impair the transcriptional activity of p53, TFEB and FOXO proteins (Figure 1).

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Epigenetically, the acetylation status of histone H4 lysine 16 (H4K16) was found to regulate
life or death decisions in autophagic cells, where an induction of autophagy results in a
decrease of H4K16 acetylation (H4K16ac) and ultimately a decrease in the expression of
ATG genes on a genome-wide level.99 Antagonizing the reduction in H4K16ac upon
autophagy induction results in an increase in autophagic cell death.99 Another checkpoint is
represented by the nutrients released from autophagic degradation such as amino acids,
which stimulate the Ragulator complex, and result in the activation of mTORC1 and
negative feedback on autophagic activity to maintain homeostasis.100 The metabolite acetylcoenzyme A, recently reported to function as a suppressor of cytoprotective autophagy in
aging cells, also occurs mechanistically through hyperacetylation of histone H3 leading to
transcriptional downregulation of a number of autophagy genes.101 Methylation also has a
role in autophagy regulation, with a genome-wide methylation analysis revealing hypermethylation of the ULK2 gene, resulting in the inhibition of autophagy in glioblastoma
cells.102 Epigenetic agents such as HDACs85 and demethylating agents103 have already been
shown to modulate autophagy, and these new findings could guide their development further
as autophagy modulators.
Posttranslationally, the autophagic machinery is regulated at multiple levels including
phosphorylation, acetylation and ubiquitination. The phosphorylation status of multiple key
players in the autophagy pathway has significant roles in the regulation of autophagy. When
phosphorylated, mTORC1 is active and results in the inhibition of autophagy through the
Oncogene. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 April 20.

Rebecca and Amaravadi

Page 13

Author Manuscript

direct phosphorylation of ULK1 by mTORC1. LC3 can also be phosphorylated by PKA and
PKC, resulting in the inability for LC3 to become lipidated, an essential step needed for LC3
incorporation within the autophagosome bilayer.104 Lysine acetylation has an inhibitory role,
where under conditions of nutrient starvation, loss of acetylation results in an induction of
autophagy.105 Silencing of acetyl-coenzyme A synthetase, leading to a decrease in the
overall acetylation of cytoplasmic proteins, has also been reported to result in enhanced
autophagy in Drosophila brains.106 Ubiquitination also helps regulate autophagy, with an
emerging role for the E3 ubiquitin ligases Nedd4,107 Parkin108 and TRIM13109 in the
initiation of autophagy, mitochondrial homeostasis and in substrate specificity for
autophagic degradation.110

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Metabolic regulation of autophagy occurs through the ability of upstream autophagyregulating effectors to sense the intracellular levels of ammonia, amino acids, growth factors,
glucose and lipids10 (Figure 1). Ammonia is created via amino-acid catabolism and induces
autophagy by way of activating AMP-activated protein kinase and leading to the ER stress
response.111 A drop in amino-acid levels is sensed by a few different mechanisms, which
include (1) sensing of the resulting accumulation of uncharged tRNA species by GCN2,112
(2) lysosomal sensing that recruits mTORC1 to the lysosomal surface,113 (3) sensing of
intracellular acetyl-CoA stores that are negatively impacted by low levels of various amino
acids114 and (4) sensing the depletion of the metabolic intermediate α-ketoglutarate, another
result of low amino-acid levels.115 All of these amino-acid sensing mechanisms result in an
induction of autophagy to increase the intracellular degradation of nonessential components
in an attempt to increase the pool of available amino acids to continue metabolism.
Understanding these epigenetic, posttranslational and metabolic regulatory circuits may help
define the autophagic switch that appears to occur in the transition from tumor suppressor to
tumor promoter. The development of small-molecule inhibitors that target cancer
metabolism will certainly have an impact on autophagy, and perhaps in some cases these
drugs can be repositioned or reconsidered as autophagy modulators if further research
indicates that autophagy is responsible for the main changes observed with these inhibitors.

NEW ROLES FOR THE FUNCTIONAL EFFECTS OF AUTOPHAGY

Author Manuscript

Autophagy functionally protects cells by way of degrading intracellular components, which
would have otherwise led to the loss of cellular fitness, while also simultaneously catering to
the ever-changing metabolite demands of the cell with freshly digested building blocks for
survival. Although it is clear that the degradation through autophagy of protein substrates
has a role in cellular survival, the specificity of this process is unknown. Global proteome
analysis comparing cells with intact-autophagy versus cells with defective autophagy
(Atg5+/+ and Atg5−/−) revealed that autophagy preferentially degrades proteins that are toxic
or nonessential for survival under stressful conditions, seeming to spare proteins involved in
the maintenance of functional autophagy and stress survival.116 Interestingly, proteins found
to increase in response to autophagy induction were involved in vesicle-mediated trafficking
and lysosomal protein degradation, potentially providing a new suite of therapeutic targets
that may augments strategies of inhibiting autophagy. Another report identified a specific
protein turnover mechanism where autophagy was responsible for the degradation of the
inhibitory p53 isoform Δ133p53α through interaction of the chaperone-associated E3
Oncogene. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 April 20.

Rebecca and Amaravadi

Page 14

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

ubiquitin ligase STUB1.117 Autophagy was also found to have a key role in the degradation
of damaged nuclear DNA in cells deficient of Dnase2a.118 DNA accumulated in autophagydeficient cells, which resulted in Sting-mediated inflammation. Autophagic activity can
govern the secretory profile of cancer cells, where high autophagy is associated with
melanoma metastasis, and serum from metastatic melanoma patients with high tumor
autophagy levels contain a secretory signature found to correlate with cells displaying high
autophagic activity.87 These findings are of immense importance as they provide a potential
avenue to assess autophagic activity of tumors within patients from serum samples as well as
the potential to provide a means to stratify potential responders in future autophagy-based
therapy regimens. Autophagy also functionally inhibits apoptosis through indirect inhibition
of p53-upregulated modulator of apoptosis, which demonstrates how autophagy can
determine cell fate.119 In addition, autophagy has been demonstrated to directly impact
proliferation by way of AMBRA promoting the dephosphorylation of c-Myc Ser62,
resulting in the proteasomal degradation of c-Myc and a decrease in the rate of cell
division.120 Finally, autophagy has a functional role in the immunogenic clearance of cancer
cells. Immunogenic cell death (ICD) relies in part on the release of ATP from dying cells121
and autophagy has been found to be critical in the ICD-associated secretion of ATP.122
Mechanistically, ATP was found to release in a manner dependent upon the lysosomal
protein LAMP1 and the opening of PANX1 (pannexin 1) channels. Implications on what
effect utilization of autophagy inhibitors may confer upon ICD remains to be determined.
However, future combination regimens can be envisioned where an autophagy inhibitor
along with an immune-enhancing therapy can provide the best of both worlds of inhibiting
cytoprotective autophagy while concurrently launching an effective immune response
against the tumor cells.

Author Manuscript

In summary, a first series of hurdles, including experiments in xenografts and genetically
engineered mouse models, followed by the first series of HCQ trials have been overcome
demonstrating the application of autophagy inhibitors in patients with advanced cancers
could be done safely, and has resulted in encouraging antitumor results in selected patients.
The stage is now set for the testing of more potent and specific inhibitors of the autophagic
machinery. While this is being done in the clinic, translating knowledge about the regulation
of autophagy and its full spectrum of functions in multicellular organisms will permit the
development of new strategies for autophagy modulation in cancer.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by R01 CA169134 (RKA) from the National Institutes of Health.

Author Manuscript

References
1. Zou CG, Ma YC, Dai LL, Zhang KQ. Autophagy protects C. elegans against necrosis during
Pseudomonas aeruginosa infection. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2014; 111:12480–12485. [PubMed:
25114220]
2. Chen M, Hong MJ, Sun H, Wang L, Shi X, Gilbert BE, et al. Essential role for autophagy in the
maintenance of immunological memory against influenza infection. Nat Med. 2014; 20:503–510.
[PubMed: 24747745]
3. Deretic V. Autophagy in tuberculosis. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med. 2014; 4:a018481. [PubMed:
25167980]
Oncogene. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 April 20.

Rebecca and Amaravadi

Page 15

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

4. Xu X, Araki K, Li S, Han JH, Ye L, Tan WG, et al. Autophagy is essential for effector CD8(+) T
cell survival and memory formation. Nature Immunol. 2014; 15:1152–1161. [PubMed: 25362489]
5. Rao S, Yang H, Penninger JM, Kroemer G. Autophagy in non-small cell lung carcinogenesis: a
positive regulator of antitumor immunosurveillance. Autophagy. 2014; 10:529–531. [PubMed:
24413089]
6. Wong YC, Holzbaur EL. Optineurin is an autophagy receptor for damaged mitochondria in parkinmediated mitophagy that is disrupted by an ALS-linked mutation. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2014;
111:E4439–E4448. [PubMed: 25294927]
7. McLendon PM, Ferguson BS, Osinska H, Bhuiyan MS, James J, McKinsey TA, et al. Tubulin
hyperacetylation is adaptive in cardiac proteotoxicity by promoting autophagy. Proc Natl Acad Sci
USA. 2014; 111:E5178–E5186. [PubMed: 25404307]
8. Amaravadi RK, Lippincott-Schwartz J, Yin XM, Weiss WA, Takebe N, Timmer W, et al. Principles
and current strategies for targeting autophagy for cancer treatment. Clin Cancer Res. 2011; 17:654–
666. [PubMed: 21325294]
9. Hanahan D, Weinberg RA. Hallmarks of cancer: the next generation. Cell. 2011; 144:646–674.
[PubMed: 21376230]
10. Galluzzi L, Pietrocola F, Levine B, Kroemer G. Metabolic Control of autophagy. Cell. 2014;
159:1263–1276. [PubMed: 25480292]
11. Amaravadi RK, Thompson CB. The roles of therapy-induced autophagy and necrosis in cancer
treatment. Clin Cancer Res. 2007; 13:7271–7279. [PubMed: 18094407]
12. Barnard RA, Wittenburg LA, Amaravadi RK, Gustafson DL, Thorburn A, Thamm DH. Phase I
clinical trial and pharmacodynamic evaluation of combination hydroxychloroquine and
doxorubicin treatment in pet dogs treated for spontaneously occurring lymphoma. Autophagy.
2014; 10:1415–1425. [PubMed: 24991836]
13. Mahalingam D, Mita M, Sarantopoulos J, Wood L, Amaravadi RK, Davis LE, et al. Combined
autophagy and HDAC inhibition: a phase I safety, tolerability, pharmacokinetic, and
pharmacodynamic analysis of hydroxychloroquine in combination with the HDAC inhibitor
vorinostat in patients with advanced solid tumors. Autophagy. 2014; 10:1403–1414. [PubMed:
24991835]
14. Rangwala R, Chang YC, Hu J, Algazy KM, Evans TL, Fecher LA, et al. Combined MTOR and
autophagy inhibition: phase I trial of hydroxychloroquine and temsirolimus in patients with
advanced solid tumors and melanoma. Autophagy. 2014; 10:1391–1402. [PubMed: 24991838]
15. Rangwala R, Leone R, Chang YC, Fecher LA, Schuchter LM, Kramer A, et al. Phase I trial of
hydroxychloroquine with dose-intense temozolomide in patients with advanced solid tumors and
melanoma. Autophagy. 2014; 10:1369–1379. [PubMed: 24991839]
16. Rosenfeld MR, Ye X, Supko JG, Desideri S, Grossman SA, Brem S, et al. A phase I/II trial of
hydroxychloroquine in conjunction with radiation therapy and concurrent and adjuvant
temozolomide in patients with newly diagnosed glioblastoma multiforme. Autophagy. 2014;
10:1359–1368. [PubMed: 24991840]
17. Vogl DT, Stadtmauer EA, Tan KS, Heitjan DF, Davis LE, Pontiggia L, et al. Combined autophagy
and proteasome inhibition: a phase 1 trial of hydroxychloroquine and bortezomib in patients with
relapsed/refractory myeloma. Autophagy. 2014; 10:1380–1390. [PubMed: 24991834]
18. Wolpin BM, Rubinson DA, Wang X, Chan JA, Cleary JM, Enzinger PC, et al. Phase II and
pharmacodynamic study of autophagy inhibition using hydroxychloroquine in patients with
metastatic pancreatic adenocarcinoma. Oncologist. 2014; 19:637–638. [PubMed: 24821822]
19. Takeshige K, Baba M, Tsuboi S, Noda T, Ohsumi Y. Autophagy in yeast demonstrated with
proteinase-deficient mutants and conditions for its induction. J Cell Biol. 1992; 119:301–311.
[PubMed: 1400575]
20. Choi AMK, Ryter SW, Levine B. Autophagy in Human Health and Disease. N Engl J Med. 2013;
368:651–662. [PubMed: 23406030]
21. Lum JJ, Bauer DE, Kong M, Harris MH, Li C, Lindsten T, et al. Growth factor regulation of
autophagy and cell survival in the absence of apoptosis. Cell. 2005; 120:237–248. [PubMed:
15680329]

Oncogene. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 April 20.

Rebecca and Amaravadi

Page 16

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

22. Wu H, Xue D, Chen G, Han Z, Huang L, Zhu C, et al. The BCL2L1 and PGAM5 axis defines
hypoxia-induced receptor-mediated mitophagy. Autophagy. 2014; 10:1712–1725. [PubMed:
25126723]
23. Ma XH, Piao SF, Dey S, McAfee Q, Karakousis G, Villanueva J, et al. Targeting ER stress-induced
autophagy overcomes BRAF inhibitor resistance in melanoma. J Clin Invest. 2014; 124:1406–
1417. [PubMed: 24569374]
24. Klionsky DJ, Codogno P, Cuervo AM, Deretic V, Elazar Z, Fueyo-Margareto J, et al. A
comprehensive glossary of autophagy-related molecules and processes. Autophagy. 2010; 6:438–
448. [PubMed: 20484971]
25. Wang K, Klionsky DJ. Mitochondria removal by autophagy. Autophagy. 2011; 7:297–300.
[PubMed: 21252623]
26. Tanida I. Autophagosome formation and molecular mechanism of autophagy. Antioxid Redox
Signal. 2011; 14:2201–2214. [PubMed: 20712405]
27. Cecconi F, Di Bartolomeo S, Nardacci R, Fuoco C, Corazzari M, Giunta L, et al. A novel role for
autophagy in neurodevelopment. Autophagy. 2007; 3:506–508. [PubMed: 17622796]
28. Codogno P, Mehrpour M, Proikas-Cezanne T. Canonical and non-canonical autophagy: variations
on a common theme of self-eating? Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2012; 13:7–12. [PubMed: 22166994]
29. Kishi-Itakura C, Koyama-Honda I, Itakura E, Mizushima N. Ultrastructural analysis of
autophagosome organization using mammalian autophagy-deficient cells. J Cell Sci. 2014; 127(Pt
18):4089–4102. [PubMed: 25052093]
30. Mathew R, White E. Autophagy, stress, and cancer metabolism: what doesn’t kill you makes you
stronger. Cold Spring Harb Symp Quant Biol. 2011; 76:389–396. [PubMed: 22442109]
31. Kim J, Kundu M, Viollet B, Guan KL. AMPK and mTOR regulate autophagy through direct
phosphorylation of Ulk1. Nature Cell Biol. 2011; 13:132–141. [PubMed: 21258367]
32. Marino G, Niso-Santano M, Baehrecke EH, Kroemer G. Self-consumption: the interplay of
autophagy and apoptosis. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2014; 15:81–94. [PubMed: 24401948]
33. Wong PM, Puente C, Ganley IG, Jiang X. The ULK1 complex: sensing nutrient signals for
autophagy activation. Autophagy. 2013; 9:124–137. [PubMed: 23295650]
34. Mandell MA, Jain A, Arko-Mensah J, Chauhan S, Kimura T, Dinkins C, et al. TRIM proteins
regulate autophagy and can target autophagic substrates by direct recognition. Dev Cell. 2014;
30:394–409. [PubMed: 25127057]
35. Backer JM. The regulation and function of Class III PI3Ks: novel roles for Vps34. Biochem J.
2008; 410:1–17. [PubMed: 18215151]
36. Hayashi-Nishino M, Fujita N, Noda T, Yamaguchi A, Yoshimori T, Yamamoto A. A subdomain of
the endoplasmic reticulum forms a cradle for autophagosome formation. Nat Cell Biol. 2009;
11:1433–1437. [PubMed: 19898463]
37. Ravikumar B, Moreau K, Jahreiss L, Puri C, Rubinsztein DC. Plasma membrane contributes to the
formation of pre-autophagosomal structures. Nat Cell Biol. 2010; 12:747–757. [PubMed:
20639872]
38. Hailey DW, Rambold AS, Satpute-Krishnan P, Mitra K, Sougrat R, Kim PK, et al. Mitochondria
supply membranes for autophagosome biogenesis during starvation. Cell. 2010; 141:656–667.
[PubMed: 20478256]
39. Nishida Y, Arakawa S, Fujitani K, Yamaguchi H, Mizuta T, Kanaseki T, et al. Discovery of Atg5/
Atg7-independent alternative macroautophagy. Nature. 2009; 461:654–658. [PubMed: 19794493]
40. Ravikumar B, Imarisio S, Sarkar S, O’Kane CJ, Rubinsztein DC. Rab5 modulates aggregation and
toxicity of mutant huntingtin through macroautophagy in cell and fly models of Huntington
disease. J Cell Sci. 2008; 121(Pt 10):1649–1660. [PubMed: 18430781]
41. Rothe K, Lin H, Lin KB, Leung A, Wang HM, Malekesmaeili M, et al. The core autophagy protein
ATG4B is a potential biomarker and therapeutic target in CML stem/progenitor cells. Blood. 2014;
123:3622–3634. [PubMed: 24755409]
42. Fujita K, Maeda D, Xiao Q, Srinivasula SM. Nrf2-mediated induction of p62 controls Toll-like
receptor-4-driven aggresome-like induced structure formation and autophagic degradation. Proc
Natl Acad Sci USA. 2011; 108:1427–1432. [PubMed: 21220332]

Oncogene. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 April 20.

Rebecca and Amaravadi

Page 17

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

43. Behrends C, Sowa ME, Gygi SP, Harper JW. Network organization of the human autophagy
system. Nature. 2010; 466:68–76. [PubMed: 20562859]
44. Mijaljica D, Prescott M, Devenish RJ. V-ATPase engagement in autophagic processes. Autophagy.
2011; 7:666–668. [PubMed: 21494095]
45. Rong Y, McPhee CK, Deng S, Huang L, Chen L, Liu M, et al. Spinster is required for autophagic
lysosome reformation and mTOR reactivation following starvation. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA.
2011; 108:7826–7831. [PubMed: 21518918]
46. Mathew R, Karp CM, Beaudoin B, Vuong N, Chen G, Chen HY, et al. Autophagy suppresses
tumorigenesis through elimination of p62. Cell. 2009; 137:1062–1075. [PubMed: 19524509]
47. Yue Z, Jin S, Yang C, Levine AJ, Heintz N. Beclin 1. An autophagy gene essential for early
embryonic development, is a haplosufficient tumor suppressor. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2003;
100:15077–15082. [PubMed: 14657337]
48. Qu X, Yu J, Bhagat G, Furuya N, Hibshoosh H, Troxel A, et al. Promotion of tumorigenesis by
heterozygous disruption of the beclin 1 autophagy gene. J Clin Invest. 2003; 112:1809–1820.
[PubMed: 14638851]
49. Laddha SV, Ganesan S, Chan CS, White E. Mutational landscape of the essential autophagy gene
BECN1 in human cancers. Mol Cancer Res. 2014; 12:485–490. [PubMed: 24478461]
50. Liu J, Xia H, Kim M, Xu L, Li Y, Zhang L, et al. Beclin1 controls the levels of p53 by regulating
the deubiquitination activity of USP10 and USP13. Cell. 2011; 147:223–234. [PubMed:
21962518]
51. Elgendy M, Ciro M, Abdel-Aziz AK, Belmonte G, Zuffo RD, Mercurio C, et al. Beclin 1 restrains
tumorigenesis through Mcl-1 destabilization in an autophagy-independent reciprocal manner. Nat
Commun. 2014; 5:5637. [PubMed: 25472497]
52. Wei Y, Zou Z, Becker N, Anderson M, Sumpter R, Xiao G, et al. EGFR-mediated Beclin 1
phosphorylation in autophagy suppression, tumor progression, and tumor chemoresistance. Cell.
2013; 154:1269–1284. [PubMed: 24034250]
53. Takamura A, Komatsu M, Hara T, Sakamoto A, Kishi C, Waguri S, et al. Autophagy-deficient mice
develop multiple liver tumors. Genes Dev. 2011; 25:795–800. [PubMed: 21498569]
54. Wei H, Wang C, Croce CM, Guan JL. p62/SQSTM1 synergizes with autophagy for tumor growth
in vivo. Genes Dev. 2014; 28:1204–1216. [PubMed: 24888590]
55. Wei H, Wei S, Gan B, Peng X, Zou W, Guan JL. Suppression of autophagy by FIP200 deletion
inhibits mammary tumorigenesis. Genes Dev. 2011; 25:1510–1527. [PubMed: 21764854]
56. Degenhardt K, Mathew R, Beaudoin B, Bray K, Anderson D, Chen G, et al. Autophagy promotes
tumor cell survival and restricts necrosis, inflammation, and tumorigenesis. Cancer Cell. 2006;
10:51–64. [PubMed: 16843265]
57. Ma XH, Piao S, Wang D, McAfee QW, Nathanson KL, Lum JJ, et al. Measurements of tumor cell
autophagy predict invasiveness, resistance to chemotherapy, and survival in melanoma. Clin
Cancer Res. 2011; 17:3478–3489. [PubMed: 21325076]
58. Guo JY, Karsli-Uzunbas G, Mathew R, Aisner SC, Kamphorst JJ, Strohecker AM, et al. Autophagy
suppresses progression of K-ras-induced lung tumors to oncocytomas and maintains lipid
homeostasis. Genes Dev. 2013; 27:1447–1461. [PubMed: 23824538]
59. Rao S, Tortola L, Perlot T, Wirnsberger G, Novatchkova M, Nitsch R, et al. A dual role for
autophagy in a murine model of lung cancer. Nat Commun. 2014; 5:3056. [PubMed: 24445999]
60. Strohecker AM, Guo JY, Karsli-Uzunbas G, Price SM, Chen GJ, Mathew R, et al. Autophagy
sustains mitochondrial glutamine metabolism and growth of BrafV600E-driven lung tumors.
Cancer Discov. 2013; 3:1272–1285. [PubMed: 23965987]
61. Yang S, Wang X, Contino G, Liesa M, Sahin E, Ying H, et al. Pancreatic cancers require autophagy
for tumor growth. Genes Dev. 2011; 25:717–729. [PubMed: 21406549]
62. Viale A, Pettazzoni P, Lyssiotis CA, Ying H, Sanchez N, Marchesini M, et al. Oncogene ablationresistant pancreatic cancer cells depend on mitochondrial function. Nature. 2014; 514:628–632.
[PubMed: 25119024]
63. Karsli-Uzunbas G, Guo JY, Price S, Teng X, Laddha SV, Khor S, et al. Autophagy is required for
glucose homeostasis and lung tumor maintenance. Cancer Discov. 2014; 4:914–927. [PubMed:
24875857]
Oncogene. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 April 20.

Rebecca and Amaravadi

Page 18

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

64. Rosenfeldt MT, O’Prey J, Morton JP, Nixon C, MacKay G, Mrowinska A, et al. p53 status
determines the role of autophagy in pancreatic tumour development. Nature. 2013; 504:296–300.
[PubMed: 24305049]
65. Amaravadi R, Debnath J. Mouse models address key concerns regarding autophagy inhibition in
cancer therapy. Cancer Discov. 2014; 4:873–875. [PubMed: 25092744]
66. Hingorani SR, Wang L, Multani AS, Combs C, Deramaudt TB, Hruban RH, et al. Trp53R172H
and KrasG12D cooperate to promote chromosomal instability and widely metastatic pancreatic
ductal adenocarcinoma in mice. Cancer Cell. 2005; 7:469–483. [PubMed: 15894267]
67. Yang A, Rajeshkumar NV, Wang X, Yabuuchi S, Alexander BM, Chu GC, et al. Autophagy is
critical for pancreatic tumor growth and progression in tumors with p53 alterations. Cancer
Discov. 2014; 4:905–913. [PubMed: 24875860]
68. Iacobuzio-Donahue CA, Herman JM. Autophagy, p53, and pancreatic cancer. N Engl J Med. 2014;
370:1352–1353. [PubMed: 24693896]
69. Fulda S, Kogel D. Cell death by autophagy: emerging molecular mechanisms and implications for
cancer therapy. Oncogene. 2015; 34:5105–5113. [PubMed: 25619832]
70. Galluzzi L, Vitale I, Abrams JM, Alnemri ES, Baehrecke EH, Blagosklonny MV, et al. Molecular
definitions of cell death subroutines: recommendations of the Nomenclature Committee on Cell
Death 2012. Cell Death Differ. 2012; 19:107–120. [PubMed: 21760595]
71. Galluzzi L, Bravo-San Pedro JM, Vitale I, Aaronson SA, Abrams JM, Adam D, et al. Essential
versus accessory aspects of cell death: recommendations of the NCCD 2015. Cell Death Differ.
2015; 22:58–73. [PubMed: 25236395]
72. Yu L, Alva A, Su H, Dutt P, Freundt E, Welsh S. Reguation of an ATG7-beclin 1 program of
autophagic cell death by caspase-8. Science. 2004; 304:1500–1502. [PubMed: 15131264]
73. Lu Z, Luo RZ, Lu Y, Zhang X, Yu Q, Khare S, et al. The tumor suppressor gene ARHI regulates
autophagy and tumor dormancy in human ovarian cancer cells. J Clin Invest. 2008; 118:3917–
3929. [PubMed: 19033662]
74. Michaud M, Martins I, Sukkurwala AQ, Adjemian S, Ma Y, Pellegatti P, et al. Autophagydependent anticancer immune responses induced by chemotherapeutic agents in mice. Science.
2011; 334:1573–1577. [PubMed: 22174255]
75. Ramakrishnan R, Huang C, Cho HI, Lloyd M, Johnson J, Ren X, et al. Autophagy induced by
conventional chemotherapy mediates tumor cell sensitivity to immunotherapy. Cancer Res. 2012;
72:5483–5493. [PubMed: 22942258]
76. Kim S, Ramakrishnan R, Lavilla-Alonso S, Chinnaiyan P, Rao N, Fowler E, et al. Radiationinduced autophagy potentiates immunotherapy of cancer via up-regulation of mannose 6phosphate receptor on tumor cells in mice. Cancer Immunol Immunother. 2014; 63:1009–1021.
[PubMed: 24943275]
77. Robert C, Long GV, Brady B, Dutriaux C, Maio M, Mortier L, et al. Nivolumab in previously
untreated melanoma without BRAF mutation. N Engl J Med. 2015; 372:320–330. [PubMed:
25399552]
78. Amaravadi RK, Yu D, Lum JJ, Bui T, Christophorou MA, Evan GI, et al. Autophagy inhibition
enhances therapy-induced apoptosis in a Myc-induced model of lymphoma. J Clin Invest. 2007;
117:326–336. [PubMed: 17235397]
79. Rebecca VW, Massaro RR, Fedorenko IV, Sondak VK, Anderson AR, Kim E, et al. Inhibition of
autophagy enhances the effects of the AKT inhibitor MK-2206 when combined with paclitaxel and
carboplatin in BRAF wild-type melanoma. Pigment Cell Melanoma Res. 2014; 27:465–478.
[PubMed: 24490764]
80. Cheng Y, Zhang Y, Zhang L, Ren X, Huber-Keener KJ, Liu X, et al. MK-2206, a novel allosteric
inhibitor of Akt, synergizes with gefitinib against malignant glioma via modulating both
autophagy and apoptosis. Mol Cancer Ther. 2012; 11:154–164. [PubMed: 22057914]
81. Chang Z, Shi G, Jin J, Guo H, Guo X, Luo F, et al. Dual PI3K/mTOR inhibitor NVP-BEZ235induced apoptosis of hepatocellular carcinoma cell lines is enhanced by inhibitors of autophagy.
Int J Mol Med. 2013; 31:1449–1456. [PubMed: 23588698]

Oncogene. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 April 20.

Rebecca and Amaravadi

Page 19

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

82. Levy JM, Thompson JC, Griesinger AM, Amani V, Donson AM, Birks DK, et al. Autophagy
inhibition improves chemosensitivity in BRAF(V600E) brain tumors. Cancer Discov. 2014;
4:773–780. [PubMed: 24823863]
83. Bray K, Mathew R, Lau A, Kamphorst JJ, Fan J, Chen J, et al. Autophagy suppresses RIP kinasedependent necrosis enabling survival to mTOR inhibition. PloS One. 2012; 7:e41831. [PubMed:
22848625]
84. Xie X, White EP, Mehnert JM. Coordinate autophagy and mTOR pathway inhibition enhances cell
death in melanoma. PloS One. 2013; 8:e55096. [PubMed: 23383069]
85. Carew JS, Nawrocki ST, Kahue CN, Zhang H, Yang C, Chung L, et al. Targeting autophagy
augments the anticancer activity of the histone deacetylase inhibitor SAHA to overcome Bcr-Ablmediated drug resistance. Blood. 2007; 110:313–322. [PubMed: 17363733]
86. Qiu L, Yao M, Gao M, Zhao Q. Doxorubicin and chloroquine coencapsulated liposomes:
preparation and improved cytotoxicity on human breast cancer cells. J Liposome Res. 2012;
22:245–253. [PubMed: 22607110]
87. Kraya AA, Piao S, Xu X, Zhang G, Herlyn M, Gimotty P, et al. Identification of secreted proteins
that reflect autophagy dynamics within tumor cells. Autophagy. 2014; 11:60–74. [PubMed:
25484078]
88. McAfee Q, Zhang Z, Samanta A, Levi SM, Ma XH, Piao S, et al. Autophagy inhibitor Lys05 has
single-agent antitumor activity and reproduces the phenotype of a genetic autophagy deficiency.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2012; 109:8253–8258. [PubMed: 22566612]
89. Ronan B, Flamand O, Vescovi L, Dureuil C, Durand L, Fassy F, et al. A highly potent and selective
Vps34 inhibitor alters vesicle trafficking and autophagy. Nat Chem Biol. 2014; 10:1013–1019.
[PubMed: 25326666]
90. Dowdle WE, Nyfeler B, Nagel J, Elling RA, Liu S, Triantafellow E, et al. Selective VPS34
inhibitor blocks autophagy and uncovers a role for NCOA4 in ferritin degradation and iron
homeostasis in vivo. Nat Cell Biol. 2014; 16:1069–1079. [PubMed: 25327288]
91. Maes H, Kuchnio A, Peric A, Moens S, Nys K, De Bock K, et al. Tumor vessel normalization by
chloroquine independent of autophagy. Cancer Cell. 2014; 26:190–206. [PubMed: 25117709]
92. Goodall ML, Wang T, Martin KR, Kortus MG, Kauffman AL, Trent JM, et al. Development of
potent autophagy inhibitors that sensitize oncogenic BRAF V600E mutant melanoma tumor cells
to vemurafenib. Autophagy. 2014; 10:1120–1136. [PubMed: 24879157]
93. Guo JY, Xia B, White E. Autophagy-mediated tumor promotion. Cell. 2013; 155:1216–1219.
[PubMed: 24315093]
94. Fullgrabe J, Klionsky DJ, Joseph B. The return of the nucleus: transcriptional and epigenetic
control of autophagy. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2014; 15:65–74. [PubMed: 24326622]
95. Bowman CJ, Ayer DE, Dynlacht BD. Foxk proteins repress the initiation of starvation-induced
atrophy and autophagy programs. Nat Cell Biol. 2014; 16:1202–1214. [PubMed: 25402684]
96. Settembre C, Di Malta C, Polito VA, Garcia Arencibia M, Vetrini F, Erdin S, et al. TFEB links
autophagy to lysosomal biogenesis. Science. 2011; 332:1429–1433. [PubMed: 21617040]
97. Kenzelmann Broz D, Spano Mello S, Bieging KT, Jiang D, Dusek RL, Brady CA, et al. Global
genomic profiling reveals an extensive p53-regulated autophagy program contributing to key p53
responses. Genes Dev. 2013; 27:1016–1031. [PubMed: 23651856]
98. Pike LR, Singleton DC, Buffa F, Abramczyk O, Phadwal K, Li JL, et al. Transcriptional upregulation of ULK1 by ATF4 contributes to cancer cell survival. Biochem J. 2013; 449:389–400.
[PubMed: 23078367]
99. Fullgrabe J, Lynch-Day MA, Heldring N, Li W, Struijk RB, Ma Q, et al. The histone H4 lysine 16
acetyltransferase hMOF regulates the outcome of autophagy. Nature. 2013; 500:468–471.
[PubMed: 23863932]
100. Jewell JL, Russell RC, Guan KL. Amino acid signalling upstream of mTOR. Nat Rev Mol Cell
Biol. 2013; 14:133–139. [PubMed: 23361334]
101. Eisenberg T, Schroeder S, Buttner S, Carmona-Gutierrez D, Pendl T, Andryushkova A, et al. A
histone point mutation that switches on autophagy. Autophagy. 2014; 10:1143–1145. [PubMed:
24879160]

Oncogene. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 April 20.

Rebecca and Amaravadi

Page 20

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

102. Shukla S, Patric IR, Patil V, Shwetha SD, Hegde AS, Chandramouli BA, et al. Methylation
silencing of ULK2, an autophagy gene, is essential for astrocyte transformation and tumor
growth. J Biol Chem. 2014; 289:22306–22318. [PubMed: 24923441]
103. Denton D, Aung-Htut MT, Lorensuhewa N, Nicolson S, Zhu W, Mills K, et al. UTX coordinates
steroid hormone-mediated autophagy and cell death. Nat Commun. 2013; 4:2916. [PubMed:
24336022]
104. Cherra SJ 3rd, Kulich SM, Uechi G, Balasubramani M, Mountzouris J, Day BW, et al. Regulation
of the autophagy protein LC3 by phosphorylation. J Cell Biol. 2010; 190:533–539. [PubMed:
20713600]
105. Wani WY, Boyer-Guittaut M, Dodson M, Chatham J, Darley-Usmar V, Zhang J. Regulation of
autophagy by protein post-translational modification. Lab Invest. 2014; 95:14–25. [PubMed:
25365205]
106. Eisenberg T, Schroeder S, Andryushkova A, Pendl T, Kuttner V, Bhukel A, et al. Nucleocytosolic
depletion of the energy metabolite acetyl-coenzyme a stimulates autophagy and prolongs
lifespan. Cell Metab. 2014; 19:431–444. [PubMed: 24606900]
107. Platta HW, Abrahamsen H, Thoresen SB, Stenmark H. Nedd4-dependent lysine-11-linked
polyubiquitination of the tumour suppressor Beclin 1. Biochem J. 2012; 441:399–406. [PubMed:
21936852]
108. Sarraf SA, Raman M, Guarani-Pereira V, Sowa ME, Huttlin EL, Gygi SP, et al. Landscape of the
PARKIN-dependent ubiquitylome in response to mitochondrial depolarization. Nature. 2013;
496:372–376. [PubMed: 23503661]
109. Tomar D, Singh R, Singh AK, Pandya CD, Singh R. TRIM13 regulates ER stress induced
autophagy and clonogenic ability of the cells. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2012; 1823:316–326.
[PubMed: 22178386]
110. Kuang E, Qi J, Ronai Z. Emerging roles of E3 ubiquitin ligases in autophagy. Trends Biochem
Sci. 2013; 38:453–460. [PubMed: 23870665]
111. Harder LM, Bunkenborg J, Andersen JS. Inducing autophagy: a comparative phosphoproteomic
study of the cellular response to ammonia and rapamycin. Autophagy. 2014; 10:339–355.
[PubMed: 24300666]
112. Ye J, Kumanova M, Hart LS, Sloane K, Zhang H, De Panis DN, et al. The GCN2-ATF4 pathway
is critical for tumour cell survival and proliferation in response to nutrient deprivation. Embo J.
2010; 29:2082–2096. [PubMed: 20473272]
113. Zoncu R, Bar-Peled L, Efeyan A, Wang S, Sancak Y, Sabatini DM. mTORC1 senses lysosomal
amino acids through an inside-out mechanism that requires the vacuolar H(+)-ATPase. Science.
2011; 334:678–683. [PubMed: 22053050]
114. Marino G, Pietrocola F, Eisenberg T, Kong Y, Malik SA, Andryushkova A, et al. Regulation of
autophagy by cytosolic acetyl-coenzyme A. Mol Cell. 2014; 53:710–725. [PubMed: 24560926]
115. Duran RV, Oppliger W, Robitaille AM, Heiserich L, Skendaj R, Gottlieb E, et al. Glutaminolysis
activates Rag-mTORC1 signaling. Mol Cell. 2012; 47:349–358. [PubMed: 22749528]
116. Mathew R, Khor S, Hackett SR, Rabinowitz JD, Perlman DH, White E. Functional role of
autophagy-mediated proteome remodeling in cell survival signaling and innate immunity. Mol
Cell. 2014; 55:916–930. [PubMed: 25175026]
117. Horikawa I, Fujita K, Jenkins LM, Hiyoshi Y, Mondal AM, Vojtesek B, et al. Autophagic
degradation of the inhibitory p53 isoform Delta133p53alpha as a regulatory mechanism for p53mediated senescence. Nat Commun. 2014; 5:4706. [PubMed: 25144556]
118. Lan YY, Londono D, Bouley R, Rooney MS, Hacohen N. Dnase2a deficiency uncovers lysosomal
clearance of damaged nuclear DNA via autophagy. Cell Rep. 2014; 9:180–192. [PubMed:
25284779]
119. Thorburn J, Andrysik Z, Staskiewicz L, Gump J, Maycotte P, Oberst A, et al. Autophagy controls
the kinetics and extent of mitochondrial apoptosis by regulating PUMA levels. Cell Rep. 2014;
7:45–52. [PubMed: 24685133]
120. Cianfanelli V, Fuoco C, Lorente M, Salazar M, Quondamatteo F, Gherardini PF, et al. AMBRA1
links autophagy to cell proliferation and tumorigenesis by promoting c-Myc dephosphorylation
and degradation. Nat Cell Biol. 2015; 17:20–30. [PubMed: 25438055]

Oncogene. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 April 20.

Rebecca and Amaravadi

Page 21

Author Manuscript

121. Krysko DV, Garg AD, Kaczmarek A, Krysko O, Agostinis P, Vandenabeele P. Immunogenic cell
death and DAMPs in cancer therapy. Nat Rev Cancer. 2012; 12:860–875. [PubMed: 23151605]
122. Martins I, Wang Y, Michaud M, Ma Y, Sukkurwala AQ, Shen S, et al. Molecular mechanisms of
ATP secretion during immunogenic cell death. Cell Death Differ. 2014; 21:79–91. [PubMed:
23852373]

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Oncogene. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 April 20.

Rebecca and Amaravadi

Page 22

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 1.

Author Manuscript

Autophagy regulators and points of intervention. (a) Autophagy occurs through a multistep
process that includes four control points: initiation, nucleation, maturation, and lysosomal
fusion and degradation of autophagosome contents. Successful autophagy results in the
recycling of nutrients into the cytoplasm. (b–e) Autophagy is regulated on multiple levels
with four major classes of regulation including posttranslational, transcriptional, epigenetic
and metabolic regulation. Potential druggable targets are depicted (red star) with a promise
to better modulate autophagy than strategies currently being implored.

Author Manuscript
Oncogene. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 April 20.

Author Manuscript

Author Manuscript
Lung
Lung

lox-stop-lox-KrasG12D

BrafV600E;

Pancreas

lox-stop-lox-KrasG12D;

Abbreviation: ND, not determined.

a
Following genetic autophagy inhibition

Pdx-cre

Pancreas

lox-stop-lox-KrasG12D; Pdx-cre
Tp53flox/+;

Pancreas

lox-stop-lox-KrasG12D; Tp53flox/flox; Pdx-cre

frt-stop-frt-KrasG12D; Tp53frt/frt
Lung

Lung

lox-stop-lox-KrasG12D; Tp53flox/flox

Tp53flox/flox

Breast

Cancer type

MMTV-PyMT

Genotype

Atg5

Atg5 or Atg7

Atg5 or Atg7

Atg7

Atg7

Atg5

Atg7

FIP200

Atg knockout

Increased

Increased

Increased

Increased

Increased

Increased

ND

Decreased

Tumor initiationa

Decreased

Decreased

Increased

Decreased

Decreased

Decreased

Decreased

Decreased

Tumor progressiona

Increased

Decreased

Decreased

ND

Increased

Increased

No difference

Increased

Mouse survival following post-tumor
autophagy inhibition

Author Manuscript

Mouse models testing the effects of tumor-specific autophagy deficiency in cancer

Iacobuzio-Donhue et al.68

Rosenfeldt et al.64

Rosenfeldt et al.64

Karsli-Uzunbas et al.63

Strohecker et al.60

Rao et al.59

Guo et al.58

Wei et al.55

References

Author Manuscript

Table 1
Rebecca and Amaravadi
Page 23

Oncogene. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 April 20.

Author Manuscript

Phase I doxorubicin+ HCQ

Phase II HCQ

6

7

Autophagy

DNA damage

HDAC

mTOR

DNA damage

Proteasome

DNA damage

Pathway

Pancreatic

Dog lymphoma

Solid tumors, renal, colon

Solid tumors, melanoma

Solid tumors, melanoma

Myeloma

Glioma

Disease

Dana–Farber

Colorado State

San Antonio, NCI

Penn, Pfizer

Penn, Merck

Penn, Millenium

ABTC (15 centers),
NCI

Sites/funding

Grade 3/4 lymphopenia

Sepsis, death, 12.5 mg/kg MTD

Grade 3 fatigue at 800 mg 600 mg
MTD

None

None

None

Myelosuppression at 800 mg 600
mg MTD

DLT/MTD

20

27

24

35

40

30

92

N

High-dose HCQ well tolerated

100% clinical benefit

Tumor biopsies; clinical activity

Serial PET scans, tumor biopsies;
clinical activity

High-dose chemo and HCQ well
tolerated; clinical activity

Comparison of purified tumor cells
with PBMC

Survival outcome National trial

Unique features

Abbreviations: HCQ, hydroxychloroquine; HDAC, histone deacetylase; MTD, maximal tolerable dose; mTOR, mechanistic target of rapamycin complex; NCI, the National Cancer Institute; PMBC,
peripheral blood mononuclear cell; PET, positron emission tomography.

Phase I vorinostat+ HCQ

Phase I temozolomide + HCQ

3

5

Phase I bortezomib + HCQ

2

Phase I temsirolimus+ HCQ

Phase I/II temozolomide/
radiation + HCQ

1

4

Agents

Author Manuscript

Trial

Author Manuscript

Clinical trials involving HCQ

Author Manuscript

Table 2
Rebecca and Amaravadi
Page 24

Oncogene. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 April 20.

Rebecca and Amaravadi

Page 25

Table 3

Author Manuscript

Therapies undergoing combinatorial testing with HCQ in cancer

Author Manuscript

Pathway

Target

Clinical agents

Company

Trial ID

PI3K

AKT

MK2206

Merck

NCT01480154

PI3K

mTOR

Sirolimus (rapamycin)

Pfizer

NCT01842594

PI3K

mTOR

Everolimus (RAD001)

Novartis

NCT01510119

MAPK

BRAF

Vemurafenib (PLX4032)

Roche/Plexxicon

NCT01897116

MAPK

Dual MEK/BRAF

Trametinib (GSK1120212) dabrafenib
(GSK2118436)

GlaxoSmithKline GlaxoSmithKline

NCT02257424

MAPK

Pan-Raf/Pan-RTK

Sorafenib

Bayer

NCT01634893

Epigenetic

HDAC

Vorinostat

Merck

NCT01023737

Immune

Interleukin-2

Aldesleukin (IL-2)

Prometheus

NCT01550367

Other

EGFR

Gefitinib

AstraZeneca

NCT00809237

Other

EGFR

Erlotinib

Genentech/Astellas

NCT01026844

Other

Nucleoside

Gemcitabine

Eli Lilly

NCT01506973

Abbreviations: EGFR, epidermal growth factor receptor; IL-2, interleukin 2; mTOR, mechanistic target of rapamycin complex; PI3K,
phosphoinositide 3-kinase; RTK, receptor tyrosine kinase.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Oncogene. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 April 20.

