Oncotarget, September, Vol.3, No 9

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Targeting Rho Associated
Myeloproliferative Neoplasms

Kinases

in

Leukemia

and

Raghuveer Singh Mali and Reuben Kapur
Myeloproliferative neoplasms (MPNs) and acute
myeloid leukemia (AML) are heterogeneous hematologic
malignancies which share the common characteristics of
myeloid cell overproduction and aberrant differentiation.
With the exception of chronic myelogenous leukemia
(CML), therapeutic intervention for these diseases is
largely ineffective. There are increasing examples of
mutations in tyrosine kinases (TKs) that contribute
to MPN as well as AML. Key examples are the well
characterized BCR-ABL transgene causing constitutively
activated Abl tyrosine kinase function in CML. FLT3
internal tandem duplications (ITDs) resulting in ligandindependent autophosphorylation in AML and activating
KIT mutations seen in AML and in over 90% cases of
systemic mastocytosis (SM). Although hyper-activation
of several signaling molecules downstream from these
tyrosine kinases has been reported; little is known
about the identity of signaling molecules that are shared
downstream from these mutations. Recent studies suggest
that activating TK mutants of KIT, FLT3 and BCR-ABL
contribute to hematopoietic cell transformation to a large
extent via the hyper-activation of Rho kinases[1]. Rho
kinases have been shown to be hyperactive in several
cancers, including breast cancer, colorectal cancer as
well as prostate cancer[2, 3]. Importantly, in pre-clinical
models, ROCK inhibitors have demonstrated significant
efficacy in repressing aspects of tumorgenesis, in
particular metastasis[4, 5]; however, their role in MPNs
and AML is only now beginning to emerge[1, 6].
Two separate genes encode for two isoforms of Rho
kinase or Rho-associated coiled coil-containing protein
kinases (ROCK), ROCK1 and ROCK2. Rho kinases are
protein serine/threonine kinases that share significant
sequence homology at the protein level. Approximately
65% overall sequence homology and about 92% in their
kinase domains[4, 7]. To elucidate the physiologic role
of Rho kinases, small molecule inhibitors have been
developed[4]. Fasudil (HA-1077), Y27632 and H-1152P
or dimethylfasudil (diMF) are most commonly used
Rho-kinase selective inhibitors and function in an ATPcompetitive manner[4]. These drugs therefore equally
inhibit the activity of ROCK1 and ROCK2. Fasudil is the
only Rho kinase inhibitor to date that has been approved
for use in humans. In humans, Fasudil has been used for
the treatment of cardiovascular indications including
hypertension, angina and stoke and appears to be
relatively safe. Although no significant side effects have
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

been reported in patients administered with Fasudil; it is
unclear at this time if the beneficial effects of this drug in
these patients are mediated via the suppression of ROCK1,
ROCK2 or both. This is an important consideration, given
that ROCK1 and ROCK2 are ubiquitously expressed and
studies demonstrating differences in the function of these
kinases are beginning to emerge[8].
Although several studies have implicated ROCK
in regulating metastasis using small molecule inhibitors,
two recent studies point to an essential role for diMF as a
therapeutic drug for treating diverse groups of hematologic
malignancies including some forms of MPN and AML[1,
6]. Mali et al recently demonstrated constitutive activation
of ROCK in cells bearing oncogenic forms of KIT, FLT3
and BCR-ABL, which was dependent on the PI3K and
Rho GTPase pathway[1]. They further demonstrated
that genetic or pharmacologic inhibition of ROCK in
oncogene bearing cells impaired the growth of leukemic
blasts and significantly prolonged the life span of mice
with MPN. Furthermore, treatment of leukemic cells
with diMF resulted in rapid dephosphorylation of a
known downstream substrate of ROCK, myosin light
chain (MLC), resulting in apoptosis of leukemic blasts.
Inhibition of MLC in vivo showed significantly prolonged
life span of oncogene bearing leukemic mice. Consistent
with the anti-leukemic effect of diMF on oncogene
bearing cells; treatment of leukemic mice with Fasudil,
also resulted in significant improvement in the life span of
oncogene bearing leukemic mice[1].
In an independent study, Wen et al showed that
diMF enhances polyploidization and apoptosis in acute
megakaryocytic leukemia (AMKL) blasts[6]. In this
study, authors showed that diMF induces apoptosis
and polyploidization in AMLK cells by inhibiting the
activation of Aurora kinase A (AURKA). These are
important findings given the fact that leukemic blasts from
AMKL patients hyperproliferate and fail to differentiate
or undergo polyploidization. Furthermore, authors
showed that diMF not only induces polyploidization but
also induces apoptosis in AMLK blasts. Interestingly,
Fasudil treatment did not induce polyploidization of
AMLK cells[6]. Thus, although ROCK has been shown
to be the primary target of diMF in most cell types
including in oncogene bearing leukemic blasts; in
AMLK cells, data suggests that its main target might be
AURKA. While, diMF clearly represses the activation of
AURKA and AURKA plays an essential role in inducing
909

Oncotarget 2012; 3: 909-910

polyploidization in AMLKs; ROCK is likely to play a role
in contributing to the polyploidization in AMLKs as bone
marrow cells deficient in the expression of ROCK1 also
demonstrate enhanced polyploidization[6]. Therefore,
experiments involving knockdown of ROCK1 and/or
ROCK2 in AMLK cells along with knockdown of AURKA
should be able to address the relative contribution of these
kinases in polyploidization of malignant megakaryocytes.
While ROCK inhibitors including Fasudil, Y27632
and diMF have been excellent tools to dissect the role of
ROCK in leukemogenesis, further experiments utilizing
mice deficient in the expression of ROCK1, ROCK2 and
both ROCK1 and ROCK2 will be needed to more precisely
delineate the role of ROCK in initiation and progression
of leukemia. In addition, it will be interesting to determine
if additional downstream substrates of ROCK such as
LIMK and Ezrin also contribute to leukemogenesis.
Small molecule inhibitors as well as mice deficient in the
expression of these kinases have been described and will
likely function as useful tools to dissect their respective
role(s) in leukemogenesis in future studies[9, 10]. An
additional important question that remains to be answered
relates to the involvement of ROCK1 and ROCK2 in
regulating the growth and survival as well as actin based
functions in leukemia initiating cells as well as their role in
regulating drug resistant mutations of BCR-ABL in CML
and/or FLT3 in AML. Once a better understanding of the
individual role of ROCK1 and ROCK2 in leukemogenesis
is established, the development of isoform specific ROCK
inhibitors may be necessary, in light of the fact that
patients treated with Fasudil, which inhibits both ROCK1
and ROCK2, demonstrate considerable lowering of their
blood pressure. Thus, if ROCKs are going to be targeted
as anti-leukemic agents either as a monotherapy or in
combination with existing drugs, a better characterization
of the relative contribution of ROCK1 and ROCK2 in
disease progression is essential.

5.	 Riento K, and Ridley AJ. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol.
2003;4:446-456.
6.	

Wen Q, Goldenson B, Silver SJ, et al. Cell. 2012;150:575589.

7.	 Nakagawa O, Fujisawa K, Ishizaki T, et al. FEBS Lett.
1996;392:189-193.
8.	 Surma M, Wei L, and Shi J. Future Cardiol. 2011;7:657671.
9.	

Bulut G, Hong SH, Chen K, et al. Oncogene. 2012;31:269281.

10.	 Prudent R, Vassal-Stermann E, Nguyen CH, et al. Cancer
Res. 2012;72:4429-4439.

Raghuveer Singh Mali: Department of Pediatrics, Indiana
University School of Medicine, Indianapolis
Reuben Kapur: Department of Pediatrics, Indiana
University School of Medicine, Indianapolis
Correspondence: Reuben Kapur, email rkapur@iupui.edu
Received: September 19, 2012;
Published: September 21, 2012;

REFERENCES
1.	

Mali RS, Ramdas B, Ma P, et al. Cancer Cell. 2011;20:357369.

2.	 Liu S, Goldstein RH, Scepansky EM, et al. Cancer Res.
2009;69:8742-8751.
3.	

Itoh K, Yoshioka K, Akedo H, et al. Nat Med. 1999;5:221225.

4.	

Mueller BK, Mack H, and Teusch N. Nat Rev Drug Discov.
2005;4:387-398.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

910

Oncotarget 2012; 3: 909-910

