Research Article

Mitochondrial Cholesterol Contributes to Chemotherapy
Resistance in Hepatocellular Carcinoma
1,2

1,2

1,2

1,2

Joan Montero, Albert Morales, Laura Llacuna, Josep M. Lluis, Oihana Terrones,
3
4
2,5
1,2
Gorka Basañez, Bruno Antonsson, Jesús Prieto, Carmen Garcı́a-Ruiz,
1,2
1,2
Anna Colell, and José C. Fernández-Checa

3

1

Liver Unit and Centro de Investigaciones Biomédicas Esther Koplowitz, IMDiM, Hospital Clı́nic i Provincial, Institut d’Investigacions
Biomèdiques August Pi i Sunyer, and Department of Cell Death and Proliferation, Instituto de Investigaciones Biomédicas de
Barcelona, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Cientı́ficas, Barcelona, Spain; 2Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red
(CIBERehd); 3Unidad de Biofı́sica (Centro Mixto Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Cientı́ficas-Universidad del Paı́s
Vasco/Euskal Herriko Unibertsitatea), Universidad del Paı́s Vasco/Euskal Herriko Unibertsitatea, Bilbao, Spain; 4Merck
Serono Internacional, Geneva, Switzerland; and 5Liver Unit and Division of Hepatology and Gene Therapy,
University Clinic and Center for Applied Medical Research, University of Navarra, Pamplona, Spain

Abstract
Cholesterol metabolism is deregulated in carcinogenesis, and
cancer cells exhibit enhanced mitochondrial cholesterol
content whose role in cell death susceptibility and cancer
therapy has not been investigated. Here, we describe that
mitochondria from rat or human hepatocellular carcinoma
(HC) cells (HCC) or primary tumors from patients with HC
exhibit increased mitochondrial cholesterol levels. HCC
sensitivity to chemotherapy acting via mitochondria is
enhanced upon cholesterol depletion by inhibition of hydroxymethylglutaryl-CoA reductase or squalene synthase (SS),
which catalyzes the first committed step in cholesterol
biosynthesis. HCC transfection with siRNA targeting the
steroidogenic acute regulatory protein StAR, a mitochondrial
cholesterol–transporting polypeptide which is overexpressed
in HCC compared with rat and human liver, sensitized HCC
to chemotherapy. Isolated mitochondria from HCC with
increased cholesterol levels were resistant to mitochondrial
membrane permeabilization and release of cytochrome c or
Smac/DIABLO in response to various stimuli including active
Bax. Similar behavior was observed in cholesterol-enriched
mitochondria or liposomes and reversed by restoring mitochondrial membrane order or cholesterol extraction. Moreover, atorvastatin or the SS inhibitor YM-53601 potentiated
doxorubicin-mediated HCC growth arrest and cell death
in vivo. Thus, mitochondrial cholesterol contributes to chemotherapy resistance by increasing membrane order, emerging
as a novel therapeutic niche in cancer therapy. [Cancer Res
2008;68(13):5246–56]

Introduction
Cholesterol is an integral component of cellular membranes that
plays an essential role in maintaining their integrity and function
(1). In addition to the regulation of membrane order, cholesterol
induces membrane packing in lateral microdomains (rafts) of the
plasma membrane, providing a scaffold for a variety of membrane-

Note: Supplementary data for this article are available at Cancer Research Online
(http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/).
A. Colell and J.C. Fernández-Checa share senior authorship.
Requests for reprints: José C. Fernández-Checa, Liver Unit, Hospital Clı́nic i
Provincial, C/Villarroel, 170, 08036-Barcelona, Spain. Phone: 34-93-227-5709; Fax: 3493-451-5272; E-mail: checa229@yahoo.com.
I2008 American Association for Cancer Research.
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-07-6161

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (13). July 1, 2008

associated signaling proteins (2, 3). Due to this role in modulating
membrane structure and function, cholesterol levels in cell
membranes are tightly regulated. The main sources of cellular
cholesterol involve either its uptake from cholesterol-rich lowdensity lipoproteins or its de novo synthesis through the
conversion of 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-CoA into mevalonate by
3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl CoA reductase (HMG-CoAR), the ratelimiting step in cholesterol synthesis, which is transcriptionally
regulated by endoplasmic reticulum–based transcription factor
SREBP-2 (1, 4).
Cholesterol accumulation and enhanced cholesterol-rich lipid
rafts have been reported in several solid tumors that modulate
tumor cell growth and survival by activating particular signaling
pathways such as Akt (5, 6). In addition, cholesterol metabolism is
abnormal in many malignancies with loss of cholesterol feedback
and HMG-CoAR up-regulation despite enhanced cholesterol levels
(7). Moreover, malignant cells exhibit elevated levels of mevalonate,
which has been shown to promote tumor growth in vivo and proliferation of breast cancer cells (8). Consistent with this scenario,
statins, which block HMG-CoAR by competing with mevalonate
for binding to the active site, have been proposed for cancer
prevention and/or treatment, although their efficacy as anticancer
agents has not always been established (9). Furthermore, even
in those cases where statins showed promising results, it remained unclear whether the therapeutic effects were due to the
cholesterol-lowering activity or to the down-regulation of isoprenoids, which are known to modulate multiple proteins by
posttranslational modifications (9, 10).
Mitochondria are cholesterol-poor organelles with estimates
ranging from 0.5% to 3% of the content found in plasma
membranes (1, 11). However, unphysiologic mitochondrial cholesterol levels have been described in solid tumors. For instance,
mitochondrial cholesterol levels of tumors from Buffalo rats
bearing transplanted Morris hepatomas were 2- to 5-fold higher
than the content found in mitochondria prepared from host liver,
and correlated with the degree of tumor growth and malignancy
(12–15). Although the mechanisms underlying the mitochondrial
cholesterol accumulation in cancer cells are poorly understood,
recent observations have reported the activity of cholesteroltransporting polypeptides, including the steroidogenic acute
regulatory protein (StAR) in human HepG2 cells that contribute
to the mitochondrial intermembrane trafficking of cholesterol (16).
Although cholesterol enrichment in mitochondria can impair
specific mitochondrial components accounting, in part, for the
mitochondrial dysfunction described in cancer cells (13, 15, 17–20),

5246

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Mitochondrial Cholesterol and Hepatocellular Carcinoma

its effect in cell death susceptibility and cancer therapy has not
been previously examined. This may be of potential relevance
because strategies targeting mitochondria have been proposed
as potential use in cancer therapy (21), and alterations in the
mitochondrial apoptotic pathway, particularly the modulation
of the mitochondrial membrane permeabilization (MMP), may
contribute to cancer growth and desensitization to cancer therapy
(21, 22).
Hepatocellular carcinoma (HC) is one of the main causes of
cancer-related deaths that frequently arises on a background of
chronic inflammation and exhibits high resistance to current
therapy (23). Thus, because mitochondria are known to play a key
role in cell death (22) and cholesterol-regulated mitochondrial
membrane order has been reported to modulate MMP and the
subsequent release of apoptotic proteins (19), the purpose of
this study was to examine the role of mitochondrial cholesterol in
the susceptibility of HC cells (HCC) to chemotherapy in vitro, the
mechanisms involved, and the relevance in an in vivo HC model.
Our findings indicate that mitochondrial cholesterol contributes to
chemotherapy resistance through altered membrane order, hence
emerging as a novel therapeutic target in cancer therapy.

Materials and Methods
Materials and recombinant proteins. Dioleoylphosphatidylcholine,
tetraoleoylcardiolipin, and cholesterol were purchased from Avanti Polar
Lipids. Dodecyl octaethylene glycol monoether (C12E8), Methyl-h-cyclodextrin, melittin, Staphylococcus aureus a-toxin, tetanolysin, and fluoresceinisothiocyanate-labeled dextrans of 70 kDa (FD-70) were obtained from
Sigma. Recombinant full-length human Bax with an amino-terminal His6
tag (Bax), caspase 8–cleaved murine BID with an amino-terminal His6 tag
(tBid), and human Bcl-2 lacking the carboxy-terminal hydrophobic domain
(Bcl-2DC) were purified as previously described (24). Oligomeric Bax (oligoBax) was obtained by incubating Bax in 100 mmol/L KCl, 10 mmol/L
HEPES, 0.1 mmol/L EDTA (pH 7.0) buffer (KHE buffer) containing
octylglucoside (2%, w/v) for 1 h at 4jC.
Cell culture, hepatocyte isolation, and mitochondria and mitoplasts
preparation. The human hepatoblastoma cell line, HepG2, and the rat
hepatoma cell line, Reuber H35, were both obtained from the European
Collection of Animal Cell Cultures and grown at 37jC in 5% CO2. Culture
medium was supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS), 2 mmol/L
L-glutamine, and 1% nonessential amino acids and antibiotics. In some
experiments, 10% of delipidated FBS was used. Primary rat hepatocytes
were isolated by collagenase perfusion and cultured as described previously
(25). Cell viability in response to chemotherapy was determined by trypan
blue exclusion. Rat and human liver mitochondria were isolated as
described in Supplementary Methods. Mitochondria from HCC were
obtained by rapid centrifugation through Percoll density gradient as
described previously (19). Mitoplasts and outer mitochondrial membranes
were prepared by the fractionation of rat liver mitochondria with digitonin
as described previously (19), monitoring the monoamine oxidase activity
for efficiency. In some experiments, the mitochondrial suspension
was incubated with 2-(2-methoxyethoxy)ethyl-8-(cis-2-n-octylcyclopropyl)
octane (A2C, 125 nmol/mg protein) at 37jC for 30 min as described in
detail (19).
Human hepatocarcinoma samples. Fresh-frozen samples from tumor
lesions were obtained from 6 patients (men, ages 57–73 y) with HC and
approved by the ethics committee. The samples were collected from the
surgical specimen after resection (n = 2) or from the liver explant at
transplantation (n = 4). In four cases, the tumor was multifocal, and in two
cases, uninodular. The underlying liver disease was alcoholic cirrhosis in
three cases, Hepatitis B virus–induced cirrhosis in two, and Hepatitis C
virus–induced cirrhosis in one. In addition, normal liver tissue was obtained
from the surgical specimen after partial hepatectomy because of colorectal
cancer metastatic to the liver.

www.aacrjournals.org

Determination of cholesterol and phospholipid levels. The amount
of cholesterol in mitochondria was measured by high performance liquid
chromatography (HPLC) using a Waters ABondapak C18 10-Am reversedphase column (30 cm  4 mm inner diameter; ref. 26). The quantitation of
phospholipids is described in detail in the Supplementary Methods.
Immunocytochemistry and laser confocal imaging. Cells were fixed
for 10 min with 3.7% paraformaldehyde in 0.1 mol/L phosphate buffer
before permeabilization with 0.1% saponin in 0.5% bovine serum albumin
(BSA)/PBS buffer for 5 min. Cells were incubated for 1 h with mouse
monoclonal antibody anti–cytochrome c (1:200; PharMingen), rinsed with
PBS, and incubated for 45 min with the secondary antibody. In some cases,
filipin (50 Ag/mL) was added during the secondary antibody incubation as
described before (27). Images were obtained by confocal microscopy as
described in Supplementary Methods.
Modulation of cholesterol content and membrane order determination. Cholesterol enrichment was achieved by incubating rat liver
mitochondria with a cholesterol-BSA complex at room temperature for
5 min as described (19). Parallel control experiments were performed using
only BSA. Cholesterol depletion in mitochondrial membranes from HepG2
or H35 cells was achieved by treatment with Me-h-cyclodextrin (MCD;
40 mmol/L) for 30 min. Mitochondrial membrane order was evaluated by
fluorescence anisotropy of the mitochondria-bound dye 1,6-diphenyl-1, 3, 5hexatriene (DPH) as described previously (17, 19), determining the SDPH
from the steady-state fluorescence anisotropy values as described (28).
Silencing of StAR by siRNA. The siRNA-targeting StAR and scrambled
siRNA were commercially purchased from Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Inc.
Transfection was performed using Lipofectamine2000 (Invitrogen) following the instruction of the manufacturer. Briefly, 5  105 HepG2 or H35 cells
were incubated with the transfection mixtures containing 100 pmol of the
siRNA-targeting StAR or the scrambled control siRNA. Cells were assayed
48 h after transfection for mRNA and protein StAR levels, and for
susceptibility to chemotherapy.
HCC xenograft model and treatment. Five- to six-week-old male
BALB/c athymic (nu/nu) nude mice were kept under pathogen-free
conditions and given free access to standard food and sterilized water.
All procedures were performed according to protocols approved by the
Institut d’Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi i Sunyer Ethical Committee. HepG2 cells (2.5  106 in 200 AL of PBS) were injected s.c. into the
flanks of the mice. Tumors were measured periodically with a vernier
caliper, and the volume was calculated as length  width2  0.5, which has
been validated previously in comparison with other established methods
(29). After 2 to 3 wk, mice were randomly divided into 3 experimental
groups: group A, solvent (control); group B, atorvastatin (10 mg/kg); and
group C, YM-53601 (15 mg/kg). After 2 wk of daily treatment by p.o. gavage,
some animals received an i.p. injection of doxorubicin (10 mg/kg).
Differences in tumor volume during the next week were evaluated in each
group and expressed as percentage of change in tumor growth with respect
to the volume measured before chemotherapy administration.
Terminal deoxynucleotidyl-transferase–mediated dUTP nick-end
labeling assay and tumor progression. After sacrifice, tumors were
fixed and paraffin sections (5 Am) from each area were stained with
terminal deoxynucleotidyl-transferase–mediated dUTP nick-end labeling
(TUNEL) reagent using a commercial kit (In Situ Cell Death Detection kit;
POD from Roche). Immunohistochemical staining of CD34, a specific
endothelial cell marker commonly used for microvessel quantification, was
performed with rat monoclonal anti-CD34 antibody (Abcam) at a dilution
of 1:50 (2 mg/mL). The slices were examined with a Zeiss Axioplan
microscope equipped with a Nikon DXM1200F digital camera. Serum
a-feto protein levels were measured by the Centro Diagnóstico Médico
(Hospital Clinic).
Statistics. Results were expressed as mean F SD with the number of
individual experiments detailed in figure legends. Statistical significance
of the mean values was established by the two-tailed distribution Student’s
t test.
Supplementary methods. This section describes the procedures for
Western blot analysis, quantitative real-time PCR, large unilamellar vesicle
(LUV) preparation, and fluorimetric assays.

5247

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (13). July 1, 2008

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

Results
Mitochondrial cholesterol in established HCC. Because
previous findings reported enhanced mitochondrial cholesterol
content in solid Morris hepatoma tumors with respect to host
liver (12–15), we first assessed the mitochondrial cholesterol levels
from established HCC. HepG2 and H35 cells were fractionated
into mitochondria and analyzed for lipid composition. Electron
microscopy and Western blot analysis of PERK, Na+/K+ ATPase a1,
and Rab5A indicated insignificant contamination with endoplasmic reticulum, plasma membrane, and endosomes, respectively, in
the final mitochondrial fraction (Fig. 1A). Monitoring Lamp1 levels
by Western blot analysis further indicated the lack of lysosomal
contamination in the final mitochondrial fraction (Fig. 1A). As
shown, the total cholesterol levels in mitochondria from H35 and
HepG2 cells were 3- to 10-fold higher with respect to rat and
human liver mitochondria without changes in total phospholipids
content (Fig. 1B), confirming previous results in implanted hepatoma tumors in vivo (12–15). Interestingly, the levels of mitochondrial cholesterol from primary tumors of patients with HC were
higher than the content of mitochondria from nontumor human
liver tissue and similar to those found in HepG2 cells (Fig. 1B).
Moreover, the enhanced levels of free cholesterol of H35 or HepG2
cells examined by confocal microscopy by filipin staining colocalized with mitochondria, and this increase was further verified by
HPLC analyses of isolated mitochondria (Fig. 1C). Finally, these
findings on mitochondrial cholesterol up-regulation correlated
with enhanced expression of the transcription factor SREBP-2 and
HMG-CoAR in H35 and HepG2 cells with respect to rat and human
liver samples (Fig. 1D). Together, these findings validate the use
of HCC lines to study the role of mitochondrial cholesterol in
chemotherapy susceptibility.
HMG-CoAR or squalene synthase inhibition sensitizes HCC
to mitochondria-targeted chemotherapy. We next examined
the role of mitochondrial cholesterol in the susceptibility of HCC
to chemotherapy targeting mitochondria. Arsenic trioxide or
lonidamine, a derivative of indazole-3-carboxylic acid, are both
antineoplastic drugs that target mitochondria and induce mitochondrial permeability transition (MPT; refs. 30, 31). Thapsigarginbased prodrugs developed for the treatment of prostate cancer
(32) are potent inhibitors of endoplasmic reticulum Ca2+ ATPases
and induce MPT by Ca2+ overload, whereas doxorubicin, an anthracycline antibiotic drug, stimulates mitochondrial reactive oxygen
species (ROS) generation (33). Both cell lines displayed a reduced
susceptibility to increasing doses of thapsigargin, lonidamine,
arsenic trioxide, or doxorubicin compared with primary rat hepatocytes (Fig. 2A). Various statins including lovastatin or atorvastatin have been shown to be effective in reducing cholesterol levels
in HepG2 cells (34). Lovastatin pretreatment sensitized H35 cells
to mitochondria-targeting drugs (Fig. 2B) with similar results
observed with HepG2 cells (Supplementary Fig. S1). Dying cells
displayed apoptotic features, such as caspase-3 activation (Supplementary Fig. S2A) and chromatin disruption (Supplementary
Fig. S2B). Moreover, the susceptibility of H35 cells to bafilomycin
A, an inhibitor of the vacuolar type H+-ATPase that impairs
lysosomal function and promotes apoptosis independently of
MMP (35), was not increased by lovastatin (Supplementary Fig. S1;
Fig. 2B) and was not accompanied by enhanced cytochrome c
release (Supplementary Fig. S3), suggesting that the sensitizing
effect of lovastatin is specific for mitochondrial-targeting drugs.
To further verify the specific role of cholesterol in chemotherapy

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (13). July 1, 2008

resistance, we investigated the effect of SS inhibition, which blocks
cholesterol biosynthesis without affecting the isoprenoid metabolism (Supplementary Fig. S4). Cell treatment with YM-53601, a
specific SS inhibitor (36), at a dose nontoxic to primary rat hepatocytes (Supplementary Fig. S5), potentiated the susceptibility of
H35 cells to thapsigargin, lonidamine, and doxorubicin (Fig. 2C)
to a similar extent as seen by lovastatin treatment. Importantly,
both lovastatin and YM-53601 reduced the mitochondrial cholesterol levels in both H35 and HepG2 cells (Fig. 2D). Finally, the
susceptibility of H35 cells to doxorubicin by lovastatin was prevented by mevalonate, independently of the inhibition of farnesyltransferase, whereas mevalonate failed to restore resistance to
doxorubicin after SS inhibition (Supplementary Fig. S6). Moreover,
7-dehydrocholesterol, the immediate precursor of cholesterol
synthesis (Supplementary Fig. S4), decreased the susceptibility
to doxorubicin by SS inhibition (Supplementary Fig. S6). Collectively, these findings suggest the involvement of mitochondrial
cholesterol in the resistance of HCC to drug-induced cell death
independently of alterations in isoprenoid metabolism.
siRNA-mediated StAR silencing sensitizes HCC to chemotherapy. To further substantiate that mitochondrial cholesterol
enrichment in HCC contributes to mitochondrial-targeting chemotherapy resistance, we investigated the role of silencing StAR.
StAR is a cholesterol-transporting polypeptide involved in the
intramitochondrial trafficking of cholesterol, which regulates the
synthesis of steroids in specialized tissues (11, 16). The levels of
StAR were higher in H35 and HepG2 cells compared with rat and
human liver samples being more abundant in HepG2 cells than in
H35 cells (Fig. 3A), which correlated with the mitochondrial
cholesterol levels observed in these cell lines (Fig. 1B). Transfection
with siRNA-targeting StAR resulted in a significant reduction of
StAR protein and mRNA expression compared with cells tranfected
with scrambled control siRNA (Fig. 3B), causing a significant
reduction of mitochondrial cholesterol levels (Fig. 3C). More
importantly, the susceptibility of HepG2 cells to doxorubicin,
thapsigargin, or arsenic trioxide was potentiated by transfection
with StAR siRNA (Fig. 3D), with similar results observed with H35
cells (Fig. 3D). Thus, these findings validate the observations with
HMG-CoAR and SS inhibition, further supporting a key role for
mitochondrial cholesterol in the sensitization of HCC to chemotherapy targeting mitochondria.
Mitochondrial cholesterol modulates membrane order and
MPT. Cholesterol, particularly free cholesterol, regulates membrane physical properties (1, 27, 28). Thus, we next determined the
membrane order from the steady-state fluorescence anisotropy of
DPH-labeled mitochondria. Mitochondria from H35 and HepG2
cells showed higher membrane order (SDPH) compared with
mitochondria from rat and human liver (Fig. 4A). Phospholipids
can also regulate membrane order. However, the content of
phosphatidylcholine, the major phospholipid in membranes,
remained unchanged in mitochondria from H35 and HepG2 cells
with respect to rat or human liver samples, whereas phosphatidylethanolamine levels in mitochondria from HepG2 cells but not H35
cells were slightly lower than those found in human liver
mitochondria (Supplementary Fig. S7). Moreover, mitochondria
from H35 and HepG2 cells exposed to the cholesterol-binding
agent MCD exhibited a significant depletion of cholesterol levels
compared with untreated mitochondria, which translated in
reduced membrane order (Fig. 4A). In contrast, incubation of rat
liver mitochondria with a cholesterol-albumin complex (19)
resulted in significant cholesterol loading, reaching the levels

5248

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Mitochondrial Cholesterol and Hepatocellular Carcinoma

Figure 1. Increased cholesterol content in mitochondria from rat (H35 ), human (HepG2 ) hepatoma cell lines, and human HC samples. A, electron microscopy
analysis showing purified mitochondria from H35 and HepG2 cells after cellular subfractionation (scale bars, 1 Am); and Western blot analysis of PERK, Na+/K+ATPase
a1, Rab5A, Lamp1, and cytochrome c expression in homogenates (H ) or mitochondrial fraction (Mit ) from H35 cells. B, total cholesterol (black bars ) and phospholipid
levels (white bars ) performed by HPLC on lipid extracts from the mitochondrial fraction from H35, HepG2 cells, and human HC samples. C, colocalization of
mitochondria and free cholesterol by confocal microscopy using mouse anti–cytochrome c (cyt C ) and filipin, respectively. The graphs on the bottom represent
the fluorescence intensity profiles plotted from a to b direction for the different cell lines. In addition, mitochondrial-free cholesterol content analyzed by HPLC.
Results in B and C are mean F SD values from at least three independent experiments. * and **, P < 0.01 versus rat and human liver mitochondria, respectively.
D, quantitative real-time reverse transcription-PCR mRNA expression of SREBP-2 and HMG-CoA reductase in H35 and HepG2 cells compared with rat and human
liver, respectively. Absolute mRNA values were determined, normalized to hypoxanthine phosphoribosyltransferase and reported as relative levels referred to the
expression in nontumor counterpart. Prot, protein.

www.aacrjournals.org

5249

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (13). July 1, 2008

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

found in mitochondria from H35 cells that increased the
membrane order (Fig. 4A). Indeed, the mitochondrial membrane
order correlated with the cholesterol content (Fig. 4A). Cholesterol
distribution after cholesterol enrichment by the cholesterolalbumin complex was estimated in mitoplasts. Although the bulk
of cholesterol (60–70%) was found in the outer membrane, in
agreement with previous findings (19), the levels of cholesterol in
mitoplasts from cholesterol-enriched mitochondria were higher
(2- to 3-fold) than those found in mitoplasts from control
mitochondria (data not shown).
We next analyzed the role of cholesterol in the response of
mitochondria to MPT triggers. Isolated mitochondria from H35 cells
with or without MCD treatment were incubated with the superoxide
anion-generating system, xanthine plus xanthine oxidase (X-XO),
shown to induce the release of mitochondrial cytochrome c (37).
Although rat liver mitochondria released cytochrome c in response

to X-XO, mitochondria from H35 were resistant to X-XO–induced
cytochrome c release (Fig. 4B); moreover, cholesterol extraction by
MCD restored the sensitivity of mitochondria from H35 cells to
X-XO–mediated cytochrome c release (Fig. 4B), with similar findings
observed in mitochondria from HepG2 cells (Fig. 4B).
Ca2+ induces the transition of the MPT pore causing
mitochondrial matrix swelling and release of the proapoptotic
proteins (38). Rat liver mitochondria enriched in cholesterol
by the cholesterol-albumin complex were resistant to swelling
(data not shown), and cytochrome c and Smac/DIABLO release
(Fig. 4C) induced by Ca2+. Moreover, mitochondria from H35 cells
were insensitive to Ca2+-induced Smac/DIABLO and cytochrome
c release (Fig. 4D), whereas cholesterol depletion by MCD
restored the response to Ca2+ (Fig. 4D). Thus, mitochondrial cholesterol regulates membrane order and the release of apoptotic
proteins by MPT triggers.

Figure 2. Inhibition of cholesterol
synthesis sensitizes cells to different
compounds that act on mitochondria.
A, primary rat hepatocytes, H35, and
HepG2 cells were incubated with
increasing doses of arsenic trioxide (ATO ),
lonidamine, thapsigargin (Thg ), or
doxorubicin for 24 h. Cell viability was
determined by trypan blue exclusion. At
least 100 cells in 4 different fields were
counted and expressed as a percentage
of total cells. B and C, disruption of
cholesterol biosynthesis by lovastain or
by the SS inhibitor YM-53601 (YM )
sensitizes H35 cells to chemotherapeutic
agents. H35 hepatoma cells untreated
(NT ) or incubated with lovastatin (Lov )
or YM-53601 for 24 h were exposed to
thapsigargin (0.2 Amol/L), lonidamine
(0.2 mmol/L), arsenic trioxide (5 Amol/L),
doxorubicin (Doxo ; 1 Amol/L), bafilomycin
A (Baf A; 10 Amol/L) for 24 h. Cell
death was determined by trypan blue
exclusion (n = 3). D, total cholesterol levels
of mitochondria from H35 and HepG2
cells 24 h after treatment with lovastatin
(2.5 Amol/L) or YM-53601 (1 Amol/L); n = 4;
*, P < 0.05 versus untreated cells.
Ctrl, control.

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (13). July 1, 2008

5250

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Mitochondrial Cholesterol and Hepatocellular Carcinoma

Figure 3. StAR suppression by siRNA increases the cytotoxicity induced by doxorubicin. A, representative immunoblot showing StAR protein abundance in H35
and HepG2 cellular extracts and in homogenates from rat and human liver. B, StAR mRNA silencing. HepG2 cells were transfected with the StAR siRNA or the control
siRNA (Ctrl siRNA ) as described in Materials and Methods. Cells were allowed to recover in regular culture medium for 48 h, and the levels of StAR protein were
quantified by Western blot in cellular extracts (left; n = 3) and mRNA levels by real-time RT-PCR (right ; n = 3). C, mitochondrial cholesterol levels from HepG2 and H35
cells 48 h after StAR mRNA silencing analyzed by HPLC. D, 48 h after transfection with StAR or control siRNA, cells were exposed to doxorubicin (1 Amol/L),
thapsigargin (0.2 Amol/L), lonidamine (Lnd ; 0.2 mmol/L), and arsenic trioxide (5 Amol/L), and cell death was analyzed 48 h later by trypan blue exclusion. At least
100 cells in 4 different fields were counted and expressed as a percentage of total cells; n = 3; *, P < 0.05 versus control siRNA–transfected cells treated with
doxorubicin.

Cholesterol impairs Bax-driven mitochondrial release of
apoptotic proteins and permeabilization in liposomes. Mitochondrial release of prodeath factors by Bax or Bak can occur by
their oligomerization and insertion into the mitochondrial outer
membrane independent of MPT (22). Thus, we next examined the
effect of cholesterol on Bax-driven mitochondrial permeabilization.
Whereas tBid-activated Bax (tBid/Bax) stimulated the release of
cytochrome c in control mitochondria, cholesterol-enriched
mitochondria were resistant to tBid/Bax-mediated cytochrome c
release (Fig. 5A). Similar findings were observed in the release of
Smac/Diablo by cholesterol enrichment (data not shown). The
incubation of cholesterol-enriched mitochondria with A2C, a fatty
acid derivative that intercalates into the lipid bilayer resulting in its
fluidization (19), restored the ability of tBid/Bax to release
cytochrome c (Fig. 5A), establishing a cause-and-effect relationship
between mitochondrial membrane order and release of apoptotic
proteins by Bax. Moreover, mitochondria from H35 cells were
insensitive to tBid/Bax-induced release of cytochrome c that was
restored by lovastatin treatment (Fig. 5A), which caused a

www.aacrjournals.org

significant reduction in the mitochondrial cholesterol levels
(Fig. 2D).
To further extend these obserations, we next examined the effect
of cholesterol on the poration of large unilamellar vesicles (LUVs)
by active Bax. LUVs with or without cholesterol were loaded with
self-quenching concentrations of FD-70, and the release of LUVentrapped FD-70 was monitored as an increase in the fluorescence
signal due to marker dilution in the external medium (24). As
shown, the release of vesicular content by tBid/Bax was impaired in
cholesterol-containing LUVs (Fig. 5B). In contrast, cholesterol was
required for the release of vesicular contents induced by
tetanolysin, a cholesterol-dependent pore-forming toxin known to
open proteinaceous channels by inserting a transmembrane abarrel in the bilayer (Fig. 5B; ref. 39). Treatment of LUVs with MCD
reversed the inhibitory effect of cholesterol upon Bax-driven
liposome permeabilization and disrupted the cholesterol-dependent channel-forming function of tetanolysin (Fig. 5B). Furthermore, cholesterol inhibited the membrane-permeabilizing activity
of tBid/Bax or Bax preoligomerized with octylglucoside (Oligo-Bax)

5251

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (13). July 1, 2008

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

in a dose-dependent manner (Fig. 5B). Similar to the effect found
on Bax, and consistent with previous observations, cholesterol also
decreased the permeabilizing activity of melittin, a widely studied
antimicrobial peptide thought to breach membrane permeability
barrier by forming lipid-containing toroidal pores instead of purely
proteinaceous channels (40). In contrast, similar to tetanolysin and
consistent with previous findings, cholesterol actually increased
the release of vesicular contents induced by the channel-forming
protein S. aureaus a-toxin (Fig. 5B; ref. 41). Antiapoptotic proteins
such as Bcl-2 antagonize the release of mitochondrial prodeath
factors during apoptosis. To address whether cholesterol modulates Bcl-2 activity, LUVs with or without cholesterol were incubated with Bcl-2DC before tBid/Bax treatment. As seen, Bax-driven
membrane permeabilization of LUVs was inhibited by Bcl-2DC in a
dose-dependent manner, despite the presence of membrane
cholesterol (Fig. 5C). Consistent with the findings in cholesterolenriched rat liver mitochondria, the resistance to Bax-induced
permeabilization of cholesterol-containing LUVs was reversed by

the fluidizing agent A2C (Fig. 5D). Finally, we examined whether
cholesterol altered the membrane-inserting capacity of preoligomerized Bax (Oligo-Bax) using lipid monolayers. Addition of oligoBax into cholesterol-containing or cholesterol-devoid lipid monolayers at different initial surface pressures allowed us to determine
critical surface pressures values (k0) for oligo-Bax, which is a
measure of the membrane penetrability of the protein. As seen, k0
values for oligo-Bax in cholesterol-containing monolayers were
notably lower than in monolayers devoid of cholesterol (Fig. 5D).
Together, these findings suggest that cholesterol-mediated rigidification of the bilayer directly modulates Bax permeabilizing
activity, at least, in part, by reducing the capacity of Bax to insert
into the lipid matrix of the membrane.
HMG-CoAR or SS inhibition potentiates chemotherapy in
tumor xenografts. We further evaluated whether cholesterol
regulates cancer therapy in vivo using tumor xenografts. Nude mice
were s.c. injected with human hepatoma HepG2 cells, and tumorbearing animals were then subjected to lipid-lowering treatments.

Figure 4. Mitochondrial cholesterol modulation regulates the release of cytochrome c and Smac/Diablo by ROS and Ca2+. A, total cholesterol levels determined
by HPLC of untreated mitochondria or after cholesterol enrichment by a cholesterol-albumin complex (CHOL ) and Me-h-cyclodextrine treatment (MCD; top ). Middle,
membrane order (SDPH ) determined from the fluorescence anisotropy monitored at 366 nm (emission, 440 nm) of mitochondria labeled with DPH, using polarizing
filters in both excitation and emission planes, and normalized as per milligram of mitochondrial protein.; n = 3; *, P < 0.05 versus untreated mitochondria; **, P < 0.05
versus rat liver mitochondria. Bottom, correlation between mitochondrial cholesterol content and membrane order (SDPH ). B, control and cholesterol-depleted (MCD)
mitochondria from H35 and HepG2 cells were incubated with xanthine (0.1 mmol/L) plus xanthine oxidase (40 mU/mL; X-XO ), and the effect on the release of
cytochrome c was analyzed by Western blot in the supernatants at the indicated times. Rat liver mitochondria were exposed to X-XO, and the release of cytochrome c
was analyzed by Western blot in the supernatants. C, release of apoptogenic proteins by Ca2+ in control and cholesterol-enriched mitochondria from rat liver.
Supernatants and pellets from mitochondria with or without CaCl2 (100 Amol/L) treatment for 1 h were used to analyze the levels of cytochrome c and Smac/DIABLO.
D, representative immunoblots of cytochrome c and Smac/DIABLO in supernatants and pellets of control and Me-h-cyclodextrin–treated mitochondria from H35 cells,
with or without CaCl2 (100 Amol/L) exposure for 30 min. B to D, the blots shown are representative of 3 to 4 independent experiments showing similar results.
The mitochondrial hsp60 protein was visualized as a loading control.

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (13). July 1, 2008

5252

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Mitochondrial Cholesterol and Hepatocellular Carcinoma

Figure 5. Cholesterol inhibits BAX-driven membrane permeabilization. A, representative immunoblots of cytochrome c in supernatants and pellets of mitochondria
from control and cholesterol-enriched rat liver mitochondria (CHOL ) with or without A2C incubation (125 nmol/mg protein) after 45 min of tBid+Bax (20 nmol/L) treatment
(left). Right, representative immunoblots of cytochrome c in supernatants and pellets of mitochondria from H35 cells treated or not with lovastatin (2.5 Amol/L)
followed by 45 min of tBid+Bax (20 nmol/L) treatment. B, representative kinetics of BAX + tBID- (50 nmol/L) and tetanolysin-induced (10 nmol/L) FD70 release from
LUV composed of phosphatidylcholine (PC)/cardiolipin (CL) 90/10 (mol/mol; CHOL) or PC/CL/cholesterol 45/10/45 (mol/mol; +CHOL; left). Middle, BAX+tBID(BAX; 50 nmol/L) and tetanolysin-induced (TET ; 10 nmol/L) FD70 release from LUV, in the presence or absence of 2 mmol/L methyl-h-cyclodextrin MCD (n = 2).
Right, vesicular FD-70 release induced by BAX+tBID (20 nmol/L), BAX oligomerized (oligo-BAX; 50 nmol/L), melittin (200 nmol/L), S. aureaus a-toxin (a toxin;
20 nmol/L), and tetanolysin (5 nmol/L) in LUV composed of PC/CL 90/10 (mol/mol) in which PC was substituted by increasing amounts of cholesterol (n = 3–6).
C, FD-70 release in LUV composed as in B and exposed to indicated amounts of Bcl-2 for 5 min before treatment with BAX+tBID (50 nmol/L). The data are normalized
as a percentage of the release produced by BAX+tBID in the absence of Bcl-2 (n = 2). D, dose-dependent effect of A2C on FD70 release from LUV composed
of PC/CL/CHOL 45/10/45 (mol/mol) in which PC was substituted by increasing amounts of A2C and then exposed to Bax and tBid (50 nmol/L each; left). Columns,
mean two to four independent measurements; bars, SD. Right, cholesterol reduces the ability of oligomerized Bax by octylglucoside to penetrate into lipid
monolayers at different surface pressures. Lipid composition was PC/CL 80/20 ( CHOL) and PC/CL/CHOL 40/20/40 (+CHOL). Critical surface pressures values
were 34.6 mN/m ( CHOL) and 30.2 mN/m (+CHOL). Oligomeric Bax concentration was 400 nmol/L.

Atorvastatin was chosen for in vivo studies as it has been shown to
be more effective than other statins both in humans and
experimental animals (42, 43). We observed that both atorvastatin
and YM-53601 administration significantly decreased the intratumor cholesterol levels (Fig. 6A). No differences in the pattern or
in the amount of microvessel formation were observed in any of
the experimental groups (Supplementary Fig. S8), suggesting that
cholesterol content plays a minor role in tumor vascularization in
this xenograft model. However, although atorvastatin notably
reduced the size of the tumors or the increase in a-feto protein

www.aacrjournals.org

levels in serum (data not shown) after 2 weeks of administration,
such effect was not observed with YM-53601 treatment (Fig. 6B),
indicating that inhibition of tumor progression by statins may be in
part caused by isoprenoids down-regulation, in agreement with
previous studies (9, 10). Interestingly, however, mice treated with
atorvastatin or the SS inhibitor displayed a greater reduction in
tumor growth after doxorubicin administration compared with
untreated mice (Fig. 6C). Furthermore, a higher number of
apoptotic cells assessed by TUNEL staining was observed in
tumors from atorvastatin or YM-53601 treated mice after

5253

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (13). July 1, 2008

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

doxorubicin administration compared with doxorubicin alone
(Fig. 6D), indicating an increased susceptibility of HCC to the
chemotherapeutic agent. Together, these data highlight the
potential relevance of the increased mitochondrial cholesterol in
modulating the response of HC to chemotherapy in vivo.

Discussion
Since its description decades ago in heterotopic Morris
hepatoma xenografts in Buffalo rats, the mitochondrial enrichment
in cholesterol has been viewed mainly as a key factor underlying, in
part, the mitochondrial dysfunction characteristic of cancer cells
(7). In this study, however, we investigated the role of cholesterol
accumulation in mitochondria from HCC in response to chemotherapy in vitro and in vivo and the mechanisms involved. First, we
confirmed that established human and rat HCC exhibit increased
mitochondrial cholesterol levels with respect to nontumor mitochondria of human and rat liver, as reported in solid hepatoma
mitochondria compared with host liver (12–15), which paralleled
those found in mitochondria from primary tumors of patients with
HC. Close to 70% of the cholesterol found in mitochondria from
HCC was unsterified, which, in contrast to esterified cholesterol, is
known to regulate membrane dynamics and order (1, 2, 19, 27, 28).

Moreover, the up-regulation of mitochondrial cholesterol content
in HCC correlates with increased expression of SREBP-2 and
HMG-CoAR, thus validating the cholesterol deregulation of cancer
cells (7–9) and their use to examine the susceptibility to
chemotherapy.
Our data uncover the resistance of HCC to chemotherapyinduced cell death that was reversed when cholesterol levels were
reduced by inhibition of HMG-CoAR or SS. Although this strategy
depletes cholesterol in different types of membranes other than
mitochondria such as in specific domains of the plasma
membrane, which has been described to modulate cancer therapy
by regulating survival pathways such as Akt (5, 6), we provide
evidence supporting a specific role for the mitochondrial
cholesterol in modulating the susceptibility of HCC to chemotherapy. First, we show that the sensitivity of HepG2 and H35 cells to
arsenic trioxide and lonidamine is potentiated by cholesterol
depletion by HMG-CoAR or SS inhibition. Arsenic trioxide and
lonidamine both induced MPT-mediated apoptosis by targeting the
adenine nucleotide translocator (ANT)1 isoform (30, 31). Four ANT
isoforms have been described, which are encoded by closely related
genes that belong to the mitochondrial carrier family, and ANT is a
major component of the MPT that mediate MMP and cell death
(44). Mitochondria from murine cells lacking ANT 1 and ANT2 can

Figure 6. Reduction of cholesterol synthesis potentiates doxorubicin therapy in an in vivo murine model. HepG2 cells (2.5  106 cells per animal) were implanted
s.c. in the flanks of athymic mice as described in Materials and Methods. When tumors averaged 50 mm3 in size (2–3 wk), mice were randomly divided into the
experimental groups and treated by a daily p.o. gavage with atorvastatin (10 mg/kg body weight) or YM-53601 (15 mg/kg body weight) for 2 wk. A, cholesterol
levels from control (vehicle treated), atorvastatin, and YM-53601–treated tumors. (n = 5). *, P < 0.05 versus control. B, tumor growth measured periodically at the
indicated days over the treatment. The volume was calculated as length  width2  0.5. The experiment was performed twice with similar results. *, P < 0.05 versus
vehicle-treated tumor. C, after 2 wk of treatment, some animals received an i.p. injection of doxorubicin (10 mg/kg). Fold increase of tumor growth was evaluated
in each experimental group (n = 5) by calculating the changes in tumor size observed after administration of the chemotherapy agent. The experiment was performed
twice with similar results. *, P < 0.05 versus doxorubicin-treated control mice. D, apoptosis induced by the chemotherapy agent in tumors from animals treated
either with statins or SS inhibitor was analyzed by TUNEL-positive staining areas. Representative images of three samples per group performed showing similar results.

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (13). July 1, 2008

5254

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Mitochondrial Cholesterol and Hepatocellular Carcinoma

still undergo Ca2+-induced swelling and MPT, although at a higher
threshold (45), which have been viewed as evidence against a
role for ANT in MPT and hence in MMP. However, the ability
of ANT1/ANT2-deficient cells to undergo MMP might be due to
the functional compensation by a novel ANT isoform identified
recently (46) or by other mitochondrial carriers able to form pores
in the inner membrane, such as the ornithine/citrulline transporters or the phosphate carrier (47).
Furthermore, additional evidence for a role of mitochondrial
cholesterol in chemotherapy susceptibility derives from the
outcome observed by StAR silencing. StAR is a polypeptide
responsible for the intramitochondrial transport of cholesterol
(11, 16) and both HepG2 and H35 cells overexpress StAR levels.
StAR silencing by siRNA sensitizes these cell lines to chemotherapy-induced cell death. Consistent with its role in the
mitochondrial trafficking of cholesterol, the sensitization to
chemotherapy by StAR down-regulation could reflect impaired
cholesterol transport from the outer to the inner mitochondrial
membranes. However, our data indicate that StAR depletion by
siRNA resulted in the net decrease of mitochondrial cholesterol
levels, implying lower delivery of cholesterol to mitochondria
from extramitochondrial sources by other proteins including
(StAR)-related lipid transfer (StART) family members. Although
the molecular mechanisms of StAR are poorly understood, recent
findings have shown that StAR interacts with specific outer
mitochondrial membrane proteins such as VDAC1 and the
phosphate carrier protein (48). Whether StAR works in concert
with other StART members via interaction with specific proteins
of the outer mitochondrial membrane to deliver cholesterol to
mitochondria remains to be investigated. Thus, collectively, these
data strongly suggest that the enrichment of mitochondria in
cholesterol plays a role in the resistance of chemotherapy acting
via mitochondria.
To explore the mechanism of the mitochondrial cholesterol–
mediated resistance to chemotherapy, we focused on the
membrane properties of isolated mitochondria from HCC. We
observed that mitochondria from HepG2 and H35 cells exhibit
higher order which is reversed by cholesterol extraction with
MCD or fluidization by A2C, translating in increased MMP and
release of cytochrome c and Smac/Diablo in response to Ca2+,
superoxide anion, and active Bax. An important piece of evidence
supporting the specificity of cholesterol in the regulation of MMP
is the fact that the in vitro enrichment of rat liver mitochondria
in cholesterol to about the same levels seen in H35 cells
reproduces the resistance to MMP and release of intermembrane
apoptotic proteins induced by active Bax. Consistent with these
observations, cholesterol-containing LUVs are also resistant to the
poration induced by Bax, and cholesterol dose-dependently
inhibited the vesicular release induced by melittin, which has
been proposed to permeabilize membranes by forming toroidal
lipidic pores (40). Because positive monolayer curvature stress
contributes to MMP by Bax (24), it is conceivable that cholesterol
may stabilize mitochondrial membranes against Bax permeabilizing action through induction of negative curvature, consistent
with the accumulation of cholesterol in high-curvature regions of
membranes (49). Remarkably, cholesterol decreased the capacity
of Bax to penetrate into the membrane, which is considered to be
a critical step in Bax activation. Thus, through modulation of
membrane order and curvature stress, cholesterol may regulate
Bax activity and the formation of lipidic pores in mitochondrial
membranes and, hence, cell death susceptibility.

www.aacrjournals.org

We also observed that tumor growth and chemotherapy
susceptibility in heterotopic murine tumor xenografts were
modulated by HMG-CoAR or SS inhibition, with both strategies
decreasing tumor mitochondrial cholesterol levels. The generation
of farnesyl diphosphate from mevalonate branches into isoprenoids and squalene, which is then committed for cholesterol
synthesis (Supplementary Fig. S4). Isoprenoids are known to
modify the function of proteins through posttranslational modifications such as the Rho family of small GTPases that coordinates
many aspects of cell motility through the reorganization of actin
cytoskeleton and changes in gene transcription (9, 10). The
isoprenylation is essential for Rho-mediated invasion of various
tumors, including melanoma, pancreatic, and breast cancer cells
(50). In the in vivo xenograft model, we observed that HMG-CoAR
but not SS reduced tumor growth, suggesting that inhibition of
tumor progression by statins may be in part caused by isoprenoids
down-regulation. However, the susceptibility of HC xenografts
to chemotherapy are observed upon statins or SS inhibition,
supporting the relevance of cholesterol rather than isoprenoids
generation in the resistance of HCC to chemotherapy. Thus, our
findings regarding the role of SS inhibition on chemotherapy along
with recent reports in different types of cancer cells such as human
prostate carcinoma cell lines (51) highlight the relevance of
cholesterol modulation in cancer therapy.
Interestingly in line with our data, recent findings in liposomes
confirmed that mitochondrial Bax activation is inhibited by
cholesterol (52). Moreover, mitochondria from HeLa cells treated
with U18666A, which caused mitochondrial cholesterol upregulation, showed a delay in the release of Smac/Diablo and
cytochrome c, as well as in Bax oligomerization and partial
protection against stress-induced apoptosis (52).
In summary, although enhanced cholesterol levels in cell
membranes including mitochondria from cancer cells have been
long known, we show here for the first time the relevance of the
cholesterol-mediated regulation of mitochondrial membrane
dynamics in the response of HCC to mitochondrial-targeting
chemotherapy in vitro and in vivo. Moreover, the potentiation of
HC chemotherapy by SS inhibition, which reduces cholesterol
levels including in mitochondria, without perturbing isoprenoid
metabolism, validates the specificity of cholesterol in chemotherapy resistance, and revitalizes the potential benefit of cholesterol
down-regulation in cancer therapy.

Disclosure of Potential Conflicts of Interest
No potential conflicts of interest were disclosed.

Acknowledgments
Received 11/8/2007; revised 3/14/2008; accepted 4/16/2008.
Grant support: Research Center for Liver and Pancreatic Diseases Grant P50 AA
11999 funded by the US National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism; Plan
Nacional de I+D Grants SAF2005-03923, SAF2005-03943, SAF2006-06780, BFU200506095, and FIS06/0395; the Centro de Investigacion Biomedica en Red de
Enfermedades Hepaticas y Digestivas supported by the Instituto de Salud Carlos III;
the Ramon y Cajal Research Program (Ministry of Education and Science; A. Colell
and A. Morales); and a predoctoral fellowship from the Basque Government
(O. Terrones).
The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of page
charges. This article must therefore be hereby marked advertisement in accordance
with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact.
We thank Susana Nuñez for the technical assistance and Dr. Bataller for the
donation of human liver samples; Virginia Villar from Clinic and Center for Applied
Medical Research, Pamplona, for her assistance in providing human HC samples; and
the Servicio Cientifico-Técnico of IDIBAPS for electron microscopy, confocal imaging,
and flow cytometry analysis.

5255

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (13). July 1, 2008

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

References
1. Maxfield FR, Tabas I. Role of cholesterol and lipid
organization in disease. Nature 2005;438:612–21.
2. Gimpl G, Burger K, Fahrenholz F. Cholesterol as
modulator of receptor function. Biochemistry 1997;36:
10959–74.
3. Simons K, Ehehalt R. Cholesterol, lipid rafts, and
disease. J Clin Invest 2002;110:597–603.
4. Horton JD, Goldstein JL, Brown MS. SREBPs: activators of the complete program of cholesterol and
fatty acid synthesis in the liver. J Clin Invest 2002;109:
1125–31.
5. Zhuang L, Kim J, Adam RM, Solomon KR, Freeman
MR. Cholesterol targeting alters lipid raft composition
and cell survival in prostate cancer cells and xenografts.
J Clin Invest 2005;115:958–68.
6. Li YC, Park MJ, Ye S-K, Kim C-W, KimY-N. Elevated
levels of cholesterol-rich lipid rafts in cancer cells are
correlated with apoptosis sensitivity induced by cholesterol-depleting agents. Am J Pathol 2006;168:1107–18.
7. Siperstein MD. Cholesterol, cholesterogenesis and
cancer. Adv Exp Med Biol 1995;369:155–66.
8. Duncan RE, El-Sohemy A, Archer MC. Mevalonate
promotes the growth of tumors derived from human
cancer cells in vivo and stimulates proliferation in vitro
with enhanced cyclin-dependent kinase-2 activity. J Biol
Chem 2004;279:33079–84.
9. Demierre MF, Higgins PDR, Gruber SB, Hawk E,
Lippman SM. Statins and cancer prevention. Nat Rev
Cancer 2005;5:930–42.
10. Liao JK, Laufs U. Pleiotropic effects of statins. Annu
Rev Pharmacol Toxicol 2004;45:89–118.
11. Soccio RE, Breslow JL. Intracellular cholesterol transport. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol 2004;24:1150–60.
12. Feo F, Canuto RA, Bertone G, Garcea R, Pani P.
Cholesterol and phospholipid composition of mitochondria and microsomes isolated from morris hepatoma
5123 and rat liver. FEBS Lett 1973;33:229–32.
13. Crain RC, Clark RW, Harvey BE. Role of lipid transfer
proteins in athe abnormal lipid content of Morris
hepatoma mitochondria and microsomes. Cancer Res
1983;43:3197–202.
14. Campbell AM, Capuano A, Chan SHP. A cholesterolbinding and transporting protein from rat liver
mitochondria. Biochim Biophys Acta 2002;1567:123–32.
15. Feo F, Canuto RA, Garcea R, Gabriel L. Effect of
cholesterol content on some physical and functional
properties of mitochondria isolated from adult rat liver,
fetal liver, cholesterol-enriched liver and hepatomas
AH-130, 3924A and 5123. Biochim Biophys Acta 1975;
413:116–34.
16. Hall EA, Ren S, Hylemon PB, et al. Detection of the
steroidogenic acute regulatory protein, StAR, in human
liver cells. Biochim Biophys Acta 2005;1733:111–19.
17. Colell A, Garcı́a-Ruiz C, Morales A, et al. Transport of
reduced glutathione in hepatic mitochondria and
mitoplasts from ethanol-treated rats: effect of membrane physical properties and S-adenosyl- L-methionine.
Hepatology 1997;26:699–708.
18. Coll O, Colell A, Garcia-Ruiz C, Kaplowitz N,
Fernandez-Checa JC. Sensitivity of the 2-oxoglutarate
carrier to alcohol intake contributes to mitochondrial
glutathione depletion. Hepatology 2003;38:692–702.

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (13). July 1, 2008

19. Colell A, Garcı́a-Ruiz C, Lluis JM, Coll O, Marı́ M,
Fernández-Checa, JC. Cholesterol impairs the adenine
nucleotide translocator-mediated mitochondrial permeability transition through altered membrane fluidity.
J Biol Chem 2003;278:33928–35.
20. Baggetto LG, Clottes E, Vial C. Low mitochondrial
proton leak due to high membrane cholesterol content
and cytosolic creatine kinase as two features of the
deviant bioenergetics of Ehrlich and AS30-D tumor cells.
Cancer Res 1992;52:4935–41.
21. Galluzzi L, Larochette N, Kroemer G. Mitochondria
as therapeutic targets for cancer chemotherapy. Oncogene 2006;5:4812–30.
22. Green DR. At the gates of death. Cancer Cell 2006;9:
328–30.
23. Motola-Kuba D, Zamora-Valdes D, Uribe M, MendezSanchez M. Hepatocellular carcinoma. An overview.
Ann Hepatol 2006;5:16–4.
24. Terrones O, Antonsson B, Yamaguchi H, et al. Lipidic
pore formation by the concertad action of proapoptotic
Bax and tBid. J Biol Chem 2004;279:30081–91.
25. Mari M, Colell A, Morales A. Acidic sphingomyelinase
downregulates the liver-specific methionine adenosyltransferase 1A, contributing to tumor necrosis factorinduced lethal hepatitis. J Clin Invest 2004;113:895–904.
26. Duncan IW, Culbreth PH, Burtis CA. Determination
of free, total, and esterified cholesterol by highperformance liquid chromatography. J Chromatogr
1979;162:281–92.
27. Mari M, Caballero F, Colell A, et al. Mitochondrial
free loading sensitizes to TNF and Fas mediated
steatohepatitis. Cell Metab 2006;4:185–98.
28. Van Blitterswijk WJ, van Hoeven RP, van der Meer
B.W. Lipid structural order parameters (reciprocal of
fluidity) in biomembranes derived from steady-state
fluorescence polarization measurements. Biochim
Biophys Acta 1981;644:323–32.
29. Hudd C, Euhus DM, LaRegina MC, Herbold DR,
Palmer DC, Johnson FE. Effect of cholescytokinin on
human cholangiocarcinoma xenografted into nude
mice. Cancer Res 1985;45:1372–6.
30. LeBras M, Borgne-Sanchez A, Touat Z, et al. Chemosensitization by knockdown of adenine nucleotide
translocase-2. Cancer Res 2006;66:9143–52.
31. Don AS, Kisker O, Dilda P, et al. A peptide trivalent
arsenical inhibits tumor angiogenesis by perturbing
mitochondrial function in angiogenic endothelial cells.
Cancer Cell 2003;3:497–509.
32. Denmeade SR, Isaacs JT. The SERCA pump as a
therapeutic target: making a "smart bomb" for prostate
cancer. Cancer Biol Ther 2005;4:14–22.
33. Kumar D, Kirshenbaum L, Li T, Danelisen I, Signal P.
Apoptosis in isolated adult cardiomyocytes exposed to
adriamycin. Ann N Y Acad Sci 1999;874:156–68.
34. Scharnagal H, Schinker R, Gierens H, Nauck M,
Wieland H, März W. Effect of atorvastatin, simvastatin
and lovastatin on the metabolism of cholesterol and
triacylglycerides in HepG2 cells. Biochem Pharmacol
2001;62:1545–55.
35. Hishita T, Tada-Oikawa S, Tohyama K, et al. Caspase3 activation by lysosomal enzymes in cytochrome
c-independent apoptosis in myelodysplastic syndromederived cell line P39. Cancer Res 2001;61:2878–84.
36. Ugawa T, Kakuta H, Moritani H, et al. YM-53601,

5256

a novel squalene synthase inhibitor, reduces plasma
cholesterol and triglyceride levels in several animal
species. Br J Pharmacol 2000;131:63–70.
37. Madesh M, Hajnoczky G. VDAC-dependent permeabilization of the outer mitochondrial membrane by
superoxide induces rapid and massive cytochrome c
release. J Cell Biol 2001;155:1003–15.
38. Ichas F, Mazat JP. From calcium signaling to cell
death: two conformations for the mitochondrial
permeability transition pore. Switching from low- to
high-conductance state. Biochim Biophys Acta 1998;
1366:33–50.
39. Rottem S, Cole RM, Habid WH, Barile MF, Hardegree
MC. Structural characteristics of tetanolysin and its
binding to lipid vesicles. J Bacteriol 1982;152:888–92.
40. Allende D, Simon SA, Mcintosh TJ. Melittin-induced
bilayer leakage depends on lipid material properties:
evidence for toroidal pores. Biophys J 2005;88:1828–37.
41. Forti S, Menestrina G. Staphylococcal a-toxin
increases the permeability of lipid vesicles by cholesterol- and pH-dependent assembly of oligomeric
channels. Eur J Biochem 1989;181:767–73.
42. Jones P, Kafonek S, Laurora I, Huninghake D.
Comparative dose efficacy study of atorvastatin versus
simvastatin, pravastatin, lovastatin and fluvastatin in
patients with hypercholesterolemia (the CURVES study).
Am J Cardiol 1998;81:582–87.
43. Auerback BJ, Krause BR, Bisgaier CL, Newton RS.
Comparative effects of HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors
on apo B production in the casein-fed rabbit: atovastatin versus lovastatin. Atherosclerosis 1995;115:173–80.
44. Halestrap AP, Brenner C. The adenine nucleotide
translocator: a central component of the mitochondrial
permeability transition pore and key player in cell death.
Curr Med Chem 2003;10:1507–25.
45. Kokoszka R, Waymire KG, Levy SE, et al. The ADP/
ATP translocator is not essential for the mitochondrial
permeability transition pore. Nature 2004;427:461–5.
46. Dolce V, Scarcia P, Iacopetta D, Palmieri F. A fourth
ADP/ATP carrier isoform in man: identification, bacterial expression, functional characterization and tissue
distribution. FEBS Lett 2005;579:633–7.
47. Palmieri F. The mitochondrial transporter family
(SLC25): physiological and pathological implications.
Pfluggers Arch 2004;447:689–709.
48. Bose M, Whittal RM, Miller L, Bose HS. Steroidogenic
activity of StAR requires contact with mitochondrial
VDAC1 and PCP. J Biol Chem 2008;14:8837–45.
49. Wang W, Yang L, Huang HW. Evidence of cholesterol
accumulated in high curvature regions: implication to
the curvature elastic energy for lipid mixtures. Biophys J
2007;92:2819–30.
50. Collisson EA, Kleer C, Wu M, et al. Atorvastatin
prevents RhoC isoprenylation, invasion, and metastasis
in human melanoma cells. Mol Cancer Ther 2003;2:
941–48.
51. Brusselmans K, Timmermans L, Van de Sande T,
et al. Squalene synthase: A determinant of raftassociated cholesterol and modulator of cancer cell
proliferation. J Biol Chem 2007;282:18777–85.
52. Lucken-Ardjomande S, Montessuit S, Martinou JC.
Bax activation and stress-induced apoptosis delayed by
the accumulation of cholesterol in mitochondrial
membranes. Cell Death Differ 2008;15:484–93.

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Mitochondrial Cholesterol Contributes to Chemotherapy
Resistance in Hepatocellular Carcinoma
Joan Montero, Albert Morales, Laura Llacuna, et al.
Cancer Res 2008;68:5246-5256.

Updated version
Supplementary
Material

Cited articles
Citing articles

E-mail alerts
Reprints and
Subscriptions
Permissions

Access the most recent version of this article at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/68/13/5246
Access the most recent supplemental material at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/suppl/2008/06/20/68.13.5246.DC1

This article cites 52 articles, 13 of which you can access for free at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/68/13/5246.full#ref-list-1
This article has been cited by 10 HighWire-hosted articles. Access the articles at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/68/13/5246.full#related-urls

Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal.
To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications
Department at pubs@aacr.org.
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications
Department at permissions@aacr.org.

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

