Oncotarget, Vol. 5, No. 17

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Editorial

mTORC2 takes the longevity stAGE
Dudley W. Lamming

demonstrating that mice lacking S6K1-/-, as well as yeast
and C. elegans with reduced levels of ribosomal subunits
and translation initiation factors, have extended longevity
(reviewed in [2]). However, our finding that rapamycin
also inhibited mTORC2 opened the door to the possibility
that decreased mTORC2 signaling might also mediate
some of the beneficial effects of rapamycin. To assess this
possibility, we examined the longevity of three genetic
mouse models of decreased mTORC2 signaling – mice
heterozygous for Rictor, mice lacking hepatic Rictor, and
mice in which Rictor was deleted from the whole body of
mice at 10 weeks or 9 months of age using a tamoxifenresponsive Cre recombinase.
We demonstrate in our latest work, now published
in Aging Cell, that the deletion of Rictor in all three
models is deleterious for the longevity of males, but
surprisingly does not negatively impact female lifespan
[6]. We initially suspected that the negative effect of
Rictor deletion might be a result of glucose intolerance,
which we had previously observed in mice lacking
hepatic Rictor, but surprisingly this was independent
from the role of Rictor in lifespan. While we cannot yet
rule out an mTORC2-independent role for Rictor, these

Rapamycin, a FDA-approved pharmaceutical, has
received significant attention as a possible anti-aging
agent since the groundbreaking discovery in 2009 that
rapamycin treatment significantly extends the lifespan
of mice [1]. Excitingly, rapamycin not only extends
lifespan, it also extends healthspan in rodent models,
preventing and delaying the onset of age-related diseases,
including cancer and Alzheimer’s disease (reviewed in
[2]). Rapamycin rejuvenates the aging mouse heart, and
ameliorates age-related cognitive decline in multiple
mouse models. Unfortunately, the therapeutic potential
of rapamycin for age-related diseases has not been fully
realized due to significant fears about its side effects.
These include immunosuppression and metabolic side
effects such as dyslipidemia, the development of glucose
intolerance and hepatic insulin resistance. Whether or
not rapamycin-induced hepatic insulin resistance is a
negative side effect, or instead reflects a starvationinduced protective state that promotes longevity, is a
subject of ongoing research [3]. Rapamycin in mice has
sexually dimorphic effects, with a more beneficial effect in
females than males [4], which may further complicate the
translation of rapamycin therapy to humans.
In order to better understand the mechanisms
underlying both the beneficial and deleterious effects of
rapamycin, we focused our attention on the mechanism by
rapamycin affects the control of glucose homeostasis. We
determined that chronic treatment of mice with rapamycin
caused hepatic insulin resistance, and using genetic
models determined that disruption of mTOR complex 1
(mTORC1), the canonical target of rapamycin, was not
the cause of this effect [5]. This surprising result led us
to the discovery that not only mTORC1, but also mTOR
complex 2 (mTORC2), a second mTOR complex that
is not acutely sensitive to rapamycin, was disrupted by
chronic rapamycin treatment in tissues including liver,
white adipose tissue, and skeletal muscle. Genetic deletion
of Rictor, an essential protein subunit of mTORC2, in
either the whole body of an adult mouse or specifically
in the liver mimicked the effects of rapamycin, producing
glucose intolerance and hepatic insulin resistance.
Prior to our discovery, the prevailing hypothesis in
the field was that the pro-longevity effects of rapamycin
were a result of the inhibition of mTORC1 signaling,
mediated by substrates including S6K1, 4E-BP1, and
ULK1. Backing this theory was work from many labs
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Figure 1: Regulation of lifespan by mTOR. The activity

of mTORC1 normally acts to limit lifespan, most likely via
the promotion of protein translation and the suppression of
autophagy (reviewed in [2]). We have determined that mTORC2
is required for the normal lifespan of male, but not female, mice
[6]. Chronic treatment with rapamycin, which inhibits both
mTORC1 and mTORC2, is more beneficial to females than
males, which may be due to the negative influence of mTORC2
inhibition on male lifespan. Sex-based side effects may be seen
during the clinical use of mTOR kinase inhibitors for cancer
treatment.
7214

Oncotarget

results suggest that even partial inhibition of mTORC2
signaling, as observed in mice heterozygous for Rictor,
is likely to impair the health and longevity of males.
As outlined in Figure 1, we theorize that the benefits of
rapamycin mediated by inhibition of mTORC1 in males
are partially counteracted by the negative effects of
mTORC2 inhibition. Conversely, in females, inhibition
of mTORC2 is not deleterious. This gender-dependent
effect of mTORC2 inhibition may therefore account for
the sexually dimorphic efficacy of rapamycin treatment
on lifespan [4]. These findings may also have significant
implications for the cancer field, as mTOR kinase
inhibitors, which acutely inhibit both mTOR complexes
(Figure 1), are being developed clinically and may have
sex-based side effects. It also suggests that, as we have
previously postulated [7], drugs or treatment regimens
that specifically inhibit mTORC1 may provide a safer and
more efficacious route for the treatment of age-related
diseases.
Our findings leave open many questions regarding
the role of mTORC2 and lifespan. Most significantly, we
do not understand the basis for the sexually dimorphic
effect of Rictor deletion, and understanding this effect
should permit the development of mTOR inhibition
strategies that are equally effective in both sexes. Further,
although it is clear that inhibition of mTORC2 results in
premature mortality in males, the actual cause of death
in these animals is unknown. Further complicating
the picture, it remains possible that partial inhibition
of signaling downstream of mTORC2 may even be
beneficial in some contexts – it was recently shown that
mice heterozygous for the mTORC2 substrate Akt1 have
extended lifespan [8], while in C. elegans, the mTORC2
substrate SGK-1 can alternately promote or retard
longevity depending upon the cellular and environmental
context [9]. A full realization of the therapeutic potential
of rapamycin and mTOR pathway inhibition will only be
achieved once the impact of mTORC2 signaling on health
and longevity is thoroughly understood.

4.	

Miller RA et al. Aging Cell. 2014; 13: 468-477.

5.	

Lamming DW et al. Science. 2012; 335: 1638-1643.

6.	

Lamming DW et al. Aging Cell. 2014.

7.	

Lamming DW et al. J Clin Invest. 2013; 123: 980-989.

8.	

Nojima A et al. PLoS One. 2013; 8: e69178.	

9.	

Mizunuma et al. Aging Cell. 2014.

Dudley W. Lamming: Department of Medicine, University
of Wisconsin-Madison and William S. Middleton Memorial
Veterans Hospital, Madison, WI
Correspondence: Dudley W. Lamming, email dlamming@
medicine.wisc.edu
Received: August 18, 2014;
Published: September 5, 2014;

REFERENCES
1.	

Harrison DE et al. Nature. 2009; 460: 392-395.

2.	

Johnson SC et al. Nature. 2013; 493: 338-345.

3.	

Blagosklonny MV. Aging (Albany NY). 2012; 4: 350-358.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

7215

Oncotarget

