Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No. 39

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Palbociclib inhibits epithelial-mesenchymal transition and
metastasis in breast cancer via c-Jun/COX-2 signaling pathway
Ge Qin1,*, Fei Xu1,*, Tao Qin1,*, Qiufan Zheng1, Dingbo Shi1, Wen Xia1, Yun Tian1,
Yanlai Tang2, Jingshu Wang1, Xiangshen Xiao1, Wuguo Deng1, Shusen Wang1
1

 un Yat-Sen University Cancer Center, State Key Laboratory of Oncology in South China, Collaborative Innovation Center of
S
Cancer Medicine, Guangzhou 510060, China

2

Department of Pediatrics, The First Affiliated Hospital, Sun Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou 510080, China

*

These authors contributed equally to this work

Correspondence to:
Shusen Wang, e-mail: wangshs@sysucc.org.cn
Wuguo Deng, e-mail: dengwg@sysucc.org.cn
Keywords: palbociclib, breast cancer, metastasis, epithelial-mesenchymal transition, COX-2
Received: July 20, 2015 	Accepted: October 05, 2015 	Published: October 19, 2015

ABSTRACT
Palbociclib, a highly selective CDK4/6 inhibitor, has been shown to be a novel
anti-tumor agent that suppresses breast cancer cell proliferation. However, its antimetastasis activity remains controversial. In the present study, we evaluated whether
palbociclib prevented breast cancer cell metastasis and revealed its regulatory
mechanism. We found that palbociclib inhibited migration and invasion in the breast
cancer cells MDA-MB-231 and T47D. The epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT)
markers, vimentin and Snail, were down-regulated with palbociclib treatment.
Moreover, we revealed that this inhibition was mediated by the c-Jun/COX-2 pathway.
COX-2 was decreased after palbociclib treatment. The production of PGE2 was
also reduced along with COX-2. Additionally, our data showed that c-Jun, a crucial
transcriptional regulator of COX-2, was down-regulated by palbociclib. We found that
palbociclib weakened the COX-2 promoter binding activity of c-Jun and prevented
its translocation from the cytoplasm to cell nuclei. Bioluminescence imaging and tail
intravenous injection were used to evaluate the anti-metastasis effect of palbociclib
in vivo. The data demonstrated that palbociclib reduced breast cancer metastasis to
the lung. These results therefore demonstrated that the anti-metastasis activity of
palbociclib is mediated via the c-Jun/COX-2 signaling pathway by inhibiting EMT in
breast cancer cells.

lowered among patients with distant metastasis. Therefore,
extensive efforts are required to explore novel therapeutic
targets to control metastasis and improve the quality of life
among breast cancer patients.
Palbociclib (PD0332991), a potent and highly
selective CDK4/6 inhibitor, has raised great concern these
years. This small molecule compound can block the cell
cycle in the G0/S1 phase, which is a key checkpoint in
cell cycle regulation. Thus, this attribute is considered
to have the potential to suppress tumor progression
[7]. In practical applications, Palbociclib has shown
effectiveness in the treatment of different types of tumors,
especially breast cancer. Richard S. Finn et al. revealed

INTRODUCTION
Breast cancer is a common malignancy and a
significant cause of death in females worldwide [1, 2].
Encouraging progress has been made with regard to the
diagnosis and treatment of breast cancer in recent years.
Chemotherapy, endocrine therapy and targeted agents
have remarkably improved the overall survival (OS)
and disease-free survival (DFS) rates of breast cancer
[3–5]. However, metastasis and recurrence are still the
critical clinical events in breast cancer. Even in nodenegative breast cancer patients, 25% of patients develop
metastasis [6]. The 5-year survival rate is dramatically

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

41794

Oncotarget

that Palbociclib could inhibit the growth of multiple breast
cancer cell lines that were at a relatively low density,
particularly ER-positive cells [8]. In vivo, Palbociclib
exerts its anti-tumor activity by inhibiting the growth of
human tumor xenografts and down-regulating the level of
the proliferation marker Ki67 [9]. This CDK4/6 inhibitor
has mostly been reported to be a powerful cytostatic agent
in ER-positive breast cancer and to have a synergistic
effect when combined with anti-hormonal agents. There
are numerous preclinical data regarding the synergy
between Palbociclib and anti-estrogen agents. [8, 10]
PALOMA-1/TRIO-18, an open-label, randomized phase 2
clinical trial confirmed that the addition of Palbociclib to
letrozole improved the PFS of postmenopausal women
with advanced ER-positive breast cancer for 18.1 months
[11]. The growth-inhibitory activity of Palbociclib in
breast cancer cells is mediated by the CDK4/6-Rb-E2F
axis [12]. Palbociclib inhibits the phosphorylation of Rb
and then influences the transcription activity of the E2F
transcription factor family, which have a large number of
target genes that regulate cell proliferation and apoptosis
[13]. Although it had been shown that Palbociclib can
suppress breast cancer proliferation, its anti-metastasis
activity is still unclear. Moreover, the therapeutic
potential of palbociclib in ER-negative breast cancer is
controversial.
Breast cancer is a malignant tumor with a
strong tendency to metastasize, and the epithelialmesenchymal transition process (EMT) is considered
to play a vital role in cancer metastasis [14]. During
the EMT process, cells lose epithelial characteristics
and obtain a mesenchymal phenotype, which weakens
the cell-cell adhesion and improves cell motility [15].
EMT is based on the down-regulation of epithelial
markers such as E-cadherin, occludins and claudins
while the mesenchymal markers, such as vimentin
and N-cadherin, are up-regulated. Moreover, EMTinducing transcriptional factors, such as Snail, Slug,
Twist and FOX2, are affected through EMT progression
[15, 16]. Cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2), an inflammationrelated enzyme, was shown to be linked to EMT and,
therefore, critical for breast cancer motility, invasion
and metastasis [17]. COX-2 is over-expressed in many
malignant human cancers and is associated with poor
prognosis [18, 19]. The enzyme was found to play a
key role in the initiation of various processes, including
apoptosis, angiogenesis and metastasis. COX-2-induced
PGE2 production was reported to assist migration
and EMT progress in human breast cancer cells [20].
Moreover, in vivo studies further indicated that specific
inhibition or knockout of COX-2 reduced cancer
metastasis in mouse models [21].
In this study, we hypothesized that Palbociclib
would inhibit the invasion and metastasis of breast cancer
cells and down-regulate the expression of EMT markers
through the modulation of the COX-2 pathway. Evidence
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

is provided that Palbociclib decreases COX-2 expression,
PGE2 abundance and vimentin and Snail expression.
Furthermore, the transcriptional regulation of COX-2
was evaluated using pull-down and immunofluorescence
assays. Additionally, the anti-metastasis activity of
Palbociclib was verified by establishing a spontaneous
metastatic model in nude mice.

RESULTS
Palbociclib decreased Rb phosphorylation
The molecular structure of palbociclib was
obtained from Pfizer’s product manual and was
showed in Fig. 1A. Rb was proved to be a key target of
palbociclib. Rb deficiency resulted in primary resistant
of palbociclib. Western blot was conducted to detect Rb
expression in MDA-MB-231 and T47D breast cancer
cells. The results showed that Rb phosphorylation (Ser
780) was inhibited by palbociclib in a concentrationdependent manner (Fig.  1B). However, no significant
proliferation inhibition activity was detected by
MTS assay in reasonable concentrations of the drug.
(Supplementary Fig. A).

Palbociclib inhibited breast cancer cell migration
and invasion and down-regulated the expression
of EMT markers
To evaluate the effect of palbociclib on migration,
we first used the scratch assay. Palbociclib was used at
7.5 μM and 15 μM. After observation for 48 hours, we
found that the migration abilities of MDA-MB-231
cells and T47D cells were inhibited in a concentrationdependent manner (Fig. 2A). The wounding space of the
control groups was 100% occupied by migrating cells
after 48 hours, which contrasted with the relatively wider
gap of the palbociclib-treated groups. However, the cell
density and morphology of the cells were not significantly
different in the treatment groups.
We next analyzed the  effect of palbociclib on
invasion by conducting transwell assays. After 16–18 hours,
palbociclib was shown to inhibit the invasion of both MDAMB-231 and T47D cells in a dose-dependent manner. The
number of invading cells in the high-concentration group
was tens times less than that of untreated group (Fig. 2B).
The number of invasive cells was calculated in three
different fields.
Vimentin and Snail are two crucial molecules
involved in EMT progression and have a vital role in
breast cancer cell migration and invasion. We therefore
analyzed the effects of palbociclib on the expression of
these two EMT markers by western blot. As expected,
the drug-treated cells had a lower expression of vimentin
and Snail, especially at the higher concentration of 15 μM
(Fig. 2C).
41795

Oncotarget

Figure 1: Rb phosphorylation was inhibited by palbociclib. A. The molecular structure of palbociclib. B. Total Rb expression
showed no significant variation while phosphorylated Rb (Ser 780 site) was down-regulated by palbociclib.

Palbociclib inhibited COX-2 expression
and PGE2 secretion

from Sigma’s product manual (Fig. 4A). Scratch and
transwell assays were conducted to evaluate celecoxib
at concentrations of 25 μM and 50 μM in MDA-MB-231
and 50 μM and 75 μM in T47D cells for 48 hours.
The results demonstrated that celecoxib inhibited the
migration and invasion of the two cell lines in a dosedependent manner (Fig. 4B and Fig. 4C). Western blot
assays were used to evaluate the expression of vimentin
and Snail again, and these EMT markers were downregulated with celecoxib treatment (Fig. 4D). These
data indicate that COX-2 inhibition was indeed related
to breast cancer cell migration and invasion.

COX-2 was shown to be up-regulated in breast
cancer and a novel metastasis-related factor. The
migration- and invasion-promoting effects of COX-2 were
mediated by the induction of PGE2 secretion. PGE2 then
increased the expression of EMT markers through multiple
pathways. We evaluated the protein expression level of
COX-2 using western blot assays, and the results confirmed
that palbociclib significantly reduced COX-2 expression at
concentrations of 7.5 μM and 15 μM (Fig. 3A).
We performed further studies to determine whether
palbociclib could down-regulate PGE2 secretion.
We collected the culture medium of control cells and
palbociclib-treated cells (7.5 μM) and detected PGE2
levels using ELISA. As shown in Fig. 3B, The PGE2 level
in palbociclib-treated cells was dramatically lower than in
untreated cells, which was consistent with the decrease of
COX-2 expression.

Celecoxib blocked while LPS partly overcame
the anti-metastastasis activity of palbociclib
Palbociclib activity was then further evaluated with
cells that were pretreated with celecoxib and LPS. LPS
was used to active COX-2 (Fig. 5A). Celecoxib (25 μM),
LPS (2mg/ml) and palbociclib (7.5 μM) were used in the
migration and invasion assay. As shown in Fig. 5B and
Fig. 5C, the migration and invasion inhibition effect of
palbociclib was weakened by celecoxib pre-treatment.
In addition, this inhibition activity was partly rescued by
LPS. The expression of vimentin and Snail was detected
by western blot and the result was consistent to migtation
and invasion assay (Fig. 5D). Our data indicated that
COX-2 plays a key role in the anti-metastasis activity of
palbociclib.

The selective COX-2 enzymatic inhibitor
celecoxib suppressed breast cancer cell
migration and invasion
Because COX-2 has been reported to have a crucial
role in breast cancer metastasis, we used celecoxib,
a selective COX-2 inhibitor, to evaluate its activity.
The molecular structure of celecoxib was obtained

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

41796

Oncotarget

Figure 2: Palbociclib inhibited breast cancer cell migration and invasion by suppressing vimentin and Snail. A. MDA-

MB-231 and T47D cells were treated with DMSO (control) or 7.5 μM or 15 μM palbociclib for 48 h after scratching. The average gap width
was used to evaluate migration. B. MDA-MB-231 and T47D cells were treated with the indicated concentration of palbociclib for 48 h, and
the transwell assay was applied to assess invasion. The number of invading cells was calculated in three different fields. C. The cells were
treated with the same conditions as before. The expression of vimentin and Snail was determined by western blot.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

41797

Oncotarget

Figure 3: COX-2 expression and PGE2 production were reduced by palbociclib. A. COX-2 expression was evaluated by

western blot after palbociclib (0 μM, 7.5 μM, 15 μM) treatment for 48 hours. B. The supernatant of control and 7.5 μM palbociclib-treated
cells was collected and stored at –80°C. PGE2 secretion was detected using ELISA.

Palbociclib down-regulated the expression
of the transcription factor c-Jun

Palbociclib weakened the COX-2 promoterbinding activity of c-Jun and prevented its
translocation from the cytoplasm to the nucleus

To further evaluated the transcriptional regulation
mechanisms of COX-2, we first studied its two important
transcription factors, NFκB and c-Jun. The expression
level of NFκB (p50) and c-Jun was detected by western
blot. c-Jun expression was down-regulated by 7.5 μM
and 15 μM palbociclib, while the protein level of NFκB
showed no significant differences. We next determined the
expression of phosphorylated c-Jun (p-c-Jun), which is the
activated form of c-Jun. The results showed that p-c-Jun
expression was decreased in treated cells, similar to total
c-Jun (Fig. 6A).
c-Jun is mainly activated by MAPK pathway. We
detected the upstream regulator of c-Jun and found that
c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK), a critical activator of
c-Jun, was down-regulated by palbociclib treatment,
while p38 showed no decrease (Fig. 6B). ERK and p-ERK
up-regulation may leading by the feedback mechanism
(Supplementary Fig. B).

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

To explore the regulation mechanism between c-Jun
and COX-2, we used pull-down and immunofluorescence
assays to assess COX-2 DNA binding activity and the
translocation of c-Jun. c-Jun was shown to bind to the
promoter region of COX-2, and the binding activity was
weakened by palbociclib at 7.5 μM (Fig. 7A).
As a transcription factor, c-Jun promotes the
transcription of COX-2 when it is located in the nucleus.
An immunofluorescence assay indicated that c-Jun was
primarily located in the nuclei in MDA-MB-231 and T47D
cell lines in the absence of palbociclib. After treatment
with palbociclib (7.5 μM) for 12 hours, however, c-Jun
appeared in the cytoplasm in some of the cells (Fig. 7B).
c-Jun expression was consistently decreased with
palbociclib treated in nuclear fraction (Fig. 7C). These
data indicate that palbociclib prevented the entry of c-Jun
to the nucleus to promote COX-2 transcription.

41798

Oncotarget

Figure 4: Selective COX-2 inhibition by celecoxib suppressed breast cancer cell migration and invasion. A. The molecular

structure of celecoxib. B. The COX-2 inhibitor celecoxib suppressed the migration of MDA-MB-231 and T47D cells at the indicated
concentrations. C. The invasion-inhibiting effect of celecoxib. D. Vimentin and Snail expression was evaluated after celecoxib treatment.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

41799

Oncotarget

Figure 5: LPS partly rescued and celecoxib weakend the anti-metastasis activity of palbociclib. A. LPS up-regulated COX2 expression. B. The migration assay was conducted with 25 μM celecoxib or 2mg/ml LPS pretreatment and 0 μM or 7.5 μM palbociclib
treatment for 48 h. C. The invasion assay was conducted using the aforementioned treatment. D. Vimentin and Snail expression was
detected by western blot.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

41800

Oncotarget

Figure 6: Palbociclib down-regulated c-Jun and JNK expression. A. The expression of c-Jun and phosphorylated c-Jun was
assessed using western blot after the cells were treated with palbociclib. B. MAPK pathway-related proteins, p38, ERK, JNK expression
levels were detected.

Palbociclib reduced the lung metastasis of
MDA-MB-231-Luc cells in animal models
and decreased COX-2 and c-Jun expression
in tumor tissues

that palbociclib prevented MDA-MB-231-Luc cells from
metastasizing and decreased the expression of COX-2 and
c-Jun in vivo.

DISCUSSION

An in vivo study was conducted to further evaluate
the anti-metastasis effect of palbociclib. A lung metastasis
animal model was generated through tail vein injections.
The MDA-MB-231 cell line was selected for its strong
metastasis tendency and stably transfected with luciferase.
Bioluminescence imaging (BLI) was applied to visualize
lung metastases, and the mice were imaged once every
week starting 3 weeks after cell injection. The final
BLI data showed that the signal in untreated mice was
substantially stronger than that in palbociclib-treated mice
using the same BLI parameters, which indicates that the
tumor burden was alleviated by palbociclib (Fig. 8A).
The weight of each mouse was also measured weekly; the
average weights of the two groups showed no significant
differences (Fig. 8B).
HE staining was used to confirm pathological
metastasis in the lungs, and the metastatic tumors were
calculated by microscopy. In accordance with BLI
observation, the amount of pulmonary metastatic tumors
in vehicle-treated mice ranged from 4 to 16, while that in
palbociclib-treated mice ranged from 0 to 5 (Fig. 8C).
COX-2 and c-Jun expression was shown to
decrease in vitro after palbociclib treatment. To
determine their expression in metastatic tumor tissue,
immumohistochemical staining was conducted. As shown
in Fig. 8D, although COX-2 expression was not apparently
high, as expected, its expression was down-regulated
in palbociclib-treated mice. The staining of c-Jun was
consistent with that of COX-2; c-Jun expression was
significantly high in vehicle-treated mice but was almost
negative in palbociclib-treated mice. These data indicate

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

In this study, we analyzed the anti-metastasis
effect of palbociclib (PD0332991) on breast cancer cells.
We found that palbociclib significantly suppressed cell
migration and invasion. The expression of vimentin and
Snail was simultaneously down-regulated. Our results
also showed that palbociclib inhibited breast cancer cell
migration and invasion by decreasing COX-2 expression
and PGE2 production. Celecoxib, a selected inhibitor
of COX-2, was shown to suppress breast cancer cell
motility and invasiveness. When combined with LPS,
the migration-and invasion-inhibition activities of
palbociclib were partly rescued. Moreover, we found
that palbociclib decreased COX-2 expression by
mediating c-Jun, an important transcription factor of
COX-2. An in vivo study demonstrated that palbociclib
accelerated lung metastasis, which was consisted with
our in vitro study.
The proliferative suppression of breast cancer by
CDK4/6 inhibition has been shown by a number of preclinical studies [7, 8]. Palbociclib was reported to arrest
the cell cycle at G1/S phase by suppressing retinoblastoma
(Rb) protein phosphorylation [12, 24]. Rb protein exerts
its activity by interacting with the E2F transcription factor
family [25, 26]. However, its effect on breast cancer
metastasis has not yet been clearly demonstrated. Rebecca
Lamb et al. revealed that palbociclib exerted divergent
functions in breast cancer stem cell-like activity depending
on estrogen receptor (ER) status. Palbociclib suppressed
mammosphere formation only in ER-positive cells
[27]. In contrast, other research showed that inhibiting

41801

Oncotarget

Figure 7: Palbociclib affected the COX-2 promoter-binding activity and the translocation of c-Jun. A. A pull-down
assay was conducted to evaluate the DNA binding activity of c-Jun using a specific probe after drug treatment. C-Jun binding to the
probe was washed off and detected by western blot. The structure of the probe is shown. B. c-Jun translocation was evaluated using
immunofluorescence. The cells were treated with palbociclib (7.5 μM) or DMSO (control) for 12 h. C. c-Jun expression in nuclear fraction
was evalutaed.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

41802

Oncotarget

Figure 8: The anti-metastasis activity of palbociclib in vivo. A. The lung metastases of the nude mice are shown using

bioluminescence imaging. B. The average weight of the two groups. C. The HE stain of the lung tissue and the metastasis tumors is noted.
The amount of the metastasis tumor was calculated under microscopy. D. The expression levels of COX-2 and c-Jun in tumor tissue were
assayed by immunohistochemical staining.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

41803

Oncotarget

CDK4/6 activity decreased migration and invasion
activity in triple-negative cell lines [28]. Because of these
controversial reports, we evaluated the anti-metastasis
property of palbociclib in two molecular subtypes of
breast cancer cells. Our results showed that palbociclib
inhibited breast cancer cell migration and invasion both
in ER-positive (T47D) and -negative (MDA-MB-231)
cell lines. The data indicated that Palbociclib may exert
its anti-metastasis activity through similar regulatory
mechanisms in different breast cancer cell lines.
The research on the mechanisms of palbociclib had
primarily focused on Rb function. Our data also showed
Rb phosphorylation was inhibited by the compound.
Cell cycle regulation, however, was shown to mediate
the expression of multiple genes including metastasisrelated genes [13]. Palbociclib has the potential to target
these genes to affect breast cancer metastasis. Epithelialmesenchymal transition (EMT) is a significant process
in cancer metastasis. EMT causes cancer cells to gain
invasive phenotypes, which has implications for the
progression of breast carcinoma to metastasis. Our
findings revealed that vimentin and Snail, two EMTassociated proteins, were down-regulated after palbociclib
treatment. Furthermore, COX-2, a key oncogene in
human breast cancer, was suppressed by the compound.
Constitutive COX-2 overexpression is a ubiquitous
oncogenic signaling in breast cancer, and COX-2
suppression showed a strong potential for breast cancer
treatment. COX-2 expression was elevated in up to 37% of
breast cancer cases and correlated with poor prognosis and
a high lymphatic metastasis rate [29, 30]. COX-2 induced
PGE2 production was reported to regulate breast cancer
metastasis through EMT progression [31]. Vimentin and
Snail were reduced by COX-2 inhibition [31, 32]. In this
study, we found palbociclib inhibited breast cancer cell
migration and invasion by targeting COX-2/PGE2. The
expression of vimentin and Snail were also decreased,
similar to COX-2. Other EMT-related proteins, such
as E-cadherin, N-cadherin, MMP-2 and MMP-9, were
evaluated but were not clearly detected because of their
relatively lower expression levels.
The transcriptional regulation of COX-2 was
evaluated in the present study. We found that c-Jun was
down-regulated in palbociclib-treated cells. Current
evidence indicates that COX-2 transcription activity is
regulated by c-Jun, which is the fundamental member and
the most potent transcriptional activator of the AP-1 family
[22]. Activated AP-1 proteins promote the transcription of
their targeted genes. C-Jun was reported to be associated
with multiple aspects of progression of malignant
disease, including proliferation, apoptosis, invasion and
tumorigenesis [33–35]. c-Jun activity is mainly regulated
by mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPKs) pathway.
C-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) and ERK signaling are two
dominating regulatory mechanisms to phosphorylate and

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

stable c-Jun [36, 37]. Activated c-Jun translocates from the
cytoplasm to the nucleus to promote COX-2 expression. In
this study, we found that p-JNK expression was decreased
in palbociclib-treated cells in accordance with p-c-Jun, but
there was no reduction in p-ERK expression. We further
showed that c-Jun bound to the promoter region of COX-2,
and its binding ability was weakened after palbociclib
treatment. The translocation of c-Jun was also prevented
by palbociclib. This result implied that the JNK/c-Jun/
COX-2 axis was a vital molecular mechanism in the
anti-metastasis activity of palbociclib. NF-kB, another
important transcription factor of COX-2, was evaluated in
this study but showed no variation.
There are limitations in our study. Our results
showed that LPS inducing COX-2 up-regulation could
not completely rescue the anti-metastasis activity of
palbociclib. This result indicates that c-Jun/COX-2
was an important but not the sole regulatory pathway
of palbociclib. Moreover, the crosstalk between the
Rb/E2F axis and the c-Jun/COX-2 pathway was not
analyzed. C-Jun has the potential to form a polymer with
other proteins to promote COX-2 transcription, but the
interacting protein of c-Jun has not yet been explored.
Moreover, clinical specimen and prognostic information
is needed to further support our findings.
In summary, we conclude that palbociclib had a
novel anti-metastasis activity in breast cancer cells that
was exerted via the c-Jun/COX-2 signaling pathway by
inhibiting cell migration and invasion. Palbociclib was
believed to be an anti-tumor agent only in ER+ breast
cancer in previous studies, our findings noted that both
ER+ and ER- breast cancer had the potential to benefit
from palbociclib treatment. Furthermore, we revealed
that the c-Jun/COX-2 signaling pathway was a promising
target of palbociclib. According to our present preclinical
data, palbociclib, a small molecule agent, showed
enormous potential for breast cancer treatment.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Cell culture and chemicals
MDA-MB-231 cells and T47D cells were obtained
from American Type Culture Collection (ATCC, Manassas,
VA, USA) and were grown in DMEM (Invitrogen,
Carlsbad, CA, USA) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine
serum (Invitrogen), 100 U/mL penicillin, and 100 μg/mL
streptomycin (Invitrogen). All cells were cultured in a
humidified atmosphere of 5% CO2 at 37°C. Palbociclib
(PD0332991) was a gift from Pfizer (New York, NY, USA)
and the COX-2 inhibitor celecoxib was purchased from
Sigma (St. Louis, MO, USA). Palbociclib was prepared in
dimethyl sulfoxide at a 20 mmol/L solution, and celecoxib
was prepared at 100 mmol/L. The stock solutions were
stored at −20°C before use.

41804

Oncotarget

Western blot analysis

The cell culture supernatants were collected after 48 hours
and centrifuged. PGE2 levels were determined using a
enzyme linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) kit (R&D
System, Minneapolis, MN, USA). The experiments were
performed according to the manufacturer’s instructions.

MDA-MB-231 and T47D cells were plated in 100mm dishes for 48 hours with different concentrations
of Palbociclib (0 μM, 7.5 μM, and 15 μM) or celecoxib
(0 μM, 25/50 μM, 50/75 μM). A total of 90 μl of RIPA lysis
buffer supplemented with 1% protease Inhibitor (Selleck,
Houston, TX, USA) and 1% phosphotransferase inhibitor
was used to lyse cells. Approximately 40–80 μg total
protein of each sample was separated by electrophoresis
and then transferred to a nitrocellulose membrane
(Amersham Biosciences, Piscataway, NJ, USA). Rabbit
polyclonal antibodies for vimentin, Snail, COX-2, p38,
ERK, p-ERK, JNK, c-Jun, p-c-Jun and histone H3 were
obtained from Cell Signaling Pathway Technology
(CST, Danvers, MA, USA). Anti-NFκB (p50) antibody
was purchased from Santa Cruz Biotechnology (Santa
Cruz, CA, USA). Anti-Rb antibody was purchased from
Proteintech (Proteintech Group, IL, USA) and anti-p-Rb
antibody (Ser 780) was obtained from Signalway Antibody
(SAB, MD, USA). The secondary antibody was from
Promega (Promega Corporation, WI, USA). To detect the
protein bands, we used the SuperSignal Chemiluminescent
Substrates from Thermo Fisher Scientific.

Confocal immunofluorescence assay
MDA-MB-231 cells and T47D cells were cultured
in cover slips after exposure to drug for 48 hours. The cells
were than fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde for 10 minutes
and permeabilized with 0.5% Triton-X for 8 minutes. The
cells were blocked with 5% bovine serum albumin (BSA)
for 30 min. The primary antibody for c-Jun was diluted
with 1% BSA at a density of 1:50 and added to the samples
and incubated at 4°C for 12 hours. Then, a 1:200 dilution
of rhodamine-conjugated secondary antibodies (Dylight
549) was added to the samples and incubated protected
from light for 30 minutes. The cell nuclei were stained
with 0.5 μg/ml of 4′,6-diamidino-2-henylindole (DAPI)
for 10 minutes. Cell samples were washed three times with
PBS between each step. The samples were observed with
a OLYMPUS FV1000 confocal microscope.

DNA-protein binding by streptavidin-agarose
pull-down assay

Scratch assay
Cells were planted in a 6-well culture plates and
incubated overnight to a density of 60%–70%. Cell
monolayers were then scratched with a 100-μL yellow
pipette tip and washed with PBS three times to remove
detached cells. The wounded areas were imaged using an
Olympus microscope and marked. The indicated doses
of Palbociclib, celecoxib or LPS were applied to culture
cells for 48 hours at 37°C in 5% CO2. The culture medium
was removed, and the same areas were imaged again to
observe the wound gap.

The COX-2 core promoter binding ability of c-Jun
was evaluated using a streptavidin-agarose pull-down
assay according to our previously described protocol [22].
A 478-bp DNA probe was used in this assay. The doublestranded probe corresponded to the COX-2 promoter
sequence (−30 to −508) and is labeled with biotin. The
probe was synthesized with a biotin-labeled primer
(forward, 5′- ACGTGACTTCCTCGACCCTC -3′, reverse,
5′- AAGACTGAAAACCAAGCCCA-3′) by polymerase
chain reaction (PCR).
C-Jun expression was analyzed by Western blotting.

Cell invasion assay

Stable transfection of luciferase

The cell invasion assay was conducted using BD
PET-track-etched membrane invasion chamber with
20 μl of diluted Matrigel (BD Biosciences, San Jose, CA,
USA). The cells were pretreated with the indicated doses
of Palbociclib,celecoxib and LPS for 48 hours and starved
for 24 hours. Then, 4 × 104 cells were added to the upper
chamber without FBS. The lower chamber was filled
with 1 ml of DMEM with 20% FBS. The chambers were
incubated at 37°C for 18 hours, and the invaded cells were
stained with crystal violet. The cells that adhered to the
membrane were imaged and counted.

pMX-Luc2 plasmid was transfected into 293FT
cells, and the supernatant was collected after 48 h. The
luciferase over-expressing lentivirus was isolated from
the supernatant. MDA-MB-231 cells were cultured
in 6-well culture plates until the cell density reached
approximately 40%–50%. The cells were washed with
PBS, and 2 ml of DMEM without FBS was added to
each well. A 100-μl suspension of the virus with 5 μg/ml
polybrene was used to infect the MDA-MB-231 cells.
At 72 hours after infection, the cells were selected with
1.0  μg/ml puromycin, and the selection was repeated
twice. The expression level of luciferase in MDAMB-231 cells was evaluated by Promega GloMax® 20/20
Fluorescent Module.

PGE2 assay
Cells were seeded in 6-well culture plates and
treated with or without Palbociclib or celecoxib in DMEM.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

41805

Oncotarget

Animals and treatment

GRANT SUPPORT

Female nude mice aged 4–5 weeks were purchased
from Guangdong Laboratory Animal Center and
quarantined for one week before use. Animal care and
experiments involved in this study were consistent with
Accreditation of Laboratory Animal Care International
guidelines. Animals and protocols were approved by the
guidelines established by the Animal Care Committee at
Sun Yat-sen University.
MDA-MB-231-LUC cells (5 × 105) were suspended
in 100 μl of normal saline (NS) and injected through the
tail vein. One week after the injection, the animals were
randomly divided into two groups and treated as follows:
the treatment group, palbociclib at 200 mg/kg via oral
gavage twice a week for 3 weeks [23]; and the control
group, which received vehicle (sodium lactate ringer’s
injection). The weights of the mice in each group were
measured weekly.

This work was supported by the funds from
the National Natural Science Foundation of China
(No. 81272896, 81372133) and the Hi-technology
Development Special Award of Guangdong Province
(No. 2012B031800447).

REFERENCES
1.	 Torre LA, Bray F, Siegel RL, Ferlay J, Lortet-Tieulent J,
Jemal A. Global cancer statistics, 2012. CA: a cancer journal for clinicians. 2015; 65:87–108.
2.	 Downs-Holmes C, Silverman P. Breast cancer: overview &
updates. The Nurse practitioner. 2011; 36:20–26; quiz 27.
3.	 Hu X-C, Zhang J, Xu B-H, Cai L, Ragaz J, Wang Z-H,
Wang  B-Y, Teng Y-E, Tong Z-S, Pan Y-Y, Yin Y-M,
Wu C-P, Jiang Z-F, Wang X-J, Lou G-Y, Liu D-G, et al.
Cisplatin plus gemcitabine versus paclitaxel plus gemcitabine
as first-line therapy for metastatic triple-negative breast cancer
(CBCSG006): a randomised, open-label, multicentre, phase 3
trial. The lancet oncology. 2015; 16:436–446.

Bioluminescence imaging
The bioluminescence imaging was supported by
Guangzhou RiboBio Co., LTD. Bruker xtreme in-vivo
imaging system was used to observe the fluorescence
signal in mice. The mice were sedated by isofluraneinhaled anesthesia for 15 minutes before imaging.
The luminescence exposure time was 60 seconds, and the
x-ray exposure tine was 20 seconds.

4.	 Rugo HS. Hormone therapy in premenopausal women with
early-stage breast cancer. The New England journal of
­medicine. 2014; 371:175–176.
5.	 Swain SM, Baselga J, Kim SB, Ro J, Semiglazov V,
Campone M, Ciruelos E, Ferrero JM, Schneeweiss A,
Heeson S, Clark E, Ross G, Benyunes MC, Cortes J,
Group  CS. Pertuzumab, trastuzumab, and docetaxel in
HER2-positive metastatic breast cancer. The New England
journal of medicine. 2015; 372:724–734.

Histopathology
The HE staining, immunohistochemical staining
(IHC) and histopathology analysis were supported by Sun
yet-son University Cancer Center Pathology Department.
The concentration of primary antibody was 1:900 for
COX-2 and 1:800 for c-Jun.

6.	 van der Heiden-van der Loo M, Schaapveld M, Ho VK,
Siesling S, Rutgers EJ, Peeters PH. Outcomes of a population-based series of early breast cancer patients with
micrometastases and isolated tumour cells in axillary
lymph nodes. Annals of oncology: official journal of the
European Society for Medical Oncology/ESMO. 2013;
24:2794–2801.

Data analyses
All data and statistic graphs were analyzed using
GraphPad Prism 6.0. Student’s t test was used to compare
the differences between control and treated groups. The
mean ±SEM is presented in all graphs, and significance
was defined as p < 0.05.

7.	 Cadoo KA, Gucalp A, Traina TA. Palbociclib: an evidencebased review of its potential in the treatment of breast
­cancer. Breast Cancer (Dove Med Press). 2014; 6:123–133.
8.	 Finn RS, Dering J, Conklin D, Kalous O, Cohen DJ,
Desai  AJ, Ginther C, Atefi M, Chen I, Fowst C, Los G,
Slamon DJ. PD 0332991, a selective cyclin D kinase 4/6
inhibitor, preferentially inhibits proliferation of luminal
estrogen receptor-positive human breast cancer cell lines
in vitro. Breast cancer research: BCR. 2009; 11:R77.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We are grateful to Pfizer for the palbociclib
compound. We thank our colleagues for their helpful
discussions.

9.	 Fry DW, Harvey PJ, Keller PR, Elliott WL, Meade M,
Trachet E, Albassam M, Zheng X, Leopold WR, Pryer NK,
Toogood PL. Specific inhibition of cyclin-dependent kinase
4/6 by PD 0332991 and associated antitumor ­activity
in human tumor xenografts. Mol Cancer Ther. 2004;
3:1427–1438.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
The authors have no conflicts of interest to declare.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

41806

Oncotarget

10.	 Miller TW, Balko JM, Fox EM, Ghazoui Z, Dunbier A,
Anderson H, Dowsett M, Jiang A, Smith RA, Maira SM,
Manning HC, Gonzalez-Angulo AM, Mills GB, Higham C,
Chanthaphaychith S, Kuba MG, et al. ERalpha-dependent
E2F transcription can mediate resistance to estrogen deprivation in human breast cancer. Cancer discovery. 2011;
1:338–351.

22.	 Deng WG, Zhu Y, Montero A, Wu KK. Quantitative
­analysis of binding of transcription factor complex to biotinylated DNA probe by a streptavidin-agarose pulldown
assay. Analytical biochemistry. 2003; 323:12–18.
23.	 Zhang C, Yan Z, Arango ME, Painter CL, Anderes K.
Advancing bioluminescence imaging technology for the
evaluation of anticancer agents in the MDA-MB-435-HALLuc mammary fat pad and subrenal capsule tumor models.
Clinical cancer research: an official journal of the American
Association for Cancer Research. 2009; 15:238–246.

11.	 Finn RS, Crown JP, Lang I, Boer K, Bondarenko IM,
Kulyk SO, Ettl J, Patel R, Pinter T, Schmidt M, Shparyk Y,
Thummala AR, Voytko NL, Fowst C, Huang X, Kim ST,
et al. The cyclin-dependent kinase 4/6 inhibitor palbociclib in combination with letrozole versus letrozole alone as
first-line treatment of oestrogen receptor-positive, HER2negative, advanced breast cancer (PALOMA-1/TRIO-18):
a randomised phase 2 study. The lancet oncology. 2015;
16:25–35.

24.	 Fry DW, Harvey PJ, Keller PR, Elliott WL, Meade M,
Trachet E, Albassam M, Zheng X, Leopold WR, Pryer NK,
Toogood PL. Specific inhibition of cyclin-dependent
kinase 4/6 by PD 02991 and associated antitumor activity
in human tumor xenografts. Molecular cancer therapeutics.
2004; 3:1427–1438.

12.	 Rivadeneira DB, Mayhew CN, Thangavel C, Sotillo E,
Reed CA, Grana X, Knudsen ES. Proliferative suppression by CDK4/6 inhibition: complex function of the retinoblastoma pathway in liver tissue and hepatoma cells.
Gastroenterology. 2010; 138:1920–1930.

25.	 Nevins JR. The Rb/E2F pathway and cancer. Human
molecular genetics. 2001; 10:699–703.
26.	 Reynolds MR, Lane AN, Robertson B, Kemp S, Liu  Y,
Hill  BG, Dean DC, Clem BF. Control of glutamine
metabolism by the tumor suppressor Rb. Oncogene. 2014;
33:556–566.

13.	 Schaal C, Pillai S, Chellappan SP. The Rb-E2F transcriptional regulatory pathway in tumor angiogenesis and metastasis. Advances in cancer research. 2014; 121:147–182.

27.	 Lamb R, Lehn S, Rogerson L, Clarke RB, Lberg G. Cell
cycle regulators cyclin D1 and CDK4/6 have estrogen
receptor-dependent divergent functions in breast cancer
migration and stem cell-like activity. Cell cycle. 2013;
12:2384–2394.

14.	 Tomaskovic-Crook E, Thompson EW, Thiery JP. Epithelial
to mesenchymal transition and breast cancer. Breast Cancer
Research. 2009; 11.
15.	 Kalluri R, Weinberg RA. The basics of epithelial-­
mesenchymal transition. The Journal of clinical investigation. 2009; 119:1420–1428.

28.	 Zhong Z, Yeow WS, Zou C, Wassell R, Wang C,
Pestell  RG, Quong JN, Quong AA. Cyclin D1/CyclinDependent Kinase 4 Interacts with Filamin A and Affects
the Migration and Invasion Potential of Breast Cancer Cells.
Cancer research. 2010; 70:2105–2114.

16.	 Zeisberg M, Neilson EG. Biomarkers for epithelial-­
mesenchymal transitions. Journal Of Clinical Investigation.
2009; 119:1429–1437.

29.	 Ristimaki A, Sivula A, Lundin J, Lundin M, Salminen T,
Haglund C, Joensuu H, Isola J. Prognostic significance of
elevated cyclooxygenase-2 expression in breast cancer.
Cancer research. 2002; 62:632–635.

17.	 Bocca C, Ievolella M, Autelli R, Motta M, Mosso  L,
Torchio B, Bozzo F, Cannito S, Paternostro C,
Colombatto  S, Parola M, Miglietta A. Expression of
Cox-2 in human breast cancer cells as a critical determinant of epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition and invasiveness. Expert opinion on therapeutic targets. 2014;
18:121–135.

30.	 Holmes MD, Chen WY, Schnitt SJ, Collins L, Colditz GA,
Hankinson SE, Tamimi RM. COX-2 expression predicts
worse breast cancer prognosis and does not modify the
association with aspirin. Breast cancer research and treatment. 2011; 130:657–662.

18.	 Coussens LM, Werb Z. Inflammation and cancer. Nature.
2002; 420:860–867.

31.	 Bocca C, Ievolella M, Autelli R, Motta M, Mosso  L,
Torchio B, Bozzo F, Cannito S, Paternostro C,
Colombatto S, Parola M, Miglietta A. Expression of Cox-2
in human breast cancer cells as a critical determinant of
­epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition and invasiveness.
Expert opinion on therapeutic targets. 2014; 18:121–135.

19.	 Sicking I, Rommens K, Battista MJ, Bohm D, Gebhard S,
Lebrecht A, Cotarelo C, Hoffmann G, Hengstler JG,
Schmidt M. Prognostic influence of cyclooxygenase-2 protein and mRNA expression in node-negative breast cancer
patients. BMC cancer. 2014; 14.
20.	 Reader J, Holt D, Fulton A. Prostaglandin E2 EP receptors
as therapeutic targets in breast cancer. Cancer metastasis
reviews. 2011; 30:449–463.

32.	 Adhim Z, Matsuoka T, Bito T, Shigemura K, Lee KM,
Kawabata M, Fujisawa M, Nibu K, Shirakawa T. In vitro
and in vivo inhibitory effect of three Cox-2 inhibitors and
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition in human bladder cancer cell lines. British journal of cancer. 2011; 105:393–402.

21.	 Chulada PC, Thompson MB, Mahler JF, Doyle CM,
Gaul BW, Lee C, Tiano HF, Morham SG, Smithies O,
Langenbach R. Genetic disruption of Ptgs-1, as well as
Ptgs-2, reduces intestinal tumorigenesis in Min mice.
Cancer research. 2000; 60:4705–4708.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

33.	 Angel P, Karin M. The role of Jun, Fos and the AP-1 complex in cell-proliferation and transformation. Biochimica et
biophysica acta. 1991; 1072:129–157.
41807

Oncotarget

34.	 Lamb RF, Hennigan RF, Turnbull K, Katsanakis KD,
MacKenzie ED, Birnie GD, Ozanne BW. AP-1-mediated
invasion requires increased expression of the hyaluronan
receptor CD44. Molecular and cellular biology. 1997;
17:963–976.

of fibrosarcoma tumor progression. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
America. 2001; 98:13055–13059.
36.	 Kappelmann M, Bosserhoff A, Kuphal S. AP-1/c-Jun transcription factors: regulation and function in malignant melanoma. European journal of cell biology. 2014; 93:76–81.

35.	 Toft DJ, Rosenberg SB, Bergers G, Volpert O, Linzer DI.
Reactivation of proliferin gene expression is associated with increased angiogenesis in a cell culture model

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

37.	 Meng Q, Xia Y. c-Jun, at the crossroad of the signaling
network. Protein & cell. 2011; 2:889–898.

41808

Oncotarget

