Published OnlineFirst October 4, 2013; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-4617

Cancer
Research

Integrated Systems and Technologies

Novel Modeling of Cancer Cell Signaling Pathways Enables
Systematic Drug Repositioning for Distinct Breast Cancer
Metastases
Hong Zhao1,2, Guangxu Jin1,2, Kemi Cui1, Ding Ren1, Timothy Liu1, Peikai Chen1, Solomon Wong5,
Fuhai Li1,2, Yubo Fan1, Angel Rodriguez3, Jenny Chang2,3, and Stephen TC Wong1,2,3,4

Abstract
A new type of signaling network element, called cancer signaling bridges (CSB), has been shown to have the
potential for systematic and fast-tracked drug repositioning. On the basis of CSBs, we developed a
computational model to derive speciﬁc downstream signaling pathways that reveal previously unknown
target–disease connections and new mechanisms for speciﬁc cancer subtypes. The model enables us to
reposition drugs based on available patient gene expression data. We applied this model to repurpose known
or shelved drugs for brain, lung, and bone metastases of breast cancer with the hypothesis that cancer
subtypes have their own speciﬁc signaling mechanisms. To test the hypothesis, we addressed speciﬁc CSBs
for each metastasis that satisfy (i) CSB proteins are activated by the maximal number of enriched signaling
pathways speciﬁc to a given metastasis, and (ii) CSB proteins are involved in the most differential expressed
coding genes speciﬁc to each breast cancer metastasis. The identiﬁed signaling networks for the three types
of breast cancer metastases contain 31, 15, and 18 proteins and are used to reposition 15, 9, and 2 drug
candidates for the brain, lung, and bone metastases. We conducted both in vitro and in vivo preclinical
experiments as well as analysis on patient tumor specimens to evaluate the targets and repositioned drugs. Of
special note, we found that the Food and Drug Administration-approved drugs, sunitinib and dasatinib,
prohibit brain metastases derived from breast cancer, addressing one particularly challenging aspect of this
disease. Cancer Res; 73(20); 6149–63. 2013 AACR.

Introduction
Drug repositioning beneﬁts signiﬁcantly from the systematic investigation of the mechanism of action of drugs against
a new disease indication. Our previous work developed a new
type of signaling network elements, called cancer signaling
bridges (CSB), to investigate underlying signaling mechanisms
systematically (1). CSBs are able to extend the known canoniAuthors' Afﬁliations: 1Department of Systems Medicine and Bioengineering; 2NCI Center for Modeling Cancer Development, The Methodist
Hospital Research Institute, Weill Cornell Medical College; 3Methodist
Cancer Center, The Methodist Hospital; 4Dan L. Duncan Cancer Center,
Baylor College of Medicine, Houston; and 5The University of Texas at
Austin, Austin, Texas
Note: Supplementary data for this article are available at Cancer Research
Online (http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/).
H. Zhao and G. Jin contributed equally to this work.
Current address for D. Ren: 85 Hospital, Shanghai, P.R. China 210002; and
current address for P. Chen, Department of Electrical and Electronic
Engineering, The University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam, Hong Kong.
Corresponding Author: Stephen T.C. Wong, 6670 Bertner Avenue, R6211, Houston, TX 77030. Phone: 713-441-5884; Fax: 713-441-7189;
E-mail: stwong@tmhs.org
doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-4617
2013 American Association for Cancer Research.

cal signaling pathways (2–4) to proteins whose coding genes
have a close relationship with cancer genetic disorders (5, 6)
or, in brief, cancer proteins. Each CSB is a speciﬁc instance
of a network motif (7), that is, recurrent and statistically
signiﬁcant sub-graphs or patterns, in the protein–protein
interaction (PPI) network. To further ensure that the CSBs
are able to link many previously unrelated cancer proteins to
a known signaling pathway of interest, the CSBs were deﬁned
as those network motif instances whose proteins include
at least one protein in a signaling pathway and at least one
cancer protein outside the signaling pathway. As an example, a
CSB comprises four proteins, BRCA1, GRB2, HSPA8, and NPM1
with four protein–protein interactions, BRCA1<>HSPA8,
BRCA1<>NPM1, GRB2<>HSPA8, and GRB2<>NPM1. The coding gene of the NPM1 protein is found mutated in acute
promyelocytic leukemia, but its signaling mechanism remains
unclear. Using this CSB, we can expand the NPM1 to the EGF
pathway through the linkage of GRB2 or E2F transcription
factor network through the linkage of BRCA1.
The identiﬁed CSBs enable drug repositioning based on
transcriptional response data and has been evaluated in drug
repositioning studies against breast cancer, prostate cancer,
and promyelocytic leukemia cells (1). However, similar to
many other available drug repositioning methods, such as
those using gene signatures to address the similarities

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 2, 2017. © 2013 American Association for Cancer Research.

6149

Published OnlineFirst October 4, 2013; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-4617

Zhao et al.

between drugs (8) or the associations between drugs and
diseases (9, 10), our previously reported drug repositioning
method relies on the availability of transcriptional response
data.
Alternative methods of drug repositioning aim to reconstruct disease-speciﬁc networks or pathways from the common gene expression proﬁles without any drug treatment
information. The key proteins identiﬁed in the networks or
pathways may serve as potential drug targets (11–13). A
common problem for these methods is that they are restrictive in ﬁnding reliable drug target candidates from generally
known or canonical signaling pathways, obtained from
either publicly available databases, such as Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (4) and Reactome (14), or
commercially available databases, such as TransPath (BioBase Inc), MetaBase (GeneGo Inc.), and Ingenuity Pathway
Analysis (Ingenuity Systems Inc.). For example, the casual
reasoning method (12) only takes into account upstream
signaling proteins whereas the pathway pattern-based
approach (13) simply employs the information on known
pathways directly to address disease relationships. These
methods are incapable of studying subtypes of the same
cancer or different cancers sharing common pathways as
they fail to explore speciﬁc mechanisms of action that are
unknown to the existing databases. In addition, the efforts
on upstream signaling proteins cannot discern the detailed
downstream differences on the signaling mechanisms
among cancer subtypes or cancers sharing similar signaling
pathways. Repositioning drugs for these speciﬁc cancers
warrants fresh approaches to derive their speciﬁc signaling
pathways.
The CSBs are a powerful means to derive the speciﬁc
signaling mechanisms for cancer subtypes. Different from the
common upstream signaling pathways, more than half of the
CSB proteins are located in the nucleus and serve as downstream signaling molecules. Our study showed that the
CSBs are mostly cancer-speciﬁc and play important roles as
the targets of anticancer drugs (9). These properties indicate
the merits of CSBs in identifying speciﬁc cancer signaling
mechanisms for individual cancer subtypes.
Following our strategy of integrating computational
biology and experimental biology to address cancer problems, we extended the concept of CSBs and developed a
computational model to reposition drugs for cancer subtypes on the basis of the common gene expression proﬁles
without any drug treatment information. The hypothesis
behind our model is that individual cancer subtypes have
their own speciﬁc signaling mechanisms. We applied the
integrative cancer biology-based drug repositioning method to brain, lung, and bone metastases of breast cancer.
The results conﬁrmed the hypothesis in that the signaling
networks for the three metastases include different sets
of proteins and drug targets. Accordingly, we repositioned
drug candidates for the three metastases of breast cancer
to individual sets of drug targets identiﬁed. Both in vitro
and in vivo experiments validate the targets and identify
two known drugs for new indication in brain metastasis of
breast cancer.

6150

Cancer Res; 73(20) October 15, 2013

Materials and Methods
RNA isolation and gene-expression proﬁling
Core biopsies from primary tumors of 52 patients of breast
cancer were obtained for Affymetrix Human Genome U133
GeneChip cDNA array analysis. This study was approved by
the Institutional Review Board at The Methodist Hospital. The
data analysis approach was described previously in our publication (15).
Human breast tumor microarray datasets
Microarray data from four cohorts of breast tumors that
include patients with brain, lung, and bone relapse were
used in the analysis. The EMC-192 (16) cohort includes 16
cases of brain relapse, 21 cases of lung relapse, and 53 cases
of bone relapse. The EMC-286 (17) cohort includes 10 cases
of brain relapse, 25 cases of lung relapse, and 69 cases of
bone relapse. The MSK-82 (18) cohort includes ﬁve cases of
brain relapse, 14 cases of lung relapse, and 14 cases of bone
relapse. The TMH-52 cohort is a treatment-refractory triple
negative breast tumor brain relapsed cohort that includes
11 cases of brain relapse. The TMH-52 cohort microarray data
is available at NCI GEO with ID: GSE 46928.
The computational modeling of speciﬁc downstream
signaling pathways
The drug repositioning pipeline comprises six computational analysis modules and two experimental modules: differential analysis, enrichment analysis, CSB analysis, network
mechanism analysis (the computational modeling), survival
analysis, and repositioning analysis; and target and drug
efﬁcacy validation (Fig. 1). All analysis modules enable the
extensive integration of gene expression proﬁles and clinical
survival information of patients, known signaling pathways,
and drug information of targets, clinical trials, and Food and
Drug Administration (FDA)-approval statuses.
Differential analysis and enrichment analysis. Differential and enrichment analyses aim to address the differentially
expressed genes (gene signatures) from gene expression proﬁles of patients and discover enriched signaling pathways
associated with the identiﬁed genes signatures. Two commercial software packages were used to implement the analyses:
Partek (http://www.partek.com/) and Ingenuity Pathway
Analysis (http://www.ingenuity.com/).
CSB analysis. CSBs are speciﬁc instances of network
motifs in the PPI network, acting as the important signaling
elements between known signaling pathways and cancer
proteins associated with cancer genetic disorders. For a
detailed deﬁnition, please see Supplementary Methods section
1 and reference (1). A relatively high-quality CSB set was
ﬁltered out for this drug repositioning study in which the
proteins physically interact and the PPIs are veriﬁed by at least
two experiments (Supplementary Methods).
Signaling network analysis. By integrating the outputs
from the differential and the enrichment analyses, this analysis component addressed the signaling networks from CSBs.
The network mechanism analysis can be represented by a
mathematical model, that is, multiobjective optimization
model, as shown in equations (1–5). The output of this analysis,

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 2, 2017. © 2013 American Association for Cancer Research.

Published OnlineFirst October 4, 2013; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-4617

Systematic Drug Repositioning

Figure 1. An overview of the
technical pipeline for cancer drug
repositioning. The pipeline
comprises six modules for the
computation biology analyses
(Differential analysis, Enrichment
analysis, CSB analysis, Survival
analysis, Signaling network analysis,
and Repositioning analysis) and
two modules for experimental
biology analyses (Target validation
and Drug efﬁcacy validation). The
Signaling network analysis, which
is the core of the computational
component, is to reﬁne the general
signaling networks to the core
signaling network that is speciﬁc to
the cancer of interest. The
Differential analysis and
Enrichment analysis modules
provide the differential genes and
enriched signaling pathways for
the mathematical model (see
Materials and Methods), whereas
the CSB analysis supplies the
essential cancer signaling network
for the mathematical model. The
Survival analysis enables further
narrowing of the signaling
networks down to the core
signaling network based on the
metastasis-free survival times of
patients. The Repositioning
analysis identiﬁes the repositioned
drug candidates from the available
drug information, integrating with
the two experimental biology
modules, Target validation and
Drug efﬁcacy validation.

that is, presignaling network, involves the maximal number
(deﬁned by the ﬁrst objective parameter, (a) of signaling
pathways and includes the most differentially expressed genes
in the gene signatures (deﬁned by the second objective parameter, (b). To satisfy the survival analysis requirement on the
protein paths instead of single genes, we used a heuristic
strategy to solve the proposed mathematical model. The
strategy ﬁrst decomposes the CSBs into identical length protein paths by using an enumeration method, and then, for each
path, it computes the terms goal1 and goal2. Thus, the parameters, (a) and (b) are helpful to prioritize the paths by
considering two criteria: (i) the number of enriched signaling
pathways and (ii) the statistical signiﬁcance of differentially
expressed genes. In this study, we used a path length l of 5;
the parameterization process of (a) and (b) is shown in Section
2 of Supplementary Methods.
Max
x

goal1 ¼

www.aacrjournals.org




N
1 [

ðS
\
Iðx
ÞÞ

i
i  ðgoal1  aÞ

N i¼1

ð1Þ

Max
x

goal2 ¼

N
1X
j logðP valuei Þj  xi
N i¼1

8
N
X
>
>
>
xi  2
>
>
>
>
i¼1
>
>
>
>
N X
N
N
<X
X
Aij xi xj 
xi  1
s:t:
>
>
i¼1 j¼1
i¼1
>
>
>
>
>
xi ¼ 0; 1
>
>
>
>
:
i ¼ 1; 2;    ; N :

ðgoal2  bÞ

ð2Þ

ð3Þ
ð4Þ

ð5Þ

where x is a variable vector denoting all of the proteins of
CSBs; each xi ði ¼ 1; 2;    ; N Þ equals either 1 or 0, indicating
whether the protein i is kept in the output of the model (core
signaling network); and Aij is an adjacent matrix representing
the interactions between the CSB proteins. Equations 3 and 4
are used to ensure the connectivity of the core signaling

Cancer Res; 73(20) October 15, 2013

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 2, 2017. © 2013 American Association for Cancer Research.

6151

Published OnlineFirst October 4, 2013; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-4617

Zhao et al.

network. Equation (1) is used to ensure the ﬁrst criterion:
including the maximal number of enriched signaling pathways
in the output; Si is a signaling pathway set for protein i that
includes the enriched signaling pathways that take protein i as
their signaling components; I(xi) is an indicator with the same
value as xi; and the term goal1 denotes the average number of
enriched signaling pathways of an output network. Similarly,
equation 2 satisﬁes another criterion: involving the most
differentially expressed genes in the output; P valuei is the
output of the statistical analysis of differential analysis; the
term goal2 stands as the average statistical signiﬁcance of
the coding genes of an output network; and a and b are two
parameters to control the scale of the output network, playing
important roles in the following analyses.
Survival analysis. The survival analysis component aims
to integrate the outputs of the signaling network analysis
component with the available clinical information of the
patients, for example, metastasis-free survival time, to further
reﬁne the identiﬁed presignaling networks. To ﬁlter out the
high conﬁdence proteins paths, we conducted hierarchical
clustering on the paths and Kaplan–Meier survival analysis
on the survival times of the patients, iteratively.
To do hierarchical clustering on the expression proﬁles of
protein paths rather than those of individual genes, we applied
our previously developed network biomarker method (19) to
transform the expression proﬁles from the gene probe-level to
the path-level:
Ipath ¼

l
X
i¼1

1
P valuei

l
P

j¼1

Iprobei

ð6Þ

1
P valuej

where path ¼ ½probe1 ; probe2 ;    ; probel ; probei is any
probe of the coding genes of the ith protein in the protein
path; Iprobei is a vector of the gene expression values of probei
across all of the patients considered; P valuei is the P value of
the statistical analysis of the differential analysis; and Ipath is
the merged gene expression proﬁle deﬁned by its component
probes.
After the hierarchical clustering on the expression proﬁles
of the paths, a heuristic cut-tree algorithm was used to focus on
the relevant paths. The cut-tree algorithm can cut the clustering tree into relatively small branches. The heuristic algorithm is used to remove each branch and conduct Kaplan–
Meier survival analysis based on the remaining branches,
including a portion of the paths. The statistical signiﬁcance
in the Kaplan–Meier survival analysis can help to determine
which branch should be removed from the paths. Hierarchical
clustering, cut-tree algorithm, and Kaplan–Meier survival
analysis were implemented in R (http://www.r-project.org/),
using the hclust and survival packages.
A remaining problem is evaluating the outputs of the cuttree algorithm. After running the cut-tree algorithm on the
paths, the output is composed of a set of subtrees after
removing the branches iteratively. Each subtree can be characterized by a three-dimensional cube with statistical P value

6152

Cancer Res; 73(20) October 15, 2013

of Kaplan–Meier survival analysis, path number, and classiﬁcation on the patients (Supplementary Fig. S7 and Supplementary Methods sections 3 and 4). The subtree with relatively
low P value, small number of paths, and better classiﬁcation
becomes the ﬁnal output of this algorithm, and the corresponding paths are entered into the ﬁnalized signaling
network.
Repositioning analysis. The signaling network derived
from the survival analysis is highly associated with the metastasis-free survival time of patients and helps to illustrate
speciﬁc signaling interactions associated with speciﬁc cancers.
In addition, these signaling networks may delineate the underlying unknown signaling mechanisms such that the drug
repositioning analysis can be conducted to search for known
drugs targeting the signaling networks.
Because drug repositioning typically focuses on existing
drugs or shelved assets that have passed at least phase I clinical
trials, we developed a Web-accessible database, DrugMap
Central, to support efﬁcient query and navigation during the
drug repositioning studies. DrugMap Central integrates information of chemical structures and properties with targets of
known drugs or compounds, as well as accesses online clinical
trial updates and FDA-approval information (20).
RT2-PCR array
Customized RT2-PCR Array from the SuperArray Bioscience
Corporation was used to examine the expression of the 31
genes in the brain metastasis of breast cancer (BCBM) signaling network. Housekeeping genes ACTB, GAPDH, and RPLP0
were included on the array to normalize the RNA amounts. The
data analysis approach used was described previously in our
publication (21). We used 20 patient specimens because (i) the
tissues were available for the analysis, and (ii) all 20 patients
have 0-month metastasis-free survival time, that is, when they
presented to the doctors, they were diagnosed with both
primary tumor and metastatic tumor.
Immunohistochemistry
Immunohistochemistry (IHC) was conducted on 5 mm
formalin-ﬁxed, parafﬁn-embedded tissue sections from BCBM
patients (n ¼ 29; The Methodist Hospital Tissue Bank). This
study was approved while waivers of consent were granted by
the Institutional Review Board at The Methodist Hospital. The
staining for p-RET [Phospho-Ret (Tyr905) antibody, 1:100,
Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Inc. cat # sc-57431] and p-FYN
[Phospho-Fyn (Tyr416) 1:100, Santa Cruz Biotechnology, cat
# sc-16848] on the total 29 samples and scoring the IHC stains
were conducted by TMHRI Pathology Core. An H score was
calculated by multiplying the fraction of positively stained
tumor (percentage) by staining intensity (0, 1þ, 2þ, or 3þ;
ref. 22). Membranous immunoreactivity was scored (0 and 1þ
indicates negative; 2þ, indeterminate; and 3þ, positive for
overexpression), and the percentage of tumor cells staining
positive was visually estimated.
Drugs and cell lines
Sunitinib and dasatinib were purchased from LC Laboratory. Sunitinib was dissolved in 0.1 mol/L citrate buffer (pH 4.7) at

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 2, 2017. © 2013 American Association for Cancer Research.

Published OnlineFirst October 4, 2013; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-4617

Systematic Drug Repositioning

a stock concentration of 3 mg/mL. Dasatinib was dissolved at
10 mmol/L in 100% dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO). The human
breast cancer brain metastatic sublines MB231-Br-HER2þ,
MB231Br-vector (MB231-Br-HER2-), and CN34-Br were previously described (16, 23, 24). Primary human brain microvessel
endothelial cells (HBMEC) and astrocytes (NHA) were purchased from Cell Systems Corporation and cultured in the
suggested media. All cell lines used in this study were regularly
authenticated by morphologic observation and tested for
absence of Mycoplasma contamination (MycoAlert, Lonza
Rockland).
RNA interference-mediated knockdown cell lines
Knockdown of FYN and RET were achieved by short hairpin
RNA (shRNA) Lentiviral Particles (sc-35425-V for FYN, sc36404-V for RET, Santa Cruz Biotechnology), which is a pool
of concentrated viral particles containing three target-speciﬁc
constructs that encode 19 to 25 nt (plus hairpin) shRNA
designed to knock down FYN and RET gene expression (Supplementary Materials). Lentiviral Particles containing a shRNA
construct encoding a scrambled sequence were used as control
shRNA (sc-108080, Santa Cruz Biotechnology). The efﬁciency
of the knockdown was conﬁrmed by Western immunoblot
analysis; antibodies for Ret (sc-167) and FYN (sc-434) were
purchased from Santa Cruz Biotechnology. Cell lines with a
transduction rate of more than 70% were used for further
studies.
Western blotting and antibodies
Cell or tissue lysates and immunoblotting analysis were
done as described previously (24). The antibodies are described
in Supplementary Materials. Densitometric analysis was conducted using ImageJ software.
In vitro blood–brain barrier assay
The analysis on cancer cell lines penetrating in vitro blood–
brain barrier (BBB) was conducted as described by Paula and
colleagues (16), with 105 HBMECs placed in the top chamber
of the inserts and human primary astrocytes on the counter
side of the insert membrane.
In vivo animal experiments
Animal procedures were conducted in accordance with
the guidelines of Institutional Animal care and Use Committee and the regulations of the Animal Research and
Comparative Medicine Committee of The Methodist Hospital Research Institute. Female BALB/c nude mice (6–7
weeks old; Charles River Laboratories) were anesthetized
with isoﬂurane/O2, and injected in the left cardiac ventricle
with cancer cell lines (1.75  105 cells in 0.1 mL serum-free
medium). The animals were then randomly divided into ﬁve
treatment groups: vehicle, low-dose sunitinib (40 mg/kg),
high-dose sunitinib (80 mg/kg), low-dose dasatinib (25 mg/
kg), and high-dose dasatinib (50 mg/kg). Treatment started
three days after cell injection. Both sunitinib and dasatinib
were administered orally once daily for 28 days. The other
batches of mice were injected with the FYN or RET shRNA

www.aacrjournals.org

knockdown cell lines, and appearance of brain metastasis
was monitored every 3 days by IVIS200 bioluminescent
imaging. The body condition was monitored once every day,
and the mice were euthanized by CO2 asphyxiation if there
were signs of neurologic impairment or if the body condition
score was 2 or less.
The animals were euthanized 6 hours after last treatment.
The whole brain was subjected to enhanced green ﬂuorescent
protein (EGFP) ﬂuorescence imaging to detect the presence of
the injected cells (Maestro 420 In Vivo Spectral Imaging
System, Cambridge Research and Instrumentation). The data
acquisition and processing software was used to unmix images
of ﬂuorescence from multiple sources (Nuance Technology).
After ﬂuorescence imaging, some of the mouse brains were
used for histologic and pathologic studies, and others were
used for examining the EGFP expression in brain lysates.
Mouse brain sections (10 mm thick) were cut serially. One
section from every 100 mm was stained with hematoxylin and
eosin (H&E) and immunohistochemistry for p-RET, p-FYN,
Ki67 (1:200, Abcam cat # ab66155), and CD31 (1:200, Abcam cat
#ab9498). The whole-section montage images were acquired
by an Olympus BX61 upright microscope (TMHRI Advanced
Cellular and Tissue Microscope Core Facility), and an image
analysis algorithm was developed to automatically quantify
the number of large lesions in the montage H&E gray-scale
images, as described previously (24).
Statistical methods
The Kaplan–Meier method and log-rank test were used
to compare differences among survival curves for the
shRNA knockdown study. For in vivo drug treatment study,
the normality of each group data was examined with the
Jarque–Bera test ﬁrst, and then Levene's F test was used
to test multigroup homogeneity of variance (HOV). If
the groups enrolled followed the HOV, a Student t test was
used for analyzing experimental data. Otherwise, a Wilcoxon
rank sum test was executed. For the in vitro study results,
ANOVA was deployed for the data analysis. For in vitro BBB
cell transmigration assay analysis, a one-way ANOVA was
conducted, by cell line (231-Br-HER2-, 231-Br-HER2þ), with
compound doses or different compounds speciﬁed as the
factor. For ANOVA of the IHC data, a binomial distribution
for the outcome variable and a logit link function were used.
Higher order effects (e.g., three-way interactions) were
dropped from the model if P was greater than 0.05. Survival
analysis was implemented by an R package "Survival." Statistical signiﬁcance was deﬁned as P less than 0.05. All
statistical tests were two-sided. All analyses were conducted
with SAS statistical software (version 9.1; SAS Institute,
Cary, NC).

Results
The computational modeling of speciﬁc downstream
signaling pathways
In our computational model, we assume that different
metastases have their own speciﬁc downstream signaling
pathways. In this article, "upstream" signaling pathways refer

Cancer Res; 73(20) October 15, 2013

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 2, 2017. © 2013 American Association for Cancer Research.

6153

Published OnlineFirst October 4, 2013; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-4617

Zhao et al.

to those signal transductions starting from ligands and receptors near the cell membrane, whereas "downstream" signaling
pathways refer to the signals ending inside nucleus. Further
study on the CSBs indicates that more than half of CSB proteins
locate in the nucleus (Supplementary Fig. S1A). The new
computational model presented in this article addresses the
speciﬁc downstream signaling pathways for each metastasis
type from the CSBs by considering two criteria: (i) these
downstream signaling pathways are activated by the maximal
number of upstream signaling pathways; and (ii) they involve
most differentially expressed genes speciﬁc to the metastasis
of interest (see Materials and Methods).
To enable computational modeling, we need the following
inputs to the model: the downstream signaling network identiﬁed from CSBs; the activated upstream signaling pathways;
and the differential genes for each of the metastasis studied.
Our model contains a number of computational analyses,
including differential analysis for differential genes, enrichment analysis for activated upstream signaling pathways, and
CSB analysis for candidate downstream signaling pathways
(Fig. 1).
Differential analysis, enrichment analysis, and CSB analysis. Differential and enrichment analyses were used to
identify the differential genes and the activated upstream
signaling pathways for each metastasis type using the patients'
gene expression proﬁles (16–18) and known signaling pathways (2–4). The most differentially expressed genes (P < 0.001,
Student t test) were identiﬁed between patients who had
tissue speciﬁc-metastasis and other patients in the same
cohort. The differential genes identiﬁed were used for pathway
enrichment analysis (Fisher exact two-tailed test). For brain,
lung, and bone metastasis of breast cancer, we addressed
eight, eight, and 21 activated upstream signaling pathways, as
shown in Supplementary Tables S1.
The CSB analysis was used to deﬁne the candidate downstream signaling pathways. The CSBs are essentially network
motifs that connect upstream signaling pathway proteins to
cancer-speciﬁc proteins whose coding genes are closely related
to genetic cancer disorders (ref. 1; Supplementary Methods).
We ﬁltered out a set of high-quality CSBs, including 673
proteins and 1,759 physical PPIs, in which each interaction
was veriﬁed by at least two independent experimental methods
(Supplementary Methods).
Computational modeling. The presented computational
model takes the results of the differential analysis, enrichment
analysis, and CSB analysis as inputs to derive the speciﬁc
downstream signaling pathways for each metastasis type by
using a multiple-objective optimization model (see Materials
and Methods). We make use of two objectives in the multipleobjective optimization model to implement the two computational modeling criteria (see Materials and Methods). The
heuristic strategy decomposed the network of CSBs into
identical-length protein paths and then applied the two aforementioned criteria to obtain speciﬁc downstream signaling
pathways (Supplementary Methods). Subsequently, we identiﬁed 98-, 144-, and 134-protein downstream signaling networks for brain, lung, and bone metastases of breast cancer
(Supplementary Figs. S1B–S1D).

6154

Cancer Res; 73(20) October 15, 2013

Correlation of the downstream signaling pathways with
patients' survival times and repositioning drugs based
on the derived high-conﬁdence downstream signaling
mechanisms
To improve the conﬁdence of the identiﬁed downstream
signaling pathways, we correlated them with patient survival
times. This survival analysis aims to use clinical information
to reﬁne the derived downstream signaling pathways. The
strategy employed in this module iteratively conducted
both hierarchical clustering on the decomposed protein
paths of the downstream signaling pathways and Kaplan–
Meier survival analysis on the metastasis-free survival times
of patients. To satisfy the hierarchical clustering, the network biomarker method (19) was applied to converge the
gene probe-level expression to the path-level (see the equation 6 in Materials and Methods). Following the hierarchical
clustering on the paths, a heuristic cut-tree algorithm was
designed to narrow down the paths to achieve the best
results for Kaplan–Meier survival analysis (see Supplementary Methods). Those paths remaining in the cut-tree algorithm with the best statistical signiﬁcance after the Kaplan–
Meier survival analysis are high-conﬁdence downstream
signaling pathways (HCDSP). The HCDSPs for brain, lung,
and bone metastases contained 31, 15, and 18 proteins,
verifying our hypothesis that different metastases have their
own speciﬁc downstream signaling pathways (Fig. 2A).
Distinguished as BR (brain), LU (lung), and BO (bone), the
downstream signaling mechanisms between these three
metastasis types are different from each other.
We used different cohorts to apply the cut-tree algorithm in
the Kaplan–Meier survival analysis. For lung and bone metastases, we considered the combined cohort, EMC-368 (MSK-82
and EMC-286), whereas for brain metastasis, we selected the
individual cohorts, MSK-82, EMC-192, and EMC-286. We
designed a special study for brain metastasis because its
sample numbers in each of the MSK-82, EMC-192, and
EMC-286 cohorts were smaller than those for lung and bone
metastases. For the cut-tree algorithm, a small number of
samples are much easier to be clustered together. Therefore,
by only considering the combined cohort, EMC-368 (MSK-82
and EMC-286), the conﬁdence for brain metastasis would
be lower than that for lung or bone metastasis. Therefore,
we applied the cut-tree algorithm on these three cohorts
individually.
The HCDSPs were paired with the targets of known
drugs, including existing drugs, discontinued or "shelved"
assets that, nevertheless, passed phase I clinical trials,
drug candidates currently under development for other
conditions, and experimental drugs (see Materials and
Methods). The repositioned drug candidates for brain, lung,
and bone are shown in Table 1, and Supplementary Tables
S4 and S5, respectively.
Lung-, bone-, and brain-metastasis signaling networks of
HCDSPs and repositioned drugs
The HCDSP for brain metastasis includes 31 proteins, of
which 26 (84%) are unique for brain metastasis, three (10%)
are shared with lung metastasis, four (13%) are shared with

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 2, 2017. © 2013 American Association for Cancer Research.

Published OnlineFirst October 4, 2013; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-4617

Systematic Drug Repositioning

Figure 2. Signaling networks for brain, lung, and bone metastases of breast cancer. A, the signaling networks for the three metastatic sites are denoted by
the labels in the nodes as well as the colors in the nodes and the interactions. Brain, blue BR; lung, red LU; and bone, yellow BO. The shared nodes are
represented by the labels BR/LU, BR/BO, LU/BO, and BR/LU/BO. The artwork was generated by using Cytoscape (47). B, the Kaplan–Meier curves for
metastasis-free survival on the basis of brain, bone, or lung HCDSP path-level values in the indicated cohorts of breast tumors. High-conﬁdence
downstream signaling pathway (HCDSP) contains the protein paths remaining in the cut-tree algorithm with the best statistical signiﬁcance in the
Kaplan–Meier survival analysis. The strategy employed in the survival analysis iteratively conducted both hierarchical clustering on the decomposed protein
paths of the downstream signaling pathways and Kaplan–Meier survival analysis on the metastasis-free survival times of patients. The cut-tree
algorithm helps to classify the patients into HCDSPþ and HCDSP by cutting the tree in the hierarchical clustering into branches. The HCDSPþ means
the patient samples are in the branch with indicator 1, whereas HCDSP indicates the patient samples are in the remaining branches with indicator
1, where 1 and 1 are deﬁned by the classiﬁcation based on branches in the cut-tree algorithm. For more details, please see the cut-tree algorithm in
Supplementary Methods.

bone metastasis, and one (3%) is shared with both lung and
bone metastases. The gene expression data used for the brain
metastasis study included three public breast tumor cohorts,
EMC-192, MSK-82, and EMC-286, as well as our own TMH-52
breast tumor brain metastasis cohort. We implemented the
signaling analysis on the TMH-52 cohort ﬁrst and then applied
the survival analysis on the EMC-192, MSK-82, and EMC-286
cohorts (Fig. 2B–D).

www.aacrjournals.org

The HCDSP for lung metastasis contains 15 proteins, of
which 8 (53%) are speciﬁc to lung and 4 (27%), 2 (13%), and
1 (7%), respectively, appear in the signaling networks of brain,
bone, and both. Both the signaling analysis and survival analysis
were conducted on the MSK-82 þ EMC-286 combined cohort.
Similarly, the signaling network for bone metastasis involved 18
proteins, in which 13 (72%) are unique, and 2 (11%), 2 (11%), and
1 (5%) are found in the signaling networks of brain, lung, and

Cancer Res; 73(20) October 15, 2013

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 2, 2017. © 2013 American Association for Cancer Research.

6155

Published OnlineFirst October 4, 2013; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-4617

Zhao et al.

Table 1. List of drugs of breast cancer brain metastasis that were repositioned and their BBB
permeability

Drug target

Drug name

Approval
status

Approved indications

HDAC1, HDAC2

Vorinostat

Approved

Cutaneous T-cell lymphoma

KDR, RET

Sunitinib

Approved

KDR

Cabozantinib
(XL184)

Phase II/III

RET
RAF1, KDR

Imatinib
Sorafenib

Approved
Approved

Pazopanib

Approved

Gastrointestinal stromal tumor
(GIST); advanced renal cell
carcinoma (RCC); advanced
pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors
(pNET)
Breast cancer (phase II); metastatic
prostate cancer (phase II); carcinoid
tumor (phase II); pancreatic
neuroendocrine tumor (phase II);
thyroid cancer (phase III);
glioblastoma multiforme (phase II);
carcinoma, non–small cell lung
(phase II); astrocytic tumors (phase II)
Chronic myeloid leukemia (CML)
Hepatocellular carcinoma; renal cell
carcinoma
Renal cell carcinoma

FYN

Dasatinib

Approved

NFKB1

Dexamethasone

Approved

Thalidomide

Approved

Pranlukast
Pegademase

Phase III
Approved

Auranoﬁn
Arsenite
Acetate ion
NADH

Approved
Not approved
Not approved
Not approved

GRB2
IKBKB
VIM
PHGDH

Chronic myeloid leukemia (CML);
Philadelphia chromosome-positive
acute lymphoblastic leukemia
(Phþ ALL)
Allergic states; dermatologic
diseases; endocrine disorders;
gastrointestinal diseases;
hematologic disorders; neoplastic
diseases; nervous system;
ophthalmic diseases; renal diseases;
respiratory diseases; rheumatic
disorders
Multiple myeloma; erythema
nodosum leprosum
Chronic sinusitis
Adenosine deaminase (ADA)
deﬁciency
Rheumatoid arthritis

"Rule of Five"
for CNS drugsa
pﬃ
pﬃ

pﬃ

BBB
permeability
2009, Clin Can
Res (26)
2009, Lancet
Oncol (45)

2011, J Clin
Oncol (28)

pﬃ
pﬃ
pﬃ
pﬃ

2010, Clin Can
Res (27)
2008, Blood (44)

pﬃ

pﬃ
pﬃ

The "Rule of Five" is so named because all the essential physical properties of compounds are parameters of ﬁve. According
to this rule, a good absorption and permeability are likely if: molecular weight is 500; oil/water distribution coefﬁcient (LogP)
is 5; hydrogen bond donors 5 (expressed as the sum of OHs and NHs); hydrogen bond acceptor 10 (expressed as the sum of
Ns and Os); and number of rotatable bonds 10.
a

both of them. The Kaplan–Meier survival analysis results for
these two signaling networks are shown in Fig. 2E and F.
The HCDSP in Fig. 2A provides 12, four, and two drug
targets for brain, lung, and bone metastases of breast cancer.

6156

Cancer Res; 73(20) October 15, 2013

The 12 brain metastasis targets allowed repositioning of 15
drug candidates, including 10 that were FDA approved, 2 in
phase II clinical trials, and 3 without any clinical information
(Table 1). The four lung metastasis targets repositioned

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 2, 2017. © 2013 American Association for Cancer Research.

Published OnlineFirst October 4, 2013; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-4617

Systematic Drug Repositioning

9 candidate drugs, containing 3 approved and 6 without
any clinical information (Supplementary Table S1). The two
bone metastasis targets repurposed 2 candidate drugs, 1 approved, and 1 without any clinical information (Supplementary Table S1).
Signaling mechanism of the repositioned drug targets of
brain metastasis of breast cancer
Brain metastasis is designated as an unmet medical need
by the United States FDA. We, thus, focused on BCBM for
examining expression of signaling molecules in clinical
samples, and conducting functional validation in in vitro
and in vivo models.
Among the 15 repositioned drug candidates for brain metastasis listed in Table 1, the chemical structures of 10 drugs
satisfy the "rule of ﬁve" (Table 1, Supplementary Fig. S2; ref. 25),
indicating their potentials to permeate the central nervous
system (CNS). Three of those 10 drugs, vorinostat (26), pazopanib (27), and XL184 (28), have shown efﬁcacies on inhibiting
brain metastases in recent independent preclinical or clinical
studies. Dexamethasone is, currently, often used in the clinic to
improve brain metastasis symptoms, and thalidomide is used
in combination with temozolomide or radiation therapy for
treatment of brain metastasis (29, 30). Two of the 10 drugs,
sunitinib (approved for treating advanced renal cell carcinoma
and gastrointestinal stromal tumors) and dasatinib (approved
for treating chronic myelogenous leukemia), with no reports
connecting them to brain metastasis of breast cancer, were
selected via their targets in the signaling network (RET and
KDR for sunitinib, and FYN for dasatinib) and validated in vitro
and in vivo.
Real-time quantitative reverse transcription PCR and IHC
experiments were used to examine the gene and proteinlevel expressions of the known drug targets in brain metastasis signaling pathways. We conﬁrmed that the codinggenes of seven drug targets, FYN, HDAC1, HDAC2, KDR,
NFKB1, RAF1, and RET, are signiﬁcantly overexpressed in
the primary breast tumors of 11 brain-relapsed patients by
real-time quantitative RT-PCR (P < 0.05, Student t test), as
shown in Fig. 3A. We then investigated the levels of protein
activity for both FYN and RET in 29 brain metastatic tumors
of breast cancer, of which 4 are matched samples with both
primary and brain tumors. Functional FYN (phospho-FYN
Tyr 416) and RET (phosph-RET Tyr 905) were detected as
positive (H score 10–300, see Materials and Methods) in 25
(86%) and 23 (79%) of the 29 brain metastatic tumors,
respectively (Fig. 3B and Supplementary Table S3).
RET protein is a proto-oncogene tyrosine-protein kinase
receptor, and RET mutations are rarely identiﬁed in breast
cancer (31). It is involved in cellular mechanisms including cell
proliferation, neuronal navigation, cell migration, and cell
differentiation upon binding with glial cell-derived neurotrophic factor family ligands. FYN is unique among Src family
kinases as it is up regulated in multiple cancers (32, 33).
Selective targeting of FYN has been proven to be especially
effective given the role of FYN in tumor invasion and metastasis (34). The RET gene is located at chromosome 10q11, and
FYN is at 6q21. Copy number alterations at these regions occur

www.aacrjournals.org

in breast cancer (35), suggesting that increased copy number
contributes to the higher expression of RET and FYN in breast
tumors and brain metastasis.
To test the functionality of the signaling proteins on brain
metastasis development, RNA interference-mediated knockdown of FYN or RET expression was examined in the brain
metastatic breast cancer cell lines MDA-MB231-BR (231-BR;
refs. 16, 24) and CN34-BR (Supplementary Fig. S3A; ref. 6). Both
signiﬁcantly decreased the in vivo brain metastatic activities of
the cell lines: MDA-MB231-BR (P < 0.001, log-rank test) and
CN34-BR (P < 0.05, log-rank test; Fig. 3C).
Effects of repositioned drugs on brain metastasis of
breast cancer
Both HER2þ and HER2 breast cancer brain metastasis
models were used for the in vitro and in vivo experiments (see
Materials and Methods). We established these two models
based on the results from the survival analysis that the brain
metastasis signaling network is signiﬁcantly associated with
the brain relapse within both HER2þ and HER2 early-stage
tumors (P < 0.01, Supplementary Fig. S4). In vitro drug treatment studies revealed that treatments with either sunitinib or
dasatinib inhibit the transmigration of 231-BR-HER2þ and
231-BR-HER2 cells through the in vitro BBB (Fig. 4A and B,
Supplementary Fig. S3B).
In the in vivo study, both sunitinib (40 and 80 mg/kg) and
dasatinib (25 and 50 mg/kg) showed antibrain metastasis
efﬁcacies when measuring the EGFP-positive tumor cells in
the whole mouse brain and the metastatic lesions in the
histologic sections (Table 2) upon effectively inhibiting the
expressions of their respective targets: p-RET (target of sunitinib) and p-FYN (target of dasatinib; Supplementary Fig. S5A).
There were fewer EGFP-positive loci in the drug-treated groups
compared with the vehicle control in both models (Fig. 4C).
This was conﬁrmed by Western blot analysis using anti-EGFP
antibody (P < 0.05, Student t test, Fig. 4D). The number of large
metastatic lesions (>50 mm2) and micrometastases (50 mm2)
in H&E-stained histologic sections were quantiﬁed by the
image analysis algorithm described previously (see Fig. 4E
and Table 2; ref. 24). For the mouse model of 231-BR-HER2-,
80 mg/kg sunitinib treatment decreased the number of large
metastases by 33% (P ¼ 0.03, Student t test), whereas 50 mg/kg
dasatinib treatment decreased the number of large metastases
by nearly 47% (P ¼ 0.02, Student t test) and the number of
micrometastases by 54% (P ¼ 0.009, Student t test). Similarly,
for the 231-BR-HER2þ mouse model, those treated with 80
mg/kg sunitinib decreased the number of large metastasis by
approximately 30% (P ¼ 0.02, Student t test), whereas 50 mg/kg
dasatinib decreased the number of metastasis by 55% in large
metastases (P ¼ 0.02, Student t test) and 61% in micrometastases (P ¼ 0.01, Student t test). These results indicate that
dasatinib effectively inhibits formation of both the large and
micro metastases formation, and sunitinib predominantly
inhibits the outgrowth of large metastases in brains of both
animal models.
Sunitinib or dasatinib treatment decreased the percentage
of proliferative (Ki67-positive) cells in the tumor sections, as
well as the perivascular invasive cells on both xenograft models

Cancer Res; 73(20) October 15, 2013

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 2, 2017. © 2013 American Association for Cancer Research.

6157

Published OnlineFirst October 4, 2013; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-4617

Zhao et al.

Figure 3. Validation of the identiﬁed brain metastasis targets. A, measurements of seven drug-target genes, FYN, HDAC1, HDAC2, KDR, NFKB1, RAF1,
and RET, in primary tumors of brain relapsed patients by the 31-gene low-density real-time quantitative RT-PCR array. Primary breast tumor tissues
from 20 patients with breast cancer were used for this quantitative RT-PCR array study; 11 of these patients had brain relapse. To compare expression
proﬁles between specimens, a geometric averaging of three reference genes (ACTB, GAPDH, and RPLP0) was used for normalization as previously
described (48). The average expression of the mean of the three reference genes is CT ¼ 22.98. The Spearman rank correlation between the
normalized Affymetrix data and quantitative RT-PCR array data were signiﬁcantly positive for 24 of 31 (77.42%) of the genes. B, representative
immunohistochemical stains of phosphorylated-FYN (p-FYN) and phosphorylated-RET (p-RET) on brain metastases tissue sections of patients
of breast cancer. Images were taken under 20 objective. Scale bar, 50 mm. Staining intensity and cellularity are indicated at the right bottom
corner of each image. C, Kaplan–Meier curves for brain metastasis-free survival of mice injected with the indicated cell lines expressing shRNA vector
control or shRNA targeting FYN or RET. P values were determined by log rank test.

(P < 0.05, Student t test, Fig. 5A–D, G, and H) through Akt,
MEK1/2, and p70S6K signaling (Supplementary Fig. S3C).
Sunitinib treatment led to fewer enlarged and tortuous vessels
within the metastasis lesions compared with the vessels in the
vehicle-treated metastatic lesions (P < 0.05, Student t test, Fig.
5E and Supplementary Fig. S5D and S5E). Although the density
of microvessels in large metastatic lesions did not change,
sunitinib treatment signiﬁcantly decreased the lesion-surrounding edema areas (P < 0.05, Student t test, Fig. 5F,
Supplementary Fig. S5B and C). These results indicate that
the mechanism of action of sunitinib in decreasing large brain

6158

Cancer Res; 73(20) October 15, 2013

metastases is through induction of vessel normalization, and
the mechanism for both sunitinib and dasatinib in decreasing
metastases may be through antitumor cell extravasation and
proliferation.

Discussion
We developed a CSB-based computational model to uncover
or derive the downstream signaling mechanism of a cancer of
interest. In contrast to the prevalent gene–signature-based
approaches for drug repositioning or network analysis, the

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 2, 2017. © 2013 American Association for Cancer Research.

Published OnlineFirst October 4, 2013; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-4617

Systematic Drug Repositioning

Figure 4. Effects of sunitinib and dasatinib treatment on brain metastases. A, target inhibition by sunitinib and dasatinib on the indicated cell lines and
conditions. B, in vitro BBB transmigration activity of the indicated cell lines and conditions. The number of transmigrated cells relative to the parental cell
lines is plotted with n ¼ 12.  , P < 0.05;   , P < 0.01 versus vehicle. P values were determined by one-way ANOVA. C, sunitinib and dasatinib inhibit
brain metastatic colonization of 231-BR cells examined by ex vivo whole-brain imaging. The 231-BR-HER2þ or 231-BR-HER2 cells, with a retrovirus
transduction expressing EGFP, were injected into the left ventricle of BALB/c nude mice. Three days after injection, sunitinib, dasatinib, or vehicle was
administered by once-daily oral gavage for 28 days. Brains dissected at necropsy were imaged using a Maestro 420 Spectral Imaging System to
detect the presence of EGFP-expressing metastases derived from the injected 231-BR cells. Representative dorsal whole-brain images from two mice
in each treatment group are shown. D, sunitinib and dasatinib inhibit brain metastases in two 231-BR models examined by EGFP Western blot on whole-brain
lysates of the animals.  , P < 0.05 versus vehicle;   , P < 0.01 versus vehicle. E, representative H&E staining images of the whole-brain sections to
show the inhibition on brain metastatic loci by sunitinib and dasatinib treatment.

www.aacrjournals.org

Cancer Res; 73(20) October 15, 2013

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 2, 2017. © 2013 American Association for Cancer Research.

6159

Published OnlineFirst October 4, 2013; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-4617

Zhao et al.

Table 2. Sunitinib and dasatinib inhibit brain metastases in preclinical models
231-Br-HER2þ model

Treatment

Large
metastases
N mean (95% CI)

Vehicle
Sunitinib 80 mg/kg
Sunitinib 40 mg/kg
Dasatinib 50 mg/kg
Dasatinib 25 mg/kg

18
17
16
14
15

20 (18–23)
14 (12–15)
16 (14–18)
9 (7–10)
13 (11–14)

231-Br-HER2 model

P

Micro
metastases
mean (95% CI)

P

ref
0.02
0.05
0.02
0.04

293.6 (255.1–332.1)
199.8 (175.7–223.9)
228.1 (199.8–256.4)
113.2 (89.4–137)
175.7 (147.9–203.5)

ref
0.05
0.07
0.01
0.04

Large
metastases
N mean (95% CI)
19
16
17
16
18

15 (12–17)
10 (9–11)
12 (10–14)
8 (6–8)
9 (7–10)

P

Micro
metastases
mean (95% CI)

P

ref
0.03
0.08
0.02
0.03

218.3 (185.3–251.3)
150.2 (128.2–177.2)
156.1 (131.1–181.1)
99.5 (89.2–109.8)
144.6 (132.1–157.1)

ref
0.06
0.05
0.009
0.012

NOTE: Mice were injected with 1.75  105 231-Br-HER2þ or 231-Br-HER2 cells through the left ventricle and treated with sunitinib,
dasatinib, or vehicle starting three days later. The treatment was carried out once daily for 28 days. Numbers of metastases were
determined in 10-step sections from each mouse brain described in Materials and Methods. CI, conﬁdence interval.
For each group of data, the normality was examined with the Jarque–Bera test ﬁrst, and then Levene F test was used to test multigroup
HOV. If the groups enrolled followed the HOV, the Student t test was used for analyzing experimental data; if not, the Wilcoxon rank test
was executed. All P values are two-sided.

proposed computational model introduces the notion of signaling networks to indicate the heterogeneity and complexity
of downstream signaling pathways of cancer, and in our
application, breast cancer metastases. The identiﬁed highconﬁdence downstream signaling mechanisms are instrumental for identifying repositioned drug candidates for the three
metastatic types of breast cancer illustrated in this article. In
addition, a detailed study was implemented on the unmet need
of brain metastasis, showing the efﬁcacies of the repositioned
drugs in prohibiting metastatic colonization in in vivo
experiments.
The HCDSPs contain few genes in the previously published
gene signatures of brain, lung, and bone metastasis of breast
cancer (16, 18, 36). We found only one gene (PHGDH) for brain,
one gene (PARD6B) for lung, and no genes for bone metastases
in the comparisons (P < 10e-10, Fisher exact two-tailed test).
We reason that our analysis takes advantage of the enriched
signaling pathways deﬁned by differentially expressed genes,
but is not limited to the known gene signatures comprised of
differential genes. The HCDSPs focus on downstream signaling
proteins in the CSBs instead of those upstream. Moreover, the
survival analysis in our study ﬁlters out most clinically relevant
genes rather than differential ones. Clearly, the beneﬁts of
using such a complicated computational approach over a more
brute force experimental one are cost-effectiveness and elimination of investigator bias.
The identiﬁcation of individualized signaling networks
opens a new vista to address the heterogeneity and complexity
of three metastases of breast cancer, as illustrated by the
shared and unique proteins of HCDSPs in Fig. 1. MAP3K3 was
identiﬁed as the shared signaling factor for metastases in
general and is involved in the mitogen-activated protein/
extracellular signal–regulated kinase (MEK) signaling pathway, which, in turn, is important to breast cancer metastasis
(37). In addition, we identiﬁed that RET and FYN were upregulated in brain metastasis. Both have been reported to
regulate brain function via adhesion mediated signaling or

6160

Cancer Res; 73(20) October 15, 2013

neuronal navigation and migration (38, 39). They are overexpressed in the brain metastatic tumors and the drugs downregulating their functions were able to inhibit the development
of brain metastasis.
A phase II clinical trial of sunitinib is now underway to
evaluate progression-free survival and response rate in the
CNS metastases of breast cancer at our hospitals
(NCT00570908, www.clinicaltrials.gov). The HSDSP of brain
metastasis signaling network are signiﬁcantly associated
with the status of brain relapse in estrogen receptor negative
(ER), progesterone receptor negative (PR), and HER2
breast tumors receiving adjuvant therapy (P < 0.01; Supplementary Fig. S4). Thus, the identiﬁed known-drug targets in
the HSDSP are useful to stratify patients into target-positive
subtypes for clinical trials. Sunitinib failed clinical trials on
breast cancer as there has been no biomarker selection for
patients. New trials on RET-overexpressing patients with
breast cancer are warranted. Sunitinib inhibits the outgrowth of brain metastatic cells by repressing the MEK/
ERK and mTOR–S6K signals downstream of RET (Supplementary Fig. S3C). Combinatory inhibition of these two
signaling pathways has been shown to efﬁciently prohibit
brain metastases in animal models (24, 40). In addition, the
antibrain-metastasis role of sunitinib beneﬁts from its antiangiogenesis role. Normalizing tumor vessels would also
have the potential to improve the quality of life of patients
with breast cancer as the interstitial pressure and edema can
be reduced (41).
Dasatinib targeting of the Src family FYN inhibits the
formation of brain metastatic colonization up to 50% compared with the untreated mice. Dasatinib was developed as a
dual BCR–ABL and Src family tyrosine kinase inhibitor. There
is a signiﬁcant increase in ABL activity in the MDA-MB231
cell line, and it is highly sensitive to dasatinib (42). FYN
mRNA can be upregulated by BCR–ABL1 fusion gene oxidative
stress in chronic myelogenous leukemia cells (33). Thus, clarifying the ABL7 mechanism on different brain metastasis

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 2, 2017. © 2013 American Association for Cancer Research.

Published OnlineFirst October 4, 2013; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-4617

Systematic Drug Repositioning

Figure 5. Mechanism of sunitinib
and dasatinib on brain metastases.
A and B, representative IHC of
CD31 (A) and Ki67 (B) staining on
the brain sections. Images were
taken under 20 objective. The
brown signals are from the sections
with positive staining. C, D, G, and
H, quantiﬁcation of the perivascular
invading cells and possibility of
Ki67 expression. E and F,
quantiﬁcation of the pixels of the
vessel area and pixels of the
loci-surrounding edema area.

, P < 0.05 versus vehicle;

, P < 0.01 versus vehicle.

models will further help prioritize patient selection for dasatinib treatment.
Clinically, the usual dose of sunitinib for patients is 50 mg/d
and for dasatinib it is 100 mg/d. Converting these doses to mice
(43), the clinically relevant dose on mice for sunitinib is
approximately 10 and 20 mg/kg for dasatinib. However, sunitinib and dasatinib have limited CNS penetration (44, 45). In
our pharmacokinetic study on the xenograft model, the brain
accumulation was measured at 25% to 28% for sunitinib and

www.aacrjournals.org

7% to 11% for dasatinib (Supplementary Fig. S6). Recent data
on metastatic renal cell carcinoma showed that increased
exposure to sunitinib appears well tolerated and is associated
with improved clinical outcome, resulting in maintenance of
antitumor activity (46). According to these results, to achieve
effective concentration in CNS for treatment of brain metastases, appropriate higher doses of these drugs on patients with
brain metastasis are suggested with consideration to the
balance between efﬁcacy and toxicity. Alternatively, newer

Cancer Res; 73(20) October 15, 2013

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 2, 2017. © 2013 American Association for Cancer Research.

6161

Published OnlineFirst October 4, 2013; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-4617

Zhao et al.

formulations of these drugs may be considered to increase the
CNS penetration.
The new downstream disease-speciﬁc signaling pathway
may facilitate the repositioning of targeted drugs. The pipeline
and computational tools will be publically released for the
scientiﬁc community in the future.
Disclosure of Potential Conﬂicts of Interest
H. Zhao, G. Jin, and S.T.C. Wong have ownership interests, including a patent
pending for molecular diagnostics and methods for predicting brain metastasis
of breast cancer. No potential conﬂicts of interest were disclosed by the other
authors.

Authors' Contributions
Conception and design: H. Zhao, G. Jin, K. Cui, Y. Fan, A. Rodriguez, J. Chang,
S.T.C. Wong
Development of methodology: H. Zhao, G. Jin, D. Ren, J. Chang, S.T.C. Wong
Acquisition of data (provided animals, acquired and managed patients,
provided facilities, etc.): H. Zhao, D. Ren, A. Rodriguez, S.T.C. Wong
Analysis and interpretation of data (e.g., statistical analysis, biostatistics,
computational analysis): H. Zhao, G. Jin, K. Cui, D. Ren, P. Chen, S. Wong, F. Li,
Y. Fan, J. Chang, S.T.C. Wong
Writing, review, and/or revision of the manuscript: H. Zhao, G. Jin, S. Wong,
F. Li, Y. Fan, J. Chang, S.T.C. Wong

Administrative, technical, or material support (i.e., reporting or organizing data, constructing databases): K. Cui, D. Ren, T. Liu, S.T.C. Wong
Study supervision: J. Chang, S.T.C. Wong

Acknowledgments
The authors thank Drs. Patricia Steeg and Joan Massague for providing the
MB231-Br and CN34-Br cell lines, Dr. Neal Copeland for providing valuable
comments on the article, and Drs. Rebecca Danforth and James Mancuso for
proofreading. All microscopic imaging studies were conducted at The Methodist
Hospital Research Institute's Advanced Cellular and Tissue Microscope Core
Facility directed by S.T.C. Wong.

Grant Support
This work is funded by NIH grants U54 CA149196, NIH R01 CA139976, and
NIH R01 CA121225, a John S. Dunn Research Foundation grant (S.T.C. Wong),
and an NIH U54 CA149196 pilot project grant (H. Zhao). The authors acknowledge the computational time funding support from the Texas Advanced Computing Center (TACC; Project ID: TG-MCB110130) at The University of Texas in
Austin and BlueBioU (IBM POWER 7 Bioscience Computing Core) at Rice
University to access their powerful super-computing resources.
The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of
page charges. This article must therefore be hereby marked advertisement in
accordance with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact.
Received December 27, 2012; revised July 24, 2013; accepted August 12, 2013;
published OnlineFirst October 4, 2013.

References
1.

2.

3.

4.

5.

6.
7.

8.

9.

10.

11.

12.

13.

6162

Jin G, Fu C, Zhao H, Cui K, Chang J, Wong ST. A novel method of
transcriptional response analysis to facilitate drug repositioning for
cancer therapy. Cancer Res 2012;72:33–44.
Schaefer CF, Anthony K, Krupa S, Buchoff J, Day M, Hannay T, et al.
PID: the Pathway Interaction Database. Nucleic Acids Res 2009;37:
D674–9.
Zou S, Chang J, LaFever L, Tang W, Johnson EL, Hu J, et al. Identiﬁcation of dAven, a Drosophila melanogaster ortholog of the cell cycle
regulator Aven. Cell Cycle 2011;10:989–98.
Kanehisa M, Goto S, Kawashima S, Okuno Y, Hattori M. The KEGG
resource for deciphering the genome. Nucleic Acids Res 2004;32:
D277–80.
Hamosh A, Scott AF, Amberger JS, Bocchini CA, McKusick VA.
Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man (OMIM), a knowledgebase of
human genes and genetic disorders. Nucleic Acids Res 2005;33:
D514–7.
Yildirim MA, Goh KI, Cusick ME, Barabasi AL, Vidal M. Drug–target
network. Nat Biotechnol 2007;25:1119–26.
Milo R, Shen-Orr S, Itzkovitz S, Kashtan N, Chklovskii D, Alon U.
Network motifs: simple building blocks of complex networks. Science
2002;298:824–7.
Iorio F, Bosotti R, Scacheri E, Belcastro V, Mithbaokar P, Ferriero R,
et al. Discovery of drug mode of action and drug repositioning from
transcriptional responses. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2011;107:
14621–6.
Shats I, Gatza ML, Chang JT, Mori S, Wang J, Rich J, et al. Using a stem
cell-based signature to guide therapeutic selection in cancer. Cancer
Res 2011;71:1772–80.
Sirota M, Dudley JT, Kim J, Chiang AP, Morgan AA, Sweet-Cordero A,
et al. Discovery and preclinical validation of drug indications using
compendia of public gene expression data. Sci Transl Med 2011;3:
96ra77.
Thomson Reuters. White paper. Knowledge-based drug repositioning
to drive R&D productivity. September 2012. http://thomsonreuters.
com/business-unit/science/subsector/pdf/knowledge-based-drugrepositioning-to-drive-rd-productivity.pdf.
Chindelevitch L, Ziemek D, Enayetallah A, Randhawa R, Sidders
B, Brockel C, et al. Causal reasoning on biological networks:
interpreting transcriptional changes. Bioinformatics 2012;28:
1114–21.
Li Y, Agarwal P. A pathway-based view of human diseases and disease
relationships. PLoS ONE 2009;4:e4346.

Cancer Res; 73(20) October 15, 2013

14. Croft D, O'Kelly G, Wu G, Haw R, Gillespie M, Matthews L, et al.
Reactome: a database of reactions, pathways and biological processes. Nucleic Acids Res 2011;39:D691–7.
15. Chang JC, Wooten EC, Tsimelzon A, Hilsenbeck SG, Gutierrez MC,
Elledge R, et al. Gene expression proﬁling for the prediction of therapeutic response to docetaxel in patients with breast cancer. Lancet
2003;362:362–9.
16. Bos PD, Zhang XH, Nadal C, Shu W, Gomis RR, Nguyen DX, et al.
Genes that mediate breast cancer metastasis to the brain. Nature
2009;459:1005–9.
17. Wang Y, Klijn JG, Zhang Y, Sieuwerts AM, Look MP, Yang F, et al.
Gene-expression proﬁles to predict distant metastasis of lymph-nodenegative primary breast cancer. Lancet 2005;365:671–9.
18. Minn AJ, Gupta GP, Siegel PM, Bos PD, Shu W, Giri DD, et al. Genes
that mediate breast cancer metastasis to lung. Nature 2005;436:
518–24.
19. Jin G, Zhou X, Wang H, Zhao H, Cui K, Zhang XS, et al. The knowledgeintegrated network biomarkers discovery for major adverse cardiac
events. J Proteome Res 2008;7:4013–21.
20. Fu C, Jin G, Gao J, Zhu R, Ballesteros-villagrana E, Wong STC.
DrugMap Central (DMC), an on-line query and visualization tool to
facilitate drug repositioning studies. Bioinformatics 2013;29:1834–6.
21. Rodriguez AA, Makris A, Wu MF, Rimawi M, Froehlich A, Dave B, et al.
DNA repair signature is associated with anthracycline response in
triple negative breast cancer patients. Breast Cancer Res Treat 2011;
123:189–96.
22. Andersen JN, Sathyanarayanan S, Di Bacco A, Chi A, Zhang T, Chen
AH, et al. Pathway-based identiﬁcation of biomarkers for targeted
therapeutics: personalized oncology with PI3K pathway inhibitors. Sci
Transl Med 2010;2:43ra55.
23. Yoneda T, Williams PJ, Hiraga T, Niewolna M, Nishimura R. A boneseeking clone exhibits different biological properties from the MDAMB-231 parental human breast cancer cells and a brain-seeking clone
in vivo and in vitro. J Bone Miner Res 2001;16:1486–95.
24. Zhao H, Cui K, Nie F, Wang L, Brandl MB, Jin G, et al. The effect of
mTOR inhibition alone or combined with MEK inhibitors on brain
metastasis: an in vivo analysis in triple-negative breast cancer models.
Breast Cancer Res Treat 2011;131:425–36.
25. Pajouhesh H, Lenz GR. Medicinal chemical properties of successful
central nervous system drugs. NeuroRx 2005;2:541–53.
26. Palmieri D, Lockman PR, Thomas FC, Hua E, Herring J, Hargrave E,
et al. Vorinostat inhibits brain metastatic colonization in a model of

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 2, 2017. © 2013 American Association for Cancer Research.

Published OnlineFirst October 4, 2013; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-4617

Systematic Drug Repositioning

27.

28.

29.

30.

31.

32.
33.

34.

35.

36.

37.
38.

triple-negative breast cancer and induces DNA double-strand breaks.
Clin Cancer Res 2009;15:6148–57.
Gril B, Palmieri D, Qian Y, Smart D, Ileva L, Liewehr DJ, et al. Pazopanib
reveals a role for tumor cell B-Raf in the prevention of HER2þ breast
cancer brain metastasis. Clin Cancer Res 2011;17:142–53.
Gordon MS, Vogelzang NJ, Schoffski P, Daud A, Spira AI, O'Keefe BA,
et al. Activity of cabozantinib (XL184) in soft tissue and bone: results of
a phase II randomized discontinuation trial (RDT) in patients (pts) with
advanced solid tumors. J Clin Oncol 2011;29:3010.
Hwu WJ, Lis E, Menell JH, Panageas KS, Lamb LA, Merrell J, et al.
Temozolomide plus thalidomide in patients with brain metastases from
melanoma: a phase II study. Cancer 2005;103:2590–7.
Hwu WJ, Krown SE, Menell JH, Panageas KS, Merrell J, Lamb LA, et al.
Phase II study of temozolomide plus thalidomide for the treatment of
metastatic melanoma. J Clin Oncol 2003;21:3351–6.
Kan Z, Jaiswal BS, Stinson J, Janakiraman V, Bhatt D, Stern HM, et al.
Diverse somatic mutation patterns and pathway alterations in human
cancers. Nature 2010;466:869–73.
Saito YD, Jensen AR, Salgia R, Posadas EM. Fyn: a novel molecular
target in cancer. Cancer 2010;116:1629–37.
Ban K, Gao Y, Amin HM, Howard A, Miller C, Lin Q, et al. BCR-ABL1
mediates up-regulation of Fyn in chronic myelogenous leukemia.
Blood 2008;111:2904–8.
Yadav V, Denning MF. Fyn is induced by Ras/PI3K/Akt signaling
and is required for enhanced invasion/migration. Mol Carcinog
2011;50:346–52.
Beroukhim R, Mermel CH, Porter D, Wei G, Raychaudhuri S, Donovan
J, et al. The landscape of somatic copy-number alteration across
human cancers. Nature 2010;463:899–905.
Kang Y, Siegel PM, Shu W, Drobnjak M, Kakonen SM, Cordon-Cardo
C, et al. A multigenic program mediating breast cancer metastasis to
bone. Cancer Cell 2003;3:537–49.
Reddy KB, Nabha SM, Atanaskova N. Role of MAP kinase in tumor
progression and invasion. Cancer Metastasis Rev 2003;22:395–403.
Fukai I, Hussey RE, Sunder-Plassmann R, Reinherz EL. A critical role
for p59(fyn) in CD2-based signal transduction. Eur J Immunol 2000;
30:3507–15.

www.aacrjournals.org

39. Venteo S, Bourane S, Mechaly I, Sar C, Abdel Samad O, Puech S, et al.
Regulation of the Na,K-ATPase gamma-subunit FXYD2 by Runx1 and
Ret signaling in normal and injured non-peptidergic nociceptive sensory neurons. PLoS ONE 2012;7:e29852.
40. Nie F, Yang J, Wen S, An YL, Ding J, Ju SH, et al. Involvement
of epidermal growth factor receptor overexpression in the promotion of breast cancer brain metastasis. Cancer 2012;118:
5198–209.
41. Carmeliet P, Jain RK. Principles and mechanisms of vessel normalization for cancer and other angiogenic diseases. Nat Rev 2011;10:
417–27.
42. Finn RS, Dering J, Ginther C, Wilson CA, Glaspy P, Tchekmedyian N,
et al. Dasatinib, an orally active small molecule inhibitor of both the src
and abl kinases, selectively inhibits growth of basal-type/"triple-negative" breast cancer cell lines growing in vitro. Breast Cancer Res Treat
2007;105:319–26.
43. Reagan-Shaw S, Nihal M, Ahmad N. Dose translation from animal to
human studies revisited. FASEB J 2008;22:659–61.
44. Porkka K, Koskenvesa P, Lundan T, Rimpilainen J, Mustjoki S, Smykla
R, et al. Dasatinib crosses the blood-brain barrier and is an efﬁcient
therapy for central nervous system Philadelphia chromosome-positive
leukemia. Blood 2008;112:1005–12.
45. Gore ME, Szczylik C, Porta C, Bracarda S, Bjarnason GA, Oudard
S, et al. Safety and efﬁcacy of sunitinib for metastatic renalcell carcinoma: an expanded-access trial. Lancet Oncol 2009;10:
757–63.
46. Buti S, Donini M, Lazzarelli S, Passalacqua R. A new modiﬁed schedule
of sunitinib for metastatic renal cell carcinoma: a retrospective analysis. Acta Biomed 2012;83:88–94.
47. Barsky A, Gardy JL, Hancock RE, Munzner T. Cerebral: a Cytoscape plugin for layout of and interaction with biological networks
using subcellular localization annotation. Bioinformatics 2007;23:
1040–2.
48. Vandesompele J, De Preter K, Pattyn F, Poppe B, Van Roy N, De Paepe
A, et al. Accurate normalization of real-time quantitative RT-PCR data
by geometric averaging of multiple internal control genes. Genome Biol
2002;3:RESEARCH0034.

Cancer Res; 73(20) October 15, 2013

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 2, 2017. © 2013 American Association for Cancer Research.

6163

Published OnlineFirst October 4, 2013; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-4617

Novel Modeling of Cancer Cell Signaling Pathways Enables
Systematic Drug Repositioning for Distinct Breast Cancer
Metastases
Hong Zhao, Guangxu Jin, Kemi Cui, et al.
Cancer Res 2013;73:6149-6163. Published OnlineFirst October 4, 2013.

Updated version
Supplementary
Material

Cited articles
Citing articles

E-mail alerts
Reprints and
Subscriptions
Permissions

Access the most recent version of this article at:
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-4617
Access the most recent supplemental material at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/suppl/2013/10/31/0008-5472.CAN-12-4617.DC1

This article cites 46 articles, 11 of which you can access for free at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/73/20/6149.full#ref-list-1
This article has been cited by 1 HighWire-hosted articles. Access the articles at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/73/20/6149.full#related-urls

Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal.
To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications Department at
pubs@aacr.org.
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications Department at
permissions@aacr.org.

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 2, 2017. © 2013 American Association for Cancer Research.

