Priority Report

Endothelial Akt Signaling Is Rate-Limiting for Rapamycin Inhibition
of Mouse Mammary Tumor Progression
1

1

1

1

Thuy L. Phung, Godfred Eyiah-Mensah, Rebekah K. O’Donnell, Radoslaw Bieniek,
1
2
3
1
Sharon Shechter, Kenneth Walsh, Charlotte Kuperwasser, and Laura E. Benjamin
1
Department of Pathology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical School; 2Whitaker Cardiovascular Institute,
Boston University School of Medicine; and 3Departments of Anatomy and Cellular Biology/Radiation Oncology,
Tufts University School of Medicine/New England Medical Center, Boston, Massachusetts

Abstract
Chronic activation of Akt signaling in the endothelium
recapitulates the salient features of a tumor vasculature and
can be inhibited by rapamycin, an inhibitor of mammalian
target of rapamycin. This led to the hypothesis that the
antitumor efficacy of rapamycin may be partially dependent
on its ability to inhibit endothelial Akt signaling, making
rapamycin an antiangiogenic agent and endothelial Akt
pathway inhibitor. Dose-response studies with rapamycin
showed that primary human endothelial cells and fibroblasts
had a bimodal Akt response with effective reductions in
phosphorylated Akt (pAkt) achieved at 10 ng/mL. In contrast,
rapamycin increased pAkt levels in tumor cell lines. When
tumor-bearing mice were treated with rapamycin doses
comparable to those used clinically in transplant patients,
we observed strong inhibition of mammary tumor growth. To
test whether Akt activation in the endothelium was ratelimiting for this antitumor response, we engineered mouse
mammary tumor virus–polyoma virus middle T antigen mice
with endothelial cell–specific expression of constitutively
activated Akt. We observed that the antitumor efficacy of
rapamycin was reduced in the presence of elevated endothelial Akt activation. Just as we observed in MCF7 cells in vitro,
rapamycin doses that were antiangiogenic resulted in
increased pAkt levels in total mouse mammary tumor virus–
polyoma virus middle T antigen tumor lysates, suggesting that
tumor cells had an opposite Akt response following mammalian target of rapamycin inhibition compared with tumor
endothelial cells. Together, these data support the hypothesis
that endothelial Akt signaling in the tumor vasculature is an
important target of the novel anticancer drug rapamycin.
[Cancer Res 2007;67(11):5070–5]

Introduction
The importance of the tumor microenvironment in regulating
tumor growth and progression has been recently appreciated and
targeted for therapy (1–3). Although there is evidence that the
tumor stroma can acquire mutations and epigenetic alterations
(4, 5), it is still believed that most cells which are resident in the
tumor microenvironment are more genetically stable than tumor
cells and retain more normal responses to growth signals and other

Note: T.L. Phung and G. Eyiah-Mensah contributed equally to this work.
Requests for reprints: Laura E. Benjamin, Department of Pathology, Beth Israel
Deaconess Medical Center, 330 Brookline Avenue, Boston, MA 02215. Phone: 617-6675964; Fax: 617-667-3591; E-mail: lbenjami@bidmc.harvard.edu.
I2007 American Association for Cancer Research.
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-06-3341

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (11). June 1, 2007

metabolic cues. For example, the tumor endothelium, whether
expanded by classic angiogenesis from preexisting vessels or by
vasculogenesis from endothelial cell precursors, is believed to
represent a cellular compartment that is sensitive to therapeutic
regulation of growth control and apoptosis. Moreover, recent
successes in antiangiogenic therapies have fueled the belief that
inhibition of tumor vascular malformations or ‘‘normalization’’ of
tumor vessels would slow the tumor growth and enhance the
effects of chemotherapeutic agents (6). Thus, the identification of
novel antiangiogenic therapies with good tolerance and efficacy is
important. Rapamycin is a specific inhibitor of the mammalian
target of rapamycin (mTOR) signaling pathway, the importance of
which in controlling cellular proliferation and survival has
attracted the attention of cancer biologists (7, 8). We have
investigated the mechanism of rapamycin’s reported antiangiogenic activity and found that its inhibition of endothelial Akt
signaling may reduce vascular permeability and block tumor
vessel–like vascular morphology driven by Akt (9). In this study, we
have asked whether rapamycin inhibition of endothelial Akt
signaling plays an important role in the antitumor efficacy of
rapamycin.

Materials and Methods
Cell culture. Human dermal microvascular endothelial cells and
fibroblasts were isolated as previously described (10). These cells were
cultured in EGM-2 media supplemented with 5% FCS and growth factors
(Clonetics). MCF7 cells ( from the cell line repository at the Lombardi
Cancer Center, Georgetown University) were cultured in MEM supplemented with 10% FCS, 0.1 mmol/L of nonessential amino acids, 1 mmol/L
of sodium pyruvate, and 0.01 mg/mL of insulin. Primary human mammary
fibroblasts were isolated as described (11). These cells were cultured in
DMEM supplemented with 10% calf serum. Use of human tissue was
approved by the Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center and the Tufts
University School of Medicine Institutional Review Boards.
Mice. The transgenic mouse model that expresses constitutively active
myristoylated Akt (myrAkt) in endothelial cells under tetracycline control
has been previously described (9, 12). Control double transgenic mice (DTG)
used in this study carried the mouse mammary tumor virus–polyoma virus
middle T antigen (MMTV-PyT) transgene and either the VE-cadherin/tTA
or the TET/myrAkt transgene. DTG mice developed mammary tumors but
did not express endothelial cell myrAkt. Triple transgenic mice (TTG) carry
all three transgenes MMTV-PyT, VE-Cadherin/tTA, and TET/myrAkt. These
animals develop mammary tumors and express tetracycline-repressible
myrAkt in endothelial cells. Untreated DTG controls (n = 5) were compared
with rapamycin-treated DTG and TTG animals (n = 3–4 animals for each
genotype and for each dose). All studies were conducted in compliance with
the Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center Institutional Animal Care and
Use Committee guidelines.
Tumor growth. MMTV-PyT tumor–bearing female mice were taken off
tetracycline to turn on myrAkt expression when tumors first became
palpable, and on the same day treatment F rapamycin was initiated. Mice

5070

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Rapamycin Is an Endothelial Akt Inhibitor
were injected i.p. with rapamycin at the indicated doses everyday, and
tumor growth was measured daily with a caliper. All tumor treatments were
initiated at similar tumor sizes (i.e., when a tumor first became palpable).
Tumor volume was calculated as volume = length  width  depth.
Rapamycin (LC Laboratories) was prepared in a solvent as previously
described (9). Means were calculated for each time point and graphed
showing error bars for SDs. Unpaired two-tailed Student’s t test was used to
calculate the significance of these means compared to controls with Prism
software (GraphPad Software, Inc.).
Immunofluorescent staining. Freshly harvested tissue was immediately
frozen in OCT embedding medium and stored at 80jC until use. Fivemicron-thick frozen sections were fixed in cold 4% paraformaldehyde for
5 min, then stained with primary antibodies rat anti-mouse CD31 monoclonal antibody (1:100 dilution; BD Biosciences), rabbit anti-mouse phosphoAkt (Ser473) monoclonal antibody (1:50 dilution; Upstate Biotechnology), or
rabbit anti-mouse phospho-S6 ribosomal protein polyclonal antibody (1:200
dilution; Cell Signaling Technology) overnight at 4jC. Tissues were then
incubated in appropriate FITC- or Cy3-conjugated secondary antibody
(1:100 dilution; Jackson ImmunoResearch) for 1 h at room temperature.
Images were captured using a Nikon TE200 inverted microscope equipped
with differential interference contrast microscopy/phase/fluorescence
optics, connected to a Leica DC200 digital camera and analyzed using
DCViewer software.
WST-1 assay. WST-1 assay for cell viability was done according to the
directions of the manufacturer (Roche Applied Science). Briefly, subconfluent cells in 96-well plates were treated with rapamycin (1–100 ng/mL) in
minimal media supplemented with 2% FCS for 72 h, at which time 10 AL of
WST-1 reagent was added to each well in a final volume of 100 AL per well.
Cells were incubated for 4 h, after which the absorbance of samples was
measured against a background control as blank at 450 nm.

Vascular content. A quantitative assessment of tumor vascular content
was measured by taking one third to one half of individual tumors and
measuring the relative amount of VE-cadherin mRNA to glyceraldehyde-3phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH) mRNA in the total RNA fraction using
quantitative real-time reverse transcription-PCR as described (12). Triplicates were run and required to be within 0.1 SE to be used for further
analysis. Controls included samples F Taq Polymerase, and RNA alone
without reverse transcription. In addition, dilutions of the cDNA were run
to ensure the efficiency of the reactions. Statistical significance was
achieved in all sets both for triplicates within experiments and repeats of
experiments. The statistical analysis was done on the yCT (dCT) values, and
treatment groups in which these values were not significantly different are
marked ‘‘n.s.’’ on the graph that shows fold changes in expression. The
formula used to calculate fold change was FC = 2-(dCT), with dCT calculated
as the difference in CT values between VE-cadherin and GAPDH. Primers
used for quantitative reverse transcription-PCR of VE-cadherin were sense,
5¶ ggccctggacagactgca 3¶ and antisense, 5¶ ttcgtggaggagctgatc 3¶. Primers
used for GAPDH were sense, 5¶ ggcaaattcaacggcacagt 3¶ and antisense,
5¶ aagatggtgatgggcttccc 3¶.
Western blot analysis. Subconfluent cells in 10-cm plates were treated
with rapamycin (1–50 ng/mL) in minimal media supplemented with 2%
FCS for 48 h. Cells were harvested and cell lysates were analyzed by
Western blot according to standard protocols. Blots were probed with
antibodies to phosphorylated Akt (pAkt; Ser473), phosphorylated p70 S6
kinase Ser371, total p70 S6 kinase (all from Cell Signaling Technology),
total Akt (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Inc.), and h-actin (Sigma-Aldrich).
Densitometry results were calculated as mean F SD. Statistical
significance of all data was analyzed using InStat 3.0 (GraphPad Software,
Inc.). P V 0.05 in unpaired two-tailed Student’s t test were considered to
be statistically significant.

Figure 1. Effects of rapamycin on levels of activated Akt and cell viability in primary human endothelial cells and fibroblasts, and MCF7 breast cancer cells.
A, Western blot analyses of cells after 48 h of rapamycin treatment for phosphorylated Akt (pAkt ), total Akt (Akt), phosphorylated S6 kinase (pS6 kinase ), and total S6
kinase (S6 kinase ). B, WST-1 assays for cell viability after 72 h of rapamycin treatment. Results are averages of three independent experiments, 12 replicates per
condition. *, P < 0.02; **, P < 0.001; ***, P < 0.005.

www.aacrjournals.org

5071

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (11). June 1, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

Figure 2. Rapamycin blood levels in FVB mice and MMTV-PyT tumor growth in response to rapamycin. A, trough blood levels of rapamycin in FVB mice after
8 d of treatment, i.p. injections (n = 5 animals per group). B, growth of MMTV-PyT tumors in DTG mice treated with 0, 0.1, and 0.5 mg/kg/d of rapamycin for 1 mo
initiated after tumors became palpable. Points, means; bars, SD. Both 0.1 and 0.5 mg/kg rapamycin treatment groups had means that were significantly different
from untreated controls (P < 0.002).

Results and Discussion
Prolonged treatment of cells with rapamycin, as in a therapeutic
setting, inhibits signaling downstream of mTOR, which can have
either positive or negative feedback effects on the upstream Akt
pathway (9, 13, 14). One mechanism that has been proposed for
rapamycin inhibition of Akt activation is the inhibition of mTORrictor complex 2 assembly, a kinase for Akt at Ser473 (13, 15).
Alternatively, increased pAkt signaling has been attributed to the
release of feedback inhibition from S6 kinase to insulin-responsive
substrate-1, which promotes pAkt signaling (14). We have treated
MCF7 breast cancer cells and stromal cells in vitro for 48 h with
rapamycin in a dose range from 1 to 50 ng/mL. Reproducibly, we
observed a bimodal pAkt response in primary human endothelial
cells and primary human dermal fibroblasts with increased pAkt
levels at 1 ng/mL of rapamycin followed by a dose-dependent
decrease in pAkt from 4 to 50 ng/mL of rapamycin (Fig. 1A). Similar
dose-dependent responses to rapamycin were also observed in
primary human mammary fibroblasts. However, rapamycin had a
different effect in MCF7 tumor cells. There was a dose-dependent
increase in pAkt levels in response to rapamycin, which remained
elevated at rapamycin concentrations up to 50 ng/mL (Fig. 1A).
Similar treatment of another tumor cell line, HeLa cells, with
rapamycin showed that the decrease in pAkt levels occurred at
much higher drug concentrations than in stromal cells (data not
shown). In all cell types tested, pS6 kinase was effectively inhibited at
much lower drug doses than pAkt, although in tumor cells, pS6
kinase was still more refractory to rapamycin than primary
endothelial cells and fibroblasts (Fig. 1A). These data, in combination with those published by others (14, 16), suggests that tumor
cells are more resistant to rapamycin inhibition of pAkt than
stromal cells. We next tested cell viability in response to rapamycin

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (11). June 1, 2007

and found that in general, the relative viability of these cells reflected
their pAkt response (Fig. 1B). In human dermal endothelial cells and
human dermal fibroblasts, cell viability was reduced; however, in
MCF7 cells, there was an increase in cell viability at lower drug
concentrations, which plateaued at higher drug concentrations.
In order to determine the pharmacologically relevant doses of
rapamycin for treatment in a mouse model of breast carcinoma, we
performed a rapamycin dose-response study in mice of the same FVB
genetic background as our tumor model. We observed that the
rapamycin blood levels recommended for clinical use in transplant
patients for immunosuppression (6–15 ng/mL; ref. 17) were achieved
between 0.1 and 0.5 mg/kg/d after 8 days of treatment in mice
(Fig. 2A). Using the mouse spontaneous mammary tumor model
MMTV-PyT, we tested the ability of rapamycin to inhibit tumor
growth at these doses. We initiated rapamycin treatment when
the tumors first became palpable, at which point they had passed
the angiogenic switch and were 50 to 100 mm3. We observed
effective inhibition of tumor growth in control DTG mice at 0.1 and
0.5 mg/kg/d (Fig. 2B). We have previously shown that these doses of
rapamycin were effective at reducing pAkt levels in the tumor vasculature, suggesting that endothelial Akt signaling may be an important target of the antitumor efficacy of rapamycin (9). Consistent
with these findings, dosing of rapamycin in a mouse model of
colon cancer was important for drug efficacy, and continuous infusion
of low drug doses was more effective at reducing tumor growth than
bolus dosing (18). Rapamycin blood levels were 15 ng/mL under
those conditions. Metronomic dosing of chemotherapeutic drugs
have been found to be most effective for targeting the stroma (19).
Clinical trials of rapamycin in breast cancer have reported the use
of a dosing schedule similar to standard chemotherapy and significantly different from the daily dosing schedule for rapamycin in

5072

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Rapamycin Is an Endothelial Akt Inhibitor

transplant patients. The standard chemotherapy dosing may be
less effective than our metronomic dosing if indeed the real tumor
target is the stroma. Rapamycin has been shown to reduce tumor
cell proliferation and increase apoptosis in breast tumors (20). In
addition, our previous work showed that rapamycin decreases Akt
signaling and vascular permeability in tumor endothelium (9).
Therefore, to test whether the antitumor response to rapamycin
was limited by endothelial Akt signaling, we did a similar course of
drug treatment in TTG animals that were littermates of the control
DTG animals shown in Fig. 2B. In addition to forming spontaneous
mammary tumors, TTG mice also had endothelial cell–specific
expression of myrAkt that was repressible by tetracycline. To assess
the response to rapamycin in animals with elevated endothelial Akt
signaling, tetracycline was removed when tumors first became
palpable. Removal of tetracycline permitted the expression of
endothelial myrAkt and rapamycin treatment was initiated at this
time. Among the untreated groups, the overall tumor growth in
TTG mice was similar to that in DTG mice, indicating that
endothelial Akt activation did not confer a growth advantage to
tumors per se (Fig. 3A). However, TTG tumors with constitutive
endothelial Akt activation showed increased resistance to rapamycin treatment at both low and high drug doses (Fig. 3B). We have
used a particular VE-cadherin/tTA transgenic line (D4 line) that

when crossed with TET/myrAkt mice, exhibited a modest increase
in myrAkt expression and a slow alteration in the systemic
vasculature, causing it to resemble the tumor vasculature. The
systemic vascular leak and edema lead to death of the animals after
6 to 7 weeks of myrAkt induction (9). In the course of this study, the
animals remained overtly healthy, although a nonstatistically
significant trend for reduced tumor growth in the untreated TTG
began after 15 days of myrAkt expression compared with control
DTG animals (Fig. 3A). Our interpretation is that this late-trend
drop in tumor growth was due to the decreased systemic vascular
function that we previously reported rather than directly due to Akt
expression in the tumor vasculature (9).
We predicted that reduction in vascular permeability in tumors
would lead to reduction in interstitial fluid pressure, which usually
is reflected by more ‘‘open’’ vessel lumens. Visualization of the
tumor vasculature with anti-CD31 antibody to label endothelial
cells in tumor tissue sections revealed that rapamycin treatment
reduced the number of tumor vessels but also resulted in more
opened blood vessels (Fig. 3C). We have sampled tumor sections
from viable portions of both smaller and larger tumor nodules,
thus representing a range of tumor sizes, and did not observe open
lumens in untreated tumors. Even though the vessel morphology differed with rapamycin treatment, there were no striking

Figure 3. Effects of increased endothelial
Akt activation on MMTV-PyT tumor
response to rapamycin. A, time course of
tumor growth in untreated DTG and TTG
mice. Points, means; bars, SD. B, time
course of tumor growth in DTG and TTG
mice treated with 0.1 and 0.5 mg/kg of
rapamycin. DTG and TTG mice were
matched sets of littermates. Differences in
mean tumor volume for DTG versus
TTG were statistically significant for
each rapamycin dose (P < 0.001).
C, representative tumor sections stained
with anti-CD31 antibody (green ) to
highlight the tumor vasculature. Untreated
tumors and tumors treated with
0.5 mg/kg/d of rapamycin (magnification,
200). D, RNA was isolated from tumors
at the end of the study and quantified
for endogenous VE-cadherin mRNA levels
by real-time reverse transcription-PCR
as a read-out of endothelial cell content.
The average fold change in treated DTG
and TTG tumors relative to corresponding
untreated tumors. Data for 0.1 and
0.5 mg/kg rapamycin for each genotype
were combined into one group.
Combining the treatment groups did not
alter the relative responses or statistical
significance. n.s., not statistically
significant; n, number of tumors analyzed.

www.aacrjournals.org

5073

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (11). June 1, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

Figure 4. Activated Akt and pS6 kinase levels in MMTV-PyT tumors treated with rapamycin. A, Western blots of tumors from DTG and TTG animals treated with
0, 0.1, and 0.5 mg/kg of rapamycin. pAkt (B) and pS6 kinase (C ) levels were measured in multiple samples (n = 3 animals per group) and quantified by densitometric
analysis followed by normalization of phosphorylated protein to total protein levels. D, tumor tissue sections from TTG mice F rapamycin were double-stained for
pAkt (red) and CD31 (green ; top ), or pS6 (red) and CD31 (green ; bottom ). Endothelial cells expressing pAkt or pS6 (arrows ). Original magnification, 200.

differences in pericyte or mural cell coverage between untreated
and treated tumors as determined by smooth muscle actin staining
of tumor sections (data not shown).
To quantify the vascular content in large areas of tumor, we used
a quantitative method to provide an average relative vascular
content. Real-time quantitative reverse transcription-PCR analysis
for endothelial cell–specific VE-cadherin mRNA levels in whole
tumor lysates allowed us to obtain a relative value for the vascular
content in control and treated tumor samples (Fig. 3D). This
methodology has been useful in measuring vascular content in
several contexts including developing organs (12). We observed
that rapamycin reduced the vascular content in DTG tumors.
Consistent with the decreased rapamycin efficacy of tumor growth
inhibition in TTG animals, we did not observe significantly reduced
vascular content in treated TTG animals. However, there was a
greater variation in vascular content from tumor to tumor in the
untreated TTG tumors, consistent with the increased variation
seen in tumor growth in the time period that these RNA samples
were obtained (see Fig. 3A, days 15–20). Overall, the data from
control animals were consistent with other reports that rapamycin
was antiangiogenic and reduced vascular density (18, 21). Because
the only difference in TTG and DTG tumors treated with
rapamycin was the expression of endothelial myrAkt, our data
suggests that the antivascular efficacy of rapamycin is reduced in
the setting of increased endothelial Akt activation.

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (11). June 1, 2007

Because we observed a difference between stromal cells and
tumor cells in pAkt response to rapamycin in vitro (Fig. 1), we next
assessed the levels of pAkt in MMTV-PyT tumors F rapamycin by
Western blot analysis of whole tumor lysates, in which the majority
of the cells were tumor cells (Fig. 4A). Quantitation of Western
blots of multiple tumor lysates (n = 3 animals per group) by
densitometry showed that statistically significant increases in pAkt
levels were observed in both DTG and TTG tumors treated with
0.5 mg/kg of rapamycin as compared with corresponding untreated
tumors or tumors treated with a low dose of rapamycin (0.1 mg/kg;
Fig. 4A and B). Both DTG and TTG total tumor lysates had reduced
pS6 kinase levels at 0.5 mg/kg of rapamycin as compared with
corresponding untreated tumors (Fig. 4A and C). However, the
inhibitory effects of rapamycin at 0.5 mg/kg on S6 kinase
phosphorylation was less in TTG than in DTG animals, suggesting
that increased endothelial Akt activation in the vasculature led to
increased resistance to rapamycin downstream of mTOR (Fig. 4C).
We failed to observe any significant changes in either pAkt or pS6
kinase levels in total lysates from tumors treated with 0.1 mg/kg of
rapamycin. However, even at this low drug dose (corresponding to
trough blood levels of 5.47 ng/mL, which is at the low end of the
therapeutic range in patients), significant inhibition of tumor
growth was observed (Figs. 2B and 3A).
To differentiate tumor cell and endothelial cell pAkt levels in
response to rapamycin, tumor sections were double-stained for

5074

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Rapamycin Is an Endothelial Akt Inhibitor

CD31 (to label endothelial cells) and pAkt, or CD31 and
phosphorylated S6 ribosomal protein (pS6), another marker of
Akt/mTOR activation (Fig. 4D). In untreated TTG animals, there
was abundant pAkt in both tumor cells and blood vessels. However,
in rapamycin-treated animals, pAkt levels in tumors blood vessels
were significantly reduced, whereas pAkt levels in tumor cells were
not significantly altered. Similar findings in tumor sections were
seen with pS6. Thus, even in the setting of sustained endothelial
Akt activation in TTG tumors, rapamycin effectively blocked Akt/
mTOR signaling in tumor endothelial cells. Our in vitro studies
showed that rapamycin, even at low concentrations, inhibited pAkt
and pS6 kinase as well as cell viability in human endothelial cells
and fibroblasts (Fig. 1A). Taken together, these findings suggest that
the stromal response to rapamycin was more sensitive than the
tumor response and is important for tumor growth inhibition.
As we have previously shown, sustained Akt activation
significantly increases vascular permeability (9). We showed that
rapamycin reduced tumor vascular permeability, which could lead
to reduced interstitial fluid pressure and better perfusion of the
tumor, thus providing more effective delivery of the drug and
improved antitumor effects. Our observations of more open vessel
lumens in rapamycin-treated tumors are consistent with our
previous finding of reduced tumor vascular permeability. It has
been difficult to determine whether the characteristic alterations in
tumor vascular structure and function provide a benefit to the
tumor. Our data supports the hypothesis that reducing vascular
abnormalities correlated with reduced tumor growth in the TTG
rapamycin cohort. Further supporting this hypothesis are the
findings that reduction of vascular hyperpermeability by endothelial nitric oxide synthase inhibitors delays tumor progression in
mice without direct cytostatic or antiangiogenic effects (22). Thus,
we propose that clinical anticancer treatment with rapamycin is
antiangiogenic in nature, and may be beneficial even at low doses
at which the antitumor effects reflect vascular normalization rather
than frank reduction in vascular density. A combined benefit might
be expected in combination therapy of standard chemotherapy
plus rapamycin because improved vascular function has been

References
1. Melillo G, Semenza GL. Meeting report: exploiting the
tumor microenvironment for therapeutics. Cancer Res
2006;66:4558–60.
2. van Kempen LC, Ruiter DJ, van Muijen GN, Coussens
LM. The tumor microenvironment: a critical determinant
of neoplastic evolution. Eur J Cell Biol 2003;82:539–48.
3. Peek RM, Jr., Mohla S, DuBois RN. Inflammation in the
genesis and perpetuation of cancer: summary and
recommendations from a national cancer institutesponsored meeting. Cancer Res 2005;65:8583–6.
4. Bierie B, Moses HL. Tumour microenvironment:
TGFh: the molecular Jekyll and Hyde of cancer. Nat
Rev Cancer 2006;6:506–20.
5. Hida K, Hida Y, Amin DN, et al. Tumor-associated
endothelial cells with cytogenetic abnormalities. Cancer
Res 2004;64:8249–55.
6. Jain RK. Normalization of tumor vasculature: an
emerging concept in antiangiogenic therapy. Science
2005;307:58–62.
7. Bjornsti MA, Houghton PJ. The TOR pathway: a target
for cancer therapy. Nat Rev Cancer 2004;4:335–48.
8. Hay N, Sonenberg N. Upstream and downstream of
mTOR. Genes Dev 2004;18:1926–45.
9. Phung TL, Ziv K, Dabydeen D, et al. Pathological
angiogenesis is induced by sustained Akt signaling and
inhibited by rapamycin. Cancer Cell 2006;10:159–70.
10. Richard L, Velasco P, Detmar M. A simple immuno-

www.aacrjournals.org

proposed to increase the efficacy of drug distribution within
tumors (23). Two studies have reported a synergy between
rapamycin and doxorubicin in a myc-driven mouse model of
lymphoma (24), and between rapamycin and paclitaxel in breast
cancer xenografts models (25). These two studies focused on tumor
cell apoptosis with the assumption that the findings were due to
direct effects on tumor cells, but did not address optimal drug
schedules and dosing, or whether there was a vascular component
to their synergy.
Our observations that rapamycin is similarly effective at reducing
Akt activation and cell viability of other stromal components, such
as fibroblasts, may suggest that rapamycin is acting as an overall
stromal inhibitor rather than strictly as an angiogenic inhibitor.
A test of the importance of rapamycin-mediated stromal inhibition
awaits model systems to induce Akt activation in other stromal cells
besides endothelial cells. Although we cannot exclude the possibility
that rapamycin has direct inhibitory effects on tumor cell
proliferation and metabolic pathways via inhibition of mTOR and
its downstream effectors, our data do suggest that the endothelial
Akt response plays a significant role in the antitumor efficacy of
rapamycin. The findings in our in vitro and in vivo studies highlight
the dose dependence of rapamycin activity. This is consistent with
previous studies that report optimal efficacy at low doses and with
continuous dosing (18, 21, 26). Thus, careful consideration of
rapamycin dosing and scheduling is indicated for optimal use of
rapamycin in cancer treatment.

Acknowledgments
Received 9/8/2006; revised 4/10/2007; accepted 4/20/2007.
Grant support: The Komen Foundation, the Department of Defense Breast Cancer
Research Program, and the NIH CA109086 (L.E. Benjamin), and the NIH NRSA
Training Grant T32 HL07893 and the American Cancer Society PF-06-185-01-MGO
(T.L. Phung).
The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of page
charges. This article must therefore be hereby marked advertisement in accordance
with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact.
We thank Carole Perruzzi and Benjamin Hopkins for excellent technical assistance,
and Dr. Gary Horowitz, Laurie Walsh, and Adele Pistorino for performing immunoassays of rapamycin blood levels.

magnetic protocol for the selective isolation and longterm culture of human dermal microvascular endothelial cells. Exp Cell Res 1998;240:1–6.
11. Kuperwasser C, Chavarria T, Wu M, et al. Reconstruction of functionally normal and malignant human
breast tissues in mice. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2004;
101:4966–71.
12. Sun JF, Phung T, Shiojima I, et al. Microvascular
patterning is controlled by fine-tuning the Akt signal.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2005;102:128–33.
13. Sarbassov dos D, Ali SM, Sengupta S, et al. Prolonged
rapamycin treatment inhibits mTORC2 assembly and
Akt/PKB. Mol Cell 2006;22:159–68.
14. O’Reilly KE, Rojo F, She QB, et al. mTOR inhibition
induces upstream receptor tyrosine kinase signaling and
activates Akt. Cancer Res 2006;66:1500–8.
15. Sarbassov dos D, Guertin DA, Ali SM, Sabatini DM.
Phosphorylation and regulation of Akt/PKB by the
rictor-mTOR complex. Science 2005;307:1098–101.
16. Edinger AL, Linardic CM, Chiang GG, Thompson CB,
Abraham RT. Differential effects of rapamycin on
mammalian target of rapamycin signaling functions in
mammalian cells. Cancer Res 2003;63:8451–60.
17. Meier-Kriesche HU, Kaplan B. Toxicity and efficacy of
sirolimus: relationship to whole-blood concentrations.
Clin Ther 2000;22 Suppl B:B93–100.
18. Guba M, Koehl GE, Neppl E, et al. Dosing of
rapamycin is critical to achieve an optimal antiangiogenic effect against cancer. Transpl Int 2005;18:89–94.

5075

19. Kerbel RS, Kamen BA. The anti-angiogenic basis of
metronomic chemotherapy. Nat Rev Cancer 2004;4:
423–36.
20. Namba R, Young LJ, Abbey CK, et al. Rapamycin
inhibits growth of premalignant and malignant mammary lesions in a mouse model of ductal carcinoma
in situ. Clin Cancer Res 2006;12:2613–21.
21. Guba M, von Breitenbuch P, Steinbauer M, et al.
Rapamycin inhibits primary and metastatic tumor
growth by antiangiogenesis: involvement of vascular
endothelial growth factor. Nat Med 2002;8:128–35.
22. Gratton JP, Lin MI, Yu J, et al. Selective inhibition
of tumor microvascular permeability by cavtratin
blocks tumor progression in mice. Cancer Cell 2003;
4:31–9.
23. Minchinton AI, Tannock IF. Drug penetration in solid
tumours. Nat Rev Cancer 2006;6:583–92.
24. Wendel HG, De Stanchina E, Fridman JS, et al.
Survival signalling by Akt and eIF4E in oncogenesis and
cancer therapy. Nature 2004;428:332–7.
25. Mondesire WH, Jian W, Zhang H, et al. Targeting
mammalian target of rapamycin synergistically enhances chemotherapy-induced cytotoxicity in breast cancer
cells. Clin Cancer Res 2004;10:7031–42.
26. Atkins MB, Hidalgo M, Stadler WM, et al. Randomized phase II study of multiple dose levels of CCI-779, a
novel mammalian target of rapamycin kinase inhibitor,
in patients with advanced refractory renal cell carcinoma. J Clin Oncol 2004;22:909–18.

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (11). June 1, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Correction
Correction: Rapamycin Is an Endothelial Akt Inhibitor
In the article on how rapamycin is an endothelial Akt inhibitor in
the June 1, 2007 issue of Cancer Research (1), there is an error in
Fig. 3B. The corrected figure appears below.

1. Phung TL, Eyiah-Mensah G, O’Donnell RK, Bieniek R, Shechter S, Walsh K,
Kuperwasser C, Benjamin LE. Endothelial Akt signaling is rate-limiting for rapamycin
inhibition of mouse mammary tumor progression. Cancer Res 2007;67:5070–5.

I2007 American Association for Cancer Research.
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-67-13-COR2

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (13). July 1, 2007

6528

www.aacrjournals.org

Endothelial Akt Signaling Is Rate-Limiting for Rapamycin
Inhibition of Mouse Mammary Tumor Progression
Thuy L. Phung, Godfred Eyiah-Mensah, Rebekah K. O'Donnell, et al.
Cancer Res 2007;67:5070-5075.

Updated version

Cited articles
Citing articles

E-mail alerts
Reprints and
Subscriptions
Permissions

Access the most recent version of this article at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/67/11/5070

This article cites 26 articles, 13 of which you can access for free at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/67/11/5070.full#ref-list-1
This article has been cited by 14 HighWire-hosted articles. Access the articles at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/67/11/5070.full#related-urls

Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal.
To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications
Department at pubs@aacr.org.
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications
Department at permissions@aacr.org.

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

