www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Oncotarget, 2017, Vol. 8, (No. 5), pp: 8383-8396
Research Paper

Nanometronomic treatment of 4T1 breast cancer with nanocaged
doxorubicin prevents drug resistance and circumvents
cardiotoxicity
Serena Mazzucchelli1, Michela Bellini2, Luisa Fiandra1, Marta Truffi1, Maria A.
Rizzuto2, Luca Sorrentino1, Erika Longhi1, Manuela Nebuloni1, Davide Prosperi2,
Fabio Corsi1,3
1
2
3

Department of Biomedical and Clinical Sciences “Luigi Sacco”, University of Milan, Milan, Italy
Department of Biotechnology and Biosciences, University of Milan-Bicocca, Milano, Italy
Surgery Department, Breast Unit, ICS Maugeri S. p. A. SB, Pavia, Italy

Correspondence to: Fabio Corsi, email: fabio.corsi@unimi.it
Davide Prosperi, email: davide.prosperi@unimib.it
Keywords: metronomic chemotherapy, breast cancer, doxorubicin, drug resistance, tumor targeting
Received: October 07, 2016     Accepted: November 24, 2016     Published: December 25, 2016

ABSTRACT
Chemotherapeutic treatment of breast cancer is based on maximum tolerated
dose (MTD) approach. However, advanced stage tumors are not effectively eradicated
by MTD owing to suboptimal drug targeting, onset of therapeutic resistance and
neoangiogenesis. In contrast, “metronomic” chemotherapy is based on frequent
drug administrations at lower doses, resulting in neovascularization inhibition and
induction of tumor dormancy. Here we show the potential of H-ferritin (HFn)-mediated
targeted nanodelivery of metronomic doxorubicin (DOX) in the setting of a highly
aggressive and metastatic 4T1 breast cancer mouse model with DOX-inducible
expression of chemoresistance. We find that HFn-DOX administered at repeated doses
of 1.24 mg kg−1 strongly improves the antitumor potential of DOX chemotherapy
arresting the tumor progression. We find that such a potent antitumor effect is
attributable to multiple nanodrug actions beyond cell killing, including inhibition of
tumor angiogenesis and avoidance of chemoresistance. Multiparametric assessment
of heart tissues, including histology, ultrastructural analysis of tissue morphology,
and measurement of markers of reactive oxygen species and hepatic/renal conditions,
provided evidence that metronomic HFn-DOX allowed us to overcome cardiotoxicity.
Our results suggest that HFn-DOX has tremendous potential for the development of
“nanometronomic” chemotherapy toward safe and tailored oncological treatments.

in cancer cell proliferation accompanied by manifestation
of chemoresistance and accelerated angiogenesis are likely
[4, 5]. Hence, a reappraisal of advanced-stage cancer
management is ongoing, moving from the “maximum
tolerable” to the “minimum effective” dose paradigm [6].
Indeed, cytotoxic agents administered at low dosages are
expected to allow protracted treatments and have been
suggested to up-regulate antiangiogenic factors such as
thrombospondin-1 and to inhibit vascular endothelial
growth factor and platelet-derived growth factor [2, 7].
The first clinical trials using low-dose metronomic
(LDM) chemotherapy were conducted for breast,
prostate, gastrointestinal, renal and pancreatic cancers,

INTRODUCTION
Over the past decades, cytotoxic chemotherapeutics
have dominated the systemic management of cancer
according to the “maximum tolerated dose” (MTD)
paradigm [1, 2]. MTD therapy requires that patients are
administered with single dose or short courses of the
highest tolerable dosage of a drug in order to achieve the
best therapeutic efficacy. Due to low tumor selectivity,
MTD treatments cannot be protracted in order to allow
recovery of healthy tissues and to reduce myelosuppression
associated with pulsed drug doses [3]. In fast-growing or
metastatic tumors, during these therapeutic breaks, a burst
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

8383

Oncotarget

RESULTS

as well as refractory melanoma [8–10]. This regimen
is based on a lower dose of drugs administered
more frequently, without the need of extensive
interruptions [2, 11]. While the conventional dosedense chemotherapeutic setting is suggested to act by
targeting the proliferating tumor cells [12], LDM is
presumed to affect the vasculature growth and repair [8,
13], to reduce systemic toxicity and myelosuppression,
and to improve the stimulation of the host immune
system against the tumor [1, 4]. However, several
limiting factors remain for LDM in order to displace
MTD treatments in clinical practice, including 1) low
drug accumulation at tumor site [14], 2) controversial
effectiveness against chemoresistance in advanced
metastatic cancers [15], and 3) acquired resistance after
prolonged treatment [16].
Recent advances in nanotechnology could offer
groundbreaking solutions to improve the effectiveness of
LDM chemotherapy, by taking advantage of the unique
targeting efficiency of engineered nanocarriers [17]. In
the present work, we propose a new concept of low dose
“nanometronomic” (LDNM) chemotherapy. In principle,
it is possible to obtain a prolonged antitumor effect with
LDNM by means of multitasking nanocarriers that
deliver lower dose of drug selectively to the growing
tumor, inhibit the neovascularization process and prevent
chemoresistance. Doxorubicin (DOX) is an excellent
pilot drug for use in a LDM regimen [18], as its great
anticancer efficacy is notoriously dose-limited by severe
systemic side effects above all long-term cardiotoxicity
with different severity grades from reduction in left
ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) to severe congestive
heart failure [19, 20]. Liposomal anthracyclines,
including pegylated liposomal doxorubicin (pl-DOX),
have been introduced in clinical practice to enhance
the therapeutic index and to avoid cardiotoxicity of
these drugs thanks to higher accumulation of DOX
in the tumor with reduced concentration in off-target
organs [21]. However, meta-analyses of several clinical
trials comparing pl-DOX to conventional DOX have
demonstrated reduced (but not annulled) cardiotoxicity
of pl-DOX, without improvement in progression-free
or overall survival in advanced breast cancer (BC)
[22]. Therefore, improving the therapeutic index of
DOX remains an open challenge. As an ideal DOX
nanocarrier for our LDNM study, we used H-Ferritin
(HFn) nanocages, recently proposed as a promising
bionanoparticle for cancer targeting [23] owing to its
affinity for transferrin receptor 1 (TfR-1), which is
constitutively overexpressed in primary and metastatic
cancer cells [24]. HFn-DOX complex was recently
demonstrated to overcome chemoresistance by actively
promoting DOX nuclear translocation in vitro [25, 26]
and was tested as a MTD treatment of a DOX-sensitive
BC animal model with encouraging results [27].

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

In vitro uptake and cytotoxicity of HFn-DOX in
4T1 breast cancer cells
The 4T1 cell line (4T1-L) was selected as in vitro
and in vivo BC model for three main reasons: 1) tumor
aggressiveness due to 4T1 genetic patterning, which
results in high level of proliferation, migration and
invasiveness; 2) basal expression of MDR-1 transporter,
which switches into overexpression upon treatment
with DOX resulting in chemoresistance [28]; 3) stable
luciferase expression, which allowed us to follow the
tumor progression and metastases. 4T1-L cells were
first treated with FITC-labeled HFn (FITC-HFn) [25] to
investigate the nanoparticle-cell interaction. Cells were
incubated with FITC-HFn for 15 min, 1, 3 and 48 h, and
analyzed by confocal microscopy to evaluate the uptake
and intracellular trafficking. HFn was quickly internalized,
since it was recovered inside the cell cytoplasm after only
15 min of incubation, and it continued accumulating in
the cytosol until 3 h (Figure 1A). The intracellular signal
intensity decreased after 48 h probably due to ferritin
disassembly, consistent with previous evidence [25]. HFn
was found partly compartmentalized in early endosomes
and partly free in the cytosol (Supplementary Figure 1),
while the absence of colocalization with lysosomes, Golgi
and transferrin (Tf) marker suggested that HFn did not
follow lysosomal degradation, elimination or recycling,
respectively, in agreement of previous evidence [25].
Binding assays with HFn at 20 or 100 μg mL−1 confirmed
a dose-dependent recognition of tumor cells (Figure 1B).
4T1-L cells were treated with DOX or HFn-DOX
at increasing concentrations of DOX to assess cell
proliferation, cell death, DNA damage and nuclear DOX
accumulation. Proliferation was arrested for at least 72 h
after treatment with 1 μM HFn-DOX, while DOX reduced
cell proliferation for 24 h only, suggesting the onset of
chemoresistance upon incubation with DOX (Figure
1C). Cell viability was evaluated by incubating the cells
with 0.01, 0.1 and 1 μM DOX or HFn-DOX for up to
72 h. Results reported in Figure 1D show that inhibition
of BC cell viability using HFn-DOX was significantly
higher than that after treatment with DOX. Such a drop
in viability was ascribed to a remarkable increase in cell
death (Figure 1E). Treatment with 0.01 μM HFn-DOX
caused pronounced apoptosis and necrosis induction and
double strand breaks in contrast to DOX (Figure 1F). It
can be assumed that the increase in cytotoxicity of HFnDOX resides in the efficiency of HFn in promoting DOX
nuclear translocation (Figure 1G), as already described
for different tumor cell lines [25, 26]. Quantitative
fluorescence analysis of confocal images gave a nuclear
DOX concentration of 15.2 and 9-fold higher than that
detected in cultures treated with DOX at 0.1 and 1 μM,
respectively (Supplementary Figure 2).
8384

Oncotarget

Figure 1: In vitro activity of HFn-DOX nanocages toward tumor cells. a. Intracellular localization of HFn nanoparticles. Confocal

microscopy merged images of 4T1-L cells, incubated for 15 min, 1, 3 and 48 h at 37 °C with 100 μg mL−1 of FITC-labeled HFn (green). Nuclei
were stained with DAPI (blue). Scale bar: 10 μm. b. HFn binding toward 4T1-L breast cancer cells. 4T1-L cells were incubated 2 h at 4 °C
with FITC-labeled HFn (20 and 100 μg mL−1) and then processed for flow cytometry. Untreated cells were used as control to set the positive
region. c. Proliferation profiles of cells treated with 1 μM DOX or HFn-DOX for up to 72 h. Untreated cells are used as control. Values are
mean of six replicates ± SE. d. Viability of cells treated with free or nanoformulated DOX. 4T1-L cells were treated with 1, 0.1, and 0.01 μM
DOX or HFn-DOX for up to 72 h. Viability was assessed by measuring the conversion of MTT into formazan, normalized on cell proliferation
of untreated cells. Statistical significance vs. CTRL #P<0.05, ##P<0.005; Statistical significance vs. DOX *P<0.01; **P<0.005. e. Cell death
assay using DOX or HFn-DOX. 4T1-L cells were treated with 1, 0.1, and 0.01 μM DOX or HFn-DOX for 3 or 24 h. Cell death was assessed
on the basis of the exposure to Annexin V, evaluated by flow cytometry. Untreated cells were used to set region of positivity. Values are mean of
three replicates ± SE. Statistical significance vs. DOX *P<0.005; **P<0.0005. f. Double-strand break of DNA after DOX exposure. Confocal
microscopy images of 4T1-L cells incubated with 0.01 μM DOX or HFn-DOX. Anti-γH2A.X antibodies were used to reveal the DNA doublestrand breaks (DSB; yellow). Nuclei were stained with DAPI (blue). Scale bar: 10 μm. g. Doxorubicin release inside the nuclear compartment.
Confocal microscopy images of 4T1-L cells incubated with 0.1 μM DOX or HFn-DOX and with 1 μM DOX for 3 h at 37 °C. DOX signal is
represented in magenta, while DOX degradation product in green. Scale bar: 10 μm.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

8385

Oncotarget

In vivo targeting and biodistribution of HFn
nanocarrier

HFn-DOX soon after administration, as in both cases the
drug was injected intravenously. DOX was extracted from
collected samples and quantified by fluorescence intensity
analysis (FLI) at λem = 550 nm (λex = 500 nm) [32]. Blood
samples taken before drug administration were set as
reference. Bioavailability of HFn-DOX was two-fold
higher than DOX although the kinetic seems to maintain
the same shape. To better discriminate kinetic’s variations
due to nanoformulation, a 10-fold higher dosage of DOX
or HFn-DOX (i.e. 12.4 mg kg−1) has been administered
to healthy mice. Results reported in Figure 3A display
different plasma distribution profiles and confirming that
HFn-DOX increases drug bioavailability in comparison to
DOX of at least four-fold at each time point
Accumulation of DOX at primary tumors (Figure
3B) was determined by fluorescence after chemical
extraction from homogenates of resected tumors at 1, 2,
24, and 48 h after single injection of HFn-DOX or DOX
at 1.24 mg DOX kg−1 [33]. DOX was found in higher
concentration in tumors of mice treated with HFn-DOX
compared to DOX within 1 h. HFn-DOX displayed faster
localization at the tumor compared to DOX, (Figure
3B), suggesting a crucial role for nanoparticle-mediated
delivery in enhancing the tumor targeting, although after 2
h the DOX levels are equilibrated in both cases. Confocal
images of 4T1-L dissociated from tumors excised at 2
h evoked higher tumor cell accumulation of DOX in
samples treated with HFn-DOX compared to DOX (Figure
3C). Combining these results suggested that HFn-DOX
were efficiently captured by tumor cells, while DOX was
confined in blood vessels of the tumor to a much larger
extent.

An orthotopic 4T1 metastatic BC model was
obtained by implanting 4T1-L cells (105 cells)
subcutaneously in the mammary fat pad of female
Balb/C mice [29]. This murine tumor was reported
to metastasize primarily, yet not exclusively, by a
hematogenous route leading to metastatic spread to lung,
liver and lymph nodes [30]. The reliability of the model
was confirmed by following tumor progression and
early onset of metastases by bioluminescence intensity
(BLI) imaging over 20 days (Supplementary Figure
3A). Histopathological analysis performed on excised
tumors confirmed that the primary mass was indeed
derived from epithelial cancer cells without undesired
morphological alterations (Supplementary Figure 3B).
4T1 mice were injected into the tail vein with Alexa
Fluor660-labeled HFn (AF660-HFn) at 5 μg kg−1 [31]
and monitored by live fluorescence imaging at 1, 2, 24
and 48 h. An intense epifluorescence signal (Epf) at the
bladder was detected within the first 2 h, which however
disappeared after 24 h (Figure 2A and 2B), suggesting
renal excretion of HFn within 1 day. Epf of excised
tumors 1, 2, 24 and 48 h after AF660-HFn injection
displayed rapid tumor uptake, which progressively
decreased in intensity over time (Figure 2C). Confocal
images acquired on cryosections of excised tumors
confirmed that HFn reached the 4T1 cell cytoplasm and
thus were not confined to the tumor stroma or vessels,
but actively entered into cancer cells (Supplementary
Figure 4). Combined data reported in Figure 2A-2C
suggested that a prevalent fraction of nanoparticles that
were not captured by the tumor were rapidly sequestered
by the kidneys, and presumably eliminated into the
bladder. This hypothesis was confirmed by Epf analysis
of excised kidneys that exhibited a detectable AF660HFn fluorescence emission at 1 and 2 h (Figure 2D and
2E) and further evidence was provided by fluorescence
measurement of collected urine (Figure 2F). Besides
kidney filtration, our results suggested preferential
distribution of HFn in the liver within the first 24 h and
appreciable Epf was also detected in the spleen for up
to 2 h. In contrast, HFn were not recovered in the lungs,
heart and brain (Figure 2D and 2E).

Impact of LDNM monotherapy on breast cancer
management
Eight-week old Balb/C female mice were implanted
with 4T1-L cells at day 0. Tumor-bearing mice were
randomly divided into three experimental groups at day
5 and treated with placebo, DOX, pl-DOX or HFn-DOX
under our LDNM setting: drug administration (1.24 mg
DOX kg−1) was performed at day 5, 9, 13 and 17. The
progression of tumor volume was monitored in vivo
before each individual drug injection by bioluminescence
imaging. Images suggested that HFn-DOX could
decrease tumor growth and metastatic spread (Figure
4A and Supplementary Table 1). Indeed, while DOX
displayed a tumor progression similar to the control
along the experimental window (Figure 4B), HFn-DOX
could suppress the tumor growth as long as the drug was
administered (day 17) and exhibited a prolonged effect
up to the experimental endpoint (day 21). An even better
effect was achieved with pl-DOX, which was indeed able
to arrest the tumor development. Immunohistochemical
analysis of tumor sections showed that the apoptotic effect

Bioavailability of HFn-DOX and accumulation
at the tumor
To evaluate the bioavailability of nanoformulated
drug, 2 groups of healthy mice (5 mice/group) were
treated with DOX or HFn-DOX at 1.24 mg kg−1. Blood
samples were collected from the retro-orbital plexus at 15,
30, 45 and 60 min. These tight time points were chosen to
detect possible changes in blood bioavailability of DOX or

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

8386

Oncotarget

Figure 2: In vivo targeting and distribution of void HFn nanocarrier. a. Epifluorescence (Epf) images of mice bearing 4T1-L
tumors acquired 1, 2, 24 and 48 h after intravenous (i.v.) injection into the tail vein of 5 μg kg−1 AF660-HFn and b. averaged Epf intensity
of the bladder region of interest (ROI). c. Epf of isolated 4T1 tumors and averaged Epf intensity of tumor ROI acquired 1, 2, 24 and 48 h
after exposure to HFn. d. Epf of isolated spleen (S), kidneys (K), liver (L), brain (B), heart (H), lungs (Lu), and e. averaged Epf intensity
of the ROI obtained after 1, 2, 24 and 48 h exposure to HFn. f. Fluorescence intensity of urine collected 1, 2, 24 and 48 h after i.v. injection
of AF660-HFn. The color scale in panels a, c and d indicates the averaged epifluorescence expressed as radiant efficiency [(p/sec/cm2/sr)/
(mW/cm2)], where p/sec/cm2/sr is the number of photons per second that leave a square centimeter of tissue and radiate into a solid angle of
one steradian (sr). Values reported in panels b, c, e and f are mean ± SE of at least 4 different samples under each experimental condition.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

8387

Oncotarget

Impact of LDNM regimen on tumor angiogenesis
and chemoresistance

of pl-DOX and HFn-DOX on BC cells was better than
that of DOX (Figure 4C and Supplementary Figure 5),
presumably due to the improved tumor accumulation of
the drug. However, the absence of statistical significance
in apoptosis between HFn-DOX and DOX treated samples
advocated alternative factors in the stronger antitumor
efficacy of HFn-DOX beyond mere cytotoxicity.

In line with the observed discrepancy in the results
from the DNA fragmentation assay (Figure 4C), we
investigated the possible involvement of anti-angiogenic
effect of HFn-DOX under the LDNM regimen. Vessel
labeling with anti-CD31 antibody in BC histological

Figure 3: Bioavailability and tumor accumulation of HFn-DOX in comparison with free DOX. a. Bioavailability of

DOX and HFn-DOX at different time points. Plasma concentration of DOX after i.v. injection of HFn-DOX (black circles) or DOX (gray
triangles) at 1.24 mg kg−1 and 12.4 mg kg−1 in healthy mice. b. DOX accumulation at 4T1-L tumor in mice at different time points after
administration of 1.24 mg kg−1 DOX as free molecule or HFn-DOX. Female Balb/C mice orthotopically implanted with 4T1-L murine
mammary carcinoma cells were injected 6 days after implantation (time 0) with DOX or HFn-DOX. DOX levels in tumor have been
determined 1, 2, 4, and 24 h after i.v. injection following acidified isopropanol extraction from tumor homogenates. Aliquots from six mice
per each time point concentration have been extracted and analyzed by spectrofluorimeter. Reported values are means of 3 samples/group
± SE. P values are summarized in Table S5. c. Confocal microscopy images of 4T1-L cells dissociated from tumor harvested 2 h after i.v.
injection of DOX and HFn-DOX. DOX signal is represented in green, while nuclei were stained with DAPI (blue). Scale bar: 10 μm.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

8388

Oncotarget

slides revealed a remarkable decrease in the number of
CD31-positive cells compared to DOX (Figure 5A and
Supplementary Figure 6), suggesting a role of the HFnDOX-promoted antiangiogenic effect on the inhibition
of tumor progression and diffusion. Analogously, it is
likely that the strong inhibition in tumor growth observed
with pl-DOX (Figure 4B) was primarily due to antiangiogenic activity (Figure 5A). 4T1-L BC cells have
been described to develop drug resistance owing to
induced overexpression of MDR-1 protein upon standard
treatment with DOX [28]. Western blot performed on 4T1
cells treated for 72 h with 0.1 μM DOX corroborated DOX
induction of MDR-1 expression in vitro (Supplementary

Figure 7). We examined MDR-1 expression in tumor
tissues dissected after LDNM treatment. Tumor sections
from DOX and pl-DOX-treated mice displayed a
three-fold and five-fold increase in MDR-1-positive
cells, respectively, compared to animals treated with
placebo and HFn-DOX treated animals (Figure 5B and
Supplementary Figure 8). As expected, both DOX and
pl-DOX induced an obvious overexpression of MDR-1 in
tumor cell membranes, which was particularly pronounced
in the proximity of the tumor endothelium [34]. In
contrast, MDR-1 expression was undetectable in tumor
cell membranes after HFn-DOX treatment and was found
only to a limited extent in tumor vessels after HFn-DOX

Figure 4: Efficacy of LDNM treatment with HFn-DOX. a. DOX and HFn-DOX in vivo efficacy. Bioluminescence imaging of

female Balb/C mice (n = 12/group) orthotopically implanted (day 0) with 4T1-L murine mammary carcinoma cells were treated with
placebo or with 1.24 mg kg−1 of DOX, pl-DOX or HFn-DOX. Drug injections were performed into the tail vein at day 5, 9, 13 and 17. Mice
were sacrificed at day 21. b. Quantification of tumor volume. Tumor volume was quantified by measuring the bioluminescence intensity
signal of 4T1-L cells 5 min after intraperitoneal injection of luciferin. Dots represent the normalized mean value of BLI tumor signal ±
SE. Statistical significance vs. placebo #P<0.05 ###P<0.005; vs. DOX *P<0.05 ***P<0.005. c. Quantification of apoptosis in tumor tissue
upon treatment with HFn-DOX. Tumors excised at day 21 (n = 6/group) were fixed with formalin and embedded in paraffin. Histological
slides were processed to label DNA fragments of apoptotic cells. Reported values are the mean of apoptotic cells number/field/sample ± SE.
The count was performed on 10 fields/sample. Magnification 20×. Statistical significance vs. placebo ###P<0.005; vs. DOX ***P<0.005.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

8389

Oncotarget

HFn-DOX suppresses DOX cardiotoxicity and
systemic dysfunction under a LDNM therapeutic
setting

treatment, at the same level of the placebo. This result is
relevant in view of a protracted metronomic treatment
preventing the onset of chemoresistance, and it is even
more surprising considering that pl-DOX is commonly
used in patients previously treated with anthracyclines and
therefore affected by potentially chemoresistant cancers.

Cardiotoxicity represents a life-threatening
unresolved issue associated to DOX chemotherapy under
clinically relevant settings [35]. To evaluate the incidence
of LDNM monotherapy on cardiotoxicity, we followed a
multiparametric approach [36]. First, histological slides
of heart tissues were treated with FITC-conjugated wheat
germ agglutinin (FITC-WGA), a cell membrane label,
and imaged by fluorescence microscopy (Supplementary
Figure 9). Cardiomyocyte cross-sections from mice
treated with HFn-DOX, pl-DOX, DOX or non-treated
were measured at day 21. Images showed a significant
increase of cardiomyocyte area in DOX and pl-DOX
samples suggesting a strong cellular damage response
compared to HFn-DOX samples (Figure 6A). Detailed
ultrastructural analysis of cardiac cells in DOX and plDOX treated samples revealed an increased number
of mitochondria compared to HFn-DOX (Figure 6B
and Supplementary Figure 10). In addition, changes in
mitochondria morphology, including larger surface area
and cristae depletion, typical effects of DOX-induced
cardiomyopathy [36], were clearly evident in DOX and
pl-DOX treated samples but not in HFn-DOX samples
(Figure 6C-6E). Therefore, the absence of obvious
alterations in mitochondria number and morphology in
heart samples from mice treated with HFn-DOX strongly
supports the lack of cardiotoxicity in LDNM HFn-DOX
treatment, even compared to pl-DOX, which is currently
considered the most safe anthracycline therapy in terms of
cardiotoxicity.
To further investigate if the ultrastructural
alterations were associated to mitochondrial dysfunction,
mitochondria isolated from heart tissue of DOX, pl-DOX
or HFn-DOX treated mice were analyzed in detail. The
membrane potential decreased by 30% in DOX and plDOX samples compared to HFn-DOX (Figure 6F). As
mitochondrial impairment was expected to generate
reactive oxygen species (ROS) [37], we quantified the
level of the ROS quencher glutathione (GSH) in heart
tissue [38]. Figure 6G displays the lower amount of
reduced GSH in DOX and pl-DOX-treated mice in
comparison to HFn-DOX, confirming mitochondrial
dysfunction induced by treatment with free and liposomal
DOX only.
Finally, we assessed the systemic toxicity of
HFn-DOX by histopathological examination of liver,
kidneys, lung, spleen, heart, gut and brain isolated
at day 21. No histological lesions were found in all
organs (Supplementary Figure 11). Liver and kidney
functionalities were also determined to further evaluate
the toxicity profile of HFn-DOX treatment. Serum levels
of aspartate transaminase (AST) and alanine transaminase
(ALT) (Supplementary Table 2), and urea and creatinine

Figure 5: Impact of LDNM regimen on tumor
angiogenesis and chemoresistance. a. Quantification of
angiogenesis in tumor tissue upon treatment with HFn-DOX.
Tumors excised at day 21 (n = 5/group) were fixed with formalin
and embedded in paraffin. Immunohistochemistry of histological
slides were processed to label CD31+ cells. Reported values
are mean of vessel number counted in 10 fields/sample ±
SE. Magnification 40×. Statistical significance vs. placebo
#P<0.005 ###P<0.00005; vs. DOX ***P<0.00005; vs. pl-DOX
§§§P<0.0005. b. Quantification of MDR-1-expression. Excised
tumors (n = 5/group) were processed for immunohistochemistry
of MDR-1 antigen. The percentage of image area positive
for MDR-1 expression was quantified using ImagePro Plus
Software. Reported values are the mean of the percentage
of MDR-1 positive signal counted in 5 fields/sample ± SE.
Statistical significance vs. Placebo ##P<0.0005 ###P<0.00005;
vs. DOX **P<0.005 ***P<0.0005; vs. pl-DOX §§§P<0.0005.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

8390

Oncotarget

Figure 6: Examination of cardiotoxicity of HFn-DOX, pl-DOX and DOX. a. Nanodelivery protects cardiomyocytes from DOX-

induced hypertrophy. Hearts excised at day 21 (n = 3/group) from mice treated with placebo or with 1.24 mg kg−1 of DOX, pl-DOX or HFnDOX were fixed with formalin and embedded in paraffin. Histological slides of cardiac sections stained with FITC-WGA were analyzed
with ImageJ software to measure cross-section area of cardiomyocytes. Quantification was performed on at least 5 images/group, reporting
the mean value of cross-section area of 250 cells/group± SE. Statistical significance vs. Placebo ###P<0.00005; vs. DOX ***P<0.00005; vs.
pl-DOX §§§P<0.00005. b. Nanodelivery protects against DOX-induced mitochondrial toxicity. Hearts excised at day 21 (n = 3/group) from
mice treated with placebo or with 1.24 mg kg−1 of DOX, pl-DOX or HFn-DOX were fixed with glutaraldehyde and embedded in epoxy-resin.
TEM images of ultrathin heart sections of cardiac tissues acquired at 4200 magnifications were analyzed with ImageJ to measure the number of
mitochondria in heart tissue. Quantification was performed on at least 9 images/group, reporting the mean mitochondria number/image ± SE.
Statistical significance vs. Placebo ###P<0.00005; vs. DOX ***P<0.00005 *P<0.005; vs. pl-DOX §§§P<0.00005. c. Representative images
of hearts excised at day 21 (n = 3/group) from mice treated with placebo or with 1.24 mg kg−1 of DOX, pl-DOX or HFn-DOX. TEM images of
ultrathin heart sections of cardiac tissues have been acquired at 11500 magnifications. d. Nanodelivery reduces the mitochondrial size growth
due to DOX treatment. Quantification of TEM images (ImageJ) of ultrathin heart sections acquired at 11500 magnifications. Quantification
was performed on at least 10 images/group, measuring at least 100 mitochondria/sample. Values represent the mean mitochondrial area
± SE. Statistical significance vs. Placebo ###P<0.00005 #P<0.05; vs. DOX ***P<0.00005; vs. pl-DOX §§§P<0.00005. e. Nano delivery
limits the damage of mitochondrial cristae from DOX. Quantification of TEM images (Image J) of ultrathin heart sections acquired at 11500
magnifications. Quantification was performed on at least 10 images/group, measuring at least 100 mitochondria/sample. Values represent the
percentage of mitochondrial area occupied by cristae ± SE. Statistical significance vs. Placebo ###P<0.00005; vs. DOX ***P<0.00005; vs.
pl-DOX §§§P<0.00005 f. HFn-DOX does not affect mitochondrial membrane potential. Mitochondrial membrane potential was measured
by staining-isolated mitochondria from mouse heart tissue dissected at day 21 (n = 3/group) from mice treated with placebo or with 1.24
mg kg−1 of DOX, pl-DOX or HFn-DOX. Statistical significance vs. Placebo #P<0.05; vs. pl-DOX §P<0.05. g. HFn-DOX does not decrease
the concentration of reduced GSH. The extent of reduced GSH was measured in lysates of hearts excised at day 21 (n = 3/group) from mice
treated with placebo or with 1.24 mg kg−1 of DOX, pl-DOX or HFn-DOX. Values represent the mean GSH concentration in heart extracts± SE.
Statistical significance vs. Placebo #P<0.05; vs. pl-DOX §P<0.05.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

8391

Oncotarget

(Supplementary Table 3), were monitored as markers
of liver and kidney condition, respectively. Our results
showed that AST/ALT and urea/creatinine ratios in HFnDOX treated mice were comparable to the control and in
the range of reference, confirming the overall nanodrug
safety.

Trojan horse, imparting DOX with drastically enhanced
nuclear penetration even in resistant cancer cells [25, 45].
Such HFn property can greatly improve current strategies
of LDM chemotherapy, due to sustained nuclear release of
a DNA-damaging drug. Indeed, our in vitro experiments
showed that HFn-mediated delivery allowed a 15.2-fold
increase of DOX nuclear concentration within 3 h as
compared to the drug alone.
Even drug resistance significantly impacts on BC
management, accounting for a relevant proportion of
patients in which anthracycline therapy fails to persistently
eradicate the tumor [46]. MDR-1 protein is one of the
most active multidrug resistance mediators in BC and it
is gradually overexpressed under DOX chemotherapy
regimens [28]. Negligible MDR-1 induction in tumor
cells in vivo after LDNM DOX administration suggested
that the multidrug resistance machinery of BC cells did
not “sense” the cytotoxic agent in HFn-DOX. Otherwise,
the dramatic increase of MDR-1 expression observed in
samples from mice treated with DOX and even with plDOX, suggested that LDNM administration associated
with cell nuclear targeting could circumvent DOX
resistance dependent by MDR-1.
The general assumption that LDM therapy is
essentially due to inhibition of angiogenesis, rather
than directly killing residual cancer cells [8], should be
reconsidered in the framework of LDNM regimen, in
which a key role of targeted action could be reappraised.
Combining our data from angiogenesis inhibition with the
results from tumor progression (i.e BC growth curves and
DNA fragmentation assay) we concluded that targeted
action of HFn-DOX on BC cells and antiangiogenic effect
of LDNM regimen could play a synergistic role in the
increased antitumor efficacy of HFn-DOX compared to
DOX alone.
Importantly, LDNM chemotherapy exhibited a safe
toxicity profile, as proven by apparent lack of systemic
side effects. This is expected to have great clinical impact
because cardiotoxicity and general side effects lead to
major restriction in the clinical use of anthracyclines.
HFn-DOX was less cardiotoxic compared to DOX and
even to pl-DOX, although the latter has been associated
with improved cardiac safety in various clinical studies.
Nevertheless, myocardial alterations provoked by pl-DOX
(Figure 6) are not surprising. Indeed, a certain degree of
myocardial damage has been previously demonstrated
in endomyocardial biopsies of patients treated with plDOX, and ultrastructural damage of pl-DOX has not
been explored [38, 47]. Moreover, although pl-DOX
is less cardiotoxic, it does not significantly reduce
relevant cardiac events, and a clinician’s preference
for pl-DOX over conventional DOX to avoid clinically
significant cardiac events is not justified in patients
without concurrent cardiac disorders that were not
previously subjected to anthracycline exposure [48].
Therefore, the general confidence on low cardiotoxicity

DISCUSSION
In the present study a highly aggressive metastatic
BC model based on murine 4T1 cells was established.
This allowed us to simulate the dramatic clinical picture
of advanced BC patients and to evaluate the impact of
DOX nanoformulation under LDM monotherapy in
compromised subjects, as DOX remains a mainstay
therapy in various solid tumors. Our results suggest that
DOX monotherapy does not affect tumor progression
significantly: although the expected cytotoxicity was
confirmed in vitro, this did not translate into substantial
antitumor activity in vivo in an advanced-stage BC model,
whereas off-target tissue accumulation and myocardial
damage largely occurred. This result is reminiscent of the
frustrating clinical condition in which chemotherapy fails
to overcome BC progression and combination therapies
become necessary to control the disease. Therefore, the
potential of LDM DOX to overcome the limitations of
dose-dense regimens in advanced-stage tumors remains
questionable, since DOX requires high doses to gain a
proper drug concentration at cancer deposits [39–40].
In contrast, the results of our study demonstrate that our
LDNM strategy, which combines LDM administration
of DOX with HFn-delivery resulted in a targeted effect
of DOX on 4T1 cancer cells together with a sustained
antiangiogenic activity in the tumor microenvironment.
Indeed, HFn-DOX exhibited potent antitumor activity
when administered at frequent doses as low as 1.24
mg kg−1 in vivo compared to free DOX and placebo.
Such a strongly improved activity correlates with the
pharmacokinetic profile of LDNM DOX, as emerged
from a recent biodistribution study [41]. Indeed, while
DOX displayed reduced bioavailability, high levels of
HFn-DOX were recovered in plasma during the first
few hours post-injection that were attributable to a lower
sequestration by off-target organs [41]. HFn-DOX could
accumulate in the tumor site exploiting the EPR effect
[42] or by endothelial wall transcytosis promoted by TfR1 recognition [43] and it is internalized in tumor cells
by receptor-mediated endocytosis [44]. HFn-mediated
target selectivity conferred earlier intra-tumor activity
to the drug, lower off-target accumulation with fast liver
metabolism and rapid clearance of circulating excess
drug by renal excretion, suggesting optimal therapeutic
index in future clinical translation [41, 44]. Beyond its
favorable bioavailability and target selectivity, a plausible
explanation for enhanced antitumor activity of LDNM
HFn-DOX resides in HFn propensity to behave like a
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

8392

Oncotarget

of pl-DOX should be reconsidered in the light of these
considerations. Otherwise, LDNM treatment with HFnDOX didn’t display anthracycline-related cardiotoxicity,
even in comparison with pl-DOX, and it is therefore a
promising option for anthracycline therapeutic regimens
in cardiosensitive subjects.
We acknowledge a potential limitation relating to
immunogenicity in clinical translation of HFn-DOX [49].
Although it is difficult to predict the long-term effect
of prolonged treatments in humans, we have collected
preliminary data suggesting negligible immunogenicity
of HFn in animals. Another limitation of the study
is the experimental timespan limited to three weeks.
However, based on our findings we could postulate that
after 21 days the metronomic treatment by HFn-DOX
would lead to further reduction of cancer deposits, as
expected by the excellent cytotoxicity showed by HFnDOX in vitro. Moreover, the fact that MDR-1 expression
remained stable over time upon treatment with HFn-DOX
suggests avoidance of chemoresistance, thus a sustained
anticancer activity even after 21 days is expected. About
cardiotoxicity, our findings suggest that substantially
no myocardial damage is present after treatment with
HFn-DOX, and we should expect the same lack in
cardiotoxicity even after experimental timespan.
In summary, this study provides robust evidence
that LDNM monotherapy with HFn-DOX is expected to
remodel the therapeutic outcome of advanced metastatic
BC compared to the drug alone and also to improve
anthracycline therapies based on liposomal DOX,
with a redefinition of the central role of DOX for solid
malignancies under the new perspective of metronomic
treatments. Further investigations are necessary to
thoroughly elucidate the individual contributions of
targeted therapy and neoangiogenesis inhibition in the
strong enhancement of the antitumor efficacy of HFnDOX. On the horizon after this study is the possibility of
countless developments, one of which is a reappraisal of
current clinical settings by combining low toxic LDNM
regimens with administration of established antiangiogenic
agents.

and orthotopically implanted at passages lower than 4 in
female Balb/C mice to obtain the BC animal model.
Details of HFn-DOX production, cell binding,
proliferation, death and DNA damage assays, intracellular
localization by confocal laser scanning microscopy, are
provided in the Supplementary Materials and Methods.

Study design
The hypothesis was that HFn-DOX would exhibit
higher antitumor efficacy and would induce minimal
or negligible side effects compared to free drug and plDOX (Caelyx) in mice bearing strongly invasive and
metastatic BC. HFn-DOX dose was set at 1.24 mg kg−1
DOX, about 1/7 of the average MTD dosage administered
in 4T1 murine BC [26]. This tumor model was selected
for its aggressiveness and spontaneous tendency to spread
to multiple metastatic sites after orthotopic injection
of luciferase-tagged cells. The endpoint of the in vivo
experiments was defined at 21 days to appreciate the
parametric differences in tumor growth, resistance onset
and cardiotoxicity in living animals, while allowing us
to operate in compliance with the National and European
legislations that regulate animal experiments. The number
of animals for each biodistribution, bioavailability, therapy
and cardiotoxicity experiment was calculated with a power
of at least 80 ± 5 %. Mice were randomized by primary
tumor size before initiation of treatments. Dye-labeled
HFn was first injected in tumor-bearing mice by tail vein,
then targeting and biodistribution were assessed by live
fluorescence imaging, while drug bioavailability was
evaluated in healthy animals. Rodents were administered
intravenously with placebo, DOX, pl-DOX or HFn-DOX
at day 5, 9, 13 and 17, and monitored for 21 days during
which tumor growth was followed by measurement of
bioluminescence signal intensity (BLI) of 4T1-L cells
after intraperitoneal injection of luciferin. BLI analyses
were undertaken under standardized conditions to gain a
quantitative estimation of live BC cells. Intermediate BLI
values and mouse weights were determined before each
administration. Collected BLI data were normalized to
the mean tumor size calculated for all mice within each
group at each time point. Animals were euthanized at day
21 to analyze resected tissues with the aim of determining
the antitumor efficacy, anti-angiogenic activity and
cardiotoxicity of DOX, pl-DOX and or HFn-DOX.
Histopathology and immunohistochemistry were analyzed
from blinded samples. Outliers were not excluded. All
experiments were conducted under an approved protocol
of the Italian Ministry of Health. Animals were cared
for according to the guidelines of the Italian Ministry of
Health (see the Supplementary Materials and Methods).

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Cell cultures and in vitro studies
Murine Bioware-Ultra 4T1-Luc2 cell line (4T1-L),
used as model of BC cells, have been purchased in 2011
from Perkin Elmer, confirmed by IMPACT I PCR profiling
by the source, and have been passaged for fewer than 6
months. 4T1-L were cultured in RPMI 1640 medium
supplemented with 10% foetal bovine serum, 2 mM
l-glutamine, penicillin (50 UI mL−1) and streptomycin (50
mg mL−1) at 37 °C in humidified atmosphere containing
5% CO2 and sub-cultured prior to confluence using
trypsin/EDTA. 4T1 cells, were used for in vitro tests
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

In vivo experiments
Details of the preparation of orthotopic 4T1 model,
tumor cell injection, tumor imaging, targeting and
8393

Oncotarget

GRANT SUPPORT

biodistribution, plasma half-life, drug accumulation at
the tumor of DOX and HFn-DOX and antitumor in vivo
efficacy of DOX, pl-DOX or HFn-DOX are provided in
Supplementary Materials and Methods.

The research was supported by the Fondazione
Regionale per la Ricerca Biomedica (NANODRUG
platform project to D.P. and F.C.), the Fondazione
Umano Progresso (to D.P.) and the Regione Lombardia
and Fondazione Cariplo (grant n° 2016-0919 to S.M.).
FRRB supported M.B., M.T. and M.A.R. with Research
Fellowships, S.M. and L.F. were supported by the
NanoMeDia project (Regione Lombardia to F.C. and D.P.).

Ex vivo analyses
Excised tumors were analyzed by fluorescence
imaging and by confocal microscopy of cryosections
to establish the HFn cellular targeting in vivo,
immunofluorescence of dissociated tumor to assess DOX
accumulation, immunohistochemistry to determine the
CD31 and MDR-1 expression in endothelial and tumor
cells, respectively, and Tumor TACS In Situ Apoptosis
Detection kit to determine cellular apoptosis. Excised
organs were analyzed by fluorescence imaging to
establish the HFn biodistribution in non-target organs.
Histopathology was performed on samples from liver,
kidneys, spleen, heart, brain, gut and lung tissues.
Kidney and liver functionality was assessed before and
after the treatment. The size of cardiomyocytes extracted
from resected heart tissues was measured after wheat
germ agglutinin (WGA) fluorescence labeling. Isolated
mitochondria from heart tissue samples were investigated
by membrane potential and ultrastructural analysis of
transmission electron micrographs; the extent of ROS
in heart was assessed by glutathione assay. Details are
reported in Supplementary Materials and Methods.

Author contributions
Conception and design: D. Prosperi, S.
Mazzucchelli, F. Corsi.
Development of methodology: M. Bellini, M.
A. Rizzuto, S. Mazzucchelli, M. Truffi, L. Fiandra, M.
Nebuloni.
Acquisition of data (provided cells, acquired
and managed animals, provided facilities, etc.): S.
Mazzucchelli, L. Fiandra, L. Sorrentino, M. Truffi, M.
Nebuloni, E. Longhi.
Analysis and interpretation of data (e.g., statistical
analysis, biostatistics, computation analysis): L. Fiandra,
S. Mazzucchelli, M. Nebuloni, F. Corsi, D. Prosperi.
Writing, review, and/or revision of the manuscript:
S. Mazzucchelli, F. Corsi, D. Prosperi. All authors edited
the manuscript.
Administrative, technical, or material support (i.e.,
reporting or organizing data): S. Mazzucchelli, L. Fiandra,
M. Nebuloni.
Study supervision: F. Corsi, D. Prosperi.

Statistical analysis
Statistical analyses were conducted using two-tailed
Student’s t-test. All plots show mean values ± SE. All tests
assumed normal distribution and the statistical significance
threshold was set at P< 0.05

REFERENCES
1.	 Kareva I, Waxman DJ, Klement GL. Metronomic
chemotherapy: an attractive alternative to maximum
tolerated dose therapy that can activate anti-tumor immunity
and minimize therapeutic resistance. Cancer Lett. 2015;
358:100-6.

Ethics statements
Investigation has been conducted in accordance with
the ethical standards and according to the Declaration of
Helsinki and according to national and international
guidelines and has been approved by the authors'
institutional review board.

2.	 Loven D, Hasnis E, Bertolini F, Shaked Y. Low-dose
metronomic chemotherapy: from past experience to new
paradigms in the treatment of cancer. Drug Discov Today.
2013; 18:193-201.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

3.	 Kaur H, Budd T. Metronomic therapy for breast cancer.
Curr Oncol Rep. 2004; 6:49-52.

We thank R. Allevi (University of Milano) for TEM
images. We acknowledge the “Centro di Microscopia
Elettronica per le Nanotecnologie applicate alla Medicina”
at University of Milano for imaging facility.

4.	 Cao Y, Langer R. Optimizing the delivery of cancer drugs
that block angiogenesis. Sci Transl Med. 2010; 2:15ps3.
5.	 Nars MS, Kaneno R. Immunomodulatory effects of low
dose chemotherapy and perspectives of its combination
with immunotherapy. Int. J. Cancer 2013; 132:2471-2478.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST

6.	 Veronesi U, Stafyla V, Luini A, Veronesi P. Breast cancer:
from “maximum tolerable” to “minimum effective”
treatment. Front Oncol. 2012; 2:1-5.

No potential conflicts of interest were disclosed.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

8394

Oncotarget

7.	 Pasquier E, Kavallaris M, Andre N. Metronomic
chemotherapy: new rationale for new directions. Nat Rev
Clin Oncol. 2010; 7:455-465.

21.	 Rivera E. Current status of liposomal anthracycline therapy
in metastatic breast cancer. Clinical Breast Cancer. 2003;
4:S76-S83.

8.	 Kerbel RS, Kamen BA. The anti-angiogenic basis of
metronomic chemotherapy. Nat Rev Cancer. 2004;
4:423-436.

22.	 Xing M, Yan F, Yu S, Shen P. Efficacy and cardiotoxicity
of liposomal doxorubicin-based chemotherapy in advanced
breast cancer: a meta-analysis of then randomized
controlled trials. PLoS ONE. 2015; 10:e0133569.

9.	 Andre N, Carre M, Pasquier E. Metronomics: towards
personalized chemotherapy? Nat Rev Clin Oncol. 2014;
11:413-431.

23.	 Corsi F, Mazzucchelli S. The potential of protein-based
nanocages for imaging and drug delivery. Ther Deliv. 2016;
7:149-151.

10.	 Kerbel RS, Grothey A. Gastrointestinal cancer rationale for
metronomic chemotherapy in phase III trials. Nat Rev Clin
Oncol. 2015; 12:313-314.

24.	 Fan K, Cao C, Pan Y, Lu D, Yang D, Feng J, Song L, Liang
M, Yan X. Magnetoferritin nanoparticles for targeting
and visualizing tumour tissues. Nat Nanotechnol. 2012;
7:459-464.

11.	 Hanahan D, Bergers G, Bergsland E. Less is more,
regularly: metronomic dosing of cytotoxic drugs can
target tumor angiogenesis in mice. J Clin Invest. 2000;
105:1045-1047.

25.	 Bellini M, Mazzucchelli S, Galbiati E, Sommaruga S,
Fiandra L, Truff, M, Rizzuto MA, Colombo M, Tortora P,
Corsi F, Prosperi D. Protein nanocages for self-triggered
nuclear delivery of DNA-targeted chemotherapeutics in
cancer cells. J Controlled Rel. 2014; 196:184-196.

12.	 Morris PG, Hudis CA. Optimizing dose-dense regimens
for early-stage breast cancer. Nat Rev Clin Oncol. 2010;
7:678-679.

26.	 Zhang L, Li L, Di Penta A, Carmona U, Yang F, Schöps
R, Brandsch M, Zugaza JL, Knez M. H-Chain Ferritin:
A Natural Nuclei Targeting and Bioactive Delivery
Nanovector. Adv. Healthcare Mat. 2015; 4:1305-1310.

13.	 Kerbel RS. Antiangiogenic therapy: a universal
chemosensitization strategy for cancer? Science. 2006;
312:1171-1174.
14.	 Kerbel RS. Improving conventional or low dose
metronomic chemotherapy with targeted antiangiogenic
drugs. Cancer Res Treat. 2007; 39:150-159.

27.	 Liang M, Fan K, Zhou M, Duan D, Zheng J, Yang D, Feng
J, Yan X. H-ferritin-nanocaged doxorubicin nanoparticles
specifically target and kill tumors with a single-dose
injection. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2014; 111:14900-14905.

15.	 Lien K, Georgsdottir S, Sivanathan L, Chan K, Emmenegger
U. Low-dose metronomic chemotherapy: a systematic
literature analysis. Eur J Cancer. 2013; 49:3387-3395.

28.	 Bao L, Haque A, Jackson K, Hazari S, Moroz K, Jetly R,
Dash S. Increased expression of P-glycoprotein is associated
with doxorubicin chemoresistance in the metastatic 4T1
breast cancer model. Am J Pathol. 2011; 178:838-852.

16.	 Cruz-Munoz W, Di Desidero T, Man S, Xu P, Jaramillo
ML, Hashimoto K, Collins C, Banville M, O'ConnorMcCourt MD, Kerbel RS. Analysis of acquired resistance
to metronomic oral topotecan chemotherapy plus pazopanib
after prolonged preclinical potent responsiveness in
advanced ovarian cancer. Angiogenesis. 2014; 7:661-673.

29.	 Pulaski BA, Ostrand-Rosenberg S. Mouse 4T1 breast tumor
model. Curr Protoc Immunol. 2001; Ch. 20:Unit 20.2.
doi:10.1002/0471142735.im2002s39.
30.	 Aslakson CJ, Miller FR. Selective events in the metastatic
process defined by analysis of the sequential dissemination
of subpopulations of a mouse mammary tumor. Cancer Res.
1992; 52:1399-1405.

17.	 Ng SSW, Sparreboom A, Shaked Y, Lee C, Man S, Desai
N, Soon-Shiong P, Figg WD, Kerbel RS. Influence of
formulation vehicle on metronomic taxane chemotherapy:
albumin-bound versus cremophor EL-based paclitaxel. Clin
Cancer Res. 2006; 12:4331-4338.

31.	 Fiandra L, Mazzucchelli S, De Palma C, Colombo M,
Allevi R, Sommaruga S, Clementi E, Bellini M, Prosperi
D, Corsi F. Assessing the in vivo targeting efficiency of
multifunctional nanoconstructs bearing antibody-derived
ligands. ACS Nano. 2013; 7:6092-6102.

18.	 Riganti C, Gazzano E, Gulino GR, Volante M, Ghigo D,
Kopecka J. Two repeated low doses of doxorubicin are
more effective than a single high dose against tumors
overexpressing P-glycoprotein. Cancer Lett. 2015;
360:219-226.

32.	 Mayer LD, Dougherty G, Harasym TO, Bally MB. The
role of tumor-associated macrophages in the delivery of
liposomal doxorubicin to solid murine fibrosarcoma tumors.
J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 1997; 280:1406-1414.

19.	 Lotrionte M, Biondi-Zoccai G, Abbate A, Lanzetta G,
D'Ascenzo F, Malavasi V, Peruzzi M, Frati G, Palazzoni,
G. Review and meta-analysis of incidence and clinical
predictors of anthracycline cardiotoxicity. Am J Cardiol.
2013; 112:1980-1984.

33.	 Laginha KM, Berwoert S, Charrois GJR, Allen TM.
Determination of doxorubicin levels in whole tumor and
tumor nuclei in murine breast cancer tumors. Clin Cancer
Res. 2005; 11:6944-6949.

20.	 Octavia Y, Tocchetti CG, Gabrielson KL, Janssens S, Crijns
HJ, Moens, AL. Doxorubicin-induced cardiomyopathy:
from molecular mechanisms to therapeutic strategies. J Mol
Cell Cardiol. 2012; 52:1213-1225.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

34.	 Guo Z, Zhu J, Zhao L, Jin X. Expression and clinical
significance of multidrug resistance proteins in brain
tumors. J Exp Clin Cancer Res. 2010; 29:122-127.
8395

Oncotarget

35.	 Khiati S, Dalla Rosa I, Sourbier C, Ma X, Rao VA, Neckers
LM, Zhang H, Pommier Y. Mitochondrial topoisomerase
I (Top1mt) is a novel limiting factor of doxorubicin
cardiotoxicity. Clin Cancer Res. 2014; 20:4873-4881.

novel mechanism for delivery of iron to the brain and other
organs. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2007; 293:C641-C649.
43.	 Li L, Fang CJ, Ryan JC, Niemi EC, Lebrón JA, Björkman
PJ, Arase H, Torti FM, Torti SV, Nakamura MC, Seaman
WE. Binding and uptake of H-ferritin are mediated by
human transferrin receptor-1. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA.
2010; 107:3505-3510.

36.	 Tsusui H, Kinugawa S, Matsushima S. Oxidative stress
and heart failure. Am Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 2011;
301:H2181-2190.
37.	 Mari M, Morales A, Colell A, Garcia-Ruiz C, FernandezCheca J C. Mitochondrial glutathione, a key survival
antioxidant. Antiox Redox Signal. 2009; 11:2685-2700.

44.	 Sengupta S, Eavarone D, Capila I, Zhao G, Watson N,
Kiziltepe T, Sasisekharan R. Temporal targeting of tumour
cells and neovasculature with a nanoscale delivery system.
Nature. 2005; 436:568-572.

38.	 Berry G, Billingham M, Alderman E, Richardson P, Torti
F, Lum B, Patek A, Martin FJ. The use of cardiac biopsy
to demonstrate reduced cardiotoxicity in AIDS Kaposi's
sarcoma patients treated with pegylated liposomal
doxorubicin. Ann Oncol. 1998; 9:711-716.

45.	 Alkhateeb AA, Connor JR. Nuclear ferritin: a new role
for ferritin in cell biology. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2010;
1800:793-797.
46.	 Wood KC. Mapping the pathways of resistance to targeted
therapies. Cancer Res. 2015; 75:4247-4251.

39.	 Todorova VK, Kaufmann Y, Klimberg VS. Increased
efficacy and reduced cardiotoxicity of metronomic
treatment with cyclophosphamide in rat breast cancer.
Anticancer Res. 2011; 31:215-20.

47.	 Gabizon AA, Lyass O, Berry GJ, Wildgust M. Cardiac
safety of pegylated liposomal doxorubicin (Doxil/)
demonstrated by endomyocardial biopsy in patients with
advanced malignancies. Cancer Invest. 2004; 22:663-669.

40.	 Mainetti LE, Rico MJ, Fernández-Zenobi MV, Perroud
HA, Roggero EA, Rozados VR, Scharovsky OG.
Therapeutic efficacy of metronomic chemotherapy with
cyclophosphamide and doxorubicin on murine mammary
adenocarcinomas. Ann Oncol. 2013; 24:2310-2316.

48.	 Yamaguchi N, Fujii T, Aoi S, Kozuch PS, Hortobagyi GN,
Blum RH. Comparison of cardiac events associated with
liposomal doxorubicin, epirubicin and doxorubicin in breast
cancer: a Bayesian network meta-analysis. Eur J Cancer.
2015; 51:2314-20.

41.	 Mazzucchelli S, Ravelli A, Gigli F, Minoli M, Corsi F,
Ciuffreda P, Ottria R. LC-MS/MS method development for
quantification of doxorubicin and its metabolite 13-hydroxy
doxorubicin in mouse biological matrices: application to a
pharmaco-delivery study. Biomed Chromatogr. 2016; doi:
10.1002/bmc.3863.

49.	 Truffi M, Fiandra L, Sorrentino L, Monieri M, Corsi F,
Mazzucchelli S. Ferritin nanocages: A biological platform
for drug delivery, imaging and theranostics in cancer.
Pharmacol Res. 2016; 107:57-65.

42.	 Fisher J, Devraj K, Ingram J, Slagle-Webb B, Madhankumar
AB, Liu X, Klinger M, Simpson IA, Connor JR. Ferritin: a

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

8396

Oncotarget

