Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No. 30

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Zr-cetuximab PET imaging in patients with advanced colorectal
cancer
89

Catharina Willemien Menke-van der Houven van Oordt1,*, Elske C. Gootjes1,*,
Marc C. Huisman2, Danielle J. Vugts2, Chantal Roth1, Anne Marije Luik1,
Emma R. Mulder2, Robert C. Schuit2, Ronald Boellaard2, Otto S. Hoekstra2, Guus
AMS van Dongen2, Henk M.W. Verheul1
1

Dept of Medical Oncology, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands

2

Dept of Radiology and Nuclear Medicine, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands

*

These authors have contributed equally to this work

Correspondence to:
Henk M.W. Verheul, e-mail: h.verheul@vumc.nl
Keywords: immunoPET, cetuximab, colorectal cancer, 89zirconium, treatment selection
Received: April 23, 2015 	

Accepted: July 10, 2015 	

 Published: July 23, 2015

ABSTRACT
Monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) against the epidermal growth factor receptor
(EGFR) are used in the treatment of advanced colorectal cancer (mCRC).
Approximately 50% of patients benefit despite patient selection for RAS wild type
(wt) tumors. Based on the hypothesis that tumor targeting is required for clinical
benefit of anti-EGFR treatment, biodistribution and tumor uptake of 89Zr-cetuximab
by Positron Emission Tomography (PET), combining the sensitivity of PET with the
specificity of cetuximab for EGFR was evaluated. Ten patients with wt K-RAS mCRC
received 37 ± 1 MBq 89Zr-cetuximab directly (<2 h) after the first therapeutic dose
of cetuximab. PET-scans were performed from 1 hour to 10 days post injection (p.i.).
Biodistribution was determined for blood and organs. Uptake in tumor lesions was
quantified by Standardized Uptake Value (SUV) and related to response. In 6 of 10
patients 89Zr-cetuximab uptake in tumor lesions was detected. Four of 6 patients with
89
Zr-cetuximab uptake had clinical benefit, while progressive disease was observed
in 3 of 4 patients without 89Zr-cetuximab uptake. Taken together, tumor uptake of
89
Zr-cetuximab can be visualized by PET imaging. The strong relation between uptake
and response warrants further clinical validation as an innovative selection method
for cetuximab treatment in patients with wt RAS mCRC.

not respond to anti-EGFR treatment. However, despite
selection based on mutational status, clinical benefit
(complete or partial resonse and stable disease according
to RECIST 1.1) to single agent cetuximab is observed in
approximately half of the patients with wt RAS mCRC
[6]. Additional mutations (such as BRAF) may play
a role, but have not proven to be definitive biomarkers
for response [7]. Variability in pharmacokinetics of the
antibody may also play a role in its clinical efficacy. It
can be influenced by the expression level of the antigen
throughout the body in addition to the expression level in
tumor lesions. EGFR is highly expressed on hepatocytes,
possibly leading to sequestration of anti-EGFR mAbs
in normal liver tissue. This may result in insufficient
circulating anti-EGFR mAbs to reach tumor lesions,

INTRODUCTION
Systemic treatment for patients with RAS wild type
(wt) colorectal cancer (mCRC) includes anti– epidermal
growth factor receptor (EGFR) monoclonal antibody
(mAb) treatment with either cetuximab or panitumumab
as monotherapy or in combination with chemotherapy
[1]. Binding of anti-EGFR mAb prevents ligand binding
to its receptor, induces receptor internalization and causes
inhibition of the receptor tyrosine kinase activity, thereby
interfering with cell growth, differentiation, proliferation,
apoptosis and cellular invasiveness [2]. Selection of
patients who will benefit from this therapy remains an
area of ongoing research. Patients with mCRC harboring
a K-RAS mutation [3–5] or N-RAS mutation [6] do
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

30384

Oncotarget

prohibiting antitumor activity. Cetuximab through levels
correlate with progression free survival, supporting the
hypothesis that cetuximab availability is crucial for its
antitumor activity [8]. The observation that increased skin
toxicity is associated with a favorable response might also
be explained by higher levels of circulating mAb. Indeed,
dose escalation based on the level of skin toxicity showed
a possible avenue for improved efficacy [9].
We hypothesize that response to treatment is
dependent on uptake of cetuximab in tumor lesions.
Differences in biodistribution and tumor uptake of the
antibody can be evaluated by immunoPET imaging as
demonstrated by successful proof-of-principle studies in
humans [10, 11]. The half life of the radiotracer 89Zr (t1/2 =
78.4 h) matches the biological half-life of intact antibodies
with slow kinetics like cetuximab. In a preclinical study
with tumor-bearing mice, 89Zr-cetuximab uptake was
demonstrated in EGFR-positive tumors. 89Zr-cetuximab
uptake did not correlate with EGFR expression levels,
implying that pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic
factors might influence cetuximab accumulation in the
tumor [12].
We performed 89Zr-cetuximab PET imaging in
patients with wt K-RAS mCRC with an indication
for anti-EGFR mAb monotherapy to investigate
biodistribution and tumor uptake as well as to establish
the optimal scanning time point to visualize tumor
targeting. Most importantly, we evaluated whether uptake
on 89Zr-cetuximab PET imaging can discriminate between
patients responding to treatment with cetuximab versus
non-responding patients.

No 89Zr-cetuximab related toxicity was reported. Only
known adverse events to cetuximab were observed, such
as skin toxicity, hypomagnesaemia and infusion related
reactions, none exceeding grade 2.
Whole body (WB) images, acquired at consecutive
time points after administration of 89Zr-cetuximab
(Figure 1 Timeline), showed radioactivity in blood pool,
liver, kidney, spleen, intestine and bone marrow. We
observed no visible uptake in the skin (Figure 2). The %
injected dose (ID) (decay corrected) in spleen, kidneys and
lungs as well as blood pool decreased in time. In liver,
the %ID increased during the first two days, after which
uptake plateaued at approximately 23% of ID (SD 4%)
(Figure 3), with a marked increase in organ to blood
pool ratio. Radioactivity concentration as measured in
the blood samples correlated well with the image derived
input (R2 = 0.97; S3). At day 6 p.i. the total radioactivity
retrieved from the WB PET images had decreased by
18.5% compared to the first scan due to gastrointestinal
excretion, as no excretion via the bladder was observed.
In 6 out of 10 patients, target lesions were
visually assessed positive for 89Zr-cetuximab uptake.
Figure 4A and 4B shows examples of visible 89Zr uptake
in a metastatic lesion of the iliac bone (patient 8) and the
lung (patient 10). In Figure 4C, another lung lesion in
patient 10 shows no uptake. Most tumor lesions showed
increasing uptake in time, indicating accumulation of
cetuximab. SUVpeak of these lesions varied between
2.2–7.5 on day 6 p.i.. Figure 4D illustrates the photopenic
aspect of liver metastases within normal liver tissue
accumulating high amounts of 89Zr-cetuximab. Two of
the 3 patients who were scanned at day 10 p.i. had visible
89
Zr-cetuximab uptake. SUVpeak at day 10 increased
compared to day 6 in patient 8 (from 7.3 to 10.3), but was
comparable in patient 6 (3.17 and 3.36, Figure 4E Due to
the physical half-life of 89Zr, image quality deteriorated
over time, making day 6 p.i. the optimal scanning time

RESULTS
Ten patients with wt K-RAS mCRC and an
indication for cetuximab monotherapy were enrolled.
A table with patient characteristics is available online (S2).

Figure 1: Timeline.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

30385

Oncotarget

Figure 2: Uptake of 89Zr-cetuximab in patient 3 with tumor lesions in the pelvis and sacral bone. Presented images are

with equal SUV max (decay corrected). Visual inspection shows uptake in normal organs which is decreasing over time. 89Zr-cetuximab
is sequestered in liver, a relatively photopenic lesion is observed at the site of a liver metastasis (arrow). Accumulation of 89Zr-cetuximab
over time is demonstrated in the tumor lesions. On the last scan a rectal hotspot with excreted 89Zr in feces is seen. Due to positioning of the
patient in the scanner the head and neck region is not visible in this plane.

Figure 3: Biodistribution (%ID) of 89Zr-cetuximab as a function of time (days p.i.) for kidney, liver, lung, spleen and
whole blood. Data are image derived and decay corrected. Error bars denote the standard deviation. (n = 7)
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

30386

Oncotarget

Figure 4A: 89Zr-cetuximab PET scan of patient 8 at day 6 p.i. with visible uptake in tumor lesion in the left iliac bone.

Figure 4B: 89Zr-cetuximab PET scan of patient 10 at day 6 p.i. with visible uptake in tumor lesion in the lower lobe of
the right lung and low accumulation in surrounding healthy lung tissue.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

30387

Oncotarget

Figure 4C: 89Zr-cetuximab PET scan of patient 10 at day 6 p.i. without visible uptake in tumor lesion in the upper lobe
of the right lung.

Figure 4D: 89Zr-cetuximab PET scan of patient 3 at day 6 p.i. illustrating high accumulation in healthy liver with
relative photopenic area’s in metastases.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

30388

Oncotarget

Figure 4E: SUVpeak calculated for tumor lesions with visible 89Zr-cetuximab uptake at sequential scanning time points.
point. Visually negative tumor sites had SUVmean of
1.0–1.9 at day 6 p.i. (Figure 5).
The majority of patients had 2 evaluable lesions and
in all but one patient, 89Zr-cetuximab tumor uptake was
either present or absent in both lesions. Five patients had
stable disease according to RECIST 1.1. Of 6 patients with
visible tumor uptake of 89Zr-cetuximab, 4 experienced
meaningful clinical benefit. Three of 4 patients without
visible uptake had progressive disease at first evaluation
at 8 weeks after start of treatment (Table 1).

Previously, a dosimetry study of 99mTc-C225
(= cetuximab) in patients with squamous cell carcinoma
of the head and neck showed reasonable dosimetric
properties, however, tumor uptake was not evaluated in
this trial [13].
In order to optimally reflect the biodistribution of
the mAb in patients, immediate binding of the labeled
mAb to easy accessible non tumor sites, e.g. liver, should
be minimized. A study evaluating 111In-C225 in patients
with squamous cell lung carcinoma showed that liver
sequestration of 111In -C225 decreased from 32 to 21.6 %ID
with increasing dose of unlabeled C225 (up to 300 mg).
Furthermore, increasing doses of unlabeled C225 resulted
in higher tumor uptake of 111In-C225 [14]. Similar results
were obtained with 89Zr-trastuzumab directed against
HER2. In trastuzumab-naive patients administration of
only 10 mg unlabeled trastuzumab resulted in a relatively
high uptake in the liver, whereas imaging characteristics
were optimal when 50 mg unlabeled trastuzumab was
administered [11].
As a proof of principle, we administered a scouting
dose of 0,1 mg 89Zr-cetuximab before the unlabeled
therapeutic dose of cetuximab in three patients. In blood
samples taken 2 and 3 hours after administration of the

DISCUSSION
We evaluated 89Zr-cetuximab PET imaging in
patients with wt K-RAS mCRC and found tumor uptake
of 89Zr-cetuximab in 6 out of 10 patients of whom 4 had
clinical benefit of cetuximab treatment (Table 1). Based
on the design of this clinical trial in which we expected
uptake in ≥1 of 10 or ≤7 of 10 patients (power  >90%,
type I error <5%), our results indicate that tumor uptake
of 89Zr-cetuximab may be used to predict clinical
benefit of cetuximab in patients with wt K-RAS mCRC,
which should be further validated in a larger cohort of
patients.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

30389

Oncotarget

Figure 5: Average SUVpeak of target lesions on day 6 p.i. Filled bars represent patients with visible 89Zr-cetuximab
uptake, dashed bars represent lesions with no visible uptake. Patient ID based on chronological order of inclusion.

Table 1: 89Zr-cetuximab uptake in extrahepatic target lesions
Patient

Extrahepatic target lesions

Zr uptake

Clinical benefit

1

Pleura

+

−

Subcutaneous

+

Lymphnode

−

Lung

−

Pelvic bone

+

Sacral bone

+

Adrenal gland

−

Soft tissue

−

Adrenal gland

−

Lymph node

−

Lung (1)

+

Lung (2)

+

7

Primary tumor

−

−

8

Iliac bone

+

+

9

Lymph node

+

+

Lung

+

Lung

+

lung

−

2
3
4
5
6

10

scouting dose, only <10 %ID 89Zr-cetuximab could be
detected. However, by administration of the therapeutic
dose of 500 mg/m2 cetuximab before the labeled fraction,
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

89

−
+
+
−
−

+

sufficient 89Zr-cetuximab was found in the blood pool for
tumor targeting (80% ID, see Figure 2). In addition, the
half life of 89Zr-cetuximab if co-administered with the
30390

Oncotarget

therapeutic dose, is comparable to unlabeled cetuximab,
indicating that in our model 89Zr-cetuximab reflects
biodistribution of unlabeled cetuximab.
Tumor uptake was initially evaluated by visual
assessment, which implies contrast with background
activity. The optimal scanning time point appears to be day
6 p.i., which is in line with literature and our expectations,
based on the t½ of 89Zr [10]. The subsequently calculated
SUVpeak at day 6 p.i. can discriminate between lesions with
and without visible uptake (Figure 5) and suggests that
a cut-off SUVpeak could be helpful in the determination
of specific uptake versus background activity. Because
a significant amount of the ID of 89Zr-cetuximab
accumulated in the liver, hepatic metastases – although
large enough for imaging purposes (diameter 4–14cm)
- were unsuitable to evaluate tumor uptake as spill-over
from uptake in adjacent normal liver tissue hampered
adequate uptake evaluation of tumor sites. In addition,
many large lesions have central necrosis with only a rim of
viable tumor tissue, which is located immediately adjacent
to healthy liver tissue accumulating very high levels of
89
Zr cetuximab. As liver is a common metastatic site of
mCRC, we have attempted to quantify uptake in hepatic
metastases. In 6 target lesions in 5 patients we observed
transient accumulation of 89Zr-cetuximab with highest
levels at day 2 pi showing a comparable pattern as healthy
liver tissue (data not shown). As the uptake pattern largely
followed normal liver tissue, quantification of hepatic
lesions seems to be unreliable due to spill-over of adjacent
liver tissue. With the liver being a common metastatic site
of mCRC this can limit the use of 89Zr-cetuximab as a
treatment selection tool.
The data in this study are too limited to draw
conclusions on the correlation between blood
concentration, liver uptake, tumor targeting and response.
However, three patients who did not show uptake had
progressive disease at first response evaluation. One could
postulate that insufficient cetuximab was available for
uptake in tumor lesions due to sequestration in the liver or
other EGFR expressing organs. For example, one patient
who had no visible 89Zr-cetuximab uptake in target tumor
lesions, had rather high liver uptake (29.0 %ID, average
all patients 22.8 ± 3.5 %ID) and relatively low plasma
levels at day 6 p.i. (10.0 %ID, average all patients 18.1 ±
6.5 %ID) suggesting possible inadequate availability in
tumor tissue.
Of 6 patients showing 89Zr-cetuximab uptake,
4 had clinical benefit. When comparing patient 6, 9 and
10 who all had lung metastases showing uptake, only
patient  9 and 10 had clinical benefit. The lack thereof
for patient 6 may be due to the multiple lines of previous
therapy including radiotherapy on the lung metastases
compared to 1–2 previous lines of therapy for the other
two patients leading to a potential difference in tissue
architecture and cellular content of these lesions. The
absence of response may also be due to N-RAS or
other mutations, however, unfortunately no adequate
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

tumor material was available for further assessment of
the mutational status in these patients. One patient had
clinical benefit, although 89Zr-cetuximab uptake could
not be visualized. Possibly, the amount of cetuximab that
reached the tumor was insufficient for visual assessment,
but did induce anti-tumor activity, for example by
antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity [15]. For 7
patients with two lesions available for quantification only
patient 10 showed heterogeneous uptake of 89Zr-cetuximab
(Figure 4B and 4C). Although all lesions in this patient
showed response to treatment, one of the lung lesion did
not show visible uptake of 89Zr cetuximab. This might
be caused by a difference in size, the negative lesion is
smaller compared to the others and thereby relatively
unfavorable for 89Zr PET imaging.
In conclusion, PET-imaging with 89Zr-cetuximab
is feasible. Despite relatively high liver uptake, variable
tumor uptake can be demonstrated in extra-hepatic
metastases of patients with wt K-RAS colorectal
carcinoma by visual assessment of 89Zr-cetuximab PET
scans. The optimal scanning time point appears to be at
day 6 post radiotracer injection. With 6 of 10 patients
showing uptake, statistical conditions were met for
89
Zr-cetuximab imaging to qualify as a potential treatment
selection tool, however additional data are needed to
confirm this
We are currently investigating whether tumor
uptake on 89Zr-cetuximab PET scan could guide
dose escalation to improve the clinical response
(NCT02117466). Ultimately, we aim to develop a
PET-imaging guided tool to select patients who could
benefit from cetuximab treatment.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Patients
Patients with histologically proven exon 2 K-RAS
wt mCRC, were eligible if they had progressive
disease after standard first and second line treatment
(fluoropyrimidines, oxaliplatin and irinotecan) or had
contra-indications to these agents. Only K-RAS exon 2
mutations were tested prior to inclusion because the trial
was started prior to the publication on the importance of
other K-RAS or N-RAS mutations [6]. Eligible patients
had ECOG of 0–2, a life expectancy of at least 12 weeks,
good end-organ function, and one or more measureable
lesion outside the liver according to RECIST 1.1. Prior
anti-EGFR therapy as well as skin conditions interfering
with EGFR inhibition were exclusion criteria amongst
others. The study (NCT01691391) was reviewed
and approved by the Central Committee on Research
Involving Human Subjects of the Netherlands and
the Medical Research Ethics Committee of the VU
University Medical Center, the Netherlands. All patients
gave written informed consent prior to any study specific
procedures.
30391

Oncotarget

89

Zr-cetuximab

activity concentration (AC) was measured and percentage
of injected dose (%ID) was calculated. Image derived AC
in the blood pool was calculated from fixed-size ROI (total
volume ~1.6 mL) placed in the middle of the aortic arch
on LD CT, on 5 consecutive planes. AC was measured
and %ID was calculated based on estimated blood volume.
Radiotracer accumulation in tumors was calculated
by drawing ROIs on the PET images and Standardized
Uptake Value (SUV) corrected for body weight was
calculated from the measured AC. In tumors with visible
uptake, SUVpeak was calculated [18, 19]. For tumor lesions
without visible uptake, an average background activity
was measured in a 5 cm diameter ROI in the area of
the tumor lesion and SUVmean was calculated. WB ROIs
were drawn to calculate the total activity measured in the
acquired PET images. Total activity measured on day 6
p.i. was compared to the activity at 1 hr p.i. to evaluate
excretion of 89Zr-cetuximab. AC was corrected for decay
between the time of injection and the start time of the scan.

Zr has been produced and purified as described
before and is coupled to mAbs via the bifunctional
chelate desferal (Df), [16, 17] which has been safely used
in the clinic before [10]. 89Zr-cetuximab is produced in
compliance with current Good Manufacturing Practice
at the VU University Medical Center. The procedures for
radiolabeling of cetuximab with 89Zr have been validated
with respect to the final quality of the prepared conjugate.
Details can be found in supplementary data online (S1).
89

Treatment with cetuximab
Patients were treated with 500 mg/m2 cetuximab
administered intravenously every two weeks. Adverse
events were graded according to CTCAE v4. Tumor
response was analyzed every 8 weeks according to
RECIST 1.1 (Figure 1). Treatment was ended in case
of unacceptable adverse events, worsening symptoms
of disease, clinical or radiological disease progression,
request by the patient or death.
89

Statistics
Based on the clinical benefit rate of single agent
therapy with cetuximab in wt K-RAS patients and
the assumption that uptake is related to response,
we hypothesized that 40% of patients would show
89
Zr-cetuximab uptake in tumor lesions [3–5]. If this
is correct, we expected uptake in ≥1 of 10 or ≤7 of 10
patients (power >90%, type I error <5%).

Zr-cetuximab PET

Within 2 hours after the first administration of
500 mg/m2 unlabeled cetuximab, 10 mg of 89Zr-cetuximab
(37 ± 1 MBq) was injected. The injected dose 89Zr (MBq)
was corrected for residual activity in the syringe and
needle. Whole-body (WB) PET scans (mid-femur-skull
vertex) were acquired 1–2 hours and 1, 2, 3 and 6 days
post injection (p.i.) in 7 patients and 6 and 10 days p.i.
in 3 patients (Figure 1). At every scanning time point,
venous blood samples were taken for pharmacokinetic
purposes. A 35 mAs low-dose (LD) CT scan was acquired
for attenuation correction and localization purposes. PET
scans consisted of 10–12 bed positions, of 5 min each.
PET data were corrected for dead time, scatter, randoms,
decay, and tissue attenuation and reconstructed according
to Makris et al [18].
An [18F]-FDG PET/CT was performed at baseline
to identify target lesions. 89Zr-cetuximab PET images
were visually assessed for 89Zr-cetuximab uptake in target
lesions. Images were evaluated by a nuclear medicine
physician (OSH) and a medical oncologist (CWM).
During the first reading session the nuclear medicine
physician was blinded for clinical information on target
lesion distribution. Tumors were scored as either positive
or negative for 89Zr-cetuximab uptake by consensus, as a
function of tracer uptake versus direct background.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Not applicable.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
The authors have declared no conflicts of interest.

GRANT SUPPORT
Not applicable.

REFERENCES
1.	 Vale CL, Tierney JF, Fisher D, Adams RA, Kaplan R,
Maughan TS, Parmar MK, Meade AM. Does anti-EGFR
therapy improve outcome in advanced colorectal cancer?
A systematic review and meta-analysis. Cancer Treat Rev.
2012; 38:618–625.
2.	 Heinemann V, Stintzing S, Kirchner T, Boeck S, Jung A.
Clinical relevance of EGFR- and KRAS-status in colorectal
cancer patients treated with monoclonal antibodies directed
against EGFR. Canc Treat Rev. 2009; 35:262–271.

Quantification of uptake
For quantification of radiotracer accumulation in
organs, regions of interest (ROI) were drawn manually on
the 89Zr-cetuximab PET images or the co-registered LD
CT scan if organ delineation was unclear on PET. Average
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

3.	 Khambata-Ford S, Garrett CR, Meropol NJ,
Basik M, Harbison CT, Wu S, Wong TW, Huang X,
30392

Oncotarget

Takimoto CH, Godwin AK, Tan BR, Krishnamurthi SS,
Burris HA 3rd, Poplin EA, Hidalgo M, Baselga J, Clark EA,
Mauro DJ. Expression of epiregulin and amphiregulin and
K-ras ­mutation status predict disease control in metastatic
colorectal cancer patients treated with cetuximab. J Clin
Oncol. 2007; 25:3230–3237.

­ onoclonal antibody U36 in the detection of lymph node
m
metastasis in head and neck cancer patients. Clin Canc Res.
2006; 12:2133–2140.
11.	 Dijkers EC, Oude Munnink TH, Kosterink JG,
Brouwers AH, Jager PL, de Jong JR, van Dongen
GA, Schröder CP, Lub-de Hooge MN, de Vries EG.
Biodistribution of 89Zr-trastuzumab and PET imaging of
HER2-positive lesions in patients with metastatic breast
cancer. Clin Pharmacol Ther. 2010; 87:586–592.

4.	 Karapatis CS, Khambata-Ford S, Jonker DJ,
O’Callaghan CJ, Tu D, Tebbutt NC, Simes RJ, Chalchal H,
Shapiro JD, Robitaille S, Price TJ, Shepherd L, Au HJ,
Langer C, Moore MJ, Zalcberg JR. K-ras mutations and
benefit from cetuximab in advanced colorectal cancer.
N Engl J Med. 2008; 359:1757–1765.

12.	 Aerts HJWL, Dubois L, Perk L, Vermaelen P, van Dongen GA,
Wouters BG, Lambin P. Disparity between in vivo EGFR
expression and 89Zr-labeled cetuximab uptake assessed
with PET. J Nucl Med. 2009; 50:123–151.

5.	 De Roock W, Piessevaux H, De Schutter J, Janssens M,
De Hertogh G, Personeni N, Biesmans B, Van Laethem JL,
Peeters M, Humblet Y, Van Cutsem E, Tejpar S. KRAS
wild-type state predicts survival and is associated to early
radiological response in metastatic colorectal cancer treated
with cetuximab. Ann Oncol. 2008; 19:508–515.

13.	 Schechter NR, Wendt RE, Yang DJ, Azhdarinia A,
Erwin WD, Stachowiak AM, Broemeling LD, Kim EE,
Cox JD, Podoloff DA, Ang KK. Radiation Dosimetry of
99mTc-Labeled C225 in Patients with Squamous Cell
Carcinoma of the Head and Neck. J Nucl Med. 2004;
45:1683–1687.

6.	 Douillard JY, Oliner KS, Siena S, Tabernero J,
Burkes R, Barugel M, Humblet Y, Bodoky G,
Cunningham D, Jassem J, Rivera F, Kocákova I, Ruff P,
Błasińska-Morawiec M, Šmakal M, Canon JL, Rother M,
Williams R, Rong A, Wiezorek J, Sidhu R, Patterson SD.
Panitumumab-FOLFOX4 treatment and RAS mutations in
colorectal cancer. N Engl J Med. 2013; 369:1023–1034.

14.	 Divgi CR, Welt S, Kris M, Real FX, Yeh SD,
Gralla R, Merchant B, Schweighart S, Unger M,
Larson SM, J. Mendelsohn. Phase I and imaging trial of
indium 111-labeled anti-Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor
monoclonal antibody 225 in patients with squamous cell
lung carcinoma. J natl cancer institute. 1991; 83:97–104.

7.	 De Roock W, Claes B, Bernasconi D, De Schutter J,
Biesmans
B,
Fountzilas
G,
Kalogeras
KT,
Kotoula V, Papamichael D, Laurent-Puig P, PenaultLlorca F,Rougier P, Vincenzi B, et al. Effects of KRAS,
BRAF, NRAS, and PIK3CA mutations on the efficacy of
cetuximab plus chemotherapy in chemotherapy-refractory
metastatic colorectal cancer: a retrospective consortium
analysis. Lancet Oncol. 2010; 11:753–762.

15.	 Bibeau F, Lopez-Crapez E, Di Fiore F, Thezenas S,
Ychou M, Blanchard F, Lamy A, Penault-Llorca F,
Frébourg T, Michel P, Sabourin JC, Boissière-Michot F.
Impact of FcRIIa-FcRIIIa polymorphisms and KRAS
mutations on the clinical outcome of patients with metastatic colorectal cancer treated with cetuximab plus irinotecan. J Clin Oncol. 2009; 27:1122–1129.
16.	 Verel I, Visser GW, Boellaard R, Stigter-van Walsum M,
Snow GB, van Dongen GA. 89Zr immuno-PET: comprehensive procedures for the production of 89Zr labeled
monoclonal antibodies. J Nucl Med. 2003; 44:1271–1281.

8.	 Azzopardi
N,
Lecomte
T,
Ternant
D,
Boisdron-Celle M,Piller F, Morel A, Gouilleux-Gruart V,
Vignault-Desvignes C, Watier H, Gamelin E, Paintaud G.
Cetuximab pharmacokinetics influences progression-free
survival. Clin Cancer. 2011; 17:6329–6337.

17.	 Lindmo T, Boven E, Cuttitta F, Fedorko J, Bunn PA Jr.
Determination of the immunoreactive fraction of radiolabeled monoclonal antibodies by linear extrapolation to
binding at infinite antigen excess. J Immunol Methods.
1984; 72:77–89.

9.	 Van Cutsem E, Tejpar S, Vanbeckevoort D,
Peeters M, Humblet Y, Gelderblom H, Vermorken JB,
Viret F, Glimelius B, Gallerani E, Hendlisz A, Cats A,
Moehler M, et al. Intrapatient cetuximab dose escalation in
metastatic colorectal cancer according to the grade of early
skin reactions: the randomized EVEREST study. J Clin
Oncol. 2012; 30:2861–2868.

18.	 Makris NE, Boellaard R, Visser EP, de Jong JR,
Vanderlinden B, Wierts R, van der Veen BJ,
Greuter HJ, Vugts DJ, van Dongen GA, Lammertsma AA,
Huisman MC. Multi-center harmonization of 89Zr PET/CT
performance. J Nucl Med. 2014; 55:264–267.

10.	 Borjesson PK, Jauw YWS, Boellaard R, de Bree R,
Comans EF, Roos JC, Castelijns JA, Vosjan MJ,
Kummer JA, Leemans CR, Lammertsma AA, van
Dongen GA. Performance of immune-positron ­emission
tomography
with
zirconium-89-labeled
chimeric

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

19.	 Lodge MA, Chaudhry MA, Wahl RL. Noise considerations for PET quantification using maximum and
peak Standardized Uptake Value. J Nucl Med. 2012;
53:1041–1047.

30393

Oncotarget

