Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No. 42

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Lymphadenectomy promotes tumor growth and cancer cell
dissemination in the spontaneous RET mouse model of human
uveal melanoma
Yeo Kim Pin1, Karen Khoo2, Muly Tham2, Tan Karwai2,3, Thiam Chung Hwee1,
Anne-Laure Puaux2, Meow Ling Cindy Phua2, Masashi Kato4, Veronique Angeli1,*,
Jean-Pierre Abastado2,5,*
1

 epartment of Microbiology, Immunology Programme, Life Science Institute, Yoon Loo Lin School of Medicine, National
D
University of Singapore, Singapore

2

Singapore Immunology Network, BMSI, A-STAR, Singapore

3

Department of Clinical Research, Singapore General Hospital, Singapore

4

Department of Occupational and Environmental Health, Nagoya University Graduate School of Medicine, Nagoya, Japan

5

Present address: Institut de Recherches Internationales Servier, Suresnes Cedex, France

*

These authors have contributed equally to this work

Correspondence to: Veronique Angeli, e-mail: micva@nus.edu.sg
Jean-Pierre Abastado, e-mail: jean-pierre.abastado@servier.com
Keywords: lymphadenectomy, uveal melanoma, inflammation
Received: July 10, 2015      Accepted: October 23, 2015      Published: November 02, 2015

ABSTRACT
Resection of infiltrated tumor-draining lymph nodes (TDLNs) is a standard
practice for the treatment of several cancers including breast cancer and melanoma.
However, many randomized prospective trials have failed to show convincing clinical
benefits associated with LN removal and the role of TDLNs in cancer dissemination
is poorly understood. Here, we found in a well-characterized spontaneous mouse
model of uveal melanoma that the growth of the primary tumor was accompanied
by increased lymphangiogenesis and cancer cell colonization in the LNs draining
the eyes. But, unexpectedly, early resection of the TDLNs increased the growth of
the primary tumor and associated blood vessels as well as promoted cancer cell
survival and dissemination. These effects were accompanied by increased tumor cell
proliferation and expression of phosphorylated AKT. Topical application of a broad
anti-inflammatory agent, Tobradex, or an oral treatment with cyclooxygenase-2
specific inhibitor, Celecoxib, reversed tumor progression observed after complete
lymphadenectomy. Our study confirms the importance of tumor homeostasis in cancer
progression by showing the enhancing effects of TDLN removal on tumor growth and
cancer cell dissemination, and suggests that TDLN resection may only be beneficial if
used in combination with anti-inflammatory drugs such as Tobradex and Celecoxib.

impeding their growth but also support tumor progression
by shaping tumor immunogenicity or promoting
immunosuppressive conditions within the tumor
environment [1]. The concept of “cancer immunoediting”
is an attempt to integrate this dual host-protective and
tumor-promoting actions of immunity on the development
and progression of cancer [1].
Integrity of lymphatic vessels (LVs) and LNs is
not only critical for proper immunologic functions but
also for maintaining fluid balance by draining interstitial

INTRODUCTION
Lymph nodes (LNs) are strategically positioned
and highly organized structures that provide optimal
interactions of components of the immune system to
induce immune response against invading pathogens and
tumors. The relationship between tumors and the immune
system is complex and it is now appreciated that the
immune system has a dual role in cancer. Indeed, it does
not only suppress tumor growth by killing cancer cells or
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

44806

Oncotarget

RESULTS

fluid, lipids, cytokines, chemokines and growth factors
from tissues back to the blood circulation [2, 3]. Notably,
each LN drains a define territory and all tissues, with a
few exceptions, are drained by LNs. Consequently, each
tumor has its own tumor-draining lymph node(s) (TDLNs)
[4, 5]. Lymphatic fluid drained away from the primary
tumor may contain tumor cells or tumor-derived factors.
The tumor cells may then form secondary tumors within
the “sentinel” LN which may subsequently colonize the
next draining LN. Tumor cells transported by lymphatics
can also reach the blood circulation and then disseminate
to other distant organs to form metastasis [6]. Analysis
of the TDLN for the presence of metastasis has been
recognized as a critical clinical staging system in the
metastatic process and surgical removal of TDLN is
now widely used in clinic as a means of determining
future treatment [7]. Although the involvement of
the sentinel LN is an important prognostic factor,
complete lymphadenectomy (CLND) does not seem to
promote survival. Many clinical trials reported to date
showed little if any survival benefit of CLND, even
after several decades of follow up [8–13]. The role of
TDLNs in tumor growth and dissemination is poorly
understood, and therefore the consequences of CLND
need further investigations.
MT/ret mice (refer to as RET mice from now)
are immune-competent mice transgenic for the human
RET oncogene which is specifically expressed by
melanocytes [14, 15]. In this mouse model of human
melanoma, tumor develops in the uvea (choroid,
ciliary body or iris), a tissue rich in melanocytes and
relatively protected from the immune system. Unlike
transplanted tumor models, RET mice spontaneously
develop clinically detectable uveal melanomas at
three to eight weeks of age, followed by a rapid and
progressive metastatic process [16]. Our previous
work showed that cancer cells disseminate as early
as three weeks after birth [16]. The disseminated
cancer cells remain dormant for months before
developing into cutaneous or visceral metastases.
We also showed that in a given mouse, metastatic
tumors share a common clonal origin. The stepwise
evolution of melanoma in RET mice recapitulates
the natural history of disease progression in cancer
patients, underlining the significance and suitability
of this melanoma model to study the effect of CLND
on tumor growth and dissemination.
In this study, we first identified LNs that drain
uveal tumors in the RET mouse model in order to
perform CLND. Unexpectedly, we found that CLND
promoted the growth of primary uveal tumor nodule,
cancer cell dissemination and metastasis. These
effects were associated with increased proliferation
and survival of tumor cells and phosphorylation of
AKT which were reversed by treatments with antiinflammatory drugs.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Cervical lymph nodes drain uveal tumors
Although
uveal
melanomas
metastasize
predominantly by hematogenous spread, they can
occasionally metastasize to the draining mandibular
or parotid LNs and intraocular injection of tumor cells
can result in cell dissemination to TDLNs [17–20]. To
verify that these LNs drain the primary tumor in RET
mice, FITC-conjugated dextran was injected peri- or
intra-ocularly and cervical region was imaged 20 mins
later. Fluorescent signal was detected in both ipsilateral
mandibular and parotid LNs as well as the corresponding
efferent LV (Figure 1A). Immunofluorescent staining of
tumor-bearing eyes from RET mice also indicated the
presence of peri-tumoral LVs while intra-tumoral LVs
were rare (Supplementary Figure S1). Next, we evaluated
the presence of tumor antigens in these TDLNs from RET
mice and non-transgenic littermates. Ectopic expression
of the melanocytic gene, daupachrome tautomerase (Dct,
an enzyme involved in melanin synthesis), is a sensitive
and reliable marker for cancer cell dissemination in RET
mice [16]. Dct expression was significantly higher in
the mandibular and parotid LNs of tumor-bearing mice
as compared to non-transgenic littermates (Figure 1B)
and correlated with primary tumor size (Spearman’s
correlation r = 0.65; p < 0.0001) (Figure 1C). Staining for
LV endothelial hyaluronan receptor-1 (Lyve-1), a specific
marker of LVs revealed extensive lymphangiogenesis in
TDLNs from mice with large uveal tumor (>10 mm2)
(Figure 1D–1E). Expression of Prox-1, a transcription
factor expressed by lymphatic endothelial cells, was
increased in the mandibular LNs draining small tumor
(<10 mm2) but returned to baseline level in larger tumors
(>10 mm2) (Figure 1F).

CLND stimulates the growth of blood vessels,
primary tumors and metastatic tumors
Having established that melanoma cells can
disseminate to the cervical LNs, we next assessed the
effects of CLND on primary tumor growth. Two- to
three-week old mice were subjected to complete bilateral
resection of mandibular and parotid LNs and analysed 4
and 21 weeks post-operation (Figure 2A). Non-surgery
(NS) control and sham control (similar surgical procedure
without removing the TDLNs) were pooled together and
defined as control group in subsequent experiments since
there was no significant difference in the parameters
assessed herein (Supplementary Figure S2A–S2C). The
primary uveal tumors are often multi-nodular and the
individual tumor nodules isolated 4 or 21 weeks postoperation were significantly larger in CLND-resected
animals than the controls at both time-points (Figure 2B).
Significant increase in the percentage of Ki67-positive
44807

Oncotarget

proliferating cells was also observed 4 weeks after surgery
(Figure 2C). Furthermore, while there was no difference
in both number and size of body metastases 4 week after
surgery, a 53% increase in the number of body metastases
was observed in the 21-week post-operated CLND group
when compare to controls (Figure 2D). The size of body
metastases was also significantly larger in the CLNDresected group than the controls (Figure 2E). Twenty one
weeks after CLND, the number of large tumors (>10 mm2)
increased by 2.5 fold compared to control group (Figure
2F). The role of blood vessels (BVs) in tumor growth

and hematogenous dissemination [21] prompted us to
assess whether enhanced angiogenesis may account for
the increase in primary tumor growth and cancer cell
dissemination following CLND. The number of BV per
tumor nodule in the primary tumor 4 weeks after CLND
increased significantly while BV density did not differ
between the two groups (Figure 2G–2H). By 21 weeks
post-surgery, both the BV number and density in primary
tumors after CLND were augmented significantly (Figure
2I–2J). Notably, the increase in smaller BVs mostly
accounted for the overall increase in BVs in the long post-

Figure 1: Cervical lymph nodes drain uveal tumors. A. FITC-conjugated dextran was injected intra- or peri-ocularly into RET
mice. LNs and LVs connecting the eyes to mandibular and parotid LNs were recognized by positive FITC signal (Green). Scale bar = 2
mm. B. Dct expression was measured by qRT-PCR in mandibular and parotid LNs of RET mice and non-transgenic control littermates
(RET-). Each point represents one LN. two-tailed Mann-Whitney test; ** p value < 0.01 (n = 6–9 mice). C. Correlation of Dct expression
in mandibular LN was plotted as a function of primary tumor area (mm2). Tumor area was measured by counting the sum of S100B+ tumor
cells from 5 representative primary tumor cross-sections. Spearman’s correlation r = 0.6529; ***p value < 0.001 (n = 19 mice). D. Top
image panels: Eye tumors stained with S100B antibody (brown) and size of tumor areas are indicated as mm2. Scale bar = 300 um. Bottom
image panels: LVs in the mandibular LNs stained with Lyve-1 antibody (green). Scale bar = 200 um. E. LV area was measured as mean
fraction of Lyve-1+ staining from LN. Total tumor area was measured by counting the sum of S100B+ tumor cells from 5 representative
primary tumor cross-sections. 1-way Anova; * p value < 0.05 (n = 5–6 mice). F. qRT-PCR analysis of Prox-1 transcripts was measured in
mandibular LNs of RET mice and control littermates. 1-way Anova; *p value < 0.05 and **p value < 0.01 (n = 6–12 mice).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

44808

Oncotarget

operative group (Figure 2K). These data shows that CLND
during early tumorigenesis not only can stimulate and
enhance growth of the primary tumor resulting in overall
larger tumor mass in the long term, but also can exacerbate
cancer cell dissemination. Furthermore, CLND-induced
tumor growth is associated with increased angiogenesis.

inflammatory drugs may reverse the effect of CLND.
One group of RET mice received topical application
of the potent anti-inflammatory drug, Tobradex, on
the eyes for 4 weeks following surgery. Tobradex is an
ophthalmic ointment containing tobramycin (antibiotic)
and dexamethasone (anti-inflammatory) [25] . In another
experimental group, RET mice were fed on a normal
or Celecoxib-supplemented diet for 4 weeks following
CLND. Celecoxib is a non-steroidal anti-inflammatory
drug (NSAID) that selectively targets cyclooxygenase-2
(cox-2) and has been shown to be chemopreventive and
chemoprotective [26]. In both Tobradex and Celecoxibtreated groups, primary tumor nodule growth was hindered
4 weeks after surgery compared to the non-treated CLND
group (Figure 3A). Celecoxib and Tobradex treatments
reduced the primary tumor area by 1.9- and 2.4-fold,
respectively. This was further supported by a marked
reduction in the percentage of proliferating uveal tumor
cells in the treated groups (Figure 3B). In addition, BV

Topical tobradex and oral celecoxib impede
CLND-induced angiogenesis, tumor growth and
metastasis
The microenvironment of many human and
murine cancers is rich in pro-inflammatory cytokines
and growth factors. This inflammatory environment
is known to contribute to cancer progression [22].
Furthermore, LN removal is expected to promote and/or
sustain inflammation at the upstream peripheral site by
disrupting lymphatic drainage (Supplementary Figure S3)
[23, 24]. Therefore, we next investigated whether anti-

Figure 2: CLND stimulates growth of the blood vessels, primary tumors and metastatic tumors. A. Schematic diagram

depicting CLND experimental plan. 2–3 week-old RET mice was subjected to bilateral complete LN resection. Sham control was performed
under similar surgical procedure without removing the LNs. Necropsy was performed 4 and 21 weeks-post operation. B. Quantification of the
area of tumor nodules within the orbit of the eye 4 and 21 weeks after CLND. two-tailed Mann-Whitney test, *** p value < 0.0001 (n = 5–20
mice). C. The percentage of Ki67+ cells in the tumor nodules 4 weeks after CLND; two-tailed Mann-Whitney test; * p value < 0.05 (n =
5–6 mice). D–E. Number and area of metastases present in mice 21 weeks after CLND; two-tailed Mann-Whitney test, ** p value < 0.01
and *** p value < 0.001 (n = 10–11 mice). F. Body metastases were segregated into three different sizes (<1 mm2, 1–10 mm2 and > 10
mm2). G–J. BVs in primary tumor cross-sections were identified by CD31 immunostaining 4 and 21 weeks after CLND. Number of BV
per tumor nodule was measured by counting all intra-tumoral BVs in each tumor nodule while BV density was the value of all intra-tumoral
BVs normalized by corresponding tumor nodule area; two-tailed Mann-Whitney test; ** p value < 0.01, *** p value < 0.001. (K) BVs
of long post survival group were categorized into two groups based on small (<2000 pixel) or large BV (>2000 pixel); 1-way anova;
** p value < 0.01.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

44809

Oncotarget

Uveal tumor cells express VEGF-A and
VEGFR-1

number and density also decreased significantly in treated
groups (Figure 3C–3D). For long term experiments,
only Celecoxib-incorporated diet was given to RET
mice after CLND because daily application of Tobradex
for 21 weeks did not seem clinically relevant. Notably,
Celecoxib supplementation for 21 weeks significantly
reduced the number and size of metastatic tumors compare
to untreated mice (Figure 3E–3F). Number of large tumors
(>10 mm2) was also reduced by 2.2-fold after Celecoxib
administration (Figure 3G). Together, these results show
that short term treatments with Tobradex or Celecoxib
following CLND potently control primary tumor and BV
growth. Long term Celecoxib treatment strongly impedes
metastatic tumor number and size, markedly hampering
early tumor dissemination and metastasis induced by
CLND.

Since VEGF-A is one major factor for
angiogenesis and tumor growth, we investigated
whether VEGF-A could mechanistically explain the
increased blood and tumor growth observed after
CLND in RET mice. First, we confirmed that tumor
cells in tumor-bearing eyes expressed VEGF-A by
immunofluorescence (Figure 4A) and flow cytometry
(Figure 4B). Notably, among the tumors derived
from RET mice the eye tumors exhibited the highest
levels of VEGF-A expression. ELISA measurement of
supernatant from Melan-ret cells, a cell line derived
from a RET tumor [27], further supported that these
tumor cells secrete VEGF-A (data not shown). We

Figure 3: Topical Tobradex and oral Celecoxib attenuate CLND-induced blood vessel growth, tumor growth and
metastasis. 2–3 week-old RET mice that underwent CLND were treated or not with daily topical application of
Tobradex or fed a diet containing Celecoxib for 4 or 21 weeks. A. After 4 weeks of treatment, primary tumor nodule areas were
measured. 1-way anova; ** p value < 0.01 (n = 7–14 mice). B. The percentage of Ki67+ cells in the tumor nodules 4 weeks after CLND
with or without treatments; two-tailed Mann-Whitney test; * p value < 0.05 (n = 5–8 mice). C–D. Number of BVs per tumor nodule and
density were measured. 1-way anova; ** p value < 0.01, *** p value < 0.001 (n = 6–12 mice). E–F. Number and area of body metastases
were quantified. two-tailed Mann-Whitney; * p value < 0.05 and *** – value < 0.0001. G. Each body metastases were segregated into three
different sizes (<1 mm2, 1–10 mm2 and > 10 mm2).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

44810

Oncotarget

next verified the expression of VEGF-A receptors,
VEGFR-1 and -2 in tumor cells and tumor-associated
BVs. Uveal tumor cells expressed VEGFR-1 while
BV expressed VEGFR-2 (Figure 4C), suggesting
that tumor cells and BVs can utilize VEGF-A for
growth and/or survival. The expression of VEGFR-1
on tumor cells was further confirmed using Melanret cells (Supplementary Figure S4). Owing to the
sensitivity of qPCR and ELISA techniques, NS and

Sham data were not combined for these analyses.
VEGF-A mRNA expression remain unchanged in nontreated groups, suggesting that CLND did not increase
VEGF-A synthesis de novo (Figure 4D). Celecoxib,
but not Tobradex, treatment reduced VEGF-A mRNA
expression. In contrast, the amount of VEGF-A protein
slightly decreased in sham control group and was further
reduced in the CLND group (Figure 4E). Reduction in
VEGF-A protein accompanied by unchanged VEGF-A

Figure 4: Uveal tumor cells express VEGF-A and VEGFR-1. A. Eye tumors cross-sections were immunostained with anti-S100B

(green) and anti-VEGF-A (red) antibodies. Scale bar = 10 um. B. Intracellular expression of VEGF-A in tumor cells from uveal (red), skin
(orange) or reproductive tract tumors (blue), and Melan-ret cell line (green). Cells immunostained for CD45loCD31loPDGFRαloVEGF-A+
were evaluated by flow cytometry. C. Immunofluorescent staining for VEGFR-1 (top) or -R2 (bottom) in primary uveal tumor crosssections. Scale bar = 20 um. D. Graph comparing the gene expression level of VEGF-A relative to GAPDH in primary uveal tumor from
NS, sham, CLND, Celecoxib- and Tobradex-treated mice. Each point represents a tumor bearing eye (n = 3–8 mice). two-tailed MannWhitney; ** p value < 0.01. E. VEGF-A protein content in homogenates of NS, sham, CLND and Celecoxib-treated uveal tumors was
examined by ELISA. Each point represents a tumor bearing eye (n = 5–16 mice). two-tailed Mann-Whitney; * p value < 0.05 and *** p
value < 0.001. F. Quantitative RT-PCR analysis of VEGFR-1 in uveal tumors of NS, sham, CLND, Celecoxib- and Tobradex-treated mice.
Each point represents a tumor-bearing eye (n = 3–8 mice). two-tailed Mann-Whitney; ** p value < 0.01 and *** p value < 0.001.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

44811

Oncotarget

DISCUSSION

synthesis after CLND led us to postulate that tumor
cells and BVs may consume this factor for their
growth. VEGFR-1 mRNA expression was significantly
upregulated in sham control group and further increased
after CLND whereas VEGFR-2 gene expression
increased after CLND (Figure 4F and data not shown).
Finally, both Celecoxib and Tobradex drastically
reduced the synthesis of VEGFR-1 (Figure 4F).

For most cancer types, metastasis remains
responsible for more than 90% of cancer-related death.
This emphasizes the need for a better understanding
of underlying mechanisms of this process in order to
control metastatic disease. Analysis of the metastatic
status of TDLNs is of central prognostic significance
and the removal of TDLNs is now commonly used as an
important guide for subsequent post-operative therapy.
However, our current data show in RET mice that
CLND significantly promotes primary tumor growth and
metastasis. This suggests that the LN metastases may not
contribute significantly to the formation of metastases in
distant organs and challenges the view of the involvement
of LN metastasis in the metastatic cascade. Indeed, if
established LN metastases serve as a cancer cell reservoir
for metastasis in our model, the RET mice should have
developed less clinically overt metastatic tumors after
CLND. But instead, we found that CLND significantly
increased metastatic outgrowth. Our results are in line
with the idea that LN metastasis is more likely an indicator
of metastatic progression [36] rather than a governor of
metastatic development. It is also consistent with the lack
of improved survival observed after lymphadenectomy in
melanoma patients [8–13].
How might resection of LN contribute to tumor
growth and cancer cell dissemination in our mouse model
of melanoma? It is well known that cancer development
and formation of metastasis are not entirely regulated by
cancer-cell autonomous changes, but may be influenced,
and possibly driven, by the cross-talk between tumor
cells and their microenvironment which may include
immune cells, stromal cells and extracellular matrix [37,
38]. Therefore, we propose that the removal of LN may
promote the growth of primary tumor and cancer cell
dissemination by stimulating a pro-tumoral environment.
It is known that the microenvironment of many cancers
in humans and experimental models is rich in proinflammatory cytokines and growth factors that contribute
to cancer progression [22]. Impaired lymphatic drainage
as a result of, for example, LN resection has been shown
to compromise the transport of inflammatory cells and
soluble mediators [3, 39, 40] and the resolution of certain
inflammatory diseases [40–42]. Notably, secondary
lymphedema, local inflammation and delayed wound
healing have been reported in melanoma, breast and
cervical cancer patients after lymphadenectomy [43–45].
Thus, the early removal of TDLNs in our cancer model
may be sufficient to create local inflammation that
stimulates the proliferation and survival of tumor cells, as
well as angiogenesis which may also contribute to tumor
growth. In support of this, we show that treatment with the
anti-inflammatory drugs Tobradex or Celecoxib inhibited
tumor growth in CLND mice in such a manner that tumor
nodule size was comparable to the sham control. Further

CLND-associated upregulation of activated
AKT protein in uveal tumor cells is reversed by
celecoxib and tobradex
As we observed increased tumor cell proliferation
and tumor growth in response to CLND, we decided to
evaluate the downstream VEGF-A signalling pathways
leading to phosphatidylinositol 3′-kinase (PI3K)/AKT and
the Mitogen Activated Protein Kinase (MAPK) activation
that are relevant to melanoma growth and survival [28–
30]. Immunoblotting using phospho-specific antibodies
revealed a significantly higher expression of pAKT while
pERK1/2 expression remained unchanged in the tumorbearing eyes of the CLND group as compared to control
group (Figure 5A–5B and data not shown). Assessment of
the effect of Celecoxib and Tobradex on pAKT revealed
that both treatments significantly decreased pAKT in uveal
tumor lysates (Figure 5A–5C). Cox-2 is constitutively
overexpressed in many human premalignant, malignant
and metastatic tumors and its upregulation promotes tumor
cell proliferation, angiogenesis, invasion and metastasis
[31–34]. We therefore evaluated if cox-2 and its metabolite,
prostaglandin-E2 (PGE2), were expressed by uveal tumor
cells from RET mice by Western blotting and ELISA,
respectively. The macrophage cell line, RAW264.7, treated
with or without LPS served as our positive and negative
controls, respectively. Cox-2 protein was not detected in
lysate from uveal tumors and PGE2 concentration did not
differ significantly among sham, CLND and Celecoxibtreated groups (Figure 5D–5E) suggesting that Celecoxib’s
ability to reduce CLND-induced tumor growth is likely cox2 independent. We, therefore, evaluated if there were any
changes in anti- or pro-apoptotic gene expression in uveal
tumors from treated- and non-treated CLND groups since
mitochondrial apoptosis pathway can be induced by cox-2
inhibitors [35]. Tobradex potently inhibited the expression of
anti-apoptotic genes including BCL-2, BCL-XL and MCL-1
while the expression of pro-apoptotic Bax and Bak-1 genes
remained unchanged or decreased compared to the CLND
group (Figure 5F). Celecoxib reduced anti-apoptotic BCL2 expression while significantly increasing pro-apoptotic
Bak-1 expression (Figure 5F). A decreased trend in BCL-XL
and MCL-1 mRNA expression and increased trend in Bax
expression level were also observed in Celecoxib-treated
group. These data suggest that Tobradex and Celecoxib may
interfere with the activation state of the kinase AKT and the
balance between anti-apoptotic and pro-apoptotic genes.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

44812

Oncotarget

work will be necessary to support the therapeutic use of
these drugs by testing, for example, their effect on tumor
progression in non-surgery RET mice.
Dexamethasone is one of the active ingredients of
Tobradex and is a synthetic analogue of glucocorticoid,
which down-regulates the expression of pro-inflammatory
genes including TNF-α [46], IL-1β [47, 48], cox-2 [48,
49], and inducible nitric oxide synthase [50]. Hence,
the effect of Dexamethasone on CLND-induced tumor
growth is likely attributed to its anti-inflammatory effect.
In addition to its analgesic property, Celecoxib has antitumor effects by blocking angiogenesis and inducing cell
cycle arrest and apoptosis [51, 52]. Although cox-2 is a
selective target of celecoxib and its expression has been
reported in several cancers including colorectal, breast,
pulmonary, prostate and malignant melanoma [31–33],
many celecoxib anti-tumor effects are independent of cox-

2. In our current work, we find that celecoxib treatment
was associated with reduced pAKT levels and decreased
anti-apoptotic gene expression. Furthermore, decreased
expression of VEGF-A and VEGFR-1 was also observed
after treatment in CLND mice. Since cox-2 expression
was not detected in the uveal tumor cells from RET mice
and PGE2 levels remained unchanged in CLND mice
regardless of celecoxib treatment, it is likely that celecoxib
exerts its anti-tumor effects in our model via a cox-2
independent pathway. Similarly, we observe that Tobradex
was associated with reduced expression of pAKT and antiapoptotic genes. Altogether, these data suggest that both
drugs may reverse CLND effect on primary tumor growth
in RET mice by interfering with the activation state of the
kinase AKT and the balance between anti-apoptotic and
pro-apoptotic genes.

Figure 5: Celecoxib and Tobradex reduce CLND-induced upregulation of activated AKT proteins in uveal tumor. Western

blot analysis of phosphorylated and total AKT uveal tumor lysates in sham, CLND, Celecoxib A. and Tobradex B.. C. Relative protein
expression was measured by densitometry analysis using Image J software and calculated as the percentage of phosphorylated AKT over
total AKT protein expression. D. Western blot analysis of cox-2 protein in tumor-bearing eyes. RAW264.7 cells treated with or without
LPS served as positive and negative control, respectively. E. PGE2 concentration from sham, CLND and Celecoxib-treated uveal tumor
lysates was quantified by ELISA. Each point represents a tumor-bearing eye (n = 7–12 mice). two-tailed Mann-Whitney F. Quantitative
RT-PCR analysis of anti-apoptotic genes (Bcl-2, Bcl-XL and MCL-1) and pro-apoptotic genes (Bak-1 and Bax) in tumor-bearing eyes of
CLND, Celecoxib- and Tobradex-treated mice. Each point represents one tumor-bearing eye (n = 7–10 mice). two-tailed Mann-Whitney
test; * p value < 0.05, *** p value < 0.001.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

44813

Oncotarget

Surgical resection of tumors is often followed by
regrowth at the primary site and outgrowth of metastases
and several mechanisms have been implicated in mediating
these postsurgical effects. Retrospective database analyses
identified an early-late bimodal cancer recurrence pattern
[53–57] where the first peak of recurrence appears to
be closely associated with the tumor resection itself.
While surgery remains a standard cancer treatment, the
perioperative period represents a high risk of metastases
development that result from the modulation of tumor
dormancy [58]. Surgical stress responses can lead to immune
suppression by reducing natural killer cell function, and
promoting Th2 responses and tumor associated macrophages
(TAM) infiltration [59]. This immunosuppressive
environment provides optimal conditions for tumor
outgrowth. In the presence of the primary tumor, metastatic
growth is suppressed by circulating angiogenic inhibitors
such as angiostatin [60]. Upon primary tumor removal,
inhibitor levels fall, leading to vigorous expansion of
previously dormant metastases [21, 60]. Surgery alone has
also been shown to trigger the production of several factors
in the wound fluid including TGF-β, bFGF [61], HB-EGF,
PDGF [62], as well as oxidative stress [63] and hypoxia
[64] leading to the establishment and rapid outgrowth of
metastases. Interestingly, we showed previously in the same
RET mouse model that surgical removal of eye tumors
resulted in increased local and distant tumor growth and such
growth was associated with increased TAM density [65].
Similarly, in the transplanted tumor models using Lewis
lung carcinoma, T241 sarcoma and B16F10 melanoma,
removal of the primary tumor led to large and highly
neovascularized growing metastases and reduced apoptosis
in metastatic tumor cells [21]. Therefore, by analogy to
surgical resection of tumor, we speculate that the surgical
trauma associated with LN removal may also promote the
growth of the primary tumor and accelerate the outgrowth
of already-disseminated metastases. However, the fact that
tumor growth and cancer cell dissemination were similar in
non-surgery and sham RET mouse groups and were only
enhanced after surgical resection of LN suggests that the
extent of surgical manipulation in sham control group may
not trigger significant changes in the microenvironment of
primary and disseminated tumor cells. Indeed, a study in
lung metastasis mouse model reported that increasing degree
of surgical stress augments tumor metastasis [66]. Notably,
perioperative administration of NSAID ketorolac, a common
surgical anti-inflammatory analgesic, in breast cancer
patients, is associated with superior disease-free survival
in the first few years after surgery and the absence of early
cancer recurrence [67]. Therefore, it is likely that Tobradex
and celecoxib may have similar effect in our model. In
summary, all these experimental and clinical reports suggest
that transient systemic inflammation accompanying surgery
may enhance metastasis and may be effectively blocked by
peri-surgical anti-inflammatory agents such as ketorolac,
Celecoxib and Tobradex.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Finally, although this point will need further
investigations, we cannot exclude that a reduction in antitumor immunity as a result of the removal of LN, a central
site for T cell priming, may account for the enhanced
tumor growth and cancer cell dissemination observed in
RET mice after lymphadenectomy [15, 16].
Here, we show that CLND enhances primary tumor
growth and metastasis in a mouse model of melanoma
in part by promoting a pro-tumoral inflammatory
environment. Treatment with anti-inflammatory drugs
such as celecoxib and Tobradex was beneficial in
controlling tumor progression after CLND and warrants
further consideration for implementation in the clinics. In
sum, this study not only sheds some light on the role of LN
in metastasis which is still currently debated, particularly
in the clinical setting, but also further highlights the
impact of tumor homeostasis on disease development and
progression.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Mice
Animal care and experimental procedures were
approved by the Singapore IACUC under protocol
120742. MT/RET mice were generated as previously
described [14, 15]. For lymphangiography of TDLNs,
10 μl of 12.5 mg/ml FITC-conjugated dextran (MW
2,000,000, Invitrogen) was injected intra- or peri-ocularly
followed by visualization under a fluorescent dissecting
microscope. Male and female mice at 2–3 weeks of
age were subjected to CLND and were euthanized and
necropsied after 4 and 21 weeks. Metastases were detected
under dissecting microscope during necropsy, removed
and photographed with a ruler in the visual field. Tumor
areas were measured using ImageJ software (http://
rsb.info.nih.gov/ij). Eye tumors were either fixed with
formalin or 2% paraformaldehyde (PFA) and 30% sucrose
overnight at 4°C, followed by embedding in paraffin or
Optimal Cutting Temperature for immunohistochemistry,
respectively.

Surgical procedures
Mice were injected subcutaneously (s.c) with
Buprenorphine (0.2–1mg/kg) and Enrofloxacin (20mg/
kg) prior to surgery. Mice were anaesthetized with
isoflurane to remove hair at the neck area and during the
entire surgical procedure. Followed by a skin incision at
the neck region, bilateral mandibular and parotids LNs
were surgically resected while similar procedure without
removing the LNs was performed in the sham control
group. Skin incision was closed by interrupted suture
and mice were allowed to recover on a heating pad.
Following surgery, Buprenorphine and Enrofloxacin were
administered s.c for three days.
44814

Oncotarget

Drug treatment

labelled specimens were viewed with a fluorescence wide
field (Axio Imager.Z1, Axioxam HRM camera; Carl Zeiss
Micro Imaging, Jena, Germany). Tumor areas and BV size
were measured using ImageJ software.

Tobradex (Alcon) was topically applied on the
eyes immediately after surgery and daily application
continued for 4 weeks. Celecoxib was purchased from LC
Laboratories and incorporated into Harlan chow diet 2918.
RET mice received 1500ppm Celecoxib chow diet for 4 or
21 weeks after surgical procedures.

Quantitative real-time PCR
Total RNA from eyes and LNs was homogenized
and extracted using TRIzol reagent (Qiagen) and
NucleoSpin RNA II kit (Macherey-Nagel) or Qiagen
RNeasy Micro kit. cDNA was reverse transcribed (Roche
Applied Biosystem reagents) from 2 μg of RNA and
analysed by quantitative PCR with SYBR green (Bio-Rad)
with specific primers. The primers sequences are shown
in Supplementary Table S1 (see Supplementary Material).

Cell lines and tumor cell isolations
Melan-ret cells [27] were cultured in RPMI-1640
medium (RPMI) supplemented with 5% heat-inactivated
fetal bovine serum, 1% non-essential amino acid, 1%
sodium pyruvate, 100 U/ml penicillin and 100 μg/ml
streptomycin (all from Invitrogen), at 37°C in a humidified
atmosphere of 95% air/5%CO2. Primary tumor cells were
isolated by digesting tumors with 1 mg/ml Collagenase
A and 0.1 mg/ml DNase I (Roche) in RPMI for 30 min
at 37°C.

ELISA and immunoblotting
Tumor-bearing eyes were harvested and
homogenized in RIPA buffer (Sigma Chemicals) with
a protease inhibitors mixture (Roche Diagnositics) and
Phosphatase Inhibitor Cocktail (Calbiochem). For ELISA,
Homogenates were centrifuged for 10 min at 4°C at 14,000
x g and supernatants were assayed using commercial
VEGF-A (R&D Systems) and PGE2 (Cayman Chemical)
ELISA kits according to manufacturers’ protocols. For
immunoblotting, total proteins were resolved by 10 or 12%
SDS-PAGE gel, transferred to nitrocellulose membranes
and blocked with 5% milk in 0.05% Tween20 in PBS.
The antibodies used for immunoblotting recognized cox-2
(Novus Biological), phospho-ERK, total ERK, phosphoAKTser473, AKT and actin (Cell Signalling Technology).
Where required, blots were stripped in stripping buffer
(Thermo Scientific) at room temperature for 7–10 min
for re-blotting for total ERK1/2 and AKT. SuperSignal
West Pico or Femto chemiluminescent substrates
(Thermo Scientific) were used for ECL and visualized on
ChemiDoc XRS (Biorad). ImageJ software was used for
Western blot densitometry analysis.

Flow cytometry analysis
Flow cytometric analysis of uveal, skin,
reproductive tract tumor and Melan-ret cell suspension
stained for CD45, CD31, PDGFRα and VEGF-A allowed
differentiation and quantification of tumor cells expressing
VEGF-A. Antibodies used included the following:
rat anti-mouse CD31 (Serotec) detected with anti-ratAlexafluor488 (Invitrogen), APC-conjugated anti-mouse
PDGFRα (eBioscience) and PCPCy5.5 –conjugated antimouse CD45 (BD Biosciences). For detection of VEGF-A
expression in tumor cells, surface antigens staining were
first performed as detailed above. Intracellular staining
for VEGF-A was then performed with the BD Fixed/
Permeabilization Kit ®, using rabbit purified anti-VEGF-A
(Santa Cruz) antibody and revealed with PE-conjugated
anti-rabbit IgG (Biolegend).

Immunohistochemistry

Statistical analysis

Formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded uveal tumor
sections (10 μm) were immunolabeled with Rabbit antiS100B (DAKO) and anti-CD31 (Biolegend) antibodies
to identify melanoma cells and blood endothelial cells,
respectively, as described previously [16]. For analysis
of proliferating cells, blood and LVs in uveal tumors,
cryosections were stained with rat anti-Ki67-biotinalyted
(eBioscience), armenian hamster anti-CD31 (PECAM-1,
Millipore) or rat anti-CD31 (PECAM-1, BD Biosciences)
and rabbit anti-Lyve-1 (Abcam) antibodies. Cy3-conjugated
streptavidin, Alexafluor647-conjugated or Cy3-conjugated
anti-armenian hamster and Alexafluor488-conjugated antirabbit (Jackson ImmunoResearch Laboratories) antibodies
were used for detection. Sections were counterstained
with 4,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI) for cell nuclei
visualization and mounted for analysis. Immunofluorescent
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Statistical analysis was performed with Graphpad
Prism version 5.0 (GraphPad Software). The tests
applied are indicated in the figure legends. Data were
presented as mean ± SEM and were statistically analysed
by nonparametric Mann-Whitney U test or two-tailed
t test for comparisons between two groups; one-way
ANOVA was used to compare multiple groups with one
experimental parameter. A p value of less than 0.05 was
considered to be statistically significant.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This research was funded by government funding
to SIgN, A*STAR, Singapore to JPA and by a grant from
A*STAR and NRF to VA. We thank Irfan Khalis Bin
44815

Oncotarget

Rosdi (Mouse Core) for maintaining the RET mice. We
are grateful to Asst Prof Zhang Yongliang and A/Prof Lim
Hsiu Kim, Lina for their generosity providing us antibody
for Western Blotting analysis.

melanoma: a prospective randomized study. Mayo Clinic
Proceedings. 1986; 61:697–705.
10.	 Morton DL, Thompson JF, Cochran AJ, Mozzillo N,
Elashoff R, Essner R, Nieweg OE, Roses DF, Hoekstra
HJ, Karakousis CP, Reintgen DS, Coventry BJ, Glass EC,
Wang HJ. Sentinel-node biopsy or nodal observation in
melanoma. N EnglJ Med. 2006; 355:1307–1317.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

11.	 Cascinelli N, Morabito A, Santinami M, MacKie RM, Belli
F. Immediate or delayed dissection of regional nodes in
patients with melanoma of the trunk: a randomised trial.
WHO Melanoma Programme. Lancet. 1998; 351:793–796.

Author contributions
YKP designed, performed experiments, analysed
data and wrote the manuscript. Karen Khoo performed
experiments and analysed data. MT and TKW performed
experiments, analysed data and contributed to scientific
discussion. TCH performed experiment. ALP and VA
conceived experimental ideas. MK provided MT/RET
mouse model. VA and JPA conceived, designed and
supervised the study. All authors had final approval of the
submitted and published versions.

12.	 Bamboat ZM, Konstantinidis IT, Kuk D, Ariyan CE, Brady
MS, Coit DG. Observation after a positive sentinel lymph
node biopsy in patients with melanoma. Ann Surg Oncol.
2014; 21:3117–3123.
13.	 Balch CM, Soong SJ, Bartolucci AA, Urist MM,
Karakousis CP, Smith TJ, Temple WJ, Ross MI, Jewell
WR, Mihm MC, Barnhill RL, Wanebo HJ. Efficacy of an
elective regional lymph node dissection of 1 to 4 mm thick
melanomas for patients 60 years of age and younger. Ann
Surg. 1996; 224:255–263; discussion 263–256.

REFERENCES

14.	 Kato M, Takahashi M, Akhand AA, Liu W, Dai Y, Shimizu
S, Iwamoto T, Suzuki H, Nakashima I. Transgenic mouse
model for skin malignant melanoma. Oncogene. 1998;
17:1885–1888.

1.	 Schreiber RD, Old LJ, Smyth MJ. Cancer immunoediting:
integrating immunity’s roles in cancer suppression and promotion. Science. 2011; 331:1565–1570.

15.	 Lengagne R, Graff-Dubois S, Garcette M, Renia L, Kato
M, Guillet JG, Engelhard VH, Avril MF, Abastado JP,
Prevost-Blondel A. Distinct role for CD8 T cells toward
cutaneous tumors and visceral metastases. J Immunol.
2008; 180:130–137.

2.	 Angeli V, Randolph GJ. Inflammation, lymphatic function, and dendritic cell migration. Lymphat Res Biol. 2006;
4:217–228.
3.	 Lim HY, Thiam CH, Yeo KP, Bisoendial R, Hii CS,
McGrath KC, Tan KW, Heather A, Alexander JS, Angeli V.
Lymphatic vessels are essential for the removal of cholesterol from peripheral tissues by SR-BI-mediated transport
of HDL. Cell Metab. 2013; 17:671–684.

16.	 Eyles J, Puaux AL, Wang X, Toh B, Prakash C, Hong M,
Tan TG, Zheng L, Ong LC, Jin Y, Kato M, Prevost-Blondel
A, Chow P, Yang H, Abastado JP. Tumor cells disseminate
early, but immunosurveillance limits metastatic outgrowth,
in a mouse model of melanoma. J Clin Invest. 2010;
120:2030–2039.

4.	 Wong JH, Cagle LA, Morton DL. Lymphatic drainage of
skin to a sentinel lymph node in a feline model. Ann Surg.
1991; 214:637–641.

17.	 Ardjomand N, Komericki P, Langmann G, Mattes D,
Moray M, Scarpatetti M, El-Shabrawi Y. Lymph node
metastases arising from uveal melanoma. Wiener klinische
Wochenschrift. 2005; 117:433–435.

5.	 Morton DL, Wen DR, Wong JH, Economou JS, Cagle
LA, Storm FK, Foshag LJ, Cochran AJ. Technical details
of intraoperative lymphatic mapping for early stage melanoma. Arch Surgery. 1992; 127:392–399.

18.	 Harris MS, Harris GJ, Simons KB, Campbell BH. Massive
extraocular extension and parotid lymph node metastasis
of uveal melanoma. Ophthal Plast Reconstr Surg. 2007;
23:430–432.

6.	 Sleeman J, Schmid A, Thiele W. Tumor lymphatics. Semin
Cancer Biol. 2009; 19:285–297.
7.	 Tanis PJ, Nieweg OE, Valdes Olmos RA, Th Rutgers EJ,
Kroon BB. History of sentinel node and validation of the
technique. Breast cancer research. 2001; 3:109–112.

19.	 Dithmar S, Diaz CE, Grossniklaus HE. Intraocular melanoma spread to regional lymph nodes: report of two cases.
Retina. 2000; 20:76–79.

8.	 Veronesi U, Adamus J, Bandiera DC, Brennhovd O,
Caceres E, Cascinelli N, Claudio F, Ikonopisov RL,
Javorski VV, Kirov S, Kulakowski A, Lacour J, Lejeune F,
Mechl Z, Morabito A, Rode I, et al. Delayed regional lymph
node dissection in stage I melanoma of the skin of the lower
extremities. Cancer. 1982; 49:2420–2430.

20.	 Boonman ZF, van Mierlo GJ, Fransen MF, Franken KL,
Offringa R, Melief CJ, Jager MJ, Toes RE. Intraocular
tumor antigen drains specifically to submandibular lymph
nodes, resulting in an abortive cytotoxic T cell reaction. J
Immunol. 2004; 172:1567–1574.
21.	 Folkman J. Role of angiogenesis in tumor growth and
metastasis. Semin Oncol. 2002; 29(6 Suppl 16):15–18.

9.	 Sim FH, Taylor WF, Pritchard DJ, Soule EH.
Lymphadenectomy in the management of stage I malignant
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

44816

Oncotarget

22.	 Balkwill F, Mantovani A. Inflammation and cancer: back to
Virchow? Lancet. 2001; 357:539–545.

35.	 Jendrossek V. Targeting apoptosis pathways by Celecoxib
in cancer. Cancer Lett. 2013; 332:313–324.

23.	 Montalto E, Mangraviti S, Costa G, Carrega P, Morandi B,
Pezzino G, Bonaccorsi I, Cancellieri A, Mingari MC, Mesiti
M, Ferlazzo G, Melioli G. Seroma fluid subsequent to axillary lymph node dissection for breast cancer derives from
an accumulation of afferent lymph. Immunol Lett. 2010;
131:67–72.

36.	 Cady B. Lymph node metastases. Indicators, but not governors of survival. Arch Surg. 1984; 119:1067–1072.
37.	 Sleeman JP, Cremers N. New concepts in breast cancer
metastasis: tumor initiating cells and the microenvironment.
Clin Exp Metastasis. 2007; 24:707–715.
38.	 Sceneay J, Smyth MJ, Moller A. The pre-metastatic niche:
finding common ground. Cancer Metastasis Rev. 2013;
32:449–464.

24.	 Tammela T, Saaristo A, Holopainen T, Lyytikka J,
Kotronen A, Pitkonen M, Abo-Ramadan U, Yla-Herttuala
S, Petrova TV, Alitalo K. Therapeutic differentiation and
maturation of lymphatic vessels after lymph node dissection
and transplantation. Nat Med. 2007; 13:1458–1466.

39.	 Tan KW, Yeo KP, Wong FH, Lim HY, Khoo KL, Abastado
JP, Angeli V. Expansion of cortical and medullary sinuses
restrains lymph node hypertrophy during prolonged inflammation. J Immunol. 2012; 188:4065–4080.

25.	 Notivol R, Amin D, Whitling A, Wells D, Kennedy M,
Cockrum PC. Prophylactic effectiveness of tobramycindexamethasone eye drops compared with tobramycin/vehicle eye drops in controlling post-surgical inflammation in
cataract patients : prospective, randomised, double-masked,
two-arm, parallel-group, placebo-controlled, multicentre
study. Clin Drug Investig. 2004; 24:523–533.

40.	 Huggenberger R, Ullmann S, Proulx ST, Pytowski
B, Alitalo K, Detmar M. Stimulation of lymphangiogenesis via VEGFR-3 inhibits chronic skin inflammation.
J Exp Med. 2010; 207:2255–69.
41.	 Szuba A, Skobe M, Karkkainen MJ, Shin WS, Beynet DP,
Rockson NB, Dakhil N, Spilman S, Goris ML, Strauss
HW, Quertermous T, Alitalo K, Rockson SG. Therapeutic
lymphangiogenesis with human recombinant VEGF-C.
FASEB J. 2002; 16:1985–7.

26.	 Gurpinar E, Grizzle WE, Piazza GA. COX-Independent
Mechanisms of Cancer Chemoprevention by AntiInflammatory Drugs. Front Oncol. 2013; 3:181.
27.	 Toh B, Wang X, Keeble J, Sim WJ, Khoo K, Wong
WC, Kato M, Prevost-Blondel A, Thiery JP, Abastado
JP. Mesenchymal transition and dissemination of cancer cells is driven by myeloid-derived suppressor cells
infiltrating the primary tumor. PLOS Biology. 2011;
9:e1001162.

42.	 Huggenberger R, Siddiqui SS, Brander D, Ullmann S,
Zimmermann K, Antsiferova M, Werner S, Alitalo K,
Detmar M. An important role of lymphatic vessel activation in limiting acute inflammation. Blood. 2011;
117:4667–4678.
43.	 Fuller J, Guderian D, Kohler C, Schneider A, Wendt TG.
Lymph edema of the lower extremities after lymphadenectomy and radiotherapy for cervical cancer. Strahlentherapie
und Onkologie. 2008; 184:206–211.

28.	 Madhunapantula SV, Robertson GP. The PTEN-AKT3 signaling cascade as a therapeutic target in melanoma. Pigment
Cell Melanoma Res. 2009; 22:400–419.
29.	 Madhunapantula SV, Mosca PJ, Robertson GP. The Akt
signaling pathway: an emerging therapeutic target in
malignant melanoma. Cancer Biology & Therapy. 2011;
12:1032–1049.

44.	 Hardin RE, Lange JR. Surgical treatment of melanoma
patients with early sentinel node involvement. Curr Treat
Options Oncol. 2012; 13:318–326.
45.	 Shada AL, Walters DM, Tierney SN, Slingluff CL, Jr.
Surgical resection for bulky or recurrent axillary metastatic
melanoma. J Surg Oncol. 2012; 105:21–25.

30.	 Inamdar GS, Madhunapantula SV, Robertson GP. Targeting
the MAPK pathway in melanoma: why some approaches
succeed and other fail. Biochem Pharmacol. 2010;
80:624–637.

46.	 Swantek JL, Cobb MH, Geppert TD. Jun N-terminal kinase/
stress-activated protein kinase (JNK/SAPK) is required for
lipopolysaccharide stimulation of tumor necrosis factor
alpha (TNF-alpha) translation: glucocorticoids inhibit TNFalpha translation by blocking JNK/SAPK. Mol Cell Biol.
1997; 17:6274–6282.

31.	 Becker MR, Siegelin MD, Rompel R, Enk AH, Gaiser T.
COX-2 expression in malignant melanoma: a novel prognostic marker? Melanoma Res. 2009; 19:8–16.
32.	 Gupta S, Srivastava M, Ahmad N, Bostwick DG, Mukhtar
H. Over-expression of cyclooxygenase-2 in human prostate
adenocarcinoma. Prostate. 2000; 42:73–78.

47.	 Lee SW, Tsou AP, Chan H, Thomas J, Petrie K, Eugui EM,
Allison AC. Glucocorticoids selectively inhibit the transcription of the interleukin 1 beta gene and decrease the
stability of interleukin 1 beta mRNA. Proc Natl Acad Sci U
S A. 1988; 85:1204–1208.

33.	 Soslow RA, Dannenberg AJ, Rush D, Woerner BM, Khan
KN, Masferrer J, Koki AT. COX-2 is expressed in human
pulmonary, colonic, and mammary tumors. Cancer. 2000;
89:2637–2645.

48.	 Abraham SM, Lawrence T, Kleiman A, Warden P,
Medghalchi M, Tuckermann J, Saklatvala J, Clark AR.
Antiinflammatory effects of dexamethasone are partly
dependent on induction of dual specificity phosphatase 1. J
Exp Med. 2006; 203:1883–1889.

34.	 Qiu X, Cheng JC, Chang HM, Leung PC. COX2 and PGE2
mediate EGF-induced E-cadherin-independent human ovarian cancer cell invasion. Endocrine-Related Cancer. 2014;
21:533–543.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

44817

Oncotarget

49.	 Crofford LJ, Wilder RL, Ristimaki AP, Sano H, Remmers
EF, Epps HR, Hla T. Cyclooxygenase-1 and -2 expression
in rheumatoid synovial tissues. Effects of interleukin-1
beta, phorbol ester, and corticosteroids. J Clin Invest. 1994;
93:1095–1101.

pulmonary metastasis in osteosarcoma. Clin Orthop Relat
Res. 2003; :159–166.
58.	 Retsky M, Demicheli R, Hrushesky W, Baum M, Gukas I.
Surgery triggers outgrowth of latent distant disease in breast
cancer: an inconvenient truth? Cancers. 2010; 2:305–337.

50.	 Kunz D, Walker G, Eberhardt W, Pfeilschifter J. Molecular
mechanisms of dexamethasone inhibition of nitric oxide
synthase expression in interleukin 1 beta-stimulated mesangial cells: evidence for the involvement of transcriptional
and posttranscriptional regulation. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S
A. 1996; 93:255–259.

59.	 Gottschalk A, Sharma S, Ford J, Durieux ME, Tiouririne
M. Review article: the role of the perioperative period
in recurrence after cancer surgery. Anesth Analg. 2010;
110:1636–1643.
60.	 O’Reilly MS, Holmgren L, Shing Y, Chen C, Rosenthal
RA, Moses M, Lane WS, Cao Y, Sage EH, Folkman J.
Angiostatin: a novel angiogenesis inhibitor that mediates
the suppression of metastases by a Lewis lung carcinoma.
Cell. 1994; 79:315–328.

51.	 Grosch S, Maier TJ, Schiffmann S, Geisslinger G.
Cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2)-independent anticarcinogenic
effects of selective COX-2 inhibitors. J Natl Cancer Inst.
2006; 98:736–747.

61.	 Hofer SO, Shrayer D, Reichner JS, Hoekstra HJ, Wanebo
HJ. Wound-induced tumor progression: a probable role
in recurrence after tumor resection. Arch Surg. 1998;
133:383–389.

52.	 Ninomiya I, Nagai N, Oyama K, Hayashi H, Tajima H,
Kitagawa H, Fushida S, Fujimura T, Ohta T. Antitumor
and anti-metastatic effects of cyclooxygenase-2 inhibition
by celecoxib on human colorectal carcinoma xenografts in
nude mouse rectum. Oncol Rep. 2012; 28:777–784.

62.	 Abramovitch R, Marikovsky M, Meir G, Neeman M.
Stimulation of tumour growth by wound-derived growth
factors. B J Cancer. 1999; 79:1392–1398.

53.	 Retsky MW, Demicheli R, Hrushesky WJ, Baum M,
Gukas ID. Dormancy and surgery-driven escape from dormancy help explain some clinical features of breast cancer.
APMIS. 2008; 116(7–8):730–741.

63.	 O’Leary DP, Wang JH, Cotter TG, Redmond HP. Less
stress, more success? Oncological implications of surgeryinduced oxidative stress. Gut. 2013; 62:461–470.

54.	 Retsky M, Rogers R, Demicheli R, Hrushesky WJ, Gukas
I, Vaidya JS, Baum M, Forget P, Dekock M, Pachmann
K. NSAID analgesic ketorolac used perioperatively may
suppress early breast cancer relapse: particular relevance to
triple negative subgroup. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2012;
134:881–888.

64.	 Paraskeva PA, Ridgway PF, Olsen S, Isacke C, Peck DH,
Darzi AW. A surgically induced hypoxic environment
causes changes in the metastatic behaviour of tumours in
vitro. Clin Exp Metastasis. 2006; 23:149–157.
65.	 Tham M, Khoo K, Yeo KP, Kato M, Prevost-Blondel A,
Angeli V, Abastado JP. Macrophage depletion reduces
postsurgical tumor recurrence and metastatic growth in
a spontaneous murine model of melanoma. Oncotarget.
2015;6:22857–68. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.3127.

55.	 Demicheli R, Retsky MW, Hrushesky WJ, Baum M,
Gukas ID. The effects of surgery on tumor growth: a
century of investigations. Annals of Oncology. 2008;
19:1821–1828.

66.	 Tsuchiya Y, Sawada S, Yoshioka I, Ohashi Y, Matsuo M,
Harimaya Y, Tsukada K, Saiki I. Increased surgical stress
promotes tumor metastasis. Surg. 2003; 133:547–555.

56.	 Weckermann D, Polzer B, Ragg T, Blana A, Schlimok G,
Arnholdt H, Bertz S, Harzmann R, Klein CA. Perioperative
activation of disseminated tumor cells in bone marrow of patients with prostate cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2009;
27:1549–1556.

67.	 Forget P, Vandenhende J, Berliere M, Machiels JP,
Nussbaum B, Legrand C and De Kock M. Do intraoperative analgesics influence breast cancer recurrence after
mastectomy? A retrospective analysis. Anesth Analg. 2010;
110:1630–1635.

57.	 Tsunemi T, Nagoya S, Kaya M, Kawaguchi S, Wada
T, Yamashita T, Ishii S. Postoperative progression of

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

44818

Oncotarget

