OPEN

Oncogene (2015) 34, 3357–3368
© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited All rights reserved 0950-9232/15
www.nature.com/onc

ORIGINAL ARTICLE

A Cre-conditional MYCN-driven neuroblastoma mouse
model as an improved tool for preclinical studies
K Althoff1,2,10, A Beckers3,10, E Bell4, M Nortmeyer4, T Thor1,2,4,5, A Sprüssel1,2,4,5, S Lindner1,2,4,5, K De Preter3, A Florin6, LC Heukamp6,7,
L Klein-Hitpass8, K Astrahantseff9, C Kumps3, F Speleman3, A Eggert9, F Westermann4, A Schramm1 and JH Schulte1,2,3,4,5
Neuroblastoma, a childhood cancer that originates from neural crest-derived cells, is the most common deadly solid tumor of
infancy. Ampliﬁcation of the MYCN oncogene, which occurs in approximately 20–25% of human neuroblastomas, is the most
prominent genetic marker of high-stage disease. The availability of valid preclinical in vivo models is a prerequisite to develop novel
targeted therapies. We here report on the generation of transgenic mice with Cre-conditional induction of MYCN in dopamine
β-hydroxylase-expressing cells, termed LSL-MYCN;Dbh-iCre. These mice develop neuroblastic tumors with an incidence of 475%,
regardless of strain background. Molecular proﬁling of tumors revealed upregulation of the MYCN-dependent miR-17–92 cluster as
well as expression of neuroblastoma marker genes, including tyrosine hydroxylase and the neural cell adhesion molecule 1. Gene
set enrichment analyses demonstrated signiﬁcant correlation with MYC-associated expression patterns. Array comparative genome
hybridization showed that chromosomal aberrations in LSL-MYCN;Dbh-iCre tumors were syntenic to those observed in human
neuroblastomas. Treatment of a cell line established from a tumor derived from a LSL-MYCN;Dbh-iCre mouse with JQ1 or MLN8237
reduced cell viability and demonstrated oncogene addiction to MYCN. Here we report establishment of the ﬁrst Cre-conditional
human MYCN-driven mouse model for neuroblastoma that closely recapitulates the human disease with respect to tumor
localization, histology, marker expression and genomic make up. This mouse model is a valuable tool for further functional studies
and to assess the effect of targeted therapies.
Oncogene (2015) 34, 3357–3368; doi:10.1038/onc.2014.269; published online 1 September 2014

INTRODUCTION
Neuroblastoma is the most common deadly solid tumor of
infancy, and accounts for 15% of pediatric cancer deaths.1,2
Primary tumors derive from precursor cells of the sympathetic
nervous system along the sympathetic chain.3 Neuroblastoma
most frequently arises in the adrenal, but also develops from the
superior cervical or celiac ganglia.4 The most prominent genetic
marker of high-stage disease is ampliﬁcation of the MYCN
oncogene, which occurs in 20–25% of all neuroblastomas.5 Mouse
models for human neuroblastoma can be helpful to understand
the molecular mechanisms underlying pathogenesis and serve as
important tools for preclinical studies. Weiss et al. has previously
demonstrated that MYCN has the potential to drive murine
neuroblastoma in a transgenic model, in which MYCN expression
is driven by a rat tyrosine hydroxylase (TH) promoter.6 Transgenic
mice expressing MYCN in the abdominal ganglia developed
neuroblastoma. Although representing an excellent and broadly
used tool, some limitations exist: (i) the transgene integration site
and its genomic context is ill-deﬁned, potentially resulting in less
robust MYCN expression, (ii) tumors predominantly originate from
abdominal ganglion structures, thus resembling only a subset of
human neuroblastoma, (iii) no intrinsic option for in vivo tumor
imaging is included and (iv) tumor incidence of heterozygous

TH-MYCN mice is 70% in the 129 × 1/SvJ strain background, but
only 5% in C57Bl6/N background, reducing the potential for
combination with other cancer-relevant alleles. We aimed to
overcome these limitations by developing a novel mouse model
with targeted Cre-conditional MYCN expression in the neural crest.
RESULTS
Characterization of LSL-MYCN mice
LSL-MYCN transgenic mice were viable and fertile without obvious
physiological or morphological phenotypes. Offspring resulting
from breeding LSL-MYCN mice with wild-type mice were born
according to the expected Mendelian ratio (data not shown). We
next conﬁrmed the molecular integration site and localization of
the transgene. Representative examples of PCR analyses validating
transgene integration in heterozygous and homozygous LSLMYCN mice are shown in Figure 1b. PCR analyses validating the
presence of a wild-type allele at the ROSA26 locus in wild-type
and heterozygous LSL-MYCN mice are shown in Figure 1c.
Targeted expression of MYCN in the neural crest causes abdominal
tumor formation in double-transgenic LSL-MYCN;Dbh-iCre mice
Double-transgenic LSL-MYCN;Dbh-iCre mice developed palpable
abdominal tumors with an incidence of 76% in a mixed

1
Department of Pediatric Oncology and Hematology, University Children's Hospital Essen, Essen, Germany; 2German Cancer Consortium (DKTK), Partner Site Essen/Duesseldorf,
Hufelandstr, Germany; 3Center for Medical Genetics Ghent (CMGG), Ghent University Hospital, De Pintelaan 185, Ghent, Belgium; 4German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Im
Neuenheimer Feld 280, Heidelberg, Germany; 5Translational Neuro-Oncology, West German Cancer Center, University Hospital Essen, University Duisburg-Essen, Essen, Germany;
6
Institute of Pathology, University Hospital Cologne, Cologne, Germany; 7New Oncology -a division of Blackﬁeld AG, Köln, Germany; 8Institute of Cell Biology (Cancer Research), Faculty
of Medicine, University of Duisburg-Essen, Essen, Germany and 9Department of Pediatric Oncology, Hematology and BMT, Charité University Medicine, Augustenburger Platz 1, Berlin,
Germany. Correspondence: Professor JH Schulte, Department of Pediatric Oncology and Haematology, University Children's Hospital Essen, Hufeland street 55, Essen 45122, Germany.
E-mail: Johannes.schulte@uni-due.de
10
These authors contributed equally to this work.
Received 24 October 2013; revised 1 June 2014; accepted 8 July 2014; published online 1 September 2014

LSL-MYCN;Dbh-iCre mouse
K Althoff et al

3358

Figure 1. Generation of transgenic LSL-MYCN mice. (a) Graphical representation of the ROSA26 locus with recombinase-mediated cassette
exchange (RMCE) sites used to introduce the RMCE exchange vector containing the MYCN transgene. The Rosa26 locus is displayed before
(top) and after (center) insertion of MYCN by RMCE, and after cre-recombinase-mediated removal of the transcription termination site 5′ to the
MYCN allele (bottom). Localizations of primers used for genotyping (A1 and A2) and the PCR-based validation of ﬂoxing out the transcriptional
site 5′ of the MYCN allele (B1 and B2) are displayed. Splice acceptor site (SA), polyadenylation signal (pA), internal ribosome entry site (IRES),
chicken actin gene promotor (CAG), transcriptional STOP cassette made of the human Growth Hormone polyadenylation signal (hGHpA),
human MYCN open reading frame (MYCN). (b) Representative genotyping PCR validating the MYCN knock-in allele in heterozygous and
homozygous LSL-MYCN mice (primers used: A1 and A2); wild type (wt), heterozygous LSL-MYCN (+/ − ), homozygous LSL-MYCN (+/+).
(c) Representative PCR validating absence or presence of the transgene inserted into the ROSA26 locus in wt, heterozygous (+/ − ) and
homozygous (+/+) LSL-MYCN mice.

C57/Bl6/129 × 1/SvJ strain background (n = 38). Tumor onset was
detectable between 26–337 days of age, and the mean age at
tumor onset was 79.6 days (Figure 2a). Interestingly, Kaplan–Meier
analysis revealed a signiﬁcantly prolonged tumor-free survival of
mice heterozygous for TH-MYCN compared with LSL-MYCN;DbhiCre mice (P = 0.001; Supplementary Figure 1). Of note, none of the
single transgenic LSL-MYCN or Dbh-iCre mice developed a tumor
(Figure 2a); P o0.0001. Cre-mediated recombination in tumors,
but not in control tissue from LSL-MYCN;Dbh-iCre mice was
validated using B1 and B2 primers (Figure 1a). In the presence of
the transcriptional termination site, a 2241-bp band was present in
control tissue, whereas Cre-mediated excision of the transcriptional termination site upstream of the MYCN allele was indicated
by the presence of a 703-bp band (Figure 2b and Supplementary
Figure 2).
Tumor localization, histology and expression of marker genes in
LSL-MYCN;Dbh-iCre mice recapitulate the patterns of human
neuroblastoma
In vivo bioluminescence imaging (Figure 2c) revealed that tumors
in LSL-MYCN;Dbh-iCre mice arose from the superior cervical
ganglion (I), the adrenals (I, II, III) or the celiac ganglion (III). Several
tumors were shown to originate from adrenal structures using
high-frequency ultrasound imaging (Figures 2d and e). Macroscopic images acquired during dissection of mice carrying
palpable tumors (Figure 2f) also conﬁrmed that tumors arose
from both adrenals and the celiac ganglion (left) and from the
superior cervical ganglion (right). Tumors had elevated expression
of both MYCN mRNA and protein compared with normal tissues
(Figures 3a and b). Hematoxylin and eosin staining of histological
tumor sections and electron microscopy showed a small round
blue cell tumor with cells harboring neurosecretory vesicles
(Figures 3c and d), indicative of neuroblastoma. Furthermore,
Oncogene (2015) 3357 – 3368

tumors strongly expressed the neuroblastoma-speciﬁc marker
genes, dopamine β-hydroxylase (Dbh), tyrosine hydroxylase (Th)
and paired-like homeobox 2b (Phox2b), as observed by quantitative PCR (qPCR; Figure 3e). The neural cell adhesion molecule,
Ncam1, a marker for neuroendocrine tissues, was strongly
expressed in tumors from LSL-MYCN;Dbh-iCre mice (Figure 3f).
Expression of tyrosine hydroxylase was also conﬁrmed on the
protein level (Figure 3g). To analyze early or even premalignant
stages of neuroblastoma development in our mouse model, we
collected adrenals for histological examinations at day of birth, at
days 14 and 28 of life (Supplementary Figures 3a–c). Hyperplastic
cells were present in the adrenal medulla of some, but not all, of
adrenal glands from 0-day-old transgenic mice and most 14- and
28-day-old transgenic mice. Especially at day 28, the adrenal
medulla of LSL-MYCN;Dbh-iCre mice had an atypical, nodal tissue
architecture. In contrast, no hyperplasia was observed in adrenal
glands from control mice of any age. The observed hyperplasia is
in line with the hyperplastic lesions (in superior cervical ganglia)
previously described in TH-MYCN mice by Hansford et al.7 Taken
together, we demonstrate that LSL-MYCN;Dbh-iCre mice develop
neuroblastomas that arise from the adrenal medulla and other
neural crest derivatives.
Murine MYCN-driven neuroblastomas are characterized by
genomic aberrations syntenic to human neuroblastomas
An overview of all genomic aberrations detected in tumors from
heterozygous LSL-MYCN;Dbh-iCre mice compared with tail DNA is
depicted in Table 1 and Figure 4a. A partial gain of murine
chromosome 11q was detected in the tumors of four mice
(Figures 4a and c). This region is syntenic to human chromosome
17 (Figure 4c), for which gain or partial gain (17q) occurs in the
majority of human neuroblastomas.8 Five tumors exhibited gain of
the entire murine chromosome 6 (Figure 4a and Supplementary
© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited

LSL-MYCN;Dbh-iCre mouse
K Althoff et al

3359

Figure 2. Double-transgenic LSL-MYCN;Dbh-iCre mice develop tumors derived from the neural crest. (a) Kaplan–Meier analysis indicating the
presence and the time to detection of palpable tumors in mice (that is, tumor-free survival) heterozygous for LSL-MYCN and mice double
transgenic for LSL-MYCN and Dbh-iCre (Log-rank test). (b) Representative result of PCR validating the removal or presence of the
transcriptional termination site 5′ to the MYCN transgene in tumor and control tissues, respectively. Wild type (wt), double-transgenic
LSL-MYCN;Dbh-iCre (+/ − ). (c) Bioluminescence imaging of three representative LSL-MYCN;Dbh-iCre mice carrying palpable tumors at the
superior cervical ganglion (I), adrenals (I, II, III) or celiac ganglion (III). Color code indicates luciferase activity (low = blue; high = red). (d) High
frequency ultrasound images of palpable tumors arising from superior cervical ganglion (left) and adrenal (middle), and three-dimensional
reconstruction of adrenal tumor (right). (e) Growth curves of tumors, as detected by high-frequency ultrasound. (f) Macroscopic images
during autopsy of mice carrying palpable tumors arising from both adrenals and the celiac ganglion (left) and from the superior cervical
ganglion (right).

Figure 4c), which is partially syntenic to human chromosomes 7p,
7q and 12p. In human neuroblastomas, gain of an entire
chromosome 7 occurs in 40% of tumors and appears to be
prevalent in all tumor stages, whereas gain of 7q, observed in 12%
of human tumors, is more common in higher stage tumors.9 Three
tumors harbored a gain of the entire mouse chromosome 12,
which is syntenic to human chromosome 2p and includes the
MYCN locus, as well as human chromosome 14q and parts of
human chromosome 7p and 7q (Figure 4a and Supplementary
Figure 4d). Eight tumors displayed gain of the entire
chromosome 3 (Figure 4a and Supplementary Figure 4b), which
is partially syntenic to human chromosome 1q, a region often
gained in human neuroblastomas.10 Interestingly, two tumors
showed a focal gain on chromosome 6 that encompassed the
ROSA26 locus, in which the human MYCN transgene was
integrated (Figures 4a and b). This focal gain resulted in a 20- to
25-fold increase in MYCN transgene copy number in these two
tumors, as measured by qPCR (inset Figure 4b). Consequently, the
two tumors containing this aberration had elevated expression of
the human MYCN mRNA (Supplementary Figure 4e), as assessed
by reverse transcription-qPCR.
No chromosomal deletions and only few focal deletions were
observed in the tumors from heterozygous LSL-MYCN;Dbh-iCre
© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited

mice. The region on murine chromosome 8 that was lost in two
murine tumors, which is syntenic to human chromosome 4, does
not harbor any annotated genes (data not shown). Each of the
remaining focal losses were only observed in one tumor, and are
not syntenic to regions often lost in human neuroblastomas. From
these data, it appears that chromosomal and focal losses observed
in human neuroblastomas are less well represented in the
LSL-MYCN;Dbh-iCre mouse model. Nevertheless, the spectrum of
chromosomal aberrations in these MYCN-driven murine tumors
recapitulates many of the observed chromosomal imbalances
observed in human neuroblastomas.
Murine MYCN-driven neuroblastoma transcriptomes show
patterns of canonical MYC-related mRNA and microRNA (miRNA)
signatures
The consequences of MYCN overexpression on downstream gene
expression were analyzed using transcriptional proﬁles obtained
from normal murine adrenal gland and tumors from LSL-MYCN;
Dbh-iCre mice. Unsupervised hierarchical clustering using the 1%
of genes with the highest standard deviation in expression across
all samples revealed distinct clustering of normal adrenal medulla
and MYCN-driven tumors (Supplementary Figure 5). Interestingly,
Oncogene (2015) 3357 – 3368

LSL-MYCN;Dbh-iCre mouse
K Althoff et al

3360

Figure 3. Tumors of LSL-MYCN;Dbh-iCre mice resemble human neuroblastoma in terms of histology and molecular expression patterns.
(a) MYCN expression (qPCR) in four representative tumors from LSL-MYCN;Dbh-iCre mice compared with control tissues. Expression was
normalized to normal adrenal glands. Student’s t-test: ***Po0.001. (b) Western blot analysis conﬁrms MYCN expression in tumors (tu)
compared with heart (he) tissue collected from four representative double-transgenic mice. (c) Hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining shows
small, round blue cells typical for neuroectodermal tumors. Scale bars = 100 μm (left) and 50 μm (right). (d) Electron micrographs show
neuronal structures, including neurosecretory vesicles (red arrows). Scale bar = 500 nm. (e) Reverse transcription-qPCR conﬁrms signiﬁcantly
increased expression of the murine orthologs of the human neuroblastoma marker genes dopamine β-hydroxylase (Dbh), tyrosine
hydroxylase (Th) and paired-like homeobox 2b (Phox2b) in tumors compared with normal control tissues (Student’s t-test; Dbh: P = 0.005, Th:
P = 0.02, Phox2b: P = 0.0006). (f, g) Immunohistochemistry conﬁrms expression of neuroblastoma markers, Ncam1 and Th. Scale bars = 200 μm.
Table 1.

Genomic aberrations in tumors from LSL-MYCN;Dbh-iCre mice compared with tail

LSL-MYCN; Dbh-iCre tumors
Chromosomal region
1
1
3
6
6
8
11
12
16
16

Genomic
aberration
Partial gain
Focal loss
Gain
Gain
Focal gain
Focal loss
Partial gain
Gain
Focal loss/gain
Focal gain

Human neuroblastoma
Frequency (%)

Syntenic region

Genomic
aberration

8
8
69
38
15
15
31
23
8
8

2q
1q41, 1q32.2, 1q32.3
1q
7
3p25.3
–
17q
7q
16q13.3
21q22.13, 21q22.2,
21q22.3

Gain

12

Vandesompele et al.43

Gain
Gain

Often
40

Schleiermacher et al.10
Stallings et al.9

Gain
Gain

50
12

a similar hierarchical clustering approach revealed that tumors
from LSL-MYCN;Dbh-iCre mice are very similar to tumors from the
well-established TH-MYCN mouse model,6 both at the level of
mRNA and miRNA expression (Supplementary Figures 6a and b).
Consistent with the role of MYCN as a transcriptional activator,
there was a predominance of upregulated over downregulated
genes: 2315 genes, represented by 3680 probe sets, were
signiﬁcantly upregulated, whereas 1190 genes, represented by
1726 probe sets, were signiﬁcantly downregulated (false discovery
rate o 0.05; Supplementary Table 2). The differential expression
proﬁles of regulated transcripts were functionally annotated using
Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA),11 which seeks to estimate
the signiﬁcance of overrepresentation of an independently
Oncogene (2015) 3357 – 3368

Frequency (%) Reference

Vandesompele et al.8
Stallings et al.9

deﬁned set of genes in gene expression data sets. LSL-MYCN;
Dbh-iCre tumors were characterized by a strong association with
MYC-upregulated target genes, whereas MYC-downregulated
target genes were enriched in the normal adrenal glands
(Figure 5a). In addition, a large number of DNA replicationrelated gene sets were statistically enriched among genes
upregulated in LSL-MYCN;Dbh-iCre tumors (Figures 5a and b(I)).
Furthermore, upregulation of a gene set representing genes
repressed during neuronal differentiation is in line with the
undifferentiated phenotype of LSL-MYCN;Dbh-iCre tumors (Figures
5a and b(II)). Finally, one of the most strongly enriched gene sets
among genes upregulated in the MYCN-driven tumors is the
WHITEFORD_PEDIATRIC_ CANCER_MARKERS gene set, consisting
© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited

LSL-MYCN;Dbh-iCre mouse
K Althoff et al

3361

Figure 4. Murine neuroblastomas recapitulate genomic aberrations of human neuroblastomas. (a) Mouse karyotype overview of all genomic
imbalances detected in 13 murine neuroblastomas (green bars: gained regions, red bars: lost regions). (b) Partial ratio plot for the mouse
chromosome 6 region encompassing the ROSA26 amplicon in tumor 9 (right) and copy number of the MYCN transgene in 13 tumors from
heterozygous LSL-MYCN;Dbh-iCre mice (+/ − ), as assessed by qPCR (insert left). Bars represent mice with normal chromosome 6 copy number
(white), with whole chromosome 6 gain (black) and with focal chromosome 6 ampliﬁcation (striped). (c) Tumor/control ratio plot for mouse
chromosome 11 in tumor 9 showing partial chromosome 11q gain, corresponding to gain of almost the entire human chromosome 17.

of differentially expressed genes in a panel of xenografts
representing eight common pediatric tumors (neuroblastoma,
rhabdomyosarcoma, Ewing sarcoma, acute lymphoblastic
leukemia, Wilms’ tumor, osteosarcoma, medulloblastoma and
ependymona), compared with normal tissues12 (Figure 5a). This
pediatric cancer phenotype is also apparent when comparing a
LSL-MYCN;Dbh-iCre signature in 967 cancer cell lines from Cancer
Cell Line Encyclopedia,13 representing more than 20 tumor
entities. The LSL-MYCN;Dbh-iCre signature, composed of the top
100 most differentially up- and downregulated genes in LSLMYCN;Dbh-iCre tumors compared with normal adrenal gland, is
signiﬁcantly higher in neuroblastoma cell lines than in any other
© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited

cancer cell line (Kruskal–Wallis rank sum test, P o 0.001; Figure 5c).
To speciﬁcally evaluate the magnitude of MYCN activity on
transcriptional proﬁles both at mRNA and miRNA level, a MYCN
signature score14 was calculated for all samples. As an additional
reference, proﬁles from neuroblastoma tumors arising from
targeted overexpression of mutated ALK15 were included. The
MYCN signature score was signiﬁcantly higher in MYCN-driven
tumors than in the ALKF1174L-driven tumors and normal murine
adrenals, demonstrating that MYCN is strongly activated in the
tumors arising in transgenic mice with targeted MYCN expression
(Figures 5d(I), Supplementary Figure 7a and Supplementary
Table 3). Known human MYCN-upregulated (Cad, Cdk4, Odc1)
Oncogene (2015) 3357 – 3368

LSL-MYCN;Dbh-iCre mouse
K Althoff et al

3362

Figure 5. Tumors from heterozygous LSL-MYCN;Dbh-iCre mice recapitulate human neuroblastoma at transcriptional level. (a) Table of selected
gene sets from the MSigDB C2 collection, enriched among genes upregulated in the tumors from heterozygous LSL-MYCN;Dbh-iCre mice based
on GSEA. (Rank of gene set in overall list of gene sets, ranked according to decreasing normalized enrichment score (NES; rank), number of
genes in each set (size), NES). (b) GSEA enrichment plots showing upregulation of a gene set representing cell cycle (I) and markers
downregulated during neuronal differentiation (II) in the transcriptional proﬁles of neuroblastoma tumors from heterozygous LSL-MYCN;DbhiCre mice. Depicted is the plot of the running sum for the MSigDB gene set within the LSL-MYCN;Dbh-iCre neuroblastoma data set, including
the maximum enrichment score and the leading edge subset of enriched genes. FDR = false discovery rate. (c) The LSL-MYCN;Dbh-iCre
signature score in the 967 cell lines in the Cancer Cell Line Encyclopedia13 showing the highest signature score in neuroblastoma cell lines,
followed by medulloblastoma cell lines. (d) The MYCN mRNA (I) and miRNA (II) gene signature in normal adrenal medulla and MYCN- and
ALKF1174L-driven tumors. Po0.05 (*) was considered signiﬁcant. (e) The cumulative distribution of the signiﬁcance score [-10log(pfp)] associated
with differential expression in tumors from heterozygous LSL-MYCN;Dbh-iCre mice (+/ − ) versus normal adrenals, for genes in the human nonMYCN-ampliﬁed neuroblastoma signature (black) and all other genes (gray). Genes in the human non-MYCN-ampliﬁed neuroblastoma signature
show more signiﬁcant differential expression compared with all remaining genes (Kolmogorov–Shmirnov test, Po0.001).
Oncogene (2015) 3357 – 3368

© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited

LSL-MYCN;Dbh-iCre mouse
K Althoff et al

3363

Figure 6. (a) Macroscopic images of cells cultivated after explantation of LSL-MYCN;Dbh-iCre tumors. Scale bars = 100 μm. (b) Representative
genotyping PCR validating the MYCN knock-in allele (left) and the Dbh-iCre transgene (right) in cells cultured from murine neuroblastoma.
Heart (he) from wild-type (wt) and heart (he) and tumor (tu) from heterozygous LSL-MYCN;Dbh-iCre mice (+/-) as controls. (c) PCR validating
the removal of the transcriptional termination site 5′ of the MYCN allele in cells cultivated after explantation of LSL-MYCN;Dbh-iCre tumors.
Wild-type (wt), heterozygous LSL-MYCN;Dbh-iCre (+/ − ), heart (he), tumor (tu). (d) Bioluminescence imaging of mNB-A1 cells. Luciferase
activity: low = blue; high = red. luciferin (luc). (e) MYCN expression (qPCR) in mNB-A1 cells compared with various control tissues and to a
representative LSL-MYCN;Dbh-iCre tumor. Expression was normalized to that in normal adrenal glands. Student’s t-test: *** = P o0.001;
NS = not signiﬁcant. (f) Western blot analysis conﬁrms MYCN expression in mNB-A1 cells compared with heart and LSL-MYCN;Dbh-iCre tumor.
(g) Tumor growth after engraftment of 107 mNB-A1 cells into three nude mice at day 0. (h) Bioluminescence imaging of mNB-A1 cells growing
in nude mice. Luciferase activity: low = blue, high = red.

and MYCN-downregulated (Dkk3, Rgs5) target genes were also
signiﬁcantly regulated in LSL-MYCN;Dbh-iCre tumors compared
with normal adrenals from wild-type mice (Supplementary
Figure 7b). The miRNA expression proﬁles obtained from normal
murine adrenal gland and both MYCN- and ALKF1174L-driven
neuroblastomas showed similar MYCN-driven patterns (Figure 5d
(II), Supplementary Figure 8 and Supplementary Table 4). Of the
380 expressed miRNAs that were measured on the platform, 26
miRNAs were upregulated and 38 miRNAs were downregulated in
LSL-MYCN;Dbh-iCre tumors compared with normal murine adrenal
gland (Supplementary Table 5). Several miRNAs from the
MYCN-induced miR-17–92 cluster (miR-17-5p, miR-18-5p,
miR-20a-5p and miR-92a-3p) were signiﬁcantly upregulated in
LSL-MYCN;Dbh-iCre tumors compared with normal adrenals from
wild-type mice (Supplementary Figure 8b). The conformity with
human neuroblastoma is further supported by the observation
that genes, differentially expressed between high- and low-risk
human neuroblastomas, either without or with inclusion of
MYCN-ampliﬁed tumors, are more signiﬁcantly altered in
© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited

LSL-MYCN;Dbh-iCre tumors compared with normal adrenals from
wild-type mice (Kolmogorov–Shmirnov test, P o0.001; Figure 5e).
In summary, these observations support the relevance of our
new MYCN-driven mouse model for the study of human
neuroblastoma.
The mNB-A1 cell line, explanted from LSL-MYCN;Dbh-iCre tumors,
reﬂects characteristics of its origin
In vitro cultured cells derived from a tumor of a LSL-MYCN;
Dbh-iCre mouse presented neuronal structures resembling human
neuroblastoma cells (Figure 6a). The presence of both MYCN and
the Dbh-iCre transgene as well as Cre-mediated recombination in
tumor-derived mNB-A1 cells was validated (Figures 6b and c).
Furthermore, mNB-A1 cells were positive for luciferase expression
as revealed by bioluminescence imaging (Figure 6d) and
expressed MYCN mRNA and protein levels similar to LSL-MYCN;
Dbh-iCre tumors (Figures 6e and f). To monitor their tumorigenic
potential in vivo, mNB-A1 cells were inoculated into nude mice
(Figure 6g). Bioluminescence imaging revealed that tumors from
Oncogene (2015) 3357 – 3368

LSL-MYCN;Dbh-iCre mouse
K Althoff et al

3364

Figure 7. Treatment of mNB-A1 and re-grafted tumors. (a) JQ1 treatment of mNB-A1 cells signiﬁcantly reduced cell viability in MTT assays
compared with untreated or DMSO-treated cells. (b) Western blot analysis conﬁrmed no MYCN protein regulation in mNB-A1 cells treated with
JQ1 compared with DMSO-treated cells. (c) MLN8237 treatment of mNB-A1 cells signiﬁcantly reduced cell viability in MTT assays compared
with untreated or DMSO-treated cells. (d) Western blot analysis conﬁrmed MYCN downregulation in mNB-A1 cells treated with MLN8237
compared with DMSO-treated cells. (e, f) A mRNA signature score established from genes differentially expressed after JQ1 treatment of
neuroblastoma cell lines16 (e), and a MYCN mRNA signature score14 (f) for mNB-A1 cells treated with either DMSO, JQ1 or MLN8237.
(g) Western blot analyses of Brd4, MYCN, Myc, E2f1 and Cyclin D1 expression in re-grafted tumors from LSL-MYCN;Dbh-iCre mice treated with
JQ1 or DMSO. Actin and Gapdh were used as loading controls. (h) Re-grafted tumors from JQ1- or DMSO-treated mice were examined
histologically after hematoxylin/eosin (H&E) staining or immunostaining for cleaved caspase 3 (apoptotic cells) or Ki-67 (actively proliferating
cells). Representative images are shown. (i) Bar graphs show the mean relative apoptosis (left) and proliferation (right) calculated from three
representative images from each re-grafted tumor from groups of mice treated with either JQ1 or DMSO. Signiﬁcance was calculated by
Student’s t-test: *Po 0.05, **Po0.01, ***Po 0.001.

mNB-A1 cells maintained their luciferase activity (Figure 6h), and
that luciferase imaging could be used to follow these tumors
in vivo. Analysis of re-grafted tumors in nude mice revealed a
strong correlation of tumor size with activity detected by
luciferase imaging (Supplementary Figure 9).
Treatment of cultured mNB-A1 cells with JQ1, a pharmacological inhibitor with a high target potency against BET bromodomain proteins,16 signiﬁcantly reduced cell viability (Figure 7a).
Although MYCN expression in mNB-A1 cells remained unaltered
by treatment with either JQ1 or the dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO)
control (Figure 7b), transcriptomic data closely mimic the
observed transcriptional changes after JQ1 treatment of neuroblastoma cell lines16 (Figure 7e). Furthermore, a strong reduction
in MYCN signatures was observed, conﬁrming the effect of JQ1
treatment on MYCN transcriptional programs (Figure 7f and
Supplementary ﬁgure 10). Treatment with MLN8237, a pharmacological inhibitor that decreases MYCN protein levels by
abolishing autophosphorylation of Aurora A,17 also signiﬁcantly
reduced cell viability (Figure 7c) and MYCN expression (Figure 7d).
Gene expression proﬁles of mNB-A1 cells after MLN8237 treatment show similarities with the transcriptional changes observed
Oncogene (2015) 3357 – 3368

after JQ1 treatment of human neuroblastoma cell lines16
(Figure 7e), and closer similarities to mNB-A1 cells treated with
JQ1 (Figure 7f and Supplementary Figure 10). These data support
a MYCN transcriptional program repression resulting from both
MLN8237 or JQ1 treatment, although slight differences are
observed, which is to be expected for treatment with compounds
having a different mode of action. We conclude that cells derived
from tumors of LSL-MYCN;Dbh-iCre mice retained their malignant
capacity upon transplantation, and that growth remains
depended on MYCN function, indicating oncogene addiction.
JQ1 treatment induces apoptosis and decreases proliferation of regrafted tumors from LSL-MYCN;Dbh-iCre tumors
We next aimed to analyze whether JQ1 treatment also affects
tumors from LSL-MYCN;Dbh-iCre mice in vivo. For that purpose,
nude mice harboring re-grafted tumors from LSL-MYCN;Dbh-iCre
mice were treated with JQ1. Western blotting of fresh-frozen
re-grafted tumor lysates showed that JQ1 treatment did not
suppress MYCN or Brd4 protein expression in the tumors
(Figure 7g), but clearly downregulated E2f1 protein expression.
© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited

LSL-MYCN;Dbh-iCre mouse
K Althoff et al

Immunhistochemical analysis of the tumors revealed that JQ1
treatment also signiﬁcantly decreased Mib-1 (Ki-67) expression,
as an indicator of cell proliferation, and increased the level
of cleaved caspase 3, indicating the induction of apoptosis
(Figures 7h and i). Taken together, the effects of JQ1 treatment
in vitro were recapitulated in vivo.
DISCUSSION
Although treatment advances in many pediatric cancer types have
resulted in increased survival of affected patients, the prognosis
for advanced stage neuroblastoma remains poor, especially after
tumor relapse.18 Preclinical models to better understand the
molecular features of aggressive neuroblastoma and that can be
used to evaluate novel therapies are urgently needed. Here, we
present a novel conditional MYCN-driven mouse model that
resembles human neuroblastoma. Using Cre expression driven by
the Dbh promotor, which is active speciﬁcally in noradrenergic
neurons of the peripheral and central nervous system,19 we
restricted transgenic MYCN expression to the presumed tissue of
neuroblastoma origin. Double-transgenic LSL-MYCN;Dbh-iCre mice
developed tumors with a high incidence and regardless of strain
background, thus overcoming one of the major limitations of
existing models. Bioluminescence imaging identiﬁed tumors
recapitulating human neuroblastoma localization and histology.
LSL-MYCN;Dbh-iCre tumors also mimicked molecular marker
expression and reﬂected chromosomal aberrations of human
neuroblastomas. Interestingly, the most common genomic aberrations in human neuroblastomas, including gain of chromosome
17q, were also observed in tumors from LSL-MYCN;Dbh-iCre
transgenic mice. Therefore, this mouse model offers the possibility
for cross-species genomic analyses toward identifying the
presumed oncogenic drivers on human chromosome 17q. In
addition to a gain of the region of mouse chromosome 11, which
is syntenic to human chromosome 17q, several other recurrent
aberrations were observed that resemble aberrations observed in
human neuroblastomas. Interestingly, chromosomal gains of
human neuroblastomas are better recapitulated in our model
than respective deletions. Speciﬁcally, loss of 1p36, a region
frequently deleted in human MYCN-ampliﬁed neuroblastomas,
was not recapitulated in our model. Our ﬁndings are in line with
previous ﬁndings in the TH-MYCN neuroblastoma mouse
model.20,21 Of note, numerical or partial gain of mouse chromosome 11 resembling human chromosome 17q gain and ampliﬁcation of the MYCN transgene was observed in both MYCN-driven
mouse neuroblastoma models. In addition, gain of mouse
chromosome 3 has been observed in all analyzed neuroblastoma
mouse models to date.15,20–22 Taken together, LSL-MYCN;Dbh-iCre
mice develop neuroblastic tumors that share histological features
and genomic alterations of human neuroblastomas.
Compared with the existing MYCN-driven mouse model of
neuroblastoma, which expresses a human MYCN cDNA under the
control of a rat tyrosine hydroxylase promoter,6 the novel
LSL-MYCN;Dbh-iCre bears several advantages. First, transgene
integration is better deﬁned in LSL-MYCN;Dbh-iCre mice. The
ROSA26 locus is commonly used for the generation of genetically
engineered knock-in mice, because it is ubiquitously expressed
and a discontinuation of that locus causes no known phenotypic
effect in mice.23,24 In contrast, it is not known whether transgene
integration into the distal region of chromosome 18, reported for
the TH-MYCN mice, also causes positional effects that could
possibly have an impact on tumorigenesis.21 Second, tumors
developing in TH-MYCN mice are limited to abdominal ganglion
structures,6 whereas LSL-MYCN;Dbh-iCre tumors develop predominantly from both adrenals, but also develop from the celiac and
superior cervical ganglia, thus covering all locations in which
human neuroblastomas arise. Third, TH-MYCN tumor penetrance is
only high in a genetically near pure 129 × 1/SvJ strain background,
© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited

probably due to differential expression of speciﬁc modiﬁers.25 This
hampers the combination with other transgenic mouse strains
modifying neuroblastomagenesis, as they need to be backcrossed
genetically to achieve the same tumor incidence. By contrast, the
LSL-MYCN;Dbh-iCre model also develops tumors in other mouse
strain backgrounds, such as C57Bl/6N, at a high frequency. Taken
together, the novel LSL-MYCN;Dbh-iCre neuroblastoma mouse
model overcomes the limitations of the only existing MYCN-driven
neuroblastoma model, TH-MYCN.
Beyond the advantages discussed above, the new LSL-MYCN;
Dbh-iCre is strikingly similar to the widely used TH-MYCN mouse
model in regard to the occurrence of chromosomal alterations,
mRNA and miRNA expression proﬁles. Therefore, subsequent
experiments with the LSL-MYCN;Dbh-iCre mouse model can easily
build on the many excellent results obtained with the TH-MYCN
mouse model in the previous years. The LSL-MYCN;Dbh-iCre model
also represents an excellent tool to evaluate new targeted therapies
in vivo. However, the LSL-MYCN;Dbh-iCre mouse model can only be
used to analyze those factors or compounds that regulate or
interfere with the MYCN protein itself or MYCN downstream
signaling. Regulators of MYCN transcription or interactors with the
MYCN mRNA, such as miRNAs targeting the MYCN 3′-untranslated
region, cannot be analyzed in this model, as the MYCN cDNA that is
ectopically expressed lacks any regulatory untranslated regions. A
mouse model in which neuroblastomas are driven by overexpressed endogenous Mycn, such as the LSL-Lin28b;Dbh-iCre
mouse model,22 is more appropriate for the latter analyses.
We have used the LSL-MYCN;Dbh-iCre mouse cell line to
evaluate two drugs, MLN8327 and JQ1, which are known to target
MYCN. MLN8327 destabilizes the MYCN oncoprotein by inhibiting
the interaction between MYCN and AURKA. We conﬁrmed that
MLN8327 treatment downregulates MYCN protein in our model
cell line, leading to a strong reduction in cell viability and a
decrease in the MYCN activity score. First, this conﬁrms that cells
derived from tumors arising in the LSL-MYCN;Dbh-iCre mice
exhibit oncogene addiction to MYCN. Second, our results support
and extend the preclinical evidence indicating MLN8327 as a
promising targeted therapeutic agent to treat MYCN-ampliﬁed
neuroblastoma. The mode of JQ1 action includes the downregulation of MYC(N) mRNA transcription and, thereby, MYCN
protein expression. As MYCN is ectopically expressed in our model
system, a downregulation of MYCN expression after BRD4
inhibition is not necessarily expected. In line with this, we
observed no change in MYCN expression after JQ1 treatment.
Alternative mechanisms that could explain why JQ1 treatment
still reduces cell viability in our model system include either
MYCN-independent effects of JQ1 or the interference of JQ1 with
MYCN-driven transcription rather than with transcription of the
MYCN gene itself. The signiﬁcant decrease of the MYCN activity
score, which we observed following JQ1 treatment, implicates the
latter effect, at least in combination with MYCN-independent
effects of JQ1. P-TEFb has been previously demonstrated to be a
factor required for MYC-driven transcription.26,27 Therefore, P-TEFb
is most likely also required for MYCN-driven transcription as well.
As BRD4 is an important factor for P-TEFb recruitment,28 we
hypothesize that inhibiting Brd4 by JQ1 impairs recruitment of
P-TEFb, and thereby attenuates MYC(N)-driven transcription.
Although not in the focus and beyond the scope of this
manuscript, this hypothesis should be taken into account and
explored where it has weight for explaining JQ1 treatment results
in future experiments attempting to ﬁnely assess the mode of
action and side effects of JQ1. These should also help delineate
the mechanism by which JQ1 decreases the MYCN signature score
without downregulating MYCN protein levels.
A prerequisite for using LSL-MYCN;Dbh-iCre mice in preclinical
research is assessing the dynamics of tumor development and a
sufﬁcient treatment window. With the dynamics of tumor
development that we observed in LSL-MYCN;Dbh-iCre mice, the
Oncogene (2015) 3357 – 3368

3365

LSL-MYCN;Dbh-iCre mouse
K Althoff et al

3366
acceleration or delay of tumor development as well as an increase
or decrease in tumor incidence could be used as measurable end
points of experimental manipulation, including the introduction of
further genetic alterations. A treatment window must be deﬁned
to use the LSL-MYCN;Dbh-iCre mice for preclinical analysis of
potential therapeutic compounds or therapeutic strategies. The
treatment window is the time from tumor detection to the time
the mouse succumbs to disease or must be killed due to tumor
burden. Our ultrasonography experiments clearly indicate the
presence of a sufﬁcient treatment window in the LSL-MYCN;
Dbh-iCre mouse model (Figure 2e), although the number of mice
analyzed was too low to exactly deﬁne the boundaries of the
treatment window. Exact delineation of the treatment window for
the same animal model will also vary between studies, as it
depends on the techniques used to detect and follow the tumor
(palpation, luciferase, ultrasonography or nuclear resonance
imaging), the end points used in the study (hyperplasia versus
an established tumor) and the time at which a mouse must be
killed due to tumor burden (ethical considerations and varying
national animal protection regulations).
As genetic features of human neuroblastomas are preserved in
LSL-MYCN;Dbh-iCre-induced tumors, positional approaches might
help to identify other crucial driver genes in neuroblastoma
development. Thus, a plethora of options is already available to
uncover the full potential of LSL-MYCN;Dbh-iCre transgenic mice
in terms of neuroblastoma genetics and future therapeutics, and
we expect the LSL-MYCN;Dbh-iCre mouse model to be a valuable
tool for the neuroblastoma research community. In fact, the
LSL-MYCN mouse line has already been transferred to several
laboratories, and is available on request to the research
community. To prepare for a future expansion of requests, sperm
and frozen embryos are being conserved to allow easier transfer,
and the mouse line will be submitted to one of the available
public repositories, such as the European Mouse Mutant Archive.
As MYC(N) is a key driver of tumorigenesis not only in
neuroblastoma, combination the conditional LSL-MYCN mouse
with other cre-transgenic models bear the potential to also model
tumorigenesis of other human malignancies.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Generation of LSL-MYCN mice and tumor detection
Human MYCN (Ensembl gene ID: ENSG00000134323) was cloned downstream of a chicken actin gene (CAG) promoter followed by loxP-ﬂanked
strong transcriptional termination site (LSL). The transgene was placed
upstream of an internal ribosome entry site (IRES) and a second open
reading frame coding for the luciferase gene (Fluc) in a proprietary plasmid
(Taconic-Artemis, Cologne, Germany). The CAG-LSL-MYCN-IRES-Fluc vector
(LSL-MYCN) was introduced into the ROSA26 locus of B6S6F1 embryonic
stem cells by recombinase-mediated cassette exchange (Figure 1a).
Recombinant clones were isolated, validated by Southern blotting and
mice were generated by injection into tetraploid blastocysts. LSL-MYCN
mice were crossbred with Dbh-iCre mice.19 Genotyping and conﬁrmation
of Cre-mediated recombination were performed as previously described.15
Primer sequences are provided in Supplementary Table 1. Abdominal
tumors were detected by weekly palpation, and conﬁrmed by highfrequency ultrasonography using a Vevo2010 device (Visualsonics,
Toronto, ON, Canada) and/or by in vivo luciferase imaging.15 Time to
tumor detection was displayed as tumor-free survival in Kaplan–Meier
analysis. Growth curves for tumors were obtained by volume measurement
using high-frequency ultrasonography.

Gene expression analysis
The RNeasy Micro Kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany) was used to isolate total
mRNA from cells or tissue, and cDNA was generated by SuperScript II
Reverse Transcriptase (Invitrogen, Darmstadt, Germany). qPCR was
performed using the TaqMan Fast Advanced Master Mix (Applied
Biosystems, Darmstadt, Germany) and the StepOnePlus Real-Time PCR
System (Applied Biosystems) according to the manufacturer’s instructions.
Oncogene (2015) 3357 – 3368

Cad1, MYCN, Dbh, Th and Phox2b mRNA expression levels were normalized
to endogenous Gapdh and calculated using the dd-Ct method using
Biogazelle software (Biogazelle, Ghent, Belgium) as previously described.29

Western blot analysis
Cells or small tissue slices were lysed on ice in RIPA buffer (50 mM HEPES,
10 mM NaCl2, 1% NP-40, 0.1% SDS and 1% Triton X-100) supplemented
with cOmplete Protease Inhibitor Cocktail Tablets and PhosSTOP
Phosphatase Inhibitor Cocktail Tablets (Roche, Mannheim, Germany) and
30 μg of the resulting proteins were separated on 10% SDS-PAGE then
transferred to Amersham Hybond-C Extra (GE Healthcare, Solingen,
Germany) membranes. Membranes were blocked in 5% milk powder in
TBS-T0.1 then incubated with primary antibodies against Brd4 (1:200;
#sc48772; Santa Cruz, Heidelberg, Germany), E2f1 (1:1000; #AF4825; R&D
Systems, Minneapolis, MN, USA) or MYCN (1:1000; #9405; Cell Signaling,
Frankfurt am Main, Germany) and Actin (1:2,000; #A3853; Sigma-Aldrich,
Taufkirchen, Germany) or Gapdh (1:2000; #MAB374; Millipore, Darmstadt,
Germany) as a loading control. After washing twice with TBS-T0.1,
membranes were incubated 1h at room temperature with horseradish
peroxidase-conjugated secondary antibodies against mouse IgG (1:2000;
#NA9310V; GE Healthcare), rabbit-IgG (1:2000; #NA9340V; GE Healthcare)
or sheep IgG (1:2000; #HAF016; R&D Systems). Protein detection and
visualization were performed as described previously.30

Immunhistochemistry and electron microscopy
Brieﬂy, 3-μm-thick sections of formalin-ﬁxed parafﬁn-embedded tumors and
adrenals were deparafﬁnized, and antigen retrieval was performed by
boiling the section in citrate buffer at pH 6 or EDTA at pH 9 for 20 min.
Staining was performed as previously described31 using anti-cleaved caspase
3 (#9661, Cell Signaling, 1:200), anti-tyrosine hydroxylase (ab76442; Abcam;
1:200), anti-Ki-67/Mib-1 (RM-9106, Dako Deutschland GmbH, Hamburg,
Germany, 1:25) and anti-Ncam1 (ab6123; Abcam, Cambridge, UK; 1:500) as
primary antibodies. Corresponding secondary antibody detection kits for
reduced background in murine tissues were used (Histoﬁne Simple Stain
Mouse MAX PO, Medac, Hamburg, Germany), and antibody complexes were
visualized using an automated stainer (LabVision Autostainer 480S, Thermo
Scientiﬁc, Langenselbold, Germany). All slides were scanned with a
Pannoramic 250 slide scanner (3D Histech.com Budapest, Hungary, Electron
microscopy was performed as previously described.32

Array comparative genome hybridization (arrayCGH)
DNA was isolated using the DNeasy Blood & Tissue Kit (Qiagen) according to
the manufacturer’s instructions. ArrayCGH was performed using a
180K (AMADID 027411) mouse whole-genome arrays (n = 13; Agilent
Technologies Santa Clara, CA, USA. Random primed labeling (BioPrime
ArrayCGH Genomic Labeling System, Invitrogen) was used to label 400 ng of
tumor DNA and matched control DNA with Cy3 and Cy5 dyes (Perkin Elmer,
Waltham, MA, USA, respectively. Hybridization and washing were performed
according to the manufacturer's instructions (Agilent Technologies).
Fluorescence intensities were measured on an Agilent scanner (G2505C,
Agilent Technologies). Data were extracted using the Feature Extraction
v10.1.1.1 software program (Agilent Technologies), and further processed
with arrayCGHbase (http://medgen.ugent.be/arraycghbase). Gains and losses
were determined using the circular binary segmentation algorithm.33,34

mRNA expression proﬁling
Primary murine tumors, normal murine adrenals and treated mNB-A1 cells
were proﬁled on Affymetrix Murine 430 version 2 oligonucleotide
microarrays according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Microarray proﬁling
results for eight LSL-MYCN;Dbh-iCre tumors have been deposited at the
Gene Expression Omnibus under accession number GSE51297. Microarray
proﬁling results for mNB-A1 cells have been deposited at Gene Expression
Omnibus under accession number GSE57810. Proﬁles for three nonmalignant adrenals from wild-type mice were used as controls. These
proﬁles have been previously described by Molenaar et al.22 Proﬁles were
compared with mRNA proﬁles of tumors from ALK-transgenic and
TH-MYCN mice that have been published previously.15 Microarray.CEL ﬁles
were normalized and summarized to gene levels using the Bioconductor
repository of the R statistical language to do gcRMA normalization.35 Probes
with a log2 expression of o5 in o11 of the 14 samples were considered
not expressed and ﬁltered out. Only the probe with the highest average
expression over all samples was retained for each gene.
© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited

LSL-MYCN;Dbh-iCre mouse
K Althoff et al

3367
miRNA expression proﬁling

Engraftment of mNB-A1 cells into nude mice

Murine mature miRNA expression levels were quantiﬁed using the stemloop reverse transcription-qPCR platform (Life Technology, Darmstadt,
Germany). Brieﬂy, 60 ng of total RNA was reverse transcribed using the
rodent stem-loop RT Megaplex primer pools A and B (v2.0) followed by a
12-cycle pre-ampliﬁcation according to the manufacturer’s instructions.
Pre-ampliﬁed cDNA was diluted and quantiﬁed using miRNA-speciﬁc
Taqman assays (Life Technology) in a 3.5-μl qPCR reaction containing 1.5 μl
of Taqman assay (1/17 dilution of 20X solution), 1.75 μl Taqman gene
expression master mix, 0.02 μl of cDNA and 0.23 μl of water on a 7900 HT
qPCR system (Life Technology). Raw miRNA expression values were ﬁltered
using a Cq-cutoff of 32, and normalized using the global mean, as
previously described.36,37

Six-week-old female athymic NCR (nu/nu) mice were subcutaneously
inoculated in the left ﬂank with 107 cells derived from the LSL-MYCN;
Dbh-iCre tumor suspended in 200 μl BD Matrigel (BectonDickinson,
Heidelberg, Germany). Mice were measured for tumor growth three times
per week using the formula (breadth · length · height)/2.

GSEA
The GSEA software was used to identify pathways or groups of functionally
related genes deregulated in tumors from LSL-MYCN;Dbh-iCre mice
compared with normal adrenal gland.11,38 GSEA was run on the collections
of 3272 curated gene sets (c2) from version 3.1 of the MSigDB.39 Gene sets
with less than 15 genes or more than 500 genes were excluded from the
analysis. Gene sets with a false discovery rate ⩽ 0.25 and a nominal
PP ⩽ 0.05 were considered signiﬁcant. The gene ranking metric in the
weighted enrichment score was the two-sided signal-to-noise ratio, and
P-values were calculated using 1000 permutations of the phenotype.

Gene signature scores
Gene signature scores were calculated with adaptation of a previously
reported algorithm.40 The LSL-MYCN;Dbh-iCre signature was composed of
the top 100 most differentially up- and downregulated genes in LSL-MYCN;
Dbh-iCre tumors compared with normal adrenal gland. The signature score
was calculated for a panel of 967 cancer cell lines in the Cancer Cell Line
Encyclopaedia,13 for which normalized gene expression data were
downloaded from http://www.broadinstitute.org/ccle/home. Signature
scores based on the expression values of MYC-regulated mRNAs or
miRNAs, as previously deﬁned by Westermann et al. and Mestdagh et al.,
respectively,14,41 were calculated for a series of tumors from ALKF1174L,15
LSL-MYCN;Dbh-iCre mice and normal adrenal gland tissue. Additional MYC
(N) signatures, retrieved from curated gene sets (c2) from version 3.1 of the
MSigDB,39 were calculated for mNB-A1 cells treated with either JQ1,
MLN8237 or DMSO. The published PUISSANT_NB_JQ1 signature22,
composed of the 316 genes differentially expressed in neuroblastoma cell
lines upon JQ1 treatment, was calculated for mNB-A1 cells treated with
JQ1, MLN8237 or DMSO.

Human neuroblastoma signature
A human neuroblastoma signature was generated using a published data
set of 69 human primary neuroblastomas.41 The signature was composed
of the most differentially expressed genes (Rank Product analysis,
Po0.001) in high-risk compared with low-risk patients, either with or
without inclusion of MYCN-ampliﬁed neuroblastomas, resulting in the
human neuroblastoma signature and human non-MYCN-ampliﬁed neuroblastoma signature, respectively. To compare these gene signatures with
expression data from LSL-MYCN;Dbh-iCre tumors, only genes with a known
human and murine homolog were retained, yielding a list of 10 433 genes
for further analysis.

Establishing of a cell line from a LSL-MYCN;Dbh-iCre tumor
Murine tumor was minced manually with scissors and the pieces digested
with 2 mg/ml collagenase in PBS for 30 min at 37 °C. Tumor pieces were
passed through sieves with different pore sizes (400, 100, 70 μm) to obtain
a cell suspension. Cells were maintained in RPMI medium supplemented
with 10% fetal calf serum, penicillin (100 U/ml), streptomycin (100 μg/ml),
1% N2 and 2% B27. The mNB-A1 cell line was in continuous culture for
more than 4 months, and all experiments performed here have been
obtained after 3–4 months in culture. Cells were seeded onto 96-well
plates and treated with 250 nM JQ1 (BPS Bioscience, San Diego, CA, USA) or
MLN8237 (Axon Medchem, Groningen, The Netherlands). Metabolic
activity was analyzed by 3-[4,5-dimethylthiazol-3-yl]-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide (MTT) assay (Roche). We used this metabolic activity as a
surrogate for the number of living cells, thus, cell viability.42
© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited

JQ1 treatment of transplanted tumors from LSL-MYCN;Dbh-iCre
mice
A Murine tumor was minced manually with scissors and the pieces were
digested with 2 mg/ml collagenase in PBS for 30 min at 37 °C. Tumor
pieces were passed through a sieve with 400 μm pore size to obtain a cell
suspension. Cells were washed with PBS and suspended in 1.5 ml Matrigel
(BD Bioscience, Heidelberg, Germany) for subcutaneous inoculation (200 μl
per mouse) into the left ﬂank of 6-week-old female athymic (nu/nu) mice.
Mice were treated with JQ1 (50 mg per kg body weight) or vehicle control
(12.5% DMSO in PBS) twice daily by intraperitoneal injection for 3
consecutive days when the volume of the subcutaneous tumor reached
500–1000 mm3, and animals were killed 4 h after the last injection. Half the
tissue was snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen then stored at − 80 °C and the
other half was formalin ﬁxed and parafﬁn embedded for immunohistochemical analyses.

Statistical analysis
Statistical analyses were conducted using Graph Pad Prism 5.0 (GraphPad
Software Inc, San Diego, CA, USA). Kaplan–Meier analyses were used to
analyze overall survival. Mean relative apoptosis (calculated by positive
staining for cleaved caspase 3) and proliferation (calculated by Ki-67
expression) in the transplanted LSL-MYCN;Dbh-iCre tumors from the
control and JQ1-treated groups of mice was calculated from three
representative images of each tumor using ImageJ 1.47 (National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA). Signiﬁcance was calculated by
Student’s t-test (*Po 0.05, **Po 0.01, ***Po 0.001). Differential gene
expression analyses were performed using the RankProd package in the
R statistical language.

CONFLICT OF INTEREST
The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We thank S Dreesmann, A Odersky, S Schäfers and N Solomentsew for excellent
technical assistance and A Henssen for helpful discussions. This work was supported
by the National Genome Research Network of the German Ministry for Education and
Research (NGFNplus grant #PKN-01GS0894-6 to JHS, AE and AS), the 7th framework
European Union project, ASSET (contract #259348-2 to AE, FS and JHS), the German
research council (SFB 832, A5 and Z1 to LCH), by the German Cancer Aid (Grant No
111301 to JHS), by the Agency for Innovation by Science and Technology (IWT PhD
grant to AB and CK) and the Fund for Scientiﬁc Research Flanders (FWO post-doc
grant to KDP).

REFERENCES
1 Ora I, Eggert A. Progress in treatment and risk stratiﬁcation of neuroblastoma:
impact on future clinical and basic research. Semin Cancer Biol 2011; 21: 217–228.
2 Park JR, Eggert A, Caron H. Neuroblastoma: biology, prognosis, and treatment.
Hematol Oncol Clin North Am 2010; 24: 65–86.
3 Jiang M, Stanke J, Lahti JM. The connections between neural crest development
and neuroblastoma. Curr Top Dev Biol 2011; 94: 77–127.
4 Maris JM. Recent advances in neuroblastoma. N Engl J Med 2010; 362: 2202–2211.
5 Brodeur GM. Neuroblastoma: biological insights into a clinical enigma. Nat Rev
Cancer 2003; 3: 203–216.
6 Weiss WA, Aldape K, Mohapatra G, Feuerstein BG, Bishop JM. Targeted expression
of MYCN causes neuroblastoma in transgenic mice. EMBO J 1997; 16: 2985–2995.
7 Hansford LM, Thomas WD, Keating JM, Burkhart CA, Peaston AE, Norris MD et al.
Mechanisms of embryonal tumor initiation: distinct roles for MycN expression and
MYCN ampliﬁcation. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2004; 101: 12664–12669.
8 Vandesompele J, Baudis M, De Preter K, Van Roy N, Ambros P, Bown N et al.
Unequivocal delineation of clinicogenetic subgroups and development of a new
model for improved outcome prediction in neuroblastoma. J Clin Oncol 2005; 23:
2280–2299.

Oncogene (2015) 3357 – 3368

LSL-MYCN;Dbh-iCre mouse
K Althoff et al

3368
9 Stallings RL, Howard J, Dunlop A, Mullarkey M, McDermott M, Breatnach F et al.
Are gains of chromosomal regions 7q and 11p important abnormalities in neuroblastoma? Cancer Genet Cytogenet 2003; 140: 133–137.
10 Schleiermacher G, Janoueix-Lerosey I, Ribeiro A, Klijanienko J, Couturier J,
Pierron G et al. Accumulation of segmental alterations determines progression in
neuroblastoma. J Clin Oncol 2010; 28: 3122–3130.
11 Subramanian A, Tamayo P, Mootha VK, Mukherjee S, Ebert BL, Gillette MA et al.
Gene set enrichment analysis: a knowledge-based approach for interpreting
genome-wide expression proﬁles. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2005; 102: 15545–15550.
12 Whiteford CC, Bilke S, Greer BT, Chen Q, Braunschweig TA, Cenacchi N et al.
Credentialing preclinical pediatric xenograft models using gene expression and
tissue microarray analysis. Cancer Res 2007; 67: 32–40.
13 Barretina J, Caponigro G, Stransky N, Venkatesan K, Margolin AA, Kim S et al. The
Cancer Cell Line Encyclopedia enables predictive modelling of anticancer drug
sensitivity. Nature 2012; 483: 603–607.
14 Westermann F, Muth D, Benner A, Bauer T, Henrich KO, Oberthuer A et al. Distinct
transcriptional MYCN/c-MYC activities are associated with spontaneous regression
or malignant progression in neuroblastomas. Genome Biol 2008; 9: R150.
15 Heukamp LC, Thor T, Schramm A, De Preter K, Kumps C, De Wilde B et al. Targeted
expression of mutated ALK induces neuroblastoma in transgenic mice. Science
translational medicine 2012; 4: 141ra91.
16 Puissant A, Frumm SM, Alexe G, Bassil CF, Qi J, Chanthery YH et al. Targeting MYCN
in neuroblastoma by BET bromodomain inhibition. Cancer Discov 2013; 3: 308–323.
17 Brockmann M, Poon E, Berry T, Carstensen A, Deubzer HE, Rycak L et al. Small
molecule inhibitors of aurora-a induce proteasomal degradation of N-myc in
childhood neuroblastoma. Cancer Cell 2013; 24: 75–89.
18 Simon T, Berthold F, Borkhardt A, Kremens B, De Carolis B, Hero B. Treatment and
outcomes of patients with relapsed, high-risk neuroblastoma: results of
German trials. Pediatric Blood Cancer 2011; 56: 578–583.
19 Stanke M, Duong CV, Pape M, Geissen M, Burbach G, Deller T et al. Targetdependent speciﬁcation of the neurotransmitter phenotype: cholinergic differentiation of sympathetic neurons is mediated in vivo by gp 130 signaling.
Development 2006; 133: 141–150.
20 Weiss WA, Godfrey T, Francisco C, Bishop JM. Genome-wide screen for allelic
imbalance in a mouse model for neuroblastoma. Cancer Res 2000; 60: 2483–2487.
21 Hackett CS, Hodgson JG, Law ME, Fridlyand J, Osoegawa K, de Jong PJ et al.
Genome-wide array CGH analysis of murine neuroblastoma reveals distinct
genomic aberrations which parallel those in human tumors. Cancer Res 2003; 63:
5266–5273.
22 Molenaar JJ, Domingo-Fernandez R, Ebus ME, Lindner S, Koster J, Drabek K et al.
LIN28B induces neuroblastoma and enhances MYCN levels via let-7 suppression.
Nat Genetics 2012; 44: 1199–1206.
23 Casola S. Mouse models for miRNA expression: the ROSA26 locus. Methods Mol
Biol 2010; 667: 145–163.
24 Tchorz JS, Suply T, Ksiazek I, Giachino C, Cloetta D, Danzer CP et al. A modiﬁed
RMCE-compatible Rosa26 locus for the expression of transgenes from exogenous
promoters. PLoS One 2012; 7: e30011.
25 Rasmuson A, Segerstrom L, Nethander M, Finnman J, Elfman LH, Javanmardi N
et al. Tumor development, growth characteristics and spectrum of genetic
aberrations in the TH-MYCN mouse model of neuroblastoma. PLoS ONE 2012; 7:
e51297.
26 Gargano B, Amente S, Majello B, Lania L. P-TEFb is a crucial co-factor for Myc
transactivation. Cell Cycle 2007; 6: 2031–2037.
27 Eberhardy SR, Farnham PJ. Myc recruits P-TEFb to mediate the ﬁnal step in the
transcriptional activation of the cad promoter. J Biol Chem 2002; 277:
40156–40162.
28 Yang Z, He N, Zhou Q. Brd4 recruits P-TEFb to chromosomes at late mitosis to
promote G1 gene expression and cell cycle progression. Mol Cell Biol 2008; 28:
967–976.

29 Schramm A, Vandesompele J, Schulte JH, Dreesmann S, Kaderali L, Brors B et al.
Translating expression proﬁling into a clinically feasible test to predict neuroblastoma outcome. Clin Cancer Res 2007; 13: 1459–1465.
30 Schulte JH, Bachmann HS, Brockmeyer B, Depreter K, Oberthur A, Ackermann S
et al. High ALK receptor tyrosine kinase expression supersedes ALK mutation as a
determining factor of an unfavorable phenotype in primary neuroblastoma. Clin
Cancer Res 2011; 17: 5082–5092.
31 Schulte JH, Lim S, Schramm A, Friedrichs N, Koster J, Versteeg R et al.
Lysine-speciﬁc demethylase 1 is strongly expressed in poorly differentiated
neuroblastoma: implications for therapy. Cancer research 2009; 69: 2065–2071.
32 Schulte JH, Lindner S, Bohrer A, Maurer J, De Preter K, Lefever S et al. MYCN and
ALKF1174L are sufﬁcient to drive neuroblastoma development from neural crest
progenitor cells. Oncogene 2012; 32: 1059–1065.
33 Menten B, Pattyn F, De Preter K, Robbrecht P, Michels E, Buysse K et al.
arrayCGHbase: an analysis platform for comparative genomic hybridization
microarrays. BMC Bioinformatics 2005; 6: 124.
34 Olshen AB, Venkatraman ES, Lucito R, Wigler M. Circular binary segmentation for
the analysis of array-based DNA copy number data. Biostatistics 2004; 5: 557–572.
35 Gentleman RC, Carey VJ, Bates DM, Bolstad B, Dettling M, Dudoit S et al.
Bioconductor: open software development for computational biology and
bioinformatics. Genome Biol 2004; 5: R80.
36 Mestdagh P, Van Vlierberghe P, De Weer A, Muth D, Westermann F, Speleman F
et al. A novel and universal method for microRNA RT-qPCR data normalization.
Genome biology 2009; 10(6): R64.
37 De Preter K, Mestdagh P, Vermeulen J, Zeka F, Naranjo A, Bray I et al. miRNA
expression proﬁling enables risk stratiﬁcation in archived and fresh neuroblastoma tumor samples. Clin Cancer Res 2011; 17: 7684–7692.
38 Mootha VK, Bunkenborg J, Olsen JV, Hjerrild M, Wisniewski JR, Stahl E et al.
Integrated analysis of protein composition, tissue diversity, and gene regulation
in mouse mitochondria. Cell 2003; 115: 629–640.
39 Liberzon A, Subramanian A, Pinchback R, Thorvaldsdottir H, Tamayo P,
Mesirov JP. Molecular signatures database (MSigDB) 3.0. Bioinformatics 2011; 27:
1739–1740.
40 Fredlund E, Ringner M, Maris JM, Pahlman S. High Myc pathway activity and low
stage of neuronal differentiation associate with poor outcome in neuroblastoma.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2008; 105: 14094–14099.
41 Mestdagh P, Fredlund E, Pattyn F, Schulte JH, Muth D, Vermeulen J et al.
MYCN/c-MYC-induced microRNAs repress coding gene networks associated
with poor outcome in MYCN/c-MYC-activated tumors. Oncogene 2010; 29:
1394–1404.
42 Cimmino F, Schulte JH, Zollo M, Koster J, Versteeg R, Iolascon A et al. Galectin-1 is
a major effector of TrkB-mediated neuroblastoma aggressiveness. Oncogene
2009; 28: 2015–2023.
43 Vandesompele J, Speleman F, Van Roy N, Laureys G, Brinskchmidt C, Christiansen
H et al. Multicentre analysis of patterns of DNA gains and losses in 204 neuroblastoma tumors: how many genetic subgroups are there?. Medical and pediatric
oncology 2001; 36: 5–10.
44 Hong F, Wittner B, Breitling R, Smith C, Battke F et al. RankProd: Rank Product
method for identifying differentially expressed genes with application in metaanalysis. R package version 2011; 2.34.0.

This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0
International License. The images or other third party material in this
article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless indicated
otherwise in the credit line; if the material is not included under the Creative Commons
license, users will need to obtain permission from the license holder to reproduce the
material. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/
by/4.0/

Supplementary Information accompanies this paper on the Oncogene website (http://www.nature.com/onc)

Oncogene (2015) 3357 – 3368

© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited

