NIH Public Access
Author Manuscript
Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 September 09.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Published in final edited form as:
Cancer Cell. 2013 September 9; 24(3): . doi:10.1016/j.ccr.2013.08.014.

Why Proteasome Inhibitors Cannot ERADicate Multiple Myeloma
Robert Z. Orlowski1,2
1Department of Lymphoma/Myeloma, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston TX
2Department

of Experimental Therapeutics, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston TX

Abstract

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Proteasome inhibitors are key parts of our armamentarium against multiple myeloma, but the
disease can become resistant through poorly defined mechanisms. In this issue of Cancer Cell,
Tiedemann and colleagues describeXBP1s-subpopulations of tumor cells that are resistant to
bortezomib, and may account for therapeutic failures in the clinic.

COMMENTARY

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Multiple myeloma is a clonal proliferationofneoplastic plasma cellsthat can present
clinically with hypercalcemia, renal insufficiency, anemia, bony lesions, bacterial infections,
hyperviscosity, and amyloidosis. Worldwide, approximately 86,000 patients will be
diagnosed each year with myeloma, which in many areas makes it the second most common
hematologic malignancy,while about 63,000 patients die every year from disease-related
complications (Becker, 2011). In the United States, due to an aging populace, it is
anticipated that the number of cases of myeloma will grow by 57% between 2010 and 2030
(Smith et al., 2009), ranking myeloma behind only stomach and liver cancer in the rate of
growth of new cases. These facts indicate that multiple myeloma is, and will continue to be,
a significant source of morbidity and mortality. Fortunately, a number of advances over the
past decade have dramatically improved patient outcomes. Among these are the advent of
novel chemotherapeutics, including the immunomodulatory agents thalidomide,
lenalidomide, and pomalidomide, andthe proteasome inhibitors (Moreau et al.,
2012)bortezomib and carfilzomib. All of these drugs have garnered regulatory approvals and
are used in patients with newly-diagnosed, relapsed, or relapsed/refractory disease, and have
contributed to a doubling of the median overall survival in many populations. This has been
fueled by a greater understanding of the pathobiology of myeloma, and by the development
of more physiologically relevant pre-clinical models, allowing for greater success in
translating laboratory concepts into patient-focused therapies. Indeed, a number of the most

© 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
Address correspondence to:Robert Z. Orlowski, Ph.D., M.D., 1515 Holcombe Blvd, Unit 429, Houston, TX 77030;
rorlowsk@mdanderson.org; telephone 713-794-3234; facsimile 713-563-5067.
CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
R.Z.O.has received research funding from Bristol-Myers Squibb, Celgene Corporation, Millennium: The Takeda Oncology Company,
and Onyx Pharmaceuticals. Also, R.Z.O. has served on advisory boards for Array Biopharma, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Celgene
Corporation, Genentech, Merck, Millennium: The Takeda Oncology Company, and Onyx Pharmaceuticals.
Publisher's Disclaimer: This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our
customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of
the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be
discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.

Orlowski

Page 2

potent combination regimens in use have been rationally developed based on studies of the
mechanisms of action of these drug classes (Mahindra et al., 2012).

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Despite these significant advances, patients are currently treated on an empiric basis,
typically with the regimens that have the highest response rates to which they have access,
rather than based on the principles of precision medicine (Mendelsohn, 2013). The
proteasome inhibitorsbortezomib and carfilzomib as single agents in the relapsed and
refractory settings both have response rates of approximately 25%, indicating a role for
innate, or primary resistance in modulating their activity. Response rates and, even more
importantly, response durability can be improved by using them earlier in the disease
process and by incorporating them into combination regimens. However, no clinically
relevant biomarkers have been validated that would allow practitioners to prospectively
identify patients with disease that is most likely to respond to proteasome inhibition, and the
same is true for the immunomodulatory drugs. In addition, even in patients whose disease
initially responds, resistance to proteasome inhibitor-based therapy emerges in many,
indicating a role for acquired, or secondary resistance through incompletely understood
mechanisms. As a result, some patients are exposed to the toxicities of these agents without
a benefit, delaying their access to more effective options, and wasting precious healthcare
resources. Clinically, these factors contribute to the natural history of the disease, which
follows a course characterized by multiple relapses, and decreasing durations of benefit with
each subsequent line of therapy.
The work of Tiedmemann and colleagues (Leung-Hagesteijn et al., 2013) in the current
issue of Cancer Cell may, however,begin to change the current status quo. Early attempts to
identify mechanisms of innate bortezomib resistance implicated a role for over-expression of
proteasome genes, and especially of PSMD4(Shaughnessy et al., 2011). Later, studies of
acquired resistance models suggested mutations of the β5 proteasome subunit targeted by
bortezomib were involved. However, these β5 mutations were subsequently not detected in
patient samples, as indicated in the introduction by Leung-Hagesteijn et al. More recently,
induction of signaling through the insulin-like growth factor (IGF-1)/IGF-1 receptor
pathway has been implicated in acquired resistance (Kuhn et al., 2012), and clinical trials to
test this possibility are planned. Finally, up-regulation of a cluster of NRF2 oxidative stress
response genes,including CHOP (DDIT3) was identified as a possible resistance signature in
studies of murine myeloma models and clinically annotated gene expression profiling
datasets (Stessman et al., 2013).

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

In contrast, Leung-Hagesteijn et al. provide a different perspectivestarting from kinomewide RNA interference studies intended to identify modulators of proteasome inhibitor
sensitivity. They report that suppression of inositol-requiring enzyme 1(IRE1) and its
downstream effector,X-box binding protein 1 (XBP1), was associated with bortezomib
resistance. This to some extent challenges a current dogma, since IRE1 and XBP1 make up
one arm of the unfolded protein response (UPR). Indeed, UPR activation was felt to
represent an adaptation to proteasome-assisted endoplasmic reticulum-associated
degradation (ERAD), which causes ER stress in plasma cells due to their large loads of
misfolded proteins. These IRE1lo and XBP1lo cells showed lower expression of plasma cell
maturation markers, lower immunoglobulin synthesis, and lower levels of UPR activation,
consistent with a lower stress level and proteasome load, which would make them resistant
to proteasome inhibitors. Moreover, plasma cell maturation markers were enriched in
samples from patients who responded to bortezomib-based therapy, and reduced in those
with no response to bortezomib. Finally, analysis of patient samples revealed the presence of
up to five tumor cell subpopulations, including B-cells, activated B-cells, pre-plasmablasts,
plasmablasts, and plasma cells, which would be expected to have different sensitivities to
bortezomib (Figure 1). Consistent with this possibility, myeloma B-cell and pre-plasmablast

Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 September 09.

Orlowski

Page 3

progenitors were found to survive proteasome inhibition, and be enriched in samples that
were refractory to bortezomib.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

These findings have a number of key implications for innate and acquired proteasome
inhibitor resistance. First, they suggestthat the seeds for bortezomib resistance, and crossresistance with other proteasome inhibitors, are already present in perhaps all patients and
that this phenotype will inevitably emerge through the attrition of bortezomib-sensitive
plasmablasts and plasma cells (Figure 1). Second, they support the possibility thatgene
expression profiling or whole genome sequencing to identify the baseline proportion of
these progenitor cells present in patients prior to initiation of therapy may predict the extent
of benefit to be expected from bortezomib. Finally, they imply that potentially curative
strategies will need to target both the committed plasma cells and the progenitor, or stem
cell-like cells.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

While these hypotheses are being tested, the current findings will also need to be validated
in a wider array of primary samples, and in additional gene expression profilingdatasets.
One question that needs to be answered is whether the same proteasome inhibitor-resistant
progenitor cells survive therapy with bortezomib in combination with other agents. This
would be especially of interest for the combination of bortezomib and lenalidomide, since
the lattermay target clonogenic side-population cells(Jakubikova et al., 2011), and this
regimen is one of our current standards of care against myeloma. Another important
question is whether it would be possible to induce differentiation of progenitor cells to more
committed plasma cells, such as through epigenetic therapies, to enhance or restore
proteasome inhibitor sensitivity. Finally, it is likely that multiple mechanisms contribute to
the development of the proteasome inhibitor-resistant phenotype. For example, while the
current studies indicate that cells with a decreased proteasome load are resistant, it is also
possible that changes that enhance plasma cell proteasome capacity would antagonize the
beneficial effects of bortezomib and carfilzomib. Taken together, however, these findings do
provide an important direction for future pre-clinical and clinical studies that will hopefully
bring us to the point that we can apply precision medicine to the therapy of multiple
myeloma.

Acknowledgments
R.Z.O. would like to acknowledge support from the National Cancer Institute in the form of The MD Anderson
Cancer Center SPORE in Multiple Myeloma (P50 CA142509), and the Southwest Oncology Group (U10
CA032102).

References
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Becker N. Epidemiology of multiple myeloma. Recent Results Cancer Res. 2011; 183:25–35.
[PubMed: 21509679]
Jakubikova J, Adamia S, Kost-Alimova M, Klippel S, Cervi D, Daley JF, Cholujova D, Kong SY,
Leiba M, Blotta S, et al. Lenalidomide targets clonogenic side population in multiple myeloma:
pathophysiologic and clinical implications. Blood. 2011; 117:4409–4419. [PubMed: 21321360]
Kuhn DJ, Berkova Z, Jones RJ, Woessner R, Bjorklund CC, Ma W, Davis RE, Lin P, Wang H,
Madden TL, et al. Targeting the insulin-like growth factor-1 receptor to overcome bortezomib
resistance in preclinical models of multiple myeloma. Blood. 2012; 120:3260–3270. [PubMed:
22932796]
Leung-Hagesteijn C, Erdmann N, Cheung G, Keats JJ, Stewart AK, Reece D, Chung KC, Tiedemann
RE. Xbp1s-negative tumor B cells and pre-plasmablasts mediate therapeutic proteasome inhibitor
resistance in multiple myeloma. Cancer Cell. 2013 In press.

Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 September 09.

Orlowski

Page 4

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Mahindra A, Laubach J, Raje N, Munshi N, Richardson PG, Anderson K. Latest advances and current
challenges in the treatment of multiple myeloma. Nat Rev Clin Oncol. 2012; 9:135–143. [PubMed:
22349016]
Mendelsohn J. Personalizing oncology: perspectives and prospects. J Clin Oncol. 2013; 31:1904–1911.
[PubMed: 23589547]
Moreau P, Richardson PG, Cavo M, Orlowski RZ, San Miguel JF, Palumbo A, Harousseau JL.
Proteasome inhibitors in multiple myeloma: 10 years later. Blood. 2012; 120:947–959. [PubMed:
22645181]
Shaughnessy JD Jr, Qu P, Usmani S, Heuck CJ, Zhang Q, Zhou Y, Tian E, Hanamura I, van Rhee F,
Anaissie E, et al. Pharmacogenomics of bortezomib test-dosing identifies hyperexpression of
proteasome genes, especially PSMD4, as novel high-risk feature in myeloma treated with Total
Therapy 3. Blood. 2011; 118:3512–3524. [PubMed: 21628408]
Smith BD, Smith GL, Hurria A, Hortobagyi GN, Buchholz TA. Future of cancer incidence in the
United States: burdens upon an aging, changing nation. J Clin Oncol. 2009; 27:2758–2765.
[PubMed: 19403886]
Stessman HA, Baughn LB, Sarver A, Xia T, Deshpande R, Mansoor A, Walsh SA, Sunderland JJ,
Dolloff NG, Linden MA, et al. Profiling bortezomib resistance identifies secondary therapies in a
mouse myeloma model. Mol Cancer Ther. 2013; 12:1140–1150. [PubMed: 23536725]

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 September 09.

Orlowski

Page 5

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Figure 1. Model of proteasome inhibitor resistance from Tiedemann and colleagues

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Patients with multiple myeloma may have a number of neoplastic subpopulations, including
B-cells, activated B-cells, pre-plasmablasts, plasmablasts, and plasma cells. B-cells are
typically cluster differentiation antigen 20+ (CD20+)/CD27+/paired box 5+ (PAX5+),and do
not have spliced X-box binding protein 1 message XBP-1s-), whereas activated B-cells are
similar but express lower levels of CD20, and can be CD30+. Neither B-cells nor activated
B-cells are involved in substantial immunoglobulin synthesis, and both therefore have
relatively low levels of proteasome-assisted, endoplasmic reticulum-associated protein
degradation(ERADlo). Pre-plasmablasts are probably CD27lo/PAX5lo/CD30+/XBP-1s-,
express the interleukin 6 receptor (IL-6R+), produce low levels of monoclonal protein (Y),
and therefore have modest levels of ERAD activity (ERADmod). Plasmablasts are CD38+/
CD138lo/IL-6R+/XBP-1s+, secrete increased levels of monoclonal protein,and therefore
have higher ERAD activity (ERADhi). Finally, terminally differentiated plasma cells are
CD38+/CD138+/IL-6R+/XBP-1s+, produce high levels of monoclonal protein, and have the
highest levels of ERAD activity. These phenotypic characteristics are taken from the work
of Leung-Hagesteijn et al., and from other literature sources. Plasmablasts and plasma cells
are sensitive to proteasome inhibitors such as bortezomib because of their high level of
immunoglobulin synthesis, leading to high levels of ERAD-related stress, which triggers
dependence on the unfolded protein response (UPR). B-cells, activated B-cells, and preplasmablasts, in part because they are XBP-1s-, produce less immunoglobulin, and are
therefore less susceptible. Treatment with bortezomib eradicates plasmablasts and plasma
cells, which initially may make up the bulk of the tumor compartment, and results in
elimination of the monoclonal protein marker. However, B-cells, activated B-cells, and preplasmablasts,which initially are a minor component of the tumor compartment, survive.
After expansion of these cells, patients may then develop clinical relapses that are
Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 September 09.

Orlowski

Page 6

bortezomib-resistant with diseasethat ishypo- or non-secretory, and may require a different
treatment approach.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 September 09.

