Research Article

Molecular Basis of the Synergistic Antiangiogenic Activity of
Bevacizumab and Mithramycin A
1

1,3

1

4

3

1

1

Zhiliang Jia, Jun Zhang, Daoyan Wei, Liwei Wang, Ping Yuan, Xiangdong Le, Qiang Li,
1
1,2
James Yao, and Keping Xie
Departments of 1Gastrointestinal Medical Oncology and 2Cancer Biology, The University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston,
Texas; 3Ruijin Hospital, Shanghai Jiaotong University, and 4Cancer Center, Tongji University Affiliated East Hospital, Shanghai, People’s
Republic of China

Abstract
The impact of antiangiogenic therapy on the Sp1/vascular
endothelial growth factor (VEGF) pathway and that of
alteration of Sp1 signaling on the efficacy of antiangiogenic
therapy is unclear, yet understanding their interactions has
significant clinical implications. Treatment with bevacizumab,
a neutralizing antibody against VEGF, suppressed human
pancreatic cancer growth in nude mice. Gene expression
analyses revealed that this treatment substantially up-regulated the expression of Sp1 and its downstream target genes,
including VEGF and epidermal growth factor receptor, in
tumor tissues, whereas it did not have this effect on pancreatic
cancer cells in culture. Treatment with mithramycin A, an Sp1
inhibitor, suppressed the expression of Sp1 and its downstream
target genes in both cell culture and tumors growing in nude
mice. Combined treatment with bevacizumab and mithramycin A produced synergistic tumor suppression, which was
consistent with suppression of the expression of Sp1 and its
downstream target genes. Thus, treatment with bevacizumab
may block VEGF function but activate the pathway of its
expression via positive feedback. Given the fact that Sp1 is an
important regulator of the expression of multiple angiogenic
factors, bevacizumab-initiated up-regulation of Sp1 and
subsequent overexpression of its downstream target genes
may profoundly affect the potential angiogenic phenotype and
effectiveness of antiangiogenic strategies for human pancreatic cancer. Therefore, this study is the first to show the
significance and clinical implications of alteration of Sp1
signaling in antiangiogenic therapy for pancreatic cancer and
other cancers. [Cancer Res 2007;67(10):4878–85]

Introduction
Pancreatic cancer is currently the fourth leading cause of cancerrelated deaths. The median survival duration from diagnosis to
death is about 4 to 6 months, and the overall 5-year survival rate is
<5% (1–3). A full understanding of the cellular and molecular
mechanisms of the development and progression of pancreatic
cancer is crucial for identifying new targets of effective treatment
modalities for this deadly disease. Among the various potential
targets are numerous proangiogenic and antiangiogenic factors
released by tumor and host cells (4–6). These factors regulate

Requests for reprints: Keping Xie, Department of Gastrointestinal Medical
Oncology, Unit 426, The University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, 1515
Holcombe Boulevard, Houston, TX 77030. Phone: 713-792-2828; Fax: 713-745-1163;
E-mail: kepxie@mail.mdanderson.org.
I2007 American Association for Cancer Research.
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-06-3494

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (10). May 15, 2007

angiogenesis, which determines the growth and metastasis of
pancreatic cancer (6–8). Of the numerous angiogenic factors
discovered thus far, studies have identified vascular endothelial
growth factor (VEGF) as a key mediator of tumor angiogenesis
(9–11). Authors have reported elevated expression of VEGF in
human pancreatic cancer specimens (12, 13), that its expression
level correlates with microvessel density (MVD; refs. 4, 6, 14–16),
and that VEGF-targeted therapy significantly inhibits angiogenesis
and growth of pancreatic cancer in animal models (4, 6, 17). Other
identified proangiogenic factors that are overexpressed in human
pancreatic cancer include epidermal growth factor (EGF) and EGF
receptor (EGFR; refs. 4, 18), insulin-like growth factor-I (IGF-I) and
IGF-I receptor (IGF-IR; ref. 19), hepatocyte growth factor (HGF)
and its receptor Met (20, 21), and fibroblast growth factor (FGF)
and FGF receptor (22).
The molecular mechanisms by which these angiogenic molecules are regulated remain unclear, yet understanding these
mechanisms is crucial for designing effective antiangiogenic
therapies. Our previous studies showed that the transcription
factor Sp1 plays an important role in regulating expression of VEGF
and angiogenesis of human pancreatic cancer (23, 24). However,
whether and, if so, how treatments targeting molecules such as
VEGF impact the expression of Sp1 and its downstream target
genes, including VEGF, are unclear. We hypothesize that strategies
such as neutralization of VEGF by treatment with bevacizumab
lead to feedback activation of Sp1 and subsequent up-regulation of
VEGF, EGFR, IGF-IR, and other factors, leading to bevacizumab
resistance, whereas blockade of Sp1 expression and function
sensitizes tumors to bevacizumab and/or reverses bevacizumab
resistance. Mechanistic studies of these strategies will have
significant clinical implications on the treatment of bevacizumab-resistant tumors, including pancreatic cancer.
Sp1 is a zinc finger transcription factor that is important to the
transcription of many cellular and viral genes that contain GC
boxes in their promoters. Researchers have cloned additional
transcription factors similar to Sp1 in their structural and
transcriptional properties (Sp2, Sp3, and Sp4), thus forming the
Sp1 multigene family (25). Although Sp1 has been perceived to be a
basal transcription factor since its discovery, increasing evidence
suggests that it regulates a variety of biological functions, including
cell survival, growth, and differentiation and tumor development
and progression (25–29). We previously reported that Sp1 overexpression is directly correlated with the angiogenic potential of
and poor prognosis for human gastric and pancreatic cancer
(22, 24, 30). Therefore, Sp1 inhibitors such as mithramycin A may
have profound antiangiogenic effects.
Mithramycin A, also known as aureolic acid and plicamycin
(Mithracin), is an aureolic acid–type polyketide produced by
various soil bacteria of the genus Streptomyces (31, 32). In the past,

4878

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Antiangiogenic Therapy for Pancreatic Cancer

physicians used mithramycin A to manage hypercalcemia in
patients with bone metastases from various malignancies, whereas
others used it to treat Paget’s disease and several types of cancer,
including testicular carcinoma, chronic myeloid leukemia, and
acute myeloid leukemia (33–35). Furthermore, researchers have
shown that mithramycin A acts as a neuroprotective drug (36).
Mithramycin A binds to GC-rich regions in chromatin and
interferes with the transcription of genes that bear GC-rich motifs
in their promoters (33, 37). Its mechanism of action involves a
reversible interaction with double-stranded DNA with GC-base
specificity. Mithramycin A is believed to act, in part, by selectively
regulating transcription of genes that have GC-rich promoter
sequences (38). In addition, recent studies have shown that
mithramycin A sensitizes tumor cells to apoptosis induced by
tumor necrosis factor and inhibits p53-mediated transcriptional
responses (39, 40). Inhibition of Sp1 activity is considered to be a
major mechanism of the antitumor activity of mithramycin A.
Thus, we did the present study to determine the effect of
and molecular basis for the combined use of bevacizumab and
mithramycin A as an antiangiogenic therapy for pancreatic cancer.

Materials and Methods
Chemicals and reagents. Mithramycin A (1 mg per vial crystal powder)
was purchased from Sigma Chemical Co. and diluted in sterile water.
Bevacizumab (25 mg/mL) was purchased from Genentech, Inc.. For animal
experiments, mithramycin A (0.1–0.4 mg/kg body weight) and bevacizumab
(25–100 Ag per mouse) were given by i.p. injection twice a week or as
indicated otherwise.
Cell lines and culture conditions. The human pancreatic adenocarcinoma cell lines BxPC3 and PANC-1 were purchased from the American
Type Culture Collection. The cell lines were maintained in plastic flasks as
adherent monolayers in MEM supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum,
sodium pyruvate, nonessential amino acids, L-glutamine, and a vitamin
solution (Flow Laboratories).

Animals. Female athymic BALB/c nude mice were purchased from The
Jackson Laboratory. The mice were housed in laminar flow cabinets under
specific pathogen-free conditions and used when they were 8 weeks old.
The animals were maintained in facilities approved by the Association for
Assessment and Accreditation of Laboratory Animal Care in accordance
with the current regulations and standards of the U.S. Department of
Agriculture, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, and NIH.
Western blot analysis. Whole-cell lysates were prepared from human
pancreatic cancer cell lines and tissues (23). Standard Western blotting was
done using polyclonal rabbit antibodies against human and mouse Sp1,
VEGF, and EGFR (Santa Cruz Biotechnology) and the anti-rabbit
immunoglobulin G (IgG) antibody, a horseradish peroxidase–linked
F(ab¶)2 fragment obtained from a donkey (Amersham). Equal proteinsample loading was monitored by probing the same membrane filter with
antibodies against anti–h-actin or glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH; ref. 23). The probe proteins were detected using the
Amersham enhanced chemiluminescence system according to the manufacturer’s instructions.
Immunohistochemical analysis and quantification of tumor MVD.
For CD31 staining, frozen tissue sections (5 Am thick) were fixed in acetone.
Endogenous peroxidase in the specimens was blocked using 3% hydrogen
peroxide in PBS for 12 min. The specimens were incubated for 20 min at
room temperature in a protein-blocking solution consisting of PBS (pH, 7.5)
containing 5% normal horse serum and 1% normal goat serum and then
incubated overnight at 4jC in a 1:100 dilution of monoclonal goat antiCD31 (PECAM1-M20), polyclonal rabbit anti-Sp1, or polyclonal rabbit antiVEGF antibodies (Santa Cruz Biotechnology). The specimens were then
rinsed and incubated with peroxidase-conjugated anti-goat or anti-rabbit
IgG for 1 h at room temperature. Next, slides were rinsed with PBS and
incubated with diaminobenzidine (Research Genetics) for 5 min. Frozen
sections of the specimens were then washed thrice with distilled water,
counterstained with Mayer’s hematoxylin (Biogenex Laboratories), and
washed once each with distilled water and PBS. Sections were mounted on
the slides using Universal Mount (Research Genetics), and the slides were
examined under a bright-field microscope. A CD31-positive and Sp1positive reaction was indicated by a reddish-brown precipitate in the
cytoplasm or nuclei, respectively. For quantification of tumor MVD, vessels

Figure 1. Dose-dependent antitumor effects of
bevacizumab and mithramycin A in xenograft models of
human pancreatic cancer. A and B, BxPC3 cells were
injected into the subcutis of nude mice (n = 5). When
tumors reached around 4 mm in diameter, the animals
received different doses of (A) bevacizumab [25 (B-25 ),
50 (B-50 ), and 100 (B-100 ) Ag] and (B) mithramycin A
[0.10 (M-10 ), 0.20 (M-20 ), and 0.40 (M-40 ) mg/kg] via i.p.
injection twice a week. Tumors were measured once every
week, and at each measurement, the mean F SD tumor
volume in the five mice in each group was calculated.
C and D, the control mice and mice that received (C )
bevacizumab and (D ) mithramycin A were weighed at the
time of experiment termination. Columns, mean weights;
bars, SD. *, P < 0.01 in a comparison between the treated
and respective control groups. This was one representative
experiment of two with similar results.

www.aacrjournals.org

4879

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (10). May 15, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

Figure 2. Synergistic antitumor effects of treatment
with bevacizumab and mithramycin A in xenograft
models of human pancreatic cancer. Both (A) BxPC3
and (B) PANC-1 cells were injected into the subcutis of
groups of mice (n = 5). Specifically, animals received
injections of PBS (controls), bevacizumab (25 Ag),
mithramycin A (0.10 mg/kg), or B + M. Tumors were
measured once every week, and at each measurement,
the mean F SD tumor volume in the five mice in each
group was calculated. A and B, *, P < 0.01 in a
comparison between the treated and respective control
groups. C, representative tumor sizes in each group of
BxPC3 model mice. This was one representative
experiment of two with similar results.

on each section were counted in five high-power fields (magnification, 200
[20 objective and 10 ocular]) as described previously (41).
Sp1 promoter constructs and analysis of Sp1 promoter activity. The
minimal Sp1 promoter reporters in pGL3 luciferase constructs were
generated and used as described previously (23, 42). To examine the
transcriptional regulation of the Sp1 promoters by bevacizumab and
mithramycin A, PANC-1 cells were seeded to about 80% confluence in sixwell plates (in triplicate) and transiently transfected with 0.6 Ag of
minimum Sp1 reporter plasmids and 0.3 Ag of effector expression plasmids
as indicated in each experiment using LipofectAMINE (Invitrogen)
according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The reporter luciferase
activity was measured 48 h later using a luciferase assay kit (Promega).
Promoter activity was normalized according to the protein concentration as
described previously (23, 42).
Chromatin immunoprecipitation. Chromatin was prepared from cells
and tumors as described previously (42). Chromatin immunoprecipitation
(ChIP) assay was done using the Chromatin Immunoprecipitation Assay Kit
(Upstate Cell Signaling Solutions) according to the manufacturer’s instructions.
Briefly, DNA cross-binding proteins were cross-linked with DNA and lysed in
SDS lysis buffer. The lysate was sonicated to shear DNA to 200 to 500 bp. After
preclearing with a salmon sperm DNA/protein A agarose–50% slurry for 30 min
at 4jC, chromatin samples were immunoprecipitated overnight with no
antibody or an anti-Sp1 antibody (PEP2). The region between 224 and 53 bp
of the Sp1 promoter was amplified using the following primers: sense, 5¶caggcacgcaacttagtc-3¶, and antisense, 5¶-gtaaggaggagggagcag-3¶. PCR products
were separated on a 1.5% agarose gel, stained with ethidium bromide, and
visualized under UV light.
Statistical analysis. Each experiment was done independently at least
twice with similar results; one representative experiment is presented. The
significance of the in vitro data was determined using Student’s t test (twotailed), whereas the significance of the in vivo data was determined using
the two-tailed Mann-Whitney U test. For the in vivo experiments, the overall

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (10). May 15, 2007

survival duration was calculated using the Kaplan-Meier method. The logrank test was used to compare the survival duration between groups. P V
0.05 was deemed significant.

Results
Synergistic antitumor effects of bevacizumab and mithramycin A in a human pancreatic cancer model. Studies have
shown that Sp1 is essential for VEGF expression, and that VEGF
plays a major role in pancreatic cancer angiogenesis. However,
whether combined inhibition of both Sp1 and VEGF signaling has a
synergistic antiangiogenic effect is unknown. To determine
whether this takes place, we treated pancreatic cancer in nude
mice with bevacizumab, mithramycin A, or a combination of the
two (B + M). Specifically, we first did dose-response experiments.
We injected BxPC3 cells s.c. into nude mice. When their tumors
reached 4 mm in diameter, we gave the animals different doses of
bevacizumab (25, 50, and 100 Ag; Fig. 1A) and mithramycin A (0.1,
0.2, and 0.4 mg/kg; Fig. 1B) via i.p. injection twice a week. We also
gave PBS injections to animals as controls. We found that
treatment with B + M produced dose-dependent antitumor activity.
Bevacizumab (at a dose of 25 Ag) and mithramycin A (at a dose of
0.10 mg/kg) had slight antitumor effects (P = not significant). We
observed no discernible effect on body weight in the mice that
received bevacizumab alone (Fig. 1C), suggesting that at the doses
given, bevacizumab did not have any systemic side effects.
However, at the highest dose given (0.4 mg/kg), mithramycin A
slightly reduced body weight (Fig. 1D).
Next, we did experiments using both BxPC3 and PANC-1 tumor
cell models in which we gave PBS, bevacizumab (25 Ag),

4880

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Antiangiogenic Therapy for Pancreatic Cancer

mithramycin A (0.10 mg/kg), or B + M to a group of nude mice.
Consistently, administration of bevacizumab or mithramycin A
alone produced marginal antitumor activity. In contrast, administration of B + M produced synergistic antitumor activity without
any systemic side effects (Fig. 2). Additionally, the mice that
received B + M had body weights similar to those of the control
mice that received PBS (data not shown). Therefore, the use of B +
M resulted in higher antitumor activity than the use of
bevacizumab or mithramycin A alone did without an increase in
toxicity, suggesting that treatment of pancreatic cancer with B + M
has a significant therapeutic benefit.
Prolonged survival of xenograft models of human pancreatic cancer that received treatment with bevacizumab and
mithramycin A. We injected PANC-1 cells into the pancreas of
nude mice and then gave treatment to them as described in Fig. 2.
We monitored animal survival daily until the termination of the
experiment 160 days after tumor-cell injection. We found that the
mice that received bevacizumab or mithramycin A alone had a
slightly increased survival duration when compared with those that
received PBS only, whereas the mice that received B + M had a
significantly longer survival duration when compared with the
other three groups of mice (Fig. 3A). Furthermore, the incidence of
tumor growth in the pancreas and of metastasis in the liver and/or
other organs was lowest by far in the mice that received B + M
(Fig. 3B).

Figure 3. Prolonged survival of mice that received treatment with bevacizumab
and mithramycin A in xenograft models of human pancreatic cancer. PANC-1
cells were injected into the pancreas of nude mice (17–20 mice per group). The
mice received treatment as described in Fig. 2. The entire experiment was
terminated 120 days after tumor-cell injection. A, animal survival was monitored
daily until the termination of the experiment. Cum, cumulative. B, tumor growth in
the pancreas and metastasis in the liver and/or other organs were evaluated and
expressed as the incidence (%). *, P < 0.01 in a comparison between the treated
and respective control groups. This was one representative experiment of two
with similar results.

www.aacrjournals.org

Up-regulation of Sp1 and VEGF expression by treatment
with bevacizumab and its reversal by treatment with
mithramycin A. To determine the molecular basis for the
synergistic effect of treatment with B + M, we did Western blot
analysis using total protein lysates extracted from the PANC-1
tumor tissue specimens collected from mice that received
treatment with PBS, bevacizumab, mithramycin A, or B + M. As
shown in Fig. 4A and B, treatment with bevacizumab alone
increased expression of Sp1 and its downstream molecule VEGF.
However, treatment with mithramycin A alone suppressed Sp1 and
VEGF expression, which was consistent with reduced MVD,
whereas treatment with bevacizumab at a low dose alone did not
significantly reduce MVD, which was consistent with increased Sp1
expression (Fig. 4C). These data suggested that the neutralization
of VEGF function by bevacizumab may up-regulate the expression
of Sp1 via a positive feedback loop and lead to increased VEGF
expression. However, because of this neutralization of VEGF
function, the sustained MVD levels may be caused by other
mechanisms. Indeed, our Western blot analysis showed that the
treatment with bevacizumab also up-regulated the expression of
other proangiogenic molecules, such as platelet-derived growth
factor, IGF-IR, and EGFR (data not shown). Therefore, bevacizumab resistance may result from overexpression not only of VEGF
but also of other Sp1 downstream molecules.
Because the low dose of bevacizumab that activated Sp1
expression (25 Ag) did not have significant antitumor activity, we
determined the levels of Sp1 expression in residual tumors in mice
that received a high dose of bevacizumab (100 Ag) that had a
significant antitumor activity. As shown in Fig. 4D, we observed
significant inhibition of Sp1 expression in the residual tumors of
mice that received 100 Ag of bevacizumab, whereas we consistently
observed up-regulation of Sp1 expression in the residual tumors of
mice that received 25 Ag of bevacizumab. The alteration of Sp1
expression was consistent with that of VEGF expression. These
data suggested that administration of a low, ineffective dose of
bevacizumab up-regulated Sp1 expression and contributed to
bevacizumab resistance.
Effects of treatment with bevacizumab and mithramycin A
on the growth of and gene expression in human pancreatic
cancer cells. To further determine whether treatment with
bevacizumab directly impacts gene expression in pancreatic
cancer cells, we incubated PANC-1 and BxPC3 cells in medium
alone or a medium containing 100 Ag/mL bevacizumab for 6 to 48
h. As expected, bevacizumab did not affect the growth of PANC-1
cells (Fig. 5A) or BxPC3 cells (Fig. 5B) in vitro. As shown in Fig. 5C,
neutralization of VEGF did not affect the expression of Sp1 or its
major downstream molecules, VEGF and EGFR. This result was
consistent with previous findings showing that bevacizumab
primarily blocks the autocrine effect of VEGF on tumor
angiogenesis (43–47). In contrast, treatment with mithramycin
A produced dose-dependent cytotoxic effects in both PANC-1
cells (Fig. 5D) and BxPC3 cells (data not shown). The calculated
IC50s for mithramycin A were >1.5 Amol/L (24-h assay) and 0.15
Amol/L (48-h assay; Fig. 5D). Therefore, for 24 and 48 h, we treated
PANC-1 cells with mithramycin A at concentrations of 0.05 and
0.10 Amol/L, respectively, which were much lower than the IC50
and effectively inhibited the expression of Sp1 and its downstream
molecules EGFR and VEGF (Fig. 5E). These data suggested that
bevacizumab does not have a direct effect on tumor cells or on the
expression of Sp1 and its downstream molecules, but that
mithramycin A does.

4881

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (10). May 15, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

Figure 4. Analysis of gene expression and microvessel
formation in tumor tissues. The tumor tissues described
in Fig. 2A were collected and processed as described in
Materials and Methods. A, total protein lysates were
harvested from tumor tissues, and the level of protein
expression in them was determined using Western blot
analysis. Equal protein-sample loading was monitored
by probing the same membrane filter with an anti–
h-actin antibody. NS, nonspecific. B, the levels of Sp1
and VEGF expression were quantitated and expressed
as fold change. C, MVD was quantitated according to
CD31 staining. D, Western blot analysis was done using
total protein lysates harvested from the tumor tissues
described in Fig. 1 A and specific antibodies against
Sp1, VEGF, and h-actin.

Effects of treatment with bevacizumab and mithramycin A
on Sp1 recruitment into the Sp1 promoter in vitro and in vivo
in human pancreatic cancer cells. In this final set of experiments, we sought to determine whether treatment with B + M
regulated Sp1 expression at the transcriptional level. We transfected Sp1 promoter reporter constructs into PANC-1 cells and
then incubated them in medium alone or a medium containing
100 Ag/mL bevacizumab or 0.1 Amol/L mithramycin A. In vitro,
treatment with bevacizumab did not suppress Sp1 promoter
activity, whereas treatment with mithramycin A did. However,
further deletion of Sp1-binding sites eliminated the ability of
mithramycin A to suppress Sp1 promoter activity (Fig. 6A and B).
Consistently, treatment with mithramycin A significantly reduced
the recruitment of Sp1 protein to its own promoter as shown in a
ChIP assay (Fig. 6C), whereas treatment with bevacizumab did not
reduce the recruitment of Sp1 protein to its promoter at either high
(100 Ag/mL; Fig. 6C) or low (12.5, 25.0, or 50.0 Ag/mL; data not
shown) concentrations. Finally, we did a ChIP assay using tumors
formed by PANC-1 cells in nude mice that received treatment as
described in Fig. 2A. Treatment with bevacizumab at a high dose
inhibited Sp1 recruitment to its own promoter, whereas treatment
with bevacizumab at a low dose significantly increased Sp1
recruitment to its own promoter (Fig. 6D). In contrast, both
treatment with mithramycin A alone and treatment with B + M
suppressed Sp1 protein recruitment to its own promoter (Fig. 6E).
These data suggested that treatment with ineffective doses of
bevacizumab up-regulates Sp1 expression in vivo via positive
feedback activation of the Sp1 gene (positive autoregulation) and
then of its downstream target molecules, such as VEGF, whereas
mithramycin A disrupts this regulatory loop.

Discussion
In this study, we found that treatment with bevacizumab upregulated the expression of Sp1, which is a key positive regulator of

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (10). May 15, 2007

the expression of various proangiogenic factors, including VEGF.
Inhibition of Sp1 using mithramycin A repressed the expression of
VEGF and tumor angiogenesis. Interestingly, treatment with B + M
at low doses had a synergistic antiangiogenic effect. This effect was
consistent with suppression of Sp1 activity and down-regulation of
multiple downstream target molecules of Sp1. Our experimental
findings indicate that inhibition of VEGF signaling in vivo leads to
feedback up-regulation of Sp1 expression, which, in turns, leads to
increased expression of multiple proangiogenic factors, including
VEGF. Thus, treatment with the anti-VEGF monoclonal antibody
bevacizumab can lead to compensatory up-regulation of pathways
that, in turn, lead to resistance to bevacizumab. Conversely,
inhibition of Sp1 blocked this feedback mechanism. For the first
time, our findings not only provide researchers with a novel
paradigm of synergism between antiangiogenic agents and
inhibitors of transcription factors such as Sp1, but also will help
clinicians design rational drug combinations that can improve
antiangiogenic activity and/or reverse antiangiogenic resistance.
Angiogenesis plays critical roles in sustained growth and
metastasis of most solid tumors, including pancreatic cancer.
Previous studies showed that antiangiogenic therapies suppress
tumor growth in animal models of pancreatic cancer. For example,
several strategies inhibit the angiogenesis, growth, and metastasis
of human pancreatic cancer and improve survival in nude mouse
models via targeting of VEGF signaling and function, including the
use of VEGF antisense oligonucleotides, VEGF-directed ribozymes,
VEGF fused to a diphtheria toxin, anti-VEGF antibodies, various
types of interference with VEGF receptor-1 and VEGF receptor-2, a
dominant-negative flk-1, and the VEGF receptor tyrosine kinase
inhibitor PTK-787 (48, 49). Additionally, celecoxib (a cyclooxygenase-2 inhibitor) and genistein (a tyrosine kinase inhibitor)
suppress pancreatic cancer growth and metastasis at least in part
by inhibiting VEGF expression and angiogenesis (24). Furthermore,
the level of VEGF expression correlates with MVD and disease

4882

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Antiangiogenic Therapy for Pancreatic Cancer

progression (4, 6). These findings from various experimental
and clinical studies using various approaches substantiate the
importance of the angiogenic process in pancreatic cancer and
support the hypothesis that VEGF plays a crucial role in this
process. Moreover, TNP-470 and endostatin reduce the rate of
pancreatic cancer angiogenesis, growth, and metastasis (43).
Although studies have shown that a number of VEGF inhibitors
have significant antitumor activity in a wide variety of xenograft
models, in human studies, the clinical activity of VEGF inhibitors
when used as single agents has been limited. Outside of use for
renal cell carcinoma, neuroendocrine carcinoma, and some
sarcomas, VEGF inhibitors are generally developed in combination

Figure 5. Effects of treatment with bevacizumab and mithramycin A on the
growth of and gene expression in human pancreatic cancer cells in vitro. BxPC3
(A) and PANC-1 cells (B) were incubated for 1 to 5 d in medium alone or a
medium containing 100 Ag/mL bevacizumab. The viable cells were counted
every 24 h. C, PANC-1 cells were incubated for 6 to 48 h in medium alone or a
medium containing 100 Ag/mL bevacizumab. Total protein lysates were
harvested from the cell cultures, and the level of Sp1, EGFR, and VEGF protein
expression was determined using Western blot analysis. Equal protein-sample
loading was monitored by probing the same membrane filter with an antiGAPDH antibody. D and E, PANC-1 cells were treated with mithramycin A at
concentrations ranging from 0.1 to 1.2 Amol/L for 24 and 48 h. D, cytotoxicity was
assessed using the 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide
assay. E, the level of gene expression was determined using Western blot
analysis. NS, nonspecific. This was one representative experiment of two with
similar results.

www.aacrjournals.org

with other therapies. Researchers have shown that antiangiogenic
approaches are more effective when combined with chemotherapy
or radiation therapy. For example, gemcitabine potentiated
antiangiogenic therapies using anti-VEGF, anti–VEGF receptor-2,
and anti-EGFR antibodies (44). The limited effectiveness of
antiangiogenic therapies that target single molecules also highlights the important issue of diverse angiogenic signals and
effector factors (6). Targeting these individual molecules individually may be ineffective and/or result in eventual resistance to
bevacizumab. In pancreatic cancer, early clinical trials of
bevacizumab, in combination with gemcitabine for advanced
disease and in combination with radiotherapy for local-regional
disease, had promising results. Investigators have proposed
various mechanisms of the synergy between antiangiogenic
therapy and chemotherapy. Some have hypothesized that therapy
targeting VEGF may normalize tumor vasculature, decrease
interstitial fluid pressure, and enhance chemotherapy delivery.
Alternatively, others have proposed that neuropilin receptors
mediate resistance to apoptosis, which can be reversed by agents
such as bevacizumab (45).
Some have recognized that elevated angiogenesis in human
pancreatic cancer involves a perturbed local imbalance of
proangiogenic and antiangiogenic factors, i.e., proangiogenic
factors predominate over antiangiogenic factors (46, 47). Among
a growing list of proangiogenic factors, various isoforms of VEGF
contribute to the growth and metastasis of pancreatic cancer
through a variety of mechanisms (4, 6). Moreover, pancreatic
cancer cells overexpress several other mitogenic growth factors
that are also angiogenic, such as EGF, transforming growth
factor-a, HGF, FGFs (e.g., FGF-1, FGF-2, FGF-5), and plateletderived growth factor-h (4, 6). Researchers have shown that many
of these and other factors correlate with increased vessel
formation and poor prognosis in patients with pancreatic cancer;
this includes expression of FGF-2 and platelet-derived endothelial
cell growth factor, mutation of K-ras, and overexpression of
hypoxia-inducible factor-1a, thymidine phosphorylase, thrombospondin-1, and cathepsin B and L (4–6). Therefore, whereas VEGF
is crucial for promoting the growth and metastasis of pancreatic
cancer, other factors are likely involved in this process as well.
Together, these factors may produce mitogenic activity in an
autocrine and paracrine fashion, promoting pancreatic tumor-cell
growth and angiogenesis and eventually enhancing pancreatic
tumor invasion and metastasis (4–6). This notion is supported by
the fact that interference with the expression and function of
these factors influences the angiogenesis and growth of human
pancreatic cancer in animal models. For example, antiangiogenesis can be achieved using treatment with dominant-negative
IGF-IR; antithrombin III and vitamin D–binding protein-macrophage activating factor; NK4, a four-kringle fragment of HGF; and
the tyrosine kinase inhibitor of EGFR (4, 6). However, simultaneously interfering with multiple target molecules is clinically
challenging.
Recent studies have suggested that there is a potential
underlying mechanism for overexpression of various proangiogenic
factors that collectively regulate pancreatic cancer angiogenesis
(6, 9). For example, in previous studies, we showed that Sp1 is
constitutively activated in human pancreatic cancer cells, and that
constitutive Sp1 activity is essential for constitutive and inducible
VEGF expression (6, 9, 23, 27, 28), strongly supporting the initial
description of the Sp1/VEGF signaling axis (27, 50). In our previous
studies, we also found that overexpression of Sp1 is correlated with

4883

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (10). May 15, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

Figure 6. Effects of treatment with bevacizumab and mithramycin A on Sp1 recruitment into the Sp1 promoter in human pancreatic cancer cells in vitro and in vivo.
A, schematic structures of the minimal Sp1 promoters. The nucleotide positions and sequences of Sp1-binding sites and PCR forward and reverse primers flanking
those sites for ChIP assay are shown. B, Sp1 promoter reporter constructs were transfected into PANC-1 cells in triplicate and incubated for 12 h. The cells were
then incubated for another 24 h in medium alone or a medium containing 100 Ag/mL bevacizumab or 0.1 Amol/L mithramycin A. Total protein lysates were harvested
from the cell cultures for measurement of Sp1 promoter activity using a luciferase assay kit. The relative Sp1 promoter activities were assessed, and the activity in
treated groups was expressed as the fold change of that in their respective control groups. C, chromatin was extracted from PANC-1 cells that were incubated in vitro
for 2 d in medium alone or a medium containing 100 Ag/mL bevacizumab or 0.1 Amol/L mithramycin A. D, chromatin was extracted from tumors formed by PANC-1
cells in nude mice that received treatment as described in Fig. 1A . E, chromatin was extracted from tumors formed by PANC-1 cells in nude mice that received
treatment as described in Fig. 2A . The ChIP assay was done using a specific anti-Sp1 antibody and oligonucleotides flanking the Sp1 promoter regions containing
Sp1-binding sites. Lane 1, input chromatin DNA; lane 2, chromatin DNA with control IgG; lane 3, chromatin DNA with anti-Sp1 antibody. Ctr, control. This was one
representative experiment of two with similar results.

MVD in human gastric cancer tissue, and that manipulating the
Sp1 expression level using a small interfering RNA approach
significantly inhibits the tumor angiogenic phenotype (6, 9). This
antiangiogenic effect of knocking down Sp1 expression is
consistent with reduced expression of several signaling molecules
in the signaling pathways that play important roles in the
regulation of tumor angiogenesis (28–30). In fact, one of our
recent studies showed that inhibition of VEGF expression and the
resulting antitumor effect of celecoxib are mediated at least in part
by suppression of Sp1 activity (24). All of these lines of evidence
indicate that Sp1 plays an important role in the regulation of
angiogenesis in human pancreatic cancer. Furthermore, as shown
in the present study, blockade of Sp1 activity by mithramycin A
suppresses tumor angiogenesis.
Finally, treatment with a low dose of mithramycin A did not
significantly inhibit tumor angiogenesis in the present study,
although the overall level of VEGF protein expression in tumors
was reduced. This finding suggests that the quantity of extracellular
matrix–associated VEGF in the tumor bed may be sufficient to
initiate and maintain the tumor angiogenesis phenotype without
continuing production of VEGF in the tumor bed. Removal of this
angiogenic signal produced by the existing VEGF is necessary,

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (10). May 15, 2007

which may explain why a single treatment with a low dose of
mithramycin A is insufficient to eliminate angiogenesis in
pancreatic tumors. However, the functional removal of VEGF by
treatment with bevacizumab up-regulates the expression of many
angiogenic molecules other than VEGF, which may explain why a
single treatment with bevacizumab was insufficient to produce
sustained antiangiogenesis. The combined use of bevacizumab and
mithramycin A should produce sustained antiangiogenesis in
pancreatic cancer. This is clearly supported by the present study, in
which combined use of low doses of bevacizumab and mithramycin A had a synergistic antiangiogenic effect in human pancreatic
cancer models. Therefore, our present findings underscore the
important roles of Sp1/VEGF signaling in pancreatic cancer
angiogenesis.
Collectively, our study suggests that bevacizumab-based treatment targeting VEGF may lead to resistance of pancreatic cancer
to bevacizumab in part via positive feedback activation of the
transcription factor Sp1 and subsequent overexpression of the
downstream target genes of Sp1. The use of mithramycin A in
combination with bevacizumab is an important novel strategy of
targeting angiogenesis by sequentially interfering with upstream
transcriptional regulation by transcription factors such as Sp1 and

4884

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Antiangiogenic Therapy for Pancreatic Cancer

neutralizing downstream effector molecules such as VEGF. Combining bevacizumab and mithramycin A in human clinical studies
represents a rationale step forward in the development of effective
antiangiogenic therapy for pancreatic cancer and other cancers.

Acknowledgments
Received 9/20/2006; revised 3/1/2007; accepted 3/7/2007.
Grant support: Specialized Programs of Research Excellence (SPORE) grant 1P20CA101936-01-PP4 in pancreatic cancer and grant 1R01-CA093829 from the National
Cancer Institute, NIH (K. Xie) and Institutional Start-up Funds (J. Yao).

References
1. Jemal A, Murray T, Ward E, et al. Cancer statistics,
2005. CA Cancer J Clin 2005;55:10–30.
2. Kuvshinoff BW, Bryer MP. Treatment of resectable and
locally advanced pancreatic cancer. Cancer Control
2000;7:428–36.
3. MacKenzie MJ. Molecular therapy in pancreatic
adenocarcinoma. Lancet Oncol 2004;5:541–9.
4. Korc M. Pathways for aberrant angiogenesis in
pancreatic cancer. Mol Cancer 2003;2:8.
5. Kern SE. Molecular genetic alterations in ductal
pancreatic adenocarcinomas. Med Clin North Am
2000;84:691–5.
6. Xie K, Wei D, Huang S. Transcriptional anti-angiogenesis therapy of human pancreatic cancer. Cytokine
Growth Factor Rev 2006;17:147–56.
7. Folkman J. Angiogenesis. Annu Rev Med 2006;57:1–18.
8. Kerbel RS. Antiangiogenic therapy: a universal chemosensitization strategy for cancer? Science 2006;312:
1171–5.
9. Xie K, Wei D, Shi Q, Huang S. Constitutive and
inducible expression and regulation of vascular endothelial growth factor. Cytokine Growth Factor Rev 2004;
15:297–324.
10. Presta LG, Chen H, O’Connor SJ, et al. Humanization
of an anti-vascular endothelial growth factor monoclonal antibody for the therapy of solid tumors and other
disorders. Cancer Res 1997;57:4593–9.
11. Dvorak HF. Discovery of vascular permeability factor
(VPF). Exp Cell Res 2006;312:522–6.
12. Ellis LM, Takahashi Y, Fenoglio CJ, Cleary KR, Bucana
CD, Evans DB. Vessel counts and vascular endothelial
growth factor expression in pancreatic adenocarcinoma.
Eur J Cancer 1998;34:337–40.
13. Fujimoto K, Hosotani R, Wada M, et al. Expression of
two angiogenic factors, vascular endothelial growth
factor and platelet-derived endothelial cell growth
factor in human pancreatic cancer, and its relationship
to angiogenesis. Eur J Cancer 1998;34:1439–47.
14. Ikeda N, Adachi M, Taki T, et al. Prognostic
significance of angiogenesis in human pancreatic
cancer. Br J Cancer 1999;79:1553–63.
15. Karademir S, Sokmen S, Terzi C, et al. Tumor
angiogenesis as a prognostic predictor in pancreatic
cancer. J Hepatobiliary Pancreat Surg 2000;7:489–95.
16. Couvelard A, O’Toole D, Leek R, et al. Expression
of hypoxia-inducible factors is correlated with the
presence of a fibrotic focus and angiogenesis in
pancreatic ductal adenocarcinomas. Histopathology
2005;46:668–76.
17. Hotz HG, Hines OJ, Masood R, et al. VEGF antisense
therapy inhibits tumor growth and improves survival in
experimental pancreatic cancer. Surgery 2005;137:192–9.
18. McBride G. Researchers optimistic about targeted
drugs for pancreatic cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst 2004;96:
1570–2.
19. Hakam A, Fang Q, Karl R, Coppola D. Coexpression
of IGF-1R and c-Src proteins in human pancreatic
ductal adenocarcinoma. Dig Dis Sci 2003;48:1972–8.

www.aacrjournals.org

The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of
page charges. This article must therefore be hereby marked advertisement in
accordance with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact.
We thank Patricia E. Ibarra-Cabello for expert help in the preparation of the
manuscript and Don Norwood for editorial comments. Part of the work described in
this article has been presented in various meetings, including those at The
University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center (Pancreatic Cancer Working
Group meeting, 2005; Department of Gastrointestinal Oncology Research Retreat,
2005; Pancreatic Cancer SPORE Internal and External Advisory Board meeting, 2006;
Department of Gastrointestinal Oncology External Advisory Board meeting, 2006;
and Trainee Recognition Day poster presentation, 2006) and those outside M. D.
Anderson Cancer Center (14th SPORE Investigators’ Workshop in Baltimore, MD,
2006).

20. Tomioka D, Maehara N, Kuba K, et al. Inhibition of
growth, invasion, and metastasis of human pancreatic
carcinoma cells by NK4 in an orthotopic mouse model.
Cancer Res 2001;61:7518–24.
21. Maehara N, Matsumoto K, Kuba K, Mizumoto K,
Tanaka M, Nakamura T. NK4, a four-kringle antagonist
of HGF, inhibits spreading and invasion of human
pancreatic cancer cells. Br J Cancer 2001;84:864–73.
22. Kornmann M, Beger HG, Korc M. Role of fibroblast
growth factors and their receptors in pancreatic cancer
and chronic pancreatitis. Pancreas 1998;17:169–75.
23. Shi Q, Le X, Abbruzzese JL, et al. Constitutive
Sp1 activity is essential for differential constitutive
expression of vascular endothelial growth factor in
human pancreatic adenocarcinoma. Cancer Res 2001;
61:4143–54.
24. Wei D, Wang L, He Y, et al. Celecoxib inhibits
vascular endothelial growth factor expression in and
reduces angiogenesis and metastasis of human pancreatic cancer via suppression of Sp1 transcription factor
activity. Cancer Res 2004;64:2030–8.
25. Black AR, Black JD, Azizkhan-Clifford J. Sp1 and
kruppel-like factor family of transcription factors in cell
growth regulation and cancer. J Cell Physiol 2001;188:
143–60.
26. Li L, He S, Sun JM, Davie JR. Gene regulation by Sp1
and Sp3. Biochem Cell Biol 2004;82:460–71.
27. Mukhopadhyay D, Datta K. Multiple regulatory
pathways of vascular permeability factor/vascular endothelial growth factor (VPF/VEGF) expression in
tumors. Semin Cancer Biol 2004;14:123–30.
28. Abdelrahim M, Smith R III, Burghardt R, Safe S. Role
of Sp proteins in regulation of vascular endothelial
growth factor expression and proliferation of pancreatic
cancer cells. Cancer Res 2004;64:6740–9.
29. Safe S, Abdelrahim M. Sp transcription factor family
and its role in cancer. Eur J Cancer 2005;41:2438–48.
30. Wang L, Wei D, Huang S, et al. Transcription factor
Sp1 expression is a significant predictor of survival in
human gastric cancer. Clin Cancer Res 2003;9:6371–80.
31. Wohlert SE, Kunzel E, Machinek R, Mendez C, Salas
JA, Rohr J. The structure of mithramycin reinvestigated.
J Nat Prod 1999;62:119–21.
32. Prado L, Lombo F, Brana AF, Mendez C, Rohr J, Salas
JA. Analysis of two chromosomal regions adjacent to
genes for a type II polyketide synthase involved in the
biosynthesis of the antitumor polyketide mithramycin
in Streptomyces argillaceus . Mol Gen Genet 1999;261:
216–25.
33. Majee S, Dasgupta SD, Chakrabarti A. Interaction of
the DNA-binding antitumor antibiotics, chromomycin
and mithramycin with erythroid spectrin. Eur J Biochem
1999;260:619–26.
34. Hall TJ, Schaeublin M, Chambers TJ. The majority of
osteoclasts require mRNA and protein synthesis for
bone resorption in vitro . Biochem Biophys Res Commun
1993;195:1245–53.
35. Remsing LL, Bahadori HR, Carbone GM, McGuffie
EM, Catapano CV, Rohr J. Inhibition of c-src transcription by mithramycin: structure-activity relationships of

4885

biosynthetically produced mithramycin analogues using
the c-src promoter as target. Biochemistry 2003;42:
8313–24.
36. Chatterjee S, Zaman K, Ryu H, Conforto A, Ratan RR.
Sequence-selective DNA binding drugs mithramycin A
and chromomycin A3 are potent inhibitors of neuronal
apoptosis induced by oxidative stress and DNA damage
in cortical neurons. Ann Neurol 2001;49:345–54.
37. Blume SW, Snyder RC, Ray R, Thomas S, Koller CA,
Miller DM. Mithramycin inhibits SP1 binding and
selectively inhibits transcriptional activity of the dihydrofolate reductase gene in vitro and in vivo . J Clin
Invest 1991;88:1613–21.
38. Tagashira M, Kitagawa T, Isonishi S, Okamoto A,
Ochiai K, Ohtake Y. Mithramycin represses MDR1 gene
expression in vitro , modulating multidrug resistance.
Biol Pharm Bull 2000;23:926–9.
39. Duverger V, Murphy AM, Sheehan D, et al. The
anticancer drug mithramycin A sensitises tumour cells
to apoptosis induced by tumour necrosis factor (TNF).
Br J Cancer 2004;90:2025–31.
40. Koutsodontis G, Kardassis D. Inhibition of p53mediated transcriptional responses by mithramycin A.
Oncogene 2004;23:9190–200.
41. Weidner N, Semple JP, Welch WR, Folkman J. Tumor
angiogenesis and metastasis–correlation in invasive
breast carcinoma. N Engl J Med 1991;324:1–8.
42. Kanai M, Wei D, Li Q, et al. Kruppel-like factor 4
represses Sp1 expression and contributes to its tumor
suppressor activity in human pancreatic and gastric
cancer. Clin Cancer Res 2006;12:6395–402.
43. Prox D, Becker C, Pirie-Shepherd SR, Celik I, Folkman
J, Kisker O. Treatment of human pancreatic cancer in
mice with angiogenic inhibitors. World J Surg 2003;27:
405–11.
44. Wiedmann MW, Caca K. Molecularly targeted
therapy for gastrointestinal cancer. Curr Cancer Drug
Targets 2005;5:171–93.
45. Kowanetz M, Ferrara N. Vascular endothelial growth
factor signaling pathways: therapeutic perspective. Clin
Cancer Res 2006;12:5018–22.
46. Jain RK. Tumor angiogenesis and accessibility: role of
vascular endothelial growth factor. Semin Oncol 2002;
29:3–9.
47. Blagosklonny MV. How Avastin potentiates chemotherapeutic drugs: action and reaction in antiangiogenic
therapy. Cancer Biol Ther 2005;4:1307–10.
48. Morabito A, De Maio E, Di Maio M, Normanno N,
Perrone F. Tyrosine kinase inhibitors of vascular
endothelial growth factor receptors in clinical trials:
current status and future directions. Oncologist 2006;11:
753–64.
49. Yazici YD, Kim S, Jasser SA, et al. Antivascular
therapy of oral tongue squamous cell carcinoma with
PTK787. Laryngoscope 2005;115:2249–55.
50. Mukhopadhyay D, Knebelmann B, Cohen HT, Ananth
S, Sukhatme VP. The von Hippel-Lindau tumor suppressor gene product interacts with Sp1 to repress
vascular endothelial growth factor promoter activity.
Mol Cell Biol 1997;17:5629–39.

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (10). May 15, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Molecular Basis of the Synergistic Antiangiogenic Activity of
Bevacizumab and Mithramycin A
Zhiliang Jia, Jun Zhang, Daoyan Wei, et al.
Cancer Res 2007;67:4878-4885.

Updated version

Cited articles
Citing articles

E-mail alerts
Reprints and
Subscriptions
Permissions

Access the most recent version of this article at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/67/10/4878

This article cites 50 articles, 11 of which you can access for free at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/67/10/4878.full#ref-list-1
This article has been cited by 10 HighWire-hosted articles. Access the articles at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/67/10/4878.full#related-urls

Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal.
To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications
Department at pubs@aacr.org.
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications
Department at permissions@aacr.org.

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

