Oncotarget, Vol. 7, No. 4

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Blocking the survival of the nastiest by HSP90 inhibition
Paul Workman1, Paul A. Clarke1 and Bissan Al-Lazikani1
1

Cancer Research UK Cancer Therapeutics Unit, Division of Cancer Therapeutics, The Institute of Cancer Research, London,
UK
Correspondence to: Paul Workman, email: paul.workman@icr.ac.uk
Keywords: HSP90
Received: November 20, 2015	

Accepted: January 21, 2016	

Published: January 21, 2016

ABSTRACT
It is now recognised that genetic, epigenetic and phenotypic heterogeneity within
individual human cancers is responsible for therapeutic resistance – knowledge that
is having a profound impact on current thinking and experimentation. There has been
concern that molecularly targeted therapy is doomed to failure, with resistant clones
emerging in response to the Darwinian selective pressure of any drug treatment.
However, two studies have shown that the evolution of drug resistance can be
restrained by co-administration of a pharmacologic inhibitor of the HSP90 molecular
chaperone.

It has been known for decades that individual
cancers are heterogeneous, undergo progression to
increasingly malignant and aggressive forms and
commonly develop therapeutic resistance. What has
changed is our ability to elucidate this progression
in extraordinary molecular detail – and especially to
characterise large numbers of human cancers using
techniques such as next-generation sequencing. Another
significant development has been the synthesis of a
new and sophisticated conceptual framework for cancer
evolution, which has enabled a more comprehensive and
nuanced understanding of disease progression. As a result
of this emerging framework, therapeutic manoeuvres
have been suggested that can directly impact on patient
treatment and inform our thinking about future therapeutic
strategies [1, 2].
Importantly, we now recognize that drug resistance
is an enduring feature of the cancer state that applies not
only to first generation cytotoxic drugs but also to the new
generation of sophisticated molecularly targeted agents
that exploit oncogene addiction, synthetic lethality and so
on [3].
In the 1860s, Herbert Spencer and Charles Darwin
first articulated the term ‘survival of the fittest’ to describe
the evolution of species by selection for heritable traits
that enable adaptation to the local environment. Here,
by analogy, we refer to this malign exemplar of the

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

evolutionary paradigm in cancer as the ‘survival of the
nastiest’
[http://www.theguardian.com/science/2013/
aug/25/hiv-aids-cancer]. There are clear parallels between
the evolution of resistance in individual cancers and
the emergence of antibiotic-resistant micro-organisms,
including the use of combinatorial drug therapy to
counteract the problem [3].
The contemporary view of cancer evolution can be
traced to 1902 and Theodor Boveri, who was the first to
propose that the origins of malignancy lie in chromosomal
abnormalities that are passed on to daughter cells. Boveri’s
theory of the clonal ancestry, and of the progression
of cancer driven by acquired genetic instability, was
subsequently supported by a large body of work – initially
using cytogenetic and protein biomarkers – as articulated
in a landmark article by Peter Nowell in 1976 [4].
In recent years, high-resolution molecular analysis
of patients’ tumors by single-cell sequencing, and
other sophisticated techniques, has yielded astonishing
insights into the degree of spatial and temporal variation
in subclonal cancer populations. It has uncovered a
branched pattern of cancer development where different
mutations can arise in distinct subpopulations (branches)
of the same tumor, generating resistance against individual
molecularly targeted drugs [2] (Figure 1A). Conversely,
through parallel evolution, distinct clones may converge
on an identical driver gene or signaling pathway, thereby

3658

Oncotarget

increasing the likelihood of a durable response to a single
targeted agent [2]. Evidence also indicates that cancers
may evolve gradually (microevolution), that is in a
stepwise fashion through point mutations, or dramatically
(macroevolution) via large chromosomal rearrangements
or genome doublings [2].
How then might inhibitors of the HSP90 molecular
chaperone block cancer evolution and overcome drug
resistance? Binding to HSP90 is essential for the activity
and stability of many oncogenic proteins – especially
those activated by mutation or translocation, or that are
overexpressed. Small molecule HSP90 inhibitors exploit
the fact that oncogenic driver proteins rely on molecular
chaperones for stability and function, and several HSP90
inhibitors are now undergoing clinical trial [5]. Previously,
it was hypothesized that HSP90 inhibitors could
overcome resistance to established drugs by disrupting
multiple oncoproteins, signaling pathways and hallmark
traits simultaneously. Specifically, it was thought that
administering an HSP90 inhibitor with an agent known

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

to block the function of a driver oncoprotein (a HSP90
client), could be especially effective [5].
Importantly, and in line with these predictions,
Whitesell et al. have shown that co-administration of
an HSP90 inhibitor substantially impairs the emergence
of resistance to anti-estrogens in a model of estrogen
receptor-positive human breast cancer [6]. Similarly,
Smyth et al. have demonstrated that administering an
HSP90 inhibitor with the BRAF inhibitor vemurafenib
can overcome or delay the appearance of resistance to
vemurafenib in models of mutant BRAF human melanoma
[7] (Figure 1B).
Consistent with the established role of HSP90 in
protein and morphological evolution, and in anti-fungal
resistance [5], these new findings support calls for clinical
testing of frontline combinations of HSP90 inhibitors
with various molecularly targeted agents – to block the
evolution of resistance and prevent the survival of the
nastiest cells in human cancers.

3659

Oncotarget

Figure 1: HSP90 inhibitors block the emergence of drug resistance in mouse models of human cancer. Panel A: The

emergence of more malignant and aggressive clones is driven by genetic instability and clonal evolution in response to the selective
pressure of drug treatment. This leads to drug resistance [1, 2]. The administration of network drugs, such as HSP90 inhibitors, can delay
or suppress the emergence of resistance to targeted drugs. Panel B: Mechanistic studies show that resistance to estrogen receptor (ER)
antagonists and the BRAF inhibitor vemurafenib (Vem) can be blocked or delayed by co-administration of an HSP90 inhibitor (HSP90i)
[6, 7]. Panel B1.1: HSP90 is important for estrogen-ER binding and thus ER activation, as well as ER stability. Panel B1.2: Combining
an HSP90i with the ER antagonist 4-hydroxytamoxifen (TAM) prevents estrogen binding and promotes ER degradation, thus prolonging
the anti-tumor effect. Panel B2.1: The BRAFV600E-mutant protein requires HSP90 for its stability and function. Panel B2.2: Cells rapidly
acquire resistance to the BRAF inhibitor Vem by upregulating other components of the signaling pathway (e.g. RTK, COT kinase), through
the heterodimerisation of BRAFV600E with CRAF, or by acquiring mutations in MEK. Panel B2.3: HSP90i treatment can overcome
acquired resistance to Vem or the MEK inhibitor selumetinib (Sel) by disrupting multiple resistance mechanisms. Co-administration of an
HSP90 inhibitor may be of benefit because of: 1) an additional effect on the target of the anti-estrogen or kinase inhibitor (ie. ER or BRAF);
2) an effect on alternative oncogenic targets or pathways which would otherwise lead to resistance; or 3) beneficial effects on the tumor
microenvironment. Integrative molecular analysis, particularly detailed genomic sequencing and protein biomarker profiling before, during
and after treatment, is needed to establish the molecular mechanisms involved. Future combination treatments may also feature immune
therapy.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST

lifetime. Annu Rev Genet. 2014; 48: 215-236.
3. 	 Al-Lazikani B, Banerji U, Workman P. Combinatorial drug
therapy for cancer in the post-genomic era. Nat Biotechnol.
2012; 30: 679-692.

Paul Workman and The Institute of Cancer Research
have a commercial interest in HSP90 inhibitors. Paul
Workman is an advisor to Vernalis, Astex Therapeutics,
Nuevolution and Chroma Therapeutics.

4.	

5.	 Neckers L and Workman P. Hsp90 molecular chaperone
inhibitors: are we there yet? Clin Cancer Res. 2012; 18: 6476.

REFERENCES
1.	 Greaves M and Maley CC. Clonal evolution in cancer.
Nature. 2012; 481: 306–313.

6. 	 Whitesell L, Santagata S, Mendillo ML, Lin NU, Proia DA,
Lindquist S. HSP90 empowers evolution of resistance to
hormonal therapy in human breast cancer models. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA. 2014; 111: 18297-18302.

2.	 Gerlinger M, McGranahan N, Dewhurst SM, Burrell
RA, Tomlinson I, Swanton C. Cancer: evolution within a
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Nowell PC. The clonal evolution of tumor cell populations.
Science. 1976; 194: 23-28.

3660

Oncotarget

7.	 Smyth T, Paraiso KH, Hearn K, Rodriguez-Lopez AM,
Munck JM, Haarberg HE, Sondak VK, Thompson NT,
Azab M, Lyons JF, Smalley KS, Wallis NG. Inhibition of
HSP90 by AT13387 delays the emergence of resistance to
BRAF inhibitors and overcomes resistance to dual BRAF
and MEK inhibition in melanoma models. Mol Cancer
Ther. 2014; 13: 2793-804.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

3661

Oncotarget

