Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No. 23

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Editorial

Doxycycline: new tricks for an old drug
David A. Barbie and Brian K. Kennedy
Since their original discovery in 1948, tetracycline
antibiotics have had a major impact on human health
and molecular biology [1]. Beyond their efficacy against
a variety of infectious diseases, insights into resistance
and discovery of the tetracycline repressor system has
yielded an invaluable tool for the inducible control of
gene expression. Though originally characterized as
selective inhibitors of the bacterial 30S ribosomal subunit
[2], tetracyclines appear also to have alternate molecular
targets in human tissues and are effective in treating
certain skin disorders such as acne and rosacea, which
extends beyond a direct antimicrobial effect [3]. Three
separate recently published reports characterize “these
off-target” activities in detail, suggesting that doxycycline
might be repurposed as an anti-cancer therapeutic.
Pulvino et al. utilized the Connectivity Map [4] to
search for compounds that reversed an NF-κB signature
in HL60 cells, identifying multiple tetracycline family
members, including doxycycline [5]. Consistent with
this observation, when they treated several different
diffuse large B cell lymphoma (DLBCL) cell lines with
doxycycline, the authors observed inhibition of NF-κB
signaling coupled to decreased cell proliferation and
survival. Doxycycline also perturbed STAT3 and ERK
activation and reduced the levels of multiple different
HSP90 client proteins in these cells, leading the authors
to explore its effects on HSP90 activity. Interestingly,
doxycycline treatment increased HSP90 ubiquitination and
degradation, and more generally increased proteasomedependent protein neddylation. Through a series of elegant
studies, they then determined that these effects were
mediated through direct inhibition of the JAMM family
metalloproteinase CSN5. Notably, doxycycline was also
effective at inhibiting the growth of DLBCL xenografts at
physiologically achievable doses, which has prompted the
translation of these findings into a clinical trial of single
agent doxycycline in relapsed/refractory non-Hodgkins
lymphoma patients.
Two other studies characterize a distinct but related
role for doxycycline in inhibiting MCF7 breast cancer
cell mammosphere formation [6, 7]. De Luca et al.
determined that MCF7 mammospheres are particularly
sensitive to perturbation of mitochondrial function [7].
Consistent with this observation, over-expression of the
transcription factor FOXM1, which promotes stem-like
phenotypes, increased mammosphere formation together
with upregulation of multiple mitochondrial proteins.
Since recent work from this group also demonstrated
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

that doxycycline could suppress tumor-sphere formation
by targeting mitochondrial ribosomes, they tested the
capacity of doxycycline to reverse FOXM1 driven
spherogenesis. Doxycycline indeed prevented the
capacity of FOXM1 to promote mammospheres, albeit at
very high concentrations. Lamb et al. further determined
that doxycycline treatment can inhibit mammosphere
formation in primary breast cancer samples, and performed
proteomics analysis of MCF7 cells to determine putative
doxycycline targets. They noted marked downregulation
of DNA-PK by doxycycline treatment, and determined
that shRNA-mediated DNA-PK suppression or direct
pharmacologic inhibition phenocopied doxycycline,
disrupting MCF7 mammosphere formation. Since DNAPK is involved in radio-resistance, they also evaluated
whether doxycycline treatment could synergize with
radiation to inhibit MCF7 mammospheres, and observed
sensitivity of this subpopulation relative to cells in a
monolayer. Finally and similar to Pulvino et al. [5], using
a series of reporters, Lamb et al. found that doxycycline
treatment of MCF7 cells impairs multiple other signaling
pathways, including STAT3 and NRF1/2 [6].
Taken together, these studies suggest that
doxycycline, a drug that has been utilized for over 50
years as an antimicrobial agent and more recently in
dermatological conditions, could also have efficacy in
certain cancers. Despite this promise, several barriers
remain to effective translation of these findings to the
clinic. First, while Pulvino et al. carefully determined that
the doxycycline concentrations used in their experiments
match clinical exposure [5], this was not fully explored in
the breast cancer studies [5, 7]. Second, a discrete readout
of effective target inhibition by doxycycline in human
tumors will be necessary to understand whether the doses
utilized in clinical trials are indeed high enough to yield

Figure 1: Novel cellular activities for doxycycline
relevant to cancer treatment strategies.
19336

Oncotarget

prolonged suppression of the tumorigenic pathways. For
example, despite equally strong evidence of antitumor
efficacy of the antimalarial drug hydroxychloroquine
in preclinical studies, treatment of pancreatic
adenocarcinoma patients was ineffective and associated
with inconsistent autophagy inhibition in peripheral blood
cells [8]. Perhaps most importantly, single agent therapy,
especially in relapsed aggressive cancers, is less likely
to be effective even with proven target inhibition. Thus,
negative findings in the lymphoma study, for example,
do not necessarily invalidate doxycycline as a useful
agent, but may suggest the need to develop combinatorial
approaches with more targeted BTK inhibitors, for
example. Finally, the characterization of CSN5 and
DNA-PK as putative doxycycline targets that mediate its
anticancer activities supports the development of more
potent and selective inhibitors of these enzymes, which,
depending on their therapeutic window, could have an
even greater impact for cancer patients.
David A. Barbie: Department of Medical Oncology, DanaFarber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical School, Boston;
and Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA,
USA
Correspondence to: David A. Barbie, email DBARBIE@PARTNERS.ORG
Received:July 26, 2015
Published: August 06, 2015

REFERENCES
1.	 Nelson ML and Levy SB. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2011;
1241:17-32.
2.	 Connamacher RH and Mandel HG. Biochem Biophys Res
Commun. 1965; 20:98-103.
3.	

Alikhan A, et al. Am J Clin Dermatol. 2010; 11:79-87.

4.	

Lamb J, et al. Science. 2006; 313:1929-1935.

5.	

Pulvino M, et al. Oncotarget. 2015; 6:14796-14813.

6.	

De Luca A, et al. Oncotarget. 2015; 6:14777-14795.

7.	

Lamb R, et al. Oncotarget. 2015; 6:14005-14025.

8.	

Wolpin BM, et al. Oncologist. 2014; 19:637-638.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

19337

Oncotarget

