Research Article

Quantitative Spatiotemporal Analysis of Antibody Fragment
Diffusion and Endocytic Consumption in Tumor Spheroids
1

1,2

Greg M. Thurber and K. Dane Wittrup

Departments of 1Chemical Engineering and 2Biological Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts

Abstract
Antibody-based cancer treatment depends upon distribution
of the targeting macromolecule throughout tumor tissue, and
spatial heterogeneity could significantly limit efficacy in many
cases. Antibody distribution in tumor tissue is a function of
drug dosage, antigen concentration, binding affinity, antigen
internalization, drug extravasation from blood vessels, diffusion in the tumor extracellular matrix, and systemic clearance
rates. We have isolated the effects of a subset of these variables by live-cell microscopic imaging of single-chain antibody
fragments against carcinoembryonic antigen in LS174T tumor
spheroids. The measured rates of scFv penetration and
retention were compared with theoretical predictions based
on simple scaling criteria. The theory predicts that antibody
dose must be large enough to drive a sufficient diffusive flux
of antibody to overcome cellular internalization, and exposure time must be long enough to allow penetration to the
spheroid center. The experimental results in spheroids are
quantitatively consistent with these predictions. Therefore,
simple scaling criteria can be applied to accurately predict
antibody and antibody fragment penetration distance in
tumor tissue. [Cancer Res 2008;68(9):3334–41]

Introduction
Antibodies are being applied for specific tumor targeting of a
variety of treatment modalities (Fc effector functions, signaling
disruption, toxins, radiation, etc.). Despite their promise, a variety
of problems have hampered antibody development for the
treatment of solid tumors. Of the antibody treatments currently
on the market, the majority are for leukemias and lymphomas
despite the higher prevalence of solid tumors. There are a variety of
reasons for this discrepancy, such as sensitivity of leukemias and
lymphomas to treatment (e.g., radiation) and accessibility to
secondary mediators (e.g., complement and effector cells). Inefficient transport of the antibody from the site of administration
(typically the plasma after i.v. injection) to the site of action in
the tumor precludes these molecules from binding and treating
many cancerous cells (1). This deficiency includes both total
uptake within a tumor as well as the distribution of the antibody
once it reaches the diseased tissue. A variety of factors contribute
to this problem. High cell and extracellular matrix density and
high vascular fluid permeability paired with decreased functional
lymphatics cause an increase in interstitial pressure (2). This results

Note: Supplementary data for this article are available at Cancer Research Online
(http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/).
Requests for reprints: K. Dane Wittrup, Department of Biological Engineering,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139. Phone: 617-253-4578;
E-mail: Wittrup@mit.edu.
I2008 American Association for Cancer Research.
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-07-3018

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (9). May 1, 2008

in negligible fluid flow (convection) within the interstitium of
most solid tumors, leaving diffusion as the major method of
transport (3). In contrast, convection is the dominant mode of
macromolecular transport in healthy tissue (4). Poor extravasation
from the lack of convection and low vascular density in tumors keep
the supply of antibody low relative to other tissues. Once extravasated, additional hurdles to antibody movement through the tumor
include internalization, slow diffusion, poor retention, and systemic
clearance, which all keep the total antibody exposure low (5).
A clear example of poor transport comes from radioimmunotherapy studies. The mechanism of cell killing from radiation is
well-understood, and given a sufficient dose of radiation, the tumor
cells will be killed. However, due to slow uptake, the exposure of the
tumor is not greatly increased over normal tissue (even in some
xenograft systems where normal tissues completely lack antigen;
ref. 6). Given that the ideal therapeutic outcome would be tumor
doses large enough to kill the most resistant cancer cells while sparing the most sensitive healthy tissue (typically bone marrow),
demands on uptake are fairly stringent and apparently difficult to
achieve. If the cell killing mechanism cannot destroy tumor cells faster
than division can replace them, the tumor will continue to grow.
Previous modeling efforts have considered the distribution of
antibodies in tumor tissue. Numerical simulations of the microdistribution around vessels (7) and physiologically based pharmacokinetic models indicate that binding increases the heterogeneity
of antibody distribution and uptake in tumors is slow relative to
other tissues (8). By analyzing the rate determining steps in uptake
and distribution, simple criteria can be derived to quantitatively
describe the distribution of antibodies within tumor tissue (5).
These criteria are based on independently measured variables
determined previously or straightforwardly obtainable from cell
culture experiments, increasing their predictive power. Without
fitting any variables to tumor uptake data, these predictions are not
restricted to the systems used for data fitting. The simplicity of
these criteria also makes trends, trade-offs, and predictions more
intuitively accessible than for many numerical simulation exercises.
A simplified model of uptake indicates that high-affinity
antibodies bind much faster than they diffuse (9). Thus, antigen
is saturated cell layer after layer as the antibody diffuses into a
spheroid or out of a capillary (5). After the antibody has
substantially cleared from the system, the antibody front seems
‘‘frozen’’ in position either near the capillary wall or surface of the
spheroid. Likewise, if internalization of the antigen occurs at a fast
enough rate, the antibody diffusing into the tumor tissue degrades
before reaching deeper into the tumor, and again, the antibody
front seems ‘‘frozen’’ in place. Theoretical models predict the
existence of such a dynamic steady-state balance between antibody
penetration and degradation (5, 9).
In this work, we examine the diffusion, binding, and distribution of antibody single chain variable fragments (scFv) against
carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) in tumor spheroids. The behavior
of full IgG antibodies compared with scFvs is quantitatively

3334

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Antibody Fragment Distribution in Spheroids

different (due to differences in the diffusion coefficient, void fraction,
and bivalent binding), and these differences are captured in the
theoretical model. Qualitatively, these molecules transport in a
similar fashion, allowing model predictions for antibodies, antibody
fragments, and other binding macromolecules. Model variables for
scFvs were measured independently in separate experiments and
used to predict the distribution in tumor spheroids. Penetration
experiments were carried out in LS174T colon cancer tumor spheroids, compared with model predictions, and found to be in excellent
quantitative agreement. This provides experimental validation for
the previously described tumor penetration criteria, which will
enable simplified and more general consideration of the process
of antibody and antibody fragment distribution in tumor tissue.

Materials and Methods
Variables for the model were measured independently to make accurate
predictions of spheroid penetration. All experiments were carried out at
37jC using a tissue culture incubator or heated microscope stage unless
otherwise indicated. The number of antigens per cell was measured using
an Alexa 488–labeled (Invitrogen) anti-CEA antibody M111147 (Fitzgerald
Industries). LS174T cells (American Type Culture Collection) were labeled
along with Quantum Simply Cellular beads (Bangs Laboratories) according
to the manufacturer’s instructions. Flow cytometry was done on a Coulter
EPICS XL flow cytometer. Cell density was determined by counting
Hoechst33342-stained nuclei (Invitrogen) in a known volume of tissue
under the microscope. Combined with antigens per cell, this gives the
overall concentration of antigen in the tumor (Ag ). To assess void fraction
(q), an irrelevant nonbinding scFv (4M5.3 that binds fluorescein) was
fluorescently labeled and allowed to diffuse into a spheroid. Using a twophoton microscope, the fluorescent intensity inside the spheroid was
compared with the fluorescent intensity outside the spheroid. Assuming the
accessible volume outside the spheroid is 100%, the effective void fraction
inside the spheroid could be found by a simple ratio. The scFvs were
secreted from yeast and purified by metal affinity and size exclusion
chromatography as described previously (10). Reducing and nonreducing
SDS-PAGE showed a single, monovalent band of the expected molecular
weight. Competitive binding to the surface of LS174T cells was used to
verify the affinity and specificity of binding to CEA. After fluorophore
conjugation and dialysis, TLC was used to verify the absence of free
fluorophore (data not shown). The scFv concentrations were measured by
absorption 280 ([Ab]surf ). The diffusion coefficient (D) was measured by
diffusion of a nonbinding irrelevant scFv. Details can be found in the
Supplementary Data, but briefly, fluorescent scFv was added to a spheroid
at time zero and a series of confocal images were taken over time. The
fluorescence intensity within the spheroid was averaged over the radius and
adjusted for the total volumetric fluorescence intensity. Because diffusion is
the only method of transport in these spheroids, the signal was normalized
to long times and the diffusion coefficient was fit according to the series
solution of diffusion in a sphere assuming Fick’s law (11). This method not
only accounts for slower diffusion due to extracellular matrix but also the
constricted and tortuous path between cells. The internalization rate for
CEA binders (k e) was calculated in a separate article,3 and the radius of the
spheroids (R) was measured from the microscopic image.
Spheroids were grown by the hanging drop method (12) using microwell
trays (Nunc). Briefly, 500 cells per well of LS174T cells were incubated upside
down at 37jC and 5% CO2 for 2 d to allow cohesion between cells. They
were then transferred to Lab-Tek dishes (Nunc) for 2 d to allow attachment
to the cover glass. Fluorescent scFv was added to the wells for a given time
before or during imaging. Details of the spheroid data analysis can be found
in the Supplementary Data. Briefly, scFvs (sm3E with a K d of 30 pmol/L;

3
M.M. Schmidt, G.M. Thurber, and K.D. Wittrup. Kinetics of Anti-Carcinoembryonic
Antigen (CEA) Antibody Internalization: Effects of Affinity Bivalency, and Stability.
Cancer Immun Immunother, submitted for publication.

www.aacrjournals.org

shMFE, K d = 8 nmol/L; ref. 10) were incubated with spheroids for a given
period of time. Images were taken on a Zeiss confocal microscope (Zeiss) or
Zeiss microscope with Spectra-Physics Ti-Sa laser for the two-photon
imaging. The confocal and two-photon imaging allowed all images (except
Fig. 5) to be taken in the presence of antibody in the bulk solution, yielding
uninterrupted sequential images. The data from high-affinity antibody
fragments were analyzed by despeckling the image and creating a binary
threshold just above background and autofluorescence. The purpose was
to select only those pixels where binding increased the fluorescence above
background. A series of dilations (and equal number of erosions) was used to
fill in small holes in the ring-shaped masks. The outer and inner areas of the
ring structure were measured (yielding the total spheroid and untargeted core areas), and the spheroid radius and radius of scFv penetration were
then calculated assuming sphericity (area averaged). Green fluorescent beads
(Duke Scientific) were added to the wells to serve as internal controls.
Although they had no direct effect on analysis of the data, consistent
fluorescence intensity of these beads verified exposure conditions were
constant across all experiments. All image analysis was done in ImageJ (NIH).
For the IHC images, spheroids were grown in a similar manner, except
they were not allowed to adhere to the cover glass. Antibody fragment
incubations were done in the hanging drop. The spheroids were then fixed
and processed in MIT’s Center for Cancer Research Histology facility. Details
for labeling can be found in the Supplementary Data, but briefly, the slides
were deparafinized, boiled in citric acid, serum blocked, and labeled with a
noncompeting fluorescent antibody to mark antigen. Images were taken
on a Deltavision deconvolution fluorescence microscope (Applied Precision).

Results
Diffusion and binding of fluorescently tagged scFv molecules in
tumor spheroids was monitored using confocal or multiphoton
fluorescence microscopy, and the distance of penetration of these
molecules was then compared with theoretical predictions. The
scaling criteria used for these predictions consist of two moduli,
which are ratios of variables that capture fundamental rates
(clearance, diffusion, internalization, etc.) that determine antibody
and antibody fragment distribution. To make accurate predictions
of antibody penetration with the clearance modulus and Thiele
modulus criteria (5), all the pertinent variables were measured
independently in these LS174T spheroids. The individual variables,
as outlined in Materials and Methods, were determined experimentally and are presented in Fig. 1. Cell density is in line with
previous estimates in other systems (13, 14), although it may be
slightly higher in these spheroids than in solid tumors due to high
viability and lack of other cell types. Antigen density is also in
agreement with reported values (15), although variability on
individual cells is high. The void fraction is slightly lower than
previous estimates for scFv (16), likely due to the high cell density.
The diffusion coefficient is lower than previously published values
(9), and this value is averaged over the entire spheroid, which
incorporates the effects of extracellular matrix, tortuosity, and
constriction between cells.
Live-cell imaging of fluorescently labeled scFvs allowed the
collection of dynamic diffusion and binding data. These spheroids
are highly scattering, so even two-photon microscopy was not able
to image in the center of the spheroids without geometric artifacts
and low signal to noise. To circumvent this problem, the spheroids
were first allowed to attach to coverslips. After sufficient time
for attachment, diffusion of scFvs between the coverslip and the
spheroid is negligible, as seen previously (17). This results in a
‘‘physical slice’’ (the coverslip) through the spheroid (Fig. 1). The
optical slicing ability of the two-photon microscope was used
to image deeper into the spheroid to verify that scFv was not
diffusing more rapidly near the coverslip.

3335

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (9). May 1, 2008

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

Figure 1. Experimental imaging setup and measured
variable values. Spheroids were allowed to attach to the
cover glass and form a hemisphere shape. All the variable
values were measured separately to give an independent
theoretical prediction for scFv distribution.

Antibody penetration into tumor tissue in vivo is predicted to be
a function of exposure time and concentration, or the area under
the curve (AUC; refs. 5, 9). In this in vitro system, there is no
clearance of the antibody fragment, so the concentration is
constant over time. The AUC in this spheroid system is just the
concentration outside the spheroid multiplied by the incubation
time. In other words, spheroids need to be incubated for a sufficient period of time for the antibody to reach the center, and this
time is a function of spheroid size, diffusion coefficient, antigen,
and antibody concentrations. In the absence of antibody metabolism, this penetration time is predicted to be (9):
tsat ¼

R2 ð½Ag=eÞ
6D½Absurf

Figure 2 shows experimental images of dynamic penetration of
scFv into a spheroid. Using 100 nmol/L concentration of sm3E, the
antibody fragment saturated the spheroid after 95 minutes of
incubation (predicted time from the above formula is 57 minutes).
This is in contrast to a nonbinding scFv (4M5.3) that reaches 90%
of total signal in 3 minutes due to lack of binding (Supplementary
Data) or lower concentrations of sm3E that do not penetrate after
48 hours (and are theoretically predicted to never reach the center
because endocytic consumption exceeds diffusive flux). With such
rapid penetration, antibody internalization (f15-hour half-life) has
a negligible effect on the saturation time. Although saturation is
predicted to occur faster than measured in the experiment,
much of this may be due to nonspecific sticking of the antibody
fragment. At concentrations above f20 nmol/L, scFv begins to
adhere to the surface of cells (data not shown), requiring more
scFv to diffuse into the spheroid to specifically bind the antigen.
Looking at the above saturation time predicted by the
clearance modulus, low doses of sm3E will reach every cell given
sufficient exposure time. However, the Thiele modulus predicts
that there is a threshold dose required to overcome internalization
and metabolism of surface-bound antibody fragment to saturate all
cells at steady state. Spheroids were incubated at low doses of
sm3E for long periods of time (48 hours), and the radius of antigen
saturation was measured. The experimental threshold dose
required for saturation closely matches the theoretical prediction
(Fig. 3, left). In all cases, the scFv was in excess at least 10-fold over
antigen to avoid depletion in the bulk solution.
To further show that the lack of penetration is due to the slow
internalization and degradation of scFv bound to antigen,
spheroids were incubated at room temperature for 48 hours at
equivalent concentrations. Internalization is significantly diminished at room temperature (data not shown), and antibody is able
to reach the center (Fig. 3, right). In the absence of internalization,

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (9). May 1, 2008

a reduction in temperature would actually be expected to decrease
the penetration distance by somewhat reducing the diffusion coefficient (18).
Low affinity antibody fragments are predicted to have more
homogenous distribution in tumor tissue (19), and this has been
verified experimentally (20). To examine this effect in the spheroid
system, a lower affinity variant of the sm3E scFv was used. This
scFv, shMFE, has a dissociation constant of 8 nmol/L versus the
30 pmol/L dissociation constant of sm3E. There are only two
amino acid changes between these scFvs, so affinity is the primary
difference (10). As shown in Fig. 4, the ‘‘low’’ affinity shMFE has a
much more homogenous distribution in the spheroid compared
with the bottom panel, which shows the heterogeneous distribution of the high-affinity scFv. However, also note that the
concentrations for shMFE are much higher than for sm3E to bind
a significant fraction of antigen. At the highest shMFE concentration (100 nmol/L), the free scFv in the bulk is approaching the
antigen concentration in the spheroid (500 nmol/L). This distribution is in agreement with numerical simulations of antibody and
antibody fragment penetration (Fig. 4, right).
Although numerical simulations are useful, scaling analyses can
also be used to determine the affinity necessary for a more homogenous distribution. If [Ab]surf is replaced with K d in the clearance
or Thiele modulus terms, this scaling variable determines whether
antibody will reach a given radius (21). Note that for low affinity
antibody fragments, this does not mean antigen is saturated to this
radius. It only means that by repetitive binding, dissociation, and
diffusion, some scFv was able to reach the given radius.
/2 ¼

ke R2 ð½Ag=eÞ
DðKd þ ½Absurf Þ

tcenter ¼

R2 ð½Ag=eÞ
DðKd þ ½Absurf Þ

As affinity increases from that of shMFE to sm3E, the model
predicts that the distribution will become increasingly heterogeneous as more scFv is bound at the higher affinities.
Due to the fact that a higher proportion of low affinity scFvs are
not bound, they may not be adequately retained after the free
antibody fragment is removed from the surface of the spheroid.
The persistence of scFv in the spheroid after free scFv was removed
from the bulk was directly tested in the spheroids. Spheroids were
incubated with 20 nmol/L sm3E or shMFE for 2.5 hours to quickly
bind antigen. The dose was kept low to minimize nonspecific
sticking, and the time was short to minimize internalization during
the binding phase, although this results in incomplete saturation.
After this brief incubation, the medium was exchanged to remove
free antibody fragment, and the spheroids were incubated for 48
hours. Figure 5 shows the images after this ‘‘wash out’’ period. The
high-affinity sm3E has a much stronger signal after 48 hours. The

3336

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Antibody Fragment Distribution in Spheroids

Figure 2. Live sm3E diffusion with binding in
spheroids. Top, radius of the moving scFv front
as a function of time (.). Black line, theoretical
prediction; gray shaded area, FSD from the
theoretical prediction due to error in the
experimentally measured variables. Bottom,
differential interference contrast (DIC ) image and
three fluorescence images at various time points.
The high background is due to the 100 nmol/L
fluorescent scFv present in the bulk solution.
Scale bar, 200 Am.

Alexa 488 dye used in these studies remains inside the cells for an
extended period of time after internalization (data not shown).
Therefore, much of the signal that is seen may be from internalized
antibody for both sm3E and shMFE. Numerical simulations provide further insights into this experiment. The high-affinity sm3E

remains bound such that very little diffuses out of the spheroid,
and the total signal is high. After 2 days, the antigen turn-over
(15-hour half-life) has internalized a significant fraction of antibody
fragment, but 15% still remains on the surface. The results are
much different for the low affinity scFv. The rapid release and low

Figure 3. Steady-state spheroid depth of
saturation. Left, the saturated fraction of
the radius [(R tumor  r antibody front)/R tumor]
is plotted as a function of the Thiele
modulus. o, measured values for individual
spheroids; black line, theoretical prediction.
Gray shaded area, FSD from the theory
due to uncertainty in the experimentally
measured variables. Complete saturation
occurs at a B2 of 6 because the geometric
shape factor of 6 (for spheres) that
arises in the exact solution is not included
in the Thiele modulus. Right, images of
two spheroids incubated at different
temperatures are shown. Antibody
fragment reaches the center at room
temperature when internalization is
reduced. Dark circles surrounding the
spheroids, green fluorescent beads serving
as internal controls. Scale bar, 200 Am.

www.aacrjournals.org

3337

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (9). May 1, 2008

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

Figure 4. Low-affinity versus high-affinity distribution. Top, images of spheroids exposed to various concentrations of shMFE for 19 h are shown alongside the
model predictions from numerical simulations (right ). The high background is caused by fluorescent scFv in the bulk solution. Bottom, spheroids were incubated
with different concentrations of sm3E for 48 h. Notice the concentrations are much lower for the high-affinity scFv. Numerical simulation predictions are shown on the
right. All images are adjusted to the same level of contrast. Scale bar, 200 Am.

fraction of bound scFv allows more homogenous penetration, but
it also allows the antibody fragment to diffuse out of the spheroid.
After 48 hours, much of the total signal is gone. The signal that
does remain has all been internalized, and <0.5% of the antigen is
predicted to be bound on the surface.
To validate the microscope-imaging techniques used, spheroids
were grown continually in a hanging drop without attachment
to plates. They were incubated with sm3E, fixed, and analyzed
by immunohistochemistry (IHC). In this setup, antigen could be
labeled independently using a noncompeting IgG in addition to
the fluorescent scFv to look at colocalization. Figure 6 (top) shows
sm3E, antigen, and merged images at three different concentra-

tions. Looking at the scFv fluorescence, the two highest concentrations have a B2 of <6 and are predicted to be saturated, in agreement with the images. The lowest concentration has peripheral
fluorescence indicative of the lack of penetration to the center of
the spheroid. The heterogeneity of antigen on individual cells seen
in flow cytometry is clearly apparent in the antigen density.
To quantitatively examine colocalization between antibody fragment and antigen, dot plots were created to evaluate the Pearson
correlation coefficient. In this way, absolute intensity of either channel
(microscope settings, differences in tags, etc.) does not influence
the results. A major increase in the Pearson correlation coefficient
occurs once the spheroid is saturated. Some correlation is expected

Figure 5. Retention of antibody fragment. Spheroids were
incubated at 20 nmol/L concentration for 2.5 h, free scFv
was removed, and they were incubated for 48 h in plain
medium. Top, images were taken of two spheroids after
the 48-h ‘‘washout’’ period. Bottom, results of a numerical
simulation where the spheroids were initially at equilibrium
with 20 nmol/L scFv then moved to scFv free medium for
48 h. Scale bar, 200 Am.

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (9). May 1, 2008

3338

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Antibody Fragment Distribution in Spheroids

Figure 6. IHC analysis of antibody fragment penetration.
Top, spheroids were incubated in suspension with three
different concentrations of green fluorescent sm3E scFv for
48 h. The spheroids were then processed for IHC and
labeled with a noncompeting anti-CEA antibody (blue
fluorescence ). The two highest concentrations have
a B2 of <6 and are predicted to be saturated. Bottom,
Pearson correlation coefficients were calculated for the
fluorescence intensity of sm3E and antigen. Pixels with
no fluorescence in either channel (background) were
excluded from the analysis. Scatter plots of the fluorescent
pixels are shown for all three images. Scale bar, 100 Am.

for the unsaturated spheroid, as there should be colocalization
near the surface in the region where scFv is able to penetrate.

Discussion
The tumor spheroid model system for measuring scFv
penetration provides valuable insights into key aspects of antibody
tumor targeting. Antibody distribution is dependent on a variety of
variables, and penetration to the center of a spheroid is not simply
a binary result. The dose, antigen density, spheroid size, incubation
time, and all the other variables present in the clearance and Thiele
moduli affect the results. The spheroids used here most closely
resemble prevascular micrometastases in normal tissue. Other
physiologic barriers, such as lowered concentrations in normal
tissue and inefficient extravasation across tumor capillaries, are not
reproduced in the spheroid model system. Therefore the in vitro
results are not intended to directly mimic the in vivo results.
Nevertheless, the fundamental processes of diffusion, binding, and
endocytosis that determine distribution in spheroids are expected
to closely replicate those acting in vivo.
The distribution of scFvs in these spheroids lacks a major barrier
to penetration in solid tumors, namely the capillary wall. Due to
elevated interstitial pressure, convection in the tumor is negligible,
and the dominate mode of transport is diffusion (3), similar to the
spheroids. Therefore, although the supply of antibodies is severely
limited compared with these spheroids (and therefore the effective
concentrations are very low), the distribution is expected to follow
the same principles. Poor extravasation of macromolecules in
tumors (22) results in concentrations outside the tumor capillary
that can be 100- to 1,000-fold below that found in the plasma (21).
The modeling results can then be modified to account for these
additional complications present in vascularized tumors in vivo.

www.aacrjournals.org

Because the transport barriers in the spheroid system also exist
in vivo, it is a necessary condition that a spheroid be saturated for
the corresponding tumor to be saturated. Spheroid saturation is
not sufficient to predict in vivo saturation because additional
barriers exist (e.g., capillary extravasation and systemic clearance.)
Modeling for the case of solid tumors compared with spheroids
and metastases has been carried out previously and shown to agree
with published data (5).
These experiments have shown that two simple model scaling
criteria can predict the distribution of antibody fragments in
spheroids. The clearance modulus, which predicts the exposure
time required to saturate spheroids, and the Thiele modulus, which
predicts the concentration required to overcome internalization to
reach the center of a spheroid, are criteria that quantitatively
capture the major determinants in antibody distribution.
Experiments with high-affinity scFvs show steep gradients as the
‘‘core’’ of unbound antigen ‘‘shrinks’’ when antibody binds the outer
layers of cells. These high-affinity antibodies bind at saturating
concentrations ‘‘from the outside in’’ (Fig. 4, bottom). Most IgG
molecules travel through tumor tissue in this ‘‘shrinking core’’
fashion (saturating cell layer after cell layer) due to their rapid
binding to free antigen, slow diffusion coefficients (9), and slow
dissociation caused by multivalent interactions. They are often
internalized before they have a chance to dissociate and diffuse
farther into the tissue (23), resulting in shrinking core penetration
with effectively irreversible binding. However, with newer protein
engineering techniques (scFvs, Fabs, single domain antibodies, and
alternative protein scaffolds), these new proteins, which are often
smaller and monovalent, can exhibit ‘‘nonshrinking core’’ transport
in tumor tissue.
Lower affinity scFvs display a more diffuse gradient, yielding
more homogenous labeling of the spheroids with lower amounts of

3339

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (9). May 1, 2008

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

bound antibody; they bind antigen at subsaturating concentrations
‘‘from the bottom up’’ (Fig. 4, top). If a significant fraction of
antigen must be bound for the desired effect, however, much higher
concentrations have to be used with the lower affinity fragments.
As mentioned previously, antibody and antibody fragment concentrations in solid tumors are often very low in vivo. The rapid
dissociation and high fraction of unbound scFv allows the lower
affinity monovalent scFv to penetrate more homogenously (21).
Increasing the valency would hinder complete dissociation and
result in distributions similar to higher affinity binders. Unfortunately, it is the same ability to rapidly dissociate that allows scFv to
diffuse back out of the tissue once the surrounding concentration
has dropped.
The poor retention of lower affinity binders has implications for
both imaging and pretargeting therapies. As systemic antibody is
cleared from the circulation, the total signal of low-affinity
antibodies will be reduced in the tumor tissue. Even if a residualizing radioisotope is used for imaging, much of this is lost due
to diffusion out of the tissue before it can be internalized during
the waiting period while clearance is reducing background levels.
For pretargeting techniques, a waiting period is again required for
normal tissue levels to drop. The surface concentration is the
variable of interest because this is the only antibody accessible to
secondary agents. In the retention experiment, diffusion out of the
spheroid occurred much more rapidly for the low affinity scFv,
resulting in higher surface concentrations for the sm3E antibody
than shMFE.
Although antibody fragments rapidly diffuse in and out of
spheroids, similar to a micrometastasis, the retention in solid
tumors is predicted to be very different. Because the capillary wall
is a significant barrier to extravasation, once the antibody has
reached the tumor tissue, it is very slow to intravasate back into
the blood. Thus, for large molecules, this enhanced permeability
and retention (‘‘EPR’’) effect occurs relatively independent of
affinity. For smaller molecules with higher permeabilities, binding
is predicted to be more important in preventing loss from the
tumor due to a lower EPR effect.
Antigen labeling in the IHC experiment shows extensive CEA
heterogeneity in the spheroids, as was seen on a per-cell basis in
the flow cytometry experiments, and this is an important point for
therapy. Looking at the merged images, the lowest concentration
spheroid clearly has antigen in the center that has not been
reached by sm3E. At the highest concentration, virtually every area
of high antigen concentration has correspondingly high scFv concentrations, indicative of saturation. The middle concentration is
more interesting. With this size spheroid, a 3 nmol/L concentration
of scFv is predicted to penetrate to the center, and there is sm3E in
the center as seen in the green channel. However, there is also a
region in the bottom left side with very high antigen concentration that is not completely saturated by scFv. The local increase in
antigen concentration (and possibly decrease in void fraction,
diffusion coefficient, etc.) has apparently prevented saturation of
this region. The live-cell imaging experiments would not have
picked up on the high local antigen density because they only
analyze the antibody fragment fluorescence signal. These IHC
experiments better capture the local heterogeneities found in solid
tumors and metastases. In the live-cell experiments, however, the
relationship between dose and penetration distance is more clearly
established despite the complicating factor of antigen heterogeneity. This antigen heterogeneity can result in antibody heterogeneity
even after full antigen saturation.

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (9). May 1, 2008

A small number of fundamental processes dictate the distribution of antibodies and antibody fragments in tumor tissue, and the
scaling criteria (Thiele and clearance moduli) capture these rates to
better understand and predict penetration. The moduli simply
relate the supply and demand of free antibody. As a bolus dose
clears the plasma and normal tissues, the supply of antibody
entering the tumor tissue continually shrinks, and the demand for
antibody remains high as more layers of cells are bound. The
clearance modulus captures this ratio and predicts the penetration
distance before clearance. Similarly, even with a steady supply
entering from the circulation, demand for antibody to replace
molecules that were internalized or degraded may immobilize all
the free antibody before it can reach every cell. This is in effect the
distance that the Thiele modulus predicts.
The implications of these experiments and scaling criteria
lend insight into optimizing antibody and antibody fragment
imaging and therapy experiments. To target all cells with a highaffinity binder, the dose must exceed the limitations posed by
clearance and internalization as given in the scaling criteria.
Decreasing the clearance rate far below the antigen turn-over
rate will not increase penetration into the tissue, as antibody
metabolism becomes rate limiting. Lower affinity binders result
in a more homogenous distribution when the K d is large
enough to reduce the scaling moduli below one. Unfortunately, the total amount entering the tumor is still small, and
the fraction that is bound is even less. For prevascular metastases
and proteins with high permeability, retention of these antibodies will also be poor. For imaging experiments, penetration of
antibodies and fragments (and the associated signal) is directly
proportional to the AUC. Increasing clearance rates reduces
background noise, but it also decreases signal. A more optimal
plasma profile would have an extended period of high concentration for tumor uptake followed by rapid clearance, advocating
the use of clearing agents. A similar strategy would benefit pretargeting methods.
Understanding the major determinants for antibody and
antibody fragment uptake, distribution, and retention in tumors
and micrometastases can point to ways of improving and
optimizing therapies. The requirements of bound antibody, total
antibody uptake, and retention required for successful imaging and
therapeutic modalities can be compared with the actual values
attainable as predicted by the model based on all the relevant
variables: dose, clearance, internalization, extravasation, diffusion,
antigen density, and tumor vascular density. The choice of antigen
target, antibody fragment size, and other protein engineering
decisions can be made rationally to optimize the desired
therapeutic or imaging result. Improvements in protein engineering, imaging sensitivity and resolution, toxin conjugates, Fc effector
functions, signal blockade, and other areas relevant to antibody
targeting will further push developments in antibody-based
therapies for the diagnosis and treatment of cancer.

Acknowledgments
Received 8/6/2007; revised 12/28/2007; accepted 3/3/2008.
Grant Support: CA101830 and CA96504, and a Ludwig Fellowship (G.M. Thurber).
The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of page
charges. This article must therefore be hereby marked advertisement in accordance
with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact.
We thank the Whitehead Institute for allowing us to measure free diffusion
coefficients using the W.M. Keck Foundation Biological Imaging Facility, the CCR
Histology laboratory for assisting with fixing spheroids for IHC, and Hyuk-Sang Kwon
and Peter So for their help and expertise with two-photon microscopy.

3340

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Antibody Fragment Distribution in Spheroids

References
1. Jain RK. Transport of molecules, particles, and cells in
solid tumors. Annu Rev Biomed Eng 1999;01:241–63.
2. Baxter L, Jain RK. Transport of fluid and macromolecules in tumors 1. Role of interstitial pressure and
convection. Microvasc Res 1989;37:77–104.
3. Pluen A, Boucher Y, Ramanujan S, et al. Role of tumorhost interactions in interstitial diffusion of macromolecules: cranial vs. subcutaneous tumors. Proc Natl
Acad Sci U S A 2001;98:4628–33.
4. Rippe B, Haraldsson B. Fluid and protein fluxes across
small and large pores in the microvasculature. application of two-pore equations. Acta Physiol Scand 1987;131:
411–28.
5. Thurber GM, Zajic SC, Wittrup KD. Theoretic criteria
for antibody penetration into solid tumors and micrometastases. J Nucl Med 2007;48:995–9.
6. Goldenberg DM, Sharkey RM, Paganelli G, Barbet J,
Chatal JF. Antibody pretargeting advances cancer
radioimmunodetection and radioimmunotherapy. J Clin
Oncol 2006;24:823–34.
7. Fujimori K, Covell D, Fletcher J, Weinstein J. Modeling
analysis of the global and microscopic distribution of
immunoglobulin G, F(ab’)2, and Fab in Tumors. Cancer
Res 1989;49:5656–63.
8. Baxter L, Zhu H, Mackensen D, Jain RK. Physiologically based pharmacokinetic model for specific and

www.aacrjournals.org

nonspecific monoclonal antibodies and fragments in
normal tissues and human tumor xenografts in nude
mice. Cancer Res 1994;54:1517–28.
9. Graff CP, Wittrup KD. Theoretical analysis of antibody
targeting of tumor spheroids: importance of dosage for
penetration, and affinity for retention. Cancer Res 2003;
63:1288–96.
10. Graff C, Chester K, Begent R, Wittrup KD. Directed
evolution of an anti-carcinoembryonic antigen scFv
with a four-day monovalent dissociation half-time at
37jC. Protein Eng Des Sel 2004;17:293–304.
11. Crank J. The Mathematics of Diffusion. 2nd ed.
Oxford: Clarendon Press; 1975.
12. Kelm J, Timmins N, Brown C, Fussenegger M, Nielsen
L. Method for generation of homogenous multicellular
tumor spheroids applicable to a wide variety of cell
types. Biotechnol Bioeng 2003;83:173–80.
13. Ballangrud AM, Yang WH, Charlton DE, et al. Response
of LNCaP spheroids after treatment with an a-particle
emitter (Bi-213)-labeled anti-prostate_specific membrane
antigen antibody (J591). Cancer Res 2001;61:2008–14.
14. Lyng H, Haraldseth O, Rofstad EK. Measurement of
cell density and necrotic fraction in human melanoma
xenografts by diffusion weighted magnetic resonance
imaging. Magn Reson Med 2000;43:828–36.
15. Berk DA, Yuan F, Leunig M, Jain RK. Direct in vivo
measurement of targeted binding in a human tumor
xenograft. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1997;94:1785–90.

3341

16. Krol A, Nagaraj S, Dewhirst M, Yuan F. Available
volume fraction of macromolecules in tumor tissues.
FASEB J 2000;14:A167–A.
17. Myrdal S, Foster M. Time-resolved confocal analysis
of antibody penetration into living, solid tumor
spheroids. Scanning 1994;16:155–67.
18. Brown EB, Boucher Y, Nasser S, Jain RK. Measurement of macromolecular diffusion coefficients in
human tumors. Microvasc Res 2004;67:231–6.
19. Fujimori K, Covell DG, Fletcher JE, Weinstein JN. A
modeling analysis of monoclonal antibody percolation
through tumors: a binding-site barrier. J Nucl Med 1990;
31:1191–8.
20. Adams G, Schier R, McCall A, et al. High affinity
restricts the localization and tumor penetration of
single-chain Fv antibody molecules. Cancer Res 2001;61:
4750–5.
21. Thurber G, Schmidt M, Wittrup KD. Factors determining antibody distribution in tumors. Trends Pharmacol Sci 2008;29:57–61.
22. Yuan F, Dellian M, Fukumura D, et al. Vascular
permeability in a human tumor xenograft: molecular
size dependence and cutoff size. Cancer Res 1995;55:
3752–6.
23. Mattes MJ, Griffiths G, Diril H, Goldenberg D, Ong G,
Shih L. Processing of antibody-radioisotope conjugates
after binding to the surface of tumor cells. Cancer 1994;
73:787–93.

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (9). May 1, 2008

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Quantitative Spatiotemporal Analysis of Antibody Fragment
Diffusion and Endocytic Consumption in Tumor Spheroids
Greg M. Thurber and K. Dane Wittrup
Cancer Res 2008;68:3334-3341.

Updated version
Supplementary
Material

Cited articles
Citing articles

E-mail alerts
Reprints and
Subscriptions
Permissions

Access the most recent version of this article at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/68/9/3334
Access the most recent supplemental material at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/suppl/2008/04/25/68.9.3334.DC1

This article cites 21 articles, 11 of which you can access for free at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/68/9/3334.full#ref-list-1
This article has been cited by 3 HighWire-hosted articles. Access the articles at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/68/9/3334.full#related-urls

Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal.
To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications
Department at pubs@aacr.org.
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications
Department at permissions@aacr.org.

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

