Research Article

NO Signaling Confers Cytoprotectivity through the Survivin
Network in Ovarian Carcinomas
1

3

2,6

3

7

Knut Engels, Shirley K. Knauer, Sibylle Loibl, Verena Fetz, Philipp Harter,
3
8
9
2
Andrea Schweitzer, Annette Fisseler-Eckhoff, Friedrich Kommoss, Lars Hanker,
6
4
5
3
Valentina Nekljudova, Iris Hermanns, Hartmut Kleinert, Wolf Mann,
7
3
Andreas du Bois, and Roland H. Stauber
Departments of 1Pathology and 2Gynecology and Obstetrics, University Hospital of Frankfurt, Frankfurt, Germany; 3Molecular and Cellular
Oncology and Departments of 4Pathology and 5Pharmacology, University Hospital of Mainz, Mainz, Germany; 6German Breast Group
Forschungs GmbH, Neu-Isenburg, Germany; 7Department of Gynecology and Gynecologic Oncology and 8Department for Pathology
and Cytology, Dr. Horst Schmidt Klinik, Wiesbaden, Germany; and 9Department for Pathology,
University of Mannheim, Mannheim, Germany

Abstract

Introduction

Despite considerable success in the treatment of epithelial
ovarian cancer (EOC), therapy resistance counteracts improvement of long-term survival. The dual role of survivin as
an apoptosis inhibitor and mitotic regulator has been
associated with disease outcome. However, the molecular
mechanisms involved in the deregulated expression in EOC of
survivin need further investigation. Here, we show that high
amounts of the nitric oxide (NO) donors, S-nitroso-N-acetylpenicillamine (SNAP) and sodium nitroprusside (SNP) or
strong overexpression of the inducible nitric oxide synthase
(iNOS) suppressed survivin levels via the p38MAPK pathway
and triggered apoptosis in ovarian cancer cell lines (OCC).
Importantly, low NO concentrations conferred resistance
against carboplatin/paclitaxel-induced apoptosis. Cytoprotection was mediated by survivin because we observed its upregulation subsequent to low SNAP/SNP doses or ectopic
expression of low amounts of iNOS. Also, RNAi-mediated
depletion of survivin blocked the antiapoptotic effects of NO
signaling. Induction of survivin involves activation of the
phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase (PI3K)/Akt pathway, which was
antagonized by the PI3K-inhibitor, LY294002. Interestingly,
application of the iNOS-inhibitor 1400W together with RNAimediated survivin down-regulation cooperatively enhanced
drug-induced apoptosis in OCCs. The iNOS/survivin interdependencies seem to be also of clinical relevance because
immunohistochemistry revealed that low iNOS levels correlate
with survivin expression (P < 0.01) in carboplatin/paclitaxeltreated EOC patients with minimal postoperative residual
tumor (n = 54). Also, iNOS and survivin expression were
associated with increased risk for disease progression. Our
study uncovers a novel molecular mechanism of how NO
signaling may contribute to therapy resistance in EOC by
modulating survivin expression. Pharmacogenetic iNOS/
survivin-targeting strategies may hence be pursued to
complement current treatment modalities in EOC. [Cancer
Res 2008;68(13):5159–66]

Note: Supplementary data for this article are available at Cancer Research Online
(http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/).
Requests for reprints: Roland H. Stauber, Molecular and Cellular Oncology,
University Hospital of Mainz, Langenbeckstrasse 1, 55101 Mainz, Germany. Phone: 496131-177002; Fax: 49-6131-176671; E-mail: rstauber@uni-mainz.de.
I2008 American Association for Cancer Research.
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-0406

www.aacrjournals.org

Although ovarian cancer is only the fifth most common cancer
among women, it is the leading cause of gynecologic cancer deaths
(1). Due to the insidious, nonspecific generalized symptoms
associated with the disease, most patients present with stage III
or IV disease. After primary surgery, the current standard
treatment for patients with advanced epithelial ovarian cancer
(EOC) involves the systemic administration of a paclitaxel/
platinum-containing chemotherapy regimen (2). Despite the
enthusiasm for optimal cytoreductive surgery and combination
chemotherapy with intent to cure, >50% of patients die within
5 years of their initial diagnosis (ref. 2, and references within).
In contrast to high response rates to first-line chemotherapy, EOC
is further characterized by the rapid development of resistance to
treatment leading to recurrences in most patients.
Among the multifaceted molecular events responsible for
resistance in EOC, overexpression of inhibitor of apoptosis proteins
(IAP; refs. 3, 4) and nitric oxide (NO) signaling (5, 6) seem to
influence tumor cell apoptosis and disease outcome.
The diffusible molecular messenger NO is synthesized endogenously from L-arginine by three isoforms of the enzyme NOsynthase. NO signaling participates in many physiologic and
pathophysiologic processes, including cancer (details refs. 5, 6).
The biological effects of NO are ultimately determined by redox
chemistry and derived reactive nitrogen oxide species. NO can
affect various cellular functions through posttranslational modifications of proteins and the guanylate cyclase–induced activation
of signaling networks (see refs. 5, 6). Low (<50 nmol/L) and
intermediate NO levels (100–300 nmol/L) are produced by
neuronal nitric oxide synthase (NOS) and endothelial NOS, whereas
high levels (>300 nmol/L) are attributed to inducible NOS (iNOS;
ref. 6). iNOS is the isoform most consistently associated with EOC.
Several studies implicate that high NO concentrations (in the
micromole range) generated by chemical NO donors or enforced
overexpression of iNOS may be used to kill cancer cells (see refs. 5, 6).
Paradoxically, iNOS is overexpressed in many tumors, including
EOC, and overexpression of iNOS often correlates with bad
prognosis (see refs. 5–7). Hence, NO may also promote tumor
progression via induction of tumor-cell proliferation and antiapoptotic programs, as well as through the expression of angiogenic
factors (see refs. 5, 6). Thus, although the expression of iNOS
has been studied in gynecologic tumors and cell lines, its functional and prognostic significance are still not fully understood
(see refs. 5, 7, 8).

5159

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (13). July 1, 2008

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

Among the IAPs overexpressed in cancer, its proposed dual role
as an apoptosis inhibitor and a mitotic effector positioned survivin
in the front line of cancer research (reviewed in refs. 3, 4, 9).
Survivin is largely undetectable in differentiated tissues but highly
expressed in most human neoplasms, including EOC (10). Survivin
is a dynamic protein capable to shuttle between the nucleus and
the cytoplasm (11). Its expression has been reported to correlate
with reduced tumor cell apoptosis, increased resistance to
chemotherapy, and abbreviated patient survival (12, 13). Several
signal transduction pathways (e.g., Her2-neu, ER, epidermal growth
factor receptor, etc.) seem to contribute to deregulating the cellcycle–dependent transcription of survivin, and/or to enhancing the
half-life and function of survivin by posttranslational modifications
(see refs. 3, 9, 10, 14). However, whether and how NO signaling may
affect survivin expression and its functional consequences in
ovarian carcinomas remain yet to be determined.
To better tailor current treatments and to develop translational
therapeutic strategies for EOC patients, an improved molecular
understanding of therapy resistance and recurrence together with
the identification of prognostic and predictive factors is of utmost
importance. Because histologic subtypes of ovarian tumors are
likely to be associated with distinct morphologic and molecular
profiles (14, 15), and residual disease after primary surgery is one of
the strongest predictors for survival (reviewed in ref. 16), we here
focused exclusively on serous EOC patients with macroscopic
complete surgical tumor resection.
Corroborating experimental approaches using ovarian cancer
cell lines revealed that NO signaling is capable of stimulating
survivin expression, thereby conferring enhanced resistance to
carboplatin/paclitaxel. In addition, we show for the first time that
NO can enhance or repress survivin expression in a concentrationdependent manner by stimulating either the phosphatidylinositol3-kinase (PI3K)/Akt or p38MAP-kinase (p38MAPK) pathway, which
ultimately modulates the cytoprotective cellular response. Our
results further uncover the prognostic and functional relevance of
the iNOS and survivin interdependencies in advanced-stage serous
ovarian carcinomas after radical surgery and postoperative
chemotherapy.

Materials and Methods
Patients and treatment. The study included 54 primary ovarian
carcinoma patients treated between 1999 and 2004 at the Departments of
Gynecologic Oncology and Gynecology in Wiesbaden and the University of
Frankfurt. Studies of human tissue biopsies were approved by the Local
Research Ethics Committees, and samples were processed anonymously.
Inclusion criteria were serous EOC and macroscopic complete debulking
during primary surgery. The majority of patients had advanced disease stages
[Fesddration Internationale des Gynaecologistes et Obstetristes (FIGO) III–IV]
and had received primary surgery followed by a platinum- and taxane-based
chemotherapy (Supplementary Table S1) according to du Bois and colleagues
(2). The median follow-up time was 96 wk (range, 0–297 wk).
Tissue samples and immunohistochemistry. Tissue samples were
fixed and paraffin embedded as described (13). Sections were used for
primary diagnosis, second reviewing and for tissue microarray (TMA)
construction according to Engels and colleagues (13). TMA sections were
processed and stained as described (13). For antigen retrieval, sections were
pretreated in a pressure cooker with EDTA buffer (10 mmol/L; pH 8.0) for
survivin or treated in a microwave oven with EDTA buffer (10 mmol/L; pH
9.0) for iNOS. For visualization of survivin and iNOS, the EnVision detection
system (Dako GmbH) was applied as described (13). Sections were
counterstained with hematoxylin. For negative controls, the primary
antibodies (Ab) were omitted. Expression levels for iNOS and survivin were

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (13). July 1, 2008

scored semiquantitatively based on staining intensity and distribution using
the immunoreactive score (IRS; ref. 13). All assessments were performed
blinded with respect to clinical patient data.
Statistical analysis. Time-to-event outcomes (progression-free survival;
PFS) were analyzed with the Kaplan-Meier product-limit method and logrank test as described (13). Association between different factors was
measured with the Spearman’s rank correlation coefficient rho. For all cell
culture experiments where P values are expressed, a paired Student’s t test
was performed, representing data from three independent experiments
done in triplicate. P values of <0.05 were considered as significant.
Cells, transfection and transduction. The ovarian carcinoma cell lines
OVCAR-3 and SKOV-3 were maintained under conditions recommended by
the American Type Culture Collection. Human umbilical vascular
endothelial cells (HUVEC) were isolated from term umbilical cord veins
and cultured according to (17). Cells were transfected or transduced as
described (13). Cells stably expressing iNOS were established by G418
selection according to (18).
Plasmids. The eukaryotic expression vector pc4-iNOS was constructed
by reverse transcription-PCR amplification of the human iNOS coding
sequence using specific oligonucleotides (iNOS_cds_5P, 5¶-GGAGATCTCGAGATGGCCTGTCCTTG-3¶; iNOS_cds_3P, 5¶-CCGCGGCCGCTCAGAGCGCTGACATCTCC-3¶) and cloning into the BglII- and NotI-digested
expression vector pcDNA4/TO (Invitrogen). Ectopic survivin expression was
achieved by using the retroviral expression vector M387-survivin (13).
RNAi. RNAi-mediated ablation of survivin was performed using doublestranded siRNAs (Eurogenetec) as described in detail (11).
Immunoblotting, immunofluorescence, and antibodies. Immunoblotting and immunofluorescence were carried out according to Kramer and
colleagues (19). To control equal loading of cell lysates, blots were reprobed
with a-actin Abs as described (19). Abs were as follows: a (anti)-Akt and
a-phosphoserine473 Akt (NEB), a-p38MAPK and a-phospho-threonine180/tyrosine182 p38MAPK (Cell Signaling Technology, Inc.), a-survivin (NB500-201; Novus Biologicals), a-iNOS (rabbit polyclonal; provided by
J. Pfeilschifter, University of Frankfurt, Frankfurt, Germany), and appropriate
Cy3/FITC-conjugated secondary Abs (Santa Cruz Biotechnology).
Microscopy. Observation of living or fixed cells and image analysis were
performed as described in detail (11, 20).
Reagents and treatment. The PI3K/Akt inhibitor, LY294002 (15 Amol/L),
and the p38MAPK inhibitor, SB203580 (15 Amol/L), were from Calbiochem.
The NO donors S-nitroso-N-acetyl-penicillamine (SNAP) and sodium
nitroprusside (SNP) were purchased from (Sigma Aldrich). Cells were
treated with cisplatinum (40 Amol/L) or Taxol (50 nmol/L; Sigma Aldrich)
as described (18). Inhibition of iNOS enzymatic activity was performed
by culturing cells in the presence of 50 Amol/L of the specific iNOS inhibitor
N-(3-(aminomethyl)benzyl)acetamidine (1400W; AXXORA GmbH).
Nitrite measurement. NO production was analyzed by measuring nitrite
by the Griess reaction in cultured medium according to (21).
Measurement of apoptosis, cell cycle, and viability. 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide (MTT) assays, propidium
iodide–fluorescence-activated cell sorting analyses and assessment of
apoptosis by quantitation of caspase-3 activity in cell extracts were
performed as described in detail (13, 22).

Results
Effects of NO on cytotoxicity and chemotherapy-induced
apoptosis in ovarian carcinoma cell lines. As the majority of
chemotherapeutic drugs cause apoptosis, and NO signaling has
been described as a proapoptotic as well as an antiapoptotic
mediator, we set out to study the biological effects of NO on the
ovarian carcinoma cell lines (OCC), OVCAR-3, and SKOV-3. First,
we used synthetic NO donors (SNAP t1/2, f5 hours, SNP t1/2, f15
minutes) releasing NO in a concentration-dependent manner
(Supplementary Fig. S1). Interestingly, we found that low concentrations of NO donors (SNAP, 0.1 mmol/L; SNP, 0.2 mmol/L) slightly
stimulated cell proliferation, whereas high NO concentrations

5160

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

iNOS-Dependent Modulation of Survivin

(SNAP, 0.5 mmol/L; SNP 1 mmol/L) resulted in the inhibition of cell
growth (Fig. 1A) and increased G2-M arrest (data not shown).
Importantly, low NO levels (SNAP, 0.1 mmol/L; SNP, 0.2 mmol/L)
reduced the cytotoxic effects of treatment with CDDP or Taxol,
whereas increased programmed cell death (PCD) was observed
upon their combination with high doses of NO donors (SNAP,
0.5 mmol/L; SNP, 1 mmol/L; Fig. 1B).
NO-induced modulation of cell survival is mediated by
survivin. Because we and others (see refs. 4, 9) have shown that
expression of survivin-protected cancer cells from drug-induced
cytotoxicity, we examined whether the observed cytoprotective
effect of low NO concentrations was mediated by the up-regulation
of survivin. Immunoblot analysis revealed that treatment with low
amounts of NO donors indeed increased survivin expression in
unsynchronized OCCs (Fig. 1C ). In contrast, survivin was
significantly reduced when the cells were exposed to high
concentrations of NO donors, which correlated with increased

PCD and reduced proliferation (Fig. 1A and B). To further confirm
that survivin counteracts NO-induced apoptosis in OCCs, we
ectopically expressed survivin by retroviral transduction and
challenged the cells with cytotoxic amounts of NO donors. In
contrast to cells transduced with internal ribosomal entry
sequence–green fluorescent protein (IRES-GFP), apoptosis was
ameliorated by increased survivin levels (Fig. 1D). Enhanced
survivin expression in survivin-IRES-GFP–transduced cells was
verified by immunoblot analysis (Fig. 1D).
p38MAPK is involved in NO-mediated apoptosis and
survivin repression. As reviewed by (5, 6), the p38MAPK pathway
seems to be involved in several aspects of NO signaling. We also
observed an up-regulation and activation of p38MAPK upon
treatment with cytotoxic doses of NO donors (SNAP, 0.5 mmol/L;
SNP, 1 mmol/L; Fig. 2A). Next, we used the p38MAPK-specific
inhibitor, SB203580, and examined its effect on NO-induced PCD
and survivin expression. OCCs were pretreated with SB203580

Figure 1. Effects of NO donors on cytotoxicity and chemotherapy-induced apoptosis in OCCs is mediated by survivin. Apoptosis was assayed by measuring
caspase-3 activity, which was set to 1 in untreated cells. Columns, mean from three independent experiments; bars, SD. Indicated P values were calculated using the
two-sided Student’s t test. A, SCOV-3 cells were incubated with the indicated concentrations of SNAP or SNP, and proliferation was analyzed by the MTT assay.
Whereas low amounts of NO donors (SNAP, 0.1 mmol/L; SNP 0.2 mmol/L) stimulated cell proliferation, high NO concentrations (SNAP, 0.5 mmol/L; SNP, 1 mmol/L)
resulted in inhibition of cell growth. B, SCOV-3 cells were treated with the indicated concentrations of SNAP or SNP for 24 h. Subsequently, Taxol or CDDP were
added, and apoptosis was assayed 24 h later. Low NO donor concentrations reduced drug-induced apoptosis, whereas high NO-levels resulted in increased PCD.
C, NO-induced increase of cell survival is mediated by survivin. Survivin protein levels were up-regulated in SCOV-3 cells treated with low concentrations of NO donors,
whereas survivin expression was reduced upon exposure to high amounts of SNAP/SNP. Survivin protein was detected by immunoblotting with a-survivin Abs.
Reprobing with a-actin Abs confirmed equal loading of cell lysates. D, ectopic expression of survivin by retroviral transduction reduced the cytotoxic effects of NO
donors. Twenty-four hours after infection, OVCAR-3 cells expressing survivin-IRES-GFP or IRES-GFP were incubated with the indicated NO donors, and apoptosis was
assessed 24 h posttreatment by measuring caspase-3 activity. Immunoblotting with a-survivin Abs confirmed enhanced survivin expression in survivin-IRES-GFP
transduced OVCAR-3 cells. Actin served as loading control.

www.aacrjournals.org

5161

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (13). July 1, 2008

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

Figure 2. p38MAPK activation is involved in
NO-mediated cell death and repression of survivin.
A, OVCAR-3 cells were treated with NO donors for 24 h.
The protein levels of p38MAPK and phospho-p38MAPK
(p-p38MAPK ) were analyzed by Western blot using
specific Abs. Treatment with high NO concentrations
(SNAP, 0.5 mmol/L; SNP, 1 mmol/L) increased
expression and activation of p38MAPK. B, OVCAR-3
cells were pretreated with SB203580 (10 Amol/L; 3 h)
and incubated with NO donors for 24 h. Subsequently,
apoptosis was assayed by quantitating caspase-3
activity. PCD induced by high NO concentrations was
reduced by SB203580. Caspase-3 activity in untreated
survivin expressing cells was set to 1. Columns, mean
from three independent experiments; bars, SD. Indicated
P values were calculated using the two-sided Student’s
t test. C, survivin expression in OVCAR-3 cells
treated as in B was analyzed by immunoblot. The
SNAP-induced decrease of survivin was counteracted
by SB203580. Reprobing with a-actin Abs served as
loading control.

(15 Amol/L, 3 hours) and incubated with NO donors (SNAP,
0.5 mmol/L; SNP, 1 mmol/L) for 24 hours. Subsequently, apoptosis
and survivin expression were assayed by caspase-3 activity and
immunoblot, respectively. As shown in Fig. 2B, NO-induced PCD
was significantly reduced by SB203580. Likewise, NO-mediated
reduction of survivin levels was counteracted by pharmacologic
inhibition of the p38MAPK pathway (data not shown; Fig. 2C).
iNOS can modulate chemotherapy-induced PCD via survivin
expression in OCCs. Next, we tested whether the biological effects
observed upon exogenous NO administration can be reproduced by
stimulating endogenous NO levels. Therefore, we ectopically

expressed iNOS in OCCs and examined its consequences on
survivin expression and apoptosis. Immunoblot analysis verified
that transfection of increasing amounts of pc4-iNOS correlates with
enhanced iNOS protein levels (Fig. 3A). Similar to the results
obtained by chemical NO induction, we observed an increase of
survivin levels upon expression of low amounts of iNOS, whereas
strong iNOS overexpression resulted in reduced survivin levels.
Subsequently, the transfected cells were challenged with cytotoxic
drugs, and apoptosis was quantitated by assaying caspase-3 activity.
Compared with cells transfected with the empty vector, the
cytotoxic effects of CDDP or Taxol were reduced in cells expressing

Figure 3. The iNOS/survivin-axis protects OVCAR-3
cells from chemotherapy-induced apoptosis via the PI3K/
Akt pathway. Apoptosis was assayed by measuring
caspase-3 activity, which was set to 1 in untreated cells
or cells transfected with the control vector. Columns,
mean from three independent experiments; bars, SD.
Indicated P values were calculated using the two-sided
Student’s t test. A, cells were transfected with pc4-iNOS
or empty pc4 vector. Immunoblot analysis showed that
transfection of increasing pc4-iNOS amounts correlated
with enhanced iNOS expression. Expression of low
amounts of iNOS resulted in enhanced survivin levels,
whereas iNOS overexpression down-regulated survivin
levels. Reprobing with a-actin Abs revealed equal
loading of cell lysates. B, cells were transfected with the
indicated plasmids. Twenty-four hours later, Taxol or
CDDP were added, and the levels of apoptosis
quantitated 24 h posttreatment by measuring caspase-3
activity. Compared with cells transfected with the
empty vector, drug-induced cytotoxicity was reduced in
cells producing low amounts of iNOS, whereas
iNOS overexpression resulted in enhanced PCD.
C, activation of PI3K/Akt is required for iNOS-mediated
chemoprotection. Cells transfected with pc4-iNOS
(0.2 Ag) were drug treated in the presence or absence
of LY294002, and apoptosis was analyzed 24 h later.
Drug-induced PCD was increased by LY294002
treatment. D, immunoblotting with a-survivin Abs
revealed that survivin expression in pc4-iNOS (0.2 Ag)
transfected cells was significantly reduced by LY294002
application. Actin served to control equal loading of
cell lysates.

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (13). July 1, 2008

5162

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

iNOS-Dependent Modulation of Survivin

low amounts of iNOS (Fig. 3B). As reported previously (see refs. 5, 6),
iNOS overexpression alone already resulted in enhanced apoptosis,
which was further increased upon drug treatment (Fig. 3B).
iNOS-induced cytoprotection requires activation of the
PI3K/Akt pathway. Because survivin up-regulation was reported
to require PI3K/Akt activation in endothelial cells (23), we treated
OVCAR-3 cells ectopically expressing low amounts of iNOS (0.2 Ag
pc4-iNOS–transfected cells), with the PI3K/Akt-inhibitor LY294002,
and challenged them with cytotoxic drugs. PI3K/Akt inhibition
resulted in reduced survivin expression (Fig. 3D), blocked upregulation of phosphorylated Akt (data not shown), and enhanced
drug-induced PCD (Fig. 3C). These data indicate that the PI3K/Akt
pathway is involved in NO-mediated cytoprotection. Similar results
were obtained in SKOV-3 cells (data not shown).
Inhibition of iNOS and down-regulation of survivin cooperatively sensitize OCCs to drug induced apoptosis. Given the
cytoprotective effect of the NO/survivin-axis, we tested whether the
pharmacologic inhibition of iNOS combined with the RNAimediated ablation of survivin may be applicable as a strategy to
enforce PCD in OCCs. OVCAR-3 cells engineered to stably express
low amounts of iNOS were transfected with survivin-siRNA or a
scrambled control, and treated with the specific iNOS inhibitor
1400W. Subsequently, cells were challenged with cytotoxic drugs,
and apoptosis was quantitated by measuring caspase-3 activity.
The inhibition of iNOS enhanced Taxol/CDDP-induced cell death,
which was significantly increased by the RNAi-mediated ablation
of survivin (Fig. 4A). RNAi-/1400W–induced down-regulation of
survivin levels were confirmed by immunoblot (Fig. 4B). Of note, in
contrast to the cytotoxic effects induced by high doses of NO
donors in HUVECs as well as in OCCs (Fig. 1B), treatment with
1400W did not affect proliferation of HUVECs (Fig. 4C).

iNOS and survivin expression correlate in EOC patients. To
investigate the association between iNOS/survivin levels and clinical
response, and to test the results obtained from our preclinical
models in the clinical setting, we determined survivin/iNOS
expression in EOC patients without residual disease by immunohistochemistry (IHC; Supplementary Table S1 for patient characteristics, and Supplementary Table S2 for summarized results).
Before IHC staining, we further controlled the specificity of the
Abs used in our study. Therefore, iNOS and survivin were
ectopically expressed in OVCAR-3 cells, and the proteins could
be specifically detected in the cytoplasm (Fig. 5A). Of note, we
rejected several commercially available a-iNOS Abs due to their
high background staining (data not shown). To systematically
analyze the protein levels in patient samples, we subsequently
performed IHC of TMAs (Supplementary Table S2 for summarized
results), which revealed low levels of the cytoplasmic iNOS protein
in the majority of tumor biopsies (Fig. 5B). In contrast, survivin was
readily detected in the cytoplasm and the nucleus of tumor cells,
whereas the surrounding tissue was mostly negative (Fig. 5B
and C). Because we observed a stimulation of survivin levels upon
low iNOS expression in OCCs (Fig. 3), we examined the expression
of the respective proteins in consecutive tumor sections. Representative examples illustrate that the low iNOS levels detectable in
the majority of tumors (74%) correlated with enhanced survivin
levels (Fig. 5C). For the computation of correlation coefficients, the
noncategorized values were used. This analysis further confirmed
that iNOS expression was significantly associated (rho, 0.39;
P = 0.009) with cytoplasmic survivin levels (IRSScyt).
Correlation of iNOS and survivin levels with patient survival. We
further analyzed the role of iNOS and survivin in predicting survival
in completely debulked patients. Kaplan-Meier curves revealed an

Figure 4. iNOS inhibition and survivin depletion cooperatively sensitize OCCs to drug-induced apoptosis. Indicated P values were calculated using the two-sided
Student’s t test. A, OVCAR-3 iNOS-expressing cells were transfected with survivin-siRNA or a scrambled control. Twenty-four hours later, cells were treated with the
iNOS inhibitor 1400W (50 Amol/L), and 16 h later, challenged with Taxol/CDDP. Measurement of caspase-3 activity by colorimetric assay was performed 24 h later.
Caspase-3 activity in untreated cells transfected with the scrambled control was set to 1. Columns, mean from three independent experiments; bars, SD. B, immunoblot
analysis of lysates from cells treated as described above using a-survivin Abs confirmed RNAi-/1400W-induced down-regulation of survivin. Reprobing with a-actin
Abs served as loading control. C, high NO concentrations inhibit cell growth, whereas treatment with 1400W (50 Amol/L) does not significantly affect proliferation
of HUVECs. HUVECs were incubated with the indicated concentrations of SNAP/SNP or the specific iNOS inhibitor 1400W, and proliferation was analyzed by the MTT
assay. MTT-activity in untreated cells was set to 1. Columns, mean from three independent experiments; bars, SD.

www.aacrjournals.org

5163

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (13). July 1, 2008

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

Figure 5. Analysis of iNOS and survivin
expression in OCCs and EOC tissue
samples. A, survivin and iNOS were
ectopically expressed in OVCAR-3 cells by
retroviral transduction (top ) or transfection
(pc4-iNOS, 0.5 Ag; bottom ). Twenty-four
hours later, cells were fixed, and the
proteins detected in the cytoplasm
using the a-survivin or a-iNOS Abs
in combination with appropriate
Cy3/FITC-conjugated secondary Abs.
Scale bar, 10 Am. B, iNOS and survivin
immunostaining in EOC using the specific
a-iNOS (1:1,000) or a-survivin (1:1,000)
Ab. Specific iNOS immunostaining was
observed in the cytoplasm (left), whereas
survivin was detectable in the cytoplasm
(middle ) and the nucleus (right ) of tumor
cells. C, iNOS and survivin levels correlate
in EOC. Immunostaining of consecutive
tumor sections revealed low levels of
iNOS protein correlating with strong
cytoplasmic survivin expression. Cell nuclei
were counterstained with hematoxylin.
Scale bar, 50 Am.

improved PFS for patients with iNOS-negative tumors (log-rank
test, P = 0.0414), whereas iNOS expression was associated with
poor prognosis (Fig. 6A). Also, Kaplan-Meier analysis indicated an
improved PFS for patients with high nuclear and low cytoplasmic
survivin (log-rank test, P = 0.0552 and P = 0.3836), although the
latter did not reach statistical significance. As a control, FIGOstages (I–II versus III–IV) were highly significant associated with
the risk of death from disease (log-rank test, P < 0.01; Fig. 6D).

Discussion
Molecular profiling studies (15, 24) and retrospective analyses of
patient cohorts (12, 25) identified survivin as a ‘‘risk factor’’ for
cancer progression and poor prognosis in ovarian carcinomas.
Thus, the aim of the present study was to identify molecular
pathways involved in the deregulated expression of survivin in
EOCs as the basis for novel potential intervention strategies.
Here, we provide evidence that modulation of survivin by the
small messenger NO contributes to the resistance of ovarian cancer
cells against drug-induced apoptosis. The dual role of NO signaling
and iNOS expression may both promote or inhibit tumor
progression, depending on various conditions such as the genetic
make-up of the cells, the local NO concentration, as well as the
presence of other regulators (see refs. 5, 6).
One explanation for the double-edged effects of NO seems to be
that high NO levels (in the Amol/L range) induce cytotoxic effects in
tumor as well as in nonmalignant cells, e.g., HUVECs (refs. 5, 6,
26, 27, and references within). This assumption is further supported
by our results showing that high-doses of chemical NO donors
(SNAP, 0.5 mmol/L; SNP, 1 mmol/L) or strong overexpression of
iNOS triggered apoptosis in vitro. However, various variables such as
the microenvironment and/or the presence of other reactive oxygen
species may influence these effects in vivo (see refs. 5, 6). Our results
now indicate that survivin plays a critical role in NO-induced PCD

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (13). July 1, 2008

because we observed down-regulation of survivin upon strong
overexpression of iNOS or treatment with high-doses of SNP/SNAP.
Also, NO-induced apoptosis was ameliorated upon ectopic survivin
expression in OCCs. We further show that high NO levels inhibit
survivin expression via the p38MAPK-dependent pathway. High NO
concentrations stimulated phosphorylation of p38MAPK, and
the NO-induced reduction of survivin levels was reversed by the
p38MAPK inhibitor SB203580. Due to the different half-life of the
applied NO donors (SNAP t1/2, f5 hours; SNP t1/2, f15 minutes),
the proapoptotic effect of NO seems to be excecuted via a rapid
activation of p38MAPK, leading to a irreversible cascade of
molecular events ultimately culminating in cell death. p38MAPK
has been associated with apoptosis in response to various cellular
stresses, including NO-induced, caspase-3–associated apoptosis in
other tumor models and macrophages (details in refs. 5, 26). Besides
p38MAPK, other members of the MAP kinase family such as
extracellular signal-regulated kinase or c-Jun NH2-terminal kinase
have been implicated in NO-mediated apoptosis (5, 6). The detailed
biochemical mechanism how NO directly or indirectly affects these
kinases and which other kinases are also capable of modulating the
NO/survivin-axis in OCCs remains to be investigated.
Importantly, we found that low concentrations of NO protect
OCCs against drug-induced apoptosis by stimulating survivin
expression. Several studies reported moderately low levels of iNOS
activity in a variety of solid tumors, stimulating the idea that low
NO concentrations may foster tumor promotion and disease
progression. NO signaling was implied in activating various
antiapoptotic pathways (28), involving bcl-2, p53 and/or direct
inactivation of caspases by S-nitrosation (see refs. 5, 6). We here
provide several lines of evidence strongly implicating that survivin
acts as a major cytoprotective factor in EOCs. For one, ectopic
expression of low iNOS levels as well as low concentrations of
chemical NO donors enhanced survivin expression, which correlated with chemoresistance against Taxol- and cisplatin-induced

5164

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

iNOS-Dependent Modulation of Survivin

cell death. Second, RNAi-mediated depletion of survivin significantly counteracted the cytoprotective effects of NO signaling
and sensitized OCCs against drug-induced PCD. We show that
NO induced phosphorylation of PI3K/Akt and that induction of
survivin was reversed by the pharmacologic inhibition of PI3K/Akt,
resulting in enhanced drug-induced apoptosis. Hence, NO-induced
survivin expression downstream of the PI3K/Akt pathway represents an essential drug-resistance mechanism for EOC. Our
findings are in agreement with previous reports from ovarian
cancer (29) and other tumor cell models demonstrating that
activation of the PI3K/Akt pathway by several stimuli including NO
can significantly enhance resistance of tumor and tumor
endothelial cells against chemotherapeutic regimens (refs. 6, 23,
30, and references within). Also, our results provide a molecular
rationale for the enhancing effects of LY294002 on paclitaxel in
reducing tumor burden in ovarian cancer mouse models (29).
The cytoprotective role of the iNOS/survivin pathway we
uncovered in OCCs models also seems to be of clinical relevance.
In our patient collective of serous EOC patients with macroscopically complete tumor resection, we found that the majority of
tumors express low iNOS levels, which significantly correlates with
enhanced survivin expression. The potential disease relevance of this
correlation is further underlined by the Kaplan-Meier survival
analysis, in which absence of iNOS-expression was a significant
marker for better PFS. iNOS expression has also been suggested as an

independent prognostic marker for poor survival in EOC (7). Several
studies in different malignancies also indicate that iNOS positivity
correlated with poor prognosis (6), although other studies propose
that iNOS expression predicts better prognosis, or showed no
relation to disease outcome (referenced in refs. 5, 31). Our results
now provide a potential molecular rational for these ‘‘inconsistencies,’’ and underline the necessity to accurately evaluate iNOS as well
as survivin expression. Standardization of staining and scoring
methods will be mandatory to evaluate and compare the prognostic
relevance of the iNOS/survivin-axis in future comprehensive studies.
Although survivin expression has been convincingly linked to
disease progression and therapy resistance in several malignancies
(referenced in refs. 3, 4, 9), its role in ovarian cancer seems to be
less clear (discussed in ref. 10). Our results are supported by other
studies (see ref. 3), although Zaffaroni and colleagues (12) proposed
that survivin was associated with resistance to the microtubuletargeting agent paclitaxel but unrelated to cisplatin responsiveness.
However, we and others showed a cytoprotective function of
survivin also against platin-based therapeutics (see refs. 3, 4, 9; this
study). Hence, the molecular mechanism explaining this observation awaits further clarification. As previously shown for several
malignancies (see refs. 4, 13), our analysis revealed that nuclear
survivin, which seems to be impaired in its cytoprotective
functions, is associated with favorable PFS also in EOC. A similar
result was observed for metastatic EOC (25), although Ferrandina

Figure 6. Kaplan-Meier curves for PFS time in EOC patients by expression of the indicated proteins. Patients were dichotomized according to the IRS of the indicated
proteins or FIGO stages. A, absence of iNOS expression is a significant favorable predictor for PFS. B, predominantly nuclear survivin and (C ) low cytoplasmic
survivin levels are also indicators for prolonged PFS. D, FIGO-stages (I–II versus III–IV) are highly significant associated with PFS.

www.aacrjournals.org

5165

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (13). July 1, 2008

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

and colleagues (10) found no significant correlation between the
intracellular localization of survivin and clinicopathologic variables. Potential discrepancies among studies may be explained by
size and clinical-pathologic characteristics of the series examined.
Because histologic subtypes of ovarian cancer are likely to be
associated with distinct morphologic and molecular profiles
(14, 15), we here exclusively analyzed serous EOC patients.
Because of its role as a cancer relevant protein, survivin is
currently vigorously pursued as a cancer drug target by various
strategies (see refs. 3, 4, 9). Supported by a favorable safety profile,
the first survivin antisense oligonucleotide is currently undergoing
phase I/II trials in patients with advanced cancers. Promising
preclinical results are also obtained using chemically synthesized
siRNAs or drugs that interfere directly or indirectly with survivin
up-regulation and/or function, such as PI3K/Akt- or hsp90inhibitors (9). Of note, several of these drugs have also been
implicated in the modulation of NO signaling (5).
Hence, it is conceivable to pursue pharmacogenetic interference
strategies with the NO/survivin-axis as a potential approach to
complement the current treatment modalities of ovarian cancer.
This conclusion is further supported by showing that RNAimediated targeting of survivin combined with a pharmacologic
inhibition of iNOS synergistically sensitized OCC against chemotherapeutic regimens. Although, iNOS antagonists have not been
tested in ovarian cancer patients, (pre)clinical studies already

References
1. Jemal A, Siegel R, Ward E, Murray T, Xu J, Thun MJ.
Cancer statistics, 2007. CA Cancer J Clin 2007;57:43–66.
2. du Bois A, Luck HJ, Meier W, et al. A randomized
clinical trial of cisplatin/paclitaxel versus carboplatin/
paclitaxel as first-line treatment of ovarian cancer. J Natl
Cancer Inst 2003;95:1320–9.
3. Pennati M, Folini M, Zaffaroni N. Targeting survivin in
cancer therapy: fulfilled promises and open questions.
Carcinogenesis 2007;28:1133–9.
4. Stauber RH, Mann W, Knauer SK. Nuclear and
cytoplasmic survivin: molecular mechanism, prognostic,
and therapeutic potential. Cancer Res 2007;67:5999–6002.
5. Fukumura D, Kashiwagi S, Jain RK. The role of nitric
oxide in tumour progression. Nat Rev Cancer 2006;6:
521–34.
6. Ridnour LA, Thomas DD, Donzelli S, et al. The
biphasic nature of nitric oxide responses in tumor
biology. Antioxid Redox Signal 2006;8:1329–37.
7. Raspollini MR, Amunni G, Villanucci A, et al.
Expression of inducible nitric oxide synthase and
cyclooxygenase-2 in ovarian cancer: correlation with
clinical outcome. Gynecol Oncol 2004;92:806–12.
8. Anttila MA, Voutilainen K, Merivalo S, Saarikoski S,
Kosma VM. Prognostic significance of iNOS in epithelial
ovarian cancer. Gynecol Oncol 2007;105:97–103.
9. Altieri DC. Survivin, cancer networks and pathwaydirected drug discovery. Nat Rev Cancer 2008;8:61–70.
10. Ferrandina G, Legge F, Martinelli E, et al. Survivin
expression in ovarian cancer and its correlation with
clinico-pathological, surgical and apoptosis-related
parameters. Br J Cancer 2005;92:271–7.
11. Knauer SK, Bier C, Habtemichael N, Stauber RH. The
Survivin-Crm1 interaction is essential for chromosomal
passenger complex localization and function. EMBO
Rep 2006;7:1259–65.
12. Zaffaroni N, Pennati M, Colella G, et al. Expression of
the anti-apoptotic gene survivin correlates with taxol
resistance in human ovarian cancer. Cell Mol Life Sci
2002;59:1406–12.

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (13). July 1, 2008

indicate that iNOS inhibitors might be of value in cancer
chemoprevention (summarized in refs. 5, 6, 32). Despite these
encouraging result, iNOS/survivin-targeting strategies have to be
carefully evaluated. The complex biological actions of NO/iNOS
mediate multiple physiologic functions (see ref. 5). Also, it is not
understood how normal and cancer cells sense and transmit NO
signaling in a temporal and concentration-dependent manner to
switch from an antiapoptotic to a proapoptotic response. Besides
cancer cells, survivin is also expressed in proliferating adult cells,
including stem cells (33). Hence, iNOS/survivin-antagonists will
necessitate careful preclinical experimentation to adequately
assess risk/benefit in potential clinical intervention studies.

Disclosure of Potential Conflicts of Interest
No potential conflicts of interest were disclosed.

Acknowledgments
Received 2/2/2008; revised 4/14/2008; accepted 4/18/2008.
Grant support: Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft, Peter und Traudl Engelhorn-,
Wilhelm Sander-, Kalkhof-Rose-Stiftung, Fonds of the Chemical Industry and Novartis
Foundation for Therapeutic Research.
The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of page
charges. This article must therefore be hereby marked advertisement in accordance
with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact.
We thank R. Lieberz and S. Schneider for excellent technical assistance, and
J. Pfeilschifter for providing the iNOS Ab.

13. Engels K, Knauer SK, Metzler D, et al. Dynamic
intracellular survivin in oral squamous cell carcinoma:
underlying molecular mechanism and potential as an
early prognostic marker. J Pathol 2007;211:532–40.
14. Shih Ie M, Kurman RJ. Ovarian tumorigenesis: a
proposed model based on morphological and molecular
genetic analysis. Am J Pathol 2004;164:1511–8.
15. Spentzos D, Levine DA, Kolia S, et al. Unique
gene expression profile based on pathologic response
in epithelial ovarian cancer. J Clin Oncol 2005;23:
7911–8.
16. du Bois A, Harter P. The role of surgery in advanced
and recurrent ovarian cancer. Ann Oncol 2006;17 Suppl
10:x235–40.
17. Muller AM, Hermanns MI, Skrzynski C, Nesslinger M,
Muller KM, Kirkpatrick CJ. Expression of the endothelial
markers PECAM-1, vWf, and CD34 in vivo and in vitro .
Exp Mol Pathol 2002;72:221–9.
18. Knauer SK, Carra G, Stauber RH. Nuclear export is
evolutionarily conserved in CVC paired-like homeobox
proteins and influences protein stability, transcriptional
activation, and extracellular secretion. Mol Cell Biol
2005;25:2573–82.
19. Kramer OH, Knauer SK, Zimmermann D, Stauber
RH, Heinzel T. Histone deacetylase inhibitors and
hydroxyurea modulate the cell cycle and cooperatively
induce apoptosis. Oncogene 2008;27:732–40.
20. Knauer SK, Bier C, Schlag P, et al. The survivin
isoform survivin-3B is cytoprotective and can function
as a chromosomal passenger complex protein. Cell
Cycle 2007;6:1502–9.
21. Korhonen R, Linker K, Pautz A, Forstermann U,
Moilanen E, Kleinert H. Post-transcriptional regulation
of human iNOS expression by the Jun N-terminal kinase.
Mol Pharmacol 2007;71:142734. Epub 2007 Feb 22.
22. Stauber RH, Rabenhorst U, Rekik A, Engels K,
Bier C, Knauer SK. Nucleocytoplasmic shuttling and
the biological activity of mouse survivin are
regulated by an active nuclear export signal. Traffic
2006;7:1461–72.
23. Tran J, Master Z, Yu JL, Rak J, Dumont DJ, Kerbel RS.

5166

A role for survivin in chemoresistance of endothelial
cells mediated by VEGF. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2002;
99:4349–54.
24. Spentzos D, Levine DA, Ramoni MF, et al. Gene
expression signature with independent prognostic
significance in epithelial ovarian cancer. J Clin Oncol
2004;22:4700–10.
25. Kleinberg L, Florenes VA, Silins I, et al. Nuclear
expression of survivin is associated with improved
survival in metastatic ovarian carcinoma. Cancer 2007;
109:228–38.
26. Choi BM, Pae HO, Jang SI, Kim YM, Chung HT. Nitric
oxide as a pro-apoptotic as well as anti-apoptotic
modulator. J Biochem Mol Biol 2002;35:116–26.
27. Rieder J, Jahnke R, Schloesser M, et al. Nitric oxidedependent apoptosis in ovarian carcinoma cell lines.
Gynecol Oncol 2001;82:172–6.
28. Salvucci O, Carsana M, Bersani I, Tragni G,
Anichini A. Antiapoptotic role of endogenous nitric
oxide in human melanoma cells. Cancer Res 2001;61:
318–26.
29. Hu L, Hofmann J, Lu Y, Mills GB, Jaffe RB. Inhibition
of phosphatidylinositol 3¶-kinase increases efficacy of
paclitaxel in in vitro and in vivo ovarian cancer models.
Cancer Res 2002;62:1087–92.
30. Kawasaki K, Smith RS, Jr., Hsieh CM, Sun J, Chao J,
Liao JK. Activation of the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase/
protein kinase Akt pathway mediates nitric oxideinduced endothelial cell migration and angiogenesis.
Mol Cell Biol 2003;23:5726–37.
31. Crowell JA, Steele VE, Sigman CC, Fay JR. Is inducible
nitric oxide synthase a target for chemoprevention? Mol
Cancer Ther 2003;2:815–23.
32. Ng QS, Goh V, Milner J, et al. Effect of nitric-oxide
synthesis on tumour blood volume and vascular activity:
a phase I study. Lancet Oncol 2007;8:111–8.
33. Leung CG, Xu Y, Mularski B, Liu H, Gurbuxani S,
Crispino JD. Requirements for survivin in terminal
differentiation of erythroid cells and maintenance of
hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells. J Exp Med
2007;204:1603–11.

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

NO Signaling Confers Cytoprotectivity through the Survivin
Network in Ovarian Carcinomas
Knut Engels, Shirley K. Knauer, Sibylle Loibl, et al.
Cancer Res 2008;68:5159-5166.

Updated version
Supplementary
Material

Cited articles
Citing articles

E-mail alerts
Reprints and
Subscriptions
Permissions

Access the most recent version of this article at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/68/13/5159
Access the most recent supplemental material at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/suppl/2008/06/25/68.13.5159.DC1

This article cites 33 articles, 11 of which you can access for free at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/68/13/5159.full#ref-list-1
This article has been cited by 4 HighWire-hosted articles. Access the articles at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/68/13/5159.full#related-urls

Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal.
To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications
Department at pubs@aacr.org.
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications
Department at permissions@aacr.org.

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

