FDA Funds Research to Help
Guide Tobacco Regulation
New tobacco products, young adult
smokers, and race among focus of studies

Y

oung adults overall frequently believe that little cigars and
cigarillos (LCCs) are less harmful than regular cigarettes,
and racial and ethnic minorities in particular are smoking
more of them, according to Kymberle Sterling, DrPH, MPH,
an associate professor at the Georgia State University School of
Public Health in Atlanta. “Our research shows that not only
the manner in which they’re smoking them but the flavors of
these products affect their risk perceptions,” Dr. Sterling says.
Her research is just one of a broad range of grants
around the country being funded by the US Food and Drug
Administration (FDA) to better understand tobacco product
use and how to regulate it. In 2009, Congress passed the
Family Smoking Prevention and Tobacco Control Act, which
created the Center for Tobacco Products at the FDA. The act
also enabled the FDA to regulate cigarettes, cigarette tobacco,
roll-your-own tobacco, and smokeless tobacco.

Cancer
CANCER

November 1, 2015
NOVEMBER 1, 2015

Although cigarette smoking has continued to decline, new
products on the marketplace are on the increase. The 2014
National Youth Tobacco Survey conducted by the Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention showed that more middle
and high school students are using electronic cigarettes
(E-cigarettes) than traditional cigarettes and 2.2 million
students reported using 2 or more types of tobacco products.
Such data are one reason that in 2014 the FDA proposed a new
rule to extend its authority to cover other tobacco products,
including E-cigarettes and LCCs.
Dr. Sterling and others are busy gathering data that will
help provide regulators with better insights into the use of all
these products.
In her case, the FDA funded 2 of her research projects. The
first, now completed, developed measures to accurately assess
use of, as well as attitudes and beliefs about, LCCs among young
adults aged 18 to 45 years. The second, which is currently still
underway, is evaluating young adults’ risk perceptions of LCCs
and how they correlate with actual smoking behavior.
The latter grant included focus groups conducted among
90 young adults in the Atlanta area as well a survey of 1000
young adults across the country, represented by one-third
white, one-third African American, and one-third Hispanic
participants.
“Preliminary findings show that African Americans and
Hispanics are using more of these products than whites, and
males are using them more than females,” Dr. Sterling says.
“We’re also seeing that young adults are not necessarily using
LCCs as intended, with tobacco inside.” Some are using them
to smoke as “blunts,” with the tobacco removed from inside
and replaced with marijuana, she notes.
Also prevalent is the use of flavored LCCs, which come in a
variety of flavors. There is a strong perception among the many
young adults in her studies that these versions of smoking are
less harmful or harmless compared with cigarettes. “They
believe they are natural and really safe to smoke,” she says,
adding that the flavored LCCs, including their scent and
colorful packaging, help make them appear safe and appealing.
The fact that these products are particularly popular
among young adults of color is a pressing concern as well.
“Our findings suggest that the use of fruit and sweet flavors
in LCCs is a tried-and-true tactic that the cigar industries are
using to lure young adult smokers—particularly women and
minorities—to initiate LCC smoking,” Dr. Sterling says.
Participants in the study noted that they also found
smoking flavored LCCs to be more palatable and pleasurable.
Furthermore, LCCs are inexpensive (2 to 3 LCCs cost as little

3751
1

© MICHAELJUNG / SHUTTERSTOCK.COM

Oncology Issues in Focus | BY CARRIE PRINTZ

as 99 cents) and are readily available at point-of-sale at gas
stations and convenience stores, she adds.
Dr. Sterling says the implications of her research are 2-fold.
First, because the FDA is proposing to deem LCCs under its
authority, the data suggest that the agency develop a product
standard that restricts flavors in the products and create a
public education campaign concerning the harmful effects of
LCCs. Second, the FDA should make product standards for
LCC components such as filters, tips, or mouthpieces.

Reduced Nicotine Products
Eric Donny, PhD, director of the Center for the Evaluation
of Nicotine in Cigarettes at the University of Pittsburgh in
Pennsylvania, is seeking to determine whether reducing nicotine
in combustible tobacco products, particularly cigarettes, will
improve public health. “There have been a number of relatively
small studies on reduced nicotine cigarettes suggesting that
they may reduce how much people smoke and may help them
quit without much risk of adverse events,” he says.
The reduced nicotine strategy is completely different from
“light” cigarettes that are ventilated to produce less nicotine in
the smoke; rather, this type of cigarette has reduced nicotine
in the tobacco itself. The problem with light cigarettes, Dr.
Donny says, is that people compensate by blocking the
ventilation holes or inhaling deeper.
Tobacco companies have had this type of “denicotinized”
tobacco technology for many years and have produced and
sold them in the past, but none are currently on the market
in the United States because they do not sell very well, he says.
Dr. Donny and his colleagues are conducting large clinical
trials to further assess how useful these types of cigarettes
would be as an FDA product standard. The FDA is funding
2 of his trials that are following participants over time to
determine what happens to their smoking behaviors with these
products. For their research, investigators are using National
Institute of Health-made cigarettes that have varying levels of
nicotine. Some of them can have as much as a 97% reduction
in nicotine.
Researchers are analyzing several different levels of nicotine
and also comparing reduced-nicotine cigarette smokers with a
control group. One trial has already been completed, and Dr.
Donny hopes to have the results soon. Three other ongoing
trials include those examining:
• What happens if nicotine is reduced gradually over time
versus immediately;
• Whether having nicotine replacement (the patch) would
be more helpful in transitioning to cigarettes with low
nicotine content; and
• How smokers with schizophrenia handle cigarettes with
low nicotine content.
These multisite studies involve daily smokers aged 18 and
older who are generally in good health. Participants are not
necessarily individuals who want to quit smoking right away.
Dr. Donny says the regulatory question he and his colleagues
are attempting to answer is, “If cigarettes were to change in this
way, what would happen to the average smoker?”
3752

Population Overview
A third FDA-funded study, in partnership with the National
Institute for Drug Abuse, is the longitudinal Population
Assessment of Tobacco and Health (PATH) study. The
PATH study seeks to learn how and why people start using
tobacco, switch from one tobacco product to another, quit,
and start using it again after they have quit. Researchers also
are gathering information regarding new products such as
E-cigarettes; tobacco product disease progression; addiction;
changes in awareness, knowledge, attitudes, and beliefs about
tobacco products; the evolving tobacco product market; and
regulatory activities.
Led by Andrew Hyland, PhD, chair of the department
of health behavior at Roswell Park Cancer Institute in
Buffalo, New York, the study involves scientific partners from
institutions across the country. The nationally representative
sample of 46,000 participants aged older than 12 years will
include never, current, and former tobacco users and will
provide significant data for informing the FDA’s regulatory
mission, Dr. Hyland says. He adds that researchers are
oversampling for both young adults and tobacco users.

Our ﬁndings suggest that the use
of fruit and sweet ﬂavors in LCCs
is a tried-and-true tactic that the
cigar industries are using to lure
young adult smokers—particularly women and minorities—to
initiate LCC smoking.
—Kymberle Sterling, DrPH, MPH
“We have some nimbleness to the study that will allow
for new tobacco products coming on the market and evolving
and that will give us the ability to make sure we’re asking the
most appropriate questions,” he says. “A lot of our instrument
is devoted to characterizing the breadth and depth of tobacco
products that consumers are using today.”
Researchers also are collecting blood and urine samples
from the adults that could help to increase future knowledge
about biomarkers from tobacco products and overall indicators
of health.
The study, launched in 2011, calls for 3 waves of data
collection over 5 years, and the first is already completed.
Meanwhile, National Institute for Drug Abuse officials are
reviewing proposals for 9 more years and 4 additional waves
of data collection. The scientific research community will have
access to all the data for future studies, Dr. Hyland notes.
Data gathered from the PATH study also may help to
inform state and local governments about the types of policies
they may want to pursue regarding the regulation of tobacco
products such as E-cigarettes, he adds.
DOI: 10.1002/cncr.29005

Cancer

November 1, 2015

