Oncotarget, Vol. 7, No. 7

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Sonic hedgehog inhibitors prevent colitis-associated cancer via
orchestrated mechanisms of IL-6/gp130 inhibition, 15-PGDH
induction, Bcl-2 abrogation, and tumorsphere inhibition
Napapan Kangwan1, Yoon-Jae Kim2, Young Min Han1, Migyeong Jeong1, Jong-Min
Park1, Eun-Jin Go1, Ki-Baik Hahm1,3
1
2
3

CHA Cancer Prevention Research Center, CHA Cancer Institute, CHA University, Seongnam, Korea
Department of Gastroenterology, Gachon University Gil Medical Center, Incheon, Korea
Digestive Disease Center, CHA University Bundang Medical Center, Seongnam, Korea

Correspondence to: K
 i-Baik Hahm, e-mail: hahmkb@cha.ac.kr
Keywords: sonic hedgehog (SHH), colitis associated cancer (CAC), anti-inflammation, 15-PGDH, cancer stem cell
Received: August 10, 2015	

Accepted: November 26, 2015	

Published: December 26, 2015

ABSTRACT
Sonic hedgehog (SHH) signaling is essential in normal development of the
gastrointestinal (GI) tract, whereas aberrantly activated SHH is implicated in GI
cancers because it facilitates carcinogenesis by redirecting stem cells. Since colitisassociated cancer (CAC) is associated with inflammatory bowel diseases, in which SHH
and IL-6 signaling, inflammation propagation, and cancer stem cell (CSC) activation
have been implicated, we hypothesized that SHH inhibitors may prevent CAC by
blocking the above SHH-related carcinogenic pathways. In the intestinal epithelial
cells IEC-6 and colon cancer cells HCT-116, IL-6 expression and its signaling were
assessed with SHH inhibitors and levels of other inflammatory mediators, proliferation,
apoptosis, tumorsphere formation, and tumorigenesis were also measured. CAC was
induced in C57BL/6 mice by administration of azoxymethane followed by dextran
sodium sulfate administration. SHH inhibitors were administered by oral gavage
and the mice were sacrificed at 16 weeks. TNF-α–stimulated IEC-6 cells exhibited
increased levels of proinflammatory cytokines and enzymes, whereas SHH inhibitors
suppressed TNF-α–induced inflammatory signaling, especially IL-6/IL-6R/gp130
signaling. SHH inhibitors significantly induced apoptosis, inhibited cell proliferation,
suppressed tumorsphere formation, and reduced stemness factors. In the mouse
model, SHH inhibitors significantly reduced tumor incidence and multiplicity,
decreased the expression of IL-6, TNF-α, COX-2, STAT3, and NF-kB, and significantly
induced apoptosis. In colosphere xenografts, SHH inhibitor significantly suppressed
tumorigenesis by inhibiting tumorsphere formation. Taken together, our data suggest
that administration of SHH inhibitors could be an effective strategy to prevent colitisinduced colorectal carcinogenesis, mainly by targeting IL-6 signaling, ablating CSCs,
and suppressing oncogenic inflammation, achieving chemoquiescence ultimately.

INTRODUCTION

Since IBD have clinical features of chronic relapsing
inflammation, several proinflammatory cytokines
such as TNF-α, IL-6, and IL-1β can induce mutagenic
environments such as increased levels of intracellular
reactive oxygen species and reactive nitrogen species,
which induce DNA damage as well as epigenetic changes
that silence tumor suppressors and promote tumor
initiation [4–6]. These events link the pathogenesis of
IBD and that of CAC. CAC can be preventable through

Colorectal cancer (CRC) is one of the most
commonly diagnosed malignancies and the third leading
cause of cancer deaths in developed countries [1] Colitisassociated cancer (CAC) is the subtype of CRC that
is associated with long-standing inﬂammatory bowel
disorders (IBD) including Crohn’s disease and ulcerative
colitis, and accounts for 15–20% of CRC cases [2, 3].
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

7667

Oncotarget

RESULTS

regular surveillance of high-risk patients with IBD and
intervention with potent anti-inflammatory agents. Unless
CAC is detected early, patients have rather poor prognosis
and show resistance to cancer therapeutics [7], which can
be explained by the facts that cancer stem cell (CSC) foci
still persist in inflamed colon tissue even after the removal
of cancer tissues and the possible presence of other target
implicated in oncogenic inflammatory mediators such as
IL-6, regenerating gene-l alpha (REG-1α), etc beyond
current targeting TNF-α [8].
The redox-sensitive NF-κB pathway, which
regulates proinflammatory responses, is markedly
activated in patients with IBD through transcriptional
activation of the expression of several proinflammatory
genes such as TNF-α, iNOS, IL-2, IL-6, IL-8, and IL-12.
In particular, IL-6, a crucial NF-κB–dependent
tumorigenic cytokine, binds to a soluble form of IL-6
receptor (IL-6R), and this complex interacts with gp130;
the IL-6–IL-6R– gp130 complex dimerizes and induces
phosphorylation of STAT3, a cytoplasmic protein that
functions as a transcriptional activator and plays a pivotal
role in the regulation of different types of immune and
inflammatory responses. Phosphorylated STAT3 dimerizes
and translocates into the nucleus, where it binds to
specific DNA motifs and activates the transcription of
distinct groups of genes implicated in inflammation and
carcinogenesis [9]. The importance of the IL-6 family of
proinflammatory cytokines and STAT3 in CAC is well
known [10].
Chronic inflammatory diseases of the gut, including
IBD, are accompanied by increased epithelial sonic
hedgehog (SHH) signaling, the abnormal persistence
of which or ectopic expression of SHH may stimulate
abnormal stem cell hyperplasia, providing a critical step
in the neoplastic transformation of the gut tissues [11].
Conversely, inhibition of SHH signaling reduces local
neutrophil infiltration and expression of proinflammatory
cytokines such as TNF-α and IL-6 [12]. Re-activation of
embryonic SHH signaling, which is essential in normal
GI tract organogenesis, can lead to an abnormal healing
process associated with oncogenesis, cancer resistance
to therapy, and relapse [13, 14]. Among these stem cell
pathways, the SHH signaling pathway is essential for
prenatal development and controlling differentiation,
maintaining stem cell niches, and determining the cellular
response to injury in adults.
In the current study, we documented the role of
IL-6/IL-6R/gp130/STAT3 signaling in CAC, investigated
whether SHH inhibitors can abrogate oncogenic IL-6
signaling, impose anti-inflammatory effects, preserve
15-hydroxyprostaglandin dehydrogenase (15-PGDH as
confidential tumor-suppressive pathways, induce apoptosis
through Gli-1–dependent down-regulation of Bcl-2, and
kill CSC presented in colosphere xenografts.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

SHH inhibitors significantly inhibit TNF-α–
stimulated IL-6 and its receptor IL-6R/gp130
signaling through STAT3
The IL-6/STAT3 signaling pathway has an essential
role in driving a variety of biological responses to
inflammatory challenge and is the principal signaling
pathway implicated in CAC [15]. To study the effects of
the SHH inhibitors cerulenin and cyclopamine on IL-6/
gp130/STAT3 signaling, IEC-6 cells were challenged
with 50 ng/ml TNF-α for 6 h (Supplementary Figure 1A).
TNF-α significantly increased the levels of IL-6 and gp30,
whereas treatment with 10 mg/ml cerulenin or 30 µM
cyclopamine significantly decreased the levels of IL-6
or gp130 mRNAs (Figure 1A) and proteins (Figure 1B).
Cyclopamine and cerulenin significantly inhibited TNF-α–
induced Cox-2, IL-6, and Smo (Supplementary Figure 1B).
Therefore, we next checked the effects of SHH inhibitors
on the activity of luciferase expressed under the control of
the IL-6 promoter. IL-6 promoter activity was significantly
increased by TNF-α, and its TNF-α–induced activity was
significantly decreased by cerulenin or cyclopamine (p
< 0.01 for both inhibitors, Figure 1C). To verify these
findings, the level and location of IL-6 and gp130 receptor
were determined by ELISA (Figure 1D) and confocal
imaging (Figure 1B), respectively. TNF-α significantly
increased, whereas SHH inhibitors significantly decreased
the levels of IL-6 and gp130. Since IL-6 signaling is
regulated by STAT3 activation, we further examined
changes in STAT3 phosphorylation after treatment with
SHH inhibitors. As shown in Figure 1E, 1 or 10 mg/
ml cerulenin or 30 µM of cyclopamine significantly
inactivated STAT3. Although ERK and AKT inactivation
was also noted in the presence of SHH inhibitors, these
kinases were not significantly activated upon TNF-α
stimulation of IEC-6 cells (in colon cancer cells HCT-116,
ERK and AKT were significantly activated by TNF-α
and significantly inactivated by SHH inhibitors; data not
shown). The levels of Gab1 and IL-11RA mRNAs were
significantly increased by TNF-α in IEC-6 cells, whereas
SHH inhibitors significantly reduced the expression of
these genes (Figure 1F).

SHH inhibitors suppress TNF-α–induced
inflammatory mediators by inactivating
NF-κB signaling
To elucidate the effects of SHH inhibitors on
additional TNF-α–induced inflammatory mediators, we
measured Cox-2, TNF-α, iNOS, and IL-8 expression (these
inflammatory mediators are all known to be involved in

7668

Oncotarget

Figure 1: Blocking the SHH pathway suppresses the IL-6/STAT3 pathway in vitro. (A) IEC-6 cells were pretreated with

SHH inhibitors for 1 h and then stimulated with 50 ng/ml TNF-α for 6 h. Expression of mRNAs for IL-6 and its receptors was quantified
by RT-PCR and expressed relative to that of GAPDH. SHH inhibitors decreased the levels of TNF-α-induced IL-6 and mRNAs for its
receptors IL-6R and gp130. (B) IL-6 (red) and gp130 (green) were detected by multiple immunofluorescence labeling and confocal laser
scanning microscopy (×400). Sections were counterstained with DAPI (blue). The bottom panel shows a merged image. (C) IEC-6 cells
were transiently transfected with luciferase reporter plasmid containing IL-6 promoter elements. After 24 h, cells were pretreated with
SHH inhibitors for 1 h, and then stimulated with 50 ng/ml TNF-α for 6 h. Luciferase activity was then determined and normalized to
β-galactosidase activity to account for differences in transfection efficiency. (D) IL-6 concentration in conditioned medium was analyzed
by ELISA. (E) Western blot analysis showed the effect of treatment with SHH inhibitors for 3 h on the levels of TNF-α–induced STAT3,
ERK, and Akt. β-actin was used as an equal loading control. (F) Regulation of STAT3-responsive genes including SOCS3, Grb2, and Gab1
was determined by RT-PCR. All data are representative of at least three independent experiments.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

7669

Oncotarget

SHH inhibitors reduce cell survival, induce
apoptosis and inhibit cell cycle

colitis and CAC [16]) and found their significant downregulation in the presence of 10 mg/ml cerulenin or 30 µM
cyclopamine (Figure 2A). Cerulenin or cyclopamine also
significantly reduced Cox-2 promoter activity assessed
by using a luciferase assay (p < 0.01; Figure 2B). Since
transcription of these proinflammatory genes is tightly
regulated by the transcription factor NF-κB [17], we
measured the levels of phosphorylated IκBα in the
cytoplasmic fraction and NF-κB in the nuclear fraction.
Both cerulenin (10 mg/ml) and cyclopamine (30 µM)
significantly inactivated the NF-κB pathway (Figure 2C).
Similarly, both 10 mg/ml cerulenin and 30 µM
cyclopamine significantly inhibited NF-κB transcriptional
activity (p < 0.01, Figure 2D).

To investigate the effects of SHH inhibitors on
cell survival and proliferation, we first used MTT assays
to measure cell viability after treatment with each
SHH inhibitor for 24 h. There was a significant and
concentration-dependent decrease in cell viability after
incubation with 10 to 50 μg/ml cerulenin and a significant
decrease in cell viability after incubation with 50 to 200 μM
cyclopamine (p < 0.01, Figure 3A). Flow cytometry
showed a similar outcome (Supplementary Figure 2A). To
see whether reduced cell viability was caused by apoptosis
induction, the levels of caspase-8, caspase-3, cleaved

Figure 2: SHH inhibitor inhibits TNF-α–induced proinflammatory cytokines and inactivates NF-κB transcription
factor. (A) Changes in the expression of mRNAs for proinflammatory cytokines and enzymes including COX-2, TNF-α, iNOS, IL-8,
and MCP-1 were evaluated by RT-PCR. IEC-6 cells were pretreated with the indicated concentrations of SHH inhibitors for 1 h, and
then stimulated with 50 ng/mL of TNF-α for 6 h. (B) IEC-6 cells were transiently transfected with luciferase reporter plasmid containing
Cox-2 promoter elements. After 24 h, cells were pretreated with SHH inhibitors for 1 h, and then stimulated with 50 ng/ml TNF-α for
6 h. Luciferase activity was then determined and normalized to β-galactosidase activity to account for differences in transfection efficiency.
Three independent assays were performed and the data shown are the mean ± SD. (C) Effect of SHH inhibitors on TNF-α–induced
phosphorylation of IκBα. IEC-6 cells were pretreated with SHH inhibitors for 1 h followed by 50 ng/mL of TNF-α for 3 h. Nuclear
localization of NF-κB was determined by Western blot analysis. (D) Transcription factor activity of NF-kB-p65 was analyzed by ELISA.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

7670

Oncotarget

PARP, p21, and p53 were examined by Western blotting.
Significant cleavage of PARP, caspase-8, and caspase-3
was noted after incubation with SHH inhibitors, in line
with significant induction of p21 and p53 (Figure 3B).
Flow cytometry showed that these pro-apoptotic events
were more prominent with cerulenin administration and
were dose dependent (p < 0.01, Figure 3C). To further
evaluate the effects of SHH inhibitors on the execution
of apoptosis, we treated HCT-116 cells with cerulenin
(15 μg/ml) or cyclopamine (50 μM), lysed them and
screened the apoptotic markers using an apoptotic
protein array (Figure 3D, Supplementary Figure 2B).
The anti-apoptotic protein Bcl-2 and the pro-apoptotic
protein BID protein were significantly down-regulated.
The treatment also reduced the levels of the inhibitors
of apoptosis XIAP and survivin. The anti-apoptotic heat
shock proteins (HSPs) HSP60, HSP70, and HSP27,
which are a result of oxidative stress in the cell, were
also significantly repressed (p < 0.01). The results of the
protein array were validated by Western blotting for Bcl-2,
XIAP, and survivin (Figure 3E). To further validate, we
used multiplex qRT-PCR analyses of cyclin D1, cyclin E,
CDK4, and p21 (Supplementary Figure 2C). We found
that SHH inhibitors reduced the levels of cyclin D1
and cyclin E proteins (Figure 3F). A DCFH-DA assay
showed that SHH inhibitors induced oxidative stress in
cells (Supplementary Figure 2D). To confirm the effect
SHH inhibitors on the SHH signaling pathway in colorectal
cancer, we investigated their effects on proliferation and
SHH/Patched/Smo/Gli signaling in HT-29 colorectal cancer
cells. We observed a significant and concentration-dependent
decrease in cell viability after 24 h of incubation with 10 to
50 μg/ml cerulenin and a significant decrease in cell viability
in the presence of 25 to 200 μM cyclopamine (p < 0.001,
Supplementary Figure 3A). Cerulenin and cyclopamine
significantly decreased the levels of the SHH, Patched,
Smo, and Gli-1 proteins (Supplementary Figure 3B)
and corresponding mRNAs (Supplementary Figure 3C).

a suggestion that SHH inhibitors significantly inhibit cell
proliferation and migration.

SHH inhibitors suppress colonocyte migration
and proliferation

To validate the above cancer-preventive actions
of SHH inhibitors in vivo, we used the azoxymethane
(AOM)-initiated, dextran sodium sulfate (DSS)-promoted
CAC model (Figure 6A). Mice were sacrificed on the 16th
week; they showed a significant reduction in colon length
and in the number of developed colitic tumors (arrows
in Figure 6A). When we analyzed tumor incidence,
tumor multiplicity, and tumor size, the cerulenin-treated
groups (3 and 4), showed a significant decrease in tumor
incidence, tumor multiplicity and tumor size (p < 0.05,
Figure 6B). Since our in vitro experiments described above
consistently showed that SHH inhibitors inhibit IL-6 and
TNF-α signaling, we measured the expression of IL-6 and
TNF-α in each group. A significant reduction in the levels
of IL-6 and TNF-α was noted in SHH inhibitor–treated
groups in comparison with the control group (p < 0.01,
Figure 6C). We also measured STAT3 phosphorylation

SHH inhibitors significantly inhibit the
expression of stemness factors as well as
tumorsphere formation and survival
Stem cell pathways may play an important role
in colon cancers and may be potential treatment targets.
Among these pathways, the SHH signaling pathway is
essential in either prenatal development in embryonal
cells or in controlling differentiation, maintaining stem
cell niches, and determining the cellular response to injury
in adults [18]. Treatment with SHH inhibitors for 24 h
significantly reduced the expression of all stemness markers
examined (CD44, Nanog, Oct-4A, c-kit, and ABCG2) in a
dose-dependent manner (p < 0.01; Figure 5A). Based on
these findings, we hypothesized that SHH inhibitors can
inhibit tumorsphere formation or ablate tumorspheres.
Indeed, various concentrations of SHH inhibitors (except
10 µM cyclopamine) significantly inhibited tumorsphere
formation compared to control (p < 0.01, Figure 5B,
upper part). Addition of cerulenin or cyclopamine after
tumorsphere formation significantly reduced survival
of colospheres in a dose-dependent manner (p < 0.05,
Figure 5B, lower part). Using an anchorage-independent
growth assay, we further evaluated whether SHH inhibitors
would affect the colony-forming capacity of HCT-116
tumorsphere cells. As shown in Figure 5C, the colonyforming capacity was significantly reduced in the presence
of SHH inhibitors in a dose-dependent manner (p < 0.01).
These results suggest that SHH inhibitors significantly
reduce either tumorsphere formation or tumorsphere
survival in a dose-dependent manner.

SHH inhibitor significantly prevented
azoxymethane-initiated, dextran sodium
sulfate–promoted CAC in mice

Next, we conducted a wound healing assay to check
the effects of SHH inhibitors on proliferation and migration
of HCT-116 cells. A significant inhibition of wound healing
was observed with both cerulenin and cyclopamine
(p < 0.05, Figure 4A), in contrast to a nearly complete
wound closure in control cells. Since β-catenin activation
is known to be the principal driver of cell proliferation
and migration, we checked β-catenin nuclear translocation
using nuclear fractions and its phosphorylation levels
using cytoplasmic fractions. Cerulenin or cyclopamine
significantly reduced β-catenin phosphorylation and
nuclear translocation (Figure 4B and 4C). Likewise, SHH
inhibitors also decreased the number of BrdU-positive cells
(p < 0.05, Figure 4D). All these findings are consistent with
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

7671

Oncotarget

Figure 3: SHH inhibitors provoke apoptosis and a change in cell cycle in HCT-116 cells. (A) HCT-116 cells were treated

with the indicated concentrations of SHH inhibitors for 24 h, and their viability was determined by the MTT assay. The results are presented
relative to the viability of untreated cells (control), which was considered as 1, and are means ± SD. *p < 0.01 in comparison with untreated
cells. (B) Western blots showing a significant increase in apoptotic proteins (cleaved caspase-3, cleaved caspase-8, and cleaved PARP) after
treatment with SHH inhibitors for 24 h. (C) HCT-116 cells were treated with SHH inhibitors for 24 h and analyzed by flow cytometry with
FITC–Annexin V and propidium iodide (PI) staining to verify the induction of apoptosis. (D) Apoptosis protein array analysis of HCT-116
cells (untreated or treated with 15 µg/ml cerulenin or 50 µM cyclopamine for 24 h). (E) Western blots showing a significant decrease in
anti-apoptotic proteins (Bcl-2, survivin, and XIAP). (F) The expression of the cell cycle markers CDK4, Cyclin D1, Cyclin E, and p21 was
assessed by Western blot analysis after treatment with an SHH inhibitor. Data are means ± SD, *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01 in comparison with
untreated control.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

7672

Oncotarget

and NF-κB nuclear translocation and found that both
were significantly inhibited by SHH inhibitor (p < 0.05,
Figure 6D). Serum levels of IL-6 and TNF-α were also
significantly decreased by SHH inhibitors (Supplementary
Figure 4A and 4B). Because transcriptional activation
of these cytokines were all provoked with chemotaxis
including macrophages and monocytes [19], we carried
out immunohistochemical staining with antibodies
against NF-κB p65 and anti-F4/80. The numbers of
cells expressing NF-kB p65 or F4/80 were significantly
increased in the AOM+DSS group compared with the
normal group (p < 0.01, Supplementary Figure 4C
and 4D; Figure 6E), but was significantly decreased in
the presence of SHH inhibitors (p < 0.05, Figure 6E).
Interestingly, the expression of COX-2 was significantly
increased in the AOM+DSS group (p < 0.05, Figure 6F),
whereas that of 15-PGDH, a prostaglandin-degrading
enzyme that is highly expressed in normal colon mucosa
but is ubiquitously lost in human colon cancers [20], was
significantly decreased in the AOM+DSS group (p < 0.05,

Figure 6F). SHH inhibitor significantly decreased COX-2
expression and significantly increased that of 15-PGDH in
comparison with the AOM+DSS group (p < 0.05, Figure
6F). Since our in vitro experiments described above, SHH
inhibitors significantly induced apoptosis executors and
significantly attenuated anti-apoptotic molecules, we
performed TUNEL staining and Western blot analysis of
cleaved caspase-3, XIAP, and Bcl-2 in different mouse
groups. As shown in Figure 6G, a significant increase in
the apoptotic index and in the level of cleaved caspase-3
was observed in the group treated with SHH inhibitors.
These results suggest that oral administration of SHH
inhibitors provoked significant apoptosis in CAC.

Significant inhibition of colosphere formation
and tumor xenograft by SHH inhibitors
Since SHH signaling has been implicated in
embryogenesis, SHH inhibitors can specifically target
CSCs [21]. Therefore, we hypothesized that SHH

Figure 4: SHH inhibitors suppress HCT-116 cell migration and proliferation. (A) Wound healing assays were carried out in

6-well plates. A line of cells in a confluent monolayer was damaged by scratching. Cell motility was examined under a light microscope
(×40 magnification) for the indicated durations (24 h). (B) SHH inhibitor treatment decreased phosphorylation of β-catenin, but did not
change the levels of GSK-3 (C) β-Catenin expression in different animal groups was assessed by using immunofluorescence staining.
(D) The percentage of BrdU-positive cells was significantly lower in the presence of SHH inhibitors than in the control group.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

7673

Oncotarget

Figure 5: Effects of SHH inhibitors on stemness and sphere formation. (A) Blocking the SHH pathway inhibited the expression

of the colon cancer stem cell markers CD44, Nanog, Oct-4A, c-Kit, and ABCG2. HCT-116 cells were treated with SHH inhibitors for 24 h
and cell extracts were analyzed by Western blotting. (B) SHH inhibitors attenuated tumorsphere formation and survival in a dose-dependent
manner (upper part). Secondary tumorspheres were grown in serum-free medium (as described in Methods) for 7 days in the presence or
absence of SHH inhibitors. The total number of tumorspheres formed from 500 single cells is shown in the lower part. (C) Effects of SHH
inhibitors on the colony formation ability of tumorsphere cells under anchorage-independent conditions were assessed by soft agar assays.
A representative photograph of a colony is shown on the left. Statistical analysis is shown on the right. All data are representative of three
independent experiments.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

7674

Oncotarget

Figure 6: SHH inhibitors prevent AOM-initiated, DSS-promoted colitis-associated cancer. (A) Overview of the experimental

protocol of the AOM+DSS model (left panel) and representative gross appearance of mouse colons (right panel). Group 1; control, Group 2;
AOM + DSS, Group 3; AOM + DSS + cerulenin 10 mg/kg, Group 4; AOM + DSS + cerulenin 30 mg/kg, Group 5; AOM + DSS +
itraconazole 100 mg/kg. Black arrows indicate tumor location in colon tissue (right panel). (B) Tumor incidence (left), multiplicity
(middle), and size (right). Data are means ± SD (n = 9 in each group). Inhibition of the SHH pathway decreased the expression of
proinflammatory cytokines, inactivated the NF-κB and STAT3 pathways and promoted apoptosis in a colitis-associated colon cancer mouse
model. (C) The levels of IL-6 and TNF-α mRNAs were determined by RT-PCR. (D) SHH inhibitors inactivated NF-κB and STAT3.
Nuclear extracts were analyzed by Western blotting (n = 4). (E) Localization and expression levels of NF-κB and F4/80 were analyzed by
immunohistochemistry in different groups (see Supplementary Figure 5A and 5B for immunohistochemical staining of NF-κB p65 and F4/80,
respectively). (F) Effect of SHH inhibitors on the expression of COX-2 and 15-PGDH. The mean expression level is shown for each group.
(G) TUNEL staining was performed to compare apoptosis in different groups (×200 magnification). Apoptotic index is shown for each group.
*p < 0.01 vs. Group 2 (lower left). Equal amounts of total protein extracted from colon tissues were subjected to Western blot analysis using
antibodies against Bcl-2, XIAP, and cleaved caspase-3. Data are means ± SD (lower right).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

7675

Oncotarget

inhibitors would be able to ablate CSCs. Figure 5B and 5C
shows that SHH inhibitors specifically and significantly
inhibited colosphere formation, supporting the hypothesis
that their cancer-preventive effects might be due to
CSC ablation (Figure 7A). SHH inhibitors significantly
inhibited tumorigenesis in a tumorsphere xenograft model
(p < 0.05, Figure 7B). Compared to the colon cancer cell
xenograft model, colospheres induced significant faster
tumorigenesis and larger tumors (data not shown), whereas
SHH inhibitors significantly inhibited tumorigenesis. Even
more remarkable changes were noted on pathological
observation of resected tumors: besides significantly
decreased tumor size, the presence of intact tumor cells
in tumor nests was significantly decreased in the group
treated with SHH inhibitors (p < 0.01, Figure 7C). The
fact that intact tumor sheets were significantly decreased
by SHH inhibitors in addition to a significant reduction in
tumor size was further confirmed by TUNEL staining of
resected xenograft tumors: the number of TUNEL-positive
cells was significantly increased by SHH inhibitors
(p < 0.01, Figure 7C).

as a potential strategy to prevent CAC, our study suggests
that SHH inhibition to target IL-6 is another strategy
to either prevent cancer or kill CSCs, which was never
achieved before the current investigation.
SHH signaling is associated with processes such
as gut development and maintenance of gut homeostasis
[26, 27]. For instance, the SHH protein is frequently
detected in gastric metaplasias in the adult human GI
tract. Since it has recently been reported that epithelial
malignancies of the adult gut are induced by both chronic
inflammation and abnormal SHH expression or signaling,
and that inflammatory environments often increase the
expression of SHH ligands [28, 29], the SHH signaling–
related transcription factor Gli-1 is a central mediator of the
IL-6 signaling network and thereby can initiate the tumor
microenvironment in CAC and regulate the progression of
precursor lesions and tumor formation. Inversely, the loss
of Gli-1 function diminishes IL-6 signaling from tumorassociated fibroblasts, which prevents progression of
pancreatic precursor lesions to advanced stages [30]. In the
current study, we demonstrated, for the first time, that the
use of SHH inhibitors can be an effective strategy to prevent
inflammation-induced carcinogenesis, especially CAC,
from efficient inhibition of IL-6 and its signaling to global
inhibition of several inflammatory mediators (Figure 1).
Although we have reported previously that administration
of anti-inflammatory agents such as infliximab, 8-OHdG,
and pantoprazole effectively prevented CAC mainly by
inhibiting TNF-α and related oncogenic mechanisms
[24, 25], SHH inhibitors were more effective than the
previously tested compounds in preventing CAC through
inhibition of IL-6 and CSC ablation.
Concurrent with the inhibition of IL-6 signaling,
another significant effect of SHH inhibitors observed in
the current study was blocking of inflammation-prone
oncogenic mechanisms via induction of NAD-dependent
15-PGDH, which plays a major role in catabolism of
the naturally occurring prostaglandin PGE2 by oxidizing
its 15-hydroxyl group to inactive 15-keto metabolites;
the induction of 15-PGDH was one of the prominent
preventive effects of SHH inhibitors against CAC.
15-PGDH is highly expressed in normal colon epithelium,
but its expression is strongly decreased in colon cancers [20];
therefore, agents that both enhance 15-PGDH expression
and suppress COX-2 production may more effectively
prevent CAC, as exemplified by the achievements with a
synthetic triterpenoid or NSAIDs. We speculate that one of
the core mechanisms of how SHH inhibitors prevent CAC
can be explained by the finding that inflammatory cytokines
(IL-6 in the current study) significantly suppress 15-PGDH
expression, whereas SHH inhibitors significantly preserve
15-PGDH in the colon (Figure 6F).
In addition to the regulation of inflammatory
mediators by SHH inhibitors, previous studies have shown
that Bcl-2 is a target protein of Gli in the SHH signaling
pathway [31] because Gli regulates the expression of

DISCUSSION
In the current study, we documented, for the first
time, that SHH inhibitors can prevent CAC through the
following novel mechanisms: 1) significant inhibition
of IL-6 signaling through STAT3 inactivation as well
as TNF-α attenuation through NF-κB repression, 2)
significant inhibition of β-catenin–dependent cell
proliferation accompanied by significant induction of
apoptosis, 3) preservation of 15-PGDH to counteract
oncogenic signaling of COX-2, and 4) ablation of CSCs as
shown by significant inhibition of tumorsphere formation;
all these concerted mechanisms are schematically
summarized in Figure 7D. Chronic inflammation has
been recognized as an important risk factor for CRC,
because it can promote carcinogenesis by inducing
gene mutations, inhibiting apoptosis, or stimulating
angiogenesis and cell proliferation [6]. Especially in
CAC, gene mutations could occur in both neoplastic and
normal cells, and were attributed to oxidative stress to
DNA caused by chronic inflammation. In this respect,
NF-κB provides a mechanistic link between inflammation
and cancer, whereas other factors such as TNF-a and
IL-6–induced signaling have been recently shown to
promote tumor growth in colitic carcinogenesis [22].
The proinflammatory mediators, especially cytokines
and chemokines, which function as driving forces for
carcinogenesis, participate in every stage of initiation,
promotion, and progression implicated in carcinogenesis
[23]. Therefore, chemopreventive compounds inhibit
carcinogenesis by inhibiting cell proliferation, inducing
apoptosis, and suppressing the proinflammatory cytokines
in adenocarcinomas that develop in the inflamed colon [24,
25]. Although TNF-α inhibition has been acknowledged
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

7676

Oncotarget

Figure 7: SHH inhibitors significantly inhibit cancer stem cell activation. (A) The overall scheme of the use of SHH inhibitors

to prevent colitis-associated colon cancer. (B) Mean tumor weights in the control group and groups treated with SHH inhibitors (cerulenin
or cyclopamine). Both SHH inhibitors significantly inhibited tumorigenesis (p < 0.05). (C) Xenograft tumors were subjected to H & E,
DAPI, and TUNEL assay. The SHH inhibitors significantly decreased the numbers of tumor nests and living tumor cells, and significantly
increased the number of TUNEL-positive cells, *p < 0.01 (×100 magnification). (D) A scheme of the preventive actions of SHH inhibitors
against colitis-associated cancer: 1) significant inhibition of IL-6 signaling through STAT3 inactivation as well as TNF-α attenuation
through NF-κB repression, 2) significant inhibition of β-catenin–dependent cell proliferation and significant induction of apoptosis,
3) preservation of 15-hydroxyprostaglandin dehydrogenase (15-PGDH) to counteract oncogenic signaling of COX-2, and 4) ablation of
cancer stem cells resulting in significant inhibition of tumorsphere formation.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

7677

Oncotarget

Bcl-2. For instance, in a study on basal cell carcinoma,
the Bcl-2 promoter was found to have seven potential Gli
anchor points, which enable Gli proteins to regulate Bcl-2
activity through transcriptional regulation of the Bcl-2
promoter. In medulloblastoma samples, Gli-1 expression
was clearly correlated with Bcl-2 mRNA levels. Therefore,
when cyclopamine blocks SHH signaling to decrease Gli-1
mRNA expression, a corresponding decrease in Bcl-2
mRNA can occur, which can promote apoptosis of tumor
cells. Furthermore, an SHH inhibitor reduced viability and
promoted apoptosis in the cancer cell line HCT-116. These
effects were observed together with an increase in the
cleaved forms of apoptotic proteins caspase-3 and PARP,
and a reduction in anti-apoptotic Bcl-2 and survivin levels
(Figure 3). Furthermore, an SHH inhibitor also inhibited
proliferation through decreased levels of CDK4, cyclin D,
and cyclin E and increased p21.
Recent publications have shown that, although HH
signaling is associated with the neoplastic process, SHH is
very important as an essential niche factor that maintains
touch-dome stem cells [32]. On the contrary, contributing
factors of CSCs, especially in cancer management, are
their “bad” functions including treatment resistance,
recurrence, and metastasis; usually their activation of
different signaling pathways such as Notch, Wnt/β-catenin,
PI3K/Akt/mTOR, JAK/STAT, and HH signaling pathways
[33]. Therefore, even though there is a crosstalk between
different embryonic developmental signaling pathways
relevant to CSCs [34], novel chemotherapeutic agents that
target CSCs (either individually or, ideally, in combinations)
to inhibit compensatory escape mechanisms are attractive
pharmaceutical candidates. Although our knowledge of the
mechanisms of activation of the Hh pathway in CSCs from
most tumor types is limited [35], several studies clearly
indicate that CSCs from many tumor types are sensitive to
HH inhibitors and that HH-targeted therapeutics can block
transforming pathways that lead to CSCs. In the current
study, we found that SHH inhibitors were very effective
in either blocking tumorsphere formation or killing already
formed tumorspheres (Figure 5B), leading to significant
inhibition of colonsphere xenografts (Figure 7B).
In conclusion, SHH inhibition can be an ideal
opportunity to seize both mutagenic inflammation
and CSC features to prevent cancer, simply achieving
chemoquiescence. However, further efforts to develop an
efficient, potent, and safe SHH inhibitor are required for
eventual clinical application.

follows: ERK, pERK, NF-kB p50, FAS, FADD, XIAP,
Survivin, and β-actin from Santa Cruz Biotechnology
(Santa Cruz, CA); Cox-2 was from Thermo Scientific
(Fremont, CA); other antibodies from Cell signaling
technology (Danvers, MA). Horseradish peroxidaseconjugated anti-rat/rabbit/mouse/goat IgG was purchased
Santa Cruz Biotechnology (Santa Cruz, CA). Primers for
RT-PCR were synthesized by Bioneer (Seoul, Korea).
Reverse transcriptase was from Promega (Madison, WI).
Azoxymethane (AOM) was purchased from SigmaAldrich (St. Louis, MO) and dissolved in distilled water.
Dextran sulfate sodium salt (DSS) was purchased from
MP biomedicals (Morgan Irvine, CA). All other materials
were obtained in the highest available grade.

Cell culture
Rat intestinal epithelial cells (IEC-6) and human
colorectal cells HCT-116 were obtained from the American
Type Culture Collection (ATCC, Rockville, MD)
and maintained according to the ATCC’s instructions.
IEC-6 cells were maintained in DMEM medium and HCT116 were maintained in McCoy’s 5a Medium Modified
containing 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS) (Hyclone,
Thermo, Utah, USA), and 1% penicillin /streptomycin at
37°C in a humidified atmosphere with 5% CO2.

Preparation of cytoplasmic and nuclear protein
extract
Nuclear–cytoplasmic fractionation was conducted
using the NE-PER Nuclear and Cytoplasmic Extraction
Reagents kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Rockford, lL)
according to the manufacturer’s protocol. The protein
concentration was measured by BCA protein assay reagent
and stored extracts at −80°C until use.

Western blot analysis
Equal amounts of protein were separated by
SDS-PAGE and electrophoretically transferred to
polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF) membranes (Millipore,
Bedford, MA, USA). The membrane was blocked at room
temperature with 5% nonfat dry milk in PBS containing
0.1% Tween (PBS-T). Membrane was washed three
with PBS-T and incubated with the primary antibodies
overnight at 4°C. After washing three times with PBS-T,
the membrane was incubated with the second antibodies
at RT for 1 hour with 3% nonfat dry milk in PBS-T, and
the membrane was washed with PBS-T for three times.
The membrane was visualized using West-zol Plus (Intron
biotechnology, Seongnam).

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Reagents
SHH inhibitors including cerulenin, cyclopamine,
and itraconazole were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich
(St. Louis, MO). Recombinant human TNF-α (rhTNF-α)
was purchased from R & D Systems (Minneapolis, MN).
Primary antibodies for western blotting were purchased as
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

RNA isolation and RT-PCR
Total RNA were isolated from cells using TRIzol
(Life technologies, Carlsbad, CA). The cells were washed
7678

Oncotarget

twice time with PBS and then incubated in TRIzol for
10 min at 4°C. Further 200 μL of chloroform was added and
gently mixed. After incubation for 10 min on ice, samples
were centrifuged at 13,200 rpm for 15 min. Supernatants
were mixed with 500 μL of isopropanol, and incubated
at 4°C for 15 min. After centrifuging at 13,200 rpm for
10 min, pellets were washed with 70% (v/v) ethanol.
After allowing the ethanol to evaporate completely, pellets
were dissolved in 100 μL of diethylenepyrocarbonate
(DEPC)-treated water (Invitrogen Life Technologies,
Carlsbad, CA). The quality of total RNA was measure
by the ratio of A260/A280 using Nanodrop 2000
spectrophotometer (Thermo Scientific, Wilmington, DE).
cDNA was prepared using reverse transcriptase originating
from Murine Moloney leukemia virus (Promega, Madison,
WI), according to the manufacturer’s instructions. PCR
was performed 30 cycles of: 94°C for 30 s, 58°C for
30 s, and 72°C for 45 s. The sequences of PCR primers
used were as follows (See Supplementary Table 1).

in complete growth medium. Cells were transiently
cotransfected with 0.8 μg/well of translucent IL-6 or Cox-2
reporter vector. IL-6-luciferase reporter construct were gift
from Dr. Seong Ho Jeon (Hanllym University, Chooncheon,
Korea) and Cox-2-luciferase reporter construct were
gift from Dr. Byung Ju Lee (Ulsan University Hospital,
Ulsan, Korea). After 24 hours of transfection, cells were
pretreated with cerulenin or cyclopamine for 1 hour and
followed by stimulating with TNF-α for 6 hours. The cell
were then washed with PBS and lysed in 1x reporter lysis
buffer (Promega). The lysed cell extract (20 µl) was mixed
with 100 µl of luciferase assay reagent (Promega) and
the luciferase activity was measured by the luminometer
(MDS Analysis Tecnologies). The β-galactosidase assay
was done according to the supplier’s instructions (Promega
β-galactosidase enzyme assay) for normalizing the
luciferase activity. All data are expressed as the percentage
of activity relative to basal activity.

Transcription factor activity assay

Levels of IL-6 by ELISA

NF-κB DNA-binding activity assays were
performed using a 96-well enzyme-linked immunosorbent
assay (ELISA)–based kit from Abcam (Cambridge, MA),
according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Briefly, NF-κB
contained in a nuclear extract binds specifically to the
NF-κB response element. NF-κB p50 and p65 subunit
are detected by addition of a specific primary antibody
directed against NF-κB p50 or p65. A secondary antibody
conjugated to HRP is added to provide a sensitive
colorimetric readout at 450 nm.

IEC-6 cells pretreated with SHH inhibitors for
1 hour and TNF-α was then treated for 6 hours. Fresh cell
culture supernatants were collected and concentrated using
Amicon Ultra-15 centrifugal filter devices (Millipore,
Billerica, MA). IL-6 was determined in the cell culture
supernatant using ELISA kits (R & D, Mineapolis, MN)
according to manufacturer’s instruction. All samples were
measured for their individual levels, and each sample was
analyzed in triplicate manner, taking the mean of the three
determinations.

Cell viability assay

Immunofluorescence staining and confocal laser
microscopy

HCT-116 cells were seeded at a density 1 × 104
cells/well in 24-well plate. After overnight attachment,
cells were incubated with different concentration of
cerulenin and cyclopamine for 24 hour. The cell viability
was determined using the 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide (MTT) (Sigma-Aldrich,
St. Louis, MO, USA) reduction assay. After incubation for
different concentrations of drugs, cells were treated with
the MTT solution (final concentration, 1 mg/ml) at 37°C
for 4 hour. The dark blue formazan crystals formed in
intact cells were dissolved with equal amounts of dimethyl
sulfoxide (DMSO) and the absorbance at 570 nm was read
using a microplate reader. Results were expressed as the
fold increase of control.

Cells were seeded onto four-chamber slides. Slides
were fixed in a 95%MeOH/5%acetic acid for 15 min.
and incubated for 2 hours at room temperature with 5%
bovine serum albumin (BSA) blocking buffer under
shaking. Slides were rinsed once with PBS and 0.05%
Tween 20 and then incubated with appropriately diluted
primary antibodies in PBS. Cells were incubated with
primary antibody for overnight at 4°C. After incubation,
the slides were rinsed three times and incubated with
FITC-conjugated secondary antibody for 1 hour at room
temperature. The cells were stained with nuclear dye
DAPI (Vector Labs, Inc., Burlingame, CA) and mounted
with mounting medium. Expression and localization of
the proteins were observed with confocal laser scanning
microscope for capturing representative images.

Assessment of apoptosis with Annexin-V assay
HCT-116 cells were plated at a density of
1.5 × 105 cells/mL. After overnight attachment, cells were
treated with cerulenin induce apoptosis in triplicate, for
24 hr, followed by washing with PBS, trypsinization, and
centrifugation. Cells were stained with the Annexin-V
kit (BD Biosciences, San Jose, CA). Briefly, cells were

Transient transfection and the luciferase
reporter activity assay
IEC-6 cells were seeded at a density of 1 × 105 cells
per well in 24-well plates and grown to 80% confluence
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

7679

Oncotarget

Tumorspheres culture and colosphere formation
assay

washed twice in cold PBS, resuspended in binding buffer
and 10 ml of FITC-conjugated Annexin-V were added.
Cells were incubated for 15 min in the dark, an additional
400 mL of binding buffer were added, and the cells were
analyzed within 1 hour by flow cytometry. Acquisition
was performed on a FACSCalibur using the CellQuest Pro
software (BD Biosciences, San Jose, CA), each analysis
was performed on at least 30,000 events.

Tumorspheres were generated by seeding the
HCT116 adherent cells into serum-free DMEM culture
medium containing, B27 (1x, Gibco), EGF (20 ng/ml,
Peprotech), bFGF (10 ng/ ml, Peprotech), 1% antibiotic
mixture (invitrogen), and the healthy adherent cells were
plated in 100-mm ultra-low attachment plate (Corning)
at 1 × 106 cells per plate in humidified incubator at 37°C
in 5% CO2. After 7 days, the primary tumorspheres were
counted and dissociated at the density of 1,000 cells per
milliliter and 500 mL single cell suspension was seeded in
each well of 24-well ultra-low attachment plate (Corning)
in serum-free medium described above. After 7 days later,
secondary tumorsphere were counted and took picture
under inverted microscopy.

5-bromo-2′-deoxyuridine (BrdU) incorporation
assay
Cells were seeded and serum starved. After
treatment with PBS or SHH inhibitors at different
concentrations for 24 hours in 10% FBS-containing
media, cells were incubated with BrdU for an additional
2 hours. BrdU-positive cells were counted under a light
microscope.

Soft agar colony formation assay

Wound healing assay

To examine the self-renewing capacity, each well
of a six-well plate was coated with 1 mL of 10% FBS
DMEM medium with 0.6 % agarose. After 30 min of
incubation at 37°C, equal numbers (104) of tumorsphere
cells or adherent cells were added in 1 mL of 10% FBS
1640 medium with 0.3% agarose. After treatment SHH
inhibitors, plates were incubated under standard conditions
and with the addition of 300 mL of medium every 3 days
for 3 weeks. Colonies were stained with 0.01% crystal
violet and counted colonies under a light microscope.

HCT-116 cells (2 × 105) were seeded in 6-well
plates. When 80% confluence of cell growth was
achieved, cells were scraped across the cell monolayer
using a 200 μl plastic tip. Photomicrographs were
captured at 0, 24 hours. Results were expressed as the
migration index (%). The experiment was repeated
3 times, independently.

Terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase-mediated
dUTP nick end labeling assay (TUNEL)

Animal study and treatment

TUNEL assay kit (Promega, Madison, WI) was
performed to verify apoptosis according to manufacturer’s
instruction. Briefly, after dewaxing and rehydrating, the
sections were incubated first with proteinase K (20 μg/ml)
for 10 min at room temperature, then with TdT and
fluorescein-12-dUTP for 1 hour at 37°C, and finally stain
with DAPI for 5 min at RT. The samples were mounted
and TUNEL-positive cells were counted under a fluoresce
microscopy.

Specific pathogen free male C57BL/6 mice
(Six weeks old) were purchased from Orient Bio
Inc. (Seongnam, Korea). All mice were divided into
5 experimental groups (10 mice per group in random).
For assessment ACF formation, the mice received a single
intraperitoneal injection of AOM at a dose of 3 mg/kg
body weight. Starting 1 week after the AOM injection,
animals were exposed to 2 % DSS in the drinking water
for 7 days. Cerulenin (10 or 30 mg/kg/day), Itraconazole
(100 mg/kg/day) were given orally daily for 2 weeks after
AOM injection 7 days. Mice were then sacrificed at the
end of the 3rd week. The other groups for assessment
tumor development, the mice were maintained with SHH
inhibitors treatment until the 16th week. These mice were
given orally 3 times per week of cerulenin (1 or 10 mg/kg)
or itraconazole (100 mg/kg) after AOM injection 7 days.
All animals were killed by CO2 asphyxiation. After
laparotomy, the lengths of colon were measured, and
isolated tissues were subjected to a histologic examination
and extraction of protein. Animals were handled in an
accredited animal facility in accordance with Association
for Assessment and Accreditation of Laboratory Animal
Care International (AAALAC International) guidelines

RayBio apoptosis array
A human apoptosis antibody array kit (Ray Biotech,
Norcross, GA) was used to detect the relative levels of
apoptosis-related proteins in the cell lysates according to
the manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, the treated cell
lysates were added to the antibody array membranes and
incubated overnight with rocking at 4°C. After washing
membrane, the membranes were incubated with a
cocktail of biotin-conjugated anti-antibodies to apoptotic
proteins at room temperature for 2 hours. After incubation
with horseradish peroxidase–streptavidin at room
temperature for 1.5 hours, the signals were visualized by
chemiluminescence.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

7680

Oncotarget

under the facility named CACU (The Center of Animal
Care and Use) of CHA University Laboratory Animal
Research Center after IRB approval.

REFERENCES

Histopathology assessment and
immunohistochemical staining

  2.	 Feagins LA, Souza RF, Spechler SJ. Carcinogenesis in IBD:
potential targets for the prevention of colorectal cancer. Nat
Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2009; 6:297–305.

  1.	 Siegel R, Naishadham D, Jemal A. Cancer statistics, 2013.
CA Cancer J Clin. 2013; 63:11–30.

Isolated colon tissues for histologic examination
were spread onto a plastic sheet, fixed in 3.7% formalin
for 24 hours, and prepared for paraffin tissue slides. The
paraffin sections were stained with hematoxylin and eosin
(H & E) or saved for immunohistochemical staining.
Briefly, after dewaxing and rehydrating, antigen retrieval
was performed by boiling in 10 mM sodium citrate
buffer, pH 6.0. Endogenous peroxidase was quenched
using 3% hydrogen peroxide in methanol for 20 min.
Sections were incubated with mouse antibodies F4/80
(1:500, eBioscience, San Diego, CA), mouse NF-κB p65
(Cell signaling technology, Danvers, MA), overnight
at 4°C. The sections were incubated with a biotinylated
secondary antibody and subsequently incubated in
VECTORSTAIN ELITE ABC reagent for 30 min, using
3,3′-diaminobenzidine (Vector Laboratories, Burlingame,
CA) as the chromogen. Sections were then counterstained
for 1–2 min with hematoxylin (Sigma, St Louis, MO) and
mounted with Permount. Scoring was estimated as the
percentage of positively stained cells of whole tissue and
performed by the first author, who was blinded as to the
primary antibodies and the treatment groups.

  3.	 Danese S, Mantovani A. Inflammatory bowel disease and
intestinal cancer: a paradigm of the Yin-Yang interplay
between inflammation and cancer. Oncogene. 2010;
29:3313–3323.
  4.	 Choi J, Yoon SH, Kim JE, Rhee KH, Youn HS,
Chung MH. Gene-specific oxidative DNA damage in
Helicobacter pylori-infected human gastric mucosa. Int J
Cancer. 2002; 99:485–490.
  5.	 Terzic J, Grivennikov S, Karin E, Karin M. Inflammation and
colon cancer. Gastroenterology. 2010; 138:2101–2114 e2105.
  6.	 Kundu JK, Surh YJ. Inflammation: gearing the journey to
cancer. Mutat Res. 2008; 659:15–30.
  7.	 van Schaik FD, Offerhaus GJ, Schipper ME, Siersema PD,
Vleggaar FP, Oldenburg B. Endoscopic and pathological
aspects of colitis-associated dysplasia. Nat Rev Gastroenterol
Hepatol. 2009; 6:671–678.
  8.	 Tanaka H, Fukui H, Fujii S, Sekikawa A, Yamagishi H,
Ichikawa K, Tomita S, Imura J, Yasuda Y, Chiba T, Fujimori T.
Immunohistochemical analysis of REG Ialpha expression in
ulcerative colitis-associated neoplastic lesions. Digestion.
2011; 83:204–209.
  9.	 Grivennikov S, Karin E, Terzic J, Mucida D, Yu GY,
Vallabhapurapu S, Scheller J, Rose-John S, Cheroutre H,
Eckmann L, Karin M. IL-6 and Stat3 are required for
survival of intestinal epithelial cells and development of
colitis-associated cancer. Cancer Cell. 2009; 15:103–113.

Statistical analysis
All data are presented as the means ± SD of three
independent experiments. The data were analyzed by one
way analysis of variance (ANOVA) test. The Fisher post
hoc test was use for significance of difference between
experimental groups. Differences were considered
statistically significant at P value < 0.05.

10.	 Yang X, Zhang F, Wang Y, Cai M, Wang Q, Guo Q, Li Z,
Hu R. Oroxylin A inhibits colitis-associated carcinogenesis
through modulating the IL-6/STAT3 signaling pathway.
Inflamm Bowel Dis. 2013; 19:1990–2000.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

11.	 Nielsen CM, Williams J, van den Brink GR, Lauwers GY,
Roberts DJ. Hh pathway expression in human gut tissues
and in inflammatory gut diseases. Lab Invest. 2004;
84:1631–1642.

We thank Dr. Eun-Hee Kim for technical assistance
in some experiments.

12.	 Pratap A, Panakanti R, Yang N, Eason JD, Mahato RI.
Inhibition of endogenous hedgehog signaling protects
against acute liver injury after ischemia reperfusion. Pharm
Res. 2010; 27:2492–2504.

FINANCIAL SUPPORT
The current study was granted by the National
Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) funded by the
Ministry of Science, ICT & Future Planning (2009–
0081758).

13.	 Saqui-Salces M, Merchant JL. Hedgehog signaling and
gastrointestinal cancer. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2010;
1803:786–795.
14.	 Yoshikawa K, Shimada M, Miyamoto H, Higashijima J,
Miyatani T, Nishioka M, Kurita N, Iwata T, Uehara H.
Sonic hedgehog relates to colorectal carcinogenesis.
J Gastroenterol. 2009; 44:1113–1117.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
No conflicts of interest.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

7681

Oncotarget

15.	 Moriasi C, Subramaniam D, Awasthi S, Ramalingam S,
Anant S. Prevention of colitis-associated cancer: natural
compounds that target the IL-6 soluble receptor. Anticancer
Agents Med Chem. 2012; 12:1221–1238.

26.	 Merchant JL. Hedgehog signalling in gut development,
physiology and cancer. J Physiol. 2012; 590:421–432.
27.	 Huang H, Cotton JL, Wang Y, Rajurkar M, Zhu LJ,
Lewis BC, Mao J. Specific requirement of Gli transcription
factors in Hedgehog-mediated intestinal development. J
Biol Chem. 2013; 288:17589–17596.
28.	 Sherman AE, Zavros Y. Role of Sonic Hedgehog signaling
during progression from inflammation to cancer in the
stomach. World J Gastrointest Pathophysiol. 2011; 2:103–108.

16.	 Grivennikov SI. Inflammation and colorectal cancer:
colitis-associated neoplasia. Semin Immunopathol. 2013;
35:229–244.
17.	 Surh YJ. NF-kappa B and Nrf2 as potential chemopreventive
targets of some anti-inflammatory and antioxidative
phytonutrients with anti-inflammatory and antioxidative
activities. Asia Pac J Clin Nutr. 2008; 17 Suppl 1:269–272.

29.	 Katoh Y, Katoh M. Hedgehog signaling pathway and
gastrointestinal stem cell signaling network (review). Int J
Mol Med. 2006; 18:1019–1023.

18.	 Abetov D, Mustapova Z, Saliev T, Bulanin D. Biomarkers
and signaling pathways of colorectal cancer stem cells.
Tumour Biol. 2015; 36:1339–1353.

30.	 Mills LD, Zhang Y, Marler RJ, Herreros-Villanueva M,
Zhang L, Almada LL, Couch F, Wetmore C, Pasca di
Magliano M, Fernandez-Zapico ME. Loss of the transcription
factor GLI1 identifies a signaling network in the tumor
microenvironment mediating KRAS oncogene-induced
transformation. J Biol Chem. 2013; 288:11786–11794.

19.	 Turner MD, Nedjai B, Hurst T, Pennington DJ. Cytokines
and chemokines: At the crossroads of cell signalling and
inflammatory disease. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2014;
1843:2563–2582.

31.	 Regl G, Kasper M, Schnidar H, Eichberger T, Neill GW,
Philpott MP, Esterbauer H, Hauser-Kronberger C,
Frischauf AM, Aberger F. Activation of the BCL2 promoter
in response to Hedgehog/GLI signal transduction is
predominantly mediated by GLI2. Cancer Res. 2004;
64:7724–7731.

20.	 Myung SJ, Rerko RM, Yan M, Platzer P, Guda K,
Dotson A, Lawrence E, Dannenberg AJ, Lovgren AK,
Luo G, Pretlow TP, Newman RA, Willis J, et al.
15-Hydroxyprostaglandin dehydrogenase is an in vivo
suppressor of colon tumorigenesis. Proc Natl Acad Sci
U S A. 2006; 103:12098–12102.

32.	 Xiao Y, Thoresen DT, Williams JS, Wang C, Perna J, Petrova R,
Brownell I. Neural Hedgehog signaling maintains stem cell
renewal in the sensory touch dome epithelium. Proc Natl
Acad Sci U S A. 2015; 112:7195–7200.

21.	 Bijlsma MF, Roelink H. Non-cell-autonomous signaling by
Shh in tumors: challenges and opportunities for therapeutic
targets. Expert Opin Ther Targets. 2010; 14:693–702.
22.	 Kraus S, Arber N. Inflammation and colorectal cancer. Curr
Opin Pharmacol. 2009; 9:405–410.

33.	 Islam F, Gopalan V, Smith RA, Lam AK. Translational
potential of cancer stem cells: A review of the detection of
cancer stem cells and their roles in cancer recurrence and
cancer treatment. Exp Cell Res. 2015; 335:135–147.

23.	 Lin WW, Karin M. A cytokine-mediated link between innate
immunity, inflammation, and cancer. J Clin Invest. 2007;
117:1175–1183.
24.	 Kim YJ, Hong KS, Chung JW, Kim JH, Hahm KB.
Prevention of colitis-associated carcinogenesis with
infliximab. Cancer Prev Res (Phila). 2010; 3:1314–1333.

34.	 Takebe N, Miele L, Harris PJ, Jeong W, Bando H, Kahn M,
Yang SX, Ivy SP. Targeting Notch, Hedgehog, and Wnt
pathways in cancer stem cells: clinical update. Nat Rev Clin
Oncol. 2015; 12:445–464.

25.	 Ock CY, Kim EH, Hong H, Hong KS, Han YM, Choi KS,
Hahm KB, Chung MH. Prevention of colitis-associated
colorectal cancer with 8-hydroxydeoxyguanosine. Cancer
Prev Res (Phila). 2011; 4:1507–1521.

35.	 Justilien V, Fields AP. Molecular pathways: novel
approaches for improved therapeutic targeting of Hedgehog
signaling in cancer stem cells. Clin Cancer Res. 2015;
21:505–513.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

7682

Oncotarget

