Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No. 12

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Dietary compound isoliquiritigenin prevents mammary
carcinogenesis by inhibiting breast cancer stem cells through
WIF1 demethylation
Neng Wang1,*, Zhiyu Wang1,2,*, Yu Wang3, Xiaoming Xie4, Jiangang Shen1,
Cheng Peng5, Jieshu You1, Fu Peng1, Hailin Tang4, Xinyuan Guan6, Jianping Chen1,5
1

School of Chinese Medicine, Li Ka Shing Faculty of Medicine, the University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong

2

 epartment of Mammary Disease, Guangdong Provincial Hospital of Chinese Medicine, The Second Clinical Medical College,
D
Guangzhou University of Chinese Medicine, Guangdong, China

3

Department of Pharmacology, Li Ka Shing Faculty of Medicine, the University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong

4

 epartment of Breast Oncology, Sun Yat-sen University Cancer Center; State Key Laboratory of Oncology in South China;
D
Collaborative Innovation Center of Cancer Medicine, Guangzhou, China

5

School of Pharmaceutical Science, Chengdu University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Sichuan, Chengdu, China

6

Department of Clinical Oncology, Li Ka Shing Faculty of Medicine, the University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong

*

These authors have contributed equally to this work

Correspondence to:
Jianping Chen, e-mail: jpjpchen@yahoo.com
Keywords: mammary tumorigenesis, cancer stem cells, WIF1 demethylation, DNMT1, Isoliquiritigenin
Received: December 25, 2014	

Accepted: February 15, 2015 	

Published: March 26, 2015

ABSTRACT
Breast cancer stem cells (CSCs) are considered as the root of mammary
tumorigenesis. Previous studies have demonstrated that ISL efficiently limited the
activities of breast CSCs. However, the cancer prevention activities of ISL and its
precise molecular mechanisms remain largely unknown. Here, we report a novel
function of ISL as a natural demethylation agent targeting WIF1 to prevent breast
cancer. ISL administration suppressed in vivo breast cancer initiation and progression,
accompanied by reduced CSC-like populations. A global gene expression profile assay
further identified WIF1 as the main response gene of ISL treatment, accompanied
by the simultaneous downregulation of β-catenin signaling and G0/G1 phase arrest
in breast CSCs. In addition, WIF1 inhibition significantly relieved the CSC-limiting
effects of ISL and methylation analysis further revealed that ISL enhanced WIF1
gene expression via promoting the demethylation of its promoter, which was closely
correlated with the inhibition of DNMT1 methyltransferase. Molecular docking analysis
finally revealed that ISL could stably dock into the catalytic domain of DNMT1. Taken
together, our findings not only provide preclinical evidence to demonstrate the use of
ISL as a dietary supplement to inhibit mammary carcinogenesis but also shed novel
light on WIF1 as an epigenetic target for breast cancer prevention.

agents with high safety for breast cancer has become an
urgent issue worldwide.
In the past decade, the discovery of CSCs in various
types of cancer has challenged our traditional view of
cancer incidence. For breast cancer, Al-hajj et al. [2]
initially identified breast CSCs with CD44+/CD24−/low
markers in 2003. Breast CSCs were characterized as
having strong abilities of self-renewal, tumorigenesis
and high metastasis [3]. As few as 100 breast CSCs could

INTRODUCTION
With the advancements of early-detection systems
and multidisciplinary treatments, the 5-year survival ratio
of breast cancer has been greatly improved. However,
breast cancer incidence has risen sharply since 2008 by
more than 20% worldwide, and 1.7 million women were
diagnosed with breast cancer in 2012 globally [1]. The
development of preventive biomarkers and targeting

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

9854

Oncotarget

form tumors when injected into non-obese diabetic/severe
combined immunodeficiency disease (NOD/SCID) mice,
and CSCs were also identified to be a critical initiator for
the formation of a metastasis lesion [4]. Targeting aberrant
signaling pathways in breast CSCs has become a novel
approach to effectively prevent breast cancer.
Recent studies indicate that the Wnt/β-catenin
signaling pathway plays a critical role in mediating
bioactivities of CSCs, including mammosphere formation
capability, differentiation potential and tumorigenesis
ability [5]. Compared with the Notch and Hedgehog
pathways, the Wnt/β-catenin pathway has been strongly
implicated in mammary development and tumorigenesis
since the discovery of Wnt1 as a mammary oncogene by
viral insertion in mouse mammary tumors in the 1980s
[6]. In particular, MMTV-Wnt1 transgenic mice display
alveolar hyperplasia early in life, and nearly 100% of these
animals ultimately develop focal mammary carcinomas
[7]. In addition, other Wnt family members including
Wnt2, Wnt9a, Wnt7b, and Wnt10b were found to be
aberrantly upregulated in human breast cancer tissues
when compared with normal mammary tissues [8].
Meanwhile, the high expression of cytoplasmic and/or
nuclear β-catenin was found to be closely correlated with
breast cancer prognosis [10], and nuclear β-catenin could
interact with the lymphocyte enhancer factor/T cell factor
family of transcription factors (LEF/TCF) to activate
multiple cancer-related molecules, including c-Myc,
cyclin D1, metalloproteinases and c-Met, etc. [11–13]. In
addition, Wnt/β-catenin signaling could also be abnormally
stimulated by oncogenic mutations of several critical
components within this pathway, such as APC, Axin and
TCF4, etc. [9]. However, mutations in such key regulators
were not frequently observed in human breast cancer
patients, indicating possible alternative mechanisms for the
hyperactivation of the Wnt/β-catenin signaling pathway.
The epigenetic silencing of multiple secreted
Wnt antagonists is a strikingly common event in
breast cancer, although the causal relationship between
their loss-of-expression and mammary carcinogenesis is
less well established. There generally exist two classes of
secreted Wnt antagonists, defined by their mechanisms of
action. The first class encompasses the Dkk family proteins,
which internalize the Wnt co-receptors LRP5/6 via
endocytosis to suppress downstream signaling transduction.
Another class includes Wnt inhibitory factor 1 (WIF1), the
sFRP family and Cerberus, which exert inhibitory effects
by directly binding to the Wnt ligands [14–15]. Compared
to other suppressors, WIF1 inactivation is a common
event in breast cancer. Both studies by Ai et al. [16] and
Veeck et al. [17] revealed that WIF1 downregulation by
hypermethylation was detected in more than 60% of human
breast carcinoma samples. Furthermore, WIF1 is expressed
at high levels in human normal breast cells and mammary
tissues, suggesting that WIF1 elevation would possibly
maintain normal mammary development while attenuating
mammary tumorigenesis [18].
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Dietary compounds have attracted growing interest
for use in cancer chemoprevention and are advantageous
owing to their wide availability, low toxicity and high
tolerability [19]. Currently, multiple natural dietary
compounds are potent in inhibiting breast cancer growth
and limiting breast CSCs, such as epigallocatechin3-gallate (EGCG), resveratrol, and piperine [20–22].
However, their role in breast cancer prevention and
the underlying molecular mechanisms remain largely
unknown. Isoliquiritigenin (ISL), a chalcone-type dietary
compound derived from licorice root and many other
plants, possesses anti-cancer activities possibly via
proliferation reduction, cell cycle arrest, angiogenesis
suppression, metastasis inhibition and apoptosis
induction [23–27]. In addition, its chemopreventive
role in breast cancer has been reported recently. ISL
suppressed phorbol ester-induced cyclooxygenase-2
(COX-2) expression in the non-tumorigenic MCF-10A
breast cell line and was capable of inhibiting DMBAinduced mammary carcinogenesis in rats [28–39]. Our
pilot results demonstrated that ISL could directly target
GRP78 to chemosensitize breast CSCs via β-catenin/
ABCG2 signaling [13]. Although it was found that
ISL limited breast CSCs via increased proteasomal
degradation of β-catenin, the effects of ISL on breast
cancer chemoprevention and its underlying mechanisms
on Wnt/β-catenin signaling deserve further investigation.
In this study, we utilized the mouse mammary tumor
virus promoter-driven polyoma middle T oncoprotein
(MMTV-PyMT) transgenic mouse model to demonstrate
the breast cancer chemoprevention effects of ISL exposure.
It was determined that ISL administration suppressed
in vivo breast cancer initiation and progression and was
accompanied by a reduced CSC-like population. Microarray
analysis further revealed that WIF1 is the main response
gene of ISL, accompanied by limited mammosphere
formation ability and G0/G1 phase arrest of breast CSCs.
Notably, DNA methylation analysis demonstrated that ISL
significantly demethylated the promoter region of WIF1
and inhibited the expression of DNMT1 methyltransferase.
Molecular docking analysis revealed that ISL could
stably dock into the catalytic domain of DNMT1, thus
competitively reversing the WIF1 methylation status. Taken
together, our findings discovered a novel function of ISL
as a natural DNMT1 inhibitor to prevent breast cancer by
targeting the aberrant WIF1 signaling.

RESULTS
ISL suppresses mammary hyperplasia and
breast cancer initiation in vivo
We initially evaluated the chemopreventive effects
of ISL on breast cancer in the MMTV-PyMT mice.
This mouse model produces spontaneous and luminallike breast cancer from normal mammary epithelium
and can recapitulate similar pathological processes and
9855

Oncotarget

characteristics found in human breast cancer. In particular,
mammary hyperplasia can be detected in this model as
early as 4 weeks of age, and nearly 100% of mice develop
breast cancer by 12–15 weeks, accompanied by the
appearance of pulmonary metastasis [30–31]. Therefore,
it is an internationally well-accepted preclinical model for
investigating the mechanisms of mammary carcinogenesis
and chemopreventive effects of natural phytochemicals.
ISL (50 mg/kg/d) and vehicle were administered to
mice by oral gavage everyday according to the schedule
illustrated in Figure 1A. The cancer prevention activity of
ISL was initially assessed by comparing the incidence of
palpable lesions at different time intervals in the transgenic
mice of each group. As shown in Figure 1B, ISL treatment
obviously delayed the onset of palpable lesions. The
cancer progression was also significantly slowed down by
ISL intervention when compared with the vehicle group.
In particular, the median time to a 50% cancer-burden in
the glands was 8 weeks in the vehicle group, while it was
10 weeks in the ISL-treated group. By the 12th week, all
mammary glands (n = 100) were identified as breast cancer
in the vehicle group, while more than 10 glands were
free of lesions in the ISL treatment group. Meanwhile,
the mean tumor volume from the 4th to 12th weeks in the
ISL intervention group was also significantly decreased
compared with the vehicle group, as presented in Figure 1C.
To further investigate the effects of ISL on breast
tumor initiation, the abdominal mammary glands of mice
were harvested for whole mount preparation at varying
stages. At 4 weeks after birth, only a rudimental primary
duct and a small number of branches can be observed in
wild-type mice (Figure 1Di). As the mice age, the length
of ducts, the amount of duct branches, and the number
of terminal ends gradually grow in wild-type mice
(Figure 1Dj-l). Alternatively, in MMTV-PyMT transgenic
mice, hyperplastic lesions could be observed as early
as the 4th week around duct branches, while no lesions
were detected in the ISL treatment group at the same age
(Figure 1De). As the mice grew older, the transgenic mice
gave rise to increasing numbers of mammary tumors,
while ISL treatment significantly limited tumor foci
growth and dispersion (Figure 1Dc,g).
Hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining further
showed the effects of ISL on the cellular morphology of
mouse mammary glands at varying stages. As shown in
Figure 1E, the 4-week-old vehicle group began to develop
hyperplastic lesions, which presented as multiple foci
around the ducts. The cellular morphology of an ISLtreated gland was similar to that of wild type, and almost
no premalignant lesions were found. In the 6th week of
age, hyperplastic lesions were present in the mammary
glands of the control and ISL-treated groups. However,
ISL treatment markedly decreased the malignant cell
proliferation within the acini and ducts when compared
with the control group in the 9th week. With tumor
progression to the 12th week, individual tumor acini began
to merge in the control group, while no such feature was
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

found in the ISL-treated group. Immunohistochemical
analysis also showed that ISL treatment could decrease
Ki67 expression in the tumor tissues at varying stages,
indicating the proliferation speed of tumor cells was
remarkably inhibited by ISL (Figure 1F). Collectively,
ISL significantly prevented mammary cancer occurrence
and growth in the MMTV-PyMT transgenic mouse model.

ISL treatment inhibits breast cancer growth and
lung metastasis in vivo
Accumulating evidence has suggested that
MMTV-PyMT mice could develop well-differentiated,
luminal-type mammary adenomas with lung metastasis
lesions in or after the 10th week [32]. Therefore, we further
examined the effects of ISL on breast cancer growth and
metastasis at the 13th week, the endpoint of our experiment.
As shown in Figure 2A, mammary tumors from the
vehicle group displayed a more necrotic and hemorrhagic
appearance than ISL-treated tumors, while no obvious
visual differences in the pulmonary specimens were
observed between the two groups. H&E analysis further
indicated that tumors from both groups showed almost
the same features of malignancy, including solid sheets
of malignant cells, marked cell morphology variation,
obvious nuclear atypia and the loss of the basement
membrane. Meanwhile, several metastatic nodules were
present in the lung parenchyma of the control group, while
few such lesions were visible in the ISL-treated group.
Although ISL treatment did not result in obvious changes
in the histopathology of the end-stage tumors based on
H&E staining, it significantly inhibited the tumor volume
and tumor burden. ISL elicited a dramatic decrease of
658 mm3 in the mean tumor volume, and a significant
18% reduction in the tumor burden compared to the vehicle
groups (Figure 2B, 2C). The discrepancy in the mean
number of metastatic nodules further revealed that ISL
harbored the potential for limiting metastasis (Figure 2D).
Kaplan-Meier curve analysis further demonstrated
that  ISL significantly prolonged the survival time of
MMTV-PyMT mice, possibly owing to the decreased
tumor burden and the limited lung metastasis (Figure 2E).
Additionally, ISL had little effect on mouse body weight
between the two groups, indicating that ISL might be
developed as a chemoprevention agent with high safety
(Supplementary Figure 1).

Identification of WIF1 by microarray profiling
as the primary target of ISL in limiting
breast CSC
Accumulating evidence has suggested that cancer
is a stem cell disorder. These rare CSCs are possibly the
ultimate roots of tumorigenesis, tumor recurrence and
metastasis [33]. To investigate the effects of ISL on the
origination of breast CSCs, we harvested primary cells from
the spontaneous mammary tumors of MMTV-PyMT mice
9856

Oncotarget

Figure 1: ISL inhibited mammary carcinogenesis in MMTV-PyMT transgenic mice. A. Schematic illustration of ISL
administration. Mice were randomly divided into vehicle and ISL treatment groups, and ISL was given by oral gavage at 50 mg/kg/d
from the 3rd to the 12th week (n = 10 mice, total of 100 glands); B. Tumor incidence ratios between the vehicle and ISL treatment groups
were compared using a log-rank test. The results revealed that ISL significantly inhibited breast cancer occurrence (P < 0.001); C. Tumor
volumes of each group were measured from the 4th to the 12th weeks. Tumor volume was calculated based on ex vivo caliper measurements
of individual tumors using the formula V = (W2× L)/2, where V is tumor volume, W is tumor width, and L is tumor length. The results
indicated that ISL significantly inhibited tumor growth (*P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, values represented as the Mean ± SD, n = 10). D. Whole
mount staining of abdominal mammary glands of mice from the 4th to 12th weeks in the wild type, vehicle, and ISL intervention groups;
E. Representative H&E staining images of mouse mammary glands from the 4th to the 12th weeks in the wild type, vehicle, and ISL
intervention groups. F. Representative immunohistochemical images of Ki 67 staining in mouse mammary glands from the 4th to the
12th weeks in the wild type, vehicle, and ISL intervention groups.

for flow cytometry analysis. Two independent markers for
breast CSCs were applied. First, a Hoechst 33342-based
“side population” (SP) assay was utilized for detecting the
effects of ISL on the CSC population. ISL treatment reduced
the cancer stem-like cell proportion from 15.7 ± 1.23 to
2.36 ± 0.24 (Figure 3A). Aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH)
was then applied as another marker for detection of stemlike cells and a specific inhibitor diethylaminobenzaldehude
(DEAB) against ALDH was used as a negative control to
minimize the influence of background fluorescence [34].
Compared with the DEAB negative control, tumors from
untreated mice consisted of approximately 2% ALDHhi cells,
while ISL administration dramatically decreased ALDHhi
cells to 0.4% (Figure 3B). Both results indicated that ISL
might prevent breast cancer occurrence and development via
limiting breast CSCs.
Microarray analysis was then applied to identify
genes that could be affected by ISL. The candidate gene
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

profiles of MMTV-PyMT tumors with or without ISL were
determined by identification of genes with expression
changes at least 2.0-fold and with a P value less than 0.05.
As indicated in Figure 3C, a total number of 249 genes
were finally selected, among which 132 genes were
up-regulated, and 117 genes were down-regulated.
Meanwhile, 14 genes were found that were involved in
CSC activities and categorized into functional clusters that
included Wnt/β-catenin signaling, Hedgehog signaling and
other CSC-related genes. Then, a real-time PCR assay
was used to validate the results of the microarray analysis.
As shown in the right panel of Figure 3D, the decreased
expression of Smad7, Bmp2, Klf4, Abca12, Abca9, Car4,
Fzd4, Nkd1, Nkd2, Ptch2 and Shh and the up-regulation
of Axin2, WIF1 and Dkk1 were all validated. Meanwhile,
it was revealed that WIF1 was the gene with the highest
expression alteration by ISL among the 14 candidate genes
(Figure 3D).
9857

Oncotarget

Figure 2: ISL inhibited breast cancer growth and lung metastasis in MMTV-PyMT transgenic mice. A. Representative

images of tumors and lungs dissected from vehicle or ISL-treated mice. H&E staining was utilized to observe tumor micromorphology of
each group with 400 fold magnification; B. Scatter plot of individual tumors and the mean tumor volume (red line) and the SEM derived
from mice tumors at the end of ISL treatment (50 mg/kg/d); C. Mean tumor burden per mouse at the experimental endpoint, analyzed by
Student’s t test. Tumor burden per mouse was calculated as tumor weight per body weight (*P < 0.05, values represented as the mean ± SD,
n = 10); D. Mean metastatic nodule count in each group at the experimental endpoint was compared (***P < 0.001, values represented as
the mean ± SD, n = 10); E. Mouse survival in the vehicle and ISL intervention groups is shown by the Kaplan-Meier curve.

To further examine the relevance of WIF1 to
the chemopreventive effects of ISL, the mRNA levels
of WIF1 in mammary tissues from vehicle and ISLtreated groups were examined by RT-PCR. The results
revealed a significant elevation of WIF1 by ISL treatment
when compared to the vehicle control (Figure 4A). In
addition, western blot analysis also confirmed that ISL
administration led to an increase in WIF1 expression
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

levels as time progressed from the 4th to the 12th week
(Figure 4B). Furthermore, immunohistochemistry staining
showed that WIF1 was expressed in wild-type mammary
tissues in mice from weanlings to adults (Figure 4C).
However, WIF1 expression was significantly attenuated in
MMTV-PyMT mice, particularly after tumor development.
Notably, augmentation of WIF1 expression was observed
in ISL-treated mammary tissues, especially when the
9858

Oncotarget

Figure 3: Identification of WIF1 as the main target of ISL by microarray profiling. A. Representative SP analysis using

primary mouse mammary cells freshly harvested from the spontaneous mammary tumors of vehicle or ISL-treated MMTV-PyMT mice.
The SP (the framed area) was shown as a percentage of the viable cell population and analyzed by FlowJo software; B. The ALDEFLUOR
assay was then used to determine the population of CSCs in the spontaneous mammary tumors of vehicle or ISL-treated MMTV-PyMT
mice. An ALDH-specific inhibitor DEAB was used as a negative control for minimizing background fluorescence. ALDHhi cells were
shown as cells residing in the framed area analyzed by FlowJo software; C. Affymetrix Mouse Gene 2.0 ST GeneChip was utilized
to reveal the gene expression changes after ISL treatment in MMTV-PyMT mice. Through GeneSpring12.6 analysis, 132 genes were
upregulated, whereas 117 genes were downregulated; D. 14 genes including Smad7, Bmp2, Klf4, Abca12, Abca9, Ca4, Fzd4, Nkd1, Nkd2,
Ptch2, Shh, Axin2, WIF1 and Dkk1 were identified as CSC-related genes affected by ISL. Real-time PCR analysis was then applied to
validate their expression changes and WIF1 was finally determined as the main response gene of ISL.

hyperplasia had developed to the carcinoma stage at
the 12th week of age. Additionally, the distribution of
WIF1 positive cells at the hyperplasic stage (4–6 weeks)
was quite different from that at the carcinoma stage
(12 weeks); specifically, WIF1 localization changed from
primarily the outer layer of lesions to being distributed
throughout the entire tumor.

by 23%, whereas 50 μM ISL resulted in over a 37%
reduction of CSC-like cells. Similar findings were also
obtained in MCF-7 cells. Compared to 6.64% of breast
CSCs in the untreated MCF-7 cells, the proportion of
CD44+CD24−/low cells dropped to 3.52% and 2.92% after
treatment with 25 and 50 μM ISL for 24 h, respectively.
ALDH was also applied for detection of stem-like cells
with or without ISL plus the specific inhibitor DEAB. It
was shown that ISL at 50 μM could reduce ALDH factions
from 4.97% to 1.41% in MDA-MB-231 and from 1.24%
to 0.298% in MCF-7, indicating that ISL could suppress
the ALDHhi population in both cell lines (Figure 5B). The
results suggested ISL could decrease CSC populations
characterized with either ALDHhi or CD44+CD24−/low
markers.
To study the effects of ISL on the self-renewal
ability of breast CSCs, we further sorted breast CSCs
from MDA-MB-231 and MCF-7 cells and performed a
mammosphere formation assay. As shown in Figure 5C,

ISL limits the self-renewal ability of human
breast CSCs in vitro
After in vivo examination, the classic “stem-like”
phenotype of CD44+CD24−/low was applied to determine
the effects of ISL on the MDA-MB-231 triple-negative
breast cancer cell line and the MCF-7 luminal cancer
cell line. Flow cytometry results showed that ISL could
significantly limit the population of breast CSCs in both
cell lines (Figure 5A). In particular, 25 μM ISL eliminated
the CD44+CD24−/low population of MDA-MB-231 cells
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

9859

Oncotarget

Figure 4: ISL significantly elevated WIF1 expression in MMTV-PyMT mice. A. Real-time PCR analysis revealed that ISL
significantly increased WIF1 mRNA expression in mammary tumors of MMTV-PyMT mice at the end of the experiment; B-C. Western
blotting and immunohistochemistry analysis further confirmed that ISL gradually increased WIF1 expression from the 4th to the 12th week.

untreated MDA-MB-231 CSCs could be enriched in
non-adherent spherical clusters of cells. However, ISL
treatment significantly inhibited the formation of primary
spheres. Compared to the control group, the number of

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

spheres at 1st passage declined to 63.7% and the size
of mammospheres was also inhibited to 42.2% after
addition of 25 μM ISL. Additionally, the limited selfrenewal ability of ISL-treated cells was also evident in the

9860

Oncotarget

ISL inhibits Wnt/β-catenin signaling in a WIF1
dependent manner

secondary and tertiary propagation of breast CSCs. Similar
inhibitory effects of ISL were observed in the breast CSCs
that were sorted from MCF-7 cells.
Because it was reported that WIF1 expression might
be correlated with cell cycle progression, we studied the
effect of ISL on the cell cycle distribution of breast CSCs.
In the sorted MDA-MB-231 CSCs, 25 μM ISL could
arrest cell cycle at the G0/G1 phase after 24 h (78.22%
of ISL-treated cells versus 61.81% of untreated cells)
and 48 h treatment (84.09% of ISL-treated cells versus
66.19% of untreated cells). Similar inhibitory activities
of  ISL on the G0/G1 population were obtained in the
MCF-7 CSCs. The proportion of ISL-treated CSCs in
G0/G1 phase increased from 57.87% to 78.23% after
24 h, and continued to elevate from 67.39% to 81.57%
after 48 h. These results suggested that ISL might limit the
self-renewal ability of breast CSCs via cell cycle arrest at
G0/G1 phase (Figure 5D).

After validating the effects of ISL on limiting breast
CSCs, we continued to examine whether ISL could exert
stimulatory effects on WIF1 in breast cancer cell lines.
As illustrated in Figure 6A, both breast cancer cell lines
treated with ISL showed dose-dependent elevations of
WIF1 transcript levels. However, it was observed that
WIF1 mRNA expression reached the highest point at
24 h of treatment and then gradually decreased after
prolonged culture in both cell populations, suggesting that
the WIF1 gene expression might be correlated with cell
cycle progression, consistent with the findings of Liu et al
[35]. To further evaluate the endogenous protein levels of
WIF1 in the presence or absence of ISL, WIF1 expression
was further examined by western blot (Figure 6B) and
immunofluorescent staining (Figure 6C). Both results

Figure 5: ISL limited the self-renewal ability of breast CSCs. A. Representative dot plots of CD44+CD24−/low cell surface markers
in MDA-MB-231 and MCF-7 cells using the BD FACSAria SORP cell sorter. Breast cancer cells were incubated with 25 or 50 μM ISL for
24 h. CD44-FITC and CD24-PE antibodies were utilized to frame CSC-like subsets in the lower right quadrant (Q3). The isotype-matched
antibody served as a negative control. The data analysis was performed using FlowJo software (*P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, values represented
as the mean ± SD, n = 3). The results suggested that ISL administration significantly reduced the CSCs population in both cancer cells in a
dose-dependent manner; B. The ALDEFLUOR assay was then used to determine the population of CSCs in MDA-MB-231 and MCF-7
cells after ISL administration. The ALDH-specific inhibitor DEAB was used as a negative control for minimizing background fluorescence.
ALDHhi cells were shown as cells residing in the framed area analyzed by FlowJo software; time-dependent manner in both CSCs.

(Continued )
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

9861

Oncotarget

Figure 5 (Continued ): C. Effects of ISL on the primary, secondary and tertiary mammospheres formed by the sorted CSCs from

MDA-MB-231 and MCF-7 cells. The CSCs were incubated with or without ISL (10, 25 or 50 μM) for 7 days. The number and size of
the mammospheres were determined using fluorescence microscopy (*P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001 vs. negative control of the 1st
passage spheres; *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001 vs. negative control of the 2nd passage spheres; ^P < 0.05, ^^P < 0.01, ^^^P < 0.001
vs. negative control of the 3rd passage spheres, values represented as the mean ± SD, n = 3); the results showed that ISL administration
could significantly limit the number and size of mammospheres formed by both CSCs populations; D. The effects of ISL on cell cycle
distributions of the sorted CSCs from MDA-MB-231 and MCF-7 cells. The CSCs were incubated with or without 25 μM ISL at 24 h and
48 h and then subjected to cell cycle investigation analyzed by Modifit LT software. The results indicated that ISL arrested cell cycle at G0/
G1 phase in a time-dependent manner in both CSCs.

revealed that ISL could stimulate WIF1 expression in both
breast cancer cell lines.
Because Wnt/β-catenin signaling is closely
correlated with the self-renewal ability of breast CSCs,
we therefore determined the inhibitory effects of ISL on
β-catenin expression in MDA-MB-231 cells. As shown
in Figure 7A, ISL inhibited both cytosolic and nuclear
β-catenin expression in a time- and dose-dependent
manner but without great influences on its mRNA
expression. Meanwhile, a series of genes downstream
of  β-catenin, including Cyclin D1, C-Myc, Survivin
and Oct-4, were also simultaneously suppressed by

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

ISL, indicating that  the  down-regulation of β-catenin
might occur at the post-translational level (Figure 7B).
To elucidate whether the enhanced WIF1 expression
is critical for inducing the down-regulated β-catenin
expression by ISL, we cultured breast CSCs in ISLtreated conditional medium (CM) of MDA-MB-231 cells,
and a WIF1 neutralizing antibody was added to the culture
system to see whether WIF1 inhibition would relieve the
CSC-limiting effects of ISL. Western blotting results
showed that when compared to the negative control,
ISL CM significantly inhibited β-catenin expression
via phosphorylating β-catenin and dephosphorylating

9862

Oncotarget

Figure 6: ISL resulted in overexpression of WIF1 levels in human breast cancer cell lines. Breast cancer cells were treated

with the indicated concentrations of ISL for different times and collected for A. Real-time PCR and B. western blotting analysis. The
results indicated that following ISL treatment, WIF1 expression in both cancer cell lines reached the maximum level at 24 h and then
began to decrease with time increasing; C. The distribution of WIF1 in MDA-MB-231 and MCF-7 cells after ISL treatment was studied
by immunofluorescence analysis. The nuclei were counterstained by DAPI. Fluorescent images were obtained using a Carl Zeiss LSM710
META laser scanning confocal microscope and were analyzed with ZEN software.

ISL elevates WIF1 expression by promoter
demethylation through inhibiting DNMT1

GSK-3β. However, the expression of β-catenin was
elevated by 24% and 65% after adding WIF1 neutralizing
antibody to the culture system at 2 μg/ml and 4 μg/ml,
respectively (Figure 7C). Meanwhile, flow cytometry
results also demonstrated that WIF1 inhibition could
reverse the down-regulation of breast CSCs induced
by ISL in MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells, but an
isotype-matched IgG at 4 μg/ml did not (Figure  7D).
On the other hand, mammosphere results showed that
ISL CM could significantly limit the number and size
of the mammospheres compared to the negative control,
while the number and size of the primary mammospheres
were  increased to 1.3- and 2.4-fold, respectively, by
adding anti-WIF1 antibody at 2 μg/ml, and to 2.1- and
3.6-fold, respectively, at 4 μg/ml, but not by an isotypematched IgG (Figure 7E). These results indicated that
ISL inhibited  the Wnt/β-catenin signaling in a WIF1dependent manner.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Accumulating evidence has supported that low
levels of WIF1 in breast cancer were largely attributed
to its aberrant hypermethylation [16]. To further unravel
the potential mechanisms underlying the stimulatory
effects of ISL on WIF1 expression, we next investigated
whether ISL would suppress WIF1 promoter methylation
in breast cancer cells. An MSP primer set (WIF1 MSP-F
and WIF1 MSP-R) and BGS primer set (WIF1 BGS-F
and WIF1 BGS-R) were designed to target the WIF1
promoter region. When MSP analysis was used on
bisulfite-modified genomic DNA harvested from the
untreated MDA-MB-231 and MCF-7 cells, we observed
strong amplification with the methylation-specific primers,
indicating a high CpG methylation status within the WIF1
promoter. In contrast, ISL administration led to WIF1
9863

Oncotarget

Figure 7: ISL inhibited breast CSCs in a WIF1-dependent manner. A. MDA-MB-231 cells treated with ISL at varying

concentrations or time intervals were assayed by western blotting for β-catenin (cytoplasmic and nuclear) and ALDH1A3 antigen. β-actin
and Lamin B were used as cytoplasmic and nuclear protein loading controls, respectively. The results indicated that ISL administration
inhibits ALDH1A3 and β-catenin expression in a dose-and time-dependent manner; B. The relative β-catenin mRNA levels and the
transcriptional activities of its downstream genes before and after ISL treatment in MDA-MB-231 were determined by real-time PCR
analysis. (*P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001, values represented as the mean ± SD, n = 3); C. Breast CSCs of MDA-MB-231 were
cultured in ISL-treated CM, and 2 or 4 μg/ml WIF1 neutralizing antibody was added to the culture system. Western blotting results revealed
that WIF1 inhibition relieved the β-catenin-inhibitory effects of ISL, accompanied by the reactivation of Cyclin D1 and the phosphorylation
of GSK-3β and AKT; D. WIF1 inhibition reversed the inhibitory effects of ISL on CSC populations in MDA-MB-231 cells; E. WIF1
inhibition abrogated the inhibitory effects of ISL on the mammosphere formation ability of CSCs. Breast CSCs were cultured in ISL-treated
CM, and WIF1 neutralizing antibody was added to the culture system at 2 or 4 μg/ml. The number and size of the primary and secondary
mammospheres were determined using fluorescence microscopy after 7 days (*P < 0.05, **P < 0.01 vs. negative control of the 1st passage
spheres, *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01 vs. negative control of the 2nd passage spheres, values represented as the mean ± SD, n = 3).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

9864

Oncotarget

promoter demethylation in a dose- and time-dependent
manner, presenting as decreased amplification with
methylation-specific primers and increased amplification
with unmethylated-specific primers (Figure 8A).
To confirm our MSP results and determine how ISL
affects WIF1 promoter methylation in breast cancer, we
used bisulfite sequencing to analyze the methylation status
of 39 CpG sites within the 415-bp fragment of the WIF1
promoter (from − 555 to − 140) in MDA-MB-231 and
MCF-7 cells (Figure 8B). Consistent with the MSP results,
we found that these CpG islands were densely methylated
in the detected sequences of both of the untreated cell lines,
presenting as 88.2% methylated in MDA-MB-231 and
50.3% methylated in MCF-7 cells. After ISL treatment,
the methylation levels were significantly reduced (69.2%
methylation in ISL-treated MDA-MB-231 cells, 39.5%
methylation in ISL-treated MCF-7 cells). These results
suggested that the enhanced WIF1 expression by ISL
might largely correlate with reduced promoter methylation
of this gene during breast tumorigenesis.
Elevated expression of DNA methyltransferases
(DNMTs), mainly DNMT1 and DNMT3B, has been
reported to be largely responsible for the aberrant

WIF1 hypermethylation in breast tumors [16]. We thus
continued to assess whether ISL could suppress the
DNMTs to mediate the WIF1 demethylation effects
of ISL. Both in vitro western blotting and in vivo
IHC analysis revealed that ISL had little influence on
DNMT3b, while it significantly inhibited DNMT1 protein
expression (Figure 8C). These results suggested that
the demethylation activity of ISL on WIF1 was mainly
through the inhibition of DNMT1 rather than DNMT3b.
The mRNA levels of DNMT1 were also decreased after
ISL administration in vitro and in vivo (Figure 8D). In
addition, DNMT1 silencing could assist ISL not only in
elevating WIF1 expression but also in down-regulating
β-catenin levels, implying that DNMT1 played a crucial
role in mediating the chemoprevention effects of ISL
(Left panel, Figure 8E). The specificity protein 1 (Sp1) is
a zinc finger transcription factor that preferentially binds
to GC-rich motifs of many promoters and is capable of
transcriptionally regulating DNMT1 [35]. Herein, we
found that ISL administration led to a significant reduction
of Sp1 levels (Right panel, Figure 8E), indicating that
ISL promoted WIF1 demethylation possibly through
inactivating a Sp1/DNMT1-dependant pathway.

Figure 8: ISL elevated WIF1 expression by promoter demethylation through inhibiting DNMT1 expression. A. MSP

analysis was conducted on bisulfite-modified genomic DNA harvested from MDA-MB-231 and MCF-7 in the presence or absence of
ISL at varying concentrations. The results indicated that ISL significantly increased the expression of unmethylated WIF1 promoter DNA
fragments; B. BGS analysis further confirmed that ISL significantly demethylated the promoter region of WIF1 in both breast cancer
cells. For BGS lollipop-style representation, filled (black) circles correspond to methylated Cs, and unfilled (white) circles correspond to
unmethylated Cs. Each row represents the sequencing results from a single clone. For BGS aggregated representation, each box corresponds
to one CpG position in the genomic sequence. The colored bars summarize the methylation states of all sequences at that position;

(Continued )
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

9865

Oncotarget

Figure 8 (Continued ): C. Western blotting and immunohistochemistry analysis indicated that ISL significantly inhibited the level

of DNMT1 expression rather than DNMT3b; D. DNMT1 mRNA levels in MDA-MB-231 cells and tumor tissues before and after ISL
treatment were assessed by RT-PCR, and normalized to β-actin or GAPDH internal control. (*P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, values represented as
the mean ± SD, n = 3); E. Left panel: DNMT1 siRNA administration further enhanced the stimulatory effects of ISL on WIF1 expression,
indicating the critical role of DNMT1 in mediating the demethylation effects of ISL; Right panel: ISL inhibited the expression of SP1.

To further explore the binding mode of ISL with
DNMT1 at the molecular level, we conducted a molecular
docking analysis of ISL using a homology model 3SWR
at the catalytic site of the DNMT1 crystal structure. Using
Discovery studio software, we determined that ISL could
stably be found at the C-terminal catalytic domain of the
catalytic site of DNMT1. In particular, ISL could form
stable hydrogen bonds with four active residues including
GLU1168, GLU1266, ARG1312 and ASN1578. ISL
could also form a strong π–π interactions with TRP1170,
which were crucial to the catalytic mechanism of DNMT1
(Figure 9).

poor or no effect in reducing the risk of hormone receptornegative breast cancer [43–44]. Meanwhile, a number of
side effects, such as endometrial cancer and osteoporosis,
may be brought forth by SERMs or AIs. Therefore, the
development of alternative chemopreventive agents is
urgently necessary. Currently, dietary compounds are
gaining increased attention for their plentiful resources,
multi-target properties, excellent safety profiles and
economic value when compared to conventional agents
[45–46]. ISL, a representative dietary phenolic compound
mainly derived from licorice, has been demonstrated
to have potent inhibitory effects on breast cancer cell
proliferation, particularly in the estrogen-negative breast
cancer cell lines MDA-MB-231 and BT549 [13]. This
suggests that ISL has potential to develop as an alter­
native and novel agent in breast cancer treatment and
prevention. Our previous study revealed that it exhibited
the greatest inhibitory effects on β-catenin transcription
activity among ten types of phytochemical candidates,
consequently resulting in its potent anti-cancer effects
[13]. Its chemopreventive effects have also been reported
recently. Tak et al. observed chemopreventive effects
in the non-tumorigenic MCF-10A breast cell line [28].
Animal studies found protective effects of ISL against
DMBA-induced mammary carcinogenesis, DMBAinduced skin carcinogenesis and azoxy-methane-induced
colon carcinogenesis [29, 47–48]. Nevertheless, limited
studies have been undertaken to reveal the underlying
mechanisms for ISL’s chemopreventive potential,
particularly in mammary carcinogenesis.
Similar to the above findings, we also observed that
ISL was capable of delaying mammary carcinogenesis
and cancer metastasis in MMTV-PyMT transgenic
mice, accompanied by a significant decrease in the CSC
population. Microarray analysis using MMTV-PyMT

DISCUSSION
Breast cancer is the second leading cause of death
among US women, with 39, 620 recorded cancer deaths
and 232, 340 new cases of invasive breast cancer in
2013 [36]. The effective prevention of breast cancer
has become a global task to further decrease its current
incidence ratio and mortality [37–39]. The two major
strategies to reduce breast cancer risks include (1) the
avoidance of cancer-causing biological, chemical, and
physical agents and (2) the habitual consumption of
diets high in supplements that protect against cancer
[40]. Chemoprevention, the second approach, involves
the administration of one or more naturally occurring
and/or synthetic agents that can prevent, delay, or even
reverse the development of pre-malignant lesions by
suppressing the multi-step carcinogenic process [41–42].
In clinical trials, breast cancer chemoprevention has
mainly focused on endocrine intervention using selective
estrogen receptor modulators (SERMs) and aromatase
inhibitors (AIs). Unfortunately, these drugs are active in
prevention of hormone responsive lesions only and have
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

9866

Oncotarget

Figure 9: The molecular binding mode of ISL with the catalytic domain within DNMT1. It was predicted by the LigandFit
algorithm in Discovery Studio 2.5 using the homology-docking template of 3SWR. It was found that ISL could form stable hydrogen
bonds with four active residues including GLU1168, GLU1266, ARG1312 and ASN1578. Meanwhile, ISL could also form a strong π–π
interaction with TRP1170. Blue dashed lines, hydrogen bonds; orange line, π–π interactions.

in vivo. Most studies elevated WIF1 levels using the
common DNA demethylating agent 5-azacytidine (5-Aza)
and its derivative 5-aza-20-deoxycytidine (Decitabine),
which have been tested in phase I and II trials for many
forms of cancer. They have been demonstrated to have
significant, although usually transient, improvement in
patient survival [54–55]. However, these agents are largely
limited due to their clinical toxicity. The major toxicity of
these drugs is myelosuppression, and the most commonly
reported nonhematologic adverse effect was nausea and
vomiting, which was grade 3–4 in approximately 10% of
patients [56–57]. Among metastatic lung cancer patients,
the toxicity of decitabine occurred in a dose- and scheduledependent manner, which required a 5–6-week recovery
period before the next cycle of therapy [58]. Alternatively,
our study suggested using a dietary phytochemical ISL to
reverse WIF hypermethylation and suppress mammary
tumorigenesis. Previous studies revealed that the minimum
lethal dose of ISL was not less than  3000  mg/kg (oral
administration) or not less than 1000 mg/kg (intraperitoneal administration) in 5-week-old mice [59]. In our
pilot studies, ISL oral administration posed little toxicity
to normal tissues and mammary stem cells in mice, even
with chronic administration at 100 mg/kg/d for 3 months,

tumors was conducted to unravel the underlying molecular
mechanisms of ISL. The results suggested that the ISL
chemopreventive effects might be tightly related to the
significant WIF1 augment, which was closely correlated
with the regulation of CSC self-renewal. Interestingly,
WIF1 inhibition relieved the CSC-limiting effects of ISL,
and it was found that ISL stimulated WIF1 expression
by promoting its promoter demethylation. It has been
reported that aberrant DNA methylation may be one of
the earliest events contributing to carcinogenesis [49–50],
and our data further demonstrated the central role of WIF1
methylation in breast cancer development and prevention.
Restoring WIF1 levels by modifying its DNA methylation
patterns has been suggested as an anti-cancer strategy in
other malignancies. Tang et al. [51] determined that WIF1
could suppress tumor growth via G1 arrest in bladder
cancer by the down-regulation of SKP2 and c-myc, as
well as the up-regulation of p21/WAF1 and p27/Kip1.
Rubin et al. [52] reported that elevated WIF1 decreased
the risks of cancer metastasis in an osteosarcoma mouse
model with attenuated expression of MMP-9 and MMP-14.
Ramachandran et al. [53] found that WIF1 re-expression
induced significant apoptosis and G2/M arrest, inhibiting
cervical cancer cell proliferation in vitro and tumor growth

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

9867

Oncotarget

making it desirable as a chemopreventive agent for breast
cancer treatment [13]. Collectively, we demonstrated
that the dietary compound ISL, at its safe dosages,
could effectively reverse the epimutational events, thus
suppressing a series of delayed premalignant progressions
(including primary/advanced hyperplasia, adenoma)
before the onset of mammary malignancy.
DNMTs have been revealed to be central mediators
for the aberrant epigenetic regulation [60]. Here, we
found that ISL restored WIF1 levels, likely by regulating
the enzyme DNMT1, which preferentially methylates
hemimethylated DNA over unmethylated DNA. Human
DNMT1 is a protein with 1616 amino acids and its
structure can be divided into an N-terminal regulatory
domain and a C-terminal catalytic domain [61]. DNMT1
disorder was considered to be a significant molecular
event to induce carcinogenesis by transferring methyl
group from S-adenosylmethionine (SAM) to the fifth
position of the cytosine ring [60]. Targeting DNMT1 has
become a promising strategy to prevent cancer occurrence.
Nowadays, DNMT1 inhibitors could be divided into
following categories: (1) trapping DNMT1 through
DNA incorporation (such as decitabine, 5-azacytidine
and zebularine); (2) blocking the catalytic active site of
DNMT1 (such as sinefungin, epigallocatechin gallate
(EGCG) and RG108); (3) interrupting the binding
site between DNMT1 and DNA (such as procaine and
procainamide); (4) inducing DNMT1 degradation (such as
decitabine) and (5) suppressing DNMT1 expression (such
as antisense MG-98) [62–63].
Based on our findings, ISL might act as both
a transcriptional modulator and a chemical inhibitor
of DNMT1. It was observed that ISL significantly
decreased DNMT1 mRNA and protein expression
levels, accompanied with decreased Sp1 levels. Sp1 is a
zinc finger transcription factor that preferentially binds to
GC-rich motifs of many promoters [64]. Numerous studies
reported that SP1 was involved in multiple biological
processes, including cell proliferation, cell growth, DNA
damage and chromatin remodeling [16, 35, 64]. Clinical
studies also indicated that Sp1 expression was aberrantly
elevated in various types of cancer, and closely correlated
to TNM classification, tumor invasion and lymph node
metastasis [65]. With regard to breast cancer, elevated Sp1
was found to regulate thousands of genes that are critically
involved in mammary tumorigenesis and metastatic
progression, such as vascular endothelial growth factor,
urokinase plasminogen activator and its receptor, cyclin
D1 and BRCA1 [66]. Recently, Sp1 was also discovered
as a transcriptional regulator of DNMT1 [67]. Meanwhile,
it was found that Sp1 binding site (5′-GGCGGG-3′) was
also exited in the promoter region of WIF1 [68]. Since Sp1
was able to recruit DNMT1 and other methyl CpG-binding
proteins following interacting with GC-rich promoters, our
results suggested that ISL might enhance WIF1 expression

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

through downregulating Sp1 level, which thereafter
inhibited DNMT1 transcription and recruiting to the
promoter region of WIF1.
On the other hand, molecular docking analysis
indicated that ISL might also potentially act as a chemical
inhibitor of DNMT1. Generally, DNMT inhibitors could
be divided into nucleoside and non-nucleoside categories
[69]. The aforementioned 5-azacytidine, decitabine, and
zebularine belong to the nucleoside analogues, which
deplete DNMTs by incorporating into DNA and resulting
in covalent trapping. The nucleoside analogues have
relatively low specificity and are always characterized
by substantial cellular and clinical toxicity owing to their
direct DNA-destroying properties [70]. Compared to
nucleoside analogues, the non-nucleoside inhibitors appear
to be less toxic by indirectly blocking DNMT1 activity via
interfering (through covalent or non-covalent interaction)
its catalytic site [71–72]. Yoo et al. [73] has applied
computational methods, and revealed that many DNMT1
inhibitors could stably dock in the catalytic binding
site of DNMT1, including (1) natural products, such as
sinefungin, EGCG, curcumin, parthenolide, and mahanine;
(2) inhibitors identified from virtual screening, such as
RG108 and its analogue RG108–1; and (3) approved drugs
for other indications, such as procaine and procainamide.
Yoo et al. [73] has also proposed that DNMT1 inhibitors
commonly share five pharmacophore features at the
catalytic site of DNMT1. The best-scoring feature is a
negative charge (N) close to the side chains of Ser1230,
Gly1231, Lys1535, and Arg1312. The second and third
favorable features are a donor site (D) that is near the side
chain of Gly1577 and an acceptor site (A) that is close to
the side chain of Arg1310 and Arg1312 in the RXR motif.
The fourth ranked feature is an aromatic ring (R) that
stabilizes the binding conformations of ligands between
AdoHcy and Cys1226. The fifth ranked feature is a donor
site (D) that is near the side chain of Glu1266, which is
a residue implicated in the mechanism of methylation.
ISL belongs to the family of non-nucleoside inhibitors.
In the present investigation, we predicted the binding
mode of ISL with the catalytic domain of DNMT1 using
the homology-docking template of the positive DNMT1
catalytic inhibitor sinefungin, and found that ISL matched
with the ring (R), donor (D), and acceptor (A) features
as stated above, which directly interact with Glu1226
and Arg1312, accompanied by Cys1226 as a surrounding
amino acid. However, no direct interaction between ISL
and Cys1226 was observed. The results suggested that
the inhibitory effects of ISL on DNMT1 activity might
largely depend on transcriptional regulation. Further study
is still needed to explore the detailed molecular interaction
between ISL and DNMT1.
Taken together, our study demonstrated that
the  dietary compound ISL prevents mammary
carcinogenesis by inhibiting breast cancer stem cells

9868

Oncotarget

Immunohistochemistry analysis

through DNMT1-mediated WIF1 demethylation. Our
findings not only provide preclinical evidence for
supporting ISL as a natural chemopreventive agent but
also shed novel light on the development of WIF1 as an
epigenetic target for breast cancer prevention.

Paraffin-embedded tumor sample sections (4 μm in
thickness) were de-paraffinized in xylene twice for 10 min
each and rehydrated using a graded series of ethanol. For
histological observation, H&E staining was used. For
immunohistochemistry analysis, endogenous peroxidase
was inactivated by incubating sections in methanol (with
0.3% hydrogen peroxide) for 30 min at room temperature.
Antigen retrieval was performed by heating slides in
sodium-citrate buffer (10 mM, pH 6.0) at 94°C for 10 min.
The samples were permeabilized in PBS with 0.2% Triton
X-100 for 15 min, and nonspecific binding was blocked by
10% normal goat serum for 60 min at room temperature.
The slides were then incubated with a 1:100 dilution of
primary antibodies WIF1, DNMT1 and DNMT3b (Cell
Signaling Technology, Danvers, MA) at 4°C overnight in
a moist chamber. After three washes with PBS, the slides
were sequentially incubated with biotinylated secondary
antibodies for 2 h at room temperature. After three washes
with PBS, streptavidin-peroxidase conjugate was added
to the samples and incubated for an additional 30 min
at room temperature. Finally, the 3, 5-diaminobenzidine
(DAB) substrate (Dako A/S, Glostrup, Denmark) was used
for color development, followed by counterstaining with
Mayer’s hematoxylin. Antigen-positive cells were counted
in six fields per tumor sample. The results were expressed
as the average ± SD of tumors per group.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Chemicals and reagents
ISL was purchased from Alpha Aesar Company
(Alfa Aesar, WardHill, MA) with more than 97% purity.
The stock solution of ISL was prepared in dimethyl
sulfoxide (DMSO) and kept at − 20°C. Hochest 33342,
4′, 6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI), bovine serum
albumin (BSA) were obtained from Sigma (Sigma,
St. Louis, MO).

Cell culture
The human breast cancer cell lines MDA-MB-231
and MCF-7 were obtained from the American Type
Culture Collection. The cells were cultivated in medium
(L-15 for MDA-MB-231; 1640 for MCF-7) supplemented
with 10% FBS and 1% penicillin and streptomycin
(Gibco Life Technologies, Lofer, Austria) at 37°C in
a humidified  incubator with or without 5% CO2. The
sorted MDA-MB-231 CSCs were subjected to in vitro
propagation in DMEM/F12 medium supplemented
with 1% penicillin and streptomycin, B27 (Invitrogen,
Carlsbad, CA), 20 ng/ml hEGF (BD Bioscience, Bedford,
MA), 5 μg/ml insulin and 0.4% BSA for the molecular
mechanisms study.

Flow cytometry analysis
Primary mouse mammary cells or breast cancer
cell lines (MDA-MB-231 and MCF-7) were washed with
PBS and then harvested with trypsin. The detached cells
were washed with PBS containing 1% FBS (wash buffer),
and resuspended in the wash buffer (106 cells/100 μl).
For SP analysis, cells were stained with Hoechst 33342
(5 μg/ml) in medium at 37°C for 2 h, and resuspended in
ice-cold PBS containing 2 μg/ml propidium iodide (PI).
For ALDEFLUOR assay, the experiment was performed
using aldehyde dehydrogenase-based cell detection kit
(Stem Cell Technologies, Grenoble, France) as described
previously [75]. Briefly, 106 cells were suspended in
Aldefluor® assay buffer containing ALDH substrate
(Bodipy-Aminoacetaldehyde) and incubated for 45 min
at 37°C. As a reference control, the cells were suspended
in buffer containing Aldefluor® substrate in the presence
of diethylaminobenzaldehyde (DEAB), a specific ALDH1
enzyme inhibitor. The brightly fluorescent ALDH1expressing cells (ALDH1high) were detected by a 488 nm
blue laser. For the in vitro stem cell analysis/sorting,
cells were incubated with combinations of fluorescenceconjugated monoclonal antibodies obtained from BD
Biosciences (San Diego, CA, USA) against human
CD44-FITC and CD24-PE at 4°C in the dark for 40 min
and then washed once with PBS. FITC- or PE-labeled

Whole mounting assay
3-week-old female mice were genotyped using
PyMT transgene primers that distinguish between the
wild type and the PyMT type (Table 1). Mammary glands
of PYMT mice were excised, and whole-mounts stained
with carmine alum were analyzed as previously described
[74]. In particular, the fourth abdominal mammary gland
was excised during necropsy, spread on glass slides for
10  min, and fixed in Carnoy’s fixative (6 parts 100%
ethanol, 3 parts chloroform, and 1 part glacial acetic
acid) for 4  h. Subsequently, the tissue was washed in
70% ethanol for 15 min, and the ethanol was changed
gradually to distilled water, with a final rinse in distilled
water for 5 min. Staining was carried out overnight in
carmine alum stain. The tissue was then dehydrated in
graded alcohol solutions (70, 95, and 100% for 30 min
each) and was cleared in two changes of xylene (30 min
each), mounted, and coverslipped using Permount.
Whole mounts were recorded using a SPOT FLEX® color
digital camera  (Diagnostic Instruments, Inc. Sterling
Heights, MI).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

9869

Oncotarget

Table 1: Primers used for PCR and sequence analysis
PyMT
Smad7
Bmp2
Klf4
Abca12
Abca9
Car4
Fzd4
Nkd1
Nkd2
Axin2
WIF1
Dkk1
Ptch2
Shh
GAPDH
β-catenin
Cyclin D1
c-Myc

(F): 5′-GGAAGCAAGTACTTCACAAGGG-3′
(R):5′-GGAAAGTCACTAGGAGCAGGG-3′
(F): 5′-ACCCCCATCACCTTAGTCG-3′
(R):5′-GAAAATCCATTGGGTATCTGGA-3′
(F): 5′-AGATCTGTACCGCAGGCACT-3′
(R):5′-GTTCCTCCACGGCTTCTTC-3′
(F): 5′-CGGGAAGGGAGAAGACACT-3′
(R):5′-GAGTTCCTCACGCCAACG-3′
(F): 5′-CCTGCTAAACCAGACGATCC-3′
(R): 5′-ACTTGCACAAAGGGGTTCC-3′
(F): 5′-TGGAAGAATACAGCCTCTCACA-3′
(R):5′-GCTTCTTCGCCAAAGTCGT-3′
(F): 5′-CAAACCAAGGATCCTAGAAGCA-3′
(R):5′-GGGGACTGCTGATTCTCCTT-3′
(F): 5′-AACTTTCACGCCGCTCAT-3′
(R):5′-CCGAACAAAGGAAGAACTGC-3′
(F): 5′-CACTGTTGGTCGAGGCACT-3′
(R):5′-CACTTCTAGGGGGAAGTCGTC-3′
(F): 5′-GCTATACACCACCGCAGGTC-3′
(R):5′-GCAGGCTCATTAGCTGGTATG-3′
(F): 5′-TGGAGGGATGTCCAGTGC-3′
(R):5′-TGCCAGACATCCTGTGACC-3′
(F): 5′-GGCAGACACTGCAATAAGAGG-3′
(R): 5′-TTAAGTGAAGGCGTGTGTCG-3′
(F): 5′-CCGGGAACTACTGCAAAAAT-3′
(R):5′-CCAAGGTTTTCAATGATGCTT-3′
(F): 5′-ACAGCTGCTGAGGGCAGA-3′
(R):5′-CCCGGAAGTGCTCGTACA-3′
(F): 5′-CCAATTACAACCCCGACATC-3′
(R):5′-GCATTTAACTTGTCTTTGCACCT-3′
(F): 5′-CCAATTACAACCCCGACATC-3′
(R): 5′-GCATTTAACTTGTCTTTGCACCT-3′
(F): 5′-GCTTTCAGTTGAGCTGACCA-3′
(R): 5′-CAAGTCCA AGATCAGCAGTCTC-3′
(F): 5′-AGGCCGGTGCTGAGTATGTC-3′
(R): 5′-TGCCTGCTTCACCACCTTCT-3′
(F): 5′-GCTGCTTAGACGCTGGATTT-3′
(R): 5′-TAACGTTGAGGGGCATCG-3′
(Continued )

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

9870

Oncotarget

survivin
4-Oct
β-actin

(F): 5′-CAATTTGCCAAGCTCT GA-3′
(R): 5′-AGATGGTCGTTTGGCTGAAT-3′
(F): 5′-CAATTTGCCAAGCTCCTGA-3′
(R): 5′-AGATGGTCGTTTGGCTGAAT-3′
(F): 5′-CCAACCGCGAGAAGATGA-3′
(R): 5′-CCAGAGGCGTACAG GGATAG-3′
Methylation-specific primers

MSP

(F): 5′-GGGCGTTTTATTGGGCGTAT-3′
(R): 5′-AAACCAACAATCAACGAAC-3′
Unmethylation-specific primers
(F): 5′-GGGTGTTTTATTGGGTGTAT-3′
(R): 5′-AAACCAACAATCAACAAAAC-3′

BGS

(F): 5′-GAGTGATGTTTTAGGGGTTT-3′
(R): 5′-CCTAAATACCAAAAAACCTAC-3′

isotype IgG1 was used as the negative control. For cell
cycle analysis, cells were fixed with ice-cold 70% ethanol
at − 20°C overnight. The next day, the cells were washed
with PBS, stained with 50 mg/mL propidium iodide
(Sigma, St. Louis, MO), and dissolved in 100 mg/L RNase
A (Sigma, St. Louis, MO). Flow cytometry analysis was
conducted with FACSAria SORP (BD Biosciences, San
Jose, CA), and analyzed by FlowJo or Modifit LT software.

(Roche Diagnostics, IN) according to the manufacturer’s
instructions. Real-time PCR analysis was performed using
a SYBR Green kit (Roche Diagnostics, IN) on a Roche
LightCycler 480 detector. The reactions were incubated in
a 96-well plate at 95°C for 10 min followed by 40 cycles
of 95°C for 10 s, 55°C for 30 s and 72°C for 1 min. The
designed primers were listed in Table 1. The Ct value was
measured during the exponential amplification phase.
The relative expression level (defined as fold change) of
the target genes was given by 2−∆∆Ct and normalized to the
internal control.

Microarray analysis
Total RNA was harvested from mammary tumor
tissues of vehicle or ISL-treated MMTV-PyMT mice,
extracted using TRIzol reagent (Invitrogen, Carlsbad,
CA), and further purified with RNeasy kits (Qiagen,
Chatsworth, CA). Microarray analysis was performed
with the Affymetrix GeneChip® Mouse Gene 2.0 ST
array (Affymetrix, Santa Clara, CA) by the Centre for
Genomic Sciences of HKU. Triplicate independent RNA
preparations of tumors from vehicle and ISL-treated
groups were compared. The results were analyzed by
GeneSpring12.6 with normalization of the raw gene
expression data, quality control checks, and subsequent
analyses. Genes that changed by at least 2.0-fold between
groups and with a P-value of less than 0.05 were finally
defined as target genes.

Western blot analysis
To determine the protein concentration, cells were
lysed in RIPA buffer (Sigma, St. Louis, MO) containing
a protease inhibitor mixture (Roche Diagnostics, IN). The
protein concentration was measured with the bicinchoninic
acid assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bonn, Germany).
Quantified protein lysates (15 μg) were subjected to
sodium dodecyl sulfate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis
(SDS-PAGE) and resolved on 12% polyacrylamide gels.
The proteins were then transferred onto a PVDF membrane
(GE Healthcare, Freiburg, Germany). The membrane
was probed with primary antibodies, including WIF1,
β-catenin, P-β-catenin (Ser33/37/Thr41), Akt, P-Akt
(Ser473), GSK3β, P-GSK3β (Ser9), DNMT1, DNMT3b,
lamin B and β-actin (Cell Signaling Technology, Danvers,
MA) at 4°C overnight. After three washes with Trisbuffered saline with 0.05% Tween-20, the membrane
was incubated with secondary anti-rabbit or anti-mouse
antibodies (Cell Signaling Technology, Danvers, MA) for
2 h at room temperature. The signals were visualized using

Real-time PCR analysis
Total RNA from primary mammary tumor tissues or
MDA-MB-231 CSCs was extracted using TRIzol reagent
(Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA), and reverse transcription
was carried out using a first strand cDNA synthesis kit

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

9871

Oncotarget

the ECL Advance reagent (GE Healthcare) and quantified
using Quantity One software.

designed methylation- and unmethylation-specific primers
were listed in Table 1. The PCR was carried out under
the following conditions: one cycle of 95°C for 10 min,
followed by 35 cycles of denaturing at 94°C for 1 min,
annealing at 60°C for 50 s and extension at 72°C for 50 s,
which was followed by the final extension at 72°C for
10 min. The PCR products were analyzed by
electrophoresis on a 2% agarose gel and samples were
visualized with a UV imaging system. For BGS sequencing
analysis, bisulfite-treated genomic DNA was amplified
using primers designed to amplify nucleotides from
−555 to −140 of the WIF1 promoter region. The designed
primers were listed in Table 1. The PCR was carried out
under the following conditions: one cycle of 94°C for
2 min, followed by 35 cycles of denaturing at 94°C for
15 s, annealing at 55°C for 30 s and extension at 68°C
for 40 s, which was followed by the final extension at
72°C for 15 min. The PCR products were cloned into
the pCRTM4-TOPO® Vector and transformed into
competent E. coli DH5a using the TOPO® TA cloning® kit
(Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA). Positive clones were selected
for sequencing using M13 primer in the Genomic Centre
of the University of Hong Kong. The DNA methylation
analysis was conducted with software BiQ Analyzer [79].

Immunofluorescence analysis
The untreated and ISL-treated MDA-MB-231
and MCF-7 breast cancer cells were fixed in 4%
paraformaldehyde for 10 min and permeabilized with
0.2% triton X-100. After blocking in 10% goat serum for
1 h, the slide was incubated with primary WIF1 antibody
(Santa Cruz, CA) overnight at 4°C, followed by secondary
fluorescence-labeled antibodies (Santa Cruz, CA) for 2 h
at room temperature. Finally, the samples were incubated
with DAPI for nuclear staining and the signal was detected
with a confocal microscope.

Mammosphere formation assays
The sorted breast CSCs from MDA-MB-231 and
MCF-7 were plated and cultured in 24-well ultralow
attachment plates at a density of 1000 cells per well.
The plating medium for mammosphere formation
consisted  of  DMEM/F12 medium supplemented with
B27, 20 ng/ml hEGF, 5 μg/ml insulin, 0.4% BSA and
1% penicillin and streptomycin. To examine the effects
of ISL on the formation of mammospheres, the 3rd day
mammospheres were treated with varying concentrations
of ISL. The plating medium was refreshed every 3 days
in the absence of additional ISL treatment and the
appearance of primary spheres was evaluated after 5 days.
To assess the effects of ISL over the secondary and the
third passage, mammospheres from the previous plating
were collected and dissociated into single-cell suspensions
with 0.05% trypsin, filtered using a 40-μm sieve and
re-plated in ultra-low attachment plates. The number and
size of the resulting mammospheres were observed with
no additional treatment. Three independent experiments
were conducted.

DNMT1 siRNA construction and transfection
The siRNAs targeting DNMT1 or their scrambled
siRNAs were purchased from Invitrogen (Carlsbad,
CA,  USA) and transfected into breast cancer cells
MDA-MB-231 using X-tremeGENE siRNA transfection
reagent (Roche Diagnostics, IN) according to the
manufacturer’s instructions.

Molecular docking
The LigandFit algorithm in Discovery Studio 2.5
was used in the molecular docking study. The LigandFit
algorithm employed a Monte Carlo conformational search
procedure to generate ligand docking conformations. The
chemical structure of ISL was drawn by Chemoffice 2002
(CambridgeSoft, Cambridge, MA). The crystal structure
of the DNMT1 catalytic structure was obtained from
the Protein Data Bank (http://www.rcsb.org/pdb/) with
the ID of 3SWR. The water molecules in DNMT1 were
removed. For docking purposes, the catalytic site of the
Cys 1226 domain within the DNMT1 catalytic structure
was defined as the ligand-binding site and ISL was docked
into DNMT1 with the correct parameter settings. The
potentials to form hydrogen bonds and π-π interactions
within the active site were calculated. Docking with no
output pose was considered a failure. Accuracy testing
was performed by calculating the root mean square
deviation (RMSD) after re-docking the internal ligand
with the algorithm into the crystal structure of the DNMT1
catalytic structure.

MSP and BGS analysis
MDA-MB-231 and MCF-7 cells were treated with
or without varying concentrations of ISL for varied time
intervals. After treatment, the genomic DNA was extracted
using the Genomic DNA Mini Kit for Cultured Cells
(Geneaid Biotech Ltd, Sijhih City, Taiwan) according to
the manufacturer’s instructions. Approximately 0.5 μg
of genomic DNA was bisulfite-modified using the
EZ DNA Methylation Kit (Zymo Research, Orange,
CA). The WIF1 promoter region has been identified
and described previously [76]. The methylation sites for
MSP and BGS at WIF1 prompter were also validated
by the studies of Mazieres et al. [77] and Yang et al.
[78]. For MSP analysis, bisulfite-treated genomic DNA
was amplified using either a methylation-specific or an
unmethylation-specific primer set targeting the WIF1
promoter region  sequences from −488 to −290. The
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

9872

Oncotarget

Statistical analysis

3.	 Subramaniam D, Ramalingam S, Houchen CW, Anant S.
Cancer stem cells: a novel paradigm for cancer prevention
and treatment. Mini Rev Med Chem. 2010; 10:359–371.

The data were shown as the mean ± SD. A
two-tailed Student’s t-test or one-way analysis of variance
was used to determine the significance of the data between
groups. Statistical significance was reached when the
P value < 0.05.

4.	 Li F, Tiede B, Massague J, Kang Y. Beyond tumorigenesis:
cancer stem cells in metastasis. Cell Res. 2007; 17:3–14.
5.	 Curtin JC, Lorenzi MV. Drug discovery approaches to
­target Wnt signaling in cancer stem cells. Oncotarget. 2010;
1:552–566.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

6.	 Nusse R, Varmus HE. Many tumors induced by the mouse
mammary tumor virus contain a provirus integrated in the
same region of the host genome. Cell. 1982; 31:99–109.

This research was funded by HMRF 11121951 from
the government of Hong Kong, and Project 319512 from
Chengdu University of Traditional Chinese medicine.
Confocal imaging and flow cytometry data were acquired
using equipment maintained by the University of Hong
Kong Li Ka Shing Faculty of Medicine Faculty Core
Facility.

7.	 Li Y, Hively WP, Varmus HE. Use of MMTV-Wnt-1
­transgenic mice for studying the genetic basis of breast
cancer. Oncogene. 2000; 19:1002–1009.
8.	 Huguet EL, McMahon JA, McMahon AP, Bicknell R,
Harris AL. Differential expression of human Wnt genes
2, 3, 4, and 7B in human breast cell lines and normal and
disease states of human breast tissue. Cancer Res. 1994;
54:2615–2621.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST

9.	 Polakis P. Wnt signaling and cancer. Genes Dev. 2000;
14:1837–1851.

The authors declare that they have no potential
financial competing interests that may in any way gain or
lose financially from the publication of this manuscript
at present or in the future. Additionally, no non-financial
competing interests are involved in the manuscript.

10.	 Khramtsov AI, Khramtsova GF, Tretiakova M, Huo D,
Olopade OI, Goss KH. Wnt/β-catenin pathway activation
is enriched in basal-like breast cancers and predicts poor
outcome. Am J Pathol. 2010; 176:2911–2920.
11.	 Su Y, Fu C, Ishikawa S, Stella A, Kojima M, Shitoh K,
Schreiber EM, Day BW, Liu B. APC is essential for targeting phosphorylated β-catenin to the SCFβ-TrCP ubiquitin
ligase. Mol Cell. 2008; 32:652–661.

Abbreviations
CSC, cancer stem cell; MSP, methylation-specific
polymerase chain reaction; BGS, bisulfite genomic
sequencing; LEF/TCF, lymphocyte enhancer factor/T cell
factor family of transcription factors; WIF1, Wnt inhibitory
factor 1; ISL, Isoliquiritigenin; EGCG, Epigallocatechin3-gallate; COX-2, Cyclooxygenase-2; MMTV-PyMT,
mouse mammary tumor virus promoter-driven polyoma
middle T oncoprotein; H&E, hematoxylin and eosin; SP,
side population; ALDH, Aldehyde dehydrogenase; DEAB,
diethylaminobenzaldehude; CM, conditional medium;
DNMTs, DNA methyltransferases; SERMs, selective
estrogen receptor modulators; AIs, aromatase inhibitors;
5-Aza, 5-azacytidine; Decitabine, 5-aza-20 deoxycytidine;
SAM, S-Adenosyl-L-methionine; DMSO, dimethyl
sulfoxide;
DAPI,
4’,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole;
BSA, bovine serum albumin; PI, propidium iodide;
SDS-PAGE, sodium dodecyl sulfate polyacrylamide gel
electrophoresis; RMSD, root mean square deviation.

12.	 He JP, Hao Y, Wang XL, Yang XJ, Shao JF, Guo  FJ,
Feng  JX. Review of the molecular ­pathogenesis
of ­osteosarcoma. Asian Pac J Cancer Prev. 2014;
15:5967–5976.
13.	 Wang N, Wang ZY, Peng C, You JS, Shen JG, Han SW,
Chen JP. Dietary compound isoliquiritigenin targets GRP78
to chemosensitize breast cancer stem cells via β-catenin/
ABCG2 signaling. Carcinogenesis. 2014; 35:2544–2554.
14.	 Kawano Y. J Cell Sci. 2003; 116:2627–2634.
15.	 Suzuki M, Shigematsu H, Nakajima T, Kubo R,
Motohashi S, Sekine Y, Shibuya K, Iizasa T, Hiroshima K,
Nakatani Y, Gazdar AF, Fujisawa T. Synchronous
­alterations of Wnt and epidermal growth factor r­eceptor
signaling pathways through aberrant methylation and
­mutation in non small cell lung cancer. Clin Cancer Res.
2007; 13:6087–6092.

1.	 Jemal A, Bray F, Center MM, Ferlay J, Ward E, Forman D.
Global cancer statistics. CA Cancer J Clin. 2011; 61:69–90.

16.	 Ai L, Tao Q, Zhong S, Fields CR, Kim WJ, Lee MW, Cui Y,
Brown KD, Robertson KD. Inactivation of Wnt inhibitory
factor-1 (WIF1) expression by epigenetic ­silencing is a
common event in breast cancer. Carcinogenesis. 2006;
27:1341–1348.

2.	 Al-Hajj M, Wicha MS, Benito-Hernandez A, Morrison SJ,
Clarke MF. Prospective identification of tumorigenic
breast cancer cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2003;
100:3983–3988.

17.	 Veeck J, Wild PJ, Fuchs T, Schuffler PJ, Hartmann A,
Knuchel R, Dahl E. Prognostic relevance of Wnt-inhibitory
factor-1 (WIF1) and Dickkopf-3 (DKK3) promoter methylation in human breast cancer. BMC Cancer. 2009; 9:217.

REFERENCES

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

9873

Oncotarget

18.	 Anastas JN, Moon RT. WNT signalling pathways as
­therapeutic targets in cancer. Nat Rev Cancer. 2013;
13:11–26.

in the MMTV-PyMT transgenic mouse model of breast
­cancer. Cancer Prev Res (Phila). 2013; 6:437–447.
31.	 Franci C, Zhou J, Jiang Z, Modrusan Z, Good Z, Jackson E,
Kouros-Mehr H. Biomarkers of residual disease,
­disseminated tumor cells, and metastases in the MMTVPyMT breast cancer model. PLoS One. 2013; 8:e58183.

19.	 Landis-Piwowar KR, Iyer NR. Cancer chemoprevention:
current state of the art. Cancer Growth Metastasis. 2014;
7:19–25.
20.	 Li Y, Wicha MS, Schwartz SJ, Sun D. Implications of cancer stem cell theory for cancer chemoprevention by natural
dietary compounds. J Nutr Biochem. 2011; 22:799–806.

32.	 Lin EY, Jones JG, Li P, Zhu L, Whitney KD, Muller WJ,
Pollard JW. Progression to malignancy in the polyoma
middle T oncoprotein mouse breast cancer model provides
a reliable model for human diseases. Am J Pathol. 2003;
163:2113–2126.

21.	 Park CH, Chang JY, Hahm ER, Park S, Kim HK, Yang CH.
Quercetin, a potent inhibitor against β-catenin/Tcf ­signaling
in SW480 colon cancer cells. Biochem Biophys Res
Commun. 2005; 328:227–234.

33.	 Tu SM. Cancer: a “stem-cell” disease? Cancer Cell Int.
2013; 13:40.

22.	 Kim J, Zhang X, Rieger-Christ KM, Summerhayes IC,
Wazer DE, Paulson KE, Yee AS. Suppression of Wnt
signaling by the green tea compound (-)-­epigallocatechin
3-gallate (EGCG) in invasive breast cancer cells.
Requirement of the transcriptional repressor HBP1. J Biol
Chem. 2006; 281:10865–10875.

34.	 Ginestier C, Hur MH, Charafe-Jauffret E, Monville F,
Dutcher J, Brown M, Jacquemier J, Viens P, Kleer CG,
Liu  S, Schott A, Hayes D, Birnbaum D, Wicha MS,
Dontu  G. ALDH1 is a marker of normal and malignant
human mammary stem cells and a predictor of poor clinical
outcome. Cell Stem Cell. 2007; 1:555–567.

23.	 Lee YM, Jeong GS, Lim HD, An RB, Kim YC, Kim EC.
Isoliquiritigenin 2′-methyl ether induces growth inhibition
and apoptosis in oral cancer cells via heme oxygenase-1.
Toxicol In Vitro. 2010; 24:776–782.

35.	 Liu J, Lam JB, Chow KH, Xu A, Lam KS, Moon RT,
Wang Y. Adiponectin stimulates Wnt inhibitory factor-1
expression through epigenetic regulations involving the
transcription factor specificity protein 1. Carcinogenesis.
2008; 29:2195–2202.

24.	 Park I, Park KK, Park JH, Chung WY. Isoliquiritigenin
induces G2 and M phase arrest by inducing DNA damage
and by inhibiting the metaphase/anaphase transition. Cancer
Lett. 2009; 277:174–181.

36.	 DeSantis C, Ma J, Bryan L, Jemal A. Breast cancer statistics, 2013. CA Cancer J Clin. 2014; 64:52–62.
37.	 Weinberg RA. How cancer arises. Sci Am. 1996;
275:62–70.

25.	 Wang ZY, Wang N, Han SW, Wang D, Mo S, Yu L,
Huang H, Tsui K, Shen JG, Chen JP. Dietary compound
isoliquiritigenin inhibits breast cancer neoangiogenesis
via VEGF/VEGFR-2 signaling pathway. PLoS One. 2013;
8:e68566.

38.	 Lori J, Sharad G, Paul F, Jeffrey W, Melanie R, Shari BG.
Breast Cancer Overview: Risk Factors, Screening, Genetic
Testing, and Prevention. Cancer Management. 2014.
39.	 Tsao AS, Kim ES, Hong WK. Chemoprevention of cancer.
CA Cancer J Clin. 2004; 54:150–180.

26.	 Kwon GT, Cho HJ, Chung WY, Park KK, Moon A,
Park JH. Isoliquiritigenin inhibits migration and invasion
of prostate cancer cells: possible mediation by decreased
JNK/AP-1 signaling. J Nutr Biochem. 2009; 20:663–676.

40.	 Amin AR, Kucuk O, Khuri FR, Shin DM. Perspectives for
cancer prevention with natural compounds. J Clin Oncol.
2009; 27:2712–2725.

27.	 Chen G, Hu X, Zhang W, Xu N, Wang FQ, Jia J, WF,
Sun ZJ, Zhao YF. Mammalian target of rapamycin regulates isoliquiritigenin-induced autophagic and apoptotic cell
death in adenoid cystic carcinoma cells. Apoptosis. 2012;
17:90–101.

41.	 Kelloff G. Perspectives on cancer chemoprevention
research and drug development. Adv Cancer Res. 2000;
78:199–334.
42.	 Crowell JA. The chemopreventive agent development
research program in the Division of Cancer Prevention
of the US National Cancer Institute: an overview”. Eur J
Cancer. 2005; 41:1889–1910.

28.	 Lau GT, Ye L, Leung LK. The licorice flavonoid
isoliquiritigenin suppresses phorbol ester-induced
­
cyclooxygenase-2 expression in the non-tumorigenic
­
MCF-10A breast cell line. Planta Med. 2010; 76:780–785.

43.	 Cazzaniga M, Bonanni B. Breast cancer chemoprevention: old and new approaches. J Biomed Biotechnol. 2012;
0:98562.

29.	 Cuendet M, Guo J, Luo Y, Chen S, Oteham CP, Moon RC,
van Breemen RB, Marler LE, Pezzuto JM. Cancer chemopreventive activity and metabolism of isoliquiritigenin, a
compound found in licorice. Cancer Prev Res (Phila). 2010;
3:221–232.

44.	 den Hollander P, Savage MI, Brown PH. Targeted therapy
for breast cancer prevention. Front Oncol. 2013; 3:250.
45.	 El-Bayoumy K, Chung FL, Richie JJr, Reddy BS, Cohen L,
Weisburger J, Wynder EL. Dietary control of cancer. Proc
Soc Exp Biol Med. 1997; 216:211–223.

30.	 Wang C, Schwab LP, Fan M, Seagroves TN,
Buolamwini JK. Chemoprevention activity of dipyridamole

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

9874

Oncotarget

46.	 Yang CS, Feng Q. Chemo/Dietary prevention of cancer:
perspectives in China. J Biomed Res. 2014; 28:447–455.

formation and carcinogenesis. Biol Pharm Bull. 2002;
25:247–250.

47.	 Yamamoto S, Aizu E, Jiang H, Nakadate T, Kiyoto I,
Wang JC, Kato R. The potent anti-tumor-promoting agent
isoliquiritigenin. Carcinogenesis. 1991; 12:317–323.

60.	 Joska TM, Zaman R. Belden WJ. Regulated DNA
­methylation and the circadian clock: implications in cancer.
Biology (Basel). 2014; 3:560–577.

48.	 Baba M, Asano R, Takigami I, Takahashi T, Ohmura M,
Okada Y, Sugimoto H, Arika T, Nishino H, Okuyama T.
Studies on cancer chemoprevention by traditional folk
medicines XXV. Inhibitory effect of isoliquiritigenin on
azoxymethane-induced murine colon aberrant crypt focus
formation and carcinogenesis. Biol Pharm Bull. 2002;
25:247–250.

61.	 Cheng X, Blumenthal RM. Mammalian DNA
methyltransferases: a structural perspective. Structure.
­
2008; 16:341–350.

49.	 Pogribny IP. Epigenetic events in tumorigenesis: putting the
pieces together. Exp Oncol. 2010; 32:132–136.

63.	 Yu J, Peng Y, Wu LC, Xie Z, Deng Y, Hughes T, He S,
Mo  X, Chiu M, Wang QE, He X, Liu S, Grever MR,
Chan KK, Liu Z. Curcumin down-regulates DNA methyltransferase 1 and plays an anti-leukemic role in acute
myeloid leukemia. PLoS One. 2013; 8:e55934.

62.	 Liu Z, Xie Z, Jones W, Pavlovicz RE, Liu S, Yu J, Li PK,
Lin J, Fuchs JR, Marcucci G, Li C, Chan KK. Curcumin is
a potent DNA hypomethylation agent. Bioorg Med Chem
Lett. 2009; 19:706–709.

50.	 Baylin SB, Herman JG. DNA hypermethylation in tumorigenesis: epigenetics joins genetics”. Trends Genet. 2000;
16:168–174.

64.	 Safe S1, Abdelrahim M. Sp transcription factor family and
its role in cancer. Eur J Cancer. 2005; 41:2438–2448.

51.	 Tang Y, Simoneau AR, Liao WX, Yi G, Hope C, Liu F,
Li  S, Xie J, Holcombe RF, Jurnak FA, Mercola D,
Hoang BH, Zi X. WIF1, a Wnt pathway inhibitor, ­regulates
SKP2 and c-myc expression leading to G1 arrest and
growth inhibition of human invasive urinary bladder cancer
cells”. Mol Cancer Ther. 2009; 8:458–468.

65.	 Wang XB, Peng WQ, Yi ZJ, Zhu SL, Gan QH. Expression
and prognostic value of transcriptional factor sp1 in breast
cancer. Ai Zheng. 2007; 26:996–1000.
66.	 Zannetti A1, Del Vecchio S, Romanelli A, Scala S,
Saviano M, Cali’ G, Stoppelli MP, Pedone C, Salvatore M.
Inhibition of Sp1 activity by a decoy PNA-DNA chimera prevents urokinase receptor expression and migration of breast ­cancer cells. Biochem Pharmacol. 2005;
70:1277–1287.

52.	 Rubin EM, Guo Y, Tu K, Xie J, Zi X, Hoang BH. Wnt
inhibitory factor 1 decreases tumorigenesis and metastasis
in osteosarcoma. Mol Cancer Ther. 2010; 9:731–741.
53.	 Ramachandran I, Thavathiru E, Ramalingam S,
Natarajan  G, Mills WK, Benbrook DM, Zuna R,
Lightfoot S, Reis A, Anant S, Queimado L. Wnt ­inhibitory
factor 1 induces apoptosis and inhibits cervical cancer
growth, invasion and angiogenesis in vivo. Oncogene. 2012;
31:2725–2737.

67.	 Maor S, Papa MZ, Yarden RI, Friedman E, Lerenthal Y,
Lee SW, Mayer D, Werner H. Insulin-like growth ­factor-I
controls BRCA1 gene expression through a­ctivation
of ­transcription factor Sp1. Horm Metab Res. 2007;
39:179–185.

54.	 Weiss AJ, Stambaugh JE, Mastrangelo MJ, Laucius JF,
Bellet RE. Phase I study of 5-azacytidine (NSC-102816).
Cancer Chemother Rep. 1972; 56:413–419.

68.	 Chang WC, Hung JJ. Functional role of post-translational
modifications of Sp1 in tumorigenesis. J Biomed Sci. 2012;
19:94.

55.	 Weiss AJ, Metter GE, Nealon TF, Keanan JP, Ramirez G,
Swaiminathan A, Fletcher WS, Moss SE, Manthei RW.
Phase II study of 5-azacytidine in solid tumors. Cancer
Treat Rep. 1977; 61:55–58.

69.	 Lyko F, Brown R. DNA methyltransferase inhibitors and
the development of epigenetic cancer therapies. J Natl
Cancer Inst. 2005; 97:1498–1506.

56.	 Vesely J, Cihak A. Possibilities for the clinical use of
5-­azacytidine. Vopr Onkol. 1977; 23:65–73.

70.	 Christman JK. 5-Azacytidine and 5-aza-2′-deoxycytidine
as inhibitors of DNA methylation: mechanistic studies and
their implications for cancer therapy. Oncogene. 2002;
21:5483–5495.

57.	 Saiki JH, McCredie KB, Vietti TJ, Hewlett JS,
Morrison  FS, Costanzi JJ, Stuckey WJ, Whitecar J,
Hoogstraten B. 5-­azacytidine in acute leukemia. Cancer.
1978; 42:2111–2114.

71.	 Pan MH, Chiou YS, Chen LH, Ho CT. Breast cancer
­chemoprevention by dietary natural phenolic compounds:
specific epigenetic-related molecular targets. Mol Nutr
Food Res. 2014; doi: 10.1002/mnfr.201400515.

58.	 Momparler RL, Bouffard DY, Momparler LF, Dionne J,
Belanger K, Ayoub J. Pilot phase I-II study on 5-aza-2′deoxycytidine (Decitabine) in patients with metastatic lung
cancer”. Anticancer Drugs. 1997; 8:358–368.

72.	 Chikan NA, Bhavaniprasad V, Anbarasu K, Shabir N,
Patel TN. From natural products to drugs for epimutation
computer-aided drug design”. Appl Biochem Biotechnol.
2013; 170:164–175.

59.	 Baba M, Asano R, Takigami I, Takahashi T, Ohmura M,
Okada Y, Sugimoto H, Arika T, Nishino H, Okuyama T.
Studies on cancer chemoprevention by traditional folk
­medicines XXV. Inhibitory effect of isoliquiritigenin on
azoxymethane-induced murine colon aberrant crypt focus
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

73.	 Yoo J, Kim JH, Robertson KD, Medina-Franco JL.
Molecular modeling of inhibitors of human DNA methyltransferase with a crystal structure: discovery of a novel
9875

Oncotarget

DNMT1 inhibitor. Adv Protein Chem Struct Biol. 2012;
87:219–247.

77.	 Mazieres J, He B, You L, Xu Z, Lee AY, Mikami  I,
Reguart  N, Rosell R, McCormick F, Jablons DM. Wnt
inhibitory factor-1 is silenced by promoter h­ ypermethylation
in human lung cancer. Cancer Res. 2004; 64:4717–4720.

74.	 Nagy T, Wei H, Shen TL, Peng X, Liang CC, Gan B,
Guan JL. Mammary epithelial-specific deletion of the focal
adhesion kinase gene leads to severe lobulo-alveolar hypoplasia and secretory immaturity of the murine m
­ ammary
gland. J Biol Chem. 2007; 282:31766–31776.

78.	 Yang Z, Wang Y, Fang J, Chen F, Liu J, Wu J,
Song  T, Zeng F, Rao Y. Downregulation of WIF-1 by
­hypermethylation in astrocytomas. Acta Biochim Biophys
Sin. 2010; 42:418–425.

75.	 Lohberger B, Rinner B, Stuendl N, Absenger M,
Liegl-Atzwanger B, Walzer SM, Windhager R, Leithner A.
Aldehyde dehydrogenase 1, a potential marker for cancer
stem cells in human sarcoma. PLoS One. 2012; 7:e43664.

79.	 Bock C, Reither S, Mikeska T, Paulsen M, Walter J,
Lengauer T. BiQ Analyzer: visualization and quality ­control
for DNA methylation data from bisulfite ­sequencing.
Bioinformatics. 2005; 21:4067–4068.

76.	 Li LC, Dahiya R. MethPrimer: designing primers for methylation PCRs. Bioinformatics. 2002; 18:1427–1431.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

9876

Oncotarget

