Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No. 31

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Application of a patient-derived xenograft model in cytolytic
viral activation therapy for nasopharyngeal carcinoma
Cheng-Lung Hsu1, Yung-Chia Kuo1, Yenlin Huang2, Yin-Cheng Huang3,
Kar-Wai Lui4, Kai-Ping Chang5, Tung-Liang Lin1, Hsien-Chi Fan1, An-Chi Lin1,
Chia-Hsun Hsieh1, Li-Yu Lee2, Hung-Ming Wang1, Hsin-Pai Li6, Yu-Sun Chang6
1

 ivision of Hematology-Oncology, Department of Internal Medicine, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, Chang Gung University,
D
Taoyuan 333, Taiwan, ROC

2

Department of Pathology, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, Chang Gung University, Taoyuan 333, Taiwan, ROC

3

 ivision of Neurologic Surgery, Department of Surgery, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, Chang Gung University, Taoyuan
D
333, Taiwan, ROC

4

 epartment of Medical Imaging and Intervention, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, Chang Gung University, Taoyuan 333,
D
Taiwan, ROC

5

 epartment of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, Chang Gung University, Taoyuan
D
333, Taiwan, ROC

6

Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Chang Gung University, Taoyuan 333, Taiwan, ROC

Correspondence to:
Cheng-Lung Hsu, e-mail: hsu2221@adm.cgmh.org.tw
Keywords: NPC, PDX, EBV, target therapy, viral lytic therapy
Received: July 09, 2015 	Accepted: September 11, 2015 	Published: September 24, 2015

ABSTRACT
Nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) is an Epstein Barr virus (EBV)-related
malignancy in which the tumor microenvironment plays a pivotal role in tumor
progression. Here, we developed two patient-derived xenograft (PDX) mouse lines
from engrafted NPC metastatic tumors. Positive staining for EBV-encoded small RNAs
confirmed that these tumors harbored EBV, and gene expression profile analyses
further showed that the PDX was highly similar to the primary parent tumor. In vivo
drug screening using the PDX system demonstrated that gemcitabine had the best
antitumor effect among the tested drugs. The donor of this PDX also showed excellent
responsiveness to gemcitabine treatment. The combination of gemcitabine and
valproic acid exerted synergistic antitumor effects. Further addition of ganciclovir to
this two-drug combination regimen enhanced cytolytic viral activation, yielding the
best antitumor response among tested regimens. Treatment with this three-drug
combination regimen decreased plasma EBV-DNA load, tumor viral concentration, and
the number of viable tumor cells to a greater extent than the two-drug gemcitabine
and valproic acid combination. These results highlight the value of PDX models in the
development of EBV-targeted strategies to treat NPC.

virus, cancer cells, and tumor microenvironment [3].
In the past decade, the amount of free EBV-DNA in
peripheral blood cells has been shown to correlate well
with tumor stage, and has essentially become a standard
marker for NPC [4]. EBV-DNA load has been identified
as an independent prognostic factor in metastatic NPC
patients such that those with a high pretreatment viral load
have worse outcomes [5–7].
There has been a recent increase in the use of
patient-derived xenografts (PDX) as a preclinical model

INTRODUCTION
Nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) is highly
prevalent in Southern Chinese populations and has a
predilection to affect young adult males [1]. In this
endemic region, non-keratinizing and undifferentiated
carcinoma constitutes up to 99% of all cases, and these
tumors are closely related to infection with Epstein Barr
virus (EBV) [2, 3]. The presence of EBV in virtually all
tumor cells highlights the integral relationship among
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

31323

Oncotarget

RESULTS

[8]. In application, the tumor from a patient is directly
implanted into a severe combined immunodeficiency
(SCID) mouse and then re-implanted into subsequent
passage mice to amplify the tumor mass. Several PDX
models have been established. These models exhibit
a stable biological profile when passaged in mice
(especially during early passages) in terms of global
gene-expression patterns, mutational status, metastatic
potential, drug responsiveness, and tumor architecture
[8]. Comprehensive genome-wide gene expression
analyses have demonstrated that early passage PDX
have key genomic expression profile features similar to
those of primary tumors [9]. In head and neck cancer,
the PDX model had been shown to harbor mutations in
TP53 or exhibit amplification of CCND1 similar those
observed clinically in association with cisplatin resistance
[10, 11]. Moreover, because orthotopic PDX models
preserve a greater proportion of stromal components, they
recapitulate tumor microenvironment effects, developing
patterns of locoregional and distant metastases similar to
those of human tumors [12, 13]. Primary tumor xenografts
have been shown to be valuable in a tailored personalized
medicine setting for drug-sensitivity screening in cases
where standard treatment has failed; they could also help
to identify key pathway components suitable for targeted
drug development [14].
The PDX model had been applied in NPC to study
combinations of chemotherapy, radiotherapy and histone
deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors [15], and for characterizing
the role of the microRNA, miR-31, in EBV-associated
NPC [16].
In a cancer cell, EBV is in a latent phase and
expresses 8–11 genes involved in maintaining EBV
proliferation. Among the latent genes expressed in NPC,
latent membrane protein 1 is considered the primary
viral oncoprotein, facilitating tumor cell growth and
local invasion, and conferring antiapoptotic properties
and survival advantages [17]. EBV reactivation from
latency requires expression of viral immediate-early
transactivators of subsequent lytic genes, including
thymidine kinase, protein kinase, and an EBV-encoded
DNA polymerase. These gene products are essential for
creating new viral genomes [18]. This EBV latent-lytic
shift may offer a strategy for promoting EBV-dependent
tumor cell killing. Some therapeutic agents, such as the
HDAC inhibitor bortezomib, a variety of chemotherapy
agents and irradiation, have been shown to induce
the ATM-p53 pathway, which would promote EBV
reactivation [19–23]. In lytic-induction strategies, some
EBV-encoded kinases may convert nucleoside analogs
such as ganciclovir into cytotoxic drugs that kill EBVpositive tumor cells and virus [20, 24]. Furthermore, the
phosphorylated form of ganciclovir can be transferred to
adjacent tumor cells through gap junctions, resulting in
“bystander killing” of a much greater percentage of tumor
cells [20].
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Establishment and characterization of the
EBV-positive PDX model
Very few currently available NPC cell lines harbor
endogenous EBV, which is important for NPC cell
growth and progression. Furthermore, microenvironmentcancer cell interactions play a pivotal role in cancer cell
progression in NPC. To address these issues, we sought
to establish EBV-positive tumors via PDX in a SCID
mouse model. Exploiting the fact that engrafting rate is
higher for metastatic tumors than primary site tumors,
we established two mouse xenograft lines from NPC
metastatic tumors: NPC01, obtained from a paraspinal
soft tissue tumor at initial diagnosis (before treatment) of
NPC with bone and soft tissue metastasis, and NPC02,
obtained from a neck lymph node biopsy after three lines
of chemotherapy. Compared with the EBV-positive NPC
cell line C666-1, a xenograft with a homogeneous single
tumor cell type, PDX had a more heterogeneous histologic
phenotype with various size tumor cells and background
cells (Fig. 1). EBER staining confirmed that these tumors
harbored EBV (Fig. 1). The PDX required a longer time
to grow (3–6 months for one passage) than the cell line
xenograft (~2–3 weeks from implantation of 5 × 105 cells
to achieving a 1,000 mm3 xenograft).
An initial small biopsy/excisional tumor was
amplified in the PDX system. An mRNA microarray analysis
of these tumors compared with in vitro-cultured NPC cell
lines and a C666-1 xenograft showed that the gene profile
of the PDX tumor was more similar to the clinical sample
than the C666-1 xenograft and was clearly different from
that of in vitro-cultured EBV-positive and -negative cell
lines (Fig. 2A). Expression levels of some hematopoietic/
macrophage-related genes were lower in the PDX than in the
parent tumor, possibly reflecting the immunocompromised
background of SCID mice. Because initial biopsy tissue
pieces were small, we lacked sufficient parent human tumor
for gene expression profile analysis of NPC02; however, the
gene expression profile of this PDX line was still different
from that of the C666-1 xenograft (Fig. 2B). Collectively,
these results confirm that the PDX system reliably represents
the clinical sample.

Drug screening using an in vitro NPC cell line
versus the in vivo PDX system
After establishing this reliable tumor system, we used
it to test sensitivities to the most commonly clinically used
anticancer chemicals, using activity in in vitro cultured
C666-1 cell line as a guide. Docetaxel, gemcitabine, and
mitomycin-C showed good anticancer activity in the
nano- to micromolar concentration range, although the
IC50 for docetaxel was lower than that for gemcitabine and
mitomycin-C (Fig. 3A). In contrast, cisplatin, fluorouracil,
31324

Oncotarget

Figure 1: Histological comparison of the parent clinical tumor A, C. with PDX B, D. and NPC cell line (C666-1) xenografts
E. H&E staining (left column) and detection of EBER by in situ hybridization (right column). Original magnification, 200X.
exert the best anticancer effect in our in vivo NPC02
PDX system. Accordingly, we tested gemcitabine in
patient number two, who had been treated unsuccessfully
with five different anticancer treatments (Fig. 4A).
Follow-up clinical assessments showed a decreased plasma
EBV-DNA load (Fig. 4A) and diminished toxicity profile
(not shown) in response to gemcitabine treatment, and an
evaluation of drug response by bone scan showed stable
disease (Fig. 4B and 4C).

etoposide, and valproic acid were largely ineffective except
at higher concentrations (Fig. 3A). Notably, millimolar
concentrations of valproic acid and ganciclovir were
required to produce antitumor effects. We next tested these
drugs in the PDX system. To our surprise, gemcitabine had
the best anticancer effect among the tested drugs in the PDX
model (Fig. 3B and 3C). Although cisplatin is effective in
clinical practice, it was ineffective at the doses tested in the
PDX system. Some diarrhea episodes were noted in the
docetaxel treatment group. Mitomycin-C was also found to
be an active drug in this in vivo assay (Fig. 3C).

Application of the PDX model to cytolytic viral
activation therapy

Drug sensitivity in PDX assays correlates with
patient clinical response

Cytolytic viral activation therapy (CVAT), which
shifts oncolytic viruses from the latent phase to the lytic
phase and causes cancer cell death, has recently come
to be considered a therapeutic strategy in EBV-related
cancers, including lymphoma and NPC [25, 26]. Different

Patient number one died due to cancer progression
before we were able to finish his drug-sensitivity screening
in the PDX system. Gemcitabine had been shown to
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

31325

Oncotarget

Figure 2: Comparison of gene expression profiles between clinical samples and PDX by microarray analysis. A. NPC01

was from a paraspinal soft tissue tumor obtained at initial diagnosis (before treatment) of NPC with bone and soft tissue metastasis.
B. NPC02 was obtained from a small piece of neck lymph node biopsy after three lines chemotherapy; it could be amplified in the NOD/
SCID mice system, but a parent clinical sample was unavailable for microarray analysis. Abbreviations: C6-XEN, C666-1 xenograft;
C6-CEL, C666-1 dish culture; TW02, NPC cell line, dish culture; NPC01F0, NPC patient 1 excision metastatic tumor; NPC01F2/NPC01F6,
second and sixth passage PDX of NPC01F0; NPC02F3/NPC02F5, third and fifth passage PDX of NPC patient 2 neck lymph node biopsy.

combinations of standard chemotherapeutic agents, HDAC
inhibitors, and antiviral agents have been reported to exert
efficient anticancer activity toward lymphoma and NPC
[19, 21, 22, 26]. In initial tests of this concept in our
PDX system, we found that, whereas gemcitabine alone
effectively suppressed tumor growth, the combination of
valproic acid and ganciclovir had no significant antitumor
effect compared with DMSO controls (Fig. 5A, valproic
acid + ganciclovir vs. gemcitabine). We confirmed the
importance of the standard chemotherapeutic agent,
gemcitabine, in these combination regimens by using
a reduced dose of gemcitabine during the first 4 weeks
of treatment, which produced little or no antitumor
effect (Fig. 5B). A combination regimen consisting
of gemcitabine and valproic acid exerted superior
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

antitumor effects compared with gemcitabine alone
(Fig. 5B, gemcitabine + valproic acid vs. gemcitabine).
Further addition of ganciclovir to this gemcitabine +
valproic acid regimen produced tumor control similar to
that observed in the gemcitabine + valproic acid group
(Fig. 5B, gemcitabine + valproic acid + ganciclovir vs.
gemcitabine + valproic acid). Xenograft weights measured
after sacrificing mice confirmed these tendencies (Fig. 5C).
Although adding ganciclovir had no additional tumorcontrolling effect, it is possible that it affected EBV-related
activity. In support of this, we found that the ganciclovircontaining three-drug combination group not only had a
lower plasma EBV-DNA load, but also a lower EBVDNA/tumor cell ratio in tumor tissue than the two-drug
gemcitabine + valproic acid group (Fig. 6A and 6B).
31326

Oncotarget

Figure 3: Drug-sensitivity screening in vitro using NPC C666-1 cell line growth assays A. and in vivo using the PDX model

(B, C). A. C666-1 cells were plated at 5 × 104 cells/well in 24-well plates and incubated with or without different concentrations of tested
drugs for 6 days. Cell growth was assessed using the MTT assay. Values presented in figures are mean OD590 ± SD from at least three
independent reaction wells. B. NOD/SCID PDX subcutaneous tumor before and after excision. C. Xenograft tumor weight after sacrificing
mice. After the tumor had been sub-implanted in NOD/SCID mice and the xenografts had reached a volume of approximately 150 mm3,
animals were randomized (3–5 tumor-bearing mice per group) and various drug dose schedules, described in Materials and Methods, were
administered via intraperitoneal injection. Mice were sacrificed 3 months after chemical injection or earlier in circumstances involving
declining health status, morbundity, or unrelieved pain and discomfort. Tumor weights presented in figures are means ± SD from at least
three independent studies. The PDX used in these studies were from the first eight passages of each line.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

31327

Oncotarget

Figure 4: PDX drug sensitivity correlates with clinical response. NPC02, a 42 year-old NPC patient with bone metastasis, had

received five different lines of palliative chemotherapy before gemcitabine (GEM) was prescribed. Allergy to cisplatin was found during
treatment with the third chemotherapy regimen (FMP); thus, cisplatin was subsequently omitted. A. Plasma EBV-DNA load reflecting
the clinical response of the patient. Plasma EBV-DNA load decreased after treatment with GEM, which was also shown to be effective
in the corresponding NPC02 PDX system. The patient died from aspiration pneumonia with septic shock 3 months after the last plasma
EBV-DNA detection. Whole-body bone scan before B. and after C. GEM treatment at 3-month intervals, revealing stable disease (hot
spots in right chest wall ribs in (C) are due to trauma). Abbreviations: PULB, cisplatin, tegafur/uracil, leucovorin, and bleomycin; MUB,
methotrexate, tegafur/uracil, and bleomycin; FMP, tegafur/uracil, mitomycin-C, and cisplatin; FM, tegafur/uracil and mitomycin-C; VP+U,
etoposide and tegafur/uracil; FA, tegafur/uracil and doxorubicin.

Furthermore, a histological examination of hematoxylin
and eosin (H&E)-stained tumors after treatment showed
fewer viable tumor cells in the ganciclovir-containing
three-drug group than in the gemcitabine + valproic acid
group. EBER in situ hybridization staining also showed
fewer EBER-positive cells in the three-drug treatment
group (Fig. 6C and 6D). These results suggest that the
ganciclovir-containing three-drug regimen is the best
combination among those tested.

Our microarray analyses showed that the gene
expression profile of the PDX tumor was highly similar
to that of the parent tumor, confirming that the PDX
system recapitulates features of the clinical sample. In
our PDX drug-sensitivity screens, gemcitabine was the
best candidate among the commonly used therapeutic
agents tested. We further clinically validated drug
sensitivity results obtained with cell line/PDX models
in the original patient (Fig. 4), showing that gemcitabine
exerted excellent anticancer effects in the corresponding
patient, who had been heavily and unsuccessfully treated
with a number of chemotherapeutic regimens. We also
demonstrated that gemcitabine plays a decisive role
in combination CVAT regimens (Fig. 5B). Although
docetaxel was found to be superior to gemcitabine in our
in vitro cell line-based drug-sensitivity screens, it showed
limited efficacy in the PDX system owing to toxicity,
which manifested as diarrhea. Mitomycin-C was also
active in PDX screens and this activity was correlated
with a positive clinical response to mitomycin-C, used
as a third-line treatment, that was maintained for almost
1 year. The combination of HDAC-inhibitor (valproic
acid) and antiviral agent (ganciclovir), which has shown

DISCUSSION
NPC is an EBV-related cancer in which the tumor
microenvironment has a crucial role in tumor progression.
Here, using metastatic tumors, which have greater
engrafting potential than primary site tumors in the PDX
model [27], we established EBV-positive PDX lines from
two patients with metastatic NPC, including one from a
neck lymph node core biopsy sample. Maintaining these
xenograft lines may help retain EBV in tumor cells, and
subsequently transferring these xenografts to an in vitro
culture system could enable the establishment of new
EBV-positive NPC cell lines.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

31328

Oncotarget

Figure 5: Tumor suppressive effects of different gemcitabine-based regimens in the PDX model. A. Valproic acid (VPA)

combined with ganciclovir (GCV) had no antitumor effect in this PDX model. The effect of gemcitabine (GEM) alone (2 mg/kg) is shown for
comparison. After the NPC02F3 PDX had been sub-implanted in NOD/SCID mice and the xenograft had reached a volume of approximately
1000 mm3, animals were randomized (2–3 tumor-bearing mice per group) and treated with the following dose schedule: DMSO 100 μl,
5 times/wk; GEM, 2 mg/kg, 5 times/wk; VPA, 50 mg/kg, 5 times/wk; and GCV, 50 mg/kg, 5 times/wk. All chemicals were applied for 2 weeks
every 3 weeks. B. Effects of GEM-based regimens in the PDX system. Low-dose GEM (1 mg/kg) given during the first 4 weeks of treatment
showed little or no antitumor effect in GEM-containing groups. Starting on week 5, the GEM dose was increased to 2 mg/kg. After subimplanted NPC02F5 PDX had reached a volume of approximately 500 mm3, animals were randomized (3–4 tumor-bearing mice per group)
and treated with the following dose schedule: DMSO 100 μl, 5 times/wk, 1 wk/3 wk; GEM, 1 mg/kg, 5 times/wk, 1 wk/3 wk; VPA, 50 mg/kg ,
5 times/wk, 1 wk/3 wk for GEM + VPA group and 2 wk/3 wk for GEM + VPA + GCV group; and GCV, 50 mg/kg, 5 times/wk, 2 nd wk/3 wk. At
the beginning of the fifth week, all treatment schedules were reset and the same dose schedule was applied except the GEM dose was increased
to 2 mg/kg. C. Xenograft weights for different treatment regimens in (B)

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

31329

Oncotarget

Figure 6: EBV activity decreased in the ganciclovir-containing treatment group. A. Plasma EBV-DNA load and B. xenograft

tissue viral concentration. NPC02F6 PDX were used in these studies with two cycles of the same drug schedule as shown in Figure 5B.
Tumor sections from the ganciclovir (GEV) + valproic acid (VPA) treatment group C. and gemcitabine (GEM) + VPA + GCV treatment
group D. Left: H&E staining; right: EBER staining. Original magnification, 40x.

some efficacy in certain lymphoma models [28], was not
effective in our NPC PDX model (Fig. 5A).
The anticancer drugs tested demonstrate efficacy in
clinical practice, but their response rates are variable—
generally less than 50% [29]. The high tumor heterogeneity
within and between tumors in a given patient and between
tumors in different patients is likely a contributing factor
to this variability. Notable in this context, the current PDX
was derived from tumors from only two cases amplified in
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

NOD/SCID mice. Taken together, these observations may
help explain why some commonly used chemotherapeutic
agents were ineffective in our PDX system.
The PDX system has previously been applied for
drug-sensitivity screening and target-gene identification
[8, 30, 31]. The true value of the PDX model for drug
sensitivity testing lies in its role as a bridge between cell
line studies and clinical tests, but it still has limitations,
including restrictions associated with surgical/biopsy
31330

Oncotarget

Cell growth assay

tissue processing, technically complicated orthotopic
implantation, limited availability of original source
material, low take out rate, and the time-consuming nature
of xenograft growth [32, 33]. Different animal species
also have different drug sensitivities and/or tolerances;
for example, docetaxel has greater gastroenteritis side
effects in NOD/SCID mice than in humans. Another
potential weak point is the immunocompromised
background of mice, which could limit its utility, since
some inflammation/immune-related phenomena may
be abolished in this system [8]. We also observed that
some hematopoietic/macrophage-related genes were
expressed at a low level in a PDX background. A high
percentage of lymphoma (32.5%) in PDX attributable
the lymphomagenesis background of NOD/SCID mice
has also recently been reported [34]. In this context,
approximately 5% of our PDX-positive mice showed
contamination by this spontaneous lymphomagenesis,
with rapid progression of the tumor after passage.
EBV is considered a therapeutic target in EBV-related
cancers, including lymphoma and NPC [25]. Valproic acid,
a short chain fatty acid used clinically as an anti-epilepsy
drug, could have some HDAC-inhibitory effects [35]. This
HDAC inhibition may sensitize cancer cells to the effects of
gemcitabine, and the combination of the drugs in these two
categories has been shown to exert synergistic anticancer
effects [22]. Our current PDX model, which revealed the
key role of gemcitabine in combination regimens, also
confirmed this concept. More recently, CVAT composed
of a standard chemotherapeutic agent (gemcitabine), an
HDAC inhibitor (valproic acid), and an antiviral agent
(ganciclovir) has shown promising anticancer effects in
refractory NPC patients [26]. Although the similar tumor
control achieved with this three-drug combination regimen
and the two-drug gemcitabine + valproic acid combination
would seem to raise questions about the role of ganciclovir
(Fig. 5), a detailed analysis demonstrated diminished EBVrelated activity in the ganciclovir-containing, three-drug
treatment group, as evidenced by lower plasma EBV-DNA
load, decreased tumor EBV concentration, and fewer viable
EBV-positive tumor cells (Fig. 6). These results suggest that
the ganciclovir-containing three-drug regimen is the best
combination among those tested. Although chemotherapyrelated toxicity observed in patients treated with this
ganciclovir-containing three-drug regimen is reported to be
mild [26], additional clinical trials will be required to further
confirm the reduced side effects, as well as the excellent
tumor control efficacy, of this three-drug combination CVAT.

C666-1 cells were grown in RPMI medium
containing 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS). Cells were
plated at 5 × 104 cells/well in 24-well plates and
incubated with or without different concentration of
tested drugs for 6 days. Cell growth was assessed
using the MTT (3-{4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl}-2,
5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide) assay [36]. At the
end of studies, 50 μl of a 5-mg/mL MTT solution was
added to each well containing 500 μl of medium, and
plates were incubated for 3 hours; 500 μl of isopropyl
alcohol was then added to dissolve the reduced formazan
product. The absorbance of each well was measured at a
wavelength of 590 nm in a DU 640B spectrophotometer
(Beckman, Fullerton, CA) according to the
manufacturer’s protocol. Values presented in figures
are mean OD590 ± SD from at least three independent
reaction wells.

Animal studies
All experiments involving laboratory animals
were done in accordance with the Guideline for Animal
Experiments of Chang Gung Memorial Hospital and were
approved by the Animal Research Committee at Chang
Gung Memorial Hospital.
The EBV-expressing NPC C666-1 cell line was used
as a positive control. The cancer cells were harvested,
washed twice with phosphate-buffed saline (PBS), and
resuspended at a final concentration of 5 × 106 cells/mL
in Matrigel (BD Biosciences, San Jose, CA) containing
basement membrane components. Then, 5 × 105 cells
(100  μL per site) were subcutaneously injected into
the flanks of 4-6-week-old male NOD/SCID mice
(BioLASCO, Taiwan). Tumor development was confirmed
within 2–3 weeks after injection of the same number of
cell sub-clones. Treatment with different chemicals
was initiated at the same time. Tumor dimensions
were measured twice a week with calipers, and tumor
volume was calculated with the formula, tumor volume
(mm3) = tumor length (mm) x [tumor width (mm)]2 × 0.5.
Tumors were harvested for further analysis. Three to five
mice for each group (with or without chemical treatment)
were used. Mice were sacrificed 3 months after chemical
injection or earlier if tumors reached a size greater than
2000 mm3, body weight loss exceeded 20%, mice were
unable to maintain their normal food and water intake
for 3 days, had micturition or defecation difficulties, or
other conditions that would violate humane treatment
regulations.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Materials

Statistical analysis

Cisplatin, gemcitabine, docetaxel, etoposide,
5-fluorouracil (fluorouracil), mitomycin-C, valproic acid,
and ganciclovir were purchased from Sigma Chemical Co
(St. Louis, MO).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Cell line and tumor weight studies data are presented
as means ± SD. Final tumor volumes were compared using
a two-tailed analysis of variance (ANOVA).
31331

Oncotarget

Patient enrollment

scaling normalization method. Reproducibility among
technical repeat data was tested by calculating the Pearson
correlation coefficient (R value >0.975). Normalized
spot intensities were transformed to log2 ratios of gene
expression between control and treatment groups. Spots
with a log2 ratio ≥1 or ≤ −1 and a P-value <0.05 were
included in further analyses.

Two biopsy-proven NPC patients with local
recurrence or distant metastasis were enrolled between
July 2013 and June 2014. Written informed consent
approved by the Institutional Review Board of Chang
Gung Memorial Hospital was obtained from these
two participating patients. The recurrent/metastatic tissues
were engrafted subcutaneously into NOD/SCID mice.

Drug sensitivity tests in the PDX model

PDX study

After tumors had been sub-implanted in NOD/
SCID mice and xenograft had reached a volume of
approximately 150 mm3, animals were randomized
(3–5 mice with tumors on the right flank per group)
and various drugs, including cisplatin, mitomycin-C,
fluorouracil, etoposide, gemcitabine, docetaxel,
valproic acid, and ganciclovir, were administered via
intraperitoneal injection. The following dose schedules
were used: cisplatin, 4 mg/kg, 1 time/wk; mitomycin-C,
3 mg/kg, 2 times/wk; fluorouracil, 20 mg/kg, 1 time/wk;
etoposide, 12 mg/kg, 3 times/wk; gemcitabine, 2 mg/kg,
5 times/wk; docetaxel, 1 mg/kg, 5 times/wk; valproic
acid, 50 mg/kg, 5 times/wk; and ganciclovir, 50 mg/kg,
5 times/wk.
Mice xenografted with the EBV-positive cell line
C666-1 served as a control. Final tumor volumes were
compared using a two-tailed ANOVA, adjusted for
multiple comparisons. A ranked list of effective treatments
was provided to the attending physician, who then selected
the patient treatment.

Local recurrent/metastatic NPC tumor samples were
obtained from patients undergoing surgical resection or
biopsy. Each sample was immediately cut into small pieces
(25–30 mm3) in PBS containing 200 U/mL penicillin and
200 μg/mL streptomycin and implanted subcutaneously in
the flank region of anesthetized, 4-6-week-old male NOD/
SCID mice [32]. In the first round, two mice were each
implanted with two pieces of tumor, where tumor volume
permitted. Tumor size was measured twice per week with
calipers, and the relative tumor volume was calculated.
After the xenograft reached ~1 cm3 in size, it was excised
and sub-implanted into the next passage of mice. The PDX
used in these studies were from the first eight passages of
each line.

Microarray analysis of tumor and xenograft
Total RNA was extracted from cells using an
RNeasy Mini kit (Qiagen, Valencia, CA) and evaluated
by microarray analysis using the Human Whole Genome
OneArray v6 (Phalanx Biotech Group, Taiwan), containing
32,679 DNA oligonucleotide probes, each of which is a
60-mer designed in the sense direction. Among the probes,
31,741 corresponded to annotated genes in RefSeq v51 and
Ensembl v65 database, and 938 corresponded to control
probes. Fluorescent aRNA targets were prepared from
1 μg total RNA samples using a OneArray® Amino Allyl
aRNA Amplification Kit (Phalanx Biotech Group, Taiwan)
and Cy5 dyes (Amersham Pharmacia, Piscataway, NJ).
Fluorescent targets were hybridized to the Human Whole
Genome OneArray® in Phalanx hybridization buffer using
the Phalanx Hybridization System. After hybridization
at 50°C for 16 hours, non-specific binding targets were
removed using three different wash steps, and the slides
were dried by centrifugation and scanned with an Axon
4000B Scanner (Molecular Devices, Sunnyvale, CA).
The Cy5 fiuorescence intensity of each spot was analyzed
using GenePix 4.1 software (Molecular Devices).
Signal intensity values for each spot were imported
into the Rosetta Resolver System® (Rosetta Biosoftware)
for data analysis. The error model of the Rosetta Resolver
System, which is able to remove both systematic and
random errors from the data, was used to filter out spots
for which the flag value was less than 0. Spots that
passed all criteria were normalized using the 50% media
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

EBV-DNA detection
DNA was extracted from plasma/tissue as
described previously [6, 32]. Briefly, 10-mL samples of
peripheral blood were collected in EDTA-treated tubes
and centrifuged at 1000 x g for 15 minutes. Plasma/
tissue DNA was extracted using a QIAamp DNA Blood
MiniKit (Qiagen, Valencia, CA). About 500–1000 μL of
each sample per column (supplied in the QIAamp kit)
was used for DNA extraction. DNA was eluted from
each column with 80 μL distilled water [4]. EBV-DNA
concentrations were measured by real-time quantitative
polymerase chain reaction (PCR) of the BamHI-W region
of the EBV genome [32]. Primer and probe sequences,
including the dual fluorescence-labeled oligomer, and
the detailed procedure have been described previously
[6]. The relative EBV-DNA concentration in tissue was
expressed as EBV-DNA copies/β-actin gene copies in the
same tested samples.

Detection of EBV-encoded small RNAs
Paraffin-embedded sections from patient tumors
or mice xenografts were used for detection of EBER
(EBV-encoded small RNAs) by fluorescence in situ
hybridization. Tissue sections were deparaffinized and
31332

Oncotarget

pretreated with proteinase K for 10 minutes and then
incubated with a fluorescein-conjugated EBER DNA
probe (Leica Biosystems, Newcastle, UK) at 37°C for
2 hours. The sections were rinsed in water and incubated
with horseradish peroxidase-conjugated anti-fluorescein
antibody for 15 minutes before addition of fresh DAB
(3,3-diaminobenzidine) substrate to produce an alcoholinsoluble brown intranuclear stain in EBV-positive cells.

carcinoma in an epidemic area. European Journal of Cancer.
2012; 48:882–888.
6.	 Hsu CL, Chang KP, Lin CY, Chang HK, Wang CH,
Lin TL, Liao CT, Tsang NM, Lee LY, Chan SC, Ng SH,
Li HP, Chang YS, Wang HM. Plasma epstein-barr virus
DNA concentration and clearance rate as novel prognostic
factors for metastatic nasopharyngeal carcinoma. Head &
neck. 2012; 34:1064–1070.
7.	 Hsu CL, Chan SC, Chang KP, Lin TL, Lin CY, Hsieh CH,
Huang SF, Tsang NM, Lee LY, Ng SH, Wang HM. Clinical
scenario of EBV DNA follow-up in patients of treated
localized nasopharyngeal carcinoma. Oral oncology. 2013;
49:620–625.

Abbreviations
5-FU, fluorouracil; EBV, Epstein Barr virus;
EBER, EBV-encoded small RNAs; CVAT, cytolytic
viral activation therapy; GCV, ganciclovir; GEM,
gemcitabine; HDAC, histone deacetylase; NOD/SCID,
nonobese diabetic/severe combined immunodeficiency;
NPC, nasopharyngeal carcinoma; PDX, patient-derived
xenograft; SCID, severe combined immunodeficiency;
VPA, valproic acid.

8.	 Tentler JJ, Tan AC, Weekes CD, Jimeno A, Leong S,
Pitts TM, Arcaroli JJ, Messersmith WA, Eckhardt SG.
Patient-derived tumour xenografts as models for oncology
drug development. Nature reviews Clinical oncology. 2012;
9:338–350.
9.	 Fichtner I, Rolff J, Soong R, Hoffmann J, Hammer S,
Sommer A, Becker M, Merk J. Establishment of patientderived non-small cell lung cancer xenografts as models for
the identification of predictive biomarkers. Clinical cancer
research: an official journal of the American Association for
Cancer Research. 2008; 14:6456–6468.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS AND FUNDING
We thank the staff at the Laboratory Animal Center,
Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, Linkou, Taoyuan,
Taiwan, for critical animal care.
This work was supported by grants from
Chang Gung Memorial Hospital (CMRPG3C1931,
CMRPG3C1932), and the Ministry of Science and
Technology, Taiwan (MOST103-2314-B-182-041,
MOST104-2314-B-182-036).

10.	 Sriuranpong V, Mutirangura A, Gillespie JW, Patel V,
Amornphimoltham P, Molinolo AA, Kerekhanjanarong V,
Supanakorn S, Supiyaphun P, Rangdaeng S, Voravud N,
Gutkind JS. Global gene expression profile of nasopharyngeal carcinoma by laser capture microdissection and
complementary DNA microarrays. Clinical cancer research:
an official journal of the American Association for Cancer
Research. 2004; 10:4944–4958.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST

11.	 Cabelguenne A, Blons H, de Waziers I, Carnot F,
Houllier AM, Soussi T, Brasnu D, Beaune P,
Laccourreye O, Laurent-Puig P. p53 alterations predict
tumor response to neoadjuvant chemotherapy in head and
neck squamous cell carcinoma: a prospective series. Journal
of clinical oncology: official journal of the American
Society of Clinical Oncology. 2000; 18:1465–1473.

The authors of this manuscript have nothing no
conflicts of interest to declare.

REFERENCES
1.	 Yu MC, Yuan JM. Epidemiology of nasopharyngeal carcinoma. Seminars in cancer biology. 2002; 12:421–429.

12.	 Fu X, Guadagni F, Hoffman RM. A metastatic nudemouse model of human pancreatic cancer constructed
orthotopically with histologically intact patient specimens.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the
United States of America. 1992; 89:5645–5649.

2.	 Shanmugaratnam K, Sobin LH. The World Health
Organization histological classification of tumours of
the upper respiratory tract and ear. A commentary on the
­second edition. Cancer. 1993; 71:2689–2697.
3.	 Chang YS, Tyan YS, Liu ST, Tsai MS, Pao CC. Detection
of Epstein-Barr virus DNA sequences in nasopharyngeal
carcinoma cells by enzymatic DNA amplification. Journal
of clinical microbiology. 1990; 28:2398–2402.

13.	 Kim MP, Evans DB, Wang H, Abbruzzese JL, Fleming JB,
Gallick GE. Generation of orthotopic and heterotopic
human pancreatic cancer xenografts in immunodeficient
mice. Nature protocols. 2009; 4:1670–1680.

4.	 Lin JC, Wang WY, Chen KY, Wei YH, Liang WM, Jan JS,
Jiang RS. Quantification of plasma Epstein-Barr virus DNA
in patients with advanced nasopharyngeal carcinoma. The
New England journal of medicine. 2004; 350:2461–2470.

14.	 Villarroel MC, Rajeshkumar NV, Garrido-Laguna I,
De Jesus-Acosta A, Jones S, Maitra A, Hruban RH,
Eshleman  JR, Klein A, Laheru D, Donehower R,
Hidalgo M. Personalizing cancer treatment in the age of
global genomic analyses: PALB2 gene mutations and the
response to DNA damaging agents in pancreatic cancer.
Molecular cancer therapeutics. 2011; 10:3–8.

5.	 Jin Y, Cai XY, Cai YC, Cao Y, Xia Q, Tan YT, Jiang WQ,
Shi YX. To build a prognostic score model containing
indispensible tumour markers for metastatic nasopharyngeal
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

31333

Oncotarget

15.	 Gressette M, Verillaud B, Jimenez-Pailhes AS, Lelievre H,
Lo KW, Ferrand FR, Gattolliat CH, Jacquet-Bescond A,
Kraus-Berthier L, Depil S, Busson P. Treatment of nasopharyngeal carcinoma cells with the histone-deacetylase
inhibitor abexinostat: cooperative effects with cis-platin
and radiotherapy on patient-derived xenografts. PloS one.
2014; 9:e91325.

Epstein-Barr virus-driven tumors. Clinical cancer research:
an official journal of the American Association for Cancer
Research. 2012; 18:5061–5070.
27.	 DeRose YS, Wang G, Lin YC, Bernard PS, Buys SS,
Ebbert MT, Factor R, Matsen C, Milash BA, Nelson E,
Neumayer L, Randall RL, Stijleman IJ, Welm BE,
Welm AL. Tumor grafts derived from women with breast
cancer authentically reflect tumor pathology, growth,
metastasis and disease outcomes. Nature medicine. 2011;
17:1514–1520.

16.	 Cheung CC, Chung GT, Lun SW, To KF, Choy KW,
Lau KM, Siu SP, Guan XY, Ngan RK, Yip TT, Busson P,
Tsao SW, Lo KW. miR-31 is consistently inactivated in
EBV-associated nasopharyngeal carcinoma and contributes
to its tumorigenesis. Molecular cancer. 2014; 13:184.
17.	 Young LS, Rickinson AB. Epstein-Barr virus: 40 years on.
Nature reviews Cancer. 2004; 4:757–768.

28.	 Ghosh SK, Perrine SP, Williams RM, Faller DV. Histone
deacetylase inhibitors are potent inducers of gene expression in latent EBV and sensitize lymphoma cells to nucleoside antiviral agents. Blood. 2012; 119:1008–1017.

18.	 Kenney SC, Mertz JE. Regulation of the latent-lytic switch
in Epstein-Barr virus. Seminars in cancer biology. 2014;
26:60–68.

29.	 Ali H, al-Sarraf M. Chemotherapy in advanced nasopharyngeal cancer. Oncology (Williston Park). 2000;
14:1223–1230.

19.	 Feng WH, Hong G, Delecluse HJ, Kenney SC. Lytic induction therapy for Epstein-Barr virus-positive B-cell lymphomas. Journal of virology. 2004; 78:1893–1902.

30.	 Einarsdottir BO, Bagge RO, Bhadury J, Jespersen H,
Mattsson J, Nilsson LM, Truve K, Lopez MD, Naredi P,
Nilsson O, Stierner U, Ny L, Nilsson JA. Melanoma
patient-derived xenografts accurately model the disease
and develop fast enough to guide treatment decisions.
Oncotarget. 2014; 5:9609–9618.

20.	 Fu DX, Tanhehco Y, Chen J, Foss CA, Fox JJ, Chong JM,
Hobbs RF, Fukayama M, Sgouros G, Kowalski J,
Pomper MG, Ambinder RF. Bortezomib-induced enzymetargeted radiation therapy in herpesvirus-associated tumors.
Nature medicine. 2008; 14:1118–1122.

31.	 Dobbin ZC, Katre AA, Steg AD, Erickson BK, Shah MM,
Alvarez RD, Conner MG, Schneider D, Chen D,
Landen CN. Using heterogeneity of the patient-derived
xenograft model to identify the chemoresistant population
in ovarian cancer. Oncotarget. 2014; 5:8750–8764.

21.	 Westphal EM, Blackstock W, Feng W, Israel B, Kenney SC.
Activation of lytic Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) infection by
radiation and sodium butyrate in vitro and in vivo: a potential method for treating EBV-positive malignancies. Cancer
research. 2000; 60:5781–5788.

32.	 Moro M, Bertolini G, Tortoreto M, Pastorino U, Sozzi G,
Roz L. Patient-Derived Xenografts of Non Small Cell Lung
Cancer: Resurgence of an Old Model for Investigation of
Modern Concepts of Tailored Therapy and Cancer Stem
Cells. Journal of Biomedicine and Biotechnology. 2012;
2012. pii:568567.

22.	 Feng WH, Kenney SC. Valproic acid enhances the ­efficacy
of chemotherapy in EBV-positive tumors by ­increasing
lytic viral gene expression. Cancer research. 2006;
66:8762–8769.

33.	 Whittle JR, Lewis MT, Lindeman GJ, Visvader JE. Patientderived xenograft models of breast cancer and their predictive power. Breast cancer research. 2015; 17:17.

23.	 Roychowdhury S, Peng R, Baiocchi RA, Bhatt D,
Vourganti S, Grecula J, Gupta N, Eisenbeis CF, Nuovo GJ,
Yang W, Schmalbrock P, Ferketich A, Moeschberger M,
Porcu P, Barth RF, Caligiuri MA. Experimental treatment
of Epstein-Barr virus-associated primary central nervous
system lymphoma. Cancer research. 2003; 63:965–971.

34.	 Zhang L, Liu Y, Wang X, Tang Z, Li S, Hu Y, Zong X,
Wu X, Bu Z, Wu A, Li Z, Li Z, Huang X, Jia L, Kang Q,
Liu Y, et al. The extent of inflammatory infiltration in primary cancer tissues is associated with lymphomagenesis in
immunodeficient mice. Scientific Reports. 2015; 5:9447.

24.	 Meng Q, Hagemeier SR, Fingeroth JD, Gershburg E,
Pagano JS, Kenney SC. The Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)encoded protein kinase, EBV-PK, but not the thymidine
kinase (EBV-TK), is required for ganciclovir and acyclovir inhibition of lytic viral production. Journal of virology.
2010; 84:4534–4542.

35.	 Chateauvieux S, Morceau F, Dicato M, Diederich M.
Molecular and Therapeutic Potential and Toxicity of
Valproic Acid. Journal of Biomedicine and Biotechnology.
2010; 2010. pii: 479364.

25.	 Mentzer SJ, Fingeroth J, Reilly JJ, Perrine SP, Faller DV.
Arginine butyrate-induced susceptibility to ganciclovir in
an Epstein-Barr-virus-associated lymphoma. Blood cells,
molecules & diseases. 1998; 24:114–123.

36.	 Hsu CL, Chen YL, Ting HJ, Lin WJ, Yang Z, Zhang Y,
Wang L, Wu CT, Chang HC, Yeh S, Pimplikar SW,
Chang C. Androgen receptor (AR) NH2- and COOHterminal interactions result in the differential influences on
the AR-mediated transactivation and cell growth. Molecular
endocrinology. 2005; 19:350–361.

26.	 Wildeman MA, Novalic Z, Verkuijlen SA, Juwana H,
Huitema AD, Tan IB, Middeldorp JM, de Boer JP,
Greijer AE. Cytolytic virus activation therapy for

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

31334

Oncotarget

