HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Author Manuscript

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 March 10.
Published in final edited form as:
Cell. 2013 November 7; 155(4): 750–764. doi:10.1016/j.cell.2013.10.029.

Mechanisms Governing Metastatic Dormancy and Reactivation
Filippo G. Giancotti
Cell Biology Program and Metastasis Research Center, Sloan-Kettering Institute for Cancer
Research, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY 10065

Summary
Author Manuscript

Many cancer patients suffer from metastatic relapse several years after they have undergone
radical surgery. Early cancer cell dissemination followed by a protracted period of dormancy
potentially explains this prevalent clinical behavior. Increasing evidence suggests that the
metastasis-initiating cells are cancer stem cells or functionally equivalent to cancer stem cells.
Here, I discuss newly uncovered mechanisms governing metastatic dormancy and reactivation,
placing emphasis on tumor evolution, stem cell signaling, and micro-environmental niches. In
spite of significant remaining uncertainties, these findings provide a framework to understand the
logic of metastatic dormancy and reactivation and open new avenues for therapeutic intervention.

Introduction
Author Manuscript

Metastatic relapse almost invariably portends a poor prognosis, as metastatic outgrowths
become rapidly recalcitrant to pharmacological treatment, seed additional metastatic
colonies, and eventually compromise the function of vital organs. Although the clinical
importance of metastasis has been obvious since the recognition of cancer as a disease, the
study of metastasis has remained the domain of specialists until the end of the last century.
More recently, advances in genomics and mouse modeling have fostered a renaissance of
studies on metastasis, leading to a conceptual framework for the understanding of its
biological basis (Nguyen et al., 2009; Valastyan and Weinberg, 2011).

Author Manuscript

Metastasis is traditionally viewed as a linear series of discrete events or steps, collectively
referred to as the invasion-metastasis cascade (Fidler, 2003) (Figure 1). The first step
commences when cancer cells at the primary site of tumor growth dissociate from one
another or from adjacent normal cells, induce partial degradation of the underlying basement
membrane, and penetrate into the underlying interstitial matrix (invasion). Subsequently, as
part of the program that enables them to sculpt a permissive microenvironment, tumor cells
foster the development of a tumor vasculature (neoangiogenesis), exploit its discontinuities
to gain access to the bloodstream (intravasation), and disseminate through the bloodstream
(dissemination). Finally, upon arresting in the microcirculatory system of the target organ
and infiltrating its stroma (extravasation), cancer cells adopt various strategies to survive
and eventually outgrow into macroscopic lesions (colonization). Systemic signals, which act
directly or indirectly on the microenvironment in which metastases arise (systemic

Correspondence: f-giancotti@ski.mskcc.org.

Giancotti

Page 2

Author Manuscript

instigation and inhibition), influence this latter step (Nguyen et al., 2009; Valastyan and
Weinberg, 2011).
The evolution of the cellular attributes that enable individual tumor cells to successfully
negotiate the invasion-metastasis cascade is akin to a Darwinian selection process, whereby
only a small percentage of the cells that emerge from one step acquire the genetic or
epigenetic alterations that enable them to complete the subsequent step (Fidler, 2003). Since
significant attrition occurs at each step, the probability that individual tumor cells traverse
all the steps of the invasion-metastasis cascade is small. Yet, a discrete number of cancer
cells endeavor to accomplish this goal during the natural history of the disease, as many
patients eventually develop metastases in multiple organs.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Recent studies have shed significant light on the molecular mechanisms governing the
invasion and dissemination phase of metastasis (Kang and Pantel, 2013; Thiery et al., 2009).
However, in spite of significant advances, the post-dissemination phase of metastasis has
remained less well understood. Mathematical modeling of clinical data and experiments in
mouse models suggest that cancer cells disseminating from prevalent cancers, such as those
of the breast and prostate, undergo an extended period of proliferative dormancy at premetastatic sites (Aguirre-Ghiso, 2007) (Figure 1). Situated between initial survival and final
outgrowth and seemingly a facultative step of colonization, metastatic dormancy has
remained relatively understudied. In this review, I will discuss the cellular participants and
the emerging molecular underpinnings of metastatic dormancy and reactivation. Although
significant uncertainties remain, a flurry of recent studies has provided significant insight
into the mechanisms that enable disseminated cancer cells to survive during dormancy and
then outgrow into life-threatening lesions. Understanding the logic behind these processes
may lead to the identification of novel therapeutic targets for the prevention or treatment of
metastatic disease.

Framework

Author Manuscript

The existence of a pause – or lag time – between dissemination and metastatic outgrowth is
not a new concept. Many patients with carcinomas of the breast, prostate, and kidney or with
melanoma suffer from metastatic relapse several years after initial diagnosis and radical
surgery. Although most breast cancer metastases are detected within 10 years of surgery,
excess mortality can be documented up to 20 years (Karrison et al.1999). Interestingly, most
patients with HER2+ or Triple Negative (TN) breast cancers relapse early (< 5 years from
surgery) developing lung, brain or liver metastases. In contrast, ER+ cancers exhibit a
relatively constant rate of relapse over several years and tend to develop predominantly bone
metastases (Kennecke et al., 2010; Smid et al., 2008). Late relapses appear thus to be a
function of molecular subtype and to result from a specific dissemination pathway, at least
in breast cancer. In prostate cancer, the median time from PSA recurrence after radical
prostatectomy to bone metastasis and death exceeds 16 years (Freedland and Moul, 2007).
Ultra-late recurrences (after 10–15 years) are also frequent in melanoma and renal cell
carcinoma, where they affect multiple organ sites, excluding the hypothesis that the bone is
a privileged site for late relapse in these cancers (McNichols et al., 1981; Tsao et al., 1997).

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 March 10.

Giancotti

Page 3

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Mathematical modeling suggests that late relapses are inconsistent with a continuous growth
model, whereby cancer cells start to outgrow as soon as they infiltrate a target organ. In fact,
retrospective analysis of over 1,000 breast cancer patients has indicated that premenopausal
women experience two distinct peaks of metastatic risk, one at about 10 months and the
other at about 30 months after surgery (Demicheli et al., 2007). Whereas the first peak is
compatible with the continuous growth model, the second peak suggests an interposed
period of dormancy. Additional clinical evidence for a lag time comes from the rare, but
well documented, transmission of melanoma and choriocarcinoma by kidney transplantation
(Strauss and Thomas, 2010). In these cases, the donors had passed pre-transplantation
screening because they were cancer-free for more than 10 years; however, their kidneys
must have harbored dormant cancer cells, which underwent reactivation in the
immunosuppressed host. Melanomas and choriocarcinomas exhibit a high rate of
transmission during transplantation of various organs (Buell et al., 2004). Biological
characteristics, such as the presence of a high proportion of tumor initiating cells in
melanomas (Quintana et al., 2008) and of embryonic carcinoma cells in choriocarcinomas
(Gokhale and Andrews, 2012), may explain this behavior.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

In parallel, studies in mouse models and clinical studies have provided evidence that tumor
cells can disseminate early during the natural history of the disease. Although they are
classified as non-invasive, the Mammary Intraepithelial Neoplasia (MIN) lesions, which
arise in MMTV-Neu and MMTV-PyMT mice, release potentially metastatic tumor cells in
the circulation. In fact, 80 disseminated tumor cells are sufficient to induce a rapidly lethal
carcinosis, when they are activated by bone marrow transplantation into wild-type recipient
mice (Hüsemann et al., 2008). In agreement with these observations, clinical studies have
identified disseminated cancer cells in the bone marrow of patients with early-stage breast
cancer (Pantel et al., 2008). In addition, lineage-tracing experiments in a mouse model of
pancreatic cancer have indicated that tumor cells that have undergone an EMT and acquired
stem cell traits can delaminate from pre-invasive pancreatic intraepithelial neoplasia (PanIN)
lesions, enter into the circulation, and seed the liver. In fact, in this model even premalignant pancreatic cells can undergo an EMT in response to inflammation and
disseminate to the liver (Rhim et al., 2012). Similarly, morphologically normal mammary
epithelial cells, which have been explanted from donor mice and injected in the tail vein of
recipient mice, infiltrate the lung and, upon oncogene induction, give rise to macroscopic
metastases (Podsypanina et al., 2008). Early dissemination potentially explains the
appearance of metastatic lesions in patients who have undergone surgical removal of small,
seemingly non-invasive tumors several years earlier (Pantel et al., 2008) or in patients with
no detectable primary tumor (metastasis of unknown primary tumor; 4–5% of all
metastases) (Greco and Hainsworth, 2009).
Although the metastatic capacity of tumor cells disseminating from MIN and PanIN lesions
is, in the above studies, induced by experimental manipulation or inferred from their
phenotype, it seems plausible that at least some of the tumor cells disseminating from these
early lesions have metastatic capacity. In fact, the tumor cells found in the bone marrow
aspirates of patients with cancers of the breast, prostate, lung, and colon are growth-arrested,
yet their abundance directly correlates with reduced metastasis-free survival, suggesting that

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 March 10.

Giancotti

Page 4

Author Manuscript

some of these cells eventually exit from proliferative quiescence to initiate metastatic
growth (Pantel et al., 2008). Taken together, these findings suggest that early dissemination
and a protracted period of metastatic dormancy characterize the natural history of many
prevalent cancer types.

Author Manuscript

The dormancy-reactivation model is not inconsistent with the well-established correlation
between primary tumor size and poor prognosis observed in the clinic, because, as primary
tumors expand, they generate and inject into the bloodstream larger numbers of metastatic
tumor cells (Figure 2A). In fact, even cancers characterized by a very rapid clinical
progression, such as those of the pancreas, may follow this model, as much of their genetic
evolution occurs in the decade preceding clinical detection (Yachida et al., 2010). However,
in spite of the appeal of the dormancy-reactivation model, its essential tenet - that early
dissemination produces dormant cells, which at a later stage spawn metastatic deposits –
remains to be formally demonstrated.

Primary tumor dormancy and metastatic dormancy

Author Manuscript

Broadly defined, tumor dormancy represents a lag in tumor growth, which may occur during
the formation of primary tumors or after the dissemination of some of their constituent cells.
However, primary tumor dormancy and metastatic dormancy appear to be distinct processes
(Weinberg, 2008). Primary tumors may undergo a phase of dormancy during neoplastic
conversion as incipient neoplastic cells acquire the additional somatic mutations required to
bypass oncogene-induced apoptosis or senescence (Lowe et al., 2004) and, at a later stage,
as neoplastic cells evolve the ability to evade immune recognition (Quezada et al., 2011) and
to elicit neo-angiogenesis (Chung and Ferrara, 2011). In contrast, tumor cells deposited at
pre-metastatic sites seem to undergo dormancy as a result of delayed adaption to the foreign
microenvironments in which they find themselves.

Author Manuscript

In spite of its clinical importance, metastatic dormancy has remained relatively
understudied, in large part because of the scarcity of mouse models that recapitulate the
complexity of this process. Dissemination and metastatic seeding occur in an asynchronous
manner in genetically engineered mouse models and in patients, limiting kinetic analysis.
Therefore, insights into the nature of metastatic dormancy and reactivation have largely been
obtained from xenograft models. Early studies showed that most of the intravenously
inoculated B16 melanoma cells, which had successfully infiltrated the liver or lung
parenchyma and survived initial attrition, entered into a protracted state of proliferative
quiescence (Cameron et al., 2000; Luzzi et al., 1998). A small minority of tumor cells
underwent limited expansion to give rise to micrometastatic lesions, and an even smaller
fraction of these micrometastases eventually outgrew into macroscopic lesions, setting the
stage for the definition of solitary tumor cell dormancy and micrometastatic dormancy
(Cameron et al., 2000; Luzzi et al., 1998) (Figure 2B). Potentially arranged as subsequent
periods of interrupted tumor growth, solitary tumor cell dormancy and micrometastatic
dormancy seem to originate from fundamentally distinct mechanisms. Solitary tumor cells
do not outgrow because they possess tumor cell-intrinsic defects or because they find
themselves in inhospitable microenvironments. In contrast, micrometastatic lesions do not
expand in size because their constituent cells undergo cell division and apoptosis at similar

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 March 10.

Giancotti

Page 5

Author Manuscript

rates. They appear to have solved the initial adaptation problem only to encounter another
barrier to further expansion.

Author Manuscript

Analysis of additional tumor models has revealed mechanisms potentially involved in
limiting the expansion of micrometastasis. Resection of subcutaneous Lewis lung
carcinomas induces angiogenic switch and hence explosive outgrowth of lung
micrometastases, suggesting that systemic signals originating from the primary tumor limit
the neovascularization of micrometastasis, holding them in check (Holmgren et al., 1995).
Furthermore, studies on melanoma, lymphoma and prostate adenocarcinoma models suggest
that immunosurveillance mechanisms may also contribute to halt the expansion of
micrometastases (Eyles et al., 2010; Rabinovsky et al., 2007). These observations suggest
that tumor cells that have extravasated in a target organ remain dormant for extended
periods as a consequence of their inability to exit from proliferative quiescence (solitary
tumor cell dormancy) or that they give rise to micrometastatic lesions that are unable to
outgrow until they avert immunosurveillance and elicit a supportive angiogenic response
(micrometastatic dormancy) (Aguirre-Ghiso, 2007).

Author Manuscript

Arguably, disseminated tumor cells originate from primary tumors that have evaded immune
recognition and undergone an angiogenic switch. Why would these tumor cells need to
evolve new capacities to exit from micrometastatic dormancy? The observation that
pathological lesions put their signature on the vasculature, leading to the generation of
vascular zip codes, suggests that partially distinct mechanisms govern neoangiogenesis
within primary tumors and at metastatic sites (Ruoslahti, 2002), necessitating the acquisition
of new capabilities by metastatic cells. Similarly, the interaction of metastatic tumor cells
with their newfound home may evoke novel innate and adaptive immune responses, which
would need to be overcome for reactivation. However, since many tumor cells within
micrometastases undergo active proliferation, they can readily acquire heritable attributes,
which increase their fitness, in agreement with the hypothesis that micrometastatic
dormancy constitutes a temporary barrier to successful colonization (Taylor et al., 2013)
(Figure 2B).

Author Manuscript

Hormone-dependent cancers, such as adenocarcinomas of the prostate and ER+ breast
cancers, may undergo dormancy in response to hormonal therapy. Studies in subcutaneous
models of breast cancer dormancy suggest that hormone-deprivation therapy induces these
tumors to regress to small masses, wherein proliferation is balanced by apoptosis (Noble,
1977; Wijsman et al., 1991). This suggests that the ER antagonists that are commonly used
as adjuvant therapy in ER+ breast cancers may exert their effect by preventing the
outgrowth of micrometastases. AR antagonists may exert a similar effect in prostate cancer.
Although potentially important, endocrine dormancy remains relatively understudied.
Experiments on a mouse model of breast cancer dormancy in the liver have revealed an
important feature of dormant tumor cells: consistent with their permanence in the G0 phase
of the cell division cycle, these cells are refractory to conventional chemotherapy (Naumov
et al., 2002; Naumov et al., 2003). Micrometastases, such as those detected in the lymph
nodes of breast cancer patients, contain a small proportion of cycling tumor cells and may be
similarly resistant to anti-mitotic therapies (Klauber-DeMore et al., 2001). These results

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 March 10.

Giancotti

Page 6

Author Manuscript

suggest that both solitary tumor cells and micrometastatic lesions are resistant to adjuvant
chemotherapy. This model implies that adjuvant chemotherapy can only eradicate the
solitary tumor cells or micrometastases that stochastically exit from dormancy during the
treatment period.

Toward a definition of metastatic cancer stem cells

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Three types of tumor heterogeneity bear significance to the understanding of metastatic
dormancy and reactivation. Firstly, it has been proposed that many carcinomas exhibit a
hierarchical organization, wherein only cancer stem cells have tumor-initiating capacity
whereas the remaining rapidly proliferating or aberrantly differentiated tumor cells lack this
property (Reya et al., 2001). Cancer stem cells may arise from oncogenic transformation of
adult stem cells or transient-amplifying cells and do not necessarily phenocopy all the
behaviors exhibited by embryonic or adult stem cells, since they are not patently multipotent
and they divide predominantly symmetrically (Clevers, 2011; Gupta et al., 2009). Secondly,
most carcinomas undergo clonal evolution as their constituent cells acquire heritable traits
that foster tumor progression and metastasis (Baylin and Jones, 2011; Fidler and Hart, 1982;
Nowell, 1976). Although it is plausible that the genetic and epigenetic modifications that
sustain these traits arise in cancer stem cells, it is also possible that they occur in progenitors
devoid of substantial self-renewal capability and that subsequent alterations induce these
progressed progenitors to acquire tumor-initiation capacity. Finally, tumor cells recruit a
complex array of stromal elements, including activated fibroblasts and immune and vascular
cells, which foster tumor progression through paracrine mechanisms (Joyce and Pollard,
2009). In some cases, cells of the tumor microenvironment produce cytokines, such as Wnt
proteins, secreted inhibitors of BMP, and Delta, which activate signaling pathways that
sustain the self-renewal capacity of cancer stem cells (Reya et al., 2001). In others, they
initiate inflammatory signals that induce transient-amplifying cells to de-differentiate to
cancer stem cells, pointing to the existence of a significant degree of plasticity (Schwitalla et
al., 2013).

Author Manuscript

Increasing evidence indicates that the tumor cells that initiate metastatic outgrowth are
cancer stem cells or, at least, possess several attributes of these cells. During tumor
progression, cancer cells often hijack the developmental program of Epithelial-toMesenchymal Transition (EMT), shedding their epithelial attributes, such as robust
cadherin-dependent junctions, and gaining invasive ability (Thiery et al., 2009). In support
of the importance of this program, expression of the EMT-inducing transcription factors
Twist and Snail promotes dissemination and metastasis of mammary carcinoma in mice
(Yang et al., 2004; Moody et al., 2005). In addition, the proportion of circulating tumor cells
exhibiting mesenchymal features increases in advanced stage breast cancer (Yu et al., 2013).
Intriguingly, ectopic expression of Twist or Snail confers mesenchymal as well as stem cell
properties upon normal mammary epithelial cells, and it induces enhanced tumor initiation
and metastatic capacity in their transformed derivatives (Mani et al., 2008; Scheel et al.,
2011). Zeb1 exerts a similar effect by repressing the ability of miR-200 family members to
inhibit stemness and to induce epithelial differentiation (Korpal et al., 2011; Shimono et al.,
2009; Wellner et al., 2009). Conversely, re-expression of the luminal cell fate determinant
GATA3 causes tumor cell differentiation and blocks dissemination and metastasis in the

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 March 10.

Giancotti

Page 7

Author Manuscript

MMTV-PyMT mouse model of mammary tumorigenesis (Asselin-Labat et al., 2011;
Kouros-Mehr et al., 2008). These studies suggest that dedifferentiation or passage through
an EMT and the attendant acquisition of stem cell properties facilitate dissemination and
metastasis.

Author Manuscript

Some of the contextual signals originating from the tumor microenvironment, such as TGFβ, can induce tumor cells to pass through an epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT) and
acquire cancer stem cell activity (Scheel et al., 2011). This suggests that even when a
primary tumor exhibits a well-differentiated histological appearance, some of its constituent
cells may acquire stem cell traits in response to microenvironmental cues (Polyak and
Weinberg, 2009). However, since common oncogenic mutations, such as the amplification
of HER2, promote disruption of epithelial adhesion and polarity and invasion without
inducing a full EMT, dissemination may not necessarily require shedding of epithelial
attributes (Muthuswamy and Xue, 2012). Moreover, the observation that metastatic lesions
originating from human carcinomas almost invariably display epithelial features, such as
well-organized adherens junctions, suggests that tumor cells that have disseminated through
an EMT revert to an epithelial phenotype through a Mesenchymal-to-Epithelial Transition
(MET) as they outgrow into macroscopic metastases (Chaffer and Weinberg, 2011).

Author Manuscript

Prospective identification studies have lent additional support to the model that only the
subpopulation of tumor cells that exhibits cancer stem cell features possesses the capacity to
generate metastasis. In human pancreatic carcinomas, this capacity is restricted to a
subpopulation of CD133+ CXCR4+ tumor-initiating cells, which are found at the invasive
edges of primary tumors (Hermann et al., 2007). In human colorectal cancers, the abundance
of CD26+ tumor-initiating cells correlates with the development of liver metastases. When
the CD26+ cells are injected in the cecal wall of mice, they produce liver metastases,
whereas the remaining tumor cells lack this capacity (Pang et al., 2010). In the same cancers,
molecular marking of tumor-initiating cells reveals that only those endowed with the highest
self-renewal capacity can metastasize (Dieter et al., 2011). Finally, expression of an
embryonic stem cell transcriptional program identifies poor prognosis patients in several
cancer types (Ben-Porath et al., 2008; Wong et al., 2008). These studies suggest that the
cancer stem cells can initiate the formation of metastases, whereas the remaining tumor cells
are devoid of this capacity, reinforcing the link between stem cell activity and metastasis.
However, it remains unclear if metastatic colonization is initiated by the same pool of cancer
stem cells that sustains primary tumor growth or by some descendants of these cells, which
retain self-renewal and tumor-initiation capacity or re-acquire it upon migrating into target
organs.

Author Manuscript

Tumor evolution and dormancy
Although it is widely accepted that clonal evolution underlies passage through the invasionmetastasis cascade, there remains a considerable degree of uncertainty regarding the rate at
which subclones carrying beneficial new mutations are generated and lost, the physical
location where progressor subclones arise (i.e. in primary tumors or after dissemination),
and even the unidirectionality of the invasion-metastasis cascade. In particular, since
colonization is rate-limiting for metastasis and involves the acquisition of heritable traits that

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 March 10.

Giancotti

Page 8

Author Manuscript

favor outgrowth in the target organ but not necessarily at the primary site, it remains unclear
how, when and where tumor cells acquire these traits (Valastyan and Weinberg, 2011).
These uncertainties limit our current understanding of the post-dissemination phase of
metastasis and thereby of metastatic dormancy and reactivation.

Author Manuscript

In some cases, it is possible that the cell-of-origin of a tumor may already possess the
capacity to survive and proliferate in a specific foreign microenvironment; therefore, its
transformed derivatives will be able to outgrow in that organ once they have successfully
negotiated the preceding steps of the invasion-metastasis cascade. In many cases, however,
it is plausible that neoplastic cells acquire the genetic and epigenetic changes that support
colonization while they are still at the primary site. Since these changes presumably
originate from mutational events, which do not confer a strong competitive advantage at the
primary site, they may not be prevalent within the primary tumor. Indeed, recent genomic
studies on patient-matched primary tumors and metastases of breast cancer and
medulloblastoma and on different geographical regions of the same primary renal cell
carcinoma and its metastatic derivatives support the view that metastases originate from a
rare subclone within primary tumors (Ding et al., 2010; Gerlinger et al., 2012; Wu et al.,
2012). In addition, it is likely that some of these changes occur after dissemination,
imparting increased proliferative ability upon a tumor cell that is already able to survive
within the stroma of a foreign organ. Recent genomic studies are also consistent with this
view, as they have documented additional driver mutations, and even provided evidence of
convergent evolution, in the metastatic clones of pancreatic and renal cancers (Campbell et
al., 2010; Gerlinger et al., 2012; Yachida et al., 2010).

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

In an extreme view, the quasi-normal cells that are released from pre-malignant lesions
acquire all the genetic changes necessary for colonization after they have disseminated and
entered into dormancy (Klein, 2009). Although this model appears to be supported by an
examination of the copy number alterations present in single disseminated breast cancer
cells (Schardt et al., 2005; Schmidt-Kittler et al., 2003), the methods used to isolate these
cells did not necessarily capture metastasis-initiating cells, as they relied on the expression
of epithelial differentiation markers, such as EpCAM and cytokeratins. Moreover, it is
difficult to envision how quasi-normal cells that have disseminated in a target organ could
acquire the multiple alterations presumably necessary for colonization in the absence of
rapid proliferation. One possibility, supported by studies in mouse models as well as certain
clinical observations, is that tumor cells that have acquired metastatic ability and
disseminated to a target organ re-populate the primary tumor from which they originated
(Norton and Massague, 2006). This model readily explains how primary tumors can acquire
many of the genetic determinants of metastatic clones. However, it does not explicitly
inform us about the mechanisms that would allow disseminated tumor cells to acquire the
competence for colonization after removal of the primary tumor.
Irrespective of which specific model may better explain the evolution of cancer, it is likely
that the percentage of circulating tumor cells partially competent for colonization increases
as primary tumors progress toward increasing malignancy. If the primary tumor is not
detected and resected very early, these cells may find themselves in foreign environments
that are not conducive to their reactivation and, hence, enter into dormancy (Figure 2). If this

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 March 10.

Giancotti

Page 9

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

is indeed the case, how do metastasis-initiating cells evolve the attributes required for full
adaptation and reactivation while they remain quiescent at premetastatic sites? Since genetic
changes are less likely to occur and to be selected for in the absence of overt proliferation,
even in genetically unstable tumor cells (Michor et al., 2004), it is plausible that adaptation
and reactivation are driven by non-genetic mechanisms, such as bidirectional interactions
with the tumor microenvironment, changes in metastable configurations of signaling
networks, or altered epigenetic states. In support of this hypothesis, lentiviral lineage
tracking has revealed the existence of two types of genetically indistinguishable tumorinitiating cells in colorectal cancer. While some of these putative cancer stem cells oscillate
between slow and rapid proliferation, others are predominantly dormant. Intriguingly,
chemotherapy eliminates the first type of cells, but it induces re-activation of the dormant
ones (Kreso et al., 2013). In addition, it has been noted that microenvironmental signals,
such as TGF-β, can induce plastic basal-like CD44lo breast cancer cells to acquire cancer
stem cell traits via chromatin remodeling at the ZEB1 promoter (Chaffer et al., 2013). This
raises the possibility that non-cancer stem cells may infiltrate target organs and remain
dormant until contextual signals induce their conversion to cancer stem cells and
reactivation.

Author Manuscript

Alternatively, it is possible that the metastasis-initiating cells do not remain stationary at
pre-metastatic sites, but they recirculate between tissue microenvironments, including
sanctuaries, such as the bone marrow, where they would find conditions appropriate for
limited expansion and chance acquisition of the traits required for their rapid reactivation in
the final target organ (Meads et al., 2008). In agreement with this hypothesis, a sizeable
fraction of disseminated tumor cells present in the bone marrow of patients affected by
colorectal carcinoma and ER- breast cancer are actively proliferating, even though the bone
is infrequently the first site of metastatic relapse in these tumor types (Schindlbeck et al.,
2005; Schlimok et al., 1990).

The dormant state

Author Manuscript

Several studies support the notion that disseminated tumor cells undergo proliferative arrest
upon infiltrating a target organ because they find themselves deprived of appropriate
adhesive and signaling interactions (Liu et al., 2002; Shibue et al., 2012; Shibue and
Weinberg, 2009). This suggests that dormancy is induced by maladaptation and must be
resolved by genetic or epigenetic alterations that increase the fitness of dormant cells within
a specific tissue microenvironment. In agreement with this notion, enhanced survival
signaling appears to be a pre-requisite for dormancy (Figure 3, top). Analysis of a large
cohort of breast cancer patients has indicated that expression of a Src signature correlates
with late relapse to the bone but not other organs. Subsequent mechanistic studies have
revealed that Src supports the survival of indolent breast cancer cells in the bone marrow by
activating Akt in response to the engagement of the CXCR4 receptor by SDF1 (Zhang et al.,
2009). Similarly, breast cancer cells expressing VCAM1 thrive in the lung because
engagement of VCAM1 by stromal macrophages expressing α4 integrins triggers activation
of Akt (Chen et al., 2011). These studies suggest that enhanced Akt signaling supports the
survival of breast cancer cells entering into both lung and bone.

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 March 10.

Giancotti

Page 10

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Stress signals mediated by the p38 MAPK may also contribute to enhance the fitness of
tumor cells during dormancy (Figure 3, bottom). In fact, analysis of a chicken CAM model
of dormancy has revealed that squamous carcinoma cells enter into proliferative quiescence
as a result of a higher ratio of flux through the p38 over the ERK signaling pathway
(Aguirre-Ghiso et al., 2003; Aguirre-Ghiso et al., 2001). Elevated p38 kinase activity
induces activation of the unfolded protein response (UPR), which upregulates the ER stressregulated transcription factor ATF6. ATF6 in turn promotes survival of dormant cells
through upregulation of Rheb and thereby mTOR signaling (Ranganathan et al., 2006;
Schewe and Aguirre-Ghiso, 2008). In addition, analysis of a subcutaneous xenograft model
of tumor dormancy has suggested the hypothesis that the Ras-related tumor suppressor
ARHI promotes the survival of ovarian carcinoma cells by inducing autophagy (Lu et al.,
2008). These findings suggest that dormant tumor cells exploit paracrine interactions with
elements of the tumor microenvironment as well as endogenous stress signaling to activate a
variety of protective responses that enhance their survival.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Even if they are fully adapted to their newfound home, the metastasis-initiating cells may
exit the cell cycle in response to contextual signals and endogenous programs that are
similar to those that suppress the self-renewal capability of adult stem cells. In a mouse
model of metastatic dormancy, mammary carcinoma cells that have successfully
extravasated in the lung and survived initial attrition remain dormant for an extended period
of time because stroma-derived BMP proteins limit their ability to outgrow. Treatment with
BMP or genetic activation of BMP signaling inhibits the ability of breast cancer cells to
manifest cancer stem cell traits in vitro and to initiate tumorigenesis upon transplantation in
vivo (Gao et al., 2012b). Prostate cancer cells may also be sensitive to the inhibitory action
of BMP, because systemic treatment with BMP blocks the outgrowth of intratibially injected
prostate carcinoma cells (Kobayashi et al., 2011). These findings suggest that paracrine
BMP signaling induces metastasis-initiating cells to enter into dormancy by inhibiting their
capacity for self-renewal. This model is consistent with previous studies indicating that
activation of the BMP pathway inhibits self-renewal and promotes differentiation in
pluripotent embryonic stem cells and adult stem cells from various tissues, including those
of the central nervous system subventricular zone, intestinal epithelium, and hair follicle
bulge (Wakefield and Hill, 2013). In addition, deactivation of oncogenic Myc, which
promotes self-renewal, induces hepatocellular carcinoma cells to exit from the cell cycle and
differentiate en masse into hepatocytes and biliary cells, suggesting that a reduction in the
expression of an endogenous positive regulator of self-renewal may induce dormancy as a
byproduct of aberrant differentiation (Shachaf et al., 2004). These findings suggest that
disseminated tumor cells can undergo dormancy as a consequence of intrinsic defects or in
response to inhibitory signals originating in the parenchyma of target organs.

Stem cell transcriptional networks in metastatic colonization
Several studies have implicated stem cell signaling pathways and the transcriptional
networks that they govern in metastatic colonization of target organs, although not
specifically in reactivation from the dormant state (Figure 4). Human lung adenocarcinomas,
which possess elevated Wnt/β-catenin signaling and hence express a WNT/TCF-dependent
transcriptional program, progress rapidly to metastasis. Inhibition of TCF-dependent gene

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 March 10.

Giancotti

Page 11

Author Manuscript

expression does not affect primary tumor growth but suppresses colonization of the bones
and brain, suggesting a specific involvement of Wnt/β-catenin signaling in metastatic
outgrowth (Nguyen et al., 2009). Similarly, miR-335 specifically suppresses breast cancer
re-initiation at lung and bone metastatic sites at least in part by inhibiting expression of the
progenitor cell transcription factor Sox4 (Png et al., 2012; Tavazoie et al., 2008). In
addition, expression of the NK2-related homeobox transcription factor Nkx2-1 induces
differentiation and thereby restricts the metastatic ability of lung adenocarcinomas arising in
mice carrying conditional alleles of mutant Ras and p53 (Winslow et al., 2011).

Author Manuscript

In other cases, similar transcriptional mechanisms drive tumor initiation and metastatic
reactivation. For example, high-level expression of the Inhibitor of Differentiation (Id) 1 and
3 transcription factors is necessary to drive both tumor initiation at the primary site as well
as re-initiation at lung metastatic sites in triple negative breast cancers (Gupta et al., 2007).
CD24 controls both tumor initiation and metastatic colonization through STAT3-mediated
regulation of NANOG in hepatocellular carcinoma (Lee et al., 2011). Finally, co-expression
of the mammary stem cell transcription factors Slug and Sox9 promotes both the
tumorigenic and metastasis-seeding abilities of human breast cancer cells (Guo et al., 2012).
It appears that, although distinct contextual signals govern the self-renewal of cancer stem
cells during primary tumor initiation and metastatic reactivation, these signals exert their
function by governing similar stemness-maintaining transcriptional circuits (Figure 4).

Metastatic niches, stem cell signaling, and metastatic reactivation

Author Manuscript

The ability of normal adult stem cells to balance self-renewal with the production of
differentiated progeny is governed by complex adhesive and signaling interactions, which
occur within specialized niches (Alvarez-Buylla and Lim, 2004; Hsu and Fuchs, 2012;
Morrison and Spradling, 2008). Recent studies suggest that metastasis-initiating cells enter
into dormancy and undergo reactivation in response to niche signals, which are similar to
those that affect normal adult stem cells (Figure 5).

Author Manuscript

Some studies have suggested that carcinoma cells can establish a permissive niche in the
target organ even prior to seeding. In this model, primary tumors release systemic factors
that upregulate the production of fibronectin by fibroblasts residing in the target organ,
leading to the recruitment of VEGFR1 + hematopoietic progenitor cells expressing the α4β1
fibronectin-binding integrin. The hematopoietic cells in turn mold the local
microenvironment within the premetastatic niche by secreting MMP-9 and other factors and
promoting angiogenesis (Psaila and Lyden, 2009). The relevance of these observations in
dormancy and reactivation has not been examined, but one envisions that failure to establish
a pre-metastatic niche may delay adaptation, thereby favoring dormancy. In agreement with
this hypothesis, whereas contact with mature blood vessels induces metastatic breast cancer
cells to become dormant, angiogenic sprouts create a local microenvironment that facilitates
reactivation (Ghajar et al., 2013).
Recently, a gain-of-function cDNA screen in a mouse model has revealed that the secreted
antagonist of TGF-β ligands Coco induces solitary breast cancer cells to undergo
reactivation at lung metastatic sites (Gao et al., 2012b). Intriguingly, Coco accumulates on

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 March 10.

Giancotti

Page 12

Author Manuscript

the surface of metastasis-initiating cells and shields them from the inhibitory action of lungderived BMP proteins (Figure 5). Coco is not required for colonization of bones and brain
because these organs contain sanctuaries devoid of bioactive BMP. In a large cohort of
patients, expression of a 14-gene Coco signature predicts relapse to the lung, but not to the
bone or brain, thus validating Coco as an organ-specific re-activator (Gao et al., 2012b).
These results suggest that metastasis-initiating cells enter into dormancy in response to
inhibitory signals originating in the parenchyma of target organs. Similar to adult stem cells
establishing their niche, metastasis-initiating cells have to overcome such inhibitory signals
through production of secreted antagonists (Wakefield and Hill, 2013). Coco may be
particularly effective among inhibitors because it has a high affinity for BMP or because it
binds to the pericellular matrix and therefore reaches a high effective concentration at the
cell surface.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Additional stem cell signals participate in the reactivation of micrometastatic lesions. The
extracellular matrix protein tenascin C, which is often found in stem cell niches, supports the
outgrowth of breast cancer micrometastases by elevating both Notch and Wnt signaling
(O'Connell et al., 2011; Oskarsson et al., 2011). This latter effect may be attributed at least
in part to the ability of tenascin C to engage Syndecan 4, which has been implicated as a coreceptor of the Wnt receptor Fzd 7 (Bentzinger et al., 2013). Periostin, another matrix
protein found in stem cell niches, promotes micrometastatic outgrowth by facilitating the
presentation of Wnt ligands to tumor cells (Malanchi et al., 2012). While tenascin C is
initially produced by the metastasis-initiating cells and later by recruited stromal fibroblasts
(Oskarsson et al., 2011), periostin is secreted by stromal fibroblasts in response to TGF-β
(Malanchi et al., 2011). Endothelial tip cells within new vascular sprouts secrete both
periostin and TGF-β, boosting the availability of periostin in micrometastatic lesions
undergoing neoangiogenesis (Ghajar et al., 2013). Intriguingly, in addition to co-assembling
with fibronectin and modulating its adhesive and signaling capacity, tenascin C and periostin
can directly engage integrins (Midwood et al., 2004; Nummela et al., 2012) (Figure 5).
These considerations suggest that the metastasis-initiating cells may induce formation of a
permissive niche consisting of matrix proteins specialized in facilitating the activation of
signaling pathways that activate their self-renewal, such as Wnt and Notch.

Does reversal of the EMT precede or follow reactivation?

Author Manuscript

Although pathological studies have suggested a role for the reversal of the EMT, the
Mesenchymal-to-Epithelial transformation (MET), in metastatic colonization, experimental
proof has remained, until recently, scarce (Chaffer et al., 2006; Korpal et al., 2011). In
addition, the ability of the EMT-inducing transcription factors Twist, Snail, and Zeb to
induce cancer stem cell traits has led to the suggestion that metastasis-initiating cells would
exploit the enhanced self- renewal capacity conferred by the EMT in order to undergo
reactivation (Mani et al., 2008; Wellner et al., 2009). In this model, only the progeny of
metastasis-initiating cells would acquire epithelial features as a result of aberrant
differentiation.
Recent studies have provided mechanistic evidence for an alternative scenario. Analysis of a
chemical carcinogenesis model of squamous carcinoma has revealed that, although

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 March 10.

Giancotti

Page 13

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

expression of Twist promotes tumor cell invasion and dissemination, inactivation of this
factor is necessary to induce an MET and to promote overt proliferation of micrometastatic
lesions (Tsai et al., 2012). In addition, the recently identified EMT inducer Prrx-1 suppresses
cancer stem cell properties – instead of inducing them - and it needs to be inactivated for
successful colonization of the lung by breast carcinoma cells (Ocana et al., 2012). In fact,
suppression of Prrx-1 is sufficient to promote colonization even in the presence of Twist or
Snail, suggesting that the effect of Prrx-1 is dominant. These results indicate that the EMT
can be uncoupled from the acquisition of stem cell potential. In the model that emerges from
these data, metastasis-initiating cells revert to an epithelial phenotype in order to outgrow
into macroscopic metastases. Stem cells, such as those of Drosophila gonads, mouse
intestinal epithelium, and skin hair follicles, are connected to one another, to their immediate
rapidly proliferating progeny, and to supporting cells via E-cadherin-dependent junctions
(Hsu and Fuchs, 2012; Morrison and Spradling, 2008). In addition to providing survival
signals, such junctions facilitate the transmission of contact-mediated (e.g. Delta-Notch) and
paracrine signals that regulate self-renewal and differentiation (e.g. Wnt). It is therefore
possible that expression of E-cadherin enables metastasis-initiating cells to exploit their
proximity to one another and to their immediate progeny to exchange signals that enhance
their survival and proliferation.

Author Manuscript

It remains to be addressed if the acquisition of epithelial features follows or precedes
metastatic reactivation. Recent studies have indicated that the abundance of circulating
tumor cells exhibiting mesenchymal traits correlates with disease progression and metastasis
in human breast cancer patients, pointing to the existence of mesenchymal cancer stem cells
with metastatic capacity (Yu et al., 2013; Zhang et al., 2013). It is possible that these cells
possess high self-renewal capability but cycle slowly in the parenchyma of the target organ,
whereas their immediate progeny expresses E-cadherin and proliferates actively. Under this
scenario, downregulation of the EMT-inducing factor causes expansion of an E-cadherinpositive transient-amplifying compartment (Figure 6, top). Alternatively, the mesenchymal
cancer stem cells may be dormant and may need to undergo a MET in order to be
reactivated. In this latter scenario, EMT-inducing factors may contribute to metastatic
dormancy (Figure 6, bottom). Future studies will be required to distinguish between these
two models.

Tumor microenvironment and micrometastatic reactivation

Author Manuscript

Like incipient primary tumors, micrometastatic outgrowths rely on successful recruitment of
endothelial cells, myeloid cells, and stromal fibroblasts for their subsequent expansion,
suggesting that neo-angiogenesis, inflammation, and fibrosis foster this process (Joyce and
Pollard, 2009). Recent studies indicate that systemic and local signals govern these changes
and that a delay in their implementation may underlie micrometastatic dormancy.
Systemic signals appear to promote dormancy of micrometastic lesions predominantly by
blocking neoangiogenesis. The prototypical endogenous inhibitors of angiogenesis,
angiostatin and endostatin, were isolated because of their ability to inhibit the outgrowth of
micrometastases upon secretion from primary xenografts of lung carcinoma and
hemangioendothelioma (Hanahan and Folkman, 1996; Nyberg et al., 2005). Prosaposin,

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 March 10.

Giancotti

Page 14

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

secreted by prostate cancer cells, induces fibroblasts within micrometastases to produce
thrombospondin-1, thereby restraining neoangiogenesis and further expansion (Kang et al.,
2009). Conversely, positive systemic signals seem to induce micrometastatic reactivation by
creating a fibrotic stroma. Inoculation of two distinct cancer cell lines in separate mammary
fat pads, or in a mammary fat pad and intravenously to seed the lung, has revealed that one
tumor can function as an “instigator” and the other as a “responder”. In the absence of
instigator, the responder remains indolent, suggesting that systemic signals can induce
reactivation of dormant lesions. Intriguingly, the instigator tumor was found to produce
osteopontin, which activates bone marrow-derived hematopoietic progenitor cells. Upon
infiltrating the responder tumor, these cells produce granulin, which induce activation of
stromal cells and, hence, a desmoplastic reaction, i.e. the creation of a dense collagen-rich
stroma (Elkabets et al., 2011; McAllister et al., 2008). Furthermore, extensively cross-linked
collagen fibers, such as those created by HIF1-induced lysil oxidase, can promote
reactivation by enhancing integrin-mediated conversion of mechanical forces into
biochemical signals (Barkan et al., 2010; Cox et al., 2013; Levental et al., 2009; Samuel et
al., 2011).

Author Manuscript

Locally derived signals that can act at multiple metastatic sites include those acting on
angiogenesis and inflammation. Production of VEGF enables Lewis Lung carcinoma
micrometastic cells to recruit Id1+ bone marrow-derived endothelial cell progenitors and
thereby trigger the angiogenic switch that is required for their expansion (Gao et al., 2008).
Angiopoietin 2 acts on TIE2-expressing pro-angiogenic myeloid cells, promoting the
conversion of micrometastases into overt lesions in the MMTV-PyMT mouse model of
breast cancer (Mazzieri et al., 2011). In addition, various microRNAs promote metastatic
colonization in breast cancer and melanoma by inducing recruitment of endothelial cells and
angiogenesis (Chou et al., 2013; Pencheva et al., 2012; Png et al., 2012). Finally, the
proteoglycan versican engages Toll-like receptors on macrophages, inducing them to secrete
TNF-α and trigger an inflammatory cascade in Lewis Lung carcinoma micrometastases
(Kim et al., 2009). The consequences may be far reaching and include a MET that favors
outgrowth in the MMTV-PyMT mouse model of breast cancer (Gao et al., 2012a).

Author Manuscript

In agreement with the notion that specific mechanisms promote colonization of the bone in
multiple cancer types (Mundy, 2002), local signals act on osteoclasts to promote the
activation of dormant micrometastases in this organ. This phenomenon has been best studied
in breast cancer, where IL11 secreted by cancer cells induce recruitment and activation of
osteoclasts, which in turn foster micrometastatic expansion (Kang et al., 2003). NF-κBmediated expression of VCAM1 enables recruitment of monocytic precursors of osteoclasts,
which express the cognate receptor, integrin α4β1, locally enhancing the generation of
active osteoclasts within micrometastases (Lu et al., 2011). Furthermore, the pro-metastatic
cytokine TGF-β induces expression of Jagged by breast cancer cells, thereby activating
Notch signaling in bone-resident cells. As a consequence, osteoblasts release IL6, which
stimulates tumor cell survival and proliferation, and pre-osteoclasts are converted into
osteoclasts, setting in motion the vicious cycle of osteolysis (Sethi et al., 2011).
While these observations suggest that systemic and local factors can remodel the tumor
microenvironment to foster micrometastatic outgrowth, it is unclear to what extent and

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 March 10.

Giancotti

Page 15

Author Manuscript

under what circumstances a delay in the recruitment of a supportive microenvironment
underlies micrometastatic dormancy.

Toward a unified model of metastatic dormancy and reactivation

Author Manuscript

The evidence discussed above suggests that dormancy and reactivation are governed by
complex interactions between metastasis-initiating cells and the microenvironment of the
target organ. Although direct, definitive evidence for the existence of metastatic stem cells is
still lacking, the involvement of specialized niches, stem cell signaling pathways, and stem
cell transcriptional circuits in metastatic colonization suggests that the metastasis-initiating
cells are cancer stem cells or progenitors that revert to stem cell state upon infiltrating a
foreign microenvironment. Increasing evidence indicated that, like normal adult stem cells,
metastasis-initiating cells may enter into dormancy in response to inhibitory niche signals
(e.g. BMP) or when deprived of activating niche signals (e.g. Wnt and Notch). These
considerations support the hypothesis that metastasis-initiating cells mold a permissive niche
or even create an activating niche to support their expansion in a foreign microenvironment
(Sneddon and Werb, 2007). Differences in the specific signaling circuits that govern the
activation of cancer stem cells from different tumor types as well as availability of activating
or inhibitory cues in the stroma of various target organs may contribute to determine the
organ-specificity of metastasis.

Therapeutic implications

Author Manuscript

In spite of significant improvements in early diagnosis, many cancer patients who have been
treated with surgery eventually develop distant metastases and succumb to the disease. The
efficacy of adjuvant therapy is predicated upon its ability to eradicate tumor cells that have
undergone dissemination prior to surgery. The realization that the tumor cells that are fated
to eventually outgrow into metastases are at least functionally equivalent to cancer stem
cells and experience a prolonged period of dormancy suggest two distinct approaches to the
prevention of metastasis (Figure 7).
First, since dormant tumor cells are critically dependent on signaling pathways that enhance
their survival, interfering with the operation of these pathways may improve the efficacy of
adjuvant therapy. Based on existing evidence, it would be informative to conduct preclinical
studies in mouse models of dormancy with inhibitors of Src, Akt or TOR, alone or in
combination with chemotherapy or oncogene-targeted therapy.

Author Manuscript

Second, if the metastasis-initiating cells are or resemble cancer stem cells, they may be
similarly refractory to chemotherapy as well as to targeted therapies. Whereas the first
resistance may arise from upregulation of ABC cassette transporters, the second suggests
that these cells are sustained by signaling pathways that are not directly downstream of
prevalent oncogenic mutations, such as the stem cell pathways. Therefore, combination
therapies that include agents targeting stem cells pathways, such as Notch and Wnt, or reactivating BMP signaling, and agents targeting canonical oncogenic pathways may display
efficacy in the adjuvant setting as well as in the treatment of metastatic disease.

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 March 10.

Giancotti

Page 16

Author Manuscript

Finally, increased understanding of the mechanisms underlying dormancy and reactivation
may lead, not only to the identification of additional therapeutic targets, but also to changes
in the schedule of administration of adjuvant therapy. Disseminated tumor cells undergo
reactivation over time in a seemingly stochastic fashion. If this is the case, it may be more
rational to administer therapies that interfere with reactivation over short periods of time
distributed across several years.

Outlook

Author Manuscript

Dormancy and reactivation have now come into sharp focus as integral components of
tumor evolution. The studies discussed above provide a framework to understand the
principles and thereby the logic of these processes. They indicate that the metastasisinitiating cells are akin to cancer stem cells and that they enter into dormancy and eventually
undergo reactivation in response to niche signals similar to those that regulate normal adult
stem cells. Several key questions remain, however, unresolved. Are the metastasis-initiating
cells the direct descendants of cancer stem cells or do aberrantly differentiated progenitors
revert to a cancer stem cell state upon infiltrating a target organ? Is the MET a pre-requisite
for reactivation? Do metastases exhibit a hierarchical organization similar to that proposed
for primary tumors? What features distinguish metastatic niches from normal stem cell
niches? Which signaling interactions and signaling pathways populate the niches that the
same type of tumor cells mold in different target organs? When and where do cells endowed
with metastatic capacity accumulate the genetic or epigenetic changes that enable
reactivation?

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Current approaches to study the molecular basis of metastasis have been extremely
successful, but they are not specifically tailored to the study of dormancy and reactivation.
Answers to many of the above questions will require new approaches. Lineage tracing
studies using newly developed reporter systems, such as Confetti (Schepers et al., 2012), can
potentially offer insight into several outstanding issues in the area of dormancy and
reactivation, especially if they are applied to transgenic mouse models that faithfully mimic
these processes. In addition, a recently developed functional genetic screen can lead to the
rapid identification of strong mediators of breast cancer reactivation in the lung (Gao et al.,
2012a). Future studies will be required to assess if screening shRNA libraries can lead to the
identification of mediators of dormancy, and if the strategy can be extended to other target
sites and tumor types. Ultimately, however, the results will need to be validated by studying
clinical samples. Improved methods for genomic, phenotypic and functional characterization
of circulating tumor cells and better access to samples of metastases will be needed to
accomplish this goal. Given the current pace of discovery in the field of metastasis, it is
likely that these important questions will be addressed rapidly, opening the way to the
design and implementation of improved strategies for the treatment of cancer.

Acknowledgement
I am indebted to Hua Gao, who spearheaded research on metastatic dormancy and reactivation in my laboratory, for
discussions, to all the participants in the Cancer Cell Biology Work-in-Progress meetings of SKI for their insight
into tumor evolution and metastasis, and to Jon Cooper for comments on the manuscript. Research in my laboratory
is supported by grants from the N.C.I. and the D.O.D.

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 March 10.

Giancotti

Page 17

Author Manuscript

References

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Aguirre-Ghiso JA. Models, mechanisms and clinical evidence for cancer dormancy. Nat. Rev. Cancer.
2007; 7:834–846. [PubMed: 17957189]
Aguirre-Ghiso JA, Estrada Y, Liu D, Ossowski L. ERK(MAPK) activity as a determinant of tumor
growth and dormancy; regulation by p38(SAPK). Cancer Res. 2003; 63:1684–1695. [PubMed:
12670923]
Aguirre-Ghiso JA, Liu D, Mignatti A, Kovalski K, Ossowski L. Urokinase receptor and fibronectin
regulate the ERK(MAPK) to p38(MAPK) activity ratios that determine carcinoma cell proliferation
or dormancy in vivo. Mol. Biol. Cell. 2001; 12:863–879. [PubMed: 11294892]
Alvarez-Buylla A, Lim DA. For the long run: maintaining germinal niches in the adult brain. Neuron.
2004; 41:683–686. [PubMed: 15003168]
Asselin-Labat ML, Sutherland KD, Vaillant F, Gyorki DE, Wu D, Holroyd S, Breslin K, Ward T, Shi
W, Bath ML, et al. Gata-3 negatively regulates the tumor-initiating capacity of mammary luminal
progenitor cells and targets the putative tumor suppressor caspase-14. Mol. Cell. Biol. 2011;
31:4609–4622. [PubMed: 21930782]
Barkan D, El Touny LH, Michalowski AM, Smith JA, Chu I, Davis AS, Webster JD, Hoover S,
Simpson RM, Gauldie J, et al. Metastatic growth from dormant cells induced by a col-I-enriched
fibrotic environment. Cancer Res. 2010; 70:5706–5716. [PubMed: 20570886]
Baylin SB, Jones PA. A decade of exploring the cancer epigenome - biological and translational
implications. Nat. Rev. Cancer. 2011; 11:726–734. [PubMed: 21941284]
Ben-Porath I, Thomson MW, Carey VJ, Ge R, Bell GW, Regev A, Weinberg RA. An embryonic stem
cell-like gene expression signature in poorly differentiated aggressive human tumors. Nat. Genet.
2008; 40:499–507. [PubMed: 18443585]
Bentzinger CF, Wang YX, von Maltzahn J, Soleimani VD, Yin H, Rudnicki MA. Fibronectin regulates
Wnt7a signaling and satellite cell expansion. Cell Stem Cell. 2013; 12:75–87. [PubMed: 23290138]
Buell JF, Beebe TM, Trofe J, Gross TG, Alloway RR, Hanaway MJ, Woodle ES. Donor transmitted
malignancies. Ann. Transplant. 2004; 9:53–56. [PubMed: 15478892]
Cameron MD, Schmidt EE, Kerkvliet N, Nadkarni KV, Morris VL, Groom AC, Chambers AF,
MacDonald IC. Temporal progression of metastasis in lung: cell survival, dormancy, and location
dependence of metastatic inefficiency. Cancer Res. 2000; 60:2541–2546. [PubMed: 10811137]
Campbell PJ, Yachida S, Mudie LJ, Stephens PJ, Pleasance ED, Stebbings LA, Morsberger LA,
Latimer C, McLaren S, Lin ML, et al. The patterns and dynamics of genomic instability in
metastatic pancreatic cancer. Nature. 2010; 467:1109–1113. [PubMed: 20981101]
Chaffer CL, Brennan JP, Slavin JL, Blick T, Thompson EW, Williams ED. Mesenchymal-to-epithelial
transition facilitates bladder cancer metastasis: role of fibroblast growth factor receptor-2. Cancer
Res. 2006; 66:11271–11278. [PubMed: 17145872]
Chaffer CL, Weinberg RA. A perspective on cancer cell metastasis. Science. 2011; 331:1559–1564.
[PubMed: 21436443]
Chen Q, Zhang XH, Massague J. Macrophage binding to receptor VCAM-1 transmits survival signals
in breast cancer cells that invade the lungs. Cancer Cell. 2011; 20:538–549. [PubMed: 22014578]
Chou J, Lin JH, Brenot A, Kim JW, Provot S, Werb Z. GATA3 suppresses metastasis and modulates
the tumour microenvironment by regulating microRNA-29b expression. Nat. Cell Biol. 2013;
15:201–213. [PubMed: 23354167]
Chung AS, Ferrara N. Developmental and pathological angiogenesis. Ann. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol. 2011;
27:563–584. [PubMed: 21756109]
Clevers H. The cancer stem cell: premises, promises and challenges. Nat. Med. 2011; 17:313–319.
[PubMed: 21386835]
Clevers H, Nusse R. Wnt/beta-catenin signaling and disease. Cell. 2012; 149:1192–1205. [PubMed:
22682243]
Cox TR, Bird D, Baker AM, Barker HE, Ho MW, Lang G, Erler JT. LOX-mediated collagen
crosslinking is responsible for fibrosis-enhanced metastasis. Cancer Res. 2013; 73:1721–1732.
[PubMed: 23345161]

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 March 10.

Giancotti

Page 18

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Demicheli R, Retsky MW, Hrushesky WJ, Baum M. Tumor dormancy and surgery-driven interruption
of dormancy in breast cancer: learning from failures. Nat. Clin. Pract. Oncol. 2007; 4:699–710.
[PubMed: 18037874]
Dieter SM, Ball CR, Hoffmann CM, Nowrouzi A, Herbst F, Zavidij O, Abel U, Arens A, Weichert W,
Brand K, et al. Distinct types of tumor-initiating cells form human colon cancer tumors and
metastases. Cell Stem Cell. 2011; 9:357–365. [PubMed: 21982235]
Ding L, Ellis MJ, Li S, Larson DE, Chen K, Wallis JW, Harris CC, McLellan MD, Fulton RS, Fulton
LL, et al. Genome remodelling in a basal-like breast cancer metastasis and xenograft. Nature.
2010; 464:999–1005. [PubMed: 20393555]
Elkabets M, Gifford AM, Scheel C, Nilsson B, Reinhardt F, Bray MA, Carpenter AE, Jirstrom K,
Magnusson K, Ebert BL, et al. Human tumors instigate granulin-expressing hematopoietic cells
that promote malignancy by activating stromal fibroblasts in mice. J. Clin. Invest. 2011; 121:784–
799. [PubMed: 21266779]
Eyles J, Puaux AL, Wang X, Toh B, Prakash C, Hong M, Tan TG, Zheng L, Ong LC, Jin Y, et al.
Tumor cells disseminate early, but immunosurveillance limits metastatic outgrowth, in a mouse
model of melanoma. J. Clin. Invest. 2010; 120:2030–2039. [PubMed: 20501944]
Fidler IJ. The pathogenesis of cancer metastasis: the ‘seed and soil’ hypothesis revisited. Nat. Rev.
Cancer. 2003; 3:453–458. [PubMed: 12778135]
Fidler IJ, Hart IR. Biological diversity in metastatic neoplasms: origins and implications. Science.
1982; 217:998–1003. [PubMed: 7112116]
Freedland SJ, Moul JW. Prostate specific antigen recurrence after definitive therapy. J. Urol. 2007;
177:1985–1991. [PubMed: 17509277]
Gao D, Joshi N, Choi H, Ryu S, Hahn M, Catena R, Sadik H, Argani P, Wagner P, Vahdat LT, et al.
Myeloid progenitor cells in the premetastatic lung promote metastases by inducing mesenchymal
to epithelial transition. Cancer Res. 2012a; 72:1384–1394. [PubMed: 22282653]
Gao D, Nolan DJ, Mellick AS, Bambino K, McDonnell K, Mittal V. Endothelial progenitor cells
control the angiogenic switch in mouse lung metastasis. Science. 2008; 319:195–198. [PubMed:
18187653]
Gao H, Chakraborty G, Lee-Lim AP, Mo Q, Decker M, Vonica A, Shen R, Brogi E, Brivanlou AH,
Giancotti FG. The BMP inhibitor Coco reactivates breast cancer cells at lung metastatic sites. Cell.
2012b; 150:764–779. [PubMed: 22901808]
Gerlinger M, Rowan AJ, Horswell S, Larkin J, Endesfelder D, Gronroos E, Martinez P, Matthews N,
Stewart A, Tarpey P, et al. Intratumor heterogeneity and branched evolution revealed by
multiregion sequencing. New Engl. J Med. 2012; 366:883–892. [PubMed: 22397650]
Greco FA, Hainsworth JD. Introduction: unknown primary cancer. Seminars Oncol. 2009; 36:6–7.
Guo W, Keckesova Z, Donaher JL, Shibue T, Tischler V, Reinhardt F, Itzkovitz S, Noske A, ZurrerHardi U, Bell G, et al. Slug and Sox9 cooperatively determine the mammary stem cell state. Cell.
2012; 148:1015–1028. [PubMed: 22385965]
Gupta GP, Perk J, Acharyya S, de Candia P, Mittal V, Todorova-Manova K, Gerald WL, Brogi E,
Benezra R, Massague J. ID genes mediate tumor reinitiation during breast cancer lung metastasis.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 2007; 104:19506–19511. [PubMed: 18048329]
Gupta PB, Chaffer CL, Weinberg RA. Cancer stem cells: mirage or reality? Nat. Med. 2009; 15:1010–
1012. [PubMed: 19734877]
Guruharsha KG, Kankel MW, Artavanis-Tsakonas S. The Notch signalling system: recent insights into
the complexity of a conserved pathway. Nat. Rev. Genetics. 2012; 13:654–666. [PubMed:
22868267]
Hanahan D, Folkman J. Patterns and emerging mechanisms of the angiogenic switch during
tumorigenesis. Cell. 1996; 86:353–364. [PubMed: 8756718]
Hermann PC, Huber SL, Herrler T, Aicher A, Ellwart JW, Guba M, Bruns CJ, Heeschen C. Distinct
populations of cancer stem cells determine tumor growth and metastatic activity in human
pancreatic cancer. Cell Stem Cell. 2007; 1:313–323. [PubMed: 18371365]
Holmgren L, O’Reilly MS, Folkman J. Dormancy of micrometastases: balanced proliferation and
apoptosis in the presence of angiogenesis suppression. Nat. Med. 1995; 1:149–153. [PubMed:
7585012]

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 March 10.

Giancotti

Page 19

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Hsu YC, Fuchs E. A family business: stem cell progeny join the niche to regulate homeostasis. Nat.
Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 2012; 13:103–114. [PubMed: 22266760]
Husemann Y, Geigl JB, Schubert F, Musiani P, Meyer M, Burghart E, Forni G, Eils R, Fehm T,
Riethmuller G, et al. Systemic spread is an early step in breast cancer. Cancer Cell. 2008; 13:58–
68. [PubMed: 18167340]
Joyce JA, Pollard JW. Microenvironmental regulation of metastasis. Nat. Rev. Cancer. 2009; 9:239–
252. [PubMed: 19279573]
Kang SY, Halvorsen OJ, Gravdal K, Bhattacharya N, Lee JM, Liu NW, Johnston BT, Johnston AB,
Haukaas SA, Aamodt K, et al. Prosaposin inhibits tumor metastasis via paracrine and endocrine
stimulation of stromal p53 and Tsp-1. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 2009; 106:12115–12120.
[PubMed: 19581582]
Kang Y, Pantel K. Tumor Cell Dissemination: Emerging Biological Insights from Animal Models and
Cancer Patients. Cancer Cell. 2013; 23:573–581. [PubMed: 23680145]
Kang Y, Siegel PM, Shu W, Drobnjak M, Kakonen SM, Cordon-Cardo C, Guise TA, Massague J. A
multigenic program mediating breast cancer metastasis to bone. Cancer Cell. 2003; 3:537–549.
[PubMed: 12842083]
Karrison TG, Ferguson DJ, Meier P. Dormancy of mammary carcinoma after mastectomy. J. Natl.
Cancer Inst. 1999; 91:80–85. [PubMed: 9890174]
Kennecke H, Yerushalmi R, Woods R, Cheang MC, Voduc D, Speers CH, Nielsen TO, Gelmon K.
Metastatic behavior of breast cancer subtypes. J. Clin. Oncol. 2010; 28:3271–3277. [PubMed:
20498394]
Kim S, Takahashi H, Lin WW, Descargues P, Grivennikov S, Kim Y, Luo JL, Karin M. Carcinomaproduced factors activate myeloid cells through TLR2 to stimulate metastasis. Nature. 2009;
457:102–106. [PubMed: 19122641]
Klauber-DeMore N, Van Zee KJ, Linkov I, Borgen PI, Gerald WL. Biological behavior of human
breast cancer micrometastases. Clin. Cancer Res. 2001; 7:2434–2439. [PubMed: 11489823]
Klein CA. Parallel progression of primary tumours and metastases. Nat. Rev. Cancer. 2009; 9:302–
312. [PubMed: 19308069]
Kobayashi A, Okuda H, Xing F, Pandey PR, Watabe M, Hirota S, Pai SK, Liu W, Fukuda K,
Chambers C, et al. Bone morphogenetic protein 7 in dormancy and metastasis of prostate cancer
stem-like cells in bone. J. Exp. Med. 2011; 208:2641–2655. [PubMed: 22124112]
Korpal M, Ell BJ, Buffa FM, Ibrahim T, Blanco MA, Celia-Terrassa T, Mercatali L, Khan Z, Goodarzi
H, Hua Y, et al. Direct targeting of Sec23a by miR-200s influences cancer cell secretome and
promotes metastatic colonization. Nat. Med. 2011; 17:1101–1108. [PubMed: 21822286]
Kouros-Mehr H, Bechis SK, Slorach EM, Littlepage LE, Egeblad M, Ewald AJ, Pai SY, Ho IC, Werb
Z. GATA-3 links tumor differentiation and dissemination in a luminal breast cancer model. Cancer
Cell. 2008; 13:141–152. [PubMed: 18242514]
Kreso A, O’Brien CA, van Galen P, Gan OI, Notta F, Brown AM, Ng K, Ma J, Wienholds E, Dunant
C, et al. Variable clonal repopulation dynamics influence chemotherapy response in colorectal
cancer. Science. 2013; 339:543–548. [PubMed: 23239622]
Lee TK, Castilho A, Cheung VC, Tang KH, Ma S, Ng IO. CD24(+) liver tumor-initiating cells drive
self-renewal and tumor initiation through STAT3-mediated NANOG regulation. Cell Stem Cell.
2011; 9:50–63. [PubMed: 21726833]
Levental KR, Yu H, Kass L, Lakins JN, Egeblad M, Erler JT, Fong SF, Csiszar K, Giaccia A,
Weninger W, et al. Matrix crosslinking forces tumor progression by enhancing integrin signaling.
Cell. 2009; 139:891–906. [PubMed: 19931152]
Liu D, Aguirre Ghiso J, Estrada Y, Ossowski L. EGFR is a transducer of the urokinase receptor
initiated signal that is required for in vivo growth of a human carcinoma. Cancer Cell. 2002;
1:445–457. [PubMed: 12124174]
Lowe SW, Cepero E, Evan G. Intrinsic tumour suppression. Nature. 2004; 432:307–315. [PubMed:
15549092]
Lu X, Mu E, Wei Y, Riethdorf S, Yang Q, Yuan M, Yan J, Hua Y, Tiede BJ, Lu X, et al. VCAM-1
promotes osteolytic expansion of indolent bone micrometastasis of breast cancer by engaging
alpha4beta1-positive osteoclast progenitors. Cancer Cell. 2011; 20:701–714. [PubMed: 22137794]

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 March 10.

Giancotti

Page 20

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Lu Z, Luo RZ, Lu Y, Zhang X, Yu Q, Khare S, Kondo S, Kondo Y, Yu Y, Mills GB, et al. The tumor
suppressor gene ARHI regulates autophagy and tumor dormancy in human ovarian cancer cells. J.
Clin. Invest. 2008; 118:3917–3929. [PubMed: 19033662]
Luzzi KJ, MacDonald IC, Schmidt EE, Kerkvliet N, Morris VL, Chambers AF, Groom AC. Multistep
nature of metastatic inefficiency: dormancy of solitary cells after successful extravasation and
limited survival of early micrometastases. Amer. J. Pathol. 1998; 153:865–873. [PubMed:
9736035]
Malanchi I, Santamaria-Martinez A, Susanto E, Peng H, Lehr HA, Delaloye JF, Huelsken J.
Interactions between cancer stem cells and their niche govern metastatic colonization. Nature.
2012; 481:85–89. [PubMed: 22158103]
Mani SA, Guo W, Liao MJ, Eaton EN, Ayyanan A, Zhou AY, Brooks M, Reinhard F, Zhang CC,
Shipitsin M, et al. The epithelial-mesenchymal transition generates cells with properties of stem
cells. Cell. 2008; 133:704–715. [PubMed: 18485877]
Mazzieri R, Pucci F, Moi D, Zonari E, Ranghetti A, Berti A, Politi LS, Gentner B, Brown JL, Naldini
L, et al. Targeting the ANG2/TIE2 axis inhibits tumor growth and metastasis by impairing
angiogenesis and disabling rebounds of proangiogenic myeloid cells. Cancer Cell. 2011; 19:512–
526. [PubMed: 21481792]
McAllister SS, Gifford AM, Greiner AL, Kelleher SP, Saelzler MP, Ince TA, Reinhardt F, Harris LN,
Hylander BL, Repasky EA, et al. Systemic endocrine instigation of indolent tumor growth requires
osteopontin. Cell. 2008; 133:994–1005. [PubMed: 18555776]
McNichols DW, Segura JW, DeWeerd JH. Renal cell carcinoma: long-term survival and late
recurrence. J. Urol. 1981; 126:17–23. [PubMed: 7253072]
Michor F, Iwasa Y, Nowak MA. Dynamics of cancer progression. Nat. Rev. Cancer. 2004; 4:197–205.
[PubMed: 14993901]
Midwood KS, Valenick LV, Hsia HC, Schwarzbauer JE. Coregulation of fibronectin signaling and
matrix contraction by tenascin-C and syndecan-4. Mol. Biol. Cell. 2004; 15:5670–5677. [PubMed:
15483051]
Morrison SJ, Spradling AC. Stem cells and niches: mechanisms that promote stem cell maintenance
throughout life. Cell. 2008; 132:598–611. [PubMed: 18295578]
Mundy GR. Metastasis to bone: causes, consequences and therapeutic opportunities. Nat. Rev. Cancer.
2002; 2:584–593. [PubMed: 12154351]
Muthuswamy SK, Xue B. Cell polarity as a regulator of cancer cell behavior plasticity. Ann. Rev. Cell
Dev. Biol. 2012; 28:599–625. [PubMed: 22881459]
Naumov GN, MacDonald IC, Weinmeister PM, Kerkvliet N, Nadkarni KV, Wilson SM, Morris VL,
Groom AC, Chambers AF. Persistence of solitary mammary carcinoma cells in a secondary site: a
possible contributor to dormancy. Cancer Res. 2002; 62:2162–2168. [PubMed: 11929839]
Naumov GN, Townson JL, MacDonald IC, Wilson SM, Bramwell VH, Groom AC, Chambers AF.
Ineffectiveness of doxorubicin treatment on solitary dormant mammary carcinoma cells or latedeveloping metastases. Breast cancer Res. Treat. 2003; 82:199–206. [PubMed: 14703067]
Nguyen DX, Chiang AC, Zhang XH, Kim JY, Kris MG, Ladanyi M, Gerald WL, Massague J.
WNT/TCF signaling through LEF1 and HOXB9 mediates lung adenocarcinoma metastasis. Cell.
2009; 138:51–62. [PubMed: 19576624]
Noble RL. Hormonal control of growth and progression in tumors of Nb rats and a theory of action.
Cancer Res. 1977; 37:82–94. [PubMed: 830424]
Norton L, Massague J. Is cancer a disease of self-seeding? Nat. Med. 2006; 12:875–878. [PubMed:
16892025]
Nowell PC. The clonal evolution of tumor cell populations. Science. 1976; 194:23–28. [PubMed:
959840]
Nummela P, Lammi J, Soikkeli J, Saksela O, Laakkonen P, Holtta E. Transforming growth factor betainduced (TGFBI) is an anti-adhesive protein regulating the invasive growth of melanoma cells.
Amer. J. Pathol. 2012; 180:1663–1674. [PubMed: 22326753]
Nyberg P, Xie L, Kalluri R. Endogenous inhibitors of angiogenesis. Cancer Res. 2005; 65:3967–3979.
[PubMed: 15899784]

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 March 10.

Giancotti

Page 21

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

O’Connell JT, Sugimoto H, Cooke VG, MacDonald BA, Mehta AI, LeBleu VS, Dewar R, Rocha RM,
Brentani RR, Resnick MB, et al. VEGF-A and Tenascin-C produced by S100A4+ stromal cells are
important for metastatic colonization. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 2011; 108:16002–16007.
[PubMed: 21911392]
Ocana OH, Corcoles R, Fabra A, Moreno-Bueno G, Acloque H, Vega S, Barrallo-Gimeno A, Cano A,
Nieto MA. Metastatic colonization requires the repression of the epithelial-mesenchymal transition
inducer Prrx1. Cancer Cell. 2012; 22:709–724. [PubMed: 23201163]
Oskarsson T, Acharyya S, Zhang XH, Vanharanta S, Tavazoie SF, Morris PG, Downey RJ, ManovaTodorova K, Brogi E, Massague J. Breast cancer cells produce tenascin C as a metastatic niche
component to colonize the lungs. Nat. Med. 2011; 17:867–874. [PubMed: 21706029]
Pang R, Law WL, Chu AC, Poon JT, Lam CS, Chow AK, Ng L, Cheung LW, Lan XR, Lan HY, et al.
A subpopulation of CD26+ cancer stem cells with metastatic capacity in human colorectal cancer.
Cell Stem Cell. 2010; 6:603–615. [PubMed: 20569697]
Pantel K, Brakenhoff RH, Brandt B. Detection, clinical relevance and specific biological properties of
disseminating tumour cells. Nat. Rev. Cancer. 2008; 8:329–340. [PubMed: 18404148]
Pencheva N, Tran H, Buss C, Huh D, Drobnjak M, Busam K, Tavazoie SF. Convergent multi-miRNA
targeting of ApoE drives LRP1/LRP8-dependent melanoma metastasis and angiogenesis. Cell.
2012; 151:1068–1082. [PubMed: 23142051]
Png KJ, Halberg N, Yoshida M, Tavazoie SF. A microRNA regulon that mediates endothelial
recruitment and metastasis by cancer cells. Nature. 2012; 481:190–194. [PubMed: 22170610]
Podsypanina K, Du YC, Jechlinger M, Beverly LJ, Hambardzumyan D, Varmus H. Seeding and
propagation of untransformed mouse mammary cells in the lung. Science. 2008; 321:1841–1844.
[PubMed: 18755941]
Polyak K, Weinberg RA. Transitions between epithelial and mesenchymal states: acquisition of
malignant and stem cell traits. Nat. Rev. Cancer. 2009; 9:265–273. [PubMed: 19262571]
Psaila B, Lyden D. The metastatic niche: adapting the foreign soil. Nat. Rev. Cancer. 2009; 9:285–293.
[PubMed: 19308068]
Quezada SA, Peggs KS, Simpson TR, Allison JP. Shifting the equilibrium in cancer immunoediting:
from tumor tolerance to eradication. Immunol. Rev. 2011; 241:104–118. [PubMed: 21488893]
Rabinovsky R, Uhr JW, Vitetta ES, Yefenof E. Cancer dormancy: lessons from a B cell lymphoma and
adenocarcinoma of the prostate. Adv. Cancer Res. 2007; 97:189–202. [PubMed: 17419946]
Ranganathan AC, Zhang L, Adam AP, Aguirre-Ghiso JA. Functional coupling of p38-induced upregulation of BiP and activation of RNA-dependent protein kinase-like endoplasmic reticulum
kinase to drug resistance of dormant carcinoma cells. Cancer Res. 2006; 66:1702–1711. [PubMed:
16452230]
Reichert M, Takano S, von Burstin J, Kim SB, Lee JS, Ihida-Stansbury K, Hahn C, Heeg S, Schneider
G, Rhim AD, et al. The Prrx1 homeodomain transcription factor plays a central role in pancreatic
regeneration and carcinogenesis. Genes & Dev. 2013; 27:288–300. [PubMed: 23355395]
Reya T, Morrison SJ, Clarke MF, Weissman IL. Stem cells, cancer, and cancer stem cells. Nature.
2001; 414:105–111. [PubMed: 11689955]
Rhim AD, Mirek ET, Aiello NM, Maitra A, Bailey JM, McAllister F, Reichert M, Beatty GL, Rustgi
AK, Vonderheide RH, et al. EMT and dissemination precede pancreatic tumor formation. Cell.
2012; 148:349–361. [PubMed: 22265420]
Samuel MS, Lopez JI, McGhee EJ, Croft DR, Strachan D, Timpson P, Munro J, Schroder E, Zhou J,
Brunton VG, et al. Actomyosin-mediated cellular tension drives increased tissue stiffness and
beta-catenin activation to induce epidermal hyperplasia and tumor growth. Cancer Cell. 2011;
19:776–791. [PubMed: 21665151]
Schardt JA, Meyer M, Hartmann CH, Schubert F, Schmidt-Kittler O, Fuhrmann C, Polzer B, Petronio
M, Eils R, Klein CA. Genomic analysis of single cytokeratin-positive cells from bone marrow
reveals early mutational events in breast cancer. Cancer Cell. 2005; 8:227–239. [PubMed:
16169467]
Scheel C, Eaton EN, Li SH, Chaffer CL, Reinhardt F, Kah KJ, Bell G, Guo W, Rubin J, Richardson
AL, et al. Paracrine and autocrine signals induce and maintain mesenchymal and stem cell states in
the breast. Cell. 2011; 145:926–940. [PubMed: 21663795]

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 March 10.

Giancotti

Page 22

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Schepers AG, Snippert HJ, Stange DE, van den Born M, van Es JH, van de Wetering M, Clevers H.
Lineage tracing reveals Lgr5+ stem cell activity in mouse intestinal adenomas. Science. 2012;
337:730–735. [PubMed: 22855427]
Schewe DM, Aguirre-Ghiso JA. ATF6alpha-Rheb-mTOR signaling promotes survival of dormant
tumor cells in vivo. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 2008; 105:10519–10524. [PubMed: 18650380]
Schmidt-Kittler O, Ragg T, Daskalakis A, Granzow M, Ahr A, Blankenstein TJ, Kaufmann M,
Diebold J, Arnholdt H, Muller P, et al. From latent disseminated cells to overt metastasis: genetic
analysis of systemic breast cancer progression. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 2003; 100:7737–
7742. [PubMed: 12808139]
Schwitalla S, Fingerle AA, Cammareri P, Nebelsiek T, Goktuna SI, Ziegler PK, Canli O, Heijmans J,
Huels DJ, Moreaux G, et al. Intestinal tumorigenesis initiated by dedifferentiation and acquisition
of stem-celllike properties. Cell. 2013; 152:25–38. [PubMed: 23273993]
Sethi N, Dai X, Winter CG, Kang Y. Tumor-derived JAGGED1 promotes osteolytic bone metastasis
of breast cancer by engaging notch signaling in bone cells. Cancer Cell. 2011; 19:192–205.
[PubMed: 21295524]
Shachaf CM, Kopelman AM, Arvanitis C, Karlsson A, Beer S, Mandl S, Bachmann MH, Borowsky
AD, Ruebner B, Cardiff RD, et al. MYC inactivation uncovers pluripotent differentiation and
tumour dormancy in hepatocellular cancer. Nature. 2004; 431:1112–1117. [PubMed: 15475948]
Shibue T, Brooks MW, Inan MF, Reinhardt F, Weinberg RA. The outgrowth of micrometastases is
enabled by the formation of filopodium-like protrusions. Cancer Discovery. 2012; 2:706–721.
[PubMed: 22609699]
Shibue T, Weinberg RA. Integrin beta1-focal adhesion kinase signaling directs the proliferation of
metastatic cancer cells disseminated in the lungs. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 2009;
106:10290–10295. [PubMed: 19502425]
Shimono Y, Zabala M, Cho RW, Lobo N, Dalerba P, Qian D, Diehn M, Liu H, Panula SP, Chiao E, et
al. Downregulation of miRNA-200c links breast cancer stem cells with normal stem cells. Cell.
2009; 138:592–603. [PubMed: 19665978]
Smid M, Wang Y, Zhang Y, Sieuwerts AM, Yu J, Klijn JG, Foekens JA, Martens JW. Subtypes of
breast cancer show preferential site of relapse. Cancer Res. 2008; 68:3108–3114. [PubMed:
18451135]
Sneddon JB, Werb Z. Location, location, location: the cancer stem cell niche. Cell Stem Cell. 2007;
1:607–611. [PubMed: 18371402]
Strauss DC, Thomas JM. Transmission of donor melanoma by organ transplantation. Lancet Oncol.
2010; 11:790–796. [PubMed: 20451456]
Tavazoie SF, Alarcon C, Oskarsson T, Padua D, Wang Q, Bos PD, Gerald WL, Massague J.
Endogenous human microRNAs that suppress breast cancer metastasis. Nature. 2008; 451:147–
152. [PubMed: 18185580]
Thiery JP, Acloque H, Huang RY, Nieto MA. Epithelial-mesenchymal transitions in development and
disease. Cell. 2009; 139:871–890. [PubMed: 19945376]
Tsai JH, Donaher JL, Murphy DA, Chau S, Yang J. Spatiotemporal regulation of epithelialmesenchymal transition is essential for squamous cell carcinoma metastasis. Cancer Cell. 2012;
22:725–736. [PubMed: 23201165]
Tsao H, Cosimi AB, Sober AJ. Ultra-late recurrence (15 years or longer) of cutaneous melanoma.
Cancer. 1997; 79:2361–2370. [PubMed: 9191524]
Valastyan S, Weinberg RA. Tumor metastasis: molecular insights and evolving paradigms. Cell. 2011;
147:275–292. [PubMed: 22000009]
Wakefield LM, Hill CS. Beyond TGFbeta: roles of other TGFbeta superfamily members in cancer.
Nat. Rev. Cancer. 2013; 13:328–341. [PubMed: 23612460]
Weinberg RA. The many faces of tumor dormancy. APMIS : acta pathologica, microbiologica, et
immunologica Scandinavica. 2008; 116:548–551.
Wellner U, Schubert J, Burk UC, Schmalhofer O, Zhu F, Sonntag A, Waldvogel B, Vannier C, Darling
D, zur Hausen A, et al. The EMT-activator ZEB1 promotes tumorigenicity by repressing
stemness-inhibiting microRNAs. Nat. Cell Biol. 2009; 11:1487–1495. [PubMed: 19935649]

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 March 10.

Giancotti

Page 23

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Wijsman JH, Cornelisse CJ, Keijzer R, van de Velde CJ, van Dierendonck JH. A prolactin-dependent,
metastasising rat mammary carcinoma as a model for endocrine-related tumour dormancy.
British J. Cancer. 1991; 64:463–468.
Winslow MM, Dayton TL, Verhaak RG, Kim-Kiselak C, Snyder EL, Feldser DM, Hubbard DD,
DuPage MJ, Whittaker CA, Hoersch S, et al. Suppression of lung adenocarcinoma progression
by Nkx2-1. Nature. 2011; 473:101–104. [PubMed: 21471965]
Wong DJ, Liu H, Ridky TW, Cassarino D, Segal E, Chang HY. Module map of stem cell genes guides
creation of epithelial cancer stem cells. Cell Stem Cell. 2008; 2:333–344. [PubMed: 18397753]
Wu X, Northcott PA, Dubuc A, Dupuy AJ, Shih DJ, Witt H, Croul S, Bouffet E, Fults DW, Eberhart
CG, et al. Clonal selection drives genetic divergence of metastatic medulloblastoma. Nature.
2012; 482:529–533. [PubMed: 22343890]
Yachida S, Jones S, Bozic I, Antal T, Leary R, Fu B, Kamiyama M, Hruban RH, Eshleman JR, Nowak
MA, et al. Distant metastasis occurs late during the genetic evolution of pancreatic cancer.
Nature. 2010; 467:1114–1117. [PubMed: 20981102]
Yang J, Mani SA, Donaher JL, Ramaswamy S, Itzykson RA, Come C, Savagner P, Gitelman I,
Richardson A, Weinberg RA. Twist, a master regulator of morphogenesis, plays an essential role
in tumor metastasis. Cell. 2004; 117:927–939. [PubMed: 15210113]
Young RA. Control of the embryonic stem cell state. Cell. 2011; 144:940–954. [PubMed: 21414485]
Yu M, Bardia A, Wittner BS, Stott SL, Smas ME, Ting DT, Isakoff SJ, Ciciliano JC, Wells MN, Shah
AM, et al. Circulating breast tumor cells exhibit dynamic changes in epithelial and mesenchymal
composition. Science. 2013; 339:580–584. [PubMed: 23372014]
Zhang L, Ridgway LD, Wetzel MD, Ngo J, Yin W, Kumar D, Goodman JC, Groves MD, Marchetti D.
The Identification and Characterization of Breast Cancer CTCs Competent for Brain Metastasis.
Sci. Translat. Med. 2013; 5 180ra148.
Zhang XH, Wang Q, Gerald W, Hudis CA, Norton L, Smid M, Foekens JA, Massague J. Latent bone
metastasis in breast cancer tied to Src-dependent survival signals. Cancer Cell. 2009; 16:67–78.
[PubMed: 19573813]

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 March 10.

Giancotti

Page 24

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Figure 1. The invasion-metastasis cascade

Author Manuscript

Genetic and epigenetic alterations endow cancer cells with the capabilities that enable them
to negotiate the sequential steps comprising the invasion-metastasis cascade. A partial or
complete EMT allows individual carcinoma cells or small groups of carcinoma cells to
disassociate from adjacent epithelial cells and to invade into the underlying interstitial
matrix (invasion). In a tightly linked process, cancer cells coopt a wide spectrum of host
cells to create a permissive microenvironment. Upon recruiting angiogenic endothelial cells
and inducing the development of a defective vasculature (angiogenesis), cancer cells enter
into the circulation (intravasation) and disseminate via the bloodstream (blood-born
dissemination). In a variation from the predominant sequence depicted here, cancer cells

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 March 10.

Giancotti

Page 25

Author Manuscript

enter into lymphatic vessels and colonize loco-regional lymphnodes prior to entering into
the blood stream. Upon arresting in the microcirculation, cancer cells disrupt the endothelial
junctions and penetrate into the stroma of the target organ (extravasation). In the final step,
colonization, they resist apoptosis (initial survival), undergo a variable period of dormancy
(dormancy) and finally outgrow into macroscopic lesions (outgrowth). In order to colonize a
target organ, cancer cells need to mold a permissive microenvironment. In certain cases,
systemic signals retard the vascularization of micrometastases (systemic inhibition),
potentially explaining why surgical resection of the primary tumor may induce rapid
outgrowth of metastatic lesions (Demicheli et al., 2007). Other systemic signals are
proposed to spur metastatic outgrowth via the recruitment of bone marrow-derived
hematopoietic cells (systemic instigation).

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 March 10.

Giancotti

Page 26

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 2. Relationship between early dissemination, metastatic dormancy and reactivation

(A) Although carcinomas in situ can release potentially metastatic cells in the bloodstream,
the number and metastatic capacity of cancer cells deposited at pre-metastatic sites
presumably increases as primary tumors progress toward increasing malignancy.
Experiments performed by inoculating B16F1 melanoma cells directly in the circulation of
mice suggest that the efficiency of extravasation is approximately 20% and that of initial
survival approximately 4% (Luzzi et al., 1998). (B) A large fraction of cancer cells, which
have remained viable in the target organ, enters into solitary dormancy before surgical

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 March 10.

Giancotti

Page 27

Author Manuscript

resection of the primary tumor interrupts dissemination. After a variable lag time, a small
minority of dormant cells undergoes reactivation and gives rise to metastatic outgrowths.
Experiments performed by inoculating B16F1 melanoma cells directly in the circulation of
mice suggest that a large fraction of micrometastases regress because they fail to establish a
permissive microenvironment, further contributing to the inefficiency of colonization (Luzzi
et al., 1998). However, a small fraction of micrometastases spawns macroscopic lesions. It is
debated whether micrometastatic dormancy occurs and, if so, whether it interrupts secondary
tumor growth for a significant period of time. The cancer cells that comprise a
macrometastasis have solved the adaptation problem and can therefore seed additional
macrometastases in the same organ. Percentages of attrition are derived from the analysis of
a single xenograft model and are therefore intended for illustrative purpose.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 March 10.

Giancotti

Page 28

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 3. Survival and stress signaling in metastatic dormancy and reactivation

Adhesive and signaling interactions leading to activation of AKT support the survival of
cancer cells during dormancy and reactivation (top). Stress signals initiated by p38 kinase
and leading to the activation of the Unfolded Protein Response (UPR) and of TOR
contribute to dormancy, whereas activation of ERK may contribute to reactivation (bottom).
mΦ: macrophage.

Author Manuscript
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 March 10.

Giancotti

Page 29

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 4. Stem cell signaling pathways and transcriptional circuits implicated in metastatic
reactivation

The stem cell signaling pathways and transcriptional circuits implicated in metastatic
colonization or, specifically, reactivation are illustrated diagrammatically. The interactions
between signaling components, transcription factors, and functional outputs are largely
inferred from studies on embryonic and adult stem cells (Clevers and Nusse, 2012;
Guruharsha et al., 2012; Wakefield and Hill, 2013; Young, 2011). Signaling pathways, such
as Wnt/p-catenin and Notch, promote cell cycle progression via Myc and Cyclin D1. Myc
also induces expression of the Polycomb Repressor Complex 1 component Bmi-1. Together
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 March 10.

Giancotti

Page 30

Author Manuscript

with JAK/STAT3, these pathways induce expression of SOX2, OCT4, and NANOG, which
constitute the core transcriptional circuit regulating self-renewal. BMP signaling opposes the
upregulation of these core factors. Additional transcription factors determine progenitor
identity and/or induce an EMT. PRRX1 also controls expression of SOX9 (Reichert et al.,
2013). Broken lines denote indirect signaling interactions. Solid lines illustrate direct
transcriptional interactions. Rectangles: transcription factors; ovals: cell cycle components;
octagon: epigenetic regulator. Functional groups are color-coded.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 March 10.

Giancotti

Page 31

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 5. Metastatic niches

Author Manuscript

Coco is retained at the cell surface presumably because it binds to cell surface
proteoglycans. It thereby effectively shields outgrowing cancer cells from the inhibitory
action of BMP proteins produced by host cells. Fibronectin fibrils that are decorated by
tenascin-C and periostin nurse outgrowing micrometastases by promoting activation of the
Notch and β-catenin/TCF signaling pathways. Tenascin-C can engage integrins as well as
Syndecan 4. The latter can function as a co-receptor for Frizzled. Periostin facilitates
presentation of Wnt to Frizzled and also binds to integrins. Tenascin-C promotes activation
of Notch and β-catenin/TCF signaling via Musashi-1 and Lgr5, respectively (Oskarsson et
al., 2011)(not shown).

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 March 10.

Giancotti

Page 32

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 6. Relationship between EMT, MET and metastatic reactivation

The existence of two types of metastatic cancer stem cells potentially explains the
relationship between MET and reactivation. Mesenchymal stem cells are cycling slowly or
are dormant, whereas E-cadherin-expressing cancer stem cells are proliferating vigorously,
mirroring the behavior of normal adult stem cells and transit-amplifying progenitors,
respectively. Experiments in mouse models suggest that, when metastasis is initiated by
mesenchymal cancer stem cells, an MET may be required for reactivation. If the
mesenchymal stem cell is cycling slowly, it can give rise to its immediate progeny, which
expresses E-cadherin and proliferates rapidly, spurring metastatic outgrowth (1). If the
mesenchymal stem cell is dormant, it may have to undergo a MET in order to become
competent for reactivation (2).

Author Manuscript
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 March 10.

Giancotti

Page 33

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 7. Anti-metastatic therapies

Since dormant cancer cells are not cycling, they may be relatively resistant to anti-mitotic
therapies. The studies discussed in this Review suggest that dormant cancer cells may
undergo apoptosis in response to Src, PI3K/TOR or AKT inhibitors. In addition, Notch and
Wnt inhibitors or BMP-R agonists may prevent the reactivation of these cells. In contrast,
adjuvant chemotherapies and targeted therapies inhibit the survival and proliferation of
reactivated cancer cells, interfering with the outgrowth of micrometastases.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 March 10.

