Cancer Cell

Perspective
Choose and Use Your Chemical Probe
Wisely to Explore Cancer Biology
Julian Blagg1,* and Paul Workman1,*
1Cancer Research UK Cancer Therapeutics Unit, The Institute of Cancer Research, London SM2 5NG, UK
*Correspondence: julian.blagg@icr.ac.uk (J.B.), paul.workman@icr.ac.uk (P.W.)
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ccell.2017.06.005

Small-molecule chemical probes or tools have become progressively more important in recent years as
valuable reagents to investigate fundamental biological mechanisms and processes causing disease,
including cancer. Chemical probes have also achieved greater prominence alongside complementary biological reagents for target validation in drug discovery. However, there is evidence of widespread continuing
misuse and promulgation of poor-quality and insufficiently selective chemical probes, perpetuating a worrisome and misleading pollution of the scientific literature. We discuss current challenges with the selection
and use of chemical probes, and suggest how biologists can and should be more discriminating in the probes
they employ.
The Value and Challenges of Chemical Probes
Chemical probes (or tools) are appropriately characterized small
molecules, ideally of well-defined biological potency, selectivity,
and cell permeability, which can be applied with confidence
to interrogate complex biological systems. Numerous breakthroughs in biology have been enabled by the use of such
small-molecule probes of sufficient quality, especially in concert
with complementary biological reagents and molecular technologies. For example, the recent revolutionary growth in our
understanding of bromodomain biology and pharmacology
was triggered by the discovery of potent chemical probes JQ1
(Filippakopoulos et al., 2010), I-BET (Nicodeme et al., 2010),
and their closely matched inactive partners used as controls,
as well as subsequent companion probes targeting other bromodomain family members (Filippakopoulos and Knapp, 2014).
Previously, the use of small-molecule chemical probes has
helped drive increased fundamental understanding and therapeutic benefit across many biological areas, such as the cell
cytoskeleton (colchicine and paclitaxel); mitotic spindle (monastrol); immunophilins and immunosuppression (FK506 and cyclosporin); mTOR signaling (rapamycin); histone/protein deacetylation (vorinostat); proteasome function (MG132); molecular
chaperones (geldanamycin and radicicol); many protein kinases
(from staurosporin and tyrphostins to numerous approved drugs)
(see Workman and Collins, 2010); and, more recently, modulation by thalidomide analogs of the CRBN-CUL4 E3 ubiquitin
ligase complex (Fischer et al., 2014). But, despite excellent progress, there are serious issues with the use of chemical probes in
biomedical research.
Earlier commentaries and reviews in the chemical biology
literature outlined the ideal attributes of ‘‘fitness factors’’ of
high-quality chemical probes to be used to answer important biological and biomedical questions (see Frye, 2010; Workman and
Collins, 2010). Recent articles, from both industrial and academic
authors, highlight an increasing need for more and better quality
chemical probes that can be applied, alongside an appropriate
suite of biological reagents, to enable discoveries about fundamental biology and disease pathophysiology, and to thoroughly
validate the roles of potential biological targets emerging from a

range of approaches, including hypothesis-driven, screeningbased, genomic, or disease-directed studies (Bunnage et al.,
2013; Blagg and Workman, 2014; Garbaccio and Parnee,
2016). Academia and open-source initiatives are contributing
to interest and efforts in this area by becoming more engaged
in drug discovery, notably through screening chemical libraries
against novel biological targets to spark the discovery of innovative chemical probes with the objective of building further understanding of target-based molecular pharmacology (Frye et al.,
2011; Frearson and Wyatt, 2010). Importantly, evolving opinion
and practice on the desired attributes of such chemical probes
has highlighted both the promise and the peril of their use in
biomedical research (Arrowsmith et al., 2015).
Why another opinion piece, why now, and why in this biological journal? A major concern, especially among researchers in
the chemical biology and drug discovery communities, is that
there is continuing evidence of the inappropriate use and promulgation of poor-quality chemical probes, perpetuating a worrisome and misleading pollution of the scientific literature, despite
the best self-corrective efforts of practising experts and scientific journals, and notwithstanding increasing endeavors to inform
the broader scientific community through primary publications,
reviews, and conference sessions (Arrowsmith et al., 2015).
An impetus for this article was the 2015 Annual Meeting of the
American Association for Cancer Research (AACR) that hosted
a number of plenary and educational sessions highlighting the
importance of, and necessity for, high-quality chemical probes
to further our understanding of the aberrant cell biology that fuels
cancer initiation and progression (American Association of Cancer Research, 2015). While the lectures were well attended, there
was a common view among invited speakers and commentators
from the floor that such sessions are largely preaching to
the choir and failing to connect to a really critical audience:
namely, the wider cancer biology community who rely upon
small-molecule tool compounds, often in harness with biological
reagents, to interrogate cancer cell biology and who frequently
draw important and highly impactful biological interpretations,
whether correct or misleading, from such studies (Blagg and
Workman, 2014).

Cancer Cell 32, July 10, 2017 Crown Copyright ª 2017 Published by Elsevier Inc. 9

Cancer Cell

Perspective
Reviews and guidelines concerning chemical probes are usually published in specialist chemical biology journals for which
the readership mainly comprises experts already well aware of
the issues and current best practice (Frye, 2010; Workman and
Collins, 2010; Bunnage et al., 2013; Blagg and Workman, 2014;
Garbaccio and Parnee, 2016; Arrowsmith et al., 2015). We have
written this article specifically for a general cancer biology audience (incorporating a glossary of technical terms) in an effort to
reach out to this important and highly influential research community and to underscore why thorough characterization of both
chemical and biological tools is so critical to the advancement
of a biological understanding of cancer (and other diseases), as
well as for robust target validation applied to drug discovery in
both industry and academia. We provide a convenient ‘‘Dos and
Don’ts’’ guidance for the selection and use of chemical probes
in biological studies. We warn that selecting, as is common practice, your chemical probe from vendor catalogs that are inevitably
driven by commercial considerations and lack scientific detail and
expert opinion, or based on search engines whose results are
biased in favor of what biologists have used in the past, will
commonly not provide the most appropriate high-quality smallmolecule tool compound to robustly test your biological hypothesis (Arrowsmith et al., 2015). In addition, we advise that good
chemical probes will rarely emerge directly from a compound library screen; hit compounds from such screens commonly
require extensive chemical optimization and biological profiling
to generate high-quality chemical probes. Later, we will describe
selected examples where erroneous use of poor-quality compounds has led to misleading or incorrect conclusions.
Small Molecules Are from Mars, Biological Tools Are
from Venus
Multiple authors have encouraged the use of small-molecule
chemical probes alongside biological reagents to assess the
importance of biological targets to various disease-relevant phenotypes, including cancer (e.g., Bunnage et al., 2013; Blagg and
Workman, 2014; Garbaccio and Parnee, 2016). Paramount in
their reasoning is that the widely used biological RNAi and clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeat (CRISPR)
reagents commonly remove the protein in its entirety, whereas
most good-quality small-molecule probes selectively modulate
protein function without altering protein levels, thereby enabling
interrogation of both the concentration- and time-dependent
response (Blagg and Workman, 2014). Note, however, that
small-molecule binding can sometimes cause degradation of
the protein target, as shown for several kinase inhibitors,
although such degradation may be slower than the rapid inhibition of, say, kinase signaling (Polier et al., 2013). Nevertheless,
target protein levels should be monitored.

Although small-molecule and biological tool approaches are
two different worlds in the same universe, it is interesting to see
that these worlds are now converging with the advent, on the
one hand, of specific protein function modulation through CRISPR
gene-editing technology (Doudna and Charpentier, 2014) and, on
the other hand, of the selective removal of whole proteins through
small-molecule-directed proteolysis targeting chimera (PROTAC)
technology and Cereblon-targeted protein degradation (Bondeson et al., 2015; Winter et al., 2015). Fundamentally important to
both worlds is an understanding of the target selectivity of both
small-molecule tools and biological reagents.
As contextual insight, we present and illustrate here an important but infrequently articulated perspective: namely that it is to
be expected that most small molecules will interact with multiple
biological targets when exposed to complex biological systems,
including both healthy cells/organisms and aberrantly wired
cancer cells/mouse models. By contrast, many optimized biological reagents, for example siRNA oligonucleotides and even
more selective antibodies, are intrinsically more likely than small
molecules to preferentially bind to their intended biological
target, by virtue of the increased breadth, complexity, and,
hence, specificity of their combined intermolecular interactions
(Hann et al., 2001).
Fragments to Fabs: Lessons in the Selectivity of
Chemical Probes and Biological Tools
The fragment-based approach to drug discovery, now oftenlauded by medicinal chemists (Baker, 2013), is based upon
the principle that low-molecular-weight fragments (those with
MW < 300 Da and <15 heavy atoms: C, N, O, S, halogen, and
not H) are very effective in sampling the theoretically available
chemical space within their molecular weight range. By this we
mean that a library comprising several thousands of fragmentlike compounds effectively represents all the possible fragment-like molecules that could theoretically exist. The larger
the number of heavy atoms, the greater the number of molecules
required to exemplify all the theoretically possible combinations
(Blum and Reymond, 2009). In addition, the lower molecular
complexity (Bottcher, 2016) of fragment-like compounds offers
a higher probability of the fragment matching the requirements of a particular protein pocket. Notably, however, fragments are commonly observed to exhibit weak binding affinities
(0.1–1 mM) across diverse binding sites, provided that the
biochemical assay methods are sufficiently sensitive to detect
them (Figure 1) (Baker, 2013; Hall et al., 2014; Parker et al.,
2017). This finding is consistent with the notion that complex,
larger molecules are more likely to have unfavorable clashes
with a given binding site (Hann et al., 2001; Leach and Hann,
2011). By analogy, small cars will fit inside most garages, while
Figure 1. Fragments to Fabs: an AffinitySelectivity Spectrum
Increasing molecular weight increases the likelihood of specificity. Careful chemical optimization
and biological testing must be carried out to
minimize the risk of off-target effects in chemical
probes.

10 Cancer Cell 32, July 10, 2017

Cancer Cell

Perspective
larger cars are more discriminating. Thus, fragments are not
themselves chemical tools but are valuable starting points for
structure-based design.
Compared with fragments, chemical tools and lead-like molecules generally encompass a higher molecular weight range
(300–500 Da) and molecular complexity, thereby offering the
opportunity to design stronger affinity to a target protein by optimizing ligand features to fit those of the chosen protein, known
€,
as ‘‘pharmacophore matching’’ (see Box 1) (Hann and Keseru
2012). Biological reagents extend further along this size/
complexity/selectivity spectrum (Figure 1). For example, optimized siRNA tools are of high molecular weight (average of
13.3 kDa for a 21 base-pair duplex siRNA), of generally high
affinity (KD < 1 nM for the binding of oligodeoxynucleotides to
complementary mRNA) (Walton et al., 2001), and selective
(rather than specific) by virtue of Watson-Crick base-pairing.
Thus, a single mismatch in an antisense oligonucleotide can
lead to a 500-fold affinity loss consistent with high target selectivity; nevertheless high concentrations of homologous mRNAs
can still result in off-target effects (Hall, 2004).
Antibody tools provide the opportunity for still further optimization of target binding affinity with concomitant target specificity;
the fragment antigen-binding (Fab fragment) region on an optimized antibody binds to antigens with sub-nM affinity and high
specificity (de Haard et al., 1999). Interestingly, although the
need for characterization of antibody affinity and selectivity may
be better recognized by biologists than is the case for chemical
probes, the validation of antibody reagents is often also inadequate (Bordeaux et al., 2010; Ponten et al., 2008; Roncador
et al., 2016; Uhlen et al., 2016). The US National Cancer Institute
Antibody Portal and EuroMabNet serve as publicly available community resources for unbiased antibody validation, including
demonstration of selective binding (National Cancer Institute,
2017; European Monoclonal Antibodies Network, 2017). Although
there is extensive contamination of the literature with poor-quality
antibodies and also poorly controlled siRNA studies, and certainly
scope for improvement and implementation of best practice, we
nevertheless observe that biologists are less aware of the potential
pitfalls with chemical probes, including a lack of recognition that
un-optimized small-molecule reagents have inherently poor selectivity and hence should be picked with even greater caution
(Figure 1).
This spectrum of affinity and selectivity in relation to molecular
weight provides an informative context for consideration of
small-molecule chemical tools which, with appropriate molecular
design and control molecules, have the potential to be as
sufficiently selective and informative as optimized biological reagents. However, as highlighted earlier, without informed medicinal chemistry optimization, promiscuity should be regarded as a
probable scenario. Thus, high-quality antibody reagents can be
expected to bind with high affinity and specificity for their intended target in in vitro cell-based assays or in vivo animal
models, whereas it is highly likely that non-optimized small molecules, even though they may appear selective across in vitro
biochemical screening panels, are likely to bind to multiple unintended biological targets in the context of biological systems.
This is especially worthy of consideration when contemplating
a screen of diverse chemical entities in a cell-based phenotypic
assay (Box 1) where numerous false-positive hits are more likely

to be observed compared with a simpler biochemical screen with
one or a few recombinant proteins. In this context, both smart
design of the cell-based assay cascade and the quality of the
chemical library are critical to enable subsequent optimization
of identified hits to inform deconvolution of their biological targets
(Blagg and Workman, 2014; Dale et al., 2015).
Complementarity of Biological and Chemical Tools
While recognizing the need to critically assess the selectivity and
effectiveness of chemical tools, the use of well-designed orthogonal studies employing biological approaches can provide further
confidence in the mechanistic specificity of the resulting phenotypes (Fu et al., 2014; Cho et al., 2016). Importantly, to get the
best out of chemical probes requires a critical evaluation of their
quality, suitability, and selectivity for the particular biological
hypothesis under scrutiny; for example, by testing for compound
binding to biological targets likely to elicit a similar phenotypic
response. Biologists need to question the acceptability and credibility of chemical probes just as much as, and indeed more so
than, any biological reagents they use. A gold-standard test to validate the functional response to a chemical probe is to demonstrate reversal of compound-induced biological effects in the
presence of a mutation that abrogates compound binding to the
biological target (Kaelin, 2017; Kasap et al., 2014). Another valuable technique is the engineering of a functional target to interact
with chemical probes not recognized by the wild-type protein
(Bishop et al., 2000; Baud et al., 2014). An additional approach is
to determine the effects of the chemical probe in cells where the
putative biochemical target has been removed by CRISPRCas9. The value of this methodology was recently exemplified
by the devalidation of the proposed oncoprotein maternal embryonic leucine zipper kinase (MELK): thus CRISPR-Cas9 deletion of
MELK was tolerated in a range of cancer cell lines, and the clinical
candidate MELK inhibitor OTS167 retained activity in MELKknockout lines, indicating that the antiproliferative activity of this
drug is mediated via an off-target mechanism (Lin et al., 2017).
Whereas the onus frequently rests on the originating research
team to demonstrate the specificity of a given biological tool for
its intended target over relatively few closely homologous proteins, it is often the purview of the medicinal chemist to prove,
to the best of their ability and often with limited budget, that a
small-molecule ligand is not overtly promiscuous across the
entire druggable proteome, which is encoded by up to 7,668
genes comprising the ‘‘druggable genome’’ (Griffith et al., 2013;
Hopkins and Groom, 2002; Overington et al., 2006; Santos
et al., 2017). To limit the scope of selectivity investigation to a realistically testable scale, it is commonly assumed that the off-targets of a chemical probe will relate to the primary target by protein
sequence and folding architecture of the secondary structure.
Indeed, protein families that share the same endogenous ligand
(see Box 1) or co-factor binding sites are more likely to bind ligands that mimic the respective endogenous molecule. However, it is now clear that many small-molecule ligands bind to
unrelated proteins from quite different families, and detailed investigations do not support a simple ‘‘code’’ with which to
predict all such off-target ligand-binding sites from protein
sequence or structure alone (Barelier et al., 2015; Lounkine
et al., 2012). Given the diversity of druggable proteins (Griffith
et al., 2013; Hopkins and Groom, 2002; Overington et al., 2006;
Cancer Cell 32, July 10, 2017 11

Cancer Cell

Perspective
Box 1. Glossary of Terms

Activity-based protein profiling: unbiased method to detect the diversity of proteins bound by a small molecule in a cellular
environment by quantifying the displacement of a tagged ligand that binds to the active site of multiple, and preferably all,
proteins in a biological class (Willems et al., 2014).
Affinity: describes the ability of a ligand to bind to a biomolecule. High-affinity compounds will occupy all available binding sites
at low concentrations.
Amphiphilic: possessing both hydrophilic and lipophilic properties, for example, a soap or detergent.
Electrophilic: from the Greek ‘‘electron-friendly’’; a molecule that attracts electrons or electron-rich species such as thiol-containing residues in proteins.
Electrophilic warhead: a chemically reactive group, such as an aldehyde, ketone, or unsaturated carbonyl compound, which
is susceptible to reaction, most commonly with cysteine thiols (Blagg, 2010).
Fragment-like molecule: small molecules of low molecular weight, commonly defined as <300 Da, with less than 15 heavy
atoms (C, N, O, S, and halogen).
Hydrophilic: from the Greek ‘‘water-friendly’’; prefers an aqueous over a lipid environment.
Lead-like molecule: commonly defined as small molecules in the molecular weight range >300 Da and <500 Da.
Ligand: a substance, usually a small molecule, that binds to a biomolecule, commonly into a defined cavity or groove on a
protein.
Lipophilic: from the Greek ‘‘fat-friendly’’; prefers a lipid over an aqueous environment.
Molecular complexity: a context-dependent concept used by diverse scientific communities that is difficult to define and
quantify (Bottcher, 2016). For the purposes of this perspective, it is the number of features in a molecule that can potentially
interact with a biological target (Hann et al., 2001).
Pharmacophore: a description of the features of a molecule that are necessary for recognition by a biological target.
Pharmacophore crossing: the propensity for ligand structural features to be complementary to binding sites in multiple
protein targets.
Pharmacophore matching: complementarity of the ligand pharmacophore to the features of a biological target.
Phenotypic assay: screening of compounds in cellular or animal models of disease to identify molecules that cause a desirable
change in the phenotype (Swinney and Anthony, 2011).
Potency: describes the amount of compound required to elicit a biological effect. Potent compounds will elicit an effect at low
concentrations. IC50 is defined as the half-maximal inhibitory concentration.
Reactive metabolite: electrophilic species generated by metabolism of a parent molecule. Reactive metabolites can bind
covalently to biological macromolecules, such as proteins and DNA, thereby affecting their function.
Selectivity: demonstration of selective affinity for the target protein of interest versus other members of the protein family and
selected members of other protein families.
Stereoisomeric: molecules that have the same molecular formula and connection of bonded atoms, but differ in the threedimensional orientation of their atoms in space.
Target engagement: quantitation of the binding of a small-molecule ligand to its target protein(s) in a biological system, such
as a cell or animal model, by biophysical methods or displacement of a tracer ligand.
Target modulation: measurement of proximal downstream biological sequelae (Banerji and Workman, 2016).

Santos et al., 2017), and recent data demonstrating the promiscuous binding of fragment molecules (see above) to hitherto undrugged proteins (Parker et al., 2017), we recommend taking a
routinely cautious and skeptical approach before investing significant resource in using a chemical probe to test important biological hypotheses in labyrinthine cellular and organismal systems.
Selectivity of Chemical Probes versus Drugs
Underpinning the above warning of caution in the selection of
chemical probes for biological studies is the realization that an
un-optimized small molecule is unlikely, until proven otherwise,
to demonstrate high-level specificity for its intended biological
target. Perhaps surprisingly to many biologists, this lack of selectivity also applies to many marketed drugs. For example, in a
study of 392 oral drugs tested versus an average of 7.3 unique
biological targets, more than half had 50% inhibitory (IC50) values
of less than 1 mM for two or more targets, suggesting significant
promiscuity in drugs (Gleeson et al., 2011). A consortium of four
12 Cancer Cell 32, July 10, 2017

pharmaceutical companies published a valuable large-scale
analysis of their combined in vitro profiling of marketed drugs
versus broad panels of biological targets associated with
adverse clinical outcomes. This demonstrated that approximately 30% of marketed drugs tested at 10 mM (a screening
concentration consistent with the upper limits of recommended
cell-based assay concentrations, see next section) show >50%
inhibition of >5% of biological targets tested (Bowes et al., 2012).
While the presence of such significant secondary pharmacology
in a drug is often acceptable, and even desirable to elicit the
required therapeutic efficacy and mitigate resistance, it is potentially confounding for the purpose of interrogating a specific biological target in the context of a detailed mechanism-based
biological investigation (Box 2). Consequently, we suggest that
a critical, weight-of-evidence argument is necessary to build
confidence in the application and subsequent interpretation of
data generated with chemical probes including, importantly,
the powerful use of more than one, and ideally multiple, chemical

Cancer Cell

Perspective
Box 2. Selectivity Profile of Chemical Probes versus Drugs

Chemical probe: used to examine the biological hypothesis and selective with respect to:
d Proteins whose altered function could confound the interpretation of the biological hypothesis under test, e.g., other cell-cycle
kinases when testing a specific cell-cycle mechanism
d Highly homologous proteins
d Protein families that share the same endogenous ligand (Box 1) or co-factor binding sites
Drug: used to build confidence in a safe therapeutic window and sufficiently selective with respect to:
d Proteins known to elicit an important short-term adverse clinical outcome, e.g., Herg inhibition and torsade de pointes (Hancox
et al., 2008)
d Proteins where there is a risk of long-term adverse clinical outcomes, e.g., 5HT2B agonism inducing cardiac valvulopathy
(Rothman et al., 2000)
d Proteins known to elicit unfavorable drug-drug interactions, e.g., cytochrome P450 family proteins

probes of differing off-target profiles and derived from diverse
chemical classes, along with appropriate structurally matched
inactive or less-active control analogs, as well as complementary use of the biological and genetic approaches mentioned
earlier, particularly rescue experiments.
The Pharmacologic Audit Trail
In addition to cell-free biochemical data demonstrating appropriate potency and selectivity (Workman and Collins, 2010), it
is also important to obtain robust evidence of on-target activity,
and ideally also off-target effects, of chemical probes in cellular
and organismal models. This is consistent with the concept we
have codified and promulgated of the Pharmacologic Audit Trail
(Banerji and Workman, 2016), and is also one of the four pillars of
cell-based target validation using chemical probes described by
Bunnage et al. (2013). Unfortunately, it is still common practice to
treat cancer cells with increasing concentrations of compound
until a phenotype, commonly cell death, is observed. Compound
promiscuity is concentration-dependent, thus the higher the
concentration of compound applied, the more likely the
observed outcome will be due to off-target pharmacology, and
results obtained from testing compounds in cancer cells at concentrations above 10–20 mM should be treated with caution.
Rather than assuming that the observed phenotypic consequence is driven by the intended biological target, it is critically
important to obtain evidence for concentration-dependent and
selective modulation of the intended molecular target at exposures that make sense with respect to the observed phenotypic
outcomes (Figure 2 and Box 3).
There are now a range of cell-based technologies for
measuring immediate target engagement (Box 1) by chemical
probes. These include direct-binding chemical proteomics
technologies such as activity-based protein profiling (ABPP)
(see Box 1, Willems et al., 2014), spatial proximity methods
such as fluorescence resonance energy transfer, bioluminescence resonance energy transfer, cellular thermal shift assays,
and fluorescence polarization microscopy, in combination with
companion imaging probes (Simon et al., 2013; Huber, 2017).
Similarly, it is also important to determine the resulting downstream effects of chemical probes on biochemical pathways
and processes by assessing a range of mechanism-based pharmacodynamic biomarkers, preferably quantitatively (Banerji and
Workman, 2016). Use of more than one biomarker can be helpful

to build confidence in an on-target mechanism of action. Biomarkers, such as proteins, that exhibit an increase in expression
in response to the exposure of cells to treatment with a chemical
probe can be valuable, since such an increase is more likely to be
the result of compound-specific action than a consequence of
the widespread protein degradation that occurs during cell death
(see also Kaelin, 2017).
Unbiased determination of the consequences of direct target
engagement and the resulting target modulation (Box 1) in cells
and organisms can be addressed using technologies such as
transcriptional and (phospho)proteomic profiling, for which valuable resources and interrogable knowledge-bases are becoming
freely available to help inform on mechanism of action (Lamb
et al., 2006; Schenone et al., 2013; Seashore-Ludlow et al.,
2015; Muroi et al., 2010); these can reveal both on- and off-target
effects. In addition, extensive public resources are available
describing the known effects of chemical compounds, including
drugs and chemical probes, as well as genetic perturbation, on
the viability or proliferative potential of large panels of genetically
annotated human cancer lines (Cancer Cell Line Encyclopedia
Consortium and The Genomics of Drug Sensitivity in Cancer
Consortium, 2015; Seashore-Ludlow et al., 2015). Importantly, it
should be noted that a highly target-specific chemical probe
may nevertheless beget pleiotropic downstream biological consequences if its biochemical target is nodal to multiple biological
pathways; thus, target specificity does not always beget biological specificity (Dale et al., 2015).
In the following sections we highlight and discuss supporting
evidence for the ubiquity of small-molecule promiscuity. We
illustrate this critical point with appropriate examples to caution
biological researchers in the best-practice use of chemical
probes and to arm them with pertinent questions that we believe
it is essential to ask before embarking upon intricate, timeconsuming, and expensive biological studies with chemical tools
that may be risky or even fatally flawed (Figure 2 and Box 3).
Representative examples are portrayed from cancer biology,
including our own experience, to illustrate how poorly characterized chemical probes can promote and perpetuate inappropriate
biological conclusions. We emphasize the warning ‘‘caveat
emptor’’ – let the buyer beware (Arrowsmith et al., 2015) – and
seek to equip the biological researcher with advice to avoid
investment in the equivalent of a defective global positioning
(or satellite navigation) system.
Cancer Cell 32, July 10, 2017 13

Cancer Cell

Perspective
Figure 2. Dos and Don’ts of Chemical
Probes

MTH1 as a Cancer Target?
A recent study elegantly highlights the complementary value and
importance of using orthogonal chemical and biological approaches to target validation in cancer (Kettle et al., 2016). Comparison of the effect of multiple high-quality chemical probes for
the DNA damage repair enzyme MTH1 with that of siRNA and
CRISPR biological tools demonstrated that, in marked contrast
to previous reports, neither chemical inhibition of MTH1 activity
nor RNAi and CRISPR-mediated knockdown of MTH1 elicited
killing of cancer cells. Previously reported chemical probes
for MTH1 include TH287 and TH588, as well as S-crizotinib
(Figure 3A). Pharmacophore crossing (see below and Box 1) of
toll-like receptor 7 (TLR-7) ligands with the MTH1 target facilitated
the discovery of potent and selective MTH1 chemical probes 1 and
2, both devoid of off-target activity in broad kinase or secondary
pharmacology profiling, and with clear evidence for MTH1 binding
in cells demonstrated by cellular thermal shift profiling. In contrast
to TH287 and more ‘‘water-hating’’ lipophilic analogs (see below
and Box 1), neither compound 1 nor 2 demonstrated antiproliferative activity across a panel of human cancer cell lines, nor did they
show evidence for the expected modulation of the DNA damage
response or apoptotic biomarkers. Although the later authors replicated the original reports of MTH1-dependence by siRNA-mediated knockdown using the same siRNA reagents, further exploration with additional siRNA reagents targeting MTH1, and also with
CRISPR-mediated silencing of MTH1, failed to confirm the original
findings, strongly suggesting off-target activity with the original
siRNA reagent. Finally, in a critical experiment, both TH287
and S-crizotinib killed MTH1-null cancer cell lines, thus implicating off-target-mediated pharmacology. Subsequent proteomic
profiling of TH287 and TH588 indicated that tubulin-binding is
responsible for their cytotoxic effects (Kawamura et al., 2016).
14 Cancer Cell 32, July 10, 2017

Taken together these comprehensive
studies clearly illustrate the potential risks
of off-target pharmacology with both
small-molecule chemical tools, particularly compounds with high lipophilicity
(see below for further discussion of this
concept and also Box 1), and RNAi reagents as well (Persengiev et al., 2004).
They also highlight the important need to
use several high-quality chemical and
orthogonal biological tools in parallel during target validation, in order to reach
robust conclusions. This exemplar case
history also serves to highlight that original
results, while sometimes reproducible,
can nevertheless lead to incorrect conclusions. Examples of lack of robustness
such as this almost certainly account
for some of the discouraging results
when biologists and drug discovery scientists attempt to replicate and extend original findings during detailed biological
target validation studies, prior to significant resource investment
(Prinz et al., 2011; Begley and Ellis, 2012; Kaelin, 2017).
Targeting Multi-Domain Proteins: SMARCA2, HIF-2a,
and the JmjC-Containing Histone Lysine Demethylases
In some cases, biological tools provide insufficient information
on the role of a particular functional protein domain. For
example, the SWItch/Sucrose Non-Fermentable (SWI/SNF)
complex modulates chromatin structure via two mutually exclusive catalytic subunits, SMARCA2 and SMARCA4, both of which
possess a bromodomain and a catalytic ATPase domain. An
elegant suite of studies carried out using biological and genetic
experiments, as well as a complementary fit-for-purpose chemical probe for the SMARCA2 bromodomain, demonstrated that
knockdown of the entire SMARCA2 protein elicits an antiproliferative phenotype in clinically relevant SMARCA4-mutant tumors.
This synthetic lethality was rescued by a bromodomain-mutant
form but not by an ATPase-dead SMARCA2 protein. Furthermore, synthetic lethality was not observed by pharmacologic
inhibition of bromodomain function using the selective chemical
probe PFI-3. Taken together these results demonstrate that the
ATPase activity of SMARCA2 is required for maintaining tumor
cell proliferation, whereas the bromodomain function is not
(Vangamudi et al., 2015). They also highlight the importance of
drugging the more challenging ATPase domain to achieve pharmacological synthetic lethality.
Also illustrative of such a comprehensive approach is an
exemplary recent study of PT2399, a small-molecule antagonist
of the PAS-B protein-binding domain of the multi-domain helixloop-helix (bHLH)-Per/Arnt/Sim (PAS) transcription factor HIF2a. This study used PT2399 in parallel with a suite of biological
tools, including an HIF-2a-mutant protein shown to block

Cancer Cell

Perspective
Box 3. Factors that Determine the Fitness and Quality of Chemical Probes

Chemical structure
d Absence of chemically reactive groups (structural alerts) and/or Pan-Assay Interference Compounds (PAINS) that may elicit
off-target pharmacology or interference with proposed assay methodologies.
d Absence of chemically unstable and/or metabolically unstable moieties that may compromise the interpretation of cell-based
or in vivo animal studies.
d Membrane permeability and solubility consistent with cell penetration.
Potency (biochemical)
d Demonstration of sufficiently potent binding affinity to the biological target of interest in multiple orthogonal assays; IC50 is
defined as the half-maximal inhibitory concentration.
Selectivity (biochemical)
d Demonstration of sufficiently selective affinity for the target protein versus other members of its protein family as well as
selected members of other protein families (e.g., by screening in broad ligand-binding assays).
Selectivity (cell-based)
d Evidence for concentration-dependent and selective modulation of the desired biochemical target in cells at concentrations
that are interpretable in the context of in vitro potency.
Selectivity (in vivo)
d Evidence for on-target biomarker modulation at in vivo exposures consistent with maintenance of selective pharmacology.
Availability of appropriate controls
d Provision of a less-active or inactive chemical tool with a similar chemical structure and properties to the active chemical probe.
d Provision of a second chemical probe from a structurally distinct chemical series.

PT2399 binding to the PAS-B domain, to demonstrate that
PT2399 decreases HIF-dependent transcription and antiproliferative activity in an on-target HIF-2a-dependent manner through
binding to the PAS-B domain, and also that the differential therapeutic sensitivity of human kidney cancer cell lines to PT2399
likely reflects differences in their HIF-2a dependence and indicates the need for predictive biomarkers (Cho et al., 2016).
Significant effort has been applied to the discovery of smallmolecule chemical tools for the JmjC-containing family of histone
lysine demethylases (KDMs). Such tools are critical if we are to understand the importance of JmjC-domain histone demethylase
catalytic activity (as distinct from the chromatin localization or
scaffolding functions of full-length KDM proteins) in determining
a given biological outcome. As described above, such a distinction
cannot be made using RNAi-mediated protein knockdown studies
that take out the whole protein, unless more technically
demanding rescue studies are carried out with appropriate
domain-targeted mutants. For the KDM4 and KDM5 proteins,
elegant biochemical studies using peptide and nucleosome substrates have shown that their Tudor domains act as co-operative
chromatin-homing motifs to both direct and enhance the rate of
JmjC-mediated demethylation of adjacent histone methyl marks
(Ortiz Torres et al., 2015; Su et al., 2016). Increasing evidence for
the role of multiple members of the KDM protein family in the initiation and maintenance of cancer has fueled mounting interest in
these targets (Højfeldt et al., 2014). Details of a number of chemical
tools that modulate the catalytic activity of KDM proteins have
been published (McAllister et al., 2016); however, many of these
tools, such as GSK-J1, suffer from low cell permeability associated with the presence of a highly ionized carboxylic acid moiety.
Without robust evidence of target modulation (Box 1) with such
compounds, linking observed cell-based phenotypes to inhibition
of demethylase activity is dangerous. To overcome the expected
poor cell permeability of inhibitors bearing a charged carboxylic
acid, the corresponding ester ‘‘prodrugs’’ have been investigated,

notably GSK-J4 which is the cell-permeable ester prodrug of the
KDM6-selective inhibitor GSK-J1 and releases the active agent
through hydrolysis by cellular esterases (Figure 3B). Exposure
of cells to GSK-J4 led to the expected increase of nuclear
H3K27me3 indicating cell-based target inhibition, whereas neither
GSK-J1 nor a structurally matched inactive control ester had this
effect (Kruidenier et al., 2012). These findings clarify the previous
ambiguity concerning the catalytic function of H3K27-specific
Jmjs in regulating inflammatory responses. This represents a
valuable approach to discovering selective and cell-permeable
chemical probes, and potentially drugs, for KDMs.
Notable Characteristics of Poor-Quality Chemical
Probes
In this section we illustrate some of the undesirable properties
associated with chemical tools of limited utility and lessons
that can be learned from their use (Figure 4).
Not What It Says on the Tin
Unfortunately, there are multiple documented cases where the
experimentally determined chemical structure of the purchased
material is inconsistent with the label description. For example,
the widely used phospholipase and sphingomyelinase inhibitor
D609 has eight possible stereoisomeric forms, all of which
present a different potential protein-binding pharmacophore.
A recent study (Kato et al., 2016) described the synthesis of all of
these isomers and demonstrated their differing in vitro inhibition
potencies versus phosphatidylcholine phospholipase C. Furthermore, the authors discovered that commercial vendors provide
differing isomeric mixtures of the compound. More worrying still,
at least 18 commercial suppliers of the leukemia drug bosutinib,
which inhibits the BCR-ABL tyrosine kinase with additional activity
on Src-family tyrosine kinases, were found to be selling an incorrect structural isomer of the compound (Extance, 2015). This highlights the importance of verifying the chemical integrity of purchased probes, for example by obtaining appropriate chemical
Cancer Cell 32, July 10, 2017 15

Cancer Cell

Perspective

Figure 3. MTH1 and Histone Demethylase Chemical Probes
(A) MTH1 ligands TH287 and TH588 with lipophilic moiety highlighted in lilac, S-crizotinib, and characterized chemical probes 1 and 2.
(B) Histone demethylase inhibitor GSK-J1 with the highly ionized and poorly cell-penetrant carboxylic acid moiety highlighted in yellow and its corresponding cellpenetrant ethyl ester GSK-J4 (ester moiety highlighted in green).

data characteristic of the molecular structure (commonly mass
spectrometry and nuclear magnetic resonance profiles) through
collaboration with chemistry colleagues, or a fee-for-service facility, and comparing the results with data in the literature that was
generated from the authentic material – caveat emptor again
(Arrowsmith et al., 2015)
In a third example that links to the subsequent narrative, Thioflavin S has been reported to modulate the interaction of
BAG-1 with the molecular chaperones HSC70 and HSP70,
and also with CRAF, both in vitro and in human breast cancer
cell lines (Sharp et al., 2009). Thioflavin S is a complex mixture
of compounds and, originally, its biological activity was not
definitively attributed to any one component; however, a subsequent study isolated and purified Thio-2 (Figure 5A), a component which retained the ability of Thioflavin S to block the
BAG-1/HSC70 interaction (Enthammer et al., 2013). Despite
this advance, the Thioflavin class of molecules, to which
Thio-2 belongs, exhibit multiple sources of off-target activities,
including CYP1A1-mediated generation of reactive intermediates and DNA-adduct formation (Chakraborty et al., 2010) as
well as PAINS motifs (see next section), casting strong doubt
upon the credentials of these compounds as high-quality chemical probes. Consultation with expert chemistry colleagues can
avoid wasted time and effort.
A particular egregious behavior that must be eliminated is the
publication of biological results for compounds where the chemical structure is not disclosed in the paper or included within a
cited reference. This is absolutely unforgivable since it is impossible to interpret the biological findings without sight of the compound structure, nor can the results be independently verified.
Reviewers and editors should be vigilant and resolute about
abolishing this practice. It is not acceptable in a chemical journal
and nor should it be in a biomedical one.
16 Cancer Cell 32, July 10, 2017

Ligand Promiscuity
Multiple factors are well known by chemical biologists and medicinal chemists, but commonly less so by academic biologists,
to promote non-selective binding of small-molecule ligands
to biomolecules. Notable among these ‘‘alerts’’ are chemical
reactivity and instability, susceptibility to repetitively coupled
reduction and oxidation (so-called redox cycling), chelation of
essential metals, and lipophilicity (characterized by ‘‘lipid-loving’’
or ‘‘water-shy’’ behavior) (Bruns and Wilson, 2012; Peters et al.,
2009; McGovern et al., 2003). The presence of more than one
alert in a chemical structure magnifies the concern (Figure 4).
These undesirable features, which commonly drive promiscuous
binding in the context of high-throughput screening (HTS), lead
to certain compounds being classed as ‘‘frequent-hitters’’ or
even ‘‘chemical imposters’’ (Baell and Walters, 2014). The
learning available from analysis of promiscuous HTS hits
(Bruns and Wilson, 2012; Peters et al., 2009; McGovern et al.,
2003; Baell and Walters, 2014; Baell and Holloway, 2010)
is equally applicable and relevant to the characterization of
chemical probes for biological use. The claimed description of
a compound as a ‘‘probe’’ does not necessarily confer upon it
better attributes than your average small molecule – caveat emptor once more.
Pan-Assay Interference Compounds
Often-cited Pan-Assay Interference Compounds (PAINS) are
one subclass of potential rogue molecules that contain substructures that have been associated with an increased risk of interference with certain assay detection methods (Baell and Holloway, 2010). Importantly, despite the fact such compounds do
not necessarily bind to multiple proteins, they may be viewed
as promiscuous by virtue of their pan-assay interference. Biologists do need to be aware of the dangers of PAINS compounds.
However, a recent publication highlights that computational

Cancer Cell

Perspective

Figure 4. Factors Likely to Influence Promiscuity in a Claimed
Chemical Probe
(1) Chemical reactivity and instability (a chemical structure that is reactive or
unstable in the medium of a biological assay); (2) lipophilicity (the propensity for
a small molecule to leave the aqueous environment and bind to proteins
irrespective of the protein structure or sequence); (3) chemical substructures
associated with assay interference (Pan-Assay Interference Compounds,
PAINS, see text). The overlap in the Venn diagram indicates that more than
one undesirable feature can occur in a given chemical structure which magnifies the likelihood of problems occurring in biological use.

PAINS filters may inappropriately flag some compound classes,
noting the potential for incorrect prediction of promiscuity and
reinforcing the need for orthogonal experimental assays to
confirm (or otherwise) compound activity versus their intended
primary biological target (Capuzzi et al., 2017). Some commentators have noted that access to multiple orthogonal assay
formats may be limited in the academic setting (Lowe, 2017);
however, such profiling of chemical probes (Boxes 2 and 3) is
essential to mitigate the risk of significant further investment
in flawed compounds. Multiple orthogonal assay formats have
been developed and proven reliable for well-studied protein
classes (e.g., kinases, G-protein coupled receptors and ion
channels) (Janzen, 2014), and many are now available through
fee-for-service vendors. Open innovation and crowdsourcing
solutions, which enable the distributed evaluation of proposed
chemical tools in multiple assays across the research community, are also to be welcomed (Structural Genomics Consortium,
2011). Further to this, provision of grant supplements for probe
profiling would encourage best practice and be consistent with
NIH requirements for the authentication of data and reagents in
grant applications (Lauer, 2016).
Chemical Reactivity and Instability Beget Biological
Promiscuity
Small molecules that are intrinsically chemically reactive, or that
generate high concentrations of chemically reactive metabolites,
are likely to bind covalently and indiscriminately to off-target proteins. A recent computational study demonstrates that frequenthitter compounds in HTS exhibit increased chemical reactivity
compared with selective compounds, mainly due to their elec-

n et al., 2014). Such properties can
trophilic character (Curpa
be highlighted in the selection of chemical probes by applying
appropriately validated in silico structural filters (Sushko et al.,
2012), and also by seeking expert advice from medicinal chemists and chemical biologists.
On the other hand, there is a resurgence of interest in chemical
probes that form a designed-in directed covalent interaction with
their target protein, i.e., an initial rapid and reversible binding of
the designed small molecule to a defined pocket on the target
protein that is followed by formation of an irreversible covalent
linkage. This is an attractive approach, particularly for the modulation of hitherto undruggable protein targets; key advantages
include the ability to completely ablate a specific protein function
without removing the protein, while at the same time avoiding
the need for challenging pharmacokinetic optimzation as a result
of essentially irreversible modification of the protein target. The
directed covalent approach also benefits from an increased
scholarship on electrophilic ‘‘warheads’’ (see Box 1) that, with
an appropriately optimized scaffold, offer the potential to selectively bind to the protein of interest (Oprea et al., 2009; Liu et al.,
2013). GSK-LSD1, a selective chemical probe for the histone
lysine demethylase KDM1A (LSD1) (Structural Genomics Consortium, 2017), and the irreversible EGFR-mutant selective kinase inhibitor osimertinib (now approved in non-small-cell lung
cancer), exemplify this approach (Finlay et al., 2014). There is a
caution here, however, since application of ABPP using mass
spectrometry-based proteomics (see Box 1) to elucidate the
proteome-wide selectivity of covalent kinase inhibitors has illustrated the potential for extensive concentration-dependent offtarget activity through covalent binding, particularly to exposed
cysteine, but also potentially to exposed serine, threonine, or
lysine residues across multiple diverse protein families (Lanning
et al., 2014). For example, ibrutinib was shown to bind to multiple
protein targets at concentrations previously used to attribute
cellular phenotypic behavior specifically to BTK inhibition. In
the context of cancer therapy, an additional and notable caution,
irrespective of the aforementioned issues with chemically reactive inhibitors, is the risk of the emergence of resistant clones
harboring mutations to the protein residues targeted by covalent
modifiers (Engel et al., 2015).
Lipophilicity Begets Small-Molecule Aggregation and
Biological Promiscuity
Lipophilic ‘‘grease-loving’’, also called hydrophobic ‘‘waterhating’’, molecules share a propensity to escape the aqueous
environment (McGovern et al., 2003). At high concentrations
in the buffer solutions used in biological assays such compounds
commonly self-condense into aggregates or micelle-like
bodies, which may present themselves as globular composites
to proteins or cell membranes in biological systems. Molecules
with greasy and polar groups at opposite ends (so-called
‘‘amphiphilic’’ molecules) are particularly prone to self-aggregation. Unsurprisingly, this phenomenon frequently leads to nonspecific effects on multiple proteins and hence misleading observations unrelated to the pharmacology of the component
small molecule (Blevitt et al., 2017; Irwin et al., 2015; Leeson
and Springthorpe, 2007). Similarly, hydrophobic interactions between ligand and protein contribute significantly to favorable
binding energies and, as a result, lipophilic molecules benefit
from a greater driving force to leave the aqueous environment
Cancer Cell 32, July 10, 2017 17

Cancer Cell

Perspective

Figure 5. Thio-2, Lowering Lipophilicity and Pharmacophore Crossing
(A) Chemical structure of Thio-2 with the reactive metabolite precursor highlighted in orange.
(B) Lowering the calculated lipophilicity (cLogP) of the PAK1 inhibitor chemical tool G-5555 by 100-fold compared with starting compound FRAX1036 by removal
of the lipophilic side chain (lilac) bearing a highly basic nitrogen and addition of a tolerated polar side chain (green) bearing a weakly basic nitrogen.
(C) Pharmacophore crossing: the PLK1 kinase-binding motif of BI2536 is highlighted in purple and the BRD4 Asn140-binding motif is shaded blue. The kinasebinding motif responsible for both JAK2 and BRD4 affinity of TG10129 is shaded purple.
(D) MLN8054 and the follow-on Aurora A candidate alisertib MLN8237; the benzodiazepine scaffold is highlighted in green; the structural differences in MLN8237
that abrogate GABAA a-1 benzodiazepine binding are highlighted in red.

and enter into complementary lipid/protein environments,
thereby resulting in multiple weak off-target interactions. Such
interactions become more important at the high compound concentrations in aqueous media commonly used in biological
€, 2013; Peters et al., 2009). Lowering
assays (Tarcsay and Keseru
the lipophilicity of the PAK1 inhibitor chemical tool G-5555 by
100-fold compared with the starting compound FRAX1036 resulted in an improved on-target PAK1 potency and enhanced
selectivity profile across kinase and non-kinase screening
panels (Ndubaku et al., 2015) (Figure 5B).
Unfortunately, the addition of lipophilic groups to small molecules is a common tactic that is frequently employed by inexperienced medicinal chemists who are seduced by increased
affinity for their biological target of interest, but unaccustomed
to the likely risks of aggregation and biological promiscuity, not
to mention metabolic instability. Thus, such molecules continue
to be synthesized and used and the biology community should
be wary of chemical tools with high calculated or measured lipophilicity. This property is captured by LogP values that reflect
the relative partitioning between water and octanol and these
can easily be provided by chemistry colleagues. Lipophilic compounds can, and should, be readily tested for self-aggregation
(McGovern et al., 2003: Irwin et al., 2015) and off-target promis18 Cancer Cell 32, July 10, 2017

cuity (Eurofins/CEREP, 2017) at a fraction of the cost of wasted
efforts on complex in vivo and cell-based studies.
Pharmacophore Crossing
While protein sequence homology, biological target class membership and/or shared endogenous ligands provide a shortlist of
likely suspects for off-target activity, small molecules can still
lead an active ‘‘night-life’’ and interact in unanticipated ways
with distant parts of the proteome. The increasing power and
adoption of ABPP is revealing the potential for off-target pharmacology with current drugs and chemical tools. For example,
a recent report highlights a chemical proteomics approach that
revealed the enzyme ferrochelatase (FECH) as a surprisingly
common off-target of kinase inhibitors; notably, 29 of the 226
clinical kinase inhibitors tested, including approved drugs vemurafenib and neratinib, bind to the protoporphyrin pocket of
FECH at low- or sub-micromolar concentrations (Klaeger et al.,
2016); this is known as ‘‘pharmacophore crossing’’ (see Box 1).
Several recent studies highlight the discovery of notable, and
at first glance surprising, pharmacophore crossing and off-target
pharmacology involving unrelated gene families, for both chemical tools and clinical agents that may otherwise have been regarded as selective. In an interesting and topical example,
several kinase inhibitors in clinical use have subsequently been

Cancer Cell

Perspective

Figure 6. Probes That Elicit a Response in Biochemical or Cell-Based Assays Due to Non-Specific Effects
(A) The metabolically unstable and chemically reactive components of iniparib and its reactive metabolite are depicted in red.
(B) The substructures contributing to the lipophilicity of apoptazole are highlighted in lilac; the chemically reactive component of pifithrin-m is highlighted in red.
(C) Putative p53 modulator pifithrin-a, which undergoes rapid conversion to pifithrin-b.
(D) The chemically reactive components of MCB-613 are highlighted in red.
(E) Evolution of the early non-selective pathfinder tool LY294002 to the more potent and selective class I PI3 kinase inhibitor GDC-0941 (pictilisib).

demonstrated to exhibit high affinity for bromodomain histone
acetyl lysine readers, such that these compounds should now
be reclassified as dual kinase-bromodomain modulators at therapeutically relevant exposures (Ciceri et al., 2014; Ember et al.,
2014), and appropriate care should be taken in interpreting results with such agents. Notably BI2536, currently marketed as
a selective PLK1 inhibitor, demonstrates comparable BRD4 bromodomain affinity (IC50 = 25 nM) to the chemical tool JQ1 (IC50 =
35 nM); and compound TG10129, currently sold as a selective
JAK2 inhibitor (IC50 = 6 nM), demonstrates an affinity for BRD4
(IC50 = 130 nM) as well as for the kinases FLT3 (IC50 = 25 nM)
and RET (IC50 = 17 nM) sufficient to cast doubt on the pharmacology underlying some of the cellular phenotypes observed
when it is used at higher concentrations (Figure 5C) (Ember
et al., 2014). Interestingly, a comparative structural analysis of
binding modes for multiple compounds exhibiting bromodomain
to kinase pharmacophore crossing revealed that diverse molecular interactions may elicit bromodomain affinity, not all of which
overlap with interactions required for kinase ATP-binding-site affinity, highlighting a significant medicinal chemistry challenge for
chemical probe and drug design.
In another notable clinically relevant example, the Aurora A
kinase inhibitor MLN8054 elicited reversible drowsiness as a
dose-limiting toxicity in Phase I dose-escalation studies, consistent with its demonstrated affinity for the off-target GABAA a-1
benzodiazepine binding site. Interestingly, MLN8054 contains
a benzodiazepine core scaffold; however, a small structural

change in the periphery of the molecule abrogated GABAA a-1
benzodiazepine binding and clinical incidence of somnolence
in the follow-on candidate alisertib MLN8237 (Figure 5D), further
emphasizing the subtlety of fine-tuning specific ligand-protein
interactions (Sells et al., 2015).
Further Cautionary Tales with Chemical Probes in
Cancer
PARP Inhibitor Iniparib
A high profile and cautionary example of an inappropriate and
advanced chemical tool is provided by iniparib, a purported poly
(ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) inhibitor that failed in Phase III
clinical trials in breast cancer (Figure 6A) (Sinja, 2014). Iniparib
was in the vanguard of PARP inhibitors and was inappropriately
progressed through preclinical and clinical studies to test the hypothesis that BRCA-mutant tumors would be particularly sensitive
to PARP inhibition, shown preclinically with olaparib and other
PARP inhibitors considered to be the first exemplification of the
concept of synthetic lethality in cancer therapy (Ashworth, 2008).
The Phase III clinical trial failure of iniparib raised significant concerns regarding this therapeutic approach; however, subsequent
studies, which should have been conducted much earlier, demonstrated that the antitumor activity of iniparib results from its conversion to the highly reactive C-nitroso metabolite (Figure 6A)
followed by non-selective modification of cysteine-containing
proteins (Patel et al., 2012; Liu et al., 2012). This behavior is due
to the presence in iniparib of an aromatic nitro group regarded
Cancer Cell 32, July 10, 2017 19

Cancer Cell

Perspective
by many experienced medicinal chemists as a disaster waiting to
happen, in both chemical tools and in drug molecules (Blagg,
2006). By notable contrast, validated PARP inhibitors, olaparib
and veliparib, have demonstrated remarkable antitumor activity
in BRCA-mutant models and in corresponding patients, resulting
in the recent approval of olaparib for the treatment of women
with BRCA-mutant ovarian cancer.
Molecular Chaperone HSP70
Protein targets with 3D structures that lack well-defined cavities
or grooves able to readily accommodate drug-like small molecules (including hard-to-drug cancer proteins such as RAS,
MYC, mutant p53, b-catenin, and the molecular chaperone
HSP70) are particularly prone to a prevalence of poor-quality
chemical tools. The application of biochemical screening
techniques will generally identify small molecules that elicit an
assay response; however, in many cases, the most likely cause
is entirely unrelated to binding at the desired protein cavity or
groove, and commonly derives from interference with the assay
readout. Furthermore, factors such as compound chemical reactivity, non-specific lipophilic interactions, or aggregation can lead
to false-positive readouts as described earlier (Figure 4).
The aforementioned caveat emptor – let the buyer beware –
applies equally well here. Furthermore, if the protein under
study has been demonstrated to have a clear oncogenic role
using biological reagents and techniques, then this scenario
is even more worrisome as poor chemical tools generate false
excitement and beget further biomedical interest, publications, and grant funding, despite their likely lack of specificity.
Numerous reports using biological reagents and techniques
built confidence in validation of the molecular chaperone
heat shock protein 70 kDa (HSP70) family as a drug target in
multiple cancer types and in drug resistance (Powers et al.,
2010). This has spawned multiple approaches to discover
small-molecule modulators of HSP70 function, many of which
should be regarded with suspicion despite the presence of
a potentially druggable, although challenging, ATP-binding
site in HSP70 (Jones et al., 2016). Notably, apoptozole
(Figure 6B) has been reported to possess strong affinity for
the HSP70 protein family (Williams et al., 2008); however, investigations using both biochemical and biophysical techniques failed to demonstrate binding of apoptazole to
HSP70. Unsurprisingly, consistent with the lipophilic structure
of apoptozole (with a preference for a lipid over an aqueous
environment of >10 million fold), this agent was found to
self-aggregate in aqueous media, and the lipid micelles
formed were shown to interact with HSP70 proteins in a
non-specific manner (Evans et al., 2015).
A second so-called chemical tool pifithrin-m (PFT-m), which is
marketed by many commercial vendors as an HSP70 modulator,
is, we propose, equally suspect. The chemical structure of PFT-m
contains a potentially reactive scaffold: a carbon-carbon triple
bond (acetylene) directly attached to an electron-withdrawing
group (sulfonamide) (Figure 6B) (Blagg, 2006). This motif clearly
signposts to chemists its potential to covalently modify proteins
through reaction with cysteine thiols. Indeed, several other reports in reputable journals highlight potentially interesting pharmacology for PFT-m, which may further hint at non-specific activity: an interaction with p53 that inhibits the binding of p53 to
mitochondria (Strom et al., 2006) and PFT-m-driven p53-inde20 Cancer Cell 32, July 10, 2017

pendent apoptosis in B-chronic lymphocytic leukemia cells
via the mitochondrial pathway (Steele et al., 2009). Given the
potential for non-specific covalent modification of proteins by
PFT-m we recommend caution in its use. The very similarly
named pifithrin-a (PFT-a) has also been reported to inhibit p53
function (Komarov et al., 1999). PFT-a has a chemical structure
entirely different from PFT-m; however, it is an equally suspect
chemical tool which undergoes rapid conversion to pifithrin-b
(PFT-b) (Figure 6C). The use of both PFT-a and PFT-b has
been discredited for over 10 years (Walton et al., 2005); however,
a Google Scholar search for PFT-a and p53 revealed 336 references published in 2016.
KRAS and Autophagy
Considerable efforts have been made to tackle the cancer driver
KRAS, a bona fide oncoprotein that lacks clearly druggable cavities or grooves, and a number of early studies concluded that
KRAS-mutant tumors become addicted to autophagy. However,
a combined group from Novartis and Pfizer recently demonstrated that RNAi-mediated knockdown of genes critical to autophagic function across 47 KRAS-mutant and wild-type cell lines
had no effect on cell growth irrespective of KRAS status (Eng
et al., 2016). Similarly, CRISPR knockout of genes involved in
autophagy, both in vitro, in cell lines and in animal models, had
no effect. Furthermore, chloroquine, a lysosomotropic agent
commonly used as a claimed chemical probe to inhibit autophagy function, and also a more potent analog thereof, were
shown to elicit antiproliferative effects in KRAS-mutant cancer
cell lines in the absence of a functioning autophagy pathway,
thereby devalidating the hypothesis that KRAS-mutant tumors
are addicted to autophagy and devalidating chloroquine as a
chemical probe for interrogating autophagy function (Eng et al.,
2016). This example further illustrates the need for the integrated
use of biological and chemical tools to test mechanistic hypotheses: the deficiencies of either approach can be highlighted by
the other.
Pan-Steroid Receptor Co-activator MCB-613
In some cases, particularly startling exemplars trigger lively
scientific debate among the medicinal chemistry and chemical
biology community. For example, MCB-613, a pan-steroid receptor co-activator (SRC) was reported to overstimulate cancer
cells leading to cell stress and death (Wang et al., 2015). But use
of MCB-613, and the related bis-chalcone class of compounds,
received criticism in the topical ‘‘In The Pipeline’’ blog (Lowe,
2016). Like PFT-m, MCB-613 is chemically reactive and derives
from a series of molecules (bis-chalcones) that have a long history of broad cell-based biological activity, most likely due to
non-specific covalent adduct formation with a plethora of cellular
proteins (Figure 6D). Critically important is the realization that
the use of molecules, such as PFT-a, PFT-m, or MCB-613, to
test specific biological hypotheses is fraught with danger owing
to the likelihood of confounding off-target biological activity.
Thus, the discovery of such molecules as hits in numerous biological screens is entirely unsurprising for the same reason,
and should trigger alarm bells to all concerned, including journal
referees and grant-funding bodies.
Probe Evolution
There are multiple examples where chemical probes have
evolved from what are initially fit-for-purpose, but not optimal,
‘‘pathfinder’’ molecules to what eventually are high-quality

Cancer Cell

Perspective
chemical probes suitable for use in cell-based and animal
studies (Workman and Collins, 2010). Despite this, biologists
commonly continue to use the earlier poorer-quality probes
which gather even more citations in a non-virtuous cycle. The
evolution of chemical probes used to study the roles of PI3
kinase is a useful exemplar. LY294002 (Figure 6E) was originally
described in 1994 as a PI3 kinase inhibitor, and its use has been
reported in 30,000 scientific publications. At the time of its initial
disclosure LY294002 represented the best available tool with
which to study the kinase function of PI3 kinase and it proved
to be an archetypal early pathfinder probe (Workman and
Collins, 2010). However, more recent research has revealed
major limitations of LY294002, most notably its weak affinity
for PI3 kinase (Ki = 1.6 mM) and its promiscuous off-target pharmacology beyond the kinome at concentrations required to elicit
PI3 kinase inhibition, including effects on the bromodomain
containing proteins BRD2, 3 and 4 (Dittmann et al., 2014). With
the discovery of more potent and selective PI3 kinase inhibitors,
such as pictilisib (GDC-0941), a pan-class I PI3K inhibitor; GDC0980, a dual PI3K/mTOR inhibitor; and idelalisib (GS-1101 or
CAL-101), a PI3Kd inhibitor (Yap et al., 2015), biologists should
no longer be using LY294002. However, entering PI3 kinase
and LY294002 into Google Scholar generated 1,190 results for
the year 2016 alone, and commercial vendors continue to sell
LY294002 as a PI3 kinase inhibitor.
The pathfinder probe ABT-737 was the first small molecule to
target the BH3 domain of the B cell lymphoma class of proteins
that regulate apoptosis. While ABT-737 had activity across
both pro- and anti-apoptotic family members, findings with this
compound and its successor ABT-263 (navitoclax) were critical
to the subsequent discovery and successful clinical development
of ABT-199 (venetoclax), which selectively inhibits the B cell lymphoma 2 (BCL2) family member. This story is now used as a case
study of chemical probe evolution on the not-for-profit expert review-based Chemical Probes Portal (www.chemicalprobes.org;
see later for more discussion) to illustrate how historic compounds can and should be superseded by improved chemical
probes (Chemical Probes Portal, 2017a, 2017b).
Select Your Chemical Probe Carefully
With the above considerations in mind, we recommend that, in
order to gain help and advice in selecting chemical tools appropriate for testing a biological hypothesis, and to avoid the pitfalls
described herein, biologists should consult with experienced
and expert medicinal chemists and/or chemical biologists
familiar with issues around chemical and pharmacological properties. Many authors have articulated the ideal attributes of
chemical tools and, to help biologists, we provide a checklist
of considerations (Box 3) and also guidance on dos and dont’s
(Figure 2). All attributes may not be immediately achievable
and an evolution of probe quality or ‘‘fitness’’ is to be expected,
particularly for unexplored protein classes where early pathfinder probes are valuable (Frye, 2010; Workman and Collins,
2010). In such cases, biological results should be interpreted
accordingly and the concomitant use of appropriate biological
tools is recommended to build confidence and consensus in
the robustness of experimental outcomes and the interpretation
thereof. Furthermore, as the quality of chemical probes against a
particular biological target evolves, it is important that the

biology community progressively adopts the new improved
probes for their studies to maximize the interpretability and value
of the generated data.
Recommendations for Probe Selection: 2017 and
Beyond
Use of suboptimal, or frankly poor, chemical probes is polluting
the scientific literature and wasting time and resources. Such
bad practice is contributing to concerns about the reproducibility
and robustness of scientific findings and the validation of biological targets (Collins and Tabak, 2014; Frye et al., 2015). Loose
standards in the design and use of chemical probes are leading
to potentially serious errors in biomedical research studies.
Over the last decade, both academic and industrial research
groups have dramatically increased their efforts to produce
chemical probes acting on a wide range of target proteins.
Many probes emerging from these efforts have fulfilled expectations, acting as powerful research tools to understand biology
and providing seeds to spur the development of new medicines.
But as the use of chemical probes has increased, it has become
clear that many such tools have significant limitations, and are
often compromised by fatal flaws.
It is quite common to see researchers continuing to use out-ofdate probes to investigate a target protein, when higher-quality
chemical probes already exist. In many instances, chemical
probes may affect proteins other than those claimed, often exhibiting a few critical or multiple off-target effects. With significant advances in chemoproteomics techniques, such as ABPP
(Willems et al., 2014), and greater coverage of the druggable
genome in broad screening panels, more examples are
emerging of off-target activity in protein classes entirely different
from the intended class, and this will likely increase as use of
broader profiling expands. As we have seen, there are examples
of drugs progressing to the clinic that are inactive against the
claimed biological target. In extreme cases, unfortunately not
at all uncommon, chemicals that are claimed as useful probes
may be indiscriminate in their actions, affecting a very large number of proteins in the cell and rendering them essentially useless
as tools for biomedical research. Urgent corrective action is
needed.
Although the volume of the call to improve selection and use
of chemical probes has been rising within the expert chemical
biology and medicinal chemistry communities, and through publications in those fields (Frye, 2010; Workman and Collins, 2010;
Bunnage et al., 2013; Blagg and Workman, 2014; Garbaccio and
Parnee, 2016), our particular purpose here is to reach out beyond
this expert group and increase awareness across the user community of biologists, including cancer researchers, who may unwittingly be promulgating bad practice with chemical probes.
On a more optimistic note, the chemical probe community recognizes the issues and is working toward better standards. The
biology community can help by consciously and critically selecting
the best tools for the job. This is important, not only to ensure that
the data generated within a biology team are relevant to the hypothesis under test but also to make certain that publications resulting from such studies lay solid foundations upon which others
can build: a fundamental tenet of scientific progress (Kaelin, 2017).
Key points in this article, captured as a checklist in Box 3 and
Figure 2 (see also Blagg and Workman, 2014; Arrowsmith et al.,
Cancer Cell 32, July 10, 2017 21

Cancer Cell

Perspective
2015), include the importance of experimental evidence for potency and selectivity. This requires evidence not only from cellfree biochemical assays, such as broad profiling against potential off-targets, but also critical assessment in multiple relevant
cellular assays and, if appropriate, whole animal models. Also,
to further minimize the risk of reaching false conclusions from
off-target effects, the use of carefully designed controls involving
at least two different chemical probes with distinct chemical
structures, as well as inactive analogs, is strongly recommended. Orthogonal biological and genetic approaches and controls
are also important (Figure 2).
Chemical probes need to dissolve well and be stable in water,
penetrate into cells, show clear evidence of target engagement
and relevant biochemical pathway modulation in cells, and be
readily available to researchers in pure form, for example from
specialist commercial vendors who can provide evidence of
identity and purity. Additional characteristics are needed if the
chemical is to be used for research in animals, which requires
features that are closer to those of a drug, such as distribution
to tissues and reasonable half-life.
Indeed, it is increasingly clear that in some respects the criteria
for high-quality chemical probes often need to be more stringent
than for a drug to be used in patients, especially in regard to selectivity. This is because it is necessary for some drugs to act on
several targets (polypharmacology) in order to deliver the desired
clinical benefit, whereas chemical probes need to be much more
selective to ask specific biological questions. It is often not appreciated by biologists that a considerable amount of work is required
to achieve a truly high-quality probe; chemical compounds identified by HTS are usually just the starting point and if used ‘‘as is’’
can be the source of many of the problems discussed here.
A noteworthy recent development has been the establishment
of the Chemical Probes Portal (Chemical Probes Portal, 2017c),
which provides the research community with expert guidance in
the selection and proper usage of chemical probes for specific
protein targets with inclusion of recommended probes and
crowdsourced comments, as well as information on historically
relevant compounds. This portal now includes over 400 probes
and rising, each of which is subject to expert peer review
comment and is accompanied by an inventory of relevant properties and guidance on their appropriate use. In addition, the
Chemistry in Cancer Research (CICR) community of the AACR
is sponsoring education sessions, exemplifying good practice
in the use of chemical probes, including at future AACR annual
meetings (American Association for Cancer Research, 2017).
We recommend the use of the Chemical Probes Portal, and
the checklist in Box 3 and Figure 2, so that researchers can
ask key questions about the quality of chemical probes. Both
should also be useful to journal editors and to peer reviewers
of publications and research grants. When new chemical probes
are submitted for publication, selection of appropriate reviewers
who are experienced in the discovery and application of such
tools is essential. We urge commercial vendors to provide accurate and up-to-date information on the properties of probes,
such as their selectivity and other fitness factors, and to make
available matched inactive control compounds.
We need to maximize the promise and minimize the peril of
chemical probes (Arrowsmith et al., 2015), and this requires the
broad research community to use high-quality chemical probes
22 Cancer Cell 32, July 10, 2017

that have been critiqued with equivalent rigor to biological reagents. It is time to put our house in order – and biologists as
well as chemists have an important responsibility to do so.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank the anonymous reviewers of this manuscript for their helpful and
constructive comments, some of which have been included in their entirety.
We thank our colleague, Nicky Evans, for editorial assistance. This work was
supported by Cancer Research UK (CRUK; grant no. C309/A11566). Paul
Workman is a Cancer Research UK Life Fellow. We also acknowledge
CRUK funding to the CRUK Center and NHS funding to the NIHR Biomedical
Research Center, both at The Institute of Cancer Research (ICR) and the Royal
Marsden NHS Trust. We are employees of ICR which has commercial interests
in a number of drug discovery and development programs with multiple
companies. We are also members of the Scientific Advisory Board, and Paul
Workman is a Board Director of the Chemical Probes Portal. We thank many
colleagues and collaborators for helpful discussions.
REFERENCES
American Association for Cancer Research. (2015). Proceedings: AACR 106th
Annual Meeting 2015. Philadelphia. Cancer Res. 75, 15 Supplement.
American Association for Cancer Research. (2017). CICR: general resources. Resources for understanding the proper use of chemical tools in
cancer research. http://www.aacr.org/MEMBERSHIP/PAGES/SCIENTIFIC%
20WORKING%20GROUPS/CICR-GENERAL-RESOURCES.ASPX#.WKTFQ_
4SHbi. Accessed March 16, 2017.
Arrowsmith, C.H., Audia, J.E., Austin, C., Baell, J., Bennett, J., Blagg, J., Bountra, C., Brennan, P.E., Brown, P.J., Bunnage, M.E., et al. (2015). The promise
and peril of chemical probes. Nat. Chem. Biol. 11, 536–541.
Ashworth, A. (2008). A synthetic lethal therapeutic approach: poly(ADP) ribose
polymerase inhibitors for the treatment of cancers deficient in DNA doublestrand break repair. J. Clin. Oncol. 26, 3785–3790.
Baell, J.B., and Holloway, G.A. (2010). New substructure filters for removal of
pan assay interference compounds (PAINS) from screening libraries and for
their exclusion in bioassays. J. Med. Chem. 53, 2719–2740.
Baell, J., and Walters, M.A. (2014). Chemical con artists foil drug discovery.
Nature 513, 481–483.
Baker, M. (2013). Fragment-based lead discovery grows up. Nat. Rev. Drug
Discov. 12, 5–7.
Banerji, U., and Workman, P. (2016). Critical parameters in targeted drug
development: the pharmacological audit trail. Semin. Oncol. 43, 436–445.
Barelier, S., Sterling, T., O’Meara, M.J., and Shoichet, B.K. (2015). The
recognition of identical ligands by unrelated proteins. ACS Chem. Biol. 10,
2772–2784.
Baud, M.G., Lin-Shiao, E., Cardote, T., Tallant, C., Pschibul, A., Chan, K.H.,
Zengerle, M., Garcia, J.R., Kwan, T.T., Ferguson, F.M., and Ciulli, A. (2014).
A bump-and-hole approach to engineer controlled selectivity of BET bromodomain chemical probes. Science 346, 638–641.
Begley, C.G., and Ellis, L.M. (2012). Drug development: raise standards for
preclinical cancer research. Nature 483, 531–533.
Bishop, A.C., Ubersax, J.A., Petsch, D.T., Matheos, D.P., Gray, N.S., Blethrow,
J., Shimizu, E., Tsien, J.Z., Schultz, P.G., Rose, M.D., et al. (2000). A
chemical switch for inhibitor-sensitive alleles of any protein kinase. Nature
407, 395–401.
Blagg, J. (2006). Structure-activity relationships for in vitro and in vivo toxicity.
Annu. Rep. Med. Chem. 41, 353–368.
Blagg, J. (2010). Structural alerts for toxicity. In Burger’s Medicinal Chemistry
and Drug Discovery, D.J. Abraham and D.P. Rotella, eds. (Wiley), pp. 301–334.
Blagg, J., and Workman, P. (2014). Chemical biology approaches to target
validation in cancer. Curr. Opin. Pharmacol. 17, 87–100.
Blevitt, J.M., Hack, M.D., Herman, K.L., Jackson, P.F., Krawczuk, P.J., Lebsack, A.D., Liu, A.X., Mirzadegan, T., Nelen, M.I., Patrick, A.N., et al. (2017).

Cancer Cell

Perspective
Structural basis of small-molecule aggregate induced inhibition of a protein–
protein interaction. J. Med. Chem. 60, 3511–3517.

Doudna, J.A., and Charpentier, E. (2014). The new frontier of genome engineering with CRISPR-Cas9. Science 346, 1258096.

Blum, L.C., and Reymond, J.L. (2009). 970 million druglike small molecules for
virtual screening in the chemical universe database GDB-13. J. Am. Chem.
Soc. 131, 8732–8733.

Ember, S.W.J., Zhu, J.-Y., Olesen, S.H., Martin, M.P., Becker, A., Berndt, N.,
Georg, G.I., and Schonbrunn, E. (2014). Acetyl-lysine binding site of bromodomain-containing protein 4 (BRD4) interacts with diverse kinase inhibitors. ACS
Chem. Biol. 9, 1160–1171.

Bondeson, D.P., Mares, A., Smith, I.E.D., Ko, E., Campos, S., Miah, A.H., Mulholland, K.E., Routly, N., Buckley, D.L., Gustafson, J.L., et al. (2015). Catalytic
in vivo protein knockdown by small molecule PROTACs. Nat. Chem. Biol. 11,
611–617.
Bordeaux, J., Welsh, A.K., Agarwal, S., Killiam, E., Baquero, M.T., Hanna, J.A.,
Anagnostou, V.K., and Rimm, D.L. (2010). Antibody validation. BioTechniques
48, 197–209.
Bottcher, T. (2016). An additive definition of molecular complexity. J. Chem.
Inf. Model. 56, 462–470.
Bowes, J., Brown, A.J., Hamon, J., Jarolimek, W., Sridhar, A., Waldron, G., and
Whitebread, S. (2012). Reducing safety-related drug attrition: the use of in vitro
pharmacological profiling. Nat. Rev. Drug Discov. 11, 909–922.
Bruns, R.F., and Wilson, I.A. (2012). Rules for identifying potentially reactive or
promiscuous compounds. J. Med. Chem. 55, 9763–9772.
Bunnage, M.E., Chekler, E.L., and Jones, L.H. (2013). Target validation using
chemical probes. Nat. Chem. Biol. 9, 195–199.
Cancer Cell Line Encyclopedia Consortium; The Genomics of Drug Sensitivity
in Cancer Consortium (2015). Pharmacogenomic agreement between two
cancer cell line data sets. Nature 528, 84–87.
Capuzzi, S.J., Muratov, E.N., and Tropsha, A. (2017). Phantom PAINS:
problems with the utility of alerts for pan-assay interference compounds.
J. Chem. Inf. Model. 57, 417–427.
Chakraborty, M., Joo Jin, K., Glover, S.A., and Novak, M. (2010). Characterization of the 4-(Benzothiazol-2-yl)phenylnitrenium ion from a putative metabolite
of a model antitumor drug. J. Org. Chem. 75, 5296–5304.
Chemical Probes Portal. (2017a). Portal News: Rigorous evaluation of
chemical probes advances drug discovery efforts. http://us12.campaignarchive2.com/?u=26d744443f0b394b8c0a3ba6d&id=9c39807005#mctoc1.
Accessed March 16, 2017.
Chemical Probes Portal. (2017b). Historic Compounds. http://www.
chemicalprobes.org/historic-compounds. Accessed March 16, 2017.
Chemical Probes Portal. (2017c). Homepage. http://www.chemicalprobes.org.
Accessed March 16, 2017.
Cho, H., Du, X., Rizzi, J.P., Liberzon, E., Chakraborty, A.A., Gao, W., Carvo, I.,
Signoretti, S., Bruick, R.K., Josey, J.A., et al. (2016). On-target efficacy of a
HIF-2a antagonist in preclinical kidney cancer models. Nature 539, 107–111.

Eng, C.H., Wang, Z., Tkach, D., Toral-Barza, L., Ugwonali, S., Liu, S., Fitzgerald, S.L., George, E., Frias, E., Cochran, N., et al. (2016). Macroautophagy is
dispensable for growth of KRAS mutant tumors and chloroquine efficacy.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 113, 182–187.
Engel, J., Lategahn, J., and Rauh, D. (2015). Hope and disappointment: covalent inhibitors to overcome drug resistance in non-small cell lung cancer. ACS
Med. Chem. Lett. 7, 2–5.
Enthammer, M., Papadakis, E.S., Gachet, M.S., Deutsch, M., Schwaiger, S.,
Koziel, K., Ashraf, M.I., Khalid, S., Wolber, G., Packham, G., et al. (2013). Isolation of a novel thioflavin s–derived compound that inhibits bag-1–mediated
protein interactions and targets BRAF inhibitor–resistant cell lines. Mol. Cancer
Ther. 12, 2400–2414.
Eurofins/CEREP. (2017). Standard profiles. http://www.cerep.fr/cerep/users/
pages/catalog/profiles/catalog.asp. Accessed March 16, 2017.
European Monoclonal Antibodies Network. (2017). EuroMabNet: European
monoclonal antibodies network. https://www.euromabnet.com/. Accessed
May 16, 2017.
Evans, L.E., Cheeseman, M.D., Yahya, N., and Jones, K. (2015). Investigating
apoptozole as a chemical probe for HSP70 inhibition. PLoS One 10, e0140006.
Extance, A. (2015). Pfizer’s Response to Compound Fraud Spotlights Quality
Issues. RSC Chemistry World, 7th December 2015.
Filippakopoulos, P., and Knapp, S. (2014). Targeting bromodomains: epigenetic readers of lysine acetylation. Nat. Rev. Drug Discov. 13, 337–356.
Filippakopoulos, P., Qi, J., Picaud, S., Shen, Y., Smith, W.B., Fedorov, O.,
Morse, E.M., Keates, T., Hickman, T.T., Felletar, I., et al. (2010). Selective inhibition of BET bromodomains. Nature 468, 1067–1073.
Finlay, M.R., Anderton, M., Ashton, S., Ballard, P., Bethel, P.A., Box, M.R.,
Bradbury, R.H., Brown, S.J., Butterworth, S., Campbell, A., et al. (2014). Discovery of a potent and selective EGFR inhibitor (AZD9291) of both sensitizing
and T790M resistance mutations that spares the wild type form of the receptor.
J. Med. Chem. 57, 8249–8267.
Fischer, E.S., Bohm, K., Lydeard, J.R., Yang, H., Stadler, M.B., Cavadini, S.,
Nagel, J., Serluca, F., Acker, V., Lingaraju, G.M., et al. (2014). Structure
of the DDB1-CRBN E3 ubiquitin ligase in complex with thalidomide. Nature
512, 49–53.

€ller, S., O’Mahony, A., Fedorov, O., Filippakopoulos, P., Hunt,
Ciceri, P., Mu
J.P., Lasater, E.A., Pallares, G., Picaud, S., Wells, C., et al. (2014). Dual
kinase-bromodomain inhibitors for rationally designed polypharmacology.
Nat. Chem. Biol. 10, 305–312.

Frearson, J., and Wyatt, P. (2010). Drug discovery in academia: the third way.
Expert Opin. Drug Discov. 5, 909–919.

Collins, F.S., and Tabak, L.A. (2014). Policy: NIH plans to enhance reproducibility. Nature 505, 612–613.

Frye, S., Crosby, M., Edwards, T., and Juliano, R. (2011). US Academic drug
discovery. Nat. Rev. Drug Discov. 10, 409–410.

n, R., Avram, S., Vianello, R., and Bologa, C. (2014). Exploring the
Curpa
biological promiscuity of high-throughput screening hits through DFT calculations. Bioorg. Med. Chem. 22, 2461–2468.

Frye, S.V., Arkin, M.R., Arrowsmith, C.H., Conn, P.J., Glicksman, M.A., HullRyde, E.A., and Slusher, B.S. (2015). Tackling reproducibility in academic
preclinical drug discovery. Nat. Rev. Drug Discov. 14, 733–734.

Dale, T., Clarke, P.A., Esdar, C., Waalboer, D., Adeniji-Popoola, O., Ortiz-Ruiz,
M., Mallinger, A., Samant, R.S., Czodrowski, P., Musil, D., et al. (2015). Identification of a potent and selective chemical probe for exploring the role of Mediator complex-associated protein kinases CDK8 and CDK19 in human disease.
Nat. Chem. Biol. 11, 973–980.

Fu, Y., Sander, J., Reyon, D., Cascio, V.M., and Joung, J.K. (2014). Improving
CRISPR-Cas nuclease specificity using truncated guide RNAs. Nat. Biotechnol. 32, 279–284.

de Haard, H.J., van Neer, N., Reurs, A., Hufton, S.E., Roovers, R.C., Henderikx,
P., de Bruı̈ne, A.P., Arends, J.-W., and Hoogenboom, H.R. (1999). A large nonimmunized human fab fragment phage library that permits rapid isolation and
kinetic analysis of high affinity antibodies. J. Biol. Chem. 274, 18218–18230.
€lth Savitski, M.,
Dittmann, A., Werner, T., Chung, C.-W., Savitski, M.M., Fa
Grandi, P., Hopf, C., Lindon, M., Neubauer, G., Prinjha, R.K., et al. (2014).
The commonly used PI3-kinase probe LY294002 is an inhibitor of BET bromodomains. ACS Chem. Biol. 9, 495–502.

Frye, S.V. (2010). The art of the chemical probe. Nat. Chem. Biol. 6, 159–161.

Garbaccio, R.M., and Parnee, E.R. (2016). The impact of chemical probes
in drug discovery: a pharmaceutical industry perspective. Cell Chem. Biol.
23, 10–17.
Gleeson, M.P., Hersey, A., Montanari, D., and Overington, J. (2011). Probing
the links between in vitro potency, ADMET and physicochemical parameters.
Nat. Rev. Drug Discov. 10, 197–208.
Griffith, M., Griffith, O.L., Coffman, A.C., Weible, J.V., McMichael, J.F., Spies,
N.C., Koval, J., Das, I., Callaway, M.B., Eldred, J.M., et al. (2013). DGIdb: mining the druggable genome. Nat. Methods 10, 1209–1210.

Cancer Cell 32, July 10, 2017 23

Cancer Cell

Perspective
Hall, J. (2004). Unravelling the general properties of siRNAs: strength in
numbers and lessons from the past. Nat. Genet. 5, 552–557.

to evaluate the proteome-wide selectivity of covalent kinase inhibitors. Nat.
Chem. Biol. 10, 760–767.

Hall, R.J., Mortenson, P.N., and Murray, C.W. (2014). Efficient exploration
of chemical space by fragment-based screening. Prog. Biophys. Mol. Biol.
116, 82–91.

Lauer, M. (2016). Authentication of key biological and/or chemical resources
in NIH grant applications. Open Mike. https://nexus.od.nih.gov/all/2016/01/
29/authentication-of-key-biological-andor-chemical-resources-in-nih-grantapplications. Accessed May 13, 2017.

Hancox, J.C., McPate, M.J., El Harchi, A., and Zhang, Y.H. (2008). The hERG
potassium channel and hERG screening for drug-induced torsades de
pointes. Pharmacol. Ther. 119, 118–132.

Leach, A.R., and Hann, M.M. (2011). Molecular complexity and fragmentbased drug discovery: ten years on. Curr. Opin. Chem. Biol. 15, 489–496.

€, G.M. (2012). Finding the sweet spot: the role of naHann, M.M., and Keseru
ture and nurture in medicinal chemistry. Nat. Rev. Drug Discov. 11, 355–365.

Leeson, P.D., and Springthorpe, B. (2007). The influence of drug-like concepts
on decision making in medicinal chemistry. Nat. Rev. Drug Discov. 6, 881–890.

Hann, M.M., Leach, A.R., and Harper, G. (2001). Molecular complexity and its
impact on the probability of finding leads for drug discovery. J. Chem. Inf.
Model. 41, 856–864.

Lin, A., Giuliano, C.J., Sayles, N.M., and Sheltzer, J.M. (2017). CRISPR/Cas9
mutagenesis invalidates a putative cancer dependency targeted in on-going
clinical trials. Elife 6, e24179.

Højfeldt, J.W., Agger, K., and Helin, K. (2014). Histone lysine demethylases as
targets for anticancer therapy. Nat. Rev. Drug Discov. 12, 917–930.
Hopkins, A.L., and Groom, C.R. (2002). The druggable genome. Nat. Rev. Drug
Discov. 1, 727–730.
Huber, K.V.M. (2017). Target engagement: shining a light. Nat. Chem. Biol. 13,
133–134.
Irwin, J.J., Duan, D., Torosyan, H., Doak, A.K., Ziebart, K.T., Sterling, T., Tumanian, G., and Shoichet, B.K. (2015). An aggregation advisor for ligand discovery. J. Med. Chem. 58, 7076–7087.
Janzen, W.P. (2014). Screening technologies for small molecule discovery: the
state of the art. Chem. Biol. 21, 1162–1170.
Jones, A.M., Westwood, I.M., Osborne, J.D., Matthews, T.P., Cheeseman,
M.D., Rowlands, M.G., Jeganathan, F., Burke, R., Lee, D., Kadi, N., et al.
(2016). A fragment-based approach applied to a highly flexible target: insights
and challenges towards the inhibition of HSP70 isoforms. Sci. Rep. 6, 34701.
Kaelin, W.G. (2017). Common pitfalls in preclinical cancer target validation.
Nat. Rev. Cancer. http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/nrc.2017.32.
Kato, M., Hammam, M.A.S., Taniguchi, T., Suga, Y., and Monde, K. (2016).
What is the true structure of D609, a widely used lipid related enzyme inhibitor?
Org. Lett. 18, 768–771.

Liu, X., Shi, Y., Maag, D.X., Palma, J.P., Patterson, M.J., Ellis, P.A., Surber,
B.W., Ready, D.B., Soni, N.B., Ladror, U.S., et al. (2012). Iniparib nonselectively modifies cysteine-containing proteins in tumor cells and is not a bona
fide PARP inhibitor. Clin. Cancer Res. 18, 510–523.
Liu, Q., Sabnis, Y., Zhao, Z., Zhang, T., Buhrlage, S.J., Jones, L.H., and Gray,
N.S. (2013). Developing irreversible inhibitors of the protein kinase cysteinome.
Chem. Biol. 20, 146–159.
Lounkine, E., Keiser, M.J., Whitebread, S., Mikhailov, D., Hamon, J., Jenkins,
J.L., Lavan, P., Weber, E., Doak, A.K., Cote, S., et al. (2012). Large-scale prediction and testing of drug activity on side-effect targets. Nature 486, 361–367.
Lowe, D. (2016). In the pipeline. What does one do with these? http://blogs.
sciencemag.org/pipeline/archives/2016/01/19/what-does-one-do-with-these.
Lowe, D. (2017). In the pipeline. No easy road to getting rid of PAINS. http://blogs.
sciencemag.org/pipeline/archives/2017/02/07/no-easy-road-to-getting-rid-ofpains.
McAllister, T.E., England, K.S., Hopkinson, R.J., Brennan, P.E., Kawamura, A.,
and Schofield, C.J. (2016). Recent progress in histone demethylase inhibitors.
J. Med. Chem. 59, 1308–1329.
McGovern, S.L., Helfand, B.T., Feng, B., and Shoichet, B.K. (2003). A specific
mechanism of nonspecific inhibition. J. Med. Chem. 46, 4265–4272.

Kawamura, T., Kawatani, M., Muroi, M., Kondoh, Y., Futamura, Y., Aono, H.,
Tanaka, M., Honda, K., and Osada, H. (2016). Proteomic profiling of smallmolecule inhibitors reveals dispensability of MTH1 for cancer survival. Sci.
Rep. 6, 26521.

Muroi, M., Sayaka Kazami, S., Noda, K., Kondo, H., Takayama, H., Kawatani,
M., Usui, T., and Osada, H. (2010). Application of proteomic profiling based on
2D-DIGE for classification of compounds according to the mechanism of action. Chem. Biol. 17, 460–470.

Kasap, C., Elemento, O., and Kapoor, T.M. (2014). DrugTargetSeqR: a genomics- and CRISPR-Cas9–based method to analyze drug targets. Nat. Chem.
Biol. 10, 626–628.

National Cancer Institute. (2017). Office of Cancer Clinical Proteomics
Research Antibody Portal. https://antibodies.cancer.gov/apps/site/default.
Accessed March 16, 2017.

Kettle, J.G., Alwan, H., Bista, M., Breed, J., Davies, N.L., Eckersley, K., Fillery,
S., Foote, K.M., Goodwin, L., Jones, D.R., et al. (2016). Potent and selective
inhibitors of MTH1 probe its role in cancer cell survival. J. Med. Chem. 59,
2346–2361.

Ndubaku, C.O., Crawford, J.J., Drobnick, J., Aliagas, I., Campbell, D., Dong,
P., Dornan, L.M., Duron, S., Epler, J., Gazzard, L., et al. (2015). Design of selective PAK1 inhibitor G-5555: improving properties by employing an unorthodox low-pKa polar moiety. ACS Med. Chem. Lett. 6, 1241–1246.

Klaeger, S., Gohlke, B., Perrin, J., Gupta, V., Heinzlmeir, S., Helm, D., Qiao, H.,
Bergamini, G., Handa, H., Savitski, M.M., et al. (2016). Chemical proteomics
reveals ferrochelatase as a common off-target of kinase inhibitors. ACS
Chem. Biol. 11, 1245–1254.

Nicodeme, E., Jeffrey, K.L., Schaefer, U., Beinke, S., Dewell, S., Chung, C.-W.,
Chandwani, R., Marazzi, I., Wilson, P., Coste, H., et al. (2010). Suppression of
inflammation by a synthetic histone mimic. Nature 468, 1119–1123.

Komarov, P.G., Komarova, E.A., Kondratov, R.V., Christov-Tselkov, K., Coon,
J.S., Chernov, M.V., and Gudkov, A.V. (1999). A chemical inhibitor of p53
that protects mice from the side effects of cancer therapy. Science 285,
1733–1737.

Oprea, T.I., Bologa, C.G., Boyer, S., Curpan, R.F., Glen, R.C., Hopkins, A.L.,
Lipinski, C.A., Marshall, G.R., Martin, Y.C., Ostopovici-Halip, L., et al. (2009).
A crowdsourcing evaluation of the NIH chemical probes. Nat. Chem. Biol. 5,
441–447.

Kruidenier, L., Chung, C.-W., Cheng, Z., Liddle, J., Che, K., Joberty, G., Bantscheff, M., Bountra, C., Bridges, A., Diallo, H., et al. (2012). A selective jumonji
H3K27 demethylase inhibitor modulates the proinflammatory macrophage
response. Nature 488, 404–408.

Ortiz Torres, I., Kuchenbecker, K.M., Nnadi, C.I., Fletterick, R.J., Kelly, M.J.,
and Fujimori, D.G. (2015). Histone demethylase KDM5A is regulated by
its reader domain through a positive-feedback mechanism. Nat. Commun.
6, 6204.

Lamb, J., Crawford, E.D., Peck, D., Modell, J.W., Blat, I.C., Wrobel, M.J.,
Lerner, J., Brunet, J.-P., Subramanian, A., Ross, K.N., et al. (2006). The Connectivity Map: using gene-expression signatures to connect small molecules,
genes, and disease. Science 313, 1929–1935.

Overington, J.P., Al-Lazikani, B., and Hopkins, A.L. (2006). How many drug targets are there? Nat. Rev. Drug Discov. 5, 993–996.

Lanning, B.R., Whitby, L.R., Dix, M.M., Douhan, J., Gilbert, A.M., Hett, E.C.,
Johnson, T.O., Joslyn, C., Kath, J.C., Niessen, S., et al. (2014). A road map

24 Cancer Cell 32, July 10, 2017

Parker, C.G., Galmozzi, A., Wang, Y., Correia, B.E., Sasaki, K., Joslyn, C.M.,
Kim, A.S., Cavallaro, C.L., Lawrence, R.M., Johnson, S.R., et al. (2017). Ligand
and target discovery by fragment-based screening in human cells. Cell 168,
527–541.

Cancer Cell

Perspective
Patel, A.G., De Lorenzo, S.B., Flatten, K.S., Poirier, G.G., and Kaufmann, S.H.
(2012). Failure of iniparib to inhibit poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase in vitro. Clin.
Cancer Res. 18, 1655–1662.
Persengiev, S.P., Zhu, X., and Green, M.R. (2004). Nonspecific, concentrationdependent stimulation and repression of mammalian gene expression by small
interfering RNAs (siRNAs). RNA 10, 12–18.
Peters, J.U., Schnider, P., Mattei, P., and Kansy, M. (2009). Pharmacological
promiscuity: dependence on compound properties and target specificity in a
set of recent Roche compounds. ChemMedChem 4, 680–686.
Polier, S., Samant, R.S., Clarke, P.A., Workman, P., Prodromou, C., and Pearl,
L.H. (2013). ATP-competitive inhibitors block protein kinase recruitment to the
Hsp90-Cdc37 system. Nat. Chem. Biol. 9, 307–312.
Ponten, F., Jirstrom, K., and Uhlen, M. (2008). The human protein Atlas — a
tool for pathology. J. Pathol. 216, 387–393.

Strom, E., Sathe, S., Komarov, P.G., Chernova, O.B., Pavlovska, I.,
Shyshynova, I., Bosykh, D.A., Burdelya, L.G., Macklis, R.M., Skaliter, R.,
et al. (2006). Small-molecule inhibitor of p53 binding to mitochondria protects
mice from gamma radiation. Nat. Chem. Biol. 2, 474–479.
Structural Genomics Consortium (2011). Cerep to build epigenetics screening
and profiling laboratory in Toronto. http://www.thesgc.org/news/SGC_Cerep_
PR_June13. Accessed March 16, 2017.
Structural Genomics Consortium (2017). GSK-LSD1 A chemical probe for
LSD1. http://www.thesgc.org/chemical-probes/GSK-LSD1. Accessed March
17, 2017.
Su, Z., Wang, F., Lee, J.H., Stephens, K.E., Papazyan, R., Voronina, E., Krautkramer, K.A., Raman, A., Thorpe, J.J., Boersma, M.D., et al. (2016). Reader
domain specificity and lysine demethylase-4 family function. Nat. Commun.
7, 13387.

Powers, M.V., Jones, K., Barillari, C., Westwood, I., van Montford, R.L.M., and
Workman, P. (2010). Targeting HSP70: the second potentially druggable heat
shock protein and molecular chaperone? Cell Cycle 9, 1542–1550.

Sushko, I., Salmina, E., Potemkin, V.A., Poda, G., and Tetko, I.V. (2012).
ToxAlerts: a web server of structural alerts for toxic chemicals and compounds
with potential adverse reactions. J. Chem. Inf. Model. 52, 2310–2316.

Prinz, F., Schlange, T., and Asadullah, K. (2011). Believe it or not: how much
can we rely on published data on potential drug targets? Nat. Rev. Drug Discov. 10, 712.

Swinney, D.C., and Anthony, J. (2011). How were new medicines discovered?
Nat. Rev. Drug Discov. 10, 507–519.

Roncador, G., Engel, P., Maestre, L., Anderson, A.P., Cordell, J.L., Cragg,
M.S., Serbec, V.C., Jones, M., Lisnic, V.J., Kremer, L., et al. (2016). The European antibody network’s practical guide to finding and validating suitable antibodies for research. MAbs 8, 27–36.
Rothman, R.B., Baumann, M.H., Savage, J.E., Rauser, L., McBride, A.,
Hufeisen, S.J., and Roth, B.L. (2000). Evidence for possible involvement of
5-HT(2B) receptors in the cardiac valvulopathy associated with fenfluramine
and other serotonergic medications. Circulation 102, 2836–2841.
Santos, R., Ursu, O., Gaulton, A., Bento, A.P., Donadi, R.S., Bologa, C.G.,
Karlsson, A., Al-Lazikani, B., Hersey, A., Oprea, T.I., et al. (2017). A comprehensive map of molecular drug targets. Nat. Rev. Drug Discov. 16, 19–34.
ı́k, V., Wagner, B.K., and Clemons, P.A. (2013). Target
Schenone, M., Danc
identification and mechanism of action in chemical biology and drug discovery. Nat. Chem. Biol. 9, 232–240.
Seashore-Ludlow, B., Rees, M.G., Cheah, J.H., Cokol, M., Price, E.V., Coletti,
M.E., Jones, V., Bodycombe, N.E., Soule, C.K., Gould, J., et al. (2015). Harnessing connectivity in a large-scale small-molecule sensitivity dataset. Cancer Discov. 5, 1210–1223.
Sells, T.B., Chau, R., Ecsedy, J.A., Gershman, R.E., Hoar, K., Huck, J., Janowick, D.A., Kadambi, V.J., LeRoy, P.J., Stirling, M., et al. (2015). MLN8054 and
alisertib (MLN8237): discovery of selective oral aurora a inhibitors. ACS Med.
Chem. Lett. 6, 630–634.
Sharp, A., Crabb, S.J., Johnson, P.W., Hague, A., Cutress, R., Townsend, P.A.,
Ganesan, A., and Packham, G. (2009). Thioflavin S (NSC71948) interferes with
Bcl-2-associated athanogene (BAG-1)-mediated protein-protein interactions.
J. Pharmacol. Exp. Ther. 331, 680–689.
Simon, G.M., Niphakis, M.J., and Cravatt, B.F. (2013). Determining target
engagement in living systems. Nat. Chem. Biol. 9, 200–205.
Sinja, G. (2014). Downfall of iniparib: a PARP inhibitor that doesn’t inhibit PARP
after all. J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 106, djt447.
Steele, A.J., Prentice, A.G., Hoffbrand, A.V., Yogashangary, B.C., Hart, S.M.,
Lowdell, M.W., Samuel, E.R., North, J.M., Nacheva, E.P., Chanalaris, A.,
et al. (2009). 2-Phenylacetylenesulfonamide (PAS) induces p53-independent
apoptotic killing of B-chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) cells. Blood 114,
1217–1225.

}, G.M. (2013). Contributions of molecular properties to
Tarcsay, Á., and Keseru
drug promiscuity. J. Med. Chem. 56, 1789–1795.
Uhlen, M., Bandrowski, A., Carr, S., Edwards, A., Ellenberg, J., Lundberg, E.,
Rimm, D.L., Rodriguez, H., Hiltke, T., Snyder, M., and Yamamoto, T. (2016). A
proposal for validation of antibodies. Nat Methods 13, 823–827.
Vangamudi, B., Paul, T.A., Shah, P.K., Kost-Alimova, M., Nottebaum, L., Shi,
X., Zhan, Y., Leo, E., Mahadeshwar, H.S., Protopopov, A., et al. (2015). The
SMARCA2/4 ATPase domain surpasses the bromodomain as a drug target
in SWI/SNF-mutant cancers: insights from cDNA rescue and PFI-3 inhibitor
studies. Cancer Res. 75, 3865–3878.
Walton, S.P., Stephanopoulos, G.N., Yarmush, M.L., and Roth, C.M. (2001).
Thermodynamic and kinetic characterization of antisense oligodeoxynucleotide binding to a structured mRNA. Biophys. J. 82, 366–377.
Walton, M.I., Wilson, S.C., Hardcastle, I.R., Mirza, A.R., and Workman, P.
(2005). An evaluation of the ability of pifithrin-alpha and -beta to inhibit p53
function in two wild-type p53 human tumor cell lines. Mol. Cancer Ther. 4,
1369–1377.
Wang, L., Yu, Y., Chow, D.C., Yan, F., Hsu, C.C., Stossi, F., Mancini, M.A.,
Palzkill, T., Liao, L., Zhou, S., et al. (2015). Characterization of a steroid receptor coactivator small molecule stimulator that overstimulates cancer cells and
leads to cell stress and death. Cancer Cell 28, 240–252.
Willems, L.I., Overkleeft, H.S., and van Kasteren, S.I. (2014). Current developments in activity-based protein profiling. Bioconjug. Chem. 25, 1181–1191.
Williams, D.R., Ko, S.-K., Park, S., Lee, M.-R., and Shin, I. (2008).
An apoptosis-inducing small molecule that binds to heat shock protein 70.
Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 47, 7466–7469.
Winter, G.E., Buckley, D.L., Paulk, J., Roberts, J.M., Souza, A., Dhe-Paganon,
S., and Bradner, J.E. (2015). Phthalimide conjugation as a strategy for in vivo
target protein degradation. Science 343, 1376–1381.
Workman, P., and Collins, I. (2010). Probing the probes: fitness factors for
small molecule tools. Chem. Biol. 17, 561–577.
Yap, T.A., Bjerke, L., Clarke, P.A., and Workman, P. (2015). Drugging PI3K
in cancer: refining targets and therapeutic strategies. Curr. Opin. Pharmacol.
23, 98–107.

Cancer Cell 32, July 10, 2017 25

