Research Article

Prolyl Isomerase Cyclophilin A Regulation of Janus-Activated
Kinase 2 and the Progression of Human Breast Cancer
Jiamao Zheng, Jennifer E. Koblinski, Laura V. Dutson, Yvonne B. Feeney, and Charles V. Clevenger
Breast Cancer Program, Robert H. Lurie Comprehensive Cancer Center and Department of Pathology,
Northwestern University, Chicago, Illinois

Abstract
The activation of the Janus-activated kinase 2 (Jak2) tyrosine
kinase following ligand binding has remained incompletely
characterized at the mechanistic level. We report that the
peptidyl-prolyl isomerase (PPI) cyclophilin A (CypA), which is
implicated in the regulation of protein conformation, is
necessary for the prolactin (PRL)-induced activation of Jak2
and the progression of human breast cancer. A direct
correlation was observed between the levels or activity of
CypA and the extent of PRL-induced signaling and gene
expression. Loss of PRLr-CypA binding, following treatment
with the PPI inhibitor cyclosporine A (CsA), or overexpression
of a dominant-negative PRLr mutant (P334A) resulted in a
loss of PRLr/Jak2–mediated signaling. In vitro, CsA treatment
of breast cancer cells inhibited their growth, motility,
invasion, and soft agar colony formation. In vivo, CsA treatment of nude mice xenografted with breast cancer cells
induced tumor necrosis and completely inhibited metastasis.
These studies reveal that a CypA-mediated conformational
change within the PRLr/Jak2 complex is required for PRLinduced transduction and function and indicate that the
inhibition of prolyl isomerases may be a novel therapeutic
strategy in the treatment of human breast cancer. [Cancer Res
2008;68(19):7769–78]

Introduction
Peptidyl-prolyl isomerases (PPI) are a family of enzymes that
catalyze the cis-trans interconversion of imide bonds of proline
residues (1). One member of this family, cyclophilin A (CypA),
was initially identified as the primary cytosolic receptor of
the immunosuppressive drug cyclosporine A (CsA; ref. 2). The
immunosuppressive activity of CsA is thought to be mediated by
the engagement of calcineurin by the CsA-CypA complex (3), an
observation supported by the finding that CypA knockout mice are
resistant to immunosuppression by CsA (4). As a PPI, CypA has
been found to assist in protein folding in vivo (5). Several lines of
research, however, have revealed that CypA and other PPIs may
function as molecular signaling ‘‘switches’’ (6). Indeed, it has been
shown that PPI activity promotes viral replication and infection of
HIV (7), modulates Itk and Crk signaling (8, 9), regulates the pore
opening of a neurotransmitter-gated ion channel (10), functions

Note: Supplementary data for this article are available at Cancer Research Online
(http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/).
Requests for reprints: Charles V. Clevenger, Department of Pathology,
Northwestern University, Lurie 4-107, 303 East Superior Street, Chicago, IL 60611.
Phone: 312-503-5750; Fax: 312-503-0095; E-mail: clevenger@northwestern.edu.
I2008 American Association for Cancer Research.
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-0639

www.aacrjournals.org

as a molecular timer for phage infection (11), and controls transcription factor activity (12).
Additional data also suggest that CypA may contribute to the
pathology of human malignancy. CypA is overexpressed in a large
number of lung (13), pancreatic (14), and oral squamous cancer
cells and tissues (15). Significantly, in a case cohort of 25,000
women who had received CsA as therapy for renal and cardiac
allografts, a reduction in the incidence of breast cancer of up to
50% in the CsA-treated group was noted during a 10-year follow-up
period. Indeed, in their first year of therapy, the CsA-treated cohort
showed a 90% reduction in the incidence of breast cancer (16).
Taken together, these data suggest that CypA may play an important role in tumorigenesis and serve as a target for PPI inhibitors
in the oncologic setting.
The important role of the hormone prolactin (PRL) in the
development and progression of breast cancer has been supported
by epidemiologic studies and transgenic model studies (17–19).
The effects of PRL on normal and malignant breast tissues are
mediated by the prolactin receptor (PRLr), a member of the
cytokine receptor superfamily and relative of the growth hormone
receptor. Both the growth hormone receptor and the PRLr are
predimerized; following ligand binding, it has been reported that
the growth hormone receptor and PRLr may undergo conformational change (20, 21), enabling the rapid activation of the Janusactivated kinase 2 (Jak2) tyrosine kinase, which results in PRLr/
growth hormone receptor phosphorylation and the activation of
several signaling cascades including the Jak2/signal transducer and
activator of transcription-5 (Stat5), Ras/mitogen-activated protein
kinase, and Nek3/Vav2/Rac1 pathways (17, 22). The triggering of
these signaling pathways summates in the activation of multiple
gene loci, including cyclin D1 (23) and the cytokine inducible SH2containing protein (CISH; ref. 24). Like other cytokine receptors
that associate with Jak2, the activation of many of these
downstream signaling pathways is dependent on the initial
activation of Jak2. However, the molecular mechanism following
ligand binding that triggers a conformational change in the Jak2receptor complex enabling Jak2 activation has remained elusive.
Given the important role that the PRLr, growth hormone receptor,
and other cytokine receptors play in normal and pathologic
physiology, an understanding of this phenomenon is highly
relevant.
Our laboratory has previously reported on a role for cyclophilin
family members in the regulation of the PRLr-mediated signaling.
Triggered by PRL, cyclophilin B potentiated Stat5 function by
inducing the release of the Stat repressor, PIAS3 (12, 25). Here, we
report that the PPI activity of CypA contributes to the proximal
activation of Jak2 and other PRLr-associated signaling pathways
following binding of ligand to the PRLr as a receptor-associated
conformational switch. Finally, our findings reveal that ablation of
CypA activity by several approaches, including the use of the Food

7769

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (19). October 1, 2008

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

and Drug Administration–approved drug CsA, inhibits the in vitro
and in vivo outgrowth of human breast cancer.

Materials and Methods
Cell culture and reagents. The human breast cancer cell lines T47D,
MCF7, and MDA-231 were maintained in recommended conditions (26).
The mouse pre-adipocyte cell line 3T3F442A, kindly provided by Dr. Stuart J.
Frank (Department of Medicine, University of Alabama, Birmingham, AL),
was maintained in DMEM supplemented with 10% calf serum. CsA
(Gengraf) was purchased from Abbott Laboratories. Recombinant human
PRL was obtained from Dr. Michael Hodsdon (Department of Pathology,
Yale University, New Haven, CT), and recombinant human growth hormone
was from Dr. Stuart J. Frank. CyQuant (Invitrogen) and QuickChange
(Stratagene) were used as directed. Antibodies used in these studies were
obtained from Santa Cruz (cyclophilin A and CISH), Invitrogen (Stat5a,
pStat5a, glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase, V5, cyclin D1, and
PRLr-ECD), and Cell Signaling [Jak2, pJak2, extracellular signal–regulated
kinase (Erk)-1/2, pErk1/2, Akt, and pAkt].

Immunoblotting and immunoprecipitation. Immunoblotting and
immunoprecipitation were done as previously described (26). Target
proteins were visualized by enhanced chemiluminescence (GE Healthcare),
and images were captured using Fujifilm LAS-3000 system. The band
intensities were quantified by densitometry using ImageQuant and
normalized to those of their respective control bands. Data were expressed
as fold changes compared with an appropriate control.
Plasmids, transfection, and retrovirus production. The PRLr, CypA
constructs, Stat5-responsive luteinizing hormone response element (LHRE),
and CISH reporters were previously described (26, 27). A set of COOHterminal deletion constructs of the PRLr were assembled into the pTracer
vector. A V5-tag was fused to the 3¶ end of all deleted constructs. All point
mutations were generated using the QuickChange kit. The pSilencer 5.1
carrying a DNA insert encoding a CypA siRNA or a scrambled control siRNA
was purchased from Ambion.
The PRL-induced, luciferase-linked gene reporters used here contained
either a synthetic LHRE reporter or the endogenous promoters from the
CISH gene. For luciferase assay, cells were transiently transfected with the
LHRE and CISH reporters, in addition to either the empty vector (control)

Figure 1. Modulation of CypA levels
regulates PRL-induced gene reporter and
endogenous gene expression. A, CypA
overexpression enhances PRL-induced
gene expression from luciferase reporters.
T47D cells were cotransfected with
LHRE or CISH reporters with increasing
amount of CypA overexpression construct
as indicated. Cells were treated with
PRL (100 ng/mL) in defined medium for
24 h. Columns, mean of at least two
independent experiments; bars, SE.
*, P < 0.05 (t test). B, CypA
overexpression enhances PRL-induced
endogenous gene expression of CISH
and cyclin D1 proteins in T47D cells.
The expression of transfected CypA was
verified by Western blot analysis of total
cell lysates with an anti-V5 antibody.
C, siRNA-mediated knockdown of CypA
results in reduced PRL-induced reporter
gene expression. T47D cells were
transfected with CypA siRNA or scrambled
control siRNA and the indicated luciferase
reporters. Following 24-h stimulation
with PRL (100 ng/mL), transfectants
were lysed and assayed for luciferase
activity. Knockdown of CypA by siRNA
was confirmed by Western blot analysis
(top right ). Columns, mean of at least
two independent experiments; bars, SE.
*, P < 0.05 (t test). D, stable depletion
of CypA represses endogenous CISH
gene expression in T47D cells. Stable
transfectants of T47D cells expressing
either scrambled siRNA or CypA siRNA
were stimulated with PRL (100 ng/mL)
for 24 h. Suppression of endogenous,
PRL-induced CISH expression by CypA
knockdown was detected by Western blot
analysis.

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (19). October 1, 2008

7770

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

CypA Regulation of Jak2 in Breast Cancer

Figure 2. Ablation of CypA activity by CsA suppresses the PRLr-associated signaling, reduces PRL-induced gene expression, and inhibits the association of CypA
with the PRLr and Jak2. A, CsA inhibits PRLr signaling. T47D cells in defined medium were pretreated with CsA for 4 to 6 h. Cells were stimulated with PRL (100 ng/mL)
at the indicated times. Blots were probed with the indicated antibodies. TCL, total cell lysates; IP, immunoprecipitation. B, CsA treatment of T47D cells results in
reduced PRL-induced gene expression. T47D cells treated without or with CsA for 6 or 24 h were assessed for CISH and cyclin D1 protein expression by Western blot
analyses. C, CsA inhibits the association of CypA with the PRLr and Jak2. T47D cells in defined medium were treated as described above. Cell lysates were
immunoprecipitated with anti-PRLr-ECD or anti-Jak2 antibody and immunoblotted with anti-CypA antibody. Representative of three independent experiments.

or the indicated plasmid. Cells were arrested for 24 h posttransfection
and then unstimulated or treated with the indicated amount of PRL.
Twenty-four hours after PRL stimulation, cells were lysed and extracts were
assayed using Victor3 Multilabel Counter (Perkin-Elmer).
The association of PRLr P334A or PRLr deletion mutants with wild-type
CypA, the association of Cyp-PPI mutants with wild-type PRLr, and the
Stat5 activation by P334A mutant were determined in 293FT cells
transfected with the indicated plasmids. The effects of wild-type CypA,
Cyp-PPI, and PRLr P334A overexpression on endogenous gene expression
were assessed in T47D cells transfected with the increased amounts of
plasmids as indicated. In all transfection experiments, the total amount of
transfected plasmid was equalized with empty vector.
For production of recombinant retroviruses, PT67 cells were transfected
with pSilencer 5.1 Retro-CypA siRNA or pSilencer 5.1 Retro-scrambled
siRNA, and viruses were harvested 48 h posttransfection. To generate stable
knockdown cells, T47D cells were infected with the retroviral supernatants,
and stable colonies were selected with 2 Ag/mL puromycin.
Cell growth assay. Cells were plated the day before CsA treatment in
24-well plates at 1  104 per well. Cells were incubated in complete medium
with various concentrations of CsA as indicated for an additional 6 d, and
viable cells were counted with a hemocytometer every other day by the
trypan blue exclusion method.
Soft agar colony formation assay. Cells (5  103) were seeded in 1 mL
of 0.3% agar in complete medium in the presence of various doses of CsA
over a 1-mL base layer of 0.6% agar in complete medium in six-well plates.
Growth medium containing various doses of CsA was added and replaced
every 2 or 3 d. Cells were incubated at 37jC for 3 to 4 wk. Colonies were
photographed with a phase-contrast microscope. Colonies (z50 Am) were
counted with Image J software.
Cell motility and invasion assay. For cell invasion assay, cells were
placed in a Matrigel-coated transwell chamber with 8-Am-pore positron
emission tomography membranes in the presence of various doses of CsA
and were allowed to migrate toward 3% fetal bovine serum for 24 h. The
number of cells invading to the lower surface of the membrane was
quantified by CyQuant (Invitrogen). Cell motility was assessed by two
distinct assays. Transwell migration assays were carried out as described
above for Matrigel invasion assays except that the chambers were not
coated with Matrigel (26). For wound healing assay, the confluent cell
monolayer was wounded with a p200 pipette tip and cultured in serum-free
medium in the presence of various doses of CsA. Representative images of a
wound closure assay were acquired with a phase-contrast microscope at the
indicated times. The wound areas were measured using Image J and the
percentage of the wound closed was calculated.

www.aacrjournals.org

Xenograft model. MCF7 or MDA231 cells (1  106) were suspended in
Matrigel and injected into the teat of the fourth abdominal mammary gland
of nude (nu/nu) mice as described (28). In brief, following injection, animals
were randomized and treated with control carrier (apple juice) or CsA
(100 mg/kg/d, standard dose; doses from 5 to 300 mg/kg/d were also
examined) 3 d postinjection for 12 wk by twice-daily gavage. The standard
dose of CsA given the mice exceeded that received by human patients
(human dose range, 0.2–10 mg/kg/d) given the rapidity at which CsA is
excreted by the murine kidney. At no point in these experiments did mice
receiving the standard dose (or less) show any signs of neurologic toxicity
or weight loss. Tumor growth was measured by weekly caliper measurement. Mice xenografted with MCF7 cells received a subcutaneous estrogen
pellet (Innovative Research) implant before injection to ensure the growth
of this estrogen receptor (ER)–positive cell line. All animal experiments
were conducted in accordance with a protocol approved by Northwestern
University Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee. After 12 wk, the
mice were euthanized by CO2 followed by cervical dislocation, and the
entire primary mammary tumors were removed and weighed. In addition,
all visceral organs, brain, and superficial lymph nodes were harvested for
microscopic examination for metastasis. One half of each tumor was
immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen and then stored at 80jC. The
remaining tumor and other organs (lung, lymph node, liver, etc.) removed
from sacrificed animals were fixed in 10% formalin for subsequent H&E
staining or immunohistochemistry, which was done by the Northwestern
University Pathology Core Facility. The necrotic area of primary tumor was
quantified by morphometric determination of the proportion of total tumor
area that was necrotic in H&E-staining section as described above. Organ
metastasis was detected by gross and histologic examination of H&Estaining section of organ tissues from the control mice and CsA-treated
mice. The number of tumor nuclei labeling positive for cyclin D1 was
quantified in four preassigned high-power fields per tumor by microscopic
examination of anti–cyclin D1 immunohistochemistry of primary tumor
tissues from mice treated with CsA or control vehicle.
Statistical analysis. Data were reported as the means F SE and
analyzed using the appropriated statistical methods as indicated. P < 0.05
was considered significant.

Results
PRL-induced gene expression is modulated by CypA levels
and CsA treatment. To test whether CypA could serve as a
molecular toggle for the PRLr, the effects of manipulating CypA
levels and activity on both PRL-responsive gene reporters and

7771

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (19). October 1, 2008

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

endogenous genes were examined in breast cancer cells (Fig. 1).
When overexpressed in T47D transfectants, CypA dose-dependently enhanced the PRL-induced expression from the Stat5-responsive
LHRE and CISH luciferase reporters. These findings were paralleled
by corresponding increases in the endogenous expression of CISH
and cyclin D1 protein (Fig. 1A and B). Conversely, the suppression
of endogenous CypA using a siRNA-mediated approach resulted in
a decrease of PRL-induced gene expression as measured by LHRE
and CISH luciferase reporters and endogenous CISH protein in
T47D cells (Fig. 1C and D). Taken together, these findings show
that alterations in CypA levels directly correlate with PRL-induced
gene expression.
To examine whether the inhibitory effects of CypA knockdown
were related to a reduction in the PPIase activity within the cell,
T47D cells were treated with the PPI inhibitor CsA, followed by an
analysis of PRL-induced signaling and gene expression evaluated
(Fig. 2). As noted with the siRNA-mediated reduction of CypA, CsA
treatment of T47D cells suppressed both basal and PRL-induced
expression of endogenous CISH and cyclin D1 (Fig. 2B). To further
delineate a mechanism for the reduction in PRL-induced gene
expression mediated by CsA treatment, analysis of PRL-induced
signaling was done. These studies (Fig. 2A) revealed a marked
inhibition of PRL-stimulated phosphorylation of Jak2, Stat5, Erk1/2,
and Akt. PRL-induced activation of these signaling molecules was
also significantly inhibited at lower doses (i.e., 1 Ag/mL; data not

shown). Because many of the functions of the PRLr require and are
initially triggered by Jak2 (29, 30), these findings would suggest that
PPI activity contributes to proximal PRLr signaling.
To confirm this hypothesis, several follow-up and control
experiments were done. If CsA was inhibiting the action of CypA
at the PRLr, then one could anticipate that CsA treatment could
interfere with CypA-PRLr interaction. Indeed, this effect was noted
(Fig. 2C), as minimal CypA could be detected in the anti-PRLr or
anti-Jak2 immunoprecipitates from CsA-treated T47D cells. In
contrast, CsA had no effect on the PRLr-Jak2 interaction
(Supplementary Fig. S1). The effects of CsA on receptor-mediated
signaling were specific, as parallel experiments examining the
activation of Erk1/2 and Akt CsA-treated T47D cells showed no
significant diminution of insulin- or epidermal growth factor–
triggered signaling (Supplementary Fig. S2). In addition, CsA had
no effect on PRL binding to the PRLr (Supplementary Fig. S3).
Thus, taken as a whole, these data support the notion that PPI
activity, such as that found in CypA, significantly contributes
to PRLr-induced signal transduction and gene expression. Interestingly, CsA also inhibits growth hormone–induced Akt and
Erk signaling (Supplementary Fig. S2). Given that the growth
hormone and PRL receptors are highly related members of the
cytokine receptor superfamily that use similar signaling pathways,
this observation is not surprising and is an area of ongoing
research.

Figure 3. Overexpression of PPI-defective mutant of CypA is unable to associate with the PRLr and potentiate PRL-induced gene expression. A, generation of a
PPI-defective CypA mutant (Cyp-PPI). Two residues (Arg55 and Phe60) were mutated to Ala using site-directed mutagenesis. B, Cyp-PPI is unable to bind to the PRLr.
Wild-type (WT) CypA, its mutant (Cyp-PPI ), or empty vector control (ctrl ) was coexpressed with the PRLr in 293FT transfectants and immunoprecipitated by using
an antibody against PRLr-ECD. Cell lysates and immunoprecipitates were probed in immunoblots with the indicated antibodies. C, Cyp-PPI fails to potentiate
PRL-induced gene expression. T47D cells were cotransfected with LHRE or CISH luciferase reporter and wild-type CypA, Cyp-PPI, or empty vector expression
construct. Following 24-h stimulation with PRL (100 ng/mL), transfectants were lysed and assayed for luciferase activity. Columns, mean of two independent
experiments; bars, SE. *, P < 0.05 (t test). Western blot analysis (top ) of total cell lysates with an anti-V5 antibody was done to verify the expression of
transfected CypA. D, Cyp-PPI inhibits PRL-induced endogenous CISH protein expression (left ), and Cyp-PPI and PRLr P334A inhibit Jak2 phosphorylation (right ).
Left, suppression of endogenous, PRL-induced CISH protein expression by the overexpression of Cyp-PPI was detected by Western blot analysis. The cells were
treated with PRL (100 ng/mL) for 24 h. Right, immunoprecipitation and immunoblots of T47D cells overexpressing either Cyp-PPI or PRLr P334A (or empty vector
control) were done as indicated.

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (19). October 1, 2008

7772

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

CypA Regulation of Jak2 in Breast Cancer

Figure 4. Mapping of the CypA-binding
site on the PRLr results in the generation
of an interaction-defective point mutant
PRLr that functions as a dominant negative
receptor. A, CypA binding requires
the PRLr X-box. A set of the PRLr
COOH-terminal truncation mutants were
prepared using PCR-based mutagenesis.
293FT transfectant lysates were
immunoprecipitated with an anti-CypA
antibody and sequentially immunoblotted
with an anti-V5 antibody. B, left, analysis
of the PRLr X-Box reveals a conserved
proline residue. PCR mutagenesis was
used to generate a receptor termed PRLr
P334A. Middle, the association of CypA
with the PRLr P334A is markedly
decreased. 293 transfectants
overexpressing wild-type PRLr and
the PRLr P334A mutants were
immunoprecipitated with an anti-CypA
antibody and analyzed by immunoblot
analyses as indicated. Right, Stat5
activation by PRLr P334A is significantly
impaired. Wild-type PRLr and its PRLr
P334A were coexpressed with rabbit
Stat5a in 293FT transfectants. The cells
were stimulated with PRL (100 ng/mL)
for 10 min and immunoprecipitated with
an antibody against Stat5. Total cell lysates
and immunoprecipitates were probed with
the indicated antibodies and subjected to
Western blot analyses as indicated. C,
PRLr P334A inhibits PRL-induced gene
expression in T47D cells in a dominant
negative manner. Top, T47D cells were
transfected with LHRE or CISH luciferase
reporters and a PRLr P334A expression
construct (or empty vector control).
Following 24-h stimulation with PRL
(100 ng/mL), transfectants were lysed and
assayed for luciferase activity. Columns,
mean of two independent experiments;
bars, SE. *, P < 0.05 (t test). Bottom, PRLr
P334A inhibits PRL-induced endogenous
CISH protein expression. Suppression of
endogenous, PRL-induced CISH protein
levels by PRLr P334A transfectants was
detected by Western blot analysis.

The PPIase activity of CypA is required for potentiation of
PRL-induced gene expression and association of CypA with the
PRLr. To delineate the molecular basis for interaction between the
PRLr and CypA and correlate this to function, selective mutagenesis was done. Many of the interactions of cyclophilins are
mediated by the PPI active site (31), and the inhibition of PRLrCypA binding by CsA further suggested that the PPI pocket was
involved in this event. Point mutagenesis to residues Arg55 and
Phe60 of the PPI pocket of CypA (Fig. 3A) resulted in a mutant
CypA lacking 99% of PPI activity found in wild-type CypA (32).
Subsequent analysis then queried whether this PPI-defective form
of CypA was capable of interacting with the PRLr and potentiating
its signal, as observed with wild-type CypA. When coexpressed with
the PRLr in 293FT cells, unlike wild-type CypA, Cyp-PPI interacted
poorly with the PRLr (Fig. 3B). Furthermore, in contrast to wildtype CypA, which potentiated both the PRL-induced LHRE and
CISH luciferase reporters when overexpressed in T47D cells,
overexpressed Cyp-PPI failed to potentiate PRL-induced gene

www.aacrjournals.org

expression of the LHRE (Fig. 3C). Indeed, Cyp-PPI overexpression
significantly repressed gene expression from CISH luciferase
reporter (Fig. 3C) and blocked Jak2 phosphorylation and the
endogenous expression of CISH protein (Fig. 3D). These data show
that the PPIase active site of CypA is involved in the PRLr-CypA
interaction and that this PPIase activity is required for the
potentiation of PRL-induced gene expression.
A conserved proline residue in the PRLr X-box motif
contributes to CypA binding and is required for PRLr
transduction. The studies presented above reveal a proximal
contribution of the PPI activity of CypA to PRLr/Jak2 signaling.
However, the possibility remained that the action of CypA could be
indirect, acting at a site other than the PRLr to effect its potentiation of Jak2/Stat5 signaling. To address this question, the binding
site of CypA on the PRLr was mapped. As an initial step, COOHterminal PRLr truncation mutants were generated and tested for
their ability when expressed to interact with CypA (Fig. 4A). These
studies revealed that truncations of the PRLr membrane proximal

7773

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (19). October 1, 2008

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

to the X-box motif were incapable of interacting with CypA,
revealing a contribution of the X-box to the engagement of CypA.
Analysis of the X-box motif (Fig. 4B) revealed a proline at residue
334 of the PRLr that was highly conserved across species. Given
the affinity of cyclophilins for proline residues, it was hypothesized
that P334 in the X-box could contribute to the engagement of
CypA. To test this hypothesis, a proline-to-alanine replacement
mutation of the PRLr was generated (P334A), and the ability of this
mutant PRLr to interact with CypA and mediate PRL-induced

signaling was tested. These studies revealed that when expressed in
T47D cells, the mutant PRLr P334A showed a significantly reduced
association with CypA (Fig. 4B). Furthermore, the ability of the
P334A mutant to induce Jak2 and Stat5 phosphorylation (in
comparison with wild-type PRLr transfected control) was also
significantly diminished (Figs. 3D and 4B). Overexpression of the
PRLr P334A mutant in T47D cells resulted in a dose-dependent
reduction in the PRL-induced expression of both cotransfected
LHRE and CISH luciferase reporters and endogenous CISH protein

Figure 5. CsA inhibits anchoragedependent and anchorage-independent
growth and motility and invasion of
breast cancer cells in vitro. A, growth
inhibition by CsA of breast cancer cells.
T47D, MCF7, and MDA-231 cells were
incubated with various doses of CsA, and
viable cells were quantified every other
day by trypan blue exclusion. Points, mean
of two independent experiments; bars, SE.
B, colony formation inhibition by CsA.
Colony enumeration used Image J
software. Columns, mean of two
independent experiments; bars, SE.
*, P < 0.05 (t test). C, inhibition of motility
by CsA as measured by wound healing
assay (left) and Boyden chamber assay
(right ). Left, a confluent cell monolayer of
MDA-231 was wounded with a pipette
tip and cultured in serum-free medium in
the presence of various doses of CsA.
Representative images of a wound closure
assay were acquired with a phase-contrast
microscope and the percentage of
the wound closed was quantified.
Representative of three independent
experiments. *, P < 0.05 (two-way
ANOVA). Right, the number of cells
migrating through pores was quantified
by CyQuant labeling. Representative of
three independent experiments. *, P < 0.05
(one-way ANOVA). D, inhibition of invasion
by CsA. The number of MDA-231 cells
invading through Matrigel-occluded pores
was quantified by CyQuant labeling.
Representative of three independent
experiments. *, P < 0.05 (one-way ANOVA).

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (19). October 1, 2008

7774

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

CypA Regulation of Jak2 in Breast Cancer

Figure 6. CsA induces central primary
tumor necrosis and the metastasis of
ER+ and ER human breast cancer
xenografts, inhibits primary tumor cyclin D1
expression, and blocks CypA-PRLr
association. A, induction of primary tumor
necrosis by CsA. Mice xenografted with
MCF7 and MDA231 cells were treated
with CsA (100 mg/kg/d; n = 18) or control
carrier (apple juice; n = 18) for 12 wk by
twice-daily gavage. Left, representative
H&E-stained sections (20; bar, 50 Am).
Right, the necrotic area of primary tumor
(right ) was quantified by determination
of the proportion of total tumor area
that was necrotic in H&E-stained section
of primary MCF7 tumor xenograft.
***, P < 0.001 (t test). B, inhibition
of metastasis by CsA. Lymph node
metastases were detected by histologic
examination of H&E-stained section of
lymph nodes harvested from mice treated
for 12 wk with either CsA (100 mg/kg/d;
n = 18) or control carrier (apple juice;
n = 18). ***, P < 0.001 (Fisher’s exact test).
C, inhibition of primary tumor cyclin D1
expression (top ) and CypA-PRLr
association (bottom ) by CsA. Top, the
number of positive cyclin D1 nuclei was
quantified by microscopic examination
of anti–cyclin D1 immunohistochemical
labeling of primary tumor tissue from
mice treated for 12 wk with either CsA
(100 mg/kg/d; n = 5) or control carrier
(apple juice; n = 5). **, P < 0.01 (t test).
Representative sections (bar, 50 Am)
of anti–cyclin D1 immunohistochemical
labeling of primary MCF7 tumor xenograft.
Columns, mean; bars, SE. Bottom, CsA
blocks the association of CypA with the
PRLr in primary MCF7 tumor xenograft.
The inhibition of CypA-PRLr association
was detected by coimmunoprecipitation
analysis.

(Fig. 4C). These findings are notable in that T47D cells are known
to express high levels of endogenous PRLr, indicating that the
P334A mutant, most probably through heterodimerization with the
wild-type PRLr (33), functions as a dominant negative receptor.
When assessed with the data presented above, these findings
would indicate that the direct action of the CypA on the PRLr
is required for effective PRL-induced signaling, a process that is
inhibited by the PRLr P334A mutant. These findings were further
confirmed by control experiments, which showed that the PRLr/
Jak2 interaction was not affected by the P334A mutation (data
not shown).

www.aacrjournals.org

CsA treatment blocks multiple cellular functions in breast
cancer cells in vitro. The data presented above have revealed
that the function of the PRLr and its associated downstream
signaling are regulated by the PPIase activity of CypA. Thus, given
the function of cyclophilins, not only at the level of the PRLr but
at other signaling loci that contribute to the pathogenesis of
breast cancer (i.e., such as NFAT ref. 34 and Stat 5 ref. 12, 25) as
well, it was reasoned that the use of PPI inhibitors such as CsA
might effectively inhibit the malignant phenotype of breast
cancer. To assess the in vitro effects of CsA on the biology of
human breast cancer, analysis of the effects of CsA on the cell

7775

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (19). October 1, 2008

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

growth, soft agar colony formation, cell motility, and invasion was
done. When cultured in monolayer in the presence of CsA, both
the ER+ lines T47D and MCF7 and the ER line MDA-231 showed
a dose-dependent inhibition of viable cell growth (Fig. 5A). At
concentrations V10 Ag/mL, this antiproliferative effect was
reversible following washing and medium change; at concentrations of z30 Ag/mL, these effects were not reversible and cell
death ensued (data not shown). To assess the effects of CsA on
anchorage-independent growth, soft agar colony formation assays
were done. As shown in Fig. 5B, CsA treatment resulted in a
marked suppression of the anchorage-independent growth of
human breast cancer cells in a dose-dependent manner. When
introduced into either cell migration or invasion assays using the
highly metastatic ER MDA-231, CsA dose-dependently inhibited
both cell motility [as assessed by wound healing assay (Fig. 5C,
left; Supplementary Fig. S4) or Boyden chamber assay (Fig. 5C,
right)] and cell invasion through Matrigel (Fig. 5D). Taken
together, these findings indicate that CsA inhibited many of the
malignant properties of breast cancer cells in vitro, suggesting
a potential in vivo role for PPI inhibition in the treatment of
breast cancer.
Inhibition of PPI activity in vivo by CsA induces primary
tumor necrosis and blocks metastasis of breast cancer
xenografts. Given the in vitro effects of CsA on breast cancer
cell biology, it was hypothesized that CsA could inhibit the in vivo
outgrowth of human breast cancer. To test this hypothesis, both
the ER+ MCF7 and the ER MDA-231 human breast cancer lines
were xenografted into nude mice, using a novel approach that
dramatically facilitates the metastatic spread of breast cancer
xenografts (28), and subsequently randomized into CsA therapy or
control groups 3 days postinjection. Whereas all CsA-treated
tumors showed a trend toward a decrease in size and weight over
time, these parameters did not achieve statistical significance (data
not shown). However, two parameters were found to be significantly changed as a function of CsA therapy, notably central
tumor necrosis and metastasis. As seen in Fig. 6A, central tumor
necrosis of both ER+ and ER was significantly increased, with a
somewhat more pronounced effect in ER+ MCF7 tumors. Most
interestingly, not a single metastasis to lymph nodes or organs was
noted in CsA-treated mice (Fig. 6B) from either ER+ or ER xenografts. Indeed, in this entire line of experimentation with 94
mice receiving varied doses of CsA (some as low as 10 mg/kg/d),
not a single CsA-treated mouse xenografted with either MCF7 or
MDA-231 cells was noted to have a metastasis, whereas between
30% and 50% of the control mice showed metastasis. To address
whether the in vivo use of CsA resulted in inhibition of Stat5driven gene expression, immunohistochemistry of the primary
tumors with an anti–cyclin D1 antibody was done and the number
of labeled nuclei was quantified. As shown in Fig. 6C (top), cyclin
D1 gene expression in both ER+ and ER primary tumors from
CsA-treated mice was significantly inhibited when compared with
tumors from control mice. To further support the in vitro
observation that the association of CypA with the PRLr was
blocked by CsA, the in vivo status of PRLr-CypA binding in CsAtreated tumor tissues was also examined. As shown in Fig. 6C
(bottom), the CypA-PRLr association in CsA-treated tumor tissues
compared with control vehicle–treated tumor tissues was
inhibited. Thus, the in vivo actions of CsA, while reducing cyclin
D1 expression and blocking CypA-PRLr association, also promoted
central tumor necrosis and inhibited metastasis of breast cancer
xenografts, irrespective of ER status.

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (19). October 1, 2008

Discussion
The proximate mechanisms that enable receptor-mediated
signal transduction following ligand binding remain poorly
characterized. Following ligand binding to the type I cytokine
receptors, such as the PRLr and growth hormone receptor,
members of the Jak family of tyrosine kinases are activated within
30 to 60 seconds by an autophosphorylation-based mechanism
(35). Recent analysis of the growth hormone receptor using
mutagenesis and fluorescence resonance energy transfer
approaches has suggested that a conformational change may
occur within the receptor following ligand binding approximating
the growth hormone receptor–associated Jak2 kinases, thereby
enabling their autophosphorylation and activation (20). Nuclear
magnetic resonance spectroscopy of the conserved Box 1 motif of
the PRLr, a hydrophobic and proline-rich intracellular domain
adjacent to the transmembrane region of this receptor, also has
suggested that a conformational change within the PRLr is also
feasible (21). However, a mechanism that would enable such a
conformational change to occur within either the growth hormone
receptor or PRLr has not been elaborated.
The data presented here indicate that the PPI activity of CypA
significantly contributes to proximate receptor activation, enabling
transduction through the PRLr/Jak2 complex. The PRL-induced
expression of both Stat5-responsive reporter constructs and
endogenous genes was directly correlated to CypA levels by both
overexpression and knockdown approaches. Loss of PPI activity in
CypA (CypA-PPI) following mutagenesis resulted in reduced PRLr
binding, Jak2 phosphorylation, and PRL-induced gene expression.
Similarly, replacement by mutation of a conserved proline residue
(PRLr-P334A) also resulted in reduced PRLr-CypA interaction,
decreased Jak2 and Stat5 phosphorylation, and decreased Stat5responsive reporter and endogenous gene expression. Indeed, when
transfected into the T47D breast cancer line, which expresses high
levels of PRLr, the PRLr-P334A functioned in a dominant negative
manner. Taken together, these results would argue that the
potentiation of PRLr-induced signaling by CypA is a consequence
of the direct actions of the PPI of CypA on the PRLr/Jak2 complex,
and not an epiphenomenon of CypA function at another site.
As a member of the cytokine receptor superfamily, the
membrane-proximal portion of the intracellular domain of the
PRLr contains the conserved Box 1/Variable Box/Box 2/X-box
motifs. Whereas the functions of the Variable Box, Box 2, and X-Box
are largely uncharacterized, the proline-rich Box 1 motif has been
implicated in the binding and ligand-induced activation of Jak2.
Deletion of this motif from the PRLr or nonconservative
replacement of its COOH-terminal proline residue with leucine
results in a loss of Jak2 binding via its NH2-terminal FERM domain
(36) and downstream PRL-induced gene expression (37). However,
although necessary for Jak2 engagement, the Box 1 motif alone is
not sufficient for lactogenic signaling (33, 37), clearly indicating
that other determinants in the PRLr contribute to Jak2 activation.
The identified contribution of the proline residue at position 334
for both CypA-PRLr association and PRL-induced Jak2 activation
would indicate that the PPI activity of CypA at this site or its
immediate environs (such as the Box 1 motif) immediately affects
Jak2-driven signaling.
CsA has been a widely used immunosuppressive drug in organ
transplantation and in the treatment of autoimmune diseases
(38, 39). As an immunosuppressant, CsA has been classically
thought to form a complex with cyclophilin that binds with high

7776

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

CypA Regulation of Jak2 in Breast Cancer

affinity to the phosphatase calcineurin. As a consequence of
this event, interleukin-2 transcription is inhibited by a loss of
calcineurin-mediated dephosphorylation of the transcription factor
NFAT activation, resulting in a loss of clonal T-cell proliferation
following antigen stimulation (40). However, our data would
indicate that, at least in human breast cancer cells, CsA also
targets the proximal Jak2 kinase, presumably through its inhibition
of the PPI activity of CypA. The loss of Jak2 activity readily explains
the loss of PRL-induced activation of downstream signaling factors
such as Stat5, Akt, and Erk, and the concomitant loss of PRLinduced, Stat5-mediated gene expression and the inhibition of
outgrowth of CsA-treated breast cancer cells. Was the inhibition of
breast cancer cell outgrowth secondary to the effects of CsA on
Stat5 or NFAT? In vitro evidence does exist showing that NFAT
activity regulated by the Akt kinase stimulates breast cancer
motility and invasion (34, 41). However, the precise role of this
transcription factor in either normal breast biology or breast
cancer pathobiology in vivo remains uncertain. In contrast, in vivo
studies using conditional Jak2 / knockout mice, and cells derived
thereof, have revealed that Jak2 is required for normal mammary
alveogenesis and lactation at the tissue level and the activation of
Stat5 and expression of cyclin D1 at the cellular level (29, 30).
Furthermore, when transgenic WAP-T antigen mice, a genetic
model of mammary cancer, were mated to heterozygous Stat5+/
mice, a significant reduction in mammary tumor size, incidence,
and progression was noted (42). Most importantly, our knockdown and overexpression studies presented here (using both wildtype and mutant CypA and PRLr) showed the effects on signaling
and gene expression comparable to those observed following CsA
treatment. These complementary, non–CsA-based approaches,
which should not result in the chelation of calcineurin or the
inhibition of other cyclophilin family members, would argue the
importance of the Jak2/Stat5 axis in breast cancer pathobiology
and suggest that the inhibition of this pathway by CsA may, in part,
explain the actions of this drug both in vitro and in vivo. However,
it is important to note that the inhibitory effects of CsA may be
unique to breast malignancies, as CsA is recognized to increase or
enhance the incidence and progression of epidermal, lymphoid,
and gastrointestinal malignancies in the laboratory and the clinic
(43–45).
Our in vitro studies showed that CsA markedly inhibited the
growth, motility, and invasion of both ER+ and ER human breast
cancer cells in a dose-dependent manner. Interestingly, in vivo CsA
therapy did not have a statistically significant effect on overall
tumor size (although CsA-treated tumors did trend toward being
smaller). However, a statistically significant increase in central
primary tumor necrosis and a complete absence of metastasis were
noted in CsA-treated mice xenografted with either ER+ or ER
breast cancer cells. Significantly, as noted in vitro, CsA-treated

References
1. Gothel SF, Marahiel MA. Peptidyl-prolyl cis-trans
isomerases, a superfamily of ubiquitous folding catalysts. Cell Mol Life Sci 1999;55:423–36.
2. Handschumacher RE, Harding MW, Rice J, Drugge
RJ, Speicher DW. Cyclophilin: a specific cytosolic
binding protein for cyclosporin A. Science 1984;226:
544–7.
3. Bram RJ, Hung DT, Martin PK, Schreiber SL, Crabtree
GR. Identification of the immunophilins capable of

www.aacrjournals.org

xenografts showed a significant reduction in the expression of the
Stat5-responsive cyclin D1. There are many potential mechanisms
through which these CsA-mediated effects on xenograft progression may have been mediated. In this context, it is interesting to
note that the inhibition of cyclin D1 expression is angiostatic (46).
In addition, epidemiologic studies have implicated a role for PRL in
the metastatic progression of human breast cancer (47, 48). It is
tempting to speculate, therefore, that some of the progressioninhibitory effects of CsA may result from its blockade of the PRL/
Jak2/Stat5 pathway, the activity of which has been implicated in the
proliferation, survival, motility, and invasion of human breast
cancer (17). It is also important to note that the significant
reduction in breast cancer observed in female patients undergoing
CsA therapy following allograft transplant (16) was at that time
interpreted to be secondary to the immunosuppressive effects of
CsA. Our in vitro and in vivo data in models lacking functional
immune systems, however, would argue that some, if not many, of
the effects of CsA are due to its direct action on breast cancer cells,
and not due to its secondary immunosuppressive actions.
In many tumor types, including breast cancer, CsA has been
found to bind to and inhibit the efflux functions of multidrug
resistance proteins including P-glycoprotein, breast cancer resistance protein, and multidrug resistance protein (49, 50). First
documented in Chinese hamster ovary cells (51) and extended into
human leukemias (52), these studies have served as the basis for
the first phase II clinical trials with cyclosporine in patients with
advanced breast cancer. In theory, by reducing drug efflux, thereby
enhancing the efficacy of chemotherapy, the combination of Paxil
and CsA was found to be safe and effective in patients with
advanced disease (53) when administered simultaneously on a
once-weekly basis. Our findings, however, would argue that
although CsA may also function as a drug efflux inhibitor, this
PPI inhibitor has direct actions on breast cancer signaling that
should be exploited in patients with this disease, by establishing
continuous serum levels of CsA that would inhibit Jak2/Stat5
transduction. Indeed, as alternative PPI-inhibitors continue to be
developed, novel and more specific pharmacotherapies against
breast cancer should be expected.

Disclosure of Potential Conflicts of Interest
No potential conflicts of interest were disclosed.

Acknowledgments
Received 2/21/2008; revised 6/30/2008; accepted 7/7/2008.
Grant support: Susan G. Komen Foundation grant BCTR05-03790 and NIH grants
CA69294 and CA102682. Additional support was received from the Zell Scholar’s Fund,
the Lynn Sage Foundation, and the Avon Foundation.
The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of page
charges. This article must therefore be hereby marked advertisement in accordance
with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact.

mediating inhibition of signal transduction by cyclosporin A and FK506: roles of calcineurin binding and
cellular location. Mol Cell Biol 1993;13:4760–9.
4. Colgan J, Asmal M, Yu B, Luban J. Cyclophilin Adeficient mice are resistant to immunosuppression by
cyclosporine. J Immunol 2005;174:6030–8.
5. Harrison RK, Stein RL. Substrate specificities of the
peptidyl prolyl cis-trans isomerase activities of cyclophilin and FK-506 binding protein: evidence for the
existence of a family of distinct enzymes. Biochemistry
1990;29:3813–6.

6. Lu KP, Finn G, Lee TH, Nicholson LK. Prolyl cis-trans
isomerization as a molecular timer. Nat Chem Biol 2007;
3:619–29.
7. Bosco DA, Eisenmesser EZ, Pochapsky S, Sundquist
WI, Kern D. Catalysis of cis/trans isomerization in native
HIV-1 capsid by human cyclophilin A. Proc Natl Acad
Sci U S A 2002;99:5247–52.
8. Colgan J, Asmal M, Neagu M, et al. Cyclophilin A
regulates TCR signal strength in CD4+ T cells via a
proline-directed conformational switch in Itk. Immunity
2004;21:189–201.

7777

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (19). October 1, 2008

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research
9. Nicholson LK, Lu KP. Prolyl cis-trans isomerization as a
molecular timer in Crk signaling. Mol Cell 2007;25:483–5.
10. Lummis SC, Beene DL, Lee LW, Lester HA, Broadhurst RW, Dougherty DA. Cis-trans isomerization at a
proline opens the pore of a neurotransmitter-gated ion
channel. Nature 2005;438:248–52.
11. Eckert B, Martin A, Balbach J, Schmid FX. Prolyl
isomerization as a molecular timer in phage infection.
Nat Struct Mol Biol 2005;12:619–23.
12. Rycyzyn MA, Clevenger CV. The intranuclear prolactin/cyclophilin B complex as a transcriptional inducer.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2002;99:6790–5.
13. Campa MJ, Wang MZ, Howard B, Fitzgerald MC, Patz
EF, Jr. Protein expression profiling identifies macrophage migration inhibitory factor and cyclophilin a as
potential molecular targets in non-small cell lung
cancer. Cancer Res 2003;63:1652–6.
14. Shen J, Person MD, Zhu J, Abbruzzese JL, Li D.
Protein expression profiles in pancreatic adenocarcinoma compared with normal pancreatic tissue and tissue
affected by pancreatitis as detected by two-dimensional
gel electrophoresis and mass spectrometry. Cancer Res
2004;64:9018–26.
15. Rey O, Baluda MA, Park NH. Differential gene expression in neoplastic and human papillomavirus-immortalized oral keratinocytes. Oncogene 1999;18:827–31.
16. Stewart T, Tsai SC, Grayson H, Henderson R, Opelz G.
Incidence of de-novo breast cancer in women chronically immunosuppressed after organ transplantation.
Lancet 1995;346:796–8.
17. Clevenger CV, Furth PA, Hankinson SE, Schuler LA.
The role of prolactin in mammary carcinoma. Endocr
Rev 2003;24:1–27.
18. Hankinson SE, Willett WC, Michaud DS, et al. Plasma
prolactin levels and subsequent risk of breast cancer
in postmenopausal women. J Natl Cancer Inst 1999;91:
629–34.
19. Rose-Hellekant TA, Arendt LM, Schroeder MD,
Gilchrist K, Sandgren EP, Schuler LA. Prolactin induces
ERa-positive and ERa-negative mammary cancer in
transgenic mice. Oncogene 2003;22:4664–74.
20. Brown RJ, Adams JJ, Pelekanos RA, et al. Model for
growth hormone receptor activation based on subunit
rotation within a receptor dimer. Nat Struct Mol Biol
2005;12:814–21.
21. O’Neal KD, Chari MV, McDonald CH, et al. Multiple
cis-trans conformers of the prolactin receptor prolinerich motif (PRM) peptide detected by reverse-phase
HPLC, CD and NMR spectroscopy. Biochem J 1996;315:
833–44.
22. Waters MJ, Hoang HN, Fairlie DP, Pelekanos RA,
Brown RJ. New insights into growth hormone action.
J Mol Endocrinol 2006;36:1–7.
23. Brockman JL, Schroeder MD, Schuler LA. PRL
activates the cyclin D1 promoter via the Jak2/Stat
pathway. Mol Endocrinol 2002;16:774–84.

24. Raccurt M, Tam SP, Lau P, et al. Suppressor of
cytokine signalling gene expression is elevated in breast
carcinoma. Br J Cancer 2003;89:524–32.
25. Rycyzyn MA, Reilly SC, O’Malley K, Clevenger CV.
Role of cyclophilin B in prolactin signal transduction
and nuclear retrotranslocation. Mol Endocrinol 2000;14:
1175–86.
26. Miller SL, DeMaria JE, Freier DO, Riegel AM,
Clevenger CV. Novel association of Vav2 and Nek3
modulates signaling through the human prolactin
receptor. Mol Endocrinol 2005;19:939–49.
27. Syed F, Rycyzyn MA, Westgate L, Clevenger CV. A
novel and functional interaction between cyclophilin A
and prolactin receptor. Endocrine 2003;20:83–90.
28. Harrell JC, Dye WW, Allred DC, et al. Estrogen
receptor positive breast cancer metastasis: altered
hormonal sensitivity and tumor aggressiveness in
lymphatic vessels and lymph nodes. Cancer Res 2006;
66:9308–15.
29. Sakamoto K, Creamer BA, Triplett AA, Wagner KU.
The Janus kinase 2 is required for expression and
nuclear accumulation of cyclin D1 in proliferating
mammary epithelial cells. Mol Endocrinol 2007;21:
1877–92.
30. Wagner KU, Krempler A, Triplett AA, et al. Impaired
alveologenesis and maintenance of secretory mammary
epithelial cells in Jak2 conditional knockout mice. Mol
Cell Biol 2004;24:5510–20.
31. Ke HM, Zydowsky LD, Liu J, Walsh CT. Crystal
structure of recombinant human T-cell cyclophilin A
at 2.5 A resolution. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1991;88:
9483–7.
32. Zydowsky LD, Etzkorn FA, Chang HY, et al. Active
site mutants of human cyclophilin A separate peptidylprolyl isomerase activity from cyclosporin A binding
and calcineurin inhibition. Protein Sci 1992;1:1092–9.
33. Chang WP, Clevenger CV. Modulation of growth
factor receptor function by isoform heterodimerization.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1996;93:5947–52.
34. Jauliac S, Lopez-Rodriguez C, Shaw LM, Brown LF,
Rao A, Toker A. The role of NFAT transcription factors
in integrin-mediated carcinoma invasion. Nat Cell Biol
2002;4:540–4.
35. Brooks AJ, Wooh JW, Tunny KA, Waters MJ. Growth
hormone receptor; mechanism of action. Int J Biochem
Cell Biol. In press 2008.
36. He K, Wang X, Jiang J, et al. Janus kinase 2
determinants for growth hormone receptor association,
surface assembly, and signaling. Mol Endocrinol 2003;17:
2211–27.
37. Lebrun JJ, Ali S, Ullrich A, Kelly PA. Proline-rich
sequence-mediated Jak2 association to the prolactin
receptor is required but not sufficient for signal
transduction. J Biol Chem 1995;270:10664–70.
38. Kahan BD. Cyclosporine. N Engl J Med 1989;321:
1725–38.

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (19). October 1, 2008

7778

39. Ponticelli C. Cyclosporine: from renal transplantation
to autoimmune diseases. Ann N Y Acad Sci 2005;1051:
551–8.
40. Schreiber SL, Crabtree GR. The mechanism of action
of cyclosporin A and FK506. Immunol Today 1992;13:
136–42.
41. Yoeli-Lerner M, Yiu GK, Rabinovitz I, Erhardt P,
Jauliac S, Toker A. Akt blocks breast cancer cell motility
and invasion through the transcription factor NFAT.
Mol Cell 2005;20:539–50.
42. Ren S, Cai HR, Li M, Furth PA. Loss of Stat5a delays
mammary cancer progression in a mouse model.
Oncogene 2002;21:4335–9.
43. Hojo M, Morimoto T, Maluccio M, et al. Cyclosporine
induces cancer progression by a cell-autonomous
mechanism. Nature 1999;397:530–4.
44. Ohsawa I, Murakami T, Uemoto S, Kobayashi E.
In vivo luminescent imaging of cyclosporin A-mediated
cancer progression in rats. Transplantation 2006;81:
1558–67.
45. Koehl GE, Andrassy J, Guba M, et al. Rapamycin
protects allografts from rejection while simultaneously
attacking tumors in immunosuppressed mice. Transplantation 2004;77:1319–26.
46. Hanai J, Dhanabal M, Karumanchi SA, et al. Endostatin causes G1 arrest of endothelial cells through
inhibition of cyclin D1. J Biol Chem 2002;277:16464–9.
47. Wang DY, Stepniewska KA, Allen DS, et al. Serum
prolactin levels and their relationship to survival in
women with operable breast cancer. J Clin Epidemiol
1995;48:959–68.
48. Holtkamp W, Nagel GA, Wander HE, Rauschecker HF,
von Heyden D. Hyperprolactinemia is an indicator of
progressive disease and poor prognosis in advanced
breast cancer. Int J Cancer 1984;34:323–8.
49. Gupta A, Dai Y, Vethanayagam RR, et al. Cyclosporin
A, tacrolimus and sirolimus are potent inhibitors of the
human breast cancer resistance protein (ABCG2) and
reverse resistance to mitoxantrone and topotecan.
Cancer Chemother Pharmacol 2006;58:374–83.
50. Qadir M, O’Loughlin KL, Fricke SM, et al. Cyclosporin
A is a broad-spectrum multidrug resistance modulator.
Clin Cancer Res 2005;11:2320–6.
51. Rauscher FJ III, Beerman TA, Baker RM. Characterization of auromomycin-resistant hamster cell mutants
that display a multidrug resistance phenotype. Mol
Pharmacol 1990;38:198–206.
52. Boesch D, Muller K, Pourtier-Manzanedo A, Loor F.
Restoration of daunomycin retention in multidrugresistant P388 cells by submicromolar concentrations
of SDZ PSC 833, a nonimmunosuppressive cyclosporin
derivative. Exp Cell Res 1991;196:26–32.
53. Helgason HH, Kruijtzer CM, Huitema AD, et al. Phase
II and pharmacological study of oral paclitaxel (Paxoral)
plus ciclosporin in anthracycline-pretreated metastatic
breast cancer. Br J Cancer 2006;95:794–800.

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Prolyl Isomerase Cyclophilin A Regulation of
Janus-Activated Kinase 2 and the Progression of Human
Breast Cancer
Jiamao Zheng, Jennifer E. Koblinski, Laura V. Dutson, et al.
Cancer Res 2008;68:7769-7778.

Updated version
Supplementary
Material

Cited articles
Citing articles

E-mail alerts
Reprints and
Subscriptions
Permissions

Access the most recent version of this article at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/68/19/7769
Access the most recent supplemental material at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/suppl/2008/09/25/68.19.7769.DC1

This article cites 52 articles, 17 of which you can access for free at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/68/19/7769.full#ref-list-1
This article has been cited by 6 HighWire-hosted articles. Access the articles at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/68/19/7769.full#related-urls

Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal.
To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications
Department at pubs@aacr.org.
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications
Department at permissions@aacr.org.

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

