Europe PMC Funders Group
Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 11.
Published in final edited form as:
Nature. 2012 August 23; 488(7412): 527–530. doi:10.1038/nature11344.

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Defining the mode of tumour growth by clonal analysis
Gregory Driessens1, Benjamin Beck1, Amélie Caauwe1, Benjamin D. Simons2,3, and Cédric
Blanpain1,4
1Université
2Cavendish

Libre de Bruxelles, IRIBHM, Brussels B-1070, Belgium
Laboratory, Department of Physics, J. J. Thomson Avenue, Cambridge CB3 0HE, UK

3The

Wellcome Trust/Cancer Research UK Gurdon Institute, University of Cambridge, Tennis
Court Road, Cambridge CB2 1QN, UK

4WELBIO,

Brussels B-1070, Belgium

Abstract

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Recent studies using the isolation of a subpopulation of tumour cells followed by their
transplantation into immunodeficient mice provide evidence that certain tumours1,2, including
squamous skin tumours3–5, contain cells with high clonogenic potential that have been referred to
as cancer stem cells (CSCs). Until now, CSC properties have only been investigated by
transplantation assays, and their existence in unperturbed tumour growth is unproven. Here we
make use of clonal analysis of squamous skin tumours using genetic lineage tracing to unravel the
mode of tumour growth in vivo in its native environment. To this end, we used a genetic labelling
strategy that allows individual tumour cells to be marked and traced over time at different stages of
tumour progression. Surprisingly, we found that the majority of labelled tumour cells in benign
papilloma have only limited proliferative potential, whereas a fraction has the capacity to persist
long term, giving rise to progeny that occupy a significant part of the tumour. As well as
confirming the presence of two distinct proliferative cell compartments within the papilloma,
mirroring the composition, hierarchy and fate behaviour of normal tissue, quantitative analysis of
clonal fate data indicates that the more persistent population has stemcell-like characteristics and
cycles twice per day, whereas the second represents a slower cycling transient population that
gives rise to terminally differentiated tumour cells. Such behaviour is shown to be consistent with
double-labelling experiments and detailed clonal fate characteristics. By contrast, measurements of
clone size and proliferative potential in invasive squamous cell carcinoma show a different pattern
of behaviour, consistent with geometric expansion of a single CSC population with limited
potential for terminal differentiation. This study presents the first experimental evidence for the
existence of CSCs during unperturbed solid tumour growth.
Different models have been proposed to explain tumour heterogeneity and growth1,6,7. In
the stochastic model, all tumour cells are considered equipotent and only a fraction (due to

Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to B.D.S. (bds10@cam.ac.uk) or C.B. (Cedric.Blanpain@ulb.ac.be).
Author Contributions C.B., G.D., B.B. and B.D.S. designed the experiments and performed data analysis. G.D. and B.B. performed
most of the experiments. A.C. provided technical support. C.B. and B.D.S. wrote the manuscript.
The authors declare no competing financial interests.

Driessens et al.

Page 2

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

genetic and/or epigenetic changes) will contribute to tumour growth. By contrast, in the CSC
model, only a fraction of tumour cells have high clonogenic potential, and give rise to a
predictable hierarchical mode of tumour growth. These two models of tumour growth are
not mutually exclusive and competition may still arise in the hierarchical model. Until now,
CSC properties have been demonstrated by the ability of a subpopulation of tumour cells to
reform a tumour identical to the parental tumour on transplantation into immunodeficient
mice. This ‘gold standard’ assay has some caveats as tumour cells are usually transplanted at
a heterotopic site, embedded in Matrigel containing a cocktail of growth factors, into an
allogenic or xenogenic immunocompromised host8. These studies clearly demonstrate the
long-term renewal potential of cancer cells in these experimental conditions, but they do not
necessarily reflect the physiological fate of these cells in their native environment1.

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Here we sought to investigate the fate of individual tumour cells within their natural
microenvironment in the early stage of squamous skin tumours. Chemical-induced
carcinogenesis is the most commonly used tumour model in mice9,10. Although this model
may only imperfectly mimic the occurrence of human skin cancers, it has proved to be
extremely useful in dissecting the different steps of tumour initiation, promotion and
malignant progression, and has been instrumental in defining many paradigms in cancer
biology relevant to human pathology9,11,12. In this protocol, mice are first treated with the
carcinogen DMBA (7,12-dimethylbenz[α]anthracene) followed by continuous
administration of the mitogen TPA (12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate). During the
course of TPA administration, benign tumours, known as papilloma, appear (initiation) and
grow steadily (promotion), with a fraction eventually progressing into invasive tumours.
Papilloma are characterized by a skin excrescence that expands slowly and presents a
stereotypical architecture similar to normal epidermis with a basal layer of proliferative
tumour cells expressing K5/K14 and suprabasal layers of non-proliferative cells expressing
K1/K10, which finally enucleate and form a stratum corneum structure (Fig. 1a). In contrast
with normal homeostasis, in which the rate of cell production matches the rate of loss,
during tumour growth this balance is shifted towards proliferation, with the diameter of the
papilloma doubling in size every month (Supplementary Fig. 1). Although these tumours
contain a mass of amorphous material arising from the terminal differentiation of tumour
cells, the proportion of differentiated cells remains relatively constant over time
(Supplementary Fig. 1), indicating that tumours grow mostly through basal epithelial cell
expansion.
These observations raise several important questions. Why is the growth of the papilloma
relatively slow? Classical theories of tumour development often involve unbridled
replication of the tumour-maintaining cell population, leading to geometric expansion of the
tumour mass13. However, papilloma arise sporadically following DMBA/TPA treatment,
after which they grow slowly, giving rise to a heterogeneous size distribution
(Supplementary Fig. 1). Is the characteristic stem/progenitor cell hierarchy of normal tissue
recapitulated in the tumour? Are proliferative tumour cells equipotent, or is the papilloma
sustained by a distinct population of tumour cells with stem-cell-like properties? To address
these questions, we used a quantitative lineage-tracing strategy that has proved successful in
resolving cellular hierarchy and stem-cell fate in normal epithelial tissues14–19.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 11.

Driessens et al.

Page 3

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

To mark individual tumour cells, we made use of an inducible genetic lineage tracing system
(Fig. 1b). Following the administration of tamoxifen (TAM) to K14CREER/Rosa-YFP mice
bearing skin tumours induced by DMBA/TPA treatment, we were able to label cells at clonal
density within the papilloma (Fig. 1c). Titrating down the dose of TAM to 0.35 mg
generated yellow fluorescent protein (YFP) expression in around 1% of basal tumour
epithelial cells (Fig. 1d and Supplementary Fig. 2), a density that allows the fate of
individual labelled cells to be traced over time. In the weeks following TAM administration,
some YFP-labelled basal cells actively divided (Fig. 1e), and formed clones containing
several basal cells as well as suprabasal cells that reach the top of the cornified layer (Fig.
1f), demonstrating that labelled tumour cells are capable of generating all cell types that
comprise the tumour. Interestingly, the initial shape of the marked tumour clones is
reminiscent of the column of marked cells (sometimes termed epidermal proliferative units)
observed in the interfollicular epidermis during normal homeostasis14,15,20–22.

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

To gain further insight into the proliferative potential of labelled tumour cells, we first
quantified the size and persistence of clones across a range of time points from 3 days up to
7 weeks post-labelling (Fig. 2a–c). Analysis of the junction between normal epidermis and
papilloma excluded the possibility that tumour clones arise from cells coming from normal
epidermis (Supplementary Fig. 3). Whereas the frequency of labelled tumour clones
(number per sectional area) remained relatively constant during the first 2 weeks after TAM
administration, this number had dropped by around 3 weeks, and by 7 weeks involved only
20% of the initial clones (Fig. 2b), indicating that only a fraction of proliferative tumour
cells present long-term self-renewal potential. The near-absence of active caspase 3+ cells in
these tumours (0.28 ± 0.03% active caspase 3+ tumour epithelial cells) indicates that clones
were lost through differentiation rather than by apoptosis. (Supplementary Fig. 4). Of the
clones that did survive at 7 weeks post-labelling, many were enormous, containing several
hundreds to thousands of cells, and sometimes comprising an entire lobe of the tumour (Fig.
2a, c). These data indicate heterogeneity in the proliferative potential of tumour cells, and
indicate that a fraction may conform to the CSC paradigm in vivo by massively contributing
at the clonal level to tumour growth.
Although the stratified architecture is conserved in papilloma, its folded structure does not
facilitate whole-mounting. Instead, clones can only be visualized through the acquisition of
sectional data. As a result, total clone size could only be scored at single-cell resolution for
individual clones by three-dimensional (3D) reconstruction using confocal analyses of serial
(25 µm) sections (Supplementary Fig. 5). Following this procedure, we scored a limited
number of clones over a 7-week time course (Fig. 2c), from which several qualitative
features emerged. First, single-cell clones, which account for some 50% of the total YFPlabelled clones at 3 days post-labelling, showed a decline only around day 9, indicating that
the loss rate of terminally differentiated cells is relatively slow in comparison to the cell
division rate. Second, from the size distribution (Fig. 2c), there is further evidence of
proliferative heterogeneity. Although the spectrum of clone sizes is broad and continuous at
3 days post-labelling (with clones of ten cells or more coexisting with clones of only two
cells), by 9 days the distribution becomes bimodal (Fig. 2c). Of the clones involving
multiple cells (and therefore derived from proliferative cells), a minority continue to grow
and expand rapidly over the time course, whereas others generate clones with fewer than ten
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 11.

Driessens et al.

Page 4

cells that become progressively lost. At 7 weeks post-labelling, clones still present
significant heterogeneity in size ranging from dozens of cells to several thousands of cells
(Fig. 2c).

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Although data from the 3D reconstruction provides qualitative insight into the proliferative
cell dynamics, to further resolve the properties of these populations, we turned to a
quantitative analysis. Because acquisition of a large statistical ensemble of clone sizes from
serial reconstruction is impractical, we used data from independent sections, which could be
obtained in larger numbers. Fortunately, analysis of data from the 3D reconstruction revealed
a robust quadratic relationship between sectional clone size, n2D, and total clone size, n3D,
which allows the statistical distribution of the latter to be reliably reconstructed from the
former (Supplementary Fig. 5 and Supplementary Information). This quadratic dependence,
n3D ≈ n2D2/3, follows from the architecture of the tissue that constrains clones to grow
laterally as cohesive ‘pancake-like’ structures once the clone has spanned the suprabasal cell
layers.

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Data from the serial reconstruction indicate that papilloma are sustained by a cellular
hierarchy in which a minority population of tumour cells with stem-cell-like properties gives
rise to a more transient progenitor cell pool. Motivated by lineage-tracing studies of normal
epidermis14,15,18, we propose that the progenitor cell population follows a stochastic
pattern of fate in which cell division can lead to all three fate outcomes: two dividing cells,
two non-dividing, and one dividing and one non-dividing (Fig. 2d). Further, we propose that
the stem-cell-like population divides rapidly, leading to a similar pattern of stochastic fate
involving self-renewal and the generation of progenitor cell progeny (Fig. 2d). With this
model, we made use of the sectional clone size data (Fig. 2e) to fit the experimental
parameters (for further details of the modelling scheme and fitting procedure, see
Supplementary Information). This procedure is simplified considerably by the divergence in
size of the progenitor-and stem-cell-derived clones, with the former dominating the
distribution for smaller clone sizes and early time points, and the latter contributing
substantially to the larger clone sizes and later time points. From the predicted dynamics, we
obtain an excellent fit to the clone size distributions over the wide time course (Fig. 2f) if we
suppose that the stem-cell-like population accounts for just 20% of the labelled tumour
proliferative cells, and take both the progenitor and stem cell fates to be approximately
balanced with some 80% of divisions leading to asymmetric fate outcome while the
remaining 20% lead to either symmetrical duplication or differentiation, with equal
probability (Fig. 2d). Moreover, the inferred stem-cell-like tumour cell division rate of twice
per day is approximately four times larger than the progenitor cell division rate in the
tumour, and an order of magnitude larger than the progenitor cell division rate in normal
tissue. Finally, as expected from the analysis of the serial reconstruction, the loss rate of
terminally differentiated cells is slow, at around once per week.
To test the predictions of the model, we performed a double-labelling nucleotide pulse-chase
assay to estimate the proportion of cells that re-enter the cell cycle after 12 h. To this end, we
first administrated a pulse of 5-ethynyl-2′-deoxyuridine (EdU) to mice bearing papilloma,
and administrated 5-bromo-2-deoxyuridine (BrdU) 12 h later, and analysed double-labelled
basal cells 4 h after that (Fig. 3a). Significantly, whereas virtually no double-positive cells

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 11.

Driessens et al.

Page 5

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

can be found in normal epidermis on the edge of the tumour (Supplementary Fig. 6), around
17% of the basal tumour epithelial cells were BrdU–EdU double-positive (Fig. 3b),
consistent with the predictions made by the analysis of the clonal fate data (Fig. 2d and
Supplementary Information). To challenge the model further, we looked for additional clonal
fate characteristics that can be matched against the predicted dynamics. To fit the parameters
of the model, we make use of the total clone size data without reference to the relative
contribution of basal and suprabasal cells within the clones. To test the model, at 9 days
post-labelling, we explored the clone size distribution disaggregated into basal and total cell
contributions, focusing on the ensemble of basal clones (those with at least one cell that
retains an attachment to the basal lamina) (Fig. 3c and Supplementary Fig. 7). With the same
parameters, we found good agreement with the measured size distributions (Fig. 3d), lending
further support to the findings.

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

To determine whether the transition from benign papilloma to malignant invasive squamous
cell carcinoma (SCC) is accompanied by a change in the cellular hierarchy and proliferation
dynamics, we combined a study of clonal fate with proliferation kinetics in invasive SCC
arising from the spontaneous malignant transformation of papilloma in DMBA/TPA-treated
mice. Whereas SCCs do not express keratins associated with epidermal differentiation (such
as K10), evidence of terminal differentiation is visible in cell clusters known as keratin
pearls (one of the pathognomonic features of skin SCCs), with a frequency that varies from
tumour to tumour (Supplementary Fig. 8). Administration of 1 mg TAM to K14CREER/
Rosa-YFP mice presenting invasive SCC induced YFP expression at clonal density (0.9
± 0.3 clone per mm2) (Fig. 4a, b). From a confocal analysis of serial thick sections
(Supplementary Fig. 9), we were able to score the total clone size at 9 days post-labelling,
the time point for which we have the most comprehensive clonal data set in papilloma. The
proportion of clones presenting signs of differentiation through the presence of keratin pearls
is similar to the overall frequency of differentiated cells within tumours, indicating that the
targeted clones are representative (Supplementary Fig. 8). Whereas clones showed
significant heterogeneity in size (Fig. 4c–g), in contrast with papilloma, SCC also showed
tumour-to-tumour variability, and the incidence of small clones was significantly
diminished. Interestingly, all of the largest clones contained cells that contact the stroma and
endothelial cells as well as cells that have lost their cohesion with the rest of the clone, and
present signs of epithelial to mesenchymal transition with a fibroblastic-like morphology
(Fig. 4d, e, h) Most cells within these clones present no sign of terminal differentiation
despite having undergone many rounds of division (Fig. 4e), indicating that these clones are
comprised of proliferative cells with a very low probability of terminal differentiation.
Consistent with the notion that most cells in invasive SCCs are proliferative, about 70% of
cells in SCC are Ki67+ and continuous administration of BrdU for 5 days labelled about
90% of undifferentiated cells in invasive SCCs (Fig. 4i–k and Supplementary Fig. 8).
Although heterogeneity of clone size could reflect tumour cells with a range of proliferative
potential, the exponential form of the cumulative clone size distribution of individual
tumours (Supplementary Fig. 9) is equally consistent with a single equipotent proliferative
cell population, biased towards symmetric self-renewal, with a broad distribution of cell
cycle times (Supplementary Information). Within this paradigm, we estimate an average cell
division time that varies between 1 and 2 days (according to the tumour). This figure is
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 11.

Driessens et al.

Page 6

consistent with the results of a BrdU–EdU double-labelling assay, which revealed that,
whereas 23% of SCC cells acquire BrdU or EdU expression following a short pulse, the
frequency of double-labelled cells after 16 h chase was below 2% (Fig. 4l–n and
Supplementary Information).

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

In summary, our data present the first attempt to dissect the mode of tumour growth using
clonal analysis by lineage tracing in mice, and demonstrate for the first time the existence of
tumour cells with stem-cell-like properties in an unperturbed solid tumour, consistent with
the CSC paradigm. The neutral competition of tumour cells uncovered here in skin
papilloma is reminiscent of the dynamics found in normal tissue and indicates that this
hierarchical mode of tumour growth is mediated at the cellular level by stochastic cell fate
decisions. This mode of tumour growth, involving the chance expansion and extinction of
neighbouring clones, may explain the clonal heterogeneity found in many different
tumours23. In future studies, it will be important to define the mechanisms regulating the
balance between proliferation and differentiation during tumour progression, the influence
of the external environment and other physical constrains on tumour expansion, and whether
this stochastic mode of tumour progression also operates in other types of cancer.

Methods Summary

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Squamous skin tumours were induced by treating K14CREER/Rosa-YFP mice with the twostep DMBA/TPA chemical carcinogenesis protocol10. Clonal YFP expression in skin
tumours was performed by administrating 0.35 mg or 1 mg TAM to K14CREER/Rosa-YFP
mice bearing benign or malignant skin tumours. Immunostainings were performed as
described24. Quantification of the total clone size was determined by counting the number
of YFP-positive cells in 3D reconstruction of the whole clone using serial thick sections
analysed by confocal microscopy. Two-dimensional clone size was determined by counting
the number of YFP cells in a single tumour thin section and its relation to the total clone size
was inferred using the algorithm defined in the main text and Supplementary Information.
BrdU–EdU double-labelling approach was performed as described25. For further details see
Supplementary Methods.

Methods
Skin tumour induction and clonal YFP expression
K14CREER26 and Rosa-YFP mice were obtained from JAX. Mouse colonies were
maintained in a certified animal facility in accordance with European guidelines. Mice were
treated with DMBA and TPA as previously described4,9. Briefly, mice were treated with
DMBA at postnatal day 23, 25 and 27 with DMBA (9,10-dimethyl-1,2-benzanthracene) and
then treated weekly for several weeks with TPA (12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate). 7week-old mice were treated again twice with DMBA. 0.35 mg Tamoxifen (TAM) was
administered intraperitoneally to K14CREER/Rosa-YFP mice bearing papilloma and 1 mg
to mice bearing SCC. The tumours were surgically excised at different time points after
TAM injection.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 11.

Driessens et al.

Page 7

Measurement of tumour growth
Skin tumours were measured using a precision calliper allowing to discriminate size
modifications >0.1 mm. Tumour surface was measured every week with the formula A =
π(dD/2), where d is the minor tumour axis and D is the major tumour axis.

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Histology, immunostaining and imaging
Tissues were pre-fixed for 2–8 h in 4% paraformaldehyde (PAF) and washed in sucrose 30%
solution to remove the excess of PAF before being embedded in OCT. Samples were
sectioned serially in thin 6–7 µm or thick 25–30 µm sections using a CM3050S Leica
cryostat (Leica Microsystems GmbH).
The following primary antibodies were used: anti-K5 (rabbit, 1:1,000, Covance), anti-β4
(rat, 1:200, BD), anti-K14 (chicken, 1:1,000, Covance), anti-GFP (rabbit, 1:1,000, Molecular
Probes), anti-K10 (rabbit, 1:2,000, Covance), anti-active caspase 3 (rabbit, 1:600, R&D
Systems), FITC (fluorescein isothiocyanate)-coupled anti-BrdU (mouse, 1:100, BD), EdU
staining was performed following the manufacturer’s instructions (Invitrogen). Sections
were incubated in blocking buffer (PBS, normal donkey serum (NDS) 5%, BSA 1%, Triton
0.2% or 0.5% for thin and thick sections, respectively) for 1 h at room temperature. Primary
antibodies were incubated in blocking buffer overnight at 4 °C. Sections were rinsed three
times in PBS and incubated with secondary antibodies diluted at 1:400 for 1 h at room
temperature for thin sections or overnight at 4 °C for thick sections. The following
secondary antibodies were used: anti-rabbit, anti-rat, anti-chicken conjugated to
AlexaFluor488 (Molecular Probes), to rhodamine Red-X (Jackson ImmunoResearch) or to
Cy5 (Jackson ImmunoResearch). Nuclei were stained in Hoechst solution (1:1,000) and
slides were mounted in DAKO mounting medium supplemented with 2.5% Dabco (Sigma).
In all immunofluorescences, Hoechst nuclear staining is represented in blue.

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Pictures were acquired using an Axio Imager M1 Microscope, AxioCamMR3 camera using
Axiovision software (Carl Zeiss).
Confocal pictures were acquired using Zeiss LSM 510 or Zeiss LSM 780 confocal
microscopes using Zen software. Images were median-filtered (3 to 3) and are represented as
orthogonal projections of 20–65 optical sections in 0.3–1 μm increments rendered using Zen
software.
Analysis of clone size
Total clone size was determined by counting the number of YFP-positive cells in 3D
reconstruction of confocal analysis of the whole clone using serial thick sections.
2D clone size was determined by imaging 30 to 1,330 clones from at least 8 different
tumours from different mice at each time point. 6–7 μm sections were analysed to number
the cells and the total clone size was inferred after correction as described in the
Supplementary Information. The density of basal clones was determined by quantifying the
number of basal clones per area of tumour and corrected for the increase in the total surface
during tumour growth.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 11.

Driessens et al.

Page 8

Proliferation assays

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

To measure the kinetics of tumour cell proliferation, mice were treated with EdU (pulse) and
chased for 12 h followed by BrdU administration and another chase of 4 h. Tissues were first
stained for K5. Sections were then washed in PBS and fixed again in PAF 4%. After
washing in PBS, tissues were incubated for 20 min in HCl 1 N at 37 °C, washed three times
and incubated overnight with FITC-coupled anti-BrdU antibody (mouse, 1:100, BD). The
tissues were washed in PBS the next day and the EdU staining was performed following the
manufacturer’s instructions (Invitrogen). Slides were mounted in DAKO mounting medium
supplemented with 2.5% Dabco (Sigma).
FACS quantification of YFP basal tumour cells
3 days after TAM administration to the K14CREER/Rosa-YFP mice bearing skin tumours,
tumours were digested in collagenase I (Sigma) for 2 h at 37 °C on a rocking plate.
Collagenase I activity was blocked by addition of EDTA (5 mM). After tumour digestion,
cells were first incubated in PBS complemented with 30% FCS to block Fc receptors for 15
min at room temperature. Immunostaining was performed using phycoerythrin-conjugated
anti-α6-integrin (clone GoH3; BD Pharmingen), allophycocyanin-Cy7-conjugated antiEpcam (clone G8.8; Biolegend). YFP-positive tumour cells were quantified within the
Epcam+/α6-integrin+ population after forward scatter, side scatter selection and Hoechst dye
exclusion. Fluorescence-activated cell sorting analysis was performed using BD LSR
Fortessa and FACSDiva software (BD Biosciences).
Theory
See Supplementary Information.

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.

Acknowledgements
C.B. is investigator of WELBIO and chercheur qualifié of the FRS/FNRS. B.B. is chargé de recherche of the FRS/
FNRS and G.D. is supported by the Brussels Region. This work was supported by the FNRS, the program
d’excellence CIBLES of the Wallonia Region, a research grant from the Fondation Contre le Cancer, the ULB
foundation and the fond Gaston Ithier, a starting grant of the European Research Council (ERC), and the EMBO
Young Investigator Program. We thank F. Bollet-Quivogne and J.-M. Vanderwinden for their help with confocal
imaging.

References
1. Shackleton M, Quintana E, Fearon ER, Morrison SJ. Heterogeneity in cancer: cancer stem cells
versus clonal evolution. Cell. 2009; 138:822–829. [PubMed: 19737509]
2. Lobo NA, Shimono Y, Qian D, Clarke MF. The biology of cancer stem cells. Annu Rev Cell Dev
Biol. 2007; 23:675–699. [PubMed: 17645413]
3. Malanchi I, et al. Cutaneous cancer stem cell maintenance is dependent on β-catenin signalling.
Nature. 2008; 452:650–653. [PubMed: 18385740]
4. Beck B, et al. A vascular niche and a VEGF–Nrp1 loop regulate the initiation and stemness of skin
tumours. Nature. 2011; 478:399–403. [PubMed: 22012397]

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 11.

Driessens et al.

Page 9

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

5. Schober M, Fuchs E. Tumor-initiating stem cells of squamous cell carcinomas and their control by
TGF-β and integrin/focal adhesion kinase (FAK) signaling. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2011;
108:10544–10549. [PubMed: 21670270]
6. Nowell PC. The clonal evolution of tumor cell populations. Science. 1976; 194:23–28. [PubMed:
959840]
7. Greaves M, Maley CC. Clonal evolution in cancer. Nature. 2012; 481:306–313. [PubMed:
22258609]
8. Nguyen LV, Vanner R, Dirks P, Eaves CJ. Cancer stem cells: an evolving concept. Nature Rev
Cancer. 2012; 12:133–143. [PubMed: 22237392]
9. Kemp CJ. Multistep skin cancer in mice as a model to study the evolution of cancer cells. Semin
Cancer Biol. 2005; 15:460–473. [PubMed: 16039870]
10. Abel EL, Angel JM, Kiguchi K, DiGiovanni J. Multi-stage chemical carcinogenesis in mouse skin:
fundamentals and applications. Nature Protocols. 2009; 4:1350–1362. [PubMed: 19713956]
11. Owens DM, Watt FM. Contribution of stem cells and differentiated cells to epidermal tumours.
Nature Rev Cancer. 2003; 3:444–451. [PubMed: 12778134]
12. Perez-Losada J, Balmain A. Stem-cell hierarchy in skin cancer. Nature Rev Cancer. 2003; 3:434–
443. [PubMed: 12778133]
13. Klein CA. Parallel progression of primary tumours and metastases. Nature Rev Cancer. 2009;
9:302–312. [PubMed: 19308069]
14. Clayton E, et al. A single type of progenitor cell maintains normal epidermis. Nature. 2007;
446:185–189. [PubMed: 17330052]
15. Doupé DP, Klein AM, Simons BD, Jones PH. The ordered architecture of murine ear epidermis is
maintained by progenitor cells with random fate. Dev Cell. 2010; 18:317–323. [PubMed:
20159601]
16. Lopez-Garcia C, Klein AM, Simons BD, Winton DJ. Intestinal stem cell replacement follows a
pattern of neutral drift. Science. 2010; 330:822–825. [PubMed: 20929733]
17. Snippert HJ, et al. Intestinal crypt homeostasis results from neutral competition between
symmetrically dividing Lgr5 stem cells. Cell. 2010; 143:134–144. [PubMed: 20887898]
18. Simons BD, Clevers H. Strategies for homeostatic stem cell self-renewal in adult tissues. Cell.
2011; 145:851–862. [PubMed: 21663791]
19. Klein AM, Simons BD. Universal patterns of stem cell fate in cycling adult tissues. Development.
2011; 138:3103–3111. [PubMed: 21750026]
20. Ghazizadeh S, Taichman LB. Multiple classes of stem cells in cutaneous epithelium: a lineage
analysis of adult mouse skin. EMBO J. 2001; 20:1215–1222. [PubMed: 11250888]
21. Potten CS. Cell replacement in epidermis (keratopoiesis) via discrete units of proliferation. Int Rev
Cytol. 1981; 69:271–318. [PubMed: 6163744]
22. Mackenzie IC. Retroviral transduction of murine epidermal stem cells demonstrates clonal units of
epidermal structure. J Invest Dermatol. 1997; 109:377–383. [PubMed: 9284108]
23. Marusyk A, Polyak K. Tumor heterogeneity: causes and consequences. Biochim Biophys Acta.
2010; 1805:105–117. [PubMed: 19931353]
24. Van Keymeulen A, et al. Epidermal progenitors give rise to Merkel cells during embryonic
development and adult homeostasis. J Cell Biol. 2009; 187:91–100. [PubMed: 19786578]
25. Rocheteau P, Gayraud-Morel B, Siegl-Cachedenier I, Blasco MA, Tajbakhsh S. A subpopulation of
adult skeletal muscle stem cells retains all template DNA strands after cell division. Cell. 2012;
148:112–125. [PubMed: 22265406]
26. Vasioukhin V, Degenstein L, Wise B, Fuchs E. The magical touch: genome targeting in epidermal
stem cells induced by tamoxifen application to mouse skin. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 1999;
96:8551–8556. [PubMed: 10411913]

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 11.

Driessens et al.

Page 10

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Figure 1. Genetic tracing of skin papilloma at clonal density.

a, Scheme of the stereotypical architecture of papilloma similar to normal epidermis. cor,
stratum corneum; der, dermis; epi, epithelial cells. b, Scheme of genetic strategy to induce
YFP expression in papilloma. ER, tamoxifen-responsive hormone-binding domain of the
oestrogen receptor; K14, human keratin 14 promoter. c, Protocol of DMBA/TPA and
tamoxifen (TAM) administration. d, Immunostainings for β4-integrin (β4) and YFP in
papilloma with or without TAM. e, Immunostaining for β4-integrin, YFP and 5-ethynyl-2′-

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 11.

Driessens et al.

Page 11

deoxyuridine (EdU) in a papilloma 6 days post-labelling. f, Immunostaining for β4 integrin,
YFP and K10 in a papilloma 14 days post-labelling. Scale bars, 50 μm.

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 11.

Driessens et al.

Page 12

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Figure 2. Quantitative clonal analysis in skin papilloma.

a, Immunostainings for β4-integrin and YFP in papilloma after TAM administration. b,
Quantification of the relative density of basal clones over time (n = 666, 383, 328, 194, 162,
35 and 33 clones from at least 5 different tumours at day 3, 6, 9, 14, 24, 40 and 60,
respectively). c, Total size of clones derived from 3D serial reconstruction over time. The n
value is shown. d, Tumour growth model showing the proliferative stem/progenitor cells. e,
Clone sizes derived from single sections over time. The n value is shown. f, Fit of the
hierarchical model (d) to the corresponding cumulative sectional clonal size distribution.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 11.

Driessens et al.

Page 13

Points show data (e) and the blue lines show the model prediction. Scale bars, 50 μm. Error
bars denote s.e.m.

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 11.

Driessens et al.

Page 14

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Figure 3. Challenging the stem/progenitor cell model in papilloma.

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

a, Immunostaining for BrdU, EdU and K5 in papilloma from mice treated following the
protocol schemed above. b, Quantification of the proportion of unmarked cells, BrdU, EdU
and EdU–BrdU double-labelled cells within the basal layer of papilloma (n = 5,512 cells
from 8 papilloma). c, Immunostaining for YFP and β4-integrin on papilloma 9 days after
TAM administration. d, Comparison between the model prediction (blue lines), with
parameters defined in Fig. 2d and in the text, and the clone size distribution (n = 105 clones
from 7 tumours). Scale bars, 50 μm. Error bars denote s.e.m.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 11.

Driessens et al.

Page 15

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Figure 4. Quantitative clonal analysis of squamous cell carcinoma.

a, Protocol of TAM administration and clonal analysis in SCC. b, Immunostaining for YFP
and β4-integrin in SCC 3 days after TAM administration. c–f, Same as in b 9 days after
TAM administration. KP, keratin pearl; str, stroma. g, Total size of clones quantified from
serial 30 μm sections 9 days after TAM administration (n = 37, 25, 42 and 28 clones in SCC
1, 2, 3 and papilloma (Pap), respectively). h, Immunostaining for YFP, K5 and endoglin
(Endo) in SCC 9 days after TAM administration. i, Protocol of BrdU administration. j,
Immunostaining for BrdU and K14 in SCC. k, Quantification of the BrdU+ tumour epithelial

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 11.

Driessens et al.

Page 16

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

cells (TECs) within SCC after 5 days of continuous BrdU administration (n = 676
undifferentiated tumour cells and 282 KP cells). Error bars denote s.d. Undiff,
undifferentiated. l, Protocol of BrdU and EdU administration. m, Immunostaining for BrdU,
EdU and K5 in SCC from mice treated following the protocol shown in l. n, Quantification
of the proportion of unmarked cells, BrdU, EdU and EdU–BrdU double-labelled cells within
SCC (n = 9,010 cells from 2 SCC). Scale bars, 50 μm.

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 11.

