www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Oncotarget, 2017, Vol. 8, (No. 2), pp: 2604-2616
Research Paper

Y-box binding protein-1 promotes hepatocellular carcinomainitiating cell progression and tumorigenesis via Wnt/β-catenin
pathway
Hsiao-Mei Chao1,2, Hong-Xuan Huang1, Po-Hsiang Chang1, Kuo-Chang Tseng1,
Atsushi Miyajima3, Edward Chern1
1

niChe Laboratory for Stem Cell and Regenerative Medicine, Department of Biochemical Science and Technology, National
Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan

2

Department of Pathology, Wan Fang Hospital, Taipei Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan

3

Institute of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan

Correspondence to: Edward Chern, email: Edchern@ntu.edu.tw
Keywords: Y-box binding protein 1, tumor-initiating cell, HCC, Wnt, stemness
Received: June 13, 2016     Accepted: November 22, 2016     Published: December 01, 2016

ABSTRACT
Y-box binding protein-1 (YB-1) is a pleiotropic molecule that binds DNA to
regulate genes on a transcriptional level in the nucleus and binds RNA to modulate gene
translation in the cytoplasm. In our previous studies, YB-1 was also characterized as a
fetal hepatic protein that regulates the maturation of hepatocytes and is upregulated
during liver regeneration. Moreover, YB-1 has been shown to be expressed in human
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). However, the role of YB-1 in HCC remains unclear.
Here, we aimed to characterize the role of YB-1 in HCC. Based on the results of loss-offunction in HCC and gain-of-function in mice liver using hydrodynamic gene delivery,
YB-1 promoted hepatic cells proliferation in vitro and in vivo. YB-1 was also involved
in HCC cell proliferation, migration, and drug-resistance. The results of extreme
limiting dilution sphere forming analysis and cancer initiating cell marker analysis
were also shown that YB-1 maintained HCC initiating cells population. YB-1 also
induced the epithelial-mesenchymal transition and stemness-related gene expression.
Knockdown of YB-1 suppressed the expression of Wnt ligands and β-catenin, impaired
Wnt/β-catenin signaling pathway and reduced the numbers of HCC initiating cells.
Moreover, YB-1 displayed nuclear localization particularly in the HCC initiating cells,
the EpCAM+ cells or sphere cells. Our findings suggested that YB-1 was a key factor
in HCC tumorigenesis and maintained the HCC initiating cell population.

INTRODUCTION

of genes encoding cyclin A and cyclin B, which are
associated with cell cycle progression [5]. In breast cancer
cells, YB-1 promotes the transcription of CD44 and
CD49f [6]. Moreover, YB-1 binds to mRNAs encoding
proteins involved in the epithelial-mesenchymal transition
(EMT) to regulate gene translation and promote the EMT
[7]. Studies have shown that microRNAs (miRNAs)
or small molecules target YB-1 to inhibit metastasis of
osteosarcoma and prostate cancer [8, 9]. Taken together,
these data imply that YB-1 may play a critical role in the
tumorigenesis and progression of cancers.
In our previous study, YB-1 was shown to be
highly expressed in E12 mouse fetal liver and then
exhibit decreased expression with maturity [10]. The

Y-box binding protein 1 (YB-1) belongs to the family
of cold shock binding proteins and binds to the nucleotide
sequence invert CCAAT to regulate gene expression. The
intracellular distribution of YB-1 determines its functions.
YB-1 binds DNA in the nucleus and RNA in the cytoplasm
to modulate the transcription and translation of genes,
respectively. YB-1 is upregulated in some cancers, such
as breast, prostate, and ovarian cancers, and functions as
a proto-oncogene [1–3]. Previous studies have shown that
YB-1 promotes the expression of multidrug resistance
genes, thereby enhancing drug resistance in tumors [4].
YB-1 has also been reported to increase the expression
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

2604

Oncotarget

expression of YB-1 increases again during liver injury
and regeneration. During liver development, YB-1
regulates the transcription of C/EBPα and modulates the
expression of carbamoyl phosphate synthetase-1 (CPS-1),
playing a role in ammonia metabolism in hepatocytes [10].
Moreover, in the normal adult liver, YB-1 is not expressed
or is maintained at a very low level [10, 11]; however,
in the fetal and regenerated liver, YB-1 is upregulated.
Thus, the expression of YB-1 may be associated with the
immaturity and proliferation of hepatocytes.
Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is the most
common liver cancer worldwide and is associated with
a high mortality rate. The biological function of YB-1 in
HCC is still unclear. In 2005, Yasen et al demonstrated
that YB-1 was expressed in human HCC [11], with 89%
of patients showing positivity for YB-1 in HCC cells.
Moreover, YB-1 is typically localized in the cytoplasm;
however, HCC cells from some patients showed both
intranuclear and cytoplasmic localization; this differential
expression pattern was found to be associated with a poor
prognosis and low survival rate. Despite these studies,
the role of the cellular localization of YB-1 in HCC is
poorly understood [11]. Increasing evidence has shown
that some stem cell-like cancer cells with self-renewal and
heterogeneous properties can act as tumor-initiating cells
during tumorigenesis, including HCC. Such stem celllike cancer initiating cells show higher chemoresistance/
radioresistance and higher potential to metastasize [12].
Moreover, some surface markers of fetal hepatoblasts
or hepatic progenitor cells, such as EpCAM, CD90, and
CD133, can also act as surface markers of HCC initiating
cells [13–15]. YB-1 plays an essential role in fetal
hepatoblasts and during liver regeneration; thus, YB-1 may
participate in HCC tumorigenesis and could be associated
with the characteristics of cancer initiating cells.
Accordingly, in the present study, we investigated
the significance of YB-1 in HCC and HCC stem cell-like
cells to clarify the role of this protein in HCC.

During fetal liver development and liver
regeneration in mice, YB-1 upregulates cyclin A and cyclin
B to modulate cell proliferation [10]. To examine whether
YB-1 was involved in HCC proliferation, we knocked
down YB-1 in HCC cells and measured the expression of
proliferation related genes and proliferative ability of HCC
cells. Genes encoding cyclin A, cyclin B, and proliferating
cell nuclear antigen (PCNA), which are all related to
proliferation, were downregulated in YB-1-knockdown
cell lines; however, the gene encoding p53 was upregulated
(Figure 1B and 1C). YB-1-knockdown cells also reduced
the proliferative ability by BrdU assay (Figure 1D). These
results showed that HCC cell proliferative activity was
decreased in YB-1-knockdown cell lines.
It is difficult to determine the functions of YB-1
in HCC cell lines by gain-of-function mutations owing
to the expression of YB-1 in HCC cells. However, YB-1
is not expressed or is expressed at very low levels in
adult hepatocytes, and hydrodynamic gene delivery is
an efficient method for transiently overexpressing YB-1
in adult liver cells. Compared with the control mouse
liver, livers showing overexpression of YB-1 exhibited
increased cyclin D, cyclin A, and cyclin B expression at
48 h after gene delivery (Figure 2).
Next, colony formation assays were carried out
to investigate the long-term effects of YB-1 on the
proliferation and tumorigenesis of hepatoma cells. As
shown in Figure 3, the colony-forming ability of YB1-knockdown cells was reduced. Thus, these results
suggested that YB-1 increased the proliferative activity of
hepatoma cells.

YB-1 function was associated with HCC
migration
The EMT occurs in wound healing, organ fibrosis,
and initiation of metastasis during cancer progression.
YB-1 has been reported to regulate several EMT-related
genes and to promote the EMT process. Thus, we next
examined whether YB-1 was involved in HCC migration
using transwell migration assays. The result (Figure 4A)
revealed that YB-1-knockdown cells exhibited reduced
migration capacity compared with control cells. Moreover,
YB-1 knockdown resulted in downregulation of the
mesenchymal genes encoding Snail and vimentin and
upregulation of the epithelial gene encoding E-cadherin
(Figure 4B). These data indicated that YB-1 may be
involved in the EMT in HCC cells.

RESULTS
YB-1 promoted HCC cell proliferation and
colony formation
YB-1 has been reported to be expressed in human
HCC. We investigated the amplification status of YB-1 in
the TCGA dataset using cBioPortal, and the importance
of YB-1 overexpression on survival of HCC patients
[16, 17]. Kaplan–Meier analysis of patients dichotomized
on median YB-1 expression demonstrates poorer
overall survival for patients with high versus low YB-1
expressing tumors in the TCGA dataset (Figure 1A).
In order to elucidate the function of YB-1 in HCC,
we first examined the expression of YB-1 in different
HCC cell lines. YB-1 was expressed in HCC cell lines
(Supplementary Figure S1).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

YB-1 increased drug resistance in HCC
Chemotherapy has been widely used to treat
cancers; however, the efficacy of different chemotherapy
regimens is variable and may be related to the expression
of multidrug-resistance genes. Although YB-1 has been
shown to increase the expression of the ABC transporter
2605

Oncotarget

MDR-1 in cancers, the role of YB-1 in drug resistance in
HCC is unknown. Therefore, we next examined the effects
of YB-1 knockdown on HCC cell numbers after treatment
with doxorubicin and sorafenib, two drugs used to treat

HCC in the clinical setting. In HCC cell culture, YB-1knockdown cells exhibited decreased drug resistance
against doxorubicin and sorafenib compared with control
cells (Figure 5).

Figure 1: YB-1 promoted HCC proliferation. (A) Patients with high YB-1 expressed HCC were associated with poor survival.

Kaplan-Meier curves of overall survival of patients with hepatocellular carcinoma in cBioportal with TCGA dataset stratified by YB-1
expression. According to cBioportal, High YB-1 indicated YB-1 gene amplification or mRNA upregulation. Low YB-1 indicated no gene
alteration of YB-1 in the tumor cases of TCGA sets. (B) Knock-down YB-1 in HepG2 cells decreased the expression of proliferation-related
genes, Cyclin A2, Cyclin B, and PCNA, and up-regulated tumor suppressor gene P53. The hepatoma cell line, HepG2 was transfected with
YB-1 siRNA. Relative expression of Cyclin A2, Cyclin B, PCNA and P53 in HepG2 were analyzed by real-time PCR. Expression levels
were normalized to that of GAPDH. Each bar represents the means of three determinations ± SD. *p < 0.05 and **p < 0.01 among the
indicated groups compared with control group. (C) The protein expressions of Cyclin A2, Cyclin B, and P53 in HepG2 were analyzed by
western blot. The protein expression was normalized to GAPDH. (D) Knockdown of YB-1 inhibited cell proliferation rate in HCC cells.
The proliferation rate of HCC cells was measured by BrdU assay. Each bar represents the means of three determinations ± SD. *p < 0.05
among the indicated groups.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

2606

Oncotarget

YB-1 increased stemness and the cancer stem
cell population in HCC

were downregulated in YB-1-knockdown cells. The
expression of alpha-fetoprotein, an immature molecular
marker, was also decreased in YB-1-knockdown cells
(Figure 6B). On the other hand, albumin, a marker of
mature hepatocytes, was upregulated (Figure 6B). These
results indicated that YB-1 may increase the stemness of
hepatoma cells.

YB-1 is upregulated in mouse fetal hepatoblasts.
However, whether YB-1 affects the stemness and maturity
of hepatoma cells is not known. As shown in Figure 6A,
stemness-related genes, such as Nanog, Oct4, and c-Myc,

Figure 2: YB-1 induced proliferation genes in mice. (A) Overexpression of YB-1 in hepatocytes of mice by hydrodynamic

gene delivery. Hepatocyte specific expression vector (pLIVE-YB-1) and the control vector (pLIVE-LacZ) were force-expressed in the
liver of 6 weeks old mice by hydrodynamic gene delivery method. After 48 hours, the mice livers were stained with YB-1 antibody.
(B, C) Proliferation genes were upregulated in YB-1 overexpressed liver. Relative expression of YB-1and cell cycle related genes in mice
liver (n = 3) were analyzed by real-time PCR. Expression levels were normalized to that of GAPDH. Each bar represents the means of three
determinations ± SD. *p < 0.05 and **p < 0.01 among the indicated groups.

Figure 3: YB-1 KD HCC cells reduced colony formation ability. (A) The control and YB-1 KD clones of HuH7 cells were seeded

at low density in individual wells of a standard 6-well plate and grew for 14 days in 3% FBS DMEM. Colonies were visualized by crystal
violet staining (A) and the numbers of colonies were counted (B). The ability of colony formation was significantly lower in the YB-1 KD
cells group compared with control cells. Each bar represents the means of three determinations ± SD. *p < 0.05 among the indicated groups.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

2607

Oncotarget

Figure 4: YB-1 Knockdown HCC cells decreased migration ability. (A) Knock-down YB-1 inhibited migration ability of
HuH7 cell. Cell migration was determined using Millipore Transwell chambers. The numbers of cells in five random microscopic fields
were counted for each group. Data shown represent the means ± standard errors of the means (SEM) of data from at least 3 independent
experiments. (B) EMT related genes were down-regulated in YB-1 knock-down HCC cells. The expression of snail and vimentin, the
mesenchymal related genes, were down-regulated, and E-cadherin, an epithelial related gene, was up-regulated in YB-1 knock-down
HuH7 cells. Expression levels were normalized to that of GAPDH. Each bar represents the means of three determinations ± SD. *p < 0.05,
**p < 0.01 and ***p < 0.001 among the indicated groups.

Figure 5: YB-1 Knockdown HCC cells decreased the drug resistance. (A) Control and YB-1 KD HuH7 cells were treated with
doxorubicin (0.15 μg/ml) or (B) sorafenib (0.15 mM) for 3 days in 3% FBS DMEM. Cell viability was assessed using the MTT assay. The
cell viability of YB-1 KD cells was decreased compared with control cells. Each bar represents the means of three determinations ± SD.
*p < 0.05; ** p < 0.01 among the indicated groups.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

2608

Oncotarget

Cellular localization of YB-1 in HCC initiating
cells

In order to determine whether YB-1 affected the
population of HCC initiating cells, we investigated
side-population and EpCAM+ hepatoma cells by flow
cytometry. As shown in Figure 6C and 6D, the numbers of
side-population cells and EpCAM+ cells were decreased
after YB-1 knockdown.

YB-1 modulates the expression of genes via DNA
transcription and RNA translation depending on its
subcellular localization. In human HCC, expression of
YB-1 in both the nucleus and cytoplasm of HCC cells
results in poor clinical outcomes compared with that
observed when YB-1 is expressed only in the cytoplasm.
To determine whether there was a subgroup of HCC
cells with predominantly nuclear expression of YB-1, we
investigated the subcellular localization of YB-1 in HCC
cells by high-content analysis. As shown in Figure 8, YB-1
was mainly expressed in the cytoplasm of HCC cells in
the attached culture, whereas YB-1 was predominantly
present in the nucleus of sphere cells and EpCAM+
cells (Figure 8A–8C). Moreover, nuclear localization
of β-catenin was also observed in the EpCAM+ cells
(Supplementary Figure S4) These results may explain the
two different immunohistochemical expression patterns
of YB-1 in human HCC and revealed that YB-1 exerted
its specific functions in cancer initiating cells via DNA
transcription.

YB-1 was involved in HCC tumorigenesis
Sphere-forming assay has been widely used
to identify stem cells based on the self-renewal and
differentiation abilities of stem cells at the single cell level
in vitro. In order to elucidate whether YB-1 was involved
in the regulatory network of hepatic cancer initiating cells,
extreme limiting dilution analysis (ELDA) [18], based on
the sphere-forming assay in vitro, was used to analyze
the cancer initiating cell frequency in hepatoma cells.
As shown in Figure 6E and Supplementary Figure S2A,
the frequency of cancer initiating cells was decreased,
and the sphere formation ability was impaired in YB-1knockdown cells. Taken together, these data suggested
that YB-1 may promote the self-renewal abilities of cancer
initiating cells to mediate tumorigenesis in HCC.

YB-1 was involved in Wnt/β-catenin signaling
pathway in HCC

DISCUSSION
YB-1 is a pleiotropic molecule that binds DNA
and RNA to regulate genes at the transcriptional level
in the nucleus and translational level in the cytoplasm,
respectively. In the present study, we found that YB-1
was expressed in HCC cell lines. After loss of YB-1
expression, HCC cells exhibited decreased expression
of proliferation markers, such as cyclin A and cyclin
B, increased expression of the tumor-suppressor gene
p53, and inhibition of cell growth. The expression of
cell cycle genes was increased in mouse livers through
the hydrodynamic gene delivery method, and YB-1 was
found to promote cell proliferation in vitro and in vivo.
Our previous study showed that YB-1 is upregulated
during liver development and liver regeneration, in
which hepatocytes require vigorous cell proliferation.
Compared with mature hepatocytes, hepatocytes present
during liver development and regeneration or in HCC are
in an immature state in which physiological functions
are suppressed. Moreover, our previous study showed
that YB-1 inhibits the expression of CPS1 to impair the
ammonia metabolism [10]. Thus, taken together, these
data suggested that YB-1 may regulate the balance
between cell proliferation and differentiation during liver
development and injury.
HCC is a heterogeneous disease. Increasing
evidence has shown that a subgroup of cancer initiating
cells has stem cell-like properties, such as self-renewal,
sphere-forming ability, and production of heterogeneous

Wnt/β-catenin signaling pathway plays an important
role in HCC initiating cells, which maintains HCC
initiating cells stem cell properties and is involved in HCC
tumorigenesis [19, 20]. In Figure 7A, knockdown of YB-1
suppressed Wnt signaling target genes, Axin1 and Axin2.
The protein level of β-catenin was also downregulated
in both YB-1 KD hepatoma cells and YB-1 KD sphere
cells (Figure 7B and Supplementary Figure S2B).
YB-1 knockdown hepatoma cells exhibited reduced
nuclear translocation of β-catenin (Figure 7C). We also
demonstrated that the expression of WNT-1 and WNT-2B
were downregulated in YB-1 KD cells (Figure 7D).
Moreover, overexpression of YB-1 increased the TOPFlash transcriptional activity (Figure 7E).
In order to realize whether YB-1 promoted stemness
via Wnt/β-catenin pathway, the rescue experiment was
carried out using the active form β-catenin (β-cateninΔN,
lack of the phosphorylation domain of GSK-3β).
Overexpression of β-cateninΔN in the YB-1 KD cells
could rescue the HCC initiating cell (EpCAM+ cell)
population and the expression of stemness genes
(Figure 7F and Supplementary Figure S3). Overexpression
of both YB-1 and β-cateninΔN in hepatoma cells could
additionally increase the TOP-Flash transcriptional
activity (Figure 7E). Taken together, YB-1 maintained
the stemness feature of HCC initiating cells probably via
Wnt/β-catenin signaling.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

2609

Oncotarget

progeny. These cancer initiating cells possess greater
chemoresistance/radioresistance and tend to show
increased invasiveness and migration capacity through
promotion of the EMT, which is associated with cancer

recurrence and metastasis. Here, we showed that YB-1
was highly expressed in cancer initiating cells in HCC
cells. Silencing of YB-1 resulted in decreased HCC
migration, increased EMT-related gene expression, and

Figure 6: YB-1 promote HCC initiating cell properties and population. (A) Stemness genes were downregulated and the

differentiated gene was upregulated in YB-1 KD HCC cells. Stemness genes, Nanog, Oct4 and cMyc were decreased in YB-1 KD HuH7
cells. (B) Hepatic maturation marker gene, albumin, was up-regulated in YB-1 KD HuH7 cells. Relative expression of genes in HCC
cells was analyzed by real-time PCR. Expression levels were normalized to that of GAPDH. Each bar represents the means of three
determinations ± SD. *p < 0.05 and **p < 0.01 among the indicated groups. (C) Numbers of side-population (SP) cells were decreased in
YB-1 KD HuH7 cells. The cells were detached, labeled with the Hoechst 33342 in the presence or absence of 50 μM verapamil and then
analyzed by flow cytometry (BD Aria III). The SP cells disappeared in the presence of verapamil (lower panel). (D) Numbers of EpCAM
positive cells were decreased in YB-1 KD HuH7 cells. The expression of HCC stem cell marker, EpCAM, bound with anti-EpCAM
conjugated FITC antibodies was analyzed by flow cytometry (BD canto II). (E) HCC initiating cells frequency was declined in YB-1 KD
HuH7 cells. Limiting dilution analysis of sphere formation was conducted to estimate the frequency of HCC initiating cells by fitting the
single-hit Poisson model to the limiting-dilution data. The frequency of HCC stem cells was calculated using the extreme limiting dilution
analysis platform.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

2610

Oncotarget

reduced chemoresistance. Furthermore, the ratio of cancer
initiating cells in HCC was decreased, and tumorigenesis
and initiating cell frequency in HCC cells was lower, as
shown by extreme limiting dilution analysis following
knockdown of YB-1. These results implied that YB-1
acted as a marker of HCC and played essential roles in

maintaining the numbers of HCC initiating cells and the
tumorigenic capacity. On the other hand, Wnt/β-catenin
signaling plays a key role in stem cell feature maintenance
in HCC [20]. According to the ChIP-on-chip data in breast
cancer by Dr. Dunn et al. [21], YB-1 might be recruited on
the promoter of wnt1, wnt2b, wnt4, wnt3A, wnt5b, wnt10a,

Figure 7: YB-1 promoted Wnt/β-catenin signaling. (A) Wnt/β-catenin signaling target genes, Anix1 and Anix2 were downregulated
in YB-1 KD HuH7 cells. Relative expression of genes in HuH7 cells was analyzed by real-time PCR. Expression levels were normalized
to that of GAPDH. Each bar represents the means of three determinations ± SD. *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01 among the indicated groups.
(B) β-catenin was downregulated in YB-1 KD HuH7 cells. Protein level of β-catenin was detected by western blot. The protein expression
was normalized to GAPDH. (C) Immunofluorescence staining of β-catenin in control and YB-1 KD HuH7 cells. (D) Wnt ligands were
down-regulated in YB-1 KD HuH7 cells. Relative expression of genes in HuH7 cells was analyzed by real-time PCR. Expression levels
were normalized to that of GAPDH. Each bar represents the means of three determinations ± SD. *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01 among the indicated
groups (E) TOP-Flash luciferase reporter assay showed the activation of Wnt signaling in HuH7 cells. Overexpression of YB-1and
β-cateninΔΝ increased TOP-Flash promoter activity. Each bar represents the means of three determinations ± SD. *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01,
***p < 0.001 among the indicated groups. (F) β-cateninΔΝ rescued EpCAM+ cell population that decreased in YB-1 KD HuH7 cells.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

2611

Oncotarget

wnt11 and wnt16 genes. Here, we found that knockdown
of YB-1 inhibited the expression of WNT-1 and WNT-2B.
However, the expression of other Wnt family was not
changed or undetectable. Moreover, silencing of YB-1
inhibited the nuclear translocation of β-catenin in HCC
cells. Overexpression of active form β-cateninΔΝ in the
YB-1 KD cells rescued the HCC initiating cell population
and tumor stemness. These data suggested that YB-1 may
promote Wnt/β-catenin signaling via upregulation of
WNT-1, WNT-2B and β-catenin. Moreover, YB-1 may be
associated with the progression of HCC. Consistent with
our previous study, YB-1 was shown to be upregulated
in the fetal and regenerating liver and was a marker of
liver stem cells; high expression of YB-1 in the HCC
subpopulation may be correlated with stemness. In
addition to liver development, YB-1 plays important roles
in the development of the brain [22]. Recent research has
revealed that YB-1 is also a marker for neural stem cells
and is expressed in tumor-initiating cells in the brain,
which participate in the development of glioblastoma
[23]. Additionally, YB-1 is a key factor contributing to
the increase in stemness. For example, YB-1 increases
the expression of stem cell marker proteins, such as CD44
and CD49f, in breast cancer [6]. Thus, YB-1 may play
essential roles in tumor initiation and development.
Clinical analysis of cBioportal database showed
that YB-1 was frequently expressed in human HCC and
associated with poor survival of patients (Figure 1A).
Yasen’s clinical data also revealed the same tendency
[11]. Moreover, YB-1 was detected in the cytoplasm or
in both the cytoplasm and nucleus. Patients with HCC
harboring YB-1 localized in the nucleus tended to have
poorer prognoses and lower survival rates. However, the
relevance of the subcellular localization of YB-1 in HCC
remains unclear. Previous studies have shown that YB-1
translocates into the nucleus to regulate transcription under
genotoxic stress, such as UV or chemotherapeutic drugs
[24, 25]. For example, YB-1 modulates the expression
of the MDR-1 gene at the transcription level [4]. In our
study, YB-1 was found to induce the expression of EMTand stemness-related genes in HCC cells. We also found
that most HCC initiating cells (EpCAM+ cells) or sphere
cells expressed YB-1 in the nucleus. These data suggested
that nuclear YB-1 may drive HCC cells to obtain stem
cell-like properties, thereby maintaining the number of
HCC initiating cells and increasing chemoresistance and
invasive capacity. This may explain why HCC patients
with nuclear YB-1 have poor disease-free survival
rates [11]. Furthermore, recent studies have shown that
recurrent ovarian cancer cells tend to have increased
nuclear YB-1 [26]. Thus, nuclear YB-1 may be related
to higher recurrence rates and common cancer stem cell
properties.
Liver carcinogenesis is a progressive process
involving cellular transformation, cancer cell proliferation,
and metastasis; this process may be reflected in the
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

differential expression and subcellular localization of
YB-1. YB-1 is induced transiently in hepatocytes to
increase proliferative capacity and repair the liver when
the liver is injured or subjected to environmental stress.
Permanent YB-1 expression may be one of the factors
driving the initiation of hepatocellular carcinogenesis.
YB-1-expressing cells may further obtain stem cell-like
properties when YB-1 translocates into the nucleus under
niche stimulation (Figure 8D). However, the mechanisms
through which YB-1 is induced are unclear. Elucidation
of the regulatory mechanisms of YB-1 expression and the
relevance of its nuclear localization in HCC may improve
our understanding of HCC tumorigenesis and progression
and provide a novel therapeutic target in HCC. In
addition, owing to its potential roles in chemoresistance,
YB-1 could be a potential adjuvant target molecule
combined with conventional chemotherapy to elevate the
chemosensitivity of HCC.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Cell lines
HuH7, HepG2, JHH5 and Hep3B HCC cell lines
were cultured in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium
(DMEM, Life Technologies) supplemented with 10%
FBS (GE Healthcare) and 1% penicillin/streptomycin/
glutamine (PSG, Life Technologies) and maintained
at 37°C in a humidified incubator with 5% CO2. The
proliferative response of YB-1 knockdown HCC cells was
examined by the BrdU Cell Proliferation Kit (Millipore)
according to the manufacturer’s procedures.

Animals
C57BL/6J mice were obtained from CLEA Japan,
Inc. The experiments were performed according to the
guideline set by the institutional animal care and use
committee of the University of Tokyo. Hydrodynamic gene
delivery was allowed the standard procedure of TransIT-EE
Delivery Kit (Mirus Bio). Twenty micrograms of purified
plasmid (pLIVE-YB-1 or pLIVE-LacZ control plasmid)
was dissolved in 1.8 ml of TransIT-EE Delivery Solution
(Mirus Bio) and then was injected via mouse tail vein.

Sphere formation assay
To obtain individual single cell, HuH7 or Hep3B
cells were treated with 0.5% trypsin. Cells were then
resuspended in DMEM/F12 medium (Life Technologies)
containing B27 (Life Technologies), human recombinant
EGF (20 ng/ml; Pepro Tech), bFGF (20 ng/ml; Pepro Tech),
plated at a density of 1 × 103 live cells/ml medium on
ultra-low attachment dish or plate and cultured for 6 days.
For limited dilution assay, cells were seeded at different
densities, including 1 × 103 cells/mL, 5 × 102 cells/mL,
2612

Oncotarget

2.5 × 102 cells/mL, and 1 × 102 cells/mL for 16 wells,
32 wells, 48 wells, and 96 wells in ultra-low attachment
96 well-dish. These cells were cultured for 8 to 10 days.
Spheres were detected by staining with Hoechst 33342 at
37°C for 30 to 40 minutes and analyzed with In Cell 2000

Analyzer (GE Healthcare). The groups were compared
by Mann Whitney test, P < 0.05 was considered to be
significantly different. For limited dilution assay, data were
analyzed by webtool at http://bioinf.wehi.edu.au/software/
elda/ P < 0.05 was considered to be significantly different.

Figure 8: YB-1 translocated into nucleus in HCC initiating cells. (A) Immunofluorescence staining of YB-1 in attached 2D

HuH7 cells and HuH7 sphere cells. YB-1 was mainly sub-localized in the nucleus of sphere cells. 2D attached HCC cells and sphere cells
were stained for YB-1 (green). Nucleus was stained by PI (red). Representative images are shown in (A). (B) The nucleus/cytoplasm ratio
of YB-1 distribution in HCC cells was quantified by high content cell analyzer (GE IN CELL 2000). The percentage of HCC cells with
nucleus/cytoplasm ratio of YB-1 localization more than 1.5 was calculated. Each bar represents the means of three determinations ± SD. (*)
P < 0.05 among the indicated groups. (C) YB-1 was mainly localized in the nucleus of EpCAM+ cells. (D) Fetal liver protein YB-1 was
upregulated again in injured liver and HCC. YB-1 promoted HCC progression and nuclear translocation of YB-1 in HCC initiating cells
may increase stem cell features via transcriptional regulation.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

2613

Oncotarget

RNA extraction and quantitative PCR analysis

for 10 minutes (PI, Life Technologies). BD FACSCantoII
and BD AriaIII were used to analyze the expression of
markers and for cell sorting, respectively. The antibodies
used in this study and its dilution condition was shown in
Supplementary Table S1. Side Population was analyzed
using flow cytometry. The cells were detached from the
dishes with Trypsin- EDTA (Invitrogen) and suspended at
1 × 106 cells/mL in PBS solution supplemented with 3%
fetal calf serum. These cells were then incubated at 37°C
for 90 minutes with 20 g/mL Hoechst 33342 (Sigma),
either alone or in the presence of 50 mol/L verapamil
(Sigma). After incubation, 1 g/mL propidium iodide (BD
Pharmingen, San Diego, CA) was added and then filtered
through a 40 μm cell strainer (BD Falcon) to obtain
single-suspension cells. Cell analysis was performed
using BD AriaIII.

The total RNA was extracted by Tripure (Roche)
following standard protocol. Total mRNA was first
reverse transcribed into cDNA using High-Capacity
cDNA Reverse Transcription Kit (Applied Biosystem)
according to the manual protocol. qPCR was performed
using iQ SYBR green detection system in Bio-Rad.
The expression level of target genes was normalized to
GAPDH expression. The primers used for qPCR were
shown in Supplementary Table S2.

Stable clone establishment
The pLKO.1-YB-1 shRNA plasmids purchased
from RNAi Core, Academia Sinica, was transfected into
HuH7 with Jet-prime transfection reagent (Polyplus). After
2days, cells were selected by 10% FBS DMEM containing
1 μg/ml puromycin. 14 days later, single colonies were
isolated and amplified. Knock down efficiency was
checked by qPCR and Western blot. Transient siRNA
knockdown was performed by BLOCK-iT™ RNAi
system (ThermoFisher), The sequences were shown in
Supplementary Table S2. β-cateninΔΝ was overexpressed
to YB-1 KD HuH7 cells by lentiviral system. HEK293T
cells were transfected with three lentivirus-packaging
plasmids
(pMDLg/pRPE,
pMD2G,
pRSV-Rev,
Addgene) and the lentivrial pSLIK-β-cateninΔΝ by
JetPRIME (Polyplus-transfection) reagent following
the manufacturer’s protocol. After 48 hrs incubation,
supernatants containing lentivirus particles were collected
by centrifugation with 8.5% polyethylene glycol 6000 and
0.3 M sodium chloride.

Transwell migration assay
Cells were starved with serum-free DMEM medium
for 3 hours. After starvation, cells were harvested and
resuspended by trypsinization. In the migration assay,
24-well culture plates were divided into upper and lower
wells by transwell inserts (BD Bioscience). The upper
surface of the transwell was loaded with 2 × 105 cells
in 300 μL serum-free DMEM medium, while the lower
well contained 500 μL DMEM with 10% FBS. Following
6 hours of incubation, the migrated cells on the bottom
surface were fixed with methanol for 10 minutes and
counted after staining with crystal violet for 1 hour.

Luciferase reporter assay

HuH7 or Hep3B cells were treated with 0.5% trypsin.
Single cells were then resuspended in 3% FBS DMEM,
plated on cell culture dish and cultured for 14 days. For
counting colonies, cells were washed twice with cold PBS,
fixed with cold methanol for 5 minutes, stained with 0.5%
crystal violet and destained with PBS. Then, pictures were
taken and analyzed by ImageJ software.

The TOP-Flash luciferase reporter construct
contains 3 copies of the Tcf/LEF-binding site
(AAGATCAAAGGGGGT) upstream of a TK minimal
promoter. HuH7 were transfected with TOP-Flash and
pmCherry-C1 (Clontech) plasmid by JetPRIME reagent
(Polyplus-transfection) following the manufacturer’s
protocol. After pME-YB-1 and β-cateninΔΝ plasmids
transfection for 48 hours, the cells were harvested for
luminescence measurement. Fluorescence intensity of
mCherry was measured for internal control.

Drug resistance assay

Immunofluorescence staining

1 × 105 Cells per well were seeded on 96-well
plate. After 24 hours., cells were treated with 150 ng/ml
Doxorubicin or 0.15 mM Sorafenib for 3 days. Cell
viability was measured by the MTT assay according to
the manual protocol.

Liver tissue was embedded in OCT (Sakura Finetek)
and cryosectioned into 8 μm thick sample using Leica
CM 1900 (Leica). The HCC cells were concentrated on
the slide glass by Cytospin (Shandon). The samples were
fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde (Sigma Aldrich) and
permeabilized with 0.1% saponin (Sigma) for 15 minutes
and 15 minutes, respectively. After the removal of culture
medium, cells were fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde and
permeabilized with 0.1% Triton X100 (Riedel-de-Haën)
for 7 minutes and 15 minutes, respectively. Then the
samples were blocked with 4% fetal bovine serum (FBS,

Colony formation assay

Flow cytometry and cell sorting
Primary conjugated antibody (or isotype control)
was added into each sample and incubated for an hour
at 4°C. Cells were then stained with propidium iodide
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

2614

Oncotarget

diluted in PBS), stained by primary antibody solution at
4°C for overnight, secondary antibody at room temperature
for an hour, and stained with Hoechst 33342 for
10 minutes before analyzed by fluorescence microscope
or high content IN Cell Analyzer (GE Healthcare) and
confocal fluorescence microscopy (Leica). The antibodies
used in this study and its dilution condition was shown in
Supplementary Table S1.

Analyzed the data: HC, HH and EC. Contributed reagents/
materials/analysis tools: EC and AM. Wrote the paper: HC
and EC.

REFERENCES
1.	 Kamura T, Yahata H, Amada S, Ogawa S, Sonoda T,
Kobayashi H, Mitsumoto M, Kohno K, Kuwano M,
Nakano H. Is nuclear expression of Y box-binding protein-1
a new prognostic factor in ovarian serous adenocarcinoma?
Cancer. 1999; 85:2450–2454.
2.	 Gimenez-Bonafe P, Fedoruk MN, Whitmore TG, Akbari M,
Ralph JL, Ettinger S, Gleave ME, Nelson CC. YB-1 is
upregulated during prostate cancer tumor progression
and increases P-glycoprotein activity. The Prostate. 2004;
59:337–349.
3.	 Stratford AL, Habibi G, Astanehe A, Jiang H, Hu K, Park E,
Shadeo A, Buys TP, Lam W, Pugh T, Marra M, Nielsen TO,
Klinge U, et al. Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)
is transcriptionally induced by the Y-box binding protein-1
(YB-1) and can be inhibited with Iressa in basal-like breast
cancer, providing a potential target for therapy. Breast
cancer research. 2007; 9:R61.
4.	 Kohno K, Tanimura H, Sato S, Nakayama Y, Makino Y,
Wada M, Fojo AT, Kuwano M. Cellular control of human
multidrug resistance 1 (mdr-1) gene expression in absence
and presence of gene amplification in human cancer cells.
The Journal of biological chemistry. 1994; 269:20503–20508.
5.	 Jurchott K, Bergmann S, Stein U, Walther W, Janz M,
Manni I, Piaggio G, Fietze E, Dietel M, Royer HD. YB-1 as
a cell cycle-regulated transcription factor facilitating cyclin
A and cyclin B1 gene expression. The Journal of biological
chemistry. 2003; 278:27988–27996.
6.	 To K, Fotovati A, Reipas KM, Law JH, Hu K, Wang J,
Astanehe A, Davies AH, Lee L, Stratford AL, Raouf A,
Johnson P, Berquin IM, et al. Y-box binding protein-1
induces the expression of CD44 and CD49f leading to
enhanced self-renewal, mammosphere growth, and drug
resistance. Cancer research. 2010; 70:2840–2851.
7.	 Evdokimova V, Tognon C, Ng T, Ruzanov P, Melnyk N,
Fink D, Sorokin A, Ovchinnikov LP, Davicioni E,
Triche TJ, Sorensen PH. Translational activation of snail1
and other developmentally regulated transcription factors
by YB-1 promotes an epithelial-mesenchymal transition.
Cancer cell. 2009; 15:402–415.
8.	 Khan MI, Adhami VM, Lall RK, Sechi M, Joshi DC,
Haidar OM, Syed DN, Siddiqui IA, Chiu SY, Mukhtar H.
YB-1 expression promotes epithelial-to-mesenchymal
transition in prostate cancer that is inhibited by a small
molecule fisetin. Oncotarget. 2014; 5:2462–2474. doi:
10.18632/oncotarget.1790.
9.	 Xu M, Jin H, Xu CX, Sun B, Song ZG, Bi WZ, Wang Y.
miR-382 inhibits osteosarcoma metastasis and relapse by
targeting Y box-binding protein 1. Molecular therapy: the
journal of the American Society of Gene Therapy. 2015;
23:89–98.

Statistics
qRT-PCR data in the bar charts represent means
± SEM and were obtained from average data of three
independent experiments. Statistical significance was
calculated using a two-tailed Student’s-test. Differences
with the P value of less than 0.05 were considered
significant, and those with P value of less than 0.01 were
considered really significant.

Abbreviations
CD: cluster of differentiation; CPS1: Carbamoyl
phosphate synthetase I; DNA: deoxyribonucleic acid;
ELDA: extreme limiting dilution analysis; EMT:
epithelial-mesenchymal transition; HCC: hepatocellular
carcinoma; MDR-1: multidrug resistance gene; miRNAs:
microRNAs; Nanog: Nanog Homeobox; Oct4: octamerbinding transcription factor 4; PCNA: proliferating
cell nuclear antigen; RNA: Ribonucleic acid; SP:
side-population; YB-1: Y-box binding protein-1;Wnt:
Wingless-type MMTV integration site family member.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We gratefully thank Dr. Yung-Ming Jeng for
his useful suggestion and providing us antibodies and
plasmids. We also thank Technology Commons, College
of Life Science, National Taiwan University (Taiwan) for
lots of supports.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
No conflicts of interest.

FINANCIAL SUPPORT
This study was supported by grants from the
Ministry of Science and Technology (MOST), Taiwan
(101-2314-B-002-095), National Taiwan University
Hospital UN103-069 and Taipei Municipal WanFang
Hospital (103-WF-EVA-139).

Authors̕ contributions
Conceived and designed the experiments: HC, HH
and EC. Performed the experiments: HC, HH, PC, KT.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

2615

Oncotarget

10.	 Chen YR, Sekine K, Nakamura K, Yanai H, Tanaka M,
Miyajima A. Y-box binding protein-1 down-regulates
expression of carbamoyl phosphate synthetase-I by
suppressing CCAAT enhancer-binding protein-alpha
function in mice. Gastroenterology. 2009; 137:330–340.

19.	 Yamashita T, Budhu A, Forgues M, Wang XW. Activation
of hepatic stem cell marker EpCAM by Wnt-beta-catenin
signaling in hepatocellular carcinoma. Cancer research.
2007; 67:10831–10839.
20.	 Wang R, Sun Q, Wang P, Liu M, Xiong S, Luo J, Huang H,
Du Q, Geller DA, Cheng B. Notch and Wnt/beta-catenin
signaling pathway play important roles in activating liver
cancer stem cells. Oncotarget. 2016; 7:5754–5768. doi:
10.18632/oncotarget.6805.
21.	 Finkbeiner MR, Astanehe A, To K, Fotovati A, Davies AH,
Zhao Y, Jiang H, et al. Profiling YB-1 target genes
uncovers a new mechanism for MET receptor regulation
in normal and malignant human mammary cells. Oncogene
2009;28:1421–1431.
22.	 Uchiumi T, Fotovati A, Sasaguri T, Shibahara K, Shimada T,
Fukuda T, Nakamura T, Izumi H, Tsuzuki T, Kuwano M,
Kohno K. YB-1 is important for an early stage embryonic
development: neural tube formation and cell proliferation.
The Journal of biological chemistry. 2006; 281:40440–40449.
23.	 Fotovati A, Abu-Ali S, Wang PS, Deleyrolle LP, Lee C,
Triscott J, Chen JY, Franciosi S, Nakamura Y, Sugita Y,
Uchiumi T, Kuwano M, Leavitt BR, et al. YB-1 bridges
neural stem cells and brain tumor-initiating cells via its
roles in differentiation and cell growth. Cancer research.
2011; 71:5569–5578.
24.	 Koike K, Uchiumi T, Ohga T, Toh S, Wada M, Kohno K,
Kuwano M. Nuclear translocation of the Y-box binding
protein by ultraviolet irradiation. FEBS letters. 1997;
417:390–394.
25.	 Cohen SB, Ma W, Valova VA, Algie M, Harfoot R,
Woolley AG, Robinson PJ, Braithwaite AW. Genotoxic
stress-induced nuclear localization of oncoprotein YB-1
in the absence of proteolytic processing. Oncogene. 2010;
29:403–410.
26.	 Yahata H, Kobayashi H, Kamura T, Amada S, Hirakawa T,
Kohno K, Kuwano M, Nakano H. Increased nuclear
localization of transcription factor YB-1 in acquired
cisplatin-resistant ovarian cancer. Journal of cancer research
and clinical oncology. 2002; 128:621–626.

11.	 Yasen M, Kajino K, Kano S, Tobita H, Yamamoto J,
Uchiumi T, Kon S, Maeda M, Obulhasim G, Arii S, Hino O.
The up-regulation of Y-box binding proteins (DNA binding
protein A and Y-box binding protein-1) as prognostic
markers of hepatocellular carcinoma. Clinical cancer
research. 2005; 11:7354–7361.
12.	 Dang HT, Budhu A, Wang XW. The origin of cancer stem
cells. Journal of hepatology. 2014; 60:1304–1305.
13.	 Yang ZF, Ho DW, Ng MN, Lau CK, Yu WC, Ngai P,
Chu PW, Lam CT, Poon RT, Fan ST. Significance of CD90+
cancer stem cells in human liver cancer. Cancer cell. 2008;
13:153–166.
14.	 Terris B, Cavard C, Perret C. EpCAM, a new marker for
cancer stem cells in hepatocellular carcinoma. Journal of
hepatology. 2010; 52:280–281.
15.	 Ma S. Biology and clinical implications of CD133(+)
liver cancer stem cells. Experimental cell research. 2013;
319:126–132.
16.	 Cerami E, Gao J, Dogrusoz U, Gross BE, Sumer SO,
Aksoy BA, Jacobsen A, Byrne CJ, Heuer ML, Larsson E,
Antipin Y, Reva B, Goldberg AP, et al. The cBio cancer
genomics portal: an open platform for exploring
multidimensional cancer genomics data. Cancer discovery.
2012; 2:401–404.
17.	 Gao J, Aksoy BA, Dogrusoz U, Dresdner G, Gross B,
Sumer  SO, Sun Y, Jacobsen A, Sinha R, Larsson E,
Cerami E, Sander C, Schultz N. Integrative analysis of
complex cancer genomics and clinical profiles using the
cBioPortal. Science signaling. 2013; 6:l1.
18.	 Hu Y, Smyth GK. ELDA: extreme limiting dilution analysis
for comparing depleted and enriched populations in stem
cell and other assays. Journal of immunological methods.
2009; 347:70–78.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

2616

Oncotarget

