Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No. 41

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Targeting CXCR1 on breast cancer stem cells: signaling
pathways and clinical application modelling
Laura Brandolini1,*, Loredana Cristiano2,*, Alessia Fidoamore2, Maria De Pizzol3,
Erica Di Giacomo2, Tiziana Marilena Florio2,4, Giuseppina Confalone2, Angelo
Galante2,4, Benedetta Cinque2, Elisabetta Benedetti2, Pier Adelchi Ruffini3, Maria
Grazia Cifone2, Antonio Giordano5,6, Marcello Alecci2,4, Marcello Allegretti1,
Annamaria Cimini2,4,6
1

Dompé Farmaceutici SpA, Via Campo di Pile, L’Aquila, Italy

2

Department of Life, Health and Environmental Sciences, University of L’Aquila, L’Aquila, Italy

3

Dompé Farmaceutici SpA, Via Santa Lucia, Milano, Italy

4

National Institute for Nuclear Physics (INFN), Gran Sasso National Laboratory (LNGS), Assergi, Italy

5

Department of Medicine, Surgery and Neuroscience, University of Siena, Siena, Italy

6

 barro Institute for Cancer Research and Molecular Medicine and Center for Biotechnology, Temple University, Philadelphia,
S
PA, USA

*

These authors have contributed equally to this work

Correspondence to: Annamaria Cimini, e-mail: annamaria.cimini@univaq.it
Marcello Allegretti, e-mail: marcello.allegretti@dompe.com
Keywords: preclinical MRI
Received: July 31, 2015	

Accepted: October 06, 2015	

Published: October 26, 2015

ABSTRACT
In breast cancer it has been proposed that the presence of cancer stem cells
may drive tumor initiation, progression and recurrences. IL-8, up-regulated in breast
cancer, and associated with poor prognosis, increases CSC self-renewal in cell line
models. It signals via two cell surface receptors, CXCR1 and CXCR2. Recently, the
IL-8/CXCR1 axis was proposed as an attractive pathway for the design of specific
therapies against breast cancer stem cells. Reparixin, a powerful CXCR1 inhibitor, was
effective in reducing in vivo the tumour-initiating population in several NOD/SCID
mice breast cancer models, showing that the selective targeting of CXCR1 and the
combination of reparixin and docetaxel resulted in a concomitant reduction of the bulk
tumour mass and CSC population. The available data indicate that IL-8, expressed by
tumour cells and induced by chemotherapeutic treatment, is a key regulator of the
survival and self-renewal of the population of CXCR1-expressing CSC. Consequently,
this investigation on the mechanism of action of the reparixin/paclitaxel combination,
was based on the observation that reparixin treatment contained the formation of
metastases in several experimental models. However, specific data on the formation
of breast cancer brain metastases, which carry remarkable morbidity and mortality to
a substantial proportion of advanced breast cancer patients, have not been generated.
The obtained data indicate a beneficial use of the drug combination reparixin and
paclitaxel to counteract brain tumour metastasis due to CSC, probably due to the
combined effects of the two drugs, the pro-apoptotic action of paclitaxel and the
cytostatic and anti-migratory effects of reparixin.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

43375

Oncotarget

INTRODUCTION

of the CSC population, docetaxel, when administered
alone, did not affect the CSC population, resulting in
a relatively small CSC increase in some cases. These
observations were reproducible across the two largely
non-overlapping breast CSC (BCSC) populations,
i.e., ALDH+ and CD44+/CD24–, that can be found in
breast cancer [11]. The current bulk of available data
clearly outlines that IL-8, expressed by tumour cells
and induced by chemotherapeutic treatment, is a key
regulator of the survival and self-renewal of the small
population of CXCR1-expressing CSC, thus setting the
premises for important clinical studies. Consequently, the
present investigation on the mechanism of action of the
combined treatment with reparixin and paclitaxel (another
fundamental drug in the treatment of breast cancer) was
based on the observation that, in previous experiments,
the effects of the drug combination on the bulk population
reduction was significantly higher than the effects of
docetaxel alone. This fact can not simply be explained by
the action on the chemotherapy-resistant CSC due to the
paucity of the CXCR1-expressing cells within the bulk
[11]. In fact, reparixin treatment clearly contained the
formation of metastasis in several experimental models
[11], but specific data on the formation of breast cancer
brain metastasis, which carry remarkable morbidity and
mortality to a substantial proportion of advanced breast
cancer patients, have not been generated.
In this work we have studied the effects of
reparixin, alone or in combination with paclitaxel, on
mammospheres derived from a highly aggressive triplenegative breast cancer cell line MDA-MB231 and also in
a murine model of breast cancer metastasis development
into the brain using the same cell line. The murine model
was implemented through two experimental settings:
the first one was implemented on an early metastatic
growth model, while the second one was implemented
on an established brain metastases one. This study was
conducted following tumour appearance, growth and
localization in vehicle and treated animals by means
of ex vivo high-resolution MRI, histochemical and
immunohistochemical examinations. The obtained data,
confirming the effects of reparixin on the CSC population,
point toward a beneficial use of the drug combination
reparixin and paclitaxel to counteract brain tumour
metastasis. This is probably due to the combined effects
of the two drugs, the pro-apoptotic action of paclitaxel and
the cytostatic and anti-migratory effects of reparixin.

Breast cancer is the leading cause of death in women
between the age of 35 and 55. Despite the significant
improvements in diagnosis and treatments, breast cancer
recurrences and metastasis remain the most common
cause of mortality following resection [1]. About 10–30%
of patients with disseminated breast carcinoma develop
metastasis in the CNS, generally with a median survival
of 1 year [2–3], despite the standard treatments. Patients
with HER2 + or triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) are
more likely to develop brain metastasis [4–6].
In breast cancer, like in other solid tumour types, the
presence of a small subpopulation of highly tumorigenic
cells within the bulk of tumour cells has suggested that
a small set of cancer stem cells (CSC) may drive tumor
initiation, progression and recurrences. Several preclinical
and clinical studies [7–8] contributed to demonstrate that
the CSC population is relatively resistant to radiation
therapy and standard chemotherapeutics, thus pointing to
the need for new targeted treatments.
Interleukin (IL)-8, known to be up-regulated in
several cancers, including breast cancer, and associated
with poor prognosis, increases CSC self-renewal in
cell line models in vitro [9–10]. IL-8 signals via two
cell surface G-protein– coupled receptors, CXCR1 and
CXCR2. The IL-8/CXCR1 axis was recently proposed as
an attractive pathway for the design of specific therapies
against breast cancer stem cells. In fact, CXCR1 was
found, to be overexpressed in a highly tumorigenic
subset of cells expressing the breast stem cell marker
ALDH1 in a series of breast cancer cell lines [11] as
well as on mammospheres grown in vitro from patients’
tumor samples [9]. Moreover, the blockade of the
receptor resulted in a significant decrease of the overall
CSC population both in vitro and in vivo. Other studies
confirmed a role of IL-8 in the regulation of CSC activity
in patient-derived breast cancer cells isolated from
metastatic ascites, pleural effusions, and primary invasive
cancers, thus pointing toward a clear correlation between
IL-8 concentration in metastatic fluids and mammosphere
formation [9; 12].
Further studies showed that the effects of CXCR1
on CSC are mediated by the FAK/AKT pathway and
that cells with constitutive activation of the FAK/AKT
(associated with PTEN deletion or FAK overexpression)
are invariably resistant to anti-CXCR1 therapy [11].
In the same work reparixin (formerly repertaxin),
a powerful small molecular weight CXCR1 inhibitor,
was tested in several NOD/SCID mice breast cancer
models showing that selective targeting of CXCR1 may
effectively reduce in vivo the tumour-initiating population
and that the combination of reparixin and docetaxel, one
of the most effective chemotherapeutic currently available
for the treatment of breast cancer patients, resulted in a
concomitant reduction of the bulk tumour mass and CSC
population. Similarly to the known chemoresistance
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

RESULTS
Mammospheres formation and characterization
from MDA-MB231
In breast cancer, the expression of stem cell
markers such as CD44, ATP-binding cassette sub-family
G member 2 (ABCG2) and aldehyde dehydrogenase
A1 (ALDHA1) can be used to selectively isolate a cell
43376

Oncotarget

population enriched in CSC. In Figure 1A, ABCG2 and
ALDHA1 enrichment, with respect to the starting cell line,
is reported. As shown in the panel, the mammospheres
isolation and purification procedure is paralleled by a
progressive significant increase of the ALDHA1 and
ABCG2 stem cell marker expression (about 80% and
11%, respectively). The relative increase of the CSC
population in the mammospheres is also confirmed by
the Aldefluor assay, measuring ALDH enzymatic activity
(Figure 1B). Different percentages of enrichment are
apparent considering ALDHA1 as antigen or as enzymatic
activity (about 4 folds and 2 folds, respectively) suggesting
that not only expression of the ALDHA1 isoform but also
overall enzymatic activity of ALDH is increased in the
mammospheres. Though the fraction of CXCR1 expressing
cells detected in MDA-MB231 was relatively high
(> 10%, Figure 1A) as compared to data reported in other
breast cancer cell lines, in agreement with previous results
[11], a significant enrichment of the CXCR1 positive
cells was observed. The fraction of CXCR2 positive
cells, present at a low extent in the bulk population, was
found to increase in the purified mammospheres, even if
not significantly. On purified mammospheres by clonal
selection, CD44, the most consistently used biomarker,
together with Cd24low , to identify and characterize the
breast cancer stem cell (BCSC) phenotype [13], was
also measured by cytofluorimetry, indicating that about
90% of the purified stem cells were CD44+ (Figure 1C).
In these series of experiments, since it is known that
MDA-MB231 cells are for the 80% CD44+/Cd24low [14],
on purified mammospheres only CD44 was assayed.
The cytofluorimetric data were further confirmed by
the immunolocalization experiments. In Figure 1D, the
localization of stemness markers in purified tumorspheres
is shown. It is possible to observe that almost all cells in a
field express ABCG2, ALDHA1, CXCR1, while only few
cells express CXCR2.

In contrast with previous observation in other
breast cancer cell lines reparixin did not significantly
induce apoptosis (Figure 2B) in the range of 1–50 µM,
whereas about 20% of apoptotic cells were counted after
an equivalent time of paclitaxel 5 nM treatment. No
influence of the combination of 5 nM paclitaxel treatment
with 50 μM reparixin on the induction of apoptosis in the
mammospheres by MDA-MB231 was observed.
In order to investigate potential synergistic effect of
the reparixin/paclitaxel combination, a lower (10 mµM)
concentration of reparixin was used in the subsequent
experiments.

Tumorspheres number and size
Tumorspheres were also investigated for number
and size upon treatments (Figure 3A and 3B). Reparixin,
differently from paclitaxel, did not show a significant
ability to reduce tumorsphere number, but the combined
treatment showed a synergistic effect (Figure 3A). Both
reparixin and paclitaxel treatment reduced the volume of
the tumorspheres, with the combined treatment showing
a significant additive effect (Figure 3B). Among the two
treatments, only paclitaxel showed the ability to increase
the number of single cells (dead cells, as determined by
counting cells by Trypan Blue exclusion) detached from
the spheres, thus supporting a different mechanism of
action of the two drugs (Figure 3C).

Tumorspheres proliferation and migration
Figure 3D reports also the CFSE staining of control
and treated tumorspheres. CFSE is a vital staining that
allows to trace not proliferating cells, which retain the
staining, compared to proliferating ones, in which the
staining is diluted. While paclitaxel increases the number
of dead cells, in the presence of reparixin a clear increase
of the number of not proliferating cells was observed.
Both phenomena occur when tumorspheres were exposed
to the drug combination. Tumor stem cells were analyzed
for microfilaments of lamellipodia/philipodia organization
by phalloidin TRITC staining (Figure 3E). As shown,
reparixin was able to completely abrogate philopodia/
lamellipodia formation in tumorspheres both as single
agent or in combination with paclitaxel, being this effect
much less evident in paclitaxel treated cells. Coherently
with this effect on microfilaments and with the results
previously reported in other tumor cell lines [11], the
western blotting analysis showed a marked decrease of
the active form of the protein of focal adhesions (p-FAK),
strongly involved in the migration capability of cells, in
the presence of reparixin, thus confirming that also in
MDA MB231-derived mammospheres, reparixin action
is mediated by inhibition of the FAK/AKT pathway that
is not affected by paclitaxel. The combined treatment
showed the same effect of reparixin alone thus confirming

Effect of reparixin treatment on MDA-MB231
and on tumorspheres viability and apoptosis
The dose-effect of reparixin on MDA-MB231 was
evaluated treating cultured adherent cells at different drug
concentrations (1 µM-3 mM) for 72 h. A moderate effect
on viability was observed only after 3 days of treatment
at high drug concentrations (1–3 mM, not shown). A
more pronounced effect on cell viability was observed
when MDA-MB231-derived tumorspheres were treated
with reparixin and/or paclitaxel. In particular, as shown
in Figure 2A, reparixin (R) decreased cell viability
in a dose-dependent manner up to about 60% of the
control, reaching a significant efficacy at 50 µM. At the
concentration of 5 nM paclitaxel (P) induced a comparable
decrease of the cell viability, while the combination of the
two drugs (R + P) at the above concentrations showed an
additive effect.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

43377

Oncotarget

that the mechanism of action of the two drugs can concur
to an effective control of tumor initiating cancer cells
growth and invasiveness. It has been previously reported
that the in vitro and in vivo inhibition of FAK decreased
self-renewal capacity, by decreasing the levels of Wnt3a
and β-Catenin, thus demonstrating a novel FAK-Wnt axis
regulating breast cancer stem cell activity and indicating

the FAK-Wnt axis as promising target to eradicate
self-renewal capacity and progression of human
breast cancers [15]. In agreement, in our experimental
conditions, the proliferation pathway Wnt-ß-Catenin,
appeared decreased only in the presence of reparixin, thus
suggesting a cytostatic effect of reparixin on cancer stem
cells by modulating the FAK-Wnt axis (Figure 3F).

Figure 1: Mammospheres formation and characterization from MDA-MB231: breast tumor stem cell marker
enrichment, with respect to the starting cell line, such as ABCG2 and ALDHA1, CXCR1 and CXCR2, evalutated by
cytofluorimetry, is reported in (A). In (B) the increase of the stem cell population in the mammospheres is confirmed by the Aldefluor
assay, measuring ALDHA1 activity. On purified mammospheres CD44 was also measured by cytofluorimetry (C) Data are mean ± SE of
three different experiments. **p ≤ 0.005; ***p ≤ 0.0005. In (D) immunofluorescence for ABCG2 and ALDHA1, CXCR1 and CXCR2 in
purified mammospheres. Bar = 25 μm.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

43378

Oncotarget

Effect of reparixin and paclitaxel on
tumorspheres cell cycle

Interestingly, it has been reported that chemotherapy may
also induce IL-8 production in injured cells [11]. This may
partially account for the increase of CSCs proliferation
after chemotherapy. The block in G2 phase after the
combination therapy confirms reparixin activity on CSC,
being reparixin able to eliminate cell with CSC features.
The combined R + P treatment acted in a synergistic
manner, being able to abolish the IL-8 effects (by blocking
CXCR1) and by inducing a block of the cells in the G2
phase, while the S phase almost completely disappeared
(Figure 4A). This suggests that the addition of reparixin to
cytotoxic chemotherapy may block this proliferative effect
by targeting the CSC population.
Figure 4B, shows the western blotting analysis
for cyclin B1, responsible for the cell cycle progression
G2/M. In agreement with the cytofluorimetric
data, cyclin D1 was not affected by the treatments

The effect of reparixin and paclitaxel treatment
on the cell cycle was evaluated by cytofluorimetry
(Figure 4A). The figure shows a shift of the tumor cells
in S phase upon paclitaxel treatment and a block of cells
in G2 phase upon combined treatment. Even if paclitaxel
is reported to have a cytostatic effect, we can speculate
that, being sphere cultures enriched in CSC, up-regulation
of DNA synthesis upon paclitaxel treatment account for
cells with CSC features that are resistant to therapy by
definition. In addition, this may also be due to the release
of IL-8 from apoptotic cells, which in turn stimulates cell
proliferation. In fact, it is known that several factors are
synthesized and secreted during the apoptotic process
when the bulk tumor cells are targeted by chemotherapy.

Figure 2: Cell viability: mammosphere viability (A) in control and treated conditions. Data are expressed as percentage of

the respective control. In (B) cytofluorimetric apoptosis detection in purified mammospheres in control and treated conditions. Data are
mean ± SE of three different experiments. *p ≤ 0.05; **p ≤ 0.005; ***p ≤ 0.0005. R: reparixin; P: paclitaxel; R + P: reparixin + paclitaxel.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

43379

Oncotarget

(data not shown), while the inhibition of cyclin B1
expression by the combined treatment was coherent
with the observed arrest in the G2 phase (Figure 4B).
In agreement, in our experimental model high cyclin
B1 nuclear staining (evalutated by the merge with DAPI
nuclear staining, not shown) is observed in mammospheres
(Figure 4C), staining that, after the combined treatment,
appeared strongly decreased. High levels of nuclear cyclin
B1 are associated with high tumor grade, larger tumor size
and higher metastasis probability, therefore a high level
of cyclin B1 is considered a predictor of poor prognosis.
The latter results show that the blockage of CXCR1signalling in tumorspheres not only directly reduces the

proliferation and invasiveness of cancer stem cells but
that also potentiates the anti-tumor effect of the standard
chemotherapy with paclitaxel by a synergistic action
leading to downregulation of cyclin B1.

Effect of reparixin and paclitaxel on
tumorspheres cell senescence
Since it has been recently described an involvement
of the PI3K-Akt-FOXO3-p27 pathway [16] in cellular
senescence, in order to better understand the differences
in cell cycle phases induced by the different treatments,
this pathway was further investigated (Figure 5). In

Figure 3: Tumorsphere, number, size, proliferation and microfilament/fokal adhesion organization: In (A-C) for
mammospheres number, and for single cells, data are expressed as X-fold of the respective control, while volume is
expresed in µm3. Data are mean ± SE of three different experiments. *p ≤ 0.05; **p ≤ 0.005; ***p ≤ 0.0005; +, p ≤ 0.05. In (D) CFSE
staining in control and treated mammospheres. Bar = 25 μm. In (E) falloidin-TRITC decoration of microfilaments in control and treated
mammospheres. Bar = 25 μm. In (F) a representative western blotting and relative densitometric analysis, expressed as relative units, for
p-FAK and β-catenin in control and treated mammospheres. Data are mean ± SE of three different experiments. *p ≤ 0.05. C: control: R:
reparixin 10 μM; P: paclitaxel 5 nM; R + P: reparixin 10 μM + paclitaxel 5 nM.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

43380

Oncotarget

agreement with the synergistic effect of R + P in inducing
a G2/M arrest of cell cycle, it appeared that the combined
treatment was able to induce cell senescence by decreasing
PI3K-Akt activation paralleled by a decrease of the
cytosolic p-FOXO3A (inactive) and by an increase of
p27, thus suggesting that cells blocked in G2/M by the
two drugs may undergo to senescence. To further explore
the cell senescence pathway, we studied the nuclear factor

NFkB that has recently been proven to have a role in
antagonizing senescence [17], in addition to being one
of the effector in IL-8 signaling. Reparixin alone showed
a trend in reducing NFkB levels, while paclitaxel was
uneffective. The combination of the two drugs showed
a significant effect in reducing NFkB levels (Figure 5).
Finally, since the interactions between the IL-8/CXCR1/2
and HER signaling in the regulation of BCSCs has

Figure 4: In (A) cytofluorimetric analyisis of cell cycle on control and treated mammospheres. Data are mean ± SE of

three different experiments. ***p ≤ 0.0005. In (B) a representative western blotting and relative densitometric analysis, expressed as
relative units, for cyclin B1 in control and treated mammospheres. Data are mean ± SE of three different experiments. **p ≤ 0.005. In
(C) immunofluorescence analysis for cyclin B1 in control and treated mammospheres, Bar = 25 μM. C: control: R: reparixin 10 μM;
P: paclitaxel 5 nM; R + P: reparixin 10 μM + paclitaxel 5 nM.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

43381

Oncotarget

In vivo experiments

been demonstrated [9], EGFR receptor phosphorylation
was investigated upon the different treatments. In
agreement with the previous observations, our data show
that blocking the IL-8-CXCR1 axis decreases EGFR
phosphorylation, this was more pronounced with the
combination of the two drugs (Figure 5).

Effect of reparixin and paclitaxel on metastasis
On the basis of the obtained results, the potential
effects of reparixin as single agent or in association
with paclitaxel were characterized in vivo. Two different
experimental sessions that differed for the day of metastasis
detection (day 14th, T14, and 21st, T21) have been set up,
with the aim to study the temporal progression of metastasis
in the brain and to identify a predictive experimental design
for testing the potential effects of the drugs.
In Figure 7, the total number of masses (NTOT)
and total volume (VTOT) parameters for the vehicle (V)
(n = 19), reparixin (R) (n = 13), paclitaxel (P) (n = 14)
and reparixin + paclitaxel (R + P) (n = 14) groups at
T14 is reported. It is possible to observe that: (i) upon
treatment with reparixin alone, paclitaxel alone or
reparixin + paclitaxel administered together, a significant
decrease of the number of metastasis is observed;

Effect of anti-IL8 and anti-CXCR1
neutralization on tumorspheres
With the aim to confirm that the effects induced by
reparixin treatment were mediated by CXCR1, the effect
of specific anti-CXCR1 and anti-IL8 antibodies on the
cell cycle, cyclin B1 and p-FAK levels were evaluated
(Figure 6). Treatment with the two antibodies induced
the same effects reported for reparixin treatment on cell
cycle (Figure 6A), cyclin B1 and p-FAK (Figure 6B), thus
confirming the downregulation of IL-8 -CXCR1 signaling
by reparixin.

Figure 5: Representative western blotting and relative densitometric analysis, expressed as relative units, for PI3K,
p-AKT, p27, NFKB, p-EGFR in control and treated mammospheres. Data are mean ± SE of three different experiments.
*p ≤ 0.05; ***p ≤ 0.0005. p-FOXO3A was analyzed by immunolocalization of the inactive phosphorylated form. Bar = 50 μm. C: control:
R: reparixin 10 μM; P: paclitaxel 5 nM; R + P: reparixin 10 μM + paclitaxel 5 nM.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

43382

Oncotarget

(ii) reparixin alone, paclitaxel alone or reparixin +
paclitaxel showed a significant activity in reducing
the total volume of metastasis. Figure 7 shows also
the NTOT and VTOT parameters for the V (n = 11),
R (n = 12), P (n = 12) and R + P (n = 12) groups at T21.
In this experimental session the drugs treatment started
at T7 and lasted until T21. The results obtained showed:
(i) a significant inhibitory effect on metastasis number

only for the association of reparixin with paclitaxel
(group R + P 9 vs 16 for group V); (ii) a statistically
significant ability to inhibit the metastasis volume by all the
treatment options with a trend of increased inhibitory effect
for the combination treatment vs the single treatments
(1.67 for R, 1.35 for P, 0.99 for R + P vs 2.36 for V).
In the same figure representative MRI images showing
the ROI considered for the analysis are also reported.

Figure 6: Effect of anti-CXCR1 and anti-IL8 neutralization on mammospheres. In (A) cytofluorimetric analysis of cell cycle

in the presence of the specific antibody administered alone or in combination with paclitaxel (P). Data are mean ± SE of three different
experiments. ***p ≤ 0.0005. In (B) representative western blotting and relative densitometric analysis, expressed as relative units, for
cyclin B1 and p-FAK in the same experimental conditions. Data are mean ± SE of three different experiments. *p ≤ 0.05; **p ≤ 0.005;
***p ≤ 0.0005.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

43383

Oncotarget

In Figure 8, examples of MRI images in vehicle and
animals at T21 are shown. Since the number of masses
as well as the dimensions are smaller at T14 than in T21
animals, it was really difficult to envisage the tumor

masses by HE or PCNA staining (not shown), probably
due to the different thickness of the histology slices with
respect to the MRI sections (500 μm versus 20 μm for
the histological slices). Fot T21 animals with R or R + P

Figure 7: Metastasis formation in nude mice injected with MDA-MB231 cells in the two different experimental models
used: the early metastatic model (T14) and a claimed brain tumor occurrence model (T21), both examined by MRI
and measured by ROI segmentation. Each group consisted of at least 11 animals. Data are mean ± SE. *p ≤ 0.05; **p ≤ 0.01. For

each group the top row of each histogram reports representative MRI images, showing ROIs utilized for quantification in control and treated
conditions are Bar = 2 mm. VTOT is expressed in µl.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

43384

Oncotarget

treatments the immunopositivity for PCNA is present at
lesser extent than in vehicle or P alone, thus suggesting a
decrease of cell proliferation in R-treated animals.

microenvironment. Studies by Singh and colleagues on
patients [9] elucidated these pathways demonstrating
the interactions between the IL-8/CXCR1/2 and HER
signaling in the regulation of BCSCs. Moreover, it
has previously identified CXCR1, by gene expression
profiling, as being overexpressed in cancer cells expressing
the stem cell marker ALDH in a series of breast cancer cell
lines [11]. CXCR1 is a receptor for the cytokine IL-8, and
it has been showed that recombinant IL-8 increased BCSC
self-renewal as determined by the ability of these cells
to form tumor spheres as well as by increased ALDH
expression. Singh et al [9] showed a close association
between the IL-8 levels in metastatic fluid and the ability
of cells from these samples to generate primary and
secondary tumorspheres.
The potential clinical relevance of strategies
interfering with the IL-8/CXCR1 axis in BCSC is
highlighted by the findings that chemotherapy with taxanes
leads to the release of IL-8 and to the increase in the BCSC
population [11; 22–23] both in vitro and in vivo, whereas
the administration of anti-CXCR1 agents or anti-IL-8
blocking mAb reduces BCSC percentage in tumors
[11; 22–23]. With the aim to improve the knowledge on
IL-8 inhibitors and on their possible use as anti-cancer

DISCUSSION
Most of deaths related to breast cancer occur
because of metastasis to secondary sites. The cancer stem
cell hypothesis considers that only CSCs will initiate
and sustain tumor growth. In such model, CSCs are
responsible for the metastatic dissemination of tumors.
Different lines of evidence indicate that breast cancer
stem cells (BCSCs) play an important role in metastasis
[18]. BCSCs display increased cell motility, invasion,
and overexpress genes that promote metastasis [19–21].
Intracardiac injection of ALDHA1+ breast cancer cells, but
not unseparated or ALDHA1− cells, into immunodeficient
mice, generates multiple metastases. Although a large
number of chemotherapeutic agents have been developed
which are capable of producing regression of metastatic
breast cancers, these tumors usually recur following
chemotherapy treatment. Previous studies have suggested
that BCSCs are regulated by intrinsic cellular pathways
as well as extrinsic signals generated by the tumor

Figure 8: Representative MRI pictures of T21 vehicle and treated animals and HE staining and immunolocalization
of PCNA in the same areas identified in the MRI images (red inset). MRI: Bar = 1,7 mm; HE: Bar = 400 μm; PCNA:
Bar = 50 μm.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

43385

Oncotarget

drugs for breast metastasis, in this study the effects
of reparixin, a clinical grade CXCR1/2 inhibitor,
administered alone or in combination with paclitaxel, were
assayed in vitro on purified mammary tumorspheres from
MDA-MB231 cell line and in vivo in a model of breast
metastasis to brain, utilizing two different experimental
conditions.
The cellular model used in this study was the triple
negative MDA-MB231 cells, that were not extensively
studied in previous experiments utilizing reparixin. This
cell line is highly aggressive and does not undergo to
apoptosis via Fas-ligand upon paclitaxel challenge (data
not shown), as described for other breast cancer cell lines
[11]. The majority of studies on breast cancer metastasis
used MDA-MB231 cells. This cell line represents the
claudin-low/mesenchymal subtype, which overexpresses
stem cell-enriched genes [24] and has a natural tendency
to metastasize to brain and lungs. In addition, this is the
breast cancer cell line with the highest ALDH1 expression
of [25]. Moreover, in this work the effects of reparixin
were investigated in highly purified mammospheres
derived from the cell line. The in vitro model, purified
mammospheres (enriched in CXCR1 as well as of
ALDHA1), allowed to demonstrate that reparixin,
administered at different concentrations, determined a
dose-dependent effect on cell viability, more apparent
when associated with paclitaxel. Reparixin alone was
able to decrease the active form of the focal adhesion
protein (p-FAK), in keeping with previous findings
[11], and β-catenin, while paclitaxel alone appears to
promote apoptosis. Focal adhesion kinase (FAK) is a
cytoplasmic tyrosine kinase identified as a key mediator
of intracellular signaling by integrins in the regulation of
different cellular functions in a variety of cells [26]. Early
studies showed that stimulation of FAK activation and
phosphorylation by oncogenic transformation provided a
plausible molecular mechanism for anchorage-independent
growth of cancer cells, one of their major hallmark [27].
Numerous studies have then linked FAK-mediated
signaling pathways to breast and other cancers as well as a
variety of different biological and disease processes. Upon
its activation by integrin-mediated cell adhesion or other
stimuli, FAK becomes associated with several molecules
containing SH2 domain including Src and p85 subunit
of PI3K [28–29] through its autophosporylated Y397
residue. FAK association and activation of PI3K through
autophosphorylated Y397 leads to increased production of
3′-phosphorylated phospholipid [30], which can activate
Akt kinase inhibiting apoptosis by regulating various cell
death machinery proteins [31–32]. These observations
appear relevant in view of the decreased PI3K, p-Akt and
p-FAK levels promoted by reparixin in our experimental
conditions. Very recent studies by several groups showed
that ablation of FAK suppressed mammary tumorigenesis
and progression in mouse models of breast cancer
[26; 33–36]. Furthermore, these studies demonstrated that
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

deletion of FAK reduced the pool of BCSCs in primary
tumors developed in FAK conditional knockout mice [34].
These studies suggest a causal role of FAK in promoting
breast cancer in vivo and also give further support for
the CSC hypothesis. Finally, it has been reported that
the inhibition of FAK in vitro and in vivo decreased
self-renewal capacity, by decreasing the levels of Wnt3a
and β-Catenin, thus demonstrating a novel FAK-Wnt
axis regulating BCSC activity and indicating the FAKWnt axis as promising target to eradicate self-renewal
capacity and progression of human breast cancers [15]. In
agreement, in our experiments reparixin alone was able to
decrease mammosphere size, p-FAK and β-catenin levels,
thus suggesting that it may also interfere with the FAKWnt axis.
Moreover, it appears that some parameters were
modulated by the two drugs, administered together, in
a synergistic manner, particularly the cell cycle arrest
in G2/M phase and the decrease of cyclin B1 levels as
well as the induction of the senescence pathway. Cellular
senescence is the process that leads to terminal growth
arrest induced by unrepairable double strand DNA
damage. Activation of the oncogenes as well as inhibition
of the tumor suppressor genes were shown to contribute
to senescence induction and senescence is considered as
a natural antitumor barrier that acts at the early stages of
cancerogenesis to stop the proliferation of transformed
cells. However, tumor cells still remain sensitive to
induction of senescence, for example during chemio- or
radiotherapy. Thus, induction of cancer cell senescence,
similarly to apoptosis, is considered to restrain tumor
growth and thus contribute to effectiveness of anticancer
therapy. The senescent cells, although do not proliferate,
remain viable and metabolically active [37]. Cellular
senescence is now increasingly recognized as a possible
outcome for the treatment of human tumours because it
is executed by cells in response to therapeutic treatments,
such as drugs and irradiation; therefore, it has recently
emerged that senescence could be a potential alternative
outcome for tumour therapy in vivo [38].
An additive effect was observed on other parameters
such as mammosphere numbers and cell viability. The
involvement of IL-8 and the specific effects of reparixin as
the single agent or in combined treatment were supported
by the use of the specific antibodies against IL-8 or CXCR1.
The specific involvement of reparixin in the
counteraction of the migrative potential of stem cells, by
decreasing p-FAK observed in our experimental in vitro
conditions, was further supported by the data analysis of
the in vivo experiments.
We show here that ex vivo MRI at 2.35 T allows
the characterization of breast cancer cells brain metastasis
in a mouse model. In agreement with other Authors [39],
we found that there is an increase in size and number of
metastatic masses over time. On this basis, we choose
two different experimental conditions. One, an advanced
43386

Oncotarget

metastatic model, where tumor was allowed to grow for
7 days and then the treatments started; the other, an early
model of metastatic cell migration, where the tumor cells
were injected and the treatments started simultaneously.
Upon 14 day of treatments, different considerations
may be done on the different experimental conditions. In
fact, in animals starting treatments after 7 days from the
tumor cell injection, the reparixin or paclitaxel treatment
and the combined treatment show a significant activity
in reducing the total volume of metastasis, while only
the combined treatment shows a significant activity
on the total mass number. This may be due to the fact
that, over 7 days, cells reached and invaded the brain
parenchyma and the only possible activity of the single
reparixin or paclitaxel treatment was the decrease tumor
cell proliferation, by, as indicated in vitro, decreasing
ß-catenin and p-FAK, CFSE, for reparixin, or by inducing
apoptosis for paclitaxel and to their incapability at this
time-point to decrease tumor invasion. The combined
treatment was able to induce both phenomena, decreasing
cell proliferation and inducing apoptosis, thus resulting in
a decrease of the total mass number. This hypothesis is
further supported by PCNA staining where it is possible to
observe that reparixin alone and the combined treatment
induce a decrease of PCNA-positive nuclei, thus indicating
a decrease of proliferation.
This seems to be in agreement with the findings
obtained in the other experimental condition, i.e. animal
injected and simultaneously treated with reparixin or
paclitaxel or reparixin + paclitaxel. In fact, in this case
the treatment with reparixin alone, paclitaxel alone or
reparixin + paclitaxel shows a significant activity in
reducing the number of metastasis, probably due to an
immediate effect on cell migration by reparixin and cell
death by paclitaxel. All treatments determine a significant
reduction of the total number and volume of metastasis,
in agreement with the hypothesis of fewer cells reaching
brain parenchyma and with the described effect of the
single drug. This result may indicate that reparixin is able
to decrease the number of metastasis by counteracting
at this time point BCSC migration and proliferation by
decreasing p-FAK and ß-catenin. On the other hand, the
effects of paclitaxel are mainly due to apoptosis promotion.
The combination shows the additive effects of the single
drugs. It is worthnoting that the results obtained in the
combinatorial group are not as robust as observed in the
vitro experiments. We interpret this apparent discrepancy
between in vitro and in vivo results as a consequence of the
intrinsic variability of the metastases model. In fact, two
important factors affecting the in vivo evaluation of the
drug combination in the brain metastasis model, i.e. drugs
distribution and tumor volume at the start of the treatment,
should be considered. In fact, it is generally known that
anticancer drugs are poorly permeant to blood brain
barrier (BBB) and permeability strictly depends on the
level of damage introduced during brain metastasis
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

derivation. That means that as much BBB has been broken
during breast cancer cells invasion as much drug has been
distributed. These factors may have a different impact on
paclitaxel and reparixin distribution and can account for
the higher variability in results observed in vivo.
Considering the significant morbidity and mortality
caused by brain metastases, several therapeutic approaches
have been pursued [40]. From this standpoint, CSC
represent a potential target as they are responsible for
disease relapse and metastasis [9]. Administration of a
CSC-targeting agent in patients at high risk for developing
brain metastases (i.e., HER2 + and TNBC patients) could
readily test this hypothesis. However, the adjuvant setting
would pose strong challenges in terms of patient number
and time of observation required [41–42]. Selected patient
groups are at even higher risk of developing BCBM (breast
cancer brain metastasis) in a shorter timeframe and would
allow a faster evaluation of the potential of a new drug on
the reduction of BCBM incidence [42]. Such hypothesis
is being tested in a clinical trial of reparixin plus paclitaxel
in women with metastatic TNBC (with no documented
brain metastases) relapsed after (neo) adjuvant treatment
(NCT02370238). While in the preventive setting there is
no requirement for penetration of an intact BBB by the
drug, which is expected to inhibit the metastatic potential
of csc outside of the central nervous system, the medical
treatment of established BCBM in combination with other
agents would require crossing of an allegedly broken BBB.
This would also heavily rely on the antitumor activity
of the partner molecule (e.g., chemotherapy) in order to
rapidly shrink BCBM and reduce patient’s symptoms,
therefore the combination requires careful selection of an
active drug based upon the tumor type being treated. The
data presented here suggest that such combination strategy
can be translated into future clinical trials in dedicated
patient populations.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Cell line and reagents
Human breast cancer cell line MDA-MB231
was obtained from the European Collection of Cell
Cultures (ECACC). Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s
(DMEM), Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium/F-12
medium (DMEM-F12), Fetal Bovine Serum (FBS),
penicillin/streptomycin, glutamine, formaldehyde,
paraformaldehyde, triton X-100, Phosphate Buffered
Saline (PBS), Bovine Serum Albumin (BSA),
poly-L-lysine, dapi, trypan blue, paclitaxel, Dimethyl
Sulfoxide (DMSO), ethanol, propidium iodide,
Nonidet-P40, RNAse, sodium deoxycholate, Sodium
Dodecyl Sulphate (SDS), Tween 20, Igepal CA 630,
Ethylenediamine tetraacetic acid (EDTA), phosphatase
inhibitor cocktail 2, protease inhibitor cocktail,
ethylenediamine tetraacetic acid (EDTA), acrylamide/
43387

Oncotarget

bis-acrylamide, Tris (hydroxymethyl)aminomethane
(Tris), hydrogen chloride (HCl), sodium chloride (NaCl),
xylazine hydrochloride, Hank’s Balanced Salt Solution
(HBSS), and sucrose were all purchased from Sigma
Chemical CO (St. Louis, Mo, USA). B27 supplement
were from Life Technologies (Paisley, Scotland, UK),
Epidermal Growth Factor (EGF) and Fibroblast Growth
Factor (FGF2) were from Peprotech (Rocky Hill, NY,
USA). reparixin (DF1681Y) was provided by Dompé
Farmaceutici Spa (L’Aquila, Italy).
Primary antibodies anti-ALDH1A1, anti-p-FAK,
anti-p-Akt, anti-ABCG2 and anti-PCNA were purchased
from Sigma Chemical CO, anti-CXCR1 (clone 42705),
anti-CXCR2 (clone 48311) and anti-IL-8 (clone 6217)
were from R&D Systems Inc. (Minneapolis, USA).
Antibodies anti-Cyclin D1, anti-PI3 Kinase, p27 and antiP-FOXO3A were purchased from Abcam (Cambridge,
MA, USA), anti-Cyclin B1 was from Acris Antibodies
(San Diego, CA, USA), anti-NFkB and anti-P-EGFR
were from Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Inc. (Santa Cruz,
CA, USA), and anti-β catenin was from Zymed (San
Francisco, CA, USA). Phalloidin-tetramethylrhodamine
isothiocynate (Phalloidin TRITC) was purchased
from Sigma Chemical CO and human monoclonal
CD44-Phycoerythrin antibody was from Miltenyi Biotec
Inc. (Auburn, CA, USA). AlexaFluor 488 anti-mouse
or anti-rabbit IgG secondary antibodies were purchased
from Molecular Probes (Life Technology, Carlsbad, CA,
USA) and peroxidase conjugated anti-mouse or anti-rabbit
IgG secondary antibodies were from KPL (Gaithersburg,
USA). Aldehyde dehydrogenase Based Cell Detection Kit
was from StemCell Technologies (Durham, NC), CellTiter
96® AQueous non-radioactive cell proliferation assay from
Promega Corporation (Madison, USA), bicinchoninic acid
(BCA) protein assay kit from Pierce (Rockford, IL, USA)
and CellTrace™ CFSE cell proliferation kit was purchased
from Molecular Probes (Life Technology, Carlsbad,
CA, USA). Vectashield mounting medium was required
to Vector Laboratories (Burlingame, CA, USA), nonfat dry milk was from Bio-Rad Laboratories (Hercules,
CA, USA), SuperSignal West Pico Chemiluminescent
Substrate and Nunc low adherent culture flasks were
purchased from Thermo Scientific (Rockford, IL, USA).
Immobilon-P Transfer Membrane (PVDF) was required
to Millipore Corporation (Billerica, MA, USA), O.C.T.
was from Sakura (St. Torrance, CA, USA), hematoxylineosin was from Bio-Optica SpA (Milano, Italy) and gelatin
glycerin was from Electron Microscopy Sciences (PA,
USA). Ketamine was purchased from Veter-Zoo S.r.l.
(Perugia, Italy). NUNC low adherent flasks were from
Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc. (Walthman, MA, USA). All
chemicals were of the highest analytical grade.

penicillin/streptomycin, 2 mM glutamine, at 37°C, in a
humidified 95% air-5% CO2 atmosphere.

Cell culture

For cell viability evaluation in mammospheres,
single-cells were plated at 10000 cells/cm2 and after
24 hours treated with different concentrations of reparixin
(1 µM, 10 µM and 50 µM) alone and in the association

Mammospheres isolation and purification
MDA-MB231 cells were plated at 1000 cells/ml
in DMEM-F12, containing 100 units/ml penicillin/
streptomycin, 2 mM glutamine, 2% B27 supplement and
20 ng/mL EGF and 40 ng/mL FGF2. Cells were cultured in
NUNC low adherent culture flasks, at 37°C, in humidified
95% air-5% CO2 atmosphere. Primary tumourspheres
were dissociated mechanically and cultured for several
passages (clonal selection).

Flow cytometer analysis
To evaluate the expression panel of several stemness
markers such as CXCR1, CXCR2, ABCG2, ALDH1A1,
MDA-MB231 cells and mammospheres were dissociated
and the single-cell suspensions (1 × 106 cell/tube) were
kept, for 15 minutes at Room Temperature (RT), with 2%
formaldehyde in PBS. For detection of ALDH1A1 the cells
were permeabilized with 0.1% Triton-X-100, for 5 minutes
at RT. Cells were washed with PBS and then incubated, for
1 hour at RT, with selected primary antibodies: monoclonal
anti-CXCR1 (1:100), anti-CXCR2 (1:100), anti-ABCG2
(1:50) and polyclonal anti-ALDH1A1 (1:200), all diluted
in PBS containing 4% BSA. After washing with PBS,
the cells were incubated for 1 hour at RT, with secondary
AlexaFluor 488-conjugated anti-mouse or anti-rabbit
IgG antibodies diluted 1:2000 in PBS containing 4%
BSA. The expression of CD44 antigen was evaluated in
purified mammospheres, incubating cells with monoclonal
anti-human Phycoerythrin-conjugated CD44 antibody.
Cells were then washed with PBS and the population of
interest was gated according to its Forward Scatter (FSC)/
Side Scatter (SSC) criteria. 10.000 events were acquired
for each sample and analyzed by CellQuest software.
(Becton Dickinson Biosciences, BD, San Diego, CA).

Aldefluor assay
ALDH enzymatic activity in control MDA-MB231
cell line and in control mammospheres was detected
using Aldehyde Dehydrogenase Based Cell Detection
Kit (StemCell Technologies, Duham, NC), according to
manifacture’s protocol. Flow cytometry data was acquired
and analyzed by CellQuest software (BD Biosciences)
using a FACS Calibur flow cytometer.

Cell viability

MDA-MB231 were plated at 30.000 cells/cm2
in DMEM supplemented with 10% FBS, 0.1 mg/ml
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

43388

Oncotarget

with 5 nM paclitaxel. The effect of drugs on cell viability
was estimated after 72 hours of treatment by counting cells
with trypan blue.

were then incubated overnight at 4°C with the following
primary antibodies, all diluted with TBS-T: rabbit anti-PI3
Kinase (1:500), p27 (1:5000), anti-Cyclin B1 (1:200),
anti-P-FAK (1:500), anti-P-Akt (1:500), anti-P-EGFR
(1:200) and mouse anti-β catenin (1:500) and anti-NFkB
(1:200). All antibodies were diluted with TBS containing
0.1% Tween-20 (TBS-T) and 5% non fat dry milk. As
secondary antibodies, peroxidase conjugated anti-rabbit or
anti-mouse IgG (1:10000), in TBS-T containing 5% non
fat dry milk, were used for 1 hour, at RT. Immunoreactive
bands were visualized by enhanced chemiluminescence
(ECL, Biorad, Hercules, CA, USA), according to the
manufacturer’s instructions. The relative densities
of the immunoreactive bands were determined and
normalized with respect to actin, using a semiquantitative
densitometric analysis with the ImageJ Software [43].
Values were given as relative units (RU).

Pharmacological treatments
Reparixin (Bacth No. 117410001S) was prepared
in PBS (pH 7.9–8.1) at a concentration of 15 mg/ml,
paclitaxel was dissolved in 100% DMSO at a
concentration of 50 mg/ml. For all the parameters
analysed, single-cells from mammospheres were plated
at a density of 10000 cells/cm2 and after 24 hours were
treated with: reparixin (10 µM), paclitaxel (5 nM), their
association, the anti-CXCR1 and anti-IL8 antibodies
(20 µg/ml) alone and in association with paclitaxel (5 nM),
for 72 hours.

Cell cycle and apoptosis analysis by FACS

Carboxyfluorescein diacetate succinimidyl ester
(CFSE) and cell proliferation

For cell cycle and apoptosis analysis, mammospheres
untreated and treated with reparixin, anti-CXCR1 and antiIL8 antibodies alone and in association with paclitaxel
for 72 h were collected, dissociated, washed twice with
icecold PBS and fixed in 70% ethanol at 4°C for 30 min.
Then, fixed cells (1 × 106 cells/ml), were washed twice
with ice-cold PBS and stained with solution containing
50 µg/mL propidium iodide, 0.1% Nonidet-P40 and
RNase A (6 µg/1 × 106 cell) for 30 min in the dark at
4°C. Cell cycle phase-distribution was analysed by a
flow cytometry system. Data from 10000 events per
sample were collected and analysed using FACS Calibur
(Becton Dickinson) instrument equipped with cell cycle
analysis software (Modfit LT for Mac V3.0). Apoptotic
cells were determined by their hypochromic subdiploid
staining profiles and analysed using Cell Quest software
(BD Biosciences, San Diego, CA).

Cell proliferation is evaluated by the CellTrace™
CFSE cell proliferation kit according to manufacturer
protocol. Briefly, mammospheres were dissociated and
incubated with PBS containing 5 µM CFSE/1 × 106 cells
and 0.1% BSA, for 15 minutes, at 37°C. The reaction
was stopped with cold culture medium and after washing
with medium, cells were seeded at 10000 cells/cm2 and
treated, after 24 hours, with 10 µM reparixin alone and in
association with 5 nM paclitaxel.
After 72 hours, mammospheres were allowed to
adhere on poly-L-lysine coated glass coverslips and
fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde in PBS, for 10 minutes,
at RT. Cell nuclei were stained with DAPI (0.5 µg/ml).
Coverslips were mounted with vectashield mounting
medium and examined at a Leica TCS SP5 confocal
microscope (Mannheim, Germany).

Protein assay

Immunofluorescence

Protein were assayed by the Pierce BCA Protein Assay
kit (Pierce, Rockford, IL, USA) reading the absorbance
at 562 nm.

To evaluate the expression panel of CXCR1,
CXCR2, ABCG2, ALDH1A1, mammospheres were
allowed to adhere on poly-L-lysine coated coverslips
(15 µg/ml) and fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde in PBS, for
10 minutes at RT. Non-specific binding sites were blocked
with 4% BSA in PBS (blocking solution), for 10 minutes
at RT. For detection of ALDH1A1, mammospheres were
permeabilized with 0.1% Triton-X-100, for 5 minutes,
at RT. Cells were washed with PBS and then incubated,
overnight at 4°C, with the following antibodies: mouse
anti-CXCR1 (1:100), anti-CXCR2 (1:100), anti-ABCG2
(1:50) and rabbit anti-ALDH1A1 (1:200), all diluited
in PBS containing 4% BSA. For actin microfilaments
detections, control and treated mammospheres were
permeabilized with 0.1% Triton-x-100, for 5 min, at RT
and incubated, for 30 minutes, at RT, with Phalloidin

Western blotting
Control and treated mammospheres were lysated in
ice-cold RIPA buffer (0.5% sodium deoxycholate, 0.1%
SDS, 1% Igepal CA630, 5 mM EDTA in PBS, 10 µl/ml
both Protease and Phosphatase Inhibitor Cocktails)
sheared through a 22-gauge needle and centrifuged at
full-speed (Eppendorff microfuge 5418), at 4°C, for 30
minutes. Protein lysates (30–50 µg) were separated on
12–15% SDS-polyacrilamide gel and electroblotted onto
PVDF. Nonspecific binding sites were blocked by 5%
non-fat dry milk in Tris buffered saline (TBS: 20 mM
Tris-HCl, pH 7.4, containing 150 mM NaCl) with 0.1%
Tween 20 (TBS-T) for 30 minutes at RT. Membranes
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

43389

Oncotarget

TRITC diluted 1:5000 in blocking solution, and for
the analysis of the immunoreactivity to cyclin B1
and FOXO3A, control and treated mammospheres
were incubated with rabbit anti-cyclin B1 (1:200) and
anti-P-FOXO3A (1:1000) antibodies, overnight, at
4°C. After washing with PBS cells were incubated, for
30 minutes at RT, with AlexaFluor 488 anti-mouse or
anti-rabbit IgG secondary antibody, diluted 1:2000 in
blocking solution. Controls were performed by omitting
the primary antibody. Cell nuclei were stained with DAPI
(0.5 µg/ml). Coverslips were mounted with Vectashield
Mountin Medium and examined at a Leica TCS SP5
confocal microscope (Mannheim, Germany).

with 250.000 MDA-MB-231 cells in 100 µl of HBSS.
Before injection, cell viability of MDA-MB-231 was
evaluated by MTS assay.

Time course of tumour formation
A time course experiment was performed in order
to follow the metastasis development. Mice injected with
tumour cells, were sacrificed at 14 (T14) and 21 days
(T21) after the injection, respectively.

Evaluation of the effects of drug treatments
To evaluate the effect of reparixin and paclitaxel
on brain metastasis (development), two different
experiments were set up. In the first set, mice, were
treated with drugs the same day of tumour cells injection
and sacrificed after 14 days (T14 groups). Reparixin was
dissolved in Phosphate Buffer Solution (PBS) pH 7.9–8.1
at the concentration of 15 mg/ml and administered at
45 mg/Kg (100 μl). Paclitaxel was prepared in 100% DMSO
(50 mg/ml) and administered, i.p, at the dose of 10 mg/Kg.
Mice were treated with: vehicle (V-T14: PBS
pH = 7.9–8.1 s.c. twice daily, every 8 hours,
and DMSO i.p. once a week); reparixin (R-T14:
45 mg/kg s.c. twice daily, every 8 hours); paclitaxel
(P-T14: 10 mg/ml i.p. once a week); reparixin + paclitaxel
(R + P-T14: 45 mg/kg s.c. twice daily, every 8 hours
and 10 mg/ml i.p. once a week). In the second set of
experiments, mice, were treated 7 days after injection of
tumour cells (T21 groups), with: vehicle (V-T21: PBS
pH = 7.9-8.1 s.c. twice daily, every 8 hours, and
DMSO i.p. once a week); reparixin (R-T21: 45mg/kg
s.c. twice daily, every 8 hours); paclitaxel (P-T21:
10 mg/ml i.p. once a week); reparixin + paclitaxel
(R + P-T21: 45 mg/kg s.c. twice daily, every 8 hours and
10 mg/ml i.p. once a week). In both experimental set up
each group consisted at least of 11 mice and the treatment
lasted 14 days.
At the end of the treatment protocols, the mice
were anesthetized with ketamine/xylazine hydrochloride
i.p. and intracardiacally perfused with 10% formalin
solution neutral buffered. Brains were dissected out and
transferred in formalin for MRI imaging.

Mammospheres and single cells number
Control and treated mammospheres were harvested
and the numbers of mammospheres and single cells was
counted in 96 well microplate by trypan blue exclusion.

Dimension analyses of mammospheres
Upon pharmacological treatment mammospheres
were collected and allowed to adhere on poly-L-lysine
coated coverslip and fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde
in PBS, for 10 minutes at RT. Cell nuclei were stained
with DAPI (0.5 µg/ml). Coverslips were mounted with
Vectashield Mounting Medium and examined and counted
at a Leica TCS SP5 confocal microscope.

In vivo experiments
Animals and ethical approval
Nude Balb/c mice (female, 4 weeks od) (Charles
River Laboratories, Calco, Italy) were used for the study.
The animals were caged (4/cage) under clean conditions
at the animal facilities of the University of L’Aquila
(Italy). Mice had free access to pellets and water during a
12:12-hour dark-light cycle. All the environmental
conditions, as well as all the procedures adopted
throughout the study for housing and handling the animals
were conducted in strict compliance with national and
international laws and policies (EEC Council Directive
86/609, OJ L 358, 1, Dec. 12,1987; Italian Legislative
Decree (Gu n. 61,14/03/2014); NIH guide for the Care
and Use of Laboratory Animals, NIH Publication
No. 85–23, 1985), and were approved by the Institutional
Review Board of the University of L’Aquila.
Each animal was randomly distributed into
experimental groups. All animals were sacrificed by
perfusion.
Nude BALB/c mice were anesthetized intraper­
itoneally with 100 mg/Kg ketamine 10 mg/Kg xylazine
hydrochloride and injected in the internal carotid artery

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

MRI
The samples for the MRI analysis consisted of
ex vivo adult Balb/C nude mice brains (weight between
300 and 490 mg) immersed in 15 ml of 4% formaldehyde
in 0.1 M PB at pH 7.4. In this study a 2.35 T Bruker Biospec
scanner comprising a superconducting magnet BC24/40
with a free bore of 400 mm and static field homogeneity
in a 60 mm diameter spherical volume (DSV) of 0.05 ppm

43390

Oncotarget

(half height) was used. A gradient system BGA26 with
a free bore of 257 mm provided a gradient strength of
21 kHz/cm at maximum current of 100 A (corresponding
to a maximum of 50 mT/m). The minimum inductive rise
time of the gradients was about 160 microseconds. The
linearity of the gradients was better then 3% in a 60 mm
DSV. A shim set BS40 provided up to eight spherical
harmonic terms with a maximum error less then 3%. The
scanner was equipped with a transmit/receive birdcage
radio frequency volume coil (8 rungs, internal diameter
62 mm, external diameter 120 mm, length 111 mm, Doty
Scientific Inc. USA). The RF coil was tuned at the proton
frequency of 100.4 MHz. The radio frequency amplifier
provided a peak power of 1 kW capable of generating the
90° and 180° RF pulses. The scanner was interfaced with
an HP XW4600 workstation running a Linux operating
system (RH WS4). The workstation comprises the Bruker
Paravison 4.0 software for data acquisition and processing.

(HR) axial GE T2-W images, covering the whole
brain, were acquired with the following parameters:
TR = 4700 ms; TE = 50 ms; flip angle = 75°;FOV = 25 mm ×
25 mm; 256*256 pixels; 98 μm in plane resolution; slice
thickness = 500 μm; slices number = 35; NEX = 16;
TACQ = 5 hours and 20 min. These images were used for
metastasis assessment, as explained in the next section.

Manual ROI segmentation
To extract information about the presence of
metastasis, a region-of-interest (ROI) manual segmentation
method was used. For each brain the high-resolution
T2-W MR images comprising up to 25 axial slices were
visualized and analyzed with the software Paravision 4.0.
To identify the metastasis each slice was analyzed with
the tool “image contrast” by adjusting the grey values
within at least three level intervals, such as to isolate the
suspected ROIs characterized by low intensity. Then the
position, shape and dimension of the ROIs were compared
with the normal anatomy of that slice, as reported in the
Paxinos Atlas [44].
Thus, from the analysis of the slices the following
two parameters were extracted: the total number of
metastasis (NTOT) present in the brain and the total
volume of the metastasis (VTOT) in μl. It is worth
noting that since the MR images are acquired with a
two-dimensional modality, this may give an overestimation of the total number of masses NTOT. The
entity of this effect will depend on the relative size of the
slice thickness (in our conditions 500 μm) and the size
of the metastasis that depends on the time post injection.
To evaluate the entity of this over-estimation effect we
developed a Matlab algorithm that associates masses
in contiguous slices as a single mass when the distance
of their centers is smaller than the average of their
pseudo-radius. The method was applied to a
subset of MR images and it was found that the
over-estimation is less than 14%. Given this relatively
small value we assumed the measured parameters (NTOT,
VTOT) to be robust.
To avoid the contribution of false positive values,
due to the intrinsic noise present in the high-resolution
T2-W images, a filtering procedure, based on the
histogram analysis of a control group (n = 5 mice) that did
not received the inoculation of the breast cancer cells, was
adopted for all the images.

MRI data acquisition
At a variable time from the sacrifice, after storage
at 4°C, for each measurement session four brains were
positioned in a plastic holder at the centre of the magnet
for MR image acquisition. Once in place and loaded with
the plastic holder containing four samples the RF coil
was tuned and matched using first a network analyzer
(Agilent E5061A) and then the “wobble” procedure from
Bruker. For all measurements the tuning frequency was
within 0.1 MHz from the centre and the matching better
then -15 dB. First, a single pulse sequence (NSPEC) was
applied to observe the NMR signal (TR = 4500 ms; flip
angle = 30°; tp = 100 µs; BW = 3kHz; 2048 points;
spectral width 30 ppm; resolution 0.73 Hz/point; NEX = 1;
TACQ = 700 ms). This sequence was used to calibrate the:
RF pulse, receiver gain, transmit flip angle and auto-shim
settings. Second, to check the position and orientation of
the samples fast scout gradient echo (GE) images (FLASH)
were acquired with the following parameters: TR = 700
ms; TE = 30 ms; FOV = 66 mm × 66 mm; 128*128 pixels;
516 μm in plane resolution; slice thickness = 1.6 mm;
slices number = 15 (13 axial, 1 sagittal and
1 coronal); NEX = 1; TACQ = 11 min. Then, fast twodimensional (2D) axial and coronal GE T2-weighted
(T2-W) images (GEFC protocol), covering the whole
brain, were acquired with the following conditions:
TR = 2700 ms; TE = 47 ms; FOV = 27 mm × 27 mm;
128*128 pixels; 210 μm in plane resolution; slice
thickness = 500 μm; inter-slice distance 1 mm; slice
number = 23; NEX = 1; TACQ = 6 min. These images
(axial and coronal planes) were used to verify the absence
of air bubbles attached to the brains or the sample tube that
could create significant image artefacts. In such cases the
sample tube was taken out and the preparation procedure
was repeated again.
Finally, to assess anatomical details and characterize
the presence of masses in the brain, 2D high-resolution
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Histology and immunofluorescence
After MRI, brains were processed for histological
analysis. Briefly, brains were transferred in 30% sucrose
for 2–3 days, then embedded in O.C.T. and frozen.
Serial Coronal cryostat sections (20 µm thick) were
processed for histological (hematoxylin-eosin staining)
and immunofluorescence analyses. Observations and
photography of histological sections were carried out
43391

Oncotarget

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST

with Stereozoom Leica S8APO microscope equipped
with digital camera EC3 (Mannheim, Germany)
Image acquisition was performed with Leica Acquire
1.0 program (Mannheim, Germany).
For immunofluorescence analysis, non-specific
binding sites were blocked with PBS containing 4%
BSA and 0.25% Tween-20, for 2 hours at RT and brain
sections were incubated, overnight at 4°C, with antibody
rabbit anti-PCNA (1:200), diluted in PBS containing 4%
BSA. After washing with PBS slides were incubated
for 2 hours at RT, with AlexaFluor 488anti-mouse or
anti-rabbit IgG secondary antibody, diluted 1:2000 in
PBS containing 4% BSA. Controls were performed in
parallel by omitting the primary antibody. Coverslips
were mounted with Vectashield Mountin Medium
and examined with a florescence microscope (Zeiss
Axioplan 2, Gottingen, Germany) equipped with Leica
DFC 350 FX camera. Image acquisition was performed
with Leica IM500 program (Mannheim, Germany).

Laura Brandolini, Marcello Allegretti, Maria De
Pizzol and Pier Adelchi Ruffini are employees of Dompè
farmaceutici S.p.A., Italy. The company has interests in
the development of CXCR1/2 allosteric modulators for the
treatment of oncologic diseases.

REFERENCES
  1.	 Burnett RM, Craven KE, Krishnamurthy P, Goswami CP,
Badve S, Crooks P, Mathews WP, Bhat-Nakshatri P,
Nakshatri H. Organ-specific adaptive signaling pathway
activation in metastatic breast cancer cells. Oncotarget
2015; 6:12682–12696.
 2.	 Lim E, Lin NU. Updates on the management of breast
cancer brain metastases. Oncology (Williston Park) 2014;
28:572–578.
  3.	 Flowers A, Levin VA. Management of brain metastases
from breast carcinoma. Oncology (Williston Park) 1993;
7:21–26;

Statistical analysis
For the in vitro experiments, samples were
processed by SPSS software (Statistical Package for
Social Sciences, v. 11.0, Tokyo, Japan). Statistical analysis
of two population means was performed by the unpaired
Student’s t test, while statistical differences comparing
multiple means were analyzed by the analysis of variance
(ANOVA) followed by Scheffe’s post hoc test analysis.
*P < 0.05; **P < 0.005, **P < 0.0005. Data were
expressed as Mean ± SE of 3 separate experiments.
For the in vivo experiments, the measured parameters
(NTOT, VTOT) were imported in STATISTICA (version
8.0, StatSoft Inc. 2007) in order to perform descriptive
statistical analysis and ANOVA to analyze the differences
between groups. Results were considered statistically
significant if p < 0.05 (*) or p < 0.01 (**). NewmannKeuls post hoc tests were further utilized. All data were
expressed as Mean ± SE.

  4.	 Weil RJ, Palmieri DC, Bronder JL, Stark AM, Steeg PS.
Breast cancer metastasis to the central nervous system. Am
J Pathol 2005; 167:913–920.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

 8.	Angeloni V, Tiberio P, Appierto V, Daidone MG.
Implications of stemness-related signaling pathways in
breast cancer response to therapy. Semin Cancer Biol 2015;
31:43–51

  5.	 Duchnowska R, Dziadziuszko R, Czartoryska-Arlukowicz B,
Radecka B, Szostakiewicz B, Sosinska-Mielcarek K,
Karpinska A, Staroslawska E, Kubiatowski T, Szczylik C.
Risk factors for brain relapse in HER2-positive metastatic
breast cancer patients. Breast Cancer Res Treat 2009;
117:297–303.
  6.	 Hicks DG, Short SM, Prescott NL, Tarr SM, Coleman KA,
Yoder BJ, Crowe JP, Choueiri TK, Dawson AE, Budd GT,
et al: Breast cancers with brain metastases are more likely to
be estrogen receptor negative, express the basal cytokeratin
CK5/6, and overexpress HER2 or EGFR. Am J Surg Pathol
2006; 30:1097–1104.
 7.	 Debeb BG, Xu W, Woodward WA. Radiation resistance
of breast cancer stem cells: understanding the clinical
framework. J Mammary Gland Biol Neoplasia 2009; 14:11–7.

The Authors thank the Human Health Foundation
for the support. Many of the experiments have been
performed in the Research Center for Molecular
Diagnostics and Advanced Therapies donated by the
Abruzzo Earthquacke Relief Fund (AERF).

  9.	 Singh JK, Farnie G, Bundred NJ, Simões BM, Shergill A,
Landberg G, Howell SJ, Clarke RB. Targeting CXCR1/2
significantly reduces breast cancer stem cell activity and
increases the efficacy of inhibiting HER2 via HER2dependent and -independent mechanisms. Clin Cancer Res
2013; 19:643–656

FUNDINGS

10.	 Korkaya H, Liu S, Wicha MS. Breast cancer stem cells,
cytokine networks, and the tumor microenvironment. J Clin
Invest 2011; 121:3804–3809.

This work has been supported by RIA funds
(Prof Cimini, Ippoliti and Benedetti). PON01_00862_RI
RICERCA E COMPETITIVITA’ 2007–2013 - Azione II
“interventi di sostegno alla ricerca industriale” (Dompè
Farmaceutici SpA).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

11.	 Ginestier C, Liu S, Diebel ME, Korkaya H, Luo M,
Brown M, Wicinski J, Cabaud O, Charafe-Jauffret E,
43392

Oncotarget

Birnbaum D, Guan JL, Dontu G, Wicha MS. CXCR1
blockade selectively targets human breast cancer stem cells
in vitro and in xenografts. J Clin Invest 2010; 120:485–497.

23.	 Samanta D, Gilkes DM, Chaturvedi P, Xiang L, Semenza
GL. Hypoxia-inducible factors are required for chemotherapy
resistance of breast cancer stem cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S
A 2014; 111:E5429–438.

12.	 Benoy IH, Salgado R, Van Dam P, Geboers K, Van Marck E,
Scharpé S, Vermeulen PB, Dirix LY. Increased serum
interleukin-8 in patients with early and metastatic breast
cancer correlates with early dissemination and survival.
Clin Cancer Res 2004; 10:7157–62.

24.	 Lehmann BD, Bauer JA, Chen X, Sanders ME, Chakravarthy
AB, Shyr Y, Pietenpol JA. Identification of human
triple-negative breast cancer subtypes and preclinical models
for selection of targeted therapies. J Clin Invest 2011;
121:2750–2767.

13.	 de Beça FF, Caetano P, Gerhard R, Alvarenga CA, Gomes M,
Paredes J, Schmitt F. Cancer stem cells markers CD44,
CD24 and ALDH1 in breast cancer special histological
types. J Clin Pathol 2013; 66:187–191.

25.	 Thakur R, Trivedi R, Rastogi N, Singh M, Mishra DP.
Inhibition of STAT3, FAK and Src mediated signaling
reduces cancer stem cell load, tumorigenic potential and
metastasis in breast cancer. Sci Rep 2015; 145:10194

14.	 Sheridan C, Kishimoto H, Fuchs RK, Mehrotra S, BhatNakshatri P, Turner CH, Goulet R Jr, Badve S, Nakshatri H.
CD44+ /CD24– breast cancer cells exhibit enhanced invasive
properties: an early step necessary for metastasis. Breast
Cancer Res. 2006; 8:R59.

26.	 Guan JL. Integrin signaling through FAK in the regulation
of mammary stem cells and breast cancer. IUBMB Life
2010; 62:268–276.
27.	 Guan JL, Shalloway D. Regulation of focal adhesionassociated protein tyrosine kinase by both cellular adhesion
and oncogenic transformation. Nature 1992; 358:690–692.

15.	 Williams KE, Bundred NJ, Landberg G, Clarke RB,
Farnie G. Focal adhesion kinase and Wnt signaling regulate
human ductal carcinoma in situ stem cell activity and
response to radiotherapy. Stem Cells 2015; 33:327–341

28.	 Chen HC, Guan JL. Association of focal adhesion kinase
with its potential substrate phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1994; 91:10148–10152.

16.	 Liu S, Wang X, Zhao Q, Liu S, Zhang H, Shi J, Li N,
Lei X, Zhao H, Deng Z, Cao Y, Ning L, Xia G, Duan E.
Senescence of human skin-derived precursors regulated by
Akt-FOXO3-p27 (KIP1)/p15 (INK4b) signaling. Cell Mol
Life Sci 2015; 72:2949–60.

29.	 Chen HC, Appeddu PA, Isoda H, Guan JL. Phosphorylation
of tyrosine 397 in focal adhesion kinase is required for
binding phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase. J Biol Chem 1996;
271:26329–26334.

17.	 Jiang Z, Liu JC, Chung PE, Egan SE, Zacksenhaus E.
Targeting HER2 (+) breast cancer: the TBK1/IKKε axis.
Oncoscience 2014; 1:180–182.

30.	Reiske HR, Kao SC, Cary LA, Guan JL, Lai JF,
Chen HC. Requirement of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase
in focal adhesion kinase- promoted cell migration. J Biol
Chem 1999; 274:12361–12366.

18.	 Velasco-Velázquez MA, Popov VM, Lisanti MP, Pestell
RG. The role of breast cancer stem cells in metastasis and
therapeutic implications. Am J Pathol 2011; 179:2–11.

31.	 Hennessy BT, Smith DL, Ram PT, Lu Y, Mills GB. Exploiting
the PI3K/AKT pathway for cancer drug discovery. Nat Rev
Drug Discov 2005; 4:988–1004.

19.	 Liu H, Patel MR, Prescher JA, Patsialou A, Qian D, Lin J,
Wen S, Chang YF, Bachmann MH, Shimono Y, Dalerba P,
Adorno M, Lobo N, et al. Cancer stem cells from human
breast tumors are involved in spontaneous metastases in
orthotopic mouse models. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2010;
107:18115–18120.

32.	 Luo J, Manning BD, Cantley LC. Targeting the PI3K-Akt
pathway in human cancer: rationale and promise. Cancer
cell 2003; 4:257–262.
33.	 Pylayeva Y, Gillen KM, Gerald W, Beggs HE, Reichardt LF,
Giancotti FG. Ras- and PI3K-dependent breast
tumorigenesis in mice and humans requires focal adhesion
kinase signaling. J Clin Invest 2009; 119:252–266.

20.	 Shipitsin M, Campbell LL, Argani P, Weremowicz S,
Bloushtain-Qimron N, Yao J, Nikolskaya T, Serebryiskaya T,
Beroukhim R, Hu M, Halushka MK, Sukumar S,
Parker LM, et al. Molecular definition of breast tumor
heterogeneity. Cancer Cell 2007; 11:259–73

34.	 Luo M, Fan H, Nagy T, Wei H, Wang C, Liu S, Wicha MS,
Guan JL. Mammary epithelial-specific ablation of the focal
adhesion kinase suppresses mammary tumorigenesis by
affecting mammary cancer stem/progenitor cells. Cancer
Res 2009; 69:466–474.

21.	 Charafe-Jauffret E, Ginestier C, Iovino F, Wicinski J,
Cervera N, Finetti P, Hur MH, Diebel ME, Monville F,
Dutcher J, Brown M, Viens P, Xerri L, et al. Breast
cancer cell lines contain functional cancer stem cells with
metastatic capacity and a distinct molecular signature.
Cancer Res 2009; 69:1302–1113.

35.	 Lahlou H, Sanguin-Gendreau V, Zuo D, Cardiff RD,
McLean GW, Frame MC, Muller WJ. Mammary epithelialspecific disruption of the focal adhesion kinase blocks
mammary tumor progression. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
2007;104:20302–20307.

22.	 Bhola NE, Balko JM, Dugger TC, Kuba MG, Sánchez V,
Sanders M, Stanford J, Cook RS, Arteaga CL. TGF-β
inhibition enhances chemotherapy action against triplenegative breast cancer. J Clin Invest 2013; 123:1348–1358.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

36.	 Provenzano PP, Inman DR, Eliceiri KW, Beggs HE,
Keely PJ. Mammary epithelial-specific disruption of focal
adhesion kinase retards tumor formation and metastasis in

43393

Oncotarget

a transgenic mouse model of human breast cancer. Am J
Pathol 2008; 173:1551–1565.

41.	 Steeg PS. Perspective: The right trials. Nature 2012;
485:S58–59.

37.	Mosieniak G, Strzeszewska A. The role of cellular
senescence in carcinogenesis and antitumor therapy. Postepy
Biochem. 2014;60:194–206.

42.	 Dawood S, Lei X, Litton JK, Buchholz TA, Hortobagyi GN,
Gonzalez-Angulo AM. Incidence of brain metastases as a
first site of recurrence among women with triple receptornegative breast cancer. Cancer 2012; 118:4652–4659.

38.	 Saretzki G. Cellular senescence in the development and
treatment of cancer. Curr Pharm Des 2010; 16:79–100

43.	 Rasband, W.S. ImageJ, U. S. National Institutes of Health.
Bethesda, Maryland, USA, 1997–2011; http://imagej.nih.
gov/ij

39.	 Perera M, Ribot EJ, Percy DB, McFadden C, Simedrea C,
Palmieri D, Chambers AF, Foster PJ. In vivo Magnetic
Resonance Imaging for investigating the development and
distribution of experimental brain metastases due to breast
cancer. Transl Oncol 2012; 5:217–25.

44.	 Fraklin KBJ, Paxinos G. The Mouse Brain in Stereotaxic
Coordinates. 3rd ed. San Diego: Academic Press; 2007.

40.	 Lin NU, Amiri-Kordestani L, Palmieri D, Liewehr DJ,
Steeg PS. CNS metastases in breast cancer: old challenge,
new frontiers. Clin Cancer Res 2013; 19:6404–18.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

43394

Oncotarget

