Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No. 30

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Inhibition of autophagy potentiates pemetrexed and simvastatininduced apoptotic cell death in malignant mesothelioma and nonsmall cell lung cancer cells
Ki-Eun Hwang1,*, Young-Suk Kim1,*, Jae-Wan Jung1, Su-Jin Kwon1, Do-Sim Park2,
Byong-Ki Cha3, Seon-Hee Oh4, Kwon-Ha Yoon5, Eun-Taik Jeong1, Hak-Ryul Kim1
1

 epartment of Internal Medicine, Institute of Wonkwang Medical Science, Wonkwang University, School of Medicine, Iksan,
D
Jeonbuk, Korea

2

Department of Laboratory Medicine, Wonkwang University, School of Medicine, Iksan, Jeonbuk, Korea

3

Department of Thoracic and Cardiovascular Surgery, Chonbuk National University Medical School, Jeonju, Jeonbuk, Korea

4

Department of Natural Medical Sciences, College of Health Science, Chosun University, Seosuk-dong, Gwangju, Korea

5

Department of Radiology, Wonkwang University School of Medicine, Iksan, Jeonbuk, Korea

*

These authors have contributed equally to this work

Correspondence to:
Hak-Ryul Kim, e-mail: kshryj@wku.ac.kr
Keywords: autophagy, apoptosis, pemetrexed, simvastatin
Received: March 30, 2015      Accepted: August 10, 2015      Published: August 20, 2015

ABSTRACT
Pemetrexed, a multitarget antifolate used to treat malignant mesothelioma and
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), has been shown to stimulate autophagy. In
this study, we determined whether autophagy could be induced by pemetrexed and
simvastatin cotreatment in malignant mesothelioma and NSCLC cells. Furthermore,
we determined whether inhibition of autophagy drives apoptosis in malignant
mesothelioma and NSCLC cells. Malignant mesothelioma MSTO-211H and A549 NSCLC
cells were treated with pemetrexed and simvastatin alone and in combination to
evaluate their effect on autophagy and apoptosis. Cotreatment with pemetrexed and
simvastatin induced greater caspase-dependent apoptosis and autophagy than either
drug alone in malignant mesothelioma and NSCLC cells. 3-Methyladenine (3-MA),
ATG5 siRNA, bafilomycin A, and E64D/pepstatin A enhanced the apoptotic potential
of pemetrexed and simvastatin, whereas rapamycin and LY294002 attenuated
their induction of caspase-dependent apoptosis. Our data indicate that pemetrexed
and simvastatin cotreatment augmented apoptosis and autophagy in malignant
mesothelioma and NSCLC cells. Inhibition of pemetrexed and simvastatin-induced
autophagy was shown to enhance apoptosis, suggesting that this could be a novel
therapeutic strategy against malignant mesothelioma and NSCLC.

At present, there are few effective chemotherapeutic options
for malignant mesothelioma [3]. New strategies based on a
better understanding of tumor biology may help maximize
the efficacy of current treatments.
Autophagy is a dynamic process in which
intracellular membrane structures sequester proteins and
organelles for degradation in a lytic compartment [4, 5].
During autophagy, parts of the cytoplasm are sequestered
into double-membrane vesicles called autophagosomes.
Autophagosomes ultimately fuse with lysosomes to
generate single-membrane autophagolysosomes that

INTRODUCTION
Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) accounts for
approximately 80% of all lung cancers, with long-term
survival restricted to a small patient subset. The majority
of NSCLC patients show locally advanced, inoperable, or
metastatic diseases [1], and cytotoxic chemotherapies have
had a modest but significant impact on survival and quality
of life of NSCLC patients [2]. Malignant mesothelioma is a
relatively rare malignancy with a generally poor outcome.
Currently, the median survival is 9–12 months after diagnosis.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

29482

Oncotarget

RESULTS

mediate the degradation of their contents [6]. A number
of stimuli can induce autophagy, apoptosis, or both; with
concomitant induction, autophagy can either protect
against, or promote apoptosis in a cell stimulus-dependent
manner [7, 8]. The molecular mechanisms that determine
autophagy, apoptosis, and their interaction are not fully
established, but may involve the induction of autophagy
genes such as Atg5 in a cell type-, stimulus-, and cellular
environment-specific manner.
Pemetrexed, a multitargeted antifolate antagonist,
is a chemotherapeutic agent used in the treatment of
malignant mesothelioma and NSCLC (mostly used in
nonsquamous cell carcinomas) [9–11]. It primarily
inhibits thymidylate synthase (TS), dihydrofolate
reductase (DHFR), and glycinamide ribonucleotide
formyltransferase (GARFT), all of which are enzymes
involved in folate-dependent metabolic processes
[12, 13]. Previous studies have reported that pemetrexedinduced apoptosis is associated with the upregulation
of p53 and inactivation of Bcl-2 [14, 15]. Additionally,
inhibition of the intrinsic apoptosis pathway has been
shown to suppress the cytotoxicity of pemetrexed [16].
Dent et al. [17] demonstrated that pemetrexed induces
tumor cell death and autophagy in a dose-dependent
fashion.
Statins are a class of drugs that inhibit the ratelimiting step of the mevalonate pathway, which is
catalyzed by 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl coenzyme A
(HMG-CoA) reductase [18]. Besides their lipid-lowering
effect, statins have been studied for their antineoplastic
properties in many solid tumor cells, including NSCLC
[19, 20]. We have demonstrated previously that
simvastatin induced apoptosis in lung cancer via AKTdependent downregulation of survivin [21]. A recent
study has also revealed that statins induce autophagy that
is dependent on AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK)
activation [22]; however, the precise mechanism for this
effect has not been clearly elucidated.
Although pemetrexed has generally been a welltolerated drug, its toxicity profile is not trivial. The most
frequently observed adverse effects include myelosuppression,
fatigue, hepatotoxicity, nephrotoxicity, pneumonitis, and
mucositis [23, 24]. Until recently, the mechanism by which a
combination of pemetrexed and statins induced apoptosis and
inhibited the growth of cancer cells had not been elucidated.
We recently showed that cotreatment with pemetrexed and
simvastatin potentiates apoptotic activity over that seen with
either drug alone in malignant mesothelioma and lung cancer
cells. These effects were mediated through mitochondrial
dysfunction, by triggering reactive oxygen species (ROS)
production and Bim induction [25].
In this study, we hypothesized that autophagy plays an
important role in the outcome of apoptosis during pemetrexed
and simvastatin treatment. We analyzed the coordinating
mechanisms mediating the interplay between these processes
in malignant mesothelioma and NSCLC cells.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Effect of pemetrexed and simvastatin alone and in
combination, on the proliferation and apoptosis of
malignant mesothelioma and NSCLC cells
As shown in Figure 1A, pemetrexed and
simvastatin cotreatment produced a addictive effect
on the growth of MSTO-211H and A549 cells. In the
presence of pemetrexed, simvastatin inhibited viability
in a concentration-dependent manner. Using ECIS, we
quantitatively evaluated cell proliferation. In this assay,
an increase in resistance reflects cell proliferation. The
ECIS data (Figure 1B) showed that the pemetrexed and
simvastatin cotreatment suppressed cell proliferation in a
dose-dependent fashion.
To examine whether the observed growth inhibition
was due to enhanced apoptosis, the proportion of apoptotic
cells was determined using annexin V-PI staining. Annexin
V staining showed that combination treatment significantly
enhances apoptosis compared to either drug alone in MSTO211H and A549 cells (Figure 1C). To further elucidate the
mechanism behind pemetrexed- and simvastatin-induced
apoptosis, cell lysates were evaluated by immunoblotting
(Figure 1D). Our results showed that the pemetrexed and
simvastatin cotreatment enhanced the cleavage of PARP,
caspase-3, -8, and -9. Additionally, AKT phosphorylation
was significantly attenuated in MSTO-211H and A549
cells treated with pemetrexed and simvastatin. These
results indicate that these drugs enhance caspase-dependent
apoptosis in MSTO-211H and A549 cells.

Pemetrexed and simvastatin cotreatment enhances
autophagy in malignant mesothelioma and
NSCLC cells
Because autophagy and apoptosis may occur
concurrently or sequentially in response to the same
stimulus, we analyzed the cellular ultrastructure by TEM
to confirm that autophagy was induced by pemetrexed
and simvastatin. The combination treatment led to the
formation of numerous lipid droplets, shown as hollow
cytoplasmic vesicles and lamellar bodies, a hallmark of
phospholipidosis. Furthermore, multiple autophagosomes
containing cytoplasmic components were observed in
MSTO-211H and A549 cells treated with both pemetrexed
and simvastatin (Figure 2A).
Autophagic induction by combination of pemetrexed
cotreatment and simvastatin was further confirmed
by transient transfection of green fluorescence protein
(GFP)-LC3-II plasmid DNA. In non-treated control cells,
a diffuse pattern of GFP fluorescence was observed in the
cytoplasm; however, MSTO-211H and A549 cells treated
with both pemetrexed and simvastatin displayed markedly
more LC3-positive GFP punctae in compared to cells
treated with pemetrexed or simvastatin alone (Figure 2B).
29483

Oncotarget

Figure 1: Inhibitory effects of pemetrexed and simvastatin cotreatment on the proliferation and apoptosis. A. Cells were

treated with different concentrations of simvastatin (SIM) in the absence or presence of 1 μM pemetrexed (PTX) for 48 h, and viability was
then measured by the MTT assay. The viability of control cells was set at 100%, and the cell survival of treated cells relative to the control
cells is presented. The data represent the mean ± S.D. of three independent experiments. *p < 0.05 compared to the control. B. Cells were
treated with different concentrations of simvastatin in the presence of 1 μM pemetrexed. Proliferation analysis was performed using the
electrical cell-substrate impedance sensing system (ECIS). Resistance was measured at 6400 Hz every 10 minutes for a period of 48 hours.
During the experiments, cultures were maintained at 37°C and 5% CO2 in air. C. Cells were incubated with 1 μM pemetrexed and/or 5 μM
simvastatin for 24 h, and apoptosis was evaluated by green fluorescent protein-annexin V + propidium iodide. The percentage of annexin
V and propidium iodide positive cells in control cells was set at 100%, and the percentage of apoptosis relative to that of the control is
presented. The data represent the mean ± SD of three independent experiments. *p < 0.05 compared to control. (Continued )

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

29484

Oncotarget

Figure 1: (Continued ) Inhibitory effects of pemetrexed and simvastatin cotreatment on the proliferation and
apoptosis. D. Cells were treated with pemetrexed and simvastatin, alone and in combination for 24 h. Then the cells were lysed, and the

cell lysate was subjected to 12% SDS-PAGE to measure the expression of the indicated proteins. Data are representative of two independent
experiments.

In both cell lines tested, we found that a combination
of pemetrexed and simvastatin induced a greater
conversion of LC3-I into LC3-II than individual drugs.
Autophagic induction was also determined by detecting
free GFP fragments formed by GFP-LC3 degradation
in autophagolysomes. GFP generation showed that
autophagic induction was significantly increased by
pemetrexed and simvastatin combination compared to
individual treatment with either drug (Figure 2C).
Finally, autophagic detection was also evaluated using
lysosomal staining with acridine orange dye and observed
under an inverted microscope to measure fluorescence. Both
pemetrexed and simvastatin alone slightly increased acidic
lysomal compartments, while an increase in acridine orange
intensity was highly apparent in the combined treatment, as
shown by FACS analysis (Figure 2D).

the induction of autophagy in cancer cells [26, 27].
Therefore, we investigated whether suppression of mTOR
function by rapamycin or LY294002 alters apoptosis
induced by the pemetrexed and simvastatin cotreatment.
Our results showed that LC3-II levels increased and p62
levels decreased in MSTO-211H and A549 cells cotreated
with pemetrexed, simvastatin, and rapamycin. Both
rapamycin and the pemetrexed–simvastatin combination
also decreased the expression of cleaved PARP, caspase-3,
-8, and -9 (Figure 4A). Following similar protocols, we
next demonstrated that pemetrexed, simvastatin, and
LY294002 cotreatment also increased LC3-II levels
(Figure 4C). Annexin V staining showed that rapamycin
or LY294002 activation of pemetrexed and simvastatininduced autophagy results in significantly attenuated
apoptosis compared to combination treatment in MSTO211H and A549 cells (Figure 4B and 4D). Together, these
findings indicate that AKT-mediated inhibition of mTOR
by rapamycin or LY294002 attenuates apoptosis induced
by pemetrexed and simvastatin combination in malignant
mesothelioma and NSCLC cells.

Pemetrexed and simvastatin cotreatment
induces AMPK- and AKT-mediated
mTOR-dependent autophagy
The mTOR regulates protein synthesis and cell
growth by sensing cellular signals. We next examined
the effects of pemetrexed and simvastatin on mTORdependent autophagic pathways in MSTO-211H and A549
cells by immunoblot analysis. As shown in Figure 3A–3C,
pemetrexed and simvastatin cotreatment increased AMPK
phosphorylation and a concomitant decrease in AKT and
mTOR phosphorylation, which induced autophagy and
the expression of autophagy-related proteins in a doseand time-dependent fashion. These data indicated that
pemetrexed and simvastatin cotreatment induces AMPKand AKT-mediated mTOR-dependent autophagy in
malignant mesothelioma and NSCLC cells.

Autophagic inhibitors augment apoptosis induced
by pemetrexed and simvastatin cotreatment
To investigate the relationship between pemetrexed
and simvastatin-induced apoptosis and autophagy,
cells were cotreated with pemetrexed and simvastatin
using one of the four autophagic inhibitors [28, 29]: (i)
3-methyladenine (3-MA), a class III PI3 kinase inhibitor;
(ii) ATG5 siRNA, an inhibitor of ATG5–12 formation;
(iii) bafilomycin A, a specific lysomal vacuolar-type
H+-ATPase pump inhibitor that blocks the fusion of
autophagosomes and lysosomes; and (iv) E64D/pepstatin
A, an inhibitor of lysosomal enzymes.
Because 3-MA inhibits early autophagy events, we
assessed its impact on autophagy flux when combined
with pemetrexed and simvastatin. We found that this
treatment decreased LC3-II levels and increased p62
levels in MSTO-211H and A549 cells. Both 3-MA and

Autophagic activators attenuate apoptosis induced
by pemetrexed and simvastatin cotreatment
Chemicals that inhibit mTOR activity via AMPK
activation or AKT inhibition have been associated with
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

29485

Oncotarget

Figure 2: Combination of pemetrexed and simvastatin enhances autophagy in MSTO-211H and A549
cells. A. Representative transmission electron microscopy photographs of cells treated with 1 μM pemetrexed and/or 5 μM simvastatin for

24 h (×10,000). Structures identified as autophagosomes are indicated with arrows. Autophagosomes are highlighted in magnified images of
each cytosolic vesicle. B. Cells were transfected with the GFP-LC3 plasmid for 6 h and then incubated with 1 μM pemetrexed and/or 5 μM
simvastatin for 24 h before analysis by confocal microscopy. Representative images of GFP-LC3 stained pemetrexed and/or simvastatin
treated cells are shown (×400). A punctuate pattern of GFP-LC3-II indicates autophagosome formation, as shown by confocal microscopy.
C. We performed western blot analysis using antibodies against endogenous LC3 and GFP. Immunoblots are representative of at least two
independent experiments. D. Acridine orange staining showed lysosomal (orange) staining in the cells of all treatments. The increased
acidic lysosomes in the combination treatment suggest potential lysosomal activation. The percentage of lysosomal (orange) stained cells
was quantified. The data represent the mean ± SD of three independent experiments. *p < 0.05 compared to control.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

29486

Oncotarget

Figure 3: Combination of pemetrexed and simvastatin induces autophagy through the mTOR-signaling pathway. Cells

were treated with different concentrations of simvastatin alone A. or 1 μM pemetrexed B. or were incubated with 1 μM pemetrexed and
5 μM simvastatin for up to 48 h C. and Western blot analysis using specific antibodies was performed to examine protein expression in
whole cell lysates. Representative images from more than three independent experiments are shown.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

29487

Oncotarget

Figure 4: Activation of autophagy decreases pemetrexed and simvastatin-induced apoptosis. A. Cells were treated with

1 μM pemetrexed and 5 μM simvastatin in the absence or presence of 20 nM rapamycin. The cell lysates were subjected to 12% SDSPAGE to measure the expression of the indicated proteins. C. Cells were treated with 1 μM pemetrexed and 5 μM simvastatin in the
absence or presence of 10 μM LY294002. The cell lysates were subjected to 12% SDS-PAGE to measure the expression of the indicated
proteins. B. and D. Apoptosis was evaluated as described in Figure 1C. The data represent the mean ± SD of three independent experiments.
*p < 0.01 compared with the control, ##p < 0.05 compared with the pemetrexed and simvastatin group.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

29488

Oncotarget

3-MA augments the inhibitory effects of
cotreatment with pemetrexed and simvastatin
in an orthotopic model of lung cancer

the pemetrexed–simvastatin combination also increased
the expression of cleaved PARP, caspase-3, -8, and -9
(Figure 5A). Annexin V staining showed that 3-MA
inhibition of pemetrexed and simvastatin-induced
autophagy significantly enhances apoptosis compared
to pemetrexed and simvastatin combination treatment
in MSTO-211H and A549 cells (Figure 5B). To rule out
non-selective effects of chemical inhibitors, we then
examined how pemetrexed and simvastatin-induced
autophagy is affected in ATG5 siRNA-transfected cells.
ATG5 silencing accelerated apoptosis and decreased
autophagy flux, as was indicated by both an increase in
the cleaved forms of caspase 3 and PARP and a decrease
in LC3-II levels compared to cells expressing control
scrambled siRNA (Figure 5C). In addition, a greater
proportion of apoptotic cells were induced by ATG5
siRNA and the pemetrexed-simvastatin combination
than cells cotreated with pemetrexed and simvastatin
(Figure 5D).
Many autophagy inhibitors act on post-sequestration
steps and are known to cause autophagosome accumulation
[30]. We found that inhibiting autophagy using
bafilomycin A increased pemetrexed and simvastatininduced cleavage of PARP, caspase-3, -8, and -9.
Importantly, bafilomycin A promoted the accumulation of
LC3-II, confirming a functional requirement for lysosomes
in pemetrexed and simvastatin-induced autophagy (Figure
5E). We next demonstrated that the protease inhibitors
E64D/pepstatin A caused the accumulation of LC3-II
(Figure 5G). Bafilomycin A or E64D/pepstatin A inhibition
of pemetrexed and simvastatin-induced autophagy also
increased the proportion of apoptotic MSTO-211H and
A549 cells (Figure 5F and 5H). Collectively, our data
reveal that autophagic inhibitors provide an positive
regulatory signal for pemetrexed and simvastatin-induced
apoptosis.

We monitored the inhibitory effects of 3-MA on
the growth of lung cancer in an orthotopic mouse model
by using micro-CT imaging, which is a noninvasive,
quantitative, and real-time tool for monitoring tumor
progression. 3-MA was injected intraperitoneally 1 h
before coadministration of pemetrexed and simvastatin.
Tumor response was quantified weekly by using serial
micro-CT imaging. At 2 weeks after intrathoracic
injection of tumor cell suspension, tumors in control
and 3MA-treated mice grew by approximately 200 and
175 mm2, those in mice treated with a combination of
pemetrexed and simvastatin grew by 75 mm2, whereas
those in mice treated with 3MA plus pemetrexed and
simvastatin remained 45 mm2, which were smaller
than those of mice treated with a combination therapy
(Figure 6E). These results are consistent with our ex
vivo tumor data measured at the end of the experiment
(Figure 6F).

DISCUSSION
In the present study, we demonstrated that
suppressing autophagy enhances the pemetrexed and
simvastatin-induced apoptosis in MSTO-211H and
A549 cells, whereas autophagy induction attenuates this
process. These results clearly indicate that autophagy
serves a prosurvival function against malignant
mesothelioma and NSCLC cells. Furthermore, the
combination of these two agents could potentially
kill malignant mesothelioma and NSCLC cells more
effectively and with fewer side effects than either drug
alone, thereby providing a rationale for combining these
drugs as a treatment for malignant mesothelioma and
NSCLC.
Pemetrexed has demonstrated clinical potential,
either alone or in combination with the platinum
compounds vinorelbine and gemcitabine in a broad
array of solid tumors [31]. Studies on pemetrexed’s
mechanism of action have shown that it inhibits cell
proliferation and induces apoptosis and autophagy
in cancer cells [32, 33]. An increasing body of
evidence supports the existence of cross-talk between
apoptosis and autophagy, including both positive and
negative interactions [34–36]. In this regard, recent
evidence suggests that autophagy may attenuate a
drug-induced apoptotic response [37, 38]. To date,
however, the molecular mechanisms that govern the
interplay between autophagy and apoptosis are poorly
understood.
To our knowledge, this is the first report highlighting
the interplay between apoptosis and autophagy in
malignant mesothelioma and NSCLC cells cotreated with

Interaction between pemetrexed and simvastatin
suppresses tumor growth in lung cancer
xenografts
To demonstrate the inhibitory effects of pemetrexed
and simvastatin on tumor growth in xenografts, we
performed an antitumor study using athymic nude mice
injected (s.c.) with A549 cells. As shown in Figure 6A,
weekly pemetrexed (100 mg/kg) and daily simvastatin
(20 mg/kg) cotreatment significantly reduced tumor
growth to an extent lesser than that achieved with
pemetrexed or simvastatin alone. Furthermore, mice
co-injected with pemetrexed and simvastatin had
significantly smaller tumor volumes compared to the
groups receiving either pemetrexed or simvastatin
alone (Figure 6B and 6C). The body weights of mice
on subsequent days after the first injection of the drug
were not significantly different among the 4 experimental
groups (Figure 6D).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

29489

Oncotarget

Figure 5: Inhibition of autophagy increases pemetrexed and simvastatin-induced apoptosis. Cells were treated with 1 μM

pemetrexed and 5 μM simvastatin in the absence or presence of the autophagy inhibitors 1 mM 3-MA A. ATG5 siRNA C. 50 nM bafilomycin
A E. and 10 μM E64d/pepstatin A G. The cell lysates were subjected to 12% SDS-PAGE to measure the expression of indicated proteins.
B, D, F. and H. Apoptosis was evaluated as described in Figure 2A. The data represent the mean ± SD of three independent experiments.
*p < 0.01 compared with the control, ##p < 0.05 compared to the pemetrexed and simvastatin group.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

29490

Oncotarget

Figure 6: Inhibitory effects of pemetrexed and simvastatin on xenografts and growth inhibitory effects of 3-MA on
orthotopics. A. Athymic nude mice were injected (s.c.) with 2 × 106 A549 cells (0.2 mL cell suspension) in both hind legs. Mice were

randomly assigned to one of the following experimental groups of (n = 5 each) when the implanted tumors reached a volume of 90–130
mm3: no treatment, pemetrexed (100 mg/kg, i.p., once a week), simvastatin (20 mg/kg, by oral gavage, once every day for 5 days), and
the combined pemetrexed and simvastatin treatment. Tumors were measured 3 times per week. Tumor volume was estimated using the
formula: volume = L × W2/2. Points, mean of 5 animals; bars, SD. *p < 0.01 compared with the control, **p < 0.05 compared to the
pemetrexed group. B. At the end of the experiment, tumor tissues were excised from mice. Representative tumor tissues from all groups
are shown. C. The tumors were weighed. The data represent the mean ± standard deviation (SD) of 5 animals. *p < 0.05 compared to
the control, **p < 0.01 compared to the control. D. Body weights of mice were not significantly different among all groups. E. MicroCT images obtained using an orthotopic mouse model. Micro-CT images of tumors in mice in the control, pemetrexed plus simvastatin,
3-MA alone, and 3-MA and combination of pemetrexed and simvastatin groups at the indicated weeks after an intrathoracic injection of
a suspension of A549 cells. Each tumor scanned using micro-CT was reconstructed to three-dimensional images (axial, coronal, and 3D).
F. Quantitative analysis of the tumor diameter using micro-CT imaging. Data represent the mean ± standard error of mean (SEM) value of
5 animals in each group. *p < 0.05 compared to the control, **p < 0.01 compared to the control.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

29491

Oncotarget

pemetrexed and simvastatin. In an effort to determine
whether autophagy serves a prosurvival or prodeath role
in response to treatment with pemetrexed and simvastatin,
we evaluated pharmacological and genetic approaches
inhibiting autophagy.
In the present study, MSTO-211H and A549 cells
cotreated with the autophagy inhibitors 3-MA, bafilomycin
A, and E64d/pepstatin A displayed markedly increased
expression of cleaved PARP, caspase-3, -8, and -9, suggesting
that autophagy serves a protective role. This finding is
further supported by our observation that pemetrexed and
simvastatin-induced apoptosis was significantly increased
in ATG5 silenced MSTO-211H and A549 cells. We also
observed that pretreatment with 3-MA was associated
with a decrease in LC3-II formation and an increase p62
levels, essentially reversing the effect of pemetrexed and
simvastatin and blocking autophagy. p62 accumulation
facilitates autophagic clearance [39], and evidence indicates
that p62 levels are regulated by autophagy and accumulate in
autophagy-deficient cells [40]. Since p62 accumulates when
autophagy is inhibited, decreased levels can be observed
when autophagy is induced. Therefore, p62 can be used
as a marker of autophagy flux. We found that pretreatment
with bafilomycin A and E64d/pepstatin A, which blocks
later autophagosomal degradation, increased the formation
of LC3-II in MSTO-211H and A549 cells after combination
treatment of pemetrexed and simvastatin.
Autophagy-associated genes are under the control
of mTOR, and the inhibition of mTOR by rapamycin or
LY294002 enhances autophagy [41, 42]. AMPK activation
negatively regulates mTOR activity and, thus, induces
autophagy. Given the positive and negative regulatory roles
of AMPK and AKT on mTOR activity, respectively, it is not
surprising that both AKT/mTOR and AMPK/mTOR signaling
mediate pemetrexed and simvastatin-induced autophagy.
Cross talk occurring between these signaling pathways is not
entirely clear and requires further investigation.
In summary, our novel findings demonstrate that
pemetrexed and simvastatin-induced autophagy involves
enhanced autophagosomal synthesis and may be a
negatively regulated modulator of apoptosis in MSTO211H and A549 cells. Therefore, autophagy serves a
prosurvial function in our treated malignant mesothelioma
and NSCLC cells. Consistent with these results,
inhibition of autophagy can enhance the anti-cancer
effects of pemetrexed and simvastatin and, thus, could be
therapeutically targeted to improve the efficacy of these
combination therapies. In conclusion, the adverse effects
of pemetrexed should be ameliorated by a high dose of
simvastatin administered as an adjuvant in cancer therapy.

(penicillin and streptomycin) were obtained from
GIBCO BRL Co. (Grand Island, NY, USA). Pemetrexed
was purchased from Toronto Research Chemicals, Inc.
(Toronto, Ontario, Canada). Simvastatin, 3-(4,5-dimethyl2-thiazolyl)-2,5-diphenyl-2H-tetrazolium bromide (MTT),
propidium iodide (PI), and dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO)
were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO,
USA). Primary antibodies against caspase-3, caspase-8,
and caspase-9, poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP),
and AKT were obtained from Santa Cruz Biotechnology
(Santa Cruz, CA, USA). Antibodies against AMPK,
mTOR, Beclin, ATG5, LC3, p62/SQSTM1, and β-actin
were purchased from Cell Signaling Technology (Beverly,
MA, USA). 3-Methyl adenine (3-MA), bafilomycin A, and
E64D/pepstatin A were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich.
Anti-rabbit IgG-conjugated horseradish peroxidase (HRP)
antibodies and enhanced chemiluminescence (ECL) kits
were purchased from Amersham Pharmacia Biotech
(Buckinghamshire, England, UK).

Cell culture and viability test
MSTO-211H cells were purchased from the
American Type Culture Collection (ATCC), Manassas, VA,
USA, and A549 human lung cancer cells were obtained
from the Korean Cell Line Bank (KCLB), Seoul, Korea.
These cell lines were grown in RPMI 1640 containing 100
units/mL penicillin, 0.1 mg/mL streptomycin, and 10%
FBS. All cell lines used in the study were authenticated
by the ATCC and KCLB using STR-PCR analysis. The
cells were incubated in a humidified atmosphere of 5%
CO2 in air at 37°C and maintained in log phase growth.
Cell viability was determined by spectrophotometrically
measuring the mitochondrial conversion of MTT to
formazan. After cells were treated with the specified
drugs, MTT was added to the cell suspension for 4 h.
After three washes with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS;
pH 7.4), the insoluble formazan product was dissolved in
dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO). The optical density (OD)
of each well was measured using a microplate reader
(Titertek Multiskan; Flow Laboratories, North Ryde, New
South Wales, Australia) at 590 nm. The OD resulting
from formazan production in control cells was considered
as 100% cell viability. All other measurements were
expressed as a percentage of the control cell value.

Electrical cell-substrate impedance sensing
system (ECIS)
ECIS experiments were conducted using an
Applied Biophysics Model ECISZθ instrument (Applied
Biophysics, Troy, NY, USA). Briefly, cells (7 × 104/well)
were plated on collagen type I-coated 8W10E+ electrode
arrays (Applied Biophysics, Troy, NY, USA), and
adherence was ensured; the cells were allowed to form a
monolayer for 5 h. After washing with PBS, the cells were
treated with different concentrations of simvastatin in the

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Materials
Roswell Park Memorial Institute medium 1640
(RPMI 1640), fetal bovine serum (FBS), and antibiotics
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

29492

Oncotarget

presence of pemetrexed and resistance was measured.
During the experiments, cultures were maintained at 37°C
and 5% CO2 in air.

cold PBS, and observed under a confocal microscope.
Fluorescence imaging was performed using a blue bandpass
filter with 490 nm excitation and the fluorescence of the
green and orange channels was recorded and merged.

Annexin V assay for the assessment of apoptosis

Western blotting

MSTO-211H and A549 cells undergoing early/
late apoptosis were analyzed by annexin V-FITC and
PI staining. Cells in the exponential growth phase
(2.5 × 105 cells) were seeded in 35-mm2 dishes. They were
left untreated or incubated with specified drugs for the
indicated times at 37°C. Both adherent and floating cells were
collected and analyzed with the annexin V assay according
to the manufacturer’s instructions. Pelleted cells were briefly
washed with PBS and resuspended in annexin-binding buffer.
They were then incubated with annexin V-FITC and PI for 15
min at room temperature. After incubation, the stained cells
were analyzed using a fluorescence-activated cell sorting
(FACS) Calibur system equipped with Cell Quest software
(Becton Dickinson, San Jose, CA, USA).

Cells were harvested and lysed using a
radioimmunoprecipitation assay buffer (50 mM Tris-Cl
[pH, 7.4], 1% NP40, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM
phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride, 1 μg/mL of aprotinin and
leupeptin each, and 1 mM Na3VO4). After centrifugation
at 12,000× g for 30 min, supernatant was collected, and
the protein concentration was determined by the Bradford
method (Bio-Rad Protein Assay). Equal amounts of
protein were separated using 12% sodium dodecyl sulfatepolyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) under
reducing conditions and were subsequently transferred to
nitrocellulose membranes. The membranes were blocked
with 5% skim milk in TBS-T (25 mM Tris [pH, 7.6], 138
mM NaCl, and 0.05% Tween-20) for 1 h and probed with
primary antibodies (at 1:1000–1:5000). After washing, the
membranes were further incubated with a HRP-conjugated
secondary antibody (at 1:2000–1:10,000). Immunoreactive
signals were detected using an ECL detection system.

Transmission electron microscopy (TEM)
Electron microscopy and morphometric analysis
were performed as described previously [26]. Cells were
fixed for 1 h with ice-cold 2.5% glutaraldehyde in 0.1 M
cacodylate buffer, and then post-fixed in 1% osmium
tetroxide before embedding in Epon. TEM was performed
with a Philips CM10 at 80 kV on ultra-thin sections
(100 nm on 200 mesh grids) stained with uranyl acetate
and counterstained with lead citrate.

Gene silencing
Pooled small interfering RNA (siRNA)
oligonucleotides against ATG5 were purchased from Cell
Signaling Technology. Cells were seeded, and after 24 h,
they were transfected with 100 nM pooled oligonucleotide
mixture by using Lipofectamine2000 (Invitrogen)
according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Twenty-four
hours after transfection, media were removed and cells
were treated with the indicated drugs. Gene silencing
efficacy by siRNA was assessed by western blot analysis.

Transient transfection
Adenoviral GFP-LC3B was kindly provided by
Dr. Xiao-Ming Yin (University of Pittsburgh School of
Medicine, Pittsburgh PA). After the cells were washed with
OPTI-MEM medium (Invitrogen), DNA was transfected
into cells using LipofectamineTM 2000 reagent according
to the manufacturer’s protocol (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA).
After incubation for 4 h, the medium was exchanged with
a complete medium containing 10% serum and antibiotics.
The cells were incubated for 24 h and treated as indicated
in the figure legends. Images were obtained using a
confocal microscope (Olympus, FluoView™ FV1000).

Tumor xenograft studies in nude mice
Five- to six-week-old BALB/c athymic nude
mice (Charles River, Japan) were housed in cages with
HEPA-filtered air (12-h light/dark cycle) and had ad
libitum access to food and autoclaved water. A549 cells
were injected subcutaneously (s.c.) into both hind legs
of each mouse. Mice were randomly assigned to one of
4 experimental groups (n = 5 each) when the implanted
tumors reached a volume of 90–130 mm3. Each group was
monitored until tumors reached a volume of 1,300 mm3 or
for 26 days. All procedures were performed in accordance
with our institutional animal care and use policies.

Acridine orange staining
Autophagy is characterized by the formation
and promotion of acidic vesicular organelles (AVOs).
In acridine orange-stained cells, the cytoplasm and
nucleus fluoresce bright green and dim red, whereas
acidic compartments fluoresce bright red or orange as
described previously [27]. After drug treatment, 5 μg/ml
acridine orange (Invitrogen, A1301) was added to the
culture medium and cells were incubated at 37°C for 15–30
min. The cells were then trypsinized, washed twice with
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Tumor orthotopic studies in nude mice
We intraperitoneally injected 20 nude mice
with thiopental sodium (0.08 mL/kg of body weight)
to induce anesthesia; subsequently, the mice were
29493

Oncotarget

REFERENCES

placed in the right lateral decubitus position. Then,
50 μL of A549 single cell suspension (1.5 × 106)
prepared using the 1-mL injector was rapidly
inoculated percutaneously into the upper margin of the
sixth intercostal rib on the left anterior axillary line
to a depth of about 5 mm, and then, the needle was
promptly removed. The mice were maintained in the
left lateral decubitus position after injection and were
observed until complete recovery.

1.	 Spiro SG, Tanner NT, Silvestri GA, Janes SM, Lim E,
Vansteenskiste JF, Pirker R. Lung cancer: progress
in diagnosis, staging and therapy. Respirology. 2010;
15:44–50.
2.	 Hotta K, Matsuo K, Ueoka H, Kiura K, Tabata M, Tanimoto M.
Meta-analysis of randomized clinical trials comparing
Cisplatin to Carboplatin in patients with advanced nonsmall-cell lung cancer. Journal of Clinical Oncology. 2004;
22:3852–3859.

Micro-CT imaging analysis

3.	 Belli C, Fennell D, Giovannini M, Gaudino G, Mutti L.
Malignant pleural mesothelioma: current treatments and
emerging drugs. Expert Opinion on Emerging Drugs. 2009;
14:423–437.

Twenty mice with lung cancer underwent micro-CT
scanning weekly after cell inoculation. Whole lungs were
scanned for detection of tumors at 20× magnification.
Each tumor scanned using micro-CT was reconstructed
to three-dimensional images (axial, coronal, and 3D).
Tumor size was evaluated using an imaging software
(Xelis; Infinitt, Seoul, Korea). The diameter of the tumor
was defined as the maximum diameter of the tumor in
a 2D plane. The tumor volume was evaluated using a
volume analysis software (VGStudio MAX, Heidelberg,
Germany). Small tumors were not included in data
analysis because of the inability to measure the size of
these tumors.

4.	 Levine B, Klionsky DJ. Development by self-digestion:
molecular mechanisms and biological functions of autophagy. Developmental Cell. 2004; 6:463–477.
5.	 Meijer AJ, Codogno P. Regulation and role of autophagy in
mammalian cells. International Journal of Biochemistry &
Cell Biology. 2004; 36:2445–2462.
6.	 Yoshimori T. Autophagy: a regulated bulk degradation process inside cells. Biochemical and Biophysical Research
Communications. 2004; 313:453–458.

Statistical analysis

7.	 Eisenberg-Lerner A, Bialik S, Simon HU, Kimchi A. Life and
death partners: apoptosis, autophagy and the cross-talk between
them. Cell Death and Differentiation. 2009; 16:966–975.

Each experiment was performed at least 3 times, and
all values were expressed as the mean ± SD of triplicate
samples. The Student’s t-test was used to determine the
statistical significance. Values of p < 0.05 were considered
statistically significant.

8.	 Amaravadi RK, Yu D, Lum JJ, Bui T, Christophorou MA,
Evan GI, Thomas-Tikhonenko A, Thompson CB.
Autophagy inhibition enhances therapy-induced apoptosis
in a Myc-induced model of lymphoma. Journal of Clinical
Investigation. 2007; 117:326–336.
9.	 Vogelzang NJ, Rusthoven JJ, Symanowski J, Denham C,
Kaukel E, Ruffie P, GGatzemeier U, Boyer M, Emri S,
Manegold C, Niyikiza C, Paoletti P. Phase III study of
pemetrexed in combination with cisplatin versus cisplatin
alone in patients with malignant pleural mesothelioma.
Journal of Clinical Oncology. 2003; 21:2636–2644.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This study was supported by a grant of the Korean
Health Technology R&D Project, Ministry of Health &
Welfare, Republic of Korea. (HI12CO110)

10.	 Scagliotti GV, Parikh P, von Pawel J, Biesma B,
Vansteenkiste J, Manegold C, Serwatowski P, Gatzemeier U,
Digumarti R, Zukin M, Lee JS, Mellemgaard A, Park K,
et al. Phase III study comparing cisplatin plus gemcitabine
with cisplatin plus pemetrexed in chemotherapy-naïve
patients with advanced-stage non-small-cell lung cancer.
Journal of Clinical Oncology. 2008; 26:3543–3551.

Author contributions
The authors have made the following declarations
about their contributions: Conceived and designed: HKE,
KYS and KHR. Development of methodology: HKE,
KYS, JJW and KSJ. Acquisition of data: HKE, KYS, JJW,
PDS, CBK, OSH and KHR. Analysis and interpretation
of data: HKE, KYS, CBK, OSH, YKH, JET and KHR.
Writing, review, and revision of the manuscript: HKE,
KYS and KHR. Study supervision: KHR.

11.	 Lim JU, Woo IS, Jung YH, Byeon JH, Park CK, Kim TJ,
Kim HR. Transformation into large-cell neuroendocrine
carcinoma associated with acquired resistance to erlotinib
in nonsmall cell lung cancer. Korean Journal of Internal
Medicine. 2014; 29:830–833.
12.	 Shih C, Chen VJ, Gossett LS, Gates SB, MacKellar WC,
Habeck LL, Shackelford KA, Mendelsohn LG, Soose DJ,
Patel VF, Andis SL, Bewley JR, Rayl EA, et al. LY231514,
a pyrrolo[2,3-d]pyrimidine-based antifolate that inhibits

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
No potential conflicts of interest were disclosed.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

29494

Oncotarget

multiple folate-requiring enzymes. Cancer Research. 1997;
57:1116–1123.

26.	 Rothbart SB, Racanelli AC, Moran RG. Pemetrexed indirectly activates the metabolic kinase AMPK in human carcinomas. Cancer Research. 2010; 70:10299–10309.

13.	 Zhang D, Ochi N, Takigawa N, Tanimoto Y, Chen Y,
Ichihara E, Hotta K, Tabata M, Tanimoto M, Kiura K.
Establishment of pemetrexed-resistant non-small cell lung
cancer cell lines. Cancer Letters. 2011; 309:228–235.

27.	 Jeong EH, Choi HS, Lee TG, Kim HR, Kim CH. Dual
inhibition of PI3K/Akt/mTOR pathway and role of autophagy in non-small cell lung cancer cells. Tuberculosis and
Respiratory Diseases. 2012; 72:343–351.

14.	 Ramirez JM, Ocio EM, San Miguel JF, Pandiella A.
Pemetrexed acts as an antimyeloma agent by provoking cell
cycle blockade and apoptosis. Leukemia. 2007; 21:797–804.

28.	 Huang S, Sinicrope FA. Celecoxib-induced apoptosis is
enhanced by ABT-737 and by inhibition of autophagy in
human colorectal cancer cells. Autophagy. 2010; 6:256–269.

15.	 Lu X, Errington J, Curtin NJ, Lunec J, Newell DR. The
impact of p53 status on cellular sensitivity to antifolate
drugs. Clinical Cancer Research. 2001; 7:2114–2123.

29.	 Zhang XD, Qi L, Wu JC, Qin ZH. DRAM1 regulates
autophagy flux through lysosomes. PLoS One. 2013;
8:e63245.

16.	 Vandermeers F, Hubert P, Delvenne P, Mascaux C,
Grigoriu B, Burny A, Scherpereel A, Willems L. Valproate,
in combination with pemetrexed and cisplatin, provides
additional efficacy to the treatment of malingnant mesothelioma. Clinical Cancer Research. 2009; 15:2818–2828.

30.	 Boya P, Gonzalez-Polo RA, Casares N, Perfettini JL,
Dessen P, Larochette N, Metivier D, Meley D. Inhibition
of macroautophagy triggers apoptosis. Molecular Biology
of the Cell. 2005; 25:1025–1040.

17.	 Bareford MD, Park MA, Yacoub A, Hamed HA, Tang Y,
Cruickshanks N, Eulitt P, Hubbard N, Tye G, Burow ME,
Fisher PB, Moran RG, Nephew KP, et al. Sorafenib
enhances pemetrexed cytotoxicity through an autophagydependent mechanism in cancer cells. Cancer Research.
2011; 71:4955–4967.

31.	 Schulze-Bergkamen H, Krammer PH. Apotosis in cancerimplications for therapy. Seminars in Oncology. 2004;
31:90–119.
32.	 Del Bufalo D, Desideri M, De Luca T, Di Martile M,
Gabellini C, Monica V, Busso S, Eramo A, De Maria R,
Milella M, Trisciuoglio D. Histone deacetylase inhibition
synergistically enhances pemetrexed cytotoxicity through
induction of apoptosis and autophagy in non-small cell lung
cancer. Molecular Cancer. 2014; 13:230.

18.	 Goldstein JL, Brown MS. Regulation of the mevalonate
pathway. Nature. 1990; 343:425–430.
19.	 Chan KK, Oza AM, Siu LL. The statins as anticancer
agents. Clinical Cancer Research. 2003; 9:10–19.

33.	 Park JH, Lee YR, So HS, Lee KK, Lee SY, Moon SR, Jo HJ,
Jeong K, Kwon KB, Yang SH. The role of autophagy
induced by pemetrexed in lung adenocarcinoma cells.
Oncology Reports. 2014; 31:2365–2370.

20.	 Demierre MF, Higgins PD, Gruber SB, Haw E, Lippman
SM. Statins and cancer prevention. Nature Reviews Cancer.
2005; 5:930–942.

34.	 Abedin MJ, Wang D, McDonnell MA, Lehmann U, Kelekar A.
Autophagy delays apoptotic death in breast cancer cells following DNA damage. Cell Death and Differentiation. 2007;
14:500–510.

21.	 Hwang KE, Na KS, Park DS, Choi KH, Kim BR, Shim H,
Jeong ET, Kim HR. Apoptotic induction by simvastatin in
human lung cancer A549 cells via Akt signaling dependent
down-regulation of surviving. Investigational New Drugs.
2011; 29:945–952.

35.	 Choi HS, Jeong EH, Lee TG, Kim SY, Kim HR, Kim CH.
Autophagy inhibition with monensin enhances cell cycle
arrest and apoptosis induced by mTOR or epidermal growth
factor receptor inhibitors in lung cancer cells. Tuberculosis
and Respiratory Diseases. 2013; 75:9–17.

22.	 Yang PM, Liu YL, Lin YC, Shun CT, Wu MS, Chen CC.
Inhibition of autophagy enhances anticancer effects of atrovastatin in digestive malignancies. Cancer Research. 2010;
70:7699–7709.

36.	 Maiuri MC, Zalckvar E, Kimchi A, Kroemer G. Self-eating
and self-killing: crosstalk between autophagy and apoptosis.
Nature Reviews Molecular Cell Biology. 2007; 8:741–752.

23.	 Sun JM, Lee KW, Kim JH, Kim YJ, Yoon HI, Lee JH,
Lee CT, Lee JS. Efficacy and toxicity of pemetrexed as a
third-line treatment of non-small cell lung cancer. Japanese
Journal of Clinical Oncology. 2009; 39:27–32.

37.	 Amaravadi RK, Thompson CB. The roles of therapyinduced autophagy and necrosis in cancer treatment.
Clinical Cancer Reserch. 2007; 13:7171–7179.

24.	 Kim KH, Song SY, Lim KH, Han SS, Kim SH, Cho JH,
Park CW, Lee S, Lee HY. Interstitial pneumonitis after
treatment with pemetrexed for non-small cell lung cancer.
Cancer Research and Treatment. 2013; 45:74–77.

38.	 Maiuri MC, Zalckvar E, Kimchi A, Kroemer G. Self-eating
and self-killing: crosstalk between autophagy and apoptosis.
Nature Reviews Molecular Cell Biology. 2007; 8:741–752.

25.	 Hwang KE, Kim YS, Hwang YR, Kwon SJ, Park DS,
Cha BK, Kim BR, Yoon KH, Jeong ET, Kim HR. Enhanced
apoptosis by pemetrexed and simvastatin in malignant
mesothelioma and lung cancer cells by reactive oxygen species-dependent mitochondrial dysfunction and
Bim induction. International Journal of Oncology. 2014;
45:1769–1777.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

39.	 Pankiv S, Clausen TH, Lamark T, Brech A, Bruun JA,
Outzen H, Overvatn A, Biorkor G, Johansen T. p62/
SQSTM1 binds directly to Atg8/LC3 to facilitate
degradation of ubiquitinated protein aggregates by
autophagy. Journal of Biological Chemistry. 2007;
282:24131–24145.
29495

Oncotarget

40.	 Mathew R, Karp CM, Beaudoin B, Vuong N, Chen G,
Chen HY, Bray K, Reddy A, Bhanot G, Gelinas C,
Dipaola RS, Karantza-Wadsworth V, White E. Autophagy
suppresses tumorigenesis through elimination of p62. Cell.
2009; 137:1062–1075.

of rapamycin-induced TOR inhibition promote autophagy,
reduce toxicity in Huntington’s disease models and enhance
killing of mycobacteria by macrophages. Autophagy. 2007;
3:620–622.
42.	 Rosenbluth JM, Pietenpol JA. mTOR regulates autophagyassociated genes downstream of p73. Autophagy. 2009;
5:114–116.

41.	 Floto RA, Sarkar S, Perlstein EO, Kampmann B,
Schreiber SL, Rubinsztein DC. Small molecule enhancers

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

29496

Oncotarget

