Cancer
Research

Review

Tumor Cell Autophagy as an Adaptive Response Mediating
Resistance to Treatments Such as Antiangiogenic Therapy
Yu-Long Hu, Arman Jahangiri, Michael DeLay, and Manish K. Aghi

Abstract
Autophagy is a lysosomal degradation pathway that can sequester cytosolic material, including organelles,
nonspeciﬁcally in a process called nonselective macroautophagy, or target speciﬁc protein aggregates designated
for destruction in a process called selective autophagy. Autophagy is one mechanism that enables tumor cells to
survive stressors in the tumor microenvironment, as well as injuries caused by treatments such as chemotherapy
and radiation therapy. The complexity of the role of autophagy in cancer is underscored by evidence that
autophagy can allow premalignant cells to escape the genotoxic stress and inﬂammation that promote
tumorigenesis, and that some tumor cells exhibit loss of autophagy capacity altogether through molecular
mechanisms that have not yet been deﬁned. Efforts to understand and modulate the autophagy pathway will be
crucial to maximize the full therapeutic potential of cancer therapies that are currently hindered by tumor cell
autophagy as a resistance mechanism. Cancer Res; 72(17); 4294–9. 2012 AACR.

Introduction
Cellular stressors activate autophagy, a pathway in which
double-membrane vesicles form and engulf damaged protein
aggregates and organelles that are then delivered to lysosomes
for degradation. Recent evidence suggests that although autophagy may initially prevent tumor formation and growth, tumor
cells respond to many treatment-related stressors by using
autophagy as a cytoprotective mechanism leading to treatment resistance. Here, we review the key mediators of autophagy, the role of autophagy in tumor cell biology, evidence
suggesting that autophagy can promote therapeutic resistance, and the challenges associated with using autophagy
inhibition as a therapeutic strategy.

Overview of Autophagy
Mammalian autophagy involves 4 steps: (i) formation of the
phagophore (also called the isolation membrane) from the
endoplasmic reticulum; (ii) assembly of autophagy-mediating
proteins at the phagophore; (iii) engulfment of the phagophore
by the endoplasmic reticulum to form double-membrane
autophagosomes; and (iv) formation of mature degradative
vacuoles (autolysosomes) by fusion of autophagosomes with
lysosomes. These 4 steps and their mediators can be described
as follows:

Authors' Afﬁliation: Department of Neurological Surgery and Helen Diller
Family Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of California, San Francisco, California
Corresponding Author: Manish K. Aghi, Department of Neurological
Surgery, University of California, 505 Parnassus Avenue, Room M779,
San Francisco, CA 94143-0112. Phone: 415-353-1172; Fax: 415-3533907; E-mail: AghiM@neurosurg.ucsf.edu
doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-1076
2012 American Association for Cancer Research.

4294

Cancer Res; 72(17) September 1, 2012

1. Phagophore formation starts with ATG1, ATG13, and
ATG17 forming a complex that recruits membrane protein ATG9 to the developing phagophore. Phagophore
formation is aided by the class III phosphatidylinositol-3
kinase (PI-3KIII) Vps34 (vesicular protein sorting 34) and
its binding partner, Beclin-1 (ATG6), whereas the initial
step of mitophagy, the autophagic degradation of mitochondria, is mediated by Bcl-2/adenovirus E1B 19-kDa
interacting protein 3 [BNIP3 (1)]. BNIP3 binds to Bcl2 and
releases Beclin-1 from Bcl2 to initiate the Beclin-1ATG14-PI3KIII complex.
2. Proteins assembling at the phagophore include ATG7,
which activates ATG12, enabling it to be transferred to
ATG10, a carrier protein that potentiates covalent linkage
of ATG12 to ATG5. The formation of the ATG12-ATG5
conjugate promotes the elongation and closure of the
phagophore to form the autophagosome.
3. In autophagosome formation, (i) ATG4-mediated cleavage of cytosolic microtubule-associated protein light
chain 3 (LC3; mammalian homolog of ATG8) generates
LC3-I; (ii) LC3-I is activated by ATG7; (iii) activated LC3-I
is transferred to ATG3, which conjugates LC3-I with
phosphatidylethanolamine to generate LC3-II; and (iv)
LC3-II is incorporated into the phagophore membrane,
where it promotes fusion of the phagophore membrane
to the endoplasmic reticulum by acting as a receptor for
adaptor molecules on target membranes, such as proteins and organelles marked for degradation. One of the
adaptor molecules that bind LC3-II is p62/SQSTM1,
which binds to ubiquitinated proteins and promotes the
turnover of p62-ubiquitinated protein aggregates.
4. Autophagosomes form mature autolysosomes by fusing
with lysosomes. This aspect of autophagy is less well
studied, but it requires G protein Rab7 in its GTP-bound
state.

Autophagy Mediates Resistance to Antiangiogenic Therapy

Although autophagosomes can sequester cytosolic material,
including organelles, nonspeciﬁcally in a process called nonselective macroautophagy, there is evidence that a process
of selective autophagy can occur as well. During selective
autophagy, autophagic degradation of speciﬁc protein aggregates occurs (Fig. 1). Selective autophagy is associated with
degradation of p62 (2), a protein complex that binds ubiquitinated protein aggregates to target them for degradation. In
contrast, nonselective autophagy involves (i) BNIP3, a hypoxiainducible factor-1a (HIF-1a) downstream target gene and
marker of autophagic destruction of mitochondria; and (ii)
LC3, which, after it converts from its LC3-I form to its LC3-II
form, is degraded by lysosomal enzymes in autolysosomes,
causing the total amount of LC3 (LC3-I plus LC3-II) to drop (3).
Because autophagosomes were initially noted to accumulate in dying cells, the term "autophagic cell death" was
created to describe a mode of cell death that lacks features of
apoptosis and instead is marked by the cytoplasmic accumulation of autophagosomes. However, subsequent studies
have shown that autophagy also can be activated by stressed
cells to survive stressors by removing damaged proteins and
organelles (4–6).

Role of Autophagy in Cancer
It has been hypothesized that autophagy protects cells from
the genotoxic stress that can lead to oncogenic transformation
by killing cells before DNA damage can be sustained. However,
some investigators have hypothesized that once this barrier
has been overcome and a tumor has formed, the tumor will use
autophagy as a survival mechanism to overcome the stresses
imposed during cancer progression, as well as those caused by
radiation or chemotherapy. When these stressors reach a
critical point, autophagy is hypothesized to revert to mediating
cell death.
Consistent with this hypothesis, a cytoprotective role of
autophagy in established tumors exposed to stressors such as
anticancer treatments was suggested in studies in which
autophagy inhibitors, such as hydroxychloroquine or 3-methyladenine (3-MA), were shown to sensitize cancer cells to
tamoxifen treatment (7), radiation (8), the DNA alkylating
agents cyclophosphamide (7) and cisplatin (9), and the tyrosine kinase receptor inhibitor imatinib (10). However, some
studies have suggested the converse—that autophagy can be
associated with cell death in tumor cells treated with chemotherapy. For example, one report showed that glioblastoma cells treated with dasatinib and temozolomide exhibited
increased autophagy and increased cell death, although a
deﬁnitive correlation between the 2 phenomena was not
offered (11). Another report in which glioblastoma cells
treated with the pan-Bcl-2 inhibitor (-)-gossypol exhibited
increased autophagy, and cell death carried this observation
one step further by showing increased cell survival after
(-)-gossypol treatment of cells transduced with short hairpin
RNA (shRNA) targeting beclin1 or ATG5 (12). In a study of
murine colon carcinoma cells treated with methotrexate or
oxaliplatin, autophagy was not required for chemotherapyinduced cell death but was required for the immunogenicity

www.aacrjournals.org

of dead cells by promoting the release of activating transcription factor (ATP) from dying cells (13).
It is possible that the differences among studies associating
autophagy with tumor cell survival versus tumor cell death in
response to therapies may merely reﬂect the extent of the
damage induced. Damage below the threshold of tolerance
may allow autophagy to be associated with tumor cell survival,
whereas damage beyond the threshold of tolerance may cause
autophagy to promote tumor cell death. Ultimately, further
work will be needed to clarify the mechanisms that render
autophagy protective rather than cytotoxic, as well as the
molecular basis of the variable role played by autophagy in
different cell types (14, 15).
The variable role of autophagy in different tumors could
reﬂect the fact that some tumor cells exhibit loss of autophagy
function through mechanisms that remain to be identiﬁed but
likely include interactions between tumor-suppressor/promoter genes and autophagy, as described below:
1. The mTOR pathway negatively regulates autophagy. A
major (and perhaps the primary) regulator of autophagy
is the mTOR pathway. mTOR is activated downstream of
phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K)–AKT, a pathway that is
commonly dysregulated in human cancer. Activation of
mTOR can also occur due to loss of tumor suppressors
(LKB1, PML, PTEN, and TSC1/2) or through gain-offunction mutations in receptor tyrosine kinases (16).
mTOR negatively regulates autophagy by causing phosphorylation of ATG13, which inhibits formation of a
trimeric complex required for autophagosome formation
(17). Because mTOR suppresses autophagy, normal liver
cells that are deﬁcient in PTEN, a tumor suppressor that
inhibits mTOR by way of PI3–AKT inhibition, exhibit
suppressed formation and maturation of autophagosomes (18). Similarly, when the Akt oncogene, an activator of mTOR, is inhibited by shRNA in a prostate cancer
cell line, autophagy is promoted (19).
2. The epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)–Ras–
mitogen-activated kinase (MAPK) pathway promotes
autophagy. Murine embryonic ﬁbroblasts with oncogene-mediated overactivation of Ras exhibit increased
autophagy due to increased p62 expression (20). The
effects of Ras overactivation on autophagy are important
because the EGFR–Ras–MAPK signaling pathway is
altered in several tumors, including >40% of glioblastomas (21).
3. p53 mutations promote autophagy when they are localized to the cytoplasm. p53 mutant proteins that localized
to the cytoplasm of colon cancer cells were shown to
promote autophagy (22). Mutations in the DNA-binding
regions of p53 did not affect autophagy, suggesting that
unidentiﬁed molecular features of p53 account for its
autophagy suppression.
In cancer, hypoxia is a crucial cellular stressor faced by
proliferating cells in a microenvironment that contains abnormal vessels that fail to deliver a blood supply effectively to
the tumor. Recent reports suggest that the cellular stress of

Cancer Res; 72(17) September 1, 2012

4295

Hu et al.

Figure 1. Simpliﬁed scheme of nonselective versus selective autophagy, and how they might be affected in cancer cells by oncogenic pathways and therapyinduced stressors. Shown are regulators of nonselective and selective autophagy in tumor cells. Hypoxia, as occurs naturally in the tumor microenvironment
or as stimulated by antiangiogenic therapy, upregulates both nonselective and selective autophagy, with mechanisms more clearly identiﬁed for the
former. Radiation, another anticancer therapy, has been shown to upregulate factors mediating nonselective autophagy. Bec-1, Beclin-1; PHD2, prolyl
hydroxylase domain-containing protein 2; ROS, reactive oxygen species.

hypoxia activates autophagy. Pathways that are activated by
the tumor cell response to hypoxia and that have been shown
to contribute to autophagy include those mediated by HIF-1a,
which is activated during physiologic hypoxia (0.1%–3% O2), or

4296

Cancer Res; 72(17) September 1, 2012

by HIF-1a–independent 50 AMP-activated protein kinase
(AMPK), which is activated during anoxia (0.01% O2). AMPK
acts as a ubiquitous sensor of cellular energy status by responding to an ATP-depleted adenine nucleotide pool by

Cancer Research

Autophagy Mediates Resistance to Antiangiogenic Therapy

phosphorylating many target proteins with functions related
to energy metabolism (23).
Several intermediate factors have been shown to allow HIF1a and AMPK to upregulate autophagy (Fig. 1). As mentioned
above, HIF-1a upregulates expression of BNIP3, a marker of
mitophagy that is essential to hypoxia-induced autophagy (24).
The upregulation of BNIP3 by hypoxia is particularly intriguing
given the role of BNIP3 in mitophagy, which could be particularly important in allowing cells to adapt to hypoxia, because
the buildup of reactive oxygen species (ROS) in the mitochondria of hypoxic cells has been suggested to be a source of cell
death. The importance of BNIP3 in the ability of tumor cells to
overcome the hypoxia present in their microenvironment is
suggested by the observed correlation of immunostaining for
BNIP3 with poor survival in lung (25) and endometrial (26)
cancers. Activation of the AMPK pathway increases tumor
cell autophagy indirectly through inactivation of the mTOR
complex (27) and directly through stimulation of ULK1 (Fig. 1;
ref. 28). The ability of tumor cells to use these 2 pathways
to harness autophagy, and mitophagy in particular, as a
survival-promoting mechanism in hypoxia could be a valuable
biologic mechanism supporting tumor growth and therapeutic
resistance.

Autophagy as an Adaptive Response to Cancer
Treatments
Several cancer therapies, including the DNA-damaging chemotherapeutic temozolomide (29) and radiation (8), induce
autophagy in culture and animal models (30), and the autophagic response to many of these treatments is cytoprotective
(31). Radiation therapy promotes autophagy by upregulating
transcription of the autophagy mediators Beclin-1, ATG3,
ATG4, ATG5, and ATG12, with a survival-promoting effect
conﬁrmed by autophagy inhibition (8). Other studies have
shown that some chemotherapy agents, such as histone deacetylase inhibitors (31) and cisplatin (32), induce autophagy by
increasing the production of ROS in mitochondria.
These observations, which point to autophagy as an adaptive response to radiation therapy and conventional DNAdamaging chemotherapy, are augmented by our recent ﬁnding
that autophagy is an adaptive response to a different type of
therapy, antiangiogenic treatment (33), whose ability to curb
tumor progression by targeting abnormal tumor vessels has
been conﬁrmed by preclinical evidence and clinical trials (34).
However, these initial successes were tempered by the failure
of angiogenesis inhibitors to produce enduring clinical
responses. For example, in phase II clinical trials of the VEGF
neutralizing antibody bevacizumab in glioblastoma multiforme (GBM), 40% to 60% of tumors progressed after initially
successful treatment (35), consistent with the development of
resistance to antiangiogenic therapy, a state that involves a
poor prognosis and poor response to available treatments (36).
We found that hypoxia increases after the devascularization
caused by antiangiogenic therapy, consistent with the goals of
these therapies, but some tumor cells survive the hypoxic insult
elicited by antiangiogenic therapy through autophagy by activating the AMPK and HIF-1a pathways (33).

www.aacrjournals.org

Our ﬁnding of hypoxia-induced autophagy in tumor cells as
an adaptive response to the hypoxia caused by antiangiogenic
therapy can be expanded to determine the effect of hypoxia on
cells in the tumor microenvironment. For example, we have
found that hypoxia does not induce autophagy in endothelial
cells isolated from GBMs (unpublished data), consistent with
our ﬁnding that the vessel density in GBMs resistant to
antiangiogenic therapy was suppressed (33), and suggesting
that tumors grow during antiangiogenic therapy without
increased endothelial survival. Furthermore, because hypoxia
increases the size of the cancer stem cell population (37), one
could hypothesize that hypoxia promotes autophagy in cancer
stem cells. Conﬁrmation of this hypothesis would provide an
additional rationale for inhibiting autophagy to prevent resistance to antiangiogenic treatment.
The adaptive response of tumors to antiangiogenic therapy
may involve increased tumor cell invasiveness (38). Additional
studies will be needed to determine whether cells that survive
antiangiogenic therapy through autophagy exhibit increased
invasiveness, as occurs in cells treated with a chemical that
induces autophagy (39). The demonstration that cells that
survive antiangiogenic therapy through autophagy exhibit
increased invasiveness would suggest that autophagy inhibition can inhibit the invasion that occurs after antiangiogenic
therapy by disrupting it at an earlier stage. This may be a more
effective strategy than targeting invasion directly, because the
numerous mediators of invasion make it difﬁcult to disrupt
invasion pharmacologically.

Autophagy Inhibition in Cancer
Based on the preclinical evidence mentioned above, autophagy inhibition is currently being investigated as a means of
modulating the response to cancer therapies in patients.
Currently, the only U.S. Food and Drug Administration–
approved agents that are able to inhibit autophagy are chloroquine, an antimalaria drug, and its derivative hydroxychloroquine, both of which block autophagy by disrupting lysosome
acidiﬁcation. One notable completed study was a randomized
trial that combined chloroquine with conventional treatment,
deﬁned as radiation plus temozolomide, for glioblastoma. The
median survival was 24 months with chloroquine treatment
and 11 months without chloroquine treatment, a difference
that was not quite statistically signiﬁcant (40). The lack of
statistical signiﬁcance in that trial could mean that the effect is
real but the sample size (30 patients total) was too small to
achieve statistical signiﬁcance, or it could mean that the
observed difference was due to chance and there really was
no effect from combining chloroquine-mediated autophagy
inhibition with standard glioblastoma treatment. If the latter is
true, it could be because chloroquine failed to sufﬁciently
inhibit autophagy in patients or because the role of autophagy
in the temozolomide response may not be cytoprotective, as
suggested by preclinical evidence (29).
Currently, 22 phase I/II cancer clinical trials involving
chloroquine or hydroxychloroquine are open nationwide
(www.clinicaltrials.gov), including 2 combining hydroxychloroquine with bevacizumab and conventional DNA-damaging

Cancer Res; 72(17) September 1, 2012

4297

Hu et al.

chemotherapy. The results of these trials could support our
preclinical data showing a role for autophagy in resistance to
antiangiogenic therapy.
In addition to these ongoing clinical efforts, the use of
autophagy inhibition as a therapeutic strategy in cancer may
require further preclinical evaluation to optimize the
chances of success. The challenges involved in using autophagy inhibition as a therapeutic strategy include (i) recognizing the dual roles played by autophagy in tumors [i.e.,
cytoprotective or cytocidal, depending on the tumor type
and whether the tumor is in early or late stages of oncogenesis (41)]; and (ii) recognizing the functional autophagy
status in tumors, because some tumors may have defects in
the autophagy pathway (13) and others may have a preserved capacity for autophagy. The ﬁrst challenge leads most
observers to suggest that autophagy inhibition will be ineffective as monotherapy because basal autophagy may be
cytocidal, whereas stress-induced autophagy (as seen in
response to traditional chemotherapy) may be cytoprotective, a resistance response that can then be targeted when
autophagy inhibition is combined with the chemotherapy.
The second challenge suggests that biomarkers for the
autophagy capability of individual tumors will be needed
to enable the identiﬁcation of tumors that are best served by
a therapeutic strategy of autophagy inhibition.
Based on the hypothesis that tumor cells exhibit minimal
basal survival-promoting autophagy and that autophagy may
be most signiﬁcant as an adaptive response to anticancer
therapies, it is believed that autophagy inhibition will likely
be of minimal utility as monotherapy. Therefore, the clinical
trials of chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine to date have all
combined these agents with treatments that induce autophagy
as an adaptive responsive.
Additional preclinical work will also be needed to develop
autophagy inhibitors beyond chloroquine or hydroxychloroquine. Although preclinical studies, including ours, have
suggested that these agents disrupt autophagy in animal
models, other studies have shown that chloroquine may
potentiate the effects of autophagy-inducing chemotherapies independently of autophagy disruption (42). Furthermore, it remains to be shown that chloroquine or hydroxychloroquine can effectively block autophagy in human
tumors, and how the genetic makeup of these tumors
inﬂuences their susceptibility to these agents. Should chloroquine or hydroxychloroquine ultimately prove to be too
nonspeciﬁc for clinical use as autophagy inhibitors, the
development of more speciﬁc autophagy inhibitors will
require a focus on kinases (e.g., ATG1 or Vps34) or proteases

(e.g., ATG4) that can speciﬁcally regulate the activation of
autophagy and autophagosome formation and that have
minimal intracellular roles outside of autophagy.

Conclusions
Autophagy is a lysosomal degradation pathway in which
double-membrane vesicles form and engulf damaged protein
aggregates and organelles that are then delivered to lysosomes
for degradation. Several themes have emerged from studies of
the role of autophagy in cancer that will inﬂuence future efforts
to understand the role of autophagy in tumor biology.
First, autophagy may initially contribute to the prevention of
oncogenic transformation in premalignant cells by eliminating
potential sources of oncogenic transformation from the cell.
Second, once tumors form and begin to proliferate, autophagy
allows the tumor cells to survive internal cellular stressors
elicited by the harsh microenvironment. Third, numerous
studies have shown autophagy to be a resistance mechanism
in cancer cells treated with conventional DNA-damaging chemotherapy and, more recently, molecularly targeted therapies
and antiangiogenic therapy. Fourth, the use of autophagy
inhibition as a therapeutic strategy designed to maximize the
therapeutic potential of other anticancer treatments will
require further work to deﬁne the ideal autophagy mediators
to pharmacologically target and deﬁne the molecular features
that enable a tumor cell to use autophagy as a survival
mechanism.
Disclosure of Potential Conﬂicts of Interest
No potential conﬂicts of interest were disclosed.

Authors' Contributions
Conception and design: Y.-L. Hu, A. Jahangiri, M. De Lay, M.K. Aghi
Development of methodology: M.K. Aghi
Acquisition of data (provided animals, acquired and managed patients,
provided facilities, etc.): M. De Lay, M.K. Aghi
Analysis and interpretation of data (e.g., statistical analysis, biostatistics,
computational analysis): Y.-L. Hu, M.K. Aghi
Writing, review, and/or revision of the manuscript: Y.-L. Hu, A. Jahangiri, M.
De Lay, M.K. Aghi
Administrative, technical, or material support (i.e., reporting or organizing data, constructing databases): A. Jahangiri
Study supervision: M. De Lay, M.K. Aghi

Grant Support
M.K. Aghi received funding from the American Brain Tumor Association,
American Cancer Society, James S. McDonnell Foundation, National Institutes of
Health (5K02NS64167-2), and UCSF Brain Tumor SPORE. A. Jahangiri is a
Howard Hughes Medical Institute research fellow.
Received March 20, 2012; revised April 9, 2012; accepted April 30, 2012;
published OnlineFirst August 22, 2012.

References
1.

2.
3.

4298

gur
Bellot G, Garcia-Medina R, Gounon P, Chiche J, Roux D, Pouysse
J, et al. Hypoxia-induced autophagy is mediated through hypoxiainducible factor induction of BNIP3 and BNIP3L via their BH3 domains.
Mol Cell Biol 2009;29:2570–81.
Kirkin V, McEwan DG, Novak I, Dikic I. A role for ubiquitin in selective
autophagy. Mol Cell 2009;34:259–69.
Xie Z, Klionsky DJ. Autophagosome formation: core machinery and
adaptations. Nat Cell Biol 2007;9:1102–9.

Cancer Res; 72(17) September 1, 2012

4.

5.

6.

lez-Polo RA, Casares N, Perfettini JL, Dessen P,
Boya P, Gonza
Larochette N, et al. Inhibition of macroautophagy triggers apoptosis.
Mol Cell Biol 2005;25:1025–40.
Lum JJ, Bauer DE, Kong M, Harris MH, Li C, Lindsten T, et al. Growth
factor regulation of autophagy and cell survival in the absence of
apoptosis. Cell 2005;120:237–48.
Sato K, Tsuchihara K, Fujii S, Sugiyama M, Goya T, Atomi Y, et al.
Autophagy is activated in colorectal cancer cells and contributes

Cancer Research

Autophagy Mediates Resistance to Antiangiogenic Therapy

7.

8.

9.

10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

15.

16.
17.

18.

19.

20.

21.

22.

23.
24.

25.

to the tolerance to nutrient deprivation. Cancer Res 2007;67:
9677–84.
Amaravadi RK, Yu D, Lum JJ, Bui T, Christophorou MA, Evan GI, et al.
Autophagy inhibition enhances therapy-induced apoptosis in a Mycinduced model of lymphoma. J Clin Invest 2007;117:326–36.
Apel A, Herr I, Schwarz H, Rodemann HP, Mayer A. Blocked autophagy
sensitizes resistant carcinoma cells to radiation therapy. Cancer Res
2008;68:1485–94.
Liu D, Yang Y, Liu Q, Wang J. Inhibition of autophagy by 3-MA
potentiates cisplatin-induced apoptosis in esophageal squamous cell
carcinoma cells. Med Oncol 2011;28:105–11.
€ gler O, Akiyama Y, Moritake K, Shinojima N,
Shingu T, Fujiwara K, Bo
et al. Inhibition of autophagy at a late stage enhances imatinib-induced
cytotoxicity in human malignant glioma cells. Int J Cancer 2009;
124:1060–71.
Milano V, Piao Y, LaFortune T, de Groot J. Dasatinib-induced autophagy is enhanced in combination with temozolomide in glioma. Mol
Cancer Ther 2009;8:394–406.
Voss V, Senft C, Lang V, Ronellenﬁtsch MW, Steinbach JP, Seifert V,
et al. The pan-Bcl-2 inhibitor (-)-gossypol triggers autophagic cell
death in malignant glioma. Mol Cancer Res 2010;8:1002–16.
Michaud M, Martins I, Sukkurwala AQ, Adjemian S, Ma Y, Pellegatti P,
et al. Autophagy-dependent anticancer immune responses induced by
chemotherapeutic agents in mice. Science 2011;334:1573–7.
Chau YP, Lin SY, Chen JH, Tai MH. Endostatin induces autophagic cell
death in EAhy926 human endothelial cells. Histol Histopathol 2003;
18:715–26.
Nguyen TM, Subramanian IV, Xiao X, Ghosh G, Nguyen P, Kelekar A,
et al. Endostatin induces autophagy in endothelial cells by modulating
Beclin 1 and beta-catenin levels. J Cell Mol Med 2009;13[9B]:3687–98.
Sabatini DM. mTOR and cancer: insights into a complex relationship.
Nat Rev Cancer 2006;6:729–34.
Jung CH, Jun CB, Ro SH, Kim YM, Otto NM, Cao J, et al. ULK-Atg13FIP200 complexes mediate mTOR signaling to the autophagy machinery. Mol Biol Cell 2009;20:1992–2003.
Ueno T, Sato W, Horie Y, Komatsu M, Tanida I, Yoshida M, et al. Loss of
Pten, a tumor suppressor, causes the strong inhibition of autophagy
without affecting LC3 lipidation. Autophagy 2008;4:692–700.
re A, Orr C, Lin J, Lee BB, Tien JY, et al. Akt
Degtyarev M, De Mazie
inhibition promotes autophagy and sensitizes PTEN-null tumors to
lysosomotropic agents. J Cell Biol 2008;183:101–16.
Duran A, Linares JF, Galvez AS, Wikenheiser K, Flores JM, Diaz-Meco
MT, et al. The signaling adaptor p62 is an important NF-kappaB
mediator in tumorigenesis. Cancer Cell 2008;13:343–54.
Smith JS, Tachibana I, Passe SM, Huntley BK, Borell TJ, Iturria N, et al.
PTEN mutation, EGFR ampliﬁcation, and outcome in patients with
anaplastic astrocytoma and glioblastoma multiforme. J Natl Cancer
Inst 2001;93:1246–56.
Morselli E, Tasdemir E, Maiuri MC, Galluzzi L, Kepp O, Criollo A, et al.
Mutant p53 protein localized in the cytoplasm inhibits autophagy. Cell
Cycle 2008;7:3056–61.
gur J. Hypoxia-induced autophagy: cell death or
Mazure NM, Pouysse
cell survival? Curr Opin Cell Biol 2010;22:177–80.
Tracy K, Dibling BC, Spike BT, Knabb JR, Schumacker P, Macleod KF.
BNIP3 is an RB/E2F target gene required for hypoxia-induced autophagy. Mol Cell Biol 2007;27:6229–42.
Giatromanolaki A, Koukourakis MI, Sowter HM, Sivridis E, Gibson S,
Gatter KC, et al. BNIP3 expression is linked with hypoxia-regulated

www.aacrjournals.org

26.

27.
28.

29.

30.

31.

32.

33.

34.
35.

36.

37.

38.

39.

40.

41.
42.

protein expression and with poor prognosis in non-small cell lung
cancer. Clin Cancer Res 2004;10:5566–71.
Giatromanolaki A, Koukourakis MI, Gatter KC, Harris AL, Sivridis E.
BNIP3 expression in endometrial cancer relates to active hypoxia
inducible factor 1alpha pathway and prognosis. J Clin Pathol 2008;
61:217–20.
Inoki K, Zhu T, Guan KL. TSC2 mediates cellular energy response to
control cell growth and survival. Cell 2003;115:577–90.
Kim J, Kundu M, Viollet B, Guan KL. AMPK and mTOR regulate
autophagy through direct phosphorylation of Ulk1. Nat Cell Biol
2011;13:132–41.
Kanzawa T, Germano IM, Komata T, Ito H, Kondo Y, Kondo S. Role of
autophagy in temozolomide-induced cytotoxicity for malignant glioma
cells. Cell Death Differ 2004;11:448–57.
Amaravadi RK, Thompson CB. The roles of therapy-induced autophagy and necrosis in cancer treatment. Clin Cancer Res 2007;13:
7271–9.
Carew JS, Nawrocki ST, Kahue CN, Zhang H, Yang C, Chung L, et al.
Targeting autophagy augments the anticancer activity of the histone
deacetylase inhibitor SAHA to overcome Bcr-Abl-mediated drug resistance. Blood 2007;110:313–22.
Takahashi A, Kimura T, Takabatake Y, Namba T, Kaimori J, Kitamura H,
et al. Autophagy guards against cisplatin-induced acute kidney injury.
Am J Pathol 2012;180:517–25.
Hu YL, Delay M, Jahangiri A, Molinaro AM, Rose SD, Carbonell WS,
et al. Hypoxia-induced autophagy promotes tumor cell survival and
adaptation to antiangiogenic treatment in glioblastoma. Cancer Res
2012;72:1773–83.
Jain RK. Lessons from multidisciplinary translational trials on antiangiogenic therapy of cancer. Nat Rev Cancer 2008;8:309–16.
Vredenburgh JJ, Desjardins A, Herndon JE 2nd, Dowell JM, Reardon DA, Quinn JA, et al. Phase II trial of bevacizumab and
irinotecan in recurrent malignant glioma. Clin Cancer Res 2007;
13:1253–9.
Clark AJ, Lamborn KR, Butowski NA, Chang SM, Prados MD, Clarke
JL, et al. Neurosurgical management and prognosis of patients with
glioblastoma that progresses during bevacizumab treatment. Neurosurgery 2012;70:361–70.
Bar EE, Lin A, Mahairaki V, Matsui W, Eberhart CG. Hypoxia
increases the expression of stem-cell markers and promotes clonogenicity in glioblastoma neurospheres. Am J Pathol 2010;177:
1491–502.
ez-Ribes M, Allen E, Hudock J, Takeda T, Okuyama H, Vin
~als F, et al.
Pa
Antiangiogenic therapy elicits malignant progression of tumors to
increased local invasion and distant metastasis. Cancer Cell 2009;15:
220–31.
Indelicato M, Pucci B, Schito L, Reali V, Aventaggiato M, Mazzarino
MC, et al. Role of hypoxia and autophagy in MDA-MB-231 invasiveness. J Cell Physiol 2010;223:359–68.
 pez-Gonza
lez MA. Adding chloroquine to
~o E, Lo
Sotelo J, Bricen
conventional treatment for glioblastoma multiforme: a randomized,
double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. Ann Intern Med 2006;144:
337–43.
~o G, Martins I, Kroemer G. Autophagy in Ras-induced malignant
Marin
transformation: fatal or vital? Mol Cell 2011;42:1–3.
Maycotte P, Aryal S, Cummings CT, Thorburn J, Morgan MJ, Thorburn
A. Chloroquine sensitizes breast cancer cells to chemotherapy independent of autophagy. Autophagy 2012;8:200–12.

Cancer Res; 72(17) September 1, 2012

4299

