FDA Approves New Treatment of Metastatic Melanoma

T

he US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) recently
approved the first oncolytic virus therapy for the treatment
of melanoma lesions in the skin and lymph nodes. The therapy
is known as Imlygic (talimogene laherparepvec). Imlygic is
manufactured by BioVex Inc, a subsidiary of Amgen Inc, based
in Thousand Oaks, California.
Imlygic is a genetically modified live oncolytic herpes virus
therapy used to treat melanoma lesions that cannot be removed
completely by surgery. It is injected directly into the melanoma
lesions, in which it replicates inside cancer cells and causes the
cells to rupture and die.
The treatment course includes a series of injections into the
melanoma lesions: 1) an initial injection; 2) a second injection
3 weeks later; and 3) then additional doses every 2 weeks for at
least 6 months unless other treatment is needed or there are no
remaining lesions to treat.
Imlygic was evaluated in a study of 436 participants with
metastatic melanoma that was considered to be inoperable.
Their lesions were treated with Imlygic or a comparable therapy

for at least 6 months or until there were no more
injectable lesions noted. Findings demonstrated
that 16.3% of participants who received
Imlygic experienced a decrease in the size of
their skin and lymph node lesions lasting
for a minimum of 6 months, compared
with 2.1% of patients who received the
comparator therapy.
The FDA cautions that Imlygic
has not been
shown to improve overall survival
or to have
an effect on melanoma that has
spread to the
brain, bone, liver, lungs, or other
internal organs.
In addition, side effects of the
treatment include
fatigue, chills, fever, nausea, flulike
symptoms,
and pain at the injection site.
Imlygic also can lead
to herpes virus infection. As
a result, it should not
be given to individuals with
suppressed
immune
systems or to women who
are pregnant.
DOI: 10.1002/cncr.29998

M

any patients who test negative for the BRCA1
and BRCA2 genes choose to undergo
comprehensive testing for genetic mutations
that increase their cancer risk, and when they
receive genetic counseling, the majority
of patients make informed decisions and
experience less anxiety, according to a study
presented at the 2015 San Antonio Breast
Cancer Symposium, held in San Antonio,
Texas, between December 8 and 12, 2015.
Lead author Angela Bradbury, MD,
assistant professor of hematology-oncology
at the University of Pennsylvania Abramson
Cancer Center in Philadelphia, notes that although
comprehensive genetic testing is becoming more widely
available, the potential benefits and risks for patients who
undergo the testing are unknown. Her study indicates that
when patients receive counseling both before and after testing,
they have more knowledge and experience less uncertainty and
anxiety after learning the results.
At the time of Dr. Bradbury’s presentation, 124 women
with a personal or family history of breast or ovarian cancer
who tested negative for BRCA1 and BRACA2 had participated
in the study. Of the 95 participants who completed pre-test
counseling with a certified genetic counselor, 93% elected to

move forward with multiplex testing, which allows
for the simultaneous analysis of alterations in
25 cancer-related genes. The testing is an
alternative to targeted tests that screen for
individual forms of cancer, such as the test
for BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations.
After counseling, patients experienced
decreases in general anxiety as well as
improvements in genetic knowledge; however,
Dr. Bradbury notes that patient experiences
may vary with the type of test result, and that
due to the limited amount of information available
for some of the mutations, a positive test result could
cause short-term increases in anxiety and uncertainty.
Susan Domchek, MD, executive director of the Basser
Center for BRCA at Abramson Cancer Center, and a senior
author of the study, adds that little is known regarding some
of the genes that are examined in the panel tests. Although it
can be reassuring for patients who learn they do not have these
mutations, there may not be much information or any effective
treatment plans for patients with mutations in certain cancer
susceptibility genes, she says. Those patients will have to wait
until additional research becomes available that will help to
guide their decisions, Dr. Domchek adds.
DOI: 10.1002/cncr.30002

© KOPYTIN GEORGY; WINAI TEPSUTTINUN / SHUTTERSTOCK.COM

BRCA 1/2-Negative Patients Who Receive Counseling After Genetic
Testing Have Lower Anxiety

Erratum: In the March 15, 2016 issue of “CancerScope,” we incorrectly defined previous PSA screening prevalence in the story “Early-Stage Prostate
Cancer, PSA Screening Rates Decline.” The statement should read: PSA screening prevalence was 34% in 2000 and 2005, and it decreased from 36% to
31% overall between 2010 and 2013.
DOI: 10.1002/cncr.30006
Content in this section does not reﬂect any ofﬁcial policy or medical opinion of the American Cancer Society or of the publisher unless otherwise noted. © American Cancer Society, 2016.

Cancer

April 15, 2016

1149

