Correspondence

Antiviral Therapy and
Hepatocellular Carcinogenesis
We have read with great interest the excellent review by Li
et al.1
The authors claim that even in subjects who have
achieved a sustained virological response with interferon
or pegylated interferon therapy, the risk of hepatocellular
carcinoma (HCC) remains, especially in those with
advanced fibrosis.
Our previous experience has shown how interferon
treatment, which compensates hepatitis C virus cirrhosis,
reduces the negative clinical evolution independently of
the type of laboratory and virological response, but it is
barely useful in the prevention of HCC because cirrhosis
itself represents a risk of cancer.2,3
We evidenced that the cumulative probabilities of
developing HCC were not significantly higher in
untreated patients versus interferon-treated cases when
they were assessed with Kaplan-Meier and log-rank tests
(P > .05).3
Some experience has shown how interferon prevents
or delays the development of HCC, but the magnitude of
the overall effect is low, and the observed benefits might
be due to false associations.4,5
Moreover, during the course of cirrhosis associated
with diabetes mellitus type 2 or the consumption of alcohol, the risk of HCC can survive even in the absence of
direct (overexpression of hepatitis C virus proteins, nonstructural protein 5B–retinoblastoma interaction, and
expression of microRNA 122) or indirect effects of
hepatitis C virus (continuous stimulus of proinflammatory, proapoptotic, and proliferative signals).5,6
Sixty to eight percent of patients with cirrhosis develop hyperinsulinemia, and approximately 20% develop
diabetes mellitus type 2. The presence of hyperinsulinemia favors the onset of HCC and exacerbates its
progression.
One must also carefully consider that with respect to
the consumption of ethanol during the course of liver cirrhosis, it is known that dosages that do not correlate with
alcohol dependence may increase the risk of mortality.
The European Association for the Study of the Liver
affirms that if there is a threshold, it is very low and difficult to detect because of the difficulties in measuring a
daily intake less than 10 to 12 g.7
It could be the case that more moderate consumption might play a more significant role in hepatic carcinoCancer

January 1, 2016

genesis than is currently thought.8 Recently, Persson
et al.9 evidenced how the consumption of 3 drinks per day
is positively associated with the occurrence of both HCC
and liver disease mortality.
Ethanol, in fact, has been included in International
Agency for Research on Cancer Group 1 with a direct
genotoxic capacity.10
It should also be noted that the risk for HCC
actually decreases by 6% to 7% per year after an individual gives up alcohol.11
From these considerations, there follows the need for a
careful metabolic evaluation, and the consumption of alcohol during the course of cirrhosis must definitely not be recommended because there is no safe threshold.12 In the
presence of alcohol dependence, however, the patient should
be seen by a hepatologist team specializing in alcohology.
Even with the introduction of direct-acting antiviral
agents, the ongoing surveillance of liver cirrhosis should
be performed every 6 months by a sonographyexperienced hepatologist despite the achievement of a sustained virological response.
FUNDING SUPPORT
No specific funding was disclosed.

CONFLICT OF INTEREST DISCLOSURES
The authors made no disclosures.

REFERENCES
1. Li DK, Chung RT. Impact of hepatitis C eradication on hepatocellular carcinogenesis. Cancer. 2015;121:2874-2882.
2. Testino G, Ansaldi F, Andorno E, et al. Interferon therapy does not
prevent hepatocellular carcinoma in HCV compensated cirrhosis.
Hepatogastroenterology. 2002;49:1636-1638.
3. Testino G, Borro P. Chemoprevention of hepatocellular carcinoma
in patients with hepatitis C virus related cirrhosis. World J Hepatol.
2013;5:521-527.
4. Camma C, Giunta M, Andreone P, Craxi A. Interferon and prevention of hepatocellular carcinoma in viral cirrhosis: an evidence-based
approach. J Hepatol. 2001;34:593-602.
5. Macaluso FS, Calvaruso V, Craxi A. Residual risk of hepatocellular
carcinoma after HCV eradication: more than meets the eye. Future
Microbiol. 2015;10:977-988.
6. Testino G, Leone S, Borro P. Alcohol and hepatocellular carcinoma: a
review and a point of view. World J Gastroenterol. 2014;20:15943-15954.
7. Sacco R, Gadaleta-Caldarola G, Galati G, et al. European Association
for the Study of the Liver Hepatocellular Carcinoma Summit 2014: old
question, new (or few) answers? Future Oncol. 2014;10:1719-1721.
8. Tokushige K, Hashimoto E, Horie Y, et al. Hepatocellular carcinoma in Japanese patients with nonalcoholic fatty liver disease, alcoholic liver disease, and chronic liver disease of unknown etiology:
report of the nationwide survey. J Gastroenterol. 2011;46:1230-1237.
9. Persson EC, Schwartz LM, Park Y, et al. Alcohol consumption, folate intake, hepatocellular carcinoma, and liver disease mortality.
Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2013;22:415-421.
10. International Agency for Research on Cancer. A review of human carcinogens. IARC Monogr Eval Carcinog Risks Hum. 2012;100:377-503.
11. Heckley GA, Jarl J, Asamoah BO, G-Gerdtham U. How the risk of
liver cancer changes after alcohol cessation: a review and metaanalysis of the current literature. BMC Cancer. 2011;11:446.

157

Correspondence
12. Chuang SC, Lee YC, Wu GJ, Straif K, Hashibe M. Alcohol consumption and liver cancer risk: a meta-analysis. Cancer Causes Control. 2015;26:1205-1231.

Gianni Testino, MD
Silvia Leone, MD
Paolo Borro, MD
Alcohologic Regional Center-Ligurian Region
IRCCS AOU San Martino-IST
Genoa, Italy
DOI: 10.1002/cncr.29696, Published online September 18, 2015
in Wiley Online Library (wileyonlinelibrary.com)

from AbbVie; and personal fees from Idenix outside the submitted
work.

REFERENCES
1. Li DK, Chung RT. Impact of hepatitis C eradication on hepatocellular carcinogenesis. Cancer. 2015;121:2874-2882.
2. Hiramatsu N, Oze T, Takehara T. Suppression of hepatocellular carcinoma development in hepatitis C patients given interferon-based
antiviral therapy. Hepatol Res. 2015;45:152-161.
3. Hung CH, Lee CM, Wang JH, et al. Impact of diabetes mellitus on
incidence of hepatocellular carcinoma in chronic hepatitis C patients
treated with interferon-based antiviral therapy. Int J Cancer. 2011;
128:2344-2352.

Darrick K. Li, MD, PhD

Reply to Antiviral Therapy and
Hepatocellular Carcinogenesis
We appreciate the interest of Testino et al in our recent
review.1 We agree that the risk of hepatocellular carcinoma
(HCC) remains elevated for patients who achieve a sustained virological response (SVR), particularly for those
who already have cirrhosis. This is a particular group of
patients who likely warrant continued regular screening for
HCC. Indeed, a subgroup analysis of trials enrolling only
hepatitis C virus (HCV) patients with advanced fibrosis
and cirrhosis found a 3-fold–increased risk of HCC in
patients who achieved SVR in comparison with trials
enrolling patients at all stages of fibrosis.2 As we discuss in
our review, a critical area of research will be identifying for
continued screening and treatment those patients who
attain SVR and continue to be at the highest risk for HCC.
We also agree that type 2 diabetes mellitus and alcohol consumption are additional risk factors for HCC, particularly for those patients with preexisting cirrhosis.
Emerging data suggest that in addition to serving as independent risk factors for the development of HCC, nonalcoholic steatohepatitis (a known result of type 2 diabetes
mellitus) and alcoholic steatohepatitis act to increase the
risk for HCC in HCV patients who have attained SVR.2,3
These findings support the developing model of multidisciplinary care for HCV patients, which will include hepatologists and other specialists who are able to assist in
managing comorbid factors, including alcohol use, obesity, and diabetes, to maximize their prognosis.
FUNDING SUPPORT
No specific funding was disclosed.

CONFLICT OF INTEREST DISCLOSURES
Raymond T. Chung reports grants from Gilead, Bristol-Myers
Squibb, Merck, Janssen, and Biologics; grants and personal fees
158

Department of Medicine
Massachusetts General Hospital
Boston, Massachusetts

Raymond T. Chung, MD
Department of Medicine
Massachusetts General Hospital
Boston, Massachusetts
Liver Center, Division of Gastroenterology
Department of Medicine
Massachusetts General Hospital
Boston, Massachusetts
DOI: 10.1002/cncr.29694, Published online September 18, 2015
in Wiley Online Library (wileyonlinelibrary.com)

Minimal Clinically Important
Difference and Edmonton
Symptom Assessment Scale
The Edmonton Symptom Assessment Scale is one of the
most widely available and used patient-reported symptom
assessment tools in both clinical and research practice.
Given such extensive implementation, we welcome the
estimate of minimal clinically important difference
(MCID) provided by Hui et al for use in sample size calculations.1 The authors have used both patient-anchored
and statistical methods to estimate the MCID. This
should help to distinguish between minimal detectable difference and minimal clinically important difference.2,3
The calculated sensitivity and specificity of each
item of the Edmonton Symptom Assessment Scale use the
patient’s global impression as the patient anchor to create
a binary MCID.
There are limits to its applicability:
 A binary approach loses valuable information by ignoring ordinal variables. It is, therefore, difficult to see
whether the authors have identified an MCID (indicating a clinical threshold for decision making) or the minimal clinically detectable difference.
Cancer

January 1, 2016

