www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Oncotarget, 2017, Vol. 8, (No. 5), pp: 7228-7230
Research Perspective

The p53 protein plays a central role in the mechanism of action
of epigentic drugs that alter the methylation of cytosine residues
in DNA
Arnold J. Levine1
1

Institute for Advanced Study, Princeton, N.J., USA

Correspondence to: Arnold J. Levine, email: alevine@ias.edu
Keywords: epigenetics, P53, Cytosine methylation, AML, Drug resistance
Received: January 16, 2017	

Accepted: January 18, 2017	

Published: January 24, 2017

ABSTRACT
Both normal and cancerous cells, treated with drugs that block cytosine
methylation of DNA, are preferentially killed by these drugs when they have p53
mutations and survive if they have a wild type protein. It appears that the wild type
p53 protein functions to eliminate cells that undergo large epigenetic alterations and
save other cells from death by this drug treatment. This has now been observed in
cancerous cells in culture, tumors in animals and tumors in humans. AML cells with
p53 mutations in humans treated with decitabine are killed by differentiation or
senescense, but then relapse at a high rate becoming drug resistant. The mechanism
of resistance to epigenetic drugs in p53 mutant cells, by possibly restoring a wild type
p53 gene or restoring a defective p53 pathway, is now an interesting hypothesis to
explore.

Eukaryotic DNA is commonly modified by
the addition or removal of methylation of cytosine
residues at the 5’ position of this base. The presence of
the methylation of cytosine can regulate the binding of
chromatin modifying enzymes, chromatin structure, alter
the transcription of genes associated with this modification,
impact the mutation rate of this modified base and regulate
DNA repair in these regions of a chromosome. There are
three enzymes that catalyze methylation at the 5’ position
of cytosine in the dinucleotide CpG (cytosine-phosphateguanine). DNA-methyltransferase-1 (DNMT1) is the
maintenance methytransferase. After DNA replication
the template strand may have methylated-CpG while
the new strand has the complimentary GpC, and DNA
methyltransferase-1 prefers hemi-methylated DNA and
adds a methyl-group onto the cytosine residue of the newly
replicated strand. DNMT3a and DNMT3b are de novo
methytransferases acting in the developing fertilized egg
to establish sexually dimorphic genomic imprinting and
in stem and progenitor cells to elaborate transcriptional
programs leading to the differentiation of cells. These
enzymes lay down the epigenetic program that results in
the development of organisms and maintains that program
in replicating cells of the organism.
Cancerous cells are commonly associated with
both genetic alterations and epigenetic alterations, both
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

of which can contribute to the tumorigenic phenotypes.
While the genetic mutations are irreversible, the epigenetic
modifications of DNA are reversible and a set of drugs
have been developed to block the activity of DNMT1
or to function as a substitute for the incorporation of
cytosine residues into RNA and DNA (azacytosine and
5’-aza-2’-deoxycytosine) and block the methylation of
cytosine residues in DNA. The methylation at certain loci
in chromosomes, like the p16 or VHL genes, repress the
transcription of these tumor suppressor genes, and it is
thought that the drugs that block epigenetic marks in the
DNA can now permit the expression of tumor suppressor
genes and kill the cancer cells [1]. The first clue that this
was too simplistic an observation came from Serrano and
his colleagues [2]. Employing 5’aza-2-deoxycytodine
to block methylation of cytosine residues in DNA they
demonstrated that this drug killed cancer cells in culture
that had p53 mutations by triggering apoptosis, but it failed
to kill cancer cells or normal cells that had wild type p53
genes and proteins. They showed that this drug entered
cells and was incorporated into DNA in both cells with
wild type and mutant p53 genes so that the mechanism of
cell killing was not due to drug exposure levels. They went
on to demonstrate that the wild type p53 gene and protein
prevents most of the cells in culture from producing
drastically altered epigenetic patterns. The few cells that
7228

Oncotarget

may have activated a tumor suppressor or triggered p53
mediated apoptosis died. These results suggest that the
majority of cells in the drug treated culture were protected
from extensive epigenetic changes by the wild type p53
protein no matter whether the cell was a cancerous cell
or a normal cell. The wild type p53 protein carried out
its proper functions permitting only cells with a normal
genome, be it a genetic or epigenetic change, to survive in
the culture. This idea that the wild type p53 protein can act
as a protector of vitality in drug treated cancer cells as well
as a suppressor of cancers arising in the organism is not
a new concept [3] and has gained considerable evidence
in recent years. We have come to realize that the wild
type p53 protein regulates p53 transcriptional programs
that repair genetic alterations and prevent epigenetic
alterations in cells. The results of Nieto and colleagues [2],
were confirmed using cancer cells with p53 mutations, but
not wild type p53 proteins, and a large number of different
drugs that blocked or altered epigenetic changes in human
cancer cells growing as tumors in immune-compromised
animals [4]. These observations were reproducible for
drugs that inhibited the DNMT1 activity or were faulty
incorporators of cytosine residues (5-aza-2-deoxycytosine)
into DNA. They were clearly reproduced with several
different types of tumors with mutant p53 genes but not
with wild type p53 genes. The only difference between the
work of Nieto and colleagues [2] and Yi and her colleagues
[4] was that in addition to wild type p53 enforcing fidelity
by apoptosis, Yi also observed cellular senescence played
a role in eliminating some cells in the tumor.
Now these results have been reproduced in humans
with two cancers, Acute Myeloid Leukemia (AML) and
Myelodisplastic Syndrome (MD) [5]. Employing the drug
decitabine or 5’-aza-2-deoxy-cytodine they demonstrated
that 21/21 patients with AML and p53 mutations responded
to this drug treatment with tumor reductions, while 78
patients with a wild type p53 gene did not respond. Those
patients with a p53 mutation commonly had an abnormal
karyotype and 20/21 of those patients responded to this
drug treatment. Abnormal karyotypes are commonly
observed with p53 mutations. The authors speculate that
the responses of AML cells with p53 mutations treated
with decitabine results from a reduced tumor load due to
differentiation of cells under the direction of the mutant
p53 protein. Terminal differentiation may be easily
confused with or is related to senescence.
Perhaps the most interesting observation made in
the Welsh publication [5] is that “Although the presence
of Tp53 mutations appears to be associated with a
high degree of decitabine sensitivity, relapses in these
patients were associated with the outgrowth of a preexisting subclone in all cases”. It is not clear from the
description of the responses to decitabine whether or
not each patient achieved a true or complete remission
or just a reduction and clearing of leukemic blasts from
the marrow. The supplementary materials in the Welsch
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

et al [5] paper demonstrates that only some of the 21
patients that responded to decitibine had p53 variant
allele frequencies of greater than 50% consistent with a
loss of homozygousity of the wild type allele and only a
p53 mutation in the cells. Other AML patients had variant
allele frequencies less than 50% suggesting that a wild
type p53 allele was retained along with a mutant p53 allele.
It would be of some interest to know if these two different
classes of AML responded differently to decitabine
treatment and if the relapses were different. The fact
that there was a response (reducing or clearing leukemic
blasts) to decitabine by the 21/21 AML patients with p53
mutations and that response was not durable in every case
means that there is a mechanism to overcome the defective
p53 pathway in cells that contain mutant p53 proteins.
AML cells with wild type p53 proteins do not respond to
decitabine. AML cells with a defective p53 pathway lead
to epigenetic cell death upon treatment with decitabine.
Perhaps the resistance to decitabine treatment observed
in the relapses results from the formation of a wild type
p53 gene or pathway as is the case observed with some
resistance to PARP inhibition in BRCA-1 tumors treated
with PARP inhibitors. This novel p53 defective pathway
would be expected to select for new clones that resist the
ability of the drug to result in extensive epigenetic changes
and differentiation, senescence or apoptosis. Resistance
to decitabine in cells with p53 mutations has not been
reported previously. Examining the mechanism by which
this occurs would be an important problem to solve.
A great deal of evidence is already in hand that
explores the role of the p53 protein in regulation of
epigenetic change. Jackson-Grusby et al [6] employed
the floxed loss of the DNMT1 gene from fibroblastic
cells in culture, which resulted in the failure to reproduce
the methylation pattern in CpG residues of DNA. After
two cell divisions, when DNA double strands with no
methylation appear, the cells in culture were killed by
p53-mediated apoptosis. This required a wild type p53
protein that senses (by an unknown mechanism that likely
involves methylation or modifications of the p53 protein)
the alterations in the pattern of DNA and likely chromatin
methylation resulting in a transcriptional program of cell
death. A similar interpretation for the role of the p53
protein in regulating changes in epigenetic marks in a cell
is found in the experiments carried out by Yamanaka and
his colleagues [7]. The addition and expression of four
different transcription factors placed into fibroblasts in
cell culture permitted the epigenetic reprograming of a
few cells so as to produce induced pluripotent stem cells
(iPSC) that were capable of differentiating into many cell
types of an embryo. This process was inefficient (about
0.1-1% of the cells) and took a long time to complete
(over a period of months). In the absence of p53 however
the cells could be reprogramed with only two of the four
transcription factors, the efficiency of producing stem cells
increased up to 50-80% and the time it took to accomplish
7229

Oncotarget

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST

this process was reduced to 1-2 weeks [8]. It appears that
the efficiency or probability of reprograming epigenetic
changes in cells is impacted by the wild type p53 protein.
An observation that tempers this hypothesis is the fact
that genetic crosses between male and female mice with
deleted p53 genes (p53 knock-out mice) give rise to live
and normal mice at birth. This requires lots of epigenetic
changes in the absence of the p53 protein. However in
many different inbred strains of mice about one third of the
female mice born are either runted or have an exocephalic
(brain outside the cranium) phenotype or developmental
abnormalities. Genetic imprinting can often be sexually
dimorphic. When the amount of cytosine methylation is
examined for the insulin like growth factor gene-2 from
the liver of the F-1 offspring of knockout mice (p53-/mice) the female mice born with genetic abnormalities had
a hypermethylation of cytosine residues at the IGF2-H-19
locus. Mice with a wild type p53 gene and protein did
not have this hypermethylation phenotype, nor genetic
defects [8]. This suggested that p53 knockout female mice
demonstrated alterations in epigenetic imprinting in a
stochastic or probabilistic fashion.
The observations reviewed here demonstrate a
critical role for the wild type p53 pathway in surveillance
of the stability of the epigenetic program in a cell.
Epigenetic stability in a cell appears to be probabilistic
with alterations occurring with age, cell divisions,
pathological situations such as cancers, and developmental
changes occurring over a lifetime. The epigenetic program
can certainly be altered by mutations in one of many genes
that modify the DNA, histones and transcription factors
regulated by protein or DNA modifications. The stability
of the epigenetic program in cells can also be impacted
by mutations in the p53 gene. Drugs that alter epigenetic
programs and are employed in cancer therapies, function
optimally in cells with p53 mutations. Just how the wild
type p53 protein blocks these drugs from acting in cells
needs to be explored in more detail. It appears that a subset
of cells with altered epigenetic programs initiate a wild
type p53 transcriptional program that kills those cells. We
need to understand the epigenetic changes that trigger p53
activation and a programed cell death. The function of the
wild type p53 protein is to insure fidelity by enforcing it
with death. It will do this in normal and in cancer cells.

These authors declare no conflict of interest.

REFERENCES
1.	 Jones PA, Baylin SB. The fundamental role of epigenetic
events in cancer. Nat Rev Genet. 2002 Jun; 3(6):415-28.
2.	 María Nieto, Enrique Samper, Mario F Fraga, Gonzalo
González de Buitrago, Manel Esteller and Manuel Serrano.
The absence of p53 is critical for the induction of apoptosis
by 5-aza-2’-deoxycytidine. Oncogene (2004) 23, 735-743.
doi:10.1038/sj.onc.1207175.
3.	 Aylon Y, Oren M.The Paradox of p53: What, How, and
Why? Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med. 2016 Oct 3;6(10).
pii: a026328. doi:10.1101/cshperspect.a026328.
4.	 Lan Yi, Yvonne Sun, Arnold Levine. Selected drugs
that inhibit DNA methylation can preferentially kill p53
deficient cells. Oncotarget. 2014; 5:8924-36. doi: 10.18632/
oncotarget.2441.
5.	 J.S. Welch, A.A. Petti, C.A. Miller, C.C. Fronick, M.
O’Laughlin, R.S. Fulton, R.K. Wilson, J.D. Baty, E.J.
Duncavage, B. Tandon, Y.-S. Lee, L.D. Wartman, G.L.
Uy, A. Ghobadi, M.H. Tomasson, I. Pusic, R. Romee, T.A.
Fehniger,K.E. Stockerl-Goldstein, R. Vij, S.T. Oh, C.N.
Abboud, A.F. Cashen, M.A. Schroeder, M.A. Jacoby, S.E.
Heath, K. Luber, M.R. Janke, A. Hantel, N. Khan, M.J.
Sukhanova, R.W. Knoebel, W. Stock, T.A. Graubert, M.J.
Walter, P. Westervelt, D.C. Link, J.F. DiPersio, and T.J.
Ley. TP53 and Decitabine in Acute Myeloid Leukemia
and Myelodysplastic Syndromes. N Engl J Med. 2016;
375:2023-2036.
6.	 Jackson-Grusby L, Beard C, Possemato R, Tudor M,
Fambrough D, Csankovszki G, Dausman J, Lee P, Wilson
C, Lander E, Jaenisch R. Loss of genomic methylation
causes p53-dependent apoptosis and epigenetic
deregulation. Nat Genet. 2001 Jan;27(1):31-9.
7.	 Takahashi K, Tanabe K, Ohnuki M, Narita M, Ichisaka T,
Tomoda K, Yamanaka S. Induction of pluripotent stem cells
from adult human fibroblasts by defined factors. Cell. 2007
Nov 30; 131(5):861-72.
8.	

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

Lan Yi, Chiwei Lu, Wenwei Hu, Yvonne Sun and Arnold J.
Levine. Multiple Roles of p53-Related Pathways in Somatic
Cell Reprogramming and Stem Cell Differentiation. Cancer
Res. 2012 Nov 1; 72(21):5635-5645.

The author would like to thank Ross Levine for a
critical reading of this manuscript and several very good
suggestions. This work was supported by a program
project grant to AJL from the National Cancer Institute.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

7230

Oncotarget

