Oncogene (2016) 35, 748–760
© 2016 Macmillan Publishers Limited All rights reserved 0950-9232/16

OPEN

www.nature.com/onc

ORIGINAL ARTICLE

TGF-β1-induced EMT promotes targeted migration of breast
cancer cells through the lymphatic system by the activation of
CCR7/CCL21-mediated chemotaxis
M-F Pang1,2, A-M Georgoudaki3, L Lambut1, J Johansson1, V Tabor1, K Hagikura1,4, Y Jin1, M Jansson5, JS Alexander6, CM Nelson2,
L Jakobsson1, C Betsholtz1, M Sund5, MCI Karlsson3 and J Fuxe1
Tumor cells frequently disseminate through the lymphatic system during metastatic spread of breast cancer and many other types
of cancer. Yet it is not clear how tumor cells make their way into the lymphatic system and how they choose between lymphatic
and blood vessels for migration. Here we report that mammary tumor cells undergoing epithelial–mesenchymal transition (EMT) in
response to transforming growth factor-β (TGF-β1) become activated for targeted migration through the lymphatic system, similar
to dendritic cells (DCs) during inﬂammation. EMT cells preferentially migrated toward lymphatic vessels compared with blood
vessels, both in vivo and in 3D cultures. A mechanism of this targeted migration was traced to the capacity of TGF-β1 to promote
CCR7/CCL21-mediated crosstalk between tumor cells and lymphatic endothelial cells. On one hand, TGF-β1 promoted CCR7
expression in EMT cells through p38 MAP kinase-mediated activation of the JunB transcription factor. Blockade of CCR7, or
treatment with a p38 MAP kinase inhibitor, reduced lymphatic dissemination of EMT cells in syngeneic mice. On the other hand,
TGF-β1 promoted CCL21 expression in lymphatic endothelial cells. CCL21 acted in a paracrine fashion to mediate chemotactic
migration of EMT cells toward lymphatic endothelial cells. The results identify TGF-β1-induced EMT as a mechanism, which activates
tumor cells for targeted, DC-like migration through the lymphatic system. Furthermore, it suggests that p38 MAP kinase inhibition
may be a useful strategy to inhibit EMT and lymphogenic spread of tumor cells.
Oncogene (2016) 35, 748–760; doi:10.1038/onc.2015.133; published online 11 May 2015

INTRODUCTION
Lymph metastasis is the earliest sign of metastatic spread and the
most powerful prognostic factor in breast cancer.1,2 Lymph vessel
invasion may be a better prognostic marker in breast cancer
compared with blood vessel invasion.3 Unlike blood vessels,
lymphatic vessels are equipped with unique button-like junctions
that support entry of both ﬂuid and dendritic cells (DCs) into
the lymphatic system.4 Thus, there may be a structural-based
prerequisite for migratory tumor cells to intravasate into lymphatic
vessels rather than blood vessels within the tumor microenvironment. However, it is not clear how tumor cells ﬁnd their way to
lymphatic vessels and whether this is a regulated or more of a
stochastic process.
Breast cancer progression toward invasive and metastatic
disease is associated with the reactivation of epithelial–mesenchymal transition (EMT), a latent developmental process, which
involves transdifferentiation of epithelial cells into mesenchymallike cells with migratory and stem cell properties.5–9 Transforming
growth factor-β (TGF-β) is a potent inducer of EMT both during
development and in cancer.10–12 Elevated levels of TGF-β1 have
been found in plasma of breast cancer patients and at invasive
fronts in human breast cancer tissues, and correlate with the
presence of lymph node metastasis.13,14 Immune cells, such as
macrophages and regulatory T cells, represent cellular sources of

TGF-β1 in the tumor microenvironment.15 Thus, TGF-β-induced
EMT represents a link between cancer and inﬂammation. Along
these lines, recent data indicate that breast cancer cells undergoing EMT acquire immune cell properties.15,16
TGF-β signaling toward EMT is mediated by both Smaddependent and Smad-independent pathways, including p38
MAP kinase (p38 MAPK). Although the Smad pathway is unique
to TGF-β signaling, p38 MAPK can also be activated by other
pathways including Ras and Wnt, which cooperate with TGF-β to
induce EMT.10,12,17 The EMT response downstream of TGF-β
signaling is induced by transcriptional reprogramming, which
promotes inactivation of genes encoding epithelial proteins, such
as E-cadherin and other junction proteins, and activation of genes
encoding mesenchymal proteins including N-cadherin and
vimentin.10–12,18 As a result, tumor cells undergoing TGF-βinduced EMT acquire the capacity to detach and migrate away
from the primary tumor.
Recently, TGF-β signaling was shown to promote single-cell
migration of mammary tumor cells.19 However, it is not clear
whether EMT cells make use of their enhanced migratory capacity
to migrate in a random or, alternatively, in a more targeted
fashion. We used a syngeneic mouse model in combination with a
three-dimensional (3D) co-culture model to test the hypothesis

1
Division of Vascular Biology, Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, Karolinska Institute, Stockholm, Sweden; 2Department of Chemical and Biological Engineering,
Princeton University, Princeton, NJ, USA; 3Department of Microbiology, Tumor and Cell Biology, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden; 4Division of Cell Regeneration and
Transplantation, Department of Functional Morphology, Nihon University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan; 5Department of Surgical and Perioperative Sciences/Surgery, Umea
University, Umea, Sweden and 6Department of Molecular and Cellular Physiology, Louisiana State University Health Sciences Center, Shreveport, LA, USA. Correspondence:
Professor J Fuxe, Division of Vascular Biology, Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, Karolinska Institute, SE-17177 Stockholm, Sweden.
E-mail: jonas.fuxe@ki.se
Received 25 March 2014; revised 5 March 2015; accepted 23 March 2015; published online 11 May 2015

TGF-β-induced EMT promotes lymph metastasis
M-F Pang et al

that TGF-β1-induced EMT promotes targeted migration of tumor
cells toward lymphatic vessels.
RESULTS
TGF-β-induced EMT promotes lymphatic dissemination of
mammary tumor cells
To study whether the induction of EMT would affect tumor cell
dissemination through the lymphatic system, we set up a mouse
model frequently used to study trafﬁcking of DCs to draining
lymph nodes after the subcutaneous injection of cells into the
hind footpad of syngeneic, recipient BALB/c mice (Figure 1a).
Previous studies have shown that DCs migrate to draining
popliteal lymph nodes (PLN) within 1–2 days after injection in the

footpad.20 This model has also been used to study lymphatic
dissemination of tumor cells, such as B16 melanoma cells.21
First, we used EpXT cells, which are stably in EMT through
cooperative effects of TGF-β1 and oncogenic Ras signaling.22 In
comparison with parental EpH4 cells, EpXT cells display EMT
properties including an elongated cell shape and a low E-to-Ncadherin ratio (Supplementary Figures 1a and b). Green ﬂuorescence protein (GFP)-labeled EpXT (GFP-EpXT) cells were injected
into the footpads of BALB/c mice to study the capacity of these
cells to migrate to draining PLN. Tumors of progressively
increasing sizes were found at injection sites in the footpads at
1, 2 and 6 days after injection (Figure 1b). From day 2 and
onwards, GFP-EpXT cells were also detected in draining PLN
(Figure 1b, lower panel), but not in contralateral, non-draining PLN

Figure 1. TGF-β1-induced EMT promotes lymphatic dissemination of mammary tumor cells. (a) Schematic drawing of the footpad model used
to study the effect of TGF-β1-induced EMT on lymphatic dissemination of mouse mammary tumor cells in syngeneic BALB/c mice. The sites of
injection (syringe), primary tumor growth (arrow), draining (ipsilateral) and non-draining (contralateral) PLN (arrowheads) are indicated.
(b) Representative confocal immunoﬂuorescence images showing GFP-labeled EpXT (GFP-EpXT) cells at the site of injection in the footpad
(upper panel), and in draining PLN (lower panel) at 1, 2 and 6 days after injection. Arrows mark GFP-EpXT cells detected in subcapsular sinuses
of PLN at day 2 and day 6 after injection. Scale bars, 200 μm (footpad images) and 50 μm (PLN images). (c) Bar graph showing quantiﬁcation of
GFP-EpXT cells that had migrated to PLN at day 1, 2 and 6 after injection in the footpad. (d) Confocal immunoﬂuorescence images showing
GFP-EpRas cells in draining PLN at 2 days after injection in the footpad. Before injection, EpRas cells had been either untreated ( − TGF-β1, left
panel), or pretreated for 14 days with 10 ng/ml of TGF-β1 (+TGF-β1, right panel). Scale bar, 50 μm. (e) Bar graph showing the quantiﬁcation of
GFP-EpRas cells in draining PLN at 2 days after injection into the mouse footpad. GFP-EpRas cells had been either untreated ( − TGF-β1) or
pretreated for 14 days with 10 ng/ml of TGF-β1. Calnexin was used as a loading control in immunoblotting experiments. *Po 0.05.
© 2016 Macmillan Publishers Limited

Oncogene (2016) 748 – 760

749

TGF-β-induced EMT promotes lymph metastasis
M-F Pang et al

750
(data not shown). Both individual and small groups of GFP-EpXT
cells were found in draining PLN and they were primarily located
in the subcapsular sinuses indicating that they had entered
through afferent lymphatic vessels. Quantiﬁcation conﬁrmed the
presence of GFP-EpXT cells in draining PLN at days 2 and 6 after
injection (Figure 1c). Injection of GFP-EpH4 cells also resulted in
the formation of small tumors in the mouse footpad, but no GFPEpH4 cells could be detected in lymph nodes up to six days after
injection (Supplementary Figure 1c).
Next we studied whether the transient induction of EMT would
affect the capacity of mammary tumor cells to migrate through
the lymphatic system. For this, we used EpRas cells, which similar
to EpH4 cells retain an epithelial morphology in culture
(Supplementary Figure 1d). However, in comparison with EpH4
cells, EpRas cells expressed decreased levels of E-cadherin and
increased levels of N-cadherin, indicating that Ras transformation
initiated a partial EMT in these cells (Supplementary Figure 1e).
Exposure to TGF-β1 (10 ng/ml) for 48 h resulted in more profound
EMT as evidenced by cellular elongation, repression of E-cadherin
and induction of vimentin and Snail (Supplementary Figures 1d
and e). Long-term treatment with TGF-β1 for 14 days accentuated
EMT even further and this EMT state was maintained for at least
6 days after TGF-β1 withdrawal (Supplementary Figure 1f). We
performed footpad injections with GFP-EpRas cells and found that
cells that had been pretreated with TGF-β1 for 14 days migrated
signiﬁcantly more efﬁcient to PLN compared with nontreated cells
(Figure 1e).
EMT cells migrate toward lymphatic vessels
Next we wanted to determine whether the enhanced capacity of
EMT cells to disseminate through the lymphatic system was
a result of their overall migratory properties or, whether this
reﬂected a more speciﬁc capacity to migrate through the
lymphatic system. We used confocal microscopy to examine the
presence and localization of blood and lymphatic vessels in EpXT
footpad tumors. Blood vessels (CD31+/LYVE-1-) were present in all
parts of EpXT footpad tumors (Figure 2a). In contrast, lymphatic
vessels (CD31+/LYVE-1+) were clustered in certain regions of the
tumors. Further analysis indicated that GFP-EpXT cells displayed a
more invasive morphology in areas where lymphatic vessels were
present (Figures 2b and c), and demonstrated how tumor cells
intravasated into lymphatic vessels in such invasive regions
(Supplementary Figure 2). Quantiﬁcation veriﬁed that lymphatic
vessel density was signiﬁcantly higher in invasive compared with
noninvasive areas (Figure 2d). In contrast, blood vessel density was
decreased in invasive compared with noninvasive areas
(Figure 2e).
These data indicated that although EpXT cells appear elongated
and migratory in culture, their behavior in vivo was different in
different regions of the tumor and linked to the presence of
lymphatic vessels. To study this further, we developed a 3D coculture system, which is based on a previously established ﬁbrin
beads assay.23 GFP-labeled EpXT, EpRas or EpH4 cells were coated
onto polymeric beads that were mixed at a 1:1 ratio in a ﬁbrin
matrix together with beads coated with dsRed-labeled immortalized human lymphatic endothelial cells (iLEC), or mouse vascular
endothelial
cells
(MS1).
Time-lapse
movies
taken
over 24 h demonstrated how individual spindle-like GFPEpXT cells detached from beads and migrated into the matrix
(Supplementary Movie 1). After the initial phase of detachment,
GFP-EpXT cells were organized into invasive protrusions and
migrated in a more collective fashion toward beads coated with
DsRed-iLEC cells. In contrast, EpH4 cells did not migrate at all in
this assay (Supplementary Movie 2). Quantiﬁcation of immunoﬂuorescence images taken at 24 h after seeding the beads showed
that 30% of DsRed-iLEC-coated beads were covered with GFPEpXT cells (Figures 2f and g). When the assay was repeated with
Oncogene (2016) 748 – 760

beads coated with GFP-EpXT and DsRed-MS1 cells, only 8% of MS1
beads were covered with GFP-EpXT cells. Thus, GFP-EpXT cells
migrated 3.75-fold more efﬁcient toward beads coated with
DsRed-iLEC cells compared with DsRed-MS1 cells. GFP-EpXT cells
also migrated signiﬁcantly more efﬁcient toward mouse lymphatic
endothelial cells (SV-LEC) compared with MS1 cells (Figure 2h).
GFP-EpRas cells migrated 1.8-fold more efﬁciently toward beads
coated with DsRed-iLEC cells and 1.2-fold more efﬁciently toward
beads coated with DsRed-MS1 cells compared with nontreated
GFP-EpRas cells after treatment with TGF-β1 (Supplementary
Figures 3a and b). Together with the in vivo results, these data
indicated that mammary tumor cells that undergo TGF-β1induced EMT gain the capacity to migrate in a targeted manner
toward lymphatic endothelial cells.
TGF-β1-induced EMT promotes tumor cell migration toward
lymphatic endothelial cells via activation of CCR7
Next we investigated the possible mechanisms that could be
involved in directing tumor EMT cells toward lymphatic vessels.
On the basis of the documented expression of CCR7 in breast
cancer cells and its established role in mediating homing of DCs to
lymph nodes, we speculated that CCR7 could have a role in
guiding EMT cells toward lymphatic vessels. In line with this, we
found that CCR7 was induced during TGF-β1-induced EMT in
EpRas cells (Figure 3a), and expressed at higher levels in EpXT
versus EpH4 cells (Supplementary Figure 3c). To study this further,
we also included an established, frequently used model of
transient TGF-β1-induced EMT in Namru mammary gland
(NMuMG) epithelial cells. Induction of EMT by treatment with
TGF-β1 resulted in signiﬁcant induction of CCR7 expression also in
NMuMG cells (Figure 3b).
This suggested that tumor cells that undergo TGF-β1-induced
EMT gain the capacity to migrate toward CCR7 ligands, such as
CCL21, which is known to be produced by lymphatic endothelial
cells and to promote migration of DCs toward lymphatic vessels.24
To test this, we performed invasion assays, in which cells with
different EMT properties were seeded in the upper wells and
recombinant CCL21 (350 ng/ml), or 10% fetal calf serum, was
added in the lower chamber as a chemoattractant. NMuMG cells
that were induced to undergo EMT with TGF-β1 migrated
signiﬁcantly more efﬁcient than nontreated cells against fetal calf
serum, and even more efﬁcient against CCL21 (Figure 3c). Similar
to this, TGF-β1-treated EpRas cells migrated more efﬁciently
toward CCL21 compared with nontreated cells (Supplementary
Figure 3d). To investigate the relative contribution of CCR7 to the
migration of EMT cells toward CCL21, we performed blocking
experiments using an anti-CCR7-neutralizing antibody. In the
presence of this antibody, but not an isotype-matched control
antibody (IgG2A), the capacity of TGF-β1-treated NMuMG cells to
migrate toward CCL21 was inhibited in a dose-dependent fashion
(Figure 3d).
Further analysis showed that EpXT cells migrated less efﬁciently
toward DsRed-iLEC in beads assays in the presence of the antiCCR7-neutralizing antibody (Figures 3e and f). To evaluate the role
of CCR7 in mediating lymphatic dissemination of EMT cells in vivo,
we introduced CCR7 small interfering RNA (siRNA) into GFP-EpXT
cells and injected cells into the mouse footpad. GFP-EpXT-siCCR7
cells expressed decreased levels of CCR7 (Supplementary Figure
3e), and migrated less efﬁcient to draining lymph nodes compared
with GFP-EpXT-sicontrol cells (Figure 3g).
CCR7 is regulated by p38 signaling via JunB during TGF-β1induced EMT
Next we wanted to determine the mechanism by which CCR7 is
regulated during TGF-β1-induced EMT. First, we used a speciﬁc
inhibitor of Smad3 (SIS3) and a selective inhibitor (SB203580) of
p38 MAPK to elucidate the role of Smad-dependent versus P38
© 2016 Macmillan Publishers Limited

TGF-β-induced EMT promotes lymph metastasis
M-F Pang et al

751

Figure 2. EMT cells migrate toward lymphatic vessels in experimental tumors and in 3D beads assays. (a) Representative confocal
immunoﬂuorescence images of GFP-EpXT footpad tumors at day 6 after injection. The image of the GFP-EpXT cells were moved from green
channel and placed in the blue channel to allow for visualization of lymphatic vessels (green), and blood vessels (red), which are doublestained for LYVE-1 (only labels lymphatic vessels) and CD31 (labels both blood and lymphatic vessels). (b) Black and white image of GFP-EpXT
cells. Invasive areas (I) containing elongated GFP-EpXT cells lining up in unidirectional patterns are indicated by arrows in both images.
(c) Representative high magniﬁcation confocal images showing the presence of lymphatic vessels in noninvasive (left panel) versus invasive
areas (right panel) GFP-EpXT tumors. (d and e) Bar graphs showing results from quantiﬁcation of area density of lymphatic vessels (d) and
blood vessels (e) in noninvasive versus invasive areas to GFP-EpXT footpad tumors. (f) Immunoﬂuorescence images showing polymeric beads
coated with GFP-EpXT cells (green) and co-cultured in a 3D ﬁbrin matrix with beads coated with DsRed-labeled MS1 vascular endothelial cells
(DsRed-MS1; upper panels), or immortalized lymphatic endothelial cells (DsRed-iLEC; lower panels), for 24 h. (g and h) Bar graphs showing
quantitative assessment of the capacity of EpXT cells to migrate toward beads coated with iLEC versus MS1 cells (g) and SV-LEC versus
MS1 cells (h). *P o0.05, ***P o0.001.
© 2016 Macmillan Publishers Limited

Oncogene (2016) 748 – 760

TGF-β-induced EMT promotes lymph metastasis
M-F Pang et al

752
MAPK-dependent pathways. We found that the induction of CCR7
mRNA was inhibited in the presence of both Smad3 and p38
MAPK inhibitors during TGF-β1-induced EMT in NMuMG cells
(Figure 4a), as well as in EpRas cells (Supplementary Figure 4a).
Inhibition of p38 MAPK for 24 h resulted in the downregulation of

CCR7 expression in EpXT cells (Figures 4b and c). On the contrary,
Smad3 inhibition in EpXT cells had no effect on CCR7 protein
levels (Figure 4c), and actually resulted in increased CCR7 mRNA
levels (Supplementary Figure 4b). These results prompted us to
perform promoter assays to determine whether Smads could

Figure 3. TGF-β1-induced EMT promotes tumor cell migration toward lymphatic endothelial cells via CCR7/CCL21-mediated chemotaxis.
(a and b) Results from expression analysis of CCR7 mRNA and protein levels in TGF-β1 treated (10 ng/ml, 48 h) versus nontreated EpRas cells
(a), and NMuMG cells (b) as determined by qPCR (bar graphs) and immunoblotting (lower panels). (c) Bar graph showing quantitative
assessment of the capacity of NMuMG cells to invade through matrigel and migrate toward a gradient of fetal calf serum (FCS) or CCL21 in
invasion assays. (d) Bar graph showing dose-dependent inhibition of migration of NMuMG cells toward CCL21 in the presence of a
neutralizing antibody to CCR7. An isotype-matched antibody (IgG2A) was used as a control. (e) Representative confocal immunoﬂuorescence
images showing the effect of a neutralizing antibody to CCR7 (20 ng/ml) on the capacity of GFP-EpXT cells to migrate toward beads coated
with iLEC. (f) Quantitative results showing the effect of a neutralizing CCR7 antibody (20 ng/ml) on the capacity of EpXT cells to migrate
toward lymphatic endothelial cells (iLEC) in the ﬁbrin beads assay. (g) Bar graph showing quantitative assessment of the capacity of GFP-EpXT
cells transfected with siRNA against CCR7 (siCCR7), or a scrambled siRNA (siScramble), to disseminate to PLN at 2 days after injection of cells
into the footpad of BALB/c mice. Scale bar, 100 μm. Calnexin was used as a loading control in immunoblotting experiments. *P o0.05.

Figure 4. Role of p38 MAPK signaling and the AP-1 factor JunB in the regulation of CCR7 during TGF-β1-induced EMT. (a) Bar graph showing the
effects of inhibitors of Smad3 (SIS3, 15 μM) and p38 MAPK (SB203580, 20 μM) on the induction of CCR7 after 48 h of TGF-β1-induced EMT (2 ng/ml
of TGF-β1) in NMuMG cells. (b) Bar graph showing the effect of SB203580 (20 μM, 48 h) on the expression of CCR7 mRNA relative to control (cells
treated with vehicle). (c) Immunoblot showing the effect of SB203580 (20 μM, 48 h) and SIS3 (15 μM, 48 h) on the expression of CCR7 and
E-cadherin in EpXT cells. (d) Schematic drawing of the CCR7 promoter showing the location of AP-1 sites and binding sites for primers used for
chromatin immunoprecipitation assays. (e) Bar graph showing changes in mRNA expression of the AP-1 factors c-Fos, c-Jun, Fra1 and JunB in
NMuMG cells during TGF-β1-induced EMT. (f) Immunoblot analysis of the effect of TGF-β1 on the expression of c-jun and JunB in NMuMG cells.
(g) Results from reporter assays showing the effect of overexpression of C-jun and JunB on the activity of the CCR7 promoter. (h)
Immunoblotting results showing the effect of TGF-β1 (2 ng/ml) on the expression of C-jun and JunB in NMuMG cells in the absence or presence
of SB203580 (20 μM) after 48 h. (i) RT–PCR results from chromatin immunoprecipitation assays showing binding of JunB to the CCR7 promoter in
TGF-β1-treated NMuMG cells. No binding of JunB was detected in a region lacking consensus AP-1-binding sites (control). (j) Bar graph showing
the effect of overexpression of siRNA against JunB (siJunB) or control (siControl) on the induction of CCR7 mRNA expression in NMuMG cells
during TGF-β1-induced EMT. (k and l) Bar graphs showing the effect of pretreatment with SB203580 (20 μM, 48 h) on the migration of GFP-EpXT
cells toward CCL21 in invasion assays (k), and the dissemination of GFP-EpXT cells to draining PLN at 2 days after injection into the footpad of
BALB/c mice (l). Calnexin was used as a loading control in immunoblotting experiments. *Po0.05, **Po0.01, ***Po0.001.
Oncogene (2016) 748 – 760

© 2016 Macmillan Publishers Limited

TGF-β-induced EMT promotes lymph metastasis
M-F Pang et al

753
activate the CCR7 promoter. Overexpression of Smad3 and Smad4
was not sufﬁcient to activate the CCR7 promoter in NMuMG cells
(Supplementary Figure 4c).

© 2016 Macmillan Publishers Limited

These data indicated that Smads were not direct activators of
CCR7 and that factors operating downstream of p38 MAPK
signaling appeared to be involved in inducing CCR7 expression in

Oncogene (2016) 748 – 760

TGF-β-induced EMT promotes lymph metastasis
M-F Pang et al

754
EMT cells. Related to this, previous data have shown that CCR7
mRNA expression in monocytes is controlled by p38 MAPK
signaling.25 The CCR7 promoter contains binding sites for AP-1
factors (Figure 4d), and such factors have been shown to promote
CCR7 expression in Hodgkins lymphoma and metastatic squamous carcinoma cells of the head and neck.26,27 On the basis of
this, and the fact that AP-1 factors are activated during, and
important for the induction of TGF-β1-induced EMT,17,28 we
hypothesized that speciﬁc AP-1 factors could be involved in
inducing CCR7 expression during TGF-β1-induced EMT. In
particular, we were interested to study the role of c-Fos, c-Jun,
Fra1 and JunB, AP-1 factors that have been implicated in
promoting the invasive capabilities of breast cancer cells in
response to TGF-β1.29 Gene expression analysis showed that
among these AP-1 factors, c-Jun and JunB were signiﬁcantly
induced at the mRNA level after 24 h of TGF-β1-induced EMT in
NMuMG cells (Figure 4e). In contrast, c-Fos expression did not
change, whereas Fra1 was downregulated. Immunoblotting
analysis conﬁrmed the induction of c-Jun and JunB in NMuMG
cells after both 24 and 48 h of TGF-β1 exposure (Figure 4f). We
then used reporter assays to examine the capacity of c-Jun and
JunB to activate the CCR7 promoter in NMuMG cells. Overexpression of JunB resulted in potent (sixfold) activation of the
CCR7 promoter, whereas the overexpression of c-Jun was less
efﬁcient (twofold; Figure 4g).
Next we studied whether the induction of c-Jun and JunB
during TGF-β1-induced EMT was mediated via the P38 MAPK
pathway. We found that in the presence of the P38 MAPK inhibitor
the induction of JunB, but not c-Jun, was inhibited in NMuMG cells
(Figure 4h). Similar to this, P38 MAPK signaling was important for
JunB induction during TGF-β1-induced EMT in EpRas cells, and for
JunB expression in EpXT cells (Supplementary Figures 4d and e).

The results pointed to a role for p38 MAPK-mediated activation of
JunB as a mechanism of CCR7 induction during TGF-β1-induced
EMT. In support of this, further studies using chromatin immunoprecipitation assays conﬁrmed binding of JunB to a region of the
CCR7 promoter containing an AP-1 site (Figure 4i), and showed that
siRNA-mediated knockdown of JunB inhibited the induction of CCR7
during TGF-β1-induced EMT in NMuMG cells (Figure 4j).
The results suggested that the inhibition of P38 MAPK signaling
in EMT cells might inhibit their capacity to disseminate through
the lymphatic system. To test this, we pretreated GFP-EpXT cells
with SB203580 for 48 h and then evaluated the effect on their
migratory behavior. GFP-EpXT cells that had been pretreated with
the P38 MAPK inhibitor migrated signiﬁcantly less efﬁcient toward
CCL21 in invasion assays (Figure 4k), and had a decreased capacity
to disseminate to lymph nodes (Figure 4l) compared with
nontreated cells.
CCL21 expression in lymphatic endothelial cells is induced by TGF-β1
and promotes chemotaxis of EMT cells in a paracrine fashion
We reasoned that an additional mechanism by which TGF-β1
could promote CCR7/CCL21-mediated chemotaxis of EMT cells
toward lymphatic vessels would be to regulate CCL21 expression
in lymphatic endothelial cells. In support of this, we found that
CCL21 was expressed at increased levels in lymphatic vessels in
tumors formed by GFP-EpXT cells, which express endogenous
TGF-β1, compared with tumors formed by GFP-EpH4 cells (Figures
5a and b). Further studies showed that CCL21 mRNA levels were
signiﬁcantly induced in both mouse (SV-LEC) and human (iLEC)
lymphatic endothelial cells, but not in vascular (MS1) endothelial
cells upon TGF-β1 exposure (Figures 5c and d and Supplementary
Figure 3f).

Figure 5. CCL21 expression in lymphatic endothelial cells is regulated by TGF-β1 and important for chemoattraction of tumor EMT cells.
(a) Representative confocal immunoﬂuorescence images showing staining of CCL21 in LYVE-1-positive lymphatic vessels in GFP-EpH4 and
GFP-EpXT footpad tumors at day 6. (b) Bar graph showing quantitative assessment of the expression of CCL21 in endothelial cells of lymphatic
vessels in GFP-EpH4 versus GFP-EpXT footpad tumors at day 6 after footpad injections. (c and d) Bar graphs showing the effect of TGF-β1
treatment (10 ng/ml, 24 h) on the expression of CCL21 in SV-LEC cells (c) and in MS1 cells (d). (e) Bar graph showing the effect of
overexpression of CCL21 or control siRNA in SV-LEC cells on their capacity to support chemotactic migration of EpXT cells in beads assays.
(f) Bar graph showing the effect of overexpression of CCL21 or control cDNA in MS1 cells on their capacity to support chemotactic migration
of EpXT cells in beads assays. *Po 0.05, **Po0.01.
Oncogene (2016) 748 – 760

© 2016 Macmillan Publishers Limited

TGF-β-induced EMT promotes lymph metastasis
M-F Pang et al

755

Figure 6. The expression of CCR7 and CCL21 is linked to EMT in human breast cancer. (a) Representative confocal immunoﬂuorescence
images showing the presence of E-cadlow/CCR7pos/CD45neg tumor cells (outlined area) within an invasive area (I) of a sample of human breast
cancer. Tumor cells in noninvasive areas (NI) were more strongly positive for E-cadherin and were negative for CCR7. (b) Proﬁling of 51 human
breast cancers based on gene expression data from the Gene Expression Atlas at the European Bioinformatics Institute (EMBL-EBI). Three
mesenchymal genes (TWIST, SNAIL and VIM) and three epithelial genes (OCLDN, CLDN3 and CDH1), which are induced and repressed,
respectively, during EMT were selected to identify tumors with an EMT genotype. The expression of CCR7 and CCL21 was higher in the EMT
samples compared with non-EMT samples (P o0.05 for both).

These data showed that CCL21 production by lymphatic
endothelial cells could be upregulated by TGF-β1 and possibly
promote chemoattraction of CCR7-expressing tumor EMT cells. To
study this, we knocked down CCL21 in SV-LEC cells and then
performed the beads assay with EPXT cells. Indeed, knockdown of
CCL21 resulted in less efﬁcient migration of EpXT cells toward SVLEC beads (Figure 5e). On the contrary, overexpression of CCL21 in
MS1 cells enhanced the capacity of these cells to promote
targeted migration of EpXT cells (Figure 5f).
The expression of CCR7 and CCL21 is linked to EMT in human
breast cancer
Finally, we investigated whether the expression of CCR7 and
CCL21 could be linked to EMT in human breast cancer. We
performed triple staining for E-cadherin, CCR7 and CD45, a panimmune cell marker, which was used to distinguish CCR7-positive
EMT cells from tumor-associated immune cells. Confocal microscopy analysis revealed the presence of invasive (I) areas where
tumor cells expressed detectable, but lower levels of E-cadherin
compared with tumor cells in noninvasive (NI) areas (Figure 6a).
Positive staining for CCR7 was detected in tumor cells within such
© 2016 Macmillan Publishers Limited

invasive areas but not in tumor cells in noninvasive areas. The
CCR7-positive tumor cells were negative for CD45. In contrast, cells
in the adjacent tumor stroma stained positive for CD45.
We also used published microarray data and performed metaanalysis of 51 samples of human breast cancer. We determined
the ratio of the values for three mesenchymal genes (TWIST, SNAIL
and VIM) and three epithelial genes (OCLDN, CLDN3 and CDH1)
known to be induced or, repressed during EMT, respectively.
Tumor samples with a mesenchymal/epithelial ratio of more than
1.0 were deﬁned as tumors displaying an EMT proﬁle. Out of 51
tumors, 17 tumors displayed such an EMT proﬁle (Figure 6b). The
expression of CCR7 and CCL21 was signiﬁcantly higher in tumors
with an EMT proﬁle compared with tumors with a non-EMT proﬁle.
DISCUSSION
The ﬁndings presented in this study describe TGF-β-induced EMT
as a mechanism, which activates tumor cells for targeted
dissemination through the lymphatic system. This resembles
how DCs become activated and migrate via peripheral lymphatic
vessels to lymph nodes during inﬂammation (Figure 7).30
Oncogene (2016) 748 – 760

TGF-β-induced EMT promotes lymph metastasis
M-F Pang et al

756
The capacity of both EMT cells and DCs to migrate to lymph nodes
is dependent on the induction of CCR7, which provides cells with
the capacity to sense and migrate toward CCL21, which is released
from lymphatic endothelial cells. Thus, by undergoing EMT tumor
cells may hijack a migratory system, which normally is used by
DCs to speciﬁcally gain access to the lymphatic system. This
provides novel insight into a major question in cancer biology,
namely why tumor cells frequently disseminate through the
lymphatic system.
During recent years, EMT has been increasingly accepted as a
developmental process, which is reactivated in breast cancer and
other types of cancer, and provides tumor cells with invasive,
migratory and cancer stem cell properties.7–9,31–33 However, it has
not been clear how EMT cells make use of their migratory
properties, in vivo. Conceptually, our results indicate that tumor
cells undergoing EMT may not only become more migratory, in
general, but may also acquire the capability to sense and migrate
in a targeted fashion toward chemokines released by lymphatic
vessels. The implication of this is that EMT may not be the sole
factor that determines whether tumor cells actually will migrate
away from the primary tumor. Instead, EMT may be regarded as an
activation step, which prepares cells for migration. Whether tumor
cells actually will migrate, or not, and how they will migrate, will
depend on which chemotactic signals that are present in the
tumor microenvironment and that can be sensed by the EMT cells.
This notion was supported by our ﬁndings showing that although
EpXT cells are elongated when grown in culture under standard
conditions, they only displayed a migratory morphology in certain
areas, in vivo. Such areas were found to contain a much denser
population of lymphatic vessels compared with the rest of the
tumors. In contrast, blood vessels were more equally abundant in
all parts of tumors. Together with the data from the 3D migration
assays, this suggests that mammary tumor cells undergoing TGFβ-induced EMT gain the capacity to migrate toward lymphatic
vessels compared with blood vessels. In line with this, recent data
show that lymph vessel invasion, but not blood vessel invasion, is
a prognostic factor in breast cancer.3,34

Our results showed that CCR7 is regulated during TGF-βinduced EMT and that blockade or knockdown of CCR7 inhibits
the capacity of EMT cells to migrate toward CCL21 and lymphatic
endothelial cells, and to disseminate through the lymphatic
system. These data are in line with other reports showing that the
expression of CCR7 is associated with poor prognosis and lymph
node metastasis in breast cancer.35–37 Recently, Shields et al.38
reported on a role for autologous, CCR7-mediated chemotaxis of
tumor cells toward lymphatic endothelial cells in 3D matrices.
Recently, the expression of CXCR5, another chemokine receptor
involved in homing of DCs to lymph nodes, and its ligand CXCL13,
was linked to EMT and lymph node metastasis in breast cancer.39
Similar to this, others have found that migratory tumor cells may
co-opt functional and migratory properties of macrophages in
mammary tumors.40,41
Induction of CCR7 was dependent on both Smad and p38 MAPK
pathways. Yet, the inhibition of p38 MAPK signaling was more
efﬁcient than Smad3 inhibition to decrease CCR7 expression in
stable EMT cells. It was also sufﬁcient to inhibit the capacity of
EMT cells to disseminate through the lymphatic system. Although
p38 MAPK signaling is frequently overactivated in breast
cancer,42,43 and also, known as one of the most important nonSmad pathways in EMT,10,12,17,44 its role in lymphatic dissemination of tumor cells has not been investigated previously.
Intriguingly, P38 MAPK signaling is important for DC migration
and homing to LN.45 A possible explanation to why p38 MAPK
signaling may stand out as a major pathway regulating migratory
properties of EMT cells is that it receives input from several
pathways that are known to cooperate to induce EMT including
TGF-β, Ras and Wnt.10,12,17,44 Thus, although Smad signaling
primarily is regulated downstream of TGF-β, p38 MAPK signaling
serves as a hub, which is co-activated and connects input signals
from several EMT-inducing pathways. These results hold the
promise of targeting p38 MAPK signaling to inhibit lymph
metastasis in breast cancer.
In summary, our results identify TGF-β-induced EMT as a
process, which activates tumor cells for targeted migration
through the lymphatic system through the induction of DC
properties. Considering the fact that activated immune cells are
the only cells in our bodies that have a similar capacity as
metastatic cancer cells to migrate in and out of vessels and reach
distant sites it will be interesting to further penetrate immune celllike features of tumor cells undergoing EMT and how they are
used during metastasis.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Cell culture

Figure 7. Schematic diagram summarizing the results that indicate
that tumor cells undergoing TGF-β1-induced EMT become activated
for targeted migration through the lymphatic system, similar to DCs
during inﬂammation. Induction of CCR7 provides both EMT cells and
DCs with a capacity to sense and migrate toward a gradient of
CCL21, which is produced by lymphatic endothelial cells. TGF-β also
induces the expression of CCL21 in lymphatic endothelial cells,
which may further promote CCR7/CCL21-mediated migration of
EMT cells toward lymphatic vessels.
Oncogene (2016) 748 – 760

Namru Murine Mammary gland (NMuMG), EpH4, EpRAS and EpXT cells
were cultivated as described previously.22,46 The murine pancreatic
islet endothelial cell line, MS1 and the human immortalized lymphatic
endothelial cells (iLEC) were maintained in Endothelial Cell Basal Medium
MV 2 containing ascorbic acid, human recombinant basic ﬁbroblast growth
factor, human recombinant epidermal growth factor, vascular endothelial
growth factor, Long R3 IFG-1, hydrocortisone, 5% fetal calf serum
(PromoCell, Germany) and 1% penicillin–streptomycin. The mouse
lymphatic endothelial cell line SV-LEC was obtained from Dr Jonathan S.
Alexander (Louisiana State University Health Sciences Center, Shreveport,
Louisiana) and cultured in DMEM with high glucose supplemented with
10% FBS and 1% penicillin–streptomycin. All cells were cultured in 37 °C
and 5% humidiﬁed CO2 incubator.
For co-culture experiments, GFP-labeled EpH4, EpRAS and EpXT cells
were generated by lentiviral transduction of GFP control lentiviral particles
(Santa Cruz Biotechnology Inc). DsRed-labeled MS1, iLECand SV-LEC were
produced by transduction with mCherry encoding lentiviral particles
(Capital Biosciences Inc.).
To investigate the effect of TGF-β1 on EpH4 and EpRAS cells, EpH4 and
EpRAS cells were treated with 10 ng/ml of TGF-β1 (R&D Systems,
Abingdon, UK). TGF-β1 long-term-treated EpRAS cells were maintained
cell culture medium containing 10 ng/ml of TGF-β1 for 2 weeks. NMuMG
© 2016 Macmillan Publishers Limited

TGF-β-induced EMT promotes lymph metastasis
M-F Pang et al

757
cells were exposed to 2 or 10 ng/ml of TGF-β1 to stimulate EMT. For
experiments using inhibitors, NMuMG cells were pretreated with 15 μM of
Speciﬁc Smad3 inhibitor (SIS3; EMD Biosciences, San Diego, CA, USA) or
20 μM SB203580 (EMD Biosciences) or 20 μM SP600125 (EMD Biosciences)
for 2 h followed by TGFβ-1 exposure. EpXT cells were treated with 15 μM of
SIS3 or 20 μM of SB203580 or 20 μM SP600125 for 48 h.

Animals
Female BALB/c mice (8 weeks old) were obtained from the breeding unit at
the Department of Microbiology and Tumor biology (MTC) at Karolinska
Institutet, Sweden. Six animals were used per group. All animal
experiments were performed according to the ethical guidelines of the
Swedish agriculture Board (Stockholms Norra Djurförsöksetiska Nämnd)
and Karolinska Institutet.

Meta-analysis of human breast cancer arrays
Fifty-one publicly available breast cancer data sets based on the
A-AFFY-44-Affymetrix GeneChip Human Genome U133 Plus 2.0 array were
collected from the E-TABM-276 database (EMBL-EBI). The ratio between the
average values for TWIST, SNAIL and VIM and three epithelial genes
(OCLDN, CLDN3, CDH1) known to be induced or, repressed during EMT,
respectively. Tumor samples with a mesenchymal/epithelial ratio of more
than 1.0 were deﬁned as tumors displaying an EMT proﬁle.

3D co-culture ﬁbrin beads assay

GFP-labeled EpH4,EpXT, EpRAS treated and untreated with TGF-β1, EpXTshTGFβ-RII cells were grown in culture ﬂasks, trypsinized, washed and
resuspended in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS), and injected at a total
number of 1 × 106 cells into the right hind footpads of 8-week-old BALB/c
mice. After 1, 2 or 6 days, footpad tissues from the injection sites, and both
ipsilateral and contralateral PLN, were isolated and ﬁxed with 4%
paraformaldehyde in PBS for 3 h. Tissues were embedded in OCT
compound (Bio-Optica, Milan, Italy) and frozen.
For CCR7 inhibition studies, GFP-labeled EpXT cells were transfected
with siRNA against CCR7 and scramble control (Dharmacon/GE Healthcare/
VWR International, Stockholm, Sweden) for 24 h. Next day, a number of
1 × 106 of EpXT-siCCR7 or EpXT-sicontrol cells were injected into the right
hind footpads of 8-week-old BALB/c mice.
For p38 inhibition studies, GFP-labeled EpXT cells were pretreated with
20 μM SB203580 or vehicle (dimethyl sulfoxide) for 48 h before footpad
injections. A total number of 1 × 106 GFP-labeled EpXT cells were
resuspended in PBS containing 20 μM SB203580, or vehicle, and injected
into the right hind footpad of 8-week-old BALB/c mice.

A 3D ﬁbrin beads assay generated by Nakatsu et al.23 was modiﬁed into a
co-culture assay. GFP-labeled EpH4, EpXT, EpRAS treated and untreated
with TGF-β1 cells were coated, separately, onto dextran-coated Cytodex-3
beads (GE Healthcare), mixed at a 1:1 ratio with beads coated with DsRedlabeled MS1 or iLEC and embedded into a ﬁbrin matrix in 24-well plates.
Twenty-ﬁve beads of EMT/non-EMT cells were mixed with 25 beads of
MS1/iLEC. Migration of EMT or non-EMT cells toward MS1 or iLEC was
monitored under a ﬂuorescence microscope. At 24 h later, the number of
beads of MS1 cells, or iLEC, that were covered with GFP-labeled EMT or
non-EMT cells were counted. Images were captured by using an Axio
Observer Z1 (Carl Zeiss, GmbH). Data were expressed as the percentage of
GFP-positive beads.
To block CCR7, beads coated with GFP-labeled EpXT cells were
pretreated with a neutralizing monoclonal anti-mouse CCR7 (20 ng/ml)
antibody or an IgG2A isotype-matched control antibody (20 ng/ml) for
30 min before the assay. To inhibit CCL21, SV-LEC were transfected with
siRNA against CCL21, or scrambled control (Dharmacon) 24 h before the
assay. In experiments where gain of function of CCL21 in MS1 cells was
studied, an expression vector encoding murine CCL21 (pcDNA3.1–CCL21)
was transfected into the MS1 cells 24 h before coating onto the beads. The
pcDNA3.1–CCL21 construct was in a previous study shown to promote
chemotactic migration of CCR7-positive immune cells after injection into
mice,47 and was a kind gift from Dr Seonghyang Sohn at the Department
of Microbiology School of Medicine, Suwon, Korea. An empty pcDNA3.1
vector was used as a control in these experiments.

Human breast cancer samples

Time-lapse confocal laser scanning

Tissue samples from breast cancer patients were collected during surgery
and freshly frozen. A clinical pathologist at Umea University Hospital,
Sweden classiﬁed the samples according to standard PAD protocols. The
Research Ethics Review Board (EPN) of Northern Sweden approved all
experiments using human tissues.

3D co-culture ﬁbrin bead assay was performed as described above in a 12well glass bottom plate (MatTek Corporation, Ashland, MA, USA). The plate
was transfered to a laser confocal microscope system (Zeiss LSM510,
equipped with a motorized stage and cultivation system) maintained at
37 ℃ and 5% CO2 with a humidiﬁer. Z slices were acquired using × 10
objective (ﬁve to nine slices per ﬁeld very 15 min using 1% laser capacity
for 48 h). Multiwells with different cells or treatments were imaged during
one experiment using Multi time series.

Mouse footpad model

Immunoﬂuorescence staining and confocal imaging
Cells grown on coverslips, or cryosections from footpad tissues or PLN, or
human breast cancer tissue samples were ﬁxed in 4% paraformaldehyde in
PBS for 15 mins at room temperature. Specimens were blocked in
incubation buffer (0.1% bovine serum albumin, 5% normal goat serum
and 0.1% sodium azide in PBS) for 1 h and then incubated with primary
antibodies diluted in incubation buffer at room temperature for 1 h
(coverslips) or overnight (cryosections). The following primary antibodies
and dilutions were used: mouse anti-E-cadherin (1:1000; clone 36, BD
Biosciences, Stockholm, Sweden); rabbit anti-E-cadherin (1:100; Clone
24E10, Cell Signaling/BioNordika, Stockholm, Sweden) as epithelial marker;
rabbit anti-N-cadherin, mouse anti-Twist (1:50; Santa Cruz, Heidelberg,
Germany), mouse monoclonal anti-SNAIL118 as mesenchymal markers;
rabbit monoclonal anti-phosphoSmad3 (1:100; Epitomics Inc., Cambridge,
UK) to detect TGFβ signaling; rabbit anti-CCR7 (1:500; clone Y59, Abcam,
Cambridge, UK); hamster anti-CD31 (1:500; clone 2H8, Chemicon/
Merck Chemicals and Life Science AB, Solna, Sweden); sheep anti-human
CD31 (R&D Systems) to stain endothelial cells; rat-anti-LYVE-1 (1:400,
Novus Biolabs, Abingdon, UK); rabbit anti-human LYVE-1 (1:100; ReliaTech,
Wolfenbüttel, Germany) and CCL21 (1:100; R&D Systems) as lymphatic
endothelial marker. Specimens were washed and incubated with
ﬂuorescent-labeled secondary antibodies conjugated to FITC, Cy3 or Cy5
(1:400, Jackson ImmunoResearch, West Grove, PA, USA) and mounted in
Vectashield mounting media with DAPI (Vectalabs). Staining was visualized
with a standard microscope equipped for ﬂuorescence (Nikon Eclipse 800)
or with a confocal microscope (LSM-700; Carl Zeiss Microimaging Inc.,
Stockholm, Sweden). Confocal stack images were captured through LSM
Image Software and used to generate 3D projections to visualize the
relationship between tumor cells and vessels in the footpad and lymph
node tissues.
© 2016 Macmillan Publishers Limited

Immunoblotting
Total protein extracts were prepared by lysing cells in Radio Immuno
Precipitation Assay buffer (Pierce Biotechnology/Life Technologies Europe
BV, Stockholm, Sweden) supplemented with a protease inhibitor cocktail
(Roche, Stockholm, Sweden). Equal amounts of total proteins were
separated by standard electrophoresis using precasted 4–12% gradient
NuPage gels (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA). Proteins were transferred onto
nitrocellulose membranes, blocked and incubated with primary antibodies
at 4 °C overnight. Antibodies used for immunoblotting were: rabbit antiCCR7 (1:500, clone Y59, Abcam); mouse anti-vimentin (1:500, Abcam);
mouse anti-twist (1:200, Santa Cruz); rabbit anti-N-cadherin (1:500, Abcam);
mouse anti-E-cadherin (1:1000; clone 36, BD Biosciences); rabbit antioccludin (1:500, Invitrogen); rabbit anti-calnexin (1:2000); rabbit anticlaudin-3 (1:1000, Zymed/Life Technologies Europe BV, Stockholm,
Sweden); rabbit anti-claudin-5 (1:1000, Zymed) rabbit anti-ZO1 (1:1000,
Zymed); rabbit anti-Smad3 (1:500, Cell Signaling), rabbit antiphosphoSmad3 (1:500, Cell Signaling) and rabbit anti-TGF-b (1:500, 56E4,
Cell Signaling) Blots were probed with horseradish peroxidase-labeled antirabbit or anti-mouse secondary antibodies (1:5000, Cell Signaling) for 1 h.
After washing, blots were incubated with ECL solution (Pierce Scientiﬁc) for
5 min and signals were detected by using FluoroChem Q (Alpha Innotech,
Kasendorf, Germany).

Quantitative real-time RT–PCR analysis
Total RNA was extracted using RNeasy mini kit (Qiagen, Valencia, CA, USA)
according to the manufacturer’s instructions. First-strand cDNA synthesis
Oncogene (2016) 748 – 760

TGF-β-induced EMT promotes lymph metastasis
M-F Pang et al

758
was performed by using the iScript cDNA synthesis kit (Bio-Rad, Solna,
Sweden) using an amount of 1 μg of total RNA. For qPCR (quantitative realtime PCR) analysis, 5 ng of the cDNA mixture was used for PCR
ampliﬁcation by KAPA SYBR fast qPCR kit (Kapa Biosystems/Techtum Lab
AB, Umeå, Sweden) with validated QuantiTect primers (Qiagen). The
following genes were analyzed: CCR7; CCL21; TGFβ-RII, GAPDH and L19.
For a list of primers used see Supplementary Table S1 in the
Supplementary Information. The PCR was carried out as follows: 3 min at
95 °C followed by 35 cycles of 3 s at 95 ºC, 20 s at 55 °C and 2 s extension
step at 72 °C in RotorGene RG-3000A PCR system.
To investigate the effect of TGF-β1 on iLEC, iLEC was serum starved in
endothelial cell basal medium containing 0.5% FBS for 24 h before TGF-β1
(10 ng/ml) exposure. After 48 h, RNA was collected and the expression of
CCL21 was analyzed as described above. Gene expression analyses were
normalized to the expression of GAPDH. To study the effect of SIS3 or p38
inhibition, EpXT cells were treated with 20 μM SB203580 for 24 h before
qPCR analysis.

Luciferase reporter assay
A CCR7 promoter reporter construct was generated to study the capacity
of Smad and AP-1 transcription factors to activate the CCR7 promoter in
reporter assays. PCR-based cloning (for primer sequences see
Supplementary Information) was used to amplify a 500-bp sequence
upstream of the transcriptional start site of the CCR7 gene from genomic
DNA prepared from 293 cells according to standard protocols. This
sequence is known to contain the core CCR7 promoter including a TATA
box, a binding site for AP-1 factors27 and a binding site for Smads
(CAGACA). The ampliﬁed promoter sequence was cloned into a pGL3
luciferase reporter vector (Promega Biotech, Nacka, Sweden) and veriﬁed
for accuracy. Expression vectors encoding C-Jun (kind gift from Dr Nancy
Colburn, National Cancer Institute, MD), JunB (kind gift from Dr Anders
Sundqvist, Uppsala University), Smad3 and Smad4,18 were transfected in
combination with the CCR7 promoter luciferase construct into NMuMG
cells using Lipofectamine 2000 (Invitrogen), according to standard
procedures. A plasmid encoding β-Galactosidase (β-gal) under the
cytomegalovirus promoter was used as an internal control for transfection
efﬁciency. Reporter constructs and expression plasmids were transfected
Luciferase and β-GAL activities were analyzed using a luciferase assay kit
(Biothema, Stocholm, Sweden) and measured with a Polar Star Omega
(BMG LABTECH, Cary, NC, USA) plate reader. Luciferase values were
normalized to β-GAL values to account for variations in transfection
efﬁciency.

Chromatin immunoprecipitation
Chromatin was isolated from 10-cm dish conﬂuent cells. First, the cells
were washed twice with PBS, crosslinked in 1% paraformaldehyde in PBS
for 10 min and quenched with glycine (125 mM in PBS) for 5 min. Cells were
scraped in 10 mM Tris (10 mM NaCl, 3 mM MgCl2, 1% NP-40, 1% SDS, 0.5%
DOC protease inhibitor, pH 8.1) and sonicated on settings 30 s on, 90 s off
for 15 times to obtain 250-bp chromatin fragments with a Bioruptor
Standard sonicator (Diagenode, Diagnostics, Seraing, Belgium). Sonicated
samples were centrifuged at 16 100 g for 5 min at 4 °C to remove cell
debris. The supernatant was divided in two aliquots, one that were used
further for in immunopreciptitation and the other as input. To input
sample, 80 μl PBS and 3.5 μl 5M NaCl was added and incubated at 65 °C for
16 h. Immunoprecipitation was done using rabbit-anti-Junb (Santa Cruz)
and rabbit-anti-Smad1/2/3 (Santa Cruz) antibodies coupled to Dynabeads
(Dynabeads, Life Technologies, Grand Island, NY, USA). The antibody
coupling was done according to manufacturer's protocol. The chromatin
was diluted to 950 μl in 16.7 mM Tris (167 mM NaCl, 0.01% SDS, 1.1% TX100,
pH 8.1) and 0.5 mg antibody-coupled magnetic beads were added, and
incubated overnight at 4 °C. The next day the samples were sequentially
washed in steps 5 min on a rotator with washing buffer I (20 mM
Tris,150 mM NaCl, 2 mM EDTA, 0.1% SDS, 1% TX100 pH 8.1), washing buffer
II (20 mM Tris, 500 mM NaCl, 2 mM EDTA, 0.1% SDS, 1% TX100 pH 8.1),
washing buffer III (10 mM Tris, 0.25M LiCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1% NP-40, 1%
deoxycholate pH 8.1) and washing buffer IV (10 mM Tris, 1 mM EDTA pH
8.1). The samples were eluted in 1% SDS, 0.1M NaHCO3 and incubated
15 min on a roller. To the eluted chromatin, 4 μl 5M NaCl was added and
incubated at 65 °C for 16 h. Both input and immunoprecipitated samples
were then treated with Proteinase K for 1 h at 45 °C. The samples were
puriﬁed using PCR puriﬁcation kit (Qiagen). To amplify the fragments of
interest PCR was run with REDTaq Readymix PCR Reaction Mix (SigmaOncogene (2016) 748 – 760

Aldrich, Stockholm, Sweden) according to the manufacturer's recommendations. PCR products were separated in 2% agarose. All procedures were
done at room temperature, unless stated otherwise. All CHIP experiments
were repeated three times.

Invasion assay
Invasion assays were performed by using 12 mm, 8-μm pore cell culture
inserts (Millipore, Billerica, MA, USA). A number of 50 000 NMuMG cells,
untreated or pretreated with TGF-β1 (10 ng/ml) for 24 h were trypsinized,
resuspended in growth factor-reduced Matrigel (2 mg/ml, BD Biosciences)
diluted 1:5 in DMEM GlutaMax supplemented with 1% FBS and seeded into
the cell culture inserts. For cells pretreated with TGF-β1, TGF-β1 was added
to the cell–matrigel suspension. The cell culture inserts were put in 24-well
plates in which 400 μl DMEM GlutaMax supplemented with 1% FBS and
recombinant mouse CCL21 (350 ng/ml, R&D Systems) had been added.
To study the functionality of CCR7 in mediating chemotaxis of TGFβ-1treated NMuMG cells toward CCL21, cells were pretreated with a
neutralizing anti-CCR7 monoclonal antibody at different doses (1, 5 and
20 ng/ml; MAB3477, R&D systems) and control antibody IgG2A isotype
control (20 ng/ml; R&D systems) for 30 min before seeding.
After 16 h, nonmigrated cells were removed from the inserts with a
cotton swab and the insert membranes were ﬁxed in methanol. Insert
membranes were removed and mounted with Vectashield containing DAPI
(Vector Labs/BIONORDIKA, Stockholm, Sweden). The membranes were
viewed with using a Nikon Eclipse 800 microscope. Images were captured
using a × 10 objective and the number of invaded cells was counted in six
random ﬁelds.
For EpH4, EpXT, EpRAS treated and untreated with TGF-β1 and EpXTshRII cells, a number of 25 000 cells were used. To study the effect of p38
inhibition, EpXT cells were pretreated with 20 μM SB203580 for 48 h. The
inhibitor was then also added to the cell culture inserts. For these cells,
ﬁxation was performed after 6 h and cells were quantiﬁed as above.

Quantitative analyses of cell migration to lymph nodes
Popliteal (footpad model) and axillary (mammary fat pad model) lymph
nodes were isolated and longitudinally sectioned. Two midsections from
each lymph node were immunoﬂuorescently stained for LYVE-1 according
to above and examined using the Nikon Eclipse 800 microscope and Zeiss
LSM-700 confocal microscope. Images were captured using a × 20
objective (Nikon Eclipse 800) and the number of GFP-positive cells was
counted in three ﬁelds per section.

Quantitative analyses of blood/lymphatic vessel density in human
breast cancer samples and footpad tumors
Sections of human breast cancer tissues and footpad tissues were stained
with antibodies against LYVE-1 and CD31. Images from three random areas
in the human breast cancer tissues and footpads were captured using a
Zeiss LSM-700 confocal microscope using × 20, × 10 or × 4 objectives,
respectively. Images were taken using the same contrast and bright-ﬁeld
settings and were imported into ImageJ software (http://rsb.info.nih.gov/ij)
for measurement of blood/lymphatic vessel area density. Intratumoral
lymphatic vessel density in the footpad tissues was quantiﬁed by dividing
the area of LYVE-1-positive lymphatic vessels with the total tumor area in
each image. For quantiﬁcation of blood/lymphatic vessel density within
the invasive and noninvasive region of footpads, images were imported
into ImageJ software, three random invasive and noninvasive regions were
marked with region of interest manager based on the morphology of the
GFP-positive EpXT tumor cells. Regions with elongated tumor cells were
deﬁned as invasive regions whereas regions with less elongated tumor
cells were deﬁne as noninvasive regions. Measurement of blood/lymphatic
vessel area density was carried out in the regions marked by region of
interest manager. Blood/lymphatic vessel density in the footpad tissues
was quantiﬁed by dividing the area of LYVE-1-positive/CD31-low lymphatic
vessels or CD31-high/LYVE-1-negative blood vessels with the total tumor
area in each image.

Quantitative analyses of CCL21 expression in lymphatic vessels of
footpad tumors
Sections of footpad tissues were stained with antibodies against LYVE-1
and CCL21. Images from three random areas in the footpads were
captured using a Zeiss LSM-700 confocal microscope and a × 10 objective
and imported into ImageJ for measurement of CCL21 area density in
© 2016 Macmillan Publishers Limited

TGF-β-induced EMT promotes lymph metastasis
M-F Pang et al

759
lymphatic vessels. Quantiﬁcation of the percentage of the CCL21-positive
area of each lymphatic vessel was performed.

Quantitative analyses of TGF-β1 signaling and EMT markers in
human breast cancer samples
Sections of human breast cancer samples were co-stained with E-cadherin
and p-Smad3 to detect TGF-β1 signaling or an EMT cocktail consisted of
Snail/Twist to detect EMT in vivo. Three random images in human breast
cancer samples were captured by using Zeiss LSM-700 confocal microscope and a × 20 objective. Nuclei with positive p-Smad3 or Snail/Twist
staining was counted within the tumor regions.

Statistical analysis
Data represent means ± s.e.m. with at least two to three independent
experiments in triplicate. For animal experiments, data represent
means ± s.e.m. with n = 6 mice per group. Statistical analyses were
determined by using Student’s t-test. Po0.05 was considered as
signiﬁcant difference between the groups.

CONFLICT OF INTEREST
The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We thank Drs Carl-Henrik Heldin and Marene Landström at the Ludwig Institute for
Cancer Research (Uppsala, Sweden) and Dr Lars Holmgren at the Karolinska
Institutet (Stockholm, Sweden) for valuable input on the results. We thank Dr Lena
Claesson-Welsh at Uppsala University and Dr Jonathan S Alexander (Louisiana
State University Health Sciences Center, Shreveport, Louisiana) for providing the
lymphatic endothelial cells. We also thank Dr Seonghyang SOHN (Department of
Microbiology School of Medicine, Suwon, Korea) for providing the CCL21 construct.
JF was supported by project grants from the Swedish Research Council, the
Swedish Cancer Society, The Strategic Cancer Programme at Karolinska Institutet,
the Nordic Cancer Foundation and the Swedish Childhood Cancer Foundation.
M-FP was supported by a PhD fellowship (KID-funding) from Stockholm County
Council/Karolinska Institutet, by the Nilsson-Ehle donation, The Robert Lundberg
foundation and the Swedish Society for Medical Research (SSMF). MCIK was
supported by the Swedish Research Council, the Swedish Cancer Society, the
Swedish Medical Society and the Magnus Bergvall foundation. VT was supported
by the Swedish Cancer Society.

REFERENCES
1 Fisher B, Bauer M, Wickerham DL, Redmond CK, Fisher ER, Cruz AB et al. Relation
of number of positive axillary nodes to the prognosis of patients with primary
breast cancer. An NSABP update. Cancer 1983; 52: 1551–1557.
2 Weaver DL, Ashikaga T, Krag DN, Skelly JM, Anderson SJ, Harlow SP et al. Effect of
occult metastases on survival in node-negative breast cancer. N Engl J Med 2011;
364: 412–421.
3 Lauria R, Perrone F, Carlomagno C, De Laurentiis M, Morabito A, Gallo C et al. The
prognostic value of lymphatic and blood vessel invasion in operable
breast cancer. Cancer 1995; 76: 1772–1778.
4 Baluk P, Fuxe J, Hashizume H, Romano T, Lashnits E, Butz S et al. Functionally
specialized junctions between endothelial cells of lymphatic vessels. J Exp Med
2007; 204: 2349–2362.
5 Ben-Baruch A. Host microenvironment in breast cancer development:
inﬂammatory cells, cytokines and chemokines in breast cancer progression:
reciprocal tumor-microenvironment interactions. Breast Cancer Res 2003; 5:
31–36.
6 Coussens LM, Werb Z. Inﬂammation and cancer. Nature 2002; 420: 860–867.
7 Kalluri R, Weinberg RA. The basics of epithelial-mesenchymal transition. J Clin
Invest 2009; 119: 1420–1428.
8 Lopez-Novoa JM, Nieto MA. Inﬂammation and EMT: an alliance towards organ
ﬁbrosis and cancer progression. EMBO Mol Med 2009; 1: 303–314.
9 Thiery JP, Acloque H, Huang RY, Nieto MA. Epithelial-mesenchymal transitions in
development and disease. Cell 2009; 139: 871–890.
10 Heldin CH, Landstrom M, Moustakas A. Mechanism of TGF-beta signaling to
growth arrest, apoptosis, and epithelial-mesenchymal transition. Curr Opin Cell
Biol 2009; 21: 166–176.
11 Massague J. TGFbeta in Cancer. Cell 2008; 134: 215–230.

© 2016 Macmillan Publishers Limited

12 Xu J, Lamouille S, Derynck R. TGF-beta-induced epithelial to mesenchymal transition. Cell Res 2009; 19: 156–172.
13 Dalal BI, Keown PA, Greenberg AH. Immunocytochemical localization of secreted
transforming growth factor-beta 1 to the advancing edges of primary tumors and
to lymph node metastases of human mammary carcinoma. Am J Pathol 1993;
143: 381–389.
14 Chod J, Zavadova E, Halaska MJ, Strnad P, Fucikova T, Rob L. Preoperative
transforming growth factor-beta 1 (TGF-beta 1) plasma levels in operable breast
cancer patients. Eur J Gynaecol Oncol 2008; 29: 613–616.
15 Fuxe J, Karlsson MC. TGF-beta-induced epithelial-mesenchymal transition: a link
between cancer and inﬂammation. Semin Cancer Biol 2012; 22: 455–461.
16 Johansson J, Tabor V, Wikell A, Jalkanen S, Fuxe J. TGF-beta1-Induced epithelialmesenchymal transition promotes monocyte/macrophage properties in breast
cancer cells. Front Oncol 2015; 5: 3.
17 Fuxe J, Vincent T, Garcia de Herreros A. Transcriptional crosstalk between
TGF-beta and stem cell pathways in tumor cell invasion: role of EMT promoting
Smad complexes. Cell Cycle 2010; 9: 2363–2374.
18 Vincent T, Neve EP, Johnson JR, Kukalev A, Rojo F, Albanell J et al. A SNAIL1SMAD3/4 transcriptional repressor complex promotes TGF-beta mediated
epithelial-mesenchymal transition. Nat Cell Biol 2009; 11: 943–950.
19 Giampieri S, Manning C, Hooper S, Jones L, Hill CS, Sahai E. Localized and
reversible TGFbeta signalling switches breast cancer cells from cohesive to single
cell motility. Nat Cell Biol 2009; 11: 1287–1296.
20 Lappin MB, Weiss JM, Delattre V, Mai B, Dittmar H, Maier C et al. Analysis of mouse
dendritic cell migration in vivo upon subcutaneous and intravenous injection.
Immunology 1999; 98: 181–188.
21 Wiley HE, Gonzalez EB, Maki W, Wu MT, Hwang ST. Expression of CC chemokine
receptor-7 and regional lymph node metastasis of B16 murine melanoma. J Natl
Cancer Inst 2001; 93: 1638–1643.
22 Oft M, Peli J, Rudaz C, Schwarz H, Beug H, Reichmann E. TGF-beta1 and Ha-Ras
collaborate in modulating the phenotypic plasticity and invasiveness of epithelial
tumor cells. Genes Dev 1996; 10: 2462–2477.
23 Nakatsu MN, Sainson RC, Aoto JN, Taylor KL, Aitkenhead M, Perez-del-Pulgar S
et al. Angiogenic sprouting and capillary lumen formation modeled by human
umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVEC) in ﬁbrin gels: the role of ﬁbroblasts and
Angiopoietin-1. Microvasc Res 2003; 66: 102–112.
24 Kriehuber E, Breiteneder-Geleff S, Groeger M, Soleiman A, Schoppmann SF,
Stingl G et al. Isolation and characterization of dermal lymphatic and blood
endothelial cells reveal stable and functionally specialized cell lineages. J Exp Med
2001; 194: 797–808.
25 Cote SC, Pasvanis S, Bounou S, Dumais N. CCR7-speciﬁc migration to CCL19 and
CCL21 is induced by PGE(2) stimulation in human monocytes: Involvement of EP
(2)/EP(4) receptors activation. Mol Immunol 2009; 46: 2682–2693.
26 Mathas S, Hinz M, Anagnostopoulos I, Krappmann D, Lietz A, Jundt F et al.
Aberrantly expressed c-Jun and JunB are a hallmark of Hodgkin lymphoma cells,
stimulate proliferation and synergize with NF-kappa B. EMBO J 2002; 21: 4104–4113.
27 Mburu YK, Egloff AM, Walker WH, Wang L, Seethala RR, van Waes C et al.
Chemokine receptor 7 (CCR7) gene expression is regulated by NF-kappaB and
activator protein 1 (AP1) in metastatic squamous cell carcinoma of head and neck
(SCCHN). J Biol Chem 2012; 287: 3581–3590.
28 Davies M, Robinson M, Smith E, Huntley S, Prime S, Paterson I. Induction of
an epithelial to mesenchymal transition in human immortal and malignant
keratinocytes by TGF-beta1 involves MAPK, Smad and AP-1 signalling pathways.
J Cell Biochem 2005; 95: 918–931.
29 Sundqvist A, Zieba A, Vasilaki E, Herrera Hidalgo C, Soderberg O, Koinuma D et al.
Speciﬁc interactions between Smad proteins and AP-1 components determine
TGFbeta-induced breast cancer cell invasion. Oncogene 2013; 32: 3606–3615.
30 Randolph GJ, Angeli V, Swartz MA. Dendritic-cell trafﬁcking to lymph nodes
through lymphatic vessels. Nat Rev Immunol 2005; 5: 617–628.
31 Mani SA, Guo W, Liao MJ, Eaton EN, Ayyanan A, Zhou AY et al. The epithelialmesenchymal transition generates cells with properties of stem cells. Cell 2008;
133: 704–715.
32 Neve RM, Chin K, Fridlyand J, Yeh J, Baehner FL, Fevr T et al. A collection of breast
cancer cell lines for the study of functionally distinct cancer subtypes. Cancer Cell
2006; 10: 515–527.
33 Scheel C, Weinberg RA. Cancer stem cells and epithelial-mesenchymal transition:
concepts and molecular links. Semin Cancer Biol 2012; 22: 396–403.
34 Van den Eynden GG, Van der Auwera I, Van Laere SJ, Colpaert CG, van Dam P,
Dirix LY et al. Distinguishing blood and lymph vessel invasion in breast cancer: a
prospective immunohistochemical study. Br J Cancer 2006; 94: 1643–1649.
35 Cunningham HD, Shannon LA, Calloway PA, Fassold BC, Dunwiddie I, Vielhauer G
et al. Expression of the C-C chemokine receptor 7 mediates metastasis of breast
cancer to the lymph nodes in mice. Transl Oncol 2010; 3: 354–361.

Oncogene (2016) 748 – 760

TGF-β-induced EMT promotes lymph metastasis
M-F Pang et al

760
36 Issa A, Le TX, Shoushtari AN, Shields JD, Swartz MA. Vascular endothelial growth
factor-C and C-C chemokine receptor 7 in tumor cell-lymphatic cross-talk promote invasive phenotype. Cancer Res 2009; 69: 349–357.
37 Muller A, Homey B, Soto H, Ge N, Catron D, Buchanan ME et al. Involvement
of chemokine receptors in breast cancer metastasis. Nature 2001; 410: 50–56.
38 Shields JD, Fleury ME, Yong C, Tomei AA, Randolph GJ, Swartz MA. Autologous
chemotaxis as a mechanism of tumor cell homing to lymphatics via interstitial
ﬂow and autocrine CCR7 signaling. Cancer Cell 2007; 11: 526–538.
39 Biswas S, Sengupta S, Roy Chowdhury S, Jana S, Mandal G, Mandal PK et al.
CXCL13-CXCR5 co-expression regulates epithelial to mesenchymal transition of
breast cancer cells during lymph node metastasis. Breast Cancer Res Treat 2014;
143: 265–276.
40 Condeelis J, Segall JE. Intravital imaging of cell movement in tumours. Nat Rev
Cancer 2003; 3: 921–930.
41 Condeelis J, Pollard JW. Macrophages: obligate partners for tumor cell migration,
invasion, and metastasis. Cell 2006; 124: 263–266.
42 Davidson B, Konstantinovsky S, Kleinberg L, Nguyen MT, Bassarova A, Kvalheim G
et al. The mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPK) p38 and JNK are markers of
tumor progression in breast carcinoma. Gynecol Oncol 2006; 102: 453–461.
43 Esteva FJ, Sahin AA, Smith TL, Yang Y, Pusztai L, Nahta R et al. Prognostic
signiﬁcance of phosphorylated P38 mitogen-activated protein kinase and

44
45
46

47

HER-2 expression in lymph node-positive breast carcinoma. Cancer 2004; 100:
499–506.
Lamouille S, Xu J, Derynck R. Molecular mechanisms of epithelial-mesenchymal
transition. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2014; 15: 178–196.
Chladkova B, Kamanova J, Palova-Jelinkova L, Cinova J, Sebo P, Tuckova L. Gliadin
fragments promote migration of dendritic cells. J Cell Mol Med 2011; 15: 938–948.
Miettinen PJ, Ebner R, Lopez AR, Derynck R. TGF-beta induced transdifferentiation
of mammary epithelial cells to mesenchymal cells: involvement of type I receptors. J Cell Biol 1994; 127: 2021–2036.
Choi B, Lim HC, Lee ES, Anower AK, Sohn S. CCL21 attenuates HSV-induced
inﬂammation through up-regulation of CD8+ memory cells. Immunobiology 2013;
218: 579–590.

This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0
International License. The images or other third party material in this
article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless indicated
otherwise in the credit line; if the material is not included under the Creative Commons
license, users will need to obtain permission from the license holder to reproduce the
material. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/
by/4.0/

Supplementary Information accompanies this paper on the Oncogene website (http://www.nature.com/onc)

Oncogene (2016) 748 – 760

© 2016 Macmillan Publishers Limited

