Oncotarget, Vol. 7, No. 45

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Research Paper

Multi-cycle chemotherapy with the glycolipid-like polymeric
micelles evade cancer stem cell enrichment in breast cancer
therapy
Tingting Meng1, Jingwen Liu1, Lijuan Wen1, Ming Yuan1, Bolin Cheng1, Yingwen
Hu1, Yun Zhu1, Xuan Liu1, Hong Yuan1, Fuqiang Hu1
1

Institute of Pharmaceutics, College of Pharmaceutical Science, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310058, China

Correspondence to: Fuqiang Hu, email: hufq@zju.edu.cn
Keywords: multi-cycle chemotherapy, tumor repopulation, drug delivery, cancer stem cell, microenvironment
Received: April 05, 2016     Accepted: September 13, 2016     Published: September 21, 2016

ABSTRACT
Multi-cycle chemotherapy is commonly used in the clinic, while the phenomena
of enrichment of cancer stem cells (CSCs) and enhanced multi-drug resistance (MDR)
are commonly involved. This research was designed for evaluating this successive
administration. Chitosan oligosaccharide-g-stearic acid (CSOSA) polymer was used
as the drug delivery system (DDS) to perform tri-cycle chemotherapy on a new tumor
model induced by mammosphere cells. In vitro, on CSCs enriched mammospheres
model, the doxorubicin-loaded CSOSA (CSOSA/DOX) displayed an improved growth
inhibition effect measured by acid phosphatase assay (APH). While in vivo, the
CSOSA/DOX micelles blocked tumor progression and led to a marked decrease of
CSCs proportion as well as MDR capacity. What’s more, the CSOSA/DOX helped decay
the microenvironment and attenuate systemic side effects. We concluded that the
CSOSA polymer could be a potential DDS for long-term multi-cycle chemotherapy in
antitumor research.

INTRODUCTION

agents within the tumor because of the enhanced
permeability and retention (EPR) effect. Targeting
strategies have been designed to remove CSCs in tumor
[7, 8]. In this research, the glycolipid-like stearic acid-gchitosan oligosaccharide (CSOSA) polymeric micelles
which presented excellent drug accumulation in drug
resistant cells [9, 10] were used as a DDS. We aimed
to remove both bulk tumor cells and drug resistant
CSCs in prevention of their mutual transformation.
Besides, three cycles’ repetitive chemotherapy with the
drug loaded CSOSA micelles was designed to simulate
the clinical regimen to detect its antitumor effect and
to dig the changing rules of tumor pathology, CSCs
proportion as well as MDR capability and the surrounding
microenvironment when treated by free drugs and drug
loaded DDS.

Chemotherapeutic treatments are commonly used
for cancer therapy. However, only specific subgroups
of patients are likely to be cured. Dose escalation is not
sufficient to result in an improved outcome because
the chemotherapy doses are limited by bone marrow
suppression and other toxicities [1, 2]. The higher the drug
dose is, the greater the cytotoxic effect is. An alternative
method for increasing dose intensity would be to use
multiple cycles’ administration with reasonably short
time intervals for recovery of normal tissue. Common
used chemotherapies in clinical regimen are multi-cycle
and repetitive. However, multiple stimulations of drugs
would lead to the enrichment of cancer stem cells (CSCs)
[3]. While, the CSCs can drive tumor growth and are
responsible for further cancer progression, recurrence and
metastasis [4]. Besides, their multi-drug resistance (MDR)
capacity [5, 6] would significantly decrease the sensitivity
of tumor cells to plenty chemicals and result in treatment
failure. Taking strategies to reduce CSCs enrichment
would be of vital help in cancer treatment.
Drug delivery system (DDS) has advantages in
delivering therapeutic agents and passively concentrating
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Preparation and characterization of CSOSA/
DOX
The grafted polymer CSOSA self-assembled into
micelles with hydrophilic shell and hydrophobic core
72978

Oncotarget

Deeper and more penetration of DOX delivered
by CSOSA in mammospheres

in aqueous medium. The critical micelle concentration
(CMC) value was 22.39 μg/mL calculated according
to Figure 1A. Its chemical structure was confirmed by
1
H NMR (Supplementary Figure S1). After DOX was
encapsulated, the particle size of micelles decreased from
53.8 ± 3.2 nm to 34.6 ± 12.7 nm because of the interaction
between hydrophobic DOX and micelles’ cores. Their
size distribution was showed in Supplementary Figure
S2. Zeta-potential values for CSOSA and CSOSA/DOX
were 21.2 ± 0.2 mV and 22.0 ± 0.7 mV, respectively.
Photos taken by transmission electronic microscopy
(TEM) (Figure 1B) showed the shape of the micelles
with uniform size approximating what was measured
above. DOX encapsulated in the micelles also showed a
delayed release rate (Figure 1C) indicating its potential as
a sustained release DDS.

Cellular uptake and penetration experiment of
doxorubicin hydrochloride (DOX•HCL) and micelleloaded DOX were performed on mammospheres. As a 3D
structure, resembling tumorospheres, the mammpspheres
can reflect nanoparticles penetration besides cellular
uptake capability. After incubated with formulations for
different time intervals, mammospheres were scanned
layer by layer. The 3D images (Figure 3A) were
reconstructed by piling up layers at different depths with
the Imaris software. Fluorescence intensity in CSOSA/
DOX group were all higher than that of DOX•HCl at
time intervals 2 h, 4 h and 8 h, which were in accordance
with the semi-quantitative results (Figure 3B) (*p < 0.05).
Micelle-loaded DOX was internalized slightly after
2  h and with incubation prolonging, internalized DOX
started to spread among mammosphere cells. As shown
in the XY plane graph (Figure 3C), DOX•HCl showed
limited penetration to the outer few cell layers with
dispersive diffusion. On the contrary, micelle-loaded DOX
efficiently penetrated to the core and mostly distributed
in the channel between cells. DOX•HCl’s diffusion,
which mainly depends on concentration gradient, may be
restricted by physical barriers of cell–cell and cell–matrix
interactions. Furthermore, rapid uptake, ardent DNA
binding capacity and sequestration in acidic endosomes
also restricted its penetration to the periphery layers
[15]. While, the relatively slow cellular internalization of
CSOSA contributed to a decreased cellular consumption
of micelle-loaded DOX. Furthermore, lipophilic SA on the
surface (so-called minor core) [10] and the positive charge
enabled the micelle strongly interact with cell membrane,
which could drag micelles to the membrane of more inner
cells. In consideration that CSCs were usually harbored in
the center of a tumor [16], taking the DDS as a strategy
would be accessible for drugs to reach them. For direct
observation of the internal drug distribution, 3D crosssectional images (Figure 3D) and videos (Supplementary
materials) were showed. The fluorescence intensity
weakened from the outer side to the inside core.

Enrichment of CSCs in mammospheres
The serum-free suspension culture, which attempts
to avoid differentiation stimulation by decreasing secretion
of differentiation factors and cell adherence, is widely
used to obtain CSCs [11]. As shown in Figure 2A, a single
MCF-7 cell formed a spheroid structure and became more
compact with a well-defined circular shape at the tenth
day. We named this structure mammosphere as advised
[12]. Following detachment, the cells could reform
mammospheres again indicating their ability to self-renew.
To verify the stemness of mammospheres, flow
cytometry (FCM) was performed to detect breast CSC
surface maker CD44+/CD24−. The ratio of CD44+/CD24−
cells in mammospheres was as high as 36.51%, while
in MCF-7 cells it was only 0.73% (Figure 2B). OCT4,
Nanog and SOX2 genes which were in charge of cell
division and differentiation in stem cells [13] were also
tested by RT-PCR and western-blot. The mRNA levels
were all multiplied, of which SOX2 increased to almost
five-fold; while three-fold, two-fold was for OCT4
and Nanog (Figure 2C). Similar to that, from a semiquantitative calculation of optical density, protein OCT4
was distinctive with three times higher. Meanwhile SOX2
and Nanog were both doubled (Figure 2D). Overall, they
were inclined to possess the characters of stem cells.
Another important character of breast CSCs is
drug resistance capacity associated with high levels of
ABCG2 [14] which defend cells by decreasing cellular
accumulation of cytotoxic agents. To observe the
expression, mammospheres were frozen sectioned. And
then enhanced ABCG2 expression was observed by a
confocal laser scan microscopy (CLSM) through the
fluorescence of ABCG2 antibody (Figure 2E). These
three indexes confirmed that the cells in mammospheres
had gained the characteristics of CSCs after serum free
medium (SFM) conditioned cultivation. The structure of
mammosphere was portrayed in Figure 2F.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Enhanced mammosphere suppression in
CSOSA/DOX group
Since the regular MTT assay has a limitation of
passing through cells in periphery layers and reacting
with internal ones (Supplementary Figure S3), an acid
phosphatase (APH) assay was adopted for detection of
all mammosphere cells with the addition of Triton-X-100.
Blank CSOSA at relevant concentrations showed barely
cytotoxicity (Figure 4A), which indicated its safety. DOX
encapsulated in CSOSA showed enhanced suppression
effect with a decrease of IC50 value from 2.64 μg/mL

72979

Oncotarget

cancer cell lines. In this study, mammosphere cells and
MCF-7 cells were inoculated under the mammary gland,
respectively. Volumes of MCF-7 tumor grew up to
200 mm3 approximately 10 days after injection of MCF-7
cells and the MCF-7 CSCs tumors retarded for a few days.
Tumors reaching 500 mm3 were applied to explore their
distinctions. However, special higher expression of CD44+/
CD24− cells was not distinguished from CSCs tumor
cells, similar to what was reported [20]. Interestingly,
cells digested off from the tumors displayed different
morphology (Figure 5A). According to the conventional
FCM FSC/SSC analysis, where values for X mean and Y
mean respectively represented cell diameter and internal
granularity, the MCF-7 tumor cells were bigger in size and
with fewer organelles. As shown in the microscope photos,
they were perfectly round and uniform. On the contrary,
morphology of CSCs tumor cells was diverse with round,
polygonal or rectangular shapes, which suggested that the
cells differed within the CSCs tumor model. The stem-like
cells (CD44+/CD24− cells), accounting for 36.51% in
mammospheres, may attribute to the diverse cell types.
Just as that in the serial tumorigenicity assay, CSCs could
generate new tumors containing additional CSCs as well
as phenotypically diverse mixed populations of non-CSCs,
which made them resemble the primary tumors [19, 21].
To figure out whether the drug resistance capacity
was still maintained after inoculation, expression of
ABCG2 protein was explored. From Figure 5B, we found

to 1.07 μg/mL (*p < 0.05). The reason for stronger
CSOSA/DOX suppression effect may due to its increased
intracellular concentration. And also CSOSA hold the
potential to gather into cell nucleus [17] where DOX
mainly works. It could also avoid the efflux by ABC
transporters which highly expressed in breast CSCs. In
contrast, DOX•HCl could be recognized and excluded. In
the curve, it’s interesting to see that the survival rate of the
first two points rose above 100%, which may be attributed
to the released prostaglandin E2. It was produced by
chemotherapy damaged cells and could recruit CSCs into
cell division [18].
For direct evaluation, spheroid visualization was
introduced. Mammospheres without any drug treatment
were bright with a distinct border and cells tightly bonded
with each other (Figure 4B). While, the CSOSA-treated
mammospheres resembled the control except for a
reduced refractivity. Cells began to shrink and fall apart in
DOX•HCl and CSOSA/DOX treated groups; more shed
and broke up in the latter group, indicating an enhanced
suppression effect of CSOSA/DOX on breast CSCs.

Obvious distinction between MCF-7 and MCF-7
CSCs induced orthotopic xenograft tumors
CSCs have strong tumorigenicity with as little as
100 cells [19]. However, few studies had reported the
difference between tumors induced by CSCs and normal

Figure 1: Characteristics of CSOSA and CSOSA/DOX micelles. (A) The I1/I3 ratio of fluorescence intensity of pyrene against
logarithm concentrations of CSOSA. (B) TEM images of the micelles. Scale bar, 200 nm. (C) In vitro DOX release profile of CSOSA/DOX
micelles and DOX in PBS (n = 3).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

72980

Oncotarget

that MCF-7 CSCs tumors showed brighter red fluorescence
meaning more ABCG2 proteins in the early state, which
would equip the tumor with feature of drug resistance. It’s
worth noting that many cancers in the clinic had intrinsic
resistance, not acquired resistance capacity. The structure
of surrounding breast tissue was also changed, showing
more ductal elements in the specific mammary gland
conformation (Figure 5C). The increased ductal branching
is usually related to mammary tissue remodeling. Previous
research had demonstrated that between non-CSCs
and CSCs, only the CSC fraction remodeled the stroma
environment [22]. This provided additional evidence for
the stemness property of mammospheres. With more
ductal elements, the basement membrane would block
access of DDS [23]. However, the effect of remodeling
in tumor still remains to be estimated. The CSC tumor
structure was also special with cell clusters surrounded
by collagen (Figure 5D) and the whole structure was
portrayed in Figure 5E. These properties collectively
demonstrated that the MCF-7 CSC-induced orthotopic
xenograft model, different from MCF-7, recapitulated the
complexity of primary tumors, with tumor heterogeneity,
drug resistance ability and ductal elements.
As to in vivo preclinical research, a proper tumor
model is always of vital importance and also a major
stumbling block. The preclinical knowledge has been
acquired principally from cell line-derived xenografts or

patient-derived xenografts (PDXs). However, the cell linederived xenografts are poorly predictive due to genetic
drift and losses of tumor heterogeneity [24] and PDXs
are cumbersome and costly [25]. The CSC orthotopic
xenograft model could meet the above requirements.
Additionally, orthotopic organ environment could avoid
the formation of skin ulcerations [26], which is benefit for
long-term experiment. Above all, this provided a useful
platform of tumor model for studying DDS.

Blocking tumor repopulation by CSOSA/DOX
Multi-cycle repetitive administration was designed
to simulate clinical regimen. Tumor naturally expanded
exponentially from beginning to end in the glucose
group (Figure 6A). Following the guidelines of the
Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee, mice were
sacrificed when their tumor volumes reached 4000 mm3.
Significant enhanced antitumor activity was observed in
the DOX•HCl and CSOSA/DOX groups compared to
the glucose group (**p < 0.01). The whole growth of the
two groups showed no significant difference (p > 0.05),
whereas when analysed separately by cycles it tended the
other way (1st, 2nd, 3rd cycle; p > 0.05, ***p < 0.001,
**p  < 0.01). Although tumors treated with DOX•HCl
was small and grow rather slowly, it continued expanding
all the time and showed an accelerated repopulation

Figure 2: Enrichment of CSCs in mammospheres. (A) Typical photograph of the mammospheres. Scale bar, 200 μm. i for MCF-7

cells and ii for mammospheres. (B) CD44+/CD24− cells measured by FCM. (C) mRNA fold change of OCT4, SOX2 and Nanog genes
after SFM culture (n = 3). (D) Fold change of the three proteins. Above: western-blot analysis; below: semi-quantitative analysis by Image
J software. (E) CLSM for immunostain of ABCG2 (red). Scale bar, 20 μm. (F) Schematic diagram of the mammospheres.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

72981

Oncotarget

at the start of the successive cycle after the intervals
(Supplementary Figure S4). The spaced treatments were
intended for recovery of normal tissue, however tumors
also recovered and proliferated. The CSOSA/DOX
showed a weaker or retardant antitumor effect in the 1st
cycle (the first 21 d), which may be attributed to the slower
uptake and release rate of DOX. But it stopped growing
since the second cycle. Compared to DOX•HCl, CSOSA/
DOX showed superior antitumor activity since 2nd cycle,
maintaining a stable size without repopulation. The tumor
suppression effect of CSOSA/DOX could compete with
that of DOX•HCl and be more effective for the perspective
of long-term chemotherapy.
To see the internal growth status, tumors at the end
of each cycle were stained with hematoxylin and eosin
(H&E). Normal tumor cells had large blue nucleus,
whereas, the chromatin of necrotic cells became absent
with only cytoplasm stained red. Degree of necrosis, to
some extent, represented therapeutic efficiency. The
negative group showed the largest and thickest living area
(Figure 6B) and its necrosis was probably due to a deficit
supply caused by rapid growth. Large necrosis areas were
observed in the other two groups, and larger in CSOSA/

DOX group, where necrosis level became higher with
treatment time prolonging. However, in the DOX•HCl
group there were always blue areas inside the tumor,
revealing vigorous regrowth ability.

Better prognosis in CSOSA/DOX- treated
tumors
Since CSCs were responsible for cancer
progression, recurrence and metastasis, the treated
tumors were extracted to detect its variation of
the CD44+/CD24− cell percentage. As indicated in
Figure  6C, the CSCs proportion of DOX•HCl group
was remarkably increased with a proportion of 69.36%,
seven-fold of that in glucose and CSOSA/DOX groups
(10.95% and 10.62%). This suggested the CSOSA/DOX
would not lead to CSCs enrichment and killed nonCSCs and CSCs indiscriminately, which was essential
in tumor therapy [27], because the non-CSCs could
transform into CSCs and further sustain tumor growth
[28, 29]. Actually in the CSOSA/DOX group, the tumor
volume was much smaller, thus the real number of CSCs
was far less.

Figure 3: Enhanced uptake of DOX delivered by CSOSA micelles. (A) Z-stack images of DOX uptake in mammospheres.

The arrows marked with X, Y and Z indicated three directions and the images were piled up by XY plane in the Z direction. (B) Semiquantitative analysis of fluorescence intensity in A images calculated by MetaMorph software (*p < 0.05). (C) Sheets of XY planes
(Z coordinate: 60 μm). Thickness of the planes was 4.8 μm approximating the diameter of a cell. (D) Internal cross-sectional view of XY,
YZ and XZ planes. Scale bar, 50 μm.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

72982

Oncotarget

After pulsed stimulation for three cycles, it was
quite understandable for tumors to express increased
ABCG2 protein (Figure 6D). ABCG2 was firstly found in
the second cycle (Supplementary Figure S5D), implying
that the acquiring process needed time. On the contrary,
no ABCG2 was found in the other two groups meaning no
acquired resistance occurred. Pictures of apoptosis were
taken at the non-necrotic area, in case being affected by the
necrotic cells. Apoptosis randomly occurred in the glucose
group; more apoptotic areas were obviously observed in
CSOSA/DOX group compared to DOX•HCl group.
The CSOSA/DOX group exhibited smallest living
area but strongest apoptosis as well as weakest drug
resistance, suggesting a better therapeutic effect. As for
DOX•HCl, many factors related to its ever growing.

Initially, the CSCs tumor model at the early stage was drugresistant and DOX•HCl can be extruded. Subsequently,
tumors got stronger resistance capacity with DOX•HCl
pulse simulation and become more difficult to kill. Another
reason for its repopulation was the remaining CD44+/
CD24− cells which reserved the ability to proliferate,
differentiate and ultimately facilitated tumor growth.

Microenvironment damage caused by CSOSA/
DOX
CSC niche was further explored to explain the
suppression effect. Except for supporting tumor cells,
microenvironment also acted as barriers hindering
delivery of nanoparticles. The dense collagen matrix

Figure 4: Cytotoxicity of CSOSA/DOX against mammospheres. (A) The survival rates of the mammospheres measured by APH
assay. *p < 0.05, n = 3. (B) Typical light photographs of mammospheres treated with formulations (CSOSA, DOX•HCl, CSOSA/DOX).
The equivalent dose of DOX was 1.5 μg/mL. Scale bar, 50 μm.

Figure 5: Structure of the CSCs induced orthotopic xenograft tumor model. (A) Conventional FCM FSC/SSC analysis and

light photographs of the tumor cells. Scale bar, 50 μm. i for MCF-7 cells and ii for mammospheres. (B) CLSM for immunostain of ABCG2
(red). Scale bar, 100 μm. (C) H&E stain images of the mammary tissue on the peripheral region of the tumors. Scale bar, 200 μm. (D) The
clusters of tumors were surrounded and separated by collagen. (E) Structure and cell components scheme of CSCs-induced orthotopic tumor.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

72983

Oncotarget

reduced vascular perfusion through elevated interstitial
fluid pressure and compressing tumor vessels [30–32],
and thus resulted in suboptimal outcomes [33]. As shown
in Figure  7, after treated by CSOSA/DOX, vessels
became bigger and more. This would enlarge the vascular
perfusion for more drug distribution. Generally, free
chemicals are unable to penetrate more than 40–50 μm
from vessels because of extracellular matrix, let alone the
distance between tumor cells and vessels was often more
than 100 μm [34]. However, CSOSA/DOX resulted in
lower collagen levels and made it easy to penetrate and
to reach tumor cells. In addition, the particle size of the
micelle was appropriate for tumor penetration, as previous
research reported only micelles of 30 nm could penetrate
in poorly permeable pancreatic tumors among different
sizes [35]. While, in DOX•HCl group, tumor vessels were
squeezed by dense collagen. The situation was the same
at the end of each chemotherapy cycle (Supplementary
Figure S5A–S5C) and the collagen grew more and more
tense. Furthermore, the destroyed microenvironment,
niche for CSCs, could no longer modulate the
transformation of CSCs to non-CSCs [36]. Tumor cells
to some extent were harbored and protected by secreted

collagen. After treated by CSOSA/DOX, shield for tumor
cell was lost. Thereby the chemotherapy was potentiated.
To figure out the leading cause of decreased
collagen level, cancer-associated fibroblast (CAF),
secreting collagen in tumors [37], was traced (Figure 7B).
Interestingly, CAFs in CSOSA/DOX showed dispersed
distribution and was of low content. It implied that the
CAF was an acting target of CSOSA/DOX. On the
contrary, tumors in DOX•HCl group were abundant of
CAFs and clusters of tumor cells were separated by them.

Reduced systemic toxicity of DOX by CSOSA
micelles
Besides therapeutic efficacy, safety was another
important therapy index. Low cytotoxicity was
undoubtedly a huge advantage especially with this longterm administration. The body weight decreased after
administration of drugs (Figure 8). Mice in CSOSA/
DOX group could always recover during the intervals.
While mice in the DOX•HCl group would only regain
a bit and this regain get less and less as chemotherapy
time extended. To further characterize its toxicity, a

Figure 6: Tumor repopulation blocking effect of CSOSA/DOX. (A) Tumor growth curve after injection of the formulations
(n = 4). The start of each treatment cycle was noted with arrows and each administration cycle last for 7 d. (B) H&E analysis of tumors at
the end of each cycle. The pink area represented necrosis. Scale bar, 500 μm. (C) FCM histograms of the CD44+/CD24− cells in B1 section.
(D) TUNEL was for apoptosis and ABCG2 stain for drug resistant capacity. Scale bar, 200 μm.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

72984

Oncotarget

Figure 7: Damage to the microenvironment caused by CSOSA/DOX. (A) Representative images from immunofluorescence
stain of tumor vessels (green) and collagen (red). (B) Immunofluorescence images of CAF (α-SMA, red). The CAFs in the DOX•HCl group
was more highly and separated the tumor cells into clusters. Scale bar, 200 μm.

Figure 8: Systemic toxicity caused by DOX. (A) Changes of body weights with repetitive administration of three formulations. (B)

H&E analysis of the organs at the end of the treatment. Myofibrillar loss in hearts and vacuoles in kidneys were indicated by the red cycles.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

72985

Oncotarget

histopathological examination of internal organs was
applied. Slight extramedullary hematopoiesis was found
in all liver and spleen because of long-term burden with
tumor. Organs of CSOSA/DOX-treated mice maintained
regular cell distribution and normal architecture.
However, irregular cell arrangement and myofibrillar
loss in hearts and vacuoles in kidneys were serious in the
DOX•HCl group (Figure 8B). For the CSOSA micelles
alone, the chitosan oligosaccharide was biodegradable,
biocompatible and non-toxic material. The reduced
systemic toxicity of DOX encapsulated could be credited
to the changed distribution by CSOSA micelles.

by centrifugation at 8000 rpm for 10 min (3K30, Sigma
Laborzentrifugen).

Characterization of CSOSA and CSOSA/DOX
The average particle diameter and size distribution
of blank micelles and DOX-loaded micelles were
measured by a dynamic light scattering (DLS) Zetasizer
(3000HS, Malvern Instruments Ltd, UK). The samples
were placed on copper grids and stained with 2% (w/v)
phosphotungstic acid for viewing by a transmission
electron microscopy (TEM, JEM-1230, Japan). The
critical micelle concentration (CMC) of the CSOSA
was determined by pyrene fluorescence method using
a fluorometer (F-2500, Hitachi Co., Japan). Pyrene
(6.0 × 10−7 mol/L) was pre-dried and CSOSA solutions
were added and sonicated together for 30 min. The
excitation wavelength was set as 337 nm and the emission
wavelength was scanned.
In vitro cumulative release of DOX from the
micelles was investigated in PBS. First, 1 mL CSOSA/
DOX solution was introduced into a dialysis membrane
(MWCO = 3.5 kDa, Spectrum Labs, USA) with ends
sealed and submerged into 20 mL release medium. The
system was stirred at 60 rpm and maintained at 37°C.
Samples were withdrawn at predetermined times (1 h,
2 h, 4 h, 6 h, 12 h, 24 h, 36 h and 48 h) from the release
medium. The concentrations of released DOX were
determined by a fluorometer. As control, dispersion of
DOX was conducted under the same condition.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Materials
Chitosan oligosaccharide (CSO, Mw = 18 kDa,
95% deacetylated degree) was obtained by enzymatic
degradation of chitosan (Mw = 450.0 kDa) supplied by
Yuhuan Marine Biochemistry Co., Ltd. Stearic acid (SA)
was purchased from Aladdin Industrial Inc. DOX was
purchased from Hisun Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd. Insulin
and immunopure p-nitrophenyl phosphate were purchased
from Sigma Chemical Co. EGF and bFGF was purchased
from Peprotech. RNAiso Plus, PrimeScriptTM RT reagent
Kit and SYBR® Premix Ex TaqTM were purchased from
TaKaRa Biotechnology (Dalian) Co., Ltd. SOX2, NANOG
and OCT4 antibodies were purchased from ABGENT.
MCF-7 cells were obtained from Cell Resource
Center of China Science Academe. Female BALB/c nude
mice (6–8 weeks old) were purchased from Shanghai
Silaike Laboratory Animal Limited Liability Company.
The mice were raised in the specific pathogen-free level
animal facility and freely allowed access to food and water.

Formation of mammospheres
A single-cell suspension of MCF-7 cells suspended
at a density of 5 × 103 cells/mL in serum free medium
(SFM) was inoculated in ultra-low-attachment plates.
The SFM was DMEM/F12 medium supplemented with
human recombinant epidermal growth factor (20 ng/mL),
recombinant basic fibroblast growth factor (20 ng/mL),
5 μg/mL insulin and 2% B27 supplement. The cells
were cultured for about 10 d in an incubator at 37 °C in
humidified 5 % CO2 atmosphere. The medium was added
every 5 d.

Synthesis of CSOSA and preparation of
CSOSA/DOX
CSOSA was fabricated via the reaction of the
carboxyl group of SA with the amine group of CSO in
the presence of 1-ethyl-3-(3-dimethylaminopropyl)
carbodiimide (EDC) as reported [10]. Briefly, SA (0.120 g)
and EDC (0.430 g) dissolved in 18 mL ethanol were
maintained at 60°C to activate the carboxyl group. CSO
(0.5 g) dissolved in 36 mL distilled water was pre-heated
followed by addition of the activated mixture. After stirred
at 60°C overnight, the final reaction mixture was dialyzed
against distilled water. Then, the lyophilized product
was dispersed in ethanol to remove the unreacted SA by
filtration. The CSOSA was received after lyophilized.
DOX-loaded micelles were prepared by dialysis.
Briefly, a solution of DMSO containing DOX was dropped
in the micelle solution and stirred for 1 h, followed by
dialysis against distilled water (Milli-Q, Millipore)
overnight. Then, the unencapsulated DOX was removed
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Flow cytometry
Mammospheres were trypsinized into single-cell
suspension with Accutase-Enzyme Cell Detachment
Medium, and then washed and resuspended in PBS. Single
cells were labeled with antibodies specific for human cells:
anti-CD24-FITC and anti-CD44-PE (BD PharmingenTM).
An unstained, single stain served as the control. Isotype
controls were used to exclude non-specific conjunctions.
After being incubated with antibodies for 30 min at 4°C
in the dark, the unbound antibody was washed. Cells were
fixed for analysis (FC500MCL, Beckman Coulter, USA).
72986

Oncotarget

For tumor analysis, harvested tumors were minced to
form single cell suspension. The tissue lysate was filtered
through a 200 mesh sieve prior to stain. Surface antigen
CD24 and CD44 were detected as above. The single cell
suspension was also observed under a light microscope.

96-well plates with 150 µL medium was incubated with
CSOSA, DOX•HCL and CSOSA/DOX for 48 h, followed
by centrifugation to spin down and washing with PBS. The
supernatant was discarded to a final volume of 100 µL.
Then, 100 µL of the assay buffer (0.1 M sodium acetate,
0.1% Triton-X-100, 1 mg/mL immunopure p-nitrophenyl
phosphate (Sigma)) was added and incubated for 90 min
at 37°C. After supplemention of 10 µL NaOH solution,
absorption at 405 nm was measured on a microplate reader
(SpectraMax M5, Molecular Devices).

Real-time polymerase chain reaction
Total RNA was extracted by TRIzol reagent (Gibco
BRL, Gaithersburg, MD) according to the manufacturer’s
protocol. Nucleic acid concentrations were measured at
260 nm (Nanodrop2000 Spectrometer). One microgram
of RNA sample was reverse transcribed to cDNA with
the PrimeScript™ RT Reagent Kit. The cDNA synthesis
condition was 37°C 15 min and 85°C 5 s. A master mix for
each PCR run was prepared with SYBR® Premix Ex Taq™
reagent. Appropriately diluted cDNA was added with the
primers (sequences shown in Supplementary Table S1).
The PCR condition was 94°C for 3 min to denature the
RNA/cDNA hybrid, then 40 cycles of 94°C for 1 min,
45°C for 1 min, and 72°C for 1 min. All samples were
ampliﬁed in triplicate (StepOneTM, Applied Biosystems,
USA). The comparative cycle threshold (CT) (2−ΔΔCT)
method was used to determine the relative expression.

Tumor progression studies
All of the experiments were performed in
compliance with the guidelines established by the
Zhejiang University Institutional Animal Care and Use
Committee. The mice were treated with estrogen before
inoculation. The MCF-7 and mammosphere cells were
injected into the mammary fat pad of the 4th nipple. An
estradiol supplementation was given every 5 d until the
tumor come up.
Tumor-bearing mice were randomly divided
into three groups: 5% glucose control group, positive
control group (DOX•HCl, 2 mg/kg/d in 0.2 mL) and the
CSOSA/DOX group (DOX, 2 mg/kg/d in 0.2 mL). Three
chemotherapy cycles were performed and each was 21 d.
Drugs were administered intravenously in the first 7 d
of each cycle. The tumor size and body weights were
recorded every 3 d. The volume was calculated with the
formula: (length) × (width)2 /2. For the analysis of changes
between cycles, two more mice were added in each group
and sacrificed at the end of each cycle.

Western blot analysis
The MCF-7 cells and mammospheres were mixed
with sample loading buffer, destroying the cell membrane
with pipette tip, boiled for 15 min and then separated by
Tris-Tricine SDS-PAGE. Proteins were electrophoretically
transferred to nitrocellulose membranes and blocked with
skim milk in PBS containing 0.05% Tween 20 for 1 h.
After we washed the membrane, the antibodies of Nanog,
OCT4 and SOX2 were added and incubated for 4 h at
room temperature. The bound antibodies were detected
by horseradish peroxidase-conjugated IgG secondary
antibodies. Signals were developed via an enhanced
chemiluminescence detection system.

Histological analysis
Tumor and organ samples were fixed in 4%
paraformaldehyde and embedded in paraffin before
sectioning at 4 μm thickness. H&E staining was performed
as follow: After fixed with ethanol for 20 min, sections were
washed and treated with hematoxylin for nuclei staining.
Then, after washed, the cytoplasm was counterstained with
1% eosin solution. Stained sections were embedded in
glycerin jelly followed by final water washing.
Immunohistochemistry and immunofluorescence
were performed as follow: after fixed with cold acetone,
cells were blocked with 2% goat serum for 2 h. The
primary antibody of ABCG2 (collagen type), α-SMA,
CD31) were applied to samples overnight at 4°C. After
washing, the secondary antibody was incubated for 1 h.
Nuclei were stained with DAPI for 10 min. The samples
were protected by glycerol and covered by a cover glass.

Uptake of DOX•HCl and CSOSA/DOX in
mammospheres
Mammospheres approximately 200 μm in diameter
were incubated with DOX•HCl and CSOSA/DOX. The
images were collected on a confocal laser scan microscopy
(CLSM) (BX61W1-FV1000, Olympus) with a 40× water
immersion objective. Laser beam with 546 nm excitation
wavelength was used for DOX. Z-stack images were
obtained by scanning the mammospheres layer by layer.
Each scanning layer was 1.2 μm in thickness, and the total
scanning was approximately 100 μm in depth.

Statistical analysis

Mammosphere suppression measured by APH
assay

All of the data were expressed as means ± standard
deviation (SD). Statistical significance was analyzed
using Student’s t-test. p value of < 0.05 was considered

The in vitro cytotoxicity was evaluated by APH assay
with minor modification [38, 39]. Mammospheres grew in
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

72987

Oncotarget

statistically significant. p > 0.05 represents not significant;
*p < 0.05; **p < 0.01; ***p < 0.001.

signaling axis eliminates patient-derived cancer stem–like
cells in head and neck squamous carcinomas. Cancer Res.
2014; 74:7546–59.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

  9.	 Hu FQ, Liu LN, Du YZ, Yuan H. Synthesis and antitumor
activity of doxorubicin conjugated stearic acid-g-chitosan
oligosaccharide polymeric micelles. Biomaterials. 2009;
30:6955–63.

We thank Mrs. Shuangshuang Liu from the Image
Center, Zhejiang University School of Medicine for
CLSM images and Dr. Karson Putt, Managing Director
for the Centre of Drug Discovery at Purdue University for
advices on article writing.

10.	 You J, Hu F-Q, Du Y-Z, Yuan H. Polymeric micelles with
glycolipid-like structure and multiple hydrophobic domains
for mediating molecular target delivery of paclitaxel.
Biomacromolecules. 2007; 8:2450–56.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST

11.	 Ravi M, Paramesh V, Kaviya SR, Anuradha E, Solomon FD.
3D cell culture systems: advantages and applications. J Cell
Physiol. 2015; 230:16–26.

There is no conflicts of interest.

12.	 Weiswald LB, Bellet D, Dangles-Marie V. Spherical cancer
models in tumor biology. Neoplasia. 2015; 17:1–15.

FINANCIAL SUPPORT

13.	 Leis O, Eguiara A, Lopez-Arribillaga E, Alberdi MJ,
Hernandez-Garcia S, Elorriaga K, Pandiella A, Rezola R,
Martin AG. Sox2 expression in breast tumours and
activation in breast cancer stem cells. Oncogene. 2012;
31:1354–65.

This project was funded by National Natural Science
Foundation of China (No. 81473144 and No. 81273442).

REFERENCES

14.	 Hu L, McArthur C, Jaffe RB. Ovarian cancer stem-like
side-population cells are tumourigenic and chemoresistant.
Br J Cancer. 2010; 102:1276–83.

  1.	 Long GD, Negrin RS, Hoyle CF, Kusnierz-Glaz CR,
Blume  KG, Chao NJ. Multiple cycles of high dose
chemotherapy supported by hematopoietic progenitor stem
cells as treatment for patients with advanced malignancies.
Cancer. 1995; 76: 860–8.

15.	 Kim TH, Mount CW, Gombotz WR, Pun SH. The delivery
of doxorubicin to 3-D multicellular spheroids and tumors in
a murine xenograft model using tumor-penetrating triblock
polymeric micelles. Biomaterials. 2010; 31: 7386–97.

  2.	 Culine S, Fabbro M, Assens C, Ychou M, Romieu G,
Kramar A, Cupissol D, Pingue F, Pujol H. Four-step
high-dose sequential chemotherapy with hematopoietic
progenitor-cell support as induction treatment for patients
with solid tumors. Ann Oncol. 1997; 8:951–6.

16.	 Ju C, Mo R, Xue J, Zhang L, Zhao Z, Xue L, Ping Q,
Zhang C. Sequential intra-intercellular nanoparticle delivery
system for deep tumor penetration. Angew Chem Int Ed
Engl. 2014; 53:6253–8.

  3.	 Kreso A, Dick John E. Evolution of the cancer stem cell
model. Cell Stem Cell. 2014; 14:275–91.

17.	 Ye YQ, Yang FL, Hu FQ, Du YZ, Yuan H, Yu* HY, Coremodified chitosan based polymeric micelles for controlled
release of doxorubicin. Int J Pharm. 2008; 352: 294–301.

  4.	 Mitra A, Mishra L, Li, S. EMT, CTCs and CSCs in tumor
relapse and drug-resistance. Oncotarget. 2015; 6:10697–711.
doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.4037.

18.	 Kurtova AV, Xiao J, Mo Q, Pazhanisamy S, Krasnow R,
Lerner SP, Chen F, Roh TT, Lay E, Ho PL, Chan KS.
Blocking PGE2-induced tumour repopulation abrogates
bladder cancer chemoresistance. Nature. 2015; 517:209–13.

  5.	 Kanehira M, Kikuchi T, Santoso A, Tode N, Hirano T,
Ohkouchi S, Tamada T, Sugiura H, Harigae H, Ichinose M.
Human marrow stromal cells downsize the stem cell
fraction of lung cancers by fibroblast growth factor 10. Mol
Cell Biol. 2014; 34:2848–56.

19.	 Al-Hajj M, Wicha MS, Benito-Hernandez A, Morrison SJ,
Clarke MF. Prospective identification of tumorigenic breast
cancer cells. P Natl Acad Sci USA. 2003; 100:3983–88.

  6.	 Jang JY, Kim MK, Jeon YK, Joung YK, Park KD, Kim CW.
Adenovirus adenine nucleotide translocator-2 shRNA
effectively induces apoptosis and enhances chemosensitivity
by the down-regulation of ABCG2 in breast cancer stemlike cells. Exp Mol Med. 2012; 44:251–9.

20.	 Wang D, Huang J, Wang X, Yu Y, Zhang H, Chen Y,
Liu  J, Sun Z, Zou H, Sun D, Zhou G, Zhang G, Lu Y,
et  al. The eradication of breast cancer cells and stem
cells by 8-hydroxyquinoline-loaded hyaluronan modified
mesoporous silica nanoparticle-supported lipid bilayers
containing docetaxel. Biomaterials. 2013; 34:7662–73.

  7.	 Kim S-S, Rait A, Kim E, Pirollo KF, Nishida M, Farkas N,
Dagata JA, Chang EH. A nanoparticle carrying the p53
gene targets tumors including cancer stem cells, sensitizes
glioblastoma to chemotherapy and improves survival. ACS
Nano. 2014; 8:5494–514.

21.	 Cho RW, Wang X, Diehn M, Shedden K, Chen GY,
Sherlock G, Gurney A, Lewicki J, Clarke MF. Isolation and
molecular characterization of cancer stem cells in MMTVWnt-1 murine breast tumors. Stem Cells. 2008; 26:364–71.
22.	 Parashurama N, Lobo NA, Ito K, Mosley AR, Habte FG,
Zabala M, Smith BR, Lam J, Weissman IL, Clarke MF,

  8.	 Sun S, Liu S, Duan SZ, Zhang L, Zhou H, Hu Y, Zhou X,
Shi C, Zhou R, Zhang Z. Targeting the c-Met/FZD8
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

72988

Oncotarget

Gambhir SS. Remodeling of endogenous mammary
epithelium by breast cancer stem cells. Stem Cells. 2012;
30:2114–27.

Adstamongkonkul P, Popovic Z, Huang P, Bawendi MG,
et al. Angiotensin inhibition enhances drug delivery and
potentiates chemotherapy by decompressing tumour blood
vessels. Nat Commun. 2013; 4:2516.

23.	 Komuro M, Suzuki K, Kanebako M, Kawahara T, Otoi T,
Kitazato K, Inagi T, Makino K, Toi M, Terada H. Novel
iontophoretic administration method for local therapy of
breast cancer. J Control Release. 2013; 168:298–306.

33.	 Song G, Darr DB, Santos CM, Ross M, Valdivia A,
Jordan JL, Midkiff BR, Cohen S, Nikolaishvili-Feinberg N,
Miller CR, Tarrant TK, Rogers AB, Dudley AC, et al.
Effects of tumor microenvironment heterogeneity on
nanoparticle disposition and efficacy in breast cancer tumor
models. Clin Cancer Res. 2014; 20:6083–95.

24.	 Gillet JP, Varma S, Gottesman MM. The clinical relevance
of cancer cell lines. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2013; 105:452–8.
25.	 Marangoni E, Poupon MF. Patient-derived tumour
xenografts as models for breast cancer drug development.
Curr Opin Oncol. 2014; 26:556–61.

34.	 Primeau AJ, Rendon A, Hedley D, Lilge L, Tannock IF. The
distribution of the anticancer drug Doxorubicin in relation
to blood vessels in solid tumors. Clin Cancer Res. 2005;
11:8782–8.

26.	 Ho KS, Poon PC, Owen SC, Shoichet MS. Blood vessel
hyperpermeability and pathophysiology in human tumour
xenograft models of breast cancer: a comparison of ectopic
and orthotopic tumours. Bmc Cancer. 2012; 12:579–88.

35.	 Cabral H, Matsumoto Y, Mizuno K, Chen Q, Murakami M,
Kimura M, Terada Y, Kano MR, Miyazono K, Uesaka M,
Nishiyama N, Kataoka K. Accumulation of sub-100 nm
polymeric micelles in poorly permeable tumours depend on
size. Nat Nano. 2011; 6:815–23.

27.	 Adorno-Cruz V, Kibria G, Liu X, Doherty M, Junk DJ,
Guan  D, Hubert C, Venere M, Mulkearns-Hubert E,
Sinyuk M, Alvarado A, Caplan AI, Rich J, et al. Cancer
Stem Cells: Targeting the roots of cancer, seeds of
metastasis, and sources of therapy resistance. Cancer Res.
2015; 75:924–29.

36.	 Borovski T, De Sousa EMF, Vermeulen L, Medema JP.
Cancer stem cell niche: the place to be. Cancer Res. 2011;
71:634–9.
37.	 Cirri P, Chiarugi P. Cancer-associated-fibroblasts and
tumour cells: a diabolic liaison driving cancer progression.
Cancer Metastasis Rev. 2012; 31:195–208.

28.	 Gupta PB, Fillmore CM, Jiang G, Shapira SD, Tao K,
Kuperwasser C, Lander ES. Stochastic state transitions
give rise to phenotypic equilibrium in populations of cancer
cells. Cell. 2011; 146:633–44.

38.	 Friedrich J, Seidel C, Ebner R, Kunz-Schughart LA.
Spheroid-based drug screen: considerations and practical
approach. Nat Protoc. 2009; 4:309–24.

29.	 Nguyen LV, Vanner R, Dirks P, Eaves CJ. Cancer stem cells:
an evolving concept. Nat Rev Cancer. 2012; 12:133–43.

39.	 Senavirathna LK, Fernando R, Maples D, Zheng Y,
Polf  JC, Ranjan A. Tumor Spheroids as an in vitro
model for determining the therapeutic response to proton
beam radiotherapy and thermally sensitive nanocarriers.
Theranostics. 2013; 3:687–91.

30.	 Fang M, Yuan J, Peng C, Li Y. Collagen as a double-edged
sword in tumor progression. Tumour Biol. 2014; 35:2871–82.
31.	 Lim YZ, South AP. Tumour-stroma crosstalk in the
development of squamous cell carcinoma. Int J Biochem
Cell Biol. 2014; 53:450–8.
32.	 Chauhan VP, Martin JD, Liu H, Lacorre DA, Jain  SR,
Kozin  SV, Stylianopoulos T, Mousa AS, Han X,

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

72989

Oncotarget

