Oncotarget, Vol. 7, No. 15

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Anti-apoptotic ARC protein confers chemoresistance by
controlling leukemia-microenvironment interactions through a
NFκB/IL1β signaling network
Bing Z. Carter1, Po Yee Mak1, Ye Chen1, Duncan H. Mak1, Hong Mu1, Rodrigo
Jacamo1, Vivian Ruvolo1, Stefan T. Arold2, John E. Ladbury3, Jared K. Burks1,
Steven Kornblau1, Michael Andreeff1
1

 ection of Molecular Hematology and Therapy, Department of Leukemia, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer
S
Center, Houston, TX, USA

2

 ing Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST), Computational Bioscience Research Center, Division of
K
Biological and Environmental Sciences and Engineering, Thuwal, Saudi Arabia

3

 epartment of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology and Center for Biomolecular Structure and Function, The University of
D
Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA

Correspondence to: Bing Z. Carter, e-mail: bicarter@mdanderson.org
	
Michael Andreeff, e-mail: mandreef@mdanderson.org
Keywords: AML, ARC, NFκB, chemoresistance
Received: January 08, 2016	

Accepted: February 15, 2016	

Published: March 04, 2016

ABSTRACT
To better understand how the apoptosis repressor with caspase recruitment
domain (ARC) protein confers drug resistance in acute myeloid leukemia (AML),
we investigated the role of ARC in regulating leukemia-mesenchymal stromal cell
(MSC) interactions. In addition to the previously reported effect on AML apoptosis,
we have demonstrated that ARC enhances migration and adhesion of leukemia cells
to MSCs both in vitro and in a novel human extramedullary bone/bone marrow
mouse model. Mechanistic studies revealed that ARC induces IL1β expression in AML
cells and increases CCL2, CCL4, and CXCL12 expression in MSCs, both through ARCmediated activation of NFκB. Expression of these chemokines in MSCs increased by
AML cells in an ARC/IL1β-dependent manner; likewise, IL1β expression was elevated
when leukemia cells were co-cultured with MSCs. Further, cells from AML patients
expressed the receptors for and migrated toward CCL2, CCL4, and CXCL12. Inhibition
of IL1β suppressed AML cell migration and sensitized the cells co-cultured with MSCs
to chemotherapy. Our results suggest the existence of a complex ARC-regulated circuit
that maintains intimate connection of AML with the tumor microenvironment through
NFκB/IL1β-regulated chemokine receptor/ligand axes and reciprocal crosstalk
resulting in cytoprotection. The data implicate ARC as a promising drug target to
potentially sensitize AML cells to chemotherapy.

INTRODUCTION

to explore mechanisms that keep AML cells tethered to
the protective BM niche and develop therapies to disrupt
leukemia-niche interactions.
BM-derived mesenchymal stromal cells (MSCs)
are an essential structural and functional component
of the BM microenvironment, and they are critical for
hematopoiesis [1]. Within the context of leukemia, MSCs
also play an essential role in protecting leukemia cells
from chemotherapeutic agents [2]. Much of the interaction
occurs through a wide range of adhesion molecules on

Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is a hematological
malignancy with poor long-term survival primarily due to
the development of chemoresistance. Multiple leukemiaintrinsic mechanisms of chemoresistance have been
established, but the clinical experience of AML treatment
also suggests that circulating leukemic cells are strikingly
more sensitive to chemotherapy than their bone marrow
(BM) counterparts. This finding has motivated the field
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

20054

Oncotarget

hematopoietic cells and their corresponding ligands secreted
by BM stromal cells. While this system of communication is
typically used between normal hematopoietic cells and BM
stromal cells, it is hijacked by leukemic cells to enhance
interactions that protect these cells from chemotherapy
[3–7].
CXCR4/CXCL12 is perhaps the best understood
receptor/ligand axis involved in AML. Elevation of
CXCR4 in AML cells and CXCL12 (also known as
SDF1α) in MSCs have both been detected in AML patient
samples, with the former associating with poor disease
prognosis [8–10]. Increased expression and activity of
CXCR4 and CXCL12 have also been shown to enhance
tumor invasiveness, growth, and metastasis in several other
types of cancer [11, 12]. Further, pharmacological blockade
of the CXCR4/CXCL12 axis results in chemosensitization
of AML cells in vitro and in vivo, therefore serving as a
biological basis for development of various CXCR4 and
CXCL12 inhibitors [13–16]. However, this strategy has
only shown limited success in mobilizing AML cells from
the BM microenvironment clinically, possibly in part due to
parallel activity of other chemokine/receptor axes that also
contribute to leukemia-stromal interactions.
In addition to the protection by BM MSCs, genes
that regulate apoptosis are frequently deregulated in
leukemic cells, which further supports their survival
during chemotherapy. Hence, simultaneous targeting of
apoptosis regulators and leukemia-stromal interactions
could be a novel strategy to overcome the development
of chemoresistance and disease relapse in AML
[2, 17]. One such regulator, the apoptosis repressor with
caspase recruitment domain (ARC) protein, is capable
of suppressing both intrinsic and extrinsic apoptosis via
inhibiting Fas/FADD interaction, blocking caspase-2/-8
activity, and/or interfering p53 and Bax function [18–22].
Increased ARC expression was recently shown to occur in
various cancer cell types, correlating with poorer disease
prognosis, and conferring chemo- and radio-resistance in
transformed cells [18, 23–26]. Our previous research, using
reverse-phase protein array (RPPA) on 511 newly diagnosed
AML samples, implicated that high ARC expression
correlated strongly with a poor survival in AML patients
[27]. Additionally, we elucidated that ARC expression is
upregulated via MAPK/PI3K signaling activated by MSCs,
an interaction that confers drug resistance and a survival
advantage to these AML cells [28]. We also identified that
ARC suppresses AML cell death by antagonizing p53 and
suppressing TRAIL [29].
While it is clear that ARC contributes to AML
chemoresistance and is associated with poor prognosis, the
precise molecular mechanisms that link this anti-apoptotic
protein to such a phenotype are still to be fully elucidated.
In the aforementioned RPPA analysis, we also assessed
the expression of over 200 proteins likely associated
with AML pathobiology. We found that enhanced ARC
expression correlated with elevated levels of numerous
proteins that are involved in cell signaling, adhesion, and
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

migration. This prompted us to investigate the role of ARC
in leukemia-stromal interactions. Here we reveal that ARC
mediates a complex regulatory circuit likely via NFκB/
IL1β signaling in both AML cells and MSCs, leading
to activation of numerous chemokine ligand/receptor
axes that foster their close association and leukemic cell
chemoresistance, therefore a novel target for AML.

RESULTS
ARC both in AML cells and MSCs regulates
leukemia-stromal interactions
Cell adhesion and migration assays were performed
first using stable ARC knockdown (KD) OCI-AML3 (high
endogenous ARC expression) or overexpression (OE)
KG-1 (low endogenous ARC expression) AML cells.
The ARC KD OCI-AML3 cells exhibited less adhesion
to and migration toward MSCs than their vector controls.
Conversely, the ARC OE KG-1 cells exhibited more
adhesion to and migration toward MSCs than the vector
controls (Figure 1A). Next, we knocked down ARC in
MSCs and queried whether this would affect adhesion and
migration of AML cells. Indeed, fewer cells from both an
AML cell line and primary patient BM samples adhered
(n = 3) and migrated (n = 5) to the ARC KD MSCs
compared to the control MSCs (Figure 1B).
We further assessed AML cell adhesion using a bone
chip model, which provides a three-dimensional scaffold
for MSC growth, mimicking in vivo structural dynamics.
MSCs expressing RFP were grown on the bone chip surface
and co-cultured with ARC KD or control OCI-AML3 cells
expressing GFP. We found significantly fewer GFP positive
pixels (an 88% decrease, P = 0.006) on bone chip associated
MSCs cultured with ARC KD OCI-AML3 cells relative
to those cultured with control OCI-AML3 cells (Figure
1C left panel, representative image and quantification of
4 images). Although ARC knockdown sensitizes AML cells
to chemotherapeutic agents [28], it neither altered AML cell
viability nor markedly decreased cell growth (Figure 1C
right panel), suggesting that decreased association of ARC
KD OCI-AML3 cells to MSCs resulted from a decreased
adhesion property in these cells. Finally, we investigated
the role of ARC in MSCs using the in vivo human
extramedullary bone/BM model [30]. ARC KD or control
human MSCs and human endothelial colony-forming cells
(ECFC) (1:1) were mixed with matrigel and injected into the
right or left flank of NOD/SCID IL2Rg null (NSG) mice,
respectively (Figure 1D). Once the bone was established,
GFP/luciferase-labeled Molm13 cells were administered
by tail vein injection. Significantly fewer (48.3% decrease,
P = 0.016 at 7 days) leukemia cells engrafted per cm2 in
the human extramedullary bone/BM constituted with ARC
KD MSCs versus with the control MSCs (Figure 1D).
Collectively, these results indicate that ARC expression in
both AML cells and MSCs mediates interactions between
these cells.
20055

Oncotarget

ARC regulates CXCL12, CCL2, and CCL4
expression in MSCs, supporting AML cell
chemotaxis

levels of these chemokines were detected in AML cells.
While it was known that OCI-AML3 cells migrate toward
CXCL12, a migration assay showed that these cells also
migrated toward CCL2 and CCL4. This migratory activity
was inhibited by anti-CCR2 and CCR5 antibodies and small
molecule inhibitors that antagonize or compete with CCL2
and CCL4 (Figure 2B). Further, CCL2, CCL4, or CXCL12
induced the migration of cells from eight AML patient BM
samples, and this chemotaxis positively correlated with
expression of the respective receptors for these cytokines on
leukemic cells from these samples (Figure 2C). ARC KD in
the MSCs partially suppressed the migration of OCI-AML3

To better understand the mechanism(s) of the ARCregulated leukemia-stromal interactions, we determined the
expression of several chemokines in ARC KD, ARC OE,
and their respective control cells by PCR array. Among
the various C-X-C and C-C motif chemokines tested,
CXCL12, CCL2, and CCL4 were expressed at high levels
in MSCs, and their expression was greatly reduced when
ARC was knocked down in MSCs (Figure 2A). Minimal

Figure 1: ARC regulates leukemia-stromal interactions. (A) Adhesion and migration of ARC KD OCI-AML3 and ARC OE KG-1

or their control cells to MSCs. (B) Adhesion and migration of OCI-AML3 and BM cells from AML patients to ARC KD or control MSCs.
Adhesion was determined at 24 h and migration at 6 h for OCI-AML3 and 24 h for patient samples. (C) ARC KD or control OCI-AML3
cells (expressing GFP) were co-cultured with MSCs (expressing RFP) growing on the surface of bone chips. Attachment of leukemia cells
to MSCs was measured at 24 h by confocal microscopy. A representative image and the quantifications from four images are shown on the
left and viability and growth curves of ARC KD and control OCI-AML3 cells are shown on the right. (D) Molm13 cells (1 × 106) stably
expressing a dual firefly luciferase–GFP reporter were injected into the tail vein of NSG mice harboring extramedullary bone/BM developed
from either ARC KD or control human MSCs on each flank. Leukemia burden was monitored by IVIS imaging. Vec, vector control.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

20056

Oncotarget

ARC-mediated IL1β activation in AML cells
induces chemokine production in MSCs that
confer leukemia cell chemoresistance

cells, and migration was further suppressed by antibodies
and small-molecule antagonists against CCL2/CCR2 or
CCL4/CCR5 (Figure 2D).
Next, we sought to determine if MSC chemokine
expression was affected by exposure to leukemic cells.
We co-cultured MSCs and OCI-AML3 cells for 48 h and
then FACS-sorted the MSCs (CD45−90+) from the AML
cells (CD45+90−) with conservative gating (Figure 3A).
Interestingly, co-culture induced CCL2, CCL4, and
CXCL12 expression in the MSCs. This induction was
diminished when MSCs were co-cultured with ARC KD
AML cells, and increased in the presence of ARC OE AML
cells (Figure 3B). Collectively, these results suggest that
like CXCR4/CXCL12, the CCR2/CCL2 and CCR5/CCL4
receptor/chemokine axes contribute to leukemia-MSC
interactions, and that the chemokines expressed by MSCs
are regulated, at least in part, by ARC in AML cells.

We next examined cytokine expression by PCR array
in ARC KD and ARC OE cells to possibly gauge ARC’s
role in the regulation of these cytokines. Interestingly, IL1β
was overexpressed in the ARC OE AML cells and reduced
in ARC KD AML cells compared to respective vector
control cells (Figure 4A). The same assay found minimal
levels of IL1β in MSCs. Conversely, the IL1 receptor
antagonist protein, IL1RN, was higher in ARC KD, and
lower in ARC OE AML cells, than observed in control cells
(Figure 4A). As IL1RN levels were very low in these cells,
we focused on the IL1β. Protein analysis by ELISA showed
that ARC KD OCI-AML3 cells secreted less IL1β than their
respective controls (Figure 4B). Furthermore, NSG mice

Figure 2: ARC regulates CXCL12, CCL2, and CCL4 production in MSCs and promotes chemokine-mediated
leukemia-stromal interactions. (A) Expression of various C-X-C and C-C motif chemokines in ARC KD and control MSCs determined
by quantitative PCR array. (B) Chemotaxis of OCI-AML3 cells to CCL2 and CCL4 in the presence or absence of antibodies or inhibitors
against CCL2, CCR2, CCL4, and CCR5 for 4 h. (C) Correlation of CCR2, CCR5, and CXCR4 expression in BM cells from patients with
AML (n = 8) and migrations to CCL2, CCL4, and CXCL12. (D) Migration of OCI-AML3 to ARC KD or control MSCs in the presence
or absence of antibodies or inhibitors against CCL2, CCR2, CCL4, and CCR5 for 6 h. Chemotaxis to CXCL12 (100 ng/ml) was used as
positive and random migration as negative controls. hCCL2 and hCCL4, neutralizing antibodies for CCL2 and CCL4, respectively.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

20057

Oncotarget

injected with ARC KD Molm13 cells had approximately
half of human IL1β concentration in their serum (Figure
4C), while the leukemia burden was about 30% less in these
mice compared to the mice injected with control Molm13
cells after three weeks [28], suggesting that ARC may exert
some of its function through IL1β signaling.

To test this hypothesis, we treated MSCs with IL1β
or conditioned medium from AML cells with or without
an IL1β receptor antagonist (IL1βRA). Indeed, IL1β alone
or the conditioned medium from AML cells increased
the level of CCL2, CCL4, and CXCL12 expression in
MSCs. This effect was diminished when the conditioned

Figure 3: ARC in AML modulates CCL2, CCL4, and CXCL12 expression in MSCs. (A) MSCs were cultured alone or with
ARC KD OCI-AML3, ARC OE KG-1, or the respective control cells for 48 h and MSCs were FACS sorted conservatively as marked in the
boxes for CD45-CD90+ cells. (B) CCL2, CCL4, and CXCL12 levels in MSCs were determined by quantitative RT-PCR.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

20058

Oncotarget

medium from ARC KD AML cells was used, and was
further suppressed by co-treating the MSCs with IL1βRA
(Figure 4D).
To assess if cytokine expression in leukemia cells
was also regulated by MSCs, OCI-AML3 cells were cocultured for 48 h with MSCs, sorted as shown in Figure 3A,
and their IL1β expression was determined by real-time RTPCR. We found that co-culture increased the expression
of IL1β in AML cells. This effect was reduced, compared
to the control MSCs, when the leukemic cells were cocultured with ARC KD MSCs (Figure 5).
To determine the biological consequence of IL1β
blockade in leukemia/stromal interactions, we next
performed an adhesion/migration assay and found that
inhibition of IL1β by IL1βRA suppressed the adhesion/
migration of leukemia cells to MSCs (Figure 6A). We

previously demonstrated that ARC KD AML cells are
more sensitive and ARC OE AML cells more resistant to
various therapeutic agent-induced apoptosis including
Ara-C [28]. To determine whether ARC-regulated IL1β,
which has a role in leukemia-stromal interactions, also
impacts chemosensitivity, we next treated OCI-AML3 cells
with Ara-C in the absence or presence of MSCs and/or
IL1βRA. As expected, the presence of MSCs significantly
(P = 0.02 and 0.004, respectively) protected the leukemia
cells from Ara-C-induced cell death at 48 and 72 h
(Figure 6B). Inhibition of IL1β had little effect on Ara-Cinduced apoptosis when OCI-AML3 cells were cultured
alone. However, blocking IL1β by IL1βRA markedly
abolished the protection of OCI-AML3 by MSC co-culture
following a similar exposure to Ara-C (Figure 6B, P = 0.13
and 0.06, respectively).

Figure 4: ARC regulates IL1β in AML cells and triggers chemokine productions by MSCs. (A) Cytokine expressions in

ARC KD, ARC OE, and the control AML cells determined by real time RT-PCR. (B) The expression of IL1β in the supernatant of ARC
KD and control OCI-AML3 cells determined by ELISA. (C) The expression of human IL1β in the serum of NSG mice three weeks after
the mice were injected with ARC KD or control Molm13 cells determined by ELISA. (D) The expression of CCL2, CCL4, and CXCL12
in MSCs treated with IL1β (100 ng/ml) or conditioned medium from control or ARC KD OCI-AML3 cells with or without IL1βRA for
24 h. *P < 0.05.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

20059

Oncotarget

ARC regulates NFκB signaling in leukemia cells
and MSCs

less in magnitude compared with the increase in ARC
levels, suggesting that ARC was possibly interacting with
other co-factor(s) to activate NFκB. This is supported by the
structural analysis showing that the disordered C-terminal
of ARC (Figure 7C) contains several-binding consensus
motifs such as a TRAF2-binding motif (TPEE, positions
149–152) and a SH2-domain binding motif (YDPP,
positions 105–108) (Figure 7C, underlined in blue). It may
also reflect that NFκB is regulated at multiple levels.

Aberrant expression of caspase activation and
recruitment domain (CARD) proteins has been implicated
in the etiology of various cancers [31]. These proteins
have diverse functions, such as inducing IL1β by caspase1-mediated cleavage and activating NFκB [31, 32]. Our
results have shown that ARC transcriptionally induces the
expression of IL1β. Given that ARC regulates the expression
of multiple NFκB-targeted cytokines/chemokines including
IL1β and CCL2 (Figures 2 and 4), this suggests that
ARC might exert this activity via activation of NFκB.
Our computational three-dimensional structure analysis
(Figure 7A) and the recently published experimental
structure of ARC residues 1–95 [33] corroborated that the
N-terminal domain of ARC adopted a CARD domain fold.
We first compared the expression of ARC and NFκB
in our RPPA data set and did not find a correlation between
ARC and NFκB protein expression. This was not surprising
since the NFκB determined in AML samples by RPPA
was the total, not the active form (nuclear localization/
phosphorylated) of the protein. We next determined the
cytosolic and nuclear protein levels of NFκBp65 and found
that nuclear NFκBp65 levels are lower in ARC KD MSCs
and OCI-AML3 cells and higher in ARC OE KG-1 cells
than controls (Figure 7B, upper panel). We then examined
ARC and p-NFκBp65 protein levels by CyTOF mass
cytometry and found that p-NFκBp65 levels are lower in
ARC KD MSCs and OCI-AML3 cells and higher in ARC
OE KG-1 cells compared to controls. In the cells that had
high levels of ARC protein there was also a high expression
of the p-NFκBp65 protein (Figure 7B, lower panel).
Although nuclear NFκBp65 and p-NFκBp65 expression
increased in ARC OE KG-1 cells, the increase was much

DISCUSSION
The anti-apoptotic protein ARC may have cellular
roles beyond apoptosis regulation. For example, it has been
reported to promote breast tumorigenesis, metastasis, and
chemoresistance [34], and was identified in a microarray
analysis as a predictor of invasion and metastasis in human
cancers [35]. However, the mechanism of action has
not been elucidated. The results presented in this report
support these findings, and importantly, demonstrate that
ARC regulates leukemia/stromal interactions likely via
several NFκB/IL1β-mediated receptor/chemokine axes
that seem to further support AML cell chemoresistance.
We first demonstrated that AML cells migrate toward
and associate with MSCs in an ARC-dependent manner
in vitro, then in vivo using a human extramedullary BM
mouse model [30, 36]. This model allowed us to genetically
modulate genes of interest in the human extramedullary
microenvironment. Using this model, we showed that
ARC in MSCs is required for full leukemia engraftment.
The results strongly support the role of ARC in MSCs as a
major regulator of microenvironmental interactions.
Having established the importance of ARC in AML
cell-MSC interactions, we queried chemokine/cytokine
expression in both MSCs and leukemic cells to determine

Figure 5: MSCs induce the expression of IL1β in AML cells. OCI-AML3 cells were cultured alone or co-cultured with ARC KD
or control MSCs for 48 h. CD45+CD90− AML cells were FACS-sorted from the floaters (collected from cells in the suspension and after
PBS wash) and attached (collected by trypsinization) cells. IL1β RNA levels were determined in sorted OCI-AML3 cells and the cells
cultured alone by real-time RT-PCR.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

20060

Oncotarget

if these cells exchange chemical signals to mediate such
interactions. We discovered that chemokines CCL2, CCL4,
and CXCL12 are regulated in MSCs in an ARC-dependent
manner, their cognate receptors CCR2, CCR5, and CXCR4
were expressed in AML cells, and that inhibition of receptor/
ligand interactions blocked AML cell migration. Next, we
observed that the expression of chemokine in MSCs was
also affected by ARC expression in the leukemic cells.
Further investigation led us to IL1β, a cytokine that is
upregulated in AML cells in an ARC-dependent manner
and also appears to stimulate production of the same three
cytokines from MSCs. Additionally, IL1β expression in
leukemic cells was increased by co-culture with MSCs,
and neutralization of IL1β signaling by antagonizing IL1R
reduced migration and adhesion of AML cells to MSCs. Our
observation that MSCs protected AML cells from killing
by chemotherapeutic compound Ara-C, but diminished
when IL1β was blocked, allowed us to conclude that this
circuitry is crucial for chemoprotection of AML cells by
MSCs. Collectively, these results strongly suggest a model
of reciprocal interaction by which ARC in both MSCs and

AML cells promotes expression of chemokines via IL1β
that foster a tight association between these two cell types
and confer AML cell chemoprotection (Figure 7D).
We also implicate NFκB as an intermediate player
in this network, showing that levels of nuclear/activated
NFκB decrease in both ARC knockdown MSCs and AML
cells. Our results suggest that ARC may activate NFκB
in both cell types, leading to upregulation of IL1β in
AML cells and CCL2, CCL4, and CXCL12 in MSCs. It
is already established that IL1β is a transcriptional target
of NFκB [37], and that ARC contains a CARD domain
typical of NFκB-activating proteins [38]. Interestingly,
when ARC was overexpressed in KG-1 cells, we did not
see a proportional induction of NFκB activation and IL1β
expression or increase in cell migration/adhesion. This
could be because ARC may have other interaction partners
required for full NFκB activation due to the presence of
other regulatory binding domains, such as TRAF2, within
the ARC protein sequence.
We identify that, in addition to the well-known
CXCR4/CXCL12 axis, CCR2/CCL2 and CCR5/CCL4 also

Figure 6: Inhibition of IL1β suppresses adhesion and chemotaxis of leukemia cells to MSCs and abolishes
chemoprotection of MSCs to leukemia cells. (A) OCI-AML3 cells were added to MSCs which were set the night before and treated

with ILβRA (100 ng/ml). Cell adhesion was determined after 24 h. OCI-AML3 cells were pre-treated with ILβRA (100 ng/ml) for 1 h and
their migration towards MSCs was determined at 6 h. (B) OCI-AML3 cells, cultured alone or with MSCs were treated with Ara-C in the
presence or absence of ILβRA (100 ng/ml). Apoptosis was assessed at 48 and 72 h by flow cytometry after staining cells with annexin V
(AnnV) and 7-aminoactinomycin D (7AAD).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

20061

Oncotarget

drive leukemia/stromal interactions. Specifically, CCL2
is one of the most highly expressed chemokines in BMderived MSCs, and its expression is regulated through ARC
in MSCs and by ARC-induced IL1β from leukemia cells.
Further, the CCL2 receptor, CCR2 was found to be highly
expressed on BM cells from AML patients, and migration

of AML blasts towards CCL2 strongly correlated with their
CCR2 expression. Similar results were observed for CCL4
and its receptor CCR5, albeit the CCR5 expression was
lower than CCR2 in the AML cells. This is the first report
on the important role of ARC in the regulation of the CCR2/
CCL2 and CCR5/CCL4 axes in leukemia and stromal cells.

Figure 7: ARC regulates NFκBp65 signaling. (A) N-terminal region of ARC adopts an atypical CARD domain fold where
the sixth helix is unfolded. The model shown is color-ramped from the N-terminus (blue, residue 1) to the C-terminus (red,
residue 95). The program SwissModel was used to model residues 87-90 which are not included in the PDB model (entry
4UZ0). (B) The expression levels of NFκBp65 protein in cytoplasmic/nuclear fractions determined by western blot and
the expression levels of p-NFκBp65 and ARC proteins by CyTOF in ARC KD and OE cells. (C) The C-terminal of ARC
is most likely disordered. YDPP (positions 105–108) is a SH2-domains binding motif and TPEE (positions 149–152) is a
TRAF2-binding consensus motif (both underlined with blue). Asterisks (*) identify the start and end of the stably folded
CARD domain of ARC in the crystallographic structure 4UZ0. (D) A putative mechanism of ARC-regulated leukemia-stromal
interactions through NFκB/IL1β signaling.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

20062

Oncotarget

These data may explain, at least in part, why the disruption
of CXCR4/CXCL12 axis alone has limited effect in the
mobilization of leukemia cells, including leukemic stem
cells, from their BM microenvironment.
IL1β has previously been linked to AML, promoting
apoptosis-resistance in AML blasts [39], and the IL-1
receptor accessory protein (IL1RAP) is reportedly
overexpressed in AML stem/progenitor cells [40].
Furthermore, targeting of IL1RAP with a neutralizing
antibody selectively killed AML stem cells [41]. These
data support the critical role of IL1β signaling in AML cell
survival in the BM microenvironment. Likewise, NFκB is
constitutively activated in primitive AML cells [42], and it
reportedly induces VCAM-1 expression to regulate MSC
accumulation at tumor sites [43]. Furthermore, VCAM-1/
VLA-4 mediated leukemia-stromal interactions activate
NFκB, which confers chemoresistance [36]. It is possible
that additional chemokines, cytokines, and microRNAs
are also important for ARC-mediated leukemia/stromal
interactions and chemoresistance in AML cells, which
warrants further investigation. The results reported here can
explain in part the diverse biological functions of ARC, and
suggest that therapeutic inhibition of this protein potentially
represents a novel approach to the treatment of AML as an
adjuvant to standard chemotherapy.

cells and MSCs were transduced with lentivirus delivering
a non-specific control vector (Open Biosystems). To
generate ARC OE KG-1 cells, the ARC coding sequence
was excised from EGFP-Myp (kindly provided by Dr. S.
Stamm, University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY) with
MluI-BglII and its ends filled in with Klenow before it was
cloned into pCDH-CMV-MCS-EF1-copGFP (SystemBio,
Mountain View, CA) between the blunted NheI-NotI sites.
The resulting lentiviral vector was designated pCDHCMV-ARC-EF1-copGFP. KG-1 cells were infected with
concentrated lentivirus transduced with either pCDH-CMVARC-EF1-copGFP or pCDH empty vector generated by a
process similar to that just described; 8 µg/ml Polybrene
(Sigma Chemical Co., St. Louis, MO) was included to
enhance lentiviral infections. Stably transduced KG-1 cells
were sorted to obtain a homogeneous population of ARC
OE CopGFP-positive cells. KD and OE were verified by
western blot analysis and by real-time RT-PCR.
Fresh BM samples from high blast AML patients
were acquired after written, informed consent according
to the Declaration of Helsinki. The study protocol was
approved by The University of Texas MD Anderson
Cancer Center Institutional Review Board. Mononuclear
cells were purified from the patient samples using a FicollHypaque (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO) density-gradient
centrifugation. All cells were cultured in RPMI 1640
medium supplemented with 10% heat-inactivated fetal
calf serum, 2 mM L-glutamine, 100 U/ml penicillin, and
100 µg/ml streptomycin.
OCI-AML3 cells were treated with Ara-C, with
or without MSC co-culture and with or without IL1βRA
for 72 h. MSCs were treated with IL1β or a conditioned
medium for 24 h. Recombinant IL1βRA and ILIβ were
purchased from PeproTech (Rocky Hill, NJ).

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Cell culture
OCI-AML3 cells were provided by Dr. M. Minden
(Ontario Cancer Institute, Toronto, Ontario, Canada). KG-1
cells were purchased from the American Type Culture
Collection (ATCC, Manassas, VA), and Molm13 cells were
purchased from the German Collection of Microorganisms
and Cell Cultures (Braunschweig, Germany). Stable ARC
KD OCI-AML3 cells and ARC OE KG-1 cells were
generated as described [28]. Early-passage MSCs were
isolated from the BM of healthy subjects [44], and stable
ARC KD MSCs were generated as described previously
[45]. Briefly, ARC was knocked down in OCI-AML3
and MSCs by lentiviral transduction using gene-specific
shRNAmir-green fluorescent protein (GFP)-expressing
transfer vectors: clone V3LHS_337663, targeting residues
732-750 on RefSeq NM_003946.4 (Open Biosystems,
Huntsville, AL). Lentivirus was prepared by co-transfection
of HEK293T cells (ATCC) with an equal molar mix of
transfer vector and packaging plasmids (psPAX2 and
pMD2.G; Addgene, Cambridge, MA) using JetPrime
transfection reagent as directed by the manufacturer
(Polyplus, Illkirch, France). Fresh lentiviral supernatants
were passed through 0.45-micron-pore surfactant-free
cellulose acetate membranes and then used immediately
to infect OCI-AML3 cells or MSCs. Infected cells were
subjected to selection with puromycin (Invivogen, San
Diego, CA) starting at 1 µg/ml. As controls, OCI-AML3
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Adhesion assay
For MSC adhesion, leukemia cells were added to
MSCs (AML cells: MSCs = 4:1) that were plated the night
before and cultured for 24 h in 5% CO2 at 37°C. Floating
leukemia cells (in suspension plus collected after a wash
with phosphate-buffered saline) and attached leukemia
cells (collected by trypsinization) were counted by flow
cytometry after staining with human CD45 antibody
in the presence of counting beads (purchased from Life
Technologies, Grand Island, NY). Adhesion was defined
as viable CD45+ attached cells/total viable leukemia cells
(floating + attached CD45+ cells).
For the three-dimensional MSC-bone chip adhesion
assay, cancellous bone chips (two to four chips, 2 mm3,
purchased from Medtronic, Minneapolis, MN) were
incubated with RFP-expressing MSCs (2 × 106 in 1 ml)
overnight in 5% CO2 at 37°C. Bone chips/MSCs were
washed with medium to remove the unattached cells and
then placed in tissue culture plates. GFP-expressing OCIAML3 cells were added. The mixtures were incubated
20063

Oncotarget

overnight in 5% CO2 at 37°C. The chips were gently washed
with medium to remove unattached leukemia cells. Images
were captured using an Olympus confocal microscope
FV1000 at 100× magnification and analyzed using InForm
2.0 (Perkin Elmer, Waltham, MA) software. A threshold
for positivity was set and the pixels above threshold were
counted.  The positive pixels were then summed and
compared with four images from each group to determine
expression differences. 

Fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS)

Migration assays

RT-PCR

MSCs (5000 cells/ml) were plated in the lower
chamber of trans-well plates (5 µm) and cultured for
24 h. Leukemia cells, 0.4 × 106 (2 × 106/ml), were added
in the insert and cultured for 6 to 24 h. The percentage of
migration was defined as viable CD45+ cells in the lower
chamber/total viable leukemia cells in insert and lower
chamber. For migration toward ligands, chemokines were
added to the lower chamber and the migration of leukemia
cells was measured at 4 to 6 h. CCL2, CCL4, and CXCL12
ligands, neutralizing antibodies for CCL2 (hCCL2) and
CCL4 (hCCL4) and antagonist for CCR5 (maraviroc)
were purchased from R & D Systems Inc. (Minneapolis,
MN). Neutralizing antibodies for CCR2 and CCR5 were
purchased from Abcam (Cambridge, MA), and antagonist
for CCR2 was purchased from Santa Cruz Biotechnology,
Inc. (Dallas, TX).

RNA isolation and RT-PCR were performed as
previously described [46] with minor modifications. The
PCR amplification mixture (20 µl) contained cDNA, a
primer pair of human cytokine primer library II primers
for pathway PCR array (Real Time Primers, LLC, Elkins
Park, PA), and SYBR Green PCR master mix (Applied
Biosystems, Foster City, CA). The abundance of each
transcript relative to that of GAPDH or actin was calculated
using the 2−ΔCt method, where ΔCt is the mean Ct of the
transcript of interest minus the mean Ct of the transcript
for GAPDH or actin.

AML cells (4 × 106 at 0.2 × 106/ml) were added to
MSCs (1 × 106 at 5000 cells/cm2) plated the night before
and co-cultured for 48 h. CD45+/CD90− leukemia cells
and CD45−CD90+ MSCs were FACS-sorted (FACS Aria
II, BD Biosciences, San Jose, CA) after trypsinization and
stained with CD45 and CD90 antibodies and subjected to
RNA isolation and real time RT-PCR.

Protein expression and localization
Western blot analysis was performed as previously
described [28]. Nuclear and cytoplasmic fractions were
prepared as previously described [47]. The NFκBp65
antibody was purchased from Cell Signaling Technology
(Danvers, MA). Histone H3 (antibody purchased from
Cell Signaling Technology) was used as loading control
for the nuclear fraction, β-actin or α-tubulin for cytoplasm,
and β-actin for total lysate. Signals were detected using the
Odyssey Infrared Imaging System (LI-COR Biosciences,
Lincoln, NE) and quantified using the Odyssey software
(version 3.0; LI-COR Biosciences). Levels of ARC and
phospho-NFκBp65 (p-NFκBp65) proteins in ARC KD
and OE cells were also determined by CyTOF mass
cytometry (Fluidigm, San Francisco, CA) after cells were
stained with a panel of antibodies for cell surface markers
and intracellular molecules as previously described [48].
ARC antibody (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Inc.) was
tagged with metal 170Er and p-NFκBp65 antibody (Cell
Signaling Technology) with 171Yb.
The expression of cell surface CCR2, CCR5 and
CXCR4 was determined by flow cytometry after cells
were stained with their respective antibodies and IgG
controls and results were expressed as relative mean
fluorescence intensity (rMFI) determined by (MFI of
antibody staining – MFI of IgG)/MFI of IgG. Antibodies
against CCR2 and CCR5 were purchased from R & D
Systems Inc. and CXCR4 from bioscience, Inc. (San
Diego, CA).
The IL1β levels in culture media and mouse serum
were determined by Quantikine human IL1β ELISA

Cell viability assay
Apoptosis was assessed by phosphatidylserine
externalization after annexin-V-Cy5 (BD Biosciences)
staining using a FACSArray Bioanalyzer (BD Biosciences)
flow cytometer. Cell membrane integrity was simultaneously
assessed by 7-aminoactinomycin D exclusion in the annexin
V-stained cells. For AML cells co-cultured with MSCs, cells
were trypsinized and stained with CD45-APC-H7, CD90PE, and annexin-V-Cy5. Apoptosis in AML cells was
determined by flow cytometric analysis of annexin-V-Cy5
positivity in CD45+CD90– cells.

In vivo study
The in vivo human leukemia-stromal interaction
study was carried out using a human extramedullary
bone/BM model in NSG mice developed and validated by
our group [30, 36]. Briefly, ARC KD or control human
MSCs and human ECFC (1:1) were mixed with matrigel
(Millipore, Billerica, MA) then injected subcutaneously
into flanks of NSG mice. 10-week later, 1 × 106 Molm13
cells expressing a dual firefly luciferase–GFP reporter
were transplanted into mice by tail vein injection. Tumor
burden was monitored using the IVIS-200 noninvasive
bioluminescence in vivo imaging system (Xenogen,
Hopkinton, MA) after injecting the mice with luciferin.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

20064

Oncotarget

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST

kit (R & D Systems Inc.) following manufacturer’s
instruction. The sera used were collected from NSG mice
3 weeks after injected with ARC KD or control Molm13
cells as previously described [28], and frozen at −20°C.

The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

Authors’ contributions

Structural analysis of ARC

BZC conceptualized and designed the study and
wrote the paper; PYM and YC did experiments and
analyzed data; DHM, HM, RJ, and VR did experiments;
STA, JEL, JKB, and SK analyzed data; MA wrote the
paper and supported the study.

The compatibility of the ARC N-terminal sequence
with CARD folds was assessed through three-dimensional
structural modeling using iTasser (http://zhanglab.ccmb.
med.umich.edu/I-TASSER/) and Swiss Model (http://
swissmodel.expasy.org/) programs, based on 27–29%
sequence identity with experimentally established
structures of CARD domains (PDB accession numbers
2b1w, 2nz7 and 4jqw). Protein structural disorder was
predicted using the PrDOS meta-server (http://prdos.hgc.
jp/cgi-bin/top.cgi). ELM (http://elm.eu.org/) was used for
prediction of function sites within the protein sequence.
During publication of our study, the ARC CARD domain
crystal structure was published (PDB entry 4UZ0) [33]
corroborating our analysis.

REFERENCES
 1.	Morrison SJ, Spradling AC. Stem cells and niches:
mechanisms that promote stem cell maintenance throughout
life. Cell. 2008; 132:598–611.
  2.	 Konopleva M, Tabe Y, Zeng Z, Andreeff M. Therapeutic
targeting of microenvironmental interactions in leukemia:
mechanisms and approaches. Drug Resist Updat. 2009;
12:103–113.
  3.	 Voermans C, van Heese WP, de Jong I, Gerritsen WR, van der
Schoot CE. Migratory behavior of leukemic cells from acute
myeloid leukemia patients. Leukemia. 2002; 16:650–657.

Statistical analyses
All experiments were conducted in triplicate and
the results are expressed as mean ± standard deviation
(error bars). Correlations are expressed as R2. Statistical
differences between groups were determined using paired
Student’s t-test with a P-value < 0.05 being considered
statistically significant. For determining protein expression
using CyTOF mass cytometry, data were analyzed with
viSNE software (v1.1, released February, 2015) and
association maps were generated with all cell surface and
intracellular markers [49].

  4.	 Burger JA, Spoo A, Dwenger A, Burger M, Behringer D.
CXCR4 chemokine receptors (CD184) and alpha4beta1
integrins mediate spontaneous migration of human CD34+
progenitors and acute myeloid leukaemia cells beneath
marrow stromal cells (pseudoemperipolesis). Br J Haematol.
2003; 122:579–589.
  5.	 Tavor S, Petit I, Porozov S, Avigdor A, Dar A, Leider-Trejo L,
Shemtov N, Deutsch V, Naparstek E, Nagler A, Lapidot T.
CXCR4 regulates migration and development of human
acute myelogenous leukemia stem cells in transplanted
NOD/SCID mice. Ca Res. 2004; 64:2817–2824.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

  6.	 Avigdor A, Goichberg P, Shivtiel S, Dar A, Peled A, Samira S,
Kollet O, Hershkoviz R, Alon R, Hardan I, Ben-Hur H, Naor D,
Nagler A, et al. CD44 and hyaluronic acid cooperate with
SDF-1 in the trafficking of human CD34+ stem/progenitor
cells to bone marrow. Blood. 2004; 103:2981–2989.

We thank Numsen Hail, Jr. and Erica Di Pierro
for editing the manuscript and Deanna A. Alexander for
assisting with its preparation.

FUNDING

  7.	 Jin L, Hope KJ, Zhai Q, Smadja-Joffe F, Dick JE. Targeting
of CD44 eradicates human acute myeloid leukemic stem
cells. Nat Med. 2006; 12:1167–1174.

This work was supported in part by grants from the
National Institutes of Health (P01 CA055164 and MD
Anderson’s Cancer Center Support Grant CA016672) and
the Paul and Mary Haas Chair in Genetics to MA and by
the University Cancer Foundation via the Institutional
Research Grant program at the University of Texas MD
Anderson Cancer Center to BZC. The research by STA
reported in this publication was supported by funding from
King Abdullah University of Science and Technology
(KAUST).

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

  8.	 Konoplev S, Rassidakis GZ, Estey E, Kantarjian H, Liakou CI,
Huang X, Xiao L, Andreeff M, Konopleva M, Medeiros LJ.
Overexpression of CXCR4 predicts adverse overall and
event-free survival in patients with unmutated FLT3 acute
myeloid leukemia with normal karyotype. Cancer. 2007;
109:1152–1156.
  9.	 Spoo AC, Lubbert M, Wierda WG, Burger JA. CXCR4 is a
prognostic marker in acute myelogenous leukemia. Blood.
2007; 109:786–791.

20065

Oncotarget

10.	 Kalinkovich A, Tavor S, Avigdor A, Kahn J, Brill A, Petit I,
Goichberg P, Tesio M, Netzer N, Naparstek E, Hardan I,
Nagler A, Resnick I, et al. Functional CXCR4-expressing
microparticles and SDF-1 correlate with circulating acute
myelogenous leukemia cells. Cancer Res. 2006; 66:
11013–11020.

nonhomotypic death-fold interactions. Mol Cell. 2004;
15:901–912.
21.	 Gustafsson AB, Tsai JG, Logue SE, Crow MT, Gottlieb RA.
Apoptosis repressor with caspase recruitment domain protects
against cell death by interfering with Bax activation. J Biol
Chem. 2004; 279:21233–21238.

11.	 Hong X, Jiang F, Kalkanis SN, Zhang ZG, Zhang XP,
DeCarvalho AC, Katakowski M, Bobbitt K, Mikkelsen T,
Chopp M. SDF-1 and CXCR4 are up-regulated by VEGF
and contribute to glioma cell invasion. Cancer Lett. 2006;
236:39–45.

22.	 Foo RS, Chan LK, Kitsis RN, Bennett MR. Ubiquitination
and degradation of the anti-apoptotic protein ARC by
MDM2. J Biol Chem. 2007; 282:5529–5535.
23.	 Wang M, Qanungo S, Crow MT, Watanabe M, Nieminen AL.
Apoptosis repressor with caspase recruitment domain (ARC)
is expressed in cancer cells and localizes to nuclei. FEBS
Lett. 2005; 579:2411–2415.

12.	 Ling X, Spaeth E, Chen Y, Shi Y, Zhang W, Schober W,
Hail N, Jr., Konopleva M, Andreeff M. The CXCR4
antagonist AMD3465 regulates oncogenic signaling and
invasiveness in vitro and prevents breast cancer growth and
metastasis in vivo. PLoS One. 2013; 8:e58426.

24.	 Mercier I, Vuolo M, Jasmin JF, Medina CM, Williams M,
Mariadason JM, Qian H, Xue X, Pestell RG, Lisanti MP,
Kitsis RN. ARC (apoptosis repressor with caspase
recruitment domain) is a novel marker of human colon
cancer. Cell Cycle. 2008; 7:1640–1647.

13.	 Zeng ZH, Shi YX, Samudio IJ, Wang RY, Ling XY, Frolova O,
Levis M, Rubin JB, Negrin RR, Estey EH, Konoplev S,
Andreeff M, Konopleva M. Targeting the leukemia
microenvironment by CXCR4 inhibition overcomes
resistance to kinase inhibitors and chemotherapy in AML.
Blood. 2009; 113:6215–6224.

25.	 Ziegler DS, Wright RD, Kesari S, Lemieux ME, Tran MA,
Jain M, Zawel L, Kung AL. Resistance of human
glioblastoma multiforme cells to growth factor inhibitors is
overcome by blockade of inhibitor of apoptosis proteins. J
Clin Invest. 2008; 118:3109–3122.

14.	 Uy GL, Rettig MP, Motabi IH, McFarland K, Trinkaus KM,
Hladnik LM, Kulkarni S, Abboud CN, Cashen AF, StockerlGoldstein KE, Vij R, Westervelt P, DiPersio JF. A phase 1/2
study of chemosensitization with the CXCR4 antagonist
plerixafor in relapsed or refractory acute myeloid leukemia.
Blood. 2012; 119:3917–3924.

26.	 Mercier I, Vuolo M, Madan R, Xue X, Levalley AJ, Ashton AW,
Jasmin JF, Czaja MT, Lin EY, Armstrong RC, Pollard JW,
Kitsis RN. ARC, an apoptosis suppressor limited to terminally
differentiated cells, is induced in human breast cancer and
confers chemo- and radiation-resistance. Cell Death Differ.
2005; 12:682–686.
27.	 Carter BZ, Qiu YH, Zhang N, Coombes KR, Mak DH,
Thomas DA, Ravandi F, Kantarjian HM, Koller E, Andreeff M,
Kornblau SM. Expression of ARC (apoptosis repressor with
caspase recruitment domain), an antiapoptotic protein, is
strongly prognostic in AML. Blood. 2011; 117:780–787.
28.	 Mak PY, Mak DH, Mu H, Shi Y, Ruvolo P, Ruvolo V,
Jacamo R, Burks JK, Wei W, Huang X, Kornblau SM,
Andreeff M, Carter BZ. Apoptosis repressor with caspase
recruitment domain is regulated by MAPK/PI3K and
confers drug resistance and survival advantage to AML.
Apoptosis. 2014; 19:698–707.
29.	 Mak PY, Mak DH, Kojima K, Dilip A, Ruvolo VR, Jacamo R,
Andreeff M, Carter BZ. ARC suppresses cell death by
antagonizing p53 function and suppressing TRAIL in AML
cells. ASH. New Orleans. 2013.
30.	 Chen Y, Jacamo R, Shi YX, Wang RY, Battula VL, Konoplev S,
Strunk D, Hofmann NA, Reinisch A, Konopleva M,
Andreeff M. Human extramedullary bone marrow in mice: a
novel in vivo model of genetically controlled hematopoietic
microenvironment. Blood. 2012; 119:4971–4980.

15.	 Andreeff M, Zeng Z, Kelly MA, Wang R-Y, McQueen TJ,
Duvvuri S, Nowshad G, Borthakur G, Burger JA, Kida TM,
Jabbour E, Cortes JE, Kantarjian H, et al. Targeting
microenvironment-mediated resistance in leukemias: Phase
I trial of mobilization and elimination of FLT3-ITD+ acute
myelogenous leukemia (AML) stem/progenitor cells
by plerixafor/g-CSF/sorafenib. J Clin Oncol. 2012; 30:
(suppl; abstr TPS6635).
16.	 Nervi B, Ramirez P, Rettig MP, Uy GL, Holt MS, Ritchey JK,
Prior JL, Piwnica-Worms D, Bridger G, Ley TJ, DiPersio JF.
Chemosensitization of acute myeloid leukemia (AML)
following mobilization by the CXCR4 antagonist
AMD3100. Blood. 2009; 113:6206–6214.
17.	 Konopleva MY, Jordan CT. Leukemia stem cells and
microenvironment: biology and therapeutic targeting. J Clin
Oncol. 2011; 29:591–599.
18.	 Heikaus S, Kempf T, Mahotka C, Gabbert HE, Ramp U.
Caspase-8 and its inhibitors in RCCs in vivo: the prominent
role of ARC. Apoptosis. 2008; 13:938–949.
19.	 Koseki T, Inohara N, Chen S, Nunez G. ARC, an inhibitor
of apoptosis expressed in skeletal muscle and heart that
interacts selectively with caspases. Proc Natl Acad Sci
USA. 1998; 95:5156–5160.

31.	 Damiano JS, Reed JC. CARD proteins as therapeutic targets
in cancer. Curr Drug Targets. 2004; 5:367–374.

20.	 Nam YJ, Mani K, Ashton AW, Peng CF, Krishnamurthy B,
Hayakawa Y, Lee P, Korsmeyer SJ, Kitsis RN. Inhibition
of both the extrinsic and intrinsic death pathways through

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

32.	 Jiang C, Lin X. Regulation of NF-kappaB by the CARD
proteins. Immunol Rev. 2012; 246:141–153.

20066

Oncotarget

33.	 Jang TH, Kim SH, Jeong JH, Kim S, Kim YG, Park HH.
Crystal structure of caspase recruiting domain (CARD) of
apoptosis repressor with CARD (ARC) and its implication
in inhibition of apoptosis. Sci Rep. 2015; 5:9847.
34.	 Medina-Ramirez CM, Goswami S, Smirnova T, Bamira D,
Benson B, Ferrick N, Segall J, Pollard JW, Kitsis RN.
Apoptosis inhibitor ARC promotes breast tumorigenesis,
metastasis, and chemoresistance. Cancer Res. 2011; 71:
7705–7715.

42.	 Guzman ML, Neering SJ, Upchurch D, Grimes B, Howard DS,
Rizzieri DA, Luger SM, Jordan CT. Nuclear factorkappaB is constitutively activated in primitive human acute
myelogenous leukemia cells. Blood. 2001; 98:2301–2307.
43.	 Uchibori R, Tsukahara T, Mizuguchi H, Saga Y, Urabe M,
Mizukami H, Kume A, Ozawa K. NF-kappaB Activity
regulates mesenchymal stem cell accumulation at tumor
sites. Cancer Res. 2013; 73:364–372.
44.	 Studeny M, Marini FC, Champlin RE, Zompetta C, Fidler IJ,
Andreeff M. Bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells
as vehicles for interferon-beta delivery into tumors. Cancer
Res. 2002; 62:3603–3608.

35.	 Tamoto E, Tada M, Murakawa K, Takada M, Shindo G,
Teramoto K, Matsunaga A, Komuro K, Kanai M, Kawakami A,
Fujiwara Y, Kobayashi N, Shirata K, et al. Gene-expression
profile changes correlated with tumor progression and lymph
node metastasis in esophageal cancer. Clin Cancer Res. 2004;
10:3629–3638.

45.	 Mak PY, Mak DH, Ruvolo V, Jacamo R, Kornblau SM,
Kantarjian H, Andreeff M, Carter BZ. Apoptosis repressor
with caspase recruitment domain modulates second
mitochondrial-derived activator of caspases mimetic-induced
cell death through BIRC2/MAP3K14 signalling in acute
myeloid leukaemia. Br J Haematol. 2014; 167:376–384.

36.	 Jacamo R, Chen Y, Wang Z, Ma W, Zhang M, Spaeth EL,
Wang Y, Battula VL, Mak PY, Schallmoser K, Ruvolo P,
Schober WD, Shpall EJ, et al. Reciprocal leukemia-stroma
VCAM-1/VLA-4-dependent activation of NF-kappaB
mediates chemoresistance. Blood. 2014; 123:2691–2702.

46.	 Carter BZ, Mak DH, Wang Z, Ma W, Mak PY, Andreeff M,
Davis RE. XIAP downregulation promotes caspasedependent inhibition of proteasome activity in AML cells.
Leukemia Res. 2013; 37:974–979.

37.	 Pahl HL. Activators and target genes of Rel/NF-kappaB
transcription factors. Oncogene. 1999; 18:6853–6866.
38.	 Napetschnig J, Wu H. Molecular basis of NF-kappaB
signaling. Annu Rev Biophys. 2013; 42:443–468.

47.	 Zhang B, Li M, McDonald T, Holyoake TL, Moon RT,
Campana D, Shultz L, Bhatia R. Microenvironmental
protection of CML stem and progenitor cells from tyrosine
kinase inhibitors through N-cadherin and Wnt-beta-catenin
signaling. Blood. 2013; 121:1824–1838.

39.	 Turzanski J, Grundy M, Russell NH, Pallis M. Interleukin1beta maintains an apoptosis-resistant phenotype in
the blast cells of acute myeloid leukaemia via multiple
pathways. Leukemia. 2004; 18:1662–1670.

48.	 Han L, Qiu P, Zeng Z, Jorgensen JL, Mak DH, Burks JK,
Schober W, McQueen TJ, Cortes J, Tanner SD, Roboz GJ,
Kantarjian HM, Kornblau SM, et al. Single-cell mass
cytometry reveals intracellular survival/proliferative signaling
in FLT3-ITD-mutated AML stem/progenitor cells. Cytometry
A. 2015; 87:346–356.

40.	 Barreyro L, Will B, Bartholdy B, Zhou L, Todorova TI,
Stanley RF, Ben-Neriah S, Montagna C, Parekh S,
Pellagatti A, Boultwood J, Paietta E, Ketterling RP, et al.
Overexpression of IL-1 receptor accessory protein in stem
and progenitor cells and outcome correlation in AML and
MDS. Blood. 2012; 120: 1290–1298.

49.	 Amir el AD, Davis KL, Tadmor MD, Simonds EF, Levine JH,
Bendall SC, Shenfeld DK, Krishnaswamy S, Nolan GP,
Pe’er D. viSNE enables visualization of high dimensional
single-cell data and reveals phenotypic heterogeneity of
leukemia. Nat Biotechnol. 2013; 31:545–552.

41.	 Askmyr M, Agerstam H, Hansen N, Gordon S, Arvanitakis A,
Rissler M, Juliusson G, Richter J, Jaras M, Fioretos T.
Selective killing of candidate AML stem cells by antibody
targeting of IL1RAP. Blood. 2013; 121:3709–3713.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

20067

Oncotarget

