Research Article

A Novel Mechanism of Resistance to Epidermal Growth Factor
Receptor Antagonism In vivo
1,2,3

4

5

Ashwani Rajput, Alan P. Koterba, Jeffrey I. Kreisberg, Jason M. Foster,
7
2
James K.V. Willson, and Michael G. Brattain

6

Departments of 1Surgical Oncology and 2Pharmacology and Therapeutics, Roswell Park Cancer Institute, 3Department of Surgery,
The State University of New York at Buffalo, Buffalo, New York; 4Department of Medicine, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor,
Michigan; 5Department of Surgery, The University of Texas at San Antonio, San Antonio, Texas; 6Department of Surgery,
Creighton University, Omaha, Nebraska; and 7Simmons Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of Texas
Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas

lins, and transforming growth factor-a (TGFa) activate EGFR by
binding to the extracellular domain and inducing the formation of
receptor homodimers and heterodimers.
TGFa activation of EGFR results in a positive growth stimulus
(11, 12). High levels of TGFa have been associated with neoplastic
transformation (13, 14) and overexpression of TGFa by stable transfection transforms fibroblasts in culture (15). Transgenic mice overexpressing TGFa develop malignant tumors at a number of sites
(16–18). Furthermore, in vivo studies have shown that the overexpression of TGFa enhances oncogene-induced carcinogenesis (19–21).
The ability of TGFa to contribute to transformation and
oncogenesis occurs through the activation of EGFR. EGFR is
widely expressed in a number of solid tumors. In non–small lung
cancer, for example, high expression of EGFR has been documented and is associated with a poor prognosis (9, 22, 23).
Overexpression of the receptor is only one means by which a cell
can achieve positive signals for survival and proliferation. Another
means is by constitutively activating the EGF receptor.
We have approached the elucidation of the role of constitutive
signaling in malignant progression by stably transfecting early
malignant colon cancer cells with a human TGFa cDNA under
repressible control by tetracycline. This construct generates
constitutive EGFR activation without alteration of EGFR levels
(10). The early malignant model used for these studies is a cell line
designated FET (24). These cells are well differentiated in tissue
culture as they form functional transport domes characteristic of
colon epithelial function. Moreover, in athymic mice, FET cells
form transient small tumors at a s.c. site which ultimately stop
growing and gradually regress over time (10). FET TGFa transfectants show growth factor independence and continue to activate
EGFR constitutively in growth-arrested states in contrast to growth
factor–dependent FET cells that down-regulate TGFa as well as
EGFR activation during growth-arrested states (25). We have
shown that inappropriate TGFa expression of transfected cells
enables progressive growth of s.c. xenografts in athymic mice (10).
As a tumor grows in size, ultimately, areas of malignant cells
outstrip available supplies of oxygen, nutrients, and growth factors
in the tumor tissue. The environmental stresses of hypoxia and
starvation generate two options for malignant cells. Cells that are
able to adapt to environmental stress survive and ultimately
undergo expansion as angiogenesis occurs, on the other hand,
cells that do not have adequate survival adaptations undergo
programmed cell death. FET seems to have a phenotype that
cannot adapt to these stresses in vivo, whereas TGFa transfection
enables cells to survive (10).
It is our hypothesis that constitutive expression of TGFa and its
subsequent constitutive activation of EGFR allows for survival in

Abstract
Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) is widely expressed
in a number of solid tumors including colorectal cancers.
Overexpression of this receptor is one means by which a cell
can achieve positive signals for survival and proliferation;
another effective means is by constitutive activation of EGFR.
We have elucidated the role of constitutive EGFR signaling
in malignant progression by stably transfecting colon cancer
cells with a human transforming growth factor-A cDNA
(a ligand for EGFR) under repressible control by tetracycline.
We show that constitutive expression of transforming growth
factor-A and its subsequent constitutive activation of EGFR
allows for cancer cell survival in response to environmental
stress in vitro and in vivo as well. The reversal of constitutive
EGFR activation results in the loss of downstream mitogenactivated protein kinase and Akt activation, and a reduction
in xenograft size that is associated with decreased proliferation and increased apoptosis. We used CI-1033, a small
molecule antagonist of EGFR, to dissect an activation pathway
that shows the ability of ERBb2 to activate Akt, but not Erk
in the face of EGFR antagonism. This novel escape mechanism
is a possible explanation of why anti-EGFR therapies have
shown disappointing results in clinical trials. [Cancer Res
2007;67(2):665–73]

Introduction
Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) signaling has been
linked to tumor growth and malignant progression (1–7). EGFR is
one of four members of the ErbB family of receptors. Activation of
EGFR generates complex signal transduction pathways that
modulate many normal cellular processes such as proliferation,
survival, adhesion, migration, and differentiation. Aberrant activation of EGFR has been shown to be critical for the maintenance of
malignancy in a number of solid tumors, including colon cancer
(8–10). EGFR can be activated as a homodimer or as a heterodimer
with one of the other three members of the ErbB family. This
dimerization results in cross-phosphorylation of SH2 sites of the
individual receptors and enables autokinase activity. Phosphorylation of SH2 sites causes signaling complexes to dock to the
receptors, which consist of adapter proteins and downstream
enzymes. Various ligands including EGF-like molecules, neuregu-

Requests for reprints: Michael G. Brattain, Department of Pharmacology and
Therapeutics, Roswell Park Cancer Institute, Elm and Carlton Streets, Buffalo, NY 14263.
Phone: 716-845-3044; Fax: 716-845-4437; E-mail: michael.brattain@roswellpark.org.
I2007 American Association for Cancer Research.
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-06-2773

www.aacrjournals.org

665

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (2). January 15, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research
0.04% bromophenol blue, and 2% h-mercaptoethanol]. Proteins were
separated by SDS-PAGE and electroblotted onto Hybond ECL nitrocellulose
membranes (Amersham, Arlington Heights, IL). After blocking with 5%
nonfat dried milk in TTBS buffer [20 mmol/L Tris (pH 7.5), 500 mmol/L
NaCl, and 0.05% Tween 20], the blots were incubated with primary antibody
overnight at 4jC. The blots were labeled with peroxidase-conjugated
AffinPure goat anti-mouse or anti-rabbit IgG (Jackson ImmunoResearch
Laboratories, Inc., West Grove, PA) for 30 to 60 min and visualized by
enhanced chemiluminescence detection (Amersham). Western blots were
repeated thrice and protein was quantified using Image Quant software
(Piscataway, NJ).
In vivo xenografts. FET control cells and FETa cells were injected s.c. on
the dorsal surface of 10 5- to 6-week-old BALB/c nude mice. Mice were
maintained in a HEPA-filtered environment. All animal studies were
conducted in accordance with the principles and procedures as outlined by
federal, state, and institutional guidelines for the care and use of laboratory
animals. Xenograft volume was determined by measuring the xenografts
with calipers and using the equation volume = (length  width2)  0.5.
CI-1033 drug treatment. For in vitro studies, drug was added directly to
the medium of quiescent cells to make a final concentration of 5 Amol/L. An
equivalent volume of DMSO was administered as a control. Cells were
harvested 3 h after treatment. For in vivo experiments, 10 animals with
FETa xenografts were treated with CI-1033. Thirteen days postinjection,
animals were treated with CI-1033 at 80 mg/mL in 0.557 mol/L of isothionic
acid in lactate buffer (pH 7.0) by gavage. Treatment was continued for up to
15 days. Control animals received gavage treatment with isothionic acid/
lactate buffer (vehicle) only. Xenograft volume was again determined by
measuring the xenografts with calipers and using the equation volume =
(length  width2)  0.5. Animals were euthanized and tumors were
harvested after 15 days of treatment.
Antibodies. Antibodies were purchased from commercially available
sources. EGFR was immunoprecipitated with a mouse monoclonal antibody
from Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Santa Cruz, CA (sc-120). Phosphotyrosine
analysis was done with RC-20 antibody (E120H; BD Transduction
Laboratories). Total protein expression was determined with antibodies to
EGFR (E12020; BD Transduction Laboratories, San Diego, CA), Erk (sc-93;
Santa Cruz Biotechnology), and Akt (no. 9272; Cell Signaling Technology,
Beverly, MA). Phosphospecific antibodies were obtained from Santa Cruz
Biotechnology (sc-7383, p-Erk), Cell Signaling Technology (no. 9271, p-Akt,
and no. 9204, p-p70S6K), and Calbiochem (no. 324864-p-EGFR, y1173, San
Diego, CA). TGFa immunohistochemical staining employed a monoclonal
antibody from Oncogene Sciences (Ab2, La Jolla, CA).
Immunohistochemistry. Deparaffinized tissue specimens were subjected to immunohistochemical staining for the detection of TGFa, p-EGFR,
p-Erk, and p-Akt using an indirect detection method (28). The catalyzed
signal amplification system was used for the phosphospecific antibodies
(Dako Corporation, Carpinteria, CA). Each antibody staining was accompanied by a negative control in which slides were incubated with an isotypic
IgG (monoclonal) or normal serum (polyclonal) instead of primary
antibody. Specimens were processed on the same day to eliminate any
variability in conditions. Slides were digitally photographed using the same
settings.
In vivo proliferation. Xenografts established from the FETa cells were
harvested and placed in 10% neutral buffered formalin fixative for 12 to
24 h and then embedded in paraffin. Slides were cut from these blocks for
H&E stains and for immunohistochemical characterizations. Serial sections
were cut to complement the H&E sections and were stained with an
IgG1 rabbit polyclonal antibody for Ki-67 (Dako Corporation). Ki-67 Mib-1
is a nonhistone nuclear antigen present in late G1, G2, and S phase of the cell
cycle but not G0. The optimal dilution of 1:100 was used. Three- to 4-Am
sections were cut, deparaffinized in xylene, and rehydrated in descending
grades of ethanol. Endogenous peroxidase activity was blocked with 3%
hydrogen peroxide in water. Immunostaining was done using a variation
of the avidin-biotin-peroxidase method. Slides were counterstained with
methyl green.
The proliferative rate was determined quantitatively by utilization of the
CAS 200 image analyzer. On each harvest day, three to four tumors were

the face of environmental stress. Although this hypothesis has been
shown to be correct in vitro for both native and engineered tissue
culture cells, it has not been shown in vivo (10, 26). We have used
‘‘tetracycline-off ’’ regulation of TGFa to repress the constitutively
activated state of EGFR in FET TGFa–transfected cells to one in
which EGFR activation is negligible in vivo. Moreover, we show that
reversal of constitutive EGFR activation results in the expected loss
of downstream mitogen-activated protein kinase and Akt activation in vivo as well. These effects of tetracycline repression of TGFa
in FET TGFa–transfected cells are paralleled by a lack of EGFR and
downstream signaling in FET control cells in vivo as well. We also
show that loss of constitutive EGFR activation in tetracyclinetreated FET TGFa–transfected cells results in the reduction of
xenograft size that is associated with decreased proliferation and
increased apoptosis.
The pathway by which decreased proliferation and increased
apoptosis causes regression of these tumors was also explored. CI1033, a small molecule antagonist of EGFR, which has undergone
clinical trials, has been shown to inhibit the growth of cultured
EGFR-expressing tumor cell lines and repress the in vivo growth of
tumors when grown as xenografts in nude mice (27). Characterization of the effects of this drug in the FET model system allowed
for the identification of a novel mechanism of escape from the
effects of small molecule EGFR inhibitors such as CI-1033. This
mechanism involves the formation of an ERBb2 heterodimer with
the EGFR in response to ligand (TGFa) binding by the receptor.
Complex formation with EGFR leads to conformation-induced
activation of ERBb2 kinase despite inhibition of EGFR kinase. The
signaling from the ERBb2 kinase can then generate downstream
signaling, leading to the activation of the phosphoinositide-3kinase (PI3K)/Akt pathway.

Materials and Methods
Cell line. The FET human colon cancer carcinoma cell line was originally
isolated from a primary human colon cancer (24). Stable transfection with
a 930 bp fragment of full-length TGFa cDNA under the control of a
tetracycline-repressible promoter, and isolation of resultant transfectants,
was done as previously described (10). TGFa transfectants (FETa) and FET
control cells were routinely maintained in chemically defined serum-free
medium consisting of McCoy’s 5A medium (Sigma, St. Louis, MO)
supplemented with pyruvate, vitamins, amino acids, antibiotics, insulin
(20 Am/mL, Sigma), EGF (10 ng/mL; R&D Systems, Minneapolis, MN), and
650 Ag/mL of active geneticin (Life Technologies, Inc., Gaithersburg, MD).
Green fluorescence protein transfection. Packaging cells, 293GP
(Clontech, Mountain View, CA), were cotransfected with the plasmid
encoding VSVG envelope protein and the retroviral vector encoding green
fluorescence protein (GFP) using FuGene (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA).
Viruses were collected 48 h later and used to infect FETa. After 48 h,
infected FETa cells were selected with puromycin for 5 days.
Tetracycline modulation. Tetracycline (Sigma) was dissolved in 50%
ethanol and stored at 20jC. Tetracycline was added to the culture
medium at a final concentration of 0.1 Ag/mL. Fresh tetracycline was added
twice weekly when changing the medium. For in vivo studies, tetracycline
was added to the animals’ drinking water at a concentration of 3 mg/mL.
Western blots. Cells were rinsed twice with PBS and lysed in lysis buffer
[62.5 mmol/L Tris-HCl (pH 6.8), 6 mol/L urea, 0.5% NP40, and 2% SDS] with
freshly added protein inhibitors (50 mmol/L NaF, 1 mmol/L Na3V04,
1 mmol/L phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride, 1 mmol/L benzamidine, 1 mmol/L
DTT, 25 Ag/mL aprotinin, 25 Ag/mL tyrosine inhibitor, 25 Ag/mL leupeptin,
and 2 mmol/L h-glycerophosphate). Cells were then lysed by a 10-s
sonication. Protein concentrations were determined using a bicinchoninic
acid protein assay reagent (Pierce, Rockford, IL). Cell lysates were heated for
5 min at 95jC in 2 sample buffer [100 mmol/L Tris (pH 6.8), 2% glycerol,

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (2). January 15, 2007

666

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Mechanism of Resistance to EGFR Antagonism
analyzed in each group. Three randomly selected histologically similar fields
in each specimen were analyzed in FET TGFa tumors and FET vector control
nodules. The mean proliferative activity was determined for each group.
In vivo apoptotic rate. The apoptotic rate in xenografts was determined
by the Apotag (Oncor, Gaithersburg, MD) terminal nucleotidyl transferase–
mediated nick end labeling (TUNEL) assay kit. The apoptotic rate was
determined by counting the number of positively stained apoptotic bodies
per 75 Am2 field at 20 magnification. This was done by two blinded
observers (one being a clinical pathologist). The apoptotic rate was determined in each specimen by counting three random fields selected by the
pathologist. The mean value for four tumors harvested from the same group
on each day was used to determine the representative apoptotic rate.

known, however, whether the constitutive EGFR activation
generated by TGFa also generated constitutive survival signaling.
Therefore, we determined whether FETa cells showed enhanced
cell survival relative to FET control cells in response to growth
factor deprivation stress (GFDS) as reflected by lower levels of
PARP cleavage. PARP degradation products were seen in FET
control cells, but not FETa cells, at 48 and 72 h following GFDS
(Fig. 1A). This indicates that the ectopic expression of TGFa
generates resistance to stress-induced apoptosis in FETa cells as
compared with FET vector control cells.
A Western blot (Fig. 1B) shows the differences in downstream
effector activation in FETa cells and FETa cells treated with
tetracycline. The level of total EGFR for both treated and untreated
cells is the same. The level of activated EGFR, however, is decreased
in cells treated with tetracycline. Similarly, levels of activated Erk
and activated Akt are also decreased in FETa cells treated with
tetracycline.

Results
In vitro and in vivo characterization of FET and FETa
responses to growth factor deprivation stress. We had
previously shown that FETa cells are growth factor–independent
for cell cycle re-entry from a growth arrested state (10). It was not

Figure 1. A, constitutive activation of EGFR rendered
FET cells resistant to GFDS-induced apoptosis.
FET vector control and FETa cells were deprived of
growth factors after growth to 80% confluence. Cells
were harvested at the indicated times and Western
blot was done with anti-PARP antibody. B, repression
of constitutive EGFR activation led to decreased
activation of EGFR, Erk, and Akt. FETa cells were
treated with 0.1 Ag/mL of tetracycline for 3 d to
repress constitutive EGFR activation. Cells were
harvested and lysates were immunoprecipitated with
anti-EGFR antibody. Western blot was done with
anti-pTyr, anti-EGFR, anti-pErk, anti-Erk, anti-pAKT,
and anti-AKT antibodies. Image Quant software was
used to quantify protein levels.

www.aacrjournals.org

667

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (2). January 15, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

large tumors can be reversed when constitutive EGFR signaling for
cell survival is blocked. These in vivo xenograft studies highlight the
importance of constitutive EGFR activation because murine serum
was incapable of supporting EGFR activation (as shown below) as
well as sustaining xenograft growth in these experiments.
Histology. Xenografts of FET control cells and FETa were excised
for histologic analysis (data not shown). The tumor histologies were
distinct for the FET control cells, FETa, and FETa + tetracycline
xenografts. The FETa + tetracycline and the FET control cells
xenografts showed similar histologic architectures. These xenografts
were primarily composed of attenuated glandular foci with
basolateral polarity of the nuclei. The FETa xenografts, which were
not treated with tetracycline, were composed primarily of aglandular/solid tumor cells that had lost basolateral nuclear polarity and
showed nuclear pleomorphism as well as cellular atypia.
Proliferation and apoptosis. Evaluation of the Ki-67 Mib1
antigen was used to assess the proliferative fraction of tumor cells,
and the TUNEL assay (Apotag) was used to measure apoptosis in
FETa versus FETa + tetracycline tumor xenografts. Figure 3A
illustrates that with the addition of tetracycline, there is a decrease
in the proliferative rate seen in the xenografts. Figure 3B shows
increased Mib1 staining of the FETa xenograft, whereas there is
decreased Mib1 staining of the FETa xenograft from that of an
animal treated with tetracycline. Figure 3C illustrates that the
withdrawal of TGFa by the addition of tetracycline results in a 2- to
3-fold increase in the apoptotic fraction. Figure 3D shows the
difference in TUNEL staining between the FETa and FETa +
tetracycline tumor xenografts, respectively. The resultant high rate
of apoptosis and tumor regression reflects the poor ability of FET
control cells to adapt to cellular stress in the absence of TGFa.
Immunohistochemical validation. FET control cell nodules,
FETa, and FETa + tetracycline xenografts were analyzed for TGFa
as well as the activation of EGFR, Erk, and Akt as reflected by
immunohistochemistry using the appropriate phosphospecific
antibodies for staining of tissues (Fig. 4). Results from each of
the four experiments are presented in a similar fashion with the
negative control in the top left, the FET control cell line in the top
right, the FETa with no tetracycline in the bottom left, and the
FETa with tetracycline treatment in the bottom right corner.
Figure 4A shows that the FETa cell line has a significant level of
TGFa. With the addition of tetracycline, the production of TGFa is
markedly reduced. Figure 4B examines the pEGFR status of the
xenografts. With the addition of tetracycline, (TGFa is downregulated), there is less activation of the EGFR receptor as shown
by the decrease in pEGFR staining. The activation of the
downstream effector Erk is shown in Fig. 4C. This shows that
with the addition of tetracycline, the resultant decrease in TGFa
and subsequent lack of activation of EGFR also fails to activate
the downstream effector Erk. Similarly, Fig. 4D shows that with the
addition of tetracycline, Akt is also not activated as shown by the
lack of Akt phosphorylation.
The FET control cells do not show substantial signaling in vivo,
despite the availability of their EGFR for activation by circulating
ligand. These results are in agreement with the modulation of these
components by tetracycline in tissue culture cells (10), and thus,
also validate this methodology for the in situ analysis of the
modulation of the activation states of EGFR, Erk, and Akt in
response to the inhibition of EGFR activation.
CI-1033 inhibits autocrine TGFA-induced EGFR and Erk
activation. FETa cells maintain EGFR activation during growth
arrest due to continuous expression of autocrine TGFa (10). We

Xenograft analysis. Having established differential FETa and
FET control cells in vitro responses to GFDS, we sought to
determine the effect of constitutive EGFR activation on the growth
of FETa xenografts. As previously described, when inoculated s.c.
in athymic nude mice, FET cells form small (300 mm3) nodules that
eventually regress (10). In contrast, FETa with constitutive TGFa
expression is highly tumorigenic, as shown in the xenograft growth
curve in Fig. 2A. This figure also shows that with the addition of
tetracycline to the drinking water of the mice, and the subsequent
down-regulation of TGFa, and therefore, decreased EGFR activation, there is a regression of the xenograft. Even large FETa
xenografts (f900 mm3) regress when animals are provided
tetracycline (3 mg/mL) in the drinking water (Fig. 2A). Figure 2B
shows two representative BALB/c nude mice with GFP-labeled
FETa s.c. xenografts 30 days postinoculation on the left. On the
right of Fig. 2B, there are two other BALB/c nude mice that
have been treated with tetracycline for 34 days after establishing
GFP-labeled FETa xenografts. The regression of green fluorescence
is reflective of increased apoptosis and decreased proliferation that
occurs as the xenografts regress in the absence of TGFa and
subsequent EGFR activation. This indicates that even the growth of

Figure 2. A, inhibition of xenograft growth of FETa cells by tetracycline.
Exponentially growing cells (5  106) were inoculated s.c. in athymic nude mice.
Tetracycline (3 mg/mL) was added to the drinking water daily from day 30
onwards. Tumors were measured externally on the indicated days in two
dimensions using calipers. Tumor volumes were determined by the equation
V = (L  W 2)  0.5, where L, length; and W, width of the tumor. Values are the
mean of 10 xenografts. B, GFP labeled 5  106 FETa cells were inoculated into
athymic nude mice. Thirty days after inoculation, tetracycline (3 mg/mL) was
added to the drinking water daily for 34 d.

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (2). January 15, 2007

668

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Mechanism of Resistance to EGFR Antagonism

Figure 3. Decreased proliferation and increased
apoptosis in FETa cells treated with tetracycline.
A, four xenografts were harvested on each indicated
day. The CAS 200 image analyzer was used to
determine the mean proliferative activity for each
group. B, slides were prepared from the harvested
xenografts for standard immunohistochemistry and
Ki-67 staining for FETa and FETa cells treated with
tetracycline (Dako Corporation). C, apoptotic rates
were determined by an average of three random
75 Am2 fields at 20 magnification. D, slides were
prepared from harvested xenografts for standard
Apotag TUNEL assay for both FETa and FETa
tetracycline–treated animals (Oncor).

treated FETa cells with CI-1033 to determine if downstream
signaling cascades, which could potentially mediate tumorigenicity,
were sensitive to the inhibition of EGFR kinase activity. FETa cells
growing in a monolayer were treated with CI-1033 (5 Amol/L) or an
equivalent volume of DMSO as a control. Receptor activation was
determined by EGFR immunoprecipitation followed by a phosphotyrosine immunoblot. Control cells showed readily detectable
levels of EGFR phosphotyrosine, whereas cells treated with 1 Amol/L
of CI-1033 displayed a dramatic reduction in tyrosine phosphorylation of EGFR immunoprecipitates (Fig. 5A). Reblotting of the
membrane with EGFR antibody indicated that total receptor protein
levels were not affected by drug treatment (Fig. 5A).

www.aacrjournals.org

Next, we examined the activation of EGFR-dependent signal
transduction proteins. Immunoblotting with the phospho-Erk
antibody revealed that cells challenged with CI-1033 showed a
large decrease in detectable phospho-signal compared with control
cells (Fig. 5A). This was apparent at the same dose that inhibited
EGFR phosphotyrosine, thus implying that Erk activation was
largely mediated by EGFR signaling.
Surprisingly, immunoblot with a phosphospecific antibody for
Akt showed that CI-1033 did not inhibit the activation of this
kinase (Fig. 5A). Moreover, an investigation of the effect of CI-1033
on another PI3K pathway intermediate, p70S6K, also indicated that
it was not inhibited by EGFR blockade. Similar results were also

669

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (2). January 15, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

Figure 4. A to D, immunohistochemical
validation of signal transduction. FETa xenografts
were harvested and placed in buffered formalin
for 24 h and then paraffin embedded. Slides
were prepared for standard immunohistochemistry
to evaluate the effect of tetracycline on the
expression of TGFa, activated EGFR, activated
Erk, and activated AKT. Phosphospecific
antibodies were used to generate this data. Each
experiment has negative control staining (top left ),
FET control cells (top right ), FETa-untreated cells
(bottom left), and FETa tetracycline–treated cells
(bottom right ).

CI-1033 once a day for 13 days (Fig. 5B). Control mice that received
a drug vehicle had tumors that continued to grow until day 22
postimplantation (Fig. 5B). CI-1033-treated mice, however, displayed no further increase in tumor formation (Fig. 5B). Growth of
the tumor resumed upon termination of CI-1033. These results
suggest that CI-1033 is capable of inhibition of tumor growth, but it
does not cause tumor regression when faced with the ERB
signaling pattern shown by these cells.
Utilization of the aforementioned immunohistochemical techniques for the determination of EGFR, Erk, and Akt activation in situ
were applied to xenografts from control and CI-1033-treated mice
to determine the ability of the drug to inhibit EGFR and the
downstream pathways. Analysis of CI-1033 xenografts indicated
that TGFa-induced EGFR activation was sensitive to inhibition by
small molecule antagonists in vivo as shown by the decrease in
EGFR phospho-staining (Fig. 6A). Additionally, phospho-Erk
positivity was considerably less abundant 13 days posttreatment
with CI-1033 than in tumors from control mice (Fig. 6B). In
contrast to the observed modulation in ERK activity, we failed to
detect a change in the relative levels of staining with p-AKT
antibody after CI-1033 administration (Fig. 6C). This was consistent
with the in vitro data described above and further confirms the lack
of sensitivity to CI-1033 by PI3K-dependent pathways in this
pattern of staining. Taken together, the findings described here
implicate a mechanism that reduces the potential effects of
inhibition of the EGFR with respect to downstream signaling in
tumors that have EGFR/ERBb2 heterodimers.

obtained with another EGFR inhibitor, AG1478 (data not shown).
These results were surprising because previous studies showed
that tetracycline treatment in tissue culture blocked both the Erk
and PI3K pathways (10), and the immunohistochemistry xenograft
results described above also showed that the reversal of ectopic
TGFa expression dramatically reduced both Erk and Akt activation,
thereby establishing the linkage of EGFR activation to Akt
signaling. How can these results be reconciled? The lack of Akt/
p70S6K sensitivity to CI-1033 may indicate that the activation of
this pathway is initiated by TGFa/EGFR binding, but is not directly
dependent on the EGFR kinase activity. One mechanism which
would be consistent with both the tetracycline and EGFR small
molecule antagonist data would be a model in which ERBb2 or
another member of the ErbB family is recruited to heterodimerize
with TGFa-bound EGFR resulting in the conformational induction
of the activation of the ERBb2 kinase or other ErbB kinase even
though CI-1033 binding would inhibit EGFR kinase. We treated
FETa cells with the 2C4 antibody against ERBb2, which we have
previously shown to inhibit the heterodimerization of ERBb2 and
EGFR, to test this hypothesis (29). Cells treated with the 2C4
antibody showed reduced ERBb2 activation as well as diminished
activation of p70S6k indicating that PI3K pathway activation was
linked to EGFR through the ERBb2 kinase. This result was also
confirmed using a small molecule competitive inhibitor of ATP
binding, AG879, which is 50-fold more selective for the ERBb2
kinase over that of the EGFR kinase (Fig. 5C and D).
CI-1033 causes tumor stasis in FETA xenografts. The data
from in vitro studies described above suggest that CI-1033 is a
potent inhibitor of autocrine TGFa-mediated constitutive EGFR
tyrosine phosphorylation. Inhibition of EGFR kinase also led to a
concomitant reduction in Erk activation. The potential for this
drug to block these important signaling mediators, but not the
PI3K/Akt pathway, encouraged us to determine if this compound
had antitumor effects and whether we could show a similar pattern
of downstream signaling as seen with CI-1033 in tissue culture in
an in vivo setting. FETa xenografts that had formed 200 mm3
tumors by day 12 postimplantation were treated by gavage with

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (2). January 15, 2007

Discussion
EGFR activation has been shown to play a role in tumor
progression in a number of solid tumor malignancies including
colon cancer. A greater understanding of the EGFR signal
transduction cascade involved in tumor progression may result
in the development of novel, selective combination anticancer
approaches. The ability to modulate the TGFa construct in this
study shows that the constitutive activation of EGFR by

670

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Mechanism of Resistance to EGFR Antagonism

Xenograft studies are limited in that they may not reflect the
complicated biological interplay between the host and an in situ
tumor that arises de novo. However, they do provide an in vivo
biological model to study tumor biology. The in vivo results with
xenografts suggest that the importance of constitutive ErbB family
activation by autocrine mechanisms in vivo may be underestimated.
To help dissect the signal transduction pathway through which
EGFR activation results in tumor progression, we studied the
effects of the EGFR kinase inhibitor CI-1033. Initially, we defined
the signaling events in vitro which were mediated by TGFa
autoactivated EGFR and then determined their susceptibility to
inhibition by CI-1033. In contrast to the results obtained with
tetracycline reversal of TGFa, Akt activation was not susceptible to
inhibition by EGFR tyrosine kinase blockade with CI-1033. This

constitutive expression of TGFa allows for tumor cell survival and
the ability to overcome environmental stress. This was extended
into an animal model along with in situ analysis of signaling. The
reversibility of TGFa expression by tetracycline treatment coincided with a decline in EGFR, Erk, and Akt activation by immunoblot.
This was validated in vivo when xenografts were stained with
corresponding phospho-antibodies to detect the activation of
these signaling markers. The mechanisms by which in vivo growth
is enabled include both increased proliferation and decreased
apoptosis, as reflected by Ki-67 and TUNEL analyses. Significantly,
even large xenografts were dependent on endogenous EGFR
activation by ectopic TGFa expression rather than acquiring
nutrients from the host sera because tetracycline treatment led to a
reduction of the tumor volume.

Figure 5. Effects of clinical EGFR antagonist on
FETa cells in vivo and in vitro. A, FETa cells were
treated with 5 Amol/L of CI-1033 for 3 h. Cells were
harvested and lysates were immunoprecipitated with
anti-EGFR antibody. Western blot was done with
anti-pTyr, anti-EGFR, anti-pErk, anti-Erk, anti-pAkt,
and anti-Akt antibodies. B, ten animals with FETa
xenografts were treated with CI-1033. Thirteen days
postinjection, animals were treated with CI-1033 at
80 mg/mL in 0.557 mol/L of isothionic acid in lactate
buffer (pH 7.0) by gavage. Treatment was continued
for up to 15 d. Control animals received gavage
treatment with isothionic acid/lactate buffer (vehicle)
only. Animals were euthanized and tumors were
harvested after 15 d of treatment. Tumor volumes
were determined by the equation V = (L  W 2) 
0.5, where L, length; W, width of the tumor. C, FETa
cells were treated with AG879, an ERBb2 antagonist,
and Western blots evaluating phosphorylated ERBb2
and p-Akt. D, FETa cells were treated with the
2C4 antibody to ERBb2 and Western blots to
p-ERBb2 and p-Erk, and p70S6k are shown.

www.aacrjournals.org

671

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (2). January 15, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

In vivo data showed that CI-1033 prevented further tumor
growth in staged tumors when administered to mice bearing FETa
xenografts. From the signaling results obtained, we conclude that
downstream activation of Erk by EGFR results in tumor growth.
This is reflected by the associated reduction in Erk activity by
inhibition of EGFR with CI-1033 and a stable xenograft volume
which did not increase as long as treatment was continued. Of
note, however, is the difference in response to CI-1033 by FETa
versus the tetracycline-off experiment in which there is not just
tumor stasis, but tumor regression. This suggests that EGFR
inhibition with the kinase inhibitor CI-1033 does not result in
increased apoptosis. Data from our group using a combination of
selective EGFR and ErbB2 inhibitors or a dual EGFR/ERBb2
selective inhibitor with FETa and other cell lines, shows that when
both members of the ErbB family are targeted in combination, the
effects on activation status, apoptosis, and inhibition of growth are
synergistic in vitro (31, 32).
This mechanism of dimer partner activation shown by EGFR
and ErbB2 is a possible explanation for why molecular targeted
therapies have shown disappointing responses in clinical trials as
single agents (33–35). In addition to this escape from inhibition of
signal transduction through a mechanism involving incomplete
inhibition of a heterodimerized receptor, we have shown that
inhibition of one receptor can be compensated for by the increased
expression and activation of another receptor (36). ErbB2
inactivation by stable transfection of a single chain antibody
against ErbB2 resulted in the inactivation of ErbB2 tyrosine
phosphorylation and reduced heterodimerization of ErbB2 and
ErbB3. This, in turn, led to the reorganization in ErbB family
signaling involving increased expression and activation of the EGFR
as well as increased heterodimerization between EGFR and ErbB3.
Thus, blockade of only one ErbB family member can result in the
generation of signaling escape mechanisms such as dimer partner
activation or recruitment and activation of remaining family
members that can sustain signal pathways that ultimately may
allow for tumor progression. The role of the ErbB family in tumor
growth and progression is well documented but, by the same
token, is very complex. Efforts directed at clinical targeting of this
family continue to reveal new complexities involving the flexibility
of this signaling system, especially with respect to the inhibition of
individual kinases and the resultant effects on the system as a
whole. The effects of targeting heterologous signaling receptors
such as the insulin-like growth factor receptor and G proteins are
as yet unexplored, but these interactions clearly have the potential
to contribute to this complexity. Added to these considerations is
the well-known variability of cell context and signaling. The ErbB
family remains an attractive and promising target for cancer
treatment; however, it is unlikely that its potential for broad clinical
application will be realized until more is known about the complex
interplay among the ErbB family members, the effects of
modulation of ErbB signaling on other receptor signaling modules,
and the cellular contexts that are most frequently encountered in
cancer target tissues.

Figure 6. A to C, CI-1033 inhibits activation of EGFR and Erk, but not AKT.
Thirteen days postinoculation; xenografts were treated with CI-1033 and
harvested after 10 or 14 d of treatment. Tissues were placed in buffered
formalin for 24 h and paraffin embedded. Immunohistochemistry was done for
p-EGFR, p-Erk, and p-AKT on negative control, vehicle control, 10 day–treated
and 14 day–treated xenografts.

effect was apparent from both cell culture experiments and in
drug-treated xenografts. The mechanism which would be consistent with both the tetracycline-off and the EGFR small molecule
antagonist data would be a model in which ErbB2 or another
member of the ErbB family is recruited to heterodimerize with
TGFa-bound EGFR (activated EGFR), thereby leading to the
conformational induction of the activation of ErbB2 kinase or
other ErbB family member even though CI-1033 binding would
inhibit EGFR kinase activity. Thus, the data suggest that blockade
of EGFR tyrosine kinase activity alone does not necessarily lead to
the inhibition of all its apparent ligand-associated pathways.
Given that other members of the ErbB family such as ErbB2 can
participate in EGFR signaling, it seems that all aspects of EGFR
signaling are not necessarily silenced by EGFR kinase inhibition
alone. It has been shown that ErbB2 remains capable of signaling
to activate Akt in response to EGF in the presence of a catalytically
impaired EGFR kinase (30). Previously, we showed that ErbB2 is
recruited to EGFR in the FET model system (10). Here, we have
shown that this results in the conformational induction of the
activation of ErbB2 kinase and its downstream effectors, even
though CI-1033 binding inhibits EGFR kinase.

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (2). January 15, 2007

Acknowledgments
Received 7/26/2006; revised 10/12/2006; accepted 11/8/2006.
Grant support: NIH grants CA34432, CA54807, and CA16056 (M.G. Brattain), and a
Wendy Will Case Cancer Foundation grant (A. Rajput).
The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of page
charges. This article must therefore be hereby marked advertisement in accordance
with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact.

672

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Mechanism of Resistance to EGFR Antagonism

References
1. Kaufmann AM, Lichtner RB, Schirrmacher V, Khazaie
K. Induction of apoptosis by EGF receptor in rat
mammary adenocarcinoma cells coincides with enhanced spontaneous tumour metastasis. Oncogene
1996;13:2349–58.
2. Kondapaka SB, Fridman R, Reddy KB. Epidermal
growth factor and amphiregulin up-regulate matrix
metalloproteinase-9 (MMP-9) in human breast cancer
cells. Int J Cancer 1997;70:722–6.
3. Simon C, Hicks MJ, Nemechek AJ, et al. PD 098059, an
inhibitor of ERK1 activation, attenuates the in vivo
invasiveness of head and neck squamous cell carcinoma. Br J Cancer 1999;80:1412–9.
4. Spector M, Nguyen VA, Sheng X, et al. Activation of
mitogen-activated protein kinases is required for a1adrenergic agonist-induced cell scattering in transfected
HepG2 cells. Exp Cell Res 2000;258:109–20.
5. Turner T, Chen P, Goodly LJ, Wells A. EGF receptor
signaling enhances in vivo invasiveness of DU-145
human prostate carcinoma cells. Clin Exp Metastasis
1996;14:409–18.
6. Ward Y, Wang W, Woodhouse E, Linnoila I, Liotta L,
Kelly K. Signal pathways which promote invasion and
metastasis: critical and distinct contributions of
extracellular signal-regulated kinase and Ral-specific
guanine exchange factor pathways. Mol Cell Biol 2001;
21:5958–69.
7. Webb CP, Van Aelst L, Wigler MH, Woude GF. Signaling
pathways in Ras-mediated tumorigenicity and metastasis. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1998;95:8773–8.
8. Huang SM, Harari PM. Epidermal growth factor
receptor inhibition in cancer therapy: biology, rationale
and preliminary clinical results. Invest New Drugs 1999;
17:259–69.
9. Salomon DS, Brandt R, Ciardiello F, Normanno N.
Epidermal growth factor-related peptides and their
receptors in human malignancies. Crit Rev Oncol
Hematol 1995;19:183–232.
10. Jiang D, Yang H, Willson JK, et al. Autocrine
transforming growth factor a provides a growth
advantage to malignant cells by facilitating re-entry
into the cell cycle from suboptimal growth states. J Biol
Chem 1998;273:31471–9.
11. Carpenter G, Cohen S. Epidermal growth factor.
Annu Rev Biochem 1979;48:193–216.
12. Derynck R. Transforming growth factor a. Cell 1988;
54:593–5.
13. Coffey RJ, Jr., Goustin AS, Soderquist AM, et al.

www.aacrjournals.org

Transforming growth factor a and h expression in
human colon cancer lines: implications for an autocrine
model. Cancer Res 1987;47:4590–4.
14. Liu C, Woo A, Tsao MS. Expression of transforming
growth factor-a in primary human colon and lung
carcinomas. Br J Cancer 1990;62:425–9.
15. Rosenthal A, Lindquist PB, Bringman TS, Goeddel
DV, Derynck R. Expression in rat fibroblasts of a human
transforming growth factor-a cDNA results in transformation. Cell 1986;46:301–9.
16. Jhappan C, Stahle C, Harkins RN, Fausto N, Smith
GH, Merlino GT. TGF a overexpression in transgenic
mice induces liver neoplasia and abnormal development of the mammary gland and pancreas. Cell 1990;
61:1137–46.
17. Matsui Y, Halter SA, Holt JT, Hogan BL, Coffey RJ.
Development of mammary hyperplasia and neoplasia in
MMTV-TGF a transgenic mice. Cell 1990;61:1147–55.
18. Sandgren EP, Luetteke NC, Palmiter RD, Brinster
RL, Lee DC. Overexpression of TGF a in transgenic
mice: induction of epithelial hyperplasia, pancreatic
metaplasia, and carcinoma of the breast. Cell 1990;61:
1121–35.
19. Murakami H, Sanderson ND, Nagy P, Marino PA,
Merlino G, Thorgeirsson SS. Transgenic mouse model
for synergistic effects of nuclear oncogenes and growth
factors in tumorigenesis: interaction of c-myc and
transforming growth factor a in hepatic oncogenesis.
Cancer Res 1993;53:1719–23.
20. Sandgren EP, Luetteke NC, Qiu TH, Palmiter RD,
Brinster RL, Lee DC. Transforming growth factor a
dramatically enhances oncogene-induced carcinogenesis in transgenic mouse pancreas and liver. Mol Cell Biol
1993;13:320–30.
21. Sandgren EP, Schroeder JA, Qui TH, Palmiter RD,
Brinster RL, Lee DC. Inhibition of mammary gland
involution is associated with transforming growth factor
a but not c-myc-induced tumorigenesis in transgenic
mice. Cancer Res 1995;55:3915–27.
22. Mendelsohn J, Baselga J. The EGF receptor family as
targets for cancer therapy. Oncogene 2000;19:6550–65.
23. Selvaggi G, Novello S, Torri V, et al. Epidermal growth
factor receptor overexpression correlates with a poor
prognosis in completely resected non-small-cell lung
cancer. Ann Oncol 2004;15:28–32.
24. Chantret I, Barbat A, Dussaulx E, Brattain MG,
Zweibaum A. Epithelial polarity, villin expression, and
enterocytic differentiation of cultured human colon
carcinoma cells: a survey of twenty cell lines. Cancer Res
1988;48:1936–42.

25. Wang D, Patil S, Li W, Humphrey LE, Brattain MG,
Howell GM. Activation of the TGF a autocrine loop is
downstream of IGF-I receptor activation during mitogenesis in growth factor dependent human colon
carcinoma cells. Oncogene 2002;21:2785–96.
26. Awwad RA, Sergina N, Yang H, et al. The role of
transforming growth factor a in determining growth
factor independence. Cancer Res 2003;63:4731–8.
27. Fry DW. Site-directed irreversible inhibitors of the
erbB family of receptor tyrosine kinases as novel
chemotherapeutic agents for cancer. Anticancer Drug
Des 2000;15:3–16.
28. Nakane PK. Recent progress in the peroxidaselabeled antibody method. Ann N Y Acad Sci 1975;254:
203–11.
29. Jackson JG, St Clair P, Sliwkowski MX, Brattain MG.
Blockade of epidermal growth factor- or heregulindependent ErbB2 activation with the anti-ErbB2 monoclonal antibody 2C4 has divergent downstream signaling
and growth effects. Cancer Res 2004;64:2601–9.
30. Deb TB, Su L, Wong L, et al. Epidermal growth factor
(EGF) receptor kinase-independent signaling by EGF.
J Biol Chem 2001;276:15554–60.
31. Zhou Y, Brattain MG. Synergy of epidermal growth
factor receptor kinase inhibitor AG1478 and ErbB2
kinase inhibitor AG879 in human colon carcinoma cells
is associated with induction of apoptosis. Cancer Res
2005;65:5848–56.
32. Zhou Y, Li S, Hu YP, et al. Blockade of EGFR and
ErbB2 by the novel dual EGFR and ErbB2 tyrosine
kinase inhibitor GW572016 sensitizes human colon
carcinoma GEO cells to apoptosis. Cancer Res 2006;66:
404–11.
33. Cunningham D, Humblet Y, Siena S, et al. Cetuximab
monotherapy and cetuximab plus irinotecan in irinotecan-refractory metastatic colorectal cancer. N Engl J
Med 2004;351:337–45.
34. Perez-Soler R, Chachoua A, Hammond LA, et al.
Determinants of tumor response and survival with
erlotinib in patients with non-small-cell lung cancer.
J Clin Oncol 2004;22:3238–47.
35. Saltz LB, Meropol NJ, Loehrer PJ, Sr., Needle MN,
Kopit J, Mayer RJ. Phase II trial of cetuximab in patients
with refractory colorectal cancer that expresses the
epidermal growth factor receptor. J Clin Oncol 2004;22:
1201–8.
36. Hu YP, Venkateswarlu S, Sergina N, et al. Reorganization of ErbB family and cell survival signaling after
Knock-down of ErbB2 in colon cancer cells. J Biol Chem
2005;280:27383–92.

673

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (2). January 15, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

A Novel Mechanism of Resistance to Epidermal Growth
Factor Receptor Antagonism In vivo
Ashwani Rajput, Alan P. Koterba, Jeffrey I. Kreisberg, et al.
Cancer Res 2007;67:665-673.

Updated version

Cited articles
Citing articles

E-mail alerts
Reprints and
Subscriptions
Permissions

Access the most recent version of this article at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/67/2/665

This article cites 36 articles, 16 of which you can access for free at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/67/2/665.full#ref-list-1
This article has been cited by 5 HighWire-hosted articles. Access the articles at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/67/2/665.full#related-urls

Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal.
To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications
Department at pubs@aacr.org.
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications
Department at permissions@aacr.org.

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

