www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Oncotarget, 2017, Vol. 8, (No. 7), pp: 12301-12310
Research Paper

Ellagic acid inhibits the proliferation of human pancreatic
carcinoma PANC-1 cells in vitro and in vivo
Hao Cheng1, Chenglin Lu1, Ribo Tang1, Yiming Pan1, Shanhua Bao1, Yudong Qiu1,
Min Xie1
1

Department of General Surgery, Nanjing Drum Tower Hospital, The Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing University Medical School,
Nanjing 210008, Jiangsu Province, China

Correspondence to: Yiming Pan, email: panyiming6620@sohu.com
Keywords: ellagic acid, pancreatic carcinoma
Received: September 24, 2016     Accepted: October 21, 2016     Published: January 25, 2017

ABSTRACT
Ellagic aicd (EA), a dietary polyphenolic compound found in plants and fruits,
possesses various pharmacological activities. This study investigated the effect of EA
on human pancreatic carcinoma PANC-1 cells both in vitro and in vivo; and defined the
associated molecular mechanisms. In vitro, the cell growth and repairing ability were
assessed by CCK-8 assay and wound healing assay. The cell migration and invasion
activity was evaluated by Tanswell assay. In vivo, PANC-1 cell tumor-bearing mice were
treated with different concentrations of EA. We found that EA significantly inhibited
cell growth, cell repairing activity, and cell migration and invasion in a dose-dependent
manner. Treatment of PANC-1 xenografted mice with EA resulted in significant
inhibition in tumor growth and prolong mice survival rate. Furthermore, flow cytometric
analysis showed that EA increased the percentage of cells in the G1 phase of cell cycle.
Western blot analysis revealed that EA inhibited the expression of COX-2 and NF-κB. In
addition, EA reversed epithelial to mesenchymal transition by up-regulating E-cadherin
and down-regulating Vimentin. In summary, the present study demonstrated that EA
inhibited cell growth, cell repairing activity, cell migration and invasion in a dosedependent manner. EA also effectively inhibit human pancreatic cancer growth in mice.
The anti-tumor effect of EA might be related to cell cycle arrest, down-regulating the
expression of COX-2 and NF-κB, reversing epithelial to mesenchymal transition by upregulating E-cadherin and down-regulating Vimentin. Our findings suggest that the use
of EA would be beneficial for the management of pancreatic cancer.

pomegranates, strawberries, raspberries and blackberries
[4]. It has antioxidant, antifibrosis, and anticarcinogenic
properties [5-7]. The anticarcinogenic effect of EA was
shown in several types of cancers including colon, breast,
and prostate cancers [8]. In spite of these findings, the
effects of EA on pancreatic cancer have not been studied.
Furthermore, the mechanisms mediating anticancer effect
of EA remain unknown.
NF-κB and COX-2 are two main factors in
inflammatory reaction, and are associated with
tumorigenesis and tumor progression [9]. Epithelialmessenchymal transition (EMT) is a basic step among
various factors in tumor metastasis and invasion
[10]. E-cadherin, as a prominent protein in epithelial
cells is down-regulated, and Vimentin, a prominent
mesenchymal protein in interstitial cells, is up-regulated
during EMT [11].

INTRODUCTION
Pancreatic cancer ranks the fourth most deadly form
of cancer in the United States and it has a poor prognosis
with a 5-year survival rate of less than 5% [1]. The median
survival time of pancreatic cancer is less than 6 months
and the overall survival time is less than 2 years due to its
high malignant degree, aggressive local invasion and early
distal metastasis [2]. Because pancreatic cancer has a poor
response to conventional chemotherapy and radiotherapy,
there is a growing interest in natural compounds for
enhancing pancreatic cancer prevention and treatment.
Recent studies have highlighted the significance of dietary
factors in managing epithelial malignancies including
pancreatic cancer [3].
Ellagic acid (EA), a natural dietary polyphenolic
compound, is present in several plants and fruits, including
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

12301

Oncotarget

The purpose of this study was to investigate the effect
of EA on the human pancreatic carcinoma PANC-1 cells
and pancreatic cancer in Balb c nude mice and to define
the associated molecular mechanisms. PANC-1 cells were
chosen because they are one of the drug-resistant pancreatic
cancer cells and are much more resistant to gemcitabine
relative to other pancreatic cancer cells. They have strong
survival ability and can survive for over 3 days even in the
complete absence of nutrients such as glucose, amino acids,
and serum. Our data showed that EA significantly inhibited
PANC-1 cell growth, repairing activity, migration and
invasion. EA also inhibited the growth of tumor xenograft
in Balb C nude mice. The molecular mechanisms under
the cell growth inhibitory effect of EA might be related to
the suppression of NF-κB and COX-2; and the reverse of
EMT in pancreatic cells. Our results imply that EA may offer
therapeutic benefits against pancreatic cancer.

the bottom of the upper compartment to assess the cell
migration (Figure 3A and 3B). To examine the cell
invasion ability, cells were cultured in Transwell chambers
with Matrigel. The cells that penetrated through the
Matrigel in the bottom of the upper compartment were
counted. Cells were also collected and the light absorbance
of cell suspension was read at 490 nm in a plate reader
(Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). The inhibition
rate (%) of cell invasion was calculated as follows (Figure
3C and 3D):
Inhibition rate (%) = (OD490control-OD490sample)/
OD490control×100%

EA inhibits the growth of PANC-1 cell xenografts
in Balb c nude mice
To examine the in vivo effect of EA on the growth
of tumor, the effects of EA on the growth of PANC-1
cell xenografts in nude mice was investigated. The result
showed that EA inhibited the PANC-1 tumor growth
(volume and size) in Balb c nude mice (Figure 4A, 4B and
4C). It was also found that the mice survival rate increased
with the increase of the concentration of EA (Figure 4D).
We did not found any toxicity of EA in the liver, spleen
and intestine of mice treated with EA, suggesting that EA
at the concentration tested is safe in animals.

RESULTS
EA inhibits pancreatic cancer cell growth
To evaluate the effects of EA on the growth
of PANC-1 cells, cells were incubated with various
concentration of EA (0,2.5μg/ml, 5.0μg/ml, 7.5μg/ml and
10.0μg/ml) for 24h (A), 48h (B) and 72h (C). CCK-8 assay
was performed and the result showed that the cell survival
rate decreased with the increase of EA concentration. We
observed that the half maximal inhibitory concentrations
(IC50) of EA were 7.38μg/ml, 6.42μg/ml and 5.41μg/ml
for 24h, 48h and 72h respectively. This result indicated
that EA inhibited pancreatic cancer cell growth in a dosedependent manner (Figure 1A, 1B and 1C).

EA increases the percentage of cells in the G1
phase of the cell cycle
The above results indicated that EA inhibits
pancreatic cell growth both in vitro and in vivo. To evaluate
the mechanism underlying the cell inhibitory effect of
EA, the effect of EA on the cell cycle was investigated.
We examined the cell cycle phase distribution of cells
treated with EA using flow cytometry after PANC-1 cells
were stained with PI and RNase. The result showed that
EA significantly increased the percentage of cells in the
G1 phase of the cell cycle. This result suggested that EA
inhibits the cell proliferation by inducing cell cycle arrest
(Figure 5A and 5B).

EA inhibits the repairing ability of PANC-1 cells
Based on the above result, the IC50 of EA is greater
than 5 μg/ml. Therefore EA was used in the concentration
under 5 μg/ml in the following experiments. In order to
evaluate the effect of EA on the repairing ability of PANC1 cells, wound healing assay was performed. A scratch
wound was created on monolayer PANC-1 cell culture
and the cultures were treated with 0, 1, 3 and 5μg/ml of
EA. The result showed that wound healing occurred in the
control group while those in the EA treated groups, the
wound healing decreased with the increased concentration
of EA (Figure 2). This result suggested that EA inhibited
the repairing ability of PANC-1 cells with concentrations
lower than its IC50.

EA down-regulates the expression of COX-2, NFκB, Vimentin and up-regulates the expression of
E-cadherin
To further explore the mechanisms underlying the
cell inhibitory effect of EA, the expression of a number
of molecules that regulated tumor development and
progression was investigated by Western blot analysis. We
found that EA treatment down-regulated the expression
of COX-2, NF-κB, Vimentin and induced the expression
of E-cadherin in PANC-1 cells (Figure 6). Because
COX-2 and NF-κB are the two main activating factors in
inflammatory reaction associated with tumor development
and progression. E-cadherin and Vimentin are proteins in

EA inhibits the migration and invasion of PANC1 cells
The effect of EA on cell migration and invasion of
PANC-1 cells was evaluated using Transwell chambers.
We counted the cells penetrating the membrane on
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

12302

Oncotarget

epithelial mesenchymal transition (EMT) which is closely
related with tumor invasion and metastasis. These results
suggested that the cell growth inhibitory effect of EA
might be regulated by COX-2 and NF-κB pathways, and
treatment with EA might prevent EMT therefore inhibit
tumor invasion and metastasis.

is hypovascular with a dense fibrous capsule on the
surface, chemotherapeutic drugs are difficult to permeate
to the tumor. Also because of its natural or acquired drug
resistance, pancreatic cancer is not always sensitive to
chemotherapeutic drugs in clinical practice [15]. Natural
products attract a lot of attention in recent years because of
fewer side effects and definite therapeutic efficacy in the
treatment of tumors [16].
The present study investigated the effect of the
natural drug EA on human pancreatic carcinoma PANC-1
cells and pancreatic xenograft tumor in Balb c nude mice.
In CCK-8 assay, we found that EA inhibited cell growth

DISCUSSION
Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDA) remains
a lethal human malignancy with historically limited
success in treatment [12-14]. Because pancreatic cancer

Figure 1: Ellagic acid inhibits the growth of PANC-1 cells. Cells were incubated with various concentration of ellagic acid (0,
2.5 μg/ml, 5.0 μg/ml, 7.5 μg/ml and 10.0 μg/ml) and cultured for 24 h A., 48h B. and 72 h C. CCK-8 assay was performed. EA=Ellagic acid.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

12303

Oncotarget

in a dose-dependent manner. In wound healing assay, EA
inhibited the repairing ability of the PANC-1 cells. We
also found that EA inhibited the migration and invasion
of PANC-1 cells through Transwell chamber. In mouse
tumor xenografts, EA inhibited the PANC-1 tumor growth
(volume and size) in Balb c nude mice and the mice
survival rate increased with the increased concentration
of EA treatment. In addition, we found that EA has no
notable toxicity in the liver, spleen and intestine in mice
treated with EA, indicating that EA is a safe natural drug.

G1/S and G2/M are the two most important
checkpoints in cell cycle and the key regulation lies in
whether the cells block or through the checkpoints [17].
G1 phase arrest is the important step in cell proliferation
inhibition and if cells can not get into the S phase, DNA
will not be synthesized and the protein metabolism will
be disturbed, then the division of cancer cells will be
inhibited [18]. We observed the effect of EA on the cell
cycle by flow cytometry and our data showed that EA
significantly increased the percentage of cells in the G1

Figure 2: EA inhibits the healing ability of the PANC-1 cells. Cells were cultured for 24h, incubated with various concentration
of ellagic acid (0, 1μg/ml,3 μg/ml,5 μg/ml). Wound healing was observed under the microscope(×50).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

12304

Oncotarget

Figure 3: Effect of EA on cell migration and invasion. A. After treated with different concentration of ellagic acid for 12, 18 or

24 h, the number of cells penetrating the membrane on the bottom of the upper compartment. B. the morphology of cells penetrating the
membrane on the bottom of the upper compartment observed under the microscope (×200). C. OD value of the cell suspension washed
from the bottom of the upper compartment. D. After treated with different concentration of ellagic acid for 24 h, the cells penetrating the
matrigel on the bottom of the upper compartment observed under the microscope(×200). Data represent the mean ± SD. aP<0.05 between
different groups on the same time, bP<0.05 between different groups on the same concentration.

Figure 4: EA inhibits the growth of PANC-1 xenografts in Balb c nude mice. A. Tumor bearing mice were treated with EA(0,

10 mg/kg, 20 mg/kg and 40 mg/kg body weight) through gavage. Tumor volume of mice was recorded daily. Data represent the mean ±
SD. aP<0.05 between different groups on the same time, bP<0.05 between different groups on the same concentration. B. Size of tumors.
Photographs of tumors of mice were taken at the end of experiment. C. Size of tumors. Photographs of tumors derived from control and
EA-treated mice were taken at the end of experiment. D. Tumor bearing mice were treated with EA(0, 10 mg/kg, 20 mg/kg and 40 mg/kg
body weight) through gavage once every two days until death. The survival rate and survival days of mice were recorded.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

12305

Oncotarget

phase of the cell cycle. Therefore cell cycle arrest might
be one of the mechanisms that EA inhibits the proliferation
of PANC-1 cells.
COX-2 is the key enzyme that catalyzes arachidonic
acid into prostaglandin [19] and has an important
biological function in the occurrence and development of
many types of tumors. Recent studies indicate that as one

of the important inflammatory factors, COX-2 plays an
important role in the development of chronic pancreatitis
and pancreatic cancer. It is generally accepted that under
a series of carcinogenic factors, normal pancreatic ductal
epithelial cells first turn into pancreatic intraephithelial
neoplasm and then develop into aggressive pancreatic
ductal adenocarcinoma, and the inflammatory response

Figure 5: EA increases the percentage of cells in the G1 phase of cell cycle. A. After treated with different concentration of

ellagic acid for 48 h, the cellular DNA content of cells was analyzed by flow cytometry. B. After treated with different concentration of
ellagic acid for 24, 48 or 72 h, we analyzed the cellular DNA content of cells by flow cytometry and the percentage of cells in the G1 phase
was calculated. Data represent the mean ± SD. aP<0.05 between different groups on the same time, bP<0.05 between different groups on
the same concentration.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

12306

Oncotarget

plays an important role in promoting the evolution [2021]. The occurrence and development of pancreatic cancer
is closely related to the high expression of COX-2 [22-23],
the related mechanisms include inducing proliferation,
inhibiting apoptosis and inducing the expression of VEGF
et al [24].
NF-κB, as another important inflammatory
factor, can activate the growth and differentiation of
epithelial cells through regulating the expressions
and activities of various cytokines and chemokines
related to inflammation. NF-κB inhibits the apoptosis
of pancreatic cells through regulating a variety of
apoptosis related genes, including Bcl-2, Bcl-xL and
caspase-3 [25-26]. A number of chemotherapeutic drugs,
including gemcitabine, can activate NF-κB and it may
be the reason that pancreatic cancer is not sensitive
to gemcitabine [27]. Therefore, targeting NF-κB and
inhibiting its activity is becoming a target of research
for the prevention and treatment of pancreatic cancer.
Our results that EA down-regulates the expression of
COX-2 and NF-κB in pancreatic cancer cells
will provide a rational for EA to become a new
chemotherapeutic agent against pancreatic cancer.
EMT has a great clinical significance in the
invasion and metastasis of epithelial tumors. The
decreased expression of E-cadherin and the increased

expression of Vimentin are the indications of EMT.
Low expression of E-cadherin is significantly related
to poor tumor differentiation, invasion and metastasis
[28], and this might be regulated by activating its
transcription factors, such as Snail, SIP1 and Slug
[29]. Recent studies showed that knockout Vimentin
in malignant cells decreased the ability of tumor cell
invasion and metastasis [30]. The increased expression
of E-cadherin and the decreased expression of Vimentin
in this study indicated that EA might have the anti-EMT
effect.
In summary, our study provides important
information regarding the antitumor activities of EA
in human pancreatic cancer cells. Specifically, we have
demonstrated that EA inhibits cell growth, cell repairing
activity, migration and invasion of PANC-1 cells. EA also
inhibited the PANC-1 tumor growth (volume and size) in
Balb c nude mice and the mice survival rate was increased
with the increased concentration of EA treatment. The
mechanisms underlying the anti-tumor effect of EA
might be due to EA can induce cell cycle arrest, inhibit
the expression of COX-2, NF-κB, Vimentin and induce
the expression of E-cadherin. Therefore, EA can be a
promising natural product for the treatment and prevention
of pancreatic cancer.

Figure 6: Western blot analysis on the expression of COX-2, NF-κB, E-cadherin and Vimentin. The β-actin was used as a
loading control. A representative picture was shown from 3 independent experiments.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

12307

Oncotarget

MATERIALS AND METHODS

migration assay, cells (1 × 104 in 100 μL) were seeded
on the upper compartment of 12-well Transwell chambers
and incubated with various concentration of EA for 24h.
The under compartment contained DMEM supplemented
with 10% heat-inactivated FBS. After 24h, the medium
on the upper compartment was removed carefully and the
cells migrated through the membrane were fixed with 95%
ethanol for 10 minutes. Then the upper compartment was
token out and put in a solution with 1% crystal violet at
4°C for 6h. After staining, the upper compartment was
washed and the cells migrated through the membrane on
the bottom of the upper compartment were counted under
the inverted microscope. For cell invasion assay, matrigel
was put between the upper and under compartments. The
above procedures were performed and cells migrated
through the matrigel was evaluated.

Chemicals and reagents
Ellagic acid, Propidium iodide (PI), RNase A,
Cell counting kit-8(CCK-8) and Transwell chamber
were purchased from Sigma Chemical (St. Louis, MO).
Fetal bovine serum (FBS) was from GIBCO (Carlsbad,
CA). Antibodies against COX-2, NF-κB, E-cadherin,
Vimentin and β-actin were purchased from Cell
Signaling Technology (Danvers, MA, USA). Enhanced
chemiluminescence (ECL), Western blot detection
reagents were purchased from American Life Sciences Inc.
(Arlington Heights, IL).

Cell culture
PANC-1 cells were purchased form American Type
Culture Collection (ATCC) (Manassas, VA). These cells
were maintained in Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle’s medium
(DMEM) supplemented with 10% heat-inactivated FBS,
100 U/mL of penicillin and 100 μg/mL of streptomycin
(all from Gibco BRL, San Diego, CA, USA) at 37°C in a
5 % CO2 atmosphere.

Anti-tumor effect of EA on the pancreatic cancer
cell xenograft in Balb C nude mice
Balb C nude mice (4-6 weeks old) were purchased
from the National Cancer Institute (Frederick, MD). Mice
were raised in specific pathogen free (SPF) environment
with clean laminar flow frame. Room temperature
was adjusted to (25±1)°C, relative humidity 40% to
60% in Nanjing Drum Tower Hospital (Nanjing Drum
Tower Hospital, The Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing
University Medical School) animal experiment center
(Use license: SCXK (SU)2014—0052).) To establish a
mouse pancreatic cancer xenograft model, PANC-1 cells
(2× 106 cells) mixed with Matrigel (Becton Dickinson,
Bedford, MA) at 50:50 ratio in a final volume of 75μL
were injected subcutaneously into the flanks of Balb C
nude mice as per approved protocol. Mice were divided
into 4 groups, 5 mice per group. In order to examine the
anti-tumor potential of EA, mice were treated with EA (0,
10 mg/kg, 20 mg/kg and 40 mg/kg body weight) through
gavage for 2 weeks after tumor formation. At the end of
the experiment, mice were euthanized and tumors were
isolated and weighted.

Cell growth assessment
CCK-8 assay was used to assess the inhibitory
effect of EA on PANC-1 cells according to manufacture’s
instruction. In brief, PANC-1 cells (1 × 104 in 100 μL)
were seeded on 96-well plates. After overnight growth,
cells were incubated with various concentration of EA
at 37°C for 24, 48 or 72 h, respectively. Then 10 μL of
CCK-8 was added to each well, incubated at 37°C for an
additional 3h and then read immediately at 490 nm by a
plate reader (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA).
The inhibition rate (%) of cell activity was calculated as
follows:
Inhibition rate (%) = (A490control-A490sample)/
A490control×100%
The half maximal inhibitory concentrations (IC 50)
were calculated using GraphPad Prism 5.

Flow cytometric analysis of the cell cycle

Cell repairing ability assessment

Cell cycle analysis was conducted by using a Cell
Cycle Analysis Kit (Beyotime, Shanghai, P.R. China)
following the manufacturer’s instruction. Briefly, after
treatment with and without EA for 24, 48 or 72 h, PANC1 cells were harvested. PANC-1 cells were trypsinized
and centrifuged at 1,500×g for 5 min. The supernatant
was removed and the cells were washed with phosphate
buffered saline (PBS) and fixed with 70% ethanol at 4°C
for 24 h. The cells were then washed and stained with a
solution containing 50 μg/mL of PI and 100 μg/mL of
RNase A at 37°C for 30 min in the dark. The cellular DNA
content and cell cycle phase distribution were analyzed
using flow cytometry (Beckman Coulter, Epics XL).

PANC-1 cell repairing ability was evaluated using
wound healing assay. Cells (1 × 104 in 100 μL) were
seeded on 6-well plates for 24h. A scratch was drawn in
these cells with a blunt head and cells were washed three
times. At last, these cells were incubated with various
concentration of EA at 37°C for 24 and the cell repairing
ability was observed.

Cell migration and invasion assay
The ability of migration and invasion of PANC-1
cells was examined using Transwell chambers. For cell
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

12308

Oncotarget

Western blot analysis

antioedematous effects of Lafoensia pacari extract and
ellagic acid. J Pharm Pharmacol. 2006;58:1265-73.

PANC-1 cells (5 × 106) were treated with various
concentrations of EA and vehicle respectively for 24,
48 or 72 h. Total protein extract from PANC-1 cells
was prepared using cell lysis buffer. The lysates (30μg)
was resolved on SDS-PAGE and electroblotted onto
polyvinylidene difluoride membrane (PVDF, Millipore
Corp., Bedford, MA) and immunblotted using various
primary antibodies including COX-2 (1 : 1000), NFκB (p65) (1 : 1000), E-cadherin (1 : 1000), Vimentin
(1 : 1000) and β-actin (1 : 1000), and then incubated
with corresponding horseradish-peroxidase-conjugated
secondary antibodies. Western blot bands were visualized
by incubation with ECL reagent (ThermoScientific Pierce,
Waltham, USA) and exposure to Clinx ChemiScope
system (Shanghai, P.R. China).

6.	 Kang EH, Kown TY, Oh GT, Park WF, Park SI, Park SK,
Lee YI. The flavonoid ellagic acid from a medicinal herb
inhibits host immune tolerance induced by the hepatitis B
virus-e antigen. Antiviral Res. 2006;72:100-6.
7.	 Buniatian GH. Stages of activation of hepatic stellate cells:
effects of ellagic acid, an inhibiter of liver fibrosis, on their
differentiation in culture. Cell Prolif. 2003;36:307-19.
8.	 Vadhanam MV, Ravoori S, Aqil F, Gupta RC.
Chemoprevention of mammary carcinogenesis by sustained
systemic delivery of ellagic acid. Eur J Cancer Prev.
2011;20:484-91.
9.	 Lee SH, Kwak CH, Lee SK, Ha SH, Park J, Chung TW,
Ha KT, Suh SJ, Chang YC, Chang HW, Lee YC, Kang BS,
Magae J, et al. Anti-Inflammatory Effect of Ascochlorin
in LPS-Stimulated RAW 264.7 Macrophage Cells Is
Accompanied With the Down-Regulation of iNOS,
COX-2 and Proinflammatory Cytokines Through NF-κB,
ERK1/2, and p38 Signaling Pathway. J Cell Biochem.
2016;117:978-87.

Statistical analysis
The SPSS 17.0 statistical software (SPSS Inc.,
Chicago, IL) was applied for statistical analysis. All values
were expressed as the mean ± SD and analyzed by oneway analysis of variance (ANOVA) followed by Tukey's
Multiple Comparison Test. A P-value of less than 0.05 was
considered statistically significant.

10.	 De Craene B, Berx G. Regulatory networks defining EMT
during cancer initiation and progression. Nat Rev Cancer.
2013;13:97-110.
11.	 Akhtar K, Ara A, Siddiqui SA, Sherwani RK. Transition
of Immunohistochemical Expression of E-Cadherin and
Vimentin from Premalignant to Malignant Lesions of Oral
Cavity and Oropharynx. Oman Med J. 2016;31:165-9.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
All the authors have declared “no conflicts of
interest”.

12.	 Ma YC, Shi C, Zhang YN, Wang LG, Liu H, Jia HT,
Zhang YX, Sarkar FH, Wang ZS. The tyrosine kinase c-Src
directly mediates growth factor-induced Notch-1 and Furin
interaction and Notch-1 activation in pancreatic cancer
cells. PLoS One. 2012;7:e33414.

GRANT SUPPORT
This study was supported by the National forestry
public welfare industry special research (201404616)
and The Fundamental Research Funds for the Central
Universities (021414380182).

13.	 Mann CD, Bastianpillai C, Neal CP, Masood MM, Jones
DJ, Teichert F, Singh R, Karpova E, Berry DP, Manson
MM. Notch3 and HEY-1 as prognostic biomarkers in
pancreatic adenocarcinoma. PLoS One. 2012;7:e51119.
14.	 Krausch M, Kroepil F, Lehwald N, Lachenmayer A,
Schott M, Anlauf M, Cupisti K, Knoefel WT, Raffel
A. Notch 1 tumor expression is lacking in highly
proliferative pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors. Endocrine.
2013;44:182-6.

REFERENCES
1.	 Siegel RL, Miller KD, Jemal A. Cancer statistics, 2016. CA
Cancer J Clin. 2016;66:7-30.
2.	 Siegel RL, Miller KD, Jemal A. Cancer statistics, 2015. CA
Cancer J Clin. 2015;65:5-29.

15.	 Long J, Zhang Y, Yu X, Yang J, LeBrun DG, Chen C, Yao
Q, Li M. Overcoming drug resistance in pancreatic cancer.
Expert Opin Ther Targets. 2011;15:817-28.

3.	 Zhao M, Tang SN, Marsh JL, Shankar S, Srivastava RK.
Ellagic acid inhibits human pancreatic cancer growth in
Balb c nude mice. Cancer Lett. 2013;337:210-7.

16.	 Ramasamy S, Abdul Wahab N, Zainal Abidin N, Manickam
S, Zakaria Z. Growth inhibition of human gynecologic
and colon cancer cells by Phyllanthus watsonii through
apoptosis induction. PLoS One. 2012;7:e34793.

4.	 Edderkaoui M, Odinokova I, Ohno I, Gukovsky I, Go VL,
Pandol SJ, Gukovskaya AS. Ellagic acid induces apoptosis
through inhibition of nuclear factor kappa B in pancreatic
cancer cells. Word J Gastroenterol. 2008;14:3672-80.

17.	 Yamashita T, Nishimura K, Saiki R, Okudaira H, Tome M,
Higashi K, Nakamura M, Terui Y, Fujiwara K, Kashiwagi
K, Igarashi K. Role of polyamines at the G1/S boundary
and G2/M phase of the cell cycle. Int J Biochem Cell Biol.
2013;45:1042-50.

5.	 Rogerio AP, Fontanari C, Melo MC, Ambrosio SR, de Souza
GE, Pereira PS, França SC, da Costa FB, Albuquerque
DA, Faccioli LH. Anti-inflammatory, analgesic and
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

12309

Oncotarget

18.	 Tanaka R, Tomosugi M, Horinaka M, Sowa Y, Sakai T.
Metformin Causes G1-Phase Arrest via Down-Regulation
of MiR-221 and Enhances TRAIL Sensitivity through DR5
Up-Regulation in Pancreatic Cancer Cells. PLoS One.
2015;10:e0125779.

24.	 Hamacher R, Diersch S, Scheibel M, Eckel F, Mayr M,
Rad R, Bajbouj M, Schmid RM, Saur D, Schneider G.
Interleukin l beta gene promoter SNPs are associated with
risk of pancreatic cancer. Cytokine. 2009;46:182-6.
25.	 Kunnumakkara AB, Guha S, Krishnan S, Diagaradjane P,
Gelovani J, Aggarwal BB. Curcumin potentiates antitumor
activity of gemcitabine in an orthotopic model of pancreatic
cancer through suppression of proliferation, angiogenesis,
and inhibition of nuclear factor-kappaB-regulated gene
products. Cancer Res. 2007;67:3853-61.

19.	 Ghoshal S, Trivedi DB, Graf GA, Loftin CD.
Cyclooxygenase-2 deficiency attenuates adipose tissue
differentiation and inflammation in mice. J Biol Chem.
2011;286:889-98.
20.	 Giantonio BJ, Catalano PJ, Meropol NJ, O'Dwyer PJ,
Mitchell EP, Alberts SR, Schwartz MA, Benson AB 3rd;
Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group Study E3200.
Bevacizumab in combination with oxaliplatin, fluorouracil,
and leucovorin (FOLFOX4) for previously treated
metastatic colorectal cancer:results from the Eastern
Cooperative Oncology Group Study E3200. J Clin Oncol.
2007;25:1539-44.

26.	 Banerjee S, Zhang Y, Ali S, Bhuiyan M, Wang Z, Chiao PJ,
Philip PA, Abbruzzese J, Sarkar FH. Molecular evidence for
increased antitumor activity of gemcitabine by genistein in
vitro and in vivo using an orthotopic model of pancreatic
Cancer. Cancer Res. 2005;65:9064-72.
27.	 Jung H, Kim JS, Kim WK, Oh KJ, Kim JM, Lee HJ,
Han BS, Kim DS, Seo YS, Lee SC, Park SG, Bae KH.
Intracellular annexin A2 regulates NF-κB signaling
by binding to the p50 subunit: implications for
gemcitabineresistance in pancreatic cancer. Cell Death Dis.
2015;6:e1606.

21.	 Sawai H, Okada Y, Funahashi H, Matsuo Y, Takahashi H,
Takeyama H, Manabe T. Interleukin-lalpha enhances the
aggressive behavior of pancreatic cancel cells by regulating
the alpha6beta1-integrin and urokinase plasminogen
activator receptor expression. BMC Cell Biol. 2006;7:8.

28.	 Yap AS, Crampton MS, Hardin J. Making and breaking
contacts: the cellular biology of cadherin regulation. Curr
Opin Cell Biol. 2007;19:508-14.

22.	 Mahadevan D, Von Hoff DD. Tumor-stroma interactions
in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma. Mol Cancer Ther.
2007;6:1186-97.

29.	 De Craene B, Berx G. Regulatory networks defining EMT
during cancer initiation and progression. Nat Rev Cancer.
2013;13:97-110.

23.	 Pilarsky C, Ammerpohl O, Sipos B, Dahl E, Hartmann
A, Wellmann A, Braunschweig T, Löhr M, Jesenofsky
R, Friess H, Wente MN, Kristiansen G, Jahnke B, et al.
Activation of Wnt signalling in stroma from pancreatic
cancer identified by gene expression profiling. J Cell Mol
Med. 2008;12:2823-35.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

30.	 Mcinroy L, Määttä A. Down-regulation of vimentin
expression inhibits carcinoma cell migration and adhesion.
Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2007;360:109-14.

12310

Oncotarget

