Oncotarget, Vol. 7, No. 15

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

The afatinib resistance of in vivo generated H1975 lung cancer cell
clones is mediated by SRC/ERBB3/c-KIT/c-MET compensatory
survival signaling
Laurence Booth1, Jane L. Roberts1, Mehrad Tavallai1, Timothy Webb1, Daniel Leon1,
Jesse Chen1, William P. McGuire2, Andrew Poklepovic2, Paul Dent1
1

Departments of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, VA 23298, USA

2

Department of Medicine, Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, VA 23298, USA

Correspondence to: Paul Dent, e-mail: pdent@vcu.edu
Keywords: H1975, ERBB1 T790M L858R, afatinib resistance, dasatinib, ERBB3+c-MET+c-KIT
Received: January 17, 2016	

Accepted: February 11, 2016	

Published: February 26, 2016

ABSTRACT
We generated afatinib resistant clones of H1975 lung cancer cells by transient
exposure of established tumors to the drug and collected the re-grown tumors. Afatinib
resistant H1975 clones did not exhibit any additional mutations in proto-oncogenes
when compared to control clones. Afatinib resistant H1975 tumor clones expressed
less PTEN than control clones and in afatinib resistant clones this correlated with
increased basal SRC Y416, ERBB3 Y1289, AKT T308 and mTOR S2448 phosphorylation,
decreased expression of ERBB1, ERBB2 and ERBB3 and increased total expression
of c-MET, c-KIT and PDGFRβ. Afatinib resistant clones were selectively killed by
knock down of [ERBB3 + c-MET + c-KIT] but not by the individual or doublet knock
down combinations. The combination of the ERBB1/2/4 inhibitor afatinib with the
SRC family inhibitor dasatinib killed afatinib resistant H1975 cells in a greater than
additive fashion; other drugs used in combination with dasatinib such as sunitinib,
crizotinib and amufatinib were less effective. [Afatinib + dasatinib] treatment
profoundly inactivated ERBB3, AKT and mTOR in the H1975 afatinib resistant clones
and increased ATG13 S318 phosphorylation. Knock down of ATG13, Beclin1 or eIF2α
strong suppressed killing by [ERBB3 + c-MET + c-KIT] knock down, but were only
modestly protective against [afatinib + dasatinib] lethality. Thus afatinib resistant
H1975 NSCLC cells rely on ERBB1- and SRC-dependent hyper-activation of residual
ERBB3 and elevated signaling, due to elevated protein expression, from wild type
c-MET and c-KIT to remain alive. Inhibition of ERBB3 signaling via both blockade of
SRC and ERBB1 results in tumor cell death.

INTRODUCTION

potent specific inhibitors of drug efflux pumps such as
ABCB1 and ABCG2; pumps that are over-expressed
in recurrent tumors and thus reduce the efficacy of
chemotherapy [1]. More recently, with the development
of drugs that have been developed as “specific” inhibitors
of protein kinases we have observed a new dimension
in tumor cell evolution, for example in which mutated
oncogenic growth factor receptors under the selective
pressure of a kinase inhibitor gain additional mutations to
render themselves resistant to the original kinase inhibitor
drug or where tumor cells utilize the redundancy between
some survival signaling pathways, changing their need for
survival signaling from one pathway to another signaling
pathway [2, 3].

It is well known that the signal transduction
pathways in a tumor cell, from receptor to nucleus,
exhibit a high degree of plasticity and redundancy thereby
enabling the tumor cell to rapidly evolve as the tumor
grows to environmental stresses such as hypoxia or nutrient
depravation. Similar forms of stress-induced changes in
receptor signaling and in the overall transduction from
membrane to nucleus occur in tumor cells exposed to anticancer therapeutic modalities, including traditional DNA
damaging chemotherapies and ionizing radiation. For
example, many millions of dollars and person-hours have
been spent in the last 25 years attempting to synthesize
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

19620

Oncotarget

It is widely accepted that some tumors and tumor cell
types are at initial presentation highly addicted for growth
and viability to one specific mutated enzyme, usually a
protein kinase but sometimes a GTP binding protein. This
mutated kinase will be one-two orders of magnitude more
active than its wild type variant and will, upon transfection
into susceptible non-transformed cells cause transformation,
most often also with a large increase in cellular tumorigenic
potential. However, although some tumor cell types very
frequently have variants that exhibit a specific addiction
to a single kinase: e.g. BCR-ABL in chronic myelogenous
leukemia; mutated active ERBB1 in non-small cell lung
cancer; mutated active B-RAF in melanoma; the majority
of other tumor types and subtypes have a pleiotropic
combination of mutations in tumor promoters and tumor
suppressors that collectively facilitate tumorigenesis: e.g.
in breast cancer; head and neck cancer; liver cancer [4–6].
It is even possible, as we note in the associated companion
manuscripts, that tumor material upon standard of care
screening does not present with any of the known well
defined mutations in proteins linked to tumorigenesis in that
tumor type; e.g. the July 2015 PDX isolate of non-small cell
lung cancer, ADOR.
Because of the simplicity with which an investigator
can generate a durable stable disease; partial response;
complete response for patients whose tumors have a sole
specific addiction to the signals of one specific mutated
enzyme, the cancer experimental therapeutics field has
evolved over the last decade to pursue concepts in which
tumors can be controlled for several years by a single drug,
even when the driving oncogene may only be present in
~2% of all patients with that particular malignancy. This
has led to the creation of the “personalized medicine”
concept where, by genetic screening, the physician will
have a list of the cellular proto-oncogene proteins that have
activating/inactivating mutations and can thus treat that
patient specifically with the drug most likely to block those
oncogenic signal(s). However, at present, we have neither
sufficient biological understanding of pathway dynamics
nor computer software to deconvolute the much more
complicated everyday “every-patient” scenario where the
patient’s tumor does not contain those one or two obvious
driving oncogenes. As genetic DNA/RNA screening does
not reveal the regulatory protein phosphorylation levels
in any protein, without an unbiased screen of protein
expression and protein phosphorylation levels, such DNA/
RNA based diagnostic assays have a high probability of
failure.
The present studies were designed to ask whether,
using traditional biochemical methods and using a minimum
of DNA screening, we could define the signal transduction
changes that occur when a tumor cell expressing a driving
oncogene, in our case ERBB1 T790M L858R in the H1975
non-small cell lung cancer line, is made resistant to a
clinically relevant standard of care drug that would be used
to treat such a tumor in a patient, afatinib. We generated
afatinib resistant H1975 tumor clones using in vivo transient
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

exposure of established flank tumors to the drug and studied
without any bias, the changes in tumor cell biology.

RESULTS
We generated by transient in vivo high dose afatinib
treatment, five afatinib-resistant H1975 tumor clones; and
in parallel five vehicle control tumor clones. H1975 nonsmall cell lung cancer cells express a double mutated active
ERBB1 and for a patient with such a tumor, afatinib would
be the standard of care treatment. Pooled control clones and
afatinib resistant clones were subjected to an Ion AmpliSeq™ Cancer Hotspot Panel v2 screen for mutations in
50 genes, performed by the VCU Health System/Department
of Pathology. The results, supplied to us by The VCU/
MCVH Department of Pathology, showed no mutational
changes in the majority of the potential mutated sites
tested (data not shown). In those proteins where mutations
were discovered, mutations that could/will have biologic
consequences for the cell, we discovered that no frequently
observed new “hotspot” site of mutation was found in the
afatinib resistant clones (Figure 1).
Afatinib resistant clones exhibited higher AKT
T308, mTOR S2448, p70 S6K T389, p38 MAPK and p65
NFκB S536 phosphorylation and demonstrated a modest
variable reduction in the phosphorylation of ERK1/2 and a
substantial reduction in the total protein levels of the lipid
phosphatase PTEN (Figure 2). Afatinib resistant H1975
clones had reduced expression of ERBB1, ERBB2, ERBB3
and ERBB4, and increased expression of c-KIT, c-MET and
PDGFRβ (Figure 3A). ERBB1 and ERBB2 protein levels
were reduced by > 80%; those of PDGFRβ increased by
~275%; those of c-MET by ~150%; and those of c-KIT by
~400%. To our surprise expression of the drug efflux pumps
ABCG2 and ABCB1 was reduced by ~50% in afatinib
resistant clones that correlated with reduced HSP27 and
GRP78 levels (Figure 3B). The phosphorylation of c-SRC
Y416 was increased and the phosphorylation of c-SRC
Y527 was reduced in afatinib resistant clones. Although
the expression of ERBB3 was considerably reduced in
the afatinib resistant clones, the levels of ERBB3 Y1289
phosphorylation remained relatively constant suggesting
that the stoichiometry of ERBB3 phosphorylation was
profoundly increased in the afatinib resistant clones
(Figure 3C). As we had observed so many changes in the
expression and phosphorylation of growth factor receptors,
we next performed a siRNA screen using control clones and
afatinib resistant clones to determine which receptors, alone
or in combination, were most responsible for the viability of
the afatinib resistant cells. Selectively, in afatinib resistant
clones, combined knock down of ERBB3, c-KIT and
c-MET caused tumor cell death (Figure 3D).
Afatinib resistant tumor cell killing by [ERBB3 +
c-KIT + c-MET] knock down was significantly, though
only partially i.e. ~70% reduction, reduced by knock
down of eIF2α, CD95 or Beclin1 (Figure 4A, p < 0.05).
The lethality of [ERBB3 + c-KIT + c-MET] knock down
19621

Oncotarget

was reduced by combined knock down of [BAX + BAK]
or of AIF (Figure 4B, data not shown). The lethality of
[ERBB3 + c-KIT + c-MET] knock down was surprisingly
only partially reduced by over-expression of BCL-XL.
Control immuno-fluorescence data showing the knock
downs of each of the proteins examined in the manuscript
is presented in Figure 4C.
Growth factor receptors such as ERBB3, c-KIT
and c-MET are not only regulated by activating point
mutations or deletions, or by receptor density, but also by
their cognate ligands that can act in a paracrine/autocrine
regulatory fashion. Compared to control clones, afatinib
resistant H1975 clones/tumors expressed higher levels of
TGFβ1, CXCL-1, IL-1β, IL-6, IL-8 and CCL-13. They
did not however over-express heregulin family growth
factors (ERBB3); stem cell factor and/or G-CSF (c-KIT);
or hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) (Figure 5A, data not
shown). Based on our knock down data with receptors,
we next attempted to recapitulate our siRNA findings
using clinically relevant drugs. Individual treatment of
clones with the ERBB1/2/4 inhibitor afatinib; the c-KIT
and c-MET inhibitor amuvatinib; the inhibitor of c-MET
crizotinib; or the inhibitor of c-KIT, VEGF receptors
and PDGF receptors sunitinib did not alter H1975 clone
viability (Figure 5B, data not shown). Some afatinib
resistant clones; 2 out of 5, were killed by single agent
drug exposure using the c-SRC and c-KIT inhibitor
dasatinib. Combined exposure of afatinib resistant clones
to either [afatinib + dasatinib] (5/5 clones) or [amuvatinib

+ dasatinib] (4/5 clones) caused very high levels of tumor
cell killing (Figure 5B). These drug combination effects on
viability correlated with drug-induced: inactivation of AKT,
mTOR, and ERK1/2, with increased phosphorylation of
ATG13 S318; and with decreased phosphorylation of SRC
Y416 and ERBB3 Y1289 (Figures 5C and 5D).
In control H1975 clones; 3 out of 5 clones were
protected from [dasatinib + afatinib] toxicity by expression
of an activated form of STAT3, and 4 out of 5 clones
were protected by expression of an activated form of
AKT (Figure 6A). Expression of activated MEK1 was not
protective in control clones. In afatinib resistant H1975
clones the expression of activated STAT3; or of activated
MEK1; or of activated AKT all suppressed the lethality of
[dasatinib + afatinib]. Thus the MEK1/2-ERK1/2 pathway
represents a new key survival signal in afatinib resistant, but
not control, clones. The cytokines CXCL-1 and CXCL-8
(IL-8) signal through 7-trans-membrane receptors whereas
IL-6 signals through JAK1 and JAK2. As JAK1/2
regulate STAT3, and as activated STAT3 was shown to be
protective we determined whether the clinically relevant
JAK1/2 inhibitor ruxolitinib (Jakafi®) could interact with
dasatinib to kill. Ruxolitinib and dasatinib interacted to kill
afatinib resistant H1975 cells, an effect that was reduced
by expression of activated STAT3 (Figure 6B). We again
examined the impact of knocking down either Beclin1 or
eIF2α on the viability of our H1975 clones, though now
using [dasatinib + afatinib] treatment rather than siRNA
knock down of receptors. In control clones knock down of

Figure 1: Afatinib resistant H1975 clones do not exhibit any alteration in the mutational status of well characterized
proto-oncogenes. Pooled control clones and pooled afatinib clones from the H1975 tumors were subjected to sequencing analyses on
an Ion Ampli-Seq™ Cancer Hotspot Panel v2 screen for mutations in 50 genes, performed by the VCU Health System/Department of
Pathology.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

19622

Oncotarget

DISCUSSION

Beclin1 had no impact on drug combination lethality, with
knock down of eIF2α having an intermediate protective
effect (Figure 6C). Afatinib resistant clones were more
effectively killed by the drug combination (p < 0.05).
Knock down of Beclin1 appeared to delay the killing
caused by [dasatinib + afatinib] as judged by both drug
treatment conditions having a similar rounded up pre-death
morphology but that cells lacking Beclin1 had less uptake
of ethidium bromide. Similar viability findings were also
present in the eIF2α knock down cells.
In other studies we have shown that the drug
combination of [pemetrexed + sorafenib] kills tumor cells
in vitro, in vivo, and as was reported at the 2015 ASCO
meeting, the phase I trial showed a 61% overall response
rate in patients [7]. In follow up laboratory based studies
we demonstrated that sorafenib-induced SRC activation
was essential for drug combination killing; thus we
would predict that the afatinib resistant H1975 clones
with activated SRC would not be killed by this drug
combination [8]. Afatinib resistant H1975 clones were
killed by [pemetrexed + sorafenib], an effect that was
magnified by dasatinib (Figure 6D, data not shown).

The present studies were designed to examine
the biology of H1975 tumors that had been treated with
afatinib until the tumor volume was zero, and then
permitted to re-grow as afatinib resistant tumors. In recent
months there have been two other studies published
examining the biology of H1975 cells being made resistant
to afatinib [9, 10]. One study stated that IGF1R signaling
was responsible for afatinib resistance whereas the other
stated that activation of the AKT and ERK1/2 pathways
played a role. Several years ago another group argued
that STAT3 signaling was a key player in H1975 afatinib
resistance [11]. In all three prior studies, H1975 cells
in vitro were made afatinib resistant by prolonged treatment
of the cells with increasing concentrations of afatinib, in
one case up to 10 µM of the drug. The present studies
represent a more clinically relevant model in which H1975
tumor cells as growing tumors were transiently treated
with high concentrations of afatinib, the tumors allowed
to completely regress, and then re-grow, before harvesting
for in vitro analyses.

Figure 2: Clonal isolates of H1975 tumors from in vivo passaging and selection exhibit different biomarkers regardless
of any drug exposure. H1975 tumors (5 from vehicle control; 5 generated to become afatinib resistant) were dissociated and the clonal
isolated cells grown in vitro as described in the Methods. Cells, 24 h after plating in the absence of any drugs were fixed in situ and immunofluorescence was performed to determine the expression of the indicated proteins: HSP70; HSP90; IGF1R; P-AKT T308; P-ERK1/2;
P-JNK1/2; P-p38 MAPK; P-p65 NFκB; P-STAT3; P-STAT5; P-mTOR; PTEN; P-p70 S6K T389; P-p70 S6K S424.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

19623

Oncotarget

Prior to any genomic analyses by the fee-for-service
MCVH Department of Pathology laboratory, our a priori
prediction was that we would observe at least one new ‘hotspot’ mutation in a pivotal upstream signal transduction
pathway which would protect against cell death e.g. N-/KRAS. It was thus a surprise when our screen of multiple
hotspot mutation sites revealed no mutational changes
whatsoever. Because of our fortunate access to a Hermes
WiScan machine, we already had a large number of data sets
examining the phosphorylation and expression of various
proteins in the resistant and control H1975 clones; proteins
we knew and in part strongly believed would be involved in
any adaptation process in the tumor cell becoming afatinib
resistant. The most obvious initial observation when the
data was collated was that ERBB family receptor expression
had declined precipitously and the expression of c-KIT,
c-MET and PDGFRβ were elevated. At the intracellular
level we noted that the total expression of PTEN had

declined which correlated with increased phosphorylation
of multiple PI3K pathway effectors downstream of PTEN
including AKT, mTOR and p70 S6K. As discussed in
the companion manuscript, the stoichiometry of PTEN
S380 phosphorylation was increased in afatinib resistant
H1975 clones, which will result in a further derogation
of PTEN function. It was then discovered that c-SRC was
activated in afatinib resistant cells as judged by increased
Y416 and decreased Y527 phosphorylation; this was
associated with a very high stoichiometry of ERBB3 Y1289
phosphorylation. Based on our data and logic, we knocked
down the most probable growth factor receptors alone or
in combination and discovered that combined knock down
of ERBB3, c-KIT and c-MET was selectively profoundly
toxic to afatinib resistant H1975 cells, but not to control
H1975 cells. The combination of PDGFRβ, c-KIT and
c-MET knock down was also found to have a significant
intermediate level of afatinib resistant cell specific killing.

Figure 3: Afatinib resistant H1975 clones exhibit lower expression of ERBB1-4 and greater levels of c-MET, c-KIT
and PDGFRβ; combined knock down of ERBB3, c-MET and c-KIT selectively kills afatinib resistant H1975 clones.
(A) H1975 tumors (5 from vehicle control; 5 generated to become afatinib resistant) were dissociated and the clonal isolated cells grown
in vitro as described in the Methods. (A) Cells, 24 h after plating in the absence of any drugs were fixed in situ and immuno-fluorescence
was performed to determine the expression of the indicated proteins: ERBB1, ERBB2, ERBB3, PDGFRβ, PDGFRα, IGF1R, c-MET and
c-KIT. (B) Cells, 24 h after plating in the absence of any drugs were fixed in situ and immuno-fluorescence was performed to determine the
expression of the indicated proteins: ABCG2, ABCB1, GRP78 and HSP27. (C) Cells, 24 h after plating in the absence of any drugs were
fixed in situ and immuno-fluorescence was performed to determine the expression/phosphorylation of the indicated proteins: c-SRC Y527,
c-SRC Y416, ERBB3, ERBB3 Y1289. (D) H1975 clones (5 from vehicle control; 5 generated to become afatinib resistant) were grown
in vitro as described in the Methods. Cells were transfected with the indicated siRNA molecules to knock down the expression of growth
factor receptors alone, in pairs or as a threesome. Twenty four h after transfection the viability of the tumor cells was assessed using a live/
dead assay in the Hermes WiScan system. Green cells = alive; Yellow cells = red + green, dead but metabolically active; red cells = dead.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

19624

Oncotarget

The commonality for both three receptor
combinations are c-KIT and c-MET; with wild type c-KIT
only expressed in the afatinib resistant cells. The protooncogene c-KIT, also known as the stem cell growth factor
receptor, binds to stem cell factor and is also indirectly
activated by G-CSF. Dasatinib is a tyrosine kinase inhibitor
with clinically validated activity against BCR-ABL, c-SRC
and c-KIT. Thus, based on the fact we observed activation
of c-SRC and over-expression of c-KIT in our afatinib
resistant clones, we chose this drug as part of our screening
to determine what clinically relevant drugs might combine
to kill these clones. The question we then posited was what
would be the most efficacious second drug to combine with
dasatinib based on the protein molecular fingerprint in the
afatinib resistant clones. We tested crizotinib, an inhibitor
of c-MET; sunitinib, an inhibitor of PDGF receptors,
VEGF receptors and c-KIT; and amuvatinib, an inhibitor of
c-KIT, PDGF receptors and FLT3; alongside afatinib and

dasatinib. To our surprise, considering that the expression
of ERBB1/2/4 had been significantly reduced, afatinib
combined with dasatinib to kill 5 out of 5 clones. These
data argue that residual signaling from ERBB1/2/4 still
plays a vital role in regulating H1975 viability.
We also observed increased expression of cytokines
and growth factors in the afatinib resistant H1975 clones
though none of those factors that were elevated are capable
of activating ERBB3, c-KIT or c-MET. Due to cessation
of laboratory funding by the VCU Massey Cancer Center
for our studies, future experiments examining the roles of
CXCL-1 and CXCL-8 in our afatinib resistance system,
through 7-trans-membrane receptors and hetero-trimeric
G proteins, have been cancelled. However, we were able
to perform a short proscribed series of studies examining
the role of IL-6 signaling via JAK1/2-STAT3 on afatinib
resistant H1975 cell viability using the clinically relevant
drug ruxolitinib. Ruxolitinib enhanced dasatinib lethality in

Figure 4: Afatinib resistant H1975 cell killing by knock down of [ERBB3 + c-KIT + c-MET] is partially reduced by
knock down of eIF2α, CD95 or Beclin1. (A) H1975 afatinib resistant clones were transfected with siRNA molecules to knock down

the expression of [ERBB3 + c-KIT + c-MET] combined. In parallel with this transfection cells were transfected with a scrambled siRNA or
siRNA molecules to knock down expression of eIF2α, CD95 or Beclin1. Twenty four h after transfection cell viability was determined by
live/dead assay in a Hermes WiScan machine. (B) H1975 afatinib resistant clones were transfected with siRNA molecules to knock down
the expression of [ERBB3 + c-KIT + c-MET] combined. In parallel with this transfection cells were transfected with a scrambled siRNA;
with siRNA molecules to knock down expression of BAX and BAK; or with a scrambled siRNA and a plasmid to express BCL-XL. Twenty
four h after transfection cell viability was determined by live/dead assay in a Hermes WiScan machine. (C) Control immuno-fluorescence
images 24 h after transfection showing the knock down of AIF, ERBB3, PTEN, PDGFRβ, BID, c-MET, c-KIT, BAX, and BAK.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

19625

Oncotarget

the afatinib resistant clones, an effect that was abolished by
expression of activated STAT3 (Unpublished results). Thus
we were able to validate at least one paracrine survival
pathway in our system from IL-6, through its receptor and
JAK1/2, to STAT3, to the regulation of protective factor
expression such as BCL-XL. As our H1975 tumors were
grown in athymic mice that only lack T cells, it is possible
that the source of the IL-6 is from a hematological / marrow
stem cell source rather than the tumor cells themselves.
One noticeable difference in the killing of the afatinib
H1975 tumor cells between [siERBB3 + si-c-MET + sic-KIT] and [dasatinib + afatinib] was the relative impact
of blocking autophagosome formation and of blocking
eIF2α-dependent endoplasmic reticulum stress signaling.
Killing the afatinib resistant clones by receptor knock down
provided strong evidence that death receptor signaling was

playing a key upstream role in causing tumor cell death,
and that downstream both endoplasmic stress signaling
through eIF2α and autophagosome formation through
Beclin1 were essential mediators of this death signal. That
BAX/BAK were essential for killing but that BCL-XL
was only partially protective suggests the possibility of a
necroptotic form of cell killing. In contrast to the genetic
data, [dasatinib + afatinib] exposure killed cells in a manner
that was only weakly blunted by knock down of eIF2α or
Beclin1. Clearly, as dasatinib likely has partial inhibitory
effects on many tyrosine kinases in addition to c-SRC and
c-KIT that are rarely discussed in the literature, the drug
combination in contrast to the molecular approach can
recruit “additional pathways to death.” As heterozygous
deletion of Beclin1 is well known to be one mechanism
used during the development of cancer and for resistance

Figure 5: SRC signaling, as judged using dasatinib, plays a key survival regulatory role in afatinib H1975 cells.
(A) Animals carrying H1975 tumors were treated with afatinib. After the tumors re-grew animals were sacrificed and mouse plasma
obtained. Clarified plasma was then subjected to multiplex assays as described in the Methods to detect the plasma levels of the indicated
HUMAN cytokines using a Bio-Rad MAGPIX multiplex instrument (total 8 animals per condition, +/– SEM). The “p” values are listed
above each bar. (B) H1975 clones were treated with vehicle control; afatinib (1 µM); dasatinib (1 µM); amuvatinib (1 µM); afatinib +
dasatinib; dasatinib + amuvatinib; dasatinib + amuvatinib + afatinib. After 24 h the cells were treated with live/dead reagent and the amount
of cell killing determined. (C) and (D) H1975 clones were treated with vehicle control; afatinib (1 µM); dasatinib (1 µM); amuvatinib
(1 µM); afatinib + dasatinib; dasatinib + amuvatinib; dasatinib + amuvatinib + afatinib. After 6 h the cells were fixed in situ and immunofluorescence was performed to determine the expression of the indicated proteins and the phosphorylation of the indicated proteins.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

19626

Oncotarget

to some traditional chemotherapeutic modalities, our
data show that by attacking multiple survival pathways
simultaneously, i.e. not just Beclin1, we gain an advantage
over any therapeutic intervention that is highly specific e.g.
AZD9291 [12, 13]. It is hoped that colleagues elsewhere
will be able to perform future studies to define whether and
how CXCL-1 and CXCL-8 signal to protect cells or studies
to define all of the necroptotic pathways being engaged
by either receptor knock down or [dasatinib + afatinib /
ruxolitinib] are unlikely to proceed.
At present there is a clinical trial open at the
H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center and Research Institute
combining afatinib and dasatinib in patients who are
initially presenting with a non-small cell lung cancer that
harbors a mutated active form of ERBB1 (NCT01999985).

A research group at the Moffitt Cancer Center using
mass spectrometric and other high end instrument
methodologies has shown, as a part of their studies, that
afatinib and dasatinib combine to kill lung cancer cells
expressing a mutated active ERBB1, though no actual
studies were performed to revert afatinib resistance and
in an ERBB1 T790M L858R double mutated receptor cell
line [14]. Collectively our data argues that an additional
exploratory phase I trial combining afatinib and dasatinib
should be proposed in NSCLC patients who have failed
single agent afatinib therapy. And, in addition, and
based on the results of the on-going phase I trial, that the
addition of the JAK1/2 inhibitor ruxolitinib in a pulsatile
fashion to [dasatinib + afatinib] may provide additional
tumor control and patient benefit.

Figure 6: [Dasatinib + afatinib] kills afatinib resistant H1975 clones to a significantly greater extent than control clones
and does so through inhibition of STAT3, MEK1 and AKT. (A) H1975 control and afatinib resistant clones were transfected

with an empty vector plasmid (CMV) or with plasmids to express: activated STAT3; activated MEK1; activated AKT. Twenty four h after
transfection the cells were treated with vehicle control or were treated with [dasatinib 1 µM + afatinib 1 µM]. Twenty four h after drug
exposure the viability of the tumor cells was assessed using a live/dead assay in the Hermes WiScan system. Green cells = alive; Yellow
cells = red + green, dead but metabolically active; red cells = dead (+/− SEM). (B) A pool of the H1975 afatinib resistant cells were
transfected with an empty vector plasmid (CMV) or with a plasmid to express activated STAT3. Twenty four h after transfection the cells
were treated with vehicle control or were treated with [dasatinib 1 µM + ruxolitinib 1 µM]. Twenty four h after drug exposure the viability
of the tumor cells was assessed using a live/dead assay in the Hermes WiScan system. (C) H1975 control and afatinib resistant clones were
transfected with a scrambled siRNA molecule (siSCR) or siRNA molecules to knock down the expression of Beclin1 or eIF2 alpha. Twenty
four h after transfection cells were treated with vehicle control or were treated with [dasatinib 1 µM + afatinib 1 µM]. Twenty four h after
drug treatment the viability of the tumor cells was assessed using a live/dead assay in the Hermes WiScan system. Green cells = alive;
Yellow cells = red + green, dead but metabolically active; red cells = dead (+/− SEM). (D) Afatinib resistant H1975 cells and the July 2015
NSCLC PDX isolate ADOR were treated with vehicle control; dasatinib (1 µM); pemetrexed (1.0 µM) + sorafenib (1.0 µM); or the three
drugs together for 12 h. Twelve h after drug treatment the viability of the tumor cells was assessed using a live/dead assay in the Hermes
WiScan system. Green cells = alive; Yellow cells = red + green, dead but metabolically active; red cells = dead.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

19627

Oncotarget

MATERIALS AND METHODS

sequences from mouse, rat or human cell lines) were used.
Ten nM siRNA (scrambled or experimental) was diluted in
serum-free media. Four μl Hiperfect (Qiagen) was added
to this mixture and the solution was mixed by pipetting up
and down several times. This solution was incubated at
room temp for 10 min, then added drop-wise to each dish.
The medium in each dish was swirled gently to mix, then
incubated at 37oC for 2 h. Serum-containing medium was
added to each plate, and cells were incubated at 37oC for
24 h before then treated with drugs (0–24 h). Additional
immuno-fluorescence/live-dead analyses were performed
at the indicated time points.

Materials
Afatinib, dasatinib, pazopanib, amuvatinib,
crizotinib, sunitinib, sorafenib tosylate and copanlisib
were purchased from Selleckchem (Houston, TX).
Trypsin-EDTA, DMEM, RPMI, penicillin-streptomycin
were purchased from GIBCOBRL (GIBCOBRL Life
Technologies, Grand Island, NY). Cells were purchased
from the ATCC and were not further validated beyond
that claimed by ATCC. Cells were re-purchased every
~6 months. Commercially available validated short hairpin
RNA molecules to knock down RNA / protein levels
were from Qiagen (Valencia, CA) or were supplied by
collaborators. Reagents and performance of experimental
procedures were described in [15–18].

Animal studies (lung cancer)
For studies to generate afatinib resistant H1975 cells,
athymic nude mice (~20 g) were injected with 1 × 107
H1975 cells into their rear flank. Tumors were permitted
to form for 7 days with tumors at that time exhibiting a
mean volume of 25–50 mm3. Athymic mice were treated
by oral gavage twice every day BID for four days with
vehicle (Cremophore) or with afatinib (50 mg/kg). After
cessation of drug treatment tumors treated twice daily
with afatinib showed a reduction in tumor volume of all
treated tumors to 0 mm3 for approximately 7 days after
which tumors began to slowly re-grow. Recurrent tumors
were isolated twenty five days after they exhibited the
initial re-formation of a small tumor, when they had a
volume of ~500 mm3, portions were either snap-frozen
or were digested to release individual tumor cells, and
cells from each tumor clone maintained separately i.e. we
generated 5 control / vehicle treated clones from 5 separate
tumors and we generated 5 afatinib-resistant clones from
5 separate tumors. Control treated tumors were also
isolated when they had a volume of ~500 mm3. Of
significant note for clonal characterization, the isolated
afatinib treated tumor clones’ cells were only growth
inhibited by afatinib when cultured in vitro with daily
supplementation at concentrations >> 2 µM, and as such
these afatinib resistant cells were routinely passaged in a
pulsatile fashion between experiments in growth media
containing only 1 µM afatinib to maintain the afatinib
resistant phenotype but not to promote further selective
pressure on drug resistance and thus also did not cause
selection of surviving clones due to non-ERBB1/2/4 offtarget effects.

Methods
Culture and in vitro exposure of cells to drugs
All cell lines were cultured at 37 oC (5% (v/v CO2)
in vitro using RPMI supplemented with dialyzed 5%
(v/v) fetal calf serum and 10% (v/v) Non-essential amino
acids. In vitro drug treatments were from 100 mM stock
solutions of each drug and the maximal concentration of
Vehicle (DMSO) in media was 0.02% (v/v). Cells were not
cultured in reduced serum media during any study in this
manuscript.

Transfection of cells with siRNA or with
plasmids
For Plasmids: Cells were plated and 24 h after
plating, transfected. Plasmids expressing a specific
mRNA (or siRNA) or appropriate vector control plasmid
DNA was diluted in 50 μl serum-free and antibiotic-free
medium (1 portion for each sample). Concurrently, 2 μl
Lipofectamine 2000 (Invitrogen), was diluted into 50 μl
of serum-free and antibiotic-free medium (1 portion for
each sample). Diluted DNA was added to the diluted
Lipofectamine 2000 for each sample and incubated at
room temperature for 30 min. This mixture was added to
each well/dish of cells containing 200 μl serum-free and
antibiotic-free medium for a total volume of 300 μl, and
the cells were incubated for 4 h at 37°C. An equal volume
of 2× medium was then added to each well. Cells were
incubated for 24 h, then treated with drugs.
Transfection for siRNA: Cells from a fresh culture
growing in log phase as described above, and 24 h after
plating transfected. Prior to transfection, the medium
was aspirated and serum-free medium was added to each
plate. For transfection, 10 nM of the annealed siRNA,
the positive sense control doubled stranded siRNA
targeting GAPDH or the negative control (a “scrambled”
sequence with no significant homology to any known gene
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Multiplex assays for cytokine expression
A Bio-Rad MAGPIX instrument with associated
software was purchased from Bio-Rad. The following BioPlex assay plates were used in our assays of mouse tumor
tissue: PRO Mouse Cyto 23-PLEX (M60009RDPD); PRO
TGF-B 3-PLEX (171W4001M); Mouse Cyto STD GRP
II 9-PLEX (171I60001). Mouse tumor tissue was assayed
according to the instructions provided by Bio-Rad and
with Bio-Rad technical assistance.
19628

Oncotarget

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS AND FUNDING

Detection of cell viability, protein expression and
protein phosphorylation by immuno-fluorescence
using a Hermes WiScan machine

Support for the present study was funded from
PHS grants from the National Institutes of Health [R01CA141704, R01-CA150214, R01-DK52825, R01CA192613]. Services in support of the research project
were provided by the VCU Massey Cancer Center Tissue
and Data Acquisition and Analysis Core, supported, in part,
with funding from NIH-NCI Cancer Center Support Grant
P30 CA016059. Thanks to Mrs. Grizzard for her support to
the Dent lab and to Dr. Harold F. Young and the Betts family
fund for support in the purchase of the Hermes Wiscan
instrument. PD is the holder of the Universal Inc. Chair in
Signal Transduction Research. The authors have no conflicts
of interest to report.

http://www.idea-bio.com/, Cells (4 × 103) are plated
into each well of a 96 well plate, and cells permitted to
attach and grow for the next 18 h. Based on the experiment,
after 18 h, cells are then either genetically manipulated,
or are treated with drugs. For genetic manipulation,
cells are transfected with plasmids or siRNA molecules
and incubated for an additional 24 h. Cells are treated
with vehicle control or with drugs at the indicated final
concentrations, alone or in combination. Cells are then
isolated for processing at various times following drug
exposure. The 96 well plate is centrifuged / cyto-spun to
associate dead cells (for live-dead assays) with the base
of each well. For live dead assays, after centrifugation,
the media is removed and cells treated with live-dead
reagent (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham MA) and
after 10 min this is removed and the cells in each well are
visualized in the Hermes instrument at 10× magnification.
Green cells  =  viable; yellow/red cells  =  dying/dead. The
numbers of viable and dead cells were counted manually
from three images taken from each well combined with data
from another two wells of separately treated cells (i.e. the
data is the mean cell dead from 9 data points from three
separate exposures). For immuno-fluorescence studies, after
centrifugation, the media is removed and cells are fixed in
place and permeabilized using ice cold PBS containing
0.4% paraformaldehyde and 0.5% Triton X-100. After
30 min the cells are washed three times with ice cold PBS
and cells are pre-blocked with rat serum for 3 h. Cells
are then incubated with a primary antibody to detect the
expression/phosphorylation of a protein (usually at 1:100
dilution from a commercial vendor) overnight at 37°C. Cells
are washed three times with PBS followed by application of
the secondary antibody containing an associated fluorescent
red or green chemical tag. After 3 h of incubation the
antibody is removed and the cells washed again. The cells
are visualized at either 10× or 60× in the Hermes machine
for imaging assessments. All immunofluorescent images for
each individual protein/phospho-protein are taken using the
identical machine settings so that the levels of signal in each
image can be directly compared to the level of signal in
the cells treated with drugs. Similarly, for presentation, the
enhancement of image brightness/contrast using PhotoShop
CS6 is simultaneously performed for each individual set of
protein/phospho-protein to permit direct comparison of the
image intensity between treatments.

Abbreviations
ERK: extracellular regulated kinase; MEK: mitogen
activated extracellular regulated kinase; PI3K: phosphatidyl
inositol 3 kinase; ca: constitutively active; dn: dominant
negative; PTX: pemetrexed; ER: endoplasmic reticulum;
mTOR: mammalian target of rapamycin; MAPK: mitogen
activated protein kinase; PTEN: phosphatase and tensin
homologue on chromosome ten; ROS: reactive oxygen
species; CMV: empty vector plasmid or virus; si: small
interfering; SCR: scrambled; IP: immunoprecipitation; Ad:
adenovirus; VEH: vehicle.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
Authors declare no conflicts of interest.

REFERENCES
  1.	 Chen Z, Shi T, Zhang L, Zhu P, Deng M, Huang C, Hu T,
Jiang L, Li J. Mammalian drug efflux transporters of the
ATP binding cassette (ABC) family in multidrug resistance:
A review of the past decade. Cancer Lett. 2016; 370:153–64.
  2.	 Alexander PB, Wang XF. Resistance to receptor tyrosine
kinase inhibition in cancer: molecular mechanisms and
therapeutic strategies. Front Med. 2015; 9:134–8.
 3.	 Chen YA, Eschrich SA. Computational methods and
opportunities for phosphorylation network medicine. Transl
Cancer Res. 2014; 3:266–278.
  4.	 Polillo M, Galimberti S, Baratè C, Petrini M, Danesi R,
Di Paolo A. Pharmacogenetics of BCR/ABL Inhibitors
in Chronic Myeloid Leukemia. Int J Mol Sci. 2015;
16:22811–29.
 5.	 Black RC, Khurshid H. NSCLC: An Update of Driver
Mutations, Their Role in Pathogenesis and Clinical
Significance. R I Med J 2015; 98:25–8.
 6.	 Richman J, Martin-Liberal J, Diem S, Larkin J. BRAF
and MEK inhibition for the treatment of advanced BRAF
mutant melanoma. Expert Opin Pharmacother. 2015;
16:1285–97.

Data analysis
Comparison of the effects of various treatments was
performed using one way analysis of variance and a two
tailed Student’s t-test. Experiments shown are the means
of multiple individual points from multiple experiments
(± SEM).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

19629

Oncotarget

  7.	 Poklepovic AS, Gordon S, Shafer DA, Roberts, JD, Bose P,
Geyer CE, Tombes MB, Shrader E, Strickler K, Quigley M,
Wan W, Kmieciak M, et al. Phase I study of Pemetrexed
with Sorafenib in Advanced Solid Tumors. Clin. Cancer
Res, 2015 submitted.

14.	 Yoshida T, Zhang G, Smith MA, Lopez AS, Bai Y, Li J, Fang B,
Koomen J, Rawal B, Fisher KJ, Chen YA, Kitano M,
Morita Y, et al. Tyrosine phosphoproteomics identifies both
codrivers and cotargeting strategies for T790M-related
EGFR-TKI resistance in non-small cell lung cancer. Clin
Cancer Res. 2014; 20:4059–74. 

  8.	 Bareford MD, Hamed HA, Allegood J, Cruickshanks N,
Poklepovic A, Park MA, Ogretmen B, Spiegel S, Grant S,
Dent P. Sorafenib and pemetrexed toxicity in cancer cells is
mediated via SRC-ERK signaling. Cancer Biol Ther. 2012;
13:793–803.

15.	 Sajithlal GB, Hamed HA, Cruickshanks N, Booth L,
Tavallai S, Syed J, Grant S, Poklepovic A, Dent P. Sorafenib/
regorafenib and phosphatidyl inositol 3 kinase/thymoma
viral proto-oncogene inhibition interact to kill tumor cells.
Mol Pharmacol. 2013; 84:562–71.

  9.	 Lee Y, Wang Y, James M, Jeong JH, You M. Inhibition of
IGF1R signaling abrogates resistance to afatinib (BIBW2992)
in EGFR T790M mutant lung cancer cells. Mol
Carcinog. 2015 Jun 4. doi: 10.1002/mc.22342. [Epub ahead
of print].

16.	 Booth L, Roberts JL, Cruickshanks N, Grant S, Poklepovic A,
Dent P. Regulation of OSU-03012 toxicity by ER stress
proteins and ER stress-inducing drugs. Mol Cancer Ther.
2014; 13:2384–98. 

10.	 Coco S, Truini A, Alama A, Dal Bello MG, Venè R, Garuti A,
Carminati E, Rijavec E, Genova C, Barletta G, Sini C,
Ballestrero A, Boccardo F, et al. Afatinib resistance in nonsmall cell lung cancer involves the PI3K/AKT and MAPK/
ERK signalling pathways and epithelial-to-mesenchymal
transition. Target Oncol. 2015; 10:393–404.

17.	Booth L, Roberts JL, Tavallai M, Nourbakhsh A,
Chuckalovcak J, Carter J, Poklepovic A, Dent P. OSU03012 and Viagra Treatment Inhibits the Activity of Multiple
Chaperone Proteins and Disrupts the Blood-Brain Barrier:
Implications for Anti-Cancer Therapies. J Cell Physiol.
2015; 230:1982–98. 

11.	 Kim SM, Kwon OJ, Hong YK, Kim JH, Solca F, Ha SJ,
Soo RA, Christensen JG, Lee JH, Cho BC. Activation of
IL-6R/JAK1/STAT3 signaling induces de novo resistance to
irreversible EGFR inhibitors in non-small cell lung cancer
with T790M resistance mutation. Mol Cancer Ther. 2012;
11:2254–64.

18.	 Bareford MD, Park MA, Yacoub A, Hamed HA, Tang Y,
Cruickshanks N, Eullit P, Hubbard N, Tye G, Burow
ME, Fisher PB, Moran RG, Nephew KP, et al. Sorafenib
enhances pemetrexed cytotoxicity through an autophagydependent mechanism in cancer cells. Cancer Research.
2011; 71:4955–4967.

12.	 Liang XH, Jackson S, Seaman M, Brown K, Kempkes B,
Hibshoosh H, Levine B. Induction of autophagy and
inhibition of tumorigenesis by beclin 1. Nature. 1999;
402:672–676.
13.	 Song HN, Jung KS, Yoo KH, Cho J, Lee JY, Lim SH,
Kim HS, Sun JM, Lee SH, Ahn JS, Park K, Choi YL,
Park W, et al. Acquired C797S Mutation upon Treatment
with a T790M-Specific Third-Generation EGFR Inhibitor
(HM61713) in Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer. J Thorac
Oncol. 2015 Dec 31. 

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

19630

Oncotarget

