HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Author Manuscript

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 07.
Published in final edited form as:
Nature. 2016 January 21; 529(7586): 351–357. doi:10.1038/nature16478.

Divergent clonal selection dominates medulloblastoma at
recurrence
A full list of authors and affiliations appears at the end of the article.

Abstract
Author Manuscript

The development of targeted anti-cancer therapies through the study of cancer genomes is
intended to increase survival rates and decrease treatment-related toxicity. We treated a
transposon–driven, functional genomic mouse model of medulloblastoma with ‘humanized’ in
vivo therapy (microneurosurgical tumour resection followed by multi-fractionated, image-guided
radiotherapy). Genetic events in recurrent murine medulloblastoma exhibit a very poor overlap
with those in matched murine diagnostic samples (<5%). Whole-genome sequencing of 33 pairs of
human diagnostic and post-therapy medulloblastomas demonstrated substantial genetic divergence
of the dominant clone after therapy (<12% diagnostic events were retained at recurrence). In both
mice and humans, the dominant clone at recurrence arose through clonal selection of a preexisting minor clone present at diagnosis. Targeted therapy is unlikely to be effective in the
absence of the target, therefore our results offer a simple, proximal, and remediable explanation
for the failure of prior clinical trials of targeted therapy.

Author Manuscript

Reprints and permissions information is available at www.nature.com/reprints
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to M.D.T. (mdtaylor@sickkids.ca) or M.A.M. (mmarra@bcgsc.ca).
*These authors contributed equally to this work.
§These authors jointly supervised this work.
Supplementary Information is available in the online version of the paper.

Author Manuscript

Author Contributions A.S.M., L.G., and M.D.T. led the study. L.G. planned and carried out in vivo and in vitro experiments and
analyses, and performed a subset of bioinformatic analyses. A.S.M. supervised the RNA-seq and WGS experiments, led and executed
bioinformatic analyses. D.J.H.S. performed bioinformatics analysis of mutation signatures. S.Z. developed and implemented the
computational method of finding initiating events in mouse tumours. X.H. developed the Drosophila brain tumour model and
performed imaging of Drosophila brains. P.S. assisted with mouse library preparation and bioinformatics analysis. M.R. and V.R.
performed bioinformatics analyses on DYNC1H1 and 14q loss. F.M.G.C. generated visualizations of structural rearrangements. P.E.L.
and S.J. developed the radiotherapy schedule for the mouse model and designed the custom made collimators, beds, and stages for
mouse CSI. K.Z. assisted with library preparation. B.L. extracted nucleic acids, managed the biobanking, and maintained the patient
database. N.T., Y.M., and K.L.M. supervised bioinformatics analyses at the Genome Sciences Center, including sequence alignment,
copy number analysis, and SNV and structural variant calling. Y.L., C.M. and E.M. performed bioinformatics analysis of human
sequencing and deep-sequencing data. K.T. and T.Z. supervised and implemented the targeted deep-sequencing work. K.S. performed
PyClone analysis. A.J.L.R. and S.S. designed and implemented PyClone, and supervised its use. H.F., S.M-L., J.R., and T.P. assisted
with bioinformatic analyses. J.L., and L.Q., assisted with animal care, and N.K., B.L.H., J.J.Y.L., L.K.D., Xin W., S.C.M., A.M.,
K.A.M., C.N., John P., A.R., and Y.Y.T. provided technical support. Xiaochong W. generated the transgenic mouse model and offered
technical advice. A.A., M.B., Y.S.N.B., R.C., Y.C., E.C., R.C., N.D., A.H., D.L., H.I.L., W.L., M.M., P.P., J.Q.Q., J.E.S., A.T., T.W.,
I.B., and Y.Z., led and performed RNA-seq and WGS library preparation and sequencing experiments and performed data analyses.
A.K., D.T.W.J., M.K., P.A.N., and S.M.P. at DKFZ performed the sequencing of four patients’ sets. C.C.F., José P., S.N., T.S., M.G.,
I.F.P., R.L.H., X.-N.Li., A.E.B., D.W.F., A.W.W., T.K., T.T., V.P.C., Y.-J.C., C.H., D.L., J.H.W., J.H.G. Jr, D.S.S., L.M., U.S., J.S.,
K.Z., S.P., O.A., S.E.D., D.P.C.T., C.G.C., H.W., A.R.H., W.I., T.J.M., J.J.O., E.G.V.M., J.-Y.L., K.-C.W., S.-K.K., B.-K.C., Y.S.R.,
S.B., J.C.L., S.C.C., C.G.E., M.K.C., R.J.P., M.M., M.L.G., N.J., and S.M.P. obtained the patient samples and clinical details that
made the study possible. T.P., G.F., S.T., U.B., U.T., C.E.H., P.D., E.B., J.T.R., R.J.W.-R., W.A.W., L.S.C., A.J.D., A.K., D.T.W.J.,
M.K., P.A.N., S.M.P., D.A.L., A.J.M., R.A.M., N.J., G.D.B., S.J.M.J., and D.M. provided valuable input regarding study design, data
analysis, and interpretation of results. A.S.M., L.G., M.R., S.Z., G.D.B., M.A.M. and M.D.T. wrote the manuscript. M.A.M. and
M.D.T. provided financial and technical infrastructure and oversaw the study. M.A.M. and M.D.T. are joint senior authors and project
co-leaders.
The authors declare no competing financial interests.

Morrissy et al.

Page 2

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Extensive efforts to understand the molecular underpinnings of medulloblastoma1–7 are
driven by the desire to develop rational, targeted therapies that will increase survival rates,
and diminish the considerable complications of radiotherapy and cytotoxic chemotherapy8.
The development of targeted therapy for medulloblastoma has been hampered by the relative
paucity of somatic single nucleotide variants (SNV), the low tumour incidence compared to
adult epithelial malignancies, and the existence of four distinct molecular subgroups (Shh,
Wnt, Group 3, and Group 4)9,10. The common practice in paediatric oncology is for novel
agents to be tested in phase I and/or phase II trials that enroll children previously treated
with radiotherapy and cytotoxic chemotherapy. The majority of basic and translational
research on the biology of medulloblastoma makes use of samples or models of
medulloblastoma that have not been exposed to prior anti-tumour therapies. There are very
few genomic studies on recurrent medulloblastoma, as recurrent disease is nearly universally
fatal, and surgery at the time of recurrence is associated with significant morbidity and
discomfort11. The current clinical pathway in which new agents are tested at recurrence is
therefore based on the unsubstantiated premise that the recurrent tumour is biologically and
genetically highly similar to the tumour at diagnosis, and therefore well represented by
tumour models derived from pre-treatment tissue samples.

Author Manuscript

Recent genomic approaches in liquid cancers (frequently re-biopsied) have suggested that
the tumour genome at the time of recurrence is divergent from the genome at diagnosis12–17,
as seen in some solid cancers18–20. Critical and careful examination of human cancer
xenografts clearly demonstrates clonal evolution21–23, even in the absence of therapy.
Almost all medulloblastoma research to evaluate novel agents has been carried out with cell
lines or xenografts derived from naive biopsies, or mouse models in which the experimental
therapy is provided at diagnosis (not after standard therapy). Successful phase I or phase II
trials of novel agents are uncommon in paediatric oncology, particularly for targeted agents,
and almost completely non-existent for medulloblastoma. We hypothesized that recurrent
medulloblastoma is highly genetically divergent from patient matched pre-therapy disease,
current experimental models fail to model recurrent disease, and that genetic divergence
with loss of targets at recurrence could account for the lack of success seen in clinical trials.

A mouse model of recurrent Shh meduloblastoma

Author Manuscript

To develop an in vivo, functional genomic, ‘humanized’ mouse model of recurrent
medulloblastoma we studied Ptch+/− mice that have transposition of the Sleeping Beauty
(SB) transposon in the Math1 compartment of the developing cerebellum (Ptch+/−/Math1SB11/T2Onc or T2Onc2). These mice have a high penetrance and short latency to develop
metastatic sonic hedgehog (Shh) medulloblastoma7,24. To accurately model recurrent
medulloblastoma, we performed subtotal tumour removal for 38 Ptch+/−/Math1-SB11/
T2Onc or T2Onc2 mice. (Extended Data Fig. 1a). Standard therapy for children with
metastatic medulloblastoma includes multi-fractionated image guided craniospinal
irradiation (CSI) to 36 Gy over four weeks. After surgery, mice received 18 fractions (2 Gy
each) of CSI over four weeks. To selectively target the central nervous system (CNS) and to
spare targeting non-CNS tissues, we used two-dimensional (2D) fluoroscopic images
(Extended Data Fig. 1b) and three-dimensional (3D) volumetric conebeam CT (computed

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 07.

Morrissy et al.

Page 3

Author Manuscript

tomography) images (Fig. 1a). After completion of therapy, mice were monitored for tumour
recurrence. The combination of microsurgical resection followed by image guided
fractionated CSI allows us to accurately mimic the therapy given to children with
medulloblastoma. Using an intent-to-treat analysis, mice treated with surgery and CSI have
an increased medulloblastoma-free survival compared to untreated controls (Fig. 1b),
median survival is 118 days for the treated group, and 5 days for the control group. However,
11/18 (61%) of treated mice developed local and/or metastatic relapse (Extended Data Fig.
1c).

Genetic divergence in recurrent mouse medulloblastoma

Author Manuscript

Massively parallel sequencing of transposon insertions analysed using a significant
recurrence method identified 23 gCISs (genic Common Insertion Sites) (Supplementary
Table 1a) in 11 primary tumours, and 40 gCISs from the local and metastatic
recurrences7,25. gCISs in the diagnostic samples are extremely different from those at
recurrence (Fig. 1c), with only the known medulloblastoma tumour suppressor gene CBP
(also known as CREBBP) found across all compartments, and only Trp53, Arid1b, and Tcf4
identified in both recurrent compartments (Supplementary Table 1a). We also developed a
complementary computational method based on the concept that tumour cell doublings will
produce a characteristic pattern of Sleeping Beauty insertion site frequency, with driverinitiating insertions being most frequent. Results from this strategy predict driver events that
show a cancer pathway enrichment, replicate the lack of overlap between events important
for primary tumorigenesis versus those at recurrence, and identify loss of function of Trp53
as a key event in the pathogenesis of recurrence (Supplementary Table 1b and
Supplementary Note).

Author Manuscript

Clonal transposon insertions in Trp53, Arid1b and Tcf4 are distributed across the coding
region of genes and are predicted to result in loss of function (Extended Data Fig. 1e)26,27.
End-point PCR for Trp53 insertions shows that they are highly clonal in the recurrences, and
either absent or present in a subclone of the matched primary tumours (Extended Data Fig.
1f). Similarly, driver events predicted by our complementary computational method that are
clonally prominent at diagnosis are reduced at recurrence, while events prominent at
recurrence are not seen at diagnosis (Supplementary Table 1c). We conclude that
medulloblastoma recurrences have undergone substantial genetic divergence, possibly due to
clonal selection secondary to surgery and radiation.

Author Manuscript

Humans with germline mutations in TP53 develop Li-Fraumeni syndrome and are at
increased risk of developing medulloblastoma. Somatic mutations of TP53 are also found in
sporadic human medulloblastomas28. Human Shh medulloblastomas with mutations in TP53
are almost always fatal, as they fail to respond to current therapies including radiation28.
Similarly, we find that animals whose recurrence contains a clonally selected Trp53 insertion
(gCIS), exhibit a worse prognosis (Extended Data Fig. 1g). In our model, driver Trp53
insertions are not clonal at diagnosis, but become clonal at recurrence (Supplementary Table
1c). We observe decreased expression of the TP53 transcriptional target p21 in recurrent
medulloblastomas with gCIS in Trp53, indicating loss of function (Extended Data Fig. 2a).
To further demonstrate the consequence of defective p53 signalling on the therapeutic

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 07.

Morrissy et al.

Page 4

Author Manuscript

outcome after radiation in vivo, we studied a Drosophila neuronal brain tumour model, in
which we expressed the oncogene dpn using insc-Gal4 in the neural stem cell lineage29.
Treating the third instar larvae bearing brain tumours with 40 Gy irradiation resulted in
widespread apoptosis in the brain lobes (Fig. 1d, e). Strikingly, expressing a dominant
negative form of the Drosophila p53, p53R159N (ref. 30), essentially abrogated this radiationinduced cell death response (Fig. 1d, e), while moderately increasing the level of mitosis
(Extended Data Fig. 1h).

Author Manuscript

Examination of the transposon insertion patterns in each compartment by animal (Fig. 2a)
confirms the paucity of overlap in clonal genetic events between matched diagnostic and
recurrent tumours. Although some insertions that assume clonal dominance at recurrence
probably arise due to selection, others are true de novo insertions not found in the primary
tumour (Fig. 2b and Extended Data Fig. 2b). Many other clonal insertions in the recurrence
are indeed found in very restricted subclones of their matching primary tumour (Extended
Data Fig. 2c–e). We used pathway analysis to compare the driver events present in the
diagnostic samples versus the local recurrent samples. Initiating driver insertions were
enriched in the Shh signalling pathway at diagnosis, but not at recurrence. Conversely, the
locally recurrent samples had over-representation of insertions in the TP53 pathway, as well
as in genes important in the DNA damage response that were not seen at diagnosis
(Supplementary Table 1d). We conclude that in our mouse model of recurrent Shh
medulloblastoma, the recurrent tumour has undergone a major change in its biology through
a process of clonal selection, and that most targets identified in the diagnostic sample are
unlikely to be present in the dominant clone at the time of recurrence.

Genetic divergence in recurrent human medulloblastoma
Author Manuscript

To validate our mouse model of recurrent medulloblastoma, we collected therapy-naive
primary human medulloblastoma samples and patient-matched recurrent tumours (after
radiation and chemotherapy, or radiation alone). Therapy-naive and recurrent
medulloblastoma tumour pairs with (n = 15) and without (n = 18) matched germline DNA
were profiled by whole-genome sequencing (WGS). An additional 10 recurrent tumours
with matching germline also underwent WGS (no pre-therapy biopsy available). Three
additional therapy-naive tumours with matching recurrences were also profiled from
formalin fixed paraformaldehyde embedded (FFPE) material using whole-exome sequencing
(WES), for a total of 46 patient samples (Supplementary Table 2a, b, g, h).

Author Manuscript

We performed integrative analysis of somatic SNVs, copy number aberrations (CNAs), loss
of heterozygosity (LOH), short indels, and large-scale structural rearrangements from our
WGS data. Our results demonstrate striking genetic divergence between therapy-naive
medulloblastoma and patient-matched recurrent medulloblastoma across all subgroups (Fig.
3a–c and Supplementary Information). Strikingly, in 13/15 patients the somatic mutational
burden increased by an average of fivefold at recurrence (P value = 2.7 × 10−4; Fig. 3a).
Although two exceptions (MB-REC-15/16) have more somatic SNVs than the average
therapy-naive tumour, their matched recurrences are similar to other recurrent
medulloblastomas. In every case, only a minority of genetic events is shared by therapynaive and patient-matched recurrent tumours (Supplementary Information and

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 07.

Morrissy et al.

Page 5

Author Manuscript

Supplementary Table 2c, d). Similar to our mouse model, on average, only 11.8% of human
somatic SNVs and indels were present in both the diagnostic and recurrent samples,
demonstrating a substantial genetic divergence at recurrence.

Author Manuscript

We classified mutations based on their allelic frequencies (Methods; ref. 31) and noted a
significant increase in the proportion of clonal mutations post-therapy (1.9-fold increase; P
value = 8.7 × 10−3; Extended Data Fig. 3, Supplementary Information and Supplementary
Table 2j), an observation consistent with therapy-induced selection eliminating lowfrequency lineages in the primary tumour. Specifically, the majority (60.5%) of damaging
clonal mutations present in primary tumours consistently decrease in abundance posttherapy and either become subclonal (25.9%), or disappear completely (34.6%). Only 25%
of patients retain the full set of clonal SNVs post-therapy, with most patients having no
retention (41.6%) or partial retention (33.3%) of clonality. Strikingly, damaging clonal
mutations post-relapse outnumber the clonal events retained from the primary tumour by
fivefold, indicating the importance of profiling this compartment.
In cases without germline controls, we enriched for somatic variants by considering events
restricted to either the therapy-naive or the recurrent tumour, and found the same trend of
increased mutational burden at recurrence (Fig. 3a). Comparison of mutational spectra
between the therapy-naive and recurrent compartments reveals four main SNV signatures
whose relative proportions change significantly at relapse (Extended Data Fig. 4a, b).
Consistent with observations in AML14, recurrences had a significantly increased proportion
of transversions, possibly due to DNA damage induced by therapy (Extended Data Fig. 4c–
e).

Author Manuscript

Structural aberrations are also observed at a higher frequency at recurrence (Fig. 3c;
Supplementary Table 2e, f and Supplementary Information), with a subset of aberrations
identified at diagnosis no longer observed at recurrence. For instance, the diagnostic sample
of MB-REC-14 harbours a TERT amplification absent at recurrence (Extended Data Fig.
5a). Discordance across time makes TERT32 a less desirable therapeutic target in this patient
at recurrence. Conversely, MB-REC-09 demonstrates chromothripsis involving the MYC
locus only at recurrence33 (P value = 3.97 × 10−7, Extended Data Fig. 5b).

Author Manuscript

Two-thirds of patients have deleterious events in at least one gene for which an antineoplastic drug interaction has been defined34 (n = 9 of 15; Extended Data Fig. 5c and
Supplementary Table 2i). The current assumption that all putative drug targets present at
diagnosis are retained post-therapy is only valid in 4 of these patients (44.4%), though in one
of these cases, we see different mutations in SMO before and after therapy, indicating
convergent evolution. Of the other five patients, two have a complete switch in actionable
targets from the naive to the post-therapy samples, and three patients gain actionable targets
post-therapy (Extended Data Fig. 5c). Cumulatively, our data demonstrate that putative drug
targets discovered in therapy-naive tumours are not, as previously assumed, representative of
the targets present at recurrence. A number of targetable events are present in the recurrent
tumour as subclonal mutations, indicating that a combination therapy approach may be
necessary to minimize evolution of resistance35.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 07.

Morrissy et al.

Page 6

Author Manuscript

Clonal selection drives recurrence

Author Manuscript

Patient MB-REC-12 harbours a clinically compelling example of a homozygous PTCH1
driver mutation that is clonally dominant in the primary tumour and completely eradicated
by therapy (Supplementary Table 2k). The nature of the PTCH1−/− driver (heterozygous
mutation followed by chr9q LOH) reveals that the recurrent tumour is derived from an
ancestral lineage with wild-type chr9q heterozygosity (Fig. 4a, b). Thus, cells derived from
the ancestral clone remained present at low frequency in the primary tumour, and a sublineage of these cells driven by CDKN2A and CDKN2B−/− loss successfully reconstituted
the tumour post-therapy. The shift in driver from PTCH1 does not change the subgroup
affiliation of the tumour, as this and other Shh patients retain a Shh-like transcriptional
signature (Supplementary Table 2l). This complete switch in ‘trunk’ driver mutations posttherapy highlights the evolutionary plasticity of medulloblastoma, and imparts a cautionary
note to the therapeutic strategy of targeting trunk mutations.

Author Manuscript

We used EXPANDS36 to computationally model the clonal diversity of the primary and
recurrent tumours and globally assess clonal dynamics as a function of therapy. Leveraging
genome-wide mutation and copy number data, EXPANDS infers a branched evolution
pattern in 14 primary and recurrent tumour samples with matched patient germline (Fig. 4c;
Extended Data Fig. 6a and Supplementary Table 3a). In the majority of patients (8/14), all
clones in the recurrent tumour arise from a single lineage in the primary tumour (Fig. 4c and
Extended Data Fig. 6a). In the remaining 6 patients, we see a more intermediate (MBREC-02/07/16) or high (MB-REC-03/13/14) phylogenetic similarity to the primary tumour.
Most patients have an increased number of clonal populations post therapy (71.4%), and
Group 4 tumours stood out as significantly more heterogeneous (diversity measured by the
Shannon Index37; P value = 0.029, Extended Data Fig. 6b and Supplementary Table 3b).

Author Manuscript

To more precisely delineate the extent of clonal selection in recurrent human
medulloblastoma, we performed ultra-deep sequencing of 192 patient-specific SNVs (n = 20
patients; Supplementary Table 3c) and compared their cellular prevalence pre- and posttherapy using PyClone38. PyClone identifies clusters of somatic SNVs that co-occur in the
same lineage, and determines their cellular prevalence (the proportion of tumour cells
harbouring the SNV). We observed three types of patterns consistent with the findings from
EXPANDS: (1) subclonal lineages in the primary tumour expanding to become clonal at
relapse, (2) clonal lineages in the primary tumour that become subclonal at relapse, and (3)
lineages in the primary tumour that retain the same cellular prevalence upon tumour relapse
(Fig. 4d and Extended Data Fig. 6c). In each and every tumour we observe a significant
incidence of novel mutations restricted to the dominant clone at the time of recurrence
(Extended Data Fig. 7a). On the basis of the results from our mouse model, we hypothesized
that some of these events might exist as rare subclones at diagnosis. To determine the
sensitivity to detect rare (<5%) sub-clonal events, we focused on clonal SNVs in the
recurrences that had at least one read of support in the primary sample and confirmed the
presence of subclonal events in the primary tumour present at frequencies as low as 2/10,000
(Extended Data Fig. 7b–d and Extended Data Fig. 8). Overall, we find evidence for
significant expansion of clones initially present at <5% in the therapy-naive tumour in 16/20

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 07.

Morrissy et al.

Page 7

Author Manuscript

patients, indicating that clonal selection is commonly observed after therapy for
medulloblastoma (Extended Data Fig. 7a).

Convergent biological pathways at relapse
We observe recurrently mutated genes and pathways restricted to the recurrent compartment
(Extended Data Fig. 9 and Supplementary Table 2q). Similar to data from our mouse model,
genetic events in TP53 pathway genes (n = 12/23, 52.2%; KEGG04115) or the actual TP53
gene (n = 6/23, 26.1%) are frequent in the human recurrences, predominantly in Shh
medulloblastoma (Fig. 5). The deleterious effects of TP53 on recurrence of Shh
medulloblastoma are known, and we conclude that in both humans and mice, TP53 pathway
alterations constitute a common feature observed at recurrence of Shh medulloblastoma28,39.

Author Manuscript

Additionally, recurrent damaging mutations in DYNC1H1 are restricted to the post-therapy
compartment in 16% of human Shh tumours (Fig. 5 and Supplementary Table 2q), and
mutations in this gene are mutually exclusive with mutations in TP53. Therapy-naive Shh
medulloblastoma with deletion of one copy of the DYNC1H1 locus (chr14q) have a poor
prognosis, but chr14q loss has no prognostic impact for non-Shh medulloblastoma (Fig. 5b,
c; Extended Data Fig. 10a–e and Supplementary Table 4a–d). Notably, recurrence rates were
higher in patients with chr14q loss (50%, 7/14) as compared to balanced chr14q (30%,
7/23). Furthermore, cases with chr14q loss were mutually exclusive with DYNC1H1
mutations, and show decreased DYNC1H1 expression (Fig. 5 and Extended Data Fig. 10a,
c). Cumulatively, 6/15 (40%) Shh medulloblastoma recurrences functionally lose one
DYNC1H1 allele. Taken together, we observed TP53 gene and pathway mutations,
DYNC1H1 mutations, or chr14q losses in 79% of recurrent Shh medulloblastoma.

Author Manuscript

These genomically defined pathway signatures were recapitulated at the transcriptional level
(Supplementary Table 2l–p). Comparisons of primary versus relapsed Group 4 recurrences
(n = 3) show enrichment for gene sets involving extracellular matrix and cell surface
receptor linked signal transduction. In contrast, Shh tumours (n = 3) show significant
enrichment in P53 signalling and apoptosis-related gene sets, indicating that apoptotic
escape may play a significant role in Shh recurrences; this is consistent with our therapyresistant Shh mouse model, where we observed enrichment in TP53 pathway gene sets in the
local recurrences (Supplementary Table 1d).

Discussion

Author Manuscript

Genomic approaches, xenografts, and mouse models of medulloblastoma used
experimentally to identify targets for rational therapy are based on untreated
medulloblastoma. Paradoxically, novel agents are tested in children with highly treated
medulloblastoma based on the assumption that biology at recurrence is largely similar to
biology at presentation. Targeted therapy by definition is based on the identification of
targets present exclusively in the diseased cell. Our data demonstrate that the model of
tumour biology as static is not valid for medulloblastoma, which instead demonstrates
striking evolution over time. Clinical trials of targeted therapy based on targets no longer
present in the dominant clone at the time of recurrence would seem doomed to failure.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 07.

Morrissy et al.

Page 8

Author Manuscript

Although genetic events present in the dominant clone at diagnosis are unlikely to be present
in the dominant clone at recurrence, we have previously shown that molecular subgroup
affiliation is extremely stable at the time of recurrence, suggesting that therapeutic strategies
based on susceptibility across a subgroup might be efficacious both upfront and at
recurrence11,40.

Author Manuscript

Our results comparing tumour genetics post-therapy for both human and murine
medulloblastoma demonstrate that the dominant clone at recurrence arises at least in part
through clonal selection of a minor clone that was already present at the time of diagnosis.
Although our ability to identify recurrent driver SNVs and CNAs at the time of recurrence is
hampered by sample size, there is a clear convergence in both human and mouse Shh
medulloblastoma on events that drive genomic instability and aneuploidy. The recurrent
convergence on a single pathway (genomic stability) after radiation treatment of Shh
medulloblastoma suggests that it might be possible to develop anticipatory therapy41, in
which genes/pathways responsible for therapeutic resistance are targeted at the time of initial
therapy in order to prevent the emergence of resistance clones, or to modulate pathways such
that resistant clones are outcompeted by therapy-sensitive ones42. Our ‘humanized mouse
model’ of recurrent medulloblastoma demonstrates the remarkable power of appropriate
‘humanized’ model systems to predict pathways of therapy resistance. We would suggest
that for all future clinical trials of targeted therapy of recurrent medulloblastoma, it should
be mandatory to include re-biopsy to demonstrate maintenance of the target in the dominant
recurrent clone. For cases in which the target is absent at recurrence, consideration should be
given to using the novel agent in a neo-adjuvant manner.

Author Manuscript

Online Content Methods, along with any additional Extended Data display items and
Source Data, are available in the online version of the paper; references unique to these
sections appear only in the online paper.

Methods
No statistical methods were used to predetermine sample size.
Survival surgery for murine tumour removal

Author Manuscript

Male and female Ptc+/−/Math1-SB11/T2Onc or T2Onc2 mice (12 to 20 weeks of age; at the
time they developed signs of medulloblastoma) were used. We did not perform a formal
sample size estimate for the study but based our experimental plan on our previous
experience with Sleeping Beauty mutagenesis screening. When mice showed early clinical
signs of brain tumours they were anaesthetized with isoflourane, ophthalmic ointment
applied to the eyes and the scalp antiseptically prepared. A 1.5 cm long midline incision was
made to expose the skull from the coronal suture to the cranio-cervical junction. Using a
high-speed drill and a 2.5 mm trephine bit, a cranial defect is drilled 2 mm posterior to
lambda to avoid the transverse sinuses. The skull and the dura are lifted with microdissecting forceps, the bulk of the tumour is then removed using a harmon forceps with
teeth, while smaller sections of tumour are removed with a microcurette (2 mm). Surgical
samples are saved in dry ice, the bleeding from the tumour site is counteracted with direct
pressure and Gelfoam. When haemostasis is obtained, the surgical wound is sutured using
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 07.

Morrissy et al.

Page 9

Author Manuscript

interrupted stitching with absorbable sutures. Animals received analgesia and
dexamethasone post-operatively to contain the brain oedema. Male and female Ptc+/−/
Math1-SB11/T2Onc or T2Onc2 control mice were monitored for early clinical signs of
brain tumours but not subjected to surgery and CSI irradiation, no formal randomization was
used. All the procedures involving animals have been approved by the institutional Animal
Care Committee, in no case were tumour-bearing animals allowed a tumour burden
compromising normal behaviour, food and water intake or exceeding the approved volume
of 1,700 mm3.
CT guided craniospinal irradiation

Author Manuscript

Mice that had recovered from tumour resection were anaesthetized with isoflurane and
placed in the brain irradiation bed in the image guided small animal irradiator (X-Rad
225CX, Precision Xray, North Branford, CT, USA). Correct animal setup was confirmed
using 2D fluoroscopic images with and without the brain collimator (2 × 2 cm) in place, all
images were acquired at 40 kVp, 0.5 mA, using the same X-ray tube which is used for
radiation treatment. 3D volumetric cone-beam CT images were used for the visualization of
bone and soft tissues within the animal and isocentre placement. The imaging capability of
the unit were described previously43, the imaging dose to the animal was estimated to be
less than 1 cGy. The delivered dose per fraction was 2 Gy, administered 3 times a week for
the first week to prevent brain oedema, followed by five times a week treatment for the
following 3 weeks. Each daily dose was delivered with two parallel opposed-lateral beams to
correct for tissue attenuation of the dose, total daily dose of 2 Gy. Dose rate for the brain
collimator was measured at 3.2 Gy per min at 225 kVp, 13 mA, on a 0.3 mm Cu filter
(HVL: 0.93 mm Cu, added filtration: 0.3 mm Cu). The tube was calibrated at these settings
following the TG61 protocol44.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

The spine treatment was introduced on the second week of CSI irradiation, we used a
4.76Gy per 6 fractions schedule, and the mice received 2 spinal fractions per week.
Radiation to the spinal cord was delivered to mice placed supine on the irradiator stage the
irradiation was done with single or multiple posterior beams. The same imaging strategy
with 2D and volumetric 3D imaging was adopted for spinal cord targeting, using a 0.5 × 5
cm collimator or multiple fields of 0.5 × 2 cm; for the spine treatment a dose correction was
applied to compensate for the different depth of the cervical spine compared to lumbo/sacral.
Treatment dose was administered at 2.8Gy per min at 225 kVp, 13 mA settings on a 0.3 mm
Cu filter. The end-point date of the control and CSI treated groups was assessed by
independent veterinary technicians blinded to the experimental group. Medulloblastoma-free
survival from the time of diagnosis was assessed for control mice and mice that underwent
surgery and radiation, no animal was removed from the study and mice euthanized during
the study for different reasons than medulloblastoma were censored in the Kaplan–Meier
estimate for tumour-free survival.
Linker-mediated PCR and Illumina HiSeq sequencing of transposon insertion sites
Genomic DNA was isolated and purified from mouse tissues with a PureLink genomic DNA
extraction kit (Invitrogen). Libraries for Illumina HiSeq sequencing were prepared as
described previously25 with minor modifications. 2 µg of gDNA were digested and ligated to

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 07.

Morrissy et al.

Page 10

Author Manuscript

the adapters, after a BamHI digest to eliminate the untransposed copies of the concatamer,
an enrichment PCR followed by a barcoding PCR were performed25. The barcode PCR was
modified to incorporate a paired-end (PE) sequencing adaptor for paired end sequencing, the
sequence of the PE adaptor was:
CAAGCAGAAGACGGCATACGAGATCGGTCTCGGCATTCCTGCTGAACCGCTCTTC
CGATCTTAGGGCTCCGCTTAAGGGAC. Libraries were purified and pooled as previously
described and sequenced on an Illumina HiSeq 2000 (ref. 25).
gCIS prediction

Author Manuscript

Sequenced libraries were demultiplexed and aligned as described previously25.
Demultiplexing and trimming of SB transpon sequences was performed using custom
scripts, alignment of reads was performed with Novoalign to mouse assembly NCBI37/mm9
(July 2007) A chi-squared test was used to asses statistical enrichment of the integration
events within each transcription unit considering the following: the number of TA
dinucleotide sites within the gene relative to the number of TA sites in the genome, the
number of integration sites within each tumour, and the total number of tumours in each
cohort. This gCIS analysis produced a P value for each of the 19,000 mouse RefSeq genes,
and a Bonferroni correction was therefore used to adjust for multiple hypothesis testing.
gCIS predictions were manually curated to filter out ambiguities, artefacts and local
hopping. BioProject ID PRJNA306269.
Genetic algorithm for driver gene prediction

Author Manuscript

The model assumes that tumour cell division and growth are initiated by a founding
transposon insertion event, and that additional insertion events can subsequently occur in
daughter cells. According to the model, insertion events in the transformed daughter cells
are expected to decrease by a factor of 2n relative to the initial transformed cell, where n is
the number of intervening cell divisions. Details of the model are described in
Supplementary Note 1.

Author Manuscript

As with any model it is important to note its limitations. First, there is a limit to the degree to
which distinct lineages can be separated. If two lineages are governed by two sufficiently
close values of the parameter G, the components will be superimposed. If the value of d is
also the same, the identification of the initiating insertions will not be affected; otherwise,
the lineage with lower d will incorrectly identify its initiating mutation as a passenger. The
extent of this issue is dependent upon the closeness of G and the depth at which a sample
has been sequenced. It almost certainly true that other lineages are present in the data, but
arose relatively late and/or have relatively low growth rates. Therefore, the model is best
described as identifying the most clear and unambiguous lineages.
Second, a lineage which have undergone multiple gene disruptions that affect growth rate at
different generations can appear as two separate lineages. For example, if a disruption of
gene A causes rampant cell division/growth, and is followed up two generations later by a
disruption in gene B that further increases the growth rate, this will appear as two lineages
with putative genotypes A- and B-. In reality, the genotypes are A- and A-;B-. Importantly,
this does not affect the ultimate identification of both of these genes as initiators.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 07.

Morrissy et al.

Page 11

Author Manuscript

Relative clonal prevalence was calculated for the genes predicted as driver as: 2d G and
normalized to the total number of predicted drivers for each sample. Driver events predicted
to happen in the founder clones (highest G) for each sample, or showing relative cell
abundance >10% were selected for pathway enrichment analysis.
PCR for Sleeping Beauty tagged fragments

Author Manuscript

The primers for amplifying Sleeping Beauty transposon insertion sites were designed based
on the chromosomal location of each insertion site and its orientation to the transcription of
the gene hosting the insertion. The primers at the inverted repeats/direct repeats (left) (IRL)
and inverted repeats/direct repeats (right) (IRR) of the transposon were 5′AAATTTGTGGAGTAGTTGAAAAACGA-3′ and 5′GGATTAAATGTCAGGAATTGTGAAAA-3′, respectively. The input represents genomic
DNA with Sleeping Beauty transposition, which was illustrated by Sleeping Beauty excision
PCR that detected the transposon post-transposition26. Three points of input (1×, 5× and
25×) were used.
Histology

Author Manuscript

Mice showing signs of late stage brain tumours were euthanized and tissue harvested for
genomic DNA extraction as well as histological examination. Extent and location of
recurrences was evaluated by standard haematoxylin and eosin staining, Trp53 pathway
status was evaluated by p21 staining performed at the Paediatric Laboratory Medicine
Department, The Hospital for Sick Children, (Toronto, Canada) using the Ventana
BenchMark XT model. The conditions were as follows: HIER: 40 min in a Tris based buffer
(pH 8.5) Ventana CC1 (http://www.ventana.com/product/203?type=204), primary antibody
p21 (1:50) (BD bioscience 556431, clone SXM30) was incubated for 1 h at 37 °C. The
signal was detected using Ventana OptiView DAB IHC Detection Kit.
Fly stocks
The following fly stocks were used: UAS-mCD8-GFP to label cell membrane; insc-Gal4
(Gal41407 inserted in an inscuteable promoter) to drive gene expression in the neuroblast
lineage; UAS-dpn for overexpression of dpn.
Fly culture
Flies were mated and maintained at 25 °C. Fly larvae were retrieved at late third instar stage
for whole body irradiation at 40 Gy. The larval brains were dissected 4 h after irradiation,
followed by fixation and immunohistochemistry analysis.

Author Manuscript

Immunofluorescence and imaging
Larval brains were dissected, fixed, and stained as previously described29. Briefly, third
instar larvae brains were dissected in PBS, fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde solution for 20
min at room temperature, and incubated with the primary antibody (rabbit anti-phosphohistone 3, Millipore, 1:200) overnight at 4 °C and secondary antibody for 2 h at room
temperature. Fluorescence images were acquired using a Leica SP5 confocal microscope.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 07.

Morrissy et al.

Page 12

Author Manuscript

Representative images of the dorsal brain lobes were shown in Fig. 1d, e and Extended Data
Fig. 1h.
Whole-genome sequencing
All patients gave informed consent to the samples collection; unless indicated otherwise, the
samples were sequenced and analysed at Canada’s Michael Smith Genome Sciences Centre
at the BC Cancer Agency (GSC). Libraries for whole-genome sequencing were constructed
using either the plate-based or SPRI-TE library construction protocol.
Illumina genomic-plate-based library construction (350–450 bp insert size)

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

2 µg of genomic DNA in a 96-well format was fragmented by Covaris E210 sonication for
30 s using a ‘duty cycle’ of 20% and ‘intensity’ of 5. The paired-end sequencing library was
prepared following the BC Cancer Agency’s Genome Sciences Centre 96-well genomic
~350–450 bp insert Illumina Library Construction protocol on a Biomek FX robot
(Beckman-Coulter, USA). Briefly, the DNA was purified in a 96-well microtitre plate using
Ampure XP SPRI beads (40–45 µl beads per 60 µl DNA), and was subject to end-repair, and
phosphorylation by T4 DNA polymerase, Klenow DNA Polymerase, and T4 polynucleotide
kinase respectively in a single reaction, followed by cleanup using Ampure XP SPRI beads
and 3′ A-tailing by Klenow fragment (3′ to 5′ exo minus). After cleanup using Ampure XP
SPRI beads, PicoGreen quantification was performed to determine the amount of Illumina
PE adapters used in the next step of adaptor ligation reaction. The adaptor-ligated products
were purified using Ampure XP SPRI beads, then PCR-amplified with Phusion DNA
Polymerase (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc. USA) using Illumina’s PE indexed primer set,
with cycle conditions: 98 °C for 30 s followed by 6 cycles of 98 °C for 15 s, 62 °C for 30 s
and 72 °C for 30 s, and a final extension at 72 °C for 5 min. The PCR products were purified
using Ampure XP SPRI beads, and checked with Caliper LabChip GX for DNA samples
using the High Sensitivity Assay (PerkinElmer, USA). PCR products of the desired size
range were gel purified (8% PAGE or 1.5% Metaphor agarose in an in-house custom built
robot), and the DNA quality was assessed and quantified using an Agilent DNA 1000 series
II assay and Quant-iT dsDNA HS Assay Kit using Qubit fluorometer (Invitrogen), then
diluted to 8 nM. The final concentration was confirmed by Quant-iT dsDNA HS Assay
before generating 100 bp paired-end reads on the Illumina HiSeq 2000/2500 platform using
v3 chemistry.
SPRI-TE genomic library construction

Author Manuscript

Whole-genome libraries of patient samples medulloblastoma-Rec-03, -04, -06, -11, -12, -18,
-19, -22–24, -26–33 have been constructed using the Spri-TE 300–600 bp fragment protocol
as follows.
Genome libraries with fragment size ranges of approximately 400 bp were constructed on a
SPRI-TE robot (Beckman Coulter, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions
(SPRIworks Fragment Library System I Kit, A84801). Briefly, 1 µg of genomic DNA in a
60 µl volume, and 96-well format, was fragmented by Covaris E210 sonication for 30 s
using a ‘duty cycle’ of 20% and ‘intensity’ of 5. Up to 10 paired-end genome sequencing
libraries were prepared in parallel using the SPRI-TE 300–600 bp size-selection program.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 07.

Morrissy et al.

Page 13

Author Manuscript

Following completion of the SPRI-TE run the adaptor ligated library templates were
quantified using a Qubit fluorometer. 5 ng of adaptor ligated template was PCR amplified
using Phusion DNA Polymerase (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) and Illumina’s PE indexed
primer set, with cycle conditions: 98 °C for 30 s followed by 10 cycles of 98 °C for 15 s,
62 °C for 30 s and 72 °C for 30 s, and a final amplicon extension at 72 °C for 5 min. The
PCR products were purified using Ampure XP SPRI beads, and checked with Caliper
LabChip GX for DNA samples using the High Sensitivity Assay (PerkinElmer, USA). PCR
products of the desired size range were purified using gel electrophoresis (8% PAGE or
1.5% Metaphor agarose gels in a custom built robot) and the DNA quality was assessed and
quantified using an Agilent DNA 1000 series II assay and Quant-iT dsDNA HS Assay Kit
using Qubit fluorometer (Invitrogen), then diluted to 8 nM. The final concentration was
verified by Quant-iT dsDNA HS Assay before Illumina Sequencing before generating 100
bp paired-end reads on the Illumina HiSeq 2000/2500 platform using v2 or v3 chemistry.

Author Manuscript

WGS
Alignment—After marking chastity failed reads, paired-end 100 bp raw reads were
aligned to the reference genome GRCh37-lite (http://www.bcgsc.ca/downloads/genomes/
9606/hg19/1000genomes/bwa_ind/genome) with the Burrows–Wheeler Aligner (BWA;
version 0.5.7)45. Bam files were sorted with SAMTools (version 0.1.13) and merged using
Picard MarkDuplicates.jar (version 1.71). The merged bam files were subsequently indexed
with SAMTools index (version 0.1.17) and submitted to the European Genome-phenome
Archive (EGAD00001000946).

Author Manuscript

German Cancer Research Centre (DKFZ)—Patient samples medulloblastomaREC-13-16 and medulloblastoma-REC-34-35 were processed at the DKFZ in Heidelberg as
previously described2.
Analysed DNA was isolated using using a Qiagen Allprep DNA/RNA/Protein Mini Kit. On
average 125 mg of homogenized (TissueLyser, Qiagen) tumour tissue was used for isolation
of analytes. The manufacturer’s protocol was adapted to allow for DNA and total RNA
(including miRNA) isolation. DNA from matching blood samples was extracted using
Qiagen Blood and Cell Culture Midi Kit according to the manufacturer’s protocol. After
quality control of isolated DNA (gel electrophoresis), extracted nucleic acids were submitted
for sequencing.

Author Manuscript

Paired-end (PE) DNA library preparation was carried out using Illumina Inc. v2 protocols.
In brief, 1–5 µg of genomic DNA were fragmented to ~300 bp (PE) insert-size with a
Covaris device, followed by size selection through agarose gel excision. Deep sequencing
was carried out with Illumina HiSeq2000 instruments.
Whole-exome sequencing at McGill—Patient samples medulloblastoma-REC-36-38
and medulloblastoma-REC-48-55 were prepared and sequenced by the Genome Quebec
Innovation Centre and analysed at the McGill University Health Centre as follows. Pairedend libraries were prepared with the Illumina’s Nextera Rapid Capture Exome kit. Captured
exome DNA fragments were then sequenced on Illumina HiSeq 2500 (rapid-run mode)
generating 100-bp paired-end reads. Adaptor sequences were removed and low-quality reads
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 07.

Morrissy et al.

Page 14

Author Manuscript

were trimmed using the FASTX toolkit. Quality trimmed reads were aligned to the human
genome reference library (hg19) using Burrows–Wheeler Aligner (BWA) version 0.5.9 (ref.
45). Indels were realigned using the Genome Analysis Toolkit (GATK)46 and duplicate reads
were marked using Picard.
Genomic SNV analysis
SNVs from WGS data were analysed using all three methods described below, whereas
SNVs from exome-seq data were analysed only with MutationSeq.
Samtools mpileup

Author Manuscript

SNVs were analysed with SAMtools mpileup v.0.1.17 either on single or paired libraries.
Each chromosome was analysed separately using the -C50-DSBuf parameters. The resulting
vcf files were merged and filtered to remove low-quality SNVs by using samtools varFilter
(with default parameters) as well as to remove SNVs with a QUAL score of less than 20.
Finally, SNVs were annotated with gene annotations from Ensembl v66 using snpEff and the
dbSNP v137 db membership assigned using SnpSift47.
Strelka
To analyse compartment specific SNVs and indels, samples were analysed pair-wise with
the default settings of Strelka v0.4.7 (ref. 48). Primary tumour samples and relapse/met were
compared against the germline sample. In the absence of a germline sample, the relapse/met
samples were compared against the primary tumour sample.
SNV classification

Author Manuscript

Variant allele frequencies (VAF) of somatic damaging SNVs (called by Strelka in 14 patients
with matched germline samples) were classified into distinct clusters using the R package
mclust, which uses finite mixture estimation via iterative expectation maximization steps
(EM) and the Bayesian Information Criterion (BIC). Each cluster is manually categorized as
either ‘homozygous’, ‘clonal’, or ‘subclonal’, depending on the cluster VAF and the
uncertainty separating it from the next cluster. Multiple subclonal populations are numbered
sequentially, starting with the most highly prevalent population.
MutationSeq

Author Manuscript

SNVs were analysed pair-wise with SAMtools mpileup v.0.1.17 (ref. 49). Each chromosome
was analysed separately using the -C50-DSBuf parameters. Before merging the resulting vcf
files, they were filtered to remove all indels and low quality SNVs by using samtools
varFilter (with default parameters) as well as to remove SNVs with a QUAL score of less
than 20 (vcf column 6). The SNVs in the resulting vcf files were further filtered and scored
using mutationSeq v1.0.2 and annotated with gene annotations from Ensembl v66 using
SnpEff and the dbSNP v137 and Cosmic 64 db membership using SnpSift
VarScan
Indels were called in the low quality exomes using VarScan version 2.3.6, using the
following parameters: P value 95 × 10−2 –strand-filter 1–min-avg-qual 20. The indels in the

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 07.

Morrissy et al.

Page 15

Author Manuscript

resulting vcf files were annotated with gene annotations from Ensembl 66 using SnpEff as
described above, and screened against dbSNP137 using SnpSift.
Mutation spectra
EMu was used to define mutation spectra for 11 samples with germline (that is, excluding
the DKFZ samples), using the expectation-maximization algorithm50. To assess significant
changes in the distributions of mutation spectra across primary, local and distal recurrences
from each medulloblastoma patient, we used the chi-squared test. Changes in (1) the number
of compartment-specific mutations and (2) in frequencies of transversion mutations, were
tested with the Wilcoxon rank-sum test. Changes in the frequency of C > T and T > G
transversions between primary and recurrent tumours were tested using factorial ANOVA
with rank transformation.

Author Manuscript

CNV analysis (CNA-seq)

Author Manuscript

The techniques outlined in ref. 51 were followed to analyse copy number changes. Sequence
quality filtering was used to remove all reads of low mapping quality (Q < 10). Due to the
varying amounts of sequence reads from each sample, aligned reference reads were first
used to define genomic bins of equal reference coverage to which depths of alignments of
sequence from each of the tumour samples were compared. This resulted in a measurement
of the relative number of aligned reads from the tumours and reference in bins of variable
length along the genome, where bin width is inversely proportional to the number of mapped
reference reads. A hidden Markov model (HMM) was used to classify and segment
continuous regions of copy number loss, neutrality, or gain using methodology outlined
previously52. The five states reported by the HMM were: loss (1), neutral (2), gain (3),
amplification (4), and high-level amplification (5). In cases with germline, copy number
gains and losses are called against the germline sample. In cases without germline, CNV
calls were made using the primary instead of the germline sample, such that gains and losses
reported in the recurrent tumour are relative to the copy number state in the primary. The
limitations of this approach are that (1) when both primary and recurrent tumours share an
event, the CNV output looks normal, and (2) when a gain (or loss) is called in the recurrent
tumour versus the primary tumour, we cannot distinguish between the two scenarios that can
give rise to such a result. The first scenario is that there is a gain the recurrence vs the
primary, and the second is that there is a loss in the primary only. To resolve this uncertainty
for particular chromosomes of interest in a subset of patients without germline, we
additionally ran the Control-FREEC algorithm53. Control-FREEC was run using the
following default parameters, with the following exceptions: breakPointType = 4,
telocentromeric = 75,000, minimal-CoveragePerPosition = 5.

Author Manuscript

Structural variant detection
Structural variant detection was performed using ABySS (v1.3.2). Genome (WGS) libraries
were assembled in single-end mode using k-mer values of k24, and k44. The contigs and
reads were then reassembled at k64 in single end mode and then finally at k64 in paired end
mode. Large-scale rearrangements and gene fusions were identified using BWA (v0.6.2r126) alignments. Evidence for the alignments were provided from aligning reads back to
the contigs and from aligning reads to genomic coordinates. Events were then filtered on
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 07.

Morrissy et al.

Page 16

Author Manuscript

read thresholds. Insertions and deletions were identified by gapped alignment of contigs to
the human reference using BWA. Confidence in the event was calculated from the alignment
of reads back to the event breakpoint in the contigs. The events were then screened against
dbSNP and other variation databases to identify putative novel events.
SNV verification

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

To verify SNVs, samples were subjected to targeted deep amplicon sequencing of the
tumour and normal DNA. Primers were designed with the Primer3 software54 with a GC
clamp and an optimal Tm of 64 °C to ensure specificity. Primers aligned against the human
reference genome were tested with a combination of UCSC’s in silico PCR tool and custom
in-house scripts to obtain unique hits. The primer pairs were designed such that the variant is
located within a maximum of 250 bp of the 5′ or 3′ amplicon end. The primers were tagged
with Illumina adapters eliminating the need for adaptor ligation during sample preparation.
The Illumina adaptor tags are as follows: 5′ -CGCTCTTCCGATCTCTG on the forward
amplicon primer and 5′ -TGCTCTTCCGATCTGAC on the reverse amplicon primers.
Genomic DNA templates or library construction intermediates were used as starting material
to generate PCR products using Phusion DNA polymerase (Fisher Scientific, catalogue
number F-540L). The amplicons ranged in size from 188–625 bp. Amplicons were pooled
by template for direct sequencing. Preparation for sequencing involved a second round of
amplification (6 cycles with Phusion DNA polymerase) with PE primer 1.0-DS (5′AATGATACGGCGACCACCGAGATCTACACTCTTTCCCTACACGACGCTCTTCCGAT
CTCTG-3′) and a custom PCR primer (5′CAAGCAGAAGACGGCATACGAGATNNNNNNGTGACTGGAGTTCAGACGTGTGCT
CTTCCGATCTGAC-3′) containing an unique six-nucleotide ‘index’ shown here as the
letter N. PCR products of the desired size range were purified using 8% PAGE gels. DNA
quality was assessed using the Agilent DNA 1000 series II assay (Agilent, Santa Clara CA,
USA) and DNA quantity was measured using by Quant-iT dsDNA HS assay on a Qubit
fluorometer (Life Technologies, Grand Island, NY, USA). The indexed libraries were pooled
together and sequenced on the Illumina MiSeq platform with paired-end 250 bp reads using
v2 reagents. An in-house generated PhiX sequencing control library was spiked in to the
samples at molar ratio of 1:100. Reads were aligned using BWA-SW, and SNVs called with
Samtools mpileup with the following parameters: -d 1000000 -B -C50 -DES. Indels were
called using VarScan and the following parameters: mpileup2indel–min-var.-freq 0–p-value
1–strand-filter 0.
Detection of rare subclones in the primary tumours using DeepSeq data

Author Manuscript

SNVs with allelic frequencies greater than 15% in recurrent tumours were considered clonal.
To find evidence for rare subclones (< 5%) of these SNVs in the primary samples, we
generated base quality (baseQ) distributions supporting the reference and all alternate alleles
in the primary (and the recurrent) compartments. Due to our amplification and sequencing
strategy, all reads start at the same position, and the target SNV is always at a specific
position in the read (that is, a given mutation covered by 2,000 reads will be at base position
40 in all reads). Thus, unlike shotgun protocols where read starts are random, the SNVs are
never affected by sequencing errors at the end of the read (where errors tend to happen more
often), and cumulative sequencing error rates for whole reads are not applicable in
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 07.

Morrissy et al.

Page 17

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

estimating local error rates at a specific base. Instead, detection of a real mutation is only
confounded by the subset of sequencing errors at the same position in the read that causes a
base change to match the mutation; sequencing errors matching the other two possible bases
(that is, non-reference and non-mutation) are a non-ambiguous measure of the error rate at a
particular position. Thus, to distinguish sequencing errors from real subclonal mutations, for
each allele (that is, the reference allele and all three alternate alleles), we generated base
quality (baseQ) distributions from all reads covering the position of the mutation; the
reference base was further used as the benchmark distribution of a base without appreciable
sequencing errors (Extended Data Fig. 8). The non-reference alleles that had the highest (1)
mean baseQ value, (2) max baseQ value, and (3) highest number of reads with baseQ values
>30, were considered real events. When all three criteria were not matched, the subclonal
presence of the mutation could not be confirmed. At positions where these criteria were
matched, the baseQ distributions of the alternate allele closely matched the baseQ
distribution of the positive control reference base, could be easily distinguished from
sequencing errors, and nearly always matched the expected mutation at that position,
confirming the subclonal presence of the mutation in the diagnostic sample.
PyClone statistical inference of tumour cell populations using deep sequencing SNV
information

Author Manuscript

The allelic ratios are modelled using a binomial distribution and incorporated into the HMM
Titan calculations, where the output is a list of copy number and LOH events. The Titan run
for a tumour sample that has the lowest SDbw score is the optimal result and the
corresponding number of clonal clusters is the optimal one—this copy number information
was then chosen for use in further analysis. Minor and major copy number counts calculated
from the optimal TitanCNA zygosity states were attached to the allele frequency information
for each SNV and was used as input for Pyclone 0.12.3. PyClone was used to infer subclonal
populations for all samples in each case. It introduces a framework that can analyse all
samples from a single case in the same run improving accuracy of the inference. Pyclone
outputs cellular frequencies and clonal cluster membership for each genomic position,
accounting for confounding factors such as mutational genotype in the context of copy
number changes. All Pyclone analyses were done using a multi-sample model and a betabinomial distribution, with pre-calculated parental copy number inferred by TitanCNA.
Genome-wide phylogenetic analysis

Author Manuscript

Copy number and LOH information was called for 14 patients with matched germline
samples using Control-FreeC53, an algorithm that provides fractional copy number level for
segments. Sensitive mutation calling was performed using muTect55 and clonal and
subclonal somatic mutations were shortlisted if there was adequate sequence coverage in
both primary and relapse tumour compartments (10 reads minimum). Shortlisted mutations
and copy number segments in areas of neutral heterozygosity were used as input to
EXPANDS36. Phylogenetic relationships between the subpopulations inferred by the
EXPANDS algorithm in primary and recurrent tumours were generated using both SNV and
copy number segments and the BIONJ algorithm. The inferred cellular prevalence values of
each subpopulation was used to generate a Shannon Index value for each compartment37.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 07.

Morrissy et al.

Page 18

Gene-expression signature

Author Manuscript

We identified 14q associated genes in Shh medulloblastoma using ANOVA in the Partek
Genomics Suite. Gene expression profiles were analysed according to 14q status in samples
from a previously published Toronto data set containing only SHH medulloblastoma
samples (n = 82)56 in a subset of cases with available SNP6 data5,57. The top 20 ranking
signature genes were applied using k-means clustering using the R2 platform (http://
hgserver1.amc.nl/cgi-bin/r2/main.cgi) on a non-overlapping, independent gene expression
profiling cohort from Boston58 sub-selecting only SHH medulloblastomas. Survival
differences were analysed using log-rank statistics and Kaplan–Meier estimates.
Messenger RNA library construction and sequencing

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Two micrograms of total RNA samples were arrayed into a 96-well plate and polyadenylated
(Poly(A)+) messenger RNA (mRNA) was purified using the 96-well MultiMACS mRNA
isolation kit on the MultiMACS 96 separator (Miltenyi Biotec, Germany) with on-column
DNaseI-treatment as per the manufacturer’s instructions. The eluted poly(A)+ mRNA was
ethanol precipitated and resuspended in 10 µl of DEPC-treated water with 1:20 SuperaseIN
(Life Technologies, USA). First-strand cDNA was synthesized from the purified poly(A)+
mRNA using the Superscript cDNA Synthesis kit (Life Technologies, USA) and random
hexamer primers at a concentration of 5 µM along with a final concentration of 1 µg ul−1
actinomycin D, followed by Ampure XP SPRI beads on a Biomek FX robot (BeckmanCoulter, USA). The second strand cDNA was synthesized following the Superscript cDNA
Synthesis protocol by replacing the dTTP with dUTP in dNTP mix, allowing the second
strand to be digested using UNG (Uracil-N-Glycosylase, Life Technologies, USA) in the
post-adaptor ligation reaction and thus achieving strand specificity. The cDNA was
quantified in a 96-well format using PicoGreen (Life Technologies, USA) and VICTOR3V
Spectrophotometer (PerkinElmer, Inc. USA). The quality was checked on a random
sampling using the High Sensitivity DNA chip assay (Agilent). The cDNA was fragmented
by Covaris E210 (Covaris, USA) sonication for 55 s, using a duty cycle of 20% and intensity
of 5. Plate-based libraries were prepared following the BC Cancer Agency’s Michael Smith
Genome Sciences Centre (BCGSC) paired-end (PE) protocol on a Biomek FX robot
(Beckman-Coulter, USA). Briefly, the cDNA was purified in 96-well format using Ampure
XP SPRI beads, and was subject to end-repair and phosphorylation by T4 DNA polymerase,
Klenow DNA Polymerase, and T4 polynucleotide kinase respectively in a single reaction,
followed by cleanup using Ampure XP SPRI beads and 3′ A-tailing by Klenow fragment (3′
to 5′ exo minus). After cleanup using Ampure XP SPRI beads, PicoGreen quantification was
performed to determine the amount of Illumina PE adapters used in the next step of adaptor
ligation reaction. The adaptor-ligated products were purified using Ampure XP SPRI beads,
then PCR-amplified with Phusion DNA Polymerase (Thermo Fisher Scientific USA) using
Illumina’s PE primer set, with cycle conditions of 98 °C 30 s followed by 10–15 cycles of
98 °C for 10 s, 65 °C for 30 s and 72 °C for 30 s, and then 72 °C for 5 min. The PCR
products were purified using Ampure XP SPRI beads, and checked with a Caliper LabChip
GX for DNA samples using the High Sensitivity assay (PerkinElmer, USA). PCR products
with a desired size range were purified using a 96-channel size selection robot developed at
the BCGSC, and the DNA quality was assessed and quantified using an Agilent DNA 1000
series II assay and Quant-iT dsDNA HS Assay Kit using Qubit fluorometer (Invitrogen),
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 07.

Morrissy et al.

Page 19

Author Manuscript

then diluted to 8 nM. The final concentration was verified by Quant-iT dsDNA HS
assay.The libraries, 2× 100 PE lanes, were sequenced on the Illumina HiSeq 2000/2500
platform using v3 chemistry and HiSeq Control Software version 2.0.10.
Alignment of strand-specific RNA-seq data

Author Manuscript

Illumina paired-end RNA sequencing data was aligned to GRCh37-lite genome-plusjunctions using BWA (version 0.5.7)49,59. This reference is a combination of GRCh37-lite
assembly and exon–exon junction sequences with coordinates defined based on transcripts in
Ensembl (v61), Refseq and known genes from the UCSC genome browser (both were
downloaded from UCSC in November 2011; The GRCh37-lite assembly is available at
http://www.bcgsc.ca/downloads/genomes/9606/hg19/1000genomes/bwa_ind/genome). BWA
“aln” and “sampe” were run with default parameters, except for the inclusion of the (-s)
option to disable the Smith-Waterman alignment, which is unsuitable for insert size
distribution in paired-end RNA-seq data. Finally, reads failing the Illumina chastity filter are
flagged with a custom script, and duplicated reads were flagged with Picard Tools (version
1.31). After the alignment, the junction-aligned reads that mapped to exon–exon junctions
were repositioned to the genome as large-gapped alignments and tagged with “ZJ:Z”59.
Differential expression analysis of RNA-seq data
We compared the expression values (RPKM) of genes in the primary and recurrent tissues of
each tumour with data in both compartments (n = 7 patients). A gene was considered
differentially expression when the absolute difference between compartments was greater
than 10 and the log2 fold-change was greater than 2. Gene sets enrichment analysis was run
on differentially expressed genes that were observed in at least two patients by subgroup,
using mSigDB60.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 07.

Morrissy et al.

Page 20

Author Manuscript

Extended Data

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Extended Data Figure 1. Microneurosurgical resection and CT guided multi-fractionated
craniospinal radiotherapy in a Shh mousemodel of medulloblastoma

a, Under general anaesthesia, Ptch+/−/Math1-SB11/T2Onc mice with symptomatic
medulloblastoma underwent microneurosurgical posterior fossa craniotomy and subtotal
tumour removal (n = 38), followed by post-operative care and monitoring. b, Subsequently,
post-operative mice are recurrently anaesthetized, and receive multi-fractionated cranial and
spinal cord irradiation in 18 fractions for a total of 36 Gy over a period of four weeks.
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 07.

Morrissy et al.

Page 21

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Radiation is delivered under computed tomography (CT) guidance using custom-made
mouse beds and collimators in order to precisely target the entire craniospinal axis. c, Mice
that completed the entire course of craniospinal radiation were cured of disease in 39% of
cases (7/18), while the remainder had to be euthanized as they recurred locally and/or with
leptomeningeal metastases (61%, 11/18). Histology (haematoxylin and eosin staining) at the
time of autopsy is shown. d, Extent of overlap of primary, local recurrences and metastatic
recurrences initiator genes as predicted by a per-mouse driver modelling approach. e, Clonal
transposon insertions in Trp53, Tcf4 and Arid1b disrupt the coding sequence of the gene.
Sense orientation insertions are illustrated in green, antisense insertions in red. f, Insertionsite end-point PCR demonstrates Trp53 insertions that are clonal in the recurrence, but
present only in a subclone of the matched primary tumour or completely absent. Three levels
of input DNA were used for each sample (1×, 5× and 25×). g, Mice treated with
microneurosurgical resection and craniospinal radiation, whose tumours show Trp53 gCIS
insertions in the local recurrence show a trend for a shorter survival than similarly treated
mice without Trp53 insertions (log-rank test; P = 0.054; n = 10). h, Drosophila brain
tumours are induced by expressing dpn in the neural stem cell lineage using insc-Gal4. In
response to a systemic 40 Gy irradiation at late third instar stage, overexpressing a dominant
negative form of Drosophila p53, p53R159N, resulted in moderately increased mitosis in
tumour cells labelled by the membrane GFP (mCD8–GFP), scale bar, 50 µm.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 07.

Morrissy et al.

Page 22

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Extended Data Figure 2. Subclonal events in primary mouse tumours become clonal at
recurrence

Author Manuscript

a, Naive tumours from Ptch+/−, Ptch+/−/Trp53+/− or Ptch+/−/Trp53−/− germline mutant mice
were analysed by immunohistochemical staining for nuclear p21 (upper panels),
demonstrating decreased nuclear p21 expression due to Trp53 pathway dysfunction.
Tumours with Trp53 damaging gCIS insertions at recurrence (03-04-11 and 06-28-11) also
show decreased immunohistochemical staining for nuclear p21 staining (lower panels),
when compared to a recurrent tumour without gCIS Trp53 insertions (02-23-11w) (scale
bars, 25 µm and 50 µm as indicated). b, Relative dominance of driver events is shown in one
individual tumour where Tead1 is detectable in both primary tumour sample and at

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 07.

Morrissy et al.

Page 23

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

recurrence. c, d, Clonal insertions in the local and metastatic recurrences that were found at
a subclonal level in the matching primary tumours are shown by mouse. In each case, the
number of insertions with evidence for expansion from a subclone of the primary is shown
as a proportion (red bar) of the total number of considered events. Green and blue bars
depict the proportion of the total number of considered events that were found in local and
metastatic recurrences, respectively. The grey bar indicates the proportion of insertions that
are also found in an unrelated Sleeping Beauty library of similar depth. We narrowed the
analysis on matching primary recurrences with at least 1 clonal insertion in common. This
excluded 3 local recurrence cases and 6 metastatic recurrence cases that had no overlap
between clonal insertions in the primary and clonal insertions in the matching local
recurrences (black stars). c, Local recurrences display statistical support for subclonal
derivation from the primary tumours (P = 0.041; n = 7; Mann–Whitney U-test). d, Metastatic
recurrences instead show a limited extent of overlap with the matching primaries that does
not reach statistical significance (P = 0.298; n = 5; Mann–Whitney U-test). e, Box plot
comparing the extent of overlap between primary/local recurrences versus primary/
metastatic recurrences, local recurrences (with at least 1 clonal insertion in common with the
primary) show a trend for higher evidence of subclonal derivation from their matched
primaries than metastatic recurrences (P = 0.051, Mann–Whitney U-test, centre lines show
the medians; box limits indicate the 25th and 75th percentiles; whiskers extend 1.5 times the
interquartile range from the 25th and 75th percentiles, samples are represented by dots. n = 7
and 5 sample points).

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 07.

Morrissy et al.

Page 24

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Extended Data Figure 3. Subclonal events in primary human tumours become clonal at
recurrence

Author Manuscript

The proportion of somatic SNVs in the primary and recurrent disease compartments of 15
patients with matched germline is shown as a function of clonality. Black indicates
homozygous events, purple indicates clonal SNVs, and subclonal SNVs are shown in green,
where lighter shades correspond to less abundant subpopulations. On average, we observe a
1.9-fold increase in the proportion of clonal and homozygous events across the cohort
(Student’s t-test; P value = 8.7 × 10−3, n = 15).

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 07.

Morrissy et al.

Page 25

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Extended Data Figure 4. Altered spectra of somatic SNVs when comparing therapy-naive to
recurrent tumours

a, Mutations in each tumour sample (n = 15) were classified based on their sequence
context, and clustered into signatures that represent four known mutational processes.
Signature A is the age-related signature observed in most tumour types (deamination of
methyl-C). Signature B is characterized by C > A and C > T mutations without a strict
context requirement. Signatures C and D respectively resemble the MSI-L and MSI-H
signatures that correlate with low (MSI-L) or high (MSI-H) microsatellite instability. b, The
contribution of each mutational process to each primary and recurrent tumour is summarized
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 07.

Morrissy et al.

Page 26

Author Manuscript

by patient. Recurrent tumours show a shift away from signature A, and an increased
prevalence of signature B and signature D. *** P < 0.001, chi-squared test denotes
significantly different distributions; NS denotes not significant. All tumours shifted
mutational signatures at the time of recurrence, for a and b, n = 15. c, d, The number c, and
frequency d, of transversion mutations is summarized in therapy-naive and recurrent
samples. Significant increases in the number and frequency of transversions is most strongly
observed in local recurrences, and to a lesser extent in metastatic recurrences. P < 0.05,
Wilcoxon rank-sum test. e, Breakdown of transversion (Tv) and transition (Ts) mutations in
therapy-naive and recurrent samples does not show a significant trend in specific nucleotide
changes. Centre lines show the medians; box limits indicate the 25th and 75th percentiles;
whiskers extend up to 1.5 times the interquartile range (from the 25th to the 75th
percentiles), and data points beyond the whiskers are outliers represented by dots. For c, d
and e, n = 13, n = 7 and n = 6, respectively.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 07.

Morrissy et al.

Page 27

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Extended Data Figure 5. Compartment-specific driver and druggable events in human tumours

a, High-level TERT amplification in the primary tumour of patient MB-REC-14 is absent in
the recurrent sample. b, Chromothripsis involving the MYC locus is specific to the recurrent
tumour on patient MB-REC-09 (P value = 3.97 × 10−7). c, Genes with defined interactions
to neoplastic drugs (DGIdb http://dgidb.genome.wustl.edu/). The majority of patients (n =
15; with matched or parental germline) have distinct druggable targets in the naive versus
post-therapy tumour samples. Bolded gene names indicate the presence of damaging
mutations that are clonal (versus subclonal events in lighter colours), underlined gene names

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 07.

Morrissy et al.

Page 28

Author Manuscript

indicate copy number aberrations (for example, loss at the TP53 locus), and italicized gene
names indicate structural rearrangements.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Extended Data Figure 6. Clonal lineage evolution post-therapy in human tumours

a, Subpopulations of cells in each primary and recurrent tumour were identified using the
EXPANDS algorithm, based on somatic SNVs and copy number gains and losses in each
sample. Each subpopulation is thus distinguished by (1) a unique combination of somatic
aberrations, which are (2) present in a particular subset of cells. Phylogenetic relationships

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 07.

Morrissy et al.

Page 29

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

between the primary (lowercase red letter labels) and recurrent (uppercase blue letter labels)
tumour subpopulations indicate that in a majority of cases the recurrent tumour lineages are
derived from only one lineage in the primary tumour, while only a small proportion of
recurrent tumours had a more intermediate similarity to the primary tumour. b, The Shannon
Index (SI) of each tumour is calculated using the cellular prevalence of the subpopulations
defined by EXPANDS. Increasing values between the primary versus recurrent
compartments indicate an increase in tumour heterogeneity (two tailed, paired t-test; P value
= 0.029, Black lines show the medians; white lines represent individual data points;
polygons represent the estimated density of the data). c, Clonal evolution between therapynaive and matched recurrent tumours was assayed through ultra-deep sequencing (> 1,500×)
of somatic mutations, and analysed using PyClone. Cellular frequencies of clones (y axis)
are scaled by the number of mutations in each clone. Ancestral high-frequency clones
present in both compartments indicate a common cell of origin in every case. Lowerfrequency mutation clusters in the primary tumour indicate clones that subsequently expand
to dominance in the recurrent tumour (blue lines). Higher frequency clusters in the primary
tumour that are absent or extremely subclonal at the time of recurrence (red lines) indicate
therapy-sensitive clones. The number of mutations studied that support each type of event
are indicated in the inset box.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 07.

Morrissy et al.

Page 30

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Extended Data Figure 7. Subclonal expansion of rare (<5%) SNVs in the primary tumour to
clonal dominance in the recurrent compartment

a, Deep amplicon sequencing was used to profile 20 patients with clonal SNVs restricted to
their recurrent tumours as determined by 30× WGS data. Many ‘recurrence specific’ SNVs
(blue) were found in a very minor subclone (< 5%) of the primary tumour (red) when
studied by deep amplicon sequencing. Clonal SNVs (allele frequency >15%) in recurrent
tumours that had >1 read supporting an alternate base in the primary tumour are shown by
patient. In each case, the number of events with evidence for expansion from a clone present

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 07.

Morrissy et al.

Page 31

Author Manuscript

at <5% is shown as a proportion (red bar) of the total number of considered events (blue
bar). b, Evidence for clonal expansion at recurrence of clones present at <5% in the
untreated tumour was observed in 16/20 patients, indicating that clonal selection is common
after therapy for medulloblastoma. The extent of clonal selection (blue > red) varies across
medulloblastoma cases, with prominent clonal selection in some cases (MB-REC-30), and
more extreme divergence in others (MB-REC-23). c, d, Deep amplicon sequencing of clonal
SNVs from both a first recurrence (dark blue), and a subsequent second recurrence (light
blue) of patient MB-REC-31 reveals that clonal SNVs present at recurrence but absent from
a 30× WGS profile of the untreated tumour (red) were indeed present at very low prevalence
(~1/1,000) in the primary sample, indicating striking clonal expansion after initial treatment
of the untreated tumour (c; AF, allele frequency; NA, not available). This is illustrated in
panel d, which depicts the allelic frequency of a very low-prevalence PIK3CA mutation in
the primary tumour that reaches clonal levels post-therapy.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 07.

Morrissy et al.

Page 32

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Extended Data Figure 8. Base quality assessment of reference and alternate alleles at SNVs with
clonal or rare allelic frequencies

a, b, To determine whether low-frequency (<5%) base calls were SNVs or sequencing
errors, we analysed the distribution of base quality (baseQ) values for each alternate base
called. This plot shows the allele frequencies (AF; secondary y axis) and the proportion of
supporting reads with baseQ values >30 (primary y axis) for a subset of SNVs in the
recurrent tumour of MB-REC-03 (x axis). At all positions, and in both the recurrent (a), and
primary (b), tumours, we observe a high proportion (~100%) of reads with baseQ >30 at

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 07.

Morrissy et al.

Page 33

Author Manuscript

both the mutant (black square) and wild-type allele (white squares). Grey squares indicate
alleles categorized as sequencing errors. Errors have low allelic frequencies (in many cases
are just one read) and a much smaller proportion of reads with baseQ values >30. In the
primary tumour, the baseQ and AF values match the pattern observed in the recurrent
tumour, indicating that these calls represent true SNVs present at very low frequencies.
Sequencing errors in the primary sample have the same base distribution as sequencing
errors in the recurrent tumour sample.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 07.

Morrissy et al.

Page 34

Author Manuscript

Extended Data Figure 9. Pathway enrichment results for genes recurrently aberrant in the
primary tumour or recurrent tumour cohorts

Pathway enrichment analysis of gene lists derived from the integrative analysis of CNVs
(gain or loss of 2 or more copies), SNVs, indels, and structural variants specific to the
primary or recurrent tumours of each patient was performed using g:Cocoa.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Extended Data Figure 10. Genetic events in recurrent human medulloblastoma converge on
specific signalling pathways

Author Manuscript

a, Copy number profile of MB-REC-12 therapy-naive (WT, green, left panel) and recurrent
tumour (loss, blue, lower panel), showing recurrence-specific loss of chr14q. b, DYNC1H1
expression is reduced in Shh patients with chr14q loss (n = 18/80, Mann–Whitney test, P <
0.0001, centre lines show the medians; box limits indicate the 25th and 75th percentiles;
whiskers extend 1.5 times the interquartile range from the 25th and 75th percentiles). c,
Expression of the chr14 signature genes discriminating between chr14q balanced (n = 34)
and chr14q loss (n = 18) in the Boston cohort of Shh medulloblastoma samples.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 07.

Morrissy et al.

Page 35

Author Manuscript

Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.

Authors

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

A. Sorana Morrissy1,2,*, Livia Garzia1,2,*, David J. H. Shih1,2,3, Scott Zuyderduyn4,
Xi Huang1, Patryk Skowron1,2,3, Marc Remke5, Florence M. G. Cavalli1,2, Vijay
Ramaswamy1,2,3,6, Patricia E. Lindsay7,8, Salomeh Jelveh8, Laura K. Donovan1,2,
Xin Wang1,2,3, Betty Luu1,2, Kory Zayne1,2, Yisu Li9, Chelsea Mayoh9, Nina
Thiessen9, Eloi Mercier9, Karen L. Mungall9, Yusanne Ma9, Kane Tse9, Thomas
Zeng9, Karey Shumansky10, Andrew J. L. Roth10, Sohrab Shah10, Hamza
Farooq1,2, Noriyuki Kijima1,2, Borja L. Holgado1,2, John J. Y. Lee1,2,3, Stuart MatanLithwick1,2, Jessica Liu1,2, Stephen C. Mack1,2,11, Alex Manno1,2, K. A.
Michealraj1,2, Carolina Nor1,2, John Peacock1,2,3, Lei Qin1,2, Juri Reimand2,4, Adi
Rolider1,2, Yuan Y. Thompson1,2,3, Xiaochong Wu1,2, Trevor Pugh12, Adrian Ally9,
Mikhail Bilenky9, Yaron S. N. Butterfield9, Rebecca Carlsen9, Young Cheng9, Eric
Chuah9, Richard D. Corbett9, Noreen Dhalla9, An He9, Darlene Lee9, Haiyan I. Li9,
William Long9, Michael Mayo9, Patrick Plettner9, Jenny Q. Qian9, Jacqueline E.
Schein9, Angela Tam9, Tina Wong9, Inanc Birol9,13,14, Yongjun Zhao9, Claudia C.
Faria15, José Pimentel16, Sofia Nunes17, Tarek Shalaby18, Michael Grotzer18, Ian F.
Pollack19, Ronald L. Hamilton20, Xiao-Nan Li21, Anne E. Bendel22, Daniel W.
Fults23, Andrew W. Walter24, Toshihiro Kumabe25, Teiji Tominaga26, V. Peter
Collins27, Yoon-Jae Cho28, Caitlin Hoffman6, David Lyden29, Jeffrey H. Wisoff30,
James H. Garvin Jr31, Duncan S. Stearns32, Luca Massimi33, Ulrich Schüller34,
Jaroslav Sterba35, Karel Zitterbart35, Stephanie Puget36, Olivier Ayrault37, Sandra
E. Dunn38, Daniela P. C. Tirapelli39, Carlos G. Carlotti39, Helen Wheeler40, Andrew
R. Hallahan41,42, Wendy Ingram41,43, Tobey J. MacDonald44, Jeffrey J. Olson45,
Erwin G. Van Meir46, Ji-Yeoun Lee47, Kyu-Chang Wang47, Seung-Ki Kim47, ByungKyu Cho47, Torsten Pietsch48, Gudrun Fleischhack49, Stephan Tippelt49, Young
Shin Ra50, Simon Bailey51, Janet C. Lindsey51, Steven C. Clifford51, Charles G.
Eberhart52, Michael K. Cooper53, Roger J. Packer54, Maura Massimino55, Maria
Luisa Garre56, Ute Bartels57, Uri Tabori2,57, Cynthia E. Hawkins2,58, Peter Dirks2,6,
Eric Bouffet2,57, James T. Rutka2,3,6, Robert J. Wechsler-Reya59, William A.
Weiss60, Lara S. Collier61, Adam J. Dupuy62, Andrey Korshunov63, David T. W.
Jones64, Marcel Kool64, Paul A. Northcott64, Stefan M. Pfister64,65, David A.
Largaespada66, Andrew J. Mungall9, Richard A. Moore9, Nada Jabado67, Gary D.
Bader4,68, Steven J. M. Jones9,13,69, David Malkin57,70, Marco A. Marra9,13,§, and
Michael D. Taylor1,2,3,6,§

Affiliations
1Developmental

& Stem Cell Biology Program, The Hospital for Sick Children,
Toronto, Ontario M5G 0A4, Canada 2The Arthur and Sonia Labatt Brain Tumour
Research Centre, The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, Ontario, Canada
3Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathobiology, University of Toronto,
Toronto, Ontario M5G 0A4, Canada 4The Donnelly Centre, University of Toronto,

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 07.

Morrissy et al.

Page 36

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Toronto, Ontario M5S 3E1, Canada 5Department of Pediatric Oncology,
Hematology, and Clinical Immunology, University Hospital Düsseldorf, M5S 3E1,
Germany 6Division of Neurosurgery, The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, Ontario
M5S 3E1, Canada 7Department of Radiation Oncology, University of Toronto,
Toronto, Ontario M5G 2M9, Canada 8Radiation Medicine Program, Princess
Margaret Cancer Centre, University Health Network, Toronto, Ontario M5G 2M9,
Canada 9Canada’s Michael Smith Genome Sciences Centre, BC Cancer Agency,
Vancouver, British Columbia V5Z 4S6, Canada 10Department of Molecular
Oncology, BC Cancer Agency, Vancouver, British Columbia V5Z 1L3, Canada
11Center for Stem Cell & Regenerative Medicine, Cleveland Clinic Foundation,
Cleveland, Ohio 44195, USA 12Clinical Genomics Research Program, Princess
Margaret Cancer Centre, University Health Network, Toronto, Ontario 44195,
Canada 13Department of Medical Genetics, University of British Columbia,
Vancouver, British Columbia V6T 1Z3, Canada 14School of Computing Science,
Simon Fraser University, Burnaby, British Columbia V5A 1S6, Canada 15Division of
Neurosurgery, Centro Hospitalar Lisboa Norte, Hospital de Santa Maria, Lisbon
1649-035, Portugal 16Divison of Pathology, Centro Hospitalar Lisboa Norte, Hospital
de Santa Maria, Lisbon 1649-035, Portugal 17Unidade de Neuro-Oncologia
Pediátrica, Instituto Português de Oncologia de Lisboa Francisco Gentil, Lisbon
1099-023, Portugal 18Departments of Oncology and Neuro-Oncology, University
Children’s Hospital of Zurich, Zurich 8032, Switzerland 19Department of
Neurological Surgery, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh,
Pennsylvania 15224, USA 20Department of Pathology, University of Pittsburgh
School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15213, USA 21Brain Tumor Program,
Children's Cancer Center and Department of Pediatrics, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, Texas 77030, USA 22Pediatric Hematology-Oncology, Children’s Hospitals
and Clinics of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota 55404, USA 23Department of
Neurosurgery, Clinical Neurosciences Center, University of Utah, Salt Lake City,
Utah 84132, USA 24A I duPont Hospital for Children, Wilmington, Delaware 19803,
USA 25Department of Neurosurgery, Kitasato University School of Medicine,
Sagamihara, Kanagawa 252-0374, Japan 26Department of Neurosurgery, Tohoku
University Graduate School of Medicine, Sendai 980-8574, Japan 27Department of
Pathology, University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 1QP, UK 28Departments of
Neurosurgery, Neurology and Neurological Sciences, Stanford University School of
Medicine, Stanford, California 94305, USA 29Departments of Pediatrics, Cell &
Developmental Biology, Weill Medical College of Cornell University, New York, New
York 10065, USA 30Department of Neurosurgery, NYU Langone Medical Center,
New York, New York 10016, USA 31Department of Pediatrics, Division of Pediatric
Hematology, Oncology, and Stem Cell Transplantation, Columbia University, New
York, New York 10032, USA 32Department of Pediatrics-Hematology and Oncology,
Rainbow Babies & Children’s Hospital and Department of Pediatrics-Hematology
and Oncology, Case Western Reserve, Cleveland, Ohio 44106, USA 33Pediatric
Neurosurgery, Catholic University Medical School, Rome 00198, Italy 34Center for
Neuropathology, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität, Munich 81377, Germany
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 07.

Morrissy et al.

Page 37

Author Manuscript

35Department

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

of Pediatric Oncology, School of Medicine, Masaryk University, Brno
625 00, Czech Republic 36AP-HP, Department of Neurosurgery, Necker-Enfants
Malades Hospital, Université René Descartes, Paris 75743, France 37Signaling in
Development and Brain Tumors, CNRS UMR 3347 / INSERM U1021, Institut Curie,
Paris Cedex 5 91405, France 38Division of Hematology/Oncology, British Columbia
Children’s Hospital, Vancouver, British Columbia V6H 3V4, Canada 39Department of
Surgery and Anatomy, Faculty of Medicine of Ribeirão Preto, Universidade de São
Paulo, Brazil, Rebeirao Preto, São Paulo 14049-900, Brazil 40Kolling Institute of
Medical Research, The University of Sydney, Sydney, New South Wales 2065,
Australia 41Queensland Children's Medical Research Institute, Children’s Health
Queensland, Brisbane, Queensland 4029, Australia 42Division of Oncology,
Children’s Health Queensland, Brisbane, Queensland 4029, Australia 43UQ Child
Health Research Centre, The University of Queensland, Brisbane 4029, Australia
44Pediatric Neuro-Oncology Program, School of Medicine and Winship Cancer
Institute, Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia 30307, USA 45Department of
Neurosurgery, School of Medicine and Winship Cancer Institute, Emory University,
Atlanta, Georgia 30322, USA 46Department of Hematology & Medical Oncology,
School of Medicine and Winship Cancer Institute, Emory University, Atlanta,
Georgia 30322, USA 47Department of Neurosurgery, Division of Pediatric
Neurosurgery, Seoul National University Children’s Hospital, Seoul 30322, South
Korea 48Institute for Neuropathology, University of Bonn D-53105, Germany
49Children’s University Hospital of Essen D-45147, Germany 50Department of
Neurosurgery, University of Ulsan, Asan Medical Center, Seoul 05505, South Korea
51Northern Institute for Cancer Research, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon
Tyne NE1 4LP, UK 52Departments of Pathology, Ophthalmology and Oncology, John
Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 21205, USA
53Department of Neurology, Vanderbilt Medical Center, Nashville, Tennessee
37232-8550, USA 54Department of Neurology, Children’s National Medical Center,
Washington DC 20010-2970, USA 55Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Nazionale Tumori,
Milan 20133, Italy 56U.O. Neurochirurgia, Istituto Giannina Gaslini, Genova 16147,
Italy 57Department of Haematology & Oncology, The Hospital for Sick Children,
Toronto, Ontario M5G 1X8, Canada 58Division of Pathology, The Hospital for Sick
Children, Toronto, Ontario M5G 1X8, Canada 59Sanford-Burnham Medical Research
Institute, La Jolla, California 92037, USA 60Departments of Pediatrics, Neurology
and Neurosurgery, University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, California
94158, USA 61School of Pharmacology, University of Wisconsin, Madison,
Wisconsin 53715, USA 62Molecular & Cellular Biology Program, University of Iowa,
Iowa City, Iowa 52242, USA 63Clinical Cooperation Unit Neuropathology, German
Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg 69120, Germany 64Division of
Pediatric Neurooncology, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg
69120, Germany 65Department of Pediatric Oncology, University Hospital
Heidelberg, Heidelberg 69120, Germany 66Masonic Cancer Center, University of
Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota 55455, USA 67Division of Hematology/
Oncology, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec H2W 1S6., Canada 68McLaughlin
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 07.

Morrissy et al.

Page 38

Author Manuscript

Centre and Department of Molecular Genetics, Banting and Best Department of
Medical Research and Samuel Lunenfeld Research Institute at Mount Sinai
Hospital, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario M5G 1L7, Canada 69Department of
Molecular Biology & Biochemistry, Simon Fraser University, Burnaby, British
Columbia M5G 1L7, Canada 70Department of Pediatrics, University of Toronto,
Toronto, Ontario M5G 1X8, Canada

Acknowledgments

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

The MAGIC project is financially supported by: Genome Canada, Genome BC, Terry Fox Research Institute,
Ontario Institute for Cancer Research, Pediatric Oncology Group Ontario, Funds from ‘The Family of Kathleen
Lorette’ and the Clark H. Smith Brain Tumour Centre, Montreal Children’s Hospital Foundation, Hospital for Sick
Children: Sonia and Arthur Labatt Brain Tumour Research Centre, Chief of Research Fund, Cancer Genetics
Program, Garron Family Cancer Centre, B.R.A.I.N. Child, and BC Childhood Cancer Parents Association. M.D.T.
is also supported by a Stand Up To Cancer St. Baldrick’s Pediatric Dream Team Translational Research Grant
(SU2C-AACR-DT1113). Stand Up To Cancer is a program of the Entertainment Industry Foundation administered
by the American Association for Cancer Research. M.D.T. is supported by The Canadian Cancer Society Research
Institute, The Garron Family Chair in Childhood Cancer Research, and grants from the Cure Search for Children’s
Cancer Foundation, the National Institutes of Health (R01CA148699 R01CA159859), The Pediatric Brain Tumour
Foundation, The Terry Fox Research Institute, Brainchild and The McLaughlin Centre at the University of Toronto.
M.D.T. is also supported by the Swifty Foundation. L.G. was supported by the Davis M. Ferguson Memorial Fund
at ABTA. Alex’s Lemonade Stand Young Investigator Award supported V.R. This study was conducted with the
support of the Ontario Institute for Cancer Research through funding provided by the Government of Ontario. This
work was also supported by a Program Project Grant from the Terry Fox Research Institute, and a Grand Challenge
Award from CureSearch for Children’s Cancer. Additionally, this work was supported by the PedBrain Tumour
Project contributing to the International Cancer Genome Consortium, funded by German Cancer Aid (109252) and
by the German Federal Ministry of Education and Research (BMBF, grants 01KU1201A, MedSys 0315416C and
NGFNplus 01GS0883). Funding by the German Childhood Cancer Foundation (Deutsche Kinderkrebsstiftung) to
S.M.P., G.F. and T.P. The study was also financed by the Hungarian Brain Research Program Grant No.
KTIA_13_NAP-A-V/3. and NAP-A-II/7. A.K. was supported by the János Bolyai scholarship of the Hungarian
Academy of Sciences. E.G.V.M. was supported by NIH R01 grants CA163722 and NS096236, and St. Baldrick’s
and Cure Childhood Cancer Foundations. We would like to acknowledge R. P. Hill (Ontario Cancer Institute), the
Labatt Brain Tumour Research Centre Tumour and Tissue Repository, which is supported by B.R.A.I.N. Child and
Megan’s Walk. M.R. is supported by a fellowship from the Dr. Mildred Scheel Foundation for Cancer Research/
German Cancer Aid. F.M.G.C. is supported by the Stephen Buttrum Brain Tumour Research Fellowship, granted by
Brain Tumour Foundation of Canada. V.R. is supported by a CIHR fellowship and an Alberta Innovates-Health
Solutions Clinical Fellowship. We would like to thank the Toronto Centre for Phenogenomics for animal housing
and veterinary support, and the Preclinical Core II and animal research facility at STTARR (Spatiotemporal
Targeting and Amplification of Radiation Response) in Toronto for assistance with CT-guided radiation
experiments. We would like to thank Z. Wang for technical help with IHC, S. Archer for technical writing and C.
Smith for artwork.

References

Author Manuscript

1. Hovestadt V, et al. Decoding the regulatory landscape of medulloblastoma using DNA methylation
sequencing. Nature. 2014; 510:537–541. [PubMed: 24847876]
2. Jones DT, et al. Dissecting the genomic complexity underlying medulloblastoma. Nature. 2012;
488:100–105. [PubMed: 22832583]
3. Kool M, et al. Genome sequencing of SHH medulloblastoma predicts genotype-related response to
smoothened inhibition. Cancer Cell. 2014; 25:393–405. [PubMed: 24651015]
4. Northcott PA, et al. Enhancer hijacking activates GFI1 family oncogenes in medulloblastoma.
Nature. 2014; 511:428–434. [PubMed: 25043047]
5. Northcott PA, et al. Subgroup-specific structural variation across 1,000 medulloblastoma genomes.
Nature. 2012; 488:49–56. [PubMed: 22832581]
6. Pugh TJ, et al. Medulloblastoma exome sequencing uncovers subtype-specific somatic mutations.
Nature. 2012; 488:106–110. [PubMed: 22820256]

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 07.

Morrissy et al.

Page 39

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

7. Wu X, et al. Clonal selection drives genetic divergence of metastatic medulloblastoma. Nature.
2012; 482:529–533. [PubMed: 22343890]
8. Moxon-Emre I, et al. Impact of craniospinal dose, boost volume, and neurologic complications on
intellectual outcome in patients with medulloblastoma. J. Clin. Oncol. 2014; 32:1760–1768.
[PubMed: 24516024]
9. Northcott PA, Korshunov A, Pfister SM, Taylor MD. The clinical implications of medulloblastoma
subgroups. Nature Rev. Neurol. 2012; 8:340–351. [PubMed: 22565209]
10. Northcott PA, et al. Medulloblastomics: the end of the beginning. Nature Rev. Cancer. 2012;
12:818–834. [PubMed: 23175120]
11. Ramaswamy V, et al. Recurrence patterns across medulloblastoma subgroups: an integrated clinical
and molecular analysis. Lancet Oncol. 2013; 14:1200–1207. [PubMed: 24140199]
12. Anderson K, et al. Genetic variegation of clonal architecture and propagating cells in leukaemia.
Nature. 2011; 469:356–361. [PubMed: 21160474]
13. Burrell RA, McGranahan N, Bartek J, Swanton C. The causes and consequences of genetic
heterogeneity in cancer evolution. Nature. 2013; 501:338–345. [PubMed: 24048066]
14. Ding L, et al. Clonal evolution in relapsed acute myeloid leukaemia revealed by whole-genome
sequencing. Nature. 2012; 481:506–510. [PubMed: 22237025]
15. Greaves M, Maley CC. Clonal evolution in cancer. Nature. 2012; 481:306–313. [PubMed:
22258609]
16. Landau DA, et al. Evolution and impact of subclonal mutations in chronic lymphocytic leukemia.
Cell. 2013; 152:714–726. [PubMed: 23415222]
17. Mullighan CG, et al. Genomic analysis of the clonal origins of relapsed acute lymphoblastic
leukemia. Science. 2008; 322:1377–1380. [PubMed: 19039135]
18. Johnson BE, et al. Mutational analysis reveals the origin and therapy-driven evolution of recurrent
glioma. Science. 2014; 343:189–193. [PubMed: 24336570]
19. Shah SP, et al. Mutational evolution in a lobular breast tumour profiled at single nucleotide
resolution. Nature. 2009; 461:809–813. [PubMed: 19812674]
20. Gerlinger M, Swanton C. How Darwinian models inform therapeutic failure initiated by clonal
heterogeneity in cancer medicine. Br. J. Cancer. 2010; 103:1139–1143. [PubMed: 20877357]
21. Eirew P, et al. Dynamics of genomic clones in breast cancer patient xenografts at single-cell
resolution. Nature. 2015; 518:422–426. [PubMed: 25470049]
22. Kreso A, et al. Variable clonal repopulation dynamics influence chemotherapy response in
colorectal cancer. Science. 2013; 339:543–548. [PubMed: 23239622]
23. Notta F, et al. Evolution of human BCR–ABL1 lymphoblastic leukaemia-initiating cells. Nature.
2011; 469:362–367. [PubMed: 21248843]
24. Mumert M, et al. Functional genomics identifies drivers of medulloblastoma dissemination. Cancer
Res. 2012; 72:4944–4953. [PubMed: 22875024]
25. Brett BT, et al. Novel molecular and computational methods improve the accuracy of insertion site
analysis in Sleeping Beauty-induced tumors. PLoS ONE. 2011; 6:e24668. [PubMed: 21931803]
26. Collier LS, Carlson CM, Ravimohan S, Dupuy AJ, Largaespada DA. Cancer gene discovery in
solid tumours using transposon-based somatic mutagenesis in the mouse. Nature. 2005; 436:272–
276. [PubMed: 16015333]
27. Dupuy AJ, Akagi K, Largaespada DA, Copeland NG, Jenkins NA. Mammalian mutagenesis using
a highly mobile somatic Sleeping Beauty transposon system. Nature. 2005; 436:221–226.
[PubMed: 16015321]
28. Zhukova N, et al. Subgroup-specific prognostic implications of TP53 mutation in
medulloblastoma. J. Clin. Oncol. 2013; 31:2927–2935. [PubMed: 23835706]
29. Zhu S, et al. The bHLH repressor Deadpan regulates the self-renewal and specification of
Drosophila larval neural stem cells independently of Notch. PLoS ONE. 2012; 7:e46724.
[PubMed: 23056424]
30. Ollmann M, et al. Drosophila p53 is a structural and functional homolog of the tumor suppressor
p53. Cell. 2000; 101:91–101. [PubMed: 10778859]

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 07.

Morrissy et al.

Page 40

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

31. Fraley C, Raftery EA, Murphy TB, Scrucca L. mclust Version 4 for R. Normal Mixture Modeling
for Model-Based Clustering, Classification, and Density Estimation. 2012 Technical Report No.
597.
32. Remke M, et al. TERT promoter mutations are highly recurrent in SHH subgroup
medulloblastoma. Acta Neuropathol. 2013; 126:917–929. [PubMed: 24174164]
33. Govind SK, et al. ShatterProof: operational detection and quantification of chromothripsis. BMC
Bioinformatics. 2014; 15:78. [PubMed: 24646301]
34. Griffith M, et al. DGIdb: mining the druggable genome. Nature Methods. 2013; 10:1209–1210.
[PubMed: 24122041]
35. McGranahan N, Swanton C. Perspective biological and therapeutic impact of intratumor
heterogeneity in cancer evolution. Cancer Cell. 2015; 27:15–26. [PubMed: 25584892]
36. Andor N, Harness JV, Müller S, Mewes HW, Petritsch C. EXPANDS: expanding ploidy and allele
frequency on nested subpopulations. Bioinformatics. 2014; 30:50–60. [PubMed: 24177718]
37. Maley CC, et al. Genetic clonal diversity predicts progression to esophageal adenocarcinoma.
Nature Genet. 2006; 38:468–473. [PubMed: 16565718]
38. Roth A, et al. PyClone: statistical inference of clonal population structure in cancer. Nature
Methods. 2014; 11:396–398. [PubMed: 24633410]
39. Hill RM, et al. Combined Myc and p53 defects emerge at medulloblastoma relapse and define
rapidly progressive, therapeutically targetable disease. Cancer Cell. 2015; 27:72–84. [PubMed:
25533335]
40. Wang X, et al. Medulloblastoma subgroups remain stable across primary and metastatic
compartments. Acta Neuropathol. 2015; 129:449–457. [PubMed: 25689980]
41. Aparicio S, Caldas C. The implications of clonal genome evolution for cancer medicine. N. Engl. J.
Med. 2013; 368:842–851. [PubMed: 23445095]
42. Maley CC, Reid BJ, Forrest S. Cancer prevention strategies that address the evolutionary dynamics
of neoplastic cells: simulating benign cell boosters and selection for chemosensitivity. Cancer
Epidemiol. Biomarkers Prev. 2004; 13:1375–1384. [PubMed: 15298961]

References
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

43. Clarkson R, et al. Characterization of image quality and image-guidance performance of a
preclinical microirradiator. Med. Phys. 2011; 38:845–856. [PubMed: 21452722]
44. Ma CM, et al. AAPM protocol for 40–300 kV X-ray beam dosimetry in radiotherapy and
radiobiology. Med. Phys. 2001; 28:868–893. [PubMed: 11439485]
45. Li H, Durbin R. Fast and accurate short read alignment with Burrows–Wheeler transform.
Bioinformatics. 2009; 25:1754–1760. [PubMed: 19451168]
46. McKenna A, et al. The genome analysis toolkit: a MapReduce framework for analyzing nextgeneration DNA sequencing data. Genome Res. 2010; 20:1297–1303. [PubMed: 20644199]
47. Cingolani P, et al. Using Drosophila melanogaster as a model for genotoxic chemical mutational
studies with a new program, SnpSift. Front. Genet. 2012; 3 http://dx.doi.org/10.3389/fgene.
2012.00035.
48. Saunders CT, et al. Strelka: Accurate somatic small-variant calling from sequenced tumour-normal
sample pairs. Bioinformatics. 2012; 28:1811–1817. [PubMed: 22581179]
49. Li H, et al. The Sequence Alignment/Map format and SAMtools. Bioinformatics. 2009; 25:2078–
2079. [PubMed: 19505943]
50. Fischer A, Illingworth CJ, Campbell PJ, Mustonen V. EMu: probabilistic inference of mutational
processes and their localization in the cancer genome. Genome Biol. 2013; 14:R39. [PubMed:
23628380]
51. Jones SJ, et al. Evolution of an adenocarcinoma in response to selection by targeted kinase
inhibitors. Genome Biol. 2010; 11:R82. [PubMed: 20696054]
52. Shah SP, et al. Integrating copy number polymorphisms into array CGH analysis using a robust
HMM. Bioinformatics. 2006; 22:431–439.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 07.

Morrissy et al.

Page 41

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

53. Boeva V, et al. Control-FREEC: a tool for assessing copy number and allelic content using nextgeneration sequencing data. Bioinformatics. 2012; 28:423–425. [PubMed: 22155870]
54. Rozen S, Skaletsky H. Primer3 on the WWW for general users and for biologist programmers.
Methods Mol. Biol. 2000; 132:365–386. [PubMed: 10547847]
55. Cibulskis K, et al. Sensitive detection of somatic point mutations in impure and heterogeneous
cancer samples. Nature Biotechnol. 2013; 31:213–219. [PubMed: 23396013]
56. Vanner RJ, et al. Quiescent Sox2+ cells drive hierarchical growth and relapse in sonic hedgehog
subgroup medulloblastoma. Cancer Cell. 2014; 26:33–47. [PubMed: 24954133]
57. Shih DJH, et al. Cytogenetic prognostication within medulloblastoma subgroups. J. Clin. Oncol.
2014; 32:886–896. [PubMed: 24493713]
58. Cho Y-J, et al. Integrative genomic analysis of medulloblastoma identifies a molecular subgroup
that drives poor clinical outcome. J. Clin. Oncol. 2011; 29:1424–1430. [PubMed: 21098324]
59. Butterfield YS, et al. JAGuaR: junction alignments to genome for RNA-seq reads. PLoS ONE.
2014; 9:e102398. [PubMed: 25062255]
60. Subramanian A, et al. Gene set enrichment analysis: a knowledge-based approach for interpreting
genome-wide expression profiles. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA. 2005; 102:15545–15550. [PubMed:
16199517]

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 07.

Morrissy et al.

Page 42

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 1. A novel functional genomic mouse model of recurrent Shh medulloblastoma using
microneurosurgical resection and computed-tomography-guided multi-fractionated craniospinal
radiotherapy

Author Manuscript

a, Ptch+/−/Math1-SB11/T2Onc mice with medulloblastoma underwent subtotal tumour
removal (n = 38) and received multi-fractionated CSI post-operatively. Radiation was
delivered under computed tomography (CT) guidance. b, Microneurosurgery and CSI
strikingly improves tumour-free survival as compared to untreated controls (P = 0.0001, logrank test, n = 64). Inset schematic indicates the fractionation schedule. c, Venn diagrams
demonstrate the paucity of overlap in the gCISs between primary tumours and their
recurrences. d, Drosophila brain tumours harbouring wild-type P53 displayed massive
apoptosis in response to 40 Gy irradiation. e, Dominant negative P53 (p53R159N) essentially
abrogated the radiation-dependent cell death. Scale bar, 50 µm.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 07.

Morrissy et al.

Page 43

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 2. Paucity of shared genetic events between therapy-naive and recurrent tumours in
individual mice treated with microneurosurgery and CT-guided multifractionated craniospinal
radiation

a, Venn diagrams demonstrate the paucity of clonal insertions shared between therapy-naive
primary tumours and their matched local and metastatic recurrences. Matched recurrences
share only very few clonal transposon insertions with the paired primary tumour. b, Endpoint PCR demonstrates examples of highly clonal insertions that are restricted to the
untreated primary (Ncoa1) and the recurrence (Crebbp), (asterisk indicates non-specific

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 07.

Morrissy et al.

Page 44

Author Manuscript

amplification). Three levels of input DNA were used for each sample 1×, 5× and 25×; NC,
negative control.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 07.

Morrissy et al.

Page 45

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 3. Major genetic divergence of human untreated medulloblastoma and patient-matched
recurrences determined by whole-genome sequencing

a, Somatic mutation burden in 45 tumours (43 patients) was increased fivefold in matched
post-treatment (blue) versus therapy-naive (red) tumours (Student’s t-test; P value = 2.7 ×
10−4). On average, 11.8% of mutations are shared somatic events (n = 15 cases with
germline). Hypermutated samples stand out by two orders of magnitude (MB-REC-26/44).
Patient subgroup is indicated by the label (blue, Wnt; red, Shh; yellow, Group 3; green,
Group 4; black, undetermined). b, Venn diagrams of three representative patients reveal a

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 07.

Morrissy et al.

Page 46

Author Manuscript

minimal overlap in genetic events between therapy-naive (red) and recurrent (blue) tumours.
c, Circos plot in a representative patient illustrates compartment-specific somatic structural
variations.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 07.

Morrissy et al.

Page 47

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 4. Genetic divergence of recurrent medulloblastoma is driven by clonal selection

a, Copy-neutral LOH PTCH1−/− driver status reverts to wild type post-therapy in
medulloblastoma-REC-12, with homozygous CDKN2A/B loss. b, The evolutionary
progression of medulloblastoma-REC-12 is illustrated by (pink) PTCH1+/− lineage
expansion, copy-neutral LOH, clonal eradication during treatment, and (blue) subsequent
expansion of an ancestral clone with CDKN2A/B−/−. c, Phylogenetic relationships between
primary (red) and recurrent (blue) tumours show that recurrences often represent a single
rather than multiple primary tumour lineages (for example, medulloblastoma-REC-05/12
compared with medulloblastoma-REC-02). d, Ultra-deep sequencing shows post-treatment
expansion of low-frequency or de novo primary clones (blue), and eradication/reduction of
therapy-sensitive lineages (red). Inset box indicates number of mutations per cluster.

Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 07.

Morrissy et al.

Page 48

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Figure 5. Signalling pathways in recurrent medulloblastoma

Author Manuscript

a, Compartment-specific deleterious events in the TP53 gene (n = 6/23), genes from the
TP53 pathway (n = 12/23), DYNC1H1 (n = 3/23), and chr14q loss (3/18). Asterisk indicates
mutations in patients with missing diagnostic samples; ‘d’ indicates different events in preand post-therapy samples; white, patients with diagnostic, post-therapy, and germline
samples; grey, no germline; pink, no matched diagnostic sample; blue, Wnt; red, Shh;
yellow, Group 3; green, Group 4. b, Overall survival decreases in Shh patients with a
chr14q-loss gene expression signature (versus balanced, log-rank test, n = 578, P = 0.0109);

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 07.

Morrissy et al.

Page 49

Author Manuscript

not significant in non-Shh tumours. c, Prognostic differences are replicated in an
independent cohort (log-rank test, n = 35, P = 0.000995).

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 July 07.

