Oncotarget, Vol. 7, No. 7

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Epigallocatechin-3-gallate induces oxidative phosphorylation by
activating cytochrome c oxidase in human cultured neurons and
astrocytes
Gloria Castellano-González1, Nicolas Pichaud2, J. William O. Ballard3, Alban
Bessede4, Helder Marcal5 and Gilles J. Guillemin1
1

MND and Neurodegenerative Diseases Research Group, Australian School of Advanced Medicine (ASAM), Macquarie
University, Sydney, Australia
2

Department of Biological and Environmental Sciences, University of Gothenburg, Göteborg, Sweden

3

School of Biotechnology and Biomolecular Sciences, The University of New South Wales, Sydney, Australia

4

Immusmol Pty Ltd, Pessac, France

5

Topical Therapeutics Research Group, School of Medical Sciences, The University of New South Wales, Sydney, Australia

Correspondence to: Gilles J. Guillemin, email: gilles.guillemin@mq.edu.au
Keywords: epigallocatechin-3-gallate, ATP, neurodegeneration, cytochrome c oxidase, mitochondria, Gerotarget
Received: October 27, 2015	

Accepted: December 24, 2015	

Published: January 09, 2016

ABSTRACT
Mitochondrial dysfunction and resulting energy impairment have been identified
as features of many neurodegenerative diseases. Whether this energy impairment is
the cause of the disease or the consequence of preceding impairment(s) is still under
discussion, however a recovery of cellular bioenergetics would plausibly prevent or
improve the pathology. In this study, we screened different natural molecules for
their ability to increase intracellular adenine triphosphate purine (ATP). Among them,
epigallocatechin-3-gallate (EGCG), a polyphenol from green tea, presented the most
striking results. We found that it increases ATP production in both human cultured
astrocytes and neurons with different kinetic parameters and without toxicity.
Specifically, we showed that oxidative phosphorylation in human cultured
astrocytes and neurons increased at the level of the routine respiration on the cells
pre-treated with the natural molecule. Furthermore, EGCG-induced ATP production
was only blocked by sodium azide (NaN3) and oligomycin, inhibitors of cytochrome c
oxidase (CcO; complex IV) and ATP synthase (complex V) respectively. These findings
suggest that the EGCG modulates CcO activity, as confirmed by its enzymatic activity.
CcO is known to be regulated differently in neurons and astrocytes. Accordingly, EGCG
treatment is acting differently on the kinetic parameters of the two cell types. To our
knowledge, this is the first study showing that EGCG promotes CcO activity in human
cultured neurons and astrocytes. Considering that CcO dysfunction has been reported
in patients having neurodegenerative diseases such as Alzheimer’s disease (AD),
we therefore suggest that EGCG could restore mitochondrial function and prevent
subsequent loss of synaptic function.

INTRODUCTION

scavenge reactive oxygen species (ROS) at relatively low
concentrations [1-3] but has pro-oxidative/pro-apoptotic
properties at higher concentrations [4]. Moreover, it
can modulate protein functions through interactions
within their hydroxyl group and the amino and carbonyl
groups in proteins [5]. These properties have conferred
multiple physiological and therapeutic benefits to EGCG.
For example, it has been used in cancer therapy for its

EGCG is the main polyphenol component of green
tea, representing more than 10% extract in dry weight.
This naturally occurring molecule is a flavonoid that
belongs to the catechin subgroup. The strongest bioactivity
of flavonoids is anti-oxidant which is potentiated by the
catechol structure. This functional group can chemically
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

7426

Oncotarget

RESULTS

apoptotic and anti-proliferative properties and its activity
on immune response [6-10]. EGCG has also been shown
to be beneficial in autoimmune diabetes due to its antiinflammatory activity in different cell types [11]. Finally,
it has important protective effects in neurodegenerative
diseases involving different molecular mechanisms and
signaling pathways (Reviewed by Mandel [12]).
Although many studies attribute the neuroprotective
role of EGCG to its properties as a radical scavenger,
other pharmacological properties may further contribute
to its therapeutic benefits. Neurodegenerative diseases are
usually accompanied by fuel restrictions in neurons and
mitochondrial impairment. EGCG has been previously
shown to target energy metabolism in several cell types,
mainly as an agonist of the main cellular energy sensor,
adenosine monophosphate- activated protein kinase
(AMPK) [13, 14]. Studies in mice demonstrated that
EGCG can cross the blood barrier and reach the brain
[15, 16] and it has been shown to accumulate in neuronal
mitochondria [2]. Of interest, it has also been shown to
restore mitochondrial membrane potential, mitochondrial
function as well as ATP synthesis in AD mice model [1,
17].
Lower ATP production and increased formation of
ROS in mitochondria are commonly observed alongside
CcO impairment [18], which was shown to occur in AD
pathology and other neurodegenerative diseases. CcO
is the terminal oxidase of the mitochondrial electron
transport system (ETS) and catalyzes the final step of the
electron transfer from reduced cytochrome c to oxygen. It
is also one of the proton pumps that generate the proton
gradient across the inner mitochondrial membrane to
power ATP synthesis. Additionally, it should be considered
that CcO regulation, assembly and structure is complex
and tissue specific [19].
Our results showed that EGCG induces CcO activity
in human cultured neurons and astrocytes. It suggests that
in addition to its antioxidant properties EGCG can induce
mitochondrial respiration by activating CcO in human
cultured neurons, increasing ATP production without
altering redox balance. Therefore using EGCG because
of its polypharmacological activities, its bioavailability
properties and its restoring effect on mitochondrial
function makes it a promising candidate for treating
several neurodegenerative diseases with mitochondrial
impairment as a common feature.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

EGCG induces ATP production in human
cultured neurons and astrocytes with different
kinetics and dose-response patterns
After EGCG was selected for its capacity to
increase ATP production in human cultured neurons (see
Supplementary Figure 1), we investigated the mechanism
of action of EGCG-induced ATP production by performing
dose-response and kinetic studies in the two main cell
types present in the brain: neurons and astrocytes.
Both neurons and astrocytes showed a two-fold
increase in ATP production after 2h treatment with 10
µM EGCG. In neurons, the ATP production is maintained
and increased over 72h (Figure 1A) whereas in astrocytes
the ATP is restored to basal levels after 6h (Figure 1B).
Neurons and astrocytes were treated with different
dose of EGCG (1 to 100 µM) for 2h in astrocytes and
24h in neurons. Increasing concentrations of EGCG (up
to 60 µM) correlate with increasing production of ATP
in neurons (Figure 1C). In astrocytes however, ATP
production was maximal at 1-10 µM, and dropped at
higher concentrations (Figure 1D). Cytotoxicity studies
were done in parallel to verify that the treatments used
were not causing cell death and that the increase of ATP
observed was not due to induction of apoptotic pathways.
Lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) was measured in the
supernatant of each condition, showing no cytotoxicity
over 72h in neurons and astrocytes treated with 10 µM
of EGCG (Figure 1E). However, cell death was induced
in neurons and astrocytes when treated for 24h with more
than 30 µM and 10 µM of EGCG, respectively (Figure
1F). These results correlate with the decrease in ATP
production observed in neurons (Figure 1C) at higher
concentrations than 60 µM.

EGCG increases mitochondrial membrane
potential in both astrocytes and neurons
Mitochondrial
membrane
potential
(Δψm)
relates to cells’ capacity to generate ATP by oxidative
phosphorylation [20]. Due to the increase in ATP
production observed after 2h treatment (Figure 1A, 1B),
we hypothesized that EGCG may be acting directly in
one of the two main sources of ATP production in the
cell: oxidative phosphorylation or glycolysis. Taking
into account that the main source of ATP in neurons is
mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation [21] and that the
effect of EGCG on ATP production is significantly higher
in neurons than in astrocytes (Figure 1A, 1C), we therefore
looked at the effect of EGCG on mitochondrial function.
We examined changes on the Δψm with two different
probes: R123 and CMXRos. Treatment with EGCG
7427

Oncotarget

Figure 1: ATP modulation in neurons’ and astrocytes’ by EGCG treatment. ATP production of neurons and astrocytes after

treatment with 10μM EGCG at different time points A., B. and with increasing concentrations (1-100 μM) for 24h C. or 2h D. was assessed
by luminescent intensity. Data (means ± s.e.m. of three or six experiments) are presented as normalized mean intensity in sample relative to
normalized mean intensity in untreated sample for each time point. *p ≤ 0.05, **p ≤ 0.01, ***p ≤ 0.005 (treatment versus none; Student’s
t-test). Cell death of neurons and astrocytes after treatment with 10 μM EGCG at different time points E. and with increasing concentrations
(1-100 μM) for 24h neurons or 2h astrocytes F. assessed by LDH activity in cell supernatant. Data (means ± s.e.m. of three experiments)
are presented as normalized mean activity in sample relative to normalized mean activity in untreated sample for each time point. *p ≤ 0.05,
**p ≤ 0.01, ***p ≤ 0.005, ****p ≤ 0.001 (treatment versus none; Student’s t-test).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

7428

Oncotarget

EGCG increases mitochondrial respiration in
intact neurons and astrocytes but does not induce
mitochondrial biogenesis

showed an increase in Δψm by R123 fluorescence in both
cell types, reaching its maximum after 10 minutes in
astrocytes and 1h in neurons (Figure 2A). Study of relative
changes of Δψm was also performed using CMXRos
[22] in human cultured neurons, as the increase of Δψm
showed by R123 was only maintained over the time in
neurons but not in astrocytes. We observed an increase
on the relative fluorescence intensity of CMXRos within
the neuronal mitochondria after 10 minutes treatment
with EGCG (Figure 2B). Thus, the induction of R123 and
CMXRos fluorescence indicates that EGCG increases
Δψm. Moreover, it suggests that EGCG effect on ATP
production could be mediated by induction of the ETS.

Mitochondria produce ATP via the electrochemical
proton motive force (Δp), which is due to the transfer of
electrons through the complexes of the ETS and provides
the energy to drive the protons against their concentration
gradient across the inner mitochondrial membrane [20].
Δp in the mitochondria is dependent of Δψm and the
mitochondrial pH gradient (ΔpH) and can be represented
at 37oC by the equation: Δp(mV)= Δψm -60ΔpHm. It should
be taken into account that Δψm does not necessarily follow
the proton gradient (ΔpHm), which is directly related to
ATP production. During cellular stress, Δψm could be
altered by deregulation of intracellular ionic charges (eg.
Ca2+ or K+), independently of ETS induction [23]. In order
to assure that the changes observed in Δψm are mediated

Figure 2: EGCG increases mitochondrial membrane potential. A. Mitochondrial membrane potential of astrocytes and neurons

assessed by R123 fluorescence intensity measured at different time points after 10 μM of EGCG treatment. Data (means ± s.e.m. from
three experiments) are presented as mean fluorescence in sample relative to mean fluorescence in untreated sample for each time point.
***p ≤ 0.001, **p ≤ 0.005, *p ≤ 0.01 (treatment versus none; Student’s t-test). B. Mitochondrial membrane potential of neurons assessed
by MitoTracker CMXRos fluorescence intensity after treatment with 10 μM of EGCG. Images represent single fields from >10 fields per
sample in two independent experiments. Scale bar: 25 μm. Data (means ± s.e.m. of two experiments) are presented as normalized mean
fluorescence in sample relative to normalized mean fluorescence in untreated sample for each time point. *p ≤ 0.01 (treatment versus none;
Student’s t-test).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

7429

Oncotarget

by ETS induction, we monitored cell oxygen consumption
using high-resolution respirometry.
Considering that EGCG increases Δψm within
10 minutes, the O2 rate was monitored before and after
EGCG addition. We found that addition of 10 µM EGCG
immediately increased routine O2 consumption (R) in
neurons (Figure 3B) and astrocytes (Figure 3A). No
significant differences were observed in proton leak or

ETS capacity. Cellular routine respiration is supported
by exogenous substrates in the culture medium. Only
physiological energy demand, energy turnover and the
degree of coupling (intrinsic uncoupling and pathological
dyscoupling) control the levels of respiration and
phosphorylation in the physiological R of intact cells
[24, 25]. Knowing that EGCG does not increase energy
demand and that there are no changes on intrinsic

Figure 3: EGCG increases neuron and astrocytes routine respiration without altering mitochondrial biogenesis. O2

consumption rate [pmol O2/min] of intact astrocytes A. and neurons B. showed by superimposed oxygraph traces from parallel measurements
in two chambers. Treatment and mitochondrial inhibitors were added, at the time points indicated, in both chambers for the study of
respiratory states. Data (means ± s.e.m. of three experiments) are presented as cell number-specific oxygen flux in sample ((pmol O2/
mim)/106 cells) relative to cell number-specific oxygen flux during routine respiration before treatment. *p ≤ 0.05 ***p ≤ 0.005 (Treatment
versus none; Student’s t-test). C. Mitochondrial biogenesis markers (Tfam and PGC-α) and mitochondrial mass marker (Mitofusin2) gene
transcript expression of human primary neurons after treatment with 10 μM of EGCG at different time points. Data (means ± s.e.m. of three
experiments) are presented as normalized transcript expression in the samples relative to normalized transcript expression in untreated
sample (Student’s t-test).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

7430

Oncotarget

uncoupling (L), the increase in O2 consumption is probably
linked to an increase in energy turnover.
Measuring mitochondrial respiration in intact cells
allows the integration of mitochondrial quality (function)
and quantity (density). To determine whether the changes
observed in routine respiration were due to an increase in
mitochondrial density, we measured expression of two key
genes involved in mitochondrial biogenesis, PGC-1α and
Tfam as well as a marker of mitochondrial mass, mitofusin

2 [26]. Our results showed that EGCG did not influence
mitochondrial biogenesis. It therefore suggests that the
observed changes in mitochondrial respiration induced
by EGCG were due to an increase of the mitochondrial
functional properties (Figure 3C).

Figure 4: EGCG-dependent ATP increase is inhibited when complex IV is blocked in neurons and astrocytes. ATP
production of neurons A. and astrocytes B. after treatment with 10 μM EGCG for 16 and 2h, respectively, with or without specific
mitochondrial complexes’ inhibitors and assessed by luminescent intensity. Data (means ± s.e.m. of three experiments) are presented
as normalized mean intensity in sample relative to normalized mean intensity in the non-EGCG treated sample from each condition (no
inhibitor and inhibitor without EGCG; fold change=1). *p ≤ 0.05, **p ≤ 0.01 (Student’s t-test). C. ATP quantification of neurons after
treatment with 10 μM EGCG with or without CC for 16h and assessed by luminescent intensity. Data (means ± s.e.m. of three experiments)
are presented as normalized mean intensity in sample relative to normalized mean intensity in untreated sample. *p ≤ 0.01, **p ≤ 0.005
(Student’s t-test).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

7431

Oncotarget

EGCG-dependent ATP increase is inhibited when
complex IV is blocked in neurons and astrocytes

complexes’ inhibitors. The time of treatments were
chosen based on the previous kinetic studies, i.e. 16h in
neurons and 2h in astrocytes. NaN3, a reversible inhibitor
of complex IV, decreased the EGCG-dependent ATP
production in neurons and astrocytes (Figure 4A, 4B).
Moreover, when ATP synthase was irreversibly inhibited
with oligomycin, a decrease in EGCG-dependent ATP

To establish whether EGCG enhances oxidative
phosphorylation by directly activating a mitochondrial
complex, we measured changes in EGCG-dependent
intracellular ATP increase in the presence of different

Figure 5: EGCG activates CcO activity without increasing oxidative stress or apoptosis. CcO activity of neurons and

astrocytes after treatment with 10 μM of EGCG at different time points A., B. assessed by the enzymatic degradation rate of cytochrome
c and showed as relative increase of untreated. Data (means ± s.e.m. of three experiments) are presented as normalized mean activity in
sample relative to normalized mean activity in untreated sample for each time point. *p ≤ 0.01 (Student’s t-test). C. ROS production of
neurons after treatment with different concentrations of EGCG (1-100 μM) and assessed by DCF fluorescence intensity. Data (means ±
s.e.m. of three experiments) are presented as mean intensity in sample relative to mean intensity in untreated sample. *p ≤ 0.01 (treatment
versus none; Student’s t-test). D. Apoptosis of astrocytes after treatment with 10-100μM of EGCG for 48h and assessed by cytofluorometric
analysis. Data are from one experiment representative of two and shown in the top right quadrant as the frequency of cells positive for
Annexin-V and PI in total astrocyte population.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

7432

Oncotarget

production was also observed. Although neither NaN3 nor
oligomicyn completely blocked the effect of EGCG on
ATP production in neurons, their effect was stronger in
astrocytes.
We also tested whether EGCG-dependent ATP
production could be mediated by activation of AMPK,
using the AMPK pharmacological inhibitor, compound
C (CC) [27]. CC did not inhibit the EGCG-induced ATP
production in neurons (Figure 4C).

significant (Figure 5A, 5B). This confirms that EGCG is
activating CcO activity in neurons, but its activation in
astrocytes may not be strong enough to be detected using
this method.
Molecular oxygen is reduced to water in the CcO
by a sequential four-electron transfer, however a minor
proportion can be reduced by a 1-electron addition that
occurs predominantly in the complex III but also in
the complex I [28]. High Δψm enhances the reduction
of molecular oxygen to superoxide anion by complex
I and III. Since EGCG is increasing CcO activity, the
concomitant increase in Δψm is expected to promote higher
rates of mitochondrial superoxide. In order to verify this
hypothesis, we therefore measured ROS production in
EGCG treated neurons and astrocytes. Treatment with
EGCG up to 50 µM in both cell types did not increase ROS
production, whereas 100 µM increased ROS production
in neurons (Figure 5C). Excessive ROS production is
associated with induction of apoptosis. We therefore
measured activation of apoptosis with AnnexinV+/PIFACs analysis in astrocytes treated for 48h with increasing

EGCG activates CcO activity in neurons without
concomitant increase of ROS production
In order to confirm the direct effect of EGCG in
CcO activity, we immunocaptured its cellular content
and measured its activity by following the degradation
rate of cytochrome c in cell cultures exposed to 10 µM
EGCG. We observed higher CcO activity in neurons
treated with EGCG compared with the controls, but the
increase of CcO activity in astrocytes was not-statistically

Figure 6: Proposed mechanism of EGCG activity in neurons. EGCG can cross the BBB and reach neuronal cytoplasm where

it targets mitochondrial CcO (C-IV). EGCG increases CcO activity by interacting with its physiological regulators or directly acting as
an electron donor. Overall, activation of CcO leads to increase of ATP turnover by ATP synthase. High levels of ATP would be sensed by
the subunit IV of CcO, allosterically inhibiting its activity. However, neurons express the isoform 2 of the subunit IV (IVi2), which is not
sensible to ATP increase (differently to astrocytes, which express the isoform 1, sensible to ATP increase). EGCG can also activate AMPK,
but the rapid raise of mitochondrial ATP synthesis, decreases ADP:ATP ratio, which is an inhibitory signal for AMPK activity.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

7433

Oncotarget

concentrations of EGCG. We did not observed increased
apoptosis (AnnexinV+/PI-) or necrosis (AnnexinV+/PI+) in
astrocytes treated with up to 30 µM of EGCG compared
with the control. However, both necrotic and apoptotic
cells were increased in 100 µM treatment with EGCG
(Figure 5D). These results indicate that the induction of
CcO by EGCG does not increase ROS production at the
concentrations used in our study. Nonetheless, at higher
doses the increase of Δψm by CcO activation could be
increasing superoxide production by complex I and III,
which ultimately induces apoptosis and cell death.

therefore be a possible target for EGCG activity. Our
results show that pharmacological inhibition of AMPK
in human cultured neurons with CC, which inhibits both
LKB-1 and CaMKKβ- mediated AMPK activation, did not
block EGCG-dependent ATP production. We also looked
at the markers used to study changes in mitochondrial
mass (mitofusin2) and biogenesis (PGC-1α and Tfam),
which have also been found to be up regulated by AMPK
[27]. AMPK phosphorylates PGC-1α, which activates
its own transcription [36]. We found that EGCG did not
affect mRNA levels of any of those genes, indicating
that the rapid increase in ATP production is not due to
activation of AMPK-mediated mitochondrial biogenesis.
However, we cannot discard that EGCG acts on AMPK
and activates PGC-1α [31, 39]. It is indeed possible that
the fastest and first notable effect of EGCG is on ETSATP production resulting in an increase of ATP/ADP ratio
that would be sensed by AMPK and would subsequently
block its activation. In fact, when mitochondrial complex
IV and V in the ETS are respectively inhibited by NaN3
and oligomycin, EGCG-mediated ATP production, even
though reduced, is not completely blocked in human
cultured neurons. This suggests that AMPK-mediated ATP
production can be activated by EGCG when mitochondrial
ATP turnover is blocked, thus maintaining the higher
levels of ATP observed in neurons. The inhibitory effect of
oligomycin and NaN3 on EGCG-mediated ATP production
is stronger in human cultured astrocytes than in neurons.
However, the variations observed between the two
cell types could be due to differences in EGCG time of
treatment. Longer treatment time in neurons could allow
EGCG to activate secondary targets in different cellular
metabolic pathways leading to ATP production. This
would cover up the effects of the mitochondrial inhibitors
blocking EGCG-mediated ATP synthesis through
oxidative phosphorylation. Nevertheless, the divergence of
metabolic regulation between neurons and astrocytes [40]
should be also taken into account. Neurons main source of
ATP is oxidative phosphorylation, whereas astrocytes rely
on glycolysis [21]. This might explain why the EGCGmediated ATP production via the ETS had a greater impact
in neurons than in astrocytes under the same treatment
conditions. We also observed different kinetic properties
for ATP production in neurons and astrocytes, which could
also be explained by differences in CcO regulation in the
two cell types. CcO is composed of 13 different subunits
in mammals, which are encoded by both mitochondrial
and genomic DNA [41]. Many of the nuclear subunits
have different isoforms, which are differently induced
and expressed according to the energy requirement of
the tissue (Reviewed by Arnold [19]). Among them,
subunit IV is a key regulator of CcO, as it inhibits CcO
when senses high ATP/ADP ratios [42]. Two isoforms
of subunit IV (IV-1 and IV-2) have been described. CcO
IV-1 is ubiquitously expressed in all tissues, whereas CcO
IV-2 showed only high expression levels in adult lung and

DISCUSSION
The brain is highly vulnerable to energy and
oxidative damage, which are the main contributing
factors in the etiology of neurological disorders and
ageing [29]. Therefore, restoring energy balance in the
brain could be of paramount importance to improve
several neurodegenerative diseases. In the current study,
we demonstrated that EGCG induces energy turnover
(ATP) by targeting CcO activity in the mitochondria of
human cultured neurons and astrocytes. Several studies
have suggested that EGCG can counteract mitochondrial
dysfunction and oxidative stress mainly because of its
antioxidant activity [2, 3], but to our knowledge our study
is the first to show the effect of EGCG on CcO activity.
EGCG can specifically accumulate in the
mitochondria of neurons and protect against oxidative
stress, by acting as a natural free radical scavenger
[2]. Accordingly, we observed that EGCG targets the
mitochondria of two different neural cell types, inducing
mitochondrial respiration. Our results are also consistent
with previous studies showing that EGCG can rescue
inflammatory cytokine-mediated reduction of ATP and
Δψm in insulin-producing β cells [30], it can restore
oligomeric Amyloid β peptides-dependent impaired ATP
levels, Δψm and respiratory rates in neuroblastoma cell
line and brain of AD mice model [1] and can recover
mitochondria function in prion-treated neuroblastoma cell
line [17]. Additionally, our data suggest that EGCG can
potentiate ETS activity without inducing toxicity under
physiological conditions in human cultured neurons and
astrocytes.
Some studies have already linked the role of EGCG
to energy metabolism as an agonist of AMPK [31-35].
AMPK is a crucial cellular energy sensor, which promotes
ATP production when activated by switching on catabolic
pathways while switching off anabolic or biosynthetic
pathways (Reviewed by Mihayolva [36, 37]). AMPK can
be activated by metabolic stresses that decrease ATP, but
also through phosphorylation by Liver Kinase B (LKB)
-1 complex or calmodium-dependent protein kinase
kinase β (CaMKKβ). CaMKKβ is important in the neural
tissue because it senses increase in cytosolic Ca2+, which
usually trigger ATP-consuming processes [38] and could
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

7434

Oncotarget

neurons, but not in astrocytes [43]. Neuronal CcO IV-2
abrogates allosteric inhibition of CcO by ATP, supporting
a constantly high neuronal activity, whereas in astrocytes,
which express CcO IV-1, ATP increase can block CcO [44,
45]. Our results show that EGCG induces an early increase
of ATP in astrocytes (which resumes after 6h) as well as
an exponential ATP increase in neurons (which raises
over 48h). We believe that it could be explained by the
ATP-mediated allosteric inhibition of CcO in astrocytes,
but not in neurons, driven by the different isoforms of
CcO subunit IV occurring in the two cell types. This also
supports that EGCG-induced ATP increase in both cell
types is mediated by an increase in ETS activity.
Another explanation for our results would be
that EGCG could prevent inflammatory-induced iNOS
overexpression and nitric oxide (NO) generation. It has
been reported that NO can bind to the heme of CcO
subunit II and inhibit its activity by competing with
O2 [30, 46]. Therefore, EGCG could activate CcO by
reducing NO-mediated inhibition of CcO. However, the
induction of CcO activity by EGCG was observed under
physiological conditions when there is no increase of
inflammatory stress, decreased oxygen levels or alteration
on CcO affinity for oxygen. It is therefore unlikely that
NO inhibition participates to the EGCG mechanisms of
action for CcO activation. Other important regulators,
which bind to different subunits of CcO, such as the
hormone sub-product 3,5-diiodothyronine [47], hypoxiainducible factor [48] or cardiolipin [49] are known to
modulate CcO activity. Alternatively, processes such
as phosphorylation [50], allosteric inhibition by proton
gradient [51] or availability of substrates, ADP and oxygen
also participate in CcO regulation. We believe that EGCG
could influence these physiological regulators and interact
with them, leading to an increase of CcO activity. Another
possible mechanism to take into consideration is that
EGCG could act as an electron donor to cytochrome c.
EGCG has a reduction energy (ER) of +0.43 eV and has
previously been shown to be able to transfer electrons to
the nucleotide deoxyguanosine monophosphate (dGMP)
[52]. EGCG would act similarly to N,N,N′,N′-Tetramethylp-phenylenediamine (TMPD) (ER =+0.23eV), which is
the artificial substrate used to reduce cytochrome c in
respirometry assays for measuring CcO activity. EGCG
is quite stable in aqueous solution under air [52], and
would not easily go under auto-oxidation, as TMPD does,
therefore making unnecessary the addition of ascorbate to
maintain the reduced state of the electron donor. However,
further studies need to be done to elucidate the mechanistic
basis of EGCG effect on the activation of CcO.
EGCG has been shown to act as an antioxidant,
reducing ROS induced by neurotoxic compounds [3]. In
this study, we also show that used at low concentrations, it
increases CcO activity and ATP synthesis without inducing
ROS production, cytotoxicity or apoptosis. Specifically,
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

our results provide compelling evidences that EGCG
targets mitochondria of human cultured neurons and
astrocytes, activating CcO and increasing ATP turnover
without affecting the redox state of the cell (Figure 6). This
natural compound may therefore be a potential interesting
candidate to counteract mitochondrial dysfunction and
oxidative stress observed in many neurodegenerative
diseases.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Cell culture
Human fetal brains were obtained from 1619 week-old fetuses collected following therapeutic
termination with informed consent. This protocol has been
approved by the Human Ethics Committees of Macquarie
University (Ethic approval: 5201300330). Mixed brain
cell suspension was prepared using a protocol previously
described by Guillemin [53]. Briefly, neurons were
cultured by plating the mixed cell suspension in culture
dishes or glass coverslips coated with Matrigel Matrix
(1:20 in Neurobasal Medium; Corning) and maintained
in Neurobasal Medium supplemented with 1% B-27
supplement, 1% GlutaMAX, 1% Antibiotic⁄Antimycotic,
0.5% HEPES buffer and 5mM glucose for 7-10 days at
37ᵒC in a humidified atmosphere containing 5% CO2
[54, 55]. Astrocytes were obtained by seeding high
density mixed brain cell suspension in a cell culture
flask. Attached cells were washed with PBS and new
medium was added twice per week. When the desired
confluence was achieved, cells were trypsinized and
expanded. Astrocytes were maintained in RPMI medium
supplemented with 10% fetal calf serum (FCS), 1%
GlutaMAX and 1% Antibiotic/Antimycotic at 37ᵒC
in a humidified atmosphere containing 5% CO2 [5658]. All cell culture reagents were obtained from Life
Technologies.

ATP- luminescent measurements
Several natural compounds were screened for their
ability to induce ATP-turnover. Treatment with kynurenic
acid (KYNA) (10 µM), Phyllantus Emblica (30 µg/mL),
Pomegranate (30 µg/mL), Curcuma Longa. (30 µg/mL),
Berberine (30 µM) or EGCG (30 µM) (Cayman Chemical)
was done for 2 and 24h in human cultured neurons.
Among the different natural compounds tested, EGCG
showed the most significant increase in intracellular ATP
production in human cultured neurons (Supplementary
Figure 1) and was therefore selected for further analysis.
For EGCG-ATP kinetics induction studies, cells were
treated with 10 µM of EGCG in the appropriate culture
7435

Oncotarget

medium at different time points. For dose-dependent
studies increasing concentrations of EGCG in the
appropriate culture medium were added for 24h in neurons
and 2h in astrocytes. For ATP depletion studies, cells were
treated with 2.5 µM antimycin A (AA), 1 µM of rotenone
(Rtn), 5 µM of oligomycin (Oligo), 10mM of NaN3 and
10 µM of CC. All reagents were obtained from SigmaAldrich. Treatment with the inhibitors was performed
1h before treatment with EGCG. Controls were treated
with equal amount of the solvent used for each treatment.
After treatments, the cells were immediately washed with
warm PBS, harvested in PBS and assessed for intracellular
total ATP production using a commercially available
luciferase-luciferin system (ATPlite; Perkin Elmer) in
a PHERAstar plate reader (BMG labtech, Ortenberg,
Germany). Briefly, harvested cells were lysed by repeated
freeze and thaw cycles and centrifuged at 10,000 g for 10
minutes; the supernatant was collected and used for ATP
measurements and protein quantification. All experiments
were performed using a minimum of 1mg/mL of cell
protein lysate. Protein measurements were determined
using Pierce BCA protein assay Kit (Thermo scientific).
Total ATP was normalized against total protein to account
for any difference in cell density.

results in the release of the dye, thus unquenching the
dye and increasing the fluorescence signal. The sample
was immediately placed in the PHERAstar plate reader
at 37°C with excitation and emission set at 560 and
645nm respectively. Mean fluorescence intensity was
measured using orbital averaging to account for uneven
cell distribution across the well.
ΔΨm was also determined using CMXRosamine
probe (CMXRos; MitoTracker Red, Life Technologies)
according to previous studies showing that an increase in
ΔΨm lead to an increase of CMXRos fluorescence intensity
[22]. Briefly, neurons cultured in glass coverslips were
treated at different time points with 10 µM of EGCG
in culture medium. Then cells were washed with warm
PBS prior to add 50nM of CMXRos in L-15 Medium
supplemented with 5mM of glucose. Cells were incubated
for 30 minutes at 37°C in a humidified atmosphere
containing 5% CO2, then washed with warm PBS and
immediately fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde (SigmaAldrich) for 15 minutes at room temperature. Nuclear
staining was performed by incubating the cells with
4,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI; Sigma-Aldrich) at
1 mg/mL for 1 minute at room temperature. Then, after
washing with PBS, the coverslips were mounted on glass
slides with Fluoromount-G (eBioscience). Epifluorescence
images were obtained on an Olympus FV1000 confocal
microscope (Olympus, Victoria, Australia) captured
with a Charged-Coupled Device image sensor. For each
coverslip, ten randomly selected fields were acquired using
the same settings along each experiment. After background
correction, fluorescence intensity for CMXRos was
measured for each condition using ImageJ software [61].
Mean fluorescence intensity was normalized against the
total number of intact cells, determined by DAPI nuclear
label.

Cytotoxicity
The release of LDH in the culture supernatant
correlates with the amount of cell death and membrane
damage, providing an accurate measure of cellular toxicity
[59]. LDH activity was measured in parallel with the
ATP. It was assayed using the commercial CytoTox 96
(Promega) cytotoxicity assay following the manufacturer’s
specifications. LDH activity in the supernatants was
normalized against total cell protein to account for any
difference in cell density.

Mitochondrial respiration in intact cells

Assessment of mitochondrial membrane potential

Oxygen consumption in intact cells was measured
using the high-resolution respirometer Oxygraph-2K
(Oroboros instruments, Innsburk, Austria). Zero oxygen
measurements were taken after injection of sodium
dithionite and polarographic oxygen sensors were
calibrated with air-saturated culture medium at 37°C.
Intact cells were removed from the tissue culture dish with
TripE (Life Technologies) and after one wash with PBS, 5
x106 cells were added to 2mL of normal culture medium.
Cell suspension was immediately placed in the oxygraph
chamber at 37°C under continuous stirring at 300rpm.
After monitoring routine respiration (R) sequential
injections of the following chemicals were performed
to evaluate different mitochondrial respiration rates:
oligomycin (5 µM) to inhibit ATP synthase and measure
the proton leak (L); FCCP (4 µM) a protonophoric
uncoupler to evaluate the ETS maximum capacity (MR);
and rotenone (1 µM) and antimycin A (2.5 µM) to inhibit

ΔΨm was determined using rhodamine 123 (R123;
Life Technologies), as described [60], with slight
modifications. Neurons or astrocytes cultures in 12 well
plates were treated at different time points with 10 µM of
EGCG in culture medium. Then, cells were washed with
warm PBS and incubated with 10 µM of R123 (quenching
mode) in Leibovitz’s (L-15) Medium (Life Technologies)
supplemented with 5mM of glucose for 20 minutes at
37°C in a humidified atmosphere containing 5% CO2. In
quenching mode, the probe will accumulate within the
mitochondria forming aggregates that quench some of
the fluorescent emission of the dye. The R123-containing
medium was removed and cells were washed with PBS
and further incubated in warm L-15 Medium supplemented
with 5mM of glucose at 37°C for 15 minutes. Treatmentinduced mitochondrial depolarization (increase in ΔΨm)
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

7436

Oncotarget

Table 1: Primers used in qPCR
Gene

Forward sequence

Reverse Sequence

Tfam

5’-CCTGCTCGGAGCTTCTCAAA-3’

5’-ACCCTTGGGGTCATTTGGTG-3’

PGC-1α

5’-AGAACAGCTAACTCCAAGTCAGATT-3’

5’-CTTCAGCTTTTCCTGCGGTGAAT-3’

PGK-1

5’-TCACTCGGGGCTAAGCAGATT-3’

5’-CAGTGCTCACATGGCTGACT-3’

TBP

5’-GGGAGCTGTGATGTGAAGT-3’

5’-GGAGGCAAGGGTACATGAGA-3’

Mitofusin2

5’-ACCCTGATGCAGACGGAAAA-3’

5’-ACCAGGAAGCTGGTACAACG-3’

ROS production with DCF

complex I and complex III respectively and to measure the
residual oxygen consumption (ROx).

Intracellular oxidative stress was assessed by
monitoring H2O2 (indicative of ROS generation).
The amount of H2O2 can be estimated by the
2-,7-dichlorofluorescin (DCF)-H2 dye (Life Technologies),
which oxidizes in the presence of H2O2 to its fluorescent
product DCF [62]. Astrocytes and neurons were pretreated
with varying concentrations of EGCG (1-100 µM) for
2h (astrocytes) and 24h (neurons). After washing twice
with PBS, cells were incubated with 10 µM DCF-H2 in
L-15 Medium supplemented with 5mM of glucose for 30
minutes at 37°C in a humidified atmosphere containing
5% CO2. Then, cells were washed twice with PBS and
pre-warmed L-15 Medium supplemented with 5mM
of glucose and 1% FCS was added. The fluorescence
intensity was immediately measured at 37°C using orbital
averaging in the PHERAstar plate reader with excitation
and emission wavelengths set at 485 nm and 530 nm
respectively.

qPCR
Total RNA from cells and tissue was prepared
from RNeasy Miniprep kit according to manufacturer’s
instructions. cDNA was prepared by using 1 µg of RNA
per reaction. Standard reverse transcription (RT) was
performed using SuperScript VILO cDNA Synthesis
Kit according to manufacturer’s instructions. qPCR
analysis was carried out on the Viia7 Real-Time PCR
system (Applied Biosystems, NSW, Australia) using
SYBR Select Master Mix. All reagents were obtained
from Life Technologies. Initial enzyme activation was
performed at 95˚C for 5 minutes, followed by 40 cycles of
denaturation at 95˚C for 5 seconds, and primer annealing/
extension at 60˚C for 20 seconds. Melting curve analysis
was performed at 95˚C for 1 minute, 60˚C for 30 seconds
and 95˚C for 30 seconds at the end of each run to confirm
a single PCR product in each reaction. The relative
expression of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
ϒ coactivator 1α (PGC-1α), mitochondrial transcription
factor A (Tfam) and Mitofusin2 was normalized against
the housekeeping genes TATA-binding protein (TBP) and
phosphoglycerate kinase (PGK)-1. Primer sequences used
for qPCR are shown in Table 1.

Apoptosis
Apoptosis was measured quantitatively using
Annexin-V FITC (BD Biosciences) and propidium
iodide. This protocol numerates early apoptotic cells by
probing for cell surface exposed phosphatidylserine (PS)
with FITC labeled Annexin-V and for plasma membrane
integrity by propidium iodide (PI). Cells were treated with
EGCG at different concentrations for 24h and with tumor
necrosis factor (TNF)-α as an apoptotic positive control
for 48h. Recovered cells were suspended in 1X binding
buffer and Annexin-V FITC and propidium iodide were
added prior to flow cytometry analysis.

Mitochondrial complex IV content and activity
The activity of complex IV (cytochrome c oxidase)
was measured by using the Mitosciences Human complex
IV activity micro plate assay Kit (Abcam) according to
the manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, cells were lysed
and BCA assay was used to measure total protein content.
The same amount of protein was loaded in each condition
(≈100 µg). Complex IV was immunocaptured with CcO
antibody and the activity was measured by the oxidation
rate of reduced cytochrome c at 550 nm, using PHERAstar
plate reader.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Data analysis
All in vitro determinations are presented as means ±
the standard error of the mean (s.e.m.) from at least three
independent experiments, unless otherwise indicated.
Student’s t-test (two-sided and paired) was used for
two-group analysis, performing separate Student’s t-test
7437

Oncotarget

in multi-group analysis. All analyses were conducted
using GraphPad Prism software (version 3.0; GraphPad
Software). Statistical significance was accepted at p<0.05.

subjects with Down’s syndrome. Biochimica et biophysica
acta. 2013; 1832:542-552.
4.	

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

5.	 Murakami A and Ohnishi K. Target molecules of food
phytochemicals: food science bound for the next dimension.
Food & function. 2012; 3:462-476.

This work was supported by the National Health and
Medical Research Council (NHMRC) and the Ramaciotti
Perpetual Foundation (Australia). Guillemin GJ is the
recipient of the Australian Research Council (ARC) Future
Fellowship and Gloria Castellano was a recipient of the
Macquarie University international scholarship.

6.	 Cusi MG, Del Vecchio MT, Terrosi C, Savellini GG, Di
Genova G, La Placa M, Fallarino F, Moser C, Cardone
C, Giorgi G, Francini G and Correale P. Immunereconstituted influenza virosome containing CD40L gene
enhances the immunological and protective activity of a
carcinoembryonic antigen anticancer vaccine. Journal of
Immunology. 2005; 174:7210-7216.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
The authors declare no conflict of interests in
regards to this manuscript.

7.	 Takahashi A, Watanabe T, Mondal A, Suzuki K, KurusuKanno M, Li Z, Yamazaki T, Fujiki H and Suganuma
M. Mechanism-based inhibition of cancer metastasis
with (-)-epigallocatechin gallate. Biochem Biophys Res
Commun. 2014; 443:1-6.

Authors’ contribution

8.	 Katiyar S, Elmets CA and Katiyar SK. Green tea and skin
cancer: photoimmunology, angiogenesis and DNA repair.
The Journal of nutritional biochemistry. 2007; 18:287-296.

GCG designed and conducted all the experiments
and wrote the manuscript. HM and WOB provided
conceptual help and reagents throughout experimentation.
AB contributed to specific experimental designs. NP made
possible and design mitochondrial studies, and contributed
to the manuscript writing. GJG was involved in conception
and design, data analysis and interpretation, manuscript
writing and final approval of the manuscript.

9.	 Singh T and Katiyar SK. Green tea catechins reduce
invasive potential of human melanoma cells by targeting
COX-2, PGE2 receptors and epithelial-to-mesenchymal
transition. PLoS One. 2011; 6:e25224.
10.	 Singh BN, Shankar S and Srivastava RK. Green tea
catechin, epigallocatechin-3-gallate (EGCG): mechanisms,
perspectives and clinical applications. Biochem Pharmacol.
2011; 82:1807-1821.

Editorial note

11.	 Fu Z, Zhen W, Yuskavage J and Liu D. Epigallocatechin
gallate delays the onset of type 1 diabetes in spontaneous
non-obese diabetic mice. The British journal of nutrition.
2011; 105:1218-1225.

This paper has been accepted based in part on peerreview conducted by another journal and the authors’
response and revisions as well as expedited peer-review
in Oncotarget.

12.	 Mandel SA, Avramovich-Tirosh Y, Reznichenko L, Zheng
H, Weinreb O, Amit T and Youdim MB. Multifunctional
activities of green tea catechins in neuroprotection.
Modulation of cell survival genes, iron-dependent oxidative
stress and PKC signaling pathway. Neurosignals. 2005;
14:46-60.

REFERENCES
1.	 Dragicevic N, Smith A, Lin X, Yuan F, Copes N, Delic
V, Tan J, Cao C, Shytle RD and Bradshaw PC. Green tea
epigallocatechin-3-gallate (EGCG) and other flavonoids
reduce Alzheimer’s amyloid-induced mitochondrial
dysfunction. Journal of Alzheimer’s disease : JAD. 2011;
26:507-521.

13.	 Zhang HS, Wu TC, Sang WW and Ruan Z. EGCG inhibits
Tat-induced LTR transactivation: role of Nrf2, AKT,
AMPK signaling pathway. Life Sci. 2012; 90:747-754.
14.	 Narkar VA, Downes M, Yu RT, Embler E, Wang YX,
Banayo E, Mihaylova MM, Nelson MC, Zou Y, Juguilon H,
Kang H, Shaw RJ and Evans RM. AMPK and PPARdelta
agonists are exercise mimetics. Cell. 2008; 134:405-415.

2.	 Schroeder EK, Kelsey NA, Doyle J, Breed E, Bouchard
RJ, Loucks FA, Harbison RA and Linseman DA. Green tea
epigallocatechin 3-gallate accumulates in mitochondria and
displays a selective antiapoptotic effect against inducers of
mitochondrial oxidative stress in neurons. Antioxidants &
redox signaling. 2009; 11:469-480.

15.	 Rietveld A and Wiseman S. Antioxidant effects of tea:
evidence from human clinical trials. The Journal of
nutrition. 2003; 133:3285S-3292S.

3.	 Valenti D, De Rasmo D, Signorile A, Rossi L, de Bari L,
Scala I, Granese B, Papa S and Vacca RA. Epigallocatechin3-gallate prevents oxidative phosphorylation deficit and
promotes mitochondrial biogenesis in human cells from
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Prochazkova D, Bousova I and Wilhelmova N. Antioxidant
and prooxidant properties of flavonoids. Fitoterapia. 2011;
82:513-523.

16.	 Lin LC, Wang MN, Tseng TY, Sung JS and Tsai TH.
Pharmacokinetics of (-)-epigallocatechin-3-gallate in
conscious and freely moving rats and its brain regional
7438

Oncotarget

distribution. J Agric Food Chem. 2007; 55:1517-1524.

suppresses hepatic gluconeogenesis through 5’-AMPactivated protein kinase. The Journal of biological
chemistry. 2007; 282:30143-30149.

17.	 Lee JH, Moon JH, Kim SW, Jeong JK, Nazim UM, Lee YJ,
Seol JW and Park SY. EGCG-mediated autophagy flux has
a neuroprotection effect via a class III histone deacetylase
in primary neuron cells. Oncotarget. 2015; 6: 9701-17. doi:
10.18632/oncotarget.3832..

32.	 Hwang JT, Ha J, Park IJ, Lee SK, Baik HW, Kim YM and
Park OJ. Apoptotic effect of EGCG in HT-29 colon cancer
cells via AMPK signal pathway. Cancer letters. 2007;
247:115-121.

18.	 Srinivasan S and Avadhani NG. Cytochrome c oxidase
dysfunction in oxidative stress. Free Radical Biology and
Medicine. 2012; 53:1252-1263.

33.	 Huang CH, Tsai SJ, Wang YJ, Pan MH, Kao JY and Way
TD. EGCG inhibits protein synthesis, lipogenesis, and
cell cycle progression through activation of AMPK in p53
positive and negative human hepatoma cells. Molecular
nutrition & food research. 2009; 53:1156-1165.

19.	 Arnold S. The power of life. Cytochrome c oxidase takes
center stage in metabolic control, cell signalling and
survival. Mitochondrion. 2012; 12:46-56.

34.	 Park SY, Jung CH, Song B, Park OJ and Kim YM. Proapoptotic and migration-suppressing potential of EGCG,
and the involvement of AMPK in the p53-mediated
modulation of VEGF and MMP-9 expression. Oncology
letters. 2013; 6:1346-1350.

20.	 Perry SW, Norman JP, Barbieri J, Brown EB and Gelbard
HA. Mitochondrial membrane potential probes and the
proton gradient: a practical usage guide. BioTechniques.
2011; 50:98-115.
21.	 Fernandez-Fernandez S, Almeida A and Bolaños JP.
Antioxidant and bioenergetic coupling between neurons
and astrocytes. Biochemical Journal. 2012; 443:3-11.

35.	 Chen C, Shen G, Hebbar V, Hu R, Owuor ED and Kong
AN. Epigallocatechin-3-gallate-induced stress signals in
HT-29 human colon adenocarcinoma cells. Carcinogenesis.
2003; 24:1369-1378.

22.	 Pendergrass W, Wolf N and Poot M. Efficacy of
MitoTracker Green™ and CMXrosamine to measure
changes in mitochondrial membrane potentials in living
cells and tissues. Cytometry Part A. 2004; 61A:162-169.

36.	 Hardie DG, Ross FA and Hawley SA. AMPK: a nutrient
and energy sensor that maintains energy homeostasis. Nat
Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2012; 13:251-262.

23.	 Nicholls DG and Budd SL. Mitochondria and Neuronal
Survival. Physiol Rev. 2000; 80:315-60.

37.	 Mihaylova MM and Shaw RJ. The AMPK signalling
pathway coordinates cell growth, autophagy and
metabolism. Nature cell biology. 2011; 13:1016-1023.

24.	 Hutter E, Unterluggauer H, Garedew A, Jansen-Durr P and
Gnaiger E. High-resolution respirometry--a modern tool in
aging research. Experimental gerontology. 2006; 41:103109.

38.	 Spasic MR, Callaerts P and Norga KK. AMP-activated
protein kinase (AMPK) molecular crossroad for metabolic
control and survival of neurons. The Neuroscientist. 2009;
15:309-316.

25.	 Pesta D and Gnaiger E. High-resolution respirometry:
OXPHOS protocols for human cells and permeabilized
fibers from small biopsies of human muscle. Methods in
molecular biology. 2012; 810:25-58.

39.	 Wagner AE, Piegholdt S, Rabe D, Baenas N, Schloesser
A, Eggersdorfer M, Stocker A and Rimbach G.
Epigallocatechin gallate affects glucose metabolism and
increases fitness and lifespan in Drosophila melanogaster.
Oncotarget. 2015; 6:30568-78. doi: 10.18632/
oncotarget.5215.

26.	 Kelly DP and Scarpulla RC. Transcriptional regulatory
circuits controlling mitochondrial biogenesis and function.
Genes & development. 2004; 18:357-368.
27.	 Dasgupta B and Milbrandt J. Resveratrol stimulates AMP
kinase activity in neurons. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007;
104:7217-7222.

40.	 Dinuzzo M, Mangia S, Maraviglia B and Giove F. The
role of astrocytic glycogen in supporting the energetics of
neuronal activity. Neurochem Res. 2012; 37:2432-2438.

28.	 Sugioka K, Nakano M, Totsune-Nakano H, Minakami
H, Tero-Kubota S and Ikegami Y. Mechanism of O2generation in reduction and oxidation cycle of ubiquinones
in a model of mitochondrial electron transport systems.
Biochimica et biophysica acta. 1988; 936:377-385.

41.	 Ludwig B, Bender E, Arnold S, Huttemann M, Lee I and
Kadenbach B. Cytochrome C oxidase and the regulation
of oxidative phosphorylation. Chembiochem. 2001; 2:392403.
42.	 Arnold S and Kadenbach B. The intramitochondrial
ATP/ADP-ratio controls cytochrome c oxidase activity
allosterically. FEBS Lett. 1999; 443:105-108.

29.	 Jellinger KA. Basic mechanisms of neurodegeneration: a
critical update. Journal of cellular and molecular medicine.
2010; 14:457-487.

43.	 Huttemann M, Kadenbach B and Grossman LI. Mammalian
subunit IV isoforms of cytochrome c oxidase. Gene. 2001;
267:111-123.

30.	 Zhang Z, Ding Y, Dai X, Wang J and Li Y.
Epigallocatechin-3-gallate protects pro-inflammatory
cytokine induced injuries in insulin-producing cells
through the mitochondrial pathway. Eur J Pharmacol. 2011;
670:311-316.

44.	 Misiak M, Singh S, Drewlo S, Beyer C and Arnold S. Brain
region-specific vulnerability of astrocytes in response to
3-nitropropionic acid is mediated by cytochrome c oxidase
isoform expression. Cell and tissue research. 2010; 341:83-

31.	 Collins QF, Liu HY, Pi J, Liu Z, Quon MJ and Cao W.
Epigallocatechin-3-gallate (EGCG), a green tea polyphenol,
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

7439

Oncotarget

93.

GJ. Involvement of the kynurenine pathway in human
glioma pathophysiology. PLoS One. 2014; 9:e112945.

45.	 Horvat S, Beyer C and Arnold S. Effect of hypoxia on the
transcription pattern of subunit isoforms and the kinetics of
cytochrome c oxidase in cortical astrocytes and cerebellar
neurons. J Neurochem. 2006; 99:937-951.

59.	 Haslam G, Wyatt D and Kitos PA. Estimating the number
of viable animal cells in multi-well cultures based on their
lactate dehydrogenase activities. Cytotechnology. 2000;
32:63-75.

46.	 Collman JP, Dey A, Barile CJ, Ghosh S and Decreau RA.
Inhibition of electrocatalytic O(2) reduction of functional
CcO models by competitive, non-competitive, and mixed
inhibitors. Inorganic chemistry. 2009; 48:10528-10534.

60.	 Norman JP, Perry SW, Kasischke KA, Volsky DJ and
Gelbard HA. HIV-1 Trans Activator of Transcription
Protein Elicits Mitochondrial Hyperpolarization and
Respiratory Deficit, with Dysregulation of Complex IV
and Nicotinamide Adenine Dinucleotide Homeostasis
in Cortical Neurons. The Journal of Immunology. 2007;
178:869-876.

47.	 Arnold S, Goglia F and Kadenbach B. 3,5-Diiodothyronine
binds to subunit Va of cytochrome-c oxidase and abolishes
the allosteric inhibition of respiration by ATP. European
journal of biochemistry. 1998; 252:325-330.

61.	 Schneider CA, Rasband WS and Eliceiri KW. NIH Image to
ImageJ: 25 years of image analysis. Nature methods. 2012;
9:671-675.

48.	 Fukuda R, Zhang H, Kim JW, Shimoda L, Dang CV and
Semenza GL. HIF-1 regulates cytochrome oxidase subunits
to optimize efficiency of respiration in hypoxic cells. Cell.
2007; 129:111-122.

62.	 King BA and Oh DH. Spatial control of reactive oxygen
species formation in fibroblasts using two-photon
excitation. Photochemistry and photobiology. 2004; 80:1-6.

49.	 Pope S, Land JM and Heales SJ. Oxidative stress and
mitochondrial dysfunction in neurodegeneration; cardiolipin
a critical target? Biochimica et biophysica acta. 2008;
1777:794-799.
50.	 Helling S, Huttemann M, Ramzan R, Kim SH, Lee I,
Muller T, Langenfeld E, Meyer HE, Kadenbach B, Vogt S
and Marcus K. Multiple phosphorylations of cytochrome c
oxidase and their functions. Proteomics. 2012; 12:950-959.
51.	 Piccoli C, Scrima R, Boffoli D and Capitanio N. Control
by cytochrome c oxidase of the cellular oxidative
phosphorylation system depends on the mitochondrial
energy state. The Biochemical journal. 2006; 396:573-583.
52.	 Lu LY, Ou N and Lu QB. Antioxidant induces DNA
damage, cell death and mutagenicity in human lung and
skin normal cells. Scientific reports. 2013; 3:3169.
53.	 Guillemin GJ, Smythe G, Takikawa O and Brew BJ.
Expression of indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase and production
of quinolinic acid by human microglia, astrocytes, and
neurons. Glia. 2005; 49:15-23.
54.	 Guillemin GJ, Cullen KM, Lim CK, Smythe GA, Garner B,
Kapoor V, Takikawa O and Brew BJ. Characterization of
the Kynurenine Pathway in Human Neurons. The Journal of
Neuroscience. 2007; 27:12884-12892.
55.	 Braidy N, Grant R, Adams S and Guillemin GJ.
Neuroprotective effects of naturally occurring polyphenols
on quinolinic acid-induced excitotoxicity in human neurons.
FEBS Journal. 2010; 277:368-382.
56.	 Ting KK, Brew BJ and Guillemin GJ. (2007). Effect of
quinolinic acid on gene expression in human astrocytes:
Implications for Alzheimer’s disease. In: Takai K, ed., pp.
384-388.
57.	 Guillemin GJ, Croitoru-Lamoury J, Dormont D, Armati
PJ and Brew BJ. Quinolinic acid upregulates chemokine
production and chemokine receptor expression in
astrocytes. GLIA. 2003; 41:371-381.
58.	 Adams S, Teo C, McDonald KL, Zinger A, Bustamante S,
Lim CK, Sundaram G, Braidy N, Brew BJ and Guillemin
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

7440

Oncotarget

