Original Article

Symptomatic Reduction in Free Testosterone Levels
Secondary to Crizotinib Use in Male Cancer Patients
Andrew J. Weickhardt, MBBS, DMedSc1; Robert C. Doebele, MD, PhD1; W. Thomas Purcell, MD, MBA1; Paul A. Bunn, MD1;
Ana B. Oton, MD1; Micol S. Rothman, MD2; Margaret E. Wierman, MD, PhD2,3; Tony Mok, MD4; Sanjay Popat, MBBS, PhD5;
Julie Bauman, MD6; Jorge Nieva, MD7; Silvia Novello, MD, PhD8; Sai-Hong Ignatius Ou, MD, PhD9; and
D. Ross Camidge, MD, PhD1

BACKGROUND: Crizotinib is a tyrosine kinase inhibitor active against ALK, MET, and ROS1. We previously reported that crizotinib
decreases testosterone in male patients. The detailed etiology of the effect, its symptomatic significance, and the effectiveness of
subsequent testosterone replacement have not been previously reported. METHODS: Male cancer patients treated with crizotinib had
total testosterone levels measured and results compared with non-crizotinib-treated patients. Albumin, sex hormone-binding globulin
(SHBG), follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH), and/or luteinizing hormone (LH) were tracked longitudinally. A subset of patients had
free testosterone levels measured and a hypogonadal screening questionnaire administered. Patients receiving subsequent testosterone supplementation were assessed for symptomatic improvement. RESULTS: Mean total testosterone levels were 225% below the
lower limit of normal (LLN) in 32 crizotinib-treated patients (27 of 32 patients below LLN, 84%) compared with 129% above LLN in
19 non-crizotinib-treated patients (6 of 19 below LLN, 32%), P 5.0012. Levels of albumin and SHBG (which both bind testosterone)
declined rapidly with crizotinib, but so did FSH, LH, and free testosterone, suggesting a centrally mediated, true hypogonadal effect.
Mean free testosterone levels were 217% below LLN (19 of 25 patients below LLN, 76%). Eighty-four percent (16 of 19) with low free
levels, and 79% (19/24) with low total levels had symptoms of androgen deficiency. Five of 9 patients (55%) with low testosterone
given testosterone supplementation had improvement in symptoms, coincident with increases in testosterone above LLN. CONCLUSIONS: Symptoms of androgen deficiency and free or total/free testosterone levels should be tracked in male patients on crizotinib
C 2013 American Cancer Society.
with consideration of testosterone replacement as appropriate. Cancer 2013;119:2383-90. V
KEYWORDS: crizotinib; NSCLC; testosterone; ALK gene rearrangements; hypogonadism.

INTRODUCTION
Crizotinib (Xalkori, Pfizer, La Jolla, CA) is an inhibitor of several different tyrosine kinases including anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK), ROS1, and MET.1-3 Use of crizotinib in molecularly selected patients with ALK or ROS1 gene-rearranged non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) leads to significant clinical benefit.1-5 In phase 1-3 studies of crizotinib
reported to date, the range of side effects attributed to crizotinib include gastrointestinal disturbance, visual side effects,
peripheral edema, and liver function test abnormalities.1,4,6,7 Because of the demographics associated with ALK-rearranged disease, patients treated with crizotinib are likely to be younger than most patients with NSCLC.8,9 Recently, we
reported that crizotinib reduced total testosterone over a period of weeks to below the lower limit of normal (LLN) in 19
of 19 male patients treated with the drug, with free testosterone levels also below the LLN in 9 of 10 patients for whom
this information was available.10 Levels of testosterone returned to normal within days following cessation of dosing with
crizotinib. The mechanism of testosterone reduction appeared to include a central effect because longitudinal sampling in
2 patients showed that follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) and luteinizing hormone (LH) levels decreased coincident
with the drop in testosterone levels.10
However, many questions about crizotinib’s effects on testosterone remain.11 Fatigue, which can be associated with
low testosterone, is a known side effect of crizotinib,1,7 but fatigue could also have multiple other etiologies. Symptoms
specifically associated with androgen deficiency may be missed in routine oncology practice12 and are not routinely

Corresponding Author: D. Ross Camidge, MD, PhD, Mail Stop F704, 1665 North Aurora Court, Aurora, CO 80045; Fax: (720) 848-0465; ross.camidge@ucdenver.edu
1
Division of Medical Oncology, Department of Medicine, University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus, Aurora, Colorado; 2Division of Endocrinology, Department of Medicine, University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus, Aurora, Colorado; 3Research Service, Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Denver, Colorado;
4
Department of Clinical Oncology at Chinese, University of Hong Kong in Prince of Wales Hospital, Hong Kong; 5The Royal Marsden, London, United Kingdom;
6
University of New Mexico Cancer Center, Albuquerque, New Mexico; 7Billings Clinic, Billings, Montana; 8Thoracic Oncology Unit, Oncology Department, University
of Turin, Turin, Italy; 9University of California, Irvine, Irvine, California.

DOI: 10.1002/cncr.28089, Received: November 29, 2012; Revised: February 10, 2013; Accepted: February 22, 2013, Published online April 12, 2013 in Wiley
Online Library (wileyonlinelibrary.com)

Cancer

July 1, 2013

2383

Original Article

assessed in lung cancer studies including any reported crizotinib trials to date. Although the index case with low testosterone that prompted these observations presented
with fatigue and loss of libido, the symptomatic consequences of these biochemical findings in most crizotinibtreated patients have not been documented.10 Similarly,
the effectiveness of testosterone replacement in such cases
has not been previously reported. Here, in a larger series
across multiple different institutions, we address the incidence of low testosterone in male patients with advanced
cancer treated with crizotinib therapy, the impact of crizotinib on testosterone-binding proteins (albumin and sex
hormone-binding globulin [SHBG]), which could differentially influence total and free levels of testosterone, the
impact of crizotinib on gonadotropin levels, the association of both total and free testosterone levels with symptoms of androgen deficiency, and whether treatment with
testosterone replacement benefited these patients
symptomatically.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Three groups of male patients with metastatic cancer were
assessed within this study. The first group represented 32
crizotinib-treated patients (crizotinib-treated group 1
[CTG1]) assessed at the University of Colorado Cancer
Center (10 of the 32) and 6 other institutions (Prince of
Wales Hospital, Hong Kong; The Royal Marsden Hospital, London, UK; San Luigi Hospital, University of Turin,
Turin, Italy; University of New Mexico Cancer Center,
Albuquerque, NM; Billings Clinic, Billings, MT; and the
University of California, Irvine, Irvine, CA). Following
the initial report of low testosterone secondary to crizotinib use from the University of Colorado, additional sites
with experience treating patients with crizotinib were
approached in April 2012.
The University of Colorado patients were tested for
molecular abnormalities on-site within the CLIA-certified
Colorado Molecular Correlates (CMOCO) laboratory,
and an institutional review board-approved protocol permits clinical correlates to be made on all in-house patients
in whom molecular analyses have been conducted within
the CMOCO laboratory. Information on patients treated
with crizotinib at other institutions and assessed for testosterone levels and androgen deprivation symptoms following the initial publication of these data was captured and
communicated for analysis within this study in accordance with each institution’s local practice guidelines.
Sites were asked to identify all patients with
advanced cancer, regardless of their underlying histology
or molecular status, who were currently on crizotinib and
2384

had received at least 21 days of continuous therapy. Total
and/or free levels of testosterone using institutional standard assays were then checked at the next routine clinic
visit. Pretreatment testosterone levels were not routinely
collected. In addition, when possible, symptoms of androgen deficiency were documented at the same time as the
initial testosterone assessment using the Androgen Deficiency in Aging Males (ADAM) questionnaire (Table 1),
a validated screening assessment of hypogonadism in
adult men.13 Serial albumin levels were assessable in most
patients. Three patients from the University of Colorado
within the CTG1 group also had serial total and free testosterone, SHBG, and gonadotropin assessments from
the day of commencement of crizotinib. If patients had
low total and/or free testosterone, they were advised to be
reviewed by an endocrinologist. Medical records from the
University of Colorado patients referred to endocrinology
were subsequently reviewed for whether testosterone
replacement was recommended and the overall effectiveness of replacement therapy on subsequent symptoms of
hypogonadism as assessed by the endocrinologist
(improved/not improved).
The second group represented the 19 crizotinibtreated patients (crizotinib-treated group 2 [CTG2])
included in the original report from the University of Colorado, which had a reanalysis of previously reported total
and free testosterone levels to allow comparison across different institutional assays (see below).14 At the time of these
assessments, all these patients had received at least 21 days
of continuous treatment with crizotinib. The ADAM questionnaire was also administered, where possible, to patients
in the CTG2 group at the time of the testosterone assessment reported here. Patients with low total and/or free testosterone were similarly referred to endocrinology and the
impact of any replacement therapy assessed.
The third group represented a reference group of 19
patients with metastatic NSCLC who had never received
TABLE 1. Androgen Deficiency in Aging Men
(ADAM questionnaire)13—Yes/No Answers
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.

Do you have a decrease in libido (sex drive)?
Do you have a lack of energy?
Do you have a decrease in strength and/or endurance?
Have you lost height?
Have you noticed a decreased “enjoyment of life”?
Are you sad and/or grumpy?
Are your erections less strong?
Have you noticed a recent deterioration in your ability to play sports?
Are you falling asleep after dinner?
Has there been a recent deterioration in your work performance?

Answering yes to number 1 or 7 or answering yes to more than 3 questions
may indicate low testosterone.

Cancer

July 1, 2013

Male Hypogonadism From Crizotinib Use/Weickhardt et al

crizotinib (non-crizotinib-treated group [NCTG]) who
were reported in the previous publication and similarly
reanalyzed to allow comparison across different institutional
assays. This group served as a control population to assess
total testosterone measurements in advanced cancer patients
compared with both the CTG1 and CTG2 groups.
Blood samples for hormonal and binding protein
levels in all patients were obtained at routine clinic visits
rather than at any consistent time of day, and when multiple assessments were made, the first assay result after 21
days of continuous crizotinib therapy was used. At the
University of Colorado Hospital, hormonal assessments
were performed as previously described.10 Patients from
the 6 other institutions had total and free testosterone
measured using a range of different assays. Although previous research suggests that interassay variability makes
only a small contribution to total variation in testosterone
measurements,14 to facilitate comparisons between all
patients across institutions, each assay measurement was
normalized by dividing individual measurements by the
LLN of the specific assay. Using this approach, each reading could then be expressed as an absolute percentage relevant to the LLN.
To explore the relationship between total testosterone (protein bound plus unbound levels of testosterone)
and free testosterone (unbound levels only), levels of albumin and/or SHBG were measured longitudinally in a subset of crizotinib-treated patients in the CTG1 and CTG2
groups. For these patients, each of the serial readings was
expressed as an absolute percentage relative to the baseline
measurement of the variable in the individual patient.
Patient age, cancer type, molecular abnormality, and duration of therapy (days) with crizotinib were recorded on
every patient.
Prism software (GraphPad, San Diego, CA) was
used to calculate statistical significance in mean total testosterone between the CTG1/CTG2 and NCTG groups
using a 2-tailed Student t test for paired data and to compare levels of free testosterone with symptoms of androgen
deficiency using the Fisher exact test of assessment for
contingency tables.

RESULTS
All patients in the CTG1 and CTG2 groups received crizotinib at 250 mg twice daily orally, apart from 1 colorectal cancer patient in the CTG1 group who received
crizotinib at 650 mg orally once daily as part of a dose
escalation cohort within a crizotinib phase 1 trial. Two
patients in the CTG1 group received crizotinib together
Cancer

July 1, 2013

TABLE 2. Patient Demographics

No. of patients
Age (y), median
Range
Cancer
Non-small cell lung cancer
Colorectal cancer

CrizotinibTreated
Group 1
(CTG1)

CrizotinibTreated
Group 2
(CTG2)

NonCrizotinibTreated
Group
(NCTG)

32
54
33-69

19
60
35-81

19
63
43-78

31(97%)
1 (3%)

19 (100%)
0 (0%)

19 (100%)
1 (5%)

Molecular status
ALK rearranged
ROS1 fusion gene
MET amplification
EGFR mutation
KRAS mutation
Undefined/other

26
2
1
1
1
1

Current therapy
Crizotinib
Median duration (mo)

32 (100%)
6.3

(82%)
(6%)
(3%)
(3%)
(3%)
(3%)

17
1
1
0
0
0

(90%)
(5%)
(5%)
(0%)
(0%)
(0%)

19 (100%)
7.3

2
0
0
5
3
9

(11%)
(0%)
(0%)
(26%)
(16%)
(47%)

0 (0%)
—

with a pan-Her inhibitor (dacomitinib, Pfizer) within a
phase 1 combination study.
Demographics of the CTG1, CTG2 and NCTG
groups are listed in Table 2. Of the 32 patients within the
CTG1 group, 31 had NSCLC (27 with ALK gene rearrangements, 2 with ROS1 gene fusions, 1 with cMET
amplification, 1 with a HER2 mutation, and 1 with an
EGFR mutation), and 1 had colorectal carcinoma with a
KRAS mutation. The median duration of crizotinib therapy at the time of hormonal sampling was 6.3 months in
the CTG1 group and 7.3 months in the CTG2 group.
The median age of the patients was 54 years in the CTG1
group, 60 years in the CTG2 group, and 63 years in the
NCTG group, consistent with the known younger demographics of ALK-rearranged NSCLCs comprising 82%
and 90% of the patients treated in the CTG1 and CTG2
groups, respectively.8,9
Mean total testosterone levels were lower in the
CTG1 group than in the NCTG group (mean, 225%
below LLN vs 129% above LLN, P 5 .0012; Fig. 1).
Mean total testosterone levels in the previously reported
the CTG2 group were even lower (mean, 245% below
LLN, P 5 .0012). In the CTG1 group, 27 of 32 patients
(84%) had levels of total testosterone below the LLN,
compared with 19 of 19 in the CTG2 group (100%) and
6 of 19 in the NCTG group (32%).
Free testosterone levels were measured in 25 crizotinib-treated patients (17 from the CTG1 group, 8 from
the CTG2 group), shown in Figure 2. Free testosterone
2385

Original Article

Figure 1. Total testosterone levels in crizotinib-treated and
non-crizotinib-treated patients in relation to the lower limit of
normal (LLN) of the assay used. NCTG, non-crizotinib-treated
group; CTG2, crizotinib-treated group 2; CTG 1, crizotinibtreated group 1.

was below the LLN in 19 of 25 patients (76%), with a
mean level 217% below the LLN. The relationship
between the total testosterone measurement relative to the
LLN and the free testosterone measurement relative to
LLN in the 25 crizotinib-treated patients is shown in Figure 3. The relationship was linear, with r2 5 0.52.
Albumin levels fell in crizotinib-treated patients
(Fig. 4). In 20 patients from the CTG1 and CTG2
groups, after 6-8 weeks of treatment with crizotinib, mean
albumin levels were 27% below baseline levels. SHBG
levels were assessed in 3 patients in detail during the first 8
weeks of therapy with crizotinib and declined precipitously in each patient, falling by up to 85% below baseline
initial level over this time frame (Fig. 4). Albumin levels
checked over the same time frame also dropped, but more
modestly. In each of the 3 patients, total and free testosterone and FSH and LH levels were also assessed. Levels of
total and free testosterone and both gonadotropins all
declined following commencement of crizotinib, consistent with our previous report.10
Symptoms of low testosterone among those with
both total and free testosterone data were assessed in 25
patients from the CTG1 and CTG2 groups using the
2386

Figure 2. Free testosterone levels in crizotinib-treated patients
relative to the lower limit of normal of the assay used.

Figure 3. Correlation of each individual’s total testosterone
relative to the lower limit of normal of the assay used to free
testosterone relative to the lower limit of normal of the assay
used. Total and free testosterone assessed on same occasion
in each patient.

ADAM questionnaire (Table 1). Of these, 20 of 25 (80%)
had responses to the questionnaire consistent with possible hypogonadism. The correlation of these responses to
Cancer

July 1, 2013

Male Hypogonadism From Crizotinib Use/Weickhardt et al

Figure 4. Dynamic assessment of sex hormones and testosterone-binding proteins in 3 patients commenced on crizotinib, showing decrease in total and free testosterone relative to baseline measurement, as well as rapid decreases in LH and FSH, albumin,
and sex hormone-binding globulin.

the assessment of total and free testosterone in these
patients is shown in Table 3. Eighty-four percent of
patients with low free testosterone (16 of 19) and 79% of
patients with low total testosterone (19 of 24) manifested
symptoms of androgen deficiency.
Cancer

July 1, 2013

The benefits of testosterone replacement in crizotinib-treated patients with low testosterone (total and/or
free) were assessed in 9 patients treated at the University
of Colorado from the CTG1 group. Replacement testosterone in the form of a topical gel or injection was
2387

Original Article
TABLE 3. Symptoms of Hypogonadism from
ADAM Questionnaire and Levels of Free
Testosterone

Free testosterone
below LLN
Free testosterone
above LLN
Total testosterone
below LLN
Total testosterone
above LLN

Symptoms

No
Symptoms

Two-Tailed
Fisher Exact
Test

16

3

P 5 0.56

4

2

19

5

1

0

P 5 1.00

undertaken in 9 patients with low total testosterone under
the supervision of an endocrinologist. At review between
2 and 3 months after commencing testosterone replacement, 5 of 9 (55%) reported improvement in symptoms
of hypogonadism to the endocrinologist. Five of 5
patients (100%) who had testosterone replacement and
increased testosterone levels above the LLN reported
improvement in symptoms, whereas none of the 4
patients who took testosterone replacement but did not
have total testosterone increase above the LLN reported a
change in symptoms.
DISCUSSION
Crizotinib use is associated with significant clinical benefit
in ALK gene- and ROS1 gene-rearranged malignancies
with additional early evidence of activity in some METdriven cancers.1-3 Previously we reported that crizotinib
use was associated with rapid onset of low testosterone in
male patients with metastatic non-small cell lung cancer,
with 19 of 19 crizotinib-treated patients (100%) manifesting low total testosterone levels and 9 of 10 (90%)
manifesting low free testosterone levels.10 When levels
were tracked longitudinally, testosterone declines were
rapid, falling below the LLN within 3 weeks of commencing therapy in most cases. As crizotinib also led to
decreases in both FSH and LH, activity of the drug within
the central hypothalamic-pituitary axis was suggested as at
least one possible mechanism underlying this effect.
However, from these initial findings it was unclear
whether the effect of crizotinib on testosterone was functionally significant in the absence of both a larger data set
and information on the symptomatic consequences of
these hormonal test results.11
Our initial findings are replicated here in a larger
cohort of prospectively tested crizotinib-treated patients,
with 84% of patients manifesting total testosterone levels
2388

below the LLN. This effect was evident in patients with
advanced cancer treated at multiple institutions, across
different cancer histologies and molecular subtypes. Certainly, a proportion of all patients with advanced cancer
would be expected to have low testosterone levels, as previously reported in the literature and shown by the 32%
of patients in the NCTG group with testosterone levels
below the LLN.10,15-18 However, despite the younger median age in the crizotinib-treated groups, the levels of total
testosterone were significantly lower in both the CTG1
and CTG2 groups compared with the NCTG group (Fig.
1). Data were not collected in this study on the amount of
prior chemotherapy, presence/absence of brain metastases, prior brain radiation, or opiate/dexamethasone use in
CTG1, all of which may influence testosterone levels.
However, in our previous study we found no significant
differences in these factors between our control and crizotinib-treated groups, and therefore these factors alone
could not explain the association between low testosterone
level and crizotinib treatment.10
Part of the rapid fall in total testosterone levels
reflects a mild effect of crizotinib on albumin levels and a
much larger effect on SHBG levels, which represent the 2
major testosterone-binding proteins (Fig. 4). Anecdotally,
among the University of Colorado patients, these drops
occurred in the absence of proteinuria or significant hepatic dysfunction (as assessed by transaminase levels in the
blood). The signaling pathways and feedback loops controlling expression of these proteins are not well understood, and the molecular basis for these effects remains
unclear. Whether chronic use of crizotinib will drop albumin levels beyond those that we have noted after 6-8
weeks on therapy to contribute toward either the lateonset peripheral edema described with crizotinib or the
meaningful effects on the activity of other drugs influenced by albumin levels, for example, Coumadin, are
unknown but should be considered.7,19 Importantly, in
the subset in whom we have data, 76% of patients manifested free testosterone below the LLN, suggesting that
effects on testosterone physiology beyond binding-protein
levels are occurring and that these low levels are likely to
be biologically significant. Consistent with this, 84% of
patients with low free testosterone levels on crizotinib (16
of 19) and 79% of patients with low total testosterone on
crizotinib (19 of 24) manifested symptoms of androgen
deficiency (Table 3). In our small study, in which very few
patients manifested normal testosterone levels on crizotinib, the presence/absence of symptoms was not statistically different between those with testosterone levels
above and below the LLN. In addition, patients with
Cancer

July 1, 2013

Male Hypogonadism From Crizotinib Use/Weickhardt et al

testosterone levels above the LLN can certainly describe
positive responses in the ADAM questionnaire, as despite
88% sensitivity, the questionnaire only has a reported
specificity of 60%.13 Specifically, in our study, the symptoms of androgen deficiency are likely to overlap with
symptoms secondary to both advanced cancer and depression (Table 1). However, consistent with the majority of
symptoms in our patients being truly reflective of their
low testosterone levels, 100% of patients who had testosterone replacement and increases in their testosterone levels above the LLN reported improvement in symptoms,
whereas 0% of those who took testosterone replacement
but did not have total testosterone levels increase above
the LLN reported a change in symptoms.
Free and total testosterone levels are related (Fig. 3),
but the relationship is only moderately strong (r2 5 0.52).
Although both low total and free testosterone levels are
associated with symptoms of androgen deficiency, because
reductions in albumin and SHBG also occur secondary to
crizotinib exposure and the incidence of androgen deficiency symptoms was marginally higher among those
with low free as opposed to low total testosterone levels,
free testosterone alone or free and total levels together
may be the most appropriate assessment methods to pursue in this indication in the future.
Building on our previous report of 2 patients tracked
longitudinally, we have demonstrated in an additional 3
patients that the commencement of crizotinib is associated with a decrease in both FSH and LH (Fig. 4), again
suggesting that a central effect of crizotinib on the hypothalamic-pituitary axis may be occurring.10 Crizotinib is
suspected to have very low blood-brain penetration; however, the pituitary lies outside the blood-brain barrier.20,21
Whether reductions in testosterone reflect an effect of crizotinib on ALK, on one of the other targets of crizotinib,
or on some combination of the drug’s targets is unknown,
but the presence or absence of this toxicity with some of
the newer ALK inhibitors currently in development
should elucidate this issue in the near future.22,23
There are several limitations of this report that need
to be accounted for. First, the number of crizotinib-treated
patients described is still relatively low (32 in the CTG1
group, 19 in the CTG2 group). Second, testosterone concentrations were measured at varied times of day. Testosterone levels are known to peak in the early morning and to be
lower in the evening, although there is some blunting of
this diurnal variation with age.24 However, given the consistent and clear reduction of levels below the lower limit of
normal in multiple individuals in 2 separate studies across
7 institutions, normal diurnal variation alone would not be
Cancer

July 1, 2013

able to account for the results seen in association with crizotinib. Third, the patients who had more complete hormonal assessments (eg, free testosterone levels or detailed
longitudinal sampling of SHBG and gonadotropin levels)
and/or who completed the initial ADAM questionnaire
represented subpopulations of the total, and biases in the
composition of each of these subgroups cannot be
excluded. Finally, the number of patients assessed for the
benefits of testosterone replacement was also small (n 5 9),
and the formal ADAM questionnaire was not repeated;
instead, benefit was assessed more subjectively on the basis
of a retrospective review of the endocrinologist’s clinic
notes. However, our results are strikingly consistent
between both the initial report and this new report and
between institutions. In addition, the result of 55% of low
testosterone cases deriving benefit from the replacement
therapy is entirely consistent with the effectiveness of testosterone replacement in cancer patients reported in the literature.25,26 Similarly, symptomatic benefit appeared entirely
dependent on patients manifesting elevated testosterone
levels from the replacement therapy.
Importantly, testosterone levels have not been formally assessed in any of the major studies of crizotinib to
date. Overall, our data strongly suggest that crizotinib rapidly drops testosterone levels in men and that this effect is
clinically significant both in producing symptoms and in
being amenable to appropriate therapy. The symptoms of
androgen deficiency in such patients may be elicited in the
clinic by using the ADAM questionnaire (Table 1). Oncologists typically avoid discussion of sexuality with patients,
and without a clear awareness of these issues, symptoms of
hypogonadism may be overlooked.12 Crizotinib is also currently being used to treat certain molecularly specific subtypes of cancer in pediatric populations, including in young
male patients approaching puberty, in whom maintenance
of normal testosterone function may be essential.27 We recommend tracking free or total/free testosterone levels in all
male patients treated with crizotinib, ideally measuring
these levels in the early morning to adjust for diurnal variation24 and referring those with low levels to an endocrinologist for discussion of the pros and cons of replacement
therapy, but with no need to change crizotinib dosage.
FUNDING SOURCES
This study was funded, in part, by NCI grant P30CA046934.

CONFLICT OF INTEREST DISCLOSURES
Drs. Andrew J. Weickhardt, Robert C. Doebele, Sanjay Popat, SaiHong Ignatius Ou, and D. Ross Camidge have received honoraria
for ad hoc consultancy/advisory meetings with Pfizer.
2389

Original Article

REFERENCES
1. Kwak EL, Bang YJ, Camidge DR, et al. Anaplastic lymphoma kinase
inhibition in non-small-cell lung cancer. N Engl J Med. 2010;363:
1693-1703.
2. Shaw AT, Camidge DR, Engelman JA, et al. Clinical activity of crizotinib in advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) harboring
ROS1 gene rearrangement. ASCO Meeting Abstracts. 2012;30(15
Suppl):7508.
3. Ou S-HI, Kwak EL, Siwak-Tapp C, et al. Activity of crizotinib
(PF02341066), a dual mesenchymal-epithelial transition (MET) and
anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) inhibitor, in a non-small cell
lung cancer patient with de Novo MET amplification. J Thorac
Oncol. 2011;6:942-946.
4. Shaw AT, Kim DW, Nagagawa K, Camidge DR, Solomon B. Phase
III study of crizotinib vs. pemetrexed or docetaxel chemotherapy in
patients with advanced ALK-positive NSCLC (PROFILE 1007).
ESMO. 2012 (2862).
5. Kim D-W, Ahn M-J, Shi Y, et al. Results of a global phase II study
with crizotinib in advanced ALK-positive non-small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC). ASCO Meeting Abstracts. 2012;30(15 Suppl):7533.
6. Camidge DR, Doebele RC. Treating ALK-positive lung cancer-early
successes and future challenges. Nat Rev Clin Oncol. 2012;9:258277.
7. Camidge DR, Bang YJ, Kwak EL, et al. Activity and safety of crizotinib in patients with ALK-positive non-small-cell lung cancer:
updated results from a phase 1 study. Lancet Oncol. Sep 3 2012.
8. Weickhardt AJ, Camidge DR. The therapeutic potential of anaplastic lymphoma kinase inhibitors in lung cancer: rationale and clinical
evidence. Clin Investig. 2011;1:1119-1126.
9. Shaw AT, Yeap BY, Mino-Kenudson M, et al. Clinical features and
outcome of patients with non-small-cell lung cancer who harbor
EML4-ALK. J Clin Oncol. 2009;27:4247-4253.
10. Weickhardt AJ, Rothman MS, Salian-Mehta S, et al. Rapid-onset
hypogonadism secondary to crizotinib use in men with metastatic
nonsmall cell lung cancer. Cancer. 2012;118:5302-5309.
11. Ramalingam SS, Shaw AT. Hypogonadism related to crizotinib therapy: Implications for patient care. Cancer. 2012;118:E1-E2.
12. Lemieux L, Kaiser S, Pereira J, Meadows LM. Sexuality in palliative
care: patient perspectives. Palliat Med. 2004;18:630-637.
13. Morley JE, Charlton E, Patrick P, et al. Validation of a screening
questionnaire for androgen deficiency in aging males. Metabolism.
2000;49:1239-1242.
14. Brambilla DJ, O’Donnell AB, Matsumoto AM, McKinlay JB. Intraindividual variation in levels of serum testosterone and other repro-

2390

15.
16.

17.

18.
19.

20.

21.
22.

23.

24.

25.

26.

27.

ductive and adrenal hormones in men. Clin Endocrinol.
2007;67:853-862.
Howell SJ, Shalet SM. Testicular function following chemotherapy.
Hum Reprod Update. 2001;7:363-369.
Chlebowski RT, Heber D. Hypogonadism in male patients with
metastatic cancer prior to chemotherapy. Cancer Res. 1982;42:24952498.
Sperti C, Bonadimani B, Guolo P, et al. Androgen profile in
patients with pancreatic carcinoma. Ital J Gastroenterol. 1992;24:
328-331.
Burney B, Garcia J. Hypogonadism in male cancer patients. J
Cachexia, Sarcopenia Muscle. 2012;3:149-155.
Petitpas I, Bhattacharya AA, Twine S, East M, Curry S. Crystal
structure analysis of warfarin binding to human serum albumin:
anatomy of drug site i. J Biol Chem. 2001;276:22804-22809.
Costa DB, Kobayashi S, Pandya SS, et al. CSF Concentration of the
anaplastic lymphoma kinase inhibitor crizotinib. J Clin Oncol.
2011;29:e443-e445.
Risau W, Wolburg H. Development of the blood-brain barrier.
Trends Neurosci. 1990;13:174-178.
Mehra R, Camidge DR, Sharma S, et al. First-in-human phase I
study of the ALK inhibitor LDK378 in advanced solid tumors.
ASCO Meeting Abstracts. 2012;30(15 Suppl):3007.
Gettinger S, Weiss GJ, Salgia R, et al. A first-in-human dose-finding
study of the ALK/EGFR inhibitor AP26113 in patients with
advanced malignancies. ESMO 37th Annual Meeting 2012; Abstract
4390.
Diver MJ; Clinical Science Reviews Committee of the Association
for Clinical Biochemistry. Analytical and physiological factors affecting the interpretation of serum testosterone concentration in men.
Ann Clin Biochem. 2006;43:3-12.
Chlebowski RT, Herrold J, Ali I, et al. Influence of nandrolone decanoate on weight loss in advanced non-small cell lung cancer. Cancer. 1986;58:183-186.
Howell SJ, Radford JA, Adams JE, Smets EM, Warburton R, Shalet
SM. Randomized placebo-controlled trial of testosterone replacement
in men with mild Leydig cell insufficiency following cytotoxic chemotherapy. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf). 2001;55:315-324.
Mosse YP, Balis FM, Lim MS, et al. Efficacy of crizotinib in children with relapsed/refractory ALK-driven tumors including anaplastic large cell lymphoma and neuroblastoma: a Children’s Oncology
Group phase I consortium study. ASCO Meeting Abstracts. 2012;
30(15 Suppl):9500.

Cancer

July 1, 2013

