Oncotarget, Vol. 5, No. 19

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Crizotinib Exhibits Antitumor Activity by Targeting ALK Signaling
not c-MET in Pancreatic Cancer
Hong Hua Yan1*, Kyung Hee Jung1*, Mi Kwon Son1, Zhenghuan Fang1, Soo Jung
Kim1, Ye-Lim Ryu1, Juyoung Kim1, Mi-Hyun Kim2, Soon-Sun Hong1
1

College of Medicine, Inha University, 3-ga, Sinheung-dong, Jung-gu, Incheon 400-712, Republic of Korea;

2

 chool of Biological & Chemical Engineering, Yanbian University of Science & Technology, Beishan St., Yanji City, Jilin Prov.,
S
133000, China

*

These authors equally contributed to this work.

Correspondence to:
Dr. Soon-Sun Hong, e-mail: hongs@inha.ac.kr
Key words: Crizotinib, Pancreatic cancer, c-MET, ALK, Apoptosis
Received: May 22, 2014	

Accepted: August 18, 2014	

Published: August 23, 2014

ABSTRACT
Crizotinib, a c-MET/ALK inhibitor, has exhibited antitumor efficacy in different
types of cancers. However, studies regarding Crizotinib in pancreatic cancer have
been limited. Thus, we investigated the effect of Crizotinib on pancreatic cancer and
its mechanism of action. Crizotinib strongly suppressed the growth and proliferation
of pancreatic cancer cells in a dose-dependent manner. Also, it induced apoptosis
by modulating its related factors. In the study, with regard to the mechanism of
action, Crizotinib did not inhibit c-MET expression on pancreatic cancer cells; instead,
it specifically inhibited the activity of ALK, which was identified to be highly expressed
on various pancreatic cancer cells and tissues in our study. In 42 different receptor
tyrosine kinase (RTKs) array, Crizotinib also strongly inhibited the expression of
activated ALK in pancreatic cancer cells, modulating its downstream mediators
such as STAT3, AKT, and ERK. Furthermore, Crizotinib inhibited angiogenesis in a
mouse Matrigel plug assay as well as the progression of tumor growth in a mouse
xenograft model. Taken together, our investigation shows that Crizotinib inhibits the
ALK signaling pathway in pancreatic cancer, resulting in cell growth/angiogenesis
inhibition and apoptosis induction. We suggest that Crizotinib might be used as a novel
therapeutic drug for treating pancreatic cancer.

The mesenchymal–epithelial transition factor
(c-MET) is one of the subfamilies of receptor tyrosine
kinase (RTKs) for hepatocyte growth factor (HGF),
which functions to mediate cell proliferation, invasion,
motility and survival. During embryogenesis and tissue
repair, c-MET signaling is critical for normal process [6].
It has been reported that c-MET was highly expressed in
many types of human cancers, such as liver, ovarian, nonsmall cell lung, gastric cancers, and pancreatic cancer [7].
Also, c-MET was frequently overexpressed, mutated or
amplified in many cancers. In pancreatic cancer, c-MET
was overexpressed up to 80% of pancreatic ductal
adenocarcinoma cases, and c-MET alterations were shown
to be a strong indicator for increased recurrence rates and
overall poor survival for pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma

INTRODUCTION
Advanced stage pancreatic cancer is the fourth
leading cause of cancer-related deaths in the United
State [1]. Even though extensive efforts have been made
to treat pancreatic cancer, its aggressive behavior and
intrinsic resistance to most chemotherapeutic agents lead
to less than a 5% overall 5-year survival rate [2]. There
are only a small percent of selected patients who are able
to undergo a surgical operation. To date, several regimens
are widely used to treat advanced pancreatic cancer,
including gemcitabine alone or in combination with other
drugs; however, it is disappointing that there is no clearly
superior treatment option for locally advanced pancreatic
cancer [3-5].

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

9150

Oncotarget

patient [8-11]. Recently, c-MET has been identified as a
new marker for pancreatic stem cells and therapeutic target
in pancreatic cancer. In addition, c-MET inhibitor, such as
Cabozantinib, has overcome gemcitabine resistance in
pancreatic cancer cells [12, 13].
Anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) is one of
the insulin receptor superfamily of RTKs, and it was
firstly identified as a result of cloning the nuclear protein
nucleophosmin (NPM)–ALK fusion gene in anaplastic
large-cell lymphomas [14]. ALK pathway is one of the most
frequently deregulated pathways in various human cancers
[15]. Activation of ALK mediates many functional processes,
including cell proliferation, survival, division, and invasion
through the modulation of signaling pathways, such as PI3K/
AKT, STAT3 and RAS/MEK [16, 17]. Translocation of ALK
was reported as the most common cause of genomic ALK
aberration in many cancers, including anaplastic large-cell
lymphomas, non-small cell lung cancer, diffuse large B-cell
lymphoma, and inflammatory myofibroblastic tumor. In
addition, ALK was also mutated or amplified frequently
in many cancers. For this reason, targeting ALK signaling
has emerged as an attractive therapy in many types of ALK
alteration cancers [18, 19].
Crizotinib is an ATP-competitive small molecule
and orally bioavailable dual inhibitor of the c-MET/
HGF receptor and ALK tyrosine kinases [20]. In early
studies, Crizotinib inhibited tumor cell proliferation
and microvessel density, and also induced apoptosis in
many types of cancers, including gastric cancer, nonsmall cell lung cancer, and ovarian cancer. In clinical
trials, Crizotinib was approved by the US Food and Drug
Administration (FDA) as a treatment for locally advanced
or metastatic ALK-rearranged non-small cell lung cancer
in 2011. This approval was dependent on response rates
of 50 - 61% from 255 ALK-rearranged non-small cell
lung cancer patients enrolled in two single-arm trials
[21, 22].
Although physiological and anticancer effects of
Crizotinib were documented in many cancers, anticancer
activities of Crizotinib in pancreatic cancer have not
been fully investigated [16]. Therefore, we investigated
the anticancer effect of Crizotinib and its mechanism of
action in pancreatic cancer. Our present study revealed that
Crizotinib induced apoptosis and inhibited cell growth or
angiogenesis via inhibition of ALK signaling, not c-MET
signaling in pancreatic cancer.

Crizotinib inhibited the growth of pancreatic cancer cells
in a dose-dependent manner for 48 hr and 72 hr with IC50
values close to 5 µM in the pancreatic cell lines (Fig. 1A).
Using BrdU staining for 6 hr, we also found that Crizotinib
inhibited the proliferation of PANC-1 cells in a dosedependent manner (Fig. 1B).

Crizotinib induced apoptosis in pancreatic
cancer cells
To further know whether Crizotinib induces
apoptosis in pancreatic cancer cells, we performed
TUNEL assay, JC-1 staining, MitoTracker probe, and
western blotting in PANC-1 cells. As observed by TUNEL
staining, DNA fragments were detected after Crizotinib
treatment (Fig. 2A). During apoptosis, several key
events happen in the mitochondria, including the release
of cytochrome c, changes in electron transport, and loss
of mitochondrial transmembrane potential. As shown
in Fig. 2B, mitochondrial transmembrane potential was
changed markedly as evident from the disappearance of
red fluorescence or the increase of green fluorescence in
most cells. Consistent with the above results, the release
of cytochrome c into the cytoplasm was induced by the
change of mitochondrial transmembrane potential as
shown in Fig. 2C. In addition, Crizotinib increased the
expression levels of cleaved caspase-3 and PARP, as well
as the Bax expression. In contrast, the expression level of
Bcl-2 was decreased by Crizotinib.

Crizotinib did not inhibit the phosphorylation of
c-MET in pancreatic cancer cells
It has been reported that c-MET was highly expressed
in a variety of carcinomas, including lung cancer, breast
cancer, colon cancer, and pancreatic cancer [7]. c-MET
inhibitors, including Crizotinib and Cabozantinib, enhanced
the antitumor effect of gemcitabine in pancreatic cancers.
Also, Crizotinib as a c-MET inhibitor showed an antitumor
effect via inhibition of c-MET signaling in lung and gastric
cancer cells [13, 23, 24]. Hence, we identified the expression
of c-MET in pancreatic cancer and then investigated
whether Crizotinib inhibited the phosphorylation of c-MET
in pancreatic cancer cells. As shown in Fig. 3A, c-MET
and p-c-MET were highly expressed in pancreatic cancer
cell lines. When pancreatic cancer cells were treated with
Crizotinib in a dose-dependent manner, it did not inhibit the
expression of both p-c-MET and c-MET (Fig. 3B).

RESULTS

Crizotinib inhibited the phosphorylation of
c-MET in c-MET amplification cells, not in
c-MET overexpression or splice mutation cells

Crizotinib inhibited cell growth and proliferation
in pancreatic cancer cells
To evaluate the effect of Crizotinib on the growth
and proliferation of pancreatic cancer cells (AsPC-1,
PANC-1 and MIA PaCa-2), we used MTT assay and BrdU
staining. The results from an MTT assay showed that
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Some reports have demonstrated that Crizotinib
inhibited the proliferation and growth by inhibiting
c-MET signaling in c-MET altered cancers [24].
9151

Oncotarget

Figure 1: Effect of Crizotinib on the proliferation of human pancreatic cancer cells. (A) Cell viability of Crizotinib was
measured by MTT assay in AsPC-1, PANC-1, and MIA PaCa-2 cells at 48 hr or 72 hr.

(Continued)
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

9152

Oncotarget

Figure 1: (B) BrdU staining was performed after PANC-1 cells were treated with or without various concentrations of
Crizotinib for 6 hr (*p < 0.05 and **p < 0.01, compared to control). The upper panel represents a treatment with various
concentrations of Crizotinib. The below panel shows the percent of BrdU-positive cells in several random fields of the BrdU
staining images. All results are expressed as a percent cell proliferation relative to the control.
However, in this study, Crizotinib did not inhibit the
phosphorylation of c-MET in pancreatic cancer cells.
To further speculate the reason, we used three types
of c-MET altered cancer cell lines including SNU-5,
MKN-45, and SNU-638 gastric cancer cells (c-MET
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

amplification), NCI-H596 non-small cell lung cancer
(c-MET splice mutation) and HT-29 colon cancer cells
(c-MET overexpression). As shown in Fig. 4, Crizotinib
(10 μM) obviously inhibited the phosphorylation of
c-MET in SNU-5 cells, MKN-45, and SNU-638 cells;
9153

Oncotarget

Figure 2: Induction of apoptosis by Crizotinib treatment in PANC-1 pancreatic cancer cells. (A) The induction of apoptosis

by Crizotinib was confirmed by TUNEL assay. (*p < 0.05 and **p < 0.01, compared to control). (B) JC-1 staining was performed to detect
the mitochondrial depolarization that occurs in apoptosis after a treatment with 10 µM of Crizotinib for 6 hr. Depolarized regions are
indicated by the green fluorescence. (400x magnification) (***p < 0.001, compared to control).
(Continued)
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

9154

Oncotarget

Figure 2: (C) PANC-1 pancreatic cancer cells were treated with Crizotinib (1 and 10 μM) for 6 hr and stained with anticytochrome c antibody, Mitotracker and DAPI. The immunostained cells were analyzed under an Olympus confocal laser
scanning microscope with 400x magnification. (D) The expression of PARP, cleaved caspase-3, Bax, and Bcl-2 were measured
by western blotting after PANC-1 cells were treated with various concentrations of Crizotinib (0-10 μM) for 72 hr.

Crizotinib inhibited the phosphorylation of ALK
in pancreatic cancer cells

while the phosphorylation of c-MET was not inhibited
in HT-29 and NCI-H596 cells. According to the result,
Crizotinib inhibited the phosphorylation of c-MET only
in c-MET amplification cancer cells, and not in other
types of c-MET alternated cancer cells.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

To test which receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK)
was regulated by Crizotinib, we performed a human
9155

Oncotarget

Figure 3: Effect of Crizotinib on c-MET expression in pancreatic cancer cells. (A) Expression of c-MET and p-c-MET
on pancreatic cancer cells were determined by Western blotting. (B) Pancreatic cancer cells were treated with Crizotinib in various
concentrations (1-20 μM).

Phospho-RTK array. 5 µM of Crizotinib was treated to
PANC-1 and MIA PaCa-2 cells for 2 hr. As shown in
Fig. 5A, Crizotinib decreased ALK phosphorylation more
than any other RTKs, including c-MET. ALK expression
has been found in several types of cancers, such as
anaplastic large-cell lymphoma, non-small cell lung

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

cancer, diffuse large B-cell lymphoma, and inflammatory
myofibroblastic tumors [25]. However, studies regarding
ALK expression in pancreatic cancer was limited.
Therefore, we used tissue array to analyze the expression
of p-ALK in human pancreatic tumor tissue. As shown
in Fig. 5B, the expression of phosphorylated ALK was

9156

Oncotarget

Figure 4: Effect of Crizotinib on c-MET expression in c-MET altered cancer cells. Cancer cells with c-MET alterations
were exposed to Crizotinib (10 µM) in the indicated times (SNU-5, MKN-45, and SNU-638: gastric cancer cells of c-MET amplification;
NCI-H596: non-small cell lung cancer cells of c-MET splicing mutation; HT-29: colon cancer cells of c-MET overexpression).

Crizotinib inhibited ALK downstream pathway
in pancreatic cancer cells

higher in pancreatic tumors than in the normal pancreas.
Furthermore, p-ALK was significantly expressed in
pancreatic cancer cell lines (AsPC-1, MIA PaCa-2,
PANC-1) we used. When PANC-1 cells were exposed to
Crizotinib for 6 hr, phosphorylation of ALK was reduced
in a dose dependent manner (Fig. 5C and 5D).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

To evaluate the ability of Crizotinib to target
downstream signaling pathways, we detected phosphor­
ylation level of downstream proteins by using human
9157

Oncotarget

Figure 5: Expression of ALK in pancreatic cancer cells and tumors. (A) After PANC-1 and MIA PaCa-2 cells were treated

with Crizotinib (5 μM) for 2 hr, the phosphorylation level of receptor tyrosine kinase was analyzed by a Phospho-RTK assay. (B) ALK expression
was determined in the human pancreatic tumor tissue. (C) ALK expression was determined in human pancreatic cancer cells. After PANC-1
cells were treated with various concentrations (0-20 μM) of Crizotinib for 2 hr, the expression of p-ALK was analyzed by Western blotting.
(Continued)
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

9158

Oncotarget

Figure 5: (D) PANC-1 cells were also treated with various concentrations (0-10 μM) of Crizotinib and stained with p-ALK
antibody and DAPI. The immunostained cells were analyzed under an Olympus confocal laser scanning microscope with
400x magnification.

Phospho-Kinase assay and western blotting. When
PANC-1 cells were treated with 5 µM of Crizotinib for
2 hr, we observed that Crizotinib down-regulated JAK/
STAT3, PI3K/AKT, and MEK/ERK1/2 signaling pathways,
which are known as the main ALK downstream signaling
pathway [18] (Fig. 6A). In particular, JAK/STAT3 pathway
was markedly inhibited by Crizotinib. These results were
also confirmed by western blotting. Indeed, Crizotinib
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

effectively suppressed the downstream factors, such as
STAT3, AKT, and ERK in a dose dependent manner.

Crizotinib inhibited tumor growth in PANC-1
pancreatic cancer xenograft models
Based on the above in vitro findings, we extended
our study to an in vivo xenograft model. After inoculation
9159

Oncotarget

Figure 6: Inhibition of ALK signaling pathway by Crizotinib in PANC-1 cells. (A) The ability of Crizotinib to target ALK
signaling pathway was analyzed by Phospho-Kinase array after PANC-1 cells were treated with Crizotinib (5 μM) for 2 hr (*p < 0.05 and
** p <0.01, compared to control). (B) The expression of p-STAT3, p-AKT, and p-ERK were measured by western blotting after PANC-1
cells were treated with Crizotinib at the indicated doses (0-20 μM) for 2 hr.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

9160

Oncotarget

with PANC-1 pancreatic cancer cells, mice were
administrated by oral gavage with Crizotinib at a dose of
50 mg/kg for 33 days (n=5, each group). Tumor volume
was significantly suppressed in the Crizotinib (50 mg/kg)
treated groups (*p < 0.05, Fig. 7A and 7C). Moreover, the
Crizotinib treated group did not show any body weight
change at the tested dosage (Fig. 7B), which indicates little
toxicity of the compound. In histopathological analysis, we
observed that there was a greater degree of tumor apoptosis

in the Crizotinib treated group compared with the control
group.
Next, immunohistochemistry and western blotting
was performed to identify the expression of PCNA
(a representative marker of proliferation), c-MET, p-ALK,
and cleaved caspase-3, and p-STAT3. As shown in
Fig. 7D, the Crizotinib treated group resulted in significant
decreased PCNA, and p-ALK, p-STAT3 and compared
with the control group. Also, the apoptotic effect of

Figure 7: Inhibition of tumor growth by Crizotinib in PANC-1 pancreatic cancer xenograft models. (A) Effect of

Crizotinib on tumor size in PANC-1 pancreatic cancer xenograft models (n=5). The volume of each tumor was measured every 3 days. The
average tumor volume in the vehicle or Crizotinib (50 mg/kg) treated group was plotted (* p <0.05, compared to control). (B) Effect of
Crizotinib on body weight change. The weight of each mouse was measured every 3 days.
(Continued)
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

9161

Oncotarget

Figure 7: (C) The size of isolated tumor from PANC-1 xenograft models. The results are expressed as the mean ± S. D.
(n = 5). (D) H&E staining, expression of p-c-MET, p-ALK, PCNA, Cleaved caspase-3, and p-STAT3 was confirmed by
immunohistochemistry, immunofluoroscence, and western blotting in pancreatic tumors. The expression of p-ALK, PCNA,
cleaved caspase-3 were quantified (**p < 0.01 and *** p <0.001, compared to control).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

9162

Oncotarget

Crizotinib on pancreatic tumor tissues was observed in
the increased expression of cleaved caspase-3. However,
we observed that Crizotinib did not decrease expression
of p-c-MET in tumor tissue using immunostaining and
western blotting.

in the Matrigel plugs without VEGF. In contrast, neovessel
containing intact red blood cells, inside the Matrigel,
were induced by VEGF, which was obviously inhibited
in the presence of 5 µM of Crizotinib. For a histological
analysis, each section of the Matrigel plug was stained
with H&E and endothelial marker CD31, respectively.
The results showed that the plug with Crizotinib treatment
had fewer vessels than those induced by VEGF. CD31
expression was also decreased by Crizotinib treatment in
the VEGF-induced Matrigel plug. These results suggest
that Crizotinib possessed a potent anti-angiogenic activity
in vivo (Fig. 8B).

Crizotinib inhibited angiogenesis in the Matrigel
plug assay
In order to identify whether Crizotinib inhibits in
vivo vascularization, we performed a Matrigel plug assay.
As shown in Fig. 8A, blood vessels were rarely observed

Figure 8: Inhibition of angiogenesis by Crizotinib. (A) Matrigel plugs containing VEGF (50 ng/mL) and/or Crizotinib (5 μM) were

implanted into the mice and then evaluated for vascularization after 7 days. The plugs were sectioned and stained with H&E. The infiltrating
microvessels with intact RBC were quantified (**p < 0.01, compared to VEGF). (B) Endothelial cells in the plug were immunostained with
CD31, and the stained plug was observed by microscopy with 400x magnification.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

9163

Oncotarget

DISCUSSION

with the studies of Tanizaki et al. and Hong et al., where
Crizotinib showed a marked anticancer action in c-MET
amplification-positive cancer cells, but not in c-MET
mutated cells [32, 33].
To investigate the possible target mechanism
involved in anticancer activities of Crizotinib, we used
a RTK array. Interestingly, we found that among the
42 RTKs, Crizotinib inhibited the phosphorylation of
ALK more than other tyrosine kinase receptors in both
PANC-1 and MIA PaCa-2 pancreatic cancer cells. In
addition, to observe the expression of ALK in pancreatic
cancer patients, we performed a human tissue array.
Surprisingly, ALK was highly expressed in pancreatic
cancer cells than normal pancreas tissues. Further,
in pancreatic cancer cell lines used in this study,
high expression of ALK was observed (AsPC-1, MIA
PaCa-2, PANC-1). In previous studies, ALK was involved
in tumor progression of several cancers, including
anaplastic large cell lymphomas, ALK-positive diffuse
large B-cell lymphomas, inflammatory myofibroblastic
tumors, and non-small cell lung carcinomas [15]. Given the
fact that ALK plays an important role in tumorigenesis as
expressing high levels in tumors, whereas the normal ALK
protein is absent or present at low levels in normal cells,
targeting ALK is expected to be an attractive anticancer
therapy [19]. Up until now, Crizotinib has been considered
as the first-generation ALK inhibitor and have inhibited
the activity of ALK in various cancers with ALK alteration
[19, 27]. Therefore, we investigated the effect of Crizotinib
on the expression of p-ALK in pancreatic cancer. From
our results, Crizotinib inhibited the expression of p-ALK
in PANC-1 pancreatic cancer cells, in a dose dependent
manner. Although relevance between the expression of
ALK and ALK gene alteration in pancreatic cancer remains
to be further investigated, Crizotinib obviously showed
an anticancer effect via target inhibition of ALK, and not
c-MET.
A lot of studies have indicated that ALK activated
various pathways including the JAK/STAT3 pathway,
PI3K/AKT pathway, and RAS/RAF/MEK/ERK1/2
pathway, which control cell proliferation and survival
[16, 19]. Therefore, to evaluate the ability of Crizotinib
in targeting downstream signaling pathways, we used
a Phospho-Kinase array. Among those downstream
signaling pathways, Crizotinib effectively inhibited the
phosphorylation of STAT3 in PANC-1 cells. Furthermore,
Crizotinib slightly affected the phosphorylation of AKT
and ERK (one of the MAPKs), the main mediators of the
ALK signaling pathway [16, 18]. These data indicate that
Crizotinib may inhibit the ALK/STAT3 pathway. Overall,
we suggest that the anticancer effect of Crizotinib is
associated with the inhibition of ALK signaling pathway,
which finally leads to the inhibition of tumor growth
and induction of apoptosis in PANC-1 xenograft models
(Fig. 7).

Current therapeutic approaches for patients with
unresectable pancreatic cancer are chemoraidotherapy or
chemotherapy alone. Although gemcitabine was adopted
as the standard therapy of advanced pancreatic cancer,
it has shown to have a low-response rate and a fast
resistance development. Also, combination therapy, such as
FOLFIRINOX (5-fluorouracil, leucovorin, irinotecan and
oxaliplatin), extended life by only 4 months compared with
gemcitabine [26]. In addition, this combination therapy
presented severe side effects in pancreatic cancer patients.
For this reason, the targeted therapies have generated a lot
of interest in discovering better approaches for patients
with pancreatic cancer. Crizotinib was initially developed
as a c-MET inhibitor [7, 27]. A few years ago, Crizotinib
has been extensively validated as a highly specific inhibitor
of not only c-MET, but also ALK among > 120 different
RTKs surveyed [28]. Based on previous studies, we set
out to evaluate the anticancer effects of Crizotinib and
its mechanism of action in pancreatic cancer. For the first
time, we report that Crizotinib inhibited ALK signaling
pathway and not c-MET, which may lead to the induction
of apoptosis along with the inhibition of cell growth and
angiogenesis in pancreatic cancer.
Crizotinib has exhibited anticancer effects in several
types of cancers, including gastric cancer and non-small
cell lung cancer [29, 30]. However, there are few studies
for anticancer effect of Crizotinib in pancreatic cancer. In
this study, we observed that Crizotinib strongly suppressed
cell growth and DNA synthesis of the three pancreatic
cancer cells. Also, Crizotinib had a strong anticancer effect
by up-regulating various apoptosis related molecules in
pancreatic cancer cells. These results were also confirmed
by in vivo data that Crizotinib inhibited tumor growth in
xenograft animal models.
Recent studies have reported that c-MET was
considered as a potential target in pancreatic cancer
[7, 31]. Therefore, we assumed that the anticancer effect
of Crizotinib (c-MET/ALK inhibitor) in this study would
be induced by targeting c-MET. However, Crizotinib
did not inhibit the expression of p-c-MET in pancreatic
cancer cells. It seems because Crizotinib did not function
in pancreatic cancer with overexpressed c-MET [8, 32].
Indeed, Okamato et al. reported that Crizotinib specifically
showed antitumor activities in gastric cancer with c-MET
amplification [29]. To confirm these observations, we
identified the activation of c-MET by Crizotinib in
various c-MET altered cells, including SNU-5, MKN-45,
and SNU-638 cells (c-MET amplification), NCI-H596
(c-MET splicing mutation), and HT-29 cells (c-MET
overexpression). Interestingly, Crizotinib inhibited
activation of c-MET only in c-MET amplified SNU
cells, and not in NCI-H596 (c-MET splicing mutation) or
HT-29 cells (c-MET overexpression). This is consistent

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

9164

Oncotarget

5′-bromo-2′-deoxyuridine (BrdU) cell
proliferation assay

Another anticancer effect of Crizotinib might be the
suppression of angiogenesis. Angiogenesis is the process of
new blood vessels sprouting from pre-existing structures,
which occurs in the growth and progression of solid
tumors, including pancreatic cancer [34, 35]. In addition,
targeting angiogenesis provides the novel prognostic and
therapeutic approaches to pancreatic cancer. Recently,
antitumor study of Crizotinib has showed that microvessel
density was reduced in a dose-dependent manner (CD31)
[22]. Consistent with their results, our study showed
that Crizotinib obviously inhibited the formation of new
blood vessels in Matrigel plug assay, as well as decreasing
the expression of CD31, suggesting that Crizotinib is a
potential anti-angiogenic agent.
In conclusion, we demonstrate that Crizotinib
suppresses tumor growth and angiogenesis and induces
apoptosis by downregulating the ALK signaling
pathway, and not c-MET in pancreatic cancer. Our
discovery of this novel anticancer mechanism of
Crizotinib may be useful for a novel drug targeting ALK
in pancreatic cancer.

PANC-1 cells were plated onto an 18-mm cover glass
in media and incubated overnight for attachment. The cells
were exposed to various concentrations of Crizotinib and
labeled with 10 µM of 5’-bromo-2’-deoxyuridine (BrdU)
for 4 hr. The cells were then fixed in ice-cold ethanol
and acetic acid mixture (2:1) for 5 min and washed with
PBS (pH 7.4) containing 1% Triton X-100. Then, fixed
cells were incubated with 4 N HCl to denature DNA for
15 min at 37°C and neutralized with 0.1 M sodium borate
(pH 8.5). The cells were washed with 0.1% NP-40 in PBS
for several times and blocked with blocking buffer for 30
min at room temperature. Finally, the FITC-anti-BrdU
(abcam: Cambridge, MA) antibody, diluted with PBS
buffer containing 0.1% Triton X-100, was used to measure
the BrdU incorporation by a fluorescence microscopy.

Terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase-mediated
nick end labeling (TUNEL) assay
PANC-1 cells were treated with various
concentrations of Crizotinib (1-10 µM) for 24 hr. The
cells were fixed in ice-cold 2% para-formaldehyde
(PFA), washed with PBS, and terminal deoxynucleotidyl
transferase-mediated nick end labeling (TUNEL) was
subsequently performed using the TUNEL kit (Chemicon,
Temecula, CA), following the manufacturer’s instructions.

MARERIALS AND METHODS
Cells and materials
Human pancreatic cancer cell lines AsPC-1, PANC-1,
MIA PaCa-2, and Capan-1 were purchased from the
American Type Culture Collection (ATCC Manassas,
VA). PANC-1 and MIA PaCa-2 were cultured in DMEM
medium, Capan-1 was cultured in IMDM, and AsPC-1
was cultured in RPMI 1640 medium supplemented
with 10% FBS and 1% penicillin/ streptomycin. Cell
culture media, FBS, penicillin-streptomycin, and other
supplementary agents were purchased from GIBCO.
3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium
bromide (MTT) was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich
(St. Louis, MO). All cell lines were maintained in a
CO2 incubator with a controlled humidified atmosphere
composed of 95% air and 5% CO2. Crizotinib was
purchased from LC laboratories (Woburn, MA) and
dissolved in DMSO.

Analysis of mitochondrial membrane potential
Mitochondrial
membrane
potential
was
measured using a mitochondria staining kit, called
5,5’,6,6’-tetrachloro -1,1’,3,3’-tetraethylbenzimidazolcarbocyanine iodide (JC-1: Grand Island, NY).
Potential-dependent accumulation can be exhibited in
the mitochondria. PANC-1 cells were plated on 18-mm
cover glasses in DMEM medium and incubated for 24 hr.
After attachment, the cells were treated with Crizotinib
(10 µM) for 4 hr and added with 100 μ JC-1 solution (final
concentration of 12.5 µg/ml) at 37°C for another 30 min.
After washing the cells with PBS, they were stained with
DAPI to visualize the nuclei. The cells were washed with
PBS several times and covered with fluorescent mounting
solution before viewing with a confocal laser scanning
microscope (Olympus, Tokyo, Japan).

Cell growth assay
AsPC-1, PANC-1, and MIA PaCa-2 were seeded
3-5×103 cells/well in 96-well plates and incubated
overnight for attachment, and Crizotinib was treated for
48 hr or 72 hr. After incubation, 20 μl of MTT solution
(2 mg/mL) was added for 4 hr at 37°C, then the medium
was removed. And 200 μl of DMSO was added to each
well to dissolve the formazan crystals by constant shaking
for 10 min. The plates were read at 540 nm on a microplate
reader. MTT assay was repeated 3 times and a doseresponse curve was used to assess IC50.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Detection of Cytochrome c location
PANC-1 cells were treated with Crizotinib (1 µM
and 10 µM) for 6 hr and then added with a mitochondrionspecific dye (MitoTracker red FM: Molecular probes
Inc, Eugene, OR) for another 30 min at 37°C. The cells
were washed with PBS and fixed in an acetone: methanol
solution (1:2) for 10 min at -20°C. After washing with

9165

Oncotarget

Human Phospho-RTK assay

PBS for several times, the cells were incubated with
cytochrome c antibody (1:50; Santa Cruz Biotechnologies,
Santa Cruz, CA) overnight for 4°C. On the following day,
the cells were again washed with PBS several times and
incubated with a mouse fluorescence-labeled secondary
antibody (1:100, Dianova, Hamburg, Germany) for 1 h at
room temperature. The cells were stained with DAPI to
visualize the nuclei. Finally, the cells were covered with
a fluorescent mounting solution (Dako, Carpinteria, CA)
before viewing with a confocal laser scanning microscope
(Olympus).

Human Phospho-RTK assay kit was purchased from
R&D Systems (Minneapolis, MN). PANC-1 and MIA
PaCa-2 cells were treated with Crizotinib (5 µM) for 2 hr.
After blocking the membranes with a blocking buffer, the
membranes were incubated with lysates extracting from
PANC-1 and MIA PaCa-2 cells by using a lysis buffer
overnight. The membranes were washed with a washing
buffer 3 times, incubated with anti-Phospho-Tyrosine-HRP
detection antibody, and then detected with an enhanced
Chemi reagent A and Chemi reagent B. To analyze the
phosphorylated proteins, the relative expression of specific
phosphorylated proteins was determined, following a
quantification of scanned images by Image J.

Western blotting
Total cellular proteins were extracted with a
lysis buffer containing 1% Igepal CA-630, 20 mM
Tris-HCl (pH 8.0), 137 μM NaCl, 10% glycerol, and
2 μM EDTA, as well as the following protease and
phophatase inhibitor: aprotinin (10 mg/ml), leupeptin
(10 mg/ml; ICN Biomedicals, Irvine, California),
phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride (1.72  µM), NaF
(100 µM), NaVO3 (500 µM), and Na4P2O7 (500 mg/mL;
Sigma-Aldrich). The proteins were separated
by a sodium dodecylsulfate-polyacrylamide gel
electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE), which were then
transferred onto nitrocellulose membranes. The
nitrocellulose membranes were immunostained with
the appropriate primary antibodies, followed by
the secondary antibodies conjugated to horseradish
peroxidase. Antibody binding was detected with an
enhanced chemiluminescence reagent (Amersham
Biosciences, Buckinghamshire, UK). Antibodies against
p-ALK(Tyr1604), ALK, p-c-MET (Tyr1234/1235), c-MET,
p-ERK (Thr202/Tyr204), ERK, p-AKT (Ser473), AKT,
p-STAT3 (Tyr705), STAT3, PARP, cleaved caspase-3, Bcl2, Bax, and β-actin were purchased from Cell Signaling
Technology (Danvers, MA) and abcam.

Human Phospho-Kinase assay
Human Phospho-Kinase assay kit was also purchased
from R&D Systems. Before extracting the protein, PANC1 cells were treated with 5 µM Crizotinib. The membranes
were incubated with cell lysates overnight at 4°C and washed
with washing buffer 3 times. To analyze the phosphorylated
proteins, a cocktail of biotinylated detection antibodies,
streptavidin- horseradish peroxidase and chemiluminescent
detection reagents were used. The relative expression
of specific phosphorylated proteins was also analyzed
following a quantification of scanned images by Image J.

Matrigel plug assay
Animal care and experimental procedures were
conducted in accordance with the Guide for Animal
Experiments by the Korean Academy of Medical Sciences.
Male, 6-week old BALB/c mice were obtained from
the ORIENT-BIO Laboratory Animal Research Center
(Gyeonggi-do, Korea). The animals were fed with standard
mice chow with free access to tap water in a 21°C and
humidity controlled animal house with alternating 12 hr
light-dark cycles. The mice were subcutaneously injected
with 700 μl of Matrigel (CORNING, Tewksbury, MA)
containing concentrated VEGF (50 ng/mL) and either
Crizotinib (5 μM) or PBS. After 7  days, mice were
sacrificed and the Matrigel plugs were fixed in 4%
buffered formaldehyde, which was embedded in paraffin,
and sectioned. The 8 μm-thick sections were stained
with hematoxylin and eosin (H&E). H&E staining was
performed to identify the formation and infiltration of
new, functional microvessles. Functional vessels with
intact RBSs were quantified manually using a microscope
[high-powerfield (HPF) x200].

Immunofluorescence
PANC-1 cells were treated with various (1-10
µM) concentrations of Crizotinib for 6 hr, washed with
PBS twice, and fixed in acetone: methanol solution
(1:1) for 10 min at -20°C. The fixed cells were washed
and blocked in a blocking buffer for 1 hr at room
temperature, and then incubated overnight with p-ALK
antibody (1:50; Cell Signaling Technology) at 4°C.
Before incubating with rabbit RITC secondary antibody
(1:100, Dianova) for 1 hr at room temperature, the
fixed cells were washed with PBS for several times.
The fixed cells were also stained with 4,6-diamidino2-phenylindole (DAPI) to visualize the nuclei. After
washing with PBS twice, the slides were covered with
DABCO (Sigma-Aldrich) and then viewed with a
confocal laser scanning microscope (Olympus).

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Tumor xenograft study
To establish PANC-1 tumors in mice, PANC-1
pancreatic cancer cells were grown in culture, then detached

9166

Oncotarget

by trypsinization, washed, and resuspended in PBS.
Six weeks old athymic BALB/c nude mice were injected
with 5×106 cells in the right flank of each mouse to
initiate tumor growth. When the tumor volume reached to
50~100 mm3, mice were randomly divided into two groups,
each having five mice. Mice were fed with Crizotinib at
a dose of 50 mg/kg by oral gavage, 6 times a week for
33 days, respectively. For the control group, 0.2 mL vehicle
was fed. The body weight and tumor size were recorded
every three days. The tumor size was calculated by 0.5 ×
long axis × (short axis)2.

3.	 Moore M J, Goldstein D, Hamm J, Figer A, Hecht J R,
Gallinger S, Au H J, Murawa P, Walde D, Wolff R A,
Campos D, Lim R, Ding K and et al. Erlotinib plus
gemcitabine compared with gemcitabine alone in patients
with advanced pancreatic cancer: a phase III trial of the
National Cancer Institute of Canada Clinical Trials Group. J
Clin Oncol. 2007; 25(15):1960–1966.
4.	 Van Cutsem E, Vervenne W L, Bennouna J, Humblet Y, Gill
S, Van Laethem J L, Verslype C, Scheithauer W, Shang A,
Cosaert J and Moore M J. Phase III trial of bevacizumab
in combination with gemcitabine and erlotinib in patients
with metastatic pancreatic cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2009;
27(13):2231–2237.

Immunohistochemistry

5.	 McGinn C J, Zalupski M M, Shureiqi I, Robertson J M,
Eckhauser F E, Smith D C, Brown D, Hejna G,
Strawderman M, Normolle D and Lawrence T S. Phase I
trial of radiation dose escalation with concurrent weekly
full-dose gemcitabine in patients with advanced pancreatic
cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2001; 19(22):4202–4208.

After deparaffinization, immunostaining was
performed using 8 μm-thick sections of the tumor samples.
Microwave antigen retrieval was performed in a citrate
buffer (pH 6.0) for 5 min prior to peroxidase quenching
with 3% hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) in PBS for 10 min.
The sections were then washed in water and preblocked
with a normal goat or horse serum for 1 hr. Next, the
tissue sections were incubated overnight at 4°C in 1:50
dilutions of anti-PCNA (abcam), cleaved caspase-3 (Cell
Signaling Technologies), and p-ALK (Tyr1604; abcam).
After washing the sections with PBS, they were incubated
with biotinylated secondary antibodies (1:100) for 1 hr and
then streptodavidin-HRP was applied. Finally, the sections
were developed with diaminobenzidine tetrahydrochloride
substrate for 10 min, and counterstained with hematoxylin.
At least three random fields of each section were examined
at a magnification of 400 x.

6.	 Liu X, Newton R C and Scherle P A. Developing c-MET
pathway inhibitors for cancer therapy: progress and
challenges. Trends Mol Med. 2010; 16(1):37–45.
7.	 Sierra J R and Tsao M S. c-MET as a potential therapeutic
target and biomarker in cancer. Ther Adv Med Oncol. 2011;
3(1 Suppl):S21–35.
8.	 Di Renzo M F, Poulsom R, Olivero M, Comoglio P M and
Lemoine N R. Expression of the c-MET/hepatocyte growth
factor receptor in human pancreatic cancer. Cancer Res.
1995; 55(5):1129–1138.
9.	 Yu J, Ohuchida K, Mizumoto K, Ishikawa N, Ogura Y,
Yamada D, Egami T, Fujita H, Ohashi S, Nagai E and
Tanaka M. Overexpression of c-MET in the early stage of
pancreatic carcinogenesis; altered expression is not sufficient
for progression from chronic pancreatitis to pancreatic
cancer. World J Gastroenterol. 2006; 12(24):3878–3882.

Statistical analysis
Data were expressed as the mean ± S.D. A statistical
analysis was performed using ANOVA. A P-value of 0.05
or less was considered statistically significant. Statistical
calculations were performed using SPSS software
for Windows operating system (Version 10.0; SPSS,
Chicago, IL).

10.	 Zhu G H, Huang C, Qiu Z J, Liu J, Zhang Z H, Zhao N,
Feng Z Z and Lv X H. Expression and prognostic
significance of CD151, c-MET, and integrin alpha3/alpha6
in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma. Dig Dis Sci. 2011;
56(4):1090–1098.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

11.	 Ebert M, Yokoyama M, Friess H, Buchler M W and
Korc M. Coexpression of the c-MET proto-oncogene and
hepatocyte growth factor in human pancreatic cancer.
Cancer Res. 1994; 54(22):5775–5778.

This
research
was
supported
by
the
National Research Foundation of Korea grant
(2012R1A2A2A01045602) and Medical Research Center
(No. 2014009392) funded by MSIP, Korea.

12.	 Li C, Wu J J, Hynes M, Dosch J, Sarkar B, Welling T H,
Pasca di Magliano M and Simeone D M. c-MET is a marker
of pancreatic cancer stem cells and therapeutic target.
Gastroenterology. 2011; 141(6):2218–2227.

REFERENCS

13.	 Hage C, Rausch V, Giese N, Giese T, Schonsiegel F,
Labsch S, Nwaeburu C, Mattern J, Gladkich J and
Herr I. The novel c-MET inhibitor cabozantinib overcomes
gemcitabine resistance and stem cell signaling in pancreatic
cancer. Cell Death Dis. 2013; 4:e627.

1.	 Hidalgo M. Pancreatic cancer. N Engl J Med. 2010;
362(17):1605–1617.
2.	 Siegel R, Ma J, Zou Z and Jemal A. Cancer statistics. CA
Cancer J Clin. 2014; 64(1):9–29.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

9167

Oncotarget

14.	 Drexler H G, Gignac S M, von Wasielewski R, Werner M
and Dirks W G. Pathobiology of NPM-ALKand variant
fusion genes in anaplastic large cell lymphoma and other
lymphomas. Leukemia. 2000; 14(9):1533–1559.

25.	 Ardini E, Magnaghi P, Orsini P, Galvani A and
Menichincheri M. Anaplastic Lymphoma Kinase: role
in specific tumours, and development of small molecule
inhibitors for cancer therapy. Cancer Lett. 2010;
299(2):81–94.

15.	 Bilsland J G, Wheeldon A, Mead A, Znamenskiy P,
Almond S, Waters K A, Thakur M, Beaumont V,
Bonnert T P, Heavens R, Whiting P, McAllister G
and Munoz-Sanjuan I. Behavioral and neurochemical
alterations in mice deficient in anaplastic lymphoma kinase
suggest therapeutic potential for psychiatric indications.
Neuropsychopharmacology. 2008; 33(3):685–700.

26.	 Conroy T, Desseigne F, Ychou M, Bouche O, Guimbaud R,
Becouarn Y, Adenis A, Raoul J L, Gourgou-Bourgade S,
de la Fouchardiere C, Bennouna J, Bachet J B,
Khemissa-Akouz F and et al. FOLFIRINOX versus
gemcitabine for metastatic pancreatic cancer. N Engl J Med.
2011; 364(19):1817–1825.

16.	 Roskoski R Jr. Anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK):
structure, oncogenic activation, and pharmacological
inhibition. Pharmacol Res. 2013; 68(1):68–94.

27.	 Grande E, Bolos M V and Arriola E. Targeting oncogenic
ALK: a promising strategy for cancer treatment. Mol
Cancer Ther. 2011; 10(4):569–579.

17.	 Chiarle R, Voena C, Ambrogio C, Piva R and Inghirami G.
The anaplastic lymphoma kinase in the pathogenesis of
cancer. Nat Rev Cancer. 2008; 8(1):11–23.

28.	 Rodig S J and Shapiro G I. Crizotinib, a small-molecule
dual inhibitor of the c-MET and ALKreceptor tyrosine
kinases. Curr Opin Investig Drugs. 2010; 11(12):1477–
1490.

18.	 Mosse Y P, Wood A and Maris J M. Inhibition of
ALKsignaling for cancer therapy. Clin Cancer Res. 2009;
15(18):5609–5614.

29.	 Okamoto W, Okamoto I, Arao T, Kuwata K, Hatashita E,
Yamaguchi H, Sakai K, Yanagihara K, Nishio K and
Nakagawa K. Antitumor action of the c-MET tyrosine
kinase inhibitor Crizotinib (PF-02341066) in gastric cancer
positive for c-MET amplification. Mol Cancer Ther. 2012;
11(7):1557–1564.

19.	 Kruczynski A, Delsol G, Laurent C, Brousset P
and Lamant L. Anaplastic lymphoma kinase as a
therapeutic target. Expert Opin Ther Targets. 2012;
16(11):1127–1138.

30.	 Tanizaki J, Okamoto I, Okamoto K, Takezawa K, Kuwata K,
Yamaguchi H and Nakagawa K. c-MET tyrosine kinase
inhibitor Crizotinib (PF-02341066) shows differential
antitumor effects in non-small cell lung cancer according to
MET alterations. J Thorac Oncol. 2011; 6(10):1624–1631.

20.	 Schettino C, Bareschino M A, Sacco P C, Maione P,
Rossi A, Casaluce F, Sgambato A and Gridelli C. New
molecular targets in the treatment of NSCLC. Curr Pharm
Des. 2013; 19(30):5333–5343.
21.	 Ou S H. Crizotinib: a novel and first-in-class multitargeted
tyrosine kinase inhibitor for the treatment of anaplastic
lymphoma kinase rearranged non-small cell lung cancer and
beyond. Drug Des Devel Ther. 2011; 5:471–485.

31.	 Herreros-Villanueva M, Zubia-Olascoaga A and Bujanda L.
c-MET in pancreatic cancer stem cells: therapeutic
implications. World J Gastroenterol. 2012; 18(38):
5321–5323.

22.	 Zillhardt M, Christensen J G and Lengyel E. An orally
available small-molecule inhibitor of c-MET, PF-2341066,
reduces tumor burden and metastasis in a preclinical model
of ovarian cancer metastasis. Neoplasia. 2010; 12(1):1–10.

32.	 Hong S W, Jung K H, Lee H S, Son M K, Yan H H,
Kang N S, Lee J, Hong S S and SB365, Pulsatilla saponin
D, targets c-MET and exerts antiangiogenic and antitumor
activities. Carcinogenesis. 2013; 34(9):2156–2169.

23.	 Avan A, Caretti V, Funel N, Galvani E, Maftouh
M, Honeywell R J, Lagerweij T, Van Tellingen O,
Campani D, Fuchs D, Verheul H M, Schuurhuis G J,
Boggi U, Peters G J, Wurdinger T and Giovannetti E.
Crizotinib inhibits metabolic inactivation of gemcitabine
in c-MET-driven pancreatic carcinoma. Cancer Res. 2013;
73(22):6745–6756.

33.	 Szpiro A A, Paciorek C J and Sheppard L. Does more
accurate exposure prediction necessarily improve health
effect estimates?. Epidemiology. 2011; 22(5):680–685.
34.	 Seo J H, Jung K H, Son M K, Yan H H, Ryu Y L, Kim J,
Lee J K, Hong S and Hong S S. Anti-cancer effect of
HS-345, a new tropomyosin-related kinase A inhibitor,
on human pancreatic cancer. Cancer Lett. 2013; 338(2):
271–281.

24.	 Zou H Y, Li Q, Lee J H, Arango M E, McDonnell S R,
Yamazaki S, Koudriakova T B, Alton G, Cui J J, Kung P P,
Nambu M D, Los G, Bender S L, Mroczkowski B and
Christensen J G. An orally available small-molecule
­
inhibitor of c-MET, PF-2341066, exhibits cytoreductive
antitumor efficacy through antiproliferative and
antiangiogenic m
­ echanisms. Cancer Res. 2007; 67(9):
4408–4417.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

35.	 Lee H, Jung K H, Jeong Y, Hong S and Hong S S.
HS-173, a novel phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K)
inhibitor, has anti-tumor activity through promoting
apoptosis and inhibiting angiogenesis. Cancer Lett. 2012;
328(1):152–159.

9168

Oncotarget

