Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No. 38

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Chemical probing of HER2-amplified cancer cells identifies
TORC2 as a particularly effective secondary target for
combination with lapatinib
Dhara N. Amin1, Ana Ruiz-Saenz1, Nathaniel Gulizia1, Mark M. Moasser1
1

Helen Diller Family Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of California, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA

Correspondence to:
Mark M. Moasser, e-mail: mark.moasser@ucsf.edu
Keywords: HER2, HER3, TORC2, mTOR, lapatinib
Received: July 26, 2015 	Accepted: September 12, 2015 	Published: October 14, 2015

ABSTRACT
The clinical impact of HER2 inhibitors in the treatment of HER2-amplified breast
cancers has been largely confined to chemotherapy combination regimens, since HER2
inhibitors appear to have very modest efficacies by themselves. This is due to the
resilient nature of the functionally relevant HER2-HER3 tumor driver, bidirectionally
linked with downstream PI3K/Akt pathway signaling, which can break through
the inhibitory effects of most current HER2 or HER3 targeting therapies. A vertical
combination approach targeting HER2 and a downstream pathway is a highly
rational strategy for much more effective targeted therapy of this disease. However
the importance of these downstream pathways in many human tissues and cells
significant limits their usefulness as secondary targets by narrowing the therapeutic
index of such combination therapies. The secondary target that can afford the highest
potential for clinical translation is the one with the highest synergy against tumor
cells in combination with HER2-inhibition, allowing the widest therapeutic index for
clinical translation. We conducted a comparative analysis of such secondary targets
in combination with the HER2 inhibitor lapatinib and find that the inhibition of mTor
affords the highest degree of synergy. In further dissecting the individual roles of
TORC1 and TORC2 complexes using pharmacologic and genetic tools, we find that it is
specifically the inactivation of TORC2 that most synergistically enhances the efficacy
of lapatinib. Although inhibitors that selectively target TORC2 are not currently
available, these data make a compelling case for their development.

disease represent some of the best in class with respect
to selectivity and/or potency, their clinical anti-cancer
activities are modest at best [6–11]. This is due to the
inherent complexity in the HER2 target that sets it apart
from many of the other kinase oncogenes.
HER2, by its very nature, signals in a codependent
manner and its partner HER3 plays a key role in mediating
many of its biological functions. In fact, the function of
HER3 is essential in HER2-driven tumorigenesis, now
confirmed in several models of HER3 knockdown in
tumor cells and conditional HER3 knockout in mouse
models [12–14]. Although HER3 is kinase inactive, it is an
important mediator of HER2 signaling, particular because
of its ability to activate the downstream PI3K/Akt pathway
[15, 16]. But the dependency on HER3 is not just a passive
dependency as an important second messenger. Rather, it’s

INTRODUCTION
The treatment of oncogene-driven cancers through
the direct inactivation of their driving oncogenes is a
treatment strategy rooted in solid scientific rationale. This
treatment strategy has now become a mainstay of cancer
therapeutics, at least in the realm of kinase oncogenes,
since pharmaceutical technologies are now readily
available to inhibit kinases with relative selectivity and
potency. Such kinase inhibitors have revolutionized the
treatment of lung cancers driven by mutationally activated
EGFR, Alk, or Ros, or melanomas driven by mutationally
activated BRAF, or leukemias driven by mutationally
activated Abl [1–5]. However the treatment of HER2amplified cancers has not followed the same paradigm.
Although the clinical kinase inhibitors developed for this
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

41123

Oncotarget

a bidirectional codependency such that inhibiting HER2
actually induces a robust increase in HER3 expression
and signaling, through a multitude of mechanisms, that
are able to amplify HER2-HER3 signaling [17–19]. The
dynamic range of signaling by the HER2-HER3 tumordriver is about two logs, thus a near complete inhibition
of the HER2 kinase is required for effective tumor cell
killing [20]. While this can easily be achieved in vitro by
fully inactivating concentrations of HER2 inhibitors, it
remains beyond the therapeutic index of all such agents
in the clinical setting. Combination therapy approaches
afford a promising direction for further pursuit.
Although HER3 itself is an ideal secondary
target for the treatment of HER2-amplified cancers, it
is currently not an easily druggable target and it may
be years before the structural basis of its functions can
be understood and potently inhibited by appropriately
designed drugs. However, the signaling cascade
downstream of HER3 involves a number of kinases
including PI3K, Akt, and mTor, which are the targets
of a plethora of kinase inhibitors in the pharmaceutical
pipelines and in early-mid phases of clinical study. But
these kinases play fundamentally important roles in many
cellular functions and downstream of many tyrosine kinase
receptor families, and these targets may not afford high
therapeutic indices for targeting, except perhaps in cancers
wherein they specifically function as the oncogenic
driver due to genomic alterations. We have explored the
potential of downstream kinases as secondary targets for
combination with HER2 inhibitors in the treatment of
HER2-overexpressing cancers. Although all combination
therapies often afford additive benefits in cell-based
assays, it is the combinations with the highest synergies
that are deemed most likely to provide a wide enough
therapeutic index to substantially improve clinical efficacy.
Our analysis here highlights the potential of mTor, and in
particular the mTor complex-2 (TORC2), which appears
to be the most promising target for combination therapy
approaches.

concept by screening a number of drugs targeting these
downstream kinases for their ability to induce apoptosis
when added to 200 nM lapatinib. This concentration of
lapatinib was chosen for this screen because it transiently
inhibits HER2-HER3 signaling and induces growth arrest,
but is overpowered by the compensatory mechanisms
driven by downstream HER3/PI3K/Akt signaling and
fails to induce tumor apoptosis [20]. The second drugs
were chosen from among many available tool compounds
and clinical agents targeting PI3K, Akt, and mTOR. The
sites of activity of these drugs and references to their
biochemical characteristics are provided in Supplementary
figure 1.  Two drugs were tested for each target for
reproducibility, and at least one clinical compound
used for each target to enable clinical translation of any
promising results. The concentrations of each second
drug was selected from pilot experiments that were
designed to identify low concentrations that completely
inactivated their direct targets in these cells. Of these
lapatinib combinations, the BEZ235, PP242, and Torin1
combinations showed significantly more apoptosis than
lapatinib alone (figure 1A). The apoptosis seen with these
lapatinib combinations is not simply from the activity
of the second drug alone, as determined by separate
experiments showing the pro-apoptotic activities of each
drug compared with their combinations (figure 1B).
We also assayed the effects of these drug
combinations on downstream signaling (figure 2).
Lapatinib alone effectively inhibits HER3 phosphorylation
and downstream MAPK signaling and PI3K/Akt/mTor
signaling, when examined at the 1 hour timepoint.
However, this inhibition is not durable and the new
steady state seen at 48 hours of continued therapy exhibits
increased HER3 expression and restored signaling
throughput. Of the combinations studied, the combinations
with BEZ235, PP242, and Torin1 afford the most effective
suppression of HER3 signaling. Consistent with more
effective suppression of oncogenic signaling, PARP
cleavage is also seen with these combinations, indicating
activation of the apoptotic signaling cascade.
We performed additional experiments to better
characterize and quantify how each drug combined with
lapatinib. Drug combination studies with the inhibitors
were performed in a matrix format and IC50 values
of the drugs for inhibiting SKBr3 cells are provided
(Supplementary Table 1). Dose response curves show
that for equimolar drug ratios the combinations of the
inhibitors with lapatinib was superior to inhibition with
single drug (Supplementary figure 2). For quantifying
synergy between two drugs we performed Combination
Index (CI) analysis of the drugs in combination with
lapatinib according to the method of Chou & Talalay
wherein synergy is defined by a CI value of less than
0.7; with decreasing CI values indicating greater synergy
[21,  22]. The combination index was obtained at three
different equimolar concentrations and the CI plots

RESULTS
We have previously shown that treatment of SkBr3
cells with 200 nM lapatinib induces growth arrest, but fails
to induce apoptotic cell death due to the failure to durably
suppress downstream signaling [17, 20]. This is primarily
a failure to inhibit signaling along the HER3-PI3K-AktmTOR pathway, and we have previously shown that it is
due to robust compensatory negative feedback signaling
that functions to protect and preserve the continuity
of this signaling pathway, well known to be critical for
many aspects of tumorigenic growth [18, 20]. A rationale
idea for more effective therapy would be the use of a
vertical combination therapy approach that targets two
points along this pathway, encompassing HER2 as well
as one of the downstream signaling nodes. We tested this
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

41124

Oncotarget

A

B

Figure 1: The apoptotic efficacy of lapatinib in combination with downstream targeting. A. SKBr3 cells were treated with
the HER2 inhibitor lapatinib (200 nM) by itself or in combination with inhibitors of PI3K (0.5 uM GDC0941), dual PI3K/mTor (250 nM
BEZ235), mTor kinase (1 uM PP242 or 20 nM Torin1), TORC1 (25 nM rapamycin), AKT (1 uM AKTi or 2.5 uM MK2206), or MEK
(100 nM CI1040) for 72 hours. The fraction of apoptotic cells was assayed by FACS analysis of DNA degradation. Results are average of
triplicates and error bars represent S.E.M. B. For the inhibitors of mTor kinase, the experiments were repeated using single and combination
therapy arms for 72 hours.
showed that the mTOR kinase inhibitor PP242 displayed
the highest synergy for inhibiting growth in combination
with lapatinib (figure 3A).
We also calculated the CI values across the entire
range of concentrations generating the CI plot against the
Fraction Affected (Fa) spectrum. Fa-CI plots also show
that the mTOR inhibitors display the highest synergy at
high Fa values (Figure 3B). For cancer drugs, CI values
at higher Fa values are more appropriate than the lower
Fa [21]. This analysis was performed using fixed ratios of
drugs at equimolar concentrations. However, the use of
different drug ratios also supports that PP242 shows the
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

highest synergy in combination with lapatinib compared to
PI3K or AKT inhibitors (Supplementary figure 3).
To determine whether the synergistic effects of
lapatinib and PP242 are evident in other HER2-amplified
cancer cell lines, we tested them in equimolar ratios in
3 more cell lines. All show increased efficacy with the
combination (Supplementary figure 4). We specifically
determined the CI of the lapatinib and PP242 combination
in BT474 and MDA-MB-453 cells at three concentrations,
confirming the synergistic interaction of this combination
in these cell lines as well (figure 4A). We also studied the
effects of the lapatinib/PP242 combination on downstream
41125

Oncotarget

Figure 2: The effects of lapatinib combinations on downstream signaling. SKBr3 cells were treated with either 200 nM
lapatinib alone or in combination with PI3K, AKT, mTor and MEK inhibitors. Cell lysates were collected at 0, 1, 48, 72 hours posttreatment and analyzed by western blotting for phosphorylation of proteins at various signaling nodes downstream of HER2 signaling.
Drug concentrations are identical to figure 1.
signaling in BT474 and MDA-MB-453 cells. In both
cells, the combination showed greater suppression of
downstream signaling compared with individual drugs
(figure 4B).
The data above shows that the efficacy of lapatinib
against HER2-amplified cancer cells can best be enhanced
by the addition of either BEZ235, PP242, or Torin1. What
these drugs all have in common is that they are of the
ATP-analog class of mTor kinase inhibitors. BEZ235 also
inhibits PI3K, but what is common between them is the
inhibition of mTor kinase activity. This kind of synergy
is not seen with the allosteric mTor inhibitor rapamycin
(figure 1A). Since rapamycin has only limited effects on
the functions of mTor, principally targeting some mTor
function in its TORC1 complex [23, 24], we decided to
more specifically query the roles of TORC1 and TORC2
as synergistic targets in combination with HER2. For these
experiments we established SkBr3 cells with tet-inducible
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

shRNA knockdown of either Raptor or Rictor to target
either TORC1 or TORC2 functions. The time courses of
knock down of Raptor and Rictor following doxcycyline
treatment were established in initial pilot experiments
(Supplementary figure 5), and for combination
experiments lapatinib treatment was instituted at the time
of effective Raptor or Rictor protein suppression. The
concomitant knockdown of Raptor with lapatinib showed
no significant suppression of downstream signaling
(figure 5). However, the concomitant knockdown of
Rictor significantly enhanced the effects of lapatinib
on downstream signaling (figure 5). The inactivation of
TORC2 by Rictor knockdown prevents the compensatory
induction of HER3 expression seen with lapatinib
therapy and consequently leads to a much more complete
inactivation of Akt by lapatinib. Similar results were seen
when TORC2 was targeted in BT474 cells and in MDAMB-453 cells (Supplementary figure 6).
41126

Oncotarget

A

B

Figure 3: mTOR kinase inhibitors show the highest extent of synergy in combination with lapatinib. A. SkBr3 cells were
treated with increasing concentrations of lapatinib and the indicated second drugs at an equimolar drug ratio in a matrix format for 72 hours
and the combination indices were calculated. The CI is plotted against effective dose values that resulted in 50%, 75% and 90% effects
on viability. B. The CI is plotted against a continuous range of fraction affected (Fa) values. CI < 0.9 synergy, CI > 1.1 = antagonism and
CI 1 = additivity.

To determine whether co-targeting TORC2
significantly enhances the apoptotic effects of lapatinib,
we assayed the effects of dual HER2/TORC2 targeting on
cell death. Interestingly, targeting TORC2 by itself induces
significant apoptotic cell death in SkBr3 cells (figure 6A).
however the addition of lapatinib significantly enhances
the apoptotic effects of targeting TORC2. In BT474 cells,
disruption of TORC2 function by itself does not induce
apoptosis, but it does significantly enhance sensitivity to
lapatinib-induced apoptosis (figure 6B).

and additional agents, currently in the investigational
pipelines, will likely enter the clinical realm in the
near future. However the clinical activities of HER2targeting agents without chemotherapy components
remain in the incremental range, and the highly effective
treatment of HER2-driven cancers through inhibition
of HER2 signaling has proven more challenging than
other oncogene-driven cancers. This is because of the
resilient signaling network within which it functions
and its highly robust ability to compensate for anything
short of the complete inhibition of HER2 signaling [20].
At this point it seems like the most promising approach
to effectively disrupt this oncogenic signaling pathway
is by dual targeting. The concept of dual targeting is
simple in design, but inherently difficult in translation
and implementation. This is because of the inherent
toxicities frequently associated with broader targeting
and the resulting reduced therapeutic index associated
with broader targeting that significantly limits the clinical
efficacies of such combination therapy approaches. While

DISCUSSION
The treatment of HER2-amplified cancers has
evolved considerably over the past two decades as we have
developed a much better understanding of the functions
of HER2, the structural basis for its functions, and the
signaling context within which it function. The HER2targeting biological agents developed and introduced
into clinical practice have made considerable impact
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

41127

Oncotarget

A

B

Figure 4: Lapatinib and mTor inhibitor combination in other HER2-amplified cell lines. A. BT474 and MDA MB 453 cell

lines were treated with lapatinib in combination with the mTOR inhibitor PP242 for 72 hours at increasing concentrations of the drugs at an
equimolar drug ratio. Combination Index value is reported for the two lines at effective dose (E.D.) values of 50, 75 and 90%. B. BT474 and
MDA MB453 cells were treated with DMSO (-), 200 nM lapatinib (L), 1 uM PP242 (P) or the combination (C) for 72 hours. Cell lysates
were analyzed by western blotting for phosphorylation of signaling proteins downstream of HER2.

the massive overexpression and overactivity of HER2
is highly unique to these cancer cells, the activities of
many of the downstream signaling elements linked with
it such as PI3K, Akt, MAPK, and mTor are less unique
to cancer cells. Their function is physiologically engaged
by upstream activation of HER2, not pathologically
engaged through mutation or amplification, and although
their activity levels are increased as a consequence of
HER2 overactivity, this represents only a relative increase
in activity compared to many cells and tissues in the
body that also depend on these signaling proteins for
their functions. As such, their use as secondary targets
can considerably reduce the therapeutic index of such
combination therapies. However such secondary targets
may have differential levels of importance in the circuitry
engaged by HER2 amplification and the best secondary
target would be the one with the most critical role in the
cancer cells, a so called “Achilles heel” type of secondary
target. Such a target, in theory, could afford the widest
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

therapeutic index and have the highest likelihood of
success in combination with HER2 targeting. In this work,
we screened a number of secondary targets using available
kinase inhibitors and we find that the target that affords
the highest combinatorial index with a HER2 inhibitor
is mTor.
The concept of therapeutic index is critical to
clinical translation. The clinical efficacy of any drug or
drug combination is not only related to its direct effects
on cancer cells, but also its effects on other host tissues.
This is because the drugs effects on other tissues creates
toxicities that limit the dose that can be administered and
ultimately limits the target inactivation within cancer
cells. Combinations of drugs are likely to have a narrower
therapeutic index because of the wider range of targets
inhibited in the normal host tissues and the increase
in toxicities that limits their dosing. However drug
combinations that show synergy against cancer cells are
particularly attractive candidates for clinical translation.
41128

Oncotarget

Figure 5: Lapatinib in combination with TORC1 or TORC2 knockdown. A. SKBr3 cells expressing dox-inducible shRNAs
targeting either Rictor or Raptor were treated with or without doxycycline (6 days for Rictor and 3 days for Raptor) and in the presence or
absence of 200 nM lapatinib for 72 hours Cell lysates from the treated cells were analyzed by western blotting as indicated. P-p70S6K is a
readout of TORC1 signaling, whereas P-NDRG1 is a readout of TORC2 signaling.
This is because synergy is not a global phenomenon, and
is a consequence of the existing circuitry and network
encompassing the two targets. Since the signaling circuitry
in cancer cells is frequently altered, synergism in cancer
cells may be specific to cancer cells and not relevant to
the host tissues, thereby providing a widening of the
therapeutic index.
The importance of the PI3K/Akt/mTor signaling
pathway in HER2-amplified breast cancers has been
known for some time, and the idea of combining inhibitors
of HER2 with inhibitors of this downstream pathway has
been studied and showed superior activity in a number of
preclinical studies [25–28]. Not all these combinations
have been tested and reported in clinical studies yet, but
combinations with the TORC1 inhibitor everolimus show
only modest activity [29, 30]. We undertook a broader
comparative and quantitative analysis of several different
vertical combination stategies which we carried further by
dissecting the differences between TORC1 and TORC2 as
secondary targets.
mTor has critical functions in cellular homeostasis
and is important in many cells and tissues, and its addition
to HER2 inhibitors is likely to significantly diminish
the therapeutic index of the combination. Indeed in
early phase clinical studies mTor kinase inhibitors have
shown little signals of efficacy, and their dosing has
been limited by organ toxicities [31, 32]. However mTor
itself is a multifunctional target and thus it is possible to
target its functions selectively. mTor exists in two large
multi-protein complexes which appear to have different
functions [33]. The functions of TORC1 are better known
and include the regulation of protein synthesis and
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

translation, whereas the functions of TORC2 are currently
less well understood. The activities of mTor are regulated
by the proteins it interacts with which are different in its
two complexes. Drugs that inhibit the catalytic kinase
activity of mTor, such as PP242 and Torin1 and other
similar drugs in the pharmaceutical pipelines, inhibit all of
its functions in both of the mTor complexes. However the
fact that protein allostery regulates the signaling functions
of the individual mTor complexes suggests that allosteric
type inhibitors can be designed to inhibit the functions
of the mTor complexes selectively. The prime example
of this is rapamycin and the variety of its analogues that
inhibit only the functions of TORC1 [23, 24]. Rapamycin
binds the cytosolic protein FKBP12 and creates a ternary
complex specifically with TORC1, inhibiting the function
of mTor only in this complex [34]. It remains plausible
that future work can identify allosteric classes of drugs
that selectively interfere with the functions of TORC2.
Our results provide a highly compelling case for the
development of such inhibitors. The studies presented here
using shRNA targeting of TORC2 suggest that HER2amplified tumors are particularly sensitive to the loss of
TORC2 function, with considerable apoptotic cell death
ensuing with the loss of TORC2 alone (such as in SkBr3
cells) or with considerable synergy when combined with
the HER2 inhibitor lapatinib (such as in BT474 cells).

MATERIALS AND METHODS
All cell lines were purchased from American Type
Culture Collection and cultured at 37C, 5% CO2 in
DMEM/HamF12 media supplemented with 10% fetal
41129

Oncotarget

A

B

Figure 6: The apoptotic efficacy of lapatinib in combination with TORC1 or TORC2 targeting. A. SKBr3 cells stably

expressing dox-inducible inactivation of TORC1 (by Raptor shRNA) or TORC2 (Rictor shRNA) were treated with or without 200 ng/ml
doxycycline, and upon knockdown of Raptor or Rictor, were also treated for an additional 72 hours with or without lapatinib. The timepoints
of Rictor and Raptor knockdown were previously determined in pilot experiments. After 72 hours of lapatinib treatment, apoptotic fraction
was assayed by FACS analysis of DNA degradation. The data shown is the mean of triplicates and error bars represent S.E.M. The P values
for the comparisons indicated by the stars is shown to the right of the stars. B. The identical experiment is shown for BT474 cells.

bovine serum, penicillin, streptomycin, and L-glutamine.
The AKT allosteric inhibitor AKTi (Akt XIII) was
purchased from Sigma. BEZ235 was obtained from
Novartis. Lapatinib was purchased from the pharmacy
as tablets and the active ingredient purified by organic
extraction as previously described [20]. CI1040 was
from SYN thesis med chem, Rapamycin was from Cell
Signaling, Torin1 and Mk2206 were from SellekChem.
GDC0941 and PP242 were provided by Kevan Shokat.
All pharmaceutical drugs were reconstituted in DMSO.
Growth assays were done in matrix format. Cells
(2000/well) were plated in 96 well plates and were allowed
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

to adhere overnight. The cells were treated with increasing
doses (11 nM–2700 nM) for all drugs except BEZ235
and Rapamycin (3–900 nM) in a 3-fold increasing
matrix format. After 72 hours MTT reagent (0.42 mg/ml)
was added to the cells for 4 h hrs and the cells lysed in
DMSO and absorbance read at 570 nm. The percentage
absorbance upon treatment compared to DMSO treatment
is reported as an average of triplicates. Error bars represent
S.E.M. For combination index analysis, the data from the
MTT assays was analyzed using the Calcusyn software.
The drugs were at fixed ratios of 1:1, 1:3, or 3:1 for
lapatinib:drug X. The Calcusyn software analyses for
41130

Oncotarget

synergy, additivity or antagonism between two drug
combinations based on the Chou & Talay methodology.
Apoptosis assays. To quantitate the amount of
apoptotic cell death, FACS analysis of nuclear degradation
was performed as described [20]. % Sub G1 cells are
reported from three independent repeats of experiments.
Error bars are calculated from S.E.M. Student’s t-test were
performed and p-values reported.
Cell lysates were prepared using modified RIPA
buffer supplemented with protease and phosphatase
inhibitors. Western blots were performed using antibodies
purchased from SantaCruz Biotechnologies (HER3, actin),
Cell Signaling (p-HER2, pAKTth308, pAKTser473, pS6,
p-NDRG1, p-MAPK, Rictor, Raptor), Enzo Life Sciences
(pPRAS40). The custom made anti-pY1289-HER3 was
previously described [20].
For inducible knockdowns of Rictor and Raptor and
Scramble-control knockdowns, cells were first transfected
with the pcDNA6/TR to express the tetracycline repressor,
and subsequently infected with the pSuperior vector
carrying the inducible shRNA sequences. The below
described oligonucleotides were synthesized and annealed
and then ligated into pSuperior vector. Standard protocols
were used according to the manufacturers (OligoEngine).
shRNA sequences used are described below:

at early and late timepoints after the genetically induced
events.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS AND FUNDING
This work was supported by the National Institutes
of Health CA 122216 (MMM) and CA112970 (subcontract
to MMM), and the California Breast Cancer Research
Program 18IB-0030 (MMM).

FINANCIAL SUPPORT
This work was supported by the National Institutes
of Health CA 122216 (MMM) and CA112970 (subcontract
to MMM), and the California Breast Cancer Research
Program 18IB-0030 (MMM).

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
The authors have no conflicts of interest to declare.

REFERENCES
1.	 Janne PA, Johnson BE. Effect of Epidermal Growth Factor
Receptor Tyrosine Kinase Domain Mutations on the
Outcome of Patients with Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer
Treated with Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor Tyrosine
Kinase Inhibitors. 2006; 4416s–4420.

Rictor shRNA sequences
5′-GATCCCGCAGCCTTGAACTGTTTAATTCA
AGAGATTAAACAGTTCAAGGCTGCTTTTTGGAA
A-3′
5′-AGCTTTTCCAAAAAGCAGCCTTGAACTG
TTTAATCTCTTGAATTAAACAGTTCAAGGCTGCG
G-3′

2.	 Camidge DR, Bang YJ, Kwak EL, Iafrate AJ, VarellaGarcia M, Fox SB, Riely GJ, Solomon B, Ou SH,
Kim   DW, Salgia R, Fidias P, Engelman JA, Gandhi L,
Janne PA, Costa DB, et al. Activity and safety of crizotinib
in patients with ALK-positive non-small-cell lung cancer:
updated results from a phase 1 study. Lancet Oncol. 2012;
13:1011–1019.

Raptor shRNA sequences

3.	 Shaw AT, Camidge DR, J.A. E, Solomon BJ, Kwak EL,
Clark JW, Salgia R, Shapiro G, Bang Y, Tan W, Tye L,
Wilner KD, Stephenson P, Varella-Garcia M, Bergethon K,
Iafrate AJ, et al. Clinical activity of crizotinib in advanced
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) harboring ROS1 gene
rearrangement. J Clin Oncol. 2012; 30: abstract 7508.

5′-GATCCCAGGGCCCTGCTACTCGCTTTTCA
AGAGAAAGCGAGTAGCAGGGCCCTTTTTTGGAA
A-3′
5′-AGCTTTTCCAAAAAAGGGCCCTGCTACTC
GCTTTCTCTTGAAAAGCGAGTAGCAGGGCCCTGG
-3′

4.	 Flaherty KT, Puzanov I, Kim KB, Ribas A, McArthur GA,
Sosman JA, O’Dwyer PJ, Lee RJ, Grippo JF, Nolop K,
Chapman PB. Inhibition of mutated, activated BRAF in
metastatic melanoma. N Engl J Med. 2010; 363:809–819.

Scramble shRNA sequences
5′-GATCCCCCTAAGGTTAAGTCGCCCTTTCA
AGAGAAGGGCGACTTAACCTTAGGTTTTTGGAA
A-3′
5′-AGCTTTTCCAAAAACCTAAGGTTAAGTCG
CCCTTCTCTTGAAAGGGCGACTTAACCTTAGGGG
-3′
The doxycycline-induced models were thoroughly
investigated to determine the timeline of gene induction
or suppression following doxycycline treatment in order
to query the signaling throughput at timepoints before and
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

5.	 Kantarjian H, Sawyers C, Hochhaus A, Guilhot F,
Schiffer  C, Gambacorti-Passerini C, Niederwieser D,
Resta D, Capdeville R, Zoellner U, Talpaz M, Druker B,
Goldman  J, O’Brien SG, Russell N, Fischer T, et al.
Hematologic and cytogenetic responses to imatinib mesylate in chronic myelogenous leukemia. N Engl J Med. 2002;
346:645–652.
6.	 Burstein HJ, Storniolo AM, Franco S, Forster J, Stein S,
Rubin S, Salazar VM, Blackwell KL. A phase II study of

41131

Oncotarget

lapatinib monotherapy in chemotherapy-refractory HER2positive and HER2-negative advanced or metastatic breast
cancer. Ann Oncol. 2008; 19:1068–1074.

using an EGF receptor/c-erbB-3 chimera. EMBO J. 1994;
13:2831–2841.
17.	 Sergina NV, Rausch M, Wang D, Blair J, Hann B,
Shokat KM, Moasser MM. Escape from HER-family tyrosine kinase inhibitor therapy by the kinase-inactive HER3.
Nature. 2007; 445:437–441.

7.	 Burstein HJ, Sun Y, Dirix LY, Jiang Z, Paridaens R,
Tan  AR, Awada A, Ranade A, Jiao S, Schwartz G,
Abbas R, Powell C, Turnbull K, Vermette J, Zacharchuk C,
Badwe  R. Neratinib, an irreversible ErbB receptor tyrosine
kinase inhibitor, in patients with advanced ErbB2-positive
breast cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2010; 28:1301–1307.

18.	 Amin DN, Sergina N, Lim L, Goga A, Moasser MM. HER3
signalling is regulated through a multitude of redundant
mechanisms in HER2-driven tumour cells. The Biochemical
journal. 2012; 447:417–425.

8.	 Baselga J, Tripathy D, Mendelsohn J, Baughman S,
Benz CC, Dantis L, Sklarin NT, Seidman AD, Hudis CA,
Moore J, Rosen PP, Twaddell T, Henderson IC, Norton L.
Phase II study of weekly intravenous trastuzumab
(Herceptin) in patients with HER2/neu-overexpressing
metastatic breast cancer. Seminars in oncology. 1999;
26:78–83.

19.	 Garrett JT, Olivares MG, Rinehart C, Granja-Ingram ND,
Sanchez V, Chakrabarty A, Dave B, Cook RS, Pao   W,
McKinely E, Manning HC, Chang J, Arteaga CL.
Transcriptional and posttranslational up-regulation of HER3
(ErbB3) compensates for inhibition of the HER2 tyrosine
kinase. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011; 108:5021–5026.

9.	 Vogel CL, Cobleigh MA, Tripathy D, Gutheil JC,
Harris  LN, Fehrenbacher L, Slamon DJ, Murphy M,
Novotny WF, Burchmore M, Shak S, Stewart SJ, Press M.
Efficacy and safety of trastuzumab as a single agent in firstline treatment of HER2-overexpressing metastatic breast
cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2002; 20:719–726.

20.	 Amin DN, Sergina N, Ahuja D, McMahon M, Blair JA,
Wang D, Hann B, Koch KM, Shokat KM, Moasser MM.
Resiliency and vulnerability in the HER2-HER3 tumorigenic driver. Sci Transl Med. 2010; 2:16ra17.
21.	 Chou TC. Drug combination studies and their synergy
quantification using the Chou-Talalay method. Cancer Res.
2010; 70:440–446.

10.	 Cortés J, Baselga J, Petrella T, Gelmon K, Fumoleau P,
Verma S, Pivot X, Ross G, Szado T, Gianni L. Pertuzumab
monotherapy following trastuzumab-based treatment:
Activity and tolerability in patients with advanced HER2positive breast cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2009; 27.

22.	 Chou TC, Talalay P. Quantitative analysis of dose-effect
relationships: the combined effects of multiple drugs or
enzyme inhibitors. Advances in enzyme regulation. 1984;
22:27–55.

11.	 Blackwell KL, Burstein HJ, Storniolo AM, Rugo H,
Sledge  G, Koehler M, Ellis C, Casey M, Vukelja S,
Bischoff J, Baselga J, O’Shaughnessy J. Randomized study
of Lapatinib alone or in combination with trastuzumab in
women with ErbB2-positive, trastuzumab-refractory metastatic breast cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2010; 28:1124–1130.

23.	 Feldman ME, Apsel B, Uotila A, Loewith R, Knight ZA,
Ruggero D, Shokat KM. Active-site inhibitors of mTOR
target rapamycin-resistant outputs of mTORC1 and
mTORC2. PLoS biology. 2009; 7:e38.
24.	 Thoreen CC, Kang SA, Chang JW, Liu Q, Zhang J, Gao Y,
Reichling LJ, Sim T, Sabatini DM, Gray NS. An ATPcompetitive mammalian target of rapamycin inhibitor
reveals rapamycin-resistant functions of mTORC1. J Biol
Chem. 2009; 284:8023–8032.

12.	 Holbro T, Beerli RR, Maurer F, Koziczak M, Barbas CF
3rd, Hynes NE. The ErbB2/ErbB3 heterodimer functions
as an oncogenic unit: ErbB2 requires ErbB3 to drive breast
tumor cell proliferation. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2003;
100:8933–8938.

25.	 O’Brien NA, McDonald K, Tong L, von Euw E, Kalous O,
Conklin D, Hurvitz SA, di Tomaso E, Schnell  C,
Linnartz  R, Finn RS, Hirawat S, Slamon DJ. Targeting
PI3K/mTOR overcomes resistance to HER2-targeted
therapy independent of feedback activation of AKT. Clin
Cancer Res. 2014; 20:3507–3520.

13.	 Lee-Hoeflich ST, Crocker L, Yao E, Pham T, Munroe X,
Hoeflich KP, Sliwkowski MX, Stern HM. A central role for
HER3 in HER2-amplified breast cancer: implications for
targeted therapy. Cancer Res. 2008; 68:5878–5887.
14.	 Vaught DB, Stanford JC, Young C, Hicks DJ, Wheeler F,
Rinehart C, Sanchez V, Koland J, Muller WJ, Arteaga CL,
Cook RS. HER3 is required for HER2-induced preneoplastic changes to the breast epithelium and tumor formation.
Cancer Res. 2012; 72:2672–2682.

26.	 Rexer BN, Chanthaphaychith S, Dahlman K, Arteaga CL.
Direct inhibition of PI3K in combination with dual HER2
inhibitors is required for optimal antitumor activity in
HER2+ breast cancer cells. Breast Cancer Res. 2014;
16:R9.

15.	 Soltoff SP, Carraway KL 3rd, Prigent SA, Gullick WG,
Cantley LC. ErbB3 is involved in activation of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase by epidermal growth factor. Mol Cell
Biol. 1994; 14:3550–3558.

27.	 Garrett JT, Sutton CR, Kurupi R, Bialucha CU,
Ettenberg SA, Collins SD, Sheng Q, Wallweber J, DefazioEli L, Arteaga CL. Combination of antibody that inhibits
ligand-independent HER3 dimerization and a p110alpha
inhibitor potently blocks PI3K signaling and growth of
HER2+ breast cancers. Cancer Res. 2013; 73:6013–6023.

16.	 Prigent SA, Gullick WJ. Identification of c-erbB-3 binding sites for phosphatidylinositol 3′-kinase and SHC

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

41132

Oncotarget

progressed on trastuzumab-based therapy. J Clin Oncol.
2011; 29:3126–3132.

28.	 Yao E, Zhou W, Lee-Hoeflich ST, Truong T, Haverty PM,
Eastham-Anderson J, Lewin-Koh N, Gunter B, Belvin M,
Murray LJ, Friedman LS, Sliwkowski MX, Hoeflich KP.
Suppression of HER2/HER3-mediated growth of breast
cancer cells with combinations of GDC-0941 PI3K inhibitor, trastuzumab, and pertuzumab. Clin Cancer Res. 2009;
15:4147–4156.

31.	 Naing A, Aghajanian C, Raymond E, Kurzrock R,
Blanco  M, Oelmann E, Grinsted L, Burke W, Kaye S,
Banerji U. First results from a phase I trial of AZD8055, a
dual mTORC1 and mTORC2 inhibitor. Molecular Cancer
Therapeutics. 2011; 10. Abstract #A168.

29.	 Gadgeel SM, Lew DL, Synold TW, LoRusso P,
Chung  V, Christensen SD, Smith DC, Kingsbury L,
Hoering A,  Kurzrock R. Phase I study evaluating the combination of lapatinib (a Her2/Neu and EGFR inhibitor) and
everolimus (an mTOR inhibitor) in patients with advanced
cancers: South West Oncology Group (SWOG) Study
S0528. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol. 2013; 72:1089–1096.

32.	 Tabernero J, Cervantes A, Gordon MS, Chiorean EG,
Burris  HB, Macarulla T, Perez-Fidalgo A, Martin M,
Jessen  K, Liu  Y, Le T, Rommel C, Berk GI, Bui LA,
Infante JR. A phase I, open label, dose escalation study
of oral mammalian target of rapamycin inhibitor INK128
administered by intermittent dosing regimens in patients
with advanced malignancies. Cancer Research. 2012; :2012.
Abstract CT-02.

30.	 Morrow PK, Wulf GM, Ensor J, Booser DJ, Moore  JA,
Flores PR, Xiong Y, Zhang S, Krop IE, Winer EP,
Kindelberger DW, Coviello J, Sahin AA, Nunez R,
Hortobagyi GN, Yu D, et al. Phase I/II study of trastuzumab
in combination with everolimus (RAD001) in patients
with HER2-overexpressing metastatic breast cancer who

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

33.	 Laplante M, Sabatini DM. mTOR signaling at a glance.
Journal of cell science. 2009; 122:3589–3594.
34.	 Tsang CK, Qi H, Liu LF, Zheng XF. Targeting mammalian
target of rapamycin (mTOR) for health and diseases. Drug
discovery today. 2007; 12:112–124.

41133

Oncotarget

