HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Author Manuscript

Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 11.
Published in final edited form as:
Cancer Cell. 2016 April 11; 29(4): 440–451. doi:10.1016/j.ccell.2016.03.009.

Intratumoral heterogeneity of the epigenome
Tali Mazor#1, Aleksandr Pankov#1,2, Jun S. Song2,3,4,5, and Joseph F. Costello1,*
1Department

of Neurological Surgery, University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA

94158, USA
2Department

of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, University of California San Francisco, San
Francisco, CA 94158, USA

Author Manuscript

3Department

of Bioengineering, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Champaign, IL

61801, USA.
4Department
5Institute

of Physics, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Champaign, IL 61801, USA.

for Genomic Biology, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Champaign, IL 61801,

USA.
#

These authors contributed equally to this work.

Abstract

Author Manuscript

Investigation into intratumoral heterogeneity (ITH) of the epigenome is in a formative stage. The
patterns of tumor evolution inferred from epigenetic ITH and genetic ITH are remarkably similar,
suggesting widespread co-dependency of these disparate mechanisms. The biological and clinical
relevance of epigenetic ITH are becoming more apparent. Rare tumor cells with unique and
reversible epigenetic states may drive drug resistance, and the degree of epigenetic ITH at
diagnosis may predict patient outcome. This perspective presents these current concepts and
clinical implications of epigenetic ITH, and the experimental and computational techniques at the
forefront of ITH exploration.

Author Manuscript

At the time a patient is first diagnosed with cancer, the tumor may be composed of tens of
millions of cells. These cell populations have already diversified, producing a tumor that can
be highly heterogeneous. Such intratumoral heterogeneity (ITH) has been observed among
spatially distinct regions of solid tumors and among individual cells in solid tumors or
leukemias (Alpar et al., 2015). Profiling ITH provides a powerful opportunity to trace back
through the formation of the malignancy and reconstruct the tumor's evolution, from the
tumor initiating events through subsequent stepwise development of malignant clones

*

Correspondence: joseph.costello@ucsf.edu (J.F.C).
Publisher's Disclaimer: This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our
customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of
the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be
discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.

Author Contributions
T.M., A.P. and J.F.C. contributed to the concept, writing and editing of the manuscript and figures. J.S.S. provided critical insights as
well as oversight of the writing.
The authors declare no competing financial interests.

Mazor et al.

Page 2

Author Manuscript

(Gerlinger et al., 2012; Merlo et al., 2006). The models of tumor evolution, or tumor
phylogenies, derived from ITH have improved our understanding of tumorigenesis. Despite
the increased understanding, a majority of cancer therapies fail to achieve durable responses,
which is often attributed to ITH. Importantly, most clinical trials still do not assess ITH and
miss an opportunity to examine the prognostic value of ITH in a controlled setting.

Author Manuscript

ITH at diagnosis may be altered by selective pressures of cytotoxic or targeted cancer
therapies, promoting outgrowth of one or more therapy-resistant tumor cell clones (Sharma
et al., 2010). Therapeutic interventions could lead to contraction of ITH in some cases or
expansion in others, influencing subsequent response and outcome. In most ITH studies,
however, only a small fraction of the tumor is available for analysis. Furthermore, tumor
samples typically lack information on where within the heterogeneous tumor they were
obtained. Using image guided biopsies instead of random samples, molecular ITH could be
compared to ITH charted by advanced imaging of tumors in patients (Sottoriva et al.,
2013a).
ITH and tumor evolution have historically been assessed with genetic alterations such as
somatic mutation and copy number alteration (CNA). However, an increasing number of
studies have shown that in cell lines with a high degree of genetic homogeneity, epigenetic
heterogeneity leads to cell to cell variability in response to therapy (Kreso et al., 2013;
Sharma et al., 2010). Epigenetic mechanisms that may contribute to ITH include DNA
methylation, post-translational modifications of histones and chromatin remodeling, which
are essential for genome organization, gene expression and cell function (Portela and
Esteller, 2010).

Author Manuscript

Epigenomics and cancer

Author Manuscript

Alteration to the epigenome is a fundamental characteristic of nearly all human cancers.
Pioneering studies focused on DNA methylation and identified decreased 5-methylcytosine
content in tumors compared to normal tissue (Feinberg and Vogelstein, 1983; Gama-Sosa et
al., 1983), further loss of 5-methylcytosine during tumor progression (Goelz et al., 1985),
and increased methylation in normally unmethylated CpG islands and promoter regions of a
wide variety of genes including tumor suppressors (Greger et al., 1994; Herman et al., 1994;
Merlo et al., 1995; Myöhänen et al., 1998; Sakai et al., 1991; Stirzaker et al., 1997),
metastasis genes (Graff et al., 2000; Graff et al., 1995), and DNA repair genes (Costello et
al., 1994; Herman et al., 1998; Kane et al., 1997; Pieper et al., 1991). The changes were
hypothesized to affect gene expression and chromosomal stability. Indeed, induction of
genome wide hypomethylation via reduction in DNA methyltransferase levels was
associated with chromosomal abnormalities and was sufficient to induce aggressive T cell
lymphoma in mice (Gaudet et al., 2003), suggesting a potentially causal role.
Several of these epigenetic defects may be linked to genetic mutations. Genes encoding
regulators of the epigenome, including the writers, readers and erasers of epigenetic marks,
are among the most commonly mutated genes observed across cancer types (Mack et al.,
2015; Shen and Laird, 2013). Thus, epigenetic alterations may be a common mechanism
linking genetic mutations to cancer phenotypes, although the details on how they are linked

Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 11.

Mazor et al.

Page 3

Author Manuscript

are just beginning to be explored. Indeed, recent work suggests that reprogramming of the
epigenome to a progenitor-like state may create a cell state required for driver mutations to
induce tumorigenesis (Kaufman et al., 2016). This work highlights the importance of
studying premalignant cells and model systems to better understand when epigenomic
changes arise and how stable they are over time. Naturally, clinical trials using new
“epigenetic therapies” have been initiated to target the genetically mutant epigenetic
regulators and their associated proteins (Rodriguez-Paredes and Esteller, 2011; Yoo and
Jones, 2006).

Author Manuscript

In contrast to genetic alterations, epigenetic modifications are enzymatically reversible and
their maintenance may have lower fidelity through DNA replication and mitosis. It had
therefore been unclear whether epigenetic ITH (eITH) would be useful to infer tumor
evolution. In normal adult cells, at least, epigenomic patterns in gene regulatory regions
contain information related to their embryonic developmental history (Hon et al., 2013;
Lowdon et al., 2014). Early ancestral information may therefore be encoded in epigenome
patterns of subsequent cell generations.

Author Manuscript

Recurrent epigenetic alterations are well characterized in many tumor types, but only
recently has eITH been profiled on a genome-wide scale. Intratumoral studies of the
epigenome have unique advantages because they eliminate major variables that confound
other study designs. For example, in contrast to inter-individual comparisons, intratumoral
studies control for variables such as age, gender, germline differences and accumulated
effects of dietary and environmental exposures, each of which can alter the epigenome.
Moreover, interpretations of epigenetic differences that were identified by comparing tumor
to normal tissues have been repeatedly questioned because the cell of origin of the tumor,
representing the ideal normal tissue control, is often not known or hotly debated. Even when
the cell of origin is known, the precise stage of differentiation at which a cell is first
transformed impacts the tumor methylation state (Kulis et al., 2012; Kulis et al., 2015;
Oakes et al., 2016). Thus investigation of eITH provides unique opportunities to identify
epigenetic alterations associated with tumor evolution.
eITH can be examined at the level of histone modifications, chromatin conformation, or
DNA methylation. To date, DNA methylation has been the main focus due to the
quantitative nature of DNA methylation assays, and the relative ease of obtaining sufficient
genomic DNA compared to chromatin. The following sections will thus focus on key issues
surrounding ITH of DNA methylation (mITH).

Author Manuscript

Studies that examined the evolution of DNA methylation from initial tumors to recurrence
found that overall DNA methylation levels can be lower at recurrence (Mazor et al., 2015),
higher at recurrence (Hogan et al., 2011; Lin et al., 2013), or exhibit patterns that do not
change across time (Cahill et al., 2013; Ju et al., 2011; Mazor et al., 2015; Schramm et al.,
2015). These seemingly conflicting findings may be related to differences in the tumor type,
the choice of the CpG sites analyzed, or to selective pressures of different therapies.
Changes in methylation in samples obtained at different times in the course of a patient's
disease could reflect clonal evolution or mITH. Here we focus specifically on studies that

Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 11.

Mazor et al.

Page 4

Author Manuscript

have explicitly examined mITH, either through multiple intratumoral samplings or
quantification of mITH from a single sample per tumor.

ITH of DNA methylation at individual genes

Author Manuscript

Initial studies of mITH analyzed the promoters of individual tumor suppressor genes and
other cancer related genes. Early studies used methylation-sensitive restriction enzyme
digestion followed by southern blotting, which was sufficient to identify samples with both
methylated and unmethylated signal, but not to determine the extent of mITH across the
genome (Costello et al., 1996; Herman et al., 1994; Merlo et al., 1995). Many subsequent
studies identified mITH using either the methylation-specific PCR method (MSP), a nonquantitative method with a binarized output (Herman et al., 1996; Klump et al., 1998;
Nakamura et al., 2001a; Nakamura et al., 2001b; Watanabe et al., 2001), or a related
quantitative assay (Eads et al., 2000a; Eads et al., 2000b). A common practice has been to
classify a gene as methylated when both methylated and unmethylated alleles are detected.
In many of these “methylated” cases, however, the evidence was also consistent with mITH.
Indeed, while many studies examined multiple samples per tumor to identify mITH, few
interpreted mixed methylated and unmethylated signal from a single sample as evidence of
mITH. Mixed methylated and unmethylated signal was more often attributed to normal cells
within the bulk tumor sample.

Author Manuscript

Quantitative methods for measuring mITH highlighted a high frequency of mITH across
cancer types (Aggerholm et al., 1999; Korshunova et al., 2008; Moelans et al., 2014;
Stirzaker et al., 1997; Varley et al., 2009). However, it remained difficult to compare the
relative degree of mITH due to the lack of standardized methods and thresholds for calling
mITH. For example, both Korshunova et al. (2008) and Moelans et al. (2014) examined
mITH in breast cancer using valid measures, but methodological differences complicate
comparison. Moreover, the methods implemented in these studies were unable to distinguish
mITH from normal cell contamination.

Author Manuscript

Siegmund et al. (2009) took a different approach to mITH in colorectal cancer by analyzing
DNA methylation patterns at two genomic loci that were assumed to have no role in gene
regulation. In contrast to driver methylation changes (De Carvalho et al., 2012), methylation
at such neutral loci were unlikely to be under selective pressure, and therefore could serve as
a “molecular clock” to measure mitotic divisions based on the higher error rate of DNA
methylation maintenance relative to the error rate of DNA polymerase. In this initial study
Siegmund et al. (2009) profiled 8 alleles/cells per sample and 10 to 14 samples per patient,
while follow-up studies used an average of 1,500 cells per sample in colorectal cancer
(Sottoriva et al., 2013b) and glioblastoma (Sottoriva et al., 2013a). This molecular clock
analysis revealed highly heterogeneous tumors, suggesting that the tumors had not
undergone any recent clonal expansion or selective sweep (Siegmund et al., 2011; Sottoriva
et al., 2013a; Sottoriva et al., 2013b). This conclusion based on neutral sites of DNA
methylation, similar to the common practice of including silent somatic mutations in
genomic evolutionary analyses, suggests an increase in power to differentiate evolutionary
branch points by including non-regulatory domains in epigenomic analyses.

Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 11.

Mazor et al.

Page 5

Author Manuscript

Inferring tumor evolution from genetic ITH

Author Manuscript

Clonal evolutionary theory (Greaves and Maley, 2012; Merlo et al., 2006; Nowell, 1976)
provides a basis to infer the order in which molecular alterations were acquired. Inference of
“evolutionary history” of a tumor from somatic mutations relies on the pattern of shared
mutations across multiple samples of a tumor: mutations present in all samples of a tumor
are inferred to be acquired by early precursor cells which clonally expanded (clonal
mutations); in contrast, mutations present in only a subset of samples are inferred to be later
events, acquired at some point during or after the initial clonal expansion (subclonal
mutations). A seminal publication (Gerlinger et al., 2012) integrated the next-generation
sequencing of tumors with principles from the clonal evolution theory of tumors. Gerlinger
et al. (2012) performed exome-sequencing of 14 and 10 spatially distinct biopsies from two
individuals with metastatic renal cell carcinoma (RCC). Taking advantage of the genetic ITH
(gITH) delineated by the multiple samplings per tumor and analyzing the patterns of shared
and unique mutations, early and late events were distinguished. Together the events revealed
a branched evolutionary history with several instances of convergent evolution in which the
same gene was mutated independently in multiple subclones within a single tumor. For each
patient, these findings were presented with a phylogenetic tree, a graphical representation of
the evolutionary history of a patient's tumor, as inferred from somatic mutations (Figure 1A).
This approach to tracing tumor evolutionary history has since been applied across a wide
range of malignancies (Cooper et al., 2015; Gerlinger et al., 2014; Gundem et al., 2015;
Johnson et al., 2014; Nik-Zainal et al., 2012; Okosun et al., 2014; Schramm et al., 2015).

Author Manuscript

While multiple samplings from a tumor is a powerful approach to profiling spatial
heterogeneity and inferring tumor populations based on their spatial distributions, new
analytical methods (Ding et al., 2014) have made it possible to infer clonal and subclonal
structures from exome or whole genome sequencing of a single sample (Nik-Zainal et al.,
2012; Shah et al., 2012). Moreover, by profiling a patient's tumor over time, it is possible to
monitor clonal dynamics and infer the evolutionary history of the malignancy (Ding et al.,
2012; Landau et al., 2013; Walter et al., 2012).

Inferring tumor evolution from DNA methylation profiles of intratumoral
samples

Author Manuscript

Recent work in solid tumors has extended genome-wide profiling of multiple intratumoral
samples from genomics into epigenomics. Given that DNA methylation is reversible and
more error prone than DNA replication, the evolutionary history of a tumor might appear
different when inferred from genetic versus epigenetic data from the same intratumoral
samples. ITH analysis in prostate cancer (Aryee et al., 2013; Brocks et al., 2014) and glioma
(Mazor et al., 2015) have shown somewhat surprisingly that the inferred histories from DNA
methylation are highly similar to those from CNA or somatic mutation profiles (Figure 1B).
Aryee et al. (2013) and Brocks et al. (2014) used arrays to simultaneously profile genomewide DNA methylation and CNA in prostate cancer. Brocks et al. (2014) examined multiple
samples from the primary tumor site as well as premalignant lesions and metastases from
five individuals, while Aryee et al. (2013) examined metastases from thirteen subjects. These

Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 11.

Mazor et al.

Page 6

Author Manuscript

studies revealed that while prostate-relevant enhancers frequently demonstrated mITH
(Brocks et al., 2014), the sites of promoter mITH and the expression of target genes did not
correlate well (Aryee et al., 2013). This may indicate that DNA methylation changes that
alter gene expression are more likely to be selected for and become relatively homogenously
present across the tumor (Aryee et al., 2013). In both studies, parallel analysis of the
genome-wide DNA methylation and CNA produced highly similar tumor evolutionary
histories.

Author Manuscript

Independent genetic and epigenetic approaches were also applied to brain tumors (Mazor et
al., 2015). Genome-wide patterns of DNA methylation across six individuals, including
multiple samplings of paired initial and recurrent gliomas, were compared to somatic
mutations derived from exome-sequencing. Construction of phylogenies independently from
the DNA methylation (phyloepigenetic tree) and somatic mutations (phylogenetic tree)
yielded highly concordant as well as complementary evolutionary histories.

Author Manuscript

Together, these studies support the concept of co-dependency of aberrant DNA methylation
and genetic alterations, including either CNAs or somatic point mutation. Moreover,
evolutionary histories could potentially be inferred from a range of additional data types,
allowing future research to address the question of the extent to which other types of
epigenetic marks evolve along similar evolutionary paths. Other datasets that could be used
to construct phylogenies and infer a tumor's evolutionary history include, but are not limited
to, histone modifications or gene expression (Figure 1B). Additional research is still needed
to determine the extent to which gITH or eITH reflects differences in regional or clonespecific driver or passenger events, and to what extent the alterations to genetics and
epigenetics may be functionally related. It is also not yet known whether the patterns in
prostate and glioma data will be widely generalizable to other cancer types.
Linking epigenetic changes to specific genetic alterations
Aberrant epigenetic states may promote genetic instability or may arise from specific genetic
alterations (Aumann and Abdel-Wahab, 2014; Brena and Costello, 2007). As an example,
using single samples per patient from a large cohort of patients, comparison of samples with
and without particular somatic mutations have identified associations between mutations and
DNA methylation patterns. These associations reflect both mutations that drove altered DNA
methylation, as with IDH1 mutation in glioma (Noushmehr et al., 2010; Turcan et al., 2012)
and altered DNA methylation landscapes which promoted the acquisition of particular
mutations, as with BRAF mutation in colorectal cancer (Hinoue et al., 2009; Weisenberger
et al., 2006).

Author Manuscript

Despite the success of previous studies identifying the relationship between a mutation and
specific methylation changes, these statistical analyses required large cohorts of cases with
and without each mutation to overcome the inherent inter-individual variability of DNA
methylation arising from germline epigenetic differences, age, gender and other covariates.
One approach to identify genetic-epigenetic associations in a smaller cohort is to use
intratumoral heterogeneity of mutations and DNA methylation. For example, chromatin
modifier genes, including SMARCA4 and BAP1, are often mutated as late events in
tumorigenesis and therefore are present heterogeneously within a tumor (Gerlinger et al.,
Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 11.

Mazor et al.

Page 7

Author Manuscript

2014; Johnson et al., 2014; Suzuki et al., 2015). By profiling mITH and contrasting the
samples with and without mutation in a particular gene, and then extending the analysis
across a cohort of patients with similarly heterogeneous mutations in the same gene,
substantial inter-patient heterogeneity can be excluded to then identify DNA methylation
changes that result from the specific mutation.

mITH from single samples of tumor

Author Manuscript

In contrast to the spatial heterogeneity of solid tumors, samples from distinct locations
(peripheral blood and lymph node) in blood cell malignancies share similar epigenomic
patterns (Cahill et al., 2013), suggesting that a single sample represents the full diversity of
tumor cell populations. Using an array-based approach, Oakes et al. (2013) calculated the
mITH levels of 68 chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) and found that overall CLL had low
mITH relative to several solid tumors. As with the analysis of multiple samplings, Oakes et
al. (2013) noted that the level of mITH within an individual's leukemia was positively
correlated with the level of gITH. Landau et al. (2014) used reduced representation bisulfite
sequencing (RRBS), also in CLL, and found a similar correlation between high numbers of
subclonal mutations and high mITH. They also discovered a different kind of correlation
between genetic and epigenetic heterogeneity. Looking at the genomic locations exhibiting
mITH, they noted that CpG sites with high mITH were found in regions of high genetic
variation, such as regions of late DNA replication and gene-poor regions. Interestingly, De et
al. (2013) also investigated genomic locations with high mITH and found lymphomas to
have high mITH in gene-rich regions, suggesting that the association of genomic features
and levels of mITH might be variable between different types of malignancies.

Author Manuscript

Landau et al. (2014) further correlated mITH at promoters with gene expression data from
single-cell RNA sequencing. They noted that promoters with high mITH showed high cellto-cell expression heterogeneity of the corresponding gene. This discrepancy with the
finding by Aryee et al. (2013) in prostate cancer may reflect a functional distinction between
solid and liquid malignancies, differences in genomic regions profiled, or the power of
single-cell RNA sequencing to identify signals that are obscured in bulk sampling.

Evolution of mITH

Author Manuscript

mITH can be further tracked for evolution over time. Intriguingly, mITH can increase or
decrease at relapse. Landau et al. (2014) classified 14 cases of CLL into those that did or did
not undergo genetic evolution and found that those patients with genetic evolution showed
higher mITH at relapse. Looking in diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL), Pan et al.
(2015) also calculated mITH from RRBS data in 11 paired diagnostic and relapse samples,
but found that the level of mITH decreased at relapse in all but one case. They interpreted
this result as reflecting a series of clonal outgrowths from more diverse cell populations, as
diagnostic samples showed lower mITH than the normal B cell population from which they
arose, and a further decrease in mITH was apparent at relapse.

Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 11.

Mazor et al.

Page 8

Author Manuscript

Computational techniques for inferring epigenetic heterogeneity and
evolution
The biological conclusions in these studies are strongly influenced by the computational
methods used in the analysis. Thus, it is necessary to understand not just the differences
between the analytical methods, but also the advantages and drawbacks in each experimental
design.
Methods to infer evolution from multiple intratumoral samples

Author Manuscript

The availability of multiple samples from individual tumors leads to a natural application of
clustering to infer the evolutionary history of tumors. While mutation information is often
simplified to a binary readout, DNA methylation data, which measures the fraction of
methylated alleles at a given CpG site, is typically represented on a continuous scale from 0
to 1, and often requires heuristic choices in the data analysis that could alter the biological
interpretation of the results. Moreover, the few published phyloepigenetic trees from DNA
methylation data are built by a distance-based clustering method. In these instances, the
choice of distance metric not only dictates the topology and branch lengths, but also
determines the relative importance of each CpG site. In contrast, building a distance matrix
from binary mutation data weighs clonal and subclonal mutations equally. Thus it is
important to understand the biological implications of each distance metric and data type.

Author Manuscript

A major benefit of understanding the phylogeny of a tumor is better knowledge of the
genetic and epigenetic signatures underlying subclones of a tumor. In evolutionary analysis,
simple set-difference calculation can often be used to identify the specific mutations
responsible for tree branch points (Merlo et al., 2006). However, identifying the CpG sites
responsible for a bifurcation in a phyloepigenetic tree is not as straightforward. Mazor et al.
(2015) calculated the singular vectors along the samples and determined the weighting of
CpG sites when projected onto those directions. A heuristic method was then applied to
determine how many CpG sites were most important for forming that bifurcation. Additional
work is still required to identify the most appropriate computational techniques for
uncovering the epigenetic signature underlying branch points in a phyloepigenetic tree.
Methods to infer heterogeneity from a single sample of a tumor

Author Manuscript

Many computational methods have been developed to quantify tissue heterogeneity or
remove the influence of mixed cell populations when conducting hypothesis testing in both
microarray and high-throughput sequencing data. McGregor et al. (2015) and Yadav and De
(2015) provide a comprehensive review and simulation results on this topic. In brief,
methods to infer ITH can be generally divided into two categories: reference-based
approaches that separate an observed heterogeneous sample into proportions of previously
profiled cell types and any remaining signal of unknown origin; and reference-free methods
that attempt to identify unmeasured confounding variables, such as ITH, with an
unsupervised approach.
In a reference-free approach applicable to sequencing data, Landan et al. (2012) used the
methylation status of CpG sites across a single read from RRBS to calculate the

Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 11.

Mazor et al.

Page 9

Author Manuscript

epipolymorphism, a measure of mITH. For any four CpG sites that are close enough to be
covered by a single sequencing read, the epipolymorphism is defined as the probability of
any two reads having a different pattern of methylation across those sites, given the overall
methylation level. While heavily methylated or unmethylated loci always have a low level of
epipolymorphism, because most alleles are identical, intermediately methylated loci can
have low (e.g. an imprinted locus) or high values, indicating the heterogeneity of
methylation patterns (Elliott et al., 2015; Lister et al., 2009).

Author Manuscript

An alternate reference-free approach applicable to array data uses the distribution of
methylation proportions across all probes to impute the amount of heterogeneity (Oakes et
al., 2013). This method takes into account the enrichment of probes centered at 0 and 1 in
normal tissue and calculates the deviation from that enrichment in tumor samples. Within a
single cell, or a homogenous population of cells, each CpG site can only exist in three states:
methylated, unmethylated, or heterozygously methylated. Therefore any intermediate
methylation in a tumor, excluding allele-specific methylation, may be considered mITH.
In contrast, reference-based approaches can be applied to deconvoluting normal
contaminating cells from the tumor population, especially for those tumor samples for which
tumor purity is low. Such an approach has already been developed for expression datasets
(Yoshihara et al., 2013). Methylation data has been used to identify component populations
of normal tissue (Koestler et al., 2013), suggesting that a reference-based approach may be
successful in identifying contaminating normal cells within DNA methylation datasets from
tumors. This approach is especially useful for identifying the amount of signal originating
from non-tumor cells with well-characterized epigenetic profiles.

Author Manuscript

Future explorations combining genetic and epigenetic data from spatially separated
samples

Author Manuscript

While important steps have been taken to understand heterogeneity from both multi-sample
and single-sample data, additional work is still necessary to compute an overall measure of
heterogeneity for a spatially distributed tumor. Thus an essential next step is to develop
methods for inferring tumor-wide heterogeneity across multiple spatially distinct samples
from the same individual. Lui et al. (2014) demonstrated the effectiveness of one approach
for determining heterogeneity across multiple samples. The authors built a gene coexpression network from 96 serial samplings of normal brain tissue. They then identified
modules of genes with similar expression profiles across the 96 samples. Finally, using the
number of separate modules that the genes were separated into, the authors estimated the
number of subtypes present within this tissue. This method has been applied to gene
expression, but the underlying technique could be applied to data types including DNA
methylation and other epigenetic marks. While the utility of this approach has been
demonstrated for normal tissue, further work is required to extend this method into cancer. It
is also important to note that even though accurately estimating a large correlation matrix
from a small sample size is mathematically difficult, this analysis led to new insights that
were independently validated
To better understand tumor heterogeneity between tumor subclones and to build a
comprehensive evolutionary history of cancer progression, a novel analytical approach
Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 11.

Mazor et al.

Page 10

Author Manuscript

combining genetic and epigenetic data is required. Although several studies have found
substantial agreement between tumor evolution traced from DNA methylation compared to
somatic mutations or CNAs, it is not yet possible to create a theoretical mathematical model
to understand how much co-dependency exists between the genetics and epigenetics, as the
rate, timing, and location of exact DNA methylation changes is not well known.

Epigenetic heterogeneity and patient outcomes

Author Manuscript

One provocative question is the possibility that mITH may be tied to patient outcomes, and
moreover that it may be used as a prognostic feature. Analysis of gITH has shown promise
as a prognostic feature in a variety of malignancies. In the premalignant condition Barrett's
esophagus, increased gITH of lesions correlated with progression to malignant esophageal
adenocarcinoma (Maley et al., 2006; Merlo et al., 2010). Similarly, studies in hematopoietic
malignancies including acute myeloid leukemia (AML) and CLL have shown that increased
gITH, as measured by the number of subclones or subclonal mutations, is associated with
worse patient outcomes (Bochtler et al., 2013; Landau et al., 2013).

Author Manuscript

Several groups have investigated a potential relationship between mITH and outcome
(Figure 2A). In CLL, high mITH at diagnosis correlated with a shorter interval until
treatment is required (Oakes et al., 2013) and, furthermore, higher mITH also correlated
with shorter progression-free survival (PFS) (Landau et al., 2014). In diffuse large B-cell
lymphoma (DLBCL), patients that had not relapsed in 5 years post treatment had lower
mITH at diagnosis than those that did relapse within 5 years (Pan et al., 2015). Furthermore,
lower mITH correlated with longer PFS following initial treatment. In a cohort including
follicular lymphoma and DLBCL, De et al. (2013) similarly showed that higher mITH
predicts poor PFS. While these initial results are promising, larger studies will be required to
determine the value of mITH as a prognostic feature.

Author Manuscript

It is unclear how mITH and patient outcome will relate in solid tumors. Increased gITH in
solid tumors does correlate with poorer outcomes with some contribution of aberrant DNA
methylation (Maley et al., 2006; Maley et al., 2004; Merlo et al., 2010). Single-cell analysis
of gene expression in glioblastoma showed that detection of multiple expression-based
subtypes (Verhaak et al., 2010) in an individual tumor is associated with worse overall
survival (Patel et al., 2014). However, analysis of mITH at the single gene level suggests that
this may not be universal. DNA methylation at the promoter/enhancer of MGMT is a
prognostic marker in glioblastoma (Hegi et al., 2005). Several studies found that the MGMT
methylation level is relatively consistent throughout individual gliomas (Dunn et al., 2009;
Grasbon-Frodl et al., 2007; Hamilton et al., 2011; van Thuijl et al., 2015). This homogeneity
may be a unique feature of MGMT or it may be indicative of a wider epigenetic pattern.
Further analysis will be required to address the potential correlation between mITH and
outcome in solid tumors.
Application of mITH in a clinical setting will require the development of clinically tractable
assays. Methylation at MGMT provides a case study for bringing DNA methylation analyses
into a clinical setting. The current standard is non-quantitative MSP, but several groups have
investigated methods for quantifying methylation at the MGMT promoter, including

Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 11.

Mazor et al.

Page 11

Author Manuscript

pyrosequencing (Christians et al., 2012; Mikeska et al., 2007) and real-time MSP
(Vlassenbroeck et al., 2008), the latter of which has been used in clinical trials (Gilbert et al.,
2013). Such clinically tractable and quantitative methods could be applied to additional loci,
as determined by genome-wide assays, for quantitative measures of mITH and their
relationship to response and outcome in patients.

Author Manuscript

These analyses examined mITH at an early time point and calculated how it relates to PFS.
A related question is how heterogeneity of a tumor might change over time: given a
particular state of heterogeneity of an initial tumor, is there a positive or negative correlation
between the duration of PFS and the level of mITH at recurrence? Given that more
heterogeneous initial tumors recur more quickly, it could be argued that continued high
levels of mITH would be associated with shorter time to recurrence (Figure 2B). An
alternate hypothesis is that the high level of mITH in the initial tumor could provide a larger
population from which a single, most-fit subclone can emerge and rapidly regrow into a less
heterogeneous recurrence in a shorter time. Future mITH studies with large cohorts of initial
and recurrent tumors will be required to address this question across a range of
malignancies.
Epigenetic heterogeneity as a driver of cell state and treatment response

Author Manuscript

Powerful in vitro and in vivo models have shown that epigenetic heterogeneity can drive
variable responses to therapy and differences in tumor-propagating potential. Gupta et al.
(2011) showed that upon separation of a breast cancer cell line into its basal, luminal, and
stem-like cell populations, each cell type expanded into a heterogeneous culture that fully
recapitulated the initial cell type heterogeneity through cell state interconversions. Kreso et
al. (2013) further showed that after isolating individual cells from the same genetic
background and transplanting them into mice, the separate transplants displayed differences
in growth dynamics and treatment-response. Similarly, Sharma et al. (2010) found that while
the majority of cells in a single cell derived non-small cell lung cancer subline were drugsensitive, a small subpopulation of cells were drug-tolerant. Following removal of drug,
these drug-tolerant persister cells expanded and reacquired drug-sensitivity. Persister cells
displayed an altered chromatin landscape, suggesting that concurrent epigenetic therapies
could reduce or eliminate them. Indeed, treatment of cell lines with HDAC inhibitors or
knockdown of the histone demethylase KDM5A reduced the emergence of persister cells.

Author Manuscript

These persister cells may model observations that some patients responded initially to
therapy, developed resistance, and then responded again to the same chemotherapy after a
drug holiday (Cara and Tannock, 2001). Thus, one hypothesis is that eITH at the single-cell
level may play a role in therapy responses in patients, and concurrent treatment with
epigenetic therapies may improve drug responses (Fang et al., 2014; Matei and Nephew,
2010; Strauss and Figg, 2016). This also raises the question of how eITH is altered in tumors
as a result of therapy. As in the in vitro cell models, a tumor may return to a state that is
similar to the pre-treatment tumor (Figure 2C, center). Alternatively, a tumor may display
increased eITH (Figure 2C, right) (Landau et al., 2014), or decreased eITH due to outgrowth
of a small number of resistant cells that dominate the recurrence (Figure 2C, left) (Pan et al.,
2015). Additional in vitro experiments with genomic and epigenomic profiling, along with

Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 11.

Mazor et al.

Page 12

Author Manuscript

increased analysis of patient tumors before and after therapy will help determine how often
each of these models applies.
These models also highlight one of the problems with profiling bulk tumor samples.
Measurements from bulk samples are a population average which will underestimate
heterogeneity by masking rare subpopulations, even though rare populations can have a
significant impact on treatment response. To fully understand eITH and to profile and study
common and rare populations, emerging technologies for single-cell sequencing will be
useful.

Coming soon: ITH at the single cell level

Author Manuscript

While numerous ITH-related discoveries have been made, current methods for determining
the eITH profile of cancer are limited. Rare cell populations such as persister cells will be
undetectable because profiling measures the dominant tumor cell population predominantly,
while the rare populations contribute relatively little signal. Additionally, the presence of
non-tumor cells can confound and mask signal from the tumor. The advancement of singlecell genome-wide profiling techniques has the potential to overcome the drawbacks
associated with the standard population profiling methods.

Author Manuscript

Studies using genome-wide single-cell measurements to study the genomic landscape in
tumors have provided valuable insights that highlight their importance to cancer biology.
Single-cell measures of CNA (Navin et al., 2011; Voet et al., 2013) have been used to
perform phylogenetic analysis and elucidate the pattern of CNA evolution within tumors.
Moreover, single-cell methods for identifying somatic mutations from exome or whole
genome sequencing have also been developed and applied to a variety of malignancies (Hou
et al., 2012; Li et al., 2012; Wang et al., 2014; Xu et al., 2012). Application of both
techniques to primary breast cancer tissue has enhanced our understanding of genetic
evolution. Navin et al. (2011) identified a population of pseudo-diploid cells, each with
unique CNAs, in each of two primary breast tumors. However no pseudo-diploid cells were
found in a patient-matched metastasis, suggesting that these cells may be the product of
processes that generate genetic diversity, yet have failed to clonally expand. Wang et al.
(2014) identified mutations and CNAs from single cells from breast cancers and inferred
chromosome rearrangements that occurred early in tumor evolution, relative to the mutations
that gradually accumulated over longer periods of time.

Author Manuscript

While valuable knowledge has been gained from single-cell genomic technologies, few
studies have explored the single-cell epigenomic landscape of cancer tissues. Two recent
studies measured chromatin accessibility by applying assay for transposase-accessible
chromatin using sequencing (ATAC-seq) to single cells (Buenrostro et al., 2015; Cusanovich
et al., 2015) and identified classes of transcription factors with high cell-to-cell variability in
the accessibility of their binding motifs within cancer cell lines. Buenrostro et al. (2015)
further found that transcription factor binding sites had the most variable accessibility in cell
types for which those transcription factors drive cell state, like GATA transcription factors in
K562 cells or Nanog in mouse embryonic stem cells, suggesting an important functional role
for this variability. Single-cell ChIP-seq has also been developed and used to explore the

Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 11.

Mazor et al.

Page 13

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

variable chromatin landscape within populations of embryonic stem cells (Rotem et al.,
2015). However the low complexity of reads produced by the approach – on the order of 800
peaks per cell – hampers its application to study ITH in cancer samples. The current state of
the technology does not provide sufficient statistical power to reliably differentiate rare cell
types in tumors from the technique-specific artifacts that can arise. Whole genome bisulfite
sequencing (WGBS) has been performed on the single cell level (Farlik et al., 2015;
Smallwood et al., 2014), but exact DNA methylation differences between cells cannot be
made at base-pair resolution and therefore regulatory region sets were used to differentiate
cell populations. Thus, while single-cell WGBS is available, the resolution of the technique
is currently too sparse to reliably identify differentially methylated CpG sites. Higher
coverage sequencing of DNA methylation can be obtained with single-cell RRBS (Guo et
al., 2015), although in far fewer CpG sites compared to WGBS. While to date these methods
have only been applied to cell lines, the next step will be to profile single cells dissociated
from primary tumor tissue.

Author Manuscript

A complementary approach to measuring ITH of individual epigenetic marks is to examine
RNA expression, in part as a readout of epigenetic states. Indeed, a recent study
simultaneously assessed DNA methylation and RNA expression from the same single cells
and were able to associate methylation changes in regulatory regions with same-cell
transcriptional changes in mouse embryonic stem cells (Angermueller et al., 2016). In
cancer, single-cell RNA sequencing has been applied to study drug tolerance in a metastatic
breast cancer cell line (Lee et al., 2014), to detect two distinct subpopulations in a human
lung adenocarcinoma patient-derived xenograft that could be separated by a module of cell
cycle genes (Min et al., 2015), to understand the influence of promoter methylation on gene
expression (Landau et al., 2014), and to investigate ITH in primary glioblastoma (Patel et al.,
2014). From the single-cell expression data, Patel et al. (2014) showed that within a primary
glioblastoma previously classified into one of the four expression-based tumor subtypes
(Verhaak et al., 2010) from bulk expression measurements, individual cells were present that
could be classified into the other three expression subtypes. The number of different
expression subtypes present in each glioblastoma negatively correlated with patient
outcome, suggesting increased ITH might lead to shorter overall survival. Moreover,
expression of surface receptors including EGFR, EGFRvIII, PDGFRA and others were
highly variably expressed between cells within a single tumor, raising concerns about the
efficacy of targeted therapies against proteins with heterogeneous expression (Furnari et al.,
2015; Nathanson et al., 2014; Patel et al., 2014; Snuderl et al., 2011). These studies highlight
the power of single-cell analysis to better understand the biological and clinical relevance of
ITH.

Author Manuscript

While there have been important discoveries from the application of single-cell technologies
to study cancer biology, it is also important to consider their current limitations. Single-cell
approaches require novel computational frameworks to take into account their relatively low
signal resolution when compared to traditional bulk tumor sample sequencing. However, a
main limitation is the potential for artifact introduced by the amplification of low amounts of
nucleic acid input, at times making it difficult to distinguish a mutation or methylation call
identified in a single cell from an error during amplification or sequencing. Additionally, it is
currently not possible to determine if an event (e.g. expression of a given gene) that is not
Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 11.

Mazor et al.

Page 14

Author Manuscript

observed in a particular cell reflects true lack of expression or lack of sampling of that
particular gene. As the field continues to improve the experimental techniques and analysis
methods, the power of these methods will transform our understanding of ITH of the
genome, epigenome and transcriptome, and will impact how tumors are classified and which
therapies are indicated.

Future Perspectives

Author Manuscript

eITH can teach us about the evolutionary history of tumors, it may serve as a predictor of
patient outcome, and may underlie variable responses to treatment and the re-sensitization of
tumors following a drug holiday, and thus may guide new therapeutic strategies. However,
many questions remain (Alizadeh et al., 2015). eITH derives from many sources, suggesting
multiple future research directions. eITH may reflect tumor cells responding to unique
microenvironments or various stages of differentiation from cancer stem cells (Mack et al.,
2015; Schonberg et al., 2014). Alternatively, eITH may reflect a mix of subclones with
distinct genomic and epigenomic features. Beyond the eITH within tumor cells, additional
epigenome variability comes from the variety of other cells present in tumor tissue,
including non-tumor stromal and immune cells. These cells can themselves have altered
epigenomes, as in the case of tumor-adjacent stroma with altered DNA methylation (Fiegl et
al., 2006; Hanson et al., 2006; Rodriguez-Canales et al., 2007). Given the epigenetic
heterogeneity present in normal tissues, it will be interesting for future research to compare
the level of eITH observed in cancer to the level of epigenetic heterogeneity in normal
tissues.

Author Manuscript

As ITH research progresses, it will become important to standardize measures of mITH, to
facilitate comparisons across studies and tumor types. Given the known relationships
between genetics and epigenetics, it will be interesting to disentangle the two by
investigating the effect of mITH, for example in the context of predicting patient outcomes,
while accounting for the extent of gITH. Current measures of eITH significantly
underestimate the levels of ITH for several reasons. Signal from bulk tumor samples is
dominated by major subclones, rendering rare subpopulations undetectable, although
emerging single-cell technologies will facilitate profiling rare cells. Additionally, in nearly
every study to date the proportion of a tumor that is assayed is quite small relative to the full
tumor mass in the patient. Finally, eITH analyses have been dominated by DNA methylation
and including histone modifications and open chromatin in the future would be beneficial.
Many questions remain and new research directions are emerging, making eITH an exciting
and clinically important topic for investigation, with the potential to revolutionize our
understanding of tumors.

Author Manuscript

Acknowledgements
Illustrations by Kenneth Xavier Probst. This project was generously supported by Accelerate Brain Cancer Cure
and a gift from the Dabbiere family. Additional support by the National Institute Of General Medical Sciences
T32GM067547 (A.P.); the National Science Foundation 1144247 (A.P.); the National Institutes of Health
R01CA163336 (J.S.S.), R01CA169316 (J.F.C.), and P50CA097257 (J.F.C.); the Sontag Foundation (J.S.S.).

Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 11.

Mazor et al.

Page 15

Author Manuscript

References

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Aggerholm A, Guldberg P, Hokland M, Hokland P. Extensive intra- and interindividual heterogeneity
of p15INK4B methylation in acute myeloid leukemia. Cancer Res. 1999; 59:436–441. [PubMed:
9927059]
Alizadeh AA, Aranda V, Bardelli A, Blanpain C, Bock C, Borowski C, Caldas C, Califano A, Doherty
M, Elsner M, et al. Toward understanding and exploiting tumor heterogeneity. Nat Med. 2015;
21:846–853. [PubMed: 26248267]
Alpar, D.; Barber, LJ.; Gerlinger, M. Chapter 24. Genetic Intratumor Heterogeneity.. In: Gray, SG.,
editor. Epigenetic Cancer Therapy. Elsevier Inc.; 2015. p. 569-594.
Angermueller C, Clark SJ, Lee HJ, Macaulay IC, Teng MJ, Hu TX, Krueger F, Smallwood SA,
Ponting CP, Voet T, et al. Parallel single-cell sequencing links transcriptional and epigenetic
heterogeneity. Nat Methods. 2016; 13:229–232. [PubMed: 26752769]
Aryee MJ, Liu W, Engelmann JC, Nuhn P, Gurel M, Haffner MC, Esopi D, Irizarry RA, Getzenberg
RH, Nelson WG, et al. DNA methylation alterations exhibit intraindividual stability and
interindividual heterogeneity in prostate cancer metastases. Sci Transl Med. 2013; 5:169ra110.
Aumann S, Abdel-Wahab O. Somatic alterations and dysregulation of epigenetic modifiers in cancers.
Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2014; 455:24–34. [PubMed: 25111821]
Bochtler T, Stölzel F, Heilig CE, Kunz C, Mohr B, Jauch A, Janssen JWG, Kramer M, Benner A,
Bornhäuser M, et al. Clonal heterogeneity as detected by metaphase karyotyping is an indicator of
poor prognosis in acute myeloid leukemia. J Clin Oncol. 2013; 31:3898–3905. [PubMed:
24062393]
Brena RM, Costello JF. Genome-epigenome interactions in cancer. Hum Mol Genet 16 Spec No. 2007;
1:R96–105.
Brocks D, Assenov Y, Minner S, Bogatyrova O, Simon R, Koop C, Oakes C, Zucknick M, Lipka DB,
Weischenfeldt J, et al. Intratumor DNA methylation heterogeneity reflects clonal evolution in
aggressive prostate cancer. Cell Rep. 2014; 8:798–806. [PubMed: 25066126]
Buenrostro JD, Wu B, Litzenburger UM, Ruff D, Gonzales ML, Snyder MP, Chang HY, Greenleaf WJ.
Single-cell chromatin accessibility reveals principles of regulatory variation. Nature. 2015;
523:486–490. [PubMed: 26083756]
Cahill N, Bergh A-C, Kanduri M, Göransson-Kultima H, Mansouri L, Isaksson A, Ryan F, Smedby
KE, Juliusson G, Sundström C, et al. 450K-array analysis of chronic lymphocytic leukemia cells
reveals global DNA methylation to be relatively stable over time and similar in resting and
proliferative compartments. Leukemia. 2013; 27:150–158. [PubMed: 22922567]
Cara S, Tannock IF. Retreatment of patients with the same chemotherapy: implications for clinical
mechanisms of drug resistance. Ann Oncol. 2001; 12:23–27. [PubMed: 11249045]
Christians A, Hartmann C, Benner A, Meyer J, von Deimling A, Weller M, Wick W, Weiler M.
Prognostic value of three different methods of MGMT promoter methylation analysis in a
prospective trial on newly diagnosed glioblastoma. PLoS ONE. 2012; 7:e33449. [PubMed:
22428052]
Cooper CS, Eeles R, Wedge DC, Van Loo P, Gundem G, Alexandrov LB, Kremeyer B, Butler A,
Lynch AG, Camacho N, et al. Analysis of the genetic phylogeny of multifocal prostate cancer
identifies multiple independent clonal expansions in neoplastic and morphologically normal
prostate tissue. Nat Genet. 2015; 47:367–372. [PubMed: 25730763]
Costello JF, Berger MS, Huang HS, Cavenee WK. Silencing of p16/CDKN2 expression in human
gliomas by methylation and chromatin condensation. Cancer Res. 1996; 56:2405–2410. [PubMed:
8625319]
Costello JF, Futscher BW, Kroes RA, Pieper RO. Methylation-related chromatin structure is associated
with exclusion of transcription factors from and suppressed expression of the O-6-methylguanine
DNA methyltransferase gene in human glioma cell lines. Mol Cell Biol. 1994; 14:6515–6521.
[PubMed: 7523853]
Cusanovich DA, Daza R, Adey A, Pliner HA, Christiansen L, Gunderson KL, Steemers FJ, Trapnell C,
Shendure J. Multiplex single-cell profiling of chromatin accessibility by combinatorial cellular
indexing. Science. 2015; 348:910–914. [PubMed: 25953818]

Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 11.

Mazor et al.

Page 16

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

De Carvalho DD, Sharma S, You JS, Su SF, Taberlay PC, Kelly TK, Yang X, Liang G, Jones PA. DNA
methylation screening identifies driver epigenetic events of cancer cell survival. Cancer Cell. 2012;
21:655–667. [PubMed: 22624715]
De S, Shaknovich R, Riester M, Elemento O, Geng H, Kormaksson M, Jiang Y, Woolcock B, Johnson
N, Polo JM, et al. Aberration in DNA methylation in B-cell lymphomas has a complex origin and
increases with disease severity. PLoS Genet. 2013; 9:e1003137. [PubMed: 23326238]
Ding L, Ley TJ, Larson DE, Miller CA, Koboldt DC, Welch JS, Ritchey JK, Young MA, Lamprecht T,
McLellan MD, et al. Clonal evolution in relapsed acute myeloid leukaemia revealed by wholegenome sequencing. Nature. 2012; 481:506–510. [PubMed: 22237025]
Ding L, Wendl MC, McMichael JF, Raphael BJ. Expanding the computational toolbox for mining
cancer genomes. Nat Rev Genet. 2014; 15:556–570. [PubMed: 25001846]
Dunn J, Baborie A, Alam F, Joyce K, Moxham M, Sibson R, Crooks D, Husband D, Shenoy A,
Brodbelt A, et al. Extent of MGMT promoter methylation correlates with outcome in
glioblastomas given temozolomide and radiotherapy. Br J Cancer. 2009; 101:124–131. [PubMed:
19536096]
Eads CA, Danenberg KD, Kawakami K, Saltz LB, Blake C, Shibata D, Danenberg PV, Laird PW.
MethyLight: a high-throughput assay to measure DNA methylation. Nucleic Acids Res. 2000a;
28:E32. [PubMed: 10734209]
Eads CA, Lord RV, Kurumboor SK, Wickramasinghe K, Skinner ML, Long TI, Peters JH, DeMeester
TR, Danenberg KD, Danenberg PV, et al. Fields of aberrant CpG island hypermethylation in
Barrett's esophagus and associated adenocarcinoma. Cancer Res. 2000b; 60:5021–5026. [PubMed:
11016622]
Elliott G, Hong C, Xing X, Zhou X, Li D, Coarfa C, Bell RJ, Maire CL, Ligon KL, Sigaroudinia M, et
al. Intermediate DNA methylation is a conserved signature of genome regulation. Nat Commun.
2015; 6:6363. [PubMed: 25691127]
Fang F, Munck J, Tang J, Taverna P, Wang Y, Miller DF, Pilrose J, Choy G, Azab M, Pawelczak KS, et
al. The novel, small-molecule DNA methylation inhibitor SGI-110 as an ovarian cancer
chemosensitizer. Clin Cancer Res. 2014; 20:6504–6516. [PubMed: 25316809]
Farlik M, Sheffield NC, Nuzzo A, Datlinger P, Schönegger A, Klughammer J, Bock C. Single-cell
DNA methylome sequencing and bioinformatic inference of epigenomic cell-state dynamics. Cell
Rep. 2015; 10:1386–1397. [PubMed: 25732828]
Feinberg AP, Vogelstein B. Hypomethylation distinguishes genes of some human cancers from their
normal counterparts. Nature. 1983; 301:89–92. [PubMed: 6185846]
Fiegl H, Millinger S, Goebel G, Muller-Holzner E, Marth C, Laird PW, Widschwendter M. Breast
cancer DNA methylation profiles in cancer cells and tumor stroma: association with HER-2/neu
status in primary breast cancer. Cancer Res66, 29-33. 2006
Furnari FB, Cloughesy TF, Cavenee WK, Mischel PS. Heterogeneity of epidermal growth factor
receptor signalling networks in glioblastoma. Nat Rev Cancer. 2015; 15:302–310. [PubMed:
25855404]
Gama-Sosa MA, Slagel VA, Trewyn RW, Oxenhandler R, Kuo KC, Gehrke CW, Ehrlich M. The 5methylcytosine content of DNA from human tumors. Nucleic Acids Res. 1983; 11:6883–6894.
[PubMed: 6314264]
Gaudet F, Hodgson JG, Eden A, Jackson-Grusby L, Dausman J, Gray JW, Leonhardt H, Jaenisch R.
Induction of tumors in mice by genomic hypomethylation. Science. 2003; 300:489–492. [PubMed:
12702876]
Gerlinger M, Horswell S, Larkin J, Rowan AJ, Salm MP, Varela I, Fisher R, McGranahan N, Matthews
N, Santos CR, et al. Genomic architecture and evolution of clear cell renal cell carcinomas defined
by multiregion sequencing. Nat Genet. 2014; 46:225–233. [PubMed: 24487277]
Gerlinger M, Rowan AJ, Horswell S, Larkin J, Endesfelder D, Gronroos E, Martinez P, Matthews N,
Stewart A, Tarpey P, et al. Intratumor heterogeneity and branched evolution revealed by
multiregion sequencing. N Engl J Med. 2012; 366:883–892. [PubMed: 22397650]
Gilbert MR, Wang M, Aldape KD, Stupp R, Hegi ME, Jaeckle KA, Armstrong TS, Wefel JS, Won M,
Blumenthal DT, et al. Dose-dense temozolomide for newly diagnosed glioblastoma: a randomized
phase III clinical trial. J Clin Oncol. 2013; 31:4085–4091. [PubMed: 24101040]

Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 11.

Mazor et al.

Page 17

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Goelz SE, Vogelstein B, Hamilton SR, Feinberg AP. Hypomethylation of DNA from benign and
malignant human colon neoplasms. Science. 1985; 228:187–190. [PubMed: 2579435]
Graff JR, Gabrielson E, Fujii H, Baylin SB, Herman JG. Methylation patterns of the E-cadherin 5'
CpG island are unstable and reflect the dynamic, heterogeneous loss of E-cadherin expression
during metastatic progression. J Biol Chem. 2000; 275:2727–2732. [PubMed: 10644736]
Graff JR, Herman JG, Lapidus RG, Chopra H, Xu R, Jarrard DF, Isaacs WB, Pitha PM, Davidson NE,
Baylin SB. E-cadherin expression is silenced by DNA hypermethylation in human breast and
prostate carcinomas. Cancer Res. 1995; 55:5195–5199. [PubMed: 7585573]
Grasbon-Frodl EM, Kreth FW, Ruiter M, Schnell O, Bise K, Felsberg J, Reifenberger G, Tonn J-C,
Kretzschmar HA. Intratumoral homogeneity of MGMT promoter hypermethylation as
demonstrated in serial stereotactic specimens from anaplastic astrocytomas and glioblastomas. Int
J Cancer. 2007; 121:2458–2464. [PubMed: 17691113]
Greaves M, Maley CC. Clonal evolution in cancer. Nature. 2012; 481:306–313. [PubMed: 22258609]
Greger V, Debus N, Lohmann D, Höpping W, Passarge E, Horsthemke B. Frequency and parental
origin of hypermethylated RB1 alleles in retinoblastoma. Hum Genet. 1994; 94:491–496.
[PubMed: 7959682]
Gundem G, Van Loo P, Kremeyer B, Alexandrov LB, Tubio JM, Papaemmanuil E, Brewer DS, Kallio
HM, Hognas G, Annala M, et al. The evolutionary history of lethal metastatic prostate cancer.
Nature. 2015; 520:353–357. [PubMed: 25830880]
Guo H, Zhu P, Guo F, Li X, Wu X, Fan X, Wen L, Tang F. Profiling DNA methylome landscapes of
mammalian cells with single-cell reduced-representation bisulfite sequencing. Nat Protoc. 2015;
10:645–659. [PubMed: 25837417]
Gupta PB, Fillmore CM, Jiang G, Shapira SD, Tao K, Kuperwasser C, Lander ES. Stochastic state
transitions give rise to phenotypic equilibrium in populations of cancer cells. Cell. 2011; 146:633–
644. [PubMed: 21854987]
Hamilton MG, Roldan G, Magliocco A, McIntyre JB, Parney I, Easaw JC. Determination of the
methylation status of MGMT in different regions within glioblastoma multiforme. J Neurooncol.
2011; 102:255–260. [PubMed: 20652362]
Hanson JA, Gillespie JW, Grover A, Tangrea MA, Chuaqui RF, Emmert-Buck MR, Tangrea JA, Libutti
SK, Linehan WM, Woodson KG. Gene promoter methylation in prostate tumor-associated stromal
cells. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2006; 98:255–261. [PubMed: 16478744]
Hegi ME, Diserens A-C, Gorlia T, Hamou M-F, de Tribolet N, Weller M, Kros JM, Hainfellner JA,
Mason W, Mariani L, et al. MGMT gene silencing and benefit from temozolomide in
glioblastoma. N Engl J Med. 2005; 352:997–1003. [PubMed: 15758010]
Herman JG, Graff JR, Myohanen S, Nelkin BD, Baylin SB. Methylation-specific PCR: a novel PCR
assay for methylation status of CpG islands. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1996; 93:9821–9826.
[PubMed: 8790415]
Herman JG, Latif F, Weng Y, Lerman MI, Zbar B, Liu S, Samid D, Duan DS, Gnarra JR, Linehan
WM. Silencing of the VHL tumor-suppressor gene by DNA methylation in renal carcinoma. Proc
Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1994; 91:9700–9704. [PubMed: 7937876]
Herman JG, Umar A, Polyak K, Graff JR, Ahuja N, Issa JP, Markowitz S, Willson JK, Hamilton SR,
Kinzler KW, et al. Incidence and functional consequences of hMLH1 promoter hypermethylation
in colorectal carcinoma. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1998; 95:6870–6875. [PubMed: 9618505]
Hinoue T, Weisenberger DJ, Pan F, Campan M, Kim M, Young J, Whitehall VL, Leggett BA, Laird
PW. Analysis of the association between CIMP and BRAF in colorectal cancer by DNA
methylation profiling. PLoS ONE. 2009; 4:e8357. [PubMed: 20027224]
Hogan LE, Meyer JA, Yang J, Wang J, Wong N, Yang W, Condos G, Hunger SP, Raetz E, Saffery R, et
al. Integrated genomic analysis of relapsed childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia reveals
therapeutic strategies. Blood. 2011; 118:5218–5226. [PubMed: 21921043]
Hon GC, Rajagopal N, Shen Y, McCleary DF, Yue F, Dang MD, Ren B. Epigenetic memory at
embryonic enhancers identified in DNA methylation maps from adult mouse tissues. Nat Genet.
2013; 45:1198–1206. [PubMed: 23995138]

Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 11.

Mazor et al.

Page 18

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Hou Y, Song L, Zhu P, Zhang B, Tao Y, Xu X, Li F, Wu K, Liang J, Shao D, et al. Single-cell exome
sequencing and monoclonal evolution of a JAK2-negative myeloproliferative neoplasm. Cell.
2012; 148:873–885. [PubMed: 22385957]
Johnson BE, Mazor T, Hong C, Barnes M, Aihara K, McLean CY, Fouse SD, Yamamoto S, Ueda H,
Tatsuno K, et al. Mutational analysis reveals the origin and therapy-driven evolution of recurrent
glioma. Science. 2014; 343:189–193. [PubMed: 24336570]
Ju HX, An B, Okamoto Y, Shinjo K, Kanemitsu Y, Komori K, Hirai T, Shimizu Y, Sano T, Sawaki A,
et al. Distinct profiles of epigenetic evolution between colorectal cancers with and without
metastasis. Am J Pathol. 2011; 178:1835–1846. [PubMed: 21406167]
Kane MF, Loda M, Gaida GM, Lipman J, Mishra R, Goldman H, Jessup JM, Kolodner R. Methylation
of the hMLH1 promoter correlates with lack of expression of hMLH1 in sporadic colon tumors
and mismatch repair-defective human tumor cell lines. Cancer Res. 1997; 57:808–811. [PubMed:
9041175]
Kaufman CK, Mosimann C, Fan ZP, Yang S, Thomas AJ, Ablain J, Tan JL, Fogley RD, van Rooijen E,
Hagedorn EJ, et al. A zebrafish melanoma model reveals emergence of neural crest identity during
melanoma initiation. Science. 2016; 351:aad2197. [PubMed: 26823433]
Klump B, Hsieh CJ, Holzmann K, Gregor M. Hypermethylation of the CDKN2/p16 promoter during
neoplastic progression in Barrett's esophagus. Gastroenterology. 1998; 115:1381–1386. [PubMed:
9834265]
Koestler DC, Christensen B, Karagas MR, Marsit CJ, Langevin SM, Kelsey KT, Wiencke JK,
Houseman EA. Blood-based profiles of DNA methylation predict the underlying distribution of
cell types: a validation analysis. Epigenetics. 2013; 8:816–826. [PubMed: 23903776]
Korshunova Y, Maloney RK, Lakey N, Citek RW, Bacher B, Budiman A, Ordway JM, McCombie
WR, Leon J, Jeddeloh JA, McPherson JD. Massively parallel bisulphite pyrosequencing reveals
the molecular complexity of breast cancer-associated cytosine-methylation patterns obtained from
tissue and serum DNA. Genome Res. 2008; 18:19–29. [PubMed: 18032725]
Kreso A, O'Brien CA, van Galen P, Gan OI, Notta F, Brown AM, Ng K, Ma J, Wienholds E, Dunant C,
et al. Variable clonal repopulation dynamics influence chemotherapy response in colorectal cancer.
Science. 2013; 339:543–548. [PubMed: 23239622]
Kulis M, Heath S, Bibikova M, Queiros AC, Navarro A, Clot G, Martinez-Trillos A, Castellano G,
Brun-Heath I, Pinyol M, et al. Epigenomic analysis detects widespread gene-body DNA
hypomethylation in chronic lymphocytic leukemia. Nat Genet. 2012; 44:1236–1242. [PubMed:
23064414]
Kulis M, Merkel A, Heath S, Queiros AC, Schuyler RP, Castellano G, Beekman R, Raineri E, Esteve
A, Clot G, et al. Whole-genome fingerprint of the DNA methylome during human B cell
differentiation. Nat Genet. 2015; 47:746–756. [PubMed: 26053498]
Landan G, Cohen NM, Mukamel Z, Bar A, Molchadsky A, Brosh R, Horn-Saban S, Zalcenstein DA,
Goldfinger N, Zundelevich A, et al. Epigenetic polymorphism and the stochastic formation of
differentially methylated regions in normal and cancerous tissues. Nat Genet. 2012; 44:1207–
1214. [PubMed: 23064413]
Landau DA, Carter SL, Stojanov P, McKenna A, Stevenson K, Lawrence MS, Sougnez C, Stewart C,
Sivachenko A, Wang L, et al. Evolution and impact of subclonal mutations in chronic lymphocytic
leukemia. Cell. 2013; 152:714–726. [PubMed: 23415222]
Landau DA, Clement K, Ziller MJ, Boyle P, Fan J, Gu H, Stevenson K, Sougnez C, Wang L, Li S, et
al. Locally disordered methylation forms the basis of intratumor methylome variation in chronic
lymphocytic leukemia. Cancer Cell. 2014; 26:813–825. [PubMed: 25490447]
Lee MC, Lopez-Diaz FJ, Khan SY, Tariq MA, Dayn Y, Vaske CJ, Radenbaugh AJ, Kim HJ, Emerson
BM, Pourmand N. Single-cell analyses of transcriptional heterogeneity during drug tolerance
transition in cancer cells by RNA sequencing. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014; 111:E4726–4735.
[PubMed: 25339441]
Li Y, Xu X, Song L, Hou Y, Li Z, Tsang S, Li F, Im KM, Wu K, Wu H, et al. Single-cell sequencing
analysis characterizes common and cell-lineage-specific mutations in a muscle-invasive bladder
cancer. Gigascience. 2012; 1:12. [PubMed: 23587365]

Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 11.

Mazor et al.

Page 19

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Lin PC, Giannopoulou EG, Park K, Mosquera JM, Sboner A, Tewari AK, Garraway LA, Beltran H,
Rubin MA, Elemento O. Epigenomic alterations in localized and advanced prostate cancer.
Neoplasia. 2013; 15:373–383. [PubMed: 23555183]
Lister R, Pelizzola M, Dowen RH, Hawkins RD, Hon G, Tonti-Filippini J, Nery JR, Lee L, Ye Z, Ngo
QM, et al. Human DNA methylomes at base resolution show widespread epigenomic differences.
Nature. 2009; 462:315–322. [PubMed: 19829295]
Lowdon RF, Zhang B, Bilenky M, Mauro T, Li D, Gascard P, Sigaroudinia M, Farnham PJ, Bastian
BC, Tlsty TD, et al. Regulatory network decoded from epigenomes of surface ectoderm-derived
cell types. Nat Commun. 2014; 5:5442. [PubMed: 25421844]
Lui JH, Nowakowski TJ, Pollen AA, Javaherian A, Kriegstein AR, Oldham MC. Radial glia require
PDGFD-PDGFRbeta signalling in human but not mouse neocortex. Nature. 2014; 515:264–268.
[PubMed: 25391964]
Mack SC, Hubert CG, Miller TE, Taylor MD, Rich JN. An epigenetic gateway to brain tumor cell
identity. Nat Neurosci. 2015; 19:10–19. [PubMed: 26713744]
Maley CC, Galipeau PC, Finley JC, Wongsurawat VJ, Li X, Sanchez CA, Paulson TG, Blount PL,
Risques RA, Rabinovitch PS, Reid BJ. Genetic clonal diversity predicts progression to esophageal
adenocarcinoma. Nat Genet. 2006; 38:468–473. [PubMed: 16565718]
Maley CC, Galipeau PC, Li X, Sanchez CA, Paulson TG, Reid BJ. Selectively advantageous mutations
and hitchhikers in neoplasms: p16 lesions are selected in Barrett's esophagus. Cancer Res. 2004;
64:3414–3427. [PubMed: 15150093]
Matei DE, Nephew KP. Epigenetic therapies for chemoresensitization of epithelial ovarian cancer.
Gynecol Oncol. 2010; 116:195–201. [PubMed: 19854495]
Mazor T, Pankov A, Johnson BE, Hong C, Hamilton EG, Bell RJA, Smirnov IV, Reis GF, Phillips JJ,
Barnes MJ, et al. DNA methylation and somatic mutations converge on the cell cycle and define
similar evolutionary histories in brain tumors. Cancer Cell. 2015; 28:307–317. [PubMed:
26373278]
McGregor K, Bernatsky S, Colmegna I, Hudson M, Pastinen T, Labbe A, Greenwood C. An evaluation
of methods correcting for cell type heterogeneity in DNA methylation studies. bioRxiv. 2015
Merlo A, Herman JG, Mao L, Lee DJ, Gabrielson E, Burger PC, Baylin SB, Sidransky D. 5' CpG
island methylation is associated with transcriptional silencing of the tumour suppressor p16/
CDKN2/MTS1 in human cancers. Nat Med. 1995; 1:686–692. [PubMed: 7585152]
Merlo LM, Pepper JW, Reid BJ, Maley CC. Cancer as an evolutionary and ecological process. Nat Rev
Cancer. 2006; 6:924–935. [PubMed: 17109012]
Merlo LMF, Shah NA, Li X, Blount PL, Vaughan TL, Reid BJ, Maley CC. A comprehensive survey of
clonal diversity measures in Barrett's esophagus as biomarkers of progression to esophageal
adenocarcinoma. Cancer Prev Res (Phila). 2010; 3:1388–1397. [PubMed: 20947487]
Mikeska T, Bock C, El-Maarri O, Hubner A, Ehrentraut D, Schramm J, Felsberg J, Kahl P, Buttner R,
Pietsch T, Waha A. Optimization of quantitative MGMT promoter methylation analysis using
pyrosequencing and combined bisulfite restriction analysis. J Mol Diagn. 2007; 9:368–381.
[PubMed: 17591937]
Min JW, Kim WJ, Han JA, Jung YJ, Kim KT, Park WY, Lee HO, Choi SS. Identification of distinct
tumor subpopulations in lung adenocarcinoma via single-cell RNA-seq. PLoS ONE. 2015;
10:e0135817. [PubMed: 26305796]
Moelans CB, de Groot JS, Pan X, van der Wall E, van Diest PJ. Clonal intratumor heterogeneity of
promoter hypermethylation in breast cancer by MSMLPA. Mod Pathol. 2014; 27:869–874.
[PubMed: 24287456]
Myöhänen SK, Baylin SB, Herman JG. Hypermethylation can selectively silence individual p16ink4A
alleles in neoplasia. Cancer Res. 1998; 58:591–593. [PubMed: 9485004]
Nakamura M, Watanabe T, Klangby U, Asker C, Wiman K, Yonekawa Y, Kleihues P, Ohgaki H.
p14ARF deletion and methylation in genetic pathways to glioblastomas. Brain Pathol. 2001a;
11:159–168. [PubMed: 11303791]
Nakamura M, Yonekawa Y, Kleihues P, Ohgaki H. Promoter hypermethylation of the RB1 gene in
glioblastomas. Lab Invest. 2001b; 81:77–82. [PubMed: 11204276]

Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 11.

Mazor et al.

Page 20

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Nathanson DA, Gini B, Mottahedeh J, Visnyei K, Koga T, Gomez G, Eskin A, Hwang K, Wang J,
Masui K, et al. Targeted therapy resistance mediated by dynamic regulation of extrachromosomal
mutant EGFR DNA. Science. 2014; 343:72–76. [PubMed: 24310612]
Navin N, Kendall J, Troge J, Andrews P, Rodgers L, McIndoo J, Cook K, Stepansky A, Levy D,
Esposito D, et al. Tumour evolution inferred by single-cell sequencing. Nature. 2011; 472:90–94.
[PubMed: 21399628]
Nik-Zainal S, Van Loo P, Wedge DC, Alexandrov LB, Greenman CD, Lau KW, Raine K, Jones D,
Marshall J, Ramakrishna M, et al. The life history of 21 breast cancers. Cell. 2012; 149:994–1007.
[PubMed: 22608083]
Noushmehr H, Weisenberger DJ, Diefes K, Phillips HS, Pujara K, Berman BP, Pan F, Pelloski CE,
Sulman EP, Bhat KP, et al. Identification of a CpG island methylator phenotype that defines a
distinct subgroup of glioma. Cancer Cell. 2010; 17:510–522. [PubMed: 20399149]
Nowell PC. The clonal evolution of tumor cell populations. Science. 1976; 194:23–28. [PubMed:
959840]
Oakes CC, Claus R, Gu L, Assenov Y, Hullein J, Zucknick M, Bieg M, Brocks D, Bogatyrova O,
Schmidt CR, et al. Evolution of DNA methylation is linked to genetic aberrations in chronic
lymphocytic leukemia. Cancer Discov. 2013; 4:348–361. [PubMed: 24356097]
Oakes CC, Seifert M, Assenov Y, Gu L, Przekopowitz M, Ruppert AS, Wang Q, Imbusch CD, Serva
A, Koser SD, et al. DNA methylation dynamics during B cell maturation underlie a continuum of
disease phenotypes in chronic lymphocytic leukemia. Nat Genet. 2016; 48:253–264. [PubMed:
26780610]
Okosun J, Bodor C, Wang J, Araf S, Yang CY, Pan C, Boller S, Cittaro D, Bozek M, Iqbal S, et al.
Integrated genomic analysis identifies recurrent mutations and evolution patterns driving the
initiation and progression of follicular lymphoma. Nat Genet. 2014; 46:176–181. [PubMed:
24362818]
Pan H, Jiang Y, Boi M, Tabbo F, Redmond D, Nie K, Ladetto M, Chiappella A, Cerchietti L,
Shaknovich R, et al. Epigenomic evolution in diffuse large B-cell lymphomas. Nat Commun.
2015; 6:6921. [PubMed: 25891015]
Patel AP, Tirosh I, Trombetta JJ, Shalek AK, Gillespie SM, Wakimoto H, Cahill DP, Nahed BV, Curry
WT, Martuza RL, et al. Single-cell RNA-seq highlights intratumoral heterogeneity in primary
glioblastoma. Science. 2014; 344:1396–1401. [PubMed: 24925914]
Pieper RO, Costello JF, Kroes RA, Futscher BW, Marathi U, Erickson LC. Direct correlation between
methylation status and expression of the human O-6-methylguanine DNA methyltransferase gene.
Cancer Commun. 1991; 3:241–253. [PubMed: 1716139]
Portela A, Esteller M. Epigenetic modifications and human disease. Nat Biotechnol. 2010; 28:1057–
1068. [PubMed: 20944598]
Rodriguez-Canales J, Hanson JC, Tangrea MA, Erickson HS, Albert PS, Wallis BS, Richardson AM,
Pinto PA, Linehan WM, Gillespie JW, et al. Identification of a unique epigenetic submicroenvironment in prostate cancer. J Pathol. 2007; 211:410–419. [PubMed: 17278115]
Rodriguez-Paredes M, Esteller M. Cancer epigenetics reaches mainstream oncology. Nat Med. 2011;
17:330–339. [PubMed: 21386836]
Rotem A, Ram O, Shoresh N, Sperling RA, Goren A, Weitz DA, Bernstein BE. Single-cell ChIP-seq
reveals cell subpopulations defined by chromatin state. Nat Biotechnol. 2015; 33:1165–1172.
[PubMed: 26458175]
Sakai T, Toguchida J, Ohtani N, Yandell DW, Rapaport JM, Dryja TP. Allele-specific
hypermethylation of the retinoblastoma tumor-suppressor gene. Am J Hum Genet. 1991; 48:880–
888. [PubMed: 1673287]
Schonberg DL, Lubelski D, Miller TE, Rich JN. Brain tumor stem cells: Molecular characteristics and
their impact on therapy. Mol Aspects Med. 2014; 39:82–101. [PubMed: 23831316]
Schramm A, Köster J, Assenov Y, Althoff K, Peifer M, Mahlow E, Odersky A, Beisser D, Ernst C,
Henssen AG, et al. Mutational dynamics between primary and relapse neuroblastomas. Nature
Genetics. 2015; 47:872–877. [PubMed: 26121086]

Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 11.

Mazor et al.

Page 21

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Shah SP, Roth A, Goya R, Oloumi A, Ha G, Zhao Y, Turashvili G, Ding J, Tse K, Haffari G, et al. The
clonal and mutational evolution spectrum of primary triple-negative breast cancers. Nature. 2012;
486:395–399. [PubMed: 22495314]
Sharma SV, Lee DY, Li B, Quinlan MP, Takahashi F, Maheswaran S, McDermott U, Azizian N, Zou L,
Fischbach MA, et al. A chromatin-mediated reversible drug-tolerant state in cancer cell
subpopulations. Cell. 2010; 141:69–80. [PubMed: 20371346]
Shen H, Laird PW. Interplay between the cancer genome and epigenome. Cell. 2013; 153:38–55.
[PubMed: 23540689]
Siegmund KD, Marjoram P, Tavare S, Shibata D. High DNA methylation pattern intratumoral diversity
implies weak selection in many human colorectal cancers. PLoS ONE. 2011; 6:e21657.
[PubMed: 21738754]
Siegmund KD, Marjoram P, Woo YJ, Tavare S, Shibata D. Inferring clonal expansion and cancer stem
cell dynamics from DNA methylation patterns in colorectal cancers. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A.
2009; 106:4828–4833. [PubMed: 19261858]
Smallwood SA, Lee HJ, Angermueller C, Krueger F, Saadeh H, Peat J, Andrews SR, Stegle O, Reik
W, Kelsey G. Single-cell genome-wide bisulfite sequencing for assessing epigenetic
heterogeneity. Nat Methods. 2014; 11:817–820. [PubMed: 25042786]
Snuderl M, Fazlollahi L, Le LP, Nitta M, Zhelyazkova BH, Davidson CJ, Akhavanfard S, Cahill DP,
Aldape KD, Betensky RA, et al. Mosaic amplification of multiple receptor tyrosine kinase genes
in glioblastoma. Cancer Cell. 2011; 20:810–817. [PubMed: 22137795]
Sottoriva A, Spiteri I, Piccirillo SG, Touloumis A, Collins VP, Marioni JC, Curtis C, Watts C, Tavare
S. Intratumor heterogeneity in human glioblastoma reflects cancer evolutionary dynamics. Proc
Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013a; 110:4009–4014. [PubMed: 23412337]
Sottoriva A, Spiteri I, Shibata D, Curtis C, Tavare S. Single-molecule genomic data delineate patientspecific tumor profiles and cancer stem cell organization. Cancer Res. 2013b; 73:41–49.
[PubMed: 23090114]
Stirzaker C, Millar DS, Paul CL, Warnecke PM, Harrison J, Vincent PC, Frommer M, Clark SJ.
Extensive DNA methylation spanning the Rb promoter in retinoblastoma tumors. Cancer Res.
1997; 57:2229–2237. [PubMed: 9187126]
Strauss J, Figg WD. Using epigenetic therapy to overcome chemotherapy resistance. Anticancer Res.
2016; 36:1–4. [PubMed: 26722021]
Suzuki H, Aoki K, Chiba K, Sato Y, Shiozawa Y, Shiraishi Y, Shimamura T, Niida A, Motomura K,
Ohka F, et al. Mutational landscape and clonal architecture in grade II and III gliomas. Nat
Genet. 2015; 47:458–468. [PubMed: 25848751]
Turcan S, Rohle D, Goenka A, Walsh LA, Fang F, Yilmaz E, Campos C, Fabius AW, Lu C, Ward PS,
et al. IDH1 mutation is sufficient to establish the glioma hypermethylator phenotype. Nature.
2012; 483:479–483. [PubMed: 22343889]
van Thuijl HF, Mazor T, Johnson BE, Fouse SD, Aihara K, Hong C, Malmstrom A, Hallbeck M,
Heimans JJ, Kloezeman JJ, et al. Evolution of DNA repair defects during malignant progression
of low-grade gliomas after temozolomide treatment. Acta Neuropathol. 2015; 129:597–607.
[PubMed: 25724300]
Varley KE, Mutch DG, Edmonston TB, Goodfellow PJ, Mitra RD. Intra-tumor heterogeneity of MLH1
promoter methylation revealed by deep single molecule bisulfite sequencing. Nucleic Acids Res.
2009; 37:4603–4612. [PubMed: 19494183]
Verhaak RG, Hoadley KA, Purdom E, Wang V, Qi Y, Wilkerson MD, Miller CR, Ding L, Golub T,
Mesirov JP, et al. Integrated genomic analysis identifies clinically relevant subtypes of
glioblastoma characterized by abnormalities in PDGFRA, IDH1, EGFR, and NF1. Cancer Cell.
2010; 17:98–110. [PubMed: 20129251]
Vlassenbroeck I, Califice S, Diserens AC, Migliavacca E, Straub J, Di Stefano I, Moreau F, Hamou
MF, Renard I, Delorenzi M, et al. Validation of real-time methylation-specific PCR to determine
O6-methylguanine-DNA methyltransferase gene promoter methylation in glioma. J Mol Diagn.
2008; 10:332–337. [PubMed: 18556773]

Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 11.

Mazor et al.

Page 22

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Voet T, Kumar P, Van Loo P, Cooke SL, Marshall J, Lin ML, Zamani Esteki M, Van der Aa N, Mateiu
L, McBride DJ, et al. Single-cell paired-end genome sequencing reveals structural variation per
cell cycle. Nucleic Acids Res. 2013; 41:6119–6138. [PubMed: 23630320]
Walter MJ, Shen D, Ding L, Shao J, Koboldt DC, Chen K, Larson DE, McLellan MD, Dooling D,
Abbott R, et al. Clonal architecture of secondary acute myeloid leukemia. N Engl J Med. 2012;
366:1090–1098. [PubMed: 22417201]
Wang Y, Waters J, Leung ML, Unruh A, Roh W, Shi X, Chen K, Scheet P, Vattathil S, Liang H, et al.
Clonal evolution in breast cancer revealed by single nucleus genome sequencing. Nature. 2014;
512:155–160. [PubMed: 25079324]
Watanabe T, Nakamura M, Yonekawa Y, Kleihues P, Ohgaki H. Promoter hypermethylation and
homozygous deletion of the p14ARF and p16INK4a genes in oligodendrogliomas. Acta
Neuropathol. 2001; 101:185–189. [PubMed: 11307615]
Weisenberger DJ, Siegmund KD, Campan M, Young J, Long TI, Faasse MA, Kang GH,
Widschwendter M, Weener D, Buchanan D, et al. CpG island methylator phenotype underlies
sporadic microsatellite instability and is tightly associated with BRAF mutation in colorectal
cancer. Nat Genet. 2006; 38:787–793. [PubMed: 16804544]
Xu X, Hou Y, Yin X, Bao L, Tang A, Song L, Li F, Tsang S, Wu K, Wu H, et al. Single-cell exome
sequencing reveals single-nucleotide mutation characteristics of a kidney tumor. Cell. 2012;
148:886–895. [PubMed: 22385958]
Yadav VK, De S. An assessment of computational methods for estimating purity and clonality using
genomic data derived from heterogeneous tumor tissue samples. Brief Bioinform. 2015; 16:232–
241. [PubMed: 24562872]
Yoo CB, Jones PA. Epigenetic therapy of cancer: past, present and future. Nat Rev Drug Discov. 2006;
5:37–50. [PubMed: 16485345]
Yoshihara K, Shahmoradgoli M, Martinez E, Vegesna R, Kim H, Torres-Garcia W, Trevino V, Shen H,
Laird PW, Levine DA, et al. Inferring tumour purity and stromal and immune cell admixture
from expression data. Nat Commun. 2013; 4:2612. [PubMed: 24113773]

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 11.

Mazor et al.

Page 23

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 1. Inferring the evolutionary history of a tumor from intratumoral heterogeneity

Author Manuscript

(A) Analysis of spatially distinct biopsies can be used to build a phylogeny which represents
the evolutionary history of a tumor. Phylogeny tree branches are colored according to the
contributions of each cell population: the black branch contains alterations that are shared
amongst all biopsies, the red/blue branch contains alterations shared between the red and
blue biopsies and the red, blue and purple branches represents those alterations which are
uniquely present in a single biopsy.
(B) Phylogenies have traditionally been built from genetic alterations, including somatic
mutations and copy number alterations. Phyloepigenetic trees have been built from genomewide DNA methylation data and could be similarly derived from other epigenetic marks,
including histone modification patterns, open chromatin or RNA expression levels.
Representative patterns of somatic mutations, copy number alterations and DNA
methylation (black = methylated CpG site; white = unmethylated CpG site) are shown. To
date, tumor histories derived from genetic alterations and DNA methylation show similar
evolutionary patterns, raising the question of the extent to which these alterations are
functionally related. Further work is still required to determine if phylogenies derived from
histone modifications and RNA expression also reflect similar evolutionary histories.

Author Manuscript
Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 11.

Mazor et al.

Page 24

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 2. Clinical implications of intratumoral heterogeneity

(A) Low levels of intratumoral heterogeneity in DNA methylation (mITH) have been
associated with improved progression free survival (PFS) and overall survival (OS).
(B) Two different timeline models of the relationship between PFS and mITH. A tumor
initiates (far left) and expands while acquiring a series of epigenetic alterations leading to
three distinct subclones (shades of blue) at the time of surgical resection (vertical black line).
In both scenarios, identical subclones are present at initial resection. Surgical resection
removes the majority of tumor cells although a small number remain which continue to

Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 11.

Mazor et al.

Page 25

Author Manuscript

evolve and eventually develop into the recurrence after a short (top) or long (bottom) period
of progression-free survival (PFS). Here we question whether the duration of PFS may
correlate with the levels of mITH in the recurrent tumor (cell populations on right).
(C) The impact of therapy on mITH is understudied. For a given number of subclones at
diagnosis (top), therapy may selectively kill some subclones leading to decreased mITH at
recurrence (left), or it may not alter the diversity of subclones, leading to a recurrence with
similar subclones as the diagnostic tumor (center), or it may promote increased mITH and
expansion of novel subclones leading to a more heterogeneous recurrence (right).

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 11.

