Europe PMC Funders Group
Author Manuscript
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 November 21.
Published in final edited form as:
Cell. 2013 June 6; 153(6): 1194–1217. doi:10.1016/j.cell.2013.05.039.

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

The Hallmarks of Aging
Carlos López-Otín1, Maria A. Blasco5, Linda Partridge3,4, Manuel Serrano2,*, and Guido
Kroemer6,7,8,9,10
1Departamento de Bioquímica y Biología Molecular, Instituto Universitario de Oncología (IUOPA),
Universidad de Oviedo, Oviedo, Spain
2Tumor

Suppression Group, Molecular Oncology Program, Spanish National Cancer Research
Centre (CNIO), Madrid, Spain
3Max

Planck Institute for Biology of Ageing, Cologne, Germany

4Institute

of Healthy Ageing, Department of Genetics, Evolution and Environment, University
College London, London, UK
5Telomeres

and Telomerase Group, Molecular Oncology Program, Spanish National Cancer
Research Centre (CNIO), Madrid, Spain
6INSERM,

U848, Villejuif, France

7Metabolomics
8Centre
9Pôle

Platform, Institut Gustave Roussy, Villejuif, France

de Recherche des Cordeliers, Paris, France

de Biologie, Hôpital Européen Georges Pompidou, AP-HP, Paris, France

10Université

Paris Descartes, Sorbonne Paris Cité, Paris, France

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Abstract
Aging is characterized by a progressive loss of physiological integrity, leading to impaired
function and increased vulnerability to death. This deterioration is the primary risk factor for
major human pathologies including cancer, diabetes, cardiovascular disorders, and
neurodegenerative diseases. Aging research has experienced an unprecedented advance over
recent years, particularly with the discovery that the rate of aging is controlled, at least to some
extent, by genetic pathways and biochemical processes conserved in evolution. This review
enumerates nine tentative hallmarks that represent common denominators of aging in different
organisms, with special emphasis on mammalian aging. These hallmarks are: genomic instability,
telomere attrition, epigenetic alterations, loss of proteostasis, deregulated nutrient-sensing,
mitochondrial dysfunction, cellular senescence, stem cell exhaustion, and altered intercellular
communication. A major challenge is to dissect the interconnectedness between the candidate
hallmarks and their relative contribution to aging, with the final goal of identifying pharmaceutical
targets to improve human health during aging with minimal side-effects.

Keywords
aging; cancer; DNA damage; epigenetic; healthspan; lifespan; longevity; metabolism;
mitochondria; nutrient-signaling pathways; senescence; stem cells; telomeres

*

Correspondence to: Manuel Serrano mserrano@cnio.es.

López-Otín et al.

Page 2

Introduction

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Aging, which we broadly define as the time-dependent functional decline that affects most
living organisms, has attracted curiosity and excited imagination throughout the history of
humankind. However, it is only 30 years since a new era in aging research was inaugurated
after the isolation of the first long-lived strains in Caenorhabditis elegans (Klass, 1983).
Nowadays, aging is subjected to scientific scrutiny based on the ever-expanding knowledge
of the molecular and cellular bases of life and disease. The current situation of aging
research exhibits many parallels with that of cancer research in previous decades. The
cancer field gained major momentum in 2000 with the publication of a landmark paper that
enumerated six hallmarks of cancer (Hanahan and Weinberg, 2000), and that has been
recently expanded to ten hallmarks (Hanahan and Weinberg, 2011). This categorization has
helped to conceptualize the essence of cancer and its underlying mechanisms.
At first sight, cancer and aging may seem opposite processes: cancer is the consequence of
an aberrant gain of cellular fitness, while aging is characterized by a loss of fitness. At a
deeper level, however, cancer and aging may share common origins. The time-dependent
accumulation of cellular damage is widely considered the general cause of aging (Gems and
Partridge, 2013; Kirkwood, 2005; Vijg and Campisi, 2008). Concomitantly, cellular damage
may occasionally provide aberrant advantages to certain cells, which can eventually produce
cancer. Therefore, cancer and aging can be regarded as two different manifestations of the
same underlying process, namely, the accumulation of cellular damage. In addition, several
of the pathologies associated with aging, such as atherosclerosis and inflammation, involve
uncontrolled cellular overgrowth or hyperactivity (Blagosklonny, 2008). Based on this
conceptual framework, a series of critical questions have arisen in the field of aging
regarding the physiological sources of aging-causing damage, the compensatory responses
that try to re-establish homeostasis, the interconnection between the different types of
damage and compensatory responses, and the possibilities to intervene exogenously to delay
aging.

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Here, we have attempted to identify and categorize the cellular and molecular hallmarks of
aging. We propose nine candidate hallmarks that are generally considered to contribute to
the aging process and together determine the aging phenotype (Figure 1). Given the
complexity of the issue, we have emphasized current understanding of mammalian aging,
while recognizing pioneer insights from simpler model organisms (Gems and Partridge,
2013; Kenyon, 2010). Each ‘hallmark’ should ideally fulfil the following criteria: (i) it
should manifest during normal aging; (ii) its experimental aggravation should accelerate
aging; and (iii) its experimental amelioration should retard the normal aging process and,
hence, increase healthy lifespan. This set of ideal requisites is met to varying degrees by the
proposed hallmarks, an aspect that will be discussed in detail for each of them. The last
criterion is the most difficult to achieve, even if restricted to just one aspect of aging. For
this reason, not all the hallmarks are fully supported yet by interventions that succeed in
ameliorating aging. This caveat is tempered by the extensive interconnectedness between the
aging hallmarks, implying that experimental amelioration of one particular hallmark may
impinge on others.

Genomic Instability
One common denominator of aging is the accumulation of genetic damage throughout life
(Moskalev et al., 2012) (Figure 2A). Moreover, numerous premature aging diseases, such as
Werner syndrome and Bloom syndrome, are the consequence of increased DNA damage
accumulation (Burtner and Kennedy, 2010), although the relevance of these and other
progeroid syndromes to normal aging remains unresolved due in part to the fact that they

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 November 21.

López-Otín et al.

Page 3

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

recapitulate only some aspects of aging. The integrity and stability of DNA is continuously
challenged by exogenous physical, chemical and biological agents, as well as by
endogenous threats including DNA replication errors, spontaneous hydrolytic reactions, and
reactive oxygen species (ROS) (Hoeijmakers, 2009). The genetic lesions arising from
extrinsic or intrinsic damage are highly diverse and include point mutations, translocations,
chromosomal gains and losses, telomere shortening, and gene disruption caused by the
integration of viruses or transposons. To minimize these lesions, organisms have evolved a
complex network of DNA repair mechanisms that are collectively capable of dealing with
most of the damage inflicted to nuclear DNA (Lord and Ashworth, 2012). The genomic
stability systems also include specific mechanisms for maintaining the appropriate length
and functionality of telomeres (which are the topic of a separate hallmark, see below), and
for ensuring the integrity of mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) (Blackburn et al., 2006; Kazak et
al., 2012). In addition to these direct lesions in the DNA, defects in the nuclear architecture,
known as laminopathies, can cause genome instability and result in premature aging
syndromes (Worman, 2012).
Nuclear DNA
Somatic mutations accumulate within cells from aged humans and model organisms
(Moskalev et al., 2012). Other forms of DNA damage, such as chromosomal aneuploidies
and copy-number variations have also been found associated with aging (Faggioli et al.,
2012; Forsberg et al., 2012). Increased clonal mosaicism for large chromosomal anomalies
has been also reported (Jacobs et al., 2012; Laurie et al., 2012). All these forms of DNA
alterations may affect essential genes and transcriptional pathways, resulting in
dysfunctional cells that, if not eliminated by apoptosis or senescence, may jeopardize tissue
and organismal homeostasis. This is especially relevant when DNA damage impacts on the
functional competence of stem cells, thus compromising their role in tissue renewal (Jones
and Rando, 2011; Rossi et al., 2008) (see also the section Stem Cell Exhaustion).

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Causal evidence for the proposed links between lifelong increase in genomic damage and
aging has arisen from studies in mice and humans, showing that deficiencies in DNA repair
mechanisms cause accelerated aging in mice and underlie several human progeroid
syndromes such as Werner syndrome, Bloom syndrome, xeroderma pigmentosum,
trichothiodystrophy, Cockayne syndrome, or Seckel syndrome (Gregg et al., 2012;
Hoeijmakers, 2009; Murga et al., 2009). Moreover, transgenic mice overexpressing BubR1,
a mitotic checkpoint component that ensures accurate segregation of chromosomes, exhibit
an increased protection against aneuploidy and cancer, and extended healthy lifespan (Baker
et al., 2012). These findings provide experimental evidence that artificial reinforcement of
nuclear DNA repair mechanisms may delay aging.
Mitochondrial DNA
Mutations and deletions in aged mtDNA may also contribute to aging (Park and Larsson,
2011). mtDNA has been considered a major target for aging-associated somatic mutations
due to the oxidative microenvironment of the mitochondria, the lack of protective histones
in the mtDNA, and the limited efficiency of the mtDNA repair mechanisms compared to
those of nuclear DNA (Linnane et al., 1989). The causal implication of mtDNA mutations in
aging has been controversial because of the multiplicity of mitochondrial genomes, which
allows for the co-existence of mutant and wild-type genomes within the same cell, a
phenomenon that is referred to as ‘heteroplasmy’. However, single-cell analyses have
revealed that, despite the low overall level of mtDNA mutations, the mutational load of
individual aging cells becomes significant and may attain a state of homoplasmy in which a
mutant genome dominates the normal one (Khrapko et al., 1999). Interestingly, contrary to
previous expectations, most mtDNA mutations in adult or aged cells appear to be caused by

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 November 21.

López-Otín et al.

Page 4

replication errors early in life, rather than by oxidative damage. These mutations may
undergo polyclonal expansion and cause respiratory chain dysfunction in different tissues
(Ameur et al., 2011). Studies of accelerated aging in HIV-infected patients treated with antiretroviral drugs, which interfere with mtDNA replication, have supported the concept of
clonal expansion of mtDNA mutations originated early in life (Payne et al., 2011).

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

The first evidence that mtDNA damage might be important for aging and age-related
diseases derived from the identification of human multisystem disorders caused by mtDNA
mutations that partially phenocopy aging (Wallace, 2005). Further causative evidence comes
from studies on mice deficient in mitochondrial DNA polymerase γ. These mutant mice
exhibit aspects of premature aging and reduced lifespan in association with the accumulation
of random point mutations and deletions in mtDNA (Kujoth et al., 2005; Trifunovic et al.,
2004; Vermulst et al., 2008). Cells from these mice show impaired mitochondrial function
but, unexpectedly, this is not accompanied by increased ROS production (Edgar et al., 2009;
Hiona et al., 2010). Moreover, stem cells from these progeroid mice are particularly
sensitive to the accumulation of mtDNA mutations (Ahlqvist et al., 2012) (see also the
section on Stem Cell Exhaustion). Future studies are necessary to determine whether genetic
manipulations that decrease the load of mtDNA mutations are able to extend lifespan.
Nuclear architecture

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

In addition to genomic damage affecting nuclear or mtDNA, defects in the nuclear lamina
can also cause genome instability (Dechat et al., 2008). Nuclear lamins constitute the major
components of the nuclear lamina, and participate in genome maintenance by providing a
scaffold for tethering chromatin and protein complexes that regulate genomic stability
(Gonzalez-Suarez et al., 2009; Liu et al., 2005). The nuclear lamina attracted the attention of
aging researchers after the discovery that mutations in genes encoding protein components
of this structure, or factors affecting their maturation and dynamics, cause accelerated aging
syndromes such as the Hutchinson-Gilford and the Néstor-Guillermo progeria syndromes
(HGPS and NGPS, respectively) (Cabanillas et al., 2011; De Sandre-Giovannoli et al., 2003;
Eriksson et al., 2003). Alterations of the nuclear lamina and production of an aberrant
prelamin A isoform called progerin have also been detected during normal human aging
(Ragnauth et al., 2010; Scaffidi and Misteli, 2006). Telomere dysfunction also promotes
progerin production in normal human fibroblasts upon prolonged in vitro culture, suggesting
intimate links between telomere maintenance and progerin expression during normal aging
(Cao et al., 2011). In addition to these age-associated changes in A-type lamins, lamin B1
levels decline during cell senescence, pointing to its utility as a biomarker of this process
(Freund et al., 2012; Shimi et al., 2011).
Animal and cellular models have facilitated the identification of the stress pathways elicited
by aberrations in the nuclear lamina characteristic of HGPS. These pathways include the
activation of p53 (Varela et al., 2005), deregulation of the somatotrophic axis (Marino et al.,
2010), and attrition of adult stem cells (Espada et al., 2008; Scaffidi and Misteli, 2008). The
causal relevance of nuclear lamina abnormalities in premature aging has been supported by
the observation that decreasing prelamin A or progerin levels delays the onset of progeroid
features and extends lifespan in mouse models of HGPS. This can be achieved by systemic
injection of antisense oligonucleotides, farnesyltransferase inhibitors or a combination of
statins and aminobisphosphonates (Osorio et al., 2011; Varela et al., 2008; Yang et al.,
2006). Restoration of the somatotrophic axis through hormonal treatments or inhibition of
NF-κB signaling also extends lifespan in these progeroid mice (Marino et al., 2010; Osorio
et al., 2012). Moreover, a homologous recombination-based strategy has been developed to
correct the LMNA mutations in induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) derived from HGPS
patients, opening an avenue towards future cell therapies (Liu et al., 2011b). Further studies

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 November 21.

López-Otín et al.

Page 5

are necessary to validate the idea that reinforcement of the nuclear architecture can delay
normal aging.
Overview

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

There is extensive evidence that genomic damage accompanies aging and that its artificial
induction can provoke aspects of accelerated aging. In the case of the machinery that ensures
faithful chromosomal segregation, there is genetic evidence that its enhancement can extend
longevity in mammals (Baker et al., 2012). Also, in the particular case of progerias
associated with nuclear architecture defects, there is proof of principle for treatments that
can delay premature aging. Similar avenues should be explored to find interventions that
reinforce other aspects of nuclear and mitochondrial genome stability, such as DNA repair,
and their impact on normal aging (telomeres constitute a particular case and are discussed
separately).

Telomere Attrition
Accumulation of DNA damage with age appears to affect the genome near-to-randomly, but
there are some chromosomal regions, such as telomeres, that are particularly susceptible to
age-related deterioration (Blackburn et al., 2006) (Figure 2A). Replicative DNA
polymerases lack the capacity to replicate completely the terminal ends of linear DNA
molecules, a function that is proprietary of a specialized DNA polymerase known as
telomerase. However, most mammalian somatic cells do not express telomerase and this
leads to the progressive and cumulative loss of telomere-protective sequences from
chromosome ends. Telomere exhaustion explains the limited proliferative capacity of some
types of in vitro cultured cells, the so-called replicative senescence or Hayflick limit
(Hayflick and Moorhead, 1961; Olovnikov, 1996). Indeed, ectopic expression of telomerase
is sufficient to confer immortality to otherwise mortal cells, without causing oncogenic
transformation (Bodnar et al., 1998). Importantly, telomere shortening is also observed
during normal aging both in human and mice (Blasco, 2007).

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Telomeres can be regarded as DNA breaks that are made invisible to the DNA repair
machinery through the formation of specialized nucleoprotein complex known as shelterin
(Palm and de Lange, 2008). This adds another peculiarity to telomeres, not only telomeres
are progressively shortened in the absence of telomerase but, also, even in the presence of
telomerase, the infliction of exogenous DNA damage to telomeres becomes invisible to the
DNA repair machineries due to the presence of shelterins. Therefore, DNA damage at
telomeres causes a persistent type of DNA damage that leads to deleterious cellular effects
including senescence and/or apoptosis (Fumagalli et al., 2012; Hewitt et al., 2012).
Telomerase deficiency in humans is associated with premature development of diseases,
such as pulmonary fibrosis, dyskeratosis congenita and aplastic anemia, which involve the
loss of the regenerative capacity of different tissues (Armanios and Blackburn, 2012).
Severe telomere uncapping can also result from deficiencies in shelterin components (Palm
and de Lange, 2008). Shelterin mutations have been found in some cases of aplastic anemia
and dyskeratosis congenita (Savage et al., 2008; Walne et al., 2008; Zhong et al., 2011).
Various loss-of-function models for shelterin components are characterized by rapid decline
of the regenerative capacity of tissues and accelerated aging, a phenomenon that occurs even
in the presence of telomeres with a normal length (Martinez and Blasco, 2010).
Genetically-modified animal models have established causal links between telomere loss,
cellular senescence and organismal aging. Thus, mice with shortened or lengthened
telomeres exhibit decreased or increased lifespan, respectively (Armanios et al., 2009;
Rudolph et al., 1999; Tomas-Loba et al., 2008). Recent evidence also indicates that aging

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 November 21.

López-Otín et al.

Page 6

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

can be reverted by telomerase activation. In particular, the premature aging of telomerasedeficient mice can be reverted when telomerase is genetically reactivated in these aged mice
(Jaskelioff et al., 2011). Moreover, normal physiological aging can be delayed without
increasing the incidence of cancer in adult wild-type mice by pharmacological activation or
systemic viral transduction of telomerase (Bernardes de Jesus et al., 2012; de Jesus et al.,
2011). In humans, recent meta-analyses have indicated a strong relation between short
telomeres and mortality risk, particularly at younger ages (Boonekamp et al., 2013).
Overview
Normal aging is accompanied by telomere attrition in mammals. Moreover, pathological
telomere dysfunction accelerates aging in mice and humans, while experimental stimulation
of telomerase can delay aging in mice, thus fulfilling all of the criteria for a hallmark of
aging.

Epigenetic Alterations
A variety of epigenetic alterations affects all cells and tissues throughout life (Talens et al.,
2012) (Figure 2B). Epigenetic changes involve alterations in DNA methylation patterns,
post-translational modification of histones, and chromatin remodeling. Increased histone
H4K16 acetylation, H4K20 trimethylation or H3K4 trimethylation, as well as decreased
H3K9 methylation or H3K27 trimethylation, constitute age-associated epigenetic marks
(Fraga and Esteller, 2007; Han and Brunet, 2012). The multiple enzymatic systems assuring
the generation and maintenance of epigenetic patterns include DNA methyltransferases,
histone acetylases, deacetylases, methylases and demethylases, as well as protein complexes
implicated in chromatin remodeling.
Histone modifications

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Histone methylation meets the criteria for a hallmark of aging in invertebrates. Deletion of
components of histone methylation complexes extends longevity in nematodes and flies
(Greer et al., 2010; Siebold et al., 2010). Moreover, histone demethylases modulate lifespan
by targeting components of key longevity routes such as the insulin/IGF-1 signaling
pathway (Jin et al., 2011). It is not clear yet whether manipulations of histone-modifying
enzymes can influence aging through purely epigenetic mechanisms, by impinging on DNA
repair and genome stability, or through transcriptional alterations affecting metabolic or
signaling pathways outside of the nucleus.
The sirtuin family of NAD-dependent protein deacetylases and ADP-ribosyltransferases has
been studied extensively as potential anti-aging factors. Interest in this family of proteins in
relation to aging stems from a series of studies in yeast, flies and worms reporting that the
single sirtuin gene of these organisms, named Sir2, had a remarkable longevity activity
(Guarente, 2011). Overexpression of Sir2 was first shown to extend replicative lifespan in
Saccharomyces cerevisiae (Kaeberlein et al., 1999), and subsequent reports indicated that
enhanced expression of the worm (sir-2.1) and fly (dSir2) orthologs could extend lifespan in
both invertebrate model systems (Rogina and Helfand, 2004; Tissenbaum and Guarente,
2001). These findings have recently been called into question, however, with the report that
the lifespan extension originally observed in the worm and fly studies was mostly due to
confounding genetic background differences and not to the overexpression of sir-2.1 or
dSir2, respectively (Burnett et al., 2011). In fact, careful reassessments indicate that
overexpression of sir-2.1 only results in modest lifespan extension in C. elegans
(Viswanathan and Guarente, 2011).

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 November 21.

López-Otín et al.

Page 7

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Regarding mammals, several studies have shown that several of the seven mammalian
sirtuins can delay various parameters of aging in mice (Houtkooper et al., 2012; Sebastian et
al., 2012). In particular, transgenic overexpression of mammalian SIRT1, which is the
closest homologue to invertebrate Sir2, improves aspects of health during aging but does not
increase longevity (Herranz et al., 2010). The mechanisms involved in the beneficial effects
of SIRT1 are complex and interconnected, including a wide range of cellular actions from
improved genomic stability (Oberdoerffer et al., 2008; Wang et al., 2008) to enhanced
metabolic efficiency (Nogueiras et al., 2012) (see also Deregulated Nutrient-sensing). More
compelling evidence for a sirtuin-mediated pro-longevity role in mammals has been
obtained for SIRT6, which regulates genomic stability, NF-κB signaling and glucose
homeostasis through histone H3K9 deacetylation (Kanfi et al., 2010; Kawahara et al., 2009;
Zhong et al., 2010). Mutant mice deficient in SIRT6 exhibit accelerated aging
(Mostoslavsky et al., 2006), whereas male transgenic mice overexpressing Sirt6 have a
longer lifespan than control animals, associated with reduced serum IGF-1 and other
indicators of IGF-1 signaling (Kanfi et al., 2012). Interestingly, the mitochondria-located
SIRT3 has been reported to mediate some of the beneficial effects of dietary restriction (DR)
in longevity, although its effects are not due to histone modifications but to the deacetylation
of mitochondrial proteins (Someya et al., 2010). Very recently, overexpression of SIRT3 has
been reported to reverse the regenerative capacity of aged hematopoietic stem cells (Brown
et al., 2013). Therefore, in mammals, at least three members of the sirtuin family, SIRT1,
SIRT3 and SIRT6, contribute to healthy aging.
DNA methylation

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

The relationship between DNA methylation and aging is complex. Early studies described
an age-associated global hypomethylation, but subsequent analyses revealed that several
loci, including those corresponding to various tumor suppressor genes and Polycomb target
genes, actually become hypermethylated with age (Maegawa et al., 2010). Cells from
patients and mice with progeroid syndromes exhibit DNA methylation patterns and histone
modifications that largely recapitulate those found in normal aging (Osorio et al., 2010;
Shumaker et al., 2006). All of these epigenetic defects or epimutations accumulated
throughout life may specifically affect the behavior and functionality of stem cells (Pollina
and Brunet, 2011) (see section on Stem Cell Exhaustion). Nevertheless, thus far there is no
direct experimental demonstration that organismal lifespan can be extended by altering
patterns of DNA methylation.
Chromatin remodeling
DNA- and histone-modifying enzymes act in concert with key chromosomal proteins, such
as the heterochromatin protein 1α (HP1α), and chromatin remodeling factors, such as
Polycomb group proteins or the NuRD complex, whose levels are diminished in both
normally and pathologically aged cells (Pegoraro et al., 2009; Pollina and Brunet, 2011).
Alterations in these epigenetic factors together with the above discussed epigenetic
modifications in histones and DNA-methylation determine changes in chromatin
architecture, such as global heterochromatin loss and redistribution, which constitute
characteristic features of aging (Oberdoerffer and Sinclair, 2007; Tsurumi and Li, 2012).
The causal relevance of these chromatin alterations in aging is supported by the finding that
flies with loss-of-function mutations in HP1α have a shortened lifespan, whereas
overexpression of this heterochromatin protein extends longevity in flies and delays the
muscular deterioration characteristic of old age (Larson et al., 2012).
Supporting the functional relevance of epigenetically-mediated chromatin alterations in
aging, there is a notable connection between heterochromatin formation at repeated DNA
domains and chromosomal stability. In particular, heterochromatin assembly at pericentric

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 November 21.

López-Otín et al.

Page 8

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

regions requires trimethylation of histones H3K9 and H4K20, as well as HP1α binding, and
is important for chromosomal stability (Schotta et al., 2004). Mammalian telomeric repeats
are also enriched for these chromatin modifications, indicating that chromosome ends are
assembled into heterochromatin domains (Gonzalo et al., 2006). Subtelomeric regions also
show features of constitutive heterochromatin including H3K9 and H4K20 trimethylation,
HP1α binding, and DNA hypermethylation. Thus, epigenetic alterations can directly
impinge on the regulation of telomere length, one of the hallmarks of aging. Moreover, in
response to DNA damage, SIRT1 and other chromatin-modifying proteins relocalize to
DNA breaks to promote repair and genomic stability (Oberdoerffer et al., 2008). Beyond its
role in chromatin remodeling and DNA repair, SIRT1 also modulates proteostasis,
mitochondrial function, nutrient-sensing pathways and inflammation (see below),
illustrating the interconnectedness between aging hallmarks.
Transcriptional alterations
Aging is associated with an increase in transcriptional noise (Bahar et al., 2006), and an
aberrant production and maturation of many mRNAs (Harries et al., 2011; Nicholas et al.,
2010). Microarray-based comparisons of young and old tissues from several species have
identified age-related transcriptional changes in genes encoding key components of
inflammatory, mitochondrial and lysosomal degradation pathways (de Magalhaes et al.,
2009). These aging-associated transcriptional signatures also affect non-coding RNAs,
including a class of miRNAs (gero-miRs) that is associated with the aging process and
influences lifespan by targeting components of longevity networks or by regulating stem cell
behavior (Boulias and Horvitz, 2012; Toledano et al., 2012; Ugalde et al., 2011). Gain- and
loss-of-function studies have confirmed the capacity of several miRNAs to modulate
longevity in Drosophila melanogaster and C. elegans (Liu et al., 2012; Shen et al., 2012;
Smith-Vikos and Slack, 2012).
Reversion of epigenetic changes

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Unlike DNA mutations, epigenetic alterations are – at least theoretically – reversible, hence
offering opportunities for the design of novel anti-aging treatments (Freije and Lopez-Otin,
2012; Rando and Chang, 2012). Restoration of physiological H4 acetylation through
administration of histone deacetylase inhibitors, avoids the manifestation of age-associated
memory impairment in mice (Peleg et al., 2010), indicating that reversion of epigenetic
changes may have neuroprotective effects. Inhibitors of histone acetyltransferases also
ameliorate the premature aging phenotype and extend longevity of progeroid mice (Krishnan
et al., 2011). Moreover, the recent discovery of transgenerational epigenetic inheritance of
longevity in C. elegans suggests that manipulation of specific chromatin modifications in
parents can induce an epigenetic memory of longevity in their descendants (Greer et al.,
2011). Conceptually similar to histone acetyltransferase inhibitors, histone deacetylase
activators may conceivably promote longevity. Resveratrol has been extensively studied in
relation to aging and among its multiple mechanisms of action is the upregulation of SIRT1
activity, but also other effects associated with energetic deficits (see Mitochondrial
Dysfunction).
Overview
There are multiple lines of evidence suggesting that aging is accompanied by epigenetic
changes, and that epigenetic perturbations can provoke progeroid syndromes in model
organisms. Furthermore, SIRT6 exemplifies an epigenetically relevant enzyme whose lossof-function reduces longevity and whose gain-of-function extends longevity in mice (Kanfi
et al., 2012; Mostoslavsky et al., 2006). Collectively, these works suggest that understanding

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 November 21.

López-Otín et al.

Page 9

and manipulating the epigenome holds promise for improving age-related pathologies and
extending healthy lifespan.

Loss of Proteostasis
Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Aging and some aging-related diseases are linked to impaired protein homeostasis or
proteostasis (Powers et al., 2009) (Figure 3). All cells take advantage of an array of quality
control mechanisms to preserve the stability and functionality of their proteomes.
Proteostasis involves mechanisms for the stabilization of correctly folded proteins, most
prominently the heat-shock family of proteins, and mechanisms for the degradation of
proteins by the proteasome or the lysosome (Hartl et al., 2011; Koga et al., 2011; Mizushima
et al., 2008). Moreover, there are regulators of age-related proteotoxicity, such as MOAG-4,
that act through an alternative pathway distinct from molecular chaperones and proteases
(van Ham et al., 2010). All these systems function in a coordinated fashion to restore the
structure of misfolded polypeptides or to remove and degrade them completely, thus
preventing the accumulation of damaged components and assuring the continuous renewal
of intracellular proteins. Accordingly, many studies have demonstrated that proteostasis is
altered with aging (Koga et al., 2011). Additionally, chronic expression of unfolded,
misfolded or aggregated proteins contributes to the development of some age-related
pathologies, such as Alzheimer’s disease, Parkinson’s disease and cataracts (Powers et al.,
2009).
Chaperone-mediated protein folding and stability

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

The stress-induced synthesis of cytosolic and organelle-specific chaperones is significantly
impaired in aging (Calderwood et al., 2009). A number of animal models support a causative
impact of chaperone decline on longevity. In particular, transgenic worms and flies
overexpressing chaperones are long-lived (Morrow et al., 2004; Walker and Lithgow, 2003).
Also, mutant mice deficient in a co-chaperone of the heat-shock family exhibit acceleratedaging phenotypes, whereas long-lived mouse strains show a marked up-regulation of some
heat-shock proteins (Min et al., 2008; Swindell et al., 2009). Moreover, activation of the
master regulator of the heat-shock response, the transcription factor HSF-1, increases
longevity and thermotolerance in nematodes (Chiang et al., 2012; Hsu et al., 2003), while
amyloid-binding components can maintain proteostasis during aging and extend lifespan
(Alavez et al., 2011). In mammalian cells, deacetylation of HSF-1 by SIRT1 potentiates the
transactivation of heat-shock genes such as Hsp70, whereas down-regulation of SIRT1
attenuates the heat-shock response (Westerheide et al., 2009).
Several approaches for maintaining or enhancing proteostasis aim at activating protein
folding and stability mediated by chaperones. Pharmacological induction of the heat-shock
protein Hsp72 preserves muscle function and delays progression of dystrophic pathology in
mouse models of muscular dystrophy (Gehrig et al., 2012). Small molecules may be also
employed as pharmacological chaperones to assure the refolding of damaged proteins and to
improve age-related phenotypes in model organisms (Calamini et al., 2012).
Proteolytic systems
The activities of the two principal proteolytic systems implicated in protein quality control,
namely, the autophagy-lysosomal system and the ubiquitin-proteasome system, decline with
aging (Rubinsztein et al., 2011; Tomaru et al., 2012), supporting the idea that collapsing
proteostasis constitutes a common feature of old age.
Regarding autophagy, transgenic mice with an extra copy of the chaperone-mediated
autophagy receptor LAMP2a do not experience aging-associated decline in autophagic
activity and preserve improved hepatic function with aging (Zhang and Cuervo, 2008).
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 November 21.

López-Otín et al.

Page 10

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Interventions using chemical inducers of macroautophagy (another type of autophagy
different from chaperone-mediated autophagy) have spurred extraordinary interest after the
discovery that constant or intermittent administration of the mTOR inhibitor rapamycin can
increase the lifespan of middle-aged mice (Blagosklonny, 2011; Harrison et al., 2009).
Notably, rapamycin delays multiple aspects of aging in mice (Wilkinson et al., 2012). The
lifespan-extending effect of rapamycin is strictly dependent on the induction of autophagy in
yeast, nematodes and flies (Bjedov et al., 2010; Rubinsztein et al., 2011). However, similar
evidence does not exist yet for the effects of rapamycin on mammalian aging, and other
mechanisms such as inhibition of the ribosomal S6 protein kinase 1 (S6K1) implicated in
protein synthesis (Selman et al., 2009), could contribute to explain the pro-longevity effects
of rapamycin (see section on Deregulated Nutrient-sensing). Spermidine, another
macroautophagy inducer that, in contrast to rapamycin, has no immunosuppressive sideeffects, also promotes longevity in yeast, flies and worms via the induction of autophagy
(Eisenberg et al., 2009). Similarly, nutrient supplementation with polyamine preparations
containing spermidine or provision of a polyamine-producing gut flora increases longevity
in mice (Matsumoto et al., 2011; Soda et al., 2009). Dietary supplementation with ω-6
polyunsaturated fatty acids also extends lifespan in nematodes through autophagy activation
(O’Rourke et al., 2013).
In relation to the proteasome, activation of EGF-signaling extends longevity in nematodes
by increasing the expression of various components of the ubiquitin-proteasome system (Liu
et al., 2011a). Likewise, the enhancement of proteasome activity by deubiquitylase
inhibitors or proteasome activators accelerates the clearance of toxic proteins in human
cultured cells (Lee et al., 2010), and extends replicative lifespan in yeast (Kruegel et al.,
2011). Moreover, increased expression of the proteasome subunit RPN-6 by the FOXO
transcription factor DAF-16 confers proteotoxic stress resistance and extends lifespan in C.
elegans (Vilchez et al., 2012).
Overview

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

There is evidence that aging is associated with perturbed proteostasis, and experimental
perturbation of proteostasis can precipitate age-associated pathologies. There are also
promising examples of genetic manipulations that improve proteostasis and delay aging in
mammals (Zhang and Cuervo, 2008).

Deregulated Nutrient-sensing
The somatotrophic axis in mammals comprises the growth hormone (GH), produced by the
anterior pituitary, and its secondary mediator, the insulin-like growth factor (IGF-1),
produced in response to GH by many cell types, most notably hepatocytes. The intracellular
signaling pathway of IGF-1 is the same as that elicited by insulin, which informs cells of the
presence of glucose. For this reason, IGF-1 and insulin signaling are known as the ‘insulin
and IGF-1 signaling’ (IIS) pathway. Remarkably, the IIS pathway is the most conserved
aging-controlling pathway in evolution and among its multiple targets are the FOXO family
of transcription factors and the mTOR complexes, which are also involved in aging and
conserved through evolution (Barzilai et al., 2012; Fontana et al., 2010; Kenyon, 2010).
Genetic polymorphisms or mutations that reduce the functions of GH, IGF-1 receptor,
insulin receptor or downstream intracellular effectors such as AKT, mTOR and FOXO, have
been linked to longevity, both in humans and in model organisms, further illustrating the
major impact of trophic and bioenergetic pathways on longevity (Barzilai et al., 2012;
Fontana et al., 2010; Kenyon, 2010) (Figure 4A).
Consistent with the relevance of deregulated nutrient-sensing as a hallmark of aging, dietary
restriction (DR) increases lifespan or healthspan in all investigated eukaryote species,
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 November 21.

López-Otín et al.

Page 11

including unicellular and multicellular organisms of several distinct phyla, including nonhuman primates (Colman et al., 2009; Fontana et al., 2010; Mattison et al., 2012).
The insulin and IGF-1 signaling pathway

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Multiple genetic manipulations that attenuate signaling intensity at different levels of the IIS
pathway consistently extend the lifespan of worms, flies and mice (Fontana et al., 2010).
Genetic analyses indicate that this pathway mediates part of the beneficial effects of DR on
longevity in worms and flies (Fontana et al., 2010). Among the downstream effectors of the
IIS pathway, the most relevant one for longevity in worms and flies is the transcription
factor FOXO (Kenyon et al., 1993; Slack et al., 2011). In mice, there are four FOXO
members, but the effect of their over-expression on longevity and their role in mediating
increased healthspan through reduced IIS have not yet been determined. Mouse FOXO1 is
required for the tumor suppressive effect of DR (Yamaza et al., 2010), but it is not yet
known whether this factor is involved in DR-mediated lifespan extension. Mice with
increased dosage of the tumor suppressor PTEN exhibit a general down-modulation of the
IIS pathway and an increased energy expenditure that is associated with improved
mitochondrial oxidative metabolism, as well as with an enhanced activity of the brown
adipose tissue (Garcia-Cao et al., 2012; Ortega-Molina et al., 2012). In line with other
mouse models with decreased IIS activity, Pten-overexpressing mice, as well as
hypomorphic PI3K mice show an increased longevity (Foukas et al., 2013; Ortega-Molina et
al., 2012).

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Paradoxically, GH and IGF-1 levels decline during normal aging, as well as in mouse
models of premature aging (Schumacher et al., 2008). Thus, a decreased IIS is a common
characteristic of both physiological and accelerated aging, while a constitutively decreased
IIS extends longevity. These apparently contradictory observations could be accommodated
under a unifying model by which IIS down-modulation reflects a defensive response aimed
at minimizing cell growth and metabolism in the context of systemic damage (Garinis et al.,
2008). According to this view, organisms with a constitutively decreased IIS can survive
longer because they have lower rates of cell growth and metabolism, and hence lower rates
of cellular damage. Along the same lines, physiologically or pathologically aged organisms
decrease IIS in an attempt to extend their lifespan. However, and this is a concept that will
recur in the following sections, defensive responses against aging may have the risk of
eventually becoming deleterious and aggravating aging. Thus, extremely low levels of IIS
signaling are incompatible with life, as exemplified by mouse null mutations in the PI3K or
AKT kinases that are embryonic lethal (Renner and Carnero, 2009). Also, there are cases of
progeroid mice with very low levels of IGF-1, in which supplementation of IGF-1 can
ameliorate premature aging (Marino et al., 2010).
Other nutrient-sensing systems: mTOR, AMPK and sirtuins
In addition to the IIS pathway that participates in glucose-sensing, three additional related
and interconnected nutrient-sensing systems are the focus of intense investigation: mTOR,
for the sensing of high amino acid concentrations; AMPK, which senses low energy states
by detecting high AMP levels; and sirtuins, which sense low energy states by detecting high
NAD+ levels (Houtkooper et al., 2010) (Figure 4A).
The mTOR kinase is part of two multiprotein complexes, mTORC1 and mTORC2, that
regulate essentially all aspects of anabolic metabolism (Laplante and Sabatini, 2012).
Genetic down-regulation of mTORC1 activity in yeast, worms and flies extends longevity
and attenuates further longevity benefits from DR, suggesting that mTOR inhibition
phenocopies DR (Johnson et al., 2013). In mice, treatment with rapamycin also extends
longevity in what is considered the most robust chemical intervention to increase lifespan in

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 November 21.

López-Otín et al.

Page 12

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

mammals (Harrison et al., 2009). Genetically-modified mice with low levels of mTORC1
activity, but normal levels of mTORC2, have increased lifespan (Lamming et al., 2012), and
mice deficient in S6K1 (a main mTORC1 substrate) are also long-lived (Selman et al.,
2009), thus pointing to the downregulation of mTORC1/S6K1 as the critical mediator of
longevity in relation to mTOR. Moreover, mTOR activity increases during aging in mouse
hypothalamic neurons, contributing to age-related obesity, which is reversed by direct
infusion of rapamycin to the hypothalamus (Yang et al., 2012). These observations, together
with those involving the IIS pathway, indicate that intense trophic and anabolic activity,
signaled through the IIS or the mTORC1 pathways, are major accelerators of aging.
Although inhibition of TOR activity clearly has beneficial effects during aging, it also has
undesirable side-effects, such as impaired wound healing, insulin resistance, cataract and
testicular degeneration in mice (Wilkinson et al., 2012). It will thus be important to
understand the mechanisms involved, in order to determine the extent to which beneficial
and damaging effects of TOR inhibition can be separated from each other.
The other two nutrient sensors, AMPK and sirtuins, act in the opposite direction to IIS and
mTOR, meaning that they signal nutrient scarcity and catabolism instead of nutrient
abundance and anabolism. Accordingly, their up-regulation favors healthy aging. AMPK
activation has multiple effects on metabolism and, remarkably, shuts off mTORC1 (Alers et
al., 2012). There is evidence indicating that AMPK activation may mediate lifespanextension following metformin administration to worms and mice (Anisimov et al., 2011;
Mair et al., 2011; Onken and Driscoll, 2010). The role of sirtuins in lifespan regulation has
been discussed above (see section on Epigenetic Alterations). In addition, SIRT1 can
deacetylate and activate the PPARγ co-activator 1α (PGC-1α) (Rodgers et al., 2005).
PGC-1α orchestrates a complex metabolic response that includes mitochondriogenesis,
enhanced anti-oxidant defenses, and improved fatty acid oxidation (Fernandez-Marcos and
Auwerx, 2011). Moreover, SIRT1 and AMPK can engage in a positive feedback loop, thus
connecting both sensors of low-energy states into a unified response (Price et al., 2012).
Overview

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Collectively, current available evidence strongly supports the idea that anabolic signaling
accelerates aging, and decreased nutrient signaling extends longevity (Fontana et al., 2010).
Even more, a pharmacological manipulation that mimics a state of limited nutrient
availability, such as rapamycin, can extend longevity in mice (Harrison et al., 2009).

Mitochondrial Dysfunction
As cells and organisms age, the efficacy of the respiratory chain tends to diminish, thus
increasing electron leakage and reducing ATP generation (Green et al., 2011) (Figure 4B).
The relation between mitochondrial dysfunction and aging has been long suspected but
dissecting its details remains as a major challenge for aging research.
Reactive oxygen species (ROS)
The mitochondrial free radical theory of aging proposes that the progressive mitochondrial
dysfunction that occurs with aging results in increased production of reactive oxygen species
(ROS), which in turn causes further mitochondrial deterioration and global cellular damage
(Harman, 1965). Multiple data support a role for ROS in aging, but we focus here on the
developments of the last five years which have forced an intense re-evaluation of the
mitochondrial free radical theory of aging (Hekimi et al., 2011). Of particular impact has
been the unexpected observation that increased ROS may prolong lifespan in yeast and C.
elegans (Doonan et al., 2008; Mesquita et al., 2010; Van Raamsdonk and Hekimi, 2009). In
mice, genetic manipulations that increase mitochondrial ROS and oxidative damage do not

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 November 21.

López-Otín et al.

Page 13

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

accelerate aging (Van Remmen et al., 2003; Zhang et al., 2009), manipulations that increase
antioxidant defenses do not extend longevity (Perez et al., 2009), and, finally, genetic
manipulations that impair mitochondrial function but do not increase ROS accelerate aging
(Edgar et al., 2009; Hiona et al., 2010; Kujoth et al., 2005; Trifunovic et al., 2004; Vermulst
et al., 2008). These and similar data have paved the way to a reconsideration of the role of
ROS in aging (Ristow and Schmeisser, 2011). Indeed, parallel and separate to the work on
the damaging effects of ROS, the field of intracellular signaling has been accumulating solid
evidence for the role of ROS in triggering proliferative and survival signals, in response to
physiological signals and stress conditions (Sena and Chandel, 2012). The two lines of
evidence can be harmonized if ROS is regarded as a stress-elicited survival signal aimed at
compensating for the progressive deterioration associated with aging. As chronological age
advances, the levels of ROS increase in an attempt to maintain survival until they betray
their original purpose and eventually aggravate, rather than alleviate, the age-associated
damage (Hekimi et al., 2011). This new conceptual framework may accommodate
apparently conflicting evidence regarding the positive, negative or neutral effects of ROS on
aging.
Mitochondrial integrity and biogenesis
Dysfunctional mitochondria can contribute to aging independently of ROS, as exemplified
by studies with mice deficient in DNA polymerase γ (Edgar et al., 2009; Hiona et al., 2010)
(see above Genomic Instability). This could happen through a number of mechanisms, for
example, mitochondrial deficiencies may affect apoptotic signaling by increasing the
propensity of mitochondria to permeabilize in response to stress (Kroemer et al., 2007), and
trigger inflammatory reactions by favoring ROS-mediated and/or permeabilizationfacilitated activation of inflammasomes (Green et al., 2011). Also, mitochondrial
dysfunction may directly impact on cellular signaling and interorganellar crosstalk, by
affecting mitochondrion-associated membranes that constitute an interface between the outer
mitochondrial membrane and the endoplasmic reticulum (Raffaello and Rizzuto, 2011).

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

The reduced efficiency of mitochondrial bioenergetics with aging may result from multiple
converging mechanisms including reduced biogenesis of mitochondria, for instance as a
consequence of telomere attrition in telomerase-deficient mice, with subsequent p53mediated repression of PGC-1α and PGC-1β (Sahin and Depinho, 2012). This mitochondrial
decline also occurs during physiological aging in wild-type mice and can be partially
reversed by telomerase activation (Bernardes de Jesus et al., 2012). SIRT1 modulates
mitochondrial biogenesis through a process involving the transcriptional co-activator
PGC-1α (Rodgers et al., 2005) and the removal of damaged mitochondria by autophagy
(Lee et al., 2008). SIRT3, which is the main mitochondrial deacetylase (Lombard et al.,
2007), targets many enzymes involved in energy metabolism, including components of the
respiratory chain, tricarboxylic acid cycle, ketogenesis and fatty acid β-oxidation pathways
(Giralt and Villarroya, 2012). SIRT3 may also directly control the rate of ROS production
by deacetylating manganese superoxide dismutase, a major mitochondrial antioxidant
enzyme (Qiu et al., 2010; Tao et al., 2010). Collectively, these results support the idea that
sirtuins may act as metabolic sensors to control mitochondrial function and play a protective
role against age-associated diseases.
Other mechanisms causing defective bioenergetics include accumulation of mutations and
deletions in mtDNA, oxidation of mitochondrial proteins, destabilization of the
macromolecular organization of respiratory chain (super)complexes, changes in the lipid
composition of mitochondrial membranes, alterations in mitochondrial dynamics resulting
from imbalance of fission and fusion events, and defective quality control by mitophagy, an
organelle-specific form of macroautophagy that targets deficient mitochondria for
proteolytic degradation (Wang and Klionsky, 2011). The combination of increased damage
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 November 21.

López-Otín et al.

Page 14

and reduced turnover in mitochondria, due to lower biogenesis and reduced clearance, may
contribute to the aging process (Figure 4B).

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Interestingly, endurance training and alternate-day-fasting may improve healthspan through
their capacity to avoid mitochondrial degeneration (Castello et al., 2011; Safdar et al., 2011).
It is tempting to speculate that these beneficial effects are mediated, at least in part, through
the induction of autophagy, for which both endurance training and fasting constitute potent
triggers (Rubinsztein et al., 2011). However, autophagy induction is probably not the sole
mechanism through which a healthy lifestyle can retard aging since, depending on the
precise DR regime, additional longevity pathways can be activated (Kenyon, 2010).
Mitohormesis

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Mitochondrial dysfunctions during aging are also connected with hormesis, a concept on
which a number of aging research lines have recently converged (Calabrese et al., 2011).
According to this concept, mild toxic treatments trigger beneficial compensatory responses
that surpass the repair of the triggering damage, and actually produce an improvement in
cellular fitness when compared to the starting pre-damage conditions. Thus, although severe
mitochondrial dysfunction is pathogenic, mild respiratory deficiencies may increase
lifespan, perhaps due to a hormetic response (Haigis and Yankner, 2010). Such hormetic
reactions may consist in the induction of a mitochondrial stress response either in the same
tissue in which mitochondria are defective, or even in distant tissues, as shown in C. elegans
(Durieux et al., 2011). There is compelling evidence that compounds such as metformin and
resveratrol are mild mitochondrial poisons that induce a low energy state characterized by
increased AMP levels and activation of AMPK (Hawley et al., 2010). Importantly,
metformin extends lifespan in C. elegans through the induction of a compensatory stress
response mediated by AMPK and the master anti-oxidant regulator Nrf2 (Onken and
Driscoll, 2010). Recent studies have also shown that metformin retards aging in worms by
impairing folate and methionine metabolism of their intestinal microbiome (Cabreiro et al.,
2013). Regarding mammals, metformin can increase mouse lifespan when administered
from early life (Anisimov et al., 2011). In the cases of resveratrol and the sirtuin activator
SRT1720, there is convincing evidence that they protect from metabolic damage and
improve mitochondrial respiration in a PGC-1α-dependent fashion (Baur et al., 2006; Feige
et al., 2008; Lagouge et al., 2006; Minor et al., 2011), although resveratrol does not extend
mouse lifespan under normal dietary conditions (Pearson et al., 2008; Strong et al., 2012).
Further support for the role of PGC-1α in longevity comes from the observation that
PGC-1α overexpression suffices to extend Drosophila lifespan in association with improved
mitochondrial activity (Rera et al., 2011). Finally, mitochondrial uncoupling, either
genetically through the overexpression of the uncoupling protein UCP1 or by administration
of the chemical uncoupler 2-4-dinitrophenol can increase lifespan in flies and mice (Caldeira
da Silva et al., 2008; Fridell et al., 2009; Gates et al., 2007; Mookerjee et al., 2010).
Overview
Mitochondrial function has a profound impact on the aging process. Mitochondrial
dysfunction can accelerate aging in mammals (Kujoth et al., 2005; Trifunovic et al., 2004;
Vermulst et al., 2008), but it is less clear whether improving mitochondrial function, for
example through mitohormesis, can extend lifespan in mammals, although suggestive
evidence in this sense already exists.

Cellular Senescence
Cellular senescence can be defined as a stable arrest of the cell cycle coupled to stereotyped
phenotypic changes (Campisi and d’Adda di Fagagna, 2007; Collado et al., 2007; Kuilman

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 November 21.

López-Otín et al.

Page 15

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

et al., 2010) (Figure 5A). This phenomenon was originally described by Hayflick in human
fibroblasts serially passaged in culture (Hayflick and Moorhead, 1961). Today, we know
that the senescence observed by Hayflick is caused by telomere shortening (Bodnar et al.,
1998), but there are other aging-associated stimuli that trigger senescence independently of
this telomeric process. Most notably, non-telomeric DNA damage and de-repression of the
INK4/ARF locus, both of which progressively occur with chronological aging, are also
capable of inducing senescence (Collado et al., 2007). The accumulation of senescent cells
in aged tissues has been often inferred using surrogate markers such as DNA damage. Some
studies have directly used senescence-associated β-galactosidase (SABG) to identify
senescence in tissues (Dimri et al., 1995). Of note, a detailed and parallel quantification of
SABG and DNA damage in liver produced comparable quantitative data, yielding a total of
~8 % senescent cells in young mice and ~17% in very old mice (Wang et al., 2009). Similar
results were obtained in the skin, lung and spleen, but no changes were observed in heart,
skeletal muscle and kidney (Wang et al., 2009). Based on these data, it is clear that cellular
senescence is not a generalized property of all tissues in aged organisms. In the case of
senescent tumor cells, there is good evidence that they are subjected to strict immune
surveillance and are efficiently removed by phagocytosis (Hoenicke and Zender, 2012;
Kang et al., 2011; Xue et al., 2007). Conceivably, the accumulation of senescent cells with
aging can reflect an increase in the rate of generation of senescent cells and/or a decrease in
their rate of clearance, for example, as a consequence of an attenuated immune response.

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Since the amount of senescent cells increases with aging, it has been widely assumed that
senescence contributes to aging. However, this view undervalues what conceivably is the
primary purpose of senescence, which is to prevent the propagation of damaged cells and to
trigger their demise by the immune system. Therefore, it is possible that senescence is a
beneficial compensatory response that contributes to rid tissues from damaged and
potentially oncogenic cells. This cellular checkpoint, however, requires an efficient cell
replacement system that involves clearance of senescent cells and mobilization of
progenitors to re-establish cell numbers. In aged organisms, this turnover system may
become inefficient or may exhaust the regenerative capacity of progenitor cells, eventually
resulting in the accumulation of senescent cells that may aggravate the damage and
contribute to aging (Figure 5A).
In recent years, it has been appreciated that senescent cells manifest dramatic alterations in
their secretome, which is particularly enriched in pro-inflammatory cytokines and matrix
metalloproteinases, and is referred to as the ‘senescence-associated secretory phenotype’
(Kuilman et al., 2010; Rodier and Campisi, 2011). This pro-inflammatory secretome may
contribute to aging (see section on Intercellular Communication).
The INK4a/ARF locus and p53
In addition to DNA damage, excessive mitogenic signaling is the other stress most robustly
associated to senescence. A recent account listed more than 50 oncogenic or mitogenic
alterations that are able to induce senescence (Gorgoulis and Halazonetis, 2010). The
number of mechanisms that implement senescence in response to this variety of oncogenic
insults has also grown, but, still, the originally reported p16INK4a/Rb and p19ARF/p53
pathways remain, in general, the most important ones (Serrano et al., 1997). The relevance
of these pathways for aging becomes even more striking when considering that the levels of
p16INK4a (and to a lower extent also p19ARF) correlate with the chronological age of
essentially all tissues analyzed, both in mice and humans (Krishnamurthy et al., 2004;
Ressler et al., 2006). We are not aware of any other gene or protein whose expression is so
robustly correlated with chronological aging, across tissues, across species, and with a range
of variation that, on average, is one order of magnitude between young and old tissues. Both

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 November 21.

López-Otín et al.

Page 16

p16INK4a and p19ARF are encoded by the same genetic locus, the INK4a/ARF locus. A
recent meta-analysis of more than 300 genome wide association studies (GWAS) identified
the INK4a/ARF locus as the genomic locus that is genetically linked to the highest number
of age-associated pathologies, including several types of cardiovascular diseases, diabetes,
glaucoma, and Alzheimer’s disease (Jeck et al., 2012).

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

The critical role of p16INK4a and p53 in the induction of cell senescence has favored the
hypothesis that p16INK4a-induced and p53-induced senescence contribute to physiological
aging. According to this view, the pro-aging activity of p16INK4a and p53 would be a
tolerable toll compared to their benefits in tumor suppression. In support of this, mutant
mice with premature aging due to extensive and persistent damage, present dramatic levels
of senescence and their progeroid phenotypes are ameliorated by elimination of p16Ink4a or
p53. This is the case of mice deficient in BRCA1 (Cao et al., 2003), of a mouse model of
HGPS (Varela et al., 2005), and of mice with defective chromosomal stability due to a
hypomorphic mutation of BubR1 (Baker et al., 2011). However, other evidence suggests a
more complicated picture. In contrast to their anticipated pro-aging role, mice with a mild
and systemic increase in p16Ink4a, p19Arf or p53 tumor suppressors exhibit extended
longevity, which cannot be accounted for by their lower cancer incidence (Matheu et al.,
2009; Matheu et al., 2007). Also, elimination of p53 aggravates the phenotypes of some
progeroid mutant mice (Begus-Nahrmann et al., 2009; Murga et al., 2009; Ruzankina et al.,
2009). Again, as discussed above for senescence, the activation of p53 and INK4a/ARF can
be regarded as a beneficial compensatory response aimed at avoiding the propagation of
damaged cells and its consequences on aging and cancer. However, when damage is
pervasive, the regenerative capacity of tissues can be exhausted or saturated and, under these
extreme conditions, the p53 and INK4a/ARF responses can become deleterious and
accelerate aging.
Overview

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

We propose that cellular senescence is a beneficial compensatory response to damage that
becomes deleterious and accelerates aging when tissues exhaust their regenerative capacity.
Given these complexities, it is not possible to give a simple answer to the question of
whether cell senescence fulfills the third ideal criteria for the definition of a hallmark. A
moderate enhancement of the senescence-inducing tumor suppressor pathways may extend
longevity (Matheu et al., 2009; Matheu et al., 2007), and, at the same time, elimination of
senescent cells in an experimental progeria model delays age-related pathologies (Baker et
al., 2011). Therefore, two interventions that are conceptually opposite are able to extend
healthspan.

Stem Cell Exhaustion
The decline in the regenerative potential of tissues is one of the most obvious characteristics
of aging (Figure 5B). For example, hematopoiesis declines with age, resulting in a
diminished production of adaptive immune cells, a process termed immunosenescence, and
in an increased incidence of anemia and myeloid malignancies (Shaw et al., 2010). A similar
functional attrition of stem cells has been found in essentially all adult stem cell
compartments, including the mouse forebrain (Molofsky et al., 2006), the bone (Gruber et
al., 2006), or the muscle fibers (Conboy and Rando, 2012). Studies on aged mice have
revealed an overall decrease in cell cycle activity of hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs), with
old HSCs undergoing fewer cell divisions than young HSCs (Rossi et al., 2007). This
correlates with the accumulation of DNA damage (Rossi et al., 2007), and with the
overexpression of cell cycle-inhibitory proteins such as p16INK4a (Janzen et al., 2006). In
fact, old INK4a−/− HSCs exhibit better engraftment capacity and increased cell cycle
activity compared with old wild-type HSCs (Janzen et al., 2006). Telomere shortening is
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 November 21.

López-Otín et al.

Page 17

also an important cause of stem cell decline with aging in multiple tissues (Flores and
Blasco, 2010; Sharpless and DePinho, 2007). These are just examples of a much larger
picture where stem cell decline emerges as the integrative consequence of multiple types of
damage.

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Although deficient proliferation of stem and progenitor cells is obviously detrimental for the
long-term maintenance of the organism, an excessive proliferation of stem and progenitor
cells can also be deleterious by accelerating the exhaustion of stem cell niches. The
importance of stem cell quiescence for the long-term functionality of stem cells has been
compellingly demonstrated in the case of Drosophila intestinal stem cells, where excessive
proliferation leads to exhaustion and premature aging (Rera et al., 2011). A similar situation
is encountered in p21-null mice, which present premature exhaustion of HSCs and neural
stem cells (Cheng et al., 2000; Kippin et al., 2005). In this regard, the induction of INK4a
during aging (see section on Cellular Senescence) and the decrease of serum IGF-1 (see
section on Deregulated Nutrient-sensing), may both reflect an attempt of the organism to
preserve the quiescence of stem cells. Also, recent studies have shown that an increase in
FGF2 signaling in the aged muscle stem cell niche results in the loss of quiescence, and
eventually in stem cell depletion and diminished regenerative capacity, while suppression of
this signaling pathway rescues these defects (Chakkalakal et al., 2012). This opens the
possibility of designing strategies aimed at inhibiting FGF2 signaling to reduce stem cell
exhaustion during aging.

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

An important debate regarding the decline in stem-cell function is the relative role of cellintrinsic pathways compared to cell-extrinsic ones (Conboy and Rando, 2012). Recent work
has provided strong support for the latter. In particular, DR increases intestinal and muscle
stem functions through cell-extrinsic mechanisms (Cerletti et al., 2012; Yilmaz et al., 2012).
Likewise, transplantation of muscle-derived stem cells from young mice to progeroid mice
extends lifespan and improves degenerative changes of these animals even in tissues where
donor cells are not detected, suggesting that their therapeutic benefit may derive from
systemic effects caused by secreted factors (Lavasani et al., 2012). Furthermore, parabiosis
experiments have demonstrated that the decline in neural and muscle stem cell function in
old mice can be reversed by systemic factors from young mice (Conboy et al., 2005; Villeda
et al., 2011).
Pharmacological interventions are also being explored to improve stem cell function. In
particular, mTORC1 inhibition with rapamycin, which can postpone aging by improving
proteostasis (see section on Loss of Proteostasis) and by affecting energy sensing (see
section on Deregulated Nutrient-sensing), may also improve stem cell function in the
epidermis, in the hematopoietic system, and in the intestine (Castilho et al., 2009; Chen et
al., 2009; Yilmaz et al., 2012). This illustrates the difficulty of disentangling the mechanistic
basis for the anti-aging activity of rapamycin, and underscores the interconnectedness
between the different hallmarks of aging discussed here. It is also worth mentioning that it is
possible to rejuvenate human senescent cells by pharmacological inhibition of the GTPase
CDC42, whose activity is increased in aged HSCs (Florian et al., 2012).
Overview
Stem cell exhaustion unfolds as the integrative consequence of multiple types of agingassociated damages and likely constitutes one of the ultimate culprits of tissue and
organismal aging. Recent promising studies suggest that stem cell rejuvenation may reverse
the aging phenotype at the organismal level (Rando and Chang, 2012).

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 November 21.

López-Otín et al.

Page 18

Altered Intercellular Communication

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Beyond cell-autonomous alterations, aging also involves changes at the level of intercellular
communication, be it endocrine, neuroendocrine or neuronal (Laplante and Sabatini, 2012;
Rando and Chang, 2012; Russell and Kahn, 2007; Zhang et al., 2013) (Figure 5C). Thus,
neurohormonal signaling (eg, renin-angiotensin, adrenergic, insulin-IGF1 signaling) tends to
be deregulated in aging as inflammatory reactions increase, immunosurveillance against
pathogens and premalignant cells declines, and the composition of the peri- and extracellular
environment changes, thereby affecting the mechanical and functional properties of all
tissues.
Inflammation

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

A prominent aging-associated alteration in intercellular communication is ‘inflammaging’,
i.e. a smoldering pro-inflammatory phenotype that accompanies aging in mammals
(Salminen et al., 2012). Inflammaging may result from multiple causes such as the
accumulation of pro-inflammatory tissue damage, the failure of an ever more dysfunctional
immune system to effectively clear pathogens and dysfunctional host cells, the propensity of
senescent cells to secrete pro-inflammatory cytokines (see section on Cellular Senescence),
the enhanced activation of the NF-κB transcription factor, or the occurrence of a defective
autophagy response (Salminen et al., 2012). These alterations result in an enhanced
activation of the NLRP3 inflammasome and other pro-inflammatory pathways, finally
leading to increased production of IL-1ß, tumor necrosis factor and interferons (Green et al.,
2011; Salminen et al., 2012). Inflammation is also involved in the pathogenesis of obesity
and type 2 diabetes, two conditions that contribute to, and correlate with aging in the human
population (Barzilai et al., 2012). Likewise, defective inflammatory responses play a critical
role in atherosclerosis (Tabas, 2010). The recent finding that age-associated inflammation
inhibits epidermal stem cell function (Doles et al., 2012), further supports the intricate
concatenation of different hallmarks that reinforces the aging process. Paralleling
inflammaging, the function of the adaptive immune system declines (Deeks, 2011). This
immunosenescence may aggravate the aging phenotype at the systemic level, due to the
failure of the immune system to clear infectious agents, infected cells, and cells on the verge
of malignant transformation. Moreover, one of the functions of the immune system is to
recognize and eliminate senescent cells (see section on Stem Cell Exhaustion), as well as
hyperploid cells that accumulate in aging tissues and premalignant lesions (Davoli and de
Lange, 2011; Senovilla et al., 2012).
Global studies on the transcriptional landscape of aged tissues have also emphasized the
relevance of inflammatory pathways in aging (de Magalhaes et al., 2009; Lee et al., 2012).
Over-activation of the NF-κB pathway is one of these transcriptional signatures of aging and
conditional expression of an NF-κB inhibitor in the aged skin of transgenic mice causes the
phenotypic rejuvenation of this tissue, as well as the restoration of the transcriptional
signature corresponding to young age (Adler et al., 2007). Likewise, genetic and
pharmacological inhibition of NF-κB signaling prevents age-associated features in different
mouse models of accelerated aging (Osorio et al., 2012; Tilstra et al., 2012). A novel link
between inflammation and aging derives from the recent finding that inflammatory and
stress responses activate NF-κB in the hypothalamus and induce a signaling pathway that
results in reduced production of gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) by neurons
(Zhang et al., 2013). This GnRH decline can contribute to numerous aging-related changes
such as bone fragility, muscle weakness, skin atrophy and reduced neurogenesis.
Consistently, GnRH treatment prevents aging-impaired neurogenesis and decelerates aging
development in mice (Zhang et al., 2013). These findings suggest that the hypothalamus
may modulate systemic aging by integrating NF-kB-driven inflammatory responses with
GnRH-mediated neuroendocrine effects.
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 November 21.

López-Otín et al.

Page 19

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Further in vivo evidence linking inflammation and aging derives from work on the mRNA
decay factor AUF1, which is implicated in the cessation of the inflammatory response by
mediating cytokine mRNA degradation (Pont et al., 2012). AUF1-deficient mice exhibit a
marked cellular senescence and premature aging phenotype that can be rescued by reexpression of this RNA-binding factor. Interestingly, and in addition to directing
inflammatory cytokine mRNA decay, AUF1 contributes to maintaining telomere length by
activating the expression of the telomerase catalytic subunit TERT (Pont et al., 2012), again
demonstrating that one single factor may have a strong impact on different aging hallmarks.
A similar situation occurs with sirtuins, which may also have an impact on inflammatory
responses associated with aging. Several studies have revealed that, by deacetylating
histones and components of inflammatory signaling pathways such as NF-κB, SIRT1 can
down-regulate inflammation-related genes (Xie et al., 2012). Consistent with these findings,
reduction of SIRT1 levels correlates with the development and progression of many
inflammatory diseases, while pharmacologic activation of SIRT1 may prevent inflammatory
responses in mice (Gillum et al., 2011; Yao et al., 2012; Zhang et al., 2010). SIRT2 and
SIRT6 may also down-regulate the inflammatory response through deacetylation of NF-kB
subunits and transcriptional repression of their target genes (Kawahara et al., 2009;
Rothgiesser et al., 2010).
Other types of intercellular communication

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Beyond inflammation, accumulating evidence indicates that aging-related changes in one
tissue can lead to aging-specific deterioration of other tissues, explaining the inter-organ
coordination of the aging phenotype. In addition to inflammatory cytokines, there are other
examples of ‘contagious aging’ or bystander effects in which senescent cells induce
senescence in neighboring cells via gap junction-mediated cell-cell contacts and processes
involving ROS (Nelson et al., 2012). The microenvironment contributes to the age-related
functional defects of CD4 T cells, as assessed by using an adoptive transfer model in mice
(Lefebvre et al., 2012). Likewise, impaired kidney function can increase the risk of heart
disease in humans (Sarnak et al., 2003). Conversely, lifespan-extending manipulations
targeting one single tissue can retard the aging process in other tissues (Durieux et al., 2011;
Lavasani et al., 2012; Tomas-Loba et al., 2008).
Restoring defective intercellular communication
There are several possibilities for restoring defective intercellular communication underlying
aging processes, including genetic, nutritional or pharmacological interventions that may
improve the cell-cell communication properties that are lost with aging (Freije and LopezOtin, 2012; Rando and Chang, 2012). Of special interest in this regard are the DR
approaches to extend healthy lifespan (Piper et al., 2011; Sanchez-Roman et al., 2012), and
the rejuvenation strategies based on the use of blood-borne systemic factors identified in
parabiosis experiments (Conboy et al., 2005; Loffredo et al., 2013; Villeda et al., 2011).
Moreover, the long-term administration of anti-inflammatory agents such as aspirin may
increase longevity in mice and healthy aging in humans (Rothwell et al., 2011; Strong et al.,
2008). Additionally, given that the gut microbiome shapes the function of the host immune
system and exerts systemic metabolic effects, it appears possible to extend lifespan by
manipulating the composition and functionality of the complex and dynamic intestinal
bacterial ecosystem of the human body (Claesson et al., 2012; Ottaviani et al., 2011).
Overview
There is compelling evidence that aging is not an exclusively cell biological phenomenon
and that it is coupled to a general alteration in intercellular communication, offering
opportunities to modulate aging at this level. Excitingly, proof of principle exists for
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 November 21.

López-Otín et al.

Page 20

rejuvenation through blood-borne systemic factors (Conboy et al., 2005; Loffredo et al.,
2013; Villeda et al., 2011).

Conclusions and Perspectives
Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

A global view at the nine candidate hallmarks of aging enumerated in this review allows
grouping them into three categories: primary hallmarks, antagonistic hallmarks, and
integrative hallmarks (Figure 6). The common characteristic of the primary hallmarks is the
fact that they are all unequivocally negative. This is the case of DNA damage, including
chromosomal aneuploidies, mitochondrial DNA mutations and telomere loss, epigenetic
drift, and defective proteostasis. In contrast to the primary hallmarks, antagonistic hallmarks
have opposite effects depending on their intensity. At low levels, they mediate beneficial
effects, but at high levels, they become deleterious. This is the case for senescence, which
protects the organism from cancer, but in excess can promote aging; similarly, reactive
oxygen species (ROS) mediate cell signaling and survival, but at chronic high levels can
produce cellular damage; likewise, an optimal nutrient-sensing and anabolism is obviously
important for survival but in excess and during time can become pathological. These
hallmarks can be viewed as designed for protecting the organism from damage or from
nutrient scarcity, but when exacerbated or chronic, subvert their purpose and generate
further damage. A third category comprises the integrative hallmarks, stem cell exhaustion
and altered intercellular communication, which directly affect tissue homeostasis and
function. Notwithstanding the interconnectedness between all hallmarks, we propose some
degree of hierarchical relation between them (Figure 6). The primary hallmarks could be the
initiating triggers whose damaging events progressively accumulate with time. The
antagonistic hallmarks, being in principle beneficial, become progressively negative in a
process that is partly promoted or accelerated by the primary hallmarks. Finally, the
integrative hallmarks arise when the accumulated damage caused by the primary and
antagonistic hallmarks cannot be compensated by tissue homeostatic mechanisms. Because
the hallmarks co-occur during aging and are interconnected, understanding their exact causal
network is an exciting challenge for future work.

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

The definition of hallmarks of aging may contribute to build a framework for future studies
on the molecular mechanisms of aging as well as for designing interventions to improve
human healthspan (Figure 7). However, there are still numerous challenges ahead in relation
to understanding this complex biological process (Martin, 2011; Miller, 2012). The rapid
development of next-generation sequencing technologies may have a special impact on
aging research by facilitating the evaluation of the genetic and epigenetic changes
specifically accumulated by individual cells in an aging organism (de Magalhaes et al.,
2010; Gundry and Vijg, 2012). These techniques are already being used to determine the
whole-genome sequence of individuals with exceptional longevity, to perform comparative
genomic studies between short-lived and long-lived animal species and strains, and to
analyze age-associated epigenetic changes at maximum resolution (Heyn et al., 2012; Kim
et al., 2011; Sebastiani et al., 2011). Parallel in vivo studies with gain- or loss-of-function
animal models will be necessary for moving beyond correlative analyses and providing
causal evidence in favor of the implication of these proposed hallmarks in the aging process.
Besides the characterization of individual hallmarks, systems biology approaches will be
required to understand the mechanistic links among the processes that accompany and lead
to aging (Gems and Partridge, 2013; Kirkwood, 2008). Additionally, molecular analysis of
the genome-environment interactions that modulate aging will help to identify drug targets
for longevity promotion (de Magalhaes et al., 2012). We surmise that ever more
sophisticated approaches for disentangling the complexities of normal, accelerated and
delayed aging will eventually resolve many of the pending issues. Hopefully, these
combined approaches will allow a detailed understanding of the mechanisms underlying the
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 November 21.

López-Otín et al.

Page 21

hallmarks of aging and will facilitate future interventions for improving human healthspan
and longevity.

Acknowledgments
Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

We thank all members of our labs for their helpful comments on the manuscript and apologize for omission of
relevant works due to space constraints. C.L-O. is supported by grants from Ministerio de Economía y
Competitividad (MINECO) and Instituto de Salud Carlos III (RTICC), and is an Investigator of the Botín
Foundation. M.S. is funded by grants from the MINECO, European Union (ERC Advanced Grant), Regional
Government of Madrid, Botín Foundation, Ramón Areces Foundation, and AXA Foundation. L.P. is supported by
the Max Planck Society, the ERC and the Wellcome Trust (UK). M.A.B. is funded by ERC Project TEL STEM
CELL, FP7 Projects MARK-AGE and EuroBATS, MINECO, Regional Government of Madrid, AXA Research
Fund, Botín Foundation and Fundación Lilly (Spain). G.K. is supported by the Ligue Nationale contre le Cancer
(Equipes labellisée), Agence Nationale pour la Recherche, AXA Foundation Chair for Longevity Research,
European Commission (ERC Advanced Grant, ArtForce, ChemoRes), Fondation pour la Recherche Médicale
(FRM), Institut National du Cancer (INCa), Fondation de France, Cancéropôle Ile-de-France, Fondation
Bettencourt-Schueller, the LabEx Immuno-Oncology, and the Paris Alliance of Cancer Research Institutes.

References

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Adler AS, Sinha S, Kawahara TL, Zhang JY, Segal E, Chang HY. Motif module map reveals
enforcement of aging by continual NF-kappaB activity. Genes Dev. 2007; 21:3244–3257. [PubMed:
18055696]
Ahlqvist KJ, Hamalainen RH, Yatsuga S, Uutela M, Terzioglu M, Gotz A, Forsstrom S, Salven P,
Angers-Loustau A, Kopra OH, et al. Somatic progenitor cell vulnerability to mitochondrial DNA
mutagenesis underlies progeroid phenotypes in Polg mutator mice. Cell Metab. 2012; 15:100–109.
[PubMed: 22225879]
Alavez S, Vantipalli MC, Zucker DJ, Klang IM, Lithgow GJ. Amyloid-binding compounds maintain
protein homeostasis during ageing and extend lifespan. Nature. 2011; 472:226–229. [PubMed:
21451522]
Alers S, Loffler AS, Wesselborg S, Stork B. Role of AMPK-mTOR Ulk1/2 in the regulation of
autophagy: cross talk, shortcuts, and feedbacks. Mol Cell Biol. 2012; 32:2–11. [PubMed:
22025673]
Ameur A, Stewart JB, Freyer C, Hagstrom E, Ingman M, Larsson NG, Gyllensten U. Ultra-deep
sequencing of mouse mitochondrial DNA: mutational patterns and their origins. PLoS Genet. 2011;
7:e1002028. [PubMed: 21455489]
Anisimov VN, Berstein LM, Popovich IG, Zabezhinski MA, Egormin PA, Piskunova TS,
Semenchenko AV, Tyndyk ML, Yurova MN, Kovalenko IG, et al. If started early in life, metformin
treatment increases life span and postpones tumors in female SHR mice. Aging. 2011; 3:148–157.
[PubMed: 21386129]
Armanios M, Alder JK, Parry EM, Karim B, Strong MA, Greider CW. Short telomeres are sufficient
to cause the degenerative defects associated with aging. Am J Hum Genet. 2009; 85:823–832.
[PubMed: 19944403]
Armanios M, Blackburn EH. The telomere syndromes. Nat Rev Genet. 2012; 13:693–704. [PubMed:
22965356]
Bahar R, Hartmann CH, Rodriguez KA, Denny AD, Busuttil RA, Dolle ME, Calder RB, Chisholm
GB, Pollock BH, Klein CA, et al. Increased cell-to-cell variation in gene expression in ageing
mouse heart. Nature. 2006; 441:1011–1014. [PubMed: 16791200]
Baker DJ, Dawlaty MM, Wijshake T, Jeganathan KB, Malureanu L, van Ree JH, Crespo-Diaz R,
Reyes S, Seaburg L, Shapiro V, et al. Increased expression of BubR1 protects against aneuploidy
and cancer and extends healthy lifespan. Nat Cell Biol. 2012; 15:96–102. [PubMed: 23242215]
Baker DJ, Wijshake T, Tchkonia T, LeBrasseur NK, Childs BG, van de Sluis B, Kirkland JL, van
Deursen JM. Clearance of p16Ink4a-positive senescent cells delays ageing-associated disorders.
Nature. 2011; 479:232–236. [PubMed: 22048312]
Barzilai N, Huffman DM, Muzumdar RH, Bartke A. The critical role of metabolic pathways in aging.
Diabetes. 2012; 61:1315–1322. [PubMed: 22618766]

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 November 21.

López-Otín et al.

Page 22

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Baur JA, Pearson KJ, Price NL, Jamieson HA, Lerin C, Kalra A, Prabhu VV, Allard JS, Lopez-Lluch
G, Lewis K, et al. Resveratrol improves health and survival of mice on a high-calorie diet. Nature.
2006; 444:337–342. [PubMed: 17086191]
Begus-Nahrmann Y, Lechel A, Obenauf AC, Nalapareddy K, Peit E, Hoffmann E, Schlaudraff F, Liss
B, Schirmacher P, Kestler H, et al. p53 deletion impairs clearance of chromosomal-instable stem
cells in aging telomere-dysfunctional mice. Nat Genet. 2009; 41:1138–1143. [PubMed: 19718028]
Bernardes de Jesus B, Vera E, Schneeberger K, Tejera AM, Ayuso E, Bosch F, Blasco MA.
Telomerase gene therapy in adult and old mice delays aging and increases longevity without
increasing cancer. EMBO Mol Med. 2012; 4:691–704. [PubMed: 22585399]
Bjedov I, Toivonen JM, Kerr F, Slack C, Jacobson J, Foley A, Partridge L. Mechanisms of life span
extension by rapamycin in the fruit fly Drosophila melanogaster. Cell Metab. 2010; 11:35–46.
[PubMed: 20074526]
Blackburn EH, Greider CW, Szostak JW. Telomeres and telomerase: the path from maize,
Tetrahymena and yeast to human cancer and aging. Nat Med. 2006; 12:1133–1138. [PubMed:
17024208]
Blagosklonny MV. Aging: ROS or TOR. Cell Cycle. 2008; 7:3344–3354. [PubMed: 18971624]
Blagosklonny MV. Rapamycin-induced glucose intolerance: hunger or starvation diabetes. Cell Cycle.
2011; 10:4217–4224. [PubMed: 22157190]
Blasco MA. Telomere length, stem cells and aging. Nat Chem Biol. 2007; 3:640–649. [PubMed:
17876321]
Bodnar AG, Ouellette M, Frolkis M, Holt SE, Chiu CP, Morin GB, Harley CB, Shay JW, Lichtsteiner
S, Wright WE. Extension of life-span by introduction of telomerase into normal human cells.
Science. 1998; 279:349–352. [PubMed: 9454332]
Boonekamp JJ, Simons MJ, Hemerik L, Verhulst S. Telomere length behaves as biomarker of somatic
redundancy rather than biological age. Aging Cell. 2013; 12:330–332. [PubMed: 23346961]
Boulias K, Horvitz HR. The C. elegans microRNA mir-71 acts in neurons to promote germlinemediated longevity through regulation of DAF-16/FOXO. Cell Metab. 2012; 15:439–450.
[PubMed: 22482727]
Brown K, Xie S, Qiu X, Mohrin M, Shin J, Liu Y, Zhang D, Scadden DT, Chen D. SIRT3 reverses
aging-associated degeneration. Cell Rep. 2013; 3:319–327. [PubMed: 23375372]
Burnett C, Valentini S, Cabreiro F, Goss M, Somogyvari M, Piper MD, Hoddinott M, Sutphin GL,
Leko V, McElwee JJ, et al. Absence of effects of Sir2 overexpression on lifespan in C. elegans and
Drosophila. Nature. 2011; 477:482–485. [PubMed: 21938067]
Burtner CR, Kennedy BK. Progeria syndromes and ageing: what is the connection? Nat Rev Mol Cell
Biol. 2010; 11:567–578. [PubMed: 20651707]
Cabanillas R, Cadinanos J, Villameytide JA, Perez M, Longo J, Richard JM, Alvarez R, Duran NS,
Illan R, Gonzalez DJ, et al. Nestor-Guillermo progeria syndrome: a novel premature aging
condition with early onset and chronic development caused by BANF1 mutations. Am J Med
Genet A. 2011; 155A:2617–2625. [PubMed: 21932319]
Cabreiro F, Au C, Leung KY, Vergara-Irigaray N, Cocheme HM, Noori T, Weinkove D, Schuster E,
Greene ND, Gems D. Metformin retards aging in C. elegans by altering microbial folate and
methionine metabolism. Cell. 2013; 153:228–239. [PubMed: 23540700]
Calabrese V, Cornelius C, Cuzzocrea S, Iavicoli I, Rizzarelli E, Calabrese EJ. Hormesis, cellular stress
response and vitagenes as critical determinants in aging and longevity. Mol Aspects Med. 2011;
32:279–304. [PubMed: 22020114]
Calamini B, Silva MC, Madoux F, Hutt DM, Khanna S, Chalfant MA, Saldanha SA, Hodder P, Tait
BD, Garza D, et al. Small-molecule proteostasis regulators for protein conformational diseases.
Nat Chem Biol. 2012; 8:185–196. [PubMed: 22198733]
Caldeira da Silva CC, Cerqueira FM, Barbosa LF, Medeiros MH, Kowaltowski AJ. Mild
mitochondrial uncoupling in mice affects energy metabolism, redox balance and longevity. Aging
Cell. 2008; 7:552–560. [PubMed: 18505478]
Calderwood SK, Murshid A, Prince T. The shock of aging: molecular chaperones and the heat shock
response in longevity and aging--a mini-review. Gerontology. 2009; 55:550–558. [PubMed:
19546513]

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 November 21.

López-Otín et al.

Page 23

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Campisi J, d’Adda di Fagagna F. Cellular senescence: when bad things happen to good cells. Nat Rev
Mol Cell Biol. 2007; 8:729–740. [PubMed: 17667954]
Cao K, Blair CD, Faddah DA, Kieckhaefer JE, Olive M, Erdos MR, Nabel EG, Collins FS. Progerin
and telomere dysfunction collaborate to trigger cellular senescence in normal human fibroblasts. J
Clin Invest. 2011; 121:2833–2844. [PubMed: 21670498]
Cao L, Li W, Kim S, Brodie SG, Deng CX. Senescence, aging, and malignant transformation mediated
by p53 in mice lacking the Brca1 full-length isoform. Genes Dev. 2003; 17:201–213. [PubMed:
12533509]
Castello L, Maina M, Testa G, Cavallini G, Biasi F, Donati A, Leonarduzzi G, Bergamini E, Poli G,
Chiarpotto E. Alternate-day fasting reverses the age-associated hypertrophy phenotype in rat heart
by influencing the ERK and PI3K signaling pathways. Mech Ageing Dev. 2011; 132:305–314.
[PubMed: 21741396]
Castilho RM, Squarize CH, Chodosh LA, Williams BO, Gutkind JS. mTOR mediates Wnt-induced
epidermal stem cell exhaustion and aging. Cell Stem Cell. 2009; 5:279–289. [PubMed: 19733540]
Cerletti M, Jang YC, Finley LW, Haigis MC, Wagers AJ. Short-term calorie restriction enhances
skeletal muscle stem cell function. Cell Stem Cell. 2012; 10:515–519. [PubMed: 22560075]
Claesson MJ, Jeffery IB, Conde S, Power SE, O’Connor EM, Cusack S, Harris HM, Coakley M,
Lakshminarayanan B, O’Sullivan O, et al. Gut microbiota composition correlates with diet and
health in the elderly. Nature. 2012; 488:178–184. [PubMed: 22797518]
Colman RJ, Anderson RM, Johnson SC, Kastman EK, Kosmatka KJ, Beasley TM, Allison DB,
Cruzen C, Simmons HA, Kemnitz JW, et al. Caloric restriction delays disease onset and mortality
in rhesus monkeys. Science. 2009; 325:201–204. [PubMed: 19590001]
Collado M, Blasco MA, Serrano M. Cellular senescence in cancer and aging. Cell. 2007; 130:223–233.
[PubMed: 17662938]
Conboy IM, Conboy MJ, Wagers AJ, Girma ER, Weissman IL, Rando TA. Rejuvenation of aged
progenitor cells by exposure to a young systemic environment. Nature. 2005; 433:760–764.
[PubMed: 15716955]
Conboy IM, Rando TA. Heterochronic parabiosis for the study of the effects of aging on stem cells
and their niches. Cell Cycle. 2012; 11:2260–2267. [PubMed: 22617385]
Chakkalakal JV, Jones KM, Basson MA, Brack AS. The aged niche disrupts muscle stem cell
quiescence. Nature. 2012; 490:355–360. [PubMed: 23023126]
Chen C, Liu Y, Zheng P. mTOR regulation and therapeutic rejuvenation of aging hematopoietic stem
cells. Sci Signal. 2009; 2:ra75. [PubMed: 19934433]
Cheng T, Rodrigues N, Shen H, Yang Y, Dombkowski D, Sykes M, Scadden DT. Hematopoietic stem
cell quiescence maintained by p21cip1/waf1. Science. 2000; 287:1804–1808. [PubMed:
10710306]
Chiang WC, Ching TT, Lee HC, Mousigian C, Hsu AL. HSF-1 regulators DDL-1/2 link insulin-like
signaling to heat-shock responses and modulation of longevity. Cell. 2012; 148:322–334.
[PubMed: 22265419]
Davoli T, de Lange T. The causes and consequences of polyploidy in normal development and cancer.
Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol. 2011; 27:585–610. [PubMed: 21801013]
de Jesus BB, Schneeberger K, Vera E, Tejera A, Harley CB, Blasco MA. The telomerase activator
TA-65 elongates short telomeres and increases health span of adult/old mice without increasing
cancer incidence. Aging Cell. 2011; 10:604–621. [PubMed: 21426483]
de Magalhaes JP, Curado J, Church GM. Meta-analysis of age-related gene expression profiles
identifies common signatures of aging. Bioinformatics. 2009; 25:875–881. [PubMed: 19189975]
de Magalhaes JP, Finch CE, Janssens G. Next-generation sequencing in aging research: emerging
applications, problems, pitfalls and possible solutions. Ageing Res Rev. 2010; 9:315–323.
[PubMed: 19900591]
de Magalhaes JP, Wuttke D, Wood SH, Plank M, Vora C. Genome-environment interactions that
modulate aging: powerful targets for drug discovery. Pharmacol Rev. 2012; 64:88–101. [PubMed:
22090473]

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 November 21.

López-Otín et al.

Page 24

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

De Sandre-Giovannoli A, Bernard R, Cau P, Navarro C, Amiel J, Boccaccio I, Lyonnet S, Stewart CL,
Munnich A, Le Merrer M, et al. Lamin a truncation in Hutchinson-Gilford progeria. Science.
2003; 300:2055. [PubMed: 12702809]
Dechat T, Pfleghaar K, Sengupta K, Shimi T, Shumaker DK, Solimando L, Goldman RD. Nuclear
lamins: major factors in the structural organization and function of the nucleus and chromatin.
Genes Dev. 2008; 22:832–853. [PubMed: 18381888]
Deeks SG. HIV infection, inflammation, immunosenescence, and aging. Annu Rev Med. 2011;
62:141–155. [PubMed: 21090961]
Dimri GP, Lee X, Basile G, Acosta M, Scott G, Roskelley C, Medrano EE, Linskens M, Rubelj I,
Pereira-Smith O, et al. A biomarker that identifies senescent human cells in culture and in aging
skin in vivo. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1995; 92:9363–9367. [PubMed: 7568133]
Doles J, Storer M, Cozzuto L, Roma G, Keyes WM. Age-associated inflammation inhibits epidermal
stem cell function. Genes Dev. 2012; 26:2144–2153. [PubMed: 22972935]
Doonan R, McElwee JJ, Matthijssens F, Walker GA, Houthoofd K, Back P, Matscheski A,
Vanfleteren JR, Gems D. Against the oxidative damage theory of aging: superoxide dismutases
protect against oxidative stress but have little or no effect on life span in Caenorhabditis elegans.
Genes Dev. 2008; 22:3236–3241. [PubMed: 19056880]
Durieux J, Wolff S, Dillin A. The cell-non-autonomous nature of electron transport chain-mediated
longevity. Cell. 2011; 144:79–91. [PubMed: 21215371]
Edgar D, Shabalina I, Camara Y, Wredenberg A, Calvaruso MA, Nijtmans L, Nedergaard J, Cannon
B, Larsson NG, Trifunovic A. Random point mutations with major effects on protein-coding genes
are the driving force behind premature aging in mtDNA mutator mice. Cell Metab. 2009; 10:131–
138. [PubMed: 19656491]
Eisenberg T, Knauer H, Schauer A, Buttner S, Ruckenstuhl C, Carmona-Gutierrez D, Ring J,
Schroeder S, Magnes C, Antonacci L, et al. Induction of autophagy by spermidine promotes
longevity. Nat Cell Biol. 2009; 11:1305–1314. [PubMed: 19801973]
Eriksson M, Brown WT, Gordon LB, Glynn MW, Singer J, Scott L, Erdos MR, Robbins CM, Moses
TY, Berglund P, et al. Recurrent de novo point mutations in lamin A cause Hutchinson-Gilford
progeria syndrome. Nature. 2003; 423:293–298. [PubMed: 12714972]
Espada J, Varela I, Flores I, Ugalde AP, Cadinanos J, Pendas AM, Stewart CL, Tryggvason K, Blasco
MA, Freije JM, et al. Nuclear envelope defects cause stem cell dysfunction in premature-aging
mice. J Cell Biol. 2008; 181:27–35. [PubMed: 18378773]
Faggioli F, Wang T, Vijg J, Montagna C. Chromosome-specific accumulation of aneuploidy in the
aging mouse brain. Hum Mol Genet. 2012; 21:5246–5253. [PubMed: 22962300]
Feige JN, Lagouge M, Canto C, Strehle A, Houten SM, Milne JC, Lambert PD, Mataki C, Elliott PJ,
Auwerx J. Specific SIRT1 activation mimics low energy levels and protects against diet-induced
metabolic disorders by enhancing fat oxidation. Cell Metab. 2008; 8:347–358. [PubMed:
19046567]
Fernandez-Marcos PJ, Auwerx J. Regulation of PGC-1alpha, a nodal regulator of mitochondrial
biogenesis. Am J Clin Nutr. 2011; 93:884S–890. [PubMed: 21289221]
Flores I, Blasco MA. The role of telomeres and telomerase in stem cell aging. FEBS Lett. 2010;
584:3826–3830. [PubMed: 20674573]
Florian MC, Dorr K, Niebel A, Daria D, Schrezenmeier H, Rojewski M, Filippi MD, Hasenberg A,
Gunzer M, Scharffetter-Kochanek K, et al. Cdc42 activity regulates hematopoietic stem cell aging
and rejuvenation. Cell Stem Cell. 2012; 10:520–530. [PubMed: 22560076]
Fontana L, Partridge L, Longo VD. Extending healthy life span--from yeast to humans. Science. 2010;
328:321–326. [PubMed: 20395504]
Forsberg LA, Rasi C, Razzaghian HR, Pakalapati G, Waite L, Thilbeault KS, Ronowicz A, Wineinger
NE, Tiwari HK, Boomsma D, et al. Age-related somatic structural changes in the nuclear genome
of human blood cells. Am J Hum Genet. 2012; 90:217–228. [PubMed: 22305530]
Foukas LC, Bilanges B, Bettedi L, Pearce W, Ali K, Sancho S, Withers DJ, Vanhaesebroeck B. Longterm p110alpha PI3K inactivation exerts a beneficial effect on metabolism. EMBO Mol Med.
2013; 5:563–571. [PubMed: 23483710]

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 November 21.

López-Otín et al.

Page 25

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Fraga MF, Esteller M. Epigenetics and aging: the targets and the marks. Trends Genet. 2007; 23:413–
418. [PubMed: 17559965]
Freije JM, Lopez-Otin C. Reprogramming aging and progeria. Curr Opin Cell Biol. 2012
Freund A, Laberge RM, Demaria M, Campisi J. Lamin B1 loss is a senescence-associated biomarker.
Mol Biol Cell. 2012; 23:2066–2075. [PubMed: 22496421]
Fridell YW, Hoh M, Kreneisz O, Hosier S, Chang C, Scantling D, Mulkey DK, Helfand SL. Increased
uncoupling protein (UCP) activity in Drosophila insulin-producing neurons attenuates insulin
signaling and extends lifespan. Aging. 2009; 1:699–713. [PubMed: 20195385]
Fumagalli M, Rossiello F, Clerici M, Barozzi S, Cittaro D, Kaplunov JM, Bucci G, Dobreva M, Matti
V, Beausejour CM, et al. Telomeric DNA damage is irreparable and causes persistent DNAdamage-response activation. Nat Cell Biol. 2012; 14:355–365. [PubMed: 22426077]
Garcia-Cao I, Song MS, Hobbs RM, Laurent G, Giorgi C, de Boer VC, Anastasiou D, Ito K, Sasaki
AT, Rameh L, et al. Systemic elevation of PTEN induces a tumor-suppressive metabolic state.
Cell. 2012; 149:49–62. [PubMed: 22401813]
Garinis GA, van der Horst GT, Vijg J, Hoeijmakers JH. DNA damage and ageing: new-age ideas for
an age-old problem. Nat Cell Biol. 2008; 10:1241–1247. [PubMed: 18978832]
Gates AC, Bernal-Mizrachi C, Chinault SL, Feng C, Schneider JG, Coleman T, Malone JP, Townsend
RR, Chakravarthy MV, Semenkovich CF. Respiratory uncoupling in skeletal muscle delays death
and diminishes age-related disease. Cell Metab. 2007; 6:497–505. [PubMed: 18054318]
Gehrig SM, van der Poel C, Sayer TA, Schertzer JD, Henstridge DC, Church JE, Lamon S, Russell
AP, Davies KE, Febbraio MA, et al. Hsp72 preserves muscle function and slows progression of
severe muscular dystrophy. Nature. 2012; 484:394–398. [PubMed: 22495301]
Gems D, Partridge L. Genetics of longevity in model organisms: debates and paradigm shifts. Annu
Rev Physiol. 2013; 75:621–644. [PubMed: 23190075]
Gillum MP, Kotas ME, Erion DM, Kursawe R, Chatterjee P, Nead KT, Muise ES, Hsiao JJ, Frederick
DW, Yonemitsu S, et al. SirT1 regulates adipose tissue inflammation. Diabetes. 2011; 60:3235–
3245. [PubMed: 22110092]
Giralt A, Villarroya F. SIRT3, a pivotal actor in mitochondrial functions: metabolism, cell death and
aging. Biochem J. 2012; 444:1–10. [PubMed: 22533670]
Gonzalez-Suarez I, Redwood AB, Perkins SM, Vermolen B, Lichtensztejin D, Grotsky DA, MorgadoPalacin L, Gapud EJ, Sleckman BP, Sullivan T, et al. Novel roles for A-type lamins in telomere
biology and the DNA damage response pathway. EMBO J. 2009; 28:2414–2427. [PubMed:
19629036]
Gonzalo S, Jaco I, Fraga MF, Chen T, Li E, Esteller M, Blasco MA. DNA methyltransferases control
telomere length and telomere recombination in mammalian cells. Nat Cell Biol. 2006; 8:416–424.
[PubMed: 16565708]
Gorgoulis VG, Halazonetis TD. Oncogene-induced senescence: the bright and dark side of the
response. Curr Opin Cell Biol. 2010; 22:816–827. [PubMed: 20807678]
Green DR, Galluzzi L, Kroemer G. Mitochondria and the autophagy-inflammation-cell death axis in
organismal aging. Science. 2011; 333:1109–1112. [PubMed: 21868666]
Greer EL, Maures TJ, Hauswirth AG, Green EM, Leeman DS, Maro GS, Han S, Banko MR, Gozani
O, Brunet A. Members of the H3K4 trimethylation complex regulate lifespan in a germlinedependent manner in C. elegans. Nature. 2010; 466:383–387. [PubMed: 20555324]
Greer EL, Maures TJ, Ucar D, Hauswirth AG, Mancini E, Lim JP, Benayoun BA, Shi Y, Brunet A.
Transgenerational epigenetic inheritance of longevity in Caenorhabditis elegans. Nature. 2011;
479:365–371. [PubMed: 22012258]
Gregg SQ, Gutierrez V, Robinson AR, Woodell T, Nakao A, Ross MA, Michalopoulos GK, Rigatti L,
Rothermel CE, Kamileri I, et al. A mouse model of accelerated liver aging caused by a defect in
DNA repair. Hepatology. 2012; 55:609–621. [PubMed: 21953681]
Gruber R, Koch H, Doll BA, Tegtmeier F, Einhorn TA, Hollinger JO. Fracture healing in the elderly
patient. Exp Gerontol. 2006; 41:1080–1093. [PubMed: 17092679]
Guarente L. Sirtuins, aging, and metabolism. Cold Spring Harb Symp Quant Biol. 2011; 76:81–90.
[PubMed: 22114328]

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 November 21.

López-Otín et al.

Page 26

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Gundry M, Vijg J. Direct mutation analysis by high-throughput sequencing: from germline to lowabundant, somatic variants. Mutat Res. 2012; 729:1–15. [PubMed: 22016070]
Haigis MC, Yankner BA. The aging stress response. Mol Cell. 2010; 40:333–344. [PubMed:
20965426]
Han S, Brunet A. Histone methylation makes its mark on longevity. Trends Cell Biol. 2012; 22:42–49.
[PubMed: 22177962]
Hanahan D, Weinberg RA. The hallmarks of cancer. Cell. 2000; 100:57–70. [PubMed: 10647931]
Hanahan D, Weinberg RA. Hallmarks of cancer: the next generation. Cell. 2011; 144:646–674.
[PubMed: 21376230]
Harman D. The free radical theory of aging: effect of age on serum copper levels. J Gerontol. 1965;
20:151–153. [PubMed: 14284786]
Harries LW, Hernandez D, Henley W, Wood AR, Holly AC, Bradley-Smith RM, Yaghootkar H, Dutta
A, Murray A, Frayling TM, et al. Human aging is characterized by focused changes in gene
expression and deregulation of alternative splicing. Aging Cell. 2011; 10:868–878. [PubMed:
21668623]
Harrison DE, Strong R, Sharp ZD, Nelson JF, Astle CM, Flurkey K, Nadon NL, Wilkinson JE, Frenkel
K, Carter CS, et al. Rapamycin fed late in life extends lifespan in genetically heterogeneous
mice. Nature. 2009; 460:392–395. [PubMed: 19587680]
Hartl FU, Bracher A, Hayer-Hartl M. Molecular chaperones in protein folding and proteostasis.
Nature. 2011; 475:324–332. [PubMed: 21776078]
Hawley SA, Ross FA, Chevtzoff C, Green KA, Evans A, Fogarty S, Towler MC, Brown LJ, Ogunbayo
OA, Evans AM, et al. Use of cells expressing gamma subunit variants to identify diverse
mechanisms of AMPK activation. Cell Metab. 2010; 11:554–565. [PubMed: 20519126]
Hayflick L, Moorhead PS. The serial cultivation of human diploid cell strains. Exp Cell Res. 1961;
25:585–621. [PubMed: 13905658]
Hekimi S, Lapointe J, Wen Y. Taking a “good” look at free radicals in the aging process. Trends Cell
Biol. 2011; 21:569–576. [PubMed: 21824781]
Herranz D, Munoz-Martin M, Canamero M, Mulero F, Martinez-Pastor B, Fernandez-Capetillo O,
Serrano M. Sirt1 improves healthy ageing and protects from metabolic syndrome-associated
cancer. Nat Commun. 2010; 1:3. [PubMed: 20975665]
Hewitt G, Jurk D, Marques FD, Correia-Melo C, Hardy T, Gackowska A, Anderson R, Taschuk M,
Mann J, Passos JF. Telomeres are favoured targets of a persistent DNA damage response in
ageing and stress-induced senescence. Nat Commun. 2012; 3:708. [PubMed: 22426229]
Heyn H, Li N, Ferreira HJ, Moran S, Pisano DG, Gomez A, Diez J, Sanchez-Mut JV, Setien F,
Carmona FJ, et al. Distinct DNA methylomes of newborns and centenarians. Proc Natl Acad Sci
U S A. 2012; 109:10522–10527. [PubMed: 22689993]
Hiona A, Sanz A, Kujoth GC, Pamplona R, Seo AY, Hofer T, Someya S, Miyakawa T, Nakayama C,
Samhan-Arias AK, et al. Mitochondrial DNA mutations induce mitochondrial dysfunction,
apoptosis and sarcopenia in skeletal muscle of mitochondrial DNA mutator mice. PLoS ONE.
2010; 5:e11468. [PubMed: 20628647]
Hoeijmakers JH. DNA damage, aging, and cancer. N Engl J Med. 2009; 361:1475–1485. [PubMed:
19812404]
Hoenicke L, Zender L. Immune surveillance of senescent cells--biological significance in cancer- and
non-cancer pathologies. Carcinogenesis. 2012; 33:1123–1126. [PubMed: 22470164]
Houtkooper RH, Pirinen E, Auwerx J. Sirtuins as regulators of metabolism and healthspan. Nat Rev
Mol Cell Biol. 2012; 13:225–238. [PubMed: 22395773]
Houtkooper RH, Williams RW, Auwerx J. Metabolic networks of longevity. Cell. 2010; 142:9–14.
[PubMed: 20603007]
Hsu AL, Murphy CT, Kenyon C. Regulation of aging and age-related disease by DAF-16 and heatshock factor. Science. 2003; 300:1142–1145. [PubMed: 12750521]
Jacobs KB, Yeager M, Zhou W, Wacholder S, Wang Z, Rodriguez-Santiago B, Hutchinson A, Deng
X, Liu C, Horner MJ, et al. Detectable clonal mosaicism and its relationship to aging and cancer.
Nat Genet. 2012; 44:651–658. [PubMed: 22561519]

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 November 21.

López-Otín et al.

Page 27

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Janzen V, Forkert R, Fleming HE, Saito Y, Waring MT, Dombkowski DM, Cheng T, DePinho RA,
Sharpless NE, Scadden DT. Stem-cell ageing modified by the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor
p16INK4a. Nature. 2006; 443:421–426. [PubMed: 16957735]
Jaskelioff M, Muller FL, Paik JH, Thomas E, Jiang S, Adams AC, Sahin E, Kost-Alimova M,
Protopopov A, Cadinanos J, et al. Telomerase reactivation reverses tissue degeneration in aged
telomerase-deficient mice. Nature. 2011; 469:102–106. [PubMed: 21113150]
Jeck WR, Siebold AP, Sharpless NE. Review: a meta-analysis of GWAS and age-associated diseases.
Aging Cell. 2012; 11:727–731. [PubMed: 22888763]
Jin C, Li J, Green CD, Yu X, Tang X, Han D, Xian B, Wang D, Huang X, Cao X, et al. Histone
demethylase UTX-1 regulates C. elegans life span by targeting the insulin/IGF-1 signaling
pathway. Cell Metab. 2011; 14:161–172. [PubMed: 21803287]
Johnson SC, Rabinovitch PS, Kaeberlein M. mTOR is a key modulator of ageing and age-related
disease. Nature. 2013; 493:338–345. [PubMed: 23325216]
Jones DL, Rando TA. Emerging models and paradigms for stem cell ageing. Nat Cell Biol. 2011;
13:506–512. [PubMed: 21540846]
Kaeberlein M, McVey M, Guarente L. The SIR2/3/4 complex and SIR2 alone promote longevity in
Saccharomyces cerevisiae by two different mechanisms. Genes Dev. 1999; 13:2570–2580.
[PubMed: 10521401]
Kanfi Y, Naiman S, Amir G, Peshti V, Zinman G, Nahum L, Bar-Joseph Z, Cohen HY. The sirtuin
SIRT6 regulates lifespan in male mice. Nature. 2012; 483:218–221. [PubMed: 22367546]
Kanfi Y, Peshti V, Gil R, Naiman S, Nahum L, Levin E, Kronfeld-Schor N, Cohen HY. SIRT6
protects against pathological damage caused by diet-induced obesity. Aging Cell. 2010; 9:162–
173. [PubMed: 20047575]
Kang TW, Yevsa T, Woller N, Hoenicke L, Wuestefeld T, Dauch D, Hohmeyer A, Gereke M,
Rudalska R, Potapova A, et al. Senescence surveillance of pre-malignant hepatocytes limits liver
cancer development. Nature. 2011; 479:547–551. [PubMed: 22080947]
Kawahara TL, Michishita E, Adler AS, Damian M, Berber E, Lin M, McCord RA, Ongaigui KC,
Boxer LD, Chang HY, et al. SIRT6 links histone H3 lysine 9 deacetylation to NF-kappaBdependent gene expression and organismal life span. Cell. 2009; 136:62–74. [PubMed:
19135889]
Kazak L, Reyes A, Holt IJ. Minimizing the damage: repair pathways keep mitochondrial DNA intact.
Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2012; 13:659–671. [PubMed: 22992591]
Kenyon C, Chang J, Gensch E, Rudner A, Tabtiang R. A C. elegans mutant that lives twice as long as
wild type. Nature. 1993; 366:461–464. [PubMed: 8247153]
Kenyon CJ. The genetics of ageing. Nature. 2010; 464:504–512. [PubMed: 20336132]
Khrapko K, Bodyak N, Thilly WG, van Orsouw NJ, Zhang X, Coller HA, Perls TT, Upton M, Vijg J,
Wei JY. Cell-by-cell scanning of whole mitochondrial genomes in aged human heart reveals a
significant fraction of myocytes with clonally expanded deletions. Nucleic Acids Res. 1999;
27:2434–2441. [PubMed: 10325435]
Kim EB, Fang X, Fushan AA, Huang Z, Lobanov AV, Han L, Marino SM, Sun X, Turanov AA, Yang
P, et al. Genome sequencing reveals insights into physiology and longevity of the naked mole rat.
Nature. 2011; 479:223–227. [PubMed: 21993625]
Kippin TE, Martens DJ, van der Kooy D. p21 loss compromises the relative quiescence of forebrain
stem cell proliferation leading to exhaustion of their proliferation capacity. Genes Dev. 2005;
19:756–767. [PubMed: 15769947]
Kirkwood TB. Understanding the odd science of aging. Cell. 2005; 120:437–447. [PubMed:
15734677]
Kirkwood TB. A systematic look at an old problem. Nature. 2008; 451:644–647. [PubMed: 18256658]
Klass MR. A method for the isolation of longevity mutants in the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans
and initial results. Mech Ageing Dev. 1983; 22:279–286. [PubMed: 6632998]
Koga H, Kaushik S, Cuervo AM. Protein homeostasis and aging: The importance of exquisite quality
control. Ageing Res Rev. 2011; 10:205–215. [PubMed: 20152936]
Krishnamurthy J, Torrice C, Ramsey MR, Kovalev GI, Al-Regaiey K, Su L, Sharpless NE. Ink4a/Arf
expression is a biomarker of aging. J Clin Invest. 2004; 114:1299–1307. [PubMed: 15520862]
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 November 21.

López-Otín et al.

Page 28

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Krishnan V, Chow MZ, Wang Z, Zhang L, Liu B, Liu X, Zhou Z. Histone H4 lysine 16
hypoacetylation is associated with defective DNA repair and premature senescence in Zmpste24deficient mice. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011; 108:12325–12330. [PubMed: 21746928]
Kroemer G, Galluzzi L, Brenner C. Mitochondrial membrane permeabilization in cell death. Physiol
Rev. 2007; 87:99–163. [PubMed: 17237344]
Kruegel U, Robison B, Dange T, Kahlert G, Delaney JR, Kotireddy S, Tsuchiya M, Tsuchiyama S,
Murakami CJ, Schleit J, et al. Elevated proteasome capacity extends replicative lifespan in
Saccharomyces cerevisiae. PLoS Genet. 2011; 7:e1002253. [PubMed: 21931558]
Kuilman T, Michaloglou C, Mooi WJ, Peeper DS. The essence of senescence. Genes Dev. 2010;
24:2463–2479. [PubMed: 21078816]
Kujoth GC, Hiona A, Pugh TD, Someya S, Panzer K, Wohlgemuth SE, Hofer T, Seo AY, Sullivan R,
Jobling WA, et al. Mitochondrial DNA mutations, oxidative stress, and apoptosis in mammalian
aging. Science. 2005; 309:481–484. [PubMed: 16020738]
Lagouge M, Argmann C, Gerhart-Hines Z, Meziane H, Lerin C, Daussin F, Messadeq N, Milne J,
Lambert P, Elliott P, et al. Resveratrol improves mitochondrial function and protects against
metabolic disease by activating SIRT1 and PGC-1alpha. Cell. 2006; 127:1109–1122. [PubMed:
17112576]
Lamming DW, Ye L, Katajisto P, Goncalves MD, Saitoh M, Stevens DM, Davis JG, Salmon AB,
Richardson A, Ahima RS, et al. Rapamycin-induced insulin resistance is mediated by mTORC2
loss and uncoupled from longevity. Science. 2012; 335:1638–1643. [PubMed: 22461615]
Laplante M, Sabatini DM. mTOR signaling in growth control and disease. Cell. 2012; 149:274–293.
[PubMed: 22500797]
Larson K, Yan SJ, Tsurumi A, Liu J, Zhou J, Gaur K, Guo D, Eickbush TH, Li WX. Heterochromatin
formation promotes longevity and represses ribosomal RNA synthesis. PLoS Genet. 2012;
8:e1002473. [PubMed: 22291607]
Laurie CC, Laurie CA, Rice K, Doheny KF, Zelnick LR, McHugh CP, Ling H, Hetrick KN, Pugh EW,
Amos C, et al. Detectable clonal mosaicism from birth to old age and its relationship to cancer.
Nat Genet. 2012; 44:642–650. [PubMed: 22561516]
Lavasani M, Robinson AR, Lu A, Song M, Feduska JM, Ahani B, Tilstra JS, Feldman CH, Robbins
PD, Niedernhofer LJ, et al. Muscle-derived stem/progenitor cell dysfunction limits healthspan
and lifespan in a murine progeria model. Nat Commun. 2012; 3:608. [PubMed: 22215083]
Lee BH, Lee MJ, Park S, Oh DC, Elsasser S, Chen PC, Gartner C, Dimova N, Hanna J, Gygi SP, et al.
Enhancement of proteasome activity by a small-molecule inhibitor of USP14. Nature. 2010;
467:179–184. [PubMed: 20829789]
Lee IH, Cao L, Mostoslavsky R, Lombard DB, Liu J, Bruns NE, Tsokos M, Alt FW, Finkel T. A role
for the NAD-dependent deacetylase Sirt1 in the regulation of autophagy. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S
A. 2008; 105:3374–3379. [PubMed: 18296641]
Lee JS, Ward WO, Ren H, Vallanat B, Darlington GJ, Han ES, Laguna JC, DeFord JH,
Papaconstantinou J, Selman C, et al. Meta-analysis of gene expression in the mouse liver reveals
biomarkers associated with inflammation increased early during aging. Mech Ageing Dev. 2012;
133:467–478. [PubMed: 22704917]
Lefebvre JS, Maue AC, Eaton SM, Lanthier PA, Tighe M, Haynes L. The aged microenvironment
contributes to the age-related functional defects of CD4 T cells in mice. Aging Cell. 2012;
11:732–740. [PubMed: 22607653]
Linnane AW, Marzuki S, Ozawa T, Tanaka M. Mitochondrial DNA mutations as an important
contributor to ageing and degenerative diseases. Lancet. 1989; 1:642–645. [PubMed: 2564461]
Liu B, Wang J, Chan KM, Tjia WM, Deng W, Guan X, Huang JD, Li KM, Chau PY, Chen DJ, et al.
Genomic instability in laminopathy-based premature aging. Nat Med. 2005; 11:780–785.
[PubMed: 15980864]
Liu G, Rogers J, Murphy CT, Rongo C. EGF signalling activates the ubiquitin proteasome system to
modulate C. elegans lifespan. EMBO J. 2011a; 30:2990–3003. [PubMed: 21673654]
Liu GH, Suzuki K, Qu J, Sancho-Martinez I, Yi F, Li M, Kumar S, Nivet E, Kim J, Soligalla RD, et al.
Targeted gene correction of laminopathy-associated LMNA mutations in patient-specific iPSCs.
Cell Stem Cell. 2011b; 8:688–694. [PubMed: 21596650]

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 November 21.

López-Otín et al.

Page 29

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Liu N, Landreh M, Cao K, Abe M, Hendriks GJ, Kennerdell JR, Zhu Y, Wang LS, Bonini NM. The
microRNA miR-34 modulates ageing and neurodegeneration in Drosophila. Nature. 2012;
482:519–523. [PubMed: 22343898]
Loffredo FS, Steinhauser ML, Jay SM, Gannon J, Pancoast JR, Yalamanchi P, Sinha M, Dall’Osso C,
Khong D, Shadrach JL, et al. Growth differentiation factor 11 is a circulating factor that reverses
age-related cardiac hypertrophy. Cell. 2013; 153:828–839. [PubMed: 23663781]
Lombard DB, Alt FW, Cheng HL, Bunkenborg J, Streeper RS, Mostoslavsky R, Kim J, Yancopoulos
G, Valenzuela D, Murphy A, et al. Mammalian Sir2 homolog SIRT3 regulates global
mitochondrial lysine acetylation. Mol Cell Biol. 2007; 27:8807–8814. [PubMed: 17923681]
Lord CJ, Ashworth A. The DNA damage response and cancer therapy. Nature. 2012; 481:287–294.
[PubMed: 22258607]
Maegawa S, Hinkal G, Kim HS, Shen L, Zhang L, Zhang J, Zhang N, Liang S, Donehower LA, Issa
JP. Widespread and tissue specific age-related DNA methylation changes in mice. Genome Res.
2010; 20:332–340. [PubMed: 20107151]
Mair W, Morantte I, Rodrigues AP, Manning G, Montminy M, Shaw RJ, Dillin A. Lifespan extension
induced by AMPK and calcineurin is mediated by CRTC-1 and CREB. Nature. 2011; 470:404–
408. [PubMed: 21331044]
Marino G, Ugalde AP, Fernandez AF, Osorio FG, Fueyo A, Freije JM, Lopez-Otin C. Insulin-like
growth factor 1 treatment extends longevity in a mouse model of human premature aging by
restoring somatotroph axis function. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010; 107:16268–16273.
[PubMed: 20805469]
Martin GM. The biology of aging: 1985-2010 and beyond. FASEB J. 2011; 25:3756–3762. [PubMed:
22046003]
Martinez P, Blasco MA. Role of shelterin in cancer and aging. Aging Cell. 2010; 9:653–666.
[PubMed: 20569239]
Matheu A, Maraver A, Collado M, Garcia-Cao I, Canamero M, Borras C, Flores JM, Klatt P, Vina J,
Serrano M. Anti-aging activity of the Ink4/Arf locus. Aging Cell. 2009; 8:152–161. [PubMed:
19239418]
Matheu A, Maraver A, Klatt P, Flores I, Garcia-Cao I, Borras C, Flores JM, Vina J, Blasco MA,
Serrano M. Delayed ageing through damage protection by the Arf/p53 pathway. Nature. 2007;
448:375–379. [PubMed: 17637672]
Matsumoto M, Kurihara S, Kibe R, Ashida H, Benno Y. Longevity in mice is promoted by probioticinduced suppression of colonic senescence dependent on upregulation of gut bacterial polyamine
production. PLoS ONE. 2011; 6:e23652. [PubMed: 21858192]
Mattison JA, Roth GS, Beasley TM, Tilmont EM, Handy AM, Herbert RL, Longo DL, Allison DB,
Young JE, Bryant M, et al. Impact of caloric restriction on health and survival in rhesus monkeys
from the NIA study. Nature. 2012; 489:318–321. [PubMed: 22932268]
Mesquita A, Weinberger M, Silva A, Sampaio-Marques B, Almeida B, Leao C, Costa V, Rodrigues F,
Burhans WC, Ludovico P. Caloric restriction or catalase inactivation extends yeast chronological
lifespan by inducing H2O2 and superoxide dismutase activity. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010;
107:15123–15128. [PubMed: 20696905]
Miller RA. Genes against aging. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci. 2012; 67:495–502. [PubMed:
22459617]
Min JN, Whaley RA, Sharpless NE, Lockyer P, Portbury AL, Patterson C. CHIP deficiency decreases
longevity, with accelerated aging phenotypes accompanied by altered protein quality control.
Mol Cell Biol. 2008; 28:4018–4025. [PubMed: 18411298]
Minor RK, Baur JA, Gomes AP, Ward TM, Csiszar A, Mercken EM, Abdelmohsen K, Shin YK,
Canto C, Scheibye-Knudsen M, et al. SRT1720 improves survival and healthspan of obese mice.
Sci Rep. 2011; 1:70. [PubMed: 22355589]
Mizushima N, Levine B, Cuervo AM, Klionsky DJ. Autophagy fights disease through cellular selfdigestion. Nature. 2008; 451:1069–1075. [PubMed: 18305538]
Molofsky AV, Slutsky SG, Joseph NM, He S, Pardal R, Krishnamurthy J, Sharpless NE, Morrison SJ.
Increasing p16INK4a expression decreases forebrain progenitors and neurogenesis during
ageing. Nature. 2006; 443:448–452. [PubMed: 16957738]

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 November 21.

López-Otín et al.

Page 30

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Mookerjee SA, Divakaruni AS, Jastroch M, Brand MD. Mitochondrial uncoupling and lifespan. Mech
Ageing Dev. 2010; 131:463–472. [PubMed: 20363244]
Morrow G, Samson M, Michaud S, Tanguay RM. Overexpression of the small mitochondrial Hsp22
extends Drosophila life span and increases resistance to oxidative stress. FASEB J. 2004;
18:598–599. [PubMed: 14734639]
Moskalev AA, Shaposhnikov MV, Plyusnina EN, Zhavoronkov A, Budovsky A, Yanai H, Fraifeld
VE. The role of DNA damage and repair in aging through the prism of Koch-like criteria. Ageing
Res Rev. 2012
Mostoslavsky R, Chua KF, Lombard DB, Pang WW, Fischer MR, Gellon L, Liu P, Mostoslavsky G,
Franco S, Murphy MM, et al. Genomic instability and aging-like phenotype in the absence of
mammalian SIRT6. Cell. 2006; 124:315–329. [PubMed: 16439206]
Murga M, Bunting S, Montana MF, Soria R, Mulero F, Canamero M, Lee Y, McKinnon PJ,
Nussenzweig A, Fernandez-Capetillo O. A mouse model of ATR-Seckel shows embryonic
replicative stress and accelerated aging. Nat Genet. 2009; 41:891–898. [PubMed: 19620979]
Nelson G, Wordsworth J, Wang C, Jurk D, Lawless C, Martin-Ruiz C, von Zglinicki T. A senescent
cell bystander effect: senescence-induced senescence. Aging Cell. 2012; 11:345–349. [PubMed:
22321662]
Nicholas A, de Magalhaes JP, Kraytsberg Y, Richfield EK, Levanon EY, Khrapko K. Age-related
gene-specific changes of A-to-I mRNA editing in the human brain. Mech Ageing Dev. 2010;
131:445–447. [PubMed: 20538013]
Nogueiras R, Habegger KM, Chaudhary N, Finan B, Banks AS, Dietrich MO, Horvath TL, Sinclair
DA, Pfluger PT, Tschop MH. Sirtuin 1 and sirtuin 3: physiological modulators of metabolism.
Physiol Rev. 2012; 92:1479–1514. [PubMed: 22811431]
O’Rourke EJ, Kuballa P, Xavier R, Ruvkun G. omega-6 Polyunsaturated fatty acids extend life span
through the activation of autophagy. Genes Dev. 2013; 27:429–440. [PubMed: 23392608]
Oberdoerffer P, Michan S, McVay M, Mostoslavsky R, Vann J, Park SK, Hartlerode A, Stegmuller J,
Hafner A, Loerch P, et al. SIRT1 redistribution on chromatin promotes genomic stability but
alters gene expression during aging. Cell. 2008; 135:907–918. [PubMed: 19041753]
Oberdoerffer P, Sinclair DA. The role of nuclear architecture in genomic instability and ageing. Nat
Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2007; 8:692–702. [PubMed: 17700626]
Olovnikov AM. Telomeres, telomerase, and aging: origin of the theory. Exp Gerontol. 1996; 31:443–
448. [PubMed: 9415101]
Onken B, Driscoll M. Metformin induces a dietary restriction-like state and the oxidative stress
response to extend C. elegans Healthspan via AMPK, LKB1, and SKN-1. PLoS ONE. 2010;
5:e8758. [PubMed: 20090912]
Ortega-Molina A, Efeyan A, Lopez-Guadamillas E, Munoz-Martin M, Gomez-Lopez G, Canamero M,
Mulero F, Pastor J, Martinez S, Romanos E, et al. Pten positively regulates brown adipose
function, energy expenditure, and longevity. Cell Metab. 2012; 15:382–394. [PubMed:
22405073]
Osorio FG, Barcena C, Soria-Valles C, Ramsay AJ, de Carlos F, Cobo J, Fueyo A, Freije JM, LopezOtin C. Nuclear lamina defects cause ATM-dependent NF-kappaB activation and link
accelerated aging to a systemic inflammatory response. Genes Dev. 2012; 26:2311–2324.
[PubMed: 23019125]
Osorio FG, Navarro CL, Cadinanos J, Lopez-Mejia IC, Quiros PM, Bartoli C, Rivera J, Tazi J,
Guzman G, Varela I, et al. Splicing-directed therapy in a new mouse model of human accelerated
aging. Sci Transl Med. 2011; 3:106ra107.
Osorio FG, Varela I, Lara E, Puente XS, Espada J, Santoro R, Freije JM, Fraga MF, Lopez-Otin C.
Nuclear envelope alterations generate an aging-like epigenetic pattern in mice deficient in
Zmpste24 metalloprotease. Aging Cell. 2010; 9:947–957. [PubMed: 20961378]
Ottaviani E, Ventura N, Mandrioli M, Candela M, Franchini A, Franceschi C. Gut microbiota as a
candidate for lifespan extension: an ecological/evolutionary perspective targeted on living
organisms as metaorganisms. Biogerontology. 2011; 12:599–609. [PubMed: 21814818]
Palm W, de Lange T. How shelterin protects mammalian telomeres. Annu Rev Genet. 2008; 42:301–
334. [PubMed: 18680434]

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 November 21.

López-Otín et al.

Page 31

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Park CB, Larsson NG. Mitochondrial DNA mutations in disease and aging. J Cell Biol. 2011;
193:809–818. [PubMed: 21606204]
Payne BA, Wilson IJ, Hateley CA, Horvath R, Santibanez-Koref M, Samuels DC, Price DA, Chinnery
PF. Mitochondrial aging is accelerated by anti-retroviral therapy through the clonal expansion of
mtDNA mutations. Nat Genet. 2011; 43:806–810. [PubMed: 21706004]
Pearson KJ, Baur JA, Lewis KN, Peshkin L, Price NL, Labinskyy N, Swindell WR, Kamara D, Minor
RK, Perez E, et al. Resveratrol delays age-related deterioration and mimics transcriptional
aspects of dietary restriction without extending life span. Cell Metab. 2008; 8:157–168.
[PubMed: 18599363]
Pegoraro G, Kubben N, Wickert U, Gohler H, Hoffmann K, Misteli T. Ageing-related chromatin
defects through loss of the NURD complex. Nat Cell Biol. 2009; 11:1261–1267. [PubMed:
19734887]
Peleg S, Sananbenesi F, Zovoilis A, Burkhardt S, Bahari-Javan S, Agis-Balboa RC, Cota P, Wittnam
JL, Gogol-Doering A, Opitz L, et al. Altered histone acetylation is associated with age-dependent
memory impairment in mice. Science. 2010; 328:753–756. [PubMed: 20448184]
Perez VI, Van Remmen H, Bokov A, Epstein CJ, Vijg J, Richardson A. The overexpression of major
antioxidant enzymes does not extend the lifespan of mice. Aging Cell. 2009; 8:73–75. [PubMed:
19077044]
Piper MD, Partridge L, Raubenheimer D, Simpson SJ. Dietary restriction and aging: a unifying
perspective. Cell Metab. 2011; 14:154–160. [PubMed: 21803286]
Pollina EA, Brunet A. Epigenetic regulation of aging stem cells. Oncogene. 2011; 30:3105–3126.
[PubMed: 21441951]
Pont AR, Sadri N, Hsiao SJ, Smith S, Schneider RJ. mRNA decay factor AUF1 maintains normal
aging, telomere maintenance, and suppression of senescence by activation of telomerase
transcription. Mol Cell. 2012; 47:5–15. [PubMed: 22633954]
Powers ET, Morimoto RI, Dillin A, Kelly JW, Balch WE. Biological and chemical approaches to
diseases of proteostasis deficiency. Annu Rev Biochem. 2009; 78:959–991. [PubMed: 19298183]
Price NL, Gomes AP, Ling AJ, Duarte FV, Martin-Montalvo A, North BJ, Agarwal B, Ye L,
Ramadori G, Teodoro JS, et al. SIRT1 is required for AMPK activation and the beneficial effects
of resveratrol on mitochondrial function. Cell Metab. 2012; 15:675–690. [PubMed: 22560220]
Qiu X, Brown K, Hirschey MD, Verdin E, Chen D. Calorie restriction reduces oxidative stress by
SIRT3-mediated SOD2 activation. Cell Metab. 2010; 12:662–667. [PubMed: 21109198]
Raffaello A, Rizzuto R. Mitochondrial longevity pathways. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2011; 1813:260–
268. [PubMed: 20950653]
Ragnauth CD, Warren DT, Liu Y, McNair R, Tajsic T, Figg N, Shroff R, Skepper J, Shanahan CM.
Prelamin A acts to accelerate smooth muscle cell senescence and is a novel biomarker of human
vascular aging. Circulation. 2010; 121:2200–2210. [PubMed: 20458013]
Rando TA, Chang HY. Aging, rejuvenation, and epigenetic reprogramming: resetting the aging clock.
Cell. 2012; 148:46–57. [PubMed: 22265401]
Renner O, Carnero A. Mouse models to decipher the PI3K signaling network in human cancer. Curr
Mol Med. 2009; 9:612–625. [PubMed: 19601810]
Rera M, Bahadorani S, Cho J, Koehler CL, Ulgherait M, Hur JH, Ansari WS, Lo T Jr. Jones DL,
Walker DW. Modulation of longevity and tissue homeostasis by the Drosophila PGC-1 homolog.
Cell Metab. 2011; 14:623–634. [PubMed: 22055505]
Ressler S, Bartkova J, Niederegger H, Bartek J, Scharffetter-Kochanek K, Jansen-Durr P, Wlaschek
M. p16INK4A is a robust in vivo biomarker of cellular aging in human skin. Aging Cell. 2006;
5:379–389. [PubMed: 16911562]
Ristow M, Schmeisser S. Extending life span by increasing oxidative stress. Free Radic Biol Med.
2011; 51:327–336. [PubMed: 21619928]
Rodgers JT, Lerin C, Haas W, Gygi SP, Spiegelman BM, Puigserver P. Nutrient control of glucose
homeostasis through a complex of PGC-1alpha and SIRT1. Nature. 2005; 434:113–118.
[PubMed: 15744310]
Rodier F, Campisi J. Four faces of cellular senescence. J Cell Biol. 2011; 192:547–556. [PubMed:
21321098]
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 November 21.

López-Otín et al.

Page 32

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Rogina B, Helfand SL. Sir2 mediates longevity in the fly through a pathway related to calorie
restriction. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2004; 101:15998–16003. [PubMed: 15520384]
Rossi DJ, Bryder D, Seita J, Nussenzweig A, Hoeijmakers J, Weissman IL. Deficiencies in DNA
damage repair limit the function of haematopoietic stem cells with age. Nature. 2007; 447:725–
729. [PubMed: 17554309]
Rossi DJ, Jamieson CH, Weissman IL. Stems cells and the pathways to aging and cancer. Cell. 2008;
132:681–696. [PubMed: 18295583]
Rothgiesser KM, Erener S, Waibel S, Luscher B, Hottiger MO. SIRT2 regulates NF-kappaB
dependent gene expression through deacetylation of p65 Lys310. J Cell Sci. 2010; 123:4251–
4258. [PubMed: 21081649]
Rothwell PM, Fowkes FG, Belch JF, Ogawa H, Warlow CP, Meade TW. Effect of daily aspirin on
long-term risk of death due to cancer: analysis of individual patient data from randomised trials.
Lancet. 2011; 377:31–41. [PubMed: 21144578]
Rubinsztein DC, Marino G, Kroemer G. Autophagy and aging. Cell. 2011; 146:682–695. [PubMed:
21884931]
Rudolph KL, Chang S, Lee HW, Blasco M, Gottlieb GJ, Greider C, DePinho RA. Longevity, stress
response, and cancer in aging telomerase-deficient mice. Cell. 1999; 96:701–712. [PubMed:
10089885]
Russell SJ, Kahn CR. Endocrine regulation of ageing. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2007; 8:681–691.
[PubMed: 17684529]
Ruzankina Y, Schoppy DW, Asare A, Clark CE, Vonderheide RH, Brown EJ. Tissue regenerative
delays and synthetic lethality in adult mice after combined deletion of Atr and Trp53. Nat Genet.
2009; 41:1144–1149. [PubMed: 19718024]
Safdar A, Bourgeois JM, Ogborn DI, Little JP, Hettinga BP, Akhtar M, Thompson JE, Melov S,
Mocellin NJ, Kujoth GC, et al. Endurance exercise rescues progeroid aging and induces systemic
mitochondrial rejuvenation in mtDNA mutator mice. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011;
108:4135–4140. [PubMed: 21368114]
Sahin E, Depinho RA. Axis of ageing: telomeres, p53 and mitochondria. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2012;
13:397–404. [PubMed: 22588366]
Salminen A, Kaarniranta K, Kauppinen A. Inflammaging: disturbed interplay between autophagy and
inflammasomes. Aging. 2012; 4:166–175. [PubMed: 22411934]
Sanchez-Roman I, Gomez A, Perez I, Sanchez C, Suarez H, Naudi A, Jove M, Lopez-Torres M,
Pamplona R, Barja G. Effects of aging and methionine restriction applied at old age on ROS
generation and oxidative damage in rat liver mitochondria. Biogerontology. 2012; 13:399–411.
[PubMed: 22580750]
Sarnak MJ, Levey AS, Schoolwerth AC, Coresh J, Culleton B, Hamm LL, McCullough PA, Kasiske
BL, Kelepouris E, Klag MJ, et al. Kidney disease as a risk factor for development of
cardiovascular disease: a statement from the American Heart Association Councils on Kidney in
Cardiovascular Disease, High Blood Pressure Research, Clinical Cardiology, and Epidemiology
and Prevention. Circulation. 2003; 108:2154–2169. [PubMed: 14581387]
Savage SA, Giri N, Baerlocher GM, Orr N, Lansdorp PM, Alter BP. TINF2, a component of the
shelterin telomere protection complex, is mutated in dyskeratosis congenita. Am J Hum Genet.
2008; 82:501–509. [PubMed: 18252230]
Scaffidi P, Misteli T. Lamin A-dependent nuclear defects in human aging. Science. 2006; 312:1059–
1063. [PubMed: 16645051]
Scaffidi P, Misteli T. Lamin A-dependent misregulation of adult stem cells associated with accelerated
ageing. Nat Cell Biol. 2008; 10:452–459. [PubMed: 18311132]
Schotta G, Lachner M, Sarma K, Ebert A, Sengupta R, Reuter G, Reinberg D, Jenuwein T. A silencing
pathway to induce H3-K9 and H4-K20 trimethylation at constitutive heterochromatin. Genes
Dev. 2004; 18:1251–1262. [PubMed: 15145825]
Schumacher B, van der Pluijm I, Moorhouse MJ, Kosteas T, Robinson AR, Suh Y, Breit TM, van
Steeg H, Niedernhofer LJ, van Ijcken W, et al. Delayed and accelerated aging share common
longevity assurance mechanisms. PLoS Genet. 2008; 4:e1000161. [PubMed: 18704162]

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 November 21.

López-Otín et al.

Page 33

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Sebastian C, Satterstrom FK, Haigis MC, Mostoslavsky R. From sirtuin biology to human diseases: an
update. J Biol Chem. 2012; 287:42444–42452. [PubMed: 23086954]
Sebastiani P, Riva A, Montano M, Pham P, Torkamani A, Scherba E, Benson G, Milton JN, Baldwin
CT, Andersen S, et al. Whole genome sequences of a male and female supercentenarian, ages
greater than 114 years. Front Genet. 2011; 2:90. [PubMed: 22303384]
Selman C, Tullet JM, Wieser D, Irvine E, Lingard SJ, Choudhury AI, Claret M, Al-Qassab H,
Carmignac D, Ramadani F, et al. Ribosomal protein S6 kinase 1 signaling regulates mammalian
life span. Science. 2009; 326:140–144. [PubMed: 19797661]
Sena LA, Chandel NS. Physiological roles of mitochondrial reactive oxygen species. Mol Cell. 2012;
48:158–167. [PubMed: 23102266]
Senovilla L, Vitale I, Martins I, Tailler M, Pailleret C, Michaud M, Galluzzi L, Adjemian S, Kepp O,
Niso-Santano M, et al. An immunosurveillance mechanism controls cancer cell ploidy. Science.
2012; 337:1678–1684. [PubMed: 23019653]
Serrano M, Lin AW, McCurrach ME, Beach D, Lowe SW. Oncogenic ras provokes premature cell
senescence associated with accumulation of p53 and p16INK4a. Cell. 1997; 88:593–602.
[PubMed: 9054499]
Sharpless NE, DePinho RA. How stem cells age and why this makes us grow old. Nat Rev Mol Cell
Biol. 2007; 8:703–713. [PubMed: 17717515]
Shaw AC, Joshi S, Greenwood H, Panda A, Lord JM. Aging of the innate immune system. Curr Opin
Immunol. 2010; 22:507–513. [PubMed: 20667703]
Shen Y, Wollam J, Magner D, Karalay O, Antebi A. A steroid receptor-microRNA switch regulates
life span in response to signals from the gonad. Science. 2012; 338:1472–1476. [PubMed:
23239738]
Shimi T, Butin-Israeli V, Adam SA, Hamanaka RB, Goldman AE, Lucas CA, Shumaker DK, Kosak
ST, Chandel NS, Goldman RD. The role of nuclear lamin B1 in cell proliferation and senescence.
Genes Dev. 2011; 25:2579–2593. [PubMed: 22155925]
Shumaker DK, Dechat T, Kohlmaier A, Adam SA, Bozovsky MR, Erdos MR, Eriksson M, Goldman
AE, Khuon S, Collins FS, et al. Mutant nuclear lamin A leads to progressive alterations of
epigenetic control in premature aging. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2006; 103:8703–8708.
[PubMed: 16738054]
Siebold AP, Banerjee R, Tie F, Kiss DL, Moskowitz J, Harte PJ. Polycomb Repressive Complex 2 and
Trithorax modulate Drosophila longevity and stress resistance. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010;
107:169–174. [PubMed: 20018689]
Slack C, Giannakou ME, Foley A, Goss M, Partridge L. dFOXO-independent effects of reduced
insulin-like signaling in Drosophila. Aging Cell. 2011; 10:735–748. [PubMed: 21443682]
Smith-Vikos T, Slack FJ. MicroRNAs and their roles in aging. J Cell Sci. 2012; 125:7–17. [PubMed:
22294612]
Soda K, Dobashi Y, Kano Y, Tsujinaka S, Konishi F. Polyamine-rich food decreases age-associated
pathology and mortality in aged mice. Exp Gerontol. 2009; 44:727–732. [PubMed: 19735716]
Someya S, Yu W, Hallows WC, Xu J, Vann JM, Leeuwenburgh C, Tanokura M, Denu JM, Prolla TA.
Sirt3 mediates reduction of oxidative damage and prevention of age-related hearing loss under
caloric restriction. Cell. 2010; 143:802–812. [PubMed: 21094524]
Strong R, Miller RA, Astle CM, Baur JA, de Cabo R, Fernandez E, Guo W, Javors M, Kirkland JL,
Nelson JF, et al. Evaluation of resveratrol, green tea extract, curcumin, oxaloacetic Acid, and
medium-chain triglyceride oil on life span of genetically heterogeneous mice. J Gerontol A Biol
Sci Med Sci. 2012; 68:6–16. [PubMed: 22451473]
Strong R, Miller RA, Astle CM, Floyd RA, Flurkey K, Hensley KL, Javors MA, Leeuwenburgh C,
Nelson JF, Ongini E, et al. Nordihydroguaiaretic acid and aspirin increase lifespan of genetically
heterogeneous male mice. Aging Cell. 2008; 7:641–650. [PubMed: 18631321]
Swindell WR, Masternak MM, Kopchick JJ, Conover CA, Bartke A, Miller RA. Endocrine regulation
of heat shock protein mRNA levels in long-lived dwarf mice. Mech Ageing Dev. 2009; 130:393–
400. [PubMed: 19428459]
Tabas I. Macrophage death and defective inflammation resolution in atherosclerosis. Nat Rev
Immunol. 2010; 10:36–46. [PubMed: 19960040]

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 November 21.

López-Otín et al.

Page 34

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Talens RP, Christensen K, Putter H, Willemsen G, Christiansen L, Kremer D, Suchiman HE,
Slagboom PE, Boomsma DI, Heijmans BT. Epigenetic variation during the adult lifespan: crosssectional and longitudinal data on monozygotic twin pairs. Aging Cell. 2012; 11:694–703.
[PubMed: 22621408]
Tao R, Coleman MC, Pennington JD, Ozden O, Park SH, Jiang H, Kim HS, Flynn CR, Hill S, Hayes
McDonald W, et al. Sirt3-mediated deacetylation of evolutionarily conserved lysine 122
regulates MnSOD activity in response to stress. Mol Cell. 2010; 40:893–904. [PubMed:
21172655]
Tilstra JS, Robinson AR, Wang J, Gregg SQ, Clauson CL, Reay DP, Nasto LA, St Croix CM, Usas A,
Vo N, et al. NF-kappaB inhibition delays DNA damage-induced senescence and aging in mice. J
Clin Invest. 2012; 122:2601–2612. [PubMed: 22706308]
Tissenbaum HA, Guarente L. Increased dosage of a sir-2 gene extends lifespan in Caenorhabditis
elegans. Nature. 2001; 410:227–230. [PubMed: 11242085]
Toledano H, D’Alterio C, Czech B, Levine E, Jones DL. The let-7-Imp axis regulates ageing of the
Drosophila testis stem-cell niche. Nature. 2012; 485:605–610. [PubMed: 22660319]
Tomaru U, Takahashi S, Ishizu A, Miyatake Y, Gohda A, Suzuki S, Ono A, Ohara J, Baba T, Murata
S, et al. Decreased proteasomal activity causes age-related phenotypes and promotes the
development of metabolic abnormalities. Am J Pathol. 2012; 180:963–972. [PubMed: 22210478]
Tomas-Loba A, Flores I, Fernandez-Marcos PJ, Cayuela ML, Maraver A, Tejera A, Borras C, Matheu
A, Klatt P, Flores JM, et al. Telomerase reverse transcriptase delays aging in cancer-resistant
mice. Cell. 2008; 135:609–622. [PubMed: 19013273]
Trifunovic A, Wredenberg A, Falkenberg M, Spelbrink JN, Rovio AT, Bruder CE, Bohlooly YM,
Gidlof S, Oldfors A, Wibom R, et al. Premature ageing in mice expressing defective
mitochondrial DNA polymerase. Nature. 2004; 429:417–423. [PubMed: 15164064]
Tsurumi A, Li WX. Global heterochromatin loss: a unifying theory of aging? Epigenetics. 2012;
7:680–688. [PubMed: 22647267]
Ugalde AP, Espanol Y, Lopez-Otin C. Micromanaging aging with miRNAs: new messages from the
nuclear envelope. Nucleus. 2011; 2:549–555. [PubMed: 22064465]
van Ham TJ, Holmberg MA, van der Goot AT, Teuling E, Garcia-Arencibia M, Kim HE, Du D,
Thijssen KL, Wiersma M, Burggraaff R, et al. Identification of MOAG-4/SERF as a regulator of
age-related proteotoxicity. Cell. 2010; 142:601–612. [PubMed: 20723760]
Van Raamsdonk JM, Hekimi S. Deletion of the mitochondrial superoxide dismutase sod-2 extends
lifespan in Caenorhabditis elegans. PLoS Genet. 2009; 5:e1000361. [PubMed: 19197346]
Van Remmen H, Ikeno Y, Hamilton M, Pahlavani M, Wolf N, Thorpe SR, Alderson NL, Baynes JW,
Epstein CJ, Huang TT, et al. Life-long reduction in MnSOD activity results in increased DNA
damage and higher incidence of cancer but does not accelerate aging. Physiol Genomics. 2003;
16:29–37. [PubMed: 14679299]
Varela I, Cadinanos J, Pendas AM, Gutierrez-Fernandez A, Folgueras AR, Sanchez LM, Zhou Z,
Rodriguez FJ, Stewart CL, Vega JA, et al. Accelerated ageing in mice deficient in Zmpste24
protease is linked to p53 signalling activation. Nature. 2005; 437:564–568. [PubMed: 16079796]
Varela I, Pereira S, Ugalde AP, Navarro CL, Suarez MF, Cau P, Cadinanos J, Osorio FG, Foray N,
Cobo J, et al. Combined treatment with statins and aminobisphosphonates extends longevity in a
mouse model of human premature aging. Nat Med. 2008; 14:767–772. [PubMed: 18587406]
Vermulst M, Wanagat J, Kujoth GC, Bielas JH, Rabinovitch PS, Prolla TA, Loeb LA. DNA deletions
and clonal mutations drive premature aging in mitochondrial mutator mice. Nat Genet. 2008;
40:392–394. [PubMed: 18311139]
Vijg J, Campisi J. Puzzles, promises and a cure for ageing. Nature. 2008; 454:1065–1071. [PubMed:
18756247]
Vilchez D, Morantte I, Liu Z, Douglas PM, Merkwirth C, Rodrigues AP, Manning G, Dillin A. RPN-6
determines C. elegans longevity under proteotoxic stress conditions. Nature. 2012; 489:263–268.
[PubMed: 22922647]
Villeda SA, Luo J, Mosher KI, Zou B, Britschgi M, Bieri G, Stan TM, Fainberg N, Ding Z, Eggel A, et
al. The ageing systemic milieu negatively regulates neurogenesis and cognitive function. Nature.
2011; 477:90–94. [PubMed: 21886162]

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 November 21.

López-Otín et al.

Page 35

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Viswanathan M, Guarente L. Regulation of Caenorhabditis elegans lifespan by sir-2.1 transgenes.
Nature. 2011; 477:E1–2. [PubMed: 21938026]
Walker GA, Lithgow GJ. Lifespan extension in C. elegans by a molecular chaperone dependent upon
insulin-like signals. Aging Cell. 2003; 2:131–139. [PubMed: 12882326]
Walne AJ, Vulliamy T, Beswick R, Kirwan M, Dokal I. TINF2 mutations result in very short
telomeres: analysis of a large cohort of patients with dyskeratosis congenita and related bone
marrow failure syndromes. Blood. 2008; 112:3594–3600. [PubMed: 18669893]
Wallace DC. A mitochondrial paradigm of metabolic and degenerative diseases, aging, and cancer: a
dawn for evolutionary medicine. Annu Rev Genet. 2005; 39:359–407. [PubMed: 16285865]
Wang C, Jurk D, Maddick M, Nelson G, Martin-Ruiz C, von Zglinicki T. DNA damage response and
cellular senescence in tissues of aging mice. Aging Cell. 2009; 8:311–323. [PubMed: 19627270]
Wang K, Klionsky DJ. Mitochondria removal by autophagy. Autophagy. 2011; 7:297–300. [PubMed:
21252623]
Wang RH, Sengupta K, Li C, Kim HS, Cao L, Xiao C, Kim S, Xu X, Zheng Y, Chilton B, et al.
Impaired DNA damage response, genome instability, and tumorigenesis in SIRT1 mutant mice.
Cancer Cell. 2008; 14:312–323. [PubMed: 18835033]
Westerheide SD, Anckar J, Stevens SM Jr. Sistonen L, Morimoto RI. Stress-inducible regulation of
heat shock factor 1 by the deacetylase SIRT1. Science. 2009; 323:1063–1066. [PubMed:
19229036]
Wilkinson JE, Burmeister L, Brooks SV, Chan CC, Friedline S, Harrison DE, Hejtmancik JF, Nadon
N, Strong R, Wood LK, et al. Rapamycin slows aging in mice. Aging Cell. 2012; 11:675–682.
[PubMed: 22587563]
Worman HJ. Nuclear lamins and laminopathies. J Pathol. 2012; 226:316–325. [PubMed: 21953297]
Xie J, Zhang X, Zhang L. Negative regulation of inflammation by SIRT1. Pharmacol Res. 2012;
67:60–67. [PubMed: 23098819]
Xue W, Zender L, Miething C, Dickins RA, Hernando E, Krizhanovsky V, Cordon-Cardo C, Lowe
SW. Senescence and tumour clearance is triggered by p53 restoration in murine liver carcinomas.
Nature. 2007; 445:656–660. [PubMed: 17251933]
Yamaza H, Komatsu T, Wakita S, Kijogi C, Park S, Hayashi H, Chiba T, Mori R, Furuyama T, Mori
N, et al. FoxO1 is involved in the antineoplastic effect of calorie restriction. Aging Cell. 2010;
9:372–382. [PubMed: 20222901]
Yang SB, Tien AC, Boddupalli G, Xu AW, Jan YN, Jan LY. Rapamycin ameliorates age-dependent
obesity associated with increased mTOR signaling in hypothalamic POMC neurons. Neuron.
2012; 75:425–436. [PubMed: 22884327]
Yang SH, Meta M, Qiao X, Frost D, Bauch J, Coffinier C, Majumdar S, Bergo MO, Young SG, Fong
LG. A farnesyltransferase inhibitor improves disease phenotypes in mice with a HutchinsonGilford progeria syndrome mutation. J Clin Invest. 2006; 116:2115–2121. [PubMed: 16862216]
Yao H, Chung S, Hwang JW, Rajendrasozhan S, Sundar IK, Dean DA, McBurney MW, Guarente L,
Gu W, Ronty M, et al. SIRT1 protects against emphysema via FOXO3-mediated reduction of
premature senescence in mice. J Clin Invest. 2012; 122:2032–2045. [PubMed: 22546858]
Yilmaz OH, Katajisto P, Lamming DW, Gultekin Y, Bauer-Rowe KE, Sengupta S, Birsoy K, Dursun
A, Yilmaz VO, Selig M, et al. mTORC1 in the Paneth cell niche couples intestinal stem-cell
function to calorie intake. Nature. 2012; 486:490–495. [PubMed: 22722868]
Zhang C, Cuervo AM. Restoration of chaperone-mediated autophagy in aging liver improves cellular
maintenance and hepatic function. Nat Med. 2008; 14:959–965. [PubMed: 18690243]
Zhang G, Li J, Purkayastha S, Tang Y, Zhang H, Yin Y, Li B, Liu G, Cai D. Hypothalamic
programming of systemic ageing involving IKK-beta, NF-kappaB and GnRH. Nature. 2013;
497:211–216. [PubMed: 23636330]
Zhang Y, Ikeno Y, Qi W, Chaudhuri A, Li Y, Bokov A, Thorpe SR, Baynes JW, Epstein C,
Richardson A, et al. Mice deficient in both Mn superoxide dismutase and glutathione
peroxidase-1 have increased oxidative damage and a greater incidence of pathology but no
reduction in longevity. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci. 2009; 64:1212–1220. [PubMed:
19776219]

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 November 21.

López-Otín et al.

Page 36

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Zhang Z, Lowry SF, Guarente L, Haimovich B. Roles of SIRT1 in the acute and restorative phases
following induction of inflammation. J Biol Chem. 2010; 285:41391–41401. [PubMed:
20966076]
Zhong F, Savage SA, Shkreli M, Giri N, Jessop L, Myers T, Chen R, Alter BP, Artandi SE. Disruption
of telomerase trafficking by TCAB1 mutation causes dyskeratosis congenita. Genes Dev. 2011;
25:11–16. [PubMed: 21205863]
Zhong L, D’Urso A, Toiber D, Sebastian C, Henry RE, Vadysirisack DD, Guimaraes A, Marinelli B,
Wikstrom JD, Nir T, et al. The histone deacetylase Sirt6 regulates glucose homeostasis via
Hif1alpha. Cell. 2010; 140:280–293. [PubMed: 20141841]

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 November 21.

López-Otín et al.

Page 37

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Figure 1. The Hallmarks of Aging

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

The scheme enumerates the nine hallmarks described in this review: genomic instability,
telomere attrition, epigenetic alterations, loss of proteostasis, deregulated nutrient-sensing,
mitochondrial dysfunction, cellular senescence, stem cell exhaustion, and altered
intercellular communication.

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 November 21.

López-Otín et al.

Page 38

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 November 21.

López-Otín et al.

Page 39

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Figure 2. Genomic and Epigenomic Alterations

A) Genomic instability and telomere attrition. Endogenous or exogenous agents can
stimulate a variety of DNA lesions that are schematically represented on one single
chromosome. Such lesions can by repaired by a variety of mechanisms. Excessive DNA
damage or insufficient DNA repair favors the aging process. Note that both nuclear DNA
and mitochondrial DNA (not represented here) are subjected to age-associated genomic
alterations. BER, base excision repair; HR, homologous recombination; NER, nucleotide
excision repair; NHEJ, non-homologous end joining; MMR, mismatch repair; ROS, reactive
oxygen species; TLS, translesion synthesis; SAC, spindle assembly checkpoint.

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 November 21.

López-Otín et al.

Page 40

B) Epigenetic alterations. Alterations in the acetylation and methylation of DNA or
histones, as well as of other chromatin-associated proteins, can induce epigenetic changes
that contribute to the aging process.

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 November 21.

López-Otín et al.

Page 41

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Figure 3. Loss of Proteostasis

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Endogenous and exogenous stress causes the unfolding of proteins (or impairs proper
folding during protein synthesis). Unfolded proteins are usually refolded by heat-shock
proteins (HSP) or targeted to destruction by the ubiquitin-proteasome or lysosomal
(autophagic) pathways. The autophagic pathways include recognition of unfolded proteins
by the chaperone Hsc70 and their subsequent import into lysosomes (chaperone-mediated
autophagy) or sequestration of damaged proteins and organelles in autophagosomes that
later fuse with lysosomes (macroautophagy). Failure to refold or degrade unfolded proteins
can lead to their accumulation and aggregation, resulting in proteotoxic effects.

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 November 21.

López-Otín et al.

Page 42

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 November 21.

López-Otín et al.

Page 43

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Figure 4. Metabolic Alterations

A) Deregulated nutrient-sensing. Overview of the somatroph axis involving growth
hormone (GH) and the insulin/insulin growth factor 1 (IGF-1) signaling pathway, and its
relationship to dietary restriction and aging. Molecules that favor aging are shown in orange,
while molecules with anti-aging properties are shown in light green.
B) Mitochondrial dysfunction. Mitochondrial function becomes perturbed by agingassociated mtDNA mutations, reduced mitochondriogenesis, destabilization of the electron
transport chain (ETC) complexes, altered mitochondrial dynamics or defective quality
control by mitophagy. Stress signals and defective mitochondrial function generate ROS
that, below a certain threshold, induce survival signals to restore cellular homeostasis, but at
higher or continued levels can contribute to aging. Similarly, mild mitochondrial damage
can induce a hormetic response (mitohormesis) that triggers adaptive compensatory
processes.

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 November 21.

López-Otín et al.

Page 44

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 November 21.

López-Otín et al.

Page 45

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Figure 5. Cellular Senescence, Stem Cell Exhaustion and Altered Intercellular Communication

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

A) Cellular senescence. In young organisms, cellular senescence prevents the proliferation
of damaged cells, thus protecting from cancer and contributing to tissue homeostasis. In old
organisms, the pervasive damage and the deficient clearance and replenishment of senescent
cells results in their accumulation, and this has a number of deleterious effects on tissue
homeostasis that contribute to aging.
B) Stem cell exhaustion. Consequences of the exhaustion of hematopoietic stem cells
(HSCs), mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs), satellite cells and intestinal epithelial stem cells
(IESCs) are exemplified.
C) Altered intercellular communication. Examples of altered intercellular communication
associated with aging.

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 November 21.

López-Otín et al.

Page 46

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Figure 6. Functional Interconnections between the Hallmarks of Aging

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

The proposed nine hallmarks of aging are grouped into three categories. In the top, those
hallmarks considered to be the primary causes of cellular damage. In the middle, those
considered to be part of compensatory or antagonistic responses to the damage. These
responses initially mitigate the damage, but eventually, if chronic or exacerbated, they
become deleterious themselves. In the bottom, there are integrative hallmarks that are the
end result of the previous two groups of hallmarks and are ultimately responsible for the
functional decline associated with aging.

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 November 21.

López-Otín et al.

Page 47

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Figure 7. Interventions that Might Extend Human Healthspan

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

The nine hallmarks of aging are shown together with those therapeutic strategies for which
there are proof of principle in mice.

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 November 21.

