Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No. 18

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Editorial

Unleashing rapamycin in fibrosis
Alexander T. Hillel and Alexander Gelbard
Rapamycin (sirolimus, rapamine) is a macrocyclic
antibiotic produced by the bacteria streptomyces
hygroscopicus,
with
immunosuppressive
and
antiproliferative capabilities. Rapamycin binds with FKbinding protein 12 to inhibit the mechanistic (formerly
mammalian) Target of Rapamycin (mTOR) protein [1].
Our laboratory recently demonstrated antifibroblast
effects with rapamycin treatment in vitro [2]. We derived
pathologic fibroblasts from patients with laryngotracheal
stenosis (LTS) and demonstrated reduced fibroblast
proliferation, collagen expression, and cellular metabolism
with rapamycin treatment. LTS is the clinical disease of
fibrosis of the larynx and trachea and may be used as a
model of fibrosis in other organs. Over the course of this
editorial we will discuss rapamycin’s therapeutic rationale
and potential for benign diseases such as fibrosis.
Fibrosis is the terminal pathological outcome of
myriad chronic inflammatory diseases. The process
is defined by the excessive accumulation of fibrous
connective tissue components of the extracellular matrix
(ECM, i.e. collagen and fibronectin) in inflamed tissue
[3]. The excessive collagen deposition ultimately results
in organ-specific injury, which in LTS manifests as airway
obstruction and clinical dyspnea. While fibroblasts are
thought to represent the end effector cell in LTS, by the

time increased collagen deposition results in clinical
stenosis of the larynx and trachea it is too late to effectively
intervene medically, committing these patients to repeated
surgical dilation and/or excision of fibrosis with the
morbidity associated with invasive surgical procedures.
In another study by our laboratory, we demonstrated scar
fibroblasts were highly proliferative compared to normal
fibroblasts yet used the inefficient metabolic process of
aerobic glycolysis to preferentially drive hyperplasia to
form scar (unpublished). This phenomenon is similar to
the Warburg effect where cancer cells drive rapid growth
through an extremely high rate of aerobic glycolysis.
While the Warburg-like effect seen in LTS fibroblasts
in vitro is less pronounced than the Warburg effect in
cancer, identifying the cellular metabolism behind fibrosis
suggests at potential therapies directed at fibroplasia. Our
investigations into fibroblast metabolism and rapamycin’s
inhibitory effect suggests at a critical link between cellular
metabolism and unregulated fibroblast proliferation that
could elucidate rational druggable targets to mitigate LTS
and fibrosis in general.
mTOR’s regulatory role makes the protein a
critical node between metabolism and cell proliferation.
Environmental factors such as stress and energy
influence mTOR, which in turn regulates protein, lipid,

FKBP12

Rapa

mTOR
Lipid, Nucleotide,
Protein biosynthesis

Cell Cycle
Progression
Clonal Expansion

Immune Cell Activation

Inflammation

Fibroblast Hypertrophy

Fibroblast Proliferation

Figure 1: Proposed schematic of rapamycin inhibition of fibrosis. Rapamycin binds with FK-binding protein 12 to inhibit

the mechanistic Target of Rapamycin (mTOR). Proposed downstream effects of mTOR inhibition on fibroblasts include reduced lipid,
nucleotide, and protein biosynthesis which results in decreased size and cell cycle inhibition which results in decreased proliferation.
Furthermore, suppression of immune cells and their mediators attenuates inflammation and its resultant stimulatory effect on fibroblasts.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

15722

Oncotarget

and nucleotide biosynthesis, mitochondrial proliferation
and function, cell growth and development amongst
other cell functions. In fibroblasts mTOR regulates cell
kinetics and collagen and other extracellular matrix
molecule production. Inhibition of mTOR has been
explored in cancer, cardiovascular disease, autoimmunity,
and metabolic disorders. In immune cells including
T-lymphocytes and macrophages, mTOR subunit
inhibition results in reduced metabolism which in turn
impacts immune cell activation and function [4]. Based on
the results of our studies, we hypothesize that mTOR has
a significant role in abnormal fibroblast proliferation and
collagen synthesis, which should allow for modulation of
the mTOR mechanism with rapamycin or other rapalogs.
Alternatively myofibroblasts have been the focus
of extensive research in fibrosis, given their role in
secreting ECM and collagen along with their fundamental
contribution to wound contracture. Epithelialmesenchymal transition (EMT), a process whereby fully
differentiated epithelial cells undergo transition to a
mesenchymal phenotype giving rise to myofibroblasts.
EMT is increasingly recognized as a contributing
factor to tissue fibrosis following epithelial injury and
a fundamental process involved in carcinogenesis and
metastasis. Inhibition of mTOR signaling through
rapamycin has been shown to attenuate the process of
EMT. This offers additional mechanistic rationale for
mTOR inhibition as a therapeutic strategy in human
fibrosis.
Strong preclinical and human evidence also
offers support for the use of rapalogs beyond its
effects modulating the end-effectors of fibrinogenesis
(fibroblasts & myofibroblasts). In preclinical models,
immunocompromised mice exhibit decreased fibrosis
during wound repair [5]. T-cell signaling appears to be a
large contributor to fibrinogenesis across multiple organ
systems with T-cell-mediated mechanisms key regulators
of fibrotic repair. Interestingly rapalogs are utilized
clinically in the transplant setting for T-cell inhibition and
clinical immunosuppression.
Rapamycin is a Food and Drug Administration
(FDA)-approved drug that promotes long term tolerance
in organ transplant patients, and is incorporated within
coronary stents to reduce restenosis and accelerated
arteriopathy. Rapamycin and rapalogs mechanism of
action is to bind to FKBP12 to inhibit a subunit protein of
mTOR, mTORC1 [1]. Prolonged exposure of rapamycin
has been shown to reduce activity in the other subunit,
mTORC2, as well. A few studies in addition to our own
demonstrated rapamycin to mitigate aberrant wound
healing and fibrosis in other organ systems, presumed
to be through mTOR-mediated immunosuppressive
and antifibroblast effects [2, 6, 7]. Figure 1 illustrates
the proposed mechanism by which rapamycin inhibits
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

fibroblast hyperplasia and hypertrophy as well as
inflammation in LTS. The immunosuppressive and
antifibroblast effects suggest at the potential of rapamycin
treatment as adjuvant therapy for LTS. Modulating the
immune and fibroblast response should be more effective
than current medical therapies.
Outstanding questions to be addressed include the
specific signaling pathway by which rapamycin inhibits
fibroplasia, and if more specific targeting of these cellular
mechanisms would be effective in treating the disease in
the trachea as well as other organs. Future studies will
also address therapeutic delivery with sustained topical
application ideal to address organ specific fibrosis and
avoid side effects associated with systemic administration.
Specific to LTS, a rapamycin-eluting stent could assist
in suppressing the inflammatory response, fibroblast
proliferation, and collagen synthesis seen in LTS while
providing structural support of the tracheal wall.
Alexander T. Hillel: Department of Otolaryngology - Head
and Neck Surgery, Johns Hopkins University School of
Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland, USA
Correspondence: Alexander T. Hillel, email ahillel@jhmi.edu
Received: June 04, 2015
Published: June 26, 2015

REFERENCES

15723

1	

Saunders RN et al Kidney Int 2001; 59: 3-16.

2	

Namba DR et al Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 2015; 152:
881-888.

3	

Wynn TA et al Nat Med 2012; 18: 1028-1040.

4	

Powell JD et al Annu Rev Immunol 2012; 30: 39-68.

5	

Ghosh A et al Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 2011; 144: 927933.

6	

Chen G et al PLoS One 2012; 7: e33626.

7	

Yu SY et al Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 2013; 61: 223-228.

Oncotarget

