Oncotarget, Vol. 7, No. 26

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Review

Tetrandrine, a Chinese plant-derived alkaloid, is a potential
candidate for cancer chemotherapy
Ting Liu1, Xin Liu2 and Wenhua Li1
1

College of Life Sciences, Wuhan University, Wuhan, P. R. China

2

Ministry of Education Laboratory of Combinatorial Biosynthesis and Drug Discovery, College of Pharmacy, Wuhan University,
Wuhan, P. R. China
Correspondence to: Wenhua Li, email: whli@whu.edu.cn
Keywords: tetrandrine, natural product, cancer, chemotherapy
Received: October 15, 2015	

Accepted: March 10, 2016	

Published: March 24, 2016

ABSTRACT
Cancer is a disease caused by the abnormal proliferation and differentiation
of cells governed by tumorigenic factors. Chemotherapy is one of the major cancer
treatment strategies, and it functions by targeting the physiological capabilities
of cancer cells, including sustained proliferation and angiogenesis, the evasion
of programmed cell death, tissue invasion and metastasis. Remarkably, natural
products have garnered increased attention in the chemotherapy drug discovery field
because they are biologically friendly and have high therapeutic effects. Tetrandrine,
isolated from the root of Stephania tetrandra S Moore, is a traditional Chinese
clinical agent for silicosis, autoimmune disorders, inflammatory pulmonary diseases,
cardiovascular diseases and hypertension. Recently, the novel anti-tumor effects
of tetrandrine have been widely investigated. More impressive is that tetrandrine
affects multiple biological activities of cancer cells, including the inhibition of
proliferation, angiogenesis, migration, and invasion; the induction of apoptosis and
autophagy; the reversal of multidrug resistance (MDR); and the enhancement of
radiation sensitization. This review focuses on introducing the latest information
about the anti-tumor effects of tetrandrine on various cancers and its underlying
mechanism. Moreover, we discuss the nanoparticle delivery system being developed
for tetrandrine and the anti-tumor effects of other bisbenzylisoquinoline alkaloid
derivatives on cancer cells. All current evidence demonstrates that tetrandrine is a
promising candidate as a cancer chemotherapeutic.

INTRODUCTION

chemotherapy works with lower negative impact on the
entire body to inhibit tumor cells effectively, especially
to prevent cancer cells from spreading to other parts
of the body through metastasis. There are currently
approximately 90 types of chemotherapy drugs widely
used in cancer treatment. These chemotherapeutic agents
have been classified as alkylating agents, antimetabolites,
platinum compounds, antitumor antibiotics and natural
products. Historically, natural products, which are fairly
pure compounds extracted from plants, have been major
sources of therapeutic formulations for disease. Because
natural products are considered to have co-evolved with
their target sites in biological systems, the application of
natural products for the control of cancer is viewed as
better and often more biologically friendly in the field of
drug discovery than are non-natural products [2]. Natural
products have garnered increasing attention in cancer

Cancer is a disease caused by the abnormal
proliferation and differentiation of cells governed by
tumorigenic factors. There are more than 100 diverse
types and subtypes of cancer that can be found within
specific organs. Most human tumors are characterized
by six physiological capabilities that occur during tumor
development, including self-sufficiency in growth signals,
insensitivity to growth-inhibitory signals, evasion of
programmed cell death, limitless replicative potential,
sustained angiogenesis, and tissue invasion and metastasis
[1]. Cancer is the second most common cause of death
worldwide.
Chemotherapy is a major strategy for cancer
treatment. Unlike surgery and radiotherapy, which target
a particular body part to remove or kill cancer cells,
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

40800

Oncotarget

Table 1: Effects of tetrandrine treatment alone on cancer cells
Name of cell line Therapeutic effects
Cancer types
(concentration)
SAS (25 μM), HSC-3 (20 Autophagy, Apoptosis
Oral cancer
μM)
Autophagy,
PC3 (15 μM), DU145(15 Apoptosis,
Prostate cancer
Metastasis,
Invasion,
μM)
Proliferation

Mechanism

References

BeclineI/LC3-I/II, PARP, [35, 36]
Caspases
Caspases,
ROS/JNK1/2,
[37, 38, 126]
PI3K-Akt

*Lung carcinoma

A549 (30 μM)

Apoptosis, Proliferation, P21, Akt, ERK, ROS
Autophagy

[43, 44, 69]

Gastric Cancer

BGC-823 (8 μg/ml)

Apoptosis

[47]

Metastasis, Angiogenesis, p-ERK,
NF-κB,
61, 69,
Mammosphere,
Metastatic and angiogenic [29,
125,
128]
Proliferation, Autophagy related proteins, ROS

Bladder cancer

4T1(1 μM), SUM-149(1
μM), SUM-159(2 μM),
MCF-7(12 μM), MDAMB-231(12 μM)
786-O(15 μM), 769-P(15
μM)
ACHN (15 μM)
HepG2(5 μM), Hep3B(10
μM),
PLC/PRF/5(10 μM),
Huh-7(20 μM)
CT-26(10 μM), LoVo(15
μM),
HT29(15 μM), HCT116(5
μM)
5637(20 μM), T24(20
μM)

*Glioma

RT-2, U87(20 μM)

*Breast cancer
Renal cell carcinoma
* Hepatic carcinoma

Colon cancer

Mitochondria/ Caspases

Apoptosis,
Cell cycle arrest

Caspases,
p21 and p27

[27]

Apoptosis, Autophagy, Mitochondria/ Caspases, [24-26, 45, 46,
Cell cycle arrest,
ROS
70]
Apoptosis,
Invasion, Metastasis,
Cell cycle arrest

p38 MAPK, IGFBP-5,
Wnt/β-catenin,
E2F1, [23,
p53/p21,
PI3K/AKT/ 59]
GSK3β

Apoptosis

Mitochondria/ Caspases

[48]

Apoptosis, Autophagy
Caspases, eIF-2α,
Angiogenesis,
58, 60,
ADAM17/ EGFR- [49,
Proliferation, Metastasis, VEGF,
69]
PI3K/AKT, ROS
Invasion

Hemangioendothelioma EOMA(50 μM)

Apoptosis, Proliferation

Nasopharyngeal
carcinoma

CNE (30 μM)

Apoptosis

*Cervical carcinoma

HeLa(5 μM)

Autophagy

ROS

[69]

Autophagy,
Differentiation,
Proliferation

ROS/Notch1

[71]

* Acute
leukemia

melocytic NB4 (2 μM)

39-42,

ROS/Akt

[28]
[105]

* Studies involving our laboratory
chemotherapy, including harringtonine, camptothecin
and Ptx, which are all traditional natural products for
cancer treatment. The famous 2015 Nobel Prize in
Physiology or Medicine was awarded for the discovery of
Qinghaosu (artemisinin), which is extracted from the herb
Artemisia annua, is an antimalarial drug from China and
is undergoing early research and testing for the treatment
of cancer.
Tetrandrine is one type of natural product originally
extracted from Chinese herbs. Tetrandrine [(1b)-6,6’,7,12tetramethoxy-2,2’-dimethyl-berbaman] (Figure 1A),
which belongs to the bisbenzylisoquinoline alkaloid
family and was isolated from the root of Stephania
tetrandra S Moore, possesses multiple pharmacologically
relevant classes. As a clinical drug in China, tetrandrine
has been used for decades to treat patients with silicosis,
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

autoimmune disorders, inflammatory pulmonary diseases,
cardiovascular diseases and hypertension. Several early
studies found that tetrandrine has pharmacological
potential in cancer therapy. The most beneficial effects of
tetrandrine on tumor cells is the inhibition of proliferation
and the induction of apoptosis, not only on cancer cell
lines, such as human leukemic U937 [3], human hepatoma
HepG2 [4], human lung carcinoma A549 [5], and human
colon cancer HCT-116 [6] cells but also on primary
cancer cells isolated from ascites and pleural fluids, such
as A-Ga31, A-Li40, P-Lu18 and A-Co20 cells, which
were isolated from patients with gastric, liver, lung and
colon cancers, respectively [7]. Other bioactivities of
tetrandrine include the reversal of multidrug resistance
(MDR) [8-11], the sensitization of tumor cells to radiation
radiosensitization, and the inhibition of angiogenesis and
40801

Oncotarget

Table 2: Effects of tetrandrine treatment in combination with other agents on cancer cells
Name of agent

Cancer cell line

Therapeutic effects

References

5-FU

HCT116

Imatinib

K562, primary leukemia cells

Endostar

LoVo,
human colon cancer

β-catenin – Migration and
[39]
Invasion
G1 arrest, Depletion of p210 (Bcr-Abl) [92]
mRNA and β-catenin protein
Apoptosis,
Cell cycle arrest, Angiogenesis, [102]
Metastasis

Docetaxel

KBv200

Inhibition of P-gp, Apoptosis

[85]

Vincristine

KBv200

Binding to P-gp- reversed resistance

[86]

Doxorubicin

Caco-2, CEM/ADR5000,
MOLT-4/DNR, K562

Daunorubicin

MOLT-4/DNR,
K562/A02

Reducing P-gp expression,
inhibition of mmdr1, mRNA/P-gp and [87, 88, 91]
NF-kappaB

Vinblastine

MOLT-4/DNR

Down-regulating GCS- Apoptosis

[88, 90]

Inhibition of P-gp

[88]

Daunorubicin, Etoposide and acute myeloid leukemia
Cytarabine
Cisplatin
YES-2/DDP,
ovarian cancer,
BEL7402, FHCC98, HepG2,
* Sorafenib
HCT116, RKO, DLD1

More tolerated in clinical trial for [89]
patients
Wnt/cadherin-apoptosis,
[94, 95]
Down-regulation of MRP1

Arsenic trioxide

Apoptosis, necrosis and cell cycle arrest [100]

* Chloroquine

HepG2, A549

ROS/Akt, Apoptosis

Huh7, FHCC98, U87, U251, ROS/p21CIP1/WAF1- Apoptosis
Calu-1, A549, HeLa
loaded KBv200,
ROS, Apoptosis
gastric cancer

PTX and PTX
nanoparticles
Lactoferrin-conjugated
polymer,
some
holding C6 glioma cells
doxorubicin (Lf-PO-Dox)

Inhibition of tumor growth

[52]

[75]
[85]
[93]

* Studies involving our laboratory
metastasis. However, the mechanisms of these effects
were not clearly addressed in publications at that time.
Recently, numerous studies have been successfully
performed to reveal the anti-tumor bioactivity of
tetrandrine. In particular, many studies specifically
investigated the mechanisms underlying tetrandrine
treatment for various cancer cells (Table 1 and Table 2).
The autophagy induction capacity of tetrandrine and a
method of delivering tetrandrine to cancer cells effectively
have recently been developed. Additionally, to improve the
anti-tumor efficiency of tetrandrine, increasing evidence
has suggested developing nanoscale delivery systems
for the delivery of tetrandrine into cancer cells. Notably,
other bisbenzylisoquinoline alkaloid derivatives, such as
fangchinoline, also have effects on cancer cells.
Metabolism, pharmacokinetic and toxicology
studies play important role in the discovery and
development of drugs. Pharmacokinetic and toxicokinetic
properties of tetrandrine are essential to its further research
for clinical use. The pharmacokinetic study of tetrandrine
with a simple HPLC method in rabbits showed that the
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

concentration-time data of tetrandrine fit the classical twocompartment model, no matter the drug was administered
intravenously or orally to rabbits and tetrandrine displays
a limited absorption in intestinal tract [12]. With a liquid
chromatography-tandem mass spectrometric method for
the determination of tetrandrine in rat plasma after a single
oral administration (50 mg/kg), tetrandrine was found no
sexual difference in pharmacokinetics of tetrandrine in rats
[13]. Besides its pharmacological effects, some data from
the animal studies indicated the potential accumulation
and injury to human livers from chronic administration of
tetrandrine. Tetrandrine was reported for its liver toxicity
when administered in high dose for a relatively long
period in dogs [14] and daily administration of tetrandrine
(57 mg/kg by oral gavage) for 8 d can induce obvious liver
injury in rats [15]. It is relatively non-toxic to humans,
even at the administration of 180 mg, intramuscularly
three times daily [16, 17]. The researchers for Ebola virus
disease take tetrandrine as the best candidate for animal
testing because of low cytotoxicity [18].
Accumulated evidence from basic research has
40802

Oncotarget

proven that tetrandrine has significant anti-tumor effects
on various cancer cells in vitro and in vivo. In this
review, we discuss the effects of tetrandrine on various
cancer therapies as well as its underlying mechanism.
The inhibition of proliferation, angiogenesis, metastasis,
and invasion; the induction of autophagy and apoptosis,
and even differentiation; the reversal of MDR; and the
enhancement of radiation sensitization in cancer cells all
indicate that tetrandrine is a potential antineoplastic drug
(Figure 1B). In addition, we discuss the development
of a nanoparticle delivery system for tetrandrine and
the anti-tumor effects of other bisbenzylisoquinoline
alkaloid derivatives on cancer cells. All current evidence
demonstrates that treatment with either tetrandrine alone
(Table 1) or in combination with other chemotherapeutic
agents (Table 2) is a potential chemotherapy strategy for
cancer.

INHIBITING
CANCER
PROLIFERATION

accumulation of transcripts with short half-lives, including
those encoding anti-apoptotic family members and cell
cycle regulators, as well as p53 and nuclear factor-kappa
B-responsive gene targets [22].
Early reports demonstrated that tetrandrine-induced
G1 arrest in human colon carcinoma cells is mediated
by the inhibition of cyclin-dependent kinase, the downregulation of E2F1 and the up-regulation of p53/p21(Cip1)
[6]. Tetrandrine also induced G1 arrest in human colon
carcinoma HT-29 cells through the PI3K/AKT/GSK3beta
pathway via down-regulation of cyclin D1 as well as upregulation of p27(kip1) [23]. The Ng group evaluated
the effects of tetrandrine on three different hepatoma cell
lines, HepG2, PLC/PRF/5 and Hep 3B, and found that
the effects of tetrandrine on cell cycle progression varied
with hepatoma cell type. The HepG2 and PLC/PRF/5 cells
treated with tetrandrine arrested at the G2/M phase in a
dose-dependent manner but not the Hep 3B cells [24].
Moreover, Huh-7 hepatocellular carcinoma cells treated
with tetrandrine suppress cell cycle progression at the
G2/M phase [25]. In contrast, tetrandrine showed marked
induction of G0/G1 cycle arrest in HepG2 and PLC/PRF/5
cells in a study by Wei et al. [26]. In addition, Chen et
al. clarified the underlying mechanisms of the anticancer
effect of tetrandrine in human renal cell carcinoma (RCC)
786-O, 769-P and ACHN cells. Their study showed that
tetrandrine was capable of inducing G1 cell cycle arrest
in RCC cells regulated by cell cycle protein p21 WAF1/
CIP1 and p27(kip1) [27]. Recently, in mouse endothelial
cells (EOMA cells), tetrandrine exhibited significant
proliferation inhibition and G1/S arrest via down-regulated
expression of cyclin D, cyclin E and CDKs. Furthermore,
intracellular accumulation of reactive oxygen species
(ROS) and the decline of phospho-Akt protein levels play
an important role in tetrandrine-induced cell cycle arrest
[28]. Specifically, tetrandrine inhibits the proliferation

CELL

In tumor progression, unrestrained cell proliferation
resulting from disordered cell division is frequently
accompanied by cell cycle dysregulation [19]. The
cell cycle control that is associated with cancer occurs
through cyclin-dependent kinases (CDK)/Cyclin kinase
hyperactivity at different stages of the cell cycle. In cancer,
mutations have been observed in genes encoding CDK,
cyclins, CDK-activating enzymes, CKI, CDK substrates,
and checkpoint proteins [20]. Because CDKs are critical
regulators of cell cycle progression, cyclin-dependent
kinases represent attractive pharmacological targets for
the development of anticancer drugs, and targeting CDKs
has been pursued as a strategy for therapeutic intervention
[21]. The inhibition of these CDKs primarily reduces the

Figure 1. A. Structure of tetrandrine. B. Effects of tetrandrine on cancer cells. Tetrandrine has numerous effects on cancer cells, including
the inhibition of proliferation, angiogenesis, migration, and invasion, the induction of apoptosis and autophagy, the reversal of MDR, and
the enhancement of radiation sensitization.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

40803

Oncotarget

of SUM-149 and SUM-159 breast cancer initiation
cells (TICs). Tetrandrine also inhibited mammosphere
formation of breast cancer TICs in vitro and had similar
effects on mammosphere formation in cells isolated from
fresh patient samples [29]. Taken together, all evidence
provided suggests that inhibiting proliferation is one of the
effects of tetrandrine in cancer cells.

apoptosis and the induction of ligand-independent Fasmediated apoptosis by activating procaspase-8 and
Bid cleavage in parallel [37]. Liu and colleagues also
confirmed that tetrandrine induced apoptosis in prostate
cancer PC3 and DU145 cells in a dose-dependent manner
by activating the caspase cascade and inhibiting the
phosphoinositide 3-kinase-Akt signal pathway [38].
By comparing tetrandrine with six chemotherapy
drugs in eight cancer lines, He et al. found that tetrandrine
exhibits anticancer activities comparable to those of
camptothecin, vincristine, paclitaxel, and doxorubicin and
that these activities were better than those of 5-fluorouracil
(5-FU) and carboplatin. Tetrandrine-induced apoptosis
may be at least in part mediated by catenin-targeting
activity [39]. In the process of tetrandrine-induced
apoptosis in colon cancer HT-29 cells, GSK3beta is
activated via AKT inhibition, resulting in the activation of
caspase 3 and subsequent cleavage of PARP [23]. Wu et al.
determined that tetrandrine induced significant apoptosis
of cultured and subcutaneous colon cancer CT-26 cells in a
concentration- and time-dependent manner. This apoptosis
effect may be associated with activation of the p38 MAPK
signaling pathway, leading to slower tumor growth,
longer animal survival time and higher survival rate [40].
Tetrandrine has also been reported to induce apoptosis in
vitro and in vivo, accompanied by the formation of ROS
and the activation of ROS-dependent c-JNK and caspase-3
in colon cancer LoVo cells [41]. Recently, one study
revealed that tetrandrine-induced apoptosis in LoVo cells
may be partly related to the down-regulation of IGFBP-5
expression, thus inactivating Wnt/β-catenin signaling
transduction [42].
Liou et al. elucidated the molecular mechanism of
apoptosis induction in lung cancer cell line A549 that
involves the up-regulation of cyclin-dependent kinase
inhibitor p21, which then mediates the activation of
caspase-3 and subsequent down-regulation of cyclin D1
[43]. In addition, ERK phosphorylation was also downregulated in tetrandrine-induced apoptosis in A549 human
lung carcinoma cells in both time- and concentrationdependent manners [44].
Moreover, tetrandrine exhibits nuclear fragmentation
and apoptotic features in HepG2, Huh-7 and PLC/PRF/5
hepatoma cells [24, 26]. Furthermore, tetrandrine-induced
apoptosis in HepG2 and Huh-7 cells was caused by p53
up-regulation, Bcl-XL down-regulation, Bid and Bax
cleavage, and the release of cytochrome c, which are all
associated with caspase cascade activation [25, 45]. There
is also in vitro and in vivo evidence of the apoptosis effects
of tetrandrine on Huh7, HepG2 and BEL7402 human
hepatocellular carcinoma cells through the regulation
of Bcl-2 family proteins and the activation of caspase
cascades by activating reactive oxygen species and
repressing Akt activity [46].
By investigating the effects of tetrandrine on human
gastric cancer BGC-823 cells, Qin R et al. reported

INDUCING APOPTOSIS OF CANCER
CELLS
The characteristics of cancer cells stem from not
only the amplification of positive growth signals, the
mutation of checkpoint and surveillance genes but also the
deregulation of cell death. These characteristics promote
inducing cancer cells to death as a critical strategy for
cancer therapy.
Apoptosis, also called type I programmed cell
death, is a form of programmed cell death that occurs
after receiving specific stimuli, which are characterized by
morphologic changes that include chromatin condensation,
nuclear fragmentation and the reduction of cell volume,
as well as biochemical changes including caspase
activation, the breakdown of DNA, and protein and
membrane surface modifications [30, 31]. Apoptosis may
be triggered by two complementary extrinsic and intrinsic
pathways: one involves the binding of death ligands
to death receptors and the other (intrinsic) initiates the
“mitochondrial” pathway [32]. Many tumor cells develop
mechanisms to evade apoptosis, such as the expression of
anti-apoptotic proteins or the down-regulation or mutation
of pro-apoptotic cell death components [33]. Thus,
targeting the apoptosis pathway is one of the important
chemotherapeutic strategies for malignant tumors, and this
pathway is the major type of cell death induced by most
of the frontline chemotherapeutic agents [34]. Numerous
studies have reported that tetrandrine induced apoptosis
effects in many human cancer cells.
Furthermore, tetrandrine significantly decreased the
viability of human oral cancer SAS [35] and HSC-3 [36]
cells in a concentration- and time-dependent manner. By
inducing chromatin condensation, inter-nucleosomal DNA
fragmentation, activation of caspase-3, caspase-8, and
caspase-9, and cleavage of poly (ADP ribose) polymerase
(PARP), tetrandrine induces apoptosis of human oral
cancer cells via the caspase-dependent pathway in these
studies.
Tetrandrine also exerts an apoptosis effect on human
prostate cancer PC3 and DU145 cells that is mediated by
both the intrinsic and extrinsic pathways. The specific
molecular mechanisms have been elucidated. Tetrandrinemediated ROS generation is caused by the activation of
c-Jun NH2-terminal kinase (JNK1/2), which mediates
proteasomal degradation of the c-FLIP L/S and Bcl2
proteins. Degradation of these proteins causes the prostate
cancer cells to undergo Fas- and mitochondria-mediated
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

40804

Oncotarget

tetrandrine-induced apoptosis of BGC-823 cells in vitro
and in vivo. The up-regulation of Bax, Bak, and Bad
and the down-regulation of Bcl-2 and Bcl-xl, which are
related by the mitochondrial pathway, both contribute
to tetrandrine-induced apoptosis in dose- and timedependent manners. Moreover, tetrandrine effectively
inhibited tumor growth via the induction of apoptosis in a
nude mouse xenograft model [47]. Other studies revealed
that tetrandrine was capable of triggering apoptosis in
5637 and T24 human bladder cancer cells and in 786O, 769-P and ACHN human RCC cells in vitro, which
was accompanied by the activation of a very strong
and prominent caspase cascade and the mitochondrial
pathway in a concentration-dependent manner [27, 48].
Additionally, tetrandrine effectively induced the apoptosis
of glioma cells in concentration- and time-dependent
manners [49] and induced the apoptosis of EOMA cells in
vitro and in vivo [28].
Agents that selectively kill or sensitize tumor cells
with no or low additional toxicity to normal cells would
have significant value on clinical therapies. Interesting,
tetrandrine causes no significant addition of toxicity to
normal cells compared to tumor cells. 6-15μΜ tetrandrine
induced no apparent apoptosis in MCF10A cells (a nontumorigenic epithelial cell line) and normal prostate
epithelial PWR-1E cells only showed less apoptosis (2.9 to
9.5%) at 30μΜ concentration of tetrandrine exposure [50,
51]. Also, immortalised non-malignant human mammary
epithelial HBL100cells and normal human hepatic L02
cells were less sensitive to tetrandrine treatment [52]. In
addition, low concentration (2 micrograms/ml) can protect
normal human mononuclear cells in vitro against damage
from a single high-dose of ionizing irradiation (10 Gy)
[53].

hydrophobic molecule with a low molecular weight, it
may cross the blood brain barrier. Chen et al. investigated
the effects of tetrandrine (150 mg/kg/day) on the
inhibition of angiogenesis in subcutaneous RT-2 glioma
cells by inhibiting the expression of VEGF in glioma
cells. Tetrandrine also affected intracerebral tumors,
showed cytotoxicity on the ECV304 human umbilical
vein endothelial cells and suppressed in vivo angiogenesis
[49, 58]. The anti-metastatic effect of tetrandrine was
investigated in a pulmonary metastatic model of colorectal
adenocarcinoma-bearing BALB/c mice after murine
colorectal adenocarcinoma CT26 cells were injected into
BALB/c mice via the tail vein to establish pulmonary
metastases [59]. Additionally, in U87 glioma cells, one
study explored the ability of tetrandrine to inhibit cell
migration and invasion in vitro [60]. Gao and colleagues
exhibited the anti-angiogenic and anti-metastatic
activities of tetrandrine in a 4T1 tumor-bearing BALB/c
mice model to be even better than those of doxorubicin.
Moreover, tetrandrine significantly inhibited endothelial
cell proliferation, adhesion, migration, invasion, and tube
formation by targeting vascular endothelial growth factor,
hypoxia-inducible factor-1, integrin 5, endothelial cell
specific molecule-1, and intercellular adhesion molecule-1
in vivo [61]. As an inhibitor of tumor vascular growth,
tetrandrine was verified to have antiangiogenic effects
in vivo in a liver cancer nude mice xenograft model [28]
and significantly weakened the migration and invasion
capacity of DU145 and PC-3 human prostate cancer cells
[38].

INDUCING CANCER CELL AUTOPHAGY
Macroautophagy (referred to as autophagy here) is a
dynamic process mediated by cellular components in the
cytoplasm, including proteins and organelles engulfed by
double-membrane autophagosomes that are subsequently
delivered to the lysosome for degradation and recycling
[62, 63]. Autophagy acts as a balancing mechanism
between cell survival and cell death (autophagic cell
death) [64]. In normal cells, the survival function is
particularly important during development and under
certain environmental stress conditions, and cellular death
is critical during processes that involve extensive cellular
remodeling [65]. Evidence has shown that autophagy is
important in normal growth control and may be defective
in cancer cells [66, 67]. In cancer cells, autophagy
has a dual role, which as a critical pathway in tumor
development and tumor therapy. Therapeutics targeting
autophagy could be inhibitory to induce non-autophagic
forms of cell death or stimulatory to incite autophagic cell
death [68].
Tetrandrine has been proven to be a potent broadspectrum autophagy agonist with effects on a variety of
cell lines, including MCF-7, HeLa, PC3, U87, MDAMB-231, and A549 cancer cells, and HFF and HEK 293

BLOCKING
ANGIOGENESIS,
MIGRATION AND INVASION OF
CANCER CELLS
Tumor angiogenesis, the growth of new blood
vessels for tumors, is considered an essential pathological
feature of cancer as growing tumors need additional
nutrients and oxygen. Tumor angiogenesis is also
indispensable for enabling other aspects of tumor
pathology such as metabolic dysregulation and tumor
metastasis and invasion [54]. Tumor metastasis and
invasion are major causes of mortality in cancer patients.
Because of the complex interplay between tumors and
stromal cells, including endothelial cells and associated
mural cells, resistance against antiangiogenic therapies
is gaining increasing awareness, especially for highly
vascularized tumors such as HCC [55]. Most agents
target the well-known vascular endothelial growth factor
pathway, and some extracellular molecules target the
inhibition of invasion [56, 57].
Because tetrandrine is a highly lipid-soluble,
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

40805

Oncotarget

nontumorigenic cells, and it exhibits a much stronger
activity in inducing autophagy than the autophagy
activator rapamycin [69]. Additionally, tetrandrine has the
capability to induce autophagy in human hepatocellular
carcinoma Huh7, BEL7402, HepG2, and L02 cells in
vitro and in vivo, and the autophagy-inducing activity
is at least partially dependent on the accumulation of
intracellular ROS and the repression of ATG7 [70]. In
addition, tetrandrine-induced autophagy in human oral
cancer HSC-3 cells and SAS cells occurs via Becline I/
LC3-I/II dependent signaling pathways [35, 36]. The
efficacy of tetrandrine on NB4 leukemia cells in vivo and
in vitro revealed that tetrandrine-induced differentiation
is accompanied by autophagy from the accumulation of
ROS and by Notch1 signaling activation. Furthermore,
autophagy and differentiation were also induced by
tetrandrine in M5 type patient primary leukemia cells [71].
Different from an autophagy activator, Qiu et al. presented
tetrandrine as a potent lysosomal inhibitor, blocking
autophagic flux at the lysosomal degradation stage in
tumor cells, predominantly by neutralizing lysosomal
acidity and then decreasing the recycling of cellular fuels
[72].
On the one hand, tetrandirne-induced cell death may
act through autophagy (autophagic cell death) in cancer
cells [35, 36, 73]. On the other hand, the tetrandirneinduced autophagy may play a protective function and
weaken apoptosis in tumor cells which provide an efficient
approach to synergize apoptosis by pharmacologically
inhibiting autophagy [71, 74, 75].

REVERSAL
RESISTANCE

OF

by compounds with a variety of pharmacological effects
to circumvent the MDR phenotype [84]. Thus, the
development of effective transporter inhibitors could
be valuable to cancer treatment. Tetrandrine is a good
candidate for the development of new MDR-reversing
agents, and its reversal mechanism is most likely due to the
potent inhibition of P-gp. Co-administration of tetrandrine
significantly reversed the sensitivity of P-gp-mediated
drug resistant KBv200 cells to paclitaxel and docetaxel
by approximately 10-fold in vitro and in xenograft models
bearing the KBv200 tumors [85]. Moreover, tetrandrine
almost completely reversed resistance to vincristine in
MDR KBv200 cells via direct binding to P-gp to increase
intracellular vincristine accumulation in a concentrationdependent manner in vitro and in vivo, but it had no effect
on the sensitivity of drug-sensitive KB cells in vitro [86].
Additionally, tetrandrine exhibited an obvious synergistic
cytotoxic effect in P-gp mediated MDR Caco-2 and CEM/
ADR5000 cancer cells in combination with the common
cancer chemotherapeutic agent doxorubicin by reducing
P-gp expression in a concentration-dependent manner
[87].
In a P-gp expressing human T lymphoblastoid
leukemia MOLT-4 MDR cell line (MOLT-4/DNR),
tetrandrine reversed MDR and showed even stronger
activity for the reversal of drug resistance to daunorubicin
(DNR), vinblastine and doxorubicin than the well-known
P-gp inhibitor cyclosporin A [88]. P-gp is also a potential
mechanism of chemotherapeutic resistance in acute
myeloid leukemia, where it is often overexpressed in
myeloblasts. When tetrandrine was combined with DNR,
etoposide and cytarabine (TET-DEC) in a multicenter
clinical trial for 38 patients with poor risk forms of acute
myeloid leukemia, TET-DEC was rather well tolerated in
these patients [89]. Tetrandrine can consistently reverse
DNR resistance in human chronic myeloid leukemia
(CML) cell line K562/A02. This chemo-sensitization
enhancement was accompanied by elevated cellular DNR
accumulation and DNR-induced apoptosis by downregulating GCS, which has a positive correlation with
P-gp [90]. In addition, tetrandrine markedly inhibited the
overexpression of doxorubicin-induced mdr1 mRNA/Pgp in K562 cells mediated by inhibiting the doxorubicininduced expression of NF-kappaB, which is accompanied
by the attenuation of NF-kappaB DNA-binding activity
[91]. Moreover, tetrandrine citrate has the capacity to
inhibit the growth of IM-resistant CML K562, primary
leukemia, and primitive CD34 (+) leukemia cells. The
antitumor activity against IM-resistant K562 cells and
CML cells was induced by the G1 arrest of leukemia cells
involved in the depletion of p210 (Bcr-Abl) mRNA and
β-catenin protein [92].
The blood-brain barrier (BBB) and MDR are the
main causes for poor prognosis of glioma patients after
chemotherapy. The lactoferrin-conjugated biodegradable
polymersome holding doxorubicin and tetrandrine (Lf-

MULTIDRUG

Multidrug resistance to anticancer drugs is one of
the major obstacles to successful tumor chemotherapy.
Of the potential mechanisms of MDR cancer cells, the
most predominantly reported ones include the adenosine
triphosphate (ATP)-binding cassette (ABC) transporter
family [76], apoptosis induction [77], autophagy induction
[78], cancer stem cell regulation [79], miRNA regulation
[80], hypoxia induction [81], DNA damage and repair
[82], and epigenetic regulation [83]. Currently, looking for
novel compounds with anti-MDR activity is a promising
approach to solving this cancer drug resistance problem;
in combination with anticancer drugs, these compounds
may increase the anticancer effect, which has led to
increased intracellular drug retention and the recovery of
cell sensitivity to chemotherapeutic drugs in combined
treatment. Moreover, some naturally occurring compounds
may be used as chemosensitizers in the treatment MDR
cancers.
MDR gene product P-glycoprotein (P-gp), a wellknown ABC transporter family member, is a drug efflux
pump that mediates MDR by decreasing the intracellular
concentration of cancer drugs; however, it can be inhibited
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

40806

Oncotarget

PO-Dox/Tet) antitumor agents loaded into a drug delivery
system demonstrated the strongest cytotoxicity against C6
glioma cells and had a greater uptake index with C6 cells
than PO-DOX, PO-Dox/Tet, or Lf-PO-Dox by integrating
both BBB and glioma-targeting moieties and an MDR
inhibitor [93]. For human ovarian cancer and human
esophageal squamous carcinoma, MDR is also one of the
major causes limiting the efficacy of chemotherapeutic
agents. Tetrandrine significantly enhances the cytotoxicity
of cisplatin in ovarian cancer, with growth suppression and
apoptosis induction by the modulation of the Wnt/cadherin
signaling pathway [94]. Tetrandrine adds to the cytotoxic
effects of cisplatin in a dose-dependent manner in the
human esophageal squamous carcinoma cisplatin-resistant
cell line YES-2/DDP, which was isolated by stepwise
selection using increasing concentrations of cisplatin.
The mechanism underlying this is the down-regulation
of MRP1 and the reversal effect on MRP1 activity [95].
Sorafenib is a molecularly targeted agent. It is a potent
inhibitor against Raf kinase and several receptor tyrosine
kinases, and it has been approved for the clinical treatment
of advanced renal and liver cancer [96]. Resistance
to sorafenib is a major reason for the failure of antihepatocellular carcinoma therapies [97]. Tetrandrine can
enhance sorafenib-induced apoptosis in human hepatoma
cell lines (BEL7402 and FHCC98), a hepatoblastoma
cell line (HepG2), and multiple human colon cancer cells
(HCT116, RKO, DLD1) in vitro and in vivo. Intracellular
ROS and Akt activity are involved in the synergistic
antitumour activity [52]. For arsenic trioxide, a traditional
agent to treat leukemia [98, 99], tetrandrine enhanced the
apoptosis, necrosis and cell cycle arrest in As2O3-treated
HepG2 and A549 cells [100]. Tetrandrine also exhibited
a synergistic caspase-dependent apoptotic cell death
effect in combination with chloroquine, which was widely
clinically utilized to treat malaria and other diseases
[101], in human hepatoma cell lines (Huh7 and FHCC98),
human glioma cell lines (U87 and U251), human lung
cancer cell lines (Calu-1 and A549), and human cervical
adenocarcinoma HeLa cells via ROS production and
p21CIP1/WAF1 expression [75]. Endostar was approved
for the treatment of cancer as an antiangiogenic agent
with limited therapeutic effects when used alone in cancer
treatment. However, the combination of tetrandrine and
Endostar had a synergistic effect on the antiproliferation
of human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs) and
human colon cancer LoVo cells. Furthermore, all these
antiangiogenic effects, such as inhibition of cell migration,
suppression of tube formation, induction of cell apoptosis,
and cell cycle arrest, were enhanced when the HUVECs
were treated with tetrandrine combined with Endostar
[102]. Tetrandrine also exhibits synergistic anticancer
capability with 5-FU to reduce migration and invasion of
HCT116 cells [39].
Some derivatives of tetrandrine also displayed antiMDR activity in cancer cells, and the ability of MDR
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

reversal may be more effective than the drug prototype,
tetrandrine. 5-Bromotetrandrine (BrTet), a brominated
derivative of tetrandrine, reversed doxorubicin resistance
in MDR human breast cancer MCF-7/Dox cells in a
dose-dependent manner. BrTet also reversed vincristine,
doxorubicin and paclitaxel resistance in MDR KBv200
human oral epidermoid carcinoma cells and innate
vincristine and doxorubicin resistance in Bel7402 human
hepatocellular carcinoma cells. These activities may be
associated with the inhibition of P-gp overexpression
and the increase in remaining intracellular anticancer
chemotherapeutics [86]. There is a series of new
bisbenzylisoquinoline alkaloids partially synthesized
from tetrandrine that exhibited an ability to reverse P-gpmediated MDR in MDR cancer cells (Bel7402 and HCT8)
[103]. H1 is a novel derivative of tetrandrine, which
displayed favorable anti-MDR activity in KB and KBv200
cancer cells in vitro and in vivo. Its mechanism may be
related to the initiation of the intrinsic apoptosis pathway
and the inhibition of Erk1/2 and Akt1/2 activation [26].
PY35 is also a novel 5-substituted tetrandrine derivative.
The ability of PY35 to reverse drug resistance was
confirmed ina study where PY35 reversed P-gp-mediated
resistant K562/Adriamycin (ADM), MCF-7/ADM cells
by the co-administration of PY35 and ADM, which
increased the intracellular accumulation of drugs, but not
by inhibiting the expression of P-gp [104].

ENHANCING RADIATION SENSITIZATION
Concurrent treatment with chemotherapy and
radiation has the potential to offer patients the combined
benefits of improved disease control. In basic and clinical
research, the anti-tumor agents can be combined with not
only other chemotherapeutic agents but also with radiation
to sensitize the cells to radiation for enhanced cancer
treatment efficacy.
Tetrandrine can increase radiosensitivity by
abrogating radiation-induced G2 arrest in the CNE
nasopharyngeal carcinoma cell line to increase apoptosis
[105]. Moreover, tetrandrine enhanced the lethal effect of
radiation on p53-mutant MCF-7/ADR, HT-29 cells and
human esophageal cancer TE1 cells in a concentrationdependent manner, which may also involve the relief of
radiation-induced G2/M arrest. Additionally, tetrandrine
can boost the cell killing activity of irradiation both in
vitro and in vivo [106, 107].

NANOPARTICLE DELIVERY SYSTEM
FOR TETRANDRINE
There have been challenges in conventional
chemotherapy, including nonspecific targeting, lack of
water solubility, poor oral bioavailability, low therapeutic
indices, cancer cell drug resistance, and severe systemic
side effects [108, 109]. Nanotechnology is a way to
40807

Oncotarget

solve this problem and specifically involves the use of
bio-conjugated molecular components and engineered
materials-nanoparticles for the delivery and targeting of
anticancer drugs in cancer cells [110, 111] while avoiding
toxicity in normal cells [112, 113]. Accumulated evidence
has raised the possibility of developing nanoscale
delivery systems using a Trojan horse strategy to achieve
improved solubility, stability and cytotoxicity of lipophilic
compounds. Because the application of tetrandrine is
limited because of its insolubility, it is necessary to
explore a tetrandrine delivery system for its use as a cancer
chemotherapeutic.
To establish a satisfactory delivery system for the
local delivery of tetrandrine, four types of core-shell
nanoparticles were prepared from a di-block copolymer
of methoxy poly(ethylene glycol)-polycaprolactone
(MePEG-PCL) and a tri-block copolymer of
polycaprolactone-poly(ethylene glycol)-polycaprolactone
(PCL-PEG-PCL). All four types of copolymers exhibited
remarkable antitumor effects in LoVo colon cancer
cells in vitro. Furthermore, the nanoparticles prepared
from the di-block copolymer with a particle size of
approximately 300 nm and a hydrophobic composition
of approximately 80% were the most effective drug
carriers for use in further studies [114]. First, a simple
way to produce tetrandrine-loaded nanoparticles (TetNPs) was to use an amphiphilic block copolymer. In
LoVo cells, doses of Tet-NPs at the lower concentrations
(1-8 µg/ml) led to more cell inhibition than equivalent
doses of free Tet did (1-8 µg/ml). Therefore, further
study indicated that the higher the uptake efficiency, the
more ROS are generated and the stronger the activation
of ROS-dependent c-JNK and caspase-3 induced by the
equivalent dose of tetrandrine delivered by nanoparticles
[41]. Moreover, cancer microenvironmental factors
are important in anticancer drug resistance. Thus, TetNPs show superiority as a nanoscale drug carrier as
they can withstand pH-induced physiological drug
resistance. When the extracellular pH decreased from
7.4 to 6.8, the cytotoxicity of free tetrandrine decreased
prominently, but the cytotoxicity of the Tet-NPs was
not significantly influenced by pH reduction. In vivo
experiments also revealed that Tet-NPs reversed PIPDR
more effectively than other existing methods and with
fewer side effects [115]. Ptx is one of the most widely
used anticancer agents and has demonstrated extraordinary
activities against a variety of solid tumors. However,
the therapeutic response of Ptx is often associated with
severe side effects caused by its nonspecific cytotoxic
effects. Studies have shown that tetrandrine and Ptx have
synergistic antitumor effects against gastric cancer cells.
Because the cellular chemo-resistance to Ptx correlates
with intracellular antioxidant capacity and tetrandrine
possesses the capacity to effectively induce intracellular
ROS production, which can deplete Ptx-induced cellular
antioxidants, the cytotoxicity of Ptx can be enhanced. In
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

addition, tetrandrine can also increase the stability of Ptxloaded nanoparticles when tetrandrine is coencapsulated
with Ptx into mPEG-PCL nanoparticles. Therefore,
nanoparticle codelivery of Ptx and tetrandrine provides a
novel therapeutic strategy against gastric cancer [116]. The
encapsulation of tetrandrine and Ptx into nanoparticles
retains the synergistic anticancer efficiency of tetrandrine
and Ptx against mice hepatoma H22 cells as well. When
delivered intratumorally, Ptx/Tet nanoparticles exhibited
significantly improved antitumor efficacy in the in
vivo evaluation as intratumoral administration was
adopted to increase site-specific delivery. Moreover,
the combination substantially increased the overall
survival in an established H22-transplanted mouse model
[117]. Thus, Ptx/Tet-coloaded nanoparticles could be a
potentially useful chemotherapeutic formulation for liver
cancer therapy. Furthermore, delivering tetrandrine in
PVP-b-PCL nanoparticles via endocytosis also leads to
enhanced induction of apoptosis in the A549 non-small
cell lung cancer cell line; this enhanced apoptosis is
achieved by inhibiting the expression of anti-apoptotic
proteins. Additionally, Tet-NPs more efficiently inhibit
cell migration and invasion than free tetrandrine by
down-regulating matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)-2 and
MMP-9 as well as up-regulating tissue inhibitor of MMP3 (TIMP-3) [118]. Therefore, nanodrug delivery systems
are an effective way to improve the anticancer efficiency
of tetrandrine alone or in combination with other agents.

EFFECTS OF TETRANDRINE ANALOGS
AND OTHER BISBENZYLISOQUINOLINE
ALKALOID DERIVATIVES ON CANCER
CELLS
The bisbenzylisoquinoline alkaloids are a large
family of natural phytochemicals found in medicinal plants
that have shown great potential for traditional clinical
application in China and other countries. In addition
to tetrandrine, cissampareine, a bisbenzylisoquinoline
alkaloid from the Cissampelos sp., was identified as
cytotoxic for tumor inhibition as early as 1965 [119].
Cepharanthine, the major bisbenzylisoquinoline
alkaloid component of S. epigaea, exhibited in vitro
cytotoxicities against multiple human cancer cell lines
(A-549, HL-60, MCF-7, SMMC-7721, and SW480)
[120]. The antiproliferative activity of cepharanthine
alone or in combination with chemotherapeutic vinca
alkaloid agents (vincristine, vinblastine, and vindesine)
was shown in human colon cancer RPMI 4788 cells
and human uterine cervical cancer HeLa cells [121].
Cepharanthine and another alkaloid berbamine completely
or partially overcome the resistance of multidrug-resistant
human KB carcinoma ChR-24 cells to anticancer
agents (vincristine, actinomycin D, daunomycin, and
adriamycin) [122]. Another derivative, named neferine,
is the major bisbenzylisoquinoline alkaloid derived from
40808

Oncotarget

the seed embryo of Nelumbo nucifera (lotus). Neferine
induced G1 cell cycle arrest and apoptosis in A549
cells with the ROS/MAPKs, as well as mitochondrial/
caspase cascade activation [123]. In addition, neferine
exhibited cytotoxicity against HCC Hep3B cells by
inducing apoptosis, autophagy and reducing migration
through multiple signaling cascades [124]. Additionally,
most studies have revealed the therapeutic potential of
fangchinoline, an alkaloid derived from the dry roots of
Stephania tetrandra S Moore (Menispermaceae). It can
inhibit the proliferation of MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231
human breast cancer cells and PC3 human prostate
carcinoma cells via G1-phase arrest [125, 126] and induce
apoptosis in breast cancer cells via the mitochondrial
apoptotic pathway and Akt/GSK-3beta/cyclin D1
signaling [127, 128]. Fangchinoline effectively suppressed
the proliferation and invasion of lung cancer A549 cells
by inhibiting p-FAK and its downstream pathways [129]
and induced autophagic cell death via p53/sestrin2/AMPK
signaling in hepatocellular carcinoma HepG2 and PLC/
PRF/5 cells [130]. Notably, fangchinoline has similar
effects to tetrandrine as it can reverse the multidrug
resistance of cancer cells by inhibiting P-gp activity [87,
131, 132], as well as CBT-1, a bisbenzylisoquinoline
plant alkaloid currently in development as a P-gp
inhibitor [133]. O-(4-Ethoxyl-butyl)-berbamine, a novel
calmodulin antagonist and bisbenzylisoquinoline alkaloid
derivative, also improved the chemosensitivity of P-gpmediated multidrug-resistant cells to doxorubicin by not
only blocking the function of P-gp but also inhibiting
the expression of P-gp [134]. Taken together, these
data suggest that other bisbenzylisoquinoline alkaloid
derivatives may have potential applications in cancer
therapy, just as tetrandrine does.

metabolism, cell motility, and drug resistance. Other
bisbenzylisoquinoline alkaloid derivatives such as
cepharanthine, neferine and fangchinoline also have
multiple therapeutic effects on cancer cells. Therefore,
tetrandrine appears to have the potential to be developed
as an anti-tumor chemotherapeutic drug. However, this
is based on the premise of investigating the directly
underlying targets of tetrandrine on cancer cells as the
different cancer cells exhibit different cytotoxic effects. To
well apply the potential clinical efficacy of tetrandrine for
cancer therapy, more mechanism-based pharmacological,
metabolism, pharmacokinetic and toxicology studies are
required.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This study was supported by the National Basic
Research Program of China (2014CB910600), the
National Natural Science Foundation of China (81273540,
81472684 and 31400155), the Program for New Century
Excellent Talents in University of Ministry of Education
of China (NCET-13-0436), and Fundamental Research
Funds for the Central Universities (2042014kf0236).

CONFLICTS OF INTERESTS
The authors declare no competing financial interests.

REFERENCES
1.	

2.	 Mishra BB and Tiwari VK. Natural products: an evolving
role in future drug discovery. European journal of medicinal
chemistry. 2011; 46:4769-4807.

DISCUSSION

3.	 Lai YL, Chen YJ, Wu TY, Wang SY, Chang KH, Chung
CH, Chen ML. Induction of apoptosis in human leukemic
U937 cells by tetrandrine. Anticancer Drugs. 1998; 9 :7781.

Tetrandrine is a calcium channel blocker that
inhibits voltage-gated Ca2+ channels [135]. By inhibiting
endosomal calcium channels, research has recently
shown that tetrandrine inhibits Ebola virus infection
both in vitro and in vivo [18]. Tetrandrine can also inhibit
lipid peroxidation, blocking ROS production to protect
several types of cells from oxidative stress [136]. Recent
examples provide further proof of principle that increasing
ROS, whether by increasing production or inhibiting
antioxidants, is a promising approach for targeting
cancer cells [137]. Inconsistent with the previous ROS
blocking function, tetrandrine exhibits anti-tumor effects
by trigging ROS accumulation. Because the induction of
autophagy can promote the differentiation of cancer cells
[138], tetrandrine may be developed to be a differentiation
agent, and research in our lab has made marked progress.
Tetrandrine plays important roles in regulating
tumor cellular functions, including proliferation/cell
cycle, survival/apoptosis, DNA damage repair, cell
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Hanahan D, Weinberg RA. The Hallmarks of Cancer. Cell.
2000; 100:57-70.

4.	

Yoo SM, Oh SH, Lee SJ, Lee BW, Ko WG, Moon CK, Lee
BH. Inhibition of proliferation and induction of apoptosis
by tetrandrine in HepG2 cells. J Ethnopharmacol. 2002;
81:225-229.

5.	 Lee JH, Kang GH, Kim KC, Kim KM, Park DI, Choi BT,
Kang HS, Lee YT, Choi YH. Tetrandrine-induced cell cycle
arrest and apoptosis in A549 human lung carcinoma cells.
Int J Oncol. 2002; 21:1239-1244.
6.	 Meng LH, Zhang H, Hayward L, Takemura H, Shao RG,
Pommier Y. Tetrandrine induces early G1 arrest in human
colon carcinoma cells by down-regulating the activity and
inducing the degradation of G1-S-specific cyclin-dependent
kinases and by inducing p53 and p21Cip1. Cancer Res.
2004; 64 :9086-9092.
7.	 Liu B, Wang T, Qian X, Liu G, Yu L and Ding Y.
Anticancer effect of tetrandrine on primary cancer cells
40809

Oncotarget

isolated from ascites and pleural fluids. Cancer letters.
2008; 268:166-175.

2015; 347:995-998.
19.	 McDonald ER 3rd, El-Deiry WS. Cell cycle control as a
basis for cancer drug development. Int J Oncol. 2000;
16:871-886.

8.	 Choi SU, Park, S. H., Kim, K. H., and Choi, E. J. The bis
benzylisoquinoline alkaloids, tetrandine and fangchinoline,
enhance the cytotoxicity of multidrug resistance-related
drugs via modulation of P-glycoprotein. Anti-Cancer
Drugs. 1998; 9:255 -261.

20.	 Katrien Vermeulen, Dirk R. Van Bockstaele and Zwi
N. Berneman. The cell cycle: a review of regulation,
deregulation and therapeutic targets in cancer. Cell Prolif.
2003; 36:131- 149.

9.	 Fu LW, Zhang, Y. M., Liang, Y. J., Yang, X. P., and
Pan, Q. C. The multidrug resistance of tumour cells was
reversed by tetrandrine in vitro and in xenografts derived
from human breast adenocarcinoma MCF-7/adr cells. Eur J
Cancer. 2002; 38:418 -426.

21.	 Peyressatre M, Prevel C, Pellerano M and Morris MC.
Targeting cyclin-dependent kinases in human cancers:
from small molecules to Peptide inhibitors. Cancers. 2015;
7:179-237.

10.	 Liu ZL, Hirano, T., Tanaka, S., Onda, K., and Oka,
K. Persistent reversal of P-glycoprotein-mediated
daunorubicin resistance by tetrandrine in multidrugresistant human T lymphoblastoid leukemia MOLT-4 cells.
J PharmPharmacol. 2003; 55:1531-1537.

22.	 Shapiro GI. Cyclin-Dependent Kinase Pathways As Targets
for Cancer Treatment. Journal of Clinical Oncology. 2006;
24:1770-1783.
23.	 Chen XL, Ren KH, He HW, Shao RG. Involvement of
PI3K/AKT/GSK3beta pathway in tetrandrine-induced G1
arrest and apoptosis. Cancer Biol Ther. 2008; 7:1073-1078.

11.	 Fu, L. W. Y. J., Deng, L. W., Ding, Y., Chen, L. M., Yanli
Ye,Y. L., Yang, X. P., and Pan, Q. C. Characterization
of tetrandrine, a potent inhibitor of P-glycoproteinmediated multidrug resistance. Cancer chemotherapy and
pharmacology. 2004; 53:349 -356.

24.	 Ng LT, Chiang LC, Lin YT, Lin CC. Antiproliferative
and apoptotic effects of tetrandrine on different human
hepatoma cell lines. Am J Chin Med. 2006; 34:125-135.
25.	 Yu VW and Ho WS. Tetrandrine inhibits hepatocellular
carcinoma cell growth through the caspase pathway and
G2/M phase. Oncol Rep. 2013; 29:2205-2210.

12.	 Xin-Hui Jiang, Jun-Qing Yang, Na Li, Han Wang, QiXin Zhou. The pharmacokinetical study of plant alkaloid
tetrandrine with a simple HPLC method in rabbits.
Fitoterapia. 2011; 82:878 - 882.

26.	 Wei N, Liu G-T, Chen X-G, Liu Q, Wang F-P and Sun
H. H1, a derivative of Tetrandrine, exerts anti-MDR
activity by initiating intrinsic apoptosis pathway and
inhibiting the activation of Erk1/2 and Akt1/2. Biochemical
pharmacology. 2011; 82:1593-1603.

13.	 Naining Song, Shaoyu Zhang, Quansheng Li, Changxiao
Liu. Establishment of a liquid chromatographic/mass
spectrometry method for quantification of tetrandrine in
rat plasma and its application to pharmacokinetic study.
Journal of Pharmaceutical and Biomedical Analysis. 2008;
48:974-979.

27.	 Chen T, Ji B and Chen Y. Tetrandrine triggers apoptosis
and cell cycle arrest in human renal cell carcinoma cells.
Journal of Natural Medicines. 2013; 68:46-52.

14.	 Yan C, Xin-Ming Q, Li-Kun G, Lin-Lin L, Fang-Ping C,
Ying X, Xiong-Fei W, Xiang-Hong L, Jin R. Tetrandrineinduced apoptosis in rat primary hepatocytes is initiated
from mitochondria: caspases and endonuclease G (Endo G)
pathway. Toxicology. 2006; 218:1-12.

28.	 Xiao W JY, Men Q, Yuan L, Huang Z, Liu T, Li W, Liu X.
Tetrandrine induces G1/S cell cycle arrest through the ROS/
Akt pathway in EOMA cells and inhibits angiogenesis in
vivo. Int J Oncol. 2015; 46 :360-368.
29.	 Xu W, Debeb BG, Lacerda L, Li J and Woodward WA.
Tetrandrine, a Compound Common in Chinese Traditional
Medicine, Preferentially Kills Breast Cancer Tumor
Initiating Cells (TICs) In Vitro. Cancers. 2011; 3:22742285.

15.	 Xin-ming QI, Ling-ling MIAO, Yan CAI, Li-kun GONG,
Jin REN. ROS generated by CYP450, especially CYP2E1,
mediate mitochondrial dysfunction induced by tetrandrine
in rat hepatocytes. Acta Pharmacologica Sinica. 2013;
34:1229-1236.

30.	 J. F. R. KERR, A. H. WYLLIE, A. R. CURRIE. Apoptosis:
a basic biological phenomenon with wide-ranging
implications in tissue kinetics. Br J Cancer. 1972; 26:239257.

16.	 Fang JH, Fang YH. Tetrandine: pharmacology and clinical
usefulness. Chin Pharma. 1996; 31:454-456.
17.	 Dai CL, Xiong HY, Tang LF, Zhang X, Liang YJ, Zeng MS,
Chen LM, Wang XH, Fu LW. Tetrandrine achieved plasma
conc entrations capable of reversing MDR in vitro and
had no apparent e Vect on doxorubicin pharmacokinetics
in mice. Cancer chemotherapy and pharmacology. 2007;
60:741-750.

31.	 Nancy A. Thornberry and Yuri Lazebnik. Caspases:
enemies within. Science. 1998; 281 (5381 ):1312-1316.
32.	 Parrish AB, Freel CD and Kornbluth S. Cellular
mechanisms controlling caspase activation and function.
Cold Spring Harbor perspectives in biology. 2013; 5(6).

18.	 Sakurai Y, Kolokoltsov AA, Chen CC, Tidwell MW, Bauta
WE, Klugbauer N, Grimm C, Wahl-Schott C, Biel M,
Davey RA.Two -pore channels control Ebola virus host cell
entry and are drug targets for disease treatment. Science.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

33.	 Igney FH and Krammer PH. Death and anti-death: tumour
resistance to apoptosis. Nature reviews Cancer. 2002;
2:277-288.

40810

Oncotarget

34.	 Koff JL, Ramachandiran S and Bernal-Mizrachi L. A Time
to Kill: Targeting Apoptosis in Cancer. International journal
of molecular sciences. 2015; 16:2942-2955.

Hanifah H, Jin H, Xu CX and Cho MH. Synergistic effect
of ERK inhibition on tetrandrine-induced apoptosis in A549
human lung carcinoma cells. Journal of Veterinary Science.
2009; 10:23.

35.	 Huang AC, Lien JC, Lin MW, Yang JS, Wu PP, Chang SJ,
Lai TY. Tetrandrine induces cell death in SAS human oral
cancer cells through caspase activation-dependent apoptosis
and LC3-I and LC3-II activation-dependent autophagy.
International Journal of Oncology. 2013; 43:485-494.

45.	 Oh S-H and Lee B-H. Induction of apoptosis in human
hepatoblastoma cells by tetrandrine via caspase-dependent
Bid cleavage and cytochrome c release. Biochemical
pharmacology. 2003; 66:725-731.

36.	 Yu FS, Yu CS, Chen JC, Yang JL, Lu HF, Chang SJ, Lin
MW and Chung JG. Tetrandrine induces apoptosis Via
caspase-8, -9, and -3 and poly (ADP ribose) polymerase
dependent pathways and autophagy through beclin-1/
LC3-I, II signaling pathways in human oral cancer HSC-3
cells. Environmental toxicology. 2014.

46.	 Liu C, Gong K, Mao X and Li W. Tetrandrine induces
apoptosis by activating reactive oxygen species and
repressing Akt activity in human hepatocellular carcinoma.
International journal of cancer Journal. 2011; 129:15191531.
47.	 Qin R, Shen H, Cao Y, Fang Y, Li H, Chen Q, Xu W.
Tetrandrine Induces Mitochondria-Mediated Apoptosis in
Human Gastric Cancer BGC-823 Cells. PLoS ONE. 2013;
8 :e7648.

37.	 Chaudhary P and Vishwanatha JK. c-Jun NH2terminal kinase-induced proteasomal degradation of
c-FLIPL/S and Bcl2 sensitize prostate cancer cells to
Fas- and mitochondria-mediated apoptosis by tetrandrine.
Biochemical pharmacology. 2014; 91:457-473.

48.	 Li X, Su B, Liu R, Wu D and He D. Tetrandrine induces
apoptosis and triggers caspase cascade in human bladder
cancer cells. The Journal of surgical research. 2011;
166:e45-51.

38.	 Liu W, Kou B, Ma ZK, Tang XS, Lv C, Ye M, Chen JQ, Li
L, Wang XY, He DL. Tetrandrine suppresses proliferation,
induces apoptosis, and inhibits migration and invasion in
human prostate cancer cells. Asian J Androl. 2015.

49.	 Chen Y, Chen JC and Tseng SH. Tetrandrine suppresses
tumor growth and angiogenesis of gliomas in rats.
International journal of cancer Journal. 2009; 124:22602269.

39.	 He BC, Gao JL, Zhang BQ, Luo Q, Shi Q, Kim SH, Huang
E, Gao Y, Yang K, Wagner ER, Wang L, Tang N, Luo J,
Liu X, Li M, Bi Y, et al. Tetrandrine inhibits Wnt/betacatenin signaling and suppresses tumor growth of human
colorectal cancer. Molecular pharmacology. 2011; 79:211219.

50.	 Yuxing Zhang, Chao Wang, Haiwei Wang, Kankan Wang,
Yanzhi Du, Ji Zhang. Combination of Tetrandrine with
cisplatin enhances cytotoxicity through growth suppression
and apoptosis in ovarian cancer in vitro and in vivo.
Cancer letters. 2011; 304:21-32.

40.	 Wu JM, Chen Y, Chen JC, Lin TY and Tseng SH.
Tetrandrine induces apoptosis and growth suppression of
colon cancer cells in mice. Cancer letters. 2010; 287:187195.

51.	 Pankaj Chaudhary and Jamboor K. Vishwanatha. c-Jun
NH2-terminal kinase-induced proteasomal degradation
of c-FLIP L/S and Bcl2 sensitize prostate cancer cells to
Fas- and mitochondria-mediated apoptosis by tetrandrine.
Biochemical pharmacology. 2014; 91:457-473.

41.	 Li X, Zhen D, Lu X, Xu H, Shao Y, Xue Q, Hu Y, Liu
B and Sun W. Enhanced cytotoxicity and activation of
ROS-dependent c-Jun NH2-terminal kinase and caspase-3
by low doses of tetrandrine-loaded nanoparticles in Lovo
cells—a possible Trojan strategy against cancer. European
journal of pharmaceutics and biopharmaceutics : official
journal of Arbeitsgemeinschaft fur Pharmazeutische
Verfahrenstechnik eV. 2010; 75:334-340.

52.	 Wan J, Liu T, Mei L, Li J, Gong K, Yu C and Li W.
Synergistic antitumour activity of sorafenib in combination
with tetrandrine is mediated by reactive oxygen species
(ROS)/Akt signaling. British Journal of Cancer. 2013;
109:342-350.
53.	 Chen YJ, Tu ML, Kuo HC, Chang KH, Lai YL, Chung CH,
Chen ML. Protective effect of tetrandrine on normal human
mononuclear cells against ionizing irradiation. Biol Pharm
Bull. 1997; 20:1160-1164.

42.	 Wu K, Zhou M, Wu QX, Yuan SX, Wang DX, Jin JL,
Huang J, Yang JQ, Sun WJ, Wan LH, He BC. The role
of IGFBP-5 in mediating the anti-proliferation effect of
tetrandrine in human colon cancer cells. Int J Oncol. 2015;
46 :1205-1213.

54.	 Wang Z, Dabrosin C, Yin X, Fuster MM, Arreola A,
Rathmell WK, Generali D, Nagaraju GP, El-Rayes B,
Ribatti D, Chen YC, Honoki K, Fujii H, Georgakilas
AG, Nowsheen S, Amedei A, et al. Broad targeting of
angiogenesis for cancer prevention and therapy. Seminars
in cancer biology. 2015.

43.	 Liou JT, Chen ZY, Ho LJ, Yang SP, Chang DM, Liang CC
and Lai JH. Differential effects of triptolide and tetrandrine
on activation of COX-2, NF-kappaB, and AP-1 and virus
production in dengue virus-infected human lung cells.
European journal of pharmacology. 2008; 589(1-3):288298.

55.	 Sun H, Zhu MS, Wu WR, Shi XD and Xu LB. Role of antiangiogenesis therapy in the management of hepatocellular
carcinoma: The jury is still out. World journal of
hepatology. 2014; 6:830-835.

44.	 Cho HS, Chang SH, Chung YS, Shin JY, Park SJ, Lee ES,
Hwang SK, Kwon JT, Tehrani AM, Woo M, Noh MS,

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

40811

Oncotarget

56.	 van Beijnum JR, Nowak-Sliwinska P, Huijbers EJ, Thijssen
VL, Griffioen AW. The Great Escape; the Hallmarks of
Resistance to Antiangiogenic Therapy. Pharmacol Rev.
2015; 67:441-461.

287:35576-35588.
71.	 Ting Liu, Qiuxu Men, Guixian Wu, Chunrong Yu, Zan
Huang, Xin Liu and Wenhua Li. Tetrandrine induces
autophagy and differentiation by activating ROS and
Notch1 signaling in leukemia cells. Oncotarget. 2015. 10;
6:7992-8006. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.3505.

57.	 Stivarou T and Patsavoudi E. Extracellular Molecules
Involved in Cancer Cell Invasion. Cancers. 2015; 7:238265.

72.	 Qiu W, Su M, Xie F, Ai J, Ren Y, Zhang J, Guan R, He W,
Gong Y and Guo Y. Tetrandrine blocks autophagic flux and
induces apoptosis via energetic impairment in cancer cells.
Cell death & disease. 2014; 5:e1123.

58.	 Chen Y, Tseng SH. The Potential of Tetrandrine against
Gliomas. Anticancer Agents Med Chem. 2010; 10:534-542.
59.	 Chang KH, Liao HF, Chang HH, Chen YY, Yu MC, Chou
CJ, Chen YJ. Inhibitory effect of tetrandrine on pulmonary
metastases in CT26 colorectal adenocarcinoma-bearing
BALB/c mice. Am J Chin Med. 2004; 32:863-872.

73.	 Lien JC, Lin MW, Chang SJ, Lai KC, Huang AC, Yu FS,
Chung JG. Tetrandrine induces programmed cell death
in human oral cancer CAL 27 cells through the reactive
oxygen species production and caspase-dependent pathways
and associated with beclin-1-induced cell autophagy.
Environmental toxicology. 2016.

60.	 Wu Z, Wang G, Xu S, Li Y, Tian Y, Niu H, Yuan F, Zhou
F, Hao Z, Zheng Y, Li Q and Wang J. Effects of tetrandrine
on glioma cell malignant phenotype via inhibition of
ADAM17. Tumour biology. 2014; 35:2205-2210.

74.	 Lin Y, Wang Y, Liu X, Yan J, Su L, Liu X. A novel
derivative of tetrandrine (H1) induces endoplasmic
reticulum stress-mediated apoptosis and prosurvival
autophagy in human non-small cell lung cancer cells.
Tumour biology. 2016.

61.	 Gao JL, Ji X, He TC, Zhang Q, He K, Zhao Y, Chen SH and
Lv GY. Tetrandrine Suppresses Cancer Angiogenesis and
Metastasis in 4T1 Tumor Bearing Mice. Evidence-based
complementary and alternative medicine : eCAM. 2013;
2013:265061.

75.	 Mei L, Chen Y, Wang Z, Wang J, Wan J, Yu C, Liu X,
Li W. Synergistic antitumor effects of tetrandrine and
chloroquine combination therapy in human cancer: a
potential antagonistic role for p21. Br J Pharmacol. 2014.

62.	 Kim J, Klionsky DJ. Autophagy, cytoplasm-to-vacuole
targeting pathway, and pexophagy in yeast and mammalian
cells. Annu Rev Biochem. 2000; 69:303-342.

76.	 Shaffer BC, Gillet JP, Patel C, Baer MR, Bates SE and
Gottesman MM. Drug resistance: still a daunting challenge
to the successful treatment of AML. Drug resistance
updates : reviews and commentaries in antimicrobial and
anticancer chemotherapy. 2012; 15(1-2):62-69.

63.	 Daniel J. Klionsky DJK, Yoshinori Ohsumi. Vacuolar
import of proteins and organelles from the cytoplasm.
Annual Review of Cell and Developmental Biology. 1999;
15:1-32.
64.	 Baehrecke EH. Autophagy: dual roles in life and death? Nat
Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2005; 6:505-510.

77.	 Shao S, Huang X, Wang Y, He S, Xu X, Zhu X, Yang X,
Ding Z, Yao L, Huang Y and Wang C. A role for activator
of G-protein signaling 3 (AGS3) in multiple myeloma.
International journal of hematology. 2014; 99:57-68.

65.	 Emr DJKaSD. Autophagy as a Regulated Pathway of
Cellular Degradation. Science. 2000; 290:1717-1721.
66.	 Xiao Huan Liang, Saadiya Jackson, Matthew Seaman,
Kristy Brown, Bettina Kempkes, Hanina Hibshoosh &
Beth Levine. Induction of autophagy and inhibition of
tumorigenesis by beclin 1. Nature. 1999; 402:672-676.

78.	 Guo XL, Hu F, Zhang SS, Zhao QD, Zong C, Ye F, Guo
SW, Zhang JW, Li R, Wu MC, Wei LX. Inhibition of p53
increases chemosensitivity to 5-FU in nutrient-deprived
hepatocarcinoma cells by suppressing autophagy. Cancer
letters. 2014; 346 :278-284.

67.	 Takamura A, Komatsu M, Hara T, Sakamoto A, Kishi
C, Waguri S, Eishi Y, Hino O, Tanaka K, Mizushima N.
Autophagy-deficient mice develop multiple liver tumors.
Genes Dev. 2011; 25:795-800.

79.	 Cheng W, Liu T, Wan X, Gao Y and Wang H. MicroRNA199a targets CD44 to suppress the tumorigenicity and
multidrug resistance of ovarian cancer-initiating cells. The
FEBS journal. 2012; 279:2047-2059.

68.	 Nagelkerke A, Sweep FC, Geurts-Moespot A, Bussink J
and Span PN. Therapeutic targeting of autophagy in cancer.
Part I: Molecular pathways controlling autophagy. Seminars
in cancer biology. 2015; 31C:89-98.

80.	 Y Shang, Z Zhang, Z Liu, B Feng, G Ren, K Li, L Zhou, Y
Sun, M Li, J Zhou, Y An, K Wu, Y Nie and D Fan. miR508-5p regulates multidrug resistance of gastric cancer by
targeting ABCB1 and ZNRD1. Oncogene. 2014; 33:32673276.

69.	 Wang HQ, Liu T, Li L, Wang Q, Yu CR, Liu X and Li WH.
Tetrandrine is a potent cell autophagy agonist via activated
intracellular reactive oxygen species. Cell & Bioscience.
2015; 5:4.

81.	 Liu L, Ning X, Sun L, Zhang H, Shi Y, Guo C, Han S, Liu J,
Sun S, Han Z, Wu K and Fan D. Hypoxia-inducible factor-1
alpha contributes to hypoxia-induced chemoresistance in
gastric cancer. Cancer science. 2008; 99:121-128.

70.	 Gong K, Chen C, Zhan Y, Chen Y, Huang Z and Li W.
Autophagy-related gene 7 (ATG7) and reactive oxygen
species/extracellular signal-regulated kinase regulate
tetrandrine-induced autophagy in human hepatocellular
carcinoma. The Journal of biological chemistry. 2012;
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

82.	 Casorelli I, Bossa C and Bignami M. DNA damage and
repair in human cancer: molecular mechanisms and
40812

Oncotarget

contribution to therapy-related leukemias. International
journal of environmental research and public health. 2012;
9:2636-2657.

93.	 Zhiqing Pang,Liang Feng,Rongrong Hua,Jun Chen,Huile
Gao,Shuaiqi Pan,Xinguo Jiang,and Peng. LactoferrinConjugated Biodegradable Polymersome Holding
Doxorubicin and Tetrandrine for Chemotherapy of Glioma
Rats. Molecular pharmaceutics. 2010; 7:1995-2005.

83.	 T. Ivanova HZ, Y. Wu, L.L. Cheng, I.B. Tan, V.
Gopalakrishnan, C.H. Ooi, J. Lee, L. Qin, J. Wu, M. Lee,
S.Y. Rha, D. Huang, N. Liem, K.G. Yeoh, W.P. Yong, B.T.
Teh, P. Tan. Integrated epigenomics identifies BMP4 as
a modulator of cisplatin sensitivity in gastric cancer. Gut.
2013; 62:22-33.

94.	 Zhang Y, Wang C, Wang H, Wang K, Du Y and Zhang
J. Combination of Tetrandrine with cisplatin enhances
cytotoxicity through growth suppression and apoptosis in
ovarian cancer in vitro and in vivo. Cancer letters. 2011;
304:21-32.

84.	 Rajesh Krishna , Lawrence D. Mayer. Multidrug resistance
(MDR) in cancer Mechanisms, reversal using modulators
of MDR and the role of MDR modulators in influencing the
pharmacokinetics of anticancer drugs. European Journal of
Pharmaceutical Sciences. 2000:265-283.

95.	 Wang TH, Wan JY, Gong X, Li HZ and Cheng Y.
Tetrandrine enhances cytotoxicity of cisplatin in human
drug-resistant esophageal squamous carcinoma cells by
inhibition of multidrug resistance-associated protein 1.
Oncol Rep. 2012; 28:1681-1686.

85.	 Zhu X, Sui M, Fan W. In vitro and in vivo characterizations
of tetrandrine on the reversal of P-glycoprotein-mediated
drug resistance to paclitaxel. Anticancer Res. 2005;
25:1953-1962.

96.	 Wilhelm S, Carter C, Lynch M, Lowinger T, Dumas J,
Smith RA, Schwartz B, Simantov R, Kelley S. Discovery
and development of sorafenib: a multikinase inhibitor for
treating cancer. Nat Rev. 2006; 5:835-844.

86.	 Jin J, Wang FP, Wei H and Liu G. Reversal of multidrug
resistance of cancer through inhibition of P-glycoprotein
by 5-bromotetrandrine. Cancer chemotherapy and
pharmacology. 2005; 55:179-188.

97.	 Zhai B and Sun XY. Mechanisms of resistance to sorafenib
and the corresponding strategies in hepatocellular
carcinoma. World journal of hepatology. 2013; 5:345-352.

87.	 Sun YF and Wink M. Tetrandrine and fangchinoline,
bisbenzylisoquinoline
alkaloids
from
Stephania
tetrandra can reverse multidrug resistance by inhibiting
P-glycoprotein activity in multidrug resistant human cancer
cells. Phytomedicine. 2014; 21(8-9):1110-1119.

98.	 Shen ZX, Chen GQ, Ni JH, Li XS, Xiong SM, Qiu QY, Zhu
J, Tang W, Sun GL, Yang KQ, Chen Y, Zhou L, Fang ZW,
et al. Use of arsenic trioxide (As2O3) in the treatment of
acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL): II. Clinical efficacy
and pharmacokinetics in relapsed patients. Blood. 1997;
89:3354-3360.

88.	 Liu, Z. L., Hirano, T., Tanaka, S., Onda, K., and Oka, K.
Persistent reversal of P-glycoprotein-mediated daunorubicin
resistance by tetrandrine in multidrug-resistant human
T lymphoblastoid leukemia MOLT-4 cells. J Pharm
Pharmacol. 2003; 55:1531-1537.

99.	 Chen GQ, Shi XG, Tang W, Xiong SM, Zhu J, Cai X, Han
ZG, Ni JH, Shi GY, Jia PM, Liu MM, He KL, Niu C, et al.
Use of arsenic trioxide (As2O3) in the treatment of acute
promyelocytic leukemia (APL): I. As2O3 exerts dosedependent dual effects on APL cells. Blood. 1997; 89:33453353.

89.	 Xu W-L, Shen H-L, Ao Z-F, Chen B-A, Xia W, Gao
F and Zhang Y-N. Combination of tetrandrine as a
potential-reversing agent with daunorubicin, etoposide and
cytarabine for the treatment of refractory and relapsed acute
myelogenous leukemia. Leukemia Research. 2006; 30:407413.

100.	Chen Y, Li P, Yang S, Tong N, Zhang J, Zhao X.
Tetrandrine enhances the anticancer effects of arsenic
trioxide in vitro. Int J Clin Pharmacol Ther. 2014; 52 :416424.

90.	 Chen B, Yin L, Cheng J, Ding J, Gao C, Sun Y, Zhao
G, Wang J, Bao W, Xia G, Gao F, Wang X. Effect of
D,
L-threo-1-phenyl-2-decanoylamino-3-morpholino1-propanol and tetrandrine on the reversion of multidrug
resistance in K562/A02 cells. Hematology. 2011; 16:24-30.

101.	Salas PF, Herrmann C, Cawthray JF, Nimphius C, Kenkel
A, Chen J, de Kock C, Smith PJ, Patrick BO, Adam MJ,
Orvig C. Structural characteristics of chloroquine-bridged
ferrocenophane analogues of ferroquine may obviate
malaria drug-resistance mechanisms. Journal of medicinal
chemistry. 2013; 56:1596-1613.

91.	 Shen H, Xu W, Chen Q, Wu Z, Tang H and Wang F.
Tetrandrine prevents acquired drug resistance of K562 cells
through inhibition of mdr1 gene transcription. Journal of
Cancer Research and Clinical Oncology. 2009; 136:659665.

102.	Xiaoping Qian, Bo Yan, Xuefei Zhou, Li Xie, Jia
Wei, Rutian Li, Lixia Yu, and Baorui Liu. Synergistic
Antiangiogenic Activity of Tetrandrine Combined with
Endostar on the Human Umbilical Vein Endothelial Cell
Model. Cancer Biotherapy & Radiopharmaceuticals. 2013;
28:385-390.

92.	 Xu XH, Gan YC, Xu GB, Chen T, Zhou H, Tang JF, Gu
Y, Xu F, Xie YY, Zhao XY and Xu RZ. Tetrandrine citrate
eliminates imatinib-resistant chronic myeloid leukemia cells
in vitro and in vivo by inhibiting Bcr-Abl/beta-catenin
axis. Journal of Zhejiang University Science B. 2012;
13:867-874.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

103.	He P, Sun H, Jian XX, Chen QH, Chen DL, Liu GT,
Wang FP. Partial synthesis and biological evaluation of
bisbenzylisoquinoline alkaloids derivatives: potential
modulators of multidrug resistance in cancer. J Asian Nat
Prod Res. 2012; 14:564-576.
40813

Oncotarget

104.	Cao Z, Wright M, Cheng J, Huang X, Liu L, Wu L,
Yang P. The novel bis-benzylisoquinoline PY35 reverses
P-glycoprotein-mediated multidrug resistance. Oncol Rep.
2014; 32 :1211-1217.

W. An efficient Trojan delivery of tetrandrine by poly(Nvinylpyrrolidone)-block-poly(epsilon-caprolactone) (PVPb-PCL) nanoparticles shows enhanced apoptotic induction
of lung cancer cells and inhibition of its migration and
invasion. International journal of nanomedicine. 2014;
9:231-242.

105.	Sun X, Xu R, Deng Y, Cheng H, Ma J, Ji J and Zhou Y.
Effects of Tetrandrine on Apoptosis and Radiosensitivity
of Nasopharyngeal Carcinoma Cell Line CNE. Acta
Biochimica et Biophysica Sinica. 2007; 39:869-878.

119.	Kupchan SM, Patel AC, Fujita E. Tumor inhibitors. VI.
Cissampareine, new cytotoxic alkaloid from Cissampelos
pareira. Cytotoxicity of bisbenzylisoquinoline alkaloids. J
Pharm Sci. 1965; 54:580-583.

106.	Sun XC, Cheng HY, Deng YX, Shao RG, Ma J. Tetrandrine:
a potent abrogator of G2 checkpoint function in tumor cells
and its mechanism. Biomed Environ Sci. 2007; 20:495-501.

120.	Lv JJ, Xu M, Wang D, Zhu HT, Yang CR, Wang YF, Li Y
and Zhang YJ. Cytotoxic bisbenzylisoquinoline alkaloids
from Stephania epigaea. Journal of natural products. 2013;
76:926-932.

107.	Yu J, Liu F, Sun M, Sun Z, Sun S. Enhancement of
radiosensitivity and the potential mechanism on human
esophageal carcinoma cells by tetrandrine. Cancer Biother
Radiopharm. 2011; 26:437-442.

121.	Ono M, Tanaka N. Positive interaction of
bisbenzylisoquinoline alkaloid, cepharanthin, with vinca
alkaloid agents against human tumors. In Vivo. 1997;
11:233-241.

108.	Prabhu RH, Patravale VB and Joshi MD. Polymeric
nanoparticles for targeted treatment in oncology: current
insights. International journal of nanomedicine. 2015;
10:1001-1018.

122.	Shiraishi N, Akiyama S, Nakagawa M, Kobayashi M,
Kuwano M. Effect of bisbenzylisoquinoline (biscoclaurine)
alkaloids on multidrug resistance in KB human cancer cells.
Cancer Res. 1987; 47:2413-2416.

109.	Cho K, Wang X, Nie S, Chen ZG and Shin DM. Therapeutic
nanoparticles for drug delivery in cancer. Clinical cancer
research : an official journal of the American Association
for Cancer Research. 2008; 14:1310-1316.

123.	Poornima P, Weng CF, Padma VV. Neferine, an alkaloid
from lotus seed embryo, inhibits human lung cancer
cell growth by MAPK activation and cell cycle arrest.
Biofactors. 2014; 40:121-131.

110.	Sinha R, Kim GJ, Nie S and Shin DM. Nanotechnology in
cancer therapeutics: bioconjugated nanoparticles for drug
delivery. Molecular cancer therapeutics. 2006; 5:19091917.

124.	Yoon JS, Kim HM, Yadunandam AK, Kim NH, Jung
HA, Choi JS, Kim CY and Kim GD. Neferine isolated
from Nelumbo nucifera enhances anti-cancer activities in
Hep3B cells: molecular mechanisms of cell cycle arrest,
ER stress induced apoptosis and anti-angiogenic response.
Phytomedicine. 2013; 20:1013-1022.

111.	Haley B and Frenkel E. Nanoparticles for drug delivery in
cancer treatment. Urologic oncology. 2008; 26:57-64.
112.	Wan J, Wang JH, Liu T, Xie Z, Yu XF and Li W. Surface
chemistry but not aspect ratio mediates the biological
toxicity of gold nanorods in vitro and in vivo. Scientific
reports. 2015; 5:11398.

125.	Xing ZB, Yao L, Zhang GQ, Zhang XY, Zhang YX, Pang
D. Fangchinoline Induces G1 Arrest in Breast Cancer Cells
Through Cell-Cycle Regulation. Phytother Res. 2013;
27:1790-1794.

113.	Allen TM. Ligand-targeted therapeutics in anticancer
therapy. Nature reviews Cancer. 2002; 2:750-763.
114.	Li R, Li X, Xie L, Ding D, Hu Y, Qian X, Yu L, Ding Y,
Jiang X and Liu B. Preparation and evaluation of PEG-PCL
nanoparticles for local tetradrine delivery. International
journal of pharmaceutics. 2009; 379:158-166.

126.	Wang CD1, Huang JG, Gao X, Li Y, Zhou SY, Yan X, Zou
A, Chang JL, Wang YS, Yang GX, He GY. Fangchinoline
induced G1/S arrest by modulating expression of p27,
PCNA, and cyclin D in human prostate carcinoma cancer
PC3 cells and tumor xenograft. Biosci Biotechnol Biochem.
2010; 74:488-493.

115.	Li R, Xie L, Zhu Z, Liu Q, Hu Y, Jiang X, Yu L, Qian
X, Guo W, Ding Y, Liu B. Reversion of pH-Induced
Physiological Drug Resistance: A Novel Function of
Copolymeric Nanoparticles. PLoS One. 2011; 6:e24172.

127.	Xing ZB, Yao L, Zhang GQ, Zhang XY, Zhang YX,
Pang D. Fangchinoline inhibits breast adenocarcinoma
proliferation by inducing apoptosis. Chem Pharm Bull
(Tokyo). 2011; 59:1476-1480.

116.	Li X, Lu X, Xu H, Zhu Z, Yin H, Qian X, Li R, Jiang X
and Liu B. Paclitaxel/tetrandrine coloaded nanoparticles
effectively promote the apoptosis of gastric cancer cells
based on “oxidation therapy”. Molecular pharmaceutics.
2012; 9:222-229.

128.	Wang CD, Yuan CF, Bu YQ, Wu XM, Wan JY, Zhang
L, Hu N, Liu XJ, Zu Y, Liu GL, Song FZ. Fangchinoline
inhibits cell proliferation via Akt/GSK-3beta/ cyclin D1
signaling and induces apoptosis in MDA-MB-231 breast
cancer cells. Asian Pac J Cancer Prev. 2014; 15 :769-773.

117.	Li X, Xu H, Dai X, Zhu Z, Liu B and Lu X. Enhanced
in vitro and in vivo therapeutic efficacy of codrug-loaded
nanoparticles against liver cancer. International journal of
nanomedicine. 2012; 7:5183-5190.

129.	Guo B, Su J, Zhang T, Wang K, Li X. Fangchinoline as a
kinase inhibitor targets FAK and suppresses FAK-mediated

118.	Xu H, Hou Z, Zhang H, Kong H, Li X, Wang H and Xie
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

40814

Oncotarget

signaling pathway in A549. Journal of Drug Targeting.
2015; 23:266-274.

134.	Liu R, Zhang Y, Chen Y, Qi J, Ren S, Xushi MY, Yang
C, Zhu H, Xiong D. A novel calmodulin antagonist O-(4ethoxyl-butyl)-berbamine overcomes multidrug resistance
in drug-resistant MCF-7/ADR breast carcinoma cells. J
Pharm Sci. 2010; 99:3266-3275.

130.	Wang N, Pan W, Zhu M, Zhang M, Hao X, Liang G and
Feng Y. Fangchinoline induces autophagic cell death via
p53/sestrin2/AMPK signalling in human hepatocellular
carcinoma cells. British Journal of Pharmacology. 2011;
164(2b):731-742.

135.	Wang G, Lemos, J.R. Tetrandrine blocks a slow , largeconductance, Ca(2 +)-activated potassium channel besides
inhibiting a non-inactivating Ca2+ current in isolated nerve
terminals of the rat neurohypophysis. Pflugers Arch. 1992;
421:558-565.

131.	Choi SU, Park SH, Kim KH, Choi EJ, Kim S, Park
WK, Zhang YH, Kim HS, Jung NP, Lee CO. The
bisbenzylisoquinoline
alkaloids,
tetrandine
and
fangchinoline, enhance the cytotoxicity of multidrug
resistance-related drugs via modulation of P-glycoprotein.
Anticancer Drugs. 1998; 9:255-261.

136.	Shen YC, Chen CF, Wang SY, Sung YJ. Impediment to
calcium influx and reactive oxygen production accounts
for the inhibition of neutrophil Mac-1 Up-regulation and
adhesion by tetrandrine. Molecular pharmacology. 1999;
55:186-193.

132.	Frappier F1, Jossang A, Soudon J, Calvo F, Rasoanaivo
P, Ratsimamanga-Urverg S, Saez J, Schrevel J, Grellier
P. Bisbenzylisoquinolines as modulators of chloroquine
resistance in Plasmodium falciparum and multidrug
resistance in tumor cells. Antimicrob Agents Chemother.
1996; 40:1476-1481.

137.	Lucas B Sullivan and Navdeep S Chandel. Mitochondrial
reactive oxygen species and cancer. Cancer & Metabolism.
2014; 2:17.
138.	Zhuang W, Li B, Long L, Chen L, Huang Q and Liang Z.
Induction of autophagy promotes differentiation of gliomainitiating cells and their radiosensitivity. International
journal of cancer. 2011; 129:2720-2731.

133.	Robey RW, Shukla S, Finley EM, Oldham RK, Barnett
D, Ambudkar SV, Fojo T, Bates SE. Inhibition of
P-glycoprotein (ABCB1)- and multidrug resistanceassociated protein 1 (ABCC1)-mediated transport by the
orally administered inhibitor, CBT-1((R)). Biochemical
pharmacology. 2008; 75:1302-1312.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

40815

Oncotarget

