Oncotarget, Vol. 7, No. 5

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

A novel approach to the discovery of anti-tumor pharmaceuticals:
searching for activators of liponecrosis
Anthony Arlia-Ciommo1, Veronika Svistkova1, Sadaf Mohtashami1 and Vladimir I.
Titorenko1
1

Department of Biology, Concordia University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada

Correspondence to: Vladimir I. Titorenko, email: vladimir.titorenko@concordia.ca
Keywords: cancer, anti-cancer therapeutics, lipid metabolism, programmed cell death, liponecrosis, yeast
Received: August 20, 2015	

Accepted: November 21, 2015	

Published: November 30, 2015

ABSTRACT
A recently conducted chemical genetic screen for pharmaceuticals that can
extend longevity of the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae has identified lithocholic acid
as a potent anti-aging molecule. It was found that this hydrophobic bile acid is also
a selective anti-tumor chemical compound; it kills different types of cultured cancer
cells if used at concentrations that do not compromise the viability of non-cancerous
cells. These studies have revealed that yeast can be successfully used as a model
organism for high-throughput screens aimed at the discovery of selectively acting
anti-tumor small molecules. Two metabolic traits of rapidly proliferating fermenting
yeast, namely aerobic glycolysis and lipogenesis, are known to be similar to those of
cancer cells. The mechanisms underlying these key metabolic features of cancer cells
and fermenting yeast have been established; such mechanisms are discussed in this
review. We also suggest how a yeast-based chemical genetic screen can be used for
the high-throughput development of selective anti-tumor pharmaceuticals that kill
only cancer cells. This screen consists of searching for chemical compounds capable
of increasing the abundance of membrane lipids enriched in unsaturated fatty acids
that would therefore be toxic only to rapidly proliferating cells, such as cancer cells
and fermenting yeast.

INTRODUCTION

amenable to comprehensive molecular analyses [21, 22],
can be used as a model organism for the discovery of
selective anti-tumor small molecules that target aerobic
glycolysis or lipogenesis [19, 23-32]. In this review, we
compare molecular and cellular mechanisms underlying
aerobic glycolysis and lipogenesis in cancer cells and
rapidly proliferating fermenting yeast. Based on our
analysis, we propose a novel yeast-based chemical genetic
screen for anti-tumor pharmaceuticals that kill cancer
cells if used at concentrations that do not compromise
functionality and viability of non-cancerous cells. This
high-throughput screen is aimed at the identification
of small molecules capable of increasing the fatty acid
desaturation index of membrane lipids in fermenting yeast
cells, thereby eliciting their liponecrotic death.

Many pharmaceuticals that are currently used or
undergoing clinical evaluation for cancer therapy have
been developed as modulators of certain metabolic
processes in cancer cells. These processes include the
following: (1) nucleotide synthesis; (2) amino acid
metabolism; (3) aerobic glycolysis, which is also known
as ″the Warburg effect″; (4) lipogenesis, a de novo
synthesis of bulk quantities of membrane lipids; (5) a
lipolytic formation of fatty acids from monoacylglycerols;
(6) mitochondrial transport and oxidation of fatty acids;
(7) pentose phosphate pathway; and (8) mitochondrial
tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle and electron transport chain
(ETC) [1-10]. A body of evidence implies that at least two
of these processes, aerobic glycolysis and lipogenesis, are
common metabolic features of cancer cells and rapidly
proliferating cells of the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae
[11-20]. Thus, S. cerevisiae, a unicellular eukaryote
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

5204

Oncotarget

LIPONECROSIS IN YEAST: A CELL
DEATH PROGRAM CAUSED BY
CHANGES IN MEMBRANE LIPIDS

(PM) bilayer [36, 37], the commitment of yeast to the
liponecrotic form of PCD does not involve nuclear
fragmentation or PS enrichment in the extracellular (outer)
leaflet of the PM [25, 35]. Furthermore, in contrast to cells
undergoing autophagic PCD and therefore accumulating
an excessive number of double-membraned vesicles called
autophagosomes [36, 38-40], yeast cells that undergo
liponecrotic PCD do not display such vast autophagic
vacuolization of the cytoplasm [35]. Moreover, contrary
to cells undergoing regulated necrotic PCD, which is
characterized by a clearly visible rupture of the PM
[41-44], yeast cells committed to liponecrotic PCD do
not exhibit any noticeable perforations in the PM [35].
However, the necrotic and liponecrotic forms of PCD
share at least one common trait - i.e., a substantial rise in
the permeability of the PM for propidium iodide (PI) and
other small molecules [25, 35, 41, 43, 44].

Our recent studies in the yeast S. cerevisiae have
discovered and characterized a previously unknown form
of programmed cell death (PCD) called ″liponecrosis″
[25, 33-35]. Liponecrotic PCD can be instigated by a
short-term exposure of yeast to exogenous palmitoleic
acid (POA), a 16-carbon monounsaturated fatty acid
(16:1 n-7) [25]. Yeast cells undergoing liponecrotic
PCD do not display morphological and biochemical
hallmarks of the well-characterized apoptotic, autophagic
or regulated necrotic forms of PCD. Indeed, unlike cell
commitment to apoptotic PCD known to be accompanied
by fragmentation of the nucleus and externalization of
phosphatidylserine (PS) within the plasma membrane

Figure 1: A model for the molecular mechanism underlying a liponecrotic form of programmed cell death (PCD) in
yeast. A brief exposure of yeast to exogenously added palmitoleic acid (POA) can trigger liponecrotic PCD, which differs from all other

presently known programs of cell death. Liponecrosis in yeast is caused by a massive remodeling of lipid metabolism and lipid transport
in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), peroxisomes (PER), plasma membrane (PM), lipid droplets (LD) and mitochondria (MIT). Activation
arrows and inhibition bars denote pro-death cellular processes (which are displayed in red color) or pro-survival cellular processes (which
are displayed in green color). See text for more details. Abbreviations: PE, phosphatidylethanolamine; ROS, reactive oxygen species.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

5205

Oncotarget

The molecular mechanism underlying liponecrosis
has begun to emerge; it is driven by an extensive
remodeling of lipid metabolism and lipid transport in yeast
cells briefly exposed to exogenous POA [34, 35]. A model
for such mechanism is depicted schematically in Figure
1. The model posits that the extent of yeast susceptibility
to liponecrotic PCD depends on the relative rates of prodeath and pro-survival cellular processes. In Figure 1 these
processes are displayed in red or green color, respectively.
The pro-death cellular processes accelerating
liponecrotic PCD can create the acute cellular stress.
These processes are elicited when exogenously
added POA is initially used for the synthesis of POAcontaining phospholipids in the endoplasmic reticulum
(ER); the bulk quantities of these phospholipids then
accumulate in the membrane bilayers of mitochondria
and PM [34, 35], likely after being transported from the
ER to these membrane bilayers via mitochondria-ER
and PM-ER junctions (Figure 1) [45-48]. The buildup
of POA-containing phospholipids in the inner and
outer mitochondrial membranes of yeast committed to
liponecrosis compromises mitochondrial functionality
because it deteriorates such vital mitochondrial processes
as respiration, electrochemical membrane potential and
ATP synthesis [34, 35]. These dysfunctional mitochondria
are unable to generate ATP in quantities that are sufficient
for the energy-demanding process of assimilating
exogenously added POA into triacylglycerols (TAG);
TAG are neutral lipids initially synthesized in the ER
and then deposited in lipid droplets (LD) [34, 35]. The
synthesis and deposition of POA-containing TAG are
considered pro-survival processes because they allow a
reduction in the incorporation of POA into phospholipids,
thus lowering their accumulation in the membranes of the
ER, mitochondria and PM (Figure 1) [34, 49-52]. The
dysfunctional mitochondria that are formed in yeast cells
committed to liponecrosis can be selectively eliminated
in the process of mitophagy. This autophagic degradation
of dysfunctional mitochondria operates as a pro-survival
process [34, 35], probably because of its well-known
essential role in sustaining a population of functional
mitochondria in a yeast cell (Figure 1) [53-55].
The accumulation of POA-containing phospholipids
in both mitochondrial membranes can commit yeast
to liponecrotic PCD not only because it weakens
mitochondrial respiration, membrane potential and ATP
synthesis but also because it considerably enhances
the formation of reactive oxygen species (ROS) in
mitochondria [34]. Due to such formation of mitochondrial
ROS in bulk quantities, the cellular concentrations
of ROS outside mitochondria in yeast committed to
liponecrosis can exceed a cytotoxic threshold. This not
only considerably reduces functionalities of various
organelles by oxidatively damaging their protein and lipid
constituents but also compromises cellular proteostasis
by oxidatively damaging protein molecules confined to
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

the cytosol (Figure 1) [34]. The numerous oxidatively
damaged and dysfunctional organelles accumulated
in yeast committed to liponecrosis undergo massive
degradation. This pro-death process is executed by
the cytosolic serine/threonine protein kinase Atg1 and
several other proteins known to govern a non-selective
autophagic breakdown of various organelles (Figure 1)
[34, 35, 56, 57]. The oxidatively damaged, dysfunctional,
unfolded and aggregated cytosolic proteins that amass in
yeast committed to liponecrosis are degraded in a prosurvival process executed by the metacaspase Yca1 and
serine protease Nma111 (Figure 1) [34]. Of note, Yca1
and Nma111 are known to be the key components of the
caspase-dependent apoptotic pathway for breakdown of
cytosolic proteins in yeast undergoing an apoptotic mode
of PCD [58-60].
The accumulation of POA-containing phospholipids
in the PM of yeast committed to liponecrosis leads to a
re-distribution of phosphatidylethanolamine (PE) from
the extracellular (outer) leaflet to the intracellular (inner)
leaflet of the PM. The resulting depletion of PE in the
outer leaflet of the PM is a pro-death process because it
substantially increases the permeability of the PM for
PI and other small molecules (Figure 1) [25, 34]. Such
re-distribution of PE within the PM bilayer is driven
by the alkaline-pH- and lipid-asymmetry-responsive
Rim101 signaling pathway, which can be activated in
response to the buildup of POA-containing phospholipids
in this membrane bilayer [34]. Noteworthy, the Rim101
signaling pathway has been shown not only to accelerate
the movement of PE from the outer leaflet of the PM to
its inner leaflet but also to decelerate the movement of
this phospholipid across the PM bilayer in the opposite
direction [61-63].
It needs to be emphasized that at least two cellular
processes can decelerate liponecrotic PCD because
they both prevent a portion of exogenously added POA
from being used for the synthesis of POA-containing
phospholipids. As previously mentioned, one of these
pro-survival cellular processes is POA incorporation into
TAG and the ensuing deposition of these neutral lipids in
LD (Figure 1) [34, 35]. Another such pro-survival cellular
process is POA oxidation in peroxisomes of yeast cells
exposed to this monounsaturated fatty acid (Figure 1) [34,
35]; peroxisomes are known for the essential role they
play in oxidative degradation of fatty acids [64, 65].

AEROBIC
GLYCOLYSIS
AND
LIPOGENESIS: SIMILAR METABOLIC
FEATURES OF THE FERMENTING
YEAST S. CEREVISIAE AND CANCER
CELLS
A body of evidence implies that rapidly proliferating
cells of the yeast S. cerevisiae grown in nutrient- and
5206

Oncotarget

and in many types of cancer cells, such ability is also due
to ″the Crabtree effect″ of suppressing mitochondrial
respiration and oxidative phosphorylation [72-76]. It
should be stressed that the conversion of glucose to lactate
taking place in cancer cells under aerobic conditions is
substantially less efficient in terms of ATP production
per molecule of glucose than the one observed in noncancerous cells under the same conditions [12, 20, 72, 77,
78]. In the presence of oxygen, these non-cancerous cells

glucose-rich media exhibit some metabolic features that
are similar to the key tumorigenic metabolic traits of
different types of cancer cells [15, 17, 19, 20, 32, 66-68].
One of these similar metabolic traits is aerobic
glycolysis, also known as the Warburg effect. This trait
consists in the ability of cancer cells to metabolically
convert glucose to lactate under aerobic conditions [18,
20, 69-71]. In all cancer cell types, this ability is known
to be caused by enhanced glucose uptake and glycolysis,

Figure 2: Some of the key metabolic processes underlying aerobic glycolysis in the fermenting yeast S. cerevisiae and
cancer cells have similar rates and patterns of regulation in these two cell types. Because of these similarities, aerobic

glycolysis is a common metabolic feature of rapidly proliferating yeast and cancer cells. Enzymes, metabolites and processes whose
activities, concentrations and rates are increased or decreased are displayed in red or green color, respectively. See text for more details.
Abbreviations: CCO, cytochrome c oxidase; ETC, electron transport chain; HK, hexokinase; PDC, pyruvate decarboxylase; PDH, pyruvate
dehydrogenase; PDHK, pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase; PFK, phosphofructokinase; PK, pyruvate kinase; PM, plasma membrane; LDH,
lactate dehydrogenase; MIT, mitochondrion; SDH, succinate dehydrogenase; TCA, tricarboxylic acid.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

5207

Oncotarget

use the glycolytic metabolic pathway to convert glucose
to pyruvate, which is then metabolized to carbon dioxide
via oxidative phosphorylation in mitochondria [79-83].
Several metabolic processes are known to underlie the
phenomenon of aerobic glycolysis. It seems that aerobic
glycolysis is common to the fermenting yeast S. cerevisiae
and different types of cancer cells because many of these
metabolic processes have similar relative rates, exhibit
similar regulation patterns, and are catalyzed by enzymes
sharing significant sequence homologies in yeast and
cancer cells [15, 18, 66-68, 72, 77, 83]. Such similarities
between the key metabolic processes underlying aerobic
glycolysis in rapidly proliferating yeast and cancer cells

are outlined schematically in Figure 2 and include the
following: (1) elevated cytosolic levels of hexokinase
isoforms that have high affinities for glucose and
low sensitivities to feedback inhibition by glucose-6phosphate [11, 13, 14, 84, 85]; (2) increased enzymatic
activities of cytosolic phosphofructokinase and augmented
concentrations of fructose-2,6-bisphosphate, a potent
allosteric activator of phosphofructokinase [15, 18, 66, 82,
86]; (3) raised levels of cytosolic pyruvate kinase isoforms
highly sensitive to allosteric activation by fructose-1,6bisphosphate, a product of the reaction catalyzed by
phosphofructokinase [82, 87-92]; (4) elevated cytosolic
levels and enzymatic activities of pyruvate decarboxylase

Figure 3: Some changes affecting lipid metabolism in cancer cells can play causal roles in certain aspects of cancer
initiation, promotion and progression. These aspects include malignant transformation of cells A., tumorigenic impairment of
normal organization of the tissue of origin B., migration of cancer cells within the tissue of origin and interaction with stromal components
of this tissue C., tumor angiogenesis and the ensuing formation of metastases D., and growth and further spreading of the cancer cells
metastasizing adipose tissue E.. See text for more details. Abbreviations: DAG, diacylglycerol; FA-CoA, acyl-CoA ester of fatty acid; LPA,
lysophosphatidic acid; MAG, monoacylglycerol; PGE2, prostaglandin E2; PI (4, 5) P2, phosphatidylinositol-4, 5-bisphosphate; PI (3, 4, 5)
P3, phosphatidylinositol-3, 4, 5-triphosphate.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

5208

Oncotarget

in yeast and lactate dehydrogenase in cancer cells, both
of which lower mitochondrial oxidation of pyruvate by
catalyzing its conversion into cytosolic acetaldehyde
or cytosolic lactate, respectively [66, 82, 93-96]; (5)
increased levels of mitochondrial pyruvate dehydrogenase
kinase, which causes a decrease in mitochondrial pyruvate
oxidation by phosphorylating and inhibiting pyruvate
dehydrogenase in mitochondria [66, 97-101]; and (6)
reduced levels and/or activities of such vital components
of the mitochondrial ETC as succinate dehydrogenase
(complex II; it is also an enzyme of the mitochondrial
TCA cycle), cytochrome c oxidase (complex IV) and
ATP synthase (complex V) [102-108]. Of note, although
most known types of cancer cells permanently exhibit the
Warburg effect of enhanced glucose uptake and intensified
glycolysis, some of these cancer cell types display the
Crabtree effect of suppressed mitochondrial TCA cycle,
ETC and/or ATP synthesis only temporally whereas others
never exhibit such an effect [15, 66, 109-113].

Fermenting cells of the yeast S. cerevisiae have
another characteristic metabolic feature which is known as
one of the key tumorigenic metabolic traits of cancer cells.
This metabolic feature is called lipogenesis. It is common
to rapidly proliferating yeast and cancer cells because both
cell types require abundant quantities of membrane lipids
that can be used for (1) cell growth and mitotic division,
and (2) membrane trafficking and membrane-associated
signaling [7, 11, 14, 16, 19, 20, 77, 80, 114-121].
Lipogenesis refers to a type of metabolic reprogramming
in which the surplus metabolites produced by aerobic
glycolysis can be used for the de novo synthesis of bulk
quantities of membrane lipids, mainly (but not exclusively)
fatty acids, phospholipids and cholesterol [1, 18, 20, 77,
114, 119]. Recent evidence indicates that certain features
of such reprogramming of lipid metabolism in cancer cells
may play causal roles in malignant transformation and
tumor development. The features of reprogrammed lipid
metabolism that can affect some specific aspects of cancer

Figure 4: Several of the key metabolic processes underlying lipogenesis in the fermenting yeast S. cerevisiae and cancer
cells have comparable rates and exhibit analogous patterns of regulation in these two cell types. Due to such similar
properties of the key metabolic processes that underlie lipogenesis, it is a common metabolic trait of the rapidly proliferating yeast and
cancer cells. Enzymes and processes exhibiting increased activities and rates are displayed in red color. Glycolytic processes whose rates
are elevated in yeast and cancer cells are also shown in red color; enzymes catalyzing these processes are named in Figure 2. See text for
more details. Abbreviations: ACC, acetyl-CoA carboxylase; ACS, acyl-CoA synthetase; FA-CoA, acyl-CoA ester of fatty acid; FASN, fatty
acid synthase; FFA, free fatty acid; LD, lipid droplets; MAG, monoacylglycerol; MAGL, monoacylglycerol lipase; MIT, mitochondria;
PM, plasma membrane; SCD, stearoyl-CoA desaturase; SPHK, sphingosine-1-kinase; TAG, triacylglycerol; TCA, tricarboxylic acid.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

5209

Oncotarget

initiation, promotion and progression are recapitulated
schematically in Figure 3 and include the following: (1)
a stimulation of the mevalonate pathway of cholesterol
synthesis, activation of fatty acid synthesis and induction
of phosphatidylinositol-3,4,5-triphosphate synthesis which can all promote malignant transformation of cells
and can also contribute to the tumorigenic impairment
of normal tissue organization (Figure 3A and 3B) [7,
120, 122-130]; (2) a lipogenic incorporation of fatty
acids into diacylglycerol, lysophosphatidic acid and
prostaglandin E2, as well as a lipolytic, monoacylglycerol
lipase (MAGL)-driven formation of fatty acids from
monoacylglycerols, all of which can help cancer cells to
invade the tissue of origin by stimulating the migration
of cancer cells within this tissue and also by promoting
the interaction of cancer cells with stromal components of
this tissue (Figure 3C) [6, 125, 131-137]; (3) the de novo
synthesis of fatty acids from acetyl-CoA and the formation
of lysophosphatidic acid, sphingosine-1-phosphate and
prostaglandin E2 from fatty acids which can support cancer
cell invasion within the tissue of origin by guiding the
bidirectional communications between the invading cancer
cells and such stromal components as cancer-associated

fibroblasts, M2 macrophages and natural killer cells
(Figure 3C) [125, 138-141]; (4) the de novo synthesis of
fatty acids, sphingosine-1-phosphate and prostaglandin E2
which can accelerate tumor angiogenesis, thus facilitating
the spreading of cancer cells into other tissues and
supporting the formation of metastases (Figure 3D) [125,
142-148]; and (5) the lipolysis of TAG deposited in LD
within adipocytes adjacent to cancer cells that metastasize
adipose tissue which allows cancer cells to generate
bulk quantities of fatty acids; after being transferred to
metastatic cancer cells, these fatty acids can be oxidized in
mitochondria to support the growth and further spreading
of the cancer cells (Figure 3E) [149-152].
Akin to aerobic glycolysis, lipogenesis is common
to the fermenting yeast S. cerevisiae and cancer cells
because several key processes underlying this metabolic
trait exhibit comparable rates, display analogous patterns
of regulation and are driven by orthologous proteins in
yeast and cancer cells [1, 16, 19, 50, 51, 81, 114, 119, 120,
153, 154]. Such similar properties of the key metabolic
processes underlying lipogenesis in rapidly proliferating
yeast and cancer cells are displayed schematically in
Figure 4 and include the following: (1) increased activities

Figure 5: Different mechanisms by which various anti-tumor pharmaceuticals can inhibit lipogenesis in cancer cells.

These mechanisms decelerate lipogenesis-related processes common to rapidly proliferating yeast and cancer cells. Genes, proteins and
processes whose increased expression levels, activities and rates promote tumorigenesis in cells that are not exposed to lipogenesisinhibiting small molecules are displayed in red color. Proteins and processes whose activities and rates attenuate tumorigenesis in response
to cell treatment with lipogenesis-inhibiting small molecules are displayed in green color. See text for more details. Abbreviations: 25HC, 25-hydroxycholesterol; ACC, acetyl-CoA carboxylase; ACS, acyl-CoA synthetase; AICAR, 5-aminoimidazole-4-carboxamide
ribonucleoside; AMPK, AMP-activated protein kinase; EGCG, epigallocatechin-3-gallate; ER, endoplasmic reticulum; FA-CoA, acylCoA ester of fatty acid; FASN, fatty acid synthase; FFA, free fatty acid; LXR, liver-X-receptor; MAG, monoacylglycerol; MAGL,
monoacylglycerol lipase; PM, plasma membrane; SCD, stearoyl-CoA desaturase; SREBP, sterol regulatory element-binding protein;
TOFA, 5-(tetradecyloxy)-2-furoic acid; TZDs, thiazolidinediones.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

5210

Oncotarget

of the enzymes involved in the de novo synthesis of acylCoA esters of saturated fatty acids from acetyl-CoA;
among these enzymes are acetyl-CoA carboxylase (ACC),
fatty acid synthase (FASN) and acyl-CoA synthetase
(ACS) in cancer cells and their orthologues Acc1, Fas1/
Fas2 complex and Faa1 in yeast [1, 19, 155-160]; (2) an
elevated enzymatic activity of stearoyl-CoA desaturase
(SCD; this enzyme catalyzes the desaturation of stearoylCoA to oleoyl-CoA) in cancer cells and of the orthologous
enzyme Ole1 in yeast [1, 5, 16, 19, 161-163]; (3) an
amplified enzymatic activity of sphingosine-1-kinase
(which accelerates the formation of the potent signaling
molecule sphingosine-1-phosphate from acyl-CoA esters
of fatty acids) in cancer cells and of its orthologues Lcb4
and Lcb5 in yeast [16, 19, 143, 164-167]; and (4) an
elevated enzymatic activity of MAGL (which catalyzes the
lipolytic formation of fatty acids from monoacylglycerols)
in cancer cells; in rapidly proliferating yeast, the TAG
lipase Tgl4 is likely to play a similar role in providing
fatty acids to support cell growth, division, membrane
trafficking and membrane-associated signaling [6, 19, 115,
117, 133, 137]. Noteworthy, although many types of solid
tumors exhibit both aerobic glycolysis and lipogenesis,
primary prostate cancers display only lipogenesis as a
characteristic metabolic trait [10, 158, 168-171].

carboxamide ribonucleoside (AICAR)- or A-769662dependent activation of AMP-activated protein kinase
(AMPK), which then phosphorylates and inhibits
ACC and FASN (Figure 5) [1, 10, 19, 192-197]; (3) an
interaction of the small molecule SR9243 with the nuclear
liver-X-receptor (LXR); such interaction attenuates the
LXR-driven transcription of nuclear genes encoding ACC,
FSN and SCD (Figure 5) [2, 198]; and (4) an inhibition
of the ER-to-Golgi transport of sterol regulatory elementbinding proteins (SREBP) by betulin and several other
small molecules; such inhibition impairs the proteolytic
processing of SREBP in the Golgi, thus preventing the
import of active fragments of SREBP into the nucleus and
attenuating SREBP-dependent transcription of nuclear
genes encoding ACC, FSN and SCD (Figure 5) [1, 199201].

A NOVEL APPROACH TO DISCOVERING
SELECTIVE
ANTI-TUMOR
PHARMACEUTICALS THAT CAN ALTER
LIPID METABOLISM: THE SEARCH FOR
ACTIVATORS OF LIPONECROSIS
A growing body of evidence indicates that
the proliferation of cancer cells can be decelerated
and their survival can be compromised by genetic
and pharmacological interventions capable of
altering (i.e. decreasing or increasing) ″the fatty acid
desaturation index″. The index is defined as the ratio
of monounsaturated fatty acids (MUFA) to saturated
fatty acids (SFA) [202, 203]. The value of this index in
human cells depends mainly on the enzymatic activity of
the SCD1 isoform of stearoyl-CoA desaturase. This ERassociated acyl-CoA delta-9 desaturase accelerates the
introduction of a cis-double bond between carbons 9 and
10 of acyl-CoA esters of palmitic or stearic acid to produce
acyl-CoA esters of palmitoleic or oleic acid, respectively
[204-207]. Palmitic and stearic acid are the most abundant
SFA in cancer cells, whereas palmitoleic and oleic acid
are the major MUFA [5, 208-211]. All four of these fatty
acids are the predominant forms of cellular lipids that
can be found as free SFA or MUFA and their acyl-CoA
esters. The bulk of these fatty acids (especially MUFA)
in cancer cells can also be incorporated into membrane
phospholipids, neutral lipids and sphingolipids [114, 158,
208-211].
Inhibition of SCD1 activity, either by certain genetic
manipulations or by some pharmaceuticals (see Figure
5), decreases the fatty acid desaturation index. Such
inhibition has been shown to exhibit potent anti-tumor
effects in different forms of cancer by affecting various
aspects of cancer initiation, promotion and progression
[5, 163, 180, 184, 186, 188, 212-219]. Recent studies
have suggested two different types of mechanisms
through which such inhibition of SCD1 and the resulting

A
CURRENT
APPROACH
TO
DEVELOPING SELECTIVE ANTITUMOR
PHARMACEUTICALS
THAT CAN REORGANIZE LIPID
METABOLISM: SEARCHING FOR
INHIBITORS OF LIPOGENESIS
The current strategy for discovering anti-tumor
pharmaceuticals that target lipid metabolism consists
of searching for small molecules capable of inhibiting
lipogenesis in cancer cells. Such molecules are expected
to diminish the quantities of membrane lipids available
to support proliferation and survival of cancer cells
without impairing functionality and viability of noncancerous cells. This strategy for uncovering anti-tumor
therapeutic agents has recently been extensively exploited
in a number of studies, and their major findings have
been reviewed elsewhere [1-3, 6, 10, 19, 81, 82, 119, 133,
148, 155, 158, 170, 172-177]. Figure 5 schematically
summarizes four different mechanisms through which
various pharmacological interventions can inhibit
lipogenesis in cancer cells by slowing down lipogenesisrelated processes that are also known to support rapid
proliferation of fermenting yeast. These mechanisms
include the following: (1) a direct chemical inhibition
of ACC, FASN, ACS, SCD or MAGL by a distinct set
of small molecules, each of which can specifically bind
to one of these enzymes (Figure 5) [1, 6, 10, 133, 155,
160, 178-191]; (2) a metformin-, 5-aminoimidazole-4www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

5211

Oncotarget

decrease of the fatty acid desaturation index (i.e. a rise
of cellular SFA concentration and a concomitant decline
of cellular MUFA concentration) can cause the observed
anti-tumor effects. These two types of mechanisms are
recapitulated schematically in Figure 6. They include the
following: (1) the build-up of SFA alters the structure of
the ER membrane and impairs its functionality, thereby
eliciting the unfolded protein response signaling pathway
in the ER and excessively stressing this organelle [162,
220-229]; if such SFA-driven stress in the ER exceeds a
cytotoxic threshold in cancer cells with inhibited SCD1,
these cells undergo apoptosis [215, 219]; and (2) SCD1
inhibition in cancer cells substantially decelerates the
flow of the surplus glycolytic metabolites into fatty

acid synthesis (and thus, suppresses lipogenesis) by
eliciting a significant decrease in the enzymatic activity
of ACC; this suppressing effect of SCD1 inhibition on
lipogenesis is due to the following demonstrated abilities
of such inhibition: (a) it activates AMPK, which then
phosphorylates and inhibits ACC, (b) it elevates cellular
concentrations of saturated acyl-CoA species known
to inhibit ACC allosterically, and (c) it attenuates the
phosphatidylinositol-3 kinase/Akt signaling pathway
needed for SREBP-driven transcription of nuclear genes
encoding ACC and other lipogenic enzymes [5, 80, 163,
180, 188, 214, 230-233].
Noteworthy, various cell lines of breast, colorectal
and prostate cancers have been shown to possess

Figure 6: Mechanisms through which an inhibition of stearoyl-CoA desaturase (SCD) by some pharmaceuticals can
cause potent anti-tumor effects. Such inhibition elicits a rise of cellular concentrations of acyl-CoA esters of saturated fatty acids
and a concomitant decline of cellular concentrations of acyl-CoA esters of unsaturated fatty acids. Genes, proteins and processes whose
increased expression levels, activities and rates promote tumorigenesis in cells that are not exposed to the SCD inhibitors are displayed in
red color. Proteins and processes whose activities and rates attenuate tumorigenesis in response to cell treatment with the SCD inhibitors
are displayed in green color. See text for more details. Abbreviations: ACC, acetyl-CoA carboxylase; AMPK, AMP-activated protein
kinase; Akt, a serine/threonine-specific protein kinase; ER, endoplasmic reticulum; FA-CoA, acyl-CoA ester of fatty acid; FASN, fatty
acid synthase; PI3K/Akt, phosphatidylinositol-3 kinase/Akt signaling pathway; PM, plasma membrane; SREBP, sterol regulatory elementbinding protein; UPRER, the unfolded protein response signaling pathway in the ER.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

5212

Oncotarget

substantially increased lipogenic activities [217].
Moreover, in primary prostate cancers, lipogenesis (but
not aerobic glycolysis) is known to be the only prominent
tumorigenic trait of metabolism [10, 158, 168-171].
It needs to be emphasized that cells of all these highly
lipogenic cancer forms have been shown to exhibit a
considerably reduced fatty acid desaturation index (i.e.
the concentrations of MUFA in these cells are decreased
whereas cellular concentrations of SFA are increased) if
the cells are not exposed to an anti-tumor agent [217].
However, these highly lipogenic cancer cells display
a substantially elevated fatty acid desaturation index
(i.e. the concentrations of both SFA and MUFA in these
cells are decreased whereas cellular concentrations of
polyunsaturated (PUFA) fatty acids are substantially
increased) if the cells are subjected to genetic or
pharmaceutical interventions lowering lipogenesis and
causing robust anti-tumor effects [217]. Because the
highly lipogenic cells of breast, colorectal and prostate
cancers exposed to such anti-tumor interventions exhibited

an elevated fatty acid desaturation index and increased
concentrations of peroxidation-susceptible PUFA, these
cells displayed raised concentrations of oxidatively
damaged membrane lipids, enhanced susceptibility to
oxidative stress, declined protein mobility within lipid
membrane bilayers and augmented permeability of the
PM bilayer to small molecules [217]. It is conceivable
therefore that some small molecules capable of increasing
the fatty acid desaturation index in the highly lipogenic
cancer cells (for instance, by stimulating SCD1 activity)
may exhibit robust anti-tumor effects in these rapidly
proliferating cells. Because lipogenesis is a common
metabolic trait of cancer cells and rapidly proliferating
fermenting yeast (see above), it is likely that such antitumor small molecules may also cause rapid loss of cell
viability in yeast.
Furthermore, it has been demonstrated that
cancer cells constitutively overexpressing Ole1, a yeast
ortholog of human SCD1, exhibit an increased fatty acid
desaturation index due to the elevated concentrations of

Figure 7: Different ways of increasing the fatty acid desaturation index of various membrane lipids in yeast with the
help of small molecules. A small molecule eliciting any of these methods for increasing the fatty acid desaturation index can commit

rapidly proliferating fermenting yeast to liponecrotic programmed cell death. Proteins and processes whose elevated or lowered activities
and rates can increase the fatty acid desaturation index of membrane lipids are displayed in red or green color, respectively. Thick black
arrows indicate processes whose rates are expected to be intensified in yeast exposed to a small molecule capable of increasing the fatty acid
desaturation indexes of various membrane lipids. See text for more details. Abbreviations: CDP-DAG, cytidine diphosphate diacylglycerol;
CL, cardiolipin; DAG, diacylglycerol; EE, ergosteryl ester; ER, endoplasmic reticulum; FA-CoA, acyl-CoA ester of fatty acid; FFA,
free fatty acid; PA, phosphatidic acid; PC, phosphatidylcholine; PE, phosphatidylethanolamine; PI, phosphatidylinositol; PM, plasma
membrane; PS, phosphatidylserine; TAG, triacylglycerol.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

5213

Oncotarget

MUFA in these cells [234, 235]. It should be stressed that
such a rise in the fatty acid desaturation index not only
enhances the fluidity of membrane bilayers in these cancer
cells but also considerably increases cell susceptibility
to exogenous tumor necrosis factor [234, 235]. Of note,
an elevated level of Ole1 expression has been shown to
impair growth and division of fermenting yeast [236].
Thus, again, it seems that pharmaceuticals capable of
increasing the fatty acid desaturation index in rapidly
proliferating cancer cells by elevating SCD activity may
have high anti-tumor potential. It is feasible that these
anti-tumor pharmaceuticals may also compromise survival
of rapidly proliferating yeast.
Moreover, a yeast mutant concurrently lacking
acyltransferases Lro1, Dga1, Are1 and Are2 is known to be
unable to incorporate acyl-CoA esters of MUFA into TAG
[237]. It has been shown that cells of this mutant exhibit
excessive proliferation of ER membranes and rapidly die
only if exposed to exogenous MUFA [237]. In contrast, an
exposure of these mutant cells to SFA does not cause ER
membrane proliferation or loss of cell viability [237]. It
is therefore likely that some small molecules capable of
reducing the incorporation of MUFA into TAG may kill
fermenting yeast cells. Due to similarities of lipogenic
processes taking place in these rapidly proliferating cells
and in cancer cells (see above), it is conceivable that
such small molecules may also exhibit robust anti-tumor
effects.
Based on the above findings, we propose the
following approach to using fermenting yeast as a model
organism for the discovery of anti-tumor pharmaceuticals
that can alter lipid metabolism. As discussed above, small
molecules that can increase the fatty acid desaturation
index of free fatty acids, phospholipids, ergosterol and
sphingolipids in fermenting yeast cells may not only
cause death of these cells but may also selectively kill
rapidly proliferating cancer cells. There are at least four
different ways of increasing the fatty acid desaturation
index of various lipid classes in yeast with the help of
small molecules. These ways are outlined schematically
in Figure 7 and include the following: (1) elevating the
enzymatic activity of the delta-9 fatty acid desaturase
Ole1, which catalyzes the formation of acyl-CoA esters of
unsaturated fatty acids from acyl-CoA esters of saturated
fatty acids [16, 50, 51]; (2) raising the enzymatic activities
of lipases involved in the hydrolytic formation of acylCoA esters of unsaturated fatty acids from TAG and
ergosteryl esters (EE); these lipases include Tgl1, Tgl3,
Tgl4, Tgl5, Yeh1 and Yeh2 [16, 50, 51]; (3) decreasing the
enzymatic activities of acyltransferases that accelerate the
incorporation of acyl-CoA esters of unsaturated fatty acids
into TAG and EE; among these acyltransferases are Dga1,
Lro1, Are1 and Are2 [16, 50, 51]; and (4) decreasing the
activities of peroxisomal enzymes Fox1, Fox2 and Fox3,
all of which are involved in degradative β-oxidation of
acyl-CoA esters of unsaturated fatty acids [16, 50, 51]. It
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

needs to be emphasized that a small molecule eliciting any
of these methods for increasing the fatty acid desaturation
index of membrane lipids is expected to cause a buildup
of unsaturated lipids in the membrane bilayers of ER,
mitochondria and PM. As it has been mentioned in the
first section of this review, the excessive accumulation of
POA-containing lipids in the membrane bilayers of ER,
mitochondria and PM can commit yeast to liponecrotic
PCD; POA is a 16-carbon MUFA [25, 33-35]. It is
therefore conceivable that pharmaceuticals causing an
increase in the fatty acid desaturation index of membrane
lipids can trigger liponecrotic cell death of fermenting
yeast. As discussed above, due to the similarities of
lipogenic processes taking place in rapidly proliferating
fermenting yeast and in cancer cells, it is plausible that
such pharmaceuticals may also have robust anti-tumor
effects.
Of note, our recent studies have convincingly
demonstrated the applicability of yeast as a model
organism for the discovery of selective anti-tumor small
molecules targeting a certain aspect of tumorigenesis.
Specifically, our high-throughput chemical genetic screen
for pharmaceuticals that can extend yeast longevity has
identified lithocholic acid (LCA), the most hydrophobic
bile acid, as one of them [25]. We have uncovered the
molecular and cellular mechanisms through which LCA
increases the lifespan of chronologically aging yeast
[33, 45, 55, 238-241]. It appears that LCA is not only a
longevity-extending molecule in yeast but also a potent
anti-tumor agent in human cells. Indeed, at concentrations
that are not cytotoxic to non-cancerous cells, LCA can
selectively kill cultured human breast, prostate and
neuroblastoma cancer cells [26, 238, 242]. Of note,
cancer is considered a disease of aging [7, 243-246]. This
assertion is based on the following findings: (1) age in
the major risk factor for developing cancer; (2) genetic,
dietary and pharmacological interventions that delay aging
in animal models reduce the incidence of cancer; and
(3) some of the evolutionarily conserved pathways and
mechanisms underlying cancer and aging are common to
these two inherently complex biological phenomena [7,
243, 247-251].
We therefore propose here to use a high-throughput
screen for small molecules that can activate liponecrotic
PCD of fermenting yeast by increasing the fatty acid
desaturation index of membrane lipids. This screen
is depicted schematically in Figure 8. It is based on
employing a microplate assay for measuring the viability
of yeast cells via monitoring the optical density of a
yeast culture at 600 nm (OD600). In the proposed screen,
fast proliferating yeast cells cultured in a nutrient- and
glucose-rich medium and progressing through the
exponential growth phase are initially incubated for 2 h in
master microplates. Yeast cultures in individual wells of
these master microplates are supplemented with various
small molecules from a compound library. Wells in one
5214

Oncotarget

set of master microplates do not contain POA, whereas
wells in another set of such microplates contain 50 µM
POA. At this concentration, exogenously added POA
kills not more than 20% of the total number of cells in a
yeast culture [34, 35]. After 2 h of incubation in master
microplates, a small aliquot of each culture is diluted
1:200 in an individual well of a replica microplate. Wells
in all replica microplates contain only a growth medium
rich in nutrients and glucose. After 16 h of incubation,
the OD600 of a cell culture in each well of the replica
microplates is measured. This incubation time is optimal
for the value of OD600 to correlate with the number of
viable cells in a well of the replica microplate (Figure 8)
[25]. The small molecules from a compound library that
cause the highest extent of decrease in the value of the
OD600 of a cell culture are chosen as ″lead″ compounds.
These compounds are then used for ″cherry-picking″ of
″lead″ compounds capable of activating liponecrotic PCD
of yeast by increasing the fatty acid desaturation index of
membrane lipids.
The high-throughput screen outlined in Figure 8
can be conducted using the following yeast strains: (1) a
wild-type strain, which exhibits ″normal″ concentrations
and activities of Ole1, Tgl1, Tgl3, Tgl4, Tgl5, Yeh1, Yeh2,
Dga1, Lro1, Are1 and Are2; as outlined above, activities
of all these enzymes play essential roles in defining the
intracellular concentrations of acyl-CoA esters of MUFA

(Figure 7); (2) a yeast strain constitutively overexpressing
the delta-9 fatty acid desaturase Ole1, which catalyzes
the formation of acyl-CoA esters of MUFA (Figure 7); as
mentioned above, this mutant strain exhibits an increased
fatty acid desaturation index of all membrane lipid classes
because it accumulates MUFA at high concentrations
[234, 235]; and (3) a yeast strain concurrently lacking
acyltransferases Lro1, Dga1, Are1 and Are2; as outlined
earlier in the text, this strain is unable to incorporate
acyl-CoA esters of MUFA into TAG (Figure 7) and, thus,
amasses MUFA-containing membrane lipids at high
concentrations [237]. It is possible that the above highthroughput screen may reveal small molecules causing
a substantial decrease in the OD600 of a cell culture not
only for the yeast strain overexpressing Ole1, but also
for the yeast strain concurrently lacking acyltransferases
Lro1, Dga1, Are1 and Are2. Moreover, among such small
molecules there may be those that do not decrease (or
decrease only slightly) the OD600 of a cell culture for a
wild-type strain of yeast. These small molecules are
expected to exhibit a combination of the following two
features: (1) they may cause rapid loss of cell viability
only in yeast strain exhibiting increased concentrations
of acyl-CoA esters of POA (and of other MUFA) and
elevated concentrations of POA-containing (and of
other MUFA-containing) membrane lipids; and (2) they
may selectively kill only lipogenic cancer cells without

Figure 8: A microplate assay for measuring the viability of yeast cells by monitoring the optical density of a yeast
culture at 600 nm (OD600). This high-throughput assay can be used to screen compound libraries for small molecules that activate

palmitoleic acid (POA)-induced liponecrotic cell death of fermenting yeast. Fast growing yeast cells are first incubated for 2 h in master
microplates containing growth medium and various small molecules, with or without POA. A small aliquot of each culture is then diluted
in an individual well of a replica microplate supplemented with growth medium only. The replica microplate is incubated for 16 h, and the
OD600 of a cell culture in each well is measured. For a cell culture in the replica microplate incubated for 16 h after cell transfer from the
master microplate, the value of OD600 is directly proportional to the number of viable cells in a well of the replica microplate. See text for
more details. Abbreviation: PCD, programmed cell death.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

5215

Oncotarget

impairing functionality and viability of non-cancerous
cells. The small molecules exhibiting a combination of
these two features have potential to be selective anti-tumor
therapeutic agents that cause liponecrotic death of cancer
cells, while sparing non-cancerous cells.
A compound library which can be used for the
high-throughput screen outlined in Figure 8 may include
many small molecules that are currently known to act as
follows: (1) to be target-specific activators of Ole1, Tgl1,
Tgl3, Tgl4, Tgl5, Yeh1, Yeh2, Dga1, Lro1, Are1 or Are2 in
fermenting yeast; and/or (2) to be target-specific inhibitors
of Dga1, Are1, Are2, Fox1, Fox2 or Fox3 in fermenting
yeast. These target-specific small molecules have been
revealed in numerous studies on yeast chemogenomic
profiling that have been conducted with the help of
haploinsufficiency profiling, homozygous deletion
profiling and multicopy gene suppression profiling assays
in a high-throughput, genome-wide format [27-29, 31,
252-256].

constrains.

FUNDING
This work was supported by grants from the Natural
Sciences and Engineering Research Council (NSERC) of
Canada and Concordia University Chair Fund. A.A-C.
was supported by Master’s Research Scholarship Award
from the Fonds québécois de la recherche sur la nature
et les technologies (FQRNT). V.S. was supported by the
Harriet and Abe Gold Entrance Bursary Award. S.M. was
supported by an Undergraduate Summer Award from
the NSERC of Canada. V.I.T. is a Concordia University
Research Chair in Genomics, Cell Biology and Aging.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
The authors declare no conflict of interest.

REFERENCES

CONCLUSIONS

1.	 Currie E, Schulze A, Zechner R, Walther TC, Farese RV
Jr. Cellular fatty acid metabolism and cancer. Cell Metab.
2013; 18:153-161.

Lipogenesis is a characteristic rewiring of lipid
metabolism in cells of various cancers. It consists in
channeling the excess metabolites made during aerobic
glycolysis into the de novo synthesis of membrane
lipids in large quantities. Lipogenesis is one of the key
tumorigenic features of cancer cell metabolism, and
it is known to play causal roles in certain aspects of
cancer initiation, promotion and progression. Recent
evidence indicates that lipogenesis is common to
cancer cells and rapidly proliferating cells of the yeast
S. cerevisiae, perhaps because several key processes
underlying lipogenesis in these cell types have similar
relative rates, exhibit comparable regulation patterns
and depend on orthologous proteins. The presently used
strategy for the discovery of potential anti-tumor small
molecules consists of uncovering pharmaceuticals that
inhibit lipogenesis in cancer cells. Emergent evidence
suggests that chemical compounds capable of increasing
the fatty acid desaturation index of membrane lipids
can elicit liponecrotic cell death of both cancer cells
and fermenting yeast. This creates an opportunity to
use rapidly proliferating yeast as a model organism for
a high-throughput screen aimed at the identification of
such compounds. The chemical genetic screen proposed
here has the potential to develop selective anti-tumor
pharmaceuticals that cause liponecrotic death of cancer
cells but do not affect functionality and viability of noncancerous cells.

2.	 Flaveny CA, Griffett K, El-Gendy Bel-D, Kazantzis M,
Sengupta M, Amelio AL, Chatterjee A, Walker J, Solt LA,
Kamenecka TM, Burris TP. Broad anti-tumor activity of a
small molecule that selectively targets the Warburg effect
and lipogenesis. Cancer Cell. 2015; 28: 42-56.
3.	 Galluzzi L, Kepp O, Vander Heiden MG, Kroemer G.
Metabolic targets for cancer therapy. Nat Rev Drug Discov.
2013; 12: 829-846.
4.	 Gorrini C, Harris IS, Mak TW. Modulation of oxidative
stress as an anticancer strategy. Nat Rev Drug Discov.
2013; 12: 931-947.
5.	 Igal RA. Stearoyl-CoA desaturase-1: a novel key player
in the mechanisms of cell proliferation, programmed cell
death and transformation to cancer. Carcinogenesis. 2010;
31: 1509-1515.
6.	 Mulvihill MM, Nomura DK. Therapeutic potential of
monoacylglycerol lipase inhibitors. Life Sci. 2013; 92: 492497.
7.	 Piano A, Titorenko VI. The intricate interplay between
mechanisms underlying aging and cancer. Aging Dis. 2014;
6: 56-75.
8.	

9.	 Vander Heiden MG. Targeting cancer metabolism: a
therapeutic window opens. Nat Rev Drug Discov. 2011;
10: 671-684.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

10.	 Zadra G, Photopoulos C, Loda M. The fat side of prostate
cancer. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2013; 1831: 1518-1532.

We are grateful to current and former members of
the Titorenko laboratory for discussions. We apologize to
those colleagues whose work was not cited owing to space
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Schulze A, Harris AL. How cancer metabolism is tuned for
proliferation and vulnerable to disruption. Nature. 2012;
491: 364-373.

11.	 Broach JR. Nutritional control of growth and development
5216

Oncotarget

in yeast. Genetics. 2012; 192: 73-105.

cells. Oncotarget. 2011; 2: 761-782. doi: 10.18632/
oncotarget.338.

12.	 Cantor JR, Sabatini DM. Cancer cell metabolism: one
hallmark, many faces. Cancer Discov. 2012; 2: 881-898.

27.	 Hillenmeyer ME, Fung E, Wildenhain J, Pierce SE, Hoon
S, Lee W, Proctor M, St Onge RP, Tyers M, Koller D,
Altman RB, Davis RW, Nislow C, Giaever G. The chemical
genomic portrait of yeast: uncovering a phenotype for all
genes. Science. 2008; 320: 362-365.

13.	 Chantranupong L, Wolfson RL, Sabatini DM. Nutrientsensing mechanisms across evolution. Cell. 2015; 161: 6783.
14.	 Conrad M, Schothorst J, Kankipati HN, Van Zeebroeck
G, Rubio-Texeira M, Thevelein JM. Nutrient sensing and
signaling in the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae. FEMS
Microbiol Rev. 2014; 38: 254-299.

28.	 Kapitzky L, Beltrao P, Berens TJ, Gassner N, Zhou C,
Wüster A, Wu J, Babu MM, Elledge SJ, Toczyski D, Lokey
RS, Krogan NJ. Cross-species chemogenomic profiling
reveals evolutionarily conserved drug mode of action. Mol
Syst Biol. 2010; 6: 451.

15.	 Diaz-Ruiz R, Uribe-Carvajal S, Devin A, Rigoulet M.
Tumor cell energy metabolism and its common features
with yeast metabolism. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2009; 1796:
252-265.

29.	 Lum PY, Armour CD, Stepaniants SB, Cavet G, Wolf
MK, Butler JS, Hinshaw JC, Garnier P, Prestwich GD,
Leonardson A, Garrett-Engele P, Rush CM, Bard M,
Schimmack G, Phillips JW, Roberts CJ, Shoemaker DD.
Discovering modes of action for therapeutic compounds
using a genome-wide screen of yeast heterozygotes. Cell.
2004; 116: 121-137.

16.	 Klug L, Daum G. Yeast lipid metabolism at a glance. FEMS
Yeast Res. 2014; 14: 369-388.
17.	 Leontieva OV, Blagosklonny MV. Yeast-like chronological
senescence in mammalian cells: phenomenon, mechanism
and pharmacological suppression. Aging (Albany NY).
2011; 3: 1078-1091.

30.	Menacho-Márquez M, Murguía JR. Yeast on drugs:
Saccharomyces cerevisiae as a tool for anticancer drug
research. Clin Transl Oncol. 2007; 9: 221-228.

18.	 Lunt SY, Vander Heiden MG. Aerobic glycolysis: meeting
the metabolic requirements of cell proliferation. Annu Rev
Cell Dev Biol. 2011; 27: 441-464.

31.	 Parsons AB, Lopez A, Givoni IE, Williams DE, Gray CA,
Porter J, Chua G, Sopko R, Brost RL, Ho CH, Wang J,
Ketela T, Brenner C, et al. Exploring the mode-of-action of
bioactive compounds by chemical-genetic profiling in yeast.
Cell. 2006; 126: 611-625.

19.	 Natter K, Kohlwein SD. Yeast and cancer cells - common
principles in lipid metabolism. Biochim Biophys Acta.
2013; 1831: 314-326.
20.	Vander Heiden MG, Cantley LC, Thompson CB.
Understanding the Warburg effect: the metabolic
requirements of cell proliferation. Science. 2009; 324:
1029-1033.

32.	 St Onge R, Schlecht U, Scharfe C, Evangelista M. Forward
chemical genetics in yeast for discovery of chemical probes
targeting metabolism. Molecules. 2012; 17: 13098-13115.
33.	 Burstein MT, Kyryakov P, Beach A, Richard VR, Koupaki
O, Gomez-Perez A, Leonov A, Levy S, Noohi F, Titorenko
VI. Lithocholic acid extends longevity of chronologically
aging yeast only if added at certain critical periods of their
lifespan. Cell Cycle. 2012; 11:3443-3462.

21.	 Botstein D, Fink GR. Yeast: an experimental organism for
21st Century biology.
22.	 Weissman J, Guthrie C, Fink GR (Editors). Guide to Yeast
Genetics: Functional Genomics, Proteomics, and Other
Systems Analysis. Academic Press, Burlington, 2010, 892
pp.

34.	 Richard VR, Beach A, Piano A, Leonov A, Feldman R,
Burstein MT, Kyryakov P, Gomez-Perez A, Arlia-Ciommo
A, Baptista S, Campbell C, Goncharov D, Pannu S,
Patrinos D, Sadri B, Svistkova V, Victor A, Titorenko VI.
Mechanism of liponecrosis, a distinct mode of programmed
cell death. Cell Cycle. 2014; 13: 3707-3726.

23.	 Beaumont TE, Shekhar TM, Kaur L, Pantaki-Eimany D,
Kvansakul M, Hawkins CJ. Yeast techniques for modeling
drugs targeting Bcl-2 and caspase family members. Cell
Death Dis. 2013; 4: e619.
24.	 Enserink JM. Chemical genetics: budding yeast as a
platform for drug discovery and mapping of genetic
pathways. Molecules. 2012; 17: 9258-9273.

35.	 Sheibani S, Richard VR, Beach A, Leonov A, Feldman R,
Mattie S, Khelghatybana L, Piano A, Greenwood M, Vali
H, Titorenko VI. Macromitophagy, neutral lipids synthesis,
and peroxisomal fatty acid oxidation protect yeast from
“liponecrosis”, a previously unknown form of programmed
cell death. Cell Cycle. 2014; 13: 138-147.

25.	 Goldberg AA, Richard VR, Kyryakov P, Bourque SD,
Beach A, Burstein MT, Glebov A, Koupaki O, BoukhViner T, Gregg C, Juneau M, English AM, Thomas DY,
Titorenko VI. Chemical genetic screen identifies lithocholic
acid as an anti-aging compound that extends yeast
chronological life span in a TOR-independent manner, by
modulating housekeeping longevity assurance processes.
Aging (Albany NY). 2010; 2: 393-414.

36.	 Galluzzi L, Vitale I, Abrams JM, Alnemri ES, Baehrecke
EH, Blagosklonny MV, Dawson TM, Dawson VL, ElDeiry WS, Fulda S, Gottlieb E, Green DR, Hengartner
MO, et al. Molecular definitions of cell death subroutines:
recommendations of the Nomenclature Committee on Cell
Death 2012. Cell Death Differ. 2012; 19: 107-120.

26.	 Goldberg AA, Beach A, Davies GF, Harkness TA, Leblanc
A, Titorenko VI. Lithocholic bile acid selectively kills
neuroblastoma cells, while sparing normal neuronal
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

37.	 Reed JC, Green DR. Apoptosis: Physiology and Pathology.

5217

Oncotarget

Cambridge University Press: New York. 2011; 438 pages.

H, Takahashi I, Matsunami M, Hashimoto A, Inagaki F,
Ohsumi Y, Okamoto K. Autophagy-related protein 32 acts
as autophagic degron and directly initiates mitophagy. J
Biol Chem. 2012; 287: 10631-10638.

38.	 Denton D, Nicolson S, Kumar S. Cell death by autophagy:
facts and apparent artefacts. Cell Death Differ. 2012; 19:
87-95.

55.	 Richard VR, Leonov A, Beach A, Burstein MT, Koupaki
O, Gomez-Perez A, Levy S, Pluska L, Mattie S, Rafesh
R, Iouk T, Sheibani S, Greenwood M, Vali H, Titorenko
VI. Macromitophagy is a longevity assurance process that
in chronologically aging yeast limited in calorie supply
sustains functional mitochondria and maintains cellular
lipid homeostasis. Aging (Albany NY). 2013; 5: 234-269.

39.	 Kroemer G, Levine B. Autophagic cell death: the story of a
misnomer. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2008; 9: 1004-1010.
40.	 Shen HM, Codogno P. Autophagic cell death: Loch Ness
monster or endangered species? Autophagy. 2011; 7: 457465.
41.	 Eisenberg T, Büttner S. Lipids and cell death in yeast.
FEMS Yeast Res. 2014; 14: 179-197.

56.	 Feng Y, He D, Yao Z, Klionsky DJ. The machinery of
macroautophagy. Cell Res. 2014; 24: 24-41.

42.	 Eisenberg T, Knauer H, Schauer A, Büttner S, Ruckenstuhl
C, Carmona-Gutierrez D, Ring J, Schroeder S, Magnes C,
Antonacci L, Fussi H, Deszcz L, Hartl R, et al. Induction
of autophagy by spermidine promotes longevity. Nat Cell
Biol. 2009; 11: 1305-1314.

57.	 Reggiori F, Klionsky DJ. Autophagic processes in yeast:
mechanism, machinery and regulation. Genetics. 2013; 194:
341-361.
58.	 Beach A, Leonov A, Arlia-Ciommo A, Svistkova V,
Lutchman V, Titorenko VI. Mechanisms by which different
functional states of mitochondria define yeast longevity. Int
J Mol Sci. 2015; 16: 5528-5554.

43.	 Eisenberg T, Carmona-Gutierrez D, Büttner S, Tavernarakis
N, Madeo F. Necrosis in yeast. Apoptosis. 2010; 15: 257268.
44.	 Vandenabeele P, Galluzzi L, Vanden Berghe T, Kroemer G.
Molecular mechanisms of necroptosis: an ordered cellular
explosion. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2010; 11: 700-714.

59.	 Carmona-Gutierrez D, Eisenberg T, Büttner S, Meisinger
C, Kroemer G, Madeo F. Apoptosis in yeast: triggers,
pathways, subroutines. Cell Death Differ. 2010; 17: 763773.

45.	 Beach A, Richard VR, Leonov A, Burstein MT, Bourque
SD, Koupaki O, Juneau M, Feldman R, Iouk T, Titorenko
VI. Mitochondrial membrane lipidome defines yeast
longevity. Aging (Albany NY). 2013; 5: 551-574.

60. 	 Madeo F, Carmona-Gutierrez D, Ring J, Büttner S,
Eisenberg T, Kroemer G. Caspase-dependent and caspaseindependent cell death pathways in yeast. Biochem Biophys
Res Commun. 2009; 382: 227-231.

46.	 Stefan CJ, Manford AG, Emr SD. ER-PM connections: sites
of information transfer and inter-organelle communication.
Curr Opin Cell Biol. 2013; 25: 434-442.

61.	 Ikeda M, Kihara A, Denpoh A, Igarashi Y. The Rim101
pathway is involved in Rsb1 expression induced by altered
lipid asymmetry. Mol Biol Cell. 2008; 19: 1922-1931.

47	 . Tamura Y, Sesaki H, Endo T. Phospholipid transport via
mitochondria. Traffic. 2014; 15: 933-945.

62.	 Kihara A, Igarashi Y. Cross talk between sphingolipids
and glycerophospholipids in the establishment of plasma
membrane asymmetry. Mol Biol Cell. 2004; 15: 4949-4959.

48.	 Tatsuta T, Scharwey M, Langer T. Mitochondrial lipid
trafficking. Trends Cell Biol. 2014; 24: 44-52.
49.	 Goldberg AA, Bourque SD, Kyryakov P, Boukh-Viner T,
Gregg C, Beach A, Burstein MT, Machkalyan G, Richard
V, Rampersad S, Titorenko VI. A novel function of lipid
droplets in regulating longevity. Biochem Soc Trans. 2009;
37: 1050-1055.

63.	 Maeda T. The signaling mechanism of ambient pH sensing
and adaptation in yeast and fungi. FEBS J. 2012; 279: 14071413.
64.	 Poirier Y, Antonenkov VD, Glumoff T, Hiltunen JK.
Peroxisomal beta-oxidation - a metabolic pathway with
multiple functions. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2006; 1763:
1413-1426.

50.	 Henry SA, Kohlwein SD, Carman GM. Metabolism and
regulation of glycerolipids in the yeast Saccharomyces
cerevisiae. Genetics. 2012; 190: 317-349.

65.	 Wanders RJ. Metabolic functions of peroxisomes in health
and disease. Biochimie. 2014; 98:36-44.

51.	 Kohlwein SD, Veenhuis M, van der Klei IJ. Lipid droplets
and peroxisomes: key players in cellular lipid homeostasis
or a matter of fat - store ‘em up or burn ‘em down. Genetics.
2013; 193: 1-50.

66.	 Diaz-Ruiz R, Rigoulet M, Devin A. The Warburg and
Crabtree effects: On the origin of cancer cell energy
metabolism and of yeast glucose repression. Biochim
Biophys Acta. 2011; 1807: 568-576.

52.	 Pol A, Gross SP, Parton RG. Review: biogenesis of the
multifunctional lipid droplet: lipids, proteins, and sites. J
Cell Biol. 2014; 204: 635-646.

67.	 Pereira C, Coutinho I, Soares J, Bessa C, Leão M, Saraiva
L. New insights into cancer-related proteins provided by the
yeast model. FEBS J. 2012; 279: 697-712.

53.	 Kanki T, Wang K, Cao Y, Baba M, Klionsky DJ. Atg32
is a mitochondrial protein that confers selectivity during
mitophagy. Dev Cell. 2009; 17: 98-109.

68.	 Tosato V, Grüning NM, Breitenbach M, Arnak R, Ralser
M, Bruschi CV. Warburg effect and translocation-induced
genomic instability: two yeast models for cancer cells. Front

54.	 Kondo-Okamoto N, Noda NN, Suzuki SW, Nakatogawa

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

5218

Oncotarget

Oncol. 2013; 2: 212.

functions of the key glycolytic regulator PKM2 in cancer.
Trends Biochem Sci. 2012; 37: 309-316.

69.	 Warburg O, Posener K, Negelein E. Üeber den Stoffwechsel
der Tumoren. Biochem Z. 1924; 152: 319-344.

89.	 Hamanaka RB, Chandel NS. Cell biology. Warburg effect
and redox balance. Science. 2011 Dec 2; 334: 1219-1220.

70.	 Warburg O, Wind F, Negelein E. The metabolism of tumors
in the body. J Gen Physiol. 1927; 8: 519-530.

90.	 Maitra PK, Lobo Z. A kinetic study of glycolytic enzyme
synthesis in yeast. J Biol Chem. 1971; 246: 475-488.

71.	 Warburg O. On the origin of cancer cells. Science. 1956;
123: 309-314.

91.	 Mazurek S. Pyruvate kinase type M2: a key regulator of the
metabolic budget system in tumor cells. Int J Biochem Cell
Biol. 2011; 43: 969-980.

72.	 Cairns RA, Harris IS, Mak TW. Regulation of cancer cell
metabolism. Nat Rev Cancer. 2011; 11: 85-95.

92.	 Mazurek S, Boschek CB, Hugo F, Eigenbrodt E. Pyruvate
kinase type M2 and its role in tumor growth and spreading.
Semin Cancer Biol. 2005; 15: 300-308.

73.	 Crabtree HG. Observations on the carbohydrate metabolism
of tumours. Biochem J. 1929; 23: 536-545.
74.	 Ferreira LM. Cancer metabolism: the Warburg effect today.
Exp Mol Pathol. 2010; 89: 372-380.

93.	 Augoff K, Hryniewicz-Jankowska A, Tabola R. Lactate
dehydrogenase 5: an old friend and a new hope in the war
on cancer. Cancer Lett. 2015 Mar 1; 358: 1-7.

75.	 Senyilmaz D, Teleman AA. Chicken or the egg: Warburg
effect and mitochondrial dysfunction. F1000Prime Rep.
2015; 7: 41.

94.	 Fantin VR, St-Pierre J, Leder P. Attenuation of
LDH-A expression uncovers a link between glycolysis,
mitochondrial physiology, and tumor maintenance. Cancer
Cell. 2006; 9: 425-434.

76.	 Sussman I, Erecińska M, Wilson DF. Regulation of cellular
energy metabolism: the Crabtree effect. Biochim Biophys
Acta. 1980; 591: 209-223.

95.	 Hohmann S, Cederberg H. Autoregulation may control the
expression of yeast pyruvate decarboxylase structural genes
PDC1 and PDC5. Eur J Biochem. 1990; 188: 615-621.

77.	 DeBerardinis RJ, Thompson CB. Cellular metabolism and
disease: what do metabolic outliers teach us? Cell. 2012;
148: 1132-1144.

96.	 Van Urk H, Voll WS, Scheffers WA, Van Dijken JP.
Transient-state analysis of metabolic fluxes in Crabtreepositive and Crabtree-negative yeasts. Appl Environ
Microbiol. 1990; 56: 281-287.

78.	 Hsu PP, Sabatini DM. Cancer cell metabolism: Warburg
and beyond. Cell. 2008; 134: 703-707.
79.	 Dang CV. Links between metabolism and cancer. Genes
Dev. 2012; 26: 877-890.

97.	 Boubekeur S, Bunoust O, Camougrand N, Castroviejo
M, Rigoulet M, Guérin B. A mitochondrial pyruvate
dehydrogenase bypass in the yeast Saccharomyces
cerevisiae. J Biol Chem. 1999; 274: 21044-21048.

80.	 DeBerardinis RJ, Lum JJ, Hatzivassiliou G, Thompson CB.
The biology of cancer: metabolic reprogramming fuels cell
growth and proliferation. Cell Metab. 2008; 7: 11-20.
81.	 Fritz V, Fajas L. Metabolism and proliferation share
common regulatory pathways in cancer cells. Oncogene.
2010; 29: 4369-4377.

98.	 Gey U, Czupalla C, Hoflack B, Rödel G, Krause-Buchholz
U. Yeast pyruvate dehydrogenase complex is regulated by
a concerted activity of two kinases and two phosphatases. J
Biol Chem. 2008 Apr 11; 283: 9759-9767.

82.	 Soga T. Cancer metabolism: key players in metabolic
reprogramming. Cancer Sci. 2013; 104: 275-281.

99.	 Jha MK, Suk K. Pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase as a
potential therapeutic target for malignant gliomas. Brain
Tumor Res Treat. 2013; 1: 57-63.

83.	 Ward PS, Thompson CB. Metabolic reprogramming: a
cancer hallmark even Warburg did not anticipate. Cancer
Cell. 2012; 21:297-308.

100.	Moore JD, Staniszewska A, Shaw T, D’Alessandro J,
Davis B, Surgenor A, Baker L, Matassova N, Murray J,
Macias A, Brough P, Wood M, Mahon PC. VER-246608,
a novel pan-isoform ATP competitive inhibitor of pyruvate
dehydrogenase kinase, disrupts Warburg metabolism
and induces context-dependent cytostasis in cancer
cells. Oncotarget. 2014; 5: 12862-12876. doi: 10.18632/
oncotarget.2656.

84.	 Hue L, Rousseau GG. Fructose 2,6-bisphosphate and the
control of glycolysis by growth factors, tumor promoters
and oncogenes. Adv Enzyme Regul. 1993; 33: 97-110.
85.	 Patra KC, Wang Q, Bhaskar PT, Miller L, Wang Z,
Wheaton W, Chandel N, Laakso M, Muller WJ, Allen
EL, Jha AK, Smolen GA, Clasquin MF, Robey RB, Hay
N. Hexokinase 2 is required for tumor initiation and
maintenance and its systemic deletion is therapeutic in
mouse models of cancer. Cancer Cell. 2013; 24: 213-228.

101.	Wigfield SM, Winter SC, Giatromanolaki A, Taylor J,
Koukourakis ML, Harris AL. PDK-1 regulates lactate
production in hypoxia and is associated with poor prognosis
in head and neck squamous cancer. Br J Cancer. 2008; 98:
1975-1984.

86.	 Reibstein D, den Hollander JA, Pilkis SJ, Shulman RG.
Studies on the regulation of yeast phosphofructo-1-kinase:
its role in aerobic and anaerobic glycolysis. Biochemistry.
1986; 25: 219-227.

102.	Cereghino GP, Atencio DP, Saghbini M, Beiner J, Scheffler
IE. Glucose-dependent turnover of the mRNAs encoding
succinate dehydrogenase peptides in Saccharomyces
cerevisiae: sequence elements in the 5’ untranslated region

87.	 Bayley JP, Devilee P. The Warburg effect in 2012. Curr
Opin Oncol. 2012; 24: 62-67.
88. Chaneton B, Gottlieb E. Rocking cell metabolism: revised
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

5219

Oncotarget

of the Ip mRNA play a dominant role. Mol Biol Cell. 1995;
6: 1125-1143.

Andrews B, Natter K, Kohlwein SD. Cdk1/Cdc28dependent activation of the major triacylglycerol lipase
Tgl4 in yeast links lipolysis to cell-cycle progression. Mol
Cell. 2009; 33: 53-63.

103.	Chatterjee A, Dasgupta S, Sidransky D. Mitochondrial
subversion in cancer. Cancer Prev Res (Phila). 2011; 4:
638-654.

118.	Loewen CJ. Lipids as conductors in the orchestra of life.
F1000 Biol Rep. 2012; 4: 4.

104.	Cuezva JM, Sánchez-Aragó M, Sala S, Blanco-Rivero A,
Ortega AD. A message emerging from development: the
repression of mitochondrial beta-F1-ATPase expression in
cancer. J Bioenerg Biomembr. 2007; 39: 259-265.

119.	Santos CR, Schulze A. Lipid metabolism in cancer. FEBS
J. 2012; 279: 2610-2623.
120.	Zaidi N, Lupien L, Kuemmerle NB, Kinlaw WB, Swinnen
JV, Smans K. Lipogenesis and lipolysis: the pathways
exploited by the cancer cells to acquire fatty acids. Prog
Lipid Res. 2013; 52: 585-589.

105.	Eraso P, Gancedo JM. Catabolite repression in yeasts is not
associated with low levels of cAMP. Eur J Biochem. 1984;
141: 195-198.
106.	
Gottlieb E, Tomlinson IP. Mitochondrial tumour
suppressors: a genetic and biochemical update. Nat Rev
Cancer. 2005; 5: 857-866.

121.	Zechner R, Zimmermann R, Eichmann TO, Kohlwein SD,
Haemmerle G, Lass A, Madeo F. FAT SIGNALS - lipases
and lipolysis in lipid metabolism and signaling. Cell Metab.
2012; 15: 279-291.

107.	Scheffler IE, de la Cruz BJ, Prieto S. Control of mRNA
turnover as a mechanism of glucose repression in
Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 1998;
30: 1175-1193.

122.	Clendening JW, Pandyra A, Boutros PC, El Ghamrasni S,
Khosravi F, Trentin GA, Martirosyan A, Hakem A, Hakem
R, Jurisica I, Penn LZ. Dysregulation of the mevalonate
pathway promotes transformation. Proc Natl Acad Sci
USA. 2010; 107: 15051-15056.

108.	Zitomer RS, Nichols DL. Kinetics of glucose repression of
yeast cytochrome c. J Bacteriol. 1978; 135: 39-44.

123.	Clendening JW, Penn LZ. Targeting tumor cell metabolism
with statins. Oncogene. 2012; 31: 4967-4978.

109.	Jose C, Bellance N, Rossignol R. Choosing between
glycolysis and oxidative phosphorylation: a tumor’s
dilemma? Biochim Biophys Acta. 2011; 1807: 552-561.

124.	Freed-Pastor WA, Mizuno H, Zhao X, Langerød A, Moon
SH, Rodriguez-Barrueco R, Barsotti A, Chicas A, Li
W, Polotskaia A, Bissell MJ, Osborne TF, Tian B, et al.
Mutant p53 disrupts mammary tissue architecture via the
mevalonate pathway. Cell. 2012; 148: 244-258.

110.	Lu J, Tan M, Cai Q. The Warburg effect in tumor
progression: mitochondrial oxidative metabolism as an antimetastasis mechanism. Cancer Lett. 2015; 356: 156-164.
111.	Rodríguez-Enríquez S, Gallardo-Pérez JC, Avilés-Salas
A, Marín-Hernández A, Carreño-Fuentes L, MaldonadoLagunas V, Moreno-Sánchez R. Energy metabolism
transition in multi-cellular human tumor spheroids. J Cell
Physiol. 2008; 216: 189-197.

125.	Liu R, Huang Y. Lipid Signaling in Tumorigenesis. Mol
Cell Pharmacol. 2014; 6: 1-9.
126.	McCubrey JA, Steelman LS, Chappell WH, Abrams SL,
Franklin RA, Montalto G, Cervello M, Libra M, Candido S,
Malaponte G, Mazzarino MC, Fagone P, Nicoletti F, et al.
Ras/Raf/MEK/ERK and PI3K/PTEN/Akt/mTOR cascade
inhibitors: how mutations can result in therapy resistance
and how to overcome resistance. Oncotarget. 2012; 3: 10681111. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.659.

112.	Rodríguez-Enríquez S, Vital-González PA, FloresRodríguez FL, Marín-Hernández A, Ruiz-Azuara L,
Moreno-Sánchez R. Control of cellular proliferation by
modulation of oxidative phosphorylation in human and
rodent fast-growing tumor cells. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol.
2006; 215: 208-217.

127.	Thurnher M, Nussbaumer O, Gruenbacher G. Novel aspects
of mevalonate pathway inhibitors as antitumor agents. Clin
Cancer Res. 2012; 18: 3524-3531.

113.	Smolková K, Bellance N, Scandurra F, Génot E, Gnaiger
E, Plecitá-Hlavatá L, Jezek P, Rossignol R. Mitochondrial
bioenergetic adaptations of breast cancer cells to aglycemia
and hypoxia. J Bioenerg Biomembr. 2010; 42: 55-67.

128.	Willemarck N, Rysman E, Brusselmans K, Van Imschoot
G, Vanderhoydonc F, Moerloose K, Lerut E, Verhoeven G,
van Roy F, Vleminckx K, Swinnen JV. Aberrant activation
of fatty acid synthesis suppresses primary cilium formation
and distorts tissue development. Cancer Res. 2010; 70:
9453-9462.

114.	Baenke F, Peck B, Miess H, Schulze A. Hooked on fat:
the role of lipid synthesis in cancer metabolism and tumour
development. Dis Model Mech. 2013; 6: 1353-1363.
115.	Chauhan N, Visram M, Cristobal-Sarramian A, Sarkleti F,
Kohlwein SD. Morphogenesis checkpoint kinase Swe1 is
the executor of lipolysis-dependent cell-cycle progression.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2015; 112: E1077- E1085.

129.	Yuan TL, Cantley LC. PI3K pathway alterations in cancer:
variations on a theme. Oncogene. 2008; 27: 5497-5510.
130.	Zunder ER, Knight ZA, Houseman BT, Apsel B, Shokat
KM. Discovery of drug-resistant and drug-sensitizing
mutations in the oncogenic PI3K isoform p110 alpha.
Cancer Cell. 2008; 14: 180-192.

116.	DeBerardinis RJ, Sayed N, Ditsworth D, Thompson CB.
Brick by brick: metabolism and tumor cell growth. Curr
Opin Genet Dev. 2008; 18: 54-61.

131.	Krishnamoorthy S, Honn KV. Eicosanoids in tumor

117.	Kurat CF, Wolinski H, Petschnigg J, Kaluarachchi S,

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

5220

Oncotarget

progression and metastasis. Subcell Biochem. 2008; 49:
145-168.

tumor metastasis by regulating prostaglandins produced by
the collecting lymphatic endothelium. Cancer Cell. 2012;
21: 181-195.

132.	Mills GB, Moolenaar WH. The emerging role of
lysophosphatidic acid in cancer. Nat Rev Cancer. 2003; 3:
582-591.

146.	Karnezis T, Shayan R, Fox S, Achen MG, Stacker SA.
The connection between lymphangiogenic signalling and
prostaglandin biology: a missing link in the metastatic
pathway. Oncotarget. 2012; 3: 893-906. doi: 10.18632/
oncotarget.593.

133. 	
Nomura DK, Long JZ, Niessen S, Hoover HS, Ng SW,
Cravatt BF. Monoacylglycerol lipase regulates a fatty acid
network that promotes cancer pathogenesis. Cell. 2010;
140: 49-61.

147.	Nagahashi M, Ramachandran S, Kim EY, Allegood JC,
Rashid OM, Yamada A, Zhao R, Milstien S, Zhou H,
Spiegel S, Takabe K. Sphingosine-1-phosphate produced by
sphingosine kinase 1 promotes breast cancer progression by
stimulating angiogenesis and lymphangiogenesis. Cancer
Res. 2012; 72: 726-735.

134.	Park JB, Lee CS, Jang JH, Ghim J, Kim YJ, You S, Hwang
D, Suh PG, Ryu SH. Phospholipase signalling networks in
cancer. Nat Rev Cancer. 2012; 12: 782-792.
135.	Ren J, Xiao YJ, Singh LS, Zhao X, Zhao Z, Feng L,
Rose TM, Prestwich GD, Xu Y. Lysophosphatidic acid is
constitutively produced by human peritoneal mesothelial
cells and enhances adhesion, migration, and invasion of
ovarian cancer cells. Cancer Res. 2006; 66: 3006-3014.

148.	Seguin F, Carvalho MA, Bastos DC, Agostini M, Zecchin
KG, Alvarez-Flores MP, Chudzinski-Tavassi AM, Coletta
RD, Graner E. The fatty acid synthase inhibitor orlistat
reduces experimental metastases and angiogenesis in
B16-F10 melanomas. Br J Cancer. 2012; 107: 977-987.

136.	Wang MT, Honn KV, Nie D. Cyclooxygenases, prostanoids,
and tumor progression. Cancer Metastasis Rev. 2007; 26:
525-534.

149.	Das SK, Eder S, Schauer S, Diwoky C, Temmel H, Guertl
B, Gorkiewicz G, Tamilarasan KP, Kumari P, Trauner
M, Zimmermann R, Vesely P, Haemmerle G, Zechner R,
Hoefler G. Adipose triglyceride lipase contributes to cancerassociated cachexia. Science. 2011; 333: 233-238.

137.	Yecies JL, Manning BD. Chewing the fat on tumor cell
metabolism. Cell. 2010; 140: 28-30.
138. 	
Heusinkveld M, de Vos van Steenwijk PJ, Goedemans
R, Ramwadhdoebe TH, Gorter A, Welters MJ, van
Hall T, van der Burg SH. M2 macrophages induced by
prostaglandin E2 and IL-6 from cervical carcinoma are
switched to activated M1 macrophages by CD4+ Th1 cells.
J Immunol. 2011; 187: 1157-1165.

150.	
Martinez-Outschoorn UE, Pestell RG, Howell A,
Tykocinski ML, Nagajyothi F, Machado FS, Tanowitz HB,
Sotgia F, Lisanti MP. Energy transfer in “parasitic” cancer
metabolism: mitochondria are the powerhouse and Achilles’
heel of tumor cells. Cell Cycle. 2011; 10: 4208-4216.

139.	Joyce JA, Pollard JW. Microenvironmental regulation of
metastasis. Nat Rev Cancer. 2009; 9: 239-252.

151.	Nieman KM, Kenny HA, Penicka CV, Ladanyi A, BuellGutbrod R, Zillhardt MR, Romero IL, Carey MS, Mills
GB, Hotamisligil GS, Yamada SD, Peter ME, Gwin K,
Lengyel E. Adipocytes promote ovarian cancer metastasis
and provide energy for rapid tumor growth. Nat Med. 2011;
17: 1498-1503.

140.	Rolin J, Maghazachi AA. Effects of lysophospholipids on
tumor microenvironment. Cancer Microenviron. 2011; 4:
393-403.
141.	Santolla MF, Lappano R, De Marco P, Pupo M, Vivacqua
A, Sisci D, Abonante S, Iacopetta D, Cappello AR, Dolce
V, Maggiolini M. G protein-coupled estrogen receptor
mediates the up-regulation of fatty acid synthase induced
by 17β-estradiol in cancer cells and cancer-associated
fibroblasts. J Biol Chem. 2012; 287:43234-43245.

152.	Nieman KM, Romero IL, Van Houten B, Lengyel E.
Adipose tissue and adipocytes support tumorigenesis and
metastasis. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2013; 1831: 1533-1541.
153.	Nielsen J. Systems biology of lipid metabolism: from yeast
to human. FEBS Lett. 2009; 583: 3905-3913.

142.	Chang SH, Liu CH, Conway R, Han DK, Nithipatikom
K, Trifan OC, Lane TF, Hla T. Role of prostaglandin E2dependent angiogenic switch in cyclooxygenase 2-induced
breast cancer progression. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2004;
101: 591-596.

154.	Petranovic D, Tyo K, Vemuri GN, Nielsen J. Prospects of
yeast systems biology for human health: integrating lipid,
protein and energy metabolism. FEMS Yeast Res. 2010
Dec; 10: 1046-1059.
155.	Beckers A, Organe S, Timmermans L, Scheys K, Peeters
A, Brusselmans K, Verhoeven G, Swinnen JV. Chemical
inhibition of acetyl-CoA carboxylase induces growth arrest
and cytotoxicity selectively in cancer cells. Cancer Res.
2007; 67: 8180-8187.

143.	Gao Y, Gao F, Chen K, Tian ML, Zhao DL. Sphingosine
kinase 1 as an anticancer therapeutic target. Drug Des Devel
Ther. 2015; 9: 3239-3245.
144.	Harjes U, Bensaad K, Harris AL. Endothelial cell
metabolism and implications for cancer therapy. Br J
Cancer. 2012; 107: 1207-1212.

156. 	
Flavin R, Peluso S, Nguyen PL, Loda M. Fatty acid
synthase as a potential therapeutic target in cancer. Future
Oncol. 2010; 6: 551-562.

145.	Karnezis T, Shayan R, Caesar C, Roufail S, Harris NC,
Ardipradja K, Zhang YF, Williams SP, Farnsworth RH,
Chai MG, Rupasinghe TW, Tull DL, Baldwin ME, Sloan
EK, Fox SB, Achen MG, Stacker SA. VEGF-D promotes
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

157.	Mashima T, Sato S, Okabe S, Miyata S, Matsuura M,
Sugimoto Y, Tsuruo T, Seimiya H. Acyl-CoA synthetase as
5221

Oncotarget

a cancer survival factor: its inhibition enhances the efficacy
of etoposide. Cancer Sci. 2009; 100: 1556-1562.

173.	Clem BF, Clem AL, Yalcin A, Goswami U, Arumugam
S, Telang S, Trent JO, Chesney J. A novel small molecule
antagonist of choline kinase-α that simultaneously
suppresses MAPK and PI3K/AKT signaling. Oncogene.
2011; 30: 3370-3380.

158.	Menendez JA, Lupu R. Fatty acid synthase and the lipogenic
phenotype in cancer pathogenesis. Nat Rev Cancer. 2007;
7:763-777.

174.	Corominas-Faja B, Cuyàs E, Gumuzio J, Bosch-Barrera J,
Leis O, Martin ÁG, Menendez JA. Chemical inhibition of
acetyl-CoA carboxylase suppresses self-renewal growth
of cancer stem cells. Oncotarget. 2014; 5: 8306-8316. doi:
10.18632/oncotarget.2059.

159.	Wakil SJ, Abu-Elheiga LA. Fatty acid metabolism: target
for metabolic syndrome. J Lipid Res. 2009; 50: S138-S143.
160.	Wang C, Rajput S, Watabe K, Liao DF, Cao D. AcetylCoA carboxylase-alpha as a novel target for cancer therapy.
Front Biosci (Schol Ed). 2010; 2: 515-526.

175.	Marjanovic J, Chalupska D, Patenode C, Coster A, Arnold
E, Ye A, Anesi G, Lu Y, Okun I, Tkachenko S, Haselkorn
R, Gornicki P. Recombinant yeast screen for new inhibitors
of human acetyl-CoA carboxylase 2 identifies potential
drugs to treat obesity. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2010; 107:
9093-9098.

161.	Hess D, Chisholm JW, Igal RA. Inhibition of stearoylCoA desaturase activity blocks cell cycle progression and
induces programmed cell death in lung cancer cells. PLoS
One. 2010; 5: e11394.
162.	Minville-Walz M, Pierre AS, Pichon L, Bellenger S, Fèvre
C, Bellenger J, Tessier C, Narce M, Rialland M. Inhibition
of stearoyl-CoA desaturase 1 expression induces CHOPdependent cell death in human cancer cells. PLoS One.
2010; 5: e14363.

176.	Menendez JA. Fine-tuning the lipogenic/lipolytic balance to
optimize the metabolic requirements of cancer cell growth:
molecular mechanisms and therapeutic perspectives.
Biochim Biophys Acta. 2010; 1801: 381-391.

163.	Scaglia N, Igal RA. Inhibition of Stearoyl-CoA Desaturase
1 expression in human lung adenocarcinoma cells impairs
tumorigenesis. Int J Oncol. 2008; 33: 839-850.

177.	Swierczynski J, Hebanowska A, Sledzinski T. Role of
abnormal lipid metabolism in development, progression,
diagnosis and therapy of pancreatic cancer. World J
Gastroenterol. 2014; 20: 2279-2303.

164.	Heffernan-Stroud LA, Obeid LM. Sphingosine kinase 1 in
cancer. Adv Cancer Res. 2013; 117: 201-235.

178.	Brusselmans K, De Schrijver E, Heyns W, Verhoeven G,
Swinnen JV. Epigallocatechin-3-gallate is a potent natural
inhibitor of fatty acid synthase in intact cells and selectively
induces apoptosis in prostate cancer cells. Int J Cancer.
2003; 106: 856-862.

165.	Ogretmen B, Hannun YA. Biologically active sphingolipids
in cancer pathogenesis and treatment. Nat Rev Cancer.
2004; 4: 604-616.
166.	Ponnusamy S, Meyers-Needham M, Senkal CE, Saddoughi
SA, Sentelle D, Selvam SP, Salas A, Ogretmen B.
Sphingolipids and cancer: ceramide and sphingosine-1phosphate in the regulation of cell death and drug resistance.
Future Oncol. 2010; 6: 1603-1624.

179.	Chang JW, Niphakis MJ, Lum KM, Cognetta AB 3rd, Wang
C, Matthews ML, Niessen S, Buczynski MW, Parsons LH,
Cravatt BF. Highly selective inhibitors of monoacylglycerol
lipase bearing a reactive group that is bioisosteric with
endocannabinoid substrates. Chem Biol. 2012; 19: 579-588.

167.	Selvam SP, Ogretmen B. Sphingosine kinase/sphingosine
1-phosphate signaling in cancer therapeutics and drug
resistance. Handb Exp Pharmacol. 2013; 216: 3-27.

180.	Fritz V, Benfodda Z, Rodier G, Henriquet C, Iborra F,
Avancès C, Allory Y, de la Taille A, Culine S, Blancou H,
Cristol JP, Michel F, Sardet C, Fajas L. Abrogation of de
novo lipogenesis by stearoyl-CoA desaturase 1 inhibition
interferes with oncogenic signaling and blocks prostate
cancer progression in mice. Mol Cancer Ther. 2010; 9:
1740-1754.

168.	Flavin R, Zadra G and Loda M. Metabolic alterations
and targeted therapies in prostate cancer. The Journal of
pathology. 2011; 223: 283-294.
169.	Rossi S, Graner E, Febbo P, Weinstein L, Bhattacharya N,
Onody T, Bubley G, Balk S, Loda M. Fatty acid synthase
expression defines distinct molecular signatures in prostate
cancer. Mol Cancer Res. 2003; 1: 707-715.

181.	Kim JH, Lewin TM, Coleman RA. Expression and
characterization of recombinant rat Acyl-CoA synthetases
1, 4, and 5. Selective inhibition by triacsin C and
thiazolidinediones. J Biol Chem. 2001; 276: 24667-24673.

170.	Suburu J, Chen YQ. Lipids and prostate cancer.
Prostaglandins Other Lipid Mediat. 2012; 98: 1-10.
171.	Swinnen JV, Roskams T, Joniau S, Van Poppel H, Oyen
R, Baert L, Heyns W, Verhoeven G. Overexpression of
fatty acid synthase is an early and common event in the
development of prostate cancer. Int J Cancer. 2002; 98: 1922.

182.	Lupu R, Menendez JA. Pharmacological inhibitors of fatty
acid synthase (FASN)-catalyzed endogenous fatty acid
biogenesis: a new family of anti-cancer agents? Curr Pharm
Biotechnol. 2006; 7: 483-493.
183.	Mashima T, Oh-hara T, Sato S, Mochizuki M, Sugimoto
Y, Yamazaki K, Hamada J, Tada M, Moriuchi T, Ishikawa
Y, Kato Y, Tomoda H, Yamori T, Tsuruo T. p53-defective
tumors with a functional apoptosome-mediated pathway: a
new therapeutic target. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2005; 97: 765777.

172.	Cao Z, Fan-Minogue H, Bellovin DI, Yevtodiyenko
A, Arzeno J, Yang Q, Gambhir SS, Felsher DW. MYC
phosphorylation, activation, and tumorigenic potential
in hepatocellular carcinoma are regulated by HMG-CoA
reductase. Cancer Res. 2011; 71: 2286-2297.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

5222

Oncotarget

184.	Mason P, Liang B, Li L, Fremgen T, Murphy E, Quinn A,
Madden SL, Biemann HP, Wang B, Cohen A, Komarnitsky
S, Jancsics K, Hirth B, Cooper CG, Lee E, Wilson S,
Krumbholz R, Schmid S, Xiang Y, Booker M, Lillie J,
Carter K. SCD1 inhibition causes cancer cell death by
depleting mono-unsaturated fatty acids. PLoS One. 2012;
7: e33823.

OXPHOS biogenesis, oxidative stress and Akt activation.
Biochim Biophys Acta. 2011; 1807: 707-718.
195.	Leone A, Di Gennaro E, Bruzzese F, Avallone A, Budillon
A. New perspective for an old antidiabetic drug: metformin
as anticancer agent. Cancer Treat Res. 2014; 159: 355-376.
196.	Pollak MN. Investigating metformin for cancer prevention
and treatment: the end of the beginning. Cancer Discov.
2012; 2: 778-790.

185.	Orita H, Coulter J, Lemmon C, Tully E, Vadlamudi A,
Medghalchi SM, Kuhajda FP, Gabrielson E. Selective
inhibition of fatty acid synthase for lung cancer treatment.
Clin Cancer Res. 2007; 13: 7139-7145.

197.	Swinnen JV, Brusselmans K, Verhoeven G. Increased
lipogenesis in cancer cells: new players, novel targets. Curr
Opin Clin Nutr Metab Care. 2006; 9: 358-365.

186.	Roongta UV, Pabalan JG, Wang X, Ryseck RP, Fargnoli
J, Henley BJ, Yang WP, Zhu J, Madireddi MT, Lawrence
RM, Wong TW, Rupnow BA. Cancer cell dependence on
unsaturated fatty acids implicates stearoyl-CoA desaturase
as a target for cancer therapy. Mol Cancer Res. 2011; 9:
1551-1561.

198.	Steffensen KR. Are synthetic compounds that silence the
liver-X-receptor the next generation of anti-cancer drugs?
Cancer Cell. 2015; 28:3-4.
199.	Kamisuki S, Mao Q, Abu-Elheiga L, Gu Z, Kugimiya A,
Kwon Y, Shinohara T, Kawazoe Y, Sato S, Asakura K,
Choo HY, Sakai J, Wakil SJ, Uesugi M. A small molecule
that blocks fat synthesis by inhibiting the activation of
SREBP. Chem Biol. 2009; 16: 882-892.

187.	Sadowski MC, Pouwer RH, Gunter JH, Lubik AA, Quinn
RJ, Nelson CC. The fatty acid synthase inhibitor triclosan:
repurposing an anti-microbial agent for targeting prostate
cancer. Oncotarget. 2014; 5: 9362-9381. doi: 10.18632/
oncotarget.2433.

200.	Kamisuki S, Shirakawa T, Kugimiya A, Abu-Elheiga L,
Choo HY, Yamada K, Shimogawa H, Wakil SJ, Uesugi
M. Synthesis and evaluation of diarylthiazole derivatives
that inhibit activation of sterol regulatory element-binding
proteins. J Med Chem. 2011; 54: 4923-4927.

188.	Scaglia N, Chisholm JW, Igal RA. Inhibition of
stearoylCoA desaturase-1 inactivates acetyl-CoA
carboxylase and impairs proliferation in cancer cells: role
of AMPK. PLoS One. 2009; 4: e6812.

201.	Williams KJ, Argus JP, Zhu Y, Wilks MQ, Marbois BN,
York AG, Kidani Y, Pourzia AL, Akhavan D, Lisiero DN,
Komisopoulou E, Henkin AH, Soto H, et al. An essential
requirement for the SCAP/SREBP signaling axis to protect
cancer cells from lipotoxicity. Cancer Res. 2013; 73: 28502862.

189.	Van Horn CG, Caviglia JM, Li LO, Wang S, Granger DA,
Coleman RA. Characterization of recombinant long-chain
rat acyl-CoA synthetase isoforms 3 and 6: identification of
a novel variant of isoform 6. Biochemistry. 2005; 44: 16351642.

202.	Chajès V, Joulin V, Clavel-Chapelon F. The fatty acid
desaturation index of blood lipids, as a biomarker of hepatic
stearoyl-CoA desaturase expression, is a predictive factor of
breast cancer risk. Curr Opin Lipidol. 2011; 22: 6-10.

190.	Wang C, Xu C, Sun M, Luo D, Liao DF, Cao D. AcetylCoA carboxylase-alpha inhibitor TOFA induces human
cancer cell apoptosis. Biochem Biophys Res Commun.
2009; 385: 302-306.

203.	Jeyakumar SM, Lopamudra P, Padmini S, Balakrishna
N, Giridharan NV, Vajreswari A. Fatty acid desaturation
index correlates with body mass and adiposity indices of
obesity in Wistar NIN obese mutant rat strains WNIN/Ob
and WNIN/GR-Ob. Nutr Metab (Lond). 2009; 6: 27.

191.	Zhou W, Han WF, Landree LE, Thupari JN, Pinn ML,
Bililign T, Kim EK, Vadlamudi A, Medghalchi SM, El
Meskini R, Ronnett GV, Townsend CA, Kuhajda FP. Fatty
acid synthase inhibition activates AMP-activated protein
kinase in SKOV3 human ovarian cancer cells. Cancer Res.
2007; 67: 2964-2971.

204.	Miyazaki M, Kim HJ, Man WC, Ntambi JM. Oleoyl-CoA
is the major de novo product of stearoyl-CoA desaturase
1 gene isoform and substrate for the biosynthesis of the
Harderian gland 1-alkyl-2,3-diacylglycerol. J Biol Chem.
2001; 276: 39455-39461.

192.	Göransson O, McBride A, Hawley SA, Ross FA, Shpiro N,
Foretz M, Viollet B, Hardie DG, Sakamoto K. Mechanism
of action of A-769662, a valuable tool for activation of
AMP-activated protein kinase. J Biol Chem. 2007; 282:
32549-32560.

205.	Ntambi JM, Miyazaki M. Regulation of stearoyl-CoA
desaturases and role in metabolism. Prog Lipid Res. 2004;
43: 91-104.

193.	Guo D, Hildebrandt IJ, Prins RM, Soto H, Mazzotta MM,
Dang J, Czernin J, Shyy JY, Watson AD, Phelps M, Radu
CG, Cloughesy TF, Mischel PS. The AMPK agonist
AICAR inhibits the growth of EGFRvIII-expressing
glioblastomas by inhibiting lipogenesis. Proc Natl Acad Sci
USA. 2009; 106: 12932-12937.

206.	Wang J, Yu L, Schmidt RE, Su C, Huang X, Gould K, Cao
G. Characterization of HSCD5, a novel human stearoylCoA desaturase unique to primates. Biochem Biophys Res
Commun. 2005; 332: 735-742.
207	 . Zhang L, Ge L, Parimoo S, Stenn K, Prouty SM. Human
stearoyl-CoA desaturase: alternative transcripts generated
from a single gene by usage of tandem polyadenylation

194.	Jose C, Hébert-Chatelain E, Bellance N, Larendra A, Su
M, Nouette-Gaulain K, Rossignol R. AICAR inhibits
cancer cell growth and triggers cell-type distinct effects on
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

5223

Oncotarget

sites. Biochem J. 1999; 340: 255-264.

220.	Ariyama H, Kono N, Matsuda S, Inoue T, Arai H. Decrease
in membrane phospholipid unsaturation induces unfolded
protein response. J Biol Chem. 2010; 285: 22027-22035.

208.	Dória ML, Cotrim Z, Macedo B, Simões C, Domingues
P, Helguero L, Domingues MR. Lipidomic approach to
identify patterns in phospholipid profiles and define class
differences in mammary epithelial and breast cancer cells.
Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2012; 133: 635-648.

221.	Basseri S, Austin RC. Endoplasmic reticulum stress and
lipid metabolism: mechanisms and therapeutic potential.
Biochem Res Int. 2012; 2012: 841362.

209.	Dória ML, Cotrim CZ, Simões C, Macedo B, Domingues
P, Domingues MR, Helguero LA. Lipidomic analysis of
phospholipids from human mammary epithelial and breast
cancer cell lines. J Cell Physiol. 2013; 228: 457-468.

222.	Borradaile NM, Han X, Harp JD, Gale SE, Ory DS,
Schaffer JE. Disruption of endoplasmic reticulum structure
and integrity in lipotoxic cell death. J Lipid Res. 2006; 47:
2726-2737.

210.	Guo S, Wang Y, Zhou D, Li Z. Significantly increased
monounsaturated lipids relative to polyunsaturated lipids in
six types of cancer microenvironment are observed by mass
spectrometry imaging. Sci Rep. 2014; 4: 5959.

223.	Deguil J, Pineau L, Rowland Snyder EC, Dupont S, Beney
L, Gil A, Frapper G, Ferreira T. Modulation of lipidinduced ER stress by fatty acid shape. Traffic. 2011; 12:
349-362.

211.	He M, Guo S, Li Z. In situ characterizing membrane lipid
phenotype of breast cancer cells using mass spectrometry
profiling. Sci Rep. 2015; 5: 11298.

224.	Erbay E, Babaev VR, Mayers JR, Makowski L, Charles
KN, Snitow ME, Fazio S, Wiest MM, Watkins SM, Linton
MF, Hotamisligil GS. Reducing endoplasmic reticulum
stress through a macrophage lipid chaperone alleviates
atherosclerosis. Nat Med. 2009; 15: 1383-1391.

212.	AbuAli G, Chaisaklert W, Stelloo E, Pazarentzos E, Hwang
MS, Qize D, Harding SV, Al-Rubaish A, Alzahrani AJ, AlAli A, Sanders TA, Aboagye EO, Grimm S. The anticancer
gene ORCTL3 targets stearoyl-CoA desaturase-1 for
tumour-specific apoptosis. Oncogene. 2015; 34: 1718-1728.

225.	Hou NS, Gutschmidt A, Choi DY, Pather K, Shi X, Watts
JL, Hoppe T, Taubert S. Activation of the endoplasmic
reticulum unfolded protein response by lipid disequilibrium
without disturbed proteostasis in vivo. Proc Natl Acad Sci
USA. 2014; 111: E2271-E2280.

213.	Huang GM, Jiang QH, Cai C, Qu M, Shen W. SCD1
negatively regulates autophagy-induced cell death in human
hepatocellular carcinoma through inactivation of the AMPK
signaling pathway. Cancer Lett. 2015; 358: 180-190.

226.	Kitai Y, Ariyama H, Kono N, Oikawa D, Iwawaki T, Arai
H. Membrane lipid saturation activates IRE1α without
inducing clustering. Genes Cells. 2013; 18: 798-809.

214.	Igal RA. Roles of stearoylCoA desaturase-1 in the regulation
of cancer cell growth, survival and tumorigenesis. Cancers
(Basel). 2011; 3: 2462-2477.

227.	Volmer R, van der Ploeg K, Ron D. Membrane lipid
saturation activates endoplasmic reticulum unfolded protein
response transducers through their transmembrane domains.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2013; 110: 4628-4633.

215.	Leung JY, Kim WY. Stearoyl co-A desaturase 1 as a ccRCC
therapeutic target: death by stress. Clin Cancer Res. 2013;
19: 3111-3113.

228.	Wang D, Wei Y, Pagliassotti MJ. Saturated fatty acids
promote endoplasmic reticulum stress and liver injury in
rats with hepatic steatosis. Endocrinology. 2006; 147: 943951.

216.	Noto A, Raffa S, De Vitis C, Roscilli G, Malpicci D,
Coluccia P, Di Napoli A, Ricci A, Giovagnoli MR,
Aurisicchio L, Torrisi MR, Ciliberto G, Mancini R.
Stearoyl-CoA desaturase-1 is a key factor for lung cancerinitiating cells. Cell Death Dis. 2013; 4: e947.

229.	Wei Y, Wang D, Topczewski F, Pagliassotti MJ. Saturated
fatty acids induce endoplasmic reticulum stress and
apoptosis independently of ceramide in liver cells. Am J
Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 2006; 291: E275-E281.

217.	Rysman E, Brusselmans K, Scheys K, Timmermans
L, Derua R, Munck S, Van Veldhoven PP, Waltregny
D, Daniëls VW, Machiels J, Vanderhoydonc F, Smans
K, Waelkens E, Verhoeven G, Swinnen JV. De novo
lipogenesis protects cancer cells from free radicals and
chemotherapeutics by promoting membrane lipid saturation.
Cancer Res. 2010; 70: 8117-8126.

230.	Ashcraft BA, Fillers WS, Augustine SL, Clarke SD.
Polymer-protomer transition of acetyl-CoA carboxylase
occurs in vivo and varies with nutritional conditions. J Biol
Chem. 1980; 255: 10033-10035.
231.	Clarke SD, Salati LM. Fatty acid-mediated disaggregation
of acetyl-CoA carboxylase in isolated liver cells. Fed Proc.
1985; 44: 2458-2462.

218.	von Roemeling CA, Marlow LA, Pinkerton AB, Crist A,
Miller J, Tun HW, Smallridge RC, Copland JA. Aberrant
lipid metabolism in anaplastic thyroid carcinoma reveals
stearoyl CoA desaturase 1 as a novel therapeutic target. J
Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2015; 100: E697-E709.

232.	Goodridge AG. Regulation of the activity of acetyl
coenzyme A carboxylase by palmitoyl coenzyme A and
citrate. J Biol Chem. 1972; 247: 6946-6952.

219.	von Roemeling CA, Marlow LA, Wei JJ, Cooper SJ,
Caulfield TR, Wu K, Tan WW, Tun HW, Copland JA.
Stearoyl-CoA desaturase 1 is a novel molecular therapeutic
target for clear cell renal cell carcinoma. Clin Cancer Res.
2013; 19: 2368-2380.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

233.	Krycer JR, Sharpe LJ, Luu W, Brown AJ. The Akt-SREBP
nexus: cell signaling meets lipid metabolism. Trends
Endocrinol Metab. 2010; 21: 268-276.
234.	Györfy Z, Benkö S, Kusz E, Maresca B, Vígh L, Duda E.
Highly increased TNF sensitivity of tumor cells expressing
5224

Oncotarget

the yeast delta 9-desaturase gene. Biochem Biophys Res
Commun. 1997; 241: 465-470.

Kroemer G. The hallmarks of aging. Cell. 2013; 153: 11941217.

235.	Györfy Z, Horváth I, Balogh G, Domonkos A, Duda E,
Maresca B, Vígh L. Modulation of lipid unsaturation
and membrane fluid state in mammalian cells by stable
transformation with the delta9-desaturase gene of
Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Biochem Biophys Res Commun.
1997; 237: 362-366.

251.	Rodier F, Campisi J. Four faces of cellular senescence. J
Cell Biol. 2011; 192: 547-556.
252.	Giaever G, Flaherty P, Kumm J, Proctor M, Nislow C,
Jaramillo DF, Chu AM, Jordan MI, Arkin AP, Davis
RW. Chemogenomic profiling: identifying the functional
interactions of small molecules in yeast. Proc Natl Acad
Sci USA. 2004; 101: 793-798.

236.	Stukey JE, McDonough VM, Martin CE. Isolation and
characterization of OLE1, a gene affecting fatty acid
desaturation from Saccharomyces cerevisiae. J Biol Chem.
1989; 264: 16537-16544.

253.	Hoepfner D, Helliwell SB, Sadlish H, Schuierer S, Filipuzzi
I, Brachat S, Bhullar B, Plikat U, Abraham Y, Altorfer
M, Aust T, Baeriswyl L, Cerino R, et al. High-resolution
chemical dissection of a model eukaryote reveals targets,
pathways and gene functions. Microbiol Res. 2014; 169:
107-120.

237.	Petschnigg J, Wolinski H, Kolb D, Zellnig G, Kurat CF,
Natter K, Kohlwein SD. Good fat, essential cellular
requirements for triacylglycerol synthesis to maintain
membrane homeostasis in yeast. J Biol Chem. 2009; 284:
30981-30993.

254.	Hoon S, Gebbia M, Costanzo M, Davis RW, Giaever G,
Nislow C. A global perspective of the genetic basis for
carbonyl stress resistance. G3 (Bethesda). 2011; 1: 219-231.

238.	Arlia-Ciommo A, Piano A, Svistkova V, Mohtashami S,
Titorenko VI. Mechanisms underlying the anti-aging and
anti-tumor effects of lithocholic bile acid. Int J Mol Sci.
2014; 15:16522-16543.

255.	Luesch H, Wu TY, Ren P, Gray NS, Schultz PG, Supek F.
A genome-wide overexpression screen in yeast for smallmolecule target identification. Chem Biol. 2005; 12: 55-63.

239.	Beach A, Richard VR, Bourque S, Boukh-Viner T,
Kyryakov P, Gomez-Perez A, Arlia-Ciommo A, Feldman
R, Leonov A, Piano A, Svistkova V, Titorenko VI.
Lithocholic bile acid accumulated in yeast mitochondria
orchestrates a development of an anti-aging cellular pattern
by causing age-related changes in cellular proteome. Cell
Cycle. 2015; 14: 1643-1656.

256.	Roemer T, Xu D, Singh SB, Parish CA, Harris G, Wang H,
Davies JE, Bills GF. Confronting the challenges of natural
product-based antifungal discovery. Chem Biol. 2011; 18:
148-164.

240.	Beach A, Titorenko VI. In search of housekeeping pathways
that regulate longevity. Cell Cycle. 2011; 10: 3042-3044.
241.	Burstein MT, Titorenko VI. A mitochondrially targeted
compound delays aging in yeast through a mechanism
linking mitochondrial membrane lipid metabolism to
mitochondrial redox biology. Redox Biol. 2014; 2: 305-307.
242.	Goldberg AA, Titorenko VI, Beach A, Sanderson JT. Bile
acids induce apoptosis selectively in androgen-dependent
and -independent prostate cancer cells. PeerJ. 2013; 1: e122.
243.	Hanahan D, Weinberg RA. Hallmarks of cancer: the next
generation. Cell. 2011; 144: 646-674.
244.	Kaeberlein M. Longevity and aging. F1000Prime Rep.
2013; 5: 5.
245.	Niccoli T, Partridge L. Ageing as a risk factor for disease.
Curr Biol. 2012; 22: R741-R752.
246.	Partridge L. Intervening in ageing to prevent the diseases of
ageing. Trends Endocrinol Metab. 2014; 25: 555-557.
247.	Blagosklonny MV. Aging and immortality: quasiprogrammed senescence and its pharmacologic inhibition.
Cell Cycle. 2006; 5: 2087-2102.
248.	Blagosklonny MV, Hall MN. Growth and aging: a common
molecular mechanism. Aging (Albany NY). 2009; 1: 357362.
249.	Campisi J. Aging, cellular senescence, and cancer. Annu
Rev Physiol. 2013; 75: 685-705.
250.	López-Otín C, Blasco MA, Partridge L, Serrano M,
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

5225

Oncotarget

