by not catching up to where we should be without inflationaryplus increases in the NIH budget,” Dr. Caligiuri says.
He points out that mandatory budgets are often more
challenging because they only last for a set period of time
and require Congress to identify funding offsets. The better
alternative would be having supplemental funding, he notes.

Hope for the Future
Although no one can predict what may happen when a new
Congress and a new administration take over next year, cancer
leaders are trying to remain hopeful about what appears to be
progress in the right direction.
When asked at a recent NCI presentation on the topic if the

new and proposed investments will have a long-term impact on
fighting cancer, Dr. Lowy responded, “This is something we ask
ourselves 24/7. Certainly to have an impact, the initiative would
need to be sustained and sustainable, and it remains to be seen
what will happen.”
Still, he added that at a recent reception celebrating the NIH
budget increase, he was heartened to see a number of Republican
and Democratic congressmen speaking about the need to allocate
more funds to the NIH in the coming years. “To do research is
exquisitely expensive, but the turnaround in investment is fast,”
Dr. Bergan says. “It will improve the health of the nation, feed
into the biotech sector, and make all of our lives better.”
DOI: 10.1002/cncr.30010

D

elaying chemotherapy more than 90 days after surgery for
breast cancer may significantly increase the risk of death,
particularly among patients with triple-negative breast cancer
(TNBC), according to a new study from The University of
Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center in Houston.1
Currently, there are no guidelines recommending the
optimal time to the initiation of adjuvant chemotherapy. For
certain patients, the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services
uses the administration of adjuvant chemotherapy within 120
days of diagnosis as a quality metric. The University of Texas
MD Anderson Cancer Center and 10 other cancer hospitals are
now reporting on this metric.
The authors of the current study found that the factors
contributing to delayed treatment were socioeconomic status,
insurance coverage, and ethnicity. They found that patients who
initiate chemotherapy more than 90 days after surgery are 34%
more likely to die within 5 years, and patients with TNBC who
delay treatment have a 53% increased risk of death.
Lead author Mariana Chavez MacGregor, MD, assistant
professor of health services research and breast medical oncology,
notes that although adjuvant chemotherapy given after primary
surgery has been shown to decrease the risk of recurrence and
death, delaying the start of it may allow small remnants of the
tumor to grow or become drug-resistant.
The population-based study assessed data from 24,823
patients with stage I to III invasive breast cancer diagnosed
between January 1, 2005, and December 31, 2010, who were
treated with adjuvant chemotherapy.
The study is the largest investigating delayed chemotherapy
initiation with contemporary treatment regimens. Investigators
found that compared with patients starting chemotherapy in
the first month after surgery, those who initiated the treatment
between 30 and 90 days after surgery did not have adverse
outcomes. However, those patients who started chemotherapy
90 days after surgery had a statistically significant increase in
the risk of death and breast cancer–specific death. The latter
patients (9.8% of all participants) were 34% more likely to

die within 5 years
and 27% more
likely to die from
breast cancer in
that time frame in
comparison
with
patients who received
chemotherapy within
30 days of surgery.
Researchers
also
analyzed the data by breast
cancer subtype. For patients with TNBC, a delay of more
than 90 days was associated with a 53% increase in the risk of
death. There was no significant effect from delay for those with
hormone receptor–positive or human epidermal growth factor
receptor 2–positive breast cancers.
As a result of the findings, study senior author Sharon
Giordano, MD, MPH, professor and chair of health services
research, concludes that timely initiation of chemotherapy
is particularly important for patients with TNBC. Among
the factors contributing to the delayed administration of
chemotherapy were increased age, reconstructive surgery, and
low sociodemographic status. Patients without private insurance
and those of Hispanic or African American descent were more
likely to experience treatment delays. Patients receiving care at
NCI-designated cancer centers had a 34% lower risk of death
in comparison with those treated elsewhere. The authors note
that in most clinical situations, starting chemotherapy within
3 months is more than feasible. All patients with breast cancer
who receive adjuvant chemotherapy should do so within 90
days of surgery or 120 days of diagnosis, say the authors.

Reference
1. Chavez-MacGregor M, Clarke CA, Lichtensztajn DY, Giordano SH. Delayed
initiation of adjuvant chemotherapy among patients with breast cancer. JAMA
Oncol. 2016;2:322-329.
DOI: 10.1002/cncr.30011

© CLEOMIU / SHUTTERSTOCK.COM

Delaying Chemotherapy After Surgery in Patients
With Breast Cancer Reduces Survival

Content in this section does not reﬂect any ofﬁcial policy or medical opinion of the American Cancer Society or of the publisher unless otherwise noted. © American Cancer Society, 2016.

Cancer

May 1, 2016

1311

/16 7:09 AM

