Research Article

The Protein Phosphatase Activity of PTEN Regulates Src Family
Kinases and Controls Glioma Migration
1

2

1

3

Nandini Dey, Hal E. Crosswell, Pradip De, Ramon Parsons, Qiong Peng,
4
1
Jing Dong Su, and Donald L. Durden

1

1

Division of Pediatric Hematology/Oncology, Aflac Cancer Center and Blood Disorders Service, Department of Pediatrics, Emory University
School of Medicine, Atlanta, Georgia; 2Pediatric Hematology and Oncology Center, Greenville Hospital System University Medical
Center, Greenville, South Carolina; 3Institute of Cancer Genetics, College of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia University,
New York, New York; and 4Semafore Pharmaceuticals, Inc., Indianapolis, Indiana

Abstract
Phosphatase and tensin homologue deleted on chromosome
10 (PTEN) is mutated or lost in 60% to 70% of advanced
gliomas and is associated with malignant phenotypic changes
such as migration, which contribute to the morbidity and
mortality of this disease. Most of the tumor suppressor
function of PTEN has been attributed to its ability to
dephosphorylate the second messenger, phosphatidylinositol
3,4,5-triphosphate, resulting in the biological control of the
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K)/AKT pathway. Despite
recent work suggesting that the protein phosphatase activity
of PTEN controls glioma cell migration, the mechanisms by
which this occurs are unclear. Herein, we show using glioma
cell lines (U87MG and U373MG) stably transfected with wildtype PTEN or catalytically altered mutants of PTEN that PTEN
controls integrin-directed migration in a lipid phosphatase,
PI3K/AKT–independent manner. Confirming this observation,
we show that the stable overexpression of COOH-terminal Src
kinase, the physiologic negative regulator of SRC family
kinases (SFK), or treatment with the SFK inhibitor PP1
abrogates glioma migration. The results provide direct
evidence that the downstream effect of the protein phosphatase activity of PTEN is to suppress SFK and FYN, and to
regulate RAC-GTPase activity after Av integrin stimulation.
Furthermore, studying vitronectin-directed migration using
(a) Fyn small interfering RNA and (b) astrocytes from Fyn
heterozygous (+/ ) mice, Pten heterozygous (+/ ) mice, Pten
and Fyn double heterozygous (+/ ) mice, or Fyn knockout
( / ) mice confirmed a role of FYN in Av integrin–mediated
haptotaxis in glial cells. Our combined results provide direct
biochemical and genetic evidence that PTEN’s protein
phosphatase activity controls FYN kinase function in glioma
cells and regulates migration in a PI3K/AKT–independent
manner. [Cancer Res 2008;68(6):1862–71]

Introduction
Mutations in phosphatase and tensin homologue deleted on
chromosome 10 (PTEN) occur in one third of advanced gliomas
and have been shown to correlate with a worse prognosis (1). In
other advanced cancers as well as glioblastoma multiforme (GBM),

Requests for reprints: Donald L. Durden, Department of Pediatrics, Emory
University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA 30322. Phone: 404-778-5118; E-mail:
don_durden@oz.ped.emory.edu.
I2008 American Association for Cancer Research.
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-07-1182

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (6). March 15, 2008

epigenetic events such as promoter methylation, COOH-terminal
phosphorylation, oxidation events, and other poorly understood
protein modifications may result in loss of PTEN function,
contributing to the many downstream effects that occur when
this tumor suppressor is lost (2, 3).
Functionally, PTEN is one of three phosphatases known to
dephosphorylate the D3 position of phosphatidylinositols, resulting
in a down-regulation of the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K)/
AKT pathway, and is thus a competitive and potent antagonist to
PI3K (4, 5). Interestingly, the initial function of PTEN as a dualspecificity protein phosphatase was discovered based on its protein
structure (6, 7); however, its ability to dephosphorylate both
tyrosine and serine/threonine sites of acidic peptides has received
relatively little attention with regard to its tumor suppressive
activity. More attention has been focused on its capacity to
antagonize the growth and proliferation-promoting actions of PI3K
and AKT via its catalytic activity toward anionic lipid substrates
like phosphatidylinositol 3,4,5-triphosphate (PIP3; refs. 4, 6, 8).
More recently, the protein phosphatase activity of PTEN has
received increased scrutiny in aberrant cellular processes, particularly regarding cell motility, invasion, migration, and in the
nucleus (9–12). Several lines of evidence point to the ability of
PTEN to regulate cell motility through protein dephosphorylation.
First, the NH2-terminal domain of PTEN has extensive homology
with tensin, a protein that interacts with actin filaments at focal
adhesion contacts (13). Second, mouse models have revealed that
the embryonic lethality associated with homozygous deletion of
PTEN and the abnormal central nervous system developments in
conditional knockout mouse are largely due to defects in cellular
migration (14–17). Also, one PTEN mutation found in Cowden
syndrome and associated with a transition of nucleotide 386, which
results in a glycine to glutamic acid switch at codon 129 (G129E),
maintains protein phosphatase function while having little lipid
phosphatase activity (5, 18). The use of this mutation in several
in vitro studies has provided indirect evidence for the protein
phosphatase activity of PTEN. The mechanism by which PTEN
exerts its inhibitory effect on migratory phenotypes, and its specific
in vivo protein substrates, have not been fully explored; however,
downstream targets of the protein phosphatase activity of PTEN
may include mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK), focal
adhesion kinase (FAK), cyclin D1, and Shc (9, 10, 13, 19–21).
SRC family kinases (SFK) are non–receptor tyrosine kinases, of
which there are 10 members, and are strongly implicated in a wide
number of cancers (22, 23). SFKs are overexpressed in many
different cancers and are typically associated with advanced
malignancies and/or metastatic spread. In addition, SFKs have
important functions specific to the motility of cells and are
necessary for the growth factor and integrin-stimulated migration

1862

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

PTEN’s Protein Phosphatase Activity and Cell Migration

of cells in neural development and various malignancies (23, 24).
Previously, FYN, LYN, YES, HCK, and SRC have all been shown to be
present in neural tissue (25, 26). Specifically, loss of Fyn in mice
[Fyn ( / ) mice die perinatally] has been associated with
abnormal neural development, suggesting an integral role of SFKs
in neural development. Although SRC is known to regulate cell
cycle progression and survival through the PI3K/AKT pathway
(27, 28), SFK’s control of integrin-stimulated adhesion and migration seems to be mediated through FAK and/or MAPK, resulting
in rearrangements of cortical actin and cytoskeletal machinery
(23, 29). One of the main downstream targets of the cooperativity of
FAK and SRC is the small Rho GTPase, RAC. RAC has been shown
to control cell motility (29, 30), affecting actin reorganization at the
leading edges of cells (31).
Recent evidence suggests that SRC may alter the function of
PTEN to regulate the PI3K signaling cascade (32) and may affect
PTEN stability, thereby potentiating its growth-enhancing effects.
SRC has been shown to increase COOH-terminal tyrosine
phosphorylation of PTEN, resulting in regulation of its tumor
suppressor function (33). SFKs have been reported to cooperate
with receptor tyrosine kinases, culminating in signaling through
PTEN/PI3K (34).
Currently, there are no reports of PTEN’s regulation of SFKs.
Herein, our results show that PTEN regulates glioma cell migration
via its protein phosphatase activity independent of lipid phosphatase activity, and suggest that this effect is potentially mediated
through its control of FYN and RAC GTPase downstream of avh3
integrin engagement.

Materials and Methods
Constructs and reagents. Wild-type (WT) PTEN and its mutant (G129E,
lipid phosphatase dead or R130M, kinase dead) cDNAs were subcloned into
a retroviral expression vector containing a muristirone-inducible promoter
or into the pBABEpuro vector for expression in U87MG and U373MG
glioma cells (15). WT COOH-terminal Src kinase (CSK) was overexpressed
in U87MG cells using retroviral constructs (pLXSN) as previously described
(35). U87MG and U373MG cells were maintained in RPMI (Invitrogen), 10%
fetal bovine serum (FBS; Hyclone), and 1% penicillin/streptomycin. Brain
astrocyte cultures were established from WT mice, Fyn heterozygous (+/ )
mice, Pten heterozygous (+/ ) mice, Pten and Fyn double heterozygous
(+/ ) mice, or Fyn knockout mice. Rabbit polyclonal antibodies against
phospho-AKT (Ser473), AKT, and PTEN were purchased from Cell Signaling
Technology. Antibodies against phospho-SRC (Y418), FYN, SRC, and CSK
are purchased from Santa Cruz Biotechnology. FYN immunokinase assay
was carried out using a SRC assay kit from Upstate Biotechnology. FYN
expression was knocked down using small interfering RNA (siRNA)
SMARTpool specific for FYN (Upstate Biotechnology) along with a
corresponding negative control. Lipofectamine 2000 was bought from
Invitrogen. Vitronectin was purchased from Sigma. Horseradish peroxidase–tagged anti-rabbit IgG and anti-mouse IgG were obtained from
Amersham Life Sciences. Goat anti-mouse and anti-rabbit IgG (H+L)–AP
(human adsorbed) were purchased from Southern Biotechnology, Inc. PAK1 PBD agarose (RAC1 assay reagent) for the pull down of activated RAC1
and monoclonal RAC1 antibody were from Upstate Biotechnology. For
PTEN phosphatase assay (both lipid and protein phosphatase assays),
malachite green solution A and B were bought from Upstate Biotechnology.
Lipid substrates [PI(3,4,5) P3DiC8] and protein substrates (YEEEEEpYEEEEEY) were procured from Echelon Biosciences, Inc., and Emory
University (Chemistry Division), respectively.
Animals. Mice heterozygous for Pten (+/ ) on the C57BL6 genetic
background were obtained from Dr. Ramon Parsons (Columbia University,
New York, NY) and maintained in the Animal Facility Core at Emory
University under an Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee–

www.aacrjournals.org

approved protocol. Genotyping of Fyn knockout mice on the C57BL6
background was performed as described elsewhere (36).
Phosphatase assay. The phosphatase activity of PTEN was determined
by malachite green assays. The lipid phosphatase activity of PTEN was
measured using water soluble D-myo-PtdIns(3,4,5) P3 (Echelon Bioscience)
as a substrate, whereas its protein phosphatase activity was measured using
a custom-made acidic peptide YEEEEEpYEEEEEY (Microchemical Core,
School of Medicine, Emory University). Reaction mixtures containing 1 Ag of
glutathione S-transferase (GST) PTEN fusion proteins (purified in the
laboratory) and 70 Amol/L D-myo-PtdIns(3,4,5) P3 or 400 Amol/L acidic
peptide (YEEEEEpYEEEEEY) were incubated for 40 min at 37jC. The color
developed by malachite green (15 min at room temperature) was measured
at 650 nm. The amount (pmol) of free phosphate released in each enzyme
reaction was determined by linear regression analysis against a standard
phosphate curve.
Astrocytes culture. The brain tissue from P0 to P1 mouse pups
(dissected on ice) was subjected to trypsin (0.25%) digestion for 5 to 7 min
at 37jC. Digested tissue was triturated in presence of DNase I (Invitrogen).
The resulting cells were grown in 10% DMEM with 1% penicillin and
streptomycin at 37jC in a humidified atmosphere of 5% CO2 in air. Testing
for astrocytic markers included glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) by
immunohistochemical analysis (>95% GFAP positive at passage 4).
Migration assays. Haptotaxis assays were carried out using transwell
migration chambers (Costar Corp.) as previously described (29, 30). Cells
(2  105 per well) were added into the upper chamber of the transwell
containing the membrane (with 8-Am pore) through which they were
allowed to migrate over time to the vitronectin-coated (10 Ag/mL for 1 h)
side. Control experiments involved coating both sides of the membrane
with vitronectin. An adhesion assay on vitronectin was performed
simultaneously with the haptotaxis assay under similar conditions as
described (29). In vitro wound healing assays were performed as previously
described (12). In brief, after coating plates with vitronectin (10 Ag/mL),
wounds were created by scratching the confluent monolayer of cells. The
number of cells that migrated into the ‘‘scratched’’ area was counted from
randomly chosen fields using either Olympus DP70 system or Axiovert 200
M, Zeiss system. Student’s t test was used to determine the statistical
significance.
Biochemical analyses. Immunoblots were performed on cell lysates
obtained from U87MG and U373MG cells grown in tissue culture (35).
Equivalent amounts of protein (Bradford assay) were resolved by SDS-PAGE
and transferred to nitrocellulose membrane. Membranes were probed with
antisera specific for PTEN, AKT, phospho-S473-AKT, CSK, FYN, phosphoY418-FYN, RAC1, and h-actin.
In vitro FYN kinase assay. FYN kinase assays were performed using
the SRC assay kit from Upstate Biotechnology following the manufacturer’s
instructions as described elsewhere (35, 37). Cells were stimulated in
10-cm nontissue culture Petri dishes (coated with 10 Ag/mL of vitronectin
in PBS for 1 h at 37jC). For FYN kinase assay, clarified lysates were
immunoprecipitated with FYN antibody bound to protein-G agarose
(Santa Cruz Biotechnology). Immunoprecipitates were used for the kinase
assay.
Integrin-induced RAC1 activation. Levels of activated RAC1 were
determined by the pull-down assay as described elsewhere (29, 37). U87MG
cells were stimulated in 10-cm Petri dishes (non–tissue culture) that were
coated with 10 Ag/mL vitronectin. Clarified lysates were used for the RAC1
pull-down assay.
In vivo knockdown of FYN protein by siRNA. A cell density of 70% to
80% was used for the transfection (Lipofectamine 2000) of Fyn-specific
siRNA into U87MG cells. Transfected cells were collected after 24 and
48 h for analyses.

Results
PTEN controls vitronectin-mediated migration through its
protein phosphatase activity. U87MG and U373MG cells, which
are null for PTEN (38, 39), were stably transfected with either fully
active PTEN (WT), a catalytically dead mutant of PTEN (R130M),

1863

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (6). March 15, 2008

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

or a protein phosphatase–active, lipid phosphatase–inactive
mutant of PTEN (G129E), as described elsewhere (5). We examined
the effects of expression of WT PTEN and its different mutants on
the downstream activation of AKT in these cells (Figs. 1 and 2). As
expected, high levels of phospho-AKT in U87MG (compare lanes 1
and 2 of Fig. 1A) and U373MG (compare lanes 2 and 5 of Fig. 2C)
cells are abrogated following the introduction of WT PTEN,
whereas the expression of R130M and G129E mutants of PTEN in
U87MG cells had no effect on the phosphorylation status of AKT
(Fig. 1A, lanes 3 and 4). Lane 9 of the inset of Fig. 2C and lane 2 of
Fig. 1A show the levels of WT PTEN in U373MG and U87MG cells,
respectively.
To investigate the effect of PTEN on integrin-directed migration,
we conducted haptotaxis assays in stably transduced (a) U87MG
cells (containing various mutants of PTEN) and (b) U373MG cells
(containing WT PTEN). Haptotaxis was carried out under serumfree conditions to rule out the possibility of a combined ‘‘integringrowth factor receptor–induced migration response’’ (e.g., the
presence of platelet-derived growth factor, epidermal growth
factor, or FBS would costimulate integrin and receptor protein
tyrosine kinases to drive migration of glioma cells; ref. 24). As
shown in Figs. 1B and 2D, vitronectin-directed migration is
significantly reduced following the transduction of WT PTEN in
both U87MG and U373MG cells, respectively. Interestingly, this
abrogation of migration occurs to an equal extent in U87MG cells
expressing G129E mutant of PTEN compared with cells expressing
fully active WT PTEN. The fact that lipid phosphatase dead (but
protein phosphatase active) mutant of PTEN (G129E) can inhibit
vitronectin-directed migration in U87MG cells to the same degree
as that of WT PTEN strongly suggests a role of PTEN’s protein
phosphatase activity in glioma cell migration and thus seems to be
independent of PTEN’s lipid phosphatase function (Fig. 1B). The
validity of these assays was tested by (a) using function-blocking
monoclonal antibodies (29), (b) determining the adhesion and
proliferation of these cells under same assay conditions (29), and
(c) determining the levels of integrin expressions in the presence of
WT and different mutants of PTEN in these cells. From these data,
we conclude that integrin-dependent migration in glioma cells is
regulated by PTEN’s protein phosphatase activity independent of
the lipid phosphatase function.
CSK overexpression controls vitronectin-directed migration
of U87MG cells. An important question then arose; if PTEN
regulates migration via its control over protein phosphorylation
events within the glioma cells, then what are the potential effectors
for this action of PTEN? The results of other investigations have
shown that the SFKs are important regulators of integrin-directed
migration (24). As SFKs have been previously implicated in the
regulation of integrin-directed migration and tumor metastasis, we
investigated the effect of PTEN on SFKs in the control of migration
of U87MG cells. It is well known that the function of SFKs is tightly
regulated by another nonreceptor protein tyrosine kinase, CSK
(13, 40). Because CSK physiologically regulates SFKs, overexpression of CSK in cells has been previously used as an excellent tool to
examine the role of SFKs in various phenotypes. In our laboratory,
we have also overexpressed CSK to explore the role of specific
members of SFKs in neuronal differentiation, integrin-directed
migration, and activation of AKT following growth factor
stimulation (35). Hence, in this study, we decided to test the
involvement of SFKs as potential downstream effectors of PTEN’s
protein phosphatase activity (that regulates glioma migration) by
studying their migration on vitronectin following the overexpress-

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (6). March 15, 2008

Figure 1. PTEN controls vitronectin-stimulated migration through protein
phosphatase function. A, Western blots showing stable expression of
WT PTEN (third panel from top ), its mutants (G129E and R130M; third panel
from top ), and CSK (fourth panel from top ), and effects of expression of these
proteins on the levels of phospho-AKT (P473 AKT; top ) in U87MG cells.
Equal loading is confirmed by the levels of AKT (second panel from top ) and
h-actin (fifth panel from top ). B, effect of WT PTEN, its mutants (G129E and
R130M), and CSK on vitronectin-directed migration of U87MG glioma cells.
Haptotaxis assays using different cell lines on 10 Ag/mL vitronectin for 4 h
show significant reduction of migration in U87MG cells expressing PTEN WT,
G129E, and CSK, suggesting that the control of PTEN over migration is
dependent on its protein phosphatase function and is mediated through SFKs.
Columns, mean from five individual experiments; bars, SD.

ing CSK in U87MG cells. We hypothesized that if PTEN regulates
integrin-directed migration in a lipid phosphatase–independent
but protein phosphatase–dependent manner, and if this effect is
mediated through the control of PTEN over the activity of SFKs,
then physiologic inhibition of SFKs ( following CSK overexpression)
in U87MG glioma cells (PTEN null) will cause a similar degree of
inhibition of this phenotype to that of WT PTEN as well as its
protein phosphatase active mutant (G129E mutant of PTEN).
Hence, CSK was overexpressed to test the involvement of SFKs as
downstream effectors of integrin-directed migration in glioma
cells. Figure 1A (lane 5) shows stable overexpression of CSK in
U87MG cells (4- to 5-fold increase in the expression of CSK as
measured by Western blot) compared with the parental cell line
(Fig. 1A, lane 1). We show (Fig. 1B) that stable CSK overexpression
in these cells reduces their migration on vitronectin to a similar
extent as that of the migration in cells containing WT PTEN and
G129E mutant of PTEN, thus implicating the role of SFKs in
integrin-directed migration. Interestingly, overexpression of CSK
does not affect AKT activation (Fig. 2A, lane 6), confirming that the
phenotypic changes related to CSK expression are likely not related
to the changes due to the effect of SRC on the PI3K cascade.
Furthermore, the integrin-mediated migration of glioma cells did

1864

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

PTEN’s Protein Phosphatase Activity and Cell Migration

Figure 2. Vitronectin-stimulated migration in glioma cells (U87MG and U373MG) is abrogated by pharmacologic and physiologic inhibitors of SFKs and not by
PI3K inhibition. A, effects of expression of PTEN and CSK and treatment with PP1 and LY294002 on levels of phospho-AKT (Ser473) in U87MG cells following
vitronectin stimulation. Parental U87MG cells were treated with an inhibitor of SFK, PP1 (10 Amol/L; lane 4); or of PI3K, LY294002 (10 Amol/L; lane 3); versus no
treatment (lanes 1 and 2 ). Stable clones of U87MG glioma cells expressing WT PTEN (lane 5 ) or CSK (lane 6) were also stimulated with vitronectin (10 Ag/mL)
for 30 min. Lane 1, no stimulation; lane 2, vitronectin stimulation. Equal loading is confirmed by the levels of AKT (second panel ). Data show that PI3K inhibitor,
LY294002, and PTEN overexpression significantly blocked AKT activation, whereas similar to PP1 treatment, CSK had no effect on AKT activation following integrin
engagement (lanes 4 and 6). B, haptotaxis assays show virtually no effect of LY294002 on migration for 4 h at 10 Amol/L concentration, the concentration at
which it causes significant reduction in activation of AKT (phospho-AKT immunoblot, lane 3, A ). Conversely, PP1 dose dependently (1, 5, and 25 Amol/L) blocked
migration of U87MG cells (PTEN null; B ) without affecting phospho-AKT levels at 10 Amol/L concentration (A, lane 4). Columns, mean from five representative
experiments; bars, SD. Individual levels of significance (P values) are shown. Data show that integrin (avh3/avh5)–directed migration in U87MG cells is independent
of PI3K activity but dependent on SFK function. C, effects of expression of PTEN and treatment with PP1 and LY294002 on levels of phospho-AKT (Ser473) in U373MG
cells following vitronectin stimulation. Parental U373MG (PTEN null) cells were treated (for 30 and 240 min) with an inhibitor of SFK, PP1 (10 Amol/L; lanes 4
and 7, respectively); or an inhibitor of PI3K, LY294002 (10 Amol/L; lanes 3 and 6, respectively); versus no treatment (lanes 1 and 2 ). Stable clones of U373MG
glioma cells expressing WT PTEN (lane 5 ) were also stimulated with vitronectin (10 Ag/mL) for 30 min. Lane 1, no stimulation; lane 2, vitronectin stimulation.
Data show that LY294002 and PTEN overexpression significantly blocked AKT activation (lanes 3, 6, and 5, respectively), whereas PP1 treatment had no
significant effect on AKT activation following integrin engagement (lanes 4 and 7). Equal loading of proteins is confirmed by the levels of AKT (second panel
from top ) and h-actin (third panel from top ). Expression of WT PTEN in U373MG cells is confirmed by Western blot analysis (lane 9, inset ). h-Actin was used
as the loading control. D, haptotaxis assays using U373MG cells show no effect of LY294002 on vitronectin-directed migration (for 4 h at 10 Amol/L), the concentration
and time at which it completely abrogated the activation of AKT (as shown in the phospho-AKT immunoblot, C, lane 6). Conversely, PP1 dose dependently (1, 5,
and 25 Amol/L) blocked migration of U373MG cells (PTEN null). Columns, mean from five representative experiments; bars, SD. Individual levels of significance
(P values) are shown. These data suggest that integrin (avh3/avh5)–directed migration in U373MG cells is independent of PI3K activity but is dependent on SFKs.

not change following the inhibition of PI3K whereas it was
inhibited by the treatment of the SFK inhibitor PP1. Treatment
of LY294002 (10 Amol/L) significantly blocked the activation of
AKT, whereas a similar treatment failed to affect migration of

www.aacrjournals.org

U87MG and U373MG glioma cells. These results support our
concept that integrin-directed migration of glioma cells occurs
in a PI3K-independent but SFK-dependent manner (Fig. 2). To
further substantiate our results, we also determined the time

1865

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (6). March 15, 2008

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

course of vitronectin-stimulated activation of AKT in the
presence of LY294002 (10 Amol/L) in U373MG cells and
compared it with the migration of these cells under similar
experimental conditions. Our data showed that despite the
abrogation of phospho-AKT levels following 4 hours of LY294002
treatment, migration of U373MG cells on vitronectin remained
unaffected (Fig. 2C and D).
The lipid phosphatase function of PTEN is required to
control the PIP3-dependent activation of AKT in glioma cells.
To understand the role of catalytic activities of different mutants
of PTEN (G129E and R130M) in the control of downstream
signals, we compared the enzymatic activity (in vitro phosphatase
activities) of these mutants to their effects on the levels of
phospho-AKT in glioma cells. We purified different mutants of
PTEN (R130M, G129E) as GST fusion proteins in Escherichia coli
and determined their lipid (Fig. 3A) and protein (Fig. 3B)
phosphatase activities compared with the WT PTEN and
catalytically dead C124S mutant of PTEN. The G129E and
R130M mutants displayed 7% and 5% of WT lipid (PIP3)–
phosphatase activities and 65% and 12% of WT protein phosphatase activities, respectively (Fig. 3). In vitro lipid phosphatase
and protein phosphatase activities of G129E and R130M mutants
of PTEN support our argument that by expressing of these
mutants in glioma cells, we were able to identify a PIP3independent but protein phosphatase–dependent function of
PTEN.
PTEN controls FYN activity through its protein phosphatase function. To explore the role of PTEN in the control of SFKs,
we confirmed the presence of specific members of SFKs (FYN,
LYN, SRC, and YES) in U87MG cells in agreement with previous
report (24). To determine the specificity of PTEN’s protein
phosphatase activity in FYN dephosphorylation, we examined
the effect of WT PTEN, R130M mutant of PTEN (catalytically dead
PTEN), G129E mutant of PTEN (lipid phosphatase dead, protein
phosphatase active PTEN), and CSK on integrin-dependent
activation of FYN kinase in glioma cells. Immunoprecipitation of
activated FYN following vitronectin stimulation of U87MG cells
(PTEN null) shows robust activation of FYN kinase, an event
abrogated by the reconstitution of WT and G129E mutant of
PTEN. Integrin engagement caused 40% increase of (above basal
level) FYN kinase activity that occurred at the same time
(15 minutes) as that of the increase in FYN phosphorylation
(Y418 FYN) following integrin stimulation as shown in Fig. 4A and B.
This activation of FYN kinase is significantly reduced in WT PTEN–
reconstituted glioma cells following similar integrin engagement
(Fig. 4B), which is comparable with the decrease in FYN
phosphorylation (Fig. 4A). Figure 4B shows that FYN kinase
activity is also inhibited significantly in U87MG cell line expressing
G129E mutant of PTEN. In sharp contrast, the overexpression of
catalytically dead PTEN (R130M) has no effect on the activation of
FYN kinase following integrin stimulation. As expected, overexpression of CSK (a physiologic inhibitor of SFK) blocked the
kinase activity of FYN following integrin stimulation (Fig. 4B). CSK
overexpression in U87MG cells inhibited FYN kinase activity
downstream of avh3 engagement (comparable with the treatment
of PP1; data not shown), thus suggesting the role of this member of
SFKs in av integrin–mediated glioma migration (Fig. 4B). Our
results indicate that the effect of PTEN on av integrin–directed
migration is correlated with the effect of PTEN on av integrin–
directed FYN activation in glioma cells. FYN protein levels in
U87MG cells reconstituted with (a) WT PTEN, (b) no PTEN, (c)

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (6). March 15, 2008

G129E and R130M mutants of PTEN, and (d) CSK at different time
points of integrin stimulation (15 and 30 minutes) remained
unaltered as shown by Western blots performed on cell lysates
(Fig. 4B). In addition, the effect of PTEN seems to be integrin
specific, as its control over FYN is less pronounced with fibronectin
stimulation, suggesting specificity of either SFK members or other
pathways that are specific to avh3 or a5h1 activation (21, 41). Our
data provide evidence for the fact that the FYN kinase activity
(predominantly expressing member of SFKs) in glioma cells is
reduced in a PTEN (specifically involving the protein phosphatase
function PTEN)–dependent manner upon av stimulation (which
correlates to the integrin-dependent migration) and compares this
effect to the phenotypic and biochemical effects of CSK overexpression (biological inhibitor of SFKs) and treatment of PP1
(pharmacologic inhibitor of SFKs). Together, our data indicate that
the control of PTEN over integrin-directed migration in glioma
cells is mediated through SFKs (specifically FYN) and its
downstream effectors.

Figure 3. Lipid phosphatase and protein phosphatase activities of WT PTEN
and its mutants. A, lipid phosphatase activity of PTEN. The enzymatic activity
of a GST fusion of WT PTEN and different mutants (G129E, R130M, and C124S)
produced in E. coli cells were assayed using the phospholipid [water-soluble
D-myo-PtdIns(3,4,5) P3] as substrate in vitro . Released phosphate was assayed
colorimetrically using the malachite green reagent (absorbance values at
650 nm). Columns, mean absorbance from three independent assays in each
case; bars, SD. Results show that G129E and R130M mutants display 7%
and 5% of WT lipid PIP3 phosphatase activity. A catalytically dead mutant of
PTEN (in which the active site cysteine was converted to serine, C124S) was
used as an internal negative control. B, protein phosphatase activity of PTEN.
The enzymatic activity of a GST fusion of WT PTEN and different mutants
(G129E, R130M, and C124S) produced in E. coli cells was assayed using
the protein (custom made acidic peptide YEEEEEpYEEEEEY) as substrate
in vitro . Released phosphate was assayed colorimetrically using the malachite
green reagent (absorbance values at 650 nm). Columns, mean absorbance
from three independent assays in each case; bars, SD. Results show that
G129E and R130M mutants display 65% and 12% of WT protein phosphatase
activity. A catalytically dead mutant of PTEN (in which the active site cysteine
was converted to serine, C124S) was used as an internal negative control.

1866

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

PTEN’s Protein Phosphatase Activity and Cell Migration

Figure 4. PTEN controls integrin-induced activation of specific SFK, FYN, and RAC1 GTPase activity in glioma cells. A, immunoprecipitated FYN kinase following
avh3 stimulation from PTEN null and WT PTEN reconstituted U87MG glioma cells at different time points (15 and 30 min). Western blot analyses show phospho-FYN
(Y418, top ) and total FYN (bottom ) after vitronectin stimulation. The results provide evidence that PTEN abrogates FYN phosphorylation/activation following integrin
stimulation in glioma cells. NS, no stimulation. FYN Western blot (bottom ) shows an equal amount of FYN that was immunoprecipitated with antibody following
vitronectin engagement. Equal loading is confirmed by the levels of total FYN (second panel from top ). B, effects of PTEN, catalytically dead PTEN (R130M),
lipid phosphatase dead PTEN (G129E), and CSK overexpression on FYN kinase activity following integrin stimulation (vitronectin engagement) in U87MG cells.
FYN kinase activity was determined from 100 Ag protein derived from U87MG cell lysates. Phosphotransferase activity toward FYN-specific peptide was determined
under vitronectin stimulation. Data are expressed as cpm for kinase activity, represented by an immunoprecipitation performed in U87MG cells transduced with
empty vector (U87MG null), WT PTEN, catalytically dead PTEN (R130M), lipid phosphatase dead PTEN (G129E), and CSK. NS, no stimulation; 15, 15-min stimulation
on vitronectin; 30, 30-min stimulation on vitronectin-coated plates. Bottom, Western blot analysis for the expression of total FYN protein in the lysate from which
each immunoprecipitation was performed. Columns, original cpm values from three individual experiments. C, to assess the downstream effects of PTEN’s control of
SFK, we show that PTEN regulates glioma cell motility and controls integrin-induced activation of the GTPase, RAC1. We measured the conversion of GDP-RAC1
to the activated GTP RAC1 in WT PTEN–reconstituted, R130M PTEN–reconstituted, G129E PTEN–reconstituted, and CSK-overexpressed U87MG glioma cells
following stimulation with vitronectin at the indicated times. Levels of GTP-bound RAC were measured by performing pull-down experiments using GST fusion protein
representing the GTP-RAC1 binding CRIB domain of PAK kinase. Equal loading is confirmed by the levels of total RAC1 (second panel from top). It is noted that
under experimental conditions, when PTEN retains its protein phosphatase activity (as in WT and G129E mutant), it can exert its control over the activation of RAC1
as well as cell migration on vitronectin. In contrast, loss of PTEN’s protein phosphatase activity (as in null and catalytically dead mutant of PTEN, R130M) is associated
with the failure of PTEN to control migration, FYN kinase activity, and activation of RAC1. From these data, we suggest that PTEN’s protein phosphatase activity is
necessary to control integrin-directed migration through FYN kinase and RAC1 GTPase in glioma cells.

The protein phosphatase function of PTEN controls
migration and the activation of RAC1. We argue that if PTEN
controls glioma migration in a lipid phosphatase–independent
manner via SFKs, then this event will involve downstream effectors
that mediate both SFK activation and integrin-directed migration.
RAC1 is one of the well-established downstream effectors of
integrin-mediated migration and SFKs activation in various cells
(23, 24). Here, in this study, we show that in glioma cells, activation
of RAC1 following vitronectin stimulation is controlled by PTEN
(Fig. 4C). Reconstitution of WT PTEN in U87MG cells almost
completely abrogates levels of RAC1-GTPase following integrin
engagement, and more importantly, this effect, like the control of
vitronectin-mediated migration by PTEN, occurs in a lipid
phosphatase–independent manner. Reconstitution of U87MG cells
with protein phosphatase active and lipid phosphatase dead
(G129E) mutant of PTEN caused a comparable inhibition of RAC1
activation following integrin engagement. We and others have
established the role of SFKs in RAC1 signaling (35). Based on the
above model for SFK action, we studied the effect of CSK
overexpression on avh3 integrin–directed RAC1 activation in
glioma cells. Levels of activated RAC1 are almost completely
abrogated following CSK overexpression under integrin stimula-

www.aacrjournals.org

tion, suggesting that the activation of RAC1 in glioma migration is
a downstream event of integrin-mediated activation of SFKs.
Further, abrogation of migration in glioma cells following overexpression of CSK (Fig. 1B) was comparable with the inhibition of
the RAC1 activity under similar conditions of integrin stimulation
(Fig. 4C). These results indicate that the protein phosphatase
activity of PTEN controls integrin-directed migration in glioma
cells by regulating activation of RAC1 downstream of activation of
SFKs.
Effect of Pten+/- status on vitronectin-directed migration of
primary astrocytes. To validate our observations regarding the
effect of PTEN on the migration of glioma cells, we sought to
determine the effect of genetic loss of PTEN on the integrindirected migration using Pten haploinsufficient (Pten heterozygous mice) primary murine astrocytes. Figure 5A shows levels
of phospho-AKT in WT versus Pten heterozygous astrocytes. In
wound healing (scratch assay) assay, cultured astrocytes were
allowed to migrate on vitronectin for 24 hours (Fig. 5B). Astrocytes
that are wild-type for PTEN migrate into the wound more slowly
than Pten heterozygous astrocytes, confirming the biological
effects of Pten haploinsufficiency in the control of integrin-directed
migration. To determine the contribution of lipid phosphatase

1867

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (6). March 15, 2008

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

activity of PTEN in the control of astrocyte migration, we stably
overexpressed AKT in primary WT astrocytes. We argue that if
activation of AKT is important in glioma migration, then astrocytes
with stable high levels of phospho-AKT would display greater
motility than WT astrocytes. On the contrary, our results show
that even high levels of phospho-AKT in WT primary astrocytes
have nominal effect on av integrin–directed migration as shown in
Fig. 5A and B. In summary, these results further support our
working model that the regulation of integrin-directed glioma
migration is independent of PTEN’s lipid phosphatase activity and
AKT kinase activity.
FYN regulates vitronectin-directed migration in both
glioma cells and primary astrocytes. To determine the role of
FYN kinase in av integrin–directed migration, we studied
migration of both glioma cells and primary astrocytes using

siRNA and genetic approaches, respectively. FYN kinase was
knocked down in U87MG cells using siRNA (Fig. 5C). Migration of
these cells was found to be significantly blocked compared with
the respective control (Fig. 5D). To further substantiate our
observation, we also compared the migration of primary
astrocytes ( fourth passage) from Fyn / mice to the migration
of WT astrocytes (similar passage). Figure 6A shows that avh3
integrin–dependent migration of astrocytes derived from Fyn /
mice was significantly reduced (60%) compared with the
migration of WT astrocytes. To obtain evidence that FYN kinase
is involved in PTEN-mediated inhibition of integrin-directed
migration of glioma cells, we studied the migration (on
vitronectin) of primary astrocytes from (a) Pten heterozygous,
(b) Fyn heterozygous, and (c) Pten and Fyn double heterozygous
mice. Figure 6B shows that the migration of astrocytes from Pten

Figure 5. PTEN regulates vitronectin-mediated cell movement in an AKT-independent manner in primary astrocytes and FYN is involved in the migration of U87MG
cells. A, PTEN inhibits avh3/avh5–directed migration in primary astrocytes; the overexpression of WT AKT does not antagonize the effect of PTEN on migration.
Primary astrocytes were isolated from WT mice or mice heterozygous for Pten as described in Materials and Methods. WT AKT (WT-aAKT ) was overexpressed
in WT astrocytes to determine the role of the PI3K pathway in migration. Immunoblots reveal that the level of phosphorylated AKT is lower in PTEN WT astrocytes
(lane 2) than in the PTEN heterozygous astrocytes (lane 1 ). The level of phosphorylated AKT is significantly higher in astrocytes that overexpressed WT AKT
(lane 3) compared with WT astrocytes (lane 2). Equal loading is confirmed by the levels of AKT (second panel from top ) and h-actin (third panel from top ).
B, WT astrocytes with and without overexpressing WT AKT and astrocytes from Pten heterozygous mice were stained with crystal violet following vitronectin-stimulated
scratch assay for 24 h. WT AKT overexpression in astrocytes had no significant effect on migration, whereas Pten heterozygous astrocytes migrated significantly
faster than WT astrocytes. Results were quantified for statistical significance. Columns, mean; bars, SD. Data are representative of four individual experiments.
*, P < 0.01. Results indicate that the control of PTEN over vitronectin-mediated cell movement is independent of the state of activation of AKT. C, effect of FYN
on integrin-directed migration of U87MG cells. FYN was knocked down in U87MG cells using siRNA. Cells were transfected with FYN-specific siRNA (SMART
pool FYN) or control siRNA (nonspecific control pool) for 24 and 48 h. Cell lysates were used to test the change in the levels of expression of FYN protein by
Western blot (top ). h-Actin was used as loading control (bottom ). D, the effect of FYN on integrin-directed migration in U87MG glioma cells was determined by studying
the migration of U87MG cells on vitronectin following the transfection of FYN-specific siRNA. After 24 and 48 h of transfection with FYN-specific siRNA, the cells
were subjected to the vitronectin-directed migration. Columns, mean; bars, SD. Data are representative of three individual experiments. *, P < 0.05. Results show
that at both time points (24 and 48 h) following transfection with FYN-specific siRNA, migration of U87MG cells was significantly blocked.

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (6). March 15, 2008

1868

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

PTEN’s Protein Phosphatase Activity and Cell Migration

Figure 6. FYN and PTEN control vitronectin-directed
migration in primary astrocytes. A, FYN controls
avh3/avh5–directed migration in primary astrocytes.
Vitronectin-directed haptotaxis assay (24 h) was carried
out in neonatal astrocytes (passage 4) from Fyn /
[knockout (KO )] and Fyn +/+ (WT ) mice.
Representative photomicrographs of vitronectin-directed migration and its semiquantification show that
migration of the neonatal astrocytes derived from Fyn
knockout mice was significantly blocked compared with
WT astrocytes. Columns, mean from five individual
experiments; bars, SD. *, P < 0.003. B, PTEN controls
avh3/avh5–directed migration in primary astrocytes.
Vitronectin-directed haptotaxis assay (24 h) was carried
out in neonatal astrocytes (fourth passage) from
Pten +/ (heterozygous) and Pten +/+ (WT) mice.
Results show that the astrocytes derived from
Pten heterozygous mice migrated significantly faster
compared with the WT astrocytes. Columns, mean
from five individual experiments; bars, SD. *, P < 0.01.
C, the inhibitory effect of genetic loss of Fyn
(Fyn heterozygous condition) on avh3/avh5–directed
migration in primary astrocytes is blocked by the
haploinsufficiency of Pten (Pten and Fyn double
heterozygous condition). Vitronectin-directed
haptotaxis assay (24 h) was carried out in neonatal
astrocytes (fourth passage) from Fyn+/
(heterozygous; FYN Het ), Pten and Fyn double
heterozygous (FYN-Het PTEN-Het ), and WT mice.
Results show that the astrocytes derived from Fyn
heterozygous mice migrated significantly slower
compared with the WT astrocytes, whereas the
astrocytes derived from Pten and Fyn double
heterozygous mice migrated significantly faster
compared with the Fyn heterozygous astrocytes.
Columns, mean from five individual experiments;
bars, SD. Results show that the genetic loss of Fyn
inhibits the vitronectin-directed migration, whereas the
haploinsufficiency of Pten counteracts this effect.
Together, these results suggest that PTEN regulates
vitronectin-directed migration
via its control on FYN kinase.

heterozygous mice was significantly higher than their WT
counterpart, whereas Fig. 6C shows that the migration defect
observed in Fyn haploinsufficient astrocytes on avh3/avh5 was
reversed in mice haploinsufficient for Pten (Pten and Fyn double
heterozygous condition). These combined results, including the
data obtained from the genetically altered mice, strongly suggest
that the inhibitory effect of PTEN on integrin-directed migration
of glioma cells is mediated through its protein phosphatase
function and involves FYN kinase.

Discussion
Malignant gliomas are one of the most frequently occurring
primary brain tumors in adults and in their most advanced stage
(GBM) are uniformly fatal in both adults and pediatric patients
(42, 43). Histologic hallmarks of advanced-stage gliomas give clues
to the oncogenic cellular milieu that include increased vascularization (angiogenesis), high mitotic index (proliferation), and
insidious cell dispersal through normal brain parenchyma (migration and invasion; ref. 44). Understanding signal transduction
pathways involving cell motility as it relates to the increased
migration and invasion in GBMs is critical to mapping out
potential new therapies for these aggressive tumors.

www.aacrjournals.org

Interactions between SRC and PTEN have recently been
documented in breast cancer and shown to have significant
implications not only in the malignant phenotype but also in
treatment responses (32–34). The ability of SRC to phosphorylate
PTEN is correlated with decreased membrane localization, reduced
activity, and increased growth, promoting the downstream effect of
activating the PI3K pathway (32, 33). The use of tumor-associated
somatic mutations in PTEN to evaluate its biochemical functions
has been a useful tool to dissect the lipid versus protein
phosphatase functions of PTEN in mammalian cells. Only a few
investigations have used cell lines that were stably transduced with
PTEN or mutants of PTEN (5, 10, 45) to address the role of PTEN in
tumor progression. We established a relationship between PTEN
(protein phosphatase–active PTEN) and SFKs (FYN) in the control
of integrin-directed haptotaxis of malignant gliomas. Our data
show that, in malignant gliomas, the relationship between PTEN
and SFKs may be reciprocal. The results of our study suggest that
the control of PTEN over FYN kinase activity functionally
correlated with the inhibition of the migration of these cells in a
well-established in vitro migration system (29, 30). Further support
that PTEN’s protein phosphatase function regulates vitronectinstimulated migration in glioma is obtained from the result that PP1
treatment and CSK overexpression inhibited the migration without

1869

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (6). March 15, 2008

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

affecting levels of phospho-AKT in these cells. In reports of Gu et al.
(13), CSK expression has been shown to have little effect on the
migration of U87MG cells, despite increased phosphorylation of
SRC and its resulting inactivated form; however, these studies
implemented transient transfection, with 7.5-fold overexpression,
and fibronectin stimulation. Stable expression of CSK may more
closely resemble physiologic conditions, allowing CSK to tightly
regulate SFKs upon activation. RAC GTPases are known to
promote motility and have previously been shown to be involved
in integrin-mediated migration through interactions with FAK,
MAPK, and SRC (35, 46). Our findings show that in addition to
controlling SFKs, PTEN also controls RAC1 GTPase activity in a
lipid phosphatase–independent manner. Activation of AKT has
long been viewed as the primary effector of an up-regulated PI3K
pathway, and as such, is an excellent surrogate marker for PTEN’s
lipid phosphatase function (5). We have observed that the
overexpression of AKT alone transforms primary murine astrocytes5 but has no effect on the migration of these cells on
vitronectin (Fig. 5B). Because PTEN controls AKT, these data
provide additional evidence that PTEN’s lipid phosphatase activity
does not control glioma cell motility.
The ability of PTEN to control migration is more pronounced
through vitronectin, which binds to avh3 integrin, than through
collagen. Hence, it is clear that specific integrins provide signaling cues that ultimately mediate specific phenotypic changes.
The use of stable transfection of PTEN or PTEN mutants into
U87MG cells and U373MG cells has allowed us to determine that
PTEN’s protein phosphatase activity seems to control migration
and coordinately regulate SFKs and RAC1 GTPases. It is not
known whether PTEN controls migration through autodephosphorylation or through dephosphorylation of another protein
substrate (1, 47). Recently, we have isolated novel PTEN’s mutants
by alanine scan methods that only affect PTEN, protein phosphatase activity (but are still able to dephosphorylate PIP3). These
will be useful in providing direct evidence of PTEN’s protein
phosphatase activity, as well as its specific substrates in biological
systems.
Previous studies have implicated PTEN’s lipid phosphatase
activity and its control of the PI3K pathway in controlling
migration of certain cell types (48, 49). For instance, in mouse
embryonic fibroblasts (MEF), Liliental et al. used retroviral
transfection of WT, catalytically dead (C124S) and lipid dead
(G129E) mutants into PTEN-null MEFs to evaluate cell motility
using a wound healing assay on fibronectin. Their approach differs
from ours in that they studied MEFs and a different matrix
protein-integrin interaction via a5h1. We and others have observed
cell type–specific differences in the effect of PTEN on haptotactic
migration, in that certain primary cell types (macrophages and
endothelial cells) use PI3K as a requirement for integrindependent cell movement.5 In addition, some discordant results
have been seen regarding the dual phosphatase effect of PTEN on
growth and cell cycle regulation in different cell types. Nevertheless, evidence for the importance of PTEN’s protein phosphatase
activity in mammalian physiology is mounting (21, 38, 47, 49, 50).
In this study, we provide evidence that PTEN’s protein phosphatase function is necessary and sufficient to regulate integrindirected migration of glioma cells. The detailed mechanism of

5

Unpublished observation.

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (6). March 15, 2008

involvement of the downstream signals initiated by the protein
phosphatase action of PTEN for this phenotype in glioma cells
remains an open question. Although results of our study suggest
an involvement of downstream effectors like SFKs and RAC1 in
this signaling pathway, the data are correlative and does not
necessarily prove that the regulatory effect of PTEN on the
migration of glioma cells is mediated specifically and solely via its
control on FYN kinase. In summary, our data showing that the
blockade of (a) kinase activity of FYN, (b) activation of RAC1, and
(c) vitronectin-directed migration in glioma cells following the
overexpression of CSK, together with the results of studies using
FYN siRNA, strongly indicate that FYN kinase is a downstream
link between the protein phosphatase activity of PTEN and glioma
migration. Here, we have identified a novel AKT-independent
pathway linking protein phosphatase activity of PTEN to
vitronectin-directed migration in glioma cells. One relevant issue
regarding the involvement of FYN kinase in PTEN-mediated
(protein phosphatase activity of PTEN), vitronectin-dependent
migration of glioma is to identify the downstream effectors of
FYN. Interestingly, our initial data provide correlative evidence to
suggest the role of RAC1 in this signaling pathway. Currently,
studies are ongoing in our laboratory to evaluate the specific role
of RAC1 in this novel AKT-independent pathway linking protein
phosphatase activity of PTEN to the integrin-dependent migration
in gliomas. Further studies are required to delineate the entire
pathway in a systematic fashion by manipulating each and every
component of the pathway.
In conclusion, our findings implicate PTEN in mediating
important functions of malignant tumor cells via catalytic activities
other than its ability to dephosphorylate PIP3. PTEN loss is
observed in many malignant tumors and is a marker for advanced
neoplastic disease, associated with a highly aggressive, resistant,
and frequently invasive or metastatic cancer. Targeted therapies
are being evaluated in patient populations who are segregated
based on PTEN status and the expected effect of the treatment on
the PI3K/AKT pathway. PI3K inhibitors are currently under
development in attempt to pharmacologically mimic PTEN tumor
suppressor activity. However, if PTEN’s protein phosphatase
activity plays a role in controlling the motile function of cells,
then inhibitors targeting the downstream effectors of PI3K and the
AKT pathway may not be as effective as expected. Future
deliberation on the ability of PTEN to regulate SFKs and RACGTPases will be important in identifying other targets associated
with complete loss of PTEN’s tumor suppressor functions. From
our results, we would predict that PTEN loss in glioblastoma will be
associated with up-regulation of not only PI3K- but also SFKmediated pathways that are involved in migration and invasion.
A potential clinical application would therefore be to combine a
PI3K inhibitor (such as SF1126; ref. 51) with an SFK inhibitor (e.g.,
dasatanib) to increase the efficacy of these targeted therapies in
this and other malignant motile diseases.

Acknowledgments
Received 3/28/2007; revised 11/30/2007; accepted 12/31/2007.
Grant support: NIH grant CA94233 (D.L. Durden), Georgia Cancer Coalition (D.L.
Durden), Golfers Against Cancer, Goldhirsh Foundation, Cure Childhood Cancer
Foundation, and Aflac Cancer Center and Blood Disorder Services.
The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of page
charges. This article must therefore be hereby marked advertisement in accordance
with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact.
We thank Dr. Yue Feng (Emory University) for the Fyn / mice and Bernadette
Jean-Joseph for technical support.

1870

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

PTEN’s Protein Phosphatase Activity and Cell Migration

References
1. Sansal I, Sellers WR. The biology and clinical relevance
of the PTEN tumor suppressor pathway. J Clin Oncol
2004;22:2954–63.
2. Vazquez F, Grossman SR, Takahashi Y, Rokas MV,
Nakamura N, Sellers WR. Phosphorylation of the PTEN
tail acts as an inhibitory switch by preventing its
recruitment into a protein complex. J Biol Chem 2001;
276:48627–30.
3. Whang YE, Wu X, Suzuki H, et al. Inactivation of the
tumor suppressor PTEN/MMAC1 in advanced human
prostate cancer through loss of expression. Proc Natl
Acad Sci U S A 1998;95:5246–50.
4. Vazquez F, Sellers WR. The PTEN tumor suppressor
protein: an antagonist of phosphoinositide 3-kinase
signaling. Biochim Biophys Acta 2000;1470:M21–35.
5. Wen S, Stolarov J, Myers MP, et al. PTEN controls
tumor-induced angiogenesis. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
2001;98:4622–7.
6. Lee JO, Yang H, Georgescu MM, et al. Crystal structure
of the PTEN tumor suppressor: implications for its
phosphoinositide phosphatase activity and membrane
association. Cell 1999;99:323–34.
7. Myers MP, Tonks NK. PTEN: sometimes taking it off
can be better than putting it on. Am J Hum Genet 1997;
61:1234–8.
8. Simpson L, Parsons R. PTEN: life as a tumor
suppressor. Exp Cell Res 2001;264:29–41.
9. Tamura M, Gu J, Tran H, Yamada KM. PTEN gene and
integrin signaling in cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst 1999;91:
1820–8.
10. Gildea JJ, Herlevsen M, Harding MA, et al. PTEN can
inhibit in vitro organotypic and in vivo orthotopic
invasion of human bladder cancer cells even in the
absence of its lipid phosphatase activity. Oncogene 2004;
23:6788–97.
11. Maier D, Jones G, Li X, et al. The PTEN lipid
phosphatase domain is not required to inhibit invasion
of glioma cells. Cancer Res 1999;59:5479–82.
12. Tamura M, Gu J, Takino T, Yamada KM. Tumor
suppressor PTEN inhibition of cell invasion, migration, and growth: differential involvement of focal
adhesion kinase and p130Cas. Cancer Res 1999;59:
442–9.
13. Gu J, Tamura M, Pankov R, et al. Shc and FAK
differentially regulate cell motility and directionality
modulated by PTEN. J Cell Biol 1999;146:389–403.
14. Di Cristofano A, Pesce B, Cordon-Cardo C, Pandolfi
PP. Pten is essential for embryonic development and
tumour suppression. Nat Genet 1998;19:348–55.
15. Li L, Liu F, Salmonsen RA, et al. PTEN in neural
precursor cells: regulation of migration, apoptosis, and
proliferation. Mol Cell Neurosci 2002;20:21–9.
16. Stambolic V, Suzuki A, de la Pompa JL, et al.
Negative regulation of PKB/Akt-dependent cell survival by the tumor suppressor PTEN. Cell 1998;95:
29–39.
17. Suzuki A, de la Pompa JL, Stambolic V, et al. High
cancer susceptibility and embryonic lethality associated
with mutation of the PTEN tumor suppressor gene in
mice. Curr Biol 1998;8:1169–78.
18. Myers MP, Pass I, Batty IH, et al. The lipid
phosphatase activity of PTEN is critical for its tumor

www.aacrjournals.org

suppressor function. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1998;95:
13513–8.
19. Rong Y, Post DE, Pieper RO, Durden DL, Van Meir
EG, Brat DJ. PTEN and hypoxia regulate tissue factor
expression and plasma coagulation by glioblastoma.
Cancer Res 2005;65:1406–13.
20. Tamura M, Gu J, Danen EH, Takino T, Miyamoto
S, Yamada KM. PTEN interactions with focal
adhesion kinase and suppression of the extracellular
matrix-dependent phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase/
Akt cell survival pathway. J Biol Chem 1999;274:
20693–703.
21. Weng LP, Brown JL, Eng C. PTEN coordinates G(1)
arrest by down-regulating cyclin D1 via its protein
phosphatase activity and up-regulating p27 via its lipid
phosphatase activity in a breast cancer model. Hum Mol
Genet 2001;10:599–604.
22. Bjorge JD, Jakymiw A, Fujita DJ. Selected glimpses
into the activation and function of Src kinase. Oncogene
2000;19:5620–35.
23. Playford MP, Schaller MD. The interplay between Src
and integrins in normal and tumor biology. Oncogene
2004;23:7928–46.
24. Ding Q, Stewart J, Jr., Olman MA, Klobe MR, Gladson
CL. The pattern of enhancement of Src kinase activity
on platelet-derived growth factor stimulation of glioblastoma cells is affected by the integrin engaged. J Biol
Chem 2003;278:39882–91.
25. Cotton PC, Brugge JS. Neural tissues express high
levels of the cellular src gene product pp60c-src.
Mol Cell Biol 1983;3:1157–62.
26. Umemori H, Wanaka A, Kato H, Takeuchi M,
Tohyama M, Yamamoto T. Specific expressions of Fyn
and Lyn, lymphocyte antigen receptor-associated tyrosine kinases, in the central nervous system. Brain Res
Mol Brain Res 1992;16:303–10.
27. Castoria G, Migliaccio A, Bilancio A, et al. PI3-kinase
in concert with Src promotes the S-phase entry of
oestradiol-stimulated MCF-7 cells. EMBO J 2001;20:
6050–9.
28. Thomas SM, Brugge JS. Cellular functions regulated
by Src family kinases. Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol 1997;13:
513–609.
29. Pradip D, Peng X, Durden DL. Rac2 specificity in
macrophage integrin signaling: potential role for Syk
kinase. J Biol Chem 2003;278:41661–9.
30. Klemke RL, Leng J, Molander R, Brooks PC, Vuori K,
Cheresh DA. CAS/Crk coupling serves as a ‘‘molecular
switch’’ for induction of cell migration. J Cell Biol 1998;
140:961–72.
31. Innocenti M, Zucconi A, Disanza A, et al. Abi1 is
essential for the formation and activation of a WAVE2
signalling complex. Nat Cell Biol 2004;6:319–27.
32. Lu Y, Yu Q, Liu JH, et al. Src family protein-tyrosine
kinases alter the function of PTEN to regulate
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase/AKT cascades. J Biol
Chem 2003;278:40057–66.
33. Nagata Y, Lan KH, Zhou X, et al. PTEN activation
contributes to tumor inhibition by trastuzumab, and
loss of PTEN predicts trastuzumab resistance in
patients. Cancer Cell 2004;6:117–27.
34. Song L, Morris M, Bagui T, Lee FY, Jove R, Haura EB.
Dasatinib (BMS-354825) selectively induces apoptosis in
lung cancer cells dependent on epidermal growth factor

1871

receptor signaling for survival. Cancer Res 2006;66:
5542–8.
35. Dey N, Howell BW, De PK, Durden DL. CSK
negatively regulates nerve growth factor induced neural
differentiation and augments AKT kinase activity. Exp
Cell Res 2005;307:1–14.
36. Sperber BR, Boyle-Walsh EA, Engleka MJ, et al. A
unique role for Fyn in CNS myelination. J Neurosci 2001;
21:2039–47.
37. Dey N, De PK, Wang M, et al. CSK controls retinoic
acid receptor (RAR) signaling: a RAR-c-SRC signaling
axis is required for neuritogenic differentiation. Mol Cell
Biol 2007;27:4179–97.
38. Li J, Yen C, Liaw D, et al. PTEN, a putative protein
tyrosine phosphatase gene mutated in human brain,
breast, and prostate cancer. Science 1997;275:1943–7.
39. Steck PA, Pershouse MA, Jasser SA, et al. Identification of a candidate tumour suppressor gene, MMAC1, at
chromosome 10q23.3 that is mutated in multiple
advanced cancers. Nat Genet 1997;15:356–62.
40. Okada M, Nada S, Yamanashi Y, Yamamoto T,
Nakagawa H. CSK: a protein-tyrosine kinase involved
in regulation of src family kinases. J Biol Chem 1991;266:
24249–52.
41. Weng LP, Smith WM, Brown JL, Eng C. PTEN inhibits
insulin-stimulated MEK/MAPK activation and cell
growth by blocking IRS-1 phosphorylation and IRS-1/
Grb-2/Sos complex formation in a breast cancer model.
Hum Mol Genet 2001;10:605–16.
42. Mischel PS, Cloughesy TF. Targeted molecular
therapy of GBM. Brain Pathol 2003;13:52–61.
43. Phuphanich S, Brat DJ, Olson JJ. Delivery systems and
molecular targets of mechanism-based therapies for
GBM. Expert Rev Neurother 2004;4:649–63.
44. Hoelzinger DB, Mariani L, Weis J, et al. Gene
expression profile of glioblastoma multiforme invasive
phenotype points to new therapeutic targets. Neoplasia
2005;7:7–16.
45. Okumura K, Mendoza M, Bachoo RM, Depinho RA,
Cavenee WK, Furnari FB. PCAF modulates PTEN
activity. J Biol Chem 2006;281:26562–8.
46. Gu J, Tamura M, Yamada KM. Tumor suppressor
PTEN inhibits integrin- and growth factor-mediated
mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase signaling pathways. J Cell Biol 1998;143:1375–83.
47. Raftopoulou M, Etienne-Manneville S, Self A, Nicholls
S, Hall A. Regulation of cell migration by the C2 domain
of the tumor suppressor PTEN. Science 2004;303:
1179–81.
48. Liliental J, Moon SY, Lesche R, et al. Genetic deletion of the Pten tumor suppressor gene promotes cell
motility by activation of Rac1 and Cdc42 GTPases.
Curr Biol 2000;10:401–4.
49. Tamura M, Gu J, Matsumoto K, Aota S, Parsons R,
Yamada KM. Inhibition of cell migration, spreading, and
focal adhesions by tumor suppressor PTEN. Science
1998;280:1614–7.
50. Leslie NR, Yang X, Downes CP, Weijer CJ.
PtdIns(3,4,5)P(3)-dependent and -independent roles for
PTEN in the control of cell migration. Curr Biol 2007;17:
115–25.
51. Garlich JR, De PK, Dey N, et al. A vascular targeted pan
phosphoinositide 3-kinase prodrug, SF1126, with antitumor
and antiangiogenic activity. Cancer Res 2008;68:206–15.

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (6). March 15, 2008

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

The Protein Phosphatase Activity of PTEN Regulates Src
Family Kinases and Controls Glioma Migration
Nandini Dey, Hal E. Crosswell, Pradip De, et al.
Cancer Res 2008;68:1862-1871.

Updated version

Cited articles
Citing articles

E-mail alerts
Reprints and
Subscriptions
Permissions

Access the most recent version of this article at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/68/6/1862

This article cites 51 articles, 26 of which you can access for free at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/68/6/1862.full#ref-list-1
This article has been cited by 21 HighWire-hosted articles. Access the articles at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/68/6/1862.full#related-urls

Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal.
To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications
Department at pubs@aacr.org.
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications
Department at permissions@aacr.org.

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

