Original Article

Acyclovir to Prevent Reactivation of
Varicella Zoster Virus (Herpes Zoster)
in Multiple Myeloma Patients
Receiving Bortezomib Therapy
Eric Vickrey, PA-C, Sharon Allen, RN, APN, Jayesh Mehta, MD, and Seema Singhal, MD

BACKGROUND: Humoral-mediated as well as cell-mediated immunity is compromised in myeloma patients
receiving treatment. Immunocompromised patients are at risk of developing herpes zoster. There is evidence from clinical trials that bortezomib therapy is associated with a significant risk of herpes zoster. It is
the authors’ clinical policy to administer long-term acyclovir prophylactically to all symptomatic myeloma
patients. METHODS: A retrospective review of the records of 125 myeloma patients who were treated with
bortezomib and who also received routine acyclovir prophylaxis at the dose of 400 mg daily in >80% of
patients was undertaken. Alternatives, used in <20% of patients, were 200 mg of acyclovir, 250/500 mg of
valacyclovir, or 500 mg of famciclovir administered daily. This was accompanied by patient education
regarding the importance of compliance with these prophylactic medications. RESULTS: The duration of
bortezomib therapy was 1 to 164 weeks (median, 16 weeks). The total duration of exposure to bortezomib
was 4150 weeks (80 patient-years). Except for the occasional missed dose, the self-reported compliance
with antiviral prophylaxis was 100%. Not a single episode of herpes zoster was reported during this period.
No adverse effects were noted that could be definitely attributed to acyclovir, valacyclovir, or famciclovir.
CONCLUSIONS: Daily acyclovir (or a suitable alternative) appears to be effective at preventing herpes zoster virus in patients with myeloma who are receiving bortezomib, with or without corticosteroids. Cancer
C 2008 American Cancer Society.
2009;115:229-32. V
KEY WORDS: acyclovir, herpes zoster, myeloma, bortezomib, shingles, varicella zoster.

Although myeloma is a malignancy of B cells, humoral- and cell-mediated immunity are both compromised in myeloma patients, especially when they are receiving treatment.1,2 Immunocompromised
patients are at risk of developing herpes zoster (varicella zoster virus reactivation).3,4
There is evidence from clinical trials that bortezomib therapy is associated with a significant risk of herpes zos5-7
ter. In a recent clinical trial using bortezomib that was associated with a sizeable incidence of herpes zoster before
universal acyclovir prophylaxis, the incidence decreased markedly after acyclovir prophylaxis was administered.8

Corresponding author: Seema Singhal, MD, Division of Hematology/Oncology, Feinberg School of Medicine, Robert H. Lurie Comprehensive Cancer
Center, Northwestern University, 676 North St. Clair Street, Suite 850, Chicago, IL 60611; Fax: (312) 695-6189; s-singhal@northwestern.edu
Division of Hematology/Oncology, Feinberg School of Medicine, Robert H. Lurie Comprehensive Cancer Center, Northwestern University, Chicago,
Illinois
Received: March 25, 2008; Revised: August 1, 2008; Accepted: August 6, 2008
C 2008 American Cancer Society
Published online: December 17, 2008, V

DOI: 10.1002/cncr:24006, www.interscience/wiley.com

Cancer

January 1, 2009

229

Original Article

It has been our clinical practice to administer acyclovir prophylactically long-term to all symptomatic myeloma patients irrespective of the therapy they are
receiving.2 The standard regimen we have used is 400 mg
of acyclovir daily. The drug is administered when diseasespecific therapy is initiated, and is continued indefinitely
unless toxicity supervenes. Although we are not aware of
any published evidence to support this practice, it has
been found to be effective in our experience because we
have not noted any incidence of herpes zoster infection
unless patients have been noncompliant. When myeloma
patients undergo autologous hematopoietic stem cell
transplantation (HSCT) with high-dose melphalan or
receive combination chemotherapy that can result in
mucositis, a higher acyclovir dose is used (400 mg three
times daily) until oral mucositis resolves, at which time
the dose is reduced to once daily.9 The purpose of the
higher dose is to prevent herpes simplex virus reactivation.
The aim of this retrospective review was to determine the efficacy of acyclovir prophylaxis in myeloma
patients receiving bortezomib therapy.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
The study population was comprised of 125 patients
with myeloma who received bortezomib with (n ¼ 101)
or without (n ¼ 24) corticosteroids and fulfilled the following criteria: all treatment was administered at Northwestern University between July 2003 and July 2007,
and patients were followed at least once a month. In all,
104 patients were being treated for recurrent or refractory disease, and 21 patients were being treated for
newly diagnosed disease.
Patients who received only part of their bortezomib
therapy at Northwestern University (ie, therapy was delivered partly there and partly elsewhere) or those who received
therapy elsewhere (usually in a community practice) but
were regularly followed at Northwestern University (approximately 200 patients over the same time period) were
excluded because of a lack of stringent information concerning compliance with antiviral prophylaxis. Patients who
received bortezomib as part of combination regimens that
contained agents other than corticosteroids were also
excluded.
In addition to disease-specific therapy and other
medications, patients were advised to take acyclovir pro230

Table 1. Herpes Zoster Prophylaxis Schedules Employed

Drug

Dose

Comments

Acyclovir
Acyclovir

400 mg daily
200 mg daily

Valacyclovir
Famciclovir

250-500 mg daily
500 mg daily

The standard regimen (n¼101)
Used if serum creatinine level
is >2 mg/dL (n¼15)
Alternative to acyclovir (n¼7)
Alternative to acyclovir (n¼2)

phylaxis if they were not already receiving it. Alternative
agents were valacyclovir or famciclovir in <10% of
patients. Table 1 shows the drug schedules used. A
detailed medication history was taken at each visit to
ensure compliance with all medications.
Patients received bortezomib either in the standard
manner (on Days 1, 4, 8, and 11 every 21 days) or on a
once-weekly schedule. A small minority of patients were
receiving bortezomib as maintenance therapy once a
month with bisphosphonates because of a previous history
of a good response to the drug.
Paper and electronic clinical records were reviewed
to determine drug therapy, herpes zoster occurrence, compliance, and potential drug toxicity. This retrospective
chart review was approved by the Institutional Review
Board as part of a study of bortezomib therapy in patients
with myeloma.

RESULTS
The duration of bortezomib therapy, measured based on
the first and last drug doses, was 1 to 164 weeks (median,
16 weeks). The total duration of bortezomib therapy was
4150 weeks (80 patient-years). During the period of observation, not a single episode of varicella zoster reactivation was observed.
Greater than 90% of patients received acyclovir, and
the remainder received valacyclovir or famciclovir over
this period of time. In the context of our clinical practice,
as described earlier, the duration of antiviral prophylaxis
was much longer. Except for the occasional missed dose
(including forgetting to take medication or running out
of medication), the self-reported compliance rate with
antiviral prophylaxis was 100%.

DISCUSSION
It is believed that the most common infections at the time
of presentation in myeloma patients are Streptococcus
Cancer

January 1, 2009

Acyclovir to Prevent Herpes Zoster in Myeloma / Vickrey et al

pneumoniae, Haemophilus influenzae, and herpes zoster.10
Although to our knowledge there are no systematic data
regarding the incidence of herpes zoster in myeloma
patients, historically we have observed an incidence of herpes zoster that is close to 10% on an annual basis in
patients who are receiving myeloma-specific therapy containing high-dose corticosteroids but who are not being
treated with prophylactic acyclovir (unpublished data).
On the basis of this finding, we have developed a policy of
administering long-term acyclovir prophylaxis to all
patients with myeloma once therapy is initiated, a practice
that has been reflected in other anti-infection prophylaxis
recommendations for myeloma patients.2
However, it must be emphasized that we are not
aware of any other evidence to support this practice.
Nonetheless, in our experience, the incidence of herpes
zoster in patients receiving acyclovir has been very low.
Indeed, whenever zoster has developed, it has been in a
patient who has been noncompliant. Because acyclovir is
relatively safe and inexpensive, with no known acquired
resistance when it is used to prevent varicella zoster virus
reactivation, the use of this agent in prophylaxis therefore
appears justified.
Recently, in the context of bortezomib therapy, herpes zoster appears to have become a clinically significant
problem.5-8 In a multicenter study from Spain,8 the overall incidence of herpes zoster was 13% in the first
38 patients. After prophylactic acyclovir was introduced,
only 2 of 30 patients developed herpes zoster. No data
were available regarding compliance.8
In a randomized study by Chanan-Khan et al comparing bortezomib with dexamethasone,5 the incidence of
herpes zoster was found to be significantly higher with
bortezomib (13%) than with dexamethasone (5%) (P ¼
.0002). However, the incidence of other opportunistic
infections, including herpes zoster, was comparable
between the 2 arms (23% vs 20%). A weakness in the way
the incidence of herpes zoster was described in that study5
was that zoster occurs in a time-dependent fashion and
therefore cannot be described simply in terms of percentages. The duration of bortezomib therapy was longer
than that of dexamethasone therapy in the study by
Chanan-Khan et al because dexamethasone-treated
patients developed disease recurrence earlier.5 It is therefore possible that the number of episodes of herpes zoster
per patient-years of exposure to either drug may not have
Cancer

January 1, 2009

been as different as would appear. The data would be better expressed the way we have done in the current study
(no episode of herpes zoster reported during 80 patientyears of exposure).
It is interesting to note that bortezomib appeared to
predispose patients to develop herpes zoster more than
other infections. To our knowledge, the reason for this
remains unclear.
Many questions relating to the development of herpes zoster during bortezomib therapy arise. What is the
exact mechanism of bortezomib-induced immunosuppression that predisposes patients to zoster reactivation? Does
the risk of occurrence increase when patients are treated
with bortezomib in combination with other agents compared with single-agent bortezomib? Does the risk of
occurrence increase when patients are treated with infrequent doses of bortezomib (once a week or once a month)?
Unfortunately, the answers to these are unknown.
The initial choice of 400 mg as the standard dose
was empiric. To our knowledge, the only data that existed
when we initiated this practice >10 years ago pertained to
higher doses of acyclovir.11 However, there are recent data
validating the use of the 400-mg dose for prophylaxis in
the setting of HSCT.12-14
Data from the current study suggest that acyclovir
or related drugs are effective at preventing varicella zoster
virus reactivation in myeloma patients receiving bortezomib provided that compliance is ensured. These drugs are
relatively safe and effective. Moreover, treatment appears
to be cost-effective because acyclovir is very inexpensive
(approximately $15 for 100 tablets of 400 mg). However,
although we have confined our data presentation in this
study to patients receiving bortezomib, unpublished
observations suggest that acyclovir at a dose of 400 mg
daily (or the equivalent) is effective at preventing herpes
zoster in myeloma patients regardless of the phase of the
disease and the type of therapy administered.
Based on the data presented herein, we suggest using
acyclovir prophylactically in patients with myeloma who
are receiving bortezomib therapy to prevent herpes zoster.
We would suggest that prophylaxis should be continued
at least as long as patients are being treated with bortezomib based on our observations. Although to our knowledge there are no data from clinical trials to support such a
practice, because of the efficacy and safety of acyclovir,
consideration should be given to using the drug
231

Original Article

prophylactically in patients with other diseases (eg, mantle
cell lymphoma or Waldenstrom macroglobulinemia) who
are receiving bortezomib or myeloma patients who are
receiving any kind of systemic therapy. Of course, prospective clinical studies would be helpful to evaluate such
an approach critically.
Conflict of Interest Disclosures
Drs. Mehta and Singhal have acted as members of the
Speakers’ Bureau for Millennium Pharmaceuticals and Celgene
Pharmaceuticals.

References
1.

Pratt G, Goodyear O, Moss P. Immunodeficiency and
immunotherapy in multiple myeloma. Br J Haematol. 2007;
138:563-579.

2.

Kelleher P, Chapel HM. Infections: principles of prevention and therapy. In: Mehta J, Singhal S, eds. Myeloma.
London: Martin Dunitz; 2001:223-239.

3.

Morison WL. Viral warts, herpes simplex and herpes zoster
in patients with secondary immune deficiencies and neoplasms. Br J Dermatol. 1975;92:625-630.

4.

Balfour HH Jr. Varicella-zoster virus infections in the
immunocompromised host. Natural history and treatment.
Scand J Infect Dis Suppl. 1991;80:69-74.

5.

Chanan-Khan AA, Sonneveld P, Schuster MW, et al. Analysis of Varicella zoster virus reactivation among bortezomib-treated patients in the APEX study [abstract]. Blood.
2006;108. Abstract 3535.

6.

232

Tong Y, Qian J, Li Y, Meng J, Jin J. The high incidence
of varicella herpes zoster with the use of bortezomib in
10 patients. Am J Hematol. 2007;82:403-404.

7.

Kropff M, Bisping G, Schuck E, et al. Bortezomib in
combination with intermediate-dose dexamethasone and
continuous low-dose oral cyclophosphamide for relapsed multiple myeloma. Br J Haematol. 2007;138:
330-337.

8.

Mateos MV, Hernandez JM, Hernandez MT, et al. Bortezomib plus melphalan and prednisone in elderly untreated
patients with multiple myeloma: results of a multicenter
phase 1/2 study. Blood. 2006;108:2165-2172.

9.

Trifilio S, Verma A, Mehta J. Antimicrobial prophylaxis in
hematopoietic stem cell transplant recipients: heterogeneity
of current clinical practice. Bone Marrow Transplant. 2004;
33:735-739.

10. Durie BGM, Kyle RA, Belch A, et al. Myeloma management guidelines: a consensus report from the Scientific
Advisors of the International Myeloma Foundation. Hematol
J. 2003;4:379-398.
11. Perren TJ, Powles RL, Easton D, Stolle K, Selby PJ. Prevention of herpes zoster in patients by long-term oral acyclovir after allogeneic bone marrow transplantation. Am J
Med. 1988;85:99-101.
12. Kanda Y, Mineishi S, Saito T, et al. Long-term low-dose
acyclovir against varicella-zoster virus reactivation after allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation. Bone Marrow Transplant. 2001;28:689-692.
13. Thomson KJ, Hart DP, Banerjee L, Ward KN, Peggs KS,
Mackinnon S. The effect of low-dose aciclovir on reactivation of varicella zoster virus after allogeneic haemopoietic
stem cell transplantation. Bone Marrow Transplant. 2005;
35:1065-1069.
14. Kim DH, Messner H, Minden M, et al. Factors influencing varicella zoster virus infection after allogeneic peripheral
blood stem cell transplantation: low-dose acyclovir prophylaxis and pre-transplant diagnosis of lymphoproliferative
disorders. Transpl Infect Dis. 2008;10:90-98.

Cancer

January 1, 2009

