Oncotarget, Vol. 7, No. 8

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Medical Machiavellianism: the tradeoff between benefit and
harm with targeted chemotherapy
Bryan Oronsky1, Corey Carter2, Anna Scicinska1, Arnold Oronsky3, Neil Oronsky4,
Michelle Lybeck1 and Jan Scicinski1
1

EpicentRx, Inc., Mountain View, CA, USA

2

Walter Reed National Military Medical Center, Bethesda, MD, USA

3

InterWest Partners, Menlo Park, CA, USA

4

CFLS, LLC, San Jose, CA, USA

Correspondence to: Bryan Oronsky, email: boronsky@epicentrx.com
Keywords: cancer, adverse events, risk to benefit, medical machiavellianism
Received: August 15, 2015	

Accepted: January 17, 2016	

Published: January 22, 2016

Abstract
Machiavellianism is a word synonymous with the phrase “the end justifies the
means”, and in this article we have coined the term Medical Machiavellianism to
describe the ‘cruel-to-be-kind’ administration of toxic chemotherapeutic agents in
apparent violation of the precept first do no harm, while acknowledging the ‘dirty
hands’ dilemma of having to decide between and choose the lesser of two evils in
the setting of advanced cancer—i.e. to treat or not to treat. The perception that
‘targeted’ therapies are relatively non-toxic and therefore respect the Hippocratic First
Commandment by virtue of their narrow selectivity is belied by their often inherent
promiscuity, addressing multiple targets either inadvertently or deliberately, which
may result in multiple side effects.
The remarkable success of immunotherapy may have taken the bloom off the
‘targeted agent’ rose, however due to a lack of other approved treatment alternatives
the toxicity of these agents may be overlooked or, at least, undervalued, especially
given that the official measure of treatment success in oncology is overall survival
(OS), not quality-of-life improvements.
By analogy with the MACH-IV personality survey (1970), [1] which measures
high and low Machiavellian orientation, we have defined in this article a rudimentary
MACH scale for selected targeted chemotherapies, based on the means-to-ends ratio
of toxicity and benefit. It is our hope that this comparison between targeted agents
will itself function as a means to an end—to help oncologists strike the right balance
between efficacy, toxicity and quality of life in the management of their patients.

Introduction

palliative, overall survival matters above all else [2,
3]. In other words, from the perspective of the medical
establishment, for the sake of an overridingly just goal,
namely, to postpone the existential threat of cancer, the end
justifies the means. This in essence is a form of Medical
Machiavellianism (MM), an epithet that originates from
the name of Niccolo Machiavelli, the author of the 1513
political treatise, Il Principe, The Prince. This work, a
handbook for despots and tyrants on the use of deceptive,
manipulative, and ruthless self-serving practices to gain,
hold, and expand power, is clearly antithetical to the
Hippocratic tradition of beneficent and unselfish concern
for the rights and welfare of patients. For Machiavelli

Irrespective of the clinical scenario the guiding
principles of medical treatment are “primum non nocere”
(“first do no harm”) and “primum succurrere” (“first
hasten to help”) although in the management of cancer
under the rubric of disease eradication the severe toxicities
of potentially life-saving chemotherapies may and in
fact usually do constitute an acceptable level of harm in
apparent violation of the First Golden Rule.
It is a uniformly accepted oncologic tenet that,
whatever the prognosis, even if the intent is only
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

9041

Oncotarget

occur in vivo [5]. The analogy of Ehrlich’s magic bullet
applies to targeted therapies but only in the sense of a
ricocheting bullet simultaneously hitting multiple targets.
The term targeted therapy also implies, incorrectly,
that conventional chemotherapy is untargeted. In fact,
all clinical chemotherapy, regardless of the mechanism,
by virtue of exercising selective cytotoxicity has a target
on which it acts [6], even if that target isn’t known
or understood. However, when advanced tumors are
confronted with targeted or “untargeted” chemotherapies,
alone or in combination, the result is almost always the
same—acquired resistance.
Nevertheless, as targeted therapies [7] become the
blueprint and the prevalent paradigm in drug development
and clinical oncology, there is a danger that oncologists
will overestimate the role of these therapies and, at the
same time, undervalue the impact of their toxicity.
Lamentably, because quality of life is not generally
assessed in clinical trials as an approval endpoint, targeted
chemotherapies in general cannot be properly evaluated
from a benefit-toxicity perspective.

“by any means necessary” was a morally permissible
and practically expedient formula because the only
virtue is success, no matter the methods necessary to
achieve it. Taking inspiration from the work of Richard
Christie and Florence Geis [1], who co-opted the term
Machiavellianism, a byword for sneakiness, ambition,
ruthlessness, and the open espousal of ‘playing hardball’,
to describe a constellation of personality traits from which
the MACH-IV personality scale was developed in 1970,
we have similarly applied the Machiavelli premise of “by
any means necessary” to highlight the tradeoffs between
activity and adverse events in the treatment of cancer.
However, as previously mentioned, Machiavellianism in
its original intent is associated with deception, while the
practice of medicine, in accordance with the Hippocratic
oath and the Hippocratic tradition, should contain no
element of deception. In this non-maleficent medical
context, since physicians are honor and duty-bound to
protect and serve the patient to the exclusion of thirdparty interests, including their own, MM, rather than
implying any element of sham or deceit, is a therapeutic
doctrine consistent with “I must be cruel to be kind” and
“if it works, use it” because the benefit of overall survival
balances or even outweighs considerations related to
quality of life and/or cost.
Survival is the name of the game and in the evolving
gambit-counter-gambit-counter-counter-gambit
chess
match of palliative cancer treatment where the oncologist
selects a therapy and tumors ‘choose’ an adaptive strategy
the sacrifice pawn is invariably quality of life even when
the only objective, the best case scenario, is to force
a stalemate from an otherwise desperate and hopeless
situation. Nevertheless in reaction to the broad toxicities
of conventional chemotherapy therapeutic strategies have
evolved to only target cancer cells while sparing their
normal counterparts (in what might be called somewhat
facetiously primum non chemothere). However, even
in this era of personalized medicine, where particular
therapies are designed and developed for particular
patients, based on a pharmacogenomic likelihood of
benefit, the balance of antitumor activity versus toxicity
is—or should be— a critical consideration.
While the applicability of this personalization on a
general level remains at best an open question, it should
be noted that the term “targeted” therapy is largely a
misnomer since the most active molecular therapeutics
(e.g. small molecule tyrosine kinase inhibitors [4]
are more promiscuous than selective with multiple
confirmed molecular targets (e.g. imatinib). And, in some
cases, unintended ‘off-target’ effects may be clinically
significant, such as inhibition of vascular endothelial
growth factor receptor 2 (VEGFR2) with regorafenib [5].
The equation, ‘drug + molecular target = targeted
therapy’, with its implication of narrow biological
specificity and toxicity, almost certainly oversimplifies
the enormously complex and coordinated interactions that
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Methods and Results
By analogy with a survey in neuropsychology called
MACH-IV by Christie and Geis in 1970 [1, 8], which
measures Machiavellianism as a distinct personality
construct, and ranks orientation according to high or low
Mach, we have defined a rudimentary MACH scale for
targeted chemotherapies, based on the means-to-ends ratio
of toxicity and benefit, derived from a Phase 3 registration
trial. The adverse event ratio is defined as the ratio of the
percentage of Grade 3 and Grade 4 adverse events of the
study drug to the comparator:
MACH Index = Adverse Event Ratio

Survival ratio
Where the Adverse Event Ratio is the ratio of the
percent of Grade 3 and higher adverse events for the study
drug divided by percent of Grade 3 and higher adverse
events for the comparator and the Survival ratio is the
number of months of median OS for the study drug over
the median OS for the comparator in months.
Although comparisons between different agents
depend on the type of comparator in the registration trial,
with the use of placebo potentially resulting in the highest
MACH index, in general, the higher the MACH index
the less desirable the agent, at least from a quality of life
perspective. In this article we compare the MACH Index
for the following small molecule inhibitors: regorafenib
(Stivarga), sorafenib (Nexavar), bortezomib (Velcade),
erlotinib (Tarceva), and sunitinib (Sutent) (Tables 1 & 2).

9042

Oncotarget

Table 1: Approved drugs and source data used in the analysis
Drug
Indication
Comparator
Bortezomib
Multiple myeloma
Dexamethasone
Sunitinib
Metastatic Renal-Cell Carcinoma
Interferon alpha
Regorafenib
Metastatic colorectal cancer
Placebo
Sorafenib
Advanced Hepatocellular Carcinoma
Placebo
Erlotinib
Advanced non-small-cell lung cancer
Placebo

Trial name
APEX
CORRECT
SHARP
SATURN

Source data
Richardson, 20079,10
Motzer, 200711
Grothey, 201212
Llovet, 200813
Coudert, 201214

Table 2: Adverse event and survival ratios with MACH index for drug/comparator pairs
Drug/Comparator Adverse
Adverse Event ratio Survival (mo) Survival ratio MACH Index
Events
Bortezomib
0.75
1.25
29.8
1.26
0.99
Dexamethasone
0.60
23.7
Sunitinib
0.37
1.48
26.0
1.30
1.14
Interferon alpha
0.25
20.0
Regorafenib
0.54
3.86
6.40
1.28
3.02
Placebo
0.14
5.00
Sorafenib
0.11
2.06
10.7
1.28
1.62
Placebo
0.05
7.9
Erlotinib
0.65
1.12
12.3
1.11
1.01
Placebo
0.58
11.1

Discussion

the case of a life-threatening medical emergency such as
cancer, in which case according to the unwritten elastic
doctrine of Medical Machiavellianism the physician
is authorized to take extraordinary measures to extend

The cardinal rule of medicine, primum non nocere,
implied in the Hippocratic Oath, is inviolate except in

Figure 1: Survival and adverse event ratios of selected targeted anti-cancer drugs. Regions are defined as: A. Favorable high
survival benefit to low toxicity;. B. Balance survival vs. toxicity; C. unfavorable survival benefit to toxicity.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

9043

Oncotarget

life, including the administration of systemically toxic
conventional chemotherapy. This is justified by the
scorched earth, win-at-all-costs ethos that has dominated
the oncology landscape ever since President Richard
Nixon launched the “War on Cancer” in 1971 [9, 10].
By contrast, the perception generally is that targeted
therapy, being targeted, has a better safety profile,
resulting in an improved functional status and healthrelated quality of life, and thereby allowing the clinician
to adhere to a primum non nocere strategy. The reality
[11] is different: many of the agents that were initially
characterized as a ‘single blade’, specific for a particular
gene or receptor are actually more akin to a Swiss Army
knife, with multifunctional properties due to inhibition of
more than one receptor, gene or pathway; the dark side
of this promiscuous pharmacology is a new spectrum
of ‘off-target’ side effects, distinct from conventional
chemotherapy, which are sometimes severe, and
therefore it is important to determine for both targeted
and conventional chemotherapy whether the absolute
magnitude of survival benefit is worth the added risks and
toxicities since the only proven curative treatments are still
surgery and radiotherapy.
Given the ubiquity of their use and uncertainty
regarding the risk:benefit ratio, it is clearly time to
examine targeted therapies in a careful and systematic
way, emphasizing determinations of health-related quality
of life (QOL), a concept defined as net satisfaction with
life in the context of the cumulative risks and benefits of
treatment, that are standard coin for medical decisionmaking in other disciplines [12]. PD-1 (programmed cell
death protein 1) and CTLA-4 (cytotoxic T-lymphocyteassociated protein 4) immune checkpoint inhibitors may
represent a new era and a paradigm shift in cancer therapy,
but, even so, the consensus is that targeted agents are not
only here to stay [19] but will continue to play a significant
role in combination with chemo and immunotherapy.
Our analysis of targeted therapies allows some
insight into their relative risk to benefit ratio. Ideal anticancer therapies, that is those that prolong survival with
minimal adverse events, would fall into the region defined
as ‘A’ in Figure 1, while therapies that provide limited
benefit with a high rate of therapy-related adverse events
fall into region ‘C’. Unfortunately, none of the five targeted
therapies studied fall into the high benefit-low morbidity
region ‘A’. The majority of the profiled drugs cluster in the
intermediate region ‘B’ of the graph, occupying a middle
ground between toxicity and benefit. At the other end of
the spectrum from region ‘A’, regorafenib and erlotinib
are found in region ‘C’ where toxicity predominates over
clinical benefit, suggesting that these agents should be
prescribed with special caution.

of the genetic vulnerabilities and dependencies of cancer
has not advanced sufficiently to permit development of
highly effective molecularly targeted agents with nontoxic safety profiles, it is anticipated that a new generation
of bellwether onco-immunology agents, from checkpoint
inhibitors to oncolytic viruses, currently in development,
will usher in a paradigm shift toward region ‘A’ of the
graph.
Although our approach is quite plainly ad hoc,
subjective, and heavily dependent on the particular
disease under investigation as well as the comparator in
the clinical trial, we hope the intention to benchmark these
‘targeted’ agents with an easily accessible rating system
will serve to highlight the centrality of QOL as a primary
index for individual patients rather than relegating it to the
all-too-familiar status of mere window dressing or icing on
the cake after overall survival.
Finally, while it may seem somewhat shocking
and heretical to associate the practice of oncology, an
ostensible ethical and moral good, with Machiavellian
tactics, the fact is that in the face of metastatic cancer the
absolute standard of non-malfeasance—“do no harm”—
does not necessarily apply and tough tradeoff treatment
decisions are frequently necessary to extend survival. In
this context, it is our hope that this article may help guide
oncologists, in true Machiavellian fashion, to choose the
lesser of two necessary targeted evils.

Conclusions

The term “Medical Machiavellianism” is presented
along with an original tool to aid oncologists in their
selection of treatment for their patients. By analogy
with the MACH-IV personality survey (Christie & Geis,

Abbreviations
CTLA-4, Cytotoxic T-lymphocyte-associated
protein 4; MM, Medical Machiavellianism; OS, Overall
survival; PD-1, Programmed cell death protein 1; QOL,
Quality of Life; VEGFR2, vascular endothelial growth
factor receptor 2.

Acknowledgments
The authors would like to acknowledge and
recognize Harry Lybeck, gentleman, scholar, scientist and
physician who at 96 years old continues in daily life, as he
did in his medical practice, to be guided by the precepts of
Hippocrates rather than Machiavelli.

Funding
The authors received no funding in the writing of
this manuscript.

Key Message

While Figure 1may indicate that our understanding
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

9044

Oncotarget

1970),1 which measures Machiavellian orientation,
a rudimentary MACH scale for selected targeted
chemotherapies is defined, based on the means-to-ends
ratio of toxicity and benefit.

Conflicts of Interest
The authors declare that there are no conflicts of
interest in the publication of this article.

References
1.	 Christie R, Geis F. Studies in Machiavellianism. NY:
Academic Press.; 1970.
2.	 Hales RK, Banchereau J, Ribas A, Tarhini AA, Weber JS,
Fox BA, Drake CG. Assessing oncologic benefit in clinical
trials of immunotherapy agents. Ann Oncol 2010; 21: 194451.
3.	 Pazdur R. Endpoints for assessing drug activity in clinical
trials. The oncologist. 2008; 13 Suppl 2: 19-21.
4.	 Broekman F, Giovannetti E, Peters GJ. Tyrosine kinase
inhibitors: Multi-targeted or single-targeted? World J Clin
Oncol. 2011; 2: 80-93.
5.	 Lee JM, Kohn EC. Proteomics as a guiding tool for more
effective personalized therapy. Ann Oncol. 2010; 21 Suppl
7: vii205-10.
6.	 Vincent MD. The animal within: carcinogenesis and the
clonal evolution of cancer cells are speciation events sensu
stricto. Evolution. 2010; 64: 1173-83.
7.	

Gerber DE. Targeted therapies: a new generation of cancer
treatments. Am Fam Physician. 2008; 77: 311-9.

8.	 Gunnthorsdottir A, McCabeb K, Smith V. Using the
Machiavellianism instrument to predict trustworthiness in a
bargaining game. Journal of Economic Psychology. 2002;
23: 49-66.
9.	

Huang S. The war on cancer: lessons from the war on terror.
Frontiers in oncology. 2014; 4: 293.

10.	 Oronsky B, Carter CA, Mackie V, Scicinski J, Oronsky A,
Oronsky N, Caroen S, Parker C, Lybeck M, Reid T. The
war on cancer: a military perspective. Frontiers in oncology.
2014; 4: 387.
11.	 Kirk R. Targeted therapies: the toxic reality of new drugs.
Nat Rev Clin Oncol. 2012; 9: 488.
12.	 Bouwling A. Measuring Disease. A Review of diseasespecific quality of life measurement scales. 2nd ed.
Buckingham, UK: Open University Press; 2001.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

9045

Oncotarget

