NIH Public Access
Author Manuscript
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 July 17.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Published in final edited form as:
Cell. 2014 July 17; 158(2): 368–382. doi:10.1016/j.cell.2014.05.042.

APC is an RNA-Binding Protein and its Interactome Provides a
Link to Neural Development and Microtubule Assembly
Nicolas Preitner1,4, Jie Quan1,4, Dan W. Nowakowski1, Melissa L. Hancock1, Jianhua Shi1,
Joseph Tcherkezian2, Tracy L. Young-Pearse3, and John G. Flanagan1,*
1Department

of Cell Biology and Program in Neuroscience, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA

02115, USA
2Laboratory

for Therapeutic Development, Rosalind and Morris Goodman Cancer Research
Centre, McGill University, Montreal, QC H3G 1Y6, Canada

3Center

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

for Neurologic Diseases, Brigham and Women's Hospital and Harvard Medical School,
Boston, MA, 02115, USA

SUMMARY
Adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) is a microtubule plus-end scaffolding protein important in
biology and disease. APC is implicated in RNA localization, although the mechanisms and
functional significance remain unclear. We show that APC is an RNA-binding protein, and
identify an RNA interactome by HITS-CLIP. Targets were highly enriched for APC-related
functions, including microtubule organization, cell motility, cancer and neurologic disease.
Among the targets is β2B-tubulin, known to be required in human neuron and axon migration. We
show β2B-tubulin is synthesized in axons and localizes preferentially to dynamic microtubules in
the growth cone periphery. APC binds the β2B-tubulin 3'UTR; treatments interfering with this
interaction reduced β2B-tubulin mRNA axonal localization and expression, depleted dynamic
microtubules and the growth cone periphery, and impaired neuron migration. These results

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

© 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
*
Correspondence: flanagan@hms.harvard.edu.
4Co-first authors

ACCESSION NUMBERS
Data accompanying this paper are available through NCBI under accession number SRP042131.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
N.P. designed, performed and analyzed most experiments, participated in the bioinformatic analysis, and wrote the manuscript. J.Q.
designed and performed most bioinformatic analysis, participated in design and interpretation of the experiments, performed the FISH
experiments, and contributed to the manuscript. D.W.N., with N.P., initiated the study and performed pilot experiments. M.L.H.
performed the cut axon studies and several immunolabeling experiments. J.S. cloned and purified the recombinant APC polypeptides.
J.T. performed the AHA experiments. T.L.Y.-P. designed and performed the cortical migration experiments. J.G.F. supervised the
study, designed and analyzed it with the other authors, and wrote the manuscript.
SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION
Supplemental information includes Extended Experimental Procedures, six figures, and seven tables and can be found with this article
online at [to be inserted].
Publisher's Disclaimer: This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our
customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of
the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be
discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.

Preitner et al.

Page 2

identify APC as a platform binding functionally-related protein and RNA networks, and suggest a
self-organizing model for the microtubule to localize synthesis of its own subunits.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

INTRODUCTION
Microtubules are fundamental for the spatial organization of the cell, providing structural
elements for cell shape, localization of subcellular components, and cell motility. Their
function in both static and dynamic cell processes is reflected at the molecular level by the
existence of distinct populations of stable and dynamic microtubules. In migrating axons, for
example, stable microtubules are bundled in the axon shaft and growth cone central domain,
while dynamic microtubules rapidly explore the growth cone peripheral domain which
initiates the direction of movement. A key site for regulation of microtubule dynamics is the
plus-end, where most growth and shortening occur. Plus-end-tracking (+TIP) proteins are
known to regulate microtubule dynamics, although the precise mechanisms by which they
operate are generally not well understood (Lowery and Van Vactor, 2009; Dent et al., 2011;
Stiess and Bradke, 2011).

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Adenomatous Polyposis Coli (APC) is a +TIP protein, which promotes microtubule
assembly, and has been studied extensively for its roles in biology and disease. Structurally,
APC is a large scaffold protein with binding sites for multiple protein partners (Figure S1A).
It was initially identified as a major tumor suppressor, and is mutated in most human colon
carcinomas, as well as in brain tumors (Kinzler and Vogelstein, 1996; Aoki and Taketo,
2007; Burgess et al., 2011), and has also been implicated in neurologic disorders including
schizophrenia and autism (Cui et al., 2005; Kalkman, 2012). Its normal biological functions
include cytoskeletal regulation in cell and axon migration, cell polarity and adhesion (Zhou
and Snider, 2006; Aoki and Taketo, 2007; Barth et al., 2008). In addition to its role in
microtubule regulation, APC functions in the canonical Wnt signaling pathway, which
regulates gene transcription (Clevers and Nusse, 2012). Although Wnt and microtubule
pathways were initially studied separately, it has become increasingly clear that they are
interconnected, and both are proposed to contribute to effects of APC in biology and cancer
(Nathke, 2006; Salinas, 2007).

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Both microtubules and APC have been studied extensively in the context of the neuron, a
well-suited model due to its highly organized shape and motility. Microtubules play critical
roles in axon and neuron migration, axon-dendrite polarity, and synapse formation (Lowery
and Van Vactor, 2009; Dent et al., 2011; Stiess and Bradke, 2011). The microtubule has also
long been known to have central roles in neurodevelopmental and neurodegenerative
diseases (Gerdes and Katsanis, 2005; Manzini and Walsh, 2011). Moreover in recent years,
mutations in several individual tubulin genes, including TUBB2B, TUBB3, TUBA1A, and
TUBA8 have been found to cause Mendelian disorders in humans resulting in abnormal axon
guidance or cortical neuron migration (Tischfield and Engle, 2010). The distinctive
phenotypes of these tubulin mutations have supported the multi-tubulin hypothesis, which
proposes that the many tubulin isotypes encoded by different genes have distinctive
functional properties. However, the mechanisms that contribute to isotype-specific tubulin
functions are generally not well understood (Tischfield and Engle, 2010).

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 July 17.

Preitner et al.

Page 3

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

RNA-based mechanisms have increasingly been implicated in the development and
functioning of the nervous system, including in axon guidance, neuron migration and
synapse plasticity, as well as in diseases such as mental retardation (Darnell, 2013; Jung et
al., 2014). In principle, important advantages of regulation at the RNA level include the
potential to direct protein synthesis to specific subcellular locations, and also the ability to
coordinately regulate extensive mRNA networks independent of the structure of the encoded
proteins. A major advance in characterizing mRNA networks at the genome-wide level has
been the introduction of HITS-CLIP, a technique that uses UV crosslinking to identify
RNAs directly bound to a protein of interest in the native context of cells or tissues,
followed by high throughput sequencing (Licatalosi et al., 2008; Darnell, 2013), although
the understanding of neural protein-RNA regulatory networks remains at an early stage.
Intriguingly, a study in fibroblasts found that APC associated, directly or indirectly, with
RNA and was required for localization of two RNAs into pseudopodia (Mili et al., 2008).
Here we set out to investigate the mechanism of APC interaction with RNA, its genomewide set of targets, and the biological significance of these interactions.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Our results identify a novel function of APC as an RNA-binding protein. HITS-CLIP in
native brain tissue identified 260 high-confidence mRNA targets, encoding proteins
strikingly related to APC in function. One of these mRNAs encodes β2B-tubulin / Tubb2b, a
tubulin isotype required in cortical neuron migration and axon tract formation in humans
(Jaglin et al., 2009; Cederquist et al., 2012; Romaniello et al., 2012). β2B-tubulin protein
was found to preferentially localize in dynamic microtubules in the growth cone peripheral
domain. Its expression was positively regulated by APC, and treatments to block the
interaction of APC with the binding site in the β2B-tubulin mRNA 3’UTR caused loss of
dynamic microtubules and the growth cone peripheral domain, and impairment of cortical
neuron migration in vivo. These results indicate that the diversity of tubulin isotypes can be
explained in part by acquisition of RNA regulatory motifs specifying distinctive subcellular
distributions. They also provide a mechanism for control of microtubule dynamics, and
suggest a self-organization principle for a polarized cellular structure, the microtubule, to
direct the localized synthesis of its own components. The results also show that in addition
to APC’s role as a scaffold for a network of proteins, it also binds a functionally-related
network of mRNAs, providing a generalizable way to coordinate cellular networks at the
protein and RNA levels, with general implications for the actions of APC in biology and
disease.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

RESULTS
Genome-wide identification of APC target mRNAs in brain
We initially considered the possibility that APC might directly bind RNA for several
reasons. APC plays a role in RNA localization in cultured fibroblasts (Mili et al., 2008).
Also, APC has an intrinsically unstructured basic region (Figures S1A and S1B) that binds
DNA (Deka et al., 1999; Qian et al., 2008). Since unstructured regions are prevalent in both
DNA-binding (Vuzman and Levy, 2012) and RNA-binding proteins (Castello et al., 2012),
and allow specific binding to more than one type of target (Tompa, 2012), and since other
proteins can bind both DNA and RNA, we experimentally investigated the associations of

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 July 17.

Preitner et al.

Page 4

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

APC with RNA using CLIP. UV crosslinking was carried out in native E14 mouse brain
tissue, followed by APC immunoprecipitation, digestion of free RNA, radiolabeling of the
protected RNAs, and resolution of protein-RNA complexes on a denaturing gel (Figure 1A).
In previous studies using several APC antibodies, the full-length and best-characterized
protein isoform migrated at ~300 KDa, with additional shorter isoforms, and here APCassociated RNAs migrated in a comparable pattern (Figure 1A). No protein-RNA complexes
were detected in cells bearing truncated APC alleles lacking the region recognized by the
APC antibodies, providing a control for antibody specificity (Figure S1C). To further test
binding with RNA, the CLIP experiment was repeated using cells transfected with a
construct expressing the APC basic domain fused to an HA tag, and the results indicated
direct binding of the APC basic domain to RNA (Figure 1B). These data, further confirmed
by evidence presented later, identify a new biochemical function for APC as an RNAbinding protein.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

To perform a genome-wide identification of RNA targets for APC in brain, we next used
HITS-CLIP, which combines CLIP with high-throughput sequencing (Figure 1A)
(Licatalosi et al., 2008). To reduce potential false positives, two different APC antibodies
were used, and for one of them three independent immunoprecipitation replicates were
performed, giving a total of four data sets (Figure S1D). Binding peaks were identified on
the basis of having multiple sequence reads in all four samples, with height and fold
enrichment strongly above background to give a low False Discovery Rate (FDR<0.001;
Figure S1D and Experimental Procedures). This procedure identified a set of 631 highconfidence binding peaks in mRNAs from 260 genes.
Figure 1C shows examples of peak distribution for representative target mRNAs encoding
proteins well known to have APC-related functions: β-catenin, a central protein in the Wnt
signaling pathway; CRMP2, a key regulator of microtubule assembly; β2B-tubulin, a
structural component of microtubules; and kinesin Kif5c, a major axonal microtubule motor
protein. The great majority of APC binding sites were in mRNA 3’UTRs (582/631 peaks;
Figures 1C and 1D). As is common for protein-RNA interactions, no unique binding
sequence could be identified. However, three consensus motifs were strongly overrepresented (Figure 1E), with 77% of APC target mRNAs carrying at least one of these
motifs within APC binding sites.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Global analysis of APC targets in biology and disease
Given the well-known role of APC in microtubule function, we first performed a systematic
search for components and regulators of the microtubule cytoskeleton encoded by APC
mRNA targets (see Experimental Procedures). This analysis revealed an extensive set of
proteins involved in microtubule organization, including tubulins, regulatory proteins that
bind microtubules, and key upstream regulatory components (Figure 2A; also Tables S1 and
S2). In addition to their relation with microtubules, these proteins bind and regulate one
another, forming a highly interconnected protein-protein interaction network. Moreover,
APC targets include actin and actin-regulatory factors, consistent with previous studies
showing that APC can bind and promote the assembly of actin filaments (Okada et al.,
2010), and with the broader concept that microtubules and the actin cytoskeleton are tightly

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 July 17.

Preitner et al.

Page 5

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

coordinated (Lowery and Van Vactor, 2009; Dent et al., 2011). Together, these observations
identify a highly interconnected network of encoded cytoskeletal proteins closely related to
known APC functions, suggesting a model where APC function could involve coordinate
regulation of both protein and RNA networks.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

For a more global analysis of APC mRNA targets, we performed gene ontology (GO)
analysis of biological processes using the DAVID platform (http://david.abcc.ncifcrf.gov/).
The top six clusters are shown in Figure 3 (also Table S4), and notably they all correspond
to biological processes in which APC is well known to play key roles. Similar clusters were
robustly obtained whether APC targets were compared to a control consisting of the brain
transcriptome used here for APC-CLIP (Table S4), or the whole mouse transcriptome
(Refseq database)(Table S5). Notably, a substantial proportion of the genes on the APC
target list fall into these top six functional categories (128/260 genes), a proportion likely to
be an underestimate since not all genes will yet have been tested for these six categories, and
because additional APC functions are not represented here (such as Wnt signaling, see
below; and synapse formation, the seventh cluster, see Table S4). In addition to their relation
with APC, these functional categories are highly related to one another, as reflected by the
fact that the majority of the genes are found across more than one category (color coded dots
in Figure 3).
When the APC targets were tested for potentially enriched signaling pathways, using the
Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA) platform, the Wnt/β-catenin pathway was identified as
the most enriched signaling pathway (p<4×10−5; see Table S1 for Wnt pathway
components), a striking finding in view of the well-known role played by APC in this
pathway. We also investigated the relationship of the APC target list to human disease using
the IPA tools (Figure 2B upper panel, also Table S3), and also by a systematic search for
genes that cause human disorders with Mendelian inheritance (Figure 2B lower panel, also
Figure S2). Both analyses revealed a relationship of APC mRNA targets to
neurodevelopmental and neurodegenerative diseases, and cancer, consistent with studies
linking these disorders with APC, the Wnt/β-catenin pathway, and microtubules. Taken
together, these analyses show that APC binds a highly coherent set of mRNA targets,
closely related to its roles in both normal biology and disease, and suggest a model where
the action of APC as an RNA-binding protein may play a role in these processes.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

β2B-tubulin mRNA as an APC target in the axon
Having obtained a list of mRNAs with APC binding sites, we were interested to
experimentally investigate potential functional effects of these binding sites. To identify
candidate mRNAs for further study, we compared our target list to a list of mRNAs prsent in
dorsal root ganglion (DRG) axons (Gumy et al., 2011), since APC is involved in axon
growth, and found that 45% of APC targets were present on the axonally expressed list
(Figure 4A, also Tables S1 and S6). Among these, β2B-tubulin emerged as a particularly
interesting candidate. β2B-tubulin had a robust APC binding peak in its mRNA 3’UTR
(Figures 4B and S3A) and has an obvious role in microtubule assembly. Moreover, in rodent
embryos, similar to APC conditional knockout, β2B-tubulin RNAi causes impaired cortical
neuron migration (Jaglin et al., 2009; Yokota et al., 2009), while in humans, β2B-tubulin

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 July 17.

Preitner et al.

Page 6

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

mutations cause asymmetric polymicrogyria, a disorder associated with severe mental
retardation, and characterized by defects in cortical neuron migration and axon tracts (Jaglin
et al., 2009; Cederquist et al., 2012; Romaniello et al., 2012). Together, these biochemical,
developmental and genetic results provided a framework of information to further study
β2B-tubulin in the context of migrating axons and neurons.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

To investigate the functional significance of the APC binding site in the β2B-tubulin mRNA,
we first wanted to delineate the site in more detail. The HITS-CLIP binding peak in the
3’UTR was centered on a sequence that fitted the consensus G-rich motif, and showed
evolutionary conservation (Figures 4B, 4C top, and S3A). To further confirm a direct
protein-RNA interaction, we performed in vitro binding assays using purified components.
Gel-shift experiments showed that recombinant purified APC basic region bound to short
synthetic RNAs containing the G-rich sequence found in the binding peak from β2B-tubulin
or other target mRNAs (Figure 4C). The binding had a high affinity, in the range of known
RNA-binding proteins interacting with their cognate RNA targets (KD ~10 nM; Figures 4D
and 4E). These in vitro binding results, taken together with the CLIP data in cells and in
native brain tissue (Figures 1A, 1B and S1C), further confirmed that APC directly binds
RNA, and indicate that the G-rich motif in the β2B-tubulin binding peak is a sequence that
can bind directly to APC-basic with high affinity.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

To investigate the regulatory effect of APC binding to the β2B-tubulin mRNA 3’UTR, an
antisense oligomer was designed to block the G-motif (3’Tubb2bAPC-site PNA, see Figure
4B, mouse sequence). Peptide-nucleic acids (PNAs) were chosen because they have
enhanced binding specificity, and antisense oligos were designed to have multiple
mismatches with any other mRNA in the transcriptome (Supplemental Experimental
Procedures). Treatment of mouse DRG neurons with the 3’Tubb2bAPC-site PNA reduced
β2B-tubulin protein levels in axons (Figure S4C). The presence of β2B-tubulin mRNA in
axons, and past evidence for tubulin translation in axons (Eng et al., 1999; Zivraj et al.,
2010; Gumy et al., 2011) makes β2B-tubulin a likely candidate for local axonal translation.
To confirm local translation in the axon, severed axons in culture were treated with the
protein synthesis inhibitor cycloheximide, resulting in a 38% reduction in β2B-tubulin
protein expression within 3.5 hours (Figure 5A). To test for a local axonal effect of the APC
binding site on β2B-tubulin expression, severed axons were treated with the antisense
3’Tubb2bAPC-site PNA, which had a similar effect to cycloheximide, reducing β2B-tubulin
protein expression by 35% within 3.5 hr (Figures 5A, S4A and S4B). These data suggest a
model in which APC binding to the β2B-tubulin mRNA would promote β2B-tubulin protein
expression. Supporting this model, β2B-tubulin protein levels were reduced when APC was
knocked down using small hairpin RNAs (Figures 5B, S4D and S4E), further establishing
APC as a positive regulator of β2B-tubulin protein expression.
We were also interested to assess whether APC might localize near components of the
translation machinery in growth cones. Immunolocalization showed that markers of
translation machinery, including eIF4E and ribosomal protein Rpl19, formed clusters in the
growth cone periphery, which were often found in overlapping or contiguous distributions
with clusters of APC (Figures 5C–5E, S4F and S4H). The slight offset sometimes seen
between APC and eIF4E or Rpl19 puncta is consistent with the large size, oligomerization,

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 July 17.

Preitner et al.

Page 7

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

and intrinsically unstructured character of APC, which allow it to extend over substantial
distances (up to 600 nm per APC molecule) (Minde et al., 2011). APC was similarly found
in overlapping or contiguous distributions with sites of newly synthesized protein visualized
by pulse labeling with the amino acid analog azidohomoalanine (AHA) (Figure S4G). We
were also interested to assess whether APC-translation machinery clusters localize near the
microtubule cytoskeleton, focusing on the peripheral domain where microtubules are spread
out and can best be observed. Microtubule dynamics in the growth cone involve cycles of
polymerization and depolymerization at microtubule filament tips, as well as the presence of
small isolated microtubule fragments (Myers et al., 2006; Stiess and Bradke, 2011). APC
and markers of translation machinery were seen around a subset of microtubule tips, and in
most growth cones showed consistent clustering around isolated microtubule fragments
(Figures 5C–5E, S4F and S4H), which may represent either severed or locally nucleated
microtubules (Stiess and Bradke, 2011).

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

We next tested whether the β2B-tubulin mRNA might be found in the growth cone
periphery, where dynamic microtubles extend. Using fluorescence in situ hybridization
(FISH) we found that β2B-tubulin mRNA is indeed located in the axon including in the
growth cone periphery (Figure 5F). When neurons were treated with the antisense
3’Tubb2bAPC-site PNA, β2B-tubulin mRNA levels dropped in the distal axon and increased
in the soma (Figures 5G and 5H), indicating that blocking the APC binding site in the β2Btubulin3’UTR inhibits axonal localization of the mRNA.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

To further validate the specificity of the antisense approach, these experiments were
repeated with antisense morpholinos, another class of nucleic acid analog with enhanced
target selectivity (Karkare and Bhatnagar, 2006). Both the 3’Tubb2bAPC-site PNA and
morpholino overlap the same G-motif, but the PNA shares only 12/25 residues of the
morpholino target sequence. Additionally, the morpholino was designed to be used in a
different species, rat, to take advantage of a single-nucleotide mouse/rat difference within
the overlapping region (asterisk in Figure 4B), further eliminating the possibility that both
antisense oligomers could significantly bind any potential common off-target RNA. As
expected, the antisense 3’Tubb2bAPC-site morpholino interfered with the binding of the APC
basic domain to the 3’Tubb2bAPC-site RNA oligonucleotide in vitro (Figure S3B) and,
confirming the results obtained with the PNA, it inhibited localization of the β2B-tubulin
mRNA in the distal axon (Figures 5H and S4I). In contrast, when rat neurons were treated
with the 3’Tubb2bAPC-site PNA designed to target the mousesequence, no effect was seen on
β2B-tubulin mRNA levels or localization (Figure S4I). Together these results indicate that
the APC binding site in the β2B-tubulin mRNA promotes axonal localization of the β2Btubulin mRNA and axonal expression of β2B-tubulin protein.
Roles in growth cone structure and neuron migration
To investigate the functional significance of β2B-tubulin local protein synthesis in axons, we
next examined the distribution pattern of this protein in dissociated DRG neurons. β2Btubulin labeling was seen prominently in axons, and extended well into the peripheral
domain of the growth cone, including the actin-rich periphery and filopodia (Figures 6A, 6B
and S5A). Similar results were obtained with two different antibodies, and immunolabeling

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 July 17.

Preitner et al.

Page 8

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

was blocked by siRNAs targeting the β2B-tubulin mRNA (data not shown). When the
peripheral to central distribution was assessed quantitatively, compared to β3-tubulin (Tuj1,
which is widely used as an axonal marker and was not on our APC target list), there was a
strong enrichment of β2B-tubulin labeling in the peripheral domain (2.9-fold enrichment;
Figure 6C). A similar result was obtained by comparing to pan-α-tubulin antibodies (data
not shown). When β2B-tubulin immunolocalization was compared with tyrosinated (Tyrtubulin; dynamic) and detyrosinated (Glu-tubulin; stable) microtubules, it was found to
overlap with dynamic microtubules in the periphery, where there was little or no labeling for
stable microtubules (Figures 6D and S5B). β2B-tubulin labeling was additionally seen in the
axon shaft where both dynamic and stable microtubules are present (Figures 6D and S5B).
While these results do not exclude the possible presence of β2B-tubulin in stable
microtubules (as indeed one might expect if β2B-tubulin were incorporated into dynamic
microtubules that subsequently become stabilized), they show prominent overlap of the β2Btubulin pattern with dynamic microtubules in the growth cone periphery.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Our findings on β2B-tubulin distribution in the axon suggested a functional role in the
growth cone periphery. To study the function of APC binding to the β2B-tubulin3’UTR , we
next analyzed the morphology of DRG neurons treated with the 3’Tubb2bAPC-site antisense
oligomers. The 3’Tubb2bAPC-site morpholino had no evident effect on the overall
morphology of neurons and their axons, or axon length (data not shown), but growth cone
area was strongly reduced (2.6-fold reduction; Figure 6F). Similarly, the 3’Tubb2bAPC-site
PNA did not affect overall morphology of the axon or soma, but strongly reduced growth
cone area, compared to a non-targeting PNA (2.3-fold reduction; Figure 6G) or compared to
a PNA targeted to a neighboring region of the β2B-tubulin3’UTR (data not shown).
Immunolabeling of stable and dynamic microtubules indicated that the overall loss of
growth cone area corresponded to a selective loss of the growth cone peripheral domain and
dynamic microtubules, while stable microtubules, found in the central domain, appeared
unaffected (Figures 6E and 6H). These results lead to a model in which tubulin synthesis in
axons is promoted by APC binding to the G-rich motif in the β2B-tubulin mRNA 3’UTR,
and in turn is important for normal extension of peripheral dynamic microtubules and
formation of the classic expanded shape of the growth cone.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

To extend our studies of β2B-tubulin regulation to the developing brain in vivo, we
examined cortical neuron migration, for several reasons. Migrating cortical neurons extend a
leading process that guides their migration and has a cytoskeletal architecture similar to
axons (Marin et al., 2010). Moreover, cortical neuron migration is impaired in both APCand β2B-tubulin-deficient rodent models (Jaglin et al., 2009; Yokota et al., 2009), while
mutations in human β2B-tubulin cause defects in axon tracts and cortical neuron migration
(Jaglin et al., 2009; Cederquist et al., 2012; Romaniello et al., 2012). Therefore, based on
our data in growth cones, we hypothesized that cortical neuron migration might be impaired
by blocking the β2B-tubulin 3’UTR APC binding site. To test this, the 3’Tubb2bAPC-site
antisense morpholino was introduced into the brain of E15.5 rat embryos by in utero
electroporation. Three days later, cortical neurons electroporated with a control morpholino
had migrated all the way to the upper layers of the cortex, while a majority of neurons
electroporated with the 3’Tubb2bAPC-site antisense morpholino had not reached the upper

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 July 17.

Preitner et al.

Page 9

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

cortical plate (Figure 7), showing an impairment of cortical neuron migration in vivo. We
also tested the APC basic domain, reasoning that it would have dominant interfering effects
on endogenous APC activity, since this domain binds RNAs (Figures 1 and 4), but lacks
other regions of APC required for protein-protein interactions and will therefore not localize
and function properly (Askham et al., 2000). As predicted, similar to the antisense
oligonucleotide against the APC binding site, expressing the basic domain of APC strongly
reduced cortical neuron migration in vivo (Figure S7).

DISCUSSION

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Here we find that APC, a protein-protein scaffold studied extensively for its important roles
in biology and disease, is also an RNA-binding protein, and moreover it associates with a
network of mRNAs highly related to its functions. The dual ability of APC to act as a
platform for extensive associations with both protein and RNA networks suggests novel
mechanisms to regulate biological network function coordinately at the protein and RNA
levels. APC is known as a microtubule +TIP protein regulating microtubule assembly, and
we find here that APC directs mRNA localization and synthesis of a specific tubulin isotype,
β2B-tubulin. Our results suggest a model where APC would promote microtubule
polymerization in part by directing the local translation of tubulin in the vicinity of
microtubule growing ends, suggesting a self-organizing principle for a polarized cellular
structure, the microtubule, to spatially direct the synthesis of its own components.
APC as an mRNA-binding protein

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

APC has not been previously identified as an RNA-binding protein in part because its
sequence does not contain any classical RNA-binding domain. Interestingly, this is
consistent with a recent genome-wide screen reporting that approximately half of all
proteins that bind RNA do not have any recognizable RNA-binding domain (Castello et al.,
2012). Although the APC basic region does not show obvious primary sequence homology
with classical RNA-binding domains, it does share properties commonly found in other
RNA-binding proteins including a low frequency of acidic residues and a high prediction
value for intrinsic disorder (Castello et al., 2012; Dyson, 2012). In addition to being
enriched in RNA binding proteins, intrinsically unstructured protein regions are currently of
high interest in biology more generally. Such regions allow scaffolding proteins such as
APC to sweep a large volume of the cell, and also they have the ability to conformationally
adapt to bind more than one type of target molecule with high specificity (Minde et al.,
2011; Tompa, 2012).
Regarding recognition motifs, RNA-binding proteins typically bind sequences that are short
or highly degenerate, and in many cases it has been difficult to identify any consensus
sequences. Here, three enriched consensus motifs were identified within APC target sites,
with 77% of the APC target mRNAs containing at least one of them. The ability of RNAbinding proteins to recognize binding sites with a variety of primary sequences can have at
least two general explanations. First, structurally flexible RNA-binding domains may be
able to bind multiple target motifs (Dyson, 2012). Second, binding sites in RNA often
involve secondary structures that can be generated by various primary sequences (Hall,

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 July 17.

Preitner et al.

Page 10

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

2002). Our in vitro binding experiments using APC basic domain and short RNA
oligonucleotides demonstrated high affinity binding to the G-rich consensus motif. This
motif might possibly form a G-quadruplex, a structure recognized by some other nucleic
acid-binding proteins (Burge et al., 2006), although the G-quadruplex consensus does not
precisely fit the G-motif identified here. Comparable binding to synthetic oligonucleotides
containing the other two motifs was not detected (unpublished observations); there could be
various reasons for this: the short RNAs used in our assay may not have possessed necessary
secondary structures; or additional APC regions outside the basic domain may contribute to
RNA binding; or APC might bind cooperatively with other RNA-binding proteins. Indeed,
APC has been reported to associate directly or indirectly with RNA binding proteins FMRP
and Fus/TLS (Mili et al., 2008; Yasuda et al., 2013), and it would be interesting to
investigate whether these interactions contribute to APC mRNA binding specificity.
Isotype specific tubulin regulation

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

The two main cytoskeletal components at the front of migrating cells and axons are
microtubules and actin filaments. Regulation of actin synthesis has been studied extensively
over the past two decades. Local actin synthesis at the leading edge is limited to the β-actin
isoform, under control of elements in its mRNA 3’UTR (Condeelis and Singer, 2005; Jung
et al., 2014). Analogous to actin – indeed substantially more numerous – tubulins exist in
multiple isotypes encoded by distinct genes. Although the significance of tubulin isotypes
remains little explored, growing evidence indicates that they have distinctive biological
functions, confer different dynamic properties to microtubules, and cause different diseases
when mutated (Tischfield and Engle, 2010). Our studies on the β2B-tubulin isotype suggest
a model where individual tubulin isotypes would have distinct sets of regulatory elements in
their 3’UTRs, allowing them to be subject to different posttranscriptional control
mechanisms and contributing to their distinctive functions.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

One potential reason for RNA-based regulation of specific tubulin isotypes could be to
control their differential spatial distribution. This hypothesis is supported by multiple
observations in our data. The β2B-tubulin mRNA was localized to axons and locally
translated there under control of the APC binding site in its 3’UTR, and we found that APC
and translational machinery clustered together near microtubule tips and isolated
microtubule fragments in the growth cone peripheral domain. Also, the β2B-tubulin isotype,
relative to other tubulins, showed preferential localization to dynamic microtubules in the
growth cone periphery. Correspondingly, blocking the APC binding site in the β2B-tubulin
3’UTR caused a strong and selective loss in dynamic microtubules and in area of the growth
cone periphery. Consistent with these findings, previous studies have described
alteredmicrotubule behavior in APC conditional knockout mice, includinga reduced duration
of microtubule growth events, and altered directionality with less frequent growth toward
the periphery (Yokota et al., 2009; Chen et al., 2011). Our results all support a model where
axonal synthesis of β2B-tubulin contributes to the extension of peripheral dynamic
microtubules enriched in β2B-tubulin,and plays an important role in formation of the
classical expanded shape of the axonal growth cone. More generally, our data suggest that
an advantage of the existence of multiple tubulin isotypes, may have been the evolutionary
acquisition of distinct RNA regulatory motifs specifying unique subcellular distributions.

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 July 17.

Preitner et al.

Page 11

Interconnected networks of APC-bound mRNAs

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Regulation at the mRNA level presents unique advantages for biological organization and
regulation. One is the ability to direct the synthesis of specific proteins to specific
subcellular sites. Consistent with such a role for APC, in addition to β2B-tubulin as
discussed above, other proteins encoded by APC mRNA targets – including β-actin, βcatenin, and import in-β – are known to be locally translated at the leading edge of migrating
cells or in axons (Hanz et al., 2003; Condeelis and Singer, 2005; Jones et al., 2008).The
localization of two mRNAs in fibroblast protrusions was previously reported to involve
APC (Mili et al., 2008); these mRNAs were not in our APC RNA interactome, although
they were in our mouse brain transcriptome, suggesting either that they interact with APC
indirectly, or that there might be brain/fibroblast differences, such as alternative 3’UTRs, or
different proteins cooperating with APC. The same study also identified a genome-wide list
of mRNAs that move into fibroblast protrusions in response to extracellular cues, although
this was not a list of APC-associated mRNAs, and it may be informative to test in future
whether all fibroblast protrusion mRNAs are associated with APC (there was little overlap
of that list with our brain APC interactome; 2/260 mRNAs). An alternative model, rather
than APC being involved in localization of all mRNAs found in the periphery of cells, is that
different subsets of mRNAs might be localized by different RNA-binding proteins, a model
that may have advantages for biological specificity.
Besides spatial organization, a second advantage of RNA-based regulation is that it can
coordinately regulate large protein networks, independent of the structure of the encoded
proteins. Here we find that the APC mRNA interactome encodes protein networks highly
interconnected by overlapping functions, regulatory relationships, and physical associations.
Although there has been no clear evidence for coordinated assembly of an entire locally
synthesized protein network, the proximity of mRNAs during protein synthesis can
contribute to formation of protein complexes co-translationally (Chang et al., 2006). The
functionally coherent mRNA interactome of APC clearly suggests mechanisms to
coordinately regulate an entire protein network temporally, or spatially.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

While axonal levels of β2B-tubulin RNA and protein were positively regulated here, it may
be interesting to investigate whether APC binding sites on mRNAs might also have negative
effects on protein expression, and what are the exact mechanisms involved. The mechanisms
of RNA localization, translation and stability are coupled, and it is common for individual
RNA-binding proteins to influence more than one of these processes (Dreyfuss et al., 2002).
Other aspects that might be interesting for future investigation are the potential relationship
with previously described RNA granules (Xing and Bassell, 2012; Yasuda et al., 2013), or
cell surface receptors (Tcherkezian et al., 2010), and whether APC is part of a constitutive
mechanism of the growth cone machinery or might be regulated by extracellular cues.
Besides its function as a cytoskeletal regulator, APC is well known as a component of the
Wnt/β-catenin pathway, where it binds and regulates the degradation of β-catenin protein
(Clevers and Nusse, 2012). Interestingly, β-catenin is known to be translated locally at the
leading edge of migrating cells (Jones et al., 2008). Here we find that APC binds the mRNA
for β-catenin, and several other proteins in the Wnt/β-catenin pathway, leading to a model

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 July 17.

Preitner et al.

Page 12

where APC may influence the expression or localization of the pathway in part via RNAbased mechanisms.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

The specific set of mRNAs associated with APC matches not only APC’s functions in
normal biology, but also its involvement in disease, including cancer and neurological
disorders. Consistent with a potential involvement of RNA-based mechanisms in these
diseases, the APC basic domain, found here to bind RNA, is deleted by the APC truncations
that are typically associated with cancer, and missense point mutations in this domain have
also been identified (Minde et al., 2011). Cancer therapies commonly target microtubules,
but toxicity remains a major caveat of this treatment (Pellegrini and Budman, 2005).
Therapeutics that act via RNA-based mechanisms may provide greater specificity by
targeting the synthesis of specific components of the microtubule regulatory machinery or
tubulin isoforms, and the identification here of APC mRNA targets offers tools to test this
hypothesis.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

APC has been studied extensively for over two decades, yet it has been difficult to identify
mechanisms that might coherently unify its diverse array of effects in biology and disease
(Burgess et al., 2011; Minde et al., 2011). Our results may help to understand the overall
mechanistic basis of APC function, by identifying a function as an RNA-binding protein and
delineating an mRNA interactome for APC. These results lead to a model where APC would
act as a platform coordinately regulating both protein-protein and protein-RNA interactions.
Our initial characterization of the APC RNA interactome indicates that it may provide a link
between APC and its broad spectrum of functions in biology and disease.

EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES
CLIP, neuron cultures, binding assays, immunolabeling, in vivo migration
Detailed procedures are in supplemental material.
Statistical analysis
All t-tests were two-tailed, unpaired.
Image quantitation

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

For growth cone area, and tubulin labeling intensities (Figures 6E–H), growth cones were
delineated by GFP or phalloidin fluorescence using the MetaMorph auto-trace function for
the distal 20 μm. Tubulin labeling intensities in Figures 5A, 5B and S4A–D were measured
in axons, including growth cones and axon shafts. For marker intensities in peripheral
tubulin clusters (Figures 5C–E), a contour was initially auto-traced in the tubulin (blue)
channel, blind to the other channels; concentric ROIs at 1-pixel intervals were then created
inside and outside the tubulin contour, and pixel intensities between these lines were
averaged for all clusters; control value was labeling intensity averaged over the entire
peripheral domain.
For FISH quantitation, neurons were selected blind to the green channel, and green puncta
were then counted in the cell body and distal 50 μm of each axon blind to the treatment.
Comparable effects of antisense oligomer were seen when the whole axon was counted, and
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 July 17.

Preitner et al.

Page 13

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

there was no effect on length or total surface area of the axon that could account for the
change in FISH signal (data not shown). To confirm results in the cell body, where puncta
were dense, average pixel intensity was measured, revealing comparable effects to puncta
counting (21% increase, p<0.03, for Tubb2b PNA).
Bioinformatic analysis
To identify CLIP binding site peaks, reads were initially combined from all four replicates;
clusters of overlapping reads were identified, and assigned two values: peak height
(maximum number of overlapping reads), and median fold enrichment (compared to
randomly sampled background from mRNA-seq). To differentiate enriched binding sites
from false positives, mock CLIP data sets were generated by randomly sampling the same
number of sequence reads as in the APC CLIP samples from the control mRNA-seq data.
High confidence peaks were selected on mature mRNAs, based on peak height, foldenrichment, and presence of multiple reads in all four replicates (Figure S1D; Tables S1 and
S7).

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

GO analysis of biological function was performed using DAVID online tools (http://
david.abcc.ncifcrf.gov/). The top six enriched clusters (Figure 3) were determined by
automated functional annotation clustering based on GO terms of biological processes
(GO_BP_FAT). The individual genes within these top six categories were then curated for
enhanced accuracy by systematic search of the GeneCards Compendium (http://
www.genecards.org/), which contains a more comprehensive annotation including literature
citations; this validated almost all the initial genes, and identified approximately 60
additional genes unambiguously annotated in these categories and cited in the literature.
APC targets related to the cytoskeleton (Figure 2A), were identified by batch query from the
Mouse Genome Informatics (MGI) database based on GO annotations related to microtubule
or actin cytoskeletons. Interactions among proteins were identified by data mining in
GeneCards (http://www.genecards.org), STRING (http://string-db.org), and BioGRID
(http://thebiogrid.org), and were then further validated by systematic searching in PubMed
and manually selecting those supported by direct experimental evidence in studies of those
individual interactions (Table S2).

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Disorders and signaling pathways associated with APC targets were identified using IPA
tools (http://www.ingenuity.com/); Figure 2B shows disorders corresponding to a specific
disease and represented by at least two genes, within the IPA neurological disease category
(the next IPA categories are in Table S6). Single genes causing human Mendelian disorders
were identified by a systematic manual search in the OMIM database (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/omim).

Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 July 17.

Preitner et al.

Page 14

Acknowledgments
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

We thank Kyoko Okada, Philippe Roux, David Van Vactor, Peter Park, Xinmin Li, Inke Näthke, Olivier Pertz,
Antonina Andreeva and Alexey Murzin for help, reagents, advice, or comments on the manuscript; Jiangwen
Zhang, Christian Daly and the Bauer Center for Genomic Research for support with deep sequencing; and Jennifer
Waters, Josh Rosenberg, Lauren Piedmont, Lara Petrak, Gaudenz Danuser, Hunter Elliott, Yichao Xu, the Nikon
Imaging Center, and the Image and Data Analysis Core at Harvard Medical School for imaging equipment and
expertise. This work was supported by grants from the NIH, and a fellowship from the Charles A. King Trust
(N.P.).

References

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Aoki K, Taketo MM. Adenomatous polyposis coli (APC): a multi-functional tumor suppressor gene. J
Cell Sci. 2007; 120:3327–3335. [PubMed: 17881494]
Barth AI, Caro-Gonzalez HY, Nelson WJ. Role of adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) and
microtubules in directional cell migration and neuronal polarization. Semin Cell Dev Biol. 2008;
19:245–251. [PubMed: 18387324]
Burge S, Parkinson GN, Hazel P, Todd AK, Neidle S. Quadruplex DNA: sequence, topology and
structure. Nucleic Acids Res. 2006; 34:5402–5415. [PubMed: 17012276]
Burgess AW, Faux MC, Layton MJ, Ramsay RG. Wnt signaling and colon tumorigenesis--a view from
the periphery. Exp Cell Res. 2011; 317:2748–2758. [PubMed: 21884696]
Castello A, Fischer B, Eichelbaum K, Horos R, Beckmann BM, Strein C, Davey NE, Humphreys DT,
Preiss T, Steinmetz LM, et al. Insights into RNA biology from an atlas of mammalian mRNAbinding proteins. Cell. 2012; 149:1393–1406. [PubMed: 22658674]
Cederquist GY, Luchniak A, Tischfield MA, Peeva M, Song Y, Menezes MP, Chan WM, Andrews C,
Chew S, Jamieson RV, et al. An inherited TUBB2B mutation alters a kinesin-binding site and
causes polymicrogyria, CFEOM and axon dysinnervation. Hum Mol Genet. 2012
Chang L, Shav-Tal Y, Trcek T, Singer RH, Goldman RD. Assembling an intermediate filament
network by dynamic cotranslation. J Cell Biol. 2006; 172:747–758. [PubMed: 16505169]
Chen Y, Tian X, Kim WY, Snider WD. Adenomatous polyposis coli regulates axon arborization and
cytoskeleton organization via its N-terminus. PLoS One. 2011; 6:e24335. [PubMed: 21915313]
Clevers H, Nusse R. Wnt/beta-catenin signaling and disease. Cell. 2012; 149:1192–1205. [PubMed:
22682243]
Condeelis J, Singer RH. How and why does beta-actin mRNA target? Biol Cell. 2005; 97:97–110.
[PubMed: 15601261]
Cui DH, Jiang KD, Jiang SD, Xu YF, Yao H. The tumor suppressor adenomatous polyposis coli gene
is associated with susceptibility to schizophrenia. Mol Psychiatry. 2005; 10:669–677. [PubMed:
15768050]
Darnell RB. RNA protein interaction in neurons. Annu Rev Neurosci. 2013; 36:243–270. [PubMed:
23701460]
Deka J, Herter P, Sprenger-Haussels M, Koosch S, Franz D, Muller KM, Kuhnen C, Hoffmann I,
Muller O. The APC protein binds to A/T rich DNA sequences. Oncogene. 1999; 18:5654–5661.
[PubMed: 10523845]
Dent EW, Gupton SL, Gertler FB. The growth cone cytoskeleton in axon outgrowth and guidance.
Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol. 2011:3.
Dreyfuss G, Kim VN, Kataoka N. Messenger-RNA-binding proteins and the messages they carry. Nat
Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2002; 3:195–205. [PubMed: 11994740]
Dyson HJ. Roles of intrinsic disorder in protein-nucleic acid interactions. Mol Biosyst. 2012; 8:97–
104. [PubMed: 21874205]
Eng H, Lund K, Campenot RB. Synthesis of b-tubulin, actin, and other proteins in axons of
sympathetic neurons in compartmented cultures. J Neurosci. 1999; 19:1–9. [PubMed: 9870932]
Gerdes JM, Katsanis N. Microtubule transport defects in neurological and ciliary disease. Cell Mol
Life Sci. 2005; 62:1556–1570. [PubMed: 15924265]

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 July 17.

Preitner et al.

Page 15

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Gumy LF, Yeo GS, Tung YC, Zivraj KH, Willis D, Coppola G, Lam BY, Twiss JL, Holt CE, Fawcett
JW. Transcriptome analysis of embryonic and adult sensory axons reveals changes in mRNA
repertoire localization. RNA. 2011; 17:85–98. [PubMed: 21098654]
Hall KB. RNA-protein interactions. Curr Opin Struct Biol. 2002; 12:283–288. [PubMed: 12127445]
Hanz S, Perlson E, Willis D, Zheng JQ, Massarwa R, Huerta JJ, Koltzenburg M, Kohler M, vanMinnen J, Twiss JL, et al. Axoplasmic importins enable retrograde injury signaling in lesioned
nerve. Neuron. 2003; 40:1095–1104. [PubMed: 14687545]
Jaglin XH, Poirier K, Saillour Y, Buhler E, Tian G, Bahi-Buisson N, Fallet-Bianco C, Phan-Dinh-Tuy
F, Kong XP, Bomont P, et al. Mutations in the beta-tubulin gene TUBB2B result in asymmetrical
polymicrogyria. Nat Genet. 2009; 41:746–752. [PubMed: 19465910]
Jones KJ, Korb E, Kundel MA, Kochanek AR, Kabraji S, McEvoy M, Shin CY, Wells DG. CPEB1
regulates beta-catenin mRNA translation and cell migration in astrocytes. Glia. 2008; 56:1401–
1413. [PubMed: 18618654]
Jung H, Gkogkas CG, Sonenberg N, Holt CE. Remote control of gene function by local translation.
Cell. 2014; 157:26–40. [PubMed: 24679524]
Kalkman HO. A review of the evidence for the canonical Wnt pathway in autism spectrum disorders.
Mol Autism. 2012; 3:10. [PubMed: 23083465]
Karkare S, Bhatnagar D. Promising nucleic acid analogs and mimics: characteristic features and
applications of PNA, LNA, and morpholino. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol. 2006; 71:575–586.
[PubMed: 16683135]
Kinzler KW, Vogelstein B. Lessons from hereditary colorectal cancer. Cell. 1996; 87:159–170.
[PubMed: 8861899]
Licatalosi DD, Mele A, Fak JJ, Ule J, Kayikci M, Chi SW, Clark TA, Schweitzer AC, Blume JE,
Wang X, et al. HITS-CLIP yields genome-wide insights into brain alternative RNA processing.
Nature. 2008; 456:464–469. [PubMed: 18978773]
Lowery LA, Van Vactor D. The trip of the tip: understanding the growth cone machinery. Nat Rev
Mol Cell Biol. 2009; 10:332–343. [PubMed: 19373241]
Manzini MC, Walsh CA. What disorders of cortical development tell us about the cortex: one plus one
does not always make two. Curr Opin Genet Dev. 2011; 21:333–339. [PubMed: 21288712]
Marin O, Valiente M, Ge X, Tsai LH. Guiding neuronal cell migrations. Cold Spring Harb Perspect
Biol. 2010; 2:a001834. [PubMed: 20182622]
Mili S, Moissoglu K, Macara IG. Genome-wide screen reveals APC-associated RNAs enriched in cell
protrusions. Nature. 2008; 453:115–119. [PubMed: 18451862]
Minde DP, Anvarian Z, Rudiger SG, Maurice MM. Messing up disorder: how do missense mutations
in the tumor suppressor protein APC lead to cancer? Mol Cancer. 2011; 10:101. [PubMed:
21859464]
Myers KA, He Y, Hasaka TP, Baas PW. Microtubule transport in the axon: Re-thinking a potential
role for the actin cytoskeleton. Neuroscientist. 2006; 12:107–118. [PubMed: 16514008]
Nathke I. Cytoskeleton out of the cupboard: colon cancer and cytoskeletal changes induced by loss of
APC. Nat Rev Cancer. 2006; 6:967–974. [PubMed: 17093505]
Okada K, Bartolini F, Deaconescu AM, Moseley JB, Dogic Z, Grigorieff N, Gundersen GG, Goode
BL. Adenomatous polyposis coli protein nucleates actin assembly and synergizes with the formin
mDia1. J Cell Biol. 2010; 189:1087–1096. [PubMed: 20566685]
Pellegrini F, Budman DR. Review: tubulin function, action of antitubulin drugs, and new drug
development. Cancer Invest. 2005; 23:264–273. [PubMed: 15948296]
Qian J, Sarnaik AA, Bonney TM, Keirsey J, Combs KA, Steigerwald K, Acharya S, Behbehani GK,
Barton MC, Lowy AM, et al. The APC tumor suppressor inhibits DNA replication by directly
binding to DNA via its carboxyl terminus. Gastroenterology. 2008; 135:152–162. [PubMed:
18474248]
Romaniello R, Tonelli A, Arrigoni F, Baschirotto C, Triulzi F, Bresolin N, Bassi MT, Borgatti R. A
novel mutation in the beta-tubulin gene TUBB2B associated with complex malformation of
cortical development and deficits in axonal guidance. Dev Med Child Neurol. 2012; 54:765–769.
[PubMed: 22591407]

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 July 17.

Preitner et al.

Page 16

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Salinas PC. Modulation of the microtubule cytoskeleton: a role for a divergent canonical Wnt pathway.
Trends Cell Biol. 2007; 17:333–342. [PubMed: 17643305]
Stiess M, Bradke F. Neuronal polarization: The cytoskeleton leads the way. Developmental
Neurobiology. 2011; 71:430–444. [PubMed: 21557499]
Tcherkezian J, Brittis PA, Thomas F, Roux PP, Flanagan JG. Transmembrane receptor DCC associates
with protein synthesis machinery and regulates translation. Cell. 2010; 141:632–644. [PubMed:
20434207]
Tischfield MA, Engle EC. Distinct alpha- and beta-tubulin isotypes are required for the positioning,
differentiation and survival of neurons: new support for the 'multi-tubulin' hypothesis. Biosci Rep.
2010; 30:319–330. [PubMed: 20406197]
Tompa P. Intrinsically disordered proteins: a 10-year recap. Trends Biochem Sci. 2012
Vuzman D, Levy Y. Intrinsically disordered regions as affinity tuners in protein-DNA interactions.
Mol Biosyst. 2012; 8:47–57. [PubMed: 21918774]
Xing L, Bassell GJ. mRNA Localization: An Orchestration of Assembly, Traffic and Synthesis.
Traffic. 2012
Yasuda K, Zhang H, Loiselle D, Haystead T, Macara IG, Mili S. The RNA-binding protein Fus directs
translation of localized mRNAs in APC-RNP granules. J Cell Biol. 2013; 203:737–746. [PubMed:
24297750]
Yokota Y, Kim WY, Chen Y, Wang X, Stanco A, Komuro Y, Snider W, Anton ES. The adenomatous
polyposis coli protein is an essential regulator of radial glial polarity and construction of the
cerebral cortex. Neuron. 2009; 61:42–56. [PubMed: 19146812]
Zhou FQ, Snider WD. Intracellular control of developmental and regenerative axon growth. Philos
Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci. 2006; 361:1575–1592. [PubMed: 16939976]
Zivraj KH, Tung YC, Piper M, Gumy L, Fawcett JW, Yeo GS, Holt CE. Subcellular profiling reveals
distinct and developmentally regulated repertoire of growth cone mRNAs. J Neurosci. 2010;
30:15464–15478. [PubMed: 21084603]

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 July 17.

Preitner et al.

Page 17

HIGHLIGHTS

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

•

Microtubule +TIP protein APC is an RNA-binding protein

•

HITS-CLIP identifies 260 mRNA targets, which are highly related to APC
functions

•

APC target β2b-tubulin is axonally synthesized and localized to dynamic
microtubules

•

Mechanism required for expanded shape of growth cone and for neuron
migration in vivo

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 July 17.

Preitner et al.

Page 18

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Figure 1. HITS-CLIP identification of RNAs interacting with APC

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

(A) APC HITS-CLIP with E14 mouse brain. Protein-RNA complexes were UV-crosslinked
in native brain tissue, brains were homogenized, RNAs were trimmed to ~40 nt, APC or
control antibodies were used for immunoprecipitation, RNAs were radiolabeled, and RNAprotein complexes were separated by SDS-PAGE and autoradiographed. a–d: RNA-protein
complexes reproducibly pulled down with APC antibodies.
(B) Direct interaction between APC basic domain and RNA (arrow). N2A neuroblastoma
cells were transfected with a plasmid expressesing APC basic domain fused to an HA tag,
followed by UV-crosslinking, lysis, RNA trimming to ~10 nt, immunoprecipitation with HA
antibody, RNA radiolabeling, SDS-PAGE and autoradiography. Negative controls are in
lanes 1, 2 and 4; APC amino acids 800–1300 provides a control region also predicted to be
unstructured (Figure S1B).
(C) Distribution of APC HITS-CLIP sequence reads on representative target genes. Red
vertical bars indicate high-confidence APC binding peaks (see Figure S1D and Experimental
Procedures).β-Catenin gene is shown starting at exon2 . Exons arein orange (5’UTR), green
(protein coding) or blue (3’UTR).
(D) APC binding peaks were predominantly in mRNA 3'UTRs.
(E) Consensus sequence motifs identified within APC binding regions using MEME
software.
See also Figure S1 and Table S1.

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 July 17.

Preitner et al.

Page 19

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Figure 2. APC RNA interactome in cytoskeleton organization and in disease

(A) APC RNA interactome encodes a highly interconnected network of cytoskeleton-related
proteins. All represented proteins are encoded by APC mRNA targets identified here, except
APC itself and icons in gray. Physical interactions are indicated by touching or overlapping
icons, or by blue arrows. Green arrows indicate major regulatory interactions; gray arrows
indicate association with the plasma membrane. Dync1li2 and Dynll2 are shown as a single
dynein icon for simplicity; and Ppp2ca, a subunit of the PP2A complex, as a single PP2A
icon. Cytoskeleton-related mRNAs were identified by database searches and manually
curated for accuracy (Experimental Procedures and Table S2).

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 July 17.

Preitner et al.

Page 20

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

(B) APC target mRNAs encode proteins linked to cancer and neurologic diseases. Upper:
Disease terms and clusters associated with APC targets, identified with the IPA package (see
Experimental Procedures). Lower: APC mRNA targets corresponding to genes that cause
Mendelian disorders in humans.
See also Figure S2, and Tables S1, S2 and S3.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 July 17.

Preitner et al.

Page 21

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Figure 3. APC mRNA targets are functionally related to APC and to one another

Represented here are the top 6 functional clusters of APC targets identified by DAVID
analysis. After automated identification of the top six clusters based on gene ontology terms
of biological processes, the list of genes for each of these clusters was curated for enhanced
accuracy (see Experimental Procedures). Proteins in more than one cluster are crossreferenced with color-coded numbers; those also in the Wnt signaling pathway, marked “w”;
and those also causing Mendelian disorders, black dots.
See also Figure S2, and Tables S1, S4 and S5.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 July 17.

Preitner et al.

Page 22

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Figure 4. APC basic domain binds a sequence in the β2B-tubulin mRNA 3’UTR

(A)β2B -tubulin was selected for further study based on the indicated criteria.
(B) APC HITS-CLIP peak in β2B-tubulin3’UTR is centered on a conserved G-rich motif.
Below the sequence are locations of the RNA probe used for band-shift assay, and the
antisense morpholino and PNA oligomers used in subsequent Figures to block the G-motif.
Asterisk marks difference between rat (morpholino) and mouse (PNA) sequences. Upper
panel is also in Figure 1C.
(C) APC basic domain binds G-rich sequences found within CLIP peaks. Upper: sequences
from the top 3 APC target mRNAs containing the G-rich motif (ranked by height of the peak

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 July 17.

Preitner et al.

Page 23

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

containing the motif). Lower: interactions of APC with these sequences were tested by
band-shift. Recombinant APC-basic domain (50 nM) or control APC region (50 nM and 400
nM) was incubated with radiolabeled RNA oligonucleotides (25 or 26mers; see
Supplemental information), and run on a native polyacrylamide gel. RNA-protein
complexes were observed with probes spanning G-rich motifs from Rad23b, Gpc2, and
Tubb2b, but not with control probes (Ctrl 1 contains binding site for the RNA-binding
protein HuR; Ctrl 2 is a random 26mer).
(D) RNA-binding affinity was determined by incubating the Tubb2b G-rich motif probe, or
control RNA probe, with increasing concentration of APC basic domain.
(E) Binding curve and affinity. Ratio of bound to total (bound plus free) RNA at each
protein concentration was derived from the gels in panel D, and fitted with the Hill equation.
The Hill coefficient was 1.8, potentially consistent with APC binding as a dimer. KD from
repeated experiments was in the 5–15 nM range.
See also Figure S3, and Tables S1 and S6.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 July 17.

Preitner et al.

Page 24

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Figure 5. Axonal synthesis of β2B-tubulin, and localization of translation machinery

(A) β2B-tubulin protein levels in severed axons are reduced by a protein synthesis inhibitor,
or by antisense PNA oligomer to block APC binding to the β2B-tubulin3’UTR . β2B-tubulin
levels were measured by immunofluorescence. E14 mouse whole DRG explants were
cultured for 2 days, then axons were severed and treated as indicated for 3.5 h.
(B)Axonal β2B -tubulin protein levels were reduced when APC levels were knocked down
using shRNAs in dissociated cultures of DRG neurons.
(C) APC and the translation initiation factor eIF4E cluster at microtubule tips and isolated
microtubule fragments (arrows) in axons of dissociated rat DRG neurons. Growth cone
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 July 17.

Preitner et al.

Page 25

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

periphery is shown here, from central domain at bottom to lamellipodial leading edge at top.
Scale bar 2 μm.
(D) Enlargement of boxed area in panel C.
(E) Quantitation of immunolabeling at isolated microtubule fragments in the periphery of
DRG growth cones. Isolated microtubule domains were identified and delineated using an
automated approach (see Experimental Procedures), and nested regions of interest (ROIs)
centered on tubulin were then used to measure the distribution of tubulin, eIF4E and APC
labeling, confirming that these markers cluster together at isolated microtubule fragments.
Control level was average for peripheral domain.
(F) Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) of β2B-tubulin mRNA in the growth cone of
N1E-115 neuronal cell line. Growth cone area is outlined by dashed line. Scale bar 5 μm.
(G) Treatment of N1E-115 cells with the antisense PNA directed against the APC binding
site in the β2B-tubulin3’UTR reduces β2B-tubulin mRNA FISH signal in the distal axon
(boxed in red). Scale bar 5 μm.
(H) Quantitation of the FISH signal in the distal axon, and in the cell body; see panel G.
Left: mouse N1E-115 neuronal cell line treated with PNA mouse antisense oligo. Right: rat
B35 neuronal cell line treated with morpholino rat antisense oligo. n=8–13.
Error bars, SEM; *p<0.05, **p<0.01, ***p<0.001, t-test.
See also Figure S4.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 July 17.

Preitner et al.

Page 26

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Figure 6. Localization and essential role for APC target β2B-tubulin in the growth cone
peripheral domain

(A) Schematic diagram of a growth cone, showing stable microtubules bundled in the
central domain, and dynamic microtubules extending into the peripheral domain.
(B) β2B-tubulin is enriched at the growth cone periphery relative to other tubulin isotypes.
Dissociated rat DRG neurons were immunolabeled for β2B-tubulin and Tuj1 (β3-tubulin).
Scale bar 5 μm.
(C) Left: β2B-tubulin/Tuj1 intensity ratios across the growth cone in B, measured along the
dashed line.Right: β2B -tubulin/Tuj1 intensity ratios averaged over multiple growth cones at
their minimum (center) and maximum (periphery), normalized to 1 at the center. n=8,
**p<0.01.
(D) β2B-tubulin protein distribution overlaps dynamic microtubules. Dissociated rat DRG
neurons were immunolabeled for β2B-tubulin, Tyr-tubulin (dynamic microtubules) and GluCell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 July 17.

Preitner et al.

Page 27

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

tubulin (stable microtubules). Arrows indicate examples of overlap for β2B-tubulin and
dynamic microtubules in the peripheral domain. Scale bar 5 μm.
(E) Growth cone area, and peripheral dynamic microtubules, were reduced by treatment of
dissociated rat DRG neurons with 3’Tubb2bAPC-site morpholino that blocks APC-binding
site in the β2B-tubulin 3'UTR.
(F) Rat DRG neurons treated with control or 3’Tubb2bAPC-site morpholino were coelectroporated with a GFP plasmid to measure growth cone area. n=37–39, *p<0.05.
(G) Mouse DRG neurons were incubated with control or 3’Tubb2bAPC-site antisense PNA
oligomer, and growth cone area was quantified based on actin (phalloidin-rhodamine)
fluorescence. n=55–151, ***p<10−14.
(H) Quantitation of growth cone Glu- or Tyr-tubulin fluorescence signals, obtained as
described in panel E. n=73–88; *p<0.05, ***p<10−7.
Error bars, SEM; p values by t-test.
See also Figure S5.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 July 17.

Preitner et al.

Page 28

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Figure 7. Antisense blockade of APC binding site on the β2B-tubulin mRNA impairs cortical
neuron migration in vivo (A)

Sections of neocortex from rat embryos electroporated as illustrated in (B), and quantitated
in (C). MAP2 immunofluorescence (red) marks the cortical plate. Antisense morpholinos
and a GFP-expressing plasmid were co-injected into the ventricles of E15.5 rat embryos in
utero, and introduced by electroporation into neurons lining the ventricle. At E18.5, most
neurons had reached the upper half of the cortical plate (Upper CP) after treatment with
control morpholino, whereas most neurons remained in deeper layers with the antisense
3’Tubb2bAPC-site morpholino. n=3–4 embryos, *p<0.05; **p<0.02; ***p<0.001. Error bars,
SEM; p values by t-test. CP: cortical plate; IZ: intermediate zone; VZ: ventricular zone.

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 July 17.

Preitner et al.

Page 29

See also Figure S7.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 July 17.

