Oncotarget, Vol, 7, No. 8

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Investigating the specific core genetic-and-epigenetic networks
of cellular mechanisms involved in human aging in peripheral
blood mononuclear cells
Cheng-Wei Li1, Wen-Hsin Wang1 and Bor-Sen Chen1
1

Laboratory of Control and Systems Biology, Department of Electrical Engineering, National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu,
Taiwan

Correspondence to: Bor-Sen Chen, email: bschen@ee.nthu.edu.tw
Keywords: human aging, genetic-and-epigenetic network, anti-ageing drugs, microRNAs, DNA methylation, Gerotarget
Received: December 31, 2015	

Accepted: February 03, 2016	

Published: February 14, 2016

Abstract
Aging is an inevitable part of life for humans, and slowing down the aging
process has become a main focus of human endeavor. Here, we applied a systems
biology approach to construct protein-protein interaction networks, gene regulatory
networks, and epigenetic networks, i.e. genetic and epigenetic networks (GENs), of
elderly individuals and young controls. We then compared these GENs to extract aging
mechanisms using microarray data in peripheral blood mononuclear cells, microRNA
(miRNA) data, and database mining.
The core GENs of elderly individuals and young controls were obtained by
applying principal network projection to GENs based on Principal Component Analysis.
By comparing the core networks, we identified that to overcome the accumulated
mutation of genes in the aging process the transcription factor JUN can be activated
by stress signals, including the MAPK signaling, T-cell receptor signaling, and
neurotrophin signaling pathways through DNA methylation of BTG3, G0S2, and AP2B1
and the regulations of mir-223 let-7d, and mir-130a. We also address the aging
mechanisms in old men and women. Furthermore, we proposed that drugs designed
to target these DNA methylated genes or miRNAs may delay aging. A multiple drug
combination comprising phenylalanine, cholesterol, and palbociclib was finally
designed for delaying the aging process.

Introduction

Several aging-related studies have been conducted
in a variety of animals in the last three decades. For
example, basic research conducted in model organisms,
particularly C. elegans, identified a number of single-gene
mutations that confer increased lifespan phenotypes. In
addition, genome-wide expression studies have revealed
distinct expression profiles associated with aging [3-5].
Jurk et al. demonstrated that chronic, and progressive
low-grade inflammation induced by knockout of the
nfkb1 subunit of the transcription factor NF-κB induces
premature aging in mice [6]. However, this study merely
demonstrates the effect of a single event, which does not
adequately explain the underlying aging mechanisms.
MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are endogenous small
RNAs that regulate gene expression mainly at the
posttranscriptional level, and have gained increasing
attention in the last decade [7, 8]. A single miRNA can
target multiple genes, and multiple miRNAs can also
target the same gene [9]. The miRNAs involved in aging

Complex biological processes such as aging do not
result from an isolated event in a single protein, chemical,
enzyme, or individual cell type. Rather, such processes
occur as the coordinated result of interacting cell types
and tissues, as well as alterations in gene regulation and
expression, signaling pathways, and biological networks.
It is the combined and synergistic effects of the individual
parts that lead to aging [1]. Aging is a complex process
comprising a wide variety of interconnected features and
effects, such as a progressive functional decline, gradual
deterioration of physiological function, and decrease in
fertility and viability. Deterioration of physical health is
the principal factor associated with aging [2]. Although
aging is inevitable, understanding the underlying
molecular mechanisms can help to retard the process. This
is a key goal of aging research, in addition to designing
drug targets to combat the aging process.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

8556

Oncotarget

and lifespan determination have been studied extensively
in the last several years. For instance, Liang et al.
demonstrated up-regulation of miRNA expression with
concomitant inverse down-regulation of target genes with
aging [10]. Additionally, Yang et al. demonstrated in C.
elegans, that a mir-34 mutant led to an extended lifespan
[11]. Understanding how miRNAs associate with agingrelated biological processes and pathways can provide
deeper insight into the mechanisms of aging.
DNA methylation patterns are shaped by two
opposing processes of adding and removing a methyl
group at position five of cytosine in DNA [12]. Ageassociated alterations in DNA methylation are commonly
grouped into a phenomenon known as “epigenetic
drift,” which is characterized by gradual extensive
demethylation of the genome and hypermethylation of
a number of promoter-associated CpG islands [13-15].
Hypermethylation of CpG islands in gene promoters
induces gene silencing and alters gene expression. Aging
induced DNA methylation has been studied extensively in
the last several years. Meaghan et al. found that healthy
human aging occurs throughout the lifetime. The authors
discussed the dynamics of DNA methylation as well as
how the interactions between genomics, the environment,
and epigenomics influence aging rates [16].
Protein-protein interactions (PPIs) are crucial for
signal transduction in biological processes. Therefore,
compiling PPIs provides new insight into protein function
[17-19]. PPIs have revealed global topological and
dynamic features related to well-understood biological
properties [20]. This indicates that studying PPIs will
allow further understanding of disease mechanisms
at a systematic level [21-23]. Wang et al. identified
C. albicans-zebrafish interspecies PPIs and used this
information to highlight the association between C.
albicans pathogenesis and the zebrafish redox process,
indicating that redox status is critical in the battle between
the host and pathogen [24]. Therefore, PPIs can be an
effective way to study the complex biological processes
involved in aging.
Transcription factors (TFs) are the main regulators
of DNA transcription. Thus, knowing the genes that are
targeted by a specific TF is of utmost importance for
understanding developmental processes, the cellular
stress response, or disease etiology [25, 26]. Recently,
Tu and Chen constructed an aging network of TF-gene
interactions in Homo sapiens [27]. This network of
regulator-gene interactions describes potential pathways
that yeast cells can use to regulate global gene expression
programs. Additionally, Tu et al. indicated that the
network robustness and response ability of dynamic gene
regulatory networks (GRN) play a key role in the aging
process [28]. Accordingly, in the current study, PPIs,
GRNs, and miRNA regulation were used to construct
genetic and epigenetic networks (GENs) in order to
understand the molecular mechanisms of human aging.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Principal component analysis (PCA) is a
multivariate technique that analyzes a data table in which
observations are described by several inter-correlated
quantitative dependent variables. The goal is to extract
the most important information from the data table.
PCA is probably the most popular multivariate statistical
technique used in all scientific disciplines. Here, the
principal network projection (PNP) method based on PCA
was utilized to obtain the core GENs for young and old
women and males.
We analyzed the GENs of human aging using a
regression model and big data mining. Based on the PPI
candidate, TF-gene regulation, and miRNA regulation
databases, as well as the gene expression profiles of young
and old peripheral blood mononuclear cell samples, two
GENs with quantitative regulatory abilities for young and
old individuals were constructed. By applying the PNP
method, we obtained the core proteins, TFs, target genes,
and miRNAs for each of the core GENs in young and old
individuals. The intersection of young and old GENs is
called the common core GEN, and the distinction between
young and old GENs is referred to as the specific core
GEN. We garnered insight into the mechanism of human
aging by investigating the specific core GEN of old
individuals. We observed that these specific core proteins,
TFs, target genes, miRNAs, and DNA methylated proteins
are involved in aging-associated cellular mechanisms,
suggesting that drug therapy to delay human aging can
be designed against these targets. In addition, we also
investigated gender differences in human aging based on
specific core GENs as well as information obtained from
the analysis of peripheral blood mononuclear cells.
Overall, this study provides new age-related
molecular drug targets as well as unravels the molecular
mechanisms of gender-specific changes in the human
aging process.
Analysis of the specific core GEN of old individuals
demonstrated that inhibition of three key genes (FLNB,
CDK4, and ZNF274) mitigated the dysregulation of
MAPK, T-cell receptor, and neurotrophin signaling
pathways as well as aberrant cell cycle and apoptosis
regulation. The specific core GEN of old men and
revealed differences in biological regulation during
aging. In women, inhibition of TAOK3 and TRAF6 genes
circumvented dysregulation of the MAPK and Tolllike receptor signaling pathways as well as immune,
proliferative, and metabolic dysfunction. However,
in men, inhibition of STMN1 and LRRFIP2 could not
overcome dysregulation of the MAPK and Wnt signaling
pathways or aberrant cell cycle and apoptosis regulation,
thus resulting in cancer. Based on these findings, we
conclude that the MAPK signaling pathway plays the most
important role in the human aging process.

8557

Oncotarget

Results

miRNAs between young and old core GENs, we identified
one common core GEN and two specific core GENs for
young and old individuals. Similarly, we also acquired one
common core GEN and two specific core GENs for old
women and males. In this section, we further discuss the
molecular mechanisms of these specific core GENs.

Molecular mechanisms of human aging in the
specific core GENs of elderly men and women
This study is focused on investigating the different
molecular mechanisms between young and elderly
individuals as well as gender specific distinctive molecular
mechanisms between old individuals in the human aging
process. Figure 1 summarize the investigation procedure,
and the details are also shown in the Materials and
Methods section. After identifying the parameters in the
PPIN model in (1) and the GRN model in (3) of GENs
(see Materials and Methods), the GENs of young and
elderly individuals were constructed (Figures 2a and 3a),
as well as those for old women and males (Figures 4a
and 5a). Using the PNP of GENs, we obtained four core
GENs for young and old women and men, as shown in
Figures 6a, 6b, 7, and 8, respectively. By intersecting and
distinguishing these core proteins, TFs, target genes and

Functional network and pathway analysis of
proteins in the GENs for young and old men and
women
Based on the GEN of young and elderly individuals
(Figures 2a and 3a), we observed that the number of nodes
and links in the elderly is higher than in the young. This
illustrates that the GEN of the elderly may contain more
pathways. In order to overcome genetic mutations in the
aging process, more genetic and epigenetic regulatory
mechanisms and pathways are developed to maintain
normal cellular functions. This could account for why the
GEN of the elderly is more complex than that of the young
[18, 28]. Similarly, the GEN of old women contained more

Figure 1: Flowchart for constructing the common and specific core GENs for human aging. Microarray data of young and

elderly samples, miRNA data, and miRNA, TF-gene, and BioGRID databases were searched to construct candidate GENs, which consisted
of interactive candidate GRN, PPIN, and miRNA regulation network. False positives of candidate GENs were then pruned for constructing
real GENs of young and old men and women by system modeling and least square estimation. The core GENs were obtained by PNP. The
intersection of young and elderly core GENs is called a common core GEN. The distinction between young and elderly core GENs are
called young and/or elderly specific core GENs. We investigated different molecular mechanisms between the young and elderly by their
specific core GENs. We further investigated the gender-specific aging mechanisms in old women and males.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

8558

Oncotarget

sensing, B cell receptor signaling, ErbB signaling, and
Toll-like receptor signaling pathways. It is possible that
the accumulated genetic mutations led to dysregulation of
these pathways.

nodes and links (Figure 4a) than that of old men (Figure
5a), illustrating that the GEN of old women may contain
more pathways. The GEN of old women is developed
to eliminate the dysfunction of accumulated genetic
mutations in order to maintain normal cellular functions
during the aging process, which reflects the increased
longevity of old women compared with old men.
We investigated the cellular enrichment functions
of these proteins in the GENs of young and old men and
women. Using the website tool DAVID https://david.
ncifcrf.gov/ and gene ontology analysis, we identified
the functional networks of these GENs (Figures 2b, 3b, 4b
and 5b) to illustrate the important functional interactions
of cellular mechanisms in young and old men and women,
respectively. As shown in Figure 2b, the first six enriched
GO terms (biological processes) for GENs of young
individuals are regulation of transcription, regulation
of RNA metabolic process, regulation of apoptosis,
intracellular signaling cascade, regulation of transcription
from RNA polymerase II promoter, and regulation of cell
proliferation. The first six enriched GO terms for GENs
of elderly individuals are regulation of transcription,
regulation of RNA metabolic process, regulation of
apoptosis, intracellular signaling cascade, RNA processing
and regulation of cell proliferation (Figure 3b). Although
the first six important functions are similar between the
cohorts, the number of proteins involved in each function
is higher in the elderly than in the young. Furthermore,
there are more regulatory miRNAs in the GEN of elderly
than in young individuals.
The analysis also demonstrated that the first six
enriched GO terms for GENs of old women and men are
also similar (Figures 4b and 5b). They include regulation
of transcription, regulation of RNA metabolic process,
regulation of apoptosis, intracellular signaling cascade,
RNA processing and regulation of cell proliferation.
Although they share the same biological processes, the
number of proteins involved in each function is higher in
old women than in old men, and there are more regulatory
miRNAs in old women than in old men. In addition, it
has been suggested that the human mutation rate is much
higher in men than in women, and this increases with
paternal age [29, 30]. Accumulation of a large number of
abnormal or mutated cells will lead to cancer, which is an
aging disease. In the GEN of old women, there is more
complexity, which is developed to reduce the dysfunction
of accumulated genetic mutations in the aging process.
This is reflected in the increased longevity of old women.
The bioinformatics database DAVID, which
automatically outputs the results from Kyoto Encyclopedia
of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathway analysis, was
used for the pathway analysis of these proteins. The results
of the pathway analysis on the GEN of the elderly are
summarized in Table 1. The first eight enriched KEGG
pathways are cancer, neurotrophin signaling, MAPK
signaling, NOD-like receptor signaling, cytosolic DNAwww.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Pathway analysis of core proteins and the impact
of miRNAs and DNA methylation on the elder
specific core GEN
For the PNP process, a threshold value is necessary
in order to obtain core proteins, TFs, and their target genes,
as well as core miRNAs of the core GEN. In the GEN of
young individuals, the threshold value th1 for proteins and
TFs in PPI was 4.0, the threshold value th2 for their target
genes in GRN was 0.015, and the threshold value th3 for
miRNAs in epigenetic regulation was 0.01 (Figure S1). In
the GEN of the elderly, the threshold value th1 for proteins
and TFs in PPI was 0.6, the threshold value th2 for their
target genes in GRN was 0.35 and the threshold value th3
for miRNAs in epigenetic regulation was 0.03 (Figure S2).
The PNP based on the assigned thresholds was used
to generate the core GENs of young and old individuals
(Figure 6a and 6b). By intersecting and distinguishing
these core proteins, TFs and target genes, and miRNAs
between the young and core GENs, we identified the
common core GEN between the young and elderly, as
well as the young and elderly specific core GENs (Figure
9). Several genes demonstrated differences in basal levels
(i.e. ki in (3) are different) between young and elderly
individuals. This is mainly due to DNA methylation
of corresponding genes, which could potentially be
developed to eliminate accumulated genetic mutations and
maintain normal cellular functions.
In order to investigate the mechanisms that cause
aging, we analyzed the elderly specific core GEN. The
bioinformatics database, DAVID, was used to examine
the function and related pathways of these core specific
proteins (Table 2). The first six enriched KEGG pathways
are the Toll-like receptor signaling, T cell receptor
signaling, Fc epsilon RI signaling, Neurotrophin signaling,
Wnt signaling, and MAPK signaling pathways. We
considered that these six pathways might play important
roles in the aging process.
In addition, from the identified specific core GEN
of elderly individuals (Figure 9), we observed that there
are several core genes that are inhibited by core miRNAs.
CDK4, APPBP2, ZNF10, CDK13, and AKTIP are
inhibited by let-7d, APPBP2 is inhibited by mir-200a,
KLC1, FLNB, MYBL1, and GCN1L1 are inhibited by
mir-223, FBXW7, ZNF274, and IRF8 are inhibited by
mir-130a, and FUBP1 is inhibited by mir-25. Next, we
therefore investigated the mechanism by which these core
protein-coding genes are regulated by core miRNAs and
the related pathways (Table 3). We observed that CDK4
is involved in the p53 signaling, PI3K-Akt signaling, and
8559

Oncotarget

Table 1: Pathway analysis of proteins in the GEN of elderly individuals
Pathway analysis
KEGG pathway
Numbers
Pathways in cancer
42
Neurotrophin signaling pathway
19
MAPK signaling pathway
32
NOD-like receptor signaling pathway
12
Cytosolic DNA-sensing pathway
10
B cell receptor signaling pathway
12
ErbB signaling pathway
13
Toll-like receptor signaling pathway
14

p-value
1.7E-4
2.4E-3
3.5E-3
3.5E-3
1.4E-2
1.5E-2
1.8E-2
2.4E-2

In the GEN of elderly individuals, the first eight enriched KEGG pathways are pathways in cancer, the Neurotrophin
signaling pathway, MAPK signaling pathway, NOD-like receptor signaling pathway, Cytosolic DNA-sensing pathway, B
cell receptor signaling pathway, ErbB signaling pathway, and Toll-like receptor signaling pathway.

Figure 2: (a) The GEN of young individuals and (b) the associated functional network. (a) The upper left circle represents

the TFs (68), the lower left circle represents the miRNAs (49), and the right circle represents the proteins (1035) for the GEN of young
individuals. Links within the “proteins” circle represent PPIs, links between the “TFs” circle and the “proteins” circle represent regulation
of TFs on target genes, and links between the “miRNAs” circle and the “proteins” circle represent regulation of miRNAs on target genes in
the GEN of young individuals. (b) In the functional network of the GEN of young individuals, the first six enriched GO terms (biological
processes) are regulation of transcription, regulation of RNA metabolic process, regulation of apoptosis, intracellular signaling cascade,
regulation of transcription from RNA polymerase II promoter, and regulation of cell proliferation. The numbers in parentheses represents
the number of proteins involved in each function.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

8560

Oncotarget

Table 2: Pathway analysis of core proteins in the specific core GEN of elderly individuals during the aging process
Pathway analysis
KEGG pathways
Numbers
p-value
Toll-like receptor signaling pathway
5
9.1E-2
T cell receptor signaling pathway
5
1.1E-1
Fc epsilon RI signaling pathway
3
2.0E-1
Neurotrophin signaling pathway
4
3.8E-1
Wnt signaling pathway
4
4.8E-1
MAPK signaling pathway
5
5.5E-1
In the specific core GEN of elderly individuals, the first six enriched KEGG pathways are the Toll-like receptor signaling
pathway, T cell receptor signaling pathway, Fc epsilon RI signaling pathway, Neurotrophin signaling pathway, Wnt
signaling pathway, and MAPK signaling pathway.

Figure 3: a. The GEN of elderly individuals, and b. the associated functional network. a. The upper left circle represents the TFs (127),
the lower left circle represents the miRNAs (93), and the right circle represents the proteins (1481) for the GEN of elderly individuals. Links
within the “proteins” circle represent PPIs, links between the “TFs” circle and the “proteins” circle represent regulation of TFs on target
genes, and links between the “miRNAs” circle and the “proteins” circle represent regulation of miRNAs on target genes in the GEN of
elderly individuals. b. In the functional network of the GEN of elderly individuals, the first six enriched GO terms (biological processes) are
regulation of transcription, regulation of RNA metabolic process, regulation of apoptosis, intracellular signaling cascade, RNA processing,
and regulation of cell proliferation. The numbers in parentheses represent the number of proteins involved in each function.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

8561

Oncotarget

T cell receptor signaling pathways, FLNB is involved in
the MAPK signaling pathway, and ZNF274 is involved in
Neurotrophin signaling pathway.
The results of the pathway analysis demonstrate the
importance of these core miRNAs in the elderly specific
core GEN, as a significant number of mutations in these
pathways often lead to cellular dysfunction. We observed
that there are three core miRNAs, mir-223, let-7d and
mir-130a, that regulate FLNB, CDK4, and ZNF274,
respectively (Figure 10). Those genes are involved in
the MAPK signaling, T cell receptor signaling, and
Neurotrophin signaling pathways, respectively. Because

these three miRNAs and genes only appear in the elderly
specific core GEN, we speculate that they play critical
roles in the aging process.

Pathway analysis of core proteins and the impact
of miRNAs and DNA methylation on the specific
core GEN of old women
As previously mentioned, in the PNP process it is
necessary to select threshold values in order to obtain
core proteins, TFs and their target genes, and core

Figure 4 : a. The GEN of old women and b. the associated functional network. a. The upper left circle represents the TFs (119), the lower

left circle represents the miRNAs (94), and the big right circle represents the proteins (1388) for the GEN of old women. Links within the
“proteins” circle represent PPIs, links between the “TFs” circle and the “proteins” circle represent regulation of TFs on target genes, and
links between the “miRNAs” circle and the “proteins” circle represent regulation of miRNAs on target genes in the GEN of old women. b.
In the functional network of the GEN of old women, the first six enriched GO terms (biological processes) are regulation of transcription,
regulation of RNA metabolic process, regulation of apoptosis, intracellular signaling cascade, RNA processing, and regulation of cell
proliferation. The number in parentheses represents the number of proteins involved in each function.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

8562

Oncotarget

Table 3: Core protein-coding genes regulated by core miRNAs in the specific core GEN of elderly individuals and the
related pathways
MiRNAs
Genes
Pathways
p53 signaling pathway
Let-7d
CDK4
PI3K-Akt signaling pathway
T cell receptor signaling pathway
Mir-223
FLNB
MAPK signaling pathway
Mir-130a
ZNF274
Neurotrophin signaling pathway
In the specific core GEN of elderly individuals, CDK4 is inhibited by let-7d, FLNB is inhibited by mir-223, and ZNF274 is
inhibited by mir-130a. Moreover, CDK4 is involved in the p53 signaling pathway, PI3K-Akt signaling pathway, and T cell
receptor signaling pathway. FLNB is involved in the MAPK signaling pathway, and ZNF274 is involved in Neurotrophin
signaling pathway.

Figure 5 : a. The GEN of old men and b. the associated functional network. a. The upper left circle represents the TFs (100), the lower left
circle represents the miRNAs (52), and the right circle represents the proteins (1163) for the GEN of old men. Links within the “proteins”
circle represent PPIs, links between the “TFs” circle and the “proteins” circle represent regulation of TFs on target genes, and links between
the “miRNAs” circle and the “proteins” circle represent regulation of miRNAs on target genes in the GEN of old men. b. In the functional
network of the GEN of old men, the first six enriched GO terms (biological processes) for are regulation of transcription, regulation of
RNA metabolic process, regulation of apoptosis, intracellular signaling cascade, RNA processing, and regulation of cell proliferation. The
number in parentheses represents the number of proteins involved in each function.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

8563

Oncotarget

Table 4: Pathway analysis of core proteins in the specific core GEN of old women during the aging process
Pathway analysis
KEGG pathways
Numbers
p-value
Toll-like receptor signaling pathway
5
3.8E-2
MAPK signaling pathway
8
4.9E-2
NOD-like receptor signaling pathway
3
1.8E-1
Neurotrophin signaling pathway
4
2.0E-1
In the specific core GEN of old women, the first four enriched KEGG pathways are the Toll-like receptor signaling
pathway, MAPK signaling pathway, NOD-like receptor signaling pathway, and Neurotrophin signaling pathway.

Figure 6 : a. The core GEN of young individuals from Figure 2a, as determined by the PNP method, and b. The core GEN of elderly
individuals from Figure 3a, as determined by the PNP method. The upper left circle represents the TFs (23), the lower left circle represents
the miRNAs (13), and the right circle represents the proteins (155) for the core GEN of young individuals. b. The upper left circle
represents the TFs (40), the lower left circle represents the miRNAs (16), and the right circle represents the proteins (119) for the core GEN
of elderly individuals. Links within the “proteins” circle represent the significant PPIs, links between the “TFs” circle and the “proteins”
circle represent significant regulation of TFs on target genes, and links between the “miRNAs” circle and the “proteins” circle represent
significant regulation of miRNAs on target genes in the core GENs of young and elderly individuals.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

8564

Oncotarget

miRNAs of the core GEN. In the GEN of old women, the
threshold value th1 for proteins and TFs in PPI was 0.5,
the threshold value th2 for their target genes in GRN was
0.4, and the threshold value th3 for miRNAs in epigenetic
regulation was 0.1 (Figure S3). In the GEN of old men,
the threshold value th1 for proteins and TFs in PPI was
0.8, the threshold value th2 for their target genes in GRN
was 0.003, and the threshold value th3 for miRNAs in
epigenetic regulation was 0.003 (Figure S4).
Using the PNP method based on thresholds in
Figure S3 and Figure S4, we obtained the old female and
male core GENs (Figures 7 and 8). By intersecting and
distinguishing these core proteins, TFs and target genes,
and miRNAs between old female and male core GENs,
we identified the common core GEN between old women
and males, the old female specific core GEN (Figure
11), and the old male specific core GEN (Figure 12). We
observed that there were greater differences in the basal
levels of genes (i.e. ki in (3) are different) in the specific
core GEN of old women than in that of old men, which are
mainly due to DNA methylation of corresponding genes.
We speculated that old women probably developed these
methylated genes in an effort to eliminate the dysfunction
of accumulated genetic mutations in the aging process. We
analyzed the old female and male specific core GENs to
determine the distinctive mechanisms between old women
and males that contribute to the gender-specific differences
in the aging process.

The results of the pathway analysis of the specific
core GEN of old women are summarized in Table 4.
The first four enriched KEGG pathways are the Toll-like
receptor, MAPK, NOD-like receptor, and Neurotrophin
signaling pathways. This indicates that these pathways are
critical to the aging process in women.
In addition, we found that there are many core genes
that are inhibited by the core miRNAs (Figure 11). TRAF6
and TAOK3 are inhibited by mir-373, GYK and APPBP2
are inhibited by mir-200a, TRAF6, TAOK3 and ZNF302
are inhibited by mir-141, CBX2 is inhibited by mir-1,
APBB1 is inhibited by mir-148b, POLR3D is inhibited
by mir-374b, NAE1 is inhibited by mir-503, and GTF2I is
inhibited by mir-98.
Next, we investigated the pathways and mechanisms
involved in the regulation of these core protein-coding
genes by core miRNAs. The results are summarized in
Table 5. TRAF6 is involved in the MAPK signaling, NFkappa B signaling, Toll-like receptor signaling, NOD-like
receptor signaling, RIG-I-like receptor signaling, and
Neurotrophin signaling pathways. In addition, TAOK3
is involved in the MAPK signaling pathway, POLR3D
is involved in metabolic and cytosolic DNA-sensing
pathways, and GTF2I is involved in the cGMP-PKG
signaling pathway. Based on these findings, it is possible
that the observed negative regulation of miRNAs were
developed as a protective mechanism to ensure normal
cellular functions.

Figure 7 : The core GEN of old women from Figure 4a, as determined by the PNP method. The upper left circle represents
the TFs (28), the lower left circle represents the miRNAs (17), and the right circle represents the proteins (148) for the core GEN of old
women. Links within the “proteins” circle represent the significant PPIs, links between the “TFs” circle and the “proteins” circle represent
significant regulation of TFs on target genes, and links between the “miRNAs” circle and the “proteins” circle represent significant
regulation of miRNAs on target genes in the core GEN of old women.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

8565

Oncotarget

Figure 8: The core GEN of old men from Figure 5a, as determined by the PNP method. The upper left circle represents
the TFs (31), the lower left circle represents the miRNAs (10), and the right circle represents the proteins (62) for the core GEN of old
men. Links within the “proteins” circle represent the significant PPIs, links between the “TFs” circle and the “proteins” circle represent
significant regulation of TFs on target genes and links between the “miRNAs” circle and the “proteins” circle represent significant regulation
of miRNAs on target genes in the core GEN of old men.

Figure 9 : The specific core GEN of elderly individuals, as determined by the distinction between the core GEN of the
young and elderly. The upper left circle represents the TFs (20), the lower left circle represents the miRNAs (5), and the right circle

represents the proteins (50) for the specific core GEN of elderly individuals. The red nodes represent DNA methylation of genes. Links
within the “proteins” circle represent the significant PPIs, links between the “TFs” circle and the “proteins” circle represent significant
regulation of TFs on target genes, and links between the “miRNAs” circle and the “proteins” circle represent significant regulation of
miRNAs on target genes in the specific core GEN of elderly individuals.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

8566

Oncotarget

Table 5: Core protein-coding genes regulated by core miRNAs in the specific core GEN of old women and the related
pathways
MiRNAs
Genes
Pathways
MAPK signaling pathway
NF-kappa B signaling pathway
Mir-141
Toll-like receptor signaling pathway
TRAF6
Mir-373
NOD-like receptor signaling pathway
RIG-I-like receptor signaling pathway
Neurotrophin signaling pathway
Mir-141
TAOK3
MAPK signaling pathway
Mir-373
Metabolic pathways
Mir-374b
POLR3D
Cytosolic DNA-sensing pathway
Mir-98
GTF2I
cGMP-PKG signaling pathway
In the specific core GEN of old women, TRAF6 and TAOK3 are inhibited by mir-141 and mir-373, POLR3D is inhibited
by mir-374b, and GTF2I is inhibited by mir-98. Moreover, TRAF6 is involved in the MAPK signaling pathway, NF-kappa
B signaling pathway, Toll-like receptor signaling pathway, NOD-like receptor signaling pathway, RIG-I-like receptor
signaling pathway, and Neurotrophin signaling pathway. TAOK3 is involved in the MAPK signaling pathway, POLR3D
is involved in metabolic pathways and the cytosolic DNA-sensing pathway, and GTF2I is involved in the cGMP-PKG
signaling pathway.

Figure 10: The role of miRNA regulation and DNA methylation on the human aging mechanism based on the specific
core GEN of the elderly. During the aging process, FLNB, MAP2K3, CRKL, FOS and JUN play key roles in the MAPK signaling

pathway. In addition, FYN, CDK4, LCK, FOS, and JUN are involved in T-cell receptor signaling pathway, and MAGED1, CRKL, ZNF274
and JUN are involved in neurotrophin signaling pathway. In order to overcome the cellular dysfunction caused by accumulated genetic
mutations during the aging process, the transcription factor JUN can be activated by a wide variety of stress signals, including the MAPK
signaling, T-cell receptor signaling, and neurotrophin signaling pathways. This results in various cellular responses, including cell cycle,
cell communication, apoptosis, cell death, biological regulation, cell transport, and response to stimulus. In this figure, the light blue blocks
represent the proteins involved in the indicated pathways, the dark green node represents the TF the dark blue blocks represent the TFs
target genes, the light green nodes represent the miRNAs, the red nodes represent DNA methylation of genes, the yellow nodes represent
the mutation of genes, arrows represent activation of proteins, and link represents interaction between these two proteins.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

8567

Oncotarget

Table 6: Pathway analysis of core proteins in the specific core GEN of old men during the aging process
Pathway analysis
KEGG pathways
Numbers
p-value
Pathway in cancer
3
3.0E-1
In the specific core GEN of old men, only one KEGG pathway is enriched in the aging process.
Table 7: Core protein-coding genes regulated by core miRNAs in the specific core GEN of old men and the related
pathways
MiRNAs
Genes
Pathways
Mir-210
STMN1
MAPK signaling pathway
Mir-214
LRRFIP2
Wnt signaling pathway
In the specific core GEN of old men, STMN1 is inhibited by mir-210, and LRRFIP2 is inhibited by mir-214. In addition,
STMN1 is involved in the MAPK signaling pathway, and LRRFIP2 is involved in the Wnt signaling pathway.

Discussion

Pathway analyses demonstrated that there are two
core miRNAs, mir-373 and mir-141 (Figure 13). TAOK3
and TRAF6 are inhibited by mir-373, and are involved in
the MAPK signaling pathway. However, TRAF6 is also
inhibited by mir-141, and is also involved in the Toll-like
receptor signaling pathway. Because these two miRNAs
and genes only appear in the old female specific core GEN
it is likely that these two miRNAs, genes, and pathways
play a critical role in the female-specific aging process.

The role of miRNA regulation and DNA
methylation in human aging based on the specific
core GEN of elderly individuals
Aging is a complex process driven by diverse
molecular pathways. Based on analysis of the specific
core GEN of elderly individuals, we demonstrate that
FLNB, MAP2K3, CRKL, FOS and JUN are involved in
the MAPK signaling pathway (Figure 10). This pathway
is activated by diverse extracellular and intracellular
stimuli including peptide growth factors, cytokines,
hormones, and various cellular stressors such as oxidative
and endoplasmic reticulum stress. It has been suggested
that the MAPK pathway regulates a variety of cellular
activities including proliferation, differentiation, survival,
and death. Dysregulation of the MAPK signaling pathway
has been implicated in the development of many human
diseases and aging [31].
In addition, we found that FYN, CDK4, LCK, FOS,
and JUN are involved in the T-cell receptor signaling
pathway. This signaling pathway, in response to antigen
recognition, plays a central role in the adaptive immune
response [32]. T-cell activation by foreign antigens
induces antigen specific T-cell clonal expansion and
differentiation, and this response is regulated by signal
transduction pathways initiated by antigen receptors and
costimulatory molecules [33].
Additionally, MAGED1, CRKL, ZNF274, and JUN
are involved in the neurotrophin signaling pathway. This
pathway is activated by neurotrophins binding to cognate
receptors, which have been shown to regulate almost all
aspects of neuronal development and function, including
precursor proliferation and commitment, cell survival,
axon and dendrite growth, membrane trafficking, synapse
formation and function, as well as glial differentiation and
interactions with neurons [34].
Humans possess the capability to respond to a
variety of external signals through cell surface receptors.

Pathway analysis of core proteins and the impact
of miRNAs and DNA methylation on the specific
core GEN of old men
Using the bioinformatics database, DAVID, we
investigated the molecular pathways related to the core
proteins in the old male specific core GEN (Table 6). It
is noteworthy that only one enriched KEGG pathway is
related to cancer.
In addition, from our specific core GEN of old
men (Figure 12), we observed that there are many core
genes that are inhibited by the core miRNA. For instance,
TUBG1 is inhibited by mir-152, STMN1 is inhibited by
mir-210, LRRFIP2 and UNG are inhibited by mir-214,
GCN1L1 is inhibited by mir-221, RPL37 is inhibited by
mir-381, and PIGN is inhibited by mir-320a and mir-653.
In Table 7, we show the specific pathways that these core
protein-coding genes are involved in. STMN1 is involved
in the MAPK signaling pathway, and LRRFIP2 is involved
in the Wnt signaling pathway.
The results of the pathway analysis indicate no
intersection between the two findings (Figure 13).
Therefore, we can only investigate how these two core
protein-coding genes are regulated by core miRNAs in the
old male specific core GEN and the associated pathways.
We observed that there are two core miRNAs, mir-210 and
mir-214, that regulate STMN1 and LRRFIP2, respectively
which are involved in the MAPK and Wnt signaling
pathways, respectively. These two miRNAs and genes
only appear in the old male specific core GEN indicating
that they are important for the male-specific aging process.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

8568

Oncotarget

Figure 11 : The specific core GEN of old women as determined by the distinction between the core GEN of old women
and men. The upper left circle represents the TFs (11), the lower left circle represents the miRNAs (8) and the right circle represents the

proteins (65) for the specific core GEN of old women. The red nodes represent DNA methylation of genes. Links within the “proteins”
circle represent the significant PPIs, links between the “TFs” circle and the “proteins” circle represent significant regulation of TFs on target
genes and links between the “miRNAs” circle and the “proteins” circle represent significant regulation of miRNAs on target genes in the
specific core GEN of old women.

Figure 12 : The specific core GEN of old men as determined by the distinction between the core GEN of old women
and old men. The upper left circle represents the TFs (12), the lower left circle represents the miRNAs (7), and the right circle represents
the proteins (23) for the specific core GEN of old men. The red nodes represent DNA methylation of genes. Links within the “proteins”
circle represent the significant PPIs, links between the “TFs” circle and the “proteins” circle represent significant regulation of TFs on target
genes and links between the “miRNAs” circle and the “proteins” circle represent significant regulation of miRNAs on target genes in the
specific core GEN of old men.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

8569

Oncotarget

In Figure 10, extracellular and intracellular stimuli
through the MAPK signaling, T-cell receptor signaling,
and neurotrophin signaling pathways lead to activation
of JUN, and result in various cellular responses through
transcriptional regulation of its target genes. The
transcription factor JUN can activate many target genes,
including BTG3 (bij = 0.150252), G0S2 (bij = 0.246038)
and AP2B1 (bij = 0.043467). BTG3 is involved in cell
cycle and cell communication, G0S2 is involved in
apoptosis, cell communication, cell death, biological
regulation and response to stimuli, and AP2B1 is involved
in cell transport.
We speculate that increased genetic and epigenetic
regulatory mechanisms and pathways are developed
during the aging process in order to maintain normal
cellular function and overcome accumulated genetic

mutations. Accumulation of a large number of abnormal
or mutated cells is part of the aging process. Mutation of
CDK4 was found to be associated with a variety of cancers
[35] and mutation of LCK was found to be associated with
immunodeficiency [36]. We observed that expression of
these two genes vary significantly between young and old
individuals (p < 0.05), which supports the above findings.
In addition, we found seven specific genes that
demonstrate differing basal expression levels (i.e. ki in
(3) are different) between young and elderly individuals,
mainly due to DNA methylation. They are FYN, CDK4,
MAGED1, ZNF274, BTG3, G0S2, and AP2B1. Analysis
of the MethHC database (a database of DNA methylation
and gene expression in Human Cancer http://methhc.
mbc.nctu.edu.tw/php/index.php) [37] demonstrated
that DNA methylation of FYN, CDK4, MAGED1,

Figure 13: The role of miRNA regulation and DNA methylation in gender specific aging mechanisms based on the
specific core GEN of old men. During the aging process, ATF4 and STMN1 are involved in the MAPK signaling pathway, and

SMAD4, LEF1, and LRRFIP2 play key roles in the Wnt signaling pathway. Since these genetic and epigenetic regulation observed cannot
overcome the dysfunction due to accumulated genetic mutations during the aging process, the transcription factor ATF4 can be activated
and LEF1 can be inhibited by a wide variety of stress signals, including the MAPK and Wnt signaling pathways. This results in deregulation
of various cellular responses, including cell cycle, apoptosis, metabolism, cell communication, cell transport, biological regulation, and
response to stimulus. In this figure, the light blue blocks represent the proteins involved in the indicated pathways, the deep green nodes
represent the TFs, the deep blue blocks represent the TFs target genes, the light green nodes represent the miRNAs, the red nodes represent
DNA methylation of genes, the yellow nodes represent the mutation of genes, arrows represent activation of proteins, and the link represents
interaction between these two proteins.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

8570

Oncotarget

ZNF274, BTG3, G0S2 and AP2B1 varies significantly
(p < 0.05) between tumor and normal samples, which
support our findings since cancer is an aging disease. In
addition, FLNB is inhibited by mir-223 (cil = -0.21954),
CDK4 is inhibited by miRNA let-7d (cil = -0.50305), and
ZNF274 is inhibited by mir-130a (cil = -0.10597). These
results were observed only in the specific core GEN of
elderly individuals. The differences between the young
and elderly specific core GENs might be responsible for
human aging mechanisms. In addition, it has been reported
that FOS and JUN are aging-related human genes (Figure
10 and GenAge: The Ageing Gene Database http://
genomics.senescence.info/genes/) [38] , which also
support our results.

In order to overcome the accumulated mutation
of genes in the aging process, the transcription factor
JUN can be activated by a wide variety of stress signals
in the aging process, including the MAPK signaling,
T-cell receptor signaling, and neurotrophin signaling
pathways. This results in various cellular responses,
including cell cycle, cell communication, apoptosis, cell
death, biological regulation, cell transport and response
to stimulus. If not, aging is accompanied by a decline
in the function of the immune system, which increases
susceptibility to infections. In addition, dysfunction of the
cell cycle results in a decreased ability of cells to arrest at
key checkpoints and also leads to the survival of abnormal
or mutated cells that would normally die, resulting
in tumorigenesis. Accumulation of a large number of

Figure 14: The role of miRNA regulation and DNA methylation on gender specific aging mechanisms based on the
specific core GEN of old women. In the aging process, DDIT3, MAX, TAOK3, TRAF6, MAP2K3, MAPKAPK2, RPS6KA5,

and FOS are involved in the MAPK signaling pathway and TRAF6, MAP2K3, MYD88, TLR9, and FOS are involved in the Toll-like
receptor signaling pathway. In order to overcome the dysfunction caused by accumulated genetic mutations during the aging process,
the transcription factor FOS and DDIT3 can be activated by a wide variety of stress signals, including the MAPK signaling and Toll-like
receptor signaling pathways. This results in various cellular responses, including immune system activation, cell proliferation, metabolism,
cell communication, cell transport, biological regulation, and response to stimulus. In this figure, the light blue blocks represent the proteins
involved in the indicated pathways, the deep green nodes represent the TFs, the deep blue blocks represent the TFs target genes, the light
green nodes represent the miRNAs, the red nodes represent DNA methylation of genes, the yellow nodes represent the mutation of genes,
arrows represent activation of proteins, and the link represents interaction between these two proteins.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

8571

Oncotarget

between young and old individuals (p < 0.05), which
supports the above results.
In addition, we found that five specific genes,
MAX, TAOK3, MYD88, IL8 and ID2, have varying
basal expression levels (i.e. ki in (3) are different) between
young and old women, which is mainly due to the DNA
methylation of corresponding genes. It has been reported
that DNA methylation and the expression levels of these
five genes vary significantly between tumor and normal
samples (p < 0.05; via MethHC) [37] , supports our
results. In addition, TAOK3 and TRAF6 are inhibited by
mir-141 (cil = -0.2235-TAOK3; cil = -0.36144-TRAF6) and
mir-373 (cil = -0.10454-TAOK3; cil = -0.12645-TRAF6).
Mutations in these genes, inhibition of miRNAs, and DNA
methylation only appear in the specific core GEN of old
women. In addition, it has been reported that DDIT3,
MAX, and FOS are aging-related human genes (Figure
14; GenAge database). Other aging-related genes were not
identified in our analyses.
The transcription factors FOS and DDIT3 can
be activated by a wide variety of stress signals in the
female aging process, including the MAPK signaling
and Toll-like receptor signaling pathways, resulting in
various cellular responses, including immune activation,
cell proliferation, metabolism, cell communication, cell
transport, biological regulation, and response to various
stimuli. If these transcription factors are not activated
during the aging process, the innate immune system
becomes dysregulated, which is characterized by persistent
inflammatory responses that involve multiple immune
and non-immune cell types. This leads to proliferation
of abnormal or mutated cells and the increased incidence
of tumorigenesis. Many tumors accumulate in the body
during aging. In addition, many metabolic pathways
decline with age, and this is a major consequence of the
aging process, which induces susceptibility to a number
of diseases. Therefore, drugs designed to target IL8, ID2,
TRAF6, or TAOK3 may improve the aging process in
women. Finally, a multiple drug combination comprising
adenosine triphosphate, sunitinib, bromodeoxyuridine, and
rivanicline was designed for delaying the aging process in
women based on GeneCards and ZINC databases (Figure
S5).

abnormal or mutated cells leads to aging. Furthermore, a
defective apoptotic processes results in a wide variety of
diseases, such as cancer. In short, aging is characterized by
deterioration in the maintenance of homeostatic processes
over time [18], leading to functional decline and increased
risk for disease and death. Therefore, drugs designed to
target these DNA methylated genes (BTG3, G0S2 and
AP2B1) or genes inhibited by miRNAs, mir-223, let-7d,
and mir-130a (FLNB, CDK4 and ZNF274) may delay
aging. Therefore, according to the databases including
GeneCards database and ZINC database, a multiple drug
combination comprising phenylalanine, cholesterol, and
palbociclib was designed for delaying the aging process
(Figure S5).

The role of miRNA regulation and DNA
methylation on human gender aging mechanisms
based on the specific core GEN of old women
Analysis of gender specific aging mechanisms based
on the specific core GEN of old women demonstrated that
DDIT3, MAX, TAOK3, TRAF6, MAP2K3, MAPKAPK2,
RPS6KA5, and FOS are involved in the MAPK signaling
pathway (Figure 14). The MAPK family plays an
important role in complex cellular programs such as
proliferation, differentiation, development, transformation,
and apoptosis [39].
In addition, TRAF6, MAP2K3, MYD88, TLR9,
and FOS are involved in the Toll-like receptor signaling
pathway. Toll-like receptors (TLRs) play an essential
role in the activation of innate immunity by recognizing
specific patterns of microbial components [40].
Stimulation of different TLRs induces distinct patterns
of gene expression, which not only lead to activation of
innate immunity but also instruct the development of
antigen-specific acquired immunity [41].
Extracellular and intracellular stimuli through the
MAPK signaling and Toll-like receptor signaling pathways
lead to activation of FOS and DDIT3, and result in various
cellular responses through transcriptional regulation of its
target genes (Figure 14). The transcription factor FOS can
activate the IL8 gene (bij = 1.136866). IL8 is involved
in a number of cellular functions of the immune system,
cell proliferation, cell communication, cell transport,
biological regulation, and the response to various stimuli.
In addition, the transcription factor DDIT3 can activate
many target genes, including IL8 (bij = 1.143526) and ID2
( bij = 0.458447). The functions of ID2 include metabolism
and biological regulations.
Accumulation of mutations play a key role in the
aging process, and it was shown that mutation of MAX
is associated with hereditary pheochromocytoma [42],
whereas mutation of MYD88 was found to be associated
with many hematological malignancies [43]. We found
that the expression of these two genes vary significantly
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

The role of miRNA regulation and DNA
methylation in the human aging mechanism based
on the specific core GEN of old men
Analysis of the specific core GEN of old men
revealed that ATF4 and STMN1 are involved in the MAPK
signaling pathway (Figure 13). The MAPK signal pathway
regulates a wide variety of cellular functions in response
to cellular stresses [53]. In addition, SMAD4, LEF1, and
LRRFIP2 are involved in the Wnt signaling pathway.
It has been suggested that the Wnt signaling pathway
8572

Oncotarget

cannot overcome the accumulated genetic mutations in
the aging process, the transcription factors ATF4 can be
activated and LEF1 can be inhibited by a wide variety
of stress signals in the male-specific aging process.
This includes the MAPK signaling and Wnt signaling
pathways, which result in dysregulation of various cellular
responses, including cell cycle, apoptosis, metabolism, cell
communication, cell transport, biological regulation, and
the response to various stimuli. Furthermore, apoptosis
enables an organism to eliminate unwanted and defective
cells through an orderly process of cellular disintegration.
Improper regulation of apoptosis contributes to disorders
such as cancer, viral infection, and autoimmune diseases.
Moreover, the cell cycle represents a series of events
responsible for cell duplication. Dysregulation of the
cell cycle leads cancer development. Medical statistics
indicate that men are more likely than women to get
cancer. This may explain why men have a lower average
life expectancy compared to women. Therefore, designing
drugs to the DNA methylated genes, CTCF, CD27 and
CCR7, or the genes inhibited by miRNAs, mir-210 and
mir-214, STMN1 and LRRFIP2, may improve the malespecific aging process. Furthermore, a multiple drug
combination comprising vinblastine, paclitaxel, and map4
was designed for delaying the male-specific aging process
based on GeneCards and ZINC databases (Figure S5).

has important functions in stem cell biology, cardiac
development and differentiation, angiogenesis, cardiac
hypertrophy, cardiac failure, and aging [45]. Aberrant Wnt
signaling underlies a wide range of pathologies in humans
[46].
We show that extracellular and intracellular
stimuli through the MAPK signaling and Wnt signaling
pathways lead to activation of ATF4 and inhibition of
LEF1, resulting in various cellular responses through
transcriptional regulation of target genes (Figure 13).
The transcription factor ATF4 can inhibit the CTCF gene
(bij= -0.57079), which plays critical roles in metabolism
and biological regulation. In addition, the transcription
factor LEF1 can activate many target genes, including
ABLIM1 (bij= 0.659135), CCR7 (bij = 0.833707), CD27
(bij= 0.850484), and PKIA (bij = 0.485246). ABLIM1 is
important for cell transport, CCR7 is involved in cell cycle
and cell communication, CD27 plays a role in apoptosis,
cell communication, biological regulation, and response to
stimulus, and PKIA is necessary for biological regulation.
As previously mentioned, accumulation of genetic
mutations is highly correlated with the aging process,
and it has been shown that mutation of SMAD4 is
associated with pancreatic cancer [47], juvenile polyposis
syndrome [48] , and hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia
syndrome [49]. Moreover, mutation of LEF1 was found
to be associated with somatic sebaceous tumors [50] ,
whereas mutation of CTCF is associated with invasive
breast cancers [51] , prostate cancers [52] , and Wilms’
tumors [52]. Mutation of CD27 is associated with
lymphoproliferative syndrome 2 [53]. Interestingly, the
expression levels of these four genes differ significantly
(p < 0.05) between young and old men in our data, which
supports the above findings.
In addition, we found that three specific genes have
differing basal level expression (i.e. ki in (3) are different)
between young and old men, which is mainly due to DNA
methylation of corresponding genes. These genes are
SMAD4, LEF1, and CCR7. It has been reported that DNA
methylation of SMAD4, LEF1, and CCR7 demonstrate
varying expression levels (p < 0.05) between tumor and
normal samples (MethHC database) [37] , which support
our results. Additionally, STMN1 is inhibited by mir-210
(cil = -0.25071) and LRRFIP2 is inhibited by the mir214 (cil = -0.48908). These genetic mutations, miRNA
inhibitions, and DNA methylation of genes only appear in
the old male specific core GEN. These differences might
account for the aging mechanisms in old men. It has
been suggested that the mutation rate is much higher in
men than in women, and increases with age. The specific
core GEN of old men is less developed to eliminate
dysfunctions due to accumulated genetic mutations in
the aging process compared to old women, which reflects
the shorter life span of old men. It has been reported that
CD27 is an aging-related human gene (GenAge).
Since these genetic and epigenetic regulations
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

The overall mechanism of human aging
Aging is characterized by a general decline in
cellular function, which ultimately affects homeostasis of
the entire body [18]. Aging is an inevitable part of life
and comes with all sorts of physical and mental ailments,
including common metabolism, inflammation, immune
decline, and cancer [54]. Extracellular and intracellular
activation of various pathways, such as the MAPK
signaling, T-cell receptor signaling, neurotrophin signaling,
Toll-like receptor signaling, and Wnt signaling pathways
lead to various cellular responses. Genetic mutations lead
to dysregulation of pathways and dysfunction of various
cellular responses necessary during the aging process.
In order to overcome these dysfunctions, genetic and
epigenetic regulation is enhanced to maintain normal
cellular functions. In addition, it has been suggested that
the human mutation rate is much higher in men than in
women and increases with paternal age. Accumulation of
a large number of abnormal or mutated cells will lead to
cancer, which is an aging disease. For old women, GEN
is more developed than that of old men, which reflects the
increased longevity of old women.

Conclusions
In this study, to investigate human aging
mechanisms from peripheral blood mononuclear cells, the
8573

Oncotarget

GENs of young and old men and women were constructed
based on their corresponding microarray data, miRNA
data, methylation data, and database mining via the least
squares parameter estimation method, AIC order detection
model, and the Student’s t-test. The core GENs were
obtained using the PNP method based on PCA. However,
the common core and specific core GENs were acquired
using the intersection and distinction of core proteins,
TFs, target genes, and miRNAs in core GENs between the
young and elderly, and between old women and males. We
found that in the specific core GEN of elderly individuals,
FLNB, CDK4, and ZNF274 are inhibited by mir-223,
let-7d, and mir-130a, respectively, and DNA methylation
of FYN, CDK4, MAGED1 and ZNF274 in order to
overcome dysregulation of the MAPK signaling, T-cell
receptor signaling, and neurotrophin signaling pathways,
as well as deregulated cell cycle and apoptosis processes.
The specific core GEN of old women demonstrated that
TAOK3 and TRAF6 are inhibited by mir-141 and mir-373,
respectively, and DNA methylation of MAX, TAOK3, and
MYD88 in order to overcome dysregulation of the MAPK
signaling and Toll-like receptor signaling pathways as well
as dysfunctions of the immune system, proliferation, and
metabolism. The specific core GEN of old men showed
that STMN1 and LRRFIP2 are inhibited by mir-210 and
mir-214, respectively, and DNA methylation of SMAD4
and LEF1, which may lead to dysregulation of the
MAPK signaling and Wnt signaling pathways as well as
deregulation of the cell cycle and apoptosis, thus resulting
in cancer. The results obtained from the present study
provides a platform for useful medical therapy to facilitate
the development of new anti-aging drugs.

based on their specific core GENs as well as data obtained
from analyzing peripheral blood mononuclear cells from
the respective individuals.

Data selection and preprocessing
Microarray datasets were obtained from the NCBI
Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO). A study by Marttila
et al. demonstrated gender-specific changes during aging
of the human immune system based on transcriptomic
analysis of peripheral blood mononuclear cells derived
from elderly individuals and young controls [56]. The
use of peripheral blood mononuclear cells may provide a
useful tool to study human aging [57, 58]. Using the GEO,
we obtained the data from this study for young and elderly
individuals (GSE65219) [56]. The sample numbers for the
young (19-30 years of age) and elderly (90-99 years of
age) groups were 30 and 146, respectively. In addition,
103 and 43 of the 146 samples were old women and
males, respectively.
The PPI candidate dataset for Homo sapiens was
obtained from the Biological General Repository for
Interaction Database (BioGRID, downloaded in March
2015). BioGRID is a freely accessible database of physical
and genetic interactions available at http://www.
thebiogrid.org [59]. More than 700,000 interactions are
available from major model organism species and from
more than 50,000 publications.
A TF-gene regulation dataset is available at The
Human Transcriptional Regulation Interactions database
(HTRIdb) [60] and Integrated Transcription Factor
Platform (ITFP) [61]. HTRIdb has been populated with
284 TFs totaling 51871 regulations. In addition, ITFP has
been populated with 4015 TFs and 69496 regulations.
The miRNA regulation dataset was collected
from starBase v2.0 http://starbase.sysu.edu.cn/ and
mirTarBase http://mirtarbase.mbc.nctu.edu.tw/.
The miRTarBase database provides the most current and
comprehensive information of experimentally validated
miRNA-target interactions [62]. All the above large
databases were used as candidates for identifying GENs
of young and old male and female samples.

Materials and Methods
Overview of the construction of common and
specific core GENs of human aging
Figure 1 shows an outline of the process for
constructing the common and specific core GENs of
human aging. Microarray data of young and old samples,
miRNA data from peripheral blood mononuclear cells, as
well as the miRNA, methylation, TF-gene, and BioGRID
databases were searched in order to construct candidate
GENs. These GENs consisted of interactive candidate
GRN, PPI, and miRNA regulation networks. In order
to avoid false positives, we applied system modeling
and least square estimation [55]. The core GENs for
young and old men and women were obtained by PNP.
The intersection of young and old core GENs is called
a common core GEN, whereas the distinction between
young and old core GENs is referred to as the young and/
or old specific core GENs. We investigated the genderspecific aging mechanisms in young and old individuals
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Selection of a protein pool and construction of
the candidate GENs for young and old men and
women
In order to construct the candidate GENs, which
are integrated through gene expression with microarray
data for young and elderly samples, miRNA data, and
the miRNA, TF-gene, and BioGRID databases were used
based on the following two steps to select the protein
pool. First, gene expression values were overlaid onto
the corresponding proteins. Then, a one-way analysis of
8574

Oncotarget

variance (ANO VA) was performed to select differentially
expressed proteins (p < 0.05). The null hypothesis (H0)
assumes that the average protein expression levels of
young and elderly samples are the same. Proteins with
p-values < 0.05 were selected for the protein pool to
construct the candidate GENs containing candidate GRN,
PPIN, and the miRNA regulatory network. A total of
2306 differentially expressed proteins between young
and elderly samples were selected as candidate GENs.
Therefore, the candidate network consisted of 4581 PPIs,
and 4400 TFs and 53099 miRNAs regulations.

expression level of the jth TF binding to the target gene
i for sample n, bij indicates the regulatory ability of the
jth TF binding to the ith target gene, miri(n) represents the
expression level of the lth miRNA interacting with target
gene i for sample n, cil denotes the regulatory ability of
the lth miRNA to the ith target gene, Ni and Oi indicate the
number of TFs and miRNAs binding to target gene i in
the candidate GRN, respectively, ki is the basal expression
level of the ith gene, and wi(n) characterizes the stochastic
noise of gene i for sample n. The model demonstrates that
target gene i is affected by Ni TFs, Oi miRNAs, the basal
expression level, and stochastic noise. Expression of the
ith gene in (3) can be represented by following regression
form:

The regression model of the GENs for young and
old men and women
A candidate GEN contains false positive interactions
and regulations because miRNA, TF-gene, and BioGRID
databases include all experimental conditions and
various experimental environments. The false positives
of a candidate GEN should therefore be pruned by using
real microarray and miRNA data through the system
identification and system order detection method. Two
regression models, the protein association model and
gene regulatory model, are used to characterize the GEN
in cells.
The PPIs of the protein i in the candidate PPIN can
be described by the following protein association model:

Note that Φi(n) in (2) and ϕi(n) in (4) denote the
regression vector, which can be obtained from microarray
and miRNA expression data. In addition, Θi in (2) and θi
in (4) represent the regulatory parameter vector of the ith
target gene to be estimated by the least squares parameter
estimation method through the real expression of genes
and miRNAs.

, for i=1, 2, ..., N (1)
where yi(n) represents the mRNA expression level
of the protein i for the sample n, yj(n) denotes the mRNA
expression level of the jth protein interacting with protein
i for the sample n, aij represents the association ability
between protein i and its interactive protein j, Ni indicates
the number of proteins interacting with protein i in the
candidate PPIN, hi is the basal expression level of protein
i, and vi(n) characterizes the stochastic noise of the ith
protein for sample n. The model demonstrates that protein
i is affected by Ni proteins, the basal expression level, and
stochastic noise. The PPI association equation of protein
i in (1) can be represented by following regression form:

Construction of GENs of human aging using the
system identification and system order detection
methods
After constructing the regression models of the
PPIN and GRN in GENs, we identified the association
ability parameters aij in (1), the TF regulatory ability
parameters bij, and the miRNA regulatory ability cil in (3)
using the least squares parameter estimation method with
microarray and miRNA data. All proteins in the candidate
PPIN and genes in the candidate GRN were identified
one protein/gene by one protein/gene. Next, the Akaike
information criterion (AIC) [55] and Student’s t-test
[63] were used for determining regression model orders
(i.e. Ni and Oi) and pruning false positive PPIs (i.e. aij
) as well as TF and miRNA regulations (i.e. bij and cil,
respectively) out of the system model order. Specifically,
the insignificant parameters, aij, bij, and cil, out of the
regression model order were deleted from candidate GENs
to obtain the real GENs.
Finally, the GENs of young and elderly individuals
were constructed (Figures 2a and 3a), as well as those for
old women and males (Figures 4a and 5a). The functional
networks of these GENs (Figures 2b, 3b, 4b, and 5b) were
used to illustrate the important functional interactions of

(2)
In addition, the TF and miRNA regulation of the
target gene i can be described using the following gene
regulatory model:
(3)
where xi(n) represents the mRNA expression level
of target gene i for sample n, yi(n) denotes the mRNA
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

8575

Oncotarget

the cellular mechanisms in young and old women and
males, respectively. However, further analysis is required
to fully understand these GENs. Therefore, we used the
PNP method based on PCA to obtain the core GEN from
the corresponding GEN.

as follows:

(7)
We further defined the 2-norm distance from each
gene, protein, and miRNA in GEN to the top M singular
vectors as:
(8)
If D(k) is close to zero, it implies that the kth gene,
protein, and miRNA is independent of the top M singular
vectors. Thus, we determine three thresholds, th1, th2,
and th3 as shown in Figures S1 and S2 for young and
elderly individuals, to respectively identify the core genes,
D(k)≥th1 for k = 1,…,N, the core proteins, D(k)≥th2 for
k = N+1,…,2N, and the core miRNAs D(k)≥th3 for k =
2N+1,…,2N+O. These were used to obtain the core GENs
as shown in Figures 6a and 6b, which have the principal
network structures of the GENs for young and elderly
individuals, respectively.
Using the PNP method based on PCA, we obtained
the core genes, proteins, miRNAs and their corresponding
interactions and regulatory abilities in core GENs for
young and elderly individuals. Comparing these core
GENs of young and elderly individuals, part of the
intersection is called the common core GEN and part of
the distinction sets are called the specific core GENs.
In the following section, we further explore the aging
mechanisms by investigating the common core GEN
and specific core GENs of elderly individuals and young
controls.

Constructing core GENs using the PNP method
After using the AIC order detection model and
Student’s t-test to prune candidate GENs to obtain the real
GENs of human aging (p < 0.05), we then obtained the
PPIN matrix A and GRN matrix B as follows:

where some aij, bij, and cil, remained while others
pruned using the AIC system order detection method
in the previous section were padded with zero. We then
combined A and B as network matrix H of GENs as
follows:

Acknowledgments
The work was supported by the Ministry of Science
and Technology of Taiwan under grant No. MOST 1042221-E-007 -124 -MY3.

PCA is based on the following singular value
decomposition,
H = U × D × VT (5)
N ×N
(2 N + O )× N
where U ∈ℜ
, V ∈ℜ , and hk denote the kth
row vectors of H for k = 1,…,(2N+O) i.e. H = [h1, …, hk ,
…, h2N+O], and the m column vectors of V are denoted as
vm, for m = 1,…,N, which are defined as the right-singular
vectors of H. The diagonal entries of the diagonal matrix,
D = diag (d1, …, dm , …, dN), are the N singular values of
H in descending order i.e. d1≥ dm ≥dN. Note that, diag (d1,
d2) denotes the diagonal matrix of d1 and d2, such that diag

Conflicts of Interest
The authors declare that there is no conflict of
interests regarding the publication of this paper.

References
1.	 Poland GA, Ovsyannikova IG, Kennedy RB, Lambert ND
and Kirkland JL. A systems biology approach to the effect
of aging, immunosenescence and vaccine response. Curr
Opin Immunol. 2014; 29:62-68.

 d1 0 


(d1, d2) =  0 d 2  . The Eigen expression fraction (Em) is

defined as

M

2.	 Jonker MJ, Melis JP, Kuiper RV, van der Hoeven TV,
Wackers PF, Robinson J, van der Horst GT, Dolle ME,
Vijg J, Breit TM, Hoeijmakers JH and van Steeg H. Life
spanning murine gene expression profiles in relation to
chronological and pathological aging in multiple organs.
Aging Cell. 2013; 12(5):901-909.

(6)
We selected the top M singular vectors vm of V such

∑E

≥ 0.85

that
with the minimal M, so that the M principal
components contain 85% of the GEN from an energy
point of view. The projections of H to the top M singular
vectors vm of V, or the similarities, are defined respectively
m =1

m

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

3.	

8576

Lund J, Tedesco P, Duke K, Wang J, Kim SK and Johnson
TE. Transcriptional profile of aging in C. elegans. Curr
Biol. 2002; 12(18):1566-1573.
Oncotarget

4.	 McCarroll SA, Murphy CT, Zou S, Pletcher SD, Chin CS,
Jan YN, Kenyon C, Bargmann CI and Li H. Comparing
genomic expression patterns across species identifies shared
transcriptional profile in aging. Nat Genet. 2004; 36(2):197204.
5.	

Cell. 2005; 122(6):957-968.
18.	 Chen BS and Li CW. Measuring information flow in
cellular networks by the systems biology method through
microarray data. Frontiers in Plant Science. 2015; 6.
19.	 Li CW and Chen BS. Identifying Functional Mechanisms
of Gene and Protein Regulatory Networks in Response to a
Broader Range of Environmental Stresses. Comparative and
Functional Genomics. 2010.

Zahn JM, Sonu R, Vogel H, Crane E, Mazan-Mamczarz K,
Rabkin R, Davis RW, Becker KG, Owen AB and Kim SK.
Transcriptional profiling of aging in human muscle reveals
a common aging signature. PLoS Genet. 2006; 2(7):e115.

20.	 Przytycka TM and Kim YA. Network integration meets
network dynamics. Bmc Biology. 2010; 8.

6.	 Jurk D, Wilson C, Passos JF, Oakley F, Correia-Melo C,
Greaves L, Saretzki G, Fox C, Lawless C, Anderson R,
Hewitt G, Pender SL, Fullard N, Nelson G, Mann J, van
de Sluis B, et al. Chronic inflammation induces telomere
dysfunction and accelerates ageing in mice. Nat Commun.
2014; 2:4172.

21.	 Rual JF, Venkatesan K, Hao T, Hirozane-Kishikawa T,
Dricot A, Li N, Berriz GF, Gibbons FD, Dreze M, AyiviGuedehoussou N, Klitgord N, Simon C, Boxem M, Milstein
S, Rosenberg J, Goldberg DS, et al. Towards a proteomescale map of the human protein-protein interaction network.
Nature. 2005; 437(7062):1173-1178.

7.	 Kim JY, Park YK, Lee KP, Lee SM, Kang TW, Kim HJ,
Dho SH, Kim SY and Kwon KS. Genome-wide profiling
of the microRNA-mRNA regulatory network in skeletal
muscle with aging. Aging (Albany, NY). 2014; 6(7):524544.

22.	 Chen BS, Tsai KW and Li CW. Using Nonlinear Stochastic
Evolutionary Game Strategy to Model an Evolutionary
Biological Network of Organ Carcinogenesis Under a
Natural Selection Scheme. Evolutionary Bioinformatics.
2015; 11:155-178.

8.	 Inukai S and Slack F. MicroRNAs and the genetic network
in aging. J Mol Biol. 2013; 425(19):3601-3608.

23.	 Chen BS, Wong SW and Li CW. On the Calculation
of System Entropy in Nonlinear Stochastic Biological
Networks. Entropy. 2015; 17(10):6801-6833.

9.	 Krek A, Grun D, Poy MN, Wolf R, Rosenberg L, Epstein
EJ, MacMenamin P, da Piedade I, Gunsalus KC, Stoffel
M and Rajewsky N. Combinatorial microRNA target
predictions. Nat Genet. 2005; 37(5):495-500.

24.	 Wang YC, Lin C, Chuang MT, Hsieh WP, Lan CY, Chuang
YJ and Chen BS. Interspecies protein-protein interaction
network construction for characterization of host-pathogen
interactions: a Candida albicans-zebrafish interaction study.
BMC Syst Biol. 2013; 7:79.

10.	 Liang R, Bates DJ and Wang E. Epigenetic Control of
MicroRNA Expression and Aging. Curr Genomics. 2009;
10(3):184-193.
11.	 Yang J, Chen D, He Y, Melendez A, Feng Z, Hong Q, Bai
X, Li Q, Cai G, Wang J and Chen X. MiR-34 modulates
Caenorhabditis elegans lifespan via repressing the
autophagy gene atg9. Age (Dordr). 2013; 35(1):11-22.

25.	 Sikora-Wohlfeld W, Ackermann M, Christodoulou EG,
Singaravelu K and Beyer A. Assessing computational
methods for transcription factor target gene identification
based on ChIP-seq data. PLoS Comput Biol. 2013;
9(11):e1003342.

12.	 Jung M and Pfeifer GP. Aging and DNA methylation. BMC
biology. 2015; 13:7.

26.	 Chen BS and Li CW. On the Interplay between Entropy and
Robustness of Gene Regulatory Networks. Entropy. 2010;
12(5):1071-1101.

13.	 Zampieri M, Ciccarone F, Calabrese R, Franceschi
C, Burkle A and Caiafa P. Reconfiguration of DNA
methylation in aging. Mechanisms of ageing and
development. 2015.

27.	 Tu CT and Chen BS. New Measurement Methods of
Network Robustness and Response Ability via Microarray
Data. Plos One. 2013; 8(1).

14.	 Horvath S, Pirazzini C, Bacalini MG, Gentilini D, Di Blasio
AM, Delledonne M, Mari D, Arosio B, Monti D, Passarino
G, De Rango F, D’Aquila P, Giuliani C, Marasco E, Collino
S, Descombes P, et al. Decreased epigenetic age of PBMCs
from Italian semi-supercentenarians and their offspring.
Aging (Albany NY). 2015; 7(12):1159-1170.

28.	 Tu CT and Chen BS. On the increase in network robustness
and decrease in network response ability during the aging
process: a systems biology approach via microarray
data. IEEE/ACM Trans Comput Biol Bioinform. 2013;
10(2):468-480.

15.	 Teschendorff AE. Epigenetic aging: insights from network
biology. Aging (Albany NY). 2013; 5(10):719-720.

29.	 Crow JF. The high spontaneous mutation rate: is it a health
risk? Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of
the United States of America. 1997; 94(16):8380-8386.

16.	 Jones MJ, Goodman SJ and Kobor MS. DNA methylation
and healthy human aging. Aging cell. 2015.

30.	 Thomas GH. High male:female ratio of germ-line
mutations: an alternative explanation for postulated
gestational lethality in males in X-linked dominant
disorders. American journal of human genetics. 1996;
58(6):1364-1368.

17.	 Stelzl U, Worm U, Lalowski M, Haenig C, Brembeck
FH, Goehler H, Stroedicke M, Zenkner M, Schoenherr A,
Koeppen S, Timm J, Mintzlaff S, Abraham C, Bock N,
Kietzmann S, Goedde A, et al. A human protein-protein
interaction network: a resource for annotating the proteome.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

31.	 Kim EK and Choi EJ. Pathological roles of MAPK signaling
8577

Oncotarget

pathways in human diseases. Biochimica et biophysica acta.
2010; 1802(4):396-405.

Eshleman JR, Goggins M, Jaffee EM, Iacobuzio-Donahue
CA, Maitra A, Cameron JL, Olino K, et al. SMAD4 gene
mutations are associated with poor prognosis in pancreatic
cancer. Clinical cancer research. 2009; 15(14):4674-4679.

32.	 Huse M. The T-cell-receptor signaling network. Journal of
cell science. 2009; 122(Pt 9):1269-1273.

48.	 Houlston R, Bevan S, Williams A, Young J, Dunlop
M, Rozen P, Eng C, Markie D, Woodford-Richens K,
Rodriguez-Bigas MA, Leggett B, Neale K, Phillips R,
Sheridan E, Hodgson S, Iwama T, et al. Mutations in DPC4
(SMAD4) cause juvenile polyposis syndrome, but only
account for a minority of cases. Human molecular genetics.
1998; 7(12):1907-1912.

33.	 Cantrell DA. T-cell antigen receptor signal transduction.
Immunology. 2002; 105(4):369-374.
34.	 Reichardt LF. Neurotrophin-regulated signalling pathways.
Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci. 2006; 361(1473):15451564.
35.	 Rane SG, Cosenza SC, Mettus RV and Reddy EP. Germ
line transmission of the Cdk4(R24C) mutation facilitates
tumorigenesis and escape from cellular senescence.
Molecular and cellular biology. 2002; 22(2):644-656.

49.	 Iyer NK, Burke CA, Leach BH and Parambil JG. SMAD4
mutation and the combined syndrome of juvenile polyposis
syndrome and hereditary haemorrhagic telangiectasia.
Thorax. 2010; 65(8):745-746.

36.	 Hauck F, Randriamampita C, Martin E, Gerart S, Lambert
N, Lim A, Soulier J, Maciorowski Z, Touzot F, Moshous D,
Quartier P, Heritier S, Blanche S, Rieux-Laucat F, Brousse
N, Callebaut I, et al. Primary T-cell immunodeficiency with
immunodysregulation caused by autosomal recessive LCK
deficiency. The Journal of allergy and clinical immunology.
2012; 130(5):1144-1152 e1111.

50.	 Takeda H, Lyle S, Lazar AJ, Zouboulis CC, Smyth I and
Watt FM. Human sebaceous tumors harbor inactivating
mutations in LEF1. Nature medicine. 2006; 12(4):395-397.
51.	 Aulmann S, Blaker H, Penzel R, Rieker RJ, Otto HF and
Sinn HP. CTCF gene mutations in invasive ductal breast
cancer. Breast cancer research and treatment. 2003;
80(3):347-352.

37.	 Huang WY, Hsu SD, Huang HY, Sun YM, Chou CH,
Weng SL and Huang HD. MethHC: a database of DNA
methylation and gene expression in human cancer. Nucleic
acids research. 2015; 43(Database issue):D856-861.

52.	 Filippova GN, Qi CF, Ulmer JE, Moore JM, Ward MD,
Hu YJ, Loukinov DI, Pugacheva EM, Klenova EM,
Grundy PE, Feinberg AP, Cleton-Jansen AM, Moerland
EW, Cornelisse CJ, Suzuki H, Komiya A, et al. Tumorassociated zinc finger mutations in the CTCF transcription
factor selectively alter tts DNA-binding specificity. Cancer
research. 2002; 62(1):48-52.

38.	 de Magalhaes JP and Toussaint O. GenAge: a genomic and
proteomic network map of human ageing. FEBS letters.
2004; 571(1-3):243-247.
39.	 Zhang W and Liu HT. MAPK signal pathways in the
regulation of cell proliferation in mammalian cells. Cell
research. 2002; 12(1):9-18.

53.	 Salzer E, Daschkey S, Choo S, Gombert M, Santos-Valente
E, Ginzel S, Schwendinger M, Haas OA, Fritsch G, Pickl
WF, Forster-Waldl E, Borkhardt A, Boztug K, Bienemann
K and Seidel MG. Combined immunodeficiency with lifethreatening EBV-associated lymphoproliferative disorder
in patients lacking functional CD27. Haematologica. 2013;
98(3):473-478.

40.	 Takeda K and Akira S. TLR signaling pathways. Seminars
in immunology. 2004; 16(1):3-9.
41.	 Akira S and Takeda K. Toll-like receptor signalling. Nature
reviews Immunology. 2004; 4(7):499-511.
42.	 Burnichon N, Cascon A, Schiavi F, Morales NP, CominoMendez I, Abermil N, Inglada-Perez L, de Cubas AA,
Amar L, Barontini M, de Quiros SB, Bertherat J, Bignon
YJ, Blok MJ, Bobisse S, Borrego S, et al. MAX mutations
cause hereditary and sporadic pheochromocytoma
and paraganglioma. Clinical cancer research. 2012;
18(10):2828-2837.

54.	 Houtkooper RH, Argmann C, Houten SM, Canto C, Jeninga
EH, Andreux PA, Thomas C, Doenlen R, Schoonjans K
and Auwerx J. The metabolic footprint of aging in mice.
Scientific reports. 2011; 1:134.
55.	 Johansson R. (1993). System modeling and identification.
(Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall).

43.	 Je EM, Kim SS, Yoo NJ and Lee SH. Mutational and
expressional analyses of MYD88 gene in common solid
cancers. Tumori. 2012; 98(5):663-669.

56.	 Marttila S, Jylhava J, Nevalainen T, Nykter M, Jylha
M, Hervonen A, Tserel L, Peterson P and Hurme M.
Transcriptional analysis reveals gender-specific changes in
the aging of the human immune system. PLoS One. 2013;
8(6):e66229.

44.	 Tanoue T and Nishida E. Docking interactions in the
mitogen-activated protein kinase cascades. Pharmacol Ther.
2002; 93(2-3):193-202.

57.	 Maynard S, Hejl AM, Dinh TS, Keijzers G, Hansen AM,
Desler C, Moreno-Villanueva M, Burkle A, Rasmussen
LJ, Waldemar G and Bohr VA. Defective mitochondrial
respiration, altered dNTP pools and reduced AP
endonuclease 1 activity in peripheral blood mononuclear
cells of Alzheimer’s disease patients. Aging (Albany NY).
2015; 7(10):793-815.

45.	 Rao TP and Kuhl M. An updated overview on Wnt
signaling pathways: a prelude for more. Circ Res. 2010;
106(12):1798-1806.
46.	 Clevers H and Nusse R. Wnt/beta-catenin signaling and
disease. Cell. 2012; 149(6):1192-1205.
47.	 Blackford A, Serrano OK, Wolfgang CL, Parmigiani
G, Jones S, Zhang X, Parsons DW, Lin JC, Leary RJ,
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

8578

Oncotarget

58.	 Maynard S, Keijzers G, Gram M, Desler C, Bendix L,
Budtz-Jorgensen E, Molbo D, Croteau DL, Osler M,
Stevnsner T, Rasmussen LJ, Dela F, Avlund K and
Bohr VA. Relationships between human vitality and
mitochondrial respiratory parameters, reactive oxygen
species production and dNTP levels in peripheral blood
mononuclear cells. Aging (Albany NY). 2013; 5(11):850864.
59.	 Stark C, Breitkreutz BJ, Reguly T, Boucher L, Breitkreutz
A and Tyers M. BioGRID: a general repository for
interaction datasets. Nucleic Acids Res. 2006; 34(Database
issue):D535-539.
60.	 Bovolenta LA, Acencio ML and Lemke N. HTRIdb: an
open-access database for experimentally verified human
transcriptional regulation interactions. BMC Genomics.
2012; 13:405.
61.	 Zheng G, Tu K, Yang Q, Xiong Y, Wei C, Xie L, Zhu
Y and Li Y. ITFP: an integrated platform of mammalian
transcription factors. Bioinformatics. 2008; 24(20):24162417.
62.	 Hsu SD, Tseng YT, Shrestha S, Lin YL, Khaleel A, Chou
CH, Chu CF, Huang HY, Lin CM, Ho SY, Jian TY, Lin FM,
Chang TH, Weng SL, Liao KW, Liao IE, et al. miRTarBase
update 2014: an information resource for experimentally
validated miRNA-target interactions. Nucleic Acids Res.
2014; 42(Database issue):D78-85.
63.	 Pagano M and Gauvreau K. (2000). Principles of
biostatistics. (Pacific Grove, CA: Duxbury).

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

8579

Oncotarget

