www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Oncotarget, 2017, Vol. 8, (No. 14), pp: 23760-23774
Research Paper

Systematic screening of isogenic cancer cells identifies DUSP6
as context-specific synthetic lethal target in melanoma
Stephanie Wittig-Blaich1,2,*, Rainer Wittig1,3,*, Steffen Schmidt4,5,*, Stefan Lyer1,6,
Melanie Bewerunge-Hudler1,7, Sabine Gronert-Sum1, Olga Strobel-Freidekind1,
Carolin Müller4,5, Markus List4,5, Aleksandra Jaskot4,5, Helle Christiansen4,5, Mathias
Hafner8, Dirk Schadendorf9, Ines Block10,11,**, Jan Mollenhauer11,12,**
  1Department of Molecular Genome Analysis, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), 69118 Heidelberg, Germany
  2Institute for Comparative Molecular Endocrinology, Ulm University, 89081 Ulm, Germany
  3Institute for Laser Technologies in Medicine and Metrology, Ulm University, 89081 Ulm, Germany
  4Lundbeckfonden Center of Excellence NanoCAN, Institute of Molecular Medicine, University of Southern Denmark, 5000
Odense, Denmark
  5Molecular Oncology, Institute of Molecular Medicine, University of Southern Denmark, 5000 Odense, Denmark
  6Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Section for Experimental Oncology and Nanomedicine (SEON), University Hospital
Erlangen, 91054 Erlangen, Germany
  7Genomics and Proteomics Core Facility, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), 69118 Heidelberg, Germany
  8Department of Biotechnology, Mannheim University of Applied Sciences, 68163 Mannheim, Germany
  9Department of Dermatology, University Hospital Duisburg-Essen, 45147 Essen, Germany and German Cancer Consortium,
69118 Heidelberg, Germany
10

Department of Clinical Genetics, Odense University Hospital, 5000 Odense, Denmark

11

 undbeckfonden Center of Excellence NanoCAN, Institute of Molecular Medicine, University of Southern Denmark, 5000
L
Odense, Denmark

12

Molecular Oncology, Institute of Molecular Medicine, University of Southern Denmark, 5000 Odense, Denmark

*

Co-first author

**

Co-senior author

Correspondence to: Ines Block, email: ines.block@rsyd.dk
Keywords: cancer, isogenic cell line libraries, functional genomics, melanoma, synthetic lethal
Received: September 14, 2016     Accepted: February 06, 2017     Published: March 02, 2017

ABSTRACT
Next-generation sequencing has dramatically increased genome-wide profiling
options and conceptually initiates the possibility for personalized cancer therapy.
State-of-the-art sequencing studies yield large candidate gene sets comprising
dozens or hundreds of mutated genes. However, few technologies are available for
the systematic downstream evaluation of these results to identify novel starting
points of future cancer therapies.
We improved and extended a site-specific recombination-based system for
systematic analysis of the individual functions of a large number of candidate genes.
This was facilitated by a novel system for the construction of isogenic constitutive
and inducible gain- and loss-of-function cell lines. Additionally, we demonstrate
the construction of isogenic cell lines with combinations of the traits for advanced
functional in vitro analyses. In a proof-of-concept experiment, a library of 108 isogenic
melanoma cell lines was constructed and 8 genes were identified that significantly
reduced viability in a discovery screen and in an independent validation screen. Here,
we demonstrate the broad applicability of this recombination-based method and we

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

23760

Oncotarget

proved its potential to identify new drug targets via the identification of the tumor
suppressor DUSP6 as potential synthetic lethal target in melanoma cell lines with
BRAF V600E mutations and high DUSP6 expression.

(FRT- or lox-site) into the host cell genome. These
sequences can consecutively be used to insert genes into
the prepared chromosomal site, allowing for the derivation
of isogenic cell lines with high efficacy.
Due to the high degree of standardization, we
expected this technique to be suitable for serially
analyzing large gene sets. First, we optimized an existing
site-specific recombination-based system for the rapid and
effective construction of isogenic cell line panels. Second,
we extended this system to simplify cell line construction
with either constitutive or inducible expression of a
single gene or two genes of interest. Subsequently, we
demonstrated the successful recombination at a single
genomic location in a number of cell lines of different
cancer types. We then selected one of these cell lines,
A375, as a representative for a proof-of-concept screen,
in which we constructed more than a hundred isogenic
melanoma cell lines. An independent repetition of the
cell line construction procedure was conducted for a
subset of these genes to demonstrate the reproducibility
of the results. Finally, the top five growth-suppressing
genes were further characterized by cell cycle analysis
and by generating cell line recombinants for cell lines of
other cancer types. A main finding of additional proofof-concept experiments was that the tumor suppressor
DUSP6 could serve as a potential synthetic lethal drug
target in melanoma with BRAF V600E mutations.

INTRODUCTION
Since its advent, genome-wide mRNA expression
profiling has been extensively used to compare tumors
versus normal tissues, different stages of cancer
progression, expression patterns associated with drug
resistance and differences between cancer subtypes.
In recent years, next-generation sequencing (NGS)
techniques have further enabled researchers to sequence
DNA and mRNA for mutations on genome-wide scale.
Commonly, these approaches discover several hundreds
of genes with recurrent mutations.
The first consensus mutational map generated
using NGS identified 189 genes with potentially relevant
mutations in driver genes of breast and colon cancer, most
of which have an unknown role in cancer [1, 2]. Shah
et al. recently identified more than 2,000 somatic single
nucleotide variations including 107 insertion-deletion
mutations in triple negative breast cancer [3]. In addition,
four studies identified a cumulated set of 137 genes with
potential driver mutations in melanoma [4–7]. Elucidating
these genes` functions and interplay is a critical step
towards the identification of novel starting points for
therapy as, for example, demonstrated by the development
of PARP-inhibitors for BRCA1/2-deficient tumors [8].
To translate the results of mutation screens into
clinical applications, in-depth characterization of the
phenotypic effect of each mutation is essential. However,
systematic downstream functional analysis is rarely
considered and evaluation commonly limited to a single
or few genes [1–7]. The lack of comprehensive functional
approaches may partially be due to limitations of existing
strategies. Conceptually, lentiviral systems may enable
functional studies of large gene sets as they enable efficient
stable genomic insertion even in non-dividing cells [9]. A
major drawback of this method is that multiple insertions
may occur in a cell, leading to unaccounted copynumber variation effects. Moreover, the random genomic
integration may create a highly heterogeneous population.
Alternatives that overcome these limitations of
lentiviral systems are genome-editing techniques based
on, for example, zinc finger nucleases, CRISPR/Cas9 or
Transcription Activator-Like Effector Nucleases (TALENs).
They enable targeted insertion of genetic changes with high
precision at single nucleotide-level. In contrast to lentiviral
systems, genome editing allows for the creation of isogenic
cells which differ only in the introduced genetic alteration.
However, the efficacy of these techniques is variable and
often in the lower percent range [10–14].
Site-specific recombination-based systems, such as
the Flp-FRT [15] and the Cre-lox system [16], facilitate
stable insertion of a recombinase recognition sequence
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

RESULTS
Re-design of site-specific recombination systems
Site-specific recombination has been used for
various applications, such as, an endogenous sequence of
the host cell genome used for the insertion of sequences
of interest (e.g. the rosa locus in mice) [17]. Moreover,
exogenous sequences like FRT- or lox-sites can be
stably integrated for subsequent gene insertion [15–17].
Remarkably, these techniques have been used extensively
for generating transgenic mice, but have not been
exploited for in vitro functional genomics approaches.
We initially used the commercially available FlpIn system (Life Technologies). The system provides
a plasmid (pFRT/lacZeo) to first insert the FRT
recombination site into the host cell genome. The FRTsite locates between a cytomegalovirus (CMV) promoter
with an ATG start codon that drives expression of a
lacZ-zeocin resistance fusion gene. Our goal was to
insert an expression plasmid hosting a gene of interest
as well as a hygromycin resistance gene using the Flp
recombinase. The inserted genes would be under the
control of the CMV promoter and start codon, thereby
23761

Oncotarget

eliminating the expression of the zeocin resistance fusion
gene. Accordingly, the absence of lacZ positive and
zeocin resistant cells, and the presence of hygromycin
resistance would indicate successful transfections. As no
correspondingly modified cancer cell lines are available,
we transfected the frequently used cancer cell lines A375
(melanoma), MCF7 (breast cancer), U251-MG (brain
cancer), and A549 (lung cancer). Unfortunately, repeated
transfections with the pFRT/lacZeo plasmid yielded low
numbers of lacZ-positive cells in three of the four cell
lines (Figure 1). Moreover, attempts to generate stable
isogenic cell lines via site-specific recombination did not
result in any hygromycin-resistant cells (data not shown).
We therefore created new vectors in which the ATGFRT cassette was placed upstream of an EGFP reporter
using pEGFP-N1 (Clontech) as the backbone (Figure 2A,
Supplementary Figure 1 and Supplementary Table 1).
This configuration substituted the lacZ-zeocin resistance
fusion gene with EGFP and a separate, i.e. non-fused,
neomycin resistance gene. One vector variant (pRAPacc1)
was equipped with the CMV promoter, while the other
(pRAPacc2) contained the elongation factor 1-alpha
(E1Fα) promoter. Using these newly generated vectors,
reporter-positive cells were generated with 15- to 188-fold
increased efficacy compared to the original system and,
in addition, stably transfected clones of A549 cells were
obtained which was not achieved with the pFRT/lacZeo
system (Figure 1).
We further modified the expression plasmids
(referred to as pRAPtar vectors) to enable serial
construction of cell lines with constitutive and inducible

expression of single or multiple genes. The pRAPtar-1c
was designed for constitutive expression of target genes,
while pRAPtar-1i contained a doxycycline (dox)-inducible
promoter and a Tet-repressor in cis to provide isogenic
cells with inducible expression in a single recombination
step (Figure 2A and 2B, Supplementary Figure 1). The
latter is particularly useful when studying cancer-related
genes, since their constitutive expression often causes
increased cell death.
In addition to the recombination-activated hygromycin
resistance gene, we inserted a lox71-site [16] preceded by
an SV40 promoter and an ATG start codon. As a result, the
introduction of the first plasmid established a secondary
recombination site suitable for the insertion of a plasmid
via Cre-lox-mediated recombination. Consequently,
a constitutive (pRAPtar-2c) and an inducible version
(pRAPtar-2i) of the corresponding expression vector were
generated. These carried a lox66-site preceding a startcodon-deficient puromycin resistance gene (Figure 2A,
Supplementary Figure 1). Thus, successful Cre-mediated
recombination yielded puromycin-selectable cells. Finally,
the pRAPtar-2 vectors further contain a third recombination
site (phiC31 attP site) [18] to theoretically allow for the
consecutive insertion of another sequence (Figure 2B,
Supplementary Figure 1).
Accordingly, following stable insertion of the
pRAPacc vectors to provide a so-called acceptor cell line
(ACL), the system allows for constructing isogenic single
recombinant cells (ISRs) via Flp-recombinase that have
constitutive or inducible expression of a target sequence.
Depending on whether a gene or a knockdown construct

Figure 1: Vector performance in generating FRT-site modified acceptor cell lines. Four cancer cell lines were transfected

under identical conditions with either pFRT/lacZeo from the commercially available Flp-In system or with pRAPacc1 or 2. After two weeks
of selection, the number of lacZ-positive (pFRT/lacZeo) and of EGFP-positive cells (pRAPacc1/2) was scored. Values are averages of at
least two independent experiments. Error bars represent standard error of the mean (SEM).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

23762

Oncotarget

(e.g. shRNA or pri-miRNA) is inserted, this results in a cell
line for subsequent gain- or loss-of-function studies (Figure
2B). Consecutively, ISRs can be used to insert a second
sequence expressed in a constitutive or inducible fashion
to obtain isogenic double recombinant cells (IDRs) with
combinatorial traits (Figure 2B).

We expected that some clones would host multiple
insertions of vectors into the cell’s genome, compromising
subsequent selection of positive recombinants and
conceivably favoring undesired intra- or interchromosomal recombination events. Thus, we tested an
initial set of 374 individual clones for single integration
via Southern blotting, yielding 70 clones (19%), for
which single integration could be confirmed (Table 1,
Supplementary Figure 2).
Next, the ability to accept an expression plasmid
via Flp-mediated recombination was assessed, using the
red fluorescent HcRed reporter gene cloned into pRAPtar1c. Most, but not all, of the clones (50 out of 70; 71%)
readily delivered stable hygromycin-resistant ISRs, in
which EGFP was switched off and the HcRed gene was

Construction of acceptor cell lines
We next constructed a panel of ACLs from 10
commonly used cell lines of various cancer types (Table
1). After transfection of pRAPacc vectors and selection
of neomycin-resistant clones, we processed 16-54 stable
EGFP-positive clones per cell line to identify cell lines
suitable as ACLs for further studies.

Figure 2: Schematic survey of the system. (A) Display of the vectors with their most relevant elements. Recombination sites are

indicated by blue triangles (1: FRT-site; 2: lox-sites; 3: phiC31 attP site for later expansion). White squares depict resistance genes for
selection of isogenic single recombinant cells (ISRs; 1: hygromycin resistance gene) and isogenic double recombinant cells (IDRs; 2:
puromycin resistance gene). Red squares symbolize the inserted target sequence, which could be either a gene or a shRNA-coding cassette
for knockdown (1: target sequence for first insertion via Flp-FRT; 2: target sequence for second insertion via Cre-lox). (B) Schematic
survey of part of the permutations of traits that can be generated. Recombination-mediated insertion of a pRAPtar-1 vector in the ACL
genome yields selectable ISRs that lack green fluorescence and display either dox-inducible (I) or constitutive (C) expression of the target
sequence. ISRs with overexpression of an open reading frame (ORF) or short hairpin RNA-mediated silencing of a gene (shRNA) would
show gain (“+”) or loss of function (“-“). Consecutive Cre-mediated insertion of a pRAPtar-2 vector yields selectable IDRs with the desired
combination of traits as exemplified for using the two inducible single recombinants.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

23763

Oncotarget

Table 1: Generation of acceptor cell lines
Type

Stable
clones

Single
integration

Rec.+a

Expr.+b

ACL Name

Mewo

Melanoma

42

13

4

0

-

SkMel28

Melanoma

20

4

3

0

-

A375

Melanoma

32

7

4

3

N103 , N104c, N120c

H1299

Lung cancer

48

6

6

1

B5c

A549

Lung cancer

53

12

12

1

X12d

MCF-7

Breast cancer

42

6

2

1

N107c

MDA-MB-231

Breast cancer

25

8

8

0

-

U87-MG

Brain cancer

42

4

4

0

-

U138-MG

Brain cancer

54

3

3

0

-

U251-MG

Brain cancer

16

7

4

2

L106c, L1e

Total

10

374

70/374

50/70

8/50

5/10 cell lines

Success rate

 

 

19%

71%

16%

50%

Cell line

c

capable of accepting pRAPtar-1 vector by site-specific recombination as judged by obtaining hygromycin-selectable
cells lacking green fluorescence; b capable of expressing target genes in an inducible fashion as judged by fluorescence
microscopy and flow cytometry analysis with the HcRed reporter gene in pRAPtar-1i after dox induction; c generated with
pRAPacc2; d generated with earlier variant of pRAPacc1 (pRAPacc1a) containing an additional TetR, which was nonfunctional after stable insertion; e generated with pRAPacc1.
a

constitutively switched on (Table 1), as was determined
by fluorescence microscopy.
We further analyzed the performance of the doxinducible expression vector. Consequently, we used the
HcRed gene that was inserted in pRAPtar-1i via Flprecombinase for testing. Silencing and induction of
red fluorescence was detected via microscopy and flow
cytometry. The majority of the clones (42 out of 50; 84%)
either displayed lack of suppression in the absence of
dox or lack of induction after dox addition (summarized
in Table 1). The remaining eight ACLs covered five
different cancer cell lines (Table 1, Figure 3A and 3B,
Supplementary Figure 3A). For a single ACL-pRAPtar-1i
clone per cancer cell line we further confirmed inducible
HcRed expression quantitatively in response to increasing
amounts of dox (Figure 3C, Supplementary Figure 3B).
In conclusion, from 374 clones eight ACLs were isolated
for the subsequent construction of clones with functional
constitutive and inducible gene expression. For five out of
10 cancer cell lines, ACLs could be obtained that passed
the described quality filters, corresponding to a 50%
success rate.

microscopy and flow cytometry confirmed high and
homogeneous expression after insertion of the HcRed
gene via pRAPtar-1c recombination and quantitatively
inducible expression after insertion of the HcRed gene
via pRAPtar-1i recombination (Figure 3A-3C). We next
inserted the TP53 gene cloned in pRAPtar-1i into the
ACL genome and isolated six independent EGFP-negative
clones (TP53-ISRs).
Southern blot analyses confirmed TP53 insertion
exclusively into the genomic location flagged by the
FRT-site (Figure 3D and 3E). We also inserted CDKN1A
in pRAPtar-1i and tested inducible expression of the
gene alongside TP53 expression in one of the TP53ISRs. Both clones displayed tunable mRNA expression
levels in response to different dox concentrations
and showed highly comparable induction kinetics
(Figure 3F). In conclusion, the data indicated that ISRs
demonstrated uniform induced expression as expected
from isogenic cells.
Finally, we tested the construction of inducible
double recombinants (IDRs) suitable to express
combinatorial traits via Cre-mediated recombination. To
facilitate this we used the A375-ACLN103 ISRs with
inducible HcRed expression, as described above, and a
commercially available EGFP-shRNA fusion construct
which targets the cellular LMNA gene. The construct was
cloned in pRAPtar-2i and -2c. Subsequently, IDRs were
constructed which were expected to exhibit inducible

Construction of isogenic single and double
recombinant cells
To further test properties of the ACLs, we focused
on A375-ACLN103 (melanoma) cells. Fluorescence
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

23764

Oncotarget

Construction and screening of an isogenic
melanoma cell line library

HcRed fluorescence in conjunction with inducible
or constitutive EGFP expression and parallel LMNA
knockdown.
Resulting puromycin-resistant IDRs displayed
the expected fluorescence patterns (Figure 4A and
4B). qRT-PCR of three individual IDRs for each
configuration further suggested uniform performance
with downregulation of LMNA mRNA to 0.53- to 0.49fold for the IDRs with inducible EGFP-shRNA expression
and 0.43- up to 0.16-fold for IDRs with constitutive
EGFP-shRNA expression (Figure 4C). These results
indicated that the system could be used efficiently to
generate uniform isogenic cell lines with individual or
combinatorial molecular traits.

Our original objective was to develop a system for
systematic functional analysis of large gene sets obtained
from e.g. genome-wide sequencing studies reporting on
recurrent mutations in tumor tissues [1–7]. To establish
if our recombination system was able to analyze such
large gene sets, we shuttled 108 genes including known
tumor suppressors, oncogenes and randomly selected
genes (Supplementary Table 2) into the pRAPtar-1i vector
and subsequently inserted these into A375-ACLN103
melanoma cells. For 95% of the selected genes point
mutations and/or copy number variations in malignant

Figure 3: Construction of isogenic single recombinants. Analyses used A375-ACLN103 cells. (A) Fluorescence microscopy of

acceptor cell line A375-ACLN103 (ACL) and isogenic single recombinants with insertion by recombination of constitutively (ISR-1c) and
dox-inducibly (ISR-1i) expressed HcRed. The phase contrast inlay (cropped) is to demonstrate the presence of cells. For ISR-1i images
were taken 48 h after induction without (dox-) or with (dox+) 50 ng/ml doxycycline. Scale bars: 100 μm. (B) Flow cytometry analyses
of HcRed expression for the corresponding ISRs and of EGFP expression for A375-ACLN103. (C) Flow cytometry analyses of HcRed
expression in response to different dox concentrations depicted in ng/ml at the respective curve. The HcRed-negative ACL is included
as negative control. (D) Configuration of pRAPacc inserted into the host cell genome (top left), part of pRAPtar-1i carrying the TP53
open reading frame (top right) and after recombination of pRAPtar-1i into the FRT-site in the host cell genome (bottom). Yellow arrow:
promoter; blue triangle: FRT-site; green square: EGFP; white square: hygromycin resistance gene; orange square: Tet-repressor. Correct
insertion into the genome-localized FRT-site would combine two KpnI restriction sites in such way that a new and unique 2.5-kb restriction
fragment emerges that can be detected with a radioactively labeled probe against the hygromycin resistance gene (indicated by the red line).
(E) Southern blot analysis of KpnI-digested genomic DNA from six independent ISRs with insertion of TP53 cloned in pRAPtar-1i
(ISR1-6), the A375-ACLN103 acceptor cell line used (ACL) and the original non-modified A375 cell line, probing the hygromycin
resistance gene. M: size marker. (F) TP53 and CDKN1A were used to construct ISRs with pRAPtar-1i. Isogenic control recombinants
(ISR-C) with insertion of the empty (i.e. ORF-deficient) pRAPtar-1i vector served as negative controls. Levels of mRNA expression were
analyzed 48 h after induction with different dox concentrations by qRT-PCR. Error bars represent SEM.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

23765

Oncotarget

melanoma are reported according to the COSMIC
database (http://cancer.sanger.ac.uk/cosmic) [19].
Transfection of A375-ACLN103 cells grown in
two wells of a 6-well plate per gene was sufficient to
yield at least three independent EGFP-negative ISR
clones. Three clones per gene were consecutively pooled
to minimize any potential random variation. Cells with
insertion of the empty pRAPtar-1i vector served as
isogenic controls (ISR-C), which allowed normalization
for effects introduced by the vector system and/or by
changes to the genomic insertion site. Subsequently,
we analyzed changes in cell viability before and after
induction of gene expression in a discovery screen.
We identified 11 genes with significant growthsuppressive effects compared to the isogenic controls
(Figure 5A). Many of these effects are in accordance
with current literature. For example, A375 cells harbor
wild type TP53, expressed at substantial levels, but
display comparably low CDKN1A (p21) protein levels
[20]. Accordingly, TP53 overexpression did not cause
significant changes in cell viability, while CDKN1A
overexpression caused strong growth suppression. MYC
has been reported to cause G2 cell cycle arrest in cells
with wild type TP53 [21], which is in accordance with
the significant suppression mediated by MYC in the
discovery screen. The tumor suppressor PTEN exerted
a moderate but significant growth suppressive effect
(Figure 5A).
We selected a set of 26 genes, including the nine
most prominent growth suppressors, for an independent
validation by construction and screening of ISRs
generated with A375-ACLN120 cells (Supplementary
Table 3). Southern blot data indicated a different

genomic insertion site as compared to A375-ACLN103
cells (Supplementary Figure 2A and 2B) such that this
independent approach was suitable to filter for effects
on cell growth caused by the chromosomal location
of the insertion site. The validation screen confirmed
effects on growth for 25 out of 26 genes. Only DDX10
was not confirmed, leading to a 96% confirmation
rate and a Pearson correlation coefficient of 0.87
(Figure 5B and  5C). In summary, this indicated that
ISR libraries  can be used efficiently to analyze large
gene sets and to identify phenotypic effects in a robust
fashion.

Identification of a potential tumor suppressive
network
We selected a subset of the genes with confirmed
growth suppressive effects for further analysis.
First, we subjected the ISRs generated with A375ACLN103 to cell cycle analyses. CDKN1A, used as
positive control, caused the expected G0/G1 arrest.
Furthermore, the G2-arrest suggested in the literature
for MYC overexpression in TP53 wild type cells was
confirmed and accompanied by a significant increase
of apoptotic cells (Figure 6A, Supplementary Figure
4). Among the top five growth-suppressing genes
tested, STARD8 and DUSP6, a commonly known tumor
suppressor [22, 23], arrested cells in G1/G0-phase,
while MAPRE3, RPS6KA2 and EMD induced apoptosis
(Figure 6A, Supplementary  Figure 4). Apoptosisinducing effects were also confirmed in independent
assays by quantifying inter-nucleosomal genomic DNA
degradation (Figure 6B).

Figure 4: Construction of isogenic double recombinants. The ISR with insertion of dox-inducible HcRed was used to
generate IDRs via Cre-lox mediated recombination with either (A) dox-inducible (pRAPtar-2i) or (B) constitutive expression
(pRAPtar-2c) of a second sequence. The sequence comprised an emerald GFP (EGFP) reporter gene linked to a cassette for
expression of an shRNA targeting the cellular LMNA gene. (A) Fluorescence microscopy of IDRs with inducible EGFPshRNA cassette shows induction of both reporters (2 μg/ml dox for maximum induction). Scale bars: 100 μm. (B) Fluorescence
microscopy of IDRs with constitutive EGFP-shRNA cassette 48 h post induction with 2 μg/ml dox and without induction.
Scale bars: 100 μm. (C) Quantification of knockdown and overexpression in IDRs. Three clones each (C1-C3 and C4-C6,
respectively) were analyzed for knockdown of LMNA and induction of HcRed mRNA expression by qRT-PCR. Values are
referred to LMNA levels in the ISR with HcRed insertion only (without induction). Error bars represent SEM.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

23766

Oncotarget

These five genes were further utilized to construct
ISRs from ACLs of the other three cancer types, using
the inducible vector pRAPtar-1i, to investigate if the
observed growth suppressive effects were melanomaspecific. Tumor suppressive effects were confirmed
for all five genes in at least one additional cancer type
(Figure 6C). ISRs with EMD could not be constructed
for the brain cancer U251-ACLL106, this was likely
due to strong apoptotic effects exerted by low leaky
expression levels in the absence of dox. Of note, in
MCF7 breast cancer cells, STARD8 had a growthpromoting effect as opposed to its tumor-suppressive
function in melanoma and lung cancer.
GeneMANIA analysis (www.genemania.org)
[24] further indicated that DUSP6, EMD, MAPRE3
and RPS6KA2, but not STARD8, are linked in a tumor
suppressive network as defined by known genetic,
pathway and/or physical interactions (Figure 6D). Taken
together, the data confirmed tumor suppressive functions
for the five genes, however, STARD8 may function as
context-specific tumor suppressor or oncogene. The
unbiased screen identified a potential tumor suppressive
network which may be relevant in various cancer

types. However, these results have to be confirmed via
functional studies.

The tumor suppressor DUSP6 is a putative
synthetic lethal target in melanoma
Analyses in primary melanoma and melanoma cell
lines indicated that MAPRE3 and EMD mRNA levels were
not substantially changed compared to primary normal
human epidermal melanocytes (NHEM). While STARD8
levels were upregulated in primary tumors and decreased
in cell lines (Figure 7A), RPS6KA2 levels were normal
or decreased, however, DUSP6 mRNA expression was
consistently elevated (Figure 7A).
Activating BRAF mutations, such as the common
V600E mutation, result in increased MEK activation,
which leads to ERK1/2 phosphorylation. PhosphoERK1/2 in turn activates downstream targets via
phosphorylation, among these p90RSK3 which is coded
by RPS6KA2. In this regulatory circuit, DUSP6 functions
as tumor suppressor in limiting ERK1/2 activity via
dephosphorylation (Figure 7B) [23, 25, 26]. In accordance
with its role as an ERK1/2 downstream target, RPS6KA2

Figure 5: Screen of a melanoma isogenic single recombinant cell library. (A) A library of 108 A375-ACLN103-derived ISRs

was generated and subjected to a cell viability scan as the primary (discovery) screen. Cell viability is displayed relative to ISRs with the
empty expression plasmid (pRAPtar-1i) inserted (ISR-C). Eleven primary hits, including known cancer genes like TP53, CDKN1A, PTEN
and MYC, were identified. (B) Validation of a panel of 26 genes in independent ISRs generated with A375-ACLN120 cells. Data from
primary screen is included for comparison. (C) Correlation plot of validation versus primary screen with Pearson correlation coefficient
(PCC) of 0.87. Statistical significance was evaluated using two-tailed Student`s t-tests and is indicated by *: P < 0.05; **: P < 0.01;
***: P < 0.001; ****: P < 0.0001. All error bars represent SEM.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

23767

Oncotarget

of tumor suppressors, specifically DUSP6, as a counterintuitive, but conceivable, synthetic lethal therapeutic
concept in a subset of melanomas.

has been associated with oncogenic functions by various
groups [27–29]. Here, our results indicated that increased
p90RSK3 activity triggers apoptosis (Figure 6A and
6B), suggesting that p90RSK3 may also function as a
tumor suppressor in specific scenarios. Survival analyses
available for breast and lung cancer patients [30] supported
this hypothesis as high expression of both DUSP6 and
RPS6KA2 were associated with significantly improved
survival in both cancer types (Figure 7C).
We therefore hypothesize that elevated DUSP6
levels in melanoma are one mechanism for compensating
BRAF V600E hyperactivation, which might otherwise
trigger apoptosis via ERK1/2 downstream targets. To
investigate this, we performed an siRNA-mediated
knockdown of DUSP6 in BRAF wild type melanoma. As
expected for a tumor suppressor, the knockdown either
promoted cell growth or did not exert any effect, while
the same knockdown in BRAF V600E melanoma with
high DUSP6 expression caused cell death via induction
of apoptosis (Figure 7D-7G). This indicated inactivation

DISCUSSION
Our present study was initiated to investigate how
large gene sets, resulting from genome-wide cancer
mutation screens, can be functionally analyzed with
a high degree of efficiency and standardization. There
is a continuously growing demand for such functional
genomic approaches because large numbers of driver
genes have been classified solely based on statistical
analysis and bioinformatic filtering processes [1–7].
However, the vast majority of the identified genes and
their mutations have unknown functions in general and
in cancer in particular. Finally, as discussed below, the
identification of oncogenes or tumor suppressors in one
cancer (sub)type does not necessarily translate to other
cancer (sub)types.

Figure 6: Identification of a tumor suppressive network. (A) Cell cycle distribution as mean of at least two independent experiments

(background: A375-ACLN103). (B) Relative apoptosis activity as mean of two independent experiments (background: A375-ACLN103).
(C) One ACL clone of each of the other three cancer backgrounds was used to create ISRs for the five genes and correspondingly matched
negative controls (ISR-Cs). ISRs were subjected to cell viability analyses after induction with dox. The effect of EMD in U251-ACLL106
could not be determined (ND) because here no ISR could be obtained. (D) Interaction network suggested by GeneMANIA tool (www.
genemania.org). Dark gray: query genes; light gray: interacting genes. Genetic, pathway and physical interactions are indicated by green,
blue, and red lines, respectively. Statistical significance was evaluated using one-tailed Student`s t-tests for the relative apoptosis activity
and otherwise using two-tailed Student`s t-tests and is indicated as *: P < 0.05; **: P < 0.01; ***: P < 0.001; ****: P < 0.0001; ns: not
significant. All error bars represent SEM.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

23768

Oncotarget

Several strategies for systematic functional analysis
are based on currently available techniques. Among
these are genome-editing techniques that allow for the
introduction of genetic changes to obtain isogenic cells.
While these techniques provide site-specific integration
they may require the screening of hundreds of cell clones
to identify corresponding cells carrying the desired
knockdown or specific mutation [10–14]. We propose the
construction of accepter cell lines (ACLs), which greatly
simplifies the subsequent insertion of one or several genes
of interest. We demonstrate that the first step to creating
suitable ACLs experiences the same low efficacy as
genome-editing. Even with an improved vector system,

it required scanning of 374 clones to derive 8 suitable
ACLs, corresponding to an efficacy of 2%. However,
the consecutive insertion of target genes into ACLs
demonstrated a success rate of nearly 100%.
Within the >100 constructed ISRs, only an isogenic
U251 cell line for induced overexpression of EMD
could not be generated, conceivably due to the strong
apoptotic effects caused by the gene. Thus, the proposed
strategy enables the efficient generation of permanent
isogenic cell line libraries, which can successively be
interrogated into various functional assays to analyze
effects on e.g. proliferation, invasion/migration, apoptosis,
or tumorsphere formation. We analyzed effects on

Figure 7: DUSP6 is a context-specific synthetic lethal target in melanoma. (A) mRNA expression levels for five genes in primary

melanoma (top panel) and melanoma cell lines (bottom panel). Case numbers are provided in the diagrams and levels are normalized to the
average of two independent samples of NHEM, which were set to 1.0 (not shown). Error bars represent minimum and maximum values.
(B) Schematic extract from Ras/Raf/MEK/ERK signaling pathway. DUSP6 inhibits p90RSK3 (coded by RPS6KA2) activation via ERK1/2
dephosphorylation. (C) Kaplan Meier plots for luminal A breast cancer patients (left panels; relapse-free survival) and lung cancer patients
(right panels; overall survival). Patients are split according to high (red curve) and low (black curve) expression. HR: hazard ratio with
95% confidence interval. (D) Western blot analyses of siRNA-mediated DUSP6 knockdown in four selected melanoma cell lines with
confirmed BRAF mutation status [43]. U: untreated; Ctrl: non-targeting control siRNA; siDu1 and siDu2: two DUSP6-targeting siRNAs.
(E) Relative cell viability after DUSP6 knockdown referred to Ctrl. (F) Time course of relative cell viability in the two susceptible cell
lines, and (G) corresponding Caspase-3/7 activity assessed in parallel and normalized to cell viability. Statistical significance was evaluated
using two-tailed Student`s t-tests and is indicated by *: P < 0.05; **: P < 0.01; ***: P < 0.001; ****: P < 0.0001. All error bars represent
SEM unless otherwise indicated.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

23769

Oncotarget

We also observed RPS6KA2-mediated apoptosis in
our studies, which led us to investigate the knockdown
effect of the upstream tumor suppressor DUSP6, which
we expected to result in RPS6KA2 hyperactivation
via ERK1/2. Our hypothesis led to the identification of
DUSP6 as a potential synthetic lethal target in melanoma
with BRAF V600E mutation and high expression of
DUSP6, suggesting that, in certain scenarios, this tumor
suppressor may serve as drug target. This counterintuitive proposition might be supported by recent
findings that indicate less strict delineations between
tumor suppressors and oncogenes. The concept of TP53
gain-of-function mutants has been revitalized and the
functions of oncogenic TP53 are currently under intensive
investigation [39–41]. Importantly, members of the
DUSP protein family, including DUSP6, have recently
been proposed as therapeutic targets for glioblastoma
multiforme, where DUSP6 causes tumor-promoting
effects and chemoresistance [42, 43].
A distinct advantage to the presented strategy
is its support for studying combinatorial traits, e.g. by
the overexpression of one target gene and the parallel
knockdown of a second target gene. We demonstrated
this by constructing IDRs with fluorescence reporter
expression and a parallel LMNA knockdown via
subsequent recombination of both target sequences into
the ACL genome. Thus, the system can, in principle, be
used for large combinatorial studies such as a systematic
screen for synthetic lethal targets in cancer.
In conclusion, we demonstrate a robust and flexible
strategy for the construction of isogenic cell line libraries
and establish its applicability for systematically screening
larger gene sets commonly recovered from genome-wide
sequencing studies. The results of a systematic proof-ofconcept cell viability screen led to subsequent hypothesisbased experiments, which identified DUSP6 as contextspecific synthetic lethal target in melanomas with BRAF
V600E mediated ERK1/2 activation.

cell viability as a typical readout and achieved a 96%
concordance rate between the discovery screen and the
validation screen in an independent ACL derived from
A375 melanoma cells.
As proof of concept, we constructed an isogenic
melanoma cell line panel for a set of 108 genes, which
were subsequently analyzed in a cell viability screen.
We acknowledge that cell viability encompasses only
one functional aspect among many that contribute to
tumorigenesis. However, once established, the cell
line libraries can be extensively studied using various
additional functional assays.
Our results further demonstrated that five genes
selected for their strong effect on cell viability also
exerted effects in other cancer types. One of the five genes
was STARD8 (also known as DLC3), which functions
as a Rho-specific GTPase-activating protein involved in
endocytic trafficking [31]. Its inactivation may prevent
EGFR degradation and interfere with adherens junction
integrity, in particular with E-cadherin function [31, 32].
One study reported a tumor suppressive role of STARD8,
which is in accord with our results in A375 cells [33].
However, Durkin et al. observed indications for a tumor
suppressive role of STARD8 in MCF7 cells [33], whereas
our results suggested a growth-promoting effect. The
contrasting data could be a result of Durkin et al. using
the longer DLC3α transcript variant [33], while we used
the alternatively spliced shorter DLC3β variant. MAPRE3
(also known as EB3 or EBF3) codes for a microtubule
end-binding protein that stabilizes focal adhesions and
has been demonstrated to trigger apoptosis in cancer types
other than those analyzed here [34–36]. EMD codes for
emerin, which is affected by mutations in X-linked EmeryDreifuss muscular dystrophy. While EMD-deficient
fibroblasts were recently shown to proliferate abnormally
[37], the gene has not yet been linked to cancer. No
consistent pattern of changes in mRNA expression levels
were observed for these three genes in melanoma, such
that their putative role in this cancer type remains elusive.
We further analyzed DUSP6, which is a welldescribed tumor suppressor engaged in a regulatory
loop with ERK1/2. DUSP6 counteracts Ras/Raf/MEK/
ERK signaling by ERK1/2 desphosphorylation [23, 26].
In our study, it exerted tumor suppressive functions in
all four cancer types analyzed. Notably, we uncovered
an unexpected opportunistic oncogenic role for DUSP6
that may involve downstream signaling via p90RSK3,
which is activated by ERK1/2-mediated phosphorylation.
Inactivation of p90RSK3 acts synergistically with EGFRinhibition, thus posing a potential synthetic lethal drug
target for overcoming PI3K-inhibitor resistance in breast
cancer [27, 28]. Of note, RPS6KA2 was also determined
to be a downstream target of BMI1 in glioblastoma stem
cells [29]. These findings indicate a role as an oncogene.
In contrast, Bignone et al. reported that RPS6KA2 is a
tumor suppressor that triggers G1-arrest and apoptosis in
ovarian cancer [38].
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Cell lines and patient samples
Cell lines from Table 1 were obtained and
cultivated  according to the instructions from ATCC.
Primary melanoma samples and patient-derived melanoma
cell lines are part of the panel previously described [44].
All tumor samples and clinical data were collected
with Institutional Review Board approval and patient's
informed consent.

Transfection of acceptor plasmids
For comparison of pRAPacc1/2 to the pFRT/lacZeo,
2 x 106 cells were transfected with 4 μg plasmid DNA in
100 μl Nucleofector Solution (Lonza) via nucleofection,
applying the conditions recommended by the supplier.
23770

Oncotarget

Transfected cells were seeded into two wells of a 6-well
plate per cell line and 24 h later zeocin or G418 selection
was introduced at concentrations previously determined
in titration experiments. After a further 48 h, cells were
transferred to 10 cm cell culture dishes and cultivated
for 2 weeks for subsequent counting of reporter-positive
clones. Cells transfected with pFRT/lacZeo were evaluated
by conventional β-Gal staining, while cells transfected
with pRAPacc1/2, were scored according to the number
of green fluorescent colonies observed by fluorescence
microscopy. Experiments were performed 2-3 times to
calculate average values.

cells served as reference point for comparison in these
analyses. Because use of pRAPtar-2i inserts a second Tetrepressor and the two CMV promoters on pRAP-tar-1 and
pRAPtar-2 might compete for each other, a higher dox
concentration, arbitrarily set to 2 μg/ml, was used for these
experiments.

Fluorescence microscopy
Images of fluorescent cell lines were taken at 60
x magnification (scale bars provided in figures) with
an Olympus IX71 microscope, using the filter sets
U-MNIBA3 (green fluorescence) and U-MWU2 (red
fluorescence) and the Cell soft pro software (Olympus)
at uniform exposure times 500 ms for green and 1000
ms for red fluorescence. Image acquisition of IDRs in
Figure 3B was performed by using the automated contrast
enhancement of the software due to weaker HcRed
fluorescence in IDRs.

Generation of isogenic recombinant cell lines
Genes were shuttled into pRAPtar-1/2 vectors via
the GATEWAY system (Invitrogen) according to the
instructions of the supplier. The respective expression
plasmid DNA was mixed at 1:5 ratio with either pOG44
for Flp-mediated recombination or pGK-Cre for Cremediated recombination. Consecutively, 1 x 106 cells were
seeded in 6-well plates and transfected with 5 μg plasmid
mixture using Lipofectamine according to manufacturer’s
instructions. Three days post transfection, the selection
antibiotic was added (hygromycin for ISRs and puromycin
for IDRs) according to individual optima determined for
the ACLs. In the majority of the transfections at least three
non-green fluorescent clones per 2 wells emerged, which
were isolated and propagated separately until pooled
for further analyses. For gene and cell line resources
management, we utilized the OpenLabFramework
software [45].

Quantitative reverse transcription
polymerase chain reaction
For quantitative reverse transcription polymerase
chain reaction (qRT-PCR) total RNA was purified using
TRIzol reagent (Invitrogen), DNAse treated, and subjected
to oligo-dT-primed reverse transcription according
to standard protocols. Analyses were performed in
triplicate wells with 10 ng cDNA, using Human ACTB
and/or GAPDH Endogenous Control assays (Applied
Biosystems) as references for normalization. The PCR was
performed using a 7500 Real-Time PCR System (Applied
Biosystems) under the following conditions: 60 ºC for 15
min (1 cycle) and 95 ºC for 15 sec, 60 ºC for 1 min (40
cycles). Data was analyzed using qbasePLUS evaluation
software (Biogazelle). The following gene-specific assays
(Applied Biosystems) were used: Hs99999147_m1 for
TP53, Hs00355782_m1 for CDKN1A, Hs00153462_m1
for LMNA, Hs00169257_m1 for DUSP6, and a custommade assay was used for HcRed mRNA detection (forward
primer: 5’-GGAGAGAACCACCACCTACGA-3’; reverse
primer: 5’-CCTCCAGGCTGGTGTCC-3’; labeled probe:
FAM-5’-ACGGCGGCATCCTGA-3’–NFQ).

Southern blot analyses
Southern blot analyses were performed to identify
ACLs with single integration and to confirm single insertion
into the authentic locus for selected recombinants. For single
integration 10 μg genomic DNA was digested with PstI and
for single insertion 15 μg genomic DNA was digested with
KpnI, followed by gel electrophoresis on 1.2 % agarose
gels and conventional Southern blotting. Standard random
hexamer-based radioactive labeling was applied to generate
an EGFP-specific probe for analyses of ACLs and a probe
targeting the hygromycin resistance gene for analyses of
TP53-ISRs.

Flow cytometry
For flow cytometric analyses, cells were trypsinized
to a single cell suspension, centrifuged (270 g for 5 min),
resuspended in Hanks Balanced Salt Solution (HBSS)
and stored on ice until analyzed with a FACSCalibur flow
cytometer (Becton Dickinson). Cell debris and dead cells
were excluded from the analyses via forward and side
scatter parameters. EGFP was detected at 488 nm in the
FL1 channel, while HcRed was detected at 640 nm in the
FL4 channel. Per analysis 10,000 cells were evaluated.
HcRed levels were analyzed after 48 h with induction by
various dox-concentrations.

Knockdown constructs
We utilized the cassette of the BLOCK-iT™ Pol II
miR-LMNA Validated miRNA Control Vector (Thermo
Fisher Scientific), where the LMNA-targeting shRNA
is cloned behind emerald GFP (EGFP). The insert
was shuttled into pRAPtar-2i and -2c vectors, which
consecutively were co-transfected with pGK-Cre plasmid
into A375-ACLN103 ISR cells already carrying the
inducible HcRed reporter in the first site. The HcRed ISR
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

23771

Oncotarget

DUSP6 knockdown

For cell cycle analyses, we incubated the cells for
4 days in the presence of 50 ng/ml dox. The cells (about
5 x 105 cells) were then trypsinized, gently pelleted by
centrifugation, and fixed with methanol for 6 h at -20
°C. After removal of methanol, cells were resuspended
in 7-aminoactinomycin D (7AAD) solution (5 μg/ml
7AAD, 1 mg/ml RNase A in PBS) and incubated for 30
min at 37 °C followed by 90 min at 4°C. Fluorescence
was evaluated as described above (detection at 650 nm;
FL3 channel).

For
DUSP6
knockdown,
cells
were
transfected with 25 nM of siDu1 (sense:
5`-GUGCAACAGACUCGGAUGGUAtt-3`; anti-sense:
5`-UACCAUCCGAGUCUGUUGCACtt-3`),
siDu2
(sense: 5`-AGCUCAAUCUGUCGAUGAAtt-3`; antisense: 5`-UUCAUCGACAGAUUGAGCUtc-3`), or the
non-targeting AllStars negative control siRNA (Qiagen),
respectively, using the Lipofectamine RNAiMAX
transfection reagent (Invitrogen) according to manufacturer’s
instructions. Transfection experiments were performed
at least three times in triplicate in 24-well format using
12,500 cells per well. The medium was replaced 24 h post
transfection and cells were cultured for an additional 48 h
for protein extraction or another 96 h for cell viability and
apoptosis assays.

Cell viability assays
We seeded 1,000 cells per well in 96-well plates
and determined cell viability after 5 d incubation by
addition of 20 μl CellTiter-Blue reagent (Promega) per
well. After 3 h incubation, fluorescence was measured
at 550/610 nm in a Fusion Fluorometer (Packard
Biosciences). Wells containing medium but no cells and
processed in parallel were used for blank subtraction.
To determine relative cell viability robustly, we first
calculated relative viability of ISR cells without dox
addition and with addition of 50 ng/ml dox relative to
two independent empty vector control ISRs (ISR-C)
processed in parallel. We then calculated the ratio of
dox+/dox- cell viability, which should normalize for
all factors contributed by vector components and/or
inherent random variation among ISRs. Experiments
were performed at least three times in triplicate. In the
primary screen, only ISRs, which displayed a 20% or
more change in cell viability were tested for statistical
significance against isogenic controls.

Western blot analyses
To confirm the knockdown of DUSP6, total
protein was harvested with RIPA buffer 48 h post
siRNA transfection. Proteins (20 μg per sample) were
separated by SDS-PAGE via an 8 % Precise protein gel
(Life Technologies) and blotted onto a Immobilon-P
transfer membrane (Millipore). Detection of DUSP6 was
performed using mouse monoclonal antibody (1:1000;
Abcam ab54940) and HRP-conjugated rabbit antimouse IgG (H+L) secondary antibody (1:5000; Jackson
Immunoresearch 315-035-003), and finally visualized with
SuperSignal West Dura Extended Duration Substrate (Life
Technologies). The antibody was afterwards removed
from the membrane with 10 M urea, 45 mM SDS followed
by washing steps with 50 % ethanol, 10 % acetic acid.
Consecutively, the membrane was re-probed with a mouse
monoclonal anti-beta tubulin antibody (1:1000; Abcam
ab7792) and the same secondary antibody as before to
confirm equal loading amounts of protein lysate.

Apoptosis assays
Relative apoptosis activity was determined using
the Cell Death Detection ELISAPlus Kit (Roche). In
brief, 104 cells per well were seeded in 12-well plates
and cells were induced with 50 ng/ml dox 24 h post
seeding. Determination of apoptosis activity followed
48 h post induction according to the instructions of the
supplier. After subtraction of blank (medium-only) values,
relative apoptosis activity was calculated normalized to an
isogenic negative control cell line with the empty vector
construct inserted (ISR-C).
Caspase-3/7 activity after DUSP6 knockdown
was determined using the Apo-ONE Homogeneous
Caspase-3/7 assay according to the protocol of the
provider (Promega) and the fluorescence signal was
detected at the wavelengths 485/535 nm with a Victor3
multi-label counter (PerkinElmer). The Caspase signal
was normalized to the relative cell number analyzed in
parallel using the fluorometric CellTiter-Blue reagent
(Promega) as described above and finally referred to the
values obtained for the non-targeting negative siRNA
control (see below).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Abbreviations
ACL, acceptor cell line; Cas9, CRISPR-associated
protein-9 nuclease; CRISPR, Clustered regularlyinterspaced short palindromic repeats; Flp, flippase;
FRT, flippase recognition target; IDR, isogenic double
recombinant cell; ISR, isogenic single recombinant cell;
ISR-C, isogenic single recombinant cell negative control;
NGS, next-generation sequencing; NHEM, primary
normal human epidermal melanocytes; shRNA, short
hairpin RNA; siRNA, short interfering RNA; TALEN,
Transcription Activator-Like Effector Nuclease

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We would like to thank Ewald Münstermann,
Angelika Wörner and Kai Wunderlich for technical
23772

Oncotarget

assistance and support in cloning. We would further like
to thank Linda Harkness for revising the manuscript.

8.	 Farmer H, McCabe N, Lord CJ, Tutt AN, Johnson DA,
Richardson TB, Santarosa M, Dillon KJ, Hickson I,
Knights  C, Martin NM, Jackson SP, Smith GC, et al.
Targeting the DNA repair defect in BRCA mutant cells as a
therapeutic strategy. Nature. 2005; 434:917-921.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST

9.	 Naldini L, Blömer U, Gallay P, Ory D, Mulligan R, Gage
FH, Verma IM, Trono D. In vivo gene delivery and stable
transduction of nondividing cells by a lentiviral vector.
Science.1996; 272:263-267.

The authors declare no competing interests.

GRANT SUPPORT

10.	 Hockemeyer D, Wang H, Kiani S, Lai CS, Gao Q, Cassady
JP, Cost GJ, Zhang L, Santiago Y, Miller JC, Zeitler B,
Cherone JM, Meng X, et al. Genetic engineering of human
pluripotent cells using TALE nucleases. Nat. Biotechnol.
2011; 29:731-734.

The work was supported by the NGFN Plus
program of the German Federal Ministry of Education and
Research (BMBF; IG-MUTANOM; Grant 01GS08105;
J.M.), the Lundbeck Foundation (Grant NanoCAN; J.M.),
and the Rektorspuljen SDU2020 Program (Grant: DAWN2020; J.M.).

11.	 Soldner F, Laganière J, Cheng AW, Hockemeyer D, Gao Q,
Alagappan R, Khurana V, Golbe LI, Myers RH, Lindquist S,
Zhang L, Guschin D, Fong LK, et al. Generation of isogenic
pluripotent stem cells differing exclusively at two early
onset Parkinson point mutations. Cell. 2011; 146:318-331.

REFERENCES
1.	 Sjöblom T, Jones S, Wood LD, Parsons DW, Lin J, Barber
TD, Mandelker D, Leary RJ, Ptak J, Silliman N, Szabo
S, Buckhaults P, Farrell C, et al. The consensus coding
sequences of human breast and colorectal cancers. Science.
2006; 314:268-274.

12.	 Ding Q, Lee YK, Schaefer EA, Peters DT, Veres A, Kim
K, Kuperwasser N, Motola DL, Meissner TB, Hendriks
WT, Trevisan M, Gupta RM, Moisan A, et al. A TALEN
genome-editing system for generating human stem cellbased disease models. Cell Stem Cell. 2013; 12:238-251.

2.	 Wood LD, Parsons DW, Jones S, Lin J, Sjöblom T, Leary
RJ, Shen D, Boca SM, Barber T, Ptak J, Silliman N, Szabo
S, Dezso Z, et al. The genomic landscapes of human breast
and colorectal cancers. Science. 2007; 318:1108-1113.

13.	 Gaj T, Gersbach CA, Barbas CF 3rd. ZFN, TALEN, and
CRISPR/Cas-based methods for genome engineering.
Trends Biotechnol. 2013; 31:397-405.

3.	 Shah SP, Roth A, Goya R, Oloumi A, Ha G, Zhao Y,
Turashvili G, Ding J, Tse K, Haffari G, Bashashati A,
Prentice LM, Khattra J, et al. The clonal and mutational
evolution spectrum of primary triple-negative breast
cancers. Nature. 2012; 486:395-399.

14.	 Hsu PD, Scott DA, Weinstein JA, Ran FA, Konermann
S, Agarwala V, Li Y, Fine EJ, Wu X, Shalem O, Cradick
TJ, Marraffini LA, Bao G, et al. DNA targeting specificity
of RNA-guided Cas9 nucleases. Nat. Biotechnol. 2013;
31:827-832.

4.	 Nikolaev SI, Rimoldi D, Iseli C, Valsesia A, Robyr D,
Gehrig C, Harshman K, Guipponi M, Bukach O, Zoete
V, Michielin O, Muehlethaler K, Speiser D, et al. Exome
sequencing identifies recurrent somatic MAP2K1 and
MAP2K2 mutations in melanoma. Nat. Genet. 2011;
44:133-139.

15.	 Senecoff JF, Bruckner RC, Cox MM. The FLP recombinase
of the yeast 2-micron plasmid: characterization of its
recombination site. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 1985;
82:7270-7274.
16.	 Zhang Z, Lutz B. Cre recombinase-mediated inversion
using lox66 and lox71: method to introduce conditional
point mutations into the CREB-binding protein. Nucleic
Acids Res. 2002; 30:e90.

5.	 Stark MS, Woods SL, Gartside MG, Bonazzi VF, DuttonRegester K, Aoude LG, Chow D, Sereduk C, Niemi
NM, Tang N, Ellis JJ, Reid J, Zismann V, et al. Frequent
somatic mutations in MAP3K5 and MAP3K9 in metastatic
melanoma identified by exome sequencing. Nat. Genet.
2011; 44:165-169.

17.	 Soriano P. Generalized lacZ expression with the ROSA26
Cre reporter strain. Nat. Genet. 1999; 21:70-71.
18.	 Kuhstoss S, Rao RN. Analysis of the integration function
of the streptomycete bacteriophage phi C31. J. Mol. Biol.
1991; 222:897-908.

6.	 Wei X, Walia V, Lin JC, Teer JK, Prickett TD, Gartner J,
Davis S, NISC Comparative Sequencing Program, StemkeHale K, Davies MA, Gershenwald JE, Robinson W,
Robinson S, et al. Exome sequencing identifies GRIN2A
as frequently mutated in melanoma. Nat. Genet. 2011;
43:442-446.

19.	 Forbes SA, Beare D, Gunasekaran P, Leung K, Bindal N,
Boutselakis H, Ding M, Bamford S, Cole C, Ward S, Kok
CY, Jia M, De T, et al. Nucleic Acids Res. 2015; 43:D805-11.
20.	 Haapajärvi T, Pitkänen K, Laiho M. Human melanoma cell
line UV responses show independency of p53 function. Cell
Growth Differ. 1999; 10:163-171.

7.	 Berger MF, Hodis E, Heffernan TP, Deribe YL, Lawrence
MS, Protopopov A, Ivanova E, Watson IR, Nickerson E,
Ghosh P, Zhang H, Zeid R, Ren X, et al. Melanoma genome
sequencing reveals frequent PREX2 mutations. Nature.
2012; 485:502-506.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

21.	 Felsher DW, Zetterberg A, Zhu J, Tlsty T, Bishop JM.
Overexpression of MYC causes p53-dependent G2 arrest
of normal fibroblasts. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 2000;
97:10544-10548.
23773

Oncotarget

22.	 Wong VC, Chen H, Ko JM, Chan KW, Chan YP, Law S,
Chua D, Kwong DL, Lung HL, Srivastava G, Tang JC,
Tsao SW, Zabarovsky ER, et al. Tumor suppressor dualspecificity phosphatase 6 (DUSP6) impairs cell invasion
and epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT)-associated
phenotype. Int. J. Cancer. 2012; 130:83-95.

protein, is downregulated in cancer and inhibits tumor cell
growth. Oncogene. 2007; 26:4580-4589.
34.	 Zhao LY, Niu Y, Santiago A, Liu J, Albert SH, Robertson
KD, Liao D. An EBF3-mediated transcriptional program
that induces cell cycle arrest and apoptosis. Cancer Res.
2006; 66:9445-9452.

23.	 Zhang H, Chi Y, Gao K, Zhang X, Yao J. p53 proteinmediated up-regulation of MAP kinase phosphatase 3
(MKP-3) contributes to the establishment of the cellular
senescent phenotype through dephosphorylation of
extracellular signal-regulated kinase 1/2 (ERK1/2). J. Biol.
Chem. 2015; 290:1129-1140.

35.	 Bennett KL, Romigh T, Eng C. Disruption of transforming
growth factor-beta signaling by five frequently methylated
genes leads to head and neck squamous cell carcinoma
pathogenesis. Cancer Res. 2009; 69:9301-9305.
36.	 Ferreira JG, Pereira AJ, Akhmanova A, Maiato H. Aurora
B spatially regulates EB3 phosphorylation to coordinate
daughter cell adhesion with cytokinesis. J. Cell Biol. 2013;
201:709-724.

24.	 Mostafavi S, Ray D, Warde-Farley D, Grouios C, Morris
Q. GeneMANIA: a real-time multiple association network
integration algorithm for predicting gene function. Genome
Biol. 2008; 9:S4.

37.	 Meinke P, Schneiderat P, Srsen V, Korfali N, Le Thanh P,
Cowan GJ, Cavanagh DR, Wehnert M, Schirmer EC, Walter
MC. Abnormal proliferation and spontaneous differentiation
of myoblasts from a symptomatic female carrier of X-linked
Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy. Neuromuscul. Disord.
2015; 25:127-136.

25.	 McCubrey JA, Steelman LS, Chappell WH, Abrams SL,
Wong EW, Chang F, Lehmann B, Terrian DM, Milella
M, Tafuri A, Stivala F, Libra M, Basecke J, et al. Roles
of the Raf/MEK/ERK pathway in cell growth, malignant
transformation and drug resistance. Biochim. Biophys.
Acta. 2007; 1773:1263-1284.

38.	 Bignone PA, Lee KY, Liu Y, Emilion G, Finch J, Soosay
AE, Charnock FM, Beck S, Dunham I, Mungall AJ,
Ganesan TS. RPS6KA2, a putative tumour suppressor gene
at 6q27 in sporadic epithelial ovarian cancer. Oncogene.
2007; 26:683-700.

26.	 Owens DM, Keyse SM. Differential regulation of MAP
kinase signalling by dual-specificity protein phosphatases.
Oncogene. 2007; 26:3203-3213.
27.	 Milosevic N, Kühnemuth B, Mühlberg L, Ripka S,
Griesmann H, Lölkes C, Buchholz M, Aust D, Pilarsky C,
Krug S, Gress T, Michl P. Synthetic lethality screen identifies
RPS6KA2 as modifier of epidermal growth factor receptor
activity in pancreatic cancer. Neoplasia. 2013; 15:1354-1362.

39.	 Adorno M, Cordenonsi M, Montagner M, Dupont S, Wong
C, Hann B, Solari A, Bobisse S, Rondina MB, Guzzardo
V. A Mutant-p53/Smad complex opposes p63 to empower
TGFbeta-induced metastasis. Cell. 2009; 137:87-98.
40.	 Muller PA, Caswell PT, Doyle B, Iwanicki MP, Tan EH,
Karim S, Lukashchuk N, Gillespie DA, Ludwig RL,
Gosselin P. Mutant p53 drives invasion by promoting
integrin recycling. Cell. 2009; 139:1327-1341.

28.	 Serra V, Eichhorn PJ, García-García C, Ibrahim YH,
Prudkin L, Sánchez G, Rodríguez O, Antón P, Parra JL,
Marlow S, Scaltriti M, Pérez-Garcia J, Prat A, et al. RSK3/4
mediate resistance to PI3K pathway inhibitors in breast
cancer. J. Clin. Invest. 2013; 123:2551-2563.

41.	 Kollareddy M, Dimitrova E, Vallabhaneni KC, Chan A, Le
T, Chauhan KM, Carrero ZI, Ramakrishnan G, Watabe K,
Haupt Y, Haupt S, Pochampally R, Boss GR, et al. Regulation
of nucleotide metabolism by mutant p53 contributes to its
gain-of-function activities. Nat. Commun. 2015; 6:7389.

29.	 Baxter PA, Lin Q, Mao H, Kogiso M, Zhao X, Liu Z, Huang
Y, Voicu H, Gurusiddappa S, Su JM, Adesina AM, Perlaky
L, Dauser RC, et al. Silencing BMI1 eliminates tumor
formation of pediatric glioma CD133+ cells not by affecting
known targets but by down-regulating a novel set of core
genes. Acta Neuropathol. Commun. 2014; 2:160.

42.	 Messina S, Frati L, Leonetti C, Zuchegna C, Di Zazzo E,
Calogero A, Porcellini A. Dual-specificity phosphatase
DUSP6 has tumor-promoting properties in human
glioblastomas. Oncogene. 2011; 30:3813-3820.

30.	 Gyorffy B, Surowiak P, Budczies J, Lanczky A. Online
survival analysis software to assess the prognostic value of
biomarkers using transcriptomic data in non-small-cell lung
cancer. PLoS One. 2013; 8:e82241.

43.	 Prabhakar S, Asuthkar S, Lee W, Chigurupati S,
Zakharian E, Tsung AJ, Velpula KK. Targeting DUSPs in
glioblastomas - wielding a double-edged sword? Cell Biol.
Int. 2014; 38:145-153.

31.	 Braun AC, Hendrick J, Eisler SA, Schmid S, Hausser
A, Olayioye MA. The Rho-specific GAP protein DLC3
coordinates endocytic membrane trafficking. J. Cell Sci.
2015; 128:1386-1399.

44.	 Ugurel S, Thirumaran RK, Bloethner S, Gast A, Sucker A,
Mueller-Berghaus J, Rittgen W, Hemminki K, Becker JC,
Kumar R, Schadendorf D. B-RAF and N-RAS mutations
are preserved during short time in vitro propagation and
differentially impact prognosis. PLoS One. 2007; 2:e236.

32.	 Holeiter G, Bischoff A, Braun AC, Huck B, Erlmann P,
Schmid S, Herr R, Brummer T, Olayioye MA. The RhoGAP
protein Deleted in Liver Cancer 3 (DLC3) is essential for
adherens junctions integrity. Oncogenesis. 2012; 1:e13.

45.	 List M, Schmidt S, Trojnar J, Thomas J, Thomassen M,
Kruse TA, Tan Q, Baumbach J, Mollenhauer J. Efficient
sample tracking with OpenLabFramework. Sci. Rep. 2014;
4:4278.

33.	 Durkin ME, Ullmannova V, Guan M, Popescu NC. Deleted
in liver cancer 3 (DLC-3), a novel Rho GTPase-activating
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

23774

Oncotarget

