1288

Combination Therapy With Fludarabine and Rituximab
Followed by Alemtuzumab in the First-line Treatment
of Patients With Chronic Lymphocytic Leukemia or
Small Lymphocytic Lymphoma
A Phase 2 Trial of the Minnie Pearl Cancer Research Network

John D. Hainsworth, MD1,2
Elizabeth R. Vazquez, BA1
David R. Spigel, MD1,2
Eric Raefsky, MD2
James D. Bearden, MD3
Ruben A. Saez, MD4
F. Anthony Greco, MD1,2
1
Sarah Cannon Research Institute, Nashville,
Tennessee.
2

Tennessee Oncology, PLLC, Nashville, Tennessee.

3

Spartanburg Regional Medical Center, Spartanburg, South Carolina.
4

Watson Clinic Center for Research, Lakeland,
Florida.

BACKGROUND. The purpose of the current study was to evaluate the efficacy and
toxicity of the combination of fludarabine and rituximab, followed by alemtuzumab, as first-line treatment for patients with chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL)
or small lymphocytic lymphoma (SLL).

METHODS. In a nonrandomized phase 2 trial, 41 patients who had previously
untreated CLL or SLL and required treatment received 4 cycles of the fludarabine
and rituximab combination followed 5 weeks later by 4 weeks (12 doses) of intravenous alemtuzumab therapy. The response to treatment was evaluated after
completion of treatment with fludarabine and rituximab, and again after the
completion of alemtuzumab consolidation.

RESULTS. Initial treatment with the combination of fludarabine and rituximab
was well tolerated, and produced a 71% overall response rate (13% complete
response). Thirty-four patients began treatment with intravenous alemtuzumab,
but this drug was relatively poorly tolerated when given at a short interval after
fludarabine and rituximab, and only 20 patients (49% of total) were able to complete the prescribed course. Five patients had an improvement in their response
with alemtuzumab; the final complete response rate was 21%. The median progression-free survival for the entire group was 42 months. Toxicity with alemtuzumab included infusion-related toxicity, myelosuppression, and opportunistic
infections.

CONCLUSIONS. The intravenous schedule of alemtuzumab employed in the trial
was relatively poorly tolerated in this community-based trial. The relatively low
complete response rates after treatment with the combination of fludarabine and
rituximab and after the completion of treatment suggest that these abbreviated
courses may compromise efficacy. The generalized use of alemtuzumab as consolidation therapy cannot yet be recommended for community practice. However,
optimization of the route of administration, duration of treatment, and interval afSupported in part by grants from Bayer Healthcare Pharmaceuticals and the Minnie Pearl Foundation.
Address for reprints: John D. Hainsworth, MD,
Sarah Cannon Research Institute, 250 25th Avenue North, Suite 110, Nashville, TN 37203; Fax:
(615) 342-1745; E-mail: jhainsworth@tnonc.com
Received July 2, 2007; revision received
September 21, 2007; accepted September 25,
2007.

ª 2008 American Cancer Society

ter completion of induction therapy may improve efficacy, and further investigation is ongoing. Cancer 2008;112:1288–95.  2008 American Cancer Society.

KEYWORDS: alemtuzumab, rituximab, fludarabine, chronic lymphocytic leukemia,
small lymphocytic lymphoma.

C

hronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL), the most common type of
adult leukemia, has traditionally been approached with palliative intent. Many patients are asymptomatic at the time of diagnosis, and can often be observed for long periods of time before

DOI 10.1002/cncr.23271
Published online 11 January 2008 in Wiley InterScience (www.interscience.wiley.com).

FR Followed by Alemtuzumab in CLL/SLL/Hainsworth et al.

requiring therapy. Several cytotoxic agents are active
in the first-line therapy of CLL/SLL (small lymphocytic lymphoma); however, most patients develop
rapidly increasing resistance to subsequent chemotherapy.
Recently, the addition of rituximab to first-line
treatment has markedly improved the complete
response rate.1,2 In a large series of patients treated
with fludarabine, cyclophosphamide, and rituximab
(FCR), the complete response rate was 70%, which
was markedly improved when compared retrospectively to the 20% complete response rate achieved
with fludarabine alone.1 In addition, the higher
response rates noted with the combination of fludarabine and rituximab or FCR have been correlated
with prolonged progression-free survival when compared with chemotherapy alone.1,2
Alemtuzumab is a monoclonal antibody with
substantial efficacy in the treatment of patients with
refractory CLL.3 As a single agent, alemtuzumab produces molecular complete responses in the bone
marrow in 20% of refractory patients and in 45% of
previously untreated patients.4,5 In patients who fail
to achieve a molecular complete response with FCR,
subsequent treatment with single-agent alemtuzumab has been reported to produce a molecular complete remission in 38% of patients.6,7 However, the
survival benefit of achieving a molecular complete
response rate has yet to be defined. In the absence
of a definitive survival advantage, the acceptance of
alemtuzumab treatment has been delayed by its toxicity, in particular opportunistic infections related to
T-cell suppression.
In this multicenter, community-based phase
2 trial, we evaluated the efficacy of first-line therapy
with fludarabine and rituximab, followed by alemtuzumab therapy, in patients with CLL and SLL. In this
trial, patients received 4 courses of fludarabine and
rituximab, followed after a 4–week to 6-week interval
by a 4-week course of alemtuzumab. The use of
short-duration therapy with fludarabine and rituximab and alemtuzumab, as well as the modest reduction in the fludarabine dose, was initiated with the
aim of providing a tolerable regimen for a wider
spectrum of patients. In addition, the trial was part
of our more general investigation of shortening the
duration of chemotherapy in conjunction with the
addition of monoclonal antibodies. We had recently
reported a high level of efficacy of 3 courses of rituximab chemotherapy followed by rituximab maintenance in patients with follicular lymphoma.8 The
results of this treatment in a group of 41 patients are
detailed in this report.

1289

TABLE 1
Minnie Pearl Cancer Research Network Participating Sites
Tennessee Oncology, PLLC
Wellstar Health System Cancer Research
Consultants in Blood Disorders and Cancer
Louisiana Oncology Associates
Grand Rapids Clinical Oncology Program
Spartanburg Regional Medical Center
South Texas Oncology and Hematology, PA
Watson Clinic Center for Research, Inc.
Atlantic Hematology Oncology Associates
Northwest Oncology and Hematology Associates

Nashville, Tennessee
Marietta, Georgia
Louisville, Kentucky
Lafayette, Louisiana
Grand Rapids, Michigan
Spartanburg, South Carolina
San Antonio, Texas
Lakeland, Florida
Manasquan, New Jersey
Coral City, Florida

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Eligibility
This trial was initiated in November 2001 and was
performed at the Minnie Pearl Cancer Research Network, a multicenter, community-based clinical trials
group (Table 1). To be eligible, patients were required
to have previously untreated CD201 B-cell CLL or
SLL using the World Health Organization classification system. Patients with CLL were required to have
Rai stage II, III, or IV disease. Patients with CLL were
eligible only if they required treatment according to
standard National Cancer Institute (NCI) Working
Group criteria.9 These criteria included 1 or more of
the following: cytopenias caused by bone marrow
infiltration; symptomatic or cosmetically bothersome
lymphadenopathy; symptomatic splenomegaly or
hepatomegaly; doubling of the peripheral lymphocyte count in <6 months; and other symptoms
caused by direct or systemic effect of CLL. Patients
with stage I CLL were eligible only if they had systemic symptoms requiring treatment. Patients with
SLL were required to have stage II, III, or IV disease
(Ann Arbor criteria) and to require treatment because
of local or systemic symptoms.
Additional eligibility criteria included an Eastern
Cooperative Oncology Group performance status of
0, 1, or 2; age >18 years; measurable or assessable
disease; serum bilirubin level 2.0 mg/dL; serum
creatinine level 2.0 mg/dL; platelet count >50,000/
lL; no serious coexistent active infections or underlying medical conditions; and no other neoplasms
treated within 5 years of study entry. Patients with
active severe autoimmune hemolytic anemia were
ineligible. Patients with central nervous system involvement (parenchymal or meningeal) were ineligible.
All patients were required to provide written
informed consent before entering this trial. The trial
was approved by the TriStar Institutional Review
Board (Nashville, Tenn) and by the review boards of
participating network sites.

1290

CANCER

March 15, 2008 / Volume 112 / Number 6

FIGURE 1. Treatment regimen. After the first 24 patients were treated, the
interval between the fourth dose of fludarabine/rituximab and the initiation of
alemtuzumab was lengthened to 12 weeks.

Pretreatment Evaluation
Before entering this trial all patients underwent complete staging evaluation, including history and physical examination, complete blood counts, differential,
chemistry profile, computed tomography (CT) scan
of the chest and abdomen, and bone marrow aspiration/biopsy. Pretreatment serum cytomegalovirus
(CMV) antibody titers were also obtained in all
patients.
Treatment Regimen
All patients received initial treatment with fludarabine at a dose of 25 mg/m2 intravenously (iv) on
Days 1–4, repeated at 28-day intervals for 4 courses.
Rituximab at a dose of 375 mg/m2 as a slow iv infusion was administered weekly for the first 4 weeks,
and then concurrently with the second, third, and
fourth courses of fludarabine (Weeks 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 9,
and 13) (Fig. 1). Patients who were considered poor
candidates for fludarabine because of advanced age
or a borderline platelet count were allowed to receive
single-agent rituximab (using the schedule in Fig. 1)
before alemtuzumab. In patients with either high
levels of circulating malignant lymphocytes (>50,000/lL)
or massive lymphadenopathy, allopurinol at a dose
of 300 mg orally daily was initiated 3 days before the
first infusion of rituximab. Although not mandated, a
2-day split course of the first rituximab dose was
recommended for patients with a total white blood
cell count >100,000/lL. In these patients, a Day 1
dose of rituximab of 100 mg was recommended, with
the remainder of the first dose administered on Day
2. Routine premedications included diphenhydramine at a dose of 50 mg iv, acetaminophen at a dose
of 650 mg orally, and cimetidine at a dose of 300 mg
iv, all administered 30 minutes before the initiation
of rituximab infusion.
After the completion of 4 courses of the combination of fludarabine and rituximab, patients were
re-evaluated for response. Five weeks after the final
dose of fludarabine, alemtuzumab was initiated.
Alemtuzumab was administered by slow iv infusion

3 times weekly for 4 weeks. During the first week,
the dose was escalated using doses of 3 mg, 10 mg,
and 30 mg; all subsequent doses were administered
at 30 mg. Premedication included acetaminophen at
a dose of 650 mg orally, and diphenhydramine at a
dose of 50 mg orally or iv, both of which were administered 30 minutes before initiating alemtuzumab
infusion. Meperidine at a dose of 25 to 50 mg iv was
administered as necessary during the infusion for
patients who developed rigors.
During the 4 weeks of alemtuzumab administration, all patients received prophylaxis with trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole, 1 tablet given twice daily
3 times weekly, and famciclovir at a dose of 250 mg
twice daily. Both of these agents were continued for
2 months after completion of alemtuzumab administration.
During therapy with fludarabine and rituximab,
fludarabine dose reductions were made on the basis
of myelosuppression on the day of scheduled treatment. Full doses of fludarabine were administered if
the absolute neutrophil count (ANC) was >1500/lL
and the platelet count was >75,000/lL. If the ANC
was between 1000 and 1500/lL or the platelet count
was between 50,000 and 75,000/lL, a 75% dose of
fludarabine was administered. If the ANC was
<1000/lL or platelet count was <50,000/lL, the
initiation of the subsequent course of treatment was
delayed for 1 week and blood counts were remeasured. Treatment proceeded with a 75% dose of fludarabine when the ANC had risen to >1000/lL and
the platelet count was >50,000/lL. All patients hospitalized for treatment of neutropenia and fever
received 75% doses of fludarabine during all subsequent courses of treatment. Doses of rituximab were
not modified on the basis of myelosuppression; however, if a course was delayed because of myelosuppression the dose of rituximab was also delayed, and
administered concurrently with fludarabine. Patients
experiencing any grade 3 or 4 nonhematologic toxicities had treatment withheld until the toxicity
improved to grade 1. For fludarabine-related toxicity, subsequent fludarabine doses were reduced to
75%. If patients had any toxicity requiring delay of
treatment for >2 weeks, they were removed from
study treatment.
During alemtuzumab therapy, dose adjustments
were made on the basis of myelosuppression.
Patients had complete blood counts measured before
each dose of alemtuzumab. If the ANC fell to <1000/
lL, treatment with either filgrastim or pegfilgrastim
was initiated and alemtuzumab administration was
continued uninterrupted and at full dose. If the
neutrophil count fell to <250/lL despite cytokine

FR Followed by Alemtuzumab in CLL/SLL/Hainsworth et al.

therapy, or if platelets fell to <25,000/lL, alemtuzumab was interrupted and treatment was resumed
only when counts had risen to ANC >500/lL and
platelets >50,000/lL. After the interruption, alemtuzumab was restarted at full dose for the first occurrence and if a second interruption was necessary,
alemtuzumab was restarted at 10 mg dosing for the
remainder of treatment. Alemtuzumab was discontinued if severe neutropenia recurred at the 10 mg
dose. Alemtuzumab doses that were withheld during
periods of myelosuppression were administered after
recovery, so that the total number of alemtuzumab
doses remained at 12 if possible.
Patients who developed reactivation of CMV or
had definitive evidence of opportunistic infection
during alemtuzumab administration were treated
appropriately, and alemtuzumab was discontinued.
For other reversible grade 3 or 4 nonhematologic
toxicities occurring during alemtuzumab administration, dosing was delayed until the toxicities resolved
to grade 1, and then alemtuzumab was resumed at
full dose.

Determination of Efficacy
Patients were initially reevaluated for response after
completion of therapy with fludarabine and rituximab. Reevaluation included complete blood counts,
differential, and chemistry profile. CT scans of the
chest and abdomen were repeated in all patients
with adenopathy or other abnormalities on pretreatment scans. Bone marrow aspiration and biopsy
were repeated only if necessary to confirm a complete remission.
Patients were again re-evaluated 4 weeks after
the completion of alemtuzumab therapy using the
same restaging procedures. At that time, patients
with CLL were assigned a response category using
the NCI Working Group revised guidelines.9 Patients
with SLL were assigned a response category according to the criteria of Cheson et al.10
After the completion of treatment and restaging,
patients were reevaluated at 3-month intervals.
Patients with objective response or stable disease at
the completion of treatment did not receive any further treatment until disease progression was documented. At that time, further treatment was at the
discretion of the treating physician.
Statistical Considerations
The goals of this nonrandomized, phase 2 study were
to assess the toxicity of first-line treatment with fludarabine/rituximab followed by alemtuzumab in
patients with CLL/SLL, and to provide a preliminary
assessment of the efficacy of this treatment approach,

1291

as measured by complete response rate and progression-free survival.
In previous trials by the Cancer and Leukemia
Group B (CALGB),2 the combination of fludarabine
and rituximab produced a complete response rate of
38% and a 2-year progression-free survival of 67%.
With the addition of alemtuzumab, it was believed
that the achievement of a complete response rate of
at least 60% and a 2-year progression-free survival
rate of 75% would indicate sufficient activity of the
regimen to warrant further development. Accrual of a
total of 40 patients to this trial was sufficient to
detect such a difference, with a 90% probability.
Progression-free survival was calculated from the
day of first treatment until the day that disease progression was documented. Overall survival was
defined as the interval from initiation of protocol
treatment until the date of death. Actuarial progression-free survival and overall survival were calculated
using the Kaplan-Meier method.11 Treatment toxicity
was graded using the National Cancer Institute Common Toxicity Criteria (version 3.0). All patients who
received at least 1 dose of treatment were included
in the evaluation of treatment-related toxicity.

RESULTS
Patient Characteristics
Between January 2002 and February 2005, 41 patients
entered this multicenter, community-based trial.
Patient characteristics are listed in Table 2. Twentyeight patients (68%) had CLL, whereas 13 patients
(32%) had SLL. The median age was 60 years (range,
40–80 years), which is typical of this patient population. Seventeen patients (41%) had stage IV disease,
and 8 of 28 patients with CLL (29%) had circulating
malignant lymphocyte counts >50,000/lL. Twentytwo patients (54%) were treated at the Sarah Cannon
Research Institute (Nashville, Tenn) and the remaining 19 patients were treated at 9 participating network sites.
Treatment Received
Thirty-five patients (85%) completed 4 courses of
treatment with fludarabine and rituximab, whereas
2 patients received single-agent rituximab. Four patients were unable to complete this treatment for the
following reasons: treatment-related toxicity in 3 patients and intercurrent illness in 1 patient. Three of
these 4 patients were unevaluable for response to the
combination of fludarabine and rituximab and received no further study treatment, whereas 1 patient
achieved a partial response after a partial course of

1292

CANCER

March 15, 2008 / Volume 112 / Number 6

TABLE 2
Patient Characteristics (N 5 41)

TABLE 3
Reasons for Premature Discontinuation of Alemtuzumab (N 5 14)

Characteristic

No. of patients

Median age (range), y
Gender
Male
Female
Diagnosis
CLL
SLL
ECOG performance status
0
1
2
CLL stage (Rai)
I
II
III
IV
SLL stage (Ann Arbor)
I
II
III
IV
WBC count (cells/lL) in CLL patients (N 5 28)
<10,000
10,000–50,000
>50,000
Primary indication for therapy (CLL patients; n 5 28)
Systemic symptoms
Symptomatic/cosmetically unacceptable adenopathy
Cytopenias
Lymphocyte count doubling in <6 mo
Symptomatic splenomegaly
Treatment site
Sarah Cannon Research Institute
Network sites

60 (40–80)
26 (63%)
15 (37%)

No. of patients
Infusion-related toxicity
Opportunistic infection
Recurrent myelosuppression
Gastrointestinal toxicity (diarrhea/dehydration)
Changed to subcutaneous alemtuzumab

5
5
2
1
1

28 (68%)
13 (32%)
27 (66%)
13 (32%)
1 (2%)
2 (5%)
16 (39%)
4 (10%)
6 (14%)
0
0
2 (5%)
11 (27%)
7 (25%)
13 (46%)
8 (29%)
11 (39%)
7 (25%)
6 (22%)
2 (7%)
2 (7%)
22 (54%)
19 (46%)

CLL indicates chronic lymphocytic leukemia; SLL, small lymphocytic lymphoma; ECOG, Eastern
Cooperative Oncology Group; WBC, white blood cell count.

fludarabine and rituximab and went on to receive
alemtuzumab. During the 4 courses of therapy, full
doses of rituximab were received by 100% of patients.
Twenty-five of 35 patients (71%) who completed 4
courses of fludarabine and rituximab received fulldose fludarabine, whereas 10 patients required dose
reductions during 1 or more courses.
After initial restaging, 34 patients (83%) began
alemtuzumab therapy. Seven patients did not receive
any alemtuzumab for the following reasons: withdrawn from study during treatment with fludarabine
and rituximab because of toxicity or intercurrent illness (3 patients); refused further treatment (2
patients); and physician decision (based on marginal
performance status and/or cytopenias) (2 patients).
Twenty patients (49% of patients entering the study)
completed 12 doses of alemtuzumab as planned per

TABLE 4
Response to Treatment
Response

After fludarabine/
rituximab (N 5 38)

After completion
of treatment (N 5 38)*

CR/CRu
Partial
Stable
Progression

5 (13%)
22 (58%)
10 (27%)
0

8 (21%)
21 (55%)
7 (19%)
2 (5%)

CR indicates complete response; CRu, unconfirmed complete response.

Thirty-four of 38 patients received at least 1 dose of alemtuzumab.

protocol. Of the 14 patients who were unable to
complete 12 doses, 7 received at least 6 doses of
alemtuzumab, whereas the remaining 7 received <6 doses.
Fourteen patients were unable to complete the
planned course of alemtuzumab for reasons detailed
in Table 3. Severe infusion-related reactions (5 patients) and opportunistic infections (4 patients) were
the most common causes of premature discontinuation of alemtuzumab.

Treatment Efficacy
Response rates after completion of therapy with fludarabine and rituximab and after the completion of
all therapies are summarized in Table 4. Twentyseven of 38 patients (71%) who were evaluable after
treatment with the combination of fludarabine/rituximab had objective responses (complete responses in
5 patients and partial responses in 22 patients).
The final responses after completion of treatment are shown for these 38 patients, 34 of whom
received at least 1 dose of alemtuzumab (Table 4).
Three patients with a partial response after treatment
with fludarabine and rituximab achieved a complete
response after alemtuzumab (final complete response
rate of 21%), whereas 2 patients with stable disease
improved to a partial response. Two patients (both
with stable disease after treatment with fludarabine
and rituximab) developed disease progression during
treatment with alemtuzumab.
After a median follow-up of 41 months, 24 patients (60%) remained progression-free. Six of the 8

FR Followed by Alemtuzumab in CLL/SLL/Hainsworth et al.

1293

TABLE 5
Treatment-related Grade 3/4 Toxicity*
No. of patients (%)
Toxicity

FIGURE 2. Progression-free survival (PFS) for the entire group (N 5 41).
The 2-year, 3-year, and 4-year PFS rates were 67%, 55%, and 47%, respectively.

complete responders remained in complete remission. The estimated median progression-free survival for the entire group was 42 months, with 2-year,
3-year, and 4-year progression-free survival rates of
67%, 55%, and 47%, respectively (Fig. 2). The progression-free survival did not differ in the groups of
patients who received 6 versus those who received
< 6 doses of alemtuzumab (2-year progression-free
survival rate of 57% vs 75%; P 5 .44).
The majority of patients in this trial were still
alive at the time of last follow-up. The median survival had not been reached, and the 4-year survival
was 82% (95% confidence interval, 65–91%). To date,
4 patients have died as a result of their disease, 2 patients
had treatment-related deaths, and 1 patient died of an
intercurrent illness (renal cell carcinoma).

Treatment-related Toxicity
Initial treatment with the combinationof fludarabine
and rituximab was well tolerated by most patients.
Grade 3/4 toxicities are summarized in Table 5. Toxicity related to myelosuppression was most common
in this patient group; 12 patients (30%) had grade
3/4 neutropenia, with 3 hospitalizations required for
the treatment of neutropenia and fever. However,
nonhematologic toxicities were uncommon, and
there were no treatment-related deaths noted during
treatment with fludarabine and rituximab.
Table 5 also summarizes the grade 3/4 toxicity
experienced by the 34 patients who received at least
1 dose of alemtuzumab. A variety of grade 3/4 infusion-related reactions occurred with this intravenous
dosing schedule. Grade 3/4 neutropenia occurred in
4 patients (12%), and 3 patients (9%) had episodes of
febrile neutropenia. Opportunistic infections were
documented in 7 patients (5 of these 7 cases were

During fludarabine/rituximab (N 5 41)
Neutropenia
Thrombocytopenia
Anemia
Neutropenia/fever
Fatigue
Infusion-related/hypersensitivity reactions
Treatment-related death
During alemtuzumab (N 5 34)
Neutropenia
Thrombocytopenia
Anemia
Neutropenia/fever
Opportunistic infection
CMV
Pulmonary infiltrates
Infusion-related/hypersensitivity reactions
Skin toxicity
Fatigue
Nausea/vomiting
Peripheral neuropathy
Dehydration
Weakness
Myalgias
Diarrhea
Treatment-related death

Grade 3

Grade 4

7 (17%)
2 (5%)
2 (5%)

5 (12%)
0
1 (2%)
3 (7%)

3 (7%)
4 (10%)

0
0
0

3 (9%)
1 (3%)
0

1 (3%)
2 (6%)
1 (3%)
3 (9%)
7 (21%)
5 (15%)
2 (6%)

7 (21%)
4 (12%)
1 (3%)
4 (12%)
0
3 (9%)
2 (6%)
1 (3%)
1 (3%)

0
0
1 (3%)
0
1 (3%)
0
0
0
0
2 (6%)

CMV indicates cytomegalovirus.
* Treatment toxicity was graded using the National Cancer Institute Common Toxicity Criteria
(version 3.0).

CMV), and resulted in 1 of the 2 alemtuzumabrelated fatalities. One additional patient died after an
unusual syndrome of anorexia, severe weakness, hyponatremia, and recurrent dehydration; because no
other etiology was identified, the death was considered treatment-related. Other grade 3/4 nonhematologic toxicities that occurred in >10% of patients
receiving alemtuzumab included infusion reactions
(21%), skin toxicity (12%), and nausea/vomiting
(12%).
After the first 24 patients were treated, the interval between completing treatment with the combination of fludarabine and rituximab and the initiation
of alemtuzumab was lengthened from 5 to 12 weeks
in an attempt to decrease the incidence of opportunistic infection. The last 10 patients who entered the
trial were treated with this longer interval. The rates
of opportunistic infection in patients treated after a
5-week versus 12-week interval were 9% and 6%,
respectively. The rates of grade 3/4 myelosuppression

1294

CANCER

March 15, 2008 / Volume 112 / Number 6

during alemtuzumab appeared to be higher in the
group with the shorter interval between treatments
(36% with the 5-week interval vs 9% with the 12week interval). However, the percentage of patients
who were able to complete the course of alemtuzumab did not differ between the 2 groups (68% and
55%).

DISCUSSION
The addition of rituximab to fludarabine has
improved the overall response rate, complete
response rate, and progression-free survival in the
treatment of patients with CLL.2 The molecular complete response rate has also improved with these
newer regimens, and has been consistently correlated with improved progression-free survival. Despite these improvements, the majority of patients
with CLL continue to develop disease recurrence after these regimens, including the patients who
achieve molecular complete remission.1,2 Therefore,
additional therapy with the intention of further
improving the rate of molecular complete response
as well as the quality of remission appears likely to
further improve the treatment outcome in patients
with CLL.
Recent efforts to improve the molecular complete response rate after initial treatment with fludarabine and rituximab-based regimens have focused
on the use of alemtuzumab. This agent is of particular interest based on the high response rates documented in fludarabine-refractory patients, as well as
the induction of molecular complete responses when
it is used as a single agent.3,4,12 In the first reported
experience with alemtuzumab as consolidation therapy,
O’Brien et al.6 treated 41 patients with alemtuzumab
after partial response to previous chemotherapy. In
11 of 29 patients, alemtuzumab therapy induced a
molecular complete response by eliminating residual
bone marrow involvement. Similar results were
reported subsequently by Montillo et al.13; in their
experience, the complete response rate improved
from 35% after fludarabine-based induction therapy
(without rituximab) to 79% after alemtuzumab consolidation. Finally, Schweighofer et al.14 reported
improved progression-free survival in a small group
of patients randomized to alemtuzumab consolidation after first-line treatment with fludarabine or the
combination of fludarabine and cyclophosphamide.
This randomized trial had been stopped prematurely
based on excessive alemtuzumab-related toxicity.
However, the median progression-free survival for
the 11 patients randomized to alemtuzumab consolidation exceeded 48 months at the time of last

follow-up, versus 20.6 months in the chemotherapyalone group. Despite these consistent findings regarding the ability of consolidation alemtuzumab
to improve the molecular complete response rate,
the clinical benefit of this approach as it relates to
progression-free survival and overall survival is undetermined.
The results of our multicenter, community-based
phase 2 trial confirm the ability of alemtuzumab
consolidation to improve the response rate after initial induction therapy. However, the overall complete
response rate in our trial was considerably lower
(21%), and only 5 patients (14%) improved their initial response rate after alemtuzumab consolidation.
The majority of our patients who failed to achieve a
complete response had residual adenopathy, even
when blood and bone marrow were clear. The median progression-free survival of 42 months in our
trial, although respectable, does not suggest an
advantage over a full course of either fludarabine
and rituximab in combination or single-agent alemtuzumab as first-line therapy.2,15,16
Several clinical features of our trial may have
collectively affected our results adversely. Probably
most important was the difficulty in administering
the intended course of alemtuzumab. Fewer than
half of the patients in this trial received the prescribed 4-week course of alemtuzumab, and 34% of
patients received fewer than 6 doses. Unfortunately,
this trial was initiated and the majority of accrual
was completed before documentation of the efficacy
and favorable toxicity profile of subcutaneous alemtuzumab.15 Because half of the patients removed prematurely from alemtuzumab had intolerable
infusion-related toxicity, it is likely that subcutaneous
administration would have improved drug delivery.
Second, the short course of fludarabine and rituximab produced a complete response rate that was
lower than expected, and may have exacerbated the
problems caused by the unexpectedly low doses of
alemtuzumab administered. Third, the inclusion of
patients with SLL (32% of the overall patient population) may have adversely affected treatment results.
The relatively weak effect of alemtuzumab in reducing adenopathy versus blood and bone marrow
involvement has been well documented.5,17 Therefore, inclusion of SLL patients may have also contributed to the inferior complete response rates
observed in this trial. Fourth, the short interval
between the completion of fludarabine and the
initiation of alemtuzumab may have increased the
incidence of opportunistic infections. Although we
lengthened the interval from 5 to 12 weeks during
the study, no clear differences in toxicity profile were

FR Followed by Alemtuzumab in CLL/SLL/Hainsworth et al.

observed. However, even this interval is ‘short’ compared with the 24-week intervals currently being
studied. Finally, the relative unfamiliarity of community-based physicians in managing the now welldescribed alemtuzumab-related toxicities may have
impaired the overall treatment results. Early treatment of CMV reactivation is highly effective, and
often allows patients to continue alemtuzumab
therapy.
Although initial experience with alemtuzumab
consolidation has been encouraging, this approach
most likely should not be generally adopted in clinical practice, pending definitive demonstrations of
prolonged progression-free and overall survival. The
administration of an abbreviated course of the combination of fludarabine and rituximab, followed by
abbreviated alemtuzumab, cannot be recommended
based on the results of the current trial. It is also
probable that patients with residual adenopathy after
fludarabine and rituximab-based induction treatment
are unlikely to benefit from alemtuzumab consolidation. Further correlation of alemtuzumab benefit
with specific molecular prognostic features may
define subsets particularly likely to benefit from this
treatment.18
Despite the results of this phase 2 trial, alemtuzumab consolidation in the first-line treatment of
CLL remains a promising treatment approach. Subcutaneous alemtuzumab appears to have similar efficacy, and greatly reduces the infusion-related toxicity
that was common in our study. A longer interval
between the completion of fludarabine and the
initiation of consolidation (perhaps as much as 6
months) may minimize the incidence of opportunistic infection. Ongoing trials should clarify many of
these issues and provide definitive information
regarding the role of this highly active agent.

4.

5.

6.

7.

8.

9.

10.

11.
12.

13.

14.

15.

REFERENCES
1.

2.

3.

Keating MJ, O’Brien S, Albitar M, et al. Early results of a
chemoimmunotherapy regimen of fludarabine, cyclophosphamide, and rituximab as initial therapy for chronic lymphocytic leukemia. J Clin Oncol. 2005;23:4079–4088.
Byrd JC, Rai K, Peterson BL, et al. Addition of rituximab to
fludarabine may prolong progression-free survival and
overall survival in patients with previously untreated
chronic lymphocytic leukemia: an updated retrospective
comparison analysis of CALGB9712 and CALGB9011.
Blood. 2005;105:49–53.
Rai KR, Freter CE, Mercier RJ, et al. Alemtuzumab in previously treated chronic lymphocytic leukemia patients who
also had received fludarabine. J Clin Oncol. 2002;20:3891–
3897.

16.

17.

18.

1295

Moreton P, Kennedy B, Lucas G, et al. Eradication of minimal residual disease in B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia after alemtuzumab therapy is associated with
prolonged survival. J Clin Oncol. 2005;23:2971–2979.
Ludin J, Osterborg A, Brittinger G, et al. CAMPATH-1H
monoclonal antibody in therapy for previously treated lowgrade non-Hodgkin’s lymphomas: a phase II multicenter
study. J Clin Oncol. 1998;16:3257–3263.
O’Brien SM, Kantarjian HM, Thomas DA, et al. Alemtuzumab as treatment for residual disease after chemotherapy
in patients with chronic lymphocytic leukemia. Cancer. 2003;
98:2657–2663.
O’Brien SM, Kantarjian HM, Thomas DA, et al. Alemtuzumab for minimal residual disease in CLL. Blood. 2003;102:
109a. Abstract 371.
Hainsworth JD, Litchy S, Morrissey LH, et al. Rituximab
plus short duration chemotherapy as first-line treatment
for follicular non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma: a phase II trial of
the Minnie Pearl Cancer Research Network. J Clin Oncol.
2005;23:1500–1506.
Cheson BD, Bennett JA, Grever M, et al. National Cancer
Institute-sponsored Working Group guidelines for chronic
lymphocytic leukemia: revised guidelines for diagnosis and
treatment. Blood. 1996;87:4990–4997.
Cheson BD, Horning SJ, Coiffier B, et al. Report of an international workshop to standardize response criteria for
non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma. J Clin Oncol. 1999;17:1244–1255.
Kaplan EL, Meier P. Non-parametric estimation from
incomplete observations. J Am Stat Assoc. 1958;53:457–481.
Fiegl M, Falkner A, Hopfinger G, et al. Routine clinical use
of alemtuzumab in patients with heavily pretreated B-cell
chronic lymphocytic leukemia. Cancer. 2006;107:2408–
2416.
Montillo M, Tedeschi A, Miqueleiz S, et al. Alemtuzumab
as consolidation after a response to fludarabine is effective
in purging residual disease in patients with chronic lymphocytic leukemia. J Clin Oncol. 2006;24:2337–2342.
Schweighofer C, Ritgen M, Eichhorst B, et al. Consolidation
with alemtuzumab improves progression-free survival in
patients with chronic lymphocytic leukemia in first remission—long-term follow-up of a randomized phase III trial
of the German CLL Study Group (GCLLSG). Blood. 2006;
108:14a. Abstract 33.
Lundin J, Kimby E, Bjorkholm M, et al. Phase II trial of
subcutaneous anti-CD52 monoclonal antibody alemtuzumab (Campath-1H) as first-line treatment for patients with
B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia (B-CLL). Blood. 2002;
100:768–773.
Hillmen P, Skotnicki A, Robak T, et al. Alemtuzumab (CAMPATH, MABCAMPATH) has superior progression-free survival vs. chlorambucil as front-line therapy for patients
with progressive B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia
(BCLL). Blood. 2006;108:93a. Abstract 301.
Osterborg A, Dyer MJ, Bunjes D, et al. Phase II multicenter
study of human CD52 antibody in previously treated
chronic lymphocytic leukemia. European Study Group of
CAMPATH-1H treatment in chronic lymphocytic leukemia.
J Clin Oncol. 1997;15:1567–1574.
Lozanski G, Heerema NA, Flinn IW, et al. Alemtuzimab is
an effective therapy for chronic lymphocytic leukemia with
p53 mutations and deletions. Blood. 2004;103:3278–3281.

