Oncotarget, June, Vol.4, No 6

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Phenylbutyrate increases activity of pyruvate dehydrogenase
complex.
Rosa Ferriero and Nicola Brunetti-Pierri
Altered metabolism is an important hallmark of
cancer cells and confers them a selective advantage for
survival and proliferation. Metabolism in cancer cells is
shifted towards glycolysis and decreased dependence on
mitochondrial glucose oxidation, a phenomenon known
as ‘Warburg effect’ (aerobic glycolysis). Lactate, the
end product of glycolysis, is produced in large excess by
cancer cells that used it as metabolic fuel, and has been
directly involved in cancer progression. Growth of cancer
cells often occurs in a hypoxic microenvironment and
thus, these cells rely on anaerobic glycolysis as a primary
energy source. Nevertheless, conversion of glucose to
lactate persists in cancer cells despite the presence of
oxygen (aerobic glycolysis). This adaptation is initiated,
in part, by activation of hypoxia-inducible factor 1α
(HIF-1) that regulates expression of several glycolytic
enzymes, glucose transporters, and mitochondrial
enzymes, including pyruvate dehydrogenase kinases
(PDKs) which inactivate the pyruvate dehydrogenase
complex (PDHC) [1]. The PDHC is an important enzyme
in metabolism linking glycolysis to the tricarboxylic
acid (TCA) cycle and lipogenic pathway. PDHC
catalyzes in mitochondria the irreversible conversion of

pyruvate into acetyl-CoA that initiates the TCA cycle.
PDHC is formed by three different enzymes: thiamine
diphosphate-dependent heterotetrameric (α2β2) E1,
dihydrolipoamide acetyltransferase (E2), and FAD
containing dihydrolipoamide dehydrogenase (E3), that
is integrated into the complex by an E3-binding protein
(E3BP). Phosphorylation of specific E1α serine residues
by PDKs (PDK1, PDK2, PDK3, and PDK4) results in
inactivation of PDHC, whereas dephosphorylation by
pyruvate dehydrogenase phosphatases (PDP1 and PDP2)
restores PDHC activity (Fig. 1). Inhibition of PDHC
activity results in conversion of pyruvate into lactate by
lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) in the cytoplasm.
Deficiency of PDHC is one of the most common
inborn errors of energy metabolism and affected patients
present with progressive neurological degeneration and
lactic acidosis [2]. Dichloroacetate (DCA) increases
PDHC activity by inhibition of PDK and is effective in
reducing blood and tissue lactate [3]. However, DCA has
been associated with hepatocellular and peripheral nerve
toxicity. We have recently found that phenylbutyrate, a
drug used in patients with urea cycle defects and cancer,
results in reduction of phosphorylated E1α and increased

Figure 1: Regulation of pyruvate dehydrogenase complex (PDHC) activity and its role in pyruvate metabolism and
oxidative phosphorylation. The phosphorylation is catalyzed by pyruvate dehydrogenase kinases (PDKs) whereas the dephosphorylation
is catalyzed by phosphatases (PDPs). Phenylbutyrate-mediated inhibition of PDK results in increased proportion of activated PDHC. The
greater PDHC activity enhances glucose oxidation, acetyl-coA levels, tricarboxylic acid cycle, and electron transport chain activity.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

804

Oncotarget 2013; 4: 804-805

enzyme activity both in fibroblasts and mice (Fig. 1).
Moreover, it improved the morphological, locomotor,
and biochemical abnormalities of a zebrafish model of
PDHC deficiency and it prevented systemic lactic acidosis
induced by partial hepatectomy in mice [2]. The effect of
phenylbutyrate was not dependent on increased expression
of genes encoding PDHC subunits or its regulatory
enzymes (PDKs and PDPs) and thus, it is not secondary
to its known activity as histone deacetylase (HDAC)
inhibitor [4]. Phenylbutyrate is a drug already approved
for use in humans with a well-established safety profile,
and therefore the study by Ferriero et al. has the potential
to be rapidly translated into a treatment for patients with
PDHC deficiency and lactic acidosis [2].
Metabolic remodeling in cancer cells is clearly
involved in cancer progression and can be exploited for
cancer treatment. Through enhancement of PDHC activity,
DCA promotes mitochondrial glucose oxidation and thus
reverses the cancer metabolic remodeling. Based on this
effect, DCA has been investigated as an anti-cancer agent.
The clinical evidence that DCA, as a single agent, might
be effective in glioblastoma [5] suggests its use in other
glycolytic forms of cancer. Interestingly, phenylbutyrate
also has shown efficacy in different cancers and so far,
its anti-tumor activity has been attributed to the HDAC
inhibitor mode of action [4]. Based on our recent finding
[2], the therapeutic effect of phenylbutyrate on cancer
cells may depend upon increased PDHC activity (Fig. 1),
in addition or alternatively to its proposed role as HDAC
inhibitor. Phenylbutyrate might be a safer alternative to
DCA especially for patients treated with chemotherapies
such as taxane, platinum and vinca-alkaloid that like DCA
can also result in peripheral neuropathy [3].
Metabolic tissues in mammals transform ingested
food into glucose, amino acid, and lipids to meet the
metabolic needs of both differentiated and proliferating
cells. Alterations in the appropriate balance of fuels and/
or signal transduction pathways that deal with nutrient
utilization may underlie cancer predisposition associated
with metabolic diseases such as diabetes and obesity.
Excess calories are indeed associated with shortened
life span whereas caloric deprivation prolongs life span.
Intriguingly, both phenylbutyrate and DCA were found
to increase life span in Drosophila melanogaster and
Caenorhabditis elegans, respectively [6-7]. Treatment of
obese and diabetic mice with phenylbutyrate resulted in
normalization of hyperglycemia, restoration of systemic
insulin sensitivity, resolution of fatty liver disease, and
enhancement of insulin action [8]. It has been proposed
that this effect is dependent on phenylbutyrate acting
as a chemical chaperone, another mode of action of
phenylbutyrate. However, given the role of PDHC in
energy metabolism, and the increased glucose disposal in
peripheral tissues obtained by increased PDHC activity,
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

the effect on glucose homeostasis may be also related to
the stimulatory effect of phenylbutyrate of PDHC.
In summary, the multiple biological effects observed
in normal and cancer cells treated with phenylbutyrate can
be dependent, at least in part, on the newly recognized
activity on PDHC, a key enzyme for metabolism and
survival.
Rosa Ferriero: Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine,
Naples, Italy
Nicola Brunetti-Pierri: Telethon Institute of Genetics and
Medicine, Naples, Italy and Department of Translational
Medicine, Federico II University of Naples, Italy.
Correspondence: Nicola Brunetti-Pierri, email brunetti@tigem.it
Received: April 26, 2013;
Published: April 28, 2013

REFERENCES
1.	

Kim JW, et al. Cell Metab. 2006; 3:177-185.

2.	

Ferriero R, et al. Sci Transl Med. 2013; 5:175ra131.

3.	

Stacpoole PW, et al. Pediatrics. 2008; 121:e1223-1228.

4.	

Bolden JE, et al.. Nat Rev Drug Discov. 2006; 5:769-784.

5.	

Michelakis ED, et al. Sci Transl Med. 2010; 2:31ra34.

6.	 Kang HL, et al. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2002; 99:838843.

805

7.	

Schaffer S, et al. Biogerontology. 2011; 12:195-209.

8.	

Ozcan U, et al. Science. 2006; 313:1137-1140.

Oncotarget 2013; 4: 804-805

