Correspondence
10. Schiffer CA, Mangu PB, Wade JC, et al. Central venous catheter
care for the patient with cancer: American Society of Clinical Oncology clinical practice guideline. J Clin Oncol. 2013;31:1357-1370.

Victor Moreno, MD
Medical Oncology Service
La Paz University Hospital
Madrid, Spain

Rocio Garcıa-Carbonero, MD
Medical Oncology Service
Virgen del Rocıo University Hospital
Seville, Spain

Joan Maurel, MD
Medical Oncology Service
Barcelona Hospital Clinic
Barcelona, Spain

Jaime Feliu, MD
Medical Oncology Service
La Paz University Hospital
Madrid, Spain
DOI: 10.1002/cncr.28449, Published online November 14, 2013
in Wiley Online Library (wileyonlinelibrary.com)

Reply to Phase 1 Study of
Cetuximab in Combination With
5-Fluorouracil, Cisplatin, and
Radiotherapy in Patients With
Locally Advanced Anal Canal
Carcinoma

impact on the VTE rate, which continued to occur in
25%, or 3 of 12 patients. Conversely, the use of agents
with potential risk for VTE (cisplatin and cetuximab) in
combination may be an issue. In our experience with the
use of only cisplatin-based chemoradiation in 86 patients
with locally advanced anal canal carcinoma, no patient
developed VTE.2
Cumulative toxicities may be relevant. In our trial,
the majority of patients received full treatment and
developed severe toxicities, and the majority of the cases
of VTE occurred after the second cycle of chemotherapy.
Conversely, in the ACCORD 16 trial,3 which is more
similar to ours, no VTE occurred, but only 8 of the 16 enrolled patients completed treatment. In fact, a constellation of factors such as diarrhea, infection, neutropenia,
and hospitalization may have played a role.
Secondly, severe comorbidities or cardiovascular
disease were exclusion criteria in our trial. The
Khorana et al predictive model for chemotherapyassociated thrombosis was applied in all patients.4
Only 3 of 23 patients were found to have an intermediated risk for VTE, and the remaining 20 patients
were found to be at low risk for developing VTE. In
conclusion, local factors and comorbidities do not
appear to have played a major role in the high VTE
rate found in our study.1
CONFLICT OF INTEREST DISCLOSURES

Feliu et al believe that local factors related to the central
venous catheters (CVC) played a major role in the high
incidence of venous thromboembolism (VTE) reported in
our phase 1 trial.1 Moreover, they claim that the inclusion
of patients with concomitant severe illness favored the
increased rates of VTE. They bring to light their own
phase 2 experience in treating patients with locally
advanced anal canal carcinoma with pelvic chemoradiation
based on the use of mitomycin-C plus panitumumab, in
which no cases of VTE were reported to have occurred. In
addition, they refer to the results of two phase 2 trials that
have been published only in abstract form.
Our reasons for disagreeing with Feliu et al are
manifold. First, comparison across the trials they refer to
is not trivial because different treatment strategies and
agents were administered. Full reports of these trials are
required to draw any conclusion. We believe the type of
catheter used in our study did not influence the rate of
VTE. The alteration of peripherally inserted central catheters to implanted CVCs in 12 patients treated with the
recommended phase 2 dose did not appear to have any
456

The authors made no disclosures.

REFERENCES
1. Olivatto LO, Vieira FM, Pereira BV, et al. Phase 1 study of cetuximab in combination with 5-fluorouracil, cisplatin, and radiotherapy
in patients with locally advanced anal canal carcinoma. Cancer. 2013;
119:2973-2980.
2. Olivatto LO, Cabral V, Rosa A, et al. Mitomycin-C– or cisplatinbased chemoradiotherapy for anal canal carcinoma: long-term results.
Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2011;79:490-495.
3. Deutsch E, Lemanski C, Paris E, et al. Cetuximab plus radiochemotherapy in locally advanced anal cancer: Interim results of the
French multicenter phase II trial ACCORD16 [Abstract]. J Clin
Oncol. 2011;29(suppl 15): Abstract 40983.
4. Khorana AA, Kuderer NM, Culakova E, Lyman GH, Francis CW.
Development and validation of a predictive model for chemotherapyassociated thrombosis. Blood. 2008;111:4902-4907.

Luis Olivatto, MD, MSc
Division of Clinical Oncology
National Cancer Institute
Rio de Janeiro, Brazil

Carlos Gil Ferreira, MD, PhD
Coordination of Clinical Research
National Cancer Institute
Rio de Janeiro, Brazil
DOI: 10.1002/cncr.28448, Published online November 14, 2013
in Wiley Online Library (wileyonlinelibrary.com)

Cancer

February 1, 2014

