Oncotarget, Vol. 7, No. 45

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Research Paper

Case-specific potentiation of glioblastoma drugs by pterostilbene
Linnéa Schmidt1, Sathishkumar Baskaran1, Patrik Johansson1, Narendra
Padhan1, Damian Matuszewski2, Lydia C Green3, Ludmila Elfineh1, Shimei Wee4,
Maria Häggblad5, Ulf Martens5, Bengt Westermark1, Karin Forsberg-Nilsson1,
Lene Uhrbom1, Lena Claesson-Welsh1, Michael Andäng4, Ida-Maria Sintorn2,
Bo Lundgren5, Ingrid Lönnstedt1, Cecilia Krona1, Sven Nelander1
1

Life Laboratory, Uppsala University, Uppsala Sweden

2

Centre for Image Analysis, Department of Information Technology, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden

3

Sahlgrenska Cancer Center, Institute of Medicine, Gothenburg, Sweden

4

Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, Karolinska Institute, Sweden

5

Cell Screening Facility, Science for Life Laboratory Stockholm, Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Stockholm
University, Solna, Sweden

Correspondence to: Sven Nelander, email: sven.nelander@igp.uu.se
Keywords: glioblastoma, glioblastoma initiating cells, stilbenoids, drug repurposing, cancer therapeutics
Received: March 12, 2016     Accepted: September 16, 2016     Published: September 28, 2016

ABSTRACT
Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM, astrocytoma grade IV) is the most common
malignant primary brain tumor in adults. Addressing the shortage of effective
treatment options for this cancer, we explored repurposing of existing drugs into
combinations with potent activity against GBM cells. We report that the phytoalexin
pterostilbene is a potentiator of two drugs with previously reported anti-GBM activity,
the EGFR inhibitor gefitinib and the antidepressant sertraline. Combinations of either
of these two compounds with pterostilbene suppress cell growth, viability, sphere
formation and inhibit migration in tumor GBM cell (GC) cultures. The potentiating
effect of pterostilbene was observed to a varying degree across a panel of 41
patient-derived GCs, and correlated in a case specific manner with the presence of
missense mutation of EGFR and PIK3CA and a focal deletion of the chromosomal
region 1p32. We identify pterostilbene-induced cell cycle arrest, synergistic inhibition
of MAPK activity and induction of Thioredoxin interacting protein (TXNIP) as
possible mechanisms behind pterostilbene’s effect. Our results highlight a nontoxic
stilbenoid compound as a modulator of anticancer drug response, and indicate that
pterostilbene might be used to modulate two anticancer compounds in well-defined
sets of GBM patients.

INTRODUCTION

a priority objective to determine which pathways are
relevant for combinatorial targeting of GBM. Furthermore,
the fact that GBM tumors exhibit molecular heterogeneity,
prompts the questions to what degree transcriptional
subtypes of GBM [7] might affect drug-drug synergy,
and if there are safe compounds that can significantly
potentiate existing drugs in well-defined subsets of GBM
patients.
Pterostilbene
(trans-3,
5-dimethoxy-4′hydroxystilbene) is chemically classified as a stilbenoid
and biologically as a phytoalexin (a class of low
molecular weight compounds synthesized by plants as

The dismal outcome for glioblastoma (GBM)
patients with current therapies [1] strongly motivates the
exploration for new therapeutic approaches. Amounting
evidence suggests that GBM cells can be inhibited by
synergistically acting pairs of compounds [2–5], such as
tricyclic antidepressants together with inhibitors of the
P2Y12 receptor family of purinergic G protein coupled
receptors, or antidepressants with sigma receptor inhibitors
[4, 6]. Such repurposed combinations of approved drugs
offer a faster route to clinical evaluation and it is therefore

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

73200

Oncotarget

RESULTS

part of their antimicrobial defense). It is considered a
safe compound with no reported toxicities, and is found
naturally in berries [8–13]. Analyses of both pterostilbene
and its analog resveratrol (3, 5, 4′-trihydroxy-transstilbene) have indicated anticancer effects in cell-based
and mouse experimental systems [14]. Evaluation in
rodent cancer models has shown that pterostilbene can
suppress the progression of experimental colon and liver
cancers [15]. In a model of colon cancer, pterostilbene
suppressed beta-catenin and cyclin D1 in colon cancer
tumor samples [16]. The molecular basis mechanism of
stilbenoids is not fully understood; but phosphodiesterase
(PDE) enzymes [17], cyclooxygenase and in particular
cytochrome p450 components have been implicated as
possible targets [18]. Studies of pterostilbene in brain
cancers are limited to the previous study from our lab
[4] and one recent publication showing that pterostilbene
suppresses self-renewal, irradiation-resistance and
gliomagenesis in vivo [19], however it has shown activity
in model systems of other cancer types [16, 20, 21].
Pterostilbene is also relevant for glioma treatment due
to its high bioavailability and its ability to pass the blood
brain barrier [8, 11].
A recent large scale screen detected that pterostilbene
might functionally interact with other compounds
to suppress growth in GBM [4]. Two such tentative
interacting partners were the serotonin reuptake inhibitor
(SSRI) sertraline and the EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitor
gefitinib. Sertraline, while not intended as a cancer drug,
effectively passes the blood brain barrier; it has been
reported to have activity against GBM cells [7, 22], and is
being considered for clinical evaluation in GBM patients
[23]. The target of gefitinib, EGFR, is frequently altered
in GBM, by point mutation, chromosomal aberration, or
both [24, 25]. However, clinical trials of gefitinib have
not shown a significant increase in GBM patient survival
[26]. It is therefore interesting to consider pterostilbene as
a possible modulator of clinical response to both sertraline
and gefitinib.

Pterostilbene potentiates gefitinib and sertraline
to suppress malignant phenotypes of GCs
We first investigated the effect of pterostilbene,
gefitinib and sertraline (Supplementary Figure S1A) in
a set of four glioblastoma cell (GC) cultures (U3017MG,
U3037MG, U3047MG and U3065MG). In each of the
cultures, we measured the viability following treatment
by pterostilbene, sertraline and gefitinib, applied singly
and in combination. The responses were used to calculate
an Interaction Score (IS, Methods). A negative IS
(IS < 0, indicating an interaction of a potentiating
type) was observed between pterostilbene and each of
gefitinib and sertraline, at multiple dose combinations
(Figure 1A). As a working model for downstream
experiments, we chose a set of doses that consistently
gave a negative score in all four GC cultures
(20 μM pterostilbene, 7 μM sertraline and 10 μM gefitinib,
Figure 1B). For these doses, the pterostilbene + gefitinib
(PG) and pterostilbene + sertraline (PS) pairs significantly
suppressed cell viability whereas single compounds did
not (IS < 0, Figure 1B–1C). Additional analysis of the time
dependency of the response showed that PS and PG negative
interaction (IS < 0) becomes apparent after approximately
35 hours of combination treatment (Figure 1D).
In addition to a synergistic effect on cell viability,
the PS and PG pairs also suppressed cell migration
and gliomasphere formation in the GC cultures
(Figure 2). Thus, while the single drugs displayed a
modest effect on migration in the GCs tested, the PS and
PG pairs significantly suppressed migration in U3017MG,
U3047MG and U3065MG (p < 0.05) (Figure 2A, 2B).
Furthermore, both PS and PG combinations displayed a
significant inhibitory effect on gliomasphere formation
(Figure 2C and Supplementary Figure S1B) in U3017MG,
U3047MG and U3065MG (p < 0.05). For the migration
and clone formation assays, U3017MG and U3037MG
were challenging cultures to work with. As a result of this,
U3037MG was excluded from the gliomasphere formingand migration analysis and U3017MG from the EdU
proliferation assay.
Altogether, the PS and PG pairs were demonstrated
to suppress viability, migration, and sphere forming
capacity of GC cultures.

We analyzed the effect of pterostilbene as a
potentiating compound across a panel of glioblastoma
cell (GC) cultures [7, 27, 28] established from patient
surgical samples. By sampling GCs from several
patients, we could assess variations in the level of
functional interaction between pterostilbene, gefitinib
and sertraline across a large and diverse sample of
patient-derived cell cultures. Further, we explored how
pterostilbene, singly or in combination, suppressed
malignant phenotypes in GCs, such as migration and
proliferation, and investigated the mechanism by
which pterostilbene modulates sertraline and gefitinib.
The results identify pterostilbene as a potentiator of
two drugs with anti-GBM activity with possible
implications for other malignancies.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Investigating drug interactions in cells
from 41 different patients
Next, we asked if PS and PG synergy would be
consistently observed across a larger sample of GCs
cultures from different individuals. We thus measured
the response to PS and PG across an extended set of

73201

Oncotarget

41 patient-derived GC cultures from our Human Glioma
Cell Culture (HGCC) biobank [29]. The cultures were
obtained from 25 males and 16 females (average age of
65.5 years) assigned a pathological diagnosis of WHO
astrocytoma grade IV, or glioblastoma multiforme (GBM).
Among the 41 cell cultures, all molecular subclasses
proposed for GBM are represented (Supplementary
Table S1) [25] and all cells used were IDH1 wildtype as
determined by exome sequencing [29].
Using an innovative protocol, we evaluated each
drug at 11 individual doses and further evaluated the
PS and PG pairs at 11 different doses in a fixed ratio

(Supplementary Table S2), after 72 hours of
drug exposure. From these three dose series, we
estimated both the interaction score (IS) and the
Combination Index (CI, Methods) (Figure 3A–3C
and Supplementary Figure S2A–S2C). Across the 41
cases, the mean IS of pterostilbene+sertraline (PS) and
pterostilbene+gefitinib (PG) were negative, −0.10 and
−0.05 respectively, indicating a functional interaction
consistent with synergism. Moreover, the mean CI
was below 1, 0.65 and 0.7 for PS and PG respectively,
demonstrating pairwise synergism (Figure 3B, 3C).
Both IS and CI medians were significantly different

Figure 1: Combination of pterostilbene with sertraline or gefitinib suppresses glioma cell growth. 72 hours viability

response to sertraline, gefitinib and pterostilbene, in four GCs treated in triplicates for each dose and combination. (A) Evaluating each
compound at three different doses, we obtained pairwise interaction scores (IS, Methods). A negative IS, consistent with a potentiating
interaction, was more pronounced at particular dose concentrations. Numbers in the table are mean and SD of IS across GCs (n = 4).
(B) Combinations of pterostilbene with sertraline or gefitinib suppressed viability at 72 hours, whereas the single agents did not. (error bars
are 95% CI). Both combinations display a significant interaction score at the doses tested in all GCs except for the PS combination in U3017.
*p < 0.05, **p < 0.01 (Methods). (C) Images of treated GC U3065 at 24 and 48 hours. (D) Real time cell growth density
measurements recorded every 12 hours for 60 hours in U3065, presented as cell growth curves with mean and SD from triplicates for each
recorded time point.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

73202

Oncotarget

from 0 and 1, respectively (IS and CI for PG and PS
p < 0.0001). As a point of reference, human astrocyte
cultures were comparatively less sensitive to pterostilbene
(Supplementary Figure S3).
Taken together, the initial observation that
pterostilbene potentiates gefitinib and sertraline in GBM
was thus extended to a broad set of patient-derived samples
and shown for two metrics of functional interaction.

robust (Methods). Whereas no correlation was observed
between CI and age, gender or survival (days from
diagnosis to death) for the PG combination, the CI of
the PS pair correlated with age (p < 0.05, Supplementary
Figure S4) (The application of correlation to survival
times is adequate since all patients were diseased, i.e.
no censored data points). We proceeded to test for
differences in CI across each of the GBM molecular
subtypes GBM [25]; Classical (CL), Mesenchymal
(MS), Neural (NL) and Proneural (PN), assigned as in
[30]. Since only two of the GCs were annotated for the
NL subtype, the analysis was focused to the three main
subtypes. The PG pair tended towards elevated synergism
(lower CI) for the CL subtype (ANOVA p = 0.075 for
a difference between the three groups, Student’s t-test
p < 0.05 compared to the MS subtype, and p = 0.17 when
compared to the PN subtype), but the ANOVA does
not support a significant difference between the groups
collectively (Figure 3D).

Pterostilbene induced drug potentiation can be
predicted in individual GC cultures
We next asked if pterostilbene-induced potentiation
of gefitinib and sertraline would correlate with either
clinical variables or molecular signatures. For the
analyses we focused on CI, rather than IS, since CI is the
metric that is often used to formally assign ‘synergism’
relationships between drug pairs and since the estimation
of CI involves more data points and is therefore more

Figure 2: Combination of pterostilbene with sertraline or gefitinib affect glioma cell migration and sphere formation.
(A) Images of migration trans-well membranes after treatment (U3047). (B) Trans-well migration capacity after 48 hours of treatment in
GC cultures. Graphs are plotted from the collected results from experiments in three GC cultures (U3047, U3065 and U3017, a total of 9
ratio data points for each treatment). (C) Gliomasphere formation after 7 days of treatment (experiment in six replicates for each treatment
in U3047, U3065 and U3037). All ratios are calculated from vehicle control measurements, and all graphs are presented as means with 95%
confidence interval. *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001 (Mann Whitney).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

73203

Oncotarget

Using a complementary method to associate CI
with molecular profiles, we applied elastic net regression
with variable selection [31] to detect molecular changes
that would predict variations in CI. The analysis showed
that both transcripts and DNA copy number aberrations
in the GC cultures could predict CI for the PS pair, as
shown by a leave-one-out cross validation analysis
(Figure 4). The procedure selected a total of five transcripts

as optimally predictive of PS synergy. The transcript that
correlated most with PS Combination Index was Ring
Finger 11 (RNF11), a component of a ubiquitin editing
complex with broad functions, including modulation
of cellular internalization of the EGF receptor [32]
(Figure 4A). Interestingly, the elastic net procedure, when
applied to DNA copy number data instead of expression
data as the predictor of CI, identified the chromosomal

Figure 3: Measurement of pterostilbene induced potentiation across 41 GC cultures. A screening experiment was performed,

measuring 11 dose series of each of the drugs both single and as fixed-proportion concentrations for the combinations pterostilbene and
gefitinib (PG) and pterostilbene and sertraline (PS) in 41 GCs. (A) Sigmoid dose response curves (dashed lines) were fitted to the mean
viability ratio across the 41 GCs (orange, blue and green lines and results for individual GCs in Supplementary Figure S2). Each two
sigmoid curves for single drugs (left and middle panel) were used to derive an expected combination response curve under the assumption
of no synergy (grey line). The thick black lines (right panel) show the average observed combination response (doses in log10). Blue
and red lines represent a synergy or an antagonism, respectively. (B, C) Boxplots of the patientwise average IS (across all overlapping
doses tested) and patientwise average CI (effect 40–60%) across all 41 GCs. The results confirm a significant generality of the synergistic
response for the drug pairs in a large patient material (p < 0.0001, Methods). (D) Differences in CI across the GC panel annotated by their
subtype. CI for PG and PS, left and right, respectively. No statistical difference was obtained between subtypes (ANOVA p = 0.075, main
text), although a trend towards a stronger synergy for the PG combination in the Classical subtype was observed.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

73204

Oncotarget

locus of RNF11 (chr1p32.3) as predictive. This locus
contains not only RNF11 but also a set of phospholipases
and other genes (Figure 4B). To explore the functional
relevance of this association, we suppressed expression of
RNF11 by siRNA knockdown in a cell line with normal
DNA copy number of the RNF11 locus, U3027MG.
RNF11 knockdown protected the U3027MG cells from
the PS combination to a moderate but significant degree
(p < 0.01) (Figure 4D). This finding suggests a possible
role for RNF11 in modulating the response to the PS pair.
For the PG pair, application of the elastic net method
did not result in a gain in predictive performance over
transcriptional signatures (not shown).
Finally, we analyzed if the CI for PS and PG,
respectively, was correlated to missense somatic mutation
of protein coding genes in the GC cultures (unpublished

data). We performed an analysis in which somatic
mutations in the 10 genes with numerically highest
somatic mutation frequency in the hgcc.se biobank (EGFR,
NF1, PDGFRA, PIK3CA, PIK3R1, PTEN, RB1, RYR2,
TP53, TTN) each were analyzed as possible predictors
of Combination Index. For the PG combination, CI was
significantly lower in the one cell culture with a high
stringency (Methods) mutation in the EGFR gene (z test
p = 0.015). The low frequency of EGFR mutant cell
cultures is partly a sampling coincidence (the 41 cell
cultures are part of a material with 9% EGFR detected
missense point mutation frequency) but may also reflect
the stringent use of mutation callers by the hgcc.se
consortium (Methods). No IDH1 mutation was found
among our cell cultures. The CI of the PS combination,
in turn, was statistically associated with PIK3CA somatic

Figure 4: Predictive markers of synergy between pterostilbene, sertraline and gefitinib in glioblastoma cell (GC)
cultures. Using data from 41 GC cultures, we applied elastic net regression to predict the Combination Index (CI) between pterostilbene
and sertraline. (A) Prediction of PS CI could be predicted with good accuracy from RNA transcripts (Pearson correlation of 0.63 between
X = observed and Y = predicted values as obtained by cross-validation, left). Transcripts selected as predictive transcripts (showing
coefficients as bars) included RNF11 and TSPYL1 (right). (B) The same analysis performed using DNA copy number aberration data for
the GC cultures. The predictive performance is not as high as for transcripts (left), and the model identifies a set of genes encoded by the
same region on chromosome 1p (including the RNF11 locus) as predictive. (C) Association between PS CI and PIK3CA missense somatic
mutation status (left) and PG CI and EGFR status (right). PIK3CA missense somatic mutation status (left), PS CI and PTEN missense mutation
status (middle) and PG CI and EGFR status (right). (D) Modulation of PS combination effects during simultaneous knockdown of RNF11
(24 and 48 h experiments collected) (p-value obtained by linear model, Methods)
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

73205

Oncotarget

missense mutation (t test p = 0.035) and showed borderline
significance with PTEN somatic missense mutations
(p = 0.13) (Figure 4C).
Taken together, while further analysis of additional
EGFR mutant cell cultures is warranted, our observation
of lower CI in classical subtype glioma and one EGFR
mutant line appears consistent with the hypothesis that the
PG pair is more synergistic in GC lines with a classical
GBM signature with hyperactivated EGFR signaling.
However, due to the low numbers of mutated samples
these findings would benefit from being confirmed in
larger studies. For PS, we identify RNF11 transcripts
and the RNF11-encoding chromosome segment on
Chr1p32 as possible biomarkers of pterostilbene mediated
potentiation. In future work, it may be possible to extend
on these findings to stratify GBM into cases more likely to
benefit from pterostilbene containing drug combinations.

that were common to all the cell cultures (Methods). The
analysis confirmed a general decrease in G1 phase cells
and a corresponding increase in S phase and G2/M phase
cells (p-values 0.00014 for G1 phase, 1.17 × 10−05 for
S phase, and 0.018 for G2/M phase). We thus conclude
that pterostilbene treated GC cultures show clear signs
of cell cycle arrest in the GC cells at 72 hours. Further
investigation is needed to define the involved checkpoints.
As an additional analysis of a possible mechanism
of action, we applied whole transcriptome mRNA
profiling to one GC culture (U3065MG after one hour
of treatment). The transcriptional response was more
pronounced (a higher number of differentially expressed
transcripts) following treatment of PG compared to PS
(Figure 6A and Supplementary Table S3). Among the
differentially expressed genes in the PG treated cells
(fold change > 0.2 and corrected p < 0.05) were MAPK
negative feedback loop regulators DUSPs and SPRYs
[35], suggesting interference with MAPK pathway by
PG. Consistent with the transcriptional suppression of
ERK targets (e.g. DUSP and SPRY family genes) in
the transcriptional profiling experiment (Figure 6A),
pERK levels, as measured by capillary electrophoresis,
were reduced in GCs 6 hours after treatment by the
PG combination (p < 0.01) (Figure 6B and signals in
Supplementary Figure S6). Interestingly, the PS combination
showed the opposite effect, inducing an increase of both
pMEK and pERK (p < 0.05) (Figure 6B, 6C and signals in
Figure S6). In addition to a likely perturbation of
transcripts downstream of MAPK signaling, we noted
that the mRNA for Thioredoxin interacting protein
(TXNIP) was consistently upregulated after pterostilbene
treatment. Given previous evidence of TXNIP as a tumor
suppressor and mediator of ROS responses [36], we tested
the hypothesis that the effect of pterostilbene might be
dependent on TXNIP activation and/or induction of reactive
oxygen species (ROS). To explore this idea, we tested if
siRNA knockdown of TXNIP, or addition of the antioxidant
N-acetylcysteine (NAC) could abrogate the effect of
pterostilbene. Indeed, we found that downregulation of
TXNIP counteracted the effect of pterostilbene (Figure 6D
and Supplementary Figure S6C) as did NAC treatment
(Figure 6E and Supplementary Figure S6C).
Taken together, the results highlight three components
of the pterostilbene response in the GC culture U3065MG.
First, pterostilbene applied singly and in combination
with the two other compounds, induces cell cycle arrest
in the GCs. Secondly, transcriptional and phosphoprotein
evidence indicate that the expected effect of gefitinib on
MAPK signaling is further elevated by pterostilbene.
Thirdly, induction of TXNIP and an associated increase in
ROS is a likely component of the response to pterostilbene
treatment. Further exploration will be warranted to explore
these findings in vitro and in vivo.

Pterostilbene potentiates gefitinib and sertraline
in GCs by cell cycle arrest and suppression of the
MAPK pathway
Since pterostilbene was previously reported to
induce cell cycle arrest in leukemia and carcinoma
cells [21, 33, 34], we investigated the effect of
pterostilbene and PS / PG pairwise treatments on cell
cycle phase distribution, as observed by 5-ethynyl-2’deoxyuridine (EdU) incorporation and flow cytometry.
While treatment with sertraline (7 μM) or gefitinib
(10 μM) decreased active DNA synthesis in our GC cultures,
pterostilbene (20 μM) increased EdU incorporation
without a corresponding increase in cell number
(Figure 5A, p < 0.05 and Supplementary Figure S5).
Consistent with this, FACS analysis of 7-AAD stained and
pterostilbene treated GCs showed a shift in DNA content
with an increase in populations corresponding to S-phase
and G2/M phase cells. The PS and PG combinations
exerted a similar effect on the cell cycle phase distribution
as pterostilbene alone (Figure 5B).
To study this effect in a larger number of cell lines,
we analyzed automated microscopy data from 14 drugtreated GCs (Methods). From the images, we applied
image analysis methods to obtain the distribution of
DNA content in cells as detected by the Hoechst dye
(Figure 5C). We subsequently applied linear regressions
with G1, S and G2/M fractions as the response variables
and the logarithm of the pterostilbene dose as the predictor
variable. Of the 14 screened cell cultures, 12 had a
negative slope for G1 phase (i.e. G1 phase cells decreased
in response to pterostilbene) and a positive slope for S
phase (sign test p = 9.16e-04) and 10 had a positive slope
for G2/M phase (sign test p = 0.0283). In an extended
analysis, we used linear mixed effects modeling to detect
dose dependent changes in G1, S and G2/M populations

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

73206

Oncotarget

DISCUSSION

Extending beyond previous studies, we show that
PS and PG combinations suppress several GBM relevant
phenotypes in GCs. While the exact mechanism remains
to be determined, our results identify pterostilbenedriven cell cycle arrest, suppression of MAPK signaling
and induction of TXNIP as points of action. These
molecular changes translate to suppressed migratory
and clone forming phenotypes, which are required for
GBM progression [38]. The increase in pMEK and
pERK following PS treatment is intriguing and may
indicate a compensatory mechanism by which U3065MG
up-regulate the MAPK pathway. This suggested that
combined targeting by both PS and the MAPK pathway,
for instance by an additional MEK inhibitor, might further
enhance synergistic action. TXNIP, which was induced by
pterostilbene, encodes a postulated tumor suppressor gene
which plays an important role in oxidative homeostasis
[36] and glioblastoma cell viability [39]. Previous
studies have shown that pterostilbene treatment reduce

We have established that pterostilbene can potentiate
the anticancer effects in GCs of two drugs, the EGFR
inhibitor gefitinib and the SSRI sertraline. Pterostilbene
is regarded as a nontoxic compound and has good
brain bioavailability [9–13]. Both EGFR inhibition and
repurposing of sertraline have been proposed for GBM
therapy, the latter as a component of a 9-drug combination
protocol [23]. Our results warrant consideration of
pterostilbene to be added to combinatorial treatment
approaches involving sertraline. The association of
PG to EGFR mutation and the CL subtype (which is
characterized by EGFR amplification [25, 37]) are
logical given that gefitinib targets EGFR, and we suggest
pterostilbene potentiates the effect of gefitinib in a subset
of Classical GBM. The findings suggest that pterostilbene
may be a relevant potentiator of EGFR-inhibitors with
good CNS penetration now under development.

Figure 5: Drug combinations and single drugs affect proliferation, and pterostilbene modulates cell cycle progression.

Assessment of proliferation and cell cycle analysis after treatment with single drugs and combinations. (A) EdU incorporation (% positive
cells) after 24 and 48 hours. Box and whiskers represent mean and 5–95 percentiles from experiments in three GC cultures (all data
plotted in Figure S5B–S5C). *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001 (Mann Whitney) (B) Flow cytometry of 7AAD-stained cells (U3065) to
measure the distribution of DNA content in treated cells. An accumulation of cells in the center of the DNA content distribution compared
to control sample is indicative of cell cycle arrest with an enriched S-phase population. The pterostilbene and combinations display an
evident cell cycle shift in this GC culture. (C) Automated imaging of GC nuclei was used to derive histograms of cell DNA content under
treatment with different doses of pterostilbene, upper left. Upper right: to quantify, we fitted GC specific linear regressions in which each
of the G0/G1, S and G2/M populations were proportional to the logarithmic dose of pterostilbene (G0/G1 in one GC culture shown). The
graph (lower left) shows the distribution of the proportionality (slope) constants across the 14 lines for each population. Lower right: linear
mixed effects model result, showing the estimate and 95% confidence interval of a common (‘fixed’) slope effect across the 14 cell cultures
(p-values 0.00014, 1.17 × 10−05 and 0.018 for the G1, S and G2/M populations, respectively).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

73207

Oncotarget

the production ROS and attenuate glutamate-induced
oxidative stress by enhancing the activities of the cellular
anti-oxidants glutathione (GSH) and superoxide dismutase
(SOD) through induction of translocation of the nuclear
transcription factor erythroid 2 (NF-E2)-related factor 2
(Nrf2) [12]. TXNIP, which is controlled by Nrf2, on the

other hand has been shown to promote ROS and apoptosis
induction by inhibiting thioredoxin [40]. Upregulation of
TXNIP in pterostilbene treated GCs therefore indicates
a more complex response in tumor cells perhaps due to
altered levels of oxidative stress or an altered metabolic
state in glioma. This finding is supported by the protective

Figure 6: Transcriptional profiling after treatment reveals differentially expressed genes in response to PS and PG
combinations. We applied mRNA profiling to measure the response to single drugs and drug pairs after 1 hour of exposure in U3065MG.

(A) Transcripts with significant changes for pterostilbene, sertraline and PS (left), and for pterostilbene, gefitinib and PG (right). The circles
represent one treatment each and the overlap represents transcripts that are altered in both treatments. The transcripts displayed in the figure
represent transcripts with a fold change of at least 0.2 and a significant fold change (adjusted p-value < 0.05) in U3065MG. All transcripts
including fold changes and p-values are shown in Supplementary Table S3. Most transcripts are downregulated: all except TXNIP for
pterostilbene in the pterostilbene areas and 4/7 (BTG2, SLC3A2, RCAN and HSPA1B) of the ones in the PS area (left). (B) pERK levels after
6 hour treatment using the NanoPro 1000 assay. pERK is significantly decreased after treatment with the PG combination, and significantly
increased after treatment with the PS combination. (C) pMEK levels after 6 hour treatment. The PS combination significantly increased
the pMEK levels. *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001 (Student’s t-test). (D) Modulation of pterostilbene effect during simultaneous
knock down of TXNIP (24 and 48h experiments collected) (p-value obtained from linear model, Methods). (E) Pterostilbene effect after
simultaneous treatment with NAC. *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001 (Mann Whitney).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

73208

Oncotarget

effect of the antioxidant NAC on GC viability following
pterostilbene treatment. The association between the
ubiquitin-editing protein complex factor RNF11 and PS
potentiation raise the hypothesis that the treatment may
lead to Nrf2 ubiquitination and proteasomal degradation,
allowing accumulation of TXNIP and ROS, which would
in turn activate PI3K and PKC signaling pathways as well
as ERK phosphorylation. In addition to these findings
our transcriptional analysis of PS and PG treated cells
identified other responding genes that may warrant followup work, including KCNJ2, which has previously been
associated with modulation of both cell growth and drug
resistance [41] and the MYC oncogene, which is a wellknown transcriptional target of MAPK signaling which
is previously reported to be over-expressed in gliomas
[42, 43]. To fully deconvolute the mechanism behind the
synergism of PS and PG will require a broader study in
vitro and in vivo, across a broader set of doses, time-points
and cell models, reserved for future work.
The significant correlation of CI with age for the
PS combination (the CI is lower in young patients) could
reflect inherent differences in the biology of GBMs in
patients of different age [29]. It may also warrant closer
investigation of methylation patterns of the cell cultures,
given that the glioma CpG island methylator phenotype
is more frequent in younger patients. However, this
phenotype is also associated with IDH1 mutation, which
was not observed among our cell cultures. The predictive
potential of the RNF11 gene was characterized by a
positive correlation with CI for the PS combination. This
combination could thus be interesting to test in breast- and
prostate cancer, due to the previously published association
between RNF11 expression and these tumor types [32].
As far as we know, the association of the
stratification of GBM patients for drug synergism has not
been attempted before in a sizeable set of GC cultures,
and our finding that marker transcripts and mutations in
EGFR and PIK3CA correlate with drug pair synergism in
GBM can have important applications for the design of
preclinical and clinical studies. The successful prediction
of PS synergism in a strict cross-validation analysis
motivates prospective testing of such PS response in
additional cases. From a methodology standpoint, our
novel technique to determine CI from serial dilution of
a drug pair in a fixed ratio is well suited for large-scale
experimentation yet constitutes an approximation in the
sense that it will be applicable to smooth response patterns
with continuous changes in drug-drug interaction. The
CI captures a large part of the interaction landscape, as
compared to the interaction score measurements, pointing
to the importance of evaluating more than one model when
exploring drug interactions.
While a high number of GC cultures support
that the synergism is a general phenomenon in GBM
cells, it remains to be determined if the results hold
in vivo; we reserve this for future work. In rodent models,
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

pterostilbene has shown activity against hepatocellular,
pancreatic and colorectal carcinomas [44–46], as well as
melanoma [47]. Resveratrol (an analog of pterostilbene
with lower bioavailability [9]) potentiated temozolomide
in a heterotopic (flank) xenograft model of glioma [48].
This should motivate further investigation of pterostilbene
and the PS and PG combinations in orthotopic xenograft
models, using well-characterized glioma cells.
Pterostilbene has been clinically evaluated for safety in
human subjects [49], but remains to be systematically
assessed as an anticancer agent in humans. It is also
important to consider possible side effects of antioxidants,
including stilbenoids, on tumor progression. For instance,
experimental mice fed antioxidants have been reported to
carry an increased tumor burden and increased rates of
metastasis [50, 51]. A similar effect in glioma has not been
reported, however one study indicates no consistent or
significant association between antioxidant consumption
and overall survival in glioblastoma patients [52].
Future work will be needed to evaluate the promise of
pterostilbene-induced drug synergism in vivo.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Glioblastoma cell cultures
The human malignant glioblastoma cell (GC)
cultures are part of the Uppsala University Human Glioma
Cell Culture (HGCC) bio bank [29]. GCs U3017MG,
U3037MG, U3047MG and U3065MG were used for
phenotypic characterization. An additional set of GCs
were used to determine interaction scores (Supplementary
Table S1 and [29]). Cells were cultured as previously
described [7] and incubated at 37°C with 5% CO2.

Compounds
Gefitinib (Tocris Biosciences), pterostilbene and
sertraline (Enzo Biosciences) were dissolved in DMSO to
a stock solution of 10mM and later diluted in cell medium
to desired concentrations.

Definition of interaction scores and combination
index
We scored functional interaction between drugs
by use of two scores, the interaction score (IS) and
the Combination index (CI). IS, based on the Bliss
independence model [53], was calculated as previously
described [54]. IS is defined as = wab − wa wb , where
wab is the viability (relative to negative control) of cells
following treatment by compounds a and b, and wa, wb
are the corresponding effects of the single compounds.
An observed value of IS significantly less than zero is
consistent with potentiation. The combination index (CI),
73209

Oncotarget

described by Chou and Talalay [55], in turn, is calculated
from a given effect level y. CIy is defined as Xa/xa+Xb/xb
where Xa and Xb are the doses of each drug constituting
the combination that gives viability inhibition effect y,
and xa and xb are the doses of each drug that individually
achieves the effect y. CI < 1 is consistent with synergy,
or potentiation. In the screening data, we calculated the
average IS across all doses and the average CI across
effect levels between 40% to 60% viability (Figure
3B, 3C). The two metrics are complementary indicators
of functional interaction.

Drugs and drug pairs were tested in 11-point dose
dilution series (see Supplementary Table S2 and
Supplementary Information), and assayed for viability
after 72 hours of treatment using resazurin (R7017,
SigmaAldrich) [58]. All data was normalized against
DMSO vehicle wells. The effect on viability of each
drug dose was calculated as a viability ratio W = Ytreated/
Ycontrol, where Y represents the average fluorescence
signal. Response curves were fitted using the package
drc [59] in R [60]. The IS was calculated using doses
represented in Supplementary Table S2, and the CI
was calculated from effect levels 40–60% inhibition.
Sigmoid response curves were fitted to the average
viability ratio across all treated GCs, and the two
single dose curves were used to calculate the predicted
combination response (assuming no synergy). The
observed and predicted combination response curves
were then compared (statistics below).

Viability and cell growth assays
For Figure 1, cells were seeded at 12 000 cells/
well in 96-well plates (BD Primaria) 24 hours prior to
treatment. Cells were treated in triplicate at 3 different
doses/drug as single doses and all doses in combination,
resulting in 9 drug pair- and 6 single drug data points per
combination studied (Figure 1). We measured viability by
the resazurin-based assay Alamar blue (Life Technologies)
and acquired imaged at 20X on an EVOS microscope
(AMG). To monitor cell growth, U3065MG cells were
seeded at 5000 cells/well in 96-well plates 24 hours prior
to treatment with vehicle, single drugs and combinations.
After starting treatment, cells were incubated in the
IncuCyte instrument (Essen BioScience), and real-time
density was recorded twice a day for 60 hours after which
results were analyzed and presented as growth curves.

To acquire images of the cell lines in the screen,
plates were washed by PBS immediately after the
resazurin assay, fixed by 4% PFA, and stained with the
DNA-selective Hoechst 33342 stain (working solution
2 uM, #14533 Sigma-Aldrich). Plates were imaged on
a Perkin Elmer Operetta instrument at 20x resolution
(4 pictures per well). A set of 14 GC cultures (U3002MG,
U3004MG, U3009MG, U3020MG, U3028MG,
U3029MG, U3033MG, U3035MG, U3039MG,
U3047MG, U3084MG, U3085MG, U3086MG and
U3117MG) were analyzed by the CellProfiler software.
Individual nuclei were identified and outlined based on
intensity thresholding the Hoechst signal using the Otsu
method. Touching or overlapping nuclei were split using
the watershed method applied to the Hoechst intensity.
To estimate the cell cycle subpopulations we used
integrated DNA content, i.e. sum of intensities of the
Hoechst stain inside each nucleus for each individual
cell. Intensity data was subsequently binned to 100
intensity levels for each dose and manually gated to
define G1, S and G2/M populations (c.f. Figure 5). To
statistically test for dose-dependent changes in cell
cycle phase for the whole sample of 14 cell cultures,
we employed a linear mixed effects model, in which
the fraction of cells in phase G1 was modeled by:

Migration capacity
To evaluate migration capacity, 24-well plates with
trans-well inserts were used (CBA-101-5, Cell Biolabs,
Inc.), and coated with laminin for 30 min in 37°C
before start of experiment. Cells were seeded at 300 000
cells/well together with treatments or DMSO controls.
Experimental procedure and readout were performed as
stated by manufacturer (images obtained at 20X on an
EVOS microscope (AMG)).

Gliomasphere forming assay
Cells were seeded at 2000 cells/well in BD 384
well plate (#353962) in suspension 24 hours prior to drug
treatment. The cells were treated for 7 days and spheres
were counted (Olympus bright field microscope) based
upon their smooth shape and diameter using CellProfiler
2.1.0 and CPAnalyst [56, 57].

The
yi G1 = c FIXED + β FIXED x + c j RANDOM + β j RANDOMX .
‘FIXED’ terms capture common effects for all cell
cultures, and the ‘RANDOM’ effects capture additional
effects that are specific to each cell culture. Fitting the
model (Matlab FITLME) we obtained an estimate, a
confidence interval and a p value for the common slope
effect (Figure 5C bottom right panel). As a complement
we also explored separate linear regressions for each
cell line, and the distribution of slopes βFIXED (Figure 5C,
middle figure).

Screening assay and high content imaging of 41
GC lines
Cells were seeded in 384-well microplates (BD
Falcon Optilux #353962) 24 hours prior to treatment.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

73210

Oncotarget

Prediction of combination index from RNA
profiles, DNA copy number aberration profiles
and somatic mutations

Cell cycle analysis

We obtained normalized gene-level log2 relative
transcript profiles (Affymetrix HTA 2) and gene-level log2
relative DNA copy number aberration profiles (Affymetrix
Cytoscan HD) from the U3000/HGCC consortium at
Uppsala University (hgcc.se). Using each respective data
set as a covariate (x) and the CI as the response variable (y)
we used elastic net regression to fit a linear function
p
yi = f ( xi ) = β 0 + ∑ β j X ij , where i is the index of the

Cells were seeded at 400 000 cells/well in 6-well
plates (BD Primaria, BD Biosciences) and incubated 24
hours before start of treatment. The cells were treated
for 24 hours, washed in PBS, detached and fixed in
ice-cold ethanol. Fixed cells were washed with PBS and
re-suspended in 400 μl of Vindelov’s reagent (20 mM TrisHCl pH 8, 100 mM NaCl, 1 μg/mL 7-AAD, 20 μg/mL
RNase, 0.1% NP40) and incubated for 30 minutes at 37°C.
The cells were then run and analyzed (phases manually set
from control cells) on a BD Accuri™ C6 Flow Cytometer
(BD Biosciences).

patient, β 0 is a constant, β = {β1 , β 2, ..., β

RNA sequencing of treated cells

j =1

p

}

is the

p-dimensional parameter weight vector and p is the number

GCs were seeded at 500 000 cells/well in 6-well
BD Primaria plates 24 hours prior to treatment. Cells
were treated for 1 hour before harvest. RNA for all
experiments was extracted and purified according to
protocol (RNeasy Plus Mini-kit, Qiagen). A total of 3 µg
RNA was used in the preparation of the TruSeq library,
for which an Illumina Low-Throughput TruSeq RNA
Sample Preparation Kit protocol was used. Samples were
sequenced on an Illumina HiSeq 2000 sequencer as singleend 51-nucleotide reads according to the manufacturer’s
protocol. Data was handled using STRT software [61].
The R software was used to define groups of responding
transcripts (Figure 6A and Supplementary Table S3).

of genes. For the N patients, the elastic net function
optimizes, 1

2N

∑

N
I =1

( yi − f ( X i )) 2 + λ ∑ j =1 (
p

1−α 2
β i +α β j )
2

where lambda and alpha are regularization parameters
(lambda determines the degree of regularization and alpha
determines the balances between a least-squares (alpha =
0) and a lasso (alpha = 1) penalty. We used a default value
of alpha = .9 and tuned lambda by leave-one-out cross
validation (selecting the lambda with the highest Pearson
correlation between left-out observed and left-out predicted
values. The genes shown in Figure 4 are the genes that
were most frequently selected as predictive variables
( β j ≠ 0 for the corresponding gene j) across the N different
leave-out simulations. The correlations and scatter plots
shown in Figure 4 represent leave-one-out results at the
optimal lambda. To correlate with mutation status, we
used preliminary calls from the U3000/HGCC pipeline
that represent AnnoVar-assigned consensus calls applied
to Ion Torrent whole exome data (cell line DNA with
patient matched reference blood), calling mutations as
positive if detected by 3 or 4 mutation callers from a
panel consisting of the four callers (MuTect, VarScan2,
Somatic Sniper, Torrent Variant Caller). Only mutations
predicted by AnnoVar to be missense were included in the
analysis

Protein expression assay
NanoPro 1000 analysis was used to assess ERK 1/2
and MEK 1/2 activity. The protocol was modified from
[62]. Samples were loaded into the NanoPro 1000 System
(ProteinSimple, Santa Clara, USA) and probed with antiERK 1/2, anti-pERK 1/2, pMEK and MEK 1/2. Full
procedure in Supplementary Information.

Gene knock down experiments and NAC
treatments
U3065MG and U3027MG were used for knock
down studies, and U3065MG for the NAC experiment.
RNF11 (Cat#AM16708, Art nr. 134278) and TXNIP
(Cat#AM16708, Art nr. 1358498) siRNAs were purchased
from Thermo Scientific/Life Technologies. For knock
down validation, primers were purchased from Thermo
Scientific/Life Technologies (Hs02801538_g1 for RNF11
and Hs01006900_g1 for TXNIP). N-acetylcysteine (Art
nr. A9165) was purchased from Sigma Aldrich. For
knock down experiments, cells were seeded in 24-well
plates 24 hours prior to addition of siRNA. At 24 and
48 h hours after siRNA addition, drugs and drug pairs
were added and viability read out was performed

EdU incorporation assay
We applied an EdU-based assay (Invitrogen,
Molecular probes, c10337) to assess proliferation. GCs
were seeded at 10000 cells/well on laminin-coated
96 well plates (Greiner bio-one, #655986) 24 hours
prior to treatment. Readout was performed at 24- and
48 hours using an 8-hour EdU exposure according to
manufacturer’s protocol. Images were acquired using
the ImageXpress (20X) (Molecular devices) and were
counted for total number of cells (Hoechst 33342) and the
percentage of proliferating cells (EdU incorporated) using
CellProfiler2.1.0 and CPAnalyst [56, 57].

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

73211

Oncotarget

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

48 hours after treatment. For the NAC experiment,
cells were seeded at 5000 cells/well in 96-well plates
24 hours prior to pre-treatment with NAC (10 mM).
After one hour of NAC treatment, pterostilbene was
added to the media and viability readout was performed
48 hours after treatment start. Experiments were
performed in 5 replicates and statistically assessed
using a linear model in which the viability response
was modeled as w = w0 + ∆wsiRNA + ∆wdrug + ∆wsiRNA, drug ,
where w0 is the baseline viability, ∆wsiRNA is the viability
changed induced by the siRNA, ∆wdrug is the viability
change induced by the drug, and ∆wsiRNA,drug is the
viability change caused by siRNA and drug interaction,
respectively. P-values and confidence intervals (Figure 4D
and Figure 6D, 6E) were obtained from the fitted model
(Matlab glmfit).

We thank the HGCC bio bank at the Department
of Immunology, Genetics and Pathology at Uppsala
University, in particular the technical expertise from
Marianne Kastemar. We also thank Therese Carlsson at
the Sahlgrenska Cancer Center, Gothenburg University,
for technical assistance.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
The authors declare that they have no conflicts of
interest.

GRANT SUPPORT
This study was supported by the Swedish
Research Council, the Swedish Cancer Society, the
Swedish Childhood Cancer Foundation NBCNS, Assar
Gabrielssons Foundation, The AstraZeneca-Science
for Life Laboratory Research Collaboration, Stiftelsen
Wilhelm och Martina Lundgrens Vetenskapsfond.

Statistical assessment of phenotypic responses
Normalized response ratios for all assays were
calculated as Ytreated/Ycontrol, where Y represents the
raw response values. To assess statistical significance
of the interaction scores in Figure 1, we performed a
permutation test by randomizing the treatment labels
10 000 times, thus obtaining a distribution of the
interaction scores simulating the case of no functional
interaction. From this distribution we obtain the
empirical p-value. To assess the significance of a
functional interaction score in the treated 41 GCs, the
non-parametric Wilcoxon signed rank test was used to
determine if median IS and CI differed from 0 and 1,
respectively. For phenotypic assays, differences between
groups were assessed using the non-parametric Mann
Whitney test in the GraphPad Prism software. The
differences in expression in the NanoPro assay were
assessed using a Student’s Independent t-test.

REFERENCES
 1.	 Stupp R, Hegi ME, Mason WP, van den Bent MJ,
Taphoorn MJ, Janzer RC, Ludwin SK, Allgeier A,
Fisher B, Belanger K, Hau P, Brandes AA, Gijtenbeek J,
et al. Effects of radiotherapy with concomitant and adjuvant
temozolomide versus radiotherapy alone on survival in
glioblastoma in a randomised phase III study: 5-year analysis
of the EORTC-NCIC trial. Lancet Oncol. 2009; 10:459–466.
 2.	 Center MDAC. 6-TG, Capecitabine and Celecoxib Plus
TMZ or CCNU for Anaplastic Glioma Patients. In:
ClinicalTrialsgov [Internet], National Library of Medicine
(US). 2014–02–17; (NCT00504660).
 3.	 Jiang P, Mukthavavam R, Chao Y, Bharati IS, Fogal V,
Pastorino S, Cong X, Nomura N, Gallagher M, Abbasi T, Vali
S, Pingle SC, Makale M, et al. Novel anti-glioblastoma agents
and therapeutic combinations identified from a collection of
FDA approved drugs. Journal Transl Med. 2014; 12:13.

DNA sequencing data
We obtained whole exome sequencing data for
genes EGFR, NF1, PDGFRA, PIK3CA, PIK3R1,
PTEN, RB1, RYR2, TP53, TTN from the Human
Glioma Cell Culture (hgcc.se consortium). In short, the
data represents 100X Ion Torrent sequencing data of cell
line DNA following Agilent SureSelect whole exome
capture. Patient-matched blood was used as control.
Aggregated mutation calls from MuTect, Somatic Sniper,
VarScan and Torrent Suite were processed by Annovar to
define somatic missense variants. only variants detected
by 3 or 4 callers were retained. We excluded known
SNPs (variants with an assigned rs ID, and/or found
in the 1000 genomes project at frequencies above 1/200).
For more information regarding these data we refer to
hgcc.se.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

  4.	 Schmidt L, Kling T, Monsefi N, Olsson M, Hansson  C,
Baskaran S, Lundgren B, Martens U, Haggblad M,
Westermark B, Forsberg Nilsson K, Uhrbom L, KarlssonLindahl L, et al. Comparative drug pair screening across
multiple glioblastoma cell lines reveals novel drug-drug
interactions. Neuro-Oncol. 2013; 15:1469–1478.
  5.	 University of California SF. Study of Bevacizumab Plus
Temodar and Tarceva in Patients With Glioblastoma or
Gliosarcoma (AVF4120s). In: ClinicalTrialsgov [Internet],
National Library of Medicin (US). 2012–05–04; Michael D.
Prados. (MD)(NCT00525525).

73212

Oncotarget

 6.	 Shchors K, Massaras A, Hanahan D. Dual Targeting of
the Autophagic Regulatory Circuitry in Gliomas with
Repurposed Drugs Elicits Cell-Lethal Autophagy and
Therapeutic Benefit. Cancer Cell. 2015; 28:456–471.
 7.	Pollard SM, Yoshikawa K, Clarke ID, Danovi D,
Stricker S, Russell R, Bayani J, Head R, Lee M,
Bernstein M, Squire JA, Smith A, Dirks P. Glioma stem
cell lines expanded in adherent culture have tumor-specific
phenotypes and are suitable for chemical and genetic
screens. Cell stem cell. 2009; 4:568–580.
 8.	 Kapetanovic IM, Muzzio M, Huang Z, Thompson TN,
McCormick DL. Pharmacokinetics, oral bioavailability, and
metabolic profile of resveratrol and its dimethylether analog,
pterostilbene, in rats. Cancer Chemother. Pharmacol. 2011;
68:593–601.
9.	 Lin HS, Yue BD, Ho PC. Determination of pterostilbene
in rat plasma by a simple HPLC-UV method and its
application in pre-clinical pharmacokinetic study.
Biomedical chromatography : BMC. 2009; 23:1308–1315.
10.	 Joseph JA, Fisher DR, Cheng V, Rimando AM, ShukittHale B. Cellular and behavioral effects of stilbene
resveratrol analogues: implications for reducing the
deleterious effects of aging. J Agric Food Chem. 2008;
56:10544–10551.
11.	 Wang B, Liu H, Yue L, Li X, Zhao L, Yang X, Wang X,
Yang Y, Qu Y. Neuroprotective effects of pterostilbene
against oxidative stress injury: Involvement of nuclear
factor erythroid 2-related factor 2 pathway. Brain Res.
2016; 1643:70–79.
12.	 Chang J, Rimando A, Pallas M, Camins A, Porquet D,
Reeves J, Shukitt-Hale B, Smith MA, Joseph JA,
Casadesus G. Low-dose pterostilbene, but not resveratrol, is
a potent neuromodulator in aging and Alzheimer’s disease.
Neurobiol Aging. 2012; 33:2062–2071.
13.	 Jang M, Cai L, Udeani GO, Slowing KV, Thomas CF,
Beecher CW, Fong HH, Farnsworth NR, Kinghorn AD,
Mehta RG, Moon RC, Pezzuto JM. Cancer chemopreventive
activity of resveratrol, a natural product derived from
grapes. Science. 1997; 275:218–220.
14.	 McCormack D, McFadden D. Pterostilbene and cancer:
current review. J Surg Res. 2012; 173:e53–61.
15.	 Paul S, DeCastro AJ, Lee HJ, Smolarek AK, So JY,
Simi B, Wang CX, Zhou R, Rimando AM, Suh N. Dietary
intake of pterostilbene, a constituent of blueberries,
inhibits the beta-catenin/p65 downstream signaling
pathway and colon carcinogenesis in rats. Carcinogenesis.
2010; 31:1272–1278.
16.	 Park SJ, Ahmad F, Philp A, Baar K, Williams T, Luo H,
Ke H, Rehmann H, Taussig R, Brown AL, Kim MK,
Beaven MA, Burgin AB, et al. Resveratrol ameliorates
aging-related metabolic phenotypes by inhibiting cAMP
phosphodiesterases. Cell. 2012; 148:421–433.
17.	Mikstacka R, Przybylska D, Rimando AM, BaerDubowska W. Inhibition of human recombinant cytochromes
P450 CYP1A1 and CYP1B1 by trans-resveratrol methyl
ethers. Mol Nutr Food Res. 2007; 51:517–524.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

18.	 Huynh TT, Lin CM, Lee WH, Wu AT, Lin YK, Lin YF,
Yeh CT, Wang LS. Pterostilbene suppressed irradiationresistant glioma stem cells by modulating GRP78/miR-205
axis. J Nutr Biochem. 2015; 26:466–475.
19.	 Li K, Dias SJ, Rimando AM, Dhar S, Mizuno CS,
Penman AD, Lewin JR, Levenson AS. Pterostilbene acts
through metastasis-associated protein 1 to inhibit tumor
growth, progression and metastasis in prostate cancer. PloS
one. 2013; 8:e57542.
20.	 Pan MH, Chang YH, Badmaev V, Nagabhushanam K,
Ho CT. Pterostilbene induces apoptosis and cell cycle
arrest in human gastric carcinoma cells. J Agric Food Chem.
2007; 55:7777–7785.
21.	Cohen MH, Williams GA, Sridhara R, Chen G,
McGuinn WD, Jr., Morse D, Abraham S, Rahman A,
Liang C, Lostritto R, Baird A, Pazdur R. United States
Food and Drug Administration Drug Approval summary:
Gefitinib (ZD1839; Iressa) tablets. Clin Canc Res. 2004;
10:1212–1218.
22.	 Kast RE, Boockvar JA, Bruning A, Cappello F, Chang WW,
Cvek B, Dou QP, Duenas-Gonzalez A, Efferth T, Focosi D,
Ghaffari SH, Karpel-Massler G, Ketola K, et al. A conceptually
new treatment approach for relapsed glioblastoma: coordinated
undermining of survival paths with nine repurposed drugs
(CUSP9) by the International Initiative for Accelerated
Improvement of Glioblastoma Care. Oncotarget. 2013; 4:
502–530. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.969.
23.	 Cancer Genome Atlas Research N. Comprehensive genomic
characterization defines human glioblastoma genes and core
pathways. Nature. 2008; 455:1061–1068.
24.	 Verhaak RG, Hoadley KA, Purdom E, Wang V, Qi Y,
Wilkerson MD, Miller CR, Ding L, Golub T, Mesirov JP,
Alexe G, Lawrence M, O’Kelly M, et al. Integrated
genomic analysis identifies clinically relevant subtypes of
glioblastoma characterized by abnormalities in PDGFRA,
IDH1, EGFR, and NF1. Cancer Cell. 2010; 17:98–110.
25.	 Uhm JH, Ballman KV, Wu W, Giannini C, Krauss JC,
Buckner JC, James CD, Scheithauer BW, Behrens RJ,
Flynn PJ, Schaefer PL, Dakhill SR, Jaeckle KA. Phase II
evaluation of gefitinib in patients with newly diagnosed
Grade 4 astrocytoma: Mayo/North Central Cancer
Treatment Group Study N0074. International journal of
radiation oncology, biology, physics. 2011; 80:347–353.
26.	 Singh SK, Clarke ID, Terasaki M, Bonn VE, Hawkins C,
Squire J, Dirks PB. Identification of a cancer stem cell in
human brain tumors. Cancer Res. 2003; 63:5821–5828.
27.	 Lee J, Kotliarova S, Kotliarov Y, Li A, Su Q, Donin NM,
Pastorino S, Purow BW, Christopher N, Zhang W, Park JK,
Fine HA. Tumor stem cells derived from glioblastomas
cultured in bFGF, EGF more closely mirror the phenotype
and genotype of primary tumors than do serum-cultured cell
lines. Cancer Cell. 2006; 9:391–403.
28.	 Xie Y, Bergstrom T, Jiang Y, Johansson P, Marinescu VD,
Lindberg N, Segerman A, Wicher G, Niklasson M,
Baskaran S, Sreedharan S, Everlien I, Kastemar M, et al.
The Human Glioblastoma Cell Culture Resource: Validated
73213

Oncotarget

Cell Models Representing All Molecular Subtypes.
EBioMedicine. 2015; 2:1351–1363.

42.	 Orian JM, Vasilopoulos K, Yoshida S, Kaye AH, Chow CW,
Gonzales MF. Overexpression of multiple oncogenes
related to histological grade of astrocytic glioma. Br J
Cancer. 1992; 66:106–112.
43.	 Pan MH, Chiou YS, Chen WJ, Wang JM, Badmaev V,
Ho CT. Pterostilbene inhibited tumor invasion via
suppressing multiple signal transduction pathways in human
hepatocellular carcinoma cells. Carcinogenesis. 2009;
30:1234–1242.
44.	 Priego S, Feddi F, Ferrer P, Mena S, Benlloch M, Ortega A,
Carretero J, Obrador E, Asensi M, Estrela JM. Natural
polyphenols facilitate elimination of HT-29 colorectal
cancer xenografts by chemoradiotherapy: a Bcl-2- and
superoxide dismutase 2-dependent mechanism. Mol Cancer
Ther. 2008; 7:3330–3342.
45.	 McCormack DE, Mannal P, McDonald D, Tighe S, Hanson J,
McFadden D. Genomic analysis of pterostilbene predicts its
antiproliferative effects against pancreatic cancer in vitro and
in vivo. J Gastrointest Surg. 2012; 16:1136–1143.
46.	 Ferrer P, Asensi M, Segarra R, Ortega A, Benlloch M,
Obrador E, Varea MT, Asensio G, Jorda L, Estrela JM.
Association between pterostilbene and quercetin inhibits
metastatic activity of B16 melanoma. Neoplasia. 2005; 7:37–47.
47.	 Lin CJ, Lee CC, Shih YL, Lin TY, Wang SH, Lin YF,
Shih CM. Resveratrol enhances the therapeutic effect of
temozolomide against malignant glioma in vitro and in vivo by
inhibiting autophagy. Free Radic Biol Med. 2012; 52:377–391.
48.	Riche DM, McEwen CL, Riche KD, Sherman JJ,
Wofford MR, Deschamp D, Griswold M. Analysis of safety
from a human clinical trial with pterostilbene. J Toxicol.
2013; 2013:463595.
49.	 Le Gal K, Ibrahim MX, Wiel C, Sayin VI, Akula MK,
Karlsson C, Dalin MG, Akyurek LM, Lindahl P, Nilsson J,
Bergo MO. Antioxidants can increase melanoma metastasis
in mice. Sci Transl Med. 2015; 7:308re308.
50.	 Sayin VI, Ibrahim MX, Larsson E, Nilsson JA, Lindahl P,
Bergo MO. Antioxidants accelerate lung cancer progression
in mice. Sci Transl Med. 2014; 6:221ra215.
51.	 Il’yasova D, Marcello JE, McCoy L, Rice T, Wrensch M.
Total dietary antioxidant index and survival in patients with
glioblastoma multiforme. Cancer causes & control : CCC.
2009; 20:1255–1260.
52.	 Bliss CI. The toxicity of poisons applied jointly. Ann Appl
Biol 1939; 26:585–615.
53.	 Yeh P, Tschumi AI, Kishony R. Functional classification
of drugs by properties of their pairwise interactions. Nat
Genet. 2006; 38:489–494.
54.	 Chou TC, Talalay P. Quantitative analysis of dose-effect
relationships: the combined effects of multiple drugs or
enzyme inhibitors. Adv Biol Regul. 1984; 22:27–55.
55.	 Carpenter AE, Jones TR, Lamprecht MR, Clarke C,
Kang IH, Friman O, Guertin DA, Chang JH, Lindquist RA,
Moffat J, Golland P, Sabatini DM. CellProfiler: image
analysis software for identifying and quantifying cell
phenotypes. Genome Biol. 2006; 7:R100.

29.	 Xie Y, Bergström T, Jiang Y, Johansson P, Marinescu VD,
Lindberg N, Segerman A, Wicher G, Niklasson M,
Baskaran S, Sreedharan S, Everlien I, Kastemar M, et al.
The human glioblastoma cell culture resource: validated cell
models representing all molecular subtypes. EBioMedicine.
2015; doi: 10.1016/j.ebiom.2015.08.026.
30.	 Friedman J, Hastie T, Tibshirani R. Regularization Paths for
Generalized Linear Models via Coordinate Descent. J Stat
Softw. 2010; 33:1–22.
31.	 Connor MK, Seth A. A central role for the ring finger protein
RNF11 in ubiquitin-mediated proteolysis via interactions
with E2s and E3s. Oncogene. 2004; 23:2089–2095.
32.	 Siedlecka-Kroplewska K, Jozwik A, Kaszubowska L,
Kowalczyk A, Boguslawski W. Pterostilbene induces cell
cycle arrest and apoptosis in MOLT4 human leukemia cells.
Folia Histochem Cyto. 2012; 50:574–580.
33.	 Wang Y, Ding L, Wang X, Zhang J, Han W, Feng L, Sun J,
Jin H, Wang XJ. Pterostilbene simultaneously induces
apoptosis, cell cycle arrest and cyto-protective autophagy
in breast cancer cells. Am J Transl Res. 2012; 4:44–51.
34.	 Pratilas CA, Solit DB. Targeting the mitogen-activated protein
kinase pathway: physiological feedback and drug response.
Clinical cancer research : an official journal of the American
Association for Cancer Research. 2010; 16:3329–3334.
35.	 Zhou J, Chng WJ. Roles of thioredoxin binding protein
(TXNIP) in oxidative stress, apoptosis and cancer.
Mitochondrion. 2013; 13:163–169.
36.	 Brennan CW, Verhaak RG, McKenna A, Campos B,
Noushmehr H, Salama SR, Zheng S, Chakravarty D,
Sanborn JZ, Berman SH, Beroukhim R, Bernard B, Wu CJ,
et al. The somatic genomic landscape of glioblastoma. Cell.
2013; 155:462–477.
37.	Barcellos-Hoff MH, Newcomb EW, Zagzag D,
Narayana A. Therapeutic targets in malignant glioblastoma
microenvironment. Semin Radiat Oncol. 2009; 19:163–170.
38.	 Ho B, Huang G, Golubovskaya VM. Focal adhesion kinase
regulates expression of thioredoxin-interacting protein
(TXNIP) in cancer cells. Anti-cancer Agents Med Chem.
2014; 14:3–8.
39.	 He X, Wang L, Szklarz G, Bi Y, Ma Q. Resveratrol inhibits
paraquat-induced oxidative stress and fibrogenic response
by activating the nuclear factor erythroid 2-related factor 2
pathway. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2012; 342:81–90.
40.	 Liu H, Huang J, Peng J, Wu X, Zhang Y, Zhu W, Guo L.
Upregulation of the inwardly rectifying potassium channel
Kir2.1 (KCNJ2) modulates multidrug resistance of smallcell lung cancer under the regulation of miR-7 and the Ras/
MAPK pathway. Mol Cancer. 2015; 14:59.
41.	 Herms JW, von Loewenich FD, Behnke J, Markakis E,
Kretzschmar HA. c-myc oncogene family expression in
glioblastoma and survival. Surg Neurol. 1999; 51:536–542.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

73214

Oncotarget

56.	 Jones TR, Carpenter AE, Lamprecht MR, Moffat J, Silver SJ,
Grenier JK, Castoreno AB, Eggert US, Root DE, Golland P,
Sabatini DM. Scoring diverse cellular morphologies in
image-based screens with iterative feedback and machine
learning. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 2009; 106:1826–1831.

cell transcriptional landscape by highly multiplex RNA-seq.
Genome Res. 2011; 21:1160–1167.
61.	Sun Z, Li X, Massena S, Kutschera S, Padhan N,
Gualandi L, Sundvold-Gjerstad V, Gustafsson K, Choy WW,
Zang G, Quach M, Jansson L, Phillipson M, Abid MR,
Spurkland A, Claesson-Welsh L. VEGFR2 induces c-Src
signaling and vascular permeability in vivo via the adaptor
protein TSAd. J Exp Med. 2012; 209:1363–1377.

57.	 Nociari MM, Shalev A, Benias P, Russo C. A novel one-step,
highly sensitive fluorometric assay to evaluate cell-mediated
cytotoxicity. J Immunol Methods. 1998; 213:157–167.
58.	 Christian Ritz JCS. Bioassay Analysis using R. Journal of
statistical software. 2005; 12.

62.	Padhan N, Nordling TE, Sundström M, Åkerud P,
Birgisson H, Nygren P, Nelander S, Claesson-Welsh L.
High sensitivity isoelectric focusing to establish a signaling
biomarker for the diagnosis of human colorectal cancer.
BMC Cancer. 2016 Aug 25;16:683. doi: 10.1186/s12885016-2725-z.

59.	 R Core Team. R: A Language and Environment for
Statistical Computing. http://R-projectorg. 2013; R
Foundation for Statistical Computing(Vienna, Austria).
60.	 Islam S, Kjallquist U, Moliner A, Zajac P, Fan JB,
Lonnerberg P, Linnarsson S. Characterization of the single-

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

73215

Oncotarget

