HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Author Manuscript

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 20.
Published in final edited form as:
Nature. 2017 February 02; 542(7639): 119–123. doi:10.1038/nature21052.

Genomic deletion of malic enzyme 2 confers collateral lethality
in pancreatic cancer

Author Manuscript

Prasenjit Dey1,2,*, Joelle Baddour3,*, Florian Muller4, Chia Chin Wu2, Huamin Wang5, WenTing Liao1, Zangdao Lan1, Alina Chen1, Tony Gutschner2, Yaan Kang6, Jason Fleming6,
Nikunj Satani4, Di Zhao1, Abhinav Achreja3, Lifeng Yang3, Jiyoon Lee3, Edward Chang2,7,
Giannicola Genovese2, Andrea Viale2, Haoqiang Ying8, Giulio Draetta2,7,8, Anirban
Maitra9,10, Y. Alan Wang1,2, Deepak Nagrath3, and Ronald A. DePinho1
1Department

of Cancer Biology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston,
Texas 77030, USA

2Department

of Genomic Medicine, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, Texas 77030, USA
3Department

of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, Department of Bioengineering, Rice
University, 6100 Main Street, Houston, Texas 77005, USA

4Department

of Cancer Systems Imaging, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, Texas 77030, USA
5Department

Author Manuscript

of Pathology, Division of Pathology/Lab Medicine, The University of Texas MD
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas 77030, USA

6Department

of Surgical Oncology, Division of Surgery, The University of Texas MD Anderson
Cancer Center, Houston, Texas 77030, USA
7Institute

for Applied Cancer Science, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, Texas 77030, USA

8Department

of Molecular and Cellular Oncology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, Texas 77030, USA
9Department

of Translational Molecular Pathology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, Texas 77030, USA

Author Manuscript

Reprints and permissions information is available at www.nature.com/reprints.
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to R.A.D (rdepinho@mdanderson.org), Y.A.W.
(yalanwang@mdanderson.org) or D.N. (deepak.nagrath@rice.edu).
*These authors contributed equally to this work.
Author Contributions P.D., Y.A.W., D.N. and R.A.D. designed the studies, interpreted the data and wrote the manuscript; P.D.
performed all experiments; J.B. performed experiments and analysis of metabolite isotope tracing, Seahorse and UPLC; A.A. and L.Y.
conducted metabolomics data analysis; C.C.W. performed bioinformatics analysis; W.-T.L. and H.W. conducted tissue microarray
analysis; Z.L. conducted ChIP analysis; T.G. was responsible for ME2 CRISPR design and cloning; Y.K., J.F. and A.V. contributed
essential reagents and resources; F.M., G.G., H.Y., G.D. and A.M. provided intellectual input; A.C., N.S., D.Z., Y.K., J.L. and E.C.
provided technical support.
Supplementary Information is available in the online version of the paper.
The authors declare no competing financial interests.

Dey et al.

Page 2

10Sheikh

Author Manuscript

Ahmed Bin Zayed Al Nahyan Center for Pancreatic Cancer Research, The University of
Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas 77030, USA

Abstract

Author Manuscript

The genome of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) frequently contains deletions of tumour
suppressor gene loci, most notably SMAD4, which is homozygously deleted in nearly one-third of
cases1. As loss of neighbouring housekeeping genes can confer collateral lethality, we sought to
determine whether loss of the metabolic gene malic enzyme2 (ME2) in the SMAD4 locus would
create cancer-specific metabolic vulnerability upon targeting of its paralogous isoform ME3. The
mitochondrial malic enzymes (ME2 and ME3) are oxidative decarboxylases that catalyse malate
to pyruvate and are essential for NADPH regeneration and reactive oxygen species homeostasis2,3.
Here we show that ME3 depletion selectively kills ME2-null PDAC cells in a manner consistent
with an essential function for ME3 in ME2-null cancer cells. Mechanistically, integrated
metabolomic and molecular investigation of mitochondrial malic enzyme-deficient cells revealed
diminished NADPH production and consequent high levels of reactive oxygen species. These
changes activate AMP activated protein kinase (AMPK), which in turn directly suppresses sterol
regulatory element-binding protein 1 (SREBP1)-directed transcription of its direct targets
including the BCAT2 (branched chain amino acid transaminase 2) gene. BCAT2 catalyses the
transfer of the amino group from branched chain amino acids to α-ketoglutarate (α–KG)4thereby
regenerating glutamate, which functions in part to support de novo nucleotide synthesis. Thus,
mitochondrial malic enzyme deficiency, which results in impaired NADPH production, provides a
prime ‘collateral lethality’ therapeutic strategy for the treatment of a substantial fraction of
patients suffering from this intractable disease.

Author Manuscript

The paucity of therapeutically actionable oncogene mutations and the frequent occurrence of
tumour suppressor gene deletions in PDAC prompted us to assess cancer-specific
vulnerabilities incurred by deletion of passenger genes encoding essential cellular functions.
In this ‘collateral lethality’ framework5, cancer cells tolerate deletion of critical
housekeeping genes owing to the co-expression of functionally redundant paralogues that
maintain these essential cellular reactions6.

Author Manuscript

Chromosomal region 18q21, which contains SMAD4, is homozygously deleted in a large
fraction of human solid tumours1 (Fig. 1a, Extended Data Fig. 1a, b). This region also
harbours multiple housekeeping genes including ME2, which is often deleted along with
SMAD4 (Fig. 1b, Extended Data Fig. 1c–e). Analyses of the copy number (Fig.1c)and
expression (Extended Data Fig. 1f) of ME2 and SMAD4 show a strong positive correlation.
PDAC TCGA copy-number and transcriptomic analyses (n = 185) and a study of
microdissected PDAC samples (n = 109)7have revealed homozygous deletion of SMAD4 in
14% (25 of 185) and 29% (32 of 109) of tumours, respectively, with ME2 deletion in 64%
(16 of 25, homozygous deletion) and 96% (31 of 32, homozygous deletion) of these
SMAD4-deleted cases, respectively (Fig. 1d, e, Extended Data Fig. 1g). Exclusion of
stromal content in the microdissection study is likely to account for the higher codeletion of
SMAD4 and ME2 in this study. Furthermore, immunohistochemistry (IHC) analysis of ME2
and SMAD4 expression in 62 PDAC and 77 matched normal samples revealed

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 20.

Dey et al.

Page 3

Author Manuscript

corresponding loss of both proteins in 37% of PDAC cases (Extended Data Fig. 1h–k).
Beyond PDAC, homozygous deletion of ME2 occurs in many other cancers (Fig. 1e).
The family of malic enzymes consists of three isoforms: a cytosolic NADP+-dependent
isoform (ME1) and two redundant mitochondrial NAD(P)+-dependent isoforms (ME2 and
ME3)2,3. In normal cells and most cancer cells, ME2 is the main isoform in mitochondria
and has higher abundance and enzymatic activity compared to ME3 (ref. 3). However, in the
absence of ME2, ME3 presumably sustains essential NADPH synthesis in mitochondria.

Author Manuscript

To test the hypothesis that ME3 enables survival of ME2-deficient cells, we identified 12
lines with homozygous deletion of ME2 from the 46 PDAC cell lines in the Cancer Cell
Line Encyclopedia (CCLE) database (Fig. 1a). We validated and used four ME2
homozygous null (hereafter ME2-null) (Panc05.04, Hs766T, PATU8988T, BxPC3) and five
ME2-intact (PATU8902, ASPC1, KP-1NL, PK59, Panc1) cell lines (Fig. 2a, b). Consistent
with the cell-essential and redundant function of malic enzymes in mitochondria, we
observed a compensatory increase in ME3 expression in ME2-null cell lines (Fig. 2b).
Similar observations were made in matched normal and PDAC samples, which showed an
increase in ME3 expression (59%, 37 out of 62), and in the CCLE database, where there is a
gain at the ME3 locus (65%, 30 out of 46) (Extended Data Fig. 2a–c). Overall, these
findings suggest that mitochondrial malic enzymes have redundant and cell-essential roles,
prompting us to hypothesize that collateral lethality would result from depletion of ME3 in
ME2-deleted PDAC cells.

Author Manuscript

We surmised that ME1 might not be a viable collateral lethality target, as ME1 is expressed
solely in the cytosolic compartment and is essential for biosynthetic pathways such as fatty
acid biosynthesis, supplying NADPH to both cancer and normal cells. Indeed, ME1 proved
to be essential for the survival of both PDAC cells and normal fibroblasts, as evidenced by
increased cell death upon either short hairpin (sh)RNA or doxycycline (dox)-inducible short
hairpin (ish)RNA-mediated knockdown of ME1in both ME2-null (PATU8988T) and ME2intact (KP-1NL, NHDF-Neo) cell lines (Extended Data Fig. 2d–l).

Author Manuscript

We tested the effect of ME3 depletion as a collateral lethal target in the ME2-null context
using dox-inducible shRNA in ME2-null and ME2-intact cells. Specifically, dox-induction
of ME3 shRNA decreased colony formation and proliferation (Fig. 2c, d, Extended Data Fig.
3a–m) and profoundly impaired tumour growth and increased survival in subcutaneous and
orthotopic models of ME2-null PDAC tumours (Fig. 2e, f, Extended Data Fig. 3n–r).
Inhibition of tumour growth was accompanied by significantly reduced cell proliferation and
increased cell death (Extended Data Fig. 4a, b), which was consistent with the identification
of enriched cell proliferation and cell death pathways by RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) and
Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (Extended Data Fig. 4c, d). Moreover, in vitro apoptosis assays
of ME3-depleted cells showed increased annexin V-positive cells when compared with
control cells (Extended Data Fig. 5a, b). Finally, these anti-tumour phenotypes were
alleviated by ectopic expression of ME2 in mitochondrial ME3-depleted cells (Fig. 2g,
Extended Data Fig. 5c–g), thus establishing that the paralogous ME3 isoform has a
compensatory function in ME2-deleted PDAC cells.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 20.

Dey et al.

Page 4

Author Manuscript

Given the observed alterations in PGC1α and TCA cycle expression signatures (Extended
Data Fig. 5h, i) following ME3 depletion in ME2-null PDAC cells, and the established
function of malic enzymes in mitochondrial redox balance, we sought to confirm the role of
malic enzymes in the maintenance of mitochondrial redox homeostasis in PDAC. We
therefore treated ME3-depleted and non-depleted control cells with cell-permeable reduced
glutathione (GSH) or antioxidant N-acetylcysteine (NAC). Treatment with either GSH or
NAC resulted in partial rescue in colony formation assays, consistent with a function for
mitochondrial malic enzymes in redox homeostasis. (Extended Data Fig. 5j), but the partial
rescue belied additional non-redox functions of mitochondrial malic enzymes (see below).
Indeed, consistent with the role of malic enzymes in converting malate to pyruvate, the
addition of 5 mM cell-permeable pyruvate decreased ROS and moderately rescued colony
formation (Extended Data Fig. 5k–n).

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Mitochondrial malic enzymes are required for maintaining the NADPH pool, matching
mitochondrial demand for reducing equivalents to detoxify mitochondrial reactive oxygen
species (ROS)8. In addition to the pyruvate study above, we also assessed the utilization of
metabolites, especially glucose (Glc) and glutamine (Gln). We have shown previously that
Glc and Gln are essential for PDAC cell survival9-10and are key suppliers of TCA cycle
intermediates. Metabolic analyses showed that ME3 depletion in ME2-null cells led to an
increase in Gln flux via the TCA cycle, as indicated by metabolite isotopomer tracing of
ME3-depleted cells using uniformly 13C-labelled Gln ([U-13C5]Gln) as a tracer (Extended
Data Fig. 5o, p). The increase in Gln flux via the TCA cycle induced by ME3 depletion
indicates that metabolic re-wiring compensates for mitochondrial stress by using an alternate
pathway (Gln) to replenish NADPH. Glc flux to lactate and pyruvate was unchanged
following ME3 depletion in ME2-null cells, but Glc entry into the TCA cycle was decreased
upon depletion of mitochondrial malic enzymes (Extended Data Fig. 6a, b). Similarly, Glc
uptake and lactate secretion rates remained unchanged upon ME3 depletion in both ME2null (Extended Data Fig. 6c–f) and ME2-intact cells (Extended Data Fig. 6l–o). Further
functional analysis using Seahorse revealed that depletion of mitochondrial malic enzymes
decreased oxygen consumption rate (OCR) compared with ME3 non-depleted controls
(Extended Data Fig. 6g). Conversely, the extracellular acidification rate (ECAR), an indirect
measurement of glycolysis, was unchanged upon depletion of mitochondrial malic enzymes
(Extended Data Fig. 6h). Similarly, we found no change in OCR and ECAR in ME2-intact
KP-1NL cells (Extended Data Fig. 6i, j). These data suggest that ME3 depletion leads to
inhibition of mitochondrial function. To further validate the effect of ME3 depletion on
mitochondrial function, we stained the cells with MitoTracker red, a marker of
mitochondrial structure. ME3 depletion in ME2-null cells generated profound changes in
mitochondrial structure, resulting in a more globular appearance as seen by MitoTracker red
staining (Fig. 3a, Extended Data Fig. 6k). In addition, ME3-depleted cells stained intensely
for MitoTracker green, an indicator of mitochondrial biomass (Extended Data Fig. 6p, q).
These data were reinforced by transmission electron microscopy (TEM) showing aberrant
ring-shaped mitochondria, a feature consistent with ROS-mediated stress (Fig. 3b).
As our previous work established that Gln is required for maintenance of redox haemostasis
and ultimately for PDAC cell survival11, we sought further to explore the molecular
mechanism that leads to mitochondrial dysfunction and ultimately cell death upon ME3
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 20.

Dey et al.

Page 5

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

depletion. To that end, we analysed the utilization of amino acids by ME3-depleted cells. We
did not observe a change in Gln uptake in either ME3-depleted ME2-null (PATU8988T) or
ME3-depleted ME2-intact (KP-1NL) cells by ultra-performance liquid chromatography
(UPLC) analysis (Extended Data Fig. 7a, b). However, we observed substantial
underutilization of branched-chainamino acids (BCAAs; isoleucine, leucine and valine)
upon ME3 depletion in ME2-null cells but not in ME2-intact cells (Fig. 3c, d, Extended Data
Fig. 7c, d). BCAAs are important contributors of amino groups to α-KG in the synthesis of
glutamic acid (Glu)12 (Extended Data Fig. 8a). Muscles act as an immediate repository of
BCAAs, which constitute more than 50% of the amino acid uptake from the circulation13,14.
An increase in BCAAs in the circulation is an indication of high protein turnover and muscle
breakdown, which are hallmarks of cancer cachexia seen in many patients with PDAC15.
Furthermore, BCAA derived from muscle breakdown provides a continuous source of Gln.
Collectively, these observations prompted speculation that these systemic metabolic shifts
may support PDAC genesis and progression by supplying BCAAs16-18.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Upon ME3 depletion in ME2-null cells, RNA-seq, immunoblot and IHC (Fig. 3e–g,
Extended Data Fig. 8b–f) analyses showed substantial downregulation of BCAT2. BCAT2 is
a mitochondrial isoform4,19 required for the first step in BCAA catabolism, where the amino
group of BCAAs is transferred to α–KG to generate Glu (Extended Data Fig. 8a). Notably,
the exocrine pancreas has the highest BCAT2 activity of all tissues19. BCAT2 operates at
near equilibrium in most cells, and a small change in its availability can greatly affect
BCAA catabolism owing to a decrease in mitochondrial BCAA uptake leading to BCAA
accumulation inside the cytosol of ME3-depleted cells13,20,21(Fig. 3h). Next, we sought to
elucidate the basis of BCAT2 downregulation. We predicted and confirmed that ME3
depletion in ME2-null cells (but not ME2-intact cells) would result in ROS accumulation,
correlating with a reduction in NADPH and reduced glutathione (Fig. 3i–o and Extended
Data Fig. 8g–i), which aligned with increased expression of the antioxidant protein regulator
NRF2 (Extended Data Fig. 8j, k). Correspondingly, ME2 overexpression restored NADPH
levels and decreased ROS (Extended Data Fig. 9a, b). High intracellular ROS is known to
induce AMPK22, an established indicator of metabolic stress. AMPK activation (evidenced
by phosphorylation of Thr172)23 was observed upon ME3 depletion (Fig. 4a). Transient
expression of kinase-dead AMPK (T172A) largely abolished the effect of ME3 depletion on
BCAT2 expression (Fig. 4b). Moreover, ME2 overexpression rescued BCAT2 expression in
ME3-depleted cells (Fig. 4c). Similarly, the anti-oxidants EUK134 (Fig. 4d) and TROLOX
(Extended Data Fig. 9c) restored BCAT2 expression. Conversely, pharmacological activation
of AMPK using the cell-permeable AMPK activator AICAR led to downregulation of
BCAT2 (Extended Data Fig. 9d). Together, these findings demonstrate that elevated ROS
activates AMPK, which in turn suppresses BCAT2 expression.
On the mechanistic level, a binding site in the BCAT2 promoter was identified and
confirmed for SREBP1c (sterol response element binding protein 1c), a known target
regulated by AMPK (Fig. 4e). Activated AMPK inhibits SREBP1 activity24. SREBP1 is a
sterol-sensing transcription factor that promotes lipogenesis. Activation of SREBP1 by
mTORC1 leads to nuclear translocation of SREBP1 and subsequent transcription of its
target genes25, such as the genes encoding acetyl CoA carboxylase and fatty acid synthase
(FAS). Thus, AMPK inhibits nuclear translocation of SREBP1 by phosphorylation and
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 20.

Dey et al.

Page 6

Author Manuscript

thereby suppresses its target genes24. Indeed, depletion of ME3 in ME2-null cells increased
SREBP1 phosphorylation (Fig. 4f). Moreover, shRNA-mediated depletion of SREBP1 or
BCAT2 (Fig. 4g), both of which decreased BCAT2 expression, led to a comparable decline
in colony formation (Fig. 4h, Extended Data Fig. 9e). Transient expression of a dominantnegative SREBP1c26, which disrupts the binding of SREBP1c to the sterol response element
(SRE), decreased expression of BCAT2, ACC and FAS (Fig. 4i). In addition, BCAT2
overexpression in ME3-depleted cells (PATU8988T-ishME3) led to aggressive tumour
growth, suggesting that PDAC tumours are acutely dependent on BCAAs (Fig. 4j). However,
the impact of BCAT2 levels appears to be independent of mitochondrial respiration, as
neither BCAT2 knockdown nor overexpression was observed to alter the OCR (Extended
Data Fig. 9f, g).

Author Manuscript

ME3 depletion in ME2-null cells inhibited amino group transfer from BCAA to α–KG; this
effect is reminiscent of BCAT2 knockdown, as shown by 15N-labelled BCAA (15N-Leu)
tracing (M1 Glu) (Extended Data Fig. 10a). A similar decrease in amino group transfer to
synthesize serine (Ser) and alanine (Ala) (non-essential amino acids derived from Glu) was
also observed (Extended Data Fig. 10b, c). However, 13C-labelled BCAA flux analysis did
not detect changes in TCA cycle flux (Extended Data Fig. 10d). It is known that Gln
contributes its amino group to synthesize ammonia required for the de novo synthesis of
nucleotides, especially pyrimidine27. Notably, addition of a mixture of nucleotides (adenine,
guanine, cytosine, thymine and inosine) rescued colony formation after ME3 depletion in
ME2-null cells, indicating that BCAA-derived nucleotide precursors are rate limiting to cell
viability (Fig. 4k, Extended Data Fig. 10e). In summary, these findings are consistent with
multiple consequences of mitochondrial malic enzyme depletion, including (i) ROSmediated activation of the AMPK pathway causing a decrease in BCAA breakdown and
thereby leading to a decrease in de novo nucleotide biosynthesis, and (ii) ROS-mediated
mitochondrial damage leading to activation of apoptotic pathways (Fig. 4l). Overall, our
study provides a mechanistic basis for the loss of cancer cell viability upon depletion of
mitochondrial malic enzymes.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Here, in an effort to expand therapeutic strategies beyond oncogenic targets to those not
directly linked to cancer pathogenesis, we have identified a collateral lethal vulnerability in
PDAC that can be targeted pharmacologically in genotype-defined patient populations.
Genomic data across many cancers further suggest that this therapeutic strategy may be
effective for many patients, including those suffering from gastric and colon cancers. Our
work also suggests a mechanism for cell lethality involving the regulation of BCAAs as
crucial metabolites in PDAC, under the critical regulation of the mitochondrial malic
enzymes. We propose that highly specific ME3 inhibitors could provide an effective therapy
for a meaningful fraction of cancer patients.

METHODS
Cell culture
All the cell lines used in this study were purchased from ATCC, used below passage 25 and
continuously cultured in 100 U/ml penicillin and 100 U/ml streptomycin. The cell lines were
authenticated by short tandem repeat (STR) profiling at the Institute for Applied Cancer
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 20.

Dey et al.

Page 7

Author Manuscript

Sciences, MD Anderson Cancer Center. The PATU8988T, Hs766T and PATU8902 cell lines
were routinely cultured in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM) with 10% fetal
bovine serum (FBS) (Invitrogen). AsPc1, BxPC3 and KP-1NL cell lines were routinely
cultured in Roswell Park Memorial Institute (RPMI) 1640 (Invitrogen) with 10% FBS, and
Panc05.04 cells were routinely cultured in RPMI 1640 with 15% FBS. For metabolic and
metabolomic assays, 10% dialysed FBS (Atlanta Biologicals Inc.) was used. For BCAA
experiments, DMEM medium without BCAAs was used (United States Biological). NHDFneo-fibroblasts were cultured in Eagle’s modified medium (EMEM) with 10% FBS. The cell
lines were mycoplasma free, based on tests done monthly in the laboratory using Lonza’s
MycoAlert Mycoplasma Detection Kit assays with confirmatory tests by PCR-based assays.
Reagents and chemicals

Author Manuscript

Trolox (Cat. No. 238813) and AICAR (A9978) were purchased from Sigma. EUK134 (Cat.
No. 10006329) was purchased from Cayman Chemicals.13C and 15N labelled isotopes were
purchased from Cambridge Isotope Laboratories.
siRNA, shRNA and CRISPR knockdown

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

shRNA knockdown was performed essentially as described previously6. We screened five
hairpins targeting ME3 and found three independent sequences that reduced mRNA levels
by >60%. Initial hairpin screenings were performed in the pLKO3.1 shRNA vectors (Sigma
Aldrich), while actual experiments were performed in the doxycycline-inducible ipLKO3.1
ishRNA vectors (engineered in the laboratory) using the sequences from the pLKO3.1
screening (ME1, ME2 and ME3 only). The ME3ishRNA sequences were as follows:
ishME3#1
(CCGGGCTCAACAAATACCGTAACAACTCGAGTTGTTACGGTATTTGTTGAGC
TTTTTG), ishME3#2 (CCGGCGTGTCTTTGAGAATTGCCATCTCGAGAT
GGCAATTCTCAAAGACACGTTTTTG) and ishME3#3 (CCGGCCTCCGA
ATCATGAGATATTACTCGAGTA ATATCTCATGATTCGGAGGTTTTTG). The ME1
shRNA sequences were as follows: ishME1#3 (CCGGGCTGAGGTTA
TAGCTCAGCAACTCGAGTTGCTGAGCTATAACCTCAGCTTTTTG) and ishME1#5
(CCGGCCTGTGGGTAAATTGGCTCTACTCGAGTAGAGCCAATTTA
CCCACAGGTTTTTG). The SREBP1 shRNA sequences were as follows: shSREBP1#2
(CCGGGCCATCGACTACATTCGCTTTCTCGAGAAAGCGAATGTA
GTCGATGGCTTTTT) and shSREBP1#3(CCGGGCTGAATAAATCTGCTGTC
TTCTCGAGAAGACAGCAGATTTATTCAGCTTTTT). The BCAT2 shRNA sequences
were as follows: shBCAT2#2 (CCGGTGAAGTGCAATACGAAATAA
ACTCGAGTTTATTTCGTATTGCACTTCATTTTTG) and shBCAT2#3 (CCGGGT
GCACCGAATCCTGTACAAACTCGAGTTTGTACAGGATTCGGTGCACTTTTTG). A
non-targeting shRNA (shCtrl) was used as a control. The shRNA-expressing pLKO3.1
vector was introduced into cancer cell lines by lentiviral infection. Recombinant lentiviral
particles were produced by transient transfection of 293T cells following a standard
protocol. Briefly, 10 μg of the shRNA plasmid, 5 μg of psPAX2 and 2.5 μg of pMD2.G were
transfected using polyethylenimine (1 μg/μl, Polysciences # 23966-2) into 293T cells plated
in a 100-mm dish. Viral supernatant was collected 72 h after transfection, centrifuged to
remove any 293T cells and filtered (0.45 μm). For transduction, viral solutions were added
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 20.

Dey et al.

Page 8

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

to cell culture medium containing 4 μg/ml polybrene; 48 h after infection, cells were
selected using 2 μg/ml puromycin and tested for ME1 and ME3 depletion by RT-qPCR or
immunoblotting. siRNA targeting ME3 (Accell SMARTpool) was purchased from
Dharmacon and used according to the manufacturer’s protocol. For CRISPR knockdown of
ME2, sgRNA were designed based on the recommendations from ref. 28(http://
portals.broadinstitute.org/gpp/public/analysis-tools/sgrna-design-v1). The sgRNA were then
cloned into pL-CRISPR.EFS.GFP (Addgene#357818)29. The sgRNA sequences are
sghME2-A_sense: CACCGCCAATTGTATATACACCGA; sghME2-A_antisense: AAACT
CGGTGTATATACAATTGGC; sghME2-B_sense_F:CACCGAGCAGGCAAGAC
CAACCGT; sghME2-B_antisense:AAACAC GGTTGGTCTTGCCTGCTC. For inducible
CRISPR knockdown of ME3 the following plasmids were obtained from TranOMICS
Technologies: three independent ME3 gRNA clones (pCLIP-gRNA-EFS-Blast and pCLIPgRNA-EFS-ZsGreen), Cas9-Nickase-Puro and pTOL-tetR vectors. The plasmids were
virally transduced into cell lines in sequence and the cells were selected for single clones at
every step.
MitoTracker analysis

Author Manuscript

Cells for the assay were grown on or off doxycycline in 100-mm dishes for 72 h. Twentythousand cells per 96 well were seeded for the flow cytometry and microplate
spectrophotometry-based assay. On the next day, the medium was removed, and pre-warmed
(37 °C) staining solution containing 50 nM MitoTracker probes was added and incubated for
45 min at 37 °C. After staining was completed, the staining solution was replaced with fresh
pre-warmed HBSS/Ca/Mg buffer. The cells were then trypsinized with 20 μl trypsin for 5
min at 37 °C and transferred to a round-bottomed 96-well plate. The plate was centrifuged
and cells washed with 150 μl cold DMEM (no FBS). The pelleted cells were resuspended in
150 μl cold DMEM (no FBS) for flow analysis. MitoTracker fluorescence was analysed by
flow cytometry (BD Fortessa) using the following channel: MitoTracker green FM: Ex
490/Em 516, FITC channel and MitoTracker Red CMXRos: Ex 579/Em 599, PE or PETexas red Channel. Ten-thousand cells per 150 μl medium were recorded by Fortessa. Data
are expressed as relative fluorescence intensity (RFI) of the mean fluorescent signal versus
unstained samples.
Ectopic expression of ME2, ME3, SREBP1, AMPK and BCAT2

Author Manuscript

Rescue of the phenotypic effects of knocking down ME3 in PATU8988T cells was
performed by re-expression of ME2 from an ectopic plasmid (CMV-ME2). For the ectopic
re-expression of ME2, sequenced-verified cDNA (Orfeome) clones were Gateway cloned
into the pHAGE-CMV lentiviral vector and transduced into PDAC cell lines as described
above. Successful re-expression of ME2 was verified by immunoblotting. For ectopic
expression of ME3 (pCMV6-XL5-ME3, SC115951), SREBP1 (pCMV6-XL6, SC117502)
and BCAT2 (pCMV6-AC-BCAT2, SC319477), cDNA clones were purchased from Origene
and transiently transfected according to the manufacturer’s protocol. GST-tagged
constitutively active rat AMPK (amino acids 1–312) and its kinase-dead mutant (T172A)
was a gift from J. Chen (MD Anderson). pSV Sport SREBP1c dominant negative was a gift
from B. Spiegelman (Addgene plasmid # 8885). pLKO-puro FLAG SREBP1 was a gift from

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 20.

Dey et al.

Page 9

Author Manuscript

D.Sabatini (Addgene plasmid # 32017). Transient transfection of PATU8988T, Panc1 and
293T cells was done using FuGENE HD (Promega) following the manufacturer’s protocol.
Proliferation and colony-formation assays
Cell growth of shRNA-treated cell lines was assayed either through crystal violet staining or
by live-cell confluence measurement with IncuCyte (Essen BioScience). Growth curves
using IncuCyte were generated by confluence imaging every 2 h with quadruplicate
replicates of an initial seeding of 300 cells per well in 96-well plates. For colony formation
assays, 300 cells were seeded in 6-well plates. At the indicated time point (usually 2 weeks),
cells were fixed with 80% methanol and stained with crystal violet solution overnight. All
experiments were performed in triplicate.
Immunoblotting and antibodies

Author Manuscript

Cells were washed twice in ice-cold phosphate-buffered saline (PBS), scraped and collected
as pellets after centrifugation at 4,000 rpm for 5 min. The pelleted cells were incubated in
RIPA buffer with proteinase and phosphatase inhibitor for 15 min. Lysates were then
collected and centrifuged at 14,000 rpm for 15 min at 4 °C. Protein concentrations were
measured using the DC Protein Assay Kit (Biorad, Cat. No. 5000111). SDS–PAGE and
immunoblotting were performed as described previously in pre-cast bis-Tris 4–20% gradient
gel (Invitrogen)6. The following antibodies were used: ME1 (Santa Cruz, sc-100569); ME2
(Santa Cruz, sc-85051; Abcam, ab139686); ME3 (Abcam, ab172972); AMPK (Cell
Signalling Technologies (CST), 5831P); phospho-AMPK Thr172 (CST, 2535); BCAT2
(CST, 9432S);phospho-SREBP1c (CST, 9874S); NRF2 (CST, 12721); pACC (CST, 11818);
ACC (CST, 3662); FAS (CST, 3180); SREBP1 (BD, 557036); GST (Abcam, 19256); and βActin (Sigma-Aldrich, A2228).

Author Manuscript

Immunohistochemistry and immunofluorescence

Author Manuscript

Tissues were fixed in 10% formalin overnight and embedded in paraffin. IHC was performed
as described previously30. Briefly, endogenous peroxidases were inactivated by 3%
hydrogen peroxide. Non-specific signals were blocked using 3% BSA, 10% goat serum in
0.1% Triton X-100. Tumour samples were stained with the following primary antibodies:
ME2 (Sigma Prestige, HPA008247), ME3 (Sigma Prestige, HPA038473), SMAD4 (Santa
Cruz, sc-7966), BCAT2 (Abcam, ab197917), Ki67 (Vector Laboratory, VP-RM04) and
cleaved caspase 3 (CST, 9661). After overnight incubation, the slides were washed and
incubated with secondary antibody (HRP-polymers, Biocare Medical) for 30 min at room
temperature. The slides were washed three times and stained with DAB substrate
(ThermoFisher Scientific). The slides were then counterstained with haematoxylin and
mounted with mounting medium.
Human PDAC primary tumour samples
PDAC samples were obtained from MD Anderson Cancer Center’s tissue Biobank. The
samples were stained using the standard IHC protocol. The antibodies used were ME2
(Sigma Prestige, HPA008247) and ME3 (Sigma Prestige, HPA038473). SMAD4 (Santa
Cruz, sc-7966,) antibody staining was conducted using a CLIA-certified protocol and

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 20.

Dey et al.

Page 10

Author Manuscript

reagents. The stained samples were imaged using Pannoramic 250 slide scanner and data
analysed using Pannoramic viewer software (3DHISTECH Ltd) by two independent
pathologists. Human studies were approved by The UT MD Anderson Cancer Center’s
institutional review board (IRB protocol number: LAB05-0854) and informed consent was
obtained from all subjects.
Chromatin immunoprecipitation
ChIP was performed as described previously31using SREBP1 antibody (Santa Cruz,
sc-367x). Briefly, 5 μg rabbit IgG (Santa Cruz) or SREBP1 antibody was incubated with
Protein A Dynabead magnetic beads (Invitrogen) for 4 h, followed by extensive washing to
remove unbound antibody. Antibody beads were then added to the chromatin and incubated
overnight. The ChIP primers were purchased from Qiagen (EpiTect ChIP PCR assay) and
used for qPCR analysis: BCAT2 (GPH1020848(+)03A).

Author Manuscript

Transcriptomic profiling by RNA-seq and qRT–PCR

Author Manuscript

RNA was isolated from tissues using Trizol extraction followed by purification with the
Qiagen RNAeasy kit as described previously32,33. RNA-seq was performed by the
Sequencing and Microarray Facility (SMF) core at MD Anderson. Libraries were generated
using Illumina’s TruSeq kit and were sequenced using the Illumina HiSeq2000 Sequencer.
Raw read RNA-seq data were mapped to the hg19 reference genome using Bowtie34. The
mapped reads were then assembled by Cufflinks35to generate a transcriptome assembly for
each sample. After the assembly phase, Cufflinks quantified the expression of the
transcriptome in each gene for each sample (that is, FPKM, fragments per kilobase of
transcript per million fragments mapped). For qRT–PCR, RNA samples were reverse
transcribed into cDNA using the High-Capacity cDNA Reverse Transcript kit (Life
Technologies). cDNA samples were subjected to qRT–PCR quantification in duplicate and
performed with Power SYBR Green PCR Master Mix (Invitrogen) according to the product
guides on a Agilent Mx3005P and Applied Biosystems AB7500 Fast Real Time machine.
The primer sequences used for real-time qRT–PCR are the following: ME2 (Fwd 5′
ATTAGTGACAGTGTTTTCCTA 3′, Rev 5′ CTATTCTGTTATCACAGG 3′), BCAT2
(Fwd 5′ CTCTGGGGCAGCTGTTTGA 3′, Rev 5′ ATAACACCATTCAGCGGGGG 3′).
Stable isotope analysis using GC-MS

Author Manuscript

Metabolite extraction—Cells were cultured in 6-well plates overnight and treated the
next day with doxycycline for 72 h. Cells were then cultured in the presence of carbon- or
nitrogen-labelled isotope tracers for 24 h. The medium was removed and cells were washed
with ice-cold PBS solution. Next, cells were quenched with 400 μl methanol and 400 μl
water containing 1 μl norvaline, scraped, washed with 800 μl ice-cold chloroform, vortexed
at 4 °C for 30 min and centrifuged at 7,300 rpm for 10 min at 4 °C. The upper aqueous
phase was collected for metabolite analysis.
Derivatization—Samples were first dried using a Speedvac, followed by the addition of 30
μl of 2% methoxyamine hydrochloride in pyridine (Pierce) and sonication for 15 min.
Samples were then kept at 37 °C for 2 h, then at 55 °C for 1 h following the addition of 45 μl

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 20.

Dey et al.

Page 11

Author Manuscript

MBTSTFA + 1% TBDMCS (Pierce). Samples were next transferred to vials equipped with
inserts.
GC-MS measurements—Metabolites were analysed using an Agilent 6890 GC equipped
with a 30-m Rtx-5 capillary column connected to an Agilent 5975B MS operating under
electron impact ionization at 70 eV. Samples were injected at 1 μl and 270 °C in splitless
mode, and helium was used as the carrier gas at 1 ml/min. The heating cycle for the GC
oven was as follows: 100 °C for 3 min, followed by 300 °C at 5 °C/min temperature
increase, for a total run time of 48 min per sample. Data were acquired in scan mode and the
integrated signal of all potentially labelled ions was normalized by the norvaline signal and
used to calculate the abundance of relative metabolites. The mass isotopomer distribution
was obtained by dividing the signal of each isotopomer by the sum of all isotopomer signals,
corrected for natural abundance.

Author Manuscript

Oxygen consumption and glycolytic capacity—PDAC cells (PATU8988T and
KP-1NL) were plated into XF Cell Culture Microplates (Seahorse Bioscience) overnight at
37 °C and 5% CO2. The next day, cells were treated with doxycycline for 72 h. To measure
OCR and ECAR, media were replaced in the Seahorse microplates with assay medium free
of sodium bicarbonate and FBS, and the plate was incubated in a CO2-free incubator for 1 h
at 37 °C. Oligomycin, FCCP, and rotenone were sequentially injected at a final
concentration of 2 μg/ml, 1 μM and 1 μM, respectively. Experiments were run using an XF
analyser and raw data were normalized with total protein measured in each well of the
microplate.

Author Manuscript

Glucose uptake and lactate production—Glucose uptake and lactate secretion were
measured using Wako Glucose kit and Trinity Lactate kit, respectively. Briefly, 200 μl of
reconstituted Wako glucose reagent or lactate reagent were added to a 96-well plate and
mixed with 10-μl samples that were diluted 1:10 in PBS. To measure glucose uptake, the
plate was incubated for 15 min at 37 °C, and the change in absorbance was recorded using a
spectrophotometer (SpectraMax M5, Molecular Devices) at 505 nm. For lactate
measurement, the plate was incubated for 1 h at 37 °C and absorbance was read at 540 nm.
Raw data were normalized to total protein per well.

Author Manuscript

Amino acid uptake—Amino acid uptake and secretion rates were measured using UPLC
(Waters Acquity). Briefly, cells were seeded in 12-well plates and treated for 72 h with
doxycycline. Spent media were collected, deproteinized and mixed with MassTrak Reagent
and Borate Buffer/NaOH. Samples were heated at 55 °C for 10 min and analysed using the
Water ACI UPLC system. Instrument eluents were prepared according to protocol and
eluents were run at 0.4 ml/min with UV detection set at 260 nm.
Pyruvate and nucleotide rescue experiments—For the pyruvate rescue experiment,
5 mM sodium pyruvate or methyl pyruvate were added to DMEM with 10% Tet-free FBS.
The medium also lacked glucose and glutamine, and was supplemented with 25 mM glucose
and 2 mM glutamine wherever required. For the nucleotide experiment, 250 μM mixture
(adenine, guanine, cytosine, thymine and inosine) was supplemented directly into complete
DMEM with 10% Tet-free FBS.
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 20.

Dey et al.

Page 12

Author Manuscript

Chromogenic spectrophotometric NADPH assay—NADPH was measured using the
NADP/NADPH assay kit (Abcam) following the manufacturer’s protocol. Briefly, 4 × 106
cells were harvested in cold PBS and extracted using extraction buffer by two freeze–thaw
cycles (20 min on dry ice followed by 10 min at room temperature). The samples were
vortexed and centrifuged at 14,000 rpm for 5 min. The extracted samples were centrifuged at
14,000 rpm and the supernatant transferred to a new tube. NADP/NADPH inhibiting
enzymes were removed using 10 kD Spin Column (Abcam, ab93349). NADPH and total
NADP were measured upon decomposition of NADP by heating at 65 °C. Multiple readings
were taken at OD450 followed by calculation of total NADP and NADPH.

Author Manuscript

Malic enzyme activity assay—Malic enzyme activity was quantified in native, nondenatured lysates of cancer cell lines following the method of Orsomando et al.36, with
slight modifications. Native lysates were prepared with 20 mM Tris (pH 7.4), 1 mM EDTA
and 1 mM β-mercaptoethanol6. After scraping, cells were broken by sonication and lysates
cleared by centrifugation at 15,000 rpm for 15 min. Protein concentration was determined
and normalized across samples. The reference assay mixture (0.4 ml final volume) contained
100 mM triethanolamine, pH 7.5, 25 mM MgCl2, 20 mM NaF, 1 mM both NMN and ATP,
and 100 μg of cell lysate. In this assay, malate and NADP are converted to NADPH, which
was left to run for 30 min; after this incubation, the assay was stopped and NAD+ was
measured using the spectrophotometric chromogenic assay described in the section above.
Controls included samples with lysis buffer only and reaction buffer (which omits malate).

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Subcutaneous and orthotopic tumour formation—All animal procedures were
approved by the MD Anderson Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC Protocol number
00001039). Subcutaneous tumours were established by injection of 500,000 cells into the
flanks of immune-compromised male mice (Taconic), aged 4–6 weeks. These experiments
were not randomized, and the investigators were not blinded to allocation during
experiments and outcome assessment. No statistical method was used to predetermine
sample size. The animal sizes for the study were estimated based on previous experience
using similar mouse models that showed significance. Animals were killed for humane
reasons when tumours were ~15 mm in diameter. Doxycycline was provided to the animals
as indicated in the form of dox water (dox 2mg/ml, sucrose 40 mg/ml) starting 2 days after
transplantation. For late induction of ME3ishRNA, dox water was started 32 days after
transplantation. For orthotopic pancreas transplantation, nude mice were anaesthetized using
ketamine/xylazine. An incision was made in the left abdomen and the pancreas was gently
pulled out along with the spleen. Luciferase-expressing cells were slowly injected into the
tail of the pancreas using a Hamilton syringe. 5 μl cells (5 × 105) mixed with 5 μl Matrigel
were injected. For the orthotopic model, animals were imaged (IVIS Spectrum,
PerkinElmer) 2 days after surgery to assess successful implantation of the tumours. Only
orthotopic tumours of similar luciferase intensity were used further for the study. These
criteria were pre-established. Furthermore, the animals were luciferase imaged to monitor
the progress of the tumour at different time points. Dox water treatment was started 2 days
after transplantation.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 20.

Dey et al.

Page 13

Author Manuscript

Measurement of total and mitochondrial ROS—A DCFDA cellular ROS detection
assay (ThermoFisher Scientific) was used to measure total ROS activity within the cells. A
total of 2.5 × 104 cells per well were seeded on a 96-well plate and allowed to attach
overnight. The cells were then stained with 25 μM DCFDA for 45 min at 37 °C. After
staining, the cells were washed and measured using flow cytometry. 100 μM tert-butyl
hydroperoxide (TBHP) was used as a positive control. For measurement of mitochondrial
ROS, MitoSOX red mitochondrial superoxide (ThermoFisher Scientific, M36008) was used
according to the manufacturer’s protocol. In brief, a total of 2.5 × 104 cells per well was
seeded on a 96-well plate and allowed to attach overnight. The cells were then stained with 5
μM MitoSOX for 10 min at 37 °C. After staining, the cells were washed and measured using
flow cytometry.

Author Manuscript

Transmission electron microscopy (TEM)—TEM was performed at MD Anderson’s
High Resolution Electron Microscopy Facility. Samples were fixed with a solution
containing 3% glutaraldehyde plus 2% paraformaldehyde in 0.1 M cacodylate buffer, pH
7.3, for 1 h. After fixation, the samples were washed and treated with 0.1% Milliporefiltered cacodylate buffered tannic acid, postfixed with 1% buffered osmium tetroxide for 30
min, and stained en bloc with 1% Millipore-filtered uranyl acetate. The samples were
dehydrated in increasing concentrations of ethanol, infiltrated and embedded in LX-112
medium. The samples were polymerized in a 60 °C oven for 2 days. Ultrathin sections were
cut in a Leica Ultracut microtome, stained with uranyl acetate and lead citrate in a Leica EM
Stainer and examined in a JEM 1010 transmission electron microscope (JEOL, USA, Inc.) at
an accelerating voltage of 80 kV. Digital images were obtained using an AMT Imaging
System (Advanced Microscopy Techniques Corp).

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Statistical analysis—Graphpad Prism software was used to conduct the statistical
analysis of all data, except for qPCR, stable isotope tracing, amino acids utilization and
Seahorse data where Microsoft Excel was used. Data are presented as mean ± s.d. except for
metabolic and metabolomic experiments where data are presented as mean ± s.e.m. All
quantitative results were assessed by unpaired Student’s t-test after confirming that the data
met appropriate assumptions (normality and independent sampling). The Student’s t-test
assumed two-tailed distributions to calculate statistical significance between groups. Unless
otherwise indicated, for all in vitro experiments, three technical replicates were analysed.
Sample size estimation was done taking into consideration previous experience with animal
strains, assay sensitivity and tissue collection methodology used. For mouse and clinical
studies, the staining intensity of tissue sections was scored in a ‘blinded’ manner by two
independent pathologists. Animal survival benefit was determined by Kaplan Meier analysis.
P < 0.05 was considered statistically significant and the P value is indicated in the figures.
Data availability—The RNA-seq data have been submitted to the Gene Expression
Omnibus under accession number GSE80411. All other raw data generated or analysed
during this study are included in this published article (and its Supplementary Information
files).

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 20.

Dey et al.

Page 14

Author Manuscript

Extended Data

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Extended Data Fig. 1. ME2 is codeleted with SMAD4 in pancreatic cancer

a, b, Scatterplots of SMAD4 mRNA expression against log2 CNA of all tumour types from
CCLE datasets (a; n = 877), and PDAC samples in TCGA (b; n = 149). c, d, Scatterplots of
ME2 mRNA expression against log2 CNA of all tumour types from CCLE datasets (c; n =
877) and PDAC samples from CCLE datasets (d; n = 46). e, log2 CNA of ME2 in TCGA
PDAC database analysed by Oncomine (n = 131). f, Correlation between mRNA expression
of ME2 and SMAD4 in TCGA PDAC database (n = 149). g, CNA of ME2 and SMAD4 in

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 20.

Dey et al.

Page 15

Author Manuscript

UTSW microdissected PDAC samples (Nature Communication data sets, 2015)7(n = 109) as
reported by cBioportal were current in August 2016. h, Representative IHC images of
SMAD4 and ME2 expression in PDAC samples compared with a matching normal pancreas
sample. i,j, Additional ME2 (i) and SMAD4 (j) IHC images of PDAC samples. Staining is
shown as no stain (score 0) and low-to-high staining (score 1). k, IHC analysis of paired
normal and PDAC samples (n = 62) for ME2 and SMAD4 expression. Scoring is based on
no expression (score 0) and low-to-high expression (score 1).

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Extended Data Figure 2. ME1 and ME3 are paralogous isoformsof ME2

a, Representative IHC images of ME3 in PDAC samples. Staining is shown as no stain or
low-to-high staining. b, IGV image of chromosome 11 encompassing region q14 of PDAC

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 20.

Dey et al.

Page 16

Author Manuscript

cell lines from CCLE (n = 46). c, ME3 mRNA expression against log2 copy number of
PDAC lines from CCLE (n = 46). d, Expression of ME1 upon depletion of ME1 in
PATU8988T cells. β-Actin used as loading control. e, Colony-formation assay of cell lines
corresponding to the immunoblot in d. f, Quantification of the colony-formation assay in e.
g, Representative microscopic fields of PATU8988T shCtrl and shME1#3 cells (Scale bar=
100 μm). h, Expression of ME1 upon depletion of ME1 in KP-1NL cells. i, Colonyformation assay corresponding to the immunoblot in h. j, Quantification of the colonyformation assay in i. k, Representative microscopic fields of KP-1NL shCtrl and shME1#3
cells (Scale bar= 100 μm). l, Colony-formation assay of NHDF-Neo cells (skin fibroblast
cell line) (ishCtrl ± dox, ishME1#3 ± dox and NHDF-Neo/ishME3#1 ± dox). β-Actin used
as loading control. Error bars represent s.d. of at least n = 3 replicates.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 20.

Dey et al.

Page 17

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Extended Data Figure 3. ME3 depletion in ME2 null cellsleads to growth inhibitiona

Immunoblot showing expression of ME3 upon depletion with three independent Doxinducible hairpins or non-targeting inducible control hairpin (ishCtrl) in PATU8988T cells.
ME1 expression remained unchanged upon ME3 depletion. b, Expression of ME3 following
depletion by ishME3#1 and ishCtrl hairpin in BxPC3 cells (ME2-null). c, Immunoblot of
KP-1NL cells (ME2-intact) assessing deletion of ME3 expression. d, Immunoblot of Panc1
cells (ME2-intact) assessing deletion of ME3 expression. e, Raw photos of colony-formation
assay upon depletion of ME3 in ME2-null PATU8988T cells. f, Malic enzyme activity assay

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 20.

Dey et al.

Page 18

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

upon depletion of ME3 in PATU8988T cells. g, Representative microscopic field comparing
cell growth between ishCtrl ± Dox and ishME3#1 ± Dox cells (Scale bar= 50 μm). h,
Growth curve upon ME3 depletion. i, Raw photos of colony-formation assay upon depletion
of ME3 in ME2-null BxPC3 cells. j, Raw photo of colony-formation assay upon inducible
CRISPR/Cas9 deletion of ME3 in Hs766T cells. k, Inducible CRISPR/Cas9 deletion of
ME3 inhibits colony formation in Hs766T cells. l, m, Raw photos of colony formation assay
upon depletion of ME3 in ME2-intact (l) KP-1NL and (m) Panc1 cells. n, o, Raw tumour
image after 60 days of tumour growth (n) and graph of mean tumour weights (o) (n = 5). p,
Immunoblot of ME3-depleted (dox+) and non-depleted (dox–) xenograft tumour samples
confirms complete depletion of ME3. Human-specific ME1 antibody did not detect any
remaining ME1 protein in dox+ mouse tumours #3 and #4, indicating no remaining human
tumour cells (Red asterisk denote the specific band). β-Actin used as loading control. q,
Luciferase imaging (IVIS spectrum) of nude mice 79 days after orthotopic transplantation of
PATU8988T-ishME3 cells (±dox). r, Survival data for mice (n = 10 each group)
orthotopically grafted with PATU8988T cells (ishCtrl ± dox and ishME3#1 ± dox).

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 20.

Dey et al.

Page 19

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Extended Data Figure 4. Inhibition of ME3 in ME2 null cells affects tumour growth

a, b, Representative IHC and haematoxylin and eosin-stained images of xenograft tumour
samples of PATU8988T ishCtrl ± dox (a) and ishME3 ± dox (b) cells. Arrowheads indicate
Ki67-positive cells. c, Top pathways enriched in ME3-depleted xenograft tumours from
Ingenuity pathway analysis of RNA-seq data. d, Electron transport cycle (ETC) pathways
are enriched in non-ME3-depleted versus ME3-depleted xenograft tumours as analysed by
GSEA.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 20.

Dey et al.

Page 20

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Extended Data Figure 5. ME3 depletion in ME2 null cells increases apoptosis

Author Manuscript

a, Increase in annexin V staining upon ME3 depletion. b, Raw flow cytometric plot of rate
of apoptosis using annexin V and propidium iodide staining of PATU8988T cells. c, qRT
PCR data showing ME2 (CMV-GFP-ME2) expression in PATU8998T-ishME3#1 cells. d,
Immunoblot of overexpression of ME2 in ME3-depleted PATU8988T cells. e, Malic enzyme
assay showing the rescue of enzyme activity upon overexpression of ME2 in PATU8998TishME3#1 cells. f, Colony-formation assay of cell lines (PATU8998T-ishME3#1-GFP and
PATU8998T-ishME3#1-GFP-ME2). g, Representative xenograft tumour photo showing
partial rescue of tumour growth upon ME2 overexpression in ME3-depleted cell lines (n = 5,

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 20.

Dey et al.

Page 21

Author Manuscript

each group). h, GSEA analysis of RNA-seq data showing enrichment of PGC1α signature. i,
GSEA analysis of RNA-seq data showing enrichment of TCA cycle signature. j, Colonyformation data for PATU8988T-ishME3 cells rescued with GSH (4 mM) or NAC (4 mM). k,
Expression of pAMPK1-T172, BCAT2 and ME3 upon treatment with Glc (10 mM), Gln (2
mM) and/or Pyr (5 mM). l, Raw flow cytometric plot of DCFDA upon rescue with pyruvate
(5 mM). m, Relative DCFDA fluorescence upon rescue with pyruvate. n, Colony-formation
data for PATU8988T-ishME3 cells rescued with pyruvate (5 mM). o, Mapping of carbon
atom transitions using uniformly labelled 13C5-glutamine. p, Mass isotopomer distribution
(MID) of uniformly labelled 13C5-glutamine contribution to TCA cycle metabolites. ME3
depletion led to increased glutamine flux into TCA cycle. Error bars represent s.e.m. of n =
4 biological samples from two independent experiments. P values were determined by twotailed t-test.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 20.

Dey et al.

Page 22

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Extended Data Figure 6. ME3 depletion in ME2 null cells causes mitochondrial dysfunction

Author Manuscript

a, Mapping of carbon atom transitions using uniformly labelled 13C6-glucose. b, MID of
uniformly labelled 13C6-glucose contribution to TCA cycle metabolites. ME3 depletion led
to decreased glucose entry to TCA cycle. Error bars represent the s.e.m of n = 4 biological
samples from two independent experiments. P values were determined by two-tailed t-test.
c–f, Glucose uptake rate and lactate secretion rate were measured in PATU8988T (c, d) and
BxPC3 (e, f) cells. g, h, Measurements of oxygen consumption rate (OCR) (g) and
extracellular acidification rate (ECAR) (h) in PATU8988T cells upon ME3 depletion. i, j,
Measurements of OCR (i) and ECAR (j) in KP-1NL cells upon ME3 depletion. Error bars
represent s.e.m. of at least n = 5 replicates. P values were determined by two-tailed t-test. k,

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 20.

Dey et al.

Page 23

Author Manuscript

MitoTracker red, DAPI and F-actin staining of ME3-depleted (Dox+) and non-depleted
(Dox–) cells. l–o, Glucose uptake rate and lactate secretion rate were measured in KP-1NL
(l, m) and Panc1 (n, o) cells. p, Quantification of MitoTracker green staining to assess the
mitochondrial biomass (Scale bar= 10 μm). q, Representative flow cytometry data of
MitoTracker green staining of ME3-depleted (+Dox) versus. non-depleted cells. Error bars
represent s.e.m. of at least n = 5 replicates. P values were determined by two-tailed t-test.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Extended Data Figure 7. ME affects branched chain amino acids metabolism

a, b,Glutamine uptake rate measured in PATU8988T (a) and KP-1NL (b) cells upon ME3
depletion. c, d, Measurement of amino acid uptake and secretion rates in PATU8988T (c)
and KP-1NL (d) cells upon ME3 depletion. Positive values refer to amino acid uptake;

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 20.

Dey et al.

Page 24

Author Manuscript

negative values refer to secretion. Error bars represent s.e.m. of n = 6 biological samples
(PATU8988T and KP-1NL). P values were determined by two-tailed t-test.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Extended Data Figure 8. ME regulates BCAT2 via a ROS mediated pathway

a, Schematic of the first enzymatic step of BCAA catabolism to branched chain ketoacid
(BCKA). b, Time course of expression of BCAT2, ME3, pAMPKα-T172 and total AMPK
following ME3 depletion in PATU8988T cells. c, Expression of BCAT2 and ME3 in cells
treated with another independent ishRNA (ishME3#3). d, Expression of BCAT2 and ME3 in

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 20.

Dey et al.

Page 25

Author Manuscript

BxPC3 cells. e, Expression of BCAT2 and ME3 upon depletion of ME1 and ME3 using
independent (non-dox dependent) shRNAs. f, Expression of ME3 and BCAT2 upon siRNA
depletion of ME3 in PDAC lines. β-Actin used as loading control. g, h, Raw flow cytometry
data of DCFDA-stained cells for measurement of ROS in PATU8988T (g) and BxPC3 (h)
cells upon ME3 depletion. i, Raw flow cytometry data of MitoSOX staining in PATU8988T
and ME3-depleted PATU8988T cells. Antimycin A used as positive control. j, Immunoblot
showing time course of expression of NRF2 in cells with dox-induced ME3 depletion. βActin used as loading control. k, IHC images showing NRF2 staining in ME3-depleted and
control xenograft tumours (Scale bar= 50μm).

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 20.

Dey et al.

Page 26

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Extended Data Figure 9. Increase in ROS activates AMPK pathway

Author Manuscript

a, b, Measurement of NADPH (a) and total ROS (b) in ME2-rescued and ME3-depleted
PATU8988T cells. Error bars represent s.d. of at least n = 5 replicates. c, Immunoblot of
ME3, BCAT2 and AMPK expression upon depletion of ME3 followed by Trolox treatment
for 24 h. Structure of Trolox (above), a synthetic vitamin E analogue that acts as a potent
antioxidant. d, Expression of BCAT2 in PATU8988T and Panc1 cells upon treatment with
AICAR for 14 h. e, Colony-formation assay showing decreased cell growth upon shRNAmediated depletion of BCAT2 and SREBP1 using two independent shRNAs. Error bars
represent s.d. of at least n = 3 replicates.f, OCR in cells depleted of BCAT2 by shRNA. g,

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 20.

Dey et al.

Page 27

Author Manuscript

OCR in cells upon overexpression of BCAT2. Error bars represent s.e.m of at least n = 5
replicates. P values were determined by two-tailed t-test.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Extended Data Figure 10. BCAAs contribution to nucleotide synthesis

a–c, MID of 15N-labelled BCAA (Leu) contribution to glutamate (a), alanine (b), and serine
(c). d, Plot of 13C-labelled BCAAs contribution to TCA cycle metabolites. Error bars
represent s.e.m. of n = 4 biological samples from two independent experiments. P values
were determined by two-tailed t-test. e, Colony formation assay of cells treated with
nucleotides (mix of thymine, guanine, cytosine, uracil, and inosine, 250 μM each) showing
rescue of ME3-depleted PATU8988T cells. Error bars represent s.d. of n = 3 biological
samples from two independent experiments. P values were determined by two-tailed t-test.
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 20.

Dey et al.

Page 28

Author Manuscript

Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.

Acknowledgments
We thank T. Tieu for vector cloning; the MD Anderson core facilities, including K. Dunner Jr for High Resolution
Electron Microscopy Facility, Sequencing and Microarray Facility (SMF), Flow Cytometry and Cellular Imaging
Core Facility; S. Jiang and Z. Xu for assistance in maintenance of mouse colonies; Z. Lu for discussion; and D.
Spring for editing. This study was supported by NCI P01 CA117969 grant (R.A.D.); UT Star award (R.A.D.);
CPRIT grant RP140612 (R.A.D.); DOD Postdoctoral research fellowship W81XWH-14-1-0429 (P.D.); MD
Anderson Bridge Fund (R.A.D.); St. Louis Ovarian Cancer Awareness Research Grant (D.N.) and Odyssey
Fellowships at MD Anderson (D.Z., T.G.).The MD Anderson core facilities are supported by NIH P30CA16672.
Reviewer InformationNature thanks C. Van Dang, A. Trumpp and the other anonymous reviewer(s) for their
contribution to the peer review of this work.

Author Manuscript

References

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

1. Bardeesy N, et al. Smad4 is dispensable for normal pancreas development yet critical inprogression
and tumor biology of pancreas cancer. Genes Dev. 2006; 20:3130–3146. [PubMed: 17114584]
2. Pongratz RL, Kibbey RG, Shulman GI, Cline GW. Cytosolic andmitochondrial malic enzyme
isoforms differentially control insulin secretion. J Biol Chem. 2007; 282:200–207. [PubMed:
17102138]
3. Jiang P, Du W, Mancuso A, Wellen KE, Yang X. Reciprocal regulation of p53 and malic enzymes
modulates metabolism and senescence. Nature. 2013; 493:689–693. [PubMed: 23334421]
4. Hutson SM, Fenstermacher D, Mahar C. Role of mitochondrial transamination in branched chain
amino acid metabolism. J Biol Chem. 1988; 263:3618–3625. [PubMed: 3346211]
5. Muller FL, Aquilanti EA, DePinho RA. Collateral lethality: a new therapeutic strategy in oncology.
Trends Cancer. 2015; 1173:161. [PubMed: 26870836]
6. Muller FL, et al. Passenger deletions generate therapeutic vulnerabilities in cancer. Nature. 2012;
488:337–342. [PubMed: 22895339]
7. Witkiewicz AK, et al. Whole-exome sequencing of pancreatic cancer defines genetic diversity and
therapeutic targets. Nat Commun. 2015; 6:6744. [PubMed: 25855536]
8. Lewis CA, et al. Tracing compartmentalized NADPH metabolism in the cytosol and mitochondria of
mammalian cells. Mol Cell. 2014; 55:253–63. [PubMed: 24882210]
9. Ying H, et al. Oncogenic Kras maintains pancreatic tumors through regulation of anabolic glucose
metabolism. Cell. 2012; 149:656–670. [PubMed: 22541435]
10. Son J, et al. Glutamine supports pancreatic cancer growth through a KRAS-regulated metabolic
pathway. Nature. 2013; 496:101–105. [PubMed: 23535601]
11. Ying H, et al. Genetics and biology of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma. Genes Dev. 2016;
30:355–385. [PubMed: 26883357]
12. Holecek M. Relation between glutamine, branched-chain amino acids, and protein metabolism.
Nutrition. 2002; 18:130–133. [PubMed: 11844643]
13. Suryawan A, et al. A molecular model of human branched-chain amino acid metabolism. Am J
Clin Nutr. 1998; 68:72–81. [PubMed: 9665099]
14. Hutson SM, Sweatt AJ, Lanoue KF. Branched-chain amino acid metabolism: implications for
establishing safe intakes. J Nutr. 2005; 135(Suppl):1557S–1564S. [PubMed: 15930469]
15. O’Connell TM. The complex role of branched chain amino acids in diabetes and cancer.
Metabolites. 2013; 3:931–945. [PubMed: 24958258]
16. Mayers JR, et al. Elevation of circulating branched-chain amino acids is an early event in human
pancreatic adenocarcinoma development. Nat Med. 2014; 20:1193–1198. [PubMed: 25261994]
17. Fearon KC, Glass DJ, Guttridge DC. Cancer cachexia: mediators, signaling, and metabolic
pathways. Cell Metab. 2012; 16:153–166. [PubMed: 22795476]

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 20.

Dey et al.

Page 29

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

18. Tsoli M, Robertson G. Cancer cachexia: malignant inflammation, tumorkines, and metabolic
mayhem. Trends Endocrinol Metab. 2013; 24:174–183. [PubMed: 23201432]
19. Sweatt AJ, et al. Branched-chain amino acid catabolism: unique segregation of pathway enzymes
in organ systems and peripheral nerves. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 2004; 286:E64–E76.
[PubMed: 12965870]
20. Krebs HA, Lund P. Aspects of the regulation of the metabolism of branched-chain amino acids.
Adv Enzyme Regul. 1976; 15:375–394. [PubMed: 19935]
21. Hutson SM, Cree TC, Harper AE. Regulation of leucine and alpha-ketoisocaproate metabolism in
skeletal muscle. J Biol Chem. 1978; 253:8126–8133. [PubMed: 711739]
22. Blättler SM, Rencurel F, Kaufmann MR, Meyer UA. In the regulation of cytochrome P450 genes,
phenobarbital targets LKB1 for necessary activation of AMP-activated protein kinase. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA. 2007; 104:1045–1050. [PubMed: 17213310]
23. Woods A, et al. Identification of phosphorylation sites in AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK)
for upstream AMPK kinases and study of their roles by site-directed mutagenesis. J Biol Chem.
2003; 278:28434–28442. [PubMed: 12764152]
24. Li Y, et al. AMPK phosphorylates and inhibits SREBP activity to attenuate hepatic steatosis and
atherosclerosis in diet-induced insulin-resistant mice. Cell Metab. 2011; 13:376–388. [PubMed:
21459323]
25. Porstmann T, et al. SREBP activity is regulated by mTORC1 and contributes to Akt-dependent cell
growth. Cell Metab. 2008; 8:224–236. [PubMed: 18762023]
26. Tontonoz P, Kim JB, Graves RA, Spiegelman BM. ADD1: a novel helix-loop-helix transcription
factor associated with adipocyte determination and differentiation. Mol Cell Biol. 1993; 13:4753–
4759. [PubMed: 8336713]
27. Berg, JM., Tymoczko, JL., Stryer, L. Biochemistry. 7. W.H. Freeman; 2012.
28. Doench JG, et al. Rational design of highly active sgRNAs for CRISPR-Cas9-mediatedgene
inactivation. Nat Biotechnol. 2014; 32:1262–1267. [PubMed: 25184501]
29. Heckl D, et al. Generation of mouse models of myeloid malignancy with combinatorialgenetic
lesions using CRISPR-Cas9 genome editing. Nat Biotechnol. 2014; 32:941–946. [PubMed:
24952903]
30. Dey P, Ström A, Gustafsson J. A. Estrogen receptor β upregulates FOXO3a andcauses induction of
apoptosis through PUMA in prostate cancer. Oncogene. 2014; 33:4213–4225. [PubMed:
24077289]
31. Kapoor A, et al. Yap1 activation enables bypass of oncogenic Kras addiction inpancreatic cancer.
Cell. 2014; 158:185–197. [PubMed: 24954535]
32. Sahin E, et al. Telomere dysfunction induces metabolic and mitochondrial compromise. Nature.
2011; 470:359–365. [PubMed: 21307849]
33. Paik JH, et al. FoxOs cooperatively regulate diverse pathways governing neural stemcell
homeostasis. Cell Stem Cell. 2009; 5:540–553. [PubMed: 19896444]
34. Langmead B, Salzberg SL. Fast gapped-read alignment with Bowtie 2. Nat Methods. 2012; 9:357–
359. [PubMed: 22388286]
35. Trapnell C, et al. Differential gene and transcript expression analysis of RNA-seqexperiments with
TopHat and Cufflinks. Nat Protocols. 2012; 7:562–578. [PubMed: 22383036]
36. Orsomando G, et al. Simultaneous single-sample determination of NMNAT isozymeactivities in
mouse tissues. PLoS One. 2012; 7:e53271. [PubMed: 23300904]

Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 20.

Dey et al.

Page 30

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 1. ME2 is a passenger deletion in patients with PDAC

a, Interactive genome viewer (IGV) image of chromosome 18 encompassing region q21 of
PDAC cell lines from CCLE data set. Twelve of 46 PDAC samples had homozygous
deletion of ME2. b, Ideogram of chromosome 18 showing close proximity (<200 kb) of
ME2 to SMAD4. c, Correlation of copy-number alterations (CNA) between SMAD4 and
ME2 in PDAC samples. d, ME2 deletion events in PDAC samples (TCGA) showing a
correlation between CNA and mRNA expression. Homozygous deletion in 16 of 185
samples. e, Frequency of ME2 and SMAD4 deletion in multiple solid tumours (cBioportal).
Boxes detail ME2 and SMAD4 deletion frequency from UTSW and TCGA PDAC datasets.
adeno, adenocarcinoma; DLBC, Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma; MPNST, Malignant
Peripheral Nerve Sheath Tumors; NEPC, Neuroedocrine prostate cancer.

Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 20.

Dey et al.

Page 31

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 2. Depletion of ME3 leads to collateral lethality in ME2-null PDAC cells

Author Manuscript

a, Relative ME2 mRNA expression determined by qRT–PCR in ME2-null and ME2-intact
PDAC cell lines. b, Immunoblots of ME1, ME2 and ME3 expression in ME2-null (red
boxes) and ME2-intact PDAC cell lines. β-Actin used as loading control. c, d, Quantification
of colony formation assay of ME2-null PATU8988T and BxPC3 cell lines (c) and ME2intact KP-1NL and Panc1 cell lines (d) upon ME3 depletion by addition of dox to cells
expressing control ishRNA (ishCtrl) or ishRNA targeting ME3 (ishME3). e, Tumour volume
progression of xenografted subcutaneous PATU8988T (ishCtrl ± dox and ishME3 ± dox)
cells (n=5, each group). Colour scale, minimum 274, maximum 4,986. f, Representative
luciferase imaging of orthotopic PDAC tumours in nude mice with and without dox (n = 5,
each group). g, Colony formation of PATU8988T cells rescued by overexpression of ME2.
All error bars represent s.d. of at least three replicates. P values determined by two-tailed ttest.

Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 20.

Dey et al.

Page 32

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 3. ME3 depletion in ME2-null PDAC cells leads to mitochondrial defects

Author Manuscript

a, MitoTracker red staining in PATU8988T cells (arrow-head shows mitochondrial fission).
Scale bar = 10 μm. b, TEM showing aberrant ring-shaped mitochondria (arrows in bottom
right). Scale bar = 500 nm. c, d, Measurement of BCAA uptake in PATU8988T (c) and
KP-1NL cells (d) (n = 6 each). Error bars represent the s.e.m.e, Log2 expression data of
BCAA transaminase 2 (BCAT2) from RNA-seq data. f, Immunoblot of BCAT2 expression
time course upon depletion of ME3. β-Actin used as loading control. g, Representative IHC
images of BCAT2 in xenograft tumours. Scale bar = 100 μm. h, Plot of intracellular levels
of BCAAs in ME3-depleted PATU8988T cells (n = 4). Error bars represent the s.e.m. i,
Overview of malic enzyme reaction. J–l, Measurement of total ROS (as 2′,7′dichlorofluorescin diacetate (DCFDA)-positive cells) in PATU8988T (j), BxPC3 (k) and
KP-1NL (l) cells (n = 5 each). m, Measurement of NADPH in PATU8988T cells. n,
Measurement of GSH/GSSG ratio in PATU8988T cells. o, Measurement of mitochondriaspecific ROS (mitoSOX red) in PATU8988T cells. All error bars represent the s.d. except
wherever mentioned otherwise. of at least three replicates from two independent
experiments. P values were determined by two-tailed t-test.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 20.

Dey et al.

Page 33

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 4. ME3 regulates BCAT2 expression via AMPK and its downstream effectors

Author Manuscript

a, Immunoblot assessing activation of AMPK and expression of NRF2 in PATU8988T cells.
β-Actin used as loading control. (b) Immunoblot showing rescue of BCAT2 expression
using GST-tagged kinase-dead AMPK (T172A) in PATU8988T cells. c, Immunoblot
showing rescue of BCAT2 expression by ME2 in PATU8988T cells. d, Immunoblot showing
rescue of BCAT2 expression by 24-h treatment with EUK134. e, Top, putative SREBP1binding site on BCAT2 promoter predicted by MotifMAP. Bottom, chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP) analysis of SREBP1 binding to BCAT2 promoter. f,
Immunoblot of SREBP1c phosphorylation at S372 in PATU8988T cells (Red asterisk denote
the specific band). g, Immunoblot of BCAT2 expression upon shRNA-mediated depletion of
SREBP1 (top) and BCAT2 (bottom) in PATU8988T cells. h, Colony formation assay of cells
depleted in BCAT2 (shBCAT2) or SREBP1 (shSREBP1). i, Immunoblot assessing BCAT2
expression in PATU8988T cells expressing DN-SREBP1c (Y320A). j, Luciferase images of
BCAT2-overexpressing subcutaneous tumours (n = 5 each group) 45 days after implantation
of 2.5 × 106 cells. Colour scale, minimum 807, maximum 14,147. k, Rescue of ME3depleted cells by addition of nucleotides. l, Proposed model of mitochondrial malic enzyme

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 20.

Dey et al.

Page 34

Author Manuscript

(mME) function. β-Actin used as loading control in all immunoblots. Error bars represent
s.d. of at least three replicates. P values determined by two-tailed t-test.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 20.

