Correspondence

Tumor Flare Reaction Associated
With Lenalidomide Treatment in
Patients With Chronic
Lymphocytic Leukemia Predicts
Clinical Response
Chanan -Khan et al demonstrated that lenalidomideinduced tumor flare reaction (TFR) is self-limiting and
correlates with response in patients with pretreated
chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL).1 Close monitoring
of patients is recommended to prevent morbidity and premature therapy discontinuation.1 Although we agree that
TFR may represent a surrogate marker for the immunomodulatory actions of lenalidomide, we wish to emphasize that such a phenomenon is not unique to CLL.1
Indeed, clinical syndromes fulfilling the diagnostic criteria
for TFR1 have been described in patients with Hodgkin
lymphoma (HL) and non-Hodgkin lymphoma and mantle cell lymphoma.2-4 Symptoms were usually mild,
promptly responded to anti-inflammatory therapy, did
not require lenalidomide discontinuation, and were similarly associated with objective antitumor responses.2,3
Similar to early studies of CLL, TFRs in patients with HL
occurred at the time of taper/suspension of symptomatic
steroids and their delayed manifestation was most likely
related to the concurrent administration of steroids.2
Patterns of TFR may reflect different treatment settings (compassionate programs vs clinical studies) and
previous chemotherapy loads affecting immune system
responsiveness to lenalidomide. Although steroids modulate the timing and severity of TFR,1 chemotherapy-naive
CLL patients, with their more conserved immune systems, demonstrate a higher frequency of TFR compared
with pretreated patients.5 If TFRs reflect a balance
between the primary actions of lenalidomide on tumor
and immune effector cells,3 their presentation, beyond
echoing the extent of local/systemic inflammatory reactions, most likely relates to variations in tumor/immune
cell ratios and the composition of the immune microenvironment, which may differ according to patients, tissues, and disease types.

1738

Disease-oriented controlled trials may clarify such
issues. TFRs mimic early disease progression,1-3 and their
under-recognition may lead to unnecessary dose reductions or therapy interruptions in patients who are very
likely to demonstrate a clinical response to lenalidomide.

CONFLICT OF INTEREST DISCLOSURES
The authors made no disclosures.

REFERENCES
1. Chanan-Khan A, Miller KC, Lawrence D, et al. Tumor flare
reaction associated with lenalidomide treatment in patients
with chronic lymphocytic leukemia predicts clinical response.
Cancer. 2011;117:2127-2135.
2. Corazzelli G, De Filippi R, Capobianco G, et al. Tumor flare
reactions and response to lenalidomide in patients with refractory classic Hodgkin lymphoma. Am J Hematol. 2010;85:8790.
3. Eve HE, Rule SA. Lenalidomide-induced tumour flare reaction in mantle cell lymphoma. Br J Haematol. 2010;151:410412.
4. Witzig TE, Vose JM, Zinzani PL, et al. An international
phase II trial of single-agent lenalidomide for relapsed or refractory aggressive B-cell non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma [published online ahead of print May 5, 2011]. Ann Oncol.
5. Chen CI, Bergsagel PL, Paul H, et al. Single-agent lenalidomide in the treatment of previously untreated chronic lymphocytic leukemia. J Clin Oncol. 2011;29:1175-1181.

Antonio Pinto, MD
Gaetano Corazzelli, MD
Hematology-Oncology and
Stem Cell Transplantation Unit
Department of Hematology
National Cancer Institute
Foundation ‘G. Pascale’
Naples, Italy

Rosaria De Filippi, MD, PhD
Hematology-Oncology and
Stem Cell Transplantation Unit
Department of Hematology
National Cancer Institute
Foundation ‘G. Pascale’
Naples, Italy;
Department of Cellular and Molecular Biology
and Pathology
Faculty of Biotechnological Sciences
Federico II University
Naples, Italy
DOI: 10.1002/cncr.26380, Published online: July 15, 2011 in
Wiley Online Library (wileyonlinelibrary.com)

Cancer

March 15, 2012

Correspondence

Reply to Tumor Flare Reaction
Associated With Lenalidomide
Treatment in Patients With
Chronic Lymphocytic Leukemia
Predicts Clinical Response

cellular immune effector cells, disease bulk, and the tumor
cell itself as well as concurrent therapeutics. It is interesting to note that the dose of lenalidomide does not appear
to be correlated with TFR severity. Because TFR is now
noted in several other lymphoid malignancies, understanding the biological processes mediating TFR can be
critical to improving our understanding of lenalidomide’s
mechanism of action.

We appreciate the comments made by Dr. Pinto et al
regarding our article1 and agree with their observations.
Tumor flare reaction (TFR) is indeed an intriguing phenomenon that was first reported with immunomodulating agents (thalidomide and lenalidomide) used to treat
patients with chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL).2,3
We observed that the clinical presentation of TFR is similar with both of these agents and improvement in symptoms was noted with the use of anti-inflammatory agents.
Clinically, TFR poses a challenge because it mimics disease progression and a careful understanding of this clinical syndrome is warranted to avoid the premature
termination of potentially effective therapy. Biologically,
TFR continues to be an interesting challenge because its
exact etiology remains unclear. We first observed that perhaps both the biological traits of the tumor cell as well as
components of its immunologic microenvironment (T
and natural killer [NK] cells) might be critical in TFR
manifestation. Analysis of patients in our study revealed
that indeed adequate CD56-positive (þ) and CD8þ cells
in the blood are correlated with TFR intensity and the
quality of the clinical remission achieved. Preclinical
investigations have confirmed the role of NK and T cell
activation in the antitumor effects of lenalidomide.4
Pinto et al highlight an important point in that
although the initial phenomenon was observed in patients
with CLL, subsequent studies recorded this syndrome in
other lymphoid malignancies, thereby validating our initial observations that this phenomenon may represent an
important biologic surrogate for clinical response. Furthermore, TFR underscores the mechanistic pathway(s)
of lenalidomide that remains elusive. Several factors may
contribute to the variability in the clinical intensity of
this syndrome, including prior treatments, integrity of the

CONFLICT OF INTEREST DISCLOSURES

Cancer

March 15, 2012

Dr. Chanan-Khan has acted as a member of the Speaker’s Bureau and advisory board of Celgene.

REFERENCES
1. Chanan-Khan A, Miller KC, Lawrence D, et al. Tumor flare
reaction associated with lenalidomide treatment in patients
with chronic lymphocytic leukemia predicts clinical response.
Cancer. 2011;117:2127-2135.
2. Chanan-Khan A, Miller KC, Takeshita K, et al. Results of a
phase 1 clinical trial of thalidomide in combination with fludarabine as initial therapy for patients with treatment-requiring chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL). Blood. 2005;106:
3348-3352.
3. Chanan-Khan A, Miller KC, Musial L, et al. Clinical efficacy
of lenalidomide in patients with relapsed or refractory chronic
lymphocytic leukemia: results of a phase II study. J Clin
Oncol. 2006; 24:5343-5349.
4. Wu L, Adams M, Carter T, et al. Lenalidomide enhances natural killer cell and monocyte-mediated antibody-dependent
cellular cytotoxicity of rituximab-treated CD20þ tumor cells.
Clin Cancer Res. 2008;14:4650-4657.
Aisha Masood, MD
Department of Medicine
Roswell Park Cancer Institute
Buffalo, New York

Taimur Sher, MD
Department of Medicine
Roswell Park Cancer Institute
Buffalo, New York

Asher Chanan-Khan, MD
Department of Medicine;
Department of Molecular Targets
and Experimental Therapeutics
Roswell Park Cancer Institute
Buffalo, New York

DOI: 10.1002/cncr.26370, Published online: August 31, 2011 in
Wiley Online Library (wileyonlinelibrary.com)

1739

