Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No. 24

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Bisphosphonate-induced differential modulation of immune cell
function in gingiva and bone marrow in vivo: Role in osteoclastmediated NK cell activation
Han-Ching Tseng1,*, Keiichi Kanayama2,3,*, Kawaljit Kaur1,*, So-Hyun Park1,
Sil Park1,2, Anna Kozlowska1,4, Shuting Sun5, Charles E. McKenna5, Ichiro
Nishimura1,2, Anahid Jewett1
1

 ivision of Oral Biology and Medicine, The Jane and Jerry Weintraub Center for Reconstructive Biotechnology, UCLA School
D
of Dentistry, Los Angeles, CA, USA

2

 ivision of Advanced Prosthodontics, The Jane and Jerry Weintraub Center for Reconstructive Biotechnology, UCLA School
D
of Dentistry, Los Angeles, USA

3

Department of Periodontology, Asahi University School of Dentistry, Gifu, Japan

4

Department of Tumor Immunology, Poznan University of Medical Sciences Poznan, Poland

5

Department of Chemistry, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, USA

*

These authors have contributed equally to this work

Correspondence to:
Corresponding author: Anahid Jewett, email: ajewett@ucla.edu
Co-corresponding author: Ichiro Nishimura, email: inishimura@dentistry.ucla.edu
Keywords: Immunology and Microbiology Section, Immune response, Immunity, osteoclasts, bisphosphonate, NK cell, zoledronate,
etidronate
Received: May 22, 2015 	

Accepted: July 03, 2015 	

Published: July 28, 2015

ABSTRACT
The aim of this study is to establish osteoclasts as key immune effectors capable
of activating the function of Natural Killer (NK) cells, and expanding their numbers,
and to determine in vivo and in vitro effect of bisphosphonates (BPs) during NK
cell interaction with osteoclasts and on systemic and local immune function. The
profiles of 27 cytokines, chemokines and growth factors released from osteoclasts
were found to be different from dendritic cells and M1 macrophages but resembling
to untreated monocytes and M2 macrophages. Nitrogen-containing BPs Zoledronate
(ZOL) and Alendronate (ALN), but not non-nitrogen-containing BPs Etidronate
(ETI), triggered increased release of pro-inflammatory mediators from osteoclasts
while all three BPs decreased pit formation by osteoclasts. ZOL and ALN mediated
significant release of IL-6, TNF-a and IL-1β, whereas they inhibited IL-10 secretion
by osteoclasts. Treatment of osteoclasts with ZOL inhibited NK cell mediated
cytotoxicity whereas it induced significant secretion of cytokines and chemokines.
NK cells lysed osteoclasts much more than their precursor cells monocytes, and this
correlated with the decreased expression of MHC class I expression on osteoclasts.
Intravenous injection of ZOL in mice induced pro-inflammatory microenvironment
in bone marrow and demonstrated significant immune activation. By contrast,
tooth extraction wound of gingival tissues exhibited profound immune suppressive
microenvironment associated with dysregulated wound healing to the effect of ZOL
which could potentially be responsible for the pathogenesis of Osteonecrosis of
the Jaw (ONJ). Finally, based on the data obtained in this paper we demonstrate
that osteoclasts can be used as targets for the expansion of NK cells with superior
function for immunotherapy of cancer.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

20002

Oncotarget

INTRODUCTION

osteoclast recruitment, differentiation and apoptosis
[15–19]. Characteristic morphological feature of BPtreated osteoclasts the lack of a ruffled border, the region
of invaginated plasma membrane facing the resorptive
cavity. BPs were also shown to disrupt the cytoskeleton
of the osteoclast [20]. It is widely accepted that BPs
exert their major effect on mature osteoclasts, however,
Kimachi et al. suggested that nitrogen-containing BPs not
only inhibit mature osteoclasts but also prevent osteoclast
precursors from differentiating and migrating towards
inflammatory osteolytic lesions [21]. It was also shown
that BPs inhibit in a dose-dependent manner the formation
of osteoclast-like cells in long-term cultures of human
bone marrow cells [22].
Osteonecrosis of the Jaw (ONJ) is a severe bone
disease that affects the maxilla and the mandible [23]. ONJ
is commonly associated with BP therapy whereas other
anti-resorptive agents are recently reported to also cause
ONJ. The clinical manifestations of ONJ vary significantly
from asymptomatic small fistulation to painful swelling
with extensive bone exposure leading to pathological bone
fracture [24–26].
As indicated above, the role of osteoclasts in bone
remodeling is well established. However, their significance
“as members” of the immune repertoire with a key role
in regulation of both innate and adaptive immune cell
function is not well understood and is the subject of this
paper. Although the role of monocytes and dendritic cells
(DCs) in the regulation of NK, T and γδ T cell function
have received considerable attention previously [27–31],
fewer reports have shown the significance of osteoclast
interaction with these cells. Particularly, very little is
known regarding the mode of BP-mediated modulation of
NK, T and γδ T cell function by osteoclasts. In this paper
we demonstrate that osteoclasts are potent activators of
NK, T and γδ T cell function, and their effect is indeed
more potent than monocytes and even DCs in the
regulation of cytokine and chemokine secretion by NK
cells. In addition, BP-treated osteoclasts activate the
function of immune effectors, in particular NK cells in
such a way, which may have the potential to establish
chronicity of inflammation leading to pathologies
observed in ONJ patients. We also demonstrate that
depending on the site of action BPs have distinct effects
on local immune cell function, being activating in the bone
marrow but demonstrating significant suppression in the
oral microenvironment where ONJ occurs.

The bone resorptive and remodeling function of
osteoclasts have been known for a long time, however,
it is only recently that their function in the regulation
of immune cell function has received attention [1].
Osteoclasts are known to initiate normal bone remodeling
during bone growth, tooth eruption and fracture healing
and also are able to mediate bone loss in pathologic
conditions, such as osteoarthritis and osteoporosis.
Osteoclasts are multinuclear giant cells derived from
myeloid lineage [2, 3].
It has been well documented that Natural Killer
(NK) cells participate in the clearance of virus-infected
and transformed cells, as well as targeting cancer stem
cells [4, 5]. The function and the role of NK cells in
osteoblast regulation and bone remodeling are not well
understood presently. IFN-γ, produced by both NK
cells and Th1 lymphocytes, has been shown to inhibit
osteoclastogenesis in vitro [6]. However, the in vivo
effects of IFN-γ on bone tissue are less clear since many
studies often provide a contrasting effect when compared
to in vitro studies [7, 8]. TNF-α, another key cytokine
produced by NK cells, can increase RANKL expression
and RANKL dependent osteoclastogenesis [9–11]. NK
cells have also been identified within inflamed synovial
fluid and express RANKL and M-CSF, which during their
interaction with monocytes can trigger the generation of
osteoclasts [12].
Bisphosphonates (BPs) have become the treatment
of choice for a variety of bone diseases in which excessive
osteoclastic activity is one of the underlying pathological
effects governing the disease, including Paget’s disease
of the bone, metastatic and osteolytic bone disease,
hypercalcemia of malignancy and osteoporosis [13].
Etidronate (ETI) was the first BPs to be used in humans.
Currently there are at least eleven BPs, which have been
registered for various clinical applications in different
countries. It was not until the 1990s that the biochemical
actions of BPs were elucidated [14]. BPs are classified into
two groups. Non-nitrogen-containing BPs, such as ETI and
Clodronate are able to generate a toxic analog of adenosine
triphosphate, which effectively inhibit the key function of
mitochondria leading to the loss of energy production in
osteoclasts. Nitrogen-containing BPs, such as Zolendronate
(ZOL) and Alendronate (ALN), inhibit key enzymes
of the mevalonate/cholesterol biosynthetic pathway.
The major enzyme target for nitrogen-containing BP is
farnesyl pyrophosphate synthase (FPPS). Inhibition of
FPPS prevents the biosynthesis of isoprenoid compounds
notably farnesol and geranylgeraniol that are required for
the post-translational prenylation of small GTP-binding
proteins such as rab, rho and rac, which are essential for
intracellular signaling events within osteoclasts [14].
BPs are known to regulate the osteoclast-mediated
bone resorptive activity in a variety of ways including
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

RESULTS
Phenotypic and functional characterization of
osteoclasts generated from purified human
monocytes
Human osteoclasts were generated using purified
monocytes treated with M-CSF and RANKL as described
20003

Oncotarget

Comparison of cell surface receptor expression
between osteoclasts, monocytes, DCs and
macrophages

in the Materials and Methods section. The analysis
of cytokines, chemokines and growth factors using
multiplex cytokine array demonstrated a gradual increase
in the secretion of IL-1RA, IL-2R, IL-12 cytokines and
MIP-1α, MIP-1β and RANTES chemokines, whereas
a decrease in IL-6 cytokine secretion can be observed
from day 2 to day 21 of differentiation of monocytes to
osteoclasts (Supplemental Table 1). Increased detection
of IL-15 and IFN-α, but not IFN-γ, was also observed
(Supplemental Table 1). The levels of MCP-1 and IL-8
remained significantly high at all time points tested. No
significant secretion of IL-1β, IL-2, IL-4, IL-5, IL-7,
IL-13, IL-17 and Eotaxin was observed at the time points
and concentration tested (data not shown). In contrast to
gradual decrease in IL-6 secretion from day 3 to day 16 of
culture, IL-10 secretion in osteoclast precursors exhibited
a gradual increase from day 3 to day 16 (Fig. S1). Thus,
there was an inverse modulation of IL-6 and IL-10 during
differentiation of osteoclasts from monocyte precursors.

When cell surface receptor expression was compared
between osteoclasts and freshly isolated autologous
monocytes, a significant down-modulation of all the cell
surface receptors was observed on osteoclasts (Fig. S2A).
Decreases in CD54, MHC-class I and II, CD44, CD14 and
CD11b were more profound on the surface of osteoclasts
when compared to freshly isolated autologous monocytes
(Fig. S2A). However, when monocytes were cultured in
media in the absence of RANKL and M-CSF and the levels
were compared to osteoclasts, the differences between
monocytes and osteoclasts decreased. The expression of
all the cell surface receptors was significantly increased
on the surface of macrophages as compared to either
day 8 cultured monocytes or osteoclasts (Fig. S2B). DCs
expressed higher levels of CD54, MHC-class II, CD44,
CD11b, B7H1 and CD33 and lower levels of MHC class I
and CD14 when compared to day 8 cultured monocytes or
osteoclasts (Fig. S2B). When the surface expression of day
8 differentiated osteoclasts were compared with day 21,
a slight increase in CD14, CD11b, B7H1 and CD33 and
a decrease in MHC class II were noted (data no shown).
The combinational addition of IFN-γ and TNF-α to mature
osteoclasts decreased CD44 and increased CD54, MHCclass II, CD14, B7H1, CD33 and CD124, whereas no
change in MHC-class I, CD11b and CD15 were noted
(Fig. S2B).

Differential induction of cytokines, chemokines
and growth factors by monocytes, M1 and M2
macrophages, dendritic cells and osteoclasts
The profile and amounts of cytokines and chemokine
secretion by osteoclasts resembled those of the freshly
purified monocytes and cultured M2 macrophages, and
were greatly distinct from M1 macrophages and dendritic
cells (DCs) (Supplemental Table 2). M1 macrophages
demonstrated the highest secretion of cytokines followed
by the DCs, which had lower overall secretion for the
majority of cytokines tested, although there were some
exceptions such as IL-1Ra, which was higher by DCs
(Supplemental Table 2). The amounts of cytokines were
largely similar between freshly isolated monocytes, M2
macrophages and osteoclasts, with osteoclasts having the
lowest secretion (Supplemental Table 2). Interestingly,
the levels of chemokines were high in all the subsets,
M1 macrophages having the highest for the MIP-1α and
MIP-1β and the lowest for MCP-1 (Supplemental Table 2).
IL-8 secretion was the highest from M1 macrophages and
M2 macrophages and monocytes had the next highest
secretion, whereas DCs and osteoclasts secreted lower
amounts (Supplemental Table 2). Secretion of RANTES
was the lowest for the M1 macrophages and higher in
the other subsets (Supplemental Table 2). Monocytes,
M2 macrophages and osteoclasts secreted the highest
levels of MCP-1 and IP-10 when compared to DCs or M1
macrophages (Supplemental Table 2). Osteoclasts had the
lowest amounts of growth factor secretion, whereas M1
macrophages had the highest with the exception of GMCSF where they secreted the least (Supplemental Table 2).
Overall, these results indicated that the profiles of cytokine,
chemokine and growth factor secretion of osteoclasts
resemble those of the monocytes and M2 macrophages and
were distinct from DCs and M1 macrophages.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Osteoclasts were targets of NK cells and induced
significant IFN-γ secretion by the NK cells
To determine whether osteoclasts are targets of NK
cells, untreated, IL-2 treated or IL-2 in combination with
anti-CD16mAb treated NK cells were used in cytotoxicity
assays against osteoclasts. We have shown previously that
the addition of anti-CD16mAb antibody in combination
with IL-2 induced split anergy in NK cells resulting in
the loss of cytotoxicity and an increase in IFN-γ secretion
[33, 37, 38]. As shown in Fig. 1A, IL-2 treated NK cells
were able to lyse osteoclasts significantly, and the addition
of anti-CD16mAb in combination with IL-2 inhibited NK
lysis as expected. To compare the levels of sensitivity to
NK cell cytotoxicity between osteoclasts and monocytes,
IL-2 treated NK cells were used in cytotoxicity assays. As
shown in Fig. 1B, NK cells lysed osteoclasts significantly
more than monocytes (P < 0.05).
In addition, both monocytes and osteoclasts were
able to induce significant secretion of cytokines and
chemokines by the NK cells, albeit the levels were much
higher when NK cells were cultured with osteoclasts
than monocytes (Table 1). Of note is significant upregulation of IL-6, IL-10, MCP-1, MIP-1α and MIP1β when osteoclasts were cultured with either IL-2 or
20004

Oncotarget

IL-2+anti-CD16mAb treated NK cells as compared to
cultures of NK cells either with monocytes or NK cells
alone (Table 1). Indeed, 8–14 fold more cytokines and
chemokines were secreted by the cultures of IL-2+antiCD16mAb treated NK cells with osteoclasts when
compared to those induced by cultures of monocytes

with the NK cells (Table 1). We then compared the levels
of IFN-γ secretion by IL-2 and IL-2+anti-CD16mAb
treated NK cells cultured either with osteoclasts, DCs
or monocytes from day 0 to day 6 of cultures (Fig. 1C).
As shown in Fig. 1C, the levels of IFN-γ secreted in
the cultures of NK cells with osteoclasts rose from

Figure 1: Osteoclasts are susceptible to NK cells mediated cytotoxicity and induced significant levels of IFN-γ secretion
by the NK cells. A. Highly purified NK cells (1 × 106 cells/ml) were left untreated, treated with IL-2 (1000 units/ml) or a combination

of IL-2 (1000 units/ml) and anti-CD16mAb (3 μg/ml) for 18 hours before they were added to 51Cr labeled autologous osteoclasts at various
effector to target ratios. NK cell mediated cytotoxicities were determined using a standard 4 hour 51Cr release assay. B. NK cells were
purified and treated with IL-2 (1000 units/ml) for 18 hours and then added to 51Cr labeled autologous monocytes or autologous osteoclasts
(hOC) at various effector to target ratios. NK cell mediated cytotoxicities were determined using a standard 4 hour 51Cr release assay.
* The difference between IL-2 treated NK cells cultured with monocytes or hOC is significant at p < 0.05. The lytic units 30/106 cells were
determined using inverse number of NK cells required to lyse 30% of the target cells X100. C. DCs, hOC and monocytes were prepared
as described in Materials and Methods and seeded at 4 × 105 cells/well in 12 well plates and incubated overnight. Purified NK cells were
pre-treated with IL-2 (1000 units/mL) or a combination of IL-2 (1000 units/mL) and anti-CD16mAb hOCs for 18 hours and then cultured
alone or with autologous DCs, hOC or monocytes at an effector to target ratio of 1:1. The supernatants from each culture condition were
harvested overnight, day 3 and day 6. The level of IFN-γ produced by NK cells was measured using multiplex cytokine array kit. D. On
the last day of the experimental period, the culture medium was refreshed and cells were cultured for an additional 5 hours. The level of
IFN-γ produced by NK cells was measured with a specific ELISA. * The difference between IL-2 or IL-2+anti-CD16mAb treated NK cells
cultured with DCs or monocytes compared to IL-2 or IL-2+anti-CD16mAb treated NK cells cultured with hOC is significant at p < 0.05.
E. Monocytes, DCs and hOC were co-cultured with pre-treated NK cells, as described in Fig. 1C, and on the last day of the experimental
period the number of cells was assessed by microscopic evaluation
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

20005

Oncotarget

Figure 1 (Continued): F. Pre-activated NK cells, as described in Fig. 1A, were co-cultured with autologous DCs, osteoclasts
or monocytes for 6 days. Afterwards, the NK cells were divided into two groups- Untreated or treated with additional IL-2
(1000 units/ml) for 48 hours and used in a standard 4 hour 51Cr release assay against OSCSCs. The lytic units 30/106 cells
were determined using inverse number of NK cells required to lyse 30% of OSCSCs X100.
Table 1: Production of cytokines, chemokines and growth factors in cultures of NK cells with monocytes and osteoclasts
treated with or without ZOL
Media

Monocytes

Osteoclasts

Osteoclasts
+ ZOL

Media alone

IL-6

IFN-γ

IL-10

MCP-1

IL-8

MIP-1α

MIP-1β

7

1

0

56

7

1039

0

Untreated NK alone

24

1

0

999

1514

942

375

IL-2 treated NK alone

54

4

0

1252

3638

1039

586

IL-2 + anti-CD16mAb
treated NK alone

252

25

0

3818

16969

5803

20368

Untreated

106

4

0

239

11217

1377

375

+ Untreated NK

99

2

0

264

10426

1135

163

+ IL-2 treated NK

136

4

10

1232

11125

1232

374

+ IL-2 + antiCD16mAbtreated NK

424

33

10

28195

21638

1619

4229

Untreated

41

4

14

31691

16607

1377

2129

+ Untreated NK

63

4

23

29258

16544

1715

2185

+ IL-2 treated NK

535

4

24

38655

19349

1908

5680

+ IL-2 + anti-CD16mAb
treated NK

3866

57

82

38916

23766

6114

61555

Untreated

196

4

14

37820

18589

1425

2157

+ Untreated NK

312

6

14

38159

20986

1715

2538

+ IL-2 treated NK

3267

12

20

39332

22631

4294

11587

+ IL-2 + anti-CD16mAb
treated NK

11605

80

31

38748

24420

6105

38411

Purified NK cells were left untreated or pre-treated with IL-2 (1000 units/mL) or the combination of IL-2 (1000 units/ml) and
anti-CD16mAb (3μg/ml) for 18–24 hours. Human monocytes purified from autologous donor’s PBMCs were differentiated
into osteoclasts as described in the Materials and Methods section for 17 days. Osteoclasts were then left untreated or treated
with ZOL (1 μM) for 72 hours then washed extensively with fresh medium and lastly co-cultured with pre-treated NK cells for
24 hours. Afterwards, supernatants from each condition were harvested and the levels of cytokine and chemokine production
were measured using multiplex cytokine array kit.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

20006

Oncotarget

ZOL and ALN, but not ETI, modulated cytokine
secretion of osteoclasts

day 0 to day 3 and remained high until day 6, and the
secreted levels were much higher than those induced in
the cultures of NK cells either with monocytes or DCs
(P < 0.05) (Fig. 1D). Indeed, within 5 hours of culture
NK cells secreted 5.5–27.7 folds more IFN-γ when
cultured with osteoclasts than DCs (P < 0.05), and the
levels were much less when cultured with monocytes
(P  < 0.05) (Fig. 1D). We then determined whether
osteoclasts can support expansion of NK cells. As
shown in Fig. 1E, both osteoclasts and DCs, and much
less monocytes, were able to support the expansion of
NK cells. NK cells expanded by osteoclasts, DCs and
monocytes were counted and equal numbers of NK cells
from each expanded subset were used in cytotoxicity
assay against OSCSCs, which is a very sensitive NK cell
target. IL-2 treated NK cells expanded by osteoclasts
had the highest cytotoxicity, followed by those expanded
by DCs and the least cytotoxicity was seen by IL-2
treated NK cells which were expanded by monocytes
(Fig. 1F). NK cells in the absence of osteoclasts, DCs
or monocytes did not expand, had much lower viability,
and were not able to mediate cytotoxicity (data not
shown).

ZOL and ALN, but not ETI, were able to increase
the secretion of IL-6 at the level of 1 μM (P < 0.05) and
the levels significantly decreased with the 25–100 μM
concentration of ZOL (P < 0.05). ALN at the levels of
100 μM exhibited significant decrease in IL-6 secretion
when compared to 1–25 μM levels (P < 0.05) (Fig. 3D).
ETI at all concentrations was not able to modulate the
secretion of IL-6 (Fig. 3D). In contrast to elevated
secretion of IL-6 by nitrogen-containing BPs, the levels
of anti-inflammatory cytokine IL-10 were severely
suppressed at the concentrations of 1–50 μM (P < 0.05)
(Fig. 3E). ETI at all concentrations had the ability to
increase or retain the secretion of IL-10 by osteoclasts
(Fig. 3E).
Since the highest increase in IL-6 secretion
was observed at 1 μM, we then determined the
ability of lower concentrations of BPs to influence
the IL-6 secretion at the range of 10 nM to 1 μM
(Fig. 3F). The results demonstrated a dose and time
dependent increase in IL-6 secretion by ZOL and ALN
(P < 0.05), with ZOL having higher ability to induce
IL-6 (Fig. 3D and 3F). ETI had no or minimal effect
on the secretion of IL-6 at all concentrations (Fig. 3D
and 3F). ZOL and ALN at concentrations below or
at 500 nM did not have a significant effect on IL-10
secretion; however, they inhibited IL-10 secretion at the
concentrations of 1–50 μM (P < 0.05) (Fig. 3E and 3G).
Dose dependent increase in TNF-α (Fig. 3H) and
IL-1β (data not shown) secretion was also observed by
ZOL (P < 0.05), followed by ALN (P < 0.05) and no
secretion by ETI. Overall, these data demonstrated the
ability of both ZOL and ALN, but not ETI, to induce
pro-inflammatory cytokines, whereas they had inhibitory
effect on the  release of anti-inflammatory cytokine
IL-10 (Fig. 3).

Uptake of ZOL and ALN by osteoclasts
To determine the effect of BPs on osteoclasts, first
we assessed the specific uptake of red-fluorescent-labeled
ZOL (ROX-ZOL) by osteoclasts (Fig. 2A). As shown in
the Fig. 2A, osteoclasts, which had taken up ROX-ZOL,
appeared red under the microscope. Human osteoclasts
differentiated from monocytes exhibit different sizes and
shapes and demonstrate multinucleated morphology in the
presence and the absence of BPs (Fig. 2B) and are TRAP
positive (Fig. 2C).

Decreased pit numbers and size by BP-treated
osteoclasts

ZOL-modulated surface receptor expression on
osteoclasts

The resorptive activity of the osteoclasts was
determined after treatment with ZOL at 0.1–10 uM
concentration. A dose dependent decrease in the
resorptive activity of osteoclasts could be seen by the
treatment with ZOL (Fig. 3A). As shown in Fig. 3B, the
effect of resorptive activity by osteoclasts was severely
hindered when treated with ZOL, as compared to ALN
and ETI (Fig. 3B). The numbers of the pits were affected
by the treatment with the three BPs (Fig. 3B). We then
determined the effect of all three BPs on osteoclasts’ cell
viability. As shown in Fig. 3C there was a dose dependent
increase in cell death when nitrogen-containing BPs, ZOL
and ALN, were added to osteoclasts, with ZOL having
higher toxicity than ALN (Fig. 3C). The non-nitrogen
containing BP, ETI, did not mediate cell death at any
concentration (Fig. 3C).

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Treatment of osteoclasts with ZOL increased all
cell surface receptors at lower concentration of ZOL,
which correlated with the increased cytokine induction
(Figs. 3 and 4A). At higher concentration of ZOL there
was less increase in the cell surface receptors (Fig. 4A).
Comparison between ZOL-treated osteoclasts and those
treated with the supernatants prepared from the activated
NK cells demonstrated higher induction of cell surface
receptors by ZOL with the exception of CD54 for which
supernatant treated osteoclasts had higher induction
(Fig. 4B). Of note both CD14 and CD44 expression were
significantly down-modulated by NK supernatant treated
osteoclasts (Fig. 4B).

20007

Oncotarget

Figure 2: Uptake and the pro-inflammatory effect of ZOL and ALN on osteoclasts. A. Human osteoclasts were generated
from healthy donor’s monocytes as described in the Materials and Methods section. Afterwards, were washed with 1X PBS, detached from
the tissue culture plate and seeded at a density of 3 × 104 cells/well in 24 well plate. After an overnight incubation, the cells were treated
with ZOL conjugated with 5 - Carboxy - X - rhodamine (5 μM) for 24 hours and the image was taken with Leica DMI 6000B microscope
B. Osteoclasts were prepared as described in the Materials and Methods section and seeded at 1 × 104 cells/well in 24 well plates. The
osteoclasts were then treated with ZOL or ALN (1 μM) for 7 days. Afterwards, culture medium was removed and the cells were washed
with 1X PBS and fixed with solution containing citrate solution, acetone and 37% formaldehyde for 5 minutes. The cells were then washed
with water and photographed using Leica DMI 6000B inverted microscope C. Osteoclasts were prepared as described in the Materials and
Methods section and seeded at 1 × 104 cells/well in 24 well plates. The osteoclasts were then treated with ZOL or ALN (1 μM) for 7 days.
Afterwards, culture medium was removed and the cells were rinsed with 1X PBS and fixed with solution containing citrate solution, acetone
and 37% formaldehyde for 5 minutes. Cells were washed with twice with 1XPBS before Fast Garnet GBC and sodium nitrite at (1:1 ratio)
were added and incubated for 1 hour at 37° (C) Plates were rinsed and hematoxylin were then added to each well for 2 mins. Plates were
air dried and images were taken by the Leica DMI 6000B inverted microscope.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

20008

Oncotarget

Figure 3: Decreased size, pit numbers, viability and cytokine secretion mediated by ZOL, ALN, and ETI-treated
osteoclasts. A. Osteoclasts were generated as described in the Materials and Methods section for 12 days. Osteoclasts (2.5 × 105 cells/ml)

were treated with different concentrations (10 nM-50 μM) of ZOL for 48 hours, and afterwards the cells were washed using freshly prepared
5% sodium hypochlorite and the images were taken with Leica DMI 6000B inverted microscope at 5X magnification B. Osteoclasts were
prepared as described in Fig. 3A and treated with varying concentrations (10 nM-50 μM) of ZOL, ALN or ETI for 48 hours. Afterwards,
the number of pits was counted using microscopy at 5X magnification C. Purified osteoclasts were treated with varying concentrations
of ZOL, ALN and ETI for 48 hours, afterwards the cells were washed with 1X PBS, stained with propidium iodide and analyzed by flow
cytometry D. Osteoclasts were generated as described in the Materials and Methods section. After the differentiation period, osteoclasts
were washed with 1X PBS, detached from tissue culture plates and seeded at 1.5 × 104 cells/well in 24 well plate for 24 hours. Cells were
then left untreated or treated with ZOL, ALN or ETI at 1, 5, 10, 25, 50 or 100 μM for 6 days. Supernatants were removed on the last day
of experiment and the levels of IL-6 E. and IL-10 F. were determined with specific ELISAs. * The difference between osteoclasts treated
with ZOL or ALN compared to untreated osteoclasts is significant at P < 0.05. Osteoclasts were generated as described in the Materials and
Methods section for 12 days. Afterwards, osteoclasts were seeded at 2 × 105 cells/ml in 24 well plate for 24 hours, and treated with ZOL,
ALN or ETI at 10 nM, 100 nM, 500 nM or 1 μM for 3 days after which the supernatants were harvested and the levels of IL-6 G. IL-10
H. and TNF-α (I). were determined with specific ELISAs. * The difference between osteoclasts treated with ZOL or ALN compared to
untreated osteoclasts is significant at P < 0.05.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

20009

Oncotarget

Figure 4: Osteoclasts treated with supernatants from activated NKs or ZOL demonstrated modulation of cell surface
receptors. A. Osteoclasts were generated as described in the Materials and Methods section for 17 days. Osteoclasts were then left
untreated or treated with ZOL at 500 nM or 5 μM. After 4 days of treatment, surface expression of CD54, MHC-I, MHC-II, CD44,
CD14, CD11b and B7H1 were determined using flow cytometric analysis after staining with the respective PE-conjugated antibodies B.
Osteoclasts were left untreated or treated with ZOL (1 μM) or supernatants harvested from pre-activated NK cells cultured with monocytes
and probiotic bacteria (sAJ2) for 48 hours. Surface expressions of CD54, MHC-I, MHC-II, CD44, CD14 and CD11b were determined using
flow cytometric analysis after staining with the respective PE-conjugated antibodies C. Isotype control antibodies were used as control. The
numbers on the right hand corner are the percentages and the mean channel fluoresence intensities for each histogram.

ZOL-treated osteoclasts were resistant to NK cell
mediated cytotoxicity

NK cells secreted significant levels of
inflammatory cytokines and chemokines in
culture with ZOL-treated osteoclasts

We then determined the cytotoxic activity of
NK cells against BPs-treated osteoclasts and BPtreated OSCSCs. IL-2 treated NK cells lysed untreated
osteoclasts, while treatment with ZOL induced resistance
in osteoclasts against NK cell cytotoxicity (P < 0.05)
(Fig. 5A). The resistance to cytotoxicity is also seen with
ALN (P < 0.05) (Fig. 5B). Osteoclasts treated with ETI
were not resistant to NK cell cytotoxicity (Fig. 5B). To
determine whether the ability to induce resistance in NK
cells is specific for osteoclasts, we treated OSCSCs with
ZOL for 15–30 min and used in cytotoxicity assay against
NK cells. Treatment of OSCSCs with ZOL induced
resistance against NK cytotoxicity, as seen in Fig. 5C
(P < 0.05). Treatment of osteoclasts with ZOL and ALN
for a longer period of time induced substantial resistance
in osteoclasts against NK cell mediated cytotoxicity
(P < 0.05) (Fig. 5D).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

We next determined the effect of BPs when NK
cells were cultured with either ZOL- or ALN-treated
osteoclasts. As shown in Table 1 and Fig. 5E-5G,
ZOL-treated osteoclasts triggered significantly higher
induction of cytokines and chemokines in the co-cultures
with NK cells, and the effect was higher when compared
to ALN-treated osteoclasts (P < 0.05) (Fig. 5E-5G),
whereas ETI had no enhancing effect (data not shown).
ZOL-treated osteoclasts upregulated secretion of cytokines
and chemokines 2–6 fold higher for IL-6, IFN-γ, IL-18,
MIP-1α and MIP-1β by IL-2 and IL-2+anti-CD16mAb
treated NK cells when compared to untreated osteoclasts
(P < 0.05) (Table 1 and Fig. 5E-5F). The levels of IL-8
and MCP-1 secretion were very high and plateaued in the
cultures of NK cells with osteoclasts (Table 1). ZOLtreated osteoclasts demonstrated decreased secretion
20010

Oncotarget

Figure 5: ZOL-treated osteoclasts and OSCSCs were resistant to NK-mediated cytotoxicity and secreted high levels
of IFN-γ. A. Highly purified NK cells (1 × 106 cells/ml) were left untreated or treated with IL-2 (1000 units/ml) or a combination of IL-2

(1000 units/ml) and anti-CD16mAb (3 μg/ml) for 18 hours before they were added to 51Cr labeled osteoclasts (hOC) at various effector
to target ratios. Osteoclasts were prepared as described in the Materials and Methods section and treated with ZOL (250 nM, 500 nM or
1 uM) for 30 minutes before used as target cells. NK cell mediated cytotoxicity was determined using a standard 4 hour 51Cr release assay.
* The difference between IL-2 or IL-2+anti-CD16mAb stimulated NK cells treated with ZOL compared to IL-2 or IL-2+anti-CD16mAb
stimulated NK cells without ZOL treatment is significant at P < 0.05 B. Osteoclasts were prepared as described in the Materials and
Methods section and treated with ZOL, ALN or ETI (100 nM) for 30 minutes before they were used NK cells were prepared as described in
Fig. 5A and then added to 51Cr labeled osteoclasts at various effector to target ratios. NK cell mediated cytotoxicity was determined using
a standard 4 hour 51Cr release assay. * The difference between IL-2 or IL-2+anti-CD16mAb stimulated NK cells treated with ZOL or ALN
compared to IL-2 or IL-2+anti-CD16mAb stimulated NK cells without BP treatment is significant at P < 0.05 C. OSCSCs were treated with
ZOL, ALN or ETI (1 μM) for 30 minutes before the addition of pre-treated NK cells, prepared as described in Fig. 5A. NK cell mediated
cytotoxicity was determined using a standard 4 hour 51Cr release assay. * The difference between IL-2 stimulated NK cells treated with
ZOL compared to IL-2 treated NK cells without BP treatment is significant at P < 0.05 D. Osteoclasts were differentiated from autologous
monocytes as described in the Materials and Methods section for 17 days. NK cells were left untreated or treated with IL-2 (1000 units/ml)
in the presence and absence of ZOL (500 nM) and ALN (500 nM) for 18 hours before they were added to 51Cr labeled osteoclasts at
various effector to target ratios. NK cell mediated cytotoxicity was determined using a standard 4 hour 51Cr release assay. * The difference
between IL-2 stimulated NK cells treated with ZOL or ALN compared to IL-2 stimulated NK cells without BP treatment is significant at
P < 0.05. The lytic units 30/106 cells were determined using inverse number of NK cells required to lyse 30% of the osteoclasts or OSCSCs
X100. E. Osteoclasts were treated as described in Fig. 5B and then added to untreated, IL-2 treated or IL-2+anti-CD16mAb treated NK
cells at 1:3 ratio (NK: target cells). After an overnight incubation, the supernatants were harvested and the levels of IL-6 F. IFN-γ G. and
IL-18 were measured with specific ELISAs. * The difference between IL-2 or IL-2+anti-CD16mAb stimulated NK cells treated with ZOL
or ALN compared to IL-2 or IL-2+anti-CD16mAb stimulated NK cells without BP treatment is significant at P < 0.05 (E) * The difference
between IL-2 stimulated NK cells treated with ZOL compared to IL-2 stimulated NK cells without BP treatment is significant at P < 0.05
(F) * The difference between untreated, IL-2 or IL-2+anti-CD16mAb stimulated NK cells treated with ZOL compared to those NK cells
without BP treatment is significant at P < 0.05.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

20011

Oncotarget

of IL-10 in the cultures with IL-2+anti-CD16mAb
treated NK cells when compared to untreated osteoclasts
(Table 1). ZOL-treated osteoclasts secreted higher levels
of IL-18 when compared to monocytes (P < 0.05), and the
levels changed moderately when cultured with NK cells
(Fig. 5G).

were found on the palatal bone as well as away from
the bone surface (Fig. 7B). Taken together, these cells in
the inflammatory area were thought to be ZOL-affected
osteoclasts. Immunohistology for CK14 confirmed oral
epithelial hyperplasia in the palatal/gingival tissue of
ZOL-injected mice (Fig. 7C). Epithelial hyperplasia
was primarily observed within the strong inflammatory
region. Flow cytometric analysis of dissociated gingival
cells demonstrated equal percentages of NK cells, whereas
on average the percentages of T cells were somewhat
decreased in cells dissociated from ZOL-injected mice
when compared to NACL-injected mice, however, such
differences were not statistically significant (Fig. 7D).
In regards to femur bone marrow (BM) derived cells,
although similar percentages of NK cells were obtained,
the percentages of T cells were elevated in ZOL-injected
mice when compared to NACL-injected mice, however,
the differences were not statistically significant (Fig. 7E).
BM derived cells and cells obtained from gingival
tissues after injection of ZOL in vivo were treated with
IL-2 before the levels of IFN-γ secretion were assessed.
As shown in Fig. 7F and 7G, injection of ZOL in animals
decreased the amounts of IFN-γ secretion by gingiva cells
(Fig. 7F) but increased those from BM cells (Fig. 7G).
Conversely, NACL-injected animals had higher levels
of IFN-γ secretion in gingival associated cells treated
with IL-2, but lower induction with IL-2 treated BM
cells when compared to ZOL-treated animals (Fig. 7F
and 7G). Similarly, IL-2 treated dissociated pancreatic
cells and adipose tissue from ZOL-injected animals had
lower secretion of IFN-γ when compared to NACLinjected animals (P < 0.05) (Fig. 7H). Untreated BM
cells, unlike IL-2 treated cells, did not secrete significant
levels of IFN-γ (data not shown). Thus, ZOL-induced
IFN-γ secretion in different tissue compartments is distinct
depending on the location and the type of cells (Fig. 7).
To determine whether IFN-γ is the only
cytokine decreased in gingival tissues, we determined
the amounts of secreted IL-6, which was also
significantly  decreased in IL-2 treated gingival tissues
of ZOL-injected mice (P < 0.05) (Fig. 7I). In addition,
in situ immunohistochemical analysis of gingival tissues
demonstrated strong IL-6 staining at the membrane of
osteoclasts in the jawbone of NACL-injected control
mice, whereas in ZOL-injected mice it showed a weak
and diffuse staining intra-cellularly and no significant
staining at the membrane of osteoclasts (Fig. 7J). In
contrast to gingiva, secretion of IL-6 was elevated in IL2-treated pancreatic and BM cells from ZOL-injected mice
when compared to NACL-injected mice (Fig. 7K, 7L).
In addition, no significant NK cell cytotoxicity could be
obtained with either ZOL- or NACL-injected IL-2 treated
gingival and adipose dissociated cells, whereas cells
dissociated from pancreatic tissues mediated significant
cytotoxicity and the levels were similar between ZOL- and
NACL-injected mice (Fig. 7M). In contrast, cytotoxicity

Similar to human osteoclasts ZOL-treated
murine osteoclasts triggered significant secretion
of IFN-γ by NK, CD3+ T cells and γδT cells
Similar to human osteoclasts, murine osteoclasts
were also able to trigger the secretion of IFN-γ by murine
NK cells (Fig. 6A). Significant induction of IFN-γ
secretion by mouse osteoclasts in a single stimulation
occurred after overnight incubation (data not shown)
and continued until day 11, albeit the levels decreased
from day 8 to day 11 (data not shown). Osteoclasts were
also able to induce secretion of IFN-γ by CD3+ T cells
(P < 0.05) and γδT cells (P < 0.05), however, differences
in IFN-γ secretion between T cells with and without
osteoclasts could only be seen after 4 days of incubation
(Fig. 6B and Fig. 6C). Treatment of osteoclasts with
ZOL was able to mediate significant increases in IFN-γ
secretion by murine NK, CD3+ T cells and γδ T cells when
compared to those cultured without osteoclasts or cultured
with untreated osteoclasts (Fig. 6).

Intravenous injection of ZOL in mice stimulated
IFN-γ and IL-6 secretion by bone marrow
derived cells but inhibited secretion by
gingival cells
Mice were injected with ZOL and the effects
were compared to 0.9% NACL solution injected mice.
Two weeks after tooth extraction, the maxillary palatal
mucosa of NACL-injected control mice showed complete
wound healing, whereas tissue swelling dotted line,
Fig. 7A around the tooth extraction site remained in
ZOL-injected mice (Fig. 7A). The maxillary bone of
FAM-ZOL-injected mice showed the strong fluorescence
signal, while the remaining molars (M1, M2, M3) was
absent of fluorescence (Fig.  7A). The visibly reduced
fluorescence was observed in the tooth extraction
sockets and the adjacent palatal bone area (dotted line
and arrowheads) (Fig. 7A). As shown in Fig. 7B, 7H &
7E stained histological sections of ZOL-injected mice
showed significant inflammatory cell infiltration in
the palatal/gingival soft tissue one week after tooth
extraction. There were signs of abnormal epithelial
hyperplasia. The extraction socket showed new bone
formation (Fig. 7B). TRAP staining revealed a number
of osteoclasts on the surface of palatal bone as well as in
the extraction socket (Fig. 7B). TRAP+ multinuclear cells
were also found within the inflammatory area (Fig. 7B).
In FAM-ZOL-injected mice, FAM-positive large cells
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

20012

Oncotarget

Figure 6: ZOL-treated murine osteoclasts trigger significant secretion of IFN-γ by NK, CD3+ T cells and γδ T cells.

A. Monocytes were purified from bone marrow cells extracted from femurs of WT B6 mice. Osteoclasts were generated as described in the
Materials and Methods section, treated with or without ZOL (500 nM) for 12 hours and then washed extensively before they were cultured
with pre-activated NK cells (1 × 106 cells/ml) treated with IL-2 (10, 000 units/ml for 12 hours) at 2:1 ratio (NK cells: osteoclasts). At the time
of the co-culture of NK cells with osteoclasts the cultures were supplemented with LPS (100 ng/ml) and incubated for 48 hours before they
were washed and treated with only IL-2 (10, 000 units/ml) for an additional 48 hours, after which the supernatants were harvested and the
levels of secreted IFN-g were determined using specific ELISAs . * The difference between IL-2 treated NK cells cultured with untreated OCs
or ZOL treated OCs compared to IL-2 treated NK cells cultured in media is significant at P < 0.05 B. Osteoclasts, and highly purified T cells
were prepared and co-cultured as described for NK cells were prepared and co-cultured as described in Fig. 6A. * The difference between IL-2
treated T cells cultured with untreated OCs or ZOL treated OCs compared to IL-2 treated T cells cultured in media is significant at P < 0.05
C. Osteoclasts, and highly purified γδT cells were prepared as described for NK cells and co-cultured as described in Fig. 6A. * The
difference between IL-2 treated γδT cells cultured with untreated OCs or ZOL treated OCs compared to IL-2 treated γδT cells cultured in
media is significant at P < 0.05 (C) After 4 days of culture, the supernatants were harvested and the levels of IFN-γ were measured with
specific ELISAs.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

20013

Oncotarget

Figure 7: In vivo injection of ZOL triggered significant IFN-γ and IL-6 secretion by bone marrow-derived cells but
inhibited secretion by gingival cells. A. Female Balb/c mice received IV injection of 500 μg/Kg ZOL or 0.9% NACL vehicle solution

followed by maxillary first molar extraction after 6 days. Two weeks after tooth extraction, the maxillary palatal mucosa of 0.9% NACL
solution-injected control mice showed complete wound healing, whereas tissue swelling (dotted line) around the tooth extraction site
remained in ZOL-injected mice. The maxillary bone of FAM-ZOL-injected mice showed the strong fluorescence signal, while the remaining
molars (M1, M2, M3) were absent of fluorescence. The visibly reduced fluorescence was observed in the tooth extraction sockets (*) and the
adjacent palatal bone area (dotted line and arrowheads). B. Hematoxylin and eosin (H & E) stained histological sections of ZOL-injected
mice showed significant inflammatory cell infiltration (Inflam) in the palatal/gingival soft tissue one week after tooth extraction. There
were signs of abnormal epithelial hyperplasia (Epi.Hyp.: arrows). The extraction socket (*) exhibited new bone formation. TRAP staining
revealed a number of osteoclasts (vertical arrows) on the surface of palatal bone (Palat.Bone) as well as in the extraction socket (*). TRAP+
multinuclear cells were found within the inflammation area (arrowheads). In non-decalcified cross-section of FAM-ZOL-injected mice,
FAM-positive large cells (arrows) were found on the palatal bone as well as away from the bone surface (arrowheads). Taken together, these
cells in the inflammatory area were thought to be ZOL-affected osteoclasts. C. Immunohistology for cytokeratin 14 (CK14) was performed
as described in the Materials and Method section, and confirmed oral epithelial hyperplasia in the palatal/gingival tissue of ZOL-injected
mice (Epi.Hyp.: arrows). Epithelial hyperplasia was primarily observed within the strong inflammatory area. D. Female B6 mice received
IV injection of 500 μg/Kg ZOL or 0.9% NACL vehicle solution followed by maxillary first molar extraction after 6 days. Two weeks after
tooth extraction the surface expression of CD45−FITC+CD3−PE or CD45−FITC+DX5−PE on cells obtained from gingival tissues.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

20014

Oncotarget

Figure 7 (Continued): E. and bone marrow F. were assessed with flow cytometric analysis after staining with the respective
PE- and FITC-conjugated antibodies. Isotype control antibodies were used as control. Right upper quadrant represent the
percentage of CD3 and DX5 positive cells within the CD45 population. B6 mice underwent experimental treatment as
described in Fig. 7D. Gingival tissues obtained from ZOL and NACL injected animals were digested as described in Materials
and Method. Dissociated cells obtained from gingival tissues were cultured in the presence of IL-2 (10,000 units/ml).
Supernatants were harvested 5 days after IL-2 treatment. The mean for (n = 4) is shown for each set in the figure. The
difference between ZOL and NACL injected gingivae is significant at a P < 0.05.
by BM derived cells was significantly higher in ZOLinjected cells when compared to NACL-injected mice
(P < 0.05) (Fig. 7N).
In addition, when NK cells were purified from
BM cells (BM-NK cells) and used in cytotoxicity assay
BM-NK cells treated with IL-2 from ZOL-injected mice
had significantly higher cytotoxic activity (P < 0.05)
(Fig. 7O), and secreted higher levels of IFN-γ (P < 0.05)
(Fig. 7P) and IL-6 (Fig. 7Q) when compared to NK cells
isolated from BM of NACL-injected mice.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Because of significant differences observed between
gingival and BM derived cells from ZOL- and NACLinjected mice, we then performed microarray analysis of
gingival cells to determine whether 1-suppression of IFN-γ
is also observed at the message level, and 2-whether other
cytokines, chemokines and growth factors were equally
affected (Figs. 7P and S3). Not only the microarray data
indicated severe decrease in the IFN-γ and IL-6 levels
but many other important genes such as IL-12, IL13,
IL15, IL-2 and TNF-α (Fig. 7P) and others (Fig. S3) were

20015

Oncotarget

Figure 7 (Continued): G. After euthanasia, femurs from ZOL and NACL injected animals were harvested and bone marrow
cells were extracted and cultured (1 × 106 /ml) in the presence of IL-2 (10, 000 units/ml). Supernatants were harvested
5 days after IL-2 treatment. The mean for (n = 4) is shown for each set in the figure. The difference between ZOL and NACL
injected bone marrow cells is significant at a P < 0.05. H. Gingival tissue, pancreas and adipose (1 × 106 /ml) from ZOL
and NACL injected animals were cultured in the absence or presence of IL-2 (10, 000 units/ml) for 5 days, after which the
supernatants were harvested and the levels of IFN-γ were measured with specific ELISA. *The difference between untreated
or IL-2 stimulated cells from ZOL injected mice compared to untreated or IL-2 stimulated cells from NACL injected mice is
significant at P < 0.05. I. Female WT B6 mice received IV injection of ZOL or NACL as described in Fig. 7A. After euthanasia,
gingival tissues obtained from ZOL and NACL injected mice were digested as described in Materials and Methods section
and cultured (1 × 106 /ml) in the presence of IL-2 (10, 000 units/ml). After five days of culture, supernatants from the cultures
of gingival tissue were harvested and the levels of IL-6 secretion were measured by specific ELISA.
decreased, whereas no or slight changes could be seen with
CSF2, CXCR3, IL-10 and IL-4 (Fig. 7P). Interestingly, the
levels of CTLA-4 gene were enhanced in cells obtained
from ZOL-injected gingival cells when compared to
NACL-injected mice (Fig. 7R).

BP:  ETI, were determined in this paper. Initial
characterization indicated that during differentiation with
RANKL and M-CSF osteoclasts gradually increased
the secretion of a number of chemokines and cytokines
from day 2 to day 21 of culture, and the profiles of
secretion were closer to those of M2 macrophages and
monocytes, and different from DCs or M1 macrophages.
In comparison to all other subsets, osteoclasts secreted
lower amounts of cytokines; however, they secreted
substantial amounts of chemokines (Supplemental
Table 2). Interestingly, secretion of IL-6 by osteoclasts

DISCUSSION
Phenotypic and functional characteristics of
osteoclasts treated with and without nitrogen-containing
BPs: ZOL and ALN, and non-nitrogen containing
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

20016

Oncotarget

Figure 7 (Continued): J. Immunohistology for IL-6 was performed as described in the Materials and Methods section,
and showed the IL-6 immuno-localization pattern was different in osteoclasts in the jawbone of 0.9% NACL solutioninjected control mice and ZOL-injected mice. K. Female B6 mice received IV injection of ZOL or NACL as described
in Fig. 7A. After euthanasia, femurs from ZOL and NACL injected mice were harvested and bone marrow cells were
extracted and cultured (1 × 106 /ml) in the presence and absence of IL-2 (10,000 units/ml). After five days of culture,
the supernatants were removed and the levels of IL-6 secretion were measured by specific ELISA. L. The pancreas was
obtained from ZOL and NACL injected mice and digested as described in Materials and Methods section. Dissociated
pancreatic cells were cultured in the presence and absence of IL-2 (10, 000 units/ml). After five days of culture, the
supernatants were removed and the levels of IL-6 secretion were measured by specific ELISA. M. Dissociated gingival,
pancreas and adipose cells (1 × 106 /ml) from ZOL and NACL injected animals were cultured in the absence or presence
of IL-2 (10, 000 units/ml) for 5 days and used as effectors against 51Cr labeled ST63 cells at various effector to target
ratios in a standard 4 hour 51Cr release assay. The lytic units 30/106 cells were determined using inverse number of NK
cells required to lyse 30% of the ST63 cells X100.
decreased whereas the IL-10 secretion gradually rose
from day 3 of differentiation to day 16. ZOL and ALN,
but not ETI, triggered dose dependent secretion of
IL-6 whereas they inhibited the secretion of IL-10 by
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

osteoclasts. The dose dependent increase in IL-6 secretion
by ZOL was evident when osteoclasts were treated with
10 nM-1 μM. However, at higher concentration of ZOL
a dose dependent decrease in the secretion of IL-6 could
20017

Oncotarget

Figure 7 (Continued): N. Total cells from the bone marrow were prepared as described in Fig. 7K . O. were prepared as described
in Fig. 7K. NK cells were purified from bone marrow cells cultured in the presence or absence of IL-2 (10, 000 units/ml) for 5 days.
P. Afterwards, the cells were used as effectors against 51Cr labeled ST63 cells at various effector to target ratios in a standard 4 hour 51Cr
release assay. The lytic units 30/106 cells were determined using inverse number of NK cells required to lyse 30% of ST63 cells X100.
* The difference between IL-2 treated BM (N) or BM-NK (O) cells obtained from mice injected with ZOL compared to IL-2 treated
BM or BM-NK cells from mice injected with NACL is significant at P < 0.05. NK cells purified from bone marrow were cultured in
the presence and absence of IL-2 (10, 000 units/ml) after which supernatants were harvested at day 5 and the levels of IFN-γ. Q. and IL-6
R. were determined by specific ELISAs. One week after tooth extraction, total RNA samples were isolated from palatal/gingival
tissue of control and ZOL-injected mice. PCR microarray analysis revealed the suppressed expression of pro-inflammatory
cytokines such as IFN-γ (ifng), IL-6, -12b, -15, -2 and TNF-α (Tnf) in the ZOL-injected mice. Those unaffected cytokines included
anti-inflammatory cytokines such as IL-10 and -4 (A complete list of PCR microarray data can be found in Fig. S3).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

20018

Oncotarget

be observed which related to the ability of ZOL to induce
cell death in osteoclasts since after normalization based
on the live cells an increase in IL-6 secretion could be
observed in doses of 1 μM-50 μM (data not shown). ZOL
induced increase in IL-6 was higher when compared to
ALN, whereas ETI demonstrated no ability to induce
IL-6 secretion. In contrast, IL-10 secretion did not change
at lower doses but decreased at higher concentrations
of ZOL and ALN but not with ETI. The increase in
inflammatory cytokines induced by ZOL and to a lesser
extent by ALN correlated with the inability of ZOL and
ALN treated osteoclasts to retain their resorptive activity
since both the number and size of the pits formed on
the resorptive plates were decreased. Interestingly, even
though ETI did not induce inflammatory cytokines it
was able to decrease the ability of osteoclasts to resorb
hydroxyapatite significantly.
To determine differences between monocytes and
osteoclasts, a number of key cell surface receptors was
analyzed on osteoclasts and compared to monocytes,
macrophages and DCs. In comparison to their precursor
cell monocytes, osteoclasts expressed much lower levels
of MHC class I and II, CD14, CD11b and CD54. Indeed,
there was 4–25 fold decrease in the expression of surface
receptors on osteoclasts, and the most decrease was
seen for MHC class I (8 fold) and II (25  fold) surface
expression. The surface expression on osteoclasts
was quite different from either macrophages or DCs.
Activation of osteoclasts with IFN-γ and TNF-α upregulated the majority of surface receptors, however,
the increase never reached to the levels obtained on the
surface of macrophages. These experiments suggested that
monocytes in the periphery may be less activating for NK
cells since they retain higher expression of MHC class I,
whereas once they move to the tissues and down-modulate
their surface receptors they may become more activating.
Indeed, this may be one reason why NK cells in peripheral
blood remain relatively quiescent, even in the presence of
competent cytotoxic machinery. Treatment of osteoclasts
with ZOL up-regulate surface receptors significantly,
and this increase is comparable or even higher when
osteoclasts are treated with culture supernatants from
highly activated NK cells which are known to increase
receptor expression substantially.
In our previous studies we determined that the
stage of maturation and differentiation of healthy
untransformed stem cells, as well as transformed
tumorigenic cancer stem cells, is predictive of their
sensitivity to NK cell lysis [5]. Differentiation of stem
cells and their resistance to NK cell mediated cytotoxicity
correlated with significant increase in the expression
of MHC class I, CD54, B7H1 surface expression in a
number of healthy and tumor stem cell models, and it
was blocked by the addition of the combination of antiTNF-α and anti-IFN-γ antibodies, which restored NK
cell cytotoxicity and blocked the increased expression
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

of above-mentioned surface markers in addition
to inhibition of cytokine and chemokine secretion
([39, 40]. Since ZOL increased MHC class I, CD54
and B7H1 on osteoclasts we reasoned that it might
behave as a differentiation agent capable of decreasing
NK cell mediated cytotoxicity. Indeed, treatment of
osteoclasts with ZOL, and much less with ALN, was
able to inhibit NK cell cytotoxicity. In addition, NK
cells were able to lyse osteoclasts much more than
freshly isolated monocytes and this correlated with the
decreased expression of MHC class I and CD54 on
osteoclasts. Therefore, NK cells can target stem like/non
differentiated cells but also they can target differentiated
cells, which might have down-modulated or shed those
receptors from their surface.
In contrast to the decrease in cytotoxicity, ZOL
mediated dose dependent increase in cytokine secretion
such as TNF-α (data not shown) and IFN-γ in the cocultures of NK cells with osteoclasts. As mentioned above,
TNF-α and IFN-γ secreted by the NK cells synergistically
augmented differentiation of cells resulting in an increase
in MHC class I, CD54 and B7H1 and their resistance to
NK cell mediated cytotoxicity and decrease in cytokine
and chemokine secretion by the NK cells cultured with
differentiated cells [40]. It is interesting to note that
osteoclasts express lower levels of MHC class I and II
and resist upregulation in MHC class I surface expression
when either treated with the combination of TNF-α
and IFN-γ or with activated NK supernatants known to
increase maximally MHC class I and II. This may be one
reason why osteoclasts are found to be the best targets
for the expansion of fully functional NK cells under the
optimized conditions of NK cell stimulation, as shown
in this paper. Indeed, such observation is of outmost
importance since this strategy may be used to expand
NK cells for therapeutic delivery to cancer patients with
increased frequencies of cancer stem cells with low/no
response to chemo-radiotherapy regimens. Osteoclastexpanded NK cells not only exhibited high cytotoxic
activity but also they mediated significant secretion of
IFN-γ when compared to DC- and monocyte-stimulated
NK cells. Osteoclast-expanded NK cells responded to IL-2
activation and substantially increased IFN-γ secretion per
cell basis when compared to NK cells expanded either by
DCs or monocytes or secreted by IL-2 treated primary
NK cells (data not shown). Interestingly, the addition of
ZOL was found to increase MHC class I on osteoclasts,
although the mechanisms underlying such increase by
ZOL is presently unknown. However, decrease in NK cell
cytotoxicity by ZOL is observed after 30 minutes treatment
of osteoclasts or tumor cells with ZOL which is quite fast,
suggesting that up-regulation of MHC class I expression
by ZOL in such a short period of time is less likely event
for inhibition of NK cell mediated cytotoxicity. Therefore,
ZOL may have a direct effect on inducing resistance of
cells to NK cell mediated cytotoxicity. Thus, these results
20019

Oncotarget

suggest that ZOL-treated osteoclasts may remain viable
in the microenvironment for a prolonged period of time
and continuously trigger high levels of cytokines and
chemokines resulting in the chronicity of inflammation.
Indeed, under the conditions in which supernatants from
the NK cells induce differentiation in stem cells such as
in dental pulp stem cells (DPSCs) or OSCSCs, there is a
significant inhibition of both cytotoxicity and cytokine and
chemokine secretion [40, 41]. However, in the presence
of ZOL, even though NK cell cytotoxicity is inhibited,
cytokine secretion continues at a high level, which may
be the reason for the adverse effects mediated by ZOL. In
addition, ZOL-treated osteoclasts may survive longer and
provide continuous NK cell stimulation by the increased
production and synergistic functions of NK activating
cytokines such as IL-18, IL-15, IL-12 and IFN-α,
which we have shown to be secreted by the osteoclasts
(Supplemental Table 1 and Fig. 5G). This possibility is
under investigation in our laboratory and is the subject of
a future report. Both ZOL and ALN but not ETI were able
to increase cytokine and chemokine secretion by the NK
cells in the co-cultures of NK cells with osteoclast.
To determine whether ZOL could similarly increase
IFN-γ secretion locally in tissues and systemically, BM,
gingival, pancreatic and adipose tissues were removed
and analyzed from mice injected intravenously with
ZOL or NACL vehicle solution. Reciprocal increase
in the secretion of IFN-γ in BM vs. those of gingival,
pancreatic and adipose tissues was observed. Whereas
BM cells exhibited higher secretion of IFN-γ when
compared to NACL-injected mice, gingival, pancreatic
and adipose tissue derived cells decreased IFN-γ in ZOLinjected mice when compared to NACL-injected mice.
These observations are of significant value since they
may provide potential mechanisms for the pathogenesis
seen in osteonecrosis of the jaw (ONJ). It is possible that
an increase in activation of BM cells by ZOL result in
the eventual loss or inhibition of IFN-γ secreting cells
when they reach to the tissues. It has been reported that
patients with long-term ZOL treatment exhibit depletion
of circulating Vγ9Vδ2 T cells [42, 43]. This clinical
observation was postulated to be due to the repeated
activations and subsequent depletion of Vγ9Vδ2 T cells
through phospho-antigens derived from macrophages
responding to ZOL infusion [44]. The present study
may suggest that BP-activated osteoclasts in BM may
contribute to the over-activation and depletion of a wider
array of myeloid as well as lymphoid immune effectors.
It is also relevant to note that ETI which does not increase
pro-inflammatory cytokine release from osteoclasts does
not induce ONJ in patients.
Gingiva-derived immune cells are of activated
phenotype when compared to BM-derived immune cells
in healthy subjects [45]. Thus, prior activation of BMderived cells with ZOL when mobilized to the gingival
tissues when exposed to the additional activation signals
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

from multitude of antigens including those contributed
by more than 450 different species of bacteria in gingiva
may undergo activation induced cell death, and become
exhausted, resulting in the lower secretion of IFN-γ by
the immune cells as seen in our in vivo model system. The
suppressive effect could be due to lower percentages of
T cells but not NK cells in gingiva as observed in mice
injected with ZOL, and more importantly due to the
suppression of gingival T and NK cell function. Therefore,
inability of NK cells to provide key cytokines to activate
and expand T cells may be one of the underlying
mechanisms for decreased percentages of T cells in the
gingival tissues. Conversely, increased function of NK
cells in BM as evidenced by higher cytotoxicity and
increased induction of IFN-γ could be the reason why
an increase in percentages of T cells was seen in BM,
although no statistical significance could be obtained for
the differences in the percentages of T cells in BM of ZOLvs. NACL-injected mice. In addition, microarray analysis
of gingival tissues from ZOL-injected as compared to
NACL-injected mice corroborated findings of lower IFN-γ
and IL-6 in addition to several key inflammatory cytokines
such as IL-12 and IL-2 and TNF-α which are crucial
for the growth and expansion of the immune effectors.
Significant inhibition of many inflammatory cytokines,
chemokines, co-stimulatory molecules and transcription
factors suggests an overall suppressive effect of ZOL
injection in gingival tissue immune function. Of note is the
no change/slight elevation of IL-10 and IL-4 in microarray
analysis. Although these results need to be confirmed at
the protein level, the findings may suggest intensified
immune-suppressive nature of the oral microenvironment
in ZOL-injected mice. It is also of interest to note the
elevation of CTLA4 in ZOL-injected oral gingivae,
another inhibitory co-stimulatory molecule which is
known to dampen the function of activated T cells.
The severe decrease observed in chemokines and their
receptors is also of a grave concern since this may imply
inhibition of immune effector recruitment to the site of
pathology, which may deepen immunosuppression. These
observations are directly relevant to designing therapeutic
strategies to effectively treat ONJ since restoration of
immune cell function rather than their inhibition, which
has been previously proposed, may be the course of action.
Indeed, previous reports of mouse ONJ models applying
anti-inflammatory drugs such as dexamethasone have
resulted in the exacerbation of the disease [46–48], which
would be predicted from our findings.
Oral cavity appears to have the most severe
immunosuppression since pancreatic tissues even
though expressed lower IFN-γ secretion, they contained
higher secretion of IL-6 whereas both IFN-γ and IL-6
was severely inhibited in the oral tissues. Indeed, in situ
analysis of the osteoclasts in the oral gingival tissues
after ZOL injection also corroborated our findings in
that these cells exhibit lower membrane expression of
20020

Oncotarget

IL-6 as compared to NACL-injected oral tissues, and the
pattern of staining for IL-6 in ZOL injected oral tissues
are more diffuse throughout the osteoclasts. Moreover,
osteoclasts were clearly a reservoir of ZOL since they up
took fluorescent-labeled ZOL significantly, in addition to
being in the connective tissue rather than in the interphase
of bone and connective tissue, which healthy osteoclasts
are usually found. Another characteristic feature of ZOLinjected mice was the finding of pseudomembranous
epithelial hyperplasia (PEH), which is also seen in
patients with ONJ. Such feature may distantly resemble
that observed in dysplastic and neoplastic tumors; albeit
with completely distinct mechanisms since in both
cases the local immune effector function is unable to
limit proliferation of epithelial cells. Indeed, we have
established that NK cells are important effectors, which
shape the fraction of stem cells in healthy as well as
transformed tissues, and their functional inactivation may
be the reason for the progression and establishment of
PEH. These possibilities are under investigation in our
laboratory. The phenotype and nature of immune cells,
including NK cells, one of the main contributors of IFN-γ
secretion in bone marrow and gingival tissues are currently
being investigated in our laboratory.
The significance and function of monocyte/
macrophages and DCs in driving an effective immune
response has been known for decades; however, their
close relative, osteoclasts were primarily known for their
function during bone turn-over and remodeling. Our
studies impart greater significance to this subset, and
place them in the ranks of monocyte/macrophages and
DCs in regulating the function of innate immunity and
particularly NK cells.

PE- and FITC-conjugated isotype control, CD3, CD11b,
CD14, CD15, CD33, CD44, CD45, CD54, CD124, B7H1,
MHC-I and MHC-II were purchased from Biolegend
(San Diego, CA). Recombinant IFN-γ and TNF-α were
obtained from Biolegend (San Diego, CA). Recombinant
IL-2 was obtained from NIH-BRB. Purified antibodies
to CD14 and CD16 were purchased from Biolegend
(San  Diego, CA). Propidium iodide was purchased
from Sigma Aldrich (Buffalo, NY). AJ2, prepared in the
laboratory, is a combination of 8 sonicated gram positive
bacteria with superior ability to induce optimal secretion
of both pro-inflammatory and anti-inflammatory cytokines
in NK cells (manuscript submitted).

Purification of monocytes and generation
of dendritic cells and osteoclasts from
mice and humans
Written informed consents approved by UCLA
Institutional Review Board (IRB) were obtained
from healthy blood donors and all the procedures
were approved by the UCLA-IRB. Peripheral blood
mononuclear cells (PBMCs) from healthy donors were
isolated as described before [33]. Briefly, PBMCs were
obtained after Ficoll-hypaque centrifugation. PBMCs
were added to the tissue culture plates, after which the
adherent sub-populations of PBMCs were detached
and the monocytes were negatively purified using
isolation kits obtained from Stem Cell Technologies
(Vancouver, Canada). Murine monocytes were also
negatively isolated from bone marrow cells. Greater
than 95% purity was achieved for each subset based on
flow cytometric analysis of CD14. Purified monocytes
were cultured in alpha-MEM medium containing M-CSF
(25 ng/mL) and RANKL (25 ng/mL) for 21 days, or
otherwise specified. Medium was refreshed every 3 days
with fresh alpha-MEM containing M-CSF and RANKL.
Purified monocytes were cultured in RPMI medium
containing GM-CSF (150 ng/mL) and IL-4 (50 ng/mL)
for 7 days to generate dendritic cells.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Cell Lines, reagents, and antibodies
Alpha-MEM medium (Life Technologies, CA)
supplemented with 10% Fetal Bovine Serum (FBS) and
penicillin-streptomycin (Gemini Bio-Products, CA)
was used to culture human osteoclasts. RPMI 1640
supplemented with 10% FBS was used for the cultures
of human and murine immune cells. Oral Squamous
Carcinoma Stem Cells (OSCSCs) were isolated from
oral cancer patient (tongue tumor) at UCLA and were
cultured in RPMI 1640 supplemented with 10% FBS
(Gemini Bio-Products, CA), 1.4% antibiotic antimycotic,
1% sodium pyruvate, 1.4% non-essential amino acids,
1% L-glutamine, 0.2% gentamicin (Gemini Bio-Products,
CA) and 0.15% sodium bicarbonate (Fisher Scientific,
PA). Human M-CSF (Biolegend, CA) and soluble RANKL
(PeproTech, NJ) were dissolved in alpha-MEM and
stored at -80°C. ZOL, ALN and ETI were purchased from
UCLA Ronald Reagan Pharmacy. Fluorescent-conjugated
ZOL analogs were synthesized via a linker strategy [32].
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Purification of human NK cells and murine NK
cells, T cells and γδ T cells
PBMCs from healthy donors were isolated
as described before [33]. Briefly, peripheral blood
lymphocytes were obtained after Ficoll-hypaque
centrifugation and purified NK cells were negatively
selected by using an NK cell isolation kit (Stem Cell
Technologies, Vancouver, Canada). The purity of NK
cell population was found to be greater than 90% based
on flow cytometric analysis of PE conjugated anti-CD16
antibody stained cells. The levels of contaminating CD3+ T
cells remained low, at 2.4% ± 1%, similar to that obtained
by the non-specific staining using isotype control antibody
throughout the experimental procedures. Similarly, murine
20021

Oncotarget

Surface staining

NK and T cells were negatively purified using isolation
kits from stem cell technologies (Stem Cell Technologies,
Vancouver, Canada) whereas murine γδ T cells were
negatively selected using isolation kit from Miltenyi
biotech (Miltenyi, biotech; CA) from mouse splenocytes.
The purity of murine NK and T cells was greater than
90% based on staining with DX5 and CD3, whereas the
purity of murine γδ T cells was greater than 80% based on
staining with GL3 antibody.

Staining was performed by labeling the cells
with antibodies as described previously [33–35]. Flow
Cytometry analysis was performed using Beckman
Coulter Epics XL cytometer (Brea, CA) and results were
analyzed was FlowJo vX software (Ashland, OR).

Cr release cytotoxicity assay

51

The 51Cr release assay was performed as described
previously [36]. Briefly, different numbers of purified NK
cells were incubated with 51Cr–labeled target cells. After a
4 hour incubation period the supernatants were harvested
from each sample and counted for released radioactivity
using the gamma counter. The percentage specific
cytotoxicity was calculated as follows:

TRAP staining
The staining was carried out as recommended by
the manufacturer (Sigma-Aldrich). Briefly, osteoclasts
were detached from tissue culture plates and seeded
in 96-well plate at 3 × 104 cells/well for 18–24 hours.
Afterwards the cells were rinsed twice with 1X PBS and
fixed with the fixative solution containing citrate solution,
acetone and 37% formaldehyde. Cells were then washed
twice with 1XPBS before Fast Garnet GBC and sodium
nitrite at (1:1 ratio) were added and incubated for 1 hour
at 37° C. Plates were rinsed and hematoxylin were then
added to each well for 2 mins. Plates were air dried and
images were taken by the Leica DMI 6000B inverted
microscope.

% Cytotoxicity =

LU 30/106 was calculated by using the inverse of
the number of effector cells needed to lyse 30% of target
cells X100.

ZOL injection and tooth extraction in mice
The UCLA Animal Research Committee reviewed
and approved all experimental protocols involving
animals (ARC# 1997–136). Seven weeks old female
Balb/c mice (Jackson Laboratory, Bar Harbor, ME)
received a bolus injection of 184 μM ZOL (500 μg/Kg)
or 184 μM 5-Carboxyfluorescein (FAM)-conjugated ZOL
in 200 μl 0.9% NACL solution from tail vein. A separate
group was injected with 0.9% NACL vehicle solution.
One week later, maxillary first molar was extracted.
Mice were anesthetized via isoflurane inhalation and
placed on a custom-made surgical table. After the
circumferential periodontal ligament of the attached
gingiva was dissected, the maxillary left first molar was
luxated by a dental explorer and gently removed using
surgical forceps. Immediately prior to tooth extraction,
5.0 mg/kg carprofen was subcutaneously injected, and this
injection was repeated every 24 hours for 48 hours. After
tooth extraction, mice were fed gel diet (DietGel 76A,
ClearH2O, Portland, ME).

Pit resorption assay
Osteoclasts differentiated from monocytes for
21 days were rinsed, detached from tissue culture plates
and seeded at 1 × 104 cells/well in 24 well plate pre-coated
with synthetic carbonate apatite (Cosmo Bio Co, Japan)
for 7 days. After the incubation period, culture medium
was removed and cells were rinsed with freshly prepared
5% sodium hypochlorite for 5 minutes. The cells were
then washed with water and photographed using Leica
DMI 6000B inverted microscope.

ELISAs
ELISAs were performed as described previously
[33]. To determine the cytokine concentrations to obtain
the cytokine concentration, a standard curve was generated
by either two or three fold dilution of recombinant
cytokines.

Histological characterization of mouse maxillary
tissue

Multiplex cytokine array kit
Fluorokine MAP cytokine multiplex kits were
purchased from Life Technologies (Carlsbad, CA) and
the procedures were conducted as suggested by the
manufacturer. To determine the cytokine concentrations
a standard curve was generated by threefold dilution of
recombinant cytokines provided by the manufacturer.
Analysis was performed using MAGPIX (Life
Technologies, CA).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Experimental cpm − spontaneous cpm
Total cpm − spontaneous cpm

One week and two weeks after tooth extraction, mice
were euthanized by 100% CO2 inhalation and the maxillary
tissue containing the wound healing site was harvested
and digitally photographed. Then the maxillary tissue was
fixed in 10% buffered formalin overnight and decalcified
in 10% EDTA for 7 to 10 days. Histological sections of
paraffin-embedded histological specimens were generated
20022

Oncotarget

in a frontal plane through the tooth extraction site and
stained by hematoxylin and eosin (H & E) or for Tartrateresistant acid phosphatase (TRAP Kit, Sigma-Aldrich,
St. Louis, MO). Adjacent histological sections were
subjected to antigen retrieval via microwave irradiation
and incubated with an anti-cytokeratin 14 or an anti-IL-6
antibody (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Dallas, TX, USA)
followed by incubation with diaminobenzidine substrate.
The sections were counterstained with hematoxylin.
The maxillary bone of FAM-ZOL-injected
mice was examined by the standardized fluorescent
biophotonics imager using an excitation wavelength of
460 nm and the 515-nm filter (LAS3000, FUJIFILM
Corp, Tokyo, Japan). The maxillary specimens with
palatal/gingival tissue of FAM-ZOL-injected mice were
fixed in 70% ethyl alcohol overnight and embedded
in plastic resin (methyl methacrylate, Polysciences,
Warrington, PA; dibutyl phthalate and benzoyl
peroxide, Sigma Aldrich, St. Louis, MO) following the
manufacturer’s protocol. Frontal sections were made
through tooth extraction site and FAM-ZOL was detected
by a fluorescent microscope.

A reference RNA sample was prepared from the gingival
tissue of a naïve mouse. The steady state mRNA levels
of cytokines and chemokines in the palatal/gingival tissue
were evaluated by a commercially available PCR array
(RT2 ProfilerTM PCR Array Mouse Th1&Th2 Responses,
Qiagen, Valencia, CA) following the manufacturer’s
protocol. The relative gene expression value was
calculated by ΔΔCt using the internal housekeeping gene
and the reference gene expression.

Statistical analysis
An unpaired, two-tailed student t-test was performed
for the statistical analysis. One way ANOVA with a
Bonferroni post-test was used to compare the different
groups.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS AND FUNDING
Histopathological
and
immunohistological
specimens were prepared at the Tissue Procurement
Core Laboratory, Department of Pathology & Laboratory
Medicine, David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA.
We thank Dr. Renata Pereira of Division of Pediatric
Nephrology and Dr. Ko Takanashi Kiehle of Department of
Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, David Geffen School
of Medicine at UCLA for their valuable assistance in nondecalcified histology and immunohistology, respectively.
This study was supported in part by NIDCR/NIH grants
(R01DE022552; R21DE023410). This investigation was
conducted in part in a facility constructed with support from
Research Facilities Improvement Program Grant Number
C06 RR014529 from NCRR/NIH. Dr. Anna Kozlowska
is the recipient of “Mobility Plus” fellowship funded by
Polish Ministry of Science and Higher Education.

Cell dissociation from femur, spleen, pancreas,
peri-pancreatic fat and gingiva of ZOLinjected mice
Female C57Bl/6J B6 mice mice received IV
injection of 500  μg/Kg ZOL or 0.9% NACL vehicle
solution followed by maxillary first molar extraction after
7 days as described above. All mice were euthanized
two weeks after tooth extraction. After euthanasia,
gingival tissues, pancreas and peri-pancreatic fat were
obtained from ZOL and NACL injected animals and
digested using collagenase II (1 mg/ml) (gingival
tissue and peri-pancreatic fat) and collagenase IV
(1 mg/ml) (pancreas) (Invitrogen, CA) and DNAse
(10 units/ml) (Sigma-Aldrich, CA) for 20 minutes at
37°C. Femurs from ZOL and NACL injected animals
were harvested and bone marrow cells were extracted
and cultured in the presence and absence of IL-2
(10,  000 units/ml) treatment using RPMI 1640 media
(Life technologies, CA). Single cells released from the
gingival tissues, peri-pancreatic fat and pancreas were
suspended in media and cultured in the presence of IL-2
(10,000 units/ml).

REFERENCES
1.	 Takayanagi H. Osteoimmunology: shared mechanisms and
crosstalk between the immune and bone systems. Nat Rev
Immunol. 2007; 7:292–304.
2.	 Chambers TJ, Fuller K, McSheehy PM, Pringle JA. The
effects of calcium regulating hormones on bone resorption
by isolated human osteoclastoma cells. J Pathol. 1985;
145:297–305.
3.	 Suda T, Takahashi N, Martin TJ. Modulation of osteoclast
differentiation. Endocr Rev. 1992; 13:66–80.

Cytokine/chemokine gene expression in the
mouse maxillary palatal/gingival tissues

4.	 Lanier LL. NK cell recognition. Annual review of
immunology. 2005; 23:225–274.

One week after tooth extraction, the maxillary
gingival tissue was harvested from mice pre-injected
with ZOL (n = 2) or 0.9% NACL vehicle solution (n = 2).
The tissue was snap frozen in liquid nitrogen and total
RNA was prepared using a commercially available kit
(RNeasy Fibrous Tissue Mini Kit, Qiagen, Valencia, CA).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

5.	 Tseng HC, Arasteh A, Paranjpe A, Teruel A, Yang W,
Behel  A, Alva JA, Walter G, Head C, Ishikawa TO,
Herschman HR, Cacalano N, Pyle AD, Park NH, Jewett A.
Increased lysis of stem cells but not their ­differentiated cells
by natural killer cells; de-differentiation or reprogramming
activates NK cells. PLoS One. 2010; 5:e11590.
20023

Oncotarget

promote apoptosis in murine osteoclasts in vitro and in vivo.
J Bone Miner Res. 1995; 10:1478–1487.

6.	 Takayanagi H, Ogasawara K, Hida S, Chiba T, Murata S,
Sato K, Takaoka A, Yokochi T, Oda H, Tanaka  K,
Nakamura K, Taniguchi T. T-cell-mediated regulation
of osteoclastogenesis by signalling cross-talk between
RANKL and IFN-gamma. Nature. 2000; 408:600–605.

19.	 Selander KS, Monkkonen J, Karhukorpi EK, Harkonen P,
Hannuniemi R, Vaananen HK. Characteristics of
clodronate-induced apoptosis in osteoclasts and
­
­macrophages. Mol Pharmacol. 1996; 50:1127–1138.

7.	 Gao Y, Grassi F, Ryan MR, Terauchi M, Page K, Yang X,
Weitzmann MN, Pacifici R. IFN-gamma stimulates osteoclast formation and bone loss in vivo via antigen-driven T
cell activation. J Clin Invest. 2007; 117:122–132.

20.	 Murakami H, Takahashi N, Sasaki T, Udagawa N,
Tanaka S, Nakamura I, Zhang D, Barbier A, Suda  T.
A possible mechanism of the specific action of
bisphosphonates on osteoclasts: tiludronate preferentially
affects polarized osteoclasts having ruffled borders. Bone.
1995; 17:137–144.

8.	 Cenci S, Toraldo G, Weitzmann MN, Roggia C, Gao Y,
Qian WP, Sierra O, Pacifici R. Estrogen deficiency induces
bone loss by increasing T cell proliferation and lifespan
through IFN-gamma-induced class II ­transactivator. Proc
Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2003; 100:10405–10410.

21.	 Kimachi K, Kajiya H, Nakayama S, Ikebe T, Okabe  K.
Zoledronic acid inhibits RANK expression and migration
of osteoclast precursors during osteoclastogenesis. Naunyn
Schmiedebergs Arch Pharmacol. 2011; 383:297–308.

9.	 Hofbauer LC, Lacey DL, Dunstan CR, Spelsberg TC,
Riggs BL, Khosla S. Interleukin-1beta and tumor necrosis
factor-alpha, but not interleukin-6, stimulate osteoprotegerin
ligand gene expression in human osteoblastic cells. Bone.
1999; 25:255–259.

22.	 Hughes DE, MacDonald BR, Russell RG, Gowen M.
Inhibition of osteoclast-like cell formation by bisphosphonates in long-term cultures of human bone marrow. J Clin
Invest. 1989; 83:1930–1935.

10.	 Quinn JM, Horwood NJ, Elliott J, Gillespie MT, Martin TJ.
Fibroblastic stromal cells express receptor activator of
NF-kappa B ligand and support osteoclast differentiation.
J Bone Miner Res. 2000; 15:1459–1466.

23.	 Ruggiero SL, Dodson TB, Fantasia J, Goodday R,
Aghaloo T, Mehrotra B, O’Ryan F, American Association
of O and Maxillofacial S. American Association of
Oral and Maxillofacial Surgeons position paper on
­medication-related osteonecrosis of the jaw—2014 update.
J Oral Maxillofac Surg. 2014; 72:1938–1956.

11.	 Lam J, Takeshita S, Barker JE, Kanagawa O, Ross FP,
Teitelbaum SL. TNF-alpha induces osteoclastogenesis by
direct stimulation of macrophages exposed to permissive
levels of RANK ligand. J Clin Invest. 2000; 106:1481–1488.

24.	 Cetiner S, Sucak GT, Kahraman SA, Aki SZ,
Kocakahyaoglu B, Gultekin SE, Cetiner M, Haznedar R.
Osteonecrosis of the jaw in patients with multiple myeloma
treated with zoledronic acid. J Bone Miner Metab. 2009;
27:435–443.

12.	 Soderstrom K, Stein E, Colmenero P, Purath U, MullerLadner U, de Matos CT, Tarner IH, Robinson WH,
Engleman EG. Natural killer cells trigger osteoclastogenesis
and bone destruction in arthritis. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A.
2010; 107:13028–13033.

25.	 Ruggiero SL, Mehrotra B, Rosenberg TJ, Engroff  SL.
Osteonecrosis of the jaws associated with the use of
bisphosphonates: a review of 63 cases. J Oral Maxillofac
Surg. 2004; 62:527–534.

13.	 Russell RG, Watts NB, Ebetino FH, Rogers MJ. Mechanisms
of action of bisphosphonates: similarities and differences and
their potential influence on clinical efficacy. Osteoporos Int.
2008; 19:733–759.

26.	 Mavrokokki T, Cheng A, Stein B, Goss A. Nature and
frequency of bisphosphonate-associated osteonecrosis
of the jaws in Australia. J Oral Maxillofac Surg. 2007;
65:415–423.

14.	 Russell RG. Bisphosphonates: the first 40 years. Bone.
2011; 49:2–19.
15.	 Flanagan AM, Chambers TJ. Dichloromethylenebisphosphonate (Cl2MBP) inhibits bone resorption through injury
to osteoclasts that resorb Cl2MBP-coated bone. Bone
Miner. 1989; 6:33–43.

27.	 Chiplunkar S, Dhar S, Wesch D, Kabelitz D. ­gammadelta
T cells in cancer immunotherapy: current status and future
prospects. Immunotherapy. 2009; 1:663–678.

16.	 Ito M, Amizuka N, Nakajima T, Ozawa H. Ultrastructural
and cytochemical studies on cell death of osteoclasts
induced by bisphosphonate treatment. Bone. 1999;
25:447–452.

28.	 Ferlazzo G, Morandi B. Cross-Talks between Natural
Killer Cells and Distinct Subsets of Dendritic Cells. Front
Immunol. 2014; 5:159.
29.	 Jewett A, Man YG, Cacalano N, Kos J, Tseng HC. Natural
killer cells as effectors of selection and differentiation
of stem cells: Role in resolution of inflammation. J
Immunotoxicol. 2014.

17.	 Breuil V, Cosman F, Stein L, Horbert W, Nieves J, Shen V,
Lindsay R, Dempster DW. Human osteoclast formation and
activity in vitro: effects of alendronate. J Bone Miner Res.
1998; 13:1721–1729.

30.	 Jewett A, Tseng HC. Potential rescue, survival and
differentiation of cancer stem cells and primary nontransformed stem cells by monocyte-induced split anergy

18.	 Hughes DE, Wright KR, Uy HL, Sasaki A, Yoneda T,
Roodman GD, Mundy GR, Boyce BF. Bisphosphonates

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

20024

Oncotarget

in natural killer cells. Cancer Immunol Immunother. 2012;
61:265–274.

c­ontact and secreted factors. Frontiers in immunology.
2014; 5:269.

31.	 Krueger PD, Lassen MG, Qiao H, Hahn YS. Regulation
of NK cell repertoire and function in the liver. Crit Rev
Immunol. 2011; 31:43–52.

40.	 Tseng HC, Cacalano N, Jewett A. Split anergized Natural
Killer cells halt inflammation by inducing stem cell differentiation, resistance to NK cell cytotoxicity and prevention
of cytokine and chemokine secretion. Oncotarget. 2015.

32.	 Hokugo A, Sun S, Park S, McKenna CE, Nishimura I.
Equilibrium-dependent bisphosphonate interaction with
crystalline bone mineral explains anti-resorptive pharmacokinetics and prevalence of osteonecrosis of the jaw in rats.
Bone. 2013; 53:59–68.

41.	 Tseng HC, Bui V, Man YG, Cacalano N, Jewett A.
Induction of Split Anergy Conditions Natural Killer Cells
to Promote Differentiation of Stem Cells through Cell-Cell
Contact and Secreted Factors. Front Immunol. 2014; 5:269.

33.	 Jewett A, Bonavida B. Target-induced inactivation and
cell death by apoptosis in a subset of human NK cells.
J Immunol. 1996; 156:907–915.

42.	 Kalyan S, Quabius ES, Wiltfang J, Monig H, Kabelitz D.
Can peripheral blood gammadelta T cells predict
osteonecrosis of the jaw? An immunological perspective on
the adverse drug effects of aminobisphosphonate therapy.
J Bone Miner Res. 2013; 28:728–735.

34.	 Jewett A, Cavalcanti M, Bonavida B. Pivotal role of
endogenous TNF-alpha in the induction of functional
inactivation and apoptosis in NK cells. J Immunol. 1997;
159:4815–4822.

43.	 Rossini M, Adami S, Viapiana O, Fracassi E, Ortolani R,
Vella A, Zanotti R, Tripi G, Idolazzi L, Gatti D. L
­ ong-term
effects of amino-bisphosphonates on circulating gammadelta
T cells. Calcif Tissue Int. 2012; 91:395–399.

35.	 Jewett A, Bonavida B. Interferon-alpha activates cytotoxic function but inhibits interleukin-2-mediated proliferation and tumor necrosis factor-alpha secretion by
immature human natural killer cells. J Clin Immunol. 1995;
15:35–444.

44.	 Rossini M, Adami S, Viapiana O, Ortolani R, Vella A,
Fracassi E, Gatti D. Circulating gammadelta T cells and the
risk of acute-phase response after zoledronic acid administration. J Bone Miner Res. 2012; 27:227–230.

36.	 Jewett A, Wang MY, Teruel A, Poupak Z, Bostanian Z,
Park NH. Cytokine dependent inverse regulation of CD54
(ICAM1) and major histocompatibility complex class I
antigens by nuclear factor kappaB in HEp2 tumor cell line:
effect on the function of natural killer cells. Hum Immunol.
2003; 64:505–520.

45.	 Jewett A, Man YG, Tseng HC. Dual functions of natural
killer cells in selection and differentiation of stem cells; role
in regulation of inflammation and regeneration of tissues.
J Cancer. 2013; 4:12–24.
46.	 Bi Y, Gao Y, Ehirchiou D, Cao C, Kikuiri T, Le A, Shi S,
Zhang L. Bisphosphonates cause osteonecrosis of the jawlike disease in mice. Am J Pathol. 2010; 177:280–290.

37.	 Jewett A, Cacalano NA, Head C, Teruel A. Coengagement
of CD16 and CD94 receptors mediates secretion of
chemokines and induces apoptotic death of naive natural
killer cells. Clin Cancer Res. 2006; 12:1994–2003.

47.	 Kikuiri T, Kim I, Yamaza T, Akiyama K, Zhang Q, Li Y,
Chen C, Chen W, Wang S, Le AD, Shi S. Cell-based immunotherapy with mesenchymal stem cells cures bisphosphonate-related osteonecrosis of the jaw-like disease in mice. J
Bone Miner Res. 2010; 25:1668–1679.

38.	 Jewett A, Teruel A, Romero M, Head C, Cacalano N.
Rapid and potent induction of cell death and loss of NK
cell cytotoxicity against oral tumors by F(ab’)2 fragment of
anti-CD16 antibody. Cancer Immunol Immunother. 2008;
57:1053–1066.

48.	 Zhao Y, Wang L, Liu Y, Akiyama K, Chen C, Atsuta I,
Zhou T, Duan X, Jin Y, Shi S. Technetium-99 conjugated
with methylene diphosphonate ameliorates ovariectomyinduced osteoporotic phenotype without c­ ausing osteonecrosis in the jaw. Calcif Tissue Int. 2012; 91:400–408

39.	 Tseng H-C, Bui VT, Man Y-G, Cacalano NA, Jewett A.
Induction of split anergy conditions Natural Killer cells
to promote differentiation of stem cells through cell-cell

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

20025

Oncotarget

