Oncotarget, Vol. 7, No. 29

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Research Paper

Inhibiting cytoplasmic accumulation of HuR synergizes genotoxic
agents in urothelial carcinoma of the bladder
Jiawei Guo1,*, Jing Lv1,*, Siyu Chang1, Zhi Chen1, Weiqiang Lu1, Chuanliang Xu2,
Mingyao Liu1,3, Xiufeng Pang1
1

Shanghai Key Laboratory of Regulatory Biology, Institute of Biomedical Sciences and School of Life Sciences, East China
Normal University, Shanghai 200241, China

2

Department of Urology, Shanghai Changhai Hospital, Second Military Medical University, Shanghai 200433, China

3

Institute of Biosciences and Technology, Department of Molecular and Cellular Medicine, Texas A&M University Health
Science Center, Houston, Texas 77030, USA

*

These authors contributed equally to this work

Correspondence to: Xiufeng Pang, email: xfpang@bio.ecnu.edu.cn
Keywords: RNA-binding protein, pyrvinium pamoate, DNA damage response, chemosensitivity, urothelial carcinoma of the
bladder
Received: February 16, 2016     Accepted: May 28, 2016     Published: June 09, 2016

Abstract
HuR, an RNA-binding protein, post-transcriptionally regulates nearly 4% of
encoding proteins implicated in cell survival. Here we show that HuR is required for
the efficacy of chemotherapies in urothelial carcinoma of the bladder. We identify
pyrvinium pamoate, an FDA-approved anthelminthic drug, as a novel HuR inhibitor that
dose-dependently inhibited cytoplasmic accumulation of HuR. Combining pyrvinium
pamoate with chemotherapeutic agents (e.g. cisplatin, doxorubicin, vincristine and
oxaliplatin) not only led to enhanced cytotoxicity in bladder cancer cells but also
synergistically suppressed the growth of patient-derived bladder tumor xenografts
in mice (P < 0.001). Mechanistically, pyrvinium pamoate promoted nuclear import
of HuR by activating the AMP-activated kinase/importin α1 cascade and blocked
HuR nucleo-cytoplasmic translocation by inhibiting the checkpoint kinase1/cyclindependent kinase 1 pathway. Notably, pyrvinium pamoate-additive treatment
increased DNA double-strand breaks as indicated by elevated γH2AX expression,
suggesting an involvement of DNA damage response. We further found that pyrvinium
pamoate dramatically downregulated several key DNA repair genes in genotoxicallystressed cells, including DNA ligase IV and BRCA2, leading to unbearable genomic
instability and cell death. Collectively, our findings are the first to characterize
a clinical HuR inhibitor and provide a novel therapeutically tractable strategy by
targeting cytoplasmic translocation of HuR for treatment of urothelial carcinoma of
the bladder.

Introduction

based treatment regimens due to poor response [4] or
unbearable renal failure [5]. Therefore, enhancing the
efficacy of current chemotherapies under a tolerable
dosage is of paramount importance. Since nearly all the
chemotherapeutic agents used in UCB treatment are
genotoxic agents, clinical improvements will likely come
from strategies aimed at augmenting genotoxic agentsmediated DNA damage.
The most lethal form of DNA damage caused by
genotoxic agents is DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs).
DSBs trigger a series of sophisticated DNA repair

Despite achievements in understanding the
molecular pathogenesis of urothelial carcinoma of the
bladder (UCB), no target-selective agents have been
approved either as monotherapy or in combination with
traditional chemotherapy in the treatment of metastatic
or recurrent UCB [1]. Systemic chemotherapy with a
platinum-based regimen remains the current standard of
care for UCB patients [2, 3]. Unfortunately, approximately
half of UCB patients are not eligible for cisplatinwww.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

45249

Oncotarget

mechanisms, called DNA damage response (DDR),
to neutralize DNA damage [6]. DDR includes cell
cycle arrest and DNA repair events where homologous
recombination (HR) and non-homologous end joining
(NHEJ) help cells to maintain genomic stability and
escape from chemotherapy [7, 8]. Therefore, interfering
with the DDR process is thought to be an intriguing
way to potentiate chemotherapies [6]. However, despite
achievements in the development of PARP inhibitors [9]
as well as Chk1 inhibitors [10], unexpected problems
occurred as complete inhibition of HR or NHEJ may be
lethal to all dividing cells [6]. To minimize unwanted
toxicity on normal tissues, temporarily interfering with
the DDR pathway is likely to be more feasible. Notably,
subcellular distribution of RNA-binding proteins (RBPs)
is quite responsive to DNA damage [11, 12]. RBPs
binding to specific pre-mRNAs and mRNAs selectively
regulate DDR genes at multiple post-transcriptional levels
(e.g. translation rate and mRNA stability) and finally lead
genome stability [12].
HuR, one of the best-studied RBPs implicated in
DDR, is indispensable for the stabilization of short-lived
mRNAs [13]. The 326 amino acid-long HuR recognizes
AU-rich RNA motifs in the 3ʹ-UTR (3ʹ-untranslated
region) and binds to its target mRNAs through its RNA
recognition motifs [14]. As a sensor protein, HuR’s
activation is a complicated process including subcellular
translocation, phosphorylation as well as homodimer
formation [11, 15, 16]. Although HuR is predominantly
located in the nucleus, its nucleo-cytoplasmic translocation
during DNA damage response has been implicated in
genomic stability maintenance as well as cell fate decision
[17, 18]. HuR-mediated DNA damage response is partially
attributed to its ability to stabilize several mRNAs of key
DDR-related genes, including p53 [19], p21 [20], RhoB
[21] and WEE1 [22]. HuR inhibition has been described
to be antineoplastic or antiangiogenic, demonstrating the
importance of HuR as a potential target in cancer therapy
[15]. In addition, the correlation between HuR cytoplasmic
accumulation and poor prognosis of bladder cancer
patients has recently been discovered [23, 24]. Since HuR
activation may help the DNA repair process during DDR,
blocking HuR-mediated responses is expected to improve
the efficacy of genotoxic agents. Under this hypothesis, we
find that inhibiting HuR is required for chemotherapeutic
efficacy in UCB and further identified pyrvinium pamoate
as a novel inhibitor of HuR cytoplasmic translocation.
Pyrvinium pamoate potentiates chemotherapeutic agents
in several preclinical cancer models in vitro and in vivo.
Furthermore, a dual mechanism involving activation
of the AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK)/importin
α1 cascade and inhibition of the Chk1/Cdk1 pathway
contribute to pyrvinium pamoate-mediated suppression
of HuR cytoplasmic translocation. As a consequence of
HuR inhibition, several DNA repair factors decrease their
expression due to loss of mRNA stability. Collectively, our
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

results establish a paradigm whereby systemic modulation
of cytoplasmic abundance of HuR is sufficient to sensitize
chemotherapy and a mechanism of HuR in DNA damage
response.

Results
Identification of pyrvinium pamoate as a novel
HuR inhibitor
It has been reported that HuR functionally
translocates into the cytoplasm under DNA-damaging
stress conditions in pancreatic cancer cells [22]. To
confirm whether HuR translocation happens in urothelial
carcinoma of the bladder, we first treated bladder
cancer cells with four first-line chemotherapeutic
agents, including cisplatin, oxaliplatin, doxorubicin and
vincristine. The results showed that HuR was highly
abundant in the cytoplasm of all treated cells, whereas
total HuR protein level in whole cell lysates exhibited
no significant change (Supplementary Figure S1A).
Such effect was a time-dependent action as indicated by
time-course treatments of doxorubicin (Supplementary
Figure S1B). Results from immunofluorescence assays
consistently showed that HuR was highly responsive to
chemotherapeutic stress by translocating from the nucleus
to the cytoplasm (Supplementary Figure S1C).
We tested if HuR played a role in chemotherapeutic
efficacy. We generated a pair of isogenic cell lines by
totally deleting HuR in 5637 cells. As shown in Figure 1A,
HuR-null cells were more vulnerable to the proliferative
inhibition caused by cisplatin or doxorubicin. The IC50s of
cisplatin and doxorubicin decreased by nearly 83% and
75% in HuR-null cells, respectively. These data indicated
that HuR activity reduced the efficacy of genotoxic agents
and targeting HuR cytoplasmic translocation may enhance
the sensitivity of UCB cells to current therapy.
No clinically applicable HuR inhibitors have been
characterized until now. Therefore, we conducted a
primary screen for such agents from a library of FDAapproved drugs using a high-throughput screen system by
inserting an HuR-recognized AU-rich sequence into the
3ʹ-UTR of firefly luciferase (FLuc) mRNA (Supplementary
Figure S2A). In order to efficiently activate HuR by
genotoxic stress, we exposed transfected cells to UVC
radiation in the primary screen. HuR activated by UVC
was able to bind to the AU-rich elements downstream
of FLuc and thus stabilized its mRNAs. The expression
of FLuc was relatively increased under UVC exposure
compared to renilla luciferase (RLuc) who lacked
ARE in its 3ʹ-UTR. Agents that interfered with HuR’s
activation were expected to decrease the ratio of FLuc
luminescence compared to RLuc. A novel finding was that
pyrvinium pamoate showed the most effective action and
significantly inhibited the UVC-triggered increase of the
FLuc/RLuc ratio (Supplementary Figure S2B). To confirm
45250

Oncotarget

We next confirmed the synergy in vivo. Two primary
bladder tumor xenograft mouse models (UCBPDX0615
and UCBPDX0826) were set up. Compared to single agent
alone, the combined regimen produced a more significant
decrease in tumor volume and tumor weight (Figure 2D–2G).
Notably, the efficacy of the combination was durable since
the average tumor volume was almost comparable to the
baseline during 4-week treatment (Figure 2D, 2E). Besides,
the combination treatment was quite tolerable as mouse
body weights were not obviously affected (Supplementary
Figure S4). Our in vitro and in vivo data indicated the
feasibility of augmenting chemotherapeutic efficacy with a
pyrvinium pamoate-combination strategy.

the inhibitory effect of pyrvinium pamoate on HuR, we
next examined the expression of p53, p21 and PTMA,
which are UVC-responsive mRNAs with known HuR
recognized AREs in their 3ʹ-UTR. The results showed
that pyrvinium pamoate dose-dependently inhibited their
expression (Supplementary Figure S3).
Since translocation from the nucleus to the
cytoplasm acts as the key functional regulatory step for
HuR activation [14], especially in stressed cells [11], we
further examined the effects of pyrvinium pamoate on
HuR subcellular distribution. As shown in Figure 1B,
pyrvinium pamoate blocked UVC-mediated cytoplasmic
accumulation of HuR in a concentration-dependent
manner. We next investigate whether pyrvinium pamoate
was also effective in chemotherapy-induced HuR
activation. The results showed that pyrvinium pamoate
potently suppressed nucleo-cytoplasmic translocation of
HuR in chemotherapy-stressed conditions (Figure 1C).
Similarity was observed by immunofluorescence assays
(Figure 1D). Together, these data indicated that pyrvinium
pamoate was an effective inhibitor of HuR cytoplasmic
translocation.
Given the potent effect of pyrvinium pamoate on
HuR translocation, we verified whether HuR primarily
contributed to the action of pyrvinium pamoate by
using HuR isogenic cell lines. The result showed the
HuR-null cells were nearly three-fold more resistant to
pyrvinium pamoate treatment compared to their wildtype counterparts (Figure 1E), suggesting that HuR was a
likely potential target of pyrvinium pamoate.

Pyrvinium pamoate promotes nuclear import
of HuR by activating the AMPK/importin α1
signaling cascade
The above findings prompted a further exploration
of molecular basis underlying how pyrvinium pamoatemediated the decrease of HuR cytoplasmic accumulation.
Pyrvinium pamoate has been reported to suppress
mitochondrial energy metabolism by inhibiting the
NADH-fumarate reductase system [25]. Our results
confirmed that treatment of pyrvinium pamoate led to a
rapid time-dependent decrease of the ATP level in bladder
cancer cells (Supplementary Figure S5). Given that AMPactivated protein kinase (AMPK) activation was rather
responsive to decreased ATP and highly involved in the
regulation of HuR, we investigated the effect of pyrvinium
pamoate on AMPK signaling. We found that pyrvinium
pamoate dose-dependently activated AMPK, coupling with
a decrease of cytoplasmic HuR (Figure 3A), suggesting a
potential role for AMPK in pyrvinium pamoate regulation
of HuR. Rescue assays by immunofluorescence showed
that AICAR, an AMPK activator, exhibited similar action
as pyrvinium pamoate, whereas compound C, an AMPK
inhibitor, squeezed HuR out of the nuclei even in the
presence of pyrvinium pamoate (Figure 3B), indicating
a pivotal role of AMPK in pyrvinium pamoate-mediated
inhibition of HuR cytoplasmic accumulation.
Importin α1 is the only characterized transporter
known to conduct nuclear import of HuR downstream of
AMPK [26]. Our results showed that pyrvinium pamoate
improved the binding of importin α1 and HuR under
both doxorubicin-stressed and control conditions (Figure
3C), implying a potential involvement of importin α1 in
pyrvinium pamoate-mediated HuR nuclear import. Since
AMPK activates importin α1 by promoting acetylation
at K22 as well as phosphorylation at S105 [26], we
examined whether constitutive expression of importin 1
mutated at these sites (K22R/S105A dual mutant) would
block the effect of pyrvinium pamoate. Our results showed
that constitutive overexpression of importin α1 in 5637
cells weakened doxorubicin-induced HuR cytoplasmic
accumulation, and the treatment of pyrvinium pamoate

Pyrvinium pamoate potentiates genotoxic agents
Given that HuR played a critical role in
chemotherapeutic efficacy and served as a potential target
of pyrvinium pamoate, we sought to test if pyrvinium
pamoate was capable of sensitizing cells to genotoxic
agents. The combinational indices (CIs) at 50% effective
dose or 75% effective dose of agents were calculated
to determine drug interactions. The results showed that
pyrvinium pamoate and genotoxic agents (doxorubicin,
cisplatin, oxaliplatin, vincristine and gemcitabine) were
synergistic in both 5637 and T24 cells (Figure 2A).
When treated the isogenic cells with different
drug combinations, we found that pyrvinium pamoate
lost potency to sensitize chemotherapy (Figure 2B),
suggesting that the synergistic efficacy of pyrvinium
pamoate and chemotherapeutic agents was primarily
dependent on HuR. A 3-D colony formation assay further
showed that a significant improvement of cisplatin
efficacy was observed once pyrvinium pamoate was added
(P < 0.001), although the concentrations of pyrvinium
pamoate and cisplatin were cut by half (Figure 2C, left).
The combined treatment decreased both colony size and
colony number in a significant manner compared to either
pyrvinium pamoate or cisplatin alone (Figure 2C, right).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

45251

Oncotarget

produced a further decrease (Figure 3D). In contrast,
HuR in 5637 cells with the K22R/S105A mutant variant
failed to respond to pyrvinium pamoate regardless of
the activated AMPK status (Figure 3D). These data

suggested that pyrvinium pamoate promoted HuR
nuclear import and thus decreased HuR cytoplasmic
accumulation through activating the AMPK/importin α1
cascade.

Figure 1: Identification of pyrvinium pamoate as an effective inhibitor of HuR. (A) HuR ablation potentiates the efficacy
of genotoxic agents. Left, HuR isogenic cell lines; right, HuR deletion potentiated chemotherapeutic efficacy in 5637 cancer cells.
(B) Pyrvinium pamoate inhibits the UVC-triggered increase of HuR cytoplasmic accumulation in a concentration-dependent manner.
(C) Pyrvinium pamoate blocks genotoxic agent-triggered cytoplasmic translocation of HuR. 5637 cells were treated with different genotoxic
agents alone or in combination with 100 nmol/L of pyrvinium pamoate for 48 h. (D) Pyrvinium pamoate blocks doxorubicin-triggered
cytoplasmic accumulation of HuR by immunofluorescence. (E) HuR-null cells are more resistant to pyrvinium pamoate’s treatment
compared to their wild-type counterparts. IC50s were calculated by GraphPad Prism Software. Dot, mean; bars, standard deviation. CE,
cytoplasmic extracts; WCE, whole-cell extracts; PP, pyrvinium pamoate; CDDP, cisplatin; Oxa, oxaliplatin; Dox, doxorubicin; VCR,
vincristine; Gem, gemcitabine; wt, wild-type; K.O., knockout.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

45252

Oncotarget

Figure 2: Pyrvinium pamoate potentiates genotoxic agents in vitro and in vivo. (A) The synergy of pyrvinium pamoate with
five different genotoxic agents. Combinatorial index values at 50% effective dose (ED50) or 75% effective dose (ED75) were calculated
using CalcuSyn software. (B) HuR is required for the synergy of pyrvinium pamoate with chemotherapeutic agents. Cell viability was
determined, and a two-tailed unpaired t-test was performed. (C) Addition of pyrvinium pamoate enhances chemotherapeutic efficacy in
spheroid growth assays. 5637 cells were exposed to 320 nmol/L of pyrvinium pamoate, 6.8 µmol/L of cisplatin or the combined treatment at
their half concentrations for 15 days. Left, representative spheroids; right, colony number. (D and E) Tumor volume of two primary bladder
cancer xenograft models. Tumor volumes were recorded every other day during treatments (n = 8–12 each group). (F and G) Tumor weight
in mice. Solid tumor weight was measured on day 28 (n = 8–12 each group). Statistical comparisons were performed by One-way ANOVA
analysis. Columns and dots, mean; bars, standard deviation. ns, not significant; *P < 0.05; **P < 0.01; ***P < 0.001. PP, pyrvinium
pamoate; CDDP, cisplatin; Dox, doxorubicin; wt, wild-type; K.O., knockout.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

45253

Oncotarget

Pyrvinium pamoate suppresses HuR nucleocytoplasmic translocation by inhibiting the
Chk1/Cdk1 signaling pathway

(Chk1) plays a vital role in genotoxic stress [27], and its
downstream effector, cyclin-dependent kinase 1 (Cdk1),
is implicated in HuR phosphorylation at S202 (pS202)
[28], we investigated whether pyrvinium pamoate
treatment affected the Chk1/Cdk1 signaling cascade. The
results showed that doxorubicin activated Chk1 at S345,
whereas pyrvinium pamoate inhibited this process in a

Apart from transporter interaction, phosphorylation
of specific HuR amino acids affects its subcellular
translocation as well [11]. Since checkpoint kinase 1

Figure 3: Pyrvinium pamoate activates the AMPK/importin α1 cascade. (A) Pyrvinium pamoate activates AMPK and
decreases HuR cytoplasmic abundance in a dose-dependent manner. (B) Immunofluorescence assays shows that pyrvinium pamoate
inhibits doxorubicin-triggered cytoplasmic translocation of HuR by activating the AMPK pathway. 5637 cells were treated with doxorubicin
(360 nmol/L) for 12 h, followed by indicated treatments (100 nmol/L pyrvinium pamoate, 10 µmol/L compound C and 2 mmol/L AICAR)
for an additional 6 h. Immunofluorescence staining for HuR was performed (magnification, 40×). (C) Pyrvinium pamoate improves the
interaction of HuR and importin α1. Cells transfected with equivalent amount of flag-pcDNA3.1 and myc-importin α1 served as the
negative control. (D) Importin α1 is required for pyrvinium pamoate-mediated HuR nuclear import. 5637 cells were transfected with
pcDNA3.1 or importin α1 (wild-type) or importin α1 (K22R/S105A, dual-site mutation). CE, cytoplasmic extracts; WCE, whole-cell
extracts; Dox, doxorubicin; PP, pyrvinium pamoate; CC, compound C; AICAR, sodium azide, 5-amino-imidazole-4-carboxamide riboside.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

45254

Oncotarget

time- and dose-dependent manner (Figure 4A and 4B).
The weakened phosphorylation of Chk1 at S345 raises
Cdk1 activity by two independent phosphorylation
events: (i) augmented Cdk7-mediated phosphorylation of
Cdk1 at T161, and (ii) attenuated Y15 phosphorylation of
Cdk1 (an inhibitory phosphorylation site) by increasing
phosphatase cdc25C level [29]. We found that both events
contributed to pyrvinium pamoate-mediated the activation
of Cdk1 under doxorubicin-stressed condition, where
pyrvinium pamoate dose-dependently increased Cdk1
phosphorylation at T161 and the expression of cdc25C,
and decreased pY15 Cdk1 phosphorylation (Figure 4A).
This evidence supports the assumption that pyrvinium
pamoate interfered with doxorubicin triggering the
activation of the Chk1/Cdk1 signaling pathway. We next
carried out a rescue assay using a Cdk1 selective inhibitor,
AZD5438. As shown in Figure 4C, pyrvinium pamoate no
longer suppressed doxorubicin-triggered HuR cytoplasmic
accumulation in the presence of AZD5438.
HuR phosphorylation at S202 is the only known
mechanism in Cdk1-regulated HuR translocation [28]. We
found that baseline cytoplasmic HuR was more abundant
in cells expressing the S202A HuR mutant than in cells

with the S202D HuR mutant (Figure 4D). Cells harboring
S202D HuR and HuR wild-type plasmids exhibited a
similar response to treatment with pyrvinium pamoate,
whereas HuR failed to translocate in the presence of
pyrvinium pamoate in cells with non-phosphorylatable
variant HuR (S202A), suggesting that pyrvinium
pamoate suppressed HuR translocation from the nucleus
to the cytoplasm by promoting a Cdk1-dependent
phosphorylation of HuR at S202.

Pyrvinium pamoate augments chemotherapymediated DNA double-strand breaks
Given that DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs) play
a vital role in the toxicity of genotoxic agents, we next
examined whether pyrvinium pamoate enhanced genotoxic
agent-triggered DNA damage. As a specific marker of
DSBs, γH2AX reflects the content of unrepaired DSBs
within cells [30]. Doxorubicin treatment alone triggered
phosphorylation of γH2AX, whereas a much higher level
of γH2AX was observed after pyrvinium pamoate was
added (Figure 5A), suggesting increased DNA damage.
We found that doxorubicin alone markedly triggered

Figure 4: Pyrvinium pamoate interferes with the Chk1/Cdk1 pathway. (A and B) Pyrvinium pamoate suppresses Chk1 and

activated Cdk1 in dose-dependent (A) and time-dependent (B) manners. (C) Cdk1 inhibition rescues pyrvinium pamoate-mediated HuR
cytoplasmic translocation. 5637 cells were treated with doxorubicin (360 nmol/L) for 12 h, followed by treatments with pyrvinium pamoate
(100 nmol/L) and/or AZD5438 (10 µmol/L) for an additional 6 h, respectively. (D) HuR mutation at S202 site affects pyrvinium pamoatemediated inhibition of HuR cytoplasmic translocation. Non, non-treatment; Dox, doxorubicin; PP, pyrvinium pamoate; AZD, AZD5438.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

45255

Oncotarget

DSBs, whereas pyrvinium pamoate potentiated DSBs to
a greater extent. Intriguingly, pyrvinium pamoate did not
induce DSBs as a single agent (Figure 5B), suggesting the
feasibility of pyrvinium pamoate in such a combinatorial
regimen. Furthermore, compound C as well as AZD5438
relieved pyrvinium pamoate-triggered DSBs (Figure 5B),
which additionally demonstrated the dual mechanism
involved in pyrvinium pamoate’s action on HuR.
An alkaline comet assay showed that both
doxorubicin and cisplatin yielded a tail moment; however,
a much longer tail was observed when either of them was
in combination with pyrvinium pamoate (Figure 5C). It
was notable that DSBs enhanced by pyrvinium pamoate
did not result from additive DNA damage, as pyrvinium
pamoate alone seemed insufficient to trigger tail moment
lengthening (Figure 5C).

We also conducted immunohistochemistry on
UCBPDX0615 xenografts, and the results showed
that pyrvinium pamoate inhibited cisplatin-mediated
cytoplasmic accumulation of HuR in a durable manner
(Figure 5D). Meanwhile, addition of pyrvinium pamoate
markedly increased cisplatin-triggered DSBs, as indicated
by significantly increased percentage of γH2AX-positive
tumor cells (Figure 5E).

Pyrvinium pamoate suppresses HuR-mediated
stabilization of DNA repair genes
Two repair systems, HR and NHEJ occur in cells
suffering DSBs. We asked if pyrvinium pamoate could
downregulate the expression profile of DNA damage
repair factors. A panel of differentially expressed genes

Figure 5: Pyrvinium pamoate enhances DNA double-strand breaks in vitro and in vivo. (A) Pyrvinium pamoate enhances

doxorubicin-induced DNA double-strand breaks in 5637 cells as indicated by increased γH2AX levels. (B) AMPK or Cdk1 inhibition
weakens pyrvinium pamoate-mediated increase of γH2AX levels during doxorubicin’s treatment. Immunofluorescence assay were
conducted for γH2AX staining (magnification, 100×). Left, representative images; right, quantiﬁcation of γH2AX foci. (C) Pyrvinium
pamoate strengthens DNA double-strand breaks in an alkaline comet assay. H2O2 at concentration of 200 μmol/L was used as a positive
control. Average tail moments were measured from 50 comet tails of each group. Columns, mean; bars, standard deviation. (D) Pyrvinium
pamoate reverses cisplatin-triggered HuR cytoplasmic accumulation in tumors from the primary bladder tumor xenograft mouse model
(UCBPDX0615). Representative images were shown (magnification, 20×). (E) Addition of pyrvinium pamoate leads to a significantly
higher level of γH2AX in tumor tissues. Percentage of γH2AX positive cells in tumors from xenograft mouse model (UCBPDX0615)
was shown. Columns, mean; error bars, standard deviation. *P < 0.05; **P < 0.01; ***P < 0.001. CDDP, cisplatin; Dox, doxorubicin; PP,
pyrvinium pamoate; CC, compound C; AZD, AZD5438.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

45256

Oncotarget

(enzymes and their regulatory proteins) necessary for
HR or NHEJ was detected. The expression of most genes
encoding DNA repair factors tended to increase under
genotoxic (doxorubicin) stress (Supplementary Table S1),
which was consistent with previous studies [31, 32].
However, the expression of these up-regulated ones were
decreased once pyrvinium pamoate was added, among
which several (breast cancer susceptibility gene (BRCA2),
DNA ligase IV (LIG4) as well as recombinase RAD51)
exhibited significantly decreased P-values as compared
with doxorubicin alone group (Supplementary Table S1).
We further confirmed the dose-dependent effect of
pyrvinium pamoate-mediated downregulation of BRCA2,
LIG4 and RAD51 under genotoxic stress (Figure 6A).
HuR typically modulates its target gene expression
by affecting mRNA stability [11]. We hypothesized that
pyrvinium pamoate might regulate several genes involved
in DNA repair through affecting their mRNA stability. As
shown in Figure 6B, pyrvinium pamoate treatment led to a
doubled rate of mRNA degradation of BRCA2, LIG4 and
RAD51, three critical genes in DNA repair. When HuR
was absent, BRCA2 and LIG4 mRNAs degraded at an
much accelerated rate (10.9 h vs. 5.2 h, 7.3 h vs. 3.8 h), but
not RAD51 (14.8 h vs. 15.5 h). To further exclude other
possible mechanisms behind pyrvinium pamoate-triggered
accelerated degradation of these three mRNAs, we also
treated HuR-null cells with pyrvinium pamoate, and found
that pyrvinium pamoate did not result in degradation of
BRCA2 and LIG4 in HuR-null cells to a great extent
as compared with wild-type counterparts or untreated
HuR-null cells. However, pyrvinium pamoate still led
to degradation of RAD51 mRNA even in the absence of
HuR (15.5 h vs. 6.3 h). These results support the notion
that pyrvinium pamoate promoted degradation of BRCA2
and LIG4 mRNAs in a HuR-dependent manner, whereas
it possibly affected RAD51 mRNA stability in a HuRindependent manner.
Considering that NHEJ is the major pathway of
DSB repair [33] and LIG4 is the key factor in this process,
we next studied LIG4 in detail. Our results showed that
HuR deletion led to a decrease of LIG4 (Figure 6C,
upper), indicating that HuR might positively regulate
LIG4. Additionally, pyrvinium pamoate at a relatively
higher concentration diminished LIG4 protein level in
the presence of doxorubicin (Figure 6C, lower). These
results indicated that pyrvinium pamoate suppressed
LIG4 expression in a HuR-dependent manner, and
LIG4 might be a novel target of HuR. To determine the
molecular interaction between HuR and LIG4 mRNA,
we cloned the whole sequence of the LIG4 3ʹUTR into
a luciferase construct (Figure 6D). Our results showed
that cells harboring a LIG4 3ʹUTR-containing vector
responded to doxorubicin and exhibited a two-fold higher
luciferase activity when compared with control cells
that lacked the 3ʹUTR. However, the elevated luciferase
activity remarkably decreased once pyrvinium pamoate
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

was added, suggesting that HuR and its downstream LIG4
could be regulated by a HuR inhibitor, such as pyrvinium
pamoate.
To elucidate the potential benefit of pyrvinium
pamoate-combined strategy in UCB, we detected the
expression of several clinical prognostic biomarkers
(PIK3CA, AURKA, PFKFB4, and HRAS) and responsive
biomarkers (Mre11, BRCA1, MDR1) in UCBPDX0615
xenografts. We found that pyrvinium pamoate combined
with cisplatin inhibited expression of all the four
prognostic biomarkers compared to the vehicle control
groups (Supplementary Figure S6). Additionally, the
combined regimen led to a significant decrease of the
three responsive biomarkers compared to cisplatin-treated
group (P < 0.01), indicating an improvement of response
to cisplatin therapy by addition of pyrvinium pamoate
(Supplementary Figure S6). In this study, we clearly
elucidated a paradigm whereby systemic modulation of
cytoplasmic abundance of HuR is sufficient to sensitize
cancer cells to chemotherapy (Figure 6E).

Discussion
The RNA binding protein HuR alters its subcellular
distribution in response to genotoxic stresses (i.e.,
radiotherapy and chemotherapy). HuR cytoplasmic
accumulation is correlated to poor prognosis of bladder
cancer patients [23, 24]. However, no HuR selective
inhibitors are available for clinical use until now, leaving it
hard to elucidate the impact of HuR on current therapy. In
this study, we identified an FDA-approved drug pyrvinium
pamoate as a novel HuR inhibitor. We found that
pyrvinium pamoate inhibited cytoplasmic accumulation of
HuR by a dual mechanism involving the AMPK/importin
α1 cascade and the Chk1/Cdk1 pathway. The synergy
of pyrvinium pamoate and first-line chemotherapies led
to elevated double-strand breaks and blocked the DNA
damage response, in part, by targeting HuR.
Given the critical role of HuR in the stabilization
of various mRNAs of survival cargo, HuR-interfering
strategy should have potential in cancer therapy. Three
compounds that inhibit the binding of HuR and its
downstream mRNAs were first described in 2007 [15];
however, these compounds exhibited unexpected offtarget effects [34, 35]. Recently, a cluster of compounds
that disrupted HuR-ARE interaction were identified by
a fluorescence polarization assay [36]. Unfortunately,
limited efficacy in cells hinders their further preclinical
evaluation. A possible explanation for this is that HuR
modifications are hard to simulate in a fluorescence
polarization assay. In this study, we set up a cell-based
and ARE-based luciferase screening assay that mimics the
stress response in cancer cells, and further characterized
pyrvinium pamoate as an effective HuR inhibitor. The
pivotal role of HuR in pyrvinium pamoate-mediated
function was evidenced by selective toxicity of pyrvinium
45257

Oncotarget

pamoate or a combined therapy in a pair of isogenic cells
(Figure 1E and 2B).
Modulation of HuR subcellular distribution is a
complicated process [26, 37–39]. In this study, we found
that importin α1 participated in HuR nuclear import by
pyrvinium pamoate, and this was partially dependent on
activation of the AMPK/importin α1 cascade (Figure  3).
Previous studies revealed that the AMPK activator
AICAR decreased cytoplasmic HuR accumulation under
UVC stimulation [26]. However, AMPK activation alone
seems insufficient to reverse genotoxic agent-triggered
HuR cytoplasmic accumulation (Figure 3C). This may
be attributed to different modifications on HuR under
different stimuli. UVC exposure activated p38, which
leads to phosphorylated HuR at T118 and promotes HuR
cytoplasmic translocation [40]. In contrast, genotoxic agents
seldom activate p38. Under DNA-damaging conditions, the
Chk1/Cdk1 signaling pathway is thought to be indispensable
for HuR modification and nuclear import [29, 41], as pS202
HuR forms a stable complex with 14-3–3θ [28]. Inhibition
of Cdk1 by activated Chk1 caused a decrease in pS202 HuR,

while agents, such as pyrvinium pamoate, could reverse this
process through inhibiting Chk1 (Figure 4).
HuR regulates nearly 4% of transcript encoding
proteins implicated in cell cycle, cell survival, division,
migration and angiogenesis [42]. However, whether HuR
is implicated in DNA damage response has not been
detailedly defined. We found that the expression of many
factors participated in homologous recombination and
non-homologous end joining was markedly increased
by doxorubicin, whereas addition of pyrvinium pamoate
significantly decreased their expression (Supplementary
Table S1). Among these HuR post-transcriptionally
regulated mRNAs, LIG4 was the most striking one
due to its potent anti-tumor effect [43]. Our half-life
analysis and luciferase assay proved that HuR-recognized
motifs exist in the 3ʹUTR of LIG4 mRNA, unveiling a
novel mechanism of acute non-homologous end joining
activation under genotoxic stress. Because HuR activation
during DNA damage response is also correlated to cell
cycle regulator expression [19–22], interfering with HuR
is a promising strategy to combat cancer.

Figure 6: Pyrvinium pamoate suppresses HuR-mediated stabilization of DNA repair genes. (A) Pyrvinium pamoate dosedependently inhibits doxorubicin-induced overexpression of BRCA2, LIG4 and RAD51 genes. The relative changes in gene expression
were expressed using untreated cells at 100%. (B) Pyrvinium pamoate decreases mRNA stability of BRCA2, LIG4 and RAD51 genes. (C)
Pyrvinium pamoate decreases LIG4 protein level in a dose-dependent manner. Upper, LIG4 expression; lower, decreased LIG4 expression
by pyrvinium pamoate. (D) Pyrvinium pamoate inhibits doxorubicin-induced HuR binding to LIG4 3ʹUTR. 5637 cells were transiently
transfected with either empty vector pLuc reporter plasmid or a 3ʹUTR reporter construct. Dots or Columns, mean of four independent
replicates; bars, standard deviation. Dox, doxorubicin; PP, pyrvinium pamoate; wt, wild-type; K.O., knockout. (E) Schematic diagram of
pyrvinium pamoate in potentiating chemotherapeutic efficacy. Grey proteins refer to inactive state and red ones refer to active state.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

45258

Oncotarget

Lysates were then incubated with 10% NP-40 and
centrifuged at 16000 g for 15 min. The supernatant was
collected.

We reported the strong synergy of pyrvinium
pamoate and first-line chemotherapy in preclinical
bladder cancer mouse models. When combined with
the chemotherapy drug cisplatin, pyrvinium pamoate
significantly contributed to a durable cytostatic tumor
growth response (Figure 2D). The UCBPDX0826
was derived from primary bladder tumors, while
UCBPDX0615 was derived from tumors undergoing
neo-adjuvant chemotherapy. Consistent with parent
tumor characteristics, the UCBPDX0826 xenografts
demonstrated a better response to cisplatin monotherapy,
whereas UCBPDX0615 showed poor response to cisplatin.
Most strikingly, pyrvinium pamoate-additive regimen
dramatically sensitized UCBPDX0615 to cisplatin and
efficiently enhanced tumor regression. These results
support the notion that a combined regimen of pyrvinium
pamoate and chemotherapy is highly effective, particularly
to treat resistant or unresponsive tumors. Notably, the mice
bearing primary bladder tumor xenografts suffered no
decrease of body weight or other obvious side effects at
tested dosages. The safety of our HuR interfering strategy
was also supported by other studies [35, 44], suggesting
that HuR is a safe target. A series of bladder cancer clinical
biomarkers were inhibited by the addition of pyrvinium
pamoate (Supplementary Figure 6), suggesting a potential
clinical benefit of pyrvinium pamoate-addition regimen.

Whole-cell extracts
Bladder cancer cells were treated with drugs
for indicated time intervals and then lysed in cold
radioimmunoprecipitation assay buffer (RIPA buffer;
20  mmol/L Tris, 2 mmol/L ethylenediaminetetraacetic
acid, 1% Triton X-100, 1% sodium deoxycholic acid and
0.1% sodium dodecyl sulfate) containing a proteinase
inhibitor cocktail. Lysates were centrifuged at 12,000 rpm
for 20 min at 4°C and the supernatant was collected.

Drug sensitivity and growth assay
Drug sensitivity assay
The effect of drugs on cell viability was measured
using CellTiter 96® AQueous One Solution from Promega
(Madison, WI) as previously described [45]. The IC50
values were calculated by Prism 5 (GraphPad Software,
La Jolla, CA). The drug combinations were performed
with fixed drug ratios (i.e., the IC50 ratio), and the
combination index (CI) as described by Chou-Talalay
[46] was generated using CalcuSyn software (Version 2;
Biosoft). Combinations with CIs < 1 were considered to
be synergistic.

Materials and Methods	
Detailed protocols are provided in Supplementary
Materials and Methods.

Anchorage independence growth assay
5637 cells suspended in 0.35% low melting point
agarose/growth medium were planted onto 6-well plates
(500 cells/well) with a 0.6% agarose underlay. Growth
medium containing different drugs or drug pairs was then
added on the top of agarose. Medium was changed every
three days for total 15 days.

Cell culture
Bladder cancer cell lines 5637 and T24 were
purchased from American Type Culture Collection
(Manassas, VA) and cultured in RPMI-1640 (Gibco,
Grand Island, NY) and McCoy’s 5A Medium (Sigma, St
Louis, MO), respectively. The 293T cell line was cultured
in Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle Medium (DMEM; Gibco).
All the cells were grown in the media containing 10% fetal
bovine serum (Gibco) and 1% penicillin/streptomycin
(Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA) at 37°C under a humidified 95:5
(%; v/v) mixture of air and CO2. Cells were authenticated
by short tandem repeat analysis before use.

Luciferase assay
Luciferase assays were performed as previously
described [22]. Briefly, PCR products of the AU-rich
element or full-length LIG4 3ʹUTR were purified and
cloned into modified pGL3-basic vector. 5637 cells were
transfected with these plasmids, followed by further drug
treatments at 48 h post-transfection. 5637 cells transfected
with modified pGL3 that contains firefly luciferase but
lacks the 3ʹUTR were used as the control.

Cytolasmic and whole-cell extracts
Cytoplasmic extracts
Bladder cancer cells were collected using trypsin
digestion and incubated on ice for 15 min in cytoplasmic
lysis buffer (10 mmol/L HEPES-NaOH, 10 mmol/L KCl,
1.5 mmol/L MgCl2 and 0.5 mmol/L beta-mercaptoethanol)
supplemented with protease and phosphatase inhibitors.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Immunofluorescence and Immunohistochemistry
The translocation of HuR was examined by
immunofluorescence assays. See Supplementary Materials
and Methods for detail protocols.

45259

Oncotarget

Alkaline comet assay

(16ZR1410400 and 14DZ2270100), the National Natural
Science Foundation of China (81101683 and 81330049),
the National Basic Research Program of China
(2012CB910400), and the State Scholarship Council
(201506145040).

The 5637 cells were treated with indicated drugs for
48 h and collected. The rate of DNA damage was measured
using Comet assay kit (Trevigen, Gaithersburg, MD)
following the manufacturer’s instructions. Imaged were
taken by a fluorescence microscope (Leica, Bensheim,
Germany).

References
 1.	 Iyer G, Milowsky MI, Bajorin DF. Novel strategies for
treating relapsed/refractory urothelial carcinoma. Expert
Rev Anticancer Ther. 2010; 10:1917–1932.

PCR and quantitative real-time PCR
The total RNA from treated cells was collected
using RNAiso plus (TaKaRa Biotechnology, Dalian,
China). RNA was then converted to cDNA using the
PrimeScript RT reagent kit (TaKaRa). Quantitative realtime PCR was performed according to the manufacturer’s
instructions of the SYBR® Premix Ex Taq kit (TaKaRa)
using the 96-well Thermal iCycler (Biorad, Hercules, CA).
Sequences of primers are listed in Supplementary Table S2
and Supplementary Table S3.

  2.	 Gupta S, Mahipal A. Role of systemic chemotherapy in
urothelial urinary bladder cancer. Cancer Control. 2013;
20:200–210.
  3.	 Sternberg CN, Bellmunt J, Sonpavde G, Siefker-Radtke AO,
Stadler WM, Bajorin DF, Dreicer R, George DJ,
Milowsky MI, Theodorescu D, Vaughn DJ, Galsky MD,
Soloway MS, Quinn DI and International Consultation
on Urologic Disease-European Association of Urology
Consultation on Bladder C. ICUD-EAU International
Consultation on Bladder Cancer 2012: Chemotherapy for
urothelial carcinoma-neoadjuvant and adjuvant settings. Eur
Urol. 2013; 63:58–66.

Analysis of mRNA stability
mRNA stability was determined by measuring the
amount of mRNA at various time points after actinomycin
D was added [22]. 5637 cells were exposed to pyrvinium
pamoate (100 nmol/L) for 24 h, followed by treatment
with 5 µmol/L of actinomycin D for indicated time points
(0, 2, 4, 8 h). The threshold cycle number for target mRNA
was normalized to that of β-actin, and the values were
converted to a linear scale. All assays were performed at
least three times from independent RNA preparations.

  4.	 Cathomas R, De Santis M, Galsky MD. First-line treatment
of metastatic disease: cisplatin-ineligible patients. Hematol
Oncol Clin North Am. 2015; 29:329–340, x.
  5.	 Maeda T, Takahashi A, Hirobe M, Honma I, Masumori N,
Itoh N, Tsukamoto T. Adverse events of MVAC
chemotherapy in patients with advanced urothelial cancer
of the bladder. Hinyokika Kiyo. 2007; 53:213–219.
 6.	 Jekimovs C, Bolderson E, Suraweera A, Adams M,
O’Byrne KJ, Richard DJ. Chemotherapeutic compounds
targeting the DNA double-strand break repair pathways: the
good, the bad, and the promising. Front Oncol. 2014; 4:86.

Statistical analysis
The data are presented as the mean ± standard
deviation. Statistical tests were performed using
Microsoft Excel and GraphPad Prism Software version
5.0 (GraphPad Software Inc., San Diego, CA). For two
group comparisons, a two-tailed unpaired t-test was used.
For multiple group comparisons, a One-way ANOVA was
used. P < 0.05 was considered as significant.

  7.	 Bouwman P, Jonkers J. The effects of deregulated DNA
damage signalling on cancer chemotherapy response and
resistance. Nat Rev Cancer. 2012; 12:587–598.
  8.	 O’Grady S, Finn SP, Cuffe S, Richard DJ, O’Byrne KJ,
Barr MP. The role of DNA repair pathways in cisplatin
resistant lung cancer. Cancer Treat Rev. 2014;
40:1161–1170.

Acknowledgments

  9.	 O’Shaughnessy J, Osborne C, Pippen JE, Yoffe M, Patt D,
Rocha C, Koo IC, Sherman BM, Bradley C. Iniparib plus
chemotherapy in metastatic triple-negative breast cancer. N
Engl J Med. 2011; 364:205–214.

The authors thank Douglas Joubert, NIH Library
Writing Center, and Dr. Stefan Siwko, Texas A&M Health
Science Center, for manuscript editing assistance.

10.	 Montano R, Chung I, Garner KM, Parry D, Eastman A.
Preclinical development of the novel Chk1 inhibitor
SCH900776 in combination with DNA-damaging agents
and antimetabolites. Mol Cancer Ther. 2012; 11:427–438.

Conflicts of Interest
No potential conflicts of interest were disclosed.

11.	 Kim HH, Abdelmohsen K, Gorospe M. Regulation of HuR by
DNA Damage Response Kinases. J Nucleic Acids. 2010; 2010.

Grant Support

12.	 Dutertre M, Lambert S, Carreira A, Amor-Gueret M,
Vagner S. DNA damage: RNA-binding proteins protect
from near and far. Trends Biochem Sci. 2014; 39:
141–149.

This work is supported by the Science and
Technology Commission of Shanghai Municipality
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

45260

Oncotarget

13.	 Brennan CM, Steitz JA. HuR and mRNA stability. Cell Mol
Life Sci. 2001; 58:266–277.

26.	 Wang W, Yang X, Kawai T, Lopez de Silanes I, MazanMamczarz K, Chen P, Chook YM, Quensel C, Kohler M,
Gorospe M. AMP-activated protein kinase-regulated
phosphorylation and acetylation of importin alpha1:
involvement in the nuclear import of RNA-binding protein
HuR. J Biol Chem. 2004; 279:48376–48388.

14.	 Fan XC, Steitz JA. HNS, a nuclear-cytoplasmic shuttling
sequence in HuR. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1998;
95:15293–15298.
15.	 Meisner NC, Hintersteiner M, Mueller K, Bauer R,
Seifert  JM, Naegeli HU, Ottl J, Oberer L, Guenat C,
Moss S, Harrer N, Woisetschlaeger M, Buehler C, et al.
Identification and mechanistic characterization of lowmolecular-weight inhibitors for HuR. Nat Chem Biol. 2007;
3:508–515.

27.	 Pouliot LM, Chen YC, Bai J, Guha R, Martin SE,
Gottesman MM, Hall MD. Cisplatin sensitivity mediated
by WEE1 and CHK1 is mediated by miR-155 and the miR15 family. Cancer Res. 2012; 72:5945–5955.
28.	 Kim HH, Abdelmohsen K, Lal A, Pullmann R, Jr.,
Yang X, Galban S, Srikantan S, Martindale JL, Blethrow J,
Shokat KM, Gorospe M. Nuclear HuR accumulation through
phosphorylation by Cdk1. Genes Dev. 2008; 22:1804–1815.

16.	 Kim HH, Gorospe M. Phosphorylated HuR shuttles in
cycles. Cell Cycle. 2008; 7:3124–3126.
17.	 Gorospe M. HuR in the mammalian genotoxic response:
post-transcriptional multitasking. Cell Cycle. 2003;
2:412–414.

29.	 Stark GR, Taylor WR. Control of the G2/M transition. Mol
Biotechnol. 2006; 32:227–248.
30.	 Huang X, Halicka HD, Darzynkiewicz Z. Detection of
histone H2AX phosphorylation on Ser-139 as an indicator
of DNA damage (DNA double-strand breaks). Curr Protoc
Cytom. 2004; Chapter 7:Unit 7 27.

18.	Hashimoto M, Tsugawa T, Kawagishi H, Asai A,
Sugimoto M. Loss of HuR leads to senescence-like cytokine
induction in rodent fibroblasts by activating NF-kappaB.
Biochim Biophys Acta. 2014; 1840:3079–3087.

31.	 Kumaraswamy S, Chinnaiyan P, Shankavaram UT, Lu X,
Camphausen K, Tofilon PJ. Radiation-induced gene
translation profiles reveal tumor type and cancer-specific
components. Cancer Res. 2008; 68:3819–3826.

19.	 Mazan-Mamczarz K, Galban S, Lopez de Silanes I,
Martindale JL, Atasoy U, Keene JD, Gorospe M. RNAbinding protein HuR enhances p53 translation in response
to ultraviolet light irradiation. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A.
2003; 100:8354–8359.

32.	 Powley IR, Kondrashov A, Young LA, Dobbyn HC,
Hill K, Cannell IG, Stoneley M, Kong YW, Cotes JA,
Smith GC, Wek R, Hayes C, Gant TW, et al. Translational
reprogramming following UVB irradiation is mediated
by DNA-PKcs and allows selective recruitment to the
polysomes of mRNAs encoding DNA repair enzymes.
Genes Dev. 2009; 23:1207–1220.

20.	 Wang W, Furneaux H, Cheng H, Caldwell MC, Hutter D,
Liu Y, Holbrook N, Gorospe M. HuR regulates p21 mRNA
stabilization by UV light. Mol Cell Biol. 2000; 20:760–769.
21.	 Westmark CJ, Bartleson VB, Malter JS. RhoB mRNA
is stabilized by HuR after UV light. Oncogene. 2005;
24:502–511.

33.	 Chapman JR, Taylor MR, Boulton SJ. Playing the end
game: DNA double-strand break repair pathway choice.
Mol Cell. 2012; 47:497–510.

22.	 Lal S, Burkhart RA, Beeharry N, Bhattacharjee V,
Londin ER, Cozzitorto JA, Romeo C, Jimbo M, Norris ZA,
Yeo CJ, Sawicki JA, Winter JM, Rigoutsos I, et al. HuR
posttranscriptionally regulates WEE1: implications for the
DNA damage response in pancreatic cancer cells. Cancer
Res. 2014; 74:1128–1140.

34.	 McDaniel R, Ebert-Khosla S, Fu H, Hopwood DA,
Khosla C. Engineered biosynthesis of novel polyketides:
influence of a downstream enzyme on the catalytic
specificity of a minimal aromatic polyketide synthase. Proc
Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1994; 91:11542–11546.

23.	 Liang PI, Li WM, Wang YH, Wu TF, Wu WR, Liao AC,
Shen KH, Wei YC, Hsing CH, Shiue YL, Huang HY,
Hsu HP, Chen LT, et al. HuR cytoplasmic expression is
associated with increased cyclin A expression and poor
outcome with upper urinary tract urothelial carcinoma.
BMC Cancer. 2012; 12:611.

35.	 Tatsuta K, Yoshimoto T, Gunji H. Total synthesis of MS444, a myosin light chain kinase inhibitor. J Antibiot
(Tokyo). 1997; 50:289–290.
36.	 Wu X, Lan L, Wilson DM, Marquez RT, Tsao WC, Gao P,
Roy A, Turner BA, McDonald P, Tunge JA, Rogers SA,
Dixon DA, Aube J, et al. Identification and Validation
of Novel Small Molecule Disruptors of HuR-mRNA
Interaction. ACS Chem Biol. 2015; 10:1476–1484.

24.	 Miyata Y, Watanabe S, Sagara Y, Mitsunari K, Matsuo T,
Ohba K, Sakai H. High expression of HuR in cytoplasm,
but not nuclei, is associated with malignant aggressiveness
and prognosis in bladder cancer. PLoS One. 2013;
8:e59095.

37.	Guttinger S, Muhlhausser P, Koller-Eichhorn R,
Brennecke J, Kutay U. Transportin2 functions as importin
and mediates nuclear import of HuR. Proc Natl Acad Sci U
S A. 2004; 101:2918–2923.

25.	 Tomitsuka E, Kita K, Esumi H. An anticancer agent,
pyrvinium pamoate inhibits the NADH-fumarate reductase
system—a unique mitochondrial energy metabolism in
tumour microenvironments. Journal of biochemistry. 2012;
152:171–183.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

38.	 Rebane A, Aab A, Steitz JA. Transportins 1 and 2 are
redundant nuclear import factors for hnRNP A1 and HuR.
RNA. 2004; 10:590–599.
45261

Oncotarget

39.	 Zou T, Liu L, Rao JN, Marasa BS, Chen J, Xiao L, Zhou H,
Gorospe M, Wang JY. Polyamines modulate the subcellular
localization of RNA-binding protein HuR through AMPactivated protein kinase-regulated phosphorylation
and acetylation of importin alpha1. Biochem J. 2008;
409:389–398.

43.	Srivastava M, Nambiar M, Sharma S, Karki SS,
Goldsmith G, Hegde M, Kumar S, Pandey M, Singh RK,
Ray P, Natarajan R, Kelkar M, De A, et al. An inhibitor
of nonhomologous end-joining abrogates double-strand
break repair and impedes cancer progression. Cell. 2012;
151:1474–1487.

40.	 Gurgis FMS, Yeung YT, Tang MXM, Heng B, Buckland M,
Ammit AJ, Haapasalo J, Haapasalo H, Guillemin GJ,
Grewal T, Munoz L. The p38-MK2-HuR pathway
potentiates EGFRvIII-IL-1 beta-driven IL-6 secretion in
glioblastoma cells. Oncogene. 2015; 34:2934–2942.

44.	 Giannini G, Penco S, Pisano C, Riccioni T, Nasini G,
Candiani G. Chrysanthones, a new source of fungal
metabolites with potential antitumor and antiangiogenesis
properties. Fitoterapia. 2003; 74:323–327.
45.	 Wang J, Hu K, Guo J, Cheng F, Lv J, Jiang W, Lu W,
Liu J, Pang X, Liu M. Suppression of KRas-mutant cancer
through the combined inhibition of KRAS with PLK1 and
ROCK. Nature communications. 2016; 7:11363.

41.	 Ali AY, Abedini MR, Tsang BK. The oncogenic phosphatase
PPM1D confers cisplatin resistance in ovarian carcinoma
cells by attenuating checkpoint kinase 1 and p53 activation.
Oncogene. 2012; 31:2175–2186.

46.	 Chou TC. Theoretical basis, experimental design, and
computerized simulation of synergism and antagonism in
drug combination studies. Pharmacological reviews. 2006;
58:621–681.

42.	 Bakheet T, Williams BR, Khabar KS. ARED 3.0: the large
and diverse AU-rich transcriptome. Nucleic Acids Res.
2006; 34:D111–114.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

45262

Oncotarget

