Oncotarget, Vol. 7, No. 29

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Research Paper

Sunitinib-induced morpho-functional changes and drug effectiveness
in malignant solitary fibrous tumours
Rosalin D. Spagnuolo1, Silvia Brich2,1, Fabio Bozzi1, Elena Conca1, Chiara Castelli3,
Marcella Tazzari3, Roberta Maestro4, Monica Brenca4, Ambra V. Gualeni5,
Annunziata Gloghini5, Silvia Stacchiotti6, Marco A. Pierotti7, Silvana Pilotti1,*,
Tiziana Negri1,*
1

 aboratory of Experimental Molecular Pathology, Department of Diagnostic Pathology and Laboratory, Fondazione IRCCS
L
Istituto Nazionale dei Tumori, Milan, Italy

2

MOSE-DEA, University of Trieste, Trieste, Italy

3

 epartment of Experimental Oncology and Molecular Medicine, Unit of Immunotherapy of Human Tumours, Fondazione
D
IRCCS Istituto Nazionale dei Tumori, Milan, Italy

4

Experimental Oncology 1, Centro di Riferimento Oncologico, Aviano, Italy

5

Department of Diagnostic Pathology and Laboratory, Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Nazionale dei Tumori, Milan, Italy

6

 dult Mesenchymal Tumour and Rare Cancer Medical Oncology Unit, Cancer Medicine Department, Fondazione IRCCS
A
Istituto Nazionale dei Tumori, Milan, Italy

7

Scientific Directorate, Fondazione Città della Speranza, Padua, Italy

*

These authors have contributed equally and share senior authorship

Correspondence to: S
 ilvana Pilotti, email: silvana.pilotti@istitutotumori.mi.it
	
Tiziana Negri, email: tiziana.negri2@istitutotumori.mi.it
Keywords: malignant solitary fibrous tumours, efficacy of sunitinib, autophagy, immune cells
Received: August 25, 2015	

Accepted: January 22, 2016	

Published: February 20, 2016

ABSTRACT
Sunitinib improves the outcomes of patients with solitary fibrous tumours (SFTs).
The aim of this study was to investigate and contextualise sunitinib-induced morphofunctional changes in order to gain insights into the drug’s mechanism of action.
To this end, four surgical specimens obtained from two sunitinib-responsive
patients with malignant SFT, and one primary cell culture obtained from fresh tumoral
tissue and its stabilised cell line, were studied by means of immunohistochemistry,
bright field in situ hybridisation, immunofluorescence/confocal microscopy, and
biochemistry.
The post-sunitinib surgical samples were characterised by two biologically
relevant morpho-functional changes: clear areas and necrotic foci. The first were
associated with the attenuation/loss of PDGFRB expression and decreased mTOR
signalling, and corresponded to a pathological response. The second were associated
with the over-expression of PDGFRB and VEGFA, strong mTOR signalling activation,
and the appearance of HIF1α expression, hallmarks of pathological progression.
The analysis clearly showed that sunitinib reduces the vascular supply network and
inhibits tumoral cells. It also either induces autophagy, thus favouring drug response,
or impairs autophagy as a result of lysosome sequestration, thus favouring disease
progression. These distinct autophagic events were associated with different myeloid
immune contextures. Finally, we also found that PDGFRB is one of the components
of a complex that includes Beclin 1 and VPS34.
The results of these tissue-based analyses provide new insights into sunitinib’s
mechanism of action in SFT patients.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

45015

Oncotarget

INTRODUCTION

patients with malignant SFT, and evaluated the characteristics
of one tumour tissue specimen obtained from one of the
patients before sunitinib treatment. No pre-sunitinib tissue
was available from the other patient, but she provided tumour
specimens taken after a first period of sunitinib treatment and
after a sunitinib rechallenge.
The main post-sunitinib changes in both patients
were rare, small (0.3–0.6 cm in diameter), randomly
arranged and highly depleted cellular areas enriched
in proteinaceous matrix (Figure 1A) and very frequent
clear areas of sparsely distributed tumoral cells with
cytoplasmic microvesicular alterations surrounded by
more crowded cells. In some cases, the central areas were
replaced by empty cores that had a twisted appearance
at low magnification (Figure 1B). The empty cores were
occasionally enlarged and filled by tumoral cells with
picnotic nuclei, an inflammatory component and necrotic
spots (Figure 1C) or, more frequently, entirely filled by
necrosis (Figure 1D).
In order to investigate the effects of sunitinib on
tumour cells and vessels, the clear areas and necrotic foci
were compared with each other and with the sunitinibnaïve samples from patient No. 1. IHC showed decreased
PDGFRB expression (Figure 2A) in all of the areas
of the treated samples except those with necrotic foci.
Remarkably, the tumoral cells surrounding the areas of
necrosis expressed more PDGFRB protein as revealed by
immunohistochemistry (IHC), and PDGFRB mRNA as
revealed by in situ hybridisation (ISH) than those in the
clear areas (Figure 2B). Furthermore, the cell boundary
immediately encircling the necrotic areas showed HIF1α
up-regulation (Figure 2B).
The expression of VEGFR2 (a marker of capillary
endothelial cells) and nestin (a marker of pericytes) was
significantly decreased in all of the post-sunitinib samples
(Supplementary Figure 1), thus corroborating the activity
of sunitinib on the tumour micro-environment.
As there was insufficient cryopreserved material
to verify the phosphorylation status of PDGFRB and
VEGFR2 by means of immunoprecipitation or phosphoRTK arrays, we investigated the phosphorylation of the
mTOR effectors S6 and 4E-BP1 as indirect markers of
RTK activation. They were more phosphorylated in the
post-sunitinib samples with necrotic foci than in those
with clear areas (Figure 3A).
As PDGFRB and VEGFR2 are sustained by an
autocrine/paracrine activation loop [4], and VEGFA
can contribute to PDGFRB activation [27, 28], we
investigated PDGFB and VEGFA expression by means of
qRT-PCR. The level of PDGFB expression was the same
in the post-sunitinib samples (regardless of whether they
were characterised by clear areas or necrotic foci) but, in
line with the presence of high HIF1α levels, the samples
with necrotic foci showed increased VEGFA expression
(data not shown), a finding that was confirmed by WB
(Figure 3B).

Solitary fibrous tumours (SFTs) are ubiquitous but
rare soft tissue sarcomas bearing the NAB2/STAT6 fusion
gene that are characterised by a spectrum of “usual”,
“malignant” and “dedifferentiated” variants [1–3]. Most
SFTs fall into the so-called “usual” category and can be
cured by means of complete surgical resection, but 10–15%
behave aggressively and lead to local recurrences and/
or distant metastases. Advanced SFTs are sensitive
to sunitinib [4–8], although the rare dedifferentiated
variant, which is currently regarded as a genetically
reprogrammed, highly instable SFT [9], seems to be less
sensitive to anti-angiogenic agents [4, 10].
Other drugs such as bevacizumab, sorafenib,
pazopanib and IGF1R inhibitors [5, 6, 11–14] have
also proved to be efficacious in treating advanced
SFTs, but the complementary nature of the receptor
tyrosine kinases (RTKs) activated in SFTs and the RTKs
inhibited by sunitinib [5] suggests that sunitinib should
be more effective. Moreover, stromal components such
as the PDGFRB-expressing pericytes and the VEGFR2expressing endothelial cells may be further targets [4].
Finally, it has recently been pointed out that the tumour
immune contexture of SFTs changes in response to
sunitinib, and that the host immune response contributes to
the drug’s efficacy [15]. However, the antitumoral efficacy
of sunitinib is transient, and it can be hypothesised that the
reduced blood flow and autophagy promoted by prolonged
treatment act as adaptive mechanisms that ultimately lead
to resistance [16].
It has been reported that a number of functionally
different forms of autophagy are induced by anti-cancer
drugs and radiation [17], and in vitro experiments have
shown that sunitinib may induce either cytoprotective
[18] or cytotoxic autophagy [19, 20]. Furthermore, the
sequestration of sunitinib by lysosomes [21–23], or of
Beclin 1 by RTKs [24, 25], causes defective/inhibited
autophagy that may ultimately lead to dedifferentiation
and the development of resistance by increasing genomic
instability [26].
The aim of this study was to investigate the events
that decrease the response to sunitinib and favour the
development of sunitinib resistance in malignant SFTs by
examining surgical samples taken from sunitinib-treated
patients, a primary cell culture, and a stabilised cell line.

RESULTS
Sunitinib-induced changes in surgical samples of
tumoral tissue
In order to make a thorough review of the changes
induced by sunitinib, and their meaning in terms of response/
resistance, we extensively examined three post-sunitinib
surgical specimens obtained from two sunitinib-responsive
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

45016

Oncotarget

Taken together, these findings suggest that the
increased devascularisation induced by anti-angiogenic
treatment may favour the development of severe hypoxia
paralleling the appearance of necrotic foci, and the upregulation of HIF1α, PDGFRB, mTOR effector activation
and VEGFA expression. This is in line with the hypothesis
that the clear areas correspond to a pathological response
consistent with sunitinib efficacy, whereas the necrotic
foci correspond to pathological progression.

p62/SQSTM1 in the surgical samples. IHC showed that
the level of LC3B expression was low in the sunitinibnaїve samples (data not shown) in keeping with basal
autophagy, whereas its expression was greater in all of the
post-sunitinib samples regardless of the type of sunitinibinduced changes (clear areas or necrotic foci) (Figure 4A).
WB showed that p62/SQSTM1 (an adaptor for delivering
autophagy substrates to autophagosomes that is degraded
in autolysosomes) was also more expressed in the postsunitinib samples (Figure 4B).
These results confirmed the presence of autophagy,
but did not allow us to distinguish whether it was
complete or defective, although the accumulation of
p62/SQSTM1 suggested the latter. The completion of
autophagy requires functional lysosomes and, as sunitinib
sequestration inhibits lysosomal function [21– 23],
we investigated the expression of LAMP2, which is
a known marker of greater lysosomal volume in the
case of dysfunction. Immunofluorescence (IF) analysis
showed that all of the post-sunitinib samples had a larger
lysosomal compartment and higher LAMP2 levels than
the naїve samples (Figure 4C). It is also worth noting that
WB-revealed LAMP2 expression in two post-sunitinib

Sunitinib-induced autophagy and its role in
response/resistance
The presence of microvesicular swelling in the
cytoplasm of tumoral cells in the clear/responsive areas
suggests autophagosome induction (Figure 4A) and, as
it is known that sunitinib induces autophagy [18–20], we
assessed its occurrence and role in drug response.

Surgical samples
IHC and Western blotting (WB) were respectively
used to investigate the autophagy markers LC3B and

Figure 1: Sunitinib-induced morphological changes in surgical samples. (A) A highly depleted cell area characterised by

the presence of an eosinophilic proteinaceous matrix and scattered ectatic vessels. (B) Clear areas made up of cells showing cytoplasmic
microvesicular swelling surrounded by more crowded cells arranged around a paucicellular (B1) or empty core (B2) that had a twisted
appearance at low magnification (B3). (C) The empty cores were occasionally enlarged and filled by tumoral cells with picnotic nuclei, an
inflammatory component (C1), and necrotic spots (C2). (D) The clear areas were sometimes replaced by discrete necrotic foci, as shown at
low (D1) and higher magnification (D2).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

45017

Oncotarget

Figure 2: Sunitinib-induced changes in the morphology of tumour cells and their PDGFRB and HIF1α expression.

(A) H & E and IHC analyses of PDGFRB expression in a sunitinib-naïve and a post-sunitinib sample obtained from patient No. 1 showing
clear areas and decreased PDGFRB expression in the latter. (B) IHC and ISH comparison of the clear areas and necrotic foci showed that
the latter were characterised by increased PDGFRB expression and the appearance of HIF1α expression.

Figure 3: Comparison of mTOR effector phosphorylation and VEGF expression in post-sunitinib samples with clear
areas or necrotic foci. (A) WB revealed increased S6 and 4E-BP1 phosphorylation/expression in the sample with necrotic foci, and IHC
confirmed the phosphorylation. (B) WB also showed that VEGF was more expressed in the sample with necrotic foci.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

45018

Oncotarget

samples clearly indicated greater LAMP2 expression in
the sample with necrotic/progressive foci (Figure 4D), and
IF showed that LAMP2 co-localised with sunitinib in the
post-sunitinib samples (Figure 4E).
Taken together, these results suggest that sunitinib
induces defective autophagy mainly in necrotic/
progressive foci.

Figure 2C). Taken together, these findings suggest that,
despite its interference with lysosomes, sunitinib does not
block autophagy in this model.
In an attempt to distinguish whether this complete
autophagy was cytotoxic and favoured a drug response,
or cyprotective and induced drug resistance, we treated
the cells with sunitinib or sunitinib combined with
chloroquine for 24 hours. The presence of cleaved
caspase-3 (Supplementary Figure 2D) showed that
apoptosis was induced by a sunitinib dose of 10 μM and
even more by a dose of 20 μM, a finding that is consistent
with the tumoral cell apoptosis found in the post-sunitinib
surgical samples (Supplementary Figure 3). Surprisingly,
apoptosis was not modified by the addition of chloroquine
and subsequent autophagy blockade (Supplementary
Figure 2E), which suggests that the autophagy was neither
cytotoxic nor cytoprotective, but simply non-protective as
has been previously observed in other models [29]. These
findings support the idea that sunitinib can induce both
complete autophagy and autophagy-independent apoptosis
in this model.

Stabilised cell line
Cells from the stabilised cell line were treated with
sunitinib in order to establish the nature of the sunitinibinduced autophagic flux. It proved to be complete insofar
as the cells showed a progressive increase in LC3B and
decrease in p62/SQSTM1 levels in comparison with
untreated cells (Supplementary Figure 2A), a finding
that was supported by the increase in LC3B levels when
the cells were simultaneously treated with sunitinib and
chloroquine (a pharmacological inhibitor of autophagy)
(Supplementary Figure 2B). Sunitinib treatment also
led an increase in LAMP2 expression (Supplementary

Figure 4: Sunitinib-induced autophagy in surgical specimens. (A) LC3B-immunolabelled tumoral cells showing microvesicular

cytoplasmic swelling (low and higher magnification) in a representative post-sunitinib sample with a clear/responsive area. (B) WB
showing that p62/SQSTM1 was more expressed in post-sunitinib than in naïve samples. (C) IF of sunitinib-naïve and post-sunitinib
samples showing the over-expression of LAMP2 and apparently larger lysosomes in the latter. (D) WB showing that LAMP2 was more
expressed in a post-sunitinib sample with necrotic/progressive foci than in a post-sunitinib sample with clear/responsive areas. (E) IF of
LAMP2 (green) and sunitinib (orange autofluorescence): the orange staining in the green labelled lysosomes indicates the localisation of
sunitinib in the lysosomes in a post-sunitinib sample.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

45019

Oncotarget

Primary cell culture

However, there were differences in CD68 staining:
the CD68-immunolabelled cells in the clear/responsive
areas were restricted to the paucicellular/empty cores
and had the round morphology we have previously found
to be associated with M1-like macrophages infiltrating
sunitinib-treated tumours [15] (Figure 5J, 5K), whereas
CD68 mainly decorated the inside margins of the cell layer
surrounding the necrotic areas, and there were no CD68+
cells in the central core (Figure 5L, 5M).
This particular distribution led us to investigate the
nature of these CD68+ cells further using IF and confocal
microscopy, which showed that a number of cells with
CD68-positive cytoplasm in the necrotic/progressive
foci had nuclei immunolabelled with STAT6 antibody
(Figure  6). Thus, the tumour cells had acquired this
lysosomal/endosomal-associated membrane glycoprotein
belonging to the family of scavenger receptors, whereas
no double-positive cells were revealed by IF using an
antibody specific for CD14, a marker further defining
macrophages/myeloid cells (data not shown).

As primary cell cultures usually resemble the
tumour from which they originate more closely than virusstabilised cell lines, we treated the primary cell culture
with sunitinib 2.5 μM and found that it increased the levels
of both LC3B and p62/SQSTM1, which accumulated in
a time-dependent manner rather than being degraded
(Supplementary Figure 4A). The trend was similar
after 48 hours’ treatment (Supplementary Figure 4B),
which suggests the induction of defective autophagy.
Furthermore, WB showed that LAMP2 expression was
higher in the sunitinib-treated than in the untreated cells
(Supplementary Figure 4C).
Finally, in order to investigate the effect of sunitinib
on apoptosis, we evaluated the expression of cleaved
caspase-3: exposure to sunitinib 2.5 μM did not lead
to apoptotic cell death after 48 hours (Supplementary
Figure  4D) or after up to five days’ treatment with
sunitinib 5 μM (data not shown). Unfortunately, we did
not have enough cells to test higher sunitinib doses, and
therefore cannot exclude the possibility that a dose of 10
or 20 μM may induce cell death.
Taken together, the primary cell culture data are in line
with the hypothesis that defective autophagy is a possible
cause of sunitinib resistance and tumour progression.

Beclin 1 binding to PDGFRB
As it has been found that there is a dynamic Beclin
1-VPS34-protein binding network in which Beclin 1 acts as
a central hub of autophagy regulation [34, 35] and that RTKs
also inhibit autophagy insofar as phosphorylated EGFR and
HER2 co-immunoprecipitate with Beclin 1 to suppress
autophagy [24, 25], we investigated whether phosphorylated
PDGFRB can interfere with autophagy by sequestering
Beclin 1 and preventing it from binding to VPS34.

Tumour-infiltrating immune cells in postsunitinib samples
Given that: i) autophagy not only preserves cell
homeostasis, but also shapes cell immunity and influences
the differentiation and activation of myeloid and lymphoid
cells [30]; ii) sunitinib has strong immunomodulating
effects on the periphery and tumour sites of SFTs [15]; iii)
our stabilised cell line readouts suggested the induction
of non-protective autophagy, which has been found to
elicit a local immune response in vivo [17]; and iv) the
necrotic/progressive foci in our surgical specimens
showed the increased VEGFA availability and the
expression of HIF1α, both of which are known to mediate
immunosuppressive function [31–33], we investigated
the distribution of immune-related cells in post-sunitinib
lesions by comparing the samples characterised by clear/
responsive areas with those characterised by necrotic/
progressive foci.
In relation to lymphoid infiltration, there were no
major differences in the distribution of CD3+ cells, which
were mainly located around the vessels (Figure 5A–5E),
and no selective enrichment in Foxp3+ regulatory T cells
in the necrotic/progressive foci (data not shown), thus
confirming our previous findings [15]. There were also
no differences in LC3B staining, which mainly decorated
the outside margins of the tumoral cells around the
paucicellular/empty cores of the clear/responsive areas
(Figure 5F, 5G) and around the necrotic/progressive foci
(Figure 5H, 5I).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Surgical sample
As expected, it was found that the PDGFRB immunoprecipitated from a sunitinib-naїve malignant SFT sample
was phosphorylated, and that the immunoprecipitation of
Beclin 1 led to its co- immunoprecipitation with PDGFRB
and VPS34 (Supplementary Figure 5A). However, it was
surprising that VPS34 was also co-immunoprecipitated
when PDGFRB was immunoprecipitated, thus supporting
the idea that the complex actually consisted of PDGFRB,
Beclin 1 and VPS34 (Supplementary Figure 5A). We used
the stabilised cell line in order to investigate this complex
with and without sunitinib treatment.

Stabilised cell line
The cells were left untreated or treated with sunitinib
10 μM for 24 hours which, as shown in Supplementary
Figure 5B, is a sufficient dose and time to switch the
receptor almost completely off. When Beclin 1 was
immunoprecipitated, PDGFRB was co-immunoprecipitated
regardless of its state of activation (Supplementary
Figure  5C), and VPS34 was co-immunoprecipitated in
untreated cells (in the presence of phosphorylated PDGFRB)
and the treated cells (in which PDGFRB was switched off)
45020

Oncotarget

(Supplementary Figure 5C). These findings suggest that
SFT cells express the Beclin-1/PDGFRB/VPS34 complex,
but further studies are required in order to establish whether
the complex functions differently (possibly by means of a
conformational regulation-based mechanism) in the presence
of phosphorylated and non-phosphorylated PDGFRB.

in sunitinib-treated patients, hypoxia-inducing drug
pressure accelerates cancer progression by promoting
the repopulation of cancer cells with a more aggressive
phenotype. Finally, they provide evidence that sunitinib
induces autophagy associated with a local immune
response, and that in vitro models only partially reflect
what happens in SFT patients.
Analysis of the surgical samples showed that
sunitinib induces two different signatures, one of which is
morphologically and functionally consistent with a drug
response, and the other with the development of resistance.
The more frequently encountered picture is marked by
clear/responsive areas and the attenuation/loss of PDGFRB
expression, decreased mTOR signalling, and strong LC3B
immunopositivity, all of which are consistent with the
induction of autophagy and a drug response. The samples with
necrotic/progressive foci showed HIF1α expression, increased
PDGFRB and VEGFA levels, the phosphorylation of mTOR
effectors, and the expression of LC3B, which can be attributed
to defective autophagy and contributes to drug resistance.

DISCUSSION
This hypothesis-generating study was based on
a thorough and comprehensive analysis of four surgical
specimens (one sunitinib-naïve and three post-treatment
specimens) obtained from two patients with malignant
SFTs who respectively showed signs of a RECIST partial
response (PR) and stable disease (SD) after progression.
The findings indicate that sunitinib reduces the
vascular supply network and inhibits tumoral cells in
malignant SFTs. They also show that sunitinib-treated
SFT cells are constantly evolving and that, although
cell death eliminates a sizeable number of cancer cells

Figure 5: Distribution of immune T, myeloid and LC3B-immunolabelled cells in post-sunitinib samples. Immunolabelled

T cells were mainly located around the vessels in the sample with clear/responsive areas and the sample with necrotic/progressive foci
(A–E), whereas LC3B mainly immunodecorated the outside boundary (see arrowheads) of tumour cells around paucicellular/empty
cores (F, G) or necrotic foci (H, I). CD68-immunolabeled cells were restricted to the paucicellular/empty cores in the sample with clear/
responsive areas (J, K), and mainly decorated the inside boundary of the cell layer surrounding the necrotic areas in the sample with
necrotic/progressing foci (L, M).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

45021

Oncotarget

In an attempt to gain insights into sunitinib-induced
autophagy and its relationship with drug response or
resistance, we performed in vitro experiments using a
stabilised cell line and a primary cell culture. However,
the results were not unequivocal because neither model
paralleled in vivo tumour behaviour. Sunitinib induced
a complete autophagic flux and apoptosis only in the
stabilised cell line (which seemed to be a model of drug
sensitivity), whereas autophagy was defective in the
primary cell culture and sunitinib failed to induce cell death.
Combined sunitinib and chloroquine treatment did
not alter sunitinib-induced apoptosis in the stabilised cell

line, a finding that is in line with a form of non-protective
autophagy similar to that observed in breast cancer
cells that are neither sensitised to nor protected against
radiation [29]. It is also worth noting that this type of
autophagy elicits an immune response that is critical for
drug effectiveness, as demonstrated by in vivo experiments
in which autophagy-deficient tumours were engrafted in
immunocompetent mice [36].
We have previously shown that sunitinib
temporarily relieves the immunosuppression of sunitinibnaїve patients [15], and the present findings confirm that
the drug’s efficacy parallels the appearance of a signature

Figure 6: Distribution of STAT6- and CD68-positive cells in post-sunitinib samples revealed by means of IF and
confocal microscopy. (A) STAT6 (green) and CD68 (red) fluorescence immunolabelling in the sample with necrotic/progressive foci:

note the nuclear presence of STAT6-positive tumour cells showing cytoplasmic CD68 immunodecoration in the merge. Low (A1) and
higher magnification (A2). (B) Confocal microscopy confirmed the co-expression of nuclear STAT6 (green) and cytoplasmic CD68 (red):
the insert shows a magnified image of the merge. (C) STAT6 (green) and CD68 (red) fluorescence immunolabelling in the sample with
clear/responsive areas: none of the CD68-expressing cells inside the paucicellular core show STAT6 positivity.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

45022

Oncotarget

consisting of activated tumour-infiltrating lymphocytes
(TILs), including CD3+, CD4+ and CD8+ cells, and
CD68+ myeloid cells [15]. The molecular events driving
this immune profile are still unclear but they certainly
include the drug-induced immunogenic cell death (ICD)
that has been described in the case of antineoplastic
chemotherapies and is often associated with different
forms of autophagy [30].
Comparisons of the samples with clear/responsive
areas and those with necrotic/progressive foci showed that
the latter were associated with a more immunosuppressive
environment characterised by the increased local
availability of VEGFA and HIF1α, which impairs the
maturation/functional status of dendritic cells (and myeloid
cells in general) [31–33] and switches their activity toward
immune suppression. The necrotic foci were also devoid
of CD68+ cells having the morphological features of
myeloid cells with scavenger activity, whereas some of the
CD68 positivity in the areas surrounding the necrosis was
due to the presence of tumour cells, as demonstrated by
their STAT6-positive nuclei. CD68 has hitherto unknown
functional significance in SFT cells, although it is worth
noting that the acquisition of macrophage markers by
tumoral cells in many other human cancers is often
associated with a more malignant phenotype and generally
correlates with a worse prognosis [37–40].
It is interesting to note that this changed phenotype
in our system selectively occurs in the tumoral cells located
in the necrotic/progressive areas of the tumours (which
is probably where defective autophagy takes place), and
may therefore represent one of the first steps in the process
leading to the generation of a resistant, dedifferentiated
form of SFT. In immunological terms, it can be speculated
that CD68+ tumoral cells acquire scavenger activity and
participate in clearing dying autophagic cells through a
non-canonical autophagy pathway involving the selective
engagement of LC3 (the so-called “LC3-associated
phagocytosis” or LAP) [41, 42]. However, this process
is inefficient because they are not professional antigenpresenting cells [43] and they ultimately compete with
these for the efficient uptake and presentation of ‘danger
signals’. Consequently, CD68+ tumour cells represent
a ‘negative’ regulatory mechanism that blunts or limits
immune responses in necrotic/progressive foci.
Finally, our studies of a sample from a sunitinibnaїve patient showed that PDGFRB is one of the
components of a complex that also includes Beclin 1
and VPS34. Unfortunately, the functional study of the
untreated and sunitinib-treated stabilised cell line did
not reveal any changes in PDGFRB, Beclin 1 or VPS34
binding, although we cannot rule out the possibility of
conformational or post-translational modifications that
warrant further investigations.
In conclusion, our findings provide morphological
and functional explanations for the clinical differences
in sunitinib activity observed in SFT patients [4–8], and
indicate that the drug’s effectiveness or detrimental action
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

is dictated by the prevalence of clear/responsive areas
(a marker of disease response) or necrotic/progressive
foci (a marker of disease progression). They also show
that effective autophagy can contribute to inducing a
sunitinib response by activating an adaptive immune
response, whereas defective autophagy favours resistance
by counteracting the immune response triggered by the
treatment [44] and causing genomic instability, and this
coincides with an advanced form of malignant SFTs that
may be a prerequisite of the dedifferentiated SFT variant
in our model [9].

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Ethics statement
Investigation has been conducted in accordance
with the ethical standards and according to the Declaration
of Helsinki and according to national and international
guidelines and has been approved by the authors’
institutional review board. In particular, the study was
approved by the Institutional Ethics Committee. The patients
whose biological samples were included in the study gave
their signed consent to donate the tissues remaining after the
diagnostic procedures had been completed.

Surgical specimens
Formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) and
cryopreserved material was obtained from two patients with
advanced and progressive malignant SFTs, who underwent
surgery after being treated with sunitinib. Pre- and postsunitinib surgical specimens were obtained from patient No.
1; no pre-sunitinib tissue was available from patient No. 2,
but she provided tumour specimens taken after a first period
of sunitinib treatment and after a sunitinib rechallenge.
Patient No. 1 experienced the intra-abdominal
relapse of a pelvic SFT and was surgically treated before
receiving sunitinib (sunitinib-naïve specimen 1A, 6
samples). After experiencing a further (peritoneal) relapse,
he was continuously treated with sunitinib 37.5 mg/day
for 10 months, which led to evidence of tumor growth
arrest after progression (RECIST stable disease, SD), and
was followed by the surgical resection of residual disease
(post-sunitinib specimen 1B, 5 samples).
Patient No. 2 was affected by a pelvic relapse of
SFT characterised by multiple peritoneal lesions, and was
continuously treated with sunitinib 37.5 mg/day for six
months, which led to a RECIST partial response (PR),
and followed by surgery (post-sunitinib specimen 2A,
3 samples). She subsequently remained disease-free for
eight months before experiencing an abdominal relapse
that was continuously treated with the same sunitinib
dose for eight months. The treatment led to RECIST
SD, and the residual tumour was excised (post-sunitinib
specimen  2B, 7 samples) but the patient relapsed five
months later (no more material was available).
45023

Oncotarget

In both cases, the post-sunitinib excisions were
performed seven days after stopping the drug and, as
RECIST PR and SD after progression are both interpreted as
indicating drug effectiveness, responsive histological changes
were expected in all the post-sunitinib surgical specimens.
Cryopreserved material available from a third
patient with a malignant SFT who had never been treated
with sunitinib was used to investigate the Beclin 1/
PDGFRB complex.
The diagnoses were confirmed by means of
immunohistochemistry (IHC: nuclear STAT6 positivity)
[9] and real-time polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR:
NAB2-STAT6 rearrangement) [9].

Real-time PCR (qRT-PCR)

Primary SFT cell culture

SS declares research funding from Pfizer. All of the
other authors declare that they have no conflicts of interest.

PDGFB and VEGFA were detected as previously
described [50].

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We would like to thank Dr. Patrizia Casalini
(Department of Experimental Oncology and Molecular
Medicine, IRCCS Istituto Nazionale dei Tumori, Milan,
Italy) for her precious help with the confocal microscopy.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST

A primary cell culture was obtained from fresh
tissue taken from the sunitinib-naїve surgical specimen of
patient No. 1 as previously described [45]. The nuclear
expression of STAT6 in paraffin-embedded cells was
verified by means of IHC [9], and the cells were treated
with sunitinib (Cat. No. S1042; Selleck Chemical,
Houston, TX, USA).

FUNDING
The study was funded by the Associazione Italiana
per la Ricerca sul Cancro (AIRC) (grant IG2013 14102
to SP, and grant MFAG 11817 to TN). MT and MB are
supported by fellowships from Fondazione Italiana
Ricerca sul Cancro (FIRC).

Stabilised SFT cell line

REFERENCES

The primary cell line was stabilised by means of the
retroviral delivery of SV40 large T-antigen (pWZL-neo
Large T-Ag) in accordance with standard procedures [46]:
a SV40 LgT-SFT bulk cell population was used throughout
the study. The nuclear expression of STAT6 in paraffinembedded cells was verified by means of IHC [9], and the
cells were treated with sunitinib and chloroquine diphosphate
salt (C6628; Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA).

  1.	 Fletcher CDM, Bridge JA, Lee JC. Extrapleural solitary
fibrous tumor. In WHO Classification of Tumors of Soft
Tissue and Bone, (4th edn), IARC Press: Lyon, 2013; 80–82.
  2.	 Mosquera JM, Fletcher CD. Expanding the spectrum
of malignant progression in solitary fibrous tumors: a
study of 8 cases with a discrete anaplastic component
– is this dedifferentiated SFT? Am J Surg Pathol. 2009;
33:1314–21.

FFPE material

  3.	 Collini P, Negri T, Barisella M, Palassini E, Tarantino E,
Pastorino U, Gronchi A, Stacchiotti S, Pilotti S. Highgrade sarcomatous overgrowth in solitary fibrous tumors:
a clinicopathologic study of 10 cases. Am J Surg Pathol.
2012; 36:1202–15.

Immunohistochemistry (IHC) and
immunofluorescence (IF)/confocal microscopy
The conditions and primary antibodies are described
in the Supplementary Data.

  4.	 Stacchiotti S, Negri T, Libertini M, Palassini E, Marrari A,
De Troia B, Gronchi A, Dei Tos AP, Morosi C, Messina A,
Pilotti S, Casali PG. Sunitinib malate in solitary fibrous
tumor (SFT). Ann Oncol. 2012; 23:3171–9.

Bright field in situ hybridisation (ISH)
PDGFRB mRNA-based ISH was performed
manually as described in the Supplementary Data.

  5.	 Stacchiotti S, Negri T, Palassini E, Conca E, Gronchi A,
Morosi C, Messina A, Pastorino U, Pierotti MA, Casali PG,
Pilotti S. Sunitinib malate and figitumumab in solitary
fibrous tumor: patterns and molecular bases of tumor
response. Mol Cancer Ther. 2010; 9:1286–97.

Cryopreserved material
Immunoprecipitation (IP) and Western blotting
(WB)

  6.	 Domont J, Massard C, Lassau N, Armand JP, Le Cesne A,
Soria JC. Hemangiopericytoma and antiangiogenic
therapy: clinical benefit of antiangiogenic therapy
(sorafenib and sunitinib) in relapsed malignant
haemangioperyctoma /solitary fibrous tumour. Invest New
Drugs. 2010; 28:199–202.

Total proteins were extracted from the surgical
specimens or cells as previously described [48]. The
conditions, the primary and secondary antibodies, and the
positive controls are described in the Supplementary Data.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

45024

Oncotarget

7.	 Mulamalla K, Truskinovsky AM, Dudek AZ. Rare case
of hemangiopericytoma responds to sunitinib. Transl Res.
2008; 151:129–33.

promotes tumor cell survival and adaptation to antiangiogenic
treatment in glioblastoma. Cancer Res. 2012; 72: 1773–83.
17.	 Gewirtz DA. The four faces of autophagy: implications for
cancer therapy. Cancer Res. 2014; 74:647–51.

8.	 George S, Merriam P, Maki RG, Van den Abbeele AD,
Yap JT, Akhurst T, Harmon DC, Bhuchar G, O’Mara MM,
D’Adamo DR, Morgan J, Schwartz GK, Wagner AJ, et al.
Multicenter phase II trial of sunitinib in the treatment of
nongastrointestinal stromal tumor sarcomas. J Clin Oncol.
2009; 27:3154–60.

18.	 Ikeda T, Ishii KA, Saito Y, Miura M, Otagiri A,
Kawakami Y, Shimano H, Hara H, Takekoshi K. Inhibition
of autophagy enhances sunitinib-induced cytotoxicity in
rat pheochromocytoma PC12 cells. J Pharmacol Sci. 2013;
121:67–73.

9.	 Dagrada GP, Spagnuolo RD, Mauro V, Tamborini E,
Cesana L, Gronchi A, Stacchiotti S, Pierotti MA, Negri T,
Pilotti S. Solitary fibrous tumors: loss of chimeric protein
expression and genomic instability mark dedifferentiation.
Mod Pathol. 2015; 28:1074–83.

19.	 Lin CI, Whang EE, Lorch JH, Ruan DT. Autophagic
activation potentiates the antiproliferative effects of tyrosine
kinase inhibitors in medullary thyroid cancer. Surgery.
2012; 152:1142–9.
20.	 Zhao Y, Xue T, Yang X, Zhu H, Ding X, Lou L, Lu W,
Yang  B, He Q. Autophagy plays an important role in
sunitinib-mediated cell death in H9c2 cardiac muscle cells.
Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2010; 248:20–7.

10.	 Stacchiotti S, Tortoreto M, Bozzi F, Tamborini E, Morosi C,
Messina A, Libertini M, Palassini E, Cominetti D, Negri T,
Gronchi A, Pilotti S, Zaffaroni N, et al. Dacarbazine in
solitary fibrous tumor: a case series analysis and preclinical
evidence vis-a-vis temozolomide and antiangiogenics. Clin
Cancer Res. 2013; 19:5192–201.

21.	 Gotink KJ, Broxterman HJ, Labots M, de Haas RR,
Dekker  H, Honeywell RJ, Rudek MA, Beerepoot LV,
Musters RJ, Jansen G, Griffioen AW, Assaraf YG, Pili R,
et al. Lysosomal sequestration of sunitinib: a novel mechanism
of drug resistance. Clin Cancer Res. 2011; 17:7337–46.

11.	 Park MS, Patel SR, Ludwig JA, Trent JC, Conrad CA,
Lazar AJ, Wang WL, Boonsirikamchai P, Choi H, Wang X,
Benjamin RS, Araujo DM. Activity of temozolomide and
bevacizumab in the treatment of locally advanced, recurrent,
and metastatic hemangiopericytoma and malignant solitary
fibrous tumor. Cancer. 2011; 117:4939–47.

22.	 Santoni M, Amantini C, Morelli MB, Liberati S,
Farfariello  V, Nabissi M, Bonfili L, Eleuteri AM,
Mozzicafreddo M, Burattini L, Berardi R, Cascinu S,
Santoni G. Pazopanib and sunitinib trigger autophagic and
non-autophagic death of bladder tumour cells. Br J Cancer.
2013; 109:1040–50.

12.	 Valentin T, Fournier C, Penel N, Bompas E, Chaigneau  L,
Isambert N, Chevreau C. Sorafenib in patients with
progressive malignant solitary fibrous tumors: a subgroup
analysis from a phase II study of the French Sarcoma Group
(GSF/GETO). Invest New Drugs. 2013; 31:1626–7.

23.	 Lopergolo A, Nicolini V, Favini E, Dal Bo L, Tortoreto M,
Cominetti D, Folini M, Perego P, Castiglioni V, Scanziani E,
Borrello MG, Zaffaroni N, Cassinelli G, et al. Synergistic
cooperation between sunitinib and cisplatin promotes
apoptotic cell death in human medullary thyroid cancer.
J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2014; 99:498–509.

13.	 Sleijfer S, Ray-Coquard I, Papai Z, Le Cesne A,
Scurr M, Schöffski P, Collin F, Pandite L, Marreaud S,
De Brauwer  A, van Glabbeke M, Verweij J, Blay JY.
Pazopanib, a multikinase angiogenesis inhibitor, in
patients with relapsed or refractory advanced soft tissue
sarcoma: a phase II study from the European organisation
for research and treatment of cancer-soft tissue and bone
sarcoma group (EORTC study 62043). J Clin Oncol. 2009;
27:3126–32.

24.	 Wei Y, Zou Z, Becker N, Anderson M, Sumpter R,
Xiao G, Kinch L, Koduru P, Christudass CS, Veltri RW,
Grishin NV, Peyton M, Minna J, et al. EGFR-mediated
Beclin 1 phosphorylation in autophagy suppression, tumor
progression, and tumor chemoresistance. Cell. 2013; 154:
1269–84.
25.	 Han J, Hou W, Lu C, Goldstein LA, Stolz DB, Watkins SC,
Rabinowich H. Interaction between Her2 and Beclin-1
proteins underlies a new mechanism of reciprocal
regulation. J Biol Chem. 2013; 288:20315–25.

14.	 Quek R, Wang Q, Morgan JA, Shapiro GI, Butrynski JE,
Ramaiya N, Huftalen T, Jederlinic N, Manola J, Wagner AJ,
Demetri GD, George S. Combination mTOR and IGF-1R
inhibition: phase I trial of everolimus and figitumumab in
patients with advanced sarcomas and other solid tumors.
Clin Cancer Res. 2011; 17:871–9.

26.	 Karantza-Wadsworth V, Patel S, Kravchuk O, Chen G,
Mathew R, Jin S, White E. Autophagy mitigates metabolic
stress and genome damage in mammary tumorigenesis.
Genes Dev. 2007; 21:1621–35.

15.	 Tazzari M, Negri T, Rini F, Vergani B, Huber V, Villa A,
Dagrada P, Colombo C, Fiore M, Gronchi A, Stacchiotti S,
Casali PG, Pilotti S, et al. Adaptive immune contexture at
the tumour site and downmodulation of circulating myeloidderived suppressor cells in the response of solitary fibrous
tumour patients to anti-angiogenic therapy. Br J Cancer.
2014; 111:1350–62.

27.	 Ball SG, Shuttleworth CA, Kielty CM. Vascular endothelial
growth factor can signal through platelet-derived growth
factor receptors. J Cell Biol. 2007; 177:489–500.
28.	 Pfister C, Pfrommer H, Tatagiba MS, Roser F. Vascular
endothelial growth factor signals through platelet-derived
growth factor receptor β in meningiomas in vitro. Br J
Cancer. 2012; 107:1702–13.

16.	 Hu YL, DeLay M, Jahangiri A, Molinaro AM, Rose  SD,
Carbonell WS, Aghi MK. Hypoxia-induced autophagy
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

45025

Oncotarget

29.	 Bristol ML, Emery SM, Maycotte P, Thorburn A,
Chakradeo S, Gewirtz DA. Autophagy inhibition for
chemosensitization and radiosensitization in cancer: do
the preclinical data support this therapeutic strategy?
J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2013; 344:544–52.

41.	 Martinez J, Almendinger J, Oberst A, Ness R, Dillon CP,
Fitzgerald P, Hengartner MO, Green DR. Microtubuleassociated protein 1 light chain 3 alpha (LC3)-associated
phagocytosis is required for the efficient clearance of dead
cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011; 108:17396–401.

30.	 Ma Y, Galluzzi L, Zitvogel L, Kroemer G. Autophagy and
cellular immune responses. Immunity. 2013; 39: 211–27.

42.	 Mehta P, Henault J, Kolbeck R, Sanjuan MA. Noncanonical
autophagy: one small step for LC3, one giant leap for
immunity. Curr Opin Immunol. 2014; 26:69–75.

31.	 Voron T, Marcheteau E, Pernot S, Colussi O, Tartour E,
Taieb J, Terme M. Control of the immune response by proangiogenic factors. Front Oncol. 2014; 4:70.

43.	 Petrovski G, Zahuczky G, Katona K, Vereb G, Martinet W,
Nemes Z, Bursch W, Fésüs L. Clearance of dying
autophagic cells of different origin by professional and
non-professional phagocytes. Cell Death Differ. 2007;
14:1117–28.

32.	 Corzo CA, Condamine T, Lu L, Cotter MJ, Youn JI,
Cheng  P, Cho HI, Celis E, Quiceno DG, Padhya T,
McCaffrey TV, McCaffrey JC, Gabrilovich DI. HIF-1α
regulates function and differentiation of myeloid-derived
suppressor cells in the tumor microenvironment. J Exp
Med. 2010; 207:2439–53.

44.	 Rao S, Yang H, Penninger JM, Kroemer G. Autophagy in
non-small cell lung carcinogenesis: A positive regulator of
antitumor immunosurveillance. Autophagy. 2014; 10:529–31.

33.	 Kumar V, Gabrilovich DI. Hypoxia-inducible factors in
regulation of immune responses in tumour microenvironment.
Immunology. 2014; 143:512–9.

45.	 Dossi R, Frapolli R, Di Giandomenico S, Paracchini  L,
Bozzi  F, Brich S, Castiglioni V, Borsotti P, Belotti  D,
Uboldi  S, Sanfilippo R, Erba E, Giavazzi R, et al.
Antiangiogenic activity of trabectedin in myxoid
liposarcoma: involvement of host TIMP-1 and TIMP-2 and
tumor thrombospondin-1. Int J Cancer. 2015; 136:721–9.

34.	 Zhong Y, Wang QJ, Li X, Yan Y, Backer JM, Chait  BT,
Heintz N, Yue Z. Distinct regulation of autophagic
activity by Atg14L and Rubicon associated with Beclin
1-phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase complex. Nat Cell Biol.
2009; 11:468–76.

46.	 Demontis S, Rigo C, Piccinin S, Mizzau M, Sonego M,
Fabris M, Brancolini C, Maestro R. Twist is substrate for
caspase cleavage and proteasome-mediated degradation.
Cell Death Differ. 2006; 13:335–45.

35.	 Kang R, Zeh HJ, Lotze MT, Tang D. The Beclin 1 network
regulates autophagy and apoptosis. Cell Death Differ. 2011;
18:571–80.

47.	 Gloghini A, Volpi CC, Gualni AV, Cortelazzi B, Perrone F,
Pilotti S. Defining the better algorithm for the accurate
identification of HPV status among oropharyngeal
squamous-cell carcinoma. Results from a pilot study.
WCRJ. 2015; 2:e497.

36.	 Michaud M, Martins I, Sukkurwala AQ, Adjemian S, Ma Y,
Pellegatti P, Shen S, Kepp O, Scoazec M, Mignot G, RelloVarona S, Tailler M, Menger L, et al. Autophagy-dependent
anticancer immune responses induced by chemotherapeutic
agents in mice. Science. 2011; 334:1573–7.

48.	 Tamborini E, Bonadiman L, Negri T, Greco A, Staurengo S,
Bidoli P, Pastorino U, Pierotti MA, Pilotti S. Detection of
overexpressed and phosphorylated wild-type kit receptor in
surgical specimens of small cell lung cancer. Clin Cancer
Res. 2004; 10:8214–9.

37.	 Gottfried E, Kunz-Schughart LA, Weber A, Rehli M,
Peuker  A, Müller A, Kastenberger M, Brockhoff G,
Andreesen R, Kreutz M. Expression of CD68 in nonmyeloid cell types. Scand J Immunol. 2008; 67:453–63.

49.	 Miselli F, Negri T, Gronchi A, Losa M, Conca E, Brich S,
Fumagalli E, Fiore M, Casali PG, Pierotti MA, Tamborini E,
Pilotti S. Is autophagy rather than apoptosis the regression
driver in imatinib-treated gastrointestinal stromal tumors?
Transl Oncol. 2008; 1:177–86.

38.	 Gloghini A, Rizzo A, Zanette I, Canal B, Rupolo G, Bassi P,
Carbone A. KP1/CD68 expression in malignant neoplasms
including lymphomas, sarcomas, and carcinomas.
Am J Clin Pathol. 1995; 103:425–31.
39.	 Facchetti F, Bertalot G, Grigolato PG. KP1 (CD 68) staining
of malignant melanomas. Histopathology. 1991; 19:141–5.

50.	 Negri T, Virdis E, Brich S, Bozzi F, Tamborini E,
Tarantino E, Jocollè G, Cassinelli G, Grosso F, Sanfilippo R,
Casalini P, Greco A, Pierotti MA, et al. Functional mapping
of receptor tyrosine kinases in myxoid liposarcoma. Clin
Cancer Res. 2010; 16:3581–93.

40.	 Strojnik T, Kavalar R, Zajc I, Diamandis EP,
Oikonomopoulou K, Lah TT. Prognostic impact of CD68
and kallikrein 6 in human glioma. Anticancer Res. 2009;
29:3269–79.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

45026

Oncotarget

