Oncotarget, Vol. 5, No. 19

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Editorial

New targets for resistant prostate cancer
Timothy C. Thompson and Likun Li

PCa in animal models [4]. The authors demonstrated that
the negative feedback signal from AR to the PI3K-Akt
pathway is AR-stimulated, FKBP5-mediated activation
of the Akt phosphatase PHLPP, and that this signal is
interrupted by AR inhibition [4].
The concept that AR inhibition may derepress
particular AR-suppressed genes was extended by the recent
findings of Cai et al, who showed that androgen-liganded
AR reduced AR target gene expression through ARBS2,
a transcriptional enhancer [5]. The authors demonstrated
that specific genes related to DNA metabolism, DNA
synthesis and repair, androgen metabolism, and the cell
cycle are repressed by active AR and derepressed by antiAR agents [5]. Importantly, many of these derepressed
genes were shown to be upregulated in castration-resistant
VCaP xenografts and in CRPC bone marrow metastases
from PCa patients. In addition, intratumoral synthesis of
androgens was shown to lead to partial restoration of AR
transcriptional activity in CRPC, yet these androgen levels
were not sufficient to downregulate the expression of
specific AR-repressed genes related to the cell cycle, DNA
synthesis and repair, and DNA metabolism [5]. Overall,
this report established that specific AR-repressed genes
related to DNA metabolism, DNA synthesis and repair,
and the cell cycle represent overexpressed genes in CRPC
and thus potential therapeutic targets.
Recently, Arora et al demonstrated that
glucocorticoid receptor (GR) expression was upregulated
in LNCaP/AR xenografts that are resistant to ENZ,
as well as in CRPC bone metastases from patients that
had a relatively poor response to ENZ compared with
those from patients who had a more favorable response

Although prostate cancer (PCa) initially responds
to standard luteinizing hormone releasing hormone
agonist–based androgen-deprivation therapy (ADT),
most advanced, lethal PCa eventually becomes castrationresistant PCa (CRPC) and metastasizes to bone [1].
The use of second generation anti–androgen receptor
(AR) agents, i.e., abiraterone and enzalutamide (ENZ),
has resulted in modestly increased survival rates, but
these therapies are not curative, and novel therapeutic
approaches are needed to treat this lethal disease.
The heterogeneous nature of PCa and the difficulty
in obtaining sufficient clinical samples of CRPC for
genomics analysis have impeded understanding of this
disease. However, recent genomics studies have identified
potentially actionable signaling pathways that contribute
to CRPC. In addition to mutations in genes or pathways,
including PI3K-Akt and Wnt/β-catenin, mutations were
found in numerous proteins that interact with AR in
CRPC samples [2]. These results support the longstanding
concept that persistent AR signaling through mutation,
amplification, and aberrant expression represents a
hallmark of CRPC [1,3].
Although the fact that mutations cause persistent
AR signaling has long been understood, suppression of
AR signaling through pharmacologic inhibition was
only recently shown to lead to derepression of specific
oncogenic signaling pathways in PCa. Carver et al
demonstrated that ADT or treatment with ENZ increased
the phosphorylation of Akt in PTEN-deleted LNCaP cells
and LAPC4 cells, whereas the combination of ENZ and
BEZ235, a PI3K inhibitor, caused marked regression of

Figure 1: Overlapping androgen
receptor (AR) and glucocorticoid
receptor (GR) or overlapping AR
and c-Myb target genes as therapy
targets
for
castration-resistant
prostate cancer. Recent studies point

to a high priority gene set of potentially
actionable therapy targets for castrationresistant prostate cancer. Anti-AR agents
result in derepression of specific genes,
including targets of GR and c-Myb, that
function as transcriptional regulators of a subset of target genes that overlap with target genes of AR. Expression of these genes is related
to adaptive drug resistance.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

8816

Oncotarget

[6]. Additional results from this study showed that GR
inhibition in resistant cells can potentiate sensitivity to
ENZ. The study also identified a common set of target
genes regulated by AR and GR in PCa cells and showed
that GR can drive AR target genes in ENZ-resistant
PCa. Importantly, experimental data also indicated that
AR directly represses GR expression in ENZ-resistant
LNCaP/AR xenografts, suggesting a model in which ENZmediated GR derepression provides an adaptive resistance
mechanism through which clonal expansion occurs in
GR-driven CRPC [6]. These results are consistent with
those of Cai et al [5] with regard to anti-AR–mediated
derepression of genes that may ultimately drive therapy
resistance.
Li et al recently found that ENZ increased
expression of the proto-oncogene c-MYB, a transcription
factor that has been shown to be upregulated in multiple
malignancies [7]. The results of this study showed that
c-Myb increases growth and metastatic potential of
both AR-positive and AR-negative PCa cells [7]. c-Myb
expression was increased in AR-positive, androgenindependent PCa cells compared with PCa cells that
were dependent on androgens for growth. Importantly,
the results of this study showed that AR and c-Myb
share a common set of target genes that include a DNA
damage response signature that is strongly associated
with cancer recurrence, castration resistance, and
metastatic disease [7]. These results point to a mechanistic
model in which ENZ-mediated derepression of c-Myb
expression compensates for loss of AR activity by ENZ
treatment through regulation of their common DNA
damage response gene targets, which, in turn, mediates
resistance to ENZ. Further experiments revealed that
c-Myb regulates DNA damage response through Topbp1,
the ataxia-telangiectasia and Rad3–related protein (ATR),
and Chk1 protein, which regulate DNA damage response
checkpoints [7]. On the basis of these results, the authors
devised a combination therapeutic strategy with an
inhibitor of c-Myb-Topbp1-ATR-Chk1 signaling, i.e., the
Chk1 inhibitor AZD7762, and an inhibitor of poly(ADP-

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

ribose) polymerase (PARP), i.e., olaparib. Results of in
vitro and in vivo studies showed that this combination
has synergistic effects in PCa models [7]. Thus, this
study identified a gene signature which is co-regulated
by AR and c-Myb, and which specifies a therapeutically
actionable pathway for CRPC.
Overall, the results of these recent studies (i)
demonstrate the persistence and importance of ARregulated gene expression in CRPC; (ii) support a model
of anti-AR agent–mediated gene derepression as an
adaptive resistance mechanism; (iii) suggest that this
adaptive response is linked to further progression of a
therapy-resistant cell population; and (iv) suggest that
overlapping AR and GR, and AR and c-Myb, target genes
are strongly selected for drug resistance and should be
considered for further study as potential therapy targets
for CRPC (Figure 1).
Timothy C. Thompson: Department of Genitourinary
Medical Oncology, The University of Texas MD Anderson
Cancer Center, Houston, Texas, USA
Correspondence: Timothy C. Thompson, email timthomp@
mdanderson.org
Received: August 25, 2014
Published: October 01, 2014

REFERENCES

8817

1.	

Karantanos T, et al. Oncogene. 2013; 32: 5501-5511.

2.	

Grasso CS, et al. Nature. 2012; 487: 239-243.

3.	

Ferraldeschi R, et al. Oncogene. 2014; In press.

4.	

Carver BS, et al. Cancer Cell. 2011; 19: 575-586.

5.	

Cai C, et al. Cancer Cell. 2011; 20: 457-471.

6.	

Arora VK, et al. Cell. 2013; 155: 1309-1322.

7.	

Li L, et al. Sci Signaling. 2014; 326: ra47.

Oncotarget

