Oncotarget, Vol. 7, No. 17

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Hedgehog pathway maintains cell survival under stress
conditions, and drives drug resistance in lung adenocarcinoma
Erh-Hsuan Lin1,2,3,4, Yu-Rung Kao1, Chih-An Lin5, Ting-Yu Kuo4, Sheng-Ping Yang2,
Chiung-Fang Hsu1, Teh-Ying Chou3,6, Chao-Chi Ho7, Cheng-Wen Wu1,2,3,4
1

Institute of Biomedical Sciences, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan

2

Institute of Microbiology and Immunology, National Yang Ming University, Taipei, Taiwan

3

Institute of Clinical Medicine, National Yang-Ming University, Taipei, Taiwan

4

Institute of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, National Yang Ming University, Taipei, Taiwan

5

Department of Clinical Laboratory Sciences and Medical Biotechnology, National Taiwan University Medical College, Taipei,
Taiwan

6

Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Taipei Veterans General Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan

7

Department of Internal Medicine, National Taiwan University Hospital and National Taiwan University Medical College,
Taipei, Taiwan

Correspondence to: Cheng-Wen Wu, e-mail: cwwu@ym.edu.tw
Keywords: lung adenocarcinoma, Hedgehog pathway, HHIP, drug resistance, HGF/MET
Received: July 30, 
2015         Accepted: March 02, 
2016         Published: March 22, 2016

ABSTRACT
Hedgehog (HH) pathway plays an important role in embryonic development,
but is largely inactive in adult except for tissue repair. Aberrant activation of
HH pathway has been found in a variety of cancer types. In non-small cell lung
cancer, however, the role and importance of HH pathway remain controversial.
In the current study, we found that HH pathway was maintained in low activity in
lung adenocarcinoma (LAC) cells under normal culture condition, but was highly
induced in response to stress conditions. Activation of HH pathway promoted cell
survival, growth, and invasion partially through HGF and MET signaling. HedgehogInteracting Protein (HHIP), a cell-surface negative regulator of HH pathway, was
epigenetically silenced in LAC. Overexpression of HHIP blocked the activation
of HH and HGF/MET pathways, and made cells significantly more susceptible to
stress conditions. In LAC cells with acquired resistance to Epidermal Growth Factor
Receptor Tyrosin Kinase Inhibitor (EGFR-TKI), we found that a part of tumor cells
were much more sensitive to HH or HGF/MET inhibitors, suggesting an oncogenic
addiction shift from EGFR to HH and HGF/MET pathways. In conclusion, this study
showed that HH pathway is a survival signaling that drives LAC cell growth under
stress conditions, and HHIP is a key regulator to block the induction of HH pathway.
Targeting the HH pathway through inhibitors or HHIP thus holds promise to address
EGFR-TKI resistance in LAC in clinic.

INTRODUCTION

Although the development of EGFR Tyrosine Kinase
Inhibitors (TKIs) has offered an improved progressionfree survival in LAC patients, drug resistance invariably
occurred [1,  4]. In clinic, the T790M point mutation
on EGFR represents approximately 50–60% of all
recurrent lung tumors with acquired resistance to current
1st-generation EGFR-TKIs (Erlotinib and Gefitinib)
[1,  4, 5]. Besides EGFR-T790M, HGF/MET signaling
also plays an important role in EGFR-TKI resistance.

Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer mortality
worldwide. Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) accounts
for about 75% of lung cancers, among which the lung
adenocarcinoma (LAC) is the most common histological
subtype (about 40%). LAC is frequently associated with
activating epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)
mutations, and chemotherapy has limited efficacy [1–3].
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

24179

Oncotarget

RESULTS

MET amplification has been reported in around 4% of
recurrent cases, which induces the resistance through
ERBB3 (HER3)-dependent activation of PI3K [5,  6].
HGF-mediated MET activation has also been found to
mediate intrinsic and acquired resistance to EGFR-TKI
by restoring PI3K/AKT pathway independent of EGFR or
ErbB3 [7]. Higher serum levels of HGF were significantly
associated with shorter progression-free survival and
overall survival in LAC patients receiving EGFR-TKI
treatment [8].
Tumor cells are continually subjected to diverse
stress conditions from microenvironment, such as
hypoxia, nutrient deprivation, and oxidative, genotoxic,
and replicative stresses [9,  10]. Stemness properties
have been implicated in cell survival against stress
conditions, and mediate tumor initiation, metastasis,
and therapeutic resistance [11,  12]. Hedgehog (HH)
pathway is a stemness pathway tightly regulated during
development, and directs segments and organ formation.
In adults, HH path­way is largely inactive, except for its
function in tissue repair or maintenance [13]. However,
aberrant activation of HH signaling has been identified
in a variety of cancer types, driving proliferation, selfrenewal and tumorigenesis in cancer stem-like cells
[14]. HH pathway performed extensive crosstalk with
other oncogenic or stemness signalings, such as RAS/
RAF/MEK/ERK, PI3K/AKT, EGFR, and Notch [15].
In small-cell lung cancers (SCLCs), a subset of tumor
samples were found to maintain their malignant phenotype
through ligand-dependent HH pathway, and inhibition of
HH pathway activity repressed tumor growth [16]. In
NSCLC, the role of HH pathway remains controversial.
It was initially suggested that HH pathway activity was
low and cells were insensitive to HH inhibitor [16, 17].
However, other studies argued that a large percentage of
NSCLC tumor samples showed high HH pathway activity,
and a number of NSCLC cell lines were sensitive to HH
inhibitors [18–21].
PTCH is the cell surface receptor of HH pathway,
which positively regulates the downstream HH signaling
through SMO. Hedgehog-interacting protein (HHIP) is a
membrane glycoprotein that binds to all three mammalian
HH ligands with an affinity comparable to PTCH [22, 23].
HHIP does not contain the intracellular domain, thus
attenuates the HH pathway by competing HH ligands
with PTCH [23]. HHIP and PTCH are both transcriptional
targets of GLI1 after activation of HH pathway, and the
HHIP-mediated negative regulatory feedback loop plays
an important role in development such as lung branching
morphogenesis [24]. HHIP expression has been found
silenced by promoter hypermethylation in several types
of tumor, including gastrointestinal [25], hepatocellular
carcinoma [26, 27], medulloblastoma [28], and pancreatic
neoplasm [29]. Nevertheless, how HHIP may regulate HH
pathway and tumor progression has not been well studied
in NSCLC.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

The gene expression of HHIP is significantly
reduced in LAC patient samples and cell lines
We first investigated whether HH pathway is
abnormally activated in LAC. Three microarray data sets
from public domain Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO)
containing the gene expression information of both tumor
and adjacent normal parts in LAC patients (GSE19804,
GSE27262, and GSE10072) were analyzed. Comparing
the relative gene expressions between tumor and normal
parts (the T/N ratio), only HHIP was significantly reduced,
while other HH pathway components largely unchanged
(T/N closed to 1) (Figure 1A). One microarray data set
(GSE10072) did not contain HHIP probe because of the
chip version (Affimatrix HG-U133A), but T/N ratios of
other genes still showed similar results (Supplementary
Figure S1). To confirm the results, we investigated the gene
expressions of SHH, GLI1, and HHIP in LAC cell lines
available in our lab. Likewise, the results showed that most
LAC cell lines (except for A549) showed a significantly
reduced HHIP, but comparable GLI1 and SHH mRNA
levels as compared to non-tumor lung epithelial cells
BEAS-2B or NL20 (Figure 1B). In protein level, all LAC
cell lines showed low HHIP, and comparable or lower
GLI1 expressions as compared to BEAS-2B or NL20
(Figure 1C). Together, these results suggested that in LAC,
the expression of HHIP was significantly suppressed, while
most other HH pathway factors largely unchanged.

The gene expression of HHIP is epigenetically
silenced in LAC
It has been reported that HHIP was epigenetically
silenced by promoter hypermethylation in different types of
cancer [25–28]. We thus examined the methylation state of
HHIP promoter in LAC. The results of methylation-specific
PCR (MSP) confirmed that in most LAC cell lines (except
for A549), HHIP promoter was intensively or partially
methylated (Figure  2A and Supplementary Figure  S2A).
Four cell lines were further investigated by bisulfite
sequencing (BS), and the results showed that the HHIP
promoters in H1975 and HCC827 were hypermethylated,
while BEAS-2B and A549  were not (Figure  2B and
Supplementary Figure S2A). The treatment with 5ʹ-Azc and
TSA (the DNA methylation and histone acetylatransferase
inhibitors, respectively) enhanced the HHIP expression in
H1975 and HCC827, but not A549 cells (Figure 2C). To
further confirm the methylation status of HHIP promoter
in LAC, 492 patient samples from TCGA open data base
were analyzed. The results showed that HHIP promoter
was significantly hypermethylated in tumor as compared
to normal tissue (Supplementary Figure  S2B), and the
methylation was significantly associated with HHIP gene
expression (Supplementary Figure S2C).
24180

Oncotarget

HHIP overexpression significantly inhibited LAC
cell proliferation, clonogenicity, invasion, and
spheroid formation in serum-starvation state

cell growth supplement) (Figure 3C). Finally we tested the
importance of HHIP in spheroid formation in serum-free
3D matrix. The results showed that cells overexpressing
HHIP formed significantly less spheroids (Figure  3D).
Together, these data suggested that although the silencing
of HHIP may not significantly influence cell functions
under normal culture condition, it plays an important
role to maintain cell proliferation, invasion, survival, and
spheroid formation under serum-starvation state.

We then investigated the role of HHIP silencing in
LAC. HHIP or Red-Fluorescent Protein (RFP, as control
protein) was overexpressed in 3 different LAC cell lines.
Unexpectedly, HHIP overexpression only slightly reduced
cell proliferation and clonogenicity in LAC cells under
normal culture condition (10% FBS) (Figure 3A and 3B).
However, when cells were cultured in serum-starvation
state (1% FBS), HHIP overexpression significantly
inhibited cell proliferation and clonogenicity (Figure 3A
and 3B, and Supplementary Figure  S3 for the full-size
images of colonies). Likewise, HHIP overexpression
inhibited cell invasion more significantly in serumstarvation state in 1% FBS or 1% Nu-serum (a low-protein

LAC cells overexpressing HHIP showed defective
tumor formation and growth activities in vivo
To verify whether HHIP influences in vivo tumor
formation and the growth of LAC cells, we implanted
LAC cells overexpressing HHIP or RFP subcutaneously in
nude mice. The tumor growth was followed for 1 month.

Figure 1: HHIP is significantly down-regulated in LAC patient samples and cell lines. (A) Two GEO microarray data sets

(GSE19804, GSE27262) containing information of both tumor and adjacent normal tissue from totally 85 LAC patient samples were
analyzed and presented together for gene expressions of HH pathway components. T/N ratio, the ratio of gene expression in tumor vs. in
normal part. (B) The relative gene expressions of HHIP, GLI1, and SHH in different LAC cell lines. The gene expression was normalized
by 18S in respective cell lines, and then compared to that of non-tumor lung epithelial cell line BEAS-2B (which is set as 1). (C) The
western-blot of GLI1 and HHIP proteins in LAC cell lines. Paired T-Test (A) and Independent-Samples T-Test (B) were used to evaluate
the significance of differences among samples. *P < 0.05. n = 85 for (A) and n = 3 for (B).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

24181

Oncotarget

HH pathway was activated in serum starvation
state, and mediated HGF expression and MET
phosphorylation in LAC cells

The result showed that tumors overexpressing HHIP had
a 70% reduced average volume and 63% reduced average
weight as compared to control tumors (Figure 3E and 3F).
Cells overexpressing HHIP did not form tumor in 2 of the
8 implanted mice, while control cells formed tumors in all
mice (Figure 3G). The HHIP overexpression in tumors was
confirmed using Western-Blot (Supplementary Figure S4).
These results indicated that HHIP overexpression in LAC
cells led to defective in vivo tumor formation and growth.

To clarify why HHIP plays a much more important
role in serum-starvation state, we examined the activity
of HH pathway. The gene expressions of GLI1 and SHH
(the main transcription factor and ligand, respectively)
were detected as indication for the pathway activity.

Figure 2: HHIP promoter is epigenetically silenced in LAC cells. The methylation status of HHIP promoter in LAC cell lines

were analyzed using (A) MSP and (B) BS (Supplementary Figure S2A). (C) The HHIP gene expression was analyzed in LAC cell lines
after treatment with 5′-Azc (DNA methylation inhibitor) and TSA (histone acetylatransferase inhibitors). The solid circle indicates a
methylated CG site, while empty circle unmethylated. Independent-Samples T-Test were used to evaluate the significance of differences
among samples. n = 5 for (C).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

24182

Oncotarget

The results showed that expressions of both genes were
significantly induced within 2 days after serum-starvation
(Figure  4A). Importantly, overexpression of HHIP
blocked the inductions. To find the downstream oncogenic
signaling, the expressions of several growth factors that
have been indicated to interact with HH pathway were

detected. The results showed that HGF was the most
dominantly induced factor after SHH treatment or serumstarvation (Supplementary Figure S5A and Supplementary
Figure S5B). Because gene expression analysis of HGF
using standard quantitative PCR procedure frequently
produced instable results, presumably due to the presence

Figure 3: HHIP overexpression significantly inhibited cell proliferation, clonogenicity, invasion, and tumor spheroid
formation in serum-starvation state. LAC cell lines overexpressing HHIP or RFP as control protein (Ctrl) were analyzed for their
(A) proliferation rate, (B)# clonogenicity in 2D culture dish, (C) invasion activity in matrigel-coated transwell, in mediums containing
10% FBS, 1% FBS, or 1% Nu-serum. (D) The tumor spheroid formation analysis was performed by seeding HCC827 cells in serumfree matrigel. For tumor formation analysis, 1 × 106 HCC827 cells were implanted subcutaneously in nude mice, and measured for (E)
tumor size, and (F) tumor weight after sacrificed on day 35. (G) The photo of resected tumors. Independent-Samples T-Test were used
to evaluate the significance of differences among samples. *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01. n = 3 for (A) and (C), n = 6 for (D), n = 8 for (E–G).
#H358 generally formed smaller colonies in 1% FBS. For a clear vision, the full-size original image of H358 colonies was provided in
Supplementary Figure S3.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

24183

Oncotarget

non-specific products (Supplementary Figure  S5C), we
then used end-point PCR to verify HGF gene expression.
We observed that HGF was significantly induced within
72  hr after serum-starvation (Figure  4B). The protein
level of GLI1 and phospho-MET (pMET) were also
enhanced after serum-starvation (Figure 4C). Notably,
overexpression of HHIP blocked these inductions
(Figure 4B and 4C), suggesting that HGF/MET signaling
was downstream of HH pathway. Similarly, knockdown of
GLI1 reduced endogenous level of pMET (Supplementary
Figure S5E). Serum-starvation or SHH treatment induced
the expression of GLI1, but not HHIP, confirming that the
epigenetic silencing of HHIP prevented its expression after
HH pathway activation (Figure  4C and Supplementary
Figure S5D). Taken together, these combined results
indicated that under stress conditions such as serumstarvation, HH pathway was activated, which then
induced the HGF expression and MET phosphorylation.
Overexpression of HHIP blocked such inductions,
suggesting that the silencing of HHIP was a critical step
to potentiate HH activation and to maintain cell survival
under stress conditions.

(Figure 6B). These results indicated that HH pathway can
be activated and improve cell survival in the treatment of
EGFR-TKI.

HH pathway maintained cell survival and
growth in LAC cells with acquired resistance to
EGFR-TKI
Finally, we investigated the role of HH pathway
in LAC cells with acquired resistance to EGFRTKI. Primary lung tumor cells isolated from patients
relapsed from EGFR-TKI treatment (Supplementary
Table S1) were analyzed for HH gene expressions. The
results showed that among the five relapsed samples
(CLH27, 13, 24, 31, and 21), three showed both much
higher SHH and GLI1 gene expressions (CLH27,  13,
and 24), and one showed only high GLI1 expression
(CLH21), as compared to the samples untreated (CLH9)
or irresponsive to EGFR-TKI (CLH1 and 2) (Figure 7A
and Supplementary Figure S7C). Like previous results,
HHIP gene expression was reduced in these tumor cells
as compared to normal fibroblast (NF) obtained from
normal tissue of patients (Supplementary Figure S7A
and Supplementary Figure S7B). Some tumor cells that
can be stably cultured were tested for sensitivities to
drugs. As expected, all cells showed low sensitivity to
Gefitinib except CLH9 (Figure  7B). In contrast, cells
from CLH27 were much more sensitive to Cyclopamine
(an HH inhibitor) or Crizotinib (an MET inhibitor)
comparing to others (Figure 7C and 7D). Overexpression
of HHIP significantly suppressed the clonogenicity of
CLH27 but not others, even in normal culture condition
(10% FBS) (Figure 7E). In serum-free 3D matrix, HHIP
overexpression significantly inhibited spheroid formation
in CLH9 and 27 cells (Figure  7F and Supplementary
Figure  S7H). Similar results were observed in our
laboratory-generated HCC827 cell lines with acquired
resistant to EGFR-TKI (Supplementary Figure  S7D–
S7F), showing that resistant cells were more sensitive
to Cyclopamine or Crizotinib as compared to parental
cells. Finally, western-blot analysis confirmed that
CLH27 cells showed higher MET phosphorylation level,
which can be inhibited by Cyclopamine (Figure 7F),
confirming that HGF/MET is a downstream of HH
pathway in these cells. All together, these combined
results showed that a part of LAC cells with acquired
resistance to EGFR-TKI showed higher HH pathway
activity, and were more sensitive to HH and HGF/MET
inhibitors. Finally, methylation status of HHIP promoter
in primary cell lines were analyzed. Unexpectedly,
except for CLH9 (patient untreated for EGFR-TKI), cells
from recurrent tumors showed little methylation on HHIP
promoter, as analyzed by MSP or BS (Supplementary
Figure S8). These results suggested that mechanism(s)
other than DNA methylation still exists to suppress HHIP
expression (Supplementary Figure S7A and S7B).

HGF recovered the clonogenicity and invasion
activity blocked by HHIP in serum starvation
state
We then tried to verify whether HGF/MET plays
an important role downstream of HH pathway. The
recombinant HGF was added into cells cultured in
mediums containing 10% or 1% FBS. The results showed
that HGF recovered the invasion activity that was reduced
in serum-starvation state in cells overexpressing HHIP,
but showed minimal effect in control cells (Figure 5A).
HGF also partially recovered the clonogenicity that was
lost in serum-starvation state in cells overexpressing
HHIP, but showed little effect in control cells (Figure 5B,
and Supplementary Figure  S6 for full-size images).
However, HGF was not able to recover the sphere
forming ability in HCC827 cells overexpressing HHIP
(data not shown).

Blocking HH pathway enhanced the sensitivity
of LAC cells to EGFR-TKI
Since HH pathway can be activated in serumstarvation state to improve cell survival, we asked whether
it can be also activated in response to drug treatment.
LAC cells were treated with EGFR-TKI (Gefitinib), and
the result showed that within 48  hr, the surviving cells
showed enhanced GLI1 expression (Figure  6A). Once
more, overexpression of HHIP blocked the induction.
The clonogenicity was also tested, and the result showed
HHIP overexpression significantly reduced the colony
numbers when LAC cells were treated with EGFR-TKI
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

24184

Oncotarget

DISCUSSION

including SHH, PTCH, SMO, and GLI1 showed negative
to weak expressions, and have no correlation with
clinical outcomes [17]. In contrast, some studies reported
that GLI1 and SHH can be positively stained in a large
percentage of NSCLC samples (> 85%), and a subset of
NSCLC cell lines were sensitive to HH inhibitors [18, 19].
The clinical outcome also showed contradictory results
concerning the overall and progression-free survival in

In previous studies, controversial conclusions have
been made concerning the role of HH pathway in NSCLC.
It was initially identified in 2003 that ligand-dependent
HH pathway maintained the malignant phenotype of a
subset of SCLC, but was low or inactive in NSCLC [16].
A recent study also showed that HH pathway components,

Figure 4: Hedgehog pathway was activated in serum-starvation state, which induced HGF expression and MET
phosphorylation in LAC cells, while HHIP overexpression blocked such inductions. (A) Gene expressions of GLI1 and
SHH were measured using qPCR 24 or 48 hrs after serum-starvation (1% FBS) in LAC cells overexpressing HHIP or RFP (Ctrl). (B) HGF
gene expression was detected using end-point PCR in LAC HHIP/Ctrl cells at indicated time points after serum-starvation (1% FBS),
and quantified. (C) protein levels of pMET, MET, and GLI1 were detected using western-blot in LAC HHIP/Ctrl cells at indicated time
points after serum-starvation (1% FBS). Independent-Samples T-Test were used to evaluate the significance of differences among samples.
*P < 0.05, **P < 0.01. n = 3 for (A) and (B).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

24185

Oncotarget

Supplementary Figure S1). In vitro analysis showed that
most LAC cell lines did not express significantly enhanced
SHH or GLI1 than non-tumor lung epithelial cells, but had
a remarkably reduced HHIP expression (Figure 1B and
1C). These results support the previous studies showing
that HH pathway was weak or inactive in most LAC
tumors [16, 17]. Nevertheless, our data showed that the
negative regulator of HH pathway, HHIP, was aberrantly
suppressed.
We then found that HHIP promoter was
epigenetically silenced in LAC, like previous reports
in other cancer types [25–29], The analysis of 492
LAC patient samples showed that HHIP promoter
was significantly hypermethylated in tumor, and the
methylation level was significantly associated with

patients with high HH activity [21,  30]. These studies
mainly relied on the immunohistochemical staining on
SHH and GLI1 in tumor tissue arrays as indication of
HH activity. Besides the different antibodies and staining
procedures used that may raise inconsistent results, the
simultaneous staining of paired tumor and adjacent normal
tissue was absent. Only a small number of normal tissues
were investigated in 2 studies (5 normal vs. 115 tumors
[18], and 20 normal vs. 87 tumor [19] samples).
To approach the problem, we first compared the
gene expression of HH pathway components between
tumor and paired normal tissues. The analysis of
3  microarray data sets (GSE19804, GSE27262, and
GSE10072) showed that all HH components, except for
HHIP, had an average T/N ratio close to 1 (Figure 1A and

Figure 5: HGF treatment recovered the clonogenicity and invasion activities that were suppressed in LAC cells
overexpressing HHIP in serum-starvation state. (A) The invasion activity of HCC827 and (B) the clonogenicity of HCC827
and H358 cells overexpressing HHIP or RFP (Ctrl) were tested. Cells were cultured in the medium containing 10% FBS, 1% FBS, or 1%
Nu-serum, with or without addition of HGF (20 ng/ml). Error bars indicate SD. Independent-Samples T-Test were used to evaluate the
significance of differences among samples. *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01. n = 5 for (A), n = 3 for (B).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

24186

Oncotarget

gene expression (Supplementary Figure  S2B and
Supplementary Figure  S2C). BS and MSP analyses in
LAC cell lines showed similar results (Figure 2). The only
exception was A549, which showed simultaneously high
levels of HHIP, GLI1, and SHH mRNA (Figure 1B). In
accordance, HHIP promoter in A549 was little methylated,
and the HHIP expression did not respond to TSA/5’Azc
treatment (Figure 2). However, in protein level of GLI1
and HHIP, A549 showed the same results with other LAC
cell lines (Figure  1C). This exception suggested that
mechanism(s) other than promoter methylation and gene
expression still exists to suppress HHIP protein expression
in LAC.
We then tried to Figure out why the downregulation of HHIP in LAC cells was not accompanied
by up-regulations of GLI1 and SHH. Since stemness
pathways have been implicated in cell survival against
stress conditions instead of keeping active [11, 12], we
hypothesized that HH pathway could be conditionally
activated, and the silencing of HHIP potentiates such

induction. To test the hypothesis, we investigated
the outcome of HHIP overexpression in LAC cells
in serum-starvation state. We found that while HHIP
overexpression did not significantly inhibit cell functions,
such as proliferation, clonogenicity, and invasion under
normal culture condition (10% FBS), it did when cells
were cultured in serum-starvation state (1% FBS or 1%
Nu-serum) (Figure  3A–3C). LAC cells overexpressing
HHIP formed much less spheroids in serum-free 3D
matrix (Figure 3D, 7F and Supplementary Figure S7H).
The formation of non-adherent sphere is a widely-applied
laboratory method to evaluate stemness activity for both
normal and cancer cells [31]. Inhibition of spheroid
formation by HHIP suggested that HH pathway was
activated and drove cell survive and self-renewal in stress
condition. Similar outcome was shown in subcutaneous
tumor formation analysis in vivo, an avascular
environment short of serum support. We found that cells
overexpressing HHIP exhibited defective tumor initiation
and growth activity in nude mice (Figure 3E–3G).

Figure 6: HH pathway was induced in LAC cells when treated with EGFR-TKI, while HHIP blocked such induction
and further sensitized cells to EGFR-TKI treatment. (A) The GLI1 gene expression was detected using qPCR at indicated time
points after EGFR-TKI (Gefitinib, 100  nM) treatment in HCC827 cells overexpressing HHIP or RFP (Ctrl). (B) The clonogenicity of
HCC827 HHIP/Ctrl cells was analyzed in 2D culture dish with the treatment of Gefitinib at indicated concentrations, and quantified. All
cells were cultured in medium contain 10% FBS. Error bars indicate SD. Independent-Samples T-Test were used to evaluate the significance
of differences among samples. *P < 0.05. n = 3 for (A), n = 4 for (B).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

24187

Oncotarget

Figure 7: HH pathway maintained cell survival and growth in LAC cells with acquired resistance to EGFR-TKI
through HGF/MET. (A) LAC tumor samples obtained from patients relapsed from EGFR-TKI treatment (Supplementary Table S1)

were analyzed for GLI1 and SHH gene expressions using qPCR. The gene expressions were normalized by 18S in respective samples, and
then compared to a patient sample untreated for EGFR-TKI (CLH9). Primary cultured normal fibroblast (NF) and tumor cells were analyzed
for survival curve against (B) Gefitinib, (C) Cyclopamine, or (D) Crizotinib treatment. (E) Primary cultured tumor cells overexpressing
HHIP or RFP (Ctrl) were analyzed for the clonogenicity in 2D culture dish. (F) CLH27 cells overexpressing HHIP or RFP were analyzed
for spheroid formation in serum-free 3D matrix, and the spheroid numbers were quantified. (G) Three primary cultured tumor cells were
analyzed for EGFR and MET phosphorylation levels against different drug treatments using Western-Blot. D: DMSO, G: Gefitinib, Cy:
Cyclopamine, Crz: Crizotinib. *P < 0.05. **P < 0.01. n = 3 for (B), (C), (D), and (E). n = 6 for (F). All cells were cultured in medium
contain 10% FBS, except for (F).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

24188

Oncotarget

Therefore, the combined data above suggest that in
LAC cells, HH pathway serves as a survival signaling,
which is inactive or kept in low level under normal
condition, but is activated in stress conditions to maintain
cell survival, proliferation, and self-renewal. In normal
cells, HHIP expression can be induced after the activation
of HH pathway because HHIP is a transcription target of
GLI1, and HHIP-mediated negative regulatory feedback
loop plays an important role in development [24]. In
lung cancer, however, the expression of HHIP cannot be
induced because of epigenetic silencing (Figures 2 and
4C and Supplementary Figure S4D), which leads to an
aberrantly activated HH pathway. The silencing of HHIP
in LAC thus plays an important role to potentiate the
activation of HH pathway under stress conditions. These
findings could also explain why past studies using GLI1
or SHH as biomarkers made controversial conclusions
for the importance of HH pathway in NSCLC [16–
21, 30], because the two factors are conditionally, but not
constitutively activated.
We also defined that HGF/MET signaling is an
important downstream of HH pathway. HGF gene
expression and MET phosphorylation can be induced
in response to SHH treatment or serum-starvation
(Figure  4B and 4C, Supplementary Figure  S5A–S5C),
while overexpression of HHIP blocked such inductions.
Knockdown of GLI1 also reduced the endogenous
level of phosphor-MET (Supplementary Figure  S5E).
Unexpectedly, although addition of recombinant HGF
recovered the invasion and (partially) 2D colony forming
ability of LAC cells overexpressing HHIP in serumstarvation state (Figure 5), it cannot recover the spheroidforming ability inhibited by HHIP (data not shown). These
results suggest that besides HGF/MET, HH pathway still
drives other oncogenic signalings to maintain cell survival
and self-renewal in stress conditions, which deserve
further studies. The interaction between HH and HGF/
MET signalings has also been reported in other cell type.
Lim et al. showed that HH pathway reduced HGF level
in stromal cells during prostate branching morphogenesis,
in contrast to our finding [32]. This difference reflects
that the function of HH pathway can be diverse in
different cell types, which further complicate its role in
microenvironment in vivo.
Serum-starvation is a general laboratory procedure
to mediate stress conditions, which can induce nutrient
deprivation, hypoxia, or autophagy in cancer cells [33].
However, serum-starvation is hard to link directly to a
single specific physiological condition. We thus tested
whether EGFR-TKI treatment could also generate a stress
condition and induce HH and HGF/MET signalings. The
results confirmed that although a lot of LAC cells died
after EGFR-TKI treatment within 48 hr (data not shown),
GLI1 expression was induced in surviving cells, and once
more, the overexpression of HHIP blocked such induction

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

(Figure  6A). Overexpression of HHIP made cells
significantly more susceptible to EGFR-TKI treatment
(Figure  6B). We then investigated the importance of
HH pathway in LAC cells with acquired resistance to
EGFR-TKI, a major problem of LAC treatment in clinic.
In both laboratory-established and clinically obtained
LAC cells stably resistant to EGFR-TKI, a tendency
of growth dependence on HH pathway was observed
(Figure 7, Supplementary Figure S7 and Supplementary
Table  S1). Three of the 5 EGFR-TKI resistant primary
LAC tumors showed higher expressions of both SHH and
GLI1 as compared to tumors untreated or irresponsive
to EGFR-TKI (Figure 7A and Supplementary Table S1).
Primary cells of CLH27  were much more susceptible
to Cyclopamine, Crizotinib, or HHIP overexpression
(Figure 7C–7F). CLH27 showed high pMET level, which
can be inhibited by Cyclopamine, confirming that HH is
a upstream of HGF/MET in these cells (Figure 7G). Cells
from CLH21, a relapsed LAC tumor harboring EGFRT790M mutation, were not sensitive to Cyclopamine or
HHIP overexpression, presumably due to the T790Mdriven EGFR activation that maintained cell survival
(Supplementary Table  S1 and Figure  7C–7E). CLH21
showed only high expression of GLI1 but not SHH
(Figure 7A and Supplementary Figure S7C), suggesting
that GLI1 might be induced through non-canonical HH
pathway. Whether GLI1 plays a role in T790M-driven
EGFR-TKI resistance remains to be investigated. In
summary, these combined data would suggest that a part of
tumor cells have activated HH pathways to survive against
EGFR-TKI treatment, and then shifted their oncogenic
addiction to HH pathway for a long-term maintenance
of cell growth. Finally, the methylation status of HHIP
promoter in EGFR-TKI resistant cells were investigated.
Unexpectedly, primary cell lines with acquired resistance
to TKI (CLH13, 21, 24, 27, 31) showed little methylation
on HHIP promoter (Supplementary Figure  S8), while
the HHIP expression was still repressed in both mRNA
and protein levels (Supplementary Figure S7A and
Supplementary Figure  S7B). These results suggest that
promoter methylation was not the only mechanism to
repress HHIP expression. How EGFR-TKI resistant cells
down-regulate HHIP and maintain HH pathway activity
deserves further dissection.
In conclusion, our current study demonstrates
the importance of HH pathway in LAC. HH pathway
is inactive or kept in low level under normal condition,
but is highly induced in response to stress conditions
and maintains cell survival. The silencing of HHIP
is required for the induction of HH and HGF/MET
pathways. Overexpression of HHIP makes LAC cells
much more susceptible to stress conditions. In LAC cells
with acquired resistance to EGFR-TKI, a part of cells
may shift their oncogene addiction from EGFR to HH
pathway. Targeting HH pathway through inhibitors or

24189

Oncotarget

HHIP recombinant protein thus holds promise to address
EGFR-TKI resistance of LAC. Future studies will focus
on how HH pathway is induced in response to stress, and
how it maintains the oncogenic phenotype of LAC cells
other than HGF/MET signaling. Finally, because of the
limitation in the availability of EGFR-TKI resistant LAC
tumors from relapsed patients, only a small number of
samples were tested, and only 4 primary tumor cells can
be adapted to stable culture and drug test. More samples
will be necessary to confirm the clinical relevance of HH
pathway in EGFR-TKI resistance.

(clone ID: TRCN0000020485) that expresses the shRNA
against GLI1 was obtained from the National RNAi Core
Facility, Academia Sinica (Taipei, Taiwan), with the target
sequence: CCTGATTATCTTCCTTCAGAA.

Bisulfite sequencing (BS) and methylationspecific PCR (MSP) analysis of HHIP promoter
BS-specific primers (HHIP-BS-F and HHIPBS-R) and BS process were performed according a
previous publication [35] (Supplementary Figure  S2,
Supplementary Table S2). Sequencing of CT converted
HHIP promoters was performed in IBMS Core Facility
(Academia Sinica). The methylation state was analyzed
using BiQ Analyzer (http://biq-analyzer.bioinf.mpi-inf.
mpg.de, Max Planck Institut Informatik, Germany).
MSP was performed according to a previous report [36]
(Supplementary Figure S2), and the primers (HHIP-MSPMeth-F, HHIP-MSP-Meth-R, HHIP-MSP-nonMeth-F,
and HHIP-MSP-nonMeth-R) are listed in Supplementary
Table S2.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Cell culture
Human LAC cell lines A549 (ATCC CCL-185),
H1975 (ATCC CRL-5908), HCC827 (ATCC CRL-2868),
and H358 (ATCC CRL-5807) were cultured in RPMI
medium containing 10% fetal bovine serum as previously
described [34]. Growth factors HGF (R & D Systems), and
anti-cancer drugs Gefitinib (Cell Signaling), Crizotinib
(Cell Signaling), and Cyclopamine (Santa Cruz) were
added to the culture medium in conditions as indicated in
Figure legends.

Reverse transcription-PCR
Quantitative PCR was performed as previously
described [37], and the primers used are listed on
Supplementary Table  S2. For detection of HGF gene
expression, end-point PCR and gel electrophorsis were
performed. RNA was reverse transcribed using the gene
specific primer HGF-1259R, and the cDNA was subjected
to PCR using the primer pair HGF-739F and HGF-964R.
For internal control, the same RNA sample was reversed
transcribed using random hexamer, and 18S was measured
using the primer 18S-F and 18S-R. The thermo-cycle
program is listed on Supplementary Table S3.

Primary cultures of tumor cells from LAC
patients
EGFR-TKI resistant LAC cells were harvested
from malignant pleural effusion of patients who were
refractory to EGFR-TKI at the National Taiwan University
Hospital (NTUH) (Supplementary Table S1). All cells in
pleural effusion were collected by centrifuge, and RBCs
were removed using RBC lysis buffer. After wash and
centrifuge, the cells were seeded in 12-well plates (5 × 105
cells/well) at 37°C in a humidified atmosphere containing
20% O2 and 5%CO2. Serum-free culture medium was
used to prevent fibroblast overgrowth. After 12~24 hours,
suspension cells in the wells were collected and cultured
in a new plate with RPMI medium containing 10% FBS.

Western-blotting
Western-Blotting was performed as previously
described [37]. Primary Antibodies included AntiGLI1 (Rabbit monoclonal, Abcam), Anti-HHIP (Rabbit
polyclonal, Genetex), Anti-β-tubulin (Mouse monoclonal,
Enogene), Anti-Met (Rabbit monoclonal, Cell Signaling
Technology), and Anti-phospho-Met (Rabbit monoclonal,
Cell Signaling Technology). Secondary antibodies
included Anti-rabbit IgG (Goat polyclonal, Peroxidase
conjugated, Merck Millipore) and Anti-mouse IgG (Goat
polyclonal, Peroxidase conjugated, Merck Millipore).

Plasmids
Lentiviral vectors pLAS3w.RFP-C.Ppuro and
pLAS3w.Ppuro were purchased from National RNAi
Core Facility Platform (Academia Sinica). HHIP and
GLI1 cDNA (library NIH_MGC_17) were obtained from
VYM Genome Research Center (National Yang-Ming
University). HHIP and GLI1 cDNAs were amplified
by PCR and ligated into pLAS3w.Ppuro via NheI,
EcoRV, and PstI sites downstream of CAG promoter
to generate pLAS3w.HHIP.Ppuro and pLAS3w.GLI1.
Ppuro expression vectors, respectively. pLKO.1-shGLI1

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

2D colony formation assay
HCC827 (2000 cells/well) or H358 (5000 cells/
well) cells were seeded in 6-well plates in RPMI medium
containing 10%, or 1% FBS as indicated on the figures, for
20–24 days without replenishing medium. HCC827 cells

24190

Oncotarget

cultured in medium containing 10% FBS were cultured
for only 10–14  days, preventing the overgrowth of
colonies (Supplementary Figure S6B). For the experiment
evaluating the effect of HGF (Figure  5), the medium
containing 0 or 20 ng/ml of HGF was refreshed every 3 or
4 days. At the end of experiment, cells were washed twice
with PBS and fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde for 15 min,
and then stained with 0.1% crystal violet for 30 min, and
de-stained with distilled water.

Biotechnology Information (GEO, NCBI). The expression
levels of HH pathway component genes between each
tumor and the paired normal tissue were compared and
presented as T/N ratios (gene expression level in tumor
divided by that in normal tissue) on the figures.

Study approval
For primary culture of LAC tumor cells, the samples
were procured and utilized according to approved IRB
protocols for research on human subjects (ClinicalTrials
registration ID: NCT00752076). Animal experiment
protocols are approved by Institutional Animal Care and
Utilization Committee (IACUC 14-02-647, Academia
Sinica).

In vitro tumor spheroid formation assay
Before experiment, 96-well plates were coated
with 0.7% agarose (50 μl/well) and incubated at room
temperature for more than 1  hr. HCC827 HHIP/Ctrl
cells were suspended in Matrigel (BD Biosciences) and
loaded on the top of agarose layer (2000 cells/30 μl/well),
incubated at room temperature for more than 30  min.
To avoid pipetting error, mixtures for 6 replicates were
prepared in one tube, and loaded to 5  wells. DMEM/
F12  medium containing 1 × N-2 Supplement (Thermo
Fisher Scientific Inc.), 50 ng/ml of EGF, and 20 ng/ml of
FGF was added to wells (200 μl/well), and refreshed every
3 or 4 days. Cells were cultured for 14 days. The spheroids
were examined and imaged with a ZEISS Observer
A1 microscopy under 2.5X and 10X object lens.

Statistics
The statistic significances of the experimental
results were assessed by Independent-Samples T-Test
(Two-tailed) or Paired T-Test (for clinical samples
containing paired tumor and normal parts) using
SigmaPlot v.12 (Systat Software Inc.). P < 0.05 is
considered significant.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

Invasion assay

We appreciate the material and technical supports
coming from Taiwan Mouse Clinic (funded by the National
Research Program for Biopharmaceuticals (NRPB) at the
National Science Council (NSC)), Pathology Core Lab
(IBMS, Academia Sinica, Taipei), and Genome Research
Center (National Yang-Ming University, Taipei).

Non-transparent trans-wells (BD Biosciences) were
coated with 7 μl of matrigel (BD Biosciences). 2 × 104
cells were suspended in 200 μl of RPMI containing 10%
FBS, 1% FBS or 1% Nu-serum (a low-protein cell growth
supplement, BD Biosciences), and seeded on matrigel.
Eighteen hr later, cells were fixed with methanol and
stained with Hoechst (Invitrogen). The invasion cells were
imaged using fluorescent microscopy and quantified with
ImageJ software.

GRANT SUPPORT
This research was supported by Ministry of Science
and Technology, Taiwan (MOST 103-2325-B-010-007
and MOST 103-2321-B-010-022), Ministry of Health and
Welfare, Taiwan (MOHW104-TDU-B-211-124-001) and
National Yang-Ming University (Aim for top, 104AC- P902).

In vivo tumor formation assay
Five-week-old nude mice (BALB/cAnN.CgFoxn1  nu/CrlNarl) were purchased from National
Laboratory Animal Center (Taipei, Taiwan), and
maintained in Taiwan Mouse Clinic (IBMS, Academia
Sinica). HCC827 cells overexpressing HHIP or RFP (as
control protein) were subcutaneously injected into the
flank region of mice (1 × 106 cells/mouse). Tumor sizes
were measured weekly with a dial caliper. All mice were
sacrificed 5  weeks after injection, and the tumors were
resected, weighed, and photographed.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
The authors have declared that no conflicts of
interest exists.

REFERENCES
  1.	 Soria JC, Mok TS, Cappuzzo F, Janne PA. EGFR-mutated
oncogene-addicted non-small cell lung cancer: current
trends and future prospects. Cancer treatment reviews.
2012; 38:416–430.

Microarray data analysis
The microarray data sets GSE19804, GSE27262,
and GSE10072  were retrieved from the public domain
of Gene Expression Omnibus on National Center for
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

  2.	 Sharma SV, Bell DW, Settleman J, Haber DA. Epidermal
growth factor receptor mutations in lung cancer. Nature
reviews Cancer. 2007; 7:169–181.
24191

Oncotarget

  3.	 Linardou H, Dahabreh IJ, Bafaloukos D, Kosmidis P,
Murray S. Somatic EGFR mutations and efficacy of
tyrosine kinase inhibitors in NSCLC. Nature reviews
Clinical oncology. 2009; 6:352–366.

16.	 Watkins DN, Berman DM, Burkholder SG, Wang B,
Beachy PA, Baylin SB. Hedgehog signalling within airway
epithelial progenitors and in small-cell lung cancer. Nature.
2003; 422:313–317.

  4.	 Carter CA, Giaccone G. Treatment of nonsmall cell lung
cancer: overcoming the resistance to epidermal growth
factor receptor inhibitors. Current opinion in oncology.
2012; 24:123–129.

17.	 Savani M, Guo Y, Carbone DP, Csiki I. Sonic hedgehog
pathway expression in non-small cell lung cancer.
Therapeutic advances in medical oncology. 2012; 4:
225–233.

  5.	 Oxnard GR, Arcila ME, Chmielecki J, Ladanyi M,
Miller VA, Pao W. New strategies in overcoming acquired
resistance to epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine
kinase inhibitors in lung cancer. Clinical cancer research.
2011; 17:5530–5537.

18.	 Yuan Z, Goetz JA, Singh S, Ogden SK, Petty WJ, Black CC,
Memoli VA, Dmitrovsky E, Robbins DJ. Frequent
requirement of hedgehog signaling in non-small cell lung
carcinoma. Oncogene. 2007; 26:1046–1055.
19.	 Yang Q, Shen SS, Zhou S, Ni J, Chen D, Wang G, Li Y.
STAT3 activation and aberrant ligand-dependent sonic
hedgehog signaling in human pulmonary adenocarcinoma.
Experimental and molecular pathology. 2012; 93:227–236.

  6.	 Engelman JA, Zejnullahu K, Mitsudomi T, Song Y,
Hyland  C, Park JO, Lindeman N, Gale CM, Zhao X,
Christensen J, Kosaka T, Holmes AJ, Rogers AM, et al.
MET amplification leads to gefitinib resistance in lung
cancer by activating ERBB3 signaling. Science. 2007;
316:1039–1043.

20.	 Hong Z, Bi A, Chen D, Gao L, Yin Z, Luo L. Activation of
hedgehog signaling pathway in human non-small cell lung
cancers. Pathology oncology research. 2014; 20:917–922.

  7.	 Yano S, Wang W, Li Q, Matsumoto K, Sakurama H,
Nakamura T, Ogino H, Kakiuchi S, Hanibuchi M,
Nishioka  Y, Uehara H, Mitsudomi T, Yatabe Y, et  al.
Hepatocyte growth factor induces gefitinib resistance
of lung adenocarcinoma with epidermal growth factor
receptor-activating mutations. Cancer research. 2008;
68:9479–9487.

21.	 Hwang J, Kang MH, Yoo YA, Quan YH, Kim HK, Oh SC,
Choi YH. The effects of sonic hedgehog signaling pathway
components on non-small-cell lung cancer progression and
clinical outcome. World journal of surgical oncology. 2014;
12:268.
22.	 Chuang PT, McMahon AP. Vertebrate Hedgehog signalling
modulated by induction of a Hedgehog-binding protein.
Nature. 1999; 397:617–621.

  8.	 Kasahara K, Arao T, Sakai K, Matsumoto K, Sakai A,
Kimura H, Sone T, Horiike A, Nishio M, Ohira T, Ikeda N,
Yamanaka T, Saijo N, et al. Impact of serum hepatocyte
growth factor on treatment response to epidermal growth
factor receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitors in patients with
non-small cell lung adenocarcinoma. Clinical cancer
research. 2010; 16:4616–4624.

23.	 Bosanac I, Maun HR, Scales SJ, Wen X, Lingel A, Bazan JF,
de Sauvage FJ, Hymowitz SG, Lazarus RA. The structure of
SHH in complex with HHIP reveals a recognition role for
the Shh pseudo active site in signaling. Nature structural
and molecular biology. 2009; 16:691–697.
24.	 Chuang PT, Kawcak T, McMahon AP. Feedback control of
mammalian Hedgehog signaling by the Hedgehog-binding
protein, Hip1, modulates Fgf signaling during branching
morphogenesis of the lung. Genes Dev. 2003; 17:342–347.

  9.	 Leprivier G, Rotblat B, Khan D, Jan E, Sorensen PH. Stressmediated translational control in cancer cells. Biochimica et
biophysica acta. 2015; 1849:845–860.
10.	 Dobbelstein M, Sorensen CS. Exploiting replicative stress
to treat cancer. Nat Rev Drug Discov. 2015; 14:405–423.

25.	 Taniguchi H, Yamamoto H, Akutsu N, Nosho K, Adachi Y,
Imai K, Shinomura Y. Transcriptional silencing of
hedgehog-interacting protein by CpG hypermethylation
and chromatic structure in human gastrointestinal cancer. J
Pathol. 2007; 213:131–139.

11.	 Pisco AO, Huang S. Non-genetic cancer cell plasticity and
therapy-induced stemness in tumour relapse: ‘What does
not kill me strengthens me’. British journal of cancer. 2015;
112:1725–1732.

13.	 Amakye D, Jagani Z, Dorsch M. Unraveling the therapeutic
potential of the Hedgehog pathway in cancer. Nature
medicine. 2013; 19:1410–1422.

26.	 Tada M, Kanai F, Tanaka Y, Tateishi K, Ohta M, Asaoka Y,
Seto M, Muroyama R, Fukai K, Imazeki F, Kawabe T,
Yokosuka O, Omata M. Down-regulation of hedgehoginteracting protein through genetic and epigenetic
alterations in human hepatocellular carcinoma. Clinical
cancer research. 2008; 14:3768–3776.

14.	 Borah A, Raveendran S, Rochani A, Maekawa T, Kumar DS.
Targeting self-renewal pathways in cancer stem cells:
clinical implications for cancer therapy. Oncogenesis. 2015;
4:e177.

27.	 Eichenmuller M, Gruner I, Hagl B, Haberle B, MullerHocker J, von Schweinitz D, Kappler R. Blocking the
hedgehog pathway inhibits hepatoblastoma growth.
Hepatology. 2009; 49:482–490.

15.	 Brechbiel J, Miller-Moslin K, Adjei AA. Crosstalk between
hedgehog and other signaling pathways as a basis for
combination therapies in cancer. Cancer treatment reviews.
2014; 40:750–759.

28.	 Shahi MH, Afzal M, Sinha S, Eberhart CG, Rey JA, Fan X,
Castresana JS. Human hedgehog interacting protein expression
and promoter methylation in medulloblastoma cell lines and
primary tumor samples. J Neurooncol. 2011; 103:287–296.

12.	 Yoshida GJ, Saya H. Therapeutic strategies targeting cancer
stem cells. Cancer science. 2016; 107:5–11.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

24192

Oncotarget

29.	 Martin ST, Sato N, Dhara S, Chang R, Hustinx SR, Abe T,
Maitra A, Goggins M. Aberrant methylation of the Human
Hedgehog interacting protein (HHIP) gene in pancreatic
neoplasms. Cancer biology and therapy. 2005; 4:728–733.

34.	 Chou YT, Lee CC, Hsiao SH, Lin SE, Lin SC, Chung CH,
Chung CH, Kao YR, Wang YH, Chen CT, Wei YH,
Wu CW. The Emerging Role of SOX2 in Cell Proliferation
and Survival and Its Crosstalk with Oncogenic Signaling in
Lung Cancer. Stem cells. 2013; 31:2607–2619.

30.	 Kim JE, Kim H, Choe JY, Sun P, Jheon S, Chung JH. High
expression of Sonic hedgehog signaling proteins is related
to the favorable outcome, EGFR mutation, and lepidic
predominant subtype in primary lung adenocarcinoma.
Annals of surgical oncology. 2013; 20:S570–576.

35.	 Song Y, Tian Y, Zuo Y, Tu JC, Feng YF, Qu CJ. Altered
expression of PTCH and HHIP in gastric cancer through
their gene promoter methylation: novel targets for gastric
cancer. Mol Med Rep. 2013; 7:1159–1168.

31.	 Visvader JE, Lindeman GJ. Cancer stem cells in solid
tumours: accumulating evidence and unresolved questions.
Nature reviews Cancer. 2008; 8:755–768.

36.	 Song Y, Zuo Y. Occurrence of HHIP gene CpG island
methylation in gastric cancer. Oncology letters. 2014;
8:2340–2344.

32.	 Lim A, Shin K, Zhao C, Kawano S, Beachy PA. Spatially
restricted Hedgehog signalling regulates HGF-induced
branching of the adult prostate. Nat Cell Biol. 2014;
16:1135–1145.

37.	 Kuo HY, Chen YC, Chang HY, Jeng JC, Lin EH, Pan CM,
Chang YW, Wang ML, Chou YT, Shih HM, Wu CW. The
PML isoform IV is a negative regulator of nuclear EGFR’s
transcriptional activity in lung cancer. Carcinogenesis.
2013; 34:1708–1716.

33.	 Pirkmajer S, Chibalin AV. Serum starvation: caveat emptor.
American journal of physiology Cell physiology. 2011;
301:C272–279.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

24193

Oncotarget

