Research Article

In vivo Real-time Tracking of Single Quantum Dots Conjugated
with Monoclonal Anti-HER2 Antibody in Tumors of Mice
1

2

2

1

Hiroshi Tada, Hideo Higuchi, Tomonobu M. Wanatabe, and Noriaki Ohuchi
1
Division of Surgical Oncology, Graduate School of Medicine and 2Biomedical Engineering Research, Organization,
Tohoku University, Sendai, Japan

Abstract
Studies with tracking of single nanoparticles are providing
new insights into the interactions and processes involved in
the transport of drug carriers in living mice. Here, we report
the tracking of a single particle quantum dot (Qdot)
conjugated with tumor-targeting antibody in tumors of living
mice using a dorsal skinfold chamber and a high-speed
confocal microscope with a high-sensitivity camera. Qdot
labeled with the monoclonal anti-HER2 antibody was injected
into mice with HER2-overexpressing breast cancer to analyze
the molecular processes of its mechanistic delivery to the
tumor. Movement of single complexes of the Qdot-antibody
could be clearly observed at 30 frames/s inside the tumor
through a dorsal skinfold chamber. We successfully identified
six processes of delivery: initially in the circulation within a
blood vessel, during extravasation, in the extracelullar region,
binding to HER2 on the cell membrane, moving from the cell
membrane to the perinuclear region, and in the perinuclear
region. The six processes were quantitatively analyzed to
understand the rate-limiting constraints on Qdot-antibody
delivery. The movement of the complexes at each stage was
‘‘stop-and-go.’’ The image analysis of the delivery processes of
single particles in vivo provides valuable information on
antibody-conjugated therapeutic nanoparticles, which will
be useful in increasing therapeutic efficacy. [Cancer Res
2007;67(3):1138–44]

Introduction
Recent anticancer therapeutics based on active tumor targeting
by conjugating tumor-specific antibodies has become of great
interest in oncology, pharmacology, and nanomedicine. This
approach will allow to increase therapeutic efficacy and to
decrease systemic toxicity (1–3). Quantitative investigation of the
dynamics of such delivery in vivo is crucial in enabling the
development of more effective drug delivery systems. One of
the best ways to do this is to apply a new technology in biophysics
wherein the positions of proteins are detected quantitatively at the
single molecule or particle level with nanometer precision (4).
However, the specific processes of its delivery in vivo postinjection
are not known at the single particle level. Conventional modalities
of in vivo imaging such as computed tomography, magnetic

Note: Supplementary data for this article are available at Cancer Research Online
(http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/).
Requests for reprints: Hideo Higuchi, Biomedical Engineering Research
Organization, Tohoku University, Engineering research Lab complex, 6-6-11 Aramaki,
Aoba-ku, Sendai, Miyagi 980-8578, Japan. Phone: 81-22-795-4735; Fax: 81-22-795-5753;
E-mail: higuchi@tubero.tohoku.ac.jp.
I2007 American Association for Cancer Research.
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-06-1185

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (3). February 1, 2007

resonance imaging, positron emission tomography, and organic
fluorescence or luminescence imaging have insufficient resolution
to analyze the pharmacokinetics of drugs at the single particle level
in vivo (5).
To address the issue, real-time single particle tracking using
quantum dots (Qdots) has been applied to the study of drug
delivery. Qdots, fluorescence nanocrystals, were thought to be as a
suitable marker because of their intense brightness and stability, in
contrast to organic dyes and green fluorescent protein (6–8). In
cultured cells, single particle tracking has yielded invaluable
information on the function of purified proteins (9–11). Recent
work shows that the antibody-conjugated Qdots have allowed realtime tracking of single receptor molecules on the surface of live
cells (12). However, no real-time single particle tracking in live
animals has been reported, and it is uncertain that single particles
of Qdots could be observed and tracked in live animals. The
analysis of single molecules and particles in living animals is
crucial to the understanding of the molecular mechanism of
proteins in vivo.
This study was designed to analyze the movement of single
functional Qdots in tumors of mice from a capillary vessel to
cancer cells. To observe single Qdot particles in tumor tissue, we
used a dorsal skinfold chamber model (13) and a high-resolution
intravital imaging system. The imaging system, which consists of a
confocal scanner unit with a Nipkow type disk and an electron
multiplying charge coupled device (EMCCD) camera (14), facilitates the high-resolution in vivo single particle tracking at a video
rate with a high spatial resolution of 30 nm. In addition,
quantitative and qualitative information such as velocity, directionality, and transport mode was obtained using time-resolved
trajectories of particles. As a result, we successfully identified the
processes of delivery; these were quantitatively analyzed to
understand the rate-limiting constraints on single Qdot-antibody
delivery in vivo.

Materials and Methods
Qdot-antibody conjugation. Qdot was conjugated to trastuzumab
(Herceptin, Chugai Pharmaceuticals Co., Ltd., Tokyo, Japan) with a Qdot 800
Antibody Conjugation Kit (Quantum Dot Corp., Hayward, CA) coated with
polyethylene glycol (PEG) amine (MW 2,000) according to the manufacturer’s instruction. Briefly, Qdots are activated with the heterobifunctional
cross-linker 4-(maleimidomethyl)-1-cyclohexanecarboxylic acid N-hydroxysuccinimide ester (SMCC), yielding a maleimide-nanocrystal surface.
Excess SMCC is removed by size exclusion chromatography. Antibody is
then reduced and fragmented by DTT to expose free sulfhydryls, and excess
DTT is removed by size exclusion chromatography. Then, activated Qdots
are covalently coupled with reduced antibody and reaction is quenched
with h-mercaptoethanol. The molar ratio of trastuzumab fragments to the
Qdots at mixing is f3:1. Conjugates are concentrated by ultrafiltration and
purified by size exclusion chromatography. This active ester maleimide–
mediated amine and sulfhydryl coupling (by SMCC) is a popular crosslinking reaction for various antibody conjugations. After this reduction,

1138

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Real-time Tracking of Single Qdots in Mouse Tumors

Figure 1. Immunocytochemical studies of
QT-complex binding activity in cultured
breast cancer cells. A, KPL-4 cells, which
are HER2 positive, as revealed by the
presence of the QT complex on the cell
surface. B, negative staining was detected
in KPL-4 cells exposed to QD-PEG in
the absence of anti-HER2 antibody.
C, negative staining was detected in
MDA-MB-231 cells, which are HER2
negative. D, competition study of QT
complex and trastuzumab. After addition of
100 nmol/L trastuzumab to KPL-4 cells,
QT-complex fluorescence was absent.
QT-complex fluorescence was detected
on the cell surface of KPL-4 but not
MDA-MB-231, confirming HER2 as a cell
surface–specific marker for some breast
cancer cell lines.

it has been found to have little or no effect on their binding ability. QT
complex [Qdot (Q)-trastuzumab (T) complex] was fractionated by agarose
gel electrophoresis into three major bands. Approximately 60% of the QT
complex was conjugated with three antibody fragments, f30% with two
fragments, and f10% with a single fragment (data not shown).
The final concentration of QT complexes was determined by measuring
the conjugate absorbance at 550 nm and using an extinction coefficient of
1,700,000 M 1 cm 1 at 550 nm.
Cell line and mouse model. The human breast cancer cell line KPL-4,
which overexpresses HER2 and is sensitive to trastuzumab (15, 16), was
kindly provided by Dr. J. Kurebayashi (Kawasaki Medical school, Kurashiki,
Japan). KPL-4 cells were cultured in DMEM supplemented with 5% fetal
bovine serum (FBS). MDA-MB-231 cells were maintained in RPMI with 10%
FBS. Conventional immunohistochemical procedures were used to
determine the binding of QT-complex conjugate to KPL-4 cells, using both
QD-PEG (no antibody) and MDA-MB-231 as negative controls. In these
studies, QT-complex or QD-PEG bioconjugates (100 nmol/L) were
incubated with the cells for 30 min at 37jC, washed, and photographed.
For competition study of QT complex and trastuzumab, KPL-4 was
pretreated with trastuzumab (100 nmol/L) for 30 min before exposure to
100 nmol/L QT complex.
A suspension of KPL-4 cells (0.8  107 per mouse) was transplanted s.c.
to the dorsal skin of female BALB/c nu/nu mice at 6 to 10 weeks of age

www.aacrjournals.org

(Charles River Japan, Yokohama, Japan). Several weeks after tumor
inoculation, mice bearing a tumor volume of 100 to 200 mm3 were
selected. All of the mice were maintained in our pathogen-free institutional
facilities. All operations on animals were in accordance with the
institutional animal use and care regulations.
QT complexes were injected into the tail vein of mice at a concentration
of 2 Amol/L and a volume of 100 AL. The mice were placed under anesthesia
by the i.p. injection of a ketamine and xylazine mixture at dosages of 95 and
5 mg/kg, respectively. The temperature of mice was maintained at 37jC
with a thermoplate and objective lens heater.
The dorsal skinfold chamber, previously described (13) and modified for
this study, was used to fix the exposed mouse tumor on the stage of the
microscope. Two sterilized polyvinyl chloride plates (0.5-mm thickness)
containing a window were mounted to fix the extended double layer of
dorsal skin including the tumor site. Skin between chambers was sutured
together with 6-0 nylon around the window so the tumor could be located
in the center of the window and fixed without influence from the beating of
the heart and/or breathing. The tumor was exposed by oval incision of
f10-mm diameter, and the s.c. connective tissue was removed. The tumor
was then placed surface down in neutral saline, mounted on coverslip, and
viewed under an inverted microscope. The mouse was fixed to a metal plate
on the stage designed to stabilize the chamber. Tumors can be visualized
directly by means of this setup.

1139

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (3). February 1, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research
After imaging, the mice were sacrificed by CO2 overdose. The tumors
were removed and divided for histologic Qdot uptake study and
immunohistochemical analysis. For the histologic Qdot uptake study,
tumors were frozen and cryosectioned (6-Am thickness), fixed with acetone
at 0jC, and examined with an imaging system. For immunohistologic
examination, tumors were fixed in 10% neutral-buffered formalin overnight
and then transferred to ethanol before processing and paraffin embedding.
Immunohistochemical analysis was done on paraffin sections of 6-mm
thickness using the HercepTest (DakoCytomation, Carpinteria, CA).
In vivo imaging and tracking. Optics and image analysis: The optics
system for three-dimensional observation consisted primarily of an
epifluorescent microscope (IX71, Olympus, Tokyo, Japan) with modifications (17, 18), a Nipkow lens type confocal unit (CSU10, Yokokawa, Japan),
and an electron multiplier type CCD camera (iXon 887, Andor, Tokyo,
Japan). The confocal unit adopts multibeam scanning using about a
thousand beams that are simultaneously emitted through a pin-hole disk to
facilitate high-speed scanning. The EMCCD has an advantage that offers
unsurpassed sensitivity performance and has been shown to yield markedly
improved S/N (signal/noise) ratio (14). The object lens (60, numerical
aperture 1.45) was moved by a piezo actuator with a feedback loop
(Nanocontrol) for stabilizing the position of the focus. A computer
controlled the piezo actuator in synchronization with the image
acquisitions that the object lens remained within the exposure time of
the CCD camera. An area of f30  30 Am2 was illuminated by a green laser
(532 nm, CrystaLaser, Reno, NV). This system captures images of single
Qdot at a video rate of 33 ms/frame. Three-dimensional confocal intravital
images of single QT complex were taken by moving an objective lens
(Fig. 2A ). Three-dimensional images of the tumor were taken by
reconstructing 10 to 20 confocal images from the surface of the mice to a
depth of 150 Am inside the tumor through the DSFC.
The xy position of the fluorescent spot was calculated by fitting to a twodimensional Gaussian curve. The single molecule could be identified by the
fluorescence intensity. In addition, quantitative and qualitative information
such as velocity, directionality, and transport mode was obtained using
time-resolved trajectories of particles. The resolution of the position was
determined from the position of immobile QT complexes in a chemically
fixed tumor cell. The resolution of the x and y directions of images taken at
an exposure time of 33 ms was 30 nm, taking into consideration the SD.

(Supplementary Fig. S1A and B). Single Qdots in the mice tumor
were observed using a high-resolution intravital imaging system
through the dorsal skinfold chamber (Fig. 2A; ref. 13). Fluorescence microangiography was done after injection of the QT
complexes into the tail vein. After injection, blood sample from
mice was examined by fluorescence observation on whether QT
complex had made the aggregation in the mice. QT complex
existed as a single particle without further aggregation (data not
shown). The membranes of the KPL-4 tumor cells were clearly
stained with single QT complexes at 6 h after the injection. At
24 h after the injection, the QT complexes had been internalized
into the tumor cells (Fig. 2B and C). After imaging of the tumors
in the living mice, histologic examination of the chemically fixed
tumors was done to confirm that QT complexes in the living mice
exhibit activity in KPL-4 cells. QT complexes observed under a
three-dimensional microscope were located at the cell membrane
and near the nuclear membrane (Supplementary Fig. S2A and B).
An adjacent slice of the observed area was further stained

Results and Discussions
In vitro study. Qdots were conjugated to trastuzumab using the
Qdot-antibody conjugation kit (QT complex). Immunocytochemical
data confirmed strong and specific binding of the QT complex to a
HER2-overexpressing human breast cancer cell line (Fig. 1A). QDPEG without antibody showed almost no binding to KPL-4 cells
(Fig. 1B). MDA-MB-231, a HER2 negative human breast cancer cell
line, showed the absence of Qdot binding (Fig. 1C). KPL-4 cells
pretreated by excess trastuzumab also showed the absence of Qdot
binding (Fig. 1D). These results indicate that QT complexes
selectively bind to the HER2 protein. Furthermore, QT complex
was compared with trastuzumab labeled with rhodamine, which is
recognized as similar to native trastuzumab. Both QT complex and
rhodamine-trastuzumab bound to the KPL-4 cell at concentrations
of 1 nmol/L but hardly at 0.1 nmol/L, indicating the binding
properties of QT complex are similar to those of native antibody
(data not shown).
Three-dimensional imaging of single Qdot-trastuzumab in
mice. It is reported that the accumulation of trastuzumab at the
HER2-overexpressing tumor site in mice model is the basis for
radioimmunoscintigraphic scanning and targeted therapy for
human HER2-overexpressing breast cancer (19–21). Here tumorbearing mouse models were prepared with KPL-4 s.c. implantation. The QT complex accumulated in the tumor specifically
because only the tumor area generated fluorescence of Qdots

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (3). February 1, 2007

Figure 2. Experimental diagram and three-dimensional intravital cancer
imaging. Mice prepared for dorsal skinfold chamber were fixed on the
microscopic stage. QT complexes were injected into the tail vein of nude BALB/c
mice bearing KPL-4 breast cancer xenograft tumor. A, three-dimensional
microscopic system consisting of a confocal unit, an EMCCD, and a computer to
control the piezo stage. B, three-dimensional image of the tumor was obtained
by the QT complexes binding to tumor cell membrane (stereoscopic image: left
and right field). C, traced outlines of the cells shown in (B).

1140

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Real-time Tracking of Single Qdots in Mouse Tumors

immunohistochemically with the anti-HER2 antibody A0485. The
cell membrane stained locally in the adjacent slice (Supplementary Fig. S2C), confirming that QT complexes were present on the
membrane of tumor cells.
Extravasation of single QT complexes in tumors of mice with
two-dimensional imaging. After the injection, three-dimensional
images of the tumor were taken to allow observation on the tumor
vessel of single QT complexes. The position of the objective was
fixed and 300 to 3,000 sequential confocal two-dimensional images
(total, 10–100 s) were taken at this fixed position. Within 30 s after
the injection, the current of the QT complex in a vessel was
observed. When the vessel and cells were clearly observable, the the
current of single QT complex in the tumor vessel was then
analyzed. The fluorescent image of the circulating QT complex was
not a circle but an ellipse and sometimes a line at the video rate
because QT complex at times moved >1 Am in single frame. The
speed of the movement of the single particles was calculated from
the positional changes of the centroid of the QT complex images
(Fig. 3A). The average speed of each complex ranged from 100 to
600 Am/s, in agreement with a previous report by another method
(22). As shown in Fig. 3A, each particle exhibits slow and fast
movement in the bloodstream. Such fast and slow movement
characteristics could be induced by the pulse and nonuniform
current within a vessel such as the Hagen-Poiseuille current. The
slow speed of the complexes inside a tumor vessel would be
important to locate pores between the vessel cells and then the
complexes diffuse out from these pores.
Focusing on the vessel walls, a movement was observed of the
complex extravasated from the intravascular space (Fig. 3B). The
edge of the vascular inner surface was not clear on a single frame
image. Therefore, all the images obtained were averaged to
precisely determine the position of the edge (Fig. 3B, i–iii). The
complexes were positioned first on the vascular surface and then
extravasated. This is the first example of video rate observation of
extravasation of very small particles, such as Qdots, in a mouse
model. The moving speed of the complexes was very low, 1 to 4
Am/s, at the pore of the vascular cells, compared with the speed in
the current. The QT complexes either interacted with the vascular
cells or became trapped in the extracellular matrix.

Diffusion of single QT complexes in extracellular and
intercellular regions. Two hours after the injection, many
complexes had migrated into the tumor interstitial area close to
the tumor vessels. Most of the movement of the complexes was
random in orientation and speed, indicating that complexes diffuse
by the Brownian motion exerted by thermal energy. The average
diffusion coefficient of the complexes was 0.0014 Am2/s, much
smaller than that at free diffusion in solution (f10 Am2/s). Many
complexes also moved randomly within a restricted small area of
f1-Am diameter and then hopped by f1 Am (Fig. 4A). These
results indicate that movement is restricted by a cage formed by
the extracellular matrix and, at times, complexes escape from this
cage.
Binding of QT complexes to cell membrane and vesicle
transport. Six hours after the injection, QT complexes had bound
to the KPL-4 cell membrane on which the HER2 protein is
located. We successfully captured specific images of the QT
complexes bound to the cell membrane (Fig. 4B). Movements of
single QT complex are identified in single frames. To identify the
positions of the tumor vessels and cells in living mice without
further fluorescence staining, images were averaged (Supplementary Fig. S3A). As viewed from the outside of the delineated cells,
the QT complexes moved toward the cell membrane at a speed of
200 to 400 nm/s (Fig. 4C), remained on the membrane for a few
seconds, and then moved randomly along the membrane. QT
complexes moved between the cells, bound to HER2, and then
moved in association with HER2 on the membrane.
Many QT complexes bound to the cell membrane exhibited
Brownian motion within a restricted region of f500-nm diameter.
The region is significantly larger than the area of f30 nm, which
was drawn by position noise of the complexes fixed on a coverslip,
indicating the movement is due to the anchor of the HER2 to a
flexible component of the cytoskeleton such as an actin filament
(23). The QT complexes restricted to the small area initiated linear
movement in one direction along the cell membrane with a speed
of 400 to 600 nm/s and traveled for several micrometers (Fig. 5A
and B; Supplementary Fig. S3B).
We also succeeded in pursuing the transport of QT complexes
from the peripheral region of the cell to the perinuclear region

Figure 3. The movement of QT
complexes from tumor vessels to the
interstitial space. A, flow of QT complexes
in the tumor vessel. The speed was
calculated by the moving distance per
33 ms. The maximum speed was f600
Am/s. B, extravasation of QT complexes
from the vascular space of the tumor.
Dotted line, trajectory of the extravasation.
i, an initial single frame tracing the
trajectory of a single QT complex shown as
a dotted line at video rate. ii, sequential
frames were averaged to define the edge of
vessel. iii, tracing of the outlines of tumor
vessels. Overlapping initial single image
and (iii ), the tracing image gives the final
images. B, inset, magnified image of the
trajectory of extravasating QT complex.

www.aacrjournals.org

1141

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (3). February 1, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

Figure 4. Tracking the movement of QT
complexes from the interstitial space to the
cell membrane. A, trajectory of the QT
complexes in the interstitial space near the
tumor vessels and magnified trajectory.
The color of the trajectory codes the time
axis from black to pink, yellow, and light
blue. B, trajectory of the binding to the
cell membrane and magnified trajectory.
C, time trajectory of the velocity of (B).
The color of the trajectory of both (B) and
(C ) codes the time axis from blue to red
and green. All time trajectories of the
velocity are calculated by the least squares
method (2 s).

(Fig. 5C; Supplementary Fig. S3C). The QT complex in a given cell
moved almost straight toward the cell membrane with a velocity of
100 to 300 nm/s, changed direction to parallel to the cell
membrane, and moved toward the cell nucleus at a velocity of
f600 nm/s (Fig. 5D). Finally, the directional movement of the QT
complexes ceased and Brownian motion commenced within a
small area, f1 Am in a diameter, near the nucleus (Fig. 5C and D,
black line). The first two movements of straight toward and along
the cell membrane would most likely be produced by the transport
of an acto-myosin system binding to vesicle containing QT
complexes (24, 25). Because the actin filaments in cultured cells
are highly concentrated in the peripheral region of cells, movement
toward the nucleus would most likely be on a microtubule
transported by dynein (26) as there are almost no actin filaments
near nucleus, but rather, a high concentration of microtubules.

Summary of the delivery processes. We have succeeded in
capturing the specific delivery of single QT complexes in tumor
vessels to the perinuclear region of tumor cells in live mice after QT
complexes had been injected into the tail vein of mice. Six stages
were detected (Fig. 6): (a) vessel circulation, (b) extravasation, (c)
movement into the extracellular region, (d) binding to HER2 on the
cell membrane, (e) movement from the cell membrane to the
perinuclear region after endocytosis, and ( f ) in the perinuclear
region. The translational speed of QT complexes in each process
was highly variable, even in the vessel circulation. The movement
of the complexes in each process was also found to be ‘‘stop-andgo’’ (i.e., the complex remaining within a highly restricted area and
then moving suddenly). This indicates that the movement was
promoted by a motive power and constrained by both the threedimensional structure and protein-protein interactions. The motive

Figure 5. Tracking of the movement of QT
complexes from the cell membrane to the
perinuclear region. A, trajectory of the
QT complexes binding to the cell
membrane and magnified image. B, time
trajectory of the velocity of (A ). The color of
the trajectory of both (A) and (B) codes the
time axis from blue to red and green.
C, trajectory of the intracellular transport of
QT complex and magnified image. D, time
trajectory of the velocity of (C ). The color
of the trajectory of both (C ) and (D ) codes
the time axis from blue to red, green,
and black. All time trajectories of the
velocity are calculated by the least squares
method (2 s).

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (3). February 1, 2007

1142

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Real-time Tracking of Single Qdots in Mouse Tumors

Figure 6. Schematic illustration of the QT
complex, the QT complex entered into
the circulation, extravasated into the
interstitial space from the vascular space,
bound to the tumor cells through the
interstitial region, and having reached the
perinuclear region after traveling on the
intracellular rail protein. All processes
exhibit a characteristic ‘‘stop-and-go’’
movement.

power of the movements was produced by blood circulation
(essential in processes a and b), diffusion force driven by thermal
energy (b, c, and d), and active transport by motor proteins (e). The
cessation of movement is most likely induced by a structural
barricade such as a matrix cage (b, c, and f ) and/or specific
interaction between proteins (e.g., an antibody) and HER2 (d),
motor proteins, and rail filaments such as actin filaments and
microtubules (e).
The molecular mechanism underlying the movement and its
cessation during delivery of nanoparticles in animal models is the
fundamental basis of drug delivery. There have been many different
approaches to tumor-targeting ‘‘nanocarriers’’ including anticancer
drugs for passive targeting, such as Myocet (27) and Doxil (28), and
for active targeting, such as MCC-465 (29) and anti-HER2
immunoliposome (19). There is still very little understanding of
the biological behavior of nanocarriers, including such crucial
features as their transport in the blood circulation, cellular
recognition, translocation into the cytoplasm, and final fate in

References
1. Mamot C, Drummond DC, Noble CO, et al. Epidermal
growth factor receptor-targeted immunoliposomes significantly enhance the efficacy of multiple anticancer
drugs in vivo . Cancer Res 2005;65:11631–8.
2. Torchilin VP, Lukyanov AN, Gao Z, PapahadjopoulosSternberg B. Immunomicelles: targeted pharmaceutical
carriers for poorly soluble drugs. Proc Natl Acad Sci
U S A 2003;100:6039–44.
3. Krauss WC, Park JW, Kirpotin DB, Hong K, Benz CC.
Emerging antibody-based HER2 (ErbB-2/neu) therapeutics. Breast Dis 2000;11:113–24.
4. Ishijima A, Kojima H, Funatsu T, et al. Simultaneous
observation of individual ATPase and mechanical events
by a single myosin molecule during interaction with
actin. Cell 1998;92:161–71.
5. Lyons SK. Advances in imaging mouse tumour models
in vivo . J Pathol 2005;205:194–205.

www.aacrjournals.org

the target cell. These results suggest that the transport of
nanocarriers would be quantitatively analyzable in the tumors of
living animals by the present method. This approach should thus
afford a potential new insight into particle behavior in complex
biological environments. Such new insight in turn will allow
rational improvements in particle design to increase the therapeutic index of the tumor-targeting nanocarriers.

Acknowledgments
Received 4/4/2006; revised 8/24/2006; accepted 12/5/2006.
Grant support: Grants-in-aid for Research Project; Promotion of Advanced
Medical Technology (H14-Nano-010, H18-Nano-General-001); Ministry of Health,
Labor, and Welfare of Japan (N. Ohuchi); Scientific Research in Priority Areas from the
Japan MEXT and CREST from the JST (H. Higuchi); and Special Coordination Funds
for Promoting Science and Technology of Japan (H. Higuchi and T.M. Wanatabe).
The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of page
charges. This article must therefore be hereby marked advertisement in accordance
with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact.
We thank Dr. H.A. Nguyen for helpful discussion and Dr. J.M. West for critical
reading of the manuscript.

6. Wu X, Liu H, Liu J, et al. Immunofluorescent labeling
of cancer marker Her2 and other cellular targets with
semiconductor quantum dots. Nat Biotechnol 2003;21:
41–6.
7. Bruchez M, Jr., Moronne M, Gin P, Weiss S, Alivisatos
AP. Semiconductor nanocrystals as fluorescent biological labels. Science 1998;281:2013–6.
8. Gao X, Cui Y, Levenson RM, Chung LW, Nie S. In vivo
cancer targeting and imaging with semiconductor
quantum dots. Nat Biotechnol 2004;22:969–76.
9. Endow SA, Higuchi H. A mutant of the motor protein
kinesin that moves in both directions on microtubules.
Nature 2000;406:913–6.
10. Yildiz A, Forkey JN, McKinney SA, Ha T, Goldman YE,
Selvin PR. Myosin V walks hand-over-hand: single
fluorophore imaging with 1.5-nm localization. Science
2003;300:2061–5.
11. Dahan M, Levi S, Luccardini C, Rostaing P, Riveau B,
Triller A. Diffusion dynamics of glycine receptors

revealed by single-quantum dot tracking. Science 2003;
302:442–5.
12. Lidke DS, Nagy P, Heintzmann R, et al. Quantum dot
ligands provide new insights into erbB/HER receptormediated signal transduction. Nat Biotechnol 2004;22:
198–203.
13. Leunig M, Yuan F, Menger MD, et al. Angiogenesis,
microvascular architecture, microhemodynamics, and
interstitial fluid pressure during early growth of human
adenocarcinoma LS174T in SCID mice. Cancer Res 1992;
52:6553–60.
14. Chong FK, Coates CG, Denvir DJ, McHale NG,
Thornvury KD, Hollywood MK. Optimization of spinning disk confocal microscopy: synchronization with
the ultra-sensitive EMCCD. Proc SPIE 2004;5324:65–76.
15. Kurebayashi J, Otsuki T, Tang CK, et al. Isolation and
characterization of a new human breast cancer cell line,
KPL-4, expressing the Erb B family receptors and
interleukin-6. Br J Cancer 1999;79:707–17.

1143

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (3). February 1, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

16. Fujimoto-Ouchi K, Sekiguchi F, Tanaka Y. Antitumor
activity of combinations of anti-HER-2 antibody trastuzumab and oral fluoropyrimidines capecitabine/5¶dFUrd in human breast cancer models. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol 2002;49:211–6.
17. Nguyen VT, Kamio Y, Higuchi H. Single-molecule
imaging of cooperative assembly of g-hemolysin on
erythrocyte membranes. EMBO J 2003;22:4968–79.
18. Nguyen H, Higuchi H. Motility of myosin V regulated
by the dissociation of single calmodulin. Nat Struct Mol
Biol 2005;12:127–32.
19. Park JW, Kirpotin DB, Hong K, et al. Tumor targeting
using anti-her2 immunoliposomes. J Control Release
2001;74:95–113.
20. Ballangrud AM, Yang WH, Palm S, et al. a-Particle
emitting atomic generator (Actinium-225)-labeled trastuzumab (Herceptin) targeting of breast cancer spheroids: efficacy versus HER2/neu expression. Clin Cancer
Res 2004;10:4489–97.
21. Wiercioch R, Balcerczak E, Byszewska E, Mirowski M.

Uptake of radiolabelled Herceptin by experimental
mammary adenocarcinoma. Nucl Med Rev Cent East
Eur 2003;6:99–103.
22. Braun RD, Abbas A, Bukhari SO, Wilson W III.
Hemodynamic parameters in blood vessels in choroidal
melanoma xenografts and rat choroid. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2002;43:3045–52.
23. Carraway CA, Carvajal ME, Carraway KL. Association
of the Ras to mitogen-activated protein kinase signal
transduction pathway with microfilaments. Evidence for
a p185(neu)-containing cell surface signal transduction
particle linking the mitogenic pathway to a membranemicrofilament association site. J Biol Chem 1999;274:
25659–67.
24. Buss F, Arden SD, Lindsay M, Luzio JP, KendrickJones J. Myosin VI isoform localized to clathrin-coated
vesicles with a role in clathrin-mediated endocytosis.
EMBO J 2001;20:3676–84.
25. Aschenbrenner L, Naccache SN, Hasson T. Uncoated
endocytic vesicles require the unconventional myosin,

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (3). February 1, 2007

1144

Myo6, for rapid transport through actin barriers. Mol
Biol Cell 2004;15:2253–63.
26. Kamal A, Goldstein LS. Connecting vesicle transport to the cytoskeleton. Curr Opin Cell Biol 2000;12:
503–8.
27. Mross K, Niemann B, Massing U, et al. Pharmacokinetics of liposomal doxorubicin (TLC-D99; Myocet) in
patients with solid tumors: an open-label, single-dose
study. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol 2004;54:514–24.
28. O’Brien ME, Wigler N, Inbar M, et al. Reduced
cardiotoxicity and comparable efficacy in a phase III
trial of pegylated liposomal doxorubicin HCl (CAELYX/
Doxil) versus conventional doxorubicin for first-line
treatment of metastatic breast cancer. Ann Oncol 2004;
15:440–9.
29. Hamaguchi T, Matsumura Y, Nakanishi Y, et al.
Antitumor effect of MCC-465, pegylated liposomal
doxorubicin tagged with newly developed monoclonal
antibody GAH, in colorectal cancer xenografts. Cancer
Sci 2004;95:608–13.

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

In vivo Real-time Tracking of Single Quantum Dots
Conjugated with Monoclonal Anti-HER2 Antibody in Tumors
of Mice
Hiroshi Tada, Hideo Higuchi, Tomonobu M. Wanatabe, et al.
Cancer Res 2007;67:1138-1144.

Updated version
Supplementary
Material

Cited articles
Citing articles

E-mail alerts
Reprints and
Subscriptions
Permissions

Access the most recent version of this article at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/67/3/1138
Access the most recent supplemental material at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/suppl/2007/01/23/67.3.1138.DC1

This article cites 29 articles, 12 of which you can access for free at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/67/3/1138.full#ref-list-1
This article has been cited by 19 HighWire-hosted articles. Access the articles at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/67/3/1138.full#related-urls

Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal.
To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications
Department at pubs@aacr.org.
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications
Department at permissions@aacr.org.

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

