Published OnlineFirst January 10, 2014; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-2787

Cancer
Research

Meeting Report

Future Opportunities in Cancer Nanotechnology—
NCI Strategic Workshop Report
Piotr Grodzinski and Dorothy Farrell

Abstract
There has been signiﬁcant progress in utilizing nanotechnology in several areas of cancer care, including in vitro
diagnostics, imaging, and therapy. The National Cancer Institute, which currently supports an array of research
activities in cancer nanotechnology, convened a strategic workshop to explore the most promising directions and
areas for future resource investment. The major discussion points as well as the opportunities identiﬁed are
presented herein. Cancer Res; 74(5); 1307–10. Ó2014 AACR.

Introduction
The National Cancer Institute (NCI) launched the Alliance
for Nanotechnology in Cancer in 2004 in response to emerging
innovation in the areas of nanomaterials and nanodevices and
their potential for applications in cancer research and care.
The program has a translational focus and supports discovery
research, which has potential to produce clinically useful
outcomes. The Alliance engages a multidisciplinary community of biologists and clinicians, chemists, and engineers to
leverage innovation and experience originating from different
research backgrounds. To monitor the development of the ﬁeld
and chart its strategies for the future, NCI holds strategic
workshops on Cancer Nanotechnology every 5 years. The last
workshop was convened in June 2013.

Nanotechnologies for Delivery of Therapies
Nanoparticles are capable of facilitating site-selective drug
delivery, enabling increased drug accumulation in the tumor
and reduced side effects (1). Many approaches currently under
development are evolutionary and provide for delivery of
established chemotherapeutics with modiﬁed delivery proﬁles.
This strategy of pursuing incremental improvements in pharmacologic and/or toxicologic design may be primarily related
to the ease of obtaining active pharmaceutical agents (API)
that are already approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and the body of regulatory data available for
them. A handful of such nanoparticle-based formulations have
been approved by the FDA (2). Other compounds could also
beneﬁt from the improved solubility and reduced side effects of
nanoparticle-based drug delivery. The workshop participants
emphasized the importance of taking advantage of the opportunity to "recover" drugs that have failed in early-stage clinical
Authors' Afﬁliation: Ofﬁce of Cancer Nanotechnology Research, National
Cancer Institute, Bethesda, Maryland
Corresponding Author: Piotr Grodzinski, National Cancer Institute, 31
Center Drive, MSC 2580, Building. 31, Room 10A52, Bethesda, MD 20892.
Phone: 301-594-4177; Fax: 301-496-7807; E-mail: grodzinp@mail.nih.gov
doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-2787
Ó2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

trials or even preclinical studies due to unfavorable toxicity or
pharmacokinetic proﬁles. Nanoparticle formulations may
facilitate biodistribution and pharmacologic properties that
enable safe delivery of therapeutically effective doses of these
compounds. The workshop participants pointed out that
although pharmaceutical companies are typically reluctant to
work on reformulating their failed candidates, they are often
willing to share the compounds with academic researchers. A
role for NCI was seen in increasing awareness of such opportunities and access to these compounds.
Other drug candidates to be delivered using nanoparticles,
in addition to small molecules include siRNAs and biologics.
Systemic delivery of siRNA is greatly improved by nanoparticle
packaging through reduction of siRNA degradation in blood
and increase in its circulation time. The effective delivery of
siRNA may enable discovery of new therapeutics that inhibit
previously "undruggable" therapeutic targets. Nanoparticle
delivery also assures cellular internalization, which is a precondition for activity of some drugs, although subsequent
escape from the endosomal compartment that mediates internalization is a standing design challenge for nanoparticle
delivery (3).
Many workshop participants felt there are also emerging
opportunities for nanotechnology in the renaissance of interest
in immunotherapies for cancer, although some participants
were not enthusiastic about this. An effective adoptive cell
transfer cancer immunotherapy depends on a successful antigen presentation through the use of dendritic cells. However,
obtaining large numbers of dendritic cells from the patient and
their ex vivo culture is not trivial. An alternate strategy relying
on nanoparticles explores designs of artiﬁcial antigen-presenting cells. The modular nature of nanoparticle designs provides
the opportunity for delivery of combinations of ligands with
well controlled per particle densities and thus eliminates the
variability observed with cell-based systems (4).

Future Drug Design in Nanomedicine
Nanomedicine constructs are multicomponent systems,
involving a carrier, therapeutic component, and often targeting
moiety. Optimization of physicochemical properties of such

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

1307

Published OnlineFirst January 10, 2014; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-2787

Grodzinski and Farrell

constructs is challenging due to the interdependence of characteristics of individual components. The workshop participants acknowledged these difﬁculties and proposed to move
the development of therapeutic constructs beyond the current
model in which carrier and therapeutic cargo are independently developed and then combined to form a nanotherapeutic. Optimizing a construct (carrier þ drug molecule) as
one unit and making this optimization part of an entire drug
discovery process will allow nanotherapeutics to become a new
class of drugs rather than being delivery vehicles for existing
drugs. This approach will bring greater ﬂexibility to the design
of APIs because drug properties (solubility, metabolism, biodistribution, and target tissue accumulation) will reﬂect the
combined properties of the drug molecule and nanoparticle.
This will relax constraints on API chemical composition, as
unfavorable physicochemical properties such as low plasma
solubility, can be modiﬁed by association with the nanoparticle. This streamlined nanomedicine development approach
combined with preparation of high-throughput screening of
large combinatorial libraries of nanoparticles with different
properties is expected to produce a better path to nanotherapeutic optimization and should result in higher success rate
of nanotherapeutics translation to clinical environment.
Recent works (5) demonstrated nanotherapeutic design
optimization using screens of libraries containing up to 100
nanoparticle constructs with systematically varied physical
and chemical properties, such as particle size, surface polyethylene glycol and ligand density, and drug release proﬁle.
This library undergoes an iterative in vitro and in vivo screening
process to optimize drug release, cell surface binding, pharmacokinetic/pharmacodynamic characteristics, biodistribution, and efﬁcacy for a given indication. The broader use of
such screening processes to include candidate APIs will lead to
new classes of drugs along with well deﬁned and possibly
standardized processes of nanotherapeutic optimization.

Next-Generation Nanoparticles and Systems
Materials science will continue to produce new and more
functional nanosystems that are responsive to changes in pH,
temperature, and enzymatic environment and can recognize
changes in physiology or in the state of the disease. Similarly,
external triggers such as light or applied electromagnetic ﬁelds
can also be used to activate nanoparticles. Exploitation of
external or physiologic triggers will allow for more sophisticated nanoparticle designs and programmed drug release.
Rational and personalized design of nanoparticles, including
optimization of pharmacokinetics and tumor accumulation in
coordination with drug release kinetics and matching targeting ligand type and density to tumor antigen proﬁle, was also
discussed as a path to improving nanoparticle drug delivery
performance.
The value of nanoparticles capable of penetrating biologic
barriers was acknowledged in discussions about nanoparticle
vehicle design. Greater focus should be placed on overcoming
biologic barriers such as tumor stroma, the blood–brain
barrier, and vascular endothelium, which inhibit effective
delivery of drugs to tumor tissue. Nanoparticle designs effec-

1308

Cancer Res; 74(5) March 1, 2014

tively facilitating alternate routes of oral or nasal delivery in
addition to predominantly used systemic delivery were also of
interest to the workshop participants.
One new and exciting area discussed at the workshop was
biomimetic nanoparticle design. This has already proved helpful in the development of new families of therapeutic nanoparticles: "leukolike" and "plateloids," which have properties
that reproduce features of biologic cells to delay uptake by the
mononuclear phagocyte system and penetrate across vascular
endothelia (leukolike) or adhere ﬁrmly to the target vascular
surface (plateloids). Another bioinspired approach is the development of cooperative systems of nanoparticles that exploit
host signaling networks to generate superior functionalities. A
system relying on the coagulation signaling cascade resulting
from deliberately inﬂicted tissue damage to recruit "clot-targeted" nanomedicines to the tumor was recently demonstrated
(6). These systems demonstrate communication and bioresponsive capabilities that go well beyond the traditional design
of contemporary nanoparticles for drug delivery.

Nanotechnology-Based Diagnostics
There was consensus that in vitro nanotechnology-based
devices and systems can be instrumental to early and precise
diagnosis and therapy monitoring, but that further development of reliable cancer biomarkers is urgently needed. Nanotechnology-enabled devices capable of simultaneous measurement of multiple protein biomarkers with high sensitivity and
speciﬁcity have been demonstrated (7). The information collected using these devices can be analyzed to establish correlations among biomarker levels and optimize panels containing
a minimum number of biomarkers needed to identify the
disease (8). These platforms should be able to identify signatures of disease, progression, and therapeutic responsiveness.
Ideally, direct probing of the tumor environment, rather than
performing analysis on bodily ﬂuids, can provide more clinically relevant information. There was an interest in implantable devices that could monitor parameters associated with
tumor growth and its response to treatment over extended
period of time.
Molecular imaging is also beneﬁting from nanotechnology
developments. Bioactivatable imaging probes can detect biomarkers in vivo and can serve as monitoring systems of disease.
For example, it is known that many types of enzymes are
constitutively active or inactivated during the process of
oncogenesis, but there is no clinically relevant way to assess
enzyme activity in vivo. Researchers are developing probes
based on readouts of optical imaging, MRI, photoacoustics,
and radionucleotides as well as their combinations to measure
proteases, kinases, hydrolases, and peroxidases. In general,
dynamic imaging probes can be activated by changes associated with tumor microenvironment in vivo and serve as
monitoring systems of disease.

Understanding Nanoparticle Delivery
Mechanisms
The majority of experimental evidence for the enhanced
permeability and retention (EPR) effect, believed to be

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

Published OnlineFirst January 10, 2014; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-2787

Cancer Nanotechnology Meeting Report

responsible for accumulation of nanoparticles at the tumor
site, originates from animal testing. EPR and its variation
among different tumor types needs to be further and better
understood in humans, and parameters associated with high
versus low EPR need to be identiﬁed (9). Answering these
questions will be fundamental to establishing a process for
selecting patients who have high probability of responding to
nanotherapies.
Better understanding of interactions between nanoparticles
and cells is also critical. Construct design parameters leading
to effective intracellular uptake and trafﬁcking of nanoparticles and efﬁcient release of cargo are still not entirely clear. For
example, the debate on the advantages of "active targeting"
using speciﬁc targeting agents such as peptides, aptamers, or
antibodies over "passive targeting" (relying solely on the EPR
effect) is still not settled (1). Whether active targeting increases
tissue localization or just cellular internalization remains a
somewhat open question, although a body of evidence for
tumor-speciﬁc delivery seems to support increased cellular
internalization as the dominant mechanism for enhanced
therapeutic efﬁcacy. Nanoparticles enter the cell using endocytosis, so designing effective strategies for endosomal escape
to prevent the degradation of cargo in lysosome and instead
enabling its effective intracellular trafﬁcking into the cytoplasm is critical to effective delivery and utilization of particlebound drug molecule (3). The workshop participants expected
that the use of modeling tools that incorporate the dynamic
interactions of nanoparticles with the complex physiologic
environment into which they are delivered will aid the
design and improve effectiveness of future nanoparticle
delivery vehicles.

(IND) enabling good laboratory practices (GLP) toxicology
studies in small and large animals, supply chain considerations, and regulatory planning all go beyond the typical
responsibilities and expertise of an academic researcher, yet
need to be addressed in the translational process. NCI formed
the Nanotechnology Characterization Laboratory (NCL) to
assist academic and industrial researchers in preclinical characterization of nanomaterials. NCL has carried out studies on a
very large number of nanoparticle delivery vehicles carrying
various cargo and has collected initial data on toxicology and
biodistribution in small animals. These efforts need to be
further supported and advanced.
Regulatory pathways for nanotherapeutics are relatively well
established and the FDA does not have special review criteria
for nanotechnology-based products. These submissions follow
the same process as other drugs or devices and their regulatory
path is determined on the basis of the ﬁnal mode of action of a
particular construct. However, the complexity and multiple
components constituting a nanoconstruct can increase the
amount of required data for review and make gaining IND or
investigational device exemption approval more challenging as
compared with less complex drug molecules.
Overall, meeting participants observed that the majority of
translational efforts in nanomedicine are carried out by small
companies, most of them spun out from academic laboratories. These companies have extremely limited resources and
struggle not necessarily because of an innate weakness in their
science or products, but because they are not able to handle the
complexities associated with scale-up and manufacturing of
large quantities of stable product.

Summary
Preclinical and Clinical Considerations
Although nanotechnology researchers can readily develop
nanotherapeutics that are efﬁcacious in cell culture and animal
models, translating them into the clinical setting is a much
more complicated matter. The difﬁculty of translation from
both the technologic and funding standpoints was broadly
discussed at the meeting. There were concerns that despite
very active research in the area of nanotherapeutics, the
number of nanodrugs that reach FDA approval stage is still
limited (10). The ability of animal models to predict efﬁcacy
and adverse reactions in humans is an issue of critical importance and selecting an animal model that is representative of
conditions in human tumors is a challenging task. For example,
stromal tissue is believed to be a major barrier to effective
delivery into pancreatic tumors, yet availability of animal
models that possess stroma is quite limited. Clinical translation will require use of appropriate systems that recapitulate
the tumor microenvironment and conditions to accurately
model the interactions that will occur when the nanoparticle is
applied in the intended clinical situation.
Several stages of the nanoparticle drug development pipeline require sophisticated laboratory and manufacturing services, which can consume signiﬁcant funds to be accomplished. The areas of lead drug selection, scale up using good
manufacturing practices (GMP), investigational new drug

www.aacrjournals.org

The workshop participants were optimistic about future
development of nanotechnologies in cancer. Further progress
in the ﬁeld was viewed as moving along two parallel tracks. The
ﬁrst track will be associated with ongoing translation to the
clinical environment and the second with the development of
new tools and techniques in the research arena. It is expected
that small-molecule drugs in nanoparticle-based formulations
currently undergoing clinical trials will be joined by other
modes of therapy, including siRNAs and biologics. Active
targeting, when appropriate, will be used more frequently. To
make translational efforts more wide spread, access to reliable
GLP characterization and GMP manufacturing facilities will
need to become more available. Imaging based on nanotechnology will evolve toward greater use of bioactivatable probes
for assessing the tumor microenvironment. Imaging will be
also be increasingly used in intraoperative imaging to guide
real-time surgery using single and multimodality imaging
nanoconstructs. In vitro diagnostic devices have matured to
a stage in which the development of additional device modalities with new transduction methods does not seem necessary.
However, devices need to demonstrate their robustness in
tests with complex clinical samples before entering main
stream use. These devices could also ﬁnd greater use in
establishing clinically relevant diagnostic, prognostic, and
predictive signatures.

Cancer Res; 74(5) March 1, 2014

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

1309

Published OnlineFirst January 10, 2014; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-2787

Grodzinski and Farrell

The research community pursuing cancer nanotechnology
is expected to continue relying on multidisciplinary environments of chemists, physicists, and engineers driving innovation in nanotechnology devices and tools and biologists and
clinicians deﬁning compelling areas of applications and clinical needs. It is hoped that involvement of clinicians in the early
stage of research and technology development will increase.
The NCI alliance program has promoted the development of
cancer nanotechnology community since 2004 and is expected
to continue doing so through a dynamic network program.
Participants stressed the importance of NCI leveraging the
network by encouraging collaboration both within and with
outside researchers, particularly in clinical research. In this

period of constrained government funding, it is also important
to maximize collective support for the further development of
the ﬁeld. Partnerships with external stakeholders, including
nonproﬁt organizations interested in cancer research and
patient advocacy groups, and involvement of industrial partners pursuing clinical translation will be an important and
ongoing part of the strategy.
Disclosure of Potential Conﬂicts of Interest
No potential conﬂicts of interest were disclosed.
Received September 26, 2013; revised December 3, 2013; accepted December
23, 2013; published OnlineFirst January 10, 2014.

References
1.

2.
3.

4.

5.

1310

Kamaly N, Xiao Z, Valencia PM, Radovic-Moreno AF, Farokhzad OC,
Targeted polymeric therapeutic nanoparticles: design, development,
and clinical translation. Chem Soc Rev 2012;41:2971–3010.
Duncan R, Gaspar R. Nanomedicine(s) under the microscope. Mol
Pharm 2011;8:2101–41.
Sahay G, Querbes W, Alabi C, Eltoukhy A, Langer R, Anderson DG,
et al. Efﬁciency of siRNA delivery by lipid nanoparticles is limited by
endocytic recycling. Nat Biotechnol 2013;31:653–8.
Steenblock ER, Wrzesinski SH, Flavell RA, Fahmy TM, Antigen presentation on artiﬁcial acellular substrates: modular systems for ﬂexible,
adaptable immunotherapy. Expert Opin Biol Ther 2009;9:451–64.
Hrkach J, Von Hoff D, Mukkaram Ali M, Andrianova E, Auer J, Campbell
T, et al. Preclinical development and clinical translation of a PSMA
targeted docetaxel nanoparticle with a differentiated pharmacological
proﬁle. Sci Transl Med 2012;4:128ra39.

Cancer Res; 74(5) March 1, 2014

6.

von Maltzahn G, Park JH, Lin KY, Ruoslahti E, Sailor MJ, Bhatia SN,
et al. Nanoparticles that communicate in vivo to amplify tumour
targeting. Nature Mater 2011;10:545–52.
7. Shi Q, Qin L, Wei W, Geng F, Hood L, Mischel PS, et al. Single-cell
proteomic chip for proﬁling intracellular signaling pathways in single
tumor cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2012;109:419–24.
8. Haun JB, Castro CM, Wang R, Peterson VM, Lee H, Weissleder R, et al.
Micro-NMR for rapid molecular analysis of human tumor samples. Sci
Transl Med 2011;71:71ra16.
9. Prabhakar U, Maeda H, Jain RK, Sevick-Muraca EM, Zamboni W,
Farokhzad OC, et al. Challenges and key considerations of the
enhanced permeability and retention effect for nanomedicine drug
delivery in oncology. Cancer Res 2013;73:2412–7.
10. Venditto VJ, Szoka FC Jr, Cancer nanomedicines: so many papers and
so few drugs!. Adv Drug Deliv Rev. 2013;65:80–8.

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

Published OnlineFirst January 10, 2014; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-2787

Future Opportunities in Cancer Nanotechnology−−NCI Strategic
Workshop Report
Piotr Grodzinski and Dorothy Farrell
Cancer Res 2014;74:1307-1310. Published OnlineFirst January 10, 2014.

Updated version
Supplementary
Material

Cited articles
Citing articles

E-mail alerts
Reprints and
Subscriptions
Permissions

Access the most recent version of this article at:
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-2787
Access the most recent supplemental material at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/suppl/2014/01/10/0008-5472.CAN-13-2787.DC1

This article cites 10 articles, 3 of which you can access for free at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/74/5/1307.full#ref-list-1
This article has been cited by 1 HighWire-hosted articles. Access the articles at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/74/5/1307.full#related-urls

Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal.
To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications Department at
pubs@aacr.org.
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications Department at
permissions@aacr.org.

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

