700

Endocrine and Targeted Manipulation of Breast Cancer:
Proceedings of the Sixth Cambridge Conference
Supplement to Cancer

Summary of Aromatase Inhibitor Clinical Trials in
Postmenopausal Women With Early Breast Cancer
Aman U. Buzdar, MD1
R. Charles Coombes, MD2
Paul E. Goss, MD, PhD, FRCP3
Eric P. Winer, MD4

Five years of adjuvant therapy with tamoxifen was considered the gold-standard
treatment for postmenopausal women with estrogen receptor-positive breast cancer for many years. Data from a core group of clinical trials investigating the
safety and efficacy of aromatase inhibitors (AIs) have challenged this perception.
These studies were designed to evaluate the safety and efficacy of AIs in the fol-

1

Department of Breast Medical Oncology, The
University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas.
2

Department of Medical Oncology, Imperial College School of Medicine, London, United Kingdom.
3

Department of Breast Cancer Research, Massachusetts General Hospital Cancer Center, Boston,
Massachusetts.
4

Breast Oncology Center, Dana Farber Cancer
Institute, Boston, Massachusetts.

lowing clinical settings: 1) as initial adjuvant therapy (the Arimidex, Tamoxifen,
Alone or in Combination trial, Breast International Group Trial 1-98), 2) in a
‘‘switched setting’’ after 2 to 3 years of treatment with tamoxifen (Arimidex-Nolvadex 95, the Austrian Breast and Colorectal Cancer Study Group 8 [ABCSG 8]
trial, the Italian Tamoxifen Anastrozole study, the Intergroup Exemestane Study),
and 3) in extended settings (National Cancer Institute of Canada Trial MA.17,
ABCSG 6a, National Surgical Adjuvant Breast and Bowel Project 33). The efficacy
data from these studies suggested that AIs have added substantial benefit in
terms of disease outcome. AIs were tolerated well, and patients who received
them experienced fewer thrombolic events and less endometrial cancer, hot
flashes, night sweats, and vaginal bleeding compared with patients who receive
tamoxifen. However, patients who received tamoxifen had less skeletal events
and accelerated bone resorption compared with women who received AIs. AIs
should be considered when planning a patient’s endocrine therapy, taking into

Dr. Buzdar has received research funding from
AstraZeneca, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Eli Lilly, Genentech, Pfizer, and Taiho.
Dr. Coombes has received research support from
AstraZeneca and has received honoraria and
research support from Pfizer.
Dr. Goss is a member of the advisory board and
Speakers’ Bureau for AstraZeneca, GlaxoSmithKline, Pfizer, and Novartis.
Dr. Winer is a member of the advisory board for
AstraZeneca and Pfizer.
Address for reprints: Aman U. Buzdar, MD, Department of Breast Medical Oncology, University of Texas
M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, 1515 Holcombe Boulevard, Unit 1354, Houston, TX 77030; Fax: (713)
794-4385; E-mail: abuzdar@mdanderson.org
Received July 30, 2007; revision received
October 2, 2007; accepted October 11, 2007.

ª 2007 American Cancer Society

account the differences in tolerability and end-organ effects of the classes of endocrine therapy. Outstanding issues to optimize AI therapy include identifying
the optimal duration, agent, and patients for these therapies. Cancer 2008;112(3
suppl):700–9.  2007 American Cancer Society.

KEYWORDS: aromatase inhibitor, breast cancer, endocrine therapy, clinical trial.

F

ive years of adjuvant therapy with tamoxifen was considered the
gold-standard treatment for postmenopausal women with estrogen receptor (ER)-positive breast cancer for many years. However,
data from a core group of clinical trials investigating the safety and
efficacy of aromatase inhibitors (AIs) have challenged this perception. These studies were designed to evaluate AIs in the following
clinical settings: 1) as initial adjuvant therapy (the Arimidex, Tamoxifen, Alone or in Combination [ATAC] study, Breast International
Group [BIG] study 1-98), 2) in a ‘‘switched setting’’ after 2 to 3 years
of treatment with tamoxifen (Arimidex-Nolvadex [ARNO] trial 95,
the Austrian Breast and Colorectal Cancer Study Group 8 trial

DOI 10.1002/cncr.23193
Published online 10 December 2007 in Wiley InterScience (www.interscience.wiley.com).

AI Clinical Trials in Early Breast CA/Buzdar et al.

[ABCSG 8], the Italian Tamoxifen Anastrozole (ITA)
trial, the Intergroup Exemestane Study [IES]), and 3)
in extended settings (National Cancer Institute of
Canada Trial MA.17, ABCSG 6a, and National Surgical
Adjuvant Breast and Bowel Project 33 [NSAPB-33]). A
summary of these studies, including study designs,
results to date, interpretations of results, and the
impact on patients, are provided below. In addition,
questions that were left unanswered by these trials
are discussed.

Initial Adjuvant Therapy
The ATAC trial assessed the efficacy and tolerability
of the AI anastrozole versus tamoxifen as initial adjuvant treatment for postmenopausal women with hormone receptor-positive disease (Table 1). At a
median follow-up of 68 months, anastrozole significantly prolonged disease-free survival (DFS) and the
time to recurrence compared with tamoxifen (DFS:
hazards ratio [HR], 0.87; 95% confidence interval
[95% CI], 0.78-0.97 [P 5 .01]; time to recurrence: HR,
0.79; 95% CI, 0.70-0.90 [P 5 .0005]).1 Distant recurrences and contralateral breast cancers also were
reduced (distant recurrences: HR, 0.86; 95% CI, 0.740.99 [P 5 .04]; contralateral breast cancers: 42%
reduction, P 5 .01). These differences favoring anastrozole were observed irrespective of baseline prognostic factors. An absolute difference in DFS was
evident within 1 year and continued to increase
beyond completion of treatment. The safety and risk
benefit analysis of ATAC data showed better tolerability and risk benefit profiles for anastrozole over tamoxifen.2 Treatment-related adverse events (AEs)
occurred significantly less often with anastrozole
(61%) compared with tamoxifen (68%; P < .0001); serious AEs and withdrawals because of AEs also were
significantly fewer with anastrozole. The risk of lifethreatening AEs, such as venous thromboembolic
events, stroke, and endometrial cancer, all were significantly lower with anastrozole.1–3 Bone fractures
were more common with anastrozole than with tamoxifen (11% vs 8%; P < .0001): Hip fractures
occurred at a similarly low incidence in both treatment groups.2 Data from a substudy of this trial suggest that, although anastrozole was associated with
significant decreases in bone mineral density (BMD)
in the lumbar spine and total hip compared with tamoxifen,4 no patients with normal BMD at baseline
became osteoporotic at 5 years. The ATAC trial endometrial subprotocol examined the effect of these
agents on endometrial pathology. At 6 years of follow-up, patients who received anastrozole had fewer

701

endometrial abnormalities than patients who
received tamoxifen (27.3% vs 43.9%; P 5 .017).5
Furthermore, in the main ATAC trial, the differences
in gynecologic AEs resulted in a 4-fold increase in
the number of hysterectomies in patients who
received tamoxifen compared with patients who
received anastrozole (5.1% and 1.3%, respectively;
P < .0001).2 The impact of both agents on healthrelated quality of life (QoL) was similar.6
The BIG 1-98 study is an ongoing, Phase III,
international, multicenter, randomized, double-blind
trial that compares the safety and efficacy of 5 years
of treatment with 4 different adjuvant endocrine
therapy regimens (Table 1). Patients were randomized to receive 1 of the following daily monotherapy or sequential treatments for 5 years: 1)
tamoxifen, 2) letrozole, 3) tamoxifen for 2 years followed by letrozole for 3 years, or 4) letrozole for 2
years followed by tamoxifen for 3 years. The objectives of this trial were to compare adjuvant letrozole
versus tamoxifen administered for 5 years and to
compare these treatment regimens given sequentially
versus continuously. Efficacy was measured as the
proportion of patients who had DFS at yearly intervals after randomization. Secondary efficacy parameters are summarized in Table 1.
In total, 8028 women were randomized into this
trial, as outlined in Table 1. To date, 2 planned analyses of the data have been reported. The BIG 1-98 collaboration group first reported on the comparison of
tamoxifen with letrozole at a median follow-up of
25.8 months.7 That analysis included all data from
patients who were assigned to the monotherapy
arms and data from the sequential therapy arms that
was censored at the time of therapy switch. In the
analysis, compared with tamoxifen, letrozole significantly reduced the risk of an event (invasive recurrence, second malignancy, or death without prior
cancer event) ending a period of DFS (HR, 0.81; 95%
CI, 0.70-0.93 [P 5 .003]), particularly the risk of
distant recurrence (HR, 0.73; 95% CI, 0.60-0.88
[P 5 .001]). With regard to safety, patients who were
receiving tamoxifen experienced more thromboembolism, endometrial cancer, and vaginal bleeding.
Patients who were receiving letrozole experienced
more skeletal events (bone fractures, arthralgia),
hypercholesterolemia, and cardiac events. A second
analysis of the data was conducted with a median of
51 months of follow-up data and included only those
patients who had been randomized to the monotherapy treatment arms.8 Similar to the first analysis, a
greater proportion of patients in the letrozole group
remained alive and disease free at 5 years (HR, 0.82;
95% CI, 0.71-0.95 [P 5 .007]). The safety profile was

702

CANCER Supplement

February 1, 2008 / Volume 112 / Number 3

similar to that reported in the first analysis. These
longer term data confirmed the safety and efficacy
findings from the first analysis. Letrozole was superior to tamoxifen in the defined primary endpoint,
DFS, and in the secondary efficacy endpoints,
including the time to distant recurrence.
To date no statistical comparison of the sequential treatment groups with one another or with
monotherapy have been conducted. However, the
data to date regarding the monotherapy arms suggest
that patients can benefit from receiving letrozole for
a period of 5 years without suffering from increasing
adverse sequelae.

Switching Endocrine Therapy
Other trials, such as ARNO 95, ABCSG 8, and ITA,
have evaluated the efficacy benefits of switching to
anastrozole in patients who have received adjuvant
treatment with tamoxifen for 2 to 3 years (Table 1).9–11
These trials evaluated the benefits of switching to
anastrozole compared with continuing tamoxifen for
the remainder of the 5-year treatment period.
Switching to anastrozole produced a significantly
reduced risk of recurrence,9 longer duration of DFS
and event-free survival,10,11 and improved overall
survival.9 A recent meta-analysis of these 3 clinical
trials demonstrated that switching from tamoxifen to
anastrozole provided significant improvements in
both DFS (HR, 0.59; 95% CI, 0.48-0.74 [P < .0001])
and overall survival (HR, 0.71; 95% CI, 0.52-0.98
[P 5 .04]).12 In these switching trials, it is important
to distinguish between the switching and sequencing
strategies, because the resulting data relate to different patient populations, and switching study populations are enriched with patients who respond well to
endocrine therapy by excluding patients who have
had an early recurrence despite tamoxifen treatment.
The IES trial was designed as an international,
multicenter, randomized, double-blind trial to compare the efficacy and safety of continued adjuvant tamoxifen therapy with exemestane therapy in
postmenopausal women with primary breast cancer
who remained free of disease after receiving adjuvant
tamoxifen for 2 to 3 years. Women were randomized
to receive either exemestane or tamoxifen daily to
complete 5 total years of treatment. The objectives of
the study were 1) to determine whether switching to
exemestane, a steroidal AI, after 2 to 3 years of tamoxifen could improve DFS compared with continuing tamoxifen for the remainder of the 5 year
treatment period; 2) to determine whether using
both treatments in sequence would produce
improved efficacy and fewer side effects than either
treatment alone; 3) to determine whether switching

to an AI would reduce the tamoxifen-associated incidence of thromboembolism and endometrial cancer;
4) to assess the effects of either treatment on BMD,
as measured by dual-energy x-ray absorptiometry,
biomarkers of bone metabolism (substudy), and fracture incidence; and 5) to determine whether switching to an AI would have an impact on the patient’s
QoL.13
In total, 4724 postmenopausal patients with unilateral, invasive breast cancer were assigned randomly to switch to exemestane or to continue
tamoxifen treatment for the remainder of a 5-year
endocrine treatment period. The primary endpoint
was DFS (Table 1).
After a median follow-up of 56 months, 809 DFS
events were reported (354 exemestane-related events,
455 tamoxifen-related events). The unadjusted HR
for DFS was 0.76 (95% CI, 0.66-0.88; P 5 .0001),
favoring exemestane with an absolute benefit of 3.3%
(95% CI, 1.6-4.9%) by the end of treatment (ie, 2.5
years after randomization). A reduction in the risk of
death was observed after a switch to exemestane
(222 deaths) compared with continuation of tamoxifen (261 deaths), corresponding to an HR of 0.85
(95% CI, 0.71-1.02; P 5 .08) and 0.83 (95% CI, 0.691.00; P 5 .05) when patients with ER-negative disease
were excluded. Exemestane and tamoxifen were tolerated well, and severe toxic effects were rare.14
In the first 6 months after switching to exemestane, BMD was lowered by 0.051 g/cm3 (2.69%; 95%
CI, 2.0-3.4% [P < .0001]) at the lumbar spine and by
0.025 g/cm3 (1.35%; 95% CI, 0.8-1.9% [P < .0001]) at
the hip compared with baseline BMD. The decline in
BMD progressively slowed thereafter. Reductions in
BMD were 1.04% (95% CI, 0.39-1.70%; P 5 .002) and
0.84% (95% CI, 0.29-1.39%; P 5 .003) in Year 2 at the
lumbar spine and hip, respectively. No patient with
normal BMD at trial entry developed osteoporosis.
Bone resorption and formation markers increased at
all time points in the women who received exemestane (P 5 .001). With a median follow-up of 58
months for all IES participants (n 5 4274 women),
162 patients (7%) in the exemestane group and 115
patients (5%) in the tamoxifen group had fractures
(odds ratio, 1.45; 95% CI, 1.13-1.87 [P 5 .003]). These
results indicate that the increase in survival reported
previously with the IES switch strategy was achieved
at the expense of some detriment to skeletal health;
thus, the risk-benefit ratio for women needs to be
assessed individually.15
A subset of IES centers participated in a QoL
substudy. The Functional Assessment of Cancer
Therapy-Breast (FACT-B) and the Endocrine Subscale
(ES) were administered before randomization and at

No. of
randomized patients

9366

8028

1059

2926

448

4006

Setting/trial*

Initial adjuvant therapy
ATAC1–6

Initial adjuvant and sequential
BIG 1-987,8

Switched
ARNO 959

ABCSG 810

ITA11

Meta-analysis of
ARNO 95, ABCSG 8,
and ITA12

Randomized after 2-3 y of
tamoxifen: Anastrozole
(n5223) or tamoxifen
(n5225)
Anastrozole (n52009) or
tamoxifen (n51997)

Randomized after 2 y of
tamoxifen: Anastrozole
(n51472) or tamoxifen
(n51454)

Randomized after 2 y of
tamoxifen: Anastrozole
(n5489) or tamoxifen
(n5490)

Tamoxifen (n52459), letrozole
(n52463),
tamoxifen?letrozole
(n51550),
letrozole?tamoxifen
(n51545)

Anastrozole (n53116),
tamoxifen (n53135),
combination (n53125)

Treatment arms

TABLE 1
Summary of Aromatase Inhibitor Trials in Postmenopausal Women With Early Breast Cancer

Primary: DFS, EFS,
distantrecurrence-free
survival, OS;
secondary: AEs

Primary: DFS, local
or distant
recurrence,
contralateral
breast cancer,
death; secondary:
OS, safety
Primary: EFS;
secondary: distant
recurrence-free
survival, OS,
tolerability
Primary: DFS;
secondary: EFS,
OS, safety

Primary: DFS;
secondary: OS,
systemic DFS,
time to distant
recurrence

Primary: DFS, safety/
tolerability;
secondary:
incidence of
contralateral
cancer, time to
distant recurrence,
OS

Primary/secondary
endpoints

(continued )

There were significant improvements in all efficacy endpoints for anastrozole
over tamoxifen

1) Switching to anastrozole showed a significantly reduced risk of recurrence,
longer duration of DFS and EFS, and improved OS; 2) thromboses,
embolism, and endometrial cancer were more common in patients
continuing on tamoxifen, whereas serious fractures were more likely in
those switching to anastrozole
1) DFS and EFS were significantly longer in the anastrozole group; 2) more
patients in the anastrozole group experienced at least 1 AE, but numbers
of patients experiencing serious AEs were comparable

1) Anastrozole treatment significantly reduced the risk of recurrence and
improved OS; 2) the incidence of serious AEs was lower in the anastrozole
group; 3) no new safety issues identified

Initial adjuvant analysis (monotherapy tamoxifen vs. letrozole): 1) letrozole
significantly increased DFS, reduced distant recurrences, prolonged time
to distant metastasis; 2) tamoxifen group experienced more
thromboembolism, endometrial cancer, hot flashes, night sweats, and
vaginal bleeding; 3) patients on letrozole experienced more skeletal and
cardiac events and hypercholesterolemia. Analysis of sequential treatment
arms: data not yet available

At 33-mo follow-up, combination arm showed no benefits over monotherapy
and was discontinued; at 68-mo follow-up, there were significant
advantages for anastrozole over tamoxifen in DFS, time to recurrence, and
contralateral breast cancer

Main findings

AI Clinical Trials in Early Breast CA/Buzdar et al.
703

Randomized after 5 y of
tamoxifen: Exemestane or
placebo
Randomized after 5 y of
tamoxifen with or without
AG: anastrozole (n5387) or
no treatment (n5469)

Randomized after 5 y of
tamoxifen: Letrozole
(n52593) or placebo
(n52594)

Randomized after 2 to 3 y of
tamoxifen: Exemestane
(n52362) or tamoxifen
(n52380)

Treatment arms

Primary: DFS;
secondary: OS,
QoL tools (SF-36,
MENQOL), lipids,
BMD
Primary: DFS;
secondary: OS,
safety, QoL
Primary: recurrencefree survival;
secondary: OS,
safety

Primary: DFS;
secondary: OS,
Safety, BMD,
biomarkers of
bone metabolism,
fracture incidence,
QoL tools (FACTB, ES)

Primary/secondary
endpoints

1) Patients receiving anastrozole experienced a significantly reduced risk of
recurrence; 2) anastrozole was well tolerated, no unexpected AEs were
reported

Women who received exemestane after 5 y of tamoxifen therapy were 56%
less likely to have relapse of breast cancer

1) Letrozole significantly improved DFS survival after 5 y of tamoxifen; 2) AEs
(primarily grade 1 and 2): hot flashes, arthritis, arthralgia, and myalgia
more common in letrozole than placebo group; trend toward higher rate
of newly diagnosed osteoporosis in letrozole group

1) Exemestane treatment after 2-3 y of tamoxifen significantly improved DFS
compared with 5 y of tamoxifen treatment; 2) No significant difference
between the 2 treatment groups for OS, but improved OS if ER-negative
patients excluded; 3) both treatment groups well tolerated with rare severe
toxic effects; 4) BMD was decreased within 6 mo of switching to
exemestane, no patient with normal BMD at entry became osteoporotic;
4) fracture incidence significantly greater in the exemestane group;
5) QoL was good and stable for 2 y with no clinically meaningful
differences observed between the 2 groups

Main findings

ATAC indicates Arimidex, Tamoxifen, Alone or in Combination; DFS, disease-free survival; OS, overall survival; BIG, Breast International Group; ARNO, Arimidex-Nolvadex; AE, adverse events; ABCSG indicates Austrian Breast and Colorectal Cancer Study Group; EFS, event-free
survival; ITA, Italian Tamoxifen Anastrozole; IES, Intergroup Exemestane Study; BMD, bone mineral density; QoL, quality of life; FACT-B, Functional Assessment of Caner Therapy-Breast; ES, Endocrine Subscale; ER, estrogen receptor; MA.17, National Cancer Institute of Canada
Trial; SF-36, 36-item short-form QoL measure; MENQOL, menopause QoL questionnaire; AG, aminoglutethimide; NSABP, National Surgical Adjuvant Breast and Bowel Project.
*Superscript numbers indicate the list of References.

856

ABCSG 6a18

5187

Extended adjuvant therapy
MA.1716

1598

4724

Switched setting
IES13–15

NSABP B-3317

No. of
randomized patients

CANCER Supplement

Setting/trial*

TABLE 1
(continued )

704
February 1, 2008 / Volume 112 / Number 3

AI Clinical Trials in Early Breast CA/Buzdar et al.

3 months, 6 months, 9 months, 12 months, 18
months, and 24 months. The primary endpoint was
the FACT-B composite Trial Outcome Index (TOI).
Secondary endpoints included the total FACT-B plus
ES score, the total ES score, and the severity of individual endocrine symptoms. Five hundred eighty-two
patients from 8 countries were enrolled into the substudy. Eighty-five percent of the questionnaires were
completed and returned for analysis. QoL generally
was good and stable for >2 years, and no clinically
meaningful differences were observed between the
groups in scores on the TOI, FACT-B, or ES at any
time point. No significant differences between
groups were observed for any endocrine symptoms
apart from vaginal discharge, which was more pronounced in women who were receiving tamoxifen
(P < .002). The switch from tamoxifen to exemestane
neither increased nor decreased endocrine symptoms
that were present after 2 to 3 years of tamoxifen; the
switch also did not initiate significant reports of new
symptoms. These results indicate that the clinical
benefits of exemestane over tamoxifen are achieved
without significant detrimental effect on QoL.16 We
conclude that the previously reported early DFS
improvements observed after a switch to exemestane
after 2 to 3 years of tamoxifen persist posttreatment
and translate into a modest, but real, improvement
in overall survival.

Extended Adjuvant Therapy
Recurrences of breast cancer continue beyond
5 years of standard adjuvant tamoxifen therapy, and
approximately half are distant recurrences with
known high clinical and financial impact. Two-thirds
of breast cancer deaths occur after the completion of
adjuvant tamoxifen. Extending tamoxifen beyond
5 years adds little, if any, benefit; therefore, an unmet
medical need exists for extended adjuvant endocrine
therapy.
Data from 3 major trials evaluating the potential
benefits of extending adjuvant therapy beyond 5
years of tamoxifen are available from the MA.17,
ABCSG 6a, and NSABP B-33 trials. The results of the
large, double-blind, placebo-controlled MA.17 clinical trial provided evidence that extending therapy
with letrozole in the extended adjuvant therapy setting provides significant additional benefit. Extended
adjuvant letrozole significantly reduced the risk of recurrence by 42% (P 5 .00,004) and the risk of distant
recurrence by 40% (P < .0001), thus corroborating
the evidence for an ongoing risk of recurrence. A
prospective, planned analysis revealed a 39% reduction in the risk of death for lymph node-positive
patients who received letrozole (P 5 .04). A retro-

705

spective cohort analysis further revealed that the
advantage of letrozole over placebo increased with
duration of treatment. In the overall population, the
HRs for DFS and distant DFS decreased significantly
between 6 months and 48 months of treatment with
letrozole (HR for DFS, 0.52-0.19; P < .0001; HR for
distant DFS, 0.66-0.24; P 5 .0004). In lymph nodepositive patients, the significant decrease in the risk
of distant metastases also translated into a significantly decreasing HR for the risk of death (HR for
overall survival, 0.72-0.43). Furthermore, the efficacy
of late extended adjuvant letrozole was assessed in
patients who switched from placebo to letrozole after
unblinding of MA.17. This postunblinding analysis
indicated that there were significant reductions in
the risk of recurrence (269%; P < .0001) and distant
recurrences (272%; P 5 .002) in patients who had
been off prior tamoxifen for periods between 1 year
and 5 years. No interaction between age and benefit
from letrozole was noted in an analysis of outcome
in the elderly.17 In summary, extended adjuvant
letrozole provides substantial benefit in women who
have completed prior tamoxifen and should be considered for such women regardless of lymph node
status, prior adjuvant chemotherapy, or age.
The NSABP B-33 study was a randomized, placebo-controlled, double-blind trial that evaluated the
safety and efficacy of exemestane given for 5 years in
cancer-free patients, hormone receptor-positive
breast cancer survivors after approximately 5 years of
tamoxifen therapy. The accrual of this trial was
stopped in October 2003 after the results from the
MA.17 trial were disclosed. At that time, approximately 50% of the patients had been enrolled (1598),
and the study was unblinded. The data reported at
the San Antonio Breast Cancer Symposium in December 2006 on 30 months of median follow-up
from the study suggested that women who received
exemestane were 56% less likely than those who
received placebo to have a recurrence of breast cancer (P 5 .004). However, no overall survival benefit
was observed (HR, 1.2; P 5 .63). The most common
grade 3 and 4 toxicities observed in the exemestane
group were arthralgia (1%), fatigue (0.9%), and bone
pain (0.5%).18
In study ABCSG 6a, patients who were recurrence-free at 5 years after tamoxifen therapy with or
without aminoglutethimide were rerandomized to
receive either 3 years of anastrozole or no further
treatment (Table 1).19 At 62.3 months of follow-up,
patients who received anastrozole experienced a significantly reduced risk of recurrence (HR, 0.62; 95%
CI, 0.40-0.96 [P 5 .031]) compared with patients who
received no further treatment.

706

CANCER Supplement

February 1, 2008 / Volume 112 / Number 3

DISCUSSION
AIs have added benefit to the outcome of women
with hormone receptor-positive breast cancer over and
above that conferred by tamoxifen alone. Until further
data are available from long-term, randomized, controlled clinical trials, newly diagnosed patients should
consider either an upfront AI or a strategy that
includes an initial course of tamoxifen followed by an
AI. Two important questions in this area currently are
being addressed in large, randomized, controlled trials.
The first is whether there is an identifiable subgroup
of patients for which tamoxifen should be considered
more strongly for initial therapy. The second question
is whether initial AI treatment is superior to a
switched or sequential regimen with both an AI and
tamoxifen. It is hoped that the BIG 1-98 trial will provide data to further our understanding in this area.
(Note that one of the authors [A.U.B.] considers
upfront AI as the preferred treatment for all newly
diagnosed patients. The other authors believe that
both options should be considered.)
It was demonstrated in the IES trial that switching
from tamoxifen to an AI has value. However, extending
the AI beyond 5 years has as yet not been established
and is the subject of ongoing evaluation. Extending
endocrine therapy beyond 5 years adds important and
substantial benefit, conferring an additional (DFS)
advantage to all patients and an overall survival
advantage in lymph node-positive patients. In women
with primary tumors that are ER-positive and progesterone (PR)-positive, an overall survival advantage was
demonstrated in the MA.17 trial. This concept of longer duration of adjuvant endocrine therapy established
by the landmark MA.17 trial currently is being tested
even in patients who received upfront AI therapy.
In premenopausal women, tamoxifen remains
the standard of care for adjuvant endocrine treatment. However, there are 2 ongoing National Cancer
Institute-Cancer Therapy Evaluation Program-sponsored trials that were designed to evaluate the efficacy of AIs and tamoxifen in this population.
The principal toxicity of aromatase inhibition is
now well recognized as accelerated bone resorption.
Monitoring women with BMD assessments; counseling related to diet, exercise, and vitamin D and
calcium supplementation; and judicious use of
bisphosphonates have been established. QoL studies
generally have indicated that AIs are tolerated well
and have no greater impact on QoL than tamoxifen,
but they affect slightly different domains, such as
body discomfort, most likely reflecting the greater
musculoskeletal and joint discomfort from AIs.
In conclusion, the advent of AIs in adjuvant therapy of women with hormone receptor-positive pri-

mary tumors has added substantial benefit in terms
of disease outcome. Clinicians should consider AIs
when planning the patient’s endocrine treatment.
Outstanding issues include identifying the optimal
duration, optimal agent, and optimal patients for
these therapies. Prolonged endocrine therapy may
become a reality for selected patients in keeping
with the chronic relapsing nature of the disease.
Optimizing, expanding, and extending endocrine
therapy is likely to add further to patient outcome.

OPEN DISCUSSION
The questions and discussion below follow from the
oral presentation given at the Sixth Cambridge Conference on Endocrine and Targeted Manipulation of
Breast Cancer and do not correspond directly to the
written article, which is a more general review.

ATAC
Dr. Charles Coombes: What is your explanation for
this very significant improvement in disease-free survival but no improvement in overall survival? Other
than the finding that many patients were switched to
an AI after the 5 years, might it also be the definition
of disease-free survival events?
Dr. Aman Buzdar: If we look at the data in terms
of survival advantage, age is a factor, because the
median age of the patients, at the start, was about
3 to 4 years younger in the trials showing survival
advantage. There were more deaths from other
causes as these women reach the age of 70 or 75
years. These treatments are not going to make them
immortal.
Dr. Eric Winer: I think the bottom line is the AIs
are an advance, but at least 5 years of therapy with
an AI versus 5 years with tamoxifen just isn’t such a
huge advance. There’s a very small improvement in
overall survival. My personal view is that the way
we’re really going to change mortality in women with
ER-positive breast cancer is by finding better treatments and by extending treatment longer in those
who need it longer. I think this is the first step, but
it’s not as big a step as we once thought that it was.
Dr. Kathleen Pritchard: It’s not a quantum leap
Dr. Winer: No, but there aren’t very many quantum leaps. I actually would argue that even trastuzumab in the adjuvant setting isn’t a quantum leap, but
it’s a bigger leap than this.
Dr. Steven Come: The other thing that has concerned me is that, when you read all the published
trials, I think in every single one of them, the AIs are
slightly better tolerated than tamoxifen in terms
of withdrawals and things like that; but, in clinical

AI Clinical Trials in Early Breast CA/Buzdar et al.

practice, they prove to be fairly difficult drugs for
patients to take.
Dr. James Ingle: I think it’s about 5-percent that
get bad musculoskeletal complaints. But I find that, in
most patients, low-dose celecoxib can take care of it.
Dr. Buzdar: Patients do complain of joint discomforts; but the thing is, most of the time, patients
are scared, and they think every ache or pain is a recurrence of cancer. If you reassure them that this is
an effect of therapy, then I think they are a little
more reassured. All of us have seen patients who,
despite doing everything, have persistent discomfort. I now have a couple of patients that I had to
switch back to tamoxifen because their QoL was so
suboptimal.

BIG 1-98
Dr. Winer: We need to know what ultimately will be
the best strategy in terms of using the AIs: How long
should they be used; which patients perhaps may be
spared all these therapies altogether, and which
patients need more than what we’re currently providing? Certainly, my experience in practice is that all of
these therapies are harder to give than we like to
believe. When you talk to groups of women about
how easy endocrine therapy is compared with treatments like chemotherapy, there invariably are a fair
number of dissenters in the audience. The burden of
long-term treatment, for some proportion of patients,
is really substantial.
Dr. Stephen Johnston: I know that the mantra is
that all patients gain or have some degree of benefit.
But, again, if we’re actually trying to say whether
everybody needs an AI upfront, just take both the
BIG 1-98 and ATAC together, is there anything really
from that that starts to be strikingly different to the
sort of similar subgroup analysis from the ATAC to
suggest it?
Dr. Winer: My sense is that it’s just that patients
who have PR-negative tumors are at higher risk of recurrence, particularly early recurrence, and that it is
a prognostic, rather than predictive, factor.
Dr. Johnston: So, in your practice, would that be
still a subgroup that you might say, okay, we’ll give
you an AI rather than tamoxifen? For whatever
degree of small benefit there might be.
Dr. Paul Goss: I don’t, actually. I see Her-2 as
another reason for high risk of early recurrence, so it
is a reason for giving an AI. There is not another subset that we currently single out for AI therapy
upfront.
Dr. Johnston: So you’d give them an AI?
Dr. Goss: Yes, because they’re at a higher risk of
relapse.

707

Dr. Winer: Now, of course, the issue with Her-2
is to what extent that is altered by treatment with
Her-2-directed therapy. We don’t know. Of course,
that argument would be at it’s strongest if it turns
out that those groups of patients—that is, those
patients with PR-negative disease, lots of positive
lymph nodes, Her-2-positive disease—are at highest
risk of early recurrence and then are at relatively
lower risk of late recurrence. That’s probably true of
Her-2. It may be true of PR. I’m not sure that it’s so
true of nodal positivity.
Dr. Johnston: So, are there subgroups where it’s
reasonable to say tamoxifen?
Dr. Winer: My own view is that it’s entirely reasonable to say that there are large groups of women
for whom tamoxifen upfront is reasonable, given the
finding that we have yet to show that there’s a survival difference with any upfront strategy with an AI.
At this point, I think that a reasonable position is
that we simply don’t know which of these strategies
is better in virtually any patient.
Dr. Goss: ER-positive breast cancer patients have
a very long time to be exposed to the risk of recurrence, so the worst thing that could happen to a
patient is to drop out of all adjuvant therapy very
early because they can’t tolerate the treatment in the
first 1 or 2 years. An important question is: Which
women experience antiestrogen toxicities? Actually,
strategies to overcome toxicity or identify reasons for
toxicity, in the 10-percent of women who stop all adjuvant therapy, probably is going to contribute to a
bettering of outcome more than any of these subtle
differences between the drugs. There’s a project that
we are just initiating looking at whether drug holidays, combined with some counseling to try to bring
patients back on therapy and keep them on therapy,
could help the outcome of the patients with hormone-dependent breast cancer.
Dr. Winer: If it turns out that we can give 10
years of an AI safely and effectively, that would be a
very important piece of information. It may turn
out—and I think it likely will turn out—that, for
some number of patients, extended therapy such as
that will be very important. My real hope is that, at
some point, we’ll also identify the patients, not just
who don’t need an AI upfront, but who don’t need
endocrine therapy at all. I actually think that tests
like Oncotype DX may help us a little in terms of
identifying patients who, in fact, don’t benefit from
endocrine therapy.
Dr. Ingle: In your technology assessment panel,
you stated that optimal endocrine therapy includes
an AI, either initially, or after several years of tamoxifen, or after some period of tamoxifen. Do you want

708

CANCER Supplement

February 1, 2008 / Volume 112 / Number 3

to comment on what the panel’s conclusion on this
was at St. Gallen that, first, there’s a reasonable
population for which 5 years of tamoxifen is appropriate and, second, if switched, most people do it after 2 or 3 years? Any comments about the tamoxifen?
Is it dead as monotherapy?
Dr. Winer: I don’t think tamoxifen is dead. The
St. Gallen statement that 5 years of tamoxifen is reasonable is a very pragmatic statement when one
looks at therapy around the world. I think the most
important thing we can do for a woman with ERpositive breast cancer, based on what we know at
the moment, is give her endocrine therapy. Given the
finding that there are parts of the world where the
cost of the AIs are relatively prohibitive, one should
not dismiss tamoxifen entirely and, for that matter,
for women who are intolerant of AIs or perhaps
women who have quite low-risk disease and don’t
want to have the side effects of the AIs, tamoxifen is
a reasonable treatment.
Dr. Buzdar: We should comment on longer duration of tamoxifen beyond 5 years. The question is
whether there are any data to support this at the
present time.
Dr. Goss: There are no data to suggest there’s an
additional benefit for continuing tamoxifen. The Adjuvant Tamoxifen Longer Against Shorter (ATLAS)
and Adjuvant Tamoxifen Treatment Offer More
(ATOM) data may show a slight difference—I’m guessing—but I doubt that the benefit of continuing
tamoxifen will exceed the benefit of switching to an
AI after 5 years of tamoxifen. I think to advocate 10
years of tamoxifen, at the present time, would not be
optimal.

IES
Dr. Goss: The protection of bone by tamoxifen in the
overall population treated is a clear benefit
Dr. Coombes: I agree with what you said, but
the fact remains if you examine the number of fractures for person years in ATAC versus IES, it’s about
the same. Whether it’s a difference in T score or
BMD loss or fractures, including traumatic, I think
there’s a lot of uncertainty, there is a lot of different
information in the denominator.
Dr. Buzdar: The total picture of AEs from tamoxifen include thromboembolic complications, endometrial bleeding, vaginal bleeding, and endometrial
cancer: When you look at the overall profile of tamoxifen, it is not as favorable as we think.
Dr. Goss: But bone toxicity needs to be looked at
in context. And the tamoxifen-associated endometrial
hysterectomy rate is partly a physician education
problem. The hysterectomies are done by gynecolo-

gists, and we all know that 98% of these hysterectomies are unnecessary. Oncologists have pointed
this out to no avail, but an educational effort is
required to stop this phenomenon.
Dr. Jo Anne Zujewski: Does the risk of fractures
increase as you stay on therapy, or is the rate the
same over time?
Dr. Coombes: When we looked at the fracture
rates, they appeared to be the same over the course
of the therapy.
Dr. Buzdar: We looked at the hazard rate of fractures in ATAC. It went up on AI (anastrozole), and it
remained higher, but it did not continue to go up,
rise, and it remained steady over the next 2 to 3
years. Risk increases to approximately 40% with therapy, then the 2 curves run parallel to each other.

MA.17
Dr. Goss: In MA.17, we exceeded the target benefit
that the doctors asked us to achieve in the lymph
node-negative patients and substantially exceeded it
in the lymph node-positive patients. And yet, still,
people around the world are reluctant to continue
extended adjuvant endocrine therapy. For lymph
node-positive patients coming off tamoxifen, they
forego a survival advantage by not taking letrozole.
Dr. Coombes: This disappointment that you’re
expressing: Is this partly because people are switching patients earlier; therefore, by the time they come
to 5 years, they have already had AI treatment?
Dr. Goss: I think patients should switch earlier in
the majority of circumstances; but no, these are doctors in the U.K. and Europe who are going to run the
5 years of tamoxifen, finish it, and not do anything
after that.
Dr. Coombes: They’re making a financial decision. Some do it for lymph node-positive patients,
but not lymph node-negative patients. How long after stopping tamoxifen can you switch?
Dr. Goss: Switching immediately is a good idea,
the best idea; but, if you have delayed starting letrozole, there is still a big advantage. We know that 20%
of the physicians in the U.S. are giving AIs for 5 years
after 2 years of tamoxifen, according to research
from the drug companies.
Dr. Pritchard: Is that because not everyone is
stopping after 5 years?
Dr. Goss: I don’t know when people stop, but
doctors are telling patients, after a couple of years of
tamoxifen, that they want them to switch and go to
an AI for at least 5 years. The others stop tamoxifen
after 5 years.

AI Clinical Trials in Early Breast CA/Buzdar et al.

REFERENCES
1.

2.

3.

4.

5.

6.

7.

8.

9.

ATAC Trialists’ Group. Results of the ATAC (Arimidex, Tamoxifen, Alone or in Combination) trial after completion
of 5 years’ adjuvant treatment for breast cancer. Lancet.
2005;365:60–62.
The ATAC Trialists’ Group. Comprehensive side-effect profile of anastrozole and tamoxifen as adjuvant treatment for
early-stage breast cancer: long-term safety analysis of the
ATAC trial. Lancet Oncol. 2006;7:633–643.
Cuzick J, Wale C; on Behalf of the ATAC Trialists’ Group. A
detailed analysis of the benefits of anastrozole over tamoxifen for venous thromboembolic events (VTEs) after 5 years
treatment. Presented at the San Antonio Breast Cancer
Symposium, San Antonio, Texas, December 14-17, 2006.
Abstract 104.
Eastell R, Hannon RA, Cuzick J, et al. Effect of anastrozole
on bone mineral density: 5-year results of the ‘Arimidex’
(anastrozole), Tamoxifen, Alone or in Combination (ATAC)
trial [abstract OC002]. Calcif Tissue Int. 2006;78(suppl
1):S25.
Duffy S; on behalf of the ATAC Trialists’ Group. Anastrozole
is associated with a lower risk of endometrial abnormalities
than tamoxifen: first report of the ATAC trial endometrial
subprotocol at 6 years’ follow-up [poster 4055]. Presented
at the San Antonio Breast Cancer Symposium, San Antonio,
Tex, December 14-17, 2006.
Cella D, Fallowfield L, Barker P, Cuzick J, Locker G, Howell
A. Quality of life of postmenopausal women in the ATAC
(‘‘Arimidex,’’ Tamoxifen, Alone or in Combination) trial after completion of 5 years’ adjuvant treatment for early
breast cancer. Breast Cancer Res Treatment. 2006;100:273–
284.
Breast International Group 1-98 Collaborative Group. A
comparison of letrozole and tamoxifen in postmenopausal
women with early breast cancer. N Engl J Med. 2005;353:
2747–2757.
Coates AS, Keshaviah A, Thurlimann B, et al. Five years of
letrozole compared with tamoxifen as initial adjuvant therapy for postmenopausal women with endocrine-responsive
early breast cancer: update of study BIG 1-98. J Clin Oncol.
2007;25:486–492.
Kaufmann M, Jonat W, Hilfrich J, et al. Survival benefit of
switching to anastrozole after 2 years’ treatment with tamoxifen versus continued tamoxifen therapy: the ARNO 95
study. ASCO Meeting Abstracts. 2006;24(18s). Abstract 547.

709

10. Jakesz R, Jonat W, Gnant M, et al. Switching of postmenopausal women with endocrine-responsive early breast cancer to anastrozole after 2 years’ adjuvant tamoxifen:
combined results of ABCSG trial 8 and ARNO 95 trial. Lancet. 2005;366:455–462.
11. Boccardo F, Rubagotti A, Guglielmini P, et al. Switching to
anastrozole versus continued tamoxifen treatment of early
breast cancer. Updated results of the Italian Tamoxifen
Anastrozole (ITA) trial. Ann Oncol. 2006;17(suppl 7):vii10–
vii14.
12. Jonat W, Gnant M, Boccardo F, et al. Effectiveness of
switching from adjuvant tamoxifen to anastrozole in postmenopausal women with hormone-sensitive early-stage
breast cancer: a meta-analysis. Lancet Oncol. 2006;7:991–
996.
13. Coombes RC, Hall E, Gibson LJ, et al. A Randomized trial
of exemestane after two to three years of tamoxifen therapy in postmenopausal women with primary breast cancer.
N Engl J Med. 2004;350:1081–1092.
14. Coombes RC, Kilburn LS, Snowdon CF, et al. Survival and
safety of exemestane versus tamoxifen after 2-3 years’ tamoxifen treatment (Intergroup Exemestane Study): a randomized controlled trial. Lancet. 2007:369;559–570.
15. Coleman RE, Banks LM, Girgis SI, et al. Skeletal effects of
exemestane on bone-mineral density, bone biomarkers,
and fracture incidence in postmenopausal women with
early breast cancer participating in the Intergroup Exemestane Study (IES): a randomised controlled study. Lancet
Oncol. 2007;8:1119–1127.
16. Fallowfield LJ, Bliss JM, Porter LS, et al. Quality of life in
the Intergroup Exemestane Study: a randomized trial of
exemestane versus continued tamoxifen after 2 to 3 years
of tamoxifen in postmenopausal women with primary
breast cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2006;24:910–917.
17. Goss PE, Ingle JN, Silvana Martino DO, et al. A randomized
trial of letrozole in postmenopausal women after 5 years of
tamoxifen therapy for early-stage breast cancer. N Engl J
Med. 2003;349:1793–1802.
18. Pfizer Inc. New study shows efficacy of aromasin on early
breast cancer. Breast Cancer News. December 18, 2006.
19. Jakesz R, Samonigg H, Greil R, et al. Extended adjuvant
treatment with anastrozole: results from the Austrian
Breast and Colorectal Cancer Study Group Trial 6a
(ABCSG-6a). ASCO Meeting Abstracts. 2005;23(10s). Abstract
527.

