1877

E D I T O R I A L

The Hazards of Intermediate
Endpoints
Tomasz M. Beer, MD
Christopher W. Ryan,

MD

Department of Medicine, Oregon Health and Science University Cancer Institute, Portland, Oregon.

C

See referenced original
1959–66, this issue.

article

on

pages

Address for reprints: Tomasz M. Beer, MD,
Department of Medicine, Oregon Health and
Science University, 3303 SW Bond, CH14R, Portland, OR 97239; Fax: (503) 494-6197. E-mail:
beert@ohsu.edu
Received June 21, 2007; accepted June 24,
2007.

ª 2007 American Cancer Society

linical beneﬁt of treatment for advanced prostate cancer is not
hard to deﬁne. Extension of survival, improved quality of life,
and reduced disease complications are concrete examples over
which there is little controversy. Clinical trials that rely on alternate
endpoints risk producing confusing, if not uninterpretable, results.
The article by Carducci et al. in this issue of Cancer presents
such a dilemma.1 Atrasentan, an agent thought promising for prostate cancer based on several prior studies, including randomized
Phase 2 data,2 was investigated in a placebo-controlled, Phase 3
trial in metastatic, androgen-independent patients using progression-free survival as the primary endpoint. At ﬁrst glance, this concept would seem clear enough. However, progression in advanced
prostate cancer is not a straight-forward endpoint. It requires a
composite construct of clinical and radiographic measures and has
not been validated. Consequently, we are left with uncertainty when
interpreting the results of this clinical trial.
The authors should be congratulated for successfully conducting such a large study without reliance on prostate-speciﬁc antigen
(PSA) as a component of the progression endpoint. This is quite an
accomplishment in a PSA-driven era, in which both patients and
clinicians feel compelled to make and break treatment decisions
based on ﬂuctuations in this marker. The temptation of choosing
PSA decline as an endpoint in prostate cancer clinical trial design
remains strong, but the meaning of such results remains uncertain.
Reduction in serum PSA in response to chemotherapy for androgen-independent disease, although it is correlated with survival,3 is
not a direct or universally accepted measure of patient beneﬁt.
Furthermore, it is not clear that biologic agents that may beneﬁt
patients by stabilizing their disease without classic responses can be
evaluated using PSA metrics. Despite the decision to exclude PSA
from the progression endpoint of their study, its inﬂuence remains:
The rigorous bone imaging schedule that may have been the study’s
undoing was put in place as an effort to override PSA-inﬂuenced
progression decisions.
In theory, progression-free survival could prove a versatile
metric applicable to both cytotoxic chemotherapy and cytostatic
agents. However, as evidenced by this trial, progression-free survival is difﬁcult to deﬁne and doubly hard to measure in advanced
prostate cancer. Progression in this disease has many potential
manifestations: a modest increase in the size of asymptomatic—

DOI 10.1002/cncr.22995
Published online 11 September 2007 in Wiley InterScience (www.interscience.wiley.com).

1878

CANCER November 1, 2007 / Volume 110 / Number 9

but radiographically detectable—pelvic lymph
nodes; the development of asymptomatic lesions on
a radionuclide scan of the skeleton; the appearance
of important clinical consequences, such as ureteral
obstruction or painful bone lesions; or the relatively
mundane rise in serum PSA. Such events are not
created equal. Although delaying progression that is
associated with symptoms surely is beneﬁcial, delaying progression of which patients would be unaware
had it not been for an arbitrary imaging study is
another matter. In the absence of evidence tightly
linking such events to subsequent cancer symptoms
or death, delaying such events loses all practical
importance. The results reported by the atrasentan
investigators are illuminating in this regard: Eightyseven percent of radiographic progression events
were not associated with any other clinical evidence
of progression. Were these events clinically meaningful?
Remarkably little is known concerning the correlation between progression-free survival and measures of clinical beneﬁt. In an analysis of 98 patients
with androgen-independent, metastatic prostate cancer treated with microtubule-targeting chemotherapy, Scher et al. examined the association between
radiographic (as well as PSA) progression-free survival and overall survival.4 Overall, the concordance
was moderate for both progression measures.
Expressed as the Kendall t statistic, concordance was
0.4 for radiographic progression-free survival and
0.33 for PSA progression-free survival. It is noteworthy that little association was observed between
radiographic progression events and subsequent
death when the progression event occurred during
the ﬁrst 4 months of treatment. Why would radiographic changes early in the course of therapy be
less informative than similar changes noted later?
One possible explanation could be that new radiographic abnormalities early in the course of treatment may represent disease progression; however,
they also may reﬂect changes that already were
underway before therapy was started or before the
therapy had its full impact on the disease process.
Another possibility is that they represent a ﬂare
phenomenon. Such phenomena have been well
described with initial hormone therapy5 and may
occur with chemotherapy.6
In the study by Carducci et al.,1 the a priori use
of the chosen intermediate endpoint was either the
undoing of an active agent or the validation of
an inactive one. Which it was, we may never know.
Several aspects of the design of their study make
it impossible to determine whether the events classiﬁed as progression were clinically signiﬁcant.

Patients were not followed for any additional evidence of progression after asymptomatic radiographic progression was noted. Early cross-over of
placebo-treated patients to open-label treatment further compromised the ability to detect more longterm beneﬁts, such as delay in symptom development or an impact on overall survival.
It is worth noting that, in some other cancers,
radiographically determined progression-free survival
has been embraced unquestioningly despite the lack
of a known correlation with ﬁrm endpoints, such as
overall survival. In a recent example, U.S. Food and
Drug Administration approvals for several kinase
inhibitors in renal carcinoma were granted based on
Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumor
(RECIST) response rates or progression-free survival
advantage. Lost in these assumptions of clinical relevancy is the historic footnote that the radiographic
changes we use unquestioningly to deﬁne solid tumor ‘‘response’’ or ‘‘progression’’ are descended from
what differences a small group of oncologists palpably could discern among spheres imbedded in a
foam mattress.7 Moertel and Hanley reﬂected on this
exercise in their seminal 1976 article, in which they
noted that most experimental therapeutic trials for
solid tumors culminate when a clinician places a
ruler or caliper over a lump and tries to estimate its
size. Thirty years later, calipers have been replaced
by computed tomography, skeletal scintigraphy,
quality-of-life instruments, and enzyme-linked
immunoadsorbent assays, but the challenges we face
remain the same: Let us measure our endpoint accurately, and let these measurements be useful.
So, is progression-free survival dead in prostate
cancer? We do not think so, but it is in dire need of
reﬁnement and subsequent validation. Methods of
assessment of progression, including types and frequency of imaging studies and their interpretation,
must be reﬁned, and the relation between radiographically detected, asymptomatic events and clinically
meaningful outcomes must be examined. The revised guidelines developed by the PSA Working
Group and initially presented at the 2007 Multidisciplinary Prostate Cancer Symposium are a down payment on this important work.8 These guidelines
inject new rigor into the diagnosis of progression of
bone metastases that are imaged using bone scintigraphy. Two unequivocally new lesions are required
to be present; then, additional new lesions must
be observed on a subsequent scan before disease
progression is declared. This approach, which was
developed through expert consensus, is logical; and,
as it is adopted, it also should be validated by
demonstrating an association between this reﬁned

Editorial/Beer and Ryan

deﬁnition of progression on bone imaging and
unambiguous measures of clinical beneﬁt. Further
reﬁnement of the progression-free survival endpoint
will depend on better understanding of the relation
between each of the elements of this composite construct and the ultimate development of clinically
meaningful outcomes. Progress toward this goal may
be possible when ﬁnal results from the Satraplatin
and Prednisone Against Refractory Cancer (SPARC)
trial are reported. The initial results of that trial,
which compares satraplatin plus prednisone with
prednisone alone, recently were reported,9 and
assessment of both progression-free and overall survival is expected when the ﬁnal analysis is completed.
We are looking forward to a more reﬁned, robust
progression-free survival endpoint. We look forward
to its use in Phase 2 studies that are designed to
screen new drugs or combinations for promising activity. Would we recommend its use in pivotal Phase
3 trials? No. Not now, and not any time soon. Not
until we are convinced that progression-free survival
is an unambiguous surrogate for clinical beneﬁt. We
are not there today, and we may never get there. The
job of Phase 3 studies is to tell us whether a new
treatment helps patients more than the best available treatments of today. To accomplish this, Phase 3
trials should be designed to measure patient beneﬁt.
Today, that means overall survival, quality of life, or
delay in skeletal or other important clinical complications of prostate cancer.

1879

REFERENCES
1. Carcuddi MA, Saad F, Abrahamsson P-A, et al. A phase 3
randomized controlled trial of the efﬁcacy and safety of
atrasentan in men with metastatic hormone-refractory
prostate cancer. Cancer. 2007:110:1959–1966.
2. Carducci MA, Padley RJ, Breul J, et al. Effect of endothelinA receptor blockade with atrasentan on tumor progression
in men with hormone-refractory prostate cancer: a randomized, phase II, placebo-controlled trial. J Clin Oncol.
2003;21:679–689.
3. Petrylak DP, Ankerst DP, Jiang CS, et al. Evaluation of prostate-speciﬁc antigen declines for surrogacy in patients treated on SWOG 99-16. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2006;98:516–521.
4. Scher HI, Warren M, Heller G. The association between
measures of progression and survival in castrate-metastatic
prostate cancer. Clin Cancer Res. 2007;13:1488–1492.
5. Thompson IM. Flare associated with LHRH-agonist therapy.
Rev Urol. 2001;3(suppl 3):S10–S14.
6. Olbert PJ, Hegele A, Kraeuter P, Heidenreich A, Hofmann R,
Schrader AJ. Clinical signiﬁcance of a prostate-speciﬁc antigen ﬂare phenomenon in patients with hormone-refractory
prostate cancer receiving docetaxel. Anticancer Drugs. 2006;
17:993–996.
7. Moertel CG, Hanley JA. The effect of measuring error on
the results of therapeutic trials in advanced cancer. Cancer.
1976;38:388–394.
8. Scher HI, Halabi S, Tannock I, et al. The Prostate Cancer
Clinical Trials Working Group (PCCTWG) consensus for
phase II trials in metastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer. Proceedings of the 2007 ASCO Prostate Cancer Symposium, Orlando, Florida, February 22–24, 2007. Abstract 182.
9. Petrylak DP, Sartor O, Witjes F, et al. A phase III, randomized, double-blind trial of satraplatin and prednisone vs
placebo and prednisone for patients with hormone refractory prostate cancer (HRPC). Proceedings of the 2007 ASCO
Prostate Cancer Symposium, Orlando, Florida, February
22–24, 2007. Abstract 144.

