Correspondence
12. Chuang SC, Lee YC, Wu GJ, Straif K, Hashibe M. Alcohol consumption and liver cancer risk: a meta-analysis. Cancer Causes Control. 2015;26:1205-1231.

Gianni Testino, MD
Silvia Leone, MD
Paolo Borro, MD
Alcohologic Regional Center-Ligurian Region
IRCCS AOU San Martino-IST
Genoa, Italy
DOI: 10.1002/cncr.29696, Published online September 18, 2015
in Wiley Online Library (wileyonlinelibrary.com)

from AbbVie; and personal fees from Idenix outside the submitted
work.

REFERENCES
1. Li DK, Chung RT. Impact of hepatitis C eradication on hepatocellular carcinogenesis. Cancer. 2015;121:2874-2882.
2. Hiramatsu N, Oze T, Takehara T. Suppression of hepatocellular carcinoma development in hepatitis C patients given interferon-based
antiviral therapy. Hepatol Res. 2015;45:152-161.
3. Hung CH, Lee CM, Wang JH, et al. Impact of diabetes mellitus on
incidence of hepatocellular carcinoma in chronic hepatitis C patients
treated with interferon-based antiviral therapy. Int J Cancer. 2011;
128:2344-2352.

Darrick K. Li, MD, PhD

Reply to Antiviral Therapy and
Hepatocellular Carcinogenesis
We appreciate the interest of Testino et al in our recent
review.1 We agree that the risk of hepatocellular carcinoma
(HCC) remains elevated for patients who achieve a sustained virological response (SVR), particularly for those
who already have cirrhosis. This is a particular group of
patients who likely warrant continued regular screening for
HCC. Indeed, a subgroup analysis of trials enrolling only
hepatitis C virus (HCV) patients with advanced fibrosis
and cirrhosis found a 3-fold–increased risk of HCC in
patients who achieved SVR in comparison with trials
enrolling patients at all stages of fibrosis.2 As we discuss in
our review, a critical area of research will be identifying for
continued screening and treatment those patients who
attain SVR and continue to be at the highest risk for HCC.
We also agree that type 2 diabetes mellitus and alcohol consumption are additional risk factors for HCC, particularly for those patients with preexisting cirrhosis.
Emerging data suggest that in addition to serving as independent risk factors for the development of HCC, nonalcoholic steatohepatitis (a known result of type 2 diabetes
mellitus) and alcoholic steatohepatitis act to increase the
risk for HCC in HCV patients who have attained SVR.2,3
These findings support the developing model of multidisciplinary care for HCV patients, which will include hepatologists and other specialists who are able to assist in
managing comorbid factors, including alcohol use, obesity, and diabetes, to maximize their prognosis.
FUNDING SUPPORT
No specific funding was disclosed.

CONFLICT OF INTEREST DISCLOSURES
Raymond T. Chung reports grants from Gilead, Bristol-Myers
Squibb, Merck, Janssen, and Biologics; grants and personal fees
158

Department of Medicine
Massachusetts General Hospital
Boston, Massachusetts

Raymond T. Chung, MD
Department of Medicine
Massachusetts General Hospital
Boston, Massachusetts
Liver Center, Division of Gastroenterology
Department of Medicine
Massachusetts General Hospital
Boston, Massachusetts
DOI: 10.1002/cncr.29694, Published online September 18, 2015
in Wiley Online Library (wileyonlinelibrary.com)

Minimal Clinically Important
Difference and Edmonton
Symptom Assessment Scale
The Edmonton Symptom Assessment Scale is one of the
most widely available and used patient-reported symptom
assessment tools in both clinical and research practice.
Given such extensive implementation, we welcome the
estimate of minimal clinically important difference
(MCID) provided by Hui et al for use in sample size calculations.1 The authors have used both patient-anchored
and statistical methods to estimate the MCID. This
should help to distinguish between minimal detectable difference and minimal clinically important difference.2,3
The calculated sensitivity and specificity of each
item of the Edmonton Symptom Assessment Scale use the
patient’s global impression as the patient anchor to create
a binary MCID.
There are limits to its applicability:
 A binary approach loses valuable information by ignoring ordinal variables. It is, therefore, difficult to see
whether the authors have identified an MCID (indicating a clinical threshold for decision making) or the minimal clinically detectable difference.
Cancer

January 1, 2016

