Correspondence

Combination of Gemcitabine and
Cisplatin Is Highly Active in
Women With Endometrial
Carcinoma

Michael H.R. Eichbaum, MD
Christof Sohn, MD
Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics
University of Heidelberg Medical School
Heidelberg, Germany
DOI: 10.1002/cncr.25923, Published online: February 1, 2011 in
Wiley Online Library (wileyonlinelibrary.com)

Results of a Prospective Phase 2 Trial
With great interest we read the article by Brown et al,
who reported the results of a phase 2 study using gemcitabine and cisplatin in patients with advanced endometrial
cancer.1 Although we recognize the reported impressive
activity of this regimen, we believe there are several aspects
that should lead to a cautious interpretation of the
data. First, the study by Brown et al was a rather
small phase 2 study, with dose modifications performed
during an ongoing trial. Moreover, despite modification
of the protocol, 80% of the evaluable patients
still required dose reductions and grade 3/4 hematotoxicity was observed in nearly 50% of the treated women.
In total, 18 of 20 patients experienced grade 3/4 toxic
effects.
Although the authors viewed the high toxicity rates
in the context of the pretreatment of these patients, we do
not agree that this is a satisfying argument in the palliative
setting. For one, the combination of weekly carboplatin
and paclitaxel has also shown remarkable activity but less
toxicity.2 Of course, a combined regimen of gemcitabine
and cisplatin may have particular advantages, as stated by
the authors.1 Nevertheless, in our view this regimen does
not appear to be appropriate for palliative treatment due
to the reported toxicity. Accepting the high antitumoral
activity found in these 20 patients, further trials should
evaluate a better tolerated schedule (eg, a biweekly application of gemcitabine and cisplatin, potentially combined
with a biological agent).
REFERENCES
1. Brown J, Smith JA, Ramondetta LM, et al. Combination of
gemcitabine and cisplatin is highly active in women with endometrial carcinoma: results of a prospective phase 2 trial.
Cancer. 2010;116:4973-4979.
2. Secord AA, Havrilesky LJ, Carney ME, et al. Weekly lowdose paclitaxel and carboplatin in the treatment of advanced
or recurrent cervical and endometrial cancer. Int J Clin
Oncol. 2007;12:31-36.

Cancer

August 1, 2011

Reply to Combination of
Gemcitabine and Cisplatin is
Highly Active in Women With
Endometrial Carcinoma
Results of a Prospective Phase 2 Trial
We appreciate the interest expressed by Drs. Eichbaum
and Sohn in our article regarding gemcitabine and cisplatin for the treatment of recurrent and advanced endometrial cancer.1 Indeed, our findings of a 50% response rate
and 80% clinical benefit rate support this as an active regimen in this group of patients, who currently have limited
treatment options.
We agree with Drs. Eichbaum and Sohn that the
study used a small cohort of patients, and we identified
this as a limitation in our article. However, despite the
need for dose modification, impressive activity was still
identified, and patients received a median number of 5
courses of therapy (range, 1-9 courses).
In this group of patients with limited treatment
options (which certainly include paclitaxel and carboplatin), this regimen represents an additional active option.2
The data do not supplant the evidence for paclitaxel and
carboplatin, and the intent is not to demonstrate superiority, but instead to identify a viable alternative treatment
option in patients with this difficult disease. We agree that
starting at a further dose reduction for patients treated
with radiation and prospectively using granulocyte–colony-stimulating factor during the first therapy cycle may
help minimize toxicity and resulting delays in treatment.
An alternate dosing regimen of gemcitabine and cisplatin
administered on a biweekly schedule, as reported in ovarian cancer, is another option.1 This is a logical conclusion
for further refinement of an active regimen, however, and
not evidence against its utility.
3529

Correspondence

REFERENCES
1. Brown J, Smith JA, Ramondetta LM, et al. Combination of
gemcitabine and cisplatin is highly active in women with endometrial carcinoma: results of a prospective phase 2 trial.
Cancer. 2010;116:4973-4979.
2. Secord AA, Havrilesky LJ, Carney ME, et al. Weekly lowdose paclitaxel and carboplatin in the treatment of advanced
or recurrent cervical and endometrial cancer. Int J Clin
Oncol. 2007;12:31-36.
Jubilee Brown, MD
Judith K. Wolf, MD
Judith A. Smith, PharmD
Department of Gynecologic Oncology
The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center
Houston, Texas
DOI: 10.1002/cncr.25919, Published online: February 1, 2011 in
Wiley Online Library (wileyonlinelibrary.com)

Activity and Safety of
Dose-Adjusted Infusional
Cyclophosphamide, Doxorubicin,
Vincristine, and Prednisone
Chemotherapy With Rituximab
in Very Elderly Patients With
Poor-Prognostic Untreated
Diffuse Large B-Cell
Non-Hodgkin Lymphoma
Musolino et al reported their experience with a
reduced dose regimen designed for ‘‘very elderly’’ patients
with high-risk diffuse large B-cell non-Hodgkin lymphomas.1 They treated 23 patients (median age, 77 years),
most of whom were diagnosed with an advanced stage of
disease and poor prognostic score, with 6 to 8 courses of
dose-adjusted infusional cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin,
vincristine, and prednisone chemotherapy with rituximab
(DA-POCH-R). This regimen is an anthracycline-based
scheme whose dose intensity, compared with the CHOP
regimen, is 88% for doxorubicin, 53% for cyclophosphamide, and nearly 90% for vincristine; however, 12 cycles
in 9 patients were administered at reduced doses. The
overall response rate was 90%, with a complete response
rate of 57%; the 3-year overall survival and event-free survival rates were 56% and 54%, respectively. Hematological toxicity was manageable and nonhematological
toxicity was negligible. The authors concluded that this
3530

regimen was a reasonable alternative for elderly patients
who were not considered to be able to tolerate standard
treatment with R-CHOP. Although we believe the study
is interesting, the authors did not make specific mention
of the criteria used for the recruitment of patients and, in
particular, they did not mention the comprehensive geriatric assessment (CGA), based on cumulative comorbidities and the ability to perform basic and instrumental
daily life activities.2-5 In our clinical practice, we treat
elderly ‘‘fit’’ patients with R-CHOP, and the majority of
‘‘unfit’’ or ‘‘frail’’ patients are treated with the R-VV
regimen, which is comprised of rituximab plus oral vinorelbine and etoposide, and which permits appreciable
results with acceptable toxicity and the avoidance of
hospital admission.
In conclusion, we believe that a broader application
of CGA could lead to a better selection of patients and,
consequently, studies with more comparable results.

REFERENCES
1. Musolino A, Boggiani D, Panebianco M, et al. Activity and
safety of dose-adjusted infusional cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, and prednisone chemotherapy with rituximab in very elderly patients with poor-prognostic untreated
diffuse large B-cell non-Hodgkin lymphoma [published
online ahead of print October 19, 2010]. Cancer.
2. Parmelee PA, Thuras PD, Katz IR, Lawton MP. Validation
of the Cumulative Illness Rating Scale in a geriatric residential population. J Am Geriatr Soc. 1995;43:130-137.
3. Katz S, Ford AB, Moskowitz RW, et al. Studies of illness in
the aged. The index of ADL: a standardized measure of biological and psychosocial function. JAMA. 1963;185 914919.
4. Lawton MP, Brody EM. Assessment of older people: selfmaintaining and instrumental activities of daily living. Gerontologist. 1969;9:179-186.
5. Tucci A, Ferrari S, Bottelli C, et al. A comprehensive geriatric assessment is more effective than clinical judgment to
identify elderly diffuse large cell lymphoma patients who
benefit from aggressive therapy. Cancer. 2009;115:45474553.
Alberto Febbri, MD
Alessandro Gozzetti, MD
Department of Hematology
University Hospital of Siena
Siena, Italy

Luigi Rigacci, MD
Department of Hematology
University Hospital of Florence
Florence, Italy

DOI: 10.1002/cncr.25948, Published online: February 1, 2011 in
Wiley Online Library (wileyonlinelibrary.com)

Cancer

August 1, 2011

Correspondence

Reply to Activity and Safety of
Dose-Adjusted Infusional
Cyclophosphamide, Doxorubicin,
Vincristine, and Prednisone
Chemotherapy With Rituximab
in Very Elderly Patients With
Poor-Prognostic Untreated
Diffuse Large B-Cell
Non-Hodgkin Lymphoma
We would like to thank Fabbri et al for their interest in

our article1 and the provision of very compelling comments. Fabbri et al draw attention to an important topic
in geriatric oncology: the use of comprehensive geriatric
assessment (CGA) for older patients with cancer.2 They
conclude that a broader application of CGA, which was
not used in our study for patient selection, could lead to a
better selection of patients and, consequently, studies with
more comparable results.3
Although several low-dose chemotherapy regimens
for elderly patients have been proposed, the regimen of rituximab plus full doses of cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin,
vincristine, and prednisone (R-CHOP) is recognized as the
gold standard treatment for elderly patients with diffuse
large B-cell non-Hodgkin lymphomas (DLBCL). However, the median age of patients enrolled in the R-CHOP
registration trial (Groupe d’Etude des Lymphomes de
l’Adulte [GELA] study) was only 69 years, and patients
aged >80 years were not included in the trial.4 Other
reports demonstrated that patients with non-Hodgkin lymphoma who are aged 70 years are more prone to encounter serious adverse events with R-CHOP compared with
younger patients and, in a retrospective series of 24 DLBCL
patients aged >80 years who received standard R-CHOP,
dose reductions of doxorubicin were mandatory in 92% of
the study patients, with a median relative dose intensity of
63%.5 The objective of our study was therefore to assess the
efficacy and safety of the combination of rituximab and
dose-adjusted infusional CHOP (DA-POCH-R) in
DLBCL patients aged 70 years who were enrolled using
selection criteria similar to those of the GELA study. The
pharmacodynamic drug dosage adjustment performed in

Cancer

August 1, 2011

the protocol led patients to avoid arbitrary dose reductions
or drug withdrawals due to toxicity. The study regimen
produced an objective response rate of 83%, with favorable
hematological and cardiac safety profiles.1
CGA is a term coined by geriatricians to describe a
multidisciplinary and multidimensional comprehensive
evaluation of an older individual’s functional status. The
evidence from recent studies demonstrates that the
domains evaluated in a CGA can predict morbidity and
mortality in older patients with cancer.2 However, further
studies are needed using a CGA to 1) guide interventions
to improve the care of elderly cancer patients and 2) evaluate the impact of cancer therapy on geriatric assessment
domains.
Based on these considerations, and according to the
comments made by Fabbri et al, our next step will be to
compare, in a randomized fashion, the DA-POCH-R
scheme versus other age-adapted, anthracycline-based regimens. CGA performance will be included in the research
protocol for better categorization of patient selection, risk
stratification, and toxicity evaluation.

REFERENCES
1. Musolino A, Boggiani D, Panebianco M, et al. Activity and
safety of dose-adjusted infusional cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, and prednisone chemotherapy with rituximab in very elderly patients with poor-prognostic untreated
diffuse large B-cell non-Hodgkin lymphoma [published
online ahead of print October 19, 2010]. Cancer.
2. Extermann M, Hurria A. Comprehensive geriatric assessment
for older patients with cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2007;25:18241831.
3. Tucci A, Ferrari S, Battelli C, Borlenghi E, Drera M, Rossi G.
A comprehensive geriatric assessment is more effective than
clinical judgment to identify elderly diffuse large cell lymphoma patients who benefit from aggressive therapy. Cancer.
2009;115:4547-4553.
4. Coiffier B, Lepage E, Briere J, et al. CHOP chemotherapy
plus rituximab compared with CHOP alone in elderly
patients with diffuse large B-cell lymphoma. N Engl J Med.
2002;346:235-242.
5. Italiano A, Jardin F, Peyrade F, et al. Adapted CHOP plus
rituximab in non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma in patients over 80
years old. Haematologica. 2005;90:1281-1283.
Antonino Musolino, MD, PhD
Daniela Boggiani, MD
Michele Panebianco, MD
Medical Oncology Unit
University Hospital of Parma
Parma, Italy
DOI: 10.1002/cncr.25962, Published online: February 1, 2011 in
Wiley Online Library (wileyonlinelibrary.com)

3531

Correspondence

Comparative Risk-Adjusted
Mortality Outcomes After
Primary Surgery, Radiotherapy,
or Androgen-Deprivation
Therapy for Localized Prostate
Cancer

2. Dubben HH. Trials of prostate-cancer screening are not
worthwhile. Lancet Oncol. 2009;10:294-298.
3. Lu-Yao GL, Yao SL. Population-based study of long-term
survival in patients with clinically localized prostate cancer.
Lancet. 1997;349:906-910.
Axel Madlung, MD
Department of Radiation Oncology
Inselspital, Bern University Hospital
and University of Bern
Bern, Switzerland

Mathew Simcock, MSc

We read with concern the study by Cooperberg et al,
which compared radical prostatectomy (RP) and externalbeam radiation therapy (EBRT).1 The authors concluded
that prostatectomy was found to be associated with a
reduction in mortality compared with radiation therapy.
However, we have doubts regarding this conclusion.
The authors stated that survival models were
adjusted using either the Kattan preoperative nomogram
or the Cancer of the Prostate Risk Assessment (CAPRA)
score. However, the authors did not include vital covariates (eg, comorbidities, race) because these are not
included in any of the scores but demonstrate significant
differences between RP and EBRT in favor of the RP
group (as shown in Table 1 in the article).1
In addition, cancer-specific mortality (CSM) was
defined as having been determined if prostate cancer was
listed as the primary, secondary, or tertiary cause of death
on the death certificate. We wonder why this definition
was chosen because it likely includes unspecific deaths as
CSM. Given a higher all-cause mortality in the EBRT
group (as explained earlier), this definition leads to an
overestimation of CSM in the EBRT group. The analysis
of Cancer of the Prostate Strategic Urologic Research
Endeavor (CaPSURE) data might reveal an inappropriate
number of misattributed deaths and thus a specificity of
the endpoint CSM of <100%. Even a small loss of specificity dramatically decreases the power of the study.2
It appears the authors have performed a ‘‘treatment
received’’ analysis. If correct, patients with unforeseen
advanced disease would likely be excluded from the RP
group when RP was aborted. This leads to a substantial
overestimation of the effectiveness of RP.3
REFERENCES
1. Cooperberg MR, Vickers AJ, Broering JM, Carroll PR.
Comparative risk-adjusted mortality outcomes after primary
surgery, radiotherapy, or androgen-deprivation therapy for
localized prostate cancer. Cancer. 2010;116:5226-5234.

3532

Swiss Group for Clinical Cancer Research
Coordinating Center (SAKK CC)
Bern, Switzerland

Pirus Ghadjar, MD
Department of Radiation Oncology
Inselspital, Bern University Hospital
and University of Bern
Bern, Switzerland

DOI: 10.1002/cncr.25949, Published online: February 1, 2011 in
Wiley Online Library (wileyonlinelibrary.com)

Reply to Comparative
Risk-Adjusted Mortality
Outcomes After Primary Surgery,
Radiotherapy, or
Androgen-Deprivation Therapy
for Localized Prostate Cancer
In response to our findings of superior risk-adjusted mortality outcomes for surgery over external-beam radiation
therapy,1 Madlung et al raise a series of concerns,
although none detract from our findings.
There is no reason to suspect that comorbidity
would affect cancer-specific mortality per se. The all-cause
mortality analysis was, in fact, adjusted for comorbidity,
and the competing risks regression analysis also reflects
both measured and unmeasured comorbidity. Race is of
course associated with disease risk, but there is no suggestion in the published literature that race is an independent
predictor of mortality after adjustment for risk. However,
based on the question raised, we re-ran the primary analysis including race as an additional covariable. Not surprisingly, race was not found to be a predictor in the model,
and the impact of treatment modality on mortality was
unchanged.

Cancer

August 1, 2011

Correspondence

As we acknowledged in the Discussion section of the
article, the determination of cause of death based on death
certificate codes is not without limitations, but this
method almost certainly underestimates the mortality
events attributable to radiation therapy. A man who dies
of bladder cancer caused by radiation is unlikely to be
coded as a prostate cancer mortality case, nor is one who
dies of a pulmonary embolus after a hip fracture caused by
accelerated osteoporosis from pelvic radiation with androgen ablation. A broader definition than that used by us
would assign these deaths as cancer-specific in the radiation arm.
In an era of the pervasive use of preoperative imaging,
a surprise finding of advanced disease at time of surgical exploration leading to termination of the case is extremely
rare, at least in the United States, and the notion that such
cases would lead to a ‘‘substantial overestimation of the
effectiveness of RP’’ is, frankly, nonsensical.
The findings we reported are increasingly echoed by
other high-quality cohort studies. However, we reiterate
that only well-performed, randomized trials, including
both surgical and radiation therapy arms, will be able to
determine what constitutes the best standard of care for
those with high-risk, nonmetastatic prostate cancer. In the
interim, however, we are left with the choice between the
careful use of observational data or using no data at all.
We prefer the former approach.

REFERENCE
1. Cooperberg MR, Vickers AJ, Broering JM, Carroll PR.
Comparative risk-adjusted mortality outcomes after primary
surgery, radiotherapy, or androgen-deprivation therapy for
localized prostate cancer. Cancer. 2010;116:5226-5234.

Matthew R. Cooperberg, MD, MPH
Department of Urology
University of California, San Francisco
San Francisco, California

Andrew J. Vickers, PhD
Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics
Memorial-Sloan Kettering Cancer Center
New York, New York

Peter R. Carroll, MD, MPH
Department of Urology
University of California, San Francisco
San Francisco, California

DOI: 10.1002/cncr.25947, Published online: February 1, 2011 in
Wiley Online Library (wileyonlinelibrary.com)

Cancer

August 1, 2011

Balancing the Harms and Benefits
of Early Detection of Prostate
Cancer
van Leeuwen et al fail to explain why the prostate-specific antigen (PSA) by itself is misleading and how physicians can gather better data to achieve better outcomes
with fewer side effects.1 A person may have a high prostate-specific antigen (PSA) level due to an enlarged prostate gland (which is quite common), irritation,
inflammation, infection, or other changes of the prostate
gland. Thus, a PSA level of 10 ng/mL may not necessarily
require biopsies or aggressive therapy. I illustrate with 1
example so physicians will have a better view of likely noncancer variability (a subject that in my opinion is poorly
understood and omitted in most studies).
For over 5 years, patient PP had a PSA level between
9 and 11 ng/mL. He had a negative biopsy the first time
his PSA level was found to be elevated. His prostate gland
was substantially enlarged (but no exact measures were
available), with the usual consequences. One day his PSA
level was 21 ng/mL. The patient changed his diet and
behavior drastically (losing weight, exercising more, eating healthier foods, and other behaviors). Within a few
weeks, the PSA level declined to 15 and then 11 ng/mL.
For the past 3 years, the patient’s PSA level has remained
between 9 and 11 ng/mL. When the PSA level was highly
elevated, 1 of the top prostate cancer experts in the United
States insisted that a biopsy be performed immediately,
without waiting for repeated testing or the effects of the
drastic diet and behavior changes proposed by the patient.
The patient refused a biopsy. Physical examination of the
prostate for the past 3 years has found no nodules. After
having a PSA level of 10 ng/mL for >10 years, and 3 years
after having a PSA level > 20 ng/mL, no cancer has been
detected to date.
PSA values of approximately 10 ng/mL are not necessarily indicative of a high probability of cancer, nor deserve
biopsies. Although the relevant factors are not known, it is
possible for a 10-point variation in PSA to be the result of
factors other than cancer, which are correctable via diet,
behavior modification, antibiotics (for infections), and
other treatment models (different from cancer treatment).
We need far better data regarding the probability of
cancer given PSA level, prostate size, body size, prostate status (inflamed, infected, irritated, etc), types of diet, and
other factors. We also need a probability distribution of the
3533

Correspondence

variability of PSA values over relatively short time periods
(measured in months). In the interim, physicians should
carefully evaluate the patient and consider alternative treatments (such as substantial weight loss and a healthier diet)
before proceeding with a biopsy. Biopsies do have undesirable side effects, and could lead to unnecessary treatment,
again with undesirable side effects.

REFERENCE
1. van Leeuwen PJ, Connolly D, Tammela TA, et al. Balancing the harms and benefits of early detection of prostate
cancer. Cancer. 2010;116:4857-4865.
Eduardo Siguel, MD, PhD
www.Essentialfats.com
Gaithersburg, Maryland

DOI: 10.1002/cncr.25922, Published online: February 11, 2011 in
Wiley Online Library (wileyonlinelibrary.com)

Reply to Balancing the Harms
and Benefits of Early Detection
of Prostate Cancer
The letter from Dr. Siguel is more a general statement
regarding prostate-specific antigen (PSA) than a direct reference to our study.1 Therefore, we will briefly address the
role of PSA in our study, and add some evidence-based
results to the suggestions made by Dr. Siguel.
At present, it is proven that PSA-based screening has
the potential to reduce prostate cancer mortality, but is
associated with a high risk of overdiagnosis and overtreatment. The aim of our study was to define the distribution
of the harms and benefits of PSA-based screening stratified by baseline PSA level.1
We agree with Dr. Siguel that PSA has its limitations. Most important, PSA is not cancer specific. The
subject of PSA variability has been extensively studied. In
addition to the factors described above, the inherent biological variability of PSA has been estimated in a systematic review,2 including data from 12 studies with 1324
patients, to have a mean variability of 20% with a 95%
confidence limit of approximately 33%, which also needs
to be taken into account when counselling men and assess-

3534

ing changes in PSA. In relation to the case described by
Dr. Siguel, this scenario is commonly observed in clinical
practice. It is unlikely that behavioral modifications such
as healthier diets or substantial weight loss as described by
Dr. Siguel had any role in the subsequent PSA decrease
back to baseline, which occurred within a period of a few
weeks. We agree with Dr. Siguel that personal risk assessment tools that assess other factors, including digital rectal
examination, family history of prostate cancer, a prior biopsy, race, and age such as the Prostate Cancer Prevention
Trial prostate cancer risk calculator and the Prostate Risk
Indicator may be beneficial and result in a considerable
reduction of unnecessary biopsies.3
Finally, the statement that a PSA level of approximately 10 ng/mL is not indicative of a high probability of
cancer nor deserves biopsies should be treated with caution. Numerous studies in different populations have
shown that a PSA value of >10.0 ng/mL is associated
with a risk of prostate cancer on biopsy of >50%.4 Obviously, this means that approximately 30% to 50% of men
will have a benign diagnosis and men should be appropriately counseled regarding this. However, to our knowledge, there is no strong evidence that dietary
modifications in this scenario are of any advantage and in
our current study, it is these men with higher PSA levels
who were found to receive the most benefit from earlier
investigation and intervention.

REFERENCES
1. van Leeuwen PJ, Connolly D, Tammela TA, et al. Balancing the harms and benefits of early detection of prostate
cancer. Cancer. 2010;116:4857-4865.
2. Soletormos G, Semjonow A, Sibley PE, et al. Biological variation of total prostate-specific antigen: a survey of published estimates and consequences for clinical practice. Clin
Chem. 2005;51:1342-1351.
3. Roobol MJ, Steyerberg EW, Kranse R, et al. A risk-based
strategy improves prostate-specific antigen-driven detection
of prostate cancer. Eur Urol. 2010;57:79-85.
4. Schroder FH, Carter HB, Wolters T, et al. Early detection
of prostate cancer in 2007. Part 1: PSA and PSA kinetics.
Eur Urol. 2008;53:468-477.
Pim J. van Leeuwen, MD
Erasmus University Medical Centre
Rotterdam, Netherlands

David Connolly, MD, PhD
Department of Urology
Belfast City Hospital
Belfast, United Kingdom

DOI: 10.1002/cncr.25920, Published online: February 11, 2011 in
Wiley Online Library (wileyonlinelibrary.com)

Cancer

August 1, 2011

