Oncotarget, Vol. 7, No. 22

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Lysyl oxidase family activity promotes resistance of pancreatic
ductal adenocarcinoma to chemotherapy by limiting the
intratumoral anticancer drug distribution
Benjamin Le Calvé1,2,3,4,14, Audrey Griveau1,2,3,4,*, David Vindrieux1,2,3,4,*, Raphaël
Maréchal5, Clotilde Wiel1,2,3,4, Magali Svrcek6,7, Johann Gout1,2,3,4, Lamia Azzi8, Léa
Payen1,2,3,4,9, Jérôme Cros10,11, Christelle de la Fouchardière3, Pierre Dubus8, Jérôme
Guitton4,9, Laurent Bartholin1,2,3,4, Jean-Baptiste Bachet12,13, David Bernard1,2,3,4
1

Inserm U1052, Centre de Recherche en Cancérologie de Lyon, Lyon, France

2

CNRS UMR5286, Lyon, France

3

Centre Léon Bérard, Lyon, France

4

Université de Lyon, Lyon, France

5

Department of Gastroenterology and Gastrointestinal Cancer Unit, Erasme Hospital, Université Libre de Bruxelles, Belgium

6

Department of Pathology, AP-HP, Hôpitaux Universitaires Est Parisien, Saint-Antoine Hospital, Paris, France

7

Sorbonne University, UPMC University, Paris, France

8

Service de Biologie des Tumeurs, CHU de Bordeaux Hôpital du Haut Lévêque, Pessac, France

9

Hospices Civils de Lyon, Université de Lyon, Lyon, France

10

AP-HP, Hôpitaux Universitaires Paris Nord Val de Seine, Beaujon, France

11

Paris Diderot University, Paris, France

12

Sorbonne University, UPMC University and INSERM, UMRS 1147, Paris Descrates University, Paris, France

13

Gastroenterology Department, APHP, Pitié Salpêtrière Hospital, Paris, France

14

Present address: URBC-NARILIS, University of Namur, Namur, Belgium

*

These authors have contributed equally to this work

Correspondence to: David Bernard, email: david.bernard@lyon.unicancer.fr
Keywords: chemoresistance, collagen, survival, biomarker, lysyl oxidase
Received: December 07, 2015     Accepted: March 18, 2016     Published: April 01, 2016

ABSTRACT
Solid tumors often display chemotherapy resistance. Pancreatic ductal
adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is the archetype of resistant tumors as current
chemotherapies are inefficient. The tumor stroma and extracellular matrix (ECM) are
key contributors to PDAC aggressiveness and to limiting the efficacy of chemotherapy.
Lysyl oxidase (LOX) family members mediate collagen cross-linking and thus promote
ECM stiffening. Our data demonstrate increased LOX, LOXL1, and LOXL2 expression
in PDAC, and that the level of fibrillar collagen, which is directly dependent of LOX
family activity, is an independent predictive biomarker of adjuvant “Gemcitabinebased chemotherapy” benefit. Experimentally in mice, increased LOX family activity
through LOXL2 promotes chemoresistance. This effect of LOX family activity seems
to be due to decreased gemcitabine intra-tumoral diffusion. This observation might
be explained by increased fibrillar collagen and decreased vessel size observed in
tumors with increased LOX family activity. In conclusion, our data support that LOX
family activity is both a novel target to improve chemotherapy as well as a novel
biomarker to predict gemcitabine benefit in PDAC. Beyond the PDAC, it is possible
that targeting LOX family activity might improve efficacy of chemotherapies against
different kinds of solid tumors.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

32100

Oncotarget

INTRODUCTION

samples and normal counterparts (described in [17]). On
the one hand, the level of transcripts corresponding to
each LOX-family member was normalized with respect
to the HPRT1 transcript level and the fold induction
calculated with respect to the level in the surrounding
normal tissue (Figure 1B). On the other hand, these data
were pooled and the mean fold induction for each LOXfamily member was determined with respect to the mean
of the controls (Figure 1C). As in the microarray database,
increased levels of LOX, LOXL1, and LOXL2 transcripts
were found in PDAC (Figure 1B, 1C). Together, these
results demonstrate that LOX, LOXL1, and LOXL2 are
upregulated in human PDAC.

Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is one
of the worst cancers, with a low five-year survival rate. It
is currently the fifth cause of cancer mortality in the USA
and its incidence could increase, to make it one of the topranking causes of cancer-related death by 2030 [1]. This
highlights the limited efficacy of conventional anticancer
therapies and makes it a priority to discover and propose
new therapeutic strategies. Although the tumors can
be surgically removed in only 10% of the cases, they
most often relapse. For the inoperable tumors and the
tumor relapses after surgery, chemotherapy alone or in
combination with radiotherapy are the only alternatives.
Currently, the main chemotherapies used, i.e. gemcitabine
plus nab-paclitaxel, and the FOLFIRINOX regimen, have
little effect with a median overall survival of less than
12 months in all studies [2–4]. Despite intense research,
new therapies show limited efficacy in PDAC treatment [5].
In PDAC, the cancer cells are surrounded by a major
stromal component consisting notably of a dense, organized
extracellular matrix (ECM) [6]. In mice, disruption of
the ECM through direct action on hyaluronan ECM
components or by targeting stromal cells via the hedgehog
pathway improves gemcitabine delivery and its effects on
PDAC growth and mice survival [6, 7]. Several proteins
and secreted factors regulate ECM organization. Lysyl
oxidase (LOX) activity, exerted by the LOX, LOXL1,
LOXL2, LOXL3, and LOXL4 proteins [8], is one of the
most important regulator of the ECM. It is reported to
increase migration, invasion, and metastasis dissemination
through its capacity to regulate collagen cross-linking and
ECM stiffening in different kinds of cancer [9–15]. This
activity has also been implicated recently in senescence
escape and cooperation with oncogenic signals to promote
PDAC formation in mice [16].
Given the major ECM component in PDAC, the
predominant role of LOX family activity in organizing
the ECM, and the general pro-tumor functions of
LOX family proteins, we have investigated its role in
PDAC chemoresistance and its impact on gemcitabine
distribution into the tumor.

Increased LOX family activity promotes
gemcitabine resistance
We next investigated whether increased synthesis
and activity of LOX-family members in human PDAC
might be involved in the well-known chemoresistance of
PDAC. We first compared LOX family member expression
in Colo-357 and MIA Paca-2 PDAC-derived cell lines. As
for the tumors, the profile of expression of LOX family
members was largely different between the two cell lines
but expression was globally higher in MIA Paca-2 mainly
for LOXL2 (Figure S1A). Accordingly, extracellular LOX
family activity was also found higher in MIA Paca-2 when
compared to Colo-357 (Figure S1B). Based on these results,
we then choose to investigate whether an increased LOX
family activity might render the Colo-357 more resistant
to gemcitabine treatment. Colo-357 tumor growth was
strongly inhibited by 80 mg/kg of gemcitabine whereas
it was not significantly impacted by the 20 mg/kg of
gemcitabine (Figure S2A). We then choose an intermediate
dose of gemcitabine (40 mg/kg) to examine whether
LOX family activity can modify tumor growth. To model
increased LOX family activity in the tumors, and as LOX
family members are secreted and can be produced by the
cancer cells as well as by the stromal cells, we choose to
add exogenously LOXL2 protein. In these settings, LOXL2
injection was active as fibrillar collagen increased (Figure
S2B). Increased LOX family activity resulted in increased
subcutaneous tumor growth in presence of gemcitabine
(Figure S2C).
We next performed experiments in which PDACderived cells expressing the luciferase gene were
orthotopically injected in order to monitor tumor growth
in the pancreas. When the tumors reached a mean
luminescence of 800 cts/s, gemcitabine at 40 mg/kg was
injected alone, with the LOXL2 protein, or with both the
LOXL2 protein and the LOX family activity inhibitor
(LOXi), to make sure the effect of the LOXL2 protein
administered alone was due to its LOX activity. As
expected, intraperitoneal LOXL2 injection lead to both,
increased LOX family activity and fibrillar collagen, in
tumors and, in the same time, co-injection of the LOXi

RESULTS
Several LOX family members display increased
expression in PDAC
To investigate transcript-level expression of the
different LOX-family genes in PDAC, we first performed
a search in the Oncomine database, a cancer microarray
database used to compare gene expression levels in
cancer versus normal tissues. This search revealed that
LOX, LOXL1, and LOXL2 transcripts are upregulated in
human PDAC (Figure 1A). These microarray data were
confirmed by RT-qPCR performed on human PDAC
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

32101

Oncotarget

completely prevented these effects (Figure 2A, 2B). In
keeping with our results obtained with subcutaneous
xenografts (Figure S2), LOXL2 injection prevented
the tumor growth slowdown induced by gemcitabine,
and LOXi countered this LOXL2-induced resistance to
gemcitabine (Figure 2C, 2D).
Gemcitabine is a nucleoside analog that exerts its
antitumor effects by inducing cell death and/or stopping

cell proliferation. We therefore examined whether LOX
family activity might regulate one or both of these
gemcitabine-induced mechanisms. Immunohistochemical
staining for the Ki67 proliferation marker demonstrated
the ability of LOXL2 to prevent the proliferationinhibiting effect of chemotherapy. Furthermore, this effect
of LOXL2 was countered by LOXi treatment (Figure 2E).
We then performed a cell death analysis, using the TUNEL

Figure 1: LOX activity increases in human PDAC. (A) Summary of studies comparing levels of LOX, LOXL1, LOXL2, LOXL3,
and LOXL4 transcripts in PDAC versus normal-tissue counterparts, obtained using the Oncomine database with the following settings:
threshold P-value: 0.05; fold change: 1.5; gene rank all. The number indicated the number of study showing the same differential. Red color
indicated an increase in the tumor whereas blue color indicated a decrease. (B–C) RNAs were extracted from both pancreatic normal and
tumor tissues from the same patients and LOX, LOXL1, LOXL2, LOXL3, and LOXL4 transcript levels were assayed by qRT-PCR and
normalized against HPRT1. LOXL3 was not detected. (B) Results are presented for each patient. (C) Results are presented as means ± SEM
of LOX, LOXL1, LOXL2, and LOXL4 induction. P-values were determined with the Mann-Whitney U test.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

32102

Oncotarget

assay. LOXL2 was found to prevent gemcitabine-induced
cell death when used alone, but not in the presence of
LOXi (Figure 2F).
Together these results indicate that LOX family
activity promotes gemcitabine resistance by decreasing
cell-death-promoting and proliferation-inhibiting effects
of the drug.

population (n = 309), as in the subgroup of patients who
did not receive an adjuvant treatment (n = 91), the level
of fibrillar collagen fibers had no prognostic value in
univariate and multivariate analysis (data not shown). In
the whole population, there was a significant interaction
between adjuvant Gemcitabine-based chemotherapy and
the level of fibrillar collagen fibers for DFS [multivariate
HR  =  1.32; 95% CI = 1.08–1.59; p = 0.041] and OS
[multivariate HR = 1.47; 95% CI = 1.09–2.08; p = 0.026].
In the subgroup of patients who received an
adjuvant “Gemcitabine-based chemotherapy” (n = 181),
a high level of fibrillar collagen fibers was significantly
correlated with a shorter DFS and OS in univariate
analysis (Table S2, Figure 4). In multivariate analysis, a
high level of fibrillar collagen fibers was an independent
prognostic biomarker for DFS and OS (Table 1). In the
univariate and multivariate analysis, no benefit in DFS or
OS from adjuvant “Gemcitabine-based chemotherapy”
was observed for patients with high fibrillar collagen
level [DFS: multivariate HR = 1.15, 95% CI = 0.76–1.75,
p  =  0.504; OS: multivariate HR = 1.13, 95%
CI = 0.72–1.79, p = 0.580], whereas adjuvant gemcitabine
was of benefit in patients with a low fibrillar collagen
level [DFS: multivariate HR = 0.63, 95% CI = 0.38–0.91,
p = 0.014; OS: multivariate HR = 0.66, 95% CI = 0.42–0.95,
p  =  0.038] (Figure 5). Thus, a high level of fibrillar
collagen fibers was a predictive biomarker of the absence
of adjuvant gemcitabine benefit.

LOX activity decreases gemcitabine
intra-tumoral distribution
LOX family activity and collagen organization
might create a biophysical barrier to gemcitabine
distribution around and inside the tumor, as observed
with other regulators of the ECM and tumor stroma [6, 7].
To test this possibility, we measured the gemcitabine
concentration at the end of the orthotopic experiment.
One hour before euthanasia, the mice were injected with
gemcitabine at 40 mg/kg and the plasma and intratumoral
gemcitabine levels were determined. As expected, similar
levels of gemcitabine were found in the plasma under all
conditions (Figure 3A). Interestingly, LOXL2-treated mice
showed significantly lower intra-tumoral concentrations
than the controls (Figure 3B). This effect of LOXL2 was
counteracted by co-treatment with LOXi (Figure  3B).
Together, these data demonstrate that resistance to
gemcitabine treatment involves reduced diffusion of
gemcitabine into the tumor.
ECM disruption by enzymatic ablation of hyaluronic
acid ECM components or by hedgehog pathway inhibition
improves gemcitabine delivery at least in part through an
improved microvasculature [6, 7]. To investigate the role
of LOX family activity in regulating the microvasculature,
endothelial cells were stained with an anti-CD31 antibody
to reveal the blood vessels. Interestingly, injections of
the LOXL2 protein resulted in a strong decrease in blood
vessel size (Figure 3C). This effect of LOXL2 appeared
to depend on its activity, since the blood vessels appeared
less collapsed in mice treated simultaneously with both
LOXL2 and LOXi (Figure 3C, 3D).
Together, these results demonstrate that LOX
family activity inhibits the intra-tumoral distribution of
gemcitabine and inducing blood vessel collapse.

DISCUSSION
LOX family activity has been implicated in tumor
initiation and progression [9–14, 16, 23], but its role in
tumor resistance, particularly in PDAC, to chemotherapy
is not known. Here we demonstrate that increased levels
of LOX-family members LOX, LOXL1 and LOXL2
expression are frequent in human PDAC samples and their
activity are predictive of gemcitabine resistance in vitro
and in vivo through modification of collagen organization,
collapses of blood vessels and a decreased gemcitabine
intra-tumoral distribution. Moreover, the level of fibrillar
collagen appears as an independent predictive biomarker
of adjuvant Gemcitabine based chemotherapy benefit.
We have previously demonstrated the involvement
of LOX activity in escape from senescence and in
PDAC formation [16]. Our present results further
demonstrate its involvement in PDAC chemoresistance.
We show that increased LOXL2 activity favors
resistance to gemcitabine, whereas inhibition of its LOX
activity promotes these antitumor effects. We further
demonstrate that LOX family activity affects the efficacy
of chemotherapy by regulating its diffusion into the
tumor, as demonstrated by direct measurement of intratumoral gemcitabine concentrations. This conclusion is
further supported by the observation that LOX family
activity directly modulates all the responses induced by

Collagen organization is predictive of adjuvant
gemcitabine benefit
To determine whether fibrillar collagen, a direct
readout of LOX family activity [8, 18–20], might predict
clinical outcomes, we analyzed these levels in a large
series of patients who underwent curative intent resection
for PDAC [21, 22]. The level of fibrillar collagen was
determined by calculating the ratio between organization/
quantity of collagen fibers in 86% of the tumors
(n = 309). The clinical and pathological characteristics
of the 309 patients are detailed in Table S1. In the whole
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

32103

Oncotarget

Figure 2: Modulating LOX family activity impacts the response to gemcitabine treatment. One million Colo-357/Luc
pancreatic cancer cells were orthotopically grafted into 6-week-old nude mice. The mice were left untreated or received IV injections of
40 mg/kg gemcitabine, alone or with LOXL2 or LOXL2 + LOXi injected IP when the tumors reached a mean luminescence of 800cts/s
(n = 7 per group). Sixty-three days after the graft, (A) part of the tumors was used to measure LOX family activity or (B) the tumors were
fixed, embedded, and tissue sections were stained with picrosirius red. Fibrillar collagen was analyzed by microscopy under polarized light.
Values are means ± SEM. (C–D) Sixty-three days after grafting, tumor luminescence was measured. (C) Representative images of tumor
development after 63 days are displayed for each condition; (D) luminescence is expressed as an integration of the average brightness/pixel
unit (cts/s). (E) Immunohistochemical staining for the proliferation marker Ki-67 was performed. Representative photographs for each
experimental condition are displayed. Ki-67-positive cells were counted in at least 25 fields. (F) A TUNEL cell death assay was performed.
Representative photographs for each experimental condition are displayed. TUNEL-positive cells were counted in at least 15 fields. (A–E)
Values are means ± SEM and the statistical test used was Mann-Whitney U.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

32104

Oncotarget

gemcitabine, such as cell death and proliferation, and that
its inhibition does not increase the effect of very high
doses of treatment (80 mg/kg).
The ability of LOX family activity to decrease the
chemotherapeutic intra-tumoral concentration might be due
to its ability to increase fibrillar collagen and then ECM
stiffness, thus creating a physical barrier to gemcitabine
diffusion. It might also be due to the vessel collapse
observed in LOXL2-treated tumors, limiting gemcitabine
arrival at the tumor site. LOX family activity has generally
been associated with increased tumor angiogenesis
[24–27]. In line with these results, we observed a slight
increase in vessel number in LOXL2-treated tumors,
disappearing in the presence of the LOX family activity

inhibitor (Figure S3). Our results suggest that, although
LOX famly activity might slightly increase vessel number,
it strongly decreases vessel size. These results might be due
to the fact that we examined the vessels after gemcitabine
treatment, which might strongly affect tumor angiogenesis
and its response to LOX family activity.
LOX family members, in particular LOXL2, can
exert effects that do not depend on their enzymatic activity
[28–30]. The fact that LOX family activity inhibitor
prevents the effects of LOXL2 on collagen organization,
gemcitabine resistance, vessel size, and gemcitabine
intra-tumoral distribution strongly supports the view that
LOXL2 exerts these effects via its enzymatic activity to
promote PDAC chemoresistance.

Figure 3: LOX family activity decreases gemcitabine distribution and favors vessels collapse. (A–B) One hour before the

endpoint of the orthotopic experiment described in Figure 3, 40 mg/kg gemcitabine was injected. At euthanasia, plasma and tumors of from
the groups having received gemcitabine alone or in combination with LOXL2 or LOXL2+LOXi were removed for measurement of the
gemcitabine concentration. The gemcitabine concentrations were determined (A) in the plasma and (B) in the tumor for each group and
the results are expressed in μg of gemcitabine per mg protein ± SEM. The statistical test used was Mann-Whitney U. (C–D) Orthotopic
tumors as described in Figure 3 were analyzed by immunohistochemical staining for CD31, an endothelial cell marker. (C) Vessel size was
calculated with ImageJ software and (D) representative photographs are displayed. Values are means ± SEM and the statistical test used
was Mann-Whitney U.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

32105

Oncotarget

Table 1: Multivariate analysis in the subgroup of patients who received an adjuvant “Gemcitabinebased chemotherapy”
OS

DFS
Bootstrap
Bootstrap
Variable
HR* 95% CI p-value
HR
95% CI
p-value
x1000
x1000
Margin positive
2.1 1.35–3.06 0.001
0.002
2.01 1.32–3.06
0.001
0.002
Node positive
1.20 0.72–2.00
0.483
0.447
Tumor differentiation
1.19 0.81–1.74
0.368
0.400
Fibrillar collagen High (> P50)
1.61 1.05–2.44 0.028
0.033
1.69 1.05–2.70
0.030
0.042
*HR of 1 indicates no difference between the two groups of patients, whereas an HR > 1 indicates an increased risk of death/
failure
As a result of their properties, LOX family
members, in particular LOX and LOXL2, are viewed as
promising targets of antitumor therapy. A LOXL2 mAb
(simtuzumab) has been developed by Gilead [13] and used
to treat PDAC in phase II trials [31]. Gilead has recently
announced that this Ab, in combination with gemcitabine,
failed to increase progression-free survival as compared
to gemcitabine alone. This raises doubts as to the clinical
utility of targeting LOXL2 to potentiate gemcitabine in
PDAC. On the basis of our results showing that LOX,
LOXL1, and LOXL2 expression can increase in PDAC

and given the fact that the corresponding proteins share
common substrates such as collagen and display similar
other pro-tumoral effects [15], it is our opinion that
targeting only one member of this family is likely to have
no clinical benefit. Nevertheless, a recent study shows
that specifically inhibiting LOX protein using a specific
Ab improves PDAC chemosensitivity using a genetically
engineered mouse model for PDAC [32]. Still designing
a pan-LOX family members’ inhibitor might hold more
promise than looking for specific inhibitors against each
LOX family members. Used of LOX family inhibitors

Figure 4: High fibrillar collagen level group displays lower survival during adjuvant gemcitabine-based therapy. Level

of fibrillar collagen was determined by calculating the ratio between fibrillar collagen and the quantity of collagen. Patients having received
an adjuvant Gemcitabine-based chemotherapy were analyzed and samples were split in 2 groups, half of having the highest ratio and half
having the lowest ratio. Kaplan Meier analyses were performed and represented (A) the disease free-survival and (B) the overall survival.
P values were calculated using a log rank test.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

32106

Oncotarget

in combination with gemcitabine might also benefit of
a biomarker, such as high level of fibrillar collagen, to
choose the patient that might benefit to this therapy.
Hyaluronan destruction by hyaluronidase, another
component of the ECM, has been showed to increase

gemcitabine intra-tumoral distribution, through increased
vasculature, and thus to potentiate gemcitabine efficiency
in experimental models of PDAC [6, 33]. Hyaluronidase
in combination with gemcitabine has recently been
reported to give some benefit in phase II clinical trial but

Figure 5: Fibrillar collagen level is a predictive factor for gemcitabine benefit. Level of fibrillar collagen was determined by

calculating the ratio between fibrillar collagen and the quantity of collagen. (A) Patients having a poor level of fibrillar collagen (mean 50%
of the patients with the lowest collagen organization/quantity ratio) were analyzed and samples were split in 2 groups, having received or
not an adjuvant gemcitabine-based chemotherapy. Kaplan Meier analyses were performed and represented the disease free-survival (left
panel) and the overall survival (right panel). P values were calculated using a log rank test. (B) A similar analysis was performed in patients
having a high level of fibrillar collagen (mean 50% of the patients with the lowest collagen organization/quantity ratio).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

32107

Oncotarget

only in the patients displaying high levels of hyaluronan
in the tumor [34], pointed out the importance to choose
only the patients displaying the targeted alteration to get
a clinical benefit. Taking into account the parallel effects
of hyaluronidase and LOX family activity inhibition in
increasing gemcitabine intra-tumoral distribution, it may
be proposed that the combination of both, instead of the use
of hyaluronidase or LOX activity inhibitor alone, will allow
higher gemcitabine distribution and better clinical benefit.
In conclusion, our data demonstrate that LOX family
activity can participate in the chemoresistance of PDAC by
limiting the intra-tumoral distribution of a chemotherapeutic
agent and the readout of its activity might be used as a
biomarker to predict gemcitabine adjuvant benefit. Beside
their implications for PDAC treatment, these results may
lead to new clinical strategies for effective targeting of
chemotherapeutic drugs to other cancer types.

chloride). Biotinylated DNA was detected with Cy-3coupled streptavidin (Interchim). The nuclei were stained
with Hoechst dye (Sigma). The samples were analyzed
by fluorescence microscopy and the number of TUNELpositive cells was estimated with ImageJ software.

Proliferation and vessel analysis
Fresh tumors were fixed for 48 hrs in 10% neutral
buffered formalin (Sigma) and embedded in paraffin. For
immunohistochemical staining, the paraffin-embedded
tumors were serially sectioned at 4-µm thickness. After
deparaffinization and rehydration in xylene and alcohol
solutions, the slides were incubated in 5% hydrogen
peroxide in sterile water to block endogenous peroxidases.
The tissue sections were boiled in 10 mmol/l citrate buffer
pH 6 (H3310, Vector laboratories) in a microwave oven
for 20 min for heat-induced antigen retrieval. The slides
were then incubated at room temperature for 1 hr with the
primary anti-Ki-67 antibody (clone Tec-3, M7249, DAKO
or CD-31, ab28364, Abcam) diluted in low-background
solution (DAKO Real). After rinsing in PBS, the slides
were incubated for 1 hr at room temperature with a
biotinylated secondary antibody bound to a streptavidin
peroxidase conjugate (Dako E0468). Bound antibody
was revealed with a peroxidase substrate kit (Vectors
Laboratories) and sections were finally counterstained
with hematoxylin (Sigma).

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Cell culture
Human metastatic PDAC-derived cells (Colo-357)
(ATCC) and virus-producing GP293 cells (Clontech)
were cultured in DMEM (Life Technologies) containing
Glutamax and supplemented with 10% FBS (Lonza) and
1% penicillin/streptomycin (Invitrogen). Upon receipt,
the cells were thawed, amplified, and aliquots frozen.
Experiments were performed on these aliquots within
4 months, without further authentication of the cell lines.

Generation of Luc-expressing PDAC cells
Colo-357/Luciferase cells were produced by
infection with the MSCV Luciferase PGK-Hygro
(Addgene plasmid 18782) retroviral vector. Production
of retrovirus and infection of target cells were performed
as described in [35]. Colo-357/Luciferase cells were
hygromycin selected after infection.

RT-qPCR
Cells were lysed in TriReagent (Sigma) and total
RNA was isolated via an acid-phenol extraction procedure
using Phase Lock gel tubes (Eppendorf). RNA (2 µg) was
reverse-transcribed with the First-Strand cDNA Synthesis
Kit (GE Healthcare) according to the manufacturer’s
recommendations. Q-PCR experiments were carried out
in a Light Cycler 2.0, in Light Cycler Taqman Master Mix
(Roche) and with the Universal Probe Library (Roche
Diagnostics). The following primers were used: LOX
5ʹ-ggatacggcactggctactt-3ʹ and 5ʹ-gacgcctggatgtagtaggg3ʹ, LOXL1 5ʹ-gccagtggatcgacataacc-3ʹ and 5ʹ-ccaaaacaat
atactttgggttca-3ʹ, LOXL2 5ʹ- tgacctgctgaacctcaatg-3ʹ and
5ʹ-tggcacactcgtaattcttctg- 3ʹ, LOXL4 5ʹ-ggatacggcactg
gctactt-3ʹ and 5ʹ-ttgttcctgagacgctgttc-3ʹ. The HPRT1
gene was used as a normalizer, with the 5ʹ-tgaccttg
atttattttgcatacc-3ʹ and 5ʹ-cgagcaagacgttcagtcct-3ʹ primers.

In vivo experiments
For subcutaneous xenografts, 5 × 106 Colo-357 cells
per mouse were injected into the right flanks of 6-weekold female NMRI nude mice (Janvier) in 200 µl PBS
containing 25% Matrigel (BD Biosciences). Tumor size
was measured with an electronic caliper and tumor volume
was calculated with the formula (length × width × depth)/2.
For orthotopic xenografting into the pancreas,
NMRI nude mice were injected under general anesthesia
with isoflurane. One million Colo-357/Luciferase cells
were suspended in 30 µl PBS containing 5% Matrigel
and injected with a 31-gauge needle. After surgery, the
peritoneum was sutured with an absorbable silk suture and
the skin with Michel suture clips. During the first 24 hrs,
the animals were maintained under analgesia. The mice
were monitored for body weight and tumor development
with the NightOWL in vivo imaging system (Berthold).

TUNEL assays
Tumor sections were treated with 4% PFA and 0.2%
PBS-Triton and then incubated with TdT enzyme and
biotinylated dUTP (Roche) in reaction buffer (200 mM
potassium cacodylate, 25 mM Tris-HCL, 1 mM cobalt
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

32108

Oncotarget

Briefly, each mouse received a 2 mg dose of luciferin
(Promega) in sodium chloride solution by intraperitoneal
injection. Ten minutes later, luminescence was quantified
in the anesthetized mouse for ten minutes to reach the
maximum value.
In all in vivo experiments, gemcitabine (Eli Lilly)
was administered by intravenous injection into the tail
vein at the dosages indicated in the figure legends. Ten
nanograms of recombinant LOXL2 protein (R  &  D
systems) was injected directly into the tumor, in the case
of subcutaneous xenografts, or intraperitoneally, in the
case of pancreatic xenografts. The LOX familty activity
inhibitor beta-aminopropionitrile (BAPN) (Sigma)
[36–38] was administered intraperitoneally each day (at
100 mg/kg in 100 µl 0.9% sodium chloride), alone or in
combination with recombinant LOXL2 protein.
The mice were housed and bred in the AniCan
dedicated pathogen-free animal facility (CRCL, Lyon,
France). All experiments were performed in accordance
with the animal care guidelines of the European Union and
with French legislation and were approved by the local
Animal Ethics Evaluation Committee (CECCAPP).

The concentration ranges for the calibration curves were
0.05 to 4 µg/ml for plasma and 0.1 to 4 µg/ml for tumor
samples.

Collagen fiber organization
Paraffin-treated sections were deparaffinized and
stained for 1 hr in 0.1% picrosirius red (Direct Red 80,
365548, Sigma) in picric acid solution (P6744, Sigma).
Counterstaining was performed with Weigert hemotoxylin
(acid condition) (HT1079, Sigma). Collagen fiber deposits
and fibrillar collagen were visualized, respectively, by
normal light and polarized light microscopy, and quantified
with ImageJ software. Fibrilar collagen level, a direct
readout of LOX family activity [8, 18–20], was defined
by the ratio fibrillar/quantity and calculated for statistical
analysis: a low score indicates a poor level of collagen
fiber organization whereas a high score indicates a high
collagen fiber organization. The same methodology was
used to analyze collagen fiber organization in orthotopic
xenograft models and in TMAs from human PDAC.

LOX family activity assays

Quantification of gemcitabine in tumors and
plasma

LOX family activity assays were performed with the
Amplex Red Monoamine Oxidase Assay Kit (molecular
probes, Invitrogen). For the supernatant activity, each
cell lines were plated at the same density (750.000 cells
per 10 cm dishes) and 48 hours after, cell mediums were
collected. Measured were performed on 20 µl of medium.
For tumor samples, LOX family activities were measured
on 2 µg of proteins after cryogenic grinding. Each sample
was used and measured according to manufacturer’s
instructions and as previously described in [16]. Amplex
red was excited at 530 nm and emission was measured
at 590 nm using Tecan M1000 PRO. Assays were run in
sextuplicate and activity were reported as a mean ± S.E.M
of all assays.

One hr before euthanasia, mice were injected in the
tail vein with 100 µl gemcitabine solution at 40 mg/kg.
Blood samples were centrifuged in the presence of
heparin to separate the plasma and conserved in liquid
nitrogen. Tumor samples were snap-frozen in liquid
nitrogen to maintain the stability of gemcitabine before
cryogenic grinding (Cryotec). Throughout the process, the
samples were maintained at –80°C. Gemcitabine was then
quantified in the plasma and tumor samples by hydrophilic
interaction liquid chromatography hyphenated to tandem
mass spectrometry, and the results were normalized with
respect to the protein content determined by the Bradford
method. In this LC-MS/MS, the chromatographic
separation was carried out in the isocratic mode, with a
Hilic-Atlantis® analytical column (2.1 mm × 150 mm; 3
µm – Waters) and with [13C, 15N2]-gemcitabine used as
internal standard. The eluent was a mixture of acetate
buffer (pH 5, 100 mM) and acetonitrile (15/85 v/v). Mass
spectra were acquired with a triple-quadrupole mass
spectrometer (Quantum-Ultra; Thermo Electron, San
Jose, USA). An electrospray ionisation source was used
in the positive mode and gemcitabine and [13C, 15N2]gemcitabine were quantified, respectively, by selected
reaction monitoring of the 264→112 and 267→ 115
transitions. Ten microliters of plasma or 100 µL of tissue
solution was introduced into a conical centrifuge tube.
After protein precipitation with 300 µL cold acetonitrile,
the sample was mixed with 50 µL internal standard
solution and then centrifuged for 10 min at 13 000 g and
6°C. The clear supernatant was transferred to a glass vial.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Statistical analysis
Values are presented as means ± S.E.M unless stated
otherwise. Data obtained from independent groups were
compared by the nonparametric Kruskal-Wallis (more
than two groups) or Mann-Whitney U test (two groups)
(*P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, *** P < 0.001). Statistical analyses
were performed with Statistica software (Statsoft).
Statistics for the TMA were explained below in the TMA
paragraph.

Tissue microarray (TMA)
Prognostic and predictive values of collagen fiber
organization have been assessed in a large series of
patients who underwent curative intent resection for
PDAC in four university centers specialized in PDAC
32109

Oncotarget

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST

treatment. Patient selection, clinicopathologic data
records, characteristics of the population and modalities of
TMA construction have been previously described [21, 22,
39, 40]. Because of TMA depletion, a total of 359 patients
among the 471 original patients of the whole series were
included in this study. Appropriate ethic committees
approved the study.
Overall Survival (OS) was defined as time from
surgery to death resulting of any cause. Disease Free
Survival (DFS) was measured from the date of surgery
to the date of relapse or death. Survival curves were
estimated using the Kaplan-Meier technique and
compared using the log-rank test. The Cox proportional
hazard regression model was used for both univariate and
multivariate analyses and for estimating the hazard ratio
with 95% confidence interval. For multivariate analysis,
internal validation was checked using bootstraping
(1000 replications).
For prognostic and predictive analyses of level of
fibrillar collagen, two groups of patients were defined
according to the median value of the organization/quantity
ratio: high level of fibrillar collagen (patients with collagen
organization/quantity ratio > median value) and low level
of fibrillar collagen (patients with collagen organization/
quantity ≤ median value).
Prognostic value of the fibrillar collagen level
was first evaluated in the whole population then in the
subgroup of patients who did not receive any adjuvant
treatment.
In the whole population, an interaction test between
the fibrillar collagen level and the administration of adjuvant
“Gemcitabine-based chemotherapy” was performed using
the Cox model to calculate the HRs (Hazard Ratio) with
95% CIs. Subsequently, the predictive value of the fibrillar
collagen was evaluated in the subgroup of patients who
received a “Gemcitabine-based chemotherapy”. Analyze
of the predictive value of fibrillar collagen was carried out
according to two subgroups defined by the median ratio
organization/quantity.
Based on univariate Cox significance level of 0.1,
clinical variables and biomarker were incorporated into
the Cox models for multivariate analysis. A backward
selection was then applied to construct the final
multivariate model (keeping all the variables with a
p value ≤ 0.10).
For each test, statistical significance was set at a
two-sided p value of < 0.05. Statistical analyses were done
with Stata V11 software.

The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

REFERENCES
  1. 	 Rahib L, Smith BD, Aizenberg R, Rosenzweig AB,
Fleshman JM, Matrisian LM. Projecting cancer incidence
and deaths to 2030: the unexpected burden of thyroid, liver,
and pancreas cancers in the United States. Cancer Res.
2014; 74:2913–21.
  2.	 Fassnacht M, Terzolo M, Allolio B, Baudin E, Haak  H,
Berruti A, Welin S, Schade-Brittinger C, LacroixA,
Jarzab B, Sorbye H, Torpy DJ, Stepan V, et al. Combination
chemotherapy in advanced adrenocortical carcinoma. N Engl
J Med. 2012; 366:2189–97.
  3.	 Conroy T, Desseigne F, Ychou M, Bouche O, Guimbaud R,
Becouarn Y, Adenis A, Raoul JL, Gourgou-Bourgade S, de la
Fouchardiere C, Bennouna J, Bachet JB, Khemissa-Akouz F,
et al. FOLFIRINOX versus gemcitabine for metastatic
pancreatic cancer. N Engl J Med. 2011; 364:1817–25.
  4.	 Hidalgo M, Von Hoff DD. Translational therapeutic
opportunities in ductal adenocarcinoma of the pancreas.
Clin Cancer Res. 2012; 18:4249–56.
  5.	 Feig C, Gopinathan A, Neesse A, Chan DS, Cook N,
Tuveson DA. The pancreas cancer microenvironment. Clin
Cancer Res. 2012;18:4266–76.
  6.	 Provenzano PP, Cuevas C, Chang AE, Goel VK, Von
Hoff DD, Hingorani SR. Enzymatic targeting of the stroma
ablates physical barriers to treatment of pancreatic ductal
adenocarcinoma. Cancer Cell. 2012; 21:418–29.
  7.	 Olive KP, Jacobetz MA, Davidson CJ, Gopinathan A,
McIntyre D, Honess D, Madhu B, Goldgraben MA,
Caldwell ME, Allard D, Frese KK, Denicola G, Feig C,
et al. Inhibition of Hedgehog signaling enhances delivery
of chemotherapy in a mouse model of pancreatic cancer.
Science. 2009; 324:1457–61.
  8.	 Lucero HA, Kagan HM. Lysyl oxidase: an oxidative
enzyme and effector of cell function. Cell Mol Life Sci.
2006; 63:2304–16.
  9.	 Erler JT, Bennewith KL, Nicolau M, Dornhofer N, Kong C,
Le QT, Le QT, Chi JT, Jeffrey SS, Giaccia AJ. Lysyl oxidase
is essential for hypoxia-induced metastasis. Nature. 2006;
440:1222–6.
10. 	 Erler JT, Bennewith KL, Cox TR, Lang G, Bird D, Koong A,
Le QT, Giaccia AJ. Hypoxia-induced lysyl oxidase is a
critical mediator of bone marrow cell recruitment to form
the premetastatic niche. Cancer Cell. 2009; 15:35–44.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS AND FUNDING
This study was supported by a grant from the
French Ministry of Health and the French National Cancer
Institute (INCA TRANSLA-13-049), the Fondation de
France (201300038288) and the Oncostarter grant from
the CLARA canceropole.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

11. 	 Bondareva A, Downey CM, Ayres F, Liu W, Boyd SK,
Hallgrimsson B, Jirik FR. The lysyl oxidase inhibitor, betaaminopropionitrile, diminishes the metastatic colonization
potential of circulating breast cancer cells. PLoS One. 2009;
4:e5620.
32110

Oncotarget

12. 	 Baker AM, Cox TR, Bird D, Lang G, Murray GI, Sun XF,
Southall SM, Wilson JR, Erler JT. The role of lysyl oxidase
in SRC-dependent proliferation and metastasis of colorectal
cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2011; 103:407–24.

24. 	 Baker AM, Bird D, Welti JC, Gourlaouen M, Lang G,
Murray GI, Reynolds AR, Cox TR, Erler JT. Lysyl oxidase
plays a critical role in endothelial cell stimulation to drive
tumor angiogenesis. Cancer Res. 2013; 73:583–94.

13. 	 Barry-Hamilton V, Spangler R, Marshall D, McCauley S,
Rodriguez HM, Oyasu M, Mikels A, Vaysberg M,
Ghermazien H, Wai C, Garcia CA, Velayo AC, Jorgensen B,
et al. Allosteric inhibition of lysyl oxidase-like-2 impedes
the development of a pathologic microenvironment. Nat
Med. 2010; 16:1009–17.

25. 	 Bignon M, Pichol-Thievend C, Hardouin J, Malbouyres M,
Brechot N, Nasciutti L, Barret A, Teillon J, Guillon E,
Etienne E, Caron M, Joubert-Caron R, Monnot C. Lysyl
oxidase-like protein-2 regulates sprouting angiogenesis
and type IV collagen assembly in the endothelial basement
membrane. Blood. 2011; 118:3979–89.

14. 	 Pez F, Dayan F, Durivault J, Kaniewski B, Aimond G, Le
Provost GS, Deux B, Clezardin P, Sommer P, Pouyssegur J,
Reynaud C. The HIF-1-inducible lysyl oxidase activates
HIF-1 via the Akt pathway in a positive regulation loop
and synergizes with HIF-1 in promoting tumor cell growth.
Cancer Res. 2011; 71:1647–57.

26. 	 Shih YH, Chang KW, Chen MY, Yu CC, Lin DJ, Hsia SM,
Huang HL, Shieh TM. Lysyl oxidase and enhancement of
cell proliferation and angiogenesis in oral squamous cell
carcinoma. Head Neck. 2013; 35:250–6.
27. 	 Zaffryar-Eilot S, Marshall D, Voloshin T, Bar-Zion A,
Spangler R, Kessler O, Ghermazien H, Brekhman V,
Suss-Toby E, Adam D, Shaked Y, Smith V, Neufeld G.
Lysyl oxidase-like-2 promotes tumour angiogenesis and
is a potential therapeutic target in angiogenic tumours.
Carcinogenesis. 2013; 34:2370–9.

15. 	 Bernard D, Wiel C. Lysyl oxidases: emerging promoters of
senescence escape, tumor initiation and progression. Cancer
Cell Microenviron. 2014; 1:e120.
16. 	 Wiel C, Augert A, Vincent DF, Gitenay D, Vindrieux D, Le
Calve B, Arfi V, Lallet-Daher H, Reynaud C, Treilleux I,
Bartholin L, Lelievre E, Bernard D. Lysyl oxidase activity
regulates oncogenic stress response and tumorigenesis. Cell
Death Dis. 2013; 4:e855.

28. 	 Cuevas EP, Moreno-Bueno G, Canesin G, Santos V,
Portillo F, Cano A. LOXL2 catalytically inactive mutants
mediate epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition. Biol Open.
2014; 3:129–37.
29. 	 Moreno-Bueno G, Salvador F, Martin A, Floristan A,
Cuevas EP, Santos V, Montes A, Morales S, Castilla MA,
Rojo-Sebastian A, Martinez A, Hardisson D, Csiszar K,
et al. Lysyl oxidase-like 2 (LOXL2), a new regulator of cell
polarity required for metastatic dissemination of basal-like
breast carcinomas. EMBO Mol Med. 2011; 3:528–44.

17. 	 Vincent DF, Yan KP, Treilleux I, Gay F, Arfi V,
Kaniewski B, Marie JC, Lepinasse F, Martel S, GoddardLeon S, Iovanna JL, Dubus P, Garcia S, et al. Inactivation of
TIF1gamma cooperates with Kras to induce cystic tumors
of the pancreas. PLoS Genet. 2009; 5:e1000575.
18. 	 Butler E, Hardin J, Benson S. The role of lysyl oxidase and
collagen crosslinking during sea urchin development. Exp
Cell Res. 1987; 173:174–82.

30. 	 Peinado H, Del Carmen Iglesias-de la Cruz, Olmeda D,
Csiszar K, Fong KS, Vega S, Nieto MA, Cano A, Portillo F.
A molecular role for lysyl oxidase-like 2 enzyme in snail
regulation and tumor progression. EMBO J. 2005; 24:3446–58.

19. 	 Moon HJ, Finney J, Ronnebaum T, Mure M. Human lysyl
oxidase-like 2. Bioorg Chem. 2014; 57:231–41.

31. 	 Bowen Benson AI, Thai Z, Hawkins MJ, Werner D, Dong H,
Lee C, Bendell JC, Lurie RH. A phase II randomized,
double-blinded, placebo-controlled study to evaluate the
efficacy and safety of simtuzumab (GS-6624) combined
with gemcitabine as first-line treatment for metastatic
pancreatic adenocarcinoma. J Clin Oncol. 2013; 31.

20. 	 Siegel RC. Biosynthesis of collagen crosslinks: increased
activity of purified lysyl oxidase with reconstituted collagen
fibrils. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1974; 71:4826–30.
21. 	 Bachet JB, Marechal R, Demetter P, Bonnetain F,
Couvelard  A, Svrcek M, Bardier-Dupas A, Hammel P,
Sauvanet A, Louvet C, Paye F, Rougier P, Penna C, et al.
Contribution of CXCR4 and SMAD4 in predicting disease
progression pattern and benefit from adjuvant chemotherapy
in resected pancreatic adenocarcinoma. Ann Oncol. 2012;
23:2327–35.

32. 	 Miller BW, Morton JP, Pinese M, Saturno G, Jamieson NB,
McGhee E, Timpson P, Leach J, McGarry L, Shanks E,
Bailey P, Chang D, Oien K, et al. Targeting the LOX/
hypoxia axis reverses many of the features that make
pancreatic cancer deadly: inhibition of LOX abrogates
metastasis and enhances drug efficacy. EMBO Mol Med.
2015; 7:1063–76.

22. 	 Marechal R, Bachet JB, Mackey JR, Dalban C, Demetter P,
Graham K, Couvelard A, Svrcek M, Bardier-Dupas A,
Hammel P, Sauvanet A, Louvet C, Paye F, et al. Levels of
gemcitabine transport and metabolism proteins predict survival
times of patients treated with gemcitabine for pancreatic
adenocarcinoma. Gastroenterology. 2012; 143:664–74.

33. 	 Chauhan VP, Boucher Y, Ferrone CR, Roberge S, Martin JD,
Stylianopoulos T, Bardeesy N, DePinho RA, Padera TP,
Munn LL, Jain RK. Compression of pancreatic tumor blood
vessels by hyaluronan is caused by solid stress and not
interstitial fluid pressure. Cancer Cell. 2014; 26:14–5.

23. 	 Levental KR, Yu H, Kass L, Lakins JN, Egeblad M,
Erler  JT, Fong SF, Csiszar K, Giaccia A, Weninger W,
Yamauchi M, Gasser DL, Weaver VM. Matrix crosslinking
forces tumor progression by enhancing integrin signaling.
Cell. 2009; 139:891–906.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

34. 	 Hingorani SR, Harris WP, Hendifar AE, Bullock AJ,
Wu XW, Huang Y, Jiang P. High response rate and PFS with
PEGPH20 added to nab-paclitaxel/gemcitabine in stage IV
32111

Oncotarget

38. 	 Wilmarth KR, Froines JR. In vitro and in vivo inhibition
of lysyl oxidase by aminopropionitriles. J Toxicol Environ
Health. 1992; 37:411–23.
39. 	 Bachet JB, Marechal R, Demetter P, Bonnetain F, Cros J,
Svrcek M, Bardier-Dupas A, Hammel P, Sauvanet A,
Louvet  C, Paye F, Vaillant JC, Andre T, et al. S100A2
is a predictive biomarker of adjuvant therapy benefit in
pancreatic adenocarcinoma. Eur J Cancer. 2013; 49:2643–53.
40. 	 Marechal R, Bachet JB, Calomme A, Demetter P,
Delpero JR, Svrcek M, Cros J, Bardier-Dupas A, Puleo F,
Monges G, Hammel P, Louvet C, Paye F, et al. Sonic
hedgehog and Gli1 expression predict outcome in resected
pancreatic adenocarcinoma. Clin Cancer Res. 2015;
21:1215–24.

previously untreated pancreatic cancer patients with highHA tumors: Interim results of a randomized phase II study.
J Clin Oncol. 2015; 33:4006.
35. 	 Vindrieux D, Devailly G, Augert A, Le Calvé B, ferrand M,
Pigny P, Payen L, Lambeau G, Perrais M, Aubert S,
Simonnet H, Dante R, Bernard D. Repression of PLA2R1 by
c-MYC and HIF-2alpha promotes cancer growth. Oncotarget.
2014; 5:1004–13. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.1681.
36. 	 Tang SS, Trackman PC, Kagan HM. Reaction of aortic lysyl
oxidase with beta-aminopropionitrile. J Biol Chem. 1983;
258:4331–8.
37. 	 Tang SS, Chichester CO, Kagan HM. Comparative
sensitivities of purified preparations of lysyl oxidase
and other amine oxidases to active site-directed enzyme
inhibitors. Connect Tissue Res. 1989; 19:93–103.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

32112

Oncotarget

