NIH Public Access
Author Manuscript
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 September 28.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Published in final edited form as:
Cell. 2013 March 28; 153(1): 56–69. doi:10.1016/j.cell.2013.03.004.

Influence of Metabolism on Epigenetics and Disease
William G. Kaelin Jr.1,2,* and Steven L. McKnight3,*
1Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and Brigham and Women’s
Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02215, USA
2Howard

Hughes Medical Institute, Chevy Chase, MD 20815, USA

3Department

of Biochemistry, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX

75390, USA

Abstract
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Chemical modifications of histones and DNA, such as histone methylation, histone acetylation,
and DNA methylation, play critical roles in epigenetic gene regulation. Many of the enzymes that
add or remove such chemical modifications are known, or might be suspected, to be sensitive to
changes in intracellular metabolism. This knowledge provides a conceptual foundation for
understanding how mutations in the metabolic enzymes SDH, FH, and IDH can result in cancer
and, more broadly, for how alterations in metabolism and nutrition might contribute to disease.
Here, we review literature pertinent to hypothetical connections between metabolic and epigenetic
states in eukaryotic cells.

Introduction

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Central to the many definitions of “epigenetics” is the knowledge that genes contain
regulatory information beyond their nucleotide sequences. This information can either be
dynamic and transitory in nature or be relatively stable, capable of being passed on to
somatic daughter cells, as occurs during lineage commitment, and in some cases to offspring
via the germline, as occurs with parentally imprinted genes. The most thoroughly
understood epigenetic mechanisms influence gene expression and do so as a result of
changes in chemical modifications of the DNA (for example, methylation of CpG
dinucleotides within gene promoters) or the physical accessibility of the DNA by virtue of
its association with histones, nonhistone proteins, or noncoding RNAs (for example, XIST).
The basic building block of chromatin is the nucleosome core particle, consisting of
approximately 147 base pairs of DNA wrapped around a histone octamer that contains two
copies each of histones 2A, 2B, 3, and 4. The tails of histones H3 and H4 are subject to a
variety of posttranslational modifications including acetylation, methylation,
phosphorylation, sumoylation, and ubiquitylation. In general, histone acetylation is
associated with a more open chromatin configuration (euchromatin) that is permissive for
transcription. Histone deacetylation is usually associated with condensed, compacted
chromatin (heterochromatin) and transcriptional repression. The positions of nucleosomes
relative to the DNA strand also influence which genes are capable of being transcribed and
are regulated by chromatin remodeling complexes such as SWI/SNF complexes.

© 2013 Elsevier Inc.
*
Correspondence: william_kaelin@dfci.harvard.edu (W.G.K.), steven.mcknight@utsouthwestern.edu (S.L.M.).

Kaelin and McKnight

Page 2

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Histone acetylation leads to an increased negative charge, which loosens the interaction
between the histone and the negatively charged DNA. In addition, acetylated histones recruit
specific chromatin-associated proteins that contain bromodomains. Histone methylation, by
contrast, does not alter histone charge but instead creates a docking site for chromatinassociated proteins that contain specific methyl histone-binding domains, such as plant
homeodomain (PHD) domains, tudor domains, or chromodomains. These chromatinassociated “reader” proteins often recruit other proteins that contain additional chromatinmodifying activities (including “writers” and “erasers” that add or remove specific histone
posttranslational modifications, respectively). The consequences of histone methylation are
influenced by the specific histone residue that is modified, the number of methyl groups
added (mono-, di-, or trimethylation), and other contextual factors. Methylation of H3K4,
H3K36, and H3K79 is often associated with transcriptionally active euchromatin. By
contrast, methylation of H3K9, H3K27, and H4K20 helps specify transcriptionally repressed
heterochromatin.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Histone methylation can also influence DNA methylation and vice versa. Specific
methyltransferase enzymes are involved in de novo and maintenance DNA methylation.
Methylation of CpG dinucleotides in promoter regions typically inhibits transcription. DNA
methylation tends to be a more stable modification than histone methylation but can undergo
changes during embryogenesis and aging. It has been appreciated for many years that
cancers can display global DNA hypomethylation while, at the same time, exhibiting
hypermethylation of genomic regions responsible for the expression of tumor suppressor
genes.
Many enzymes that play important roles in epigenetic gene regulation utilize cosubstrates
generated by cellular metabolism, thereby providing a potential link between nutrition,
metabolism, and gene regulation. In this review, we describe examples of such enzymes as
well as evidence that altered metabolism, through altered epigenetics, can contribute to
disease. As this topic has recently also been reviewed by others (e.g., Dawson and
Kouzarides, 2012; Lu and Thompson, 2012; Teperino et al., 2010) we focus particular
attention on pertinent studies that might have been overlooked. We have also purposely been
provocative by raising questions and, in some cases, challenging existing dogma in the field.

Acetyl-CoA: “Activated Acetate” and Histone Acetylation

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Acetyl-CoA fuels the TCA cycle for the production of ATP under aerobic conditions and is
a critical building block for cholesterol, lipids, amino acids, and other components required
for cell growth. It was discovered as the “activated” form of acetate, so named because of its
favorable energetic state for two-carbon donation in anabolic biochemistry (Lipmann and
Kaplan, 1946). Acetyl-CoA is also the substrate used by histone acetyl transferase (HAT)
enzymes to modify histone tails as an integral determinant of the epigenetic state of
chromatin in eukaryotic cells (Figure 1) (Lee and Workman, 2007; Shahbazian and
Grunstein, 2007).
Acetyl-CoA Generation
Acetyl-CoA can be produced through a variety of metabolic pathways, both catabolic and
anabolic (Figure 1). Principal among these is the conversion of pyruvate into acetyl-CoA via
the mitochondrial pyruvate dehydrogenase complex late during the oxidation of glucose and
the -oxidation of fatty acids. Given its polarity and relative chemical complexity, acetylCoA does not readily diffuse across membranes. As such, metazoan cells have evolved the
malate-citrate antiporter system to move mitochondrial citrate to the cytoplasm, where it can
combine with ATP and CoA to be converted to acetyl-CoA and oxaloacetate via the ATP
citrate lyase enzyme, thereby affording a cytoplasmic pool of acetyl-CoA for lipid
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 September 28.

Kaelin and McKnight

Page 3

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

biosynthesis. Acetyl-CoA can also be produced catabolically from threonine via a
mitochondrial threonine dehydrogenase enzyme uniquely expressed in mouse embryonic
stem cells; anabolically from acetate, ATP, and CoA via acetyl-CoA synthase enzymes
localized in mitochondrial, cytoplasmic, or nuclear compartments of mammalian cells; and
via an anaplerotic pathway through reductive carboxylation of -ketoglutarate
Acetyl-CoA Fluctuation

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

A recurring theme woven throughout this review asks the question of how the levels of
consumable nutrients, enzyme substrates, and even molecular oxygen are sensed by cells as
a means of adaptation. More specifically, we focus on the possibility that gene expression is
modulated via epigenetic modification of chromosomal proteins in accord with the
abundance of essential metabolites. The activity of almost all enzymes involved in
intermediary metabolism is regulated as a function of the abundance of both enzyme
substrate and product. By contrast, many enzymes involved in key aspects of intracellular
signaling are not regulated in this way. Take, for example, the hundreds of protein kinase
enzymes that, using ATP as a substrate, modify target proteins by phosphorylation. With the
exception of the adenosine monophosphate-regulated protein kinase (Hardie, 2011), almost
no protein kinase enzymes are built to sense the level of cellular ATP in the context of their
regulatory function. Unless a cell is in a deathly sick state of ATP under abundance, protein
kinase enzymes are capable of functioning perfectly well irrespective of ATP levels. This
obviously results from the fact that protein kinases are endowed with affinity for substrate
that is considerably more avid than the ambient levels of intracellular ATP.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Turning to enzymes involved in epigenetic regulation, starting with HATs, we ask the
following: are we to consider them as being analogous to substrate-limited metabolic
enzymes, or are they instead protein kinase-like in having evolved properties that shield
themselves from fluctuation in the level of intracellular acetyl-CoA? Before considering
whether acetylase enzymes might be substrate regulated, it is first important to ask whether
the intracellular levels of acetyl-CoA fluctuate in biological settings. Studies of two different
eukaryotic cells have indeed given evidence of significant fluctuation in acetyl-CoA. For
example, prototrophic (wild-type) strains of yeast grown in the nutrient-limiting
environment of a chemostat spontaneously enter a synchronous and highly robust metabolic
cycle (Klevecz et al., 2004; Tu et al., 2005; Tu and McKnight, 2006, 2009; Tu et al., 2007).
Over a 4–5 hr cycle the cells rhythmically oscillate between oxidative and reductive growth
(Figure 2). Mitochondrial respiration during the oxidative phase of this yeast metabolic
cycle (YMC) helps accumulate appropriate levels of energetically valuable building blocks
required for transition into a reductive, glycolytic phase wherein the cells commit to DNA
synthesis and cell division. Acetyl-CoA levels fluctuate dramatically as a function of the
YMC. Acetyl-CoA levels peak at a 6-fold-higher level at the transition of the oxidative (Ox)
phase to the reductive building (RB) phase relative to the metabolically quiescent, reductive
charging (RC) phase of the YMC (Cai et al., 2011; Tu et al., 2007). One likely means by
which intracellular levels of acetyl-CoA peak at the Ox/RB boundary is the coordinated
induction of all enzymes required to convert ethanol into acetylaldehyde, acetylaldehyde
into acetate, and acetate into acetyl-CoA at this precise temporal window of the YMC. In
this way, ethanol fermented via the consumption of glucose during the RB phase of the
YMC and accumulated in the extracellular reservoir of the chemostat can be retrieved and
rebuilt into a valuable cellular building block. That the “recycled” hydrocarbon of ethanol
enzymatically converted into acetyl-CoA might be directly relevant to the epigenetic state of
yeast cells is strongly hinted by the fact that the terminal enzyme in the pathway, acetylCoA synthase, has been shown to be localized to the nucleus (Takahashi et al., 2006).
Significant fluctuation in the abundance of acetyl-CoA has also been observed as a function
of the differentiation of mouse embryonic stem cells (ESCs). Undifferentiated ESCs contain
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 September 28.

Kaelin and McKnight

Page 4

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

significantly higher levels of acetyl-CoA than the embryoid body (EB) cells induced to
differentiate by the combined withdrawal of leukemia-inhibitory factor (LIF) and
application of retinoic acid (RA) (Wang et al., 2009a, 2011). The observed fluctuation of
acetyl-CoA levels correlates with dramatic changes in the expression of the threonine
dehydrogenase (TDH) enzyme, which is rate limiting for the conversion of threonine into
glycine and acetyl-CoA. Undifferentiated mouse ESCs express levels of TDH upward of
1,000-fold higher relative to any other source of mouse cells or tissues, and the gene
encoding TDH is stringently repressed immediately upon induction of ESC differentiation in
response to LIF withdrawal and RA administration. When undifferentiated ESCs are
exposed to a specific chemical inhibitor of the TDH enzyme, intracellular levels of acetylCoA drop precipitously (Alexander et al., 2011). As will be discussed subsequently, it has
been hypothesized that the ability of the TDH enzyme to convert threonine into glycine and
acetyl-CoA may not only fuel mouse ESCs in a specialized manner but also help dictate an
equally specialized epigenetic state.
Control of Gene Expression by Acetyl-CoA
Do the unusually high levels of acetyl-CoA present in undifferentiated mouse ESCs, or yeast
cells poised at the Ox/RB boundary of the YMC, play a determinative role in epigenetic
regulation of gene expression? Where this has only been hypothesized for mouse ESCs, data
have been gathered to affirmatively answer this question in yeast cells (Figure 2).

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

As described by Tu and colleagues (Cai et al., 2011; Cai and Tu, 2011, 2012), numerous
acetylation marks on the K9, K14, K23, and K27 residues of histone H3 and the K5, K8, and
K12 residues on histone H4 only appear over a 30–45 min window corresponding exactly
with the Ox/RB boundary that is coincident with the peak abundance of intracellular acetylCoA. The fact that these acetylation marks peak at the Ox/RB boundary gives evidence that
this form of epigenetic regulation is unusually dynamic, consistent with reports that the halflife of histone acetylation may be as short as 3 min (Waterborg, 2002). Further DNA
microarray and ChIP-seq experiments led to the identification of roughly 1,000 growth
genes selectively acetylated and activated only when intracellular levels of acetyl-CoA peak
(Cai et al., 2011, Tu et al., 2005). These include genes encoding ribosomal components,
translation factors, and the regulatory D1 cyclin, corresponding precisely to the set of genes
known to gate entry of yeast cells into the cell division cycle (Jorgensen et al., 2002). The
precision of temporal induction of these 1,000+ genes is astounding; the entire gene set is
coordinately induced within a single-digit number of minutes within the 4–5 hr YMC
(Rowicka et al., 2007).
Acetyl-CoA and Histone Acetyltransferase Enzymes

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

The GCN5 histone acetylase enzyme of the SAGA complex has been identified as the
critical enzyme responsible for transient acetylation of growth genes at the Ox/RB boundary
(Cai et al., 2011). This conclusion derives from ChIP-seq experiments showing the selective
association of the SAGA complex with the promoters of the entire battery of growth genes
only during the window of peak acetyl-CoA accumulation, along with genetic experiments
wherein it has been demonstrated that catalytically active GCN5 is critically required for
YMC oscillation (Cai et al., 2011). What properties of the SAGA complex and GCN5 might
uniquely qualify it as an acetyl-CoA sensor? Several regulatory subunits of the SAGA
complex are themselves transiently acetylated only during the Ox/RB window, raising the
possibility that a complex pathway of allosteric regulation is at the heart of the sensing
ability of SAGA (Cai et al., 2011). More simplistically, it is possible that GCN5 requires
high levels of acetyl-CoA and that the enzyme is less active in other phases of the YMC
relative to the Ox/RB window wherein acetyl-CoA levels peak. In this regard it may be
notable that the off-rate of acetyl-CoA binding to the yeast GCN5 enzyme is more than an

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 September 28.

Kaelin and McKnight

Page 5

order of magnitude more rapid than that of human p300/CBP HAT enzyme, human GCN5,
or Tetrahymena GCN5 (Langer et al., 2002).

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Cancer Connection

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

The genes whose promoter regions and chromatin are differentially acetylated exactly when
acetyl-CoA levels peak during the YMC encode precisely those protein and RNA products
required to enable cell growth. This yeast growth gene battery matches closely with the
genes induced by the c-Myc oncoprotein in mammalian cells (Ji et al., 2011), which have
been reported to be codependent upon c-Myc and GCN5/SAGA (McMahon et al., 1998,
2000). This precisely orchestrated pattern of yeast growth gene induction in response to
ambient levels of intracellular acetyl-CoA probably represents an evolutionarily ancient
regulatory pathway allowing cells to properly link the commitment of cell growth and
division to nutritional state. Future studies will help assess whether this same pathway is
employed by mammalian cells, especially the nutrient-limited cells of solid tumors. In this
vein, it is noteworthy that the production of acetyl-CoA in HeLa cells necessary to drive
histone acetylation has been attributed to the enzymatic conversion of citrate into
oxaloacetate and acetyl-CoA via the ATP citrate lyase enzyme (Wellen et al., 2009).
Whereas mammalian cells contain three paralogous enzymes capable of converting acetate
into acetyl-CoA, the latter study provides evidence that cancer cells make acetyl-CoA via a
fundamentally different pathway than prototrophic yeast. The observations of Wellen and
colleagues do conclude, however, that the GCN5 histone acetyltransferase enzyme of the
SAGA complex is of critical importance for histone acetylation in response to the combined
provision of glucose and growth factors to otherwise quiescent cells. As such, both yeast and
human cancer cells may employ similar strategies to couple nutrient availability to the
control of gene expression.

NAD+ and Deacetylation

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

The burning of metabolic fuels uses molecular oxygen as the ultimate electron acceptor.
Instead of being directly transferred to O2, electrons evolving from oxidative reactions use
pyridine nucleotides as specialized carriers, with the reduced forms of these carriers then
being able to transfer electrons to molecular oxygen. Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide
(NAD) is a key electron carrier in the oxidation of hydrocarbon fuels. The nicotinate moiety
of NAD (niacin or vitamin B6) is derived from tryptophan and combines with 5phosphoribosyl-1-pyrophosphate (PRPP) to yield nicotinate ribonucleotide and inorganic
pyrophosphate. Desamido-NAD is then formed via the transfer of an AMP moiety from
ATP to nicotinate ribonucleotide, with the final step in the synthesis of NAD involving the
transfer of the ammonia generated from the amide group of glutamine to the nicotinate
carboxyl group. NADP, the related, phosphorylated derivative of NAD, is made via the
transfer of a phosphoryl group from ATP to the 2 -hydroxyl group via an NAD kinase
enzyme. Upon electron acceptance, NAD+ and NADP+ are converted to the reduced forms
of these pyridine nucleotides. The ambient intracellular ratio of NAD+/NADH is roughly
100:1, whereas the ratio of NADP+/NADPH is 1:100. These ratios reflect the evolved
necessity for NAD+ to function primarily as an electron acceptor in the burning of
hydrocarbon fuels and the necessity for NADPH to fulfill anabolic biosynthetic reactions
including the synthesis of cholesterol, bile acids, steroid hormones, and triglycerides.
Considerable attention has been paid to the hypothetical role of fluctuating NAD+ levels as
a function of nutritional state and the activity of deacetylase enzymes. These enzymes come
in two flavors, those that catalyze deacetylation in an NAD+-independent manner, yielding
the deacetylated substrate and free acetate as products; and those that are NAD+-dependent,
yielding O-acetyl-ADP-ribose, the deacetylated substrate, and nicotinamide as products
(Denu, 2005; Feldman et al., 2012; Haberland et al., 2009; Sauve et al., 2006). The latter
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 September 28.

Kaelin and McKnight

Page 6

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

proteins are members of the sirtuin family of deacetylases (Figure 1), which include two
isoforms that are primarily housed in the nuclei of mammalian cells (SIRT6 and SIRT7),
three that are localized to mitochondria (SIRT3, SIRT4, and SIRT5), and two that are found
in both cytoplasmic and nuclear compartments (SIRT1 and SIRT2) (Finkel et al., 2009;
Guarente, 2011a; Haigis and Sinclair, 2010; Verdin et al., 2010).
NAD+ and Sirtuin Deacetylases

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

For the purpose of simplicity, one can consider the action of sirtuin deacetylase enzymes as
being a counterbalance to nutrient-driven protein acetylation. On a more microscopic level,
the involvement of the mitochondrial SIRT3 enzyme in the deacetylation of the acetyl-CoA
synthase enzyme AceCS2 is revealing (Hallows et al., 2006; Schwer et al., 2006). Under
appropriate nutritional conditions, AceCS2 is acetylated on a specific lysine residue that
inhibits the ability of the enzyme to convert acetate into acetyl-CoA, a regulatory scheme
conserved from Salmonella to mammals (Hirschey et al., 2011; Starai et al., 2002). SIRT3mediated deacetylation of AceCS2 reactivates the enzyme. One potential reason for
justifying why AceCS2 is deacetylated by a sirtuin enzyme is that the product of the reaction
is not acetate, which might create a futile cycle, but instead O-acetyl-ADP-ribose and
nicotinamide. Alternatively, sirtuin-mediated production of the latter metabolite might avail
it for biosynthetic or regulatory purposes (Hassa et al., 2006). On a more macroscopic level,
one can consider the ability of SIRT1 to deacetylate the PGC1 transcriptional coactivator.
PGC1 coordinately regulates many genes whose products conspire to control intermediary
metabolism in many tissues of the body. When heavily acetylated, PGC1 is inactive (Lerin
et al., 2006; Rodgers et al., 2005). SIRT1-mediated deacetylation reactivates PGC1 (Lerin
et al., 2006). In the cases of both AceCS2 and PGC1 , access to ample nutrients can
simplistically be understood to inhibit the activities of the two proteins via acetyl-CoAmediated acetylation. This inhibition, in turn, can be respectively counterbalanced by the
mitochondrial SIRT3 and nuclear SIRT1 enzymes.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Caloric restriction would logically be expected to demand the activity of the sirtuin family
of deacetylase enzymes. For example, SIRT3-mediated deacetylation of AceCS2 would be
desired to maximize production of acetyl-CoA from acetate under conditions of caloric
restriction, and SIRT1-mediated deacetylation of PGC1 would help activate transcription
of the appropriate battery of nuclear genes important for adaptation to starvation or caloric
restriction. Evidence has been reported that the levels of expression of sirtuin enzymes can
adapt to metabolic state (Hirschey et al., 2011). It has likewise been reported that NAD+
levels may increase upon caloric restriction, thereby offering an alternative means of sirtuin
activation. Although it is counterintuitive to consider that cells or tissues would produce
higher levels of NAD+ under conditions of caloric restriction, where the need of the cofactor
as an electron acceptor for oxidation of hydrocarbons should be diminished, this
interpretation has gained widespread acceptance (Canto´ and Auwerx, 2011; Guarente,
2011b). Such interpretations contradict classical studies showing that NAD+ levels do not
increase as a function of starvation. The collective work of Krebs and Veech exhaustively
demonstrated that NAD+/NADH levels do not change as a function of starvation,
irrespective of whether one measures bound or free fractions of the cofactors (Krebs and
Veech, 1969; Veech et al., 1969).
It has also been reported that NAD+ levels fluctuate as a function of the circadian cycle,
thereby instructing nuclear sirtuin enzymes to control the epigenetic state of chromatin in an
NAD+-regulated manner. Mouse embryo fibroblast (MEF) cells deficient in the CLOCK
transcription factor were reported to contain only 4%–5% as much NAD+ as wild-type MEF
cells (Nakahata et al., 2009). When NAD+ levels were measured in liver tissue of wild-type
mice, two ultradian sets of peaks and troughs of NAD+ abundance were observed per 24 hr
cycle (Ramsey et al., 2009). The peak-to-trough fluctuation in NAD+ abundance varied by
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 September 28.

Kaelin and McKnight

Page 7

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

20%–30%, as reported in the latter study. By contrast, when NAD+ levels were measured as
a function of the YMC, which is far more robust in amplitude than metabolic fluctuation
taking place as a function of the circadian cycle, no changes in NAD+ levels were observed
(Tu et al., 2007). Likewise, extensive studies of yeast cells exposed to a variety of nutritional
states, including caloric restriction, have shown no alteration in NAD+ or nicotinamide
levels that could be interpreted to increase the activity of sirtuin enzymes upon glucose
restriction (Evans et al., 2010). Thus it remains unclear whether sirtuin activity is
operatively linked to metabolic state via fluctuations in the intracellular levels of NAD+.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

What is clear, however, is that sirtuin enzymes sit in diametric opposition to protein
acetylating and that protein acetylation can be influenced by intracellular levels of acetylCoA. In the case of the AceCS2 enzyme that uses acetate to produce mitochondrial acetylCoA, SIRT3 serves to induce the catalytic activity of the enzyme by removing an inhibitory
acetylation mark. In the case of PGC1 , the nuclear SIRT1 enzyme serves to deacetylate
this transcriptional coactivator, thereby liberating its capacity to induce the expression of
genes whose products are required in energy-depleted cells. Recent studies have provided
evidence that the genes encoding SIRT3 and SIRT6 are tumor suppressors (Kim et al., 2010;
Sebastián et al., 2012). In this regard, it is particularly intriguing that the battery of SIRT6
target genes (Sebastián et al., 2012) has been reported to overlap significantly with genes
codependent on the c-Myc oncoprotein and the SAGA/GCN5 histone acetylase complex
(Cai et. al., 2011; Ji et al., 2011; McMahon et al., 1998, 2000).
NAD+ Independent Histone Deacetylases
A recent study has raised the possibility of a different sort of connection between an
abundant metabolite and the NAD+-independent class of histone deacetylase enzyme. hydroxybutyrate, which is one of the three ketone bodies, is produced at mM quantities after
prolonged exercise or starvation (Candido et al., 1978). Like sodium butyrate, hydroxybutyrate inhibits the activities of many NAD+-independent histone deacetylase
enzymes (Shimazu et al., 2013). By administering -hydroxybutyrate to laboratory mice via
an intraperitoneal pump, Shimazu and colleagues were able to demonstrate enhancement of
H3K9 and H3K14 acetylation, induced expression of FOXO3A–regulated genes, and
resistance to oxidative stress. These data provide evidence that a distinct metabolite, hydroxybutyrate, is able not only to fuel metabolic adaptation to starvation but also to help
sustain a protective epigenetic state by inhibiting the activities of NAD+-independent
histone deacetylase enzymes.

Methylation of DNA and Histones: SAM and the “Activated Methyl Cycle“
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

S-adenosylmethionine (SAM) contains the active methyl donor group utilized by most
methyltransferase enzymes (Figure 3). Tetrahydrofolate (THF), when methylated on its N-5
atom (N5-MTHF), also acts as a methyl donor. Unlike SAM, the transfer potential of the
methyl donor group of N5-MTHF is not sufficiently high for most biosynthetic methylation
reactions. SAM is produced by the condensation of methionine and ATP during the first of
nine steps required for the conversion of methionine to succinyl-CoA. The methyl group of
SAM is chemically activated via the positive charge on the adjacent sulfur atom, which
causes the SAM methyl group to be considerably more reactive than the methyl group on
N5-MTHF. Enzyme-catalyzed donation of the methyl group of SAM to an acceptor
macromolecule yields S-adenosylhomocysteine (SAH), which, in turn, is hydrolyzed to
homocysteine and adenosine. The activated methyl cycle can then be looped back via the
transfer of a methyl group from N5-MTHF to homocysteine, regenerating methionine.

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 September 28.

Kaelin and McKnight

Page 8

SAM and Histone/DNA Methylation

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Histone methylation represents a covalent modification that is of equal importance to
histone acetylation in defining the epigenetic state of chromatin (Kouzarides, 2002; Zhang
and Reinberg, 2001). DNA itself is also subject to methylation on the C5 atom of cytosine
(Bird, 2002). Intense studies reported over the past decade have led to the identification of a
multitude of enzymes that afford the methylation and demethylation of both histone and
DNA substrates. Both histone and DNA methylation require SAM as the high-energy
methyl donor (Figure 3). Parallel with the aforementioned thinking concerning the
possibility that acetyl-CoA levels might specify epigenetic state, the question can be raised
as to whether ambient levels of intracellular or intranuclear SAM might help drive histone
methylation. The conversion of methionine to SAM is catalyzed in an ATP-dependent
manner by methionine adenosyltransferase (MAT) enzymes (Sakata et al., 1993). A recent
study has given evidence that one of the MAT isoforms, MATII , associates with a genespecific transcription factor designated MafK. The latter protein is a small bZip transcription
factor that, depending upon its heterodimeric partner, can either repress or activate gene
expression (Hintze et al., 2007; Igarashi and Sun, 2006; Muto et al., 1998; Ochiai et al.,
2006; Zhang et al., 2006). Affinity chromatography experiments employing a tagged version
of the MafK protein led to the discovery of its interaction with MATII , raising the
possibility that the MafK transcription factor might recruit this enzyme directly to its target
genes (Katoh et al., 2011). Cytological experiments revealed the nuclear localization of the
MATII enzyme, and the results of a variety of molecular biological experiments were
interpreted to indicate that the association of the MATII methyltransferase enzyme with
MafK target genes may be required for transcriptional repression. If correct, these
observations offer the possibility that a localized increase in the production of SAM might
help establish the epigenetic state of cells.
Threonine Dehydrogenase and SAM

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Related interpretations have evolved from studies of mouse ESCs. As mentioned earlier in
this review, mouse ESCs express exceptionally high levels of the TDH enzyme, which
catabolizes threonine into glycine and acetyl-CoA (Figure 4). When ESCs are exposed to a
selective chemical inhibitor of the TDH enzyme, intracellular levels of acetyl-CoA drop
significantly (Alexander et al., 2011). Simultaneous increases in the intracellular abundance
of threonine and 5-aminoimidazole-4-carboxamide ribonucleotide (AICAR) were observed
upon TDH inhibition in ESCs. The increase in threonine can logically be attributed to
diminution in the activity of the enzyme that degrades it. Increases in AICAR, a biosynthetic
intermediate that awaits N5-MTHF-mediated one-carbon donation to continue along the
pathway of purine biosynthesis, could likewise be attributed to attenuation in the production
of mitochondrial glycine. The latter catabolite of TDH-mediated degradation of threonine is
known to feed the mitochondrial glycine cleavage enzyme complex responsible for
converting tetrahydrofolate to N5-MTHF (Figure 4). Not surprisingly, chemical inhibition of
the TDH enzyme in mouse ESCs causes a precipitous drop in the level of intracellular N5MTHF (Alexander et al., 2011). Having observed reduced levels of N5-MTHF and increased
levels of the AICAR intermediate in purine biosynthesis upon chemical inhibition of the
TDH enzyme, it was straightforward to predict that catabolism of threonine is vitally
important for ESCs to biosynthesize the required building blocks for DNA synthesis. Given
that the cell division cycle for mouse ESCs (4–5 hr in length) is more rapid than even the
fastest growing of cultured cancer cell lines, it may reasonably be concluded that these cells
require the specialized features of the TDH catabolic pathway to convert threonine into both
acetyl-CoA and the glycine-dependent methylation capacity essential for the biosynthesis of
nucleotides. Perplexingly, unique among all primates, mammals, and— perhaps—all
metazoan species, humans do not encode a functional TDH enzyme (Edgar, 2002). As such,

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 September 28.

Kaelin and McKnight

Page 9

the unique metabolic properties engendered by copious expression of the TDH enzyme in
mouse ESCs cannot apply to human stem cells.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

More recent work on mouse ESCs has led to the conclusion that TDH-mediated catabolism
of threonine might also be important for maintaining high levels of SAM (Shyh-Chang et
al., 2013). Knowing that N5-MTHF is required for the regeneration of methionine from
homocysteine, it was logical to predict that intracellular levels of SAM might drop when
ESCs are deprived of threonine.
Intriguingly, threonine restriction was observed to dramatically impede deposition of the
H3K4me2 and H3K4me3 marks on chromatin. These impediments were selective; threonine
deprivation had no effect on the deposition of H3K4me1, H3K9me3, H3K27me3,
H3K36me3, or H3K79me3 marks on histone tails. If correct, these observations offer a
logical interpretation of the connection between nutritional and epigenetic states analogous
to what has been learned from studies of acetyl-CoA levels driving the epigenetic state of
prototrophic yeast cells growing under nutrient-limited conditions (Cai et al., 2011).

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

The H3K4me2 and H3K3me3 marks that disappear when mouse ESCs are deprived of
threonine (Shyh-Chang et al., 2013) are part of a “bivalent” epigenetic state believed to be
uniquely important for keeping the chromatin structure of genes encoding developmentally
important transcription factors in a properly repressed/poised state for subsequent induction
as a function of embryogenesis (Bernstein et al., 2006). It is therefore possible that, by
catabolizing threonine along pathways important for the production of both acetyl-CoA
necessary for histone acetylation and methylation capacity via the generation of N5-MTHF
and SAM, the TDH enzyme may be of fundamental importance in controlling two unique
properties of mouse ESCs—their incredibly rapid rate of cell division and their unique
retention of developmental pluripotency.

FAD and Histone Demethylation
Flavin adenine dinucleotide (FAD) is derived from the vitamin riboflavin (vitamin B2) and
functions as the prosthetic group for certain oxidation-reduction enzymes. Riboflavin is
phosphorylated by riboflavin kinase to generate riboflavin 5 -phosphate (sometimes called
flavin monucleotide or FMN), which is then converted to FAD by FAD synthetase (also
called FMN adenyl-transferase). The former enzyme appears to be rate limiting for FAD
production.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

In a landmark paper, Yang Shi and coworkers showed that LSD1 (also called KDM1A or
AOF2) is a nuclear FAD-dependent enzyme capable of demethylating methylated H3K4
both in vitro and in vivo, thereby establishing that histone methylation is a dynamic,
reversible process (Shi et al., 2004). The chemical reaction catalyzed by LSD1 requires a
protonated lysine epsilon amino group, thereby limiting its activity to monomethylated and
dimethylated H3K4 (Figure 5). LSD1 and its paralog LSD2 (also called KDM1B or AOF1)
can also influence H3K9 methylation and DNA methylation, either due to their participation
in multiprotein complexes that contain additional chromatin-modifying enzymes, including
deacetylases and methyltransferases, or due to indirect effects of H3K4 methylation on
recruitment of such enzymes (Ciccone et al., 2009; Lan et al., 2008; Wang et al., 2009b). It
has also been argued that the reactive oxygen species produced by the LSD1 histone
demethylation reaction can react with neighboring DNA and other macromolecules and
thereby affect transcription (Perillo et al., 2008).
FAD is produced in mitochondria. It has been suggested that the nuclear location of LSD1
might render it particularly sensitive to changes in FAD availability (and the ratio of FAD to
FADH2) arising from the activities of other flavin-linked dehydrogenases and oxidases,
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 September 28.

Kaelin and McKnight

Page 10

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

including those associated with fatty acid -oxidation and the TCA cycle (Hino et al., 2012).
LSD1, in turn, regulates mitochondrial respiration and energy expenditure. Specifically,
LSD1 binds directly to genes such as PPARg coactivator-1 (PGC1 ), PDK4, FATP1, and
ATGL and represses their transcription associated with loss of H3K4 methylation (Hino et
al., 2012).

2-Oxoglutarate-Dependent Dioxygenases
JmjC and TET Demethylases

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

A number of chromatin-modifying enzymes, including the approximately 30 JmjC domaincontaining histone demethylases and the three TET (ten-eleven translocation) proteins, are
2-oxoglutarate-dependent dioxygenases (Loenarz and Schofield, 2011) (Figure 5). The JmjC
histone demethylases, in contrast to LSD proteins, are capable of demethylating
trimethylated lysines and arginines. Different JmjC histone demethylases exhibit preferences
for different histone methylation marks. For example, KDM5A (also called RBP2 or
JARID1A) specifically recognizes methylated H3K4. TET proteins can oxidize 5methylcytosine (5mC) to 5-hydroxymethylcytosine (5hmC), 5-formyl cytosine (5fC), and 5carboxylcytosine (5caC) (He et al., 2011; Ito et al., 2011; Tahiliani et al., 2009). 5hmC in the
nervous system is associated with actively transcribed genes and is recognized by the
histone-reader protein MeCP2, which is mutationally inactivated in the neurological disorder
of Rett syndrome (Mellén et al., 2012). TET-catalyzed oxidation of 5mC followed by
decarboxylation or base excision is strongly suspected of contributing to DNA
demethylation (Cortellino et al., 2011; He et al., 2011; Ito et al., 2011), yet there are
currently conflicting reports regarding the effect of TET inactivation on global DNA
methylation patterns in somatic cells (Figueroa et al., 2010; Ko et al., 2010; Yamazaki et al.,
2012).
Iron and Oxygen
2-oxoglutarate-dependent dioxygenases require oxygen and Fe (II) in addition to 2oxoglutarate (also called -ketoglutarate). The latter metabolite is decarboxylated to
succinate during the oxidation reaction (Figure 5). These enzymes are also sensitive to
reactive oxygen species and their activity is enhanced in the presence of ascorbic acid. These
biochemical attributes render these enzymes potentially susceptible to carcinogenic metals
such as nickel, arsenic, and chromium, which displace iron, contribute to oxidative stress, or
do both (Chervona and Costa, 2012).

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Certain 2-oxoglutarate-dependent dioxygenases, such as the EglN prolyl hydroxylases that
mark the HIF transcription factor for destruction, have O2 Km values at or near atmospheric
oxygen levels and hence their activity is sensitive to changes in oxygen availability within a
physiologically relevant range (Hirsilä et al., 2003). By contrast, the collagen prolyl
hydroxylases have very low O2 Km, presumably so that they can function in environments
such as poorly vascularized wounds (Hirsilä et al., 2003).
The O2 Km values for the JmjC histone demethylases and TET proteins are not known,
although indirect evidence suggests that at least some of the former could be oxygen
sensitive. Specifically, the messenger RNAs (mRNAs) for multiple JmjC histone
demethylase genes, including JMJD1A (an H3K9 demethylase), JMJD2B (an H3K9
demethylase), and JARIDC (an H3K4 demethylase), are induced by hypoxia and HIF,
conceivably to compensate for their diminished catalytic activity under low-oxygen
conditions (Chervona and Costa, 2012; Xia et al., 2009) (Figure 6A). Moreover, increased
H3K4 and H3K9 histone methylation has been documented in cells treated with hypoxia in
vitro (Johnson et al., 2008; Tausendschön et al., 2011; Zhou et al., 2010).

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 September 28.

Kaelin and McKnight

Page 11

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

HIF synthesis is influenced by the PI3K-AKT-mTOR pathway, which senses nutrients such
as glucose and amino acids, while its degradation is under the control of the EglN prolyl
hydroxylases, which respond to changes in oxygen and different Krebs cycle intermediates
(Figure 6A). Therefore, HIF provides another link between metabolism and epigenetics
through its transcriptional regulation of JmjC histone demethylases and other modifiers of
epigenetic state.
2-Oxoglutarate
2-oxoglutarate is produced from isocitrate in the mitochondria by the action of isocitrate
dehydrogenases 2 and 3 (IDH2 and IDH3) in the TCA cycle and can also be generated from
several amino acids including arginine, proline, histidine, and glutamine, which can be
converted to glutamic acid and transaminated to produce 2-oxoglutarate. 2-oxoglutarate
generated in the course of the TCA cycle is converted to succinyl CoA by the action of the
2-oxoglutarate dehydrogenase complex and is also consumed during the conversion of
cysteine and lysine to pyruvate and acetyl-CoA, respectively. 2-oxoglutarate generated in
the mitochondria can enter the cytosol, either as 2-oxoglutarate or after transamination to
produce glutamic acid, via specific transporter proteins such as the malate-2-oxoglutarate
antiporter, which participates in the malate-aspartate shuttle. A third IDH paralog, IDH1,
resides in the cytosol and peroxisomes and provides an alternative source for
nonmitochondrial 2-oxoglutarate.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Intracellular 2-oxoglutarate levels are estimated to be in the low millimolar range, well
above the 2-oxoglutarate Km values of the JmjC histone demethylases and TET proteins
determined to date (Chowdhury et al., 2011; Pritchard, 1995). A caveat, however, is that
such Km values are typically determined under idealized in vitro conditions using purified
enzymes in the absence of endogenous inhibitory molecules such as fumarate, succinate, and
reactive oxygen species. In this regard, intracellular fumarate and succinate concentrations
are estimated to be in the high micromolar and low millimolar range, respectively (Johnson
et al., 2008). In model systems, many metabolic enzymes display Km values in vivo that are
higher than their corresponding in vitro values and certainly closer to the concentrations of
their cosubstrates (Bennett et al., 2009; Yuan et al., 2009). This presumably allows such
enzymes to respond to changes in the concentrations of available agonists and antagonists.
Moreover, the concentrations of 2-oxoglutarate in specific subcellular compartments such as
the nucleus are not known, nor is it known how much 2-oxoglutarate is free versus tightly
bound to other proteins. It thus remains possible, but not proven, that JmjC proteins and
TET proteins can respond under physiological conditions to changes in agonists such as 2oxoglutarate or antagonists such as succinate and fumarate. The functions of these proteins
do, however, appear to be deregulated as a result of altered metabolism under the
pathological conditions found in the specific cancers described below.

SDH, FH, and IDH Mutations and Cancer
Inactivating mutations affecting the mitochondrial succinate dehydrogenase (SDH) complex
subunits and fumarate hydratase (FH) have been identified in cancers, particularly in
familial paragangliomas and papillary renal cancers, respectively (Kaelin, 2009). These
mutations lead to the marked accumulation of succinate and fumarate, respectively (Figure
6B). Somatic mutations affecting cytosolic IDH1 and mitochondrial IDH2 have been
identified in gliomas, acute myelogenous leukemia, chondrosarcomas, and
cholangiosarcomas. Somatic mosaicism for such mutations causes Ollier Disease syndrome
and Maffucci syndrome, which are characterized by the development of endochondromas
and spindle cell hemangiomas (Amary et al., 2011; Pansuriya et al., 2011). Tumorassociated IDH mutations unmask a latent ability of these enzymes to produce the R

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 September 28.

Kaelin and McKnight

Page 12

enantiomer of 2-hydroxyglutarate, which accumulates to low millimolar levels in IDH
mutant tumors (Dang et al., 2009; Gross et al., 2010; Ward et al., 2010).

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

R-2HG, succinate, and fumarate are all capable of inhibiting multiple 2-oxoglutaratedependent dioxygenases, including the JmjC histone demethylases and TET proteins, when
present at sufficiently high concentrations (Figure 6B) (Cervera et al., 2009; Chowdhury et
al., 2011; Figueroa et al., 2010; Koivunen et al., 2012; Lu et al., 2012; Smith et al., 2007;
Turcan et al., 2012; Xiao et al., 2012; Xu et al., 2011). The challenge for the field is to
determine which of these enzymes are actually inhibited by these metabolites in vivo in
tumors bearing the appropriate mutations and which of these enzymes are causally linked to
the transformed phenotype. For example, the HIF1 transcription factor accumulates in
SDH and FH mutant tumors, presumably due to inhibition of the EglN prolyl hydroxylases
(Dahia et al., 2005; Isaacs et al., 2005; Pollard et al., 2005, 2007; Selak et al., 2005).
Moreover, it is plausible that HIF1 promotes the formation of such tumors based on its
repertoire of downstream targets. Deletion of HIF1 , however, worsened the pathological
changes observed in mice engineered to lack FH, suggesting that it normally constrains,
rather than promotes, the emergence of FH-defective tumors (Adam et al., 2011).

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

A number of 2-oxoglutarate-dependent enzymes that act on chromatin are themselves targets
of inactivating mutations in cancer, including the UTX H3K27 demethylase (also called
KDM6A), JARID1C H3K4 demethylase (KDM5C), and TET2, making them attractive
candidates for pathogenically relevant inhibition by succinate, fumarate, and R-2HG (AbdelWahab et al., 2009; Dalgliesh et al., 2010; Tefferi et al., 2009; van Haaften et al., 2009). In
this regard, TET2 and IDH mutations are both found in acute myelogenous leukemia and are
mutually exclusive, consistent with the idea that R-2HG produced by mutant IDH provides
an alterative means of inactivating TET2 (Figueroa et al., 2010). Moreover, IDH mutant
tumors have been reported to display DNA hypermethylation changes consistent with TET2
inactivation. In addition, TET2 inactivation is sufficient to promote hematopoietic stem cell
self-renewal and to block differentiation (Figueroa et al., 2010; Li et al., 2011; MoranCrusio et al., 2011; Noushmehr et al., 2010; Turcan et al., 2012; Losman et al., 2013).
Therefore, inactivation of TET2 probably contributes to leukemic transformation at the
hands of mutant IDH and the R-2HG “oncometabolite” it produces. Interestingly, R-2HG is
sufficient to promote cytokine independence and block differentiation of hematopoietic cells
in vitro and these effects are fairly rapidly reversed upon R-2HG withdrawal (Losman et al.,
2013; K. Yen, personal communication). This suggests either that these phenotypes are not
due to epigenetic targets of R-2HG or that R-2HG-induced epigenetic changes are
surprisingly dynamic.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

In summary, SDH, FH, and IDH mutations cause the accumulation of succinate, fumarate,
and R-2HG, respectively. These metabolites appear to cause cancer by affecting the
behavior of various 2-oxoglutarate-dependent dioxygenases, including dioxygenases linked
to DNA and histone methylation, and therefore have the potential to alter the epigenome.

Nutrition, Epigenetics, and Disease
Altered epigenetics is believed to play a part in a variety of diseases in addition to cancer,
including diabetes, obesity, dyslipidemia, hypertension, and neurodegeneration. The
biochemical considerations outlined herein provide a conceptual framework for
understanding how environmental changes, including changes in nutrition, could affect
epigenetics and therefore diseases where epigenetic alterations play a role.
In this regard, particular attention has been paid to the influence of diet on one-carbon
metabolism, which plays an important role in DNA and histone methylation and in risk of
disease. Studies in rodents and sheep have confirmed that the availability of nutrients
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 September 28.

Kaelin and McKnight

Page 13

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

required for one-carbon metabolism (for example, folate, choline, methionine, and betaine,
as well as selected B vitamins) at the time of conception and during pregnancy can induce
epigenetically driven phenotypes in their offspring (Dolinoy et al., 2007; Sinclair et al.,
2007; Waterland et al., 2006; Wolff et al., 1998). There is also evidence that changes in
glucose and glucose metabolism can leave lasting epigenetic marks (Park et al., 2012; Pirola
et al., 2010).
Observational studies in humans are also consistent with a possible role of nutrition in
epigenetics and disease. For example, studies of individuals conceived during famine
conditions have revealed decreased DNA methylation of specific loci, such as the IGF2
gene, associated with an increased risk of obesity, dyslipidemia, and insulin resistance later
in life (Dominguez-Salas et al., 2012). Genetic variation in a number of genes linked to onecarbon metabolism, including methylenetetrahydrofolate dehydrogenase 1, FTHF
dehydrogenase, 5–10 methylene-THF reductase, methionine synthase, and glycine-Nmethyltransferase, has been linked to a variety of disease phenotypes including cancer and
developmental defects (Stover, 2011).

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Biomarkers or dietary histories indicative of nutritional deficiencies associated with defects
in one-carbon metabolism (for example, folate deficiency) have frequently been associated
with an increased risk of cancer in epidemiological studies. Disappointingly, however,
intervention trials have failed to demonstrate a reduction of cancer risk in individuals
randomized to receive folic acid supplements compared to controls (Andreeva et al., 2012;
Cole et al., 2007; Song et al., 2012; Zhang et al., 2008). This might suggest that folate
deficiency correlates with, but does not cause, cancer or that folate is important during an
early time window, perhaps occurring at an early age and prior to or during tumor initiation,
but not thereafter. In this regard, animal studies suggest that folate might actually increase
cancer progression if given to nascent tumors in the colon (Kim, 2004).
There are many bioactive molecules present in food and herbs, in addition to folate, that are
capable of influencing epigenetics and that have been touted as potential chemopreventative
agents. Examples include various B vitamins, retinoic acid, vitamin D3, reservatrol,
genistein and daidzein, epigallocatechin-3-gallate (EGCG), and curcumin (Gerhauser, 2013;
Stefanska et al., 2012). Moving forward, it will be important to determine whether these
agents influence epigenetic enzymes at concentrations that can be achieved in vivo (as
opposed to cell culture studies), to understand their dose-response relationships, and to
determine when, during the lifetime of an individual, they can exert their salutary effects.

Conclusions and Future Questions
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Many epigenetic enzymes are potentially susceptible to changes in the levels of cosubstrates
and cofactors such as oxygen, ATP, acetyl-CoA, MTHF, S-adenosylmethionine, NAD,
FAD, and 2-oxoglutarate and are hence poised to respond to changes in nutrient intake and
metabolism. We need to learn more, however, about how much the levels of some of these
cosubstrates and cofactors can vary in space (for example, in different cellular
subcompartments and in different tissues) and how much they can fluctuate over time (for
example, in response to changes in nutrition or as a function of age). If they do not vary
significantly, how are they sensed and how are they buffered? If they do vary significantly,
do they actually become limiting for specific epigenetic enzymes in vivo? If so, does this
contribute to disease?
There is increasing evidence that early exposures, including intrauterine exposures, can lead
to lasting epigenetic changes and that epigenetic differences can influence many phenotypes,
including the risk of disease. Among the relevant exposures are exposures related to

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 September 28.

Kaelin and McKnight

Page 14

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

nutrition. This has led to the hypothesis that “we are what we eat but also what our parents
ate” (Dominguez-Salas et al., 2012). We need better biomarkers for assessing variability in
nutrition and metabolism in the population and its effects on epigenetics. From a public
health perspective we need to better understand which alterations in metabolism and
epigenetics cause, rather than correlate with, disease and when—and how—it might be
possible to intervene.

Acknowledgments
The authors apologize to colleagues whose work was not cited due to space limitations or our oversight. Please
bring errors and egregious omissions to our attention. S.M. is the founder and chairman of the scientific advisory
board of Peloton Therapeutics. In these roles, S.M. has received compensation in the form of both consulting fees
and stock equity in the company. W.K. owns equity in, and consults for, Agios, Fibrogen, Lilly, Nextech, Peloton,
and Tracon.

REFERENCES

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Abdel-Wahab O, Mullally A, Hedvat C, Garcia-Manero G, Patel J, Wadleigh M, Malinge S, Yao J,
Kilpivaara O, Bhat R, et al. Genetic characterization of TET1, TET2, and TET3 alterations in
myeloid malignancies. Blood. 2009; 114:144–147. [PubMed: 19420352]
Adam J, Hatipoglu E, O’Flaherty L, Ternette N, Sahgal N, Lockstone H, Baban D, Nye E, Stamp GW,
Wolhuter K, et al. Renal cyst formation in Fh1-deficient mice is independent of the Hif/Phd
pathway: roles for fumarate in KEAP1 succination and Nrf2 signaling. Cancer Cell. 2011; 20:524–
537. [PubMed: 22014577]
Alexander PB, Wang J, McKnight SL. Targeted killing of a mammalian cell based upon its specialized
metabolic state. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 2011; 108:15828–15833. [PubMed: 21896756]
Amary MF, Damato S, Halai D, Eskandarpour M, Berisha F, Bonar F, McCarthy S, Fantin VR, Straley
KS, Lobo S, et al. Ollier disease and Maffucci syndrome are caused by somatic mosaic mutations of
IDH1 and IDH2. Nat. Genet. 2011; 43:1262–1265. [PubMed: 22057236]
Andreeva VA, Touvier M, Kesse-Guyot E, Julia C, Galan P, Hercberg S. B vitamin and/or u-3 fatty
acid supplementation and cancer: ancillary findings from the supplementation with folate, vitamins
B6 and B12, and/or omega-3 fatty acids (SU.FOL.OM3) randomized trial. Arch. Intern. Med. 2012;
172:540–547. [PubMed: 22331983]
Bennett BD, Kimball EH, Gao M, Osterhout R, Van Dien SJ, Rabinowitz JD. Absolute metabolite
concentrations and implied enzyme active site occupancyinEscherichia coli. Nat. Chem. Biol. 2009;
5:593–599. [PubMed: 19561621]
Bernstein BE, Mikkelsen TS, Xie X, Kamal M, Huebert DJ, Cuff J, Fry B, Meissner A, Wernig M,
Plath K, et al. A bivalent chromatin structure marks key developmental genes in embryonic stem
cells. Cell. 2006; 125:315–326. [PubMed: 16630819]
Bird A. DNA methylation patterns and epigenetic memory. Genes Dev. 2002; 16:6–21. [PubMed:
11782440]
Cai L, Tu BP. On acetyl-CoA as a gauge of cellular metabolic state. Cold Spring Harb. Symp. Quant.
Biol. 2011; 76:195–202. [PubMed: 21900151]
Cai L, Tu BP. Driving the cell cycle through metabolism. Annu. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol. 2012; 28:59–87.
[PubMed: 22578140]
Cai L, Sutter BM, Li B, Tu BP. Acetyl-CoA induces cell growth and proliferation by promoting the
acetylation of histones at growth genes. Mol. Cell. 2011; 42:426–437. [PubMed: 21596309]
Candido EP, Reeves R, Davie JR. Sodium butyrate inhibits histone deacetylation in cultured cells.
Cell. 1978; 14:105–113. [PubMed: 667927]
Cantó C, Auwerx J. NAD+ as a signaling molecule modulating metabolism. Cold Spring Harb. Symp.
Quant. Biol. 2011; 76:291–298. [PubMed: 22345172]
Cervera AM, Bayley JP, Devilee P, McCreath KJ. Inhibition of succinate dehydrogenase dysregulates
histone modification in mammalian cells. Mol. Cancer. 2009; 8:89. [PubMed: 19849834]
Chervona Y, Costa M. The control of histone methylation and gene expression by oxidative stress,
hypoxia, and metals. Free Radic. Biol. Med. 2012; 53:1041–1047. [PubMed: 22841757]
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 September 28.

Kaelin and McKnight

Page 15

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Chowdhury R, Yeoh KK, Tian YM, Hillringhaus L, Bagg EA, Rose NR, Leung IK, Li XS, Woon EC,
Yang M, et al. The oncometabolite 2-hydroxyglutarate inhibits histone lysine demethylases.
EMBO Rep. 2011; 12:463–469. [PubMed: 21460794]
Ciccone DN, Su H, Hevi S, Gay F, Lei H, Bajko J, Xu G, Li E, Chen T. KDM1B is a histone H3K4
demethylase required to establish maternal genomic imprints. Nature. 2009; 461:415–418.
[PubMed: 19727073]
Cole BF, Baron JA, Sandler RS, Haile RW, Ahnen DJ, Bresalier RS, McKeown-Eyssen G, Summers
RW, Rothstein RI, Burke CA, et al. Polyp Prevention Study Group. Folic acid for the prevention
of colorectal adenomas: a randomized clinical trial. JAMA. 2007; 297:2351–2359. [PubMed:
17551129]
Cortellino S, Xu J, Sannai M, Moore R, Caretti E, Cigliano A, Le Coz M, Devarajan K, Wessels A,
Soprano D, et al. Thymine DNA glycosylase is essential for active DNA demethylation by linked
deamination-base excision repair. Cell. 2011; 146:67–79. [PubMed: 21722948]
Dahia PL, Ross KN, Wright ME, Hayashida CY, Santagata S, Barontini M, Kung AL, Sanso G,
Powers JF, Tischler AS, et al. A HIF1alpha regulatory loop links hypoxia and mitochondrial
signals in pheochromocytomas. PLoS Genet. 2005; 1:72–80. [PubMed: 16103922]
Dalgliesh GL, Furge K, Greenman C, Chen L, Bignell G, Butler A, Davies H, Edkins S, Hardy C,
Latimer C, et al. Systematic sequencing of renal carcinoma reveals inactivation of histone
modifying genes. Nature. 2010; 463:360–363. [PubMed: 20054297]
Dang L, White DW, Gross S, Bennett BD, Bittinger MA, Driggers EM, Fantin VR, Jang HG, Jin S,
Keenan MC, et al. Cancer-associated IDH1 mutations produce 2-hydroxyglutarate. Nature. 2009;
462:739–744. [PubMed: 19935646]
Dawson MA, Kouzarides T. Cancer epigenetics: from mechanism to therapy. Cell. 2012; 150:12–27.
[PubMed: 22770212]
Denu JM. The Sir 2 family of protein deacetylases. Curr. Opin. Chem. Biol. 2005; 9:431–440.
[PubMed: 16122969]
Dolinoy DC, Huang D, Jirtle RL. Maternal nutrient supplementation counteracts bisphenol A-induced
DNA hypomethylation in early development. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 2007; 104:13056–
13061. [PubMed: 17670942]
Dominguez-Salas P, Cox SE, Prentice AM, Hennig BJ, Moore SE. Maternal nutritional status, C(1)
metabolism and offspring DNA methylation: a review of current evidence in human subjects.
Proc. Nutr. Soc. 2012; 71:154–165. [PubMed: 22124338]
Edgar AJ. The human L-threonine 3-dehydrogenase gene is an expressed pseudogene. BMC Genet.
2002; 3:18. [PubMed: 12361482]
Evans C, Bogan KL, Song P, Burant CF, Kennedy RT, Brenner C. NAD+ metabolite levels as a
function of vitamins and calorie restriction: evidence for different mechanisms of longevity. BMC
Chem. Biol. 2010; 10:2. [PubMed: 20175898]
Feldman JL, Dittenhafer-Reed KE, Denu JM. Sirtuin catalysis and regulation. J. Biol. Chem. 2012;
287:42419–42427. [PubMed: 23086947]
Figueroa ME, Abdel-Wahab O, Lu C, Ward PS, Patel J, Shih A, Li Y, Bhagwat N, Vasanthakumar A,
Fernandez HF, et al. Leukemic IDH1 and IDH2 mutations result in a hypermethylation phenotype,
disrupt TET2 function, and impair hematopoietic differentiation. Cancer Cell. 2010; 18:553–567.
[PubMed: 21130701]
Finkel T, Deng CX, Mostoslavsky R. Recent progress in the biology and physiology of sirtuins.
Nature. 2009; 460:587–591. [PubMed: 19641587]
Gerhauser C. Cancer chemoprevention and nutriepigenetics: state of the art and future challenges. Top.
Curr. Chem. 2013; 329:73–132. [PubMed: 22955508]
Gross S, Cairns RA, Minden MD, Driggers EM, Bittinger MA, Jang HG, Sasaki M, Jin S, Schenkein
DP, Su SM, et al. Cancer-associated metabolite 2-hydroxyglutarate accumulates in acute
myelogenous leukemia with isocitrate dehydrogenase 1 and 2 mutations. J. Exp. Med. 2010;
207:339–344. [PubMed: 20142433]
Guarente L. Franklin H. Epstein Lecture: Sirtuins, aging, and medicine. N. Engl. J. Med. 2011a;
364:2235–2244. [PubMed: 21651395]
Guarente L. Sirtuins, aging, and metabolism. Cold Spring Harb. Symp. Quant. Biol. 2011b; 76:81–90.

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 September 28.

Kaelin and McKnight

Page 16

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Haberland M, Montgomery RL, Olson EN. The many roles of histone deacetylases in development
and physiology: implications for disease and therapy. Nat. Rev. Genet. 2009; 10:32–42. [PubMed:
19065135]
Haigis MC, Sinclair DA. Mammalian sirtuins: biological insights and disease relevance. Annu. Rev.
Pathol. 2010; 5:253–295. [PubMed: 20078221]
Hallows WC, Lee S, Denu JM. Sirtuins deacetylate and activate mammalian acetyl-CoA synthetases.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 2006; 103:10230–10235. [PubMed: 16790548]
Hardie DG. Adenosine monophosphate-activated protein kinase: a central regulator of metabolism
with roles in diabetes, cancer, and viral infection. Cold Spring Harb. Symp. Quant. Biol. 2011;
76:155–164. [PubMed: 22071265]
Hassa PO, Haenni SS, Elser M, Hottiger MO. Nuclear ADP-ribosylation reactions in mammalian cells:
where are we today and where are we going? Microbiol. Mol. Biol. Rev. 2006; 70:789–829.
[PubMed: 16959969]
He YF, Li BZ, Li Z, Liu P, Wang Y, Tang Q, Ding J, Jia Y, Chen Z, Li L, et al. Tet-mediated
formation of 5-carboxylcytosine and its excision by TDG in mammalian DNA. Science. 2011;
333:1303–1307. [PubMed: 21817016]
Hino S, Sakamoto A, Nagaoka K, Anan K, Wang Y, Mimasu S, Ume-hara T, Yokoyama S, Kosai K,
Nakao M. FAD-dependent lysine-specific demethylase-1 regulates cellular energy expenditure.
Nat. Commun. 2012; 3:758. [PubMed: 22453831]
Hintze KJ, Katoh Y, Igarashi K, Theil EC. Bach1 repression of ferritin and thioredoxin reductase1 is
heme-sensitive in cells and in vitro and coordinates expression with heme oxygenase1, betaglobin, and NADP(H) quinone (oxido) reductase1. J. Biol. Chem. 2007; 282:34365–34371.
[PubMed: 17901053]
Hirschey MD, Shimazu T, Huang JY, Schwer B, Verdin E. SIRT3 regulates mitochondrial protein
acetylation and intermediary metabolism. Cold Spring Harb. Symp. Quant. Biol. 2011; 76:267–
277. [PubMed: 22114326]
Hirsilä M, Koivunen P, Günzler V, Kivirikko KI, Myllyharju J. Characterization of the human prolyl
4-hydroxylases that modify the hypoxia-inducible factor. J. Biol. Chem. 2003; 278:30772–30780.
[PubMed: 12788921]
Igarashi K, Sun J. The heme-Bach1 pathway in the regulation of oxidative stress response and
erythroid differentiation. Antioxid. Redox Signal. 2006; 8:107–118. [PubMed: 16487043]
Isaacs JS, Jung YJ, Mole DR, Lee S, Torres-Cabala C, Chung YL, Merino M, Trepel J, Zbar B, Toro J,
et al. HIF overexpression correlates with biallelic loss of fumarate hydratase in renal cancer: novel
role of fumarate in regulation of HIF stability. Cancer Cell. 2005; 8:143–153. [PubMed:
16098467]
Ito S, Shen L, Dai Q, Wu SC, Collins LB, Swenberg JA, He C, Zhang Y. Tet proteins can convert 5methylcytosine to 5-formylcytosine and 5-carboxylcytosine. Science. 2011; 333:1300–1303.
[PubMed: 21778364]
Ji H, Wu G, Zhan X, Nolan A, Koh C, De Marzo A, Doan HM, Fan J, Cheadle C, Fallahi M, et al.
Cell-type independent MYC target genes reveal a primordial signature involved in biomass
accumulation. PLoS ONE. 2011; 6:e26057. [PubMed: 22039435]
Johnson AB, Denko N, Barton MC. Hypoxia induces a novel signature of chromatin modifications and
global repression of transcription. Mutat. Res. 2008; 640:174–179. [PubMed: 18294659]
Jorgensen P, Nishikawa JL, Breitkreutz BJ, Tyers M. Systematic identification of pathways that couple
cell growth and division in yeast. Science. 2002; 297:395–400. [PubMed: 12089449]
Kaelin WG Jr. SDH5 mutations and familial paraganglioma: somewhere Warburg is smiling. Cancer
Cell. 2009; 16:180–182. [PubMed: 19732718]
Katoh Y, Ikura T, Hoshikawa Y, Tashiro S, Ito T, Ohta M, Kera Y, Noda T, Igarashi K. Methionine
adenosyltransferase II serves as a transcriptional corepressor of Maf oncoprotein. Mol. Cell. 2011;
41:554–566. [PubMed: 21362551]
Kim YI. Will mandatory folic acid fortification prevent or promote cancer? Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 2004;
80:1123–1128. [PubMed: 15531657]
Kim HS, Patel K, Muldoon-Jacobs K, Bisht KS, Aykin-Burns N, Pennington JD, van der Meer R,
Nguyen P, Savage J, Owens KM, et al. SIRT3 is a mitochondria-localized tumor suppressor

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 September 28.

Kaelin and McKnight

Page 17

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

required for maintenance of mitochondrial integrity and metabolism during stress. Cancer Cell.
2010; 17:41–52. [PubMed: 20129246]
Klevecz RR, Bolen J, Forrest G, Murray DB. A genomewide oscillation in transcription gates DNA
replication and cell cycle. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 2004; 101:1200–1205. [PubMed:
14734811]
Ko M, Huang Y, Jankowska AM, Pape UJ, Tahiliani M, Bandukwala HS, An J, Lamperti ED, Koh
KP, Ganetzky R, et al. Impaired hydroxylation of 5-methylcytosine in myeloid cancers with
mutant TET2. Nature. 2010; 468:839–843. [PubMed: 21057493]
Koivunen P, Lee S, Duncan CG, Lopez G, Lu G, Ramkissoon S, Losman JA, Joensuu P, Bergmann U,
Gross S, et al. Transformation by the (R)-enantiomer of 2-hydroxyglutarate linked to EGLN
activation. Nature. 2012; 483:484–488. [PubMed: 22343896]
Kouzarides T. Histone methylation in transcriptional control. Curr. Opin. Genet. Dev. 2002; 12:198–
209. [PubMed: 11893494]
Krebs, HA.; Veech, R. Pyridine nucleotide interrelations in The Energy Level and Metabolic Control
in Mitochondria. Papa, S.; Tager, J.; Quagliariello, E.; Slater, E., editors. Bari, Italy: Adriatica
Editrice; 1969. p. 329-382.
Lan F, Nottke AC, Shi Y. Mechanisms involved in the regulation of histone lysine demethylases. Curr.
Opin. Cell Biol. 2008; 20:316–325. [PubMed: 18440794]
Langer MR, Fry CJ, Peterson CL, Denu JM. Modulating acetyl-CoA binding in the GCN5 family of
histone acetyltransferases. J. Biol. Chem. 2002; 277:27337–27344. [PubMed: 11994311]
Lee KK, Workman JL. Histone acetyltransferase complexes: one size doesn’t fit all. Nat. Rev. Mol.
Cell Biol. 2007; 8:284–295. [PubMed: 17380162]
Lerin C, Rodgers JT, Kalume DE, Kim SH, Pandey A, Puigserver P. GCN5 acetyltransferase complex
controls glucose metabolism through transcriptional repression of PGC-1alpha. Cell Metab. 2006;
3:429–438. [PubMed: 16753578]
Li Z, Cai X, Cai CL, Wang J, Zhang W, Petersen BE, Yang FC, Xu M. Deletion of Tet2 in mice leads
to dysregulated hematopoietic stem cells and subsequent development of myeloid malignancies.
Blood. 2011; 118:4509–4518. [PubMed: 21803851]
Lipmann F, Kaplan NO. A common factor in the enzymatic acetylation of sulfanilamide and of
choline. J. Biol. Chem. 1946; 162:743–744.
Loenarz C, Schofield CJ. Physiological and biochemical aspects of hydroxylations and demethylations
catalyzed by human 2-oxoglutarate oxygenases. Trends Biochem. Sci. 2011; 36:7–18. [PubMed:
20728359]
Losman JA, Looper R, Koivunen P, Lee S, Schneider-Kramann R, Cowley G, Root DE, Ebert B,
Kaelin WG. (R)-2-Hydroxyglutarate is sufficient to reversibly promote leukemogenesis and its
effect are reversible. Science. 2013
Lu C, Thompson CB. Metabolic regulation of epigenetics. Cell Metab. 2012; 16:9–17. [PubMed:
22768835]
Lu C, Ward PS, Kapoor GS, Rohle D, Turcan S, Abdel-Wahab O, Edwards CR, Khanin R, Figueroa
ME, Melnick A, et al. IDH mutation impairs histone demethylation and results in a block to cell
differentiation. Nature. 2012; 483:474–478. [PubMed: 22343901]
McMahon SB, Van Buskirk HA, Dugan KA, Copeland TD, Cole MD. The novel ATM-related protein
TRRAP is an essential cofactor for the c-Myc and E2F oncoproteins. Cell. 1998; 94:363–374.
[PubMed: 9708738]
McMahon SB, Wood MA, Cole MD. The essential cofactor TRRAP recruits the histone
acetyltransferase hGCN5 to c-Myc. Mol. Cell. Biol. 2000; 20:556–562. [PubMed: 10611234]
Mellén M, Ayata P, Dewell S, Kriaucionis S, Heintz N. MeCP2 binds to 5hmC enriched within active
genes and accessible chromatin in the nervous system. Cell. 2012; 151:1417–1430. [PubMed:
23260135]
Moran-Crusio K, Reavie L, Shih A, Abdel-Wahab O, Ndiaye-Lobry D, Lobry C, Figueroa ME,
Vasanthakumar A, Patel J, Zhao X, et al. Tet2 loss leads to increased hematopoietic stem cell selfrenewal and myeloid transformation. Cancer Cell. 2011; 20:11–24. [PubMed: 21723200]
Muto A, Hoshino H, Madisen L, Yanai N, Obinata M, Karasuyama H, Hayashi N, Nakauchi H,
Yamamoto M, Groudine M, Igarashi K. Identification of Bach2 as a B-cell-specific partner for
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 September 28.

Kaelin and McKnight

Page 18

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

small maf proteins that negatively regulate the immunoglobulin heavy chain gene 3´ enhancer.
EMBO J. 1998; 17:5734–5743. [PubMed: 9755173]
Nakahata Y, Sahar S, Astarita G, Kaluzova M, Sassone-Corsi P. Circadian control of the NAD+
salvage pathway by CLOCK-SIRT1. Science. 2009; 324:654–657. [PubMed: 19286518]
Noushmehr H, Weisenberger DJ, Diefes K, Phillips HS, Pujara K, Berman BP, Pan F, Pelloski CE,
Sulman EP, Bhat KP, et al. Cancer Genome Atlas Research Network. Identification of a CpG
island methylator phenotype that defines a distinct subgroup of glioma. Cancer Cell. 2010;
17:510–522. [PubMed: 20399149]
Ochiai K, Katoh Y, Ikura T, Hoshikawa Y, Noda T, Karasuyama H, Tashiro S, Muto A, Igarashi K.
Plasmacytic transcription factor Blimp-1 is repressed by Bach2 in B cells. J. Biol. Chem. 2006;
281:38226–38234. [PubMed: 17046816]
Pansuriya TC, van Eijk R, d’Adamo P, van Ruler MA, Kuijjer ML, Oosting J, Cleton-Jansen AM, van
Oosterwijk JG, Verbeke SL, Meijer D, et al. Somatic mosaicIDH1 and IDH2 mutations are
associated with enchondroma and spindle cell hemangioma in Ollier disease and Maffucci
syndrome. Nat. Genet. 2011; 43:1256–1261. [PubMed: 22057234]
Park J, Sarode VR, Euhus D, Kittler R, Scherer PE. Neuregulin 1-HER axis as a key mediator of
hyperglycemic memory effects in breast cancer. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 2012; 109:21058–
21063. [PubMed: 23213231]
Perillo B, Ombra MN, Bertoni A, Cuozzo C, Sacchetti S, Sasso A, Chiariotti L, Malorni A,
Abbondanza C, Avvedimento EV. DNA oxidation as triggered by H3K9me2 demethylation drives
estrogen-induced gene expression. Science. 2008; 319:202–206. [PubMed: 18187655]
Pirola L, Balcerczyk A, Okabe J, El-Osta A. Epigenetic phenomena linked to diabetic complications.
Nat. Rev. Endocrinol. 2010; 6:665–675. [PubMed: 21045787]
Pollard PJ, Brière JJ, Alam NA, Barwell J, Barclay E, Wortham NC, Hunt T, Mitchell M, Olpin S,
Moat SJ, et al. Accumulation of Krebs cycle intermediates and over-expression of HIF1alpha in
tumours which result from germline FH and SDH mutations. Hum. Mol. Genet. 2005; 14:2231–
2239. [PubMed: 15987702]
Pollard PJ, Spencer-Dene B, Shukla D, Howarth K, Nye E, El-Bahrawy M, Deheragoda M, Joannou
M, McDonald S, Martin A, et al. Targeted inactivation of fh1 causes proliferative renal cyst
development and activation of the hypoxia pathway. Cancer Cell. 2007; 11:311–319. [PubMed:
17418408]
Pritchard JB. Intracellular alpha-ketoglutarate controls the efficacy of renal organic anion transport. J.
Pharmacol. Exp. Ther. 1995; 274:1278–1284. [PubMed: 7562499]
Ramsey KM, Yoshino J, Brace CS, Abrassart D, Kobayashi Y, Marcheva B, Hong H-K, Chong JL,
Buhr ED, Lee C, et al. Circadian clock feedback cycle through NAMPT-mediated NAD+
biosynthesis. Science. 2009; 324:651–654. [PubMed: 19299583]
Rodgers JT, Lerin C, Haas W, Gygi SP, Spiegelman BM, Puigserver P. Nutrient control of glucose
homeostasis through a complex of PGC-1alpha and SIRT1. Nature. 2005; 434:113–118. [PubMed:
15744310]
Rowicka M, Kudlicki A, Tu BP, Otwinowski Z. High-resolution timing of cell cycle-regulated gene
expression. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 2007; 104:16892–16897. [PubMed: 17827275]
Sakata SF, Shelly LL, Ruppert S, Schutz G, Chou JY. Cloning and expression of murine Sadenosylmethionine synthetase. J. Biol. Chem. 1993; 268:13978–13986. [PubMed: 8314764]
Sauve AA, Wolberger C, Schramm VL, Boeke JD. The biochemistry of sirtuins. Annu. Rev. Biochem.
2006; 75:435–465. [PubMed: 16756498]
Schwer B, Bunkenborg J, Verdin RO, Andersen JS, Verdin E. Reversible lysine acetylation controls
the activity of the mitochondrial enzyme acetyl-CoA synthetase 2. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA.
2006; 103:10224–10229. [PubMed: 16788062]
Sebastián C, Zwaans BM, Silberman DM, Gymrek M, Goren A, Zhong L, Ram O, Truelove J,
Guimaraes AR, Toiber D, et al. The histone deacetylase SIRT6 is a tumor suppressor that controls
cancer metabolism. Cell. 2012; 151:1185–1199. [PubMed: 23217706]
Selak MA, Armour SM, MacKenzie ED, Boulahbel H, Watson DG, Mansfield KD, Pan Y, Simon
MC, Thompson CB, Gottlieb E. Succinate links TCA cycle dysfunction to oncogenesis by
inhibiting HIF-alpha prolyl hydroxylase. Cancer Cell. 2005; 7:77–85. [PubMed: 15652751]

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 September 28.

Kaelin and McKnight

Page 19

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Shahbazian MD, Grunstein M. Functions of site-specific histone acetylation and deacetylation. Annu.
Rev. Biochem. 2007; 76:75–100. [PubMed: 17362198]
Shi Y, Lan F, Matson C, Mulligan P, Whetstine JR, Cole PA, Casero RA, Shi Y. Histone
demethylation mediated by the nuclear amine oxidase homolog LSD1. Cell. 2004; 119:941–953.
[PubMed: 15620353]
Shimazu T, Hirschey MD, Newman J, He W, Shirakawa K, Le Moan N, Grueter CA, Lim H, Saunders
LR, Stevens RD, et al. Suppression of oxidative stress by -hydroxybutyrate, an endogenous
histone deacetylase inhibitor. Science. 2013; 339:211–214. [PubMed: 23223453]
Shyh-Chang N, Locasale JW, Lyssiotis CA, Zheng Y, Teo RY, Ratanasirintrawoot S, Zhang J, Onder
T, Unternaehrer JJ, Zhu H, et al. Influence of threonine metabolism on S-adenosylmethionine and
histone methylation. Science. 2013; 339:222–226. [PubMed: 23118012]
Sinclair KD, Allegrucci C, Singh R, Gardner DS, Sebastian S, Bispham J, Thurston A, Huntley JF,
Rees WD, Maloney CA, et al. DNA methylation, insulin resistance, and blood pressure in
offspring determined by maternal periconceptional B vitamin and methionine status. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. USA. 2007; 104:19351–19356. [PubMed: 18042717]
Smith EH, Janknecht R, Maher LJ 3rd. Succinate inhibition of alpha-ketoglutarate-dependent enzymes
in a yeast model of paraganglioma. Hum. Mol. Genet. 2007; 16:3136–3148. [PubMed: 17884808]
Song Y, Manson JE, Lee IM, Cook NR, Paul L, Selhub J, Giovannucci E, Zhang SM. Effect of
combined folic acid, vitamin B(6), and vitamin B(12) on colorectal adenoma. J. Natl. Cancer
Inst. 2012; 104:1562–1575. [PubMed: 23066166]
Starai VJ, Celic I, Cole RN, Boeke JD, Escalante-Semerena JC. Sir2-dependent activation of acetylCoA synthetase by deacetylation of active lysine. Science. 2002; 298:2390–2392. [PubMed:
12493915]
Stefanska B, Karlic H, Varga F, Fabianowska-Majewska K, Hasl-berger A. Epigenetic mechanisms in
anti-cancer actions of bioactive food components—the implications in cancer prevention. Br. J.
Pharmacol. 2012; 167:279–297. [PubMed: 22536923]
Stover PJ. Polymorphisms in 1-carbon metabolism, epigenetics and folate-related pathologies. J
Nutrigenet Nutrigenomics. 2011; 4:293–305. [PubMed: 22353665]
Tahiliani M, Koh KP, Shen Y, Pastor WA, Bandukwala H, Brudno Y, Agarwal S, Iyer LM, Liu DR,
Aravind L, Rao A. Conversion of 5-methylcytosine to 5-hydroxymethylcytosine in mammalian
DNA by MLL partner TET1. Science. 2009; 324:930–935. [PubMed: 19372391]
Takahashi H, McCaffery JM, Irizarry RA, Boeke JD. Nucleo-cytosolic acetyl-coenzyme a synthetase
is required for histone acetylation and global transcription. Mol. Cell. 2006; 23:207–217.
[PubMed: 16857587]
Tausendschön M, Dehne N, Brüne B. Hypoxia causes epigenetic gene regulation in macrophages by
attenuating Jumonji histone demethylase activity. Cytokine. 2011; 53:256–262. [PubMed:
21131212]
Tefferi A, Lim KH, Levine R. Mutation in TET2 in myeloid cancers. N. Engl. J. Med. 2009;
361:1117–1118. [PubMed: 19741235]
Teperino R, Schoonjans K, Auwerx J. Histone methyl transferases and demethylases; can they link
metabolism and transcription? Cell Metab. 2010; 12:321–327. [PubMed: 20889125]
Tu BP, McKnight SL. Metabolic cycles as an underlying basis of biological oscillations. Nat. Rev.
Mol. Cell Biol. 2006; 7:696–701. [PubMed: 16823381]
Tu BP, McKnight SL. Evidence of carbon monoxide-mediated phase advancement of the yeast
metabolic cycle. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 2009; 106:14293–14296. [PubMed: 19706514]
Tu BP, Kudlicki A, Rowicka M, McKnight SL. Logic of the yeast metabolic cycle: temporal
compartmentalization of cellular processes. Science. 2005; 310:1152–1158. [PubMed:
16254148]
Tu BP, Mohler RE, Liu JC, Dombek KM, Young ET, Synovec RE, McKnight SL. Cyclic changes in
metabolic state during the life of a yeast cell. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 2007; 104:16886–
16891. [PubMed: 17940006]
Turcan S, Rohle D, Goenka A, Walsh LA, Fang F, Yilmaz E, Campos C, Fabius AW, Lu C, Ward PS,
et al. IDH1 mutation is sufficient to establish the glioma hypermethylator phenotype. Nature.
2012; 483:479–483. [PubMed: 22343889]

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 September 28.

Kaelin and McKnight

Page 20

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

van Haaften G, Dalgliesh GL, Davies H, Chen L, Bignell G, Greenman C, Edkins S, Hardy C,
O’Meara S, Teague J, et al. Somatic mutations of the histone H3K27 demethylase gene UTX in
human cancer. Nat. Genet. 2009; 41:521–523. [PubMed: 19330029]
Veech RL, Eggleston LV, Krebs HA. The redox state of free nicotinamide-adenine dinucleotide
phosphate in the cytoplasm of rat liver. Biochem. J. 1969; 115:609–619. [PubMed: 4391039]
Verdin E, Hirschey MD, Finley LW, Haigis MC. Sirtuin regulation of mitochondria: energy
production, apoptosis, and signaling. Trends Biochem. Sci. 2010; 35:669–675. [PubMed:
20863707]
Wang J, Alexander P, Wu L, Hammer R, Cleaver O, McKnight SL. Dependence of mouse embryonic
stem cells on threonine catabolism. Science. 2009a; 325:435–439. [PubMed: 19589965]
Wang J, Hevi S, Kurash JK, Lei H, Gay F, Bajko J, Su H, Sun W, Chang H, Xu G, et al. The lysine
demethylase LSD1 (KDM1) is required for maintenance of global DNA methylation. Nat. Genet.
2009b; 41:125–129. [PubMed: 19098913]
Wang J, Alexander P, McKnight SL. Metabolic specialization of mouse embryonic stem cells. Cold
Spring Harb. Symp. Quant. Biol. 2011; 76:183–193. [PubMed: 22071264]
Ward PS, Patel J, Wise DR, Abdel-Wahab O, Bennett BD, Coller HA, Cross JR, Fantin VR, Hedvat
CV, Perl AE, et al. The common feature of leukemia-associated IDH1 and IDH2 mutations is a
neomorphic enzyme activity converting alpha-ketoglutarate to 2-hydroxyglutarate. Cancer Cell.
2010; 17:225–234. [PubMed: 20171147]
Waterborg JH. Dynamics of histone acetylation in vivo. A function for acetylation turnover? Biochem
Cell Biol. 2002; 80:363–378. [PubMed: 12123289]
Waterland RA, Dolinoy DC, Lin JR, Smith CA, Shi X, Tahiliani KG. Maternal methyl supplements
increase offspring DNA methylation at Axin Fused. Genesis. 2006; 44:401–406. [PubMed:
16868943]
Wellen KE, Hatzivassiliou G, Sachdeva UM, Bui TV, Cross JR, Thompson CB. ATP-citrate lyase
links cellular metabolism to histone acetylation. Science. 2009; 324:1076–1080. [PubMed:
19461003]
Wolff GL, Kodell RL, Moore SR, Cooney CA. Maternal epigenetics and methyl supplements affect
agouti gene expression in Avy/a mice. FASEB J. 1998; 12:949–957. [PubMed: 9707167]
Xia X, Lemieux ME, Li W, Carroll JS, Brown M, Liu XS, Kung AL. Integrative analysis of HIF
binding and transactivation reveals its role in maintaining histone methylation homeostasis. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 2009; 106:4260–4265. [PubMed: 19255431]
Xiao M, Yang H, Xu W, Ma S, Lin H, Zhu H, Liu L, Liu Y, Yang C, Xu Y, et al. Inhibition of -KGdependent histone and DNA demethylases by fumarate and succinate that are accumulated in
mutations of FH and SDH tumor suppressors. Genes Dev. 2012; 26:1326–1338. [PubMed:
22677546]
Xu W, Yang H, Liu Y, Yang Y, Wang P, Kim SH, Ito S, Yang C, Wang P, Xiao MT, et al.
Oncometabolite 2-hydroxyglutarate is a competitive inhibitor of -ketoglutarate-dependent
dioxygenases. Cancer Cell. 2011; 19:17–30. [PubMed: 21251613]
Yamazaki J, Taby R, Vasanthakumar A, Macrae T, Ostler KR, Shen L, Kantarjian HM, Estecio MR,
Jelinek J, Godley LA, Issa JP. Effects of TET2 mutations on DNA methylation in chronic
myelomonocytic leukemia. Epigenetics. 2012; 7:201–207. [PubMed: 22395470]
Yuan J, Doucette CD, Fowler WU, Feng XJ, Piazza M, Rabitz HA, Wingreen NS, Rabinowitz JD.
Metabolomics-driven quantitative analysis of ammonia assimilation in E. coli. Mol. Syst. Biol.
2009; 5:302. [PubMed: 19690571]
Zhang Y, Reinberg D. Transcription regulation by histone methylation: interplay between different
covalent modifications of the core histone tails. Genes Dev. 2001; 15:2343–2360. [PubMed:
11562345]
Zhang J, Ohta T, Maruyama A, Hosoya T, Nishikawa K, Maher JM, Shibahara S, Itoh K, Yamamoto
M. BRG1 interacts with Nrf2 to selectively mediate HO-1 induction in response to oxidative
stress. Mol. Cell. Biol. 2006; 26:7942–7952. [PubMed: 16923960]
Zhang SM, Cook NR, Albert CM, Gaziano JM, Buring JE, Manson JE. Effect of combined folic acid,
vitamin B6, and vitamin B12 on cancer risk in women: a randomized trial. JAMA. 2008;
300:2012–2021. [PubMed: 18984888]

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 September 28.

Kaelin and McKnight

Page 21

Zhou X, Sun H, Chen H, Zavadil J, Kluz T, Arita A, Costa M. Hypoxia induces trimethylated H3
lysine 4 by inhibition of JARID1A demethylase. Cancer Res. 2010; 70:4214–4221. [PubMed:
20406991]

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 September 28.

Kaelin and McKnight

Page 22

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Figure 1. Metabolism and Acetylation/Deacetylation

Histone acetylases use acetyl-CoA (Ac-CoA) as an acetyl donor, whose synthesis requires
coenzyme A (CoA). Ac-CoA canbe regeneratedin chemical reactions involving pyruvate,
citrate, acetate, and various amino acids such as threonine and by fatty acid beta oxidation.
Deacetylation by Sirtuin family histone deacetylases requires NAD+, leading to the
generation of O-acetyl-ADP ribose and nicotinamide (NAM). NAD+ is produced from
NMN (nicotinamide mononucleotide), which can be salvaged from NAM or produced de
novo from tryptophan. For simplicity, enzymes catalyzing the various reactions are not
shown.

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 September 28.

Kaelin and McKnight

Page 23

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Figure 2. Evidence of Transient Acetylation of Histone H3 Only during the Oxidative Phase of
the Yeast Metabolic Cycle

(A) Periodic fluctuation in oxygen levels in a chemostat growing prototrophic yeast. The
yeast metabolic cycle (YMC) is roughly 5 hours in duration and defined by sequentially
repeating oxidative (Ox), reductive building (RB), and reductive charging (RC) metabolic
phases (adapted from Tu et al., 2005).
(B) Quantitative measurement of acetyl-CoA levels over the YMC reveal elevated levels of
the metabolite during the Ox phase of the YMC. Western blot measurements of H3K9
acetylation over the YMC reveal dynamic acetylation temporally correlate with the peak
abundance of acetyl-CoA.
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 September 28.

Kaelin and McKnight

Page 24

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

(C) ChIP-seq analysis of H3K9 acetylation on the promoter of the gene encoding the RPS7B
ribosomal protein reveals modification limited to the Ox phase of the YMC.
(D) Transcript abundance of the RPS7B mRNA peaks during the Ox phase of the YMC
precisely when acetyl-CoA levels are of highest abundance and when the promoter of the
RPS7B gene is modified by H3K9 acetylation.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 September 28.

Kaelin and McKnight

Page 25

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Figure 3. Metabolism and Methyltrans-ferases

DNA and histone methyltransferases use S-adenosylmethionine (SAM), derived from
methionine, as a methyl donor, resulting in the generation of S-adenosylhomocysteine
(SAH). SAH is converted to homocysteine, which is then converted back to methionine in a
vitamin B12-dependent reaction that utilizes carbons derived from either choline or folate.
DHF, dihydrofolate; THF, tetrahydrofolate; 5,10-MTHF, 5,10-methylene THF; CH3,
methyl. Also shown are steps requiring vitamin B6 and B2. For simplicity, enzymes
catalyzing the various reactions are not shown.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 September 28.

Kaelin and McKnight

Page 26

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Figure 4. TDH-Mediated Catabolism of Threonine

Threonine is catabolized to acetyl-CoA and glycine via a two-step process, first involving
the rate-limiting threonine dehydrogenase (TDH) enzyme yielding the short-lived
intermediate 2-amino-3-ketobutyrate. This intermediate is subsequently subject to the 2amino-3-ketobutyrate ligase (KBL) enzyme that, supplemented by coenzyme A (CoA),
yields the final products of the reaction, acetyl-CoA and glycine. Both steps of the catabolic
reaction take place in the mitochondria of eukaryotic cells. The former product, acetylCoA,can be fed into the TCA cycle or used as an anabolic building block for other
metabolites. The latter product, glycine, is used to feed the mitochondrial glycine cleavage
system for the conversion of tetrahydrofolate (THF) into N5, N10-methylenetetrahydrofolate (MTHF). MTHF, in turn, is capable of one-carbon donation in biosynthetic
reactions involving purine and pyrimidine synthesis, as well as the regeneration of
methionine from homocysteine.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 September 28.

Kaelin and McKnight

Page 27

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Figure 5. Histone Demethylase Reactions

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

LSD demethylases oxidize monomethylated and dimethylated histones using FAD (flavin
adenine dinucleotide) as a cofactor. The oxidized methyl group is unstable and, after attack
by water, given off as formaldehyde (HCHO). FAD is derived from FMN (flavin
mononucleotide), which in turn is derived from riboflavin. JmjC demethylases hydroxylate
methylated histones in a reaction coupled to decarboxylation of 2-oxoglutarate to succinate.
2-oxoglutarate (also called -ketoglutarate) can be derived from several sources including
isocitrate and glutamic acid. Spontaneous release of the hydroxylated methyl group results
in demethylation.

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 September 28.

Kaelin and McKnight

Page 28

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Figure 6. Mutant Metabolic Enzymes, Epigenetics, and Cancer

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

(A) The abundance of the HIF transcription factor is regulated by the 2-oxoglutaratedependent EglN dioxygenases, which are sensitive to changes in oxygen and metabolism,
and by the PI3K–AKT-mTOR pathway, which is involved in nutrient sensing and frequently
mutationally activated in cancer. HIF induces the transcription of a number of JmjC histone
demethylases.
(B) Mutational inactivation of the Krebs Cycle Enzymes SDH and FH leads to the
accumulation of succinate and fumarate, respectively, whereas tumor-derived IDH1 and
IDH2 mutants produce high levels of R-2-hydroxyglutarate (R-2HG). Succinate, fumarate,
and R-2HG can inhibit 2-oxoglutarate-dependent dioxy-genases, including JmjC histone
demethylases and TET DNA hydroxylases.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 September 28.

