Oncotarget, Vol. 7, No. 1

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

F-FDG PET imaging for identifying the dynamics of intestinal
disease caused by SFTSV infection in a mouse model
18

Daisuke Hayasaka1,2, Kodai Nishi3, Takeshi Fuchigami4, Kazuya Shiogama5,
Takanori Onouchi5, Satoshi Shimada1,2, Yutaka Tsutsumi5 and Kouichi Morita1,2
1

Department of Virology, Institute of Tropical Medicine, Nagasaki University, Sakamoto, Nagasaki, Japan

2

Leading Graduate School Program, Nagasaki University, Sakamoto, Nagasaki, Japan

3

Department of Radioisotope Medicine, Atomic Bomb Diseases Institute, Nagasaki University, Sakamoto, Nagasaki, Japan

4

Department of Hygienic Chemistry, Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, Nagasaki University, Bunkyo-machi, Nagasaki,
Japan
5

Department of Pathology, Fujita Health University School of Medicine, Dengakugakubo, Kutsukake-cho, Toyoake, Aichi,
Japan

Correspondence to: Daisuke Hayasaka, email: hayasaka@nagasaki-u.ac.jp
Keywords: SFTSV, 18F-FDG PET imaging, mouse model, intestinal disorder, antiserum therapy, Immunology and Microbiology Section, Immune response, Immunity
Received: August 31, 2015	

Accepted: December 05, 2015	

Published: December 17, 2015

Abstract
Severe fever with thrombocytopenia syndrome (SFTS) is an emerging disease
that causes fever, enteritis, thrombocytopenia, and leucopenia and can be fatal
in up to 30% of cases. However, the mechanism of severe disease is not fully
understood. Molecular imaging approaches, such as positron-emission tomography
(PET), are functional in vivo imaging techniques that provide real-time dynamics of
disease progression, assessments of pharmacokinetics, and diagnoses for disease
progression. Molecular imaging also potentially provides useful approaches to explore
the pathogenesis of viral infections. Thus, the purpose of this study was to image the
pathological features of SFTSV infection in vivo by PET imaging. In a mouse model,
we showed that 18F-FDG accumulations clearly identified the intestinal tract site as a
pathological site. We also demonstrated that 18F-FDG PET imaging can assess disease
progression and response to antiserum therapy within the same individual. This is
the first report demonstrating a molecular imaging strategy for SFTSV infection.
Our results provide potentially useful information for preclinical studies such as the
elucidation of the mechanism of SFTSV infection in vivo and the assessment of drugs
for SFTS treatment.

Introduction

treatments or vaccines available. Thus, elucidating the
mechanism of severe disease progression leading to death
is critical to developing efficient vaccines and drugs for
SFTS.
In vivo imaging is a powerful tool that provides
dynamic information on metabolic disorders, disease
progression, and drug intervention. Molecular imaging
technologies, including positron-emission tomography
(PET) and single photon emission computed tomography,
are functional in vivo imaging techniques that can be
combined with structural imaging techniques, such as
computed tomography (CT). In particular, 2-deoxy-2-[18F]
fluoro-D-glucose (18F-FDG) can be used to assess glucose
metabolism and 18F-FDG PET/CT is currently utilized for

Severe fever with thrombocytopenia syndrome
(SFTS) is an emerging disease that was first identified
in China and later in South Korea and Japan [1-4]. The
causative agent, SFTS virus (SFTSV), belongs to the genus
Phlebovirus of the family Bunyaviridae and is categorized
as a BSL-3 pathogen. It has been suggested that SFTSV is
transmitted by Ixoded ticks, and humans and animals are
infected by tick bites [5, 6]. The clinical manifestations
of SFTS include fever, enteritis, thrombocytopenia and
leucopenia. The disease is fatal in up to 30% of cases [13, 7]. However, the mechanism of disease progression is
not fully understood, and there are currently no specific
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

140

Oncotarget

imaging tumor, infection and inflammation in both basic
studies and clinical applications [8-10].
Molecular imaging has been developed and applied
in research for neurology, oncology, cardiovascular
physiology, and immunology. However, molecular
imaging for infectious diseases caused by highly
pathogenic viruses, including biosafety level (BSL)-3
agents, has not been fully utilized because of the need for a
high-level biocontainment facility [11]. It is suggested that
molecular imaging potentially provides useful approaches
to explore the mechanism of disease progression, to assess
pharmacokinetics, and to diagnose disease progression
of infectious diseases, including viral infections [9, 11].
Thus, we postulated that molecular imaging provides a
powerful tool for in vivo approach to examine the disease
progression of SFTSV infection.
Type-I interferon receptor knock-out (A129) mice
provide a useful model for investigating the pathogenic
mechanism of SFTSV infection in vivo [12, 13]. We
previously showed that lethal SFTSV infection in mice
led to acute clinical signs, including piloerection, slowed
movement, anorexia, and severe weight loss by 2 days
post-infection (pi), and all mice died by 7 days pi [13].
However, the primary cause of lethal pathology was not
characterized. We further showed that post-exposure
treatment with anti-serum significantly protected the
animals from death [13]. Thus, we expected that the mouse
model provides a useful platform to study the in vivo
imaging of disease progression and antiviral intervention
caused by SFTSV infection.
The purpose of this study was to image the
pathological features of SFTSV infection in vivo by PET.
In a mouse model, we first examined the pathological
features of lethal infection with SFTSV. We next assessed
whether 18F-FDG PET/CT imaging provides an effective
approach for monitoring disease progression of SFTSV
infection. We further evaluated whether the therapeutic
efficacy of anti-serum treatment could be observed by
18
F-FDG PET/CT imaging in the same individual.

of SFTSV-infected mice (Figure 1D). Viral genomic RNA
was detected in the epithelial cells of the stomach and
intestine of SFTSV-infected mice (Figure 1D). Significant
histopathological changes were not observed in the spleen
of SFTSV-infected mice (Figure 1D). There was no viral
RNA detected in the mock-infected mice (data not shown).
These observations suggest that lethal infection with
SFTSV caused severe gastrointestinal disorders. These
findings suggest that the gastrointestinal tract is a potential
target for PET imaging of SFTSV infection.
We next performed 18F-FDG PET imaging of
SFTSV-infected mice at 3 days pi. 18F-FDG accumulation
was clearly observed in the intestine of SFTSV-infected
mice, but not in the stomach (Figure 2A and Video 1).
The mock-infected mice did not exhibit any 18F-FDG
accumulation in the stomach or intestine (Figure 2B and
Video 2). There was no specific accumulation of 18F-FDG
in the spleen of SFTSV-infected mice that exhibited
splenomegaly (Figure 2A and Video 1). There was
18
F-FDG accumulation in the bladders of both SFTSVinfected and mock-infected mice, indicating that the
accumulation in these organs is a physiological property
of 18F-FDG.
These observations strongly indicate that 18F-FDG
accumulation reflected the pathological region in the
intestinal tract and could represent the characteristic
features of intestinal disease following SFTSV infection
in mice.
The major advantages of molecular imaging include
its noninvasive nature and its ability to be used for realtime monitoring in vivo within the same individual.
We previously showed that post-exposure treatment
with antiserum at 1 hour to 3 days pi could rescue mice
from lethal infection with SFTSV [13]. Therefore, we
performed 18F-FDG PET imaging in SFTSV-infected
mice treated with antiserum to identify the dynamics of
intestinal disease and evaluate the therapeutic effects. To
observe the sequential progress of 18F-FDG accumulation
in mice, PET imaging were performed at 2 and 4 days pi
in each mouse.
There was no 18F-FDG accumulation in the
intestines of antiserum- and saline- treated mice at 2 day pi
(Figure 3A, Video 3 and Video 4). The saline-treated mice
exhibited 18F-FDG accumulation in the intestinal tract at
4 days pi (Figure 3A and Video 5). The gross pathology
showed severe gastric and intestinal distension in addition
to reduced cecum size (Figure 3B). On the other hand, the
antiserum-treated mice showed no 18F-FDG accumulation
in the intestinal tract (Figure 3A and Video 6), and there
was no gastric or intestinal distension (Figure 3B). These
observations suggest that 18F-FDG PET imaging can
noninvasively monitor disease progression in vivo and can
show the efficacy of therapeutics.

Results
A129 mice were infected with a lethal dose of
SFTSV, and we observed the pathological changes at 3
days pi before mice started to die at 4 days pi [13]. The
gross pathology revealed that SFTSV-infected mice
exhibited gastric and intestinal distensions and had
reduced stools in the intestine and a reduced cecum
size compared to mock-infected mice (Figure 1A). The
stomach contents of SFTSV-infected mice were liquid,
whereas the contents of mock-infected mice were solid
(Figure 1B). A characteristic splenomegaly was present
in SFTSV-infected mice compared to mock-infected mice
(Figure 1C).
The histopathological examination revealed erosion
in the gastric mucosa but not in the small intestinal mucosa
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

141

Oncotarget

Figure 1: Histological features of A129 mice inoculated with a lethal dose of SFTSV. A.-C. Gross pathology of gastrointestinal
tracts A., stomach affecting the consistency of food contents. B. and spleens C., D. Histological and ISH features of the gastrointestinal
tract of heavily infected mice (top panels: hematoxylin and eosin staining; bottom panels: ISH using AT-tailed antisense cocktail probes).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

142

Oncotarget

Figure 2: Representative whole body PET/CT images of SFTSV-infected A. and mock-infected A129 mice B. at 3 days pi.
PET/CT images were acquired 30-60 min after intravenous injection of 18F-FDG (10 MBq in 400 μl of saline per mouse).

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

143

Oncotarget

Discussion

because expressed cytokines are closely associated with
IFN-I response. Thus, it is controversial whether disease
progression in a mouse model directly reflects the disease
in human cases.
However, SFTSV-infected A129 mice showed
apparent gastrointestinal disease. Mice showed acute
weight reduction after 2 days pi [13] and the loss of
appetite that led to decreased food and water intake
probably caused it (data not shown). Thus, the clinical
signs in mice may be relevant to the gastrointestinal
symptoms in human cases during SFTSV infection.
Pathological observations of SFTSV-infected A129 mice
showed gastric and intestinal distensions, reduced stools
in the intestine, erosion in the gastric mucosa. However,
the pathological features in human SFTS cases have
not been well described. Although, further information
including the histopathological findings in human cases
will be required to assess whether a mouse model actually
reflects the gastrointestinal disease in human cases, we
raise the possibility that PET imaging data will provide
important clues to the in vivo studies of SFTSV infection

This is the first report demonstrating the molecular
imaging of infectious disease caused by SFTSV in a
mouse model. Specific 18F-FDG uptake was observed in
the intestinal tract of SFTSV-infected A129 mice.
Common symptoms of SFTS patients are
nonspecific febrile illness and gastrointestinal tract
disorders such as nausea, anorexia and diarrhea in the
early phase of the disease, followed by progressive decline
in platelets and white blood cells [1-3]. It was suggested
that higher viral load and abnormally expressed cytokine
profiles in the serum are associated with the disease
severity of SFTS in human cases [14-16].
On the other hand, SFTSV-infected A129 mice did
not have elevated body temperature (data not shown).
We previously showed that SFTSV-infected A129 mice
exhibited high levels of viral replication in tissue, such as
the lung, spleen, liver, kidney, brain, and spinal cord [13].
However, SFTSV-infected A129 mice may not reflect
abnormal cytokine expression following SFTSV infection,

Figure 3: A. Representative whole body PET/CT images of SFTSV-infected A129 mice treated with saline (mouse no. 465) and antiserum
(mouse no. 474) at 2 and 4 days pi. PET/CT images were acquired 30-60 min after intravenous injection of 18F-FDG (10 MBq in 400 μl of
saline per mouse). B. Gross pathology of saline- and antiserum-treated A129 mice at 4 days pi. Mice were dissected after PET/CT imaging.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

144

Oncotarget

University according to standard BSL-3 guidelines.

and preclinical studies such as the assessment of drugs for
SFTS treatment.
Interestingly, 18F-FDG accumulated in the intestinal
tract but not in the stomach of SFTSV-infected mice.
18
F-FDG is a glucose analogue that is absorbed by cells
with a high-glucose demand. The FDG is moved by
glucose transporters and is phosphorylated to 18F-FDG-6phosphate once in cells, but it is not further metabolized
in cells [17]. There have been several reports of 18F-FDG
PET imaging for the detection of pathological conditions,
such as tumors and inflammatory diseases, in the
gastrointestinal tract [10, 18-20]. Rat models have shown
that 18F-FDG uptake occurs in indomethacin-induced
intestinal ulceration models, and 18F-FDG accumulation
was found in inflammatory cells [21].
Viral infections and inflammatory reactions in
the intestine may be correlated with specific 18F-FDG
accumulation in SFTSV infected-mice. However,
18
F-FDG accumulations were not observed in other sites
of gastrointestinal tract and other organs. In particular,
gross pathological changes were apparently present in the
stomach, but 18F-FDG uptake was not observed. Although
it is unclear why the specific 18F-FDG uptake was observed
in the intestine but not in the stomach, the elucidation of
the mechanism will provide interesting insights into the
mechanism of gastrointestinal disease in vivo due to lethal
infection with SFTSV.
Classical approaches to preclinical studies of
pathogenic virus infections using animal models involve
euthanasia and tissue dissection. As a result, it was
impossible to follow the real-time dynamics of disease
progression in the same individuals. Molecular imaging
techniques are noninvasive and can provide insight into
disease progression, prognosis, and responses to therapy
in the same individuals. However, there are currently a
limited number of reports using in vivo molecular imaging
for highly pathogenic pathogens. Thus, molecular imaging
is expected to play an increasing role in the pathological
studies and the development of effective treatment
strategies for infectious viruses including BSL-3 viruses.

Mice
A129 mice were purchased from B & K Universal
Limited and were mated in the facility at Nagasaki
University. Adult mice were subcutaneously inoculated
with 106 focus-forming units (ffu) of SFTSV diluted in
EMEM containing 2% FBS. Animal experiments were
performed in accordance with the recommendations
in the Fundamental Guidelines for Proper Conduct of
Animal Experiment and Related Activities in Academic
Research Institutions under the jurisdiction of the Ministry
of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology.
The Animal Care and Use Committee of the Nagasaki
University approved all of the experimental protocols
(approval number: 1210251024, 1401201115-6).

Histopathological study
SFTSV-infected A129 mice were anesthetized
and then perfused with 10% phosphate-buffered
formalin at 3 days pi. The fixed tissues were routinely
embedded in paraffin, sectioned, and stained with
hematoxylin and eosin. Viral RNA was detected using
ISH in formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded (FFPE)
sections using the AT-tailing method for high-sensitivity
detection as described previously [22]. The AT-tailed
oligonucleotide cocktail antisense probes L(5’-tcagggaag
caatgacagacgccttccatggtaatagggaatatatatatatatatatat-3’), M
ctccttggatatgcaggcctcatgctactcaccaaatatatatatatatatatat-3’)
and
S(5’-cttctgtcttgctggctccgcgcatcttcacattgatagtata
tatatatatatatatat-3’) segments of the viral RNA were
used as probes. The reaction products were visualized
in diaminobenzidine tetrahydrochloride and hydrogen
peroxide, and the nuclei were lightly counterstained with
hematoxylin.

F-FDG-PET/CT imaging

18

Materials and Methods

PET/CT images were acquired using Triumph
combined PET/SPECT/CT systems (TriFoil Imaging, Inc.,
CA, USA). SFTSV-infected A129 mice were administered
approximately 10 MBq of 18F-FDG (Nihon Medi-Physics
Co., Ltd. Kurume, Japan) intravenously via the tail
vein. The mice were anesthetized with 1.5% isoflurane,
and CT acquisitions were performed for anatomical
reference. The PET acquisitions were performed for 30
min starting 30 min after 18F-FDG injection. The PET data
were reconstructed using a 3D-Maximum-Likelihood
Expectation Maximization (MLEM) algorithm (60
iterations). The acquired PET and CT data were processed
using VIVID™ (TriFoil Imaging, Inc.) and OsiriX MD
(FDA cleared, Pixmeo).

Virus and cells
The YG-1 strain of SFTSV was kindly provided by
Ken Maeda at Yamaguchi University. The SFTSV stock
virus was prepared from cell culture medium of Vero E6
cells. Vero E6 cells were maintained in Eagle’s Minimal
Essential Medium (EMEM; Nissui Pharmaceutical Co.,
Tokyo, Japan) containing 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS).
The viral titers were determined using the focus forming
assay described previously [13]. All experiments using live
SFTSV were performed in a BSL-3 laboratory at Nagasaki
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

145

Oncotarget

Antiserum treatment in SFTSV-infected mice

References

Antiserum was collected from a patient who
contracted SFTS in 2005. The serum collection was
performed eight years after the patient recovered. The
experiment using human serum was performed with
the approval of the Ethics Committee of the Institute
of Tropical Medicine, Nagasaki University (approval
number: 140829129). The serum was diluted tenfold in
saline, and 500 μl of diluent was intraperitoneally injected
in mice 1, 24, 48 and 72 hours after inoculation with 106
ffu of SFTSV. Saline was used for mock treatment. Our
previous data indicated that antiserum treatment by 3 days
pi completely protected mice against lethal infection.
Thus, we observed PET imaging after the antiserum
treatment to compare survivals between treated and
non-treated mice. In addition, to examine the course of
disease progression, we observed the sequential imaging
in individual mice. Furthermore, to minimize the influence
of the intravenous damages by the injection, we examined
the mice every second day. As a result, we performed PET
imaging at 2 and 4 days pi for antiserum treatment.

1.	 Liu Q, He B, Huang SY, Wei F and Zhu XQ. Severe fever
with thrombocytopenia syndrome, an emerging tick-borne
zoonosis. Lancet Infect Dis. 2014; 14:763-772.
2.	 Takahashi T, Maeda K, Suzuki T, Ishido A, Shigeoka
T, Tominaga T, Kamei T, Honda M, Ninomiya D, Sakai
T, Senba T, Kaneyuki S, Sakaguchi S, et al. The first
identification and retrospective study of Severe Fever with
Thrombocytopenia Syndrome in Japan. J Infect Dis. 2014;
209:816-827.
3.	

4.	 Kim KH, Yi J, Kim G, Choi SJ, Jun KI, Kim NH, Choe
PG, Kim NJ, Lee JK and Oh MD. Severe fever with
thrombocytopenia syndrome, South Korea, 2012. Emerg
Infect Dis. 2013; 19:1892-1894.
5.	

Zhang YZ, Zhou DJ, Qin XC, Tian JH, Xiong Y, Wang JB,
Chen XP, Gao DY, He YW, Jin D, Sun Q, Guo WP, Wang
W, et al. The ecology, genetic diversity, and phylogeny of
Huaiyangshan virus in China. Journal of virology. 2012;
86:2864-2868.

6.	

Niu G, Li J, Liang M, Jiang X, Jiang M, Yin H, Wang Z, Li
C, Zhang Q, Jin C, Wang X, Ding S, Xing Z, Wang S, Bi
Z and Li D. Severe fever with thrombocytopenia syndrome
virus among domesticated animals, China. Emerg Infect
Dis. 2013; 19:756-763.

Acknowledgments
We thank Ken Maeda (Joint Faculty of Veterinary
Medicine, Yamaguchi University) for providing SFTSV
YG-1, Koichi Izumikawa (Department of Infectious
Diseases, Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences,
Course of Emerging Infectious Diseases, Nagasaki
University) for providing antiserum against SFTS and
Corazon C. Buerano from Department of Virology,
Institute of Tropical Medicine, Nagasaki University for
the editing of the paper.

7.	 Liu S, Chai C, Wang C, Amer S, Lv H, He H, Sun
J and Lin J. Systematic review of severe fever with
thrombocytopenia syndrome: virology, epidemiology, and
clinical characteristics. Rev Med Virol. 2014; 24:90-102.
8.	 Jamar F, Buscombe J, Chiti A, Christian PE, Delbeke
D, Donohoe KJ, Israel O, Martin-Comin J and Signore
A. EANM/SNMMI guideline for 18F-FDG use in
inflammation and infection. Journal of nuclear medicine.
2013; 54:647-658.

Conflicts of Interest
The authors declare no competing financial interests.

9.	

Grant Support
This work was supported financially by KAKENHI
Grant-in-Aid for Scientific Challenging Exploratory
Research (23658243 and 25660229), Grant-in-Aid for
Scientific Research (B) (25304045)] from the Japan
Society for the Promotion of Science, a Health and Labor
Sciences Research Grant on Emerging and Re-emerging
Infectious Diseases from the Japanese Ministry of Health,
Labor and Welfare, Health and Labor Sciences Research
Grants (Grants in aid H25- Shinko-Ippan-007, H25Shinko-shitei-009), the Cooperative Research Grant of
NEKKEN 2015, AMED and J-GRID.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Yu XJ, Liang MF, Zhang SY, Liu Y, Li JD, Sun YL, Zhang
L, Zhang QF, Popov VL, Li C, Qu J, Li Q, Zhang YP, et
al. Fever with thrombocytopenia associated with a novel
bunyavirus in China. N Engl J Med. 2011; 364:1523-1532.

Vaidyanathan S, Patel CN, Scarsbrook AF and Chowdhury
FU. FDG PET/CT in infection and inflammation-current
and emerging clinical applications. Clinical radiology.
2015; 70:787-800.

10.	 von Schulthess GK, Steinert HC and Hany TF. Integrated
PET/CT: current applications and future directions.
Radiology. 2006; 238:405-422.
11.	 Bocan TM, Panchal RG and Bavari S. Applications of
in vivo imaging in the evaluation of the pathophysiology
of viral and bacterial infections and in development of
countermeasures to BSL3/4 pathogens. Molecular imaging
and biology. 2015; 17:4-17.
12.	 Liu Y, Wu B, Paessler S, Walker DH, Tesh RB and Yu XJ.
The pathogenesis of severe fever with thrombocytopenia
syndrome virus infection in alpha/beta interferon knockout
mice: insights into the pathologic mechanisms of a new
146

Oncotarget

viral hemorrhagic fever. Journal of virology. 2014;
88:1781-1786.
13.	 Shimada S, Posadas-Herrera G, Aoki K, Morita K and
Hayasaka D. Therapeutic effect of post-exposure treatment
with antiserum on severe fever with thrombocytopenia
syndrome (SFTS) in a mouse model of SFTS virus
infection. Virology. 2015; 482:19-27.
14.	 Sun Y, Jin C, Zhan F, Wang X, Liang M, Zhang Q, Ding S,
Guan X, Huo X, Li C, Qu J, Wang Q, Zhang S, et al. Host
cytokine storm is associated with disease severity of severe
fever with thrombocytopenia syndrome. J Infect Dis. 2012;
206:1085-1094.
15.	 Li J, Han Y, Xing Y, Li S, Kong L, Zhang Y, Zhang L,
Liu N, Wang Q, Wang S, Lu S and Huang Z. Concurrent
measurement of dynamic changes in viral load, serum
enzymes, T cell subsets, and cytokines in patients with
severe fever with thrombocytopenia syndrome. PLoS One.
2014; 9:e91679.
16.	 Yoshikawa T, Fukushi S, Tani H, Fukuma A, Taniguchi
S, Toda S, Shimazu Y, Yano K, Morimitsu T, Ando K,
Yoshikawa A, Kan M, Kato N, et al. Sensitive and specific
PCR systems for detection of both Chinese and Japanese
severe fever with thrombocytopenia syndrome virus strains
and prediction of patient survival based on viral load. J Clin
Microbiol. 2014; 52:3325-3333.
17.	 Pauwels EK, McCready VR, Stoot JH and van Deurzen
DF. The mechanism of accumulation of tumour-localising
radiopharmaceuticals. European journal of nuclear
medicine. 1998; 25:277-305.
18.	 Kresnik E, Gallowitsch HJ, Mikosch P, Wurtz F, Alberer
D, Hebenstreit A, Kogler D, Gasser J, Igerc I, Kumnig
G, Gomez I and Lind P. (18)F-FDG positron emission
tomography in the early diagnosis of enterocolitis:
preliminary results. European journal of nuclear medicine
and molecular imaging. 2002; 29:1389-1392.
19.	 Chin BB and Wahl RL. 18F-Fluoro-2-deoxyglucose
positron emission tomography in the evaluation of
gastrointestinal malignancies. Gut. 2003; 52 Suppl 4:iv2329.
20.	 Sugaya T, Sakamoto S, Tominaga K, Nakano M, Sugaya
H and Hiraishi H. Feasibility of detecting small intestinal
disease by FDG-PET/CT. Abdominal imaging. 2015;
40:2193-9.
21.	 Yamato M, Kataoka Y, Mizuma H, Wada Y and Watanabe
Y. PET and macro- and microautoradiographic studies
combined with immunohistochemistry for monitoring
rat intestinal ulceration and healing processes. Journal of
nuclear medicine. 2009; 50:266-273.
22.	 Nakajima N, Ionescu P, Sato Y, Hashimoto M, Kuroita T,
Takahashi H, Yoshikura H and Sata T. In situ hybridization
AT-tailing with catalyzed signal amplification for sensitive
and specific in situ detection of human immunodeficiency
virus-1 mRNA in formalin-fixed and paraffin-embedded
tissues. The American journal of pathology. 2003; 162:381389.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

147

Oncotarget

