Editorial

Toward Predictors of Survival in
Castration-Resistant Prostate Cancer
Julie N. Graff, MD and Tomasz M. Beer, MD

Overall survival is a widely accepted endpoint in phase 3 clinical trials of castration-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC).
However, the use of this endpoint is becoming more difficult as more agents are shown to improve survival in patients
with CRPC. For new agents tested today, there is a growing risk that multiple subsequent therapies that alter survival may
obscure an important treatment effect. This will drive new agents to be tested in heavily pretreated patients and complicate
their incorporation into the management of prostate cancer earlier in the disease, when their impact could be greater. To
ensure that novel agents are tested in earlier stages of advanced prostate cancer, early endpoints that reliably measure clinical benefit are needed. Such endpoints could also shorten the duration of trials and accelerate the incorporation of effective
new agents into patient care.
Overall survival is a poor marker for phase 2 studies designed to select agents for phase 3 testing. Overall survival
takes too long to ascertain and can vary considerably because of patient selection. Thus, phase 2 studies have typically
relied on a variety of early markers of treatment effect (ie, prostate-specific antigen [PSA] decline, measurable disease
response, symptomatic improvement, time to PSA increase, time to disease progression, and changes in circulating tumor
cells [CTCs]) to divine which drugs and combinations deserve evaluation in phase 3 studies.
Robust, informative phase 2 studies that reliably predict which agents are and which are not likely to succeed in
phase 3 studies are critical to accelerating drug development in CRPC. To this end, an understanding of which early
markers of drug activity best predict success in a phase 3 setting is essential. Therefore, we applaud this effort by Sonpavde
et al to critically examine measurable tumor response in this context.
Until approximately 1970, there was little consensus regarding how to follow imaging studies in cancer patients and
define progressive, stable, and responding disease. The World Health Organization (WHO) criteria, developed in the
1970s, were followed in 2000 by the Response Evaluation Criteria In Solid Tumors (RECIST) criteria.1 RECIST criteria,
which focus primarily on the evaluation of soft tissue tumors, serve prostate cancer researchers poorly because measurable
disease is not the dominant manifestation of advanced prostate cancer, in which nonmeasurable bone metastases predominate.2 RECIST criteria also do not address PSA changes with therapy.
The Prostate Cancer Working Group formulated 2 sets of guidelines for prostate cancer researchers.3 The first, published in 1999, focused on ‘‘response’’ definitions for imaging and PSA. However, debate over the usefulness of response
endpoints continued until the second set of guidelines that emphasized nonprogression were published in 2008. These,
the so-called Prostate Cancer Working Group 2 (PCWG2) criteria, have been incorporated into several phase 3 clinical
trials that will collect both progression-free survival (PFS) and overall survival data and will allow us to prospectively examine the predictive capacity of PCWG2.
The serum PSA concentration generally corresponds with the bulk of prostate cancer, but it is an imperfect marker.
Higher grade cancers may produce less PSA per unit of tumor and PSA production is regulated by androgen signaling.
PSA is cheaply, easily, and reproducibly measured and for this reason has received considerable attention as a potential
marker of treatment effect. Associations between PSA decline and overall survival have been made through retrospective
Corresponding author: Tomasz M. Beer, MD, Division of Hematology and Medical Oncology, Knight Cancer Institute, Oregon Health and Science University, Mail
Code CH14R, 3303 SW Bond Avenue, Portland, OR 97239; Fax: (503) 494-6197; beert@ohsu.edu
Division of Hematology and Medical Oncology, Knight Cancer Institute, Oregon Health and Science University, Portland, Oregon
See referenced original article on pages 3963-71, this issue.
DOI: 10.1002/cncr.25986, Received: January 3, 2011; Revised: January 14, 2011; Accepted: January 18, 2011, Published online March 9, 2011 in Wiley Online
Library (wileyonlinelibrary.com)

3882

Cancer

September 1, 2011

Survival in Castration-Resistant Prostate Ca/Graff and Beer

analyses of the TAX327 trial4 and the Southwest Oncology Group (SWOG) 99-16 trial.5 The analysis of SWOG
99-16 found that a 30% PSA reduction at 3 months was a
strong surrogate for overall survival.6 In TAX327, a 30%
PSA reduction explained approximately 67% of the subsequent overall survival.7 Although encouraging, these
results were not sufficiently robust to enable PSA to serve
as an accepted surrogate marker in prostate cancer drug
development.
Both imaging and PSA can be used to determine
PFS in CRPC. To the best of our knowledge, studies published to date have shown a relatively weak association
between PFS and subsequent overall survival. For example, Scher et al conducted a retrospective review of 3 clinical trials that used cytotoxic therapies.8 The results were
found to be only modestly associated with overall survival,
regardless of whether PSA or imaging was used to detect
progression of CRPC. The prospective evaluation of
PCWG2 criteria in ongoing studies will shed additional
light on this question.
Researchers have shown that the number of CTCs at
baseline and changes in the CTC number are associated
with overall survival. The Incremental Maximum Margin
Criterion 38 (IMMC38) study collected baseline blood
samples from CRPC patients about to begin a first-, second-, or third-line chemotherapy regimen. A reanalysis of
the IMMC38 data indicated that the baseline number of
CTCs was more strongly associated with survival than baseline PSA.9 The combination of the number of CTCs before
and after treatment plus baseline lactate dehydrogenase was
found to be the strongest predictor of overall survival.
However, currently available technology detects CTCs in
only approximately one-half of the patients, thereby preventing this marker from being universally useful.
Pain relief is an accepted measure of clinical benefit
and is also associated with overall survival.10 However,
similar to measurable disease and the number of CTCs,
pain is not a universally relevant measure.
Much of the work described above was performed
using data from studies of cytotoxic chemotherapy. Recent
results with immunotherapy remind us that the therapeutic context may also need to be considered when early
markers are examined with an eye toward predicting longterm outcomes. During Sipuleucel T first phase 3 randomized controlled study (D9901), the primary endpoint of
time to disease progression was not found to be statistically
significant between the treated and control groups
(P ¼ .052).11 However, overall survival, one of the study’s
secondary endpoints, did reach statistical significance. The

Cancer

September 1, 2011

confirmatory phase 3 study, Immunotherapy for Prostate
Adenocarcinoma Treatment (IMPACT), used overall
survival as the primary endpoint and verified the statistically significant improvement in overall survival with this
agent and again did not demonstrate a PFS benefit.12
Thus, in the context of immunotherapy, traditional measures of early response to treatment or initial nonprogression
may not be useful and entirely new measures are necessary
to advance novel agents forward.
Although the need for robust early markers of subsequent clinical benefit in general and survival specifically
has never been greater, we still lack such markers, despite
considerable efforts by many researchers. It is into this
challenging area that Sonpavde et al ventured in the current issue of Cancer.13 They retrospectively analyzed the
TAX327 study in an effort to clarify the associations
between radiographic response in soft tissue disease and
subsequent survival.
TAX327 is 1 of 2 large randomized controlled studies to compare docetaxel with mitoxantrone and led to US
Food and Drug Administration approval of docetaxel as
the first-line chemotherapeutic agent for CRPC.4 Of the
1006 men included in the original study, 412 (41%) had
WHO-defined measurable metastatic disease on baseline
studies and were included in this analysis. Unfortunately,
160 of these men did not undergo follow-up imaging
studies, which may have weakened the association.
The authors found a clear association between radiographic response (partial or complete response vs stable
disease vs progressive disease) and overall survival.13 This
finding adds another to our collection of useful, but
imperfect, measures.
There are some important limitations to the study by
Sonpavde et al that must be noted. Setting aside the finding
that the majority of TAX327 participants did not have
measurable disease at baseline, thereby limiting the generalizability of the results, ascertainment of measurable disease
was incomplete, with nearly 39% of patients failing to
undergo a follow-up scan. In a study in which the median
number of cycles delivered was 9.5, the missing data are a
bit of a dissonant note that stands in contrast to the rest of
the study. It is impossible to know the analyses would have
turned out if those 160 patients contributed data. The statistical power of the analyses was limited by the relatively small
number of patients experiencing either complete or partial
responses (37 patients from among 1006 total patients enrolled). Although radiographic response remained an independent predictor of overall survival, its importance as a
predictor was lessened when other traditional predictors,

3883

Editorial

such as PSA, were entered into the model. Sonpavde et al
used the WHO criteria to assess measureable lesions because
RECIST was not yet widespread at the time of data collection (2000-2002),13 which makes the findings less applicable by today’s standards. Their analysis did not differentiate
between visceral metastases and lymph node disease. Prior
studies have shown that the presence of visceral disease portends a poor outcome, and it would be helpful to know the
relative contribution of each group. Similarly, it is unclear
whether patients with soft tissue-only disease (as opposed to
bone and soft tissue metastases) had different outcomes in
this analysis.
The authors’ findings provide another data point
in the long quest for early markers of drug activity.
Thanks to the article by Sonpavde et al,13 its limitations
not withstanding, we now know that in addition to PSA
reduction and pain relief, shrinkage of soft tissue tumors
after the initiation of chemotherapy is associated with
longer survival.
As multiple agents enter into the clinic, the need for
robust, reliable markers of clinical benefit that can be
measured early in the course of therapy and inform drug
selection for phase 3 studies, enable phase 3 study designs
that are not vulnerable to the dilution of the primary endpoint by subsequent therapies, and inform individual
patient care decisions in the clinic has never been greater.
Sonpavde et al13 have added to our knowledge base in this
area but also point out how much further we have to go.
One can be hopeful that current phase 3 studies, many of
which are prospectively examining a variety of early
markers of drug effect, will bring us closer to the day when
the long-term clinical benefit of an intervention will be
discernible shortly after the therapy is initiated. Patient
care, drug development, and clinical research in general
will all be better off when such tools are available.

CONFLICT OF INTEREST DISCLOSURES
The authors made no disclosures.

3884

REFERENCES
1. Therasse P, Arbuck SG, Eisenhauer EA, et al. New guidelines
to evaluate the response to treatment in solid tumors. European Organization for Research and Treatment of Cancer,
National Cancer Institute of the United States, National Cancer Institute of Canada. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2000;92:205-216.
2. Scher HI, Morris MJ, Kelly WK, Schwartz LH, Heller G.
Prostate cancer clinical trial end points: ‘‘RECIST’’ing a step
backwards. Clin Cancer Res. 2005;11:5223-5232.
3. Scher HI, Halabi S, Tannock I, et al. Design and end
points of clinical trials for patients with progressive prostate
cancer and castrate levels of testosterone: recommendations
of the Prostate Cancer Clinical Trials Working Group.
J Clin Oncol. 2008;26:1148-1159.
4. Tannock IF, de Wit R, Berry WR, et al. Docetaxel plus
prednisone or mitoxantrone plus prednisone for advanced
prostate cancer. N Engl J Med. 2004;351:1502-1512.
5. Petrylak DP, Tangen CM, Hussain MH, et al. Docetaxel
and estramustine compared with mitoxantrone and prednisone for advanced refractory prostate cancer. N Engl J Med.
2004;351:1513-1520.
6. Petrylak DP, Ankerst DP, Jiang CS, et al. Evaluation of prostate-specific antigen declines for surrogacy in patients treated
on SWOG 99-16. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2006;98:516-521.
7. Armstrong AJ, Garrett-Mayer ES, Yang YC, de Wit R, Tannock IF, Eisenberger M. A contemporary prognostic nomogram
for men with hormone-refractory metastatic prostate cancer: a
TAX327 study analysis. Clin Cancer Res. 2007;13:6396-6403.
8. Scher HI, Warren M, Heller G. The association between
measures of progression and survival in castrate-metastatic
prostate cancer. Clin Cancer Res. 2007;13:1488-1492.
9. Scher HI, Jia X, de Bono JS, et al. Circulating tumour cells
as prognostic markers in progressive, castration-resistant
prostate cancer: a reanalysis of IMMC38 trial data. Lancet
Oncol. 2009;10:233-239.
10. Armstrong AJ, Garrett-Mayer E, Ou Yang YC, et al. Prostate-specific antigen and pain surrogacy analysis in metastatic hormonerefractory prostate cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2007;25:3965-3970.
11. Higano CS, Schellhammer PF, Small EJ, et al. Integrated data
from 2 randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, phase 3
trials of active cellular immunotherapy with sipuleucel-T in
advanced prostate cancer. Cancer. 2009;115:3670-3679.
12. Kantoff PW, Higano CS, Shore ND, et al. Sipuleucel-T
immunotherapy for castration-resistant prostate cancer.
N Engl J Med. 2010;363:411-422.
13. Sonpavde G, Pond GR, Berry WR, et al. The association
between radiographic response and overall survival in men
with metastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer receiving
chemotherapy. Cancer. 2011;117:3963-3971.

Cancer

September 1, 2011

