Original Article

Under-Representation of Racial Minorities in Prostate Cancer
Studies Submitted to the US Food and Drug Administration to
Support Potential Marketing Approval, 1993-2013
Michel D. Wissing, drs1; Paul G. Kluetz, MD1; Yang-Min Ning, MD, PhD1; Jonca Bull, MD2; Christine Merenda, MPH2;
Anthony J. Murgo, MD, MS, FACP1; and Richard Pazdur, MD, FACP1

BACKGROUND: US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approval of new drugs depends on results from clinical trials that must be generalized to the US population. However, racial minorities are frequently under-represented in clinical studies. The enrollment of racial minorities was compared in key clinical studies submitted to the FDA in the last 10 years in support of potential marketing approval for prostate
cancer (PCa) prevention or treatment. METHODS: Patient demographic data were obtained from archival data sets of large registration
trials submitted to the FDA to support proposed PCa indications. Six countries/regions were analyzed: the United States, Canada,
Australia, Europe, the United Kingdom, and Eastern Europe. Background racial demographics were collected from national census
data. RESULTS: Seventeen key PCa clinical trials were analyzed. These trials were conducted in the past 20 years, comprising 39,574
patients with known racial information. Most patients were enrolled in the United States, but there appeared to be a trend toward
increased non-US enrollment over time. In all countries, racial minorities were generally under-represented. There was no significant
improvement in racial minority enrollment over time. The United States enrolled the largest nonwhite population (7.1%). CONCLUSIONS: Over the past 20 years, racial minorities were consistently under-represented in key PCa trials. There is a need for effective
measures that will improve enrollment of racial minorities. With increased global enrollment, drug developers should aim to recruit a
patient population that resembles the racial demographics of the patient population to which drug use will be generalized upon apC 2014 American Cancer Society.
proval. Cancer 2014;120:3025-32. V
KEYWORDS: prostate cancer, race relations, clinical trial, phase 3, US Food and Drug Administration.

INTRODUCTION
Prostate cancer (PCa) incidence and mortality rates vary among races. Between 2006 and 2010, the age-adjusted PCa incidence rates were 144.9, 228.5, 81.8, and 77.8 per 100,000 men in white, black, Asian, and Native American men in the
United States, respectively.1 The age-adjusted PCa mortality rates were 21.2, 50.9, 10.1, and 20.7 per 100,000 men in the
respective racial groups.1 These results indicate that black men are most prone to PCa disease and death. In contrast,
Asians are least likely to be diagnosed with and die from PCa. Comparing incidence rates to mortality rates, relative mortality is strikingly higher in black and Native American populations. In general, these patient groups present with more
advanced disease and receive less aggressive treatment.2-6 Furthermore, black patients diagnosed with very-low-risk PCa
may have more advanced PCa than white patients with the same diagnosis.7 Multiple underlying factors may contribute
to the aforementioned epidemiological findings, such as genetic tumor alterations, differences in lifestyle, cultural and
socioeconomic factors, distances needed to travel to the nearest hospital for treatment (which, for multiple American Indian tribes, can exceed >100 miles), variations in participation in population-based prostate-specific antigen screening,
and nonconformity in clinical trial participation between racial groups.6,8-15
Because the presentation of PCa disease differs among racial groups, the response to PCa therapies may also differ.
Therefore, the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) strongly recommends conducting clinical trial testing of novel

Corresponding author: Paul G. Kluetz, MD, Office of Hematology and Oncology Products, Office of New Drugs, Center for Drug Evaluation Research, US. Food
and Drug Administration, 10903 New Hampshire Avenue, Building 22, Room 2356, Silver Spring, MD, 20993; Fax: (301) 796-9909; paul.kluetz@fda.hhs.gov
1
Office of Hematology and Oncology Products, Office of New Drugs, Center for Drug Evaluation Research, US Food and Drug Administration, Silver Spring,
Maryland; 2Office of Minority Health, US Food and Drug Administration, Silver Spring, Maryland

Additional Supporting Information may be found in the online version of this article.
See editorial on pages 2944-5, this issue.
We thank Mr. Frank H. Cross, Jr.; Dr. Peter F. Bross; and Dr. Ian F. Tannock for their help collecting data sets.
This article has been contributed to by US Government employees and their work is in the public domain in the USA.
DOI: 10.1002/cncr.28809, Received: February 27, 2014; Revised: April 3, 2014; Accepted: April 8, 2014, Published online June 25, 2014 in Wiley Online Library
(wileyonlinelibrary.com)

Cancer

October 1, 2014

3025

Original Article

PCa drugs in a population that adequately represents the
racial distribution of the US population that would
receive the drug in a clinical setting. Nevertheless, minority accrual in clinical trials has been a challenge, because
minorities are traditionally under-represented in clinical
trials.14,15 Disparity between racial distribution in clinical
trial populations compared with the average US population has been a factor in FDA decisions in the past. For
example, during the Oncology Drug Advisory Committee
meeting at which finasteride and dutasteride were discussed for the chemoprevention of PCa in December
2010, the FDA noted that these studies lacked adequate
enrollment of black patients, questioning how well the
studies represented the average US PCa population.
Therefore, minority accrual is of high importance in clinical studies with PCa patients.
In the current study, we investigated the enrollment of
racial minorities in key clinical trials conducted in PCa
patients that were submitted for FDA review in the past 2
decades. Minority accrual was compared across various
countries/regions in the world. We also investigated whether
minority accrual has changed over time.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Data Collection

For the collection of demographic data, various statistical
government resources, publicly available on the internet,
were used. These included US 2010 census data, Canadian 2011 national household survey data, Australian
2011 census data, United Kingdom 2001 census data,
data from the Montaigne Institute (French demographics), and data from the Czech Statistical Office.
Key clinical trials submitted for FDA review in
which patients were recruited between 1993 and 2013
were analyzed regardless of the marketing approval outcome. The proposed therapeutic indications were specific
to patients with PCa, ie, drug or biologic products that
sought approval for the treatment of bone metastases in
cancer patients in general were not included in this study.
Data sets from selected clinical trials were retrieved from
the FDA archives. Anonymity was applied to nonpublic
data.
Data Analyses

Data were analyzed for the following regions: globally, the
United States, Canada, Australia, “Europe,” the United
Kingdom, and Eastern Europe. Countries in “Europe”
included the 27 countries in the European Union and the
4 countries that form the European Free Trade Association. Eastern European countries consisted of all countries
3026

in Europe east of the former Berlin wall, including Russia
but excluding Turkey. Turkey was considered part of
West Asia (the Middle East).
On the basis of the initiation of patient enrollment,
the 17 clinical trials were divided into 2 major time periods. In group 1, clinical trials were included that initiated
enrollment between 1993 and 2004 (n 5 7), and trials
that initiated enrollment after 2006 were included in
group 2 (n 5 10). Group 1 comprised clinical trials that
were designed before FDA approval of docetaxel, whereas
the clinical trials in group 2 were designed after docetaxel
had been approved for its use in patients with castrate-resistant PCa.
FDA guidelines recommend that investigators separately collect demographics regarding race and ethnicity
in clinical trials.16 In these guidelines, racial groups are divided into white, black, Asian, American Indian/Alaska
Native, Pacific Islander, or other. Ethnicity is divided into
Hispanic/Latino or non-Hispanic/Latino. In line with
these guidelines, we divided race into white, black, Asian,
native, or other. White patients included individuals of
European descent and those from the Middle East and
Africa north of the Sahara. Black patients were individuals
who descended from sub-Saharan Africans. Asian patients
included all patients of Asian descent except for the Middle East and Russia. Natives were considered American
Indians, Alaska Natives, Canadian Indians, Pacific
Islanders, and Aboriginals. The race “other” primarily
consisted of patients with a multiracial background.
A majority of studies in our analysis did not report
Hispanics as a separate ethnicity but as a race. All patients
whose registered race was “Hispanic” were excluded from
our analyses, because only their ethnicity, but not their
self-reported race, was known. Patients who did not have
their race reported also were excluded from our analyses.
In total, the race of 90% of patients was retrieved for
analysis.
Eighteen key or “pivotal” PCa clinical trials were
identified during the period specified in our analysis,
from 1993 to 2013. Of these, the key study supporting
FDA approval of mitoxantrone was excluded from our
analysis, because racial demographics of those patients
had not been collected. The remaining 17 clinical trials,
all of which were included in our analysis, are listed alphabetically in Supporting Table 1 (see online supporting
materials). These included key studies for review of abiraterone acetate (Janssen Biotech, Horsham, Pa), atrasentan
hydrochloride (Abbott Laboratories, North Chicago, Ill),
cabazitaxel (Sanofi-Aventis, Paris, France), degarelix (Ferring Pharmaceuticals, St-Prex, Switzerland), denosumab
Cancer

October 1, 2014

Racial Minority Enrollment in PCa Trials/Wissing et al

(Amgen, Thousand Oaks, Calif), docetaxel (Sanofi-Aventis), dutasteride (GlaxoSmithKline, Brentford, United
Kingdom), enzalutamide (Medivation, San Francisco,
Calif), finasteride (Merck & Company, Whitehouse Station, NJ), leuprorelin (6-month formulation; AbbVie
Inc., North Chicago, Ill), radium-223 dichloride (Bayer,
Leverkusen, Germany), satraplatin (GPC Biotech, Martinsried, Germany), sipuleucel-T (Dendreon, Seattle,
Wash), and triptorelin (6-month formulation; Actavis
plc, Dublin, Ireland).
TABLE 1. The Percentage of Patients Enrolled in
Key Prostate Cancer Clinical Trials per Nation/
Region Analyzed in the Current Studya
Country/Region
United States
Canada
Australia
“Europe”
United Kingdom
Eastern Europe

Percentage of Patients Enrolled
60.2
4.8
1.6
26.5
4.6
6.6

a

Patients from the 17 trials were pooled together; patients listed as
“unknown” or “Hispanic, not further specified” were excluded from the
patient count. “Europe” includes the 27 countries in the European Union
plus the 4 countries in the European Free Trade Association. Eastern
Europe includes all countries east of the former Berlin wall, including Russia
but excluding Turkey. Note that not all percentages add up to 100%,
because some studies enrolled patients in countries/regions other than
those listed in the table, and because patients from the United Kingdom
and Eastern Europe are also counted in “Europe”.

We calculated enrollment estimates for racial minorities that reflected the incidence and mortality of PCa
among racial populations in the United States to further
explore whether minority representation was adequate in
the clinical trials analyzed. To estimate projected patient
enrollment in the United States based on PCa incidence,
we multiplied the age-adjusted incidence of PCa in each
racial group by their proportion in the US population
based on 2010 US census data. For each race, the calculated number was divided by the sum of all calculated
numbers. This resulted in estimates of the percentage of
each racial group needed in a PCa clinical trial to reflect
the racial distribution of patients diagnosed with PCa. A
similar procedure was used to estimate the projected
patient minority enrollment in the United States based on
PCa mortality that would approximately represent the
racial distribution of patients who die from PCa.
RESULTS
In total, 40,912 patients had been enrolled in selected
clinical trials between October 1993 and February 2011.
The race of 1338 patients was unknown; therefore, these
patients were excluded for further analysis. Of the remaining 39,574 patients, 60.2% were enrolled in the United
States, 26.5% were enrolled in “Europe,” 4.8% were enrolled in Canada, and 1.6% were enrolled in Australia
(Table 1).

Figure 1. (A-F) Patient enrollment in key prostate cancer clinical trials per country/region is illustrated. Studies were sorted by initiation of patient enrollment, study 17 most recently having started patient enrollment. Bars present the percentage of enrolled
patients from the analyzed nation/region in that study. “Europe” includes the 27 countries in the European Union plus the 4
countries in the European Free Trade Association. Eastern Europe includes all countries east of the former Berlin wall, including
Russia but excluding Turkey.

Cancer

October 1, 2014

3027

Original Article
TABLE 2. Average Percentage of Patients Enrolled
in Key Prostate Cancer Clinical Trials Initiated Pre2005 and Post-2005 per Nation/Region Analyzed
in the Current Studya
Country/Region
United States
Canada
Australia
“Europe”
United Kingdom
Eastern Europe

1993-2004

2006-2013

47.7
10.1
1.8
34
5.6
9.5

29.2
7.1
3.9
38.7
7.4
13.5

a

Clinical trials were divided into 2 groups based on initiation of patient
enrollment (1993-2004 and 2006-2013; ie, before and after docetaxel approval). These percentages were calculated by dividing the sum of percentage enrollment in each individual study by the number of studies. “Europe”
includes the 27 countries in the European Union plus the 4 countries in the
European Free Trade Association. Eastern Europe includes all countries
east of the former Berlin wall, including Russia but excluding Turkey. Note
that not all percentages add up to 100%, because some studies enrolled
patients in countries/regions other than those than listed in the table and
because patients from the United Kingdom and Eastern Europe are also
counted in “Europe”.
Additional supporting information may be found in the online version of this
article.

The percentage of patients enrolled in each analyzed
country/region is displayed for all individual studies in
Figure 1, sorted according to the time of enrollment initiation. Patient enrollment varied widely between different studies: some studies enrolled only patients in the
United States, whereas 1 study recruited only patients outside the United States.
Next, we studied whether there was a difference in
enrollment in countries between key PCa clinical trials
initiated before or after 2005 (Table 2). Patient enrollment in the United States had decreased. Enrollment in
Canada was relatively low and decreased slightly after
2005. In contrast, patient enrollment in European countries was higher after 2005. Patient enrollment in Australia also was higher; however, that increase was driven
mostly by the 4 most recent studies, in which up to 12%
of patients were enrolled in Australia (Table 2, Fig. 1C).
Although Eastern European enrollment was greater in
group 2 compared with group 1, enrollment of Eastern
Europeans decreased again in the most recent studies of
group 2 (Fig. 1F).
Our analyses further focused on enrollment of racial
minorities in the selected PCa clinical trials in relation to
national/regional racial minority population statistics.
Studying national census data across the various countries,
the nonwhite population was largest in the United States
(27.6%); whereas, in Eastern European countries such as
the Czech Republic, less than 1% of the population consisted of nonwhites (Fig. 2A). When we pooled racial de3028

Figure 2. Racial minority demographics in Western nations/
regions and enrollment of racial minorities in key prostate
cancer trials are illustrated. (A) Bar graph represents the demographic distribution of racial minorities in a selection of
Western nations. (B) Bar graph displays both global racial minority enrollment and racial minority enrollment in selected
nations/regions. Data were pooled from all 17 key prostate
cancer studies. (C) Global enrollment of racial minorities for
each key prostate cancer clinical trial is illustrated. Studies
are sorted by initiation of patient enrollment, study 17 having
most recently started patient enrollment.

mographic data from all 17 studies and compared
enrollment between different nations/regions, enrollment
of racial minorities was largest in the United States (7.1%)
(Fig. 2B), and this population consisted primarily of black
patients (5.3%). In other countries/regions, enrollment of
racial minorities did not exceed 5%; minority accrual was
virtually nonexistent in Eastern Europe. Hence, comparing the enrollment of racial minorities (Fig. 2B) with the
Cancer

October 1, 2014

Racial Minority Enrollment in PCa Trials/Wissing et al

Figure 3. Enrollment of racial minorities in key prostate carcinoma clinical trials is illustrated in (A) the United States, (B)
Canada, and (C) Australia. Studies are sorted by initiation of
patient enrollment, study 17 most recently having started
patient enrollment. Studies were excluded from graphs if no
patient had been enrolled in the analyzed nation for that particular study. The total number of patients enrolled from the
analyzed country (including white patients) is listed above
each bar.

expected pool of eligible patients based on census data
(Fig. 2A), the enrollment of racial minorities was appreciably lower across all nations/regions. Comparing global
enrollment of racial minorities over time, enrollment of
nonwhites seemed to be consistent at approximately 5%
to 10% (Fig. 2C). Exceptions were studies 10, 12, and 13,
Cancer

October 1, 2014

which enrolled greater than 15% racial minorities. Study
10 was performed entirely outside the United States.
Because this was a non-Western nation, it was not analyzed further. Study 13 was conducted completely in the
United States. Study 12 had a large Asian population,
because this study had higher enrollment in Asia compared with the other studies.
In the United States, enrollment of racial minorities
was higher across all studies compared with global minority enrollment (compare Fig. 3A with Fig. 2C), possibly
because of the large minority population in the United
States in general (Fig. 2A). We note that enrollment of
racial minorities was greater than 20% in studies 9, 12,
and 13 (Fig. 3A). In studies 12 and 13, Hispanic/Latino
ethnicity was not collected as a separate category. Therefore, these patients may have been included in the racial
groups “black” and “other,” increasing minority enrollment as measured in this study compared with clinical trials in which the Hispanic population was excluded from
analysis. The reported minority enrollment in study 9
excluded the 9% Hispanics from the analysis, because
their race had not been collected separately from
ethnicity.
Racial minority enrollment did not exceed 15% in
any Canadian (Fig. 3B) or Australian (Fig. 3C) study population. Comparing the enrollment of racial minorities
between Canada and Australia, which have a similar proportion of racial minorities in the population (Fig. 2A),
Australia enrolled markedly fewer racial minorities.
In “Europe,” the enrollment of racial minorities was
relatively low (Fig. 4A). We further specified enrollment
in the United Kingdom (Fig. 4B), a Western European
country with an extensive colonial history, and in Eastern
European countries (Fig. 4C). On the basis of the demographics (Fig. 2A), as expected, the enrollment of racial
minorities was higher in the United Kingdom, whereas
virtually all patients enrolled in Eastern Europe were
white. Similar results were produced when we analyzed
minority enrollment in France separately (Supplementary
Fig. 1): in line with its demographics (Supporting Fig.
1A; see online supporting information), racial minority
enrollment was greater in France compared with Eastern
Europe, but it was slightly lower compared with the
United Kingdom (Supporting Fig. 1B; see online supporting information).
DISCUSSION
Data from our study indicate that racial minorities are
consistently under-represented in major clinical trials
assessing novel PCa therapies, also relative to differences
3029

Original Article

Figure 4. Enrollment of racial minorities in key prostate carcinoma clinical trials is Europe is illustrated. Studies are sorted
by initiation of patient enrollment, study 17 most recently
having started patient enrollment. Studies were excluded
from graphs if no patient had been enrolled in the analyzed
nation/region for that particular study. Minority enrollment
was analyzed both for (A) “Europe” as a whole (countries of
the European Union plus European Free Trade Association),
(B) the United Kingdom, and (C) Eastern Europe (all countries east of the former Berlin wall, including Russia but
excluding Turkey). The total number of patients enrolled from
the analyzed country/region (including white patients) is
listed above each bar.

3030

in population demographics by country. This finding is
consistent with previous reports in PCa and other diseases.14,15 Treatment benefit may differ between racial
groups because of variations in tumor characteristics.9
Therefore, the US FDA and other regulatory authorities
strongly recommend the registration of racial demographics for clinical studies.16 Furthermore, studies have
indicated that oncology patients who participated in clinical trials had better survival compared with nonparticipants.14,17,18 These results may have been biased: patients
with a worse prognosis may have been excluded from clinical trials, and physicians who are treating patients in a
clinical trial may adhere more strictly to provided study
protocols. For adjuvant breast cancer treatment, protocol
adherence was strongly associated with improved survival.17 Therefore, PCa survival may improve among
minorities with increased participation in clinical trials.
In this article, we compared racial minority enrollment in PCa studies with the expected accrual based on
census data. Our analysis has several important limitations. First, census data are self-reported and are only representative of individuals who respond to the
questionnaires. Second, demographics were collected
inconsistently: whereas, in some studies, Hispanics were
reported under a separate category for ethnicity as recommended by FDA guidelines,16 in a majority of studies,
Hispanics were reported as a separate race. Third, to be
able to adequately study the treatment effect in racial
minorities, it could be argued that the enrollment of racial
minorities should be increased even further. Fourth, data
from the US Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results
database indicate that the incidence and mortality of PCa
is higher in the black population than in the white population in the United States (Supporting Fig. 2A; see online
supporting information).1 Therefore, we could argue that
adequate representation of patients with PCa in the
United States should include a higher percentage of black
patients than reported in the Census (12.6%). For example, we estimated that, in studies performed in the general
PCa population, evaluating a treatment in early stage disease (such as finasteride and dutasteride for PCa risk
reduction), a representation of the US population would
include specifically 31.1% nonwhite patients and 18.9%
black patients (Supporting Fig. 2B; see online supporting
information). For therapies aimed at patients with latestage disease (such as enzalutamide for patients with metastatic, castrate-resistant PCa after docetaxel treatment), a
stage at which most patients will eventually die from PCa,
should include an estimated 26.1% black patients because
of the higher mortality rate in this racial group
Cancer

October 1, 2014

Racial Minority Enrollment in PCa Trials/Wissing et al

(Supporting Fig. 2B; see online supporting information).
The latter 2 examples further demonstrate that enrollment
of racial minorities needs to be improved compared with
current enrollment.
Finally, there are obvious limitations to grouping
patients into broad phenotypic categories (white, black,
Asian, native, and other minorities). These racial groups
are only very general predictors of biologic variations that
may result in differences in PCa growth and therapy
response. These biologic differences, in addition to environmental, socioeconomic, and dietary variability, may be
substantial between 2 populations categorized as the same
race but from differing countries. For example, whereas
individuals from the Arabian Peninsula and North Africa,
by consensus, are considered white in epidemiological
studies, it is highly likely that substantial differences in
environmental and genetic factors exist between these 2
subgroups and Europeans within the same racial category.
Similarly, significant differences may exist between Japanese patients living in Japan compared with those of Japanese ancestry who reside in the United States. Despite
these limitations, capturing racial demographics in clinical trials remains an important tool to ensure that the population enrolled more accurately approaches the general
PCa population within a country. Furthermore, racial demographic data can identify potential challenges in clinical trial access and reveal differences in the safety and
efficacy of a therapy between racial subgroups, potentially
aiding in the discovery of predictive biomarkers.
Although the need to increase minority accrual has
been universally acknowledged, determining how this
goal can be achieved remains a challenge. Various efforts
have had limited success in the past; for instance, efforts to
increase enrollment of racial minorities in the Prostate
Cancer Prevention Trial were fruitless.19 The limited success of efforts to improve enrollment of racial minorities is
reflected in our study results, which indicate that no significant improvement in minority recruitment has been
made over the past 2 decades.
Previous research indicated that white and nonwhite
patients have an equal interest in learning about clinical
trials.20 However, investigators also observed that the
media used to collect information about clinical trials differed between racial groups in the United States. Whereas
white patients used the internet and physicians more often
as information sources, racial minorities more often relied
on information provided by other patients. This is seemingly in contrast to a study by Markman et al, who suggested that the internet may be useful as a source to recruit
minorities for participation in clinical trials.21 Other studCancer

October 1, 2014

ies have identified additional factors that may improve
minority enrollment, such as having a more senior physician approach Asian patients, having staff and/or local
leaders of the same ethnicity inform patients, and making
use of written translations.22 Furthermore, although most
clinical trials are performed in university hospitals in
major cities, rural minorities, particularly Native Americans in the United States, would benefit if patients in
community/peripheral hospitals also could be recruited.
Most important, studies concluded that the main factor
influencing the enrollment of racial minorities was level of
trust.20,22,23
Despite the limited success of improving the enrollment of racial minorities in oncology studies in general,
some studies were more successful in recruiting minorities, such as study 9 in our analysis. Additional exploration indicated that the enrollment of black patients onto
that study was particularly high at 1 study site in Aventura, Florida, where 19 of 29 patients enrolled in the study
were classified as black, and half of all black patients enrolled in the study were enrolled from that site. The population served by the hospital included a large population
from the Caribbean, primarily indicated as “white/other,
Hispanic” in the US census data. There seems to be discrepancy in reporting whether patients from the Caribbean were considered white (Hispanic), black, or Native
American (Puerto Rico). It is plausible that the investigator in that study registered patients from the Caribbean as
black.
Finally, our current results indicate that the majority
of patients in PCa registration trials that were intended
for an FDA review for marketing approval were enrolled
in the United States. However, our data also suggested a
potential trend toward increased non-US enrollment.
One key advantage of global clinical trial conduct is rapid
enrollment, which can decrease the time needed to bring
an effective treatment to the market. However, it also
raises the question whether the results acquired from treating patients abroad properly reflect the efficacy and safety
of the treatment in the average US population who will
receive the treatment upon FDA approval. The current
study underlines the importance of this question, because
the enrollment of racial minorities was lower in all studied
nations/regions compared with the United States, particularly in Eastern Europe. Conversely, study 10, which globally had the highest enrollment of racial minorities, was
conducted completely outside the United States in a
country with a considerably greater nonwhite population.
This indicates that adequate minority accrual is possible,
and there is not necessarily an objection to the recruitment
3031

Original Article

of patients outside the United States or outside Western
nations, provided that the rights, safety, and well being of
the individuals participating in those trials are ensured;
that there is compliance with good clinical practices, and
that the results can be generalized to the US population.
However, it must be acknowledged that biologic and socioeconomic characteristics of racial populations in the
United States may differ from such characteristics in the
same racial population accrued in another country.
In conclusion, investigators and drug developers
should take differences in racial demographics into
account when selecting countries for clinical trials. In accordance with FDA guidelines, sponsors are advised to
classify racial demographics consistently and to consult
the review division before study initiation about the estimated size of minority enrollment in their proposed
trial.16 Although it is acknowledged that biologic and
environmental differences may exist within the same racial
category between countries, researchers should aim to
improve the enrollment of racial minorities during international trial conduct to accurately reflect demographics
in countries for which they seek approval of their therapy.
Inadequate minority enrollment may prevent us from
achieving a full understanding of the benefit-risk profile
of novel treatments in racial minorities. The trend toward
increasing the number of non-US countries, including
countries with a large white population, entails a tradeoff
of enhancing enrollment and time to trial completion versus enrolling a population that adequately represents the
racial demographics of the average US population. Therefore, improved strategies are needed to enhance minority
accrual in such large multinational studies.
FUNDING SUPPORT
Michel Wissing was supported by a grant from the Dutch Association of Medical Oncologists (Nederlandse Vereniging voor Medische Oncologie) and by an appointment to the Research
Participation Program at the Center for Drug Evaluation and
Research administered by the Oak Ridge Institute for Science and
Education through an interagency agreement between the US
Department of Energy and the US Food and Drug Administration.

CONFLICT OF INTEREST DISCLOSURES
The authors made no disclosures.

4.

5.
6.
7.

8.
9.
10.
11.

12.

13.
14.

15.
16.

17.

18.
19.
20.
21.

REFERENCES
1. Surveillance, Epidemiology, End Results (SEER) Program; National
Cancer Institute. SEER*Stat fact sheets: prostate. Available at: http://
seer.cancer.gov/statfacts/html/prost.html. Accessed June 29, 2013.
2. Desantis C, Naishadham D, Jemal A. Cancer statistics for African
Americans, 2013. CA Cancer J Clin. 2013;63:151-166.
3. Newman LA, Lee CT, Parekh LP, et al. Use of the National Cancer
Data Base to develop clinical trials accrual targets that are appropri-

3032

22.
23.

ate for minority ethnicity patients: a report from the American College of Surgeons Oncology Group (ACOSOG) Special Population
Committee. Cancer. 2006;106:188-195.
Rogers D, Petereit DG. Cancer disparities research partnership in
Lakota Country: clinical trials, patient services, and community education for the Oglala, Rosebud, and Cheyenne River Sioux tribes.
Am J Public Health. 2005;95:2129-2132.
Shavers VL, Brown M, Klabunde CN, et al. Race/ethnicity and the
intensity of medical monitoring under ‘watchful waiting’ for prostate
cancer. Med Care. 2004;42:239-250.
Taksler GB, Keating NL, Cutler DM. Explaining racial differences
in prostate cancer mortality. Cancer. 2012;118:4280-4289.
Sundi D, Ross AE, Humphreys EB, et al. African American men
with very low-risk prostate cancer exhibit adverse oncologic outcomes after radical prostatectomy: should active surveillance still be
an option for them? J Clin Oncol. 2013;31:2991-2997.
Freedman ML, Haiman CA, Patterson N, et al. Admixture mapping
identifies 8q24 as a prostate cancer risk locus in African-American
men. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2006;103:14068-14073.
Martin DN, Starks AM, Ambs S. Biological determinants of health
disparities in prostate cancer. Curr Opin Oncol. 2013;25:235-341.
Petereit DG, Rogers D, Govern F, et al. Increasing access to clinical
cancer trials and emerging technologies for minority populations: the
Native American Project. J Clin Oncol. 2004;22:4452-4455.
Petereit DG, Guadagnolo BA, Wong R, Coleman CN. Addressing
cancer disparities among American Indians through innovative technologies and patient navigation: the Walking Forward experience [serial online]. Front Oncol. 2011;1:11.
Holm JE, Vogeltanz-Holm N, Poltavski D, McDonald L. Assessing
health status, behavioral risks, and health disparities in American
Indians living on the Northern Plains of the US. Public Health Rep.
2010;125:68-78.
Weinrich SP. Prostate cancer screening in high-risk men: African
American Hereditary Prostate Cancer Study Network. Cancer. 2006;
106:796-803.
Goyal J, Nuhn P, Huang P, et al. The effect of clinical trial participation versus nonparticipation on overall survival in men receiving
first-line docetaxel-containing chemotherapy for metastatic
castration-resistant prostate cancer. BJU Int. 2012;110:E575-E582.
Movsas B, Moughan J, Owen J, et al. Who enrolls onto clinical oncology trials? A radiation patterns of care study analysis. Int J Radiat
Oncol Biol Phys. 2007;68:1145-1150.
US Food and Drug Administration. Guidance for Industry—Collection of Race and Ethnicity Data in Clinical Trials. Available at:
http://www.fda.gov/downloads/RegulatoryInformation/Guidances/
ucm126396.pdf. Accessed July 1, 2013.
Schwentner L, Van ER, Kurzeder C, et al. Participation in adjuvant
clinical breast cancer trials: does study participation improve survival
compared with guideline adherent adjuvant treatment? A retrospective multi-centre cohort study of 9,433 patients. Eur J Cancer. 2013;
49:553-563.
Chow CJ, Habermann EB, Abraham A, et al. Does enrollment in
cancer trials improve survival&quest; J Am Coll Surg. 2013;216:774780.
Moinpour CM, Atkinson JO, Thomas SM, et al. Minority recruitment in the Prostate Cancer Prevention Trial. Ann Epidemiol. 2000;
10:S85-S91.
Wood CG, Wei SJ, Hampshire MK, Devine PA, Metz JM. The
influence of race on the attitudes of radiation oncology patients
towards clinical trial enrollment. Am J Clin Oncol. 2006;29:593-599.
Markman M, Petersen J, Montgomery R. An examination of the
influence of patient race and ethnicity on expressed interest in learning about cancer clinical trials. J Cancer Res Clin Oncol. 2008;134:
115-118.
Symonds RP, Lord K, Mitchell AJ, Raghavan D. Recruitment of
ethnic minorities into cancer clinical trials: experience from the front
lines. Br J Cancer. 2012;107:1017-1021.
Skinner CS, Schildkraut JM, Calingaert B, et al. Factors associated
with African Americans’ enrollment in a national cancer genetics
registry. Commun Genet. 2008;11:224-233.

Cancer

October 1, 2014

