Oncotarget, Vol. 7, No. 46

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Research Paper

Rapamycin
ameliorates
chitosan
nanoparticle-induced
developmental defects of preimplantation embryos in mice
Yun-Jung Choi1, Sangiliyandi Gurunathan1, DaSom Kim1, Hyung Seok Jang2, WooJin Park1, Ssang-Goo Cho1, Chankyu Park1, Hyuk Song1, Han Geuk Seo1 and JinHoi Kim1
1

Department of Stem Cell and Regenerative Biotechnology, Humanized Pig Research Center (SRC), Konkuk University,
Seoul, Republic Korea
2

Department of Pathology, Hanyang University Medical Center, Wangsimni-ro, Seongdong-gu, Seoul, Republic of Korea

Correspondence to: Jin-Hoi Kim, email: jhkim541@konkuk.ac.kr
Keywords: chitosan nanoparticles, Rapamycin, preimplantation, autophagy, ER stress
Received: June 13, 2016	

Accepted: July 14, 2016	

Published: July 24, 2016

ABSTRACT
Chitosan nanoparticles (CSNPs) are used as drug or gene delivery vehicles.
However, a detailed understanding of the effects of CSNPs on embryonic development
remains obscure. Here, we show that CSNPs can be internalized into mouse blastocysts,
such as the zona pellucida, the perivitelline space, and the cytoplasm. Consequently,
CSNPs-induced endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress increases both of Bip/Grp78,
Chop, Atf4, Perk, and Ire1a mRNAs expression levels, and reactive oxygen species.
Moreover, CSNPs show double- and multi-membraned autophagic vesicles, and lead
to cell death of blastocoels. Conversely, treatment with rapamycin, which plays an
important role as a central regulator of cellular proliferation and stress responses,
decreased CSNPs-induced mitochondrial Ca+2 overloading, apoptosis, oxidative stress,
ER stress, and autophagy. In vivo studies demonstrated that CSNPs injection has
significant toxic effect on primordial and developing follicles. Notably, rapamycin
rescued oxidative stress-induced embryonic defects via modulating gene expression
of sirtuin and mammalian target of rapamycin. Interestingly, CSNPs treatment alters
epigenetic reprogramming in mouse embryos. Overall, these observations suggest
that rapamycin treatment could ameliorate CSNPs-induced developmental defects
in preimplantation embryos. The data from this study would facilitate to understand
the toxicity of these CSNPs, and enable the engineering of safer nanomaterials for
therapeutic applications.

INTRODUCTION

accumulate in the ovaries, and this accumulation results
in ovarian damage, causes an imbalance in the distribution
of mineral elements and sex hormones, decreases fertility,
and causes oxidative stress in mice [8]. The daily
inhalation of cadmium oxide nanoparticles (CdO NPs,
230μg/m3) increased the uterine weight and altered the
placental weight of pregnant CD-1 mice [9]. At a dose of
0.8 mg/mouse in pregnant mice, silica nanoparticles (SiO2)
and TiO2 NPs caused a decrease in the uterine weight and
an increase in the fetal reabsorption rate [10]. Many NPs,
such as TiO2 NPs, SiO2 NPs [10], quantum dots (QDs)
[11], and carbon NPs [12], can also penetrate the placental
barrier. Exposure to NPs during the gestational period
affects fetal organogenesis and morphology [13]. Several
NPs exhibit detrimental effects on both male and female

Nanotechnology is a key technology that plays an
important role in various disciplines, such as electronics,
the optical industry, environmental engineering,
biotechnology, and nanomedicines [1-4]. It is very well
known that chitosan nanoparticles (CSNPs) are nontoxic, biodegradable polycationic polymers with low
immunogenicity [5]. However, previous studies have
shown that CSNPs are cytotoxic to tumor cell lines [6].
Furthermore, Loh et al. [7] found that CSNPs could be
internalized by human liver cells, reducing the cell’s
viability and proliferation and compromising the integrity
of the cell membrane.
Titanium dioxide nanoparticles (TiO2 NPs) can
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

74658

Oncotarget

fertility and fetal development, and these adverse effects
are related to NP composition, surface modification, dose,
exposure route, and animal species [14].
Besides metal nanoparticles, non-metallic
nanoparticles also have influence in toxicity of
reproductive systems. For example, Farombi et al.
[15] showed that intraperitoneally administered carbon
nanotubes (CNTs) in rats at a dose of 0.25~1.0 mg/kg
for 5 days produced marked histopathological changes
in both the testis and epididymis, decreased the plasma
testosterone levels, and increased oxidative stress in
both the testis and spermatozoa. The effects of CNTs
on embryonic development in CD1 female mice were
observed through CNTs injections on gestational day (GD)
5.5. They found that CNTs induced early miscarriages,
fetal malformations, and oxidative stress in malformed
fetuses [16]. Recently, Xu et al. [17] studied the effects
of reduced graphene oxide (RGO) on female mouse
reproductive ability, at 6.25-25 mg/kg one or 30 day before
mating or on gestation day 6 or 20. The results suggest
that RGOs has no significant reproductive adverse effects;
however, when small-RGO was administered during late
gestation, most of the pregnant mice died and some mice
had malformed fetuses. In another study, Tsuchiya et al.
[13] injected the pregnant mice with fullerene at doses of
25-137 mg/kg on GD10 and GD11, and demonstrated that
most of the embryos were died after 18 h of treatment.
Among them, 50% of the embryos showed morphological
abnormalities at the 50 mg/kg dose, especially in head
region. Particularly, treatment with 50 mg/kg had a
seriously harmful effect on the yolk sac, such as a
shrunken membrane and narrowed blood vessels.
In our previous study, we showed that after morula
stage embryos were developed to blastocyst in culture
media with or without CSNPs, when they were transferred
to recipients, the percentage of blastocysts resulting in
viable pups was significantly reduced. These detrimental
effects are linked to reduced total cell numbers,
enhanced apoptosis, and abnormal blastocoel formation
at the blastocyst stage, indicating that CSNPs treatment
might have long-term adverse biological effects during
pregnancy [18]. The unique physicochemical properties
of CSNPs can enhance their biological effects, and they
could cause developmental toxicity to embryos. There
are growing concerns regarding the effects of NPs on
pregnant women and the possibility that they can cross
the placental barrier and cause fetal harm [13, 19-23].
However, little is known regarding the potential toxicity of
CSNPs on embryo development in the context of animal
studies. This area of study is important because CSNPs
are administered to the human body via several routes to
various tissues through the systemic circulation [24-26].
Rapamycin plays an important role as a central
regulator of metabolism, growth, cellular proliferation,
stress responses, and cell cycle progression [27] and the
dysregulation of mTOR is linked to the development of
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

various chronic diseases including insulin resistance,
diabetes, cardiovascular disease, and obesity; as well as
progression of various types of cancer [28-30]. Previous
study suggested that rapamycin can protect the neuronal
cells from apoptosis induced by rotenone treatment by
inducing autophagy [31].
In this study, firstly we investigated the mechanism
of CSNPs-induced embryo damage caused by oxidative
and ER stress and autophagy. Secondly, we evaluated the
protective effect of rapamycin on CSNPs-induced damage
of preimplantation embryos and finally, we investigated
short-term in vivo toxic effects of CSNPs on ovary,
embryo development, and implantation in female mice.

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Cellular uptake and effects of CSNPs on
blastocyst-stage embryos
A previous study reported that different types of cell
death (apoptosis, necrosis, and autophagy) contribute to
the pathophysiology of different human disorders [32],
in which autophagy is one among process of cell death
and autophagy acts as either a survival or death safeguard
mechanism on different environmental stresses and cell
types. Recent studies suggest that autophagy, a highlyregulated intracellular process for the degradation of longlived proteins and damaged organelles, may represent a
general cellular and tissue response to oxidative stress
[33, 34]. However, when oxidative stress reaches a level
beyond the control of cellular protective mechanisms, cell
death will occur through necrosis, apoptosis, or autophagic
cell death [35, 36]. In this study, we are interested to
investigate whether CSNPs triggered the production
of excessive intracellular reactive oxygen species
(ROS), resulting in autophagic death of preimplantation
embryo. We examined the interaction of CSNPs with
preimplantation embryos and the activation of various
genes involved in embryonic physiological processes. The
embryos treated with CSNPs showed severely swollen
mitochondria, autophagosomes (mitophagosomes), lipid
droplets (lipophagy), and lysosomes were the predominant
types of autophagic vacuoles (Figure S1), indicating that
removing the damaged mitochondria and the accumulated
lipid droplets is most pertinent for protecting host cells
from CSNPs-induced injury.
CSNPs are well suited for studying the influence
of nanomaterials on various biological processes because
they are more soluble in aqueous solutions than other
nanomaterials [37]. We used CSNPs with a diameter
of 100 nm to determine the CSNPs-induced damage on
preimplantation embryos, according to our previous study
[18]. The determination of the size of the NPs used is an
important factor for assessments of toxicology, cellular
74659

Oncotarget

distribution and uptake amount. Therefore, the size of
the prepared CSNPs was determined using dynamic light
scattering (DLS) and transmission electron microscopy

(TEM). The synthesized CSNPs were distributed
uniformly and showed spherical in shape (Figure 1A). The
average size of the particles was 100 nm (Figure 1B) when

Figure 1: Characterization and localization of CSNPs. A. TEM images of several fields were used to measure the particle sizes

of CSNPs. B. Histogram showing the particle size distribution ranging from 80 nm to 160 nm based on TEM images of CSNPs. C. DLS
of CSNPs. D. CSNPs penetrated the zona pellucida and exited inside the zona pellucida. The red circle indicates CSNP and shows high
magnification. E. CSNPs passed the zona pellucida and are shown in the perivitelline space and cavity. F. Blue and yellow arrows indicate
the CSNPs and autophagosomes. G. Green arrow indicates autophagosome (AP). H. Black, green, and yellow arrows indicate mitochondria,
autophagosomes, and autophagice vacuoles, respectively. I. Dashed line showed each single cell of CSNPs treated blastocyst. J. The red
box shows autophagy and autophagic vesicles. K. High magnification of J, dA and mA indicate double- and multi-membrane vesicles. L.
Blue arrows indicate high magnification of autophagosome. M. Orange arrows indicate dilation of the ER lumen.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

74660

Oncotarget

it was estimated from measuring more than 200 particles
from TEM images. From Dynamic Light Scattering (DLS)
analysis, the average size was found to be 120 nm (Figure
1C), which is slightly larger than those observed in TEM,
might be due to the influence of Brownian motion.
We next detected the uptake of CSNPs in blastocyst
embryos using TEM to examine whether preimplantation
embryos could internalize CSNPs. CSNPs have a large
number of atoms, which enable its distinction from
cellular structures using TEM. After treating morulastage embryos with CSNPs (100µg/ml) for 24 h, CSNPs
were found inside the zona pellucida and the perivitelline
space (Figure 1D and 1E). CSNPs were numerous inside
the cells and were dispersed in the cytosol (Figure 1F and
1G). Blastocysts showing the initial stages of apoptosis
were filled with small and electron-lucent vesicles.
The aggregated vesicles were frequently observed to
amalgamate, followed by the appearance of “empty zones”
in the cytoplasm, such as the formation of large vacuoles
(Figure 1H), which were scarce in control embryos.
In the blastocysts, CSNPs mostly accumulated on
and around autophagosomal membranes (Figure 1I and
1J). The autophagic vacuoles were recognized as doublemembrane structures with contents ranging from granular
cytoplasm, degenerated organelles and endoplasmic or
protein aggregates. CSNPs-treated blastocysts showed
double- and multi-membraned autophagic vesicles (Figure
1K and 1L; Figure S1). In addition, CSNPs caused the
dilation ER membranes (Figure 1M). However, whether
CSNPs entered the nucleus was somewhat unclear, even
at the prolonged incubation time.

cell death [40]. In this study, we found that in an
immunofluorescence assay, LC3-II expression and the
number of puncta in blastocysts were noticeable in the
CSNPs-treated groups, whereas the blastocysts pretreated
with rapamycin and then treated with CSNPs had a lesser
number of puncta than the CSNPs treatment group alone
(Figure 2B). Interestingly, CSNPs-treated blastocysts
showed 2 different patterns for LC3-II expression: the
CSNPs-treated group had a higher ratio for the TypeII expression pattern than the expression pattern for
Type-I as compared with the control or the CSNPs+
rapamycin-treated group (Figure 2C). The increased
amount of cytoplasmic LC3+ signal per cell indicates that
the conversion of LC3-I to LC3-II increased following a
shift to CSNPs-supplemented medium and in response to
rapamycin (Figure 2B and 2C). In contrast, LC3 punctate
were less observed in control blastocysts. We propose
that LC-3 expression most likely reflects the direct effects
of CSNPs that are dependent on both apoptosis and
autophagy machinery.
As shown in Figure 2B and 2C, the increased
amount of cytoplasmic LC3+ signal per cell indicates that
the conversion of LC3-I to LC3-II increased following
a shift to both of CSNPs-supplemented medium and
rapamycin+CSNPs: GRP78 and LC-3 protein expression
in CSNPs-treated groups are significantly increased
compared to control (Figure 2E). After the embryos were
treated with CSNPs for 24 h, they showed different sized
cavity, from 0 (arrested morula stage embryo) to 100%
(normal stage blastocyst embryo) (Figure 2F). Because
of the differences in the sizes of the blastocoels, it was
apparent that different development levels were caused by
CSNPs.

CSNPs induce autophagy via ER-activated stress
in blastocyst-stage embryos

CSNPs induces mitochondrial Ca2+ overloading

Previous studies reported that ER stress can activate
autophagy in plants and algae [38, 39], suggesting that the
signaling pathways controlling autophagy activation are
involved in response to this intracellular stress. To connect
ER stress with autophagy, we are interested to study the
link between ER stress and autophagy in CSNPs-treated
embryos. Therefore, we examined the expression of ER
stress-activated genes, such as Atf4, Ire1a, Chop, Perk,
and Grp78/Bip. The expression levels of the ER stressrelated genes were increased (Figure 2A). Thus, our
observation demonstrated that CSNPs-induced autophagy
required the classical autophagic machinery, including the
autophagosome-initiating molecule Beclin 1, along with
molecules involved in the membrane extension of the
autophagosomal membranes: Atg7, and LC3 (Figure 2D).
Lysosomal turnover of the autophagosomal
biomarker LC3-II reflects starvation-induced autophagic
activity, and detecting LC3 by immunofluorescence has
become a reliable method for monitoring autophagy
and autophagy-related processes, including autophagic
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Ca2+ trafficking in and out of the ER regulate
diverse cellular responses and signaling transduction
pathways relevant to the stress response, the modulation
of transcriptional processes, and development [41]. A
study from Rizzuto et al. [41] suggested that the acute
release of Ca2+ from the ER can trigger a variety of
signaling mechanisms that promote cell death, mainly
by Ca2+-mediated mitochondrial cell death. To assess the
effect of CSNPs on the ER, we measured the ER stress
level and the mitochondrial Ca2+ level in different-sized
embryos with different blastocoel sizes (0%; arrested
morula embryo, 30%, 80%, and 100%). As shown in
Figure 2G and 2H, the treatment of mouse embryos with
CSNPs significantly increased the staining intensity of
ER-Tracker Blue-White DPX dye as compared with the
control or the CSNPs- and rapamycin-treated groups.
This observation suggested that rapamycin, as an ER
stress inhibitor, can lead to the reduction of cellular injury
in CSNPs-induced damage. These results indicate that
the supplementation of the culture medium with CSNPs
74661

Oncotarget

CSNPs induce ER stress and activate the UPR in
mouse blastocyst-stage embryos

induces Ca2+ overloading at the mouse blastocyst stage.
The above results implicate CSNPs as a kind of ER
stress inducer that elicits unmanageable apoptosis in
preimplantation embryos. Calpain proteins and inositol
1,4,5-triphosphate receptor type1 (IP3R1) are known
to play important roles in various biological processes,
including cell differentiation and apoptosis. As shown in
Figure 2I, abrogating activities of Calpain2 and IP3R1 are
closely implicated in the modulation of calcium levels by
CSNPs in the ER.

The treatment of morula embryos with CSNPs
revealed that the presence of these protein aggregates that
are sometimes found inside autophagic vacuoles and ER
dilation are characteristic of ER stress (Figure 1K, 1L, 1M
and Figure S1). To validate this concept, we focused on
the expression levels of ER stress- and unfolded protein
response (UPR) marker-genes. Real time qRT-PCR

Figure 2: Effects of rapamycin on CSNPs-induced ER stress and autophagy in preimplantation embryos. A. Morula

embryos were cultured with CSNPs with or without rapamycin. Expression levels of genes involved in ER stress, such as Atf4, Ire1a,
Chop, Perk, and Grp78, were measured by real time qRT-PCR. Rapamycin-treated groups restored their expression levels. B. Induction
of autophagy by CNSPs and the rescue effect of rapamycin. Representative images of cells were taken using a fluorescence microscope.
Note the red color showing the localization of punctate LC3. C. Based on immunostaining data, we divided the puncta into two groups
(Types I and II). The numbers of LC3 puncta were counted and separated into 2 groups by expression patterns. D. The autophagy-related
gene expression analyses were measured by real time qRT-PCR. Atg7, Belcin1, and LC3 mRNA expression levels were significantly
induced in the CSNPs-treated group, but were restored by rapamycin treatment. E. Expression analysis of GRP78 and LC3 in CSNPs or
rapamycin+CSNPs treated embryos using Western blot. F. CSNPs induced an abnormal developmental rate. Four groups were created
based on the developmental rate. Ca2+ and ER stress in cells were analyzed. G. The effects of CSNPs and rapamycin on Rhod-2-AM
fluorescence in blastocysts dependent on the developmental rate. H. Blastocysts from each group were labeled with ER tracker to visualize
ER localization and expression. ER distribution/expression patterns were evaluated using fluorescence microscopy. I. Expression analysis
of calpain2 and type 1 IP3R. * and ** indicate p<0.05,and p<0.01, respectively. RM indicates rapamycin.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

74662

Oncotarget

analysis showed that Grp78/Bip, Ire1a, Perk, Atf4, and
Chop/Gadd153 mRNAs expression levels in blastocysts
treated with CSNPs were significantly increased compared
with those of the control group (Figure 2A). It was
necessary to determine the importance of ER stress and
UPR markers in several stages of blastocyst development,
including the following stages: no cavity (0%; arrested
morula embryo), small cavity (30% blastocoel), middlesized cavity (80% blastocoel) or 100% blastocoel. The
rate of development for blastocysts with normal cavities
in the rapamycin-treated group was significantly increased
compared with those of the CSNPs-treated groups (Figure
3A). These observations demonstrated that pretreatment
with rapamycin rescued the defects of the partially
developed embryo through suppressing the ER stressmediated response.
Relative sizes of the inner cell mass (ICM) and
trophectoderm (TE) were determined using CDX2

and OCT3/4 staining. The cell size of the ICM was
significantly increased in the group treated with CSNPs
or/and the group treated with rapamycin+CSNPs as
compared with the control. In the case of TE, the CSNPstreated groups showed only a significant increasing in
size compared with the control or the group treated with
rapamycin+CSNPs (Figure 3B).
Therefore, we examined the expression of ER stress
activated genes, such as Grp78/Bip, Ire1a, Perk, Xbp1,
Atf4, Jnk1, and Chop/Gadd153. The expression levels of
most of these genes were significantly higher in the 0%
stage, except Grp78/Bip (Figure 3C). Among the members
of the UPR signaling pathways, IRE1a is a key molecule
that functions as a rheostat capable of regulating cell fate.
IRE1a can stimulate the activation of apoptotic signaling
kinase-1 (ASK1), which causes the downstream activation
of the stress kinases Jun-N-terminal kinase (JNK) and
p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK), which

Figure 3: The rescue effect of rapamycin on CSNPs-induced ER stress. A. After treatment with CSNPs, morula-stage embryos

exhibited developmental delay. Blastocoel size was divided into four groups (0% to 100%) based on the effect caused by CSNPs. B.
Immunostaining of OCT3/4 for the ICM marker and CDX2 for the trophoblast cell marker were performed, and then size was measured.
The graph shows each cell size. The ICM cell size was larger when the ICM was treated with CSNPs and rapamycin compared to that of the
control. In the TE, the cell size was recovered by rapamycin treatment. RP indicates rapamycin. C. The expression levels of various genes
involved in ER stress, such as Grp78, Ire1a, Perk, Xbp1, Atf4, Jnk1, and Chop, were determined in each group of blastocysts. *, **, ***,
and NS indicate p<0.05, p<0.01, p<0.001, and not significant, respectively..

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

74663

Oncotarget

promote apoptosis [42]. ATF6 is a transcriptional factor
that, upon induction of ER stress, translocate to the Golgi
compartment, where it is cleaved by the action of two
proteases, Site-2 protease (S1P) and Site-2 protease (S2P).
ATF4 drives the important targets a transcriptional factor
C/Ebp homologous protein (CHOP), growth arrest, DNA
damage-inducible 34 (GADD34), and ATF3 [43]. The
activation of these ER stress genes may be responsible for
CSNPs-induced cell death, and rapamycin can alleviate
this CSNPs-induced ER stress. To obtain further evidence
for the direct effects of the apoptosis of blastocysts treated
with CSNPs, embryos were treated with CSNPs and the
results showed that more than 50% of the CSNPs-treated
embryos were arrested at an earlier stage of blastocyst
development compared with the control group or the
group treated with rapamycin+CSNPs (Figure 3A).
Next, we used different concentrations of rapamycin
(5, 10, 50, 100μg/ml) to determine the optimal dosage

of rapamycin that could prevent the CSNPs induced
toxicity. As shown in Table S1, 100μg/ml of rapamycin
significantly prevented CSNPs-induced embryo toxicity.
These findings suggested that rapamycin had protective
roles against CSNPs induced damages.
To determine whether CSNPs promote the survival
or death of preimplantation mouse embryos, we exposed
the embryos to autophagy activators, rapamycin and then
evaluated the development of the CSNPs-treated embryos
and their embryonic cell death (Figure 5A). Only the
CSNPs-treated embryos showed significant detrimental
effects in the embryo development process, whereas the
embryos pre-treated with rapamycin had more developed
blastocysts and fewer apoptotic cells. We determined that
rapamycin+CSNPs treatment promotes embryo survival
and protects against CSNPs-induced apoptosis. As shown
in Figure 5B, mRNAs expression levels of Bax and
Caspase-3 in CSNPs-treated embryos were significantly

Figure 4: The rescue effect of rapamycin on CSNPs-induced mitochondrial damage. A. Mitochondrial structural

disorganization in blastomeres was determined by TEM. B. The number and size of mitochondria per blastomere were determined by TEN
and copy numbers of mitochondria per blastomere were determined by real time qRT-PCR in the control group, the CSNPs-treated group
and the group treated with both CSNPs and rapamycin..C. Mitochondrial morphology in the control group, the CSNPs-treated group and
the group treated with both rapamycin and CSNPs was visualized via MitoTracker Green FM staining in different groups of blastocysts. D.
Mitochondrial activity levels of ATP synthase, ATP5b, Cbr1, Rhot2, Cytochrome C, Sco1, Sco2, Imp1, Mvp17, and Mrfp1 were evaluated
using real time qRT-PCR. *, **, ***, NS, and ND indicate p < 0.05, p < 0.01, p < 0.001, not significant, and not determined, respectively.
RM indicates rapamycin.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

74664

Oncotarget

increased when compared with the control, whereas Bcl-2
mRNA expression was significantly decreased. Next, the
total number of cells per blastocyst and the cell numbers
of the ICM and TE were counted. The results suggest
that the CSNPs-treated groups had significant reductions
in the total numbers of cells when compared with the
control group. Also, CSNPs-treated embryos had a small
number of ICM, although after rapamycin treatment, the
number of ICM was rescued (Figure 5C). Taken together,
these results suggest that CSNPs treatment may promote
apoptosis of blastocyst stage embryos.

compared to the control group or the group treated with
both of rapamycin+CSNPs. It is very well-known that
SIRTUINS-1 expression has been reported to play crucial
roles in the self-renewal and differentiation processes in
response to environmental stress [44] or offset of aging
process triggered by oxidative stress [45]. In addition,
SIRTUINS-3 expression can also increase the expression
of mitochondrial factors such as ATP synthase and
Cytochrome C oxidase subunits [46] or can promote cell
survival thorough deacetylation of Ku70, which involved
in DNA repair, in response to genotoxic agents [47, 48].
Also, SIRTUINS-6 function has been associated with
genomic stability, DNA repair, and gene silencing. It
can deacetylate histones in H3K9Ac and contributing to
heterochromatin formation and telomere stability [49].
Taken together, these observations indicated that downregulation of Sirtuin-1 and -3 mRNAs expression leads
to mitochondrial dysfunction via oxidative stress, which
is one of the vital mechanisms for nanoparticle-mediated
toxicity in mouse preimplantation embryos.
As shown in Figure 5E, real time qRT-PCR analysis
showed that rapamycin pretreatment decreased mTOR,
Cyclin D1, and c-Myc expression levels. This effect
was accompanied by decreased expression levels of G1associated proteins, such as CCDN1 (Cyclin D1) and
c-MYC. Considering blastocyst with developmental
defects by CSNPs treatment exhibited a delay in
mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) replication, we analyzed
ICM-, TE-, and three germ layer-specific marker
gene expressions, which involved in development of
preimplantation embryos, using the RT2 Profiler PCR
Array (Figure 5F). We found that there were substantial
differences among the CSNPs-treated, control, and
rapamycin+CSNPs-treated
groups.
Surprisingly,
differentially expressed genes, namely, Lif, Stat3, Klf4,
Sox2, Cdx2, Emos, Krt8, B3gnt, Gata6, Bmp4, and Fgf5,
were all substantially down regulated upon exposure to
CSNPs, whereas most of the down regulated genes were
rescued by rapamycin treatment. Overall, these results
suggest that rapamycin pretreatment may promote the
transition from the morula stage to the blastocyst stage,
and blastocoel formation, thus preventing cell cycle arrest
and apoptosis induced by CSNPs treatment.

CSNPs induce mitochondria disorganization via
the modulation of mTOR and Sirtuin signaling
CSNPs
internalization
causes
structural
disorganization in mitochondria. After internalization,
the size of mitochondria was increased, however copy
numbers of mitochondria per blastomere were reduced
(Figure 4A and 4B). As shown in Figure 4C, CSNPs
treated groups showed that mitochondria per blastomere
in CSNPs-treated groups were significantly reduced
compared to control group. Further, our results show
that CSNPs influence the genes expression involved in
mitochondrial activity, such as ATP synthase, Atp5b, Cbr1,
Ras Homolog Family Member T2 (Rhot2), Cytochrome C,
synthesis of Cytochrome C Oxidase 1 (Sco1), synthesis
of Cytochrome C Oxidase2 (Sco2), Imp1, Myelin,
lymphocyte protein 17 (Mvp17), and Mrfp1, whereas
rapamycin rescues the defects caused by CSNPs (Figure
4D). Thus, these results suggest that CSNPs treatment
may promote mitochondria disorganization of blastocyst
stage embryos. To explore the possible mechanisms of
mitochondrial dynamics impairment, we examined ROS
level in blastocyst stage embryos at 12 h after CSNPs or
rapamycin+CSNPs treatment. To provide evidence for
CSNPs induce non radical ROS, we assessed CSNPsinduced ROS using the H2DCF-DA assay, which
measures peroxide-dependent oxidation of H2DCF-DA to
fluorescent DCF. As shown in Figure S2, the ROS signal
level was five-folds higher in CSNPs-treated group than
those of control or rapamycin+CSNPs treated group.
To determine the underlying mechanisms of
mitochondrial defect and genomic stability caused by
CSNPs, we examined Sirtuin family gene expression
in CSNPs-induced embryonic cell death. As shown in
Figure 5D, real time qRT-PCR results suggest that the
expression levels of Sirtuins-1, and Sirtuins-3 mRNAs in
the presence of CSNPs were markedly reduced (Figure
5D). However, rapamycin pretreatment increased
Sirtuin-1, -3, and -6 mRNAs expression, recovered antiapoptotic protein Bcl-2 mRNA expression, and reduced
Caspase-3 mRNA expression (Figure 5B). As shown in
Figure 2A, more than 50% of the CSNPs-treated embryos
were arrested at an early stage of blastocyst development
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

CSNPs
treatment
reprogramming

alters

epigenetic

Epigenetic mechanisms are essential elements
for the regulation of cellular differentiation and the
maintenance of cell type-specific gene expression patterns
[45]. Ten-eleven translocation proteins (TETs) enzymes
(TET-1/-2/-3) convert 5-methylcytosine (5-mC) to
5-hydroxymethylcytosine (5-hmC) in various embryonic
and adult tissues [50, 51]. To further characterize how
CSNPs treatment or rapamycin pretreatment modulates the
74665

Oncotarget

epigenetic reprogramming of preimplantation embryos,
we measured the mRNA expression levels of Tets, DNA
methyltransferase (Dnmts), density of 5-mC, and 5-hmC
signals. Even though the Tet-2 and -3 mRNAs expression
in CSNPs-treated group do not show a statistical
difference compared to the control group, Tet-1 mRNA
in the CSNPs treated groups was more strongly expressed
(Figure 6A). Of note, Tet-2 mRNAs expression levels
were significantly lower in the blastocysts pretreated with
rapamycin compared to those treated with CSNPs alone.
There was no significant difference in the expression of
Tet-3 mRNA among the three groups.
DNA methylation is associated with repressive,
inactive chromatin and is a key stable and heritable
epigenetic modification [52]. The majority of 5-mC occurs

at CpG dinucleotides that are modified up to 70-80% in a
cell type specific manner in human cells and are faithfully
transmitted to daughter cells during cell division [53, 54].
DNA methylation is catalyzed by DNMT1, DNMT3a and
DNMT3b. DNMT1 maintains existing DNA methylation
patterns, whereas DNMT3a and DNMT3b are mainly
involved in the de novo establishment of DNA methylation
marks [55, 56]. We examined whether CSNPs-mediated
DNA demethylation may be a DNMTs-mediated process
and also to examine whether CSNPs is directly targeting
of DNA methylation through the DNMTs. To determine
the impact of CSNPs on the expression of Dnmt families,
the embryos were treated with CSNPs, and their relative
mRNA expression levels were measured. Interestingly,
CSNPs-treated groups exhibited significant reductions

Figure 5: The effects of rapamycin on CSNPs-induced embryonic defects. A. The determination of apoptosis in preimplantation

embryos after CSNPs treatment. The numbers of apoptotic cells were measured using TUNEL-positive cells. Apoptotic cells were observed
very rarely in the control group. The CSNPs-treated groups showed increased numbers of TUNEL-positive cells. After pre-treatment with
rapamycin, apoptosis decreased. Various concentrations of rapamycin (5~100 µg/ml) resulted in the suppression of apoptotic cells. B. Real
time qRT-PCR analysis was used to measure Bcl-2, Bax, and Caspase-3 mRNA expression. C. Immunostaining analysis of ICM and TE
cells using CDX2 and OCT3/4. The total cell numbers were measured in the ICM and the TE. The CSNPs-treated group showed a lower
number of ICM and a lower total cell number. Rapamycin rescued the effect of CSNPs. D. Real time qRT-PCR analysis of the Sirtuin
family pathway. E. Real time qRT-PCR analysis of the mTOR pathway. F. The graphs of the validation of self-renewal, ICM, TE, and three
germ cell layer markers. The heat map represents the changes in gene expression in the control, CSNPs-treated and rapamycin-pretreated
embryos. The 6 groups are clustered around the horizontal axis with gene names on the vertical axis. *, **, and NS indicate p < 0.05, p <
0.01, and not significant, respectively. RM indicates rapamycin.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

74666

Oncotarget

in Dnmt1, Dnmt3a, and Dnmt3b mRNAs expression.
Conversely, rapamycin pretreatment rescued the effect
caused by CSNPs, in which the relative Dnmt1, Dnmt3a,
and Dnmt3b mRNAs expression levels were comparable
with the control (Figure 6B). 5-hmC is known to play an
important key intermediate for active DNA demethylation
pathway during DNA repair [57]. The widely used bisulfite
sequencing technique does not distinguish between 5-mC
and 5-hmC. Therefore, in this study we used synthetic
oligonucleotides with different distributions of cytosine
as templates for generation of DNAs containing 5-mC
and 5-hmC. The resulting CSNPs treated embryos shows
higher level of 5-mC and 5-hmC than untreated groups.
However, the embryos treated with rapamycin+CSNPs

exhibited lower level of 5-mC and 5-hmC than CSNP
treatment only. It suggests that CSNPs play crucial role in
methylation process of embryonic cells (Figure 6C).
Next, we examined the density of 5-hmC and 5-mC
signals from fully developed to arrest embryos (Figure
6D and Figure S4A). In control-derived blastocyst
stage embryos, 5-mC signal intensity in ICM cells was
stronger than those of TE cells, whereas 5-hmC signals
in ICM cells was weaker than those of TE cells. After
rapamycin pretreatment, 5-mC and 5-hmC signal levels
were increased in ICM and TE cells. This finding suggests
that rapamycin recovered the CSNPs-induced epigenetic
changes. In 100% blastocoels treated with CSNPs, the
signal levels of 5-hmC were slightly decreased in the ICM

Figure 6: CSNPs-altered epigenetics in preimplantation embryos. A. Real time qRT-PCR analysis of the Tet family (Tet-1, Tet-

2, Tet-3) and B. the Dnmt family (Dnmt1, Dnmt3a, Dnmt3b). C. 5-mC to 5-hmC analysis. D. Immunostaining of 5-mC and 5-hmC. The
fluorescence intensities of 5-mC and 5-hmC were measured in both the ICM and the TE. E. Heterochromatin condensation was observed
in the control and CNSPs-treated groups using TEM. To calculate each type of heterochromatin and based on the condensation, we divided
the embryos into 3 groups: Types I, II and III. Transcriptional silencing is associated with the targeting of genomic sequences to repressive
(heterochromatic) nuclear compartments. F. The H3K27me3 expression level was analyzed using immunofluorescence staining. Embryos
were divided into Types I, II, and III by their expression patterns. G. The relative expression levels of methylase (Ezh2) and its co-factors
(Eed5, Suz12) were measured using real time qRT-PCR analysis. *, **, and NS indicate p<0.05, p<0.01, and not significant, respectively.
RM indicates rapamycin.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

74667

Oncotarget

and TE, whereas on rapamycin+CSNPs group, intensity
of the 5-mC signal in the TE and ICM cells resulted in a
dramatic increase compared to CSNPs group (Figure 6D).
In 80% blastocoels treated with CSNPs, the expression
levels of 5-mC and 5-hmC signals were significantly
reduced when compared to control (Figure S4B) and
surprisingly rapamycin+CSNPs treated 80% blastocoels
shows further reduced level of both 5-mC and 5-hmC
signals (Figure S4B). In 30% blastocoels treated with
CSNPs or rapamycin+CSNPs, the expression levels of
5-mC and 5-hmC were not significantly different between
CSNPs and rapamycin+CSNPs treated groups (Figure
S4B). However, the expression levels of 5-mC and
5-hmC signals were significantly different from control
on delayed embryonic development. Taken together,
this finding indicates that CSNPs may regulate active
or passive DNA methylation in the TE cells of mouse
blastocysts.
Eukaryotic interphase nuclei are highly
compartmentalized structures and have two types of
chromatin, such as euchromatin and heterochromatin,
which are potentially active and inactive, respectively
[58]. The architectural organization of the nucleus and
the regulation of transcription are functionally linked.
There is also significant evidence that shows that
transcriptional silencing is associated with the targeting
of genomic sequences to repressive (heterochromatic)
nuclear compartments. Furthermore, it has long been
known that the methylation of particular DNA sequences
is often linked to their transcriptional inactivity [59].
Next, we wanted to observe the effect of rapamycin on the
chromatin display using TEM. The TEM results were used
to determine the ratio of heterochromatin to euchromatin,
the location of the nucleus, and its shape. Each cell
showed three types of chromatin. Interestingly, control
group showed a slight condensed chromatin, whereas the
CSNPs-treated groups showed more condensed chromatin
than the control group (Figure 6E and Figure S3).
In this study, we examined H3K27me3 localization
and expression and found that there were significant
changes in the modifications of both the ICM and TE.
Depend on blastocyst development stages, we divided into
3 groups. Of note, CSNPs treated group shown type I and
III expression patterns, but not for type II. The intensity
of the H3K27me3 level was lower in CSNPs-treated
blastocysts compared to control blastocysts; however,
rapamycin rescued the side effects caused by CSNPs
treatment (Figure 6F). Finally, we were also interested in
studying the effects of CSNPs on the expression of the
methyltransferase of H3K27me3 and PRC2 complex such
as the Ezh2 co-factors, Eed5 and Suz12. We found that
global levels of H3K27me3 decreased in the CSNPstreated groups, corresponding to the time of major
embryonic genome activation. Ezh2 and Eed5 mRNA
expression was remarkably decreased in the CSNPstreated embryos compared to the control; conversely,
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Suz12 expression was not significantly different from
the control (Figure 6G). Interestingly, pretreatment with
rapamycin rescued the side effects caused by CSNPs
in the embryos in all cases. Previously, a study from
bovine oocytes and pre-implantation embryos examined
the expression levels of H3K27me3, Ezh2 and its cofactors, Eed5 and Suz12 genes [60]. The global level of
H3K27me3 was highest in oocytes, decreased during
initial cleavages, and increased again from the 8-cell to
the blastocyst stage [61]. Taken together, CSNPs treatment
alters the epigenetic regulatory mechanism of genomewide gene expression.

Rapamycin rescues suppressive effects of CSNPs
on postimplantation embryo development
To determine the effects of rapamycin on CSNPsinduced developmental defects, blastocysts derived from
the control group, the group treated with CSNPs only, and
the group treated with rapamycin+CSNPs were transferred
into recipients, respectively and the numbers of blastocysts
with implantation bleeding (or spotting) were calculated
in the uteri of recipient mice. The implantation ratio of
the CSNPs-treated group was significantly lower than
the control or both of rapamycin+CSNPs-treated group.
The CSNPs definitely had a significant negative effect on
development, and rapamycin treatment showed a rescue
effect on postimplantation development (Figure S6A).
As shown in Figure 7A, the sex ratios of offspring were
determined in all treated groups, including the control
group. The CSNPs-treated groups had smaller male
ratios compared to both the control and the rapamycinand CSNPs-treated groups. The CSNPs-treated groups
showed higher placental weight and lower fetus weight,
whereas the rapamycin- and CSNPs-treated group
showed the reverse order (Figure 7A). These findings
indicate that CSNPs exposure at the morula stage for
24 h reduces embryo implantation, whereas rapamycin
treatment has a potential rescue effect on CSNPs-induced
postimplantation development (Figure S6B).
Normal placental development is important for
embryonic growth, and placental dysfunction leads to
miscarriage and fetal growth restrictions [10, 62, 63]. In
mice, there are three distinctive trophoblastic cell structures
in developing placenta that are formed by embryonic day
10 and persist throughout gestation: an inner labyrinthine
layer, an intermediate spongiotrophoblast layer, and
an outermost layer of trophoblast giant cells [64, 65].
To investigate the role of CSNPs treatment in placental
dysfunction, we examined placental abnormalities
through the observation of the spongiotrophoblast layer
using Periodic Acid-Schiff (PAS) staining. There was
a marked increase in the spongiotrophoblast layer in
CSNPs-derived placentae, and we found many mislocated
spongiotrophoblast cells in CSNPs treatment, and
74668

Oncotarget

rapamycin+CSNPs treated groups (Figure 7B and Figure
S6C). Of note, spongiotrophoblast areas in the cells in
some of the CSNPs-treated embryo derived placentae were
slightly increased, but most increases were not significant.
However, the length and area of the spongiotrophoblasts
in the CSNPs-treated group were different compared to
the control group, but rapamycin treatment rescued the
defects in spongiotrophoblast length and area (Figure 7B).
Defective placenta may affect the normal branching and/
or survival of the embryonic labyrinthine vascular system.
Abnormalities of the labyrinthine layer can be raised as a
consequence of abnormalities in the allantoic mesenchyme
or the trophoblast [65]. An intact spongiotrophoblast layer
is required for normal development of the labyrinthine

trophoblast layer [66]. Taken together, rapamycin might be
used to rescue placental abnormalities caused by CSNPs.
Next, we investigated the rescue effect of rapamycin
on the expression profiles of various genes involved in
placental development. Among these genes, the CSNPstreated groups showed downregulation of Msh2, Cdx2,
Gjb3, and Gbe1 mRNAs expression levels, whereas
Hand1 and Gcm1 mRNAs expression levels were
upregulated; Gys1 and Prl8a8 mRNAs expression showed
no significant difference between the treated and untreated
groups (Figure 7C). Interestingly, regardless of whether
the genes were upregulated or downregulated in the
CSNPs-treated conditions, all of these genes were rescued
by rapamycin pretreatment.

Figure 7: Comparison of sex ratio, placenta weight, and fetus weight in control and CSNPs or rapamycin+CSNPs
treated groups. Mouse blastocysts were treated with or without CSNPs, and with rapamycin+CSNPs, and transferred into uteri of

pseudopregnant mice. Pups were recovered by caesarian section at gestational day 20. A. The sex ratio, placenta weight, fetus weight, the
fetus and placenta ratio were analyzed. The rapamycin+ CSNPs-treated group showed a fetus/placenta ratio comparable with the control and
the CSNPs-treated groups. B. Morphology analysis of placenta by PAS staining from the control, the CSNPs, and CSNPs+rapamycin treated
group. PAS positive staining was observed in the decidua and junctional layers. In the spongiotrophoblasts, deep purple color indicates
glycogen cells. Of note, CSNPs-treated placenta exhibited a slightly high glycogen cell number/length. CSNPs or CSNPs+rapamycin
treated groups showed a lot of mislocation of spongiotrophoblasts. C. The relative expression levels of critical developmental genes,
including Mash2, Cdx2, Hand1, Gys1, Gcm1, Prl8a8, and Gjb3, in the E20 placenta. D. Rapamycin rescued abnormal regulation of
placental nutrient transporters caused by CSNPs treatment. E. Comparison of Ig, Lit1, Meg1, Peg3, Peg10, and Ragf1 mRNAs expression
in full-term derived placentas. *, **, and NS indicate p < 0.05, p < 0.01, and not significant, respectively. RM indicates rapamycin.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

74669

Oncotarget

Finally, we analyzed nutrient transport gene
expressions, such as Atp2a3, solute carrier family 22
member 3 (Slc22a3), and solute carrier family 40 (ironregulated transporter), member 1 (Slc40a1) (Figure
7D). These genes were expressed at higher levels in
the presence of CSNPs, whereas rapamycin treatment
modulated their expression levels so that they were
comparable to those of the control. Also, we evaluated the
expression of imprinted genes involved in the methylation
process (Figure 7E). Of these, the expression levels of
Lit1 and Meg1 mRNAs in the CSNPs-treated group were
significantly downregulated compared with those of the

control. However, rapamycin did not show any significant
rescue effect on the CSNPs-induced downregulation.
Conversely, the expression levels of Peg3, Peg10, and
Ragf1 mRNAs were slightly upregulated in the presence
of CSNPs, and in the group treated with rapamycin,
rapamycin rescued the effect caused by CSNPs. From
our analysis, we conclude that rapamycin is essential to
the rescue of placental development defects caused by
CSNPs and that CSNPs have a negative effect on normal
homeostasis in mouse embryos.

Figure 8: Short-term toxic effects on ovary, primodial follicles, and developing fetuses after injection of CSNPs into vein
of female mouse. Two different doses (500 or 1000 μg/kg per body weight) of CSNPs were injected into tail vein of female mice. Ten days
later, ovaries were recovered from CSNPs-injected female mice. A.-D. shows HE staining, TUNEL assay, Flow cytometry, Western blot
analysis, respectively. In CSNPs-injected groups, a lot of apoptosis (red color) was observed. BCL-2 expressions in CSNPs-injected groups
are significantly decreased or undetectable. E.-F. Real time qRT-PCR and immunohistochemistry analysis. Expression of Figla, Foxa3A,
Lhx8, and Nobox mRNAs, which is a biomaker of primordial follicle, were compared in control and CSNPs-treated groups. G. Comparison
of developing fetusus between control and CSNPs treated groups. At 10 day after injection of CSNPs into vein of female mice, female mice
were mated with fertile male mice and confirmed varginal plug at next morning (gestational day 0.5). Uteri from each female groups were
recovered at gestational day 9.5 (at 19.5 days after CSNPs injection), stained with Chicago blue dye, and counted developing fetuses.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

74670

Oncotarget

Temporal toxic effects of CSNPs on primordial
follicles, developing follicles, granulosa, and theca
cells by direct injection of CSNPs into tail vein of
female mice

exposure rather than short-term to impart its fetotoxic
effect.

CONCLUSIONS
	 The increased use of nanomaterials in our daily
life has raised concerns regarding their potential risks to
human health and their effects on biological behaviors
at the cellular, subcellular, and protein levels and in
terms of developmental delays. In particular, the use
of CSNPs in nanomedicine is ever increasing, and it is
important to understand their targeted and non-targeted
effects. Here, we report a comprehensive collection of
the significant nanoreprotoxicity of CSNPs in blastocysts
through their cellular uptake and their effects on various
signaling cascades, such as oxidative stress, ER stress,
and autophagy. Furthermore, we have demonstrated
the rescue effects of rapamycin in the amelioration of
CSNPs-induced detrimental effects in blastocysts. With
all of these data, we summarized the mechanisms of the
effects of CSNPs on preimplantation embryos (Figure S7).
CSNPs-treated embryos have detrimental effects in their
placentae that are linked to their structural and functional
aspects. Additionally, we analyzed the epigenetic
regulatory mechanisms of CSNPs-treated embryos by
immunofluorescence staining. Combined with advanced
microfabrication techniques, our studies indicated that the
CSNPs delivery system could be applied to other multiple
cells, including germ cells, with higher safety. This study
also provides a significant contribution to future research,
which should focus on the exact mechanisms of the
effects of CSNPs and should concentrate on producing
biocompatible and safer nanomaterials.

To corroborate the in vitro data, we examined the
potential adverse effects of CSNPs in vivo. Female mice
were intravenously injected at concentration of 500μg
CSNPs/kg or 1000μg CSNPs/kg body weight, and 10
days later ovaries were subjected to examination. The
results from in vivo studies suggest that CSNPs-treated
groups showed significant reduction in the number of
developing follicles, compared to control group (Figure
8A). Furthermore, TUNEL assay also showed significant
number of TUNEL positive granular and theca cells
(Figure 8B), whereas the number of TUNEL positive
cells rarely observed in control group. Therefore, ovarian
steroidogenesis, which plays a pivotal role for follicle
development, is expected to be hampered because of
CSNPs-induced loss of granular and theca cells. Further,
to substantiate apoptotic property of CSNPs, we performed
flow cytometry analysis (Figure 8C). The result from flow
cytometry analysis suggest that CSNPs enhances the level
of late apoptosis up to 3.3 folds for 500μg of CSNPs/
kg and 8.19 folds for 1000μg of CSNPs/kg treated mice
compared to control group which showed up to 1.55% late
apoptotic cells. However, the observation indicated that
CSNPs-treated mice showed only moderate apoptosis in
liver compared to ovaries. To support the data obtained
from in vivo, we performed western blotting analysis
which suggest that the expression of BCL-2 protein were
significantly decreased at lower dose of CSNPs (500μg/
kg) and not detectable at higher dose (1000μg/kg) (Figure
8D). All these findings indicated that CSNPs injection
causes adverse effects on ovarian function.
Real time qRT-PCR (Figure 8E) and
immunohistochemistry (Figure 8F) analysis was
performed using primordial follicle biomarkers, STELLA
and NOBOX. The result showed that primordial follicles
are significantly reduced at 10 days after CSNPs treatment.
Further, to examine in vivo toxicity of the newly ovulated
oocytes and fertilized embryos, we recovered blastocyst
stage embryos from gestational day 3.0 mice (12.5 day
after CSNPs injection). Notably, CSNPs-injected mice
produced a lot of blastocyst embryos (500μ/kg vs. 1000μ/
kg: 39±6.4 vs. 26.1±9.3 per mouse) than those (22±9 per
mouse) of control mice. However, there is no significant
difference between treated and control group in total cells,
CDX2 and OCT3/4-positive cells (Figure S5). Of note,
CSNPs treated pregnant mice have equal or more number
of fetuses than those of control group, indicating that
newly ovulated oocytes around 10 days after injection of
CSNPs into vein of female mice have no effect (Figure
8G). Taken together, our observations indicated that
CSNPs injection into female mice required long term
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Synthesis and characterization of CSNPs
CSNPs were prepared as described earlier
[18]. Briefly, chitosan solutions were prepared by
dissolving purified and sonicated chitosan in a 0.1M
acetic acid solution until the solution was transparent.
Tripolyphosphate (TPP) was dissolved in deionized water
at a concentration of 1 mg/ml. The chitosan solution
was mixed with the TPP solution, and the formation of
chitosan-TPP NPs began spontaneously via the TPPinitiated ionic gelation mechanism. The size of the
synthesized particles was measured using a Zetasizer
Nano ZS90 (Malvern Instruments Ltd, Worcestershire,
UK). Furthermore, the shape and morphology was
determined using TEM (JEM-1200EX). Ten microliters of
the nanoparticle suspension was placed on a copper grid,
and the excess liquid was removed with a piece of filter
paper. The grid was then air-dried.
74671

Oncotarget

Animal

100 kV.

Mitochondrial analysis

The mice were housed in wire cages at 22±1°C
under a 12 h light-dark cycle with 70% humidity and
had free access to water and food. All experiments were
conducted in accordance with the Konkuk University
Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals
(IACUC approval number: KU12044).

A Rhod2-AM (Molecular Probes, Eugene, OR)
probe was used to determine the mitochondrial Ca2+
level [68]. Rhod2-AM possesses a net positive charge,
which facilitates its sequestration into the mitochondria
because of its membrane potential-driven uptake. The use
of Rhod2-AM enhances the selectivity for mitochondrial
loading because this dye exhibits Ca2+-dependent
fluorescence only after it is oxidized, which occurs
preferentially within the mitochondria. Cells were treated
with CSNPs and incubated for 12h, and the cells were
then harvested, washed, and suspended in PBS containing
Rhod2-AM (1μM). For image analysis, the cells were
loaded with Rhod2-AM and incubated for 30 min at
37 °C. Cells were washed, and the stained cells were
mounted onto a microscope slide with mounting medium
(Vector Laboratories, USA). For mitochondrial staining,
embryos in culture were incubated in 160nM MitoTracker
(Molecular Probes, OR, USA) in DMEM before being
fixed and immunostained. For green fluorescent protein
(GFP) visualization, cells were only fixed and washed.
Microscopic images were collected using an Olympus BXUCB microscope and were processed using DP controller
software. Quantitative analysis of fluorescence intensity
was performed using MeTaMorph image analysis software
(Molecular Devices, California, USA).

Treatment
The dose of CSNPs was optimized as 100µg/
ml based on previous study [18]. For in vivo study, we
used two different doses such as 500µgof CSNPs/kg and
1000µg of CSNPs/kg. Two different doses, 500µg of
CSNPs/kg or1000µg of CSNPs/kg, are injected into tail
vein of female mouse for in vivo study.

Collection of mouse morula-stage embryos
The collection of morula-stage embryos from mice
was performed as described earlier [18]. Female ICR mice
(age 6-8 weeks) were superovulated by the injection of
5IU of the pregnant mare’s serum gonadotropin (PMSG),
followed 48 h later by an injection of 5IU of human
chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) and were then mated
with fertile male ICR mice. The day a vaginal plug was
found was defined as day 0.5 of gestation. Morulae stage
embryos from plug-positive females mice were obtained
by flushing the uterine tubes at 2.5 days post-mating using
CZB-HEPES medium. After the morula-stage embryos
were collected, they were cultured with KSOM [67]
including CSNPs or rapamycin+CSNPs for 24-28 h at 37
°C at 5% CO2. All reagents were purchased from SigmaAldrich (St. Louis, MO, USA).

ER analysis
Image analysis for ER staining was achieved by
seeding cells on a coverslip-loaded six-well plate at 50
blastocysts/ml. At 16 h after plating, blastocyst were
treated with CSNPs. Twelve hours later, the ER-Tracker
Blue-White DPX (Molecular Probes, Eugene, OR) probe
was added to blastocyst and was incubated for 30 min
under the same growth conditions. The loading solution
was removed, and blastocysts were then washed with PBS.
Microscopic images were collected using an Olympus
BX-UCB microscope and processed using DP controller
software. The quantitative analysis of fluorescent intensity
was performed using MeTaMorph image analysis software
(Molecular Devices, California, USA).

Localization of CSNPs in embryos by transmission
electron microscopy (TEM)
After fixation of arterial samples in 2.5%
glutaraldehyde (TED PELLA, CA, USA) in PBS (pH
7.2), specimens were post-fixed in 1% osmium tetroxide
(Heraeus, Hanau, Germany), dehydrated in graded
ethanol and propylene oxide (Acros Organics, USA), and
then embedded in Epoxy resin (mix with Nadic Methyl
Anhydride (NMA) and Dodecenyl Succinic Anhydride
(DDSA) and DMP-30, all reagents from Polysciences
(PA, USA). Serial ultrathin sections were cut using an
LKB-III ultratome (LEICA, Wetzlar, Germany). Ultrathin
sections were stained with uranyl acetate (TED PELLA,
CA, USA) and lead citrate (TED PELLA, CA, USA) and
were examined with the aid of a Hitachi H7600 electron
microscope (Hitachi, Japan) at an accelerating voltage of
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Western blotting analysis
Approximately 30 blastocyst or ovary cells
was lysed in RIPA (GenDOPET, Texas, USA) buffer
containing protease inhibitors, and then subjected to 10%
SDS-PAGE. The separated proteins were transferred to
a PVDF, which was then pretreated with 5% skim milk
74672

Oncotarget

for blocking and incubated with primary antibodies as
follows: GRP78 (Abcam, UK) and LC3 (Cell Signaling,
Boston, USA) for blastocysts samples, BAX (Abcam, UK)
and BCL-2 (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, TA, USA) for
ovary samples. Blots were then incubated with anti-rabbit
or anti-mouse IgG antibody conjugated to horseradish
peroxidase. The protein bands were visualized using an
ECL plus Western Blotting Detection System (Amersham
Pharmacia Biotech, USA). The membrane was then
washed and reblotted with actin antibody for an internal
control. Densitometric quantification was performed with
ImageJ software (NIH).

housekeeping genes (Actb, B2m, Gapdh, and Gusb).

Terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase dUTP
nick-end labeling (TUNEL) assay
Apoptosis was assessed using the In Situ Cell
Death Detection Kit (Roche, West Sussex, UK) and
4’,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI) dual staining
(Vector Laboratories, CA, USA). Briefly, the cells and
ovary tissues in each group were prepared, washed twice
with D-PBS and then incubated with TUNEL reaction
mixture for 60 min at 37°C. The cells undergoing
apoptosis were detected using an Olympus BX-UCB
microscope and were processed using DP controller
software. At least 20 blastocysts were analyzed for each
determination.

Detection of intracellular ROS
To detect intercellular ROS in living embryos,
we used H2DCF-DA from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis,
MO, USA). H2DCF-DA was prepared in DMSO
immediately prior to loading. Embryos were incubated
with 10μM H2DCF-DA for 10 minutes and observed
under a fluorescence microscope (Olympus, Japan), with
an excitation wavelength of 480 nm and an emission
wavelength of 505-530 nm.

Immunostaining and confocal imaging
Embryos were fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde for 20
min and permeabilized for 20 min with PBS containing
0.2% Triton X-100. Permeabilized embryos were blocked
overnight at 4°C in 1% bovine serum albumin (BSA)
and 0.1% Triton X-100 in PBS before incubation with
the primary antibodies anti-5-mC (Eurogentec, Seraing,
Belgium), anti-5-hmC (Active Motif, CA, USA), LC3
(Novus, CO, USA), OCT3/4 (Santa Cruz Biotechnology,
TA, USA), H3K27me3 (Millipore, MA, USA), and CDX2
(Biogenex, CA, USA) for 2 h in a humidified chamber at
room temperature. For 5-mC and 5-hmC immune stains,
samples were prepared as described by Dean group [69].
Embryos were preincubated with 4N HCl for 10 min
at room temperature and then with 100 mM Tris-HCl
for 20 min after the blocking step. The embryos were
washed several times in 0.05% Tween 20 in PBS (PBST),
transferred to a secondary antibody mixture of Alexa
Fluor 568 goat anti-mouse and Alexa Fluor 488 goat antirabbit (Molecular Probes, USA), and incubated at room
temperature for 30 min. Confocal images were acquired
using an Olympus Fv1000 microscope and were processed
using FV10-ASW 2.0 Viewer. Fluorescent images were
acquired using an Olympus BX-UCB microscope and
were processed using DP controller software. The
quantitative analysis of the fluorescent intensity was
performed using MeTaMorph image analysis software
(Molecular Devices, California, USA).

mRNA extraction and amplification
Total RNAs was extracted from blastocysts using
Dynabeads mRNA Direct Kit (ThermoFisher, USA)
according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Real
time qRT-PCR was conducted using a Vill7 (Applied
Biosystems, OR, USA) and SYBR Green as the doublestranded DNA-specific fluorescent dye (Applied
Biosystems, OR, USA). Target gene expression levels
were normalized to GAPDH gene expression, which
was unaffected by CSNPs treatment. The mitochondrial
DNA (mtDNA) content was determined by comparing
the ratio of mtDNA to nuclear DNA, as measured by real
time qRT-PCR. The real time qRT-PCR primer sets are
shown in Tables S2-4. Real time qRT-PCR was performed
independently in triplicate for each of the different
samples, and the data are presented as the mean values of
the gene expression levels measured in the CSNPs-treated
samples versus the controls.

RT2 profiler PCR array
Changes in gene expression were analyzed using a
pathway-focused Mouse Embryonic Stem Cells PCR array
(SABiosciences, Valencia, CA, USA). Data were analyzed
using SABiosciences RT2 Profiler PCR Data Analysis
software, available at http://pcrdataanalysis.sabiosciences.
com/pcr/arrayanalysis.php, and were considered
significant at >1.5-fold change. Relative quantitation
of each gene was performed by normalization to four
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Immunohistochemistry (IHC)
At 10 days after CSNPs injection via tail vein, ovary
was fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde and embedded in
paraffin. Sections were stained with Hematoxylin for light
microscopy. After deparaffination and rehydration in PBS,
sections were blocked in background Sniper solution.
74673

Oncotarget

After washing, the samples were incubated with specific
primary antibodies for STELLA (MilliporeCompany,
MA, USA) and NOBOX (Cell Signaling, Boston, USA).
Samples were then stained with ImmPACTTM DAB
peroxidase substrate (Vector Laboratories; CA, USA)
to visualize the signal and observed using fluorescence
microscopy (Olympus, Japan).

PAS-hematoxylin (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA).
The border between the labyrinth and spongiotrophoblasts
was identified visually. The total cross-sectional areas of
labyrinthine zones were measured and calculated using
ImageJ software (National Institutes of Health, Bethesda,
MD).

DNA glycosylation, digestion and real time qRTPCR

Embryo transfer
Female mice were mated with vasectomized male
mice to induce recipient mice. After mating, the females
were checked for the presence of a vaginal plug, and
upon finding it, they were assumed to be on day 0.5 of
pseudopregnancy. Blastocysts were transferred through
the utero-tubal junction of the uterus of surrogate mother
under inhalation anesthesia with isoflurane (Isoba Vet
Schering-Plough, New Jersey, USA). Blastocysts were
transferred through the utero-tubal junction into the uterus
of surrogate mother as synchronous between the embryo
and maternal environment.

To analyze and quantitate 5-mC and 5-hmC
within a specific locus, we used an EpiMark 5-hmC and
5-mC Analysis Kit (NEB, MA, USA) according to the
manufacturer’s instructions. In brief, DNA was isolated
from embryos at the blastocyst stage (n = 10). DNA was
then subjected to T4 Phage β-glucosyltransferase (T4BGT, NEB) treatment for 18 h. Glycosylated DNA was
digested with 40U of HpaII, 100U of MspI or no enzyme
(mock digestion) at 37°C for 18 h, which was followed
by treatment with Proteinase K (PK) for 30 min at 40°C.
The subsequent inactivation of PK was performed at 98°C
for 10 min. HpaII- and MspI-resistant fractions were used
for real time qRT-PCR with primers that were designed
around the MspI (HpaII) site. DNA subjected to the
glycosylation treatment that was not completely digested
by MspI at the MspI site was considered to contain 5-hmC
at this site. The real time qRT-PCR reaction (25 µl)
consisted of 2µl of DNA, 12.5µl of SYBR Green master
mix (TaKaRa, Japan), 9.5µl of RNase-free water and
0.5µl of both forward and reverse primers (10 pmol) for
each gene. The real time qRT-PCR protocol consisted of a
denaturing cycle of 10 min at 95°C and 40 cycles of PCR
(95°C for 10s, 60°C for 30 sec, 72°C 20 sec). The relative
amounts of DNA were analyzed using the 2-ΔΔCT method.

Analysis of implantation
Control or CSNPs treated females were mated with
wild type fertile males to induce pregnancy. Implantation
sites were examined at gestational day 9.5 (19.5 days after
CSNPs injection) and visualized by intravenous injection
of a Chicago blue dye solution (0.1ml of 1% Chicago
blue).

Flow cytometry analysis
Ovary were recovered from CSNPs injected female
mice, minced, and trypsinized to make single cells.
Single cells are washed in PBS, centrifuged at 1200g,
and resuspened in binding buffer. TUNEL analysis was
performed to measure the degree of cellular apoptosis
using an EzWay Annexin V-FITC apoptosis Detection
kit (Komabiotech, Seoul, Korea) according to the
manufacturer’s instructions. Cells were characterized
using a FACSCalibur cell analyzer and the data were
analyzed using CellQuest software (BD Biosciences, New
Jersey, USA). For each runs, 104 events were collected.
We counted at least 10,000 cells/tube for flow cytometry
analysis in each experiment, respectively.

Data analysis
All experimental data are presented as the mean±
SD. Each experiment was performed at least three times
and was subjected to statistical analysis. The results
from the three representative experiments are presented
in each figure. For statistical analysis, one-way analysis
of variance (ANOVA) was first performed to determine
whether there were differences among groups (P < 0.05).
Fisher’s post-test was then performed to determine the
significant differences between pairs. A value of P < 0.05
was considered significant. Statistical tests were performed
using StatView software version 5.0 (SAS Institute Inc.,
Cary, NC).

Periodic acid-schiff (PAS) staining

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST

Fixed placental discs were bisected through the
attachment of the umbilical cord and then embedded in
paraffin wax. At least five placentae (from different litters)
in each group were examined. Five-micrometer crosssections were obtained and stained with hematoxylin and
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

No potential conflicts of interest were disclosed.

74674

Oncotarget

GRANT SUPPORT

Placental Barrier. Small. 2010; 6:670-678.
12.	 Sumner SC, Fennell TR, Snyder RW, Taylor GF and Lewin
AH. Distribution of carbon-14 labeled C60 ([14C]C60)
in the pregnant and in the lactating dam and the effect of
C60 exposure on the biochemical profile of urine. J Appl
Toxicol. 2010; 30:354-360.

This work was supported by Science Research
Center (2015R1A5A1009701) from the National Research
Foundation of Korea, Republic of Korea.

Editorial note

13.	 Tsuchiya T, Oguri I, Yamakoshi YN and Miyata N. Novel
harmful effects of [60]fullerene on mouse embryos in vitro
and in vivo. FEBS Lett. 1996; 393:139-145.

This paper has been accepted based in part on peerreview conducted by another journal and the authors’
response and revisions as well as expedited peer-review
in Oncotarget.

14.	 Sun J, Zhang Q, Wang Z and Yan B. Effects of nanotoxicity
on female reproductivity and fetal development in animal
models. Int J Mol Sci. 2013; 14:9319-9337.
15.	 Farombi EO, Adedara IA, Forcados GE, Anao OO, Agbowo
A and Patlolla AK. Responses of testis, epididymis,
and sperm of pubertal rats exposed to functionalized
multiwalled carbon nanotubes. Environ Toxicol. 2014;
31:543-551

REFERENCES
1.	 Donaldson K. Resolving the nanoparticles paradox.
Nanomedicine (Lond). 2006; 1:229-234.

16.	 Pietroiusti A, Massimiani M, Fenoglio I, Colonna M,
Valentini F, Palleschi G, Camaioni A, Magrini A, Siracusa
G, Bergamaschi A, Sgambato A and Campagnolo L. Low
doses of pristine and oxidized single-wall carbon nanotubes
affect mammalian embryonic development. Acs Nano.
2011; 5:4624-4633.

2.	 Kagan VE, Bayir H and Shvedova AA. Nanomedicine and
nanotoxicology: two sides of the same coin. Nanomedicine.
2005; 1:313-316.
3.	 Linkov I, Satterstrom FK and Corey LM. Nanotoxicology
and nanomedicine: making hard decisions. Nanomedicine.
2008; 4:167-171.
4.	

17.	 Xu S, Zhang Z and Chu M. Long-term toxicity of
reduced graphene oxide nanosheets: Effects on female
mouse reproductive ability and offspring development.
Biomaterials. 2015; 54:188-200.

Medina C, Santos-Martinez MJ, Radomski A, Corrigan OI
and Radomski MW. Nanoparticles: pharmacological and
toxicological significance. Br J Pharmacol. 2007; 150:552558.

18.	 Park MR, Gurunathan S, Choi YJ, Kwon DN, Han JW, Cho
SG, Park C, Seo HG and Kim JH. Chitosan nanoparticles
cause pre- and postimplantation embryo complications in
mice. Biol Reprod. 2013; 88:88.

5.	 Kumar MNVR. A review of chitin and chitosan
applications. React Funct Polym. 2000; 46:1-27.
6.	

Qi LF, Xu ZR, Li Y, Jiang X and Han XY. In vitro effects
of chitosan nanoparticles on proliferation of human gastric
carcinoma cell line MGC803 cells. World J Gastroentero.
2005; 11:5136-5141.

19.	 Takeda K, Suzuki KI, Ishihara A, Kubo-Irie M, Fujimoto
R, Tabata M, Oshio S, Nihei Y, Ihara T and Sugamata M.
Nanoparticles Transferred from Pregnant Mice to Their
Offspring Can Damage the Genital and Cranial Nerve
Systems. J Health Sci. 2009; 55:95-102.

7.	 Loh JW, Yeoh G, Saunders M and Lim LY. Uptake and
cytotoxicity of chitosan nanoparticles in human liver cells.
Toxicol Appl Pharm. 2010; 249:148-157.

20.	 Saunders M. Transplacental transport of nanomaterials.
Wiley Interdiscip Rev Nanomed Nanobiotechnol. 2009;
1:671-684.

8.	 Gao GD, Ze YG, Li B, Zhao XY, Zhang T, Sheng L,
Hu RH, Gui SX, Sang XZ, Sun QQ, Cheng J, Cheng Z,
Wang L, et al. Ovarian dysfunction and gene-expressed
characteristics of female mice caused by long-term
exposure to titanium dioxide nanoparticles. J Hazard Mater.
2012; 243:19-27.
9.	

21.	 Menezes V, Malek A and Keelan JA. Nanoparticulate drug
delivery in pregnancy: placental passage and fetal exposure.
Curr Pharm Biotechnol. 2011; 12:731-742.
22.	Fujimoto A, Tsukue N, Watanabe M, Sugawara I,
Yanagisawa R, Takano H, Yoshida S and Takeda K. Diesel
exhaust affects immunological action in the placentas of
mice. Environ Toxicol. 2005; 20:431-440.

Blum JL, Xiong JQ, Hoffman C and Zelikoff JT. Cadmium
Associated With Inhaled Cadmium Oxide Nanoparticles
Impacts Fetal and Neonatal Development and Growth.
Toxicol Sci. 2012; 126:478-486.

23.	 Semmler-Behnke M, Kreyling WG, Lipka J, Fertsch
S, Wenk A, Takenaka S, Schmid G and Brandau W.
Biodistribution of 1.4- and 18-nm gold particles in rats.
Small. 2008; 4:2108-2111.

10.	 Yamashita K, Yoshioka Y, Higashisaka K, Mimura K,
Morishita Y, Nozaki M, Yoshida T, Ogura T, Nabeshi
H, Nagano K, Abe Y, Kamada H, Monobe Y, et al. Silica
and titanium dioxide nanoparticles cause pregnancy
complications in mice. Nat Nanotechnol. 2011; 6:321-328.

24.	 Takenaka S, Karg E, Roth C, Schulz H, Ziesenis A,
Heinzmann U, Schramel P and Heyder J. Pulmonary and
systemic distribution of inhaled ultrafine silver particles in
rats. Environ Health Persp. 2001; 109:547-551.

11.	 Chu MQ, Wu Q, Yang H, Yuan RQ, Hou SK, Yang YF,
Zou YJ, Xu S, Xu KY, Ji AL and Sheng LY. Transfer of
Quantum Dots from Pregnant Mice to Pups Across the
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

74675

Oncotarget

25.	 Burch WM. Passage of inhaled particles into the blood
circulation in humans. Circulation. 2002; 106:E141-E141.

Lifshitz LM, Tuft RA and Pozzan T. Close contacts with
the endoplasmic reticulum as determinants of mitochondrial
Ca2+ responses. Science. 1998; 280:1763-1766.

26.	 Hu YL, Qi W, Han F, Shao JZ and Gao JQ. Toxicity
evaluation of biodegradable chitosan nanoparticles using a
zebrafish embryo model. Int J Nanomedicine. 2011; 6:33513359.

42.	 Ron D and Hubbard SR. How IRe1 reacts to ER stress. Cell.
2008; 132:24-26.
43.	 Sano R and Reed JC. ER stress-induced cell death
mechanisms. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2013; 1833:34603470.

27.	 Laplante M and Sabatini DM. mTOR signaling at a glance.
J Cell Sci. 2009; 122:3589-3594.
28.	 McMahon G, Weir MR, Li XC and Mandelbrot DA. The
Evolving Role of mTOR Inhibition in Transplantation
Tolerance. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2011; 22:408-415.

44.	 Pollina EA and Brunet A. Epigenetic regulation of aging
stem cells. Oncogene. 2011; 30:3105-3126.
45.	 Rodriguez RM, Fernandez AF and Fraga MF. Role of
sirtuins in stem cell differentiation. Genes Cancer. 2013;
4:105-111. doi: 10.1177/1947601913479798.

29.	Reidy-Lagunes D and Thornton R. Pancreatic
Neuroendocrine and Carcinoid Tumors: What’s New,
What’s Old, and What’s Different? Curr Oncol Rep. 2012;
14:249-256.

46.	Shi T, Wang F, Stieren E and Tong Q. SIRT3, a
mitochondrial sirtuin deacetylase, regulates mitochondrial
function and thermogenesis in brown adipocytes. J Biol
Chem. 2005; 280:13560-13567.

30.	 Arva NC, Pappas JG, Bhatla T, Raetz EA, Macari M,
Ginsburg HB and Hajdu CH. Well-differentiated Pancreatic
Neuroendocrine Carcinoma in Tuberous Sclerosis-Case
Report and Review of the Literature. Am J Surg Pathol.
2012; 36:149-153.

47.	 Sundaresan NR, Samant SA, Pillai VB, Rajamohan SB
and Gupta MP. SIRT3 is a stress-responsive deacetylase
in cardiomyocytes that protects cells from stress-mediated
cell death by deacetylation of Ku70. Mol Cell Biol. 2008;
28:6384-6401.

31.	 Pan T, Rawal P, Wu Y, Xie W, Jankovic J and Le W.
Rapamycin Protects against Rotenone-Induced Apoptosis
through Autophagy Induction. Neuroscience. 2009;
164:541-551.
32.	Lowe SW and Lin AW. Apoptosis
Carcinogenesis. 2000; 21:485-495.

in

48.	 Yang HY, Yang T, Baur JA, Perez E, Matsui T, Carmona
JJ, Lamming DW, Souza-Pinto NC, Bohr VA, Rosenzweig
A, de Cabo R, Sauve AA and Sinclair DA. Nutrientsensitive mitochondrial NAD(+) levels dictate cell survival.
Cell. 2007; 130:1095-1107.

cancer.

33.	 Xie Z and Klionsky DJ. Autophagosome formation: core
machinery and adaptations. Nat Cell Biol. 2007; 9:11021109.

49.	 Yang B, Zwaans BMM, Eckersdorff M and Lombard
DB. The sirtuin SIRT6 deacetylates H3 K56Ac in vivo to
promote genomic stability. Cell cycle. 2009; 8:2662-2663.

34.	 Ryter SW and Choi AM. Regulation of autophagy in
oxygen-dependent cellular stress. Curr Pharm Des. 2013;
19:2747-2756.

50.	 Dawlaty MM, Ganz K, Powell BE, Hu YC, Markoulaki S,
Cheng AW, Gao Q, Kim J, Choi SW, Page DC and Jaenisch
R. Tet1 Is Dispensable for Maintaining Pluripotency and
Its Loss Is Compatible with Embryonic and Postnatal
Development. Cell Stem Cell. 2011; 9:166-175.

35.	 Chen Y, McMillan-Ward E, Kong J, Israels SJ and Gibson
SB. Mitochondrial electron-transport-chain inhibitors of
complexes I and II induce autophagic cell death mediated
by reactive oxygen species. J Cell Sci. 2007; 120:41554166.
36.	 Chen Y, Azad MB and Gibson SB. Superoxide is the major
reactive oxygen species regulating autophagy. Cell Death
Differ. 2009; 16:1040-1052.

51.	 Dawlaty MM, Breiling A, Le T, Raddatz G, Barrasa MI,
Cheng AW, Gao Q, Powell BE, Li Z, Xu MJ, Faull KF,
Lyko F and Jaenisch R. Combined Deficiency of Tet1 and
Tet2 Causes Epigenetic Abnormalities but Is Compatible
with Postnatal Development. Dev Cell. 2013; 24:310-323.

37.	 Mima S, Miya M, Iwamoto R and Yoshikawa S. Highly
deacetylated chitosan and its properties. J Appl Polym Sci.
1983; 28:1909-1917.

52.	 Hashimoto H, Vertino PM and Cheng XD. Molecular
coupling of DNA methylation and histone methylation.
Epigenomics-Uk. 2010; 2:657-669.

38.	 Perez-Perez ME, Florencio FJ and Crespo JL. Inhibition
of Target of Rapamycin Signaling and Stress Activate
Autophagy in Chlamydomonas reinhardtii. Plant Physiol.
2010; 152:1874-1888.

53.	 Bird A. DNA methylation patterns and epigenetic memory.
Gene Dev. 2002; 16:6-21.
54.	 Klose RJ and Bird AP. Genomic DNA methylation: the
mark and its mediators. Trends Biochem Sci. 2006; 31:8997.

39.	 Liu YM, Burgos JS, Deng Y, Srivastava R, Howell SH and
Bassham DC. Degradation of the Endoplasmic Reticulum
by Autophagy during Endoplasmic Reticulum Stress in
Arabidopsis. Plant Cell. 2012; 24:4635-4651.

55.	 Jurkowska RZ, Jurkowski TP and Jeltsch A. Structure
and Function of Mammalian DNA Methyltransferases.
Chembiochem. 2011; 12:206-222.

40.	 Tanida I, Ueno T and Kominami E. LC3 and Autophagy.
Methods Mol Biol. 2008; 445:77-88.

56.	 Jin B, Li Y and Robertson KD. DNA methylation: superior
or subordinate in the epigenetic hierarchy? Genes Cancer.
2011; 2:607-617. doi: 10.1177/1947601910393957.

41.	 Rizzuto R, Pinton P, Carrington W, Fay FS, Fogarty KE,
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

74676

Oncotarget

57.	 Gong ZZ and Zhu JK. Active DNA demethylation by
oxidation and repair. Cell Res. 2011; 21:1649-1651.

64.	 Cross JC, Werb Z and Fisher SJ. Implantation and the
placenta: key pieces of the development puzzle. Science.
1994; 266:1508-1518.

58.	 Schneider R and Grosschedl R. Dynamics and interplay
of nuclear architecture, genome organization, and gene
expression. Gene Dev. 2007; 21:3027-3043.

65.	 Roberts AW, Robb L, Rakar S, Hartley L, Cluse L, Nicola
NA, Metcalf D, Hilton DJ and Alexander WS. Placental
defects and embryonic lethality in mice lacking suppressor
of cytokine signaling 3. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2001;
98:9324-9329.

59.	 Deaton AM and Bird A. CpG islands and the regulation of
transcription. Genes Dev. 2011; 25:1010-1022.
60.	 Ross PJ, Ragina NP, Rodriguez RM, Iager AE,
Siripattarapravat K, Lopez-Corrales N and Cibelli JB.
Polycomb gene expression and histone H3 lysine 27
trimethylation changes during bovine preimplantation
development. Reproduction. 2008; 136:777-785.

66.	 Tanaka M, Gertsenstein M, Rossant J and Nagy A. Mash2
acts cell autonomously in mouse spongiotrophoblast
development. Dev Biol. 1997; 190:55-65.
67.	 Lawitts JA and Biggers JD. Culture of preimplantation
embryos. Methods Enzymol. 1993; 225:153-164.

61.	 Canovas S, Cibelli JB and Ross PJ. Jumonji domaincontaining protein 3 regulates histone 3 lysine 27
methylation during bovine preimplantation development. P
Natl Acad Sci USA. 2012; 109:2400-2405.

68.	 Brandes R and Bers DM. Simultaneous measurements of
mitochondrial NADH and Ca2+ during increased work in
intact rat heart trabeculae. Biophys J. 2002; 83:587-604.

62.	 Kibschull M, Gellhaus A and Winterhager E. Analogous
and Unique Functions of Connexins in Mouse and Human
Placental Development. Placenta. 2008; 29:848-854.

69.	 Santos F, Hendrich B, Reik W and Dean W. Dynamic
reprogramming of DNA methylation in the early mouse
embryo. Dev Biol. 2002; 241:172-182.

63.	 Gasperowicz M and Otto F. The notch signalling pathway
in the development of the mouse placenta. Placenta. 2008;
29:651-659.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

74677

Oncotarget

