Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No. 14

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Systemic attenuation of the TGF-β pathway by a single drug
simultaneously rejuvenates hippocampal neurogenesis and
myogenesis in the same old mammal
Hanadie Yousef2,5, Michael J. Conboy1, Adam Morgenthaler1, Christina
Schlesinger1, Lukasz Bugaj1, Preeti Paliwal1, Christopher Greer1, Irina M. Conboy1,
David Schaffer1,3,4
1

Department of Bioengineering and California Institute for Quantitative Biosciences (QB3), UC Berkeley, Berkeley, CA, USA

2

Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, UC Berkeley, Berkeley, CA, USA

3

Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, UC Berkeley, Berkeley, CA, USA

4

Helen Wills Neuroscience Institute, UC Berkeley, Berkeley, CA, USA

5

Current address: Department of Neurology and Neurological Science, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA

Correspondence to:
David Schaffer, e-mail: schaffer@berkeley.edu
Irina M. Conboy, e-mail: iconboy@berkeley.edu
Keywords: aging, stem cell microenvironment, neurogenesis, TGF-b signaling, myogenesis
Received: March 03, 2015	Accepted: April 24, 2015	Published: May 06, 2015

ABSTRACT
Stem cell function declines with age largely due to the biochemical imbalances
in their tissue niches, and this work demonstrates that aging imposes an elevation
in transforming growth factor β (TGF-β) signaling in the neurogenic niche of the
hippocampus, analogous to the previously demonstrated changes in the myogenic
niche of skeletal muscle with age. Exploring the hypothesis that youthful calibration
of key signaling pathways may enhance regeneration of multiple old tissues, we
found that systemically attenuating TGF-β signaling with a single drug simultaneously
enhanced neurogenesis and muscle regeneration in the same old mice, findings
further substantiated via genetic perturbations. At the levels of cellular mechanism,
our results establish that the age-specific increase in TGF-β1 in the stem cell niches of
aged hippocampus involves microglia and that such an increase is pro-inflammatory
both in brain and muscle, as assayed by the elevated expression of β2 microglobulin
(B2M), a component of MHC class I molecules. These findings suggest that at high
levels typical of aged tissues, TGF-β1 promotes inflammation instead of its canonical
role in attenuating immune responses. In agreement with this conclusion, inhibition
of TGF-β1 signaling normalized B2M to young levels in both studied tissues.

in several tissue types, ultimately leading to tissue
aging. Such changes in stem cell microenvironments
that negatively regulate stem cell function have been
observed in aged skeletal muscle, brain, skin, blood,
and bone [1]. Considering that the same morphogenic
signal transduction pathways – including Notch, Wnt,
transforming growth factor β (TGF-β), fibroblast growth
factor (FGF), Sonic hedgehog (Shh), and others –
regulate adult stem cell behavior in different tissues [2],
it is possible that age-related changes in these pathways
that lead to diminished stem cell regeneration are also

INTRODUCTION
Adult stem cells persist in the body as we age, but
their regenerative capacity declines over time, leading to
an inability of tissues and organs to maintain homeostasis
and repair damage with advancing age. Evidence suggests
that the intrinsic capacity of some tissue stem cells, such
as in muscle, for tissue maintenance and repair does not
drastically decline with age. Rather, molecular changes in
the stem cell microenvironments or niches contribute to
or account for diminished stem cell regenerative potential

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

11959

Oncotarget

conserved among multiple organ systems, such as brain
and muscle. Furthermore, complex interplays between
systemic and local changes in specific signaling factors
with age have been shown to inhibit stem cell mediated
tissue regeneration [3–9], and these interactions may also
be conserved across tissues.
Neurogenesis occurs throughout life in the
subgranular zone (SGZ) of the dentate gyrus (DG) of
the hippocampus and the subventricular zone (SVZ) of the
lateral ventricles in mammals, via differentiation of adult
neural stem cells (NSCs) into excitatory granule neurons
and inhibitory olfactory bulb interneurons, respectively
(Ming & Song, 2005). Hippocampal neurogenesis is
believed to modulate new memory formation, while SVZ
neurogenesis plays a role in sensory functions [10–12].
Hippocampal neurogenesis, however, severely declines
with age in rodents and primates [13–15]. In addition,
SGZ neurogenesis is very active in humans and exhibits
a steady decline in both NSC number and function with
age [15–17], though the significance of the SVZ to human
biology and health is unclear as this region does not
exhibit active neurogenesis leading to maintenance of
olfactory functions in adult humans [18]. Skeletal muscle
regeneration also occurs throughout life, though muscle
loses its regenerative capacity with age due to the failure
of satellite cells (muscle stem cells) to divide and generate
fusion competent myoblasts and terminally differentiated
myofibers in response to muscle injury or attrition [1].
Consequentially, the replacement of the damaged tissue
with new muscle fibers becomes inefficient with age,
and instead scarring and inflammation persist [19, 20].
Considering that TGF-β regulates adult stem cell behavior
in various tissues [1, 21–24], including in brain and
muscle, we hypothesized that age-related elevation in the
intensity of this pathway may contribute to diminished
stem cell regeneration in the hippocampal niche, which
combined with our prior results with the skeletal muscle
stem cell niche would demonstrate conservation of signal
transduction changes with age.
TGF-β1 is a multi-functional cytokine that becomes
elevated with age both in circulation and locally in several
tissues, including the muscle and brain [6, 25]. Such
changes in the intensity of TGF- β/pSmad2,3 signaling –
with aging, pathology, or experimental induction – have
been shown to perturb homeostasis of such diverse tissues
as muscle, bone and cartilage, the subventricular zone
of the brain, vasculature, the hematopoietic/immune
system, heart and skin [21–24, 26–34]. TGF-β1 can
inhibit cell proliferation by upregulating the expression of
several CDK inhibitors, including p21 [27, 35–37], and
it may thereby directly inhibit the proliferation of tissue
stem and progenitor cells. Furthermore, TGF-β1 was
recently described to be required for late-stage neuronal
development, maturation or survival [38]. Increased
TGF-β1 signaling could therefore also be a mechanism
to enhance mature neuronal differentiation or survival in
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

addition to its detrimental effects on de-novo neurogenesis.
However, it may also modulate tissue inflammation, as
TGF-β1 can be either anti- or pro-inflammatory depending
on the levels of this morphogen and the gene expression
landscape of the responding tissue [29, 32]. For example,
young and healthy levels of TGF-β1 are known to downregulate the immune response, and accordingly the
complete absence of TGF-β1 or its downstream signaling
causes multifocal inflammation in young mammals
(reviewed in [32]). In contrast, when present at high or
pathological levels, TGF-β1 has been shown to promote
massive inflammation in a variety of systems [29, 32].
While inflammatory responses, which in general can
include induction of MHC class I and/or class II genes
and the production of multiple inflammatory cytokines
including TGF-β1, are needed for productive regeneration
of tissues including skeletal muscle and brain, prolonged
and excessive inflammation is known to interfere with
tissue maintenance and repair [7, 29, 32].
We demonstrate an elevation of TGF-β1 in the
aged circulation, old muscle, and old brain and crosstissue conservation in elevated TGF-β/pSmad2,3 signal
transduction in aged skeletal muscle and neural stem cell
microenvironments. An ability of circulating TGF-β1 to
cross the blood brain barrier may increase with age, when
BBB becomes more permeable [39], but regardless of its
endocrine levels, local production of TGF-β1 by microglia
and by endothelial cells increases in the hippocampus
with aging. Importantly, the age-associated increase in
TGF-β1 levels leads to a decline in NSC proliferation and
downstream neurogenesis with age. Moreover, TGF-β
may exert its pro-aging effects in brain and muscle in part
by increasing inflammatory responses, as indicated by the
upregulation of β2 microglobulin (B2M), a component
of MHC class I molecules. Finally, youthful calibration
of TGF-β1/pSmad2,3 pathway by a systemically
administered inhibitor of TGF-β receptor kinase activity
reduced tissue inflammation in brain  and  muscle, as
indicated by normalized levels of B2M, and robustly
rejuvenated hippocampal neurogenesis and skeletal
myogenesis in the same old animal.

RESULTS
TGF-β1/pSmad signaling increases in aged
neural and muscle stem cell niches
Consistent with previously published results
[13–15], we found that Sox2+BrdU+ proliferating
Type 1 and 2a hippocampal neural stem and progenitor
cells significantly decline with age (Figure 1A).
To  determine whether this decrease in proliferating
neural stem and progenitor cells correlates with levels of
TGF-β1, we isolated hippocampi from young (2–4 mo)
and old (22–24 mo) male C57BL6/J mice. Tgfb1 mRNA
11960

Oncotarget

expression was examined by qRT-PCR, and TGF-β1
protein levels were analyzed both by ELISA in tissue
lysates and via immunofluorescence in whole tissue
sections. As shown in Figure 1B-1E, TGF-β1 became
elevated with age in the murine hippocampus. Confirming
a broad age-related increase of TGF-β1, this cytokine
also became elevated in old blood serum, as assayed by
both ELISA and Western blotting (Supplemental Data
Figure 1A and [6]), and old skeletal muscle (Supplemental
Data Figure 1B, 1C and [28].
TGF-β1 expression has been reported to rise with
age in the subventricular zone of the forebrain [34, 40, 41],
contributing to a decline in SVZ neurogenesis. In contrast,
GDF11, which like TGF-β1 signals through ALK5/
TGFBR2 receptor complex and pSmad2/3, has been
suggested to enhance SVZ neurogenesis [9]. To investigate
and reconcile the age-specific expression of multiple TGF-β
family members in skeletal muscle and hippocampus, we
performed mRNA and protein analysis. These results
confirmed an age-specific increase in TGF- β1 in muscle
and revealed an increase in the hippocampal stem cell
niche (Supplemental Figure 1B–1C and Figure 1B–1E).
Interestingly, however, Tgfb2 mRNA did not change with
age in myofibers, while Tgfb3 and Gdf11 – other TGF-β
family ligands that signal through SMAD2/3 – were not
expressed at detectable levels (Supplemental Figure 1D,
1H, 1I). In addition, qRT-PCR confirmed an increase in
Tgfb2 and Tgfb3 mRNA levels in aged hippocampi, while
Gdf11 was expressed in hippocampi but did not change
with age (Supplemental Figure 1E–1G).
To assess the cellular source of elevated TGF-β
production, additional immunostaining of astrocytes,
microglia, and endothelial cells was performed using an
antibody that reacts with TGF-β1-3. We found that in the
hippocampus, microglia and endothelial cells, but not
astrocytes, expressed TGF-β in both old and young dentate
gyri (Figure 2A-2D), suggesting they are sources of the
age-associated increases in TGF-β.
To confirm and build upon these results, we analyzed
downstream pSmad signaling in young versus aged neural
stem cells in vivo. As shown in Figure 3A (and quantified
in 3B), the levels of pSmad3 were up-regulated in aged
compared to young Sox2+ neural stem and progenitor cells
in the SGZ. Furthermore, TGF-β1 is a known inhibitor of
cell proliferation [26, 27, 35, 37], and accordingly qRTPCR revealed that in vivo hippocampal expression of p21,
a known down-stream target of TGF-β1/pSmad pathway
that inhibits cell cycle progression [37, 42], was elevated
with age (Figure 3C). To probe whether the age-associated
increase in TGF-β expression may be functionally
important for neurogenesis, TGF-β1 ligand was added
to hippocampal-derived Sox2+ neural progenitor cell
(NPCs) cultures and observed to both upregulate pSmad3
(Figure 3D) and decrease cell proliferation, as assayed by
reduced BrdU uptake (Figure 3E-3F). These data are the

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

first to profile the age-specific expression of TGF-β family
ligands in the neurogenic and myogenic tissue niches.
Furthermore, these data are the first to demonstrate that the
levels of TGF-β1 transcript and protein and p21 transcript
increase with age in the hippocampus and particularly in
microglia, and that SMAD3 phosphorylation increases in
resident Sox2+ neural stem and progenitor cells of the old
hippocampus.

Simultaneous systemic enhancement of
hippocampal neurogenesis and myogenesis
in old mice
The conserved increase in TGF-β1/pSmad3
signaling within muscle and brain stem cell niches
with age suggested that stem cell responses could
be enhanced in both tissues by attenuating the
intensity of this pathway, which would both validate
our conclusions and offer translational potential for
rejuvenating multiple tissues in the same organism
with a single therapeutic intervention. Accordingly,
a small molecule drug pharmacological inhibitor of
the TGF-β receptor I kinase (Alk5), was added to
cultured NPCs, where it was found to down-modulate
pSmad2 and pSmad3 levels (Supplemental Figure 2A,
quantified in B). In vivo, this drug was administered
systemically via intraperitoneal (IP) injection into aged
mice (24–26  months old) once daily for 11 days. In
mice perfused on day 12, a robust decrease in pSmad2/3
levels was observed in the hippocampus (Supplemental
Figure 2C-2F). To assess the ability of the Alk5 inhibitor
to enhance regeneration of multiple tissues in the same
animal, muscle was injured by cardiotoxin one week
after the start of Alk5 inhibitor administration (day  0
of schematic Figure 4A), and tissue regeneration was
analyzed at 5 days post-injury (Figure 4A). In parallel,
we quantified hippocampal neurogenesis – i.e. the
numbers of BrdU+Sox2+ cells in tissue sections
across the hippocampus – in the same animal cohorts
(Figure 4B-4C). Very interestingly, both neurogenesis
and myogenesis were significantly enhanced in the
aged mice treated with Alk5 inhibitor, compared to the
animals receiving control buffer (Figure 4B-4E). In brain
this was evident from a two-fold increase in the numbers
of proliferating, Sox2+ neural stem and progenitor cells
within the hippocampal dentate gyrus (Figure 4B-4C).
In muscle we observed enhanced de novo myofiber
formation 5 days post-injury as assayed by quantifying
the numbers of eMyHC+ fibers with centrally located
nuclei (Figure 4D, 4E). These results confirmed the promyogenic effects of Alk5 inhibitor [6, 43] and revealed
that systemic administration of an attenuator of the
TGF-β/pSmad3 pathway simultaneously rejuvenated
skeletal myogenesis and hippocampal neurogenesis in
the same old animal.

11961

Oncotarget

Figure 1: TGF-β increases with age locally in mice hippocampi. A. Young (2 month) and old (24 month) mice (n = 3) were
administered daily with BrdU for 5 days, followed by perfusion and PFA fixation. Immunofluorescence (IF) was performed for Sox2 (green)
and BrdU (red), with DAPI (blue) labeling all nuclei. Representative images are shown. Scale bar = 100 μM. B. qRT-PCR quantification of
Tgfb1 mRNA expression from young and old hippocampi. The relative average expression level was normalized to GAPDH and presented
as the average expression level relative to that of young hippocampi. Significant differences were identified by Student’s t-tests (two-tailed)
(*p < 0.003). Error bars indicate standard error of the mean (n = 4 biological replicates per group). C. Immunofluorescence was performed
on perfused and PFA fixed young and old brain tissue sections (n = 3), for Sox2 (green) and TGF-β1,2,3 (red), with Hoechst (blue) labeling
all nuclei. Representative low and high magnification images are shown. Scale bars = 50 μM. D. Integrated pixel intensity of TGF-β1,2,3
immunofluorescence in young and old dentate gyri tissue sections was calculated using ImageJ. Pixel intensities are presented relative to
young dentate gyri. Significant differences were identified by Student’s t-tests (*p < 0.003). Error bars indicate standard error of the mean
(n = 3 young, 3 old biological replicates). E. An ELISA was performed on young and old hippocampal protein extract to assess the level of
local TGF-β1 and represented as the averages of the pg TGF-β1 normalized to pg total hippocampal protein lysate. Significant differences
were identified by Student’s t-tests (two-tailed) (*p < 0.01). Error bars indicate standard error of the mean (n = 4 young, 5 old biological
replicates).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

11962

Oncotarget

Figure 2: TGF-β is expressed by microglia and endothelial cells. A. Immunofluorescence was performed on perfused old brain

tissue sections for TGF-β1,2,3 (green), the microglial marker Iba1 (red), and astrocyte marker GFAP (gray), with Hoechst (blue) labeling
all nuclei. Representative low and high magnification images are shown. Scale bars = 50 μM. Arrows indicate areas of TGF-β and Iba1
colocalization. B. Immunofluorescence was performed on perfused young brain tissue sections for TGF-β1,2,3 (green), Iba1 (red), and
GFAP (gray), with Hoechst (blue) labeling all nuclei. Representative low and high magnification images are shown. Scale bars = 50 μM.
Arrows indicate areas of TGF-β and Iba1 colocalization. C. Immunofluorescence was performed on perfused old brain tissue sections for
TGF-β1,2,3 (green), endothelial marker CD31 (red), and Sox2 (gray), with Hoechst (blue) labeling all nuclei. Representative low and high
magnification images are shown. Scale bars = 50 μM. Arrows indicate areas of TGF-β and CD31 colocalization. D. Immunofluorescence
was performed on perfused young brain tissue sections for TGF-β1,2,3 (green), CD31 (red), and Sox2 (gray), with Hoechst (blue) labeling
all nuclei. Representative low and high magnification images are shown. Scale bars = 50 μM. Arrow indicates area of TGF-β and CD31
colocalization.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

11963

Oncotarget

Figure 3: Downstream effectors of TGF-β signaling increase with age in mice hippocampi and inhibits neural
progenitor cell proliferation. A. Immunofluorescence staining for Sox2 (green) and pSmad3 (red) was performed on young and old

brain tissue sections (n = 4 young, 6 old), with DAPI (blue) labeling all nuclei. Representative images are shown. Scale bar = 50 μM.
B. MetaXpress image quantification was developed to calculate the average pixel intensity specifically in Sox2+ neural stem and progenitor
cells in the SGZ of the dentate gyrus. Significant differences were identified by Student’s t-tests (two-tailed) (*p < 0.001). Error bars indicate
standard error of the mean (n = 4 young, 6 old). C. qRT-PCR quantification of p21 mRNA expression from young and old hippocampi. The
relative average expression level was normalized by GAPDH and presented relative to young hippocampi. Significant differences were
identified by Student’s t-tests (two-tailed) (*p < 0.003), and error bars indicate standard error of the mean (n = 3 young, 3 old biological
replicates per group). D. Immunoblotting analysis of a downstream effector of TGF-β, pSmad3, from NPCs cultured in growth medium in
the presence or absence of TGF-β1 (50 ng/mL) for 30 minutes. pSmad3 signaling is induced through TGF-β1, as compared with levels of
total SMAD2/3. E. Functional validation of increasing TGF-β1. NPCs were cultured in growth medium (DMF12 + N2 + 10 ng/mL FGF-2)
in the presence or absence of TGF-β1 (100 ng/mL) for 24 hrs. A 2 hour BrdU (10 μM) pulse was performed before cell fixation to label
proliferating cells. Staining was conducted for BrdU (green) and Sox2 (red), with Hoechst (blue) labeling all nuclei. Representative images
are shown. Scale bar = 100 μM. F. Proliferation of NPCs was quantified by cell scoring in 25 random fields of each condition using an
automated imager and MetaXpress cell scoring software. Results are displayed as the mean percent of BrdU+ proliferating NPCs +/-SD,
respectively. Significant differences were identified by Student’s t-tests (two-tailed) (*p < 0.0003), and error bars indicate standard error
of the mean (n = 4 biological replicates).

Rejuvenation of myogenesis and neurogenesis by
genetic attenuation of TGF-β signaling

control shRNA lentiviral transduction, the numbers of
Sox2+ proliferating cells (quantified in the GFP+ region
of tissue sections throughout the entire hippocampus) were
significantly increased after a single injection of shRNA to
Smad3. There was also a significantly higher proportion
of GFP+Sox2+ cells that were also BrdU+ (Figure 5D),
confirming lentiviral delivery of shRNA against Smad3,
but not control shRNA, enhanced neural progenitor
cell proliferation. Neurogenesis was thus significantly
enhanced by the inhibition of Smad3 signaling in the
local niche of neural stem cells in 2 year old mice
(analogous to 80 year old humans), demonstrating
progress in rejuvenating neurogenesis in very old mice,
and complementing reports on the enhancement of
neurogenesis through increase of Wnt-mediated signaling
in 13 month old mice [44].

To confirm these findings using independent
experimental approaches, we inhibited TGF-β signaling
using a lentivirally-encoded shRNA we developed against
Smad3. The efficacy of this shRNA was confirmed in
transduced mouse muscle progenitor cells in vitro via
western blotting and in mouse neural progenitor cells
in vitro via qRT-PCR (Supplemental Figure 3A-3B). After
a single stereotaxic hippocampal injection of a lentiviral
vector encoding GFP plus the shRNA against Smad3 –
or a control shRNA against LacZ – into 24 month old
mice, animals were allowed to recover for 2 weeks,
followed by five consecutive days of BrdU administration
(Figure  5A). As shown in Figure 5B–5C, compared to
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

11964

Oncotarget

Figure 4: Simultaneous partial rescue of hippocampal neurogenesis and myogenesis in aged mice through systemic
in vivo inhibition of TGF-β. A. Schematic of Alk5 inhibitor administration. Aged (2 year old) mice received IP injections of TGF-β

type I receptor kinase Alk5 inhibitor (Alk5i), or vehicle control, once daily for 11 days (Day -6 through Day 4) and were sacrificed on
Day 5. Tibialis anteriors (TAs) were injured with cardiotoxin on Day 0, and mice began receiving daily IP injections of BrdU through Day 4.
TAs were collected on Day 5, 5 days post injury (5 dpi). B. Following perfusion and PFA fixation, brain sections of Alk5 inhibitor or vehicle
treated mice (n = 4 per group) spanning the entire hippocampus were immunostained for BrdU (red) and Sox2 (green), with Hoechst (blue)
labeling cell nuclei. Representative images are shown. Scale bar = 50 μM. C. Quantification by stereology of BrdU+Sox2+ cells per dentate
gyrus. As shown, Alk5 type I receptor kinase inhibitor increases the average number of BrdU+Sox2+ cells in the dentate gyrus. Significant
differences were identified by Student’s t-tests (two-tailed) (*p < 5 × 10−7). Error bars indicate standard error of the mean (n = 4 young, 4 old
biological replicates) D. TA muscle sections collected 5 days post injury were immunostained for eMyHC (green), with Hoechst (blue)
labeling cell nuclei. Representative images show newly regenerating myofibers in injured muscle sections. Hematoxylin and eosin staining
of injury sites are also shown. Scale bars = 100 μM. E. Regenerative index quantifies the number of newly formed eMyHC+ myofibers
per square millimeter in the injured area. Systemic administration of the Alk5 inhibitor enhances old muscle regeneration after injury, as
displayed by the mean regenerative index per group. Significant differences were identified by Student’s t-tests (two-tailed) (*p < 0.0002),
and error bars indicate standard error of the mean (n = 4 biological replicates per group).

To analyze analogous effects on downstream type
2b Doublecortin expressing (DCX+) transit amplifying
cells, another cohort of animals was mitotically
labeled (with EdU) for 5 consecutive days and studied
5  days after the final injection to detect the cells that
had progressed towards neuronal commitment [45].
There was a substantial increase in the total number
of  EdU+DCX+GFP+ type 2b cells (Supplemental
Figure  4A-4C), demonstrating that not only the
proliferation of neural stem and progenitor cells but the
generation of neuronally committed cells is enhanced in
old mice administered with Smad3 shRNA.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

To further compare molecular conservation of tissue
aging between brain and muscle, we also performed a
single administration of the lentiviral vector encoding
shRNA against Smad3 into injured hind leg muscle of
24 month old mice, simultaneously with cardiotoxin to
induce muscle injury [19, 46]. Significant enhancement
of old muscle repair, based on the numbers of de-novo
formed muscle fibers that were quantified throughout the
entire injury site [19, 47], was observed in the 24 month
old mice injected with the shRNA to Smad3, compared
to the control shRNA (Supplemental Figure 4D, 4E), and
consistent with our prior report [35].

11965

Oncotarget

Figure 5: Rescue of neurogenesis in aged hippocampi by in vivo genetic inhibition of smad3. A. Schematic of stereotaxic

lentiviral injection experiment. Aged (18 month old) mice received stereotaxic injections into hippocampi (coordinates from bregma:
AP: −2.12, ML: +/−1.5, VD: −1.55) of lentiviral vectors encoding shRNA against either Smad3 or lacZ. Mice were allowed to recover
for 14 days, followed by daily BrdU (50 mg/kg) intraperitonial injections for 5 days, then analysis. B. Brain sections of lacZ or Smad3
shRNA injected mice (n = 5 lacZ shRNA lentivirus, 4 Smad3 shRNA) spanning the entire hippocampus were immunostained with
GFP (green), BrdU (red), and Sox2 (gray), with Hoechst (blue) labeling cell nuclei. Representative low and high magnification images
are shown. Scale bars = 50 μM. Arrows in high magnification image indicate transduced, proliferating NPCs. C. Quantification of the
mean number of BrdU+Sox2+ cells per dentate gyrus shows an increase in proliferating NPCs in aged animals expressing anti-Smad3
shRNA. Significant differences were identified by Student’s t-tests (two-tailed) (*p < 0.05). Error bars indicate standard error of the mean
(n = 5 lacZ shRNA, 4 Smad3 shRNA brains). D. Quantification of the mean percentage of BrdU+GFP+Sox2+ proliferating NPCs as
compared with BrdU-GFP+Sox2+ NPCs in shRNA injected brains demonstrates an increase in proliferating neural progenitor cells due
to shRNA-Smad3 transduction as compared with shRNA-lacZ control mice. Significant differences were identified by Student’s t-tests
(two-tailed) (*p < 4 × 10−7), and error bars indicate standard deviation (n = 3).

We further corroborated our findings by introducing
a dominant negative form of the TGF-β1 receptor
(dnTGFBR2, known to inhibit pSmad2/3 levels [48]).
Expression of the dnTGFBR2 in neural progenitor cells
and downstream inhibition of pSmad3 were confirmed

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

by western blotting (Supplemental Figure 5A, 5B).
Retroviral vectors encoding dnTGFBR2 or GFP as a
control were injected into CTX injured muscle one day
after injury, when resident muscle stem cells are breaking
quiescence and entering the cell cycle [1, 19] (Figure 6A).

11966

Oncotarget

next examined the effects of the age-specific elevated
TGF-β1 on tissue inflammation by assaying the levels of
MHC class I gene expression, which is known to directly
associate with and to promote inflammation in multiple
tissues including in brain and muscle pathologies [40,
49,  50]. B2M is the invariant chain of the MHC class
I protein complex, and its expression is regulated similarly
to the variable/polymorphic MHC class I genes [51–53].
We compared the B2M expression levels as an
indicator of inflammatory response in young and old
mice treated with vehicle control, and old mice treated
with the Alk5 inhibitor (Figure 4). B2M levels were
extremely low in young brain and muscle, consistent with
prior work  [30], but increased significantly with aging
(Figure 7A-7E). Importantly, when TGF-β signaling was
attenuated in vivo by the Alk5 inhibitor, B2M levels were
significantly diminished both in old brain (Figure 7B, 7C)
and old muscle (Figure 7D, 7E). These results demonstrate
that B2M becomes upregulated with aging in multiple
tissues (suggesting an increase in inflammation) and
that down-modulation of TGF-β signaling, which
rejuvenates myogenesis and neurogenesis, normalizes
B2M in myogenic and neurogenic regions to their young
levels, suggesting attenuation of inflammation. As further
support of this conclusion, the levels of B2M were also
significantly reduced in regenerating regions of the old
muscle administered with the dnTGFBR2, as compared to
tissue administered with control GFP virus (Figure 7F, 7G).
Furthermore, addition of low concentrations of TGF-β1
(0–5 ng/mL) to immune cells, specifically BV2 cells  –
a microglia cell line – did not affect B2M levels,
as assayed by pixel intensity and percent area staining of
B2M  (Supplemental  Figure  6A-6C). In contrast, high
TGF-β1 (50 ng/mL) levels induced a significant increase
in B2M expression. Thus, physiologically young levels
TGF-β1 does not induce B2M, but increased TGF-β1 does.

Three days after injury, muscle was harvested and assayed
for proliferating (EdU+) myogenic cells. Compared to
the aged tissue injected with control vector, in old muscle
administered with dnTGFBR2 retroviral vector there was
a marked increase in the percentage of desmin+ muscle
precursor cells (Figure 6B, 6C) and a significant
increase in proliferating desmin+EdU+ myogenic cells
(Figure 6D, 6E). We also examined muscle tissue 5 days
after injury and observed that repair of old damaged
muscle in vivo was robustly enhanced by dnTGFBR2, as
assayed by the replacement of the injury with the newly
formed myofibers and reduction in scarring (Figure
6F,  6G). These results extend our previous work [6] to
in vivo studies and interestingly suggest that retroviral
delivery of dnTGFBR2 rejuvenated the myogenic capacity
of old muscle stem cells already responding to tissue
injury, suggesting that old muscle repair can be enhanced
after the time of breakage of quiescence (e.g. by enhancing
the proliferation of the few old muscle stem cells that have
entered cell cycle). Importantly, these data confirm that
canonical TGF-β1/pSmad signaling is involved in the ageimposed inhibition of myogenesis.
To further validate the cross-tissue conservation
of TGF-β1 signaling with aging, hippocampal neural
progenitor cells were transduced with dnTGFBR2encoding retrovirus and assessed for proliferation. As
shown in Figure 6H-6I, dnTGFBR2 increased neural
progenitor proliferation in their (FGF-2-containing)
growth medium as compared to GFP control, based on
EdU incorporation. Western blotting analysis showed that
there was relatively high pSmad3 signaling in NPCs in
growth medium even in the absence of exogenous TGF-β1,
which was diminished upon dnTGFBR2 retroviral
transduction (Supplemental Figure 5A). Furthermore,
TGF-β1 (10 ng/mL) addition to growth medium overnight
inhibited proliferation of GFP+ NPCs, but did not affect
dnTGBR2+ NPCs (Figure 6H, 6I). Collectively, these
results including both pharmacological and genetic
intervention suggest that TGF-β1/pSmad2/3 signaling
increases with age in both myogenic and neurogenic
niches of tissue stem cells and that attenuation of this
pathway partially rescues myogenesis and neurogenesis.

DISCUSSION
Collectively, these data are the first to suggest that
similar molecular mechanisms acutely yet reversibly
inhibit the capacity of stem cells in old muscle and
in the hippocampus of the aged brain to contribute to
differentiated tissue. This study specifically focused
on age-imposed misregulation of the TGF-β/pSmad3
signaling pathway, and cross-tissue conservation was
clearly identified. Confirming these conclusions and
demonstrating clear therapeutic significance, systemic
administration of an Alk5 Type I receptor kinase inhibitor
simultaneously improved repair of skeletal muscle and
enhanced hippocampal neurogenesis in 2-year old mice,
suggesting promising strategies for combating multiple
age-related degenerative disorders, which are known
to contribute to the loss of a person’s agility, mobility,
memory, learning, and independence. These  results

High TGF-β levels increase B2M expression in
aged neural and muscle stem cell niches
The developmental origins and properties of muscle
and brain (and their respective stem cells) are quite
different, and we therefore next focused on potential
underlying molecular mechanisms that may be regulated
by the pleiotropic TGF-β/pSmad3 pathway and thus shared
between such adult organ systems. The TGF-β/pSmad3
pathway exerts complex and sometimes reciprocal effects
on cellular and tissue responses, including the rate of cell
cycle progression and the anti- versus pro-inflammatory
role in regulating immune responses [29]. Thus, we
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

11967

Oncotarget

Figure 6: Rescue of myogenesis in aged muscle and enhanced NPC proliferation by in vivo genetic inhibition of
TGF-β receptor II. A. Schematic. Aged (18 month old) mice TA muscle was injured with cardiotoxin on Day 0, followed by injection

of dnTGFBR2 retrovirus into injury sites 36 hours later, on Day 1.5. On Day 2 gastrocnemius muscle were injured, followed by injection
of dnTGFBR2 retrovirus at sites of injury 36 hours later, on Day 3.5. Mice received IP injection of EdU 12 hours before muscle tissue was
harvested. B. Myogenic precursor cells isolated 3 days post-injury from gastrocnemius muscle were stained for Desmin (red), with Hoechst
(blue) labeling all cell nuclei. Representative images are shown. Scale bar = 50 μM. C. Quantification of the mean percentage of Desmin+
precursor cells. Significant differences were identified by Student’s t-tests (two-tailed) (*p < 0.03). Error bars indicate standard error of
the mean (n = 3 biological replicates). D. Myogenic precursor cells isolated 3 days post-injury from gastrocnemius muscle were stained
for Desmin (red) and EdU (green), with Hoechst (blue) labeling all cell nuclei. Representative images are shown. Scale bar = 50 μM.
E. Quantification of the mean percentage of proliferating myogenic precursor cells isolated from muscle that received dnTGBR2 or GFP.
Significant differences were identified by Student’s t-tests (two-tailed) (*p < 0.02), and error bars indicate standard error of the mean
(n = 3 biological replicates per group) F. Hematoxylin and eosin of muscle TAs isolated 5 days post-injury and sectioned in a cryostat
at 10 μM. Representative images shown. Scale bar = 100 μM. G. Five days post-injury regeneration of old mice tibialis anterior muscle,
which received dnTGFBR2 or GFP retrovirus, was quantified from muscle sections (10 μM sections throughout sites of injury) and is
presented as the mean number of newly regenerated myofibers per square millimeter of injury site. Error bars indicate standard error
of the mean, (n = 3 mice per group). Significant differences were identified by Student’s t-tests (two-tailed) (*p <0.01). H. NPCs were
transduced with dnTGFBR2 or GFP and cultured for one week, followed by 16 hour incubation in growth medium in the presence/absence
of 10 ng/mL TGF-β1. Cells were pulsed with EdU (30 μM) for 4 hours before fixation to label proliferating cells. Cells were stained for
GFP or FLAG (green), EdU (red), and Sox2 (gray), with Hoechst (blue) labeling cell nuclei. Representative images are shown. Scale
bar = 100 μM. I. Proliferation of NPCs was quantified by cell scoring in 36 random fields of each condition using an automated imager
and MetaXpress cell scoring software. Results are displayed as the mean percent of EdU+Sox2+ proliferating NPCs +/-SD, respectively.
Significant differences were identified by Student’s t-tests (two-tailed) (*p < 9 × 10−10, **p < 3 × 10−24, ***p < 4 × 10−16). Error bars indicate
standard deviation (n = 36 technical replicates). The experiment was replicated 4 times.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

11968

Oncotarget

Figure 7: B2M levels decrease in neurogenic and myogenic niches following systemic or local attenuation of TGF-β
signaling. A. qRT-PCR quantification of B2m mRNA expression from young and old hippocampi. The relative average expression level

was normalized by GAPDH and presented relative to young hippocampi. Significant differences were identified by Student’s t-tests (twotailed) (*p < 0.04), and error bars indicate standard error of the mean (n = 4 old, 4 young). B. Brain sections spanning the hippocampus
from young mice (2 month), as well as Alk5 inhibitor or vehicle treated old (24 month) mice, were immunostained for B2M (red), with
Hoechst (blue) labeling all cell nuclei. Representative images are shown. Scale bar = 50 μM. C. Average B2M pixel intensity was quantified
using MetaXpress software, and significant differences were identified by Student’s t-tests (two-tailed) (*p < 3 × 10−6, **p < 0.0001). Error
bars indicate standard error of the mean (n = 5 young, 3 old + Alk5i, 3 old + vehicle biological replicates (mice), with n = 12 technical
replicates per mouse) D. Tibialis anterior muscle collected 5 days post-injury were immunostained for B2M (red), with Hoechst (blue)
labeling all cell nuclei. Representative images are shown. Scale bar = 100 μM. E. Average B2M pixel intensity of 10 μM tibialis anterior
muscle sections throughout sites of injury were quantified using MetaXpress software. Significant differences were identified by Student’s
t-tests (two-tailed) (*p < 7 × 10−7, **p < 5 × 10−5), and error bars indicate standard error of the mean (n = 3 biological replicates per group
(mice), with n = 12 technical replicates per mouse) F. TA muscles collected 5 days post injury were immunostained for B2M (red), with
Hoechst (blue) labeling all cell nuclei. Representative images are shown. Scale bar = 100 μM. G. Average B2M pixel intensity of TA muscle
sections throughout sites of injury were quantified using MetaXpress software. Significant differences were identified by Student’s t-tests
(two-tailed) (*p < 0.002). Error bars indicate standard error of the mean (n = 3 biological replicates per group (mice), with n = 12 technical
replicates per mouse).

show that excessive TGF-β/pSmad3 signaling induces
inflammation in muscle and brain, as indicated by
increased B2M expression. Systemic inhibition of the
TGF-β type 1 receptor enhanced both neurogenesis and
myogenesis and normalized B2M levels. An increase in
inflammation resulting in part from pathologically high
TGF-β1 levels may contribute to the broad decline in

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

maintenance and repair of old tissues by their dedicated
stem cells, in addition to up-regulation of p21 and other
cell cycle inhibitors known to occur in skeletal muscle
[1, 19] described here for the hippocampus.
Independent genetic and pharmacological
approaches to attenuate TGF-β/pSmad3 signaling drove
parallel enhancements of neurogenesis and myogenesis,

11969

Oncotarget

thus providing important cross- validation of these results
and conclusions. While local tissue delivery of shRNA
against Smad3 most likely inhibited TGF-β/pSmad3
signaling directly in muscle or brain, the systemic
administration of Alk5 inhibitor could function both
directly and potentially indirectly through attenuation
of TGF-β pathway signaling in multiple tissues. Of
note, both endothelial cells and microglia secrete
TGF-β (Figure 2). TGF-β signaling is critical for the
development of microglia and for the maintenance of their
unique molecular signature in the adult CNS [54], thus
suggesting that microglia may produce TGF-β for their
own immunological functions in the brain in addition to
signaling to other cells. In addition, microglia are known
both to increase in number in the aged brain and also
to develop a more inflammatory phenotype with higher
expression of several cytokines, including TGF-β1 [55].
Finally, endothelium may also be a source of elevated
TGF-β secretion in the hippocampus. Neural stem cells
are known to be closely associated with blood vessels in
a vascular niche, where endothelial cells are important
regulators of neurogenesis that have been reported to
promote self-renewal and prevent differentiation of NSCs
through secretion of soluble factors [56]. Furthermore, the
permissiveness of blood brain barrier increases in the aged
and pathological brain [57], and the levels of TGF-β1 rise
with age in circulation ([6], and Supplemental Figure 1),
suggesting another means by which inhibitory amounts
of this cytokine could reach the neurogenic SGZ. Finally,
with potential significance to aging, TGF-β is known to
be up regulated upon central nervous system damage, and
such elevation is concurrent with the dramatic induction of
MHC class I gene expression, as well as with such known
phenotypes of the aged brain as activation of microglia
and neuronal apoptosis [30].
Various studies have demonstrated that not just one
signaling pathway, but a network of highly interactive
pathways including Notch, Wnt, BMP, Shh, TNF-α, IGF,
and IL-6 are affected by the aging process [1, 2, 46]. For
example, Wnt signaling has been demonstrated to decrease
in aged hippocampi and contribute to the decline of adult
hippocampal neurogenesis [1, 44, 58, 59]. Furthermore,
IL-6 becomes elevated in the old and especially at the sites
of tissue damage [60], is secreted by activated microglia,
and is known to promote inflammation in part via support
of Th17 cells and up-regulation of MHC class I and class II
gene expression [32, 61, 62]. Therefore, it is possible that the
age-specific increase in TGF-β1 signaling may contribute
to the excess of IL-6 or other inflammatory cytokines such
as IL-17, and consequentially experimental attenuation
of TGF-β1 may result in lower levels of inflammatory
cytokines and normalized levels of MHC I proteins. The
detailed understanding of the age-specific cytokine interplay
in the neurogenic and myogenic niches would be interesting
to uncover in future comprehensive studies.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

In summary, this work improves our understanding
of the aging of tissue stem cells, reveals a molecular
conservation of the aging process between muscle and
hippocampal region of brain, and suggests novel clinical
strategies for the simultaneous rejuvenation of myogenesis
and neurogenesis in old mammals.

EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES
Animals
Young (2–3 month old) and old (18–24 month old)
C57BL6/J male mice were purchased from the Jackson
Laboratory and the NIH. The animal experimental
procedures were performed in accordance with the Guide
for Care and Use of Laboratory Animals of the National
Institutes of Health, and approved by the Office of
Laboratory Animal Care, UC Berkeley.
For each experiment on aged (18–24 month old)
mice, an n of at least 7 per group would be used initially. If
aged mice died due to surgery or age-related health issues,
a minimum of n = 3 remaining mice were analyzed and
assessed for statistical significance (described in statistical
analysis below). Mice of the same genetic strain and age
were assigned to groups at random.

Cell culture
Primary rat neural progenitor cells isolated from
the hippocampi of female Fisher 344 rats (Charles
River) were cultured in growth medium (DMEM/F12
(Life Technologies) containing N2 supplement (Life
Technologies) and 10 ng/mL FGF-2 (PeproTech)) on
laminin (Roche) and polyornithine (Sigma) coated
tissue culture plates, with subculturing on reaching 80%
confluency using Accutase (Phoenix Flow Systems), as
previously described [63].
Primary mouse neural progenitor cells were isolated
froom C57BL6/J male mice (Charles River) as previously
described [64]. Cells were cultured in growth medium
(Neurobasal A (Gibco) containing B27 supplement
(Gibco), Glutamax-1 supplement (Gibco), 20 ng/mL
FGF-2 (Peprotech), and 20 ng/mL EGF (PeproTech))
on Poly-d-Lysine (Sigma) and Laminin (Roche) coated
tissue culture plates, with subculturing on reaching 80%
confluency using Accutase (Phoenix Flow Systems).
Primary mouse muscle progenitor cells
(myoblasts) were isolated as previously described
[65] and cultured and expanded in growth medium
containing: Ham’s F-10 (Gibco), 20% Bovine Growth
Serum (Hyclone), 5 ng/mL FGF-2 (PeproTech) and 1%
penicillin-streptomycin on Matrigel (BD Biosciences)
coated plates (1:300 Matrigel: PBS), with subculturing
on reaching 80% confluency using 0.5% Trypsin (Sigma
Aldrich) diluted in PBS.

11970

Oncotarget

Progenitor cells were tested for miscroplasma
contamination at the UC Berkeley Stem Cell Core Facility
and using Hoechst DNA stain.
Primary Muscle stem cells were isolated from
male C57BL6/J mice as described below and cultured in
DMEM (Life Technologies) with 5% serum from the same
age mouse on Matrigel (BD Biosciences) coated plates
(1:100 Matrigel:PBS) overnight before cell fixation with
70% cold ethanol.
BV2 microglia (gift of Wyss-Coray lab, Stanford),
were cultured in DMEM (Gibco) + 10% Fetal Bovine
Serum (Hyclone), with subculturing on reaching 80%
confluency using 0.5% Trypsin (Sigma Aldrich) diluted
in PBS.

1  mM Phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride (PMSF), 1 mM
sodium fluoride and 1 mM sodium orthovanadate. The
tissue debris was spun at 10K rpm for 5 min at 4C, and
supernatant containing protein extract snap frozen with
dry ice.

RNA extraction, RT-PCR and real-time PCR
Total RNA was extracted from primary neural
progenitor cells or young and old murine hippocampi
using Trizol reagent (Invitrogen) according to
manufacturer’s instructions. 1 ug of total RNA was used
for cDNA synthesis with Olig Dt primers (Invitrogen).
For real-time PCR amplification and quantification of
genes of interest, an initial amplification using specific
primers to each gene of interest (realtimeprimers.com)
was done with a denaturation step at 95°C for 5 min,
followed by 45 cycles of denaturation at 95°C for 1 min,
primer annealing at 58°C for 30 s, and primer extension
at 72°C for 15 s. Real-time PCR was performed using
SYBR and an ABI PRISM 7500 Sequence Detection
System (Applied Biosystems). Reactions were run
in triplicate in three independent experiments. The
geometric mean of housekeeping gene GAPDH was
used as an internal control to normalize the variability
in expression levels and were analyzed using the 2−ΔΔCT
method described [66].

In vitro validation of TGF-β1 signaling and
proliferation assay
Primary rat NPCs were cultured in growth medium
(DMF12 + N2 + 10 ng/mL FGF-2) as described above.
Cells were cultured at a density of 200,000 cells per
well of a 6-well culture slide in the presence/absence of
TGF-β1 (50 ng/mL) (HumanZyme, Inc.) for 30 minutes,
followed by a PBS wash and cell scraping into RIPA
buffer for western blot analysis as described below. rNPCs
were also cultured at a density of 80,000 cells per well
of an 8-well chamber slide in growth medium plus the
presence/absence of TGF-β1 (100 ng/mL) for 24 hours.
NPCs were pulsed for 2 hours with 10 μM BrdU (Sigma
Aldrich) before cell fixation with 70% cold ethanol for
immunocytochemistry analysis as described below.
BV2 microglia were cultured in growth medium
as described above. For experimental treatment, cells
were then cultured at a density of 80,000 cells per well
of an 8-well chamber slide in DMEM plus the presence
of lipopolysaccharide (LPS) (100 ng/mL) (Invivogen)
and IFN-γ (20 ng/mL) (Peprotech, Inc.) for 24 hours in
order to stimulate BV2s to an inflammatory activated
phenotype. TGF-β1 (PeproTech, Inc.) was concurrently
added to cells for 24 hours at 0–50 ng/mL to assess the
inflammatory response. After 24 hours, cells were fixed
with 4% paraformaldehyde for immunocytochemistry
analysis as described below.

ELISA
The concentration of active TGF-β1 in blood serum
or tissue protein lysate was determined using enzymelinked immunoabsorbent assay (ELISA)-based cytokine
antibody array (R&D), according to manual instructions.

Immunocytochemistry
Mice were anesthetized and perfused with
saline and 4% PFA. Brains were collected and placed
in 4% PFA overnight for a post fixation, followed by
dehydration in 30% sucrose/PBS at 4°C for 2 days.
Brains were then sectioned at 40 μM using a vibratome
and stored in a glycerol-based cryoprotectant at −20°C
until further analysis by immunostaining. For nonBrdU/EdU staining, sections were washed 3 times for
15 minutes in TBS, followed by one hour blocking in
a permeabilization/staining buffer, TBS++ (3% Donkey
Serum and 0.25% Tween X-100 in TBS), then incubated
with primary antibodies of interest (see Antibodies) for
72 hours. For secondary staining, sections were washed
3 times, 15 minutes each in TBS, followed by 2 hour
incubation in donkey raised, fluorophore-conjugated,
species-specific secondary antibodies (Jackson
Immunoresearch) at 1:250 dilution in TBS++. Following
secondary staining, sections underwent 3, 15 minute
washes in TBS, with 4 μM Hoechst in the second wash.

Dissection and preparation of murine
hippocampi for RNA or protein analysis
Young or old mice were anesthetized and
perfused with 20 mL saline, followed by dissection of
hippocampi. For RNA extraction, tissue was placed in
1 mL Trizol (Invitrogen) and homogenized, followed by
chloroform extraction as previously described [63]. For
protein extraction, hippocampi tissue was homogenized
in RIPA buffer (50 mM Tris, 150 mM NaCl, 1%
NP40, 0.25% sodium deoxycholate and 1 mM EDTA,
pH  7.4) containing 1X protease inhibitor (Roche),
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

11971

Oncotarget

with Bio-Rad Gel Doc/Chemi Doc Imaging System and
Quantity One software. Results of multiple assays were
quantified using Applied Biosystems or Image J software.
Pixel Intensity of bands of interest were normalized
with pixel intensity of glyceraldehydes-3-phosphate
dehydrogenase or β-actin.

Finally, the sections were mounted on positively charged
frosted slides, dried overnight and imaged with a prairie
confocal microscope.

BrdU in vivo labeling and immunostaining
Mice were intraperitoneally injected with BrdU
(50 mg/kg of body weight, Sigma Aldrich) dissolved in
saline to label mitotic cells. Sections were incubated in
SSC/formamide at 65°C water for 2 hours, washed
in TBS, followed by 2N HCl for 15 minutes. They
were then placed in 2X Saline-Sodium Citrate (SSC)
for 30 minutes,  .1 mM Borate Buffer for 15 minutes,
followed by 6, 15 minute washes in TBS, then blocked
in a permeabilization/staining buffer, TBS++ for 2 hours.
Sections were then incubated with αRat-BrdU (Abcam
Inc. ab6326) and other antibodies (see Antibodies section)
in TBS++ at 4°C for 72 hours. Secondary staining was
done as described above.

Antibodies
αRabbit-pSmad2 (Millipore AB3849), αRabbitβactin (Cell Signaling #4967), αMouse-TGFβ1 (R&D
MAB240), αMouse-TGFβ1,2,3 (R&D MAB1835),
EdU Click-it kit (Invitrogen C10337 and C10338),
αGuineyPig-DCX (Millipore AB2253), αGoat-Sox2
(Santa Cruz SC-17320), αRabbit-Desmin (Abcam
ab32362),
αMouse-embryonic
myosin
heavey
chain (eMyHC) (Hybridoma Bank, clone F1.652),
αChicken-GFP (Abcam ab13970), αRabbit-FLAG
(Santa Cruz sc-807), αMouse-FLAG (Abcam
ab18230), αRabbit-pSmad3 (Epitomics #1880-1),
αRat-BrdU (Abcam ab6326), TGF-β1 ELISA kit (R&D
DY1679), αMouse-Smad2/3 (Santa Cruz sc-133098),
αRabbit-B2M (Abcam ab75853), αGoat-GapDH
(Abcam ab9483), αRat-CD31 (BD Biosciences 550274),
αGoat-Iba1 (Abcam ab5076), αRabbit-GFAP (Abcam
ab7260).

EdU in vivo labeling and immunostaining
Mice were intraperitoneally injected with EdU
(50  mg/kg of body weight, Invitrogen) dissolved in
phosphate-buffered saline to label mitotic cells. Brain
sections were post-fixed with 4% PFA for 30 minutes
after primary and secondary staining, and treated for EdU
visualization using the Click-iT EdU kit (Invitrogen), as
per the manual’s instructions.
Muscle progenitor cells were fixed with cold, 70%
ethanol and stained for αRabbit-Desmin and secondary
staining as described below under muscle methods.
Following secondary staining, cells were treated for EdU
visualization using the Click-iT EdU kit (Invitrogen), as
per the manual’s instructions.

In vitro validation of Alk5 inhibitor in rNPCs
Following overnight rNPC culturing in growth
medium at a density of 300,000 cells per well of a 6 well
tissue culture plate, rNPCs were starved in a basal medium
(lacking FGF-2) for 1 hour, then untreated, or treated with
1 ng/mL TGF-β1 for 1 hour in the presence/absence of
5 uM of Alk5 inhibitor, followed by a PBS wash and cell
scraping to collect cells into RIPA buffer for western blot
analysis.

Western blot analysis
Primary neural or muscle progenitor cells, or whole
muscle tissue were lysed in RIPA buffer (50 mM Tris,
150 mM NaCl, 1% NP40, 0.25% sodium deoxycholate
and 1 mM EDTA, pH 7.4) containing 1X protease
inhibitor (Roche), 1 mM Phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride
(PMSF), 1  mM sodium fluoride and 1 mM sodium
orthovanadate. The protein concentration was determined
by Bradford assay (Bio-Rad). Lysates were resuspended
in 1X Laemmli buffer (Bio-Rad), boiled for 5 minutes
and separated on precast 7.5% or 4–15% TGX gels
(Biorad). Primary antibodies were diluted in 5% nonfat milk in TBS + 0.1% Tween-20, and nitrocellulose
membranes were incubated with antibody mixtures
overnight at 4°C. HRP-conjugated secondary antibodies
(Santa Cruz Biotech) were diluted 1:500 in 5% non-fat
milk in TBS + 0.1% Tween-20 and incubated for 1 hour
at room temperature. Blots were developed using Western
Lightning ECL reagent (Perkin Elmer), and analyzed
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

In vivo validation of Alk5 inhibitor
Aged (24 month old) C57BL6/J male mice were
injected intraperitonially (IP) with TGF-β1 Type I
Receptor Kinase Alk5 inhibitor 2-(3-(6-Methylpyridin2-yl)-1H-pyrazol-4-yl)-1,5-naphthyridine (Enzo Life
Sciences) diluted in sunflower seed oil to a concentration
of 57.4 μM. Mice (n = 4) received 100 uL IP injections
of the Alk5 inhibitor or vehicle control once daily for
11 days, and were perfused on the 12th day. Tibialis
Anterior muscle was injured with cardiotoxin after one
week of IP injections, on day 7 (as described below in
muscle methods). Additionally, on day 7 we began daily
IP BrdU injections (50 mg/kg body weight). Four hours
after receiving the fifth BrdU IP injection, the mice were
perfused (on Day 12), and brains and TAs were collected
for analysis.

11972

Oncotarget

Lentiviral and retroviral vector construction,
packaging, and purification

receiving the fifth BrdU IP injection, mice were saline and
4% PFA perfused. Immunostaining and Quantification
described elsewhere.
Aged (18 month) C57BL6/J male mice received
lateral intrahippocampal injections of 1 μl of lentiviral
solutions (LV-shRNA-Smad3-GFP or LV-shRNA-lacZGFP, 1–3 × 10^8 IU/mL) in PBS on day -14, on the right
hemisphere hippocampus, at 0.25 uL per minute. The
injection coordinates with respect to bregma were -2.12
anteriorposterior, -1.55 dorsoventral (from the dura), and
1.5 mediolateral (refer to Supplemental Figure 4). Mice
were allowed to recover 14 days, followed by EdU IP
injections (50 mg/kg bodyweight) 1X daily for 5 days.
Five days after receiving the fifth EdU IP injection, mice
were saline and 4% PFA perfused. Immunostaining and
Quantification described elsewhere.

A DNA cassette encoding human U6 promoterdriven expression of shRNA against mouse Smad3 (Gene
ID: 17127) was constructed by PCR with flanking Pac I
sites and, following restriction digestion and phenol/
chloroform purification, ligated into the Pac I site of the
pFUGW lentiviral vector. Five candidate sequences were
tested for knockdown efficiency, and the most effective
sequence (shSMAD 3.4 in Supplemental Table 1) was
selected for experimental studies. Sequences for all
shRNAs tested are provided in Supplemental Table 1.
The control shRNA vector against LacZ was constructed
previously [63]. PCR was performed with Phusion DNA
Polymerase (New England Biolabs) under the following
conditions: 98°C for 2 min, 30 cycles of 12 s at 95°C,
30 s at 65°C, and 25 s at 72°C, with a final extension
step of 2 min at 72°C. Lentiviral and retroviral vectors
were packaged and purified using standard methods as
described [67].
A dominant negative TGFBR2 retroviral plasmid
was obtained (Addgene, Cambridge, MA, http://www.
addgene.org/12640/) and packaged and purified as
previously described [68].

shRNA muscle injection
Aged (24 month) C57BL6/J male mice were injured
with CTX in the tibialis anterior (TA) muscle in two sites
as described below, and on the following day 5 μl of
concentrated lentiviruses carrying Smad3 shRNA or LacZ
shRNA were injected to the injury sites using a 30 gauge
needle. Mice TAs were harvested 5 days post injury, as
described below.

In vitro validation of smad3 shRNA vector
Mouse myoblasts were cultured for 24 hours at
a density of 100,000 cells per well of a 6 well tissue
culture plate in 50% growth medium and 50% lentiviral
supernatant (in DMEM + 10% FBS), packaged as
previously described [68], followed by culturing in
growth medium for a total of 72 hours. Cells were then
washed once with PBS, scraped and collected into RIPA
for western blot analysis.
mNPCs were plated at 200,000 cells per well
of a 6 well tissue culture plate in growth medium, and
transduced with lentivirus encoding shRNA to Smad3
or lacZ at a multiplicity of infection (MOI) of 5 and
cultured for two weeks. RNA was extracted with Trizol
(Invitrogen) followed by qPCR to assess levels of Smad3
(see Supplemental Table 1 for sequences).

In vitro validation of dnTGFBR2 vector
Neural progenitor cells (NPCs) were transduced
with retroviruses carrying dominant negative TGFBR2
(Addgene, Cambridge, MA, http://www.addgene.
org/12640/) which has a cytoplasmic truncation and a
FLAG tag, or GFP control and cultured for 72 hours. GFP
and dnTGFBR2-transduced cell lysates were prepared
as described in western blotting methods, and probed on
western blots for the FLAG-tagged dnTGFBR2 using
anti-FLAG antibody (Santa Cruz), GFP (Abcam), pSmad3
(Epitomics), Smad2/3 (Santa Cruz), and βactin (Cell
Signaling). Transduced NPCs were also plated at 300,000
cells per well of a 6-well tissue culture plate and cultured
in basal medium (DMF12 + N2) after cell splitting for
4 hours, followed by 45 minute treatment with 0, 1, or
12.5 ng/mL TGF-β1. Cell pellets were lysed in 100 uL
RIPA buffer, and probed on western blots for pSmad3,
Smad2/3, and βactin.
For proliferation assay, NPCs were transduced
with 3 μL concentrated retroviruses per 3 × 105 cells,
delivering dnTGFBR2 or GFP and cultured for one week.
Transduced NPCs were then split at 80,000 cells per
well into 8-well chamber slides and cultured overnight
in growth medium (DMF12 + N2 + 10 ng/mL FGF-2)
in the presence/absence of 10 ng/mL TGF-β1. 16 hours
post addition of TGF-β1, cells were pulsed for 4 hours
with EdU (30  μM). Cells were fixed with 4% PFA for

In vivo loss of function with shRNA
Aged (18 month) C57BL6/J male mice received
lateral intrahippocampal injections of 1 μl of lentiviral
solutions (LV-shRNA-Smad3-GFP or LV-shRNA-lacZGFP, 1–3 × 10^8 IU/mL) in PBS on day -14, on the right
hemisphere hippocampus, at 0.25 uL per minute. The
injection coordinates with respect to bregma were -2.12
anteriorposterior, -1.55 dorsoventral (from the dura), and
1.5 mediolateral (refer to Figure 5A). Mice were allowed
to recover 14 days, followed by BrdU IP injections
(50 mg/kg bodyweight) 1X daily for 5 days. One day after
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

11973

Oncotarget

20 minutes, and immunostained for FLAG (Abcam), GFP
(Abcam), EdU (Invitrogen), and Sox2 (Santa Cruz), as
described in immunocytochemistry methods.

by counting total newly regenerated fibers and dividing
by the regeneration area. Immunostaining was performed
as described [69]. Briefly, after permeabilization in
PBS + 1% FBS + 0.25% Triton-X-100, tissues and cells
were incubated with primary antibodies in staining buffer
(PBS + 1% FBS) for 1 h at room temperature, followed by
1 h incubation fluorochrome-labeled secondary antibodies
(ALEXA at 1:1000). BrdU-specific immunostaining
required an extra step of 2 M HCl treatment before
permeablization.

In vivo muscle injection of dnTGFBR2 retrovirus
Aged (18 month) C57BL6/J male mice were injured
with CTX in the tibialis anterior muscle in two sites and in
the gastrocnemius muscle in four sites as described below,
and 5 μl of concentrated retroviruses carrying dnTGFBR2
or GFP control were injected to the injury sites using a
30 gauge needle at different time points (see Figure 6
for details). Mice received EdU IP injection (50 mg/kg)
12 hours before muscle harvest at 5 days post injury.

Whole muscle tissue analysis
Whole muscle from young and old resting TA
and TA adjacent to cardiotoxin injured gastrocnemius
muscle was isolated and lysed as described earlier [7]. In
brief, muscles were lysed using Miltenyi Biotec Tissue
Dissociator in tissue lysate buffer and lysates were run on
7.5% Criterion gel (BioRad) and western blotted against
TGF-β1 (R&D, mouse monoclonal antibody) and GAPDH
(Abcam, goat polyclonal) antibody. The images were
quantified using Image J software and P values calculated
using student’s t-test.

Muscle injury
Isoflurane was used to anesthetize the animal during
the muscle injury procedure. For bulk myofiber satellite
cell activation, gastrocnemius muscles were injected with
cardiotoxin 1 (Sigma) dissolved at 100 micrograms per
milliliter in PBS, at 4 sites of 5 microliters each for each
muscle. Muscles were harvested 3 days later. For focal
injury to assay regeneration by immunoanalysis and
histology, 5 microliters of 0.5 milligram per milliliter
CTX was injected to two sites at the middle of the tibialis
anterior muscle, and muscle harvested 5 days later.

Quantification and statistical analysis
For quantification of immunofluorescent images
for BrdU incorporation, 25 20x images per replicate
were taken on the Molecular Devices ImageXpress
Micro automated epifluorescence imager, followed by
automated cell quantification using the multiwavelength
cell scoring module within the MetaXpress analysis
software. Data was analyzed using Student’s t-tests
(two-tailed) and P values equal or lower than 0.05 were
considered statistically significant. Sample sizes of n = 3
or greater were determined for each experiment based on
power analysis and IACUC considerations, and based
on previously published experimental group numbers
[19,  44,  63] and assessed for significance based on
p values and heteroscedastic variance between groups
that were statistically compared. For pixel intensity and
percent area quantifications of immunofluorescent images,
MetaXpress Analysis Software or ImageJ were used to
determine integrated pixel intensity and percent positive
area of thresholded images.
For quantification of the number of BrdU+Sox2+
cells in Alk5 inhibitor treated mice, unbiased stereology
(Zeiss Axio Imager, software by MicroBrightfield) using
the optical fractionator method was performed on 8
vibratome coronal brain slices spanning the hippocampus
(40 microns thick, 200 microns apart), and the number
of selected cells was normalized by the volume of
hippocampal tissue analyzed. For quantification of the
number of BrdU+Sox2+ or EdU+DCX+ cells in shRNA
viral vector injected brains, confocal stacks of 8 vibratome
coronal GFP+ brain slices spanning the hippocampus

Muscle fibers and muscle progenitor
cell isolation
Injured gastrocnemius muscle was dissected from
old mice and incubated at 37°C in digestion medium
(150  U/mL Collagenase type II in DMEM medium,
buffered with 30 mM HEPES) for 2 hours. Digested
muscle was gently triturated and myofibers were collected.
Myofibers were further digested with 1 U/mL Dispase
and 40 U/mL Collagenase type II to liberate muscle stem
cells  [65]. Muscle stem cells were cultured in DMEM
(Life Sciences) with 5% serum from the same age mouse.

Muscle tissue immunofluorescence
and histological analysis
Muscle tissue was dissected, flash frozen in OCT
compound (Tissue Tek; Sakura) and cryo-sectioned at
10 micrometers. Cryo-sectioning was performed through
the entire volume of muscle (50–70 sections total, done
at 200 μm intervals), thereby serially sampling the
entire tissue. Muscle sections were stained with aqueous
hematoxylin and eosin (H&E), as per the manufacturer’s
instructions (Sigma-Aldrich). Regeneration and myogenic
potential was quantified by examining injury sites from
representative sections along the muscle spanning the
injury, then by measuring the injured area using Adobe
Photoshop Elements. Myofiber regeneration was quantified
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

11974

Oncotarget

and imaging. We also thank Tony Wyss-Coray’s lab
(Stanford, CA) for providing BV2 microglia.

(40 microns thick, 200 microns apart) were acquired on a
Prairie confocal microscope and cells were counted. Cell
numbers were normalized to the volume of the DG granule
cell layer measured by ImageJ and as previously described
[59]. Briefly, volume was calculated based on a threshold
of the granule layer of each image as determined with
Hoechst staining, then calculating the volumetric fraction
based on the thickness of the brain slice (40 μM) and the
interval at which hippocampi sections were analyzed
(every 6th section).

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
The authors declare they have no known conflicts of
interest in this work.

Author contributions
HY produced and assessed all viral particles,
designed, performed and analyzed the experiments for
Figures 1-6, Supplemental Figures 1A and D-I, 2, 3,
4A-4C, 5, and 6, designed and analyzed experiments
for Figure  7, interpreted these data and co-wrote the
manuscript. MJC designed and performed experiments for
Figures 4D-4E, 6A-6G, Supplemental Figures 1A, 4D-4E,
designed experiments for Figure 7, interpreted these
data and edited the manuscript. AM performed and
analyzed experiments for Figures 5-7 and Supplemental
Figures 4A-4C; CS performed and analyzed experiments
for Figures 4,  5, and Supplemental Figure 2A-2B. LB
designed and cloned Smad3 shRNA constructs. PP
provided data for Supplemental Figure 1B-1C. CG
performed and analyzed experiments for Supplemental
Figure 4D-4E. IMC and DVS designed, directed and
integrated the study, interpreted the data, and co-wrote the
manuscript.

Inclusion/exclusion criteria
Only aged mice that died during the study due to
health reasons were excluded from analysis. In terms of
automated counting of cells using MetaXpress analysis
software, only sites that were blurry with indistinguishable
colors (such as areas on the slide with bubbles or sites
imaged with incorrect focus by the Molecular Devices
ImageXpress Micro automated epifluorescence imager),
or areas with large cell clumps were excluded from
the cell quantification analysis. These criteria were
pre-established.
When performing in vivo experiments, such as
Alk5 inhibitor injections or shRNA steretaxic brain
injections, there was no blinding. For quantification and
analysis, researchers were blinded to the group allocation,
specifically when doing regenerative index calculations,
stereology and cell counts.

REFERENCES

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

1.	 Conboy IM, Rando TA. Heterochronic parabiosis for the
study of the effects of aging on stem cells and their niches.
Cell cycle (Georgetown, Tex). 2012; 11:2260–2267.

This work was supported by grants from the
National Institutes of Health R01 AG02725201 and
California Institute for Regenerative Medicine RN100532-1 to IMC, California Institute for Regenerative
Medicine grant RT2-02022 to DVS, Roger’s Family
Award to IMC and DVS and NSF Pre-doctoral fellowship
to HY. We thank Mary West and the CIRM/QB3 Shared
Stem Cell Facility at UC Berkeley for designing the
MetaXpress journal for quantification of pSmad3 pixel
intensity in Sox2+ cells, for use of the Molecular Devices
ImageXpress and Prairie 2P/Confocal microscope and
training on these instruments. We thank Mustafa Alkhouli
for assisting with animal injections and care, cell counts,
brain staining and image processing; Pamela Rios for
assistance in histology staining and RI calculations of
dnTGFBR2 injected muscle TAs; Hikaru Mamiya and
Matthew Zeiderman for assistance in in vitro rNPC
staining, qPCRs and westerns to test for shRNA-Smad3
efficacy; Eric Jabart for the dnTGFBR2 plasmid and
reagents and thoughtful discussion; Manika Paul for her
assistance with brain staining and image processing,
acquisition of pSmad3 pixel intensity, and cell counts;
and Ashutosh Shrestha for assistance with cell staining

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

2.	 Silva HS, Conboy IM, Gilliland G. (2008). Aging and
stem cell renewal. StemBook: The Stem Cell Research
Community.
3.	 Loffredo FS, Steinhauser ML, Jay SM, Gannon J,
Pancoast  JR, Yalamanchi P, Sinha M, Dall’Osso C,
Khong D, Shadrach JL, Miller CM, Singer BS, Stewart A,
Psychogios N, Gerszten RE, Hartigan AJ, et al. Growth
­differentiation factor 11 is a circulating factor that reverses
age-related cardiac hypertrophy. Cell. 2013; 153:828–839.
4.	 Villeda SA, Luo J, Mosher KI, Zou B, Britschgi M, Bieri G,
Stan TM, Fainberg N, Ding Z, Eggel A, Lucin KM, Czirr E,
Park JS, Couillard-Despres S, Aigner L, Li G, et al. The
ageing systemic milieu negatively regulates neurogenesis
and cognitive function. Nature. 2011; 477:90–94.
5.	 Vukovic J, Colditz MJ, Blackmore DG, Ruitenberg MJ,
Bartlett PF. Microglia modulate hippocampal ­neural
­precursor activity in response to exercise and aging.
J Neurosci. 2012; 32:6435–6443.
6.	 Carlson ME, Conboy MJ, Hsu M, Barchas L, Jeong  J,
Agrawal A, Mikels AJ, Agrawal S, Schaffer DV,

11975

Oncotarget

Conboy IM. Relative roles of TGF-beta1 and Wnt in the
systemic regulation and aging of satellite cell responses.
Aging cell. 2009; 8:676–689.

19.	 Conboy IM, Conboy MJ, Smythe GM, Rando TA.
Notch-mediated restoration of regenerative potential to aged
muscle. Science (New York, NY). 2003; 302:1575–1577.

7.	 Paliwal P, Pishesha N, Wijaya D, Conboy IM. Age
dependent increase in the levels of osteopontin
­
­inhibits ­skeletal muscle regeneration. Aging. 2012;
4:553–566.

20.	 Conboy IM, Rando TA. The regulation of Notch signaling
controls satellite cell activation and cell fate determination
in postnatal myogenesis. DevCell. 2002; 3:397–409.
21.	 Walston JD. Sarcopenia in older adults. Current opinion in
rheumatology. 2012; 24:623–627.

8.	 Ruckh JM, Zhao JW, Shadrach JL, van Wijngaarden P,
Rao TN, Wagers AJ, Franklin RJ. Rejuvenation of regeneration in the aging central nervous system. Cell stem cell.
2012; 10:96–103.

22.	 Sinha M, Jang YC, Oh J, Khong D, Wu EY, Manohar R,
Miller C, Regalado SG, Loffredo FS, Pancoast JR,
Hirshman MF, Lebowitz J, Shadrach JL, Cerletti  M,
Kim MJ, Serwold T, et al. Restoring systemic GDF11
levels reverses age-related dysfunction in mouse
­skeletal  muscle. Science (New York, NY). 2014;
344:649–652.

9.	 Katsimpardi L, Litterman NK, Schein PA, Miller CM,
Loffredo FS, Wojtkiewicz GR, Chen JW, Lee RT,
Wagers AJ, Rubin LL. Vascular and neurogenic rejuvenation of the aging mouse brain by young systemic factors.
Science (New York, NY). 2014; 344:630–634.

23.	 Modahl C, Green L, Fein D, Morris M, Waterhouse L,
Feinstein C, Levin H. Plasma oxytocin levels in autistic
children. Biological psychiatry. 1998; 43:270–277.

10.	 Deng W, Aimone JB, Gage FH. New neurons and new
memories: how does adult hippocampal neurogenesis affect
learning and memory? Nature reviews Neuroscience. 2010;
11:339–350.

24.	 Ruggeri B, Sarkans U, Schumann G, Persico AM.
Biomarkers in autism spectrum disorder: the old and the
new. Psychopharmacology. 2014; 231:1201–1216.

11.	 Deng W, Saxe MD, Gallina IS, Gage FH. Adult-born
­hippocampal dentate granule cells undergoing maturation
modulate learning and memory in the brain. J Neurosci.
2009; 29:13532–13542.

25.	 Doyle KP, Cekanaviciute E, Mamer LE, Buckwalter MS.
TGFbeta signaling in the brain increases with aging and signals to astrocytes and innate immune cells in the weeks after
stroke. Journal of neuroinflammation. 2010; 7:62.

12.	 Oboti L, Savalli G, Giachino C, De Marchis S, Panzica GC,
Fasolo A, Peretto P. Integration and sensory experiencedependent survival of newly-generated neurons in the
accessory olfactory bulb of female mice. The European
journal of neuroscience. 2009; 29:679–692.

26.	 Allen RE, Boxhorn LK. Regulation of skeletal muscle satellite cell proliferation and differentiation by transforming
growth factor-beta, insulin-like growth factor I, and fibroblast growth factor. Journal of cellular physiology. 1989;
138:311–315.

13.	 Maslov AY, Barone TA, Plunkett RJ, Pruitt SC. Neural
stem cell detection, characterization, and age-related
changes in the subventricular zone of mice. J Neurosci.
2004; 24:1726–1733.

27.	 Buckwalter MS, Yamane M, Coleman BS, Ormerod BK,
Chin JT, Palmer T, Wyss-Coray T. Chronically increased
transforming growth factor-beta1 strongly inhibits hippocampal neurogenesis in aged mice. Am J Pathol. 2006;
169:154–164.

14.	 Olariu A, Cleaver KM, Cameron HA. Decreased neurogenesis in aged rats results from loss of granule cell precursors
without lengthening of the cell cycle. The Journal of comparative neurology. 2007; 501:659–667.

28.	 Carlson ME, Suetta C, Conboy MJ, Aagaard P, Mackey A,
Kjaer M, Conboy I. Molecular aging and rejuvenation of
human muscle stem cells. EMBO molecular medicine.
2009; 1:381–391.

15.	 Walter J, Keiner S, Witte OW, Redecker C. Age-related
effects on hippocampal precursor cell s­ubpopulations
and  neurogenesis. Neurobiology of aging. 2011;
32:1906–1914.

29.	 Han G, Li F, Singh TP, Wolf P, Wang XJ. The pro-­
inflammatory role of TGFbeta1: a paradox?. International
journal of biological sciences. 2012; 8:228–235.

16.	 Eriksson PS, Perfilieva E, Bjork-Eriksson T, Alborn AM,
Nordborg C, Peterson DA, Gage FH. Neurogenesis in
the adult human hippocampus. Nature medicine. 1998;
4:1313–1317.

30.	 Bohatschek M, Kloss CU, Hristova M, Pfeffer K,
Raivich  G. Microglial major histocompatibility complex
glycoprotein-1 in the axotomized facial motor nucleus:
regulation and role of tumor necrosis factor receptors
­
1 and 2. The Journal of comparative neurology. 2004;
470:382–399.

17.	 Spalding KL, Bergmann O, Alkass K, Bernard S,
Salehpour  M, Huttner HB, Bostrom E, Westerlund I,
Vial  C, Buchholz BA, Possnert G, Mash DC, Druid H,
Frisen J. Dynamics of hippocampal neurogenesis in adult
humans. Cell. 2013; 153:1219–1227.

31.	 Rico MC, Rough JJ, Del Carpio-Cano FE, Kunapuli SP,
DeLa Cadena RA. The axis of thrombospondin-1,
transforming growth factor beta and connective t­issue
­
growth factor: an emerging therapeutic target in
­
rheumatoid arthritis. Current vascular pharmacology. 2010;
8:338–343.

18.	 Bergmann O, Liebl J, Bernard S, Alkass K, Yeung MS,
Steier P, Kutschera W, Johnson L, Landen M, Druid H,
Spalding KL, Frisen J. The age of olfactory bulb neurons in
humans. Neuron. 2012; 74:634–639.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

11976

Oncotarget

32.	 Sanjabi S, Zenewicz LA, Kamanaka M, Flavell RA.
Anti-inflammatory and pro-inflammatory roles of TGF-beta,
IL-10, and IL-22 in immunity and autoimmunity. Current
opinion in pharmacology. 2009; 9:447–453.

46.	 Conboy IM, Rando TA. Aging, stem cells and tissue
­regeneration: lessons from muscle. Cell cycle (Georgetown,
Tex). 2005; 4:407–410.
47.	 Conboy IM, Conboy MJ, Wagers AJ, Girma ER,
Weissman IL, Rando TA. Rejuvenation of aged progenitor
cells by exposure to a young systemic environment. Nature.
2005; 433:760–764.

33.	 Lan TH, Huang XQ, Tan HM. Vascular fibrosis in
­atherosclerosis. Cardiovascular pathology: the official
journal of the Society for Cardiovascular Pathology. 2013;
22:401–407.

48.	 Dumont N, Arteaga CL. A kinase-inactive type II
TGFbeta receptor impairs BMP signaling in human breast
cancer  cells. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2003;
301:108–112.

34.	 Carmena JM, Lebedev MA, Crist RE, O’Doherty JE,
Santucci DM, Dimitrov DF, Patil PG, Henriquez CS,
Nicolelis MA. Learning to control a brain-machine interface for reaching and grasping by primates. PLoS biology.
2003; 1:E42.

49.	 Hanisch UK. Proteins in microglial activation—inputs and
outputs by subsets. Current protein & peptide science. 2013;
14:3–15.

35.	 Carlson ME, Hsu M, Conboy IM. Imbalance between
pSmad3 and Notch induces CDK inhibitors in old muscle
stem cells. Nature. 2008; 454:528–532.

50.	 Knight JC. Genomic modulators of the immune response.
Trends in genetics: TIG. 2013; 29:74–83.

36.	 Inman GJ. Switching TGFbeta from a tumor suppressor to
a tumor promoter. Current opinion in genetics & development. 2011; 21:93–99.

51.	 van den Elsen PJ. Expression regulation of major histocompatibility complex class I and class II encoding genes.
Frontiers in immunology. 2011; 2:48.

37.	 Yoo YD, Choi JY, Lee SJ, Kim JS, Min BR, Lee YI,
Kang YK. TGF-beta-induced cell-cycle arrest through
the p21(WAF1/CIP1)-G1 cyclin/Cdks-p130 pathway in
­gastric-carcinoma cells. International journal of cancer
Journal international du cancer. 1999; 83:512–517.

52.	 Solheim JC. Class I MHC molecules: assembly and antigen
presentation. Immunological reviews. 1999; 172:11–19.
53.	 Neefjes JJ, Momburg F. Cell biology of antigen presentation. Current opinion in immunology. 1993; 5:27–34.
54.	 Breuil V, Amri EZ, Panaia-Ferrari P, Testa J, Elabd C,
Albert-Sabonnadiere C, Roux CH, Ailhaud G, Dani C,
Carle GF, Euller-Ziegler L. Oxytocin and bone remodelling: relationships with neuropituitary hormones, bone
status and body composition. Joint, bone, spine: revue du
rhumatisme. 2011; 78:611–615.

38.	 He Y, Zhang H, Yung A, Villeda SA, Jaeger PA,
Olayiwola  O, Fainberg N, Wyss-Coray T. ALK5dependent TGF-beta signaling is a major determinant of
late-stage adult neurogenesis. Nature neuroscience. 2014;
17:943–952.
39.	 Heinemann U, Kaufer D, Friedman A. Blood-brain barrier
dysfunction, TGFbeta signaling, and astrocyte dysfunction
in epilepsy. Glia. 2012; 60:1251–1257.

55.	 Barraza JA, Grewal NS, Ropacki S, Perez P, Gonzalez A,
Zak PJ. Effects of a 10-day oxytocin trial in older adults
on health and well-being. Experimental and clinical
­psychopharmacology. 2013; 21:85–92.

40.	 Harry GJ. Microglia during development and aging.
Pharmacology & therapeutics. 2013; 139:313–326.

56.	 Elabd C, Cousin W, Upadhyayula P, Chen RY,
Chooljian  MS, Li J, Kung S, Jiang KP, Conboy IM.
Oxytocin is an age-specific circulating hormone that is
­necessary for muscle maintenance and regeneration. Nature
Communications. 2014; in press.

41.	 Pineda JR, Boussin FD, Mouthon MA. [TGFbeta, a troublemaker in the adult neural stem cell niche]. Medecine sciences: M/S. 2013; 29:572–574.
42.	 Gartel AL, Radhakrishnan SK. Lost in transcription:
p21 repression, mechanisms, and consequences. Cancer
research. 2005; 65:3980–3985.

57.	 Strakova Z, Copland JA, Lolait SJ, Soloff MS. ERK2 mediates oxytocin-stimulated PGE2 synthesis. The American
journal of physiology. 1998; 274:E634–641.

43.	 Jeong J, Conboy MJ, Conboy IM. Pharmacological inhibition of myostatin/TGF-beta receptor/pSmad3 signaling
rescues muscle regenerative responses in mouse model
of type 1 diabetes. Acta pharmacologica Sinica. 2013;
34:1052–1060.

58.	 Okamoto M, Inoue K, Iwamura H, Terashima K, Soya H,
Asashima M, Kuwabara T. Reduction in paracrine Wnt3
factors during aging causes impaired adult neurogenesis.
FASEB J. 2011; 25:3570–3582.

44.	 Miranda CJ, Braun L, Jiang Y, Hester ME, Zhang L,
Riolo  M, Wang H, Rao M, Altura RA, Kaspar BK.
Aging brain microenvironment decreases hippocampal
­neurogenesis through Wnt-mediated survivin signaling.
Aging cell. 2012; 11:542–552.

59.	 Seib DR, Corsini NS, Ellwanger K, Plaas C, Mateos A,
Pitzer C, Niehrs C, Celikel T, Martin-Villalba A. Loss
of Dickkopf-1 restores neurogenesis in old age and
­counteracts cognitive decline. Cell stem cell. 2013;
12:204–214.

45.	 Ming GL, Song H. Adult neurogenesis in the mammalian
central nervous system. Annual review of neuroscience.
2005; 28:223–250.

60.	 Singh T, Newman AB. Inflammatory markers in ­population
studies of aging. Ageing research reviews. 2011;
10:319–329.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

11977

Oncotarget

61.	 Torchinsky MB, Blander JM. T helper 17 cells: discovery,
function, and physiological trigger. Cellular and molecular
life sciences: CMLS. 2010; 67:1407–1421.

65.	 Conboy MJ, Conboy IM. Preparation of adult muscle fiberassociated stem/precursor cells. Methods in molecular
­biology (Clifton, NJ). 2010; 621:149–163.

62.	 Elabd C, Basillais A, Beaupied H, Breuil V, Wagner  N,
Scheideler M, Zaragosi LE, Massiera F, Lemichez E,
Trajanoski Z, Carle G, Euller-Ziegler L, Ailhaud G,
Benhamou CL, Dani C, Amri EZ. Oxytocin controls differentiation of human mesenchymal stem cells and reverses osteoporosis. Stem cells (Dayton, Ohio). 2008; 26:2399–2407.

66.	 Livak KJ, Schmittgen TD. Analysis of relative gene
­expression data using real-time quantitative PCR and
the  2(-Delta Delta C(T)) Method. Methods. 2001;
25:402–408.
67.	 Peltier J, Schaffer DV. Viral packaging and ­transduction
of adult hippocampal neural progenitors. Methods in
­molecular biology (Clifton, NJ). 2010; 621:103–116.

63.	 Ashton RS, Conway A, Pangarkar C, Bergen J, Lim KI,
Shah P, Bissell M, Schaffer DV. Astrocytes regulate adult
hippocampal neurogenesis through ephrin-B signaling.
Nature neuroscience. 2012; 15:1399–1406.

68.	 Yu JH, Schaffer DV. High-throughput, library-based
selection of a murine leukemia virus variant to infect
­
­nondividing cells. J Virol. 2006; 80:8981–8988.

64.	 Babu H, Claasen JH, Kannan S, Runker AE, Palmer T,
Kempermann G. A protocol for isolation and enriched
monolayer cultivation of neural precursor cells from mouse
dentate gyrus. Frontiers in neuroscience. 2011; 5:89.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

69.	 Conboy MJ, Cerletti M, Wagers AJ, Conboy IM. Immunoanalysis and FACS sorting of adult muscle fiber-­associated
stem/precursor cells. Methods in molecular biology
(Clifton, NJ). 2010; 621:165–173.

11978

Oncotarget

