Research Article

The Triterpenoid 2-Cyano-3,12-dioxooleana-1,9-dien-28-oic Acid
and Its Derivatives Elicit Human Lymphoid Cell Apoptosis
through a Novel Pathway Involving the Unregulated
Mitochondrial Permeability Transition Pore
1

2

3

1

1

Paul S. Brookes, Kimberly Morse, Denise Ray, Andrew Tompkins, Sara M. Young,
2
2
5
5
Shannon Hilchey, Suhail Salim, Marina Konopleva, Michael Andreeff,
3
2,4
Richard Phipps, and Steven H. Bernstein

1
Department of Anesthesiology, 2James P. Wilmot Cancer Center, 3Lung Biology and Disease Program, and 4Lymphoma Biology Program,
University of Rochester Medical Center, Rochester, New York; and 5Molecular Hematology and Therapy,
University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas

Abstract
2-Cyano-3,12-dioxooleana-1,9-dien-28-oic acid (CDDO) and its
C28 imidazole and dinitrile derivatives are novel oleanane
triterpenoids exhibiting promise as both therapeutic and
preventative agents for cancer. Herein we show that these
triterpenoids induce normal and malignant B-lymphoid cell
apoptosis, with the C28 derivatives being more potent than
CDDO, through a novel mitochondrial mechanism. We show
using both normal and malignant human B cells, as well as
isolated rat mitochondria, that CDDO directly interacts with a
limited number of as yet undefined mitochondrial proteins.
Such an interaction results in the loss of mitochondrial thiol
status and the secondary modification of numerous mitochondrial protein thiols. Our data further suggest that such
modifications result in the formation of high molecular
weight protein aggregates that form ‘‘unregulated,’’ constitutively open, cyclosporin A–insensitive permeability transition
(PT) pores. The formation of such PT pores results in the
subsequent generation of mitochondrial superoxide and cell
death. In total, our studies (a) suggest a novel mechanism of
action for triterpenoid-induced cell death; (b) are among
the first to directly support the existence of an unregulated
PT pore formed by mitochondrial protein aggregates, as first
proposed by Lemasters and colleagues; and (c) validate such
an unregulated PT pore as a viable target for the development
of new cancer therapeutics. [Cancer Res 2007;67(4):1793–802]

Introduction
There is much interest in developing cancer therapeutics
that directly target cancer cell mitochondria (1). The desired final
effector pathway of such agents would be to elicit mitochondrial
outer membrane permeabilization, resulting in the release of both
caspase-dependent and caspase-independent proapoptotic mediators, as well as resulting in metabolic cell death by the uncoupling
of oxidative phosphorylation. One approach to induce mitochondrial outer membrane permeabilization is to open the mitochondrial permeability transition (PT) pore (2), a high-conductance

Requests for reprints: Steven H. Bernstein, Lymphoma Biology Program, James P.
Wilmot Cancer Center, Box 704, University of Rochester Medical Center, 601 Elmwood
Avenue, Rochester, NY 14642. Phone: 585-275-3504; Fax: 585-276-0337; E-mail:
steven_bernstein@urmc.rochester.edu.
I2007 American Association for Cancer Research.
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-06-2678

www.aacrjournals.org

channel that allows water and solutes up to 1.5 kDa to pass
between the mitochondrial matrix and cytosol. This nonspecific
pore is a target for the actions of Bcl-2 family proteins and is
formed by interactions between existing mitochondrial proteins,
including but not limited to the adenosine nucleotide translocase,
the voltage-dependent anion channel, and cyclophilin D (3). The
latter is inhibited by the immunosuppressant drug cyclosporin A
(CsA; ref. 4). This classically defined ‘‘regulated PT pore’’ is
activated (i.e., opened) by Ca2+ and/or reactive oxygen species
(ROS) and is inhibited (i.e., closed) by CsA and Mg2+. It has been
proposed that arsenic trioxide, an agent for the treatment of acute
promyelocytic leukemia, may work in part by activating the
regulated PT pore through a direct interaction with adenosine
nucleotide translocase (5). In addition, lonidamine, a drug showing
promising results for the treatment of solid tumors, may work via
a similar mechanism (1). Overall, the regulated PT pore may be a
viable target for the development of cancer therapeutics.
Recent studies have shown that mitochondrial PT can also occur
in a non-Ca2+-dependent manner that is insensitive to CsA (6, 7).
To explain this phenomenon, He and Lemasters (7) have proposed
the existence of an alternative ‘‘unregulated’’ PT pore, and
suggested that such a pore is generated when mitochondrial
protein misfolding results in the exposure of hydrophilic residues
to the lipid bilayer, which then cluster to form transmembrane
pores. Amphipathic proteins, such as adenosine nucleotide translocase, then further assemble into these pore-forming clusters.
In a submaximal state, chaperone proteins such as cyclophilin D
block conductance through such pores in a Ca2+-, Mg2+-, and CsAdependent manner, characteristics that define the regulated pore.
It is postulated that when the number or size of the protein clusters
exceeds the mitochondrial chaperone capacity, a constitutively
open pore forms, which is Ca2+, Mg2+, and CsA insensitive. These
are characteristics that define the unregulated pore. This is a
hypothetical model, however, and, to our knowledge, there has
been no demonstration of high molecular weight mitochondrial
protein aggregates associated with the formation of an unregulated
PT pore. Nevertheless, this model has garnered a considerable level
of acceptance in the field of mitochondrial biology.
The triterpenoids are plant-derived substances that have been
used over several centuries for medicinal purposes in Asia and
that exhibit antineoplastic activity (8). To enhance the efficacy of
these agents, several synthetic triterpenoids have recently been
synthesized, including 2-cyano-3,12-dioxooleana-1,9-dien-28-oic
acid (CDDO) and several C28 substituted derivatives such as the

1793

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (4). February 15, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

imidazole derivative, CDDO-Im, and the dinitrile derivative,
Di-CDDO (9–13). CDDO and its derivatives have been shown in
preclinical in vitro and in vivo models to have activity against a
broad spectrum of solid and hematologic malignancies through
both caspase-dependent and caspase-independent pathways
(14–24). CDDO has also been shown to induce apoptosis by
disrupting intracellular redox balance and by depleting mitochondrial glutathione (15, 16, 25).
The synthetic triterpenoids have two electrophilic Michael
acceptor moieties at the triterpenoid nucleus, which likely
contribute to their ability to modify thiol groups in proteins, such
as the cytoplasmic repressor Keap-1 (26, 27), or in glutathione.
Because modification of mitochondrial protein thiols, especially
the cross-linking of sulfhydryl groups, may be critical for the initial
misfolding of membrane proteins that leads to clustering, we were
particularly interested in determining whether the triterpenoids
elicit apoptosis, in part, by affecting the regulated or unregulated
PT pore.
We have recently shown that 15-deoxy-D12,14-prostaglandin J2
(15d-PGJ2), an oxidized lipid with an a/h unsaturated ketone
moiety that is similar in character to CDDO, elicits apoptosis of
both normal and malignant B cells (28–31). In addition, we have
shown (32) that CDDO elicits apoptosis of human diffuse large
B-cell lymphomas. Therefore, we evaluated the effects of CDDO,
CDDO-Im, and Di-CDDO on normal human peripheral blood B
cells, OCI-Ly19 human diffuse large B-cell lymphoma cells, and
Ramos human Burkitt’s lymphoma cells. Herein, we show that
these triterpenoids elicit lymphoid cell apoptosis through a
mitochondrial dependent pathway. Our studies in whole cells
and isolated mitochondria suggest a novel cell death mechanism in
which CDDO modifies mitochondrial protein thiols, resulting in
large molecular weight protein aggregates and the generation of a
CsA-insensitive, unregulated PT pore. This model may also apply to
other electrophilic compounds being evaluated as therapeutic
agents for cancer.

Materials and Methods
Animals, reagents, and cell lines. Male Sprague-Dawley rats (200–250 g
body mass) were from Harlan (Indianapolis, IN) and maintained in
accordance with the NIH Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory
Animals. CDDO, CDDO-Im, and DI-CDDO were synthesized by Dr. T. Honda
and kindly provided by Dr. Michael Sporn, both of Dartmouth College
(Hanover, NH). Annexin V-FITC was from Southern Biotechnology
(Birmingham, AL); MitoSOX red and Amplex red were from Molecular
Probes (Eugene, OR). OCI-Ly19 cells are human diffuse large B-cell
lymphoma lines of germinal center phenotype and Ramos cells are human
Burkitt’s lymphoma cells; both were cultured as previously described.
Biotinylated CDDO was synthesized as previously described (25, 33). All
other reagents were of analytic grade (Sigma, St. Louis, MO).
Peripheral human blood B-cell isolation. One unit of blood was
obtained from healthy adult donors, as approved by the University of
Rochester Institutional Review Board and Office for Human Subject
Protection. The buffy coat was obtained by centrifugation at 933  g for
8 min, and then separated over a Ficoll gradient to obtain peripheral blood
mononuclear cells (PBMC). PBMCs were washed in PBS and the B cells
selected with CD19 magnetic beads (Dynal, Lake Success, NY). The CD19+
cells were then washed and the beads detached using CD19 Detachabead
(Dynal). Cells were then washed and stained for CD19 and CD3 dual flow
cytometry to check purity. The B-cell population was purified to >98%
CD19+ cells, with <1% CD3+ cells, and was then cultured as previously
described (31).
Viability and proliferation assays. Cells were incubated with CDDO,
CDDO-Im, Di-CDDO, or DMSO (vehicle control) at a density of 6  104

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (4). February 15, 2007

per well on a 96-well flat-bottomed microtiter plate, and an 3-(4,5dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide (MTT) assay was
done as described (31). The results are presented as the percent of cells that
reduce MTT, as compared with DMSO-treated control cells.
Annexin V and propidium iodide staining. Double staining for
Annexin V-FITC binding and DNA using propidium iodide was done on
OCI-Ly19, Ramos, and normal human B cells exposed to DMSO, CDDO,
CDDO-Im, or Di-CDDO for 24 h. Cells were washed in PBS and resuspended
in binding buffer [10 mmol/L HEPES, 140 mmol/L NaCl, 2.5 mmol/L CaCl2,
0.1% bovine serum albumin (BSA), pH 7.4]. The cell suspension was then
incubated with Annexin V-FITC on ice. After 15 min, an additional 380 AL
of binding buffer was added, followed by 0.5 mg/mL propidium iodide
immediately before analysis on a BD FACSCalibur flow cytometer
(BD Biosciences, San Diego, CA). The percentage of Annexin V-FITC/
propidium iodide–positive cells was determined using CellQuest Software
(BD Biosciences).
Intracellular mitochondrial ROS production. MitoSOX red dye was
used as a specific indicator of superoxide production in mitochondria. After
treatment with CDDO and its derivatives, cells were washed in HBSS
containing Mg2+ and Ca2+, resuspended in a 5 Amol/L solution of MitoSOX
red in HBSS, and incubated for 10 min at 37jC. The cells were washed in
HBSS and immediately analyzed on a flow cytometer, with post hoc data
analysis using FlowJo software (Tree Star, Inc., Ashland, OR).
Mitochondrial isolation and PT pore assay. Rat liver mitochondria
were isolated as previously described (34). Protein content was assayed by
the Folin phenol method (35) against a standard curve constructed with
BSA. Complex I activity was monitored as the rotenone-sensitive oxidation
of NADH in the presence of coenzyme Q1, at 340 nm, as previously
described (36). Opening of the PT pore was monitored as the swellingdependent decrease in light scattering (absorbance) at 540 nm in a
Beckman DU-800 spectrophotometer, as previously described (34). Mitochondria were incubated at 0.5 mg protein/mL in buffer containing
mannitol (195 mmol/L), sucrose (25 mmol/L), HEPES (40 mmol/L),
succinate (5 mmol/L), rotenone (1 Amol/L), pH 7.4 at 37jC. Ca2+, CsA,
CDDO and its derivatives, and all other additions were made at the
concentrations and times indicated in figure legends.
Isolated mitochondrial ROS generation. ROS generation was measured using the Amplex red reagent (36), with mitochondria suspended at
0.5 mg protein/mL, in the same buffer as for swelling experiments, with
addition of Amplex red (20 Amol/L), superoxide dismutase (80 units/mL),
and type II horseradish peroxidase (HRP; 1 unit/mL). Fluorescence was
measured at k ex 570 nm and k em 584 nm and calibrated by addition of
authentic H2O2.
Mitochondrial protein aggregation. Protein aggregation was measured
by blue-native gel electrophoresis as previously described (37). This method
separates protein complexes in their native form; gels are run at pH 7.4,
with proteins solubilized by the nondenaturing detergent dodecyl-h-Dmaltoside. Protein movement on the gel is facilitated by the negative charge
imparted by Coomassie brilliant blue G. Mitochondria under PT pore
opening conditions (Fig. 3) were diluted into blue-native sample buffer and
treated with 2 mmol/L of the cross-linking agent disuccinimidyl-suberate
for 15 min on ice. Samples were then electrophoresed overnight on bluenative gels at 20 V, 4jC and subsequently silver stained.
Mitochondrial thiol modification and biotinylated CDDO assays.
For monitoring mitochondrial thiols, following CDDO treatment, mitochondria were incubated with substrates plus the mitochondria-specific
thiol probe iodobutyl-triphenylphosphonium (IBTP). Samples were then
separated on SDS-PAGE gels, Western blotted to nitrocellulose, and
membranes were probed with an IBTP antibody (36, 38). Development of
blots used a HRP-linked goat anti-rabbit secondary antibody and enhanced
chemiluminescence (ECL) detection (GE Biosciences, Piscataway, NJ). For
biotinylated CDDO staining, mitochondria were incubated as in PT pore
opening assays, except that 15 Amol/L biotin-CDDO (25, 33) was used
instead of native CDDO. After various incubation times (see figure legends),
mitochondria were subjected to nonreducing SDS-PAGE. Gels were then
Western blotted to nitrocellulose and probed with streptavidin-HRP with
ECL detection.

1794

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

CDDO and Unregulated Mitochondrial PT Pore

Results
CDDO and its derivatives decrease malignant and normal
human lymphoid cell viability by inducing apoptosis. To
determine the effect of CDDO, in comparison with its C28
derivatives, CDDO-Im and Di-CDDO, on human diffuse large
B-cell lymphoma, Burkitt’s lymphoma, and normal peripheral
blood B-cell viability, an MTT assay was done after 24-h exposure to
triterpenoids. As shown in Fig. 1A, exposure of Ramos Burkitt’s
lymphoma cells to CDDO, Di-CDDO, and CDDO-Im for 24 h with
up to 5 Amol/L triterpenoids resulted in a dose-dependent decrease
in cell viability for each triterpenoid. CDDO was less potent than
Di-CDDO and CDDO-Im, each of which had similar potency, with
an IC50 for CDDO of f1.4 Amol/L compared with 0.3 Amol/L for
Di-CDDO and CDDO-Im. Similar results were seen in diffuse large

B-cell lymphoma cells (Fig. 1B). In contrast to prior reports
whereby triterpenoids had no effect on the viability of normal
lymphocytes (14, 22), our data using freshly isolated normal human
B cells clearly showed a dose-dependent decrease in cell viability
(Fig. 1C), with CDDO again showing less potency than Di-CDDO
and CDDO-Im. These different results may be due, in part, to the
fact that whereas we examined the effects of the triterpenoids on
freshly isolated normal human B cells from peripheral blood, the
other studies evaluated their effects on either normal ‘‘lymphocytes’’ or tonsillar B cells (14, 22). In addition, differences in the
doses of triterpenoids used in these studies may also account for
some of the different findings.
We next examined whether the triterpenoid-induced cell death
was apoptotic using Annexin V and propidium iodide analysis

Figure 1. CDDO and its derivatives induce
apoptosis in malignant and normal human
B cells in a concentration-dependent
manner. A, Ramos Burkitt’s lymphoma
cells were treated with the indicated
concentrations of CDDO, Di-CDDO,
or CDDO-Im, and cell viability was
determined via the MTT assay at 24 h.
Percentage of the initial value for control
(untreated) cells. *, P < 0.05, triterpenoidtreated cells versus untreated control cells.
B, as in (A ), but with OCI-Ly19 cells.
C, as in (A), but with normal human B cells.
A to C, points, mean of an experiment
(done in triplicates) that is representative
of two to three independent experiments;
bars, SE. D, the mode of cell death
induced by CDDO and its derivatives was
monitored by flow cytometry, in which
cells were stained with the nuclear stain
propidium iodide and the externalized
phosphatidylserine ligand with Annexin V.
All three drugs led to accumulation of cells
in the lower right quadrant of the flow
cytometry scattergram (i.e., Annexin V
positive, propidium iodide negative), thus
indicating apoptosis as the mode of cell
death. Similar results were seen with
OCI-Ly19 cells (not shown).

www.aacrjournals.org

1795

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (4). February 15, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

(Fig. 1D). Ramos Burkitt’s lymphoma cells and freshly isolated
normal human peripheral blood B cells were exposed for 24 h to
2.5 Amol/L CDDO, 0.6 Amol/L Di-CDDO, or 0.3 Amol/L CDDO-Im,
at which time flow cytometric analysis was done. For each cell type
and triterpenoid combination, there was a consistent shift from a
predominance of viable cells (propidium iodide/Annexin / ) to
that of apoptotic cells (propidium iodide/Annexin /+) and cells
undergoing secondary necrosis (propidium iodide/Annexin+/+;
Fig. 1D). Similar to the results of the MTT assay, CDDO was a
less potent inducer of apoptosis than either Di-CDDO or CDDO-Im.
For example, whereas exposure of Ramos Burkitt’s lymphoma cells
to 1.25 Amol/L CDDO resulted in 48% Annexin-positive, propidium
iodide–negative cells, 0.6 Amol/L Di-CDDO and 0.3 Amol/L CDDOIm resulted in 53% and 69% Annexin-positive, propidium iodide–
negative cells, respectively (Fig. 1D). Similar results were seen for
the OCI-Ly19 diffuse large B-cell lymphoma cells (not shown).
Taken together, these data indicate that the decrease in viability of
both normal and malignant B cells exposed to the triterpenoids is
through apoptosis, with Di-CDDO and CDDO-Im having greater
potency than CDDO.
CDDO-induced apoptosis is insensitive to the regulated
mitochondrial PT pore inhibitors, CsA and nortryptilline. We
next examined whether the CDDO-induced lymphoid cell death
was mediated by a regulated PT pore by determining the effects of
the PT pore inhibitors CsA and nortryptilline. In Fig. 2A, Ramos
Burkitt’s lymphoma cells were exposed for 24 h to 1 Amol/L CsA
alone, 2 Amol/L nortriptyline alone, 2.5 Amol/L CDDO alone, or the
combination of CDDO and CsA or CDDO and nortryptilline.
CsA alone resulted in a 35% decrease in cell viability whereas
nortriptyline alone was without effect. CDDO at 2.5 Amol/L
resulted in a 97% decrease in cell viability. Pretreatment with either
CsA or nortriptyline had no effect on CDDO-induced cytotoxicity.
As shown in Fig. 2B and C, similar results were obtained in OCILy19 cells and normal human B cells, respectively. These data
suggest that the CDDO-induced lymphoid cell death is not
mediated by the classic regulated CsA-sensitive PT pore.
CDDO induces CsA-insensitive, unregulated PT pore opening in isolated mitochondria. Given the above findings in whole
cells, we next sought to examine whether CDDO and its derivatives
could directly induce PT pore opening in a well-characterized
isolated mitochondrial system. The results in Fig. 3 show that,
indeed, CDDO and its derivatives all potently induced large-scale
mitochondrial swelling. However, whereas swelling in response to
Ca2+ alone and Ca2+ plus low concentrations (1 Amol/L) of CDDO
and its derivatives was inhibited by the classic PT pore inhibitor
CsA, this was not the case for swelling induced by Ca2+ plus higher
(5 Amol/L) concentrations of CDDO and its derivatives (Fig. 3B and
C). This suggests that CDDO does not induce classic PT pore
opening but rather induces an unregulated CsA-insensitive form of
the PT pore. Such an unregulated pore has been hypothesized to be
the result of nonspecific protein aggregation in the mitochondrial
inner membrane (6, 7).
CDDO induces protein aggregation in isolated mitochondria,
and inhibiting the proteasome augments CDDO toxicity.
Building on the observation that CDDO induces unregulated PT
pore opening in isolated mitochondria, we next sought to obtain
biochemical evidence for the formation of large-scale protein
aggregates because these have been postulated to underlie the
mechanism of the unregulated pore. The data in Fig. 4A show that
Di-CDDO indeed caused the formation of large protein aggregates
in the mitochondrial membrane. At this stage, the composition of

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (4). February 15, 2007

Figure 2. CDDO-induced apoptosis is not sensitive to inhibitors of the
mitochondrial PT pore. A, Ramos cells were treated with the indicated
concentrations of CDDO, with or without pretreatment with the PT pore inhibitor
CsA (1 Amol/L) or nortriptyline (NT ; 2 Amol/L). Cell viability was determined by
the MTT assay (see Fig. 2) and expressed as a percentage of that in the control,
untreated cells. B, as in (A ), but with OCI-Ly19 cells. C, as in (A ), but with
normal human B cells. Columns, mean of an experiment (done in triplicate)
that is representative of two to three independent experiments; bar, SE.
*, P < 0.05, between CDDO and control groups. There were no significant
effects of CsA or nortriptyline on CDDO-induced cell death.

these aggregates is unknown, although their molecular mass
seems to be several megadaltons based on calibration of the gel
with respiratory complex I (900 kDa) and complex V (660 kDa). One
of the initial mechanisms by which cells may attempt to dispose
of misfolded proteins is via the proteasome (39). Therefore, we
hypothesized that inhibiting the proteasome might augment CDDO
toxicity. In support of this hypothesis, the combination of a mildly
toxic dose of CDDO (1.25 Amol/L) with a nontoxic dose of the
proteasome inhibitor PS341 (Velcade, 1 Amol/L) resulted in enhanced
toxicity toward OCI-Ly19 cells (Fig. 4B); however, bortezomib may
augment CDDO toxicity through alternative mechanisms, such as the
up-regulation of proapoptotic family members (40).
CDDO induces mitochondrial thiol damage and directly
interacts with mitochondrial proteins. As a precursor to a
full proteomic analysis of the targets of CDDO, we analyzed
the effects of CDDO on mitochondrial protein thiols. The

1796

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

CDDO and Unregulated Mitochondrial PT Pore

mitochondria-specific thiol probe IBTP has been previously used for
such purposes, and the availability of anti-IBTP antibodies permits
the examination of thiol modifications via Western blotting (36, 38).
As the data in Fig. 4C show, this technique reveals that CDDO is a
potent mitochondrial thiol oxidant; virtually all bands on the IBTP
blot (each band representing a protein with a free -SH group)
disappear following CDDO exposure. Note that this occurred at
a concentration of CDDO that did not induce PT pore opening,
and therefore uptake of IBTP into mitochondria was unaffected.
Given the importance of cysteine redox status for protein folding,
it does not seem unreasonable to suggest that CDDO may elicit
protein misfolding by oxidizing or modifying mitochondrial protein
thiols. To further probe the mechanism of action of CDDO, a biotinylated derivative of CDDO (25) was added to mitochondria,
and modified proteins were then examined by SDS-PAGE and
Western blotting. As shown in Fig. 4D, a very limited number
of proteins were modified by CDDO, with a predominant band at
f60 kDa. The labeled proteins across all samples are endogenous
biotin-containing mitochondrial proteins (e.g., carboxylases). Notably, whereas electrophiles such as 15d-PGJ2 are known to both
induce PT pore opening (41) and inhibit mitochondrial complex I
via thiol modifications (42), we found that 20 Amol/L CDDO was
without effect on complex I activity (data not shown).
CDDO-induced cell death is inhibited by the antioxidant
N-acetylcysteine, and CDDO induces mitochondrial ROS
generation. We next determined whether CDDO-induced cell

death was inhibited by the antioxidant N-acetylcysteine. In Fig. 5,
exposure of Ramos, OCI-Ly19, and normal human B cells to
2.5 Amol/L CDDO for 24 h resulted in 98%, 68%, and 81% decrease
in cell viability, as determined by the MTT assay. In contrast,
pretreatment with 1 mmol/L N-acetylcysteine completely abrogated the cytotoxicity of CDDO in each of these cell types. Similar
results were obtained with DTT (not shown). It is interesting that
N-acetylcysteine treatment alone resulted in a minimal increase in
MTT activity in Ramos and OCI-Ly19 cells and a marked increase in
activity in normal human B cells (Fig. 5A–C). This may represent
an augmentation of MTT-reductive capacity, owing to cross talk
between N-acetylcysteine and the reduced glutathione (GSH)/
NADPH repletion system. It is known that N-acetylcysteine is a
precursor for GSH synthesis, and it has been suggested that some
toxicity of CDDO may be due to GSH depletion (15, 25). Therefore,
the differential sensitivity of normal versus cancer cells to rescue by
N-acetylcysteine may indicate different GSH synthetic capacities.
That CDDO-mediated cell death is completely blocked by
N-acetylcysteine implies that CDDO results in ROS generation.
To investigate this, we used the novel probe MitoSOX red, a cellpermeable fluorescent dye that is targeted to mitochondria and
is highly selective for superoxide, in a flow cytometric assay. As
shown in Fig. 5D, CDDO elicited a dose- and time-dependent
increase in mitochondrial superoxide generation in Ramos cells
with a right shift in the peak indicating increased superoxide. At
2.5 Amol/L CDDO, an increase in mitochondrial superoxide was

Figure 3. CDDO induces CsA-insensitive, unregulated PT pore
opening in isolated mitochondria. Swelling of isolated rat liver
mitochondria was monitored as the decrease in light scattering
(absorbance) at 540 nm, as described in Materials and Methods.
A, typical swelling traces, showing addition of Ca2+ (100 Amol/L;
arrow ) followed by addition of 5 Amol/L CDDO, CDDO-Im, or
Di-CDDO (arrow ). Traces are labeled to the right. In the trace
labeled Ca2+ + CsA, 10 Amol/L CsA was present from the
beginning of the experiment. B, quantitation of swelling traces,
showing the maximum swelling rate achieved (% DA 540/min).
C, quantitation of swelling traces, showing the magnitude of
swelling (% DA 540 at 15 min). Data are shown for addition of
1 and 5 Amol/L CDDO and derivatives. Open columns, standard
condition (Ca2+); shaded columns, in the presence of CsA.
Columns, mean of at least five independent experiments; bars,
SE. Differences between groups were analyzed by ANOVA.
*, P < 0.05; **, P < 0.01, between the CsA treatment groups
and their corresponding control (non-CsA) conditions.

www.aacrjournals.org

1797

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (4). February 15, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

Figure 4. CDDO induces nonspecific protein aggregation and thiol oxidation in mitochondria, reacts directly with mitochondrial proteins, and is more cytotoxic when
combined with bortezomib. A, mitochondria were incubated under conditions as in Fig. 3, which induced PT pore opening. Samples were then cross-linked with
disuccinimidyl-suberate and high molecular weight aggregates were visualized on a blue-native gel. Only the Ca2+ + Di-CDDO treatment group contained aggregates
(as indicated by arrows to the right). Respiratory complexes I and V are indicated by arrows on the left. B, OCI-Ly19 cells were exposed to vehicle, 1 Amol/L PS341,
1.25 Amol/L CDDO, or 1.25 Amol/L CDDO + PS341 for 24 h, at which time an MTT assay was done. Columns, mean of an experiment (done in triplicate) that is
representative of four independent experiments; bars, SE. *, P < 0.003, CDDO versus vehicle-treated control. **, P = 0.008, CDDO + PS341 compared with CDDO
alone. C, mitochondria were treated, as in Fig. 3, with 1 Amol/L Di-CDDO, and then labeled with the mitochondrial specific thiol probe IBTP. Samples were separated by
SDS-PAGE and Western blotted with an anti-IBTP antibody. Positive labeling indicates a protein with a free thiol (-SH), and loss of labeling indicates modification
of that thiol. Di-CDDO caused large-scale loss of mitochondrial protein free thiol content, which was augmented by Ca2+. Numbers to the left are molecular weight
markers (kDa). Blot is representative of at least three similar experiments. D, mitochondria were incubated in the presence of 15 Amol/L CDDO or biotin-CDDO for the
indicated times, then separated by nonreducing SDS-PAGE and Western blotted; blots were probed with streptavidin-HRP. Left, 10% acrylamide gel; right, 15%
acrylamide gel. Numbers to the left of blots are molecular weight markers (kDa). The arrow to the right highlights a band at f60 kDa that was labeled with biotin-CDDO.
The two thick bands appearing in all lanes are endogenous biotin-containing proteins in mitochondria. Blots are representative of three similar experiments.

seen as early as 3 h, whereas at 0.625 Amol/L, an obvious increase
was not seen until 8 h. Maximum ROS generation was seen after
24 h. As MitoSOX red is a DNA intercalator, it is likely that the third
peak evident after 24 h (having a mean fluorescence intensity of
f103) represents MitoSOX/nuclear DNA complexes in dead cells.
Taken together with the N-acetylcysteine data, this indicates that
CDDO treatment of lymphoid cells results in a dose-dependent and
relatively late-occurring generation of mitochondrial superoxide
linked to cell death.
CDDO-induced mitochondrial PT pore opening is not
inhibited by N-acetylcysteine. To further probe the temporal
relationship of unregulated PT pore opening and ROS generation,
the effect of N-acetylcysteine on CDDO-induced swelling in
isolated mitochondria was examined. As shown in Fig. 6A,
N-acetylcysteine (1 mmol/L) did not inhibit CDDO-induced
swelling. Because mitochondria cannot synthesize their own GSH
and must import it from the cytosol, it is not surprising that if
CDDO depletes mitochondrial GSH, N-acetylcysteine is ineffective
at preventing this process in isolated mitochondria. In contrast, in

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (4). February 15, 2007

isolated cells, N-acetylcysteine is effective because it can be used to
synthesize GSH in the cytosol, which can then be transported into
mitochondria to protect against CDDO toxicity. These mitochondrial results also have an important implication for the mechanism
of action of N-acetylcysteine in cells; if N-acetylcysteine were
simply reacting with and sequestering CDDO, then we would
expect to see an effect of N-acetylcysteine on CDDO-treatment
in isolated mitochondria. The lack of effect suggests that
N-acetylcysteine does not simply react with CDDO in the cell
culture medium (Fig. 5A–C).
CDDO-induced ROS generation in isolated mitochondria is
downstream of PT pore opening. It has been proposed that ROS
generation may be upstream of PT pore opening (43). However, if
this were the case for CDDO-induced PT pore opening, the process
should be inhibitable by antioxidants such as N-acetylcysteine in
isolated mitochondrial incubations. This is not the case, suggesting
that ROS generation lies downstream of PT pore opening in the
pathway of CDDO-induced cell death. This would be consistent
with the late onset of mitochondrial superoxide generation

1798

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

CDDO and Unregulated Mitochondrial PT Pore

observed in Fig. 5D. To examine the temporal relationship between
ROS and PT pore opening in isolated mitochondria, ROS
generation was measured with the probe Amplex red. In Fig. 6B,
it can be seen that addition of CDDO to mitochondria at
concentrations known to cause swelling does not cause a largescale elevation in ROS generation rate. An elevation in ROS is only
seen after a significant lag time of f1 min, which corresponds
to the onset of swelling. This suggests that mitochondrial ROS
generation occurs downstream of PT pore opening. We have
discussed elsewhere at length the mechanisms by which PT pore
opening can induce secondary ROS generation (44). Taken together
with the data presented above, a novel mechanism of action for the
triterpenoids is proposed and schematically represented in Fig. 6C.

Discussion
CDDO is a novel oleanane triterpenoid having promising clinical
potential both as a therapeutic agent and as a chemopreventive
agent for cancer, given its anti-inflammatory, antiproliferative,
differentiating, and apoptosis-inducing activities (14–22, 24, 25,
33, 45). Modifications of CDDO have generated derivatives that
have more potent anti-inflammatory and antitumor activities than
CDDO (10–14, 19, 20, 23, 25, 26, 33). Similarly, we show that both
CDDO-Im and Di-CDDO are more potent inducers of lymphoid
cell apoptosis than CDDO. It is of interest that whereas others
have shown a greater selectivity of apoptosis induction of the
triterpenoids toward malignant versus normal B cells (14, 22), such
selectivity was not seen in the present study.
There has been much recent interest in the mitochondrial toxic
effects of the triterpenoids as a mechanism for their apoptotic
activity (8, 15, 16, 25, 33, 46). Indeed, triterpenoids have been shown
to induce tumor cell apoptosis through both redox-dependent
mechanisms and by directly depleting mitochondrial glutathione
(15, 25, 33). The structurally similar lipid oxidation product
15d-PGJ2 has been shown to have direct mitochondrial effects by
inducing the classic CsA-sensitive, regulated PT pore, a process
dependent on its electrophilic character (41). Because we

previously showed that 15d-PGJ2, similar to CDDO, elicits human
lymphoid cell death (28–31), we hypothesized that the triterpenoids could mediate their effects through such a mechanism. To
evaluate this, we pretreated human lymphoid cells with either CsA
or nortriptyline, pharmacologic inhibitors of the regulated PT pore
(4, 47), and then exposed the cells to triterpenoids. That
pretreatment of cells with these inhibitors had no effect on the
magnitude of triterpenoid-induced cell death suggested that the
regulated PT pore was not a target for triterpenoids. This was
further supported by our findings in isolated mitochondria, in
which induction of mitochondrial swelling (defining PT pore
opening) by Ca2+ was CsA sensitive but triterpenoid-induced
swelling was CsA insensitive (Fig. 3). Together, these data suggest
that triterpenoids elicit mitochondrial swelling through a mechanism other than the regulated CsA-sensitive PT pore.
Recently, it was shown that the methyl ester derivative of CDDO
(CDDO-Me) induces mitochondrial swelling in a CsA-insensitive
fashion (33), and it was proposed that this was due to a generalized
perturbation of mitochondrial inner membrane fluidity, a process
dependent on the a/h unsaturated ketone character of the drug
because swelling was inhibited by the reducing nucleophile DTT.
In contrast, our current data suggest that the CDDO-induced
CsA-insensitive PT pore opening is due to the induction of an
unregulated PT pore, as first proposed by Kim et al. (6) and He and
Lemasters (7).
As described above, the existence of an unregulated PT pore was
first proposed to explain the finding that mitochondrial PT can
occur in a Ca2+-independent fashion that is CsA insensitive. Such a
constitutively open pore is proposed to form when cellular stress
results in formation of large amphipathic protein aggregates whose
size and number exceed the mitochondrial chaperone capacity,
which normally regulates the PT pore. To our knowledge, however,
demonstration of the formation of a CsA-insensitive PT pore
associated with the formation of high molecular weight protein
aggregates, therefore confirming the existence of the hypothetical
unregulated pore, has not been previously shown until now. In our
studies, exposure of isolated mitochondria to triterpenoids resulted

Figure 5. CDDO-induced apoptosis
is inhibited by the antioxidant
N-acetylcysteine and involves late-stage
mitochondrial ROS generation. Cells
were treated with 2.5 Amol/L CDDO and
cell viability was assayed as in Fig. 3.
Where indicated, N -acetylcysteine (NAC )
was present in the incubation medium
at 1 mmol/L. A, Ramos cells. B, OCI-Ly19
cells. C, normal human B cells.
Columns, mean of an experiment
(done in triplicate) that is representative
of four independent experiments; bars, SE.
*, P < 0.05, compared with untreated cells.
D, mitochondrial superoxide flow cytometry
(see Materials and Methods). Cells were
treated with the indicated concentrations of
CDDO; harvested at 3, 6, 8, 12, and 24 h;
and then loaded with MitoSOX red for
analysis. A right shift in the peak indicates
more mitochondrial superoxide generation.
Representative of data obtained in three
independent experiments.

www.aacrjournals.org

1799

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (4). February 15, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

Figure 6. Temporal relationship between CDDO-induced PT pore opening and
ROS generation in isolated mitochondria. A, PT pore opening was measured in
isolated mitochondria as detailed in Fig. 4. Where indicated, N -acetylcysteine
(5 mmol/L) was present from the beginning of the incubation. Representative
data of similar results from three independent experiments. B, mitochondrial
ROS generation was monitored in parallel with swelling, under identical
conditions, using Amplex red. Ca2+ and Di-CDDO were added as indicated by
the arrows, and two representative fluorescent ROS tracings are shown below
the appropriate swelling traces. Where indicated, fluorescence was calibrated
by addition of a standard concentration of H2O2. Representative data of at least
three independent experiments. C, a schematic of the proposed mechanism
of action of the triterpenoids.

in both CsA-insensitive PT and the formation of high molecular
weight protein aggregates.
As the triterpenoids have two electrophilic Michael acceptor
functions that are essential for the antiproliferative, anti-inflammatory, and antitumor properties of these compounds (10–12, 18,
19, 22), we hypothesized that mitochondrial protein misfolding and
aggregation is likely a result of thiol modifications of mitochondrial
proteins. Indeed, the anti-inflammatory effects of the triterpenoids
have been shown to be the result of thiol modification in Keap-1,
resulting in Nrf2-mediated induction of the phase II antioxidant
response (26, 27). In addition, the antitumor effects of CDDO-Im
are thought to be partly due to thiol modifications of critical
proteins because CDDO-Im cytotoxicity is blocked by DTT (25, 33).
Indeed, herein we similarly show that triterpenoid-induced cell
death is blocked by pretreatment with N-acetylcysteine (Fig. 5) and
DTT (not shown).
To evaluate the direct effects of CDDO on mitochondrial protein
thiols, we used the mitochondrially targeted thiol probe IBTP and

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (4). February 15, 2007

its antibody, which labels free protein -SH groups (36, 38). On
exposure to CDDO, virtually all bands on the IBTP blot
disappeared, confirming that CDDO has potent mitochondrial
thiol–oxidizing effects. A full proteomic analysis of which
mitochondrial proteins are modified by the triterpenoids, and
which proteins form high molecular weight protein aggregates
following triterpenoid exposure, will provide further insight to the
mechanism of action of these agents, and such studies are
currently under way. It is anticipated that mitochondrial proteins
that are already known components of the regulated PT pore and
which contain redox-active thiols (e.g., adenosine nucleotide
translocase) may also be components of the unregulated PT pore.
Previous studies have shown that triterpenoids induce apoptosis
as a result of ROS generation (15, 16), partly due to intracellular
glutathione depletion (15, 25, 33). Consistent with this, herein we
show that CDDO exposure results in a dose- and time-dependent
generation of mitochondrial superoxide in Ramos cells. In contrast,
Samudio et al. (33) showed that exposure of U937 cells to CDDOMe resulted in lower levels of superoxide; however, they only
examined time points up to 180 min, whereas our data show
that the major superoxide generation elicited by triterpenoids is
after 3 h.
The temporal relationship between ROS and PT pore opening
was also investigated because ROS have been shown both to cause
PT pore opening and to be generated following PT pore opening
(43). That CDDO-induced PT pore opening in isolated mitochondria was not inhibited by N-acetylcysteine (Fig. 5) suggests that
ROS generation is downstream of the PT pore. This is further
supported by our kinetic studies of mitochondrial ROS generation,
showing that ROS generation does not increase immediately after
CDDO addition but rather undergoes a lag phase before increasing
at a time concomitant with the initiation of PT pore opening
(swelling). Notably, the mitochondrial GSH depletion previously
reported to be a mechanism of triterpenoid activity may, in part, be
a consequence of PT pore opening because it is expected that GSH
release occurs upon mitochondrial permeabilization.
Because the triterpenoids share both structural similarities and
biological activities with 15d-PGJ2, we hypothesized that some of
their effects on PT pore opening and ROS generation were due in
part to inhibition of mitochondrial complex 1, as has been shown
for 15d-PGJ2 (42). However, even at suprapathologic doses, CDDO
was without effect on complex I (not shown). This may be due to
important differences between 15d-PGJ2 and CDDO structure in
the nonelectrophilic part of the molecule, which may affect
subcellular or even submitochondrial targeting. Notably, these
results also imply that complex I is not a major source of ROS
generation in this system. Because ROS generation occurs
downstream of PT pore opening, one potential mechanism
stimulating ROS generation could be inhibition of the respiratory
chain at complex III due to loss of cytochrome c upon PT pore
opening (44).
To examine the interaction of CDDO with mitochondrial
proteins, we used a biotinylated CDDO (25, 33), which has
previously been used in fluorescent microscopy studies to show a
mitochondrial localization of CDDO by showing an overlap with
MitoTracker green in U937 cells (33). A similar biotin-tag approach
has also been used to identify mitochondrial proteins modified by
15d-PGJ2, which include dehydrogenases, subunits of ATP synthase
and complex III, adenosine nucleotide translocase, other metabolic
proteins, and, interestingly, proteins associated with protein folding
(48). Surprisingly, we found that CDDO directly interacted with

1800

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

CDDO and Unregulated Mitochondrial PT Pore

only a limited number of mitochondrial proteins, with a major band
at f60 kDa. In contrast, the IBTP studies described above suggest
that CDDO results in thiol modification of numerous mitochondrial
proteins. This suggests an ‘‘amplification’’ effect of CDDO such that
directly modifying only a few critical proteins results in the loss of
mitochondrial thiol status (maybe due to GSH release via the PT
pore) and secondary thiol modification of numerous proteins. We
attempted to identify the proteins to which CDDO binds; however,
due to the poor resolution of one-dimensional SDS-PAGE, proteins
cannot be identified by techniques such as matrix-assisted laser
desorption/ionization-time of flight mass spectrometry. To separate proteins for identification, two-dimensional gels are necessary
but, unfortunately, the isoelectric focusing step of two-dimensional
gels requires reducing agents, and it was found that the biotinylated
CDDO-protein adduct was sensitive to reduction (not shown).
This result (i.e., reversibility of CDDO protein modification by
thiol-active reagents) provides further support for the idea that
CDDO modifies protein thiols.
Overall, we propose a novel mechanism for CDDO activity,
whereby direct interaction with a limited number of as yet
undefined mitochondrial proteins results in mitochondrial thiol
oxidation, with the subsequent generation of high molecular

References
1. Andre N, Rome A, Carre M. Antimitochondrial agents:
a new class of anticancer agents. Arch Pediatr 2006;13:
69–75.
2. Green DR, Kroemer G. The pathophysiology of
mitochondrial cell death. Science 2004;305:626–9.
3. Forte M, Bernardi P. Genetic dissection of the
permeability transition pore. J Bioenerg Biomembr
2005;37:121–8.
4. Halestrap AP, Davidson AM. Inhibition of Ca2(+)induced large-amplitude swelling of liver and heart
mitochondria by cyclosporin is probably caused by the
inhibitor binding to mitochondrial-matrix peptidylprolyl cis-trans isomerase and preventing it interacting
with the adenine nucleotide translocase. Biochem J
1990;268:153–60.
5. Scholz C, Richter A, Lehmann M, et al. Arsenic trioxide
induces regulated, death receptor-independent cell
death through a Bcl-2-controlled pathway. Oncogene
2005;24:7031–42.
6. Kim JS, He L, Lemasters JJ. Mitochondrial permeability
transition: a common pathway to necrosis and apoptosis. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 2003;304:463–70.
7. He L, Lemasters JJ. Regulated and unregulated
mitochondrial permeability transition pores: a new
paradigm of pore structure and function? FEBS Lett
2002;512:1–7.
8. Setzer WN, Setzer MC. Plant-derived triterpenoids as
potential antineoplastic agents. Mini Rev Med Chem
2003;3:540–56.
9. Suh N, Honda T, Finlay HJ, et al. Novel triterpenoids
suppress inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS) and
inducible cyclooxygenase (COX-2) in mouse macrophages. Cancer Res 1998;58:717–23.
10. Honda T, Rounds BV, Gribble GW, et al. Design and
synthesis of 2-cyano-3,12-dioxoolean-1,9-dien-28-oic acid, a novel and highly active inhibitor of nitric oxide
production in mouse macrophages. Bioorg Med Chem
Lett 1998;8:2711–4.
11. Honda T, Rounds BV, Bore L, et al. Novel synthetic
oleanane triterpenoids: a series of highly active inhibitors of nitric oxide production in mouse macrophages.
Bioorg Med Chem Lett 1999;9:3429–34.
12. Honda T, Rounds BV, Bore L, et al. Synthetic oleanane
and ursane triterpenoids with modified rings A and C: a
series of highly active inhibitors of nitric oxide
production in mouse macrophages. J Med Chem 2000;
43:4233–46.

www.aacrjournals.org

weight protein aggregates, which then form a CsA-insensitive,
unregulated PT pore. Subsequent mitochondrial generation of
ROS may then amplify the PT pore formation, leading to
cytochrome c release and cell death. To our knowledge, this data
is the first to directly support the existence of the unregulated PT
pore, as proposed by Lemasters et al. (6, 7). In addition, these data
suggest a novel mechanism by which electrophiles such as
triterpenoids elicit antitumor activity. Indeed, recent preclinical
studies show significant antitumor activity of other electrophiles
such as avicins and parthenolide (49, 50). Finally, the development
of compounds that elicit unregulated PT pore formation in cancer
cells represents a new area for cancer therapeutics development.

Acknowledgments
Received 7/20/2006; revised 9/15/2006; accepted 11/14/2006.
Grant support: NIH grants RO1 HL71158 (P.S. Brookes) and RO1 DE11390-19-23
(R. Phipps), Leukemia and Lymphoma Society Translational Research grant RO1
DE11390-19-23, and a James P Wilmot Cancer Scholar Award (S.H. Bernstein).
The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of page
charges. This article must therefore be hereby marked advertisement in accordance
with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact.
We thank Michael B. Sporn for providing CDDO and derivatives and for critical
discussions.

13. Honda T, Honda Y, Favaloro FG, Jr., et al. A novel
dicyanotriterpenoid, 2-cyano-3,12-dioxooleana-1,9(11)dien-28-onitrile, active at picomolar concentrations for
inhibition of nitric oxide production. Bioorg Med Chem
Lett 2002;12:1027–30.
14. Chauhan D, Li G, Podar K, et al. The bortezomib/
proteasome inhibitor PS-341 and triterpenoid CDDO-Im
induce synergistic anti-multiple myeloma (MM) activity
and overcome bortezomib resistance. Blood 2004;103:
3158–66.
15. Ikeda T, Sporn M, Honda T, et al. The novel
triterpenoid CDDO and its derivatives induce apoptosis
by disruption of intracellular redox balance. Cancer Res
2003;63:5551–8.
16. Ikeda T, Nakata Y, Kimura F, et al. Induction of redox
imbalance and apoptosis in multiple myeloma cells by
the novel triterpenoid 2-cyano-3,12-dioxoolean-1,9-dien28-oic acid. Mol Cancer Ther 2004;3:39–45.
17. Inoue S, Snowden RT, Dyer MJ, et al. CDDO induces
apoptosis via the intrinsic pathway in lymphoid cells.
Leukemia 2004;18:948–52.
18. Ito Y, Pandey P, Sporn MB, et al. The novel
triterpenoid CDDO induces apoptosis and differentiation of human osteosarcoma cells by a caspase8 dependent mechanism. Mol Pharmacol 2001;59:
1094–9.
19. Konopleva M, Tsao T, Ruvolo P, et al. Novel
triterpenoid CDDO-Me is a potent inducer of apoptosis
and differentiation in acute myelogenous leukemia.
Blood 2002;99:326–35.
20. Konopleva M, Contractor R, Kurinna SM, et al. The
novel triterpenoid CDDO-Me suppresses MAPK pathways and promotes p38 activation in acute myeloid
leukemia cells. Leukemia 2005;19:1350–4.
21. Lapillonne H, Konopleva M, Tsao T, et al. Activation
of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor g by a
novel synthetic triterpenoid 2-cyano-3,12-dioxooleana1,9-dien-28-oic acid induces growth arrest and apoptosis in breast cancer cells. Cancer Res 2003;63:5926–39.
22. Pedersen IM, Kitada S, Schimmer A, et al. The
triterpenoid CDDO induces apoptosis in refractory CLL
B cells. Blood 2002;100:2965–72.
23. Place AE, Suh N, Williams CR, et al. The novel
synthetic triterpenoid, CDDO-imidazolide, inhibits inflammatory response and tumor growth in vivo . Clin
Cancer Res 2003;9:2798–806.
24. Suh N, Wang Y, Honda T, et al. A novel synthetic
oleanane triterpenoid, 2-cyano-3,12-dioxoolean-1,9dien-28-oic acid, with potent differentiating, antiproli-

ferative, and anti-inflammatory activity. Cancer Res
1999;59:336–41.
25. Samudio I, Konopleva M, Hail N, Jr., et al. 2-Cyano3,12-dioxooleana-1,9-dien-28-imidazolide (CDDO-Im)
directly targets mitochondrial glutathione to induce
apoptosis in pancreatic cancer. J Biol Chem 2005;280:
36273–82.
26. Yates MS, Kwak MK, Egner PA, et al. Potent
protection against aflatoxin-induced tumorigenesis
through induction of Nrf2-regulated pathways by the
triterpenoid 1-[2-cyano-3-,12-dioxooleana-1,911.-dien28-oyl]imidazole. Cancer Res 2006;66:2488–94.
27. Dinkova-Kostova AT, Liby KT, Stephenson KK, et al.
Extremely potent triterpenoid inducers of the phase 2
response: correlations of protection against oxidant and
inflammatory stress. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2005;102:
4584–9.
28. Padilla J, Kaur K, Harris SG, et al. PPAR-g-mediated
regulation of normal and malignant B lineage cells. Ann
N Y Acad Sci 2000;905:97–109.
29. Ray DM, Akbiyik F, Bernstein SH, et al. CD40
engagement prevents peroxisome proliferator-activated
receptor g agonist-induced apoptosis of B lymphocytes
and B lymphoma cells by an NF-nB-dependent mechanism. J Immunol 2005;174:4060–9.
30. Ray DM, Bernstein SH, Phipps RP. Human multiple
myeloma cells express peroxisome proliferator-activated
receptor g and undergo apoptosis upon exposure to
PPARg ligands. Clin Immunol 2004;113:203–13.
31. Padilla J, Kaur K, Cao HJ, et al. Peroxisome
proliferator activator receptor-g agonists and 15-deoxy-D(12,14)(12,14)-PGJ2. induce apoptosis in normal
and malignant B-lineage cells. J Immunol 2000;165:
6941–8.
32. Ray DM, Morse KM, Hilchey SP, et al. The novel
triterpenoid 2-cyano-3,12-dioxooleana-1,9-dien-28-oic
acid (CDDO) induces apoptosis of human diffuse large
B-cell lymphoma cells through a peroxisome proliferator activated receptor g-independent pathway. Exp
Hematol 2006;34:1202–11.
33. Samudio I, Konopleva M, Pelicano H, et al. A novel
mechanism of action of methyl-2-cyano-3,12 dioxoolean1,9 diene-28-oate: direct permeabilization of the inner
mitochondrial membrane to inhibit electron transport
and induce apoptosis. Mol Pharmacol 2006;69:1182–93.
34. Brookes PS, Salinas EP, Darley-Usmar K, et al.
Concentration-dependent effects of nitric oxide on
mitochondrial permeability transition and cytochrome
c release. J Biol Chem 2000;275:20474–9.

1801

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (4). February 15, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research
35. Lowry OH, Rosebrough NJ, Farr AL, et al. Protein
measurement with the Folin phenol reagent. J Biol
Chem 1951;193:265–75.
36. Tompkins AJ, Burwell LS, Digerness SB, et al.
Mitochondrial dysfunction in cardiac ischemia-reperfusion injury: ROS from complex I, without inhibition.
Biochim Biophys Acta 2006;1762:223–31.
37. Brookes PS, Pinner A, Ramachandran A, et al. High
throughput two-dimensional blue-native electrophoresis: a tool for functional proteomics of mitochondria
and signaling complexes. Proteomics 2002;2:969–77.
38. Lin TK, Hughes G, Muratovska A, et al. Specific
modification of mitochondrial protein thiols in response
to oxidative stress: a proteomics approach. J Biol Chem
2002;277:17048–56.
39. Grune T, Jung T, Merker K, et al. Decreased
proteolysis caused by protein aggregates, inclusion
bodies, plaques, lipofuscin, ceroid, and ‘‘aggresomes’’
during oxidative stress, aging, and disease. Int J Biochem
Cell Biol 2004;36:2519–30.
40. Ling YH, Liebes L, Ng B, et al. PS-341, a novel
proteasome inhibitor, induces Bcl-2 phosphorylation

and cleavage in association with G2-M phase arrest and
apoptosis. Mol Cancer Ther 2002;1:841–9.
41. Landar A, Shiva S, Levonen AL, et al. Induction of the
permeability transition and cytochrome c release by
15-deoxy-D12,14-prostaglandin J2 in mitochondria. Biochem J 2006;394:185–95.
42. Martinez B, Perez-Castillo A, Santos A. The mitochondrial respiratory complex I is a target for 15deoxy-y12,14-prostaglandin J2 action. J Lipid Res 2005;
46:736–43.
43. Vercesi AE, Kowaltowski AJ, Grijalba MT, et al. The
role of reactive oxygen species in mitochondrial
permeability transition. Biosci Rep 1997;17:43–52.
44. Brookes PS, Yoon Y, Robotham JL, et al. Calcium,
ATP, and ROS: a mitochondrial love-hate triangle. Am J
Physiol Cell Physiol 2004;287:C817–33.
45. Konopleva M, Tsao T, Estrov Z, et al. The synthetic
triterpenoid 2-cyano-3,12-dioxooleana-1,9-dien-28-oic
acid induces caspase-dependent and -independent
apoptosis in acute myelogenous leukemia. Cancer Res
2004;64:7927–35.
46. Hail N, Jr., Konopleva M, Sporn M, et al. Evidence

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (4). February 15, 2007

1802

supporting a role for calcium in apoptosis induction by
the synthetic triterpenoid 2-cyano-3,12-dioxooleana-1,9dien-28-oic acid (CDDO). J Biol Chem 2004;279:11179–87.
47. Tang TS, Slow E, Lupu V, et al. Disturbed Ca2+
signaling and apoptosis of medium spiny neurons in
Huntington’s disease. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2005;102:
2602–7.
48. Landar A, Zmijewski JW, Dickinson DA, et al.
Interaction of electrophilic lipid oxidation products
with mitochondria in endothelial cells and formation of
reactive oxygen species. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol
2006;290:H1777–87.
49. Gaikwad A, Poblenz A, Haridas V, et al. Triterpenoid
electrophiles (avicins) suppress heat shock protein-70
and x-linked inhibitor of apoptosis proteins in malignant cells by activation of ubiquitin machinery:
implications for proapoptotic activity. Clin Cancer Res
2005;11:1953–62.
50. Guzman ML, Rossi RM, Karnischky L, et al. The
sesquiterpene lactone parthenolide induces apoptosis of
human acute myelogenous leukemia stem and progenitor cells. Blood 2005;105:4163–9.

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

The Triterpenoid 2-Cyano-3,12-dioxooleana-1,9-dien-28-oic
Acid and Its Derivatives Elicit Human Lymphoid Cell
Apoptosis through a Novel Pathway Involving the
Unregulated Mitochondrial Permeability Transition Pore
Paul S. Brookes, Kimberly Morse, Denise Ray, et al.
Cancer Res 2007;67:1793-1802.

Updated version

Cited articles
Citing articles

E-mail alerts
Reprints and
Subscriptions
Permissions

Access the most recent version of this article at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/67/4/1793

This article cites 50 articles, 31 of which you can access for free at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/67/4/1793.full#ref-list-1
This article has been cited by 10 HighWire-hosted articles. Access the articles at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/67/4/1793.full#related-urls

Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal.
To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications
Department at pubs@aacr.org.
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications
Department at permissions@aacr.org.

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

