Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No. 41

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

The ascidian natural product eusynstyelamide B is a novel
topoisomerase II poison that induces DNA damage and growth
arrest in prostate and breast cancer cells
Michelle S. Liberio1,2, Martin C. Sadowski1, Rohan A. Davis2, Anja Rockstroh1,
Raj Vasireddy1, Melanie L. Lehman3, Colleen C. Nelson1
1

 ustralian Prostate Cancer Research Centre – Queensland, Institute of Health and Biomedical Innovation, Queensland
A
University of Technology, Princess Alexandra Hospital, Translational Research Institute, Brisbane, Queensland, Australia

2

Eskitis Institute for Drug Discovery, Griffith University, Nathan, Queensland, Australia

3

Vancouver Prostate Centre, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada

Correspondence to: Colleen Nelson, e-mail: colleen.nelson@qut.edu.au
Keywords: eusynstyelamide B, G2/M arrest, DNA damage, topoisomerase II poison, LNCaP
Received: July 26 2015	

Accepted: October 08, 2015	

Published: November 02, 2015

ABSTRACT
As part of an anti-cancer natural product drug discovery program, we recently
identified eusynstyelamide B (EB), which displayed cytotoxicity against MDA-MB-231
breast cancer cells (IC50 = 5 µM) and induced apoptosis. Here, we investigated
the mechanism of action of EB in cancer cell lines of the prostate (LNCaP) and
breast (MDA-MB-231). EB inhibited cell growth (IC50 = 5 µM) and induced a G2 cell
cycle arrest, as shown by a significant increase in the G2/M cell population in the
absence of elevated levels of the mitotic marker phospho-histone H3. In contrast to
MDA-MB-231 cells, EB did not induce cell death in LNCaP cells when treated for up to
10 days. Transcript profiling and Ingenuity Pathway Analysis suggested that
EB activated DNA damage pathways in LNCaP cells. Consistent with this, CHK2
phosphorylation was increased, p21CIP1/WAF1 was up-regulated and CDC2 expression
strongly reduced by EB. Importantly, EB caused DNA double-strand breaks, yet did
not directly interact with DNA. Analysis of topoisomerase II-mediated decatenation
discovered that EB is a novel topoisomerase II poison.

INTRODUCTION

Topoisomerase poisons are among the most
widely prescribed anti-cancer drugs in clinical use.
These cytotoxic drugs (e.g. etoposide, doxorubicin,
and mitoxantrone) are frontline therapies for a variety
of cancers [9, 10]. Topoisomerases are essential
nuclear enzymes that play a major role in DNA
replication, transcription, recombination, chromosome
condensation and segregation [9, 11–13]. There are two
major topoisomerase families. Type I topoisomerases
make transient cuts in the DNA, regulating over- and
under-winding within the double helix which reduces
the stress accumulated ahead of replication forks
and transcription complexes. Type II topoisomerases
make transient double-strand breaks in DNA and
modulates under- and over-winding, knotting, and
tangling. Topoisomerase II can be found in two forms,
topoisomerase IIα and IIβ [9, 11–13]. These isoforms are
differentially expressed in cells and have separate nuclear
functions. Topoisomerase IIα is regulated through cell

During an anti-cancer natural product drug discovery
program [1, 2], we recently identified eusynstyelamide
B (EB) from the Great Barrier Reef marine ascidian,
Didemnum candidum. This complex and unique
bis-indole alkaloid displayed cytotoxicity (IC50 = 5 μM)
and induced apoptosis in MDA-MB-231 breast cancer
cells [3]. Marine organisms such as sponges and ascidians
have been a prolific source of cytotoxic compounds
several of which have been shown to target topoisomerase
enzymes. Marine natural products belonging to the
makaluvamine, pyridoacridine and xestoquinone structure
classes have all been shown to interact and perturb
topoisomerases [4]. The discovery of novel cytotoxic
compounds is very important for the development of anticancer treatments [5]. New cytotoxic drugs have been
recently approved (eribulin, trabectedin, ixabepilone) and
many are being tested in the clinic against chemoresistant
cancers and in drug combination therapies [5–8].
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

43944

Oncotarget

RESULTS

cycle and its maximal level peaks at the G2/M boundary.
Moreover, this isoform is found in rapidly proliferating
tissues and can be found in replication forks and associated
with chromosomes during mitosis [9, 11–13]. In contrast,
the β isoform is present in most cell types independent
of their proliferation status and it appears to be involved
in the transcription of hormonally and developmentally
regulated genes [14, 15].
Topoisomerase II-inhibiting drugs can affect
different stages of the catalytic cycle and are categorized
into two groups: catalytic inhibitors and poisons.
Catalytic inhibitors prevent the formation of the
cleavage complex through inhibition of TOPO II binding
caused by its intercalation into DNA [9,  11– 13,  16].
The bisdioxopiperazines, ICRF- 187 and ICRF-193 and
the quinoline aminopurine are examples of catalytic
inhibitors that stabilize the closed clamp intermediate,
which is formed by the enzyme around the DNA,
and blocks ATP hydrolysis [17, 18]. In contrast,
TOPO II poisons stabilize the cleavage complex
[9,  11– 13,  19], and can be categorized as interfacial
or covalent [20, 21]. The interfacial poisons etoposide,
doxorubicin, mitoxantrone, and bioflavonoids such as
genistein bind non-covalently to the cleavage complex,
intercalate into the DNA at the cleaved scissle bond
and prevent religation. Covalent poisons have protein
reactive groups, such as quinones, isothiocyanates, and
maleimides that form adducts with the enzyme. The
stabilization of the DNA cleavage complex leads to the
formations of permanent double strand breaks when, for
example, replication forks and transcription complexes
try to transverse the cleavage. This can cause genome
instability and chromosome translocations, which is
associated with the development of some specific forms
of leukemia [10,  22]. Currently, no drugs specific to
topoisomerase IIα or β are available for clinical use.
Results suggest that cardiotoxicity resulting from the
use of the topoisomerase II-targeted drugs doxorubicin
is due to its interactions with the β isoform [23]. There
is also evidence that this isoform is responsible for
initiating some of the secondary malignancies associated
with topoisomerase-targeted drugs [24]. Compounds
such as, NK314, tricitrinol B and Dp44mT favor
TOPO IIα and aim for producing less off-targeted effects
[25–28]. At the moment, four TOPO II-targeted drugs
are in clinical development: F14512, versaroxin, C-1311
and XK469 [10].
Here, we report mechanism of action studies on
eusynstyelamide B (EB), providing a basis for further
development of this agent (or optimized analogs) as a
potential human breast and prostate cancer therapeutic.
Our data indicated that EB inhibited the proliferation of
LNCaP and MDA-MB-231 cells in vitro by inducing a G2
arrest. Importantly, EB was found to be a non-intercalating
topoisomerase II poison that activates DNA damage
response pathways.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

EB arrested growth of LNCaP cells
We recently demonstrated during a screening
campaign of an ascidian-derived extract library that
EB inhibited growth (IC50 5.0 µM) and caused cell
death through apoptosis in MDA-MB-231 breast cancer
cells [3]. As shown in Figure 1A, analysis of growth
with a real-time cell analyzer (xCELLigence) revealed
that EB exhibited a similar inhibitory potency in the
prostate cancer cell line LNCaP (IC50 5.0 µM). Real
time analysis of cell confluence by live cell imaging
(IncuCyte FLR) demonstrated that 2.5 µM and 5.0 µM
EB efficiently blocked growth of LNCaP cells up to
96 h (Figure 1B). Yet, no typical morphological signs
of cell death (cell shrinkage and membrane blebbing)
were observed after 96 h (Figure 1C) or 10 days of
treatment (Figure S1), suggesting that EB is cytostatic
in LNCaP cells (36 h doubling time). Indeed, Western
blot analysis of LC3B-II, a marker of autophagy, and
cleaved PARP, a marker of late apoptosis, as well
as Annexin V staining, a marker of early apoptosis
(data not shown), confirmed that EB did not induce
autophagy or apoptosis in LNCaP cells (Figure 1D).
Notably, growth of the highly proliferative primary
human neonatal foreskin fibroblast cell line NFF
(IC50 1.3 µM, 24 h doubling time) and non-malignant
prostate cell line RWPE-1 (IC50 0.92 µM, 22 h doubling
time) was also inhibited by EB (Figure S2), suggesting
that EB displayed higher potency in fast proliferating
cell lines.

EB induced a G2 cell cycle arrest
Previous work by our group described a significant
G2/M arrest of MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells after
treatment with 5.0 µM EB for 72 h [3]. A time course
study of MDA-MB-231 and LNCaP cells revealed that EB
induced a G2/M arrest in both cell lines as early as 24 h
after treatment had commenced (Figure 2A). Concomitant
with the increase of the G2/M cell population, EB largely
reduced the G0/G1 cell population of MDA-MB-231
cells with a modest decrease of the number of cells
in S phase, while EB mainly affected the S phase cell
population in LNCaP cells. Furthermore, the G2/M arrest of
MDA-MB-23 cells was most pronounced after 48 h, after
which the number of cells in G2/M visibly declined and
the G0/G1 cell population increased, suggesting that the
inhibitory effect of EB was in part temporary in the breast
cancer cell line (Figure 2A). In contrast, the EB-induced
G2/M arrest remained unchanged in LNCaP cells over
the treatment period of 96 h (Figure 2A) and increased
after 10 days of treatment (Figure S1). EB-treated MDAMB-231 cells consistently displayed higher levels of dead
cells with hypodiploid DNA content (sub-G1) compared
43945

Oncotarget

to control when treated for 48 h or longer, while no such
trend was visible in LNCaP cells (Figure 2A) even after
10 days of treatment (Figure S1). A dose titration experiment
(4.9 nM to 5 µM EB) for 72 h showed that concentrations
of 0.625 µM EB and higher induced a visible increase of
the G2/M cell population of MDA-MB-231 cells, while
5 µM EB were required to visibly arrest LNCaP cells in
G2/M (Figure 2B). Similar to the results above, there was a
modest concentration-dependent increase in the number of
dead cells (sub-G1) in the breast cancer cell line but not in
LNCaP cells (Figure 2B). Treatment of LNCaP cells with
5 µM EB for 72 h confirmed that EB significantly increased
the number of cells in G2/M (p < 0.05) (Figure 2C).
With the purpose of determining if EB arrested
LNCaP and MDA-MB-231 cells in G2 or in M phase of
the cell cycle, two different experimental approaches were
pursued. First, cell lysates of EB-treated cells were probed
for the expression of the mitotic marker phospho-histone
H3 (PHH3) by Western blotting. Elevated levels of PHH3
indicate an increase in the amount of cells in mitosis
[29]. This was observed with MDA-MB-231 and LNCaP
cells when treated with taxol or nocodazole, which both
arrest cells in mitosis (Figure 2D) [30, 31]. In contrast,
EB treatment decreased the phosphorylation of histone
H3 in MDA-MB-231 cells (Figure 2D), while PHH3
levels remained unchanged in LNCaP cells (Figure 2D).
The absence of increased PHH3 levels in both cell lines
indicated that EB did not cause a mitotic arrest.
Next, the mitotic index of EB-treated MDAMB-231 and LNCaP cells was calculated by high content
screening (HCS) based on PHH3 staining. EB treatment
decreased the mitotic index in MDA-MB-231 cells by
30-fold and in LNCaP cells by 3-fold (Figure 2E). Taken
together, the increased G2/M cell population, absence of
elevated PHH3 levels and reduced mitotic index after EB
treatment together indicated that EB arrested LNCaP and
MDA-MB-231 in G2 of the cell cycle.

Pathway analysis of differentially regulated genes
with Ingenuity IPA software indicated that EB strongly
changed the expression of 615 genes involved in cell cycle
regulation and of 504 genes involved in DNA replication,
recombination and repair. Many genes related to the role
of BRCA1 in DNA damage response, such as CHEK2 and
PLK1, were substantially down-regulated (17- and 48-fold,
respectively). Pathways related to DNA repair, including
homologous and non-homologous recombination, showed
down-regulation of most of its genes. Furthermore, ATM
signaling, which comprises part of the DNA damage
response, was another pathway highly de-regulated by
EB (Figure 3). EB treatment affected 28 out of 47 genes
related to G2/M check point regulation and 44 genes out
of 99 involved in p53 signaling, respectively. For example,
EB treatment increased CDKN1A expression by 12-fold
and MDM2 by 4-fold, and decreased BRCA1 expression
by 17-fold and CHEK1 by 13-fold.

Validation of microarray results by qRT-PCR
and Western blotting analyses
Gene expression profiling by microarray analysis
showed a strong differential regulation of genes involved
in the control of cell growth, cell cycle and DNA
damage response pathways. As shown by microarray
analysis, the cell cycle regulation genes CDK1, CCNB1
and CDC25A were transcriptionally down-regulated by
14-, 12-, and 9-fold, respectively, while the CDK inhibitor
CDKN1A which encodes the p21CIP1/WAF1 protein, was upregulated 12-fold. Similar levels of differential expression
were observed by qRT-PCR (Figure 4A). Furthermore,
expression of MKI67, which encodes the nuclear
proliferation marker KI67, was suppressed 15-fold and
25-fold as shown by the microarray and qRT-PCR analyses,
respectively (Figure 4A). Consistent with the results of the
microarray experiment, qRT-PCR demonstrated that the
growth-arrest and DNA-damage-inducible stress response
genes GADD45A and GADD45G were up-regulated by
3-  and 2-fold, respectively (Figure 4A). In summary,
qRT-PCR analysis of seven critical cell cycle regulatory
genes confirmed the observation of the microarray study
that EB-induced their differential expression in LNCaP
cells. In MDA-MB-231 cells, EB treatment increased the
expression of CDKN1A by 4-fold, while it decreased the
expression of CCNB1 by 1.9- fold (Figure 4A). In addition,
the transcription levels of CDK1, CDC25A, MKI67,
GADD45A and GADD45G did not change substantially
(fold change < 1.5) after EB treatment, suggesting cell linespecific difference in the regulation of these genes.
In order to validate the gene profiling result and
to further study the molecular basis of the EB induced
G2 cell cycle arrest, the expression of proteins involved in
DNA damage response and G2/M check point regulation

EB treatment activates the DNA damage
response pathway
To guide the characterization of the molecular
mechanism underlying the EB-induced growth arrest of
LNCaP cells, differential gene expression was studied
by DNA microarray with a custom 180 k Agilent oligo
microarray (VPCv3, ID032034, GPL16604). This prostate
cancer focused array contains probes mapping to human
protein-coding as well as non-coding loci; with probes
targeting exons, 3’UTRs, 5’UTRs, intronic and intergenic
regions [124]. With cut-offs of p ≤ 0.05 and fold change
≥ 1.5, EB caused up-regulation of 2751 genes and
down-regulation of 1743 genes (Figure 3). The 20 most
differentially regulated genes after EB treatment of LNCaP
cells relative to DMSO control are shown in Table S1.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

43946

Oncotarget

was investigated in both cell lines by Western blotting
analysis. As controls, cells were treated with the DNA
intercalator doxorubicin, which induces DNA damage
by stalling topoisomerase II, the mitotic inhibitors taxol
and nocodazole that target tubulin polymerization, and

the autophagy inhibitor chloroquine [31–34]. The
retinoblastoma tumor suppressor protein, RB, regulates
cell proliferation by controlling G1-S phase progression of
the cell cycle through its inactivation by phosphorylation
[35, 36]. DNA damage can lead to RB dephosphorylation,

Figure 1: EB arrested growth of LNCaP cells. (A) LNCaP cells were treated with the indicated concentrations of EB, and growth

was monitored with a real-time cell analyzer (xCELLigence) for 72 h in three independent experiments. The IC50 was calculated by
non-linear regression analysis of the dose response curves (n = 3, mean ± SD). (B) LNCaP cells were treated with 2.5 µM EB, 5.0 µM
EB, 1.0 µg/mL tunicamycin (TUN, positive control), or vehicle control (DMSO). Cell growth as a function of increasing confluence was
measured by real-time phase contrast imaging every two hours for 96 h on a live cell IncuCyte FLR system (n = 3, mean ± SD). (C) LNCaP
cells were treated with 5.0 µM EB for the indicated times after which protein lysates were prepared and analyzed by Western blot analysis
for the levels of PARP (116 kDa), cleaved PARP (89 kDa), LC3B-I (16 kDa), LC3B-II (14 kDa), and β-actin as a loading control. Control (C)
cells were treated with the drug vehicle DMSO (0.1%) for 96 h. Other controls used were doxorubicin (Dox, 1 µM for 48 h), taxol
(Tax, 2 nM for 24 h), and nocodazole (Noc, 83 nM for 24 h) as positive controls for PARP cleavage and chloroquine (Cq, 25 µM for 48 h)
as a positive control for autophagy. Protein levels were quantified, normalized against the loading controls, and the results were expressed
in relation to DMSO control (C). (D) Representative images of the analysis in B after 0 h and 72 h of treatment.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

43947

Oncotarget

Figure 2: EB induced a G2 cell cycle arrest. (A) Cell cycle distribution of LNCaP (left panel) and MDA-MB-231 cells (right panel)

treated for the indicated times with 5 µM EB or 0.1% DMSO (control). DNA content was analyzed by flow cytometry, and the number of
cells in the indicated cell cycle phases was quantitated. (B) LNCaP (left panel) and MDA-MB-231 cells (right panel) were treated for 72 h
with the indicated concentrations of EB and analyzed as in A. (C) LNCaP cells were treated for 72 h with 5 µM EB or 0.1% DMSO (control)
and analyzed as in A (n = 3, mean ± SD, *p < 0.05). (D) MDA-MB-231 (top panel) and LNCaP cells (bottom panel) were treated with 2.5
µM and 5 µM EB, respectively, and extracted at the indicated time points for Western blot analysis with anti-phospho-histone H3 antibody
(PHH3). β-actin levels were determined as loading control. As a control (C), cells were treated with the drug vehicle DMSO (0.1%) for 96
h. Other controls used were the DNA damage inducer doxorubicin (Dox, 1 µM for 48 h), and the anti-mitotic drugs taxol (Tax, 2 nM for
24 h) and nocodazole (Noc, 83 nM for 24 h). Protein levels were quantified, normalized against the loading controls, and the results were
expressed in relation to the DMSO control (C). (E) Quantification of the mitotic index by HCS after phospho-histone H3 labelling. LNCaP
and MDA-MB-231 cells were treated with 5 µM EB for 24 h and probed with anti-phospho-histone H3 antibody. Control cells were treated
for 24 h with 0.1% DMSO or 83 nM of nocodazole. Quantification of PHH3 staining and calculation of the mitotic indices were carried out
on the HCS instrument Operetta (PerkinElmer). Asterisks indicate results with p < 0.05 in a One-way ANOVA analysis.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

43948

Oncotarget

which causes a cell cycle arrest in G1 [37, 38]. In
MDA- MB-231 breast cancer cells, EB treatment
showed only moderate alterations in RB phosphorylation
(Ser795, Ser807 and Ser811), indicating that G1-S phase
progression was not affected by EB treatment (Figure 4B).
On the other hand, the amount of phosphorylated RB
at Ser807/811 reduced over time after treatment of
LNCaP cells, while Ser795 phosphorylation remained
unchanged (Figure 4B). It is unclear why these three
CDK4/CYCLIN D target sites were differentially
regulated in LNCaP cells. Nevertheless, loss in RB
phosphorylation leads to RB activation and inhibition of
S phase progression as indicated by the reduced number
of cells in S phase (Figure 2). The mRNA levels of TP53,
which encodes the p53 protein, did not change after EB
treatment in LNCaP cells (data not shown). Protein p53
is activated by phosphorylation in the presence of cellular
stress, and regulates the expression and activation of
molecules associated with cell cycle arrest, apoptosis,
DNA repair, senescence, and metabolism. Increased
phosphorylation of p53 was not detected up to 96 h after
treatment of LNCaP cells with EB (Figure 4B). Instead,

EB treatment temporarily reduced the expression of p53.
In stark contrast to LNCaP cells, p53 phosphorylation and
total p53 expression were substantially up-regulated in a
time dependent manner in MDA-MB-231 cells (Figure
4B). In the absence of cellular stress, p53 is expressed at
low levels but upon stress stimuli like DNA damage is
stabilized and activated by a series of post-translational
modifications, such as phosphorylation by the kinases
DNA-PK and ATM/ATR [39]. Like p53, CHK2 is also
activated through phosphorylation by DNA-PK and ATM/
ATR following DNA damage [40]. EB treatment of both
cell lines led to increased CHK2 phosphorylation. While
CHK2 phosphorylation increased by approximately
two-fold in a time-dependent manner in MDA-MB-231
cells, it was strongly up-regulated (seven-fold) as early
as 24 h post EB treatment in LNCaP cells (Figure 4B).
Interestingly, the microarray results showed that CHEK2
(CHK2) gene expression was down-regulated by 5-fold
in EB-treated LNCaP cells; however, the expression of
total CHK2 protein was not affected by EB treatment,
as shown by Western blotting (Figure 4B). Activation of
CHK1 kinase inactivates the phosphatase CDC25, which

Figure 3: Microarray analysis of EB-treated LNCaP cells. (A) Venn diagram of differentially expressed genes of LNCaP cells

treated with 5.0 μM EB for 24 h. (B) Ingenuity pathway analysis of G2/M DNA damage checkpoint regulation. EB caused up-regulation
of 2751 genes and down-regulation of 1743 genes. The canonical pathway of G2/M DNA damage checkpoint regulation was overlaid with
the microarray analysis-derived gene expression changes of LNCaP cells treated with 5.0 μM EB for 24 h. Genes in red were up-regulated
and genes in green were down-regulated by the indicated values (fold change) relative to vehicle control (DMSO).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

43949

Oncotarget

removes the inhibitory Tyr15 phosphorylation of CDC2
(CDK1) [41]. Increased phosphorylation of CHK1 was
observed in breast cancer cells with a peak at 48 h post
treatment (Figure 4B), whereas it was undetectable in
LNCaP cells (data not shown). The CDC2/CYCLIN B
complex is critical for the transition from G2 into mitosis.
Entry of eukaryotic cells into mitosis is regulated by
activation of CDC2 kinase through de-phosphorylation
of CDC2 at Thr14 and Tyr15 [42–44]. EB treatment
induced an accumulation of total CDC2 protein and
inhibitory phosphorylation at Tyr15 in MDA-MB-231 cells

(Figure 4B). When corrected for the up-regulation in
total protein levels of CDC2, Tyr15 phosphorylation was
increased by approximately 2-fold. The opposite was
observed in EB-treated LNCaP cells (Figure 4B) where
total CDC2 protein was markedly reduced at every time
point. This is in agreement with the microarray and qRTPCR results which showed a 14- and 17-fold reduction in
CDC2 gene expression after EB treatment of LNCaP cells
for 24 h. While the inhibitory Tyr15 phosphorylation of
CDC2 was slightly increased after 24 h of EB treatment
when corrected for the decline in total CDC2 protein

Figure 4: EB affected critical regulators of the G2/M DNA damage checkpoint and cell cycle. (A) LNCaP and

MDA-MB-231 cells were treated for 24 h with 5 µM EB prior to RNA extraction and analysis of gene expression by qRT-PCR of the
indicated genes. As a control, cells were treated with 0.1% DMSO for 24 h. Expression levels are shown as fold change relative to control
(n = 3, mean ± SD, *p < 0.05, **p < 0.001, ***p < 0.0001). (B) LNCaP and MDA-MB-231 cells were treated with 5 µM and 2.5 µM EB,
respectively, and extracted at the indicated time points for Western blot analysis with antibodies directed against the indicated proteins.
β-ACTIN levels were determined as loading control. As a control (C), cells were treated with the drug vehicle DMSO (0.1%) for 96 h.
Other controls used were the DNA damage inducer doxorubicin (Dox, 1 µM for 48 h), the anti-mitotic drugs taxol (Tax, 2 nM for 24 h)
and nocodazole (Noc, 83 nM for 24 h), and the autophagy inhibitor chloroquine (Cq, 25 µM for 48 h). Protein levels were quantified,
normalized against the loading controls, and the results were expressed relative to the DMSO control (C).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

43950

Oncotarget

levels, it was barely detectable at later time points, which
was probably due to the strong loss of CDC2 protein.
Consistent with the transcriptional changes of CDKN1A
(p21CIP1/WAF1) (Figure 4A), expression of the kinase inhibitor
was strongly induced in both cell lines after EB treatment
(Figure 4B). The cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor
1 (p21CIP1/WAF1) works as a cell cycle regulator of G1 and
S phase as well as an important mediator of cell cycle
arrest at G2/M phase in response to DNA damage [45].
The expression of p21CIP1/WAF1 is up-regulated in the
presence of low levels of DNA damage; however, at high
levels of DNA damage, p21CIP1/WAF1 is proteolytically
removed followed by induction of apoptosis [45]. Taken
together, qRT-PCR and Western blot analysis corroborated
above findings of the cell cycle and microarray analyses.
Importantly, they demonstrated that critical regulators of
the DNA damage pathways (GADD45, p53, CHK1, and
CHK2) were activated.

damage was repaired. In summary, EB induced DNA
damage by causing DSBs in LNCaP and MDA-MB-231
cells. Furthermore, both cell lines displayed distinct
kinetics of EB-induced DNA damage, suggesting cell
line-specific responsive mechanisms.

EB is a topoisomerase II poison
As shown above, EB treatment induced DSBs in
LNCaP and MDA-MB-231 cells. In order to verify if the
observed DNA damage was a result of a direct interaction
of EB with DNA (e.g. DNA intercalation), two different
techniques were used. In the first assay, the displacement
of ethidium bromide (EtBr) intercalated in double-stranded
DNA was measured. The fluorescence emitted by
EtBr (excitation at 530 nm and emission at 600 nm) is
around 30 times stronger when it is intercalated into
DNA. Displacement by a competitor compound will
therefore reduce the fluorescence intensity [49, 50].
The second assay measured changes to the melting
temperature of double-stranded DNA. In both assays
the fluorescent, DNA intercalating compound DAPI
was used as a positive control. As shown in Figure 6A,
DAPI displaced EtBr from the EtBr-DNA complex in a
concentration-dependent manner, as indicated by
the strong reduction in fluorescence (Figure 6A).
In contrast, EB did not affect the fluorescence of the EtBrDNA complex even at the highest concentration tested
(50 μM), which was almost 100-fold more than EtBr,
suggesting that EB did not intercalate in DNA. Next,
the thermal profile of double-stranded DNA complexed
with fluorescent SYBR® Green was analyzed (Figure 6B).
Melting curve analysis comprises the assessment of the
dissociation characteristics of double-stranded DNA
during heating. The melting point is the temperature
at which 50% of the DNA is denatured and present as
single-stranded DNA. The interaction of compounds with
DNA can stabilize or destabilize its structure, affecting
the melting temperature [51–53]. For example, DMSO is
known to inhibit secondary structures of DNA and reduces
the melting temperature of G/C-rich DNA sequences
[54]. Consistent with this, DMSO shifted the melting
temperature from 80.39°C to 78.34°C (Figure 6B).The
dissociation of double-stranded DNA can be monitored
using a DNA-intercalating fluorophore such as SYBR®
Green, which fluoresces 1000-fold more intensely when
intercalated [55]. Heat-induced denaturation of DNA leads
to reduced binding of the fluorophore and can be measured
by a reduction in fluorescence [56]. As shown in Figure
6B, the positive control DAPI increased the DNA melting
temperature by up to 10°C in a concentration-dependent
manner (0.12 – 1.0 μM), indicating a physical interaction
of DAPI with DNA which probably stabilized the double
helix [57]. Consistent with this, DAPI displaced SYBR®
Green from the DNA as indicated by a concentrationdependent reduction of the median fluorescent

EB caused DNA double strand breaks
The above studies demonstrated that MDA-MB-231
and LNCaP cells reacted to EB treatment by differential
regulation of genes and proteins involved in DNA damage
pathways, suggesting that EB might induce DNA damage.
In order to investigate whether EB causes DNA
double strand breaks (DSBs), EB-treated LNCaP and
MDA-MB-231 cells were analyzed by quantitative
γH2AX foci and neutral COMET assays. DSBs
induce phosphorylation of histone H2AX (γH2AX),
generating foci in the nucleus that can be detected by
specific antibodies [46]. In a time-dependent manner,
EB substantially increased the number of γH2AX
foci in LNCaP cells to levels seen after treatment with
doxorubicin (Figure 5A). A strong increase in the number
of γH2AX foci was also observed in MDA-MB-231
cells when treated for 4 h with EB. Yet, longer treatment
periods (72 h) generated visibly less DSBs, suggesting
that part of the initial EB-induced DSBs was repaired
(Figure 5A).
The analysis of DSBs by neutral COMET assay
is based on the fact that DSBs result in the extension of
DNA loops, which form a comet-like tail after neutral
electrophoresis of lysed and salt-extracted nuclei [47]. The
amount of DNA in the tail of the comets is correlated to
the level of DNA damage [48]. While the tail length of the
comets derived from LNCaP cells treated for 4 h with EB
were comparable to the control, they were significantly
increased after EB treatment for 72 h and similar to
the doxorubicin control (Figure 5 B). The tail length of
the comets of MDA-MB-231 cells was significantly
increased after EB treatment for 4 h when compared to the
control (Figure 5B). Yet, they were visibly shorter when
MDA-MB-231 cells were treated with EB for longer
periods of time (72 h), suggesting a reduction in the
amount of DSBs over time and that part of the initial
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

43951

Oncotarget

intensity of the DNA-SYBR® Green complex by up to
2.8-fold. In contrast, EB did not affect the DNA melting
temperature or caused displacement of SYBR® Green
at all concentrations tested (6.25 – 100 μM, Figure 6B,
Table S2). Taken together, both the displacement assay

and DNA melting temperature analysis demonstrated that
EB did not directly interact with DNA, suggesting that
EB induced DNA double strand breaks were possibly
mediated indirectly by targeting a DNA modifying
enzyme.

Figure 5: EB caused DNA double strand breaks. (A) EB induced γH2AX foci formation. LNCaP and MDA-MB231cells were

treated for 4 h and 72 h with 5 µM and 2.5 µM and EB, respectively. As controls, cells were treated with 0.1% DMSO for 72 h (control)
or the DNA damage inducing agent doxorubicin (Dox, 5 µM) for 24 h. Fixed cells were reacted with antibodies directed against γH2AX
(green), DNA was counterstained with DAPI (blue), and cells were visualized by immunofluorescence microscopy with a DeltaVision
microscope (60 × objective). The number of foci per cell was quantified with Metamorph software (n < 100 cells, scale bar = 30 µm). (B)
LNCaP and MDA-MB-231 cells were treated for 4 h and 72 h with 5 µM and EB, and DNA damage was analyzed by neutral single cell
COMET assay. As controls, cells were treated with 0.1% DMSO for 72 h (control) or 5 µM doxorubicin (Dox) for 48 h. The amount of
DSBs was quantified by measuring the length of the comet tails with CometScore software (n = 100 cells, *p < 0.05). Representative images
of the comet tails are shown (bottom panels).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

43952

Oncotarget

profiling indicated that BRCA1 and BRCA2, which are
major players in the repair of DNA DSBs by homologous
recombination, were down-regulated by 17- and 12-fold
[65]. Genes involved in DSBs repair by NHEJ, such as
PARP1, XRCC5, PRKDC, XRCC1 and DCLRE1C were
also down-regulated [66]. These are the main DSBs
repair systems in the cell, and their inactivation could
be the reason for the accumulation of DSBs over time in
EB-treated LNCaP cells. In many cases, chemoresistance
of cancer cells to DNA damaging agents is because of
increased DNA repair. Thus, co-targeting DNA repair
mechanisms could cause hypersensitivity to DNA
damage [67–69]. With this aim different compounds
that target components of the DNA repair machine
have been developed, such as O6-alkylating agents and
temozolomide [70].
DNA damage is first detected by ATM, ATR and
DNA-PK and can induce cell cycle arrest to allow DNA
repair, or induce senescence or apoptosis. The arrest at
G2/M phase prevents mitotic segregation of damaged
chromatids and is mediated by ATM/ATR, CHK1 and
p21CIP1/WAF1 [71–73]. Induction of the CDK inhibitor
p21CIP1/WAF1 is required for nuclear sequestration of inactive
cyclin B-Cdc2 complexes, leading to cell cycle arrest at
G2. CHK1 activation through phosphorylation at Ser345
and Ser317 is induced by ATR, after phosphorylation at
Ser286 and Ser301 by CDKs for an efficient response to
DNA damage [74]. Active CHK1 inactivates CDC25C by
phosphorylation, impairing cell progression to mitosis,
since it is responsible to activate CDC2 by removing
the inhibitory phosphate groups Thr14/Tyr15 [75]. All
cancer cells have a defect in G1 control and this makes
them extremely dependent on S and G2/M checkpoints
[76, 77]. Our microarray data showed that CHEK1
(CHK1) was down-regulated by 13-fold and CDKN1A
(p21CIP1/WAF1) was up-regulated by 12-fold in LNCaP cells
treated with EB. The increase of CDKN1A was confirmed
by qRT-PCR for LNCaP and MDA-MB-231 cells.
Western blot results displayed that CHK1 was activated
through phosphorylation at Ser345 after 24 h treatment of
MDA-MB-231 cells with EB. The maximum amount of
p-CHK1 was observed after 48 h treatment. Nevertheless,
it has been reported that CHK1 is dispensable in the
presence of a functional p21CIP1/WAF1 induction [77].
Transcription of TP53 and phosphorylation or
stabilization of p53 protein was not observed in treated
LNCaP cells but Ingenuity pathway analysis predicted
TP53 as an activated upstream regulator with a z-score
of 9.74 (data not shown). Moreover, TP53I3, which is
directly regulated by TP53 was 48-fold up-regulated
after treatment. In contrast, EB-treated MDA-MB-231
cells increased phosphorylation and total p53 protein in a
time dependent way. Phosphorylation of p53 at Ser15 is
mediated by ATM and CHK2 in response to DNA damage
[78]. Phosphorylation also occurs at Ser20 or Ser37 and
promotes the stabilization and activation of p53. Protein

Ascidians are a known source for compounds
that induce DSBs via inhibition of topoisomerase II
(topo II) [58]. TOPO II is an important enzyme that
participates in DNA replication, transcription and
chromosome condensation. It has the essential role of
regulating the uncoiling of DNA through catalyzing
transient breaks in the DNA duplex in an ATP-dependent
reaction to release topological stress. An in vitro assay for
TOPO II activity was carried out in order to determine
whether EB caused DNA damage by inhibiting TOPO II
[59]. EB was incubated with kinetoplast DNA (kDNA)
and TOPO II, and the decatenation activity of TOPO
II was analyzed by agarose gel electrophoresis (Figure
6C). EB strongly decreased the decatenation of kDNA
in a concentration-dependent manner, as judged by the
decreased levels of decatenated DNA and increased levels
of high molecular weight kDNA with low electrophoretic
mobility (Figure 6C). Interestingly, 50 µM of EB were
visibly more potent in inhibiting TOPO II than the
equimolar concentration of the known TOPO II poison
etoposide (Figure 6C). Next, the experiment was repeated
in a modified format to test for the presence of linear DNA
(covalently bound to TOPO II) which is a product of the
cleavage reaction and indicative that EB acted as a TOPO II
poison rather than a catalytic inhibitor. As shown in Figure
6C, this analysis demonstrated that, with increasing
inhibition of the decatenation reaction, EB generated
linearized DNA in a concentration-dependent manner
(Figure 6C), indicating that EB is a TOPO II poison.

DISCUSSION
We previously showed that EB displayed
cytotoxicity against MDA-MB-231 cells through
induction of apoptosis [3]. Here, we demonstrated that
EB significantly arrested MDA-MB-231 and LNCaP cells
in the G2 phase after 24 h in a time- and concentrationdependent manner. G2 arrest is regulated by the DNA
damage check point, which allows DNA repair by the
different repair systems before entering into mitosis
[60, 61]. The microarray results with LNCaP cells showed
that EB activated pathways related to DNA damage
and to G2/M check point regulation. EB-induced DNA
damage was confirmed by observations of increased
levels of γH2AX foci and a positive COMET assay after
4 h treatment in LNCaP and MDA-MB-231. DSBs can
have dangerous consequence for genomic stability and
cell survival when not repaired. They may be partly
recognized because of the destabilization of chromatin
structure, which activates homologous recombination
repair (HRR) or non-homologous end joining (NHEJ) as
part of the DNA damage response [62–64]. The reduction
in the number of DSBs in the breast cancer cell line after
a longer incubation period suggests that the DNA was
repaired. Nevertheless, this seemed not to have happened
in the LNCaP prostate cancer cell line. Gene expression
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

43953

Oncotarget

p53 is one of the inducers of the expression of p21CIP1/ WAF1
and GADD45A, which were both up-regulated in
LNCaP cells treated with EB as shown by microarray.
Nevertheless, the data presented here suggested that
the induction of p21CIP1/WAF1 and GADD45A in LNCaP

cells was p53-independent. Cell cycle arrest induced by
p21CIP1/WAF1 has been previously described by both p53dependent and independent pathways [79–81]. Apart
from the tumor suppressor p53, p21CIP1/WAF1 can also be
regulated by BRCA1 [82], CHK2 [83], and others.

Figure 6: EB inhibited topoisomerase II. (A) Fluorescent intercalator displacement assay. EB at the indicated concentrations was

added to reactions containing plasmid DNA and EtBr, and fluorescence of EtBr was measured (λext = 210 nm, λem = 600 nm) in a FLUOstar
Omega plate reader (n = 3, mean ± SD). DAPI at the indicated concentrations was used as a positive control for EtBr displacement.
Asterisks indicate statistical significant results with p*** < 0.001 and p* < 0.05 in a One-way ANOVA analysis. (B) DNA melting
temperature analysis. The temperature-dependent dissociation of SYBR® Green-stained double-stranded DNA in the presence of different
concentrations of EB (6.25, 12.5, 25, 50 and 100 µM) was monitored on an Applied Biosystems 7900HT Fast Real-Time PCR instrument.
DMSO and DAPI (0.12–1 µM) were used as controls. NCA, no compound added. The melting-curves shown are representatives of
three replicates. (C) Topoisomerase II-mediated decatenation of kDNA in the presence of EB. The indicated concentrations of EB were
incubated with topoisomerase II and kDNA, and reaction products were separated and visualized by agarose gel electrophoresis containing
EtBr. Etoposide, a topoisomerase II poison, was used as positive control. 0.1% DMSO was used as vehicle control. In the second gel
samples were reacted as described above, followed by proteinase K digestion, chloroform/isoamyl alcohol fractionation and agarose gel
electrophoresis. The gel was stained with SYBR® Safe. Dec, decatenated kDNA; Linear, linear DNA; Cat, catenated kDNA. For better
clarity, irrelevant lanes were removed from the image, as indicated by the gap.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

43954

Oncotarget

Despite the 5-fold down-regulation of CHEK2
observed by microarray in LNCaP cells, an increased
activation of CHK2 by phosphorylation at Thr68
was noticed. The same was observed in EB-treated
MDA-MB-231 cells. This activation is mediated by ATM
and induces CHK2 dimerization [84]. After intermolecular
phosphorylation, enzymatically active monomers
leave chromatin to phosphorylate different substrates;
including CDC25C that together with CHK1 leads to
cell cycle arrest at G2/M phase [85, 86]. CHK2's role in
G2/M arrest is not well defined. It is possible that CHK2
activation is redundant in the presence of other checkpoint
regulators [87]. CHK2 function could also be associated
in controlling other proteins involved in the cell cycle,
such as phosphorylating RB [88]. The CHK2 kinases
inactivate CDC25 via phosphorylation at Ser216, blocking
the activation of CDC2. The complex CDC2/CYCLIN B
is of fundamental importance to the progress from G2 into
mitosis. CDC2 is kept inactive during G2 phase through
phosphorylation at Thr14/15 by WEE1 and MYT1 protein
kinases [89–93]. The down-regulation of CDK1 (CDC2)
gene expression (19-fold) in LNCaP cells was confirmed
on the protein level by Western blot. After 24 h treatment
the expression levels of CDC2 decreased dramatically,
followed by loss of p-CDC2. In contrast, CDC2 protein
accumulated in EB-treated MDA-MB-231 cells. However,
this was accompanied by a greater increase in inhibitory
CDC2 phosphorylation, suggesting that CDC2 activity
overall was suppressed. Microarray and qRT-PCR showed
that the expression of CCNB1 (CYCLIN B) was downregulated in MDA-MB-231 and LNCaP cells. Thus, the
G2/M arrest after EB treatment of MDA-MB-231 cells
was induced ultimately by inactivation of cdc2 and downregulation of CYCLIN B, along with CHK1 activation and
p21 expression induced by p53 stabilization and activation.
Another contribution for the G2/M arrest in LNCaP cells
might have been GADD45A and GADD45G which were
up-regulated after EB treatment and have been shown to
inactivate CDC2/CYCLIN B kinase [94]. Thus, the results
indicated that EB induced G2 arrest in LNCaP cells by
down-regulation of CDC2 and CYCLIN B expression,
which was maintained through up-regulation of GADD45
and p21CIP1/WAF1.
Studies have shown that overexpression of
p21CIP1/WAF1 is related to induction of BAX and promotion
of apoptosis [95, 96]. Consistent with this, EB induced
apoptosis in the breast cancer cell line. Cell cycle
distribution of treated MDA-MB-231 cells revealed
an increase in the sub-G1 population, demonstrating
that EB induced cell death. EB-induced apoptosis in
MDA-MB-231 cells was confirmed by the detection of
PARP cleavage. Nevertheless, high levels of p21CIP1/WAF1
expression can also inhibit apoptosis through inhibition
of PROCASPASE 3 activity [97], stabilization of the
anti-apoptotic protein c-IAP1 [98], or down-regulation of
caspase-2 [99]. These anti-apoptotic effects of p21CIP1/WAF1
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

might explain why EB did not induce cell death in LNCaP
cells when treated for up to 10 days.
DSBs may be caused directly (replication/
transcription-independent) or indirectly (replication/
transcription-dependent) by cytotoxic compounds [68].
SSBs can become DSBs when a replication fork meets
a SSB [100]. Similarly, collisions of RNA polymerase
during transcription with TOPO II/DNA complexes
can cause DSBs [101]. The induction of DSBs and
activation of the DNA damage pathways by EB could
have been due to a direct interaction of EB with DNA,
such as binding or intercalation, induction of oxidative
stress response or inhibition/poison of topoisomerases.
EtBr displacement assay and DNA melting temperature
analysis strongly suggested that EB did not directly
interact with DNA. Instead, EB was found to inhibit
TOPO II activity in vitro and to stabilize the cleavage
complex. Microarray analysis showed that the expression
of TOP2A was down-regulated by 49-fold, whereas
transcription of the isoform TOP2B was only reduced
by 1.3-fold. While TOP2A is cell cycle regulated by
Rb and important for DNA synthesis and chromosome
segregation; [102, 103]. TOP2B is mainly involved in
transcription and has been shown to bind to the androgen
receptor [104]. Thus, our findings indicate that EB is a
topoisomerase II poison that, like etoposide, does not
directly interact with DNA [105, 106].
It has been shown that BRCA1 is necessary for
ubiquitination of topoisomerase IIα, which is correlated
with higher DNA decatenation activity. Decatenation of
chromatid arms happens before mitosis, while centromeric
catenations persist till metaphase/ anaphase [107, 108].
Any problem during this process activates the decatenation
G2 checkpoint signaling and can lead to G2 arrest in the
absence of DNA damage [109, 110]. Our results indicate
down-regulation of BRCA1, which could result in defective
DNA decatenation [111]. Hence, DSBs and inhibition of
chromatid decatenation caused by topo II poisoning might
have caused the G2 arrest in EB-treated cells.
Besides its cytotoxicity towards LNCaP and MDAMB-231, EB showed to be cytotoxic to the non-malignant
cell lines RWPE-1 and NFF. It is known that rapidly
proliferating cells, such as RWPE-1 and NFF, are more
sensitive to TOPO II inhibitors because they contain
high concentrations of topoisomerase II, especially the
α isoform [112–114]. Nevertheless, it has been reported
that intrinsic characteristics of the cell line can also affect
sensitivity to TOPO II catalytic inhibitors. For example,
researchers have found that BRCA1 mutant cells are more
sensitive to TOPO II catalytic inhibitors [18]. Moreover,
defects in the G2/M checkpoint that regulates cell cycle
by controlling the presence of catalytic TOPO II can also
affect cell sensitivity [115–117].
Natural products are still the main source of
topoisomerase II-targeting agents, and they usually
contain polycyclic, aromatic, or planar structures
43955

Oncotarget

and intercalate DNA [28]. EB was shown to be a nonintercalating topoisomerase II poison that arrests LNCaP
and MDA-MB-231 cells at the G2 phase. Similar results
were obtained with the treatment of MDA-MB-231 cells
with the topoisomerase IIα inhibitor CS1. CS1 was less
toxic than etoposide and showed potential anti-multidrug
resistance capabilities [118]. Further tests will determine
EB toxicity and its preference for topoisomerase IIα or β
isoform. Different strategies have been used to increase
the potency and selectivity of topoisomerase II-targeting
drugs. The development of compounds more specific
to the α isoform can reduce adverse effects such as,
cardiotoxicity and secondary malignancies. Another
approach is the use of different drug delivery systems (e.g.
polyethylene glycol and nanoparticles) to target tumors
while sparing normal tissues or increase drug activity
[119]. In order to increase the potency, drug combination
approaches have revealed positive results. The use of
PARP inhibitors are likely to be beneficial in specific
tumors, such as in BRCA1-positive breast cancer cells
[120]. Finally, combination treatment of doxorubicin with
microRNA-21 inhibitor resulted in increased expression
of tumor suppressor genes, increasing synergistically the
anti-cancer activity of doxorubicin towards glioma in vitro
[121].
In summary, our work shows that the natural product
eusynstyelamide B (EB) is a novel topoisomerase II poison
with comparable potency to the anti-cancer drug etoposide.
Our findings warrant further studies investigating the
efficacy of EB in various cancer models and potential
synergies with clinically used anti-cancer drugs.

cells were maintained in phenol-red free RPMI-1640
medium (Life Technologies) supplemented with 5%
fetal calf serum (FCS) (Life Technologies) at 37°C in an
atmosphere containing 5% CO2. MDA-MB-231 cells were
cultured in DMEM supplemented with 10% (v/v) FCS
(Life Technologies).

Live cell analysis with xCELLigence and
IncuCyte technologies
For real-time measurement of the cell index,
which is a composite figure of cell number, morphology
and adhesiveness, and computation of IC50, cells
were analyzed on a xCELLigence system (Roche) as
described previously.[122] LNCaP (1.0 × 104 cells per
well), NFF (1.8 × 103 cells per well) and RWPE-1 cells
(4.0 × 103 cells per well) cells were seeded in triplicate
in 96-well E-plates® for 24 h. Cells were treated with
the indicated concentrations of EB for 72 h, and the cell
index measured hourly for 96 h. Calculations of IC50
(72 h) from three independent experiments were
performed with GraphPad Prism (GraphPad Software).
For real-time live cell imaging, LNCaP cells were seeded
in 96-well plates at 4.0 × 103 cells per well and grown
to 20% confluence before addition of the indicated
concentrations of EB or tunicamycin (1 µg/mL). Growth
as a function of increasing confluence was monitored in
real-time by phase contrast microscopy with the IncuCyte
FLR system (Essen BioScience). Images were captured
with a 10 × objective at 2 h intervals from 3 separate
wells per treatment for 96 h, and mean ± SD of confluence
percentages was computed.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Cell cycle analysis

Reagents

LNCaP (2.0 × 105 cells per well) and MDA-MB-231
(1.0 × 105 cells per well) cells were seeded in a 6-well
plate for 24 h. For time course studies, cells were treated
with 2.5 µM EB (MDA-MB-231) or 5.0 µM EB (LNCaP)
for the indicated times. For the 10 day treatment with EB,
LNCaP cells (2.5 × 104) were treated with 5 µM EB for
72 h followed by periodic change of growth medium. For
dose titration studies, LNCaP and MDA-MB-231cells
were treated with the indicated concentrations of EB
for 72  h. Cells were processed, and DNA content was
analyzed by flow cytometry as described elsewhere [123].
The percentage of cells in each cell cycle phase was
calculated with ModFit LT (Verity Software House) based
on DNA histograms of 20,000 cells per treatment.
To calculate the mitotic index, LNCaP
(1.0 × 104 cells per well) and MDA-MB-231 (5.0 × 103
cells per well) cells were seeded in a 96-well plate for
24 h. Cells were treated with 5 µM EB, 0.1% DMSO or
83 nM nocodazole for 24 h. The cell culture medium was
removed, and cells were fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde
followed by incubation with blocking buffer (2% BSA

A stock solution of 10 mM EB was prepared
in DMSO (Sigma-Aldrich) and sonicated to provide
complete dissolution of the natural product. For cell
treatment, the stock solution was diluted to the desired
concentration in the appropriate complete cell culture
medium. Tunicamycin, etoposide, chloroquine, taxol,
and nocodazole were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich and
dissolved in DMSO. Doxorubicin (Sigma-Aldrich) was
dissolved in water.

Antibodies
The antibodies used in this study are described in
Supplementary Table S3.

Cell culture
LNCaP and MDA-MB-231 cells were obtained
from the American Type Cell Culture Collection. LNCaP
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

43956

Oncotarget

Western blotting

in PBS). Cells were then reacted with anti-phosphohistone H3 (Ser10, 1:100, Abcam) overnight, and DNA
counter stained with DAPI (1:500, Life Technologies)
and Alexa Fluor® 568 donkey anti-rabbit IgG (1:500, Life
Technologies). Samples were analyzed using the highcontent screening machine Operetta (PerkinElmer). The
mitotic index was calculated with Harmony® software
(PerkinElmer). Statistical significance (n = 3, mean ±
SD) was analyzed with GraphPad Prism (GraphPad
Software) by one-way ANOVA with Dunnett’s multiple
comparison test.

LNCaP (1.5 × 105 cells per well) and
MDA-MB-231 (5.0 × 104 cells) were seeded in a 6-well
plate and treated for the indicated times with 5.0 and
2.5 µM EB, respectively. As positive controls, cells
were treated with doxorubicin (1 µM, 48 h), etoposide
(25 µM, 24 h), chloroquine (25 µM, 48 h), taxol
(2 nM, 24 h), or nocodazole (83 nM, 24 h). 0.1%
DMSO was used as vehicle control. At the end of the
treatment, cells were harvested and lyzed with lysis
buffer containing protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche) and
phosphatase inhibitors [124, 125]. Protein concentration
was determined through a bicinchoninic protein assay
(BCA assay, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Thirty micrograms
of protein lysates per well were loaded onto a NuPAGE®
4–12% Bis-Tris Gel (Life Technologies) and transferred
to a nitrocellulose membrane by wet transfer. After
primary antibodies and secondary HRP conjugated
secondary antibody incubation (Table S4), membranes
were developed with a chemiluminescent HRP Substrate
(Immobilon Merck Millipore). Beta-ACTIN was used
as a loading control. Protein signals were quantified
using Image Lab™ software (Bio-Rad), normalized to the
respective loading control, and expressed relative to the
control treatment. Phosphorylation levels were calculated
relative to the normalized total amount of the respective
protein.

Microarray gene expression profiling
For sample preparation, LNCaP cells were seeded at
a density of 2.0 × 105 cells per well in a 6-well plate. After
24 h, cells were treated with 5 µM EB or 0.1% DMSO
for 24 h. Triplicates of each condition were prepared for
microarray profiling as previously described [124].
The microarray raw data were processed using
the Agilent Feature Extraction Software (v10.7) as
described elsewhere [124]. Genes that were significantly
different between two groups were identified with an
adjusted p-value of ≤ 0.05, and an average fold change of 
≥ 1.5. The gene expression data have been submitted to
Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) with the accession
number GSE74212. The filtered gene lists were examined
by Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA, Ingenuity Systems
Inc.) for functional annotation and gene network analysis.

DNA damage analysis
For quantitative analysis of γH2AX foci formation
by fluorescence microscopy, LNCaP (6.0 × 104 cells per
well) and MDA-MB-231 cells (3.0 × 104 cells per well)
were seeded on glass coverslips (coated with poly-lornithine for LNCaP) in a CO2 humidified incubator for
24 h. Cells were treated with 0.1% DMSO, 5.0 µM EB,
or 1.0 µM doxorubicin for the indicated times. Cells
were fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde (Sigma-Aldrich)
and stained as described previously with some minor
modifications.[126] Cells were probed with anti-phosphohistone H2AX (Ser139) antibody (1:500, Merck KGaA)
at 4°C overnight, followed by Alexa Fluor® 488 goat
anti-mouse IgG (1:500, Life Technologies) and DNA
counterstaining with DAPI (1:500, Life Technologies).
γH2AX foci were imaged with a DeltaVision microscope
(GE Healthcare) and counted with MetaMorth software
(Molecular Devices). A minimum of 100 cells were
analyzed per sample.
For the analysis of DNA damage by neutral
comet assay, LNCaP (2.0 × 105 cells per well) and
MDA-MB-231 (1.0 × 105 cells per well) were seeded in
a 6-well plate for 24 h. Cells were treated with 5.0 µM
EB, 1.0 µM doxorubicin or 0.1% DMSO for the indicated
times. The assay was performed as described previously
with minor modifications [127]. Briefly, cells were

Quantitative real time polymerase chain reaction
(qRT-PCR)
LNCaP (2.0 × 105) and MDA-MB-231 (1.0 × 105)
cells were seeded in a 6-well plate for 24 h and treated
with 5 µM EB or 0.1% DMSO for 24 h. Total RNA was
obtained using the RNeasy mini kit (Qiagen) according
to the manufacturer’s instructions. The quantity and the
quality of the RNA were measured using a Nano-drop UV
spectrophotometer (ThermoFisher Scientific). The samples
were treated with DNAse I (Life Technologies), and cDNA
was prepared from 2.0 µg total RNA with Superscript III
(Life Technologies). Quantitative real-time PCR (qRTPCR) was performed with SYBR Green PCR Master
Mix (Life Technologies) on a 7900HT Fast PCR System
(Applied Biosystems). Data were analyzed with SDS2.3
software (Applied Biosystems). mRNA expression levels
were calculated by the ∆∆Ct method and normalized
relative to the expression levels of the house keeping gene
(RPL32) of the respective treatment and calculated relative
to the vehicle control (DMSO). Statistical significance
(n = 3, mean ± SD) was analyzed with GraphPad Prism
(GraphPad Software) by Student's t test. The sequences of
the primers used are listed in the Supporting Information
(Table S4).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

43957

Oncotarget

washed once with DPBS (Invitrogen) and harvested to
obtain a single cell suspension of 1.0 × 106 cells/mL in 1x
Tris-borate-EDTA (TBE, 89 mM Tris Base, 89 mM Boric
acid, 2 mM EDTA). Approximately 4.0 × 103 cells were
suspended into 150 μl of 0.6% low melting-point agarose
(Sigma-Aldrich) and 60 μl of this mixture was applied onto
each well of a COMET slide (Trivigen Inc). Slides were
then placed on a cold surface (4°C) for 10 min followed by
immersion in ice cold lysis buffer (2.5 M NaCl, 100 mM
EDTA, 10 mM Tris, 1% Triton-X-100; pH 10) overnight.
Slides were washed in 100 mL of 1 × TBE for 15 min at
4°C. After removing excess salts with 1 × TBE, slides were
placed in an electrophoresis tank (BioRad) containing
1 × TBE buffer. Electrophoresis was performed for
30 min at 70 V and 90 mA by adjusting the height of the
buffer. After the completion of electrophoresis, slides were
immersed in distilled water for 5 min followed by 5 min
incubation in 70% ethanol. Slides were then incubated at
45°C for about 10 min and left to cool down at RT. 100 μl
of DAPI (1 μg/mL) we added onto each well and incubated
at 4°C for 5 min. Excess DAPI was removed and slides
were scanned using an epifluorescence microscope (Nikon
Eclipse) equipped with a 10 × objective. One hundred
comets in each sample were scored using the COMET
Score software (TriTek Corp). Statistical significance
(mean ± SD) was analyzed with GraphPad Prism
(GraphPad Software) by one-way ANOVA with Dunnett’s
multiple comparison test.

Thermal profiles were analyzed with SDS 2.4 software
(Applied Biosystems).

DNA interaction studies

Michelle S. Liberio is grateful for a PhD scholarship
provided by the Eskitis Institute and Griffith University.

Topoisomerase II assay
The topoisomerase II-mediated decatenation of
kinetoplast DNA in the presence of EB (25-100 µM),
etoposide (25-100 µM), or DMSO as vehicle control
was carried out using the kDNA based Topoisomerase
II Drug Screening kit (TopoGen) as described by the
manufacturer. Samples were separated on a 1% (w/v)
agarose gel by electrophoresis for 30 min at 100 V and
visualized by EtBr staining under UV light with a Quantum
ST4 (Vilber Lourmat) gel documentation system. To
detect the linear DNA intermediate of the topoisomerase
II reaction, samples were prepared and reacted as
described above followed by proteinase K treatment
(50 µg/mL, Sigma-Aldrich) for 15 min at 37°C. DNA
was extracted by chloroform/isoamyl alcohol extraction
(24:1, Sigma-Aldrich) before electrophoresis on a 1% (w/v)
agarose gel containing SYBR® Safe (Life Technologies).

Appendix A. supplementary material
The following are supplementary material related to
this article.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

An EtBr displacement assay was performed to
identify the ability of EB to intercalate with DNA.
As a positive control, increasing concentrations of the
DNA intercalator DAPI (0.04–360 µM) were tested.
Increasing concentrations of EB (6.25–50 µM) were
incubated with 2.5 µg plasmid DNA in the presence of
1.3 µM EtBr in a 96-well plate completed with TE buffer
(10 mM Tris-Cl, pH 7.5 and 1 mM EDTA) to a final
volume of 100 µl. Controls consisted of the individual
reaction components (EtBr, DNA, and EB) and EtBr
mixed with DNA. Each sample was set up in triplicate,
and fluorescence was measured in a FLUOstar Omega
plate reader (BMG Labtech) with an excitation at 530 nm
and emission recorded at 605 nm. Readings were corrected
for background fluorescence.
To study DNA binding of EB, increasing
concentrations of EB (6.25 – 100 µM), DMSO (0.1%),
or DAPI (0.12–1.00 µM) were added in triplicate to a
completed qRT-PCR reaction run with SYBR® Green
PCR Master Mix (Life Technologies) containing a 151
bp PCR product of the RPL32 gene. Melting curves
were generated with an Abi 7900HT qRT-PCR machine
(Applied Biosystems) using the protocol: 50°C 2 min,
95°C 15 s, 60°C 15 s, and 95°C 15 s with data recording
of the temperature gradient between 60°C and 95°C.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

FUNDING SUPPORT
This study was supported by the Movember
Foundation and the Prostate Cancer Foundation of
Australia through a Movember Revolutionary Team
Award; and the Australian Government Department of
Health. The authors acknowledge the National Health and
Medical Research Council (NHMRC) for financial support
(Grant APP1024314 to R.A.D) and thank the Australian
Research Council (ARC) for support towards NMR and
MS equipment (Grant LE0668477 and LE0237908) and
financial support (Grant LP120200339 to R.A.D.).

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

REFERENCES
  1.	 Khokhar S, Feng Y, Campitelli MR, Ekins MG, Hooper JN,
Beattie KD, Sadowski MC, Nelson CC, Davis RA.
Isolation, structure determination and cytotoxicity studies
of tryptophan alkaloids from an Australian marine sponge
Hyrtios sp. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2014; 24:3329–3332.
43958

Oncotarget

  2.	 Levrier C, Sadowski MC, Nelson CC, Healy PC, Davis RA.
Denhaminols A-H, dihydro-beta-agarofurans from the
endemic Australian rainforest plant Denhamia celastroides.
J Nat Prod. 2015; 78:111–119.

17.	 van Hille B, Etievant C, Barret JM, Kruczynski A, Hill BT.
Characterization of the biological and biochemical activities
of F 11782 and the bisdioxopiperazines, ICRF-187 and
ICRF-193, two types of topoisomerase II catalytic inhibitors
with distinctive mechanisms of action. Anticancer Drugs.
2000; 11:829–841.

  3.	 Liberio MS, Sadowski MC, Nelson CC, Davis RA.
Identification of eusynstyelamide B as a potent cell cycle
inhibitor following the generation and screening of an
ascidian-derived extract library using a real time cell
analyzer. Mar Drugs. 2014; 12:5222–5239.

18.	 Chene P, Rudloff J, Schoepfer J, Furet P, Meier P, Qian Z,
Schlaeppi JM, Schmitz R, Radimerski T. Catalytic
inhibition of topoisomerase II by a novel rationally designed
ATP-competitive purine analogue. BMC chemical biology.
2009; 9:1.

4.	 Dias N, Vezin H, Lansiaux A, Bailly C. Topoisomerase
inhibitors of marine origin and their potential use
as anticancer agents. In: Waring M and Chaires J,
eds. DNA Binders and Related Subjects: Springer Berlin
Heidelberg, 2005; pp. 89–108.

19.	 Wang JC. Cellular roles of DNA topoisomerases: a
molecular perspective. Nature Reviews Molecular Cell
Biology. 2002; 3:430–440.

  5.	 Lu Y, Mahato RI. (2009). Pharmaceutical perspectives of
cancer therapeutics. (Dordrecht; New York. Arlington,
Va.: Springer; AAPS Press).

20.	 Deweese JE, Osheroff N. The DNA cleavage reaction of
topoisomerase II: wolf in sheep’s clothing. Nucleic Acids
Res. 2009; 37:738–748.

  6.	 Fabi A, Moscetti L, Ciccarese M, Caramanti M, Salesi N,
Verde NL, Russillo M, Generali D, Scandurra G, Vari S,
Pacetti U, Cognetti F, Giannarelli D. Eribulin in
heavily pretreated metastatic breast cancer patients and
clinical/biological feature correlations: impact on the
practice. Future Oncol. 2015; 11:431–438.

21.	 Ketron AC, Osheroff N. Phytochemicals as anticancer and
chemopreventive topoisomerase II poisons. Phytochem
Rev. 2014; 13:19–35.

  7.	 Jordan K, Jahn F, Jordan B, Kegel T, Muller-Tidow C,
Russel J. Trabectedin: Supportive care strategies and safety
profile. Crit Rev Oncol Hematol. 2015; 94:279–90.

23.	 Zhang S, Liu X, Bawa-Khalfe T, Lu LS, Lyu YL, Liu LF,
Yeh ET. Identification of the molecular basis of doxorubicininduced cardiotoxicity. Nat Med. 2012; 18:1639–1642.

22.	 Pendleton M, Lindsey RH, Jr., Felix CA, Grimwade D,
Osheroff N. Topoisomerase II and leukemia. Ann N Y Acad
Sci. 2014; 1310:98–110.

  8.	 Roque DM, Ratner ES, Silasi DA, Azodi M, Rutherford TJ,
Schwartz PE, Nelson WK, Santin AD. Weekly ixabepilone
with or without biweekly bevacizumab in the treatment
of recurrent or persistent uterine and ovarian/primary
peritoneal/fallopian tube cancers: A retrospective review.
Gynecol Oncol. 2015; 137:392–400.

24.	 Cowell IG, Sondka Z, Smith K, Lee KC, Manville CM,
Sidorczuk-Lesthuruge M, Rance HA, Padget K, Jackson GH,
Adachi N, Austin CA. Model for MLL translocations in
therapy-related leukemia involving topoisomerase IIbetamediated DNA strand breaks and gene proximity. Proc Natl
Acad Sci U S A. 2012; 109:8989–8994.

  9.	 Nitiss JL. Targeting DNA topoisomerase II in cancer
chemotherapy. Nat Rev Cancer. 2009; 9:338–350.

25.	 Toyoda E, Kagaya S, Cowell IG, Kurosawa A, Kamoshita K,
Nishikawa K, Iiizumi S, Koyama H, Austin CA, Adachi N.
NK314, a topoisomerase II inhibitor that specifically targets
the α isoform. J Biol Chem. 2008; 283:23711–23720.

10.	 Pommier Y. Drugging topoisomerases: lessons and
challenges. ACS Chem Biol. 2013; 8:82–95.
11.	 Champoux JJ. DNA topoisomerases: Structure, function,
and mechanism. Annu Rev Biochem. 2001; 70:369–413.

26.	 Du L, Liu HC, Fu W, Li DH, Pan QM, Zhu TJ, Geng MY,
Gu QQ. Unprecedented citrinin trimer tricitinol B functions
as a novel topoisomerase IIalpha inhibitor. J Med Chem.
2011; 54:5796–5810.

12.	 Pommier Y, Leo E, Zhang H, Marchand C. DNA
topoisomerases and their poisoning by anticancer and
antibacterial drugs. Chem Biol. 2010; 17:421–433.

27.	 Yalowich JC, Wu X, Zhang R, Kanagasabai R, Hornbaker M,
Hasinoff BB. The anticancer thiosemicarbazones Dp44mT
and triapine lack inhibitory effects as catalytic inhibitors
or poisons of DNA topoisomerase IIalpha. Biochem
Pharmacol. 2012; 84:52–58.

13.	 Nitiss JL. DNA topoisomerase II and its growing repertoire
of biological functions. Nat Rev Cancer. 2009; 9:327–337.
14.	 Burden DA, Osheroff N. Mechanism of action of eukaryotic
topoisomerase II and drugs targeted to the enzyme.
Biochimica et Biophysica Acta (BBA) - Gene Structure and
Expression. 1998; 1400:139–154.

28.	 Chen W, Qiu J, Shen YM. Topoisomerase IIalpha, rather
than IIbeta, is a promising target in development of
anti-cancer drugs. Drug Discov Ther. 2012; 6:230–237.

15.	 Ju BG, Lunyak VV, Perissi V, Garcia-Bassets I, Rose DW,
Glass CK, Rosenfeld MG. A topoisomerase IIbeta-mediated
dsDNA break required for regulated transcription. Science.
2006; 312:1798–1802.

29.	 Hendzel MJ, Wei Y, Mancini MA, Van Hooser A, Ranalli T,
Brinkley BR, Bazett-Jones DP, Allis CD. Mitosis-specific
phosphorylation of histone H3 initiates primarily within
pericentromeric heterochromatin during G2 and spreads
in an ordered fashion coincident with mitotic chromosome
condensation. Chromosoma. 1997; 106:348–360.

16.	 Froelich-Ammon SJ, Osheroff N. Topoisomerase poisons:
harnessing the dark side of enzyme mechanism. J Biol
Chem. 1995; 270:21429–21432.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

43959

Oncotarget

30.	 Yang Z, Kenny AE, Brito DA, Rieder CL. Cells satisfy
the mitotic checkpoint in Taxol, and do so faster in
concentrations that stabilize syntelic attachments. J Cell
Biol. 2009; 186:675–684.

46.	 Kuo LJ, Yang LX. Gamma-H2AX - a novel biomarker for
DNA double-strand breaks. In vivo. 2008; 22:305–309.
47.	 Collins AR. The comet assay for DNA damage and repair:
principles, applications, and limitations. Mol Biotechnol.
2004; 26:249–261.

31.	 Jordan MA, Thrower D, Wilson L. Effects of vinblastine,
podophyllotoxin and nocodazole on mitotic spindles.
Implications for the role of microtubule dynamics in
mitosis. J Cell Sci. 1992; 102:401–416.

48.	 Olive PL, Banath JP. The comet assay: a method to measure
DNA damage in individual cells. Nat Protocols. 2006;
1:23–29.

32.	 Bodley A, Liu LF, Israel M, Seshadri R, Koseki Y,
Giuliani FC, Kirschenbaum S, Silber R, Potmesil M. DNA
topoisomerase II-mediated interaction of doxorubicin and
daunorubicin congeners with DNA. Cancer Res. 1989;
49:5969–5978.

49.	 Morgan AR, Lee JS, Pulleyblank DE, Murray NL, Evans DH.
Review: ethidium fluorescence assays. Part 1.
Physicochemical stu dies. Nucleic Acids Res. 1979;
7:547–569.
50.	 Latimer LJ, Lee JS. Ethidium bromide does not fluoresce
when intercalated adjacent to 7-deazaguanine in duplex
DNA. J Biol Chem. 1991; 266:13849–13851.

33.	 Farshori PQ, Goode D. Effects of the microtubule
depolymerizing and stabilizing agents nocodazole and
taxol on glucose-induced insulin secretion from hamster
islet tumor (HIT) cells. J Submicrosc Cytol Pathol.
1994; 26:137–146.
34.	 Mizushima N, Yoshimori T, Levine B. Methods in
mammalian autophagy research. Cell. 2010; 140:313–326.
35.	 Connell-Crowley L, Harper JW, Goodrich DW. Cyclin
D1/Cdk4 regulates retinoblastoma protein-mediated cell
cycle arrest by site-specific phosphorylation. Mol Biol Cell.
1997; 8:287–301.
36.	 Knudsen ES, Wang JY. Differential regulation
of retinoblastoma protein function by specific
Cdk phosphorylation sites. J Biol Chem. 1996; 271:
8313–8320.
37.	 DelSal G, Loda M, Pagano M. Cell cycle and cancer:
critical events at the G1 restriction point. Crit Rev Oncog.
1996; 7:127–142.

51.	 Bueren-Calabuig JA, Giraudon C, Galmarini CM, Egly JM,
Gago F. Temperature-induced melting of double-stranded
DNA in the absence and presence of covalently bonded
antitumour drugs: insight from molecular dynamics
simulations. Nucleic Acids Res. 2011; 39:8248–8257.
52.	 González-Ruiz V, Olives AI, Martín MA, Ribelles P, Ramos
MT, Menéndez JC. (2011). An Overview of Analytical
Techniques Employed to Evidence Drug-DNA Interactions.
Applications to the Design of Genosensors. (INTECH:
Biomedical Engineering, Trends, Research and Technologies).
53.	 Wienken CJ, Baaske P, Duhr S, Braun D. Thermophoretic
melting curves quantify the conformation and stability of
RNA and DNA. Nucleic Acids Res. 2011; 39:e52.
54.	 Musso M, Bocciardi R, Parodi S, Ravazzolo R, Ceccherini I.
Betaine, dimethyl sulfoxide, and 7-deaza-dGTP, a powerful
mixture for amplification of GC-rich DNA sequences. J Mol
Diagn. 2006; 8:544–550.
55.	 Gudnason H, Dufva M, Bang DD, Wolff A. Comparison
of multiple DNA dyes for real-time PCR: effects of
dye concentration and sequence composition on DNA
amplification and melting temperature. Nucleic Acids Re.
2007; 35:e127.
56.	 Ririe KM, Rasmussen RP, Wittwer CT. Product
differentiation by analysis of DNA melting curves during
the polymerase chain reaction. Anal Biochem. 1997;
245:154–160.
57.	 Kapuscinski J, Skoczylas B. Fluorescent complexes of
DNA with DAPI 4‘,6-diamidine-2-phenyl indole.2HCl or
DCI 4‘,6-dicarboxyamide-2-phenyl indole. Nucleic Acids
Res. 1978; 5:3775–3799.
58.	 Menna M, Fattorusso E, Imperatore C. Alkaloids from
marine ascidians. Molecules. 2011; 16:8694–8732.
59.	 Gardner L, Malik R, Shimizu Y, Mullins N, ElShamy W.
Geminin overexpression prevents the completion of
topoisomerase IIalpha chromosome decatenation, leading
to aneuploidy in human mammary epithelial cells. Breast
Cancer Res. 2011; 13:R53.
60.	 Lowndes NF, Murguia JR. Sensing and responding to DNA
damage. Curr Opin Genet Dev. 2000; 10:17–25.

38.	 Bartek J, Bartkova J, Lukas J. The retinoblastoma protein
pathway and the restriction point. Curr Opin Cell Biol.
1996; 8:805–814.
39.	 Lavin MF, Gueven N. The complexity of p53 stabilization
and activation. Cell Death Differ. 2006; 13:941–950.
40.	 Li J, Stern DF. Regulation of CHK2 by DNA-dependent
protein kinase. J Biol Chem. 2005; 280:12041–12050.
41.	 Uto K, Inoue D, Shimuta K, Nakajo N, Sagata N. Chk1, but
not Chk2, inhibits Cdc25 phosphatases by a novel common
mechanism. EMBO J. 2004; 23:3386–3396.
42.	 Norbury C, Blow J, Nurse P. Regulatory phosphorylation
of the p34cdc2 protein kinase in vertebrates. EMBO J.
1991; 10:3321–3329.
43.	 Atherton-Fessler S, Liu F, Gabrielli B, Lee MS, Peng CY,
Piwnica-Worms H. Cell cycle regulation of the p34cdc2
inhibitory kinases. Mol Biol Cell. 1994; 5:989–1001.
44.	 Wells NJ, Watanabe N, Tokusumi T, Jiang W, Verdecia MA,
Hunter T. The C-terminal domain of the Cdc2 inhibitory
kinase Myt1 interacts with Cdc2 complexes and is required
for inhibition of G(2)/M progression. J Cell Sci. 1999;
112 :3361–3371.
45.	 Cmielova J, Rezacova M. p21Cip1/Waf1 protein and its function
based on a subcellular localization. J Cell Biochem.
2011; 112:3502–3506.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

43960

Oncotarget

61.	 Abraham RT. Cell cycle checkpoint signaling through the
ATM and ATR kinases. Genes Dev. 2001; 15:2177–2196.
62.	 Kinner A, Wu W, Staudt C, Iliakis G. γ-H2AX in recognition
and signaling of DNA double-strand breaks in the context of
chromatin. Nucleic Acids Res. 2008; 36:5678–5694.

and mediates reversible growth arrest in human fibroblasts.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1995; 92:8493–8497.
80.	 Dvory-Sobol H, Cohen-Noyman E, Kazanov D, Figer A,
Birkenfeld S, Madar-Shapiro L, Benamouzig R, Arber N.
Celecoxib leads to G2/M arrest by induction of p21
and down-regulation of cyclin B1 expression in a p53independent manner. Eur J Cancer. 2006; 42:422–426.

63.	 Scott SP, Pandita TK. The cellular control of DNA doublestrand breaks. J Cell Biochem. 2006; 99:1463–1475.

81.	 Han J, Kim S, Yang JH, Nam SJ, Lee JE. TPA-induced
p21 expression augments G2/M arrest through a p53independent mechanism in human breast cancer cells.
Oncol Rep. 2012; 27:517–522.

64.	 Featherstone C, Jackson SP. DNA double-strand break
repair. Curr Biol. 1999; 9:R759–761.
65.	 Bassing CH, Alt FW. The cellular response to general and
programmed DNA double strand breaks. DNA repair. 2004;
3:781–796.

82.	 Somasundaram K, El-Deiry WS. Inhibition of p53mediated transactivation and cell cycle arrest by E1A
through its p300/CBP-interacting region. Oncogene.
1997; 14:1047–1057.

66.	 Hefferin ML, Tomkinson AE. Mechanism of DNA doublestrand break repair by non-homologous end joining. DNA
repair. 2005; 4:639–648.

83.	 Aliouat-Denis CM, Dendouga N, Van den Wyngaert I,
Goehlmann H, Steller U, van de Weyer I, Van Slycken N,
Andries L, Kass S, Luyten W, Janicot M, Vialard JE. p53independent regulation of p21Waf1/Cip1 expression and
senescence by Chk2. Mol Cancer Res. 2005; 3:627–634.

67.	 Longley DB, Johnston PG. Molecular mechanisms of drug
resistance. J Pathol. 2005; 205:275–292.
68.	 Zhu Y, Hu J, Hu Y, Liu W. Targeting DNA repair pathways:
a novel approach to reduce cancer therapeutic resistance.
Cancer Treat Rev. 2009; 35:590–596.

84.	 Matsuoka S, Huang M, Elledge SJ. Linkage of ATM to cell
cycle regulation by the Chk2 protein kinase. Science. 1998;
282:1893–1897.

69.	 Madhusudan S, Hickson ID. DNA repair inhibition: a
selective tumour targeting strategy. Trends Mol Med. 2005;
11:503–511.

85.	 Ahn JY, Li X, Davis HL, Canman CE. Phosphorylation
of threonine 68 promotes oligomerization and
autophosphorylation of the Chk2 protein kinase
via the forkhead-associated domain. J Biol Chem.
2002; 277:19389–19395.

70.	 Middleton MR, Margison GP. Improvement of
chemotherapy efficacy by inactivation of a DNA-repair
pathway. Lancet Oncol. 2003; 4:37–44.
71.	 Smith J, Tho LM, Xu N, Gillespie DA. The ATM-Chk2 and
ATR-Chk1 pathways in DNA damage signaling and cancer.
Adv Cancer Res. 2010; 108:73–112.

86.	 Li J, Stern DF. DNA damage regulates Chk2 association
with chromatin. J Biol Chem. 2005; 280:37948–37956.
87.	 Meng S, Arbit T, Veeriah S, Mellinghoff IK, Fang F,
Vivanco I, Rohle D, Chan TA. 14-3-3sigma and p21
synergize to determine DNA damage response following
Chk2 inhibition. Cell cycle. 2009; 8:2238–2246.
88.	 Inoue Y, Kitagawa M, Taya Y. Phosphorylation of pRB at
Ser612 by Chk1/2 leads to a complex between pRB and
E2F-1 after DNA damage. EMBO J. 2007; 26:2083–2093.
89.	 Elledge SJ. Cell cycle checkpoints: preventing an identity
crisis. Science. 1996; 274:1664–1672.
90.	 Peng CY, Graves PR, Thoma RS, Wu Z, Shaw AS, PiwnicaWorms H. Mitotic and G2 checkpoint control: regulation of
14-3-3 protein binding by phosphorylation of Cdc25C on
serine-216. Science. 1997; 277:1501–1505.
91.	 Sanchez Y, Wong C, Thoma RS, Richman R, Wu Z, PiwnicaWorms H, Elledge SJ. Conservation of the Chk1 checkpoint
pathway in mammals: linkage of DNA damage to Cdk
regulation through Cdc25. Science. 1997; 277:1497–1501.
92.	 Weinert T. A DNA damage checkpoint meets the cell cycle
engine. Science. 1997; 277:1450–1451.
93.	 Bulavin DV, Higashimoto Y, Demidenko ZN, Meek S,
Graves P, Phillips C, Zhao H, Moody SA, Appella E,
Piwnica-Worms H, Fornace AJ, Jr. Dual phosphorylation
controls Cdc25 phosphatases and mitotic entry. Nat Cell
Biol. 2003; 5:545–551.

72.	 Harper JW, Elledge SJ. The DNA damage response:
ten years after. Mol Cell. 2007; 28:739–745.
73.	 Kops GJ, Weaver BA, Cleveland DW. On the road to
cancer: aneuploidy and the mitotic checkpoint. Nat Rev
Cancer. 2005; 5:773–785.
74.	 Xu N, Libertini S, Black EJ, Lao Y, Hegarat N, Walker M,
Gillespie DA. Cdk-mediated phosphorylation of Chk1 is
required for efficient activation and full checkpoint proficiency
in response to DNA damage. Oncogene. 2012; 31:1086–1094.
75.	 Dai Y, Grant S. New insights into checkpoint kinase 1 in the
DNA damage response signaling network. Clin Cancer Res.
2010; 16:376–383.
76.	 Massague J. G1 cell-cycle control and cancer. Nature. 2004;
432:298–306.
77.	 Lossaint G, Besnard E, Fisher D, Piette J, Dulic V. Chk1
is dispensable for G2 arrest in response to sustained DNA
damage when the ATM/p53/p21 pathway is functional.
Oncogene. 2011; 30:4261–4274.
78.	 Zhao H, Traganos F, Darzynkiewicz Z. Phosphorylation of
p53 on Ser15 during cell cycle caused by Topo I and Topo
II inhibitors in relation to ATM and Chk2 activation. Cell
cycle. 2008; 7:3048–3055.
79.	 Agarwal ML, Agarwal A, Taylor WR, Stark GR. p53
controls both the G2/M and the G1 cell cycle checkpoints
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

43961

Oncotarget

94.	 Zhan Q, Antinore MJ, Wang XW, Carrier F, Smith ML, Harris CC,
Fornace AJ, Jr. Association with Cdc2 and inhibition of Cdc2/
Cyclin B1 kinase activity by the p53-regulated protein Gadd45.
Oncogene. 1999; 18:2892–2900.
95.	 Kang KH, Kim WH, Choi KH. p21 promotes ceramideinduced apoptosis and antagonizes the antideath effect
of Bcl-2 in human hepatocarcinoma cells. Exp Cell Res.
1999; 253:403–412.

107.	Diaz-Martinez LA, Gimenez-Abian JF, Azuma Y, Guacci V,
Gimenez-Martin G, Lanier LM, Clarke DJ. PIASgamma
is required for faithful chromosome segregation in human
cells. PLoS One. 2006; 1:e53.
108.	Santamaria A, Neef R, Eberspacher U, Eis K, Husemann M,
Mumberg D, Prechtl S, Schulze V, Siemeister G,
Wortmann L, Barr FA, Nigg EA. Use of the novel Plk1
inhibitor ZK-thiazolidinone to elucidate functions of
Plk1 in early and late stages of mitosis. Mol Biol Cell.
2007; 18:4024–4036.

96.	 Gartel AL, Tyner AL. The role of the cyclin-dependent
kinase inhibitor p21 in apoptosis. Mol Cancer Ther.
2002; 1:639–649.

109.	Bower JJ, Karaca GF, Zhou Y, Simpson DA,
Cordeiro-Stone M, Kaufmann WK. Topoisomerase IIalpha
maintains genomic stability through decatenation G(2)
checkpoint signaling. Oncogene. 2010; 29:4787–4799.

97.	 Suzuki A, Tsutomi Y, Akahane K, Araki T, Miura M.
Resistance to Fas-mediated apoptosis: activation of caspase 3
is regulated by cell cycle regulator p21WAF1 and IAP gene
family ILP. Oncogene. 1998; 17:931–939.

110.	Skoufias DA, Lacroix FB, Andreassen PR, Wilson L,
Margolis RL. Inhibition of DNA decatenation, but not
DNA damage, arrests cells at metaphase. Mol Cell.
2004; 15:977–990.

98.	 Steinman RA, Johnson DE. p21WAF1 prevents downmodulation of the apoptotic inhibitor protein c-IAP1
and inhibits leukemic apoptosis. Mol Med. 2000;
6:736–749.

111.	Tominaga Y, Wang A, Wang RH, Wang X, Cao L, Deng CX.
Genistein inhibits Brca1 mutant tumor growth through
activation of DNA damage checkpoints, cell cycle
arrest, and mitotic catastrophe. Cell Death Differ.
2007; 14:472–479.

99.	 Baptiste-Okoh N, Barsotti AM, Prives C. Caspase 2 is both
required for p53-mediated apoptosis and downregulated
by p53 in a p21-dependent manner. Cell cycle.
2008; 7:1133–1138.

112.	Heck MM, Earnshaw WC. Topoisomerase II: A
specific marker for cell proliferation. J Cell Biol.
1986; 103:2569–2581.

100.	Saleh-Gohari N, Bryant HE, Schultz N, Parker KM,
Cassel TN, Helleday T. Spontaneous homologous
recombination is induced by collapsed replication forks that
are caused by endogenous DNA single-strand breaks. Mol
Cell Biol. 2005; 25:7158–7169.

113.	Sullivan DM, Latham MD, Ross WE. Proliferationdependent Topoisomerase II Content as a Determinant
of Antineoplastic Drug Action in Human, Mouse,
and Chinese Hamster Ovary Cells. Cancer Res. 1987;
47:3973–3979.

101.	Wu J, Liu LF. Processing of topoisomerase I cleavable
complexes into DNA damage by transcription. Nucleic
Acids Res. 1997; 25:4181–4186.

114.	Burgess DJ, Doles J, Zender L, Xue W, Ma B,
McCombie WR, Hannon GJ, Lowe SW, Hemann MT.
Topoisomerase levels determine chemotherapy response
in vitro and in vivo. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008;
105:9053–9058.

102.	Isaacs RJ, Davies SL, Sandri MI, Redwood C,
Wells NJ, Hickson ID. Physiological regulation of
eukaryotic topoisomerase II. Biochim Biophys Acta.
1998; 1400:121–137.
103.	Tamaichi H, Sato M, Porter ACG, Shimizu T, Mizutani S,
Takagi M. Ataxia telangiectasia mutated-dependent
regulation of topoisomerase II alpha expression and
sensitivity to topoisomerase II inhibitor. Cancer Science.
2013; 104:178–184.

115.	Deming PB, Cistulli CA, Zhao H, Graves PR, PiwnicaWorms H, Paules RS, Downes CS, Kaufmann WK. The
human decatenation checkpoint. Proc Natl Acad Sci. 2001;
98:12044–12049.
116.	Toyoda Y, Yanagida M. Coordinated requirements of human
topo II and cohesin for metaphase centromere alignment
under Mad2-dependent spindle checkpoint surveillance.
Mol Biol Cell. 2006; 17:2287–2302.

104.	Haffner MC, Aryee MJ, Toubaji A, Esopi DM, Albadine R,
Gurel B, Isaacs WB, Bova GS, Liu W, Xu J, Meeker AK,
Netto G, De Marzo AM, Nelson WG, Yegnasubramanian S.
Androgen-induced TOP2B-mediated double-strand breaks
and prostate cancer gene rearrangements. Nat Genet. 2010;
42:668–675.

117.	Lou Z, Minter-Dykhouse K, Chen J. BRCA1 participates in
DNA decatenation. Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2005; 12:589–593.

105.	Ross W, Rowe T, Glisson B, Yalowich J, Liu L. Role of
Topoisomerase II in Mediating Epipodophyllotoxin-induced
DNA Cleavage. Cancer Res. 1984; 44: 5857–5860.

118.	Shen Y, Chen W, Zhao B, Hao H, Li Z, Lu C, Shen Y.
CS1 is a novel topoisomerase IIα inhibitor with favorable
drug resistance profiles. Biochem Biophys Res Commun.
2014; 453:302–308.

106.	Chow KC, Macdonald TL, Ross WE. DNA binding
by epipodophyllotoxins and N-acyl anthracyclines:
implications for mechanism of topoisomerase II inhibition.
Mol Pharmacol. 1988; 34:467–473.

119.	Williams J, Lansdown R, Sweitzer R, Romanowski M,
LaBell R, Ramaswami R, Unger E. Nanoparticle drug
delivery system for intravenous delivery of topoisomerase
inhibitors. J Control Release. 2003; 91:167–172.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

43962

Oncotarget

120.	Węsierska-Gądek
J,
Zulehner
N,
Ferk
F,
Składanowski A, Komina O, Maurer M. PARP inhibition
potentiates the cytotoxic activity of C-1305, a selective
inhibitor of topoisomerase II, in human BRCA1positive breast cancer cells. Biochem Pharmacol. 2012;
84:1318–1331.

124.	Sieh S, Taubenberger AV, Rizzi SC, Sadowski M, Lehman ML,
Rockstroh A, An J, Clements JA, Nelson CC, Hutmacher DW.
Phenotypic characterization of prostate cancer LNCaP cells
cultured within a bioengineered microenvironment. PLoS
ONE. 2012; 7:e40217.
125.	Sadowski M, Mawson A, Baker R, Sarcevic B. Cdc34
C-terminal tail phosphorylation regulates Skp1/cullin/F-box
(SCF)-mediated ubiquitination and cell cycle progression.
Biochem J. 2007; 405:569–581.

121.	Zhang S, Han L, Wei J, Shi Z, Pu P, Zhang J, Yuan X,
Kang C. Combination treatment with doxorubicin and
microRNA-21 inhibitor synergistically augments anticancer
activity through upregulation of tumor suppressing genes.
Int J Oncol. 2015; 46:1589–1600.

126.	Vasireddy RS, Sprung CN, Cempaka NL, Chao M,
McKay MJ. H2AX phosphorylation screen of cells from
radiosensitive cancer patients reveals a novel DNA doublestrand break repair cellular phenotype. Br J Cancer. 2010;
102:1511–1518.

122.	Liberio MS, Sadowski MC, Soekmadji C, Davis RA,
Nelson CC. Differential effects of tissue culture coating
substrates on prostate cancer cell adherence, morphology
and behavior. PLoS One. 2014; 9:e112122.

127.	Shahidi M, Mozdarani H, Bryant PE. Radiation sensitivity
of leukocytes from healthy individuals and breast cancer
patients as measured by the alkaline and neutral comet
assay. Cancer Lett. 2007; 257:263–273.

123.	Sadowski MC, Pouwer RH, Gunter JH, Lubik AA, Quinn RJ,
Nelson CC. The fatty acid synthase inhibitor triclosan:
repurposing an anti-microbial agent for targeting prostate
cancer. Oncotarget. 2014; 5: 9362–81.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

43963

Oncotarget

