Research Article

c-Fos as a Proapoptotic Agent in TRAIL-Induced Apoptosis
in Prostate Cancer Cells
1

2

2

2

3

3

Xiaoping Zhang, Liang Zhang, Hongmei Yang, Xu Huang, Hasan Otu, Towia A. Libermann,
2
4
1
William C. DeWolf, Roya Khosravi-Far, and Aria F. Olumi
1
Department of Urology, Massachusetts General Hospital; 2Division of Urologic Surgery; 3Center for Genomics and 4Department of
Pathology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts

Abstract
Tumor necrosis factor–related apoptosis-inducing ligand
(TRAIL)/Apo-2L promotes apoptosis in cancer cells while
sparing normal cells. Although many cancers are sensitive to
TRAIL-induced apoptosis, some evade the proapoptotic effects
of TRAIL. Therefore, differentiating molecular mechanisms
that distinguish between TRAIL-sensitive and TRAIL-resistant
tumors are essential for effective cancer therapies. Here, we
show that c-Fos functions as a proapoptotic agent by repressing the antiapoptotic molecule c-FLIP(L). c-Fos binds the
c-FLIP(L) promoter, represses its transcriptional activity, and
reduces c-FLIP(L) mRNA and protein levels. Therefore, c-Fos
is a key regulator of c-FLIP(L), and activation of c-Fos determines whether a cancer cell will undergo cell death after
TRAIL treatment. Strategies to activate c-Fos or inhibit c-FLIP(L)
may potentiate TRAIL-based proapoptotic therapies. [Cancer
Res 2007;67(19):9425–34]

Introduction
Aberrant apoptotic pathways contribute to initiation and progression of neoplasia; therefore, proapoptotic agents can be used for
treatment of various malignancies (1). Although many cancers are
sensitive to proapoptotic agents like tumor necrosis factor (TNF),
FasL, and TNF-related apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL)/Apo-2L
(2), some develop resistance and apoptotic stimuli become ineffective (3). Whereas many apoptotic stimuli are associated with
severe systemic cytotoxicity, limiting their clinical utility, TRAIL/
Apo-2L has the unique feature of inducing apoptosis in cancer
cells, with minimal cytotoxicity. Differentiating between cancers
that are sensitive to TRAIL-induced apoptosis and cancers that are
resistant to TRAIL-induced apoptosis can improve the efficacy of
TRAIL-related compounds that are currently in clinical trials (4).
TRAIL-induced apoptosis may involve both extrinsic and
intrinsic pathways and can be regulated by many important
factors such as nuclear factor-nB (NF-nB), Akt, Bcl-2, Bax, XIAP,
IAPs, Smac/DIABLO, and c-FLIP (FLICE-like inhibitory protein;
ref. 5). We previously showed that expression of the antiapoptotic
molecule c-FLIP(L) is necessary and sufficient to maintain
resistance to TRAIL-induced apoptosis (4). Although expression
of c-FLIP(L) can be regulated at the translational and posttranslational levels, we have found that expression of c-FLIP(L) can also

Note: Supplementary data for this article are available at Cancer Research Online
(http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/).
Requests for reprints: Aria F. Olumi, Massachusetts General Hospital, 55 Fruit
Street, Yawkey Building, Suite 7E, Boston, MA 02114. Phone: 617-643-0237; Fax: 617643-4019; E-mail: aolumi@partners.org.
I2007 American Association for Cancer Research.
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-07-1310

www.aacrjournals.org

be partially regulated at the transcriptional level. In this report,
we show that transcription of c-FLIP(L) is repressed by the c-Fos
oncoprotein.
Fos proteins are basic region-leucine zipper (bZIP) transcription
factors that bind to Jun or other bZIP proteins and create the
activator protein 1 (AP-1) dimer complex, which regulates gene
expression (6). c-Fos, a well-established oncogene, is considered to
play a critical role in tumorigenesis, proliferation and transformation, angiogenesis, tumor invasion, and metastasis, and its expression is associated with poor clinical outcomes (6). Therefore, c-Fos
has preferentially been considered an antiapoptotic molecule.
However, recent evidence suggests that c-Fos may also have a
proapoptotic role. The first indication of such proapoptotic
function of c-Fos comes from the observation that c-Fos expression
preceded apoptosis (7), and is also observed during mammary
gland involution (8) and in other systems (9). However, proapoptotic downstream molecular targets of c-Fos are poorly understood.
In this report, we show that c-Fos has a novel proapoptotic
function in TRAIL-induced apoptosis. We show that nuclear c-Fos
primes cancer cells to undergo apoptosis, and its expression is
necessary but insufficient for TRAIL-induced apoptosis. Activation
of c-Fos/AP-1 is critical for cancer cells to undergo apoptosis after
treatment with TRAIL/Apo-2L. We show that c-Fos, as a proapoptotic molecule, represses the antiapoptotic gene, c-FLIP(L), by
direct binding to the promoter region of c-FLIP(L).

Materials and Methods
Materials. Horseradish peroxidase–conjugated secondary antibody
(goat–anti-mouse, goat–anti-rabbit, goat–anti-rat antibodies), biotinylated
goat–anti-rabbit secondary antibodies, Oct-1 antibody, c-Fos antibody (D1),
c-FLIP antibody (G11), c-Jun antibody, Fos B antibody, Fra 1 antibody, Fra 2
antibody, Jun B antibody, Jun D antibody, and c-Fos small interfering RNA
(siRNA) were obtained from Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Inc. c-Jun and c-Fos
were obtained from Cell Signaling Technology, Inc. Recombinant human
TRAIL/TNFSF10 was obtained from R&D Systems, Inc. Monoclonal antiFLIP antibody (Dava II) was obtained from Apotech Corp. a-Tubulin
antibody was purchased from Sigma. Glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase antibody was from Abcam, Inc. g-32P–labeled ATP was
purchased from Perkin-Elmer.
Cell culture. PC3, LNCaP, A-498, 786-O, 769-P, MDA-MB231, and MDAMB453 were obtained from the American Type Culture Collection. PC3-TR
is a TRAIL-resistant subline of PC3 cells (10). SN12-PM6 was supplied by
Dr. I.J. Fidler, M.D. Anderson Cancer Center (Houston, TX). Cells were
cultured as previously described (10).
Cell viability. Cell viability was determined by 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide (MTT) method (Roche Diagnostics) as
previously described (10). Cells were then treated with various concentrations of TRAIL.
Apoptosis assay. Apoptosis was detected by using fluoresceinconjugated Annexin V (Annexin V–FITC) kit according to manufacturer’s
protocol (BD Biosciences).

9425

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (19). October 1, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research
Western blot analyses and immunofluorescence. Western blot and
immunofluorescence experiments were carried out as previously described
(10, 11). Nuclear extraction was prepared according to the kit from Pierce
Biotechnology, Inc.. Oct-1 is used as loading control of nuclear extraction.
If the Oct-1 amount of whole-cell lysate is at 20% or less than that of the
nuclear extraction, nuclear extraction is considered as qualified extraction.
Band density was analyzed by GelDoc (Bio-Rad Laboratories).
Luciferase assay. c-FLIP(L) promoter ( 1,179 to +281) luciferase
structure was provided by Dr. W.S. El-Deiry (University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, PA; ref. 12). c-FLIP(L) promoter with the deletion of AP-1-( f)
site was prepared by our laboratory. Briefly, c-FLIP(L) promoter ( 1,700,
+300) was cloned from Bac-IP11-536I18 (Children’s Hospital, Oakland
Research Institute, Oakland, CA) with appropriate primers for PCR
amplification. The primers used were sense, 5¶-CTCGAGTGAACCTGGGAGGTTAAGGC-3¶; antisense, 5¶-AGATCTGAGGCAAAGAAACCGAAAGC-3¶,
which contained an XhoI site and BglII site, respectively. The PCR products
were inserted into pGEMT-Easy vector (Promega Co.). Once the sequence
of the construct had been verified, it was subcloned into the PGL3enhancer vector (Promega) at XhoI and BglII sites. AP-1-( f) site binding
site was deleted from the above c-FLIP(L)/PGL3-enhancer construct by
QuikChange II XL Site-Directed Mutagenesis Kit (Stratagene). The primers
used were as follows: sense, 5¶-GAGGCCGAGGCGGGCAAGGACCAGCAGTTGGAGACCAGCC-3¶; antisense, 5¶-GGCTGGTCTCCAACTGCTGGTCCTTGCCCGCCTCGGCCTC-3¶. The sequence of ‘‘TCACTTGAGG’’ was
deleted and verified by DNA sequencing. Cells were seeded into 24-well
plates. When cells reached 80% confluence, both AP-1 luciferase reporter
(25 ng/well) and Renilla reporter (5 ng/well) from Stratagene or
c-FLIP(L) reporter and Renilla reporter were cotransfected into cells. In
other experiments, when cell reached 70% confluence, c-Fos siRNA, c-Fos,
or A-Fos were transfected into cells for 24 h before transfection of luciferase and Renilla. Here, Renilla served as an internal control for transfection efficiency. After 24 h of transfection, cells were treated with TRAIL
(100 ng/mL), and then both attached and floating cells were collected,
prepared, and further detected by using Dual-Luciferase Reporter Assay
System (Promega). Samples were stored at 20jC until detection. All
results represent average of at least three independent experiments F SD.
Cell extracts and electrophoretic mobility shift assay. Frozen
cell pellets were resuspended as described (13). The reactions were made
using 10 Ag of whole-cell extract and 0.1 to 0.5 ng of 32P-labeled doublestranded specific oligonucleotides (5,000–25,000 cpm) in the presence of
2 Ag of poly(deoxyinosinic-deoxycytidylic acid) (Sigma) in binding buffer
[25 mmol/L Tris (pH 8.0); 50 mmol/L KCl; 6 mmol/L MgCl2; 10% v/v
glycerol]. The reaction was incubated at room temperature for 20 min and
run on 5% to 7% polyacrylamide 0.5 Tris glycine EDTA. Gels were
dried with Bio-Rad gel dryer and imaged using Kodak BioMax MR Film
(Fisher Scientific). General AP-1 gel shift oligonucleotide was obtained
from Santa Cruz Biotechnology. Wild-type and mutant oligonucleotides
with four-tandem repeats of the c-FLIP(L) AP-1( f) site were designed as
5¶-ATCA CTTGAGGATCA CTTGAGGATCA CTTGAGGATCA CTTGAGG-3¶
(wild-type) and 5¶-ATTG CTTGAGGATTG CTTGAGGATTG CTTGAGAGGATTGCTTGAGG-3¶ (mutant). ‘‘Co’’ stands for competing control, using
90% cold prober plus 10% hot prober.
Transfection of c-Fos, A-Fos, and siRNA. Full-length human c-Fos
cDNA was provided by Dr. L Shenshedini, University of Toledo, Toledo, OH
(14). A-Fos vector was obtained from Dr. Charles Vinson (National Cancer
Institute, Bethesda, MD; ref. 15). The plasmids with or without c-Fos or
A-Fos were transfected with LipofectAMINE 2000 (Invitrogen Life
Technologies). siRNA of c-Fos was transfected into cells by TransMessenger
(Qiagen). Nonspecific siRNA was used as control (Qiagen). After
transfection with the c-Fos or A-Fos vector for 24 h or c-Fos siRNA for
36 h, the cells were seeded in 96-well plates for cell viability assays or treated
with TRAIL.
Chromatin immunoprecipitation assay. Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assay was done by the ChIP Assay Kit (Upstate Cell Signaling
Solutions). Cells were cultured in 10-cm dishes, treated with or without
TRAIL for 4 h. Cross-linking of DNA and proteins was carried out by adding
formaldehyde for final concentration of 1% and incubated for 10 min at

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (19). October 1, 2007

37jC. Both attached and floating cells were collected, washed, and resuspended in 200 AL of SDS lysis buffer for 10 min and then sonicated. Samples
were centrifuged for 10 min at 13,000 rpm at 4jC and the supernatant was
harvested. Concentration of each sample was quantitated using BCA
protein assay. Positive controls were 10% of each DNA sample, which did
not included the immunoprecipitation step. The remainder of the samples
was equally divided into two groups. The experimental group was
immunoprecipitated with specific c-Fos (D-1) antibody, whereas the negative control group was immunoprecipitated with general mouse IgG antibody. After immunoprecipitation, protein-DNA cross-linking was reversed.
The isolated DNA was first purified, then amplified by PCR, using specific
primers encompassing the c-FLIP(L) AP-1( f) binding site (Genbank).
The primers for the experiments in Fig. 4A are 5¶-CCTGTGATCCCAGCACTTTG-3¶ ( forward primer) and 5¶-CACCATGCCCGACTAATTTT-3¶
(reverse primer).
Xenograft orthotopic implantations and immunohistochemical
analysis. Prostate and renal orthotopic implantations were carried out by
injection of 1  106 cells in either the posterolateral lobe of the prostate or
beneath the kidney capsule of athymic nude mice (Charles River
Laboratories) at 6 to 8 weeks of age. Mice were implanted with the
following cells (untreated group/treated group): PC3 (six of five), PC3-TR
(seven of five), LNCaP cells ( five of six), SN12-PM6 (eight of eleven), and
A-498 (nine of eleven). After implantation of the xenografts 10 weeks for
prostate cancer cells and 3 weeks for renal cancer cells, the athymic nude
mice were randomly divided into treated and untreated groups and treated
with Lexatumumab (TRAIL receptor 2 agonist; Human Genome Science,
Inc.) via tail vein twice a week (10 mg/kg), as previously described (16). Four
weeks after treatment, all animals were euthanized and xenografts were
harvested, and assessed for tumor weight, metastasis, apoptosis, and
immunoreactivity for c-Fos and c-FLIP. Tumor tissues were fixed in 10%
formalin and embedded in paraffin routinely. Histologic tests and
immunohistochemistry were carried out as previously described (11). The
dilution of both c-Fos (D1) and c-FLIP (G11) is 1:80. The mice were housed
and maintained in laminar flow cabinets under specific pathogen-free
conditions. All experiments were approved by the Institutional Animal Care
and Use Committee at Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center.
Terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase-mediated nick end labeling.
Terminal deoxyribonucleotide transferase–mediated nick-end labeling
(TUNEL) was done to assess the apoptotic cells using a commercial kit
according to the manufacturer’s instruction (Promega). Background
reactivity was determined by processing slides in the absence of terminal
deoxynucleotidyl transferase (negative control); maximum reactivity was
observed by preincubating the tissue sections with DNase I to confirm the
quality of the specimen and availability of protocol. Tissue sections were
mounted with Vectashield mounting medium with 4¶,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (Vector Laboratories, Inc.) to counterstain the nuclei. At least 200
cells from each sample were captured with a Nikon TE300 microscope and
analyzed by counting positive rate. Positive apoptotic rate is defied as the
ratio of green staining within nuclear area to the total nuclear staining
(blue).

Results
AP-1 activity is increased in TRAIL-sensitive cancer cells
and c-Fos translocates to the nucleus. Prostate cancer cells have
variable sensitivity to recombinant human TRAIL/Apo-2L. We
found that PC3 cells were very sensitive to TRAIL/Apo-2L, whereas
PC3-TR and LNCaP cells were very resistant to TRAIL/Apo-2L
(Fig. 1A). Previously, we have shown that c-FLIP(L), but not
c-FLIP(s), is necessary and sufficient to maintain resistance to
TRAIL/Apo-2L (4). We also found that expression of c-FLIP(L) is
partially regulated at the transcriptional level. To explore the transcription factors that regulate c-FLIP(L) and may play an important
role in differentiating between TRAIL-sensitive and TRAIL-resistant
cancer cells, we analyzed the putative promotor and regulatory
regions of c-FLIP(L) by using the Alibaba 2.1 software (17). We

9426

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

c-Fos Represses c-FLIP(L)

Figure 1. Nuclear c-Fos and AP-1 are up-regulated in TRAIL-sensitive cancer cells after TRAIL treatment. A, cells were treated with TRAIL/Apo-2L with different
doses for 24 h and assayed for death by the MTT assay. [A is the same as the one used in our prior work (10); it is only shown here to demonstrate to the current
readers our model of TRAIL-sensitive and TRAIL-resistant prostate cancer cells]. B, potential binding sites for putative transcriptional factors in the cFLIP(L) promoter
and regulatory region. Putative AP-1, NF-nB, and ARE sites are indicated. C, time course of AP-1 luciferase activity after TRAIL/Apo-2L in prostate cancer cells.
D, c-Fos and c-Jun whole-cell lysate (top ) and nuclear (bottom ) protein levels after TRAIL treatment at different time points. Oct-1 is used as loading control for nuclear
extracts. Bars, SD from at least three independent experiments.

analyzed the possible transcription factor binding sites that
spanned 17,000 bp of the c-FLIP(L) gene, including 3 kb upstream
of exon1, introns 1 to 2, and exon 2 region before the ATG start
codon (Fig. 1B). We identified potential binding sites for NF-nB
(18, 19), androgen response elements (20) and Myc (12), all of which
have been shown to regulate expression of c-FLIP(L). In addition to
identifying known transcription factors that regulate c-FILP(L), we
also found multiple potential AP-1 binding sites in the c-FLIP(L)
regulatory region (Fig. 1B). Because AP-1 family of proteins are
important transcription factors, we hypothesized that AP-1 might
be an important regulator of c-FLIP(L); it may play a key role in
mediating cell response to TRAIL-induced apoptosis.
To determine whether AP-1 has any direct transcriptional
activity in regulating TRAIL-induced apoptosis, we examined for
AP-1 activity and DNA binding in TRAIL-sensitive (PC3) and
TRAIL-resistant (PC3-TR and LNCaP) cells. We found that the
activity of AP-1 significantly increased in the TRAIL-sensitive PC3
cells; however, AP-1 activity did not significantly change in the
TRAIL-resistant PC3-TR and LNCaP cells (Fig. 1C). However, the
increased AP-1 activity in the TRAIL-sensitive cells were temporal;
24 h after TRAIL treatment, no more AP-1 activity was detected
because majority of the cells have undergone apoptosis by this time

www.aacrjournals.org

(Fig. 1C; ref. 4). In addition, in the TRAIL-sensitive PC3 cells, we
found increased AP-1 DNA binding as determined by electrophoretic mobility gel shift assay (EMSA), a finding that was not
observed in the TRAIL-resistant PC3-TR or LNCaP cells (data not
shown). These results show that there is increased AP-1 activity
and DNA binding in the TRAIL-sensitive cells, but not in the
TRAIL-resistant cells.
Because AP-1 family of proteins is composed of dimers between
several family members, we wished to determine which member(s)
were mainly responsible for the increased AP-1 activity in the
TRAIL-sensitive PC3 cells after TRAIL treatment. Total protein
whole-cell lysate Western blot analysis did not reveal any differences in protein levels of the two major components of AP-1, c-Fos
and c-Jun (Fig. 1D, top), and other AP-1 family members (Fos B,
Jun B, Jun D, Fra1, and Fra2; data not shown) in either TRAILsensitive (PC3) or TRAIL-resistant (PC3 and LNCaP) cancer cells
after TRAIL/Apo-2L treatment. Because AP-1 is a well-known
transcription factor, we examined the nuclear levels of its different
family member proteins. Surprisingly, we found that expression of
nuclear c-Fos was increased rapidly in the TRAIL-sensitive PC3
cells by Western blot (Fig. 1D, bottom) and immunofluorescence
(Supplementary Fig. S1). In contrast, in TRAIL-resistant cells, we

9427

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (19). October 1, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

found that nuclear c-Fos had either no significant change in PC3TR cells or was deceased in LNCaP cells (Fig. 1D, bottom). Nuclear
c-Fos was increased in the PC3 cells after 10 min of TRAIL/Apo-2L
treatment and reached its peak after 4 h; however, nuclear c-Fos
levels decreased at 24 h after treatment because majority of PC3
cells were dead at this time point. In addition, there was no
increase in other nuclear AP-1 member proteins, including c-Jun,
Fos B, Jun B, Jun D, Fra1, and Fra2 in the TRAIL-sensitive PC3 cells
(Fig. 1D and data not shown). Therefore, the change in nuclear
c-Fos protein levels (Fig. 1D) correlated with AP-1 activity levels
(Fig. 1C) in the TRAIL-sensitive PC3 cells.
Although c-Fos nuclear translocation occurred rapidly 10 min
after TRAIL treatment in the TRAIL-sensitive PC3 cells, we found
that the TRAIL-sensitive PC3 cells undergo apoptosis 60 min
after TRAIL treatment as determined by Annexin V-FITC flow
cytometric assay (data not shown). Therefore, c-Fos nuclear
translocation may precede initiation of apoptosis in the TRAILsensitive cells, and is maintained after they have undergone
apoptosis.
To assure that the increased nuclear c-Fos we observed was not a
PC3 cell line or prostate cancer–specific phenomenon, we
evaluated other TRAIL-sensitive and TRAIL-resistant renal and

breast cancer cells. We found that expression of nuclear c-Fos
was also increased before initiation of apoptosis in the TRAILsensitive renal (A-498) and breast (MDA-MB231) cancer cells, but
not in the TRAIL-resistant renal 786-O and breast cancer cells
MDA-MB453 (data not shown). Therefore, elevated nuclear c-Fos
seems to occur before the cells undergo apoptosis, and it is a
common finding in different cancer cell types sensitive to TRAILinduced apoptosis.
c-Fos ‘‘primes’’ cancer cells to undergo apoptosis. We found
that increased expression of nuclear c-Fos in the TRAIL-sensitive
PC3 cells correlated with increased AP-1 luciferase activity.
However, it is unclear if increased c-Fos/AP-1 merely reflects a
stress response (21), or if activated c-Fos has a direct role in
regulating apoptosis. Silencing expression of nuclear c-Fos by
siRNA reduced AP-1 activity (Fig. 2A) and changed PC3 cells from
TRAIL-sensitive to a more TRAIL-resistant phenotype (Fig. 2B).
In addition, ectopic expression of a dominant-negative form of
AP-1, A-Fos (15), also reduced the AP-1 activity in the PC-3 cells
(Fig. 2C), and converted the PC3 cells from a TRAIL-sensitive to a
TRAIL-resistant phenotype (Fig. 2D). These data show that c-Fos
primes cancer cells to undergo cell death, and nuclear localization
of c-Fos is necessary for TRAIL-induced apoptosis.

Figure 2. Inhibition of c-Fos/AP-1 converts TRAIL-sensitive PC3 cells to a more TRAIL-resistant phenotype. A, nuclear c-Fos protein levels and AP-1 luciferase
activity in PC3 cells after using c-Fos siRNA in the absence or presence of TRAIL. Oct-1 is loading control for nuclear extracts. B, cell viability assays, with control
nonspecific siRNA ( ) or with c-Fos siRNA (+), before and after TRAIL treatment. C, AP-1 luciferase activity and protein expression of c-Fos/A-Fos transfection of
dominant-negative AP-1, A-Fos, and TRAIL treatment. Note that c-Fos antibody recognizes both A-Fos and c-Fos. D, cell viability assays with A-Fos ectopic
expression. *, significant differences between control and experimental samples. B, SD of at least three replicate experiments. c-Fos transfection ( ) or A-Fos
transfection ( ) refer to empty vector control transfections.

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (19). October 1, 2007

9428

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

c-Fos Represses c-FLIP(L)

Figure 3. c-Fos represses expression of c-FLIP(L). A, fold change
in luciferase activity of c-FLIP(L) promoter region. B, mRNA and
protein levels of c-FLIP(L) in PC3, PC3-TR, and LNCaP cells after
TRAIL treatment at various time points. C, relative change in luciferase
activity of c-FLIP(L) promoter region in the absence or presence of
c-Fos siRNA and treatment with TRAIL. D, expression of c-FLIP(L)
protein in the absence or presence of c-Fos siRNA or dominant
negative AP-1 (A-Fos). * and #, statistically significant difference
between control and experimental samples. Bars, SD of at least three
replicate experiments.

c-Fos represses the expression of c-FLIP(L) directly. c-Fos/
AP-1 increases in the TRAIL-sensitive PC3 cells after TRAIL/Apo-2L
treatment (Fig. 1C and D), whereas previously we have found that
c-FLIP(L) expression in PC3 cells decreases in a time- and dosedependent manner after TRAIL/Apo-2L treatment (4). The inverse
correlation between c-Fos and c-FLIP(L) protein levels in the
TRAIL-sensitive cells, and the presence of multiple AP-1 binding
sites in c-FLIP(L) regulatory region (Fig. 1B), prompted us to
examine whether the c-Fos/AP-1 in TRAIL-sensitive cells may
affect the expression of the antiapoptotic molecule, c-FLIP(L). After
treatment with TRAIL/Apo-2L, c-FLIP(L) promoter luciferase
activity was reduced in the TRAIL-sensitive PC3 cells, whereas
c-FLIP(L) promoter luciferase activity was potentiated in the
TRAIL-resistant PC3-TR and LNCaP cells (Fig. 3A). The reduced
c-FLIP(L) luciferase activity correlated with reduced c-FLIP(L)
mRNA and protein levels in the TRAIL-sensitive PC3 cells.
However, c-FLIP(L) mRNA and protein levels in the TRAILresistant PC3-TR and LNCaP cells were unchanged before and
after TRAIL treatment (Fig. 3B). Silencing expression of c-Fos by

www.aacrjournals.org

siRNA potentiated the c-FLIP(L) promoter luciferase activity after
treatment with TRAIL/Apo-2L in the TRAIL-sensitive PC3 cells,
whereas the c-FLIP(L) promoter luciferase activity was reduced
when c-Fos expression was not silenced (Fig. 3C ). Moreover, protein levels of c-FLIP(L) were maintained when c-Fos
expression was either reduced by siRNA (Figs. 2A and 3D) or its
AP-1 activity was suppressed by a AP-1 dominant-negative A-Fos
(Figs. 2C and 3D).
To further determine whether c-Fos has any direct transcriptional activity in regulating c-FLIP(L), we examined the potential
AP-1 binding sites in the putative c-FLIP(L) regulatory region
[17,000 bp upstream of the c-FLIP(L) ATG start codon; Fig. 1B]. We
identified and examined binding of c-Fos to 14 AP-1 binding sites
in the putative c-FLIP(L) regulatory region via ChIP assays, which
included six AP-1 binding sites before exon 1 (designated sites ‘‘a’’
through ‘‘f ’’ in Fig. 1B) and eight within introns 1 to 2. We only
detected binding of c-Fos protein to the c-FLIP(L) AP-1( f) site
(Figs. 1B and 4A). ChIP assays showed that binding of c-Fos to
the c-FLIP(L) AP-1( f) site increased in the TRAIL-sensitive PC3

9429

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (19). October 1, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

cells, whereas c-Fos binding to the c-FLIP(L) AP-1( f) site was
reduced in the TRAIL-resistant PC3-TR and LNCaP cells after
treatment with TRAIL/Apo-2L. To confirm the importance of
c-Fos/AP-1 binding AP-1( f) site on regulating c-FLIP(L) expression, we deleted this AP-1( f) site in our c-FLIP(L) promoter
luciferase reporter. We found that deletion of the c-FLIP(L) AP-1( f)
site abolished the ability of c-Fos to suppress c-FLIP(L) expression
(Fig. 4B). To further determine whether AP-1 binding to the
c-FLIP(L) AP-1( f) site was specific to this AP-1( f) DNA sequence,
we designed a wild-type and mutant oligonucleotide with fourtandem repeats of the AP-1( f) binding site. EMSA showed that
binding to the wild-type AP-1( f) sequence was increased in the
TRAIL-sensitive PC3 cells after treatment with TRAIL/Apo-2L,
whereas there was minimal to no binding to the wild-type AP-1( f)
site in the TRAIL-resistant PC3-TR and LNCaP cells (Fig. 4C). In
contrast, binding to the mutant AP-1( f) site was abolished,
regardless of whether the cells were TRAIL-sensitive or TRAILresistant. These data further confirm that c-Fos protein binds to
c-FLIP(L) AP-1( f) site, represses expression of c-FLIP(L) gene, and
sensitizes cancer cells to undergo TRAIL-induced apoptosis.
Deletion and mutations of the c-FLIP(L) AP-1( f) promoter region
abrogates the ability of c-Fos to repress the antiapoptotic molecule,
c-FLIP(L).
Ectopic expression of c-Fos represses c-FLIP(L) and sensitizes TRAIL-resistant cancer cells. Next, we wished to determine
whether ectopic expression of c-Fos can alter TRAIL-induced
apoptosis in resistant prostate cancer cells. c-Fos was ectopically
expressed in TRAIL-resistant PC3-TR and LNCaP cells. Concomitant with increased c-Fos protein levels in both PC3-TR and

LNCaP cells, c-FLIP(L) levels were reduced by half (Fig. 5A), AP-1
activity was increased (Fig. 5B), and cell viability was decreased
(Fig. 5C). These data suggest that c-Fos represses the expression
of the antiapoptotic molecule, c-FLIP(L). In addition, ectopic
expression of wild-type c-Fos in PC3-TR and LNCaP cells was
associated with increased c-Fos protein levels and enhanced AP-1
activity, which led to nuclear localization of c-Fos (data not shown),
but did not promote cell death (Fig. 5C). Therefore, the TRAILresistant cells (LNCaP and PC3-TR) were sensitized to TRAIL when
c-Fos was ectopically expressed. We conclude that nuclear
localization of c-Fos by itself is necessary but insufficient to
promote apoptosis in cancer cells.
c-Fos translocates to the nucleus in orthotopic in vivo
xenografts. To determine whether nuclear expression of c-Fos that
we observed in vitro in the TRAIL-sensitive cancer cells is also
found in in vivo models, we orthotopically implanted prostate
cancer cells (PC3, PC3-TR, and LNCaP) and renal cancer cells
(SN12-PM6, A-498) in the posterolateral lobe of the prostate
and under the kidney capsule of athymic nude mice, respectively.
After orthotopic implantation of the xenografts (11), the athymic
mice were treated with a TRAIL receptor 2 agonist antibody
(Lexatumumab), which is currently in clinical trials for advanced
malignancies (4). Lexatumumab has equivalent sensitivity and
resistance profiles and induces similar downstream signaling molecules as recombinant TRAIL (16). Orthotopically implanted xenografts were treated for 4 weeks with i.v. Lexatumumab, and primary
tumors were harvested and assessed for tumor weight, TUNEL
staining, and expression of c-Fos and c-FLIP(L). The rate of tumor
formation in the TRAIL-sensitive and TRAIL-resistant xenografts

Figure 4. c-Fos represses expression of c-FLIP(L) by
direct binding to its promoter region. A, AP-1(f) binding to
c-FLIP(L) promoter analyzed by CHIP assay. Cells were
treated with TRAIL (100 ng/mL) for 4 h. B, c-FLIP(L)
promoter luciferase activity after deletion of AP-1(f) in the
presence and absence of TRAIL/Apo-2L. Wt and Del,
wild-type c-FLIP(L) promoter luciferase reporter and
deletion of AP-1(f) site from the reporter, respectively.
C, EMSA of AP-1 using a wild-type or mutated four-tandem
oligonucleotide of the c-FLIP(L) AP-1(f) binding site as
probes. Co, competing control. *, statistically significant
difference between indicated groups. Bars, SD of at least
three replicate experiments.

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (19). October 1, 2007

9430

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

c-Fos Represses c-FLIP(L)

sensitive in vitro models, but also in orthotopic in vivo models after
treatment with TRAIL receptor agonist compounds. Potentially,
nuclear localization of c-Fos could be used to identify human
cancers that are sensitive to TRAIL-induced apoptosis.

Discussion

Figure 5. Ectopic expression of c-Fos sensitizes TRAIL-resistant PC3-TR and
LNCaP cells. A, expression of c-Fos and c-FLIP(L) in PC3-TR and LNCaP cells
in the absence or presence of c-Fos transfection. Numbers, band intensity. AP-1
luciferase activity (B) and cell viability (C ) of PC3-TR and LNCaP cells with
empty vector ( ) or with c-Fos (+) ectopic expression, and treatment with TRAIL.
*, significant difference between indicated groups. Bars, SD of at least three
replicate experiments.

was equivalent, and there was no significant difference in the body
weight of the animals in the treated and untreated groups
(Supplementary Table S1). However, TRAIL-sensitive xenografts
had a much higher apoptotic rate (P < 0.01) and significantly
decreased tumor burden (P < 0.05) when the animals were treated
with Lexatumumab compared with the control groups. In contrast,
the apoptotic rates were very low and there was no significant
difference of tumor burden in TRAIL-resistant PC3-TR and LNCaP
xenografts with or without treatment (Supplementary Table S1).
Similar results were also observed in renal cancer SN12-PM6 and
A-498 xenografts (22). Next, we found that expression of nuclear
c-Fos was pronounced in the TRAIL-sensitive PC3, SN12-PM6, and
A-498 xenografts after treatment, but not in the TRAIL-resistant
PC3-TR and LNCaP xenografts (Fig. 6). These findings suggest that
increased nuclear expression of c-Fos is found not only in TRAIL-

www.aacrjournals.org

Because the AP-1 family member protein c-Fos plays a crucial
role in a variety of biological processes, identifying the downstream
targets of c-Fos has significant implications in understanding of
normal development, inflammation, and oncogenesis (6). In this
report, we show that c-Fos, in addition to its well-known oncogenic
function, has a novel proapoptotic function in TRAIL-induced
apoptosis. c-Fos exerts its proapoptotic function by repressing
c-FLIP(L). We define Fos-dependent priming (FDP) as increased
expression of nuclear c-Fos after treatment with TRAIL/Apo-2L.
Clinical implications of these results include the possibility of using
FDP as a marker in cancer patients being treated with proapoptotic
agents. The presence of FDP may identify tumors that are sensitive
to proapoptotic stimuli, whereas lack of FDP identifies resistant
tumors.
Caspases are important modulators of apoptosis ( for review, see
ref. 23). Activation of specific death domain receptors, like DR4 and
DR5 by their ligand, TRAIL, promotes formation of death-inducing
signaling complex (DISC). DISC recruits an adaptor molecule,
Fas-associated death domain (FADD), which in turn interacts with
and activates caspase-8 and/or caspase-10, leading to initiation of
the extrinsic proapoptotic signaling pathway. Because of its
sequence homology with caspase-8, c-FLIP(L) has been shown to
competitively inhibit the interaction between FADD and caspase-8,
and thus inhibits the initiation of proapoptotic stimuli. We and
others (4, 24, 25) have shown that persistent expression of
c-FLIP(L) is necessary and sufficient to maintain resistance to
TRAIL-induced apoptosis. Here, we show that c-Fos represses expression of c-FLIP(L). Therefore, for a cancer cell to undergo apoptosis
after TRAIL treatment is dependent on a feedback loop mechanism
as determined by activation of c-Fos and c-FLIP(L) level.
c-Fos is one of the immediate-early response and inducible
transcription factors. Its level is increased after many stress stimuli,
including some proapoptotic stimuli. For example, c-Fos levels have
been increased after chemotherapy (26), UV radiation (27, 28), and
TNF-a exposure (29). Few studies have noted increased levels
of c-Fos after TRAIL treatment (30, 31); however, the function of
c-Fos in these biological settings have not been clearly defined.
Although, c-Fos usually acts as a transcriptional activator, it has
been shown that it can also function as a transcriptional suppressor.
For example, c-Fos can negatively regulate its own expression
(32, 33), or other molecules like inducible nitric oxide synthase,
TNF-a, and IL-12 (34, 35). Our report shows for the first time the
role of c-Fos as a repressor of the antiapoptotic molecule, c-FLIP(L).
We postulate that posttranslational modifications of c-Fos
may determine whether cancer cells are sensitive or resistant to
TRAIL-induced apoptosis. In our in vitro and orthotopic in vivo
studies, we showed that nuclear translocation of c-Fos and
repression of c-FLIP(L) gene is an important process in promoting
TRAIL-induced apoptosis in cancer cells. Cellular localization and
activation of c-Fos can depend on its phosphorylation, protein
stability, and other chaperone proteins. Recent work has suggested
that phosphorylation of c-Fos, which is an important determinant
of its activity and expression, is tightly regulated by a variety of
kinases such as mitogen-activated protein kinase (36), FRK (37),

9431

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (19). October 1, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

Figure 6. Immunohistochemical analysis of orthotopically
implanted prostate cancer cells (PC3, PC3-TR, and
LNCaP) and renal cancer cells (SN12-PM6 and A-498).
Representative immunohistochemical images of c-Fos
without ( ) or with (+) Lexatumumab treatment in
TRAIL-sensitive or TRAIL-resistant prostate cancer and
renal cancer xenografts. Bar, f50 Am.

RSK2 (38), CKII (39), and PDK1 (40). Protein stability of c-Fos,
another regulator of its physiologic function, has been shown to be
dependent on its COOH-terminal PEST3 domain, which modulates
c-Fos proteosome-mediated degradation (41). Associated proteins
in the form of chaperone proteins or heterodimers can also
regulate c-Fos structure and function. As a follow-up study to the
current report, we have recently reported that the proteosome
inhibitor, MG-132, sensitizes TRAIL-resistant cancer cells by upregulating AP-1 activity (22). Therefore, up-regulation of AP-1 and
sensitization to TRAIL-induced apoptosis is another example of
necessary mechanisms that may serve an important function in
overcoming resistance to TRAIL-induced apoptosis. Therefore,
we believe that the posttranslational modifications of c-Fos can
significantly affect its ability to regulate c-FLIP(L) gene expression

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (19). October 1, 2007

and TRAIL-induced apoptosis, and it is an area under investigation
in our laboratory.
The c-FLIP family of proteins is homologous to pro-caspase-8
( for review, see ref. 23). Both c-FLIP(L) and c-FLIP(s), and perhaps
the newly detected c-FLIP(r) (42), can bind to the DED domains
of FADD and caspase-8 and regulate apoptosis through their
interference with the recruitment of caspase-8 to FADD. Most
reports suggest that c-FLIP(L) has an anti apoptotic role, largely due
to results from experiments using ectopic expression of c-FLIP(L).
Moreover, c-FLIP(L) / mouse embryonic fibroblasts are more
sensitive to proapoptotic agents, which strongly suggests that
c-FLIP(L) has an antiapoptotic function (43). However, some recent
reports suggest that c-FLIP(L) may have a dual function, a
proapoptotic function at low physiologic concentrations, and an

9432

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

c-Fos Represses c-FLIP(L)

antiapoptotic function at high cellular concentrations (44). In
accordance with the role of c-FLIP(L) as an antiapoptotic molecule,
we have found that persistent expression of c-FLIP(L) is necessary
and sufficient to maintain resistance to TRAIL-induced apoptosis.
Meanwhile, our observations found that level of c-FLIPs were too
low to be detected by Western blot in prostate and renal cancer cell
lines we used, which did not support that c-FLIPs might play an
important role in regulating TRAIL sensitivity in these cells.
Although regulation of c-FLIP(L) can occur at the translational
and posttranslational levels, we found that transcriptional regulation of c-FLIP(L) may also affect cancer cell sensitivity to TRAILinduced apoptosis (10). Other investigators have shown that NF-nB
(18, 19), c-Myc (12), nuclear factor of activated T cells (45), and even
androgen receptor response elements (20) may regulate expression
of c-FLIP(L) through direct or indirect mechanisms. Here, we show
that c-Fos directly binds the AP-1( f) site of the c-FLIP(L) gene
(Fig. 4A), represses expression of c-FLIP(L), and promotes TRAILinduced apoptosis. In contrast, deletion of the AP-1( f) site
abrogates binding of c-Fos, leading to enhancement of c-FLIP(L)
gene expression and resistance to TRAIL-induced apoptosis. The
AP-1( f) site lies within a CpG island (Fig. 1B); therefore, methylation
patterns in this site may regulate the direct interaction between
c-Fos protein and the c-FLIP(L) gene.
Some limitations of our study is that we only investigated the
effect of c-Fos/AP-1 on c-FLIP(L). It is likely that c-Fos regulates
other apoptosis-related molecules besides c-FLIP(L) to alter cell
sensitivity to TRAIL-induced apoptosis. Our rationale for investigating the interaction between c-Fos and c-FLIP(L) stems from

References
1. Evan G, Littlewood T. A matter of life and cell death.
Science 1998;281:1317–22.
2. Wiley SR, Schooley K, Smolak PJ, et al. Identification
and characterization of a new member of the TNF
family that induces apoptosis. Immunity 1995;3:673–82.
3. French LE, Tschopp J. The TRAIL to selective tumor
death. Nat Med 1999;5:146–7.
4. Johnson RL, Gillotte D, Poortman C, et al. Human
agonistic anti-TRAIL receptor antibodies, HGS-ETR1
and HGS-ETR2, induce apoptosis in ovarian tumor lines
and their activity is enhanced by Taxol and carboplatin.
Orlando (FL); American Association of Cancer Research
Annual Meeting; 2004. Abstract 3579.
5. Kelley SK, Ashkenazi A. Targeting death receptors in
cancer with Apo2L/TRAIL. Curr Opin Pharmacol 2004;4:
333–9.
6. Wagner EF, Eferl R. Fos/AP-1 proteins in bone and the
immune system. Immunol Rev 2005;208:126–40.
7. Smeyne RJ, Vendrell M, Hayward M, et al. Continuous
c-fos expression precedes programmed cell death
in vivo . Nature 1993;363:166–9.
8. Marti A, Jehn B, Costello E, et al. Protein kinase A and
AP-1 (c-Fos/JunD) are induced during apoptosis of
mouse mammary epithelial cells. Oncogene 1994;9:
1213–23.
9. Preston GA, Lyon TT, Yin Y, et al. Induction of
apoptosis by c-Fos protein. Mol Cell Biol 1996;16:211–8.
10. Zhang X, Jin TG, Yang H, Dewolf WC, Khosravi-Far
R, Olumi AF. Persistent c-FLIP(L) expression is
necessary and sufficient to maintain resistance to
tumor necrosis factor-related apoptosis-inducing ligandmediated apoptosis in prostate cancer. Cancer Res 2004;
64:7086–91.
11. Olumi AF, Grossfeld GD, Hayward SW, Carroll PR,
Tlsty TD, Cunha GR. Carcinoma-associated fibroblasts
direct tumor progression of initiated human prostatic
epithelium. Cancer Res 1999;59:5002–11.
12. Ricci MS, Jin Z, Dews M, et al. Direct repression of

www.aacrjournals.org

prior reports demonstrating up-regulation of c-Fos in cancer cells
after TRAIL treatment (30, 31), presence of multiple c-Fos/AP-1
binding sites in the putative promoter region of c-FLIP(L) (Fig. 1B),
and our previous work suggesting that c-FLIP(L) could be regulated
transcriptionally in cancer cells after TRAIL treatment (10). In
addition, we have not investigated the mechanism that c-Fos is
translocated from the cytoplasm to the nucleus. Chaperon
proteins, alterations in c-Fos phosphorylation, or changes in
c-Fos protein stability are all potential mechanism that may play
a role in translocation of c-Fos from the cytoplasm to the nucleus
in TRAIL-sensitive cells. Currently, these areas are under active
investigation in our laboratory.
In conclusion, we have shown that c-Fos has a proapoptotic
function by repressing the antiapoptotic molecule, c-FLIP(L). FDP
is necessary but insufficient for TRAIL-induced apoptosis. We
believe that presence of FDP identifies cancers that are sensitive,
while lack of FDP identifies cancers that are resistant to TRAILinduced apoptosis.

Acknowledgments
Received 4/9/2007; revised 6/4/2007; accepted 6/27/2007.
Grant support: Department of Defense grant PC040806, NIH grant DK64062, and
Howard Hughes Medical Institute/Specialized Programs of Research Excellence grant
(53000234-0006) to the Biomedical Research Support Program at Harvard Medical
School (A.F. Olumi); and NIH grant 1 R01 HL080192 and Department of Defense grant
DAMD17-03-1-0230 (R. Khosravi-Far).
The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of page
charges. This article must therefore be hereby marked advertisement in accordance
with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact.

FLIP expression by c-myc is a major determinant of
TRAIL sensitivity. Mol Cell Biol 2004;24:8541–55.
13. Yang H, Lin CH, Ma G, Baffi MO, Wathelet MG.
Interferon regulatory factor-7 synergizes with other
transcription factors through multiple interactions
with p300/CBP coactivators. J Biol Chem 2003;278:
15495–504.
14. Tillman K, Oberfield JL, Shen XQ, Bubulya A,
Shemshedini L. c-Fos dimerization with c-Jun represses
c-Jun enhancement of androgen receptor transactivation. Endocrine 1998;9:193–200.
15. Bonovich M, Olive M, Reed E, O’Connell B, Vinson C.
Adenoviral delivery of A-FOS, an AP-1 dominant
negative, selectively inhibits drug resistance in two
human cancer cell lines. Cancer Gene Ther 2002;9:62–70.
16. Zhang L, Zhang X, Barrisford GW, Olumi AF.
Lexatumumab (TRAIL-receptor 2 mAb) induces expression of DR5 and promotes apoptosis in primary and
metastatic renal cell carcinoma in a mouse orthotopic
model. Cancer Lett 2007;25:146–57.
17. Grabe N. AliBaba2: context specific identification of
transcription factor binding sites. In Silico Biol 2002;2:
S1–15.
18. Kreuz S, Siegmund D, Scheurich P, Wajant H. NF-nB
inducers upregulate cFLIP, a cycloheximide-sensitive
inhibitor of death receptor signaling. Mol Cell Biol 2001;
21:3964–73.
19. Micheau O, Lens S, Gaide O, Alevizopoulos K,
Tschopp J. NF-nB signals induce the expression of cFLIP. Mol Cell Biol 2001;21:5299–305.
20. Gao S, Lee P, Wang H, et al. The androgen receptor
directly targets the cellular Fas/FasL-associated death
domain protein-like inhibitory protein gene to promote
the androgen-independent growth of prostate cancer
cells. Mol Endocrinol 2005;19:1792–802.
21. Herdegen T, Leah JD. Inducible and constitutive
transcription factors in the mammalian nervous system:
control of gene expression by Jun, Fos and Krox, and
CREB/ATF proteins. Brain Res Brain Res Rev 1998;28:
370–490.

22. Li W, Zhang X, Olumi AF. MG-132 Sensitizes TRAILresistant Prostate Cancer Cells by Activating c-Fos/c-Jun
Heterodimers and Repressing c-FLIP(L). Cancer Res
2007;67:2247–55.
23. Jin Z, El-Deiry WS. Overview of cell death signaling
pathways. Cancer Biol Ther 2005;4:139–63.
24. Mathas S, Lietz A, Anagnostopoulos I, et al. c-FLIP
mediates resistance of Hodgkin/Reed-Sternberg cells to
death receptor-induced apoptosis. J Exp Med 2004;199:
1041–52.
25. Micheau O, Thome M, Schneider P, et al. The long
form of FLIP is an activator of caspase-8 at the Fas
death-inducing signaling complex. J Biol Chem 2002;277:
45162–71.
26. Jazirehi AR, Bonavida B. Cellular and molecular
signal transduction pathways modulated by rituximab
(rituxan, anti-CD20 mAb) in non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma:
implications in chemosensitization and therapeutic
intervention. Oncogene 2005;24:2121–43.
27. Quan T, He T, Voorhees JJ, Fisher GJ. Ultraviolet
irradiation induces Smad7 via induction of transcription
factor AP-1 in human skin fibroblasts. J Biol Chem 2005;
280:8079–85.
28. Tanos T, Marinissen MJ, Leskow FC, et al. Phosphorylation of c-Fos by members of the p38 MAPK family.
Role in the AP-1 response to UV light. J Biol Chem 2005;
280:18842–52.
29. Manchester KM, Heston WD, Donner DB. Tumour
necrosis factor-induced cytotoxicity is accompanied by
intracellular mitogenic signals in ME-180 human
cervical carcinoma cells. Biochem J 1993;290:185–90.
30. Siegmund D, Mauri D, Peters N, et al. Fas-associated
death domain protein (FADD) and caspase-8 mediate
up-regulation of c-Fos by Fas ligand and tumor necrosis
factor-related apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL) via a
FLICE inhibitory protein (FLIP)-regulated pathway.
J Biol Chem 2001;276:32585–90.
31. Drosopoulos KG, Roberts ML, Cermak L, et al.
Transformation by oncogenic RAS sensitizes human
colon cells to TRAIL-induced apoptosis by up-regulating

9433

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (19). October 1, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research
death receptor 4 and death receptor 5 through a MEKdependent pathway. J Biol Chem 2005;280:22856–67.
32. Sassone-Corsi P, Sisson JC, Verma IM. Transcriptional
autoregulation of the proto-oncogene fos. Nature 1988;
334:314–9.
33. Lucibello FC, Lowag C, Neuberg M, Muller R. transrepression of the mouse c-fos promoter: a novel mechanism
of Fos-mediated trans-regulation. Cell 1989;59:999–1007.
34. Okada S, Obata S, Hatano M, Tokuhisa T. Dominantnegative effect of the c-fos family gene products on
inducible NO synthase expression in macrophages. Int
Immunol 2003;15:1275–82.
35. Agrawal S, Agrawal A, Doughty B, et al. Cutting edge:
different Toll-like receptor agonists instruct dendritic cells
to induce distinct Th responses via differential modulation
of extracellular signal-regulated kinase-mitogen-activated
protein kinase and c-Fos. J Immunol 2003;171:4984–9.
36. Mackeigan JP, Murphy LO, Dimitri CA, Blenis J.

Graded mitogen-activated protein kinase activity precedes switch-like c-Fos induction in mammalian cells.
Mol Cell Biol 2005;25:4676–82.
37. Deng T, Karin M. c-Fos transcriptional activity
stimulated by H-Ras-activated protein kinase distinct
from JNK and ERK. Nature 1994;371:171–5.
38. David JP, Mehic D, Bakiri L, et al. Essential role of
RSK2 in c-Fos-dependent osteosarcoma development.
J Clin Invest 2005;115:664–72.
39. Manak JR, de Bisschop N, Kris RM, Prywes R. Casein
kinase II enhances the DNA binding activity of serum
response factor. Genes Dev 1990;4:955–67.
40. Wang Y, Falasca M, Schlessinger J, et al. Activation of
the c-fos serum response element by phosphatidyl
inositol 3-kinase and rho pathways in HeLa cells. Cell
Growth Differ 1998;9:513–22.
41. Acquaviva C, Bossis G, Ferrara P, Brockly F, JarielEncontre I, Piechaczyk M. Multiple degradation path-

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (19). October 1, 2007

9434

ways for Fos family proteins. Ann N Y Acad Sci 2002;973:
426–34.
42. Golks A, Brenner D, Fritsch C, Krammer PH, Lavrik
IN. c-FLIPR, a new regulator of death receptor-induced
apoptosis. J Biol Chem 2005;280:14507–13.
43. Degli-Esposti MA, Dougall WC, Smolak PJ, Waugh JY,
Smith CA, Goodwin RG. The novel receptor TRAIL-R4
induces NF-nB and protects against TRAIL-mediated
apoptosis, yet retains an incomplete death domain.
Immunity 1997;7:813–20.
44. Chang DW, Xing Z, Pan Y, et al. c-FLIP(L) is a
dual function regulator for caspase-8 activation
and CD95-mediated apoptosis. EMBO J 2002;21:
3704–14.
45. Zaichuk TA, Shroff EH, Emmanuel R, Filleur S, Nelius
T, Volpert OV. Nuclear factor of activated T cells
balances angiogenesis activation and inhibition. J Exp
Med 2004;199:1513–22.

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

c-Fos as a Proapoptotic Agent in TRAIL-Induced Apoptosis
in Prostate Cancer Cells
Xiaoping Zhang, Liang Zhang, Hongmei Yang, et al.
Cancer Res 2007;67:9425-9434.

Updated version
Supplementary
Material

Cited articles
Citing articles

E-mail alerts
Reprints and
Subscriptions
Permissions

Access the most recent version of this article at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/67/19/9425
Access the most recent supplemental material at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/suppl/2007/09/26/67.19.9425.DC1

This article cites 44 articles, 23 of which you can access for free at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/67/19/9425.full#ref-list-1
This article has been cited by 4 HighWire-hosted articles. Access the articles at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/67/19/9425.full#related-urls

Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal.
To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications
Department at pubs@aacr.org.
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications
Department at permissions@aacr.org.

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

