Oncotarget, Vol. 7, No. 7

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Valproic acid potentiates the anticancer activity of capecitabine
in vitro and in vivo in breast cancer models via induction of
thymidine phosphorylase expression
Manuela Terranova-Barberio1, Maria Serena Roca1, Andrea Ilaria Zotti1, Alessandra
Leone1, Francesca Bruzzese1, Carlo Vitagliano1, Giosuè Scogliamiglio2, Domenico
Russo3, Giovanni D’Angelo3, Renato Franco2, Alfredo Budillon1, Elena Di Gennaro1
1

Experimental Pharmacology Unit, Istituto Nazionale Tumori Fondazione G. Pascale - IRCCS, Naples, Italy

2

Pathology Unit, Istituto Nazionale Tumori Fondazione G. Pascale - IRCCS, Naples, Italy

3

Institute of Protein Biochemistry, National Research Council, Naples, Italy

Correspondence to: Alfredo Budillon, e-mail: a.budillon@istitutotumori.na.it
Keywords: HDAC inhibitor, valproic acid, thymidine phosphorylase, breast cancer, capecitabine
Received: July 27, 2015     Accepted: December 23, 2015     Published: December 31, 2015

ABSTRACT
The prognosis of patients with metastatic breast cancer remains poor, and thus
novel therapeutic approaches are needed. Capecitabine, which is commonly used
for metastatic breast cancer in different settings, is an inactive prodrug that takes
advantage of elevated levels of thymidine phosphorylase (TP), a key enzyme that is
required for its conversion to 5-fluororacil, in tumors. We demonstrated that histone
deacetylase inhibitors (HDACi), including low anticonvulsant dosage of VPA, induced
the dose- and time-dependent up-regulation of TP transcript and protein expression in
breast cancer cells, but not in the non-tumorigenic breast MCF-10A cell line. Through
the use of siRNA or isoform-specific HDACi, we demonstrated that HDAC3 is the main
isoform whose inhibition is involved in the modulation of TP. The combined treatment
with capecitabine and HDACi, including valproic acid (VPA), resulted in synergistic/
additive antiproliferative and pro-apoptotic effects in breast cancer cells but not in
TP-knockout cells, both in vitro and in vivo, highlighting the crucial role of TP in the
synergism observed. Overall, this study suggests that the combination of HDACi (e.g.,
VPA) and capecitabine is an innovative antitumor strategy that warrants further
clinical evaluation for the treatment of metastatic breast cancer.

trastuzumab. Furthermore, due to its tolerability and efficacy
as a single agent and its lack of cross-resistance with other
chemotherapeutics, capecitabine may also be considered
a preferred partner to be assessed in novel combination
regimens [2–4]. After its absorption as an intact molecule,
capecitabine is converted into 5-FU in the gastrointestinal
tract through a three-step process. The key step, the
conversion of 5’-deoxy-5-fluorouridine (5’-DFUR) into
active 5-FU, occurs primarily in the tumor and is catalyzed
by thymidine phosphorylase (TP). Subsequently, 5-FU is
metabolized into two active cytotoxic metabolites. The first,
5-fluoro-2-deoxyuridine monophosphate (FdUMP), interferes
with DNA synthesis through a reduction in thymidine
production following the inhibition of thymidylate synthase
(TS). The second, 5-fluorouridine triphosphate (FUTP),
inhibits RNA and protein synthesis by competing with

INTRODUCTION
Breast cancer remains one of the most serious
and common diseases and is second only to lung cancer
as the leading cause of cancer death in women [1].
Although advances in breast cancer treatment have led to
the development of novel therapeutics in the last years,
metastatic breast cancer is largely an incurable disease.
As a monotherapy, capecitabine, an oral prodrug
of 5-fluorourcacil (5-FU), is one of the mainstays for the
treatment of patients with metastatic breast cancer who are
ineligible for or who are pretreated with a more intensive
anthracycline- and/or taxane-based regimen. Moreover,
capecitabine is approved for use in combination with
docetaxel for the treatment of breast cancer patients who
have received prior therapy with anthracycline, taxane, and
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

7715

Oncotarget

uridine-triphosphate for incorporation into the RNA strand
[2, 5]. Therefore, TP represents the rate-limiting enzyme in
the activation of 5’-DFUR and capecitabine, and its elevated
level in many tumors allows for high local concentrations
of the active drug [2]. Indeed, in breast cancer, TP has been
considered a predictive marker for clinical response to
capecitabine [6, 7], which suggests that an increase in TP
expression might enhance sensitivity of tumor cells to this
prodrug. Conversely, the overexpression of TS has been
associated with aggressive breast cancer phenotypes and a
worse prognosis, particularly in patients with breast cancer
who are treated with 5-FU-based chemotherapy [8].
Through the regulation of acetylation of histone and
non-histone proteins, histone deacetylases (HDACs) control
cellular functions such as the cell cycle, proliferation,
survival, DNA repair and differentiation. Their expression
is frequently altered in hematologic and solid tumors [9].
Class-I HDACs (1–3, 8) are predominantly expressed in the
nucleus and are the major mediators of histone deacetylation,
whereas class-IIa HDACs (4, 5, 7, 9) and class-IIb HDACs
(6 and 10) either shuttle between the nucleus and the
cytoplasm or are predominantly expressed in the cytoplasm
where they function to deacetylate non-histone proteins [9].
A large number of histone deacetylase inhibitors (HDACi)
are currently in clinical development as anticancer agents,
and three (vorinostat, romidepsin and belinostat1) have been
approved by the FDA for the treatment of cutaneous T-cell
lymphoma [10–12]. Moreover, panobinostat was the first
HDACi approved as a combination therapy to treat recurrent
multiple myeloma [13]2. In solid tumors including breast
cancer, HDACi have failed to show considerable antitumor
activity as single agents and are more active in combination
with radiotherapy, chemotherapy or other biologicals [14].
Recently, based on the results of a phase-II randomized trial,
the HDACi entinostat has been designated as a breakthrough
therapy for the treatment of recurrent/metastatic estrogen
receptor-positive breast cancer when given in combination
with exemestane in postmenopausal women who progressed
following non-steroidal aromatase inhibitor therapy [15].
Our group demonstrated the synergistic antitumor
activity of HDACi in combination with several anticancer
agents, including 5-FU and capecitabine [16–19]. In
details, we have previously demonstrated, that the HDACi
vorinostat in combination with capecitabine produces a
synergistic antitumor effects by up-regulating, in vitro and
in vivo, in colorectal cancer cells but not in ex vivo treated
peripheral blood lymphocytes, the mRNA and protein
expression of TP [18].
Valproic acid (VPA) is a generic low-cost
anticonvulsant and mood stabilizer that has been used for
over 40 years and that demonstrates HDAC inhibitory
activity and anticancer properties [20]. Compared

with other HDACi, VPA has a good safety profile, and
neovestibular symptoms, fatigue and somnolence are
the only dose-limiting toxicities [20]. Several phase-I
and phase-II studies of VPA in hematologic and solid
malignancies, including breast cancer, showed that VPA,
either as a monotherapy or in combination with other
agents, was reasonably well tolerated and resulted in some
encouraging responses [20–24].
In the present study, we demonstrated that several
HDACi including VPA down-regulate TS and up-regulate
TP mRNA and protein expression in breast cancer cell
lines. VPA modulates TP at the transcriptional level, and
this alteration primarily involves the HDAC3 isoform.
We showed that these effects were obtained even with
low doses of VPA easily achieved in epileptic patients
treated with common anticonvulsant dosage. Moreover,
through the use of a stable TP-knockout cell model, we
demonstrated that TP has a critical role both in vitro and
in vivo in the synergistic antitumor effects of VPA in
combination with 5’-DFUR and capecitabine, respectively.

RESULTS
Cytotoxic effects of HDACi and 5’-DFUR in
breast cancer cells
Multiple cell lines that represent the molecular
diversity of breast cancer were equally sensitive to the
cytotoxic effect of different HDACi (VPA, vorinostat,
entinostat and panobinostat) independently of subtype, p53,
RAS, hormone receptor expression (ER and PR), HER2
status (Table 1) or the basal expression of HDAC isoforms,
TS or TP proteins (Supplementary Figure S1). Conversely,
in the two triple negative MDA-MB231 and MDAMB468 cell lines, lower mRNA and protein expression
of TP correlated with lower sensitivity to the capecitabine
metabolite 5’-DFUR (Table 1 and Supplementary Figure
S1A and S1B), which confirms the critical role of TP
expression for fluoropyrimidine-induced cytotoxicity.
MDA-MB231, together with the non-tumorigenic cell
line MCF-10A, is the only breast cancer cell line to express
the mesenchymal marker vimentin, while all the other three
breast cancer cell lines (MCF-7, SKBR3 and MDA-MB468)
express the epithelial marker E-cadherin (Supplementary
Figure S1A). Moreover MDA-MB231 and MCF-10A
showed a similar high basal expression of HDAC3 and
HDAC6 enzymes compared to the other tumorigenic cell
lines analysed (Supplementary Figure S1C).

HDACi modulate TS and TP proteins
We then demonstrated that HDACi with different
specificity are able to modulate TP and TS protein levels in
all breast cancer cell lines, as previously described by us and
other groups in different tumor models [18, 25, 26]. Both
pan-HDACi (e.g., vorinostat, trichostatin-A, panobinostat)

http://www.fda.gov/newsevents/newsroom/
pressannouncements/ucm403929.htm
2	
http://www.fda.gov/NewsEvents/Newsroom/
PressAnnouncements/ucm435296.htm
1	

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

7716

Oncotarget

Table 1: Characteristics and sensitivity of breast cancer cell lines to vorinostat, panobinostat, valproic acid,
entinostat and 5’-DFUR
cell lines

breast
cancer
subtype

p53 status

RAS
status

additional
features

IC50
vor, μM
(± SD)

IC50
pan, μM
(± SD)

IC50
VPA, mM
(± SD)

IC50
ent, μM
(± SD)

IC50
5’-DFUR,
μM
(± SD)

MCF-7

Luminal B

wt

wt

ER+/PR+
/Her2−

0.77
(± 0.28)

0.029
(± 0.016)

2.22
(± 0.74)

0.46
(± 0.023)

2.03
(± 0.18)

SKBR3

Basal like

mut

wt

ER−/PR−/
Her2+++

1.24
(± 0.22)

0.046
(± 0.0066)

1.69
(± 0.54)

0.83
(± 0.3)

1.99
(± 0.57)

MDAMB231

Triple
negative
Basal like

mut

mut

ER−/PR−/
Her2−

0.92
(± 0.17)

0.10
(± 0.028)

1.60
(± 0.17)

0.2
(± 0.035)

10.4
(± 3.78)

MDAMB468

Triple
negative
Basal like

mut

wt

ER−/PR−/
Her2−

0.76
(± 0.12)

0.11
(± 0.011)

3.19
(± 0.75)

1.01
(± 0.21)

12.14
(± 1.09)

IC50 values computed at 96 hours of treatment (mean ± SD from at least three separate experiments performed in
quadruplicates).
Abbreviations: vor (vorinostat); pan (panobinostat), VPA (valproic acid); ent (entinostat); 5’-DFUR (5’-deoxy-5fluorouridine); mut (mutant); wt (wild-type); ER (estrogen receptor); PR (progesterone receptor); Her2 (human epidermal
growth factor receptor 2); SD (standard deviation).
and class-I/IIa (e.g., VPA) or class-I HDACi (e.g.,
entinostat) are able to up-regulate TP and down-regulate TS
expression in MCF-7 cells. However, the HDAC6-selective
inhibitor tubacin is unable to modulate TS protein and only
slightly induces TP expression compared with its inactive
homologue niltubacin [27] (Figure 1A). Time- and dosedependent modulation of TP and TS proteins by vorinostat,
panobinostat and VPA were confirmed in all cell lines within
10 hours of treatment. This modulation was independent
of basal expression of both enzymes (Figure 1B, 1C and
Supplementary Figure S2). Notably, even low doses of
HDACi are able to up-regulate the level of TP and downregulate the level of TS (Figure 1B and 1C). A time-course
VPA removal experiment revealed that the VPA-induced
up-regulation of TP protein lasts as long as 24 hours after
treatment, while the down-regulation of TS is prolonged up
to 48 hours after washout (Supplementary Figure S3).
Notably, in the non-tumorigenic cell line MCF10A, although increased histone-H3 acetylation was
evident after 24 hours, we did not observe TP induction
or TS down-regulation by VPA (Figure 1D). Moreover
a time-course experiment showed no major changes of
both proteins up to 72 h of VPA treatment (Supplementary
Figure S2B), confirming that the modulation of both
enzymes is confined to cancer cells.

As shown in Figure 2A, the up-regulation of TP
protein correlates with a dose- and time-dependent mRNA
increase induced by VPA in MCF-7 cells. Moreover, the
VPA-mediated increase of TP mRNA within 10 hours
was completely blocked by concurrent treatment with
the transcriptional inhibitor actinomycin-D. This result
is consistent with a transcriptional effect (Figure 2B).
GADD45a, a well-known gene that is up-regulated by
HDACi at the transcriptional level [28], was evaluated as
positive control.
On the basis of the data shown in Figure 1 and to
identify if a specific HDAC isoform is involved in the
modulation of TP, we treated MCF-7 cells with HDAC1,
HDAC2, HDAC3, HDAC6 or scrambled siRNAs (33
nM) for 24 hours. As shown in Figure 2C, HDAC3
silencing produced the best induction of TP transcript,
whereas no effect or just a slight increase was observed
with HDAC1 or HDAC2 silencing, respectively.
An evident but smaller increase was observed with
HDAC6 silencing. Moreover, to confirm these data,
we evaluated TP transcript in MCF-7 cells that were
treated with vorinostat, which may inhibit all four
class-I HDACs (1,2,3,8) and HDAC6 [29]. The cells
were also treated with VPA, a class-I HDAC inhibitor
that may also partially inhibit class-IIa HDACs (4, 5, 7
but not HDAC9) [20]. TP transcript was also evaluated
in cells that were treated with the selective-HDAC1-2
inhibitor MRLB-223 [30], the class-I-selective HDACi
romidepsin, the selective-HDAC6 inhibitor rocilinostat
[31], and the selective-HDAC3 inhibitor RGFP-966
[31]. As shown in Figure 2E, the best induction of
TP transcript was observed in cells that were treated

HDACi induce TP expression at the
transcriptional level
We next evaluated the mechanism of HDACimediated induction of TP protein that is observed in breast
cancer cells.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

7717

Oncotarget

with VPA, romidepsin or RGFP-966, which confirms
that class-I HDACs, and HDAC3 in particular, are the
primary HDACs that are involved in the regulation of
TP expression in MCF-7 cells. However, rocilinostat
also induced TP expression, albeit to a lesser extent,
which suggests that HDAC6 may also be involved.
Conversely, TS down-regulation was significantly
induced by all HDACi tested but primarily by MRLB223 and romidepsin, which suggests that HDACs 1
and 2 are probably involved in the modulation of TS.
Notably, these data were also confirmed at the protein
level, with romidepsin and RGFP-966 as the best
inducers of TP and MRLB-223 and romidepsin as the
best down-regulators of TS. Because deacetylation of
α-tubulin is mediated by HDAC6, we used α-tubulin
acetylation as a marker of HDAC6 inhibitor activity,
while histone-H3 acetylation was used as a surrogate
marker of class-I HDACi activity (Figure 2F).

Interestingly, although only vorinostat and rocilinostat
were confirmed as HDAC6 inhibitors, being able to
induce α-tubulin acetylation, the ability of rocilinostat
also to induced histone-H3 acetylation, suggest that the
induction of TP expression by this latter agent could not
be related to HDAC6 inhibition. We should also note
that the comparable dosage of the inhibitors used in
these assays was derived from published data and could
have influenced the extent of the observed effects [30,
32, 33]. Similarly, HDAC isoform-specific silencing
resulted in compensatory modulation of different
HDACs (data not shown) that might have affected the
modulation of TP expression.
The observed modulation of TS and TP expression
prompted us to investigate if, consequently, HDACi
(particularly VPA) might increase the sensitivity of breast
cancer cells to fluoropyrimidines such as 5’-DFUR and
capecitabine.

Figure 1: HDACi modulates TP and TS expression in breast cancer cell lines in a dose- and time-dependent manner.

Protein expression was determined by western blot. A. TP, TS, acetyl-H3 and acetyl-α-tubulin proteins evaluated in MCF-7 cells untreated
or treated for 24 hours with different HDACi at concentration corresponding to IC5072h. B. TP and TS proteins evaluated in MCF-7 untreated
or treated with increased doses of VPA for 10, 24 or 48 hours. C. TP and TS proteins evaluated in MCF-7, SKBR3 and MDA-MB231 breast
cancer cells untreated or treated with increased doses of vorinostat, panobinostat or VPA for 48 hours. D. TP, TS and acetyl-H3 proteins
evaluated in non-tumorigenic MCF-10A cells untreated or treated with increased doses of VPA for 24 hours. For A, B, C and D, γ-tubulin
or GAPDH were used as protein loading control.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

7718

Oncotarget

In vitro synergistic antitumor effects of HDACi
in combination with 5’-DFUR in breast cancer
cell lines

dose reduction that was obtained for the IC50 (DRI50), in
combination versus single-agent treatments (Table 2).
Indeed, in all three cell lines, the combination resulted in
the reduction of IC50 values (DRI50) from a mean of 1.46to 4.58-fold for the HDACi, and from 2.44- to 14.5-fold
for 5’-DFUR. Notably, in the breast non-tumorigenic cell
line MCF-10A, in which VPA was unable to modulate
the expression of TP, the combination of 5’-DFUR with
either entinostat or VPA resulted in only additive (CIs =
0.9-1.1) if not antagonistic effect (CIs > 1.1). Moreover,
the best interaction between 5’-DFUR and HDACi (CIs
always < 0.7) was observed in MDA-MB468, which
exhibits the lowest expression of TP out of any of the cell
lines (Supplementary Figure S1). This again suggests the
critical role of TP modulation in the observed synergism.
We found only additive antiproliferative effects in
MDA-MB231 cells, even if we were able to modulate
TP protein and mRNA levels by HDACi (Figure 1C,

We first evaluated the cytotoxic effects of different
HDACi in combination with 5’-DFUR by performing
a median drug effect analysis and by calculating the
combination indexes (CIs) [16], after the cells were
treated with equipotent doses of the two agents (50:50
cytotoxic ratio) for 96 hours. As shown in Table 2 , we
obtained consistent synergistic effects with low CIs
(<0.9), which were calculated at 50% (CI50) or 75%
(CI75) of cell lethality, in three out of four breast cancer
cell lines (MCF-7, SKBR3, MDA-MB468); all HDACi
were tested, and the best results were observed with
VPA. The synergistic interaction was confirmed by an
evaluation of the dose reduction indexes (DRIs), which
represent the order of magnitude (i.e., fold change) of the

Figure 2: HDACi induced TP expression at the transcriptional level. A. TP mRNA expression was evaluated by qRealTime-

PCR in untreated MCF-7 cells and MCF-7 cells that were treated with increased doses of VPA for 6 or 10 hours. B. MCF-7 cells that were
untreated or treated with VPA (2.5 mM) and/or actinomycin D (1μg/mL) for 10 hours. The expression levels of TP and GADD45a mRNA
were determined by qRealTime-PCR. C. TP mRNA expression was determined by qRealTime-PCR in MCF-7 cells that were exposed
to HDAC1, HDAC2, HDAC3, HDAC6 or scrambled (33 nM) siRNA for 24 hours. D. The efficiency of HDAC1, HDAC2, HDAC3 and
HDAC6 knockdown was verified by qRealTime-PCR. E. The expression levels of TP and TS mRNA were evaluated by qRealTime-PCR
in untreated MCF-7 cells and in MCF-7 cells that were untreated or treated with selective HDACi at the indicated concentrations for 24
hours. For A, B, C, D and E, β-actin was used as the housekeeping control gene to which the expression levels obtained by qRealTimePCR were normalized. F. The expression of TP, TS, acetylated H3 and acetylated α-tubulin proteins was determined by western blot in
untreated cells and in MCF-7 cells that were treated for 48 hours with different HDACi at the indicated concentrations. α-tubulin was used
as the protein loading control.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

7719

Oncotarget

Table 2: Combination index (CI) and dose reduction index (DRI) values for HDACi (vorinostat, panobinostat,
entinostat or VPA) and 5’-DFUR combination treatment.
cell lines

a

CI50 ± SD

a

CI75 ± SD

vorinostat + 5’DFUR vorinostat + 5’DFUR

b

DRI at IC50 ± SD
vorinostat

5’-DFUR

SKBR3

0.63 ± 0.23

0.70 ± 0.21

3.42 ± 1.70

3.8 ± 1.82

MDA-MB231

0.98± 0.27

1.02± 0.1

3.46 ± 1.7

1.34 ± 0.62

MDA-MB468

0.49 ± 0.13

0.50 ± 0.14

2.64 ± 0.78

10.62 ± 4.1

MCF-7

0.71 ± 0.10

0.71 ± 0.068

2.67 ± 0.65

3 ± 1.10

panobinostat +
5’DFUR

panobinostat +
5’DFUR

panobinostat

5’-DFUR

SKBR3

0.73 ± 0.15

0.71 ± 0.2

3.43 ± 1.76

3.44 ± 1.73

MDA-MB231

0.99 ± 0.4

0.93 ± 0.4

2.56 ± 1.07

2.17 ± 1.67

MDA-MB468

0.53 ± 0.2

0.58 ± 0.15

4.58 ± 2.7

5.45 ± 1.25

MCF-7

0.58 ± 0.16

0.61 ± 0.094

3.08 ± 1.72

4.5 ± 1.99

entinostat + 5’DFUR

entinostat + 5’DFUR

entinostat

5’-DFUR

SKBR3

0.76 ± 0.01

0.74 ± 0.10

4.38 ± 2.28

2.44 ± 1.29

MDA-MB231

1.12 ± 0.04

1.26 ± 0.20

1.35 ± 0.24

2.92 ± 1.15

MDA-MB468

0.55 ± 0.045

0.54 ± 0.022

3.32 ± 1.56

3.0 ± 0.84

MCF-7

0.75 ± 0.16

0.76 ± 0.11

1.46 ± 0.36

14.5 ± 3.59

MCF-10A

1.22 ± 0.14

1.57 ± 0.036

1.53 ± 0.32

1.81 ± 0.10

VPA + 5’DFUR

VPA + 5’DFUR

VPA

5’-DFUR

SKBR3

0.63 ± 0.14

0.59 ± 0.2

2.89 ± 1.5

4.45 ± 2.12

MDA-MB231

1.04 ± 0.037

1.06 ± 0.066

2.06 ± 0.36

1.71 ± 0.42

MDA-MB468

0.61 ± 0.17

0.65 ± 0.083

2.81 ± 1.27

5.81 ± 2.9

MCF-7

0.59 ± 0.24

0.56 ± 0.2

2.39 ± 0.76

6.45 ± 4.62

MCF-10A

1.11 ± 0.19

1.11 ± 0.18

0.99 ± 0.17

8.39 ± 7.13

CI values (mean ± SD from at least three separate experiments performed in quadruplicates) computed at 50 and 75%
of cell kill (CI50 and CI75, respectively) according by CalcuSyn software after 96 hours of treatment. Combinations were
considered strongly synergistic when CIs were below 0.9. bDRI values (mean ± SD from at least three separate experiments
performed in quadruplicates) represents the order of magnitude (fold) of dose reduction obtained for IC50 (DRI50) in
combination setting compared with each drug alone.
Abbreviations: VPA (valproic acid); 5’-DFUR (5’-deoxy-5-fluorouridine)
a

Supplementary Figure S2A, Supplementary Figure
S4A and S4B). On this regard, we also investigate,
by chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assay, the
levels of two active histone marks at TP promoter: the
acetylation of histone 3 lysine 9 (H3K9Ac) and the
trimethylation of H3 lysine 4, (H3-K4me3). However,
we observed a clear increase of both H3K9Ac and H3K4me3 in cells treated with either VPA or VPA/5’DFUR combination, in line with the TP protein and
mRNA induction observed (Supplementary Figure
S4C). Interestingly, we observed a slightly better effect
(lower CIs) when we treated MDA-MB231 with higher
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

relative doses of VPA (75:25 cytotoxic ratio, data not
shown).
Finally, we confirm that TP modulation by low
doses of VPA and by isoform-selective HDACi also
translate in increase sensitivity to 5’-DFUR. In details,
we demonstrated that combination treatment with IC30 of
VPA resulted in up to 4.5-fold of 5’-DFUR IC50 reduction
in MCF-7 cells (Supplementary Figure S5). Similarly, by
combining 5’-DFUR with IC30 of RGFP-966 we obtained
more than 2-fold of IC50 reduction. Conversely, a slight
or no IC50 reduction was observed in combination with
rocilinostat and MRLB-223, respectively.
7720

Oncotarget

TP protein expression plays a critical role in
synergistic antiproliferative and pro-apoptotic effect
induced by the combination of VPA/5’-DFUR

(Figure 4A), the percent of tumor volume change (Figure
4B), the tumor growth delay (TGD) (Figure 4C) and the CI
value (Figure 4D). Specifically, twenty-eight xenografted
mice for each cell line were randomly assigned to
receive sub-therapeutic doses of VPA (200 mg/kg i.p.),
capecitabine (359 mg/Kg p.o.), both drugs in combination,
or their respective vehicles as a control. Treatments were
administered 5 days/week for three weeks.
As shown in Figure 4A, the combination treatment
induced a significant inhibition of tumor growth compared
with single-agent treatments only in the mice that were
injected with control cells (sh-control MCF-7). In mice
that were injected with sh-TP MCF-7 cells, no significant
difference was observed compared with capecitabine
treatment alone.
Moreover, by calculating the percent change in
tumor volume from the time of initial treatment (day 0)
to the end of the study (day 37), VPA, capecitabine and
combination treatment reduced the tumor burden in shcontrol mice by 11.4%, 32.9% and 62.4%, respectively.
However, in the TP-knockout xenografts, VPA did not
reduce the tumor burden, while capecitabine as both
a single agent and in combination treatment, reduced
the tumor burden by 14.2% (Figure 4B). The resultant
TGD in the sh-control mice that were treated with a
combination reached a peak of more than 60%, and the
rate of tumor growth in the control, at that point, was
2-fold higher (Figure 4C). Either a reduced TGD or no
effect was observed with single-agent capecitabine or
VPA treatments, respectively. Furthermore, the synergistic
effect of VPA/capecitabine was also confirmed by the
reported CIs versus the LCK (Figure 4D). Notably,
the evaluation of the TGD and CIs did not show any
synergistic effect in TP-knockout xenografts (Figure 4C
and 4D).
The combined treatment of VPA plus capecitabine
was well tolerated, as shown by the maintenance
of body weight (inset in Figure 4A) and the absence
of other signs of acute or delayed toxicity in both
xenograft models.

To confirm that the HDACi-induced expression
of TP is mechanistically correlated with the observed
synergism, we next evaluated whether a stable TPknockout by a specific shRNA would affect the
antiproliferative synergistic effect of HDACi/5’-DFUR.
MCF-7 cells were transfected with TP-specific sh-RNA
or with control sh-RNA, and four pooled clones in
which TP was stably silenced (MCF-7 sh-TP), clearly
showed a significant reduction (5-fold) of TP transcript
and protein, but similar TS expression compared
with the empty vector-transfected clones (MCF-7 shcontrol) or wild type (wt-) untrasfected MCF-7 cells
(Supplementary Figure S6A). The loss of TP was able
to reduce the antiproliferative effect observed after
VPA/5’-DFUR combination (Supplementary Figure
S6B). As shown in Figure 3B and 3C, increasing doses
of VPA were unable to induce TP mRNA or protein
expression in MCF-7 sh-TP cells compared with MCF7 sh-control cells.
Combined treatment with either VPA or entinostat and
5’-DFUR for 96 hours at the same ratio as that evaluated in
parental MCF-7 cells, resulted in synergistic antiproliferative
effects in MCF-7 sh-control cells, but not in MCF-7 sh-TP cells
as shown by the CI values (Figure 3A) and antiproliferative
curves (Supplementary Figure S6B). Moreover, a statistically
significant induction of apoptosis upon VPA/5’-DFUR
combination treatment compared with single-agent treatments
after 72 hours of exposure was observed in wt-MCF-7
cells but not in sh-TP cells, as demonstrated by Annexin
V-FITC staining (Figure 3D). This effect correlates with a
less pronounced amount of PARP (1.7-fold increase) and
Caspase 3 (2.4-fold increase) cleavage, which was induced
by combination treatment in sh-TP cells compared with wtMCF7 (3.8-fold and 4.1-fold increase, respectively) (Figure
3E). Again, TP protein induction after VPA or VPA/5’-DFUR
treatments was observed only in wt-MCF-7 cells but not in
sh-TP cells (Figure 3E).
All together, these findings confirmed that TP upregulation is critical for the synergistic antiproliferative
effects and apoptotic cell death induced by the
combination of VPA/5’-DFUR.

Pharmacodynamic effects in xenograft tumors
treated with a combination of VPA/capecitabine
At day 32, which represents the end of the treatment,
we sacrificed one mouse per group (each with two tumors,
one on each flank) to perform a pharmacodynamic
analysis.
To confirm the synergistic effect and the modulation
of both TS and TP in tumor cells in vivo, we isolated
mRNA and proteins from tumor tissues and also performed
IHC analysis on formalin fixed paraffin embedded (FFPE)
tumor sections.
As shown in Figure 5, the down-regulation of
TS protein (Figure 5A) and the up-regulation of TP
mRNA and protein levels (Figure 5B) after VPA and or

In vivo synergistic antitumor effect of VPA in
combination with capecitabine is limited to
TP-expressing cells
To confirm the synergistic interaction between
HDACi and fluoropyrimidines in vivo and the critical role
of HDACi-mediated TP up-regulation, we evaluated VPA
in combination with capecitabine in both sh-control and
sh-TP MCF-7 xenograft models in athymic mice. This was
accomplished through the measurement of tumor volume
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

7721

Oncotarget

combination treatment, were also observed in MCF-7 shcontrol xenograft tumor tissues. MCF-7 sh-TP xenografts
were confirmed to express very low levels of TP-protein
or mRNA, which were not modulated by VPA. On the
other hand, TS protein was down-regulated by VPA
and by combination treatment in these tumors (Figure
5A). Similar data were obtained by an IHC analysis of
xenograft tumor sections (Figure 5C and 5D). An analysis
of mitotic and necrotic cells on H&E-stained slides of
tumor sections demonstrated an increase in the percentage
of necrotic cells after single-agent or combination
treatment compared with vehicle treatment in MCF-7 shcontrol xenografts but not in TP-knockout tumors (Figure
5C and 5D).

As expected, a western blot analysis of total
lysine acetylation demonstrated a significant increase
in both the VPA and VPA/capecitabine groups
compared with controls, but we also observed an
evident increase in histone-H3 acetylation in the
capecitabine group (Figure 5A) as we have previously
reported [18].
Finally, it was shown that TP, which is also
known as pro-angiogenic platelet-derived endothelial
cell growth factor (PD-ECGF), may contribute to
angiogenesis through VEGF secretion and through other
mechanisms [34]. However, we have not observed any
modulation of VEGF mRNA expression (supplementary
Figure S7A) or VEGF secretion (Supplementary Figure

Figure 3: TP protein plays a critical role in the synergistic antiproliferative and pro-apoptotic effect induced by the
combination of VPA and 5’-DFUR. A. Synergistic interaction between VPA or entinostat and 5’-DFUR evaluated in MCF-7 sh-

control and MCF-7 sh-TP cells by calculation of CI values when 50% and 75% of the cells had died (CI50 and CI75, respectively) according
to CalcuSyn software after 96 hours of treatment (Mean ± SD from at least three separate experiments performed in quadruplicate). B. TP
mRNA expression in MCF-7 sh-control and MCF-7 sh-TP cells that were either untreated or treated with increasing doses of VPA for 10 or
24 hours, as determined by qRealTime-PCR. C. TP and TS protein expression was determined by western blot in MCF-7 sh-control and
MCF-7 sh-TP cells that were either untreated or treated with increasing doses of VPA for 24 hours. D. Apoptotic effect as assessed by flow
cytometric analysis upon Annexin V-FITC staining of MCF-7 sh-control, MCF-7 wt, and MCF-7 sh-TP cells that were either untreated or
treated for 72 hours with 2 mM VPA and/or 0.75 μM 5’-DFUR (Statistical analysis: One-way ANOVA, *p ≤ 0.001, **p = 0.003). E. The
expression of cleaved-PARP, TP and cleaved-caspase 3 proteins as evaluated by western blot in MCF-7 wt and MCF-7 sh-TP cells that were
untreated or treated for 48 hours with 2 mM VPA and/or 0.75 μM 5’-DFUR. γ-tubulin was used as the protein loading control.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

7722

Oncotarget

DISCUSSION

S7B) in VPA-treated cells. Similarly, no effect was
observed in other angiogenesis-related factors such
as PDGF, FGF, G-CSF and GM-CSF (Supplementary
Figure S7C and S7D) or in any of the 27 cytokines
that were analyzed (data not shown). Moreover, no
significant induction of endothelial cells in histological
tissue sections as evaluated by IHC analysis of CD31
expression was observed in VPA-treated tumors
(Supplementary Figure S8).
Taken together, these data confirmed our in vitro
findings, which demonstrate a synergistic antitumor
interaction between VPA and capecitabine and the crucial
role of TP up-regulation that occurs as a result of this
effect.

Although several improvements in terms of therapy
have been made in the last years, the prognosis of patients
with recurrent/metastatic breast cancer remains poor.
In this study, we reported an innovative and rational
therapeutic approach in breast cancer models based upon
the combination of the HDACi VPA with capecitabine,
a drug largely used to treat this disease. The results we
obtained suggest that the up-regulation of TP, a critical
enzyme in the final step of the metabolic transformation of
the capecitabine metabolite 5’-DFUR to 5-FU, is induced
by VPA and other HDACi. This up-regulation is crucial
for the synergistic effect and may explain the mechanism

Figure 4: Synergistic antitumor effect induced by VPA/capecitabine combination in vivo strictly depends on TP
modulation. MCF-7 sh-control and MCF-7 sh-TP cells (8 × 106) were s.c. injected into athymic mice as described in the Materials and
Methods. When established tumors were palpable, mice were treated with VPA (200 mg/kg i.p.), capecitabine (359 mg/Kg p.o.), or both
drugs 5 days/week for three weeks. A. Relative tumor volume curves for MCF-7 sh-control and MCF-7 sh-TP xenografts. Mean ± SD
tumour volume measured at pre-specified time points (n = 7). *, P ≤ 0.001; and **, P ≤ 0.05. Inset, body weight measured three times/week.
B. Tumour volume averages from each group at day 0 and day 37 were compared and presented as percentages of vehicle. C. Tumor
growth delay (TGD), determined, in both MCF-7 sh-control and MCF-7 sh-TP xenografts, as %TGD = [(T - C) / C] × 100, where T and
C are the mean times expressed in days for the treated or control groups, respectively, to reach a defined tumour volume (see Materials
and Methods). D. In vivo VPA plus capecitabine combination studies evaluated by CalcuSyn in both MCF-7 sh-control and MCF-7 shTP xenografts. For the calculation of CI, the values of log cell kill (LCK) for a fixed tumour volume were considered (see Materials and
Methods).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

7723

Oncotarget

behind the synergistic interaction between these two agents,
which is observed both in vitro and in vivo (Figure 6).
Our results demonstrated in vitro that concurrent
exposure of equipotent doses of an HDACi (e.g., VPA,
vorinostat, panobinostat and entinostat) and 5’-DFUR,
resulted in synergistic/additive antiproliferative and
pro-apoptotic effects in all breast cancer cell lines
examined and that these effects were independent of
their characteristics and genetic backgrounds, being
observed in ER+ MCF-7, HER-2 overexpressing SKBR3
or triple-negative MDA-468 cells. In MDA-MB231
cells, which have a hypermethylated TP promoter and
express a low level of TP protein, we observed only
an additive effect. However, in this cell line, both TP
transcript and protein were up-regulated by all HDACi

tested. We also performed a ChiP assay to measure
the levels of two active histone marks at TP promoter
and confirmed that they were both increase by VPA or
VPA/5’-DFUR combination, in line with TP transcript
and protein induction. Altogether, these results suggested
that the absence of synergism in MDA-MB231 cells is
not dependent on the lack of TP up-regulation. We can
speculate that their different genetic background, being
these cells the only one carrying both p53 and KRAS
mutations, or their mesenchymal phenotype, could explain
their intrinsic resistance to fluoropyrimidine, as suggested
before [36, 37]. Alternatively, the presence of a mutated/
inactive TP enzyme, described in disease other than cancer
[38] could not be excluded and further studies are needed
to investigate this hypothesis.

Figure 5: Role of TP expression on pharmacodynamic effects in xenograft tumors treated with VPA/capecitabine
combination. Tumors from one mouse (carrying two tumors, one on each flank) per group were collected at the end of the treatment in both
MCF-7 sh-control and MCF-7 sh-TP xenografts. A. TP, TS, acetyl-H3 and acetyl-Lysine protein expression determined by western blot.
γ-tubulin was used as protein loading control. B. TP mRNA expression determined by qRealTime-PCR. β-actin was used as housekeeping
control gene to normalize qRealTime-PCR reactions. C. Paraffin-embedded tissues were generated for each group for hematoxylin and
eosin stain (H&E) and immunohistochemistry analysis for TP as described in the Materials and Methods. Images were captured with a 20x
or 40x objective on a light microscope. D. Tumour sections stained for TP were scored semiquantitatively for the percentage of positive
cells. Necrotic area was evaluated as the percentage of necrosis inner to tumoral nodule.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

7724

Oncotarget

Although the synergistic intereraction with 5’DFUR was observed with pan-HDACi such as vorinostat
and panobinostat as well as with the class I selective
HDACi such as entinostat and VPA, we focused on
VPA for all subsequent experiments and for our in vivo
study because, due to its safe use as a chronic therapy
for epileptic disorders, it is a very good candidate for the
translation of our findings in a proof-of-concept clinical
study. Significantly, the synergistic effect demonstrated
in vitro was confirmed in vivo in an MCF-7 breast cancer
cell xenograft model where VPA plus capecitabine
compared with single-agent treatments demonstrated a
clear inhibition of tumor growth. This was confirmed by
the assessment of the percentage of the reduction in the
tumor volume, the TGD and the evaluation of the CI.
VPA up-regulates TP, both in vitro and in vivo,
through a transcriptional mechanism, which confirmed the
results obtained by our group in colorectal cancer models
and those of Puppin et al. in breast cancer cells [18, 26].
Through the use of siRNA or isoform-specific
HDACi, we provided several pieces of evidence that are
consistent with the hypothesis that HDAC3, one of the
direct targets of VPA, is the main isoform involved in
the regulation of TP expression. Indeed, both HDAC3specific siRNA and the isoform-specific inhibitor RGFP966 are the most effective with respect to the induction
of TP expression. This observation is clinically relevant
because HDAC3 is emerging as a critical anticancer

target [39–41] and more selective HDAC3 inhibitors may
have a more favorable side-effect profile than class-I or
non-selective HDACi. However, we cannot completely
exclude the possibility that other class-I HDACs are
involved. We observed that the HDAC6-specific siRNA
and the HDAC6-inhibitor rocilinostat also up-regulated
TP expression. However the observation that rocilinostat
could target also class-I HDACs [31] and that tubacin,
another HDAC6-inhibitor, only slightly affect TP
expression, suggest that TP regulation could be confined
to class-I HDACs. Significantly, HDAC3 inhibitor RGFP966 in combination treatment induced a 2-fold reduction
of 5’-DFUR IC50 compared to modest or no effect obtained
with HDAC6 inhibitor rocilinostat or HDAC1-2 inhibitor
MRLB-223. Moreover, the compensatory modulation of
other HDAC isoforms upon siRNA-mediated HDAC6
down-modulation, could, at least in part, explain some
of our contradictory findings. Furthermore, the evident
up-regulation of TP by HDACi (i.e., such as by VPA,
depsipeptide or entinostat) not supposed to affect HDAC6,
reinforces our hypothesis. Nevertheless, further studies are
necessary to confirm the specific involvement of HDAC3
in the regulation of TP expression in cancer cells.
Low doses of VPA that are typically given as
anticonvulsant therapy in the treatment of epileptic
patients and that correspond to the plasma level range
of 50-100 mg/ml, are included within the clinical limits
of tolerance. Remarkably, these low doses were able to

Figure 6: Mechanism of action of capecitabine and proposed synergistic interaction with valproic acid. Capecitabine is

an oral fluoropyrimidine absorbed unchanged through the gastrointestinal wall and converted to 5’-DFUR in the liver, by the sequential
action of CE and CyD, and to 5-FU in tumor cells by TP. The active metabolite FdUMP by binding and inhibiting TS, causes rapid
depletion of dTTP and thus thymine-less apoptosis. FdUTP and FUTP can be incorporated into DNA and RNA, respectively, contributing
to 5-FU cytotoxicity. VPA synergizes with capecitabine preferentially by up-regulating TP, while down-regulation of TS expression is only
partially involved. Abbreviation: CE, carboxylesterase; 5-DFCR, 5’-deoxy-5-fluorocytidine; CyD, cytidine deaminase; 5-DFUR, 5’-deoxy5-fluorouridine; TP, thymidine phosphorylase; 5-FU, 5-fluorouracil; OPRT, orotate phosphoribosyl transferase; FUMP, 5-fluorouridine
monophosphate; FUDP, 5-fluorouridinediphosphate; RR, ribonucleotide reductase; FUTP, 5-fluorouridine triphosphate; F-dUrd, 5-fluoro-2’deoxyuridine; TK, thymidine kinase; F-dUDP, 5-Fluoro-2’-deoxyuridine diphosphate; F-dUMP, 5-fluoro-2’-deoxyuridine monophosphate;
dUMP, 2’-deoxyuridine monophosphate; TS, thymidylate synthase; F-dUTP, 5-Fluoro-2’-deoxyuridine triphosphate; NDK, nucleoside
diphosphate kinase; UMP-CMPK, urdine monophosphate-cytidine monophosphate kinase; dTTP, Deoxythymidine triphosphate.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

7725

Oncotarget

significantly modulate TP expression within a few hours.
This suggests that the enhanced lethality of combination
treatment could primarily be attributed to this mechanism.
Indeed low doses of VPA were able to reduce 5’-DFUR
IC50 up to 4.5-fold in combination treatment. Moreover,
we showed that TP-knockout in MCF-7 cells significantly
suppresses both in vitro and in vivo, the synergistic
antitumor effect induced by the VPA/capecitabine
combination, which confirms the critical role of TP in the
observed synergism.
We also showed that VPA in breast cancer cells
and in xenograft tumors induced the down-regulation
of TS, the target of 5-FU. However, although this effect
may contribute to the synergistic antitumor effect of
fluoropyrimidine, it is not essential (Figure 6). Indeed, in
TP-knockout cells, even though we observed TS downregulation upon VPA treatment, both in vitro and in vivo,
the synergistic antitumor effect with capecitabine was
abrogated.
Interestingly, in the non-tumorigenic mammary cell
line MCF-10A, we did not observe TP and TS modulation
after VPA treatment or the synergistic/additive effect
between VPA or entinostat and 5’-DFUR. Consequently,
we can assume that, as demonstrated for other genes, TP
can be specifically modulated by HDACi in tumor cells in
which TP is deregulated either by promoter methylation
or other mechanisms, while normal cells are not affected.
This observation suggests that the increased antitumor
effect observed in tumor cells both in vitro and in vivo by
a combination of HDACi and fluoropyrimidines should
not translate into an increased toxicity in normal cells.
Indeed, no additional toxic effect was observed in vivo in
the setting of combination therapy compared with singleagent treatments.
PD-ECGF/TP expression may contribute to
angiogenesis, tumor progression and metastasis via
mechanisms that remain to be defined [34]. Interestingly,
we did not detect any modulation of angiogenesis either in
vitro or in vivo upon VPA treatment. This is in agreement
with several reports that have demonstrated that HDACi
including VPA prevent tumor invasion and metastasis as
well as tumor-induced angiogenesis [42].
Several preclinical and clinical indications have
demonstrated that intrinsic or acquired resistance to
fluoropyrimidines correlates with low or deficient
intratumoral TP expression [6, 7, 43, 44], which suggests
that an increase in TP expression might enhance
the sensitivity of tumor cells to these drugs. In this
regard, when combined with capecitabine, several
chemotherapeutics such as taxanes and cyclophosphamide,
X-ray irradiation or targeted therapy such as the EGFR
tyrosine kinase inhibitor gefitinib, have shown synergistic
antitumor effects via the induction of TP up-regulation [34,
45–47]. Indeed, TP-inducible chemotherapeutics such as
taxanes in combination with or followed by capecitabine,
showed an increased response rate, time to progression
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

and survival in patients with breast cancer and TP
expression has been suggested to be a predictive marker of
therapeutic benefit [4, 7, 48, 49]. Anthracycline- or taxanebased regimens are commonly used in the treatment of
breast cancer as first-line in the metastatic settings.
However, there is no single accepted standard of care after
failure of anthracycline and taxane therapy. Capecitabine
is widely considered a drug with a favourable risk:benefit
profile in patients with metastatic breast cancer, being used
in the first-, second-, and third-line settings as single agent
or in combination with several other drugs. Capecitabine
has also been the control arm in several phase III trials
in metastatic setting. Recently the phase III study leading
to the approval of Eribulin mesylate (eribulin), a novel
microtubule dynamics inhibitor, as single agent in
metastatic breast cancer, demonstrated that eribulin was
not shown to be superior to capecitabine with regard to
overall survival, progression-free survival or healthrelated quality of life [50, 51]. Overall, although several
novel drugs are currently available, capecitabine remains
one of the most effective and used drugs in the treatment
of metastatic breast cancer [52].
In the present study, we showed for the first time
the synergistic interaction between capecitabine and VPA,
which are two generic drugs that can be administered
orally with consequent increased compliance for the
patients, providing a rationale for the evaluation of the
clinical efficacy of VPA/capecitabine combination in
breast cancer patients.
Based on the current study and on the results that
were obtained in colorectal cancer models, in which we
showed a synergistic antitumor effect of the HDACi
vorinostat and capecitabine, we recently launched a
phase-I/II clinical study (V-ShoRT-R3 trial) to explore
whether the addition of both VPA and capecitabine to
short-course radiotherapy, before optimal radical surgery,
might increase the pathologic complete tumor regression
rate in low-moderate risk rectal cancer patients [53].

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Reagents
Valproic acid (VPA) was purchased from Enzo
Life Sciences and 5’-deoxy-5-fluorouridine (5’-DFUR)
was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. Stock solutions
were prepared in sterile water and diluted to appropriate
concentrations in culture medium before addition to
the cells. Entinostat (MS-275) was from Adipogen,
panobinostat (LBH589) from Biovision Incorporated,
trichostatin A (TSA) from Alexis Biochemicals, tubacin
and niltubacin were kindly provided by Dr. S.L.
Schreiber and Dr. Ralph Mazitschek. Vorinostat was
from Calbiochem, RGFP966, romidepsin and rocilinostat
were from Selleck Chemicals and MRLB223 was kindly
provided by Dr S. Minucci. Stock solutions were prepared
7726

Oncotarget

in DMSO. Capecitabine (Xeloda) was from Roche.
Capecitabine is a prodrug that needs the Carboxyl esterase
activity to be converted in the first metabolic step, but,
due to his low level expression in most cancer cell lines,
all in vitro studies in cancer cells were performed with
capecitabine-metabolite 5’-DFUR, which requires the
presence of TP to be converted into the active 5-FU drug,
as previously described [18].
All media, serum, antibiotics, and glutamine were
from Lonza.
Primary antibodies (Abs) for western blotting:
thymidylate synthase (TS)-Ab (Rockand Immunochemicals
Inc.; cod. 100-601-199), E-cadherin-Ab (Abcam, cod.
ab40772), vimentin-Ab (Dako; cod. M0725), poly-(ADPribose)-polymerase (PARP)-Ab (BD Biosciences, cod.
556494), acetyl-α-tubulin-Ab (Sigma-Aldrich, cod. T7451),
γ-Tubulin-Ab (cod. sc-7396) and thymidine phosphorylase
(TP)/platelet-derived endothelial growth factor (PD-ECGF)Ab (cod. sc-71867) (Santa Cruz Biotechnology), GAPDHAb (cod. #2118), α-tubulin-Ab (cod. #2144), acetylatedlysine monoclonal-Ab (cod. #9681), acetyl-H3-Ab (cod.
#9649) and caspase-3-Ab (cod. #9661) (Cell Signalling
Technology). For IHC mouse monoclonal TP/PD-ECGFAb (Thermo Scientific; cod. MS-499) or goat polyclonal
CD31/Pecam-1-Ab (Santa Cruz; cod. sc-1506) were used.
Actinomycin D is from Sigma Aldrich.

additivity, and antagonism were quantified after an
evaluation of the combination index (CI), which was
calculated by the Chou-Talalay equation with CalcuSyn
software (Biosoft), as described elsewhere [54]. A CI <
0.9, CI = 0.9–1.2, and CI > 1.2 indicated a synergistic, an
additive or an antagonistic effect, respectively [16]. The
DRI (dose reduction index) determines the magnitude
of dose reduction allowed for each drug when given in
combination, compared with the concentration of a single
agent that is needed to achieve the same effect [18].

Western blot analysis
Immunoblotting was performed as described
elsewhere [54]. Densitometric analysis was performed by
NIH ImageJ software.

Gene-knockout
RNA interference (siRNA) against human HDAC1,
HDAC3, HDAC6, scrambled RNAi used as the negative
control (Integrated DNA Technologies), or HDAC2
(Ambion Life Technologies) were transiently transfected
into MCF-7 cells using Lipofectamine 2000 (Invitrogen)
according to the manufacturer’s instructions.
TP-knockout was accomplished by the transfection
of MCF-7 cells via Lipofectamine 2000 with a vector in
a pGFP-V-RS plasmid that carries a short hairpin RNA
(shRNA) that targets human TP mRNA. Four stable clones
selected by puromycin resistance were pooled together
(MCF-7 sh-TP). Scrambled transfected cells were also
selected as a control (MCF-7 sh-control).

Cell culture conditions
The MCF-7 and SKBR3 cells were maintained in
Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM), whereas
MDA-MB468 were maintained in DMEM/F12 medium
and MDA-MB231 in RPMI-1640 medium. All media
were supplemented with 10% heat-inactivated fetal bovine
serum, 50 units/mL penicillin, 500 μg/mL streptomycin,
and 4 mmol/L glutamine. MCF-10A cells were maintained
in Mammary Epithelial Cell Growth Medium (MEGM™).
All cell lines were cultivated at 37°C in a humidified
5% CO2 atmosphere. All cell lines were from American
Type Culture Collection, were regularly inspected for
mycoplasma and have been authenticated with a shorttandem repeat profile according to LGC Standards.

Real-time quantitative PCR and mRNA stability
assay
Total RNA was extracted from the cells by Trizol
reagent according to the manufacturer’s instructions
(Invitrogen). The reverse transcription-PCR (RT-PCR)
assay was performed with a High-Capacity cDNA
Reverse-Transcription Kit (Applied Biosystems). TS
(Hs00426586_m1), TP (Hs00157317_m1), VEGFa
(Hs00900055_m1), HDAC2 (Hs00231032_m1) and
GADD45 (Hs99999173_m1) mRNA expression was
quantified as previously described [18]. Each gene was
tested in each cell line in triplicates in three independent
experiments. The relative changes in gene expression were
normalized to endogenous β-actin levels by the −2ΔΔCT
method [18]. HDAC1 (QT00015239, Qiagen), HDAC3
(QT00093730) and HDAC6 (QT 00002709) mRNA
expression levels were quantified by the fluorescent dye
SYBR-Green-I method (Qiagen) and were normalized to
endogenous β-actin (QT00095431) levels.
To study the effect of VPA on TP mRNA stability,
MCF-7 cells were untreated or treated with 1 μg/ml
actinomycin D and/or VPA (2.5mM), for 10 hours. TP

Cell viability assay and in vitro drug combination
studies
Cell viability/proliferation was evaluated by
a spectrophotometric dye incorporation assay using
sulforhodamine B (SRB, ICN Biomedicals) in
quadruplicate in 96-well plates, 96 hours after treatment,
as described previously [16].
Drug combination studies were based on
concentration-effect curves generated as a plot of the
fraction of unaffected (i.e., surviving) cells versus the drug
concentration [18]. Serial dilutions of equipotent doses of
the two agents in combination were tested. Synergism,
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

7727

Oncotarget

and GADD45a mRNA expression was determined as
described above.

tumors became palpable, the mice were randomized
into four experimental groups (n = 7) for each cell line.
Based on pilot studies (data not shown) and previous
reports [18], the mice were treated intraperitoneally (i.p.)
with VPA (200 mg/Kg melted in water and diluted in a
physiological solution) in the morning and/or capecitabine
per os (359 mg/Kg in 40 mM citrate buffer-pH 6
containing 5% Arabic gum) in the afternoon 5 days/week
for three weeks. Mice in the control group were treated
with both physiological solution and citrate buffer/Arabic
gum vehicles. Tumor volume (TV) (mm3) was calculated
by the formula TV=[length (mm) x width (mm)2]/2, where
the width and the length are the shortest and the longest
diameters, respectively, as measured by a caliper three
times/week. The mice were monitored daily for clinical
signs and mortality; in addition, body weight recordings
were performed triweekly. At the end of the study, at day
37 after the implantation and one week after the end of
treatment, the mice were sacrificed by cervical dislocation.
Tumor growth delay (TGD) was determined as %TGD =
[(T - C)/C] x 100, where T and C are the mean times in
days required to reach the same fixed tumor volume in
the treated group and control group, respectively [54].
The percent change was calculated for all experimental
groups using the formula: [(Day37 tumor volume – Day0
tumor volume)/ Day0 tumor volume x 100]. The percent
change in the experimental groups was compared with
that of the vehicle control group using the equation:
[(Overall percent change experimental – overall percent
change vehicle)/overall percent change vehicle x 100]
[56]. For the calculation of CI by CalcuSyn, the values of
Cell Kill (CK) for a fixed tumor volume were considered
[determined by the log CK (LCK)]. Log Cell Kill was
determined by LCK = (T-C)/(3.3-Td), where T and C are
the same values as described above; Td represents the
mean control group doubling time required to reach a fixed
tumor volume and is expressed in days [54].

Chromatin immunoprecipitation assay
MDA-MB231 cells (5 × 106) treated for 24
hours with the indicated drugs were fixed with 1%
formaldehyde. After cross-linking, crude nuclear
extracts were isolated and subjected to sonication, which
resulted in 200 bp to 500 bp DNA fragments. After
immunoprecipitation with the anti-H3K4me3 (Abcam
cod. ab8580) or anti-H3K9/14Ac (Millipore cod. 06599) antibodies (2μg/100μg of nuclear lysate), the
immunocomplexes were purified by co-precipitation with
protein A-Sepharose (GE Healthcare). Species matched
IgG were used as the negative control. The amount of
recovered DNA was determined, and the quantification
of chromatin-immunoprecipitated DNA fragments was
performed using qRT-PCR with the following primers:
TYMP forward (GAGGCAGACACGGACGAG) and
TYMP reverse (GGTCATCAAGGCTGCCATC) specific
for the TYMP promoter region chr-22: 50, 529, 694-50,
529, 866. The enrichment of the DNA was calculated
in terms of % input = 2−ΔCt × 100, where ΔCt (threshold
cycle) was determined by CtIP sample - CtInput, and 100 refers
to the input being 1% of the chromatin amount exposed to
the immunoprecipitation.

Detection of apoptosis
Apoptosis was measured by flow cytometry using
the Annexin V-FITC, as described previously [55].

Cytokine assay
Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF),
Platelet-Derived Growth Factor (PDGF), Fibroblast
growth factor (FGF), Granulocyte colony-stimulating
factor (G-CSF) and Granulocyte-macrophage colonystimulating factor (GM-CSF) and other cytokine levels
in MCF-7 cell supernatants were assayed using Bio-Plex
Pro Human Cytokine 27-plex Assay (Biorad) and acquired
on a Bio-Plex array reader (Luminex) according to the
manufacturer’s instructions [35].

Histology, immunohistochemistry, western blotting
and Real-Time PCR analysis from tumor samples
At the end of treatment, one mouse per group was
sacrificed for a pharmacodynamic study, and tumors
(one on each flank) were collected; half of the tumors
were stored at -80 °C while the other half were fixed
in 10% buffered formalin and embedded in paraffin for
immunohistochemical analysis.
Protein and mRNA expression levels of the tumor
samples were evaluated as previously described.
We evaluated necrosis by hematoxylin and eosin
(H&E) stain, and the expression of TP and CD31/
Pecam-1 by immunohistochemistry (IHC). Briefly, the
sections were incubated with primary antibodies and
then with biotin-conjugated secondary antibodies before
incubation with specific Streptavidin HRP-conjugated
tertiary antibody (Dako). Peroxidase reactivity was

In vivo xenograft studies
Female NOD/SCID athymic mice (Harlan) were
acclimatized in the Animal Care Facility of Biogem
S.C.A.R.L. in accordance with the institutional guidelines
of the Italian Ministry of Health Animal Care and Use
Committee, before they were injected subcutaneously
(s.c.) with a 60-day release 17β-estradiol pellet (Innovative
Research of America). After three days, MCF-7 sh-control
or MCF-7 sh-TP cells (8 x 106) diluted in 200 ml [M199
medium/Matrigel GF (Becton Dickinson) 1/1] were
injected s.c in both flank regions of the mice. When the
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

7728

Oncotarget

visualized using a 3,3′-diaminobenzidine (Abcam). A
single pathologist (R.F.) performed a blinded analysis of
the slides.

on medical treatment of metastatic breast cancer. Annals of
oncology. 2009; 20:1771–1785.
4.	 Gligorov J, Doval D, Bines J, Alba E, Cortes P, Pierga JY,
Gupta V, Costa R, Srock S, de Ducla S, Freudensprung U
and Mustacchi G. Maintenance capecitabine and bevacizumab versus bevacizumab alone after initial first-line bevacizumab and docetaxel for patients with HER2-negative
metastatic breast cancer (IMELDA): a randomised, openlabel, phase 3 trial. Lancet Oncol. 2014; 15:1351–1360.

Statistical analysis
The result of the in vitro cell viability assay is
expressed as the mean for at least three independent
experiments, which were conducted in quadruplicate
(±SD). The results of the apoptotic analysis are expressed
as the mean for at least three independent experiments
(±SD), and the statistical significance was determined
by one-way ANOVA and Holm-Sidak methods.
A p < 0.05 was considered to be statistically significant.
Representative results from a single experiment of qRealTime PCR, western blot and immunohistochemistry are
presented; additional experiments yielded similar results.
Statistical significance in the differences of tumor
growth in vivo was determined by the one-way ANOVA
and Tukey Test (p < 0.05). All statistical evaluations were
performed with Sigma Stat software (Systat Software Inc).

5.	 Longley DB, Harkin DP and Johnston PG. 5-fluorouracil: mechanisms of action and clinical strategies. Nat Rev
Cancer. 2003; 3:330–338.
6.	 Patterson AV, Zhang H, Moghaddam A, Bicknell R, Talbot
DC, Stratford IJ and Harris AL. Increased sensitivity to
the prodrug 5’-deoxy-5-fluorouridine and modulation of
5-fluoro-2'-deoxyuridine sensitivity in MCF-7 cells transfected with thymidine phosphorylase. Br J Cancer. 1995;
72:669–675.
7.	 Bonotto M, Bozza C, Di Loreto C, Osa EO, Poletto E and
Puglisi F. Making capecitabine targeted therapy for breast
cancer: which is the role of thymidine phosphorylase?
Clinical breast cancer. 2013; 13:167–172.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

8.	 Takagi K, Miki Y, Nakamura Y, Hirakawa H, Kakugawa
Y, Amano G, Watanabe M, Ishida T, Sasano H and Suzuki
T. Immunolocalization of thymidylate synthase as a favorable prognostic marker in estrogen receptor-positive breast
carcinoma. Histology and histopathology. 2015:11619.

The authors thank by Dr. S.L. Schreiber and Dr.
Ralph Mazitschek for providing tubacin and niltubacin
and Prof. S. Minucci for providing the HDAC1/2 inhibitor
MRLB-223. The authors would like also to thank Dr. A.
Di Cintio, Dr. G. Piro and Dr. C. Carbone for technical
assistance and for some pilot experiments on this project.

9.	 Budillon A, Di Gennaro E, Bruzzese F, Rocco M, Manzo
G and Caraglia M. Histone deacetylase inhibitors: a new
wave of molecular targeted anticancer agents. Recent Pat
Anticancer Drug Discov. 2007; 2:119–134.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST

10.	 Mann BS, Johnson JR, Cohen MH, Justice R and Pazdur
R. FDA approval summary: vorinostat for treatment of
advanced primary cutaneous T-cell lymphoma. The oncologist. 2007; 12:1247–1252.

No potential conflicts of interest were disclosed.

FINANCIAL SUPPORT

11.	 Khot A, Dickinson M and Prince HM. Romidepsin for
peripheral T-cell lymphoma. Expert review of hematology.
2013; 6:351–359.

This study was partially supported by the following
Research Grants to AB: AIRC (IG9332-2009); Italian
Ministry of Health (RF-2011-02346914);POR Campania
FESR 2007-2013 – Rete delle Biotecnolgie in Campania
(Progetto “FARMABIONET”).

12.	 Lee HZ, Kwitkowski VE, Del Valle PL, Ricci MS, Saber
H, Habtemariam BA, Bullock J, Bloomquist E, Li Shen
Y, Chen XH, Brown J, Mehrotra N, Dorff S, et al. FDA
Approval: Belinostat for the Treatment of Patients with
Relapsed or Refractory Peripheral T-cell Lymphoma. Clin
Cancer Res. 2015.

REFERENCES
1.	 Siegel RL, Miller KD and Jemal A. Cancer statistics, 2015.
CA. 2015; 65:5–29.

13.	 Panobinostat approved for multiple myeloma. Cancer discovery. 2015; 5:OF4.

2.	 Daniele G, Gallo M, Piccirillo MC, Giordano P, D'Alessio
A, Del Giudice A, La Porta ML, Perrone F, Normanno N
and De Luca A. Pharmacokinetic evaluation of capecitabine
in breast cancer. Expert opinion on drug metabolism & toxicology. 2013; 9:225–235.

14.	 Raha P, Thomas S and Munster PN. Epigenetic modulation:
a novel therapeutic target for overcoming hormonal therapy
resistance. Epigenomics. 2011; 3:451–470.
15.	 Yardley DA, Ismail-Khan RR, Melichar B, Lichinitser M,
Munster PN, Klein PM, Cruickshank S, Miller KD, Lee MJ
and Trepel JB. Randomized phase II, double-blind, placebocontrolled study of exemestane with or without entinostat in
postmenopausal women with locally recurrent or metastatic

3.	 Beslija S, Bonneterre J, Burstein HJ, Cocquyt V, Gnant M,
Heinemann V, Jassem J, Kostler WJ, Krainer M, Menard S,
Petit T, Petruzelka L, Possinger K, et al. Third consensus
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

7729

Oncotarget

estrogen receptor-positive breast cancer progressing on
treatment with a nonsteroidal aromatase inhibitor. J Clin
Oncol. 2013; 31:2128–2135.

synthase gene expression and synergize with the fluoropyrimidines in colon cancer cells. Int J Cancer. 2009;
125:463–473.

16.	 Di Gennaro E, Bruzzese F, Pepe S, Leone A, Delrio P,
Subbarayan PR, Avallone A and Budillon A. Modulation
of thymidilate synthase and p53 expression by HDAC
inhibitor vorinostat resulted in synergistic antitumor effect
in combination with 5FU or raltitrexed. Cancer Biol Ther.
2009; 8:782–791.

26.	 Puppin C, Puglisi F, Pandolfi M, Di Loreto C and Damante
G. Histone deacetylase inhibitors induce thymidine phosphorylase expression in cultured breast cancer cell lines.
Oncol Rep. 2011; 26:309–314.
27.	 Haggarty SJ, Koeller KM, Wong JC, Grozinger CM and
Schreiber SL. Domain-selective small-molecule inhibitor of
histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6)-mediated tubulin deacetylation. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2003; 100:4389–4394.

17.	 Bruzzese F, Rocco M, Castelli S, Di Gennaro E, Desideri A
and Budillon A. Synergistic antitumor effect between vorinostat and topotecan in small cell lung cancer cells is mediated by generation of reactive oxygen species and DNA
damage-induced apoptosis. Molecular cancer therapeutics.
2009; 8:3075–3087.

28.	 Thurn KT, Thomas S, Raha P, Qureshi I and Munster PN.
Histone deacetylase regulation of ATM-mediated DNA
damage signaling. Mol Cancer Ther. 2013; 12:2078–2087.
29.	 Bradner JE, West N, Grachan ML, Greenberg EF, Haggarty
SJ, Warnow T and Mazitschek R. Chemical phylogenetics of histone deacetylases. Nature chemical biology. 2010;
6:238–243.

18.	 Di Gennaro E, Piro G, Chianese MI, Franco R, Di Cintio A,
Moccia T, Luciano A, de Ruggiero I, Bruzzese F, Avallone
A, Arra C and Budillon A. Vorinostat synergises with
capecitabine through upregulation of thymidine phosphorylase. British journal of cancer. 2010; 103:1680–1691.

30.	 Newbold A, Matthews GM, Bots M, Cluse LA, Clarke
CJ, Banks KM, Cullinane C, Bolden JE, Christiansen
AJ, Dickins RA, Miccolo C, Chiocca S, Kral AM, et al.
Molecular and biologic analysis of histone deacetylase
inhibitors with diverse specificities. Molecular cancer therapeutics. 2013; 12:2709–2721.

19.	 Bruzzese F, Leone A, Rocco M, Carbone C, Piro G,
Caraglia M, Di Gennaro E and Budillon A. HDAC inhibitor vorinostat enhances the antitumor effect of gefitinib in
squamous cell carcinoma of head and neck by modulating ErbB receptor expression and reverting EMT. J Cell
Physiol. 2011; 226:2378–2390.

31.	 Thaler F and Mercurio C. Towards selective inhibition of histone deacetylase isoforms: what has been achieved, where we
are and what will be next. ChemMedChem. 2014; 9:523–526.

20.	 Chateauvieux S, Morceau F, Dicato M and Diederich M.
Molecular and therapeutic potential and toxicity of valproic
acid. J Biomed Biotechnol. 2010; 2010.

32.	 Santo L, Hideshima T, Kung AL, Tseng JC, Tamang D,
Yang M, Jarpe M, van Duzer JH, Mazitschek R, Ogier
WC, Cirstea D, Rodig S, Eda H, et al. Preclinical activity, pharmacodynamic, and pharmacokinetic properties
of a selective HDAC6 inhibitor, ACY-1215, in combination with bortezomib in multiple myeloma. Blood. 2012;
119:2579–2589.

21.	 Munster P, Marchion D, Bicaku E, Schmitt M, Lee JH, DeConti
R, Simon G, Fishman M, Minton S, Garrett C, Chiappori A,
Lush R, Sullivan D, et al. Phase I trial of histone deacetylase
inhibition by valproic acid followed by the topoisomerase II
inhibitor epirubicin in advanced solid tumors: a clinical and
translational study. J Clin Oncol. 2007; 25:1979–1985.

33.	 Wells CE, Bhaskara S, Stengel KR, Zhao Y, Sirbu B, Chagot
B, Cortez D, Khabele D, Chazin WJ, Cooper A, Jacques V,
Rusche J, Eischen CM, et al. Inhibition of histone deacetylase 3 causes replication stress in cutaneous T cell lymphoma.
PloS one. 2013; 8:e68915.

22.	 Atmaca A, Al-Batran SE, Maurer A, Neumann A, Heinzel
T, Hentsch B, Schwarz SE, Hovelmann S, Gottlicher M,
Knuth A and Jager E. Valproic acid (VPA) in patients with
refractory advanced cancer: a dose escalating phase I clinical trial. Br J Cancer. 2007; 97:177–182.

34.	 Liekens S, Bronckaers A, Perez-Perez MJ and Balzarini
J. Targeting platelet-derived endothelial cell growth factor/thymidine phosphorylase for cancer therapy. Biochem
Pharmacol. 2007; 74:1555–1567.

23.	 Arce C, Perez-Plasencia C, Gonzalez-Fierro A, de la CruzHernandez E, Revilla-Vazquez A, Chavez-Blanco A, TrejoBecerril C, Perez-Cardenas E, Taja-Chayeb L, Bargallo E,
Villarreal P, Ramirez T, Vela T, et al. A proof-of-principle
study of epigenetic therapy added to neoadjuvant doxorubicin
cyclophosphamide for locally advanced breast cancer. PloS
one. 2006; 1:e98.

35.	 Milone MR, Pucci B, Bruzzese F, Carbone C, Piro G,
Costantini S, Capone F, Leone A, Di Gennaro E, Caraglia
M and Budillon A. Acquired resistance to zoledronic acid
and the parallel acquisition of an aggressive phenotype are
mediated by p38-MAP kinase activation in prostate cancer
cells. Cell death & disease. 2013; 4:e641.

24.	 Munster P, Marchion D, Bicaku E, Lacevic M, Kim J, Centeno
B, Daud A, Neuger A, Minton S and Sullivan D. Clinical and
biological effects of valproic acid as a histone deacetylase inhibitor on tumor and surrogate tissues: phase I/II trial of valproic
acid and epirubicin/FEC. Clin Cancer Res. 2009; 15:2488–2496.

36.	 Zhang W, Feng M, Zheng G, Chen Y, Wang X, Pen B,
Yin J, Yu Y and He Z. Chemoresistance to 5-fluorouracil
induces epithelial-mesenchymal transition via up-regulation of Snail in MCF7 human breast cancer cells. Biochem
Biophys Res Commun. 2012; 417:679–685.

25.	 Fazzone W, Wilson PM, Labonte MJ, Lenz HJ and Ladner
RD. Histone deacetylase inhibitors suppress thymidylate
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

7730

Oncotarget

37.	 Guarcello V, Blanquicett C, Naguib FN and El Kouni MH.
Suppression of thymidine phosphorylase expression by promoter methylation in human cancer cells lacking enzyme
activity. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol. 2008; 62:85–96.

48.	 Puglisi F, Cardellino GG, Crivellari D, Di Loreto C,
Magri MD, Minisini AM, Mansutti M, Andreetta C,
Russo S, Lombardi D, Perin T, Damante G and Veronesi
A. Thymidine phosphorylase expression is associated
with time to progression in patients receiving low-dose,
docetaxel-modulated capecitabine for metastatic breast cancer. Annals of oncology. 2008; 19:1541–1546.

38.	 Slama A, Lacroix C, Plante-Bordeneuve V, Lombes A,
Conti M, Reimund JM, Auxenfants E, Crenn P, Laforet P,
Joannard A, Seguy D, Pillant H, Joly P, et al. Thymidine
phosphorylase gene mutations in patients with mitochondrial neurogastrointestinal encephalomyopathy syndrome.
Molecular genetics and metabolism. 2005; 84:326–331.

49.	 Bonotto M, Fontanella C and Puglisi F. Looking
for ­predictive markers in breast cancer. Lancet Oncol.
2015; 16:e1.

39.	 Muller BM, Jana L, Kasajima A, Lehmann A, Prinzler J,
Budczies J, Winzer KJ, Dietel M, Weichert W and Denkert
C. Differential expression of histone deacetylases HDAC1,
2 and 3 in human breast cancer--overexpression of HDAC2
and HDAC3 is associated with clinicopathological indicators of disease progression. BMC cancer. 2013; 13:215.

50.	 Kaufman PA, Awada A, Twelves C, Yelle L, Perez EA,
Velikova G, Olivo MS, He Y, Dutcus CE and Cortes J.
Phase III open-label randomized study of eribulin mesylate versus capecitabine in patients with locally advanced or
metastatic breast cancer previously treated with an anthracycline and a taxane. J Clin Oncol. 2015; 33:594–601.

40.	 Spurling CC, Godman CA, Noonan EJ, Rasmussen TP,
Rosenberg DW and Giardina C. HDAC3 overexpression
and colon cancer cell proliferation and differentiation.
Molecular carcinogenesis. 2008; 47:137–147.

51.	 Cortes J, Hudgens S, Twelves C, Perez EA, Awada A, Yelle
L, McCutcheon S, Kaufman PA, Forsythe A and Velikova G.
Health-related quality of life in patients with locally advanced
or metastatic breast cancer treated with eribulin mesylate
or capecitabine in an open-label randomized phase 3 trial.
Breast cancer research and treatment. 2015; 154:509–520.

41.	 Minami J, Suzuki R, Mazitschek R, Gorgun G, Ghosh B,
Cirstea D, Hu Y, Mimura N, Ohguchi H, Cottini F, Jakubikova
J, Munshi NC, Haggarty SJ, et al. Histone deacetylase 3 as a
novel therapeutic target in multiple myeloma. Leukemia. 2014;
28:680–689.

52.	 Muller V, Fuxius S, Steffens CC, Lerchenmuller C, Luhn
B, Vehling-Kaiser U, Hurst U, Hahn LJ, Soeling U,
Wohlfarth T and Zaiss M. Quality of life under capecitabine
(Xeloda(R)) in patients with metastatic breast cancer: data
from a german non-interventional surveillance study.
Oncology research and treatment. 2014; 37:748–755.

42.	 Shiva Shankar TV and Willems L. Epigenetic modulators
mitigate angiogenesis through a complex transcriptomic
network. Vascular pharmacology. 2014; 60:57–66.
43.	 de Bruin M, van Capel T, Van der Born K, Kruyt FA,
Fukushima M, Hoekman K, Pinedo HM and Peters GJ.
Role of platelet-derived endothelial cell growth factor/thymidine phosphorylase in fluoropyrimidine sensitivity. Br J
Cancer. 2003; 88:957–964.

53.	 Avallone A, Piccirillo MC, Delrio P, Pecori B, Di Gennaro
E, Aloj L, Tatangelo F, D'Angelo V, Granata C, Cavalcanti
E, Maurea N, Maiolino P, Bianco F, et al. Phase 1/2 study of
valproic acid and short-course radiotherapy plus capecitabine
as preoperative treatment in low-moderate risk rectal cancerV-shoRT-R3 (Valproic acid--short Radiotherapy--rectum 3rd
trial). BMC cancer. 2014; 14:875.

44.	 Salonga D, Danenberg KD, Johnson M, Metzger R, Groshen
S, Tsao-Wei DD, Lenz HJ, Leichman CG, Leichman L,
Diasio RB and Danenberg PV. Colorectal tumors responding
to 5-fluorouracil have low gene expression levels of dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase, thymidylate synthase, and thymidine phosphorylase. Clin Cancer Res. 2000; 6:1322–1327.

54.	 Bruzzese F, Di Gennaro E, Avallone A, Pepe S, Arra C,
Caraglia M, Tagliaferri P and Budillon A. Synergistic antitumor activity of epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase
inhibitor gefitinib and IFN-alpha in head and neck cancer cells
in vitro and in vivo. Clin Cancer Res. 2006; 12:617–625.

45.	 Sawada N, Ishikawa T, Sekiguchi F, Tanaka Y and Ishitsuka
H. X-ray irradiation induces thymidine phosphorylase and
enhances the efficacy of capecitabine (Xeloda) in human
cancer xenografts. Clin Cancer Res. 1999; 5:2948–2953.
46.	 Endo M, Shinbori N, Fukase Y, Sawada N, Ishikawa T,
Ishitsuka H and Tanaka Y. Induction of thymidine phosphorylase expression and enhancement of efficacy of capecitabine
or 5’-deoxy-5-fluorouridine by cyclophosphamide in mammary tumor models. Int J Cancer. 1999; 83:127–134.

55.	 Bruzzese F, Pucci B, Milone MR, Ciardiello C, Franco R,
Chianese MI, Rocco M, Di Gennaro E, Leone A, Luciano
A, Arra C, Santini D, Caraglia M, et al. Panobinostat synergizes with zoledronic acid in prostate cancer and multiple
myeloma models by increasing ROS and modulating mevalonate and p38-MAPK pathways. Cell death & disease.
2013; 4:e878.

47.	 Ait-Tihyaty M, Rachid Z, Mihalcioiu C and Jean-Claude
BJ. Inhibition of EGFR phosphorylation in a panel of
human breast cancer cells correlates with synergistic interactions between gefitinib and 5’-DFUR, the bioactive
metabolite of Xeloda. Breast cancer research and treatment.
2012; 133:217–226.

56.	 Burgenske DM, Monsma DJ, Dylewski D, Scott SB, Sayfie
AD, Kim DG, Luchtefeld M, Martin KR, Stephenson P,
Hostetter G, Dujovny N and MacKeigan JP. Establishment
of genetically diverse patient-derived xenografts of colorectal cancer. American journal of cancer research. 2014;
4:824–837.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

7731

Oncotarget

