Oncotarget, Vol. 7, No. 15

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Zoledronic acid-encapsulating self-assembling nanoparticles and
doxorubicin: a combinatorial approach to overcome simultaneously
chemoresistance and immunoresistance in breast tumors
Joanna Kopecka1, Stefania Porto2, Sara Lusa3, Elena Gazzano1, Giuseppina
Salzano4, Martha Leonor Pinzòn-Daza1,5, Antonio Giordano6, Vincenzo Desiderio7,
Dario Ghigo1, Giuseppe De Rosa3, Michele Caraglia2,6, Chiara Riganti1
1

Department of Oncology, University of Turin, Turin, Italy

2

Department of Biochemistry, Biophysics and General Pathology, Second University of Naples, Naples, Italy

3

Department of Pharmacy, Federico II University of Naples, Naples, Italy

4

Center for Pharmaceutical Biotechnology and Nanomedicine, Northeastern University, Boston, MA, USA

5

 niversidad del Rosario, Facultad de Ciencias Naturales y Matemáticas, RG in Biochemistry and Biotechnology (BIO-BIO),
U
Bogotá, Colombia

6

 barro Institute for Cancer Research and Molecular Medicine, Center for Biotechnology, College of Science and Technology,
S
Temple University, Philadelphia, PA, USA

7

Department of Experimental Medicine, Second University of Naples, Naples, Italy

Correspondence to: M
 ichele Caraglia, e-mail: michele.caraglia@unina2.it
	
Chiara Riganti, e-mail: chiara.riganti@unito.it
Keywords: self-assembling nanoparticles, zoledronic acid, doxorubicin resistance, immunoresistance, immunosuppression
Received: September 24, 2015	

Accepted: February 16, 2016	

Published: March 09, 2016

ABSTRACT
The resistance to chemotherapy and the tumor escape from host immunosurveillance
are the main causes of the failure of anthracycline-based regimens in breast cancer,
where an effective chemo-immunosensitizing strategy is lacking.
The clinically used aminobisphosphonate zoledronic acid (ZA) reverses
chemoresistance and immunoresistance in vitro. Previously we developed a
nanoparticle-based zoledronic acid-containing formulation (NZ) that allowed a higher
intratumor delivery of the drug compared with free ZA in vivo. We tested its efficacy
in combination with doxorubicin in breast tumors refractory to chemotherapy and
immune system recognition as a new combinatorial approach to produce chemo- and
immunosensitization.
NZ reduced the IC50 of doxorubicin in human and murine chemoresistant breast
cancer cells and restored the doxorubicin efficacy against chemo-immunoresistant
tumors implanted in immunocompetent mice. By reducing the metabolic flux through
the mevalonate pathway, NZ lowered the activity of Ras/ERK1/2/HIF-1α axis and
the expression of P-glycoprotein, decreased the glycolysis and the mitochondrial
respiratory chain, induced a cytochrome c/caspase 9/caspase 3-dependent apoptosis,
thus restoring the direct cytotoxic effects of doxorubicin on tumor cell. Moreover, NZ
restored the doxorubicin-induced immunogenic cell death and reversed the tumorinduced immunosuppression due to the production of kynurenine, by inhibiting the
STAT3/indoleamine 2,3 dioxygenase axis. These events increased the number of
dendritic cells and decreased the number of immunosuppressive T-regulatory cells
infiltrating the tumors.
Our work proposes the use of nanoparticle encapsulating zoledronic acid as an
effective tool overcoming at the same time chemoresistance and immunoresistance
in breast tumors, thanks to the effects exerted on tumor cell and tumor-infiltrating
immune cells.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

20753

Oncotarget

INTRODUCTION

in vitro [16, 26]. When administered as free agent, however,
ZA is avidly taken by bone and reaches insufficient intratumor concentrations [27]. To overcome this criticism we
developed self-assembling nanoparticles (NPs) encapsulating
ZA (here called NZ): compared to free ZA, NZ exhibited
increased intra-tumor delivery of the aminobisphosphonate
[28, 29] and increased anti-proliferative effects against
tumors implanted in immunodeficient animals [30–33].
Moreover, the self-assembling feature of these NPs makes
them suitable for clinical applications, overcoming the issues
generally associated with the scale-up and clinical use of NP
formulations [28].
In this work, we investigated whether NZ - in
combination with doxorubicin - overcomes chemoresistance
and immunoresistance of breast tumors implanted in
immunocompetent mice, rescuing the anthracycline’s
efficacy in refractory breast cancers.

Anthracycline-based regimens are widely used as
neo-adjuvant and adjuvant chemotherapy against breast
cancers [1, 2]. The main drawbacks of anthracyclines
like doxorubicin are the onset of cardiotoxicity [3, 4] and
the onset of drug resistance that makes chemotherapy
progressively ineffective. Doxorubicin, as well as the other
anthracyclines, are substrates of ATP binding cassette
(ABC) transporters, such as P-glycoprotein (Pgp) and
multidrug resistance related protein 1 (MRP1), which
efflux the drugs outside the tumor cell, thus lowering their
cytotoxicity [5].
Liposomal doxorubicin has been successfully
employed to circumvent cardiotoxicity [6], but it is not
effective against doxorubicin-resistant breast tumors
[7]. The co-administration of chemosensitizing agents,
such as ABC transporter inhibitors of natural or synthetic
origin, has obtained promising results in vitro [8–11]. This
approach, however, failed to overcome drug resistance
in vivo, for the low specificity and high toxicity of the
chemosensitizing agents [10, 12].
A second criticism of doxorubicin-resistant tumors
is their simultaneous resistance to chemotherapy and
immune system. In drug-sensitive tumors, doxorubicin
induces an immunogenic cell death, by promoting the
plasma membrane exposure of the protein calreticulin
(CRT), which activates the local dendritic cells (DCs) to
phagocytize tumor cells and stimulates the subsequent
expansion of anti-tumor CD8+ T-lymphocytes [13].
These mechanisms work in doxorubicin-sensitive tumors,
not in doxorubicin-resistant ones: here Pgp hinders the
doxorubicin-mediated immunogenic cell death by rapidly
effluxing the drug and by inhibiting the immunosensitizing
function of CRT [14, 15]. Besides escaping the DCmediated immunosurveillance, drug-resistant tumors
show also highly basal synthesis of kynurenine [16, 17],
an immunosuppressive catabolite of tryptophan that is
produced by indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase (IDO) [18].
Kynurenine reduces the proliferation and survival of CD4+
and CD8+ T-lymphocytes [17], and promotes the expansion
of the immunosuppressive T-regulatory (Treg) cells [16],
favoring the immunoescape of drug-resistant tumors.
Since an active immune system plays an important
role in limiting the growth and relapse of breast tumors
[19–21], chemo-immunotherapy-based approaches are
under intensive investigation for these cancers [22–24].
An “ideal” doxorubicin-based regimen for breast cancer
should circumvent the tumor drug resistance and prevent
at the same time the tumor-induced immunoresistance and
immunosuppression.
We previously demonstrated that zoledronic acid
(ZA), a clinically used aminobisphosphonate that inhibits
the farnesyl pyrophosphate synthase (FPPS) step in
the mevalonate pathway [25], is an effective chemoimmunosensitizing agent in doxorubicin-resistant cell lines
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

RESULTS
NZ reduces the resistance to doxorubicin
in breast cancer cells and the growth of
chemoresistant tumors
We first tested the chemosensitizing effects of NZ
and free ZA in a panel of human and murine breast cancer
cell lines, showing different expression of the doxorubicin
efflux transporters Pgp and MRP1 (Figure 1A). NZ and
ZA increased the doxorubicin intracellular retention
(Figure 1B) and lowered the doxorubicin IC50 (Figure 1C),
according to the number of viable cells positive for the
neutral red staining after 72 h of treatment: these effects
were specific for tumor cells, since they did not occur in
the non-transformed MCF10A epithelial cells. NZ was
as effective as ZA in the cell lines with low Pgp levels
(i.e. MCF7, SKBR3, T74D cells) and significantly more
effective than ZA in the cell lines with high Pgp levels (i.e.
MDA-MB-231, JC, TUBO cells), suggesting that it was an
effective chemosensitizing agent in doxorubicin-resistant
breast cancer cells.
In the subsequent set of experiments, we focused on
the JC model, a constitutively doxorubicin-resistant cell
line over-expressing Pgp and syngeneic with BALB/c mice
[34]. JC cells stably transduced with a luciferase expression
vector (JC-luc clone) were implanted in immunocompetent
animals. As shown by the in vivo bioluminescence imaging
(Figure 2A–2B), by the manual measurement of tumor
growth (Figure 2C) and by the tumor gross pathology
(Figure 2D and Table 1), doxorubicin and ZA alone did
not reduce tumor progression. The combination of ZA
and doxorubicin, as well as NZ alone, produced a small
reduction of tumor growth (Figure 2A–2D and Table 1)
and decreased tumor cell proliferation, as revealed by
the Ki67 staining (Figure 2E). The association of NZ
and doxorubicin had the strongest effects on the tumor
growth (Figure 2A–2D and Table 1); such association
20754

Oncotarget

reduced tumor cellularity and proliferation, and induced the
appearance of intra-tumor necrotic areas (Figure 2E). This
combination did not induce more damage on liver, heart and
kidney compared to the other treatments, as suggested by
the hematochemical parameters of hepatotoxicity (lactate
dehydrogenase LDH, aspartate aminotransferase AST,
alanine aminotransferase ALT, alkaline phosphatase AP),
cardiotoxicity (creatine phosphokinase CPK), nefrotoxicity
(creatinine; Table 2). NPs without ZA (blank NPs) did not
exert any chemosensitizing effects in vitro (Supplementary
Figure 1A–1B) and in vivo (Supplementary Figure 1C), and
were not further evaluated in the study.

than Pgp, we focused our attention on the modulation of
the latter. In line with recent findings on lung cancer [33],
NZ and - at a lesser extent ZA - lowered the activity of Ras
and Ras-downstream effectors ERK1/2 (Figure 3A), the
amount, phosphorylation, nuclear translocation (Figure 3B)
and activity (Figure 3C) of HIF-1α, the transcription of the
HIF-1α-target gene Pgp (Figure 3D) and the amount of Pgp
protein (Figure 3E) in JC tumor extracts. The effects of NZ
on Ras/ERK1/2/HIF-1α/Pgp axis was likely due to the strong
reduction in the synthesis of FPP (Supplementary Figure 2), a
critical metabolite for Ras activity [35]. ZA caused a significant
but weaker decrease in FPP levels (Supplementary Figure 2);
doxorubicin did not alter FPP synthesis (Supplementary
Figure 2) or Ras/ERK1/2 activity in untreated, ZA-treated and
NZ-treated tumors (Figure 3A). The anthracycline increased
HIF-1α amount and nuclear translocation, (Figure 3B–3C) and
Pgp levels (Figure 3D) in tumor extracts: these effects were
fully prevented by NZ, which decreased HIF-1α and Pgp
amount below the control (Figure 3B–3E).

NZ lowers the Pgp levels in chemoresistant
tumors
Since the chemosensitizing effects were more related
to the presence of Pgp than MRP1, which was present in
only two of Pgp-containing cell lines and was less expressed

Figure 1: NZ reverses doxorubicin resistance in breast cancer cells. Human non transformed breast epithelial MCF10A cells,

human breast cancer MCF7, SKBR3, T74D, MDA-MB-231 cells, murine mammary cancer TUBO and JC cells were subjected to the
following investigations. (A) Western blot analysis of Pgp and MRP1. The actin expression was used as control of equal protein loading.
The figure is representative of 3 experiments with similar results. (B) Cells were incubated for 24 h with 5 µmol/L doxorubicin (Dox),
1 µmol/L zoledronic acid (ZA) for 24 h followed by 5 µmol/L doxorubicin for additional 24 h (ZA + Dox), 1 µmol/L self-assembling ZA
formulation (NZ) for 24 h followed by 5 µmol/L doxorubicin for additional 24 h (NZ + Dox). The intracellular content of doxorubicin
was measured spectrofluorimetrically in duplicate (n = 4). Data are presented as means ± SD. Versus Dox: *p < 0.001; NZ + Dox versus
ZA + Dox: °p < 0.01. (C) Cells were left untreated or incubated for 72 h in the presence of 1 µmol/L ZA or NZ; different concentrations
(1 nmol/L, 10 nmol/L, 100 nmol/L, 1 µmol/L, 10 µmol/L, 100 µmol/L, 1 mmol/L) of doxorubicin (Dox) were added in the last 48 h. Sample
were then stained in quadruplicate with the neutral red solution (n = 4). IC50 was calculated as the concentration of doxorubicin that kills
50% of cells. Data are presented as means ± SD. Versus Dox: *p < 0.05; NZ + Dox versus ZA + Dox: °p < 0.005.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

20755

Oncotarget

NZ impairs the energy metabolism and the
mitochondrial functions, inducing cytochrome
c/caspase 9/caspase 3-dependent apoptosis in
chemoresistant tumors

glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH),
enolase A (ENOA), pyruvate kinase (PK) in tumor
extracts (Figure 4A). By contrast, NZ, either alone or
in the presence of doxorubicin, significantly reduced
the levels of these mRNAs in JC tumors (Figure 4A). In
keeping with these effects, doxorubicin increased and NZ
decreased the glucose uptake (Figure 4B) and the glucose
flux through glycolysis and tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle
(Figure 4C) in JC cells.

Doxorubicin increased the mRNA levels of the
HIF-1α-target genes involved in the glucose uptake and
glycolytic flux, such as glucose transporter 1 (GLUT1),
hexokinase (HK), phosphofructokinase-1 (PFK1),

Figure 2: The association of NZ and doxorubicin reduces the growth of chemoresistant tumors. Six weeks-old female

BALB/c mice bearing 60 mm3 JC-luc tumors were randomly divided into the following groups (10 mice/group): 1) Ctrl group, treated with
0.1 mL saline solution i.v. at day 3, 9, 15; 2) Dox group, treated with 5 mg/kg doxorubicin i.v. at day 3, 9, 15; 3) ZA group, treated with
20 µg/mouse ZA i.v. at day 2, 8, 14; 4) ZA + Dox group, treated with 20 µg/mouse ZA i.v. at day 2, 8, 14 followed by 5 mg/kg doxorubicin
i.v. at day 3, 9, 15; 5) NZ group, treated with 20 µg/mouse self-assembling ZA formulation i.v. at day 2, 8, 14; 6) NZ + Dox group, treated
with 20 µg/mouse NZ i.v. at day 2, 8, 14 followed by 5 mg/kg doxorubicin i.v. at day 3, 9, 15. (A) Representative in vivo bioluminescence
imaging, performed at day 0, 6, 12, 18 after randomization. (B) Photons quantification of tumors according to the imaging data. Data are
presented as means ± SD. Versus Ctrl group: *p < 0.01. (C) Tumor growth was monitored daily by caliper measurement. Data are presented
as means ± SD. Versus Ctrl group: *p < 0.005. (D) Photograph of representative tumors from each treatment group after mice sacrifice.
(E) Sections of tumors from each group of animals were stained with hematoxylin and eosin (HE; upper panel: 20× objective; lower
panel: 63× objective; stars: necrotic areas) or immunostained for Ki67 (63× objective). Nuclei were counter-stained with hematoxylin.
Bar = 10 µm. The photographs are representative of sections from 5 tumors/group. The percentage of proliferating cells was determined
by the ratio of Ki67-positive nuclei and the total nuclei (hematoxylin-positive nuclei), by counting sections from 5 animals of each group
(108–73 nuclei/field). Ctrl group percentage was considered 100%. Data are presented as means + SD. Versus Ctrl group: *p < 0.05; versus
Dox group: °p < 0.002.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

20756

Oncotarget

Table 1: Measurement of animals weight, tumor weight and tumor growth inhibition
 

Ctrl

Dox

ZA

ZA + dox

NZ

NZ + dox

Final mice weight (g)

20.28 ± 3.46

20.19 ± 3.81

21.09 ± 2.33

20.11 ± 1.29

20.01 ± 2.74

19.68 ± 1.82

Final tumor weight (g)

3.51 ± 0.72

3.18 ± 0.91

3.02 ± 0.39

2.28 ± 0.31*

2.25 ± 0.42*

1.12 ± 0.24*

9.40%

13.96%

35.04%*

35.90%*

68.09%*

% inhibition rate

Animals (n = 10/group) were treated as reported under Materials and methods. The percentage of inhibition rate was calculated
as it follows: (average tumor weight of control group – average tumor weight of test group)/average tumor weight of control
group × 100%. Significance versus Ctrl group: *p < 0.01.

Table 2: Hematochemical parameters of animals
 

Ctrl

Dox

ZA

ZA + Dox

NZ

NZ + Dox

LDH (U/L)

6052 ± 1761

7098 ± 1872

6677 ± 1512

7551 ± 1927

7091 ± 1872

7381 ± 1724

AST (U/L)

235 ± 81

289 ± 77

322 ± 81

331 ± 67

284 ± 62

312 ± 86

ALT (U/L)

27.5 ± 4.5

29.8 ± 6.3

28.6 ± 1.9

30.6 ± 3.4

28.7 ± 3.4

28.6 ± 3.4

81 ± 16

74 ± 11

79 ± 11

81 ± 18

82 ± 13

79 ± 13

CPK (U/L)

467 ± 109

670 ± 156

681 ± 208

608 ± 192

679 ± 129

689 ± 132

Creatinine
(mg/L)

0.034 + 0.004

0.036 ± 0.005

0.038 ± 0.004

0.040 ± 0.005

0.039 ± 0.004

0.037 ± 0.007

AP (U/L)

Animals (n = 10/group) were treated as reported under Materials and methods. Blood was collected immediately after mice
euthanasia and analyzed for lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), aspartate aminotransferase (AST), alanine aminotransferase (ALT),
alkaline phosphatase (AP), creatine phosphokinase (CPK), creatinine. There were not statistically significant differences
among each group of treatment.
Whereas doxorubicin had no effect on mitochondrial
electron flux (Figure 5A) and ATP production (Figure 5B),
NZ decreased these parameters (Figure 5A–5B).
NZ effect was likely due to the decreased amount of
the mitochondrial electron transporter ubiquinone
(Supplementary Figure 3), whose synthesis depends on
the mevalonate pathway, since it contains an isoprenoid
tail essential for its activity [36]. The impairment of the
mitochondrial energy metabolism induced by NZ was
paralleled by increased reactive oxygen species (ROS;
Figure 5C), mitochondrial depolarization (Figure 5D),
release of cytochrome c in the cytosol (Figure 5E),
activation of caspase 9 and caspase 3 (Figure 5F).
ZA, which decreased the energy metabolism (Figure 4,
Figure 5A–5B) and ubiquinone synthesis (Supplementary
Figure 3) less than NZ, poorly increased ROS levels and
mitochondrial depolarization, without eliciting cytochrome
c release and caspases activation (Figure 5C–5F). Similarly,
doxorubicin was devoid of any mitochondrial-damaging
or pro-apoptotic effects in JC cells. Only the pre-treatment
with NZ induced all these events in doxorubicin-treated cells
(Figure 5C–5F). The activation of caspase 9 and caspase 3 by
NZ was time-dependent (Supplementary Figure 4A–4D); the
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

addition of doxorubicin further increased caspases activities
in cells incubated with NZ for at least 12 h (Supplementary
Figure 4A–4D; Figure 5F).

The association of NZ and doxorubicin restores
the recognition of resistant tumors by the host
immune system
We previously demonstrated that the combination of
ZA and doxorubicin restored the immunogenic effects of
the anthracycline in mildly chemoresistant cells in vitro,
where doxorubicin alone was ineffective [26]. However,
in the highly chemoresistant JC cells, the association of
doxorubicin and ZA elicited low pro-immunogenic effects,
as revealed by the very weak extracellular release of ATP
(Figure 6A) and high mobility group binding protein 1
(HMGB1; Figure 6B–6C), and by the absence of CRT
exposure on JC cell surface (Figure 6D), considered as
indexes of immunogenic death [37]. ZA and NZ alone
did not elicit these effects as well. Interestingly, the
association of NZ and doxorubicin was the only treatment
that significantly increased the extracellular release of ATP
and HMGB1 (Figure 6A–6C), and the exposure of CRT
20757

Oncotarget

Figure 3: NZ decreases the activation of Ras/ERK1/2/HIF1α axis and the expression of Pgp in chemoresistant tumors.

Six weeks-old female BALB/c mice bearing 60 mm3 JC-luc tumors were randomly divided into the following groups (10 mice/group):
1) Ctrl group, treated with 0.1 mL saline solution i.v. at day 3, 9, 15; 2) Dox group, treated with 5 mg/kg doxorubicin i.v. at day 3, 9, 15;
3) ZA group, treated with 20 µg/mouse ZA i.v. at day 2, 8, 14; 4) ZA + Dox group, treated with 20 µg/mouse ZA i.v. at day 2, 8, 14 followed
by 5 mg/kg doxorubicin i.v. at day 3, 9, 15; 5) NZ group, treated with 20 µg/mouse self-assembling ZA formulation i.v. at day 2, 8, 14;
6) NZ + Dox group, treated with 20 µg/mouse NZ i.v. at day 2, 8, 14 followed by 5 mg/kg doxorubicin i.v. at day 3, 9, 15. (A) Tumor
extracts were subjected to the Western blot analysis for Ras-GTP, total Ras, phospho(Thr202/Tyr204, Thr185/Tyr187)-ERK1/2, total
ERK1/2. The actin expression was used as control of equal protein loading. The figure is representative of 4 tumors per each group.
(B) Cytosolic (CYT) and nuclear (NCL) fractions were separated from tumor extracts and analyzed for the expression of phospho(Ser)
HIF-1α and HIF-1α by Western blotting. The actin and TBP expressions were used as controls of equal protein loading in each fraction. The
figure is representative of 4 tumors per each group. (C) HIF-1α activity was measured in nuclear extracts from each tumor (n = 10/group) by
ELISA. Data are presented as means + SD. Versus Ctrl group: *p < 0.05; versus Dox group: °p < 0.05. (D) Pgp mRNA levels were detected
in each tumor extract (n = 10/group) by qRT-PCR. Data are presented as means + SD. Versus Ctrl group: *p < 0.05; versus Dox group:
°p < 0.01. (E) Sections of tumors from each group of animals were immunostained for Pgp. Nuclei were counter-stained with hematoxylin.
Bar = 10 µm (63× objective). The photographs are representative of sections from 5 tumors/group. The percentage of Pgp-positive cells was
determined by analyzing sections from 5 animals of each group (110–72 cells/field), using Photoshop program. The intensity of Ctrl group
was considered 100%. Data are presented as means + SD. Versus Ctrl group: *p < 0.05; versus Dox group: °p < 0.001.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

20758

Oncotarget

NZ lowers the tumor-induced kynurenine
production by reducing the activation of STAT3
and decreases the number of intra-tumor Treg
lymphocytes

on JC cell surface (Figure 6D). NZ increased the release
of ATP and HMGB1 if incubated at least 48 h before
doxorubicin; shorter incubations did not elicited these
effects (Supplementary Figure 5A–5H).
In keeping with these findings, the number of cells
positive for CRT and the number of DCs present within
JC tumors, revealed by the staining for the DC-marker
CD11c, were markedly increased in animals exposed to
NZ and doxorubicin (Figure 6E).

As observed previously, ZA can lower in vitro
the synthesis of the immunosuppressive metabolite
kynurenine, by inhibiting the Ras/ERK1/2 pathway and the
phosphorylation of STAT3 on serine 727 [16]. In JC tumors

Figure 4: NZ reduces the glucose metabolism in chemoresistant cells. (A) Six weeks-old female BALB/c mice bearing 60 mm3

JC-luc tumors were randomly divided into the following groups (10 mice/group): 1) Ctrl group, treated with 0.1 mL saline solution i.v. at
day 3, 9, 15; 2) Dox group, treated with 5 mg/kg doxorubicin i.v. at day 3, 9, 15; 3) ZA group, treated with 20 µg/mouse ZA i.v. at day 2, 8,
14; 4) ZA + Dox group, treated with 20 µg/mouse ZA i.v. at day 2, 8, 14 followed by 5 mg/kg doxorubicin i.v. at day 3, 9, 15; 5) NZ group,
treated with 20 µg/mouse self-assembling ZA formulation i.v. at day 2, 8, 14; 6) NZ + Dox group, treated with 20 µg/mouse NZ i.v. at day
2, 8, 14 followed by 5 mg/kg doxorubicin i.v. at day 3, 9, 15. Tumor extracts (n = 10/group) were analyzed for the mRNA levels of GLUT1,
HK, PFK1, GAPDH, ENOA, PK by qRT-PCR. Data are presented as means + SD. Versus Ctrl group: *p < 0.001; versus Dox group:
°p < 0.001. (B) JC cells were grown in fresh medium (Ctrl) or medium containing 5 µmol/L doxorubicin (Dox, 24 h), 1 µmol/L zoledronic
acid (ZA, 48 h), 1 µmol/L ZA for 24 h followed by 5 µmol/L doxorubicin for additional 24 h (ZA + Dox), 1 µmol/L self-assembling ZA
formulation (NZ, 48 h), 1 µmol/L NZ for 24 h followed by 5 µmol/L doxorubicin for additional 24 h (NZ + Dox). The uptake of 2-deoxyD-[3H]-glucose was measured by cell radiolabeling and quantified by liquid scintillation. Data are presented as means + SD (n = 3). Versus
Ctrl: *p < 0.001; versus Dox: °p < 0.002. (C) JC cells were incubated as reported in (B). The glucose flux through glycolysis and TCA
cycle was measured in cells radiolabeled with [6–14C]-glucose. Data are presented as means + SD (n = 3). Versus Ctrl: *p < 0.001; versus
Dox: °p < 0.001.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

20759

Oncotarget

extracted from mice treated with ZA, however, we did not
observe any reduction of phosphorylated STAT3 (Figure 7A),
IDO mRNA (Figure 7B) and kynurenine production
(Figure 7C). These three events were instead detected
in tumors derived from NZ-treated animals and were not
affected by doxorubicin (Figure 7A–7C). Neither ZA nor
NZ, alone and in combination with doxorubicin, modified

the amount of intra-tumor CD19+, CD4+ or CD8+ cells
(Supplementary Figure 6), suggesting that they did not
affect the amount of B- and T-lymphocytes infiltrating the
tumor bulk.
High levels of kynurenine have been correlated with
the expansion of immunosuppressive Treg cells [16], which
favor an immunotolerant and permissive environment

Figure 5: NZ impairs the mitochondrial metabolism and induces apoptotic death in chemoresistant cells. JC cells were

grown in fresh medium (Ctrl) or medium containing 5 µmol/L doxorubicin (Dox, 24 h), 1 µmol/L zoledronic acid (ZA, 48 h), 1 µmol/L
ZA for 24 h followed by 5 µmol/L doxorubicin for additional 24 h (ZA + Dox), 1 µmol/L self-assembling ZA formulation (NZ, 48 h),
1 µmol/L NZ for 24 h followed by 5 µmol/L doxorubicin for additional 24 h (NZ + Dox). (A) The electron flux between Complex I and
III, either ubiquinone-independent (i.e. in the absence of the Complex I inhibitor rotenone, 50 µmol/L) or ubiquinone-dependent (i.e. in the
presence of rotenone), was measured spectrophotometrically in isolated mitochondria. Data are presented as means + SD (n = 3). Versus
Ctrl: *p < 0.05; versus Dox: °p < 0.01. (B) ATP levels in isolated mitochondria were measured by a chemiluminescence-based assay. Data
are presented as means + SD (n = 3). Versus Ctrl: *p < 0.01; versus Dox: °p < 0.01. (C) Intramitochondrial ROS levels were measured
spectrofluorimetrically in triplicate using the DCFDA-AM probe. Data are presented as means + SD (n = 3). Versus Ctrl: *p < 0.05; versus
Dox: °p < 0.001. (D) The mitochondrial membrane potential was assessed by the JC-1 staining method. The percentage of green versus
red mitochondria was considered an index of mitochondrial depolarization and permeability transition. Data are presented as means + SD
(n = 3). Versus Ctrl: *p < 0.05; versus Dox: °p < 0.001. (E) Mitochondrial (MIT) and cytosolic (CYT) extracts were analyzed for the levels
of cytochrome c by Western blotting. The porin and actin expressions were used as controls of equal protein loading in each fraction. The
figure is representative of 3 experiments. (F) The activities of caspase 9 and 3 were measured spectrofluorimetrically in the cell lysates.
Data are presented as means + SD (n = 3). Versus Ctrl: *p < 0.005; versus Dox: °p < 0.005.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

20760

Oncotarget

Figure 6: NZ restores the doxorubicin-induced immunogenic death in chemoresistant tumors. (A) JC cells were grown

in fresh medium (Ctrl) or medium containing 5 µmol/L doxorubicin (Dox, 24 h), 1 µmol/L zoledronic acid (ZA, 48 h), 1 µmol/L ZA for
24 h followed by 5 µmol/L doxorubicin for additional 24 h (ZA + Dox), 1 µmol/L self-assembling ZA formulation (NZ, 48 h), 1 µmol/L
NZ for 24 h followed by 5 µmol/L doxorubicin for additional 24 h (NZ + Dox). The extracellular release of ATP was measured by a
chemiluminescence-based assay. Data are presented as means + SD (n = 3). Versus Ctrl: *p < 0.05; versus Dox: °p < 0.001. (B) Western
blot analysis of HMGB1 in the cell supernatants. Red Ponceau staining was used to check the equal loading of proteins. The figure is
representative of 3 experiments. (C) The extracellular release of HMGB1 was measured by ELISA. Data are presented as means + SD
(n = 3). Versus Ctrl: *p < 0.005; versus Dox: °p < 0.001. (D) Surface calreticulin (CRT) was measured by flow cytometry in duplicate. The
figure is representative of 3 experiments. Anti-isotype: incubation with non immune isotypic antibody, included as negative control. (E) Six
weeks-old female BALB/c mice bearing 60 mm3 JC-luc tumors were randomly divided into the following groups (10 mice/group): 1) Ctrl
group, treated with 0.1 mL saline solution i.v. at day 3, 9, 15; 2) Dox group, treated with 5 mg/kg doxorubicin i.v. at day 3, 9, 15; 3) ZA
group, treated with 20 µg/mouse ZA i.v. at day 2, 8, 14; 4) ZA + Dox group, treated with 20 µg/mouse ZA i.v. at day 2, 8, 14 followed by
5 mg/kg doxorubicin i.v. at day 3, 9, 15; 5) NZ group, treated with 20 µg/mouse self-assembling ZA formulation i.v. at day 2, 8, 14; 6)
NZ + Dox group, treated with 20 µg/mouse NZ i.v. at day 2, 8, 14 followed by 5 mg/kg doxorubicin i.v. at day 3, 9, 15. Sections of
tumors from each group of animals were immunostained for CRT or CD11c, a marker of dendritic cells. Nuclei were counter-stained with
hematoxylin. Bar = 10 µm (63× objective). The photographs are representative of sections from 5 (for CRT) or 10 (for CD11c) tumors/
group. The percentage of CRT-positive cells was determined by analyzing sections from 5 animals of each group (108–76 cells/field),
using Photoshop program. The intensity of Ctrl group was considered 100%. The number of CD11c-positive cells/field was calculated by
analyzing sections from 10 animals of each group (114–71 cells/field), using ImageJ software (http://imagej.nih.gov/ij/). Data are presented
as means + SD. Versus Ctrl group: *p < 0.05; versus Dox group: °p < 0.001.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

20761

Oncotarget

for tumor growth [38]. Of note, JC tumors were basally
infiltrated of immunosuppressive Treg cells, as documented
by the presence of Foxp3A+ cells (Figure 7D). ZA and
doxorubicin did not modify such infiltrate, which was
instead significantly reduced by NZ (Figure 7D). An active
immune system was essential to mediate the anti-tumor
effect of NZ and to fully rescue doxorubicin’s activity:
indeed NZ, alone or in combination with doxorubicin,
reduced JC tumor growth implanted also in NOD SCID
mice (Supplementary Figure 7), but the anti-tumor activity
of the combination “NZ plus doxorubicin” was significantly
stronger in immunocompetent (Figure 2C) than in
immunodeficient (Supplementary Figure 7) animals.

genes support cell proliferation and glucose metabolism
through the glycolytic pathway [41]. In accord with these
experimental evidences, NZ reduced proliferation, downregulated the expression levels of glycolytic genes and
decreased the glucose flux through glycolysis and TCA
cycle in our model. In parallel, by reducing the supply of
isoprenoid moieties necessary for the electron transporter
ubiquinone, it reduced the mitochondrial respiratory chain
activity. This global impairment of the energy metabolism
determined lower production of ATP and increased ROS
levels, which damaged mitochondria and induced a
mitochondria-dependent apoptosis. The simultaneous
activation of glycolysis and oxidative phosphorylation is a
typical feature of chemoresistant cells [42], which require
huge amounts of ATP to support the ABC transporters
activity. On the other hand, chemoresistant cells are more
susceptible to the ATP depletion and to the ROS-induced
damage than chemosensitive cells [43]. NZ, by decreasing
ATP supply and increasing ROS levels, hits two “Achille’s
heels” of chemoresistant cells. This mechanism can
explain the anti-proliferative effect of NZ alone against
chemoresistant breast tumors.
More importantly, NZ restored the anti-tumor efficacy
of doxorubicin in JC tumors, which were fully refractory
to the drug. In line with the in vitro data, the combination
of NZ and doxorubicin was more effective than the
combination of ZA and doxorubicin. Since Pgp is a target
gene of HIF-1α [41], the circumvention of doxorubicin
resistance in NZ-treated animals was likely due to the
down-regulation of the HIF-1α-mediated transcription of
Pgp. It has been reported that doxorubicin activates HIF-1α
by decreasing the intracellular availability of iron [44]: this
finding is in accord with our scenario, where doxorubicin
increased the transcriptional activity of HIF-1α in a Ras/
ERK1/2-independent way. Although the intra-tumor
concentration of doxorubicin in JC tumors is very low [45],
such concentration was sufficient to increase HIF-1α and
up-regulate Pgp levels, glycolytic genes levels, glucose
uptake and metabolism through glycolysis and TCA cycle.
This metabolic signature, which provides JC tumors with
ATP and can maintain the ATP-dependent activity of Pgp,
was abrogated by NZ.
The low concentration of doxorubicin within
JC tumors, however, was not sufficient to impair the
mitochondrial respiratory chain and increase the ROS
production from Complex I, two events that contribute to
the doxorubicin cytotoxicity in drug-sensitive cells [46, 47],
but not in drug-resistant ones [45]. NZ, which increased the
intracellular retention of doxorubicin in JC cells, restored
also these “mitochondrial” effects of the drug. Moreover,
NZ alone impaired the mitochondrial energy metabolism.
We might speculate that in tumors exposed to NZ and
doxorubicin the effects of NZ on mitochondria functions
are additive to the effects of doxorubicin: the two drugs
strongly reduced the electron flux and ATP synthesis,
increased ROS levels and mitochondrial depolarization,

DISCUSSION
In this work we show that NZ restores the sensitivity
to doxorubicin in resistant breast tumors, re-inducing
both the “direct” cytotoxic effects – i.e. reducing cell
viability and inducing a necro-apoptotic cell death – and
the “indirect” effects – i.e. restoring the doxorubicininduced immunogenic death – exerted by anthracyclines in
responsive tumors.
NZ produced a significant chemosensitization
in breast cancer cell lines that differ for the expression
of estrogen receptor, progesterone receptor and human
epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (Her2) [39]. Worthy of
note, NZ exerted strong chemosensitizing effects in triple
negative breast cancer cells such as MDA-MB-231 cells.
This result is important in a translational perspective since
the first-line therapy in triple negative breast cancers is
chemotherapy, which achieves poor results for the intrinsic
chemoresistance of these tumors [40]. Moreover, the
chemosensitizing effects of NZ were not species-specific,
since they were detected in both human and murine
resistant cells.
To validate the efficacy in vivo and investigate
the molecular mechanisms of the NZ-induced
chemosensitization, we focused on the JC model, which
was the most chemoresistant cell line in vitro and was
syngeneic with BALB/c mice [34]. This feature allowed
us to set up a model of chemoresistant tumor implanted in
immunocompetent animals and to examine the effects of NZ
on both tumor and host immune system.
Interestingly, whereas ZA did not reduce the tumor
growth, NZ exerted a detectable anti-proliferative effect
even when used alone. This result, which is in keeping
with previous findings [30, 32], can be explained by
the use of NPs that allows a higher delivery of the
aminobisphosphonate within the tumor, compared to free
ZA [28–33].
By reducing the Ras/ERK1/2 activity, NZ lowered
the ERK1/2-dependent phosphorylation and activation
of HIF-1α, which was constitutively translocated into the
nucleus in JC cells even under normoxia, as it occurs in
many chemoresistant cells [26]. Several HIF-1α target
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

20762

Oncotarget

Figure 7: NZ counteracts the tumor-induced immunosuppressive microenvironment. Six weeks-old female BALB/c mice

bearing 60 mm3 JC-luc tumors were randomly divided into the following groups (10 mice/group): 1) Ctrl group, treated with 0.1 mL saline
solution i.v. at day 3, 9, 15; 2) Dox group, treated with 5 mg/kg doxorubicin i.v. at day 3, 9, 15; 3) ZA group, treated with 20 µg/mouse
ZA i.v. at day 2, 8, 14; 4) ZA + Dox group, treated with 20 µg/mouse ZA i.v. at day 2, 8, 14 followed by 5 mg/kg doxorubicin i.v. at day
3, 9, 15; 5) NZ group, treated with 20 µg/mouse self-assembling ZA formulation i.v. at day 2, 8, 14; 6) NZ + Dox group, treated with
20 µg/mouse NZ i.v. at day 2, 8, 14 followed by 5 mg/kg doxorubicin i.v. at day 3, 9, 15. (A) Tumor extracts were subjected to the Western
blot analysis for phospho(Tyr705)-STAT3, phospho(Ser727)-STAT3, total STAT3. The actin expression was used as control of equal protein
loading. The figure is representative of 4 tumors per each group. (B) IDO mRNA levels were detected in each tumor extract (n = 10/group)
by qRT-PCR. Data are presented as means + SD. Versus Ctrl group: *p < 0.01; versus Dox group: °p < 0.01. (C) The release of kynurenine
in the tumor supernatants was measured spectrophotometrically (n = 10/group). Data are presented as means + SD. Versus untreated Ctrl
group: *p < 0.02; versus Dox group: °p < 0.02. (D) Sections of tumors from each group of animals were immunostained for Foxp3A, a
marker of Treg cells. Nuclei were counter-stained with hematoxylin. Bar = 10 µm (63× objective). The photographs are representative
of sections from 10 tumors/group. The number of Foxp3A-positive cells/field was calculated by analyzing sections from 10 animals of
each group (111–75 cells/field), using ImageJ software (http://imagej.nih.gov/ij/). Data are presented as means + SD. Versus Ctrl group:
*p < 0.02; versus Dox group: °p < 0.005.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

20763

Oncotarget

activated the cytochrome c/caspase 9/caspase 3-dependent
pro-apoptotic axis.
The effects of ZA on HIF-1α transcriptional activity,
glucose metabolism and mitochondrial functions were lower
than those elicited by NZ. As noted earlier, the lower intratumor uptake of free ZA compared to NZ [28–32] limits
the ability of the former to reduce the synthesis of FPP and
ubiquinone, to inhibit the Ras/ERK1/2/HIF-1α/Pgp axis, to
impair the energy metabolism, to fully restore doxorubicin’s
efficacy in vivo.
In partial contrast with our work, the treatment with
ZA administered before doxorubicin has not improved the
efficacy of the anthracycline in human MDA-MB-436 cells
implanted in nude mice [48]. This model, however, differs
from the one used in our work for several reasons. First,
the use of free ZA instead of NZ reduces the antitumor
effects of the aminobisphosphonate, as demonstrated in
other tumor models [30, 32]. Second, ZA and doxorubicin
target both tumor cells and tumor-associated immune cells
[13, 49, 50]: the use of immunodeficient mice did not allow
to investigate the effects of ZA and doxorubicin on the host
immune system. Our comparison between the anti-tumor
effect of NZ in immunocompetent and immunodeficient
mice suggested that, although NZ was effective also in
immunodeficient animals, in line with previous observations
[30–33], it achieved the maximal efficacy in animals with an
active immune system. These results suggest that part of the
anti-tumor effects of NZ was mediated by the activation of
the host immune system against the tumor.
Indeed, we found that NZ restored the antitumor
efficacy of doxorubicin also by rescuing its proimmunogenic effects, as revealed by the increased
extracellular release of ATP and HMGB1, and by the
increased amount of CRT on the plasma membrane.
The concurrent presence of these three events is widely
recognized as indexes of immunogenic cell death [37]. In
our model, the release of ATP and HMGB1 elicited by NZ
started later than the triggering of apoptosis: these findings
led to hypothesize that the apoptotic process induced by
NZ primes cells for a more severe damage, leading to
the release of ATP and HMGB1. We cannot exclude that
these molecules are released passively as a consequence
of the necro-apoptotic cell death; however, since they are
paralleled by the exposure of CRT on cell surface, they
can suggest a simultaneous induction of immunogenic cell
death.
The exposure of CRT on the cell surface coupled
with the reduction of Pgp levels, two events that
occurred in JC tumors treated with NZ and doxorubicin,
are necessary to trigger the tumor cell phagocytosis
by local DCs [15, 26]. The increased amount of DCs
infiltrating JC tumors treated with NZ and doxorubicin
suggests an increased recruitment of local DCs. Although
the presence of DCs within breast tumors has been
associated with either anti-tumor or pro-tumor effects,
the presence of DCs activated by the release of HMGB1
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

has been unequivocally correlated with the recruitment
of T-lymphocytes recognizing tumor-associated antigens
[21]. An immunotherapy based on the only boosting of
DCs, however, is ineffective in breast cancer and requires
the integration with chemotherapy and/or therapeutic tools
that inhibit immunosuppressive lymphocytes [23].
According to our data, NZ can be an excellent
immunoadjuvant agent: indeed, besides recruiting local
DCs, it lowered the production of the immunosuppressive
metabolite kynurenine by the resistant tumors. The
expression of IDO, the main enzyme producing
kynurenine in resistant cancer cells [17], is controlled by
the transcriptional factor STAT3, which is active when
phosphorylated on tyrosine 705 and serine 727 [51, 52].
In resistant malignant pleural mesothelioma cells, the Ras/
ERK1/2 axis promotes the phosphorylation of STAT3 on
serine 727 and increases the transcription of IDO; this event
is prevented by ZA and reduces the ex vivo expansion of
immunosuppressive Treg cells [16]. A similar mechanism
occurred in JC tumors, where ZA and in particular NZ
reduced the phosphorylation of STAT3 on serine 727. The
slight reduction of phospho(Ser727)STAT3 elicited by
ZA, however, was not sufficient to produce any change
in kynurenine synthesis. By contrast, the strong inhibition
of STAT3 phosphorylation induced by NZ decreased the
transcription of IDO mRNA, the release of kynurenine in
the tumor supernatant and the infiltration of Treg cells.
The only decrease in Treg cells is sufficient to
reverse the immunotolerant microenvironment created
by solid tumors, also in the absence of changes in other
classes of B- and T-lymphocytes [38, 53]. When effective,
anthracycline-based regimens reduce the intra-tumor
Foxp3A+ cells without changing the amount of CD8+
T-lymphocytes [54]. Interestingly, in a large phase III
trial the decrease of intra-tumor Foxp3A+ cells has been
predictive of anthracyclines efficacy in patients with breast
cancer [55]. In JC resistant tumors, doxorubicin did not
modify the percentage of intra-tumor Foxp3A+ Treg cells.
This was likely an additional mechanism of doxorubicin
resistance: of note, this feature was counteracted by the
pre-treatment with NZ.
In conclusion our work suggests that NZ is a multitarget chemo-immunosensitizing agent, acting on both
tumor cell and tumor microenvironment. On the one hand,
it exerts cytotoxic effects against breast tumors refractory
to doxorubicin when used alone, by impairing the tumor
energy metabolism and reducing the tumor-induced
immunosuppression. On the other hand, NZ overcomes the
resistance to doxorubicin by at least two mechanisms: 1) it
increases the intracellular retention of the drug, enhancing
the direct cytotoxicity of doxorubicin on tumor cells; 2) it
restores the doxorubicin-induced immunogenic cell death,
re-establishing an anti-tumor immune microenvironment
(Figure 8). We propose the use of NZ as an adjuvant tool
in chemo-immunotherapy protocols for the treatment of
anthracycline-refractory breast tumors.
20764

Oncotarget

Figure 8: Effects of NZ on tumor cells and tumor-associated immune microenvironment. By inhibiting the farnesyl

pyrophosphate synthase (FPPS), self-assembling zoledronic acid formulation (NZ) reduces the isoprenoids supply. This event implies:
1) lower activity of Ras/ERK1/2/HIF-1α axis, lower HIF-1α-dependent transcription of P-glycoprotein (Pgp) and lower production of
ATP via HIF-1α-dependent anaerobic energy metabolism; 2) reduced amount of the electron carrier ubiquinone (U), which decreases
the mitochondrial aerobic energy metabolism and further diminishes the ATP supply for Pgp; 3) reduced activity of Ras/ERK1/2/STAT3
axis, lower expression of indoleamine 2,3 dioxygenase (IDO) and lower production of the immunosuppressive metabolite kynureine (K)
that is required for the expansion of the tumor-tolerant T-regulatory (Treg) cells. The impairment in tumor energy metabolism and the
reduction of Treg may explain the anti-tumor effect of NZ. When co-administered with doxorubicin (D), NZ reduces the drug efflux owing
to the lower expression of Pgp; in parallel, it increases the doxorubicin-mediated exposure of calreticulin (CRT) that activates the tumor
cell phagocytosis by local dendritic cells (DC). Hence, NZ induces chemosensitization and immunosensitization. Dotted lines: pathways
inhibited by NZ; continuous lines: pathways activated by NZ.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

20765

Oncotarget

MATERIALS AND METHODS

resulting dispersion was maintained at room temperature
for 10 min. NPs without ZA were also prepared similarly,
starting from CaPNPs and cationic liposomes. Each
formulation was prepared in triplicate.
The mean diameter of stealth liposomes and
CaPZNPs were determined at 20°C by photon correlation
spectroscopy (N5, Beckman Coulter, Miami, FL). Each
sample was diluted in deionizer/filtered water and analyzed
with detector at 90° angle. Polydispersity index (P.I.) was
used as measure of the particle size distribution. For each
batch, the mean diameter and size distribution were the
mean of three measures. For each formulation, the mean
diameter and P.I. were calculated as the mean of three
different batches. The zeta potential (ζ) of the NP surface
was measured in water by means of a Zetasizer Nano Z
(Malvern, UK). Data of ζ were collected as the average
of 20 measurements. To measure the ZA encapsulation
efficacy, 1 mL of NP dispersion was ultra-centrifuged
(Optima Max E, Beckman Coulter) at 80,000 × g at 4°C
for 40 min. Supernatants were carefully removed and ZA
concentration was determined by high pressure liquid
chromatography. The ZA encapsulation efficiency was
calculated as [(TSZA – ASZA)/TSZA] × 100, where TSZA is
the theoretical ZA in the supernatant and ASZA is the actual
ZA concentration in the supernatant.

Ethical statement
Investigation has been conducted in accordance with
the ethical standards, the Declaration of Helsinki, national
and international guidelines, and has been approved by the
Bio-Ethical Committee of the University of Turin, Italy.

Chemicals
Fetal bovine serum and culture medium were from
Invitrogen Life Technologies (Carlsbad, CA). Plasticware
for cell cultures was from Falcon (Becton Dickinson,
Franklin Lakes, NJ). ZA was a gift from Novartis (Basel,
Switzerland). Electrophoresis reagents were obtained from
Bio-Rad Laboratories (Hercules, CA). The protein content
in cell lysates and tumor homogenates was assessed with
the BCA kit from Sigma Chemical Co. (St. Louis, MO).
Unless otherwise specified, all the other reagents were
purchased from Sigma Chemical Co.

Preparation and characterization of NZ
Self-assembling NPs encapsulating ZA were prepared
as previously reported [28]. Briefly, an aqueous solution of
18 mmol/L CaCl2 was added, dropwise and under magnetic
stirring, to an aqueous solution of 10.8 mmol/L Na2HPO4.
The resulting suspension (termed CaPNPs) was filtered
through a 0.22 µm polycarbonate filter (MF-Millipore,
Microglass Heim, Italy) and stored at 4°C before use. ZA
was then complexed with CaPNPs (to obtain CaPZNPs),
at a volume ratio of 50:1, with a final ZA concentration of
50 mg/mL. Cationic liposomes (N-[1-(2,3-dioleoyloxy)
propyl]-N,N,N-trimethylammonium chloride/cholesterol/
1,2-distearoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphoethanolamine-N-[amino
(polyethylene glycol)-2000] at a ratio of 1:1:0.5) were
prepared by hydration of a thin lipid film followed by
extrusion. The lipid mixture dissolved in chloroform/
methanol (2:1 v/v) was added to a 50 mL round-bottom
flask and the solvent was removed under reduced pressure
by a rotary evaporator (Laborota 4010 digital, Heidolph,
Schwabach, Germany) in nitrogen atmosphere. The resulting
lipid film was hydrated with 1 mL of 0.22 µm-filtered
distilled water and the resulting suspension was gently
mixed in the presence of glass beads followed by incubation
at room temperature for 2 h. The liposome suspension
was then extruded using a thermobarrel extruder system
(Northern Lipids Inc., Vancouver, BC, Canada) passing
repeatedly the suspension under nitrogen atmosphere
through polycarbonate membranes with decreasing pore
sizes from 400 to 100 nm (Nucleopore Track Membrane
25 mm, Whatman, Brentford, UK). The liposomes were
stored at 4°C. Each formulation was prepared in triplicate.
Finally, equal volumes of suspensions of the liposomes and
CaPZNPs, respectively, were mixed in a glass tube and the
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Cells
Human non-transformed breast epithelial MCF10A
cells, human breast cancer MCF7, SKBR3, T74D, MDAMB-231 cells and murine mammary cancer JC cells were
purchased from ATCC (Manassas, VA). Murine mammary
cancer TUBO cells were a kind gift of Prof. Federica
Cavallo, Department of Molecular Biotechnology and
Health Sciences, University of Turin, Italy. Cells were
maintained in medium supplemented with 10% v/v fetal
bovine serum, 1% v/v penicillin-streptomycin, 1% v/v
L-glutamine. 2 × 105 JC cells were stably transfected
with 2 μg of pGL4.51[luc2/CMV/Neo] vector (Promega
Corporation, Madison, WI), then selected in culture medium
containing 1 μg/mL neomycin to generate the stably
luciferase-expressing JC-luc clone.

Western blot analysis
Cells were lysed in MLB buffer (125 mmol/L TrisHCl, 750 mmol/L NaCl, 1% v/v NP40, 10% v/v glycerol,
50 mmol/L MgCl2, 5 mmol/L EDTA, 25 mmol/L NaF,
1 mmol/L NaVO4, 10 μg/mL leupeptin, 10 μg/mL pepstatin,
10 μg/mL aprotinin, 1 mmol/L phenylmethylsulfonyl
fluoride, pH 7.5), sonicated and centrifuged at 13,000 × g
for 10 min at 4°C. Tumors were frozen at −80°C for 24 h,
then homogenized in MLB buffer and treated as reported
above. 20 μg of proteins from cell lysates or tumor
homogenates were subjected to Western blotting and probed
with the following antibodies: anti-Pgp (BD Biosciences,
20766

Oncotarget

San Josè, CA), anti-MRP1 (Abcam, Cambridge, UK),
anti-Ras (Millipore, Billerica, MA), anti-phospho(Thr202/
Tyr204, Thr185/Tyr187)-ERK1/2 (Millipore), anti-ERK 1/2
(Millipore), anti-phospho(Tyr705)-STAT3 (Cell Signaling
Technology, Danvers, MA), anti-phospho(Ser727)STAT3 (Cell Signaling Technology), anti-STAT3 (Thermo
Scientific, Rockford, IL). The proteins were detected by
enhanced chemiluminescence (Bio-Rad Laboratories).
To evaluate the activity of Ras, the Ras GTPbound fraction, taken as an index of the active protein,
was measured in a pull-down assay using Raf-1-GST
fusion protein-agarose beads-conjugates (Millipore) and
then probing the immuno-precipitated samples with an
anti-Ras (Millipore) antibody. Nuclei-cytosol separation
was obtained with the Nuclear Extract Kit (Active Motif,
Rixensart, Belgium). To assess HIF-1α phosphorylation, the
cytosolic lysate was immunoprecipitated with a polyclonal
anti-HIF-1α antibody (Santa Cruz Biotechnology Inc.,
Santa Cruz, CA), then resolved by SDS-PAGE and probed
with a biotin-conjugated anti-phosphoserine antibody
(Sigma Chemical Co.), followed by polymeric streptavidinhorseradish peroxidase-conjugates (Sigma Chemical Co.).
10 μg nuclear proteins were resolved by SDS-PAGE and
probed with an anti-HIF-1α antibody (BD Biosciences),
to measure the amount of protein translocated into the
nucleus. The amount of cytochrome c in the cytosolic and
mitochondrial extracts was measured as described in [56],
using an anti-cytochrome c antibody (BD Biosciences).
The equal protein loading in whole cell lysates, nuclear
and mitochondrial extracts was checked by using anti-actin
(Sigma Chemical Co.), anti-TATA-box binding protein
(TBP; Santa Cruz Biotechnology Inc.), anti-porin (Abcam)
antibodies, respectively.

previously reported [57]: at the end of the treatment period,
cells were incubated for 1 h at 37°C in culture medium
containing 70 μg/mL of neutral red solution (Sigma
Chemical Co.), then washed three times with PBS and
rinsed with stop buffer (32 mmol/L trisodium citrate, 50%
v/v methanol, pH 6). The absorbance at 540 nm was read
using a Synergy HT Multi-Detection Microplate Reader
(Bio-Tek Instruments). The absorbance of untreated cells
was considered as 100% viability; the results were expressed
as percentage of viable cells versus untreated cells.

Cytotoxicity assays
The release of HMGB1 in the cell culture
supernatant was measured using the High Mobility Group
Protein 1 ELISA kit (Cloud-Clone Corp., Houston, Texas),
following the manufacturer’s instructions. Results were
expressed in pg/mg cell proteins, according to a titration
curve previously prepared. In parallel, 20 μL of the cell
culture medium were resolved by SDS-PAGE and probed
with an anti-HMGB1 antibody (Sigma Chemical Co.).
Blots were pre-stained with Red Ponceau, to check the
equal loading of proteins.

In vivo assays
1 × 106 JC or JC-luc cells, mixed with 100 µL
Matrigel, were injected subcutaneously in 6 weeks-old
immunocompetent or NOD SCID female BALB/c mice,
housed (5 per cages) under 12 h light/dark cycle, with
food and drinking provided ad libitum. Palpable tumors
developed 2-3 weeks after injection. The tumor growth was
measured daily by caliper and was calculated according to
the equation (L × W2)/2, where L = tumor length; W = tumor
width. When the tumor reached the volume of 60 mm3, the
mice were randomized into 6 groups: 1) Ctrl group, treated
with 0.1 mL saline solution i.v. at day 3, 9, 15; 2) Dox group,
treated with 5 mg/kg doxorubicin i.v. at day 3, 9, 15; 3) ZA
group, treated with 20 µg/mouse ZA i.v. at day 2, 8, 14;
4) ZA + Dox group, treated with 20 µg/mouse ZA i.v.
at day 2, 8, 14 followed by 5 mg/kg doxorubicin i.v. at
day 3, 9, 15; 5) NZ group, treated with 20 µg/mouse
NZ i.v. at day 2, 8, 14; 6) NZ + Dox group, treated
with 20 µg/mouse NZ i.v. at day 2, 8, 14 followed
by 5 mg/kg doxorubicin i.v. at day 3, 9, 15. In vivo
bioluminescence imaging was performed at day 0, 6, 12,
18 after randomization, with a Xenogen IVIS Spectrum
(PerkinElmer, Waltham, MA). Tumor volumes were
monitored daily and animals were euthanized by injecting
i.m. zolazepam (0.2 mL/kg) and xylazine (16 mg/kg)
at day 21 after randomization. The hematochemical
parameters LDH, AST, ALT, AP, CPK, creatinine were
measured on 0.5 mL of blood collected immediately after
mice sacrifice, using commercially available kits from
Beckman Coulter Inc.

Intracellular doxorubicin accumulation
Cells were incubated for 3 h with 5 µmol/L
doxorubicin, then washed twice in PBS, detached with
trypsin-EDTA, centrifuged at 1,300 × g for 2 min, sonicated
and re-suspended in 0.5 mL ethanol/0.3 N HCl. The amount
of doxorubicin was measured spectrofluorimetrically, using
a Synergy HT Multi-Detection Microplate Reader (BioTek Instruments, Winooski, VT). Excitation and emission
wavelengths were 475 nm and 553 nm. Fluorescence was
converted into nmoles/mg cell proteins, using a calibration
curve previously set.

Cell viability
To determine IC50, 5 × 105 cells were incubated
in the absence or presence of 1 µmol/L ZA or NZ for
72 h, with increasing concentrations of doxorubicin (from
1 nmol/L to 1 mmol/L) in the last 48 h. IC50 was considered
the concentration of doxorubicin that kills 50% cells. Viable
cells were quantified by the neutral red staining method, as

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

20767

Oncotarget

Immunohistochemistry

transport by measuring the uptake in the presence of
10 µmol/L cytochalasin B, an inhibitor of the facilitated
glucose transport: such value was always < 10% of the total
uptake. The results were expressed as pmoles 2-deoxy-D[3H]-glucose/mg cell proteins. The glucose flux through
glycolysis and TCA cycle was measured by radiolabeling
cells with 2 μCi/mL [6–14C]-glucose (55 mCi/mmol;
PerkinElmer). Cell suspensions were incubated for 1 h at
37°C in a closed experimental system to trap the 14CO2
developed from [14C]-glucose, and the reaction was stopped
by injecting 0.5 mL of 0.8 N HClO4. The amount of glucose
transformed into CO2 through the glycolysis and the TCA
cycle was calculated as described [59] and expressed as
pmoles CO2/h/mg cell proteins.

Tumors were resected, photographed and fixed in
4% v/v paraformaldehyde. The sections were stained with
hematoxylin/eosin or immunostained for Ki67 (Millipore),
Pgp (Millipore), CRT (Affinity Bioreagents, Golden,
CO), CD11c (BD Biosciences), CD19 (BD Biosciences),
CD4 (Abcam), CD8 (Abcam), Foxp3A (eBioscience,
San Diego, CA), followed by a peroxidase-conjugated
secondary antibody (Dako, Glostrup, Denmark). Nuclei
were counterstained with hematoxylin.

HIF-1α activity
The activity of HIF-1α was assessed on 10 μg
proteins from nuclear extracts with the TransAM™ HIF-1
Transcription Factor Assay Kit (Active Motif). Data
were expressed as mU absorbance/mg nuclear proteins.
For each set of experiments, a blank (with bis-distilled
water), a negative control (with mutated oligonucleotide)
and a competition assay (with 10 pmoles of the wild
type oligonucleotide and 100 pmoles of the mutated
oligonucleotide incubated with the nuclear extracts of
JC cells grown at 3% O2 for 24 h), were included. In
hypoxic conditions, the activity of HIF-1α was 307.23 ±
12.81 mU/mg nuclear proteins; in the competition assay, the
corresponding HIF-1α activity was reduced to 27.75 ± 5.71
mU/mg nuclear proteins (n = 3; p < 0.001).

Mitochondrial respiratory chain assays
Mitochondria were extracted as described earlier
[56]. A 50 μL aliquot was sonicated and used for the
measurement of protein content or Western blotting; the
remaining part was stored at −80°C until the use. To confirm
the presence of mitochondrial proteins in the extracts,
10 μg of each sonicated sample was subjected to SDSPAGE and probed with an anti-porin antibody (Abcam; data
not shown). The electron flux from Complex I to Complex
III was measured on 10 μg of non-sonicated mitochondrial
extracts, re-suspended in 150 µL buffer A (5 mmol/L
KH2PO4, 5 mmol/L MgCl2, 5% w/v bovine serum albumin).
Then 75 µL buffer B (25% w/v saponin, 50 mmol/L
KH2PO4, 5 mmol/L MgCl2, 5% w/v bovine serum albumin,
0.12 mmol/L cytochrome c-oxidized form, 0.2 mmol/L
NaN3) were added for 5 min at room temperature. Each
sample was incubated in the absence or presence of the
Complex I inhibitor rotenone (50 µmol/L), to measure the
ubiquinone-independent and the ubiquinone-dependent
electron flux, respectively. The reaction was started with
0.15 mmol/L NADH and was followed for 5 min, using a
Synergy HT Multi-Detection Microplate Reader (Bio-Tek
Instruments). Results were expressed as nmoles reduced
cytochrome c/min/mg mitochondrial proteins.

Quantitative real time PCR (qRT-PCR)
Total RNA was extracted by phenol/chloroform
method; 1 µg RNA was reverse-transcribed using the
iScript Reverse Transcription Supermix kit (Bio-Rad
Laboratories), according to the manufacturer’s instruction.
25 ng cDNA were amplified with 10 µL IQTM SYBR Green
Supermix (Bio-Rad Laboratories), using 400 nmol/L of
forward and reverse primers. Primers sequence is listed in
the Supplementary Table 1. RT-PCR was carried out with
a iQTM5 cycler (Bio-Rad Laboratories). Cycling conditions
were: 30 s at 95°C, followed by 40 cycles of denaturation
(15 s at 95°C), annealing/extension (30 s at 60°C). The
same cDNA preparation was used to quantify the genes of
interest and the housekeeping gene S14, used to normalize
gene expression. The relative quantitation of each sample
was performed using the Gene Expression Quantitation
software (Bio-Rad Laboratories). Results were expressed
in arbitrary units. For each gene, the expression in
untreated cells was considered “1”.

ATP measurement
The amount of ATP was measured on 20 μg of
mitochondrial proteins or on 100 μL of cell supernatants
with the ATP Bioluminescent Assay Kit (FL-AA, Sigma
Chemical Co.), using a Synergy HT Multi-Detection
Microplate Reader (Bio-Tek Instruments). ATP was
quantified as arbitrary light units; data were converted
into nmoles/mg mitochondrial or cellular proteins, using a
calibration curve previously set.

Glucose uptake and metabolism
The uptake of glucose was measured as described
earlier [58], by radiolabeling cells with 0.3 µCi/mL
2-deoxy-D-[3H]-glucose (7.5 Ci/mmol, PerkinElmer). The
uptake values were corrected for the non carrier-mediated
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

ROS measurement
Mitochondria were extracted, re-suspended in a
final volume of 0.5 mL PBS, incubated for 30 min at 37°C
20768

Oncotarget

with the fluorescent probe 5-(and-6)-chloromethyl-2′,7′dichlorodihydro-fluorescein diacetate-acetoxymethyl ester
(5 μmol/L; DCFDA-AM), centrifuged at 13,000 × g for
5 min and re-suspended in 0.5 mL PBS. The fluorescence
of each sample, taken as index of ROS level, was read
at 492 nm (excitation) and 517 nm (emission), using a
Synergy HT Multi-Detection Microplate Reader (Bio-Tek
Instruments). The results were expressed as nmoles/mg
mitochondrial proteins.

Bioreagents) for 1 h on ice. After washing, samples were
incubated with an AlexaFluor 488-conjugated secondary
antibody (Millipore) for 30 min and re-washed. Samples
were analyzed with a Guava easyCyte flow cytometer
(Millipore). For each analysis 10,000 events were collected.
Control experiments included incubation with non immune
isotypic antibody followed by the secondary antibody.
The results were analyzed with the easyCyte software
(Millipore).

Mitochondrial electric potential (Δψ)
measurement

Kynurenine production
Tumor pieces were collected immediately after mice
sacrifice and maintained for 24 h in culture medium, then
200 μL of the supernatants were used to measure the levels
of kynurenine, taken as index of IDO activity, as previously
detailed [17]. Supernatants were added to 100 μL of 30%
w/v trichloroacetic acid and incubated for 30 min at 50°C
to hydrolyze N-formylkynurenine to kynurenine. After
centrifugation at 10,000 × g for 10 min, 100 μL of the
supernatant were transferred into a 96-well plate, mixed
with 100 μL of 2% w/v p-dimethylamino benzaldehyde in
99.8% v/v acetic acid, and incubated for 10 min at room
temperature. Kynurenine was detected by measuring the
absorbance at 490 nm, using a Synergy HT Multi-Detection
Microplate Reader (Bio-Tek Instruments). The absorbance
of the culture medium alone was considered as a blank and
was subtracted from the values obtained in the presence of
the cells. The results were expressed as nmol kynurenine/mg
cell proteins, according to a titration curve previously set.

1 × 106 cells re-suspended in 0.5 mL PBS were
incubated for 30 min at 37°C with the fluorescent probe JC-1
(2 µmol/L; Biotium Inc., Hayward, CA), then centrifuged at
13,000 × g for 5 min and re-suspended in 0.5 mL PBS. The
fluorescence of each sample was read using a Synergy HT
Multi-Detection Microplate Reader (Bio-Tek Instruments):
the red fluorescence, index of polarized mitochondria, was
detected at 550 nm (excitation) and 600 nm (emission);
the green fluorescence, index of depolarized and damaged
mitochondria, was detected at 485 nm (excitation) and
535 nm (emission). The fluorescence units were used to
calculate the percentage of green-fluorescent mitochondria
versus red-fluorescent mitochondria.

Caspases activity
The activity of caspase 9 and caspase 3 was measured
as reported in [60]. Cells were lysed in 0.5 mL of caspase
lysis buffer (20 mmol/L Hepes/KOH, 10 mmol/L KCl,
1.5 mmol/L MgCl2, 1 mmol/L EGTA, 1 mmol/L EDTA,
1 mmol/L dithiothreitol, 1 mmol/L phenylmethylsulfonyl
fluoride, 10 µg/mL leupeptin, pH 7.5). 20 μg cell lysates
were incubated for 1 h at 37°C with 20 µmol/L of the
fluorogenic substrate of caspase 9 Ac-Leu-Glu-His-Asp7-amino-4-methylcoumarin (LEHD-AMC) or fluorogenic
substrate of caspase 3 Ac-Asp-Glu-Val-Asp-7-amino-4methylcoumarin (DEVD-AMC), in 0.25 mL caspase assay
buffer (25 mmol/L Hepes, 0.1 % w/v 3-[(3-cholamidopropyl)
dimethylammonio]-1-propanesulfonate, 10% w/v sucrose,
10 mmol/L dithiothreitol, 0.01% w/v egg albumin,
pH 7.5). The reaction was stopped by adding 0.75 mL icecold 0.1% w/v trichloroacetic acid and the fluorescence of
AMC fragment released by active caspases was read using
a Synergy HT Multi-Detection Microplate Reader (Bio-Tek
Instruments). Excitation and emission wavelengths were 380
and 460 nm, respectively. Fluorescence was converted in
nmoles/mg cell proteins, using a calibration curve prepared
previously with standard solutions of AMC.

FPP and ubiquinone synthesis
Cells were labeled with 1 μCi/mL [3H]-acetate
(3600 mCi/mmol; Amersham Bioscience, Little Chalfont,
UK). The synthesis of radiolabeled FPP and ubiquinone
was measured as described in [61]. Results were expressed
as pmoles [3H]-FPP or [3H]-ubiquinone/mg cell proteins,
according to the relative calibration curve.

Statistical analysis
All data in text and figures are provided as
means ± SD. The results were analyzed by a one-way
analysis of variance (ANOVA) and Tukey’s test. p < 0.05
was considered significant.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We are grateful to Prof. Amalia Bosia for the fruitful
discussion and to Mr. Costanzo Costamagna for the
technical assistance.

Flow cytometry analysis

GRANT SUPPORT

1 × 106 cells, rinsed and fixed with 2% w/v
paraformaldehyde for 2 min, were washed three times
with PBS and stained with an anti-CRT antibody (Affinity
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

This work was supported with funds from Italian
Association for Cancer Research (MFAG11475 and
20769

Oncotarget

IG15232 to CR); Italian Ministry of University and Research
(PRIN 2009 to GDR; FIRB-ACCORDI DI PROGRAMMA
2011 to GDR and MC; FIRB 2012, grant RBFR12SOQ1
to CR); Regione Campania (Laboratori Pubblici Hauteville
Project to GDR and MC). The funding institutions had no
role in the study design, in the data collection and analysis,
in the manuscript writing.
Joanna Kopecka is the recipient of a “Mario and
Valeria Rindi” fellowship from Italian Foundation for
Cancer Research (FIRC).

  7.	 Ma P, Mumper RJ. Anthracycline nano-delivery systems
to overcome multiple drug resistance: a comprehensive
review. Nano Today. 2013; 8:313–331.
  8.	 Molnár J, Engi H, Hohmann J, Molnár P, Deli J, Wesolowska O,
Michalak K, Wang Q. Reversal of multidrug resistance by
natural substances from plants. Curr Top Med Chem. 2010;
10:1757–1768.
  9.	 Abraham I, El Sayed K, Chen ZS, Guo H. Current status on
marine products with reversal effect on cancer multidrug
resistance. Mar Drugs. 2012; 10:2312–2321.
10.	 Amiri-Kordestani L, Basseville A, Kurdziel K, Fojo AT,
Bates SE. Targeting MDR in breast and lung cancer:
discriminating its potential importance from the failure of
drug resistance reversal studies. Drug Resist Updat. 2012;
15:50–61.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
The authors declare that they have no conflicts of
interests.

11.	 Karthikeyan S, Hoti SL. Development of fourth generation
ABC inhibitors from natural products: a novel approach to
overcome cancer multidrug resistance. Anticancer Agents
Med Chem. 2015; 15:605–615.

REFERENCES
 1.	 Buzdar AU, Suman VJ, Meric-Bernstam F, Leitch AM,
Ellis MJ, Boughey JC, Unzeitig G, Royce M, McCall LM,
Ewer MS, Hunt KK, American College of Surgeons
Oncology Group investigators. Fluorouracil, epirubicin, and
cyclophosphamide (FEC-75) followed by paclitaxel plus
trastuzumab versus paclitaxel plus trastuzumab followed
by FEC-75 plus trastuzumab as neoadjuvant treatment
for patients with HER2-positive breast cancer (Z1041): a
randomised, controlled, phase 3 trial. Lancet Oncol. 2013;
14:1317–1325.

12.	 Callaghan R, Luk F, Bebawy M. Inhibition of the multidrug
resistance P-glycoprotein: time for a change of strategy?
Drug Metab Dispos. 2014; 42:623–631.
13.	 Apetoh L, Mignot G, Panaretakis T, Kroemer G, Zitvogel L.
Immunogenicity of anthracyclines: moving towards more
personalized medicine. Trends Mol Med. 2008; 14:141–151.
14.	 De Boo S, Kopecka J, Brusa D, Gazzano E, Matera L,
Ghigo D, Bosia A, Riganti C. iNOS activity is necessary
for the cytotoxic and immunogenic effects of doxorubicin
in human colon cancer cells. Mol Cancer. 2009; 8:e108.

  2.	 Gianni L, Eiermann W, Semiglazov V, Lluch A, Tjulandin S,
Zambetti M, Moliterni A, Vazquez F, Byakhov MJ,
Lichinitser M, Climent MA, Ciruelos E, Ojeda B, et al.
Neoadjuvant and adjuvant trastuzumab in patients with
HER2-positive locally advanced breast cancer (NOAH):
follow-up of a randomised controlled superiority trial with
a parallel HER2-negative cohort. Lancet Oncol. 2014; 15:
640–647.

15.	 Kopecka J, Campia I, Brusa D, Doublier S, Matera L, Ghigo D,
Bosia A, Riganti C. Nitric oxide and P-glycoprotein
modulate the phagocytosis of colon cancer cells. J Cell Mol
Med. 2011; 15:1492–1504.
16.	Salaroglio IC, Campia I, Kopecka J, Gazzano E,
Orecchia S, Ghigo D, Riganti C. Zoledronic acid overcomes
chemoresistance and immunosuppression of malignant
mesothelioma. Oncotarget. 2015; 6:1128–1142. doi:
10.18632/oncotarget.2731.

  3.	 Ky B, Putt M, Sawaya H, French B, Januzzi JL Jr, Sebag IA,
Plana JC, Cohen V, Banchs J, Carver JR, Wiegers SE,
Martin RP, Picard MH, et al. Early increases in multiple
biomarkers predict subsequent cardiotoxicity in patients
with breast cancer treated with doxorubicin, taxanes, and
trastuzumab. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2014; 63:809–816.

17.	 Campia I, Buondonno I, Castella B, Rolando B, Kopecka J,
Gazzano E, Ghigo D, Riganti C. An autocrine cytokine/JAK/
STAT-signaling induces kynurenine synthesis in multidrug
resistant human cancer cells. PLoS One. 2015; 10:e0126159.

 4.	 Caram ME, Guo C, Leja M, Smerage J, Henry NL,
Giacherio D, Rubenfire M, Schott A, Davis M, Hayes DF,
Van Poznak C, Cooney KA, Hertz DL, et al. Doxorubicininduced cardiac dysfunction in unselected patients with
a history of early-stage breast cancer. Breast Cancer Res
Treat. 2015; 152:163–172.

18.	 Prendergast GC. Cancer: Why tumors eat tryptophan.
Nature. 2011; 478:192–194.
19.	 Andre F, Dieci MV, Dubsky P, Sotiriou C, Curigliano G,
Denkert C, Loi S. Molecular pathways: involvement of
immune pathways in the therapeutic response and outcome
in breast cancer. Clin Cancer Res. 2013; 19:28–33.

  5.	 Gottesman MM, Fojo T, Bates SE. Multidrug resistance
in cancer: role of ATP-dependent transporters. Nat Rev
Cancer. 2002; 2:48–58.

20.	 Unsworth A, Anderson R, Britt K. Stromal fibroblasts and
the immune microenvironment: partners in mammary gland
biology and pathology? J Mammary Gland Biol Neoplasia.
2014; 19:169–182.

 6.	 Tahover E, Patil YP, Gabizon AA. Emerging delivery
systems to reduce doxorubicin cardiotoxicity and improve
therapeutic index: focus on liposomes. Anticancer Drugs.
2015; 26:241–258.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

21.	 Palucka K, Coussens LM, O’Shaughnessy J. Dendritic cells,
inflammation, and breast cancer. Cancer J. 2013; 19:511–516.
20770

Oncotarget

22.	 Criscitiello C, Curigliano G. Immunotherapeutics for breast
cancer. Curr Opin Oncol. 2013; 25:602–608.

33.	 Kopecka J, Porto S, Lusa S, Gazzano E, Salzano G,
Giordano A, Desiderio V, Ghigo D, Caraglia M, De Rosa G,
Riganti C. Self-assembling nanoparticles encapsulating
zoledronic acid revert multidrug resistance in cancer
cells. Oncotarget. 2015; 6:31461–31478. doi: 10.18632/
oncotarget.5058.

23.	 Datta J, Berk E, Cintolo JA, Xu S, Roses RE, Czerniecki BJ.
Rationale for a multimodality strategy to enhance the
efficacy of dendritic cell-based cancer immunotherapy.
Front Immunol. 2015; 6:e271.
24.	 Ravelli A, Reuben JM, Lanza F, Anfossi S, Cappelletti MR,
Zanotti L, Gobbi A, Milani M, Spada D, Pedrazzoli P,
Martino M, Bottini A, Generali D, et al. Immune-related
strategies driving immunotherapy in breast cancer
treatment: a real clinical opportunity. Expert Rev Anticancer
Ther. 2015; 15:689–702.

34.	 Lee BD, French KJ, Zhuang Y, Smith CD. Development of
a syngeneic in vivo tumor model and its use in evaluating
a novel P-glycoprotein modulator, PGP-4008. Oncol Res.
2003; 14:49–60.

25.	 Dunford JE, Thompson K, Coxon FP, Luckman SP, Hahn FM,
Poulter CD, Ebetino FH, Rogers MJ. Structure-activity
relationships for inhibition of farnesyl diphosphate
synthase in vitro and inhibition of bone resorption in vivo
by nitrogen-containing bisphosphonates. J Pharmacol Exp
Ther. 2001; 296:235–242.

36.	Teclebrhan H, Olsson J, Swiezewska E, Dallne G.
Biosynthesis of the side chain of ubiquinone: transprenyltransferase in rat liver microsomes. J Biol Chem.
1993; 268:23081–23086.

35.	 Laufs U, Liao JK. Targeting Rho in cardiovascular disease.
Circ Res. 2000; 87:526–528.

37.	 Kepp O, Senovilla L, Vitale I, Vacchelli E, Adjemian S,
Agostinis P, Apetoh L, Aranda F, Barnaba V, Bloy N, Bracci L,
Breckpot K, Brough D, et al. Consensus guidelines for the
detection of immunogenic cell death. Oncoimmunology.
2014; 3:e955691.

26.	 Riganti C, Castella B, Kopecka J, Campia I, Coscia M,
Pescarmona G, Bosia A, Ghigo D, Massaia M. Zoledronic
acid restores doxorubicin chemosensitivity and immunogenic
cell death in multidrug-resistant human cancer cells. PLoS
One. 2013; 8:e60975.

38.	 von Boehmer H, Daniel C. Therapeutic opportunities for
manipulating T(Reg)cells in autoimmunity and cancer. Nat
Rev Drug Discov. 2013; 12:51–63.

27.	 Caraglia M, Marra M, Naviglio S, Botti G, Addeo R,
Abbruzzese A. Zoledronic acid: an unending tale for an
antiresorptive agent. Expert Opin Pharmacother. 2010;
11:141–154.

39.	 Holliday DL, Speirs V. Choosing the right cell line for
breast cancer research. Breast Cancer Res. 2011; 13:e215.
40.	 Arpino G, Milano M, De Placido S. Features of aggressive
breast cancer. Breast. 2015; 24:594–600.

28.	 Salzano G, Marra M, Porru M, Zappavigna S, Abbruzzese A,
La Rotonda MI, Leonetti C, Caraglia M, De Rosa G. Selfassembly nanoparticles for the delivery of bisphosphonates
into tumors. Int J Pharm. 2011; 403:292–297.

41.	 O’Donnell JL, Joyce MR, Shannon AM, Harmey J,
Geraghty J, Bouchier-Hayes D. Oncological implications
of hypoxia inducible factor-1alpha (HIF-1alpha) expression.
Cancer Treat Rev. 2006; 32:407–416.

29.	 Schiraldi C, Zappavigna S, D’ Agostino A, Porto S, Gaito O,
Lusa S, Lamberti M, De Rosa M, De Rosa G, Caraglia M.
Nanoparticles for the delivery of zoledronic acid to prostate
cancer cells: a comparative analysis through time lapse
video-microscopy technique. Cancer Biol Ther. 2014;
15:1524–1532.

42.	Martinez-Outschoorn UE, Pestell RG, Howell A,
Tykocinski ML, Nagajyothi F, Machado FS, Tanowitz HB,
Sotgia F, Lisanti MP. Energy transfer in “parasitic” cancer
metabolism: mitochondria are the powerhouse and Achilles’
heel of tumor cells. Cell Cycle. 2011; 10:4208–4216.

30.	 Marra M, Salzano G, Leonetti C, Tassone P, Scarsella M,
Zappavigna S, Calimeri T, Franco R, Liguori G, Cigliana G,
Ascani R, La Rotonda MI, Abbruzzese A, et al.
Nanotechnologies to use bisphosphonates as potent anticancer
agents: the effects of zoledronic acid encapsulated into
liposomes. Nanomedicine. 2011; 7:955–964.

43.	 Pluchino KM, Hall MD, Goldsborough AS, Callaghan R,
Gottesman MM. Collateral sensitivity as a strategy against
cancer multidrug resistance. Drug Resist Updat. 2012;
15:98–105.
44.	 Spagnuolo RD, Recalcati S, Tacchini L, Cairo G. Role of
hypoxia-inducible factors in the dexrazoxane-mediated
protection of cardiomyocytes from doxorubicin-induced
toxicity. Br J Pharmacol. 2011; 163:299–312.

31.	 Marra M, Salzano G, Leonetti C, Porru M, Franco R,
Zappavigna S, Liguori G, Botti G, Chieffi P, Lamberti M,
Vitale G, Abbruzzese A, La Rotonda MI, et al. New selfassembly nanoparticles and stealth liposomes for the
delivery of zoledronic acid: a comparative study. Biotechnol
Adv. 2012; 30:302–309.

45.	 Riganti C, Gazzano E, Gulino GR, Volante M, Ghigo D,
Kopecka J. Two repeated low doses of doxorubicin are
more effective than a single high dose against tumors
overexpressing P-glycoprotein. Cancer Lett. 2015;
360:219–226.

32.	 Porru M, Zappavigna S, Salzano G, Luce A, Stoppacciaro A,
Balestrieri ML, Artuso S, Lusa S, De Rosa G, Leonetti C,
Caraglia M. Medical treatment of orthotopic glioblastoma
with transferrin-conjugated nanoparticles encapsulating
zoledronic acid. Oncotarget. 2014; 5:10446–10459.
doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.2182.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

46.	 Marcillat O, Zhang Y, Davies KJ. Oxidative and non-oxidative
mechanisms in the inactivation of cardiac mitochondrial
electron transport chain components by doxorubicin. Biochem
J. 1989; 259:181–189.
20771

Oncotarget

47.	 Simunek T, Sterba M, Popelova O, Adamcova M, Hrdina R,
Gersl V. Anthracycline-induced cardiotoxicity: overview
of studies examining the roles of oxidative stress and free
cellular iron. Pharmacol Rep. 2009; 61:154–171.

in cancer cells and anthracyclines efficacy in patients with
primary breast cancer treated with adjuvant chemotherapy
in the phase III UNICANCER-PACS 01 trial. Ann Oncol.
2012; 23:2552–2561.

48.	 Ottewell PD, Mönkkönen H, Jones M, Lefley DV, Coleman RE,
Holen I. Antitumor effects of doxorubicin followed by
zoledronic acid in a mouse model of breast cancer. J Natl
Cancer Inst. 2008; 100:1167–1178.

56.	 Campia I, Lussiana C, Pescarmona G, Ghigo D, Bosia A,
Riganti, C. Geranylgeraniol prevents the cytotoxic effects of
mevastatin in THP-1 cells, without decreasing the beneficial
effects on cholesterol synthesis. Br J Pharmacol. 2009;
158:1777–1786.

49.	 Coscia M, Quaglino E, Iezzi M, Curcio C, Pantaleoni F,
Riganti C, Holen I, Mönkkönen H, Boccadoro M, Forni G,
Musiani P, Bosia A, Cavallo F, et al. Zoledronic acid
repolarizes tumour-associated macrophages and inhibits
mammary carcinogenesis by targeting the mevalonate
pathway. J Cell Mol Med. 2010; 14:2803–2815.

57.	 Gelsomino G, Corsetto PA, Campia I, Montorfano G,
Kopecka J, Castella B, Gazzano E, Ghigo D, Rizzo AM,
Riganti C. Omega 3 fatty acids chemosensitize multidrug
resistant colon cancer cells by down-regulating cholesterol
synthesis and altering detergent resistant membranes
composition. Mol Cancer. 2013; 12:e137.

50.	 Rogers TL, Wind N, Hughes R, Nutter F, Brown HK,
Vasiliadou I, Ottewell PD, Holen I. Macrophages as potential
targets for zoledronic acid outside the skeleton-evidence
from in vitro and in vivo models. Cell Oncol (Dordr). 2013;
36:505–514.

58.	 Bergandi L, Silvagno F, Russo I, Riganti C, Anfossi G,
Aldieri E, Ghigo D, Trovati M, Bosia A. Insulin stimulates
glucose transport via nitric oxide/cyclic GMP pathway in
human vascular smooth muscle cells. Arterioscler Thromb
Vasc Biol. 2003; 23:2215–2221.

51.	 Wen Z, Zhong Z, Darnell JE Jr. Maximal activation of
transcription by Stat1 and Stat3 requires both tyrosine and
serine phosphorylation. Cell. 1995; 82:241–250.

59.	 Riganti C, Gazzano E, Polimeni M, Costamagna C, Bosia A,
Ghigo D. Diphenyleneiodonium inhibits the cell redox
metabolism and induces oxidative stress. J Biol Chem.
2004; 279:47726–47731.

52.	 Hazan-Halevy I, Harris D, Liu Z, Liu J, Li P, Chen X,
Shanker S, Ferrajoli A, Keating MJ, Estrov Z. STAT3 is
constitutively phosphorylated on serine 727 residues, binds
DNA, and activates transcription in CLL cells. Blood. 2010;
115:2852–2863.

60.	 Riganti C, Rolando B, Kopecka J, Campia I, Chegaev K,
Lazzarato L, Federico A, Fruttero R, Ghigo D. Mitochondrialtargeting nitrooxy-doxorubicin: a new approach to overcome
drug resistance. Mol Pharm. 2013; 10:161–174.

53.	 Sakaguchi S, Yamaguchi T, Nomura T, Ono M. Regulatory
T cells and immune tolerance. Cell. 2008; 133:775–787.

61.	 Campia I, Sala V, Kopecka J, Leo C, Mitro N, Costamagna C,
Caruso D, Pescarmona G, Crepaldi T, Ghigo D, Bosia A,
Riganti C. Digoxin and ouabain induce the efflux of
cholesterol via LXR signalling and the synthesis of ATP in
cardiomyocytes. Biochem J. 2012; 447:301–311.

54.	 Ladoire S, Arnould L, Apetoh L, Coudert B, Martin F,
Chauffert B, Fumoleau P, Ghiringhelli F. Pathologic
complete response to neoadjuvant chemotherapy of breast
carcinoma is associated with the disappearance of tumorinfiltrating foxp3+ regulatory T cells. Clin Cancer Res.
2008; 14:2413–2420.
55.	 Ladoire S, Mignot G, Dalban C, Chevriaux A, Arnould L,
Rébé C, Apetoh L, Boidot R, Penault-Llorca F, Fumoleau P,
Roché H, Spielmann M, Levy C, et al. FOXP3 expression

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

20772

Oncotarget

