HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Author Manuscript

Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 July 14.
Published in final edited form as:
Cancer Cell. 2014 July 14; 26(1): 16–17. doi:10.1016/j.ccr.2014.06.004.

Interstitial pressure and vascular collapse in pancreas cancer:
fluids and solids, measurement and meaning
Kathleen E. DelGiorno1, Markus Carlson1, Ryan Osgood3, Paolo P. Provenzano1,#, J. Scott
Brockenbough1, Curtis B. Thompson3, H. Michael Shepard3, Gregory I. Frost3, John D.
Potter2,5,6, and Sunil R. Hingorani1,2,4,*
1Clinical

Author Manuscript

2Public

Research Division, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, WA, 98109, USA

Health Sciences Division, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, WA, 98109,

USA
3Halozyme
4Division

Therapeutics, Inc., San Diego, CA, 92121, USA

of Medical Oncology, University of Washington School of Medicine, WA, 98195, USA

5Department

of Epidemiology, University of Washington School of Public Health, Seattle, WA,

98195, USA
6Centre

for Public Health Research, Massey University, Wellington 6140, NEW ZEALAND

Author Manuscript

Chauhan et al. suggest that vascular collapse and hypoperfusion in pancreatic ductal
adenocarcinoma (PDA) are caused by solid stress (SS) (Chauhan et al., 2014) instead of
elevated interstitial fluid pressures (IFP) associated with high extravascular concentrations
of hyaluronan (Provenzano et al., 2012). We appreciate their attention to our work and the
opportunity to clarify underlying mechanisms. Chauhan et al. make four important claims, to
which we respond.

First, that IFP equilibrates with and cannot exceed microvascular pressure
(MVP)

Author Manuscript

Starling’s principles of fluid flux (see Supplemental Information (SI)) reveal that IFP need
not be limited by MVP, and Jain and colleagues have themselves shown this with wick-inneedle (WN) measurements of 94 mmHg in cervical cancer and 79 mmHg in head-and-neck
cancer (Jain et al., 2007). Further, when Chauhan et al. state that our interpretations “are not
consistent with the physiology of fluid homeostasis,” the precise physiology in question is
important. Their theoretical framework of tumor physiology derives largely from studying
engrafted and ex vivo tumor models that typically have hypervascular tumor beds with
increased permeability and hydraulic conductivity (“leaky” vessels). However,
autochthonous PDA are hypovascular and have blood vessels that are functionally and
structurally similar to those of healthy pancreata (Jacobetz et al., 2013). Finally, the post-

*

Correspondence: srh@fhcrc.org.
#Current address: Department of Biomedical Engineering and Masonic Cancer Center, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN,
55455

DelGiorno et al.

Page 2

Author Manuscript

mortem persistence of elevated IFP in autochthonous PDA (Provenzano et al., 2012) and our
dissection of IFP into that due to free and non-mobile fluid phases (see below), demonstrate
that this claim is not always true.

Second, that IFP cannot compress blood vessels
Two, among several, pathophysiological conditions refute this assertion. Compartment
syndrome results from fluid accumulation in a virtual space defined by muscle and fascia;
fluid pressures can rise to >100 mmHg following trauma, compressing vessels and
compromising limb viability. Acute angle-closure glaucoma results from accumulation of
free fluid in the posterior chamber of the eye, which compresses the optic nerve and blood
flow. Thus, fluid pressures can compress blood vessels in certain contexts.

Author Manuscript

Third, that SS is elevated in PDA and vessel decompression by PEGPH20
occurs solely by reducing SS
To estimate SS, Jain and colleagues measured the “gape” in partially transected tumor
explants which suggested that B16-F10 melanoma spheroids had higher SS than PDA; by
this criterion, PDA appeared to have among the lowest SS of all cancers studied
(Stylianopoulos et al., 2012). Lacking the requisite data on bulk and shear moduli, which
can vary widely across tissue and tumor types, that study provides no calculation for SS in
PDA. Most recently, they applied this approach to KPC PDA cell-explants and calculated
SS at 11.5–18 mmHg (Boucher, FHCRC Consortium Seminar, November 2013), which is
less than 20% of the pressures we measured in autochthonous PDA (Provenzano et al.,
2012) and suggests that SS is not the major determinant of interstitial pressure in this setting.

Author Manuscript

Fourth, that the discrepancy between our respective results stems from our
measurement of SS as IFP
Jain and colleagues conclude that the piezoelectric pressure catheter (PC) must be measuring
SS. From response 3 above, it follows that if the PC measures SS, then their combined
mathematical and explant approach to SS must be flawed; conversely, if their method is
valid, the PC does not measure SS. Furthermore, contrary to their claim, normal tissues
often show positive IFP by a variety of methods (Figures S1A, S1B).

Author Manuscript

So, why the discrepancy between instruments? It has long been appreciated that IFP
involves two components: freely mobile and relatively immobile fluid phases (Brace, 1981).
The majority of interstitial fluid is immobile (historically also called gel-fluid, although not
all the oncotically active molecules form a gel). The highly charged nature of hyaluronan
contributes extensively to both hydrostatic and oncotic fluid pressures in the interstitium, but
hydrated hyaluronan is not a gel: it partitions into the soluble fraction after tissue
homogenization and demonstrates Newtonian viscosities over a wide range of
concentrations and shear rates (see SI). Part of this debate may therefore lie in the semantics
of “fluids” and “solids” when considering solutions with viscoelastic properties.
A more complete formula for IFP that takes into account both fluid phases is:

Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 July 14.

DelGiorno et al.

Page 3

Author Manuscript

The first two terms describe classical Starling forces with reflection coefficient σ; Pimm and
Πimm represent the hydrostatic and oncotic components of fluid pressure, respectively, in the
immobile-fluid phase (see SI). Historical methods for measuring IFP including micropipette,
needle, WN and perforated capsule can measure pressure only in the free-fluid-phase
(reviewed in Brace, 1981). In contrast, the PC measures fluid pressures associated with both
phases.

Author Manuscript

To test our hypotheses, we measured IFP in several different transplanted tumors. As
expected, the PC typically measured higher basal IFP than the WN and the difference
correlated with hyaluronan content (Figures S1C, S1D). These measurements converged
after systemic PEGPH20 (Figure S1E), which degrades hyaluronan and liberates the large
reservoir of immobilized fluid, leaving essentially only free fluid.
The hypothesized difficulties of WN to accurately and rapidly measure fluid pressures were
tested in solutions containing only water and increasing concentrations of hyaluronan
(Figure S1F). Even in pure solutions of hyaluronan, the WN does not fully capture fluid
pressure.
Moreover, we reconfigured the PC as a piezoelectric catheter-in-needle (PC-N) to shield the
probe from any potential SS (Figure S1G). IFP with PC and PC-N were identical (32+/−8
mmHg vs. 31+/−10 mmHg, respectively), and both were higher than WN (25+/−8 mmHg).
If the PC was primarily or even partially measuring SS, then the PC-N would register
considerably lower values.

Author Manuscript

Finally, we have never suggested that “PDA vessels are non-permeable to macromolecules,”
as stated by Chauhan et al., and have instead demonstrated the opposite (Provenzano et al.,
2012). They present as evidence for leaky vessels that PEGPH20 “permeates across vessel
walls” and nab-paclitaxel improves survival. In fact, leaky vessels are not required for these
molecules to reach the interstitium: PEGPH20 readily depletes interstitial hyaluronan from
normal organs (Jacobetz et al., 2013; Provenzano et al., 2012) and macromolecular
chemotherapies can produce toxicities to normal tissues with intact vessels.

Author Manuscript

Brace notes that many investigators equated the free-fluid component of interstitial pressure
with IFP because that was all that was measurable with classical techniques (Figure S1H);
this seemed reasonable at the time because the primary interest then was in edema (Brace,
1981). We are no longer limited to, nor solely interested in, measuring the free-fluid
component of IFP. Indeed, the immobilized-fluid phase is the major barrier to drug delivery
in PDA; we can now quantify it, identify its source, and offer remedies to remove it.

Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.

Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 July 14.

DelGiorno et al.

Page 4

Author Manuscript

References

Author Manuscript

Brace RA. Progress toward resolving the controversy of positive Vs. negative interstitial fluid
pressure. Circ. Res. 1981; 49:281–297. [PubMed: 7018732]
Chauhan VP, Boucher Y, Ferrone CR, Roberge S, Martin JD, Stylianopoulos T, Bardeesy N, DePinho
RA, Padera TP, Munn LL, Jain RK. Compression of pancreatic tumor blood vessels by hyaluronan
is caused by solid stress and not interstitial fluid pressure. Cancer Cell. 2014
Jacobetz MA, Chan DS, Neesse A, Bapiro TE, Cook N, Frese KK, Feig C, Nakagawa T, Caldwell ME,
Zecchini HI, et al. Hyaluronan impairs vascular function and drug delivery in a mouse model of
pancreatic cancer. Gut. 2013; 62:112–120. [PubMed: 22466618]
Jain RK, Tong RT, Munn LL. Effect of vascular normalization by antiangiogenic therapy on
interstitial hypertension, peritumor edema, and lymphatic metastasis: insights from a mathematical
model. Cancer Res. 2007; 67:2729–2735. [PubMed: 17363594]
Provenzano PP, Cuevas C, Chang AE, Goel VK, Von Hoff DD, Hingorani SR. Enzymatic targeting of
the stroma ablates physical barriers to treatment of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma. Cancer Cell.
2012; 21:418–429. [PubMed: 22439937]
Stylianopoulos T, Martin JD, Chauhan VP, Jain SR, Diop-Frimpong B, Bardeesy N, Smith BL,
Ferrone CR, Hornicek FJ, Boucher Y, et al. Causes, consequences, and remedies for growthinduced solid stress in murine and human tumors. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 2012; 109:15101–
15108. [PubMed: 22932871]

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 July 14.

