Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No. 20

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Identification of TAX2 peptide as a new unpredicted ­anticancer agent
Albin Jeanne1,2,3, Emilie Sick1,4, Jérôme Devy1,2, Nicolas Floquet5, Nicolas Belloy2,6,
Louis Theret1,2, Camille Boulagnon-Rombi2,7, Marie-Danièle Diebold2,7, Manuel
Dauchez2,6, Laurent Martiny1,2, Christophe Schneider1,2, Stéphane Dedieu1,2
1

Université de Reims Champagne-Ardenne, Laboratoire SiRMa, UFR Sciences Exactes et Naturelles, Reims, France

2

CNRS UMR 7369, Matrice Extracellulaire et Dynamique Cellulaire, MEDyC, Reims, France

3

SATT Nord, Lille, France

4

Université de Strasbourg, CNRS UMR 7213, Illkirch, France

5

Institut des Biomolécules Max Mousseron (IBMM), CNRS UMR 5247, Université de Montpellier, Ecole Normale Supérieure
de Chimie de Montpellier, Faculté de Pharmacie, Montpellier, France

6

Plateforme de Modélisation Moléculaire Multi-échelle (P3M), Université de Reims Champagne-Ardenne, Reims, France

7

CHU de Reims, Laboratoire Central d’Anatomie et de Cytologie Pathologiques, Reims, France

Correspondence to:
Stéphane Dedieu, e-mail: stephane.dedieu@univ-reims.fr
Keywords: TSP-1, CD47, CD36, cancer, angiogenesis
Received: March 24, 2015 	

Accepted: May 09, 2015	Published: May 22, 2015

ABSTRACT
The multi-modular glycoprotein thrombospondin-1 (TSP-1) is considered as a
key actor within the tumor microenvironment. Besides, TSP-1 binding to CD47 is
widely reported to regulate cardiovascular function as it promotes vasoconstriction
and angiogenesis limitation. Therefore, many studies focused on targeting TSP1:CD47 interaction, aiming for up-regulation of physiological angiogenesis to enhance
post-ischemia recovery or to facilitate engraftment. Thus, we sought to identify an
innovative selective antagonist for TSP-1:CD47 interaction. Protein-protein docking
and molecular dynamics simulations were conducted to design a novel CD47-derived
peptide, called TAX2. TAX2 binds TSP-1 to prevent TSP-1:CD47 interaction, as revealed
by ELISA and co-immunoprecipitation experiments. Unexpectedly, TAX2 inhibits
in vitro and ex vivo angiogenesis features in a TSP-1-dependent manner. Consistently,
our data highlighted that TAX2 promotes TSP-1 binding to CD36-containing complexes,
leading to disruption of VEGFR2 activation and downstream NO signaling. Such
unpredicted results prompted us to investigate TAX2 potential in tumor pathology.
A  multimodal imaging approach was conducted combining histopathological
staining, MVD, MRI analysis and μCT monitoring for tumor angiography longitudinal
follow-up and 3D quantification. TAX2 in vivo administrations highly disturb syngeneic
melanoma tumor vascularization inducing extensive tumor necrosis and strongly
inhibit growth rate and vascularization of human pancreatic carcinoma xenografts
in nude mice.

progression [2]. ECM is composed of a hydrated ground
substance of glycosaminoglycans and proteoglycans,
in which fibrous proteins and associated glycoproteins
are embedded. Among them, thrombospondins (TSPs)
consist of a family of five members with TSP-1 first
identified in 1978 from human blood platelets [3].

INTRODUCTION
Besides its architectural role, extracellular matrix
(ECM) is commonly known to be involved in a wide
range of physiological and pathological functions [1],
with cell-ECM interaction actively taking part in cancer

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

17981

Oncotarget

TSP-1 is a ubiquitously expressed multimodular protein
of high molecular weight secreted as a disulfide-linked
450 kDa homotrimer. The ability of TSP-1 to bind a
wide variety of ligands such as cell membrane receptors
or ECM molecules allows it to mediate cell-cell and
cell-ECM interactions [4], thus conferring multifaceted
functionalities. TSP-1 modulates tumor cell adhesion [5],
proliferation [6], survival or apoptosis [7–9]. Furthermore,
TSP-1 is also involved in inflammation, immune response
[10] and is widely known as an endogenous inhibitor of
angiogenesis [11–14] by interacting with stromal cells.
The globular carboxy-terminal cell-binding domain
(CBD) of TSP-1 binds the cell surface receptor CD47,
also called IAP (integrin-associated protein) [15]. CD47
is a ubiquitous 50 kDa five-spanning membrane receptor
that belongs to the immunoglobulin superfamily. While
TSP-1:CD47 interaction is identified as a key signaling
integrator of tumor progression [4], its contribution
remains somewhat controversial as TSP-1 exhibits a
pleiotropic activity within the tumor microenvironment.
TSP-1 is overexpressed in tumor stroma [16] and could
sustain cancer cell invasion by increasing ECM-associated
proteolytic activity through CD47 ligation [17]. Moreover,
TSP-1 was reported to inhibit apoptosis and to promote
drug resistance in thyroid carcinoma cells [7, 8] and was
associated with poor prognosis and recurrence in several
cancers [18–20]. However, concerns should be raised
about a possible pro-tumor role for TSP-1, as a number
of contrasting results were obtained considering other
cancer types. Indeed, TSP-1 is down-regulated in taxane
resistant cells due to its ability to induce apoptosis via
CD47 ligation [21], and TSP-1 binding to CD47 is also
recognized to induce killing of breast cancer cells [9].
Besides, TSP-1 could delay tumor growth by indirectly
altering tumor blood flow [22]. Finally, TSP-1 as well as
proteolytic fragments or synthetic peptides derived from
TSP-1 have anti-angiogenic and anti-neoplasic potentiality
[16, 23, 24].
In addition to its major contribution in cancer
progression [7, 8, 16, 17, 21], TSP-1 appears to be highly
implicated in the regulation of cardiovascular functions
as it promotes vasoconstriction and limits angiogenesis
[11, 12]. The anti-angiogenic activity of TSP-1 is mainly
mediated via binding to CD47, resulting in disruption
of CD47 association with VEGFR2 [14] and inhibition
of NO-induced activation of guanylate cyclase [25].
Therefore, particular attention was paid over recent
years to identify new therapeutic tools antagonizing
TSP-1:CD47 in the purpose of restoring blood flow and
tissue perfusion. Indeed, antibody blockade of CD47
as well as morpholino suppression of CD47 expression
yields promising results regarding graft reperfusion and
survival, as demonstrated by pre-clinical trials performed
in mouse [26], rat [27] and porcine [28] models.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

We previously characterized the molecular interface
between TSP-1 CBD and CD47 using a molecular docking
approach [29] since the crystallographic structure of this
complex has not been resolved so far. In the present study,
original molecular modeling approach led to the design
of a new peptide mimicking this region and aiming to
functionally antagonize the protein:protein interaction.
Contrary to our initial expectation, this peptide exhibited
anti-angiogenic properties in vitro and ex vivo by
inhibiting TSP-1 binding to CD47 in primary endothelial
cells. This unexpected result prompted us to investigate
the biological consequences of peptide treatment in the
context of tumor pathology. Using multimodal and multiscale imaging approaches from in silico to in vivo, we
evidenced that this CD47-derived peptide disrupts tumor
angiogenesis in several experimental models and reveals
exciting anti-tumor properties.

RESULTS
Design of peptides derived from the TSP-1
binding sequence of CD47
We recently demonstrated by using both normal
mode analyses and energy minimizations that TSP-1
CBD can self-open, requiring disruption of an electrostatic
scratch between R136 and D185 and leading to the solvent
exposure of the CD47-interacting sequence RFYVVMWK
[29] (Supplementary movie 1). These preliminary results
allowed conducting molecular docking experiments
between the extracellular domain of CD47 and an open
conformation of the TSP-1 CBD (Fig. 1A). We thus
identified the SQLLKGD receptor sequence as putatively
involved in the TSP-1:CD47 interaction and proposed
two CD47-derived dodecapeptides (called TAX2) that
could bind TSP-1: the linear IEVSQLLKGDAS and its
cyclic disulfide analogue CEVSQLLKGDAC. Structural
alignments showed that PEP-FOLD predicted structures
of both linear and cyclic TAX2 perfectly mimic the
helical folding of the sequence in native CD47 (Fig. 1B).
As shown in Figs. 1C and 1D, molecular dynamics
experiments highlighted that the interacting sequence is
less stretchy in the cyclic peptide. This correlates with
increased stability over time and a conservation of the
helical native conformation, suggesting an increased
ability of cyclic TAX2 to bind TSP-1 CBD compared
to the linear analogue. These data led us to favor the
cyclic form of the peptide throughout our study. Docking
experiments were also conducted between cyclic TAX2
and TSP-1 revealing that the CD47-derived peptide binds
open TSP-1 CBD in a very similar way as the entire
receptor (Fig. 1E). This suggests that the theoreticallypredicted CD47-derived peptide might bind TSP-1 to
antagonize TSP-1:CD47 interaction.

17982

Oncotarget

Figure 1: Identification and characterization of TAX2 peptides targeting the CD47-binding domain of TSP-1. A. Left

panel. Result of rigid protein-protein molecular docking between an open conformation of TSP-1 CBD (MRMS = 2 Å; represented with a
solvent-accessible surface on the protein) and the extracellular domain of CD47 (PDB ID code 2JJS, chain C). Solvent-accessible surface
of RFYVVMWK interaction sequence on TSP-1 (red) is highlighted, as well as R136 and D185 residues allowing TSP-1 opening (O is red,
N is blue, C is cyan). Right panel is a focus on the interaction region showing lateral chains of CD47 binding sequence IEVSQLLKGDAS
(blue). B. Structural alignments of TAX2 predicted structures with CD47 extracellular domain. Top panel represents alignment of linear
TAX2 (IEVSQLLKGDAS). Bottom panel represents alignment of the cyclic analogue (CEVSQLLKGDAC). Calculated RMSD values are
indicated. C. Stable structure of TAX2 cyclopeptide as observed along 50 ns molecular dynamics simulation trajectory, highlighting that
flexibility of the peptide is reduced to the disulfide bridge. D. RMSD from linear TAX2 (black line) and cyclic TAX2 (blue line) starting
structures along the 50 ns simulation. Horizontal dotted line, mean. E. Result of molecular docking between minimized TAX2 cyclopeptide
(represented as its secondary structure with lateral chains) and the open TSP-1 CBD. F. Thrombospondin from human platelets (5 μg/mL)
was immobilized on ELISA microtiter plates and blocked with 1% (w/v) BSA. Biotinylated scrambled peptide (mentioned as Ctrl, 10 μg/mL),
biotinylated TAX2 peptide (10 μg/mL) or non-labeled TAX2 competitor (1 mg/mL) were incubated in buffer containing 0.5% (w/v) BSA
for 3 h at room temperature. Thrombospondin-bound biotin-labeled peptides were then quantified as described in Materials and Methods
(see left panel scheme). Results are expressed as percentage of ligand bound to immobilized TSP-1 (mean ± SE, n = 3 independent
experiments performed in triplicate, t test). G. Binding of biotinylated TAX2 peptide (10 μg/mL) to immobilized TSP-1 was assessed in the
presence of increasing concentrations of unlabeled TAX2 competitor (0.001 to 5 mg/mL).

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

17983

Oncotarget

CD47-derived TAX2 peptide directly
binds TSP-1

length. Accordingly, the formation of branching points,
capillary tubes and nodal structures was also decreased
under TAX2 treatment (Fig. 2D, right panel). The decrease
in endothelial cells ability to assemble in well-formed tube
networks cannot be attributed to any cytotoxic effect of
TAX2 (Fig. 2E). RNA interference-mediated knock-down
of TSP-1 gene expression confirmed that TAX2 effects
on lumen formation are specifically mediated by TSP1 targeting, as they were wholly abolished under TSP-1
gene silencing (Figs. 2F and 2G). To confirm the results
observed with this angiogenesis cell-based assay, TAX2
properties were also evaluated in a more physiologically
relevant setting using a mouse aortic ring assay [33]. As
shown in Fig. 2H, microvessel sprouting from the aorta
was markedly inhibited by the CD47-derived peptide,
supporting its unpredicted but exciting anti-angiogenic
effect.

We further investigated whether the CD47-derived
peptide, proposed using molecular modeling, directly
binds to TSP-1 using an ELISA binding assay with biotinlabeled peptides (Fig. 1F). The results highlighted that
the TAX2 peptide binds to immobilized TSP-1 whereas
the scrambled peptide does not. The specificity of the
molecular interaction was controlled by competition with
the corresponding non-biotinylated peptide. Competitive
binding occurred in a dose-dependent fashion supporting
this result (Fig. 1G). Consistently, the ability of TAX2
to bind TSP-1 was also confirmed by surface plasmon
resonance and microscale thermophoresis (data not
shown). These data demonstrate that the newly discovered
CD47-derived peptide directly binds to TSP-1, and could
prevent its endogenous interaction with CD47.

TAX2 prevents angiogenesis both in vitro
and ex vivo

TAX2 anti-angiogenic properties are mediated
by TSP-1 binding to CD36

As TSP-1 or TSP-1-derived peptides that bind
to CD47 have been extensively reported to inhibit
angiogenesis [12, 25], we investigated whether TAX2
treatment could rescue angiogenesis using in vitro and
ex vivo models. First co-immunoprecipitation assays were
carried out to confirm that TAX2 specifically prevents
TSP-1 binding to CD47 in human primary endothelial
cells (Fig. 2A). However, TAX2 does not affect TSP-1
binding to soluble partners such as FGF-2 and VEGF
nor its ligation to other membrane receptors such as β1
integrin and LRP-1 (Fig. S1) [30, 31]. As endothelial
cell migration is critical to form blood vessels [32], a
wound-healing assay was then conducted to quantify
endothelial cell migration under TAX2 treatment. Contrary
to our initial expectation, a reduced migration rate was
observed when endothelial cells were treated by the
CD47-derived peptide compared to control (Fig. 2B).
Endothelial cell migration was also assessed using
a Boyden chamber assay (Fig. 2C). TAX2 inhibited
endothelial cell migration by 50% in this 3D-like system,
consistent with the results obtained with the 2D woundhealing model. A dose-response assay showed that the
optimal inhibition is reached at a 100 μM concentration
of TAX2 (data not shown). The unexpected inhibition of
endothelial cell migration induced by TAX2 suggests that
the newly characterized TSP-1:CD47 antagonist could act
as prospective anti-angiogenic agent. To investigate the
functional consequences of the CD47-derived peptide on
microvascular network formation, we first conducted an
in vitro assay allowing lumen formation by HUVECs on
matrigel. As shown in Fig. 2D (left and middle panels),
TAX2 inhibited the formation of a pseudo-tube network
by 40% as assessed by quantification of total network

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

The anti-angiogenic properties of TAX2 were
unexpected since TSP-1 binding to CD47 was mainly
reported to promote arterial vasoconstriction and to
inhibit VEGFR2 signaling [13, 14]. Considering that
CD36 is also implicated in angiogenesis inhibition in
response to soluble TSP-1 [11, 13], we investigated
whether the anti-angiogenic effects of TAX2 could be
mediated by CD36. As expected, we found that CD36
is highly expressed in HUVECs (Fig. 3A). The amount
of TSP-1 co-immunoprecipitated with CD36 increased
by 3-fold in the presence of TAX2 (Fig. 3B), indicating
that TAX2 enhances TSP-1 binding to CD36 in HUVECs.
Since VEGFR2 can associate as a dimer with a CD36/
β1 integrin complex to form a cluster of membrane
receptors regulating angiogenesis [13, 34], we further
investigated the ability of TAX2 to inhibit VEGFinduced activation of VEGFR2. As shown in Fig. 3C (left
panel), TAX2 partially reverses VEGF-induced VEGFR2
phosphorylation in HUVECs. This effect may be due to the
association of activated VEGFR2 to a CD36-containing
complex, as revealed by CD36 co-immunoprecipitation
assays (Fig. 3C, right panel). Consistent with these
data concerning VEGFR2 phosphorylation state, TAX2
treatment also decreases cGMP production by endothelial
cells after NO stimulation by around 25% (Fig. S2).
Furthermore, the ability of TAX2 to prevent endothelial
cell migration (Fig. 3D) and formation of capillary
structures (Figs. 3E to 3G) is wholly reversed in the
presence of a CD36 blocking antibody. Altogether, these
data demonstrate that TAX2 promotes TSP-1 binding to
CD36-containing complexes, leading to disruption of
VEGFR2 signaling.

17984

Oncotarget

Figure 2: TAX2 peptide impairs endothelial cell migration and inhibits angiogenesis in vitro and ex vivo. A. HUVECs

were treated with TAX2 (100 μM) or scrambled peptide (Ctrl, 100 μM). CD47 was immunoprecipitated from total protein lysates using
anti-CD47 (clone B6H12) and non-specific IgGs were used as a negative control. Immunocomplexes were then submitted to SDS-PAGE
and immunoblotted (IB) using specific TSP-1 and CD47 antibodies. Histogram represents the quantification of co-immunoprecipitated
TSP-1 relative to immunoprecipitated CD47. Results are expressed as percentage compared to control (n = 3 separate experiments, t test).
B. HUVECs (1 × 105 per well) were grown at confluence and then cell proliferation was inhibited by incubating with 10 μg/mL mitomycin
C for 2 h. Migration assays were performed for 9 h with or without TAX2 peptide (100 μM), as described in Materials and Methods.
Photographs (100×) were taken every 3 h. Graph represents the quantification of the wounded area. Each value is the mean of 3 independent
experiments, each performed in quadruplicate. C. HUVECs (5 × 104 per well) were plated into the upper compartment of a Transwell
membrane and incubated for 12 h in EGM-2 in the presence of 100 μM TAX2 peptide. Hoechst-stained migrating cells attached on outside
surface of the top chamber were photographed (20× objective) and counted. Results are expressed as percentage of migrated cells as
compared to control. Each value represents the mean of 5 independent experiments, each performed in triplicate.*p < 0.05, compared to
control; t test. D. HUVECs (5 × 104) were cultured on matrigel layers in control conditions (Ctrl) or in the presence of TAX2. After 8 h
incubation, HUVEC tube-like formation was observed on an inverted microscope (40×) and quantification of network total length was
done using ImageJ software. Numeration of branching points, tubes and nodal structures was conducted using S.CORE system. Data are
expressed as the mean ± SE from at least 3 independent experiments, each performed in triplicate.

(Continued )

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

17985

Oncotarget

Figure 2: (Continued) E. HUVEC viability was assessed and expressed as percent compared to control treatment (t test, ns, not significant).

F. Total RNAs were purified from HUVECs transfected with non-silencing siRNA (siCtrl) or siRNA targeting TSP-1 (siTSP-1). The
transcriptional level of TSP-1 was assessed by RT-PCR and normalized to β-actin. Numbers under the gel indicate the fold change as
compared to siCtrl cells used as reference. G. Tube formation assay was performed as described above. HUVECs transfected with siRNA
sequences (siCtrl and siTSP-1) were allowed to form tubes on matrigel during 8 h in presence or absence of TAX2 (*, p < 0.05; ns, not
significant; t test). H. Aortic ring assays were performed as described in the experimental procedure. After 6 days incubation in the presence
of 100 μM TAX2 or control peptide (Ctrl), images were taken with an inverted microscope (40×) and microvessel area was quantified using
ImageJ software. Insets from control conditions (arrowhead) and TAX2 treatment (star) highlight that the microvessel sprouting in matrigel
was inhibited by TAX2 (zoomed in 200%). *, p < 0.05, compared to control (t test).

TAX2 induces extensive melanoma
tumor necrosis in vivo

cores remained much more restricted for control mice
(Figs. 4C and 4D, see volume quantification bars under
the images). Furthermore, these imaging observations
were correlated to histopathological HPS staining showing
that the necrotic area in TAX2-treated mice was increased
by about 3-fold compared to control mice (Fig.  4E).
Interestingly, neither μCT imaging of healthy organs
nor mice dissections highlighted any sign of thrombosis,
hemorrhage or embolism (data not shown).

To investigate whether TAX2 could prevent
tumor development by inhibiting angiogenesis, B16F1
melanoma cells were subcutaneously inoculated in the
left flank of C57BL/6 mice prior to three intraperitoneal
administrations of TAX2 at days 3, 5 and 7. No significant
modification in the measured median tumor volume was
found for TAX2-treated mice compared to control mice
during early stages of tumor development (Fig. 4A).
However, mice treated with the CD47-derived peptide
exhibited a substantial tumor necrosis at day 20 after
tumor challenge (Fig. 4B). Tumor necrosis was visualized
upstream through a multimodal imaging approach
combining magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) analysis
of isolated tumors (Fig. 4C) and quantitative microcomputed tomography (μCT) imaging of mice (Fig. 4D).
The manual measurement of tumor size did not give
rise to any differences between TAX2-treated mice and
control mice (Fig. 4A). However, quantitative imaging
highlighted that the CD47-derived peptide could decrease
tumor proper volume. Indeed, both MRI and μCT
highlighted a large central necrotic area inside tumor
masses from TAX2-treated mice whereas such necrotic

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

TAX2 peptide substantially disturbs melanoma
tumor vascularization in vivo
To determine whether tumor necrosis could be due
to TAX2-induced inhibition of tumor angiogenesis, we
performed a longitudinal follow-up of melanoma allograft
angiography using μCT monitoring after intravenous
injection of an alkaline earth-based nanoparticulate
contrast agent [35]. While vascular structures were
easily visualized within tumors of control mice at day 7
after tumor challenge, blood vessels were undetectable
within tumors of TAX2-treated mice (Fig. 5A, top
panel). Intratumoral vascularization remained prominent
within growing tumors of control mice, while it appeared
restricted to tumor periphery under TAX2 treatment at day

17986

Oncotarget

Figure 3: Anti-angiogenic properties of TAX2 are mediated by TSP-1 binding to CD36. A. Expression of CD36 in HUVECs

was assessed by immunoblotting (left panel) and immunofluorescence staining (right panel, red). Nuclei were counterstained with DAPI
(blue). B. HUVECs were incubated with 100 μM cyclic TAX2 or in control conditions for 24 h. Then, CD36-containing complexes
were co-immunoprecipitated from whole cell extracts (non-specific IgGs were used as a negative control for immunoprecipitation).
Immunocomplexes were submitted to SDS-PAGE and immunoblotted (IB) by using specific antibodies for TSP-1 and CD36. The presence
of TSP-1 in immunocomplexes was quantified by densitometric analysis relative to immunoprecipitated CD36. C. VEGFR2 phosphorylation
induced by VEGF in the presence of TAX2. After overnight serum starvation, HUVECs were pre-treated with 100 μM TAX2 or control for
12 h, then incubated with 30 ng/mL VEGF for 5 min. Whole cell lysates (left panel) or immunoprecipitated CD36-containing complexes
(right panel) were submitted to SDS-PAGE and immunoblotted (IB) using anti-p-VEGFR2 (Y1175), anti-VEGFR2 and anti-β-actin or
anti-CD36 antibodies. Upper numbers indicate the value of pVEGFR2/VEGFR2 ratio by densitometry (n = 3). D. Transwell migration
assay was performed as described for Fig. 2C. HUVECs were allowed to migrate for 12 h under TAX2 or control treatment (100 μM) and
with/without anti-CD36 blocking antibody (10 μg/mL). Non-reactive IgG1 serves as control for anti-CD36 treatment. Data are expressed
as the mean ± SE (n = 3; *p < 0.05, ANOVA). E-G. HUVECs were incubated for 12 h in endothelial cell growth medium with 100 μM
TAX2 or control peptide and with/without anti-CD36 blocking antibody (non-specific IgG1 serves as control). Tube formation assay was
performed as described for Fig. 2D. Quantification of total tube-like network length was realized using ImageJ software E. Branching
points F. and nodal structures G. were numbered using the S.CORE web-based system. Data are expressed as the mean ± SE (n = 3;
*p < 0.05, ANOVA).

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

17987

Oncotarget

Figure 4: TAX2 induces central tumor necrosis in a mouse melanoma allograft model. A. 2.5 × 105 melanoma B16F1 cells

were subcutaneously injected into the left side of C57BL/6 mice. Control (Ctrl, open circle) or TAX2 (filled box) peptide (10 mg/kg) was
intraperitoneally injected at days 3, 5 and 7. Tumor volume was measured with a caliper as described in Materials and Methods. Graph
represents tumor volume measurements at day 12 after melanoma cell injection. Horizontal lines, median (n = 54, Mann-Whitney test).
B. Tumor photographs at day 20 from 2 mice treated with scrambled (Ctrl, left panel) or TAX2 (right panel) peptide. C. Ex vivo MRI
analysis of isolated tumors at day 12 after tumor challenge. Top panel: 2D virtual slice at the center of tumor volume. Bottom panel: Tumor
3D reconstruction (orange: tumor, purple: necrotic area). Horizontal bars show the respective proportions of necrotic area and viable
tumor tissue as quantified using Amira 5.4.3 software (representative of n = 10). D. μCT analysis of mice at day 14 after tumor challenge:
tri-dimensional reconstruction after segmentation of melanoma tumor (blue) and the associated necrotic core (green) using Amira 5.4.3
software. Horizontal bars show distribution of necrotic and viable parts within tumor volume (representative of n = 10). E. HPS staining of
tumor sections showing tumor necrosis (dotted line). Insets (correspond to black rectangle in tumor sections, zoomed ×100) highlight the
dense tumor tissue and its vascularization in viable areas (V) and cellular debris in the necrotic area (N) Tumor periphery is surrounded by
a fibrotic capsule region (C). Histogram: quantification of the necrotic area relative to total tumor surface on each HPS-stained histological
section using ImageJ software. Data are expressed as the mean ± SE (*p < 0.05, t test).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

17988

Oncotarget

Figure 5: TAX2 disturbs tumor angiogenesis. A. 2.5 × 105 melanoma B16F1 cells were subcutaneously injected into the left side

of C57BL/6 mice, then intraperitoneal administrations of scrambled (Ctrl, left panel) or TAX2 (right panel) peptide (10 mg/kg) were
performed at days 3, 5 and 7. Intravenous injections of an alkaline earth-based contrast agent (100 μL) were performed before mice
imaging at days 7, 10 and 14 to allow a longitudinal follow-up of tumor angiography through μCT analysis. Black arrows illustrate
contrast enhancement of intratumoral blood vessels; white arrow indicates tumor necrosis (representative of n = 5). B. Tridimensional
reconstructions of tumors at day 14. Melanoma tumor (purple) and the associated vascular network (orange) were segmented using Amira
5.4.3 software. C. Color-coded representation of tumor-associated blood vessel network depending on structure thickness (Amira 5.4.3
software). Thin structures are represented in blue, which changes to green and red when the vessel diameter increases. D. Quantification
of tumor-associated blood vessel mean length, volume and radius using Amira 5.4.3 software. Data are expressed as the mean ± SE
(*p < 0.05, t test). E. CD31 immunostaining of tumor frozen sections. Quantification was done using ImageJ software, and results are
expressed as a percentage of control MVD and blood vessel mean size (mean ± SE, n = 6, t test).

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

17989

Oncotarget

10 (Fig. 5A, middle panel). At day 14, a central vascular
network within tumors from TAX2-treated mice was still
lacking and a wide hemorrhagic area corresponding to the
previously described necrotic zone was observed (Fig. 5A,
bottom panel). Tridimensional reconstructions 14 days
after tumor challenge revealed a mature peritumoral and
intratumoral vascular network in control mice (Fig. 5B,
upper panel). In contrast, after TAX2 treatment, tumor
vasculature appeared highly anarchic and discontinuous,
only at the tumor surface, surrounding a central
hemorrhagic area (Fig. 5B, lower panel). Segmentation
and quantification of the tumor-associated vascular
network revealed that TAX2 induces a 2-fold reduction in
blood vessel mean volume, as the treatment significantly
decreased both the length and diameter of blood vessels
(Fig. 5C, 5D and Supplementary movie 2). In accordance
with these results, CD31 immunostaining of tumor
cryosections reveals a 60% diminution in intratumoral
MVD associated to a diminution in vessel size (Fig. 5E).
In light of these observations and in consistence with
results from in vitro and ex vivo assays, we established
using μCT longitudinal analysis that TAX2 acts as a new
anti-angiogenic agent.

tumor-associated vascular network (Fig. 6G). Altogether,
these data presents TAX2 peptide as a new anti-angiogenic
agent suppressing tumor vasculature.

DISCUSSION
In the present study, we used molecular docking
experiments to identify an innovative dodecapeptide
sequence derived from the cell surface receptor CD47 that
antagonizes TSP-1:CD47 interaction. We demonstrate
that the in silico-designed peptide, called TAX2, exhibits
unexpected anti-angiogenic properties in vitro and ex vivo
and induces extensive melanoma tumor necrosis in vivo
by inhibiting tumor angiogenesis. Moreover, TAX2
peptide also significantly inhibits tumor growth in a
human pancreatic carcinoma xenograft model. These
results were obtained by means of a large number of
animals and samples using innovative multimodal and
multi-scale imaging approaches that were supported by
histopathological staining.
The anti-angiogenic properties of TAX2 were quite
surprising and unexpected since TSP-1 binding to CD47
has been mainly reported to promote vasoconstriction and
limitation of angiogenesis. Indeed, by using TSP1-derived
peptides and recombinant fragments of TSP-1, Isenberg
and collaborators demonstrated that the anti-angiogenic
activity of TSP-1 is mainly mediated via binding to
CD47, resulting in inhibition of NO-induced activation of
guanylate cyclase [25]. Besides the modulation of cyclic
nucleotide levels, TSP-1 CBD ligation to CD47 was
recently reported to disrupt the constitutive association
of CD47 with VEGFR2 in endothelial cells, resulting
in inhibition of VEGFR2 activation and downstream
signaling [14].
Here, we do not dispute the fact that TSP-1 is
capable of inhibiting angiogenesis by different routes.
However, we are convinced that the selective inhibition
of TSP-1 interaction with CD47 can induce a previously
unpredicted overall anti-cancer response, to be explored
and deciphered. Although the anti-angiogenic and antitumor properties of TAX2 were initially not predicted, they
are nevertheless consistent with results previously reported
by Maxhimer and collaborators [36] who emphasized the
therapeutic value of blocking TSP1:CD47 interaction by
using the same experimental in vivo melanoma model.
This study also suggests that favorable combination
of TAX2 with radiotherapy would be promising to
improve therapeutic response and treatment tolerance.
Interestingly, the effects of TAX2 appear to be restricted to
the tumor-associated environment overexpressing TSP-1,
as no signs of thrombosis, hemorrhage or embolism
were observed in healthy organs in both syngeneic
melanoma and human pancreatic carcinoma models.
We are convinced that the unexpected effects of TAX2
could be attributable to an intense matrix remodeling

TAX2 treatment delays growth of human
pancreatic carcinoma xenografts
While significant defects in vascularization and
extensive tumor necrosis were observed in the syngeneic
subcutaneous melanoma model, there was no change
regarding apparent tumor volume (Fig. 4A). As this
conflicting result might be explained by the notorious
invasiveness of the B16 model, we decided to extend the
results in a less aggressive model of human pancreatic
carcinoma xenograft. Intraperitoneal administrations of
TAX2 after tumor pre-establishment induced a strong
delay in MIA PaCa-2 subcutaneous xenografts growth
(Fig. 6A); resulting in a 2-fold decrease of tumor volume
at day 38 after cells inoculation (Figs. 6B and 6C) while
mice did not exhibit any other clinical sign or weight
loss (Fig. 6D). Mouse dissections disclosed a correlation
between reduced tumor volume and decreased tumor
vasculature under TAX2 treatment (Fig. 6E). Analysis
of tumor angiography by μCT revealed that intratumoral
blood vessels were undetectable within subcutaneous
xenograft at day 24 after tumor challenge (Fig. 6F, left
panel), when no differences in measured tumor volume
were observed at this stage (Fig. 6A). Longitudinal followup until day 38 showed prominent intratumoral blood
vessels within growing tumors of control mice, while
decreased tumor growth was accompanied by a striking
alteration of tumor vascularization under TAX2 treatment
(Fig. 6F, middle and right panels). Tridimensional
reconstructions at day 38 after tumor challenge
confirmed that TAX2 administrations strongly inhibit­

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

17990

Oncotarget

Figure 6: TAX2 inhibits growth of human pancreatic carcinoma tumor xenografts. A. 3 × 106 pancreatic carcinoma MIA
PaCa-2 cells were subcutaneously injected into the left side of BALB/C nu/nu mice. Control (Ctrl) or TAX2 peptide (10 mg/kg) was
intraperitoneally injected 3 times a week for 4 weeks starting at day 10 after tumor challenge. Tumor volume was measured with a caliper
as described in Materials and Methods. Histogram represents the evolution of tumor xenograft volume. Data are expressed as apparent
median tumor volume ± SE (*p < 0.05; Mann-Whitney test; n = 15 from days 10 to 24, n = 11 at day 31, n = 9 at day 38). B. Tumor volume
measurements at day 38 after pancreatic tumor cells injection. Horizontal lines, median (n = 9; Mann-Whitney test; *p < 0.05). C. Tumor
photographs at day 38 after pancreatic tumor cells injection. Dotted lines show tumor contours. D. Mouse mean weight evolution for control
(Ctrl, open circle) and TAX2-treated (filled box) groups. E. Tumor dissection photographs at day 38 for 2 mice from control group (Ctrl, top
panel) or TAX2-treated group (bottom panel). F. μCT imaging of mice at days 24, 31 and 38 after intravenous injection of an alkaline earthbased contrast agent (100 μL) allowing tumor angiography analysis. Black arrows illustrate contrast enhancement of intratumoral blood
vessels (representative of n = 5). G. Tridimensional reconstructions of tumors at day 38. Human pancreatic carcinoma xenograft (blue) and
the associated vascular network (red) were segmented using Amira 5.4.3 software.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

17991

Oncotarget

occurring within tumor-associated microenvironment,
in which matricellular proteins, including TSP-1 and
CD47 ligands, may reach bioavailable concentrations
that overcome physiological levels. By disregarding the
main changes in the molecular balances between the
respective ligands occurring in the highly reactive tumor
microenvironment, we impede our thinking and limit our
ability to improve existing treatments. TSP-1 was indeed
reported to be over-expressed in tumor stroma [37], and its
contribution through CD47 ligation remains controversial
in this context due to the pleiotropic nature of TSP-1
and its ability to induce opposite effects in different host
organ environments [16, 23]. In myeloma, the potential
importance of targeting CD47-TSP-1 axis has already
been highlighted [38]. Consistent with our data, CD47 was
found to be elevated in clinical melanoma samples and
delivery of siRNA targeting CD47 was recently reported
to effectively inhibit melanoma tumor growth and lung
metastasis [39]. Moreover, recent data pointed out that
CD47 mRNA expression in patients are correlated with
decreased survival in several cancer types and antibody
blockade of CD47 yielded promising results in mice
bearing human xenografts reducing tumor growth as well
as metastasis [40]. Strategies based on CD47 blockade
are also currently under development giving promising
results in multiple pancreatic cancer preclinical models
[41]. However, caution must be raised when comparing
TAX2 biological effects to previous results obtained by
using blocking CD47 antibodies. TAX2 treatment only
targets TSP-1 and may not affect CD47 association with
other ligands such as integrins or SIRP-α as the structures
involved are not redundant with those implicated in
the molecular complex interface (Fig. S3) [4, 42].
Moreover, anti-CD47 IgG may also induce Fc-mediated
effects such as antibody-dependent phagocytosis or
cytotoxicity. Using TAX2 provides new opportunities to
bypass the problem of existing molecules blindly targeting
CD47 towards its ligands that may have major effects on
tumorigenesis.
In addition to the putative effects that may be
due to CD47 association with its co-receptors, TAX2bound TSP-1 also remains able to bind a wide variety of
ligands through the other domains of the multi-modular
protein. Among these domains, a central region of TSP-1
called 3TSR (three TSP-1 type 1 repeats) binds to the
CD36 membrane receptor, also leading to inhibition of
angiogenesis. Indeed, CD36 ligation by TSP-1 is known
to induce an anti-angiogenic response by promoting
CD36 association with β1 integrin and VEGFR2
dimer in a tripartite complex, resulting in decreased
VEGFR2 phosphorylation after VEGF stimulation [13].
Physiological plasmatic TSP-1 concentration at around
100 pM favors TSP-1 ligation to CD47, as the binding
affinity is higher compared to CD36 binding [43]. To
explain our apparently contradictory results, we

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

hypothesized that TAX2 peptide inhibiting TSP-1:
CD47 interaction may increase the amount of
bioavailable soluble TSP-1 that is free from CD47
engagement, thus stimulating TSP-1 3TSR binding to
CD36 and resulting to an anti-angiogenic response.
Using CD36 co-immunoprecipitation experiments,
VEGFR2 phosphorylation assays and validated
CD36 blocking antibodies, we established that TAX2
induced a shift in TSP-1 binding from CD47 to
CD36 (Fig. 7). Accordingly, we propose that TAX2
prevents VEGFR2 activation by VEGF and inhibits
subsequent NO-cGMP signaling, leading to inhibition
of endothelial cell migration and abrogation of the
formation of capillary-like structures. Furthermore, we
found using TSP-1 ELISA assay that soluble TSP-1
reaches nanomolar concentrations compatible with CD36
activation in our endothelial cell environment (data not
shown) [25]. CD36 has already been considered as a
target of interest in the development of TSP-1-based
anti-angiogenic therapies. Dawson and colleagues first
described in 1999 a modified TSP-1 type 1 repeats-derived
nonapeptide (since referenced as ABT-510) exhibiting
strong anti-angiogenic and anti-neoplasic activities
[44]. By modulating endothelial cell proliferation and
migration as well as apoptosis in CD36-expressing cancer
cells [45], ABT-510 targets both tumor cells and the
associated tumor vascular network. Indeed, significant
effects of ABT-510 on tumor growth and vascularization,
especially microvessel density, were reported in vivo in
many cancers including glioma [46], ovarian carcinoma
[45], Lewis lung carcinoma [47] and bladder cancer [48].
Several phase I and phase II clinical trials have been
conducted with ABT-510 since 2005. These trials have
sometimes led to intricate and nuanced outcomes mainly
due to a lack of clinical activity when used as a single
agent with frequently observed severe adverse events
such as thrombosis and pulmonary embolism [49, 50].
By concomitantly inhibiting TSP-1 binding to CD47
and enhancing its ligation to CD36, TAX2 may induce a
weaker anti-angiogenic response than the one resulting
from 3TSR stimulation of CD36, which might therefore
significantly reduce the risk of thrombosis.
In the subcutaneous B16 melanoma model, systemic
administrations of TAX2 peptide during the early stages
of tumor growth induces a delayed but extensive tumor
necrosis, as evidenced by MRI and μCT. Regarding the
results obtained in our in vitro and ex vivo models, we
assume that TAX2-related effects may mostly be attributed
to stromal cells in the TSP-1-enriched tumor stroma,
especially through endothelial cell targeting. Analysis
of tumor angiography highlighted that tumor-associated
vascular network appears significantly disrupted and
unstructured as a delayed consequence of TAX2 treatment,
which was consistent with the results obtained from the in
vitro morphogenesis assay.

17992

Oncotarget

Figure 7: TAX2 induces a shift in TSP-1 binding from CD47 to CD36. A. In physiological conditions, most of TSP-1-related

effects on vascular function are mediated by TSP-1 carboxy terminal domain interaction with CD47 receptor. B. Under TAX2 treatment
preventing TSP-1:CD47 interaction, binding of the 3TSR module of TSP-1 to CD36 receptor is promoted, thus leading to an overall
anti-angiogenic response (NTD, N-terminal domain; Col, procollagen-homology domain; CBD, carboxy terminal cell binding domain).

Given the fact that TAX2 anti-cancer effects were
reproduced in immunodeficient BALB/C nu/nu athymic
mice, the eventual immunological contribution that
may be involved in TAX2-derived anti-tumor effects
could be de-emphasized. In the less aggressive MIA
PaCa-2 pancreatic carcinoma xenograft model, systemic
administrations of TAX2 peptide decrease growth of preestablished subcutaneous tumors 2-fold by considerably
altering tumor-associated vasculature. Consistent with
our proposed mechanism of action that involves an
enhanced activation of the TSP-1/CD36 axis under TAX2
treatment, these experimental data are also coherent
with previous work underlying the anti-angiogenic and
anti-tumor potential of the CD36-binding 3TSR module
of TSP-1 in human pancreatic cancer models [51, 52].
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Indeed, the relevance of targeting VEGFR signaling in
pancreatic cancer has also been demonstrated [53]. An
obvious approach for VEGF inhibition is to decrease
the availability of ligand (VEGF), as demonstrated by
bevacizumab, a humanized murine anti-human VEGF-A
monoclonal antibody that has been used in the treatment of
pancreatic cancer together with other chemotherapy agents
[54, 55]. In the MIA PaCa-2 xenograft model, our results
show that TAX2 administrations led to higher inhibition
rates compared to 5 mg/kg bevacizumab intraperitoneally
injected twice weekly [56], suggesting that TAX2 peptide
may be useful upon development of tumor resistance
against bevacizumab and other conventional antiangiogenic therapies. Indeed, recent studies showed that
anti-VEGF treatment could make tumor more aggressive
17993

Oncotarget

and metastatic [57]. While the mechanisms and mediators
of this phenomenon are not yet all understood, emerging
evidence indicates that angiogenesis targeting agents
may induce a “metastatic switch” as a result of hypoxia
in certain experimental conditions [58]. Interestingly,
TAX2 did not increase metastasis formation considering
an experimental model of lung metastasis using invasive
B16F10 melanoma cells (data not shown), confirming
that using TAX2 alone or in combination with other
chemotherapeutic agents may be highly relevant for future
therapeutic approaches.
Overall, we have developed and characterized an
innovative and non-obvious molecule that targets TSP-1
at the CD47 binding site and exhibits unpredicted but
exciting overall anti-cancer properties in vivo. These data
emphasize the therapeutic value of blocking TSP1:CD47
interaction for inhibiting tumor vascular network. This
challenges the current dogma on TSP-1 and provides new
conceptual insight that could supply innovative therapeutic
approaches against malignant diseases.

(Y1175, #CC1028), anti-VEGFR2 (#CC1020), antiFGF-2 (clone C-18, #sc-1360), anti-VEGF (clone C-1,
#sc-7269) and normal mouse IgG (#sc-2025, used as
a control for immunoprecipitation) were from Santa
Cruz Biotechnology (Tebu-bio, Le Perray-en-Yvelines,
France). HRP-linked anti-mouse IgG (#7076S) and
anti-rabbit IgG (#7074S) used as secondary antibodies
for Western blots were purchased from Cell Signaling
Technology
(Ozyme,
Saint-Quentin-en-Yvelines).
HRP-linked anti-goat IgG (#A5420), DEA-NONOate
(2-(N, N-Diethylamino)-diazenolate 2-oxide sodium salt
hydrate) and IBMX (3-isobutyl-1-methylxanthine) were
obtained from Sigma-Aldrich (Saint-Quentin Fallavier,
France). Anti-CD31 antibody (clone MEC 13.3) used
for immunohistochemistry was from BD Pharmingen
(#557355) and biotinylated anti-rat IgG (#BA-4001) used
as secondary antibody was Vector Laboratories (Abcys).
Secondary Alexa Fluor 568-conjugated antibodies and
Prolong Gold antifade reagent with DAPI were from
Molecular Probes (Invitrogen, Cergy-Pontoise, France).

Molecular docking and simulations

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Rigid protein-protein docking of CD47 (PDB ID
code 2JJS [42], chain C) was performed against an open
conformation of TSP-1 CBD, as previously determined
by normal mode analysis [29] using the GRAMM-X web
server v1.2.0. A refinement of the resulting orientations
was further performed using RosettaDock (Rosetta 3.4
software). The structure of the CD47-derived peptide
(TAX2) was predicted using the PEP-FOLD online
resource in order to verify that the chosen sequence
mimics the native helix conformation. Predicted structures
of this linear peptide and of its cyclic disulfide analogue
(manually edited and minimized) were compared to
the corresponding X-ray structure in 2JJS using VMD
software. Molecular dynamics simulations in explicit
solvent (TIP3P) were performed on both peptides using
NAMD software together with the CHARMM27 force
field, in the NPT ensemble at 293 K - 1 atm, with a cutoff of 11 Å for long-range interactions. The relative
flexibility of both peptides was assessed by means of Root
Mean Square Deviation (RMSD) calculations. Molecular
docking between the minimized cyclic peptide and the
TSP-1 open conformation was done using Autodock
4.2 software (population size of 200, 10 × 106 energy
evaluations, 250 LA-GS runs). Figures and graphs were
generated using VMD and R software, respectively.

Cell culture, reagents and antibodies
B16F1 cancer cell line was obtained from the
American Type Culture Collection (ATCC) and maintained
in RPMI-1640 medium (Gibco, Life Technologies, SaintAubin, France) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum
(FBS). CD47 expression in B16F1 cells was checked by
immunoblot. MIA PaCa-2 cell line was obtained from
ATCC and maintained in Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle’s
Medium (Gibco) supplemented with 10% FBS and 2.5%
horse serum. HUVECs pre-screened for angiogenesis
and vascular cell health markers (including eNOS and
VEGF-R2) were purchased from Lonza Clonetics (Basel,
Switzerland) and maintained in complete endothelial
growth medium (EGM-2, Lonza) at early passages (up
to 4). All cell lines were authenticated before experiments
according to the provider’s protocol. Cell viability
and cell proliferation were assessed using UptiBlue
Viable Cell Counting Kit (Uptima, Interchim, France).
Thrombospondin from human platelets and human
recombinant VEGF-165 were purchased from Calbiochem
(Merck Millipore, Darmstadt, Germany) and PromoKine
(PromoCell, Heidelberg, Germany), respectively. Antibiotin antibody (#MB-9100) was purchased from Vector
Laboratories (Abcys, Les Ulis, France). Anti-CD47 (clone
B6H12, #556044) was from BD Pharmingen (Le Pontde-Claix, France). Anti-TSP-1 (clone A6.1, #ab1823)
and anti-β1 integrin (clone BV7, #ab7168) were from
Abcam (Paris, France). Anti-LRP light chain (clone
5A6, #438192) and heavy chain (clone 8G1, #438190)
were from Calbiochem. Anti-CD36 (clone FA6–152,
#sc-52645), anti-β-actin (#sc-1616), ­anti-p-VEGFR2

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Designed peptides
The
CD47-derived
linear
dodecapeptide
(IEVSQLLKGDAS), its cyclic disulfide analogue
(CEVSQLLKGDAC), the scrambled dodecapeptide
used as a control (LSVDESKAQGIL) as well as the
corresponding biotinylated peptides were synthesized

17994

Oncotarget

and purified by Genecust (Dudelange, Luxembourg).
Each peptide was controlled following synthesis for
composition and purity through electrospray ionizationmass spectrometry (ESI-MS) and HPLC. Disulfide bridge
cyclisation was ensured by Raman spectroscopy. Peptides
were solubilized in the appropriate medium for in vitro
and ex vivo assays, or in normal saline solution (0.9%
(w/v) NaCl) for in vivo experiments.

manufacturer’s protocol. 10 μg of antibody (anti CD47,
anti-CD36, anti-FGF2, anti-VEGF, anti-β1 integrin
and anti-LRP1 heavy chain) or non-specific IgGs were
incubated with the delivered resin and covalently
coupled. The antibody-coupled resin was incubated
with whole HUVEC protein lysate overnight at 4°C
under gentle agitation (no cross-linker was used to
stabilize protein complexes before HUVEC lysis).
Then the resin was washed and the protein complexes
bound to the antibody were eluted. Immunoprecipitated
protein complexes were solubilized under denaturing
and reducing conditions, heated to 100°C for 5 min and
analyzed by immunoblotting as described above.

Binding of biotin-labeled peptides to
immobilized TSP-1
Microtiter plates (Nunc, ThermoFisher Scientific,
Courtaboeuf, France) were coated overnight at 4°C with
0.5 μg TSP-1 in sodium carbonate-bicarbonate (BupH)
buffer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Plates were washed
with PBS 0.1% BSA (Sigma-Aldrich) and non-specific
sites were saturated during 30 min using 1% (w/v)
BSA in BupH buffer. Biotin-labeled peptide (10 μg/
mL, determined after dose-response assay from 0.01 to
100 μg/mL) was added in buffer containing 0.5% (w/v)
BSA and incubated for 3 h at room temperature. Nonlabeled peptide (0.001 to 5 mg/mL) was used as selective
competitor. Plates were washed with PBS containing
0.1% (w/v) BSA and treated for 30 min with mouse antibiotin antibody. Bound antibody was quantified using the
mouse IgG Elite Vectastain ABC kit (Vector Laboratories)
followed by incubation with 1-Step Turbo TMB substrate
as a chromogen (ThermoFisher Scientific). The reaction
was stopped with 0.5 M H2SO4 and absorbance was read
at 450 nm.

Wound healing assay
HUVECs were allowed to grow to confluence in
12-well plates and then incubated with 10 μg/mL
mitomycin C at 37°C, 5% CO2 during 2 h to inhibit
proliferation. The monolayer was wounded by scratching
with a 200 μL pipette tip. Images were collected at
different times using a phase contrast microscope with a
20× objective coupled to a Nikon digital camera. Wound
area was quantified using ImageJ software (3 photographs/
wound and 3 replicates for each condition).

Transwell assay
24-well Transwell cell growing chambers (8.0 μm
pore size; Greiner Bio-one, Dutscher) were used to assess
endothelial cell migration. HUVECs were seeded into the
upper compartment and incubated at 37°C for 12 h, the
lower chamber containing complete EGM-2 with 2% (v/v)
FBS acting as the stimulus for migration. Non-migrated
cells on the top side of the surface were eliminated with a
cotton swab, then the migrated cells at the bottom of the
membrane were fixed with methanol, stained with Hoechst
33342 and visualized using a Zeiss inverted microscope
(20× objective). Migration was quantified in 4 random
microscopic fields per well using ImageJ software.

Protein extraction and Western blot analysis
Cells were harvested on monolayers, washed with
ice-cold PBS and then solubilized in lysis buffer (50 mM
HEPES, pH 7.6, 100 mM NaCl, 20 mM EDTA, 1% (v/v)
Triton X-100, 0.5 mM PMSF) supplemented with Halt
protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (Thermo Fisher
Scientific). The protein concentration was quantified using
the BCA Assay kit (Uptima). Lysates were loaded on 10%
polyacrylamide gels and separated by SDS-PAGE. Proteins
were transferred to nitrocellulose membranes (Amersham
Biosciences), blocked with dry milk solution (5% w/v) or
BSA (5% w/v) for phospho-proteins and immunoblotted
with indicated antibodies. Immunoreactive bands were
revealed using ECL+ chemiluminescence kits (Amersham
Biosciences) and analyzed with a ChemiDoc-XRS imaging
station (Bio-Rad, Marnes-la-Coquette, France).

Endothelial tube formation assay
Pre-chilled 24-well plates were coated with 250 μL
matrigel (BD Biosciences) and incubated at 37°C for 30
min. HUVECs were plated at subconfluent densities in
endothelial cell growth medium to form capillary-like
structures. Pseudo-tubes formation was observed after 8 h
incubation period using a Zeiss phase-contrast inverted
microscope (20× objective; 4 photographs and 3 replicates
for each condition). Total network length was quantified
using ImageJ software. Branching points, nodal structures
and tubes were assessed using the S.CORE web-based
system for automatic image analysis (S.CO LifeScience,
Hoehenkirchen, Germany).

Co-immunoprecipitation assay
Protein lysates prepared in ice-cold lysis
buffer or conditioned media were subjected to
immunoprecipitation assay using the Pierce Co-IP
kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to the
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

17995

Oncotarget

Small interfering RNA transfection

The French Ministry of Higher Education and Research
approved protocols under references 02203.01 and
02204.01.

HUVECs were transfected with a pool of
3  target-specific 20–25 nt TSP-1 siRNAs (Santa Cruz
Biotechnology, #SC-36665) designed to knock-down
gene expression. As a control, cells were treated with an
equal amount of nonspecific control RNA (Dharmacon,
Thermo Fisher Scientific). Transfection of synthetic RNA
(200 nM siRNA or control) was done using Amaxa™
HUVEC Nucleofector™ kit according to the
manufacturer’s protocol (Lonza). Following transfection
with siRNA, cells were incubated for 24 h followed by the
conditions indicated.

Mouse aortic ring assay for endothelial
cell sprouting
Thoracic aortae were excised from C57BL/6 mice
and peri-adventitial fibro-adipose tissues were removed.
Aortae were then cut into 1 mm rings, washed and
transferred to 96-well tissue culture plates coated with
100 μL per well of matrigel. Explants were then overlaid
with additional 50 μL of matrigel. After polymerization,
endothelial growth medium was added and then renewed
every day. Digital images were taken on day 6 for
quantitative analysis of vascular endothelial outgrowth
using ImageJ software.

Reverse Transcription-PCR
RNA was extracted with RNeasy kit (Qiagen,
Courtaboeuf, France) according to the manufacturer’s
instructions. RNA (100 ng) from each sample was
transcribed to cDNA using Verso cDNA kit (AB-1453/B)
from ThermoFisher Scientific. Previously described PCR
primers for TSP-1 [17] and β-actin [59] were synthesized
by Eurogentec (Angers, France). Numbers of cycles were
adjusted to ensure that amplifications were in a linear
range. An aliquot of each PCR product was subjected to
1.2% (w/v) agarose gel electrophoresis and visualized by
staining with ethidium bromide.

In vivo models
For the subcutaneous melanoma tumor model,
suspensions of B16F1 cells (2.5 × 105 cells in 100 μL
RPMI-1640 medium) were subcutaneously injected into
the left flank of different randomized series of syngeneic
C57BL/6 mice (n = 8–10 per group), as previously
described [60]. Intraperitoneal administrations of peptide
(10 mg/kg mouse weight) or controls (physiological
serum 0.9% (w/v) NaCl or a scrambled peptide) were
performed at days 3, 5 and 7. In human pancreatic
carcinoma xenograft experiments, 3 × 106 MIA PaCa2 cells/mouse were implanted subcutaneously into the
left flank of BALB/C athymic nude mice, then TAX2
intraperitoneal treatments (10 mg/kg mouse weight) were
performed 3 times a week during 4 weeks starting at
day 10 after tumor cells inoculation. Tumor volume was
determined according to v = 0.5 A × B2, where A denotes
the largest dimension of the tumor and B represents the
smallest dimension [61]. At days indicated, mice were
sacrificed and tumors were surgically extracted and
fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde for further morphologic
studies and for magnetic resonance imaging, or frozen for
immunohistochemistry. Mice were also weighed every
2–3 days and daily checked for any modification in their
behavior. Loss of 15% body weight was an indication
for euthanasia as well as severe tumor necrosis, as it was
sometimes associated with skin ulceration that would
result in loss of body fluid and/or infection.

Intracellular cGMP measurement
HUVECs (1 × 104 per well) were grown over 24 h in
96-well plates containing EGM-2 full growth medium and
then serum-starved in EBM-2 containing 0.1% (v/v) BSA
over additional 24 h. Cells were then pre-treated during
15 min with 100 μM TAX2 in EBM-2 without additives
plus 0.1% (v/v) BSA before treatment with NO donor in
presence of 1 mM IBMX as a phosphodiesterases inhibitor.
After 10 min, intracellular cGMP levels were determined
according to the manufacturer’s instructions using an
enzyme immunoassay kit (Amersham Biosciences).

Animals
8-week-old female C57BL/6 mice (average body
weight, 18–20 g) were purchased from Janvier Labs
(Saint-Berthevin, France). 8-week-old female BALB/C
nu/nu mice were supplied by Charles River Laboratories
(L’Arbresle, France). Animals were kept in a room with
constant temperature and humidity, and food and water
were given ad libitum. Mice were acclimatized to our
laboratory conditions for 1 week before starting the
experiments. The in vivo experiments were conducted
in conformity with institutional ethical guidelines of
the University of Reims Champagne-Ardenne and the
CNRS (Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique),
in compliance with the European Directive 2010/63/UE.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Histopathological analysis of tumors
Histological analysis of formaldehyde-fixed
and paraffin-embedded tumors were performed on
hemalun, phloxin and saffron (HPS) stained 3 μm thick
sections prepared using routine histological methods.
To assess tumor-associated microvessel density (MVD),
CD31 immunostaining was performed on 5 μm thick

17996

Oncotarget

cryosections using biotin-labeled secondary antibody
and streptavidin-HRP AEC detection system (Microm
Microtech, Francheville, France), followed by hematein
counter-coloration. Negative controls were done omitting
the primary antibody. The necrotic part relative to total
tumor surface for each tumor slice as well as MVD were
quantified using ImageJ software.

using 2-tailed Student’s t test and analysis of variance
(ANOVA) for in vitro and ex vivo studies; Mann-Whitney
U test was used for in vivo experiments. For all tests,
statistical significance was assumed when p < 0.05 (*).

Ex vivo MR imaging of tumors

The authors thank C. Hachet, C. Fichel and
N. Bouland for invaluable technical assistance. They
are grateful to J.L. Breda for animal care, as well as to
Prof. D. Ploton for discussion and advice. They also
thank A. Martinez and H. Kaplan for technical support
with MR imaging, as well as C. Laheurte, O. Bocquet
and S. Quemener for their help in performing in vivo
experiments. The authors acknowledge S. Ricord and
D. Blackwell for editorial assistance.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

Tumors were studied by magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI) for visualization of tumor necrosis when
the subcutaneous allografts reached a diameter of about
0.8 cm (day 12). NMR ex vivo studies were performed on
an 11.7 Tesla Bruker Avance DRX 500 system equipped
with a micro-imaging probe (Bruker Biospin, Germany).
High-resolution T1-weighted images were obtained
with the following parameters: TR = 300 ms, TE  =
2.2 ms, 256 × 256 × 256 matrix and a 0.9 × 0.9 × 1.5 cm
FOV. Image treatment, segmentation, tri-dimensional
reconstruction and quantification were performed using
ImageJ and Amira 5.4.3 (Visualization Sciences Group,
Burlington, MA, USA) software.

GRANT SUPPORT
This work was supported by grants from Centre
National de la Recherche Scientifique (CNRS), CPER
2007–2013, Région Champagne-Ardenne and SATT
Nord. A.J. and E.S. were supported by fellowships
from the Ministère de l’Enseignement Supérieur et de
la Recherche (2010–13) and the Région ChampagneArdenne (2011–12), respectively. A.J. was recipient of
grants from the French Society for Extracellular Matrix
Biology (SFBMEc), French Society for Biochemistry and
Molecular Biology (SFBBM), Federation of European
Biochemical Societies (FEBS), J.P. Ebel Foundation
and Cancéropôle du Grand-Est. The funders had no role
in study design, data collection and analysis, decision to
publish, or preparation of the manuscript.

μCT imaging of mice
Animals were anesthetized by isoflurane (Forene,
Abbott France, Rungis, France) inhalation (3% for
induction and 1–1.5% for maintenance) and then after
placed in a carbon fibers bed. CT images were acquired
on a dedicated small animal μCT scanner (Skyscan 1076,
Bruker, Kontich, Belgium) while continuously rotating
the camera by 180° with the following parameters: 50 kV,
0.5 mm Al filter, 200 μA source current, 35 μm isotropic
resolution, 180 ms exposure time, 4 projection images
per 0.7° rotation step and a retrospective synchronization.
The projections were reconstructed using a filtered
backprojection algorithm using Skyscan software
(NRecon, Skyscan). For tumor angiography analysis,
an alkaline earth-based nanoparticulate contrast agent
(Viscover ExiTron nano 12000, Miltenyi Biotec, Paris,
France) was injected in the mouse tail vein. Mice were
imaged during the next 30 min following injection, a
period during which no reduction in contrast was observed
[35]. Analysis of reconstructed images and quantification
of the vascular network were performed using Amira 5.4.3
software.

Author contributions
AJ, NF, NB, MD performed the in silico
experiments; AJ, ES, CS, LT performed the in vitro
experiments; ES performed the ex vivo experiments;
AJ, ES, CS and JD performed the in vivo experiments;
JD managed in vivo imaging and images analysis; M-DD
and CB-R managed anapathology experiments and
analysis; SD, AJ, CS and ES designed the experiments
and analyzed results; ES, CS and LM contributed to write
the manuscript; AJ and SD wrote the manuscript; SD
supervised the work; SD and LM provided funding and
reagents.

Statistical analysis

Footnote

GraphPad Prism 5.0 software (GraphPad, La Jolla,
CA) was used for all statistical analyses. Each result is
representative of at least 3 independent experiments. Data
are expressed as the mean ± SE. Significance was assessed

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

The TAX2 peptides were filed for worldwide patent
(WO/2013/007933; 01.17.2013; international patent
application: PCT/FR2012/051593).

17997

Oncotarget

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST

Sarfati M. Thrombospondin/CD47 interaction: a pathway to
generate regulatory T cells from human CD4+ CD25- T cells
in response to inflammation. J Immunol. 2006; 177:3534–41.

The authors disclose no potential conflict of interest.

11.	 Isenberg JS, Frazier WA, Roberts DD. Thrombospondin-1:
a physiological regulator of nitric oxide signaling. Cell Mol
Life Sci. 2008; 65:728–42.

Abbreviations
3TSR, three thrombospondin-1 type 1 repeats; CBD,
carboxy terminal cell binding domain; ECM, extracellular
matrix; LRP-1, low-density lipoprotein receptor-related
protein-1; MRI, magnetic resonance imaging; MVD,
microvessel density; SIRP-α, signal regulatory protein
alpha; TSP-1, thrombospondin-1; VEGFR2, vascular
endothelial growth factor receptor 2; μCT, microcomputed tomography.

12.	 Isenberg JS, Shiva S, Gladwin M. Thrombospondin-1-CD47
blockade and exogenous nitrite enhance ischemic tissue survival, blood flow and angiogenesis via coupled NO-cGMP
pathway activation. Nitric Oxide. 2009; 21:52–62.
13.	 Zhang X, Kazerounian S, Duquette M, Perruzzi C, Nagy JA,
Dvorak HF, Parangi S, Lawler J. Thrombospondin-1 modulates vascular endothelial growth factor activity at the
receptor level. FASEB J. 2009; 23:3368–76.
14.	 Kaur S, Martin-Manso G, Pendrak ML, Garfield SH,
Isenberg JS, Roberts DD. Thrombospondin-1 inhibits
VEGF receptor-2 signaling by disrupting its association
with CD47. J Biol Chem. 2010; 285:38923–32.

REFERENCES
1.	 Murphy-Ullrich JE, Sage EH. Revisiting the matricellular
concept. Matrix Biology. 2014; 37:1–14.

15.	 Gao AG, Lindberg FP, Finn MB, Blystone SD, Brown EJ,
Frazier WA. Integrin-associated protein is a receptor for the
C-terminal domain of thrombospondin. J Biol Chem. 1996;
271:21–4.

2.	 Van Dijk M, Göransson SA, Strömblad S. Cell to extracellular matrix interactions and their reciprocal nature in
cancer. Exp Cell Res. 2013; 319:1663–70.
3.	 Lawler JW, Slayter HS, Coligan JE. Isolation and characterization of a high molecular weight glycoprotein from
human blood platelets. J Biol Chem. 1978; 253:8609–16.

16.	 Kazerounian S, Yee KO, Lawler J. Thrombospondins in
cancer. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2008; 65:700–12.
17.	 Sid B, Langlois B, Sartelet H, Bellon G, Dedieu S,
Martiny  L. Thrombospondin-1 enhances human thyroid
carcinoma cell invasion through urokinase activity. Int J
Biochem Cell Biol. 2008; 40:1890–900.

4.	 Sick E, Jeanne A, Schneider C, Dedieu S, Takeda K,
Martiny L. CD47 update: a multifaceted actor in the tumour
microenvironment of potential therapeutic interest. Br J
Pharmacol. 2012; 167:1415–30.

18.	 Grossfeld GD, Ginsberg DA, Stein JP, Bochner BH,
Esrig  D, Groshen S, Dunn M, Nichols PW, Taylor CR,
Skinner DG, Cote RJ. Thrombospondin-1 expression in
bladder cancer: association with p53 alterations, tumor
angiogenesis, and tumor progression. J Natl Cancer Inst.
1997; 89:219–27.

5.	 Li SS, Liu Z, Uzunel M, Sundqvist KG. Endogenous
thrombospondin-1 is a cell-surface ligand for regulation of
integrin-dependent T-lymphocyte adhesion. Blood. 2006;
108:3112–20.
6.	 Sick E, Boukhari A, Deramaudt T, Rondé P, Bucher B,
André P, Gies JP, Takeda K. Activation of CD47 receptors causes proliferation of human astrocytoma but not normal astrocytes via an Akt-dependent pathway. Glia. 2011;
59:308–19.

19.	 Sutton CD, O’Byrne K, Goddard JC, Marshall LJ, Jones L,
Garcea G, Dennison AR, Poston G, Lloyd DM, Berry DP.
Expression of thrombospondin-1 in resected colorectal liver
metastases predicts poor prognosis. Clin Cancer Res. 2005;
11:6567–73.

7.	 Rath GM, Schneider C, Dedieu S, Sartelet H, Morjani
H, Martiny L, El Btaouri H. Thrombospondin-1
C-terminal-derived peptide protects thyroid cells from
­
ceramide-induced apoptosis through the adenylyl cyclase
pathway. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2006; 38:2219–28.

20.	 Okada KI, Hirabayashi K, Imaizumi T, Matsuyama M,
Yazawa N, Dowaki S, Tobita K, Ohtani Y, Tanaka M,
Inokuchi S, Makuuchi H. Stromal thrombospondin-1
expression is a prognostic indicator and a new marker of
invasiveness in intraductal papillary-mucinous neoplasm of
the pancreas. Biomed Res. 2010; 31:13–9.

8.	 Rath GM, Schneider C, Dedieu S, Rothhut B, SoulaRothhut M, Ghoneim C, Sid B, Morjani H, El Btaouri H,
Martiny L. The C-terminal CD47/IAP-binding domain of
thrombospondin-1 prevents camptothecin- and doxorubicin-induced apoptosis in human thyroid carcinoma cells.
Biochim Biophys Acta. 2006; 1763:1125–34.

21.	 Lih CJ, Wei W, Cohen SN. Txr1: a transcriptional regulator
of thrombospondin-1 that modulates cellular sensitivity to
taxanes. Genes Dev. 2006; 20:2082–95.

9.	 Manna PP, Frazier WA. CD47 mediates killing of breast
tumor cells via Gi-dependent inhibition of protein kinase A.
Cancer Res. 2004; 64:1026–36.

22.	 Isenberg JS, Hyodo F, Ridnour LA, Shannon CS, Wink DA,
Krishna MC, Roberts DD. Thrombospondin 1 and vasoactive agents indirectly alter tumor blood flow. Neoplasia.
2008; 10:886–96.

10.	 Grimbert P, Bouguermouh S, Baba N, Nakajima T,
Allakhverdi Z, Braun D, Saito H, Rubio M, Delespesse G,

23.	 Taraboletti G, Rusnati M, Ragona L, Colombo G. Targeting
tumor angiogenesis with TSP-1-based compounds: rational

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

17998

Oncotarget

design of antiangiogenic mimetics of endogenous inhibitors. Oncotarget. 2010; 1:662–73.

36.	 Maxhimer JB, Soto-Pantoja DR, Ridnour LA, Shih  HB,
Degraff WG, Tsokos M, Wink DA, Isenberg JS, Roberts DD.
Radioprotection in normal tissue and delayed tumor growth
by blockade of CD47 signaling. Sci Transl Med. 2009; 1:3ra7.

24.	 Miyata Y, Watanabe S, Kanetake H, Sakai H.
Thrombospondin-1-derived 4N1K peptide expression is
negatively associated with malignant aggressiveness and
prognosis in urothelial carcinoma of the upper urinary tract.
BMC Cancer. 2012; 12:372.

37.	 Brown LF, Guidi AJ, Schnitt SJ, Van De Water L, IruelaArispe ML, Yeo TK, Tognazzi K, Dvorak HF. Vascular
stroma formation in carcinoma in situ, invasive carcinoma,
and metastatic carcinoma of the breast. Clin Cancer Res.
1999; 5:1041–56.

25.	 Isenberg JS, Ridnour LA, Dimitry J, Frazier WA, Wink DA,
Roberts DD. CD47 is necessary for inhibition of
nitric oxide-stimulated vascular cell responses by
­thrombospondin-1. J Biol Chem. 2006; 281:26069–80.

38.	 Kukreja A, Radfar S, Sun BH, Insogna K, Dhodapkar MV.
Dominant role of CD47-thrombospondin-1 interactions in
myeloma-induced fusion of human dendritic cells: implications for bone disease. Blood. 2009; 114:3413–21.

26.	 Isenberg JS, Pappan LK, Romeo MJ, Abu-Asab M,
Tsokos M, Wink DA, Frazier WA, Roberts DD. Blockade of
thrombospondin-1-CD47 interactions prevents necrosis of full
thickness skin grafts. Ann Surg. 2008; 247:180–90.

39.	 Wang Y, Xu Z, Guo S, Zhang L, Sharma A, Robertson GP,
Huang L. Intravenous Delivery of siRNA Targeting CD47
Effectively Inhibits Melanoma Tumor Growth and Lung
Metastasis. Mol Ther. 2013; 21:1919–29.

27.	 Maxhimer JB, Shih HB, Isenberg JS, Miller TW, Roberts DD.
Thrombospondin-1/CD47 blockade following ischemia-reperfusion injury is tissue protective. Plast Reconstr Surg. 2009;
124:1880–9.

40.	 Willingham SB, Volkmer JP, Gentles AJ, Sahoo D,
Dalerba  P, Mitra SS, Wang J, Contreras-Trujillo H,
Martin R, Cohen JD, Lovelace P, Scheeren FA, Chao MP,
et al. The CD47-signal regulatory protein alpha (SIRPalpha)
interaction is a therapeutic target for human solid tumors.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2012; 109:6662–7.

28.	 Isenberg JS, Romeo MJ, Maxhimer JB, Smedley J,
Frazier WA, Roberts DD. Gene silencing of CD47 and antibody ligation of thrombospondin-1 enhance ischemic tissue
survival in a porcine model: implications for human disease.
Ann Surg. 2008; 247:860–8.

41.	 Blocking CD47 Shrinks Pancreatic Tumors: Cancer
Discovery. 2014; 4:864–864.

29.	 Floquet N, Dedieu S, Martiny L, Dauchez M, Perahia D.
Human thrombospondin’s (TSP-1) C-terminal domain opens
to interact with the CD-47 receptor: a molecular modeling
study. Arch Biochem Biophys. 2008; 478:103–9.

42.	 Hatherley D, Graham SC, Turner J, Harlos K, Stuart DI,
Barclay AN. Paired receptor specificity explained by structures of signal regulatory proteins alone and complexed
with CD47. Mol Cell. 2008; 31:266–77.

30.	 Margosio B, Rusnati M, Bonezzi K, Cordes BLA, Annis DS,
Urbinati C, Giavazzi R, Presta M, Ribatti D, Mosher DF,
Taraboletti G. Fibroblast growth factor-2 binding to the
thrombospondin-1 type III repeats, a novel antiangiogenic
domain. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2008; 40:700–9.

43.	 Roberts DD, Miller TW, Rogers NM, Yao M, Isenberg JS.
The matricellular protein thrombospondin-1 globally regulates cardiovascular function and responses to stress via
CD47. Matrix Biol. 2012; 31:162–9.

31.	 Greenaway J, Lawler J, Moorehead R, Bornstein P, Lamarre J,
Petrik J. Thrombospondin-1 inhibits VEGF levels in the ovary
directly by binding and internalization via the low density
lipoprotein receptor-related protein-1 (LRP-1). J Cell Physiol.
2007; 210:807–18.

44.	 Dawson DW, Volpert OV, Pearce SF, Schneider AJ,
Silverstein RL, Henkin J, Bouck NP. Three distinct
D-amino acid substitutions confer potent antiangiogenic
activity on an inactive peptide derived from a thrombospondin-1 type 1 repeat. Mol Pharmacol. 1999; 55:332–8.

32.	 Lamalice L, Le Boeuf F, Huot J. Endothelial cell migration
during angiogenesis. Circ Res. 2007; 100:782–94.

45.	 Greenaway J, Henkin J, Lawler J, Moorehead R, Petrik J.
ABT-510 induces tumor cell apoptosis and inhibits ovarian
tumor growth in an orthotopic, syngeneic model of epithelial ovarian cancer. Mol Cancer Ther. 2009; 8:64–74.

33.	 Baker M, Robinson SD, Lechertier T, Barber PR, Tavora B,
D’Amico G, Jones DT, Vojnovic B, Hodivala-Dilke K. Use of
the mouse aortic ring assay to study angiogenesis. Nat Protoc.
2012; 7:89–104.

46.	 Anderson JC, Grammer JR, Wang W, Nabors LB, Henkin J,
Stewart JE Jr, Gladson CL. ABT-510, a modified type 1
repeat peptide of thrombospondin, inhibits malignant glioma growth in vivo by inhibiting angiogenesis. Cancer Biol
Ther. 2007; 6:454–62.

34.	 Kazerounian S, Duquette M, Reyes MA, Lawler JT, Song K,
Perruzzi C, Primo L, Khosravi-Far R, Bussolino F, Rabinovitz
I, Lawler J. Priming of the vascular endothelial growth factor
signaling pathway by thrombospondin-1, CD36, and spleen
tyrosine kinase. Blood. 2011; 117:4658–66.

47.	 Haviv F, Bradley MF, Kalvin DM, Schneider AJ, Davidson
DJ, Majest SM, McKay LM, Haskell CJ, Bell  RL,
Nguyen B, Marsh KC, Surber BW, Uchic JT, et al.
Thrombospondin-1 mimetic peptide inhibitors of angiogenesis and tumor growth: design, synthesis, and optimization
of pharmacokinetics and biological activities. J Med Chem.
2005; 48:2838–46.

35.	 Boll H, Nittka S, Doyon F, Neumaier M, Marx A, Kramer M,
Groden C, Brockmann MA. Micro-CT Based Experimental
Liver Imaging Using a Nanoparticulate Contrast Agent:
A  Longitudinal Study in Mice. PLoS ONE. 2011; 6:
e25692.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

17999

Oncotarget

48.	 Reiher FK, Volpert OV, Jimenez B, Crawford SE,
Dinney CP, Henkin J, Haviv F, Bouck NP, Campbell SC.
Inhibition of tumor growth by systemic treatment with
thrombospondin-1 peptide mimetics. Int J Cancer. 2002;
98:682–9.

antibody for treating cancer. Nat Rev Drug Discov. 2004; 3:
391–400.
55.	 Huang ZQ, Saluja AK, Dudeja V, Vickers SM,
Buchsbaum  DJ. Molecular Targeted Approaches for
Treatment of Pancreatic Cancer. Curr Pharm Des. 2011;
17:2221–38.

49.	 Baker
LH,
Rowinsky
EK,
Mendelson
D,
Humerickhouse  RA, Knight RA, Qian J, Carr RA,
Gordon  GB, Demetri GD. Randomized, phase II study
of the thrombospondin-1-mimetic angiogenesis inhibitor
ABT-510 in patients with advanced soft tissue sarcoma. J
Clin Oncol. 2008; 26:5583–8.

56.	 Frentzen A, Yu YA, Chen N, Zhang Q, Weibel S, Raab V,
Szalay AA. Anti-VEGF single-chain antibody GLAF-1
encoded by oncolytic vaccinia virus significantly enhances
antitumor therapy. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2009;
106:12915–20.

50.	 Ebbinghaus S, Hussain M, Tannir N, Gordon M, Desai
AA, Knight RA, Humerickhouse RA, Qian J, Gordon GB,
Figlin R. Phase 2 study of ABT-510 in patients with previously untreated advanced renal cell carcinoma. Clin Cancer
Res. 2007; 13:6689–95.

57.	 Carbone C, Moccia T, Zhu C, Paradiso G, Budillon A,
Chiao PJ, Abbruzzese JL, Melisi D. Anti-VEGF treatmentresistant pancreatic cancers secrete proinflammatory factors
that contribute to malignant progression by inducing an
EMT cell phenotype. Clin Cancer Res. 2011; 17:5822–32.

51.	 Zhang X, Galardi E, Duquette M, Lawler J, Parangi S.
Antiangiogenic treatment with three thrombospondin-1 type
1 repeats versus gemcitabine in an orthotopic human pancreatic cancer model. Clin Cancer Res. 2005; 11:5622–30.

58.	 De Bock K, Mazzone M, Carmeliet P. Antiangiogenic therapy, hypoxia, and metastasis: risky liaisons, or not? Nat Rev
Clin Oncol. 2011; 8:393–404.
59.	 Körner A, Mudduluru G, Manegold C, Allgayer H.
Enzastaurin inhibits invasion and metastasis in lung cancer
by diverse molecules. Br J Cancer. 2010; 103:802–11.

52.	 Zhang X, Connolly C, Duquette M, Lawler J, Parangi S.
Continuous administration of the three thrombospondin-1
type 1 repeats recombinant protein improves the potency
of therapy in an orthotopic human pancreatic cancer model.
Cancer Lett. 2007; 247:143–9.

60.	 Thevenard J, Ramont L, Devy J, Brassart B, DupontDeshorgue A, Floquet N, Schneider L, Ouchani F,
Terryn C, Maquart FX, Monboisse JC, Brassart-Pasco S.
The YSNSG cyclopeptide derived from tumstatin inhibits
tumor angiogenesis by down-regulating endothelial cell
migration. Int J Cancer. 2010; 126:1055–66.

53.	 Taeger J, Moser C, Hellerbrand C, Mycielska ME,
Glockzin  G, Schlitt HJ, Geissler EK, Stoeltzing O,
Lang SA. Targeting FGFR/PDGFR/VEGFR impairs tumor
growth, angiogenesis, and metastasis by effects on tumor
cells, endothelial cells, and pericytes in pancreatic cancer.
Mol Cancer Ther. 2011; 10:2157–67.

61.	 Wald M, Olejár T, Sebková V, Zadinová M, Boubelík M,
Poucková P. Mixture of trypsin, chymotrypsin and papain
reduces formation of metastases and extends survival time
of C57Bl6 mice with syngeneic melanoma B16. Cancer
Chemother Pharmacol. 2001; 47:S16–22.

54.	 Ferrara N, Hillan KJ, Gerber HP, Novotny W. Discovery
and development of bevacizumab, an anti-VEGF

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

18000

Oncotarget

