Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No. 36

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

MDP, a database linking drug response data to genomic
information, identifies dasatinib and statins as a combinatorial
strategy to inhibit YAP/TAZ in cancer cells
Cristian Taccioli1,*, Giovanni Sorrentino2,3,*, Alessandro Zannini2,3, Jimmy Caroli1,
Domenico Beneventano4, Laura Anderlucci5, Marco Lolli6, Silvio Bicciato1,
Giannino Del Sal2,3
1

Department of Life Sciences, University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, Modena 41125, Italy

2

Laboratorio Nazionale CIB (LNCIB), Area Science Park, Trieste 34149, Italy

3

Dipartimento di Scienze della Vita, Università degli Studi di Trieste, Trieste 34149, Italy

4

Dipartimento di Ingegneria “Enzo Ferrari”, Modena 41125, Italy

5

Dipartimento di Scienze Statistiche, Bologna 40124, Italy

6

Department of Science and Drug Technology, University of Torino, Torino 10125, Italy

*

These authors have contributed equally to this work

Correspondence to:
Silvio Bicciato, e-mail: silvio.bicciato@unimore.it
Giannino Del Sal, e-mail: delsal@lncib.it
Keywords: cancer, targeted therapy, Hippo pathway, small molecules, pharmacogenomics
Received: August 10, 2015 	

Accepted: October 05, 2015 	

Published: October 15, 2015

ABSTRACT
Targeted anticancer therapies represent the most effective pharmacological
strategies in terms of clinical responses. In this context, genetic alteration of
several oncogenes represents an optimal predictor of response to targeted therapy.
Integration of large-scale molecular and pharmacological data from cancer cell lines
promises to be effective in the discovery of new genetic markers of drug sensitivity
and of clinically relevant anticancer compounds. To define novel pharmacogenomic
dependencies in cancer, we created the Mutations and Drugs Portal (MDP, http://
mdp.unimore.it), a web accessible database that combines the cell-based NCI60
screening of more than 50,000 compounds with genomic data extracted from the
Cancer Cell Line Encyclopedia and the NCI60 DTP projects. MDP can be queried
for drugs active in cancer cell lines carrying mutations in specific cancer genes or
for genetic markers associated to sensitivity or resistance to a given compound.
As proof of performance, we interrogated MDP to identify both known and novel
pharmacogenomics associations and unveiled an unpredicted combination of two
FDA-approved compounds, namely statins and Dasatinib, as an effective strategy to
potently inhibit YAP/TAZ in cancer cells.

MEK inhibitors. Although the beneficial responses are
not always durable [1], the likelihood of patients bearing
this kind of mutations to respond to Vemurafenib or
MEK inhibitors is high [2]. For those patients without
these genetic alterations, unfortunately no dedicated
therapies exist yet [3] and the identification of novel
pharmacogenomics associations driven by large-scale
genomic studies could undoubtedly provide information
that may increase patients’ chances to survive. However,

INTRODUCTION
Genetic alterations in cancer cells often generate
cancer-specific dependencies that are exploited to
develop targeted therapies. Mounting evidence shows
that the number of cancer patients responding to targeted
therapies has dramatically increased. For example, about
half of melanomas show mutations in BRAF, making these
cells sensitive to specific BRAF (Vemurafenib) and/or

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

38854

Oncotarget

the systematic identification of disease-specific genes
associated to drug sensitivity or resistance is hampered
by the lack of integrated large-scale genomic and
pharmacological data. The NCI60 cancer cell line
database [4] and the Cancer Cell Line Encyclopedia
(CCLE) [5] are the most comprehensive large-scale
information sets with multiple genomic and drug response
resources. Due to the extensive pharmacological and
genomic data available, these open source databases
are prime candidates for integration and broad public
access. Nevertheless, the lack of interconnection among
these resources reduces the opportunities for molecular
oncology and system pharmacology investigations.
With the aim to develop novel therapies by identifying
cancer cells with specific drug sensitivity as a result of
genetic abnormalities, we designed the Mutations and
Drugs Portal (MDP), a publicly accessible database that
interconnects pharmacological information extracted
from the NCI60 DTP screening with genomic data of
the CCLE and NCI60 projects. Specifically, the MDP
not only associates pharmacological and genomics
data of the NCI60 repository but also correlates CCLE
sequencing data (1,651 genes) to NCI60 drug response
information (50,816 compound). Indeed, while NCI60
exome-sequencing of 15,000 genes can be linked to
pharmacological data through Cell Miner [4], a web
tool part of the NCI60 project, the high quality genomic
variant information of the CCLE, focusing on a specific
set of cancer related genes, still lacks of any integration
with a large panel of drug response data. As compared to
other tools, whose pharmacological database is limited
to few hundreds compounds [6, 7], MDP integration of
CCLE sequencing and NCI60 drug data leverages the
possibility to identify candidate compounds or genomic
markers of response from cancer cell lines models. In this
study, querying MDP for drugs active on cells bearing
inactivating mutation in NF2 (Neurofibromatosis 2/
Merlin) gene, a condition associated with hyperactivation
of the oncogenes YAP and TAZ, we identified statins
and Dasatinib as a pharmacological combination able to
potently inhibit YAP/TAZ function in cancer cells.

from melanomas and leukemias. In the NCI60 screen,
drug activity is measured in terms of GI50, the log of
compound concentration required to cause 50% of growth
inhibition whereas molecular data of cell lines includes
DNA copy number, single nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs) [10,11], whole-exome sequencing [12], and RNA/
micro-RNA expression profiles [13–15]. In particular,
exome-sequencing data are available for 15,000 genes.
Nowadays, the database of the NCI60 Developmental
Therapeutics Program (NCI60 DTP) is by far the largest
public repository of pharmacological and genomics data
comprising response characteristics of cancer cell lines to
more than 50,000 compounds. The Broad-Novartis Cancer
Cell Line Encyclopedia (CCLE) instead, contains genomewide DNA copy number, gene expression profiles for
960 human cancer cell lines, drug response information for
24 anticancer drugs across 504 cell lines, and the mutational
status of 1,651 genes determined by hybrid capture highthroughput sequencing [5]. In essence, the NCI60 provides
the largest variety of compounds and a comprehensive
profiling of exonic variants, while CCLE offers the
complete panel of cell lines, a profound sequencing depth,
although limited to slightly more than 1,600 cancer-related
genes, but rather limited pharmacological information.
Given these premises, the aim of MDP is bridging NCI60
uniquely large number of drug sensitivity data with both
CCLE and NCI60 DTP gene sequencing information. As
such, MDP can query drug sensitivity data for 50,816
compounds on CCLE and NCI60 sequenced cell lines
(see Figure 1). The guiding element, used to link NCI60
pharmacological information to CCLE and NCI60 genomic
data, is the set of common cancer cell lines between the
NCI60 drug screening (now available for 115 cell lines) and
the CCLE and NCI60 genomic repositories, comprising
50 and 60 cell lines, respectively. Using these common cell
lines, MDP can query NCI60 pharmacological data and
CCLE and NCI-60 genomic information to identify drugs
correlated to gene mutations (from gene to drug) or gene
mutations associated to drug response (from drug to gene).

RESULTS

The web interface allows querying associations
between genomic and pharmacological data in either
direction depending on the particular question of interest.
In the Analysis page, selecting the from gene to drug
section, it is possible to start from a gene to retrieve
compounds or drug families with growth-inhibitory
effects on cancer cell lines carrying mutations on that
gene. Instead, using the from drug to gene analysis, the
user can input a drug to identify which genomic mutations
affect the sensitivity of the cancer cell lines. Both types
of queries can be performed selecting the genomic
information of the 1,651 oncogenes from CCLE (run
analysis on CCLE) or the whole set of 15,000 human
genes from NCI60 repository (run analysis on NCI60).

Web interface

Database content and architecture
The MDP database builds on exome-sequencing and
drug response data from the NCI60 and the CCLE datasets.
The National Cancer Institute (NCI) anticancer drug screen
was originally developed to identify compounds with
growth-inhibitory or toxic effects on a panel of 60 human
tumour cell lines (NCI60), representing different tumour
types [8,9]. The aim of the project was to prioritize
compounds for their ability to inhibit, in vitro, growth of
human cancer cell lines from tissues as breast, prostate,
lung, colon, ovary, kidney, central nervous system and
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

38855

Oncotarget

Figure 1: The database scheme of MDP. MDP allows identifying compounds with statistically significant anticancer activity (from

gene to drug) or the most enriched mutations for a selected compound (from drug to gene). Pharmacological data are from the NCI60
screening of 50,816 compounds on 115 cancer cell lines; genomic information is from the CCLE and NCI60 databases and comprises the
high-throughput screening of 1,651 cancer-related genes on 50 cancer cell lines (CCLE) and of 15, 000 genes on 60 cell lines (NCI60).
MDP can be interrogated to retrieve the most significant anticancer molecules selecting a gene or mutation using the from gene to drug
analysis or to search for the most enriched mutation given a specific compound using the from drug to gene query.

Specifically, when selecting the from gene to drug
section, both run analysis on CCLE and run analysis on
NCI60 buttons re-direct to a web page where the user can
query for the gene names or the SNP Ids of interest [16].
Multiple gene names or dbSNP Ids can be inputted at the
same time to explore drug sensitivity to combinations of
multiple genes or SNPs. Once selected the genomic entity,
the query can be limited to subsets of tissues (i.e., cell
lines) and of variant classifications (i.e., mutation types).
Available gene names, dbSNP Ids, and mutation types will
vary depending on the selected sequencing data, meaning
that the search will be less flexible when selecting the highdepth genomic sequencing of the 1,651 cancer-related
genes from CCLE. The output of from gene to drug
analysis is a list of molecules that show a statistically
significant activity on cell lines bearing specific mutations
on the selected gene/s (Figure 2A). Results are returned
using graphical and interactive representations and the
list of molecules can be downloaded for post-processing
evaluations. In particular, the result page contains two
main tables, i.e., the Table Results and the Enriched Drug
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Families table. The Table Results lists the compound
NSC ID, the compound name, the drug family, mechanism
of action and FDA status, and the enrichment score and
p-value, and can be sorted, ordered and searched to
select specific characteristics of the outputted molecules.
Instead, the Enriched Drug Families table shows the
total sensitivity enrichment of each drug family when
compared to the total number of compounds. Drug
families are ranked according to the p-value of drugs with
an enrichment score higher than 0.6. Furthermore, the
result page contains three different plots:
1.	 a pie-chart showing the drug families frequency
distribution of the complete pool of significant drugs;
2.	 a barplot showing the score of each drug
belonging to a particular drug family;
3.	 a scatterplot showing the relationship between
the score and the p-value for each drug and highlighting
in red statistically significant compounds for a specific
drug family.
When using the from drug to gene analysis, MDP
identifies genomic variants that might be related to the
38856

Oncotarget

Figure 2: The result pages. MDP mutation result pages contain different information depending on the type of query. A. When

performing a from gene to drug analysis, the result page reports a list of molecules that show a statistically significant activity on cell
lines bearing mutations on selected gene/s. In particular, the result page contains the Table Results, the Enriched Drug Families table and
three plots charting the drug families frequency distribution of the complete pool of significant drugs, the score of each drug belonging
to a particular drug family, and the relationship between the score and the p-value for each drug. B. When using the from drug to gene
analysis, MDP returns a Volcano Plot highlighting gene variants significantly associated (p-value < 0.05 and score > 0.3) to sensitivity
(green bubbles) or resistance (red bubbles). The size of the bubbles is proportional to the total number of mutations in sensitive/resistant
cancer cell lines. Table and plots summarize the characteristics and distributions of gene variants associated to sensitivity or resistance

sensitivity or resistance of cancer cell lines to a specific
compound. The overall output is summarized in the
Volcano Plot highlighting gene variants significantly
associated to sensitivity (green bubbles) or resistance (red
bubbles) to the selected molecule (p-value < 0.05 and
score > 0.3). The size of the bubbles is proportional to
the total number of mutations found in cancer cell lines
(Figure 2B). The detail output lists, for gene variants
associated to sensitivity or resistance, the tissue type,
the gene carrying the mutation, the affected cell line, the
variant classification, the mutation type, the chromosomal
localization, the SNP ID, the enrichment score and
p-value. The detailed results also include three pie
charts showing the frequency of the identified variants in
each cell line (Cell Lines Analysis Distribution), in each
tissue (Tissues Analysis Distribution), and for each variant
classification (Variant Type Analysis Distribution).

[17]. Somatic BRAF mutations, in particular the V600E
mutation within the kinase domain, have been frequently
found in melanomas, thyroid, colorectal, and lung cancer
[18]. For these reasons, the oncogenic RAF-MAPK axis is
nowadays used as a target for cancer therapies and specific
BRAF and MEK inhibitors have been now approved by
FDA (US Food and Drug Administration) for the treatment
of diseases such as melanoma and lung cancer [19, 20].
Thus, we interrogated MDP searching for drugs
with selective cytotoxicity for cancer cells bearing BRAF
mutations. Since the V600E accounts for the majority of
BRAF mutations in cancer, we used its specific dbSNP
Id number (rs113488022) to query CCLE genomic data.
When considering all tissues, the analysis identified, out
of 5,793  drugs, 197 drugs with significant selectivity
for the BRAF-mutated cell lines. Interestingly, among
the top 20  score-ranked molecules we identified seven
compounds that are already associated with BRAF
mutations. In particular, we identified three BRAF inhibitors:
Dabrafenib  [19] ( p  =   6.48 × 10−7), Vemurafenib  [20]
( p = 1.2 × 10−5) and SB-590885-AAD [21] ( p = 7.96 × 10−5);
three MEK inhibitors: Hypothemycin [22] ( p = 9.49 × 10−5),
Selumetinib  [23] ( p  =  0.0008) and protein LF (anthrax
lethal factor, p = 0.001) [24]; and a tyrosine kinase inhibitor:
SB-682330-A ( p = 7.96 × 10−5) (Figure 3A). Similar results
were obtained querying MDP with NCI60 genomic data.
Notably, Vemurafenib and Dabrafenib are FDA-approved
and currently used for the treatment of melanoma, whereas
Selumetinib is under clinical trials [25]. These results
demonstrate the capacity of MDP to identify drugs with

Validation of known dependencies
To determine whether MDP could be used to find out
real pharmacogenomic associations between somatic gene
mutations and sensitivity to specific drugs, we decided to
interrogate MDP for genes on which targeted therapies
have been already established and clinically proved. In
particular, the Mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK)
pathway is involved in the control of proliferation of both
normal and transformed cells [17]. MAPK cascade and
its downstream kinase MEK (Mitogen-activated protein
kinase) are activated by the Serine/Threonine Kinase RAF
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

38857

Oncotarget

Figure 3: Application of MDP to investigate known dependencies. MDP has been tested for its ability to retrieve known

dependencies between gene variants and drugs. A. When searching for drugs active on cell lines bearing the V600E BRAF mutation
(SNP Id rs113488022), MDP identifies well-known inhibitors such as Dabrafenib, Selumetinib and Vemurafenib. The scatter plot highlights
the significance thresholds in terms of scores (vertical line, cut off of 0.3) and p-values (horizontal line, cut off of 0.05). B. The same
graphical representation highlights Selumetinib and Iressa as effective drugs on cells with mutations on EGFR. C. Drugs statistically
relevant on cancer cell lines with mutations of Kras, Hsp90 or Pi3K. D. Drugs statistically relevant on cancer cell lines with mutations of
Brca1 and 2, Pten, Met, Atm, Fbxw7, and Erbb4 genes.

exquisite selectivity for specific mutations. It is of major
interest to note that all the other molecules identified
in our analysis could potentially act as BRAF-MEK
inhibitors perhaps with better therapeutic activity and/or
pharmacodynamic properties. As an example, the compound
NSC-682449 (Benzo[1,2-b:4,5-b’]dithiophene-4,8-dione,
2-(1-hydroxyethyl)), which falls within the 10 top ranked
drugs, is surely worth of further investigations.
Next, we searched for pharmacogenomic
associations with mutations in one of the most clinically
relevant tyrosine kinase receptor: the Epidermal Growth
Factor Receptor (EGFR). Mutations that lead to EGFR
overexpression or hyperactivity have been associated
with a number of cancers, including lung cancer [25].
To further demonstrate the reliability of MDP, we found
a statistical significant association between the EGFR
inhibitor Gefitinib (Iressa) (p-value = 0.03) [26] and the
tyrosine kinase inhibitor Selumetinib (p-value = 0.03) with
somatic missense EGFR mutations in CCLE cancer cell
lines (Figure 3B).
We also successfully identified a number of other
known pharmacogenomic associations such as: cytidine
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

derivatives with KRAS mutations [27], gemcitabine with
HSP90 mutations [28] and PI3K/AKT/mTOR inhibitors
Sirolimus (Rapamycin) with PI3K missense mutations
[29] (Figure 3C). Altogether, these results demonstrate
that MDP resource can easily identify already known
pharmacogenomic associations and might be a conceivable
starting point to unveil and design new rational targeted
therapies.

Identification of new dependencies
Several other new pharmacogenomic associations
that we identified cannot be explained with our current
biological knowledge but surely generate novel interesting
hypothesis to be validated with in vitro experiments.
For example MDP suggests that BRCA1 and BRCA2
missense mutations are associated with sensitivity to
Mitoxantrone; PTEN mutations with sensitivity to
Brequinar; MET mutations with sensitivity to Dabrafenib;
ATM mutations with sensitivity to Lapatinib; FBXW7
mutations with sensitivity to Corticosteroids (Prednisolone
and Fluorometholone) and ERBB4 mutations with
38858

Oncotarget

sensitivity to Acivicin (Figure 3D). If validated, all these
associations could open new therapeutic opportunities for
several tumours lacking approved targeted therapies.
Having tested its robustness and reliability, we
used MDP to identify those compounds that might be
able to inhibit proliferation of cancer cells with aberrant
nuclear YAP/TAZ activation. YAP/TAZ are transcriptional
cofactors that, in tumours, are deregulated by loss of cell
polarity and EMT (epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition)
and are highly expressed in cells with cancer stem cells
properties and metastatic potential [30]. Increased YAP/
TAZ transcriptional activity is frequent in several human
malignancies, making YAP/TAZ an ideal therapeutic
target for cancer. The main genetic lesions associated with
YAP and TAZ hyperactivation, excluding the occasional
gene amplification of chromosome locus 11q22 [31],
are represented by mutations occurring on the genes
encoding for members of the Hippo signalling pathway.
Indeed, the Hippo pathway is the major negative regulator
of YAP/TAZ transcriptional activity and, as such, is a
potent regulator of cellular proliferation, differentiation,
and tissue homeostasis [38]. Among the members of
the Hippo pathway, mutations in the gene NF2 are the
most frequent alterations [32]. Germline mutations in the
NF2 gene is the cause of the Neurofibromatosis type 2, a
tumour-prone disorder characterized by the development
of multiple schwannomas and meningiomas, but
importantly, NF2 is also frequently inactivated in human
malignant pleural mesothelioma, a disease where YAP is
frequently activated [33].
Based on these premises, we used MDP to
seek for compounds that could specifically target
cancer cells bearing NF2 gene mutations and thus
with aberrant YAP/TAZ activity. In particular, we
queried the association of NF2 missense and non-sense
mutations and drugs (from gene to drug) on all CCLE
cell lines and identified the most enriched family drugs.
Interestingly, the Enriched Drug Families table of this
query highlighted Statins (p-value < 0.01) and Imatinib
analogues (p-value  < 0.01) as the only two classes of
drugs significantly associated to drug sensitivity in cancer
cell lines harbouring NF2 mutations (Supplementary
Figure 1). Of note, these classes of drugs were identified
as statistically significant also by querying MDP with
NCI60 data.
Statins are inhibitors of HMG-CoA-reductase,
the limiting step enzyme of the metabolic mevalonate
pathway and used in clinics for the treatment of
hypercholesterolemia [34]. Several clinical and preclinical studies suggest that statins can exert an antitumour effect in particular biological contexts [35].
Importantly, we recently identified statins as inhibitors of
YAP/TAZ activity in cancer cells [36]. Furthermore, YAP
expression has been shown to be a predictive biomarker
of Dasatinib response in breast cancer cells [37, 48].
Therefore when interrogated for drugs acting on cells
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

with mutations in genes controlling the activity of YAP
and TAZ the portal allowed the identification of molecules
affecting YAP and TAZ function. We next wanted to test
whether the pharmacological combination of statins and
Dasatinib could have stronger effects in inhibiting YAP/
TAZ nuclear localization and transcriptional activity. To
this aim, we treated a panel of cancer cells from tissues in
which the role of YAP and TAZ in tumorigenesis has been
established (breast, lung, colon, prostate) [38] with statins
and Dasatinib alone or in combination. Although both
statins and Dasatinib, as single treatments, were effective
in reducing YAP/TAZ nuclear localization (Supplementary
Figure 2), the combination of these two drugs dramatically
increased the number of cells showing a complete YAP/
TAZ nuclear exclusion (Figure 4A and 4B). Similar
results were obtained using an alternative mevalonate
pathway inhibitor: zoledronic acid (ZA) (Figure 4C).
Moreover, the concomitant treatment of MDA-MB-231
breast cancer cells with statins and Dasatinib completely
blocked the YAP/TAZ transcriptional activity, as
observed by the dramatic drop in the expression of the
well established YAP/TAZ target genes CTGF, CYR61,
ANKRD1 and BIRC5 and the TEAD-responsive reporter
8XGTII (Figure 4D and 4E) [36, 40]. Of note, the effect
of Dasatinib and statins reduced YAP/TAZ target genes
expression to the same extent obtained by YAP/TAZ
siRNA transfection, suggesting that this combinatorial
treatment can fully blunt the pro-oncogenic transcriptional
activities of YAP/TAZ. Strikingly, in different cancer
cell lines, statins and Dasatinib were significantly more
active in inducing apoptosis (Figure 4F and 4G and
Supplementary Figure 3A and 3B) when administered
concomitantly.
YAP and TAZ are known to induce chemoresistance
to taxanes in different cancer cells and their inhibition
has been proposed as a strategy to sensitize cancers
cells to standard chemotherapy [42]. Based on this, we
hypothesized that combination of mevalonate pathway
inhibitors and Dasatinib could efficiently sensitize
cancer cells to sub-lethal doses of paclitaxel. As shown
in Figure 4H, viability assay performed in MDA-MB-231
breast cancer cells with activated YAP/TAZ, confirmed
that combination of Zoledronic acid and Dasatinib
significantly sensitized cancer cells to paclitaxel treatment.
These results demonstrate that combinations of Dasatinib
and mevalonate pathway inhibitors could represent a
pharmacological strategy to inhibit YAP/TAZ in cancer
cells and to sensitize cells with active YAP/TAZ to
standard chemotherapy.

DISCUSSION
Targeted therapies directed against specific
oncogenes are established strategies to successfully treat
a growing number of cancers. Although many patients
38859

Oncotarget

Figure 4: Dasatinib and statin combination fully blunts YAP/TAZ nuclear activity. A. Quantification of cells with complete

YAP/TAZ nuclear exclusion in seven cancer cell lines treated with vehicle (-), statin 1 μM (S) and Dasatinib 1 μM (D) alone or in
combination (SD) for 24 h. Data are derived from n = 3 independent experiments where at least 300 cells were scored. Error bars represent
mean ± s.d. B. Representative images of immunofluorescence in MDA-MB-231 treated as in A. C. Quantification of cells with complete
YAP/TAZ nuclear exclusion. MDA-MB-231 cells were treated with vehicle (-), Zoledronic acid 30 μM (ZA) and Dasatinib 1 μM (D)
alone or in combination (ZAD) for 24 h. Data are derived from n = 3 independent experiments where at least 300 cells were scored. Error
bars represent mean ± s.d. D. Luciferase reporter assay (8XGTII–lux). Cells were transfected with control siRNA (siCTL) or with YAP/
TAZ siRNA (siYT). After 24 h cells were treated with vehicle (-) or with statin 1 μM and Dasatinib 1 μM in combination (DS) for 24 h.
Error bars represent mean ± s.d., from n = 3. E. Quantitative PCR (qPCR) analysis in MDA-MB-231. Cells were transfected with control
siRNA (siCTL) or with YAP/TAZ siRNA (siYT). After 24 h cells were treated with vehicle (-) or with statin 1 μM and Dasatinib 1 μM
in combination (DS) for 48 h. Error bars represent mean ± s.d., from n = 3 biological replicates. F. MDA-MB-231 and H1299 cells were
treated with indicated compounds for 48 h. Representative blots are shown. G. Cell growth of MDA-MB-231 and H1299 cells treated with
vehicle (–), statin 1 μM (S) and Dasatinib 1 μM (D) alone or in combination (SD) for three days. Error bars represent mean ± s.d., from
n = 3 biological replicates. H. Cell viability of MDA-MB-231 cells treated with vehicle (–), Paclitaxel 1 μM (PTX) alone or in combination
with Zoledronic acid 30 μM and Dasatinib 1 μM (PTX+ZAD) for 48 hour.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

38860

Oncotarget

benefit of such therapeutic intervention, tumours often
recur in few months due to acquired drug resistance,
which calls for urgent development of novel strategies to
identify drugs for personalized therapies [41].
Next generation sequencing of cancer cell lines,
coupled with high throughput cell viability-based
screening of small molecules, offers the possibility to
rapidly identify many cancer-specific dependencies,
potentially targetable with numerous chemical
compounds. Nevertheless, the full exploitation of
these “omics” databases is still hampered by gaps in
the integration of genomics and pharmacological data.
Here we developed MDP, an open access resource,
which helps the researchers to unveil oncogene-induced
dependencies by systematically coupling specific gene
mutations with the pharmacological response to tens
of thousands of compounds. MDP is available on-line
and links genomic information from CCLE and NCI60
databases to pharmacological data from the NCI60 DTP
screening allowing the identification of synthetic or
natural compounds active in cancer cells with specific
genetic features. The main goal of this web resource is
to offer a very user-friendly platform for the execution
of custom in-silico high-throughput screenings of
thousand of compounds, with the possibility to querying
associations in either direction (i.e., genes to drugs or
drugs to genes) depending on the particular question of
interest.
Since oncogenes may give rise to pharmacological
dependencies only in particular tissues, MDP easily
allows users to run the analysis selecting only cancer cells
from a specific tissue thus leading to the identification
of tissue-specific therapeutic biomarkers. Moreover the
resource permits multiple mutation queries, enabling the
identification of drugs active against cells with more than
one mutated gene at the same time.
MDP, through the from drug to gene analysis,
is capable of retrieving the most enriched mutations
associated with sensitivity to the specific drug selected
by the users and, in this way, might help researchers
to identify potential drug-mutation dependencies in
cancer cell lines, or unveiling new correlations between
these mutated cancer cell lines and their sensitivity to a
particular drug.
The reliability of this approach is guaranteed by the
identification of already established and clinically proved
gene-drug pairs, among them BRAF V600E mutation with
clinically used BRAF/MEK inhibitors or EGFR mutations
with EGFR inhibitors. Moreover, MDP suggests several
novel dependencies, making it a powerful tool to guide
the early phases of drug discovery or drug repositioning.
As an example, querying MDP for drugs selectively active
on cells bearing mutation in NF2 gene, an event that leads
to the aberrant activation of the transcription cofactors
YAP and TAZ, we found that the combinatorial use of
two FDA-approved drugs, namely statins and Dasatinib,
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

acts synergistically to strongly inhibit the activity of YAP
and TAZ in different biological contexts.
YAP and TAZ are critical downstream effectors
of actomyosin cytoskeleton acting as nuclear
transducers of mechanical stimuli [40] and we and
others, recently discovered that YAP and TAZ are
activated by the metabolic mevalonate pathway through
geranylgeranylation of RhoA, and their oncogenic
activities can be efficiently blunted by using statins
and bisphosphonates [36]. Furthermore, it has been
recently shown that in cancer associated fibroblasts,
downstream of actomyosin cytoskeleton and mechanical
stress, the kinase Src is functionally required for YAP
activation and its inhibition by Dasatinib can efficiently
block YAP nuclear functions [49]. Therefore, the
specific effect exerted by statins and Dasatinib in cells
with YAP/TAZ hyperactivation could be ascribed to
the combined inhibition of the signals that from the
cytoskeleton converge on YAP/TAZ. YAP levels have
been identified as a biomarker of Dasatinib sensitivity
in breast cancer [48] and, in particular, basal-type triple
negative breast cancer (TNBC) cells, which have highly
activated Src and YAP, are more sensitive to Dasatinib
treatment [46, 38].
The evidence that statin and Dasatinib, as
demonstrated from our work, act synergistically to inhibit
YAP/TAZ suggests that they could be used in combination
and thus at lower concentrations, to inhibit YAP/TAZ
activity and tumour growth in cancers characterised by
hyperactivation of YAP/TAZ and, among them, in triple
negative breast cancer and metastatic mesothelioma [42].
While the huge amount of compounds screened
represents the strength of MDP, the limited number of
cancer cells and genotypes used can depict a weakness.
However, the NCI60 cell lines have been extensively
used to identify novel predictive cancer biomarkers
proving that the number of different genotypes is not
necessarily a limitation [43–45]. Recent publications
reported the generation of interactive resources useful to
identify novel gene-drug dependencies [6, 7]. Although
these databases are built from genomic characterization
of more than 200 cell lines, thus showing higher
genetic heterogeneity in comparison to MDP, the
pharmacological data obtained by these resources are
dramatically lower compared to our tool. Importantly,
despite such differences, MDP and these other resources
identified a number of similar gene-drug connections,
such as the already established BRAF mutations with
MEK inhibitors and EGFR mutations with tyrosine
kinases inhibitors, as well as novel connections such as
NF2 mutations with Dasatinib [6] and XIAP mutations
with Brefeldin [7]. Thus, due to the very large number
of pharmacological data deposited in its database, MDP
can represent a reliable alternative to other predictor
tools available on-line for the repositioning of several
compounds for targeted therapy.
38861

Oncotarget

Fisher’s exact test for the enrichment of good responses
in cases as compared to bad responses in controls, given
the number of bad responses in cases and good responses
in controls.
The same ranking function and statistical test
is also used to identify the most enriched mutations
starting from a drug when performing a from drug to
gene analysis. In this case, the normalized log2IC50 of
the selected compound is used to first retrieve the two
groups of cell lines with good and bad responses for that
drug. Then, for each mutation, we calculate the number
of cases, i.e., the fraction of cell lines in the good
response group bearing  the considered mutation, and
the number of controls, as the fraction of cell lines in
the bad response group bearing the considered mutation.
The score given by the fraction of good responses in
cases multiplied by the fraction of bad responses in
controls is again used to rank mutations and a Fisher’s
test for the enrichment of good responses in cases as
compared to bad responses in controls, given bad
responses in cases and good responses in controls, to
assess significance.

In conclusion, here we present MDP, an online tool able to perform prediction about cancer cell
lines mutations and drugs sensitivity dependencies.
MDP is, as far as we know, the largest database of
pharmacogenomics structured to be a user-friendly tool
for the investigation of drugs-mutations correlations, and
can be queried either from the gene or drug perspective.
Data obtained via MDP will help researchers in the
challenge of patients’ stratification, thus refining the
parameters for personalized targeted therapies on the
basis of their specific genetic abnormalities. We strongly
believe that MDP provides a novel and comprehensive
tool for the systematic identification of new biomarkers
of drug sensitivity, setting the rationale for the design of
new clinical trials and the discovery of novel anticancer
drugs.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Statistical analysis
Statistical analyses are based on the drug response data
file GI50 Data (Sept 2014 release; https://wiki.nci.nih.gov/
display/NCIDTPdata/NCI-60+Growth+Inhibition+Data),
retrieved from the NCI60 DTP portal, and sequencing data
and variant classifications retrieved from the CCLE (http://
www.broadinstitute.org/ccle/data/browseData?conversation
Propagation=begin) and NCI60 (http://discover.nci.nih.gov/
cellminer/loadDownload.do) public repositories.
GI50 Data file contains a matrix of GI50 values
for 50,816 molecules tested on 115 cancer cell lines.
GI50 values are computed, for any compound, as minus
the log10 of IC50, i.e., the drug concentration necessary to
inhibit 50% growth of treated cells relative to untreated
controls. Prior to analysis, for any single compound,
first  the GI50 is transformed back to IC50 and then the
IC50 value is normalized dividing the IC50 of any cell line
by the average of the IC50 across all 115 cell lines.
The normalized IC50 (in log2 scale) of a compound
is used to define the response for any combination of drug
and cell line in terms of i) good response if the normalized
log2 IC50 is lower than two standard deviations of the
distribution of all log2 IC50 in a given cell line, and ii) bad
response otherwise.
In the from gene to drug analysis, given a specific
set of mutation/s, compounds with increased activity in
cases (cancer cell lines treated with the given compound
and bearing the specific set of mutation/s selected by the
user) as compared to controls (all the other cancer cell
lines treated with the given compound), are identified
ranking all compounds based on a score given by the
fraction of good responses in cases multiplied by the
fraction of bad responses in controls. This score ranks
each drug based on the enrichment of good responses in
the case group. The statistical significance (p-value) of
this ranking is computed, for each drug, using a one-tailed
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

MDP web tool programming
MDP web interface has been written using
PHP version 5.0, HTML 5.0 and CSS. Connections
between pages and programming languages have been
performed using Twig, a template engine that allows
fast connections between PHP and HTML. Graphical
representations in the results pages (i.e. barplots, pie
charts, tables, and scatter plots) have been coded using
JavaScript and jQuery, basing on the structure of the
latest Google APIs release (2015). Statistical methods
of analyses were performed using Python 2.7, through
Pandas 0.16  module, and R 3.0.  R software was used
in the from gene to drug analysis, whereas Python 2.7
and Pandas were used to perform the from drug to gene
statistical process. MDP is hosted on a Linux server with
512 GB RAM and 64 processors.

Cancer cell lines/treatments
MDA-MB-231, HT29, PC-3, SKBR-3 and PANC-1
were cultured in DMEM supplemented with 10% FBS
(fetal bovine serum) and antibiotics. H1299 cells were
cultured in RPMI 1640 with 10% FBS and antibiotics.
Cells have been authenticated by STR profiling and are
free from mycoplasma contamination. The following
compounds were purchased from Sigma Aldrich: statin
(Cerivastatin, SML0005), Zoledronic Acid (SML0223),
Paclitaxel (T7191). Dasatinib was purchased from
Selleck (S1021). Cell lines used to build MDP have been
already authenticated (Berretina et al. 2012, Lorenzi
et al. 2009).
38862

Oncotarget

YAP/TAZ nuclear localization

was performed. Cells were collected 24 h after DNA
transfection.

For the quantification of the number of cells with
nuclear YAP/TAZ at least 300 cells from different fields
were counted. Only cells with complete nuclear YAP/TAZ
exclusion were scored as positive.

Antibodies
The antibodies used for western blot and
immunofluorescence were: anti-YAP/TAZ (1:1,000 for
western blot, 1:100 for immunofluorescence; sc101199,
Santa Cruz Biotechnology), anti-actin (1:2,000; C11,
Sigma), anti-Cleaved Caspase 3 (1:1000; D175, Cell
Signaling).

Cell growth/viability assays
For cell growth assay cells (MDA-MB-231, H1299,
HT-29, PANC-1) were plated in 96-well plates and treated
as indicated. Cells were trypsinized, collected and counted
at day 1, 2 and 3. Cell viability was assayed with ATPlite
(Perkin Elmer) according to the manufacturer’s instructions
using the EnSpireMultilabel Reader (Perkin Elmer).

Immunofluorescence and western blot
Immunofluorescence staining was performed
as previously described [36]. Briefly, cells were fixed
in 4% paraformaldehyde for 10 min, washed in PBS,
permeabilized with Triton 0.1% for 10 min and blocked
in PBS FBS 3% for 30 min. Antigen recognition was done
by incubating primary antibody for 1 h at 37°C and with
Goat anti-mouse Alexa Fluor 568 (Life Technologies)
as secondary antibody for 30 min at 37°C. Nuclei were
counterstained with Hoechst 33342 (Life Technologies).
Western blot analysis was performed as previously
described [36].

Quantitative real-time PCR
Cells were collected in Qiazol lysis reagent (Qiagen)
for total RNA extraction, and contaminant DNA was
removed by DNase treatment. Retrotranscription was
performed with the Quantitect reverse transcription kit
(Qiagen). The obtained cDNA was properly diluted and
used in qPCR reactions performed with SsoAdvanced
SYBR Green Supermix (Biorad) using the CFX96
Touch Real-Time PCR Detection System and analyzed
with Biorad CFX Manager software. Each experiment
was performed at least three times Expression levels are
always given relative to histone H3. The primers used
were previously described [36].

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We acknowledge Dario Stabili, Elena Viola and
Andrea Orlandi for helping in editing MDP web pages.
We thank A. Testa for discussion and proofreading the
manuscript. This work was supported by grants from the
Associazione Italiana per la Ricerca sul Cancro (AIRC)
and AIRC Special Program Molecular Clinical Oncology
‘5 per mille’ to G.D.S. and S.B. and the Italian Ministry
of Education, University and Research (COFIN, FIRBaccordi di programma 2010 cod.RBAP10XKNC_003) to
G.D.S. S.B. is supported by MIUR FIRB RBAP11T3WB;
MIUR EPIGEN - Italian Flagship Project Epigenomics
and JDRF foundation award 17-2013-326. G.S. is a
fellow of the Fondazione Italiana per la Ricerca sul Cancro
(FIRC). We acknowledge G. Pastore for technical support.

Transfections
siRNA transfections were performed with
Lipofectamine RNAi-MAX (Life Technologies) in
antibiotic-free medium according to the manufacturer’s
instructions. Negative control siRNA was: AllStars
negative control siRNA Qiagen 1027281. siRNA
sequences are: YAP (GACAUCUUCUGGUCAGAGA)
and TAZ (ACGUUGACUUAGGAACUUU).
DNA transfections were done with Lipofectamine
LTX and Plus Reagent (Invitrogen) or Lipofectamine
2000 (for H1299 cells; Life Technologies) according to
the manufacturer’s instructions.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST

Luciferase assay

The authors declare no competing financial interests.

Luciferase assays were performed in MDA-MB-231
cells with the established YAP/TAZ-responsive reporter
8xGTII–lux. Cell lysates were analyzed using the DualLuciferase Reporter Assay System (Promega, cod. E1910).
Luciferase reporter (300 ng cm−2) were transfected
together with CMV–Renilla (30 ng cm−2) to normalize
for transfection efficiency. Cells were collected 24 h
after DNA transfection. For luciferase assays in siRNAtransfected cells, siRNA transfection was achieved
first and, after  48  h, transfection of plasmid DNA
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

REFERENCES
1.	 Gonzalez de Castro D, Clarke PA, Al-Lazikani B,
Workman  P. Personalized cancer medicine: molecular
­diagnostics, predictive biomarkers, and drug resistance.
Clin Pharmacol Ther. 2013; 93:252–259.
2.	 Ribas A, Gonzalez R, Pavlick A, Hamid O, Gajewski TF,
Daud A, Flaherty L, Logan T, Chmielowski B, Lewis K,
Kee D, Boasberg P, Yin M, et al. Combination of
38863

Oncotarget

vemurafenib and cobimetinib in patients with advanced
BRAFV600-mutated melanoma: a phase 1b study. Lancet
Oncol. 2014; 15:954–965.

14.	 Moghaddas Gholami A, Hahne H, Wu Z, Auer FJ, Meng C,
Wilhelm M, Kuster B. Global proteome analysis of the
NCI-60 cell line panel. Cell Rep. 2013; 4:609–20.

3.	 Ascierto PA, Kirkwood JM, Grob JJ, Simeone E,
Grimaldi  AM, Maio M, Palmieri G, Testori A,
Marincola FM, Mozzillo N. The role of BRAF V600 mutation in melanoma. J Transl Med. 2012; 10:85.

15.	 Abaan OD, Polley EC, Davis SR, Zhu YJ, Bilke S,
Walker RL, Pineda M, Gindin Y, Jiang Y, Reinhold WC,
Holbeck SL, Simon RM, Doroshow JH, et al. The exomes
of the NCI-60 panel: a genomic resource for cancer
­biology and systems pharmacology. Cancer Res. 2013;
73:4372–4382.

4.	 Shankavaram UT, Varma S, Kane D, Sunshine M,
Chary  KK, Reinhold WC, Pommier Y, Weinstein JN.
CellMiner: a relational database and query tool for the NCI60 cancer cell lines. BMC Genomics. 2009; 10:277.

16.	 Sherry ST, Ward MH, Kholodov M, Baker J, Phan L,
Smigielski EM, Sirotkin K. dbSNP: the NCBI database of
genetic variation. Nucleic Acids Res. 2001; 29:308–311.

5.	 Barretina J, Caponigro G, Stransky N, Venkatesan K,
Margolin AA, Kim S, Wilson CJ, Lehár J, Kryukov GV,
Sonkin D, Reddy A, Liu M, Murray L, et al. The Cancer
Cell Line Encyclopedia enables predictive modelling of
anticancer drug sensitivity. Nature. 2012; 483:603–607.

17.	 Roberts PJ, Der CJ. Targeting the Raf-MEK-ERK mitogenactivated protein kinase cascade for the treatment of cancer.
Oncogene. 2007; 26:3291–3310.
18.	 Davies H, Bignell GR, Cox C, Stephens P, Edkins S,
Clegg S, Teague J, Woffendin H, Garnett MJ, Bottomley W,
Davis N, Dicks E, Ewing R, et al. Mutations of the BRAF
gene in human cancer. Nature. 2002; 417:949–954.

6.	 Yang W, Soares J, Greninger P, Edelman EJ, Lightfoot H,
Forbes S, Bindal N, Beare D, Smith JA, Thompson IR,
Ramaswamy S, Futreal PA, Haber DA et al. Genomics
of Drug Sensitivity in Cancer (GDSC): a resource for
­therapeutic biomarker discovery in cancer cells. Nucleic
Acids Res. 2013; 41:D955–61.

19.	 Hauschild A, Grob JJ, Demidov LV, Joury T, Gutzmer R,
Millward M, Rutkowski P, Blank CU, Miller WH Jr,
Kaempgen E, Martìn-Algarra S, Karaszewska B, Mauch C,
et al. Dabrafenib in BRAF-mutated metastatic melanoma: a
multicentre, open-label, phase 3 randomised controlled trial.
Lancet. 2012; 380:358–365.

7.	 Basu A, Bodycombe NE, Cheah JH, Price EV, Liu K,
Schaefer GI, Ebright RY, Stewart ML, Ito D, Wang S,
Bracha AL, Liefeld T, Wawer M, et al. An interactive
resource to identify cancer genetic and lineage dependencies targeted by small molecules. Cell. 2013; 154:1151–61.

20.	 Chapman PB, Hauschild A, Robert C, Haanen JB,
Ascierto  P, Larkin J, Dummer R, Garbe C, Testori A,
Maio  M, Hogg D, Lorigan P, Lebbe C, et al. Improved
­survival with vemurafenib in melanoma with BRAF V600E
mutation. N Engl J Med. 2011; 364:2507–2516.

8.	 Paull KD, Shoemaker RH, Hodes L, Monks A,
Scudiero  DA, Rubinstein L, Plowman J, Boyd MR.
Display and analysis of patterns of differential activity of
drugs against human tumor cell lines: development of mean
graph and COMPARE algorithm. J Natl Cancer Inst. 1989;
81:1088–92.

21.	 King AJ, Patrick DR, Batorsky RS, Ho ML, Do HT,
Zhang SY, Kumar R, Rusnak DW, Takle AK, Wilson DM,
Hugger E, Wang L, Karreth F, et al. Demonstration of a
genetic therapeutic index for tumors expressing oncogenic
BRAF by the kinase inhibitor SB-590885. Cancer Res.
2006; 66:11100–11105.

9.	 Shoemaker RH. The NCI60 human tumour cell line
­anticancer drug screen. Nat Rev Cancer. 2006; 6:813–23.
10.	 Bussey KJ, Chin K, Lababidi S, Reimers M, Reinhold WC,
Kuo WL, Gwadry F, Ajay, Kouros-Mehr H, Fridlyand J,
Jain A, Collins C, Nishizuka S, et al. Integrating data on
DNA copy number with gene expression levels and drug
sensitivities in the NCI-60 cell line panel. Mol Cancer Ther.
2006; 5:853–67.

22.	 Zhao A, Lee SH, Mojena M, Jenkins RG, Patrick DR,
Huber HE, Goetz MA, Hensens OD, Zink DL, Vilella D,
Dombrowski AW, Lingham RB, Huang L. Resorcylic acid
lactones: naturally occurring potent and selective inhibitors
of MEK. J Antibiot. 1999; 52:1086–1094.

11.	 Ruan X, Koxher JP, Pommier Y, Liu H, Reinhold WC.
Mass homozygotes accumulation in the NCI-60 cancer cell
lines as compared to HapMap Trios, and relation to fragile
site location. PLoS One. 2012; 7.

23.	 Catalanotti F, Solit DB, Pulitzer MP, Berger MF, Scott SN,
Lyriboz T, Lacouture ME, Panageas KS, Wolchok JD,
Carvajal RD, Schwartz GK, Rosen N, Chapman PB.
Phase II trial of MEK inhibitor selumetinib (AZD6244,
ARRY-142886) in patients with BRAFV600E/K-mutated
­melanoma. Clin Cancer Res. 2013; 19:2257–2264.

12.	 Liu H, DʼAndrade P, Fulmer-Smentek S, Lorenzi P,
Kohn  KW, Weinsten JN, Pommier Y, Reinhold WC.
mRNA and microRNA expression profiles of the NCI-60
integrated with drug activities. Mol Cancer Ther. 2010;
9:1080–91.

24.	 Bodart JF, Chopra A, Liang X, Duesbery N. Anthrax, MEK
and cancer. Cell Cycle. 2002; 1:10–15.
25.	 Da Cunha Santos G, Shepherd FA, Tsao MS EGFR
­mutations and lung cancer. Annu Rev Pathol. 2011;
6:49–69.

13.	 Blower PE, Verducci JS, Lin S, Zhou J, Chung JH,
Dai Z, Liu CG, Reinhold WC, Lorenzi PL, Kaldjian EP,
Croce CM, Weinstein JN, Sadee W. MicroRNA expression
profiles for the NCI-60 cancer cell panel. Mol Cancer Ther.
2007; 1483–91.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

26.	 Paez JG, Jänne PA, Lee JC, Tracy S, Greulich H,
Gabriel S, Herman P, Kaye FJ, Lindeman N, Boggon TJ,
Naoki K, Sasaki H, Fujii Y, et al. EGFR mutations in
38864

Oncotarget

lung cancer: correlation with clinical response to gefitinib
­therapy. Science. 2004; 304:1497–1500.

38.	 Moroishi T, Hansen CG, Guan KL. The emerging rol of
YAP and TAZ in cancer. Nat Rev Cancer. 2015; 15:73–9

27.	 Neubauer A, Maharry K, Mrózek K, Thiede C, Marcucci G,
Paschka P, Mayer RJ, Larson RA, Liu ET, Bloomfield CD.
Patients with acute myeloid leukemia and RAS mutations
benefit most from postremission high-dose cytarabine: a
Cancer and Leukemia Group B study. J Clin Oncol. 2008;
26:4603–9.

39.	 Li W, Cooper J, Karajannis MA, Giancotti FG. Merlin: a
tumour suppressor with functions at the cell cortex and in
the nucleus. EMBO Rep. 2012; 13:204–215.
40.	 Dupont S, Morsut L, Aragona M, Enzo E, Giulitti S,
Cordenonsi M, Zanconato F, Le Digabel J, Forcato M,
Bicciato S, Elvassore N, Piccolo S. Role of YAP/TAZ in
mechanotransduction. Nature. 2011; 474:179–83.

28.	 Arlander SJ, Eapen AK, Vroman BT, McDonald RJ,
Toft DO, Karnitz LM. Hsp90 Inhibition Depletes Chk1 and
Sensitizes Tumor Cells to Replication Stress. J Biol Chem.
2003; 278:52572–52577.

41.	 Holohan C, Van Schaeybroeck S, Longley DB,
Johnston  PG. Cancer drug resistance: an evolving paradigm. Nat Rev Cancer. 2013; 13:714–726.

29.	 Meric-Bernstam F, Akcakanat A, Chen H, Do KA,
Sangai  T, Adkins F, Gonzalez-Angulo AM, Rashid A,
Crosby K, Dong M, Phan AT, Wolff RA, Gupta S, et al.
PIK3CA/PTEN Mutations and Akt Activation As Markers
of Sensitivity to Allosteric mTOR Inhibitors. Clin Cancer
Res. 2012; 18:1777–1789.

42.	 Cordenonsi M, Zanconato F, Azzolin L, Forcato M,
Rosato A, Frasson C, Inui M, Montagner M, Parenti AR,
Poletti A, Daidone MG, Dupont S, Basso G, et al. The
Hippo transducer TAZ confers cancer stem cell-related
traits on breast cancer cells. Cell. 2011; 147:759–772.
43.	 Yu X, Vazquez A, Levine AJ, Carpizo DR. Allele-specific
p53 mutant reactivation. Cancer Cell. 2012; 21:614–625.

30.	 Piccolo S. LIF-ting Hippo averts metastasis. Nat Med.
2012; 18:1463–1465.

44.	 Mori S, Chang JT, Andrechek ER, Potti A, Nevins JR.
Utilization of Genomic Signatures to Identify PhenotypeSpecific Drugs. PLoS One. 2009; 4:e6772.

31.	 Lorenzetto E, Brenca M, Boeri M, Verri C, Piccinin  E,
Gasparini P, Facchinetti F, Rossi S, Salvatore G,
Massimino M, Sozzi G, Maestro R, Modena P. YAP1 acts
as oncogenic target of 11q22 amplification in multiple
­cancer subtypes. Oncotarget. 2014; 5:2608–2621.

45.	 Okabe M, Szakács G, Reimers MA, Suzuki T, Hall MD,
Abe T, Weinstein JN, Gottesman MM. Profiling SLCO
and SLC22 genes in the NCI-60 cancer cell lines to
­identify drug uptake transporters. Mol Cancer Ther. 2008;
7:3081–3091.

32.	 Sekido Y. Inactivation of Merlin in malignant mesothelioma cells and the Hippo signaling cascade dysregulation.
Pathol Int. 2011; 61:331–344.

46.	 Tryfonopoulos D, Walsh S, Collins DM, Flanagan L,
Quinn C, Corkery B, McDermott EW, Evoy D, Pierce A,
OʼDonovan N, Crown J, Duffy MJ. Src: a potential target for the treatment of triple-negative breast cancer. Ann
Oncol. 2011; 22:2234–2240.

33.	 Yokoyama T, Osada H, Murakami H, Tatematsu  Y,
Taniguchi T, Kondo Y, Yatabe Y, Hasegawa Y,
Shimokata K, Horio Y, Hida T, Sekido Y. YAP1 is involved
in mesothelioma development and negatively regulated by
Merlin through phosphorylation. Carcinogenesis. 2008;
29:2139–2146.

47.	 Matusewicz L, Meissner J, Toporkiewicz M, Sikorski AF.
The effect of statins on cancer cells—review. Tumour Biol.
2015; 36:4889–4904.

34.	 Taylor F, Huffman MD, Macedo AF, Moore TH, Burke M,
Davey Smith G, Ward K, Ebrahim S. Statins for the primary
prevention of cardiovascular disease. Cochrane Database
Syst Rev. 2013; 1:CD004816.

48.	 Finn RS, Dering J, Ginther C, Wilson CA, Glaspy P,
Tchekmedyian N, Slamon DJ. Dasatinib, an orally active
small molecule inhibitor of both the src and abl kinases,
selectively inhibits growth of basal-type/“triple-negative”
breast cancer cell lines growing in vitro. Breast Cancer Res
Treat. 2007; 105:319–326.

35.	 Chan KKW, Oza AM, Siu LL. The statins as anticancer
agents. Clin Cancer Res. 2003; 9:10–9.
36.	 Sorrentino G, Ruggeri N, Specchia V, Cordenonsi M,
Mano M, Dupont S, Manfrin A, Ingallina E, Sommaggio R,
Piazza S, Rosato A, Piccolo S, Del Sal G. Metabolic control of YAP and TAZ by the mevalonate pathway. Nat Cell
Biol. 2014; 16:357–366.

49.	 Calvo F, Ege N, Grande-Garcia A, Hooper S,
Jenkins  RP, Chaudhry SI, Harrington K, Williamson P,
Moeendarbary E, Charras G, Sahai E. Mechanotransduction
and YAP-dependent matrix remodelling is required for the
generation and maintenance of cancer associated fibroblasts. Nat Cell Biol. 2013; 15:637–46.

37.	 Davis SL, Eckhardt SG, Tentler JJ, Diamond JR.
­Triple-negative breast cancer: bridging the gap from cancer
genomics to predictive biomarkers. Ther Adv Med Oncol.
2014; 6:88–100.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

38865

Oncotarget

