HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Author Manuscript

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 22.
Published in final edited form as:
Cell. 2016 November 17; 167(5): 1281–1295.e18. doi:10.1016/j.cell.2016.10.039.

Epigenetic Activation of WNT5A Drives Glioblastoma Stem Cell
Differentiation and Invasive Growth

Author Manuscript

Baoli Hu1,16, Qianghu Wang2,3,16, Y. Alan Wang1,16,*, Sujun Hua1, Charles-Etienne Gabriel
Sauvé1, Derrick Ong1, Zheng D. Lan1, Qing Chang3,9, Yan Wing Ho1, Marta Moreno
Monasterio1, Xin Lu1, Yi Zhong4, Jianhua Zhang3,9, Pingna Deng1, Zhi Tan5, Guocan
Wang1, Wen-Ting Liao1, Lynda J. Corley6, Haiyan Yan10, Junxia Zhang11, Yongping You11,
Ning Liu11, Linbo Cai12, Gaetano Finocchiaro13, Joanna J. Phillips14, Mitchel S. Berger15,
Denise J. Spring1, Jian Hu1, Erik P. Sulman7,8, Gregory N. Fuller6, Lynda Chin3, Roeland
G.W. Verhaak2,3, and Ronald A. DePinho1,17,*
1Department

of Cancer Biology, University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX

77030, USA
2Department

of Bioinformatics and Computational Biology, University of Texas MD Anderson
Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA
3Department

of Genomic Medicine, University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston,
TX 77030, USA

4Department

Author Manuscript

of Epigenetics and Molecular Carcinogenesis, University of Texas MD Anderson
Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA

5Department

of Experimental Therapeutics, University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, TX 77030, USA

6Department

of Pathology, University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030,

USA
7Department

of Radiation Oncology, University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston,
TX 77030, USA

8Department

of Translational Molecular Pathology, University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA

Author Manuscript

*

Correspondence: yalanwang@mdanderson.org (Y.A.W.), rdepinho@mdanderson.org (R.A.D.) http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.
2016.10.039.
16Co-first author
17Lead Contact

Supplemental Information: Supplemental Information includes seven figures and seven tables and can be found with this article online
at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2016.10.039.
Author Contributions: B.H., Y.A.W., and R.A.D. designed the project and analyzed data; B.H. performed the experiments; Q.W.
performed bioinformatics analysis for ChIP-seq, RNA-seq, DNA microarray, and clinical datasets; S.H. performed ChIP-seq, DNA
microarray, and data analysis; R.G.W.V., Y.Z., and J.Z. provided assistance for TCGA data analysis; C.-E.G.S., D.O., M.M.M., P.D.,
Y.W.H., G.W., Z.T., H.Y., and W.-T.L. provided assistance in cell-culture and molecular biochemical experiments; Q.C. provided
assistance in image capture; Q.W., J.Z., Y.Y., N.L., and L.C. provided assistance for analysis of GBM paired samples; Z.D.L., G.N.F.,
J.J.P., and M.S.B. provided TCGA GBM biospecimens; E.P.S., G.N.F., and L.J.C. provided assistance for pathological analysis on
human GBM samples; L.C. provided intellectual contribution and designed early study. S.H., C.-E.G.S., D.O., X.L., J.H., and D.J.S.
provided critical intellectual contributions throughout the project; B.H., Y.A.W., and R.A.D. wrote the manuscript.

Hu et al.

Page 2

9Institute

Author Manuscript

for Applied Cancer Science, University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston,
TX 77030, USA

10Department

of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA 02215, USA

11Department

of Neurosurgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing
210029, China

12Department

of Oncology, Guangdong 999 Brain Hospital, Guangzhou 510510, China

13Unit

of Molecular Neuro-Oncology, Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Neurologico C. Besta, 20133
Milano, Italy
14Departments

of Neurological Surgery and Pathology, University of California, San Francisco,
San Francisco, CA 94143, USA

Author Manuscript

15Neurological

Surgery, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA

Graphical abstract

Author Manuscript

Epigenetic activation of WNT5A expression contributes to glioblastoma tumor recurrence by
promoting differentiation of glioma-derived stem cells into endothelial cells.

Summary

Author Manuscript

Glioblastoma stem cells (GSCs) are implicated in tumor neovascularization, invasiveness, and
therapeutic resistance. To illuminate mechanisms governing these hallmark features, we developed
a de novo glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) model derived from immortalized human neural stem/
progenitor cells (hNSCs) to enable precise system-level comparisons of pre-malignant and
oncogene-induced malignant states of NSCs. Integrated transcriptomic and epigenomic analyses
uncovered a PAX6/DLX5 transcriptional program driving WNT5A-mediated GSC differentiation
into endothelial-like cells (GdECs). GdECs recruit existing endothelial cells to promote
peritumoral satellite lesions, which serve as a niche supporting the growth of invasive glioma cells
away from the primary tumor. Clinical data reveal higher WNT5A and GdECs expression in
peritumoral and recurrent GBMs relative to matched intratumoral and primary GBMs,
respectively, supporting WNT5A-mediated GSC differentiation and invasive growth in disease
recurrence. Thus, the PAX6/DLX5-WNT5A axis governs the diffuse spread of glioma cells
throughout the brain parenchyma, contributing to the lethality of GBM.

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 22.

Hu et al.

Page 3

Author Manuscript

Introduction
Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is a highly lethal primary brain tumor characterized by
robust neovascularization and glioma cell invasiveness throughout the brain parenchyma
(Dunn et al., 2012; Furnari et al., 2007). Poor prognosis relates to the near universal
recurrence of tumors despite aggressive multimodality treatment of maximal surgical
resection, radiotherapy, and chemotherapy (Wen and Kesari, 2008). Gliomagenesis is driven
by genetic alterations, including those targeting components of the TP53-ARF-MDM2 and
PTEN-PI3K-AKT pathways (Cancer Genome Atlas Research Network, 2008; Brennan et
al., 2013; Ceccarelli et al., 2016) and can arise from the transformation of neural stem/
progenitor cells (NSCs) (Alcantara Llaguno et al., 2009; Zheng et al., 2008).

Author Manuscript

GBM possesses so-called glioblastoma stem cells (GSCs), which share many NSC features
such as expression of stem cell markers (e.g., Nestin, CD133), self-renewal, and multilineage differentiation capacity (Furnari et al., 2007; Lobo et al., 2007; Singh et al., 2004).
GSCs are associated with strong tumor initiation potential and are thought to contribute to
disease progression, recurrence and therapeutic resistance (Bao et al., 2006; Chen et al.,
2012; Zheng et al., 2008; Zhu et al., 2014). While GSCs exhibit differentiation capacity into
glial and neuronal lineages, their terminal differentiation capacity is markedly impaired (Hu
et al., 2013; Zheng et al., 2008), and they show trans-differentiation capacity (Cheng et al.,
2013; Ricci-Vitiani et al., 2010; Soda et al., 2011; Wang et al., 2010).

Author Manuscript

The robust developmental plasticity of GSCs has also been evidenced by their capacity to
differentiation into endothelial cells (ECs), which display classic EC phenotypes in vitro and
have been reported to contribute to GBM vascularization in vivo (Ricci-Vitiani et al., 2010;
Wang et al., 2010). The genetic and epigenetic factors driving GSCs differentiation into ECs
have not been elucidated; nor is it known how GdECs might contribute to the pathobiology
of GBM or to clinical outcomes (Cheng et al., 2013; Rodriguez et al., 2012).
Here, we delineate mechanisms governing the aberrant developmental plasticity of GSCs
and its contribution to the refractory nature of GBM. We establish a GBM model that affords
a direct comparison of genome-wide histone modifications and associated gene expression
alterations between parental human NSCs and their derivative oncogene-induced GSCs
(hereafter iGSCs), identifying PAX6- and DLX5-regulated WNT5A as a key factor driving
iGSCs differentiation into GdECs. These GdECs function, in turn, to recruit host ECs to
form a vascular-like niche that supports the growth of invading glioma cells in the brain
parenchyma, a process known to contribute to disease recurrence in the clinic.

Author Manuscript

Results
EC Signaling Pathway Enrichment in De Novo Gliomagenesis via Oncogenic
Transformation of Human NSCs
Consistent with the critical roles of TP53 and PTEN-PI3K-AKT alterations in GBM
pathogenesis (Cancer Genome Atlas Research Network, 2008; Brennan et al., 2013), GBM
genomic and proteomic profiles from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) show significant

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 22.

Hu et al.

Page 4

Author Manuscript

correlation between poorer prognosis and higher levels of AKT activation in patients with
TP53 mutations (Figure S1A). These results are consistent with the notion that robust AKT
activation promotes disease aggressiveness (Molina et al., 2010; Phillips et al., 2006; Suzuki
et al., 2010; Wang et al., 2004).

Author Manuscript

To model these pathway alterations and establish a de novo human GBM model, we
employed Myc-immortalized human NSCs (hNSCs) that were documented to possess NSClike features including self-renewal, expression of NSC markers, and multi-lineage
differentiation capacity (data not shown). The hNSCs were infected with lentiviruses
encoding dominant-negative p53 (p53DN) and/or a constitutively active myristoylated form
of AKT (myr-AKT) (Figure 1A). The hNSCs transduced with both p53DN and myr-AKT
(p53DN-AKT-hNSCs), but not p53DN or myr-AKT alone, exhibited robust soft agar colony
formation (Figures 1B and S1B) and highly penetrant tumorigenic potential following
intracranial injection in mice (Figure 1C).

Author Manuscript

Histopathological characterization of the p53DN-AKT-hNSCs derived tumors documented
classical GBM features of high cellular density, pseudopalisading necrosis, and
microvascular hyperplasia (Figures 1D and 1E). These tumors showed a high proliferative
index (Ki67), robust expression of glioma markers (Nestin, GFAP), strong pAKT, and
p53DN expression (Figure 1F). These de novo tumors readily generated iGSCs as evidenced
by (1) tumor-repopulating potential with as few as 200 implanted cells and median tumor
latency of 15–35 weeks (Figure S1C); (2) robust Nestin expression; and (3) limited capacity
to differentiate into astrocytic and neuronal lineages (Figure S1D). Accordingly,
transduction of c-Myc, p53DN, and myr-AKT in another primary human NSC line also
generated high-grade gliomas following intracranial implantation (data not shown). Thus,
p53 neutralization and AKT activation cooperate to transform these hNSCs into high-grade
gliomas with classical disease features.

Author Manuscript

To gain mechanistic insight into system-level differences between premalignant hNSCs and
their malignant derivatives, we performed transcriptomic analysis focusing on the changes of
68 stem cell-related signaling pathways from Molecular Signatures Database (MSigDB)
(Subramanian et al., 2005). Notably, gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) revealed that
upregulation of EC signaling pathway was observed in p53DN-AKT induced transformation
of hNSCs (Figures 1G and 1H). Furthermore, genome-wide chromatin immunoprecipitation
sequencing (ChIP-seq) analysis focusing on H3K27 histone modifications in core promoter
regions revealed 85 genes displaying a dynamic switch from H3K27 trimethylation (me3) to
H3K27 acetylation (ac), indicating epigenetic activation during oncogenic transformation of
hNSC (Figures 1I and S1E; Table S1). Interestingly, EC signaling pathway, but not
HEMATOPOIESIS_STEM_CELL NUMBER_LARGE_VS_TINY_UP (p > 0.14), was
significantly enriched (p< 0.05) in these genes, further highlighting the upregulation of EC
signaling pathway in glioma-relevant biological processes. Given the seminal finding that
GSCs can differentiate into ECs and participate in tumor vascularization (Ricci-Vitiani et al.,
2010; Wang et al., 2010), the above transcriptomic and epigenomic analyses prompted us to
verify EC differentiation in our system experimentally. Fluorescence-activated cell sorting
(FACS) analysis of EC markers revealed that 12.8% and 8.5% of iGSCs under NSC culture
conditions expressed VE-Cadherin (CD144) and PECAM-1 (CD31), respectively (Figure

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 22.

Hu et al.

Page 5

Author Manuscript

S1F). Moreover, these iGSCs also displayed high levels of classical EC markers and
possessed functional EC features such as fluorescent acetylated-low density lipoprotein (DiIAcLDL) uptake under EC culture conditions (Figures S1G and S1H). Consistently, we also
observed GdECs in tumors derived from p53DN-AKT-hNSCs (Figure S1I). Together, these
findings of an EC signature and phenotypic features establish that GSC can differentiate into
EC in our model system.
AKT Activation Plays a Key Role in Endothelial Lineage Differentiation of GSC

Author Manuscript

The association of AKT activation in hNSC transformation and EC signature enrichment
prompted us to directly assess the potential role of AKT in driving EC differentiation. To
that end, immunofluorescence (IF) analysis showed that NSCs expressing p53DN plus myrAKT, but not p53DN alone, expressed CD144 and CD31 (Figure S2A). Correspondingly,
FACS analysis showed that p53DN-AKT-hNSCs expressed CD133 and CD144, which
together are known to mark GSC-derived endothelial progenitor cells (Wang et al., 2010); in
contrast, p53DN-hNSCs expressed CD133 but not CD144 (Figure 2A). Finally,
pharmacological inhibition of AKT signaling with mTOR inhibitor rapamycin decreased the
percentage of CD133+/CD144+ cells in vitro. (Figure 2B).

Author Manuscript

To reinforce the link between CD133+/CD144+ cells and EC biology, p53DN-AKT-hNSCs
were sorted into CD133+/CD144− and CD133+/CD144+ subpopulations. Compared to
CD133+/CD144− cells, CD133+/CD144+ cells showed significantly higher expression levels
of CD31, CD34, TIE2, VEGFR2, and von Willebrand factor (vWF) by qRT-PCR (Figure
2C). On the functional level, culturing CD133+/CD144+ cells in EC media for 5 days
resulted in DiI-AcLDL uptake in cells expressing CD105, VEGFR2, and vWF (Figures 2D
and S2B), which was also inhibited by rapamycin (Figure S2C). Moreover, when grown in
matrigel cultures, CD133+/CD144+ cells, but not CD133+/CD144− cells, were able to form
tubular networks and displayed DiI-AcLDL uptake (Figures 2E and S2D), which was
abolished by rapamycin (Figure 2E). Importantly, transcriptomic analysis revealed that the
level of the EC signature from MSigDB exhibited a stepwise increase in these sorted cell
fractions, from CD133−/CD144− to CD133+/CD144− to CD133+/CD144+ to CD133−/
CD144+, progressing toward the signature of bona fide endothelial cells (Figure S2E; Table
S2). This stepwise differentiation process was further validated in these sorted
subpopulations by IF staining of VEGFR2 and endothelial nitric oxide synthase (eNOS),
which play important roles in vasculature biology (Förstermann and Münzel, 2006) (Figure
S2F).

Author Manuscript

We further tested whether the level of activated AKT downstream signaling in patientderived GSCs correlated with EC differentiation. Analysis of six GSC lines showed that two
lines with relatively higher pS6 expression (TS603, BT147) exhibited a higher percentage of
CD133+/CD144+ cells (Figures 2F and 2G) and showed considerably greater tube-forming
ability (Figure S2G). In contrast, three lines with lower levels of activated AKT downstream
signaling (TS543, TS576, and TS586) had lower percentages of CD133+/CD144+ cells
(Figures 2F and 2G). Enforced myr-AKT expression in these three GSC lines significantly
increased the fraction of CD133+/CD144+ cells (Figure 2H). Reciprocally, rapamycin
inhibition of AKT pathway decreased the fraction of CD133+/CD144+ cells in TS603 and

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 22.

Hu et al.

Page 6

Author Manuscript

BT147 cells (Figure 2I). Together, these results indicate that robust AKT activation plays a
key role in driving GSC differentiation with EC-like properties.
AKT Activation Upregulates WNT5A to Drive GdEC Differentiation of GSC

Author Manuscript

Given the key role of AKT activation in the transformation of hNSCs and endothelial
lineage differentiation of GSC, coupling with the association of high-AKT activation with
poor prognosis (Suzuki et al., 2010), we identified a list of genes associated with high AKT
activation from our oncogene-induced hNSC system (Table S3). To identify genes mediating
AKT-induced endothelial lineage differentiation, we intersected these high AKT-associated
genes with 85 genes displaying histone modification switch from H3K27me3 to H3K27ac,
known to play a pivotal role in lineage commitment and cell fate determination (Adam et al.,
2015). Thus, we identified eight upregulated genes (CXCL14, DLX5, DMRT3, GPR37,
MYLIP, NUDT14, TCF7, and WNT5A) that might be involved in promoting endothelial
lineage differentiation.

Author Manuscript

To explore this supposition, each gene was transduced into p53DN-hNSCs and monitored
for generation of CD133+/CD144+ cells. Compared to myr-AKT, only WNT5A and DLX5
overexpression generated a considerable percentage of CD133+/CD144+ cells in p53DNhNSCs (Figures 3A and 3B). Conversely, small hairpin RNA (shRNA)-mediated knockdown
of the eight genes showed that only WNT5A knockdown substantially impaired tubular
network formation of CD133+/CD144+ cells sorted from p53DN-AKT-hNSCs (Figures 3C
and 3D). Notably, myr-AKT also dramatically increased WNT5A expression (Figures S3A
and S3B). Furthermore, the WNT5A antagonist, BOX5, significantly inhibited the
production of CD133+/CD144+ cells in p53DN-hNSCs transduced with myr-AKT or
WNT5A (Figures 3E, S3C, and S3D). Finally, BOX5 treatment blocked tubular network
formation of CD133+/CD144+ cells sorted from p53DN-AKT-hNSCs (Figures 3F, 3G, and
S3E). Together, these results indicate that AKT-mediated upregulation ofWNT5A plays a
pivotal role in the GdEC differentiation of GSC.
Regulation of WNT5A Expression by the Opposing Actions of DLX5 and PAX6
Chromatin landscape and transcriptome comparisons between hNSCs and iGSCs established
that, in hNSCs with no WNT5A expression, the WNT5A promoter exhibited a poised
(bivalent) chromatin status defined by both H3K4me3 and H3K27me3 marks (Bernstein et
al., 2006; Figures 4A, 4B, S3A, and S3B). In contrast, the WNT5A promoter of WNT5Aexpressing iGSCs exhibited an active H3K27ac mark with concomitant loss of the repressive
H3K27me3 mark (Figures 4A and 4B). These patterns are consistent with the poised
WNT5A promoter being epigenetically activated during transformation.

Author Manuscript

To further explore the mechanisms governing the transcriptional regulation of the WNT5A
locus under AKT activation, TCGA proteomic datasets analyses (RPPA) further confirmed
the correlation between WNT5A mRNA levels and the mTOR/S6K pathway (Figure S4A).
We next identified a significant negative correlation between WNT5A expression and known
master transcription factors of NSC self-renewal and lineage determination including Gli2,
FoxG1, SOX2, PAX4/6, and HES1 in this specific context (Figure S4A). These findings
indicate that downregulating the neurogenesis TFs may be necessary for EC lineage

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 22.

Hu et al.

Page 7

Author Manuscript

differentiation of GSC. Moreover, only the PAX subclass (PAX4 and PAX6) promoter
exhibited a gain in repressive H3K27me3 mark following transition from hNSCs to iGSCs
(Figures 4C and S4B–S4G). Correspondingly, the WNT5A locus possesses PAX6 binding
motifs located in regulatory region 1 (R1), regulatory region 2 (R2), and promoter region (P)
(Figures 4A and 4B), which were further validated by ChIP-PCR in hNSCs (Figure 4D).
Consistent with implied negative regulation of PAX6 on WNT5A expression, CD133+/
CD144+ cells sorted from iGSCs showed negligible PAX6 and high WNT5A expression
compared to CD133+/CD144− cells (Figure S4H).

Author Manuscript

As noted previously, enforced DLX5 expression in p53DN-hNSCs produced CD133+/
CD144+ cells (Figures 3A and 3B). Notably, the WNT5A promoter possesses a DLX5
binding motif in close proximity to the PAX6 binding site (Figure 4B). Intriguingly, the
locus harboring DLX5 exhibited a poised pattern in hNSCs and switched to an
epigenetically activated pattern in iGSCs (Figure 4E). ChIP-PCR validated DLX5 binding to
the WNT5A promoter region in these iGSCs (Figure 4F). Finally, we solidified PAX6 and
DXL5 in the opposing regulation of WNT5A by demonstrating that enforced PAX6
expression reduced WNT5A mRNA and protein levels (Figures 4G and S4I), whereas
enforced DLX5 expression increased WNT5A mRNA and protein levels in iGSCs and
patient-derived GSCs (Figures 4H and S4J).

Author Manuscript

In line with our experimental observations, analysis of TCGA GBM gene expression and
proteomic profiles showed that WNT5A and DLX5 were positively associated, and PAX6
negatively associated, with activation of the mTOR/S6K pathway (Figure S4A). These
results support the view that both PAX6 and DLX5 are repressed and activated, respectively,
in response to AKT signaling leading to an epigenetic switch of the WNT5A locus, its
transcriptional activation in GSC, and promotion of GdEC differentiation of GSC. These
results also align with our observation that DLX5 silencing alone did not impair tubular
network formation of GdECs (Figures 3C and 3D), indicating that both the opposite actions
of DLX5 and PAX6 are necessary to regulate WNT5A-mediated GdEC differentiation of
GSC. We propose that AKT activation upregulates WNT5A, which promotes EC
proliferation and differentiation in neovascularization (Cheng et al., 2008; Masckauchán et
al., 2006; Yang et al., 2009), thus enabling GSC aberrant developmental plasticity and
differentiation into GdEC (Figures S4K and S4L).
WNT5A-Mediated Endothelial Differentiation of GSCs in Tumor Invasive Growth

Author Manuscript

To address whether WNT5A-mediated endothelial differentiation of GSCs plays a functional
role in gliomagenesis in vivo, we next employed a patient-derived GSC orthotopic tumor
model that would be more directly relevant to the human pathological condition. TS543
GSC derived tumors had higher levels of PAX6 and lower levels of pS6, WNT5A, and
DLX5 compared with GBMs derived from p53DN-AKT-hNSCs (Figure S5A). In the TS543
model, enforced WNT5A expression (WNT5A-TS543) generated tumors with more rapid
growth and shorter latency relative to Vector-TS543 controls (Figures S5B–S5D). WNT5ATS543 gliomas were highly hemorrhagic (Figure 5A), showed increased microvascular
density (MVD) and exhibited increased expression of endothelial markers (Figures 5A, S5E,
and S5F). WNT5A-TS543 gliomas were strikingly more invasive, generating many distant

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 22.

Hu et al.

Page 8

Author Manuscript

satellite lesions in the peritumoral brain parenchyma that were evident on histologic
examination (Figure S5G) and confirmed by human-specific antigen (TRA-1-85/CD147) IF
staining (Figures 5B and S5H). Finally, WNT5A promoted endothelial differentiation in
vivo as evidenced by increased CD34+/TRA-1-85+ GdECs in the intratumoral and
peritumoral regions of gliomas derived from WNT5A-TS543 (Figures 5C and 5D). Of note,
there was a higher number of GdECs in the peritumoral regions compared to intratumoral
regions (Figures 5C–5E). Thus, WNT5A drives GdEC differentiation, which is associated
with an increase in tumor neovascularization and an increase in peritumoral satellite lesions,
which may provide a microenvironment to promote the growth of invading glioma cells
throughout the brain parenchyma.

Author Manuscript

To ascertain the tumor biological significance of these WNT5A-mediated phenotypes, the
herpes simplex virus thymidine kinase gene (HSVTK)/ganciclovir (GCV) cell ablation
system was used to selectively eliminate GdECs in vivo. To that end, we constructed a
vector encoding an HSVTK-GFP fusion protein under control of the CD144 promoter
(hereafter, pCD144-GFP) (Figure S5I). Following pCD144-GFP transduction into TS543
and WNT5A-TS543 GSCs, FACS detected 0.61% and 6.98% GFP+ cells, respectively
(Figures S5J and S5K). Next, 1 week following orthotopic implantation of pCD144-GFPtransduced WNT5A-TS543 GSCs, mice were treated with GCV resulting in increased
apoptosis in pCD144-GFP+ GdECs relative to controls (Figure S5L). Tumors from GCVtreated animals showed overall reduction in intratumoral MVD detected by CD34 staining
and a modest increase in mouse survival (Figures 5F, 5G, and S5M). Notably, while the
depletion of GdECs by GCV showed similar intratumoral size, it dramatically decreased
satellite lesions and invasiveness in peritumoral areas (Figures 5H and S5N), supporting a
key role for GdECs in tumor invasive growth.

Author Manuscript

WNT5A-Mediated GdECs Recruitment of Non-transformed ECs Promotes GSCs SelfRenewal and Invasive Growth

Author Manuscript

We next investigated the role of GdECs in peritumoral satellite lesion formation with a
specific emphasis on whether these peritumoral satellite lesions might support the growth of
invading glioma cells in the periphery. We observed that the higher frequency of GdECs in
tumors derived from pCD144-GFP-trans-duced WNT5A-TS543 correlated with higher
MVD. Moreover, host mouse ECs (CD34+/TRA-1-85−) were in close proximity to GdECs
in peritumoral areas (Figures 6A, 6B, and S6A–S6C), raising the possibility that GdECs
may recruit host ECs to form peritumoral satellite lesions. To assess this possibility, we
performed transwell assays using GdECs sorted from pCD144-GFP-transduced WNT5ATS543 and GSC TS603 (endogenous WNT5A), respectively, and demonstrated increased
recruitment of human brain microvascular endothelial cells (HBMECs) compared with nonGdECs sorted from these GSCs (Figures 6C and 6D). Furthermore, WNT5A mRNA levels
were higher in GdECs subpopulations than non-GdEC subpopulations sorted from pCD144GFP-transduced WNT5A-TS543 and GSC TS603 cultures (Figure 6E). We next determined
whether WNT5A directly mediates EC recruitment. In the transwell assay, recombinant
WNT5A (rWNT5A), but not rWNT3A, acted as a chemoattractant and significantly
recruited HBMECs, which was drastically impaired in the presence of WNT5A antagonist
BOX5 (Figure 6F). Importantly, WNT5A increased HBMECs proliferation and survival in

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 22.

Hu et al.

Page 9

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

serum-free medium (Figure S6D). Together, these results indicate that GdECs-derived
WNT5A can stimulate EC recruitment and proliferation. Furthermore, in GBM sections,
pCD144-GFP+ GdECs were consistently in close proximity to host ECs (CD34+/
TRA-1-85−) in the peritumoral satellite lesions; and the larger satellite lesions possessed
greater numbers of GdECs and mouse host ECs (Figure 6G). Additionally, GCV-mediated
depletion of GdECs resulted in diminished satellite lesion formation (Figure 5H), although
individual SOX2 positive GSCs were still present throughout peritumoral area (data not
shown). These observations suggest that GdECs are required for the maintenance and
expansion of the peritumoral satellite lesions, prompting us to speculate that GdECs recruit
host ECs, which may act synergistically to provide a microenvironment that supports the
growth and survival of GSCs in these peritumoral areas. To test this hypothesis, we audited
tumor sphere formation to check proliferation and self-renewal of GSCs in the presence of
GdEC + HBMEC co-cultures. Strikingly, only GdEC/HBMEC co-cultures, but not GdEC or
HBMEC cultures, increased sphere formation of GSC TS543 and TS603 (Figures 6H and
S6E). These co-cultures also increased soft agar colony formation of TS543 and TS603
(Figures S6F and S6G). These observations gain added significance in light of emerging
evidence for the crucial role of ECs in NSC/GSC niche formation that supports NSC/GSC
growth and survival (Calabrese et al., 2007; Shen et al., 2004; Zhu et al., 2011). Together,
these observations support our model that GSC differentiation into GdEC stimulates host EC
recruitment via WNT5A to create a vascular-like niche supporting GSC growth and survival,
thereby promoting tumor cells growth beyond the primary tumor microenvironment.
WNT5A-Mediated GdEC in Human GBM Recurrence

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

To investigate the clinical relevance of our findings, we asked whether the WNT5Amediated process of GdEC biology is operative in GBM patient specimens. First, we
documented that WNT5A mRNA levels were significantly higher in GBM tumors than in
non-tumor brain tissues (Figure S7A). Second, we documented the presence of GdECs
(SOX2+/CD31+, SOX2+/CD105+, or CD133+/CD31+) and established a significant
correlation between high WNT5A expression and increasing frequency of GdECs in human
GBMs (Figures 7A, S7B, and S7C). Moreover, GdECs were noted to situate close to host
ECs (SOX2−/CD31+, SOX2−/CD105+, or CD133−/CD31+) (Figure 7A), which was verified
by objective proximity measurements of GdECs and host EC in tumor sections that were
double-stained (immunohistochemistry [IHC]) and assessed by an automated quantitative
pathology imaging system (Figures 7B and 7C). To further verify these findings in largescale human GBM datasets, we generated a GdEC signature by integrated analyses of
transcriptomic profiling from our de novo GBM model and EC signature from MSigDB,
which included genes upregulated in both neoplastic and the EC signaling process (Tables
S2 and S4). Based on 364 primary IDHwt GBM from TCGA datasets, we found that both
GdEC and EC signatures were positively associated with WNT5A mRNA expression
(Figures 7D and S7D). Together, these human GBM data strongly align with our
experimental findings of WNT5A-directed GdEC differentiation and associated host EC
recruitment in GBM.
As shown in previous studies (Ricci-Vitiani et al., 2010; Wang et al., 2010), we observed
that GdEC (SOX2+/CD31+) was incorporated into blood vessels in human GBM tumor

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 22.

Hu et al.

Page 10

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

sections (Figure S7E). Importantly, we observed (1) peritumoral satellite lesions in GBM
patient samples, (2) GdECs (CD31+/SOX2+) in close proximity to host ECs (CD31+/
SOX2−) in these structures, (3) larger satellite lesions possessed greater numbers of GdECs
and host ECs (Figures 7E and 7F). To investigate whether WNT5A expression is associated
with peritumoral satellite lesions and patient outcome, 14 primary GBMs with progressionfree survival (PFS) information were stained for WNT5A, revealing that higher levels of
WNT5A were associated with increased number of peritumoral satellite lesions and with a
tendency to develop recurrent tumors with a shorter PFS (Figures 7G and S7F). Strikingly,
using transcriptomic profiling from a previous study (Sottoriva et al., 2013), we found that
WNT5A and GdEC signature are significantly higher in the peritumoral regions compared
with matched intratumoral regions for GBM patients (Figures 7H and S7G). Using another
RNA-seq dataset from previous study (Gill et al., 2014), we observed a dramatic increase of
WNT5A expression and GdEC signature in nonenhancing (NE) regions versus contrastenhancing (CE) regions from 27 different GBM patients (Figures S7H and S7I). These
findings reinforce the key role of WNT5A and GdEC in the peritumoral disease and support
the mechanism of their cooperative role in disease recurrence. Furthermore, multiple
variable COX analysis clearly demonstrates that WNT5A is an independent prognostic
factor for PFS in GBM patients (Figure 7I; Tables S5 and S6).

Author Manuscript

To validate WNT5A/GdEC in tumor recurrence, 14 paired primary/recurrent GBMs tumor
sections were immunohistochemically stained and showed significantly higher levels of
WNT5A and CD31 (marker for GdEC and EC) in recurrent tumors compared to their paired
primary tumors (Figures 7J, S7J, and S7K). Furthermore, the significantly higher frequency
(p = 5.5e-7) of GdECs at recurrence was systematically and accurately identified by an
automated quantitative pathology imaging system (Figure 7K). Most importantly,
comprehensive transcriptome analysis on 81 paired primary/recurrent IDHwt GBMs
validated increased WNT5A expression and GdEC signature in recurrent GBMs compared
to paired primary GBMs (Figures 7L and S7L). Pairwise comparisons also displayed the
strong association of both GdEC and EC signature with WNT5A in recurrent GBMs
(Figures 7M and S7M). Collectively, these data strongly support our experimental findings
that WNT5A-mediated GdEC differentiation contributes to peritumoral satellite lesion
formation and tumor recurrence in human GBM (Figure S7N).

Discussion

Author Manuscript

In this study, we generated a de novo human GBM model enabling precise comparison of
chromatin and transcriptomic changes in the malignant transformation of human NSCs into
GSCs. Our efforts to understand the mechanisms governing GSC hallmark features and their
contributions to GBM's clinical properties resulted in identification of the opposing actions
of DLX5 activation and PAX6 repression of WNT5A transcription, which, in turn, drives a
differentiation program producing GdECs. Together with recruited host ECs, these GdECs
support glioma cell growth and invasion in the surrounding brain parenchyma—tumor
biological properties that are intimately associated with glioma recurrence in patients.
Transcriptional regulatory networks known to regulate stem cell plasticity and lineage
determination under physiological conditions are shown here to be hijacked to mediate

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 22.

Hu et al.

Page 11

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

GdEC differentiation of GSC in gliomagenesis. Specifically, our identification and
functional validation of WNT5A in this process is consistent with previous work showing
that WNT5A can promote embryonic stem cell differentiation into EC lineage during normal
vascular development, and can regulate EC proliferation, migration, and survival in
angiogenesis (Cheng et al., 2008; Masckauchán et al., 2006; Yang et al., 2009). Interestingly,
PAX6 can function as a tumor suppressor and inhibit angiogenesis and invasion in glioma
(Mayes et al., 2006; Zhou et al., 2005). Furthermore, DLX5 has been shown to regulate
WNT5A expression in CNS development and DLX5 expression has been observed in
CD133+ GBM cells (Liu et al., 2009; Paina et al., 2011). Finally, AKT enhances protein
stability and transcriptional activity of DLX5 (Jeong et al., 2011); and AKT activation also
upregulates CCCTC binding factor, which can epigenetically repress PAX6 transcription via
promoter methylation (Gao et al., 2007, 2011). Collectively, these reports along with our
findings, strongly substantiate a role of the AKT-DLX5/PAX6-WNT5A axis in regulation of
aberrant developmental oncobiology, which plays a key role in GBM's lethal
pathophysiology (Figures S4K and S4L).

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

The frequency and function of GSC differentiation into GdEC have been a source of
controversy in the GBM field (Cheng et al., 2013; Ricci-Vitiani et al., 2010; Rodriguez et al.,
2012; Soda et al., 2011; Wang et al., 2010). Our work provides reinforcing evidence of this
phenomenon and expands our understanding of the molecular underpinnings and tumor
biological relevance of GdECs. Specifically, as a result of AKT activation, GdECs produce
WNT5A resulting in recruitment and proximal association of host ECs, which, in turn,
promotes distant satellite lesion formation and glioma cell invasive growth. The sources of
host ECs in our model remain to be determined and may include circulating endothelial cells
and bone-marrow-derived endothelial progenitor cells (Boer et al., 2014; Folkins et al.,
2009), in additional to a dense network of microvasculature within the brain. Importantly,
we found that GdECs not only recruit host ECs, but also increase their proliferation in a
WNT5A-dependent manner, a finding that provides a rational explanation for the previous
observation of robust neovascularization yet low frequency of GdECs integration into tumor
vessels.(Rodriguez et al., 2012). GSCs enrichment has been observed in perivascular and
hypoxia niche, which has been shown to maintain GSC multipotency and tumor initiation
potential as well as tumor progression, therapeutic resistance, and recurrence (Calabrese et
al., 2007; Lathia et al., 2011). However, little is known about how GSCs are maintained
outside of these native niches in the peritumoral regions, which can drive disease recurrence
following surgery and radiotherapy. Our in vitro and in vivo findings support a model
whereby GdECs play an instructive role in establishing a vascular-like niche for GSCs
maintenance and growth via WNT5A-mediated recruitment of existing ECs. In particular,
we noted that GdECs recruit ECs within very small cell clusters (Figures 6G and 7F), and
thus the initiation of neovascularization in GBM may occur prior to the hyperplasia to
neoplasia transition (Folkman et al., 1989; Hanahan and Folkman, 1996) and likely
independent of hypoxia in these peritumoral areas. Importantly, we observe that GdEC + EC
co-cultures are able to enhance GSC self-renewal, which supports their cooperative role in
supporting distal tumor invasive growth, hence tumor recurrence.
Clinically, disease recurrence is the sine qua non of GBM with tumor re-emergence typically
within a few centimeters of the primary tumor bed following optimal multi-modality
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 22.

Hu et al.

Page 12

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

treatment (Giese et al., 2003). Based on comprehensive analysis using human GBMs
specimens and datasets, our study establishes a strong correlation among elevated levels of
WNT5A and GdEC signature, peritumoral satellite lesions, and tumor recurrence, prompting
us to speculate that WNT5A-mediated EC differentiation of GSC and satellite lesion
formation provide a nurturing tumor microenvironment in the brain parenchyma. In this
light, it is worth noting that, while bevacizumab has been approved as a single-agent for
recurrent GBM, patients experience only transient benefit and develop highly infiltrative
tumors (de Groot et al., 2010; Ferrara et al., 2004). Thus, it would be interesting to explore
whether bevacizumab increases WNT5A-mediated endothelial lineage differentiation
resulting in these refractory phenotypes. Notably, a previous study showed that GSCs
differentiation into ECs failed to be blocked by anti-VEGF inhibitors and that GdECs were
increased following VEGF receptor inhibitor treatment in mouse GBM (Soda et al., 2011).
On the basis of these clinical and experimental observations, together with mechanistic
findings of this study, we propose the therapeutic strategy of targeting WNT5A-mediated
GSCs differentiation into ECs and GdECs recruitment of exiting ECs (Figure S7N). This
strategy should ameliorate the outcome of GBM patients undergoing VEGF therapy, by
limiting tumor neovascularization, invasiveness, and disease recurrence.

Contact for Reagent and Resource Sharing
Further information and requests for reagents may be directed to, and will be fulfilled by the
corresponding author Ronald A. DePinho (rdepinho@mdanderson.org).

Experimental Model And Subject Details
Cell Lines and Cell Culture

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

The c-myc-immortalized human neural progenitor cells (ReNcell) were purchased from
Millipore (EMD Millipore, Billerica, MA). Another human neural stem cell line (NSC) was
derived from 18-week gestation fetal brain tissue that was provided by Dr. Volney L. Sheen
(BIDMC, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA), which was immortalized by c-MYC
(pWZL-Blast-MYC, Addgene). Patient-derived glioma stem cells (GSCs) were provided by
Dr. Cameron W. Brennan (Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY, USA)
and by Dr. Keith L. Ligon (Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA, USA). All NSCs and
GSCs were cultured in NSC proliferation media (Millipore Corporation, Billerica, MA) with
20 ng/ml EGF and 20 ng/ml bFGF. Human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs) and
human brain microvascular endothelial cells (HBMECs) were purchased from ScienCell and
Neuromics and were cultured in endothelial cell media (ECM, Cat#1001, ScienCell;
MED001, Neuromics).The 293T packaging cells from ATCC were cultured in DMEM with
10% FBS.
Mice and Animal Housing
Female ICR SCID mice at 3-4 weeks age were purchased from Taconic Biosciences. Mice
were grouped by 5 animals in large plastic cages and were maintained under pathogen-free
conditions. All animal experiments were performed with the approval of MD Anderson
Cancer Center's Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC).

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 22.

Hu et al.

Page 13

Intracranial Xenograft Tumor Models

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Female SCID mice were anesthetized and placed into stereotactic apparatus equipped with a
z axis (Stoelting). A small hole was bored in the skull 0.5 mm anterior and 3.0 mm lateral to
the bregma using a dental drill. Cells (2 × 105 in Figure 1C; 200-200,000 in Figure S1C) in 5
μl Hanks Balanced Salt Solution were injected into the right caudate nucleus 3 mm below
the surface of the brain using a 10 μL Hamilton syringe with an unbeveled 30-gauge needle.
Alternatively, mice were bolted before the intracranial implantation at MD Anderson's Brain
Tumor Center Animal Core. To install guide screw, animals were anesthetized by
intraperitoneal injection with ketamine/xylazine solution (200 mg ketamine and 20 mg
xylazine in 17 mL of saline) at a dosage of 0.15 mg/10 g body weight. The plastic screw was
rotated into a small drill hole made 2.5 mm lateral and 1mm anterior to the bregma and the
central hole of the guide screw was closed by placing a cross-shaped stylet inside it. After
one week recovery, mice were grouped by four or five animal for cells implantation. The
cells (5 × 105 in Figure S5D; 1 × 104 in Figure S5M) were injected in 5 μl Hanks Balanced
Salt Solution. Animals were followed daily for the development of tumors. Mice with
neurological deficits or moribund appearance were sacrificed. Brains were removed using
transcardial perfusion with 4% paraformaldehyde (PFA) and were fixed in formalin or postfixed in 4% PFA and processed for paraffin embedded or OCT frozen tissue blocks.

Method Details
Lentivirus Production and Transduction of Target Cells

Author Manuscript

The expression vectors (p53 dominant negative-p53DN, myr-AKT, CXCL14, DLX5,
DMRT3, GPR37, MYLIP, NUDT14, TCF7, WNT5A, and PAX6) were generated by cloning
the respective open reading frame (ORF) into pLenti6.3 vector using Gateway Cloning
system. The pLKO.1 shRNAs were purchased from Sigma. Gene expression was validated
by qRT-PCR or immunoblotting in lentivirus infected target cells. Lentiviruses were
produced in 293T cells with packaging system (pCMVR8.74, pMD2.G, Addgene) as per
Vendor's instruction.
Immunoblotting (IB), Immunohistochemistry (IHC) and Immunofluorescence (IF)

Author Manuscript

For immunoblotting, cells were harvested, washed with phosphate buffered saline, lysed in
RIPA buffer (150 μM NaCl, 50 μM Tris [pH 8.0], 1.0% Igepal CA-630, 0.5% sodium
deoxycholate, 0.1% sodium dodecyl sulfate [SDS]; Sigma) with protease inhibitor cocktail
tablet complete mini (Roche Diagnostics), phosphatase inhibitor cocktail 2 (Sigma) and 1
μM DTT, and centrifuged at 10,000 × g at 4°C for 15 min. Protein lysates were subjected to
SDS-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis on 4%–12% gradient polyacrylamide gel (NuPage,
Thermo Fischer Scientific), transferred onto nitrocellulose membranes which were incubated
with indicated primary antibodies, washed, and probed with HRP-conjugated secondary
antibodies. For IHC staining, brain sections were incubated with indicated primary
antibodies for 1 hr at room temperature (RT) or overnight at 4°C after deparaffinization,
rehydration, antigen retrieval, quenching of endogenous peroxidase and blocking. The
sections were incubated with horseradish peroxidase (HRP)-con-jugated polymer (DAKO)
for 40 min and then Diaminobenzidine using Ultravision DAB Plus Substrate Detection
System (Thermo Fischer Scientific) for 1-10 min at RT, followed by hematoxylin staining.
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 22.

Hu et al.

Page 14

Author Manuscript

For IF staining, OCT frozen brain sections were thawed at RT for 30 min, rinsed and
rehydrated with phosphate buffered saline 3 times. After blocking with PBS buffer
containing 10% FBS, 1% BSA and 0.3% Triton, the sections were incubated with indicated
primary antibodies overnight at 4°C. The samples were then incubated with speciesappropriate donkey secondary antibodies coupled to AlexaFluor dyes (488, 555,568 or 594,
647, Invitrogen) for 1 hr at RT. VECTASHIELD with DAPI (Vector Laboratories) was used
to mount coverslips. The slides were scanned using the digital slide scanner, Pannoramic
250 Flash II (3DHISTECH, Ltd.) and images analyzed by Pannoramic viewer.
Flow Cytometry and FACS Sorting

Author Manuscript

Cells were harvested and suspended in ice-cold PBS with 1% BSA and 2mM EDTA. After
incubation with FcR Blocking Reagent (Miltenyi Biotec), cells were stained by fluorescently
conjugated antibodies and incubated for 10 min in the dark in the refrigerator (2–8°C).
Antibodies include CD31-APC, CD144-FITC, CD144-APC, CD133-PE, IgG-APC, IgGFITC, and IgG-PE from Miltenyi Biotec. The stained cells or GFP-labeled cells were
analyzed in a BD Fortessa analyzer. FACS sorting was performed using the BD FACSAria
cell sorter. Data were analyzed using FlowJo software.
Chromatin Immunoprecipitation Sequencing (ChIP-Seq) and ChIP-qPCR

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Chromatin Immunoprecipitation (ChIP) was performed on early passage cell lines, hNSCs
and three tumor neurosphere lines derived from hNSC transduced with p53DN and myrAKTas previously described (Shang et al., 2000). Briefly, cells (∼2 × 106 cells per ChIP)
were cross-linked in 1% formaldehyde solution, re-suspended, and lysed. Cell lysates were
solubilized, and cross-linked chromatin was sheared to a size range of 100 to 300 bases
using a Bioruptor Sonicator (Diagenode, UCD-200). Solubilized chromatin was diluted 10fold in ChIP dilution buffer and incubated at 4 °C with 2 μg antibodies against specific
histone modification or transcription factors. The following antibodies were used in ChIP
assays: anti-H3K27me3, anti-H3K27ac, anti-H3K4me3, anti-H3K4me1, anti-H3K4me, antiPAX6, anti-DLX5, normal rabbit IgG and normal goat IgG. After ChIP, samples were
washed, and bound complexes were eluted and reverse cross-linked. Multiplexed and
barcoded sequencing libraries for ChIPed DNA and Input DNA were generated with
NEBNext Library Prep kit according to the manufacturer's instructions, and then were
sequenced by Illumina HiSeq 2000. Histone modification peaks and transcription factorbound regions were identified as genomic regions with a significant read enrichment in
ChIPed reads over the Input reads analyzed by the Model-based Analysis of ChIP-Seq
(MACS) tool (Zhang et al., 2008). For ChIP-qPCR assays, the fold enrichment of ChIPed
DNA relative to input DNA at a given genomic site was determined by comparative CT (ΔΔ
CT) method using Power SYBR Green PCR Master Mix (Applied Biosystems) according to
the manufacturer's protocol. An 18S rRNA genomic region was used for normalization. The
primers used for ChIP-qPCR are listed in Table S7.
RNA Isolation, qRT-PCR and DNA Microarray
RNA was isolated with RNeasy Mini Kit (QIAGEN), and then used for first-strand cDNA
synthesis using random primers and Super-ScriptIII Reverse Transcriptase (Invitrogen).
qRT–PCR was performed using Power SYBR Green PCR Master Mix (Applied
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 22.

Hu et al.

Page 15

Author Manuscript

Biosystems). Primers are listed in Table S7. The relative expression of genes was normalized
using ribosomal protein L39 (RPL39) as a housekeeping gene.
Early passage cell lines, including hNSC, hNSC-p53DN, two independent lines for hNSCP53DN-AKT, three tumor neurosphere lines derived from hNSC-P53DN-AKT (iGSC-1,
iGSC-2, and iGSC-3), and FACS-sorting cells were grown in NSC proliferation media with
EGF and bFGF for 24 hr. RNA was isolated using Trizol (Invitrogen) and the RNeasy mini
kit (QIAGEN). Gene expression profiling was performed using the Affymetrix U133 Plus
2.0 Array at DFCI and MD Anderson's Sequencing and Microarray core facility.
Anchorage-Independent Growth Assays, Transwell Assay and Matrigel-based Tube
Formation Assay

Author Manuscript

Anchorage-independent growth assays were performed in triplicate in 6-well plates or in 48well plates. Indicated cells (2 × 104 or 1 × 103 per well) were seeded in NSC proliferation
media with EGF and bFGF containing 0.4% low-melting agarose on the top of bottom agar
containing 1% low-melting agarose NSC proliferation media with EGF and FGF. After 14 –
21 days, colonies were stained with Iodonitrotetrazolium chloride (Sigma) and counted.

Author Manuscript

Transwell assays were performed in BD FluoroBlok 96-multiwell insert systems (3.0 μm
pore sizes) as per manufacturer's protocol (BD biosciences). HBMECs were seeded in
transwell inserts at 1 × 104 cells/well in EC media overnight. After 4 hr starvation in EC
basal media at 37°C, 5% CO2 incubator, the inserts were transferred into the basal chambers
containing chemoattractant in NSC media as indicated. After 24 hr incubation, the inserts
were transferred into a second 96-well plate containing 4 μg/mL Calcein AM (BD
biosciences) in DPBS. Incubate for 1 hr at 37°C, 5% CO2, fluorescence of invaded cells was
read at wavelengths of 494/517 nm (Ex/Em) on fluorescent plate reader. Neurosphere
formation was performed by transwell assay in 24-well plate by culturing sorted GdECs or
non-GdECs with HBMECs (1 × 104 of indicated cells) in transwell inserts containing NSC
media, and GSC being cultured in basal chamber at 1 cell per microliter (500 μl/well) in
NSC media. GSC neurospheres were counted after 7 days.

Author Manuscript

EC tubular formation was assessed by growth factor reduced Matrigel assay kit (BD
Biosciences) in three-dimensional (3D) culture according to the manufacturer's instructions.
The CD133+/CD144+ cells sorted from p53DN-AKT-hNSCs were infected by lentivirus
carrying shRNA targeting the indicated genes (Figures 3C and 3D) or were treated with
BOX5 (100μM) (Figures 3F and 3G). Cells were harvested at 48 hr post-infection or
treatment and then were cultured in growth factor reduced Matrigel. Quantification was
performed after 8-12 hr. To quantify the tubular formation, branch points (3 or more tubular
branches emanating from a point) were analyzed with an inverted microscope at 40×
magnification and counted in 5 random fields per well.
Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI)
MRI studies were performed on the 4.7 T Biospec USR MRI system (Bruker Biospin MRI,
Billerica, MA) in MD Anderson's Small Animal Cancer Imaging Research Facility. Animals
were anesthetized with 1.5%–5% isoflurane inhalation anesthesia. Images of brains were
acquired using T2-weighted axial and coronal Rapid Acquisition with Relaxation
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 22.

Hu et al.

Page 16

Author Manuscript

Enhancement (RARE) scans with TR = 3000 ms, TE = 57 ms, RARE factor = 12, 4
Averages, 156 μm in-plane resolution, 4 cm × 3 cm FOV, 0.75 mm slice thickness and 0.25
mm slice gap. Tumor volume was measured by contouring the lesions in the T2-weighted
images using ImageJ software (National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA). The
total tumor volume is the sum of the in-plane tumor volumes and the sum of the tumor
volumes within the slice gaps, which was estimated by multiplying the mean of the
contoured areas on adjacent slices by the width of the slice gap.
Selective Targeting of GdECs in GBM xenografts by GCV/HSVTK system

Author Manuscript

To generate the plasmid of CD144 (VE-Cadherin)-promoter-driven expression of HSVTK
plus GFP, the original promoter in pLVX-ZsGreen1-N1 (Clontech) was replaced by a PCR
amplified 1.5 kb genomic region of human CD144 promoter. The fragment coding HSVTKGFP amplified from cEF.tk-GFP (Addgene) by PCR was inserted into pLVX-ZsGreen1-N1
downstream of CD144 promoter to generate pCD144-HSVTK-GFP, in which the region of
ZsGreen was removed and subsequently validated by sequencing. GSCs were transduced
with pCD144-HSVTK-GFP though lentiviral infection and then transplanted into brains of
SCID mice. Tumor-bearing animals were administrated GCV (InvoGen) at 80mg/kg/day or
PBS daily through intraperitoneal injection. The xenograft tumors were collected for IHC
and IF analyses. To detect GCV-induced apoptosis in GdECs expressing HSVTK, TUNEL
assay was performed according to manufacturer's instructions (Trevigene).
Identification of Histone H3K27 Status Switch Genes and AKT Activation Signature Genes

Author Manuscript

Genomic regions within 2 kilobases upstream and downstream of gene transcriptional start
sites (TSSs) were examined for histone modification peaks based on Model-based Analysis
of ChIP-Seq (MACS). Histone H3K27 status switch genes were identified as a group of
genes with dynamic histone modification changes of H3K27me3 and H3K27ac in iGSCs
compared with hNSCs. AKT activation signature genes (417) were identified based on gene
expression profile comparison: at least 2-fold changes for 3 independent tumor spheres lines
derived from p53DN-AKT-hNSCs (iGSC-1, iGSC-2, and iGSC-3) versus hNSCs; two
independent cell lines for p53DN-AKT-hNSCs (different levels of AKT activation) versus
hNSCs; one line for p53DN-AKT-hNSCs (higher AKT levels) versus the other line for
p53DN-AKT-hNSCs (lower AKT levels).
Clinical Datasets and Pathological Analysis

Author Manuscript

TCGA GBM datasets include gene mutations, copy number, gene expression, proteomics
(RPPA), tumor subtypes and patient survival information (https://tcga-data.nci.nih.gov).
Preprocessed gene expression profile and annotation of TCGA GBM samples were obtained
from GlioVis. For the published datasets of human GBMs used in this study, gene
expression profiles data for 9 pairs of intratumor and peritumor regions from GBM patients
were obtained from ArrayExpress Archive (accession nos. E-MTAB-1215 and EMTAB-1129)(Sottoriva et al., 2013); each gene mRNA expression was normalized to NES
in Figures 7H and S7G. RNA-Seq data for 39 samples from contrast-enhancing (CE) regions
and 36 samples from non-enhancing (NE) regions from 27 different glioma patients were
obtained from Gene Expression Ominbus (accession number GSE59612) (Gill et al., 2014);
each gene mRNA expression was normalized to NES in Figures S7H and S7I.
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 22.

Hu et al.

Page 17

Author Manuscript

RNA-Seq data for 124 (81 pairs with IDHwt and pairwise profiles on the same platform for
analysis in this study) paired primary and recurrent gliomas including both TCGA and inhouse datasets were provided by Dr. Roel Verhaak's lab (MD Anderson). Frozen GBM
tissues (n = 12) were obtained from TCGA collections and 10 primary GBMs (FFPE) blocks
were obtained from Dr. Erik Sulman's lab. The paired primary/recurrent GBM slides (FFPE)
for IHC were provided by the first Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical University,
Nanjing, China and Guangdong 999 Brain Hospital, Guangzhou, China. The pathological
analysis of human GBMs was guided by board-certified neuropathologists. Aperio
ImageScope and InForm software were used for identification and quantification. All human
GBM tissue samples were analyzed with IRB-approval protocol (PA16-0408).

Quantification and Statistical Analysis
Author Manuscript

For quantification of microvessel density (MVD), images of tumor sections with IF or IHC
staining were captured by using the digital slide scanner, Pannoramic 250 Flash II.
Measurement was performed in a single area of intratumoral or peritumoral tumor (∼0.178
mm2 in Pannoramic view) representative of the highest microvessel density (“hot spot”).
The CD34 positive cells or micro-vessels were counted. Five fields in each tumor were
randomly selected for MVD analysis and statistical analysis was performed by using Welch's
t test of Graphpad Prism6.

Author Manuscript

Quantification of GdECs by co-localization analysis using Caliper Vectra Image System and
InForm software. Briefly, the IF or IHC (double staining-Wrap red and DAB) stained slides
were loaded onto the Vectra slide scanner. Vectra Nuance 3.0.0 software was used to build
the spectral libraries using 1 single chromogen only (e.g., DAPI, AlexaFluor-488,
AlexaFluor-594, DAB, Wrap red, hematoxylin). Nuance multispectral image cubes were
acquired with 20 × objective lens (0.5 micron/pixel) and using a full CCD frame at 1 × 1
binning (1360 × 1024 pixels) for analysis. For GdECs in IF stained xenograft tumors (Figure
5D), at least 3 image fields from 3 tumors with intratumoral and peritumoral areas were used
for automated co-localization analysis using InForm software. Statistical analysis was
performed by using unpaired Student's t test. For GdECs in IHC stained human GBM
tumors sections (Figure 7K), 150 random images fields from 5 primary or recurrent GBM
tumors were used for automated co-localization analysis using InForm software. Statistical
analysis was performed by using Wilcoxon rank test.

Author Manuscript

To quantify cell distance in xenograft tumor sections (Figure 6B), the IF stained images
were captured using the digital slide scanner, Pannoramic 250 Flash II and cell distance was
measured manually using Pannoramic viewer. GdECs (GFP+) were first located in the
peritumoral regions (low cell density) and then the nearest host EC (CD34+/TRA-1-85-)
within ∼30μm of each respective GdEC was defined. The nearest tumor cells
(TRA-1-85+/GFP-) to the defined host EC was then located. At least 5 fields in peritumoral
areas for each tumor (n = 3) were selected for distance measurements. Statistical analysis
was performed by using Welch'st test of Graph-pad Prism6. To quantify cell distance in
human GBM specimens (Figure 7C), 300 image fields from 10 human GBM tumors with
IHC (double staining-Wrap red and DAB) staining were captured using Caliper Vectra
Image System and analyzed data were generated using InForm software. GdECs were first

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 22.

Hu et al.

Page 18

Author Manuscript

located and the nearest host EC within 40 pixels (∼28μm) of each respective GdEC was
defined. The nearest GSC (SOX2+/CD31-) to the defined host EC (SOX2-/CD31+) was then
located for calculation by using R package. Statistical analysis was performed by using
Wilcoxon rank test.

Author Manuscript

To test the significance of overlap between stem cell pathways/genesets that compiled from
MsigDB v5.1 and 85 genes with H3K27 acetylation (epigenetic activation), hypergeometric
test was performed by using R package. P value for significance was given by 1-phyper (X,
M, N, 85), where X is the size of overlapped genes, M is the number of genes in the stem
cell related pathways for testing, and N is the number of genes that do not in stem cell
related pathways. Based on this formula, the pathway of HEMATOPOIESIS_STEM_CELL
NUMBER_LARGE_VS_TINY_UP was not significantly enriched (p value of
hypergeometric test of overlap > 0.14), however, EC signaling pathway was significantly
enriched (p value of hypergeometric test of overlap < 0.05) in these 85 genes (Figure 1)
Statistical information including n, mean and statistical significance values are indicated in
the text or the figure legends. Animal survivals were analyzed using Log-rank test and cell
distance and MVD were analyzed using Welch's t test based on Graphpad Prism6.
Comparisons of cell growth, colony formation in anchorage-independent growth assays,
tubular formation, transwell assay, neurosphere formation, and gene expression by qRT-PCR
were performed using the unpaired Student's t test. Error bars in the experiments represent
standard deviation (SD) of the mean values from either independent experiments or
independent samples. All other statistical analyses were performed using R package
(Version 3.2.5), and the detailed information about statistical methods were specified in
figures/tables.

Author Manuscript

Data and Software Availability
Data Resources
The gene expression profile by microarray and the histone landscape by ChIP-Seq in this
paper have been deposited in NCBI GEO: GSE85615 and GSE86624.

Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.

Acknowledgments
Author Manuscript

The authors thank Dr. Raghu Kalluri for critical reading and comments; Dr. Keith L. Ligon for initial assistance
with histopathological analysis and providing GSCs lines; Drs. Colin Watts, Andrea Sottoriva, and Sara G.M.
Piccirillo for providing detailed information about their published datasets of gene expression profile; Verlene K.
Henry and her staff for their help in mouse brain implantation; Keith A. Michel and Charles V. Kingsley for
assistance with MRI imaging and analysis; Shan Jiang for excellent mouse husbandry and care; Dr. Jared K. Burks
for assistance with confocal image and PE Vectra system; Dr. Karen C. Dwyer and her staff for assistance with flow
cytometer; Sequencing & Non-Coding RNA program and Sequencing and Microarray Facility at MDACC provided
sequencing service. This research is supported by UCSF Brain Tumor SPORE Tissue Bank P50 CA097257 (J.J.P.),
NIH 2P50CA127001 (YAW), 5P01CA095616 (R.A.D. and L.C.), the Ben and Catherine Ivy Foundation Research
Award (2009, R.A.D. and L.C.), and Clayton Foundation (RAD). The core facilities are supported by P30CA16672.

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 22.

Hu et al.

Page 19

Author Manuscript

References

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Adam RC, Yang H, Rockowitz S, Larsen SB, Nikolova M, Oristian DS, Polak L, Kadaja M, Asare A,
Zheng D, Fuchs E. Pioneer factors govern super-enhancer dynamics in stem cell plasticity and
lineage choice. Nature. 2015; 521:366–370. [PubMed: 25799994]
Alcantara Llaguno S, Chen J, Kwon CH, Jackson EL, Li Y, Burns DK, Alvarez-Buylla A, Parada LF.
Malignant astrocytomas originate from neural stem/progenitor cells in a somatic tumor suppressor
mouse model. Cancer Cell. 2009; 15:45–56. [PubMed: 19111880]
Bao S, Wu Q, McLendon RE, Hao Y, Shi Q, Hjelmeland AB, Dewhirst MW, Bigner DD, Rich JN.
Glioma stem cells promote radioresistance by preferential activation of the DNA damage response.
Nature. 2006; 444:756–760. [PubMed: 17051156]
Bernstein BE, Mikkelsen TS, Xie X, Kamal M, Huebert DJ, Cuff J, Fry B, Meissner A, Wernig M,
Plath K, et al. A bivalent chromatin structure marks key developmental genes in embryonic stem
cells. Cell. 2006; 125:315–326. [PubMed: 16630819]
Boer JC, Walenkamp AM, den Dunnen WF. Recruitment of bone marrow derived cells during antiangiogenic therapy in GBM: The potential of combination strategies. Crit Rev Oncol Hematol.
2014; 92:38–48. [PubMed: 24933160]
Brennan CW, Verhaak RG, McKenna A, Campos B, Noushmehr H, Salama SR, Zheng S, Chakravarty
D, Sanborn JZ, Berman SH, et al. The somatic genomic landscape of glioblastoma. Cell. 2013;
155:462–477. [PubMed: 24120142]
Calabrese C, Poppleton H, Kocak M, Hogg TL, Fuller C, Hamner B, Oh EY, Gaber MW, Finklestein
D, Allen M, et al. A perivascular niche for brain tumor stem cells. Cancer Cell. 2007; 11:69–82.
[PubMed: 17222791]
Cancer Genome Atlas Research Network. Comprehensive genomic characterization defines human
glioblastoma genes and core pathways. Nature. 2008; 455:1061–1068. [PubMed: 18772890]
Ceccarelli M, Barthel FP, Malta TM, Sabedot TS, Salama SR, Murray BA, Morozova O, Newton Y,
Radenbaugh A, Pagnotta SM, et al. Molecular profiling reveals biologically discrete subsets and
pathways of progression in diffuse glioma. Cell. 2016; 164:550–563. [PubMed: 26824661]
Chen J, Li Y, Yu TS, McKay RM, Burns DK, Kernie SG, Parada LF. A restricted cell population
propagates glioblastoma growth after chemotherapy. Nature. 2012; 488:522–526. [PubMed:
22854781]
Cheng CW, Yeh JC, Fan TP, Smith SK, Charnock-Jones DS. Wnt5a-mediated non-canonical Wnt
signalling regulates human endothelial cell proliferation and migration. Biochem Biophys Res
Commun. 2008; 365:285–290. [PubMed: 17986384]
Cheng L, Huang Z, Zhou W, Wu Q, Donnola S, Liu JK, Fang X, Sloan AE, Mao Y, Lathia JD, et al.
Glioblastoma stem cells generate vascular pericytes to support vessel function and tumor growth.
Cell. 2013; 153:139–152. [PubMed: 23540695]
de Groot JF, Fuller G, Kumar AJ, Piao Y, Eterovic K, Ji Y, Conrad CA. Tumor invasion after treatment
of glioblastoma with bevacizumab: Radiographic and pathologic correlation in humans and mice.
Neuro-oncol. 2010; 12:233–242. [PubMed: 20167811]
Dunn GP, Rinne ML, Wykosky J, Genovese G, Quayle SN, Dunn IF, Agarwalla PK, Chheda MG,
Campos B, Wang A, et al. Emerging insights into the molecular and cellular basis of glioblastoma.
Genes Dev. 2012; 26:756–784. [PubMed: 22508724]
Ferrara N, Hillan KJ, Gerber HP, Novotny W. Discovery and development of bevacizumab, an antiVEGF antibody for treating cancer. Nat Rev Drug Discov. 2004; 3:391–400. [PubMed: 15136787]
Folkins C, Shaked Y, Man S, Tang T, Lee CR, Zhu Z, Hoffman RM, Kerbel RS. Glioma tumor stemlike cells promote tumor angiogenesis and vasculogenesis via vascular endothelial growth factor
and stromal-derived factor 1. Cancer Res. 2009; 69:7243–7251. [PubMed: 19738068]
Folkman J, Watson K, Ingber D, Hanahan D. Induction of angiogenesis during the transition from
hyperplasia to neoplasia. Nature. 1989; 339:58–61. [PubMed: 2469964]
Förstermann U, Münzel T. Endothelial nitric oxide synthase in vascular disease: From marvel to
menace. Circulation. 2006; 113:1708–1714. [PubMed: 16585403]

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 22.

Hu et al.

Page 20

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Furnari FB, Fenton T, Bachoo RM, Mukasa A, Stommel JM, Stegh A, Hahn WC, Ligon KL, Louis
DN, Brennan C, et al. Malignant astrocytic glioma: Genetics, biology, and paths to treatment.
Genes Dev. 2007; 21:2683–2710. [PubMed: 17974913]
Gao J, Li T, Lu L. Functional role of CCCTC binding factor in insulin-stimulated cell proliferation.
Cell Prolif. 2007; 40:795–808. [PubMed: 18021171]
Gao J, Wang J, Wang Y, Dai W, Lu L. Regulation of Pax6 by CTCF during induction of mouse ES cell
differentiation. PLoS ONE. 2011; 6:e20954. [PubMed: 21695148]
Giese A, Bjerkvig R, Berens ME, Westphal M. Cost of migration: Invasion of malignant gliomas and
implications for treatment. J Clin Oncol. 2003; 21:1624–1636. [PubMed: 12697889]
Gill BJ, Pisapia DJ, Malone HR, Goldstein H, Lei L, Sonabend A, Yun J, Samanamud J, Sims JS,
Banu M, et al. MRI-localized biopsies reveal subtype-specific differences in molecular and cellular
composition at the margins of glioblastoma. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2014; 111:12550–12555.
[PubMed: 25114226]
Hanahan D, Folkman J. Patterns and emerging mechanisms of the angiogenic switch during
tumorigenesis. Cell. 1996; 86:353–364. [PubMed: 8756718]
Hu J, Ho AL, Yuan L, Hu B, Hua S, Hwang SS, Zhang J, Hu T, Zheng H, Gan B, et al. From the
Cover: Neutralization of terminal differentiation in gliomagenesis. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2013;
110:14520–14527. [PubMed: 23918370]
Jeong HM, Jin YH, Kim YJ, Yum J, Choi YH, Yeo CY, Lee KY. Akt phosphorylates and regulates the
function of Dlx5. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2011; 409:681–686. [PubMed: 21619873]
Lathia JD, Heddleston JM, Venere M, Rich JN. Deadly teamwork: Neural cancer stem cells and the
tumor microenvironment. Cell Stem Cell. 2011; 8:482–485. [PubMed: 21549324]
Liu Q, Nguyen DH, Dong Q, Shitaku P, Chung K, Liu OY, Tso JL, Liu JY, Konkankit V, Cloughesy
TF, et al. Molecular properties of CD133+ glioblastoma stem cells derived from treatmentrefractory recurrent brain tumors. J Neurooncol. 2009; 94:1–19. [PubMed: 19468690]
Lobo NA, Shimono Y, Qian D, Clarke MF. The biology of cancer stem cells. Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol.
2007; 23:675–699. [PubMed: 17645413]
Masckauchán TN, Agalliu D, Vorontchikhina M, Ahn A, Parmalee NL, Li CM, Khoo A, Tycko B,
Brown AM, Kitajewski J. Wnt5a signaling induces proliferation and survival of endothelial cells in
vitro and expression of MMP-1 and Tie-2. Mol Biol Cell. 2006; 17:5163–5172. [PubMed:
17035633]
Mayes DA, Hu Y, Teng Y, Siegel E, Wu X, Panda K, Tan F, Yung WK, Zhou YH. PAX6 suppresses the
invasiveness of glioblastoma cells and the expression of the matrix metalloproteinase-2 gene.
Cancer Res. 2006; 66:9809–9817. [PubMed: 17047041]
Molina JR, Hayashi Y, Stephens C, Georgescu MM. Invasive glioblastoma cells acquire stemness and
increased Akt activation. Neoplasia. 2010; 12:453–463. [PubMed: 20563248]
Paina S, Garzotto D, DeMarchis S, Marino M, Moiana A, Conti L, Cattaneo E, Perera M, Corte G,
Calautti E, Merlo GR. Wnt5a is a transcriptional target of Dlx homeogenes and promotes
differentiation of interneuron progenitors in vitro and in vivo. J Neurosci. 2011; 31:2675–2687.
[PubMed: 21325536]
Phillips HS, Kharbanda S, Chen R, Forrest WF, Soriano RH, Wu TD, Misra A, Nigro JM, Colman H,
Soroceanu L, et al. Molecular subclasses of high-grade glioma predict prognosis, delineate a
pattern of disease progression, and resemble stages in neurogenesis. Cancer Cell. 2006; 9:157–
173. [PubMed: 16530701]
Ricci-Vitiani L, Pallini R, Biffoni M, Todaro M, Invernici G, Cenci T, Maira G, Parati EA, Stassi G,
Larocca LM, De Maria R. Tumour vascularization via endothelial differentiation of glioblastoma
stemlike cells. Nature. 2010; 468:824–828. [PubMed: 21102434]
Rodriguez FJ, Orr BA, Ligon KL, Eberhart CG. Neoplastic cells are a rare component in human
glioblastoma microvasculature. Oncotarget. 2012; 3:98–106. [PubMed: 22298889]
Shang Y, Hu X, DiRenzo J, Lazar MA, Brown M. Cofactor dynamics and sufficiency in estrogen
receptor-regulated transcription. Cell. 2000; 103:843–852. [PubMed: 11136970]
Shen Q, Goderie SK, Jin L, Karanth N, Sun Y, Abramova N, Vincent P, Pumiglia K, Temple S.
Endothelial cells stimulate self-renewal and expand neurogenesis of neural stem cells. Science.
2004; 304:1338–1340. [PubMed: 15060285]

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 22.

Hu et al.

Page 21

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Singh SK, Hawkins C, Clarke ID, Squire JA, Bayani J, Hide T, Henkelman RM, Cusimano MD, Dirks
PB. Identification of human brain tumour initiating cells. Nature. 2004; 432:396–401. [PubMed:
15549107]
Soda Y, Marumoto T, Friedmann-Morvinski D, Soda M, Liu F, Michiue H, Pastorino S, Yang M,
Hoffman RM, Kesari S, Verma IM. Transdifferentiation of glioblastoma cells into vascular
endothelial cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2011; 108:4274–4280. [PubMed: 21262804]
Sottoriva A, Spiteri I, Piccirillo SG, Touloumis A, Collins VP, Marioni JC, Curtis C, Watts C, Tavaré
S. Intratumor heterogeneity in human glioblastoma reflects cancer evolutionary dynamics. Proc
Natl Acad Sci USA. 2013; 110:4009–4014. [PubMed: 23412337]
Subramanian A, Tamayo P, Mootha VK, Mukherjee S, Ebert BL, Gillette MA, Paulovich A, Pomeroy
SL, Golub TR, Lander ES, Mesirov JP. Gene set enrichment analysis: A knowledge-based
approach for interpreting genome-wide expression profiles. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2005;
102:15545–15550. [PubMed: 16199517]
Suzuki Y, Shirai K, Oka K, Mobaraki A, Yoshida Y, Noda SE, Okamoto M, Suzuki Y, Itoh J, Itoh H, et
al. Higher pAkt expression predicts a significant worse prognosis in glioblastomas. J Radiat Res
(Tokyo). 2010; 51:343–348. [PubMed: 20410674]
Wang H, Wang H, Zhang W, Huang HJ, Liao WS, Fuller GN. Analysis of the activation status of Akt,
NFkappaB, and Stat3 in human diffuse gliomas. Lab Invest. 2004; 84:941–951. [PubMed:
15184909]
Wang R, Chadalavada K, Wilshire J, Kowalik U, Hovinga KE, Geber A, Fligelman B, Leversha M,
Brennan C, Tabar V. Glioblastoma stem-like cells give rise to tumour endothelium. Nature. 2010;
468:829–833. [PubMed: 21102433]
Wen PY, Kesari S. Malignant gliomas in adults. N Engl J Med. 2008; 359:492–507. [PubMed:
18669428]
Yang DH, Yoon JY, Lee SH, Bryja V, Andersson ER, Arenas E, Kwon YG, Choi KY. Wnt5a is
required for endothelial differentiation of embryonic stem cells and vascularization via pathways
involving both Wnt/beta-catenin and protein kinase Calpha. Circ Res. 2009; 104:372–379.
[PubMed: 19096028]
Zhang Y, Liu T, Meyer CA, Eckhoute J, Johnson DS, Bernstein BE, Nusbaum C, Myers RM, Brown
M, Li W, et al. Model-based analysis of ChIP-Seq (MACS). Genome Biol. 2008; 9:R137.
[PubMed: 18798982]
Zheng H, Ying H, Yan H, Kimmelman AC, Hiller DJ, Chen AJ, Perry SR, Tonon G, Chu GC, Ding Z,
et al. p53 and Pten control neural and glioma stem/progenitor cell renewal and differentiation.
Nature. 2008; 455:1129–1133. [PubMed: 18948956]
Zhou YH, Wu X, Tan F, Shi YX, Glass T, Liu TJ, Wathen K, Hess KR, Gumin J, Lang F, Yung WK.
PAX6 suppresses growth of human glioblastoma cells. J Neurooncol. 2005; 71:223–229.
[PubMed: 15735909]
Zhu TS, Costello MA, Talsma CE, Flack CG, Crowley JG, Hamm LL, He X, Hervey-Jumper SL, Heth
JA, Muraszko KM, et al. Endothelial cells create a stem cell niche in glioblastoma by providing
NOTCH ligands that nurture self-renewal of cancer stem-like cells. Cancer Res. 2011; 71:6061–
6072. [PubMed: 21788346]
Zhu Z, Khan MA, Weiler M, Blaes J, Jestaedt L, Geibert M, Zou P, Gronych J, Bernhardt O,
Korshunov A, et al. Targeting self-renewal in high-grade brain tumors leads to loss of brain tumor
stem cells and prolonged survival. Cell Stem Cell. 2014; 15:185–198. [PubMed: 24835569]

Author Manuscript
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 22.

Hu et al.

Page 22

Author Manuscript

Highlights
•

Comparisons of NSCs and derivative GSCs reveal elevated WNT5A and EC
signature

•

PAX6/DLX5 bidirectionally regulates WNT5A during differentiation of
GSCs into GdECs

•

WNT5A-mediated GdEC differentiation and EC recruitment support GSC
invasive growth

•

Clinical studies of peritumoral/recurrent GBM reveal increased WNT5A/
GdEC expression

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 22.

Hu et al.

Page 23

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 1. Overexpression of p53DN and myr-AKT Generates Malignant Glioma and Upregulates
EC Signaling Pathway

Author Manuscript

(A) Immunoblot analysis of overexpressed oncogenes in hNSCs.
(B) Soft agar colony formation of hNSCs expressing p53DN, p53DN/myr-AKT (p53DNAKT). Error bars represent SD of triplicate wells. **p < 0.01. Representative images are
shown.
(C) Kaplan-Meier survival analysis for oncogenic transformation of hNSC in vivo.
(D) Representative H&E image of intracranial tumor derived from p53DN-AKT-hNSCs;
scale bars, 1 mm.
(E) Representative H&E image of tumor sections with necrotic area (N) and microvascular
hyperplasia (black arrow). Scale bars, 50 μm.
(F) IHC staining of tumors with the indicated antibodies. Scale bars, 50 μm.
(G) Top ten signaling pathways related to hNSC oncogenic transformation were identified
by GSEA analysis based on gene expression profiles of hNSCs and their derivative cells.
The normalized enrichment scores (ES) and the log transformed p values are shown.
(H) GSEA enrichment plots of genes ranked based on oncogenic transformation versus EC
signaling pathway.
(I) Heatmap of histone landscape of gene transcriptional start sites (TSSs) within ±2 kb and
of Log2-ratio of these gene expression levels in hNSCs and iGSCs.

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 22.

Hu et al.

Page 24

See also Figure S1 and Table S1.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 22.

Hu et al.

Page 25

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 2. Activation of AKT Pathway Induces Differentiation of GSCs into ECs

Author Manuscript

(A) FACS analysis of hNSCs, p53DN-transduced hNSCs, and p53DN-AKT-hNSCs based
on CD133 and CD144 expression.
(B) Fold change of percentage of CD133+/CD144+ cells by FACS analysis in p53DN-AKThNSCs under treatment with rapamycin (RAPA, 50 nM) for 72 hr.
(C) qRT-PCR for indicated EC markers expression in two sorted subpopulations from
p53DN-AKT-hNSCs.
(D) IF analysis of sorted CD133+/CD144+ from p53DN-AKT-hNSCs cultured under NSC or
EC media for 5 days for EC markers expression and DiI-AcLDL uptake. Scale bar, 40 μm.
(E) Tubular networks formation of sorted CD133+/CD144+ and CD133+/CD144− cells from
p53DN-AKT-hNSCs cultured on Matrigel in EC media with/without RAPA (50 nM)
treatment. Scale bar, 100 μm.
(F) Immunoblot analysis of AKT/mTOR pathway activation in patient-derived GSCs.
(G) FACS analysis of CD133+/CD144+ cells in the indicated GSCs.
(H) FACS analysis of CD133+/CD144+ cells in the indicated GSCs with myr-AKT
overexpression.
(I) FACS analysis of CD133+/CD144+ cells in the indicated GSCs treated with RAPA (50
nM) for 72 hr. Error bars represent SD of the mean of two (C and G) or three (B, H, and I)
independent experiments. **p < 0.01. See also Figure S2 and Table S2.
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 22.

Hu et al.

Page 26

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Figure 3. AKT-Driven WNT5A Upregulation in GdECs Differentiation of hNSCs

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

(A) FACS analysis for the percentage of CD133+/CD144+ cells in7 days post-infection
p53DN-hNSCs cells by lentivirus carrying the indicated genes individually.
(B) Quantitation of the percentage of CD133+/CD144+ cells in (A) from four independent
experiments.
(C) Matrigel tubular network formation of the sorted CD133+/CD144+ cells from p53DNAKT-hNSCs with infection by lentivirus carrying pooled short hairpins (minimum three
shRNAs) targeting each indicated gene.
(D) Quantitation of the number of tubular networks branch points in (C) (n = 5).
(E) FACS analysis of CD133+/CD144+ cells in p53DN-hNSCs overexpressing myr-AKT or
WNT5A with BOX5 treatment (50 μM) for 72 hr. (n = 3).
(F) Representative images for the tubular network of sorted CD133+/CD144+ cells from
p53DN-AKT-hNSCs with BOX5 treatment. Scale bar, 100 μm.
(G) Number of branch points calculated in (F) (n = 5). Error bars represent SD of the mean;
**p < 0.01.
See also Figure S3 and Tables S1 and S3.

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 22.

Hu et al.

Page 27

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 4. Transcriptional Activation of WNT5A by PAX6 and DLX5

Author Manuscript

(A) ChIP-seq analysis of chromatin status for WNT5A locus around TSS in hNSC and
iGSC.
(B) PAX6 and DLX5 binding motifs in WNT5A regulatory regions.
(C) Chromatin modification changes from hNSC to iGSC for PAX6. The peak of H3K27me
in iGSC is highlighted in sky blue color.
(D) Binding of PAX6 in WNT5A regulatory regions in hNSC by ChIP-PCR. Beta-actin
locus (ACTB_exon) was used as the negative control (n = 3).
(E) Chromatin modification changes from hNSC to iGSC in DLX5-DLX6 locus.
(F) Binding of DLX5 in WNT5A regulatory regions by ChIP-PCR. PAX2 was used as the
control for non-specific binding (n = 3).
(G) WNT5A expression by qRT-PCR analysis in GSCs and iGSC-overexpressing PAX6 (n =
3).
(H) WNT5A expression by qRT-PCR analysis in GSCs and iGSC-overexpressing DLX5 (n
= 3). Error bars represent SD of the mean; *p < 0.05 and **p < 0.01.
See also Figure S4.

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 22.

Hu et al.

Page 28

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 5. WNT5A-Mediated Endothelial Lineage Differentiation in Tumor Neovascularization
and Satellite Lesion Formation

Author Manuscript

(A) Representative images for the hemorrhage lesion in mouse brain that received injection
of TS543-overexpressing WNT5A (WNT5A OE) versus control (Vector). H&E and IHC
analyses of tumor sections show the microvascular hyperplasia (black arrows) and
expression of CD34 and WNT5A. Scale bar, 50 μm.
(B) Representative images for the satellite lesions in peritumoral areas. Scale bar, 200 μm.
(C) Representative images for GdECs (yellow arrows) identified by co-staining with
TRA-1-85 and CD34 in intratumoral and peritumoral areas. Scale bar, 25 μm.
(D) Quantitation of TRA-1-85+/CD34+ cells using Vectra software system (n = 3 tumors).
(E) High magnification of rectangle area in (C). Scale bar, 10 μm.
(F) IHC staining of CD34 in intracranial tumors derived frompCD144-GFP infected
WNT5A-TS543following GCV treatment. Representative images of low (scale bar, 100 μm)
and high (scale bar, 50 μm) magnification.
(G) Dotplots for quantitation of MVD in tumors with/without GCV treatment (n = 4 tumors,
five fields per tumor).
(H) Representative images for tumor appearance (left, scale bar, 2,000 μm) and peritumoral
satellite lesions (right, scale bar, 200 μm).
See also Figure S5.

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 22.

Hu et al.

Page 29

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 6. Recruitment of Host ECs by WNT5A-Mediated GdECs Contributes to GSCs SelfRenewal and Proliferation

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

(A) Representative images of IF analysis for GdECs (green arrows), compared with tumor
cells (red arrows), are in close proximity to mouse ECs (white arrow) in tumor sections.
Scale bar, 10 μm.
(B) Dotplots show the distance from mouse ECs to the nearest tumor cells and GdECs,
respectively (n ≥ 15).
(C) Illustration of the transwell system to measure EC recruitment.
(D) Fluorescence intensity shows HBMECs recruitment after co-culture with GdECs for 24
hr (n ≥ 3).
(E) qRT-PCR for CD144 and WNT5A mRNA levels in sorted pCD144-GFP– and pCD144GFP+ from TS543-WNT5A and TS603 (n = 3).
(F) Fluorescence intensity shows HBMECs recruitment after co-culture with NSC media
containing rWNT5A (0.5 μg/ml) or rWNT3A (0.05 μg/ml) (n = 3).
(G) Representative images of GdECs (green arrows) and mouse ECs (white arrows) in
variously sized satellite lesions. Scale bar, 20 μm.
(H) Neurosphere formation of TS543 or TS603 co-cultured with GdECs and HBMECs (n =
3). Cartoon depicting the experimental approach. Error bars represent SD of the mean; *p <
0.05 and **p < 0.01.
See also Figure S6.

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 22.

Hu et al.

Page 30

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 7. Correlation of WNT5A-Mediated GdEC with Peritumoral Satellite Lesion and Tumor
Recurrence in GBM Patients

Author Manuscript

(A) Representative images of GdECs (yellow arrows) defined using indicated EC and GSC
markers. White arrows denote host ECs. Scale bar, 20 μm.
(B) Representative images with IHC double-staining and cell segmentation obtained from
Caliper InForm analysis software show the close proximity of GdEC (SOX2+/CD31+,
yellow) and host ECs (SOX2−/CD31+, green) compared with GSCs (SOX2+/CD31−, red) in
tumor sections. SOX2−/CD31− cells are marked in blue color. Scale bar, 20 μm.
(C) Boxplot of distances from host ECs to the nearest GSCs and GdECs, respectively (n =
300).
(D) The correlation between WNT5A mRNA expression and GdEC signature score. n = 364
(IDHwt GBMs); mRNA expression was normalized across genes.
(E) Representative image of H&E staining for intratumoral and peritumoral regions (black
dashed line) of GBM patient's sample. Black arrows denote peritumoral satellite. Scale bar,
200 μm.
(F) Representative images for GdECs (black arrows) and host ECs (red arrows) in variously
sized satellite lesions in IHC double-staining tumor sections. Scale bar, 25 μm.
(G) Fourteen patients' primary tumors were divided by WNT5A staining index into two
groups (low and high). Tumor sections with peritumoral satellite lesions (more than ten)

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 22.

Hu et al.

Page 31

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

were counted as the highest score. *p = 0.04 by the log-rank test for PFS between two
groups, HR = 3.45 (high versus low).
(H) Comparison of WNT5A mRNA expression between nine pairs of intratumor and
peritumor regions from GBM patients. Each dot in the scatterplot represents a pair. Boxplot
summarizes the distribution of WNT5A expression in nine intratumor and peritumor
regions, respectively.
(I) TCGA GBMs (IDHwt, n = 228) were used for PFS analysis. Red and blue lines show
survival curves of top 20% of GBMs with highest and lowest WNT5A mRNA expression,
respectively.
(J) Representative images for WNT5A (brown) and CD31 (red) staining of paired primary/
recurrent tumors from one GBM patient. Scale bar, 25 μm.
(K) Unbiased quantification of GdEC frequency in primary and recurrent GBMs (n = 150).
(L) Correlation between WNT5A expression and GdEC signature scores in recurrent GBMs.
Small boxplot panel shows all 81 pairs while the big boxplot panel shows the majority of
samples.
(M) Association of differences of WNT5A mRNA expression and GdEC signature score
between 81 matched primary/recurrent GBMs pairs. Each circle in the scatterplot represents
a GBM pair; mRNA expression was normalized across genes.
See also Figure S7 and Tables S2, S4, S5, and S6.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 22.

Author Manuscript
Cell Signaling Technology
Cell Signaling Technology
Cell Signaling Technology
Cell Signaling Technology
Cell Signaling Technology
Cell Signaling Technology
Cell Signaling Technology
Cell Signaling Technology
Santa Cruz Biotechnology
Santa Cruz Biotechnology
Santa Cruz Biotechnology
Santa Cruz Biotechnology
Santa Cruz Biotechnology
Miltenyi biotec
Miltenyi biotec
Miltenyi biotec
Miltenyi biotec
Sigma-Aldrich
Sigma-Aldrich
Sigma-Aldrich
DAKO

Rabbit monoclonal anti-p70 S6 Kinase

Rabbit polyclonal anti-p44/42 MAPK (Erk1/2)

Rabbit polyclonal anti-Phospho-p44/42 MAPK (Erk1/2) (Thr202/Tyr204)

Rabbit monoclonal anti -Wnt5a/b (C27E8)

Rabbit monoclonal anti-VEGFR2 (55B11)

Rabbit polyclonal anti-Phospho-CaMKII (Thr286)

Rabbit polyclonal anti-CaMKII (pan)

Rabbit polyclonal anti-p53 (FL-393)

Goat polyclonal anti-DLX5 (ChIP)

Mouse monoclonal anti-PAX6 (WB)

Normal rabbit IgG antibody

Normal goat IgG antibody

CD31-APC, human (clone: AC128)

CD144 (VE-Cadherin)-FITC, human (clone: REA199)

CD144 (VE-Cadherin)-APC, human (clone: REA199)

CD133/1 (AC133)-PE, human (clone: AC133)

Mouse monoclonal anti-b-Actin (Clone AC-74)

Rabbit polyclonal anti-PAX6(IHC)

Rabbit polyclonal anti-DLX5(WB/IHC)

Mouse monoclonal anti-CD105 (Endoglin, SN6h)

Cell Signaling Technology

Rabbit monoclonal anti-Phospho-S6 Ribosomal Protein (Ser235/236) (D57.2.2E) XP

Rabbit monoclonal anti-Phospho-p70 S6 Kinase (Thr389) (108D2)

Cell Signaling Technology

Rabbit monoclonal anti-Phospho-Akt (Thr308) (244F9)

Cell Signaling Technology

Cell Signaling Technology

Rabbit polyclonal anti-Phospho-Akt (Ser473)

Mouse monoclonal anti-S6 Ribosomal Protein (54D2)

Cell Signaling Technology

SOURCE

Rabbit polyclonal anti-AKT

Author Manuscript

Antibodies

Author Manuscript

REAGENT or RESOURCE

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 22.

Cat# M3527 RRID:AB_2099044

Cat# HPA005670 RRID:AB_1078681

Cat# HPA030775 RRID:AB_10601243

Cat# A2228

Cat#130-080-801

Cat#130-100-708

Cat#130-100-742

Cat#130-092-652

Cat# sc-2028 RRID:AB_737167

Cat# sc-3888 RRID:AB_737196

Cat# sc-81649 RRID:AB_1127044

Cat# sc-18152 RRID:AB_2090874

Cat# sc-6243 RRID:AB_653753

Cat# 3362 RRID:AB_2067938

Cat# 3361 RRID:AB_10015209

Cat# 2479L RRID:AB_2212507

Cat# 2530S RRID:AB_2215595

Cat# 9101 RRID:AB_331646

Cat# 9102L RRID:AB_823494

Cat# 2708 RRID:AB_390722

Cat# 9234P RRID:AB_10121787

Cat# 2317 RRID:AB_2238583

Cat# 4858S RRID:AB_916156

Cat# 4056 RRID:AB_331163

Cat# 9271 RRID:AB_329825

Cat# 9272 RRID:AB_329827

IDENTIFIER

Author Manuscript

Key Resources Table
Hu et al.
Page 32

Abcam
Active Motif
EMD Millipore
EMD Millipore
GeneTex
R&D Systems
Covance Research
BD Biosciences
BD Biosciences

Rabbit polyclonal anti-Histone H3K4me2

Rabbit polyclonal anti-H3K27me3

Rabbit polyclonal anti-H3K4me3

Rabbit monoclonal anti-CD34 (EP373Y)

Mouse monoclonal anti-Human TRA-1-85

Rabbit monoclonal anti-Neuronal Class III beta-Tubulin (TUJ1)

Mouse monoclonal anti-CD144

Mouse monoclonal anti-eNOS/NOS Type III

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 22.
R&D Systems
R&D Systems
InvivoGen
Sigma-Aldrich
BD Biosciences

Wnt-5a Recombinant Protein

Wnt-3a Recombinant Protein

Ganciclovir (GCV)

Iodonitrotetrazolium chloride

Calcein AM

Thermo Fisher
New England BioLabs

DiI-AcLDL Uptake Assay

NEBNext DNA Library Prep kit

Critical Commercial Assays

Calbiochem

Wnt Antagonist III, Box5

Chemicals, Peptides, and Recombinant Proteins

Abcam

Mouse monoclonal anti-Nestin (10C2)

Abcam

Rabbit polyclonal anti-H3K27ac

Rabbit monoclonal anti-SOX2 (EPR3131)

Abcam

Mouse monoclonal anti-CD31

Abcam

Abcam

Rabbit polyclonal anti-CD31

Rabbit polyclonal anti-PAX6 (ChIP)

Abcam

Rabbit polyclonal anti-Von Willebrand Factor

Abcam

Abcam

Rabbit polyclonal anti-VEGF Receptor 2

Rabbit polyclonal anti-H3K4me1

Vector Laboratories

Rabbit monoclonal anti-Ki67

Author Manuscript
DAKO

Author Manuscript

Rabbit polyclonal anti-Glial Fibrillary Acidic Protein (GFAP)

Author Manuscript
SOURCE

Cat# E7370S

Cat# L35353

Cat#564061

Cat# I10406

CAS # 82410-32-0 Cat. Code sud-gcv

Cat# 5036-WN

Cat# 645-WN

Cat# 681673

Cat# 610297 RRID:AB_397691

Cat# 555661 RRID:AB_396015

Cat# MRB-435P-100 RRID:AB_10175616

Cat# MAB3195 RRID:AB_2066681

Cat# GTX61737 RRID:AB_10624965

Cat# 07-473 RRID:AB_1977252

Cat# 07-449 RRID:AB_310624

Cat# 39141 RRID: AB_2614985

Cat# ab22035 RRID:AB_446723

Cat# ab92494 RRID:AB_10585428

Cat# ab5790 RRID:AB_305110

Cat# ab8895, RRID:AB_306847

Cat# ab4729 RRID:AB_2118291

Cat# ab9498 RRID:AB_307284

Cat# ab28364 RRID:AB_726362

Cat# ab9378 RRID:AB_307223

Cat# ab39256 RRID:AB_883437

Cat# VP-RM04 RRID:AB_2336545

Cat# N1506 RRID:AB_10013482

IDENTIFIER

Author Manuscript

REAGENT or RESOURCE

Hu et al.
Page 33

Biocare Medical
Biocare Medical

MACH 2 Double Stain 1

MACH 2 Double Stain 2

NCBI Gene Expression Omnibus

ChIP sequencing data

Laboratory of Dr. Cameron W. Brennan (MSKCC)
Laboratory of Dr. Keith L. Ligon (DFCI)
ATCC
ScienCell Research Laboratories
ScienCell Research Laboratories
Neuromics

Patient derived GSC lines (TS543, TS576,TS586,TS603)

Patient derived GSC lines (BT112,BT147)

293T packaging cells

Human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVEC)

Human Brain Microvascular Endothelial Cells (HBMECs)

Human Brain Microvascular Endothelial Cells (HBMECs)

Addgene
Addgene
Addgene
Thermo Fisher
Clontech
Addgene
This paper
This paper
This paper
This paper

pWZL-Blast-myc

pCMVR8.74

pMD2.G

pLenti6.3/V5-DEST gateway Vector

pLVX-ZsGreen1-N1

cEF.tk-GFP

pLenti6.3-GFP

pWZ-neo-myr-AKT

pLenti6.3-myr-AKT

pLenti6.3-p53DN

Recombinant DNA

Mouse: ICR SCID female

Taconic

This paper

Myc-immortalized human neural stem cells

Experimental Models: Organisms/Strains

EMD Millipore

Myc-immortalized human neural progenitor cells (ReNcell)

Experimental Models: Cell Lines

NCBI Gene Expression Omnibus

Gene expression profile

Deposited Data

Trevigene

TumorTACS In Situ Apoptosis Detection Kit

Author Manuscript
BD Biosciences

Author Manuscript

BD FluoroBlok System

Author Manuscript
SOURCE

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 22.
N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

Cat#33308

Cat#632565

Cat#V53306

Cat#12259

Cat#22036

Cat#10674

ICRSC-F

Cat# HEC02

Cat#1000

Cat#8000

CRL-11268

N/A

N/A

N/A

Cat# SC007

GEO: GSE86624

GEO:GSE85615

Cat# MRCT525G

Cat# MRCT523G

Cat# 4815-30-K

Cat# BD351161

IDENTIFIER

Author Manuscript

REAGENT or RESOURCE

Hu et al.
Page 34

Sigma-Aldrich
Sigma-Aldrich
Sigma-Aldrich
Sigma-Aldrich
Sigma-Aldrich
Sigma-Aldrich
Sigma-Aldrich

pLKO.1 target gene set (DLX5)

pLKO.1 target gene set (DMRT3)

pLKO.1 target gene set (GPR37)

pLKO.1 target gene set (MYLIP)

pLKO.1 target gene set (NUDT14)

pLKO.1 target gene set (TCF7)

pLKO.1 target gene set (WNT5A)

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 22.
PerkinElmer
FlowJo
3DHISTECH Ltd.
National Institutes of Health
Leica Biosystems
The Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard
The R Project for Statistical Computing
Zhang et al., 2008

InForm Cell Analysis Version 2.2

Flow Jo_v10

Pannoramic Viewer

ImageJ

Aperio ImageScope_v12

Integrative Genomics Viewer (IGV)

R package (Version 3.2.5)

Model-based Analysis of ChIP-Seq (MACS)

Software and Algorithms

All primers and oligonucleotides are listed in Table S7

This paper

Sigma-Aldrich

Sequence-Based Reagents

This paper

pLKO.1 target gene set (CXCL14)

This paper

pLenti6.3-TCF7

pCD144-HSVTK-GFP

This paper

pLenti6.3-NUDT14

This paper

This paper

pLenti6.3-MYLIP

pLenti6.3-PAX6

This paper

pLenti6.3-GPR37

This paper

This paper

pLenti6.3-DMRT3

pLenti6.3-WNT5A

This paper

pLenti6.3-DLX5

Author Manuscript
This paper

Author Manuscript

pLenti6.3-CXCL14

Author Manuscript
SOURCE

Page 35

https://genomebiology.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/gb-2

https://www.r-project.org

http://software.broadinstitute.org/software/igv/

http://www.leicabiosystems.com/digital-pathology/digital-pathol

https://imagej.nih.gov/ij/

http://www.3dhistech.com/pannoramic_viewer

http://www.flowjo.com/

http://www.perkinelmer.com/lab-products-and-services/resource

N/A

SHCLNG-NM_003392

SHCLNG-NM_003202

SHCLNG-NM_177533

SHCLNG-NM_013262

SHCLNG-NM_005302

SHCLNG-NM_021240

SHCLNG-NM_005221

SHCLNG-NM_004887

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

IDENTIFIER

Author Manuscript

REAGENT or RESOURCE

Hu et al.

Author Manuscript
N/A

Author Manuscript

Data Visualization Tools for Brain Tumor Datasets

Author Manuscript
SOURCE
http://gliovis.bioinfo.cnio.es

IDENTIFIER

Author Manuscript

REAGENT or RESOURCE

Hu et al.
Page 36

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 22.

