As part of the study, a girl’s parent or guardian is asked to
complete a questionnaire regarding their child’s prenatal and
early development, including issues such as whether they were
breast fed and what type of diet they consumed. The girls, who
visit their speciﬁc participating center every 6 months, also are
asked to answer questions about their lifestyle such as whether
they participate in sports, whether they walk to school, and what
their typical diet is. They also are asked about their emotional
well-being in terms of whether they are worried about their
increased risk of breast cancer.

Our hypothesis is that there
are things we can measure and
things we can do in early life
that will modify girls’ risk of
getting breast cancer as adults.
— Saundra Buys, MD
In addition, the girls submit blood, saliva, and urine
samples, which provide researchers with a wealth of information
such as hormone levels and DNA data. They also are followed
for their growth and development through measurements of
weight, height, waist and hips, body fat composition, and foot
size; breast and pubic hair development; and age at menarche.
Scientists know that an earlier age at menarche, breast
development, and the speed of reaching adult height are
important predictors of increased breast cancer risk, but
they want to determine whether the tempo of maturation
also inﬂuences risk, Dr. Buys says. “Does the length of time
when breasts are in that development phase before girls reach
menarche have an inﬂuence on later risk for the disease, and
is there a diﬀerence between girls with and without a family
history?” she asks. “If so, then that’s important information to
know.”
Another tool researchers in the study are using is optical
breast spectroscopy for girls aged 10 years and older. This

noninvasive technique shines a light on breast tissue to examine
the amount of water, fat, muscle, and blood. This information
will help researchers compare breast tissue characteristics among
girls of diﬀerent ages and with diﬀerent lifestyle factors as well as
how the tissue changes as girls get older.
Investigators also are searching for speciﬁc biomarkers in
the blood that may correlate with pubertal development and,
consequently, breast cancer risk. In the psychosocial realm,
they are examining how the knowledge of family breast cancer
risk may inﬂuence a girl’s choice to engage in risky lifestyle
behaviors. “Do girls from these families say, ‘I’ve got this family
history so it doesn’t matter what I do, I’m doomed so I’m going
to smoke or drink,’ or do they say, ‘I’m going to do everything I
can to not get breast cancer,’” Dr. Buys says.
In addition to these areas, researchers also are examining:
• Girls’ use of hair products and lotions containing
endocrine disrupters that may play a role in early pubertal
development.
• DNA methylation in breast tissue and how changes in
DNA structure can inﬂuence risk.

Expanded Prevention
Investigators have already published a few preliminary studies
and are anticipating more soon. They also want to continue
their research in this area and work with colleagues in the
ﬁeld who are studying related issues. “We hope we can ﬁgure
out a way to expand breast cancer prevention across an entire
lifetime,” Dr. John says.
Cindy Solomon is pleased that she and her daughter are
helping scientists gather new information about the disease.
A genetic counselor herself, Ms. Solomon was motivated to
participate in part because she had an aunt who was diagnosed
with breast cancer at the age of 50 years.
“Being able to look at this group of young women may one
day provide some answers that will aﬀect all women,” she says.
DOI: 10.1002/cncr.29000

Studies Presented at ASCO Meeting Highlight Success With
Targeted Therapies

N

ew therapies that can improve outcomes for children with
a rare form of kidney cancer and adults with recurrent
multiple myeloma were among the studies presented at the
American Society of Clinical Oncology (ASCO) Annual Meeting,
which was held from May 29 to June 2, 2015, in Chicago.

New Therapy for Recurrent Multiple Myeloma
Interim results from a phase 3 trial have demonstrated that a
new immune-based therapy may help patients with recurrent
multiple myeloma. When added to standard lenalidomide and
dexamethasone therapy, the monoclonal antibody elotuzumab
was found to extend the duration of remissions by approximately
5 months compared with standard treatment alone.
2666

Lead author Sagar Lonial, MD, chief medical oﬃcer of
the Winship Cancer Institute of Emory University in Atlanta,
Georgia, notes that the diﬀerence in remission rates between the
elotuzumab and control groups appears to get bigger over time,
illustrating the power of the new immune-based approach.
Elotuzumab works by attaching to a cell surface protein
called SLAMF7, which is found on myeloma cells and on
natural killer cells. The drug is believed to target the myeloma
cells directly and also enhance the ability of natural killer cells
to kill the myeloma cells.
In the study, 646 patients with recurrent multiple myeloma
were randomly assigned to receive either the standard treatment
or the standard treatment with elotuzumab. After a median

Cancer

August 15, 2015

follow-up of 24 months, the new immune therapy reduced the
risk of cancer progression by 30%. At the same time, patients
taking elotuzumab had a signiﬁcantly longer period without
disease progression (on average, 19.4 months vs 14.9 months
for the control group).
The ﬁndings indicated that patients with genetic
abnormalities considered high risk (del[17p] and
t[4;14]) beneﬁtted from elotuzumab as much as
patients with average risk, whereas standard
therapy was not found to be as helpful in
these high-risk patients.
This new combined therapy was
granted a breakthrough therapy designation
by the US Food and Drug Administration
in 2014 to treat patients with recurrent
multiple myeloma. Currently ongoing trials
are exploring using the therapy in patients with
newly diagnosed multiple myeloma and testing
it in various combinations with existing treatments.

Treatment of Wilms Tumor
Two phase 2 Children’s Oncology Group studies demonstrated
that adding speciﬁc drugs to standard therapy improves
outcomes for children with a high-risk form of Wilms tumor
(a rare form of kidney cancer that mainly aﬀects children
aged younger than 5 years). The children have a chromosomal
abnormality associated with a poorer prognosis.
Previous studies in these patients indicated they had a
4-year recurrence-free survival rate of 74.9% for stage I/II
disease and 65.9% for stage III/IV disease. In the new studies,
the augmented therapy led to improved survival rates of 83.9%
for patients with stage I/II disease and 91.5% for those with
stage III/IV disease.

Lead author David Dix, MD, of the British Columbia
Children’s Hospital in Vancouver, Canada, and his colleagues
focused on children with Wilms tumor of favorable histology.
Approximately 5% to 6% of those patients were found to have a
chromosome abnormality in the tumor that is known as loss of
heterozygosity on chromosomes 1p and 16q. These patients
have a higher risk of disease recurrence.
The researchers found that this loss of
heterozygosity of 1p and 16q was detected
in 35 patients with stage I/II disease and in
52 patients with stage III/IV disease. For
patients with stage I/II disease, the standard
therapy (chemotherapy with vincristine
and dactinomycin) was augmented with the
addition of doxorubicin. Patients with stage
III/IV disease received the standard therapy,
augmented with outpatient chemotherapy
with cyclophosphamide and etoposide.
After a median follow-up of 3.6 years, the
4-year survival rates were 83.9% for patients with stage I/
II disease and 91.5% for patients with stage III/IV disease who
were treated with the augmented therapy and 75% for patients
with early-stage disease and 66% for patients with late-stage
disease who were treated with the standard therapy.
Because the numbers in the study were small, the beneﬁt
was less clear for patients with lower-stage disease but the results
suggest they also have an improved outcome.
The authors note that the treatment was well tolerated. The
most common side eﬀect noted among patients treated with the
stage III/IV therapy was suppression of bone marrow function,
but it was manageable. However, the authors add that the regimen
is predicted to lead to some risk of reduced fertility.
DOI: 10.1002/cncr.29581

Vegetarian Diet Associated With Lower Risk of Colorectal Cancer

A

• Pesco-vegetarians (those who also eat ﬁsh) had a 43%
lower risk; and

• Semi-vegetarians had an 8% lower risk.
Reference
1. Orlich MJ, Singh PN, Sabate J, et al. Vegetarian dietary patterns and the risk
of colorectal cancers. JAMA Intern Med. 2015;175:767-776.
DOI: 10.1002/cncr.29582

© RIDO, PSDESIGN1 / FOTOLIA.COM

new study concluded that those who consume a vegetarian
diet have a lower risk of developing colorectal cancer
when compared with nonvegetarians.1 Dietary factors have
been identiﬁed as a modiﬁable risk factor for colorectal cancer,
according to researchers who conducted the study among men
and women who are members of the Seventh-day Adventist
Church. Red meat has been linked to a higher risk whereas foods
rich in dietary ﬁber are linked to a reduced risk of the disease.
Lead author Michael Orlich, MD, PhD, of Loma Linda
University in California, and his colleagues studied 77,659
participants and identiﬁed 380 cases of colon cancer and 110 cases
of rectal cancer. Compared with nonvegetarians, the vegetarians
were found to have a 22% lower risk of all colorectal cancers, a
19% lower risk of colon cancer, and a 29% lower risk of rectal
cancer.
In addition, when compared with nonvegetarians:
• Vegans had a 16% lower risk of colorectal cancer;
• Lacto-ovo vegetarians (those who also consume milk and
eggs) had an 18% lower risk;

Content in this section does not reﬂect any ofﬁcial policy or medical opinion of the American Cancer Society or of the publisher unless otherwise noted. © American Cancer Society, 2015.

Cancer

August 15, 2015

2667

