HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Author Manuscript

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 09.
Published in final edited form as:
Nature. 2015 August 6; 524(7563): 47–53. doi:10.1038/nature14664.

Comprehensive genomic profiles of small cell lung cancer
A full list of authors and affiliations appears at the end of the article.

Abstract

Author Manuscript

We have sequenced the genomes of 110 small cell lung cancers (SCLC), one of the deadliest
human cancers. In nearly all the tumours analysed we found bi-allelic inactivation of TP53 and
RB1, sometimes by complex genomic rearrangements. Two tumours with wild-type RB1 had
evidence of chromothripsis leading to overexpression of cyclin D1 (encoded by the CCND1 gene),
revealing an alternative mechanism of Rb1 deregulation. Thus, loss of the tumour suppressors
TP53 and RB1 is obligatory in SCLC. We discovered somatic genomic rearrangements of TP73
that create an oncogenic version of this gene, TP73Δex2/3. In rare cases, SCLC tumours exhibited
kinase gene mutations, providing a possible therapeutic opportunity for individual patients.
Finally, we observed inactivating mutations in NOTCH family genes in 25% of human SCLC.
Accordingly, activation of Notch signalling in a pre-clinical SCLC mouse model strikingly
reduced the number of tumours and extended the survival of the mutant mice. Furthermore,
neuroendocrine gene expression was abrogated by Notch activity in SCLC cells. This first
comprehensive study of somatic genome alterations in SCLC uncovers several key biological
processes and identifies candidate therapeutic targets in this highly lethal form of cancer.

Author Manuscript

Small cell lung cancer (SCLC) accounts for approximately 15% of all lung cancers, arises in
heavy smokers, and the tumour cells express neuroendocrine markers. Although
chemotherapy is initially effective in the treatment of SCLC, recurrence arises rapidly in the
vast majority of cases, usually killing the patient within only a few months1. SCLC is rarely

Reprints and permissions information is available at www.nature.com/reprints.
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to R.K.T. (roman.thomas@uni-koeln.de), J.S. (julsage@stanford.edu)
or M.P. (mpeifer@uni-koeln.de).
†Present address: Genetic Cancer Susceptibility Group, Section of Genetics, International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARCWHO), 69008 Lyon, France.
*These authors contributed equally to this work.
Supplementary Information is available in the online version of the paper.

Author Manuscript

Author Contributions J.G., J.S.L., M.P., J.S. and R.K.T. conceived the project, analysed and interpreted the data, and wrote the
manuscript. J.G., J.S.L., J.S., F.L., R.M., S.P., D.E., B.Pü, M.S.W., J.O.K., J.A., C.B., M.B. and P.S. designed experiments. J.G., J.S.L.,
I.D., C.M., A.T., R.M., S.-M.C., D.K., D.E., I.V., D.S., B.Pi, P.S., C.B., P.M.S. and M.Bog performed experiments. J.G., M.P., J.S.L.,
S.A.H., M.V., M.S.W., J.O.K., Y.C., X.L., D.V., M.W., N.H. and M.Bos performed data analysis. E.B., W.D.T., R.B., L.H., L.O., S.P.,
S.J.J. and G.K. performed pathology review. E.B., W.D.T., L.O., A.N.K., Y.Y. and V.T. conducted further immunohistochemistry
studies. F.L., L.F.-C., G.B., S.M., D.S., V.A., U.L., T.Z., S.A., M.H., J.W., P.N. and C.R. helped with logistics. S.J.J., N.S.J., K.-S.P.,
D.Y., J.Y., T.K., R.I., K.T., M.N., T.M., H.H., P.A.S., I.P., Y.C., A.S., C.-M.C., Y.-H.K., P.P.M., Y.Z., D.J., M.K., G.M.W., P.A.R., B.S.,
I.K., M.L., L.A.M, A.l.T., J.K.F., M.J., J.Kn., E.C.-V., L.R., U.P., O.-T.B., M.L.-I., E.T., J.Kö., M.Sc, J.B., M.Sa, M.S.-C., H.B.S.,
Y.Y., S.P., L.H., R.B. and E.B. contributed with murine and human tissue samples.
Affymetrix SNP 6.0, whole-genome, and transcriptome sequencing on human specimen have been deposited at the European
Genome-phenome Archive under the accession code EGAS00001000925. Whole-exome and whole-genome sequencing data of
murine SCLC tumors can be accessed through (http://www.translational-genomics.uni-koeln.de/scientific-resources/). Microarray data
on mouse cell lines is accessible through Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) accession number GSE69091.
The authors declare competing financial interests: details are available in the online version of the paper. Readers are welcome to
comment on the online version of the paper.

George et al.

Page 2

Author Manuscript

treated by surgery and few specimens are available for genomic characterization. Previous
studies applying mostly exome sequencing in a limited number of tumour specimens have
revealed only a few recurrently mutated genes2,3.
We hypothesized that complex genomic rearrangements, which are undetectable by exome
sequencing, might further contribute to the pathogenesis of SCLC and thus performed
whole-genome sequencing of 110 human SCLC specimens (Supplementary Tables 1–4).
One of the hallmarks of SCLC is the high frequency of mutations in TP53 and RB1 (refs 2–
7). As mice lacking Trp53 and Rb1 in the lung develop SCLC8,9, we also sequenced 8 of
these murine SCLC tumours in order to identify mutations that may promote SCLC
development following loss of Trp53 and Rb1 and that may overlap with such accessory
genes in human SCLC10 (Supplementary Table 5).

Author Manuscript

Samples and clinical data

Author Manuscript

We collected 152 fresh-frozen clinical tumour specimens obtained from patients diagnosed
with stage I–IV SCLC under institutional review board approval (Supplementary Table 1
and Extended Data Fig. 1). The tumour samples were enriched for earlier stages and
consisted of primary lung (n = 148) and metastatic tumours (n = 4) obtained by surgical
resection (n = 132), biopsy (n = 4), pleural effusion (n = 1) or through autopsy (n = 15). We
performed whole-genome sequencing on 110 of these tumours and their matched normal
DNA. A total of 42 cases were excluded from the analysis because of insufficient quality or
amount of DNA. Most of these 110 tumours were treatment-naive, with only five cases
obtained at the time of relapse. We analysed transcriptome sequencing data in 71 of the 110
specimens that had undergone genome sequencing and in 10 additional specimens. Finally,
103 of the 110 genome-sequenced specimens and 39 additional specimens were analysed by
Affymetrix 6.0 SNP arrays (Supplementary Table 1 and Extended Data Fig. 1). Eight tumour
samples from preclinical SCLC mouse models were analysed by whole-exome sequencing
(n = 6) or whole-genome sequencing (n = 2) (Supplementary Table 5).

Recurrent somatic alterations in SCLC

Author Manuscript

SCLC genomes exhibited extremely high mutation rates2,3 of 8.62 nonsynonomous
mutations per million base pairs (Mb). C:G>A:T transversions were found in 28% of all
mutations on average, a pattern indicative of heavy smoking (Fig. 1a and Supplementary
Tables 2 and 3). The smoking history or clinical stage of the tumours did not correlate with
the type and number of mutations (Extended Data Fig. 2). The median tumour content was
84% (Extended Data Fig. 3a and Supplementary Table 2). By contrast, murine SCLC
tumours showed a low number of somatic alterations (on average 28.5 protein-altering
mutations per sample on average)10 (Supplementary Table 5).
In order to assess the amount of genetic heterogeneity of SCLC, we developed a
subclonality score, which can be interpreted as the probability that an arbitrary point
mutation in a randomly selected cancer cell is subclonal throughout the entire tumour
(Methods). A reliable reconstruction of the subclonal architecture was possible in 55 of the
cases (Extended Data Fig. 3b). A comparison to lung adenocarcinoma11 indicated a

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 09.

George et al.

Page 3

Author Manuscript

threefold lower subclonal diversity in SCLC (P = 0.00023, Extended Data Fig. 3b), pointing
to pronounced differences in the evolution of SCLC and lung adenocarcinoma12,13. In
contrast to adenocarcinomas, the level of heterogeneity in SCLC did not correlate with
clinical stage (Extended Data Fig. 2b).

Author Manuscript

We applied several analytical filters in order to identify mutations with a probable relevance
in SCLC biology in the context of the high load of background mutations2 (Extended Data
Fig. 1, Supplementary Table 6 and Methods). They include (I) analyses of significance
determined by a comparison of observed and expected mutation rates followed by a
correction for expressed genes, (II) a survey of regional clustering of mutations that may
indicate mutational targeting of functionally enriched areas in tumour suppressors or protooncogenes, (III) determination of genes that are enriched for likely damaging mutations,
(IV) a comparison with genes whose biological relevance has been established in SCLC
mouse models, and (V) a listing of genes with a likely therapeutic relevance or that are
otherwise frequently affected by genetic alterations in human cancers (that is, genes in the
Cancer Gene Census14 and COSMIC15 database).
Among the significantly mutated genes (I), (q-values < 0.05, Methods) were TP53 and RB1
(refs 4–7), KIAA1211 and COL22A1, as well as RGS7 and FPR1, both of which are
involved in G-protein-coupled receptor signalling (Fig. 1a).

Author Manuscript

Locally clustered mutations (II) are indicative of functional selection (P < 0.05,
Supplementary Table 6, Methods)2,16. Of all genes, Fig. 1a lists those alterations that
occurred in more than 8% of the samples, were otherwise affected by recurrent genomic
rearrangements (Supplementary Table 4), or were mutated in Trp53−/−, Rb1−/− or Trp53−/−,
Rb1−/−, Rbl2−/− SCLC tumours arising in mice8,9 (Supplementary Table 5). Confirming
previous results and our analytical strategy, the histone acetyltransferase genes CREBBP and
EP300 exhibited significantly clustered mutations and recurrent inactivating translocations
(Fig. 1a and Extended Data Fig. 3c)2,3. Furthermore, significant mutation clustering
occurred in genes with functional roles in the centrosome (ASPM, ALMS1 and PDE4DIP),
in the RNA-regulating gene XRN1 and the tetraspanin gene PTGFRN; the latter was also
mutated in murine SCLC (Extended Data Fig. 3c). The TP53 homologue TP73, which was
also affected by recurrent somatic rearrangements (Fig. 1a), also showed clustered
mutations.

Author Manuscript

In the group of significantly damaged genes (III) we also found TP53, RB1, CREBBP and
COL22A1, further highlighting their likely biological relevance in SCLC. Additional
inactivating mutations occurred in FMN2 and NOTCH1 (P < 0.01). NOTCH family genes
were recurrently mutated with a pattern of frequent inactivation. Notch3 was also mutated in
a Trp53−/−,Rb1−/−,Rbl2−/− mouse tumour (Fig. 1a, Supplementary Table 5 and Methods).
Of the genes with an established role in murine SCLC (IV), we confirmed PTEN10,17. RBL1
and RBL2, which are closely related to RB1 (ref. 9), similarly exhibited inactivating
translocations and mutations (Fig. 1a, Extended Data Fig. 3d and Supplementary Table 4).
Mice with inactivation of Trp53, Rb1 and Rbl2 develop SCLC with shorter latency than

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 09.

George et al.

Page 4

Author Manuscript

mice lacking Trp53 and Rb1 alone9, thus validating RBL2 as another accessory tumour
suppressor in SCLC.
Given the lack of therapeutic options in SCLC, we sought mutations that are known
oncogenic drivers in other cancers and sometimes associated with response to targeted drugs
(V)14,15. Of these, we found mutations in four tumours with a potential therapeutic
implication, including mutations in BRAF18, KIT19,20 and PIK3CA21 (Extended Data Fig.
3e). Thus, genotyping of SCLC patients may reveal individual patients who might have a
possible benefit from targeted therapeutic intervention.

Author Manuscript

Across these five categories, mutations in CREBBP, EP300, TP73, RBL1, RBL2 and
NOTCH family genes were largely mutually exclusive (Fig. 1a), suggesting that they may
exert similar pro-tumorigenic functions in the development of SCLC. We did not observe
significant correlations of global mutational signatures (for example, predominance of
C:G>A:T transversions) with the mutational status of these genes (Extended Data Fig. 2b).
Furthermore, mutations in these genes were not significantly associated with the total
number of mutations, overall survival or other clinical parameters (Extended Data Fig. 4).
The mutation status of 22 of the most frequently mutated genes was confirmed in an
independent data set (Methods and Supplementary Table 7).

Author Manuscript

By analysing somatic copy number alterations, we confirmed previously known genomic
losses within 3p pointing to focal events on 3p14.3–3p14.2 (harbouring FHIT5) and 3p12.3–
3p12.2 (harbouring ROBO1 (ref. 22)) (Fig. 1b, Extended Data Fig. 5a and Supplementary
Table 8)5,22,23. FHIT expression was also reduced in cases with focal deletions (Extended
Data Fig. 5b). In addition to homozygous losses in the CDKN2A locus (Extended Data Fig.
5c), amplification of the MYC family genes5, MYCL1, MYCN and MYC, as well as of the
tyrosine kinase gene, FGFR1 (refs 2, 24), and IRS2 were recurrent genomic events (Fig. 1b).
Focal IRS2 amplifications occurred in 2% of the cases (Extended Data Fig. 5d, e).

Universal inactivation of TP53 and RB1

Author Manuscript

Inactivating mutations in TP53 and RB1 have been shown to affect up to 90% and up to 65%
of SCLC, respectively2–7. By contrast, our whole-genome sequencing analyses revealed that
both genes were altered in all but two cases that exhibited signs of chromothripsis25 (Figs 1
and 2). TP53 and RB1 alterations were mostly inactivating (Supplementary Table 9 and
Extended Data Fig. 6a). Missense mutations in TP53 affected the functionally critical DNA
binding domain, while RB1 was frequently altered by complex genomic translocations.
Many mutations in RB1 occurred at exon–intron junctions, which caused protein-damaging
splice events as confirmed by transcriptome sequencing (Extended Data Fig. 6b–e and
Supplementary Tables 10 and 11). In the 108 tumours without chromothripsis, TP53 and
RB1 had bi-allelic losses in 100% and 93% of the cases, respectively. Inactivating events
included mutations, translocations, homozygous deletions, hemizygous losses, copy-neutral
losses of heterozygosity (LOH) and LOH at higher ploidy (Fig. 2a, Extended Data Fig. 6
and Supplementary Table 9). Loss of CDKN2A occurred in cases with both bi-allelic
inactivation of TP53 and RB1 and hemizygous loss of RB1 (Fig. 2a). Although emerging
data supports a continuum model of inactivation of tumour suppressors across multiple

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 09.

George et al.

Page 5

Author Manuscript

cancers, TP53 and RB1 follow the classical discrete ‘two-hit paradigm’ pattern of Knudsontype tumour suppressors in SCLC26,27.

Author Manuscript

The two tumours affected by chromothripsis displayed a similar pattern of massive genomic
rearrangements between chromosomes 3 and 11 (Fig. 2b and Extended Data Fig. 7a), but
lacked shared fusion transcripts in the transcriptome sequencing data, suggesting that a
particular fusion is not a common target (Extended Data Fig. 7b and Supplementary Table
12). Of the genes on chromosomes 3 and 11, CCND1 (encoding cyclin D1) was retained
(Fig. 2b and Extended Data Fig. 7a) resulting in significant CCND1 overexpression in both
tumours, but not in the other SCLC specimens (Fig. 2c, d and Supplementary Table 13).
Immunohistochemistry confirmed high expression of cyclin D1 and a lack of nuclear Rb1
(Fig. 2e, Extended Data Fig. 7c). There were fewer proliferating Ki67-positive cells in these
two cases. As cyclin D1 negatively regulates Rb family proteins28, these findings suggest
that chromothripsis in cases with wild-type RB1 may compensate for genomic loss of RB1.
Together, our findings provide evidence for the notion that complete genomic loss of both
TP53 and RB1 function is obligatory in the pathogenesis of SCLC.

Oncogenic genomic events affecting TP73

Author Manuscript

We analysed the genome sequencing data for the presence of clustered chromosomal
breakpoints that may indicate a common biological target (Supplementary Table 14)29 and
found 5 major clusters affecting RB1, as well as regions on chromosomes 1, 3 (3q26), 6
(affecting CDKAL1) and 22 (Fig. 3a). Breakpoints in chromosome 22 caused inactivating
translocations of TTC28 (Extended Data Fig. 8a)30. Breakpoints also clustered downstream
of the L1HS retrotransposon in SCLC, further supporting a role for this element in
cancer31,32, (Extended Data Fig. 8b). Breakpoints on chromosomes 3, 6 and 22 did not result
in changes of expression of the affected genes (Supplementary Table 10).

Author Manuscript

By contrast, genomic breakpoints affecting chromosome 1 clustered precisely in the TP73
locus in 7% of the cases (n = 8). To our surprise, several breakpoints were recurrently
located in introns 1, 2 and 3 of TP73. In two cases, breakpoints led to complex
intrachromosomal rearrangements (Extended Data Fig. 8c and Supplementary Table 4),
while the majority of breaks caused intragenic fusions and, thus, exclusion of either exon 2,
or exons 2 and 3, which were all somatic (Fig. 3b and Extended Data Fig. 8d). Some
rearrangements were copy-neutral events, while others occurred on the background of copy
number gains (Extended Data Fig. 8e). One tumour sample revealed genomic exclusion of
exon 10 (Fig. 3b). Analyses of transcriptome sequencing data confirmed that these
rearrangements created the N-terminally truncated transcript variants p73Δex2 and
p73Δex2/3, as well as p73Δex10 (ref. 33) (Fig. 3c, d and Supplementary Table 11). Genomic
validation and comparative profiling of transcript variants confirmed that p73Δex2/3 were
not naturally occurring splice variants in SCLC and were only found in cases with genomic
rearrangements (Fig. 3d and Supplementary Table 11). Some tumours expressed p73Δex2, in
which we failed to identify genomic rearrangements (Supplementary Table 11).

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 09.

George et al.

Page 6

Author Manuscript

p73Δex2 and p73Δex2/3 lack a fully competent transactivation domain and are known
tumour-derived variants of TP73 (ref. 33). p73 with N-terminal truncations has dominant
negative functions on wild-type p73 and p53, and is a confirmed oncogene in vivo34,35.
p73Δex10 results in an early stop codon; C-terminal truncations can similarly exert
dominant-negative effects on wild-type p73 (ref. 33).
Altogether, TP73 was somatically altered by mutations and genomic rearrangements in 13%
of the cases (Fig. 1 and Extended Data Fig. 8c–e). To our knowledge, this is the first study
describing p73Δex2/3 variants to emerge as a consequence of precise genomic
rearrangements.

Tumour suppressive roles of Notch in SCLC
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

In an unsupervised hierarchical clustering analysis of transcriptome sequencing data
(Methods), we observed two major clusters of SCLC tumours (Fig. 4a and Extended Data
Fig. 9a). The majority (77%, n = 53/69) of tumours exhibited high expression of the
neuroendocrine markers CHGA (chromogranin A)1 and GRP (gastrin releasing peptide)5,
had high levels of DLK1 (ref. 36), a non-canonical inhibitor of Notch signalling36, and
ASCL1, a lineage oncogene of neuroendocrine cells whose expression is inhibited by active
Notch signalling (Extended Data Fig. 9b)37,38. The remaining cases (23%, n = 16/69) also
expressed SYP (synaptophysin) or NCAM1 (CD56), thus confirming that all tumours were
of the typical SCLC subtype1 (Extended Data Fig. 9c). Furthermore, no significant
difference in the distribution of the major known SCLC mutations (for example, TP53, RB1
or CREBBP) existed between the two transcriptional subtypes (Extended Data Fig. 9a).
Thus, although all SCLC tumours shared the most frequent mutations as well as key
neuroendocrine markers, the majority had a gene expression pattern suggestive of low Notch
pathway activity (high levels of ASCL1 and DLK1).
Mutations affected NOTCH family genes in both human and murine SCLC (Fig. 1a and
Supplementary Table 5). The mutations did not cluster significantly in any individual
domains, but frequent damaging mutations occurred in the extracellular domain (Fig. 4b and
Extended Data Fig. 10a), suggesting that NOTCH may be a tumour suppressor in SCLC.
Overall, the NOTCH family was affected by genomic alterations in 25% of human SCLC
(Fig. 1).

Author Manuscript

Based on these observations and emerging evidence that activation of Notch signalling may
inhibit the expansion of neuroendocrine tumour cells39,40, we examined the consequences of
Notch pathway activation in Trp53;Rb1;Rbl2 conditional triple-knockout (TKO) mice9.We
crossed Rosa26Lox-stop-Lox-Notch2ICD (LSL-N2ICD) mice that conditionally express an
activated form of Notch2 (Notch2 intracellular domain, N2ICD) to TKO mice and found a
significant reduction in the number of tumours that arose in the presence of N2ICD (P <
0.001; Fig. 4c). Similar results were obtained upon activation of Notch1, reflecting a general
inhibition of SCLC initiation by active Notch signalling (Extended Data Fig. 10b). The
recombination efficiency of an innocuous inducible reporter allele (Rosa26mT/mG) by Cre
was much greater than that of the N2ICD allele, providing further support for a strong
negative selection against active Notch signalling during SCLC development (Extended Data

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 09.

George et al.

Page 7

Author Manuscript

Fig. 10c–e). Importantly, the inhibitory effects of Notch observed in the early stages of
tumorigenesis correlated with a prolongation of survival of the mutant mice expressing
N2ICD (Fig. 4d). Similarly, ectopic expression of N1ICD in both mouse and human SCLC
cell lines significantly inhibited their growth (Fig. 4e and Extended Data Fig. 10f).

Author Manuscript

SCLC tumours in TKO mice showed typical patterns of neuroendocrine differentiation with
high expression of synaptophysin and Ascl1. Consistent with the notion that Notch regulates
neuroendocrine differentiation in SCLC, overexpression of N2ICD resulted in the
upregulation of Hes1 and abrogated expression of neuroendocrine markers (Extended Data
Fig. 10g). Similarly, N1ICD induced upregulation of Notch targets (for example, Hes1,
Hey1, Hey2) in murine SCLC cells (Fig. 4f, Extended Data Fig. 10h and Supplementary
Table 15), as well as gene expression signatures consistent with cell cycle inhibition
(Extended Data Fig. 10i). Ectopic expression of N1ICD inhibited cell cycle progression in
murine and human SCLC cell lines (Extended Data Fig. 10j, k). This cell cycle inhibition is
reminiscent of what has been seen in other contexts where Notch activation acts as a tumour
suppressor41,42.
Altogether, our analyses involving genome and transcriptome sequencing of human and
murine SCLC tumours, as well as studies in genetically manipulated mice, identify and
validate Notch as a tumour suppressor and master regulator of neuroendocrine
differentiation in SCLC.

Discussion

Author Manuscript

Here we provide a comprehensive analysis of somatic genome alterations in SCLC,
identifying many novel candidate genes, some of which may have therapeutic implications.
Such alterations with immediate therapeutic consequences are rare but present in SCLC (for
example, in BRAF or KIT), suggesting that individual patients may benefit from genotyping
and subsequent targeted kinase inhibitor therapy. We further discovered recurrent expression
of p73Δex2/3 in SCLC and established a genetic mechanistic basis for this oncogenic
variant. TP73Δex2/3 has recently been demonstrated to function as an oncogene34,35 and
therapeutic options were identified to restrict p73-dependent tumour growth in vivo,
including in Trp53-deficient tumours35. Given the frequent occurrence of genomic TP73
alterations in SCLC, such approaches may potentially be promising in SCLC tumours. Our
results furthermore provide proof for universal bi-allelic inactivation of TP53 and RB1,
thereby establishing these two genes as obligatory tumour suppressors in SCLC.

Author Manuscript

Our genomic analyses also identified NOTCH family genes as tumour suppressors and
master regulators of neuroendocrine differentiation in SCLC, and we validated this finding
in vivo in a pre-clinical mouse model of this disease. Our observations may thus provide an
initial link between Notch and the neuroendocrine phenotype in SCLC. In contrast to the
involvement of TP73 and NOTCH family genes (Fig. 5), the functional role of most of the
other newly discovered genes (for example, KIAA1211, COL22A1, ASPM, PDE4DIP or
PTGFRN) is much less clear. Although our analytical filters support their involvement in the
tumour pathogenesis, functional experiments will be required to clarify their biological role.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 09.

George et al.

Page 8

Author Manuscript

In summary, we have provided the first, to our knowledge, comprehensive genomic analysis
of SCLC, implicating several previously unknown genes and biological processes (Fig. 5) in
the pathogenesis of this disease as possible targets for more efficacious targeted therapeutic
intervention against this deadly cancer.
Online Content Methods, along with any additional Extended Data display items and
Source Data, are available in the online version of the paper; references unique to these
sections appear only in the online paper.

METHODS
Human lung tumour specimens

Author Manuscript

The institutional review board of the University of Cologne approved this study. We
collected and analysed fresh-frozen tumour samples of 152 SCLC patients, which were
provided by multiple collaborating institutions as fresh-frozen tissue specimen, frozen
sections or as genomic DNA extracted from fresh-frozen material (Extended Data Fig. 1).
Human tumour samples were obtained from patients under IRB-approved protocols
following written informed consent.

Author Manuscript

The fresh-frozen SCLC samples were primary tumours diagnosed as stage I–IV tumours,
and snap-frozen after tissue sampling. All tumour samples were pathologically assessed to
have a purity of at least 60% and no extensive signs of necrosis. Additionally, these tumour
samples were reviewed by at least two independent expert pathologists and the diagnosis of
SCLC was histomorphologically confirmed by H&E staining and immunohistochemistry for
chromogranin A, synaptophysin, CD56 and Ki67. Matching normal material was provided
in the form of EDTA-anticoagulated blood or adjacent non-tumorigenic lung tissue
(Supplementary Table 1). The matched normal tissue was confirmed to be free of tumour
contaminants by pathological assessment. Furthermore, tumour and matching normal
material were confirmed to be acquired from the same patient by short tandem repeat (STR)
analysis conducted at the Institute of Legal Medicine at the University of Cologne
(Germany), or confirmed by subsequent SNP 6.0 array and sequencing analyses. Patient
material was stored at −80 °C.

Author Manuscript

Whole-genome sequencing was performed on 110 SCLC fresh-frozen tumour samples and
matched normal material. Additionally, we analysed RNA-seq data of 81 SCLC primary
tumours (Extended Data Fig. 1 and Supplementary Table 1), among which 20 cases were
previously published2,43. Furthermore, we studied the copy-number alterations of a total of
142 fresh-frozen tumour specimen by Affymetrix SNP 6.0, among which 74 cases were
described before44.
Clinical correlation studies were performed with the study cohort of 110 SCLC patients
considering age of diagnosis, gender, tumour stage, surgery, treatment with
chemotherapeutics, smoking status, smoking history and overall survival (Extended Data
Figs 2 and 4 and Supplementary Table 1). The median follow-up time for this cohort of 110
SCLC patients was 69 months, and 31% of the patients were alive at the time of last followup (Extended Data Fig. 2a and Supplementary Table 1). Smoking status was available for

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 09.

George et al.

Page 9

Author Manuscript

88% (n = 97) of the patients; 63% (n = 69) reported a smoking history amounting to a
median of 45 pack-years. Patients with a known smoking history were further
subcategorized to heavy smokers (>30 pack-years), average smokers (10–30 pack-years) and
light/never smokers (<10 pack-years).
Primary findings on somatic mutations were further studied in a second independent cohort
consisting of 112 SCLC cases. This validation cohort refers to the exome sequencing data of
28 fresh-frozen SCLC primary tumours and 9 SCLC cell lines2,3 which were re-analysed in
this present study (Supplementary Table 7). Additionally, we performed targeted sequencing
on 8 fresh-frozen and 67 formalin fixed paraffin embedded (FFPE) samples from SCLC
patients (Supplementary Table 1).
Mouse SCLC models and tumour samples

Author Manuscript

Mice were maintained according to practices prescribed by the NIH (Bethesda, MD) at
Stanford’s Research Animal Facility, accredited by the Association for the Assessment and
Accreditation of Laboratory Animal Care (AAALAC). The Trp53;Rb1 double-knockout
(DKO) and the Trp53;Rb1;Rbl2 triple-knockout (TKO) mouse models for SCLC have been
previously described8,9. Mice were bred onto a mixed genetic background composed of
C57BL/6, 129/SvJ and 129/SvOla. SCLC tumours were induced in 8-week-old mice by
intratracheal instillation with 4 × 107 plaque-forming units (p.f.u.) of adenovirus expressing
the Cre recombinase (Ad-Cre, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX).

Author Manuscript

Whole-genome and whole-exome sequencing was performed on 8 murine SCLC tumours
isolated from DKO and TKO mice. Primary tumours and metastases were dissected, snapfrozen, and stored at −80 °C. The material was pathologically confirmed to have a tumour
content of at least 90%. The respective tail tissue was similarly processed and served as a
normal reference for 6 tumour samples (Supplementary Table 5). Average mutation rates
were calculated for cases with tumour-normal pairs (n = 6).

Author Manuscript

SCLC tumours expressing the activated intracellular domain (ICD) of Notch1 (Notch1 ICD,
N1ICD) and Notch2 (Notch2 ICD, N2ICD) were analysed in mouse models.
Rosa26Lox-stop-Lox-Notch1ICD (LSL-N1ICD) or Rosa26Lox-stop-Lox-Notch2ICD (LSL-N2ICD)
mice were obtained from Spyros Artavanis-Tsakonas and Exelixis. These mice are similar to
recently published Rosa26+/LSL-Notch3ICD mice45. Rosa26+/LSL-N1ICD or Rosa26+/LSL-N2ICD
mice were crossed with TKO mice. TKO or TKO;Rosa26+/LSL-NICD mice were infected
with Ad-Cre at week 8 and their survival was monitored. The sample size was chosen based
on our experience with these mouse models of cancer (a minimum of 3–5 mice usually
ensures statistical significance if the phenotypes are robust). We used both males and
females in these experiments, littermates served as controls. Tumour initiation was studied
three months after Ad-Cre instillation. The lungs were fixed and tumour burden was
quantified using ImageJ software. To control for the efficiency of deletion, we also crossed
TKO mice to Rosa26mT/mG reporter mice46. For all tumour quantifications, the investigator
was blinded to the genotypes when the H&E pictures were taken, and during the
quantification of tumour number and area. No samples or animals were excluded from the
analyses, and no randomization was performed.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 09.

George et al.

Page 10

DNA and RNA extractions

Author Manuscript

Nucleic acids were extracted from fresh-frozen tissue specimen which were processed to
15–30 sections each of 20 µm thickness at a cryostat maintaining a temperature of −20 °C
(Leica). In the case of FFPE samples, 6–10 sections of 10 µm thickness were prepared.
DNA was extracted from fresh-frozen tissues, EDTA blood, or FFPE samples using the
Gentra Puregene DNA extraction kit (Qiagen) following the protocol of the manufacturer.
DNA isolates were hydrated in TE-buffer and confirmed to be of high molecular weight
(>10 kb) by agarose gel electrophoresis. Genomic DNA from fresh-frozen samples with
evident signs of degradation were excluded from further sequencing studies.

Author Manuscript

For RNA extractions, tissue sections were first lysed and homogenized with the Tissue Lyzer
(Qiagen). Subsequent RNA extractions were performed with the Qiagen RNAeasy Mini Kit
according to the instructions of the manufacturer. The RNA quality was assessed at the
Bioanalyzer 2100 DNA Chip 7500 (Agilent Technologies) and samples with a RNA
integrity number (RIN) of over 7 were further analysed by RNA-seq.
Next-generation sequencing
All sequencing reactions were performed on an Illumina HiSeq 2000 instrument (Illumina,
San Diego, CA, USA).

Author Manuscript

Whole-genome sequencing—Whole-genome sequencing was performed with DNA
extracted from fresh-frozen tumour and normal material. Short insert DNA libraries were
prepared with the TruSeq DNA PCRfree sample preparation kit (Illumina) for paired-end
sequencing at a minimum read length of 2 × 100 bp. Human DNA libraries were sequenced
with the aim to obtain a coverage of minimum 30× for both tumour and matched normal.
Murine DNA libraries of tumour and matched normal were both sequenced to a coverage of
25×.
Whole-exome sequencing—Whole-exome sequencing was performed on fresh-frozen
tissue specimen from mice. The enrichment for the exome was performed with the
SureSelectXT Mouse All Exon kit (Agilent) following the protocol of the manufacturer. The
exon-enriched libraries were subjected to paired-end sequencing with a read-length of 2 ×
100 bp. Both tumour and normal material was sequenced to a minimum coverage of 60×

Author Manuscript

RNA-sequencing—RNA-sequencing (RNA-seq) was performed with RNA extracted
from fresh-frozen human tumour tissue samples. cDNA libraries were prepared from
poly(A) selected RNA applying the Illumina TruSeq protocol for mRNA. The libraries were
then sequenced with a 2 × 100 bp paired-end protocol to a minimum mean coverage of 30×
of the annotated transcriptome.
Targeted enrichment sequencing—Targeted enrichment sequencing was performed on
human FFPE and fresh-frozen tumour and normal specimen for the purpose of validating
genome alterations in an independent cohort. The custom probe design was constructed with
SureDesign (Agilent Technologies) enriching for the exons of 22 genes of interest. DNA
libraries were prepared with the SureSelect XT reagent kit according to the manufacturer’s
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 09.

George et al.

Page 11

Author Manuscript

instructions (Agilent Technologies) and sequenced with the aim to obtain a coverage of at
least 200×.
Dideoxy sequencing for validation of somatic alterations
If available, RNA-seq or exome sequencing was used to validate somatic mutations
determined by genome sequencing. Alternatively, dideoxynucleotide chain termination
sequencing (Sanger sequencing) was performed to validate mutations, genomic
rearrangements, and chimaeric fusion transcripts. Primer pairs were designed to amplify the
target region encompassing the somatic alteration. The PCR reactions were performed either
with genomic DNA, whole-genome amplified DNA or cDNA. The amplified products were
subjected to Sanger sequencing and the respective electropherogram was analysed with
Geneious (http://www.geneious.com).

Author Manuscript

Copy number analysis by Affymetrix SNP 6.0 arrays
Human DNA extracted from fresh-frozen tumour specimen was hybridized to Affymetrix
Genome-Wide Human SNP array 6.0 following the manufacturer’s instructions. The signal
intensities were processed to analyse for chromosomal gene copy number data. Raw copy
number signals and segmented copy number data were computed following the procedure
described previously24.
The raw, unsegmented copy number signals were used to analyse for significant copy
number alterations applying the method CGARS47. Significant amplifications were
determined with the upper quantiles 0.25, 0.15, 0.1, and 0.05; deletions were computed in
reference to the 0.25 lower quantile. The significance threshold was set at a q-value of 0.05
(Supplementary Table 8).

Author Manuscript

Data processing
The raw sequencing reads of human and mouse samples acquired from whole-genome,
whole-exome or targeted enrichment sequencing were aligned to the respective human
(NCBI37/hg19) or mouse reference genome (NCBI37/mm9). The alignment was performed
with the BWA aligner48 (version 0.6.1-r104). Concordant read-pairs were identified as
potential PCR duplicates and were subsequently masked in the alignment file. The quality of
the sequencing data was determined and is summarized in Supplementary Table 2.
The whole-genome sequencing data of human samples was analysed for purity and ploidy
with methods previously described2 (Extended Data Fig. 3a and Supplementary Table 2).

Author Manuscript

Somatic mutations and copy number alterations were determined with our in-house analysis
pipeline2,49. The calling of somatic mutations in human samples was further improved by
filtering the identified variant against the sequencing data of more than 500 normal samples
(including exome or genome sequencing data). Additionally, an estimation of human DNA
library contamination was implemented to enhance sensitivity and specificity of mutation
calling.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 09.

George et al.

Page 12

Analysis of significantly mutated and biologically relevant genes

Author Manuscript

The significance of recurrently mutated genes was analysed for the whole-genome
sequencing data set of 110 human SCLC samples (Extended Data Fig. 1a).
As previously described2, the analysis first estimated the background mutation rate for each
gene and corrected for its expression by referring to the RNA-seq data of 81 human primary
SCLC tumour specimen analysed in the present study. The analysis included those genes
which had FPKM values (fragments per kilobase of exon per million fragments mapped) of
over 1 in at least 50 samples. Following corrections for the occurrence of synonymous
mutations, significantly mutated genes were determined with q-values of < 0.05 (Fig. 1a,
Extended Data Fig. 1a (filter I) and Supplementary Table 6).

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Mutations that cluster within a gene are defined as a mutational hotspot similar to our
previously described method2. Here we used an analytical derivation of the test statistics,
rather than resampling. To this end, the mutated positions are rescaled to lie within zero and
one (using the protein length). Under the null hypothesis of having no particular mutational
hotspot, the rescaled mutated positions are uniformly distributed between zero and one, thus
its expected value is 0.5. We therefore chose the final statistics as sum over the modulus of
the rescaled position minus 0.5. This allows that the distribution under the null hypothesis
can analytically be calculated; hence, also the P values. The analysis was calculated for
genes that were significantly mutated in at least 5% of the samples with P < 0.05 (Fig. 1a,
Extended Data Fig. 1a (filter II) and Supplementary Table 6). In order to further filter for the
genes of relevance, subsequent analysis considered those genes recurrently mutated in more
than 8% (n > 8) samples. The called genes were scored for their relevance by either
analysing recurrent translocations affecting these genes (Supplementary Table 4) or by
comparison with the mouse SCLC mutation data to identify alterations in common genes
(Supplementary Table 5).
Additionally, recurrent mutations were scored for the accumulation of clearly damaging
mutations in which splice site, frameshift and nonsense mutations were considered as
damaging mutations. Here, we restricted the aforementioned significance analysis only to
this class of mutations (by restricting the background mutation rate only to damaging
mutations) and determined significance at P < 0.01 (Fig. 1a, Extended Data Fig. 1a (filter
III) and Supplementary Table 6).

Author Manuscript

Genetic alterations were further scored for their relevance by comparison with genes that
were functionally characterized in genetically engineered mouse models (GEMM) for
SCLC9,10, or by comparing somatic mutations in SCLC with mutations in other cancer types
reported in the Cancer Gene Census14 and in COSMIC (catalogue of somatic mutations in
cancer)15 (Fig. 1a, Extended Data Fig. 1a (filter IV and V) and Supplementary Table 6).
Additionally, the sequencing data of mouse SCLC specimen was used to identify alterations
in common genes.
Analysis of subclonal architecture
To determine the subclonal architecture from genome sequencing data, we first computed
the cancer cell fraction (CCF; that is, the fraction of cancer cells carrying a particular
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 09.

George et al.

Page 13

Author Manuscript

mutation) of each called somatic point mutation. To this end, we first estimated the tumour
purity, absolute copy numbers, and subclonal copy number changes using our previously
described method2 and computed for each mutation the expected allelic fraction under
clonality assumption. The quotient between the observed allelic fraction of a mutation with
its corresponding expected allelic fraction then yields the CCF. To assess the clonal and
subclonal populations we next identified distinct clusters in the CCF profile and assigned
each mutation to the cluster of highest probability. In order to provide a measure for the
subclonal architecture, we proposed the following score:

Author Manuscript

where i = 0 represents the clonal population, i = 1,…,nc the subclonal populations; φi is the
CCF of each population (thus, φ0 ≈ 1), and mi is the number of mutations assigned to
cluster i. This subclonality score can be interpreted as the probability that a randomly
selected mutation present in a single cancer cell is subclonal throughout the entire tumour.
As a low sequencing depth limits the robust identification of subclonal populations, we
computed the genome-wide average contribution of a single mutated read to the CCF. For a
given tumour purity p, average ploidy π, and mean coverage c, this measure is given by:

Author Manuscript

The smaller the average increase of CCF per read, the more accurately the subclonality score
can be determined since more subclonal mutations can be called from the sequencing data.
In this study, the most limiting factor for assessing the subclonal diversity is the relatively
low sequencing depth (35× on average). We therefore used this measure to select the
samples that are suitable for a reliable calculation of the subclonality score. To this end, we
systematically scanned from the average increase of CCF per read form large to small values
and detected the point of the most prominent change in the distribution of the subclonality
score (Supplementary Table 2).
Analysis of genomic breakpoints

Author Manuscript

Genomic rearrangements were reconstructed from the whole-genome sequencing data of
110 human SCLC samples following the procedure as previously described2,49. The
genomic rearrangements called from each tumour sample were further filtered against a
library of 110 normal genomes to thus minimize the detection of false-positive
rearrangements. Genomic breakpoints of SCLC candidate driver genes are listed in
Supplementary Table 4.
The genomic breakpoints of all samples were mapped to their chromosomal locations and
recurrent breakpoints clustering within the range of 100 kb were identified with a similar
approach described previously29 (Supplementary Table 14).

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 09.

George et al.

Page 14

Processing and analysis of RNA-seq data

Author Manuscript

RNA-seq data was processed as previously described2,49 to detect chimaeric transcripts and
to determine the transcriptional abundance of annotated transcript variants. In brief, pairedend RNA-seq reads were mapped to the human reference genome (NCBI37/hg19) using
GSNAP. Potential chimaeric fusion transcripts were identified by discordant read pairs and
by individual reads mapping to distinct chromosomal locations. The sequence context of
rearranged transcripts was reconstructed around the identified breakpoint and the assembled
fusion transcript was then aligned to the human reference genome to determine the genes
involved in the fusion.
Cufflinks was used to determine the expression levels of annotated transcripts referring to
unique paired-end reads which align within the expected mapping distance. The expression
is represented as FPKM values (Supplementary Table 10).

Author Manuscript

Transcript splicing analysis

Author Manuscript

RNA-seq data was used to analyse for alternative splicing events of TP53, RB1 and TP73
caused by exon skipping or intron retention (Supplementary Table 11). The paired-end reads
were mapped to the reference genome (hg19) using STAR mapper. In reference to the
annotation of exon junctions provided from UCSC genes and RefSeq the following
parameters were applied: ref 1, options:–alignIntronMin 20,–alignIntronMax 500000,–
outFilterMismatchNmax 10, and–chimSegmentMin 10. The coordinates of reads potentially
crossing exon boundaries were derived from the respective “SJ.out.tab” file and compared to
the reference annotation. Subsequently, junction read counts were assigned to all transcripts
containing the respective exon combination. If the exon combination is novel, read counts
were assigned to those transcripts sharing one of the exons contributing to the novel
junction. For subsequent analyses the transcript with the highest number of junction read
counts was used as a reference. Additionally, for exon combinations unique to alternative
transcripts a representative transcript was selected based on total read counts. The read
counts of each exon junction were normalized to the reads per kilobase per million mapped
reads (RPKM) per sample. These expression values were further normalized per gene by
dividing by the average expression of the exons of the reference transcript. Potentially novel
exon combinations were rejected if the average expression of the reference transcript was <2
or if their expression were <10% of the reference transcript expression.
Differential expression for outlier studies

Author Manuscript

Differential gene expression analysis was performed to compare the transcriptional profile of
the two chromothripsis cases (S02297 and S02353) with other non-chromothripsis SCLC
cases and to thus identify outliers in the expression profile. The expression was analysed by
computing z-scores for all samples referring to the RPKM values and using the R function
‘scale’; RPKM values smaller than 3 were set to 0. In order to prioritize for genes
differentially expressed in the two samples S02297 and S02353, genes were ranked by their
respective z-scores. Statistical testing was performed for genes on Chr 3 and Chr 11,
respectively. The P values were then combined from the two samples using Fisher’s method
and corrected for multiple hypothesis testing by using the Benjamini–Hochberg approach.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 09.

George et al.

Page 15

Author Manuscript

Differentially expressed genes with a P < 0.05 and q-values <0.01 are provided in
Supplementary Table 13.
Unsupervised expression clustering

Author Manuscript

Unsupervised clustering was performed with RNA-seq data of 69 SCLC cases for which
matching genome sequencing data was available (Fig. 4a and Extended Data Fig. 9a). As
expression values are approximately following log-normal distribution, we transformed raw
FPKM of each transcript by log2(1 + FPKM). The resulting expression scores were then
searched for a high and low expression characteristic over the samples. To this end,
expression scores of each transcript were divided into two states using k-means clustering.
To prevent an accumulation of artificial signals, only transcripts with at least 6 samples in
each state and having a state-averaged fold change larger than 3 are considered for further
analysis. A t-test is then computed between the two states of the remaining transcripts and
corrected for multiple hypothesis testing using the false discovery rate framework. Next,
transcripts having a q-value smaller than 0.01 were selected. For genes with multiple
transcript variants, the transcript with the smallest q-value was chosen as representative
transcript. Then, invariant genes were removed (having a standard deviation across all
samples <2). To improve clustering, only genes that share a similar pattern of the two states
in at least 6 other genes are finally selected (using a Fisher’s exact test with a significance
threshold of 10−6). Using the determined list of transcripts/genes, hierarchical clustering
(Euclidean distance, complete linkage) was performed on the raw expression scores.
IRS2 amplification FISH assay

Author Manuscript

A fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) assay was used to detect and confirm IRS2
amplifications at the chromosomal level. We performed a signal detection approach, with
two probes on chromosome 13: the reference probe is located on the centromeric region of
chromosome 13 (Empire Genomics, Art.Nr.: CHR13-10-GR) and was labelled with green 5fluorescein dUTP to produce a green signal; the target probe is located on the IRS2 locus
spanning 13q33.3–34 and was labelled with biotin to produce a red signal using the
CTD-2083015 BAC clone (Life Technologies, CA, USA). As previously described24, slides
of FFPE and fresh-frozen samples of tumour tissues were prepared, stained and analysed at a
fluorescence microscope (Zeiss, Jena, Germany) with a 63× oil immersion objective. A nonamplified nucleus showed one red target signal for every corresponding green reference
signal, with a red/green ratio of 1:1 (Extended Data Fig. 5e). High-level amplifications were
determined for at least 10 red signals. In some cases the red signals were observed as
clusters in the cells. At least 100 nuclei per case were evaluated.

Author Manuscript

Immunohistochemistry
Immunohistochemistry was performed on human tumour FFPE samples to analyse for the
protein expression of Rb, cyclin D1, p53, p14 (ARF), and p16. The staining was performed
with the BenchMark XT automated immunohistochemistry slide staining system (Roche).
The following antibodies and conditions were applied: Rb (C-15) rabbit polyclonal (Santa
Cruz; FFPE retrieving conditions: 60 min at pH 6.0; dilution: 1:500; incubation: 60 min,
37 °C); Cyclin D1 clone SP4 rabbit monoclonal (Microm France; FFPE retrieving
conditions: 90 min at pH 8.4; dilution: 1:200; incubation: 60 min, 37 °C); p53 clone DO7
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 09.

George et al.

Page 16

Author Manuscript

mouse monoclonal (Dako; FFPE retrieving conditions: 60 min at pH 8.4; dilution: 1:25;
incubation: 60 min, 37 °C); p14ARF clone 4C6/4 mouse monoclonal (Cell Signaling; FFPE
retrieving conditions: 60 min, water-bath 98 °C at pH 6.0; manual immunohistochemistry
staining with Novolink Max polymer detection system (Leica); dilution: 1:4,000; incubation:
overnight, 4 °C); p16 INK4 Ab-7 clone PO7 mouse monoclonal (Neomarkers; FFPE
retrieving conditions: 60 min at pH 8.4; dilution: 1:800; incubation: 60 min, room
temperature).

Author Manuscript

For immunohistochemistry on mouse tumour FFPE samples, sections were permeabilized
for antigen retrieval by microwaving in a citrate-based antigen unmasking solution (Vector
Laboratories). The following antibodies were used: GFP (Invitrogen; A11122; dilution:
1:400), RFP/Tomato (Rockland Immunochemicals; 600-401-379; dilution: 1:500), Notch2
(Cell Signaling; 5732; dilution: 1:200), Hes1 (Cell Signaling; 11988; dilution: 1:200), Ascl1
(BD Biosciences; 556604; dilution: 1:200) and Synaptophysin (Neuromics; MO20000;
dilution: 1:200). Sections were developed with DAB (Vector Labs) and counterstained with
haematoxylin.
Cell lines, tissue culture and transfections

Author Manuscript

Mouse (KP1) and human (NJH29, NCI-H82 and NCI-H187) SCLC cell lines were grown in
RPMI-1640 media supplemented with 10% bovine growth serum (BGS) (Fisher Scientific)
and penicillin-streptomycin-glutamine (Gibco), as described before50. KP1, NJH29 were
generated at Stanford. NCI-H82 and NCI-H187 were purchased from ATCC. These cells
grow as suspension spheres or aggregates in culture. All cell lines were maintained at 37 °C
in a humidified chamber with 5% CO2. All cell lines tested negative for mycoplasma
infection. For transient expression of Notch ICD, cells were trypsinized and transfected with
either MigR1-IRES-GFP (Ctrl) or MigR1-Notch1-ICD-IRES-GFP (NICD) using
Lipofectamine 2000 (Life Technologies). The plasmids were gifts from W.S. Pear
(University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia). Then 48 h after transfection, cells were
trypsinized and resuspended in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) containing 10% BGS and 1
µg ml−1 7-aminoactinomycin D (Life Technologies) that labels dead cells. Live GFP+ cells
were then sorted for subsequent experiments using a BD FACSAria fluorescence-activated
cell sorting (FACS) machine.
Gene expression and microarray analysis
Gene expression and microarray analyses were performed with the mouse cell line KP1
transiently transfected with MigR1-IRES-GFP (Ctrl) or MigR1-Notch1-ICD-IRES-GFP
(N1ICD).

Author Manuscript

Then 1 × 105 GFP+ cells were sorted and the RNA isolated using the AllPrep DNA/RNA
micro kit (Qiagen). RNA quality assessment using the 2100 Bioanalyzer (Agilent) as well as
the subsequent cDNA preparation steps for microarray analysis were performed at the
Stanford Protein and Nucleic Acid (PAN) facility using the GeneChip Mouse Gene 2.0 ST
Array (Affymetrix). For gene expression analysis, the Robust Multichip Average (RMA)
Express 1.0.4 program was used for background adjustment and quantile RMA
normalization of the 41,345 probe sets encoding mouse genome transcripts. Linear models

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 09.

George et al.

Page 17

Author Manuscript

for microarray data (LIMMA) was used to compare Ctrl or N1ICD samples on RMA
normalized signal intensities. Only genes with an adjusted P value of 0.05 or less were
considered as significantly differentially expressed. A total of 769 probes accounting for 760
genes were significant, and the expression levels of these genes were represented as a
heatmap using the heatmap.2 function in R. The analysis was performed in triplicates. A list
of significant genes is provided in Supplementary Table 15.
MTT cell viability assay
Sorted GFP+ cells were seeded at 1 × 104 per well in 96-well plates. The MTT reagents
(Roche) were added on days 0, 2, 4, 6 and 8 for mouse SCLC cell lines or on days 0, 2, 4
and 6 for the human SCLC cell line NJH29. The absorbance wavelength was 570 nm with a
reference wavelength of 650 nm.

Author Manuscript

EdU incorporation assay
Transfected cells were treated with 10 µM EdU (5-ethynyl-2′-deoxyuridine) (Life
Technologies) for 3 h before trypsinization for FACS. 1 × 105 live, GFP+ cells were sorted
and labelled with EdU using the Click-iT EdU Pacific Blue flow cytometry assay kit (Life
Technologies). Cells were then run through the BD FACSAria to analyse for per cent EdU
incorporation.
Data reporting
No statistical methods were used to predetermine sample size.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 09.

George et al.

Page 18

Author Manuscript

Extended Data

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Extended Data Figure 1. Genomic analyses in SCLC tumours

a, Schematic detailing the genomic study and number of samples as well as various steps of
analyses for the identification of candidate genes in SCLC. b, Illustration of the number of
samples analysed in this study.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 09.

George et al.

Page 19

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Extended Data Figure 2. Clinical molecular-correlation analyses

a, Survival analysis of SCLC patients based on clinical stage and treatment options (surgery
and/or chemotherapy). Statistical significance was determined by log-rank test. b, Analyses
of clinical stage and smoking status and the respective effect on number and type of
mutations, as well as mutational subclonality in tumours. Statistical significance was
determined by Kruskal–Wallis analysis.

Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 09.

George et al.

Page 20

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Extended Data Figure 3. Genomic characterization of SCLC tumours

a, Purity and ploidy determined in SCLC tumours by whole-genome sequencing presented
as dot density plots showing median and the interquartile range (IQR) b, Subclonal
architecture of SCLC in comparison to lung adenocarcinoma (AD). Whole-genome
sequencing data of SCLC and of adenocarcinoma (n = 15)11 was analysed for the presence
of subclonal populations using clustering of the derived cancer cell fraction (CCF) of all
single nucleotide mutations. To compare the emerging subclonal structure, we derived a
subclonality score that takes into account the CCF of each subpopulation as well as its

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 09.

George et al.

Page 21

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

mutational burden (see Methods). In order to prevent the low sequencing coverage (35 × for
SCLC and 63 × for AD) from causing a systematic underrepresentation of the subclonal
diversity in the mutation calls, we computed the contribution of a single read to the CCF on
genome-wide average. After systematically determining a threshold within the average
increase of CCF per read values (see Methods for details), we determined the group of
samples for which a reliable estimation of the subclonality score is not possible (grey area).
The subclonality scores of the remaining SCLC cases were then compared to those of the
adenocarcinoma cases (P = 0.000232; Mann–Whitney test). c, Schematic representation of
candidate genes with significant clustering of mutations in respective protein domains.
Somatic mutations and genomic translocations are mapped to the respective protein regions.
Hotspot mutations are highlighted in red. d, e, Genomic alterations in the RB1 family
proteins p107 (RBL1) and p130 (RBL2) (d), and in KIT and PIK3CA (e). Somatic
mutations in therapeutic target genes are listed and mapped to the protein domains of KIT
and PIK3CA. Mutations with potential therapeutic implications are highlighted in red.

Author Manuscript
Extended Data Figure 4. Clinical molecular-correlations of significantly mutated genes

Author Manuscript

a, Survival analysis of SCLC patients based on the status of CREBBP/EP300, TP73 or
NOTCH alterations. Statistical significance was determined by log-rank test. b, Analysis of
CREBBP/EP300, TP73 and NOTCH alterations and their effect on clinical and genetic
parameters. Statistical significance was analysed by multinomial logistic regression.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 09.

George et al.

Page 22

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Extended Data Figure 5. Significant somatic copy number alterations in SCLC

a, Deletions of the chromosomal arm 3p point to the 3p14 (FHIT) and 3p12 (ROBO1) locus.
b, Expression analyses of genes encoded on the 3p14.3–3p14.2 and 3p12.2–3p12.2 locus.
Histogram displaying the expression of samples with focal deletions (blue) and samples
without any copy number alterations (white). Mean and standard error of the mean is plotted
for each gene in each group. Significant differences were determined by Mann–Whitney
test; *P < 0.05; **P < 0.01. c, d, Focal deletions of the CDKN2A (c) and focal
amplifications of IRS2 (d) were found on chromosome 9 and 13, respectively. The copy

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 09.

George et al.

Page 23

Author Manuscript

number (CN) states were computed from SNP array (SNP 6.0) and from whole-genome
sequencing (WGS) data. The samples are sorted according to their amplitude of deletions or
amplifications. e, Amplifications of IRS2 were determined by FISH analysis. IRS
amplifications were quantified based on the ratio of red signals (IRS2-specific probe) to
green signals (centromere probe for chromosome 13). Lymphocyte spreads and SCLC
tumours without detectable IRS2 amplifications served as negative controls. Scale bar, 100
µm.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 09.

George et al.

Page 24

Extended Data Figure 6. TP53 and RB1 alterations in SCLC

Author Manuscript

a, Distribution of somatic mutations in TP53 and RB1 according to the colour panel
provided. b, c, Complex genomic rearrangements in RB1 showing homozygous deletions of
exon 1 (b) or inversions within the RB1 gene (c). d, e, Annotated silent or missense
mutations in RB1 occur at intron-exon junctions resulting in alternative splicing, intron
retention (d) or exon skipping events (e). The coverage at the respective exon junctions is
quantified as RPKM values. Sample S02194 is not holding any mutations at intron–exon
junctions and is displayed as an example for unaltered splicing of RB1.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 09.

George et al.

Page 25

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Extended Data Figure 7. Chromothripsis in human SCLC

a, Circos plot of the chromothripsis sample S02353 showing intra- and interchromosomal
rearrangements between chromosome 3 and 11. The integral copy number state (iCN) is
plotted as a heatmap and assigned to the respective chromosomal regions. The chromosomal
context of CCND1 (on chromosome 11) is highlighted. b, Circos plots displaying fusion
transcripts identified in the SCLC chromothripsis cases (Supplementary Table 12) are
represented as blue (S02297) or red (S02353) lines for genes located on chromosome 3 and

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 09.

George et al.

Page 26

Author Manuscript

11. c, Immunohistochemistry staining for p53, p14 (ARF) and p16 on FFPE material of the
chromothripsis sample S02297. Original magnification, ×400.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Extended Data Figure 8. Recurrent genomic translocations in SCLC

Author Manuscript

a, Recurrent genomic translocations (n = 14) affecting chromosome 22 are illustrated as a
Circos plot highlighting the respective rearrangements as red connecting lines. b,
Breakpoints in chromosome 22 map to intron 1 of TTC28 and cluster downstream of the
LINE1 (L1Hs) retrotransposon. Each arrow indicates the sample and the respective
chromosomal position the segment translocates to. c, Schematic representation of the TP73
locus (hg19) describing complex intrachromosomal rearrangements of TP73 identified for
S02397 and S02243. Recurrent somatic mutations identified in Fig. 1a are mapped to the
respective exons. d, Validation of somatic TP73 translocations. Genomic regions involved in
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 09.

George et al.

Page 27

Author Manuscript

the TP73 rearrangements were amplified in matched normal (N) and tumour (T) samples.
The expected band size is indicated in brackets. The respective PCR products were subjected
to Sanger sequencing to confirm the genomic breakpoint. e, Copy-number state of the TP73
gene in samples involved in genomic translocations.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Extended Data Figure 9. Transcriptome profile of human SCLC tumours

a, Unsupervised hierarchical clustering of transcriptome sequencing data of 69 SCLC
specimens as described in Fig. 4a. Each sample is annotated for the genomic alterations

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 09.

George et al.

Page 28

Author Manuscript

described in Fig. 1. Black filled boxes describe the presence of a genomic event. b,
Expression values of CHGA, GRP, ASCL1 and DLK1 (FPKM) are represented as dot
density plots for the subgroups identified in (a). Red lines highlight the median value for
each group. c, Expression values of the neuroendocrine markers SYP (synaptophysin) and
NCAM1 (CD56) plotted as scatter plots for all SCLC samples. Green lines indicate
thresholds for no expression (FPKM<1).

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Extended Data Figure 10. Notch is a tumour suppressor in SCLC regulating neuroendocrine
differentiation

a, Somatic mutations identified in NOTCH3 and NOTCH4 are mapped to the protein
domains. Damaging mutations are highlighted in red. Mutations found in murine SCLC
tumours are highlighted in blue. b, Quantification of tumour lesions and per cent tumour
area to lung in TKO (n = 5) and TKO;N1ICD (n = 4) mice 3 months after Ad-Cre
instillation. Statistical significance was determined by two-tailed unpaired Student’s t-test. c,
Representative immunohistochemistry for GFP or tdTomato in lungs from

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 09.

George et al.

Page 29

Author Manuscript

TKO;Rosa26mT/mG mice approximately 6 months after tumour induction. Left scale bar, 500
µm; right and middle: scale bar, 50 µm. d, Representative immunostaining for Notch2 in
lungs from TKO;Rosa26N2ICD mice approximately 6 months after tumour induction. Left
scale bar, 500 µm; right scale bar, 50 µm. e, Quantification of the per cent recombination at
the Rosa26 locus in TKO;Rosa26mT/mG (n = 6) and TKO;Rosa26N2ICD mice (n = 10; twotailed unpaired Student’s t-test). f, Cell viability assay of the human SCLC cell line NJH29
transfected with a N1ICD (Notch1) expression plasmid or empty vector control (Ctrl) (3
independent biological replicas with 3 technical replicas each). Fold growth was normalized
to day 0; representative images were taken on day 6. Scale bar, 50 µm. g,
Immunohistochemistry staining in FFPE embedded tissues of TKO and TKO;N2ICD mice.
Scale bar, 50 µm. h, Quantitative RT–PCR validation of Notch1 induction and the
expression of common Notch target genes after N1ICD transfection in murine SCLC cells
(three biological replicas; two-tailed paired Student’s t-test). i, Mouse SCLC cells
transfected with control or N1ICD (Notch1) were analysed 48 h later by gene expression
microarrays. Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA) was performed on these data; selected
significant gene sets are displayed. j, k, EdU analysis of mouse (j) and human (k) SCLC
cells (three independent biological replicas with three technical replicas each; two-tailed
paired Student’s t-test). *P < 0.05; **P < 0.01; ***P < 0.001. Data are represented as mean
± s.d.

Author Manuscript

Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.

Authors
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Julie George1,*, Jing Shan Lim2,*, Se Jin Jang3, Yupeng Cun1, Luka Ozretić4, Gu
Kong5, Frauke Leenders1, Xin Lu1, Lynnette Fernández-Cuesta1,†, Graziella
Bosco1, Christian Müller1, Ilona Dahmen1, Nadine S. Jahchan2, Kwon-Sik Park2,
Dian Yang2, Anthony N. Karnezis6, Dedeepya Vaka2, Angela Torres2, Maia Segura
Wang7, Jan O. Korbel7, Roopika Menon8, Sung-Min Chun3, Deokhoon Kim9, Matt
Wilkerson10, Neil Hayes11, David Engelmann12, Brigitte Pützer12, Marc Bos1,
Sebastian Michels13, Ignacija Vlasic14, Danila Seidel1, Berit Pinther1, Philipp
Schaub1, Christian Becker15, Janine Altmüller15,16, Jun Yokota17,18, Takashi
Kohno17, Reika Iwakawa17, Koji Tsuta19, Masayuki Noguchi20, Thomas Muley21,22,
Hans Hoffmann21, Philipp A. Schnabel22,23, Iver Petersen24, Yuan Chen24, Alex
Soltermann25, Verena Tischler25, Chang-min Choi26, Yong-Hee Kim27, Pierre P.
Massion28, Yong Zou28, Dragana Jovanovic29, Milica Kontic29, Gavin M. Wright30,
Prudence A. Russell31, Benjamin Solomon32, Ina Koch33, Michael Lindner33, Lucia
A. Muscarella34, Annamaria la Torre34, John K. Field35, Marko Jakopovic36, Jelena
Knezevic37, Esmeralda Castaños-Vélez38, Luca Roz39, Ugo Pastorino40, Odd-Terje
Brustugun41,42, Marius Lund-Iversen43, Erik Thunnissen44, Jens Köhler45,46, Martin
Schuler45,46, Johan Botling47, Martin Sandelin47, Montserrat Sanchez-Cespedes48,
Helga B. Salvesen49,50, Viktor Achter51, Ulrich Lang51,52, Magdalena Bogus53,
Peter M. Schneider53, Thomas Zander54, Sascha Ansén13, Michael Hallek13,55,
Jürgen Wolf13, Martin Vingron56, Yasushi Yatabe57, William D. Travis58, Peter
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 09.

George et al.

Page 30

Author Manuscript

Nürnberg15,55,59, Christian Reinhardt14, Sven Perner9, Lukas Heukamp4, Reinhard
Büttner4, Stefan A. Haas56, Elisabeth Brambilla60, Martin Peifer1,59, Julien Sage2,
and Roman K. Thomas1,4

Affiliations
1Department

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

of Translational Genomics, Center of Integrated Oncology Cologne–
Bonn, Medical Faculty, University of Cologne, 50931 Cologne, Germany
2Departments of Pediatrics and Genetics, Stanford University, Stanford, California
94305, USA 3Department of Pathology and Center for Cancer Genome Discovery,
University of Ulsan College of Medicine, Asan Medical Center 88, Olympic-ro 43-gil,
Songpa-gu, Seoul 138-736, Korea 4Department of Pathology, University Hospital
Cologne, 50937 Cologne, Germany 5Department of Pathology, College of Medicine,
Hanyang University. 222 Wangsimniro, Seongdong-gu, Seoul 133-791, Korea
6Vancouver General Hospital, Terry Fox laboratory, Vancouver, British Columbia
V5Z 1L3, Canada 7European Molecular Biology Laboratory, Genome Biology Unit,
69117 Heidelberg, Germany 8Institute of Pathology, Center of Integrated Oncology
Cologne–Bonn, University Hospital of Bonn, 53127 Bonn, Germany 9Center for
Cancer Genome Discovery, University of Ulsan College of Medicine, Asan Medical
Center 88, Olympic-ro 43-gil, Songpa-gu, Seoul 138-736, Korea 10Department of
Genetics, Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, The University of North
Carolina at Chapel Hill, North Carolina 27599-7295, USA 11UNC Lineberger
Comprehensive Cancer Center School of Medicine, University of North Carolina at
Chapel Hill, North Carolina 27599-7295, USA 12Institute of Experimental Gene
Therapy and Cancer Research, Rostock University Medical Center, 18057 Rostock,
Germany 13Department I of Internal Medicine, Center of Integrated Oncology
Cologne-Bonn, University Hospital Cologne, 50937 Cologne, Germany
14Department of Internal Medicine, University Hospital of Cologne, 50931 Cologne,
Germany 15Cologne Center for Genomics (CCG), University of Cologne, 50931
Cologne, Germany 16Institute of Human Genetics, University Hospital Cologne,
50931 Cologne, Germany 17Division of Genome Biology, National Cancer Center
Research Institute, Chuo-ku, Tokyo 1040045, Japan 18Genomics and Epigenomics
of Cancer Prediction Program, Institute of Predictive and Personalized Medicine of
Cancer (IMPPC), Barcelona 08916, Spain 19Department of Pathology and Clinical
Laboratories, National Cancer Center Hospital Chuo-ku, Tokyo 1040045, Japan
20Department of Pathology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Tsukuba, Ibaraki
305-8575, Japan 21Thoraxklinik at University Hospital Heidelberg, Amalienstrasse 5,
69126 Heidelberg, Germany 22Translational Lung Research Center Heidelberg
(TLRC-H), Member of German Center for Lung Research (DZL), Amalienstrasse 5,
69126 Heidelberg, Germany 23Institute of Pathology, University of Heidelberg, Im
Neuenheimer Feld 220, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany 24Institute of Pathology, Jena
University Hospital, Friedrich-Schiller-University, 07743 Jena, Germany 25Institute of
Surgical Pathology, University Hospital Zürich, 8091 Zürich, Switzerland
26Department of Oncology, University of Ulsan College of Medicine, Asan Medical
Center, 88, Olympic-ro 43-gil, Songpa-gu, Seoul 138-736, Korea 27Department of
Thoracic and Cardiovascular Surgery, University of Ulsan College of Medicine, Asan

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 09.

George et al.

Page 31

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Medical Center, 88, Olympic-ro 43-gil, Songpa-gu, Seoul 138-736, Korea 28Thoracic
Program, Vanderbilt-Ingram Cancer Center PRB 640, 2220 Pierce Avenue,
Nashville, Tennessee 37232, USA 29University Hospital of Pulmonology, Clinical
Center of Serbia, Medical School, University of Belgrade, 11000 Belgrade, Serbia
30Department of Surgery, St. Vincent’s Hospital, Peter MacCallum Cancer Centre,
3065 Melbourne, Victoria, Australia 31Department of Pathology, St. Vincent’s
Hospital, Peter MacCallum Cancer Centre, 3065 Melbourne, Victoria, Australia
32Department of Haematology and Medical Oncology, Peter MacCallum Cancer
Centre, 3065 Melbourne, Victoria, Australia 33Asklepios Biobank für
Lungenerkrankungen, Comprehensive Pneumology Center Munich, Member of the
German Center for Lung Research (DZL), Asklepios Fachkliniken München-Gauting
82131, Germany 34Laboratory of Oncology, IRCCS Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza,
Viale Cappuccini, 71013 San Giovanni, Rotondo, Italy 35Roy Castle Lung Cancer
Research Programme, Department of Molecular and Clinical Cancer Medicine,
Institute of Translational Medicine, The University of Liverpool Cancer Research
Centre, 200 London Road, L69 3GA Liverpool, UK 36University of Zagreb, School of
Medicine, Department for Respiratory Diseases Jordanovac, University Hospital
Center Zagreb, 10000 Zagreb, Croatia 37Laboratory for Translational Medicine,
Rudjer Boskovic Institute, 10000 Zagreb, Croatia 38Charité Comprehensive Cancer
Center, Charité Campus Mitte, 10115 Berlin, Germany 39Tumor Genomics Unit,
Department of Experimental Oncology and Molecular Medicine, Fondazione IRCCS
— Istituto Nazionale Tumori, Via Venezian 1, 20133 Milan, Italy 40Thoracic Surgery
Unit, Department of Surgery, Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Nazionale Tumori, 20133
Milan, Italy 41Institute of Clinical Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of Oslo,
N-0424 Oslo, Norway 42Department of Oncology, Norwegian Radium Hospital, Oslo
University Hospital, N-0310 Oslo, Norway 43Department of Pathology, Norwegian
Radium Hospital, Oslo University Hospital, N-0310 Oslo, Norway 44Department of
Pathology, VU University Medical Center, 1007 MB Amsterdam, The Netherlands
45West German Cancer Center, Department of Medical Oncology, University
Hospital Essen, 45147 Essen, Germany 46German Cancer Consortium (DKTK),
69120 Heidelberg, Germany 47Departments of Immunology, Genetics and
Pathology, and Medical Sciences, Respiratory, Allergy and Sleep Research,
Uppsala University, 75185 Uppsala, Sweden 48Genes and Cancer Group, Cancer
Epigenetics and Biology Program (PEBC), Bellvitge Biomedical Research Institute
(IDIBELL), 08908 Hospitalet de Llobregat, Barcelona, Spain 49Department of
Clinical Science, Center for Cancer Biomarkers, University of Bergen, N-5058
Bergen, Norway 50Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics, Haukeland University
Hospital, N-5058 Bergen, Norway 51Computing Center, University of Cologne,
50931 Cologne, Germany 52Department of Informatics, University of Cologne,
50931 Cologne, Germany 53Institute of Legal Medicine, University of Cologne,
50823 Cologne, Germany 54Gastrointestinal Cancer Group Cologne, Center of
Integrated Oncology Cologne–Bonn, Department I for Internal Medicine, University
Hospital of Cologne, 50937 Cologne, Germany 55Cologne Excellence Cluster on
Cellular Stress Responses in Aging-Associated Diseases (CECAD), University of
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 09.

George et al.

Page 32

Author Manuscript

Cologne, 50931 Cologne, Germany 56Computational Molecular Biology Group, Max
Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, 14195 Berlin, Germany 57Department of
Pathology and Molecular Diagnostics, Aichi Cancer Center, 464-8681 Nagoya,
Japan 58Department of Pathology, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New
York 10065, USA 59Center for Molecular Medicine Cologne (CMMC), University of
Cologne, 50931 Cologne, Germany 60Department of Pathology, CHU Grenoble
INSERM U823, University Joseph Fourier, Institute Albert Bonniot 38043, CS10217
Grenoble, France

Acknowledgments
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

We are grateful to all the patients who contributed their tumour specimens. We thank the computing center of the
University of Cologne (RRZK) for providing the CPU time on the DFG-funded supercomputer ‘CHEOPS’, as well
as for the support. We thank S. Artavanis-Tsakonas and S. Fre for the gift of the mice with inducible NICD
expression. We thank C. Nguyen, J. Berg, J. Heuckmann, F. Malchers, C. Lovely and A. Bernschein for scientific
discussions and advice. We thank Genentech/gRED for providing raw sequencing data from a previously published
study3. Some tumors in these studies were provided by the LungBiobank Heidelberg, member of the NCT-Tissue
bank, the biomaterial bank Heidelberg and the biobank platform of the German Center for Lung Research,
Heidelberg, Germany. This work was supported by the German Cancer Aid (Deutsche Krebshilfe) as part of the
small cell lung cancer genome sequencing consortium (grant ID: 109679 to R.K.T., M.P., R.B., P.N., M.V. and
S.A.H.). Further support was provided by the Korea Research Foundation (KRF 2011-0030105; grant to S.J.J.).
Additional funding was provided by the NIH (5R01CA114102-08 to J.S.), the German Ministry of Science and
Education (BMBF) as part of the NGFNplus program (grant 01GS08101 to R.K.T., J.W. and P.N.) and as part of the
e:Med program (grant no. 01ZX1303A to R.K.T., J.W., C.R., R.B. and M.P. and grant no. 01ZX1406 to M.P.), by
the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG; through TH1386/3-1 to R.K.T and KFO-286 to P.N.), by the German
federal state North Rhine Westphalia (NRW), by the European Union (European Regional Development Fund:
Investing In Your Future) as part of the PerMed NRW initiative (grant 005-1111-0025 to R.K.T., J.W. and R.B.), by
SFB832 (TP6 to R.K.T., TP5 to L.C.H.), by the Deutsche Krebshilfe as part of the Oncology Centers of Excellence
funding program (to R.B., R.K.T. and M.S.), by the EU-Framework program CURELUNG (HEALTHF2-2010-258677 to R.K.T., J.W., J.K.F., L.R., M.S.C. and E.B.), by Stand Up To Cancer—American Association of
Cancer Research Innovative Research Grant (SU2C-AACR-IR60109 to R.K.T.), by the German Consortium for
Translational Cancer Research (DKTK) Joint Funding program, by the National Cancer Center Research and
Development Fund (NCC Biobank: 23A-1, to T.K., J.Y. and R.I.), by the Italian Ministry of Health (Ricerca
Corrente RC1303LO57 and GR program 2010-2316264 to L.A.M.), by the Roy Castle Lung Cancer Foundation
UK (to J.K.F.), by the AIRC/MGAF grant 12983 (to L.A.M.) and by A*STAR in Singapore (scholarship to J.S.L.).
J.S. is the Harriet and Mary Zelencik Scientist in Children’s Cancer and Blood Diseases.

References

Author Manuscript

1. van Meerbeeck JP, Fennell DA, De Ruysscher DK. Small-cell lung cancer. Lancet. 2011; 378:1741–
1755. [PubMed: 21565397]
2. Peifer M, et al. Integrative genome analyses identify key somatic driver mutations of small-cell lung
cancer. Nature Genet. 2012; 44:1104–1110. [PubMed: 22941188]
3. Rudin CM, et al. Comprehensive genomic analysis identifies SOX2 as a frequently amplified gene
in small-cell lung cancer. Nature Genet. 2012; 44:1111–1116. [PubMed: 22941189]
4. Takahashi T, et al. p53: a frequent target for genetic abnormalities in lung cancer. Science. 1989;
246:491–494. [PubMed: 2554494]
5. Wistuba II, Gazdar AF, Minna JD. Molecular genetics of small cell lung carcinoma. Semin. Oncol.
2001; 28:3–13. [PubMed: 11479891]
6. Horowitz JM, et al. Frequent inactivation of the retinoblastoma anti-oncogene is restricted to a
subset of human tumor cells. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA. 1990; 87:2775–2779. [PubMed: 2181449]
7. Mori N, et al. Variable mutations of the RB gene in small-cell lung carcinoma. Oncogene. 1990;
5:1713–1717. [PubMed: 2176283]
8. Meuwissen R, et al. Induction of small cell lung cancer by somatic inactivation of both Trp53 and
Rb1 in a conditional mouse model. Cancer Cell. 2003; 4:181–189. [PubMed: 14522252]

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 09.

George et al.

Page 33

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

9. Schaffer BE, et al. Loss of p130 accelerates tumor development in a mouse model for human smallcell lung carcinoma. Cancer Res. 2010; 70:3877–3883. [PubMed: 20406986]
10. McFadden DG, et al. Genetic and clonal dissection of murine small cell lung carcinoma
progression by genome sequencing. Cell. 2014; 156:1298–1311. [PubMed: 24630729]
11. Imielinski M, et al. Mapping the hallmarks of lung adenocarcinoma with massively parallel
sequencing. Cell. 2012; 150:1107–1120. [PubMed: 22980975]
12. Zhang J, et al. Intratumor heterogeneity in localized lung adenocarcinomas delineated by
multiregion sequencing. Science. 2014; 346:256–259. [PubMed: 25301631]
13. de Bruin EC, et al. Spatial and temporal diversity in genomic instability processes defines lung
cancer evolution. Science. 2014; 346:251–256. [PubMed: 25301630]
14. Futreal PA, et al. A census of human cancer genes. Nature Rev. Cancer. 2004; 4:177–183.
[PubMed: 14993899]
15. Forbes SA, et al. COSMIC: exploring the world’s knowledge of somatic mutations in human
cancer. Nucleic Acids Res. 2015; 43:D805–D811. [PubMed: 25355519]
16. Lawrence MS, et al. Mutational heterogeneity in cancer and the search for new cancer-associated
genes. Nature. 2013; 499:214–218. [PubMed: 23770567]
17. Yokomizo A, et al. PTEN/MMAC1 mutations identified in small cell, but not in non-small cell
lung cancers. Oncogene. 1998; 17:475–479. [PubMed: 9696041]
18. Holderfield M, Deuker MM, McCormick F, McMahon M. Targeting RAF kinases for cancer
therapy: BRAF-mutated melanoma and beyond. Nature Rev. Cancer. 2014; 14:455–467. [PubMed:
24957944]
19. Hibi K, et al. Coexpression of the stem cell factor and the c-kit genes in small-cell lung cancer.
Oncogene. 1991; 6:2291–2296. [PubMed: 1722571]
20. Hirota S, et al. Gain-of-function mutations of c-kit in human gastrointestinal stromal tumors.
Science. 1998; 279:577–580. [PubMed: 9438854]
21. Shibata T, Kokubu A, Tsuta K, Hirohashi S. Oncogenic mutation of PIK3CA in small cell lung
carcinoma: a potential therapeutic target pathway for chemotherapy-resistant lung cancer. Cancer
Lett. 2009; 283:203–211. [PubMed: 19394761]
22. Angeloni D, et al. Analysis of a new homozygous deletion in the tumor suppressor region at 3p12.3
reveals two novel intronic noncoding RNA genes. Genes Chromosom. Cancer. 2006; 45:676–691.
[PubMed: 16607615]
23. Kovatich A, et al. Molecular alterations to human chromosome 3p loci in neuroendocrine lung
tumors. Cancer. 1998; 83:1109–1117. [PubMed: 9740075]
24. Weiss J, et al. Frequent and focal FGFR1 amplification associates with therapeutically tractable
FGFR1 dependency in squamous cell lung cancer. Sci. Transl. Med. 2010; 2:62ra93.
25. Korbel JO, Campbell PJ. Criteria for inference of chromothripsis in cancer genomes. Cell. 2013;
152:1226–1236. [PubMed: 23498933]
26. Knudson AG. Two genetic hits (more or less) to cancer. 1 . Nature Rev. Genet. 2001; 1:157–162.
27. Berger AH, Knudson AG, Pandolfi PP. A continuum model for tumour suppression. Nature. 2011;
476:163–169. [PubMed: 21833082]
28. Beasley MB, et al. The P16/cyclin D1/Rb pathway in neuroendocrine tumors of the lung. Hum.
Pathol. 2003; 34:136–142. [PubMed: 12612881]
29. Northcott PA, et al. Enhancer hijacking activates GFI1 family oncogenes in medulloblastoma.
Nature. 2014; 511:428–434. [PubMed: 25043047]
30. The Cancer Genome Atlas Network. Comprehensive molecular characterization of human colon
and rectal cancer. Nature. 2012; 487:330–337. [PubMed: 22810696]
31. Pitkänen E, Cajuso T, Katainen R, Kaasinen E, Välimäki N. Frequent L1 retrotranspositions
originating from TTC28 in colorectal cancer. Oncotarget. 2014; 5:853–859. [PubMed: 24553397]
32. Helman E, Lawrence ML, Stewart C. Somatic retrotransposition in human cancer revealed by
whole-genome and exome sequencing. Genome Res. 2014; 24:1053–1063. [PubMed: 24823667]
33. Jancalek R. The role of the TP73 gene and its transcripts in neuro-oncology. Br. J. Neurosurg.
2014; 28:598–605. [PubMed: 24742294]

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 09.

George et al.

Page 34

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

34. Tannapfel A, et al. Autonomous growth and hepatocarcinogenesis in transgenic mice expressing
the p53 family inhibitor DNp73. Carcinogenesis. 2008; 29:211–218. [PubMed: 17984115]
35. Venkatanarayan A, et al. IAPP-driven metabolic reprogramming induces regression of p53deficient tumours in vivo. Nature. 2015; 517:626–630. [PubMed: 25409149]
36. Falix FA, Aronson DC, Lamers WH, Gaemers IC. Possible roles of DLK1 in the Notch pathway
during development and disease. Biochim. Biophys. Acta. 2012; 1822:988–995. [PubMed:
22353464]
37. Ball DW. Achaete-scute homolog-1 and Notch in lung neuroendocrine development and cancer.
Cancer Lett. 2004; 204:159–169. [PubMed: 15013215]
38. Augustyn A, et al. ASCL1 is a lineage oncogene providing therapeutic targets for high-grade
neuroendocrine lung cancers. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA. 2014; 111:14788–14793. [PubMed:
25267614]
39. Sriuranpong V, et al. Notch signaling induces cell cycle arrest in small cell lung cancer cells.
Cancer Res. 2001; 1:3200–3205. [PubMed: 11306509]
40. Wael H, et al. Notch1 signaling controls cell proliferation, apoptosis and differentiation in lung
carcinoma. Lung Cancer. 2014; 85:131–140. [PubMed: 24888228]
41. Rangarajan A, et al. Notch signaling is a direct determinant of keratinocyte growth arrest and entry
into differentiation. EMBO J. 2001; 20:3427–3436. [PubMed: 11432830]
42. Qi R, et al. Notch1 signaling inhibits growth of human hepatocellular carcinoma through induction
of cell cycle arrest and apoptosis. Cancer Res. 2003; 63:8323–8329. [PubMed: 14678992]

References

Author Manuscript

43. Iwakawa R, et al. Genome-wide identification of genes with amplification and/or fusion in small
cell lung cancer. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2013; 52:802–816. [PubMed: 23716474]
44. Seidel D. A genomics-based classification of human lung tumors. Sci. Transl. Med. 2013;
5:209ra153.
45. Lafkas D, et al. Notch3 marks clonogenic mammary luminal progenitor cells in vivo. J. Cell Biol.
2013; 203:47–56. [PubMed: 24100291]
46. Muzumdar MD, Tasic B, Miyamichi K, Li L, Luo L. A global double-fluorescent Cre reporter
mouse. Genesis. 2007; 45:593–605. [PubMed: 17868096]
47. Lu X, Thomas RK, Peifer M. CGARS: cancer genome analysis by rank sums. Bioinformatics.
2014; 30:1295–1296. [PubMed: 24413525]
48. Li H, Durbin R. Fast and accurate short read alignment with Burrows–Wheeler transform.
Bioinformatics. 2009; 25:1754–1760. [PubMed: 19451168]
49. Fernandez-Cuesta L, et al. Frequent mutations in chromatin-remodelling genes in pulmonary
carcinoids. Nat. Commun. 2014; 5:3518. [PubMed: 24670920]
50. Jahchan NS, et al. A drug repositioning approach identifies tricyclic antidepressants as inhibitors of
small cell lung cancer and other neuroendocrine tumors. Cancer Discov. 2013; 3:1364–1377.
[PubMed: 24078773]

Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 09.

George et al.

Page 35

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Figure 1. Genomic alterations in small cell lung cancer

Author Manuscript

a, Tumour samples are arranged from left to right. Alterations of SCLC candidate genes are
annotated for each sample according to the colour panel below the image. The somatic
mutation frequencies for each candidate gene are plotted on the right panel. Mutation rates
and type of base-pair substitution are displayed in the top and bottom panel, respectively.
Significant candidate genes are highlighted in bold (*corrected q-values < 0.05, †P < 0.05,
‡P < 0.01). The respective level of significance is displayed as a heatmap on the right panel.
Genes that are also mutated in murine SCLC tumours are denoted with a § symbol. Mutated
cancer census genes of therapeutic relevance are denoted with a + symbol. b, Somatic copy
number alterations determined for 142 human SCLC tumours by single nucleotide
polymorphism (SNP) arrays. Significant amplifications (red) and deletions (blue) were
determined for the chromosomal regions and are plotted as q-values (significance < 0.05).

Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 09.

George et al.

Page 36

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 2. Universal bi-allelic inactivation of TP53 and RB1 in human SCLC

a, Alterations of TP53 and RB1 were determined based on whole-genome sequencing data
of 108 SCLC cases. Samples are plotted from left to right. Alleles A and B are represented
for each case and colour-coded according to the somatic alteration. The integral copy
number (iCN) state of each allele is plotted; hemizygous losses are annotated as loss of
heterozygosity (LOH), copy-neutral LOH or LOH at higher ploidy. Samples retaining allele
A and B show alterations on both alleles (bi-allelic alterations). b, Circos plot of case
S02297 showing intra- and interchromosomal translocations between chromosome 3 and 11.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 09.

George et al.

Page 37

Author Manuscript

The copy number state of the respective chromosomal regions (iCN) is plotted as a heatmap.
The genomic context of CCND1 (on chromosome 11) is highlighted. c, Significantly
differentially expressed genes encoded on chromosome 11 are analysed in both
chromothripsis cases in comparison to all other tumours. Positive and negative z-scores
show upregulation and downregulation of genes, respectively (P < 0.05; *q-value < 0.05). d,
Distribution of CCND1 expression over 81 SCLC samples. Chromothripsis cases are
highlighted in red. e, Haematoxylin and eosin (H&E) and immunohistochemistry staining
for cyclin D1 and Rb1 for sample S02297. Original magnification, ×400.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 09.

George et al.

Page 38

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 3. Recurrent rearrangements generating oncogenic variants of TP73

a, Genomic breakpoints identified by whole-genome sequencing were mapped to their
chromosomal locations. Recurrent breakpoints (n > 6 samples) are highlighted in colours. b,
Schematic representation of the TP73 locus (hg19) illustrating intragenic translocations.
Coding and non-coding regions of the annotated exons are shown as black and white boxes,
respectively. c, Schematic representation of exons encoding p73, p73Δex2, p73Δex2/3 and
p73Δex10. d, Exon skipping events were assessed in the transcriptome data of samples with
genomic translocations resulting in p73Δex2, p73Δex2/3 and p73Δex10 transcript variants.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 09.

George et al.

Page 39

Author Manuscript

S02139 served as a reference sample without TP73 alterations. The expression of
uncommon exon combinations is highlighted in red.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 09.

George et al.

Page 40

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 4. Notch is a tumour suppressor and a key regulator of neuroendocrine differentiation in
SCLC

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

a, Unsupervised expression analysis of human SCLC tumours. Tumour samples are arranged
in columns and grouped by the expression of differentially expressed genes (rows).
Expression values are represented as a heatmap; yellow and blue indicate high and low
expression, respectively. b, Schematic representation of NOTCH1 and NOTCH2. Somatic
mutations are mapped to the respective protein domains. Damaging and missense mutations
are highlighted in red and black, respectively. c, Representative H&E images of lungs from
Trp53;Rb1;Rbl2 triple-knockout (TKO) or TKO;N2ICD (Notch2) mice collected 3 months
after Ad-Cre instillation. Scale bar, 1 mm. Tumours were quantified for each genotype (n =
8). Statistical significance was determined by two-tailed unpaired Student’s t-test. d,
Survival analysis of TKO (n = 7, median survival = 210 days) and TKO;N2ICD (n = 8,
median survival = 274 days) mice. Statistical significance was determined by log-rank test.
e, Cell viability assay of the murine SCLC cell line KP1 transfected with a N1ICD (Notch1)
expression plasmid or empty vector control (Ctrl) (3 independent biological replicas with 3
technical replicas each). Fold growth is normalized to day 0; representative images were
taken on day 8. Scale bar, 50 µm. Statistical significance was determined by two-tailed
paired Student’s t-test. f, Mouse SCLC cells were transfected with control or N1ICD and
analysed 48 h after transfection by gene expression microarrays. The heatmap describes
differentially expressed genes in control or N1ICD-transfected cells (n = 3, each); red and
green indicate high and low expression, respectively. *P < 0.05; **P < 0.01; ***P < 0.001.
Data are represented as mean ± s.d.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 09.

George et al.

Page 41

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 5. Signalling pathways recurrently affected in SCLC

Red and blue boxes denote genes with activating and inactivating alterations, respectively.
Deep blue boxes highlight the bi-allelic inactivation of TP53 and RB1. Genes found
expressed at high levels are shown in red font.

Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 09.

