Oncotarget, Vol. 7, No. 28

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Research Paper

Quantitative in vivo optical tomography of cancer progression &
vasculature development in adult zebrafish

Sunil Kumar1,*, Nicola Lockwood2,3,*, Marie-Christine Ramel2,4, Teresa Correia5,
Matthew Ellis6, Yuriy Alexandrov1, Natalie Andrews4,7, Rachel Patel2, Laurence
Bugeon4, Margaret J. Dallman4, Sebastian Brandner6,8, Simon Arridge5, Matilda
Katan9, James McGinty1,* , Paul Frankel2,*, Paul M.W. French1,*
1

Department of Physics, Imperial College London, London SW7 2AZ, UK

2

Division of Medicine, University College London, London WC1E 6JF, UK

3

CoMPLEX, University College London, London WC1E 6BT, UK

4

Department of Life Sciences, Imperial College London, London SW7 2AZ, UK

5

Department of Computer Science, University College London, London WC1E 6BT, UK

6

Department of Neurodegenerative Disease, UCL Institute of Neurology, London WC1N 3BG, UK

7

Institute of Chemical Biology, Department of Chemistry, Imperial College, London SW7 2AZ, UK

8

Division of Neuropathology, The National Hospital for Neurology and Neurosurgery, University College London NHS
Foundation Trust, London WC1N 3BG, UK

9

Division of Structural and Molecular Biology, University College London, London WC1E 6BT, UK

*

Denotes equal contribution

Correspondence to: Paul Frankel, email: p.frankel@ucl.ac.uk
Paul M.W. French, email: paul.french@imperial.ac.uk
Keywords: cancer, adult zebrafish, optical projection tomography, hepatocellular carcinoma, KRas
Received: March 03, 2016     Accepted: April 28, 2016     Published: June 01, 2016

ABSTRACT
We describe a novel approach to study tumour progression and vasculature
development in vivo via global 3-D fluorescence imaging of live non-pigmented adult
zebrafish utilising angularly multiplexed optical projection tomography with compressive
sensing (CS-OPT). This “mesoscopic” imaging method bridges a gap between established
~µm resolution 3-D fluorescence microscopy techniques and ~mm-resolved whole body
planar imaging and diffuse tomography. Implementing angular multiplexing with CSOPT, we demonstrate the in vivo global imaging of an inducible fluorescently labelled
genetic model of liver cancer in adult non-pigmented zebrafish that also present
fluorescently labelled vasculature. In this disease model, addition of a chemical inducer
(doxycycline) drives expression of eGFP tagged oncogenic K-RASV12 in the liver of
immune competent animals. We show that our novel in vivo global imaging methodology
enables non-invasive quantitative imaging of the development of tumour and vasculature
throughout the progression of the disease, which we have validated against established
methods of pathology including immunohistochemistry. We have also demonstrated its
potential for longitudinal imaging through a study of vascular development in the same
zebrafish from early embryo to adulthood. We believe that this instrument, together
with its associated analysis and data management tools, constitute a new platform for
in vivo cancer studies and drug discovery in zebrafish disease models.

in situ in live organisms utilising whole-body molecular
imaging [1]. Fluorescence imaging can provide in vivo
molecular contrast [2] and established 3-D microscopy
techniques such as laser scanning confocal or multiphoton

INTRODUCTION
There is increasing interest in biomedical research
and drug discovery to study biological processes
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

43939

Oncotarget

fluorescence microscopy can provide subcellular
resolution imaging. However, the image acquisition times
can become prohibitively long for whole-body imaging of
larger (>1 mm) scale samples and the extended exposure
to focussed excitation light can lead to photobleaching
and to phototoxicity in live subjects. For most animal
models, in vivo imaging is further compromised by strong
absorption and scattering of optical radiation and there
is a dearth of approaches to bridge the “gap” between
optical microscopy of small (~mm scale) organisms and
global imaging of murine disease models that is currently
implemented [3] using “planar imaging” techniques
or diffuse tomography. This “gap” can be addressed by
hybrid photoacoustic techniques, e.g. [4,5] but these are
not yet able to access the full range of readouts available
to fluorescence imaging.
For transparent samples, a variety of 3-D mesoscopic
fluorescence imaging techniques have been developed
for both ex vivo and in vivo studies, including optical
projection tomography (OPT) [6,7], scanning laser optical
tomography (SLOT) [8] and light sheet microscopy (LSM)
[9], These techniques can form diffraction-limited, 3-D
images of transparent mesoscopic samples at higher frame
rates and much reduced photobleaching/phototoxicity
compared to laser scanning microscopy. They have been
successfully applied to fixed samples that have been
chemically cleared and to live, partly transparent, organisms
such as Drosophila [10], C. Elegans [11] and early stage
zebrafish (Danio rerio) embryos [12,13]. OPT provides
the advantages of low phototoxicity associated with the
wide-field illumination, simplicity, relatively low cost of
implementation (requiring only sample rotation) and ease of
scaling the imaging system to larger samples. It also offers
the opportunity to reduce light dose and acquisition time
using compressive sensing (CS) [14] by taking advantage
of iterative reconstruction algorithms, previously developed
for x-ray computed tomography, that permit 3-D images to
be reconstructed with many fewer angular projections than
required for fully sampled filtered back-projection (FBP).
In support of translational oncology research, we
have developed an enabling new imaging modality to
study tumour progression and vasculature development in
vivo using global 3-D fluorescence imaging of live nonpigmented adult zebrafish. Due to their rapid generation
time and genetic accessibility, zebrafish are increasingly
used to model disease and aid drug development [15].
To date, most imaging studies have focused on the use
of optically clear embryos, which can be used to monitor
organ development and differentiation. However, the use
of embryos has considerable limitations for many diseases
settings where development of the animal is key such as
the requirement for a mature vasculature and immune
system in cancer. Recently, adult zebrafish have been used
to faithfully model tumour progression, with significant
similarities to human disease progression [16,17,18].
While wild-type adult zebrafish are not amenable to
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

optical imaging, there are now non-pigmented mutants
available of which the adults are sufficiently transparent
to permit optical readouts [19,20,14]. Here we describe
the development and application of angularly multiplexed,
compressive sensing optical projection tomography
(CS-OPT) for 3-D global fluorescence imaging of liver
cancer in adult TraNac zebrafish, enabling in vivo and
longitudinal quantitation of tumour progression and
vascular development. To illustrate its potential, we have
applied this instrument to image changes in tumour and
vasculature associated with hepatocellular carcinoma
(HCC) in live tumour burdened adult transgenic (Tg)
TraNac zebrafish, TraNac Tg (KDR:mCherry:Fabp10rtTA:TRE-eGFPKRASV12). These zebrafish are immune
competent and display mCherry expression in the
vasculature and hepatocyte specific expression of
eGFPKRASV12 upon treatment with doxycycline (DOX).
Continued treatment leads to liver-specific eGFP-labelled
tumorigenesis with an HCC phenotype, which is reversible
upon withdrawal of DOX [21].

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Figure 1 shows the configuration of the novel OPT
instrument we have designed for 3-D global imaging of
anaesthetised adult zebrafish. To increase light collection
efficiency and spatial resolution, we have implemented
multiplexed OPT with two imaging arms of approximately
0.5x magnification focussed to different planes within
the sample [22] that acquire projection images with a
diffraction-limited resolution of 26 μm. As described in the
Materials and Methods section, this has been configured
to acquire sets of angularly resolved projection images
in spectral channels optimised for eGFP and mCherry
fluorescence. To facilitate the analysis, management and
remote access of the large multispectral 3-D data sets,
we have developed an OPT data workflow that utilises
OMERO [23] (Supplementary Figure S2).
In initial studies to optimise our imaging
protocols, we determined that starved male, homozygous
KDR:mCherry+/+ fish should be used (Supplementary
Figure S3) and, in order to minimise the duration of the
imaging procedure, we undertook an investigation of the
trade-off between the reconstructed 3-D image quality
and the number of angular projections acquired. This
was undertaken by imaging an adult tumour-burdened
zebrafish after 3 weeks’ treatment with DOX and
acquiring 512 angular projections. We then applied the
structural similarity index measure (SSIM) to segmented
3-D image reconstructions obtained from subsets of the
acquired image data with varying numbers of projections
and compared the results to that obtained from the full
512 projection FBP reconstruction, which was used to
represent the “ground truth”. This preliminary study
indicated that reconstructing with 64 projections using
the “compressive sensing OPT” (“CS-OPT”) approach
43940

Oncotarget

[14] was optimal for image reconstruction (as indicated in
Supplementary Figure S4 and S5).
Figure 2a shows the fluorescence intensity image
of this adult tumour-burdened zebrafish reconstructed
from a 512 projection FBP and Figure 2b shows how
this image is degraded if only 64 projections are
used in a FBP reconstruction. Figure 2c shows the
fluorescence intensity image reconstructed from the
same 64 projections using the iterative CS algorithm.
Following reconstruction, the 3-D image stacks were
segmented and skeletonized to produce binary images
of the vasculature, as discussed in the Materials and
Methods section. Figure 2d shows the “vesselness”
of this 3-D dataset visualised after Hessian-based
analysis using MATLAB and Figure 2e shows the
“final” segmented image following skeletonization and
dilation of the vasculature. Rendered 3-D images of
these corresponding figures are shown in Supplementary
Video S1. In general, this CS-OPT approach exploiting
under-sampling and iterative tomographic reconstruction
is attractive for in vivo imaging since it reduces the light
dose and the time that the animal must be maintained
under anaesthetic.

Having optimised the conditions for acquisition
of adult tumour burdened zebrafish using CS-OPT, we
performed an in vivo cross-sectional study of tumour and
vasculature development following treatment with - and
withdrawal of - DOX. Adult TraNac Tg (KDR:mCherry:
Fabp10-rtTA:TRE-eGFPKRASV12) zebrafish were treated
with DOX and imaged after 1, 2 and 3 weeks of treatment
and after a 4th week of no treatment. Continued treatment
has been reported to lead to a hyperplastic liver phenotype
associated with progression to HCC , which is reversible
upon withdrawal of DOX due to the oncogene addicted
nature of the model resulting in rapid clearance of the tumour
through apoptosis [17]. The maximum intensity projection
(MIP) reconstructions of Figure 3a-3c (and Supplementary
Videos S2-S3) show the qualitative changes in induced eGFPlabelled tumour and the mCherry-labelled vasculature during
progression. Quantitative analysis of the reconstructed 3-D
images was undertaken and Figure 3d shows the significant
increase in tumour volume observed between 1 and 3 weeks
DOX treatment and the significant decrease between 3
weeks treatment and 1 week DOX withdrawal. Quantitative
analyses of the tumour vasculature based on segmented
3-D imaged datasets (Figure 3e, 3f and Supplementary

Figure 1: Schematic of dual projection channel multispectral OPT system.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

43941

Oncotarget

Figure 6), show increases in branching and percent tumour
vascularisation consistent with HCC tumour angiogenesis
[24], and which is reversed upon DOX withdrawal. We also
analysed the mean vessel diameter and length and found no
significant differences (Supplementary Figure S6).
After imaging, tumours were removed and
subjected to histological analysis for comparison to
CS-OPT data. Using H&E staining we confirmed that
DOX treatment leads to progression towards an HCC
phenotype as previously described [17] (Figure 4). In
addition, quantitative analysis of the percentage tumour
vascularisation using immunohistochemistry (IHC) with
an mCherry antibody (Figure 5a) in regions corresponding
to segmented vasculature in the CS-OPT data revealed
similar levels and trends in vessel coverage as can be seen
by comparing Figure 5b and Figure 3f.
This agreement in tumour vascularisation is
encouraging because CS-OPT is rapid and non-invasive
and the analysis can be applied to the whole tumour –or
the whole fish. However, it should be noted that CS-OPT
does not account for scattering or aberrations of the emitted
fluorescence and the imaging performance is reduced
towards the centre of adult zebrafish. Thus, as shown in
Supplementary Figure 7 and Supplementary Video S3, the
ability of the CS-OPT image reconstruction and subsequent

image segmentation to visualise the tumour vasculature
can vary throughout individual fish due to variations in
their optical properties. While this instrument does already
provide a useful platform for studying cancer progression,
its capabilities could be improved through the use of red and/
or infrared fluorophores, since the optical scattering would
be reduced at longer wavelengths. The imaging platform
could be further developed to incorporate more advanced
algorithms for tomographic reconstruction using weakly
scattered light or by implementing techniques for selecting
ballistic (non-scattered) light.
To demonstrate how the minimally invasive nature
of this in vivo CS-OPT platform, coupled with the rapid
acquisition time, can enable longitudinal studies of
individual zebrafish, we repeatedly imaged an individual
TraNac Tg(KDR:mCherry) zebrafish over a 26 week
period. The results are illustrated in Figure 6, which
shows maximum intensity projections of segmented 3-D
reconstructions of the mCherry-labelled vasculature of an
individual TraNac Tg(KDR:mCherry) zebrafish imaged
repeatedly over a 26 week period and Supplementary Video
S4 shows the corresponding 3-D renderings. Quantitative
analysis of developmental angiogenesis of the lateral
cutaneous artery shows increases in vascular length,
diameter, and branching, as summarised in Table 1.

Figure 2: Exemplar reconstructed OPT images of adult [81 days post fertilization (dpf)] TraNac Tg (KDR:m
Cherry:Fabp10-rtTA:TRE-eGFPKRASV12) zebrafish expressing liver specific eGFP-labelled tumour and
mCherry-labelled vasculature showing maximum intensity projections of eGFP (green) and mCherry (red) fluorescence
(scale bar = 2.5 mm). a. and b. show FBP reconstructed images computed with 512 and 64 projections respectively, c. shows the
corresponding image reconstructed from 64 projections using the CS-OPT approach, d. shows the “vesselness” of the same reconstruction
and e. shows the “final” segmented image of the vasculature. See Supplementary Video S1 for corresponding 3-D animations.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

43942

Oncotarget

Figure 3: a-c. Representative “final” segmented reconstructed CS-OPT images of eGFP-labelled tumour and mCherry-labelled

vasculature in adult TraNac Tg (KDR:mCherry;Fabp10:rtTA;TRE:eGFP:KRASV12) zebrafish with data acquired following DOX treatment
at 145 dpf after one, two and three weeks of treatment and after three weeks of DOX treatment plus a further week with no treatment
(See also Supplementary Videos S2-S3). (a) shows whole images of tumour and vasculature (scale bar = 5 mm); (b) and (c) show the
corresponding CS-OPT images (scale bar = 2 mm) of the of the tumour alone and of the segmented vasculature associated with the tumour.
d, e, f. respectively are graphs plotting the corresponding variation of the mean tumour volume, the mean number of tumour vessel branch
points and percent tumour vascularisation (proportion of vasculature volume within tumour volume) calculated from this OPT data set, for
which n≥5 at each condition and the error bars represent the standard error of the mean (SEM). *p<0.05, **p<0.01 as indicated by lines.

Figure 4: Induction and progression of HCC in adult TraNac Tg (KDR:mCherry:Fabp10-rtTA:TRE-eGFPKRASV12)
zebrafish. Images of H&E stained representative tumour sections following tumour induction for a. one week, b. two weeks and c. three weeks
with d. imaged after three weeks of induction plus a further week after removal of inducer treatment. Each group (n=6-8) Scale bars 100 μm.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

43943

Oncotarget

Figure 5: a. Representative IHC mCherry staining showing vessels (brown) from three week tumour induced adult TraNac Tg

(KDR:mCherry:Fabp10-rtTA:TRE-eGFPKRASV12) zebrafish. Scale bar 50μm. b. Graph showing IHC mCherry quantitative analysis of
percent vessel coverage over regions of interest. Each group (n =3) and error bars represent the SEM. *p<0.05, **p<0.01 as indicated by lines.

Figure 6: Representative final reconstructed CS-OPT images from a longitudinal study of an individual TraNac Tg
(KDR:mCherry) zebrafish re-imaged at 4, 8, 12 and 26 weeks post fertilisation (wpf). Inset boxes define the vascular region
containing the lateral cutaneous artery and Table 1 summarises the quantification of key parameters of this developmental angiogenesis.
(scale bar = 2 mm) (See also Supplementary Video S4).

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

43944

Oncotarget

Table 1: Quantification of developmental angiogenesis of the lateral cutaneous artery in a TraNac Tg
(KDR:mCherry) zebrafish longitudinally imaged using CS-OPT at 8,12 and 26 weeks post fertilisation (wpf).
Length (mm)
Mean Diameter (μm)
Number of Branchpoints

8 wpf

12 wpf

26 wpf

7.09

11.00

16.01

159.82

253.22

265.24

36

57

65

In conclusion, we present a novel 3-D imaging
platform based on angularly multiplexed OPT with
compressive sensing that has been optimised for imaging
live tumour burdened adult zebrafish. Using only 64
angular projections, the total data acquisition time for
both tumour and vascular channels was less than 3.5
minutes, which is important for zebrafish viability and
application to longitudinal studies. We have shown
that CS-OPT can be applied to image the progression
of HCC in adult zebrafish and we have demonstrated
the capability of this platform for longitudinal imaging
studies of adult zebrafish. We believe this work indicates
the potential of CS-OPT to provide robust quantitative
measurements of disease development and to evaluate
anti-cancer therapies. This capability can be implemented
at a cost that is comparable to a wide-field fluorescence
microscope.

water, with the addition of 0.0003% (w/v) methylene blue
to embryos. Tumour induction was performed through the
addition of doxycycline (Sigma D-9891) in fish water at
a concentration of 10mg/L. For imaging, male zebrafish,
starved for 24 hours, were anaesthetised with 4.2%
Tricaine solution before acquisition. After which the fish
were transferred to a recovery tank, monitored to regain
consciousness, before being returned to storage tanks.

Imaging instrumentation
The angularly multiplexed [22] two channel OPT
instrument represented in Figure 1 was designed to
accommodate adult zebrafish up to 5 cm in length and 1
cm in diameter and provide a field of view of 33.8 x 28.5
mm. In each channel the optical imaging system depicted
in Supplementary Figure 1 provided a magnification of
0.49x with images acquired using sCMOS cameras (Zyla
5.5 sCMOS, Andor Technology Ltd) with an imaging
sensor of 16.6 x 14.0 mm with 2560 x 2160 pixels of
6.5 μm. The effective numerical aperture (NA) of each
imaging arm was adjusted using the adjustable iris in the
back focal plane of the “objective” lenses L1 to provide a
depth of field of 2.5 mm with a diffraction limited point
spread function of FWHM 18-22 μm depending on the
wavelength. This is close to the Nyquist limit of 26 μm
determined by the system magnification and the pixel size
of the camera. One imaging arm was focused to 1.25 mm
and the other to 3.75 mm from the axis of rotation. These
imaging arms were optimised using WinLens (www.
winlens.de) for minimum aberrations and field curvature
across the field of view.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Transgenic zebrafish
The transgenic lines used within the study
were TraNac Tg(KDR:mCherry:Fabp10-rtTA:TREeGFPKRASV12) and TraNac Tg(KDR:mCherry).
These lines were generated through the breeding of
transparent TraNac zebrafish (gift from Julian Lewis,
Cancer Research Institute), a double mutant for the
mitfa/nacre and the mpv17/transparent genes, to
both Tg(KDR:mCherry) fish (gift from Steve Wilson,
University College London) and Tg(Fabp10-rtTA:TREeGFPKRASV12) fish (gift from Zhiyuan Gong, National
University of Singapore). The resultant TraNac
Tg(KDR:mCherry) and TraNac Tg (Fabp10-rtTA:TREeGFPKRASV12) were crossed to generate the transparent
line with mCherry labelled vasculature and an inducible,
liver-specific GFP labelled tumour.

Image acquisition
For imaging, anaethetised fish were transferred into
a clear tube of 9.5 mm internal diameter (11 mm outside
diameter) made of FEP (fluorinated ethylene propylene)
tubing with a refractive index of 1.34 (EW-06406-12, Cole
Parmer Instrument Co Ltd) with care taken to minimise
any bubbles within the tube. These tubes were then sealed
with a plug and mounted under a rotation stepper motor
(T-NM17A200, Zaber Technologies Inc.) set to run using a
sufficiently low level of acceleration to prevent ‘slipping’
of the fish within the tube. Typically, the acceleration used
was 10 microsteps/s2 for a motor with 12800 microsteps/

Zebrafish husbandry
Zebrafish lines were bred and maintained within
the UCL fish facility and the Central Biomedical Services
facility at Imperial College London according to standard
practices where all procedures conformed to UK Home
Office requirements (PPL 70/7700 & PPL 70/8365).
Breeding and maintenance were carried out in system
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

43945

Oncotarget

revolution (T-NM17A200), corresponding to an angular
acceleration of ~1.6 deg/s2. The tube was suspended in
a custom-built imaging chamber of octagonal crosssection filled with water to provide index matching of the
tube and with glass windows normal to the imaging and
excitation axes. This chamber allowed for the sample to
be illuminated from multiple directions simultaneously
in order to improve uniformity of fluorescence excitation.
The collimated excitation laser beams were directed onto
a rotating engineered diffuser (ED1-C50-MD, Thorlabs,
Inc) with a cone angle of 50 degrees and the resulting
scattered light was collimated with a Fresnel lens of 50.8
mm diameter (FRP251, Thorlabs, Inc) and 51 mm focal
length. Because adult zebrafish typically present an aspect
ratio >4:1 (i.e. >4 cm length and ~1 cm diameter), it is
possible to more efficiently utilise this excitation light by
dividing it into three sub-beams with similar aspect ratio
to the fish. The OPT image projection data were acquired
by the two sCMOS cameras running in parallel interfaced
with separate computers and the acquisition process
was controlled by custom software written in LabVIEW
(National Instruments) such that one computer was slaved
to the other, which also controlled the rotation stage motor,
and the projection images were acquired in synchronism.
Multispectral imaging of the eGFP-labelled tumour and
the mCherry-labelled vasculature was implemented by
acquiring two data sets sequentially with excitation at 488
nm and 561 nm, for which exposure times of 1 s and 2 s
respectively were typically required for each projection at
the maximum excitation power levels of up to 150 mW at
488 nm provided by a diode laser (MLD, Cobalt AB) and
up to 200 mW at 561 nm provided by a diode-pumped
solid-state laser (Jive, Cobolt AB).

Filtered Back Projection (FBP) via a MATLAB (The
MathWorks Inc) programme written in-house using the
standard iradon library function. FBP reconstruction
ideally requires several 100 angular projections to
reconstruct 3-D images without loss of information using
the imaging system reported here. When implemented
on a personal computer with a graphics processing
unit (NVIDIA Tesla K40 GPU), this typically takes a
few minutes for a data set with 200 projections that
reconstructs to a z-stack of 2000 image planes.
The CS-OPT approach is applicable to sparse
data and entails acquiring under-sampled datasets (i.e.
fewer angular projections) and reconstructing the 3-D
image stacks using an iterative algorithm. Here we use
the TwIST algorithm [25], which we have implemented
in MATLAB (The MathWorks Inc) and which requires
approximately 30 minutes on a multicore personal
computer (with Intel®Xeon® E5-2630 processor, 128
GB RAM and NVIDIA Tesla K40 GPU) to reconstruct
a 3-D image stack using 64 angular projections. This
iterative reconstruction process followed that described
in reference [14] and the same default values were used
for all parameters excluding the regularisation parameter,
τ, and the number of total variation minimisations, TVit.
For the tumour reconstructions, τ was set to 0.015 with
TVit set to 25 and, for the vasculature reconstructions,
τ was set to 0.004 and TVit set to 10. These values
were selected based upon a compromise between
reconstruction quality and time.

Image segmentation and quantification
A percentile threshold based upon the cumulative
frequency graph was applied to both tumour and
vasculature reconstructions. For quantitative analysis
of the vasculature, a median filter was applied over a
neighborhood of 5 pixels, before using a multiscale
Hessian-based method [26] in MATLAB for vessel
enhancement. This determines the “vesselness”, i.e.
the likelihood of each voxel belonging to a vessel, by
analysing local image structure in the form of Hessian
eigenvalues. The eigenvalues represent variations in
intensity in three orthogonal directions and it is deemed
likely the voxel belongs to a vessel if one eigenvalue
is small and the other two are of large magnitude and
negative, considering that the vessel structures are brighter
than the background. The input parameters used were as
previously described [14].
Following the iterative reconstruction of the 3-D
data for the cross-sectional and longitudinal studies,
the resulting “z-stacks” could be analysed to quantify
the eGFP-labelled tumour volume and the changes
in the structure of the mCherry-labelled vasculature,
respectively. The tumour volume was quantified
through extracting the number of non-zero voxels in the
image. For the vasculature, the output of the Hessian-

Data management
Following the data acquisition, each series of angular
projections was manipulated computationally to ensure that
the rotation axis was centred in the adjusted dataset and the
two multiplexed camera datasets were then co-registered
using a calibration process incorporating magnification,
translation and rotation with rigid body transforms. The
co-registered angular projections were then saved as OMETIFF files on an OMERO [23] server to enable sharing of
these large datasets with remote access across the internet.
This angular projection dataset requires much less storage
capacity than the 3-D reconstructed image stacks. The
projection data can subsequently be downloaded and the
3-D image stacks reconstructed on demand. Supplementary
Figure 2 presents an overview of the data workflow.

Image reconstruction
OPT datasets comprising co-registered sets of
angular projections from each sCMOS camera saved as
OME-TIFF files could be directly reconstructed using
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

43946

Oncotarget

based analysis was subjected to a threshold before
being imported into the Amira (FEI) software package.
In Amira a 3-D median filter with a neighborhood of 6
was used before applying the auto-skeleton tool with
no threshold, 10 iterations and “smooth” and “attach
to data” coefficients of 0.5 and 0.25, respectively.
From the resultant skeleton vessel length, volume,
diameter and branching were analysed for the tumour
region. Vessels with diameter smaller than 26 μm were
excluded from the analysis. For visualisation the final
CS-OPT images are presented with the skeletonized
and dilated vasculature to present a binary image with
appropriate vessel diameters. In the final segmented
images, vasculature extending up to ~1.7 mm into fish
has been reconstructed.

increments of 1, searching for a change in value greater
than 0.01au; a percentile of 99 describes the threshold
that separates the lowest stained 99% of tissue from
the highest 1%. A lower threshold (Th_L) was then
calculated at Th_V-4. Following identification of
all areas with brown staining greater than Th_V, any
object with blue staining equal to or greater than the
level of brown staining was removed. The remaining
brown areas were then grown into surrounding pixels
with brown staining greater than Th_L. Vessel lumen
were then incorporated and vessel diameters calculated.
Percent tumour vascularisation was based on the vessel
stain plus lumen for the area of tissue plus enclosed
background. Due to changes in vessel morphology
upon tissue fixation (i.e. collapsed vessels) and limits
of CS-OPT resolution as described above, vessels with
diameter greater than 100 μm or lower than 5 μm and
diameter lower than 10μm with a width/length ratio
over 3 were excluded from analysis.

Histopathology and Immunohistochemistry
For the cross-sectional study of HCC progression,
whole fish were fixed in 10% formalin (Fischer Scientific,
P/0840/53) following imaging for subsequent tumour
dissection and histological analysis. Dissected tumours
were paraffin embedded and sagittal sectioned at 5 μm.
Histopathological analysis of tumour progression was
performed on haematoxylin- and eosin-stained sections
digitally imaged using a NanoZoomer (Hamamatsu,
UK). Immunohistochemistry (IHC) was performed by
IQPath: (UCL- https://www.ucl.ac.uk/ion/divisions/
neuropathology/ion-histology/histology). Staining was
performed using the Ventana Discovery XT instrument,
using the Ventana DAB Map detection kit (760-124).
Heat mediated epitope demasking was performed on the
Ventana instruments, using a citrate based buffer (Ventana
Ribo CC, 760-107). Anti-mCherry (Novus Biologicals,
1C51) primary antibody incubation was for 8 hours
using a 1:100 dilution. Rabbit anti- Mouse (Dako E0354)
secondary antibody incubation was for 32 minutes, using
a 1:200 dilution. Slides were haematoxylin counterstained.
Digital images of the stained sections were generated
using a Leica SCN400F at x40 magnification.

Statistical analysis
Statistical analysis was performed by one-way
analysis of variance (ANOVA), where p <0.05 was
considered significant.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Zhiyuan Gong (NUS, Singapore) for the
Tg(Fabp10-rtTA:TRE-eGFPKRASV12) zebrafish line and
help with husbandry and for reagents. We thank Roberto
Mayor for discussions on zebrafish IHC. We thank the
UCL Zebrafish Facility and the CBS facility at Imperial
for their respective expertise in zebrafish maintenance and
husbandry.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
No potential conflicts of interest were disclosed.

Immunohistochemistry Quantification

GRANT SUPPORT

Analysis of the digital IHC images was performed
at x20 magnification. Manually selected regions of
interest (ROI) corresponding to segmented vasculature
in the CS-OPT data were analysed using Definiens
Developer XD v2.4.2 (Munich, Germany). Initial
identification of the tissue, background and vessels
within these ROI was based on the level of blue and
brown staining, calculated from the RGB image
using HSD model [27]. The combined level of brown
and blue staining was used to identify the tissue and
background; background ≤ 0.5 > Tissue (value range
0-3 a.u.). The threshold used to identify vessels (Th_V)
was calculated using percentiles decreasing from 99 in

This work was supported in part by the UK Medical
Research Council (MR/K011561/1). N. Lockwood is
supported by a doctoral training grant (SP/08/004) from
the British Heart Foundation to P. Frankel and by UCL
CoMPLEX. N. Andrews is supported by a CASE PhD
studentship from the UK Engineering and Physical
Sciences Research Council with AstraZeneca. Support
from Magnus Life Science is also gratefully acknowledged.
We gratefully acknowledge the donation of a Tesla K40
GPU by NVIDIA (https://registration.nvidia.com/ahr.aspx).
S. Brandner & M. Ellis are supported by the Department
of Health’s NIHR Biomedical Research Centre’s funding
scheme and The Brain Tumour Charity (UK).

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

43947

Oncotarget

REFERENCES

15.	 Barriuso J, Nagaraju R, Hurlstone A. Zebrafish: a new
companion for translational research in oncology. Clinical
Cancer Research. 2015; 21: 969-975.

1.	 Ntziachristos V, Ripoll J, Wang LV, Weissleder R.
Looking and listening to light: the evolution of wholebody photonic imaging. Nature Biotechnology. 2005; 23:
313-320.

16.	 Lam SH, Wu YL, Vega VB, Miller LD, Spitsbergen J, Tong
Y, Zhan H, Govindarajan KR, Lee S, Mathavan S, Murthy
KR, Buhler DR, Liu ET, Gong Z. Conservation of gene
expression signatures between zebrafish and human liver
tumors and tumor progression. Nature Biotechnology. 2006;
24: 73-75.

2.	 Ntziachristos V. Fluorescence molecular imaging. Annual
Review of Biomedical Engineering. 2006; 8: 1-33.
3.	 Leblond F, Davis SC, Valdes PA, Pogue BW. Pre-clinical
whole-body fluorescence imaging: Review of instruments,
methods and applications. Journal of Photochemistry and
Photobiology B - Biology. 2010; 98: 77-94.

17.	 Nguyen AT, Emelyanov A, Koh CH, Spitsbergen JM,
Parinov S, Gong Z. An inducible kras(V12) transgenic
zebrafish model for liver tumorigenesis and chemical drug
screening. Disease Models and Mechanisms. 2012; 5: 63-72.

4.	 Ma R, Distel M, Dean-Ben XL, Ntziachristos V, Razansky
D. Non-invasive whole-body imaging of adult zebrafish
with optoacoustic tomography. Physics in Medicine and
Biology. 2012; 57: 7227-7237.

18.	 Zheng W, Li Z, Nguyen AT, Li C, Emelyanov A, Gong
Z. Xmrk, kras and myc transgenic zebrafish liver cancer
models share molecular signatures with subsets of human
hepatocellular carcinoma. PLoS One. 2014; 9: e91179.

5.	 Wang X, Pang Y, Ku G, Xie X, Stoica G, Wang LV.
Noninvasive laser-induced photoacoustic tomography
for structural and functional in vivo imaging of the brain.
Nature Biotechnology. 2003; 21: 803-806.

19.	 White RM, Sessa A, Burke C, Bowman T, LeBlanc J,
Ceol C, Bourque C, Dovey M, Goessling W, Burns CE,
Zon LI. Transparent adult zebrafish as a tool for in vivo
transplantation analysis. Cell Stem Cell. 2008; 2: 183-189.

6.	 Sharpe J, Ahlgren U, Perry P, Hill B, Ross A, HecksherSørensen J, Baldock R, Davidson D. Optical projection
tomography as a tool for 3D microscopy and gene
expression studies. Science. 2002; 296: 541-545.
7.	 Colas J-F, Sharpe J. Live optical projection tomography.
Organogenesis. 2009; 5: 211-216.

20.	 Heilmann S, Ratnakumar K, Langdon EM, Kansler ER, Kim
IS, Campbell NR, Perry EB, McMahon AJ, Kaufman CK,
van Rooijen E, Lee W, Iacobuzio-Donahue CA, Hynes RO,
et al. A Quantitative System for Studying Metastasis Using
Transparent Zebrafish. Cancer Research. 2015; 75: 4272-4282.

8.	 Lorbeer RA, Heidrich M, Lorbeer C, Ramírez Ojeda DF,
Bicker G, Meyer H, Heisterkamp A. Highly efficient 3D
fluorescence microscopy with a scanning laser optical
tomograph. Optics Express. 2011; 19: 5419-5430.

21.	 Chew TW, Liu XJ, Liu L, Spitsbergen JM, Gong Z, Low
BC. Crosstalk of Ras and Rho: activation of RhoA abates
Kras-induced liver tumorigenesis in transgenic zebrafish
models. Oncogene. 2014; 33: 2717-2727.

9.	 Huisken J, Stainier, DY. Selective plane illumination
microscopy techniques in developmental biology.
Development. 2009; 136: 1963-1975.

22.	 Chen L, Andrews N, Kumar S, Frankel P, McGinty J,
French PM. Simultaneous angular multiplexing optical
projection tomography at shifted focal planes. Optics
Letters. 2013; 38: 851-853.

10.	 Vinegoni C, Pitsouli C, Razansky D, Perrimon N,
Ntziachristos V. In vivo imaging of Drosophila melanogaster
pupae with mesoscopic fluorescence tomography. Nature
Methods. 2008; 5: 45-47.

23.	 Allan C, Burel JM, Moore J, Blackburn C, Linkert M,
Loynton S, Macdonald D, Moore WJ, Neves C, Patterson
A, Porter M, Tarkowska A, Loranger B, et al. OMERO:
flexible, model-driven data management for experimental
biology. Nature Methods. 2012; 9: 245-253. http://www.
openmicroscopy.org/site/products/omero

11.	 Birk UJ, Rieckher M, Konstantinides N, Darrell A, SarasaRenedo A, Meyer H, Tavernarakis N, Ripoll J. Correction
for specimen movement and rotation errors for in-vivo
Optical Projection Tomography. Biomedical Optics
Express. 2010; 1: 87-96.

24.	 Semela D, Dufour JF. Angiogenesis and hepatocellular
carcinoma. Journal of Hepatology. 2004; 41, 864-880.

12.	 Huisken J, Stainier DY. Even fluorescence excitation by
multidirectional selective plane illumination microscopy
(mSPIM). Optics Letters. 2007; 32: 2608-2610.

25.	 Bioucas-Dias J, Figueiredo M. A new TwIST: two-step iterative
shrinkage/thresholding algorithms for image restoration. IEEE
Transactions on Image Processing. 2007; 16: 2992–3004.

13.	 McGinty J, Taylor HB, Chen L, Bugeon L, Lamb JR,
Dallman MJ, French PM. In vivo fluorescence lifetime
optical projection tomography. Biomedical Optics Express.
2011; 2: 1340-1350.

26.	 Frangi AF, Niessen WJ, Vincken KL, Viergever MA.
Multiscale vessel enhancement filtering. Medical Image
Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention - Lecture
Notes in Computer Science. 1998; 1496: 130-137. Springer
Verlag, Berlin.

14.	 Correia T, Lockwood N, Kumar S, Yin J, Ramel M-C,
Andrews N, Katan M, Bugeon L, Dallman MJ, McGinty
J, Frankel P, French PM, Arridge S Accelerated Optical
Projection Tomography Applied to In Vivo Imaging of
Zebrafish. PLoS One. 2015; 10: e0136213.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

27.	 van Der Laak JA, Pahlplatz MM, Hanselaar AG, de
Wilde PC. Hue-saturation-density (HSD) model for
stain recognition in digital images from transmitted light
microscopy. Cytometry. 2000; 39: 275-284.
43948

Oncotarget

