Oncotarget, Vol. 7, No. 38

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Research Paper

Synergistic effect of reduced polypeptide micelle for co-delivery
of doxorubicin and TRAIL against drug-resistance in breast
cancer
Chuling Hu1,*, Fenfen Gu1,*, Zongguang Tai1,*, Chong Yao1, Chunai Gong1, Qingming
Xia1, Yuan Gao1, Shen Gao1
1

Department of Pharmaceutics, Changhai Hospital, Second Military Medical University, Shanghai 200433, China

*

These authors contributed equally to this work

Correspondence to: Shen Gao, email: liullk@126.com
Yuan Gao, email: gaoy82@hotmail.com
Keywords: polyarginine, lipoic acid, reduction-sensitive, drug resistance, cancer therapy
Received: May 02, 2016     Accepted: August 13, 2016     Published: August 20, 2016

ABSTRACT
Cationic peptides as a non-viral gene vector have become a hotspot of research
because of their high transfection efficcacy and safety. Based on our previous study,
we synthesized a cationic reduction-responsive vector based on disulfide cross-linked
L-arginine, L-histidine and lipoic acid (LHRss) as the co-carrier of both doxorubicin
(DOX) and the necrosis factor-related apoptosis-inducing ligand (pTRAIL). The
LHRss/DOX/TRAIL construct has reduction-sensitive behavior and an enhanced
endosomal escape ability to increase the cytotoxicity of DOX and the transfection
efficiency. Further, the LHRss/DOX/TRAIL construct increased the accumulation of
DOX and promoted the expression of pTRAIL, thus increasing cellular apoptosis by
83.7% in MCF-7/ADR cells. In addition, the in vivo biodistribution results showed
that the LHRss/DOX/TRAIL construct could target tumors well. The in vivo anti-tumor
effect study demonstrated that the LHRss/DOX/TRAIL construct inhibited tumor
growth markedly, with a tumor inhibitory rate of 94.0%. The co-delivery system
showed a significant synergistic anti-tumor effect. The LHRss/DOX/TRAIL construct
may prove to be a promising co-delivery vector for the effective treatment of drug
resistant breast cancer.

INTRODUCTION

apoptosis by interacting with death receptor 4 (DR4) and
death receptor 5 (DR5), leading to the formation of the
death-inducing signaling complex (DISC), which binds
caspase-8 [4, 5]. The recruitment of caspase-8 to the
DISC activates its proteolytic properties, thus initiating
a cascade of protease activation involving enzymes such
as caspase-3, which promotes the subsequent cleavage
of death substrates and results in apoptosis. Herein, codelivery TRAIL and chemotherapeutic drugs may increase
the synergistic effects of drug efficacy and prohibit the
MDR of chemotherapy. However there are challenges of
the transport of chemotherapeutic drugs and gene drugs
in the co-delivery systems such as ineffective cellular
transfection, instability in vivo of gene drug, as well as
non specific target effect of drugs [6, 7].
Effective delivery systems can cross various
barriers in vivo and intracellularly deliver drugs to the
target tumor cells and cause an antitumor effect [8, 9].

Multidrug resistance (MDR) often leads to failure
of breast cancer chemotherapy because MDR may
increase cell surface drug-pump protein efflux, inhibit
cancer cell apoptosis, decrease drug influx, and alter cell
cycle regulation [1, 2]. Tumor cells are characterized
by a strong proliferative ability, but the most important
feature of tumor cells is their loss of the ability to undergo
spontaneous apoptosis. Thus, the study of apoptosis in
tumors is one of the more promising breakthrough points
in tumor chemotherapy [3]. It was reported that tumor
necrosis factors (TNF) such as TNF-α can increase tumor
cell apoptosis and enhance the efficacy of chemotherapy
drugs [4]. TNF-related apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL)
has recently been identified as a protein of interest because
of its remarkable ability to induce rapid apoptosis of tumor
cells without affecting most normal cells. TRAIL induces
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

61832

Oncotarget

Therefore, these delivery systems should have multiple
functions such as long-term stability, target specificity,
and the ability to enhance endosomal escape [10].
The synthesis of functional units, a technology using
supramolecular groups to assemble multiple functional
units into a combination, is an effective method to obtain
multi-functional carriers. The ordered structure of selfassembly with the appropriate nano-size and a controllable
structure that can cross a series of barriers, such as the
cell membrane, the endosomal membrane, and the nuclear
membrane, has great potential prospect [11].
In this study, we developed a nanosystem based on
disulfide cross-linked lipoic acid modified polyarginine
peptide and histidine (LHRss) for co-delivery of the
chemotherapeutic drug doxorubicin (DOX) and TRAIL
to MDR breast cancer cells. Polyarginine, as a cell
penetrating peptide, was used as an intracellular delivery
vector, knowing that it can effectively compress DNA
by enriching the positive charges in the DNA [12, 13],
and histidine can help nanomicelle endosomal escape
through the proton sponge effect [14, 15]. Moreover, the
intermolecular disulfide bonds of lipoic acid can avoid
instability by self-assembling into a nanomicelle in vivo
that is cracked in the glutathione-reducing conditions in
tumor cells, releasing the drug and avoiding the failure of
effective drug release in cells [16, 17]. The LHRss/DOX/
TRAIL construct was assembled into a nanomicelle
structure with DOX encapsulated in the hudrophobic
core and pTRAIL condensed on the hudrophilic layer. We
hypothesized that the LHRss/DOX/TRAIL construct could
effectively enhance the cytotoxicity of the drug, promote
the apoptotic response, providing a targeted delivery and
enhanced effect of DOX and TRAIL to drug-resistant
breast cancer cells (Figure 9). For this purpose, cellular
uptake, in vitro transfection efficiency, cytotoxicity,
cellular apoptosis rate, in vivo distribution as well as antitumor effect of the LHRss/DOX/TRAIL construct were
investigated in a drug-resistant breast cancer xenograft
nude mice model.

to LHR was 10%, and the Mw of the LHRss was
significantly enhanced compared to that of the original
monomer LHR (1544.88 Da). The formation of LHRss
was verified by 1H-NMR (Figure 1B). Figure 1B shows
the 1H NMR results of LHRss, indicating that δ3.59 ppm
(signal c) belonged to the methyne of the lipoic acid,
and δ2.34 ppm (signal g) belonged to the hydrogen on
the methylene group of the carbonyl group. δ3.48 ppm,
2.58 ppm and δ1.36~1.59 ppm were from the proton of
lipoic acid moiety (signals a,b,e,d and f, respectively). The
peak at δ1.79 ppm (signal i) and the peak at δ2.04 ppm
were attributed to −CH2−close to the tertiary carbon in
arginine and histidine (signal m). Signals d (δ1.54 ppm)
and h (δ3.19 ppm) were attributed to the rest of −CH2−in
arginine. The peaks at δ4.23−4.62 ppm(signal n) were due
to protons of tertiary carbon in the polymer. The peak at
δ7.17 ppm (signal j) and δ8.54 ppm (signal k) were from
protons of imidazole in histidine.

Characterization of LHRss/DOX/pGL3
complexes
The zeta potential and particle size of LHRss/DOX/
DNA are closely related to the N/P ratio. The LHRss/
DOX/pGL3 complexes were prepared at different N/P
ratios from 2.5:1 to 80:1. As shown in Figure 2A, all
complexes had a positive surface charge with a zeta
potential ranging from 10 to 30 mV when the N/P ratio
was higher than 10. Figure 2A also shows that the particle
size of the LHRss/DOX/pGL3 complexes was less than
200 nm at all the N/P ratios. When the N/P ratio was
higher than 10, most LHRss/DOX/pGL3 complexes had
a higher zeta potential and a smaller particle size than
the low N/P ratio complexes. Among the LHRss, LHRss/
DOX/pGL3 was found to have an appropriate size and
zeta potential (Figure 2B and 2C) at an N/P ratio at 40,
with a particle size and zeta potential of 69 ± 2.14 nm and
30.7 ± 2.94 mV, respectively. TEM showed that the LHRss/
DOX/pGL3 complexes formed a compact nanostructure,
with a similar size as the results shown in Figure 2D at an
N/P of 40. Figure 2E showed that with different N/P ratios
from 0.25 to 15, the condensing ability of LHRss was
enhanced as the N/P ratio was increased. When the N/P
ratio was greater than 5, the pGL3 plasmid was completely
condensed, indicating that the compression ability of LHR
was improved by cross-linking with the disulfide bond.
To confirm this finding, DTT, a reducing agent, was used
to break the disulfide bond. As shown in Figure 2E, the
LHRss/DOX/pGL3 complexes showed a weaker pGL3
binding affinity in the presence of DTT because of the
depolymerization of LHRss. Thus, we presume that the
inter-molecular disulfide bond of lipoic acid can be broken
by reducing the condition in the cytoplasm, thus reducing
the affinity of LHRss for pGL3. The characteristics of the
inter-molecular disulfide bond of lipoic acid remain stable
extracellularly but not stable in the cytoplasm, which

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Characterization of LHRss
LHR was synthesized using F-moc-SPPS, and
cysteine was used as a cross-linking agent to cross-link
an intermolecular disulfide bond of lipoic acid to obtain
the appropriate molecular weight for further research.
At the same time, methanol was used as a solvent. After
completion of the reaction, the solvent was removed by
N2 drying, and the remaining cysteine was neutralized
by NaOH. The peptide LHR was synthesized with
> 95% purity and a precise molecular weight of 1554.88
Da. The mass-average molecular weights (Mw) of the
polymers are summarized in Table 1. The Mw of the
LHRss was 22.9  kDa when the molar ratio of cysteine
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

61833

Oncotarget

Table 1: The synthetic conditions and the corresponding molecular weight of LHRss
Polymers

LHR(mg)

Cysteine(mg)

Feed ratio(%)a

Mw(kDa)b

LHR

−

−

−

1.555

LHRss

50

0.39

10.0

22.9

Notes: a Molar ratio of cysteine to LHR. b Data obtained by gel permeation chromatography.
can provide a guarantee for the effective uptake and the
effective release of the drug.

that the glutathione concentration in the cytosol of tumor
cells was 100–1,000 times that of normal cells [18].
Kim et al. [19] reported that the disulfide bond could be
cleaved rapidly via thiol-disulfide exchange reactions with
intracellular reducing molecules, especially glutathione.
Our study showed that the prepared nanomicelle could
rapidly release drugs under the reducing conditions of
tumor cells.

Loading and release at different pHs of DOX
Loading of DOX into LHRss/DOX/TRAIL was
performed by Dialysis method. It was found that the DLC
was 12.5%wt, and the DLE was as high as 71.4%. DOX
released from the micelles was pH-sensitive, as shown
by the experiments carried out under two different pH
conditions (pH 5.5 and 7.4) (Figure 2F). Through the
spontaneous fluorescence behavior of DOX, the content
of DOX can be detected. The drug release behavior
was detected by dialysis. Thus, if DOX was completely
condensed in the LHRss, only the released DOX could
be detected. The cumulative release rate increased with
the lower pH of the release media, from 54.5% in pH 7.4
medium to 95.5% with 60 h in the media with pH of 5.5,
which is most likely due to the release of the drug from
the disulfide bond under acidic conditions. It was reported

Cellular uptake
Cellular uptake is an important factor in drug
delivery. To determine the cellular uptake of LHRss and
the cellular DNA uptake mediated by LHRss/pDNA, the
LHR/pDNA in MCF-7 cells and MCF-7/ADR cells was
measured using YOYO-1 labeled pDNA. The positive
cells were quantitatively assessed by flow cytometry
after being incubated for 1, 2, and 4 h. As shown in
Figure 3A, the fluorescent signal could not be detected in
cells treated with LHR/ YOYO-1pDNA, even after being

Figure 1: Synthesis and 1H-NMR determination of LHRss (A) Synthesis of LHRss and (B) 1H-NMR spectra of LHRss
in D2O at 600 MHz. Abbreviations: Arg, arginine; His, histidine; LA,L-lipoic acid; cys, cysteine; LHR, lipoic acid modified polyarginine
peptide and histidine (LHRss); LHRss, disulfide cross-linked lipoic modified with polyarginine peptide and histidine.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

61834

Oncotarget

incubated for 4 h, probably because of the low positive
charge of the micelles compressing the DNA and its
low affinity to the cell membrane. The cellular uptake
of LHRss/ YOYO-1pDNA by MCF-7 cells and MCF-7/
ADR cells was time-independent. The uptake of pDNA
by MCF-7/ADR cells was slightly more than the uptake
by MCF-7 cells. The cellular uptake results showed
that the cellular uptake efficiency of the LHRss/pDNA
nanomicelle was significantly higher than that of the
LHR/pDNA in both MCF-7 and MCF-7/ADR cells. The
amount of positive cells was approximately 9.59 fold and
21.05 fold that of the LHR/pDNA nanomicelle in MCF-7
and MCF-7/ADR cells, respectively, probably because
cross-linking increased the affinity of the nanocarrier
with the cell membrane [20].
Figure 3B shows the uptake of free DOX and LHRss/
DOX by MCF-7 and MCF-7/ADR cells. In MCF-7 cells,

the cellular uptake of free DOX and LHRss /DOX was
both high, and almost saturated at 2 h. However, the
uptake of free DOX in MCF-7/ADR cells was low,
while the LHRss/DOX had a high accumulation after 4-h
treatment, indicating that the uptake might be derived from
caveolae endocytosis or micropinocytosis [21]. The high
expression of p-gp in the drug resistant cells would efflux
DOX, which entered the membrane through electrostatic
interaction [22]. However, the micelles could enter the
cells through clathrin- or caveolin-mediated endocytosis
and bypass the drug efflux pumps, thus increasing the
cellular uptake.
To observe the intracellular location of LHRss/
YOYO-1pDNA, DOX, LHRss/DOX,and LHRss/DOX/
YOYO-1pDNA, DAPI (4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole)
was used to stain the nucleus. Figure 3Ca shows the
intracellular distribution of the micelle in MCF-7 and

Figure 2: Characterization ofLHRss/DOX/TRAIL. (A) Particle size and zeta potential of LHRss/DOX/TRAIL determined by

DLS. (B) Particle sizes distribution of LHRss/DOX/TRAIL at N/P ratio of 40 determined by DLS. (C) Zeta potential of LHRss/DOX/
TRAIL at N/P ratio of 40 determined by DLS. (D) TEM images of LHRss/DOX/TRAIL at mass ratio at N/P ratio of 40. (E) Agarose
gel electrophoresis results (a. agarose gel electrophoresis of LHR/pGL3; b. agarose gel electrophoresis of LHRss/pGL3; c. agarose gel
electrophoresis of LHRss/pGL3 at DTT condition). (F) Release of DOX from LHRss/DOX/TRAIL.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

61835

Oncotarget

MCF-7/ADR cells 4 h after transfection. The confocal
microscopic images of MCF-7 and MCF-7/ADR cells
showed a large amount of green fluorescence in the
cytoplasm and a small punctate in the nucleus, which
coincided with blue fluorescence, indicating that YOYO1-labeled pDNA successfully escaped from the endosome
and entered the nucleus [23, 24]. These results showed that
the LHRss could promote endosomal escape. Figure 3Cb
and Figure 3Cc showed the intracellular location of free
DOX and LHRss/DOX in MCF-7 and MCF-7/ADR cells.
The location of free DOX was basically the same as the
LHRss/DOX, indicating that the drug DOX could enter the
nucleus to play the cytotoxic effect. While in MCF-7/ADR
cells, only a small amount of free DOX was distributed
in the cytoplasm and could not enter the nucleus.
Interestingly, when MCF-7/ADR cells were treated with
LHRss/DOX, the distribution of red fluorescence in the
nucleus DOX was significantly increased. The result is

consistent with the above cellular uptake. Figure 3Cd
showed the co-delivery system of DOX and pDNA,
where the green fluorescence was distributed in both
cytoplasm and nucleus in both MCF-7 and MCF-7/ADR
cells. The red fluorescence was distributed in the nucleus
in both MCF-7 cells and MCF-7/ADR cells. These results
suggested that the co-delivery system could carry the gene
drug and chemotherapy to the cell nucleus.

Gene transfection efficiency
The gene transfection efficiency of LHRss was
measured using a reporter genes (EGFP) in MCF-7 and
MCF-7/ADR cells. It seemed that the gene transfection
efficiency was dependent upon the N/P ratio, and this
result was observed for both MCF-7 and MCF-7/ADR
cells (Figure 4A). The gene transfection efficiency of the
LHRss in both MCF-7 and MCF-7/ADR cells at N/P ratio

Figure 3: Cellular uptake of DOX and YOYO-1 pDNA. (A) Quantitative analysis uptake of YOYO-1 pDNA in MCF-7 cells and

MCF-7/ADR cells after treated with LHR/YOYO-1 pDNA and LHRss/YOYO-1 pDNA for 1, 2 and 4 h. (B) Quantitative analysis of DOX
uptake in MCF-7 cells and MCF-7/ADR cells after treated with DOX, LHRss/DOX for 1, 2 and 4 h. (C) Confocal microscopic images of
MCF-7 cells and MCF-7/ADR cells incubated with LHRss/YOYO-1 pDNA (a), DOX (b), LHRss/DOX (c) and LHRss/DOX/YOYO-1
pDNA (d).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

61836

Oncotarget

40 was significantly higher than that in the groups at N/P
ratio 20 (p < 0.05) (Figure 4B and 4C), most probably
because of the enhanced gene compression of the LHRss
[25]. It is noteworthy that LHRss showed the optimal gene
transfection efficiency at an N/P ratio of 40.

of TRAIL, making the LHRss/DOX/TRAIL an efficient
co-delivery system with good synergy between the drugs
and DNA, and caused a significantly decline in MDR in
vitro.

Cell apoptosis

Cytotoxicity assay

Figure 5C showed the apoptosis of MCF-7/ADR
cells with each treatment group. MCF-7/ADR cells
exposed to BMPs did not show any visible apoptosis
after 48-h incubation, which is consistent with the result
of CCK-8 assay. Likewise, only 12.73% of the cells were
apoptotic because of treatment with free DOX, which
failed to afford clear therapy efficacy due to the efflux
effect of P-glycoprotein (p-gp). There was no obvious
therapeutic effect of the single delivery of pTRAIL,
distinctly disclosing the synergistic effect on apoptosis
induction in the cells. As shown by the flow cytometry
images, LHRss/DOX induced 60.19% cellular apoptosis
by benefiting from the up-regulation of TRAIL by LHRss/
TRAIL and the intracellular accumulation of DOX.
Nevertheless, LHRss/DOX/TRAIL caused 83.78% cell
apoptosis via the synergist effect of DOX and TRAIL.

A successful co-delivery system requires the
minimal toxicity of the blank polymer. Figure 5A showed
the cytotoxicity of LHRss. The viability of MCF-7 and
MCF-7/ADR cells was not significantly affected at the
concentrations of LHRss up to 200 μg/mL, indicating
that LHRss almost has no cytotoxicity and has a good
biocompatibility.
The IC50 value of free DOX in MCF-7 and MCF-7/
ADR cells at 48 h determined by CCK-8 assay was 2.2 × 10-4
and 0.97 mg/mL, respectively, indicating a strong
resistance in MCF-7/ADR cells (Figure 5B). LHRss/DOX
and LHRss/DOX/TRAIL showed no higher cytotoxicity as
compared with free DOX in MCF-7 cells. In MCF-7/ADR
cells, LHRss/DOX had an IC50 value of 6 × 10-3 mg/mL,
indicating an increased cytotoxicity by 49.1 fold, which
may result from TRAIL and the burst release of DOX
induced by the acidic pH of endosomes/lysosomes. The
most remarkable killing effect in MDR cells was achieved
by LHRss/DOX/TRAIL. The synergy between DOX and
TRAIL decreased the IC50 value to 2.50 × 10-3 mg/mL. In
addition, LHRss accelerated the intracellular DOX release
and improved the endo/lysosomal escape and the release

Biodistribution
DIR, a lipophilic fluorescent dye, is a model drug
for targeted research of nanomicelles [26, 27]. The
distribution of free DIR in each tissue was observed using
an in vivo imaging system. As seen in Figure 6, most free

Figure 4: In vitro transfection efficiency in MCF-7 cells and MCF-7/ADR cells after treated with LHRss/pEGFP for
48 h. (A) Microscopic images of MCF-7 cells and MCF-7/ADR cells treated with LHRss/pEGFP at different N/P ratio (10, 20, 40 and 80)
for 48 h. (B) Quantitative analysis of EGFP expression in MCF-7 cells and MCF-7/ADR cells transfected with LHRss/pEGFP. (C) Flow
cytometry figures display EGFP expression of MCF-7/ADR cells after treatment with LHRss/pEGFP at different N/P ratio.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

61837

Oncotarget

DIR was highly aggregated in the liver and lung, allowing
for capture by the reticuloendothelial system (RES) [28].
Thus, the accumulation of free DIR in the tumor was
quite low. LHRss/DIR accumulation at the tumor site
was increased markedly, while DIR accumulation in the
lung, spleen and other organs was decreased substantially.
These results indicated that DIR was protected by the
nanomicelle due to the enhanced permeability and
retention effect [29, 30].

mean tumor volume increased from 52.1 mm3 on the
first day to 2,544.6 mm3 within 21 days (Figure 7B).
The similar result was also observed in BMPs-treatment
group, indicating that the nanocarrier itself hardly had any
physiological activity. The tumor-inhibitory capacity of
LHRss/TRAIL and free DOX was 60.9% and 58.6% TIR,
respectively, demonstrating that pDNA could promote
tumor apoptosis in vivo. LHRss/DOX showed an increased
tumor-inhibitory rate of 86.7%, probably due to drug
accumulation at the tumor site [33]. The most significant
effect was concerned with LHRss/DOX/TRAIL, showing
a tumor-inhibitory rate of 94.0%. The final tumor volume
was 99.2 mm3, which was only 3.9% of the tumor volume
in the saline group, and 8.6-fold smaller than that in free
DOX group. The predominant therapeutic effect could
be triggered by targeted accumulation in the tumor, and

In vivo anti-tumor effect
The therapeutic effectiveness of LHRss/DOX/
TRAIL was evaluated in MCF-7/ADR tumor-bearing
nude mice. Tumor growth in the saline group was used
as a control, where the growth rate was so fast that the

Figure 5: In vitro anti-tumor effect of LHRss/DOX/TRAIL. (A) Viability of MCF-7 cells and MCF-7/ADR cells after treatment
with BMPs at different concentrations for 48 h. (B) Viability of MCF-7 cells and MCF-7/ADR cells after treatment with TRAIL, LHRss/
TRAIL, DOX, LHRss/DOX and LHRss/DOX/TRAIL at different DOX concentrations for 48 h. (C) Flow cytometry analysis for apoptosis
of MCF-7/ADR cells induced by LHRss, LHRss/TRAIL, DOX, LHRss/DOX and LHRss/DOX/TRAIL.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

61838

Oncotarget

Figure 6: Biodistribution of LHRss/DIR. (A) Biodistribution of DIR in MCF-7/ADR tumor-bearing mice at 1, 4, 8, 12 and 24 h after

intravenous administration of DIR and LHRss/DIR at the dose of 5 mg/kg. (B) Ex vivo fluorescence images of tissue including heart, liver,
spleen, lung, kidneys, and tumor at 24 h after intravenous administration of saline, DIR and LHRss/DIR.

Figure 7: In vivo anti-tumor effect. (A) The picture of the tumors on day 21. (B) The tumor inhibiting rate at day 21. (C) Body weights
of tumor-bearing mice. Date was given as mean ± SD (n = 6). (**p < 0.01).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

61839

Oncotarget

the combination with TRAIL promoted apoptosis, which
enhanced the sensitivity of tumor cells to chemotherapy
[31, 32].
Body weight change was used an indicator of
systemic toxicity (Figure 7C) [34, 35]. Importantly, mice
treated with BMPs and LHRss/TRAIL had similar body
weight to the saline group, indicating that the nanocarrier
had nearly no systemic toxicity. Remarkably, the LHRss/
DOX and LHRss/DOX/TRAIL groups had reduced body
weight after 15-day treatment, which can be explained
by a loss in tumor weight. In contrast, the body weight
of free DOX group was decreased substantially, indicating

a severe adverse effect. Histological analysis using HE
staining showed that treatment with LHRss/DOX/TRAIL
resulted in extensive necrosis of the tumor tissue with little
damage to the heart. However, free DOX caused significant
heart necrosis but little tumor necrosis. In addition, free
DOX even led to myocardial atrophy (Figure 8).

CONCLUSIONS
In this study, we designed and developed a
co-delivery system of DOX and pTRAIL based on
LHRss. Due to the intermolecular disulfide bond of lipoic

Figure 8: The histological characteristic of MCF-7/ADR tumor tissue and organ histology. (A) The histological characteristic
of MCF-7/ADR tumor tissue after treatment with saline, LHRss, LHRss/TRAIL, DOX, LHRss/DOX, and LHRss/DOX/TRAIL. (B)
Representative organ histology of saline, LHRss, LHRss/TRAIL, DOX, LHRss/DOX, and LHRss/DOX/TRAIL injected mice.

Figure 9: Scheme l. The formation of LHRss/DOX/TRAIL and the in vitro/in vivo effect.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

61840

Oncotarget

Synthesis and characterization of polymers

acid, the nanomicelle showed a pH-sensitive behavior,
which promoted endosomal escape. LHRss/DOX/
TRAIL enhanced the intracellular accumulation of DOX,
promoted the expression of TRAIL, and promoted the
apoptosis of drug-resistant breast cancer cells. Because
of its good biocompatibility, biodegradation and high
cytotoxicity, the co-delivery system of LHRss/DOX/
TRAIL is expected to be a promising approach for the
treatment of drug-resistant breast cancer.

First, a histidine-arginine peptide (H3R6, HR) was
synthesized using the method of F-moc-solid phase
peptide synthesis (SPPS). Second, lipoic acid was coupled
to the N-terminus of the HR peptide to obtain lipoic acid
HR (LHR) using the same synthesis method. The products
were purified by reverse HPLC. Then, the LHR (10 mg)
was dissolved in 1 mL methanol, and a methanol solution
of L-cysteine hydrochloride was added to the mixture
under stirring to serve as a cross-linked catalyst at room
temperature for 12 h. Finally, the solvent was removed
by N2 drying, and the remaining cysteine was neutralized
with NaOH. The solution was then lyophilized to obtain
LHRss (Figure 1A). The molecular weight of LHR and
LHRss was determined by HLC-8220 gel permeation
chromatography (TOSOH Corporation, Tokyo, Japan).
The synthesized polymers were also characterized by
1
H-NMR at 600 MHz (Varian Inc., Palo Alto, CA, USA)
in deuterium oxide.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Materials
L-histidine hydrochloride, L-arginine and lipoic
acid were purchased from Sangon Biotech (Shanghai,
China). L-cysteine hydrochloride monohydrate and
dithiothreitol (DTT) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich
(St Louis, MO, USA). A luciferase assay kit was gifted
from Promega (Madison, WI, USA). An enhanced
bicinchoninic acid protein assay kit was purchased from
Beyotime (Nanjing, China). Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle’
Medium (DMEM), fetal bovine serum (FBS), YOYO(Y3601) and a penicillin-streptomycin solution (5 KU/mL)
were purchased from Life Technologies (Carlsbad, CA,
USA). The Cell Counting Kit-8 (CCK-8) was purchased
from Dojindo Molecular Technologies, Inc. (Nanjing,
China). Propidium iodide (PI) and an apoptosis kit were
purchased from Invitrogen (Oregon, USA). pDNA (pGL3,
pEGFP and pTRAIL) was purchased from Shanghai
Innovation Biotechnology Co., Ltd (Shanghai, China).
Doxorubicin (DOX) hydrochloride was gifted from Hisun
Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd (Zhejing, China).

Preparation and characterization of
LHRss/DOX/TRAIL micelle
Co-delivery of pDNA and DOX by LHRss
pGL3 was used as a model plasmid. For the DOXentrapped LHRss (LHRss/DOX), 2 mg DOX.HCl was
dissolved in 1 mL acetonitrile, and 5 µl trimethylamine
was added to the solution to transform DOX.HCl into
hydrophobic DOX. Then, the DOX solution and sodium
cholate hydrate (1%) were placed into the LHRss solution.
The organic solution was then mixed with 20 mL distilled
water and vigorously ultrasonicated. The solvent was
evaporated by vigorous stirring at 1,000 rpm overnight
to remove the acetonitrile. The resulting nanomicelle
suspension was centrifuged at 10,000 rpm for 15 min. The
supernatant then was passed through a 0.220 µm syringe
filter to eliminate the polymer and DOX aggregates.
The LHRss/(DOX/pDNA) was prepared by mixing the
pDNA solution (20 µM) with a specified amount of the
LHRss/DOX solution, and the mixture was incubated at
room temperature for 30 min to electrostatically bind the
negative pDNA to the positive surface of the nanocarrier.
All procedures were carried out in the dark.

Cell lines and cell culture
The human breast adenocarcinoma MCF-7 cell
line was obtained from the American Type Culture
Collection (ATCC, Manassas, VA) and grown in DMEM
supplemented with 10% FBS and antibiotics (100 U/mL
penicillin and streptomycin). The DOX-resistant cell
line (MCF-7/ADR cells) was purchased from Gefan
Biotech, Co., Ltd (Shanghai, China) and cultured in
complete DMEM with 1 μg/mL DOX. Both cell lines were
maintained at 37°C in a humidified 5% CO2 atmosphere.

Size and zeta potential of the complex

Animals

pGL3 was used as a model plasmid. The LHRss/
DOX complex was mixed with pGL3 at different N/P
ratios in 1 mL PBS (19 mM, pH 7.4), and the mixture
was incubated at room temperature for 30 min. Then, the
particle size and zeta potential of the complex were further
determined using dynamic light scattering (Zetasizer
Nano ZS90, Malvern Instruments, Malvern, USA). The
morphology of the LHRss/pGL3 complex at an N/P

Male BALB/c nude mice (12–14 g) were purchased
from the Department of Experimental Animals of the
Second Military Medical University (Shanghai, China).
All animal procedures were performed under the
guidelines approved by the Institutional Animal Care and
Use Committee (IACUC) of the Shanghai Institute of
Materia Medica of the Chinese Academy of Sciences.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

61841

Oncotarget

ratio of 40 was examined under a transmission electron
microscope (Hitachi, Tokyo, Japan) at an acceleration
voltage of 75 kV.

added to the MCF-7 and MCF-7/ADR cells, with a final
YOYO-1pDNA concentration of 75 nM, and a final DOX
concentration of 5 µg/mL. After they were incubated for 1,
2, and 4 h, the cells were washed, trypsinized, centrifuged,
and re-suspended in 300 µl PBS. The cells were analyzed
on a FACScan flow cytometer (Becton Dickinson, San
Jose, CA, USA).

Drug loading efficiency and drug release
The loading efficiency of DOX within the
nanocarrier was measured using a GloMax-Multi Jr
Single Tube Multimode Reader (Promega). Briefly, 5 mg
nanocarrier was dissolved in 1 ml PBS (pH 7.4) using
vigorous vortexing. This solution was transferred to a
200-µl capillary tube. The measurement was performed
in triplicate. For the determination of the drug loading
content (DLC) and the drug loading efficiency (DLE),
lyophilized drug-loaded nanoparticles were dissolved
in DMSO. The amount of DOX was determined using
fluorescence measurements. The DLC and DLE were
calculated according to the following formulas:
DLC (wt%) = (wt of loaded drug/total wt of polymer
and loaded drug)×100%
DLE (%) = (weight of loaded drug/weight of drug
in feed)×100%
The pH-dependence of the drug release behavior of
the DOX-LHRss nanocarrier was shown using a GloMaxMulti Jr Single Tube Multimode Reader. To examine
the pH-dependent dye release, DOX-loaded nanocarrier
solutions (10%) were treated with solutions of disodium
hydrogen phosphate citrate buffer at different pHs (pH 5.5
and 7.4). The amount of DOX released at each time point
was determined by fluorescence detector analysis.

CLSM observation
MCF-7 cells and MCF-7/ADR cells were seeded
into glass-bottom 24-well plates at a density of 1 × 105
cells per well and incubated for 24 h. After replacing
the culture medium, the LHRss/ YOYO-1pDNA with
or without free DOX solution, LHRss/DOX, or LHRss/
DOX/YOYO-1pDNA were added to MCF-7 cells
and MCF-7/ADR cells with a final YOYO-1pDNA
concentration of 75 nM and a final DOX concentration of
5 µg/mL. After incubation for 1, 2, and 4 h, the medium
was replaced, and the culture was expanded. At different
times after transfection, the cells were fixed using 4%
paraformaldehyde and treated with 4,6-diamidino-2phenylinole dihydrochloride to stain the nucleus. Then,
the cells were washed, sealed with mounting medium, and
imaged using a CLSM.

Gene transfection assay
The in vitro gene transfection efficacy of the LHRss/
DNA complexes was evaluated using MCF-7 cells and
MCF-7/ADR cells. pEGFP was used as the reporter gene
to compare the transfection efficiency of the LHRss-based
gene carrier. Transfection experiments were performed
using 24-well plates. MCF-7 cells and MCF-7/ADR cells
were seeded into 24-well plates at 2 × 105 cells per well
and incubated for 24 h. Before transfection, the serumfree medium was replaced. Complexes including 1 µg
pDNA (pEGFP) were placed into each plate with different
N/P ratios. After 4-h incubation, the culture medium was
replaced with 10% FBS. For pEGFP transfection, the
gene expression was detected by fluorescence microscopy
(Leica, Germany). The expression of EGFP was analyzed
by flow cytometry. Forty-eight hours after transfection,
the cells were digested and suspended in 300 µl PBS. The
fluorescence intensity was detected by flow cytometry
(BD, USA).

Agarose gel electrophoresis
The condensation ability of the complexes was
determined by agarose gel electrophoresis. The complexes
were prepared at different N/P ratios (0.25–15). After they
were incubated for 30 min, the complexes, which included
1 μg pGL3, were added to the pores of an acetic acidEDTA buffer and TAE-containing 1% agarose gel. The gel
was run at 100 V for 30 min. The nucleic acid framework
was irradiated under UV.
The DNA release ability was evaluated by salt
separation. Complexes with an N/P ratio of 20 were
prepared and incubated in 25 nM DTT at 37°C for 2 h.
Samples were analyzed with agarose gel electrophoresis
under the same conditions.

Cellular uptake of YOYO-1-DNA and
intracellular accumulation of DOX

Cytotoxicity assay
To evaluate the cytotoxicity of LHRss, a CCK-8
assay was performed. Briefly, MCF-7 and MCF/ADR
cells were seeded at a density of 1 × 104 cells per well in
96-well plates for 24 h. The medium was then
replaced with fresh culture medium containing various
concentrations of the polymer. Cells without treatment
were used as the control. The final concentrations of the

The DNA uptake by MCF-7 cells and MCF-7/ADR
cells was analyzed using flow cytometry. MCF-7 cells
and MCF-7/ADR cells were seeded into 12-well plates
at 2 × 105 cells per well and incubated for 24 h. After
replacing the culture medium, the LHRss/YOYO-1pDNA
or with the DOX solution and the LHRss/DOX were
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

61842

Oncotarget

polymer ranged from 1 × 10−5 −2 × 10−1 mg/mL. After
24 h incubation, fresh medium containing a 10% CCK8 solution was added. The absorbance of each well was
measured at 450 nm using a microplate reader (Thermo
Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). The absorbance of
the untreated cells was set at 100%, and the cell viability
was expressed as the percentage relative to the absorbance
of the untreated cells.
The cytotoxicity of the polymers for MCF-7 cells
and MCF-7/ADR cells was evaluated with a CCK-8 assay.
MCF-7 cells and MCF-7/ADR cells were inoculated into
96 well-plates with densities of 8 × 103 cells per well and
incubated for 24 h. Then, different concentrations of DOX,
LHRss/DOX, LHRss/TRAIL and LHRss/ DOX/TRAIL
were added to each well. After 24-h incubation, fresh
medium containing a 10% CCK-8 solution was added.
The absorbance of each well was measured at 450  nm
using a microplate reader (Thermo Fisher Scientific,
Waltham, MA, USA). The absorbance of the untreated
cells was set at 100%, and cell viability was expressed as
the percentage relative to the absorbance of the untreated
cells. The experiment was repeated three times.

randomly divided into saline, LHRss, LHRss/TRAIL,
DOX, LHRss/DOX, and LHRss/DOX/TRAIL groups
(n = 6 each group). The mice were intravenously
administered the respective formulation once per week at
a dose of 6 mg/kg DOX and 2 mg/kg TRAIL. The body
weight and tumor volumes ([major axis] × [minor axis]
2/2, measured by calipers) were monitored and recorded
twice per week over a period of 21 days. Then, the mice
were sacrificed, and their tumors were excised, weighed
and photographed. The tumor inhibitory rate (TIR) was
calculated using the following equation:
TIR= (1 –Wtest/Wsaline) × 100%
Where W test is the mean tumor weight of the tested
groups, and Wsaline refers to the mean tumor weight of
the saline group.

Statistical analysis
All values are presented as the mean ± S.D. Each
value is the mean of at least three repetitive experiments
in each group. The statistical significance was determined
using Student’s t-test. The differences were considered
significant for *p < 0.05 and very significant for **p < 0.01.

Cell apoptosis

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS AND FUNDING

To determine the effect of LHRss/DOX/TRAIL
on cell apoptosis, MCF-7/ADR cells seeded in 12-well
plates (3 × 105 cells/well) were treated with LHRss,
DOX, LHRss/TRAIL, LHRss/DOX, and LHRss/
TRAIL/DOX (5 μg/mL DOX and 1 μg/mL TRAIL) for
48 h. Cells without treatment were used as control. For
the quantitative measurement of apoptosis, cells were
harvested, washed twice with ice-cold PBS and then
stained with Annexin V-FITC and PI for 15 min at room
temperature in the dark. The apoptosis was analyzed by
flow cytometry.

This study was supported by the National Natural
Science Foundation of China (Nos. 81172514, 81372762).

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
The authors declare no competing financial interest.

REFERENCES
1.	 Aller SG, Yu J, Ward A, Weng Y, Chittaboina S, Zhuo R,
Harrell PM, Trinh YT, Zhang Q, Urbatsch IL, Chang G.
Structure of P-glycoprotein reveals a molecular basis for
poly-specific drug binding. Science. 2009; 323:1718–1722.
2.	 Ambudkar SV, Kimchi-Sarfaty C, Sauna ZE,
Gottesman MM. P-glycoprotein: from genomics to
mechanism. Oncogene. 2003; 22:7468–7485.
3.	 Johnstone RW, Ruefli AA, Lowe SW. Apoptosis: a link
between cancer genetics and chemotherapy. Cell. 2002; 108
:153–164.
4.	 Johnstone RW, Frew AJ, Smyth MJ. The TRAIL apoptotic
pathway in cancer onset, progression and therapy. Nat Rev
Cancer. 2008; 8:782–798.
5.	 Yagita H, Takeda K, Hayakawa Y, Smyth MJ,
Okumura K. TRAIL and its receptors as targets for cancer
therapy. Cancer Sci. 2004; 95:777–783.
6.	 Wang Y, Gao S, Ye WH, Yoon HS, Yang YY. Co-delivery
of drugs and DNA from cationic core–shell nanoparticles
self-assembled from a biodegradable copolymer. Nat Mater.
2006; 5:791–796.

Biodistribution and in vivo anti-tumor effect
A subcutaneous tumor model was generated by
injection of 1 × 106 MCF-7/ADR cells into the right
axilla of nude mice. The tumors were allowed to grow
to approximately 100 mm3 before the experiment. To
determine the tissue distribution of DOX and TRAIL, DIR,
a lipophilic fluorescent dye was used as the model drug
for the targeted research of nanomicelles. Female nude
mice bearing MCF-7/ADR breast cancer were randomly
assigned to 3 groups (n = 3) and injected with PBS, DIR,
LHRss/DIR (DIR of 50 μg/kg) through the tail vein. The
mice were sacrificed 24 h later to excise the heart, liver,
spleen, lung, kidney and the tumor. The excise organs and
tumor were washed with cold saline and imaged using the
FX Pro in vivo imaging system (Carestream Health, USA).
An in vivo anti-tumor effect assay was carried out as
follows: mice bearing visible MCF-7/ADR tumors were

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

61843

Oncotarget

  7.	 Wang H, Zhao Y, Wu Y, Hu YL, Nan K, Nie G, Chen H.
Enhanced anti-tumor efficacy by co-delivery of doxorubicin
and paclitaxel with amphiphilic methoxy PEG-PLGA
copolymer nanoparticles. Biomaterials. 2001; 32:8281–8290.

22.	 Ohnishi T, Tamai I, Sakanaka K, Sakata A, Yamashima T,
Yamashita J, Tsuji A. In vivo and in vitro evidence for
ATP-dependency of P-glycoprotein-mediated efflux of
doxorubicin at the blood-brain barrier. Biochem Pharmacol.
1995; 49:1541–1544.

  8.	 Farokhzad OC, Langer R. Impact of nanotechnology on
drug delivery. ACS Nano. 2009; 3:16–20.

23.	 Tai Z, Wang X, Tian J, Gao Y, Zhang L, Yao C, Wu X,
Zhang W, Zhu Q, Gao S. Biodegradable Stearylated Peptide
with Internal Disulfide Bonds for Efficient Delivery of
siRNA In Vitro and In Vivo. Biomacromolecules. 2015;
16:1119–1130.

  9.	 Kesharwani P, Gajbhiye V, Jain NK. A review of
nanocarriers for the delivery of small interfering RNA.
Biomaterials. 2012; 33:7138–7150.
10.	 Guo S, Huang L. Nanoparticles escaping RES and
endosome: challenges for siRNA delivery for cancer
therapy. J Nanomater. 2011; 2011:16247–16256.

24.	 Wen Y, Guo Z, Du Z, Fang R, Wu H, Zeng X, Wang C,
Feng  M, Pan S. Serum tolerance and endosomal escape
capacity of histidine-modified pDNA-loaded complexes
based on polyamidoamine dendrimer derivatives.
Biomaterials. 2012; 33:8111–8121.

11.	 Balazs AC, Emrick T, Russell TP. Nanoparticle polymer
composites: where two small worlds meet. Science. 2006;
314:1107–1110.

25.	 Mann A, Shukla V, Khanduri R, Dabral S, Singh H,
Ganguli  M. Linear short histidine and cysteine modified
arginine peptides constitute a potential class of DNA
delivery agents. Mol Pharm. 2014; 11:683–696.

12.	 Zhang C, Tang N, Liu X, Liang W, Xu W, Torchilin VP.
siRNA-containing liposomes modified with polyarginine
effectively silence the targeted gene.  J Control Release.
2006; 112:229–239.

26.	 Schädlich A, Hoffmann S, Mueller T, Caysa H, Rose C,
Göpferich A, Li J, Kuntsche J, Mäder K. Accumulation
of nanocarriers in the ovary: A neglected toxicity risk? J
Control release. 2012; 160:105–112.

13.	 Zhao ZX, Gao SY, Wang JC, Chen CJ, Zhao EY, Hou WJ,
Feng Q, Gao LY, Liu XY, Zhang LR, Zhang Q. Selfassembly nanomicelles based on cationic mPEG-PLAb-Polyarginine (R 15) triblock copolymer for siRNA
delivery. Biomaterials. 2012; 33:6793–6807.

27.	 Texier I, Goutayer M, Da Silva A, Guyon L, Djaker N,
Josserand V, Neumann E, Bibette J, Vinet F. Cyanineloaded lipid nanoparticles for improved in vivo fluorescence
imaging. J Biomed Opt. 2009; 14:054005.

14.	 Wu H, Zhu L, Torchilin V P. pH-sensitive poly (histidine)PEG/DSPE-PEG co-polymer micelles for cytosolic drug
delivery. Biomaterials. 2013; 34:1213–1222.

28.	 Ali I, Salim K, A Rather M, A Wani W, Haque A. Advances
in nano drugs for cancer chemotherapy. Curr Cancer Drug
Tar. 2011; 11:135–146.

15.	 Hu J, Miura S, Na K, Bae Y H. pH-responsive and charge
shielded cationic micelle of poly (L-histidine)-block-short
branched PEI for acidic cancer treatment. J Control Release.
2013; 172: 69–76.

29.	 Maeda H, Wu J, Sawa T, Matsumura Y, Hori K. Tumor
vascular permeability and the EPR effect in macromolecular
therapeutics: a review. J Control release. 2000; 65:271–284.

16.	 Zhong Y, Zhang J, Cheng R, Deng C, Meng F, Xie  F,
Zhong  Z. Reversibly crosslinked hyaluronic acid
nanoparticles for active targeting and intelligent delivery of
doxorubicin to drug resistant CD44+ human breast tumor
xenografts. J Control Release. 2015; 205: 144–154.

30.	 Ferrari M. Nanovector therapeutics. Curr Opin Chem Biol.
2005; 9:343–346.
31.	 Bae YH, Park K. Targeted drug delivery to tumors: myths,
reality and possibility. J Control Release. 2011; 153:198–205.

17.	 Xu X, Jian Y, Li Y, Zhang X, Tu Z, Gu Z. Bio-inspired
supramolecular hybrid dendrimers self-assembled from lowgeneration peptide dendrons for highly efficient gene delivery
and biological tracking. ACS Nano. 2014; 8:9255–9264.

32.	 Keane MM, Ettenberg SA, Nau MM, Russell EK,
Lipkowitz  S. Chemotherapy augments TRAIL-induced
apoptosis in breast cell lines. Cancer Res. 1999; 59:734–741.

18.	 Cheng R, Feng F, Meng F, Deng C, Feijen J, Zhong Z.
Glutathione-responsive nano-vehicles as a promising
platform for targeted intracellular drug and gene delivery.
J Control Release. 2011; 152:2–12.

33.	 Guo L, Fan L, Pang Z, Ren J, Ren Y, Li J, Chen J, Wen X,
Jiang X. TRAIL and doxorubicin combination enhances
anti-glioblastoma effect based on passive tumor targeting
of liposomes. J Control Release. 2011; 154:93–102.

19.	 Kim TI, Ou M, Lee M, Kim SW. Arginine-grafted
bioreducible poly(disulfide amine) for gene delivery
systems. Biomaterials. 2009; 30:658–664.

34.	 Kedmi R, Ben-Arie N, Peer D. The systemic toxicity of
positively charged lipid nanoparticles and the role of Tolllike receptor 4 in immune activation. Biomaterials. 2010;
31:6867–6875.

20.	 Cicchillo RM, Booker SJ. Mechanistic investigations of
lipoic acid biosynthesis in Escherichia coli: both sulfur atoms
in lipoic acid are contributed by the same lipoyl synthase
polypeptide. J Am Chem Soc. 2005; 127:2860–2861.

35.	 Lee ES, Na K, Bae YH. Doxorubicin loaded pH-sensitive
polymeric micelles for reversal of resistant MCF-7 tumor. J
Control Release. 2005; 103:405–418.

21.	 Kirkham M, Parton RG. Clathrin-independent endocytosis:
new insights into caveolae and non-caveolar lipid raft
carriers. BBA-Mol Cell Res. 2005; 1745:273–286.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

61844

Oncotarget

