Research Article

Sodium Selenite Induces Superoxide-Mediated Mitochondrial
Damage and Subsequent Autophagic Cell Death in
Malignant Glioma Cells
1

2

2

3,4

5

Eun Hee Kim, Seonghyang Sohn, Hyuk Jae Kwon, Seung U. Kim, Min-Jung Kim,
5
1,3
Su-Jae Lee, and Kyeong Sook Choi

1
Department of Molecular Science and Technology and 2Lab of Cell Biology, Institute for Medical Sciences and 3Brain Disease Research
Center, Ajou University School of Medicine, Suwon, Korea; 4Department of Neurology, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British
Columbia, Canada; and 5Laboratory of Radiation Effect, Korea Institute of Radiological and Medical Sciences, Seoul, Korea

Abstract
Malignant gliomas are resistant to various proapoptotic
therapies, such as radiotherapy and conventional chemotherapy.
In this study, we show that selenite is preferentially cytotoxic to
various human glioma cells over normal astrocytes via autophagic cell death. Overexpression of Akt, survivin, XIAP, Bcl-2, or
Bcl-xL failed to block selenite-induced cell death, suggesting that
selenite treatment may offer a potential therapeutic strategy
against malignant gliomas with apoptotic defects. Before
selenite-induced cell death in glioma cells, disruption of the
mitochondrial cristae, loss of mitochondrial membrane potential, and subsequent entrapment of disorganized mitochondria
within autophagosomes or autophagolysosomes along with
degradation of mitochondrial proteins were noted, showing
that selenite induces autophagy in which mitochondria serve as
the main target. At the early phase of selenite treatment, high
levels of superoxide anion were generated and overexpression of
copper/zinc superoxide dismutase or manganese superoxide
dismutase, but not catalase, significantly blocked seleniteinduced mitochondrial damage and subsequent autophagic cell
death. Furthermore, treatment with diquat, a superoxide
generator, induced autophagic cell death in glioma cells. Taken
together, our study clearly shows that superoxide anion
generated by selenite triggers mitochondrial damage and
subsequent mitophagy, leading to irreversible cell death in
glioma cells. [Cancer Res 2007;67(13):6314–24]

Introduction
Gliomas account for >50% of all brain tumors and are by far the
most common primary brain tumors in adults (1). Despite the use of
conventional treatments, including surgery, g-irradiation, and
chemotherapy, the average life expectancy of glioma patients after
the initial diagnosis is usually less than 1 year (2). Although caspasemediated apoptosis is the best-defined cell death program counteracting tumor growth, glioma cells are resistant to the conventional
proapoptotic cancer therapeutics (3). Therefore, effective treatment
of malignant gliomas may rely on the development of novel
strategies for inducing nonapoptotic cell death, such as autophagic
cell death or cell death through mitotic catastrophe, which has been
recently described as alternative death pathways (4).
Note: Supplementary data for this article are available at Cancer Research Online
(http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/).
Requests for reprints: Kyeong Sook Choi, Department of Molecular Science and
Technology, Institute for Medical Sciences, Ajou University School of Medicine, Suwon,
Korea. Phone: 82-31-219-4552; Fax: 82-31-219-4401; E-mail: kschoi@ajou.ac.kr.
I2007 American Association for Cancer Research.
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-06-4217

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (13). July 1, 2007

Selenium, a metalloid element that occurs naturally in the earth’s
soil, is a key element for maintaining the activity of some
antioxidant enzymes and redox-regulatory proteins (5). Several
epidemiologic studies have shown an inverse association between
selenium levels and cancer risks in humans (6–8), and selenium
levels in the cerebrospinal fluid of patients with malignant brain
tumors have been reported to be lower than those with benign
tumors (9). Sodium selenite, a commonly used dietary form of
selenium (10), was recently reported to confer anticancer effects
through induction of apoptosis in several cancer cell types (11, 12).
In this study, we show for the first time that selenite shows an
anticancer effect via autophagic cell death in various glioma cells
but not in astrocytes.
Autophagy, a regulated process of degradation and recycling of
cellular constituents, also participates in organelle turnover and in
the bioenergetic management of starvation (13, 14). During
autophagy, parts of the cytoplasm or entire organelles are
sequestered into double-membraned vesicles called autophagic
vacuoles or autophagosomes. These autophagosomes ultimately
fuse with lysosomes to generate single-membraned autophagolysosomes capable of degrading their contents. Although autophagy
can serve as a protective mechanism against apoptosis and
starvation by recycling macromolecules and removing damaged
mitochondria and other organelles (15, 16), it can also lead to
growth arrest, reduction in cell number, and a nonapoptotic cell
death associated with appearance of excessive autophagic vesicles
(17). Therefore, high levels of autophagy can function as a cell
death effector mechanism. Recently, induction of autophagy or
autophagic cell death has been reported in several types of cancer
cells in response to radiation or chemotherapy (18, 19). The
molecular mechanisms of autophagy remain largely unknown,
including the initiating signal(s) of autophagy, the mechanism(s) by
which the targeted organelle is recognized and/or selected by the
autophagosome, the source(s) of the sequestering membrane, and
the precise mechanism of vesicle formation.
In the present work, we present clear evidence that seleniteinduced superoxide anion triggers functional and structural
disruption in mitochondria, leading to mitochondria-selective
autophagy (mitophagy) and subsequent nonapoptotic cell death.
These findings provide novel insights into the underlying
mechanisms of mitophagy, as well as offering a potential strategy
for treatment of gliomas, which are resistant to proapoptotic
therapeutics.

Materials and Methods
Cell culture. Human glioma cell lines U87MG, T98G, and A172 were
purchased from Korean Cell Line Bank. Human glioma cell lines U343 and

6314

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Mitophagy and Subsequent Cell Death by Superoxide
U251 were purchased from the American Type Culture Collection. Various
glioma cells were cultured in DMEM supplemented with 10% fetal bovine
serum (FBS) and antibiotics (Life Technologies). The primary cultures of
normal human astrocytes were prepared from 14-week-gestation fetal
cerebrum tissues as described previously (20). Human astrocyte cultures
were grown in DMEM with high glucose supplemented with 10% FBS and
20 Ag/mL gentamicin (Life Technologies) and subcultured every 2 weeks,
and cell culture passage number less than five was used in the present

study. Immunofluorescence study indicated that better than 99% of cells
expressed glial fibrillary acidic protein, a cell type–specific marker for
astrocytes. Permission to use human brain tissues for research was granted
by the clinical screening committee involving human subjects of the
University.
Chemicals. Sodium selenite, polyethylene glycol (PEG)-catalase,
3-methyladenine (3-MA), acridine orange, monodansylcadaverine (MDC),
Cu (II)-(diisopropylsalicylate)2 (CuDIPS), Mn (III) meso-tetrakis (4-benzoic

Figure 1. Sodium selenite induces caspase-independent nonapoptotic cell death in various malignant glioma cells but not in normal astrocytes. A, effect of selenite on
the viability of human glioma cells and astrocytes. Human glioma cells and astrocytes were treated with the indicated concentrations of selenite for 24 h. Cellular
viability was assessed using calcein-AM and EthD-1. Points, mean of three independent experiments; bars, SE. *, P < 0.01, compared with untreated cells.
B, DNA content of glioma cells treated with selenite. U87MG cells were untreated or treated with 7 Amol/L selenite for 24 h, and DNA contents were measured by
fluorescence-activated cell sorting analysis. C, inhibition of caspases by z-VAD pretreatment or CrmA overexpression does not block selenite-induced cell death. Con.
cells (pcDNA3/U87MG; U87MG cells stably transfected with pcDNA3) were pretreated with 50 Amol/L z-VAD-fmk for 30 min and further treated with the indicated
concentrations of selenite for 24 h. Cellular viability was assessed using calcein-AM and EthD-1. Stable U87MG cell lines overexpressing CrmA were established and
CrmA expression was examined by Western blotting. Con. cells and CrmA-overexpressing U87MG cells were treated with selenite for 24 h, and cellular viabilities
were compared using calcein-AM and EthD-1. Columns, average of three independent experiments; bars, SE. *, P < 0.001, compared with untreated cells; **, P < 0.01,
compared with cells treated with selenite. D, morphologies of selenite-treated glioma cells and astrocytes. Various glioma cells and astrocytes were treated with
7 Amol/L selenite for 12 h and observed under a phase-contrast microscope. Bar, 2 Am. Representative pictures. E, effects of the overexpression of various
antiapoptotic proteins on selenite-induced cell death. Stable cell lines overexpressing Myc-tagged Akt or XIAP, Flag-tagged survivin, Bcl-2, or Bcl-xL were established
and their respective overexpressions were confirmed with Western blotting using anti-Myc or anti-Flag antibodies. Con. cells and the respective overexpressing
cell lines were treated with 7 Amol/L selenite for 24 h and cellular viabilities were assessed using calcein-AM and EthD-1. Columns, average of three independent
experiments; bars, SE. *, P < 0.01, compared with cells treated with selenite. To avoid problems of clonal variability, more than three different subclones of each
overexpressing cell line were tested, and similar results were obtained in each case.

www.aacrjournals.org

6315

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (13). July 1, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (13). July 1, 2007

6316

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Mitophagy and Subsequent Cell Death by Superoxide
acid) porphyrin (MnTBAP), and N-acetylcysteine (NAC) were purchased
from Sigma Chemical Corp. Hydroethidine, rhodamine 123 (Rh-123), calcein
acetoxymethyl ester (calcein-AM), and ethidium homodimer (EthD-1) were
purchased from Molecular Probes. Caspase inhibitor benzyloxy-carbonylVal-Ala-Asp-(OMe) fluoromethyl ketone (z-VAD-fmk) was from R&D
Systems.
Measurement of cell viability. Cell viability was assessed by double
labeling of cells with 2 Amol/L calcein-AM and 4 Amol/L EthD-1. The
calcein-positive live cells and EthD-1–positive dead cells were visualized
using a fluorescence microscope (Axiovert 200M using Axiovision Release
4.4 and Axiocam HRM digital camera, Zeiss).
Establishment of the stable cell lines overexpressing CrmA, Akt,
Bcl-2, Bcl-xL, XIAP, survivin, copper/zinc superoxide dismutase,
manganese superoxide dismutase, or catalase and the stable cell lines
expressing the fluorescence specifically in mitochondria, endoplasmic
reticulum, or peroxisomes. U87MG cells were transfected with the
following: a mammalian expression vector containing CrmA cDNA, a
vector containing Myc-tagged active Akt (Upstate Biotechnology), a vector
encoding Flag-tagged Bcl-xL, a vector containing Flag-tagged Bcl-2, a vector
containing Myc-tagged XIAP, a vector containing Flag-tagged survivin, and
pcDNA3 (Invitrogen). The cDNAs encoding human copper/zinc superoxide
dismutase (Cu/ZnSOD), manganese superoxide dismutase (MnSOD), and
catalase were PCR amplified from plasmids containing these sequences
(kindly provided by Dr. M. Akashi, National Institute of Radiological
Sciences, Chiba, Japan), with the MnSOD- or catalase-specific primers
designed to incorporate a 5¶-hemagglutinin (HA) epitope. The respective
PCR products were subcloned into the pcDNA3.1(+) expression vector
(Invitrogen), and the resulting constructs were confirmed by nucleotide
sequencing. U87MG cells were separately transfected with these generated
expression vectors. Stable cell lines overexpressing CrmA, active Akt, XIAP,
survivin, Cu/ZnSOD, MnSOD, or catalase were selected with fresh medium
containing 500 Ag/mL G418 (Calbiochem). Overexpression of CrmA,
survivin, or Cu/ZnSOD was analyzed by Western blotting using anti-CrmA
(BD PharMingen), anti-Flag (Sigma Chemical), or anti-Cu/ZnSOD (Calbiochem) antibody, respectively. Overexpression of MnSOD or catalase was
analyzed by Western blotting using anti-HA antibody (Covance Research
Products). Overexpression of active Akt or XIAP was analyzed by Western
blotting using anti-Myc (Santa Cruz Biotechnology) antibody. Stable cell
lines overexpressing Bcl-2 or Bcl-xL were selected in fresh medium
containing 4 Ag/mL puromycin (Sigma Chemical). Overexpression of Bcl-2
or Bcl-xL in the stable cell lines was analyzed by Western blotting using
anti-Flag antibody. To establish the stable cell lines expressing the
fluorescence specifically in mitochondria, endoplasmic reticulum (ER), or
peroxisomes, U87MG cells were transfected with pEYFP-Mito, pEYFP-ER, or
pEGFP-Peroxi vector (Clontech Laboratories) and selected with the
complete medium containing 500 Ag/mL G418.

Detection and quantification of acidic vesicular organelles with
acridine orange staining. To detect acidic vesicular organelles (AVO),
selenite-treated cells were stained with 1 Ag/mL acridine orange for 15 min
and samples were observed under a fluorescence microscope using Zeiss
filter set #20 (excitation band pass, 546 nm; emission band pass, 575–640 nm).
To quantify the development of AVOs, selenite-treated cells were stained
with acridine orange, detached by trypsinization, and processed for the
FACScan using CellQuest software (Becton Dickinson).
Visualization of autophagic vacuoles. Following treatment with
selenite, autophagic vacuoles were labeled with MDC by incubating cells
grown on coverslips with 50 Amol/L MDC in PBS at 37jC for 15 min. After
incubation, cells were washed thrice with PBS and immediately analyzed by
fluorescence microscopy using an inverted microscope (Axiovert 200M)
equipped with Zeiss filter set #34 (excitation band pass, 390 nm; emission
band pass, 460 nm).
GFP-LC3 translocation. U87MG and T98G cells were respectively
transfected with the plasmid encoding GFP-LC3 (21), and the stable cell
lines were selected with changes of medium containing 500 Ag/mL G418.
The stable cell lines expressing GFP-LC3 were incubated in the live cell
chamber Chamlide IC (Live Cell Instrument) and then treated with 7 Amol/L
sodium selenite. Translocation of GFP-LC3 from cytosol to autophagic
vacuoles was observed under a fluorescence microscope equipped with
Zeiss filter set #10 (excitation band pass, 450–490 nm; emission band
pass, 515–565 nm), and the percentage of cells with GFP-LC3 dots was
assessed.
Small interfering RNAs. The 25-nucleotide small interfering RNA
(siRNA) duplexes used in this study were purchased from Invitrogen and
have the following sequences: ATG6, CAGUUUGGCACAAUCAAUAACUUCA; ATG7, CAGAAGGAGUCACAGCUCUUCCUUA. Cells were transfected with siRNA oligonucleotides using LipofectAMINE 2000 (Invitrogen)
according to the manufacturer’s recommendations.
Measurement of mitochondrial membrane potential. Selenite-treated
cells were stained with 1 Ag/mL Rh-123 for 15 min, and samples were
observed under a fluorescence microscope equipped with Zeiss filter set #10
(excitation band pass, 450–490 nm; emission band pass, 515–565 nm).
Transmission electron microscopy. Cells were prefixed in Karnovsky’s
solution [1% paraformaldehyde, 2% glutaraldehyde, 2 mmol/L calcium
chloride, 0.1 mol/L cacodylate buffer (pH 7.4)] for 2 h and washed with
cacodylate buffer. Postfixing was carried out in 1% osmium tetroxide and
1.5% potassium ferrocyanide for 1 h. After dehydration with 50% to 100%
alcohol, the cells were embedded in Poly/Bed 812 resin (Pelco) and
polymerized and observed under electron microscope (EM 902A, Zeiss).
Measurement of superoxide anion. Generation of superoxide was
determined using a previously established fluorescence microscopy or flow
cytometry technique based on the superoxide-induced conversion of
hydroethidine to ethidium (22).

Figure 2. Induction of autophagy in glioma cells treated with selenite. A, selenite induces formation of AVOs in various glioma cells but not in astrocytes. Cells treated
with 7 Amol/L selenite for 16 h were incubated with acridine orange and examined with an inverted fluorescence microscope using identical settings and image
modifications. Bar, 2 Am. Representative fluorescent and phase-contrast images of the treated cells. AVOs were quantified with a fluorescence-activated cell sorter in
T98G treated with 7 Amol/L selenite for the indicated times. B, selenite treatment increases the uptake of MDC in glioma cells. T98G or A172 cells were left untreated or
treated with 7 Amol/L sodium selenite for 12 h and then stained with MDC. Images of the cells were taken on a fluorescence microscope. Bar, 2 Am. The number
of cells with a granular positive MDC staining was counted; a minimum of 100 cells was counted per sample. Columns, average of three independent experiments;
bars, SE. *, P < 0.01, compared with untreated cells. C, selenite triggers translocation of LC3 into granular structures in glioma cells. U87MG cell lines stably
transfected with GFP-LC3 were treated with 7 Amol/L sodium selenite for the indicated times. Representative images of cells after fluorescence and phase-contrast
microscopy. Bar, 2 Am. The percentage of cells with GFP-LC3 localized to granular structures was estimated by counting a minimum of 100 cells per sample with
the given values representing the means of five independent experiments. Bars, SE. *, P < 0.01, compared with untreated cells. D, effect of 3-MA on selenite-induced
LC3 translocation and cell death. a, T98G cells stably transfected with GFP-LC3 were pretreated or not with 0.5 mmol/L 3-MA for 30 min and further treated with
7 Amol/L sodium selenite for the indicated times to observe the translocation of GFP-LC3. Representative images of the cells observed under fluorescence and
phase-contrast microscopy. Bar, 2 Am. b, effect of 3-MA on selenite-induced cell death. GFP-LC3–transfected T98G cells were pretreated or not with 3-MA at the
indicated concentrations for 30 min and further treated with 7 Amol/L sodium selenite for 12 or 24 h. Cellular viabilities were compared using calcein-AM and EthD-1.
Columns, average of three independent experiments; bars, SE. *, P < 0.05, compared with cells treated with selenite for the indicated time points. E, ATG6 and
ATG7 are involved in selenite-induced LC3 translocation and cell death. a, GFP-LC3–expressing T87G cells were transfected with 40 nmol/L scrambled negative
control RNA, ATG6 siRNA, or ATG7 siRNA and incubated for 24 h and the expressions of ATG6 and ATG7 were analyzed by Western blotting analysis. As a
loading control, protein levels of a-tubulin were examined by Western blotting. b, GFP-LC3–expressing T98G cells were transfected with 40 nmol/L scrambled negative
control RNA, ATG6 siRNA, or ATG7 siRNA and further treated with 7 Amol/L selenite for 12 h. Expression of GFP-LC3 in the respective cells was observed under
fluorescence and phase-contrast microscope. Representative images of cells. Bar, 2 Am. c, GFP-LC3–expressing T98G cells were transfected as described above and
further treated with 7 Amol/L selenite for 24 h. Cellular viabilities were analyzed using calcein-AM and EthD-1. Columns, average of three independent
experiments; bars, SE. *, P < 0.001, compared with cells treated with selenite.

www.aacrjournals.org

6317

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (13). July 1, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

Figure 3. Selenite-induced autophagy is preceded by functional and structural disruption of mitochondria. A, reduction of MMP following selenite treatment. T98G
glioma cells were treated with 7 Amol/L selenite for the indicated times and then incubated with Rh-123. Fluorescent and phase-contrast images of cells. Bar,
2 Am. B, mitochondria colocalize with vacuoles induced by selenite treatment, whereas the ER and peroxisomes do not. YFP-Mito cells were treated with 7 Amol/L
selenite for the indicated times and observed under a fluorescence microscope. Bar, 2 Am. Fluorescent and phase-contrast images of cells are superimposed.
To examine the effect of selenite on ER or peroxisomes, U87MG cell lines stably expressing the pEYFP-ER (YFP-ER cells) or pEGFP-Peroxi plasmid (GFP-Peroxi
cells) were treated with 7 Amol/L selenite for 12 h and observed under a fluorescence microscope.

Measurement of SOD and catalase activity. Cells (2  106) plated in
100-mm culture dishes were collected, washed with PBS, and pelleted by
centrifugation at 500  g for 10 min. The cell pellet was resuspended in
ice-cold 50 mmol/L potassium phosphate (pH 7) containing 1 mmol/L
EDTA, sonicated, and centrifuged at 10,000  g for 15 min at 4jC. The
supernatant fraction was used for determination of SOD or catalase activity
using kits from Cayman Chemical Co. according to the manufacturer’s
instructions.
Statistical analysis. All data are presented as mean F SE of at least
three independent experiments. The statistical significance of differences
was assessed using ANOVA (GraphPad Software) followed by StudentNewman-Keuls’ multiple comparison tests. P < 0.05 was considered
significant.

Results
Sodium selenite induces nonapoptotic cell death in human
glioma cells. We examined the effect of sodium selenite on viability
in a variety of human glioma cells and normal astrocytes. Our
results revealed that 1 to 7 Amol/L selenite decreased viability in the
tested glioma cell lines, whereas the human astrocytes were
relatively resistant to the same doses (Fig. 1A), suggesting that
selenite is preferentially cytotoxic to malignant glioma cells over
normal astrocytes. We next examined whether the cytotoxic effect
of selenite on glioma cells is associated with induction of apoptosis.
Flow cytometric analysis of the cellular DNA content showed that
the sub-G1 population was not increased in U87MG cells treated
with 7 Amol/L selenite for 24 h (Fig. 1B), although cellular viability

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (13). July 1, 2007

decreased up to 20% at this time point (Fig. 1A). When we further
assessed DNA fragmentation by terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase–mediated dUTP nick end labeling (TUNEL) assay, TUNELpositive cells were rarely found in T98G cells treated with 7 Amol/L
selenite for 24 h (Supplementary Fig. S1). Selenite-induced cell
death was not inhibited by pretreatment with the pan-caspase
inhibitor z-VAD or by overexpression of the viral caspase-8 inhibitor
CrmA (Fig. 1C; ref. 23). Selenite-treated glioma cells showed
numerous small vesicles around their nuclei before selenite-induced
cell death, whereas treated astrocytes did not (Fig. 1D). However, no
apoptotic morphologies, such as cellular shrinkage, formation of
apoptotic bodies, membrane blebbing, and nuclear fragmentation,
were observed during selenite-induced cell death. Malignancy and
resistance to various conventional anticancer therapies of gliomas
have been associated with Akt activation due to mutations in the
PTEN pathway and high expression of XIAP or survivin (24–26). In
addition, Bcl-2 and Bcl-xL have been shown to protect various
cancer cells from death stimuli (27). Accordingly, we investigated
whether overexpression of these antiapoptotic proteins could
attenuate selenite-induced cell death but found no evidence that
selenite-induced cell death was affected by any of them (Fig. 1E).
Taken together, selenite induces nonapoptotic cell death in human
glioma cells but not in normal human astrocytes, suggesting that
selenite treatment may provide an effective therapeutic strategy for
malignant gliomas, many of which are resistant to conventional
treatments due to inherent defects in apoptotic machineries.

6318

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Mitophagy and Subsequent Cell Death by Superoxide

Selenite induces autophagy in glioma cells. We investigated
whether the vacuolation observed in selenite-treated glioma cells
was associated with autophagy. To identify the development of
AVOs, which are characteristic of autophagy (19), we used the
lysomotropic agent acridine orange. Staining with acridine orange
followed by fluorescence microscopy revealed significant development of AVOs beginning 6 h after treatment in U87MG, T98G,
U251, and A172 glioma cells, but no AVO development was
observed in astrocytes by 16 h after treatment (Fig. 2A). To further
assess the possibility of autophagy, we stained sodium selenite–
treated and untreated glioma cells with MDC, an autofluorescent
base that has been reported to accumulate in autophagic vacuoles
(28). Fluorescence microscopy revealed that the sodium selenite–
treated T98G and A172 cells showed high-intensity accumulation of
MDC into granular structures, whereas untreated glioma cells did

not (Fig. 2B). Vesicular accumulation of LC3 (microtubuleassociated protein 1 light chain 3) is a marker of autophagy, as
recruitment of modified LC3 to the nascent autophagic vesicle is a
common event in autophagosome formation (21). To reliably
detect the formation of autophagic vesicles, we expressed GFPtagged LC3 (21) in U87MG cells and examined changes in the
expression of GFP-LC3 following selenite treatment. In untreated
cells, GFP-LC3 showed diffuse expression, whereas in selenitetreated cells it showed ring-shaped pattern around the vacuoles at
6 h and a high-intensity punctate expression at 12 h (Fig. 2C).
Similar results were obtained in T98G cells stably transfected with
GFP-LC3 (Fig. 2D, a). The functional role of autophagy in seleniteinduced cell death was investigated using 3-MA, the specific
inhibitor of early stages of the autophagic process (29). Pretreatment of GFP-LC3–transfected U87MG cells with 3-MA attenuated

Figure 4. A, electron microscopic observation of glioma cells treated with selenite. T98G cells were untreated or treated with 7 Amol/L selenite for the indicated times
and transmission electron microscopy was done. Bar, 2 Am. B, mitochondria (Mito. ) and autophagic vacuoles may fuse after selenite treatment. YFP-Mito cells
were untreated or treated with 7 Amol/L selenite for 12 h and then incubated with MDC. Changes in mitochondrial morphologies and cellular MDC uptake were observed
under a fluorescence microscope. Bar, 2 Am. C, mitochondria and lysosomes (Lyso. ) may fuse after selenite treatment. YFP-Mito cells were left untreated or
treated with 7 Amol/L selenite for 12 h and then incubated with LysoTracker Red. Changes in mitochondrial morphologies and lysosomes were observed under a
fluorescence microscope. Bar, 2 Am. D, reduction of mitochondrial protein levels during selenite-induced cell death. T98G, U87MG, or U343 cells were treated with
7 Amol/L selenite for the indicated time points, lysed, and subjected to Western blotting for the indicated mitochondrial proteins. Equal loading of protein samples
was confirmed by Western blotting using a-tubulin antibody.

www.aacrjournals.org

6319

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (13). July 1, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

Figure 5. Pretreatment with CuDIPS, MnTBAP, or NAC blocks selenite-induced autophagic cell death. A, generation of superoxide by selenite. T98G cells were
treated with 7 Amol/L selenite for 6 h, exposed to hydroethidine, and observed under a fluorescence microscope. Bar, 2 Am (left). The accumulation of intracellular
superoxide levels was also measured in T98G cells following treatment with selenite for the indicated times and subsequent incubation with hydroethidine (HE )
using a fluorescence-activated cell sorter (right ). B, effect of various antioxidants on selenite-induced cell death. T98G cells were pretreated with the indicated
concentrations of antioxidants for 24 h, and cellular viability was assessed using calcein-AM and EthD-1. Columns, average of three independent experiments; bars,
SE. *, P < 0.001, compared with cells treated with selenite. C, pretreatment with CuDIPS, MnTBAP, or NAC blocks selenite-induced loss of MMP. T98G cells
were treated with or without 10 Amol/L CuDIPS, 200 Amol/L MnTBAP, 2.5 mmol/L NAC, or 1,000 units PEG-catalase for 30 min, further treated with 7 Amol/L selenite for
8 h, and then incubated with Rh-123. Representative fluorescent and phase-contrast images of cells. Bar, 2 Am. D, pretreatment with CuDIPS, MnTBAP, or NAC
blocks selenite-induced AVO formation. T98G cells were pretreated with or without 10 Amol/L CuDIPS, 200 Amol/L MnTBAP, 2.5 mmol/L NAC, or 1,000 units
PEG-catalase for 30 min, further treated with 7 Amol/L selenite for 12 h, and then incubated with acridine orange. Representative fluorescent and phase-contrast
images of cells. Bar, 2 Am.

selenite-induced translocation of GFP-LC3 and cell death (Fig. 2D,
a and b). Furthermore, siRNA-mediated knockdown of either ATG6
or ATG7 expression also inhibited the translocation of GFP-LC3
and cell death induced by selenite (Fig. 2E), suggesting the
involvement of ATG6 and ATG7 in selenite-induced autophagic cell
death. Taken together, these results show that excessive autophagy
induced by selenite contributes to nonapoptotic cell death.
Selenite-damaged mitochondria are targeted by autophagy.
Because mitochondria play a crucial role in regulating cell death, we
next examined whether selenite-induced autophagic cell death in
glioma cells was associated with alterations in mitochondrial
function and/or structure. Measurement of mitochondrial membrane potential (MMP) using Rh-123 showed that treatment of
T98G cells with 7 Amol/L selenite induced a significant loss of MMP
beginning 4 h after treatment (Fig. 3A). Interestingly, following
exposure to selenite, decreased MMP was always detected in
vacuolated cells. We then examined selenite-induced changes in
mitochondrial morphology using an U87MG subline stably transfected with pEYFP-Mito plasmid for mitochondrial labeling
(YFP-Mito cells). As shown in Fig. 3B, mitochondria in untreated
YFP-Mito cells showed filamentous or elongated morphologies but
became fragmented within 2 h after selenite treatment. Notably, all
mitochondria exactly colocalized with the numerous small vacuoles
6 h after treatment. Beyond 6 h after treatment, the numbers and
sizes of vacuoles expressing mitochondria-specific fluorescence

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (13). July 1, 2007

increased further. These results suggest the possibility that
fragmented mitochondria by selenite treatment may be engulfed
by autophagic vacuoles. To test whether the autophagic vacuoles
also colocalized with the ER or peroxisomes during seleniteinduced autophagy, we used a stable U87MG subline transfected
with pEYFP-ER or pEGFP-Peroxi plasmid. In contrast with
mitochondria, colocalization of the vacuoles with the ER or
peroxisomes was minimal in selenite-treated cells, suggesting that
mitochondria may be selectively targeted during selenite-induced
autophagy. Transmission electron microscopy to observe ultrastructural changes showed that the mitochondria appeared as
highly branched and interconnected tubular networks in untreated
T98G cells (Fig. 4A, a and b). Two hours after treatment with
selenite, however, the mitochondria appeared shorter and more
rounded and the cristae were dramatically disrupted (Fig. 4A, c and
d). From 4 h after treatment, swollen mitochondria filled with an
electron-dense material, presumably mitochondrial remnants, were
frequently observed (Fig. 4A, e–j, black arrowheads). Furthermore,
these disorganized mitochondria were frequently surrounded by the
double membrane associated with autophagosomes (Fig. 4A, e–j
and i, black arrows). At 8 h after treatment, more advanced
mitochondrial disruption was observed with frequent fusion
between the vacuoles appearing to increase their sizes (Fig. 4A,
h and i) and we observed ongoing fusion of autophagosomes with
lysosomes (Fig. 4A, j, white arrowheads). Staining of selenite-treated

6320

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Mitophagy and Subsequent Cell Death by Superoxide

Figure 6. Selenite-induced autophagic cell death is blocked by overexpression of Cu/ZnSOD or MnSOD but not by catalase. A, a, establishment of the stable cell lines
overexpressing antioxidant proteins. U87MG cells were stably transfected with expression vectors encoding Cu/ZnSOD, HA-MnSOD, or HA-catalase. As a control,
Con. cells (U87MG cells transfected with pcDNA3) were used. Protein levels of the respective antioxidant proteins were analyzed by Western blotting using
anti-Cu/ZnSOD or anti-HA antibodies, and equal loading of protein samples was confirmed by Western blotting of a-tubulin. b, Measurement of SOD and catalase
(CAT) activity in the established stable cell lines. SOD activity in the lysates from the stable cell lines overexpressing Cu/ZnSOD or MnSOD was measured and
compared with that of Con. cells using SOD assay kit (Cayman Chemical Co.). Representative results of three independent experiments. Catalase activity in the lysates
from the stable cell lines overexpressing catalase was also compared with that of Con. cells using catalase assay kit (Cayman Chemical Co.). Similar results were
obtained from three independent experiments. B, overexpression of SOD, but not catalase, blocks selenite-induced cell death. Con. cells and cells overexpressing
Cu/ZnSOD, MnSOD, or catalase were treated with 7 Amol/L selenite for 24 h, and cellular viabilities were assessed using calcein-AM and EthD-1. Columns, average of
three independent experiments; bars, SE. *, P < 0.001, compared with cells treated with selenite. C, overexpression of Cu/ZnSOD or MnSOD, but not catalase,
blocks selenite-induced loss of MMP and autophagy. Con. cells and cells overexpressing Cu/ZnSOD (clone 15), MnSOD (clone 5), or catalase (clone 25) were
treated with 7 Amol/L selenite for 8 h and then incubated with Rh-123. Representative fluorescent and phase-contrast images. Bar, 2 Am (top ). The same cells
were incubated with 7 Amol/L selenite for 12 h and then stained with acridine orange. Representative fluorescent and phase-contrast images. Bar, 2 Am (bottom ).
D, generation of superoxide by diquat induces autophagy. For detection of diquat-induced superoxide generation, T98G cells were treated with or without 10 Amol/L
diquat for 12 h and then stained with hydroethidine. Representative fluorescent and phase-contrast images. Bar, 2 Am (D, a). For the detection of MMP loss or induction
of autophagy, T98G cells were treated with or without 10 Amol/L diquat for 16 h and then stained with Rh-123, acridine orange (AO ), or MDC. Representative
fluorescent and phase-contrast images. Bar, 2 Am (D, b–d ).

www.aacrjournals.org

6321

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (13). July 1, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

YFP-Mito cells with MDC or LysoTracker Red showed that the
mitochondria significantly overlapped with the autophagic vacuoles
and lysosomes, respectively (Fig. 4B and C). In addition, Western
blot analysis revealed that the total amounts of mitochondrial
proteins, such as cytochrome c, Smac, and OxPhos Complex II
(succinate ubiquinol oxidoreductase) 70-kDa subunit, gradually
decreased following selenite treatment (Fig. 4D). These results
suggest that selenite-damaged mitochondria may ultimately be
degraded via fusion with autophagosomes and lysosomes. Taken
together, selenite may damage preferentially mitochondria in
treated glioma cells, which then undergo autophagy to remove
the disrupted mitochondria. However, excessive mitophagy may
result in irreversible cell death.
Selenite-induced superoxide generation triggers mitochondrial damage and subsequent autophagic cell death. Next, we
investigated the upstream regulatory mechanisms leading to
selenite-induced mitochondrial damage and subsequent autophagic cell death. Selenite has been reported to increase the generation
of superoxide anion during apoptosis (30, 31). Thus, we tested
whether intracellular superoxide levels increase during seleniteinduced autophagy in glioma cells. Hydroethidine-based measurements (22) revealed that intracellular superoxide levels were
significantly increased in T98G cells from 2 h of selenite treatment
compared with untreated cells (Fig. 5A). Similar trends were
observed in luminometric analysis to detect superoxide levels using
lucigenin (30) and H2DCFDA-based detection of total reactive
oxygen species (ROS) by fluorescence microscopy (data not
shown). To examine whether superoxide plays a role in seleniteinduced autophagic cell death, we pretreated T98G cells with
various antioxidants and then exposed the cells to 7 Amol/L
selenite for 24 h. Selenite-induced cytotoxicity was significantly
blocked by pretreatment with a SOD mimetic CuDIPS or MnTBAP,
whereas pretreatment with PEG-catalase could not block seleniteinduced cell death (Fig. 5B). Pretreatment with NAC also showed a
considerable blocking effect on selenite-induced cell death.
Consistent with this finding, selenite-induced loss of MMP in
T98G cells was significantly blocked by CuDIPS, MnTBAP, or NAC
but not by PEG-catalase (Fig. 5C). Moreover, selenite-induced AVO
formation was almost completely inhibited by CuDIPS, MnTBAP,
or NAC but not by PEG-catalase (Fig. 5D). SOD is able to reduce the
superoxide radical into hydrogen peroxide (H2O2). Catalase
catalyzes decomposition of H2O2 to ground-state O2. Because
SOD mimetics and PEG-catalase showed different effects on
selenite-induced autophagic cell death, we further examined the
effect of SOD or catalase by establishment of U87MG sublines
stably overexpressing Cu/ZnSOD, MnSOD, or catalase (Fig. 6A, a).
Overexpression of Cu/ZnSOD or MnSOD in U87MG cells resulted
in the enhancement of SOD activity. In U87MG cells stably
overexpressing catalase, increased catalase activity was measured
(Fig. 6A, b). Interestingly, selenite-induced cell death was significantly blocked by overexpression of Cu/ZnSOD or MnSOD but not
by catalase (Fig. 6B). Very similar results were obtained using
retroviral vector system overexpressing Cu/ZnSOD, MnSOD, or
catalase (Supplementary Fig. S2), clearly showing that the
regulatory roles of SOD and catalase in selenite-induced cell death
are different. Selenite-induced dissipation of MMP and development of AVOs were also blocked by overexpression of Cu/ZnSOD
or MnSOD but not by catalase (Fig. 6C). Moreover, treatment of
T98G cells with diquat, a superoxide generator, induced autophagy
in a manner similar to selenite (Figs. 2A and B, 3A, and 5A),
including increased superoxide levels (Fig. 6D, a), MMP loss

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (13). July 1, 2007

(Fig. 6D, b), and the formation of autophagic vacuoles (Fig. 6D,
c and d). In contrast, treatment of T98G cells with various doses of
H2O2, nitric oxide donor SNAP, or peroxynitrite donor SIN-1 did not
induce any evidences of autophagy (data not shown). Taken
together, these results show that superoxide generation plays a
major role in selenite-induced mitochondrial damage and subsequent autophagy leading to irreversible cell death.

Discussion
Selenium is an essential trace element with potent chemopreventive effects against various cancers (5). Sodium selenite is a
common dietary form of selenium (10). To date, research into the
cytotoxic effects of selenite in various cancer cells has predominantly focused on its apoptosis-inducing effects (12, 30, 32).
Interestingly, we herein show that treatment with selenite can
effectively induce autophagy and subsequent nonapoptotic cell
death in malignant glioma cells. Autophagy was traditionally
believed to be a random, nonselective process through which
cytoplasm and organelles are sequestered into autophagosomes and
delivered to lysosomes for degradation. However, a new concept of
selective autophagy has emerged in recent years. The identification
of the yeast mitochondrial protein Uth1P, which is required for
mitochondrial autophagy (mitophagy) but not for macroautophagy,
provided evidence that mitochondria can be specifically targeted for
degradation by autophagy (33). However, few previous reports have
described selective removal of an entire cohort of mitochondria via
autophagy in mammals (34, 35). In the present study, high-power
transmission electron microscopy images show that selenite
treatment induced rapid disruption of cristae and mitochondrial
swelling. Decreased cellular retention of Rh-123 indicated that a
mitochondrial permeability transition (MPT) was induced by
selenite treatment. Fluorescence microscopic analysis using YFPMito cells, YFP-ER, or GFP-Peroxi cells and transmission electron
microscopy showed that autophagic vacuoles subsequently entrapped the disorganized mitochondria preferentially over other
organelles, such as the ER or peroxisomes. Furthermore, various
mitochondrial proteins were degraded in the progression of seleniteinduced autophagy. Collectively, these results show that selenite
induces excessive mitophagy. It is not yet known how the
mitochondria are specifically selected for autophagy following
exposure to selenite. MPT has been proposed to trigger the
engulfment of depolarized mitochondria by autophagy (36).
Alternatively, oxidatively damaged proteins or lipids on the surface
of the mitochondria in selenite-treated cells may provide an ‘‘eat me’’
signal, mediating digestion by highly active autophagic vacuoles.
It is interesting to speculate on whether autophagic depletion of
mitochondria is the direct cause of selenite-induced cell death. We
presume that selenite-enhanced autophagic activity and subsequent
removal of a cohort of mitochondria might contribute to irreversible
cell death perhaps because a certain number of functional
mitochondria are required for energy production and cell survival.
Alternatively, selenite-induced autophagy of mitochondria may
hasten the progression of nonapoptotic cell death by eliminating
a major source of ATP production and decreasing the release of
mitochondria-derived proapoptogenic factors, thus tipping the
cellular balance away from apoptosis.
In terms of the mechanism by which selenite treatment affects
the mitochondria, our results indicate that selenite-induced
intracellular superoxide generation acts to trigger mitochondrial
damage and subsequent autophagic cell death. Several lines of

6322

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Mitophagy and Subsequent Cell Death by Superoxide

evidence support this hypothesis. First, selenite-induced superoxide
anion generation was accompanied by mitochondrial damage,
including MMP dissipation, disruption of cristae, and fragmentation/swelling of mitochondria. Second, not only pretreatment with
CuDIPS or MnTBAP but also overexpression of Cu/ZnSOD or
MnSOD significantly blocked selenite-induced mitochondrial
damage, formation of autophagic vacuoles, and ultimately cell
death. Third, treatment with diquat, a superoxide generator,
triggered mitochondrial damage and autophagic cell death in
glioma cells. These findings indicate that superoxide plays a critical
role in mitochondrial damage and subsequent autophagic cell
death and may further suggest the existence of a positive
amplification loop between superoxide generation and damaged
mitochondria following selenite treatment. Recently, Yu et al. (37)
showed that caspase inhibition induced autophagic cell death
through ROS accumulation due to catalase degradation, suggesting
that ROS damage can be a cause of autophagic cell death. Notably,
however, PEG-catalase pretreatment and catalase overexpression
did not block selenite-induced mitochondrial damage and
autophagic cell death, suggesting that selenite-induced autophagic
cell death is not associated with the regulation of catalase.
Furthermore, H2O2, SIN-1, or SNAP treatment failed to induce
autophagic cell death in glioma cells, whereas treatment with
diquat induced autophagic cell death in these cells. These results
suggest that superoxide, rather than other types of ROS, is
responsible for selenite-induced mitochondrial damage and
subsequent autophagy. A considerable protective effect of NAC
on selenite-induced autophagic cell death might be due to its
strong scavenger activity against ROS, including superoxide anion
(38). Zhao et al. (32) recently showed that generation of superoxide
during selenite-induced apoptosis in prostate cancer cells is
dependent on p53. However, we found that selenite-induced
superoxide generation and autophagic cell death occurred in
glioma cells with both wild-type p53 (U87MG, A172, and U343;
refs. 39, 40) and mutant p53 (T98G and U251; refs. 40, 41),
indicating that generation of superoxide during selenite-induced
autophagic cell death is not dependent on p53.
Our study revealed that 1 to 10 Amol/L selenite was preferentially toxic to various glioma cells over human normal astrocytes. Zhang et al. (42) previously reported that Wistar rats with
brain gliomas given selenite-containing drinking water showed
preferential selenite accumulation in tumor tissue versus normal

References
1. Weller RO. Brain tumours in man. Food Chem Toxicol
1986;24:91–8.
2. Stewart LA. Chemotherapy in adult high-grade glioma:
a systematic review and meta-analysis of individual
patient data from 12 randomised trials. Lancet 2002;359:
1011–8.
3. Lefranc F, Brotchi J, Kiss R. Possible future issues in
the treatment of glioblastomas: special emphasis on cell
migration and the resistance of migrating glioblastoma
cells to apoptosis. J Clin Oncol 2005;23:2411–22.
4. Okada H, Mak TW. Pathways of apoptotic and nonapoptotic death in tumor cells. Nat Rev Cancer 2004;4:
592–603.
5. McKenzie RC, Arthur JR, Beckett GJ. Selenium and the
regulation of cell signaling, growth, and survival:
molecular and mechanistic aspects. Antioxid Redox
Signal 2002;4:339–51.
6. Cai L, You NC, Lu H, et al. Dietary selenium intake,
aldehyde dehydrogenase-2 and X-ray repair cross-

www.aacrjournals.org

brain. They also showed that dietary selenium decreased tumor
development in rat transplanted with glioma (43). These results
collectively suggest that intake of sodium selenite in human glioma
patients may have a potential therapeutic effect for targeting
malignant gliomas over normal brain cells. Although malignant
gliomas are resistant to apoptosis (type I programmed cell death),
they seem to be less able to resist autophagic cell death (type II
programmed cell death; ref. 44). Notably, radiation, arsenic trioxide,
and ceramide were shown to induce autophagy or autophagic cell
death in various glioma cells (19, 45, 46), whereas these stimuli
induced apoptosis in other types of cancer cells (47–49). We found
that selenite-induced cell death in glioma cells was not blocked
by overexpression of various antiapoptotic proteins, suggesting
that sodium selenite–induced autophagic cell death pathway may
be safely used in the treatment of malignant glioma cells, at least
partially bypassing their dramatic resistance to various proapoptotic therapies. However, extensive animal studies and preclinical
trials are required to warrant the potential applicability of selenite
for treating resistant gliomas.
In summary, the present results show that the elevated levels of
intracellular superoxide generated by selenite treatment of glioma
cells initiated an autophagic cell death in which mitochondria
served as the main target. These novel findings not only improve
our understanding of the autophagic effect of selenite and the role
of superoxide in this process but also offer a potential therapeutic
strategy for malignant gliomas, which are resistant to various
proapoptotic therapeutics.

Acknowledgments
Received 11/15/2006; revised 3/19/2007; accepted 4/26/2007.
Grant support: Korea Research Foundation grants KRF-2006-311-E00195 and KRF2004-015-E00053 funded by the Korean Government (Ministry of Education and
Human Resources Development).
The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of page
charges. This article must therefore be hereby marked advertisement in accordance
with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact.
We thank Prof. V.M. Dixit (University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, MI)
for providing CrmA expression vector; Prof. A. Strasser (The Walter and Eliza Hall
Institute of Medical Research, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia) for providing the
expression vectors encoding Flag-tagged Bcl-xL and Bcl-2 cDNA; Prof. T. Nomura
(Oita Medical University, Oita, Japan) for providing a vector containing Myc-tagged
XIAP; Prof. J.S. Lee (Ajou University, Suwon, Korea) for providing a vector containing
Flag-tagged survivin; Dr. M. Akashi for providing the cDNAs encoding human Cu/
ZnSOD, MnSOD, and catalase; and Prof. T. Yoshimori (Osaka University, Osaka, Japan)
and N. Mizushima (Tokyo Metropolitan Institute of Medical Sciences, Tokyo, Japan) for
providing the plasmid encoding GFP-LC3.

complementing 1 genetic polymorphism, and the risk
of esophageal squamous cell carcinoma. Cancer 2006;
106:2345–54.
7. Li H, Stampfer MJ, Giovannucci EL, et al. A prospective
study of plasma selenium levels and prostate cancer
risk. J Natl Cancer Inst 2004;96:696–703.
8. Reid ME, Duffield-Lillico AJ, Sunga A, Fakih M, Alberts
DS, Marshall JR. Selenium supplementation and colorectal adenomas: an analysis of the nutritional prevention of cancer trial. Int J Cancer 2006;118:1777–81.
9. El-Yazigi A, Al-Saleh I, Al-Mefty O. Concentrations of
Ag, Al, Au, Bi, Cd, Cu, Pb, Sb, and Se in cerebrospinal
fluid of patients with cerebral neoplasms. Clin Chem
1984;30:1358–60.
10. Schrauzer GN. Nutritional selenium supplements:
product types, quality, and safety. J Am Coll Nutr 2001;
20:1–4.
11. Sinha R, El-Bayoumy K. Apoptosis is a critical cellular
event in cancer chemoprevention and chemotherapy by
selenium compounds. Curr Cancer Drug Targets 2004;4:
13–28.

6323

12. Zhong W, Oberley TD. Redox-mediated effects of
selenium on apoptosis and cell cycle in the LNCaP
human prostate cancer cell line. Cancer Res 2001;61:
7071–8.
13. Klionsky DJ, Emr SD. Autophagy as a regulated pathway
of cellular degradation. Science 2000;290:1717–21.
14. Levine B, Klionsky DJ. Development by self-digestion:
molecular mechanisms and biological functions of
autophagy. Dev Cell 2004;6:463–77.
15. Bauvy C, Gane P, Arico S, Codogno P, Ogier-Denis E.
Autophagy delays sulindac sulfide-induced apoptosis in
the human intestinal colon cancer cell line HT-29. Exp
Cell Res 2001;268:139–49.
16. Scott RC, Schuldiner O, Neufeld TP. Role and
regulation of starvation-induced autophagy in the
Drosophila fat body. Dev Cell 2004;7:167–78.
17. Tsujimoto Y, Shimizu S. Another way to die:
autophagic programmed cell death. Cell Death Differ
2005;12:1528–34.
18. Kanazawa T, Germano IM, Komata T, Ito H, Kondo Y,
Kondo S. Role of autophagy in temozolomide-induced

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (13). July 1, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research
cytotoxicity for malignant glioma cells. Cell Death Differ
2004;11:448–57.
19. Paglin S, Hollister T, Delohery T, et al. A novel
response of cancer cells to radiation involves autophagy
and formation of acidic vesicles. Cancer Res 2001;61:
439–44.
20. Kim SU. Antigen expression by glial cells grown in
culture. J Neuroimmunol 1985;8:255–82.
21. Kabeya Y, Mizushima N, Ueno T, et al. LC3, a
mammalian homologue of yeast Apg8p, is localized in
autophagosome membranes after processing. EMBO J
2000;19:5720–8.
22. Rothe G, Valet G. Flow cytometric analysis of
respiratory burst activity in phagocytes with hydroethidine and 2¶,7¶-dichlorofluorescin. J Leukoc Biol 1990;
47:440–8.
23. Zhou Q, Snipas S, Orth K, Muzio M, Dixit VM,
Salvesen GS. Target protease specificity of the viral
serpin CrmA. Analysis of five caspases. J Biol Chem 1997;
272:7797–800.
24. Shingu T, Yamada K, Hara N, et al. Growth inhibition
of human malignant glioma cells induced by the PI3-Kspecific inhibitor. J Neurosurg 2003;98:154–61.
25. Wagenknecht B, Glaser T, Naumann U, et al.
Expression and biological activity of X-linked inhibitor
of apoptosis (XIAP) in human malignant glioma. Cell
Death Differ 1999;6:370–6.
26. Chakravarti A, Noll E, Black PM, et al. Quantitatively
determined survivin expression levels are prognostic
value in human gliomas. J Clin Oncol 2002;20:1063–8.
27. El-Deiry WS. Role of oncogenes in resistance and
killing by cancer therapeutic agents. Curr Opin Oncol
1997;9:79–87.
28. Biederbick A, Kern HF, Elsasser HP. Monodansylcadaverine (MDC) is a specific in vivo marker for
autophagic vacuoles. Eur J Cell Biol 1995;66:3–14.
29. Seglen PO, Gordon PB. 3-Methyladenine: specific

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (13). July 1, 2007

inhibitor of autophagic/lysosomal protein degradation
in isolated rat hepatocytes. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
1982;79:1889–92.
30. Shen HM, Yang CF, Ong CN. Sodium selenite-induced
oxidative stress and apoptosis in human hepatoma
HepG2 cells. Int J Cancer 1999;81:820–8.
31. Shen HM, Yang CF, Ding WX, Liu J, Ong CN.
Superoxide radical-initiated apoptotic signalling pathway in selenite-treated HepG(2) cells: mitochondria
serve as the main target. Free Radic Biol Med 2001;30:
9–21.
32. Zhao R, Xiang N, Domann FE, Zhong W. Expression
of p53 enhances selenite-induced superoxide production and apoptosis in human prostate cancer cells.
Cancer Res 2006;66:2296–304.
33. Kissova I, Deffieu M, Manon S, Camougrand N. Uth1p
is involved in the autophagic degradation of mitochondria. J Biol Chem 2004;279:39068–74.
34. Lemasters JJ. Selective mitochondrial autophagy, or
mitophagy, as a targeted defense against oxidative
stress, mitochondrial dysfunction, and aging. Rejuvenation Res 2005;8:3–5.
35. Mijaljica D, Prescott M, Devenish RJ. Different fates
of mitochondria: alternative ways for degradation?
Autophagy 2007;3:4–9.
36. Elmore SP, Qian T, Grissom SF, Lemasters JJ. The
mitochondrial permeability transition initiates autophagy in rat hepatocytes. FASEB J 2001;15:2286–7.
37. Yu L, Wan F, Dutta S, et al. Autophagic programmed
cell death by selective catalase degradation. Proc Natl
Acad Sci U S A 2006;103:4952–7.
38. Hussain S, Slikker W, Jr., Ali SF. Role of metallothionein and other antioxidants in scavenging superoxide radicals and their possible role in neuroprotection.
Neurochem Int 1996;29:145–52.
39. Li H, Lochmuller H, Yong VW, Karpati G, Nalbantoglu
J. Adenovirus-mediated wild-type p53 gene transfer and

6324

overexpression induces apoptosis of human glioma cells
independent of endogenous p53 status. J Neuropathol
Exp Neurol 1997;56:872–8.
40. Asai A, Miyagi Y, Sugiyama A, et al. Negative effects of
wild-type p53 and s-Myc on cellular growth and
tumorigenicity of glioma cells. Implication of the tumor
suppressor genes for gene therapy. J Neurooncol 1994;19:
259–68.
41. Zhao S, Tsuchiba T, Kawakami K, Shi C, Kawamoto K.
Effect of As2O3 on cell cycle progression and cyclins D1
and B1 expression in two glioblastoma cell lines
differing in p53 status. Int J Oncol 2002;21:49–55.
42. Zhang Z, Chinen Y, Zhu Z, Kimura M, Itokawa Y.
Uptake and distribution of sodium selenite in rat brain
tumor. Biol Trace Elem Res 1995;48:45–50.
43. Zhang Z, Kimura M, Itokawa Y. The decrement of
carcinogenesis by dietary selenium and expression of
placental from of glutathione-S -transferase in rat
glioma. Biol Trac Elem Res 1997;57:147–55.
44. Lefranc F, Kiss R. Autophagy, the Trojan horse to
combat glioblastomas. Neurosurg Focus 2006;20:E7.
45. Kanzawa T, Kondo Y, Ito H, Kondo S, Germano I.
Induction of autophagic cell death in malignant glioma
cells by arsenic trioxide. Cancer Res 2003;63:2103–8.
46. Daido S, Kanazawa T, Yamamoto A, Takeuchi H,
Kondo Y, Kondo S. Pivotal role of the cell death
factor BNIP3 in ceramide-induced autophagic cell
death in malignant glioma cells. Cancer Res 2004;64:
4286–93.
47. Ross GM. Induction of cell death by radiotherapy.
Endocr Relat Cancer 1999;6:41–4.
48. Gazitt Y, Akay C. Arsenic trioxide: an anti cancer
missile with multiple warheads. Hematology 2005;10:
205–13.
49. Lin CF, Chen CL, Lin YS. Ceramide in apoptotic
signaling and anticancer therapy. Curr Med Chem 2006;
13:1609–16.

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Sodium Selenite Induces Superoxide-Mediated Mitochondrial
Damage and Subsequent Autophagic Cell Death in Malignant
Glioma Cells
Eun Hee Kim, Seonghyang Sohn, Hyuk Jae Kwon, et al.
Cancer Res 2007;67:6314-6324.

Updated version
Supplementary
Material

Cited articles
Citing articles

E-mail alerts
Reprints and
Subscriptions
Permissions

Access the most recent version of this article at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/67/13/6314
Access the most recent supplemental material at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/suppl/2007/06/20/67.13.6314.DC1

This article cites 49 articles, 17 of which you can access for free at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/67/13/6314.full#ref-list-1
This article has been cited by 6 HighWire-hosted articles. Access the articles at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/67/13/6314.full#related-urls

Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal.
To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications
Department at pubs@aacr.org.
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications
Department at permissions@aacr.org.

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

