Oncotarget, Vol. 7, No. 7

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Dynamics of cytotoxic T cell subsets during immunotherapy
predicts outcome in acute myeloid leukemia
Frida Ewald Sander1, Anna Rydström1, Elin Bernson1, Roberta Kiffin1, Rebecca
Riise1, Johan Aurelius1,2, Harald Anderson3, Mats Brune2, Robin Foà4, Kristoffer
Hellstrand1, Fredrik B. Thorén1 and Anna Martner1
1

TIMM Laboratory, Sahlgrenska Cancer Center, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden

2

Department of Hematology, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden

3

Department of Cancer Epidemiology, University of Lund, Lund, Sweden

4

Department of Cellular Biotechnologies and Hematology, Sapienza University of Rome, Rome, Italy

Correspondence to: Anna Martner, email: anna.martner@gu.se
Keywords: acute myeloid leukemia, immunotherapy, cytotoxic T cells, antigen-specific T cells, Immunology and Microbiology Section, Immune response, Immunity
Received: December 22, 2015	

Accepted: January 26, 2016	

Published: February 05, 2016

Abstract
Preventing relapse after chemotherapy remains a challenge in acute myeloid
leukemia (AML). Eighty-four non-transplanted AML patients in first complete
remission received relapse-preventive immunotherapy with histamine dihydrochloride
and low-dose interleukin-2 in an international phase IV trial (ClinicalTrials.gov;
NCT01347996). Blood samples were drawn during cycles of immunotherapy and
analyzed for CD8+ (cytotoxic) T cell phenotypes in blood. During the first cycle of
therapy, a re-distribution of cytotoxic T cells was observed comprising a reduction of T
effector memory cells and a concomitant increase of T effector cells. The dynamics of T
cell subtypes during immunotherapy prognosticated relapse and survival, in particular
among older patients and remained significantly predictive of clinical outcome after
correction for potential confounders. Presence of CD8+ T cells with specificity for
leukemia-associated antigens identified patients with low relapse risk. Our results
point to novel aspects of T cell-mediated immunosurveillance in AML and provide
conceivable biomarkers in relapse-preventive immunotherapy.

INTRODUCTION

largely unknown, experience from the use of allogeneic
transplantation for relapse prevention in AML strongly
implies a role for grafted T cells [2-4]. In non-transplanted
AML patients, the role of T cells for the surveillance of
leukemic cells is less well documented, but the results
of smaller studies suggest that prognosis is favorably
impacted by the emergence of anti-leukemic T cells in
bone marrow or blood [5] and by the presence of mRNAs
encoding leukemia-associated antigens [6]. These
results have inspired the design of immunotherapies
aiming at achieving T cell-mediated elimination of AML
cells e.g. by the adoptive transfer of engineered T cells
[NCT01864902, 7], by promoting autologous T cell
function by vaccination [8], by use of bispecific antibodies
linking T cells to leukemic cells [NCT02152956,
9], by countering mechanisms of T cell suppression
[NCT02532231, 9], and by the administration of T cellactivating cytokines [NCT01885897, 10].

Patients diagnosed with acute myeloid leukemia
(AML) receive induction chemotherapy aiming at
attaining the microscopic disappearance of leukemic cells
and the re-appearance of normal hematopoiesis (complete
remission, CR). The post-remission phase includes
consolidation chemotherapy with the goal of eradicating
undetectable leukemic cells. However, relapse in CR is
common, in particular in older patients ( > 60 years old),
and significantly explains why a minority of adult AML
patients achieve long-term leukemia-free survival (LFS)
[1, 2].
Relapse in the post-consolidation phase of AML in
CR likely results from the expansion of leukemic cells
that have escaped the initial rounds of chemotherapy.
While details regarding the role of cellular immunity
for the elimination of residual leukemic cells remain
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

7586

Oncotarget

CD8+ (cytotoxic) T cells differentiate from antigeninexperienced naïve T cells (TN) into central memory
(TCM), effector memory (TEM) and effector (Teff) cell
populations [11]. These T cell subsets are distinguished
by phenotype and by their localization: naïve T cells
(CD45RA+CCR7+) and TCM (CD45RO+CCR7+) are
localized mainly in secondary lymphoid organs whereas
TEM (CD45RO+CCR7-) and Teff (CD45RA+CCR7-) cells
circulate through non-lymphoid tissues [12]. Studies using
adoptive cell transfer for therapeutic purposes imply that
T cells at early stages of differentiation are superiorly
efficacious in cancer immunotherapy as these cells are
capable of self-renewal and may continuously provide
new Teff cells [13]. For the present study, we assessed the
distribution of CD8+ T cell subsets in the peripheral blood
of AML patients undergoing immunotherapy for relapse
prevention with histamine dihydrochloride and low-dose
interleukin-2 (HDC/IL-2). Our results suggest that the
dynamics of T cell phenotypes during immunotherapy
heralds remission maintenance and survival in AML.

2A). Also, the CD8+ T cell counts (above or below the
median) before or after therapy did not impact on relapse
risk (data not shown).
When comparing the distribution of CD8+ TN,
TCM, TEM and Teff cells before and after the first treatment
cycle, non-relapsing patients showed a distinct reduction
of the fraction of TEM cells along with an induction of
Teff cells (Figure 2). At onset of therapy, patients with a
high percentage (above the median) of TEM cells showed
a slightly higher likelihood of LFS, while no significant
differences in relapse risk were found for patients with a
high or low percentage (by the median) of TN, TCM, or Teff
cells (Figure S1). Patients experiencing a reduction of the
frequency of TEM cells or an induction of Teff cells during
cycle 1 showed significantly improved LFS and/or OS
(Figure 3C-3D with results of multivariate analyses shown
in Table 1). Also, induction of the frequency of naïve T
cells during the first treatment cycle significantly predicted
LFS and OS (Figure 3A, Table 1). The distribution of TCM
cells was seemingly unaltered during immunotherapy
(Figure 2D) and did not influence relapse risk (Figure 3B).
The distribution of T cell subsets was not significantly
altered during treatment cycle 3 (data not shown).
Stimulation of CD8+ T cells with antigen has been
proposed to drive differentiation from TN→TCM→TEM→Teff
cells [14, 15]. We thus speculated that Teff cells were
induced from TEM cells during the first treatment cycle of
HDC/IL-2. Indeed, a correlation was observed between
an induction of Teff and a reduction of TEM during cycle 1
(Figure S2). Eighteen out of 44 analyzable patients (41 %)
showed a memory to effector T cell transition, defined as
a reduction of CD8+ TEM cells with a concomitant increase
in CD8+ Teff cells. These patients showed improved LFS
(HR 0.19, p < 0.001) and OS (HR 0.13, p = 0.002; Figure
3E, Table 1).

RESULTS
Dynamics of cytotoxic T cell subsets during
immunotherapy
AML patients in first CR received 10 consecutive
3-week cycles of HDC/IL-2 in the post-consolidation
phase, as outlined in Figure 1. Peripheral blood
collected before and after the first and the third cycles of
immunotherapy was analyzed for CD8+ T cell content and
phenotype. During the treatment cycles, HDC/IL-2 did not
alter the absolute counts of CD8+ T cells in blood (Figure

Figure 1: Overview of the Re:Mission phase IV trial. Eligible AML patients in first complete remission (CR) received ten 3-week

cycles of HDC/IL-2 over 18 months. Peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) were isolated from blood collected before and after
cycles 1 and 3. Patients were followed-up for 6 months after completing the last treatment cycle.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

7587

Oncotarget

Table 1: Univariate and multivariate Cox regression analyses of the impact of aspects of CD8+ T cell
phenotype on LFS and OS.

T cell phenotypes in older patients

of the induction of TN and Teff cells, the reduction of the
frequency of TEM cells and the apparent transition of TEM
cells into Teff cells on outcome was pronounced in older
patients. All of these aspects of immunotherapy-induced
CD8+ T cell differentiation thus heralded LFS and/or OS
in this age group (Figure 3F-3J) and remained significantly
predictive after correction for prognostic factors (Table
1). The dynamics of CD8+ T cell subsets during cycle 1
did not significantly prognosticate LFS or OS in younger
patients (Figure S3E-S3N).

The trial protocol specified analyses of outcome by
subgroups according to patient age at enrollment ( < 60
and > 60 years). The CD8+ T cell count or the distribution
of CD8+ TN/TCM/TEM/Teff cells at onset of immunotherapy
did not differ significantly between age groups (Figure
S3A-S3D). During the first cycle, treatment with HDC/
IL-2 induced a significant increase of the frequency of
Teff cells only in older patients (Figure S3D). The impact
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

7588

Oncotarget

Table 2: Patient characteristics

Additional markers of T cell activation

of the first HDC/IL-2 treatment cycle weakly predicted
a favorable clinical outcome (univariate Cox regression
analysis for OS was p = 0.04, while multivariate Cox
regression analysis for OS was p = 0.12; Figure 4A).

In addition to the distribution of T cell phenotypes
we analyzed the impact of the immunotherapy on
cytotoxic T cell activation markers. The expression levels
of CD69 and CD25, which are frequently employed
markers of activated T cells, were unaffected by HDC/
IL-2 treatment (Figure S4A-S4B) and the expression
levels of these markers did not influence clinical outcome
(data not shown). In contrast, the expression of HLADR was reduced during the first cycle of therapy (Figure
S4C). HLA-DR was mainly expressed by the memory
populations, and the reduction was significant for TCM
and TEM cells but not TN or Teff cells (data not shown). A
low expression of HLA-DR on CD8+ T cells at the end
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Presence of leukemia-specific T cells heralds
maintained CR
We next determined the ability of CD8+ T cells to
produce IFN-ɣ ex vivo before and after immunotherapy.
The capacity of patients’ CD8+ T cells to produce IFN-ɣ
after stimulation with PMA/ionomycin was similar
before and after the first treatment cycle (Figure S4D)
and did not impact on the clinical outcome (not shown).
7589

Oncotarget

To determine whether patients harbored CD8+ T cells
that were specifically reactive with leukemic antigens,
PBMCs were stimulated by peptide pools representing
known leukemia-associated antigens (WT1, survivin,
PRAME and hTERT) followed by quantification of IFNγ-producing CD8+ T cells. Healthy donor CD8+ T cells
from PBMCs did not produce above background levels of
IFN-γ in response to the leukemia-derived peptides (data
not shown). Three out of 20 analyzed patients displayed
antigen-specific CD8+ T cells against any of these antigens
at onset of immunotherapy (C1D1). Two of these patients
experienced late relapses (at > 600 days). Seven patients
acquired leukemia-reactive T cells during immunotherapy
(at C1D21, n = 2, C3D1, n = 4 or C3D21, n = 1), all of
whom remained in uninterrupted CR. By Kaplan-Meier
analysis, presence of leukemia-specific CD8+ T cells
predicted LFS (p = 0.01) whereas presence of antigenspecific CD8+ T cells responding to viral control peptides
(CMV, EBV and influenza; CEF) did not (p = 0.5; Figure
4B-4C).

major finding was that these aspects of T cell immunity
determined the relapse risk and survival of older patients,
who are at high risk of relapse and death [16]. Our
results also point to conceivable biomarkers for efficacy,
including memory to effector T cell transition, which may
be broadly useful in T cell-based cancer immunotherapy.
The reason for the lack of significant correlation between
the dynamics of CD8+ T cell subsets and outcome in
younger patients is not known, but might be related to a
lower incidence of relapse in this age group along with
fewer samples available for analysis.
The precise mechanism explaining our finding of a
shift from TEM cells to Teff cells in blood of AML patients
during the first cycle of HDC/IL-2 immunotherapy
remains to be determined. However, IL-2 has been
reported to promote the development of CD8+ T cells into
memory and effector cell populations (reviewed in [17])
and it is thus conceivable that the IL-2 component of the
HDC/IL-2 regimen was crucial for the observed memory
to effector T cell transition. Also, the memory to effector
cell transition is compatible with the view that TEM cells
differentiate into Teff cells after antigen exposure [14, 15].
While alternative explanations are possible, including
extravasation of T cell subsets during immunotherapy,
we hypothesize that immunotherapy with HDC/IL-2
facilitates the development of effector T cells, which
may explain the strong prediction of clinical outcome in

DISCUSSION
The results of this study imply, for the first time,
that an altered distribution of cytotoxic T cell phenotypes
in blood during immunotherapy may be relevant to the
prognosis of non-transplanted AML patients in CR. A

Figure 2: Distribution of CD8+ subsets in non-relapsing and relapsing AML patients during immunotherapy with
HDC/IL-2. A. Blood counts of CD8+ T cells before (D1) and after (D21) the first and third cycles of HDC/IL-2 treatment (C1D1 n =

62; C1D21 n = 54; C3D1 n = 52; C3D21 n = 51). B. Gating strategy for determining naïve (TN; CD45RA+CCR7+), central memory (TCM;
CD45RO+CCR7+), effector memory (TEM; CD45RO+CCR7-) and effector (Teff; CD45RA+CCR7-) cells within the CD8+ T cell compartment.
C-F. Frequency of the CD8+ subpopulations TN C., TCM D., TEM E. and Teff F. cells in non-relapsing (n = 18) and relapsing (n = 26) patients
at the onset (C1D1) or end of (C1D21) the first cycle of immunotherapy. Statistical analysis was performed by Student’s paired t-test.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

7590

Oncotarget

patients experiencing TEM to Teff transition. Of note, others
have shown that AML-specific T cells carry a Teff cell
phenotype [18]. In further support for the development
of functional T cell immunity during immunotherapy,
detectable levels of CD8+ T cells that reacted with
leukemic peptides evolved in 7/20 patients during the
course of therapy. Presence of leukemia-specific CD8+ T
cells, but not CD8+ T cells reactive with common viral

antigens, significantly predicted LFS. These results concur
with previous observations on a role for immunoreactive
leukemia-associated antigens in AML [5, 6, 19] and lend
support to the role of cytotoxic T cells for surveillance of
the leukemic clone.
HLA-DR is considered a T cell activation marker
[20], but increased expression of HLA-DR on CD8+

Figure 3: Impact of altered distribution of CD8+ subsets on the clinical outcome of patients receiving HDC/IL-2. In A-D.

all patients, and in F-I. patients ≥ 60 years old, were dichotomized based on induction or reduction of the frequency of CD8+ T cell subsets
during the first treatment cycle, followed by analyses of LFS and OS by the logrank test. In E. all patients, and in J. patients≥ 60 years old,
were dichotomized based on transition (trans) or no transition from TEM to Teff cells and LFS and OS were analyzed by the logrank test. A
patient was considered transition-positive by the occurrence of a reduction of TEM cells (%) and a simultaneous induction of Teff cells (%)
during the first treatment cycle.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

7591

Oncotarget

Figure 4: Impact of HLA-DR expression and leukemia-specific CD8+ T cells on LFS in patients receiving HDC/IL-2.

A. Patients were dichotomized by the median HLA-DR expression on CD3+CD8+ T cells at onset of therapy (C1D1; n = 44) or after the
first treatment cycle (C1D21; n = 47). LFS and OS were analyzed by the logrank test. B-C. Blood samples from patients undergoing HDC/
IL-2 treatment were stimulated with a pool of peptides from leukemia-associated antigens (AML-peptides) or a pool of peptides from
CMV, EBV and influenza viruses (CEF-peptides), or no peptides (negative control). The percentage of IFN-γ producing CD8+ T cells was
determined by flow cytometry. In B. representative dot plots show IFN-γ production in samples without stimulation and samples stimulated
with AML- or CEF-peptides. In C. patients were dichotomized based on the presence or absence of AML-specific or CEF-specific CD8+
T cells, followed by analysis of LFS by the logrank test. Only patients with no events occurring before the last time point of analysis of
antigen-specific T cells (C3D21; 105 days) were considered in the latter analyses.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

7592

Oncotarget

Figure 5: Impact of TEM to Teff cell transition and NK cell NKp46 expression on clinical outcome. A.-B. Patients were

regarded as transition-positive when showing a reduction of TEM cells (%) and a simultaneous induction of Teff cells (%) during the first
treatment cycle, and were considered NKp46high when their CD16+ NK cells expressed above median levels of NKp46 after the first cycle
of immunotherapy (C1D21). Data show the LFS and OS (analyzed by the logrank test for trend) of patients with transition TEM-Teff and
NKp46high (both), transition only, NKp46high only, no transition TEM-Teff and low NKp46 expression (neither).

T cells has also been linked to T cell suppression and
exhaustion in cancer, chronic virus infections and aging
[21, 22]. The reduction of HLA-DR expression in TCM and
TEM cells during immunotherapy and the trend towards
favorable clinical outcome among patients with reduced
expression suggest that the memory population of CD8+
T cells may be shifted towards improved effector function
during immunotherapy, but further studies are required to
confirm this hypothesis.
HDC/IL-2 has been developed for AML
immunotherapy to expand and activate populations of T
cells and natural killer (NK) cells (IL-2 component) and
concurrently protect these anti-leukemic effector cells
against inactivation by myeloid cell-derived reactive
oxygen species (HDC component) [23]. Earlier results
from the Re:Mission trial show that treatment with
HDC/IL-2 triggered expression of natural cytotoxicity
receptors (NCR), which are activating receptors of
importance for NK cell recognition of aberrant cells,
along with increasing NK cell counts in blood [24, 25].
The Re:Mission trial results suggested that in-cycle
increments of NCR expression and NK cell counts only
weakly predicted LFS and OS [24], whereas the results
presented herein imply that altered distribution of CD8+
T cell subsets during the first treatment cycle was critical
to prognosis. Additional studies are required to define the
relative contribution by NK cells and T cells in mediating
the anti-leukemic properties of HDC/IL-2 and in
surveillance of the leukemic clone in AML. We observed
that patients with a TEM to Teff cell transition during the
first treatment cycle along with high NKp46 expression
on cytotoxic CD16+ NK cells after immunotherapy were
strikingly protected from relapse, while patients with TEM
to Teff cell transition or high NKp46 expression alone were
only partly protected (Figure 5). These data support the
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

hypothesis that T and NK cell effector functions evolve
simultaneously during immunotherapy and that both cell
subsets may contribute in relapse protection.
A limitation to this study is that relatively few
patients were available for assessment of T cell phenotype
and function, and larger studies are required to confirm
our observations. Also, the observed dynamics of CD8+ T
cell subsets during treatment with HDC/IL-2 may reflect
an inherent survival advantage of a subgroup of patients
with functional cellular immunity rather than effects of
immunotherapy. Randomized comparisons, preferably
within the group of older patients at high risk for relapse,
should be performed to further define the role of CD8+
T cell dynamics for the course of AML and in AML
immunotherapy.

PATIENTS AND METHODS
Patients, study design and objectives
This single-armed multicenter phase IV study
(Re:Mission, NCT01347996, registered at www.
clinicaltrials.gov) enrolled 84 patients (age 18-79) with
AML in first CR. As outlined schematically in Figure 1,
the patients received ten consecutive 21-day cycles of
histamine dihydrochloride (HDC; Ceplene) in combination
with low-dose IL-2 during 18 months or until relapse or
death. Patients were monitored for at least six additional
months after the end of immunotherapy. Patients who
discontinuated prematurely from the study (9 due to
adverse events, 3 due to withdrawn concent and 2 for other
reasons) were sensored at the last captured follow-up date
The dosage, route of administration, exclusion criteria
7593

Oncotarget

etc. were identical to those described for a previous phase
III trial [10]. Primary endpoints in the Re:Mission study
included assessment of the quantitative and qualitative
pharmacodynamic effects of HDC/IL-2 by monitoring T
and NK cell phenotypes before and after treatment cycles.
The protocol stated that all data collected in support of
these objectives were to be analyzed for the populations
as a whole and by subgroups according to patient age at
enrolment ( < 60 and > 60 years). The herein reported
aspects of T cell biology vs. clinical outcome (LFS and
OS) were performed post-hoc. Patient characteristics
are presented in Table 2. A more detailed account for
previous induction and consolidation therapy can be found
elsewhere [24, 25].

(BD Biosciences). Samples with less than 25 % viability
were excluded.
Blood samples were available from 81 out of
84 patients. Differential counts of whole blood were
performed at local sites and were utilized to calculate
absolute counts of blood CD8+ T cells. All available
samples were analyzed for T cell content and expression
of activation markers (including CD25 and CD69 and
IFN-γ production in response to PMA). If an analysis
failed according to pre-defined criteria (experimental
failure, few cells, poor cellular viability), a second sample
was thawed for re-analysis. If also the second attempt
failed to generate data, these samples were excluded from
analysis. In a second set of experiments, available samples
were analyzed for distribution of T cell subsets and
HLA-DR expression. All successfully analyzed samples,
according to the pre-defined criteria stated above, were
included in this report. A flow chart of patients that were
included or excluded from the analyses is shown in Figure
S5.

Sampling of peripheral blood and flow cytometry
Peripheral blood was collected before and after
the first and third treatment cycles, i.e. cycle 1, day
1 (C1D1) and cycle 1, day 21 (C1D21), cycle 3, day 1
(C3D1) and cycle 3, day 21 (C3D21). PBMC were
isolated and cryopreserved at local sites and shipped
on dry ice to the central laboratory (at the Sahlgrenska
Cancer Center, University of Gothenburg, Sweden) for
analysis by use of flow cytometry. For these analyses, the
frozen PBMC samples were thawed quickly in Iscoves’
medium supplemented with 10% FCS. Subsequently, cells
were washed in Iscoves’ medium and thereafter in PBS.
Cells were first stained with LIVE/DEAD fixable yellow
stain (Life technologies, Grand Island, NY, USA) by
incubation for 30 min at 4°C in PBS, followed by staining
for surface markers for 30 min at 4°C in PBS containing
0.5% BSA and 0.1% EDTA or in brilliant stain buffer (BD
Biosciences, Stockholm, Sweden). The following antihuman monoclonal antibodies were used for phenotyping:
CD3-FITC (HIT3a), CD4-APC-H7 (RPA-T4), CD4Horizon V450 (RPA-T4), CD8-APC (RPA-T8), CD8PerCP-Cy5.5 (RPA-T8/SK1), CD8-Qdot705 (3B5),
CD16-Horizon V450 (3G8), CD25-Brilliant Violet
421 (M-A251), CD45RA-APC (HI100), CD45RO-PE
(UCHL1), CD56-PerCP-eFluor710 (CMSSB), CD56PE-Cy7 (NCAM16.2), CD69-PE-Cy7 (FN50), HLADR-FITC (L243) (all from BD Biosciences). CCR7PE-Cy7 (G043H7) from Biolegend, San Diego, CA,
USA. CD3-Pacific Blue (S4.1), CD14-Qdot655 (TüK4)
and streptavidin-Qdot605 (all from Life technologies).
Intracellular staining of IFN-ɣ-PE-Cy7 (B27; BD
Biosciences) was performed after surface staining and
fixation and permeabilization using the FoxP3 fixation/
permeabilization kit (eBioscience, San Diego, CA, USA)
according to the manufacturer’s instructions.
Stained samples were analyzed on a 4-laser BD
LSRFortessa SORP flow cytometer (405, 488, 532, and
640 nm; BD Biosciences). Data were analyzed using the
FlowJo software, version 7.6.5 or later (TreeStar, Ashland,
OR, USA) or the FACSDiva software, version 6 or later
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

IFN-ɣ-production after PMA/ionomycin
peptide stimulation

or

Thawed samples collected before and after the first
and third treatment cycles of HDC/IL-2 immunotherapy
were seeded in Iscoves’ medium supplemented with 10
% FCS in 96-well plates, 1x106 cells per well. Cells were
left to rest over night at 37°C. The next day, cells were
washed with warm medium before stimulation consisting
either of a 5 hours incubation with 0.2 µg/ml PMA
(Sigma-Aldrich Munich, Germany) together with 2 µg/ml
ionomycin (Sigma-Aldrich) or a 6 hours incubation with a
pool of AML-peptides (overlapping peptides covering the
leukemia-associated proteins WT1, PRAME, survivin and
hTERT; Miltenyi Biotec) or, as a control, CEF-peptides
(32 peptides specific for MHC class I with sequences
derived from human cytomegalovirus (HCMV), EpsteinBarr virus (EBV) and influenza viruses; Miltenyi Biotec).
The final concentration of each peptide was 0.6
nmol. The co-stimulatory molecules anti-CD28 (CD28.2;
BD Biosciences) and anti-CD49d (9F10; BD Biosciences),
2 µg/ml of each, were added to wells with peptide
stimulation, as well as to the negative control samples,
which served to determine the background signal. For all
stimuli, Golgiplug (BD Biosciences) was added during the
last 4 hours of stimulation according to manufacturer’s
protocol. Samples were stained with LIVE/DEAD fixable
yellow stain and surface markers before being fixed,
permeabilized and intracellularly stained with IFN-ɣ
as described above. Patients were considered to harbor
AML- or CEF-specific CD8+ T cells if the frequency of
IFN-ɣ-producing CD8+ T cells exceeded 0.05 % (after
subtraction of background as determined by the negative
control sample) at any of the time points (C1D1, C1D21,
7594

Oncotarget

GRANT SUPPORT

C3D1, C3D21). To avoid selection bias, only patients with
no events (relapses) occurring before the last time point
(C3D21; 105 days) were considered in these analyses.

This work was supported by Meda Pharma, Bad
Homburg, Germany (Study Sponsor), the Swedish
Research Council (2012-2047, 2012-3205, 2011-3003),
the Swedish Society for Medical Research (SSMF),
the Swedish Society of Medicine (SLS-502321, SLS406151), the Swedish Cancer Society (Cancerfonden,
CAN 212/595, CAN 213/550), the Swedish state via the
ALF agreement (ALFGBG-436961, ALFGBG-151441,
ALFGBG-292701), the Erna and Victor Hasselblad
Foundation, the Torsten and Ragnar Söderberg Foundation,
The IngaBritt and Arne Lundberg Foundation, the Assar
Gabrielsson foundation, The Lars Hierta Foundation, Lion
Cancer Foundation West, BioCARE - a National Strategic
Research Program at University of Gothenburg, and the
Sahlgrenska Academy at University of Gothenburg.

Statistics
In accordance with the statistical analysis plan,
paired t-test was used for single comparisons of CD8+ T
cell phenotypes. To determine the impact of the dynamics
of CD8+ subsets or markers on outcome, samples were
dichotomized by the median for single time points or
by induction/reduction during the first treatment cycle if
not otherwise stated. The analyses of T cell function vs.
outcome are based on data for LFS, defined as the time
in days from start of immunotherapy with HDC/IL-2 to
relapse or death from any cause, and OS, defined as the
corresponding time to death, available at the trial closing
date (October 13, 2014), i.e. when all patients had been
followed for at least 24 months (18 months of treatment
and 6 months of additional follow-up). Relapse was
defined as at least 5% blast cells in the bone marrow or
presence of extramedullary leukemia. The impact of T cell
phenotype on LFS and OS was analyzed using the logrank test.
The impact of age, risk group classification
according to recommendations by the European
LeukemiaNet [26], number of induction courses required
to achieve CR (1 or > 1), and number of consolidation
courses (0-2 or > 2) on LFS and OS was assessed using the
Cox univariate regression model. The prognostic factors
with a p-value below 0.1 (age, and number of induction
cycles) were included as potential confounders in a Cox
multivariate regression analysis (Table 1). All indicated
p-values are 2-sided. This study was conducted according
to Declaration of Helsinki principles. The trial was
approved by the Ethics Committees of each participating
institution, and all patients gave written informed consent
before enrollment.

Editorial note
This paper has been accepted based in part on peerreview conducted by another journal and the authors’
response and revisions as well as expedited peer-review
in Oncotarget.

REFERENCES
1.	 Burnett AK, Goldstone A, Hills RK, Milligan D, Prentice
A, Yin J, Wheatley K, Hunter A and Russell N. Curability
of patients with acute myeloid leukemia who did not
undergo transplantation in first remission. Journal of clinical
oncology. 2013; 31:1293-1301.
2.	 Martner A, Thoren FB, Aurelius J and Hellstrand K.
Immunotherapeutic strategies for relapse control in acute
myeloid leukemia. Blood reviews. 2013; 27:209-216.
3.	 Appelbaum FR. Haematopoietic cell transplantation as
immunotherapy. Nature. 2001; 411:385-389.
4.	 Kolb HJ. Graft-versus-leukemia effects of transplantation
and donor lymphocytes. Blood. 2008; 112:4371-4383.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

5.	 Montagna D, Maccario R, Locatelli F, Montini E, Pagani
S, Bonetti F, Daudt L, Turin I, Lisini D, Garavaglia C,
Dellabona P and Casorati G. Emergence of antitumor
cytolytic T cells is associated with maintenance of
hematologic remission in children with acute myeloid
leukemia. Blood. 2006; 108:3843-3850.

The authors are indebted to the participating patients
and to the participants in the Re:Mission Study Group.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST

6.	 Greiner J, Schmitt M, Li L, Giannopoulos K, Bosch K,
Schmitt A, Dohner K, Schlenk RF, Pollack JR, Dohner H
and Bullinger L. Expression of tumor-associated antigens
in acute myeloid leukemia: Implications for specific
immunotherapeutic approaches. Blood. 2006; 108:41094117.

Authors MB and KH are past or present consultants
to the study sponsor (Meda Pharma). Author KH holds
patents protecting the use of histamine dihydrochloride in
cancer immunotherapy. Authors AM, RF and FBT have
received honoraria and/or travel grants from the study
sponsor. The other authors declare no conflict of interest.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

7.	

7595

Pizzitola I, Anjos-Afonso F, Rouault-Pierre K, Lassailly F,
Tettamanti S, Spinelli O, Biondi A, Biagi E and Bonnet D.
Chimeric antigen receptors against CD33/CD123 antigens
Oncotarget

8.	

efficiently target primary acute myeloid leukemia cells in
vivo. Leukemia. 2014; 28:1596-1605.

and proteinase 3 in patients with acute myeloid leukemia.
Blood. 2002; 100:2132-2137.

Van Tendeloo VF, Van de Velde A, Van Driessche A, Cools
N, Anguille S, Ladell K, Gostick E, Vermeulen K, Pieters
K, Nijs G, Stein B, Smits EL, Schroyens WA, Gadisseur
AP, Vrelust I, Jorens PG, et al. Induction of complete
and molecular remissions in acute myeloid leukemia by
Wilms’ tumor 1 antigen-targeted dendritic cell vaccination.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the
United States of America. 2010; 107:13824-13829.

19.	 Greiner J, Schneider V, Schmitt M, Gotz M, Dohner K,
Wiesneth M, Dohner H and Hofmann S. Immune responses
against the mutated region of cytoplasmatic NPM1 might
contribute to the favorable clinical outcome of AML
patients with NPM1 mutations (NPM1mut). Blood. 2013;
122:1087-1088.
20.	 Ko HS, Fu SM, Winchester RJ, Yu DT and Kunkel HG.
Ia determinants on stimulated human T lymphocytes.
Occurrence on mitogen- and antigen-activated T cells. J
Exp Med. 1979; 150:246-255.

9.	 Krupka C, Kufer P, Kischel R, Zugmaier G, Lichtenegger
FS, Kohnke T, Vick B, Jeremias I, Metzeler KH, Altmann
T, Schneider S, Fiegl M, Spiekermann K, Bauerle PA,
Hiddemann W, Riethmuller G, et al. Blockade of the PD-1/
PD-L1 axis augments lysis of AML cells by the CD33/CD3
BiTE antibody construct AMG 330: reversing a T-cellinduced immune escape mechanism. Leukemia. 2016;
30:484-91.

21.	 Arruvito L, Payaslian F, Baz P, Podhorzer A, Billordo A,
Pandolfi J, Semeniuk G, Arribalzaga E and Fainboim L.
Identification and clinical relevance of naturally occurring
human CD8+HLA-DR+ regulatory T cells. J Immunol.
2014; 193:4469-4476.
22.	 Imamichi H, Lempicki RA, Adelsberger JW, Hasley RB,
Rosenberg A, Roby G, Rehm CA, Nelson A, Krishnan S,
Pavlick M, Woods CJ, Baseler MW and Lane HC. The
CD8+ HLA-DR+ T cells expanded in HIV-1 infection are
qualitatively identical to those from healthy controls. Eur J
Immunol. 2012; 42:2608-2620.

10.	 Brune M, Castaigne S, Catalano J, Gehlsen K, Ho AD,
Hofmann WK, Hogge DE, Nilsson B, Or R, Romero AI,
Rowe JM, Simonsson B, Spearing R, Stadtmauer EA,
Szer J, Wallhult E, et al. Improved leukemia-free survival
after postconsolidation immunotherapy with histamine
dihydrochloride and interleukin-2 in acute myeloid
leukemia: results of a randomized phase 3 trial. Blood.
2006; 108:88-96.

23.	 Thoren FB, Romero AI, Brune M and Hellstrand K.
Histamine dihydrochloride and low-dose interleukin-2
as post-consolidation immunotherapy in acute myeloid
leukemia. Expert Opin Biol Ther. 2009; 9:1217-1223.

11.	 Farber DL, Yudanin NA and Restifo NP. Human memory
T cells: generation, compartmentalization and homeostasis.
Nat Rev Immunol. 2014; 14:24-35.

24.	 Martner A, Rydstrom A, Riise RE, Aurelius J, Anderson
H, Brune M, Foa R, Hellstrand K and Thoren FB. Role of
natural killer cell subsets and natural cytotoxicity receptors
for the outcome of immunotherapy in acute myeloid
leukemia. Oncoimmunology. 2015:DOI: 10.1080/2162402
X.2162015.1041701.

12.	 Sallusto F, Geginat J and Lanzavecchia A. Central memory
and effector memory T cell subsets: function, generation,
and maintenance. Annu Rev Immunol. 2004; 22:745-763.
13.	 Rosenberg SA and Restifo NP. Adoptive cell transfer as
personalized immunotherapy for human cancer. Science.
2015; 348:62-68.

25.	 Martner A, Rydstrom A, Riise RE, Aurelius J, Anderson
H, Brune M, Foa R, Hellstrand K and Thoren FB. NK
cell expression of natural cytotoxicity receptors may
determine relapse risk in older AML patients undergoing
immunotherapy for remission maintenance Oncotarget.
2015:doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.15559.

14.	 Restifo NP and Gattinoni L. Lineage relationship of effector
and memory T cells. Current opinion in immunology. 2013;
25:556-563.
15.	 Roychoudhuri R, Lefebvre F, Honda M, Pan L, Ji Y,
Klebanoff CA, Nichols CN, Fourati S, Hegazy AN, Goulet
JP, Gattinoni L, Nabel GJ, Gilliet M, Cameron M, Restifo
NP, Sekaly RP, et al. Transcriptional profiles reveal a
stepwise developmental program of memory CD8(+) T cell
differentiation. Vaccine. 2015; 33:914-923.

26.	 Dohner H, Estey EH, Amadori S, Appelbaum FR, Buchner
T, Burnett AK, Dombret H, Fenaux P, Grimwade D, Larson
RA, Lo-Coco F, Naoe T, Niederwieser D, Ossenkoppele
GJ, Sanz MA, Sierra J, et al. Diagnosis and management of
acute myeloid leukemia in adults: recommendations from
an international expert panel, on behalf of the European
LeukemiaNet. Blood. 2010; 115:453-474.

16.	 Burnett AK. Treatment of acute myeloid leukemia: are we
making progress? ASH Education Program Book. 2012;
2012:1-6.
17.	 Liao W, Lin JX and Leonard WJ. IL-2 family cytokines:
new insights into the complex roles of IL-2 as a broad
regulator of T helper cell differentiation. Current opinion in
immunology. 2011; 23:598-604.
18.	Scheibenbogen C, Letsch A, Thiel E, Schmittel A,
Mailaender V, Baerwolf S, Nagorsen D and Keilholz U.
CD8 T-cell responses to Wilms tumor gene product WT1
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

7596

Oncotarget

