Oncotarget, Vol. 7, No. 40

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Research Paper

Tumor vessel normalization after aerobic exercise enhances
chemotherapeutic efficacy

Keri L. Schadler1, Nicholas J. Thomas1, Peter A. Galie2, Dong Ha Bhang1, Kerry C.
Roby1, Prince Addai1, Jacob E. Till1, Kathleen Sturgeon1, Alexander Zaslavsky1,
Christopher S. Chen3, Sandra Ryeom1
1

Department of Cancer Biology, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Abramson Family Cancer Research
Institute, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA

2

Department of Physiology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA

3

Department of Bioengineering, Boston University, Boston, MA 02215, USA

Correspondence to: Sandra Ryeom, email: sryeom@upenn.edu
Keywords: tumor vascular normalization, NFAT, thrombospondin-1, exercise
Received: May 11, 2016     Accepted: August 25, 2016     Published: August 31, 2016

ABSTRACT
Targeted therapies aimed at tumor vasculature are utilized in combination
with chemotherapy to improve drug delivery and efficacy after tumor vascular
normalization. Tumor vessels are highly disorganized with disrupted blood flow
impeding drug delivery to cancer cells. Although pharmacologic anti-angiogenic
therapy can remodel and normalize tumor vessels, there is a limited window of efficacy
and these drugs are associated with severe side effects necessitating alternatives
for vascular normalization. Recently, moderate aerobic exercise has been shown
to induce vascular normalization in mouse models. Here, we provide a mechanistic
explanation for the tumor vascular normalization induced by exercise. Shear stress,
the mechanical stimuli exerted on endothelial cells by blood flow, modulates vascular
integrity. Increasing vascular shear stress through aerobic exercise can alter and
remodel blood vessels in normal tissues. Our data in mouse models indicate that
activation of calcineurin-NFAT-TSP1 signaling in endothelial cells plays a critical role
in exercise-induced shear stress mediated tumor vessel remodeling. We show that
moderate aerobic exercise with chemotherapy caused a significantly greater decrease
in tumor growth than chemotherapy alone through improved chemotherapy delivery
after tumor vascular normalization. Our work suggests that the vascular normalizing
effects of aerobic exercise can be an effective chemotherapy adjuvant.

INTRODUCTION

For example, the utility of vascular normalization has been
demonstrated in glioblastoma patients who were treated
with the anti-angiogenic agent cediranib in combination
with chemoradiation. Improved tumor blood perfusion
after cediranib treatment correlated with improved overall
survival [4]. However, resistance to anti-angiogenic
therapy and significant adverse side effects necessitate
better approaches to normalize tumor vasculature [5].
Since all drugs have accompanying side effects,
non-pharmacologic approaches for tumor vascular
normalization would be ideal. In addition to growth factor
signaling, blood vessel growth is regulated by mechanical
cues created by changes in blood flow, velocity and
pressure. Blood flow induces shear stress, the mechanical
force on endothelium that is critical for the establishment

Tumor vasculature is unorganized and leaky; as
many as 50% of tumor vessels are non-functional [1].
Consequently, drug delivery to tumors is inefficient,
reducing chemotherapeutic efficacy. The concept of
vascular normalization, originally proposed by Jain and
colleagues in 2001, posits that restoring the balance of
angiogenic regulators by decreasing pro-angiogenic
factors remodels tumor vasculature to become more
organized and functional, similar to normal vasculature
[2]. Anti-angiogenic drugs normalize tumor vasculature
to increase chemotherapy delivery to the tumor, and have
been used in combination with chemotherapy to enhance
chemotherapeutic efficacy in multiple cancer types [3].
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

65429

Oncotarget

of mature, functional vasculature during development.
Thus, we reasoned that increasing blood flow in tumor
vasculature may promote tumor vessel function. One
approach to modulate blood flow systemically is through
aerobic exercise. Aerobic exercise has been shown to be
safe in patients undergoing chemotherapy and to improve
quality of life measures such as mobility and fatigue
[6, 7]. Recently, tumor vascular remodeling in response to
exercise has been described in mouse cancer models, but
the molecular mechanisms regulating the tumor vascular
response to exercise have not been elucidated [8–10]. In
this work, we utilized moderate intensity treadmill running
to increased blood flow in mice with B16F10 melanoma
or PDAC-4662 pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma tumors.
Tumor growth was significantly inhibited in mice treated
with chemotherapy and subjected to aerobic exercise
as compared to mice treated with chemotherapy alone.
Aerobic exercise triggered tumor vascular normalization,
characterized by increased vascular length and perfusion
and increased chemotherapy delivery to the tumor bed.
Utilizing microfluidic devices and modified tissue culture
dishes to mimic increased blood flow-induced shear stress
in vitro, we found that shear stress alters the angiogenic
secretome of endothelial cells (ECs), leading to secretion
of soluble factors that inhibit tumor EC sprouting and
permit vascular remodeling. Further, we demonstrate
that fluid flow activates the transcription factor Nuclear
Factor of Activated T cells (NFAT) in ECs, modulating
the expression of multiple pro- and anti-angiogenic
factors [11, 12]. Our studies identified increased levels of
thrombospondin-1 (TSP-1), a key anti-angiogenic protein,
as a critical downstream mediator of tumor vascular
normalization during exercise via calcineurin-NFATTSP-1 signaling.

blood vessels (Figure 1A). Similarly, the average vessel
length and number of visible lumens was significantly
higher in PDAC-4662 tumors from exercised compared
to non-exercised mice (Figure 1B). The hallmark of
vascular normalization is improved vessel function that
can be quantified by lectin perfusion. We identified a 24%
increase in lectin-positive (functional) vessels in PDAC4662 tumors from exercised compared to non-exercised
mice (Figure 1C).

Exercise enhances chemotherapeutic efficacy
Exercise has been described as both pro- and antitumor growth in studies using mouse models [8, 15, 16].
Our data demonstrating vascular normalization in PDAC4662 and B16F10 tumors should lead to increased blood
delivery to the tumor promoting the growth of these
tumors. Using moderate intensity treadmill exercise, we
examined the growth of transplanted tumors in syngeneic
wild-type mice with and without exercise. While exercise
significantly promoted B16F10 melanoma growth, it had
no significant effect on the growth of pancreatic ductal
adenocarcinoma cells (PDAC-4662). Since aerobic
exercise triggers cancer type specific effects on tumor
growth, we examined how exercise affected tumorigenesis
when combined with chemotherapy. The addition of
aerobic exercise to chemotherapy inhibited both B16F10
and PDAC-4662 tumor growth significantly more than
chemotherapy alone (Figure 2B and Supplementary
Figure S1A, Supplementary Table S1). Exercise
modulates multiple biological effects, including changes
in metabolism, immune function, and vascular function.
We detected no significant difference in tumor glucose,
glutamate, glutamine, or lactate, and no difference in
numbers of infiltrating CD45+CD11b+ or CD3+ cells
(Supplementary Figure S1B–S1D). Therefore, to
determine whether increasing blood flow is sufficient to
enhance chemotherapeutic efficacy, we modulated blood
flow pharmacologically. Anti-hypertensive drugs cause
vasodilation by relaxing vascular smooth muscle cells to
lower the pressure in large vessels. In normotensive mice,
this leads to increased blood velocity in peripheral vessels
such as tumor vessels, which lack vascular smooth muscle
and do not dilate [17]. Combining the anti-hypertensive
drug prazosin together with gemcitabine also increased
gemcitabine efficacy towards PDAC-4662 tumors,
suggesting that pharmacologically increasing blood
velocity improves drug delivery to tumors (Figure 2C).

RESULTS
Exercise normalizes tumor vasculature
One of the many effects of aerobic exercise is
a systemic increase in blood flow that increases the
mechanical force on endothelial cells at a rate proportional
to exercise intensity [13]. Mechanical forces have been
shown to promote mature, functional vasculature in healthy
tissues. We therefore used moderate intensity (60–70%
VO2 max [14]) daily treadmill running in tumor-bearing
mice to examine the effect of exercise-increased blood
flow on tumor vasculature. Tumor vascular normalization
includes a decrease in non-functional sprouts, an increase
in hierarchical vasculature with reduced leakiness, and no
change in microvessel density, resulting in increased blood
delivery [2]. Consistent with this, B16F10 tumors from
exercised mice showed no change in microvessel density
but a significant increase in longer vessels. Exercise shifted
the morphology of tumor vasculature from disconnected,
small clumps of CD31+ endothelial cells (ECs) to elongated
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Exercise improves delivery of chemotherapy to
tumors
One explanation for the significant decrease in tumor
growth observed upon combining chemotherapy with
exercise in mice is greater drug delivery to tumors due
to more normalized tumor vasculature. Consistent with
65430

Oncotarget

this, we show increased expression of the DNA damage
marker γH2AX in PDAC-4662 tumors from mice treated
with exercise and gemcitabine compared to gemcitabine
alone (Figure 3A) while there was no difference in tumor
cell proliferation in tumors from mice treated with or
without exercise or in tumor cells in vitro treated with
serum from exercised or non-exercised mice (Figure 3B
and Supplementary Figure S2A). Doxorubicin delivery
was also significantly increased in B16F10 tumors from
exercised mice even with a single dose of doxorubicin

delivered after the final exercise session (Figure 3C). Our
data suggests that chronic aerobic exercise normalizes
tumor vasculature. To examine the necessity for vessel
normalization versus simply increasing blood flow during
acute exercise, B16F10 tumor-bearing mice were treated
with doxorubicin immediately prior to undergoing a single
exercise session. Unlike chronically exercised mice, there
was no difference in doxorubicin levels in tumors from
mice that underwent only one exercise session compared
to non-exercised mice (Figure 3C).

Figure 1: Exercise normalizes tumor vasculature. (A, B) Representative images of anti-CD31 immunofluorescence on (A)

B16F10 or (B) PDAC-4662 tumors with DAPI staining to visualize the nucleus. After B16F10 or PDAC-4662 tumors were palpable, mice
were randomized into treadmill running or no exercise groups. 21 days later, tumors were harvested. Microvessel density (MVD), the
number of vessels > 100 μm (large), the number of visible lumens and the average vessel length, and were counted in 5 random sections/
tumor and averaged to obtain a value per tumor, *p < 0.05, n = 5–6 per group, Bars = 100 μm. (C) Representative images of anti-CD31
immunofluorescence and isolectin-B4 positive vessels from PDAC-4662 tumors. When tumors were palpable, PDAC-4662 tumor-bearing
mice were treated with gemcitabine with or without daily treadmill running for two weeks. Prior to euthanasia, mice were injected with
isolectin-B4. Quantification of Isolectin-B4 (red) and CD31 (green) double positive vessels is shown on the right with double positive
vessels quantified in 5 sections/tumor and shown as the mean +/– S.E.M., n = 4 per group, *p < 0.05, Bars = 100 μm.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

65431

Oncotarget

Increased blood flow alters the endothelial cell
secretome to remodel tumor vasculature

blood flow specifically on ECs, we transplanted Matrigel
plugs containing primary mouse lung ECs into mice. After
a week of exercise, the vasculature in the Matrigel plugs
from these mice was examined and showed elongated,
large vessels with an almost 2-fold increase in lectin
perfusion compared to Matrigel plugs from non-exercised
mice (Figure 4C). Since previous studies have shown that
tumor vascular normalization requires a restoration of
the angiogenic balance in the tumor microenvironment

Mature blood vessels include both quiescent
endothelium and pericyte coverage. However, the extent of
desmoplastic stroma and pericyte coverage were similar in
tumors from exercised and non-exercised mice, prompting
us to focus on the endothelial response to exercise (Figure
4A, 4B). To examine the effects of exercise-increased

Figure 2: Exercise-induced shear stress increases chemotherapeutic efficacy. (A) Tumor growth in exercised or non-exercised

mice. B16F10 or PDAC-4662 cells were injected subcutaneously. When tumors were either palpable or seven days after tail vein injection,
mice were randomized into either treadmill running or no exercise groups. B16F10 or PDAC-4662 tumor volumes were measured on the
indicated days and are shown as the mean +/– S.E.M., *p < 0.05, n = 5–6 per group. (B) Tumor growth in exercised or non-exercised mice
with or without chemotherapy. When B16F10 or PDAC-4662 tumors were palpable, wild type mice were treated with 2 mg/kg doxorubicin
or 45 mg/kg gemcitabine weekly, with or without treadmill running. Tumor volume was measured on the indicated days and is shown as
mean +/– S.E.M., *p < 0.05, n = 5 per group. (C) Tumor growth of PDAC-4662 flank tumors in mice treated with or without the antihypertensive drug and gemcitabine. PDAC-4662 tumor bearing mice were treated with prazosin, gemcitabine, or both. Tumor volumes
were measured on the indicated days and are shown as mean +/– S.E.M, n = 3 for control, 4–5 for other groups, *p ≤ 0.01.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

65432

Oncotarget

[18], we examined whether the angiogenic secretome
was altered due to increased blood flow by utilizing a
microfluidic blood vessel model [19]. In this model, ECs
form a lumenized tube through a collagen matrix and sprout
outward into the collagen under controlled fluid flow, which
mimics increased blood velocity that occurs during exercise
(Supplementary Figure S2B). Addition of serum from
tumor-bearing exercised mice, but not tumor-bearing nonexercised mice, significantly suppressed mouse lung EC
sprouting and decreased the average sprout length by 83%,

consistent with vascular maturation (Figure 4D). Similarly,
serum from exercised but not non-exercised tumor-bearing
mice inhibited EC growth and tube formation in Matrigel
(Supplementary Figure S2C, S2D).
Serum contains angiogenic factors from several
cellular sources besides ECs, and secretion of angiogenic
factors occurs in response to numerous cues. To investigate
the mechanical cues associated with exercise-increased
blood flow, we exposed ECs to fluid flow at 0, 0.8, or 8
dynes/cm2 of shear stress in our microfluidic devices. We

Figure 3: Exercise increases delivery of chemotherapy to the tumor. (A, B) Representative images and quantification of (A)

γH2AX (red) or (B) Ki67 (red) immunostaining on PDAC-4662 flank tumors harvested from mice after treatment with gemcitabine with
and without exercise. Nuclei = blue, DAPI, n = 3–5 tumors per group, *p < 0.05, Bar = 50 μm (A) or 100 μm (B). (C) Quantification of
doxorubicin in B16F10 flank tumors harvested from mice after chronic or acute exercise. B16F10 tumor-bearing mice were exercised for
2 weeks (chronic) followed by doxorubicin treatment 72 hours after exercise completion, then euthanasia. For acute exercise, mice were
treated with doxorubicin when tumors were ~100 mm3 then subjected to 1 session of treadmill running followed by euthanasia. Doxorubicin
within tumors was quantified by spectrophotometry and normalized against tumors from mice that did not receive doxorubicin. *p < 0.05,
n = 4 or 6 per group.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

65433

Oncotarget

TSP-1 is upregulated after increased shear stress
through activation of calcineurin-NFAT

collected media after it passed through the EC lumen in
these microfluidic devices. This shear stress-conditioned
media was added to naïve ECs, and proliferation and tube
formation were examined. While non- conditioned media
had no effect on either proliferation or tube formation,
the addition of media conditioned by ECs exposed to
either low or high shear stress inhibited growth and tube
formation of naïve ECs (Figure 4E, 4F).

Screening both conditioned media from ECs after
exposure to shear stress in vitro and serum harvested
from tumor bearing-mice after aerobic exercise identified
4 angiogenic factors that were increased in both the
conditioned media and serum (Supplementary Figure

Figure 4: Exercise-induced tumor vascular remodeling is mediated in an endothelial cell autonomous manner. (A)

Representative image of Masson’s trichome staining of PDAC-4662 tumors from exercised or non-exercised mice. (B) Quantification of for
α-SMA and CD31 immunofluorescence of B16F10 tumors from exercised or non-exercised mice. Graph shows the average α-SMA:CD31
ratio +/– S.E.M for individual tumors, n = 4–5, bar = 100 μm. (C) Representative images and quantification of isolectin-B4 and CD31
in Matrigel plugs. Matrigel plugs with ECs harvested from mice after 7 days of exercise or non-exercise control were immunostained
for isolectin-B4 (red), CD31 (green), and DAPI (blue), n = 4, * p < 0.05, Bars = 50 μm. (D) Representative images of EC sprouting in a
microfluidic device in vitro after exposure to circulating media containing serum from exercised or non-exercised mice. Average sprout
length was quantified after 24 hours, shown as the mean +/– S.E.M., *p < 0.05, n = 3. (E) Proliferation of naïve ECs at the indicated
days in media conditioned by ECs after exposure to either no, low or high shear stress for 24 hours. Data are shown as mean +/– S.E.M.,
*p < 0.05, n = 3. (F) Images of Matrigel tube formation by naïve ECs in conditioned media harvested from ECs exposed to either no or
high shear stress, Bar = 50 μm.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

65434

Oncotarget

S2E). Three of these, VEGF-A, osteopontin, and MIP1a,
are linked to the transcription factor Nuclear Factor of
Activated T cells (NFAT). VEGF-A and osteopontin
activate NFAT, while MIP1a is transcriptionally
induced by NFAT [12, 20, 21]. We and others have
previously shown that the calcineurin-NFAT pathway is a
downstream mediator of VEGF signaling and plays a key
role in EC activation [12, 22, 23]. Calcineurin, a ser/thr
phosphatase activated by increased intracellular calcium,
dephosphorylates the NFAT family of transcription factors
leading to NFAT nuclear import [24]. Increased shear
stress causes an influx of calcium and high intracellular
calcium in ECs [25]. Exposure of ECs to shear stress
increased calcineurin-NFAT activation as evidenced by
NFATc1 nuclear localization (Figure 5A). Additionally,
exposure of ECs to shear stress specifically increased the
expression of the NFAT targets cyclooxygenase 2 and
Rnd1, both of which have been previously reported to be
shear responsive, but not the NFAT regulated gene Cxcr7,
a gene unaffected by shear stress (Figure 5B). Inhibiting
the calcineurin-NFAT pathway pharmacologically by
treating B16F10 tumor bearing-mice with the specific
calcineurin inhibitor cyclosporin A, prevented exercisemediated increased tumor growth. Cyclsoporin A treatment
also abrogated the increased efficacy of doxorubicin when
combined with aerobic exercise (Figure 5C). Similarly,
PDAC-4662 tumors grown in Dscr1 transgenic mice
[22], in which calcineurin-NFAT signaling is inhibited by
increased expression of DSCR1, an endogenous inhibitor
of calcineurin, showed no increased gemcitabine efficacy
with the addition of exercise (Figure 5D) and no change
in microvessel density, average vessel length, or total
numbers of lumens (Figure 5E).
Approaches to normalize tumor vasculature have
primarily focused on decreasing pro-angiogenic proteins
in the tumor microenvironment. However, upregulation of
anti-angiogenic factors to restore the angiogenic balance
has been shown to promote vascular normalization [26].
The potent anti-angiogenic protein thrombospondin-1
(TSP-1), is a direct transcriptional target of NFAT [27, 28]
and was significantly upregulated in ECs after exposure
to shear stress (Figure 6A) and in the lungs after chronic
exercise (Figure 6B). Exposure of ECs to shear stress in
vitro mimics the increased blood flow that occurs during
exercise in vivo. In contrast to conditioned media from
wild-type ECs, conditioned media from Tsp1–/– ECs after
exposure to shear stress did not inhibit proliferation of
naïve wild-type ECs (Figure 6C). The necessity for TSP1 in exercise-induced tumor vessel normalization was
evidenced by the lack of difference in chemotherapeutic
efficacy with aerobic exercise in tumor bearing Tsp1–
/–
mice (Figure 6D; [29]) and the lack of vascular
normalization in tumors from these mice (Figure 6E).
TSP-1 is expressed by numerous cell types, thus to
specifically examine the contribution of EC-derived TSP-1
towards tumor vascular normalization, we generated Tspfl/fl
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

mice and bred them to VE-cadherin-Cre transgenic mice
[30]. After confirmation of TSP-1 deletion specifically in
ECs (Supplementary Figure S3A), we inoculated Tspfl/fl;
VE-cadherin-Cre mice with PDAC-4662 tumors and
examined tumor growth during gemcitabine treatment
with or without exercise. In these mice, the addition of
exercise training during chemotherapy did not increase the
efficacy of gemcitabine against PDAC tumors (Figure 6F),
confirming the requirement for EC-derived TSP-1.

DISCUSSION
Improved chemotherapy delivery through tumor
vascular normalization has proven effective in multiple
mouse models of cancer and in patients, but vascular
normalization using anti-angiogenic agents has not
gained wide clinical use due a small window of efficacy
and significant adverse side effects [4, 16]. Therefore,
normalizing tumor vasculature by modulating blood
flow through aerobic exercise has clinical implications.
While the importance of blood flow during developmental
angiogenesis is appreciated, the role of shear stress created
by flow during tumor angiogenesis is not well understood.
Aerobic exercise has been shown to improve tumor
vessel function and chemotherapy delivery in models
of mammary and prostate cancer, but the underlying
mechanisms mediating these effects are not known [8–
10, 16]. We used moderate intensity treadmill running
to demonstrate that exercise significantly enhances the
efficacy of chemotherapy in mouse models of cancer
due to vascular normalization. Increased blood flow due
to aerobic exercise triggered the remodeling of tumor
vessels to a more functional state. We identify a previously
unknown shear stress-responsive pathway in ECs,
calcineurin-NFAT-TSP-1 signaling, and demonstrate that
TSP-1 expression is critical for exercise-induced tumor
vascular normalization.
Aerobic exercise alone increased the rate of
B16F10 melanoma growth yet had modest effects on the
growth of PDAC tumors. This is consistent with reports
of tumor-specific effects of exercise on tumor growth,
where exercise alone was sufficient to inhibit mammary
carcinoma growth but had no effect on prostate tumor
growth in mice [10, 16]. However, importantly, exercise
in combination with chemotherapy showed enhanced
anti-tumor efficacy of both tumor types. Using aerobic
exercise as a non-pharmacologic method for remodeling
tumor vasculature may circumvent the challenges
associated with anti-angiogenic therapies currently in
clinical use. In addition to the associated adverse side
effects [31], pharmacologic angiogenesis inhibitors have
a small therapeutic window; low doses are ineffective and
high doses deplete too many vessels leaving insufficient
vasculature. Over-pruning of vessels impedes drug delivery
and increases tumor hypoxia, often making tumor cells
more aggressive and possibly increasing metastasis [32]. In
65435

Oncotarget

flow during aerobic exercise. Using an in vitro model of
shear stress to mimic increased blood flow by exercise,
we identified activation of the transcription factor NFATc1
in ECs as important for vascular remodeling in response
to shear stress. We found that in response to increased
shear, activation of calcineurin-NFAT signaling in ECs
upregulates the anti-angiogenic protein TSP-1. Altering the
expression of secreted angiogenic factors allows cross-talk

contrast, it is unlikely that exercise will over-prune tumor
vasculature because blood vessels respond to chronic
exercise by maturing and then becoming quiescent [33].
Prior studies have demonstrated that exercise
increases blood perfusion to tumors [9, 10], however the
mechanism by which vascular remodeling occurs is not
understood. Our work indicates that normalization of
tumor vasculature underlies the increased tumor blood

Figure 5: NFAT is necessary for vascular normalization by exercise-induced shear stress. (A) Representative images of

immunofluorescence for NFATc1 (red) and nuclei (DAPI;blue) on mLung ECs after exposure to shear stress for 8 minutes in vitro. The
percent of nuclear NFATc1 was quantified for 4 random fields per sample to achieve one value per sample, and is shown as the mean +/–
S.E.M *p < 0.05, n = 3, Bars = 50 μm. (B) qPCR analysis for Cox2, Cxcr7, and Rnd1 in ECs exposed to 24 hours shear stress. mRNA
normalized to 18s RNA, +/– S.E.M., *p < 0.05, n = 3. (C) B16F10 tumor volumes in wild type mice treated with cyclosporin A, with
or without doxorubicin and treadmill running, as indicated. B16F10 cells were injected subcutaneously into WT mice and all mice were
treated with cyclosporine A. After tumors were palpable, mice were randomized into either treadmill running or no exercise groups with
or without 2mg/kg doxorubicin weekly. Tumor volumes were measured on the indicated days Data are mean +/– S.E.M., n = 5. (D) Tumor
growth in Dscr1 transgenic (Tg) mice. PDAC-4662 cells were injected subcutaneously into Dscr1 Tg mice. After tumors were palpable,
mice were randomized into either treadmill running or no exercise groups. Tumor volumes were measured on the indicated days and are
shown as the mean +/– S.E.M., *p < 0.05, n = 5 per group. (E) Quantification of vascular normalization. PDAC-4662 tumors from Dscr1
Tg mice were assessed by immunofluorescence staining for microvessel density, lumens per field, and mean vessel length. 5 sections per
tumor were quantified and used to obtain one value per tumor. Each marker represents one tumor, n = 5, not significant.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

65436

Oncotarget

between ECs experiencing shear stress and ECs in regions
of disrupted shear, promoting vascular normalization.
Indeed, conditioned media from ECs exposed to shear
stress or serum from exercised mice inhibited proliferation
of naïve ECs in a TSP-1 dependent manner.
To date, most studies of vascular normalization have
focused on decreasing pro-angiogenic factors produced
by many cell types in the tumor microenvironment
[34]. However, it was unknown whether modulation
of angiogenic factors produced by ECs alone would be
sufficient to overcome the pro-angiogenic growth factor
milieu secreted by tumor cells. Further, increasing

endogenous anti-angiogenic protein expression to restore
the angiogenic balance has not been explored. We
generated transgenic mice with EC specific loss of Tsp1 to
demonstrate that EC-derived TSP-1 is necessary for tumor
vascular normalization in response to exercise.
Exercise did not improve chemotherapeutic efficacy
in mice lacking Tsp1 systemically or specifically in the
endothelium. Tumors grown in these mice had more
open lumens than tumors from wild type mice even
without treatment, consistent with previous reports of
dilated tumor vessels in Tsp1–/– mice [35]. This suggests
the possibility that vessels in Tsp1–/– mice do not respond

Figure 6: Endothelial-derived TSP-1 is critical for increased chemotherapeutic efficacy by shear stress. (A) Immunoblots

for TSP-1 expression by mouse lung ECs after exposure to 0 or 24 hours of shear stress (8 dynes/cm2). Actin was probed as a loading
control. (B) Immunoblot for TSP-1 expression by lungs from wild-type mice exercised for two weeks with actin as a loading control. Each
lane is a lung from one mouse. TSP-1 expression is quantified relative to actin, n = 5, *p < 0.05. (C) Proliferation of wild type or Tsp1–/–
ECs in conditioned media from wild type or Tsp1–/– mLung ECs after exposure to 0 or 24 hours of shear stress. Data are represented as
mean +/– S.E.M., n = 3, *p < 0.05. (D) Tumor growth in Tsp1–/– mice. PDAC-4662 cells were inoculated in the flanks of Tsp1–/– mice. Mice
were treated with gemcitabine with or without exercise by the same protocol used in wild type mice for Figure 2. Tumor volumes shown
as mean +/– S.E.M., n = 4, not significant. (E) Quantification of vascular normalization on tumors from Tsp1–/– mice. PDAC-4662 tumors
from Tsp1–/– mice treated with exercise or non-exercise control were assessed by immunofluorescence staining for vessels >100 μm and the
number of visible lumens per field. 5 sections per tumor were quantified and used to obtain one value per tumor. Each marker represents
one tumor, n = 4, not significant. (F) PDAC-4662 flank tumor growth in VE-cadherin-Cre; Tsp1fl/fl mice. PDAC-4662 cells were inoculated
into VE-cadherin-Cre; Tsp1fl/fl mice. When tumors were palpable, mice were treated with gemcitabine with or without exercise. Data are
average tumor volumes +/–S.E.M. on the indicated days, n = 5, not significant.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

65437

Oncotarget

to exercise because they are already maximally dilated,
although vessel structure does not always correlate with
function in tumors. Endothelial TSP-1 may be necessary
to mediate exercise-induced changes in vessel function
independent of its effect on vessel dilation or lumens.
Moderate intensity treadmill running in mice,
roughly the equivalent of brisk walking in humans at
approximately 60–70% V02 max [36], enhanced the
efficacy of chemotherapy. The addition of exercise during
chemotherapy allowed a 50% reduction in the dose of
gemcitabine while retaining the same anti-tumor efficacy
as standard gemcitabine dosing. Together with other
studies demonstrating safety and feasibility of exercise
regimens for patients undergoing cancer treatment, our
findings represent a mechanistic explanation of an easily
translatable intervention that is likely to have large clinical
impact.

volume, mice began treatment. For PDAC tumor-bearing
mice, the exercise and exercise plus chemotherapy
groups performed 45 minutes of treadmill running for
5 consecutive days per week at 12  m/min. For PDAC
tumor-bearing mice, gemcitabine was delivered by tail
vein injection 3 times per week. For B16F10 tumorbearing mice, the exercise and exercise plus doxorubicin
groups performed 45 minutes of treadmill running for 5
consecutive days per week at 10 m/min. Mice received
2  mg/kg of doxorubicin by tail vein injection once per
week. At the end of each experiment, 72 hours after the
final exercise session, mice were euthanized, tumors
harvested and fixed in formalin or frozen in OCT. Mice
were given prazosin hydrochloride (50  mg/L in water)
(Sigma) beginning on the day of tumor inoculation with
prazosin replaced every other day. Cyclosporin A (10 mg/
kg in peanut oil) (Teva Czech Industries) was delivered
daily by oral gavage beginning 5 days before tumor cell
implantation. Statistical analysis for all experiments is
explained in Supplemental Methods.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Cell culture

Doxorubicin quantification

B16F10 cells were from ATCC. PDAC-4662 were
isolated from pancreatic tumors of KrasLSL-G12D/;Trp53LSLR172H/+
;Pdx1-Cre (KPC) mice and were provided by Dr.
Robert Vonderheide (University of Pennsylvania School
of Medicine). Primary mouse lung endothelial cells were
isolated from mice using CD31 magnetic bead positive
selection, as described previously [28]. Culture conditions
described in supplemental methods. Exposure to fluid
flow using the microfluidics lumenized endothelial cell
device has been described [19]. Cells were exposed to
0.8 (low) or 8.0 (high) dynes/cm2 of shear stress for 24
hours. Conditioned media was collected after flowing
through the lumen once. For RNA or protein harvest and
for immunofluorescence, cells were exposed to fluid flow
(~10 dynes/cm2 of shear stress) for the indicated time
using a modified 100 mm plate in which cells are plated
only on the outer rim and placed on an orbital rotator
plane, as described in [37].

Mice were inoculated with B16F10 tumors and
injected with 10 mg/kg doxorubicin via tail vein 72 hours
after the last exercise session. Twenty minutes later, mice
were euthanized and tumors were immediately harvested,
weighed, and homogenized in acid isoproponal/Triton-X
as described [38]. Doxorubicin fluorescence was read
using a spectrophotometer (λ = 488) and compared to
a standard curve, then normalized against the weight of
tumor input and the background reading of a tumor from a
mouse that received no doxorubicin.

Immunofluorescence staining
Detailed methods can be found in supplemental
methods. Antibodies include: rat anti-mouse CD31,
1:50 (BD Pharmingen); mouse anti-mouse alpha smooth
muscle actin, 1:100, (Abcam); rabbit anti-mouse γH2AX,
1:750 (Millipore); rabbit anti-mouse Ki67, 1:250 (Novus);
rabbit anti-human CD3, 1:200 (Dako).
For quantification, 5 random 10× magnification
pictures were taken of each slide and the area of CD31+
structures, number of visible lumens, vessels, and vessels
> 100 μm was counted. Values for each of the 5 sections
were averaged to obtain one value for each tumor. Individual
averages for all tumors within a treatment group were then
averaged to determine the group average and SEM.

Animal experiments
All animal experiments were approved by the
University of Pennsylvania Institutional Animal Care
and Use Committee. Mice were 6–8 weeks old and sexmatched within each experiment. Wild-type mice were bred
from C57Bl/6J obtained from Jackson Laboratories. Dscr1
transgenic mice on a C57Bl/6 background are described in
[22]. Tsp1–/– mice on a C57Bl/6 background were obtained
from Dr. Jack Lawler (Beth Israel Deaconess Medical
Center, Boston, MA) [29]. VE-Cadherin–Cre mice were
obtained from Dr. Luisa Iruela- Arispe [30].
300,000 tumor cells in 200 μl PBS were injected
subcutaneously into the flanks of mice. When tumors
reached ~35 mm3 (4–7 days post injection) or at indicated
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Matrigel tube formation assay
WT and Tsp1–/– mouse lung ECs were exposed
to shear stress using our lumenized EC tube device
(described above) for 24 hours. Conditioned media was
collected, centrifuged, and used for EC tube formation
65438

Oncotarget

assays. Detailed methods for tube formation assay and
Matrigel in mice can be found in supplemental methods.

  9.	 McCullough DJ, Stabley JN, Siemann DW, Behnke BJ.
Modulation of Blood Flow, Hypoxia, and Vascular Function
in Orthotopic Prostate Tumors During Exercise. J Natl
Cancer Inst. 2014; 106.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

10.	 Betof AS, Lascola CD, Weitzel DH, Landon CD,
Scarbrough  PM, Devi GR, Palmer GM, Jones LW,
Dewhirst  MW. Modulation of Murine Breast Tumor
Vascularity, Hypoxia, and Chemotherapeutic Response by
Exercise. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2015; 107.

We are grateful to Joseph Libonati, PhD for helpful
scientific discussions.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST

11.	 Urso K, Alfranca A, Martínez-Martínez S, Escolano A,
Ortega I, Rodríguez A, Redondo JM. NFATc3 regulates
the transcription of genes involved in T-cell activation and
angiogenesis. Blood. 2011; 118:795–803.

None.

GRANT SUPPORT

12.	 Minami T, Jiang S, Schadler K, Suehiro J-i, Osawa T,
Oike Y, Miura M, Naito M, Kodama T, Ryeom S. The
Calcineurin-NFAT-Angiopoietin-2 Signaling Axis in Lung
Endothelium Is Critical for the Establishment of Lung
Metastases. Cell Reports. 2013; 4:709–723.

This work was supported by the National Cancer
Institute of National Institutes of Health T32CA009140
(KLS) and pilot funding from parent U54-CA155850 (SR
and KLS), the American Heart Association Post-Doctoral
Fellowship 14POST20450102 (PAG), the National
Institutes of Health R01EB00262 and R01HL115553
(CAC) and R01CA118374 (SR), The Garrett B. Smith
Foundation, and TedDriven Foundation (SR).

13.	 Suh GY, Les A, Tenforde A, Shadden S, Spilker R, Yeung J,
Cheng C, Herfkens R, Dalman R, Taylor C. Hemodynamic
Changes Quantified in Abdominal Aortic Aneurysms with
Increasing Exercise Intensity Using MR Exercise Imaging
and Image-Based Computational Fluid Dynamics. Ann
Biomed Eng. 2011; 39:2186–2202.

REFERENCES

14.	 Mille-Hamard L, Billat V, Henry E, Bonnamy B, Joly F,
Benech P, Barrey E. Skeletal muscle alterations and exercise
performance decrease in erythropoietin-deficient mice: a
comparative study. BMC Med Genomics. 2012; 5:29.

1.	 Jain RK. Determinants of Tumor Blood Flow: A Review.
Cancer Res. 1988; 48:2641–2658.
2.	 Jain RK. Normalization of Tumor Vasculature: An
Emerging Concept in Antiangiogenic Therapy. Science.
2005; 307:58–62.
3.	 Ma J, Waxman DJ. Combination of antiangiogenesis with
chemotherapy for more effective cancer treatment. Mol
Cancer Ther. 2008; 7:3670–3684.
4.	 Batchelor TT, Gerstner ER, Emblem KE, Duda DG,
Kalpathy-Cramer J, Snuderl M, Ancukiewicz M,
Polaskova P, Pinho MC, Jennings D, Plotkin SR, Chi AS,
Eichler AF, et al. Improved tumor oxygenation and survival
in glioblastoma patients who show increased blood
perfusion after cediranib and chemoradiation. PNAS. 2013;
110:19059–19064.
5.	 Bergers G, Hanahan D. Modes of resistance to antiangiogenic therapy. Nat Rev Cancer. 2008; 8:592–603.
6.	 Chen HM, Tsai CM, Wu YC, Lin KC, Lin CC. Randomised
controlled trial on the effectiveness of home-based
walking exercise on anxiety, depression and cancer-related
symptoms in patients with lung cancer. Br J Cancer. 2015;
112:438–45.
7.	 Brown JC, Winters-Stone K, Lee A, Schmitz KH.
Cancer, Physical Activity, and Exercise. Comprehensive
Physiology: John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 2012.
8.	 Jones LW, Viglianti BL, Tashjian JA, Kothadia SM, Keir ST,
Freedland SJ, Potter MQ, Jung Moon E, Schroeder  T,
Herndon JE, Dewhirst MW. Effect of aerobic exercise on
tumor physiology in an animal model of human breast
cancer. J Appl Physiol. 2010; 108:343–348.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

15.	 Sturgeon K, Schadler K, Muthukumaran G, Ding D,
Bajulaiye A, Thomas NJ, Ferrari V, Ryeom S, Libonati JR.
Concomitant low-dose doxorubicin treatment and
exercise. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol. 2014;
307:R685–R692.
16.	 Jones LW, Antonelli J, Masko EM, Broadwater G,
Lascola  CD, Fels D, Dewhirst MW, Dyck JRB,
Nagendran J, Flores CT, Betof AS, Nelson ER, Pollak M,
et al. Exercise modulation of the host-tumor interaction
in an orthotopic model of murine prostate cancer. J Appl
Physiol. 2012; 113:263–272.
17.	 Milkiewicz M, Brown MD, Egginton S, Hudlicka O.
Association between Shear Stress, Angiogenesis, and VEGF in
Skeletal Muscles In Vivo. Microcirculation. 2001; 8:229–241.
18.	 Benjamin LE, Golijanin D, Itin A, Pode D, Keshet E.
Selective ablation of immature blood vessels in established
human tumors follows vascular endothelial growth factor
withdrawal. J Clin Invest. 1999; 103:159–165.
19.	 Galie PA, Nguyen DHT, Choi CK, Cohen DM, Janmey PA,
Chen CS. Fluid shear stress threshold regulates angiogenic
sprouting. PNAS. 2014; 111:7968–7973.
20.	 Tanabe N, Wheal BD, Kwon J, Chen HH, Shugg RPP,
Sims  SM, Goldberg HA, Dixon SJ. Osteopontin signals
through calcium and nuclear factor of activated T cells (NFAT)
in osteoclasts: a novel RGD-dependent pathway promoting
cell survival. J Biol Chem. 2011; 286:39871–39881.

65439

Oncotarget

21.	 Macián F, García-Rodríguez C, Rao A. Gene expression
elicited by NFAT in the presence or absence of cooperative
recruitment of Fos and Jun. EMBO J. 2000; 19:4783–4795.

30.	 Alva JA, Zovein AC, Monvoisin A, Murphy T, Salazar A,
Harvey NL, Carmeliet P, Iruela-Arispe ML. VE-CadherinCre-recombinase transgenic mouse: A tool for lineage
analysis and gene deletion in endothelial cells. Dev Dynam.
2006; 235:759–767.

22.	 Baek KH, Zaslavsky A, Lynch RC, Britt C, Okada Y,
Siarey  RJ, Lensch MW, Park IH, Yoon SS, Minami  T,
Korenberg JR, Folkman J, Daley GQ, et al. Down’s
syndrome suppression of tumour growth and the role of the
calcineurin inhibitor DSCR1. Nature. 2009; 459:1126–1130.

31.	 Elice F, Rodeghiero F. Side effects of anti-angiogenic drugs.
Thromb Res. 2012; 129:S50–S53.
32.	 Pàez-Ribes M, Allen E, Hudock J, Takeda T, Okuyama H,
Viñals F, Inoue M, Bergers G, Hanahan D, Casanovas O.
Antiangiogenic Therapy Elicits Malignant Progression of
Tumors to Increased Local Invasion and Distant Metastasis.
Cancer cell. 2009; 15:220–231.

23.	 Mena MP, Papiewska-Pajak I, Przygodzka P, Kozaczuk A,
Boncela J, Cierniewski CS. NFAT2 regulates COX-2
expression and modulates the integrin repertoire in endothelial
cells at the crossroads of angiogenesis and inflammation. Exp
Cell Res. 2014; 324:124–136.

33.	 Di Francescomarino S, Sciartilli A, Di Valerio V, Di
Baldassarre A, Gallina S. The Effect of Physical Exercise
on Endothelial Function. Sports Med. 2009; 39:797–812.

24.	 Müller MR, Rao A. NFAT, immunity and cancer: a
transcription factor comes of age. Nat Rev Immunol. 2010;
10:645–656.

34.	 Grivennikov SI, Greten FR, Karin M. Immunity,
Inflammation, and Cancer. Cell. 2010; 140:883–899.

25.	 Ando J, Yamamoto K. Flow detection and calcium
signalling in vascular endothelial cells. Cardiovasc Res.
2013; 99:260–268.

35.	 Rodríguez-Manzaneque JC, Lane TF, Ortega MA,
Hynes RO, Lawler J, Iruela-Arispe ML. Thrombospondin-1
suppresses spontaneous tumor growth and inhibits
activation of matrix metalloproteinase-9 and mobilization
of vascular endothelial growth factor. PNAS. 2001;
98:12485–12490.

26.	 Russell S, Duquette M, Liu J, Drapkin R, Lawler J, Petrik
J. Combined therapy with thrombospondin-1 type I
repeats (3TSR) and chemotherapy induces regression and
significantly improves survival in a preclinical model of
advanced stage epithelial ovarian cancer. FASEB J. 2015;
29:576–588.

36.	 Schefer V, Talan MI. Oxygen consumption in adult and aged
C57BL/6J mice during acute treadmill exercise of different
intensity. Exp Geront. 1996; 31:387–392.

27.	 Schadler KL, Crosby EJ, Zhou AY, Bhang DH, Braunstein L,
Baek KH, Crawford D, Crawford A, Angelosanto
J, Wherry EJ, Ryeom S. Immunosurveillance by
Antiangiogenesis: Tumor Growth Arrest by T Cell–Derived
Thrombospondin-1. Cancer Res. 2014; 74:2171–2181.

37.	 dela Paz NG, Walshe TE, Leach LL, Saint-Geniez  M,
D’Amore PA. Role of shear-stress-induced VEGF
expression in endothelial cell survival. J Cell Sci. 2012;
125:831–843.

28.	 Lee JH, Bhang Dong H, Beede A, Huang Tian L, Stripp
Barry  R, Bloch Kenneth  D, Wagers Amy  J, Tseng Y-H,
Ryeom S, Kim Carla F. Lung Stem Cell Differentiation in
Mice Directed by Endothelial Cells via a BMP4-NFATc1Thrombospondin-1 Axis. Cell. 2014; 156:440–455.

38.	 Laginha KM, Verwoert S, Charrois GJR, Allen TM.
Determination of Doxorubicin Levels in Whole Tumor
and Tumor Nuclei in Murine Breast Cancer Tumors. Clin
Cancer Res. 2005; 11:6944–6949.

29.	 Lawler J, Sunday M, Thibert V, Duquette M, George EL,
Rayburn H, Hynes RO. Thrombospondin-1 is required for
normal murine pulmonary homeostasis and its absence
causes pneumonia. J Clin Invest. 1998; 101:982–992.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

65440

Oncotarget

