www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Oncotarget, 2017, Vol. 8, (No. 12), pp: 19323-19341
Research Paper

Secreted heat shock protein 90 promotes prostate cancer stem
cell heterogeneity
Krystal D. Nolan1,*, Jasmine Kaur1,*, Jennifer S. Isaacs1
1

Department of Cell and Molecular Pharmacology, Medical University of South Carolina, Hollings Cancer Center, Charleston,
SC, USA

*

These authors have contributed equally to this work

Correspondence to: Jennifer S. Isaacs, email: isaacsj@musc.edu
Keywords: Hsp90, cancer stem cells, prostaspheres, epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT)
Received: October 20, 2016     Accepted: December 05, 2016     Published: December 27, 2016

ABSTRACT
Heat-shock protein 90 (Hsp90), a highly conserved molecular chaperone, is
frequently upregulated in tumors, and remains an attractive anti-cancer target. Hsp90
is also found extracellularly, particularly in tumor models. Although extracellular
Hsp90 (eHsp90) action is not well defined, eHsp90 targeting attenuates tumor
invasion and metastasis, supporting its unique role in tumor progression. We herein
investigated the potential role of eHsp90 as a modulator of cancer stem-like cells
(CSCs) in prostate cancer (PCa). We report a novel function for eHsp90 as a facilitator
of PCa stemness, determined by its ability to upregulate stem-like markers, promote
self-renewal, and enhance prostasphere growth. Moreover, eHsp90 increased the
side population typically correlated with the drug-resistant phenotype. Intriguingly,
tumor cells with elevated surface eHsp90 exhibited a marked increase in stem-like
markers coincident with increased expression of the epithelial to mesenchymal
(EMT) effector Snail, indicating that surface eHsp90 may enrich for a unique CSC
population. Our analysis of distinct effectors modulating the eHsp90-dependent CSC
phenotyperevealed that eHsp90 is a likely facilitator of stem cell heterogeneity. Taken
together, our findings provide unique functional insights into eHsp90 as a modulator
of PCa plasticity, and provide a framework towards understanding its role as a driver
of tumor progression.

of stem-like cells within the rat prostate to regenerate
after castration-induced atrophy [7]. Furthermore, this
regenerative population is enriched for stem-like surface
markers [8], supporting the premise that, within a cancer
context, distinct cell populations endowed with stem-like
properties are essential for tumor regrowth.
The epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT)
developmental pathway has been causally linked with
increased tumor invasion, metastasis and therapeutic
resistance [9–12]. EMT activation also notoriously
increases cellular plasticity [13, 14], along with cell
populations endowed with stem-like properties [15],
a feature that promotes tumor chemoresistance and
contributes to treatment failure [10, 13, 16, 17]]. Within
the context of prostate cancer (PCa), EMT activation has
been linked with the development of cell populations with
stem cell signatures [18]. This has particular significance

INTRODUCTION
Metastasis is the major cause of cancer associated
mortality. A prevailing view is that this dissemination
and ensuing proliferation of cancer cells at distal sites is
executed by a small population of cancer stem-like cells
(CSCs) that harbor regenerative potential and tumour
initiating properties. Although tumour initiating or CSCs
were first identified in leukemia more than two decades
ago [1], subsequent studies have recognized the presence
and importance of these cells in a variety of tumor
settings, including breast and prostate cancers [2, 3].
Numerous reports suggest that specific CSC-associated
gene targets correlate with the self-renewal and metastatic
potential of cancer cells [4–6]. Within the prostate, the
existence of epithelial stem cells was first illustrated
by Isaacs et al., wherein they established the ability

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

19323

Oncotarget

for PCa treatment, given that cancer lethality is primarily
due to tumor recurrence following development of
castrate resistant prostate cancer (CRPC) [19]. Of further
relevance, EMT activation has been observed in the
prostate following androgen-deprivation therapy [20], and
PCa tumor cells with diminished expression of Androgen
Receptor (AR) have been characterized as harboring both
mesenchymal and cancer stem cell (CSC) properties,
including tumor initiation [21, 22].
Heat-shock protein 90 (Hsp90), a highly conserved
molecular chaperone, is frequently upregulated in tumors
[23], and has been an attractive molecular target for
pharmacological intervention [24]. Despite this clinical
interest, a potential role for Hsp90 as a regulator of CSCs
has not been well studied. A handful of reports implicate
Hsp90 in maintaining the cancer stem phenotype [25–27],
which may be due in part to its physical interaction with
a cohort of CSC facilitators [28–30]. However, in nonmalignant conditions, Hsp90 inhibition has been shown to
protect the stem cell niche [31], indicating the possibility
of a context dependent role for the chaperone.
In addition to its intracellular localization, Hsp90
has also been reported in the extracellular space, a trend
frequently observed in tumor models. This extracellular
Hsp90 (eHsp90) may be found either in a secreted form
or on the cell surface [32, 33]. Although the functions of
eHsp90 are not well defined, its targeting across multiple
tumor models via use of impermeant blocking antibodies
or nonpermeable small molecules attenuates tumor
cell motility and invasion in vitro [34, 35], and blocks
invasion and metastasis in vivo [36–39], as reviewed [33],
supporting a unique role for eHsp90 in tumor progression.
We have reported that eHsp90 enhances cellular motility,
invasion, and tumorigenicity in prostate cancer models,
which may be due to the ability of eHsp90 to initiate
EMT events [40, 41]. Given the link between EMT and
stemness, and the ability of eHsp90 to modulate EMT
events and tumor aggressiveness, we investigated the
possibility that eHsp90 may influence CSCs within PCa.
We herein report a novel function for eHsp90 as
a facilitator of cancer stemness, a premise confirmed by
utilization of several well-established assays designed
to assess cancer stem-like properties. We demonstrate
the ability of eHsp90 to upregulate a cohort of stemassociated markers. We additionally demonstrate that
eHsp90 promotes self-renewal, relevant for tissue
regeneration, and prostasphere growth, indicative of the
anchorage-independent growth associated with metastatic
propensity [42]. Of additional clinical relevance, eHsp90
increased the side population that is typically correlated
with a chemoresistant phenotype [43]. Intriguingly, tumor
cells with elevated surface eHsp90 exhibited a marked
increase in stem-like markers coincident with expression
of the EMT effector Snail, indicating that surface eHsp90
may enrich for a unique CSC population. Finally, our
collective analysis of putative effectors modulating the
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

eHsp90-dependent CSC phenotype supports the notion
that eHsp90 is a facilitator of stem cell heterogeneity.
Taken together, our findings highlight a paradigm whereby
eHsp90 orchestrates molecular and functional events to
promote PCa plasticity and tumor progression.

RESULTS
Hsp90 secretion promotes self renewal and
expression of stem-like gene targets
We have previously reported a model for directed
secretion of Hsp90, whereby Hsp90 alpha is fused to a
secretion peptide that facilitates its extracellular localization
[40]. We demonstrated that enforced Hsp90 secretion was
sufficient to induce EMT events in minimally tumorigenic
ARCaPE PCa cells [40]. In this study, we sought to evaluate
the effects of eHsp90 in an expanded prostate cancer cell
cohort. DU145 is an aggressive androgen independent
prostate cancer cell line derived from metastatic tissue
[44]. We had previously shown that targeting eHsp90 with
the small molecule inhibitor non-permeable geldanamycin
(NPGA) attenuated mesenchymal features in DU145 [45]. In
this study, we evaluated the molecular and functional effects
of enhanced eHsp90 via stable transduction with a lentiviral
construct encoding a secreted version of V5-tagged Hsp90.
As shown (Figure 1A), the exogenous V5-tagged Hsp90
protein is detected in both lysate and conditioned media
fractions derived from transduced ARCaPE and DU145,
while it is absent in the corresponding matched LacZ
controls. This result confirms that Hsp90 is being secreted
in these cell types, therefore validating the utility of these
cell models.
Given our prior work indicating that eHsp90 may
modulate EMT events [40], and the well-known link
between EMT plasticity and stem-like features [9, 14,
16], we explored the possibility that eHsp90 may affect
stem-like features in prostate cancer models. A number
of functional and molecular assays have been used to
identify distinct stem-like populations in cancer cells. We
first assessed whether eHsp90 may promote self renewal,
a property of cancer cells to proliferate and repopulate
a tumor, indicative of the general ability of a cancer
cell to proliferate and repopulate a tumor. Following an
initial round of growth under suspension conditions (P0),
single cells were seeded into low-attachment plates (P1
generation). As shown (Figure 1B), ARCaPE-eHsp90 cells
exhibited nearly a two-fold increase in sphere-forming
capacity relative to the matched ARCaPE-LacZ control
cells when progressing from P0 to P1 passages. Moreover,
the sphere forming ability was increased by almost 8-fold
when cells from the P2 generation were tested in this
assay. This marked increase is in part due to the reduced
spheroid efficiency of control (ARCaPE-LacZ) cells
(from P1 to P2), and to the enhanced spheroid efficiency
of ARCaPE-eHsp90 during similar passaging conditions.
19324

Oncotarget

Secreted Hsp90 increases prostasphere
formation

Moreover, eHsp90 increased self-renewal over 3-fold
(Figure 1C), defined as the capacity to form spheres at P2
generation relative to the P1 stage. The growth of DU145
was minimal under similar conditions and therefore, it was
not possible to achieve consistent results with this model.
We next evaluated whether Hsp90 secretion
influenced the expression of stem-like gene targets in
the ARCaPE and DU145 isogenic models. As shown
(Figures 1D, 1E), both Trop2 and Nestin were significantly
increased in ARCaPE-eHsp90 relative to LacZ control
cells, while Trop2, ID2, and MDR1 (multidrug resistance
1) were increased in DU145-eHsp90 relative to its LacZ
control. Although MDR1 is not a specific stem cell marker,
this gene, and its family members, are frequently detected
in stem cell populations in a number of cancer models
[46] including prostate [47]. These findings indicate
that, although the specific targets may vary depending
upon cellular context, eHsp90 has the general capacity to
increase stem-like properties within PCa cell models.

Self-renewing stem cells have increased potential
for forming prostaspheres, and Huang et al. have shown
that prostaspheres can form fully differentiated prostate
basal and luminal cells in vivo [48], supporting use
of this assay for CSC enrichment. Use of this assay
revealed the ability of eHsp90 to increase prostasphere
formation in ARCaPE at each passage (from P0-P3),
with significance achieved at all generations except P2
(Figure 2A). Moreover, the number of spheres generated
consistently increased from P0 to P3 generations.
Interestingly, eHsp90 had a less pronounced effect in
the DU145 model (Figure 2B). Although there was an
increase in sphere generation from P1 to passages P2
and P3, this increase was also noted in the matched
LacZ control cells. Therefore, relative to control cells,
eHsp90 was only able to elicit a statistically significant

Figure 1: Hsp90 secretion promotes self-renewal and expression of stem-like gene targets. A. ARCaPE and DU145 prostate

cancer cells were stably transduced with either a control (LacZ) plasmid or an expression construct directing the extracellular secretion of
Hsp90 (eHsp90). Protein from either total cell lystates (TCL) or conditioned media was evaluated for V5-tagged eHsp90 expression. B.
Percentage of spheres formed by ARCaPE-LacZ and ARCaPE-eHsp90 as defined by the total number of spheres generated divided by the
number of initial wells seeded with single cells from passages 1 and 2 (P1 and P2) in 96 well ultra-low attachment plates. Following 10-12
days, productive self-renewal was assessed by observation of a minimum of 5 cells per well. C. Graphical representation of the self-renewal
potential of ARCaPE, defined by the percentage of P2 spheres divided by the percentage of P1 spheres. D, E. Total RNA was isolated from
ARCaPE (D) or DU145 (E) stably transduced with either the LacZ control plasmid or the eHsp90 expression plasmid, and expression of the
indicated stem-like targets was assessed by qPCR. All statistics were performed using the Student’s t-test. * = p<0.05, ** p<0.01.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

19325

Oncotarget

increase in DU145 prostasphere formation at the P2
stage, indicating that eHsp90 has a modest effect on
prostasphere growth in this cell line.
We previously demonstrated that eHsp90 induced
the expression of Snail and EZH2 in ARCaPE [40, 45],
and similarly modulated EZH2 expression in DU145 [45].
Given the well documented roles of Snail and EZH2 as
modulators of cancer stemness [49–52], we evaluated their
potential role in eHsp90-mediated cellular plasticity. As
shown (Figure 2C), stable transduction of the indicated
models with shRNAs against Snail or EZH2 resulted in
a significant decrease in the protein expression of these
targets. Interestingly, knockdown of Snail also impacted
EZH2 expression, an effect that was reciprocally
observed with EZH2 knockdown, and in keeping with
a prior report [53]. As shown (Figure 2D), loss of Snail

protein impaired sphere formation, an effect which was
sustained through multiple generations. Surprisingly, loss
of EZH2 in ARCaPE-eHsp90 did not impair prostasphere
growth, and in fact, may have enhanced growth at P1. In
contrast, loss of Snail in DU145-eHsp90 had no effect
upon prostasphere growth, while loss of EZH2 profoundly
affected spheroid growth (Figure 2E). These data indicate
that the key effectors driving prostasphere growth
demonstrate cell-context dependent effects.

Extracellular Hsp90 enhances ALDH activity via
Snail and EZH2
To determine whether eHsp90 impacted additional
properties associated with stem cell behavior, we next
assessed the role of eHsp90 signaling on ALDH1A1

Figure 2: Secreted Hsp90 increases prostasphere formation. A, B. Representative images of prostaspheres generated at P0 (first

generation) and P3 (fourth generation) in ARCaPE-LacZ and ARCaPE-eHsp90 (A) and DU145-LacZ and DU145-eHsp90 (B). Bottom
panels depict a graphical representation of the spheres generated from P0-P3 when passaged at 2000 cells per well in a 6 well lowattachment plate. The experimental eHsp90-expressing cells were compared to LacZ controls for each respective passage number. C.
Immunoblot analysis depicting Snail and EZH2 expression in shRNA transduced ARCaPE-eHsp90 and DU145-eHsp90 cell models in
relation to the shGFP control vector. Tubulin is used as a loading control. D, E. Graphical representation of the spheres generated from
P0-P2 in ARCaPE-eHsp90 (D) and P0 in DU145-eHsp90 (E) following suppression of either Snail or EZH2. Successive generations in
DU145-eHsp90 did not produce spheres. The shSnail and shEZH2 experimentals were statistically compared against shGFP for each given
passage number. All statistics were performed using the Student’s t-test. * = p<0.05, ** p<0.01.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

19326

Oncotarget

activity. The Aldefluor assay isolates the ALDH+
population, which is highly enriched in tumor initiating
cells (TICs) in prostate and other progenitors [54], and
ALDH1 is commonly used as a marker to predict clinical
outcome in prostate cancer patients [55]. Of note, some
of the previously noted downstream effectors of eHsp90
signaling, such as Snail and EZH2, have both been linked to
ALDH1A1 expression and/or activity [50, 56, 57]. Utilizing
the established ALDEFLUOR assay, we observed that
eHsp90 significantly enhanced ALDH1A1 activity between
1.5-2 fold in both ARCaPE and DU145 (Figures 3A, 3B,
uppermost panels, and respective bottom left graphs).
Interestingly, loss of Snail more dramatically attenuated
eHsp90-dependent ALDH1A1 activity in both ARCaPE and
DU145 relative to loss of EZH2, the latter of which had a

very modest, but significant effect in ARCaPE (Figures 3A,
3B, middle panels and bottom middle graphs, experimental
controls shown in Supplementary Figure 1A). These data
support previously published findings indicating a role for
Snail regulation of ALDH1A1 activity [58, 59].
Both Snail and EZH2 may be influenced by ERK
signalling [45, 60, 61], and ERK signaling has been
further implicated in regulating prostate cancer stem
cells [62]. Given this link, along with our previous
demonstration that ERK is a critical signal integrator for
eHsp90 action [45], we assessed whether ERK targeting
impacted the eHsp90-mediated increase in ALDH1A1
activity. Surprisingly, targeting ERK with the specific
small molecule SCH-229874 (referred to as SCH) had a
very modest effect in ARCaPE-eHsp90, and essentially no

Figure 3: eHsp90 enhances ALDH activity via Snail and EZH2. A, B. Top panels show representative flow cytometry scatter

plots for the ALDEFLUOR assay of ARCaPE-LacZ relative to ARCaPE-eHsp90 (A) and DU145-LacZ relative to DU145-eHsp90 (B).
Middle panels show representative scatter plots for ARCaPE-eHsp90 and DU145-eHsp90 transduced with either an shGFP vector control,
shSnail, or shEZH2. Lower panels show representative scatter plots for ARCaPE-eHsp90 and DU145-eHsp90 treated with 100 nM SCH or
500 nM GSK343 over a 3 day period. Comparisons included eHsp90-expressing cells relative to the matched LacZ control. As indicated,
additional treatments or cell derivatives were compared relative to the matched untreated eHsp90-expressing cells. Combined analysis of
replicate assays are shown in accompanying graphs. All statistics were performed using the Student’s t-test. * = p<0.05, ** p<0.01.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

19327

Oncotarget

Blockade of eHsp90 signaling impairs
spheroidogenesis

effect in DU145-eHsp90 (Figures 3A, B, lower panels, and
right-most graphs). We further investigated the effects of
EZH2 targeting, as the pharmacologic blockade of EZH2
should be more effective relative to RNAi suppression.
EZH2 targeting with the small molecule inhibitor GSK343
resulted in nearly identical results to those produced by
shRNA-dependent targeting, thereby validating a modest,
and possibly cell-context dependent role for EZH2 in
modulation of ALDH activity. Collectively, our findings
also suggest that ERK may not represent a central
signaling portal for eHsp90 function within the context
of ALDH activity. Alternatively, Snail appears to play a
dominant role in an ERK-independent manner.

Our collective results support a role for eHsp90 as
a facilitator of prostasphere growth. We next explored the
dynamics of eHsp90, ERK and EZH2 action with respect
to their requirement for spheroid growth. The general
treatment schema is depicted in Figure 5A, wherein
treatments were evaluated either prior to initiation of
suspension conditions (Pre-treatment), targeting cells post
suspension (Post-treatment), or continuous exposure of
cells both prior to and immediately following initiation of
spheroid seeding (Contin-treatment). This treatment plan
revealed that targeting eHsp90 in ARCaPE-eHsp90 prior
to spheroid conditions, or under continuous conditions,
reduced prostasphere growth at passage P0, with the
latter condition completely preventing spheroid growth at
passage P1. Although NPGA appeared to increase sphere
number post treatment, the spheres were dramatically
smaller relative to untreated spheres (not shown).
Moroever, under Post-NPGA treatment conditions, no
spheres were recovered from the P0 to P1 passage. These
data support the notion that eHsp90 action is continuously
required for robust prostasphere growth.
A similar experimental strategy was utilized to
evaluate the requirement for ERK and EZH2 activity upon
ARCaPE-eHsp90 prostasphere growth. ERK targeting by
SCH impaired ARCaPE-eHsp90 prostasphere growth
when administered prior to suspension conditions,
consistent with its ability to attenuate prostasphere growth
under continuous conditions (Figure 5C). Given that PostSCH treatment was ineffective, our results indicate that
ERK signaling is more critical prior to sphere generation.
The effects of EZH2 targeting were unexpected. While
EZH2 targeting reduced prostasphere growth under both
pre- and post-treatment conditions, as well as under
continuous treatment, this effect was only observed for
passage P0 (Figure 5D). Upon transition from P0 to P1,
ARCaPE-eHsp90 appeared relatively resistant to EZH2
targeting, and in fact, an increase in sphere growth was
noted. Although the precise mechanism for this effect
is not clear, this result may be due to a compensatory
feedback mechanism or emergence of a more resistant
CSC population.
We next evaluated the involvement of eHsp90,
ERK and EZH2 in DU145-eHsp90 prostasphere growth.
Consistent with our results with ARCaPE-eHsp90,
eHsp90 targeting with NPGA dramatically reduced
prostasphere growth in all treatment regimens, thereby
validating its role as a critical mediator of sphere growth
and regeneration. Interestingly, ERK targeting in DU145
was most efficacious when administered after initiation
of spheroid growth (Figure 5F), in contrast to its impact
in ARCaPE-eHsp90 prior to spheroid generation. EZH2
was important for DU145-eHsp90 prostasphere growth,
demonstrated by its ability to attenuate spheroid growth

Extracellular Hsp90 increases the side
population in part through an EZH2
dependent pathway
Cancer stem-like cells demonstrate an enhanced
ability to efflux toxins and drugs, a property that
contributes to their drug resistant phenotype. These cell
types can be detected by the ‘side population’ assay, as
assessed by the extent of dye efflux [43, 63]. As shown
(Figure 4A), eHsp90 increased the dye-effluxed side
population by approximately 2-fold in eHsp90-expressing
ARCaPE and DU145 models relative to their respective
LacZ controls (experimental controls shown in Supp
Figure 2A). To further validate a functional role for
eHsp90, we determined whether the eHsp90 inhibitor
NPGA would reverse these trends. We therefore evaluated
the effects of NPGA in both DU145 and M12, the latter an
aggressive mesenchymal cell line [64] that depends upon
sustained eHsp90 signaling for a subset of its aggressive
traits [40, 45]. As shown (Figure 4B), NPGA treatment
significantly reduced the side population in both ARCaPEeHsp90 and DU145-eHsp90 models relative to their
respective LacZ controls.
We next evaluated the relative involvement of Snail,
EZH2 and ERK in regulation of the eHsp90-mediated side
population. As shown (Figure 4C, experimental controls
in Supplementary Figure 2B), the genetic suppression of
Snail or EZH2 failed to negatively impact the percentage
of cells characterized as belonging to the side population.
We next utilized pharmacologic inhibitors of ERK and
EZH2 to further validate their potential role in regulating
this cell population. Whereas genetic suppression of
EZH2 did not demonstrate a significant effect, GSK343
treatment did elicit a modest, but statistically significant
reduction in the side population in ARCaPE-eHsp90,
and exhibited a more robust effect in DU145-eHsp90
(Figure 4D). Interestingly, ERK targeting had no negative
impact upon the side population. These results indicate
that pharmacologic targeting of EZH2 more effectively
attenuated EZH2 activity relative to genetic suppression,
and that EZH2 plays a contributory role in promoting
eHsp90-dependent expansion of the side population.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

19328

Oncotarget

Increased stem marker expression in tumor cells
with elevated surface-bound Hsp90

in all treatment regimens (Figure 5G). As we were unable
to passage DU145 under these conditions beyond passage
P0, we did not observe a compensatory effect upon EZH2
targeting, as was noted in ARCaPE-eHsp90. Our data
demonstrate that eHsp90, ERK and EZH2 are important
effectors of prostasphere growth, but that they may exert
differential effects upon sphere initiation relative to
successive propagation.

Our data indicated that eHsp90 modulated several
facets associated with stem-like cell behavior. Given
that eHsp90 may be found in both secreted and cell
surface-bound forms, we next evaluated whether cells
exhibiting elevated surface-bound Hsp90 may enrich

Figure 4: eHsp90 increases the side population in part through an EZH2 dependent pathway. A. Representative flow

cytometry scatter plots for the side population of ARCaPE-LacZ relative to ARCaPE-eHsp90 and DU145-LacZ relative to DU145-eHsp90
are shown, along with graphs demonstrating the results of the combined analysis of replicate assays. B. Representative flow cytometry
scatter plots for the side population of M12 and DU145, each treated with 1 uM NPGA for 3 days. Comparisons included eHsp90expressing cells relative to the matched LacZ control (A) or drug treated relative to untreated control cells (B). Shown are quantified
results of the combined analysis of replicate assays. C. Representative flow cytometry scatter plots for the side population of ARCaPEeHsp90 and DU145-eHsp90, each stably transduced with plasmids encoding shGFP (vector control), shSnail or shEZH2 are shown, along
with graphs demonstrating the results of the combined analysis of replicate assays. D. Representative flow cytometry scatter plots for the
side population of ARCaPE-eHsp90 and DU145-eHsp90 treated with 100 nM SCH or 500 nM GSK343 over a 3 day period are shown,
along with graphs demonstrating the results of the combined analysis of replicate assays. Comparisons included eHsp90-expressing cells
relative to the matched LacZ control. As indicated, eHsp90-expressing shRNA cell derivatives were compared relative to matched shGFP
transduced cells (C), while eHsp90-expressing drug treated cells were compared to matched untreated controls (D). All statistics were
performed using the Student’s t-test. * = p<0.05, ** p<0.01.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

19329

Oncotarget

Surface-bound Hsp90 co-segregates with a
subset of PSA(lo)-expressing cells

for a stem-like cell population. As shown, incubation of
nonpermeabilized ARCaPE or DU145 cells with labeled
anti-Hsp90 alpha antibody enabled isolation of respective
populations with high and low surface Hsp90 expression
(Figure 6A). Remarkably, the stem markers Trop2 and ID2
were significantly elevated in both ARCaPE and DU145
cell populations exhibiting high surface Hsp90 expression,
while Nestin was upregulated in eHsp90-isolated ARCaPE
(Figure 6B). Interestingly, EZH2 and Snail were also
upregulated in Hsp90 surface bound cell populations
from both ARCaPE and DU145. These findings indicate
that prostate cancer cells marked with surface Hsp90
enriches for a distinct cell population that possess elevated
expression of a cohort of stem-like gene targets.

The role of stem-like cancer cells in the
development of prostate cancer is not well characterized.
Although prostate cancer is considered an androgendriven pathology, particularly in the early stages, a number
of studies have reported the existence of a cell population
with diminished AR activity, and corresponsibly reduced
prostate-specific antigen (PSA) expression [21, 65]. It has
been shown that this PSA(lo) cell population segregates
with cells exhibiting CSC features. Given our data that
surface Hsp90 may ‘mark’ a population of stem-like
prostate cancer cells (Figure 6), we next evaluated whether

Figure 5: Blockade of eHsp90 signaling impairs spheroidogenesis. A. Schematic representation of treatment regimens followed

for cells treated with either 1 uM NPGA, 100 nM SCH or 500 nM GSK343. Cells were separated into 3 treatment groups, and each group
was placed into spheroid suspension at Day 0. The pre-treatment group was subjected to the indicated inhibitors for 3 days prior to the
spheroid suspension assay. The post-treatment group was treated with the indicated inhibitors upon initial suspension into the spheroid
assay. The continuous treatment group (Contin) was pre-treated for 3 days with the indicated inhibitors, and subsequently maintained under
the specified conditions following initiation of spheroid culture. ARCaPE-eHsp90 B-D. and DU145-eHsp90 E-G. were subjected to the
indicated inhibitors and evaluated under the 3 experimental conditions as outlined in A. The number of spheres generated by each treatment
status was counted for each generation and is graphically depicted. The sphere treatments were all compared against the untreated (UT)
control sample for each given passage. All statistics were performed using the Student’s t-test for the treated versus the untreated control.
* = p<0.05, ** p<0.01.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

19330

Oncotarget

surface Hsp90 correlated with AR expression. The wellcharacterized human prostate cancer line LNCaP, as
well as the mouse line Myc-CaP [66] were utilized as
androgen-dependent cell models. To facilitate detection
of AR activity, these cell models were transduced with
plasmids encoding a PSA-GFP vector, whereby GFP
expression is driven by PSA activity [21]. This approach
allows for the isolation of GFP-expressing cell types as a
functional surrogate for AR activity.
We first confirmed detection of intact cell
populations exhibiting high and low GFP expression
(Figure 7A). We next confirmed that the respective
PSA(lo) populations were due to diminished AR activity,
rather than the result of inefficient transduction. Although
the overall activity of AR was higher in LNCaP, we
detected similar levels of GFP gene integration within
the sorted PSA(hi) and PSA(lo) populations (Figure 7B),
indicating that differences in PSA expression within these
populations were most likely reflective of AR activity,

rather than to differences in GFP gene integration and
respective gene copy. Having validated the utility of the
system, we next evaluated PSA expression within the
context of surface Hsp90. Representative flow cytometry
scatter plots demonstrating both surface bound Hsp90
and GFP expressing populations in these cell models
is shown (Figure 7C), along with the corresponding
tabular depiction these quantified data (Figure 7D). The
distribution of the 4 relevant cell populations reveals that,
although elevated AR activity is observed in both eHsp90
high and low populations, AR activity preferentially trends
with eHsp90lo cells. This trend is corroborated in that
the eHsp90(hi) cell populations (in bold) preferentially
segregate with a subset of the CSC-associated PSA(lo)
cell population (Figure 7D). These data highlight an
inverse trend in that high surface Hsp90 expression tends
to ‘mark’ a subpopulation of PCa cells with diminished
PSA-GFP expression.

Figure 6: Increased stem marker expression in tumor cells with elevated surface-bound Hsp90. A. Representative flow

cytometry scatter plots for surface-bound Hsp90-alpha in ARCaPE and DU145. Samples treated with secondary Rabbit IgG-PE were used
as a negative control (denoted PE Control). Surface-bound Hsp90-PE was defined as the area of events with higher PE staining not found
in the negative control population, which ranged from 2-5% for each cell line. B. RNA was harvested from each of these respective cell
populations and qRT-PCR was performed for each of the indicated stem-like gene targets. All statistics were performed using the Student’s
t-test for the treated versus the untreated control. * = p<0.05, ** = p<0.01, *** = p<0.001.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

19331

Oncotarget

Figure 7: Surface-bound Hsp90 co-segregates with a subset of PSA(lo)-expressing cells. A. Androgen receptor (AR) responsive

LNCaP and Myc-CaP prostate cancer cells were transiently transduced with lentiviral particles encoding PSA-GFP and GFP expression
was assessed by flow cytometry. Approximately 70-80% of LNCaP are GFP+, while approximately 40% of MycCaP demonstrate similar
positivity. PSA-Con refers to nontransduced control cells, while PSA-GFP refers to non-sorted bulk cells. B. Quantitative PCR analysis
was performed on the indicated cell populations to determine the relative DNA expression of GFP, indicative of transduction efficiency. The
populations are identified as follows: untransduced (PSA-con), transduced unsorted (PSA-GFP), and flow sorted PSA-GFP positive and
negative (PSA-GFP(Hi)) and PSA-GFP(Lo)). C. Representative flow cytometry scatter plots demonstrating the relation between surfacebound Hsp90-alpha and PSA-GFP expression in LNCaP and MycCaP cells. D. Tabular depiction of replicate flow cytometry analyses for
surface-bound Hsp90 in LNCaP and Myc-CaP cells. E. Model depicting the role of eHsp90 in supporting stem-like cellular heterogeneity.
Collectively, our data support a model whereby secreted Hsp90 increases stem-like properties in prostate tumor cells. This was demonstrated
by increased prostasphere growth, and expansion of both the side population (indicative of dye efflux and drug transporter activity) and
ALDH activity. As indicated, the effectors EZH2 and Snail appear to differently impact seveal of these metrics. In tandem, tumor cells
with elevated surface Hsp90 appear to correlate with lower levels of PSA-regulated GFP, indicating a potential inverse correlation between
surface Hsp90 and androgen receptor (AR) regulation.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

19332

Oncotarget

Table 1: Primers used for RT-PCR
Name

Accession #

Sequence

Trop2

NM_002353

Sense
Antisense

CCCTTTCGGTCCAACAACAGGAAA
AACGATCCCGGGTTGTCATACAGA

Sox4

NM_003107

Sense
Antisense

CTCCAGCCTGGGAACTATAA
GGAGGTGGGTAAAGAGAGAA

ID2

NM_002166

Sense
Antisense

TCCCAGGGTGTTCTCTTACTTGGA
AAACCTTCCAACTGCAGAAAGGGC

GAPDH

NM_002046

Sense
Antisense

TCGACAGTCAGCCGCATCTTCTTT
ACCAAATCCGTTGACTCCGACCTT

Nestin

NM_006617

Sense
Antisense

AGAGCGTAGAGGCAGTAAA
ACAGTGGTGCTTGAGTTTC

MDR1

NM_000927

Sense
Antisense

ATGCTCTGGCCTTCTGGATGGGA
ATGGCGATCCTCTGCTTCTGCCCA

ACTB

NM_001101

Sense
Antisense

GATCAGCAAGCAGGAGTATG
AAGGGTGTAACGCAACTAAG

Snail

NM_005985.3

Sense
Antisense

CTCCCTCTTCCTCTCCATAC
TGGCAGTGAGAAGGATGT

EZH2

NM_004456

Sense
Antisense

AGAGGACGGCTTCCCAATAACAGT
TTCAGTCCCTGCTTCCCTATCACT

DISCUSSION

supports the development of stem-like cell populations
within the context of PCa.
The EMT developmental process is a critical
regulator of cell fate decisions. Given our prior findings
linking eHsp90 and EMT [40, 45], we evaluated the
potential involvement of the eHsp90 effectors EZH2 and
ERK within the context of eHsp90-mediated stemness.
We also assessed the role of Snail, given its identity as an
eHsp90 target [40], and as a well-established effector of
both EMT activation and cancer stemness [75–78].
Interestingly, although our findings implicate ERK, EZH2
and Snail as participants in eHsp90-driven stem-like
traits, our data demonstrate that these effectors modulate
different attributes of stem-like behavior. As summarized
schematically (Figure 7E), while blockade of EZH2, Snail
and ERK impacted eHsp90-directed prostasphere growth,
EZH2 regulated both the side population and cells marked
by ALDH activity, while Snail preferentially affected the
ALDH population. These data indicate that although Snail
and EZH2 may co-regulate similar stem-like populations,
consistent their demonstrated ability to functionally
cooperate in regulating EMT events and gene targets [79,
80], they may also influence distinct cell types, indicating
a divergence of function. Functional crosstalk has also
been reported for ERK and EZH2 [45, 60, 81], and
between ERK and Snail [82, 83]. However, as is evident
from our findings, ERK was unable to modulate either
the side population or the ALDH population, indicating
that ERK does not significantly collaborate with either
EZH2 or Snail within this context. Nonetheless, our data

It is well established that CSCs contribute to cancer
cell plasticity and confound therapeutic approaches [67].
However, the effective targeting of CSCs has posed a
significant challenge, due in part to the multitude of
cellular stimuli capable of supporting and expanding
this cell population [68]. To our knowledge, this study
represents the first report to identify eHsp90 as a
regulator of prostate CSCs. This premise is supported by
integrated data obtained from multiple well-established
assays designed to evaluate CSC-like properties. Using
isogenic lines to establish a role for Hsp90 secretion, we
determined that eHsp90 promotes the existence of cell
populations with properties of enhanced self-renewal,
increased efficiency of prostasphere formation, increased
side population and increased ALDH activity. Moreover,
eHsp90 increased the expression of several stem-like gene
targets. Although the eHsp90-mediated induction of these
gene targets exhibited variability within the evaluated
PCa lines, Trop2 (tumor-associated calcium signal
transducer 2) was induced in both instances. Trop2 has
been reported as a marker for prostate stem cells [69], and
its expression is associated with sphere formation, selfrenewal and tissue regeneration [70, 71]. Also of note, the
developmental transcription factor SOX4, upregulated in
DU145, has been shown to possess oncogenic activity in
prostate cancer [72, 73], wheres Nestin has been associated
with the drug resistant prostate stem population [74].
Collectively, our data demonstrate that eHsp90 broadly
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

19333

Oncotarget

demonstrating a critical role for Snail in prostasphere
growth is consistent with other studies utilizing PCa
models [49].
It is well known that cellular heterogeneity is a major
component of PCa development and maintenance [84], a
feature that complicates both the diagnosis and treatment
of cancer. Multiple subsets of stem-like tumor initiating
cells (TICs) are suspected of supporting this tumor
heterogeneity [85, 86]. Our collective findings support the
existence of a heterogeneous stem-like cell population,
which is further validated by our data demonstrating the
ability of multiple effectors to govern overlapping, and
distinct, stem-like cell populations. While it is presently
unclear how stem markers and their respective functional
properties relate within a clinical setting, it is likely that
multiple stem-like populations cooperate to drive cancer
at distinct stages. Reports have validated the existence
of stem cell markers found in bone metastatic cancer,
although their relation to EMT effectors was inconsistent
[87]. Likewise, global analysis of CSCs compiled from
numerous studies has demonstrated variable EMT profiles
in prostate CSCs [88], further attesting to tumor and CSC
heterogeneity. Additional studies are warranted to better
understand whether eHsp90-regulated CSC populations
harbor properties associated with TICs, metastatic
potential, and/or therapeutic resistance.
Extracellular Hsp90 also may be localized in a
cell surface-bound form, as recently reviewed [33].
Although it is unclear whether soluble or surface forms
represent separate or dynamic populations [89], both
forms are preferentially detected in diverse tumor
types. We therefore evaluated whether PCa tumor cells
‘marked’ with surface Hsp90 may represent a unique cell
population. Intriguingly, tumor cells with elevated surface
Hsp90 expression (eHsp90hi) isolated from ARCaPE and
DU145 demonstrated a profound increase in a cohort of
stem-like effectors, such as Trop2, ID2 and Snail. While
many of these expression trends were similarly observed
within the nonselected eHsp90-expressing bulk cells,
isolation of PCa cells with surface Hsp90 exhibited a
dramatic increase, indicating that surface eHsp90 may
indeed mark a distinct CSC population. In further support
of this premise, expression levels of Snail message were
substantially increased in this population, indicating
that these cells may be reliant upon Snail action. Using
a similar sorting strategy to evaluate surface eHsp90 in
androgen dependent models, we show that eHsp90(hi)
cells preferentially segregate with PSA(lo) cells. This
PSA(lo) subpopulation has been shown to harbor selfrenewing CSCs that are refractory to castration, correlated
with a drug-resistant mesenchymal phenotype [65], and
are present in patient populations [21, 22]. It remains
to be determined whether surface eHsp90 supports the
development of, or is required for, maintenance of this
population. Corroborating our findings, a recent report
demonstrated that surface eHsp90 correlates with stemwww.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

like markers in breast cancer [90]. Moreover, eHsp90
was shown to be required for breast cancer clonogenic
potential, indicating that surface localization of eHsp90
in tumors may be a conserved property of aggressive
subtypes.
The discovery that eHsp90 may be correlated with
a stem-like tumor population has broad implications.
Numerous environmental stressors have been reported
to increase both secreted and surface bound expression
of eHsp90. Given this correlation, it is possible that
within a clinical setting, therapeutic modalities such
as chemotherapy and radiotherapy would stimulate
eHsp90 expression, and in turn support the survival and
maintenance of a CSC population, a result predicted to
contribute to the enriched stem-like population observed
following therapy. Hsp90 inhibitors are generally well
known to sensitize the drug-resistant side population of
tumor cells [91–93] supporting a linkage between Hsp90
and cancer stemness. As these drugs are predicted to
nonspecifically target both intracellular and extracellular
populations of Hsp90, it remains an open question whether
more specific targeting of eHsp90 may elicit a more direct
effect upon the CSC population. A recent report supports
such a directed strategy in that therapeutic targeting of
eHsp90 synergized with conventional therapeutics [90].
Our findings also raise the question of whether eHsp90
may broadly contribute to the de-differentiation of
cell types to facilitate the generation of stem-like cell
populations. Although such dynamic interconversions
have been demonstrated within the context of malignancy
[94], a similar mechanism may be relevant for wounding
and repair. Cellular plasticity is essential for tissue
remodeling, and eHsp90 has been shown to support tissue
repair [95]. Taken together, it is plausible that cancer
cells have hijacked an expanded and conserved function
of eHsp90, thereby enabling tumor cells to acquire the
enhanced plasticity required for survival upon exposure to
the environmental stress associated with malignancy and
therapy.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Cell models and culture
ARCaPE cells were purchased from Novicure
Biotechnology, DU145, LNCaP, and MyC-CaP were
purchased from ATCC, M12 was obtained from Joy
Ware (VCU Medical Center). 293T cells for lentiviral
transductions were obtained from Scott Eblen (MUSC).
The ARCaP cell pair was cultured in T-media (Invitrogen)
supplemented with 5% heat-inactivated fetal bovine
serum (FBS from Gibco 10437-028) and 1% penicillin/
streptomycin (Pen/Strep from Hyclone SV30010).
The M12 was cultured in T-media with 0.5% heatinactivated FBS with 1% Pen/Strep. LNCaP and DU145
were maintained in RPMI-1640 (Hyclone SH30096.02)
19334

Oncotarget

supplemented with 10% FBS with 1% HEPES, 1%
sodium pyruvate, 1% glutamine, and 1% Pen/Strep.
The 293T and myc-Cap cells were cultured in DMEM
(Hyclone SH30285.02) with 10% FBS. Cells cultured in
the spheroid assay were all cultured in 6 well ultra-low
attachment plates in DMEM/F12 with 1X N2 (Gibco
17502-048) and 1x B27 (Gibco 17504-044) as previously
described [18].

removed and particles were resuspended into 1 mL of
serum-free RPMI or T-media. Viral particles were either
used directly or aliquoted and stored at -80C.
All lentiviral transductions were performed
similarly. Cells to be infected were seeded into either a
12 or 24 well plate with 0.5 to 0.75 mL culture media
and cultured to 40-50% confluency. Fresh media was
added directly prior to transduction containing 8 ug/mL
Polybrene. Concentrated viral particles were added at 50150 uL to designated wells. A second round of transduction
was performed in the same manner 24 hours after the
first transduction. After 24-48 hours from the second
transduction, cells were trypsinized and plated into 10 cm
dishes and cultured for an additional 48 hours. At 48 hours
post-plating the media was changed to selection media
containing either puromycin or blasticidin depending on
plasmid resistance. Surviving cells were then cultured for
characterization and further experiments.

Reagents and antibodies
Recombinant Hsp90a protein was purchased from
Enzo Life Sciences (ADI-SPP-776). DMAG-N-oxide
modified geldanamycin (NPGA) was synthesized by Chris
Lindsey and Craig Beeson (Drug Discovery, Medical
University of South Carolina). ERK1/2 Inhibitor, SCH229874 (S7101, Lot# 3), and EZH2 inhibitor, GSK343
(S7184), were purchased from SelleckChem. Verapamil
was purchased from Tocris (0654) and Hoescht 33342
was purchased from Invitrogen (H3569). Antibodies for
Snail (3895) and EZH2 (5246) were purchased from Cell
Signaling. Antibody to a-tubulin (T6074) was purchased
from Sigma and V5 antibody (NB600-381) was purchased
from Novus Biologicals. Antibodies for Hsp90-alpha
(ADI-SPA-840) and Hsp90-alpha-PE conjugate (ADISPA-840PE-200, Lot# 03051244C) were obtained from
ENZO Lifesciences.

Western blotting
Western blots were performed as previously
described [40, 45]. Briefly, protein lysates from cells
were collected upon lysis in RIPA-lysis buffer and
centrifuged to pellet cellular debris. Media from serumstarved cultures were collected and concentrated through
a Millipore Amicon Ultra 3K column and analyzed for
protein concentration. 20-50 ug of total cell lysate proteins
were loaded onto a 10% SDS-PAGE gel and allowed to
migrate through the gel at 90-100V. The resultant gels
were then transferred onto a nitrocellulose membrane
overnight, followed by blocking in 10% milk. Primary
antibodies in 5% milk were added for overnight incubation
at 40C. Membranes were subsequently washed in TBST
and secondary antibodies conjugated to HRP were added
in 5% milk and incubated for a minimum of one hour at
room temperature. Membranes were subsequently washed
and developed with chemiluminescent regents.

Viral constructs, transfections, and
transductions
Plasmids for transfection were processed and
purified utilizing QIAGEN’s Maxi-Prep Hi-Speed kit
per manufacturer’s instructions. The pLenti6.3-V5-LacZ
and eHsp90 plasmids were generated and purchased from
Genecopoeia as described [40]. The shEZH2 plasmid
was purchased from the MUSC shRNA Technology Core
(Sigma Mission Library cat# SHCLND-NM_004456)
and the shSnail plasmid was obtained from Gregory
Longmore (Washington University, St. Louis, MO). The
PSA-GFP vector was obtained from Dean Tang (MD
Anderson, Houston, TX). All transfections for production
of lentiviruses were performed as previously described
[40, 45] in 293T cells. Briefly, 293T cells were cultured
in 10 cm plates in antibiotic-free media for a full 24
hours prior to transfection. On the day of transfection,
a 6:1 ratio volume of Fugene (Promega E2691) to DNA
amount was added to 800 uL of serum-free DMEM
and incubated for 15 minutes at room temperature. The
plasmid DNA of interest and two packaging co-plasmids
(VSV-G and DR891) were added to the Fugene-media
mix and incubated an additional 15-30 minutes at room
temperature. The mixture was then added to the 10 mL
of media on the 293T cells. At 24 and 48 hours posttransfection media was collected and ultra-centrifuged at
50,000x g to pellet viral particles. The supernatant was
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Spheroid and self-renewal assays
To analyze prostasphere formation, adherent
cells were trypsinized, counted, and re-suspended to 1
x105 cells per mL. Cells were seeded at 2000 cells per
well in a 6 well low-attachment plate to inhibit plate
attachment. Spheroid media containing DMEM/F12,
B27, and N2 was added at 2 mL per well. 1 mL of media
was added every 3-4 days and spheres were counted on
Day 10-14 for each passage. Criteria for spheroid growth
constituted a minimum of 5 cells adhered together.
Images were captured with an inverted Nikon Eclipse
TE 2000-S microscope with 10× magnification. Spheres
were passaged by collecting the spheres post-imaging
and centrifuging in a 15 mL conical. Spheres were then
re-suspended in 100-250 uL Accutase (Corning, 25-058CI) cell detachment solution. They were then incubated
19335

Oncotarget

at 370C for a minimum of 10 minutes and a maximum
of 20 minutes for dissociation of the cells. Cells were
then counted and re-seeded to new 6 well low attachment
plates with spheroid media. Spheres were passaged for
no more than five generations. Resultant sphere numbers
for each passage was graphed in a bar graph as number
of spheres per 1000 cells. Statistical differences between
cell lines or treatments were determined via one-way
ANOVA followed by Student’s t-test for each individual
passage.
Self-renewal assay was performed as previously
described [96]. Briefly single cells were suspended at 1000
cells per mL following the first or second generation of
spheroid formation. 2 uL of cells were seeded into a 96
well low-attachment round bottom plate with 100 uL of
spheroid media and verified for single cell dispersal 24
hours post seeding. The number of wells with a single
cell provided the base number to assess renewal. 50 uL
of fresh spheroid media was added to each well every 3-4
days and the number of spheres formed from the initial
wells was counted at 10-14 days post-seeding. The percent
efficiency of sphere formation was determined by dividing
the number of spheres formed over the initial number of
wells with a single cell multiplied by 100. Self-renewal
efficiency was calculated by dividing the efficiency
of sphere formation at P2 over the efficiency of sphere
formation at P1 multiplied by 100.

at 1 x 106 cells per mL in culture media. 50 uM of the ABC
transporter inhibitor, verapamil, was added to labeled
microcentrifuge tubes as an inhibitor-negative control for
the side population. 1 mL of cells was added to either an
empty microcentrifuge tube or an inhibitor labeled tube.
Hoescht 33342 nucleic acid stain was added at 5 ug/mL
to every tube. All tubes were subsequently protected from
light and incubated in a 37C water bath for 2 hours. Cells
were then centrifuged and supernatant was removed.
Cells were resuspended in 0.5 to 1 mL PBS + 2% FBS
and kept on ice. Additional supplements of 10 ug/mL
Propidium Iodide and 10 uL of DNase 1 were added to
assess cell viability and reduce cell-cell adhesion. Cells
were then processed through the flow cytometer utilizing
the UV laser to gate for emission spectra of 620 nm on the
x-axis (Hoescht Red) and 448 nm (Hoescht Blue) on the
y-axis. The gating was performed against the control cells
treated with 50 uM verapamil to inhibit dye efflux. The
percentage of events indicated within this gated area was
labeled as the percentage of side population positive cells.
Each experiment was performed a minimum of three times
to obtain data suitable for statistical analysis, with analysis
performed via Student’s t-test. If no side population was
present, the experiment was repeated a second time to
verify the lack of a side population.
ALDH activity assay was performed utilizing the
ALDEFLUOR kit obtained from StemCell Technologies
(# 01700), which contains a substrate that becomes
fluorescent upon catalysis via ALDH1A1. Cells were
trypsinized, counted, and resuspended at 1 x106 cells per
mL in ALDEFLUOR Assay Buffer. 5 uL of the provided
inhibitor reagent DEAB was added to the labeled tubes.
500 uL of cells were added to the non-inhibitor containing
tubes and a subsequent 500 uL of ALDEFLUOR Assay
Buffer was added. 5 uL of the ALDEFLUOR Reagent
was added to the tubes containing the cells, mixed, and
500 uL of the cell mixture was quickly transferred to
the labeled inhibitor tube. All tubes were incubated in
a 37C water bath for 15 minutes for ARCaPE cells or
30 minutes for DU145 cells. Cells were transferred to
an ice bucket then centrifuged, supernatant removed,
and fresh ALDEFLUOR buffer was added at 500 uL
per tube. Cells were kept on ice and propidium iodide
was added similar to the above assay. Cells were then
processed through the flow cytometer and excited
using the FL1 laser (488 nm) to generate an emission
spectra at 513 nm. Cell events were plotted with the
FL1 emission spectra on the x-axis (ALDH+) and the
side-scatter on the y-axis. Gating for positively stained
cells was determined by analyzing the area of cell events
missing from the DEAB treated cells. ALDH+ cells were
then gated as cells occupying the corresponding empty
space in non-DEAB treated cells. The percentage of
events indicated within this gated area was label as the
percentage of ALDH+ cells.

Quantitative RT-PCR
RNA purification from cells was performed
following a TRIzol/chloroform extraction procedure
according to the manufacturer's recommendations
(Qiagen miRNeasy kit #217004). Quantitative RT-PCR
was performed utilizing the two-step process involving
converting the mRNA to complementary DNA (cDNA)
followed by real-time PCR. Isolated mRNA was converted
into cDNA (Bio-Rad iScript cDNA synthesis kit) and
amplified for quantitative PCR reactions. Primers were
purchased from Integrated DNA Technologies and the
sequences are listed in Table 1. All quantitative real-time
PCR reactions were performed in technical triplicates
from at least two biological replicates. The data shown
are presented as mean ± S.D. with differences in treatment
groups defined as statistically significant at p < α = 0.05,
as calculated from Student's t-test.

Flow cytometry assays
All flow cytometry experiments were performed
utilizing the Regenerative Medicine Core facility at
MUSC. Samples were processed through the MoFlo
Astrios and were either sorted into selected populations
and/or analyzed for fluorescent emissions. The side
population was performed as previously described [97].
In detail, cells were trypsinized, counted, and resuspended
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

19336

Oncotarget

Surface antigen analysis for Hsp90 was performed
following standard antibody binding protocols. Briefly,
cells were gently dissociated from the plates using Accutase
and resuspended in PBS + 2% FBS at 5 x 105 cells/mL.
Cells were re-centrifuged in labeled microcentrifuge
tubes and resuspended in 100 uL containing either
1:100 diluted Hsp90-PE antibody (LNCaP only) or 1:50
diluted Hsp90-PE antibody (ARCaPE, DU145, MycCap). A corresponding tube with 1:50 unconjugated
PE secondary antibody was used as a negative control.
Cells were incubated in the dark on ice for 30 minutes
before centrifugation and 1X wash with PBS + 2% FBS.
7-AAD was used a viability stain per manufacturer’s
recommendations (BD Biosciences). Cells were excited
using the 488 nm laser and analyzed at 576 nm for the PE
emission. Positively stained cells were gated out and sorted
for downstream PCR analysis and the bottom 5% of nonstained cells were gated as a control population.
Analysis for GFP expression due to activation of the
PSA promoter was performed in LNCaP and Myc-CaP
cells using the vector provided by Dean Tang’s lab [21,
98]. Vector transduction was confirmed in both the GFP
positive and GFP negative populations via qPCR for GFP
(Sense Primer: CTCGTGACCACCCTGACC, Antisense
Primer: TAGTTGCCGTCGTCCTTGAA). Determination
of surface bound Hsp90 was performed in transduced
cells as described above. Gating strategy for analysis of
surface-bound Hsp90 in transduced cells included autocompensation to account for spectral overlap between GFP
and PE emission spectra.

KDN and JK executed the experiments and
performed statistical analyses.
JSI, KDN and JK analyzed and interpreted data and
wrote the manuscript.

REFERENCES
1.	 Dick D. Human acute myeloid leukemia is organized as a
hierarchy that originates from a primitive hematopoietic
cell. Nature Med. 1997; 3: 730-7.
2.	 Al-Hajj M, Wicha MS, Benito-Hernandez A, Morrison
SJ, Clarke MF. Prospective identification of tumorigenic
breast cancer cells. Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences. 2003; 100: 3983-8.
3.	 Maitland NJ, Collins AT, Bryce S, Sarah M, Berry P,
Hyde K, Hamdy F, Stower MJ, Linton K. Prospective
identification of tumorigenic prostate cancer stem cells.
Cancer Research. 2005; 65: 591.
4.	 Pallini R, Ricci-Vitiani L, Banna GL, Signore M, Lombardi
D, Todaro M, Stassi G, Martini M, Maira G, Larocca LM.
Cancer stem cell analysis and clinical outcome in patients
with glioblastoma multiforme. Clinical Cancer Research.
2008; 14: 8205-12.
5.	 Singh SK, Hawkins C, Clarke ID, Squire JA, Bayani J, Hide
T, Henkelman RM, Cusimano MD, Dirks PB. Identification
of human brain tumour initiating cells. Nature. 2004; 432:
396-401.
6.	 Eramo A, Lotti F, Sette G, Pilozzi E, Biffoni M, Di
Virgilio A, Conticello C, Ruco L, Peschle C, De Maria R.
Identification and expansion of the tumorigenic lung cancer
stem cell population. Cell Death & Differentiation. 2008;
15: 504-14.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We wish to thank Joy Ware for M12 prostate cancer
cells, Dean Tang for the GFP-PSA reporter plasmid,
and Geoffrey Longmore for shRNA plasmids against
Snail. This study utilized the services of the MUSC
Flow Cytometry Facility, which is supported by NIHNIGMS P30 GM103342 to the South Carolina COBRE
for Developmentally Based Cardiovascular Diseases.
Additional reagents were supported in part by the shRNA
Shared Resource, Hollings Cancer Center, Medical
University of South Carolina.

7.	 English HF, Santen RJ, Lsaacs JT. Response of glandular
versus basal rat ventral prostatic epithelial cells to androgen
withdrawal and replacement. The Prostate. 1987; 11:
229-42.
8.	 Collins AT, Berry PA, Hyde C, Stower MJ, Maitland NJ.
Prospective identification of tumorigenic prostate cancer
stem cells. Cancer research. 2005; 65: 10946-51.
9.	 Nieto MA, Huang RYJ, Jackson RA, Thiery JP. EMT: 2016.
Cell. 2016; 166: 21-45.
10.	 Polyak K, Weinberg RA. Transitions between epithelial and
mesenchymal states: acquisition of malignant and stem cell
traits. Nat Rev Cancer. 2009; 9: 265-73.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST

11.	 Tan TZ, Miow QH, Miki Y, Noda T, Mori S, Huang RYJ,
Thiery JP. Epithelial-mesenchymal transition spectrum
quantification and its efficacy in deciphering survival
and drug responses of cancer patients. EMBO molecular
medicine. 2014: e201404208.

The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

GRANT SUPPORT
This work was supported by RO1 CA187342 (JSI)
and F31 CA177015 (KDN).

12.	 Chaffer CL, Weinberg RA. A perspective on cancer cell
metastasis. Science. 2011; 331: 1559-64.
13.	 Chaffer CL, Marjanovic ND, Lee T, Bell G, Kleer CG,
Reinhardt F, D’Alessio AC, Young RA, Weinberg RA.
Poised chromatin at the ZEB1 promoter enables breast

Author contributions
KDN and JSI participated in study design.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

19337

Oncotarget

cancer cell plasticity and enhances tumorigenicity. Cell.
2013; 154: 61-74.

28.	 Bradley E, Bieberich E, Mivechi NF, Tangpisuthipongsa D,
Wang G. Regulation of embryonic stem cell pluripotency
by heat shock protein 90. Stem Cells. 2012; 30: 1624-33.

14.	 Nieto MA. Epithelial plasticity: a common theme in
embryonic and cancer cells. Science. 2013; 342: 1234850.

29.	 Zong H, Gozman A, Caldas-Lopes E, Taldone T, Sturgill
E, Brennan S, Ochiana SO, Gomes-DaGama EM, Sen S,
Rodina A. A hyperactive signalosome in acute myeloid
leukemia drives addiction to a tumor-specific Hsp90
species. Cell reports. 2015; 13: 2159-73.

15.	 Guo W, Keckesova Z, Donaher JL, Shibue T, Tischler V,
Reinhardt F, Itzkovitz S, Noske A, Zürrer-Härdi U, Bell G.
Slug and Sox9 cooperatively determine the mammary stem
cell state. Cell. 2012; 148: 1015-28.

30.	 Filatova A, Seidel S, Bogurcu N, Gräf S, Garvalov BK,
Acker T. Acidosis acts through HSP90 in a PHD/VHLindependent manner to promote HIF function and stem
cell maintenance in glioma. Cancer Research. 2016;
76:5845-5856.

16.	 Mani SA, Guo W, Liao MJ, Eaton EN, Ayyanan A, Zhou
AY, Brooks M, Reinhard F, Zhang CC, Shipitsin M. The
epithelial-mesenchymal transition generates cells with
properties of stem cells. Cell. 2008; 133: 704-15.
17.	 Singh A, Settleman J. EMT, cancer stem cells and drug
resistance: an emerging axis of evil in the war on cancer.
Oncogene. 2010; 29: 4741-51.

31.	 Joly A, Deepti A, Seignez A, Goloudina A, Hebrard S,
Schmitt E, Richaud S, Fourmaux E, Hammann A, Collura
A. The HSP90 inhibitor, 17AAG, protects the intestinal
stem cell niche and inhibits graft versus host disease
development. Oncogene. 2015.

18.	 Kong D, Banerjee S, Ahmad A, Li Y, Wang Z, Sethi
S, Sarkar FH. Epithelial to mesenchymal transition is
mechanistically linked with stem cell signatures in prostate
cancer cells. PloS one. 2010; 5: e12445.

32.	 Li W, Sahu D, Tsen F. Secreted heat shock protein-90
(Hsp90) in wound healing and cancer. Biochimica et
Biophysica Acta (BBA)-Molecular Cell Research. 2012;
1823: 730-41.

19.	 Nakazawa M, Kyprianou N. Epithelial-mesenchymaltransition regulators in prostate cancer: Androgens and
beyond. The Journal of steroid biochemistry and molecular
biology. 2016.

33.	 Hance MW, Nolan KD, Isaacs JS. The double-edged sword:
conserved functions of extracellular hsp90 in wound healing
and cancer. Cancers. 2014; 6: 1065-97.

20.	 Sun Y, Wang BE, Leong KG, Yue P, Li L, Jhunjhunwala
S, Chen D, Seo K, Modrusan Z, Gao WQ. Androgen
deprivation causes epithelial–mesenchymal transition in
the prostate: implications for androgen-deprivation therapy.
Cancer research. 2012; 72: 527-36.

34.	 Eustace BK, Sakurai T, Stewart JK, Yimlamai D, Unger
C, Zehetmeier C, Lain B, Torella C, Henning SW, Beste
G. Functional proteomic screens reveal an essential
extracellular role for hsp90α in cancer cell invasiveness.
Nature cell biology. 2004; 6: 507-14.

21.	 Qin J, Liu X, Laffin B, Chen X, Choy G, Jeter CR, CalhounDavis T, Li H, Palapattu GS, Pang S. The PSA−/lo prostate
cancer cell population harbors self-renewing long-term
tumor-propagating cells that resist castration. Cell stem cell.
2012; 10: 556-69.

35.	 Sidera K, Samiotaki M, Yfanti E, Panayotou G, Patsavoudi
E. Involvement of cell surface HSP90 in cell migration
reveals a novel role in the developing nervous system.
Journal of Biological Chemistry. 2004; 279: 45379-88.

22.	 Chen X, Li Q, Liu X, Liu C, Liu R, Rycaj K, Zhang D, Liu
B, Jeter C, Calhoun-Davis T, Lin K, Lu Y, Chao HP, et al.
Defining a population of stem-like human prostate cancer cells
that can generate and propagate castration-resistant prostate
cancer (CRPC). Clinical Cancer Research. 2016; 22:4505-16.

36.	 Tsutsumi S, Scroggins B, Koga F, Lee M, Trepel J, Felts S,
Carreras C, Neckers L. A small molecule cell-impermeant
Hsp90 antagonist inhibits tumor cell motility and invasion.
Oncogene. 2008; 27: 2478-87.
37.	 Stellas D, Karameris A, Patsavoudi E. Monoclonal
antibody 4C5 immunostains human melanomas and inhibits
melanoma cell invasion and metastasis. Clinical Cancer
Research. 2007; 13: 1831-8.

23.	 Whitesell L, Lindquist SL. HSP90 and the chaperoning of
cancer. Nature Reviews Cancer. 2005; 5: 761-72.
24.	 Whitesell L, Lin NU. HSP90 as a platform for the assembly
of more effective cancer chemotherapy. Biochimica et
Biophysica Acta (BBA)-Molecular Cell Research. 2012;
1823: 756-66.

38.	 Stellas D, El Hamidieh A, Patsavoudi E. Monoclonal
antibody 4C5 prevents activation of MMP2 and MMP9 by
disrupting their interaction with extracellular HSP90 and
inhibits formation of metastatic breast cancer cell deposits.
BMC cell biology. 2010; 11: 1.

25.	 Calderwood SK. Tumor heterogeneity, clonal evolution,
and therapy resistance: an opportunity for multitargeting
therapy. Discovery medicine. 2013; 15: 188.

39.	 Wang X, Song X, Zhuo W, Fu Y, Shi H, Liang Y, Tong M,
Chang G, Luo Y. The regulatory mechanism of Hsp90α
secretion and its function in tumor malignancy. Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences. 2009; 106: 21288-93.

26.	 Kim HB, Lee SH, Um JH, Kim MJ, Hyun SK, Gong EJ, Oh
WK, Kang CD, Kim SH. Sensitization of chemo-resistant
human chronic myeloid leukemia stem-like cells to Hsp90
inhibitor by SIRT1 inhibition. International journal of
biological sciences. 2015; 11: 923.

40.	 Hance MW, Dole K, Gopal U, Bohonowych JE, JezierskaDrutel A, Neumann CA, Liu H, Garraway IP, Isaacs JS.
Secreted Hsp90 is a novel regulator of the epithelial to

27.	 Newman B, Liu Y, Lee HF, Sun D, Wang Y. HSP90
inhibitor 17-AAG selectively eradicates lymphoma stem
cells. Cancer research. 2012; 72: 4551-61.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

19338

Oncotarget

mesenchymal transition (EMT) in prostate cancer. Journal
of Biological Chemistry. 2012; 287: 37732-44.

54.	 Burger PE, Gupta R, Xiong X, Ontiveros CS, Salm SN,
Moscatelli D, Wilson EL. High aldehyde dehydrogenase
activity: a novel functional marker of murine prostate stem/
progenitor cells. Stem Cells. 2009; 27: 2220-8.

41.	 Chen JS, Hsu YM, Chen CC, Chen LL, Lee CC, Huang TS.
Secreted heat shock protein 90α induces colorectal cancer
cell invasion through CD91/LRP-1 and NF-κB-mediated
integrin αV expression. Journal of Biological Chemistry.
2010; 285: 25458-66.

55.	 Li T, Su Y, Mei Y, Leng Q, Leng B, Liu Z, Stass SA, Jiang
F. ALDH1A1 is a marker for malignant prostate stem
cells and predictor of prostate cancer patients’ outcome.
Laboratory investigation. 2010; 90: 234-44.

42.	 Frisch SM, Screaton RA. Anoikis mechanisms. Current
opinion in cell biology. 2001; 13: 555-62.

56.	 Kunju LP, Cookingham C, Toy KA, Chen W, Sabel MS,
Kleer CG. EZH2 and ALDH-1 mark breast epithelium at
risk for breast cancer development. Mod Pathol. 2011; 24:
786-93.

43.	 Patrawala L, Calhoun T, Schneider-Broussard R, Zhou
J, Claypool K, Tang DG. Side population is enriched in
tumorigenic, stem-like cancer cells, whereas ABCG2+ and
ABCG2− cancer cells are similarly tumorigenic. Cancer
research. 2005; 65: 6207-19.

57.	 Matsika A, Srinivasan B, Day C, Mader SA, Kiernan DM,
Broomfield A, Fu J, Hooper JD, Kench JG, Samaratunga
H. Cancer stem cell markers in prostate cancer: an
immunohistochemical study of ALDH1, SOX2 and EZH2.
Pathology-Journal of the RCPA. 2015; 47: 622-8.

44.	 Stone KR, Mickey DD, Wunderli H, Mickey GH, Paulson
DF. Isolation of a human prostate carcinoma cell line (DU
145). International journal of cancer. 1978; 21: 274-81.

58.	 Morata-Tarifa C, Jiménez G, García MA, Entrena JM,
Griñán-Lisón C, Aguilera M, Picon-Ruiz M, Marchal JA.
Low adherent cancer cell subpopulations are enriched in
tumorigenic and metastatic epithelial-to-mesenchymal
transition-induced cancer stem-like cells. Scientific reports.
2016; 6.

45.	 Nolan KD, Franco OE, Hance MW, Hayward SW, Isaacs
JS. Tumor-secreted Hsp90 subverts polycomb function
to drive prostate tumor growth and invasion. Journal of
Biological Chemistry. 2015; 290: 8271-82.
46.	 Nakai E, Park K, Yawata T, Chihara T, Kumazawa A,
Nakabayashi H, Shimizu K. Enhanced MDR1 expression
and chemoresistance of cancer stem cells derived from
glioblastoma. Cancer investigation. 2009; 27: 901-8.

59.	 Wu D, Mou YP, Chen K, Cai JQ, Zhou YC, Pan Y, Xu
XW, Zhou W, Gao JQ, Chen DW, Zhang RC. Aldehyde
dehydrogenase 3A1 is robustly upregulated in gastric
cancer stem-like cells and associated with tumorigenesis.
Int J Oncol. 2016; 49:611-22.

47.	 Rentala S, Mangamoori L. Isolation, characterization and
mobilization of prostate cancer tissue derived CD133+
MDR1+ cells. Journal of stem cells. 2009; 5: 75-81.

60.	 Fujii S, Tokita K, Wada N, Ito K, Yamauchi C, Ito Y, Ochiai
A. MEK–ERK pathway regulates EZH2 overexpression
in association with aggressive breast cancer subtypes.
Oncogene. 2011; 30: 4118-28.

48.	 Huang Y, Hamana T, Liu J, Wang C, An L, You P, Chang
JY, Xu J, McKeehan WL, Wang F. Prostate sphere-forming
stem cells are derived from the P63-expressing basal
compartment. Journal of Biological Chemistry. 2015; 290:
17745-52.

61.	 Zhang K, Corsa CA, Ponik SM, Prior JL, Piwnica-Worms
D, Eliceiri KW, Keely PJ, Longmore GD. The collagen
receptor discoidin domain receptor 2 stabilizes SNAIL1 to
facilitate breast cancer metastasis. Nat Cell Biol. 2013; 15:
677-87.

49.	 Deep G, Jain AK, Ramteke A, Ting H, Vijendra KC, Gangar
SC, Agarwal C, Agarwal R. SNAI1 is critical for the
aggressiveness of prostate cancer cells with low E-cadherin.
Molecular cancer. 2014; 13: 1.

62.	 Rybak AP, Ingram AJ, Tang D. Propagation of human
prostate cancer stem-like cells occurs through EGFRmediated ERK activation. PloS one. 2013; 8: e61716.

50.	 Zhou W, Lv R, Qi W, Wu D, Xu Y, Liu W, Mou Y, Wang
L. Snail contributes to the maintenance of stem cell-like
phenotype cells in human pancreatic cancer. PLoS One.
2014; 9: e87409.

63.	 Golebiewska A, Brons NH, Bjerkvig R, Niclou SP. Critical
appraisal of the side population assay in stem cell and
cancer stem cell research. Cell stem cell. 2011; 8: 136-47.

51.	 Burdach S, Plehm S, Unland R, Borkhardt A, Staege MS,
Müller-Tidow C, Richter GH. Epigenetic maintenance of
stemness and malignancy in peripheral neuroectodermal
tumors by EZH2. Cell Cycle. 2009; 8: 1991-6.

64.	 Bae VL, Jackson-Cook CK, Maygarden SJ, Plymate SR,
Chen J, Ware JL. Metastatic sublines of an SV40 large T
antigen immortalized human prostate epithelial cell line.
Prostate. 1998; 34: 275-82.

52.	 Chang CJ, Yang JY, Xia W, Chen CT, Xie X, Chao CH,
Woodward WA, Hsu JM, Hortobagyi GN, Hung MC. EZH2
promotes expansion of breast tumor initiating cells through
activation of RAF1-β-catenin signaling. Cancer cell. 2011;
19: 86-100.

65.	 Paranjape A, Soundararajan R, Werden S, Joseph R, Taube
J, Liu H, Rodriguez-Canales J, Sphyris N, Wistuba I, Miura
N. Inhibition of FOXC2 restores epithelial phenotype and
drug sensitivity in prostate cancer cells with stem-cell
properties. Oncogene. 2016.

53.	 Wang J, Zhu X, Hu J, He G, Li X, Wu P, Ren X, Wang
F, Liao W, Liang L. The positive feedback between Snail
and DAB2IP regulates EMT, invasion and metastasis in
colorectal cancer. Oncotarget. 2015; 6:27427-39. doi:
10.18632/oncotarget.4861.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

66.	 Ammirante M, Luo JL, Grivennikov S, Nedospasov S,
Karin M. B-cell-derived lymphotoxin promotes castrationresistant prostate cancer. Nature. 2010; 464: 302-5.
19339

Oncotarget

67.	 Todaro M, Gaggianesi M, Catalano V, Benfante A, Iovino
F, Biffoni M, Apuzzo T, Sperduti I, Volpe S, Cocorullo G.
CD44v6 is a marker of constitutive and reprogrammed
cancer stem cells driving colon cancer metastasis. Cell stem
cell. 2014; 14: 342-56.

Polycomb complex 2 is required for E-cadherin repression
by the Snail1 transcription factor. Molecular and cellular
biology. 2008; 28: 4772-81.
80.	 Battistelli C, Cicchini C, Santangelo L, Tramontano A,
Grassi L, Gonzalez F, de Nonno V, Grassi G, Amicone L,
Tripodi M. The Snail repressor recruits EZH2 to specific
genomic sites through the enrollment of the lncRNA
HOTAIR in epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition.
Oncogene. 2016.

68.	 Marcucci F, Stassi G, De Maria R. Epithelial-mesenchymal
transition: a new target in anticancer drug discovery. Nature
Reviews Drug Discovery. 2016; 15: 311-25.
69.	 Goldstein AS, Lawson DA, Cheng D, Sun W, Garraway IP,
Witte ON. Trop2 identifies a subpopulation of murine and
human prostate basal cells with stem cell characteristics.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 2008;
105: 20882-7.

81.	 Tee WW, Shen SS, Oksuz O, Narendra V, Reinberg D.
Erk1/2 activity promotes chromatin features and RNAPII
phosphorylation at developmental promoters in mouse
ESCs. Cell. 2014; 156: 678-90.

70.	 Garraway IP, Sun W, Tran CP, Perner S, Zhang B, Goldstein
AS, Hahm SA, Haider M, Head CS, Reiter RE. Human
prostate sphere-forming cells represent a subset of basal
epithelial cells capable of glandular regeneration in vivo.
The Prostate. 2010; 70: 491.

82.	 Barbera MJ, Puig I, Domínguez D, Julien-Grille S, GuaitaEsteruelas S, Peiro S, Baulida J, Francí C, Dedhar S, Larue
L. Regulation of Snail transcription during epithelial to
mesenchymal transition of tumor cells. Oncogene. 2004;
23: 7345-54.

71.	 Stoyanova T, Goldstein AS, Cai H, Drake JM, Huang J,
Witte ON. Regulated proteolysis of Trop2 drives epithelial
hyperplasia and stem cell self-renewal via β-catenin
signaling. Genes & development. 2012; 26: 2271-85.

83.	 Zhang K, Corsa CA, Ponik SM, Prior JL, Piwnica-Worms
D, Eliceiri KW, Keely PJ, Longmore GD. The collagen
receptor discoidin domain receptor 2 stabilizes SNAIL1
to facilitate breast cancer metastasis. Nature cell biology.
2013; 15: 677-87.

72.	 Liu P, Ramachandran S, Seyed MA, Scharer CD, Laycock
N, Dalton WB, Williams H, Karanam S, Datta MW, Jaye
DL. Sex-determining region Y box 4 is a transforming
oncogene in human prostate cancer cells. Cancer research.
2006; 66: 4011-9.

84.	 Stoyanova T, Goldstein AS. Distinct phases of human
prostate cancer initiation and progression can be driven by
different cell-types. Cancer cell & microenvironment. 2014;
1.

73.	 Bilir B, Osunkoya AO, Wiles WG, Sannigrahi S, Lefebvre
V, Metzger D, Spyropoulos DD, Martin WD, Moreno CS.
SOX4 is essential for prostate tumorigenesis initiated by
PTEN ablation. Cancer research. 2016; 76: 1112-21.

85.	 Shibata M, Shen MM. The roots of cancer: stem cells and
the basis for tumor heterogeneity. Bioessays. 2013; 35:
253-60.
86.	 Liu X, Chen X, Rycaj K, Chao HP, Deng Q, Jeter C, Liu
C, Honorio S, Li H, Davis T. Systematic dissection of
phenotypic, functional, and tumorigenic heterogeneity of
human prostate cancer cells. Oncotarget. 2015; 6: 2395986. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.4260.

74.	 Liu T, Xu F, Du X, Lai D, Liu T, Zhao Y, Huang Q, Jiang
L, Huang W, Cheng W. Establishment and characterization
of multi-drug resistant, prostate carcinoma-initiating stemlike cells from human prostate cancer cell lines 22RV1.
Molecular and cellular biochemistry. 2010; 340: 265-73.

87.	 Jadaan DY, Jadaan MM, McCabe JP. Cellular plasticity
in prostate cancer bone metastasis. Prostate cancer. 2015;
2015.

75.	 Batlle E, Sancho E, Francí C, Domínguez D, Monfar M,
Baulida J, de Herreros AG. The transcription factor snail
is a repressor of E-cadherin gene expression in epithelial
tumour cells. Nature cell biology. 2000; 2: 84-9.

88.	 Hsu CL, Chung FH, Chen CH, Hsu TT, Liu SM, Chung
DS, Hsu YF, Chen CL, Ma N, Lee HC. Genotypes of cancer
stem cells characterized by epithelial-to-mesenchymal
transition and proliferation related functions. Scientific
Reports. 2016; 6.

76.	 Cano A, Pérez-Moreno MA, Rodrigo I, Locascio A, Blanco
MJ, del Barrio MG, Portillo F, Nieto MA. The transcription
factor snail controls epithelial–mesenchymal transitions
by repressing E-cadherin expression. Nature cell biology.
2000; 2: 76-83.

89.	 Barrott JJ, Hughes PF, Osada T, Yang XY, Hartman ZC,
Loiselle DR, Spector NL, Neckers L, Rajaram N, Hu F.
Optical and radioiodinated tethered Hsp90 inhibitors reveal
selective internalization of ectopic Hsp90 in malignant
breast tumor cells. Chemistry & biology. 2013; 20: 1187-97.

77.	 Battula VL, Evans KW, Hollier BG, Shi Y, Marini FC,
Ayyanan A, Wang Ry, Brisken C, Guerra R, Andreeff
M. Epithelial-Mesenchymal Transition-Derived Cells
Exhibit Multilineage Differentiation Potential Similar to
Mesenchymal Stem Cells. Stem cells. 2010; 28: 1435-45.
78.	 Wu Y, Zhou BP. Snail: more than EMT. Cell adhesion &
migration. 2010; 4: 199-203.

90.	 Stivarou T, Stellas D, Vartzi G, Thomaidou D, Patsavoudi
E. Targeting highly expressed extracellular HSP90 in breast
cancer stem cells inhibits tumor growth in vitro and in vivo.
Cancer biology & therapy. 2016.

79.	 Herranz N, Pasini D, Díaz VM, Francí C, Gutierrez A, Dave
N, Escrivà M, Hernandez-Muñoz I, Di Croce L, Helin K.

91.	 Fiskus W, Verstovsek S, Manshouri T, Rao R, Balusu R,
Venkannagari S, Rao NN, Ha K, Smith JE, Hembruff

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

19340

Oncotarget

SL. Heat shock protein 90 inhibitor is synergistic with
JAK2 inhibitor and overcomes resistance to JAK2-TKI in
human myeloproliferative neoplasm cells. Clinical Cancer
Research. 2011; 17: 7347-58.

95.	 Bhatia A, O'Brien K, Chen M, Woodley DT, Li W.
Keratinocyte-Secreted Heat Shock Protein-90alpha:
Leading Wound Reepithelialization and Closure. Advances
in wound care. 2016; 5: 176-84.

92.	 Sobhan PK, Seervi M, Joseph J, Chandrika BB, Varghese
S, Santhoshkumar T, Pillai MR. Identification of heat
shock protein 90 inhibitors to sensitize drug resistant side
population tumor cells using a cell based assay platform.
Cancer letters. 2012; 317: 78-88.

96.	 Zhang L, Jiao M, Li L, Wu D, Wu K, Li X, Zhu G, Dang
Q, Wang X, Hsieh JT, He D. Tumorspheres derived from
prostate cancer cells possess chemoresistant and cancer
stem cell properties. J Cancer Res Clin Oncol. 2012; 138:
675-86.

93.	 Tatokoro M, Koga F, Yoshida S, Kawakami S, Fujii Y,
Neckers L, Kihara K. Potential role of Hsp90 inhibitors in
overcoming cisplatin resistance of bladder cancer-initiating
cells. International Journal of Cancer. 2012; 131: 987-96.

97.	 Golebiewska A, Brons NH, Bjerkvig R, Niclou SP. Critical
appraisal of the side population assay in stem cell and
cancer stem cell research. Cell Stem Cell. 2011; 8: 136-47.
98.	 Liu X, Chen X, Rycaj K, Chao HP, Deng Q, Jeter C, Liu
C, Honorio S, Li H, Davis T, Suraneni M, Laffin B, Qin
J, et al. Systematic dissection of phenotypic, functional,
and tumorigenic heterogeneity of human prostate cancer
cells. Oncotarget. 2015; 6: 23959-86. doi:10.18632/
oncotarget.4260.

94.	 Chaffer CL, Brueckmann I, Scheel C, Kaestli AJ, Wiggins
PA, Rodrigues LO, Brooks M, Reinhardt F, Su Y, Polyak
K. Normal and neoplastic nonstem cells can spontaneously
convert to a stem-like state. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences. 2011; 108: 7950-5.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

19341

Oncotarget

