www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Oncotarget, 2017, Vol. 8, (No. 8), pp: 13126-13141
Research Paper

Cell type- and density-dependent effect of 1 T static magnetic
field on cell proliferation
Lei Zhang1,2,*, Xinmiao Ji1,*, Xingxing Yang1, Xin Zhang1
1

High Magnetic Field Laboratory, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Hefei, Anhui, 230031, P. R. China

2

University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, Anhui, 230036, P. R. China

*

These authors have contributed equally to this work

Correspondence to: Xin Zhang, email: xinzhang@hmfl.ac.cn
Keywords: static magnetic field, cancer cell, EGFR
Received: September 12, 2016      Accepted: December 13, 2016      Published: January 04, 2017

ABSTRACT
Increasing evidence shows that static magnetic fields (SMFs) can affect cell
proliferation but mixed results have been reported. Here we systematically examined
the effects of 1 T (Tesla) SMF, which is close to the SMF intensity that patients are
exposed to MRI (magnetic resonance imaging) scanners in hospitals, for its effect on
15 different cell lines, including 12 human and 3 rodent cell lines. Our results show
that 1 T SMF does not have apparent impact on cell cycle or cell death. However, at
higher cell density, it reduced cell numbers in six out of seven solid human cancer cell
lines. We found that both cell type and cell density had evident impacts on SMF effects.
Moreover, the EGFR-Akt-mTOR pathway, which varies significantly between different
cell types and densities, contributes to the differential effects of SMF. In addition, SMF
also increases the efficacy of Akt inhibitors on cancer cell growth inhibition. Therefore
1 T SMF affects cell proliferation in a cell type- and cell density-dependent manner,
and the inhibition effect of 1 T SMF on multiple cancer cells at higher cell density may
indicate its clinical potential in late stage cancer therapy.

SMF [6], but other studies found that even 8-10 T strong
SMFs did not induce obvious changes in non-cancer cells
such as CHO (chinese hamster ovary) or human fibroblast
cells [7, 8]. These results indicate that cell type is a
very important factor that contributes to the differential
cellular responses to SMFs. However, most individual
studies investigated only one or very few types of cells.
Therefore comparing different cell types side-by-side for
their responses to the magnetic fields is strongly needed to
achieve a better understanding for the biological effects of
magnetic fields.
In comparison to Dynamic/Time-varying Magnetic
Fields, static magnetic field (SMF) is more suitable
to study the biological effects and their underlying
mechanisms because they have less variable parameters.
Electromagnetic fields from power lines, microwave ovens
and cell phones are all dynamic/time-varying magnetic
fields, whose effects on human bodies are still debated and
causing widespread public health concerns. In contrast,
SMF is characterized by steady, time-independent field
strengths, and the reported biological effects of SMFs are
mostly negligible or even beneficial. The core component

INTRODUCTION
Although there are numerous reports of in vitro
and in vivo experiments that demonstrate the effects
of magnetic field on biological systems, experimental
coherence among different studies is still lacking.
However, the seemingly inconsistent observations are
mostly due to the different magnetic field parameters
and multiple experimental variables. It is obvious that
magnetic fields of different types (static or time-varying
magnetic fields), field intensity (weak, moderate or strong
magnetic fields) or frequencies (extremely low frequency,
low frequency or radiofrequency) can lead to diverse and
sometimes completely opposite results [1–4].
Besides various parameters of the magnetic fields,
different biological samples in individual studies often
have distinct genetic background, which makes them
respond to the magnetic fields differentially. For example,
Aldinucci et al. found that 4.75 T SMF significantly
inhibited Jurkat leukemia cell proliferation but did not
affect normal lymphocytes [5]. Rayman et al showed that
growth of a few cancer cell lines can be inhibited by 7 T
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

13126

Oncotarget

of the MRI (magnetic resonance imaging) machines
in most hospitals is a strong SMF with field intensities
ranging between 0.1-3 T, in combination with pulsed
radiofrequency magnetic fields. The SMF intensities in
the 0.1-3 T range are currently considered to be safe to
human bodies because no severe health consequences
have been reported. The discomforts in patients such as
dizziness are all temporary, which disappear after the MRI
examination. However, mixed experimental reports from
the laboratories are in the literature, which seem to be
controversial. Some studies show that SMFs in this range
do not affect cell growth or cell cycle [9, 10], while the
others show that they may have some beneficial effects on
cancer growth inhibition, either alone or in combination
with chemodrugs or radiation [11–14]. Therefore, the
exact effects, especially prolonged exposure of SMFs
in the range of MRI machines on human bodies are still
inconclusive.
Here in this study, we chose 1 T SMF to test its
effect on 15 different cell lines side-by-side, including
12 human cell lines (7 solid cancer and 5 non-cancer cell
lines) and 3 rodent cell lines. We found that 1 T SMF not
only affected cell proliferation in a cell type-dependent
manner, but also cell density-dependent manner. We
revealed that cell growth of most human solid cancer
cell lines we tested, but not non-cancer cell lines, can be
inhibited by 1 T SMF at higher cell densities, in which the
EGFR-Akt-mTOR pathway may play essential roles.

contrary, there was a tendency of increased cell number
after SMF treatment compared to control. However, when
the CNE-2Z cells were seeded at higher densities, 2-4 x
105 cells/ml, it is interesting that 1 T SMF can consistently
inhibit CNE-2Z cell proliferation (Figure 1). These results
show that although CNE-2Z cells could proliferate in
both control and 1 T SMF groups, the proliferation was
differentially influenced by 1 T SMF at lower cell seeding
density vs. higher cell seeding density. In another word,
the cell density can directly influence the effect of 1 T
SMF on CNE-2Z cells.
Next we wanted to systematically investigate
multiple cell lines to find out whether cell density can also
affect cells other than CNE-2Z. We chose 6 other human
solid cancer cell lines, including colon cancer HCT116,
skin cancer A431, lung cancer A549, breast cancer
MCF7, prostate cancer PC3 and bladder cancer EJ1 cells.
For each cell line, we tested four different cell densities
and repeated at least three times by two independent
researchers. For high densities in different cell types,
we used either 4 or 5 x 105 cells/ml for cell seeding,
depending on which concentrations could reach maximum
confluence at the end of experiments. We found that there
was no significant cell morphology change by 1 T SMF
treatment (Supplementary Figure 1 and 2). However, in
most of them, the cell number can be reduced by 1 T SMF
when they were plated at higher densities, but not at lower
densities (Figure 2). In fact, SMF tends to increase cell
number when they were plated at lower cell density. This
indicates that cell density is an important factor that affects
the impact of SMF on these human solid cancer cell lines.

RESULTS
Cell type- and density-dependent cell number
reduction of 1 T SMF in 7 different human
cancer cell lines

Cell type- and density-dependent effects of 1 T
SMF on 5 different human non-cancer cell lines
and two rodent cell lines

We previously found that 1 T static magnetic field
(SMF) can effectively inhibit human nasopharyngeal
cancer CNE-2Z cell proliferation [11]. However, it was
interesting that we got different results when we seeded
the cells at different densities. To confirm the influence of
cell density on SMF-induced CNE-2Z cell proliferation
inhibition, we seeded them at four different densities, 0.5,
1, 2 or 4 x 105 cells/ml, cultured with or without 1 T SMF
for 2 days and examined them side-by-side (Figure 1). At
the end of the experiments, the control cells plated at lower
cell densities are usually only around 50% confluent,
while at higher cell density, the cells usually reach
maximum confluence. To get unbiased and reproducible
results throughout this study, we had two researchers
to conduct the same sets of experiments independently
and gathered their results together for statistic analysis.
Experiments of four different cell densities were done
using the same batch of cells side-by-side to reduce any
potential variations. We found that at lower densities of
0.5-1 x 105 cells/ml, 1 T SMF treatment for 2 days did
not inhibit CNE-2Z cell proliferation (Figure 1). On the
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

The above 7 human cell lines are all human solid
cancer cell lines. However, it has been shown that many
non-cancer cell lines are not affected by moderate intensity
SMFs. For example, Wiskirchen et al showed that 0.2, 1.0,
and 1.5 T SMFs do not affect the cell growth of human
fetal lung fibroblasts [9]. Next we chose 5 human noncancer cells lines to examine the effects of 1 T SMF. We
chose embryonic kidney cell line 293T, the immortalized
retinal pigment epithelial cell line RPE1, and three normal
lung cells (HSAEC2-KT, HSAEC30-KT and HBEC30KT). We found that 1 T SMF did not reduce cell numbers
of these human non-cancer cell lines, at all cell densities
we tested (Figure 3, Supplementary Figure 3). Although
the mechanism is unclear, it is obvious that the effects
of 1 T SMF on these 5 human non-cancer cells lines are
also cell type- and cell density-dependent (Figure 3). For
293T and RPE1 cells, 1 T SMF has minimal effects on
cell numbers at all cell densities (Figure 3). For the three
normal lung cells, we notice that SMF increases their
cell numbers at some cell densities, which also varies
13127

Oncotarget

between different cell types. In addition, we compared the
relative cell number reduction in the 6 cancer vs. 6 noncancer cells at four different cell densities (Supplementary
Figure 4). Our results show that at higher cell density, 1
T SMF exposure for 2 days could cause ~15% cell number
reduction in the 6 solid cancer cell lines, while in the 6 noncancer cell lines there was no reduction (Supplementary
Figure 4). This is statistically different (p < 0.05).

Next we examined two rodent cell lines, Chinese
Hamster Ovary cell line CHO and mouse embryo
fibroblast cell line NIH-3T3 (Figure 4). NIH-3T3 cells
have been reported to be affected by 7-17 T SMFs [15] but
CHO cells were shown to be irresponsive to SMFs ranging
from moderate intensity SMFs to 13 T ultra-high SMFs
in both ours and other people’s studies [4, 7, 8]. Here we
found that at high density, 1 T SMF reduced NIH-3T3 cell

Figure 1: 1 T Static Magnetic Field (SMF) affects the number of human nasopharyngeal carcinoma CNE-2Z cells in
a cell density dependent manner. CNE-2Z cells were plated one day ahead at different concentrations and treated with 1 T SMF for
2 days before they were analyzed. A. Representative bright field images of CNE-2Z cells after 1 T SMF exposure for 2 days. B. Relative
cell numbers of CNE-2Z after control or 1 T SMF treatment for 2 days. Quantification was from 4 independent experiments (n=4). ns, not
significant; *, p<0.05. Green color indicates 1 T SMF increases the cell number and red color indicates 1 T SMF decreases the cell number.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

13128

Oncotarget

number but has minimal effects on CHO cells (Figure 4),
which is consistent with previous reports. In addition, our
results also show that 1 T SMF affected the NIH-3T3 cell
in a cell-density dependent way. The differences between
CHO and NIH-3T3 cells are probably due to the hamster
vs. mouse species difference, tissue difference, or ovary
vs. embryo difference, which will need more studies to
disclose the underlying mechanism.

T SMF induced differential effects on their cell numbers
(Table 1). Since reduced cell number could result from
reduced cell proliferation, increased cell death, or cell
cycle arrest, we first examined whether the cell death was
affected by 1 T SMF. We used Annexin/PI stain and flow
cytometry to examine live cells, apoptotic cells or necrotic
cells (Figure 5). Our results show that 1 T SMF does not
have apparent effects on apoptotic or necrotic cell number,
which indicates that 1 T SMF does not promote cell death
in these cell lines we tested (Figure 5).
Next we used flow cytometry to examine the cell
cycle distribution to see whether the cell number reduction
was due to cell cycle arrest at certain stage. However,
although the cell density itself has a significant impact

1 T SMF does not have obvious effects on cell
death or cell cycle
By now we have examined 7 human solid cancer, 5
human non-cancer and two rodent cell lines, in which 1

Figure 2: 1 T SMF affects multiple human solid cancer cell lines in a cell density dependent manner. HCT116, A431,

A549, PC3, MCF7 and EJ1 cells were seeded at different densities one day ahead and treated with 1 T SMF for 2 days before they were
counted. Relative cell numbers are shown in the figure and quantification was from 3-4 independent experiments. ns, not significant; *,
p<0.05; **, p<0.01. Green color indicates 1 T SMF increases the cell number and red color indicates 1 T SMF decreases the cell number.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

13129

Oncotarget

on cell cycle distribution in multiple cell lines, 1 T SMF
does not have evident effect on cell cycle in all cell lines
we tested (Figure 6). These results indicate that the cell
number reduction by 1 T SMF we observed in multiple
human solid cancer cell lines as well as the mouse embryo
fibroblast NIH-3T3 cells at high density was not due to
increased cell death or cell cycle arrest.

on cell number. However, the mechanism is still unclear.
Our previous study showed that EGFR (epidermal
growth factor receptor) and the mTOR pathway could
be affected by SMFs [4, 11]. Specifically, using purified
proteins and high resolution single molecular imaging,
we previously found that SMF could directly change
EGFR protein orientation and inhibit their activation.
Therefore we wanted to test whether the EGFR-AktmTOR pathway is different at various cell densities.
Western blot analysis showed that multiple components
in the EGFR-Akt-mTOR pathway were clearly affected
by cell density in both HCT116 and CNE-2Z cancer
cell lines (Figures 7A and Supplementary Figure 5). For

The EGFR-Akt-mTOR pathway contributes to
the differential cellular effects of 1 T SMF
Our results so far showed that both cell type and
cell density can directly influence the effects of SMFs

Figure 3: 1 T SMF has minimal effects on multiple human non-cancer cell lines. 293T, RPE1, HSAEC-2KT, HSAEC-30KT
and HBEC-30KT cells were seeded at different cell densities one day ahead and treated with 1 T SMF for 2 days before they were counted.
Relative cell numbers are shown in the figure and quantification was from 3-5 independent experiments. ns, not significant; *, p<0.05; ***,
p<0.005. Green color indicates 1 T SMF increases the cell number.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

13130

Oncotarget

example, the phosphorylation level of EGFR and Akt were
increased when the cells were plated at higher density. It
is interesting that the EGFR-Akt-mTOR pathway was
also affected in three normal human lung cell lines by
cell density (Figure 7B and Supplementary Figure 6) but
the change pattern was different. More specifically, the
phosphorylation level of EGFR and Akt were decreased
at higher cell density in these normal lung cells, which are
opposite to HCT116 and CNE-2Z cancer cells.
Next we compared the cancer vs. non-cancer cells
from human lungs. We examined different densities of
A549 lung cancer cells and HSAEC2-KT normal lung
cells side-by-side to see whether the EGFR-Akt-mTOR
pathway is differentially regulated by cell type and cell
density (Figure 7C and Supplementary Figure 7). Not
surprisingly, multiple components in the EGFR-AktmTOR pathway were highly expressed/activated in the
A549 lung cancer cells but not in HSAEC-2KT normal
lung cells (Figure 7C, 7D and Supplementary Figure 7),
which is consistent with their oncogenetic functions. In
addition, the cell density also affected their expression
differentially in these two cell lines. Although the
protein expression and phosphorylation pattern in the
three cancer cell lines we tested here (HCT116, CNE2Z and A549) are not completely identical, they have
some aspects in common. For example, increasing cell

density in HCT116, CNE-2Z and A549 lung cancer cells
increased the expression and phosphorylation of EGFR,
but not in HSAEC2-KT normal lung cells. Since EGFR
is an important anti-cancer target that is overexpressed in
multiple cancer cells [16–19] and is also a direct target
for SMFs [4], we hypothesized that it may played a key
function in SMF-induced cell type and density-dependent
cell proliferation inhibition.
Next we tested whether EGFR can convert the
EGFR-null CHO cells (Figure 4) from SMF-insensitive
into SMF-sensitive cells by EGFR transfection. We made
a CHO cell line that stably overexpresses EGFR with a
FLAG tag (CHO-EGFR cells) [4]. Here we examined
them for their responses to 1 T SMF at different cell
densities. Our results showed that its cell number was
reduced by 1 T SMF in a cell density-dependent manner
(Figure 8A), which was different from CHO cells (Figure
4), but was similar to many cancer cells we tested (Figure
2). Quantification results showed that at 0.5 x 105 cells/ml,
the cell number of CHO-EGFR cells were increased by 1
T SMF (Figure 8B). However, when they were plated at
8-fold higher density (at 4 x 105 cells/ml), the cell number
of CHO-EGFR cells are reduced by 1 T SMF (Figure 8B).
These results show that transforming EGFR, a protein that
is overexpressed and/or activated in multiple cancers, can
make the SMF-insensitive CHO cells respond to SMF

Figure 4: 1 T SMF reduces NIH-3T3 cell number but has minimal effects on CHO cells. NIH-3T3 and CHO cells were
plated at different concentrations one day ahead and treated with 1 T SMF for 2 days before they were counted. Relative cell numbers are
shown in the figure and quantification was from 3-5 independent experiments. ns, not significant; *, p<0.05. Red color indicates 1 T SMF
decreases the cell number.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

13131

Oncotarget

Table 1: A table summarizes the cell lines we used and the effects of 1 T SMF 2 day exposure on their cell numbers

Human cancer

Human
non-cancer

Cell line names

Species

Cell line
information

CNE-2Z

human

HCT116

effects of 1 T SMF on cell number
High cell density

Low cell density

Nasopharyngeal
cancer

Reduction

Increase

human

colon cancer

Reduction

No effect

A431

human

skin cancer

Reduction

No effect

A549

human

lung cancer

Reduction

No effect

MCF7

human

breast cancer

Reduction

Increase

PC3

human

prostate cancer

Reduction

No effect

EJ1

human

bladder cancer

No effect

Increase

HSAEC2-KT

human

normal lung

Increase

Increase

HSAEC30-KT

human

normal lung

Increase

No effect

HBEC30-KT

human

normal lung

Increase

Increase

RPE1

human

retinal pigment
epithelial

No effect

No effect

293T

human

embryonic
kidney

No effect

No effect

CHO

hamster

Chinese Hamster
Ovary

No effect

No effect

NIH-3T3

mouse

mouse embryo
fibroblast

Reduction

No effect

Rodent

1 T SMF increases the efficacy of Akt inhibitors
on CNE-2Z cell growth inhibition

in a cell density-dependent manner. In addition, Western
blot analysis also showed that the EGFR expression level
and phosphorylation at 1068 were both increased in cells
plated at higher cell densities, which were similar to
HCT116, CNE-2Z and A549 cancer cells (Figure 8C).
In addition, the EGFR phosphorylation level at higher
cell density could be reduced by SMF (Figure 8C). In
contrast, the EJ1 cell, which was the only cancer cell
line in all 7 solid cancer cell lines we tested that was not
reduced by 1 T SMF, showed a different EGFR pattern.
The EGFR expression level and phosphorylation level do
not increase at higher cell density (Figure 8D). Moreover,
the EGFR phosphorylation level of EJ1 cells at higher
cell density could not be reduced by 1 T SMF (Figure
8D). Therefore, although we cannot exclude the possible
involvement of other cellular factors, for example, other
Receptor Tyrosine Kinases that are also overexpressed
in many cancer cells, our data show that the EGFR-AktmTOR pathway is one of the key factors involved in the
SMF-induced differential effects in different cell types at
different densities. EGFR is likely to be at least one of the
major reasons that contribute to the 1 T SMF-induced cell
number reductions in some solid cancer cell lines.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

We have previously shown that 1 T SMF can
increase the drug efficacy of EGFR and mTOR
inhibitors [4, 11]. Since EGFR and Akt inhibitors are
frequently used in combinational therapy to improve
the drug efficacy [20, 21], next we examined whether
1 T SMF can also increase the drug efficacy of Akt
inhibitors (BEZ-235 and MK2206) (Figure 9). We tested
them at both high cell density (Figure 9A, 9B) and low
cell density (Figure 9C, 9D). We found that although
the combinational effects were more consistent and
obvious in some drug concentrations than the others,
overall the drug efficacies of both Akt inhibitors (BEZ235 and MK2206) were increased by 1 T SMF (Figure
9). To quantitatively analyze the combination effects
between 1 T SMF and Akt inhibitors, we calculated their
coefficient of drug interaction (CDI) (Figure 9). Most
CDI values are between 0.7 and 1, which indicate there
are weak synergistic effects between SMF and these
two Akt inhibitors on cell number reduction in CNE-2Z
cancer cells.
13132

Oncotarget

DISCUSSION

as well as alterations in some signal pathways [22–28].
Therefore, although our data in this study did not provide
clear-cut molecular mechanisms for the SMF-induced
cellular effects in all types of cells at all cell densities, we
aim to alert people that both cell type and density are key
factors that directly influence the effects of SMF on cell
proliferation. Researchers should take these into account
when they analyze their own data as well as the current
literature.
The apparent different responses of human cancer
vs. non-cancer cells to 1 T SMF are very interesting.

We suspected that the cell density-induced variations
must have contributed to some of the inconsistencies in
the literature. Most researchers in the field of biological
studies of magnetic fields, actually including us, did not
pay much attention to the cell density, or at least did
not realize that the cell density could cause dramatic
differences in our experimental outcomes. However, it has
been shown that the cell density difference could directly
cause variations in cell growth rate, protein expression,

Figure 5: 1 T SMF does not promote cell death. Various cells were plated at different concentrations one day ahead and treated with

1 T SMF for 2 days before they were analyzed for cell death using Annexin/PI stain and flow cytometry. Representative raw data A. and
quantification of live, apoptotic and necrotic cell numbers B. are shown.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

13133

Oncotarget

Actually there were multiple previous studies indicated
that SMFs have more impacts on cancer cells than on noncancer cells [5, 14, 29] and moderate intensity SMFs could
increase the efficacy of some chemodrugs on cancer cells
[11, 12, 30, 31]. Moreover, moderate intensity SMF was
also shown to be able to reduce tumor growth and increase
chemodrugs efficacy in mouse models [13, 30]. Here we
found that the inhibition effects of 1 T SMF on cancer

cells are cell type- and cell density- dependent. We showed
that for 6 out of 7 human solid cancer cell lines, 1 T SMF
reduced their cell numbers at higher cell densities but not
at lower cell densities. In contrast, for all 5 human noncancer cell lines, 1 T SMF did not reduce cell numbers at
all cell densities we tested. For the same tissue, the cell
number of human lung cancer A549 cells was effectively
reduced by 1 T SMF at higher cell density, but cell number

Figure 6: 1 T SMF has minimal effects on cell cycle. Various cells were plated at different concentrations one day ahead and treated
with 1 T SMF for 2 days before they were analyzed for cell cycle. Experiments have been down for at least two times for each cell line and
representative quantification results are shown.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

13134

Oncotarget

Figure 7: Cell density differentially affects the EGFR-Akt-mTOR pathway in cancer vs non-cancer cells. A. Colon

cancer HCT116 and nasopharyngeal cancer CNE-2Z or B. three normal lung cell lines HSAEC-30KT, HBEC-30KT and HSAEC-2KT
were plated at four different cell densities one day ahead before they were harvested for Western Blot (WB). Representative Western Blots
are shown. C. Lung cancer A549 and normal lung cells HSAEC-2KT cells were plated at four different cell densities one day ahead before
they were harvested for Western Blot. Samples were loaded on the same gel for comparison. Representative Western Blots are shown.
D. Quantification of relative intensity of WB in (C) to compare the difference between lung cancer vs. normal lung cells. Cropped WB
images are shown in the figures to save space. Full size WB images are in Supplementary Figures 5-7.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

13135

Oncotarget

Figure 8: The EGFR expression influences SMF-induced cell proliferation effects. CHO cells stably transfected with EGFR-

FLAG (CHO-EGFR cells) or EJ1 cells were plated at different cell densities one day ahead, and treated with 1 T SMF for 2 days before they
were counted for cell number A, B. and analyzed for Western Blot C, D. (A) Representative bright field images of cells. (B) Quantification
of (A) from 4 independent experiments. ns, not significant; *, p<0.05. Green color indicates 1 T SMF increases the cell number and red
color indicates 1 T SMF decreases the cell number. (C, D) Representative Western Blots and the quantification results. EGFR and pEGFR
were normalized to actin or tubulin control.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

13136

Oncotarget

of normal human lung cells HSAEC2-KT, HSAEC30-KT
and HBEC30-KT were even increased.
The fact that 1 T SMF could inhibit many solid
cancer cells growth at higher densities is interesting
and potentially promising. Although the regular MRI
examination in the hospitals only last minutes to hours,
the SMF could be provided by other devices. There are
actually some people using permanent magnets to treat
late-stage cancer patients/volunteers and got encouraging
results (unpublished). Their treatment time goes far
beyond the MRI machines. However, our results showed
that the cell growth for one of the seven cancer cell lines,
the bladder cancer EJ1 cell, was not reduced by SMF at
all. In addition, we have only tested 7 human solid cancer
cell lines, whether other cancer cells in suspension, such as

various types of leukemia cells, can be affected in the same
pattern is still unknown. Therefore, although at higher cell
density, 1 T SMF reduced the cell number in majority
of cancer cell lines we tested, further investigations are
strongly needed to explore the clinical potential of SMFs
on cancer growth inhibition. It is very possible that only
some cancer cell types can be inhibited by SMFs, which
is likely relevant to their different genetic background. In
addition, the tendency of SMFs to promote some cancer
cell growth at lower cell density should also raise caution
about the potential oncogenic effect at early cancer stages
for this prolonged SMF exposure. More investigations are
needed to address this issue.
One limitation of our study was that we did not
address the potential issue of metabolism, nutritional

Figure 9: 1 T SMF increases the efficacy of AKT inhibitors on CNE-2Z cell inhibition. CNE-2Z cells were plated one day
ahead at 4 x 105 or 0.5 x 105 cells/ml and treated with 1 T SMF with or without different BEZ-235 or MK2206 for 2 days before they
were counted. A, B. High cell density (4 x 105 cells/ml). C, D. Low cell density (0.5 x 105 cells/ml). Relative cell numbers are shown and
quantifications were from 3-4 independent experiments by two independent researchers. CDI (Coefficient of drug interaction) values are
shown. Blue color indicates additive effect. Red color indicates weak synergistic effect. ns, not significant; *, p<0.05; **, p<0.01; ***,
p<0.005; ****, p<0.001.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

13137

Oncotarget

competition for cells at high density, which is apparently
more stringent than cells at lower density. Theoretically,
SMFs may affect cell metabolism, for example, utilization
of carbon and nitrogen sources, oxygen consumption,
respiration etc. However, we recently started to examine
two types of leukemia cells in suspension and found that 1
T SMF inhibited both of them at lower cell concentration
but not at higher cell concentrations. Therefore we think
it is less likely that the reasons mentioned above such
as oxygen consumption or nutrient competition are
the major factors. In the meantime, it has been shown
that moderate intensity SMFs could affect intracellular
signaling pathways [32, 33]. Although we found that the
EGFR-Akt-mTOR pathway is involved, other factors must
co-exist. Further investigations are strongly needed to
examine more cell types at different conditions to unravel
additional mechanisms of the SMF effects on various
cancer cell types at different conditions.
It was known that the biological effects of
magnetic fields can be influenced by the magnetic field
types, strength, frequency, treatment time and other
parameters, which all contribute to the mixed results
of biological effects of magnetic field in the literature.
Here by systematically testing 15 different cell lines at 4
different cell densities, we revealed that both cell types
and densities are key factors that influence the effects of
SMF. In addition, EGFR-Akt-mTOR likely contributes to
the cell types and densities induced variations. The fact
that most cancer cell lines can be inhibited at high density
indicates the clinical potential of SMF in solid tumors or
end-stage tumors.

and 1% P/S. HSAEC2-KT, HSAEC30-KT and HBEC30KT cells were cultured in SAGM medium. All cells were
cultured in 5% CO2 at 37 °C.

Magnetic field exposure
Cells were plated at different concentrations one
night ahead to allow them to attach to the tissue culture
plates. Cells plated at 1 x 105 cells/ml are equivalent
to the density of 2 x 104 cells/cm2. On the second
day, they were placed in regular full-sized CO2 cell
incubator (Shanghai Boxun, BC-J160S) that has accurate
control of temperature (37°C), humidity and CO2 (5%)
(Supplementary Figure 8A, 8B). The sham control
group (control) was placed far away from the magnets
(dimension: 5 cm x 5 cm x 5 cm) and the Gauss meter
(LakeShore 475 DSP Gaussmeter) showed the magnetic
field intensity of 0.925 ± 0.206 Gs (background magnetic
field in the lab was 0.875 ± 0.171 Gs and in a separate
CO2 cell incubator with no magnets was 0.875 ± 0.096
Gs). The sham control is labeled as “control” in the
figures. The magnetic exposure group (+ 1 T) was placed
directly on the top center of the magnets, where the Gauss
meter showed that the magnetic intensity was 1.07 ± 0.037
T. The magnetic field exposed cells were labeled as “ + 1
T” in the figures. The magnetic field exposure group (1.07
± 0.037 T) has around 10,000-fold higher magnetic field
intensity than the sham control (0.925 ± 0.206 Gs).
The magnet surface dimension is 5 cm x 5 cm and
the diameter of the cell culture plates we used was 3.5
cm (Supplementary Figure 8C). Therefore the whole
cell culture plate was fully covered by the magnet. Both
control and the 1 T SMF exposed plates were in the same
incubator to reduce experimental variations. For cells
treated with SMF and Akt inhibitors, the inhibitors were
added right before the cells exposed to sham control or
the 1 T SMF. Cells were incubated with or without 1 T
SMF for 2 days before they were taken out and subjected
to further analyses, including cell counting, cell cycle and
cell death analysis and Western blotting.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Cell culture
We tested 15 cell lines in total, which are all adherent
cell lines. For the 12 human cell lines, we chose 7 cancer
cell lines (nasopharyngeal cancer CNE-2Z, colon cancer
HCT116, skin cancer A431, lung cancer A549, breast
cancer MCF7, prostate cancer PC3 and bladder cancer
EJ1 cells) and 5 non-cancer cell lines (embryonic kidney
cell line 293T, immortalized retinal pigment epithelial cell
line RPE1, and three normal lung cell lines HSAEC2-KT,
HSAEC30-KT and HBEC30-KT). The three rodent cell
lines are Chinese Hamster Ovary cell line CHO and mouse
embryo fibroblast cell line NIH-3T3, as well as CHO cells
that overexpresses EGFR-FLAG (CHO-EGFR cells). All
cells were from ATCC except for CHO-EGFR, which was
constructed as previously described [4]. HCT116, A431,
A549, MCF7, PC3, 293T, NIH-3T3, CHO, CHO-EGFR
and RPE1 cells were maintained in DMEM (Dulbecco
minimum essential medium) supplemented with 10%
(vol/vol) fetal bovine serum (FBS) and 1% (vol/vol)
penicillin and streptomycin (P/S). CNE-2Z and EJ1 cells
were cultured in RPMI-1640 supplemented with 10% FBS
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Cell counting
As mentioned above, cells were plated at different
concentrations in 35 mm cell culture plates. After SMF
exposure, bright field images were taken before the
cells were harvested by trypsinization. An aliquot of the
cells were counted by hemocytometer and the rest cells
were used for flow cytometry analysis (cell death and
cell cycle). Experiments were repeated for at least three
independent times by two researchers. The results were
gathered together for analysis.

Cell cycle analysis
Cells were trypsinized and washed with PBS. Then
they were fixed in 70% ice-cold ethanol overnight at 4
13138

Oncotarget

°C before they were washed with PBS, and incubated
in PI (propidium iodide) solution (BD Pharmingen) for
30 min at room temperature in the dark. Samples were
then analyzed on a BD Flow Cytometry (BD Biosciences,
Calibur). For each condition, we collected 1 x 104 cells per
sample. Data were analyzed using ModFit LT. Experiments
were done for at least two times and representative results
were shown in the figures.

were repeated for at least three independent times (n=3). In
each experiment, one plate of sham control and one plate of
magnetic exposure were examined. Each plate had 1-10 x
105 cells seeded at the beginning of the experiment.
For quantifications in this manuscript, mean
values are shown in all figures, and standard deviations
are shown as error bars. All images shown in figures
are representative results from multiple experiments.
Comparisons between different treatments were analyzed
by a two-tailed Student t test. P values are labeled in
figures for where data were compared.
We calculated the coefficient of drug interaction
(CDI = AB/(A x B)) of SMF in combination with Akt
inhibitors for their effects on cell numbers in Figure 9.
AB is the ratio of SMF + drug combination group to
the control group. A or B is the ratio of SMF or drug
single treatment group to the control group. Generally a
CDI value < 1 indicates synergistic effect, a CDI value
= 1 indicates additive effect, a CDI value > 1 indicates
antagonistic effect. Usually CDI < 0.7 indicates that the
treatment combination is significantly synergistic.

Annexin V/PI double stain
Cells were trypsinized and washed twice with icecold PBS before they were resuspended in binding buffer
at 106 cells/ml. Then 100 μl of them was transferred to a
5 ml culture tube and 5 μl of FITC-Annexin V + 5 μl of
PI (FITC-Annexin V Apoptosis Detection Kit was from
BD PharmingenTM) were added to the tube, mixed, and
incubated in the dark for 15 min at room temperature.
Then, 400 μl of binding buffer was added to the stained
cells before they were analyzed by flow cytometry within
1 h. Approximately 1 x 104 cells were collected by flow
cytometer. Experiments were done for at least two times
and representative results were shown in the figures.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

Western blotting

We would like to thank Dr. Qingsong Liu for
providing Akt inhibitors and Flow Cytometer; Dr. Liang
Chen for assistance with some of the cell lines.

Cells grown in tissue culture plates were lysed
directly in plates by 200 or 100 μl of M-PER lysis buffer
(Pierce) supplemented with protease and phosphatase
inhibitor cocktail at 4°C for 20 min. The whole cell
lysate was mixed with 2 x SDS loading buffer, boiled,
and subjected to Western blotting. The PVDF membrane
was blocked with 5 % NFDM (non-fat dry milk) at room
temperature for around 1 h. Corresponding primary
antibodies were diluted in AbDil-Tween (TBS; 2 % BSA;
0.1 % Tween-20) at 1:1000 dilution. Primary antibodies
used include phospho-specific antibodies, EGFR, Akt,
S6K, 4EBP1, and the HRP-linked anti-rabbit and antimouse IgG antibodies which were from Cell Signaling
Technology. The mouse monoclonal antibodies for
beta-tubulin and beta-actin were from Beijing TransGen
Biotech. All primary antibodies were diluted in AbDilTween at 1:1000 dilution (TBS supplemented with 2%
BSA and 0.1% Tween-20) and HRP conjugated secondary
antibodies were diluted in TBS with 0.1 % Tween-20 and
5 % NFDM at 1:5000 dilution. Western blotting results
were obtained by Bio-Rad ChemiDocTM XRS+ System and
Beijing Tanon Fine-do X6. ImageJ software was used to
quantify the protein relative level shown by Western blots.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

GRANT SUPPORT
This work was supported by the National
Key Research and Development Program of China
(#2016YFA0400900), Hefei Science Center CAS
(2016HSC-IU007), National Natural Science Foundation
of China (Grant No U1532151) and Chinese Academy of
Sciences “Hundred Talent program” to Xin Zhang, and
Chinese High Magnetic Field Laboratory facility.

REFERENCES
1.	 Sun W, Shen X, Lu D, Lu D, Chiang H. Superposition of an
incoherent magnetic field inhibited EGF receptor clustering
and phosphorylation induced by a 1.8 GHz pulse-modulated
radiofrequency radiation. Int J Radiat Biol. 2013; 89:
378-83.

Statistical analysis

2.	 Sun W, Gan Y, Fu Y, Lu D, Chiang H. An incoherent
magnetic field inhibited EGF receptor clustering and
phosphorylation induced by a 50-Hz magnetic field in
cultured FL cells. Cell Physiol Biochem. 2008; 22: 507-14.

To ensure the reproducibility of the experiments, most
experiments in this work were repeated by two independent
researchers on different days. Each researcher did their
experiment independently, according to the same protocol.
For quantifications presented in the figures, experiments
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

3.	 Jia C, Zhou Z, Liu R, Chen S, Xia R. EGF receptor
clustering is induced by a 0.4 mT power frequency
13139

Oncotarget

magnetic field and blocked by the EGF receptor tyrosine
kinase inhibitor PD153035. Bioelectromagnetics. 2007; 28:
197-207.

magnetic fields. Journal of Magnetic Resonance Imaging.
2005; 22: 334-40.
16.	 Normanno N, De Luca A, Bianco C, Strizzi L, Mancino
M, Maiello MR, Carotenuto A, De Feo G, Caponigro F,
Salomon DS. Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)
signaling in cancer. Gene. 2006; 366: 2-16.

4.	 Zhang L, Wang J, Wang H, Wang W, Li Z, Liu J, Yang X, Ji X,
Luo Y, Hu C, Hou Y, He Q, Fang J, et al. Moderate and strong
static magnetic fields directly affect EGFR kinase domain
orientation to inhibit cancer cell proliferation. Oncotarget.
2016; 7:41527-41539. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.9479.

17.	 Yoshimura N, Kudoh S, Kimura T, Mitsuoka S, Matsuura
K, Hirata K, Matsui K, Negoro S, Nakagawa K, Fukuoka
M. EKB-569, a new irreversible epidermal growth factor
receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitor, with clinical activity
in patients with non-small cell lung cancer with acquired
resistance to gefitinib. Lung Cancer. 2006; 51: 363-8.

5.	 Aldinucci C, Garcia JB, Palmi M, Sgaragli G, Benocci
A, Meini A, Pessina F, Rossi C, Bonechi C, Pessina GP.
The effect of strong static magnetic field on lymphocytes.
Bioelectromagnetics. 2003; 24: 109-17.
6.	 Raylman RR, Clavo AC, Wahl RL. Exposure to strong static
magnetic field slows the growth of human cancer cells in
vitro. Bioelectromagnetics. 1996; 17: 358-63.

18.	 Traxler P, Allegrini PR, Brandt R, Brueggen J, Cozens
R, Fabbro D, Grosios K, Lane HA, McSheehy P, Mestan
J, Meyer T, Tang C, Wartmann M, et al. AEE788: a dual
family epidermal growth factor receptor/ErbB2 and
vascular endothelial growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase
inhibitor with antitumor and antiangiogenic activity. Cancer
Res. 2004; 64: 4931-41.

7.	 Zhao G CS, Zhao Ye, Zhu L. Effects of 13T Static
Magnetic Fields (SMF) in the Cell Cycle Distribution and
Cell Viability in Immortalized Hamster Cells and Human
Primary Fibroblasts Cells. Plasma Science and Technology.
2010; 12: 123-8.

19.	 Seshacharyulu P, Ponnusamy MP, Haridas D, Jain M, Ganti
AK, Batra SK. Targeting the EGFR signaling pathway in
cancer therapy. Expert Opin Ther Targets. 2012; 16: 15-31.

8.	 Nakahara T, Yaguchi H, Yoshida M, Miyakoshi J. Effects of
exposure of CHO-K1 cells to a 10-T static magnetic field.
Radiology. 2002; 224: 817-22.
9.	 Wiskirchen J, Gronewaller EF, Heinzelmann F, Kehlbach
R, Rodegerdts E, Wittau M, Rodemann HP, Claussen CD,
Duda SH. Human fetal lung fibroblasts: in vitro study of
repetitive magnetic field exposure at 0.2, 1.0, and 1.5 T.
Radiology. 2000; 215: 858-62.

20.	 Crafter C, Vincent JP, Tang E, Dudley P, James NH,
Klinowska T, Davies BR. Combining AZD8931, a novel
EGFR/HER2/HER3 signalling inhibitor, with AZD5363
limits AKT inhibitor induced feedback and enhances
antitumour efficacy in HER2-amplified breast cancer
models. Int J Oncol. 2015; 47: 446-54.

10.	 Schiffer IB, Schreiber WG, Graf R, Schreiber EM, Jung D,
Rose DM, Hehn M, Gebhard S, Sagemuller J, Spiess HW,
Oesch F, Thelen M, Hengstler JG. No influence of magnetic
fields on cell cycle progression using conditions relevant
for patients during MRI. Bioelectromagnetics. 2003; 24:
241-50.

21.	 Lara PN, Jr., Longmate J, Mack PC, Kelly K, Socinski
MA, Salgia R, Gitlitz B, Li T, Koczywas M, Reckamp KL,
Gandara DR. Phase II Study of the AKT Inhibitor MK-2206
plus Erlotinib in Patients with Advanced Non-Small Cell
Lung Cancer Who Previously Progressed on Erlotinib. Clin
Cancer Res. 2015; 21: 4321-6.

11.	 Zhang L, Yang XX, Liu JJ, Luo Y, Li ZY, Ji XM, Wang WC,
Zhang X. 1 T moderate intensity static magnetic field affects
Akt/mTOR pathway and increases the antitumor efficacy of
mTOR inhibitors in CNE-2Z cells. Science Bulletin. 2015;
60: 2120-8.

22.	 Swat A, Dolado I, Rojas JM, Nebreda AR. Cell DensityDependent Inhibition of Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor
Signaling by p38 alpha Mitogen-Activated Protein Kinase
via Sprouty2 Downregulation. Molecular and Cellular
Biology. 2009; 29: 3332-43.

12.	 Luo Y, Ji X, Liu J, Li Z, Wang W, Chen W, Wang J, Liu Q,
Zhang X. Moderate intensity static magnetic fields affect
mitotic spindles and increase the antitumor efficacy of 5-FU
and Taxol. Bioelectrochemistry. 2016; 109: 31-40.

23.	 Caceres-Cortes JR, Alvarado-Moreno JA, Waga K, RangelCorona R, Monroy-Garcia A, Rocha-Zavaleta L, UrdialesRamos J, Weiss-Steider B, Haman A, Hugo P, Brousseau R,
Hoang T. Implication of tyrosine kinase receptor and steel
factor in cell density-dependent growth in cervical cancers
and leukemias. Cancer Research. 2001; 61: 6281-9.

13.	 Strelczyk D, Eichhorn ME, Luedemann S, Brix G, Dellian
M, Berghaus A, Strieth S. Static magnetic fields impair
angiogenesis and growth of solid tumors in vivo. Cancer
Biol Ther. 2009; 8: 1756-62.

24.	 Baba M, Hirai S, Kawakami S, Kishida T, Sakai N, Kaneko
S, Yao M, Shuin T, Kubota Y, Hosaka M, Ohno S. Tumor
suppressor protein VHL is induced at high cell density and
mediates contact inhibition of cell growth. Oncogene. 2001;
20: 2727-36.

14.	 Ghibelli L, Cerella C, Cordisco S, Clavarino G, Marazzi
S, De Nicola M, Nuccitelli S, D'Alessio M, Magrini A,
Bergamaschi A, Guerrisi V, Porfiri LM. NMR exposure
sensitizes tumor cells to apoptosis. Apoptosis. 2006; 11:
359-65.

25.	 Takahashi K, Tsukatani Y, Suzuki K. Density-dependent
inhibition of growth by E-cadherin-mediated cell adhesion.
Molecular Biology of the Cell. 1996; 7: 2466-.

15.	 Valiron O, Peris L, Rikken G, Schweitzer A, Saoudi
Y, Remy C, Job D. Cellular disorders induced by high
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

13140

Oncotarget

30.	 Gray JR, Frith CH, Parker JD. In vivo enhancement of
chemotherapy with static electric or magnetic fields.
Bioelectromagnetics. 2000; 21: 575-83.

26.	 Mcclain DA, Edelman GM. Density-Dependent Stimulation
and Inhibition of Cell-Growth by Agents That Disrupt
Microtubules. Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences of the United States of America-Biological
Sciences. 1980; 77: 2748-52.

31.	 Liu Y, Qi H, Sun RG, Chen WF. An investigation into the
combined effect of static magnetic fields and different
anticancer drugs on K562 cell membranes. Tumori. 2011;
97: 386-92.

27.	 Holley RW, Armour R, Baldwin JH, Brown KD, Yeh YC.
Density-Dependent Regulation of Growth of Bsc-1 Cells
in Cell-Culture - Control of Growth by Serum Factors.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the
United States of America. 1977; 74: 5046-50.

32.	 Wang Z, Sarje A, Che PL, Yarema KJ. Moderate strength
(0.23-0.28 T) static magnetic fields (SMF) modulate
signaling and differentiation in human embryonic cells.
BMC Genomics. 2009; 10: 356.

28.	 Macieira.A. Influence of Cell Density on Growth Inhibition
of Human Fibroblasts in Vitro. Proceedings of the Society
for Experimental Biology and Medicine. 1967; 125: 548-.

33.	 Wang Z, Che PL, Du J, Ha B, Yarema KJ. Static magnetic
field exposure reproduces cellular effects of the Parkinson's
disease drug candidate ZM241385. PLoS One. 2010; 5:
e13883.

29.	 Short WO, Goodwill L, Taylor CW, Job C, Arthur ME,
Cress AE. Alteration of Human Tumor-Cell Adhesion
by High-Strength Static Magnetic-Fields. Investigative
Radiology. 1992; 27: 836-40.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

13141

Oncotarget

