www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Oncotarget, 2017, Vol. 8, (No. 7), pp: 10785-10808
Priority Research Paper

Surrogate in vitro activation of innate immunity synergizes with
interleukin-7 to unleash rapid antigen-driven outgrowth of CD4+
and CD8+ human peripheral blood T-cells naturally recognizing
MUC1, HER2/neu and other tumor-associated antigens
Latha B. Pathangey1,*, Dustin B. McCurry1,*, Sandra J. Gendler1,2,3, Ana L.
Dominguez1, Jessica E. Gorman1, Girish Pathangey1, Laurie A. Mihalik3, Yushe
Dang4, Mary L. Disis4 and Peter A. Cohen2,3
1

Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Mayo Clinic, Scottsdale, AZ, USA

2

Department of Immunology, Mayo Clinic, Scottsdale, AZ, USA

3

Department of Hematology and Oncology, Mayo Clinic, Scottsdale, AZ, USA

4

Tumor Vaccine Group, Center for Translational Medicine in Women’s Health, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA

*

Shared first authorship

Correspondence to: Peter A. Cohen, email: cohen.peter@mayo.edu
Correspondence to: Sandra J. Gendler, email: gendler.sandra@mayo.edu
Correspondence to: Mary L. Disis, email: ndisis@uw.edu
Keywords: PBMC, TLR agonists, GM-CSF, IL-7, adoptive therapy, MUC1
Received: October 07, 2016	

Accepted: November 23, 2016	

Published: December 11, 2016

ABSTRACT
Effective adoptive immunotherapy has proved elusive for many types of human
cancer, often due to difficulties achieving robust expansion of natural tumor-specific
T-cells from peripheral blood. We hypothesized that antigen-driven T-cell expansion
might best be triggered in vitro by acute activation of innate immunity to mimic
a life-threatening infection. Unfractionated peripheral blood mononuclear cells
(PBMC) were subjected to a two-step culture, first synchronizing their exposure to
exogenous antigens with aggressive surrogate activation of innate immunity, followed
by γ-chain cytokine-modulated T-cell hyperexpansion. Step 1 exposure to GM-CSF
plus paired Toll-like receptor agonists (resiquimod and LPS), stimulated abundant
IL-12 and IL-23 secretion, as well as upregulated co-stimulatory molecules and
CD11c expression within the myeloid (CD33+) subpopulation. Added synthetic long
peptides (>20aa) derived from widely expressed oncoproteins (MUC1, HER2/neu
and CMVpp65), were reliably presented to CD4+ T-cells and cross-presented to CD8+
T-cells. Both presentation and cross-presentation demonstrated proteasomal and
Sec61 dependence that could bypass the endoplasmic reticulum. Step 2 exposure
to exogenous IL-7 or IL-7+IL-2 produced selective and sustained expansion of
both CD4+ and CD8+ peptide-specific T-cells with a predominant interferon-γproducing T1-type, as well as the antigen-specific ability to lyse tumor targets. Other
γ-chain cytokines and/or combinations were initially proliferogenic, but followed
by a contractile phase not observed with IL-7 or IL-7+IL-2. Regulatory T-cells were
minimally propagated under these culture conditions. This mechanistically rational
culture sequence, effective even for unvaccinated donors, enables rapid preparation
of T-cells recognizing tumor-associated antigens expressed by the majority of human
cancers, including pancreatic cancers, breast cancers and glioblastomas.

INTRODUCTION

strategy for cancer patients. Patients with advanced
melanoma often experience durable tumor regressions
when they are reinfused with culture-expanded natural
T-cells derived from their own tumor nodules, in

Adoptive immunotherapy (AIT) employing
autologous culture-expanded T-cells is a promising
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

10785

Oncotarget

conjunction with nonmyeloablative chemotherapy and
high dose IL-2 [1, 2]. Such AIT with naturally occurring
tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes (TIL) has recently been
extended to target individual mutations in a variety of
cancers besides melanoma [3, 4]. Responsiveness to
AIT correlates to the ability of culture-expanded TIL to
produce interferon- γ (IFNγ) upon tumor reexposure, as
well as to the dual presence of CD4+ and CD8+ T-cells in
the administered AIT product [5-7]. Consistent with these
results, we and others have shown that tumor-specific
CD4+ T-cells are sometimes a required component of
curative AIT in syngeneic mouse tumor models, and
that co-transfer of IFNγ-producing anti-tumor CD4+ and
CD8+ T cells can markedly accelerate tumor rejection [811].
Despite these promising developments, significant
barriers have impeded the wider use of natural
T-lymphocytes for AIT. It has been observed that TIL,
including mutation-specific TIL, can only be cultureexpanded from a subset of resected tumor nodules, and
equivalently performing T-cells have yet to be reliably
expanded to large numbers from human peripheral
blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) [12, 13]. The recent
widespread testing of lymphocytes transfected to express
alternative T-cell receptors or chimeric antigen receptors
(CAR) reflects, paradoxically, that it currently remains
easier to gene-modify peripheral lymphocytes than it is
to propagate natural tumor-reactive T-lymphocytes from
PBMC [14-18].
Peripheral blood nonetheless constitutes the most
convenient compartment, and often the only readily
available compartment, from which to harvest human
T-cells for culture expansion. Billions of PBMC can
reliably be collected by leukapheresis regardless of a
patient’s tumor type, containing not only CD4+ and CD8+
T-cells, but also monocytes which can be differentiated
into professional antigen (Ag)-presenting dendritic cells
(DCs) [19-21].
Despite the historic difficulties propagating natural
tumor-reactive T-cells from PBMC, it has recently proved
possible to culture-expand PBMC-derived T-cells from
lymphoma patients which recognize Epstein-Barr virus
(EBV) tumor-associated epitopes. Such cultured EBVspecific T-cells are often therapeutically active when
reinfused into patients [22]. Similarly, we have shown
that unfractionated PBMC from HER2/neu-vaccinated
cancer patients can give rise to enriched HER2-specific
CD4+ and CD8+ T-cells, when such PBMC are cultured
with the vaccination peptides as well as with exogenous
recombinant IL-12 and IL-2, then further expanded by
polyclonal anti-CD3/CD28 stimulation [23, 24]. When
such T-cells are reinfused into patients after administration
of cyclophosphamide, they often persist for months in the
peripheral circulation, and exert dose-dependent antitumor effects which are proportionate to the number
of HER2-specific T-cells reinfused [24]. Notably, the
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

inclusion of exogenous IL-12 in culture was required to
engage the selective outgrowth of HER2-specific T-cells
[23].
We hypothesized that upfront exposure of
unfractionated PBMCs to aggressive activators of
innate immunity, rather than to exogenous IL-12, could
optimally trigger the differentiation of IL-12-secreting,
type-1 polarized myeloid DCs naturally contained within
the myeloid PBMC subpopulation. We hypothesized that
such in vitro simulation of a life threatening infection
could further enhance the processing and presentation
of exogenous tumor-associated Ags added to culture,
promoting a highly desirable expansion of both CD4+ and
CD8+ T1-type (IFNγ-secreting), Ag-specific T-cells also
present in unfractionated PBMC.
Myeloid DC as well as monocytic DC precursors
are maximally activated by synergizing combinations
of closely timed danger signals [25-27]. Synergistic
danger signal pairings vary by species, and can consist
of a MyD88-activating and a TRIF-activating Toll-like
receptor (TLR) agonist, a single TLR agonist plus IFNγ
or CD40 ligand, or the combination of IFNγ plus CD40
ligand itself [25, 28]. Successful triggering of this alarm
system results in activation of innate immunity, type 1
polarization of myeloid DC, and emblematic production
of IL-12 and IL-23 to enhance T1- and T17-type responses
against life-threatening pathogens [25, 29]. This tightly
regulated requirement for multiple closely timed danger
signals protects the host from mounting potentially selfdestructive immune responses against isolated false
alarms. We postulated, however, that such maximally
synergistic danger signals might safely and conveniently
be applied to unfractionated PBMC outside the body
in order to strongly activate innate immunity, license
acquired immunity, and ramp up in vitro sensitization of
natural T-cells, both CD4+ and CD8+, to tumor-associated
antigens.

RESULTS
Combined upfront conditioning of unfractionated
human PBMC with recombinant GM-CSF,
resiquimod, and LPS licenses robust IL-12
production, costimulatory molecule upregulation
within the myeloid subset, and markedly
enhanced expansion of Ag-driven T-cells
In
preliminary
experiments,
previously
cryopreserved, freshly thawed unfractionated PBMC from
unvaccinated healthy volunteers were exposed for one day
to conventional DC differentiation stimuli (recombinant
human (rh) GM-CSF (GM) and rhIL-4), then overnight to
a variety of innate immunity stimuli, after which ELISA
was performed on culture supernatants to measure PBMC
10786

Oncotarget

secretion of IL-12p70 (assembled IL-12 dimer). As shown
in Figure 1A and Supplemental Figure S1A, a range of
responses was observed among individual donors and
culture media, but the paired addition of the TLR4 agonist
LPS and the TLR8 agonist resiquimod (R848) was by
far the strongest and most consistent rapid inducer of IL12p70 production. Furthermore, exposure to GM and/or
IL-4 prior to R848+LPS was itself responsible for a log
fold augmentation of IL-12p70 secretion (Supplemental
Figure S1B). Intracellular IL-12p70 assays confirmed that
IL-12 production was attributable to the CD33+ myeloid
fraction of PBMC (Supplemental Figure S1C). Consistent
with the absence of TLR9 and TLR7 expression on human
myeloid cells [25], CpG and imiquimod proved ineffective
for inducing IL-12p70 production (data not shown).
Even though initial conditioning of human PBMC
with either IL-4 or GM logarithmically enhanced
R848+LPS induced IL-12p70 production (Supplemental
Figure S1B), preliminary experiments revealed that initial

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

conditioning with GM alone (omitting IL-4) was most
effective for culture-expanding IFNγ-producing, Agspecific T-cells in vitro (data not shown). We therefore
directly compared the T-cell sensitizing impacts of
standard culture in exogenous IL-12 (“IL-12”) to upfront
conditioning with exogenous GM (“GM”) or GM plus
R848 and LPS (“GM+R848+LPS”), when PBMC from
healthy unvaccinated donors were pulsed with either
Candida albicans extract (CAN) or with recombinant
HER2 intracellular domain protein (HER2-ICD) (Figure
1B illustrates conditions for the “GM+R848+LPS”
groups).
Phenotypic analyses and ELISAs of IL-12 and
IL-23 production were performed on d2 of cultures. At
that juncture, the “IL-12” group had not yet received
exogenous IL-12 or IL-2, and was notable for modest
major histocompatibility complex (HLA-DR) expression,
an absence of co-stimulatory B7.1 (CD80) within the
CD33+ (myeloid) fraction, and undetectable endogenous

10787

Oncotarget

Figure 1: Unfractionated PBMC contain highly serviceable, readily activated myeloid Ag-presenting cells. A.

Cryopreserved healthy donor PBMC derived by leukapheresis were thawed on d0, cultured overnight in RPMI 1640 with standard
additives,10% heat deactivated human AB serum, 40ng/ml rhGM-CSF and 20ng/ml rhIL-4, then exposed on d1 to single or paired danger
signals (pIC 50μg/ml, R848 10μM, LPS 50ng/ml, IFNγ 2000 IU/ml). Supernatants were harvested for ELISA on d2 to determine production
of IL-12 (functionally assembled IL-12p70 dimer), pg/ml, 6 million PBMC/ml. This is representative of 8 biological replicates. B. Scheme
depicting Steps 1 and 2 of culture for groups receiving rhGM-CSF+R848+LPS. C. d2 analyses of PBMC cultured three different ways:
(a) standard “IL-12” culture group (2 days prior to their initial exposure to rhIL-12 and rhIL-2); (b) “GM” conditioned culture group
which received rhGM-CSF (40 ng/ml) on d0; (c) “GM+R848+LPS” group, same as “GM” group but also receiving R848+LPS on d1.
d2 supernatants were assayed for IL-12p70 and IL-23 (BD = below detection) and resuspended PBMC were analyzed by FACS for B7.1
and HLA-DR expression within the CD33+ myeloid subpopulation. Mean fluorescent indices (MFI) were normalized relative to isotype
control values of 1.0, and are representative of 5 biological replicates. D. Same groups as in C., carried forward in culture after pulsation
either with Candida albicans extract at a 1:10 dilution (CAN) or with recombinant HER2 intracellular domain protein (HER2-ICD 50 μg/
ml). “IL-12” groups were Ag-pulsed d0 prior to receiving rhIL-2 and rhIL-12 on days 4, 8 and 12 (60 IU/ml and 10 ng/ml respectively).
“GM” and “GM+R858+LPS” groups received GM d0, were Ag-pulsed d1 with or without R848+LPS, and transitioned to IL-7/IL-2
treatment d2. All groups were harvested on d16 (end of “Round One”), and tested in an ICC assay for specific reactivity to freshly thawed
Ag-pulsed autologous PBMC. The “GM+R848+LPS” groups were also carried forward for Round Two of culture. Restimulator PBMC
were either unpulsed (UP), or pulsed with CAN or HER2-ICD, and added at a T-cell:restimulatory PBMC ratio of 2:1. Fold expansion is
indicated for each group. Shown dot plots are gated on the CD4+ subpopulation, with CD8+ T-cell responses displaying a parallel trend (not
shown). Numbers in each dot plot show each culture condition’s frequency of IFNγ+ CD4+ T-cells, calculated as %RUQ/(%RUQ+%RLQ).
Representative of two biological replicates.

IL-12p70 or IL-23 secretion. By comparison, exposure
to exogenous GM beginning on d0 increased expression
of both HLA-DR and B7.1 expression within the CD33+
subpopulation without inducing IL-12p70 or IL-23
secretion, whereas exposure both to GM on d0 and to
R848+LPS on d1 (GM+R848+LPS) further matured the
CD33+ subset and also stimulated prodigious IL-12p70
and IL-23 secretion (Figure 1C). In addition, expression
of the alpha X-chain integrin CD11c, normally restricted
to the small subpopulation of precommitted DC within the
CD33+ PBMC fraction [30, 31], extended to the majority
of CD33+ cells after exposure to GM and/or R848+LPS
(Supplemental Figure S1D).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

The “GM” and “GM+R848+LPS” culture groups
were expanded from d2 forward in exogenous IL7+IL-2 (Figure 1B) whereas standard “IL-12” groups
received IL-12 and IL-2 on days 4, 8 and 12. Intracellular
cytokine assays (ICC’s) were performed at d16 of culture.
Compared to exogenous IL-12 or GM conditioning, the
combination of GM+R848+LPS markedly increased both
the absolute numbers and the frequency of either CAN- or
HER2-ICD-specific, IFNγ-producing T-cells, both CD4+
and CD8+ (Figure 1D and not shown). This was already
observable within a single 16-19 day round of culture,
and was easily amplified further by a second round of Agdriven culture (Figure 1D).
10788

Oncotarget

IL-7 uniquely extends the proliferation and
survival of GM+R848+LPS conditioned,
Ag-specific CD4+ and CD8+ T-cells from
unfractionated PBMC

expansion and/or survival of both CD4+ and CD8+ Agspecific T-cells during 2-3 week culture (Figure 2A left and
right panels). Furthermore, co-exposure to any examined
γ-chain cytokine(s) other than IL-2 reduced IL-7’s ability
to license Ag-specific T-cell expansion (Figure 2A, 2B).
Multiple linear regression analyses (Supplemental Table
S1 and Figure 2F) revealed that only IL-7 exposure was
significantly associated with CD4+ T-cell Ag-specificity
(Figure 2A, 2C), CD8+ T-cell Ag-specificity (Figure 2A,
2D), and fold expansion (Figure 2B, 2E) (p = 0.00185**,
0.00406**, and 0.00572** respectively).Thus, while
GM+R848+LPS conditioning could license preferential
expansion of Ag-driven PBMC T-cells, exposure to rhIL7 proved to be an equally critical co-licensing requirement
for maximally sustained Ag-specific proliferation and
survival.

We examined the impact of different γ-chain
cytokines, individually or in combination, upon the
expansion of Ag-specific CD4+ or CD8+ T-cells from
unfractionated, GM+R848+LPS conditioned PBMC.
Previous reports have observed that IL-7 and IL-21, IL-7
and IL-15 or IL-15 and IL-21 can synergize to enhance
generation of Ag-specific T cells [32-36]. Surprisingly,
for GM+R848+LPS conditioned PBMC, rhIL-7 or rhIL7+rhIL-2 proved far superior to other γ-chain cytokines,
whether singly or in combination, for licensing selective

Figure 2: γ-chain cytokines have varying impacts on GM+R848+LPS modulated Ag-specific PBMC T-cell expansion.
Cultures as in Figure 1D, but all groups received GM, CAN, R848 and LPS prior to exposure to various γ-chain cytokines from d2 to d16
(see doses under Materials and Methods). Graphs depict ICC analyses of harvested T-cells on d16, namely: A., left panel, frequency of
CAN-specific IFNγ+ CD4+ T-cells; A., right panel, frequency of CAN-specific IFNγ+ CD8+ T-cells; and B., gross fold culture expansion.
C./D./E. Linear regression analyses comparing the presence (“NO vs YES”) of each cytokine, indicating that among the γ-chain cytokines
tested (rhIL-7, rhIL-2, rhIL-15 and rhIL-21), only rhIL-7 had a significantly positive association with T-cell specificity, both CD4+ and
CD8+, as well as with yield. Representative of two biological replicates. See F. and Supplemental Table S1 for details of the statistical
analysis.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

10789

Oncotarget

CD4+ and CD8+ T-cells with enriched specificity
for tumor-associated long synthetic peptides
are readily expanded from GM+R848+LPS
conditioned, unfractionated PBMC

that we have previously described and utilized in clinical
trials [23, 24, 43] (Figure 4B/4C/4D/4E).

Phenotypic features of Ag-specific T-cells derived
during GM+R848+LPS stimulated human PBMC
cultures

Because it is often difficult and/or costly to prepare
clinically acceptable grades of complex proteins for
use as Ags, we investigated whether GM+R848+LPS
conditioned PBMC could process exogenous synthetic
peptides as effectively as CAN extract or recombinantly
produced HER2-ICD. We therefore sought to identify long
synthetic peptides (20mers or longer) that had the potential
to be truly universal HLA-DR (MHC class II) binders,
based on cleavable embedded 15mer peptide sequences
[37], as well as cleavable embedded 8-9mers with high
avidity for the widely prevalent MHC Class I haplotype
HLA-A2.1 (see Materials and Methods), We applied this
strategy to predict immunogenic “hot spots” within the
widely prevalent tumor-associated proteins MUC1 and
HER2 (Figure 3 and Figure 4), as well as the brain tumorassociated pp65 cytomegalovirus (CMV) protein [21, 3841].
Employing this algorithm, we identified and
synthesized leading candidate peptide sequences from
MUC1, HER2 and CMVpp65. Predictions encompassed
both previously identified [42-45] and heretofore
unidentified epitopes. Compared to HER2, which was
abundant in hot spot regions (Figure 4A), MUC1 displayed
few hot spots, with the leading MUC1 candidate sequences
proving to be within the Sperm protein, Enterokinase and
Agrin (SEA) domain, designated SEA1 and SEA2 (Figure
3A, 3B). Ironically, the most widely studied MUC1
region, the variable number of tandem repeats (VNTR)
domain [46], was predicted to be much less effective as
an immunogen, at least in a nonglycosylated state (Figure
3A, difference in composite IC50 for VNTR versus SEA1,
SEA2 or CMVpp65 p < 0.0001****).
The synthesized long peptides were individually
pulsed onto GM+R848+LPS conditioned PBMC cultures
established from unvaccinated HLA-A2.1+ healthy
volunteers, then expanded in rhIL-7 or rhIL-7+rhIL-2.
Within 16 culture days it was consistently possible
to numerically expand and significantly increase the
frequency of T-cells with natural specificity for MUC1,
HER2, or CMVpp65, both CD4+ and CD8+ (Figure
3 and Figure 4). As predicted from our algorithm, the
SEA1 and SEA2 MUC1 sequences as well as CMVpp65
were highly immunogenic, whereas the VNTR nonglycosylated sequence was reproducibly less effective
(Figure 3E). Proliferation of CD4+ and CD8+ T-cells was
indistinguishable, with both subsets retaining their initial
proportionality during expansion (data not shown).
HER2-specific CD4+ and CD8+ T-cell responses
could also be readily achieved against tested long peptides,
some of which contained embedded promiscuous15mers
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

GM+R848+LPS conditioned, IL-7 or IL-7+IL-2
expanded PBMC T-cells were analyzed for their abilities
to produce Ag-specific cytokines in restimulatory Luminex
assays of supernatants as well as in restimulatory ICCs.
Although a mixture of T1-, T2- and T17-type cytokines
were produced by the bulk cultures, a predominantly
T1-type IFNγ-producing response was evident in the
Luminex assays (Figure 5A1, 5A2), paralleling ICC
results (e.g., Figure 3C, 3D). Furthermore, T-cells from
GM+R848+LPS conditioned PBMC driven by either
SEA2 or SEA1 long peptides not only specifically
recognized one or both of these sensitizing peptides at
restimulation, but also preferentially lysed the HLA-A2.1+
human breast cancer line MDA-MB-231 transduced to
express MUC1 (Figure 5B).
Subanalysis of CD4+T-cells producing Ag-specific
IFNγ demonstrated nearly uniform expression of the B7.1
costimulatory receptor CD28, as well as a near absence
of CD56, consistent with a favorably multipotent, non
exhausted state of T-cell differentiation (Supplemental
Figure S2A [47-49]). Furthermore, a mix of CCR7+
and CCR7- T-cells was expanded in culture, consistent
with dual maintenance of central memory and memory
effector T-cells (Supplemental Figure S2A [50, 51]).
Co-staining in ICC’s for multiple intracellular cytokines
was also performed to see if individual Th1 and Th17
subpopulations were discernable. In such experiments, we
observed that individual T-cells produced every possible
combination of IFNγ, IL-17 and IL-2 upon reexposure to
their driving Ag (Supplemental Figure S2B).
We investigated whether regulatory T-cells (Tregs)
were conspicuous in these cultures. Although a subset of
T-cells expressed Foxp3 at culture’s end (Supplemental
Figure S3), this subset was almost completely lacking
co-expression of latency-associated peptide (LAP) and/or
glycoprotein A repetitions predominant LRRC32 (GARP)
(Supplemental Figure S4), a composite phenotype
associated with activated effector T-cells rather than with
Treg function [52-54]. A parallel absence of LAP and/or
GARP expression was also observed for Helios+ T-cells
(Supplemental Figure S4), indicating that they too were
not Tregs [53, 54]. Finally, as expected, subsets of both
CD4+ and CD8+ T-cells displayed physiologic checkpoint
receptors for B7.1 (CTLA4) and/or for PD-L1 (PD-1)
(Supplemental Figure S3 [55, 56]).
Preliminary PBMC cultures established from
four breast cancer patients indicated that the presently
described culture system could be applied successfully
10790

Oncotarget

Figure 3: CD4+ and CD8+ natural T-cells recognizing MUC1- and CMV-associated peptide sequences can be reliably
propagated even from non-vaccinated PBMC donors. Utilizing known HLA-DR frequencies, a composite array of 29 HLA-DR

haplotypes was identified that together spanned nearly 90% of individuals regardless of race or ethnicity (Supplemental Table S2). Open
access Ag discovery software (NetMHCIIpan 2.1-3.0 and NetMHCpan 2.4-2.8) was employed to identify “hot spot” domains within
individual tumor-associated proteins containing clusters of embedded 15mers with promiscuously high affinity for the composite HLA-DR
array, as well as embedded 8-9mers predicted to have high affinity for the widely prevalent HLA-A2.1 haplotype. A. Predicted averaged
HLA-DR binding affinities for all 15mers contained within three MUC1 domains (VNTR, SEA1 and SEA2) as well as CMVpp65. Data
are portrayed as IC50 in nM, with lower values indicating higher affinity. Affinities for SEA1- and SEA2-derived 15mers were observed
to be significantly stronger than VNTR-derived 15mers (two-tailed p always < 0.0001****). B. A heat map was derived for MUC1
showing a relative dearth of hot spots compared to HER2/neu (Figure 4A) or to CMV pp65 protein (not shown). C.-D. Representative ICC
outcomes when PBMC were cultured with GM+R848+LPS, pulsed with SEA2 or CMVpp65 (50μg/ml), then expanded in rhIL-7 to d16.
Restimulation PBMC were either unpulsed or pulsed with CMVpp65, SEA2, or VNTR peptide. Dot plots are gated on CD4+ or CD8+
T-cells. Both CD4+ and CD8+ IFNγ-producing T-cells were readily sensitized and expanded. E. Graphic summary for 4 successive healthy
unvaccinated PBMC donors, vertical lines showing the range of responses (frequency of Ag-specific, IFNγ-producing T-cells) and the
boxes showing averaged response of the 4 donors. Culture succeeded in expanding T1-type CD4+ and CD8+ T-cells recognizing SEA1,
SEA2 and CMVpp65 from all 4 donors, but not VNTR (latter significantly different compared to the other three Ags with two-tailed p
ranging from 0.03* to 0.0002***; no significant differences among the other three Ags).

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

10791

Oncotarget

Figure 4: HER2/neu specific natural CD4+ and CD8+ T-cells are readily propagated in culture. A. Heat map of HER2/neu

derived as described in Figure 3. In contrast to MUC1, “hot spots” are numerous. B./C./D./E. d16 ICC’s showing natural sensitization of
both CD4+ and CD8+ PBMC T-cells driven by 4 different HER2/neu-derived peptide sequences, with specific reactivity apparent for the
sensitizing peptides, but not to CMVpp65, VNTR or to other HER2-derived peptides absent during the prior sensitization culture.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

10792

Oncotarget

Figure 5: Ag-specific T1 cytokine and lytic profile dominate outcomes of GM+R848+LPS+IL-7 conditioned, Ag-driven
cultures. Cultures were conducted as in Figure 3 and Figure 4. A1. Comprehensive representative Luminex cytokine profile when a

donor’s T-cell culture was Ag-driven by either CMVpp65 or SEA2 peptide, then restimulated overnight on d16 with unpulsed PBMC vs
PBMC pulsed with the driving peptide (e.g., SEA2UP vs SEA2SEA2). A2. Meta-analysis of Luminex assays including five biological
replicates per cytokine (three cultures of SEA2-driven T-cells and 2 cultures of CMVpp65-driven T-cells), showing averaged Ag-specific
cytokine release in log scale. IFNγ production exceeded that of any other cytokine by one to three logs, a difference which was significant
(two-tailed p range from 0.0240* to 0.0158*). B. Capacity of T-cells from cultures driven by SEA1 or SEA2 peptides to preferentially
lyse MUC1-expressing tumor targets. HLA-A2.1+ PBMC from 3 healthy donors were either driven polyclonally with anti-CD3/CD28
(see Methods) or driven by long peptides synthesized from the SEA domain of MUC1 (SEA1 and SEA2) with GM+R848+LPS+IL-7
conditioning. At the end of T-cell culture expansion, each of the T-cell groups was cultured for 8h at a 100:1 ratio with Cr51-labelled
HLA-A2.1+ human breast cancer line MDA-MB-231, either transduced to express MUC1 (MDA-MB-231.MUC1) or Neo control (MDAMB-231.Neo). % Lysis was calculated as ((Experimental Lysis - Spontaneous Cr51 release)/(Complete Lysis in Triton X-100 - Spontaneous
Cr51 release)) x 100. % lysis of MDA-MB-231.Neo was statistically indistinguishable for all 3 donors whether cultures were polyclonally-,
SEA1- or SEA2-driven. Polyclonally driven T-cells from all 3 donors lysed MDA-MB-231.MUC1 indistinguishably from MDA-MB-231.
Neo. In contrast, SEA1- and SEA2- driven T-cells from all 3 donors lysed MDA-MB-231.MUC1 targets significantly more than MDAMB-231.Neo targets (two-tailed p = 0.039 and 0.038 applying Student’s paired t-test).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

10793

Oncotarget

R848 and LPS together produce maximal
expansion of Ag-specific, IFNγ-producing CD4+
and CD8+T-cells from PBMC

to patients with malignancies (example shown in
Supplemental Figure S5A). Furthermore, cocktails of long
peptides could be employed to simultaneously expand
T-cells encompassing a variety of oncoprotein specificities
(Supplemental Figure S5A and S5B). PBMC cultures
could also be conducted in expansile 1 liter vessels
(G-Rex 100M [57]) at least as effectively as in 24 well
cluster plates (Supplemental Figure S5B). Finally, T-cells
cryopreserved at the end of culture fully retained their
capacity for Ag-specific IFNγ production upon subsequent
rethaw (data not shown).

To understand the mechanism(s) behind the
enhanced generation of Ag-driven specific T-cells
observed with GM+R848+LPS conditioning, we
performed further analyses on d2 cultures, 24h after
Ag-addition. Conditioning with GM alone was unable
to induce detectible IL-12 or IL-23 secretion (Figure 6A
left panel). In contrast, GM+R848 conditioning (omitting

Figure 6: Exposure to R848 and LPS is a critical determinant of CD8+ T-cell sensitization. A. left panel. IL-12 and IL-23

production during first two days of culture are both markedly enhanced by dual stimulation with R848 and LPS. Methods as in Figure 1B.
Note that cytokine production is shown in log scale. This graphing of ELISA results shows an averaging of 4 biological replicates. A. right
panel, exposure to R848+LPS enhances frequency and/or density of co-stimulatory ligands and receptors on PBMC CD33+ constituents.
Methods as in Figure 1B., with FACS analyses performed after 48h in culture. Frequency of each molecule of interest in the CD33+
subpopulation was determined and averaged for 4 biological replicates; in addition, fold-increase in cell surface staining density relative
to isotype control (averaged Mean Fluorescent Index) was determined. Frequency of expression is shown graphically, whereas for MFI
only tabulated p values are shown. Exposure to R848+LPS significantly increased both the frequency and MFI of CD70, 4-1BB ligand,
and B7.1 (CD80) (shown on graph). In addition, although frequency of CD40 expression was already nearly uniform without R848+LPS
exposure, R848+LPS significantly increased the MFI for CD40. Two-tailed p values are shown, based on a paired Student t-test comparing
with and without R848+LPS exposure within each experimental run. B, left panel, dual exposure to R848+LPS significantly enhances Agspecific CD4+ and CD8+ propagation. Cultures were initially pulsed with CAN, with or without co-exposure to R848 and LPS, performing
an ICC assay at the end of culture to enumerate frequency of CAN-specific, IFNγ-producing CD4+ and CD8+ T-cells. Graphs show an
averaging of 2 biological replicates. Two-tailed p values are shown, based on a paired Student t-test comparing with and without R848 and/
or LPS exposure within each experimental run. B, right panel, averaged gross numeric expansions of all cells for each culture condition,
corresponding to experimental runs in the left panel, demonstrating that gross numeric expansion per se is not predictive for enrichment
of T-cell specificity.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

10794

Oncotarget

LPS) resulted in moderately potent production of IL-23
and IL-12, and GM+LPS (omitting R848) conditioning
resulted in IL-23 but not IL-12 production. Complete
GM+R848+LPS conditioning maximally raised both IL12 and IL-23 secretion (Figure 6A left panel).
We examined the expression of co-stimulatory
and other molecules in the CD33+ myeloid fraction
of PBMC as a consequence of R848+LPS exposure
(Figure 6A right panel). We examined changes in both
the frequency of expression (shown graphically) and
the intensity of expression (data not shown except for
p values). Compared to conditioning with GM alone,
GM+R848+LPS conditioning significantly licensed de
novo expression, both frequency and intensity, of the
costimulatory ligands CD70 and 4-1BBL within the
CD33+ myeloid subpopulation (Figure 6A right panel).
Both of these ligands are strongly associated with the
promotion and sustenance of Ag-driven CD8+ T-cell
responses [58-63]. R848+LPS exposure also triggered a
significantly higher frequency and more intense expression
of the co-stimulatory molecule B7.1 (CD80) (Figure
6A right panel). R848+LPS exposure did not enhance
the frequency of CD40 expression, which was already
nearly uniform with GM alone, but R848+LPS exposure
significantly increased the intensity of CD40 expression,
potentially enhancing CD40 ligand-mediated licensure
of crosspresentation to CD8+ T-cells [64] (Figure 6A
right panel).Taken as a whole, GM+R848+LPS strongly
biased the CD33+ myeloid subset of PBMC to acquire the
characteristics of DC1-polarized, IL-12-secreting, fully
matured DC [25].
Next, we examined the individual impacts of R848
and/or LPS upon subsequent Ag-specific T-cell generation
during exposure to IL-7+IL-2. GM conditioning with
omission of R848 and/or LPS more severely limited the
expansion of Ag-specific CD8+ T-cells than of CD4+
T-cells, indicating that reliable MHC Class I crosspresentation of exogenous Ag was particularly enhanced
by aggressive activation of innate immunity (Figure
6B, left and mid panel). Notably, in contrast to Agspecific frequency, gross numerical cell expansion was
not significantly different across all the GM-conditioned
treatment groups (Figure 6B right panel), indicating
that supplementation of GM with R848+LPS enhanced
selective proliferation and/or preferential survival of Agdriven T-cells over bystander T-cells [65].
Given the diverse impacts of GM+R848+LPS upon
the CD33+ PBMC subpopulation, we sought to determine
whether the observed enhancements of both CD4+ and
CD8+ T-cell Ag-driven propagation were absolutely
dependent upon the CD33+ subpopulation’s production
of IL-12 and/or IL-23. Quantitative mAb neutralization
of IL-12 and/or IL-23 during GM+R848+LPS cultures
proved to have no significant impact, either deleterious
or enhancing, upon propagation of Ag-specific, IFNγproducing CD4+ and CD8+ T-cells (data not shown),
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

indicating that composite effects of GM+R848+LPS
upon DC1 polarization were sufficiently diverse to reduce
dependence upon any individual factor such as IL-12.

PBMC-based
Ag-presenting
cells
avoid
acidification and utilize the proteasome and
Sec61 for both MHC Class I and II presentation
of exogenous Ag
To delineate the pathway(s) involved in PBMCbased Ag-processing and presentation, we performed
restimulation ICC assays in which freshly thawed
autologous PBMC were conditioned with GM or
GM+R848+LPS, Ag-pulsed, and concurrently exposed
to known inhibitors of Ag-processing, before being
extensively washed and introduced as restimulators for
Ag-driven T-cells after 16 days’ culture.
Under the classical pathway of exogenous Agprocessing, Ag is internalized in endosomes which fuse
with acidifying lysosomes for purposes of Ag trimming.
For MHC Class I cross-presentation of exogenous Ag,
which rarely occurs spontaneously, Ags retrotranslocate
into the cytosol from the late endosome for proteasomemediated processing, followed by Transporter Associated
with Ag Processing (TAP)-mediated importation into the
endoplasmic reticulum (ER), loading onto MHC Class
I molecules, transfer to the Golgi apparatus, and export
to the cell surface [66, 67]. In the case of MHC Class
II, endosomes fuse with vesicles exported by the Golgi
apparatus containing MHC Class II and invariant chain to
become the late endosomal MHC class II compartment,
which loads peptide onto MHC Class II complexes for
transport to the cell surface [66, 68].
Downstream disruption of classical Ag-processing
pathways can be accomplished by treatment with brefeldin
A (BFA), an inhibitor of ER-Golgi transport that blocks
ER export of both MHC Class I and Class II molecules
[69]. Surprisingly, when 16d T-cell cultures were tested in
restimulation ICC assays, treatment of the freshly prepared
restimulatory PBMC with BFA did not significantly
abrogate Ag-specific responses, and often paradoxically
enhanced them (Figure 7). BFA’s lack of an inhibitory
effect was observed both for GM and for GM+R848+LPS
conditioning, and occurred whether the restimulatory Ag
was SEA1, SEA2 or CMVpp65.
These results indicated that an alternative Agprocessing mechanism(s) able to bypass the ER/Golgi
was operative [68]. One such alternative pathway is a
variant of the ER-associated degradation (ERAD) pathway
in which endosomes themselves acquire features more
typically associated with ER, such as MHC-Class I, TAP,
Sec61, and p97 expression. This allows exogenous Ags
in professional Ag-presenting cells (APC) to bypass ER/
Golgi-dependent Ag processing, helpfully segregating the
processing of exogenous from endogenous Ags [70-73].
10795

Oncotarget

Best studied for MHC Class I-restricted responses, Sec61
and p97 translocate exogenous Ags from endosomes into
the cytosol, where they are processed by the proteasome,
before reentering endosomes for loading onto MHC Class
I complexes.
To test the potential role of an ERAD-like pathway in
GM+R848+LPS conditioned PBMC cultures, we utilized
MG132 and lactacystin (LT), both well-characterized
proteasome inhibitors [74], and Pseudomonas aeruginosa
Exotoxin A (ExoA), an inhibitor of Sec61-mediated Ag
translocation previously shown to diminish endosomedependent processing [72, 73]. Even though MG132,

LT and ExoA exerted no detectable toxic effects upon
restimulator PBMC, treatment with any of these three
agents significantly diminished the restimulators’ ability
to trigger both CD8+ and CD4+ T-cell Ag-specific IFNγ
production (p range from 0.0001**** to 0.0006***). This
was observed equally for GM and for GM+R848+LPS
conditioning, and occurred whether the restimulatory
Ag was SEA1, SEA2 or CMVpp65 (Figure 7), These
results indicated that both the proteasome and Sec61
were virtually essential to both MHC Class II- and Class
I-directed presentation of exogenous Ag by PBMC [73,
75].

Figure 7: APC within the PBMC compartment forego acidification of exogenous Ag and utilize the proteasome and
Sec61 for both MHC Class I and II presentation. Freshly thawed PBMC were activated with GM alone or GM+R848+LPS;

unpulsed or pulsed with SEA1, SEA2 or CMVpp65 peptides; and concurrently exposed to standard doses of individual inhibitors of Ag
processing: the acidification inhibitor chloroquine (CQ, 100μM), the Sec61 transport inhibitor ExoA (100 ng/ml), the proteasome inhibitor
MG132 (10μM) and the ER/Golgi transport inhibitor Brefeldin A (BFA, 10 μg/ml). At 48h each group was harvested, washed thoroughly to
remove inhibitors, confirmed for intact viability, and used to restimulate autologous d16 T-cell cultures previously expanded to specifically
recognize.SEA1, SEA2, or CMVpp65. The ICC assay measured, as a readout for Ag-presentation, the frequency (%) of cultured CD4+ and
CD8+ T-cells achieving Ag-specific IFNγ production when exposed to restimulatory PBMC pulsed with the relevant sensitizing peptide
(minus the background frequency of IFNγ+ T-cells exposed to unpulsed restimulatory PBMC). Readouts were normalized relative to the
groups receiving restimulatory PBMC not treated with inhibitors, which were scored as 1.0. Each bar represents the average ±SD of three
determinations under the same conditions, one for each driving peptide, with the impacts of the inhibitors not proving significantly different
for GM vs GM+R848+LPS conditioning, There was also no significant difference between “No inhibitor” groups and groups receiving
CQ or BFA, whereas “No inhibitor” vs ExoA and “No inhibitor” vs MG132 were highly significant (two-tailed p consistently < 0.0007***
for both CD4+ and CD8+ T-cells). Results testing another proteasome inhibitor, lactacystin, closely paralleled the impacts observed with
MG132 (data not shown).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

10796

Oncotarget

Since previous reports have described an association
between proteasome-dependent MHC Class II processing
and MHC recycling [76, 77], we examined the impact of
the MHC Class II recycling inhibitor, primaquine [77].
Both CD8+ and CD4+T-cell responses were insensitive
to primaquine (data not shown). Finally, we also tested
the endosomal acidification inhibitor, chloroquine (CQ)
[68, 78]. Ag-processing was CQ insensitive (Figure
7), consistent with previous reports that professional
APC avoid rapid acidification of exogenous Ags to
better preserve intermediate degraded epitopes for Agpresentation [79]. CQ insensitivity was observed both
for GM and for rhGM+R848+LPS conditioning, and
occurred whether the restimulatory Ag was SEA1, SEA2

or CMVpp65 (Figure 7),
Identical impacts of the inhibitors were observed
whether tested for IFNγ production in restimulatory ICC
assays in the presence of the Golgi inhibitor monensin, or
assayed by ELISA of supernatants for IFNγ secretion in
the absence of monensin (data not shown).

IL-7 and non-IL-7 driven, GM+R848+LPS
conditioned PBMC display indistinguishable
kinetics during the initial week of culture
To assess the mechanism(s) behind rhIL-7’s colicensure of GM+R848+LPS conditioning, we tracked

Figure 8: Kinetics of Ag-specific T-cell survival and proliferation attributable to rhIL-7. A. PBMC were CFSE labelled

on d0 of culture, then conditioned with GM+R848+LPS and either unpulsed or pulsed with CAN, then transitioned to recombinant
human rhIL-7+rhIL-2 versus rhIL-2 alone beginning on d2 of culture. In this analysis, representative of four biological replicates, T-cell
proliferation over time is indicated by the right-to-left-shift as cell division dilutes intracellular CFSE. B. Left panel displays % viable
T-cells over time. No significant differences were observed prior to d12, whereas at d12 and d16 viability remained significantly higher
for T-cells exposed to CAN, rhIL-7 and rhIL-2 compared to CAN and rhIL-2 without rhIL-7. Right panel demonstrates that the superior
viability of the CAN, rhIL-7 and rhIL-2 group from d12 forward corresponded to sustained numeric expansion significantly greater than
when rhIL-7 was omitted. Statistical calculations in both panels of B. show averaged results of four biological replicates. C. Fate of
individual PBMC constituents during optimized Ag-driven cultures. PBMC were labelled on d0 with Cell Trace Violet (CTV), conditioned
with GM+R848+LPS, pulsed with CAN, then transitioned to rhIL-7 plus rhIL-2. Graph shows in log scale the absolute proportions
and numbers of PBMC subpopulations over time, distinguishing CD33+ myeloid cells, never proliferated T-cells (undiluted CTV), and
already proliferating T-cells (i.e., CTV diluted due to previous cell division). Data are representative of two biological replicates. D. T-cell
cultures were labelled with CTV at d9 to facilitate monitoring of continuing proliferation after that time point in conjunction with livedead staining. Panel representative of two biological replicates displays d16 of culture, with dot plots showing unproliferated dead cells
(RUQ), unproliferated live cells (RLQ), proliferated dead cells (LUQ) and proliferated live cells (LLQ). At the d16 timepoint the continuing
inclusion of rhIL-7 has licensed sustained high viability B.,D. and proliferation A.,D. resulting in marked net numeric T-cell expansion
B.,C. as well as further enrichment of CAN-specific CD4+ and CD8+ T-cells (Figure 2).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

10797

Oncotarget

gross culture expansion and also labeled PBMC with
CFSE or its congener Cell Trace Violet (CTV) on
d0 to monitor the proliferation of individual T-cells.
Unexpectedly, exposure of Ag-pulsed, GM+R848+LPS
conditioned PBMC T-cells either to IL-7+IL-2 or to IL-2
alone resulted in indistinguishably high frequencies of
proliferation (i.e., CFSE dilution) between days 5 and 8 of
initial culture (Figure 8A). In fact, the intense proliferation
detectable after d5 already left most dividing T-cells
with only background levels of CFSE by d8 (Figure
8A). In contrast, GM+R848+LPS conditioned PBMC
subsequently maintained in IL-7+IL-2 but never Agpulsed displayed much more sluggish T-cell CFSE dilution
out to d8 (Figure 8A). Nonetheless, percent cell viability
and overall yields were not significantly different among
these three tested conditions during the first 8-9 days of
culture (Figure 8B left and right panels).
We sought to reconcile the intense CFSE or CTV
dilution of Ag-pulsed PBMC T-cells already observed by
d8-9 of culture with the lack of gross numerical expansion
up to that time point. By correlating the frequencies of
T-cell and myeloid lineage markers with CFSE or CTV
tracking and gross numeric expansion, we were able to
extrapolate absolute numbers of resting T-cells (undiluted
CFSE or CTV) from already proliferating T-cells (diluted
CFSE or CTV) as well as CD33+ myeloid cells out to d16
of culture (Figure 8C). Such analyses of GM+R848+LPS
conditioned, Ag-pulsed, IL-7+IL-2 treated PBMC
revealed that while the CD33+ myeloid fraction did
not detectably proliferate (data not shown), it displayed
relative enrichment between d0 and d2 of culture due
to T-cell dropout. After that, the myeloid fraction itself
commenced to drop out, such that the CD33+ fraction
was reduced in absolute numbers by approximately
half between d2 and 7 in culture, and decimated by d16
(Figure 8C). In contrast, after the first two days of culture,
the absolute number of resting T-cells (undiluted CTV)
remained virtually unchanged out to d16, indicating that
an undetectably small subset of resting T-cells made the
transition to proliferation (Figure 8C). Furthermore, the
proliferating (diluted CTV) T-cell compartment began to
detectably expand in absolute number by d4 of culture,
becoming the dominant population after d8 of culture
(Figure 8C).

contrast, GM+R848+LPS conditioned, Ag-pulsed PBMC
T-cell cultures exposed to IL-2 without IL-7 displayed a
significant decline in viability and only marginal gross
numeric expansion after d9 of culture (Figure 2, Figure
8A, 8B).
Because CFSE or CTV labeling of PBMC on d0,
d2, or d4 of culture did not permit continuing proliferation
analysis after d8-9 of culture, due to many T-cells having
already proliferated to background CFSE or CTV levels
(Figure 8A and data not shown), we also carried groups
in culture for which such labelling was delayed until d9,
to prospectively distinguish further proliferation of T-cells
and their survival (Figure 8D).
When GM+R848+LPS conditioned, Ag-pulsed
PBMC T-cell cultures were exposed to IL-2 without IL7, they displayed profoundly stunted gross expansion,
proliferation and viability after d9 of culture (Figure 8B,
8D). With greater than 80% of cells dead by d16, the
surviving T-cells, both CD4+ and CD8+, nonetheless
continued to display Ag-specificity in ICC assays
(10-40%, Figure 2A, 2B), but with scant evidence of
proliferation from d9 forward (Figure 8B, 8D). In contrast,
GM+R848+LPS conditioned, Ag-pulsed PBMC T-cell
cultures exposed to IL-7 in addition to IL-2 displayed 80%
or greater viability at d16, with a sustained proliferating
compartment after d9 that demonstrated up to 80% Agspecificity in ICC assays (Figure 2A, 2B and 8A-D).
Therefore, exposure to IL-7 rescued the expanded T-cells
from a lethal contraction during the second week of
culture, and furthermore licensed continued CD4+ and
CD8+ T-cell Ag-specific proliferation with excellent
viability.
Recent reports have suggested that lymphopeniainduced homeostatic proliferation favors survival and
expansion of Ag-stimulated T-cells due to the ability of
endogenous IL-7 to rescue TCR-triggered T-cells from a
proapoptotic state [80-83]. Although T-cell upregulation
of the anti-apoptotic factor Bcl-2 is a frequently reported
impact of IL-7 exposure [84, 85], we have observed that
either IL-2 or IL-7+IL-2 treatment induced comparable
levels of Bcl-2 in T-cells which proved to be equally well
sustained, even when T-cells exposed to IL-2 but not IL-7
were massively dying during week 2 of culture (data not
shown). Therefore, rhIL-7’s protection of GM+R848+LPS
conditioned T-cells does not correlate simply to Bcl-2
induction.
Finally, we sought to determine whether the
timing of IL-7 addition to GM+R848+LPS conditioned
PBMC cultures was critical to the emergence of T-cell
Ag-specificity [32, 35]. Interestingly, indistinguishable
synergy between IL-7 and GM+R848+LPS conditioning
was observed whether IL-7 was standardly introduced
to culture on d2 (after GM+R848+LPS conditioning and
Ag pulsation), on d0 of culture (concurrent with GM
exposure), on d1 of culture (concurrent with Ag pulsation)
or delayed until d4 (data not shown). Furthermore, we

IL-7 and Ag exposure condition PBMC T-cells for
late-stage Ag-specific proliferation and survival
protection
Between days 9 and 16 of culture, GM+R848+LPS
conditioned, Ag-pulsed PBMC cultures exposed to IL-7
or IL-7+IL-2 displayed a burst in absolute numbers that
was solely attributable to continued numeric expansion
and high maintained viability of the already proliferating
T-cell subpopulation (Figure 2A-2C, Figure 8A-8C). In
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

10798

Oncotarget

tested different concentrations of IL-7 and observed that
preferential expansion and survival of Ag-driven T cells
was IL-7 dose and schedule dependent, working best when
dosing was sufficiently high or frequent to render T-cell
expression of the IL-7 receptor (CD127) undetectable for
the duration of the culture (data not shown and [86, 87]).
Taken as a whole, these data suggest that Ag-driven T-cells
emerging from their initial proliferative burst are IL-7
responsive, itself a property associated with long-lived
memory T-cells [86, 87].

vaccine strategies [90], at least in part because the
imprecise transition from deficient to effective immunity
during vaccine maneuvers itself provides a window
of opportunity for tumors to escape by reducing their
expression of Ag, MHC molecules, and/or beta2microglobulin (i.e., immunoediting) [38]. In contrast,
temporarily removing T-cells from the body to optimize
their number and synchronize their activation state
prior to adoptive reinfusion can markedly improve their
subsequent in vivo therapeutic performance. This is clearly
illustrated by reports that culture-activated T-cells from
pmel mice (transgenic for TcR recognizing the melanomaassociated Ag gp100) can be given in a dose-dependent
manner as adoptive therapy with vaccinia-gp100, rIL-2
and sublethal irradiation to cure normal syngeneic B6
mice of sizable established B16 melanoma challenges.
In contrast, adoptive transfer of non-culture-activated
pmel T-cells is ineffective [91]. Furthermore, pmel mice
themselves do not resist B16 challenges [91].
The present culture system demonstrates that
unvaccinated donor PBMC pulsed with peptide sequences
derived from MUC1, HER2, and CMVpp65 can rapidly
and consistently give rise to high frequencies and
yields of predominantly T1-type T-cells, both CD4+
and CD8+, that recognize these antigens. Furthermore,
MUC1-sensitized T-cells preferentially lysed partially
histocompatible MUC1-expressing tumor targets. Our
success driving cultures with longer peptides demonstrates
that PBMC contain APC which can routinely process and
cross-present complex Ags to CD8+ T-cells, in addition
to presenting them to CD4+ T-cells. Optimal culture
outcomes are observed so long as the necessary licensing
factors—rhGM, R848, LPS and rhIL-7—are included
along with driving Ag.
We ascertained that upfront conditioning of
extracorporealized PBMC with GM+R848+LPS to
simulate a life-threatening infection has no apparent
detrimental impact on T-cell function while it profoundly
enhances APC function. We and others have identified that
decisive activation of innate immunity either in vitro or
in vivo requires exposure to two or more closely timed
danger signals [25-27]. Activation of robust IL-12 and IL23 production is a signature event of strongly activated
innate immunity and DC1 polarization, which necessitates
the activation of myeloid DC or monocytic DC precursors
rather than IFNα-secreting plasmacytoid DC [25]. We
observed that, for unfractionated human PBMC, the
combination of the MyD88-activating TLR8 agonist R848
and the TRIF/MyD88-activating TLR4 agonist LPS was
far superior to other danger signal pairings for generating
reliable and robust IL-12p70 production, particularly
when GM conditioning preceded TLR agonist exposure.
Furthermore, the abundant secretion of IL-12p70 was
accompanied by equally abundant IL-23 secretion,
significant upregulation of B7.1 and CD40 expression, and
de novo expression of additional co-stimulatory factors

DISCUSSION
Historically it has proved difficult to raise large
numbers of Ag-specific T-cells from peripheral blood
for purposes of adoptive immunotherapy. For example,
it has been reported that highly specific anti-MART1
CD8+ T-cells can be propagated from melanoma patients’
peripheral blood, potentially useful when tumor nodules
are unavailable to establish TIL cultures. Unfortunately,
the robust expansion of the peripheral blood T-cells during
many weekly cycles of MART1 peptide pulsing was not
adapted to bulk culture methods, but rather extrapolated
from scaled-back cultures run in 96- or 24-well cluster
plates [12]. While there have been many additional reports
that peripheral blood T-cells can be sensitized to recognize
tumor-associated Ags by repetitive peptide stimulations,
the demonstration of Ag-specificity is often within the
context of sluggish cultures already evincing features of
T-cell exhaustion [13].
Another historical issue is that the processing of
exogenous Ag by PBMC cultures typically results in MHC
Class II- but not MHC Class I-restricted presentation,
unless the Ag is 8-9 amino acids in length and able to bind
directly to MHC Class I clefts already on the cell surface.
To get around this requirement, individual laboratories
have resorted to rupturing endosomes/lysosomes to leak
larger Ags into the cytoplasm where they can access
proteasome processing. This was first accomplished in
the 1990’s by having APC ingest Ag-loaded abrasive
iron beads or pH-sensitive liposomes, or by performing
transient hypoosmotic shock [88, 89]. Such workarounds
have constituted an important proof-of-principle but
have provided few clues as to the physiologic signals
which might naturally give rise to MHC Class I Ag crosspresentation.
Finally, even though therapeutically active TIL from
melanoma patients are more reliably expandable in culture
than peripheral blood T-cells, it has not proved possible
to reliably expand even TIL unless they are propagated in
exceedingly high concentrations of IL-2 (6,000 IU/ml) [1,
2], a maneuver which has not proved to be successfully
adaptable to peripheral blood T-cells.
Despite these frustrating culture constraints, the
use of adoptive T-cell therapy to treat mouse tumors
and human melanoma has historically outperformed
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

10799

Oncotarget

MATERIALS AND METHODS

(CD70 and 4-1BBL).
Because CD33+ PBMC can readily be differentiated
into myeloid DC by a variety of treatments [19-21, 2527], it is not surprising that, even without exposure to
danger signals, they utilize an alternative, endosomecentric ERAD-like pathway to professionally isolate the
processing of exogenous Ag from endogenous Ag. It is
likely that the classical BFA-sensitive ER-based pathway,
though accessible to exogenous Ag transiting the cytosol,
prioritizes the detection and sterilization of endogenous
pathogens. Furthermore, the observed resistance of
exogenous Ag processing to CQ indicates that this nonclassical ERAD-pathway avoids precipitous lysosomal
acidification which can eradicate pathogens, but can also
excessively catabolize peptides until they are too short to
bind to MHC clefts. Instead, the processing of exogenous
Ag for both MHC Class I and Class II presentation
appears to invoke a Sec61-dependent round trip between
endosome and cytosol to access proteasomally controlled
degradation. Even though this professional routing of
exogenous Ag is observed for both GM+R848+LPS
conditioning and GM conditioning alone (Figure 7),
GM+R848+LPS is far superior for initial launching of Agdriven T-cell expansion (Figure 1D and 6B), likely due to
its distinctive upregulation of costimulatory molecules and
DC1-polarized cytokine production (Figure 6A).
Because MUC1 and HER2 are, in composite,
hyperexpressed by the majority of human cancers [38,
92], the ability to readily grow out natural T1-type CD4+
and CD8+ T-cells recognizing these Ags, even from the
PBMC of non-vaccinated donors, has the potential to
make adoptive natural T-cell therapy applicable to most
cancer patients, also potentially bypassing the need for
vaccine maneuvers which themselves could prematurely
result in tumor escape through immunoediting [38]. It is
encouraging that autologous adoptive therapy with natural
EBV-specific PBMC-derived T-cells has already proved
to be a well-tolerated and clinically effective therapy for
lymphoma patients whose tumors express EBV product
[22]. We have already confirmed that our culture method
for targeting MUC1 and HER2 can be successfully scaled
up for the purpose of treating patients (Supplemental
Figure S5B). Furthermore, preliminary PBMC cultures
established from breast cancer patients confirm that our
culture system and antigen discovery algorithm can be
extended successfully to patients with MUC1- and HER2expressing malignancies (Supplemental Figure S5A).
Finally, the likely physiologic expression of checkpoint
receptors such as PD-1 and CTLA-4 on subsets of the
culture-expanded T-cells (Supplemental Figure S3)
suggests that co-treatment with checkpoint inhibitors may
substantially potentiate the T-cells’ continued expansion
and survival in vivo post-infusion.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Ethics statement
Investigations have been conducted in accordance
with the ethical standards of the Declaration of Helsinki, as
well as current national and international guidelines, and
have been approved by the authors’ institutional review
boards. Data reported in this article involving the blood
cells of both healthy donors and cancer patients were
performed under Mayo IRB #09-000263 and IRB #15007-402, in each case with informed consent obtained.

Reagents used in culture
Media
Many culture media were comparatively screened
for their capacity to support propagation of natural Agspecific T-cells from human PBMC, including RPMI 1640
(Thermo-Fisher, Waltham MA, #11875119), CTS AIM-V
(Thermo-Fisher #0870112DK), CTS OpTmizer (ThermoFisher #A1048501), Ex Vivo10 (Lonza, Walkersville
MD, #04-380Q), and Gibco macrophage SFM (ThermoFisher #12065074), variously supplemented with human
AB serum (HuAB) already heat-deactivated at purchase
(Fisher-Scientific/Gemini #100-512, Lot#H15M03A).
Optimal culture performance was attained employing
AIM-V already formulated to contain glutamine,
penicillin and streptomycin, supplemented only with
Gibco Amphotericin B at an optimized final concentration
of 0.125 μg/ml (Thermo-Fisher #15290018). Serumfree T-cell propagation was not sustainable, but
supplementation of AIM-V with 0.5% HuAB during Step
1 (d0-2 of culture) and 2.0% HuAB during Step 2 (d2 and
thereafter) proved optimal for robust expansion of both
CD4+ and CD8+, natural Ag-specific T-cells. Culture
incubators were maintained at a CO2 tension of 5%.
Step 1 factors
As shown in Figure 1B, agents added standardly
during Step 1 (d0-2 of culture) included recombinant
human (rh) GM-CSF on d0 of culture (sargramostim,
Sanofi-Aventis, Bridgewater NJ, optimized final
concentration 40 ng/ml); resiquimod on d1 of culture
(R848 VacciGrade, Invivogen, San Diego CA, optimized
final concentration 3 μg/ml); and LPS on d1 of culture
(E. coli 026:B6, Sigma-Aldrich, St Louis MO, #2654,
optimized final concentration 5 ng/ml). Other agents
tested in Step 1 but absent from the optimized formulation
included rhIL-4 (Peprotech, Rocky Hill NJ, #200-04. 20
ng/ml); rhIL-12 (Peprotech #200-12, 10 ng/ml); rhIFNγ
(Actimmune, Horizon Pharma, Deerfield IL, 2000 IU/
ml); and polyI:C (Sigma-Aldrich #P1530, 50 μg/ml). Ags
10800

Oncotarget

added on d1 of culture (prior to R848 and LPS) included
MUC1-, HER2/neu- and CMVpp65-derived synthetic
peptides added at an optimized final concentration of
50 μg/ml when pulsed singly, or 10 μg/ml each when
multiple peptides were pulsed as a cocktail (see Peptide
synthesis below); clinical grade Candida albicans extract
(CAN, Hollister Stier, Spokane WA, #5053, at a 10%
v:v optimized final concentration); and recombinant
HER2/neu intracellular domain protein (HER2-ICD,
SignalChem, Richmond,BC #E27-11G at an optimized
final concentration of 50 μg/ml).

amide)
HER2
p146-174
29mer
(TEILKGGVLIQRNPQLCYQDTILWKDIFH)
HER2
p848-865
21mer
(DLAARNVLVKSPNHVKITDFG)
HER2
p675-703
29mer
(IKRRQQKIRKYTMRRLLQETELVEPLTPS)
HER2
p776-797
22mer
(GVGSPYVSRLLGICLTSTVQLV)
MUC1-VNTR 24mer was also synthesized
as a control for its contrastingly low predicted
affinities for HLA-DR and A2.1 (Figure 3A)
(AHGVTSAPDTRPAPGSTAPPAHGV-amide).
All peptides were produced to > 98% homogeneity
as confirmed by mass spectrometry.

Step 2 factors
Beginning with culture Step 2 (d2 of overall
culture), rhIL-7 (Miltenyi Biotec premium grade, Auburn
CA, #130-095-364) was added at an optimized final
concentration of 50 ng/ml to fresh medium added at
culture splits. Other agents tested in Step 2 but absent from
the optimized formulation included rhIL-2 (aldesleukin,
Prometheus Labs, San Diego, CA, final concentration 24
IU/ml); rhIL-15 (Peprotech #200-15, final concentration
5 ng/ml) and rhIL-21 (Peprotech #200-21, final
concentration 3 ng/ml).

Collection and preservation of PBMC
A total of 7 healthy HLA-A2.1+ eligible volunteer
donors consented to undergo repetitive leukapheresis
collections at intervals deemed safe and appropriate by
the American Association of Blood Banks. Collections
were performed using antecubital access and return,
employing the COBE Spectra apheresis system with
settings to minimize retention of RBC and neutrophils in
the collection. Occasional collections notable for visible
RBC retention were subjected to Ficoll-Hypaque density
separations (Ficoll-Paque Plus, Thermo-Fisher #17-144002) for 20 minutes at 450 x g (2,000 rpm) to isolate the
RBC- and neutrophil-poor PBMC interface. PBMC
collections were observed to perform well in culture
whether or not they required the Ficoll-Hypaque step (data
not shown). All collections were then repetitively washed
more slowly at 115 x g (1,000 rpm) in PBS to eliminate
platelets from the pelleting PBMC, endpointed by an
absence of turbidity in the supernatant. Cells were then
resuspended in ice cold HuAB, to which an equal volume
of 20% DMSO/80% HuAB was added dropwise for a final
concentration of 10% DMSO (Sigma-Aldrich #D2438).
Aliquots in cryovials were placed overnight in a freezer
at -80o C prior to transfer into liquid nitrogen storage. The
performance of all PBMC detailed in this report reflects
PBMC which were subjected to initial cryopreservation on
the collection day, followed days to months later by thaw
and culture. Up to 12 billion PBMC were safely collected
during each leukapheresis procedure.
PBMC were also collected from cancer patients
consenting to a single 100 ml peripheral venipuncture,
always followed by a Ficoll-Hypaque density separation
for RBC and neutrophil depletion.

Ag processing inhibitors
When thawed cryopreserved PBMC were pulsed
with Ag for use as restimulators of culture-expanded
autologous T-cells, they were also electively exposed to
standard doses of the following Ag-processing inhibitors:
brefeldin A (Sigma-Aldrich #B5936-200UL, optimized
final concentration 10 μg/ml); MG132 (Calbiochem/
EMD Millipore, Billerica MA, #474791, optimized final
concentration 10 μM); lactacystin (Santa Cruz Biotech,
Santa Cruz CA, #SC-3575, optimized final concentration
10 μM); exotoxin A (Sigma-Aldrich #P0184, optimized
final concentration 100 ng/ml); and chloroquine (Santa
Cruz Biotech #SC-205629, optimized final concentration
100 μM). Inhibitors were thoroughly washed out before
the restimulating PBMC were combined with already
culture-expanded T-cells.

Peptide synthesis
The following long peptides were synthesized
for immunotargeting in the Mayo Peptide Synthesis
Laboratory or at Genscript (Piscataway NJ), based on
analyses indicating a wealth of embedded peptides with
predicted high affinity for multiple HLA-DR haplotypes
as well as for HLA-A2.1 (see Results and Figure 3A, 3B
and 4A):
CMVpp65-derived
28mer
(SQEPMSIYVYALPLKMLNIPSINVHHYP)
MUC1-SEA domain-derived 32mer (SEA1)
(SPQLSTGVSFFFLSFHISNLQFNSSLEDPSTD-amide}
MUC1-SEA domain-derived 39mer (SEA2) (STD
YYQELQRDISEMFLQIYKQGGFLGLSNIKFRPGSVVwww.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

10801

Oncotarget

Optimized PBMC culture and restimulation
assays for propagation of naturally Ag-specific
T-cells

FACS analyses
When proliferation in culture was analyzed (e.g.
Figure 8), cells were preloaded with cytoplasmic tags
which diluted linearly with cell division, using CellTrace
CFSE or Violet Cell Proliferation Kits (Invitrogen/
Thermo-Fisher, #C34554 and #C34557). Multicolor
analyses were performed on a five laser Fortessa (BD
Biosciences). Cells were buffered during staining with Ca/
Mg-free PBS (Gibco/Thermo-Fisher #10010) containing
1% heat-deactivated fetal bovine serum (FBS, SigmaAldrich #F2442) and 0.02% sodium azide (SigmaAldrich #S-8032). Fc receptor blockade was performed
by preadding 50 μg of unconjugated human IgG (SigmaAldrich #I4506) to each sample.
Fluorescently-conjugated mAb targeting cell surface
proteins were then added, also including Live/Dead UV
Blue Stain to delineate viability (Life Technologies/
Thermo-Fisher #L23105). If intracellular proteins were
also to be co-analyzed (IFNγ and/or other cytokines,
Foxp3, Helios, or CTLA-4), staining for cell surface
proteins was followed by fixation and permeabilization
per manufacturer guidelines (eBioscience, San Diego
CA, #00-5123-43, #00-5223-56 and #00-8333-56; BD
Biosciences #51-2090KZ, #51-2091KZ), followed by
staining for the intracellular proteins. mAb employed
included anti-CD3 APC efluor 780 (eBioscience #470036-42); anti-CD4 BV 510 (BD Horizon/BD Biosciences
#582970); anti-CD8 evolve 655 (eBioscience #86-008842); anti-CD33 APC (eBioscience #17-0338-42); antiCD56 efluor 710 (eBioscience #46-056-42); anti-CD56
FITC (MEM-188) (eBioscience #11-0569-42) anti-HLADR PE (eBioscience #12-9956-42); anti-CD11c eFluor
450 (eBioscience #48-0116-42); anti-IL-12p70 FITC (BD
Pharmingen/BD Bioscience #554574); anti-CD80 (B7.1)
BV650, BioLegend, San Diego CA, #305227); anti-4-1BB
FITC (eBioscience #11-1379-42); anti-4-1BBL PE (BD
Pharmingen #559446); anti-CD70 PE (BD Pharmingen
#555835); anti-CD40 eFluor 450 (eBioscience # 48-040942); anti-IFNγ efluor 450 (eBioscience #48-7319-42);
anti-IL-2 FITC (eBioscience #11-7029-42); anti-IL-17A
APC-eFluor 780 (eBioscience #47-7179-42); anti-CD25
BB515 (BD Horizon #564467); anti-CD28 PerCPCy5.5 (eBioscience #45-0289-42); anti-CTLA-4 BV421
(BD Horizon #562743); anti-PD-1 BV 785 (BioLegend
#329930); anti-Foxp3 PE-Dazzle 594 (BioLegend
#320126); anti-Helios PerCP-Cy5.5 (BioLegend
#137230); anti-LAP APC (eBioscience #17-9829-42);
anti-GARP BV421 (BD Horizon #563956). Appropriate
isotype controls were also acquired for each evaluated
specific mAb.

For limited scale T-cell expansions as in Figure
1B, thawed PBMC on d0 of culture (i.e., Step 1) were
resuspended in AIM-V with 0.5% HuAB and 40 ng/ml
rhGM-CSF (rhGM) at 6 million PBMC/ml, and plated at
1 ml per well in 24-well cluster plates (Costar Corning/
Sigma-Aldrich #3524). The next day (d1 of culture)
wells were Ag-pulsed, and exposed 4h later to R848, then
30m later to LPS. The next day (d2 of culture, beginning
of Step 2) cells were harvested, with cell detachment
facilitated by washing with Ca/Mg-free PBS. Cells were
centrifuged, washed again in PBS, resuspended in AIM-V
with 2% HuAB and 50 ng/ml rhIL-7 to 12 times the initial
volume, and plated at 2ml/well in fresh 24 well cluster
plates. Further intermittent splits including fresh rhIL-7
were performed upon yellowing of the media, with final
harvest performed on d16 to d19. 2d prior to final harvest,
cryopreserved autologous PBMC were freshly thawed and
subjected to a 2-day “Step 1” culture including Ag pulsing
to provide restimulatory PBMC for intracellular cytokine
(ICC) assays, Luminex assays, and/or further Ag-driven
culture expansion, typically at a 2:1 ratio of harvested
T-cells to restimulatory PBMC. The restimulatory PBMC
did not require exposure to GM, R848 or LPS to present
pulsed-Ag efficiently to the culture-expanded T-cells.
Bulk expansions were also performed using WilsonWolf G-Rex 100M (1-liter) vessels (Brighton, MN) instead
of 24-well cluster plates.

ICC and luminex assays
Culture-expanded T-cells were co-cultured with
freshly thawed autologous restimulatory PBMC, pulsed
either with the Ag which drove the expanded T-cells,
irrelevant Ag, or no Ag (unpulsed). Restimulation was
performed in 24 well cluster plates with 2 million T-cells
and 1 million restimulatory PBMC per well for 1824h. For ICC, monensin (GolgiStop, BD Biosciences,
San Diego CA, #554724) was added per manufacturer
guidelines after 4-6h to block export of endogenously
produced cytokines, and subsequent co-staining for
surface CD4 and CD8 was performed in addition to
intracellular cytokine staining to delineate the T-cell
subsets’ respective contribution to cytokine production.
Luminex-assayed production of cytokines on a multiplex
platform (Thermofisher) was performed on supernatants
identical to ICC restimulatory cultures except for the
exclusion of monensin, following the manufacturer’s
guidelines.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

10802

Oncotarget

ELISA assays

performed as detailed in Supplemental Table S1 and
Figure 2F.

Culture supernatants were assayed for IL-12p70
and/or IL-23 content employing ELISA reagents from
eBioscience (San Diego CA), following manufacturer
guidelines.

Abbreviations
Ag, antigen(s); AIT, adoptive immunotherapy;
APC, antigen-presenting cell(s); BFA, brefeldin A; CFSE,
carboxyfluorescein succinimidyl ester; CQ, chloroquine;
CTV, Cell Trace Violet; CMV, cytomegalovirus; ER,
endoplasmic reticulum; ERAD, ER-associated degradation
(pathway); ExoA, exotoxin A; GM, GM-CSF; HER2,
HER2/neu (ERBB2); HuAB, human AB serum; ICC,
intracellular cytokine (assay); ICD, intracellular domain
of HER2/neu; IL-12p70, assembled IL-12 dimer; LPS,
lipopolysaccharide; LT, lactacystin; LUQ/LLQ/RUQ/
RLQ, left/right upper/lower quandrant (dot plots);
MFI, mean fluorescent index; PBMC, peripheral blood
mononuclear cells; R848, resiquimod; rh, recombinant
human; SEA, Sperm protein, Enterokinase and Agrin
domain of MUC1; VNTR, Variable Number of Tandem
Repeats domain of MUC1; TAP, Transporter-Associated
with Ag Processing; TIL, tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes;
TLR, toll-like receptor (agonist).; Treg, regulatory T-cell.

Lytic assays
PBMC from multiple healthy HLA-A2.1+
donors were either driven polyclonally in culture with
immobilized anti-CD3 plus soluble anti-CD28, 1 μg/ml
and 0.5 μg/ml respectively (BD Pharmingen #555329
and #555725), or driven by SEA1 or SEA2 long
peptides synthesized from the SEA domain of MUC1
with GM+R848+LPS+IL-7 conditioning. At the end of
culture, SEA-driven T-cells selectively recognized the
driving SEA peptides when reexposed to peptide-pulsed
autologous stimulatory PBMC (e.g., Figure 3) whereas
polyclonally-driven T-cells did not (data not shown). To
determine whether MUC1-expressing malignant cells
could also be targeted, we employed the HLA-A2.1+
human breast cancer line MDA-MB-231, purchased from
the American Type Culture Collection, stably transduced
with retroviral vector pLNCX.1 expressing MUC1 (MDAMB-231.MUC1) or Neo control (MDA-MB-231.Neo)
[93]. Analyses by IDEXX (Columbia MO) confirmed the
human origin of the cell lines, absence of mycoplasma,
and that the MUC1+ and Neo control cell lines originated
from ATCC HTB-26. Staining with anti-MUC1 mAb
(FITC-anti-CD227, clone HMPV, BD Biosciences)
confirmed cell surface staining for MDA-MB-231.MUC1
but not MDA-MB-231.Neo. The malignant cell lines were
incubated overnight with 0.5 ng/ml recombinant human
IFNγ to enhance their MHC expression (BD Bioscience
#554617) prior to labelling with Cr51 (200 μCi, Perkin
Elmer, Bridgeport CT, #NEZ03005MC) for 3 hrs. Each
of the T-cell groups was then cultured for 8h with each
of the Cr51-labelled malignant lines at a 100:1 ratio,
then supernatants assayed on a Top Count NXT counter
(Perkin/Elmer). % Lysis was calculated as ((Experimental
Lysis - Spontaneous Cr51 release)/(Complete Lysis in
Triton X-100 - Spontaneous Cr51 release)) x 100.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We convey our deepest gratitude to our blood donors
for making these studies possible.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
The authors declare no conflict of interest.

GRANT SUPPORT
This work was supported by NIH grants P50
CA102701 (Mayo Pancreatic SPORE project P.I.’s Cohen/
Gendler) and R01CA136632-01 (P.I.’s Disis/Cohen), as
well as funds from the Mayo Foundation.

REFERENCES
1.	 Dudley ME, Wunderlich JR, Robbins PF, Yang JC, Hwu
P, Schwartzentruber DJ, Topalian SL, Sherry R, Restifo
NP, Hubicki AM, Robinson MR, Raffeld M, Duray P, et al.
Cancer regression and autoimmunity in patients after clonal
repopulation with antitumor lymphocytes. Science. 2002;
298(5594):850-854.

Statistical analysis
Biological replicability was confirmed for all
experiments as designated in the figure legends. Analyses
by Student t-test were always two-tailed, and unless
identified as paired data were performed unpaired.
Comparisons determined to be p < 0.05 but > 0.01
were labelled *, p ≤ 0.01 but > 0.001**, p ≤ 0.001 but
> 0.0001***. and p ≤ 0.0001****. ns = not significant.
In Figure 2 a multiple linear regression analysis was
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

2.	

10803

Dudley ME, Wunderlich JR, Yang JC, Sherry RM, Topalian
SL, Restifo NP, Royal RE, Kammula U, White DE,
Mavroukakis SA, Rogers LJ, Gracia GJ, Jones SA, et al.
Adoptive cell transfer therapy following non-myeloablative
but lymphodepleting chemotherapy for the treatment of
patients with refractory metastatic melanoma. J Clin Oncol.
2005; 23(10):2346-2357.
Oncotarget

3.	 Tran E, Turcotte S, Gros A, Robbins PF, Lu YC, Dudley
ME, Wunderlich JR, Somerville RP, Hogan K, Hinrichs
CS, Parkhurst MR, Yang JC and Rosenberg SA. Cancer
immunotherapy based on mutation-specific CD4+ T
cells in a patient with epithelial cancer. Science. 2014;
344(6184):641-645.

MART-1. J Immunol. 1995; 154(5):2257-2265.
13.	 Salgaller ML, Afshar A, Marincola FM, Rivoltini L,
Kawakami Y and Rosenberg SA. Recognition of multiple
epitopes in the human melanoma antigen gp100 by
peripheral blood lymphocytes stimulated in vitro with
synthetic peptides. Cancer Res. 1995; 55(21):4972-4979.

4.	 Lu YC, Yao X, Crystal JS, Li YF, El-Gamil M, Gross C,
Davis L, Dudley ME, Yang JC, Samuels Y, Rosenberg SA
and Robbins PF. Efficient identification of mutated cancer
antigens recognized by T cells associated with durable
tumor regressions. Clin Cancer Res. 2014; 20(13):34013410.

14.	 Kochenderfer JN, Dudley ME, Kassim SH, Somerville RP,
Carpenter RO, Stetler-Stevenson M, Yang JC, Phan GQ,
Hughes MS, Sherry RM, Raffeld M, Feldman S, Lu L, et
al. Chemotherapy-refractory diffuse large B-cell lymphoma
and indolent B-cell malignancies can be effectively treated
with autologous T cells expressing an anti-CD19 chimeric
antigen receptor. J Clin Oncol. 2015; 33(6):540-549.

5.	 Dudley ME, Gross CA, Somerville RP, Hong Y, Schaub
NP, Rosati SF, White DE, Nathan D, Restifo NP, Steinberg
SM, Wunderlich JR, Kammula US, Sherry RM, et al.
Randomized selection design trial evaluating CD8+enriched versus unselected tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes
for adoptive cell therapy for patients with melanoma. J Clin
Oncol. 2013; 31(17):2152-2159.

15.	 Robbins PF, Kassim SH, Tran TL, Crystal JS, Morgan
RA, Feldman SA, Yang JC, Dudley ME, Wunderlich JR,
Sherry RM, Kammula US, Hughes MS, Restifo NP, et al.
A pilot trial using lymphocytes genetically engineered with
an NY-ESO-1-reactive T-cell receptor: long-term followup and correlates with response. Clin Cancer Res. 2015;
21(5):1019-1027.

6.	 Schwartzentruber DJ, Hom SS, Dadmarz R, White DE,
Yannelli JR, Steinberg SM, Rosenberg SA and Topalian
SL. In vitro predictors of therapeutic response in melanoma
patients receiving tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes and
interleukin-2. J Clin Oncol. 1994; 12(7):1475-1483.

16.	 Zhong S, Malecek K, Johnson LA, Yu Z, Vega-Saenz de
Miera E, Darvishian F, McGary K, Huang K, Boyer J,
Corse E, Shao Y, Rosenberg SA, Restifo NP, et al. T-cell
receptor affinity and avidity defines antitumor response and
autoimmunity in T-cell immunotherapy. Proc Natl Acad Sci
U S A. 2013; 110(17):6973-6978.

7.	 Schwartzentruber DJ, Topalian SL, Mancini M and
Rosenberg SA. Specific release of granulocyte-macrophage
colony-stimulating factor, tumor necrosis factor-alpha, and
IFN-gamma by human tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes
after autologous tumor stimulation. J Immunol. 1991;
146(10):3674-3681.
8.	

17.	 Posey AD, Jr., Schwab RD, Boesteanu AC, Steentoft C,
Mandel U, Engels B, Stone JD, Madsen TD, Schreiber
K, Haines KM, Cogdill AP, Chen TJ, Song D, et al.
Engineered CAR T Cells Targeting the Cancer-Associated
Tn-Glycoform of the Membrane Mucin MUC1 Control
Adenocarcinoma. Immunity. 2016; 44(6):1444-1454.

Peng LM, Kjaergaard J, Plautz GE, Weng DE, Shu SY and
Cohen PA. Helper-independent, L-selectin(low) CD8(+) T
cells with broad anti-tumor efficacy are naturally sensitized
during tumor progression. Journal of Immunology. 2000;
165(10):5738-5749.

18.	 Bhoj VG, Arhontoulis D, Wertheim G, Capobianchi J,
Callahan CA, Ellebrecht CT, Obstfeld AE, Lacey SF,
Melenhorst JJ, Nazimuddin F, Hwang WT, Maude SL,
Wasik MA, et al. Persistence of long-lived plasma cells
and humoral immunity in individuals responding to CD19directed CAR T-cell therapy. Blood. 2016; 128(3):360-370.

9.	 Wang LX, Shu SY, Disis ML and Plautz GE. Adoptive
transfer of tumor-primed, in vitro-activated, CD4(+) T
effector cells (T(E)s) combined with CD8(+) T(E)s provides
intraturnoral T-E proliferation and synergistic antitumor
response. Blood. 2007; 109(11):4865-4872.

19.	 Czerniecki BJ, Carter C, Rivoltini L, Koski GK, Kim HI,
Weng DE, Roros JG, Hijazi YM, Xu S, Rosenberg SA and
Cohen PA. Calcium ionophore-treated peripheral blood
monocytes and dendritic cells rapidly display characteristics
of activated dendritic cells. J Immunol. 1997; 159(8):38233837.

10.	 Cohen PA, Peng LM, Plautz GE, Kim JA, Weng DE and
Shu SY. CD4(+) T cells in adoptive immunotherapy and the
indirect mechanism of tumor rejection. Critical Reviews in
Immunology. 2000; 20(1):17-56.
11.	 Cohen PA, Peng LM, Kjaergaard J, Plautz GE, Finke JH,
Koski GK, Czerniecki BJ and Shu SY. T-cell adoptive
therapy of tumors: Mechanisms of improved therapeutic
performance. Critical Reviews in Immunology. 2001; 21(13):215-248.

20.	 Xu S, Koski GK, Faries M, Bedrosian I, Mick R, Maeurer
M, Cheever MA, Cohen PA and Czerniecki BJ. Rapid high
efficiency sensitization of CD8+ T cells to tumor antigens
by dendritic cells leads to enhanced functional avidity
and direct tumor recognition through an IL-12-dependent
mechanism. J Immunol. 2003; 171(5):2251-2261.

12.	 Rivoltini L, Kawakami Y, Sakaguchi K, Southwood S, Sette
A, Robbins PF, Marincola FM, Salgaller ML, Yannelli
JR, Appella E and et al. Induction of tumor-reactive CTL
from peripheral blood and tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes
of melanoma patients by in vitro stimulation with an
immunodominant peptide of the human melanoma antigen
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

21.	 Dang Y, Knutson KL, Goodell V, dela Rosa C, Salazar LG,
Higgins D, Childs J and Disis ML. Tumor antigen-specific
T-cell expansion is greatly facilitated by in vivo priming.
Clin Cancer Res. 2007; 13(6):1883-1891.
22.	 Bollard CM, Gottschalk S, Torrano V, Diouf O, Ku S,
10804

Oncotarget

Hazrat Y, Carrum G, Ramos C, Fayad L, Shpall EJ, Pro
B, Liu H, Wu MF, et al. Sustained complete responses in
patients with lymphoma receiving autologous cytotoxic T
lymphocytes targeting Epstein-Barr virus latent membrane
proteins. J Clin Oncol. 2014; 32(8):798-808.

33.	 Markley JC and Sadelain M. IL-7 and IL-21 are superior
to IL-2 and IL-15 in promoting human T cell-mediated
rejection of systemic lymphoma in immunodeficient mice.
Blood. 2010; 115(17):3508-3519.
34.	 Cieri N, Camisa B, Cocchiarella F, Forcato M, Oliveira G,
Provasi E, Bondanza A, Bordignon C, Peccatori J, Ciceri F,
Lupo-Stanghellini MT, Mavilio F, Mondino A, et al. IL-7
and IL-15 instruct the generation of human memory stem T
cells from naive precursors. Blood. 2013; 121(4):573-584.

23.	 Knutson KL and Disis ML. IL-12 enhances the generation
of tumour antigen-specific Th1 CD4 T cells during ex vivo
expansion. Clin Exp Immunol. 2004; 135(2):322-329.
24.	 Disis ML, Dang Y, Coveler AL, Marzbani E, Kou ZC,
Childs JS, Fintak P, Higgins DM, Reichow J, Waisman J
and Salazar LG. HER-2/neu vaccine-primed autologous
T-cell infusions for the treatment of advanced stage HER2/neu expressing cancers. Cancer Immunol Immunother.
2014; 63(2):101-109.

35.	 Deshpande P, Cavanagh MM, Le Saux S, Singh K, Weyand
CM and Goronzy JJ. IL-7- and IL-15-mediated TCR
sensitization enables T cell responses to self-antigens. J
Immunol. 2013; 190(4):1416-1423.
36.	 Zeng R, Spolski R, Finkelstein SE, Oh S, Kovanen PE,
Hinrichs CS, Pise-Masison CA, Radonovich MF, Brady
JN, Restifo NP, Berzofsky JA and Leonard WJ. Synergy of
IL-21 and IL-15 in regulating CD8+ T cell expansion and
function. J Exp Med. 2005; 201(1):139-148.

25.	 Napolitani G, Rinaldi A, Bertoni F, Sallusto F and
Lanzavecchia A. Selected Toll-like receptor agonist
combinations synergistically trigger a T helper type
1-polarizing program in dendritic cells. Nat Immunol. 2005;
6(8):769-776.

37.	 Gragert L, Madbouly A, Freeman J and Maiers M. Sixlocus high resolution HLA haplotype frequencies derived
from mixed-resolution DNA typing for the entire US donor
registry. Hum Immunol. 2013; 74(10):1313-1320.

26.	 Zheng R, Cohen PA, Paustian CA, Johnson TD, Lee
WT, Shu S and Koski GK. Paired Toll-like receptor
agonists enhance vaccine therapy through induction of
interleukin-12. Cancer Res. 2008; 68(11):4045-4049.

38.	 Lakshminarayanan V, Supekar NT, Wei J, McCurry DB,
Dueck AC, Kosiorek HE, Trivedi PP, Bradley JM, Madsen
CS, Pathangey LB, Hoelzinger DB, Wolfert MA, Boons
GJ, et al. MUC1 Vaccines, Comprised of Glycosylated or
Non-Glycosylated Peptides or Tumor-Derived MUC1, Can
Circumvent Immunoediting to Control Tumor Growth in
MUC1 Transgenic Mice. PLoS One. 2016; 11(1):e0145920.

27.	 Kalinski P, Wieckowski E, Muthuswamy R and de Jong E.
Generation of stable Th1/CTL-, Th2-, and Th17-inducing
human dendritic cells. Methods Mol Biol. 2010; 595:117133.
28.	 Manrique SZ, Dominguez AL, Mirza N, Spencer CD,
Bradley JM, Finke JH, Lee JJ, Pease LR, Gendler SJ and
Cohen PA. Definitive activation of endogenous antitumor
immunity by repetitive cycles of cyclophosphamide with
interspersed Toll-like receptor agonists. Oncotarget. 2016;
7:42919-42942. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.10190.

39.	 Wakefield A, Pignata A, Ghazi A, Ashoori A, Hegde M,
Landi D, Gray T, Scheurer ME, Chintagumpala M, Adesina
A, Gottschalk S, Hicks J, Powell SZ, et al. Is CMV a target
in pediatric glioblastoma? Expression of CMV proteins,
pp65 and IE1-72 and CMV nucleic acids in a cohort of
pediatric glioblastoma patients. J Neurooncol. 2015;
125(2):307-315.

29.	 Czerniecki BJ, Koski GK, Koldovsky U, Xu S, Cohen PA,
Mick R, Nisenbaum H, Pasha T, Xu M, Fox KR, Weinstein
S, Orel SG, Vonderheide R, et al. Targeting HER-2/neu in
early breast cancer development using dendritic cells with
staged interleukin-12 burst secretion. Cancer Res. 2007;
67(4):1842-1852.

40.	 Nair SK, De Leon G, Boczkowski D, Schmittling R, Xie
W, Staats J, Liu R, Johnson LA, Weinhold K, Archer GE,
Sampson JH and Mitchell DA. Recognition and killing of
autologous, primary glioblastoma tumor cells by human
cytomegalovirus pp65-specific cytotoxic T cells. Clin
Cancer Res. 2014; 20(10):2684-2694.

30.	 Radford KJ, Turtle CJ, Kassianos AJ and Hart DN. CD11c+
blood dendritic cells induce antigen-specific cytotoxic T
lymphocytes with similar efficiency compared to monocytederived dendritic cells despite higher levels of MHC class I
expression. J Immunother. 2006; 29(6):596-605.

41.	 Lucas KG, Bao L, Bruggeman R, Dunham K and Specht
C. The detection of CMV pp65 and IE1 in glioblastoma
multiforme. J Neurooncol. 2011; 103(2):231-238.

31.	 Hart JP, Gunn MD and Pizzo SV. A CD91-positive subset
of CD11c+ blood dendritic cells: characterization of the
APC that functions to enhance adaptive immune responses
against CD91-targeted antigens. J Immunol. 2004;
172(1):70-78.

42.	 Knutson KL, Schiffman K and Disis ML. Immunization
with a HER-2/neu helper peptide vaccine generates HER2/neu CD8 T-cell immunity in cancer patients. J Clin Invest.
2001; 107(4):477-484.

32.	 Gagnon J, Chen XL, Forand-Boulerice M, Leblanc C,
Raman C, Ramanathan S and Ilangumaran S. Increased
antigen responsiveness of naive CD8 T cells exposed
to IL-7 and IL-21 is associated with decreased CD5
expression. Immunol Cell Biol. 2010; 88(4):451-460.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

43.	 Disis ML, Gooley TA, Rinn K, Davis D, Piepkorn M,
Cheever MA, Knutson KL and Schiffman K. Generation
of T-cell immunity to the HER-2/neu protein after active
immunization with HER-2/neu peptide-based vaccines. J
Clin Oncol. 2002; 20(11):2624-2632.

10805

Oncotarget

44.	 Heukamp LC, van der Burg SH, Drijfhout JW, Melief CJ,
Taylor-Papadimitriou J and Offringa R. Identification of
three non-VNTR MUC1-derived HLA-A*0201-restricted
T-cell epitopes that induce protective anti-tumor immunity
in HLA-A2/K(b)-transgenic mice. Int J Cancer. 2001;
91(3):385-392.

56.	 Ribas A and Tumeh PC. The future of cancer therapy:
selecting patients likely to respond to PD1/L1 blockade.
Clin Cancer Res. 2014; 20(19):4982-4984.
57.	 Jin J, Sabatino M, Somerville R, Wilson JR, Dudley ME,
Stroncek DF and Rosenberg SA. Simplified method of the
growth of human tumor infiltrating lymphocytes in gaspermeable flasks to numbers needed for patient treatment. J
Immunother. 2012; 35(3):283-292.

45.	 Rongcun Y, Salazar-Onfray F, Charo J, Malmberg KJ,
Evrin K, Maes H, Kono K, Hising C, Petersson M, Larsson
O, Lan L, Appella E, Sette A, et al. Identification of new
HER2/neu-derived peptide epitopes that can elicit specific
CTL against autologous and allogeneic carcinomas and
melanomas. J Immunol. 1999; 163(2):1037-1044.

58.	 McKinstry KK, Strutt TM, Bautista B, Zhang W, Kuang Y,
Cooper AM and Swain SL. Effector CD4 T-cell transition
to memory requires late cognate interactions that induce
autocrine IL-2. Nat Commun. 2014; 5:5377-5389.

46.	 Hattrup CL and Gendler SJ. Structure and function of the
cell surface (tethered) mucins. Annu Rev Physiol. 2008;
70:431-457.

59.	 Munitic I, Kuka M, Allam A, Scoville JP and Ashwell JD.
CD70 deficiency impairs effector CD8 T cell generation
and viral clearance but is dispensable for the recall response
to lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus. J Immunol. 2013;
190(3):1169-1179.

47.	 Fuse S, Zhang W and Usherwood EJ. Control of memory
CD8+ T cell differentiation by CD80/CD86-CD28
costimulation and restoration by IL-2 during the recall
response. J Immunol. 2008; 180(2):1148-1157.

60.	 Feau S, Garcia Z, Arens R, Yagita H, Borst J and
Schoenberger SP. The CD4(+) T-cell help signal is
transmitted from APC to CD8(+) T-cells via CD27-CD70
interactions. Nat Commun. 2012; 3:948-957.

48.	 Lemster BH, Michel JJ, Montag DT, Paat JJ, Studenski SA,
Newman AB and Vallejo AN. Induction of CD56 and TCRindependent activation of T cells with aging. J Immunol.
2008; 180(3):1979-1990.

61.	 Chacon JA, Wu RC, Sukhumalchandra P, Molldrem JJ,
Sarnaik A, Pilon-Thomas S, Weber J, Hwu P and Radvanyi
L. Co-stimulation through 4-1BB/CD137 improves the
expansion and function of CD8(+) melanoma tumorinfiltrating lymphocytes for adoptive T-cell therapy. PLoS
One. 2013; 8(4):e60031.

49.	 Michel JJ, Turesson C, Lemster B, Atkins SR, Iclozan C,
Bongartz T, Wasko MC, Matteson EL and Vallejo AN.
CD56-expressing T cells that have features of senescence
are expanded in rheumatoid arthritis. Arthritis Rheum.
2007; 56(1):43-57.

62.	 Zhao Y, Tahiliani V, Salek-Ardakani S and Croft M.
Targeting 4-1BB (CD137) to enhance CD8 T cell responses
with poxviruses and viral antigens. Front Immunol. 2012;
3:332-344.

50.	 Guarda G, Hons M, Soriano SF, Huang AY, Polley R,
Martin-Fontecha A, Stein JV, Germain RN, Lanzavecchia
A and Sallusto F. L-selectin-negative CCR7- effector and
memory CD8+ T cells enter reactive lymph nodes and kill
dendritic cells. Nat Immunol. 2007; 8(7):743-752.

63.	 Watanabe K, Suzuki S, Kamei M, Toji S, Kawase T,
Takahashi T, Kuzushima K and Akatsuka Y. CD137-guided
isolation and expansion of antigen-specific CD8 cells for
potential use in adoptive immunotherapy. Int J Hematol.
2008; 88(3):311-320.

51.	 Sallusto F, Langenkamp A, Geginat J and Lanzavecchia A.
Functional subsets of memory T cells identified by CCR7
expression. Curr Top Microbiol Immunol. 2000; 251:167171.

64.	 Lu Z, Yuan L, Zhou X, Sotomayor E, Levitsky HI and
Pardoll DM. CD40-independent pathways of T cell help for
priming of CD8(+) cytotoxic T lymphocytes. J Exp Med.
2000; 191(3):541-550.

52.	 Kmieciak M, Gowda M, Graham L, Godder K, Bear HD,
Marincola FM and Manjili MH. Human T cells express
CD25 and Foxp3 upon activation and exhibit effector/
memory phenotypes without any regulatory/suppressor
function. J Transl Med. 2009; 7:89-95.

65.	 Di Genova G, Savelyeva N, Suchacki A, Thirdborough
SM and Stevenson FK. Bystander stimulation of activated
CD4+ T cells of unrelated specificity following a booster
vaccination with tetanus toxoid. Eur J Immunol. 2010;
40(4):976-985.

53.	 Abd Al Samid M, Chaudhary B, Khaled YS, Ammori BJ
and Elkord E. Combining FoxP3 and Helios with GARP/
LAP markers can identify expanded Treg subsets in cancer
patients. Oncotarget. 2016; 7:14083-14094. doi: 10.18632/
oncotarget.7334.

66.	 Delamarre L, Holcombe H and Mellman I. Presentation of
exogenous antigens on major histocompatibility complex
(MHC) class I and MHC class II molecules is differentially
regulated during dendritic cell maturation. J Exp Med.
2003; 198(1):111-122.

54.	 Elkord E, Abd Al Samid M and Chaudhary B. Helios, and
not FoxP3, is the marker of activated Tregs expressing
GARP/LAP. Oncotarget. 2015; 6:20026-20036. doi:
10.18632/oncotarget.4771.

67.	 Kreer C, Rauen J, Zehner M and Burgdorf S. Crosspresentation: how to get there - or how to get the ER. Front
Immunol. 2011; 2:87-97.

55.	 Hoos A. Development of immuno-oncology drugs - from
CTLA4 to PD1 to the next generations. Nat Rev Drug
Discov. 2016; 15(4):235-247.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

68.	 Belizaire R and Unanue ER. Targeting proteins to distinct
10806

Oncotarget

subcellular compartments reveals unique requirements for
MHC class I and II presentation. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A.
2009; 106(41):17463-17468.

80.	 Caserta S, Alessi P, Basso V and Mondino A. IL-7 is
superior to IL-2 for ex vivo expansion of tumour-specific
CD4(+) T cells. Eur J Immunol. 2010; 40(2):470-479.

69.	 Men Y, Audran R, Thomasin C, Eberl G, Demotz S, Merkle
HP, Gander B and Corradin G. MHC class I- and class IIrestricted processing and presentation of microencapsulated
antigens. Vaccine. 1999; 17(9-10):1047-1056.

81.	 Koenen P, Heinzel S, Carrington EM, Happo L, Alexander
WS, Zhang JG, Herold MJ, Scott CL, Lew AM, Strasser A
and Hodgkin PD. Mutually exclusive regulation of T cell
survival by IL-7R and antigen receptor-induced signals. Nat
Commun. 2013; 4:1735-1745.

70.	 Ackerman AL, Kyritsis C, Tampe R and Cresswell P. Early
phagosomes in dendritic cells form a cellular compartment
sufficient for cross presentation of exogenous antigens. Proc
Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2003; 100(22):12889-12894.

82.	 Katz G, Pobezinsky LA, Jeurling S, Shinzawa M, Van
Laethem F and Singer A. T cell receptor stimulation
impairs IL-7 receptor signaling by inducing expression of
the microRNA miR-17 to target Janus kinase 1. Sci Signal.
2014; 7(340):ra83.

71.	 Imai J, Hasegawa H, Maruya M, Koyasu S and Yahara
I. Exogenous antigens are processed through the
endoplasmic reticulum-associated degradation (ERAD) in
cross-presentation by dendritic cells. Int Immunol. 2005;
17(1):45-53.

83.	 Jacobs SR, Michalek RD and Rathmell JC. IL-7 is essential
for homeostatic control of T cell metabolism in vivo. J
Immunol. 2010; 184(7):3461-3469.

72.	 Ackerman AL, Giodini A and Cresswell P. A role for the
endoplasmic reticulum protein retrotranslocation machinery
during crosspresentation by dendritic cells. Immunity. 2006;
25(4):607-617.

84.	 Karawajew L, Ruppert V, Wuchter C, Kosser A, Schrappe
M, Dorken B and Ludwig WD. Inhibition of in vitro
spontaneous apoptosis by IL-7 correlates with bcl-2 upregulation, cortical/mature immunophenotype, and better
early cytoreduction of childhood T-cell acute lymphoblastic
leukemia. Blood. 2000; 96(1):297-306.

73.	 Zehner M, Marschall AL, Bos E, Schloetel JG, Kreer C,
Fehrenschild D, Limmer A, Ossendorp F, Lang T, Koster
AJ, Dubel S and Burgdorf S. The translocon protein sec61
mediates antigen transport from endosomes in the cytosol
for cross-presentation to CD8(+) T cells. Immunity. 2015;
42(5):850-863.

85.	 Kim K, Lee CK, Sayers TJ, Muegge K and Durum SK. The
trophic action of IL-7 on pro-T cells: inhibition of apoptosis
of pro-T1, -T2, and -T3 cells correlates with Bcl-2 and
Bax levels and is independent of Fas and p53 pathways. J
Immunol. 1998; 160(12):5735-5741.

74.	 Kisselev AF and Goldberg AL. Proteasome inhibitors:
from research tools to drug candidates. Chem Biol. 2001;
8(8):739-758.

86.	 Alves NL, van Leeuwen EM, Derks IA and van Lier
RA. Differential regulation of human IL-7 receptor alpha
expression by IL-7 and TCR signaling. J Immunol. 2008;
180(8):5201-5210.

75.	 Menager J, Ebstein F, Oger R, Hulin P, Nedellec S,
Duverger E, Lehmann A, Kloetzel PM, Jotereau F and
Guilloux Y. Cross-presentation of synthetic long peptides
by human dendritic cells: a process dependent on ERAD
component p97/VCP but Not sec61 and/or Derlin-1. PLoS
One. 2014; 9(2):e89897.

87.	 Kaech SM, Tan JT, Wherry EJ, Konieczny BT, Surh CD
and Ahmed R. Selective expression of the interleukin 7
receptor identifies effector CD8 T cells that give rise to
long-lived memory cells. Nat Immunol. 2003; 4(12):11911198.

76.	 Tewari MK, Sinnathamby G, Rajagopal D and Eisenlohr
LC. A cytosolic pathway for MHC class II-restricted
antigen processing that is proteasome and TAP dependent.
Nat Immunol. 2005; 6(3):287-294.

88.	 Reddy R, Zhou F, Huang L, Carbone F, Bevan M and
Rouse BT. pH sensitive liposomes provide an efficient
means of sensitizing target cells to class I restricted CTL
recognition of a soluble protein. J Immunol Methods. 1991;
141(2):157-163.

77.	 Sinnathamby G and Eisenlohr LC. Presentation by recycling
MHC class II molecules of an influenza hemagglutininderived epitope that is revealed in the early endosome by
acidification. J Immunol. 2003; 170(7):3504-3513.

89.	 Kovacsovics-Bankowski M, Clark K, Benacerraf B and
Rock KL. Efficient major histocompatibility complex class
I presentation of exogenous antigen upon phagocytosis
by macrophages. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1993;
90(11):4942-4946.

78.	 Garulli B, Stillitano MG, Barnaba V and Castrucci MR.
Primary CD8+ T-cell response to soluble ovalbumin is
improved by chloroquine treatment in vivo. Clin Vaccine
Immunol. 2008; 15(10):1497-1504.

90.	 Rosenberg SA, Yang JC and Restifo NP. Cancer
immunotherapy: moving beyond current vaccines. Nat Med.
2004; 10(9):909-915.

79.	 Crespo MI, Zacca ER, Nunez NG, Ranocchia RP, Maccioni
M, Maletto BA, Pistoresi-Palencia MC and Moron G.
TLR7 triggering with polyuridylic acid promotes crosspresentation in CD8alpha+ conventional dendritic cells by
enhancing antigen preservation and MHC class I antigen
permanence on the dendritic cell surface. J Immunol. 2013;
190(3):948-960.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

91.	 Overwijk WW, Theoret MR, Finkelstein SE, Surman DR,
de Jong LA, Vyth-Dreese FA, Dellemijn TA, Antony PA,
Spiess PJ, Palmer DC, Heimann DM, Klebanoff CA, Yu Z,
et al. Tumor regression and autoimmunity after reversal of
a functionally tolerant state of self-reactive CD8+ T cells. J

10807

Oncotarget

Exp Med. 2003; 198(4):569-580.

93.	 Thompson EJ, Shanmugam K, Hattrup CL, Kotlarczyk
KL, Gutierrez A, Bradley JM, Mukherjee P and Gendler
SJ. Tyrosines in the MUC1 cytoplasmic tail modulate
transcription via the extracellular signal-regulated kinase
1/2 and nuclear factor-kappaB pathways. Mol Cancer Res.
2006; 4(7):489-497.

92.	 Salazar LG, Coveler AL, Swensen RE, Gooley TA, Goodell
V, Schiffman K and Disis ML. Kinetics of tumor-specific
T-cell response development after active immunization
in patients with HER-2/neu overexpressing cancers. Clin
Immunol. 2007; 125(3):275-280.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

10808

Oncotarget

