HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Author Manuscript

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 24.
Published in final edited form as:
Cell. 2016 September 08; 166(6): 1362–1364. doi:10.1016/j.cell.2016.08.058.

Probing the Diversity of T Cell Dysfunction in Cancer
Ryan T. Sowell1 and Susan M. Kaech1,*
1Department

of Immunobiology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut

06520, USA

Abstract
Author Manuscript

T cell dysfunction in cancer comes in many forms, with two new varieties reported in this issue.
Daley et al. find that T cells expressing γδ T cell receptors (TCR) promote pancreatic tumor
growth by inhibiting activation of T cells with conventional TCRs. Singer et al. characterize
dysfunctional tumor infiltrating lymphocytes to reveal a role for zinc homeostasis in anti-tumor
immunity.

Author Manuscript

For the immune system to mount an adequate response to cancer it must overcome a slew of
obstacles. T cells that recognize tumor antigens must be sufficiently activated by antigen
presenting cells, then seek out and destroy tumor cells. However, within the harsh tumor
microenvironment, numerous factors dampen and suppress anti-tumor T cell responses. For
example, a complex combination of hypoxia, nutrient imbalances, acidic pH,
immunosuppressive cytokines (such as TGF-β and IL-10), lipids (such as PGE2), lactate and
other metabolites are well-known to inhibit tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs).
Additionally, co-inhibitory receptor:ligand pairs (such as PD-1:PD-L1, CTLA-4:B7, and
TIM-3:Galectin-9) expressed on tumor cells and tumor-infiltrating immune cells are
currently at the center of attention as drugs developed to block these molecular interactions
(termed immune checkpoint inhibitors) have demonstrated considerable clinical benefit for
numerous cancer types. The heterogeneous nature of individual tumors and cancer types and
the development of acquired resistance to most therapy, make it unlikely that one form of
therapy will reinvigorate the immune system to effectively combat all cancers. Thus,
identifying new avenues to circumvent immune cell dysfunction in adjunct with current
cancer therapies is needed to increase overall patient survival. In this issue of Cell, two
groups report on the discovery of new mediators of T cell dysfunction in cancer. Daley et al.
(2016) describe an unexpected role for γδ T cells in blocking the activity of conventional αβ
T cells in pancreatic tumors through PD-1:PD-L1 interactions. Singer et al. (2016)
characterize a genetic signature of dysfunctional CD8 T cells that led to the identification of
metallothioneins (MTs) and the zinc-finger transcription factor GATA3 in suppressing the
function of tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes. Both of these studies shed light on new
biological targets that may lead to new anti-cancer treatments (Figure 1).

Author Manuscript

Pancreatic cancer is a devastating form of cancer with extremely poor survival rates that can
significantly benefit from identification of new therapeutic targets. Daley et al. show that the

*

Correspondence: susan.kaech@yale.edu.

Sowell and Kaech

Page 2

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

majority of T cells infiltrating pancreatic ductal carcinoma in humans and a mouse model of
pancreatic cancer possess the γδ T cell receptor (TCR), not the conventional αβ TCR. γδ T
cells makeup a relatively small subset of T cells in the circulation but are found in greater
proportions within the intestinal mucosa and skin epithelium where their role in barrier
protection is well characterized. γδ T cells are reported to mount potent responses against
tumors, but other studies have demonstrated their ability to be tumor promoting. In the
current study, the authors find that the γδ T cells infiltrate the pancreas and suppress
activation of αβ T cells. γδ T cells in the pancreas secrete a combination of antiinflammatory and pro-inflammatory cytokines, such as IL- 10 and IL-17, IFN-γ, TNF-α,
and IL-13. The γδ T cells also express high levels of PD-L1 and Galectin-9, which the
authors find directly inhibit the activation of αβ T cells. Removal of γδ T cells from the
tumor microenvironment enables αβ T cells to better infiltrate the tumor and control tumor
growth. These findings not only strengthen the rationale for expanding PD-1/PD-L1
blockade therapy to pancreatic cancer but also suggest that targeting γδ T cells through
antibody depletion may be another therapeutic option.

Author Manuscript

In the report by Singer et al. (2016), a series of computational methods is used to identify
genes unique to dysfunctional CD8+ tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes. By comparing RNA
profiles of populations of dysfunctional T cells (as well as individual single T cells within)
to functional antiviral CD8 T cells, they are able to better distinguish genes associated with
T cell dysfunction from those associated with T cell activation. This has been challenging
because in some cases the inhibitory receptors that help define dysfunctional T cells (e.g.,
PD-1, TIM-3, LAG-3, and TIGIT) are also found on functional activated T cells. Thus,
population-based analyses of T cells distinguished by these markers alone may preclude the
identification of genes driving T cell dysfunction in tumors. Using single-cell gene
expression analysis of tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes the authors found that the T cell
“activation” and “dysfunction” gene modules negatively correlate with each other and are
exclusively enriched in distinct populations of CD8 T cells. These findings suggest that
while dysfunctional or “exhausted” T cells arise from activated T cells, they acquire a
distinct transcriptional state that is no longer dependent on the module of activation genes.
Furthermore, zeroing in on the dysfunctional gene modules led to the discovery of new
regulators of T cell dysfunction, including metallothioneins and the zinc-dependent
transcription factor Gata3. The authors find that metallothioneins are highly expressed in
dysfunctional T cells and genetic deletion of MT1 and MT2 restores their cytokine
production. Interestingly, tumors grew slower in metallothionein-deficient mice in spite of
relatively high amounts of PD-1 and Tim-3 on tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes.

Author Manuscript

As metallothionein levels are regulated by Zn2+ and are important for its binding and
transport the authors postulate that increased metallothionein and intracellular Zn2+ affects
zinc-dependent transcription factors involved in T cell dysfunction. It is worth noting,
though, that the role of metallothioneins in T cells may not be limited to Zn2+ as they also
bind other metal cations such as Cu2+. Profiling the transcription factors differentially
expressed between the dysfunctional and activation gene modules identified GATA3 and
Helios (IKZF2), both zinc-finger transcription factors. Indeed, a small subset of tumorinfiltrating lymphocytes express higher levels of GATA3, and upon activation these cells
produced IL-10 and made less IFN-γ and IL-2 than GATA3− cells. Deletion of Gata3 in
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 24.

Sowell and Kaech

Page 3

Author Manuscript

tumor-specific CD8 T cells increased IFN-γ and IL-2 production, decreased IL-10, and
suppressed tumor growth. Interestingly, GATA3 counter-regulates T-bet in CD4 T cells, and
given that T-bet restrains the terminal stages of CD8 T cell exhaustion (Kao et al., 2011),
switches in GATA3 expression in CD8 T cells may signify and promote this transition.
While these findings reveal new factors in regulating T cell dysfunction in tumors, many
questions remain. For example, what induces high amounts of PD-L1 on pancreatic γδ T
cells? Possibly IL-27, as it has been shown to induce PD-L1 expression on CD4 T cells and
inhibit Th17 mediated autoimmunity (Hirahara et al., 2012). What type of TCR antigens or
other stress-related ligands for NKG2D or Toll-like-receptors in the pancreatic tumor
microenvironment drive γδ T cell accumulation and their suppressive functions?
Alternatively, perturbed metabolic properties of the malignant pancreas or its close
proximity to the duodenum may promote pancreatic infiltration of γδ T cells.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Additionally, what programs T cell dysfunction aside from persistent antigen? This study
demonstrates a role for GATA3 in promoting T cell dysfunction. However, it remains
undetermined if GATA3 is a core regulator of the dysfunctional gene modules or if deletion
of metallothionein suppresses the activity of GATA3 or other zinc-finger transcription
factors (e.g., IKZF2) due to zinc irregularities. IKZF2 also represses IL-2 production and is
required for Ly49+ CD8+ Tregs (Kim et al., 2015), potentially drawing a parallel between
these cells and tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes. Other regulators of CD8 T cell dysfunction in
tumors include PGE2 and adenosine, and both signal downstream through cAMP and PKA.
Interestingly, the dysfunctional gene module contains the PGE2 receptor Ptger4, in
agreement with our prior work demonstrating Ptger2 and Ptger4 contribute to CD8 T cell
dysfunction (Chen et al., 2015). Moreover, blockade of PGE2 signaling boosts the
therapeutic effects of PD-1 blockade in cancer and chronic viral infection (Chen et al., 2015;
Zelenay et al., 2015). Furthermore, metallothionein expression can be enhanced by
adenosine (Xiong et al., 1992) and cAMP/PKA signaling, providing another link between
these pathways in lymphocyte dysfunction.

Author Manuscript

Lastly, it will be important to link the dysfunctional gene program(s) to T cell metabolism
because decreased glycolysis and mitochondrial function are core to T cell dysfunction
(Chang and Pearce, 2016). PD-1 can suppress T cell glycolysis, and conversely, increasing
hypoxia inducible factor-1 alpha (HIF-1α) activity boosts glycolysis as well as effector
functions in CD8 T cells in chronic viral infection and tumors (Doedens et al., 2013).
Perhaps, HIF-1α counteracts GATA3 and IKZF2 to promote “activation” gene expression
and metabolic states optimal for CD8 T cell effector function. In relation, hypoxic stress can
paradoxically increase production of reactive oxygen species and possibly infiltrating
lymphocytes combat this in hypoxic tumor microenvironments by importing Zn2+ as an
antioxidant. However, this in turn, may increase metallothionein expression and further
suppress T cell function and mitochondrial respiration. Thus, while signaling through coinhibitory receptors may set the stage for T cell dysfunction, the eventual loss of
bioenergetic potential and alterations of intracellular metabolites and ions may ultimately
remodel the transcriptional and epigenetic landscape that manifests in CD8 T cell
dysfunction in tumors.

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 24.

Sowell and Kaech

Page 4

Author Manuscript

Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.

References

Author Manuscript

Chang CH, Pearce EL. Nat Immunol. 2016; 17:364–368. [PubMed: 27002844]
Chen JH, Perry CJ, Tsui YC, Staron MM, Parish IA, Dominguez CX, Rosenberg DW, Kaech SM. Nat
Med. 2015; 21:327–334. [PubMed: 25799228]
Daley D, Zambirinis C, Seifert L, Akkad N, Mohan N, Werba G, Barilla R, Torres-Hernandez A,
Hundeyin M, Mani VRK. Cell. 2016; 166:1485–1499. this issue. [PubMed: 27569912]
Doedens AL, Phan AT, Stradner MH, Fujimoto JK, Nguyen JV, Yang E, Johnson RS, Goldrath AW.
Nat Immunol. 2013; 14:1173–1182. [PubMed: 24076634]
Hirahara K, Ghoreschi K, Yang XP, Takahashi H, Laurence A, Vahedi G, Sciumè G, Hall AO, Dupont
CD, Francisco LM, et al. Immunity. 2012; 36:1017–1030. [PubMed: 22726954]
Kao C, Oestreich KJ, Paley MA, Crawford A, Angelosanto JM, Ali MA, Intlekofer AM, Boss JM,
Reiner SL, Weinmann AS, Wherry EJ. Nat Immunol. 2011; 12:663–671. [PubMed: 21623380]
Kim HJ, Barnitz RA, Kreslavsky T, Brown FD, Moffett H, Lemieux ME, Kaygusuz Y, Meissner T,
Holderried TA, Chan S, et al. Science. 2015; 350:334–339. [PubMed: 26472910]
Singer M, Wang C, Cong L, Marjanovic ND, Kowalczyk MS, Zhang H, Nyman J, Sakuishi K,
Kurtulus S, Gennert D, et al. Cell. 2016; 166:1500–1511. this issue. [PubMed: 27610572]
Xiong X, Garrett SH, Arizono K, Brady FO. Proc Soc Exp Biol Med. 1992; 201:59–65. [PubMed:
1528909]
Zelenay S, van der Veen AG, Böttcher JP, Snelgrove KJ, Rogers N, Acton SE, Chakravarty P, Girotti
MR, Marais R, Quezada SA, et al. Cell. 2015; 162:1257–1270. [PubMed: 26343581]

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 24.

Sowell and Kaech

Page 5

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 1. Releasing Brakes on Tumor T Cells

Author Manuscript

(Left and center) γδ T cells, in concert with myeloid-derived suppresor cells and tumorassociated macrophages, foster a suppressive tumor microenvironment in pancreatic cancer.
γδ T cells promote tumor growth through upregulation of co-inhibitory molecules PD-L1
and Galectin-9, directly blocking αβ CD4 and CD8 T cell activation. Deletion of γδ T cells
through various means (i.e., CCR2, CCR5, CCR6, and TCRδ-genetic deficiency) restores
αβ T cell cytokine production, co-stimulatory molecule expression, and control of tumor
growth. Therapeutic benefit of PD-L1 or Galectin-9 antibody blockade primarily hinges
upon targeting γδ T cells, in turn promoting increased T cell infiltration and control of
tumor growth. (Right) Metallothioneins (MTs) regulate metabolism of Zn2+ and other trace
minerals. Intracellular accumulation of Zn2+ promotes T cell dysfunction in the tumor
microenvironment and increases activity of zinc-finger transcription factors. Genetic
deletion of Gata3 reverses metallothionein-dependent T cell loss of cytokine production,
independent of the expression of classic cell surface markers of T cell dysfunction.

Author Manuscript
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 24.

