Original Article

Resveratrol Inhibits Ovarian Tumor Growth in an In Vivo
Mouse Model
Lijun Tan, BS1; Weimin Wang, PhD1; Gong He, BS1; Rork D. Kuick, MA2; Gabrielle Gossner, MD3; Angela S. Kueck, MD4;
Heather Wahl, MD1; Anthony W. Opipari, MD, PhD1; and J. Rebecca Liu, MD1

BACKGROUND: Resveratrol inhibits the growth of ovarian carcinoma cells in vitro through the inhibition of glucose metabolism and
the induction of both autophagy and apoptosis. In the current study, we investigated the metabolic and therapeutic effects of resveratrol in vivo. METHODS: A fluorescent xenograft mouse model of ovarian cancer was used. Mice were treated with cisplatin, resveratrol, or vehicle alone. Tumor burden was assessed using whole-body imaging. The effect of resveratrol on glucose uptake in vivo was
determined using micro-positron emission tomography scanning. To determine whether resveratrol could inhibit tumor regrowth,
tumor-bearing mice were treated with cisplatin followed by either daily resveratrol or vehicle. Autophagic response in resected
tumors taken from mice treated with resveratrol was examined by transmission electron microscopy. Glycolysis and mitochondrial
respiration in ovarian tumor cells after treatment with resveratrol was assessed. RESULTS: Mice treated with resveratrol and cisplatin
were found to have a significantly reduced tumor burden compared with control animals (P<.001). Resveratrol-treated mice demonstrated a marked decrease in tumor uptake of glucose compared with controls. After treatment with cisplatin, “maintenance” resveratrol resulted in the suppression of tumor regrowth compared with mice receiving vehicle alone (P<.01). Tumors resected from mice
treated with resveratrol exhibited autophagosomes consistent with the induction of autophagy. Treatment with resveratrol inhibited
glycolytic response in ovarian tumor cells with high baseline glycolytic rates. CONCLUSIONS: Treatment with resveratrol inhibits glucose uptake and has a significant antineoplastic effect in a preclinical mouse model of ovarian cancer. Resveratrol treatment suppresses tumor regrowth after therapy with cisplatin, suggesting that this agent has the potential to prolong disease-free survival.
C 2015 American Cancer Society.
Cancer 2016;122:722-9. V
KEYWORDS: apoptosis, autophagy, glycolysis, ovarian cancer, resveratrol, tumor metabolism..

INTRODUCTION
Epithelial ovarian carcinoma is the leading cause of death among patients with gynecological cancers. The majority of
patients with ovarian cancer die of chemoresistant, recurrent disease. Chemoresistance is accompanied by resistance to apoptosis, and the identification of therapies that circumvent these mechanisms would enhance our ability to treat this disease. The most common alteration in cellular metabolism in neoplastic cells involves upregulated glucose uptake.
Alterations in glucose metabolism have been linked to therapeutic resistance in cancer treatment. Targeting cellular metabolism may improve the response to conventional cancer therapeutics and the combination of chemotherapeutic drugs
with cellular metabolism inhibitors represents a promising strategy with which to overcome chemoresistance.1
Resveratrol is a natural phytoalexin that has antineoplastic activity in multiple tumor types. We have found that
although resveratrol can induce apoptotic cell death, it can also induce autophagocytic cell death, and inhibits glucose
uptake in ovarian carcinoma cells in vitro.2 Resveratrol is regarded as a caloric restriction mimetic, known to extend the
lifespan in several model species ranging from yeast to mice.3 In humans, studies have shown that obesity, hyperglycemia,
and hyperinsulinemia may contribute toward cancer development, progression, and prognosis. In multiple tumor types,
diabetes and obesity increase cancer risk.4 In contrast, caloric restriction has been shown to prolong life span and reduce
cancer incidence in several animal models by altering different metabolic pathways.
In response to nutrient deprivation, cells attempt to recycle, degrade, and use their own organelles as a source of
energy. Eventually, if nutrient deprivation is sustained, the cell will undergo autophagic cell death. We hypothesized that
because resveratrol can induce cell death through a mechanism distinct from apoptosis, it may provide a therapeutic

Corresponding author: J. Rebecca Liu, MD, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Michigan Health System, L4604 WH, 1500 East Medical Center Dr, Ann Arbor, MI 48109; Fax: (734) 764-7261; rliu@umich.edu
1
Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Michigan Health System, Ann Arbor, Michigan; 2Department of Biostatistics, University of Michigan
Health System, Ann Arbor, Michigan; 3Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, St. Luke’s-Roosevelt Hospital, New York, New York; 4Department of Obstetrics
and Gynecology, University of Connecticut Health Center, Farmington, Connecticut

DOI: 10.1002/cncr.29793, Received: July 15, 2015; Revised: October 21, 2015; Accepted: October 22, 2015, Published online November 30, 2015 in Wiley
Online Library (wileyonlinelibrary.com)

722

Cancer

March 1, 2016

Resveratrol Inhibits Ovarian Tumors/Tan et al

advantage in the management of chemoresistant ovarian
cancer. We previously observed that resveratrol inhibits
glucose uptake in ovarian carcinoma cells in vitro.2 There
is evidence that therapeutic agents that alter cellular metabolism, such as metformin, can affect the growth of cancer cells in vitro and in vivo.5 In the current study, we
investigated the therapeutic potential of resveratrol in an
ovarian cancer animal model, as well as whether the metabolic state of tumor cells affected response to resveratrol.
MATERIALS AND METHODS

as noted above. After 24 hours, ovarian cancer cells
(A2780 and SKOV3) were treated with their respective
IC25 of cisplatin for 48 hours, followed by treatment
with their respective IC25 of resveratrol or vehicle control
for an additional 72 hours. After 48 hours, 50 lL of MTT
solution (5 mg/mL in PBS) was added to the medium,
and the cells were incubated at 37 8C for 4 hours. The optical density was measured at 540 nm using a microplate
spectrophotometer (SpectraMax; Molecular Devices) to
determine the cell viability. All samples were run in
triplicate.

Reagents and Cell Culture

Resveratrol was generously provided by Pharmascience
(Montreal, Quebec, Canada) and was dissolved in aqueous dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) at a final concentration
of 0.1% (volume/volume). The ovarian carcinoma cell
lines A2780 and SKOV3 were obtained from the
National Cancer Institute (Biological Testing Branch,
Developmental Therapeutics Program, Division of Cancer Treatment and Diagnosis, National Cancer Institute,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Md). Green fluorescent protein (GFP) was stably expressed in A2780 cells
as described previously.6
In Vitro Growth Inhibition Assay

The 25% inhibition concentration (IC25) and IC50 for
cisplatin and for resveratrol was determined for each cell
line (A2780 and SKOV3). Cells were seeded in each well
containing 50 lL of medium in a 96-well plate and incubated at 37 8C in 5% carbon dioxide. After 24 hours, the
medium was removed and replaced with fresh medium
containing test compounds at various concentrations in
which the cisplatin concentration ranged from 0 to 60 lg/
mL and the resveratrol concentration ranged from 0 to
200 lM. Triplicate cultures were established for each
treatment. Seventy-two hours later, 20 lL of 3-(4,5Dimethylthiazol-2-Yl)-2,5-Diphenyltetrazolium Bromide
MTT(5 mg/mL) in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) solution was added to each well and the plate was then incubated further for 4 hours. The concentrations of drug that
inhibited cell growth by 25% and 50% were used as IC25
and IC50, respectively. All remaining supernatant fluid
was removed and 150 lL of DMSO was added to each
well and mixed thoroughly to dissolve the formed crystal
formazan. After 15 minutes of incubation, the absorbance
of each well was read at 570 nm using an enzyme-linked
immunoadsorbent assay (ELISA) plate reader (SpectraMax; Molecular Devices, Sunnyvale, Calif).
To determine whether low concentrations of resveratrol could prevent tumor cell regrowth, cells were plated
Cancer

March 1, 2016

Measurement of Oxygen Consumption and
Extracellular Acidification Rate

Cells were split into XF24 cell culture plates for the Seahorse Extracellular Flux Analyzer (Seahorse Biosciences,
North Billerica, Mass). This provided real-time measurements of the oxygen consumption rate (OCR), a measure
of oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS), and the extracellular acidification rate (ECAR), a measure of glycolysis.
Cells were analyzed under basal conditions (no treatment)
and after injection of pharmacologic inhibitors: oligomycin (1 uM), an inhibitor of adenosine triphosphate (ATP)
synthase, which allowed for the measurement of ATPcoupled oxygen consumption through OXPHOS; carbonyl
cyanide-4-(trifluoromethoxy)phenylhydrazone
(FCCP; 300 nM), an uncoupling agent that allows for
maximum electron transport and therefore is a measure of
maximum OXPHOS respiration capacity; 2-deoxy-Dglucose (100 mM), an inhibitor of glycolysis; and rotenone (1 uM), an inhibitor of complex I of the mitochondrial respiratory chain, which allows for the measurement
of mitochondrial uncoupling. All chemicals were
obtained from Sigma-Aldrich Corporation (St. Louis,
Mo).
Ultrastructural Characterization

For transmission electron microscopy (TEM), treated cell
monolayers were rinsed with 0.1 M of Sorensen buffer
(pH 7.4) and then fixed for 1 hour in glutaraldehyde
(2.5% weight/volume) in the same buffer. After a buffer
rinse, they were postfixed for 15 minutes in osmium tetroxide (1% weight/volume), rinsed in water, and then
stained en block for 30 minutes in aqueous uranyl acetate
(3% weight/volume). Cell monolayers were then scraped
and pelleted, dehydrated in a graded series of ethanol
baths, and then infiltrated and embedded in Spurr resin.
Ultra-thin sections were poststained with uranyl acetate
and lead citrate and viewed on a Philips CM100 TEM
723

Original Article

Figure 1. Resveratrol treatment is as effective as cisplatin in reducing tumor burden in vivo. (A) The treatment plan is shown.
Female nu/nu mice aged 6 to 8 weeks were injected with GFP-labeled A2780 ovarian carcinoma cells intraperitoneally (IP).
Tumors were observed 3 to 5 days after tumor cell injection. Treatment with solvent control, cisplatin (at a dose of 6 mg/kg IP every 3 days 3 3), or resveratrol (at a dose of 160 mg/kg IP every day 314 days) was initiated on day 1 of treatment (day 5 after tumor cell injection), and tumor burden was recorded every 3 days. (B) Representative images of mice C. (C) Tumor size over time
(in cm2). Tumors from mice treated with resveratrol and cisplatin were found to be significantly reduced in size compared with
tumors grown in mice treated with vehicle control (8 mice per group) (P<.01 for days 17 and 21). Control mice were treated with
DMSO (aqueous dimethyl sulfoxide).

(Philips Innovation Services, Andover, Mass) at 60
kilovolts.
In Vivo Mouse Experiments

Female nu/nu mice aged 6 weeks were injected intraperitoneally (IP) with GFP-labeled A2780 ovarian carcinoma
cells at 106 per injection. Cisplatin (at a dose of 6 mg/kg)
and resveratrol (dissolved into DMSO:polyethylene glycol 400 [PEG400]:distilled and deionized water [1:1:3] at
a dose of 160 mg/kg) were injected IP. Tumor nodules
were visible as early as 3 to 5 days after tumor cell injection
using external whole-body imaging with a fluorescent
light box with fiberoptic lighting of 490 nm. The light
box was linked to a camera to enable digital storage and
analysis of tumor volume. Image analysis was performed
using MetaVue software (Molecular Devices). For micropositron emission tomography (micro-PET) imaging,
mice fasted for 4 hours before the tracer injection. The
mice were anesthetized with isoflurane, a catheter was
inserted into the tail vein, and the animals were injected
724

with 3.7 to 7.4 millibecquerels of 2-deoxy-2-[18F]fludeoxyglucose ([18F]FDG) in 200 mL of PBS. A Concorde
microPET P4 scanner (Concorde Microsystems, Knoxville Tenn) was used for imaging, and acquisition scans
were performed approximately 60 minutes after injection.
Mice were maintained under isoflurane anesthesia during
the injection, accumulation, and scanning periods.
Statistical Analysis

For in vitro experiments, cell viability after treatment with
each drug was determined by MTT assay as noted above.
Data were analyzed using an analysis of variance
(ANOVA) model with 4 means. Error bars demonstrated
the standard deviations from 3 replicate samples. Realtime measurements of the OCR and ECAR were measured as noted above. Mean values and standard deviations
were analyzed using the Student t test. For in vivo experiments, tumor size was measured in tumor-bearing mice
using external whole-body imaging as noted above. Tumor size was measured twice weekly and the combined
Cancer

March 1, 2016

Resveratrol Inhibits Ovarian Tumors/Tan et al

Figure 2. Resveratrol inhibits recurrent tumor cell growth in vitro and in vivo. (A) A2780 and SKOV3 ovarian carcinoma cell lines
were treated with their respective 25% inhibition concentration (IC25) of cisplatin for 48 hours (0.5 mg/mL and 5 mg/mL, respectively). Cells were then treated with vehicle alone or their respective IC25 of resveratrol for 72 hours (25 lM and 50 lM, respectively). Viability was assessed with MTT. In A2780 ovarian cancer cells, resveratrol inhibited the regrowth of tumor cells (P <
.0001) whereas in SKOV3 ovarian cancer cells resveratrol did not significantly inhibit tumor cell regrowth (P 5.16), and the difference for A2780 cells was larger than for SKOV3 cells (P 5.0003; all P values were derived from an analysis of variance model
with 4 means). Error bars show standard deviations from 3 samples. (B) Female nu/nu mice aged 6 to 8 weeks were injected
with GFP-labeled A2780 ovarian carcinoma cells intraperitoneally. The mice were treated with cisplatin at a dose of 6 mg/kg intraperitoneally on days 5 and 8 after tumor cell injection, followed by vehicle control or resveratrol. Tumor burden was assessed
by fluorescent imaging. The treatment plan schematic is shown. Mice treated with resveratrol after completing treatment with cisplatin were found to have reduced tumor growth compared with mice treated with vehicle control (P<.05; 16 mice). (C) Representative mice treated with cisplatin followed by vehicle control and resveratrol on day 25.

area of the multiple tumor nodules was added to obtain a
total tumor size per mouse. For analysis, tumor size
between mice treated with resveratrol or vehicle at each
time point were compared using 2-sample Student t tests.
RESULTS
Resveratrol Inhibits Ovarian Tumor Growth In
Vivo

We and others have previously determined that resveratrol
induces apoptosis and autophagy and inhibits ovarian carcinoma cell growth in vitro.2,7 Stakleff et al determined
that orally administered resveratrol did not affect tumor
cell growth using a rat model of ovarian carcinoma.8
Recently, the in vitro and in vivo metabolism of resveratrol has been shown to have profound interindividual difCancer

March 1, 2016

ferences, which may explain in part the phenomenon
behind the “resveratrol paradox,” (low apparent bioavailability with high bioactivity).9,10 We investigated the therapeutic potential of IP administered resveratrol using a
xenograft model of epithelial ovarian carcinoma. GFPlabeled A2780 ovarian carcinoma cells were injected into
the peritoneal cavity of female nu/nu mice. Tumor nodules were visible as early as 3 to 5 days after tumor cell
injection using external whole-body imaging with a fluorescent light box with fiberoptic lighting of 490 nm. The
light box was linked to a camera to enable images to be
displayed on a monitor and stored digitally, allowing for
the quantification of tumor size twice weekly for 4 weeks.
Comparing groups of mice using 2-sample Student t tests
on log-transformed tumor area, mice treated with
725

Original Article

cisplatin and resveratrol demonstrated significantly
smaller tumors at days 17 and 21 compared with control
mice who developed carcinomatosis (P 5 .0007 and
0.0002, respectively, for cisplatin and P 5 .0003 and
0.001, respectively, for resveratrol) (Fig. 1). There were
no significant differences in tumor size noted between
mice treated with cisplatin and resveratrol at any time
point. All mice were euthanized at day 25 after tumor cell
injection.
Resveratrol Inhibits Tumor Cell Regrowth In
Vitro and In Vivo

In considering possible clinical applications for resveratrol
in patients with ovarian cancer, the use of this agent in
maintaining clinical disease remission appeared to have the
most potential. Ovarian cancer cell lines (A2780 and
SKOV3) were treated with their respective IC25 of cisplatin
for 48 hours, followed by treatment with their respective
IC25 of resveratrol for an additional 72 hours. Resveratrol
was found to inhibit the regrowth of A2780 tumor cells
whereas in SKOV3 cells, resveratrol did not appear to inhibit tumor cell growth (Fig. 2A). To determine whether
this phenomenon could be replicated in vivo, GFP-labeled
A2780 ovarian carcinoma cells were injected into the peritoneal cavity of female nu/nu mice. Cisplatin was administered on days 5 and 8 after tumor cell injection, and was
withdrawn before complete regression of tumor cells was
observed using the blue-light fiberoptics light box. After the
completion of cisplatin treatment, animals were treated
with resveratrol or vehicle control starting on day 10 after
tumor cell injection (Fig. 2B). Mice treated with resveratrol
(8 mice) demonstrated diminished tumor regrowth compared with mice treated with vehicle control (8 mice) at
days 16, 23, and 25 (P 5 .008, .011, and .005, respectively;
2-sample Student t tests on log-transformed data) (Figs. 2B
and 2C). Control mice developed carcinomatosis by day 25
after tumor cell injection (Fig. 2C).

Figure 3. Tumor burden assessed by 2-deoxy-2-[18F]fludeoxyglucose ([18F]FDG) in vivo after treatment with resveratrol.
Female nu/nu mice aged 6 to 8 weeks were injected with GFPlabeled A2780 ovarian carcinoma cells intraperitoneally (10
mice). Tumors were observed 3 to 5 days after tumor cell injection. Treatment with solvent control or resveratrol was initiated
on day 4 after tumor cell injection. Tumor burden in (A) mice
treated with resveratrol and (B) control mice was assessed by
micro-positron emission tomography scan on day 11 after tumor cell injection. Representative images are shown.

Resveratrol Treatment Inhibits Glucose Uptake
In Vivo

We previously determined that treatment with resveratrol
results in inhibition of Akt activation, inhibition of glucose inhibition, and cell death through a combination of
autophagic and apoptotic cell death in vitro.2 We next
investigated whether resveratrol treatment affected
glucose uptake in ovarian carcinoma cells in vivo. GFPlabeled A2780 ovarian carcinoma cells were injected into
the peritoneal cavity of female nu/nu mice. Treatment
with solvent control or resveratrol was initiated on day 4
after tumor cell injection. Glucose uptake in tumors was
726

assessed on day 11 after tumor cell injection (after 6 days
of resveratrol treatment) by micro-PET scan. Mice treated
with resveratrol exhibited diminished uptake of
[18F]FDG, whereas those treated with vehicle demonstrated FDG-avid lesions (Figs. 3A and 3B). At this time
point (6 days of resveratrol treatment), tumor-bearing
mice treated with resveratrol or vehicle control still had
similar-sized tumors (Fig. 1B and 1C). To determine
whether tumor cells in mice treated with resveratrol demonstrated autophagic cell death, tumors were harvested
Cancer

March 1, 2016

Resveratrol Inhibits Ovarian Tumors/Tan et al

Figure 4. Resveratrol induces autophagy in vivo. GFP-labeled A2780 ovarian carcinoma cells were injected into the peritoneal
cavity of female nude mice aged 6 weeks. The mice were treated with (A and C) vehicle alone or (B and D) resveratrol (at a dose
of 160 mg/kg/day). Tumors were harvested 18 days after tumor cell injection. Tumor cells harvested from control mice were
actively proliferating with intact mitochondria. In contrast, tumor cells in mice treated with resveratrol were filled with autophagosomes. Representative transmission electron microscopy images are shown at indicated magnifications.

Resveratrol Inhibits Glycolytic Response in
Ovarian Cancer Cells

blocked in resveratrol-treated cells (Figs. 5B and 5C).
There was a greater effect of resveratrol inhibition of glycolysis in A2780 ovarian cancer cells compared with
SKOV3 cells. FCCP was added to maximally increase respiration, suppressing glycolysis (ECAR production) in
both cell lines. A2780 cells treated with vehicle increased
their ECAR output (glycolysis), whereas the increase in
glycolysis was blocked by resveratrol in these cells. There
was no effect of resveratrol noted with regard to glycolytic
response in SKOV3 ovarian cancer cells (Fig. 5D).

Resveratrol has been shown to mimic the effects of caloric
restriction and inhibit glucose metabolism in vitro and in
vivo.11 We next evaluated the OCR and ECAR in A2780
and SKOV3 ovarian carcinoma cells. The OCR is an indicator of mitochondrial respiration, whereas the ECAR is
the result of glycolysis. The OCR/ECR ratio was low in
the A2780 cells and high in the SKOV3 cells, indicating a
higher baseline glycolytic rate in A2780 cells compared
with SKOV3 cells, which generate ATP primarily through
OXPHOS (Fig. 5A). Cells were incubated with resveratrol or vehicle and the ECAR was measured. In both cell
lines, there was an initial increase in ECAR output
because resveratrol is a known inhibitor of mitochondrial
complex V and the cells compensated by increasing glycolysis. Oligomycin was added to completely block
OXPHOS. In response, control-treated cells increased
their ECAR output (glycolysis), whereas glycolysis was

DISCUSSION
The results of the current study demonstrate that resveratrol has significant antineoplastic activity and suppresses
glucose metabolism in a xenograft mouse model of ovarian carcinoma. In addition, resveratrol has the capability
to inhibit tumor cell growth after treatment with cisplatin
both in vitro and in vivo. These properties suggest that
resveratrol, and compounds similar to this phytoalexin,
have therapeutic potential in the treatment of epithelial
ovarian carcinoma.
Previous studies have demonstrated the suppressive
effects of resveratrol on multiple aspects of glucose metabolism. The mechanism of action governing resveratrol’s
effects on glucose metabolism includes multiple downstream targets, and is not uniform across cell types.12 We
previously demonstrated that resveratrol decreases glucose

from resveratrol-treated mice on day 18 after tumor cell
injection and cells were fixed and analyzed for ultrastructural characterization using TEM. Tumor cells in control
mice were actively proliferating with intact mitochondria.
In contrast, tumor cells in mice treated with resveratrol
were filled with autophagosomes. Representative TEM
images are shown in Figure 4 at indicated magnifications.

Cancer

March 1, 2016

727

Original Article

Figure 5. Resveratrol inhibits glycolytic response in ovarian carcinoma cells (OV CA) with a low baseline oxygen consumption
rate (OCR)/extracellular acidification rate (ECAR) ratio. The OCR and ECAR were measured in A2780 and SKOV3 ovarian carcinoma cells at approximately 6-minute intervals. OCR is an indicator of mitochondrial respiration, whereas ECAR is proportional to
glycolysis. (A) The OCR/ECR ratio was low in the A2780 ovarian carcinoma cells and high in the SKOV3 ovarian carcinoma cells,
indicating a higher baseline glycolytic rate in A2780 cells compared with SKOV3 cells, which generate adenosine triphosphate
(ATP) primarily through oxidative phosphorylation (B and C). Cells as indicated were incubated with resveratrol or vehicle beginning at point A, and the ECAR was measured. In both cell lines, there was an initial increase in the ECAR because resveratrol is a
known inhibitor of mitochondrial complex V and the cells compensated by increasing glycolysis. Oligomycin was added at time
point B to completely block oxidative phosphorylation. At time point C, carbonyl cyanide-4-(trifluoromethoxy)phenylhydrazone
(FCCP) was added to maximally increase respiration, suppressing glycolysis (ECAR production) in both cell lines. (D) ECAR
response after the addition of oligomycin presented as a percentage increase above the basal rate based on 4 replicates.
Vehicle-treated A2780 cells increased ECAR output (glycolysis), whereas the increase in glycolysis was blocked by resveratrol in
these cells. There was no effect of resveratrol on this response noted in SKOV3 cells.

use and mirrors nutrient deprivation in ovarian cancer
cells.2 Others have demonstrated that resveratrol suppresses [18F]FDG uptake and glucose metabolism in an in
vivo model of Lewis lung carcinoma tumor-bearing
mice.11 More recently, Gwak et al reported resveratrol
mediated interruption of glucose metabolism in ovarian
cancer cells by blocking Akt-mediated trafficking of the
glucose transporter 1 to the plasma membrane.13 Glucose
transporter 1 is known to be overexpressed in the majority
of high-grade serous ovarian carcinomas, and is predictive
of poor clinical outcome.14
The development of recurrent, chemoresistant disease is one of the primary challenges to effectively eradicating ovarian cancer. Although the majority of ovarian
cancer cells primarily rely on glycolysis for the production
728

of ATP, there is evidence that bioenergetic plasticity, or
the ability to use both glycolysis and OXPHOS as an ATP
source, may develop as an adaptive survival response. After treatment with conventional chemotherapy, ovarian
cancer cells with the capacity to metabolically adapt to
high- or low-nutrient environments may allow small populations of quiescent or slowly self-renewing cancer cells
to survive treatment. The data from the current study confirm that ovarian cancer cells that use both glycolysis and
OXPHOS for ATP generation are less likely to respond to
agents such as resveratrol that block glycolysis. Pasto et al
recently reported that ovarian cancer stem cells exhibit the
ability to alter cellular metabolism and resist glucose
deprivation by using OXPHOS for ATP generation.15
Together, these data suggest that the use of drug
Cancer

March 1, 2016

Resveratrol Inhibits Ovarian Tumors/Tan et al

combinations that inhibit distinct metabolic pathways
may be more effective than monotherapy alone in eliminating cancer cells. Although metabolic enzymes are not
mutated in cancer cells, there is evidence that many are
aberrantly regulated by oncogenes.16 Several metabolic
enzymes are regulated by specific posttranslational modifications in cancer cells. Therefore, metabolic profiles can
differ widely in cancer cells compared with normal cells,
which allows for therapeutic strategies that exploit this
phenotype. Recent studies in prostate cancer reveal that
targeting both glycolysis and OXPHOS using 2deoxyglucose and metformin resulted in significant apoptotic response in tumor cells, while sparing normal prostate cells.17 Targeting metabolic pathways with agents
such as resveratrol provides clinicians with additional
tools to enhance our ability to treat patients with ovarian
cancer.
FUNDING SUPPORT
Support for this work was provided by the Department of Defense
(grant OC050305 to J. Rebecca Liu).

CONFLICT OF INTEREST DISCLOSURES
Rork Kuick was supported by a National Institutes of Health Cancer Center Support Grant for work performed as part of the current
study. Anthony Opipari was supported by a National Institutes of
Health grant and received nonfinancial support from Lycera Corporation for work performed as part of the current study. He has
also received personal fees from Lycera Corporation for work performed outside of the current study and has the following patents
pending: 8,809,323; 8,722,667; and 8,415,343.

REFERENCES
1. Zhao Y, Butler EB, Tan M. Targeting cellular metabolism to
improve cancer therapeutics. Cell Death Dis. 2013;4:e532.
2. Kueck A, Opipari AW Jr, Griffith KA, et al. Resveratrol inhibits glucose metabolism in human ovarian cancer cells. Gynecol Oncol.
2007;107:450-457.

Cancer

March 1, 2016

3. Rascon B, Hubbard BP, Sinclair DA, Amdam GV. The lifespan
extension effects of resveratrol are conserved in the honey bee and
may be driven by a mechanism related to caloric restriction. Aging
(Albany NY). 2012;4:499-508.
4. Pierotti MA, Berrino F, Gariboldi M, et al. Targeting metabolism
for cancer treatment and prevention: metformin, an old drug with
multi-faceted effects. Oncogene. 2013;32:1475-1487.
5. Choi YK, Park KG. Metabolic roles of AMPK and metformin in
cancer cells. Mol Cells. 2013;36:279-287.
6. Priebe A, Tan L, Wahl H, et al. Glucose deprivation activates
AMPK and induces cell death through modulation of Akt in ovarian
cancer cells. Gynecol Oncol. 2011;122:389-395.
7. Nessa MU, Beale P, Chan C, Yu JQ, Huq F. Studies on combination of platinum drugs cisplatin and oxaliplatin with phytochemicals
anethole and curcumin in ovarian tumour models. Anticancer Res.
2012;32:4843-4850.
8. Stakleff KS, Sloan T, Blanco D, Marcanthony S, Booth TD,
Bishayee A. Resveratrol exerts differential effects in vitro and in vivo
against ovarian cancer cells. Asian Pac J Cancer Prev. 2012;13:13331340.
9. Bode LM, Bunzel D, Huch M, et al. In vivo and in vitro metabolism of trans-resveratrol by human gut microbiota. Am J Clin Nutr.
2013;97:295-309.
10. Tome-Carneiro J, Larrosa M, Gonzalez-Sarrias A, Tomas-Barberan
FA, Garcia-Conesa MT, Espin JC. Resveratrol and clinical trials: the
crossroad from in vitro studies to human evidence. Curr Pharm Des.
2013;19:6064-6093.
11. Jung KH, Le JH, Thien Quach CH, et al. Resveratrol suppresses
cancer cell glucose uptake by targeting reactive oxygen speciesmediated hypoxia-inducible factor-1a activation. J Nucl Med. 2013;
54:2161-2167.
12. Poulsen MM, Jorgensen JO, Jessen N, Richelsen B, Pedersen SB.
Resveratrol in metabolic health: an overview of the current evidence
and perspectives. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2013;1290:74-82.
13. Gwak H, Haegeman G, Tsang BK, Song YS. Cancer-specific interruption of glucose metabolism by resveratrol is mediated through inhibition of Akt/GLUT1 axis in ovarian cancer cells. Mol Carcinog.
2015;54:1529-1540.
14. Cho H, Lee YS, Kim J, Chung JY, Kim JH. Overexpression of glucose transporter-1 (GLUT-1) predicts poor prognosis in epithelial
ovarian cancer. Cancer Invest. 2013;31:607-615.
15. Pasto A, Bellio C, Pilotto G, et al. Cancer stem cells from epithelial
ovarian cancer patients privilege oxidative phosphorylation, and resist
glucose deprivation. Oncotarget. 2014;5:4305-4319.
16. Vander Heiden MG. Targeting cancer metabolism: a therapeutic
window opens. Nat Rev Drug Discov. 2011;10:671-684.
17. Ben Sahra I, Laurent K, Giuliano S, et al. Targeting cancer cell metabolism: the combination of metformin and 2-deoxyglucose induces
p53-dependent apoptosis in prostate cancer cells. Cancer Res. 2010;
70:2465-2475.

729

