NIH Public Access
Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 November 1.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Published in final edited form as:
Nature. 2009 February 12; 457(7231): E1–E3. doi:10.1038/nature07738.

ETS genetic rearrangements do not initiate cancer in the prostate
Brett S Carver1,3, Jennifer Tran1, Zhenbang Chen1,5, Arkaitz Carracedo-Perez1, Andrea
Alimonti1,5, Caterina Nardella1,5, Anuradha Gopalan2, Peter T Scardino3, Carlos CordonCardo4, William Gerald2, and Pier Paolo Pandolfi1,2,5,*
1 Cancer Biology and Genetics Program, Sloan-Kettering Institute, Memorial Sloan-Kettering
Cancer Center, New York, New York 10021
2

Department of Pathology, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New York 10021

3

Department of Surgery, Division of Urology, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York,
New York 10021
4

Department of Pathology, Columbia University, New York, NY 10032

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

5

Cancer Genetics Program, Beth Israel Deaconess Cancer Center and Department of Medicine,
Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston MA 02215
The first recurrent translocation event in prostate cancer has been recently described.1 It results
in the translocation of an ETS transcription factor (ERG or ETV1) to the TMPRSS2 promoter
region, which contains androgen responsive elements.1 The TMPRSS:ERG genetic
rearrangement has been reported to occur in approximately 40% of primary prostate tumors
(ETV1 genetic rearrangements occurring at a much lower frequency) and results in an aberrant
androgen regulated expression of ERG.1,2,3 While Tomlins et al.4 concluded that ETS genetic
rearrangements are sufficient to initiate prostate neoplasia, we argue that ETS genetic
rearrangements may in fact, represent progression events rather than initiation events in
prostate tumorigenesis. To this end, we demonstrate that the prostate specific over-expression
of ERG does not initiate prostate tumorigenesis.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

We have found that mice over-expressing ERG (expression confirmed by qRT-PCR, western
blotting, and immunohistochemistry) under the control of the probasin (ARR2-PB, B6J
background strain) promoter do not develop neoplasia, but only display a very subtle phenotype
of nuclear atypia (prominent nucleoli) without an increase in cellular proliferation (Figure 1A).
This is similar to what is shown by Tomlins et al. in their description of ETV1 transgenic mice.
4 These subtle nuclear changes without an increase in cellular layers are not sufficient to be
classified as prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia (PIN), and are in fact frequently observed also
in the wild-type mouse prostate (Figure 1A). We observe no significant difference in the
prostate phenotype across all prostatic lobes (anterior, ventral, and dorsal-lateral) between
ERG transgenic and wild-type littermate mice. The subtle histologic changes observed in
ETV1 and ERG transgenic mice is strikingly different from human high-grade PIN and the PIN
lesions which develop in Pten heterozygous mice (Figure 1B). Additionally, we did not observe
an increase in proliferative rate in the prostates of mice over-expressing ERG compared to
wild-type controls. As measured by Ki67 staining, on average 1% of prostate epithelial cells
in ARR2-PB-ERG mice were positive and 1% of prostate epithelial cells in wild-type mice
were positive (Figure 1C). With analyses up to 18 months of age, no ARR2-PB-ERG mice
have displayed any change in phenotype. While Tomlins et al. concluded that ETS genetic
rearrangements are sufficient to initiate prostate neoplasia, we argue and present data that

*

To whom correspondence should be addressed: ppandolf@bidmc.harvard.edu.

Carver et al.

Page 2

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

ETS genetic rearrangements may in fact, represent progression events rather than initiation
events in prostate tumorigenesis, as there are no proliferative and pathological changes
consistent with high-grade PIN found in either ERG or ETV1 mice.
Additionally, the ERG translocation is infrequently found in human high grade prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia and only in a minority (approximately 10% to 20%) of patients who also
have the translocation present in associated adenocarcinoma of the prostate. The majority of
prostate cancer specimens with ERG genetic rearrangements do not display this rearrangement
in the associated HGPIN. Therefore, the TMPRSS2:ERG translocation appears to be an early
event in human prostate tumorigenesis, but one associated with progression from HGPIN to
cancer.
Through mouse modeling, we have demonstrated that the aberrant expression of ERG is not
sufficient to initiate neoplastic transformation but rather may cooperate with other genetic
events to promote prostate cancer progression. We propose a working model whereby genetic
initiating events conferring a proliferative advantage select for cooperating ETS genetic
rearrangements which promote an invasive phenotype.

Methods
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Mice (B6J background strain) expressing ERG under the control of the probasin (ARR2-PB)
promoter were generated, genotyped, and examined for transgene expression by qRT-PCR,
western blotting, and immunohistochemistry. We generated and analyzed 3 independent
ERG lines. Founders were subsequently bred and 4 mice of each genotype were euthanized at
2, 4, 6, 8, 12, and 18 months of age. Prostate tissues were procured for formalin fixation, paraffin
embedding, and frozen storage for future molecular analyses.

Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Drs. P. Romanienko and W. Mark from our genetically engineered mouse core facility for
their assistance in generating and genotyping our prostate specific ERG mouse model. We acknowledge the Pathology,
Genomic and Molecular Cytogenetics Core labs for their work with the human prostate cancer specimens. We would
also like to thank Ms. R. Lester at our animal facility for caring for our mice on a daily basis, Ms. L. DiSantis for her
editorial support, and Dr. C. Sawyers for stimulating discussions. We especially thank all members of the Pandolfi
laboratory for their support and intellectual discussions regarding our study project. This work was funded through
grants from the NIH (R01-CA82328, R01-CA84292, P50-CA92629), and MSKCC Research in Therapeutics Program
in Prostate Cancer award to B.S.C. and P.P.P.

References
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

1. Tomlins SA, Rhodes DR, Perner S, Dhanasekaran SM, Mehra R, Sun XW, Varambally S, Cao X,
Tchinda J, Kuefer R, Lee C, Montie JE, Shah RB, Pienta KJ, Rubin MA, Chinnaiyan AM. Recurrent
fusion of TMPRSS2 and ETS transcription factor genes in prostate cancer. Science 2005;310:644–8.
[PubMed: 16254181]
2. Tu JJ, Rohan S, Kao J, Kitabayashi N, Mathew S, Chen YT. Gene fusions between TMPRSS2 and
ETS family genes in prostate cancer: frequency and transcript variant analysis by RT-PCR and FISH
on paraffin-embedded tissues. Mod Pathol. 2007 [Epub ahead of print].
3. Perner S, Mosquera JM, Demichelis F, Hofer MD, Paris PL, Simko J, Collins C, Bismar TA,
Chinnaiyan AM, De Marzo AM, Rubin MA. TMPRSS2-ERG fusion prostate cancer: an early
molecular event associated with invasion. Am J Surg Pathol 2007;31:882–8. [PubMed: 17527075]
4. Tomlins SA, Bharathi L, Dhanasekaran SM, Helgeson BE, Cao X, Morris DS, Menon A, Jing A, Cao
Q, Han B, Yu J, Wang L, Montie JE, Rubin MA, Pienta KJ, Roulston D, Shah RB, Varambally S,
Mehra R, Chinnaiyan AM. Distinct classes of chromosomal rearrangements create oncogenic ETS
gene fusions in prostate cancer. Nature 2007;448:595–601. [PubMed: 17671502]

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 November 1.

Carver et al.

Page 3

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Figure 1. Prostate specific over-expression of ERG does not induce high grade prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

A total of 24 wild-type and 24 ERG transgenic mice were phenotypically characterized from
one founding line after establishment that three independent founding lines produced a similar
phenotype (A). Low (100X) and high (400X) power representative sections are shown for mice
6 months of age (ventral, anterior, and dorsal-lateral prostate lobes) demonstrating prominent
nucleoli in wild-type mouse prostate glands. Representative histology of human high grade
prostatic intra-epithelial neoplasia (HGPIN) and HGPIN in Pten heterozygous mice at 12
months of age (B). Immunohistochemical staining for Ki67 demonstrated no difference
between wild-type mice and ERG transgenic mice (C).

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 November 1.

