Research Article

Automated, Quantitative Screening Assay for Antiangiogenic
Compounds Using Transgenic Zebrafish
1

2

1

1

T. Cameron Tran, Blossom Sneed, Jamil Haider, Delali Blavo, Audrey White,
1
1
1
Temitope Aiyejorun, Timothy C. Baranowski, Amy L. Rubinstein,
1
2
1
Thanh N. Doan, Raymond Dingledine, and Eric M. Sandberg

1

1

Zygogen, LLC, and 2Chemical Biology Discovery Center and Department of Pharmacology, Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia

Abstract
Pathologic angiogenesis has emerged as an important
therapeutic target in several major diseases. Zebrafish offer
the potential for high-throughput drug discovery in a whole
vertebrate system. We developed the first quantitative,
automated assay for antiangiogenic compound identification
using zebrafish embryos. This assay uses transgenic zebrafish
with fluorescent blood vessels to facilitate image analysis.
We developed methods for automated drugging and imaging
of zebrafish in 384-well plates and developed a custom
algorithm to quantify the number of angiogenic blood vessels
in zebrafish. The assay was used to screen the LOPAC1280
compound library for antiangiogenic compounds. Two known
antiangiogenic compounds, SU4312 and AG1478, were identified as hits. Additionally, one compound with no previously
known antiangiogenic activity, indirubin-3¶-monoxime (IRO),
was identified. We showed that each of the hit compounds had
dose-dependent antiangiogenic activity in zebrafish. The IC50
of SU4312, AG1478, and IRO in the zebrafish angiogenesis
assay was 1.8, 8.5, and 0.31 Mmol/L, respectively. IRO had
the highest potency of the hit compounds. Moreover, IRO
inhibited human umbilical vein endothelial cell tube formation and proliferation (IC50 of 6.5 and 0.36 Mmol/L, respectively). It is therefore the first antiangiogenic compound
discovered initially in a zebrafish assay that also has
demonstrable activity in human endothelial cell-based angiogenesis assays. [Cancer Res 2007;67(23):11386–92]

ability for much higher-throughput screening than other available
animal models.
Blood flow begins in the zebrafish embryo at f24 h postfertilization. Shortly after this, the angiogenic vessels that perfuse the
trunk of the embryo (intersegmental vessels) sprout from the
vasculogenic vessels (2). Major molecular pathways regulating
angiogenesis in mammalian systems are conserved in zebrafish
(3, 4). Studies have shown that treatment of zebrafish embryos with
clinical stage antiangiogenic compounds inhibits growth of
angiogenic blood vessels, suggesting that larger-scale antiangiogenic compound screening in zebrafish is possible (5–7).
We developed an automated, quantitative screening assay for the
discovery of antiangiogenic compounds using zebrafish. Transgenic
zebrafish expressing green reef coral fluorescent protein (GRCFP)
under the control of the vascular endothelial growth factor receptor
(VEGFR) 2 promoter [TG(VEGFR2:GRCFP)] for blood vesselrestricted expression were used for this assay. The creation of this
line was described previously (6). The assay includes automated
methods for compound delivery and embryo imaging in 384-well
plates. Additionally, we developed a custom algorithm for
quantifying the growth of angiogenic vessels in zebrafish embryos.
Using this assay, we screened the LOPAC1280 compound library for
antiangiogenic activity and identified three hit compounds. The
most potent, indirubin-3¶-monoxime (IRO), has not been previously
reported to have antiangiogenic activity. Furthermore, IRO inhibits
human endothelial cell tube formation and proliferation, and is
therefore the first antiangiogenic compound discovered in zebrafish
whose activity subsequently translated to human cell-based assays.

Introduction
Angiogenesis is a well-established therapeutic target. Several
angiogenesis assays are currently used for drug screening (1).
Endothelial cell models of migration, proliferation, apoptosis, and
tube formation are popular due to their simplicity and throughput.
However, these assays lack the biological complexity of in vivo
systems. Animal models, including the chick chorioallantoic
membrane assay, corneal neovascularization assay, and Matrigel
plug assay preserve biological complexity but are costly and low
throughput. Zebrafish provide a system for drug screening
that combines the biological complexity of in vivo models with the

Note: Supplementary data for this article are available at Cancer Research Online
(http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/).
T.C. Tran and B. Sneed contributed equally to this work.
Requests for reprints: Eric Sandberg or Amy Rubinstein, Zygogen, LLC, 24
Peachtree Center Avenue, 520 Kell Hall, Atlanta, GA 30303. Phone: 404-523-7309;
E-mail: eric@zygogen.com or amy@zygogen.com.
I2007 American Association for Cancer Research.
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-07-3126

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (23). December 1, 2007

Materials and Methods
Zebrafish husbandry. Adult zebrafish were maintained at 27jC in a
recirculating aquaculture system (8). Fertilized eggs were obtained from
adult mating pairs, treated with Pronase to remove chorions, and raised in
Holtfreter’s solution (60 mmol/L NaCl, 2.4 mmol/L sodium bicarbonate,
0.8 mmol/L CaCl2, 0.67 mmol/L KCl, and 10 mmol/L HEPES) in a
humidified incubator at 27jC.
Library screening (primary screen). The LOPAC1280 library was
obtained from Sigma. TG(VEGFR2:GRCFP) embryos were arrayed into 384well plates (one embryo per well) in 30 AL of Holtfreter’s solution at 1 day
postfertilization. The positive control for this assay was 10 Amol/L PTK787,
a VEGFR antagonist, and the negative control was 1% DMSO. Automated
drugging was performed using a Sciclone ALH3000 robotic liquid handler
(Caliper Life Sciences). A 60-Amol/L working stock of each compound was
prepared in Holtfreter’s solution, and 30 AL of the working stock was added
to each well of the 384-well plate, resulting in a final screening
concentration of 30 Amol/L. Five embryos per compound were dosed. At
2 days postfertilization, zebrafish were anesthetized with 0.016% tricaine
and a fluorescent image of each embryo was captured automatically using
the Discovery-1 or ImageXpress imaging systems (Molecular Devices).
Images of zebrafish embryos were captured using a Nikon CFI PlanApo 2

11386

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Zebrafish Screening Assay for Antiangiogenics
objective (numerical aperture, 0.10; working distance, 8.5 mm; focal length,
100 mm); camera exposure, 75 ms; camera binning, 2; gain, 2; with a FITC
fluorescence filter set and autofocus in each well. Trunks of the zebrafish
were isolated from fluorescent images using MetaMorph software, and a
custom automated algorithm (described below) was used to count
intersegmental vessels and their branching arteries. Because the trunk
isolation step of the journal was interactive, each image was viewed by the
user during the analysis, allowing exclusion of images showing embryos
that were unhealthy or in an improper orientation for analysis. Percent
control was defined as 100  (C PTK787) / (DMSO PTK787), where C,
PTK787, and DMSO represent the mean vessel count in the presence of
compound, PTK787, and DMSO, respectively. A 384-well plate required
f30 min for image acquisition and f20 min for data analysis.
Experimental log P values for compounds were obtained from
DrugBank3 or ChemIDPlus Advanced.4
Design of the automated algorithm for quantifying angiogenesis in
zebrafish. An interactive algorithm (journal) was developed using the
Discovery-1/MetaMorph software to rapidly analyze each image. The key
component of the analysis was counting the number of intersegmental
vessels and branching arteries in the isolated trunk of the embryo using the
MetaMorph Neurite Outgrowth application drop-in. The application
settings identified the vasculogenic vessels as one or more cell bodies and
the angiogenic vessels as outgrowths of these cell bodies. Vasculogenic
vessels (cell bodies) were differentiated from their branching arteries
(outgrowths) by their larger width and greater fluorescence intensity. The
application settings for identification of cell bodies were as follows:
approximate maximum width, 160 Am; intensity above local background,
120 gray levels; and minimum area, 2,000 Am2. The application settings for
identification of outgrowths were as follows: maximum width is 33 Am and
intensity above local background is 45 gray levels. The data (number of
intersegmental vessels and branching arteries) were exported as a summary
log to Microsoft Excel.
Secondary screens. Follow-up studies, including dose-response studies,
were performed using zebrafish expressing AcGFP under the control of the
VEGFR2 promoter, [TG(VEGFR2:AcGFP)]. This line responds similarly to the
TG(VEGFR2:GRCFP) line when treated with antiangiogenic compounds
(data not shown). Zebrafish were anesthetized and mounted in methyl
cellulose for imaging. Images were acquired using a Leica MZ16FA
fluorescent microscope equipped with an AxioCam MRc5 camera.
Human umbilical vascular endothelial cell assays. Human umbilical
vascular endothelial cell (HUVEC) assays were performed by Southern
Research Institute. HUVECs and medium were purchased from Lonza
Group Ltd. For all HUVEC assays, cells were grown in a 37jC incubator
under 5% CO2. Full-growth medium for HUVECs was endothelial cell basal
medium (EBM) supplemented with 2% fetal bovine serum, 12 Ag/mL bovine
brain extract, 1 Ag/mL hydrocortisone, and 1 Ag/mL GA-1000 (gentamicinamphothericin). HUVECs were used between passages 3 and 12.
[3H]thymidine incorporation assay. HUVECs were seeded into 96-well
plates (6,250 cells per well) in growth medium. After 24 h, various doses of
IRO were added to the cultures. After 3 days of treatment, the HUVEC
cultures were pulsed with 1 ACi of [3H]thymidine for 8 h and harvested with
a semiautomatic cell harvester onto DNA-binding filters. The filters were
counted in a Perkin-Elmer Microbeta scintillation counter (Trilux) to
determine the amount of [3H]thymidine incorporation.
CellTiter-Glo luminescent cell viability assay. The CellTiter-Glo
luminescent cell viability assay quantifies total ATP levels in cells, which
reflects the relative number of viable cells. The assay was performed
according to the manufacturer (Promega). Briefly, HUVECs were seeded
into 96-well plates (6,250 cells per well) in growth medium. After 24 h, IRO
was added to the cultures at the indicated concentrations. After 3 days of
treatment, CellTiter-Glo reagent was added to the cultures and luminescent
signal was measured with an EnVision Multilabel Reader (Perkin-Elmer).
Controls were treated with vehicle (DMSO).

3
4

http://redpoll.pharmacy.ualberta.ca/drugbank/
http://chem.sis.nlm.nih.gov/chemidplus/

www.aacrjournals.org

HUVEC tube formation. The in vitro angiogenesis assay kit (Millipore)
was used for tube formation studies. HUVECs were seeded into 96-well
plates (15,000 cells per well) coated with ECMatrix (Millipore), consisting of
laminin, collagen type IV, heparin sulfate proteoglycans, entactin, and
nidogen. The cells were treated with IRO at the indicated concentrations.
Controls were treated with vehicle (DMSO). The cells were allowed to form
endothelial tubes for 18 h and then examined under an inverted light
microscope. Microscopic fields were photographed and quantitatively
analyzed using Image Pro Plus software, which detects tubule extensions
from endothelial cell bodies, to determine tubule length. Tubule length was
measured as an average of three fields of view in each well.
HUVEC migration. The transwell migration chamber of the biocoat
endothelial cell migration angiogenesis system (BD Bioscience) was used for
endothelial cell migration assays. Chamber inserts were equilibrated at
37jC in EBM containing 0.1% bovine serum albumin (BSA) for 1 h.
Endothelial cells were starved for 4 to 5 h in EBM containing 0.1% BSA
before harvesting. The endothelial cells were then seeded into the upper
chambers of the transwell system (1  105 cells per well) in 100 AL of EBM
containing 0.1% BSA and IRO at the indicated concentrations. Full growth
medium was added to the bottom chamber as a chemoattractant. Cell
migration through the filter was allowed to proceed for 22 h. Unmigrated
cells on the top of the filters were removed, and migrated cells on the
bottom of the filters were fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde and stained with
Hoechst 33342. Three microscopic fields for each filter were used to count
the number of migrated cells and determine an average for that filter.
Statistical methods. The screening Z’ factor, signal-to-background (S:B)
ratio, and signal-to-noise (S:N) ratio for the zebrafish screening assay were
calculated by averaging the values for each plate analyzed. Z’ factor = 1
[3  (r p + r n) / ll p l nl], where l p and r p are the mean and SD of the
positive control (PTK787) and l n and r n are mean and SD for the negative
control (9). S:B = l p/l n and S:N = (l p
l n)/sqrt (r 2p + r 2n). Statistical
significance for experiments was determined using unpaired Student’s
t tests and P < 0.05.

Results
Screening for antiangiogenic compounds using live zebrafish. TG(VEGFR2:GRCFP) zebrafish embryos with fluorescent blood
vessels were used to screen the LOPAC1280 compound library for
antiangiogenic activity. Screening was performed collaboratively
between Zygogen and Emory University. Half of the library (640
compounds) was screened at each site. Adult mating pairs were set
up in the evening, and fertilized eggs were collected the next
morning. Embryos were drugged one day after fertilization in the
morning, before formation of the angiogenic intersegmental
vessels. For drugging, zebrafish were manually arrayed into 384well plates (one embryo per well; five embryos per condition) using
a 200-AL wide-bore pipette tip (to avoid damaging the embryos)
and treated with 30 Amol/L of each test compound using a robotic
liquid handling instrument. Before arraying the plate, unhealthy or
developmentally delayed embryos were removed by examination
under a bright field microscope. All plates contained both negative
controls (1% DMSO) and positive controls [10 Amol/L PTK787, a
VEGFR antagonist that potently inhibits angiogenic blood vessel
growth in the head and trunk of zebrafish (ref. 5; Fig. 1A)]. After
overnight incubation with test compounds, a fluorescent image of
each zebrafish embryo in the 384-well plate was captured using an
automated imaging system. The trunk of each zebrafish in the
fluorescent image was isolated using MetaMorph software. An
automated custom algorithm was used to quantify the number of
angiogenic vessels in the zebrafish trunk (Fig. 1B). A detailed
description of this algorithm is included in Materials and Methods.
Hits were defined as compounds that caused an inhibition of
angiogenic vessel growth that was three times greater than the SD

11387

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (23). December 1, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

Figure 1. The LOPAC1280 library was screened
for antiangiogenic compounds using transgenic
zebrafish. A, bright field and fluorescent images of
2-d postfertilization zebrafish treated overnight with
1% DMSO (control ; vehicle control for the assay)
and 10 Amol/L PTK787 (positive control for the
assay). Angiogenic blood vessel growth is inhibited
in the head and trunk of the PTK787-treated
embryos. B, for quantification of angiogenic vessel
growth in zebrafish embryos, the trunk is manually
isolated from the fluorescent image. An automated
algorithm masks the vasculogenic vessels
based on fluorescence signature and size
(masked trunk), and a binarized image is created
from the masked image (binarized mask ). The
intersegmental vessels (IV ) and their branching
arteries, the vertebral artery (VA ) and dorsal
longitudinal anastomatic vessel (DLAV ), are
counted by the software. C, the LOPAC1280
library was screened jointly by Zygogen
(blue points ) and Emory University (green points ).
Points, mean value of up to five embryos tested
for each compound. Data were normalized as
percentage of plate average (average vessel count
of all test compounds on plate). Positive hits
(red points ) were defined as compounds that
caused an inhibition of angiogenic vessel count
>3 SDs from the plate average. IRO, 1; SU4312, 2;
AG1478, 3.

for compound responses in each plate (Fig. 1C). Forty compounds,
representing 3.1% of the total library, were severely toxic or lethal
at the screening dose and were not analyzed further. The screen
had robust quality control measures, with mean plate Z’ factor of
0.58, S:B of 4.8, and S:N of 10.2.
Three hits were identified in the screen, representing a 0.23%
hit rate. Two of these compounds, SU4312 (a VEGFR and plateletderived growth factor receptor antagonist), and AG1478 (an
epidermal growth factor receptor antagonist), are known to have
antiangiogenic activity (10, 11), although this is the first report
showing antiangiogenic activity of these compounds in zebrafish.
The other hit compound, IRO, has not been previously described
as antiangiogenic. Inhibition of angiogenesis by IRO was
confirmed with freshly purchased compound from another source
(VWR). In subsequent experiments, 24-h postfertilization zebrafish embryos were treated with each of the hit compounds for
4 or 24 h. All three compounds showed antiangiogenic activity at
both time points (Figs. 2A and B, 3A and B, and 4A and B). Additionally, each of the three compounds caused a dose-dependent
inhibition of angiogenic vessel growth in 2-day postfertilization
zebrafish that had been treated overnight (Fig. 2C, Fig. 3C, and
Fig. 4C), with IRO having the highest potency (IC50, 0.31 Amol/L).
The IC50 for SU4312 and AG1478 was 1.8 Amol/L and 8.5 Amol/L,
respectively.
Five compounds [SU5416, 2-methoxyestradiol, difluoromethylornithine (DFMO) hydrochloride, minocycline hydrochloride, and
thalidomide] in the LOPAC1280 library that are listed as
antiangiogenic in the compound description were not scored
as hits during the screen. The reasons why these compounds
were negative in the assay are as follows: SU5416 was lethal at
the 30-Amol/L screening dose but was antiangiogenic in
zebrafish at sublethal doses (6). 2-Methoxyestradiol was also
toxic at the screening dose, but the embryos survived, showing

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (23). December 1, 2007

severely bent trunks and cardiac edema. 2-Methoxyestradiol
reduced intersegmental vessel growth, but it was unclear if these
effects were a result of toxicity. We found that 2-methoxyestradiol
was antiangiogenic when tested at a lower dose (10 Amol/L), and
that the toxicity was reduced (data not shown). The antiangiogenic
effects of 2-methoxyestradiol in zebrafish are consistent with
previously published work (7). It is likely that the three other
compounds (DFMO hydrochloride, minocycline hydrochloride, and
thalidomide) failed to inhibit angiogenesis in the zebrafish because
they are highly hydrophilic, with log P values less than 1 ( 0.49 for
DFMO, 0.092 for minocycline, and 0.146 for thalidomide).
Compounds with log P values less than 1 are typically not wellabsorbed from the medium by zebrafish embryos (12).5
IRO does not affect vasculogenic vessel development or
preexisting vasculature. Because the intersegmental vessels in
zebrafish form by sprouting from the preformed vasculogenic
vessels, any compound that disrupts vasculogenesis will also
inhibit the growth of angiogenic vessels. To determine the effect
of IRO on vasculogenesis, zebrafish embryos were treated with
1 Amol/L IRO at 10 h postfertilization. This time point precedes
the appearance of angioblasts, which differentiate to form the
vasculogenic vessels. Treatment of zebrafish at this early time point
had a very strong antiangiogenic effect, causing nearly complete
inhibition of intersegmental vessel growth. The vasculogenic dorsal
aorta and posterior cardinal vein were unaffected (Supplementary
Fig. S1).
To determine if IRO has an effect on established vasculature,
zebrafish embryos were treated with IRO beginning at 3 days
postfertilization, an age when intersegmental vessels have
formed completely and are stabilized. Embryos were imaged at

11388

5

Zygogen, unpublished data.

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Zebrafish Screening Assay for Antiangiogenics

Figure 2. SU4312 inhibits angiogenic
vessel growth in zebrafish embryos.
A, bright field and fluorescent images of
28-h postfertilization zebrafish treated for
4 h with 1% DMSO (control ) or 30 Amol/L
SU4312 and 2-d postfertilization zebrafish
treated overnight with 1% DMSO
(control ) or 30 Amol/L SU4312 (B).
C, SU4312-mediated antiangiogenic
effects are dose dependent. D, structure
of SU4312. Points, mean for three
independent dose-response experiments
(n = 19–30 total embryos for each
condition); bars, SE.

4 days postfertilization (Supplementary Fig. S2A), and the
number of angiogenic vessels in the trunk was quantified
(Supplementary Fig. S2B). IRO had no effect on the preexisting
vessels, demonstrating that its effects are cytostatic, not

cytotoxic. Taken together, the data in Supplementary Figs. S1
and S2 show that IRO has specific antiangiogenic activity
because it does not affect vasculogenesis and does not target
established blood vessels.

Figure 3. AG1478 inhibits angiogenic
vessel growth in zebrafish embryos.
A, bright field and fluorescent images of
28-h postfertilization zebrafish treated for
4 h with 1% DMSO (control ) or 30 Amol/L
AG1478 and 2-d postfertilization zebrafish
treated overnight with 1% DMSO (control )
or 10 Amol/L AG1478 (B ). AG1478 inhibits
angiogenic vessel growth in the trunk of
zebrafish embryos. C, AG1478-mediated
antiangiogenic effects are dose dependent.
D, structure of AG1478. Points, mean
of three independent dose-response
experiments (n = 15–29 total embryos for
each condition); bars, SE.

www.aacrjournals.org

11389

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (23). December 1, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

Figure 4. IRO inhibits angiogenic vessel
growth in zebrafish embryos. A, bright
field and fluorescent images of 28-h
postfertilization zebrafish treated for 4 h
with 1% DMSO (control ) or 30 Amol/L
IRO and 2-d postfertilization zebrafish
treated overnight with 1% DMSO (control )
or 10 Amol/L IRO (B). IRO inhibits
angiogenic vessel growth in the trunk of
zebrafish embryos. C, IRO-mediated
antiangiogenic effects are dose dependent.
D, structure of IRO. Points, mean of three
independent dose-response experiments
(n = 24–35 total embryos for each
condition); bars, SE.

Antiangiogenic activity of IRO in human endothelial cell
assays. To determine if IRO is antiangiogenic in human
endothelial cells and to elucidate its mechanism of action on
endothelium, IRO was assessed in human umbilical cord vein
endothelial cell assays. Endothelial tube formation was assessed
using HUVECs cultured on extracellular matrix. Full-growth
medium was used to stimulate tube formation. IRO was added
to the growth medium and tube formation was allowed to
proceed for 18 h. Tube length was measured using Image Pro Plus
software. IRO inhibited endothelial tube formation with an IC50 of
6.5 Amol/L (Fig. 5A).
HUVEC proliferation was assessed using the [3H]thymidine
incorporation assay. Endothelial cells were seeded into a 96-well
plate, treated with different concentrations of IRO, and [3H]thymidine incorporation was determined. IRO inhibited endothelial
cell proliferation with an IC50 of 0.36 Amol/L (Fig. 5B).
Proliferation was inhibited at a >20-fold lower concentration
than that needed to produce cytotoxicity (IC50, 8.7 Amol/L),
estimated by reduced cellular ATP levels (Fig. 5C).
Finally, endothelial cell migration was assessed using a
transwell migration assay (BD Biosciences). HUVECs were
serum starved for 4 h then seeded into the top wells of
migration chambers in endothelial basal medium (without
growth factors). Complete medium containing growth factors
was placed in the bottom well as a chemoattractant. Migration
was allowed to proceed for 22 h, at which point migrated cells
were fixed, stained, and quantified. IRO did not significantly
affect endothelial cell migration (Fig. 5D). Collectively, the data
in Fig. 5 show that IRO inhibits two major components of
the angiogenic process, endothelial tube formation and cell
proliferation, but does not significantly affect endothelial cell
migration.

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (23). December 1, 2007

Discussion
We have used transgenic zebrafish to create the first automated,
quantitative assay capable of identifying compounds with antiangiogenic activity in a whole organism. The benefits of using live
animals for phenotypic screening include the absence of timeconsuming manual fixation steps. Moreover, screening in zebrafish
can be performed more rapidly on a higher number of animals
using much less compound than other animal models. Screening
the LOPAC1280 library identified two known antiangiogenic
compounds as hits, thus validating the use of the assay for
antiangiogenic drug discovery. The two known antiangiogenic
compounds, SU4312 and AG1478, had not been previously shown
to have antiangiogenic activity in zebrafish. IRO, a novel
antiangiogenic compound, was also identified.
IRO is a cell-permeable derivative of indirubin, the active
component of Danggui Longhui Wan, a mixture of plants used in
traditional Chinese medicine for the treatment of chronic diseases,
particularly chronic myelocytic leukemia (CML). IRO and other
indirubin derivatives were shown to inhibit cyclin dependent
kinases (CDK; ref. 13). More recently, IRO has been shown to inhibit
GSK3h (14), AMP-activated protein kinase, Lck, serum glucocorticoid-inducible kinase (15), and c-Jun-NH2-kinase (16) with similar
potencies to its activity on CDKs. Therefore, the antiangiogenic
activity of IRO may be multimodal. Interestingly, IRO was also
shown to inhibit fibroblast growth factor receptor 1, which may
play a role in its antiangiogenic activity (17). This work shows that
IRO may have use as a therapeutic for solid tumors that rely on
angiogenesis for growth, in addition to its use against CML.
We showed that IRO inhibits endothelial cell proliferation and
tube formation in HUVEC assays. Importantly, the relatively low
level of IRO-induced endothelial cytotoxicity shows that its

11390

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Zebrafish Screening Assay for Antiangiogenics

Figure 5. IRO inhibits in vitro angiogenesis. A, to test the effects of IRO on endothelial cell tube formation, HUVECs were plated in a 96-well plate on extracellular
matrix and treated with IRO at the indicated concentrations. IRO dose-dependently inhibited tube formation. B, to determine the effects of IRO on endothelial
cell proliferation, [3H]thymidine incorporation into cultured HUVECs treated with IRO at the indicated concentrations was assessed. IRO inhibited HUVEC proliferation in
a dose-dependent manner. C, to test the effects of IRO on cell viability, cellular ATP levels were determined using the CellTiter-Glo Assay. D, to test the effects
of IRO on endothelial cell migration, a transwell migration assay was performed. IRO does not significantly affect endothelial cell migration at any dose tested.
Points, mean of three independent experiments; bars, SE.

antiproliferative activity is not due to broad cytotoxic effects. This is
consistent with the zebrafish data, which show no observable
toxicity of IRO on embryos treated with antiangiogenic doses of IRO
and no effect of IRO on preexisting vasculature. This marks the first
report to date of a novel antiangiogenic compound identified using
zebrafish and confirmed in human cell-based assays.
The zebrafish angiogenesis assay is clearly capable of identifying
known antiangiogenic compounds and useful for discovering novel
antiangiogenic compounds. Despite this, five known antiangiogenic
compounds in the LOPAC1280 library were not identified as hits.
Two of these, SU5416 and 2-methoxyestradiol, were toxic at the
screening dose but were antiangiogenic at lower, nontoxic doses.
To circumvent this issue in future applications, lower compound
doses can be tested to find only the most potent compounds, while
avoiding toxicity. Alternatively, higher screening doses can be used

www.aacrjournals.org

to enrich for antiangiogenic compound identification, and the
activity of toxic compounds can be resolved by secondary
screening at lower concentrations. Three other antiangiogenic
compounds with low log P values, DFMO hydrochloride, minocycline hydrochloride, and thalidomide, were also not identified.
Compounds with log P values less than 1 are typically not wellabsorbed by zebrafish at commonly used screening concentrations.
This is a limitation of the assay, but low log P compounds in a
library can be identified before screening and tested by treating
zebrafish embryos at high concentrations of these compounds, or
by injecting these compounds into embryos. For high-throughput
applications, however, low log P antiangiogenic compounds will
likely be accepted as false negatives.
The transgenic zebrafish assay described provides a whole
organism system for rapid screening of compound libraries. It

11391

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (23). December 1, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

combines the physiologic complexity of an in vivo vertebrate
model with the speed of high-throughput screening. As such, the
assay may be used as a physiologically relevant primary screen, or
as a bridge between biochemical or cell-based screening assays
and expensive, labor-intensive mammalian systems. Compounds
found to be active in primary screens can be rapidly tested in
zebrafish to prioritize compounds for preclinical drug development, thus providing a valuable and efficient tool for drug
discovery.

References
1. Auerbach R, Lewis R, Shinners B, Kubai L, Akhtar N.
Angiogenesis assays: a critical overview. Cancer Metastasis Rev 2000;49:32–40.
2. Isogai S, Horiguchi M, Weinstein BM. The vascular anatomy of the developing zebrafish: an atlas of embryonic
and early larval development. Dev Biol 2001;230:278–301.
3. Liang D, Chang JR, Chin AJ, et al. The role of vascular
endothelial growth factor (VEGF) in vasculogenesis,
angiogenesis, and hematopoesis in zebrafish development. Mech Dev 2001;108:29–43.
4. Lyons MS, Bell B, Stainier DY, Peters KG. Isolation of
the zebrafish homologues for the tie-1 and tie-2
endothelium-specific receptor tyrosine kinases. Dev
Dyn 1998;212:133–40.
5. Chan J, Bayliss PE, Wood JM, Roberts TM. Dissection
of angiogenic signaling in zebrafish using a chemical
genetic approach. Cancer Cell 2002;1:257–67.
6. Cross LM, Cook MA, Lin S, Chen JN, Rubinstein AL.
Rapid analysis of angiogenic drugs in a live fluorescent
zebrafish assay. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol 2003;23:
911–2.

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (23). December 1, 2007

Acknowledgments
Received 8/16/2007; revised 9/23/2007; accepted 10/3/2007.
Grant support: NIH grants U54 HG003918 (R. Dingledine) and R43CA117000 (E.M.
Sandberg).
The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of page
charges. This article must therefore be hereby marked advertisement in accordance
with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact.
We thank Dr. Yuhong Du for help with the early stages of the study and Brian
Revennaugh for data management; Drs. Zhican Qu and Anshu Roy from Southern
Research Institute for performing endothelial cell-based assays; and Dr. Peter Eimon
for critically reviewing the manuscript.

7. Seng WL, Eng K, Lee J, McGrath P. Use of a
monoclonal antibody specific for activated endothelial
cells to quantitate angiogenesis in vivo in zebrafish after
drug treatment. Angiogenesis 2004;7:243–53.
8. McKinley ET, Baranowski TC, Blavo DO, et al. Neuroprotection of MPTP-induced toxicity in zebrafish
dopaminergic neurons. Brain Res Mol Brain Res 2005;
141:128–37.
9. Zhang JH, Chung TD, Oldenburg KR. A simple
statistical parameter for use in evaluation and validation of high throughput screening assays. J Biomol
Screen 1999;4:67–73.
10. Schultheiss C, Blechert B, Gaertner FC, et al. In vivo
characterization of endothelial cell activation in a
transgenic mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease. Angiogenesis 2006;9:59–65.
11. Vinals F, Pouyssequr J. Transforming growth factor
h1 (TGF-h1) promotes endothelial cell survival during
in vitro angiogenic via an autocrine mechanism
implicating TGF-a signaling. Mol Cell Biol 2001;21:
7218–30.
12. Milan DJ, Peterson TA, Ruskin JN, Peterson RT,
MacRae CA. Drugs that induce repolarization abnor-

11392

malities cause bradycardia in zebrafish. Circulation
2003;107:1355–8.
13. Hoessel R, Leclerc S, Endicott JA, et al. Indirubin, the
active constituent of a Chinese antileukaemia medicine,
inhibits cyclin-dependent kinases. Nat Cell Biol 1999;1:
60–7.
14. Leclerc S, Garnier M, Hoessel R, et al. Indirubins
inhibit glycogen synthase kinase-3 h and CDK5/p25, two
protein kinases involved in abnormal tau phosphorylation in Alzheimer’s disease. A property common to most
cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitors? J Biol Chem 2001;
276:251–60.
15. Bain J, McLauchlan H, Elliott M, Cohen P. The
specificities of protein kinase inhibitors: an update.
Biochem J 2003;371:199–204.
16. Xie Y, Liu Y, Ma C, et al. Indirubin-3¶-oxime inhibits
c-Jun NH2-terminal kinase: anti-apoptotic effect in
cerebellar granule neurons. Neurosci Lett 2004;367:
355–9.
17. Zhen Y, Sorenson V, Jin Y, Suo Z, Wiedlocha A.
Indirubin-3¶-monoxime inhibits autophosphorylation of
FGFR1 and stimulates ERK1/2 activity via p38 MAPK.
Oncogene 2007;26:6372–85. Epub 2007 May 28.

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Automated, Quantitative Screening Assay for Antiangiogenic
Compounds Using Transgenic Zebrafish
T. Cameron Tran, Blossom Sneed, Jamil Haider, et al.
Cancer Res 2007;67:11386-11392.

Updated version
Supplementary
Material

Cited articles
Citing articles

E-mail alerts
Reprints and
Subscriptions
Permissions

Access the most recent version of this article at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/67/23/11386
Access the most recent supplemental material at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/suppl/2007/12/03/67.23.11386.DC1

This article cites 17 articles, 4 of which you can access for free at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/67/23/11386.full#ref-list-1
This article has been cited by 12 HighWire-hosted articles. Access the articles at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/67/23/11386.full#related-urls

Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal.
To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications
Department at pubs@aacr.org.
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications
Department at permissions@aacr.org.

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

