Oncotarget, Vol. 7, No. 27

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Research Paper

Phospholipid scramblase 1 as a critical node at the crossroad
between autophagy and apoptosis in mantle cell lymphoma
Katy Mastorci1, Barbara Montico1, Damiana A. Faè1, Luca Sigalotti1, Maurilio
Ponzoni2, Giorgio Inghirami3, Riccardo Dolcetti1,4,*, Jessica Dal Col1,*
1

Cancer Bio-Immunotherapy Unit, Department of Translational Research, Centro di Riferimento Oncologico, IRCCS-National
Cancer Institute, Aviano (PN), Italy

2

Pathology Unit and Unit of Lymphoid Malignancies, San Raffaele Scientific Institute, Vita-Salute University San Raffaele,
Milan, Italy

3

Department of Pathology and CeRMS, University of Torino, Torino, Italy

4

The University of Queensland Diamantina Institute, Translational Research Institute, Brisbane, Australia

*

These authors shared senior authorship

Correspondence to:Jessica Dal Col, email: jdalcol@cro.it
Keywords: mantle cell lymphoma, phospholipid scramblase 1, autophagy, apoptosis, interferon-a
Received: December 04, 2015     Accepted: May 04, 2016     Published: May 26, 2016

ABSTRACT
Mantle cell lymphoma (MCL) is an aggressive haematological malignancy in
which the response to therapy can be limited by aberrantly activated molecular and
cellular pathways, among which autophagy was recently listed. Our study shows
that the 9-cis-retinoic acid (RA)/Interferon(IFN)-a combination induces protective
autophagy in MCL cell lines and primary cultures reducing the extent of drug-induced
apoptosis. The treatment significantly up-regulates phospholipid scramblase 1
(PLSCR1), a protein which bi-directionally flips lipids across membranes. In particular,
RA/IFN-a combination concomitantly increases PLSCR1 transcription and controls
PLSCR1 protein levels via lysosomal degradation. Herein we describe a new function
for PLSCR1 as negative regulator of autophagy. Indeed, PLSCR1 overexpression
reduced MCL cell susceptibility to autophagy induced by RA/IFN-a, serum deprivation
or mTOR pharmacological inhibition. Moreover, PLSCR1 can bind the ATG12/ATG5
complex preventing ATG16L1 recruitment and its full activation, as indicated by coimmunoprecipitation experiments. The combination of doxorubicin or bortezomib with
RA/IFN-a strengthened PLSCR1 up-regulation and enhanced apoptosis, as a likely
consequence of the blockade of RA/IFN-a-induced autophagy. Immunohistochemical
analysis of 32 MCL biopsies revealed heterogeneous expression of PLSCR1 and
suggests its possible implication in the response to anticancer therapies, especially
to drugs promoting protective autophagy.

The complex pathogenesis of MCL integrates alterations
in cell cycle regulation, DNA damage response
mechanisms, and activation of cell survival pathways
[5–9]. Most MCL cases show an aggressive clinical
course, with continuous relapse pattern and, often,
refractory disease [10]; only, a subset of up to 15% longterm survivors has been identified with a rather indolent
clinical course [11, 12]. Despite improved survival data
in the younger population, therapy for the elderly or
refractory/relapsed patients remains unsatisfactory, and
the prognosis quite poor [13, 14].

INTRODUCTION
Mantle cell lymphoma (MCL) is a distinct
subtype of malignant B-cell non Hodgkin lymphoma
characterized by the t(11;14)(q13;q32) chromosomal
translocation, resulting in constitutional overexpression
of cyclin D1 and subsequent deregulation of the cyclin
D/Rb protein pathway [1, 2]. Despite the critical
pathogenic role of this genetic alteration, the t(11;14)
(q13;q32) translocation is not sufficient per se for the full
transformation and malignant evolution of B cells [3, 4].

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

41913

Oncotarget

RESULTS

In the last years, the increased understanding of MCL
cell biology led to the use of different therapeutic agents
active against this lymphoma, including the proteasome
inhibitor bortezomib (BTZ) [15–17], or mammalian target
of rapamycin (mTOR) antagonists such as everolimus and
temsirolimus [18, 19]. Nevertheless, the response of MCL
to these drugs is highly heterogeneous and recent studies
showed that the lack of treatment efficacy correlated with
induction of autophagy [20, 21]. Several lines of evidence
indicate that autophagy can influence the responsiveness to
anticancer therapies, since it often functions as a protective
mechanism for cell survival under metabolic or drugdependent stress conditions. In particular, autophagy is
correlated to apoptosis and activation of the autophagic
machinery can allow the cells to resist and/or elude apoptotic
death. Therefore, counteracting autophagy could represent a
successful strategy to improve the efficacy of pro-apoptotic
chemotherapy [22, 23]. More importantly, the identification
of critical regulators of the delicate balance between
autophagy and apoptosis could help the design of optimal
combination therapy.
Aiming at this goal, we have exploited the features
of MCL cell apoptosis induced by the combination of
9-cis-retinoic acid (RA) and Interferon(IFN)-α [24],
two drugs that may stimulate both pro-apoptotic and
autophagic effects in different cellular backgrounds,
including lymphocytes [25, 26]. In particular, gene
expression profiling approach identified phospholipid
scramblase 1 (PLSCR1) as one of the pro-apoptotic
genes significantly up-regulated by RA/IFN-α treatment
in different MCL cell lines. PLSCR1 is an IFN-inducible
protein [27, 28] able to promote rapid transbilayer
movement of membrane phospholipids, particularly the
exposure of phosphatidylserine on cell surface. Recent
data indicate that PLSCR1 may induce apoptotic effects
in different cellular systems [29], although no information
is currently available on the possible involvement of
PLSCR1 in regulating apoptotic and/or autophagic
responses in MCL cells. Intriguingly, Huett A. et al.
identified PLSCR1 as one of the binding partners of the
autophagy-related protein (ATG)12 [30], an ubiquitin-like
protein involved in the elongation step of autophagosome
formation. The ATG5/ATG12 complex is one of the two
ubiquitin-like conjugation systems essential for membrane
structure expansion of the phagophore and its full
activation is reached through the binding with ATG16L1.
Therefore, we investigated the potential interaction
between PLSCR1 and the ATG12/ATG5 complex and its
possible consequences for drug-induced MCL autophagy.
More importantly, analysis of a pilot series of MCL
samples disclosed that PLSCR1 is heterogeneously
expressed by these lymphomas, suggesting a possible
influential relevance of this protein especially as putative
predictive marker of clinical response to autophagyinducer therapeutic agents. These findings deserve to be
tested in prospective studies.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

RA/IFN-α combination promotes protective
autophagy in MCL
Previously, we demonstrated that RA/IFN-α
treatment induces apoptosis in MCL cells through the
inhibition of the PI3-K/Akt pathway [24]. Given the
significance of this signalling in the cross-talk between
apoptosis and autophagy [31, 32], we investigated the
possible relationship between RA/IFN-α-induced cell
death and autophagy in MCL cells.
As a first step, autophagy was evaluated by
multispectral imaging flow cytometry in Mino and SP53
cell lines exposed to RA/IFN-α for 72 hours and labelled
with the autophagy Cyto-ID Green dye. This dye
specifically accumulates in the autophagosomes allowing
the evaluation of the extent of autophagy as number of
green fluorescent spots into each single cell. Considering
that autophagy usually precedes apoptotic process, the
analysis was conducted specifically in living cells, as
shown in Figure 1A, excluding apoptotic cells on the
bases of nuclear fragmentation. RA/IFN-α treatment
induced autophagosome formation as indicated by the
increase in the percentage of cells with one or more
spots compared to the untreated population. Moreover,
molecular markers of autophagy were investigated in the
same MCL cells also treated with the mTOR inhibitor
rapamycin used as positive control for autophagy
induction. Immunoblotting analysis demonstrated
Beclin-1 upregulation, p62 downregulation, and
LC3B-I decrease with concomitant detection of the
lipidated form LC3B-II, in samples treated with RA/
IFN-α or rapamycin, consistent with the activation of
the autophagic flux (Figure 1B). Likewise, RA/IFN-α
significantly (*p < 0.05) increased GFP-LC3 puncta
in Mino and Jeko-1 cells infected with the LC3-GFP
retroviral expression vector. In particular, these samples
were analyzed by exploiting an algorithm of the IDEAS
software called “H Variance Mean” (Figure 1C), a cell
texture feature that quantifies GFP-LC3 clustering in the
presence of high background. In details, lower values of
H Variance Mean correspond to more clustered GFPLC3. Moreover, the addition of the autophagy inhibitor
chloroquine further increased the number of LC3-GFP
puncta/cell (*p < 0.05; **p < 0.01) (Figure 1D) in
RA/IFN-α treated samples compared to the untreated
ones. These results, accordingly with the guidelines
for autophagy evaluation [33], confirmed the ability of
RA/IFN-α treatment to promote autophagy. Notably,
inhibition of RA/IFN-α-dependent autophagy with
chloroquine markedly enhanced the extent of apoptosis
induced by RA/IFN-α (Figure 2A-2B) indicating that in
this setting autophagy plays a protective role.

41914

Oncotarget

Figure 1: Protective autophagy reduces MCL responsiveness to RA/IFN-α-induced apoptosis. A. After 72 hours of RA (1

μM)/IFN-α (1000 U/ml) treatment, MCL cells were labelled with the vital nuclear dye DRAQ5, in order to exclude apoptotic cells, and with
Cyto-ID autophagy Green dye. 50x103 cells were analyzed for the presence of autophagosomes (green spots). The results are representative
of 1 of 2 experiments. B. Mino and SP53 cells were treated or not for 48 hours with RA/IFN-α or 1 μM Rapamycin and molecular markers
of autophagy were analyzed by immunoblotting. Densitometric analysis of p62 and beclin-1 was reported. C. RA/IFN-α treatment (72
hours) decreased H Variance Mean of GFP fluorescence indicating a more clustered LC3-GFP in these samples compared to the untreated
ones. The histograms and cell images from IDEAS software on the left are representative of 1 of 3 experiments. On the right, Bars, mean of
3 independent experiments; error bars, SD. *p < 0.05 (T Student test) D. LC3-GFP puncta formation was evaluated in MCL cell lines after
72 hours of culture in the presence or not of RA/IFN-α. After 48 hours 50 μM CQ was added, where indicated, to block the autophagic flux.
Bars, mean of 3 independent experiments; error bars, SD. *p < 0.05; **p < 0,01 (T Student test).

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

41915

Oncotarget

RA/IFN-α induces PLSCR1 transcription and
controls the stability of this protein via lysosomal
degradation

in SP53, Jeko-1 and Mino cells. In particular, treatment
with IFN-α alone for 24 hours increased PLSCR1 mRNA
levels, and, more interestingly, RA significantly enhanced
PLSCR1 induction when added to IFN-α (Figure 3A).
Immunoblotting
analysis
confirmed
a
corresponding increase in PLSCR1 protein levels
after RA/IFN-α treatment and showed that basal
expression of this protein is heterogeneous in the three
cell lines studied, with detectable levels only in SP53
cells (Figure 3B). In addition, a prolonged treatment
up to 72 hours did not further increase the levels of
PLSCR1 expression (not shown), suggesting that RA/
IFN-α combination could probably control also protein
stability. Therefore, co-treatment with RA/IFN-α and

Given that autophagy is tightly correlated to
apoptosis and profoundly implicated in the responsiveness
to anticancer therapies, we reasoned that a more thorough
characterization of the mechanisms underlying RA/IFNα-induced autophagy could be useful to identify markers
with a potential predictive value. Gene expression profiling
identified PLSCR1 as one of the most significantly upregulated pro-apoptotic genes in RA/IFN-α-treated MCL
cells. These data were validated by real-time qPCR
demonstrating the transcriptional induction of PLSCR1

Figure 2: Blockade of RA/IFN-α-induced autophagy enhanced the extent of treatment-induced apoptosis. A-B. MCL
cell lines were exposed to RA/IFN-α combination. After 48 hours 50 μM CQ was added to the culture medium. Apoptosis extent was
evaluated at 72 hours of treatment by Annex-V/PI assay and confirmed through PARP and cleaved caspase 3 detection by immunoblotting.
Flow cytometry dot plot and immunoblotting analyses are representative of 1 of 3 experiments. On the right, Bars, mean of 3 independent
experiments; error bars, SD. *p < 0.05 (T Student test).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

41916

Oncotarget

Figure 3: RA/IFN-α combination controls both transcription and protein degradation of PLSCR1. A-B. PLSCR1

mRNA and protein were analyzed after 24 hours of treatment with RA (1 μM), IFN-α (1000 U/ml) or their combination. Bars, mean of 3
independent experiments; error bars, SD. **p < 0.01 value relative to untreated and RA-treated samples; *p < 0.05 value relative to IFN-αtreated samples (T Student test). The results depicted in B are representative of 1 of 3 independent experiments. C. After 48 hour exposure
to RA/IFN-α or RA/IFN-α+CQ (50 μM), protein synthesis was blocked by cycloheximide (100 μM) addition in Jeko-1 cell line. Cells
were harvested at different time points and PLSCR1 expression was analyzed by immunoblotting. The presence of CQ delayed PLSCR1
protein degradation as demonstrated by densitometric analysis. D. RA/IFN-α treatment promoted PLSCR1/Lysotracker co-localization. 106
Mino cells were treated for 2 days with RA/IFN-α and labelled with Lysotracker and anti-PLSCR1 antibody. 50x103 cells were acquired
and analyzed with the ImageStreamX instrument. E. Blockade of RA/IFN-α-induced autophagy by CQ enhanced PLSCR1 up-regulation
in Jeko-1, Mino and Mino LC3-GFP infected cells, and promoted its accumulation into autolysosomes. 106 Mino cells were treated for 2
days with RA/IFN-α and labelled with anti-PLSCR1 antibody. 50x103 cells were acquired and analyzed with the ImageStreamX instrument.
PLSCR1/Lysotracker and PLSCR1/LC3-GFP co-localization was measured using the Bright Detailed Similarity Score, a feature of IDEAS
software.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

41917

Oncotarget

the protein synthesis inhibitor cycloheximide showed
that PLSCR1 levels decreased by nearly 50% after
4 hours since cycloheximide addition (Figure 3C).
Moreover, the presence of chloroquine together with
cycloheximide prevented RA/IFN-α-induced PLSCR1
degradation (Figure 3C) and led to the accumulation of
this protein into the lysosomes, as shown by PLSCR1/
Lysotracker co-localization (Figure 3D). In keeping
with this finding, when chloroquine was used to block
RA/IFN-α-induced autophagy, a further up-regulation
of PLSCR1 protein levels was observed (Figure 3E).
In addition, PLSCR1 transfer into autophagosomes/
autolysosomes was detected by multispectral imaging
flow cytometry through PLSCR1 co-localization with
LC3-GFP puncta (Figure 3E). Taken together, these
data indicated that PLSCR1 protein could be degraded
by lysosomes and/or autolysosomes during RA/IFNα-induced protective autophagy and stimulated further
investigations to evaluate its potential involvement in
the cross-talk between autophagy and apoptosis.

Recently, Huett A. et al., by exploiting a novel hybrid
yeast-human network analysis, identified PLSCR1 as one
of the binding partners of ATG12 [30], an ubiquitin-like
protein involved in the elongation step of autophagosome
formation. We therefore evaluated the ability of PLSCR1
to bind ATG12 by co-immunoprecipitation assay. To
this end, ATG12 protein was immunoprecipitated from
plain and PLSCR1-expressing Mino cell lysates treated
or not with RA/IFN-α for 72 hours. Immunoblotting
analysis demonstrated that a fraction of PLSCR1 was
bound to ATG12/ATG5 conjugates in Mino plain treated
cells and this interaction seems to interfere with ATG12/
ATG5/ATG16L1 complex formation (Figure 4F and
Supplementary Figure S3). Moreover, in Mino cells
overexpressing PLSCR1, the bound fraction of ATG16L1,
especially the α isoform, was markedly lower than that
detected in Mino plain cells (Figure 4F and Supplementary
Figure S3). Overall, these results suggest that PLSCR1
may play an inhibitory role in the autophagic process
likely interfering with ATG12/ATG5/ATG16L1 complex
formation and phagophore elongation.

PLSCR1 prevents autophagy through the
binding with the ATG12/ATG5 complex

Bortezomib and doxorubicin enhanced RA/IFNα-dependent apoptosis by impairing autophagy
induced by this drug combination

To assess the potential contribution of PLSCR1
to RA/IFN-α-triggered autophagy in MCL cells, we
generated a cell line co-expressing ectopic PLSCR1
and LC3-GFP. As shown in Figure 4A, PLSCR1
overexpression significantly (*p < 0.05) decreased the
formation of LC3-GFP puncta in RA/IFN-α treated cells
(Figure 4A) with a concomitant increase of apoptotic
cell fraction (Figure 4B). These results support an
inhibitory function of PLSCR1 in the activation of the
autophagic cascade and are consistent with a protective
role of autophagy in the context of RA/IFN-α-induced
apoptosis. To confirm the role of PLSCR1 in mediating
MCL cell responses to RA/IFN-α treatment, the protein
was knocked down using a short hairpin RNA (shRNA)
expression vector containing a specific sequence
targeting PLSCR1 mRNA (shPLSCR1) (Figure 4C). On
the contrary, Mino cells infected with the empty vector
or containing a mismatched sequence (shPLSCR1mis)
expressed similar levels of the protein after the exposure
to the treatment (Figure 4C). Notably, PLSCR1 silencing
decreased the extent of apoptosis induced by RA/IFN-α,
as shown by PARP cleavage and the detection of apoptotic
cells by Annexin V/7-AAD staining (Figure 4C-4D).
Similar results were obtained in SP53 and Jeko-1 cells
(Supplementary Figure S1).
Interestingly, PLSCR1 overexpression impaired the
ability of MCL cells to undergo autophagy induced also by
serum starvation or by treatment with the mTOR inhibitors
rapamycin (1 μM) and everolimus (1 μM) (Figure 4E and
Supplementary Figure S2), while concomitantly improved
cell responsiveness to the anti-proliferative activity of both
these drugs (Supplementary Figure S2).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

As shown in Figure 5A, the proteasome inhibitor
Bortezomib (BTZ) and Doxorubicin (DX), two drugs
currently employed in MCL management, are able
to increase RA/IFN-α-induced PLSCR1 expression
in MCL cells. In particular, Mino and Jeko-1 cells,
in which PLSCR1 was previously induced by 48hour pre-treatment with RA/IFN-α, were cultured
in the absence or presence of sublethal doses of DX
(50 nM) or BTZ (0.5 nM) for 24 and 48 hours. The
addition of both DX or BTZ enhanced PLSCR1
protein levels (Figure 5A) concomitantly with an
increase in apoptosis extent (Figure 5A-5B). To assess
whether these results are a consequence of autophagy
involvement, we analyzed the effects of BTZ and DX
on the autophagic markers p62 and LC3B in Jeko1 and Mino cells. Immunoblotting analysis revealed
that both drugs promoted the accumulation of p62 and
LC3B-1 consistently with a blockade of the autophagic
flux (Figure 5C). More interestingly, when these two
drugs were used in combination with RA/IFN-α,
they impaired protective autophagy induced by this
treatment with the concomitant PLSCR1 up-regulation
coupled with enhanced pro-apoptotic effects (Figure
5D). Furthermore, PLSCR1 knock down decreased the
extent of apoptosis in cells pre-treated with RA/IFN-α
and successively exposed to DX (Figure 6A) or BTZ
(Figure 6B). These findings show that DX and BTZ are
able to enhance RA/IFN-α-induced apoptosis by further
up-regulating PLSCR1 levels and decreasing RA/IFNα-promoted autophagy.
41918

Oncotarget

Figure 4: PLSCR1 overexpression reduces cell propensity to undergo autophagy. A. PLSCR1 overexpression inhibited LC3-

GFP clustering and puncta formation after 72 hours of RA/IFN-α treatment; filled curve refers to Mino LC3-GFP, empty curve refers to
Mino LC3-GFP overexpressing PLSCR1. In the upper panel autophagy was evaluated as H variance mean. Bars, mean of 3 independent
experiments; error bars, SD. In the lower panel, autophagy extent was measured by the counting of LC3-GFP puncta in untreated or treated
cells, 50 μM CQ was added to block the autophagic flux after 48 hours of culture. Bars, mean of 5 independent experiments; error bars,
SD. *p < 0.05 (T Student test). B. Ectopic PLSCR1 concomitantly increases the extent of apoptotic response. The results depicted in B are
representative of 1 of 2 independent experiments. C-D. PLSCR1 knock down reduced the apoptotic cell fraction after 3 days of exposure
to RA/IFN-α combination. Bars in D, mean of 3 independent experiments; error bars, SD. E. PLSCR1 overexpression impaired autophagy
induction by serum deprivation or pharmacological mTOR inhibition. Cells were starved O.N. or treated with 1 μM Rapamycin or 1 μM
Everolimus; after 24 hours 50 μM CQ was added to each sample for 1 day more. 106 cells were analyzed for LC3-GFP puncta counting.
Bars, mean of 3 independent experiments; error bars, SD.*p < 0.05 (T Student test). F. PLSCR1 protein co-immunoprecipitated with ATG12/
ATG5 complex. ATG12 was immunoprecipitated from 150 μg of total lysate and the samples were separated by SDS-PAGE. Expression of
the indicated proteins was detected by immunoblotting. Given the overlapping between ATG12 and immunoglobulin heavy chain, ATG12
immunoblotting was performed in the input samples and in the unbound fractions. The absence of the protein in the supernatants indicates
indirectly the efficiency of the immunoprecipitation. The results are representative of 1 of 3 independent experiments.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

41919

Oncotarget

Figure 5: BTZ and DX enhances RA/IFN-α-induced apoptosis through PLSCR1 up-regulation and counteracting
treatment-dependent autophagy. A-B. After 48 hours of RA/IFN-α treatment, DX (50 nM) or BTZ (0.5 nM) were added to the

culture medium for additional 24 and 48 hours. PLSCR1 expression and concomitant PARP cleavage were analyzed at fourth day since
the beginning of treatment. Apoptosis was analyzed by Annexin-V/PI staining. Bars, mean of 3 independent experiments; error bars, SD.
C. MCL cell lines were treated for 24 hours with different concentrations of BTZ or DX and the protein levels of the indicated autophagy
markers were evaluated by immunoblotting. The results are representative of 1 of 3 independent experiments D. Addition of DX or BTZ
to 48-hour RA/IFN-α pre-treated Mino cells prevented p62 degradation and LC3B lipidation. Data are representative of 1 of 2 independent
experiments.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

41920

Oncotarget

PLSCR1 is heterogeneously expressed in MCL
and its expression is inducible by doxorubicin

Expression of the Ki-67 proliferation marker was
not significantly different between PLSCR1 positive and
negative samples (p > 0.05; two-tailed independent non
parametric Mann-Whitney U-Test). Similarly, the expression
of cleaved-caspase 3, as a marker of apoptotic cells, was also
comparable between PLSCR1 positive and negative MCL
cases. These findings are consistent with the observation that
PLSCR1 overexpression in Mino cells did not confer any
noticeable proliferation advantage (Supplementary Figure
S2) nor increased basal apoptosis (Figure 4B), although it
resulted in resistance to drug-induced autophagy.
Immunoblotting experiments carried out with 6
MCL primary cultures (MCL4, MCL5, MCL6, MCL7,
MCL8, and MCL10) confirmed the heterogeneity of
PLSCR1 basal levels in this lymphoma, and showed a
marked induction of PLSCR1 expression by RA/IFN-α
combination in all samples (Figure 7B). Notably, PLSCR1
up-regulation correlated with a pro-apoptotic effect
shown by the increased expression of cleaved caspase-3.
Autophagy induction by RA/IFN-α treatment in primary
MCL cells was also demonstrated by the accumulation of
Beclin-1 and the decrease of LC3B-I (Figure 7B).

Considering the involvement of PLSCR1 in the
interconnection between autophagy and apoptosis in
MCL and the observed variability of its basal expression
in the cell lines included in this study, we analyzed
32 MCL biopsies for the expression of PLSCR1. By
immunohistochemical analysis we identified 7 samples
(22%) in which PLSCR1 expression was detectable in
10% or more of neoplastic cells and 25 cases (78%)
in which it was expressed by less than 10% of tumor
cells or was absent. Thus, using the upper quartile
method, we calculated 10% as cut-off to subdivide
the samples in positive and negative for PLSCR1
expression. The relatively broad range of percentages
of PLSCR1 positive cells observed is consistent with
an evident intra-tumor and inter-patient heterogeneity
(Figure 7A). The analysis of a published microarray
dataset (GDS4984) showed different levels also
of PLSCR1 mRNA in 38 MCL untreated samples
(Supplementary Figure S4).

Figure 6: PLSCR1 knock down reduces MCL cell sensitivity to the additional pro-apoptotic effect of DX and BTZ with
RA/IFN-α. A-B. Mino cell lines infected with empty vector or shPLSCR1 were treated for 48 hours with RA/IFN-α, successively DX

(50 nM) or BTZ (0.5 nM) were added to the culture medium for additional 24 and 48 hours. PLSCR1 expression and concomitant PARP
cleavage were analyzed at fourth day since the beginning of treatment. Apoptosis was analyzed by Annexin-V/7-AAD staining. Bars, mean
of 3 independent experiments; error bars, SD.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

41921

Oncotarget

Figure 7: PLSCR1 expression in primary MCLs. A. Immunohistochemistry analysis showed heterogeneous expression of PLSCR1

in MCLs. Representative negative (on the left) and positive (on the right) samples are reported. B. RA/IFN-α treatment (2 days) induced
PLSCR1 expression in 6 MCL primary cultures concomitantly with triggering of both autophagy (monitored by beclin-1 accumulation and
LC3B) and apoptosis (caspase 3 cleavage). C. 24 hour DX exposure (500 nM) up-regulated PLSCR1 mRNA in Mino and Jeko-1 cell lines.
Bars, mean of 3 independent experiments; error bars, SD. (*p < 0.05 T Student test). On the right an increase in PLSCR1 protein levels was
shown in Jeko-1 cell lines and MCL primary cultures together with a reduction of lipidated LC3B II and p62 accumulation. D. Schematic
model of RA/IFN-α, DX, BTZ and PLSCR1 interconnection.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

41922

Oncotarget

Intriguingly, a recent study showed that
anthracyclines are able to trigger type I IFN signalling
in murine sarcoma, mammary carcinoma and leukemia
cell lines, including the transcription of several Interferon
stimulated-genes (ISGs) and also of PLSCR2 [34]. These
findings prompted us to assess whether anthracyclines
were also able to up-regulate PLSCR1 in MCL cells.
Although low doses (50 and 100 nM) of DX did not
influence PLSCR1 expression in MCL cell lines (not
shown), when DX was used at 500 nM a significant
increase in PLSCR1 mRNA (*p < 0.05) and protein
levels was detectable (Figure 7C). Notably, also the
exposure of primary MCL cells from MCL7 and MCL10
to DX at 500 nM, but not at 50 nM, increases PLSCR1
protein levels (Figure 7C). Moreover, immunoblotting
analysis of the autophagic markers LC3B and p62 in the
same primary MCL cells revealed that, as in Jeko-1, DX
promoted the accumulation of p62 and of LC3B-I, in
keeping with a block of autophagic flux (Figure 7C). In
summary, PLSCR1 is heterogeneously expressed by these
lymphomas and chemotherapeutic regimes currently used
in MCL management, including anthracyclines, could
induce PLSCR1 expression suggesting a potential role
of this protein in mediating tumor response to anticancer
therapies.

network analysis [30], we showed that PLSCR1 can
physically bind the ATG12/ATG5 complex, preventing
ATG16L1α recruitment and thereby inhibiting the correct
execution of the autophagic process. Interestingly, when
the autophagic flux is active in RA/IFN-α-treated MCL
cells PLSCR1 protein undergoes lysosomal/autolysosomal
degradation.
We demonstrate that PLSCR1 is inducible also in
primary MCL cells by RA/IFN-α concomitantly with
autophagy and apoptosis promotion. In addition, PLSCR1
expression was detected by immunohistochemistry in
lymphoma cells of a fraction of MCL biopsies, although
with a broad heterogeneity both inter- and intra-patient.
Consistently with in vitro findings obtained in MCL
cells overexpressing PLSCR1, no correlation was found
between PLSCR1 expression and Ki-67 or cleaved
caspase-3 in the MCL biopsies investigated, indicating
that PLSCR1 per se does probably not play a role in
regulating MCL cell proliferation or survival. Our results
rather suggest that PLSCR1 expression could be correlated
to a decreased propensity of tumor cells to undergo
autophagy. As a practical implication, these results may
provide the rationale to investigate PLSCR1 protein
expression in a larger series of MCL patients to assess
possible correlations with the response to treatment with
drugs, such as everolimus or temsirolimus, whose efficacy
is limited by autophagy. Intriguingly, PLSCR1 protein was
found overexpressed in colorectal cancer (CRC) and in
the corresponding liver metastasis as well [40, 41] and
available data suggest that this protein may be involved in
tumorigenesis and tumor progression [42], but a possible
correlation with autophagy is not currently investigated.
Notably, the biological and clinical significance of
autophagy in CRC are still poorly understood given that
some studies reported contradictory results [43–45].
PLSCR1 expression was also implicated in ovarian cancer
response to arsenic trioxide, a pro-apoptotic and proautophagic agent [46]. These and our findings stimulate
further investigation aimed at elucidating the role of
PLSCR1 in autophagy control in both hematologic and
solid tumors.
The most common autophagy inhibitors
presently used in clinical trials are chloroquine and
hydroxychloroquine, antimalarial drugs that abolish the
degradative activity of lysosome. Nevertheless, high
doses and/or prolonged treatments with chloroquine
are burdened with several side effects. Other putative
inhibitors, such as bafilomycin A1, pepstatin A
and monensin, were studied for their anti-tumor
effects in vitro and in vivo, unfortunately showing an
unsatisfactory specificity for the autophagy targets.
Accordingly, exploiting the anti-autophagic effects of
drugs already-in-use in chemotherapeutic regimens
could provide the rationale to optimize current schedules
of treatment or develop novel drug combinations. It is
worth mentioning in this respect that sublethal doses of

DISCUSSION
Protective autophagy is known to be a cell
survival mechanism that impairs chemotherapy efficacy.
Recently, several preclinical studies and clinical trials
have evaluated the combination of autophagy inhibitors
with conventional anticancer drugs as new therapeutic
strategy in different tumors [35–37]. At present, however,
only few studies have investigated the possible role of
protective autophagy in MCL, but data accumulated so far
convincingly demonstrated the critical involvement of this
process in the responsiveness to everolimus, flavopiridol,
and anti-CD74 monoclonal antibody milatuzumab [20, 38,
39].
In line with these findings, the identification of
molecular actors involved in treatment-induced autophagy
could be useful to drive the most appropriate therapeutic
approach. In the present study, we demonstrate that the
pro-apoptotic RA/IFN-α combination induces protective
autophagy in MCL cells, and that autophagy inhibition
with chloroquine enhances the extent of RA/IFN-αinduced apoptosis. Notably, characterization of the
interplay between autophagy and apoptosis in RA/IFN-αtreated MCL cells allowed the identification of PLSCR1
as a novel regulator of the autophagic process. In fact,
we provide evidence indicating that this protein is able
to counteract RA/IFN-α-, rapamycin-, and everolimusinduced autophagy while simultaneously enhancing MCL
cells sensitivity to the antitumor activity of these drugs.
Moreover, according to the recent hybrid yeast-human
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

41923

Oncotarget

Antibodies and reagents

both BTZ and DX used in our study can impair RA/
IFN-α-dependent protective autophagy, concomitantly
enhancing the pro-apoptotic activity of these drugs,
effects that are probably correlated with PLSCR1
up-regulation (Figure 7D). In line with our findings,
BTZ was recently shown to block cisplatin-induced
autophagy and improved the anticancer effects of this
drug, although information on the possible involvement
of PLSCR1 is lacking [47]. As a further support to
the likely broad involvement of PLSCR1 in inhibiting
autophagy we also observed that DX, when used as
single agent, induces PLSCR1 expression in MCL cells.
These result are consistent with the recent demonstration
that the pro-apoptotic effects of anthracyclines, and
particularly of DX, are correlated to the activation of
type I IFNs-dependent signalling in cancer cells [34].
In summary, the present work describes a new
function of PLSCR1 as a possible negative regulator
of autophagy and suggests a potential involvement of
this protein in MCL response to anticancer therapy,
especially to autophagy-inducer agents. In addition, our
results highlight the importance to re-evaluate presently
used chemotherapeutic agents for their capacity to
induce or abrogate autophagy, in order to optimize their
employment in the design of novel and/or more effective
drug combinations in cancer treatment.

Rabbit anti-PLSCR1 antibody was from Genetex;
mouse anti-PLSCR1 (1E9), and GADPH from Abcam;
PARP (F2), Vinculin and β-tubulin from Santa Cruz
Biotechnology, cleaved caspase-3, LC3B, beclin-1,
SQSTM1/p62, Atg16L1 (D6D5) and Atg12 (D88H11)
from Cell Signaling Technology; mouse monoclonal antiAtg12 (6E5) from Medical & Biological Laboratories
CO.; anti-rabbit conjugated-HRP from Bethyl; anti-mouse
conjugated-HRP from Perkinelmer; secondary antibodyes
for flow cytometry were from Beckman Coulter. Vital
nuclear dye DRAQ5 was from Alexis Biochemicals,
Everolimus (RAD001) from Selleck, LysoTraker®
Deep Red from Life Technologies; G418, Rapamycin,
Chloroquine and 9-cis-retinoic acid from Sigma. IntronA
was purchased from SP Europe, doxorubicin from
EBEWE, and bortezomib from JANSSEN-CILAG.

Immunohistochemistry
Formalin-fixed, paraffin embedded 4μ-thick sections
were stained with anti-scramblase 1 monoclonal antibody
(ABCAM, Cambridge, UK, clone 1E9) at a dilution of
1:100, after antigen retrieval using TRIS-EDTA at pH9 for
30 minutes at 97°C. Reaction was developed with polymer
and counterstained with haematoxylin. The mount of
positive neoplastic cells was evaluated semiquantitatively.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Autophagy detection

Patient samples and cell lines

Autophagy was detected in MCL cells infected or
not with LC3-GFP retroviral expression vector. 106 cells
were labeled using the Cyto-ID® Autophagy Detection
Kit (Enzo Life Sciences) according to manufacturer’s
instructions. Cells undergoing autophagy showed green
fluorescent countable punctuate structures. Similarly,
in cells infected with LC3-GFP retroviral expression
vector, the autophagy extent is measurable through
the counting of LC3-GFP puncta per cell. 50x103 cells/
sample were acquired with the ImageStreamX instrument
(Amnis Corporation, Seattle, WA) using the INSPIRE
software and, using a specific feature of the IDEAS
analysis software, the number of fluorescent spots per
cell was evaluated. The “H variance mean” algorithm of
the IDEAS software allowed to evaluate the distribution
and the texture of fluorescence into the cells also in the
presence of high background.

Thirty-two patients with MCL were diagnosed
according to WHO lymphoma classification [48]. The
study was performed in accordance with protocols
approved by the local ethical committee, and all
patients gave their informed consent. Mononuclear
cells of 6 patients (Supplementary Table S1) were
isolated from unicellular suspension obtained from
mechanically minced lymph nodes or spleen. Cells
were re-suspended and enriched MCL samples (>70%
MCL) were cryopreserved in 10% DMSO until further
study. Mino, SP53 and Jeko-1 cell lines, all carrying
the t(11;14)(q13;q32) translocation, were generously
contributed by Dr. Raymond Lai, University of Alberta
and Cross Cancer Institute (Edmonton, Alberta,
Canada). Z-138 cell line was generously contributed
by Dr Bertoni F., IOSI Oncology Institute of Southern
Switzerland, (Bellinzona, Switzerland). Cell lines were
authenticated in our lab by fingerprinting (Power Plex
1.2, Promega) in January 2011 and in March 2015. All
cells were cultured in RPMI 1640 supplemented with
10% heat-inactivated fetal calf serum (FCS; Lonza), 100
U/ml penicillin, 100 µg/ml streptomycin, and 20 mM
L-glutamine (Sigma), and maintained in a humidified
5% CO2 incubator at 37°C.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Apoptosis detection
Apoptosis was evaluated by fluorescence analysis
by Annexin V/7-AAD or Annexin V/PI staining and/or by
using ImageStreamX technology with DRAQ5 nuclear
dye. This technology allows distinguishing between viable
and apoptotic cells based only on the nuclear morphology.

41924

Oncotarget

Flow cytometric analyses were performed on a FC500
flow cytometer (Beckman Coulter, Milan, Italy).

protein A-Sepharose CL4B (Amersham International)
overnight, centrifuged, and washed three times with
lysis buffer. Proteins were fractionated using SDSPAGE and transferred onto nitrocellulose membranes.
Immunoblotting was performed using Clarity™ Western
ECL substrate (BIO-RAD) through Chemidoc instrument
(BIO-RAD).

RNA extraction, cDNA synthesis and real-time
quantitative reverse transcription PCR
(qRT-PCR) for PLSCR1 mRNA
Total RNA was extracted from 1 to 3x106 cells by
QIAGEN RNeasy Mini Kit. Quantification and integrity
of mRNA were determined through the Experion
Automated Electrophoresis system (BIO-RAD, Hercules,
CA, US). 1 µg of RNA was retro-transcribed into cDNA
using the ISCRIPT RT OneTube Supermix according to
manufacturer’s recommendations (BIO-RAD).
qRT-PCR was performed in a Thermal Cycler
CFX96 (BIO-RAD) using SsoFast EvaGreen Supermix
according to manufacturer’s instructions (BIO-RAD).
The PLSCR1 specific primers were designed by Primer3
Input software (version 0.4.0), and were synthesized by
SIGMA-Aldrich Co. (St Luois, Missouri, US) (primer
forward: 5’-AAATCCAAGCTCCTCCTGGT-3’, primer
reverse:
5’-TTTGCCAACCACACACTGTT-3’).
Specificity control was performed by BLAST alignment
tool. Four different housekeeping genes, beta-actin,
GAPDH, beta2-microglobulin (β2M), and 18-S were used.
Specific primers for 18-S and β2M were kindly provided
by BIO-RAD, while the other primers where designed by
the software, as above.
Normalized fold expression was calculated with
the formula 2-ΔΔCt, through the Bio-Rad CFX Manager
software.

PLSCR1 and LC3-GFP infection
To generate the pQCXIP-PLSCR1 expression
vector, the coding sequence of human PLSCR1 was
obtained from TrueClone™ human full-lenght PLSCR1
cDNA by PCR, using a 5′ primer containing the BamHI
restriction site and the ATG codon, and a 3′ primer
including the stop codon linked to the EcoRI restriction
site. After BamHI–EcoRI digestion, the PLSCR1 coding
sequence product was cloned directionally in the BamHI–
EcoRI-digested pQCXIP retroviral vector. pMXs-LC3GFP Retroviral Expression Vector was purchased from
Cell Biolabs. For infection, in brief, infectious supernatant
from pQCXIP, pQCXIP-PLSCR1 and pMXs-LC3-GFP
retrovirally transfected Phoenix cells were collected
after 48 hours and used for three cycles of infections.
Upon infection, Cells were selected with puromycin or
sorted using FacsARIA III (Beckton Dickinson) for GFP
expression. Finally, PLSCR1 expression was evaluated by
flow cytometry (90% of positive cells).

PLSCR1 silencing
Four different shRNA PLSCR1 constructs were
obtained by sub-cloning the double-stranded 64mer oligonucleotide containing the PLSCR1 target
sequences (A: 5′-GGACCTCCAGGATATAGTG-3';
B:
5′-CTCTGGAGAGACCACTAAG-3';
C:5′AGTCTCCTCAGGAAATCTG-3') or the mismatched
sequence (MIS: 5′-GGACGTCCTGGATTTAGTG-3′)
into the pSUPER.retro.neo+GFP vector (pSUPER;
OligoEngine). Infection was performed as described
above. Immunoblotting analysis of transfected Phoenix
cells identified the construct shPLSCR1A as the most
efficient in protein silencing, therefore we selected this
to perform all subsequent experiments. Upon infection,
Mino cells were selected with G418 (1 mg/mL) and the
infection efficiency was checked through the detection of
GFP expression by flow cytometry (97% positive cells).

PLSCR1 intracellular localization
PLSCR1 localization into lysosomes or
autolysosomes was evaluated by multispectral imaging
flow cytometry. 106 cells per sample were fixed with 2% of
paraformaldehyde and permeabilized with cold methanol.
After a wash with PBS containing 0.5% bovine serum
albumin (BSA), cells were incubated with mouse antiPLSCR1 (1E9) antibody at RT for 30 minutes. After two
washes, cells were incubated for 30 minutes in ice with PEor FITC-anti-Mouse secondary antibody. 50x103 cells were
acquired with the ImageStreamX instrument and PLSCR1/
Lysotracker or PLSCR1/LC3-GFP co-localization was
analyzed with IDEAS software using the Similarity Bright
Details Score as previously described [24].

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

Extracts preparation, immunoblotting and
immunoprecipitation

The Flow Cytometry Facility (Clinic and
Experimental Onco-Hematology Unit) of Centro di
Riferimento Oncologico provided sorting of LC3GFP infected cells. The authors thank Dr. Ravo M.
of Laboratory of Molecular Medicine and Genomics

Whole-cell lysate extracts and immunoprecipitated
samples were prepared as previously described [49].
Briefly, in immunoprecipitation experiments, 150 μg
of proteins were incubated with 5 μg of anti-Atg12
(6E5) mouse monoclonal antibody and 30 μL of
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

41925

Oncotarget

(University of Salerno, Italy) for the contribution to the
microarray dataset analysis.

9.	 Campo E, Rule S. Mantle cell lymphoma: evolving
management strategies. Blood. 2015; 125:48-55.
10.	 Avivi I, Goy A. Refining the Mantle Cell Lymphoma
Paradigm: Impact of Novel Therapies on Current Practice.
Clinical cancer research. 2015; 21:3853-3861.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
The authors declare no competing financial interests.

11.	 Orchard J, Garand R, Davis Z, Babbage G, Sahota S,
Matutes E, Catovsky D, Thomas PW, Avet-Loiseau H,
Oscier D. A subset of t(11;14) lymphoma with mantle cell
features displays mutated IgVH genes and includes patients
with good prognosis, nonnodal disease. Blood. 2003;
101:4975-4981.

FINANCIAL SUPPORT
This study was supported by: Italian Association for
Cancer Research (My First Grant MFAG 11729 to JDC,
and contract 14287 to RD), “CRO Intramural Bench to
Bedside” Grant 2012 (to RD). KM was supported by an
Italian Foundation for Cancer Research fellowship.

12.	 Martin P, Chadburn A, Christos P, Weil K, Furman
RR, Ruan J, Elstrom R, Niesvizky R, Ely S, Diliberto
M, Melnick A, Knowles DM, Chen-Kiang S, Coleman
M, Leonard JP. Outcome of deferred initial therapy in
mantle-cell lymphoma. Journal of clinical oncology. 2009;
27:1209-1213.

REFERENCES

13.	 Vignon M, Venon MD, Hermine O, Delarue R.
Management of mantle cell lymphoma in the elderly:
current and potential strategies. Drugs & aging. 2013;
30:979-986.

1.	 Bosch F, Jares P, Campo E, Lopez-Guillermo A, Piris MA,
Villamor N, Tassies D, Jaffe ES, Montserrat E, Rozman C,
et al. PRAD-1/cyclin D1 gene overexpression in chronic
lymphoproliferative disorders: a highly specific marker of
mantle cell lymphoma. Blood. 1994; 84:2726-2732.

14.	 Njue A, Colosia A, Trask PC, Olivares R, Khan S, Abbe
A, Police R, Wang J, Ruiz-Soto R, Kaye JA and Awan F.
Clinical efficacy and safety in relapsed/refractory mantle
cell lymphoma: a systematic literature review. Clinical
lymphoma, myeloma & leukemia. 2015; 15:1-12 e17.

2.	 Bertoni F, Zucca E, Cotter FE. Molecular basis of mantle
cell lymphoma. British journal of haematology. 2004;
124:130-140.
3.	 Lovec H, Grzeschiczek A, Kowalski MB and Moroy
T. Cyclin D1/bcl-1 cooperates with myc genes in the
generation of B-cell lymphoma in transgenic mice. The
EMBO journal. 1994; 13:3487-3495.

15.	 Fisher RI, Bernstein SH, Kahl BS, Djulbegovic B,
Robertson MJ, de Vos S, Epner E, Krishnan A, Leonard
JP, Lonial S, Stadtmauer EA, O'Connor OA, Shi H, Boral
AL and Goy A. Multicenter phase II study of bortezomib in
patients with relapsed or refractory mantle cell lymphoma.
Journal of clinical oncology. 2006; 24:4867-4874.

4.	 Klier M, Anastasov N, Hermann A, Meindl T, Angermeier
D, Raffeld M, Fend F, Quintanilla-Martinez L. Specific
lentiviral shRNA-mediated knockdown of cyclin D1 in
mantle cell lymphoma has minimal effects on cell survival
and reveals a regulatory circuit with cyclin D2. Leukemia.
2008; 22:2097-2105.

16.	 Robak T, Huang H, Jin J, Zhu J, Liu T, Samoilova O,
Pylypenko H, Verhoef G, Siritanaratkul N, Osmanov E,
Alexeeva J, Pereira J, Drach J, Mayer J, Hong X, Okamoto
R, et al. Bortezomib-based therapy for newly diagnosed
mantle-cell lymphoma. The New England journal of
medicine. 2015; 372:944-953.

5.	 Rizzatti EG, Falcao RP, Panepucci RA, Proto-Siqueira
R, Anselmo-Lima WT, Okamoto OK and Zago MA.
Gene expression profiling of mantle cell lymphoma cells
reveals aberrant expression of genes from the PI3K-AKT,
WNT and TGFbeta signalling pathways. British journal of
haematology. 2005; 130:516-526.

17.	 Furtado M, Johnson R, Kruger A, Turner D, Rule
S. Addition of bortezomib to standard dose chop
chemotherapy improves response and survival in relapsed
mantle cell lymphoma. British journal of haematology.
2015; 168:55-62.

6.	 Rudelius M, Pittaluga S, Nishizuka S, Pham TH, Fend F,
Jaffe ES, Quintanilla-Martinez L, Raffeld M. Constitutive
activation of Akt contributes to the pathogenesis
and survival of mantle cell lymphoma. Blood. 2006;
108:1668-1676.

18.	 Coiffier B, Ribrag V. Exploring mammalian target of
rapamycin (mTOR) inhibition for treatment of mantle cell
lymphoma and other hematologic malignancies. Leukemia
& lymphoma. 2009; 50:1916-1930.

7.	 Dal Col J, Zancai P, Terrin L, Guidoboni M, Ponzoni
M, Pavan A, Spina M, Bergamin S, Rizzo S, Tirelli U,
De Rossi A, Doglioni C, Dolcetti R. Distinct functional
significance of Akt and mTOR constitutive activation in
mantle cell lymphoma. Blood. 2008; 111:5142-5151.

19.	 Hess G, Coiffier B, Crump M, Gisselbrecht C, Offner F,
Romaguera J, Kang L, Moran PJ. Effect of prognostic
classification on temsirolimus efficacy and safety in
patients with relapsed or refractory mantle cell lymphoma:
a retrospective analysis. Experimental hematology &
oncology. 2015; 4:11.

8.	 Jares P, Colomer D, Campo E. Molecular pathogenesis of
mantle cell lymphoma. The Journal of clinical investigation.
2012; 122:3416-3423.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

41926

Oncotarget

20.	 Rosich L, Xargay-Torrent S, Lopez-Guerra M, Campo E,
Colomer D, Roue G. Counteracting autophagy overcomes
resistance to everolimus in mantle cell lymphoma. Clinical
cancer research. 2012; 18:5278-5289.

33.	 Klionsky DJ, Abdelmohsen K, Abe A, Abedin MJ,
Abeliovich H, Acevedo Arozena A, Adachi H, Adams CM,
Adams PD, Adeli K, Adhihetty PJ, Adler SG, Agam G,
Agarwal R, Aghi MK, Agnello M, et al. Guidelines for the
use and interpretation of assays for monitoring autophagy
(3rd edition). Autophagy. 2016; 12:1-222.

21.	 Niewerth D, Jansen G, Assaraf YG, Zweegman S, Kaspers
GJ and Cloos J. Molecular basis of resistance to proteasome
inhibitors in hematological malignancies. Drug resistance
updates: reviews and commentaries in antimicrobial and
anticancer chemotherapy. 2015; 18:18-35.

34.	 Sistigu A, Yamazaki T, Vacchelli E, Chaba K, Enot DP,
Adam J, Vitale I, Goubar A, Baracco EE, Remedios C,
Fend L, Hannani D, Aymeric L, Ma Y, Niso-Santano M,
Kepp O, et al. Cancer cell-autonomous contribution of
type I interferon signaling to the efficacy of chemotherapy.
Nature medicine. 2014; 20:1301-1309.

22.	 El-Khattouti A, Selimovic D, Haikel Y, Hassan M.
Crosstalk between apoptosis and autophagy: molecular
mechanisms and therapeutic strategies in cancer. Journal of
cell death. 2013; 6:37-55.

35.	 Zeng X, Zhao H, Li Y, Fan J, Sun Y, Wang S, Wang Z,
Song P, Ju D. Targeting Hedgehog signaling pathway
and autophagy overcomes drug resistance of BCR-ABLpositive chronic myeloid leukemia. Autophagy. 2015;
11:355-372.

23.	 Marino G, Niso-Santano M, Baehrecke EH and Kroemer G.
Self-consumption: the interplay of autophagy and apoptosis.
Nature reviews Molecular cell biology. 2014; 15:81-94.
24.	 Dal Col J, Mastorci K, Fae DA, Muraro E, Martorelli D,
Inghirami G, Dolcetti R. Retinoic acid/alpha-interferon
combination inhibits growth and promotes apoptosis in
mantle cell lymphoma through Akt-dependent modulation
of critical targets. Cancer research. 2012; 72:1825-1835.

36.	 Sun WL, Lan D, Gan TQ and Cai ZW. Autophagy
facilitates multidrug resistance development through
inhibition of apoptosis in breast cancer cells. Neoplasma.
2015; 62:199-208.
37.	 Martin S, Dudek-Peric AM, Maes H, Garg AD, Gabrysiak
M, Demirsoy S, Swinnen JV and Agostinis P. Concurrent
MEK and autophagy inhibition is required to restore
cell death associated danger-signalling in Vemurafenibresistant melanoma cells. Biochemical pharmacology. 2015;
93:290-304.

25.	 Rajawat Y, Hilioti Z, Bossis I. Autophagy: a target for
retinoic acids. Autophagy. 2010; 6:1224-1226.
26.	 Schmeisser H, Bekisz J, Zoon KC. New function of type
I IFN: induction of autophagy. Journal of interferon &
cytokine research. 2014; 34:71-78.
27.	 Zhou Q, Zhao J, Al-Zoghaibi F, Zhou A, Wiedmer T,
Silverman RH and Sims PJ. Transcriptional control of the
human plasma membrane phospholipid scramblase 1 gene is
mediated by interferon-alpha. Blood. 2000; 95:2593-2599.

38.	 Alinari L, Baiocchi RA and Praetorius-Ibba M. FTY720induced blockage of autophagy enhances anticancer efficacy
of milatuzumab in mantle cell lymphoma: is FTY720 the
next autophagy-blocking agent in lymphoma treatment?
Autophagy. 2012; 8:416-417.

28.	 Zhao KW, Li X, Zhao Q, Huang Y, Li D, Peng ZG, Shen
WZ, Zhao J, Zhou Q, Chen Z, Sims PJ, Wiedmer T, Chen
GQ. Protein kinase Cdelta mediates retinoic acid and
phorbol myristate acetate-induced phospholipid scramblase
1 gene expression: its role in leukemic cell differentiation.
Blood. 2004; 104:3731-3738.

39.	 Xiao Y, Guan J. 17-AAG enhances the cytotoxicity of
flavopiridol in mantle cell lymphoma via autophagy
suppression. Neoplasma. 2015; 62:391-397.
40.	 Kuo YB, Chan CC, Chang CA, Fan CW, Hung RP,
Hung YS, Chen KT, Yu JS, Chang YS and Chan EC.
Identification of phospholipid scramblase 1 as a biomarker
and determination of its prognostic value for colorectal
cancer. Mol Med. 2011; 17:41-47.

29.	 Sahu SK, Gummadi SN, Manoj N, Aradhyam GK.
Phospholipid scramblases: an overview. Archives of
biochemistry and biophysics. 2007; 462:103-114.
30.	 Huett A, Ng A, Cao Z, Kuballa P, Komatsu M, Daly MJ,
Podolsky DK and Xavier RJ. A novel hybrid yeast-human
network analysis reveals an essential role for FNBP1L in
antibacterial autophagy. J Immunol. 2009; 182:4917-4930.

41.	 Cui W, Li SY, Du JF, Zhu ZM and An P. Silencing
phospholipid scramblase 1 expression by RNA interference
in colorectal cancer and metastatic liver cancer.
Hepatobiliary & pancreatic diseases international. 2012;
11:393-400.

31.	 Cheng Y, Ren X, Zhang Y, Patel R, Sharma A, Wu H,
Robertson GP, Yan L, Rubin E, Yang JM. eEF-2 kinase
dictates cross-talk between autophagy and apoptosis
induced by Akt Inhibition, thereby modulating cytotoxicity
of novel Akt inhibitor MK-2206. Cancer research. 2011;
71:2654-2663.

42.	 Chen CY, Chen JS, Chou YP, Kuo YB, Fan CW and Chan
EC. Antibody against N-terminal domain of phospholipid
scramblase 1 induces apoptosis in colorectal cancer cells
through the intrinsic apoptotic pathway. Chemical biology
& drug design. 2014; 84:36-43.

32.	 Booth LA, Tavallai S, Hamed HA, Cruickshanks N, Dent
P. The role of cell signalling in the crosstalk between
autophagy and apoptosis. Cellular signalling. 2014;
26:549-555.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

43.	 Giatromanolaki A, Koukourakis MI, Harris AL,
Polychronidis A, Gatter KC and Sivridis E. Prognostic
relevance of light chain 3 (LC3A) autophagy patterns in

41927

Oncotarget

colorectal adenocarcinomas. Journal of clinical pathology.
2010; 63:867-872.

47.	 Kao C, Chao A, Tsai CL, Chuang WC, Huang WP, Chen
GC, Lin CY, Wang TH, Wang HS and Lai CH. Bortezomib
enhances cancer cell death by blocking the autophagic flux
through stimulating ERK phosphorylation. Cell death &
disease. 2014; 5:e1510.

44.	 Lai K, Killingsworth MC and Lee CS. The significance
of autophagy in colorectal cancer pathogenesis and
implications for therapy. Journal of clinical pathology.
2014; 67:854-858.

48.	 Jaffe ES. The 2008 WHO classification of lymphomas:
implications for clinical practice and translational research.
Hematology/ American Society of Hematology Education
Program. 2009:523-531.

45.	 Yang Z, Ghoorun RA, Fan X, Wu P, Bai Y, Li J, Chen
H, Wang L, Wang J. High expression of Beclin-1 predicts
favorable prognosis for patients with colorectal cancer.
Clinics and research in hepatology and gastroenterology.
2015; 39:98-106.

49.	 Guidoboni M, Zancai P, Cariati R, Rizzo S, Dal Col J,
Pavan A, Gloghini A, Spina M, Cuneo A, Pomponi F,
Bononi A, Doglioni C, Maestro R, Carbone A, Boiocchi M,
Dolcetti R. Retinoic acid inhibits the proliferative response
induced by CD40 activation and interleukin-4 in mantle cell
lymphoma. Cancer research. 2005; 65:587-595.

46.	 Kodigepalli KM, Anur P, Spellman P, Sims PJ and
Nanjundan M. Phospholipid Scramblase 1, an interferonregulated gene located at 3q23, is regulated by SnoN/SkiL
in ovarian cancer cells. Molecular cancer. 2013; 12:32.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

41928

Oncotarget

