Oncotarget, Vol. 7, No. 5

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Antitumoral effect of Ocoxin on acute myeloid leukemia
Elena Díaz-Rodríguez1, Susana Hernández-García1, Eduardo Sanz2, Atanasio
Pandiella1
1

Instituto de Biología Molecular y Celular del Cáncer CSIC-Universidad de Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain

2

Catalysis, S.L., Madrid, Spain

Correspondence to: Atanasio Pandiella, e-mail: atanasio@usal.es
Keywords: acute myeloid leukemia, antioxidants, cell cycle, p27
Received: November 19, 2015     Accepted: December 22, 2015     Published: January 09, 2016

ABSTRACT
Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is a heterogeneous hematological malignancy
whose incidence is growing in developed countries. In the relapse setting, very
limited therapeutic options are available and in most cases only palliative care can
be offered to patients. The effect of a composite formulation that contains several
antioxidants, Ocoxin Oral solution (OOS), was tested in this condition. When analyzed
in vitro, OOS exhibited anti-AML action that was both time and dose dependent. In
vivo OOS induced a ralentization of tumor growth that was due to a decrease in cell
proliferation. Such effect could, at least partially, be due to an increase in the cell
cycle inhibitor p27, although other cell cycle proteins seemed to be altered. Besides,
OOS induced an immunomodulatory effect through the induction of IL6. When tested
in combination with other therapeutic agents normally used in the treatment of AML
patients, OOS demonstrated a higher antiproliferative action, suggesting that it may
be used in combination with those standard of care treatments to potentiate their
antiproliferative action in the AML clinic.

use in the oncology clinic, commercial formulations which
include some of these molecules offer the possibility to
incorporate them easily and safely to the treatments
commonly used to treat certain neoplasias [9]. Such is the
case of Ocoxin Oral Solution (OOS), an oral nutritional
supplement that includes recognized anti-cancer
compounds. OOS contains green tea polyphenols such
as epigallocatechin 3-gallate, vitamin B6 and vitamin C,
three products whose anticancer action has been proven in
several studies [8, 10]. OOS also contains cinnamic acid,
a compound which may inhibit tumor growth [11], as well
as glycyrrhizinic acid, whose action as anti-inflammatory
and immunomodulator has been reported [12].
OOS is being currently investigated in clinical
trials as part of the treatment for several types of cancer,
mainly associated with chemotherapy and radiotherapy. In
these studies, an improvement in the quality of life of the
patients has been reported [13]. Although the mechanism
of action of OOS is largely unknown, a recent report has
demonstrated the antitumoral action of OOS in preclinical
models of HER2+ breast cancer [14]. In these models,
OOS provoked cell cycle blockage by the upregulation
of p27 and downregulation of cyclin D1 as well as an

INTRODUCTION
Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is a complex and
heterogeneous hematological malignancy in which a
multipotent hematopoietic stem cell or progenitor cell will
be transformed to a leukemia stem cell as a result of the
accumulation of genomic alterations [1]. AML is a disease
predominantly of adults with a median age at diagnosis
of 69 years [2, 3]. Probably due to the general population
aging or to the fact that AML can also appear as a second
cancer in patients previously treated with chemo or
radiotherapy [4, 5], its incidence is rising in developed
countries. Despite recent advances in its diagnosis and
treatment, up to 75% of the patients will die of this disease
[6]. On the other hand, for patients with relapsed AML,
treatment options are very limited and in most of the cases
only palliative care can be offered.
In the past few years, multiple studies have
demonstrated that the co-administration of combination of
various antioxidants with conventional chemotherapy or
radiotherapy results in significant antitumor synergism and
an inhibition of the toxicity of conventional therapy [7,
8]. Thus, while the pure compounds are not available for
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

6231

Oncotarget

increase in apoptotic cell death. Moreover this formulation
potentiated the action of lapatinib, a HER2 inhibitor used
in breast cancer clinic [14].
Based on these previous results, the effects of OOS
on preclinical models of AML were explored. Its potential
antiproliferative action on several AML cell lines was
initially tested in vitro. Later on, OOS effects in vivo were
determined on a xenograft model in which the AML cell
line HEL was used to generate the tumors. In that context,
OOS reduced tumor growth in vivo. Moreover in this
system cell cycle blockage was also linked to an increase
in p27. Finally, combination studies aimed at evaluating if
OOS could augment the efficacy of standard of care drugs
used in AML clinic showed that this compound potentiates
the antitumoral action of those drugs, giving the rationale
to explore its clinical value on AML patients.

determine the effect of OOS treatment once the tumors
have already been established. CB17-SCID athymic mice
were orthotopically injected with the AML cell line HEL
and when tumors were palpable, animals were randomized
to 4 different groups to orally receive water or increasing
amounts of OOS: 100, 200 or 300 μl OOS per 20 g of
animal weight. Initially, tumors included in the four groups
had a similar volume (53±4.9; 56±5.4; 53±4.9 and 52±3.1
mm3, mean ± SEM, respectively). After 17 days of daily
oral treatment with OOS (Monday to Friday), a decrease
in the growth of the tumors was observed (figure 3A and
data not shown). Thus the mean tumor volume of control
mice was 484±75.8 mm3, as compared with 222±37.3,
207±66.5 or 232±61.9 mm3 corresponding to 100, 200
or 300 μl OOS, respectively. The mean body weight of
control or treated mice did not decrease throughout the
duration of the experiment (figure 3B and data not shown),
indicative of no significant toxicity of OOS in the different
experimental conditions. Thus, at the day of sacrifice,
mean body weight in control mice was 21.3±1 grams
compared to 18.9±0.6, 19.5±0.5 and 19.5±0.3 grams in
the different OOS treated groups.

RESULTS
Effect of OOS on the proliferation of AML
cell lines
The in vitro action of OOS was initially evaluated
on several AML cell lines. With this purpose, the AML cell
lines HEL, HL60 and KG1 were grown in the presence of
increasing doses of OOS diluted into the culture medium
and their proliferation was evaluated in MTT assays
at different days of treatment. OOS decreased MTT
metabolization in the three cell lines tested (Figure 1).
Moreover, this effect was more evident at longer
incubation times (Figure 1D). The IC50 values ranged from
1/10-1/15 at 24 hours to up to 1/137 at 96 hours for the
HEL cell line. Comparing the three cell lines tested, HEL
cells were the most sensitive to the action of OOS at the
different times and concentrations tested.

Effect of OOS on circulating cytokines
As mentioned above, some components of OOS
such as glycyrrhizinic acid exert immunomodulatory
actions [12]. Because of this and the relevant role of the
immune system in the control of tumor progression, we
explored whether this formulation could affect immune
system properties through the measurement of cytokine
levels in mice circulating blood. Thus, the levels of IL-6,
IL-10, IFNγ, MCP-1, TNFα and IL12p70 were measured
in the sera collected from the animals at the time of
sacrifice. An increase in the level of IL6 was observed as
the amount of OOS used in the treatment rose. In fact,
significant differences for this cytokine were observed
between the control group and those treated with 200 or
300 μl OOS (p=0,023 or p=0,027 respectively)(Figure 4).
The same tendency was observed for the 100 μl group but
in this case differences were not statistically significant
(p=0.079), probably due to the small number of animals.
No major changes were observed in the amount of the
other cytokines tested (Figure 4). Moreover, there was no
correlation between those levels and the amount of OOS
used for the treatment

Effect of OOS in combination with anti-AML
treatments
In most of the cases, the success of antitumor
therapies is based on the combination of different agents
[15]. For this reason we wondered if the combination
of OOS with drugs commonly used in the AML clinic
could improve their antitumor effect. Thus, OOS was
administered in vitro to HEL cells alone (dilution
factor 1/50), or in combination with Ara C (250 nM),
Doxorubicin (DXR, 100 nM) or Fludarabine (Fluda, 250
nM). In all the three cases the combination was more
effective inhibiting the cell growth than the independent
treatment with any of the agents (Figure 2).

Effect of OOS cell proliferation and apoptosis
in vivo
Because OOS caused a decrease in tumor growth
when compared to untreated controls, we questioned if
that effect was caused by an increased cell death, a lower
rate of proliferation or vascularization or a combination
of any of the above. When sections of the tumors were
stained to identify apoptotic cells, using the conventional

In vivo efficacy of OOS in AML murine models
Given the action of OOS in vitro, we explored
whether this in vitro effect could translate in vivo. With
that purpose we used a xenograft murine model to
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

6232

Oncotarget

TUNEL staining technique, no differences in the number
of apoptotic cells were observed between the different
groups (Figure 5A).
On the other hand, when tumors develop, a blood
supply is necessary for them to grow beyond a few
millimeters in size [3, 16]. For this reason, the presence of
blood vessels in the tumor can be considered an indicator
of tumor activity and progression, and such presence can
be assessed by staining endothelial cells with the specific
marker CD31 [17, 18]. Even though OOS treated tumors
grew slower, no differences in the number of cells stained

for this marker were observed among the different groups
(Figure 5B).
Finally, the expression of human Ki-67, a protein
associated with cell proliferation, was evaluated. To verify
if OOS treatment induced changes in the proliferation
of the tumors, staining for this marker was carried out.
Treatment with OOS induced an evident decrease in the
percentage of Ki-67 positive cells (Figure 5C). Moreover,
such a decrease was statistically significant when
compared with control untreated tumors (Figure 5C).

Figure 1. Efficacy of OOS on AML cell lines in vitro. Dose-dependent effect of OOS on the proliferation of HEL, KG1 or HL60

AML cells was assessed in vitro. Cells were incubated with OOS at the indicated dilution factors and MTT metabolization was measured
at 24 (A), 48 (B), 72 (C) or 96 (D) hours. Mean absorbance values of untreated samples were taken as 100% and then mean values referred
to that. Data are represented as mean ± SD of quadruplicates of an experiment that was repeated at least twice.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

6233

Oncotarget

To further investigate the mechanism by which
these tumors exhibited a decrease in proliferation, the
amount and status of several proteins involved in cell cycle
progression was evaluated by Western Blot analysis. This
panel of proteins included markers of the different phases
of the cell cycle, such as Wee1, BUBR1, pHistoneH3, pRB
or p21 and p27, or different cyclins and CDKs, (Figure
6A). Representative tumors were chosen and lysed to
prepare protein extracts as described in the materials
and methods section. Proteins were separated in SDSPAGE gels and the membranes probed with the indicated
antibodies. For most of the proteins analyzed, no mayor
differences in the control versus treated tumors were

observed. Interestingly the levels of the cell cycle inhibitor
p27 were upregulated in tumors from animals that had been
treated with OOS (Figure 6A and B). p27 is an inhibitor
of the Cyclin E/Cdk2 and Cyclin D/Cdk4 complexes, and
its higher levels would slow down cell cycle progression,
mainly blocking the cell cycle progression through the G1
phase. To analyze this hypothesis, HEL cells were in vitro
treated with OOS, and the cell cycle profile was analyzed.
In those conditions, an accumulation in the G1-phase
population and a correlative G2-M decrease was detected
(Figure 6C). Moreover, when p27 levels were analyzed in
vitro in those conditions, a clear increase in this protein
was observed in OOS treated cells (Figure 6D).

Figure 2. OOS is more effective in combination with standard of care treatments. The effect of OOS alone (1:50) or in

combination with Ara C (250 nM, A), Doxorubicin (DXR, 100 nM, B) or Fludarabine (Fluda, 250 nM, C) were determined in MTT
assays. The mean absorbance values of untreated samples from each were considered as 100%. Data are represented as mean ± SD of
quadruplicates of an experiment that was repeated at least twice.

Figure 3. Efficacy of OOS on AML models in vivo. (A) OOS interferes with tumor growth. Female CB17-SCID athymic mice were

injected with HEL cells. When tumors became palpable and were growing, they were randomized to different groups that were orally
treated 5 days per week (Monday to Friday) with 100μl OOS/animal (■) or vehicle alone (water,♦), and tumor volumes were measured
twice a week. Data are represented as mean tumor volume ± SEM of the animals on each group. (B) Effect of OOS on animal weight.
Statistical significant differences are shown (*p<0.05).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

6234

Oncotarget

Transcriptional effect of OOS in vivo

more expressed in the control condition. On the other
hand the T cell receptor TARP was the most upregulated
gene (4.77 times) after OOS treatment. Besides within
the deregulated genes there are other genes related to
membrane receptors or ionic channels, such as SNC9A or
TSPAN33. Pathway analyses defined routes particularly
affected by the treatment with OOS. A complete listing of
the results of pathway analyses is shown in Supplementary
figure 1. Among the routes affected were genes involved
in cell cycle regulation, as CDK15 or RGCC, or other
genes involved in EGFR, IGF or TGF beta signaling or
the leukemia inhibitory factor (LIF).

In order to better understand the mechanisms by
which OOS executes its action, we investigated the
changes in gene expression profiles derived from the in
vivo treatment with OOS. Thus, gene expression analyses
were performed in triplicates of the tumors from control
untreated animals and compared with those from animals
treated with OOS that had exhibited a slower tumor
growth. Unsupervised clustering of the gene expression
data associated samples into two groups, control and
OOS-treated, indicating that treatment with OOS was able
to sufficiently change the transcriptome to make treated
samples to diverge from the untreated control tumors
(Figure 7A). Quantitative comparison of both conditions
defined 150 (fold change of 1.5, Supplementary Table 1)
deregulated genes. Of them, 33 genes were deregulated
more than two-fold (Figure 7B). Within those genes the
most downregulated gene after OOS treatment was the G
protein coupled receptor 34 (GPR34) that was 2.96 times

DISCUSSION
In this study we have evaluated the antitumoral
effect of OOS in AML, using both in vitro and in
vivo models. OOS induced a clear decrease in MTT
metabolization, indicative of antitumoral effect, in the
different AML derived cell lines tested, and such reduction

Figure 4. Action of OOS on immune system cytokines. At the time of sacrifice, blood from the animals under the different

treatments was collected by intracardiac injection, and sera clarified and frozen. The amount of the indicated cytokines was determined
by flow cytometry using a BD Cytometric Bead Array as described in the materials and methods section. The amount for each molecule
and experimental condition are shown in the corresponding boxplots, as indicated. Statistical significant differences are shown (*p<0.05).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

6235

Oncotarget

Figure 5. OOS induces a decrease in tumor proliferation. (A) OOS does not induce apoptotic cell death on AML tumors. For each
experimental condition, two tumors were randomly processed for IHQ analysis and apoptotic cells were detected by tunnel staining. The
number of apoptotic cells/field was quantified for each condition and its mean number ± SD is shown in the graph. Pictures of representative
fields stained for this marker are shown on the right. (B) Similarly the number or endothelial cells was measured by CD31 staining. (C)
Besides, to establish the proliferative status of the tumors, Ki67 marker was used. Pictures of representative fields stained for Ki-67 are
shown on the right upper row and lower pictures show part of them (inset) at higher magnification. Statistical significant differences are
shown (*p<0.05).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

6236

Oncotarget

was both time and dose dependent. Moreover, OOS
reduced tumor progression in vivo in mice implanted with
the cell line HEL, which was the most sensitive cell line to
OOS in vitro, and was used to generate xenograft models.
OOS treatment slowed down tumor growth without
apparent toxicity, since the weights of the control and
treated mice were analogous, and no detectable changes
in their behavior were observed. Thus, OOS demonstrated
a clear effect on AML tumor progression.
Since OOS is a nutritional supplement that includes
recognized anti-oxidants in its formulation, chances are
that these agents would also have a preventive action in
vivo. In fact this action has been recently described for
other models such as breast cancer models in which OOS
has antitumor effects both preventive, and once the tumors
have been established [14]. If OOS could also have such
a preventive action on AML models should be similarly
tested.
To gain insights into the mechanisms leading to
the reduction of tumor burden in vivo, several studies
were carried out. To evaluate if it was due to a reduction

in cell duplication, an increase in cell death or both,
sections of the tumors were stained with appropriate
markers. There was no effect of OOS on cell death
since no differences on the number of cells stained by
TUNEL were observed when compared to tumors from
untreated animals. Similarly, no differences on the
vascularization marker CD31 were found. It was only
when the proliferation marker Ki67 was used to stain
the sections when significant differences were found.
Tumors from animals treated with OOS exhibited a lower
percentage of cells stained with this marker, pointing to a
decrease in cell proliferation in those conditions. To better
characterize this effect, the amount and status of different
cell cycle markers were determined by WB. There were
no differences in the CDKs or cyclins tested. The main
differences were observed in the levels of p27Kip1. This
is an inhibitor of cell cycle progression encoded by the
CDKN1B gene and whose presence prevents the activation
of the cyclin E-CDK2 and cyclin D-CDK4 complexes, and
thus blocks the cell cycle at the G1 phase [19]. In fact p27
has been described to play a role in carcinogenesis, and

Figure 6. OOS causes accumulation of p27 and G1 arrest. (A) Quantitation of the in vivo levels of cell cycle related proteins. The

amount of the indicated proteins in the tumors was assessed by conventional WB. (B) The amount of p27 was quantified using the NIH
image software, and the mean ± SD of such amount is represented in the graph. (C) Cell cycle analysis of HEL cells treated for 24 hours
with OOS (1/50 dilution). The percentage of cells in the different phases of the cell cycle is shown. (D) Action of OOS (1/50) on p27 levels.
HEL cells were treated for 24 hours with OOS and cell extracts prepared to analyze p27 by WB. GAPDH was used as a loading control.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

6237

Oncotarget

Figure 7. In vivo effect of OOS on gene expression profiles. (A) Hierarchical clustering of the 6 tumors and the 37 genes deregulated
after OOS treatment. Each row represents a gene and each column represents a tumor (1- control, 2- OOS treated). The expression level
of each gene in each tumor is relative to its medium abundance across all the tumors and is depicted according to the color scale shown.
Red and green indicate high or low expression levels, respectively. (B) The gene expression profile of three control tumors was compared
to that of three tumors treated with 100 μl of OOS. A list with those genes whose expression changed above 2 times with the treatment is
shown in the figure.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

6238

Oncotarget

could probably be used as a prognostic factor in different
tumors, as well as an indicator of response to therapies
[20]. Besides these data corroborate those found for the
mechanism of action of OOS on breast cancer models.
In that model OOS induces both cell death and cell cycle
arrest in G1, this latter due to an increase in p27 levels,
concomitant with a decrease in cyclin D1 [14].
So far, the general mechanism of OOS action is
not clear, although it points to inhibitory effects on cell
cycle progression. The analysis of the genes whose
expression changed after OOS treatment identified some
involved in cell cycle regulation and progression such
as CDK15 or RGCC. The function of these proteins as
cell cycle regulators is not fully known and its potential
role in AML should be carefully analyzed in this context.
Interestingly, OOS caused a decrease in the amount of LIF.
This polypeptide acts by binding to the LIF receptors and
gp130, and such binding triggers the activation of several
signaling pathways, including the JAK/STAT, MAPK,
and PI3K routes. In different cell types, LIF may exert
opposite effects including stimulation or inhibition of cell
proliferation [21].
One of the characteristics of AML is the replacement
of normal blood cells with leukemic cells, which makes
the patients more susceptible to infections [22, 23]. In our
study OOS seems to stimulate the immune system through
the production of IL6. Thus, if OOS not only blocks the
proliferation of AML cells, but also stimulates the immune
system, patients could benefit from this double advantage.
Most antitumor therapies rely on the combination of
agents to increase the antitumor action of the individual
agents [15]. In this respect, when OOS was used in
combination with AML standard of care treatments, a
potentiation of their antiproliferative effect was found.
This observation would establish the rationale to test the
therapeutic potential of OOS in AML patients alone or
in combination with other antitumoral agents. Especial
attention should be paid to patients with relapsed AML,
since in them the therapeutic options are very limited
and in most of the cases, only palliative care can be
offered [24]. In this group of patients OOS addition to
gold standard therapies could augment their antitumoral
properties and be, therefore, an interesting therapeutic
option.

purchased to BD biosciences. Other generic chemicals
were purchased from Sigma Chemical Co., Roche
Biochemicals or Merck.
The origin of the different antibodies used in the
Western blotting analyses were as follows: the antiGAPDH, anti-p21, anti-Wee1, anti-CDC2/CDK1, antipCDC2, anti-Cyclin B and anti-Cyclin D1 antibodies
were purchased from Santa Cruz Biotechnology; the antiBUBR1, anti-Rb, anti-Cyclin A, anti-Cyclin D3 and antiCyclin E from BD Biosciences; the anti-p27 and the antipRbS780 from Cell Signaling technology; the anti-Calnexin
from Stressgen and the anti-pHistone H3 from Millipore.
The horseradish peroxidase-conjugated secondary
antibodies were from Bio-Rad.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

For animal studies, twenty-four 7-week-old
female athymic mice (CB17-SCID) were purchased
from Charles River Laboratories (Wilmington, MA),
and kept in pathogen free housing at our Institutional
Animal Care Facility. One week later, 3x106 HEL cells
resuspended in 50 μl of RPMI-1640 and 50 μl of Matrigel
were subcutaneously injected into the right caudal flank
of each animal. When tumors became palpable, mice
were randomized into four groups (n = 6 per group), that
were administered the different treatments: control group
(receiving the vehicle alone) or various concentrations of

Cell culture, cell cycle and cell proliferation
measurement
AML cell lines were grown in RPMI 1640 medium
supplemented with 10% FBS and antibiotics. All the cell
lines were cultured at 37°C in a humidified atmosphere
in the presence of 5% CO2-95% air. The cell lines were
obtained from the American Type Culture Collection, Cell
Biology Collection (Manassas, VA), or have already been
described [25].
For cell cycle analysis by flow cytometry, ethanol
fixed cells were stained with 5 μg/ml propidium iodide
(PI) and 250 μg DNAse-free RNAse. A total of 50,000
cells were acquired in the propidium iodide gate by using
a BD AccuriTM C6 flow cytometer and the C6 software
(BD Biosciences).
Cell proliferation of AML cells was examined
using a modified MTT metabolization assay [26]. Briefly,
cells were plated in triplicates and, on the day of the
experiment, MTT was added to the wells at 0.5 mg/ml
and incubated at 37°C for 4 hours. The MTT-formazan
crystals were dissolved in isopropanol-HCl and the
absorbance of the samples was recorded at 570 nm using
a Tecan spectrophotometer with the X-Fluor 4 software.
At least three wells were analyzed for each condition,
and the results are presented as the mean +/- SD of a
representative experiment repeated at least twice.

In vivo experiments

Reagents and antibodies
Cell culture media, 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide (MTT), hematoxylin
and eosin were purchased from Sigma. Foetal bovine
serum (FBS) and antibiotics were from Life Technologies
and Immobilon P (PVDF) membranes from Millipore.
OOS was provided by Catalysis, S.L. (Madrid, Spain).
The Cytometric Bead Array Mouse Inflammation kit was
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

6239

Oncotarget

OOS, including 100 μl, 200 μl, or 300 μl per mouse (20
g). Treatments were administered for 17 days with a daily
schedule (Monday to Friday) by oral gabage. Mice were
weighted and tumors measured twice a week with a digital
caliper (Proinsa, Vitoria, Spain). Tumor volumes were
calculated using the following formula: V = (L/2) x (W/2)2
x 4/3 x π, where V = volume (cubic mm), L = length (mm)
and W = width (mm). At the time of sacrifice, tumor tissue
was resected and immediately frozen at –80°C. Besides,
blood was extracted by intracardiac injection, and the sera
collected and frozen at -80°C for further analyses.

that was performed as previously described [27]. Thus, 2
cell conditioning periods of 8 min at 95°C and 4 min at
100°C on hot plate using TRIS-EDTA (pH=8) buffer were
performed on previously dewaxed formalin-fixed paraffinembedded sections. Sections were then incubated with the
anti-Ki67 or anti-CD31 antibodies, and the staining was
performed with the IHC 3,3´-diaminobenzidine MAPO
system (Ventana Medical Systems). For the TUNEL
staining the In Situ Cell Death Detection Kit (Roche
Mannheim, Germany) was used, and counterstained with
4´,6-diamino-2-phenylindole. Results were evaluated
blinded to clinicopathologic and molecular data. The
number and intensity of immunoreactive cells were
evaluated in at least ten randomly selected fields. These
procedures were done by independent personnel of the
pathology unit of our center. Conflict measurements were
solved by consensus.

Protein extraction and Western blotting (WB)
Frozen mice tumor samples were minced, washed
with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS), and homogenized
in ice-cold lysis buffer [26], that had been supplemented
with 10X protease inhibitors using a tight-fitting Dounce
homogenizer. This homogenate was centrifuged at 4°C,
and the supernatants were transferred to new tubes for
protein concentration measurement by Bradford assay.
Boiled samples were separated on 6%–15% SDS-PAGE
gels, depending on the molecular weight of the proteins
to be analyzed, and after electrophoresis, proteins in gels
were transferred to PVDF membranes and WB performed
as previously described [26]. Bands were visualized
by using ECL Western Blotting Detection System
(GE Healthcare, Buckinghamshire, United Kingdom).
Similarly, protein extracts from OOS-treated cells were
prepared and analyzed.

RNA isolation, cDNA synthesis and microarray
hybridization and analysis
After thawing, tumors were excised and lysed
in Trizol Reagent (Life Technologies), according to
the manufacturer´ instructions. Briefly, tumors were
homogenized (Dispomix, L&M Biotech, Holly Springs,
NC, USA) and incubated in the Trizol solution for 2
minutes at room temperature, before the addition of
chloroform. Tubes were vigorously shaken and the
different phases separated by centrifugation. The upper,
aqueous phase was recovered and the RNA present
precipitated with isopropyl alcohol. Once washed in
70% ethanol the resultant RNA was column-purified
(Qiagen, RNeasy mini kit) and its integrity was assessed
(Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer, Agilent). Biotinylated
complementary RNA was then synthesized (Enzo Life
Sciences) and hybridized to HG-U133 plus 2.0 GeneChip
oligonucleotide arrays (Affymetrix). Quantitation of
fluorescence intensities of probesets was done using the
GenArray Scanner (Hewlett Packard). Unprocessed files
were normalized using the RMA algorithm implemented
in the Affimetrix Expression Console. Differentially
expressed genes were identified using significant analysis
of microarrays, selecting all genes with a value of Q≤0.05.
Microarray data are now available through the GEO
repository database (reference GSE75174).

Analysis of circulating cytokines
To determine the amount of different cytokines
present in mice serum samples, the BDTM CBA Mouse
Inflammation kit was used, following the providers´
instructions. Briefly, sera to be tested were thawn on
ice while in parallel the capture beads specific for the
cytokines were properly mixed and 50 μl added to the
assay tubes. On top of them, either 50 μl of the unknown
samples, or the mouse inflammation standards previously
prepared by serial dilution were added and incubated
in the dark for 2 hours at room temperature. One ml
wash buffer was added and the beads spun down. After
aspirating the supernatant, pellets were resuspended in 300
μl wash buffer and samples analyzed in a BD AccuriTM C6
cytometer. Data were further analyzed using the BD FCAP
ArrayTM software version 3.0.

Statistical analysis
Each condition was analyzed in triplicate or
quadruplicate and data are presented as the mean ± SD of
at least three independent experiments. Comparisons of
continuous variables between two groups were performed
using two-sided Student´s t test. Differences were
considered to be statistically significant when P values
were less than 0.05.

Histological and immunohistochemistry (IHC)
analyses
Representative tumor areas were fixed in formalin,
paraffin embedded, cut in 2- to 3-μm sections, and either
stained with hematoxylin and eosin or prepared for IHC,

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

6240

Oncotarget

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS AND
FINANCIAL SUPPORT

10.	 Hollman PC, Feskens EJ and Katan MB. Tea flavonols in
cardiovascular disease and cancer epidemiology. Proc Soc
Exp Biol Med. 1999; 220:198-202.

This work was partially supported by Catalysis S.L.
as well as the Ministry of Economy and Competitiveness
of Spain (BFU2012-39151). E.D.-R was supported by the
Spanish Association for Cancer Research (AECC). Our
cancer Research Institute and the work carried out at our
laboratory receive support from the European Community
through the regional development funding program
(FEDER) and from the Fundación Ramón Areces.

11.	 Liu L, Hudgins WR, Shack S, Yin MQ and Samid D.
Cinnamic acid: a natural product with potential use in cancer intervention. Int J Cancer. 1995; 62:345-350.
12.	 Gomez EV, Perez YM, Sanchez HV, Forment GR, Soler
EA, Bertot LC, Garcia AY, del Rosario Abreu Vazquez
M and Fabian LG. Antioxidant and immunomodulatory
effects of Viusid in patients with chronic hepatitis C. World
J Gastroenterol. 2010; 16:2638-2647.
13.	 Dayem Uddin MAI, I Mahmood, AK Ghosha, RA Khatuns.
Findings of the 3-Month supportive treatment with ocoxin
solution beside the standard modalities of patients with different neoplastic diseases. TAJ. 2009; 22:172-175.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
E.S. is an employee of Catalysis S.L. The research
costs of this work were partially supported by Catalysis S.L.

14.	 Hernandez-Garcia S, Gonzalez V, Sanz E and Pandiella A.
Effect of Oncoxin Oral Solution in HER2-Overexpressing
Breast Cancer. Nutr Cancer. 2015; 67:1159-1169.

REFERENCES

15.	 Ocana A and Pandiella A. Personalized therapies in the cancer "omics" era. Mol Cancer. 2010; 9:202.

1.	 Aleem E and Arceci RJ. Targeting cell cycle regulators in
hematologic malignancies. Front Cell Dev Biol. 2015; 3:16.

16.	 Carmeliet P and Jain RK. Angiogenesis in cancer and other
diseases. Nature. 2000; 407:249-257.

2.	 Appelbaum FR, Gundacker H, Head DR, Slovak ML,
Willman CL, Godwin JE, Anderson JE and Petersdorf
SH. Age and acute myeloid leukemia. Blood. 2006;
107:3481-3485.

17.	 Horak ER, Leek R, Klenk N, LeJeune S, Smith K, Stuart N,
Greenall M, Stepniewska K and Harris AL. Angiogenesis,
assessed by platelet/endothelial cell adhesion molecule
antibodies, as indicator of node metastases and survival in
breast cancer. Lancet. 1992; 340:1120-1124.

3.	 Juliusson G, Antunovic P, Derolf A, Lehmann S, Mollgard
L, Stockelberg D, Tidefelt U, Wahlin A and Hoglund
M. Age and acute myeloid leukemia: real world data on
decision to treat and outcomes from the Swedish Acute
Leukemia Registry. Blood. 2009; 113:4179-4187.

18.	 Weidner N. Current pathologic methods for measuring
intratumoral microvessel density within breast carcinoma
and other solid tumors. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 1995;
36:169-180.

4.	 Leone G, Mele L, Pulsoni A, Equitani F and Pagano L. The
incidence of secondary leukemias. Haematologica. 1999;
84:937-945.

19.	 Sherr CJ and Roberts JM. CDK inhibitors: positive and
negative regulators of G1-phase progression. Genes Dev.
1999; 13:1501-1512.

5.	 Renella R, Verkooijen HM, Fioretta G, Vlastos G, Kurtz J,
Sappino AP, Schafer P, Neyroud-Caspar I and Bouchardy
C. Increased risk of acute myeloid leukaemia after treatment
for breast cancer. Breast. 2006; 15:614-619.

20.	 Chu I, Blackwell K, Chen S and Slingerland J. The dual
ErbB1/ErbB2 inhibitor, lapatinib (GW572016), cooperates
with tamoxifen to inhibit both cell proliferation- and estrogen-dependent gene expression in antiestrogen-resistant
breast cancer. Cancer Res. 2005; 65:18-25.

6.	 Appelbaum FR, Rosenblum D, Arceci RJ, Carroll WL,
Breitfeld PP, Forman SJ, Larson RA, Lee SJ, Murphy SB,
O'Brien S, Radich J, Scher NS, Smith FO, et al. End points
to establish the efficacy of new agents in the treatment of
acute leukemia. Blood. 2007; 109:1810-1816.

21.	 Nicola NA and Babon JJ. Leukemia inhibitory factor (LIF).
Cytokine Growth Factor Rev. 2015; 26:533-544.
22.	 Giamarellou H and Antoniadou A. Infectious complications of febrile leukopenia. Infect Dis Clin North Am. 2001;
15:457-482.

7.	 Lamson DW and Brignall MS. Antioxidants in cancer therapy; their actions and interactions with oncologic therapies.
Altern Med Rev. 1999; 4:304-329.

23.	 Klastersky J, Paesmans M, Rubenstein EB, Boyer M, Elting
L, Feld R, Gallagher J, Herrstedt J, Rapoport B, Rolston K
and Talcott J. The Multinational Association for Supportive
Care in Cancer risk index: A multinational scoring system
for identifying low-risk febrile neutropenic cancer patients.
J Clin Oncol. 2000; 18:3038-3051.

8.	 Yang CS, Chung JY, Yang G, Chhabra SK and Lee MJ.
Tea and tea polyphenols in cancer prevention. J Nutr. 2000;
130(2S Suppl):472S-478S.
9.	 Milkovic L, Siems W, Siems R and Zarkovic N.
Oxidative stress and antioxidants in carcinogenesis and
integrative therapy of cancer. Curr Pharm Des. 2014;
20:6529-6542.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

24.	 Szer J. The prevalent predicament of relapsed acute myeloid
leukemia. Hematology Am Soc Hematol Educ Program.
2012; 2012:43-48.

6241

Oncotarget

25.	 Colado E, Alvarez-Fernandez S, Maiso P, Martin-Sanchez
J, Vidriales MB, Garayoa M, Ocio EM, Montero JC,
Pandiella A and San Miguel JF. The effect of the proteasome inhibitor bortezomib on acute myeloid leukemia cells
and drug resistance associated with the CD34+ immature
phenotype. Haematologica. 2008; 93:57-66.

and Pandiella A. Deficient spindle assembly checkpoint in
­multiple myeloma. PLoS One. 2011; 6:e27583.
27.	 de Alava E, Ocana A, Abad M, Montero JC, EsparisOgando A, Rodriguez CA, Otero AP, Hernandez T, Cruz JJ
and Pandiella A. Neuregulin expression modulates clinical
response to trastuzumab in patients with metastatic breast
cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2007; 25:2656-2663.

26.	 Diaz-Rodriguez E, Alvarez-Fernandez S, Chen X, Paiva
B, Lopez-Perez R, Garcia-Hernandez JL, San Miguel JF

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

6242

Oncotarget

