Commentary

Fungal Cytoskeleton Dysfunction or
Immune Activation Triggered
by b-Glucan Synthase Inhibitors
Potential Mechanisms for the Prolonged Antifungal Activity of Echinocandins
Amar Safdar, MD

Echinocandins continue to exert antifungal activity after their serum and tissue concentrations fall
below what are considered therapeutic levels; possible mechanisms for this prolonged antimicrobial effect
have been proposed. The echinocandin-mediated disruption of b-glucan synthesis in the fungal cell is
well-regulated by Rho1p, which binds guanosine triphosphate (GTP). Rho1p is also a key regulatory molecule in actin synthesis, actin morphogenesis, cell wall cytoskeletal reorganization, and vesicular intracellular transport. The effects of echinocandins on Rho1p-regulated pathways may result in subtle cytoskeletal
abnormalities that promote cell fatigue and/or delayed recovery, even when echinocandin levels are insufficient to effectively inhibit b-(1,3)-glucan synthase. In addition, caspofungin and possibly other echinocandins may lead to fungal cell wall rearrangement that exposes b-glucan on the cell surface. The highly
immunogenic b-glucan can then activate an innate immune response via pattern recognition receptors,
leading to fungal clearance even after the drug concentration has dropped below levels needed to inhibit bglucan synthase. Furthermore, drug-induced cell wall remodeling may make fungi more susceptible to
phagocytosis by mechanisms that to our knowledge are not yet well understood. The evaluation of these
and other potential pathways of echinocandin-induced fungal damage may provide insights needed to
optimize the treatment of patients with invasive fungal disease.
Echinocandins are naturally occurring lipopeptides that cause fungal cell death for the majority of
pathogenic Candida species. Conversely, filamentous fungi such as Aspergillus and non-Aspergillus molds
experience retardation in fungal growth and fungal tissue invasion after exposure to these agents. Three
semisynthetic echinocandins (caspofungin, micafungin, and anidulafungin) are currently available in the
US for use in treating systemic fungal infections. Although the efficacy of these antifungal agents is concentration-dependent, they have a prolonged antimicrobial effect that persists even after serum and tissue levels drop to what would typically be considered subtherapeutic levels. For example, in animal experiments,
a higher tissue concentration of caspofungin was associated with increased fungal killing and clearance,
Corresponding author: Amar Safdar, MD, Department of Infectious Diseases, Infection Control, and Employee Health, Unit 402, The University of
Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, 1515 Holcombe Boulevard, Houston, TX 77030; Fax: (713) 745-6839; asafdar@mdanderson.org
Department of Infectious Diseases, Infection Control, and Employee Health, The University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas
Received: October 24, 2008; Revised: November 24, 2008; Accepted: December 3, 2008
C 2009 American Cancer Society
Published online: April 6, 2009 V

DOI: 10.1002/cncr.24323, www.interscience.wiley.com

2812

Cancer

July 1, 2009

Commentary/Safdar

FIGURE 1. Echinocandins inhibit b-glucan synthase via binding to Fsk1p/Fsk2p, the catalytic cell membrane subunits of this
enzyme complex. Rho1p, a GTPase, is the essential regulatory cytoplasmic unit of the b-glucan synthase complex. Rho1p binds
guanosine triphosphate (GTP) and controls cytoskeletal stability in response to various exogenous and internal stressful stimuli
via downstream signaling molecules. Mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase modifies actin synthesis and the rearrangement of
newly formed and existing actin filaments and is controlled by Rho1p. b-glucan provides structural stability and crosslinks with
other cell wall components such as chitin and mannoproteins. Echinocandin-induced cell wall reorganization exposes the fungal
immune stimulatory carbohydrate (b-glucan) on the cell surface. Exposure of this pathogen-associated molecular pattern activates macrophages and neutrophils via pattern recognition receptors. Therefore, in addition to interfering with b-glucan synthesis, echinocandins also may assist the host’s immune system in fungal clearance. This may occur at drug concentrations below
the levels needed to inhibit b-glucan synthesis. Modified from Wheeler RT, Fink GR. A drug-sensitive genetic network masks fungi
from the immune system. PloS Pathog. 2006;2:e35; and Wagner C, Graninger W, Presterl E, Joukhadar C. The echinocandins:
comparison of their pharmacokinetics, pharmacodynamics and clinical applications. Pharmacology. 2006;78:161–177.

and the antifungal activity persisted despite a decline in
the serum concentration.1 In addition, animals given
micafungin in another study demonstrated persistent
antifungal activity even after both serum and tissue drug
concentrations had become negligible.2 In fact, persistence of the antimicrobial activity of echinocandins often
corresponds with a higher initial dose.1,2 However, to our
knowledge, the clinical significance of this phenomenon
remains uncertain, and the manner by which their activity persists is not known. In this article, potential mechanisms of the prolonged antifungal activity of
echinocandins are discussed.
Cancer

July 1, 2009

Antifungal Activity
The currently accepted mechanism of echinocandinmediated fungal killing is via inhibition of the b-(1,3)glucan synthase enzyme. The echinocandins inhibit the
synthesis of b-(1,3)-glucan, a component of the fungal
cell wall, by binding to the catalytic subunits of b-(1,3)glucan, Fsk1p and Fsk2p, which are present in the plasma
membrane (Fig. 1). Rho1p, which binds to GTP, is the
cytoplasmic component of the b-(1,3)-glucan synthase
enzyme complex,3 and is critical in regulating Fsk1p/
Fsk2p-mediated polymerization of uridine diphosphate
2813

Commentary

glucose into b-(1,3)-glucan.4,5 The echinocandininduced inhibition of b-(1,3)-glucan synthesis leads to
weakening of the cell wall, which compromises cellular osmotic stability. The resulting lack of selective permeability
to large exogenous molecules may cause serious cell injury
and death.
Proposed Mechanism(s) of the Prolonged
Antifungal Activity of Echinocandins
Modification of fungal cytoskeleton

One mechanism by which the antifungal activity of
echinocandins is prolonged may be disruption of the fungal cytoskeleton. Rho1p, a GTPase, plays an important
role in regulating actin synthesis and thus the stability of
the fungal cytoskeleton. Rho1p affects eukaryotic actin
via several downstream pathways (Fig. 1). Its activation of
mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPK) such as
Mpk1p and Pkc1p controls actin synthesis and cytoskeletal rearrangement or actin morphogenesis,6 although intracellular or environmental stress factors such as excessive
heat or a hyperosmolar environment may influence
MAPK signaling by pathways that are independent of the
classic Rho1p ‘‘cell integrity pathway.’’7 The echinocandins may indirectly modify the Rho1p downstream signal
transduction protein kinases involved in the maintenance
of the fungal cytoskeleton. This disruption of the Rho1pMAPK pathway may promote subtle abnormalities in the
fungal cytoskeleton that lead to cell fatigue and/or delayed
recovery from echinocandin-induced cell wall damage,
even when drug concentrations have fallen to sublethal
levels. Rho1p also regulates actin reorganization via the
Bni1p pathway, which is important during multiplication
of yeasts8; disruption of this pathway may disrupt yeast
growth and multiplication. Rho1p also has an impact on
intracellular vesicular transport channels via Sec3p.9,10
Disruption of intracellular vesicular transport may be important in treating fungal disease, because exposure to an
echinocandin may interfere with the secretion and release
of noxious proteins and/or other fungal peptides that are
important virulence factors promoting fungal disease.
Cell wall rearrangement/reorganization

The fungal cell wall composition changes during fungal growth, budding, mating, and sporulation. After exposure to caspofungin via complex, interconnected cell
remodeling pathways, the structural and biologic integrity of
2814

the fungal cell wall is compromised.11,12 Echinocandinmediated defects in cell wall assembly and/or polarized fungal growth may be another mechanism that mitigates and/or
delays fungal recovery after exposure to echinocandins.
Another mechanism of the prolonged antifungal activity of echinocandins may be stimulation of the immune
system through fungal cell wall reorganization and exposure of b-glucan.13,14 b-Glucan is the principal pathogenassociated molecular pattern (PAMP) recognized by a variety
of pattern recognition receptors (PRR) such as scavenger
receptors, CR3, lactosylceramide, TLR2, TLR4, and dectin1.15 PAMP-PRR interactions lead to transcription of the
genes responsible for antimicrobial responses such as synthesis of antimicrobial peptides, oxidative burst, and the release
of proinflammatory cytokines and proinflammatory and
chemotactic chemokines.16 PRRs are expressed mainly on
the cell surface of innate immune cells such as monocytes,
macrophages, and neutrophils; activation of these receptors
by fungal PAMP carbohydrate (b-glucan) augments phagocytosis and enhances fungal clearance.17
In the cell walls of most pathogenic filamentous
fungi, the immune-stimulatory b-glucan is masked by an
outer covering of immunologically less active mannoproteins (Fig. 1), whereas in Candida species, mannoproteins
via Myd88 (an intracellular TLR adaptor molecule) and
TLR4 in cooperation with b-glucan induce the activation
of macrophages and other effector cells of the innate
immune system.18,19 Echinocandin (caspofungin)induced reorganization and fungal cell wall rearrangement
expose the deeper layer of b-glucan.20 This exposure activates PRR (dectin-1 and TLR2)-mediated proinflammatory cytokine production by mononuclear cells and fungal
clearance may occur even after the echinocandin concentration has dropped below those levels needed to inhibit
b-(1,3)-glucan synthase, the target enzyme for these
drugs. Moreover, echinocandin-induced cell wall and cytoskeleton remodeling6–12 may make fungi more susceptible to phagocytosis by mechanisms that to our knowledge
are not yet well understood. Another intriguing mechanism of the prolonged activity of the echinocandins may
be altered cellular stress-response pathways in response to
b-glucan rearrangement, which may impede fungal recovery after exposure to echinocandins.
The current discussion provides a brief overview of
several possible ways echinocandins may induce fungal
damage from which fungi may not readily recover, even
Cancer

July 1, 2009

Commentary/Safdar

after the drug concentration falls below sublethal levels.
This may provide a basis for clinical trials exploring intermittent high-dose echinocandin therapy21 for invasive
mold disease in combination with other mold-active
drugs in patients with non-neutropenic cancers and allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation recipients
with graft-versus-host disease. A favorable clinical outcome resulting from drug-related modification of the host
immune response, as was noted in a recent study of patients
with zygomycosis who were treated with caspofungin plus
amphotericin B, may also be explored for the treatment of
other life-threatening invasive mycoses.22 The evaluation of
these and other potential pathways of echinocandininduced antifungal activity23 may provide insights needed
to optimize the treatment of invasive fungal disease in
severely immunosuppressed patients with cancer.
Conflict of Interest Disclosures
Supported in part by Cancer Center Support Grant CA16672
from the National Institutes of Health.

References
1.

2.

Loue A, Deziel M, Liu W, Drusano MF, Gumbo
T, Drusano GL. Pharmacodynamics of caspofungin in a
murine model of systemic candidiasis: importance of persistence of caspofungin in tissue to understand drug activity. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2005;49:5058–5068.
Gumbo T, Drusano GL, Liu W, et al. Once-weekly
micafungin therapy is as effective as daily therapy for disseminated candidiasis in mice with persistent neutropenia.
Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2007;51:968–974.

9.

Guo W, Tamanoi F, Novick P. Spatial regulation of the exocyst complex by Rho1 GTPase. Nat Cell Biol. 2001;3:353–360.

10. Schmitz HP, Huppert S, Lorberg A, Heinisch JJ.
Rho5p downregulates the yeast cell integrity pathway. J
Cell Sci. 2002;115:3139–3148.
11. Reinoso-Martin C, Schuller C, Schuetzer-Muehlbauer
M, Kuchler K. The yeast protein kinase C cell integrity
pathway mediates tolerance to the antifungal drug caspofungin through activation of Slt2p mitogen-activated protein kinase signaling. Eukaryot Cell. 2003;2:1200–1210.
12. Lesage G, Sdicu AM, Menard P, Shapiro J, Hussein
S, Bussey H. Analysis of beta-1,3-glucan assembly in Saccharomyces cerevisiae using a synthetic interaction network and
altered sensitivity to caspofungin. Genetics. 2004;167: 35–49.
13. Lamaris GA, Lewis RE, Chamilos G, et al. Caspofunginmediated b-glucan unmasking and enhancement of human
polymorphonuclear neutrophil activity against Aspergillus
and non-Aspergillus hypae. J Infect Dis. 2008; 198:186–192.
14. Hohl TM, Feldmesser M, Perlin DS, Pamer EG.
Caspofungin modulates inflammatory responses to Aspergillus fumigatus through stage-specific effects on fungal b-glucan exposure. J Infect Dis. 2008;198:176–185.
15. Brown GD, Gordon S. Immune recognition of fungal
beta-glucans. Cell Microbiol. 2005;7:471–479.
16. Willment JA, Lin HH, Reid DM, et al. Dectin-1
expression and function is enhanced on alternatively activated and GM-CSF treated macrophages and negatively
regulated by IL-10, dexamethasone and LPS. J Immunol.
2003;171:4569–4573.
17. Taylor PR, Brown GD, Reid DM, et al. The beta-glucan receptor, dectin-1, is predominantly expressed on the
surface of cells of the monocyte/macrophage lineages. J
Immunol. 2002;269:3876–3882.
18. Vecchiarelli A. Puliti M, Torosantucci A, Cassone A,
Bistoni F. In vitro production of tumor necrosis factor by
murine splenic macrophages stimulated with mannoprotein
constituents of Candida albicans cell wall. Cell Immunol.
1991;134:65–76.

3.

Beauvais A, Bruneau JM, Mol PC, Buitrago MJ,
Legrand R, Latge JP. Glucan synthase complex of Aspergillus fumigatus. J Bacteriol. 2001;183:2273–2279.

4.

Drgonova J, Drgon T, Tanaka K, et al. Rho1p, a yeast
protein at the interface between cell polarization and morphogenesis. Science. 1996;272:277–279.

19. Netea MG, Gow NAR, Munro CA, et al. Immune
sensing of Candida albicans requires cooperative recognition
of mannans and glucans by lectin and toll-like receptors. J
Clin Invest. 2006;116:1642–1650.

5.

Qadota H, Python CP, Inoue SB, et al. Identification
of yeast Rho1p GTPase as a regulatory subunit of 1,3-betaglucan synthase. Science. 1996;272:279–281.

20. Wheeler RT, Fink GR. A drug-sensitive genetic network masks
fungi from the immune system. PloS Pathog. 2006; 2:e35.

6.

Kikuchi Y, Mizuuchi E, Nogami S, Morishita S, Ohya
Y. Involvement of Rho-type GTPase in control of cell size in
Saccharomyces cerevisiae. FEMS Yeast Res. 2007;7:569–578.

21. Safdar A, Rodriguez G, Rolston KV, et al. High-dose caspofungin combination antifungal therapy in patients with hematologic malignancies and hematopoietic stem cell
transplantation. Bone Marrow Transplant. 2007;39:157–164.

7.

Harrison JC, Zyla TR, Bardes ESG, Lew DJ. Stressspecific activation mechanism for the ‘‘cell integrity’’
MAPK pathway. J Biol Chem. 2004;279:2616–2622.

22. Reed C, Bryant R, Ibrahim AS, et al. Combination
polyene-caspofungin treatment of rhino-orbital cerebral
mucormycosis. Clin Infect Dis. 2008;47:364–371.

8.

Kohno H, Tanaka K, Mino A, et al. Bni1p implicated
in cytoskeletal control in a putative target of Rho1p small
GTP binding protein in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. EMBO J.
1996;15:6060–6068.

23. Wagner C, Graninger W, Presterl E, Joukhadar C.
The echinocandins: comparison of their pharmacokinetics,
pharmacodynamics and clinical applications. Pharmacology.
2006;78:161–177.

Cancer

July 1, 2009

2815

