Published OnlineFirst July 22, 2011; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-11-1014

Cancer
Research

Therapeutics, Targets, and Chemical Biology

Bcl-2 Family Genetic Profiling Reveals MicroenvironmentSpecific Determinants of Chemotherapeutic Response
Justin R. Pritchard1, Luke A. Gilbert1, Corbin E. Meacham1, Jennifer L. Ricks1, Hai Jiang1,
Douglas A. Lauffenburger1,2, and Michael T. Hemann1

Abstract
The Bcl-2 family encompasses a diverse set of apoptotic regulators that are dynamically activated in response
to various cell-intrinsic and -extrinsic stimuli. An extensive variety of cell culture experiments have identified
effects of growth factors, cytokines, and drugs on Bcl-2 family functions, but in vivo studies have tended to focus
on the role of one or two particular members in development and organ homeostasis. Thus, the ability of
physiologically relevant contexts to modulate canonical dependencies that are likely to be more complex has yet
to be investigated systematically. In this study, we report findings derived from a pool-based shRNA assay that
systematically and comprehensively interrogated the functional dependence of leukemia and lymphoma cells
upon various Bcl-2 family members across many diverse in vitro and in vivo settings. This approach permitted us
to report the first in vivo loss of function screen for modifiers of the response to a front-line chemotherapeutic
agent. Notably, our results reveal an unexpected role for the extrinsic death pathway as a tissue-specific modifier
of therapeutic response. In particular, our findings show that particular tissue sites of tumor dissemination play
critical roles in demarcating the nature and extent of cancer cell vulnerabilities and mechanisms of chemoresistance. Cancer Res; 71(17); 5850–8. 2011 AACR.

Introduction
Chemotherapy represents a major treatment modality for
cancer, and numerous genetic screens have probed the
mechanisms underlying cell-intrinsic resistance or sensitivity
to front-line chemotherapy (1–6). However, these studies,
although informative, have not been adapted to relevant
tumor microenvironments, which may contain diverse stromal and/or immune cell types, are subject to immune surveillance, and harbor physical barriers to drug delivery (7). In
addition, the native tumor microenvironment comprises a
diverse mixture of chemokines and cytokines that may impact
responses to genotoxic agents (8, 9). Thus, the central determinants of therapeutic outcome may be highly dependent
upon paracrine survival or stress signals. Indeed, it is well
documented that gene function and relevance can vary dramatically when compared in vivo versus in vitro (8, 10).
Consequently, studying the impact of defined genetic alteraAuthors' Affiliations: 1The Koch Institute for Integrative Cancer Research;
and 2Department of Biological Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts
Note: Supplementary data for this article are available at Cancer Research
Online (http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/).
J.R. Pritchard and L.A. Gilbert contributed equally to this work.
Corresponding Author: Michael T. Hemann, The Koch Institute for
Integrative Cancer Research, MIT, 77 Massachusetts Ave., 76-361B,
Cambridge, MA 02139. Phone: 617-324-1964; Fax: 617-252-1891; E-mail:
hemann@mit.edu
doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-11-1014
2011 American Association for Cancer Research.

5850

tions on therapeutic response in native tumor microenvironments is critical for effective drug development, personalized
cancer regimens, and the rational design of combination
therapies.
Recent advances in the development of tractable mouse
models of cancer have, for the first time, enabled the examination of complex sets of defined alterations in individual
mice. For example, retroviral infection of murine hematopoietic stem cells or primary embryonic hepatocytes with small
pools of short hairpin RNAs (shRNA), followed by adoptive
transfer into lethally irradiated recipient mice, has been used
to screen for suppressors of B cell lymphomagenesis or
hepatocellular carcinoma (11, 12). In addition, ex vivo manipulation of lymphoma cells followed by transfer into syngeneic
recipient mice has permitted the interrogation of thousands of
shRNAs for modulators of tumor growth and dissemination
(13). These screens provide powerful proofs of principle that
diverse alterations can be introduced in chimeric tumor
models in vivo and that these systems might permit the
simultaneous examination of the relevance of a whole set
of genes to therapeutic response in relevant physiologic
contexts.
Front-line cancer therapies generally exert their effects by
modulating the proportion of pro- to antiapoptotic death
regulators, most notably members of the Bcl-2 family (14,
15). Thus, we reasoned that interrogating Bcl-2 family functionality might provide a high-resolution focus on a crucial
facet of cytotoxic cellular responses to chemotherapy in a
variety of distinct settings. Notably, previous studies using
recombinant BH3 peptides in reconstituted mitochondrial

Cancer Res; 71(17) September 1, 2011

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 5, 2017. © 2011 American Association for Cancer Research.

Published OnlineFirst July 22, 2011; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-11-1014

In Vivo shRNA Screen for Mediators of Therapeutic Response

suspensions have systematically identified cellular states associated with the loss of function of one of the BH3-only Bcl-2
family members, the loss of function of a multidomain proapoptotic Bcl-2 family member, or the enhanced function of an
antiapoptotic family member; these states characterize the
potential range of dysregulation that the Bcl-2 family can
acquire during tumorigenesis and demarcate central cell fate
decisions that are susceptible to therapeutic intervention (16,
17). However, this approach, although quite powerful, does not
allow for the comprehensive examination of the role and
relevance of individual Bcl-2 family members to cell death
following chemotherapy. Here, we describe a complementary
in vivo screening approach that provides a detailed assessment of the role of each Bcl-2 family member in the response
to chemotherapy in heterogeneous tumor environments.

Materials and Methods
shRNA generation
shRNAs targeting the Bcl-2 family (18) were designed by
using Biopredsi from Novartis. shRNAs were cloned into the
MLS (19) retroviral vector containing a Mir30 expression
cassette under the transcriptional control of the MSCV LTR
and coexpressing green fluorescent protein (GFP). Plasmids
were verified for mRNA target knockdown by using standard
quantitative reverse transcriptase PCR techniques. Western
blots were done to analyze total protein knock down for a
subset of Bcl-2 family members. Bim, Bax, and Bak knockdown
are shown in Supplementary Figures S1A and B. The shRNA
library was constructed by evenly pooling individual minipreps of each individual shRNA. This mixture was cotransfected into Phoenix retroviral packaging cells and pooled virus
was collected.
Western blots
SDS-PAGE was done according to standard protocols, and
gels were transferred to polyvinylidene difluoride membranes.
The antibodies used were as follows: Bid (polyclonal antisera
from Honglin Li), BAX (Cell Signaling Technologies; #2772),
BAK (Upstate; #06-536), BIM (Cell Signaling Technologies;
#C34C5), caspase 8 (Cell Signaling Technologies; #D35G2),
beta-actin (Cell Signaling Technologies; #4967L), and Tubulin
(ECM Biosciences; #TM1541).
Luminex bead–based assay
Carboxylated Luminex beads were purchased from Mirai
Biosystems. Probe oligonucleotides comprised of the shRNA
antisense strand modified with C12-amine were conjugated to
the beads by using EDC in a pH 4.5 MES hydrate buffer.
Coupling efficiency was validated with sense oligonucleotides.
A total of 3,500 beads were added to a 50-mL reaction volume
in a 3 mol/L tetra-methyl ammonium chloride (TMAC) buffer
to reduce the differences in Tm that accompany differences in
GC content. DNA loading concentrations are as indicated (2–
200 ng per well were added). Blocking oligos that corresponded to the biotinylated PCR product but lacked the sense
portion of the shRNA were added at 100-fold molar excess to
compete out the dsPCR product and reduce the preferential

www.aacrjournals.org

rehybridization of the PCR product. Samples were denatured
for 3 minutes at 95 C and hybridized for 30 minutes at 52 C.
Streptavidin-PE (Invitrogen)/TMAC was then added to the
wells and incubated for 5 minutes at 52 C. All samples were
incubated at 52 C to ensure they stayed at equilibrium, and
the PMT setting on the Luminex machine was approximately
520 volts (low calibration).
PCR
Three individual 25 mL PCR reactions were done by using a
50 primer targeting the constant hairpin loop region and a 30
primer targeting the vector backbone. The PCR buffer was 2
Failsafe Buffer B (Epicentre Biotechnologies), and we ran 35
cycles with an extension time of 1 minute at 72 C and a
hybridization temperature of 52 C for 35 seconds. The 30
primer was biotinylated. Pooled PCR product was column
purified and resuspended in 36 mL water prior to serial
dilution and subsequent measurement.
Cell culture
All lymphoma and leukemia cells were isolated directly
from tumor-bearing animals and cultured at 5% CO2 at 37 C.
Em-Myc p19ARF/ cells were isolated and maintained as
described (5). B-ALL cells were maintained as described
(20). All in vitro viral transduction was done by coinfecting
1 million cells per 10-cm plate. Infection efficiency was
quantified by flow cytometry for GFP-positive cell populations. Infection efficiencies under 50% were utilized to ensure
a multiplicity of infection of approximately 1. Pool composition was measured at the beginning of the experiment, as well
as following recovery from an LD90 doxorubicin drug dose.
Untreated cells that had grown in culture for the duration of
the experiment were used as controls. Hairpin 97mer
sequences in the Mir30 context were as follows:
shBid-1- TGCTGTTGACAGTGAGCGCCACAGAAGATTCCATATCAAATAGTGAAGCCACAGATGTATTTGATATGGAATCTTCTGTGATGCCTACTGCCTCGGA,
shBid-2- TGCTGTTGACAGTGAGCGCCACAGAAGATTCCATATCAAATAGTGAAGCCACAGATGTATTTGATATGGAATCTTCTGTGATGCCTACTGCCTCGGA.
shCaspase 8- TGCTGTTGACAGTGAGCGAAACTATGACGTGAGCAATAAATAGTGAAGCCACAGATGTATTTATTGCTCACGTCATAGTTCTGCCTACTGCCTCGGA
Background distribution analysis for in vivo screening
data
A total of 454 sequencing data used to determine coefficient
of variation (CV) thresholds is available from the GEO database (accession number GSE16090). CVs were calculated by
dividing the SD of the fold change in read number (for any
hairpin with >4 reads) by the mean of the fold change. To be
included in this analysis, hairpins had to be present at high
enough quantities to have at least 4 reads. Previously validated
hit CVs (13) included IL-6, Lyn, Rac2, Twf, and CrkL and were
compared with the background distribution by t test. Cumulative distributions were plotted in Matlab by using the
dfittool.

Cancer Res; 71(17) September 1, 2011

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 5, 2017. © 2011 American Association for Cancer Research.

5851

Published OnlineFirst July 22, 2011; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-11-1014

Pritchard et al.

In vivo screening
Six-week-old C57BL/6J mice (Jackson Laboratories) were
tail-vein injected with 2 million Em-Myc p19ARF/ lymphoma
cells expressing the 22 shRNAs targeting the Bcl-2 family.
Infection was optimized such that each tumor cell expressed a
single shRNA. We sampled pool composition before injection,
upon the development of a palpable tumor burden and upon
relapse following IP injection of 8 mg/kg of doxorubicin. For in
vivo screen validation, pure populations of cells expressing
shRNAs were isolated by GFP sorting by using a fluorescenceactivated cell sorting ARIA cell sorter. Two million cells
transduced with a vector control or specific shRNAs were
injected into syngeneic recipient mice. At the presentation of
palpable lymphomas, mice were treated with 10 mg/kg doxorubicin and disease-free survival/tumor-free progression
were monitored.
Screening analysis
Luminex intensities for serial dilutions of PCR samples from
pooled hairpin libraries were compared by calculating a curve
fit for a given sample by using the equation [Y ¼ a*(1exp
(b*x)]. Sample integrals were then calculated, and these
integral scores were compared after subtracting the initial
from the final integral score. All independent Luminex runs
were normalized to the maximum signal intensity and all runs
done on different days contained internal standards for dayto-day normalization. Scoring shRNAs were identified following a 3-step process. First, to eliminate a systematic error for
depleting hairpins, we transformed all the data by adding the
hairpin mean to all in vivo measurements. We then applied 2
filters. The first filter was based upon a comparison of the
distribution of a given shRNA with the variation of neutral
hairpins. We required our "hits" to have a CV that was equal to
or less than 0.4. This allowed us to threshold out approximately 80% of neutral hairpins. The second filter was based
upon a comparison of treated samples with untreated hairpin
samples. To progress to further validation efforts, we required
our treated sample to be different at the 0.10 significance level
versus untreated controls.
Data analysis
Linear fits were calculated by using a least squares algorithm. Sequences were compared for overlap by using the local
alignment method of Smith–Waterman in the Matlab function localalign.m. Heat maps were generated in Matlab.
Kaplan–Meier analyses were carried out by using GraphPad
Prism software.

Results
A bead-based assay for the direct measurement of
pooled shRNA representation
The Bcl-2 family consists of 16 pro- and 6 antiapoptotic
proteins that regulate programmed cell death in response to a
diverse set of intrinsic and extrinsic death stimuli (21, 22). To
assess how these genes modulate chemotherapy-induced cell
death across multiple in vivo contexts, as well as across diverse
in vitro conditions in a multiplexed manner, we adapted a

5852

Cancer Res; 71(17) September 1, 2011

validated set of shRNAs targeting all 22 Bcl-2 family members
to Luminex bead–based analysis (Fig. 1A; ref. 18). This technology has previously been used to quantify diverse sets of
microRNAs in solution with improved accuracy relative to
classic microarray approaches (23). Thus, we reasoned that
this approach could be modified to carry out reproducible
quantification of subgenome-sized shRNA pools.
Briefly, we covalently coupled an amino-modified oligonucleotide that is the reverse complement of the unique guide
strand section of each shRNA to fluorescently labeled Luminex
beads. Our PCR strategy uses a forward primer complementary to the microRNA loop sequence present in all hairpins
and a biotinylated reverse primer complementary to the
flanking microRNA sequence (Fig. 1B). Thus, all shRNA guide
strands can be amplified by using common primers, and the
quantity of individual shRNAs can be visualized with streptavidin–PE after bead hybridization. Notably, this approach is
distinct from barcoded shRNA libraries, in which shRNAs are
identifiable by a flanking DNA sequence. In this case, we used
the unique portion of the shRNA, itself, as the barcode. This
allows for multiplexed shRNA quantification in any vector
backbone.
As an initial proof-of-principle experiment, we confirmed that
each Bcl-2 shRNA could be quantified by Luminex bead hybridization when starting with similar concentrations of dsPCR
product (Supplementary Fig. S2A). Importantly, whereas each
PCR product with a cognate bead was readily detectable, a
control probe exhibited no significant signal with any of the 22
shRNAs in the plasmid library. In fact, the average maximum
signal for an shRNA present in the pool was approximately 100fold higher than the control probe signal. Although this negative
control ruled out any large magnitude nonspecific hybridization,
we wanted to rule out smaller amounts of cross hybridization as
the source of the variation in the maximum fluorescence
intensity of the various probes (Supplementary Fig. S2B). To
this end, we noted a strong relationship between probe GC
content and maximum signal intensity. Oligonucleotides deviating from this relationship were analyzed for local sequence
alignments across the entire shRNA library utilizing the dynamic
programming method of Smith–Waterman (24). The variation
in the average local alignment bit scores for all "outlier" probes
was highly similar (Supplementary Fig. S2C), indicating that
cross-hybridization is an unlikely contributor to overall signal
intensity. Thus, oligonucleotide sequences chosen for optimal
siRNA performance are well suited for hybridization-based
sequence identification.
We next carried out mock enrichment experiments in
which known concentrations of genomic DNA from single
hairpin infected Em-Myc p19Arf/ lymphoma cells were combined at distinct ratios (Supplementary Fig. S2D). These
lymphoma cells were derived from a well-established preclinical mouse model of Burkitt's lymphoma and represent a
tractable setting to investigate the genetics of therapeutic
response (25, 26). By using these cells, we observed a linear and
highly reproducible change in measured fluorescence intensity that tightly correlated with the known fold enrichment of
the control sample across 8 fold changes in relative DNA
abundance.

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 5, 2017. © 2011 American Association for Cancer Research.

Published OnlineFirst July 22, 2011; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-11-1014

In Vivo shRNA Screen for Mediators of Therapeutic Response

The Bcl-2 family differentially modulates therapeutic
response in distinct B-cell tumors
The initial validation of our measurement technology led us
to benchmark this approach against an established single
shRNA flow cytometry–based assay. In this assay, GFP was
used as a surrogate marker for the presence of each of 16
distinct Bcl-2 family member shRNAs, and the impact of gene
suppression was determined by the relative change in the
percent of GFP-positive cells following treatment (18). In each
case, we examined the effect of Bcl-2 family gene knockdown
on the in vitro response of Em-Myc p19Arf/ lymphoma cells to
the front-line chemotherapeutic doxorubicin (Fig. 1C). A
linear relationship (r2 ¼ 0.89) was observed between multiplexed bead-based measurements and single shRNA flow
cytometry measurements of shRNA enrichment and depletion
following doxorubicin treatment. Thus, a bead hybridization
assay can rapidly and accurately measure shRNA pool composition following drug selection.
A key advantage of shRNA pool–based approaches lies in
their inherent adaptability to diverse experimental systems
and conditions. To test the flexibility of our system, we
examined the effects of Bcl-2 family member suppression

on doxorubicin response in a distinct cell line. In this case,
we examined cells derived from a BCR-Abl–driven murine
model of B cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (B-ALL; ref. 27).
As observed in the Burkitt's lymphoma model, we could
identify a robust Bcl-2 family shRNA drug resistance and
sensitivity profile in these cells. However, the shRNA signatures were distinct between cell types. The most obvious
feature differentiating the 2 cell lines was the critical role
for the BH3-only member Bim in doxorubicin-induced cell
death in B-ALL (Fig. 1D). Because Bim levels are known to
increase in response to environmental but not genotoxic
stress, the involvement of Bim in the response to a DNAdamaging agent in this context was unexpected. To explore
the mechanism of Bim-induced cell death, we examined Bim
levels in p185þ BCR-Abl ALL cells treated with genotoxic
agents (doxorubicin and chlorambucil) and a histone deacetylase inhibitor known to promote significant Bim induction
(SAHA) in B cell malignancies (28). Notably, protein levels of
Bim were induced acutely following treatment with DNAdamaging agents in B-ALL cells (Fig. 1E). These data highlight
the potential of pool-based shRNA approaches to identify
tumor cell–specific determinants of therapeutic response.

Figure 1. Examining the role of the entire Bcl-2 family in therapeutic response. A, a schematic depicting the difference between single and pool-based
evaluation of shRNA composition. B, a diagram illustrating the Luminex-based shRNA PCR strategy. PCR primers were designed from constant regions
flanking all hairpins. After PCR amplification, a biotinylated primer is used to measure hairpin abundance, and the unique fluorescence of the Luminex bead
distinguishes hairpin identity. C, a comparison of the bead-based quantification of hairpin representation following doxorubicin treatment with single-cell flow
cytometry measurements (18). Left, bead-based measurements are plotted against each corresponding single-hairpin measurement. Right, heat maps
comparing shRNA enrichment and depletion by using bead-based and flow cytometry approaches. D, a heat map comparing the impact of depleting
each Bcl-2 family hairpin on the response to doxorubicin treatment in Em-MYC p19Arf/ lymphomas and p185 BCR-Ablþ p19Arf/ B-ALLs. The asterisk
demarcates the differential impact of suppressing the BH3-only protein Bim on doxorubicin sensitivity in these 2 cell types. E, p185 BCR-Ablþ p19Arf/ cells
were treated for 12 hours at an LD90 of the indicated compounds and analyzed for Bim levels by Western blot.

www.aacrjournals.org

Cancer Res; 71(17) September 1, 2011

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 5, 2017. © 2011 American Association for Cancer Research.

5853

Published OnlineFirst July 22, 2011; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-11-1014

Pritchard et al.

An in vivo screen for microenvironment-specific
modifiers of therapeutic response
A central challenge in the development of effective anticancer approaches is to understand the impact of the tumor
microenvironment on therapeutic response. To test whether
our system could be used to examine cancer therapy in vivo,
we conducted a screen to identify Bcl-2 family members that
modulate the response of lymphomas to doxorubicin. Here, all
Bcl-2 family shRNAs were simultaneously cotransfected into
viral packaging cells to produce a multiconstruct viral pool
(Fig. 2A). The resulting pool was used to infect primary Em-Myc
p19Arf/ lymphoma cells ex vivo, and transduced cells were
tail-vein injected into syngeneic recipient mice. A cohort of 8
mice was sacrificed following tumor onset, and a second
cohort was treated with 8 mg/kg doxorubicin. Following
tumor relapse, lymphoma cells were harvested from lymph
nodes and the thymus, 2 common sites of lymphoma manifestation in the Em-Myc mouse (25), and the relative shRNA
content was compared between untreated and treated tumors
in these distinct tumor microenvironments.
A striking feature of the resulting data was the mouse-tomouse variability in hairpin composition following drug treat-

ment. This suggests that the complexity of the in vivo microenvironment can substantially influence the measured effect
of a relatively neutral shRNA. Further inspection of this
variation suggested that a subset of shRNAs exhibited a level
of variation comparable with the in vitro data, whereas the
remainder showed significantly higher fluctuation (Fig. 2B). If
otherwise neutral hairpins exhibit larger variation in in vivo
datasets, the size of this variation may represent a meaningful
discriminator to focus on hairpins whose effects are large and
reproducible enough to overcome this variability. To determine whether such variation is a consistent feature of in vivo
datasets, we made use of a comprehensive in vivo versus in
vitro shRNA screening dataset (13). Indeed, most shRNAs
exhibited high mouse-to-mouse CVs in vivo (Fig. 2C). However,
when we focused on shRNAs shown to exert a biological effect
in subsequent validation experiments, we saw a significant
decrease in shRNA CVs (P < 0.01). Thus, variation present in
this established dataset can be used to generate a CV threshold that identifies shRNAs with a high probability of exerting a
relevant biological effect. This cutoff was then employed to
filter data generated by using our Luminex approach (Fig. 2D).
As a test of the relevance of this variation cutoff to other drug

Figure 2. An in vivo shRNA screen for modulators of doxorubicin response. A, a diagram depicting the in vivo screening strategy. Pooled shRNAs targeting Bcl2 family members were retrovirally transduced into Em-MYC p19Arf/ lymphomas. shRNA composition was measured either following the presentation of
palpable tumor burden or following tumor relapse after treatment with 8 mg/kg doxorubicin. B, a comparison of the CV for hairpins targeting the Bcl-2 family in
cell culture versus in vivo screens by using a Luminex measurement methodology. C, an analysis of the distribution of shRNA CV values for a large in vitro
versus in vivo screening dataset generated by high-throughput sequencing. The vertical line represents the CV threshold used to filter in vivo data. The arrows
denote averages for validated hairpins relative to all hairpins. D, Bcl-2 family "hits" following filtering for CV and enrichment criteria and separated by
anatomical niche. The asterisk denotes a Bcl-w shRNA that scored as enriched in the thymus but was excluded because of the lack of Bcl-w expression in this
context.

5854

Cancer Res; 71(17) September 1, 2011

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 5, 2017. © 2011 American Association for Cancer Research.

Published OnlineFirst July 22, 2011; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-11-1014

In Vivo shRNA Screen for Mediators of Therapeutic Response

Figure 3. Bid potentiates doxorubicin efficacy in the thymus. A, a graph depicting an in vivo GFP competition assay in lymphoma cells partially transduced
with shBid-1. Mice were injected with partially transduced lymphoma populations. At tumor onset, all mice were treated with 10 mg/kg doxorubicin.
Seventy-two hours after treatment, mice were sacrificed and surviving lymphoma populations were harvested. Fold change in GFP percentage was
assessed 48 hours later (n  4). B, hematoxylin and eosin–stained sections from mice-bearing vector control or shBid thymic lymphomas. Mice were
treated with 10 mg/kg doxorubicin and sacrificed 48 hours later. Representative fields from treated and untreated are shown at 25 magnification.
Dark patches in treated vector control tumors indicate sites of normal lymphocyte infiltration.

screens, we examined the stochastic variation in the representation of vector control infected Em-Myc tumor cells following treatment with the microtubule poison vincristine in
vivo. Here, we transplanted tumor cells into recipient mice at a
defined infection efficiency, as monitored by GFP expression,
and examined the variation in the percentage of GFP-positive
cells in distinct mice following treatment. Importantly, these
controls exhibited an in vivo CV that was greater than the
doxorubicin variation cutoff (Supplementary Fig. S3A and B),
suggesting that the CV threshold established in this study may
be broadly applicable to other datasets.
As additional criteria for examining in vivo screening data,
we required that shRNA target mRNAs be present in untransduced lymphoma cells and that the representation of a
"scoring" shRNA be significantly enriched or depleted as a
consequence of doxorubicin treatment (see methods). The
resulting list of scoring shRNAs included Bcl-2 family members previously described to influence therapeutic response
(ref. 17; Fig. 2D and Supplementary Table S1). For instance, we
found that suppression of the BH3-only protein Puma promoted doxorubicin resistance in both the lymph node and
thymus compartments, consistent with previous reports
examining either B lymphoma cells or thymocytes (26, 29).
Thus, this approach can readily identify important regulators
of drug-induced cell death.
The extrinsic death pathway is a thymus-specific
mediator of therapeutic response
Interestingly, in contrast with Puma and other general cell
death regulators, we identified the proapoptotic Bcl-2 family
member Bid as a specific mediator of doxorubicin cytotoxicity
in the thymus but not in the lymph nodes. To validate and
extend the genetic result in light of this finding, we conducted
an in vivo GFP competition assay in the spleen, bone marrow,
peripheral lymph nodes, and thymus. In this assay, GFP
positivity is used as a surrogate marker for the presence of
a Bid shRNA, and the impact of Bid suppression is determined
by the relative change in the percent of GFP-positive tumor

www.aacrjournals.org

cells. Consistent with the initial screening data, Bid loss
impaired lymphoma cell death in the thymic tumor microenvironment but not other tumor microenvironments (Fig. 3A
and B). This tissue specificity was not because of the selective
expression of these proteins in specific tumor microenvironments, as we observed similar levels of Bid and its upstream
regulator caspase 8 in the tumor-bearing lymph node and
thymus (Supplementary Fig. S4A and B). Notably, Bid is unique
among Bcl-2 family members in that it translocates to the
mitochondria following extrinsic activation of death receptors
(30, 31). Thus, these data are consistent with a mechanism
whereby constitutively present Bid is activated following the
release of secreted factors or tumor–stromal cell interactions
that are specific to the treated thymic microenvironment.
The relevance of Bid to DNA damage–induced death
remains a subject of debate (32, 33). To confirm the importance of Bid to doxorubicin-induced cell death in vivo, we
injected 3 cohorts of syngeneic mice with Em-Myc p19Arf/
lymphoma cells expressing 1 of 2 validated shRNAs targeting
Bid or a vector control. At tumor onset, all mice were treated
with 10 mg/kg doxorubicin and monitored for tumor regression and relapse. Suppression of Bid resulted in decreased
tumor-free survival and tumor cell clearance compared with
control tumors (Fig. 4A). Furthermore, in mice-bearing shBidtransduced lymphomas, 50% of the mice showed no tumorfree survival, whereas 90% of control mice exhibited a period
of tumor-free survival. Notably, in the case of the lymphoma
cells used in this study, suppression of Bid in vitro had minimal
effect on lymphoma cell survival following doxorubicin treatment (Fig. 4B). Thus, treatment of these tumors in their native
microenvironment reveals genetic dependencies that are not
present in cultured cells.
These data suggest that activation of components of the
extrinsic cell death pathway potentiate chemotherapeutic efficacy in the thymus. To further interrogate the role of death
receptor signaling in therapeutic response in this setting, we
targeted caspase 8, the direct activator of Bid by generating
hairpins targeting caspase 8 (Supplementary Fig. S4C).

Cancer Res; 71(17) September 1, 2011

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 5, 2017. © 2011 American Association for Cancer Research.

5855

Published OnlineFirst July 22, 2011; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-11-1014

Pritchard et al.

Finally, to confirm the specificity of Bid-induced cell death
in the thymus relative to whole organism chemotherapeutic
response, we examined the effect of Bid suppression on
tumor-free survival following doxorubicin treatment in athymic mice. Pure populations of either shBid or vector control
transduced lymphoma cells were transplanted into surgically
thymectomized recipient mice. Upon the presentation of a
palpable disease burden, mice were dosed with 10 mg/kg of
doxorubicin and monitored for tumor-free and overall survival. In this context, chemotherapeutic response was indistinguishable in the presence or absence of Bid (Fig. 5B).

Discussion

Figure 4. Bid status affects therapeutic outcome in vivo, but not in vitro. A,
a Kaplan–Meier curve showing tumor-free survival in mice-bearing
vector or shBid lymphomas. All mice were treated with a single dose of 10
mg/kg doxorubicin (n  10). Inset, a Western blot showing Bid protein
levels in the presence of Bid shRNAs. B, a dose–response curve
showing the relative viability of lymphoma cells treated with doxorubicin
in vitro for 48 hours. Lymphoma cells were transduced with either a
vector control or an shRNA targeting Bid.

Suppression of caspase 8 in transplanted lymphomas phenocopied the effect of Bid silencing as measured by tumor-free survival
(Fig. 5A), suggesting an upstream induction of death receptor
signaling in the thymus following doxorubicin treatment.

We have presented a tractable methodology for pooled
shRNA screens that can be rapidly adapted to diverse vector
systems and gene families. The value of this system is exemplified by the rapid manner in which drug function can be
interrogated in multiple cell types in vitro and in diverse
anatomical contexts in vivo. Importantly, although numerous
cell culture—based loss of function screens have been carried
out to identify modulators of therapeutic response, this is the
first report to describe an in vivo loss of function therapy
screen-–the relevance of which is apparent in light of the
discordant in vitro and in vivo phenotypes resulting from Bid
suppression. Whereas the set of shRNAs probed in this work is
restricted to a particular aspect of cell biology, recent
advances in bead-based DNA hybridization now permit the
simultaneous resolution of as many as 500 distinct oligonucleotides so that multiple facets can be explored simultaneously. We have recently shown that as many as 1,000
distinct shRNAs can be introduced into individual mice
(13), suggesting that large shRNA libraries can be combined
with this technology to probe the impact of myriad genetic
lesions in diverse pathophysiologic contexts.
In this study, we systematically examined shRNAs targeting
the entire Bcl-2 family in multiple in vitro and in vivo settings.
In all therapeutic contexts, we identified a specific BH3
"activator" gene essential for mediating the effects of frontline chemotherapy. Biochemical studies have previously
defined critical roles for the BH3 only family members Bid,
Figure 5. The extrinsic death
pathway mediates doxorubicin
response in the thymus. A, a
Kaplan–Meier curve showing
tumor-free survival of micebearing vector, shBid, or
shCaspase 8–expressing
lymphomas. All mice were treated
with a single dose of 10 mg/kg
doxorubicin (n  10). B, a Kaplan–
Meier curve showing the tumorfree survival of thymectomized
mice transplanted with pure
populations of lymphoma cells
transduced with shBid or a vector
control. All mice were treated with
a single dose of 10 mg/kg
doxorubicin (n ¼ 6 for both
cohorts).

5856

Cancer Res; 71(17) September 1, 2011

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 5, 2017. © 2011 American Association for Cancer Research.

Published OnlineFirst July 22, 2011; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-11-1014

In Vivo shRNA Screen for Mediators of Therapeutic Response

Puma, and Bim. Furthermore, the recent development of a Bid,
Puma, and Bim triple knockout mouse confirmed the essential
role of these proteins in developmentally regulated apoptosis
(34). Interestingly, our data suggests that the relevant "activator" protein can vary quite significantly in neoplastic cells.
Although an "activator" is always necessary for cell death, the
cellular environment or driving oncogene can dramatically
shift the precise BH3-only family member that is most relevant
for therapy-induced apoptosis. This context-dependent relevance of apoptotic regulators may underlie the significant
challenge in eradicating disseminated malignancies and highlights the need to understand the relationship between intrinsic and paracrine signals and Bcl-2 family regulation.
An unexpected finding from this work is that although
caspase 8 and Bid are expressed at similar levels in diverse
tumor-bearing locations in vivo, they are specifically required
for drug efficacy in the thymus. Examined in isolation, this
result would suggest that the thymus is a prodeath microenvironment. However, previous studies in thymectomized
mice have shown that the thymus can exert a net protective
effect on tumor cells following doxorubicin treatment (9). This
cytoprotective effect is mediated in a paracrine fashion by
thymic endothelial cells that secrete multiple prosurvival
cytokines in response to DNA damage. Cytokine induction
subsequently upregulates Bcl-xL and promotes the survival of
target tumor cells. Thus, the unique role of death receptor
activity in this context may function to counterbalance
unchecked survival signaling following cellular stress in the

thymic microenvironment. Notably, however, the precise
mechanism of death receptor engagement in this context
remains to be determined. Addition of recombinant death
receptor ligands, such as FASL, TNF, and TRAIL in vitro fails to
induce lymphoma cell death. Consequently, the engagement
of death receptor signaling, like survival signaling, may require
a more complex concerted action of secreted factors and cell–
cell or cell–stromal interactions.
Disclosure of Potential Conflicts of Interest
No potential conflicts of interest were disclosed.

Acknowledgments
The authors thank members of the Lauffenburger and Hemann labs for
helpful comments and criticisms. We would also like to thank Hai Jiang for
important conceptual and technical contributions to this study.

Grant Support
M.T. Hemann is supported by NIH RO1 CA128803 and the Ludwig Foundation. J.R. Pritchard is a Poitras Graduate Fellow, and J.R. Pritchard and C.E.
Meacham are supported by the MIT Department of Biology training grant. L.A.
Gilbert is supported by a Ludwig Fellowship. Additional funding was provided
by the Integrated Cancer Biology Program grant NCI 1-U54-CA112967 to D.A.
Lauffenburger and M.T. Hemann.
The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment
of page charges. This article must therefore be hereby marked advertisement in
accordance with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact.
Received March 24, 2011; revised June 20, 2011; accepted July 15, 2011;
published OnlineFirst July 22, 2011.

References
1.

Bartz SR, Zhang Z, Burchard J, Imakura M, Martin M, Palmieri A, et al.
Small interfering RNA screens reveal enhanced cisplatin cytotoxicity
in tumor cells having both BRCA network and TP53 disruptions. Mol
Cell Biol 2006;26:9377–86.
2. Berns K, Horlings HM, Hennessy BT, Madiredjo M, Hijmans EM,
Beelen K, et al. A functional genetic approach identifies the PI3K
pathway as a major determinant of trastuzumab resistance in breast
cancer. Cancer Cell 2007;12:395–402.
3. Huang S, Laoukili J, Epping MT, Koster J, Holzel M, Westerman BA,
et al. ZNF423 is critically required for retinoic acid-induced differentiation and is a marker of neuroblastoma outcome. Cancer Cell
2009;15:328–40.
4. Doles J, Hemann MT. Nek4 status differentially alters sensitivity to
distinct microtubule poisons. Cancer Res 2010;70:1033–41.
5. Burgess DJ, Doles J, Zender L, Xue W, Ma B, McCombie WR, et al.
Topoisomerase levels determine chemotherapy response in vitro and
in vivo. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2008;105:9053–8.
6. Smogorzewska A, Desetty R, Saito TT, Schlabach M, Lach FP, Sowa
ME, et al. A genetic screen identifies FAN1, a Fanconi anemiaassociated nuclease necessary for DNA interstrand crosslink repair.
Mol Cell 2010;39:36–47.
7. Sharpless NE, Depinho RA. The mighty mouse: genetically engineered mouse models in cancer drug development. Nat Rev Drug
Discov 2006;5:741–54.
8. Hideshima T, Mitsiades C, Tonon G, Richardson PG, Anderson KC.
Understanding multiple myeloma pathogenesis in the bone marrow to
identify new therapeutic targets. Nat Rev Cancer 2007;7:585–98.
9. Gilbert LA, Hemann MT. DNA damage-mediated induction of a chemoresistant niche. Cell 2010;143:355–66.
10. Nguyen DX, Bos PD, Massague J. Metastasis: from dissemination to
organ-specific colonization. Nat Rev Cancer 2009;9:274–84.
11. Bric A, Miething C, Bialucha CU, Scuoppo C, Zender L, Krasnitz A,
et al. Functional identification of tumor-suppressor genes through an

www.aacrjournals.org

12.

13.

14.
15.
16.

17.

18.

19.

20.

21.
22.

in vivo RNA interference screen in a mouse lymphoma model. Cancer
Cell 2009;16:324–35.
Zender L, Xue W, Zuber J, Semighini CP, Krasnitz A, Ma B, et al. An
oncogenomics-based in vivo RNAi screen identifies tumor suppressors in liver cancer. Cell 2008;135:852–64.
Meacham CE, Ho EE, Dubrovsky E, Gertler FB, Hemann MT. In vivo
RNAi screening identifies regulators of actin dynamics as key determinants of lymphoma progression. Nat Genet 2009;41:1133–7.
Adams JM, Cory S. Bcl-2-regulated apoptosis: mechanism and
therapeutic potential. Curr Opin Immunol 2007;19:488–96.
Cotter TG. Apoptosis and cancer: the genesis of a research field. Nat
Rev Cancer 2009;9:501–7.
Certo M, Del Gaizo Moore V, Nishino M, Wei G, Korsmeyer S,
Armstrong SA, et al. Mitochondria primed by death signals determine
cellular addiction to antiapoptotic BCL-2 family members. Cancer Cell
2006;9:351–65.
Deng J, Carlson N, Takeyama K, Dal Cin P, Shipp M, Letai A. BH3
profiling identifies three distinct classes of apoptotic blocks to predict
response to ABT-737 and conventional chemotherapeutic agents.
Cancer Cell 2007;12:171–85.
Jiang H, Pritchard JR, Williams RT, Lauffenburger DA, Hemann MT. A
mammalian functional-genetic approach to characterizing cancer
therapeutics. Nat Chem Biol 2011;7:92–100.
Dickins RA, Hemann MT, Zilfou JT, Simpson DR, Ibarra I, Hannon GJ,
et al. Probing tumor phenotypes using stable and regulated synthetic
microRNA precursors. Nat Genet 2005;37:1289–95.
Williams RT, den Besten W, Sherr CJ. Cytokine-dependent imatinib
resistance in mouse BCR-ABLþ, Arf-null lymphoblastic leukemia.
Genes Dev 2007;21:2283–7.
Letai AG. Diagnosing and exploiting cancer's addiction to blocks in
apoptosis. Nat Rev Cancer 2008;8:121–32.
Youle RJ, Strasser A. The BCL-2 protein family: opposing activities
that mediate cell death. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2008;9:47–59.

Cancer Res; 71(17) September 1, 2011

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 5, 2017. © 2011 American Association for Cancer Research.

5857

Published OnlineFirst July 22, 2011; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-11-1014

Pritchard et al.

23. Lu J, Getz G, Miska EA, Alvarez-Saavedra E, Lamb J, Peck D, et al.
MicroRNA expression profiles classify human cancers. Nature
2005;435:834–8.
24. Smith TF, Waterman MS. Identification of common molecular subsequences. J Mol Biol 1981;147:195–7.
25. Adams JM, Harris AW, Pinkert CA, Corcoran LM, Alexander WS, Cory
S, et al. The c-myc oncogene driven by immunoglobulin enhancers
induces lymphoid malignancy in transgenic mice. Nature 1985;318:
533–8.
26. Jiang H, Reinhardt HC, Bartkova J, Tommiska J, Blomqvist C, Nevanlinna H, et al. The combined status of ATM and p53 link tumor development with therapeutic response. Genes Dev 2009;23:1895–909.
27. Williams RT, Roussel MF, Sherr CJ. Arf gene loss enhances oncogenicity and limits imatinib response in mouse models of Bcr-Ablinduced acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
2006;103:6688–93.
28. Lindemann RK, Newbold A, Whitecross KF, Cluse LA, Frew AJ, Ellis L,
et al. Analysis of the apoptotic and therapeutic activities of histone
deacetylase inhibitors by using a mouse model of B cell lymphoma.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A2007;104:8071–6.

5858

Cancer Res; 71(17) September 1, 2011

29. Villunger A, Michalak EM, Coultas L, Mullauer F, Bock G, Ausserlechner MJ, et al. p53- and drug-induced apoptotic responses
mediated by BH3-only proteins puma and noxa. Science 2003;
302:1036–8.
30. Wang K, Yin XM, Chao DT, Milliman CL, Korsmeyer SJ. BID: a
novel BH3 domain-only death agonist. Genes Dev 1996;10:
2859–69.
31. Li H, Zhu H, Xu CJ, Yuan J. Cleavage of BID by caspase 8 mediates
the mitochondrial damage in the Fas pathway of apoptosis. Cell
1998;94:491–501.
32. Zinkel SS, Hurov KE, Ong C, Abtahi FM, Gross A, Korsmeyer SJ. A role
for proapoptotic BID in the DNA-damage response. Cell 2005;122:
579–91.
33. Kaufmann T, Tai L, Ekert PG, Huang DC, Norris F, Lindemann RK,
et al. The BH3-only protein bid is dispensable for DNA damage- and
replicative stress-induced apoptosis or cell-cycle arrest. Cell
2007;129:423–33.
34. Ren D, Tu HC, Kim H, Wang GX, Bean GR, Takeuchi O, et al. BID, BIM,
and PUMA are essential for activation of the BAX- and BAK-dependent cell death program. Science 2010;330:1390–3.

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 5, 2017. © 2011 American Association for Cancer Research.

Published OnlineFirst July 22, 2011; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-11-1014

Bcl-2 Family Genetic Profiling Reveals Microenvironment-Specific
Determinants of Chemotherapeutic Response
Justin R. Pritchard, Luke A. Gilbert, Corbin E. Meacham, et al.
Cancer Res 2011;71:5850-5858. Published OnlineFirst July 22, 2011.

Updated version
Supplementary
Material

Cited articles
Citing articles

E-mail alerts
Reprints and
Subscriptions
Permissions

Access the most recent version of this article at:
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-11-1014
Access the most recent supplemental material at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/suppl/2011/07/22/0008-5472.CAN-11-1014.DC1

This article cites 33 articles, 9 of which you can access for free at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/71/17/5850.full#ref-list-1
This article has been cited by 2 HighWire-hosted articles. Access the articles at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/71/17/5850.full#related-urls

Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal.
To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications Department at
pubs@aacr.org.
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications Department at
permissions@aacr.org.

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 5, 2017. © 2011 American Association for Cancer Research.

