Original Article

Suberoylanilide Hydroxamic Acid Blocks
Self-Renewal and Homotypic Aggregation of
Inflammatory Breast Cancer Spheroids*
Fredika M. Robertson, PhD1,2,3; Wendy A. Woodward, MD, PhD1,4; Ross Pickei, BS2; Zaiming Ye, PhD2;
William Bornmann, PhD2; Ashutosh Pal, PhD2; Zhenghong Peng, PhD2; Carolyn S. Hall, PhD5;
and Massimo Cristofanilli, MD1,3

BACKGROUND: Inflammatory breast cancer (IBC) is the most aggressive form of locally advanced breast cancer
(LABC). Patients with IBC commonly present with skin metastasis, which are observed microscopically as tumor
emboli within dermal lymphatics. These metastatic tumor cells aberrantly overexpress E-cadherin and exhibit the ability to undergo self-renewal and are highly invasive. There are no therapeutics yet identified that target the structure
and functions of IBC tumor emboli. The present studies evaluated the effects of the pan-histone deacetylase (HDAC)
inhibitor suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid (SAHA) using IBC tumor spheroids derived from established IBC cell lines
and tumor spheroids derived from pleural effusion (PE) aspirates of patients with IBC and LABC, designated as PEIBC and PE-LABC. METHODS: Methods used are as follows: culture of IBC cells from clonal density single cells in low
adherence culture conditions that promote formation of IBC tumor spheroids; clonogenic assays; cell fractionation
and Western blotting; confocal microscropy; and modified Boyden chamber invasion assays. RESULTS: SAHA inhibited self-renewal of IBC tumor spheroids from established IBC cell lines and PE-IBC and PE-LABC, as assessed by
decreased clonogenic growth. SAHA blocked homotypic aggregation of the cells that comprised the IBC tumor
spheroids leading to loss of their 3-dimensional (3D) structure, which was associated with a change in location of Ecadherin protein from the plasma membrane in untreated IBC tumor spheroids to the cytoplasm of cells within IBC
tumor spheroids with SAHA treatment. In addition, SAHA blocked the robust invasion exhibited by IBC tumor spheroids of established cell lines as well as by tumor spheroids derived from PE-IBC and PE-LABC. CONCLUSIONS:
SAHA targets the integrity and biological activities of IBC tumor spheroids and may be a promising agent to evaluate
C 2010 American Cancer Society.
for its effectiveness in treatment of IBC. Cancer 2010;116(11 suppl):2760–7. V
KEYWORDS: inflammatory breast cancer, self-renewal, E-cadherin, homotypic aggregation, histone deacetylase
enzymes, suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid, SAHA, cancer stem cells.

Inflammatory breast cancer (IBC) is the most aggressive variant of this disease, with a 5 year overall survival rate
for IBC patients that is significantly lower compared with the overall survival rate for patients with non-IBC locally
advanced breast cancer (LABC).1 Although multimodality therapy, including neoadjuvant chemotherapy, followed by
surgical resection and radiation, has been used to treat IBC patients older than 30 years, there has been no change in overall
survival of IBC patients during this time period.2 There is an urgent need to identify therapeutic agents that target specific
characteristics that are associated with the highly aggressive phenotype of IBC.
One of the signatures of IBC is the presence of invasion of tumor cells into the lymphatics of the dermis.1 IBC tumor
emboli within the dermal lymphatics aberrantly overexpress the calcium-dependent adhesion molecule E-cadherin. This
Corresponding author: Fredika M. Robertson, PhD, Department of Experimental Therapeutics, 1515 Holcombe Blvd, Unit 422, The University of Texas M. D.
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030; frobertson@mdanderson.org
1
The Morgan Welch Inflammatory Breast Cancer Research Program, The University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas; 2Department of Experimental Therapeutics, The University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas; 3Department of Breast Medical Oncology, The University of Texas
M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas; 4Department of Radiation Oncology, The University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas;
5
Department of Surgical Oncology Research, The University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas

The technical assistance of Kimberly Boley is gratefully acknowledged.
Massimo Cristofanilli’s current address: Department of Medical Oncology, Fox Chase Cancer Center, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
*Proceedings of the First International Inflammatory Breast Cancer Conference, Supplement to Cancer.
DOI: 10.1002/cncr.25176, Received: December 7, 2009; Accepted: January 14, 2010, Published online May 19, 2010 in Wiley InterScience (www.interscience.wiley.com)

2760

Cancer

June 1, 2010

SAHA Inhibits Self-Renewal and Integrity of IBC Tumor Spheroids/Robertson et al

protein, which is located at the adherens junctions on the
plasma membrane, mediates homotypic aggregation,
which confers the 3-dimensional (3D) structure of the tumor emboli.3 E-cadherin has been associated with a normal
phenotype, with loss of E-cadherin reported to commonly
occur during the epithelial-mesenchymal transition
(EMT). However, a recent study suggests that tumors with
a highly malignant phenotype expression of E-cadherin,
which occurs in conjunction with its binding partner p120
catenin and small GTPases, results in increased motility
and invasion.4 These observations are consistent with Ecadherin overexpression on the surface of highly invasive
IBC tumor emboli. In addition to E-cadherin expression,
IBC tumor emboli have been shown to possess characteristics consistent with this tumor type being enriched for cells
with a tumor initiating ie, cancer stem cell phenotype,
including the ability to undergo self-renewal.5
To date, no therapeutic agents have been identified
that target the characteristics of IBC, such as homotypic
aggregation of IBC tumor emboli and self-renewal. Recent
evidence suggests that histone deacetylase enzymes
(HDAC) enzymes, in tandem with histone acetylases
(HAT) enzymes, control reversible chromatin remodeling,
which is a key epigenetic mechanism that regulates transcription of genes associated with multiple activities of normal and malignant cells, including self-renewal, survival
and resistance to apoptosis, cell cycle progression, aggregation, motility, invasion, angiogenesis, and metastasis.6,7
Several HDAC inhibitors have been developed that
inhibit the activity of multiple HDAC enzymes. Suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid (SAHA; Vorinostat; Zolinza,
Merck & Co., Inc.) is the first pan-HDAC inhibitor to be
approved by the FDA.8,9 Although the first indication for
SAHA was for the treatment of patients with CTCL,
recent studies suggest that this pan-HDAC inhibitor may
have activity in solid tumors, including metastatic breast
cancer.10 Preclinical studies and clinical trials are underway to evaluate both pan-HDAC inhibitors and selective
HDAC inhibitors for their utility in treatment of multiple
types of solid tumors as well as hematological disorders.
Not only has there been a lack of progress in development of effective treatments for IBC, but there are also
few cell lines available with which to study IBC. Only 2
cell lines are widely available for study. The SUM149 IBC
cell line was developed from pleural effusion cells of an
IBC patient and is the most studied of all of the IBC cell
lines.11,12 SUM190 IBC cells were developed from the
primary tumor of an IBC patient. Both of these IBC cell
lines are used in the present study. Because of the lack of

Cancer

June 1, 2010

cell lines with which to study IBC and LABC, the present
study also used tumor cells isolated from pleural effusion
of a patient with IBC and a patient with LABC, as a comparison to the response of the established IBC cell lines to
SAHA. By using a combination of established IBC cell
lines and tumor cells isolated from patients with metastatic IBC and LABC, the present studies evaluated the
effects of SAHA on specific characteristics associated with
the aggressive phenotype of IBC.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Cell Lines and Conditions
The human MCF-7 breast cancer cell line was obtained
from American Type Cell Culture (Manassas, Va). MCF7 is an estrogen receptor positive (ERþ) breast cancer cell
line used as a control cell line in these studies. MCF-7 cells
were cultured in Dulbecco modified Eagles medium
(DMEM/F12; Invitrogen, Carlsbad, Calif) and supplemented with 10% heat-inactivated fetal bovine serum
(FBS; Invitrogen). The SUM149 and SUM190 cell lines
were provided by Dr. Stephen Ethier (Asterand, Detroit,
Mich).11,12 SUM149 and SUM190 cells were maintained
as 2-dimensional (2D) adherent cultures in Ham F12 Nutrient Mixture (Invitrogen) and supplemented with 10%
FBS, insulin (1 mg/mL; Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, Mo)
and hydrocortisone (1 mg/mL; Sigma-Aldrich). For low
adherence culture conditions, which promote formation
of tumor spheroids and self-renewal, SUM149 and
SUM190 cells as well as pleural effusion (PE)-IBC and
PE-LABC cells were maintained in serum-free mammary
epithelial growth medium (MEGM, BioWhittaker) supplemented with B27 (Invitrogen), 20 ng/mL epidermal
growth factor (EGF), 40 ng/mL bFGF (BD Biosciences),
and 4 ug/mL heparin (Sigma).13,14 All cell lines were
maintained at 37 C under 5% CO2 in humidified
incubators.
Assessment of Self-Renewal as Measured
by Clonogenic Growth
Single cell suspensions were plated into ultra low attachments plates or flasks (Corning) and maintained as
described above. Tumor spheroids were treated with either dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) as the solvent control or
with SAHA at concentrations of 0.25 lM, 0.5, 2.5, 5.0,
10.0, 25.0, or 50.0 lM, with each concentration run in
triplicate. After 10 days in culture, 0.5% thiazolyl blue tetrazolium bromide (MTT) was added to each well to allow
visualization of the tumor spheroids and samples were

2761

Original Article
Table 1. SAHA Inhibits Clonogenic Growth of IBC Tumor
Spheroids

Sample

IC50 [lM]

R2

MCF-7
SUM149
SUM190
PE-IBC
PE-LABC

0.37
0.17
3.31
2.27
1.52

0.94
0.91
0.91
0.95
0.94

SAHA significantly inhibits clonogenic growth of tumor spheroids from
established IBC cell lines SUM190 and SUM149 and from tumor spheroids
obtained from PE-IBC and PE-LABC. IC50 concentrations for the inhibitory
effect of SAHA ranged from 0.17 lM for SUM149 to 3.31 lM for SUM190.
SAHA indicates suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid; IBC, inflammatory breast
cancer; PE, pleural effusion; LABC, locally advanced breast cancer.

returned to the incubator for 1 hour. Formation of tumor
spheroids was measured with an Optronix Scanner
(Oxford, UK) and data was analyzed using GelCount
software. The IC50 for SAHA was calculated using nonlinear regression analysis of average tumor spheroid formation. The concentration of SAHA that inhibited 50%
of spheroid formation, designated as the IC50 values, are
represented from data obtained in 3 separate experiments
for all cell lines and pleural effusion cells evaluated, with
the Pearson correlation coefficients shown in Table 1.
E-Cadherin Antibody Staining of IBC Spheroids
and Photographic Assessment of Homotypic
Aggregation of IBC Tumor Cells

Confocal microscopy was used to define the location of E-cadherin on IBC tumor spheroids. Spheroids
were treated with SAHA (5 lM, 6 hours, 24 hours),
and slides were prepared by centrifuging spheroids onto
slides at 500 rpm for 3 minutes using a Shandon cytospin. Slides were rinsed with phosphate buffered saline
(PBS) at room temperature, fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde in PBS for 15 minutes at room temperature, followed by additional washes in PBS. Cells were
permeabilized with 0.1% Triton-X 100 in PBS for 5
minutes, followed by incubation in 5% goat serum in
PBS for 1 hour to block nonspecific antibody binding.
Slides were then incubated with E-cadherin polyclonal
antibody (Cell Signaling, Danvers, Mass) in PBS for 18
hours at 4 C. Nonspecific staining was determined by
incubating slides with isotypic control antibody as the
staining control. Slides were then washed in PBS 3
times for 10 minutes each, and incubated with goatantirabbit secondary antibody conjugated with AlexFluor 568 (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, Calif) in PBS at a
1:400 dilution for 2 hours at room temperature. For
nuclear staining, slides were then incubated with TO-

2762

PRO-3 (Invitrogen) in PBS at a dilution of 1:300 for
15 minutes. Slides were then washed in PBS 3 times for
10 minutes each, followed by placing cover slips on
slides using antifade mounting medium (Vector Laboratories, Burlingame, Calif). Images were captured using a
Zeiss LSM 510 confocal microscope. Representative
confocal images are shown to allow visualization of the
location of E-cadherin protein on SUM149 spheroids
and to observe the loss of homotypic aggregation
induced by exposure of SUM149 spheroids to SAHA
(Figs. 3 A-F).
Western Blot Analysis of Effects of SAHA on
Amount and Location of E-Cadherin Protein
in IBC Tumor Spheroids
SUM149 and SUM190 cells were cultured either under
adherent conditions in Ham F12 medium with 10% FBS
or under low adherence conditions in MEGM with
growth factors and supplements. For analysis of total Ecadherin protein, cells were treated with 5 lM SAHA for
24 hours. After treatment, cells were isolated and spun
down to isolate cell pellets, which were then lysed in 1%
M-PER lysis buffer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Rockford,
Ill). For analysis of E-cadherin protein in different cell
fractions, cells were cultured under low adherence conditions, treated with SAHA at 5 lM for 24 hours. Cells
were isolated and centrifuged to obtain cell pellets, with
removal of the supernatants to obtain pellets as dry as possible. Pellets were placed in buffers to isolate cytoplasmic
or nuclear fractions using the nuclear and cytoplasmic
extraction kit (Pierce Biochemicals, Rockford, Ill) according to manufacturer’s instructions. Equal amounts of protein (50-100 lg), as determined by total protein assay
(Bio-Rad Laboratories, Hercules, Calif), were then separated using 10% polyacrylamide gels (Bio-Rad). Proteins
were transferred to nitrocellulose membranes (GE
Healthcare, Piscataway, NJ), blocked for nonspecific
binding using a buffer containing 1X PBS, 0.1% Tween20, and 5% milk and then probed with E-cadherin antibodies (Cell Signaling, Danvers, Mass), followed by incubation with antirabbit IgG horseradish peroxidaseconjugated secondary antibodies (GE Healthcare). For
analysis of total protein in whole cell lysates and cytoplasm fractions, E-cadherin protein was normalized to bactin, used as a loading control. For analysis of E-cadherin
protein in nuclear fractions, Histone 3 was used as a loading control. Protein bands were observed by Chemiglow
enhanced chemiluminescence system (Alpha Imager, San
Leandro, Calif). Images were scanned and quantified

Cancer

June 1, 2010

SAHA Inhibits Self-Renewal and Integrity of IBC Tumor Spheroids/Robertson et al

invaded through transwell inserts coated with the artificial
basement membrane, Matrigel. Tumor spheroids were
trypsinized, resuspended in media, and counted. Plates
(6-well) compatible with transwell inserts with 8 lm
pore-sized polycarbonate filters (Fisher Scientific) were
coated with Matrigel in cold serum-free DMEM/F12 at a
final concentration of 0.7 mg/mL and placed at room
temperature for 40 minutes. Cells (in 500 lL serum-free
medium) were added into the transwell inserts and incubated for 72 hours in absence or presence of SAHA. As a
control, 10% FBS was used to evaluate the baseline extent
of invasion of tumor spheroids. The lower chambers were
filled with 2 mL of media. After incubation, noninvasive
cells on the upper surface of the filter were removed with
cotton swabs. Cells that had passed through the pores
onto the lower side of the filter were fixed, stained with
Hema-3 stain (Fisher Scientific), and quantified. The
experiments were performed in triplicate and repeated
twice. Two-tailed Student t tests were performed to evaluate the effects of SAHA on invasion of IBC tumor
spheroids.

RESULTS

Figure 1. Suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid (SAHA) inhibited
the homotypic aggregation and 3D integrity of inflammatory
breast cancer tumor spheroids. (A) Phase contrast micrographs revealed that SAHA induced a dose dependent inhibition of the homotypic aggregation of cells within SUM149
and (B) SUM190 tumor spheroids (A, B) with a loss of their
3-dimensional integrity of both SUM149 and SUM190 tumor
spheroids.

using an Alpha Innotech densitometer with the Alpha
Imager application program. Experiments were repeated
3 times and representative Western blots and densitometric analysis are shown.
Assessment of Invasion Through an Artificial
Matrigel Basement Membrane
The effects of SAHA on in vitro invasion of SUM149 and
SUM190 IBC spheroids and tumor spheroids from PEIBC and PE-LABC through a Matrigel basement membrane was determined based on the number of cells that

Cancer

June 1, 2010

SAHA Inhibited Clonogenicity of IBC Tumor
Spheroids
The effects of the pan-HDAC inhibitor SAHA on selfrenewal of IBC cells cultured under low adherence conditions, which promote formation of tumor spheres, was
assessed. For these studies, clonogenicity of tumor spheroids from established IBC cell lines as well as PE-IBC,
and PE-LABC was evaluated. SAHA induced a dose dependent inhibition of self-renewal of SUM149 and
SUM190 IBC tumor spheroids as well as inhibited selfrenewal of freshly isolated PE-IBC and PE-LABC. As
shown in Table 1, the concentrations of SAHA that inhibited 50% of clonogenic growth (IC50) of tumor spheroids
ranged from 0.17 lM for SUM149 to 3.31 lM for
SUM190, with the IC50 of PE-IBC and PE-LABC at
doses between those observed for the SUM190 tumor
spheroids. The IC50 doses of SAHA for all of the IBC cells
was within the clinically achievable range of 2.5 lM
SAHA.
SAHA Inhibited Homotypic Aggregation and
3D Integrity of IBC Tumor Spheroids
Both SUM149 and SUM190 cells form tumor spheroids
when placed in low adherence conditions in defined medium. Although SUM190 cells form very tight tumor

2763

Original Article

spheres, SUM149 cells form tumor spheroids that are not
as tightly packed as the SUM190 cells (Fig. 1 A and B).
Phase contrast microscopy was used to observe the dose
dependent effects of SAHA (2.5 lM-10 lM; 24 hours)
on homotypic aggregation of SUM149 and SUM190
IBC tumor spheroids, revealing that SAHA induced a loss
of integrity of both SUM149 and SUM190 tumor spheroids (Figs. 1 A and B). Similar dose and time dependent
results were observed with treatment of PE-IBC with
SAHA (data not shown).
SAHA Altered the Location of E-Cadherin
Protein in IBC Tumor Spheroids
SUM149 and SUM190 cells produce abundant E-cadherin protein when cultured under both 2D adherent conditions and in 3D low adherence culture conditions,
which promote formation of tumor spheres (Fig. 2 A and
B). When cultured as adherent cells, SUM149 cells produce approximately a 2-fold greater amount of E-cadherin
protein, which included a higher molecular weight glycosylation product, which was not detected in SUM149 tumor spheroids cultured under low adherence conditions
(Fig. 2 A and B). SUM190 cells produced equivalent
amounts of E-cadherin protein regardless of the culture
conditions. When cultured as tumor spheroids, both
SUM149 and SUM190 cells produced E-cadherin protein, with no change in total E-cadherin protein when
treated with SAHA (Fig. 2 C). Cell fractionation studies
combined with Western blotting and densitometry
revealed that although SAHA did not alter the total E-cadherin protein produced by IBC tumor spheroids, SAHA
treatment resulted in a change in the location of E-cadherin protein on IBC tumor spheroids. In untreated IBC
tumor spheroids, E-cadherin was located on the plasma
membrane, which was translocated into the cytoplasm by
SAHA treatment (Fig. 2 E and F).
SAHA Altered Location of E-Cadherin Protein and
Inhibits Homotypic Aggregation of IBC Spheroids

Confocal microscopy was used to observe the distinct pattern of E-cadherin protein localized to the adherens junctions of cells within SUM149 tumor spheroids.
In untreated SUM190 spheroids, E-cadherin protein was
located at the surface of the plasma membrane at the point
of cell:cell contact between cells within tumor spheroids
(Fig. 3 A-C). Treatment of SUM149 tumor spheroids
with 5 lM SAHA for 6 hours induced a loss of E-cadherin
protein at the adherens junctions, with E-cadherin protein
visible within the cytoplasm of IBC tumor cells that had

2764

been detached from the spheroid structure (Fig. 3 D-F).
The SAHA-induced alteration in E-cadherin localization
at the plasma membrane occurred simultaneously with
the diminished homotypic aggregation of cells within the
spheres, resulting in loss of integrity of the 3D tumor
spheroid structures (Figs. 3 D-F). The results of confocal
imaging studies are consistent with results shown in Figures 1 and Figures 2 which demonstrated that SAHA did
not alter the total amount of E-cadherin protein in IBC
tumor spheroids but mediated a translocation of protein
to the cytoplasm of IBC tumor spheroids, which was associated with the loss of homotypic aggregation and integrity of IBC tumor spheres.
IBC Tumor Spheroids Exhibit Robust Invasion
Across an Artificial Basement Membrane that
is Blocked by SAHA
SUM149 cells cultured as either adherent cells or as tumor
spheroids exhibit the ability to invade across an artificial
basement membrane. In contrast, SUM190 cells are not
invasive when cultured under 2D adherent conditions but
acquire this characteristic when cultured under low adherence conditions. SAHA significantly (P < .05) inhibited
invasion of SUM149 and SUM190 tumor spheroids as well
as invasion exhibited by PE-IBC and PE-LABC (Fig. 4).

DISCUSSION
IBC has a propensity to invade into the lymphatic system
of the dermis1 and to form aggregates of cells, defined as
tumor emboli, which exhibit homotypic aggregation that
is mediated through the aberrant overexpression of E-cadherin.3,5 In addition, IBC tumor cells have been shown to
express surface characteristics consistent with the enrichment for cells with a ‘‘tumor initiating’’ phenotype, ie,
cancer stem cells that are capable of self-renewal and multipotency.5 There are no therapeutic agents yet identified
that effectively inhibit self-renewal and the tight homotypic aggregation that are characteristics of IBC tumor
emboli.
The present studies used established IBC cell lines
SUM190, SUM149, as well as used tumor cells isolated
from pleural effusion aspirates from a patient with IBC
and a patient with LABC, designated as PE-IBC and PELABC, respectively, to evaluate the effects of the panHDAC inhibitor SAHA, on self-renewal of IBC tumor
spheroids and on their tight homotypic aggregation.
SAHA significantly inhibited self-renewal of IBC tumor
spheroids formed by established IBC cell lines SUM149
Cancer

June 1, 2010

SAHA Inhibits Self-Renewal and Integrity of IBC Tumor Spheroids/Robertson et al

Figure 2. Suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid (SAHA) induced translocation of E-cadherin protein into the cytoplasm of inflammatory breast cancer tumor spheroids. (A, B) Western blotting combined with densitometric analysis revealed that SUM149 cells
produced approximately 2-fold greater amounts of E-cadherin protein when cultured as 2-dimensional (2D) adherent cells compared with levels of E-cadherin protein produced by SUM149 cells cultured as 3-dimensional (3D) tumor spheroids. This appears
to be because of the presence of a glycosylated protein product in 2D adherent SUM149 cells. The amount of protein produced
by SUM190 cells was equivalent in 2D adherent compared with 3D tumor spheroids. (C, D) SAHA treatment did not alter the total
amount of E-cadherin protein produced by either SUM149 or SUM190 tumor spheroids. (E, F) Cell fractionation combined with
Western blotting and densitometry analysis revealed that SAHA altered the location of E-cadherin protein from the plasma membrane to the cytoplasm without altering the total amount of E-cadherin protein.

Cancer

June 1, 2010

2765

Original Article

Figure 3. Suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid (SAHA) altered
the location of E-cadherin protein and blocked homotypic
aggregation of inflammatory breast cancer tumor spheroids.
(A-C) E-cadherin protein (red fluorescence) was observed at
the adherens junctions of SUM149 cells that comprise the
inflammatory breast cancer tumor spheroids. Blue fluorescence is associated with nuclear DNA stained with TO-PRO3. Panel C is the merged image showing E-cadherin protein
localization at the plasma membrane with nuclear staining
shown in blue. (D-F) After exposure to 5 lM SAHA for 6
hours, E-cadherin protein was diminished at the adherens
junctions at the plasma membrane, with visible E-cadherin
protein within the cytoplasm. The decreased E-cadherin protein staining at the cell surface was associated with the loss
of homotypic aggregation of cells within the tumor spheroid,
leading to disintegration of the tumor spheroid structure.

and SUM190 and by PE-IBC and PE-LABC. The inhibitory effects of SAHA on homotypic aggregation were
apparent visually at a microscopic level using phase contrast microscopy and appeared as a loss of integrity of the
3D structure of IBC spheroids. On the basis of the known
role of E-cadherin in mediating homotypic aggregation,
further studies were performed to determine the effects of
SAHA on E-cadherin protein production by IBC tumor
spheroids.
The present results confirm previous reports that
IBC cells express high levels of E-cadherin.3,5 Previous
studies using anti-E-cadherin antibodies and small interfering (si) ribonucleic acid (RNA) approaches to knockdown E-cadherin have demonstrated that the result of
effectively blocking the homeotypic aggregation of IBC
tumor emboli is the inhibition of IBC metastasis.5 Interestingly, although SAHA did not alter the total amount of
E-cadherin protein, it altered its location, leading to a loss
of homotypic aggregation of IBC tumor spheroids.
SAHA is among the first therapeutic agents that have been
shown to effectively alter E-cadherin function in IBC.
Although E-cadherin has been reported to commonly be
lost during the process of EMT, which is associated with
tumor progression and metastasis, IBC is a notable excep-

2766

Figure 4. Suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid (SAHA) blocks
invasion of inflammatory breast cancer (IBC) tumor spheroids
from established IBC cells lines and from pleural effusion
(PE)-IBC and PE-locally advanced breast cancer (LABC).
SAHA significantly inhibited invasion of IBC tumor spheroids
derived from established cell lines and from pleural effusion
cells isolated from a patient with IBC (PE-IBC) and patient
with LABC (PE-LABC).

tion in that it is overexpressed during IBC invasion into
the dermal lymphatics.3,5 The specific role of E-cadherin
in IBC metastasis and the mechanisms of its regulation
are currently unclear and represents an important avenue
for further study. Future studies will elucidate the associations between aberrant E-cadherin expression in IBC, and
its association between its cytoplasmic binding partner
p120 catenin, small GTPases, and beta catenin signaling
pathway, which may together be critical to mediating the
rapid invasion observed in IBC.
Taken together, the present studies demonstrate
that cells derived from established SUM190 and
SUM149 IBC cell lines as well as cells isolated from pleural effusion of patients with metastatic IBC and LABC exhibit self-renewal as assessed by clonogenicity, which is
consistent with an enriched subpopulation with characteristics of cancer stem cells. IBC tumor spheroids serve as a
good in vitro surrogate model with which the peculiar
characteristics exhibited by IBC tumors can be studied,
including the aberrant overexpression of E-cadherin and
the homotypic aggregation of IBC cells that exhibit robust
invasive activity. By using approaches such as those taken
in the present experiments, it is possible to identify potential therapeutic targets that can be matched by the availability of FDA-approved therapeutic agents, which can be
immediately evaluated for their effects on characteristics
that define the aggressive phenotype of IBC. In addition,

Cancer

June 1, 2010

SAHA Inhibits Self-Renewal and Integrity of IBC Tumor Spheroids/Robertson et al

the present results are the first to demonstrate the potential utility of agents that are capable of epigenetic modulation of IBC tumors as a strategy to target the molecular
signatures that define IBC as the most aggressive form of
locally advanced breast cancer.

CONFLICT OF INTEREST DISCLOSURES
These studies were supported in part by American AirlinesKomen Foundation Promise Grant KGO81287 (FMR, MC),
NIH NCI R01 CA-138239-02 (WW, MC), and the State of
Texas Grant for The Rare and Aggressive Breast Cancer
Research Program (MC).

REFERENCES
1. Singletary SE, Cristofanilli M. Defining the clinical diagnosis of inflammatory breast cancer. Semin Oncol. 2008;35:710.
2. Cristofanilli M, Valero V, Buzdar AU, et al. Inflammatory
breast cancer (IBC) and patterns of recurrence: understanding the biology of a unique disease. Cancer. 2007;110:14361444.
3. Alpaugh ML, Tomlinson JS, Ye Y, Barsky SH. Relationship
of sialyl-Lewis(x/a) underexpression and E-cadherin overexpression in the lymphovascular embolus of inflammatory
breast carcinoma. Am J Pathol. 2002;161:619-628.
4. Liu Y, Wang Y, Zhang Y, et al. Abnormal expression of
p120-catenin, E-cadherin, and small GTPases is significantly
associated with malignant phenotype of human lung cancer.
Lung Cancer. 2009;63:375-382.

Cancer

June 1, 2010

5. Xiao Y, Ye Y, Yearsley K, Jones S, Barsky SH. The lymphovascular embolus of inflammatory breast cancer
expresses a stem cell-like phenotype. Am J Pathol. 2008;
173:561-574.
6. Lee MJ, Kim YS, Kummar S, Giaccone G, Trepel JB. Histone deacetylase inhibitors in cancer therapy. Curr Opin
Oncol. 2008;20:639-649.
7. Xu WS, Parmigiani RB, Marks PA. Histone deacetylase
inhibitors: molecular mechanisms of action. Oncogene. 2007;
26:5541-5552.
8. Mann BS, Johnson JR, Cohen MH, Justice R, Pazdur R. FDA
approval summary: vorinostat for treatment of advanced primary
cutaneous T-cell lymphoma. Oncologist. 2007;12:1247-1252.
9. Duvic M, Vu J. Vorinostat: a new oral histone deacetylase
inhibitor approved for cutaneous T-cell lymphoma. Expert
Opin Investig Drugs. 2007;16:1111-1120.
10. Luu TH, Morgan RJ, Leong L, et al. A phase II trial of vorinostat (suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid) in metastatic
breast cancer: a California Cancer Consortium study. Clin
Cancer Res. 2008;14:7138-7142.
11. Ethier SP. Human breast cancer cell lines as models of
growth regulation and disease progression. J Mammary
Gland Biol Neoplasia. 1996;1:111-121.
12. Forozan F, Mahlamaki EH, Monni O, et al. Comparative
genomic hybridization analysis of 38 breast cancer cell lines:
a basis for interpreting complementary DNA microarray
data. Cancer Res. 2000;60:4519-4525.
13. Dontu G, Abdallah WM, Foley JM, et al. In vitro propagation and transcriptional profiling of human mammary stem/
progenitor cells. Genes Dev. 2003;17:1253-1270.
14. Dontu G, Wicha MS. Survival of mammary stem cells in
suspension culture: implications for stem cell biology and
neoplasia. J Mammary Gland Biol Neoplasia. 2005;10:75-86.

2767

