Research Article

Revealing Targeted Therapy for Human Cancer by Gene
Module Maps
1

1,3,4

5

1

David J. Wong, Dimitry S.A. Nuyten, Aviv Regev, Meihong Lin, Adam S. Adler,
6
4
1,2
Eran Segal, Marc J. van de Vijver, and Howard Y. Chang

1,2

1

Programs in Epithelial Biology and 2Cancer Biology, Stanford University, Stanford, California; Departments of 3Radiation Oncology and
Diagnostic Oncology, The Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam, the Netherlands; 5MIT Department of Biology and Broad Institute
of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, Massachusetts; and 6Department of Computer Science and Applied Mathematics, Weizmann
Institute, Rehovot, Israel
4

hundreds of genes, which allowed definition of new molecular
subtypes of cancer with distinct risks of metastasis, death, and
response to therapy (1–6). However, whereas genomic technologies
have improved the precision and prognostic power of cancer
diagnoses, they have shed less light on how these newly recognized
subtypes of cancers should be therapeutically targeted. As clinical
experience with Her-2 and epidermal growth factor receptor
inhibition in cancer has illustrated, identification and selection of
patients who are likely to respond to molecularly targeted therapies
are critical to the success of these approaches (7–10). Unfortunately, because a large number of genes with many diverse
functions are identified in prognostic signatures, the laundry lists
of genes may yield excellent prognostic markers without revealing
much of the underlying biological mechanisms. In many instances,
physicians and patients thus faced the quandary of knowledge of
certain doom but little guidance for a course of action.
Previously, investigators have suggested adjusting the intensity
of current chemotherapeutic regimens based on cancer subtypes
as defined by gene expression signatures (11). Alternatively, other
groups have suggested using gene expression signatures of
oncogenic pathways (12), drug-specific gene expression signatures
predictive of cell killing (13), and gene expression signatures
induced by drugs (14, 15) to guide targeted therapy. Whereas these
methods are promising, they require extensive gene expression
profiling of in vitro cell models to define expression signatures for
each chemical entity. For instance, Lamb et al. (16) carried out 564
arrays to determine the transcriptional response to 164 drugs, most
of which in a single cell line.
To address this challenge, we adapted the gene module map
method to identify genotype-specific therapeutic targets for
human cancer (17). In a gene module map, the genome-scale
expression profile of each tumor is deconvoluted into a series of
activated and deactivated gene modules representing distinct
functional pathways, enabling a higher-order and systematic view
of the perturbed functional network in cancer cells (17). We
hypothesized that by intersecting the gene module map with
genotypic data, such as previously identified prognostic gene
expression signatures, we can identify unique functional features
that cosegregate with each genetic subtype. Genotype-specific
functional pathways can then form the basis of targeted therapies
that match unique molecular interventions to the subset of
patients most likely to respond.
Clinically aggressive breast tumors acquire the ability to
proliferate rapidly, invade through tissue planes, induce new blood
vessel formation, and recruit inflammatory cells—many features
that are normally reserved for the physiologic response of wound
healing. We have discovered that a gene expression program
reminiscent of wound healing, termed the ‘‘wound signature,’’ is a

Abstract
A major goal of cancer research is to match specific therapies
to molecular targets in cancer. Genome-scale expression
profiling has identified new subtypes of cancer based on
consistent patterns of variation in gene expression, leading to
improved prognostic predictions. However, how these new
genetic subtypes of cancers should be treated is unknown.
Here, we show that a gene module map can guide the
prospective identification of targeted therapies for genetic
subtypes of cancer. By visualizing genome-scale gene expression in cancer as combinations of activated and deactivated
functional modules, gene module maps can reveal specific
functional pathways associated with each subtype that might
be susceptible to targeted therapies. We show that in human
breast cancers, activation of a poor-prognosis ‘‘wound
signature’’ is strongly associated with induction of both a
mitochondria gene module and a proteasome gene module.
We found that 3-bromopyruvic acid, which inhibits glycolysis,
selectively killed breast cells expressing the mitochondria
and wound signatures. In addition, inhibition of proteasome
activity by bortezomib, a drug approved for human use in
multiple myeloma, abrogated wound signature expression and
selectively killed breast cells expressing the wound signature.
Thus, gene module maps may enable rapid translation of
complex genomic signatures in human disease to targeted
therapeutic strategies. [Cancer Res 2008;68(2):369–78]

Introduction
One of the outstanding issues in treating cancer is the vexing
heterogeneity in patient course and response to therapy, even in
apparently similar tumors as defined by conventional criteria.
Molecular genetic analyses over the last several decades have
increasingly revealed the genetic heterogeneity that underlies the
clinical spectrum of disease outcomes and progression. For
instance, genome-wide gene expression profiling of apparently
similar human tumors by traditional criteria have revealed
consistent and large-scale differences in the expression pattern of

Note: Supplementary data for this article are available at Cancer Research Online
(http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/).
D.J. Wong and D.S.A. Nuyten contributed equally to this work.
Requests for reprints: Howard Y. Chang, Program in Epithelial Biology, Stanford
University, CCSR 2155, 269 Campus Drive, Stanford, CA 94305. E-mail: howchang@
stanford.edu or Marc van de Vijver, Department of Diagnostic Oncology, The
Netherlands Cancer Institute, Plesmanlaan 121, 1066 CX Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
E-mail: m.vd.vijver@nki.nl.
I2008 American Association for Cancer Research.
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-07-0382

www.aacrjournals.org

369

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (2). January 15, 2008

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

Figure 1. Gene module map showing activation of mitochondria and proteasome gene sets in human breast cancers with poor prognosis wound signature. A, flow
chart of the steps in our analysis to identify and test potential therapeutic targets in breast cancers with poor prognosis wound signature. B, a matrix of gene sets
(rows ) versus 295 human breast cancer expression arrays (columns ), where a red (or green) entry indicates that the gene members of the particular gene set
were significantly induced (or repressed) in the breast cancer sample more than would be expected by chance alone (P < 0.05, FDR <0.05). The brown entries (in the
bar located below the matrix) indicate that the breast cancers have an activated wound signature. The gene sets that are significantly coactivated with the wound
signature in the breast cancers are indicated by the red bar on the left of the matrix. The ‘‘wound signature–activated’’ and ‘‘wound signature–quiescent’’ gene sets are
coded in red and green, respectively, on the right side of the matrix. The names of the gene sets that make up the proteasome module are labeled in blue. The names
of the gene sets that make up the mitochondria module are labeled in brown.

powerful and independent predictor of breast cancer metastasis
and survival present in 40% of primary breast tumors (11, 18).
Activation of the wound signature in primary breast cancer is
most prominently due to coordinate amplification of two genes
on chromosome arm 8q: MYC and CSN5 (19). In a retrospective
study of 295 early breast tumors (stage I and II), the wound
signature was the most significant predictor of metastasis in
multivariate analysis, far ahead of traditional clinical, histologic,
and molecular criteria (11). Whereas patients whose tumors lack
the wound signature may be more assured of their good
prognosis and avoid unnecessary adjuvant systemic therapy
(11, 20), how patients with an activated wound signature should
be treated is unclear. Here, we use gene module map as an
unbiased approach to search for therapeutic targets in wound-like
breast cancers and to identify glycolysis blockade and proteasome
blockade as potential therapeutic strategies for these highly
aggressive tumors.

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (2). January 15, 2008

Materials and Methods
Gene module map. Gene module map was done as described with the
program Genomica (17) using 1,256 gene sets derived from Gene Ontology
(21) and the gene expression profiles of 295 human primary breast cancers
from the Netherlands Cancer Institute (NKI) data set (11, 20). Briefly, given
this collection of precompiled gene sets and this compendium of expression
arrays, the method first identifies the gene sets that are induced or repressed
significantly in the set of arrays (Fig. 1A). In the second step, the method
identifies the gene sets that are significantly associated with particular
clinical annotations, specifically the wound signature, in the breast cancer
arrays. The coactivated gene sets were then combined into higher-level
modules based on their Gene Ontology relations, specifically the mitochondria and proteasome modules. Genomica and the full gene module map of
the 295 breast tumors can be downloaded and interactively queried.7

7

370

http://genomica.weizmann.ac.il/

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Revealing Targeted Therapy for Human Cancer
(0.1% FBS) for 24 h before RNA extraction. The array data are available at
GEO (accession nos. GSE2824, GSE5307, and GSE8957).
Data analysis. To determine the wound, mitochondria, and proteasome
signature scores, we calculated the Pearson correlation coefficient of the
expression pattern of genes in the mitochondria or proteasome signature
relative to the expression pattern of these genes in serum-stimulated
fibroblasts, as previously described for the wound score (11). The KD50 was
defined as the dose of bortezomib required to kill 50% of tumor cells.
Pearson correlations between KD50 and wound or proteasome scores were
calculated in Winstat.
To quantify the association of the proteasome signature with the wound
signature in six independent human breast cancer data sets, we calculated
the Pearson correlation of the wound signature score and the proteasome
signature score across individuals in each data set. The wound scores and
proteasome scores were plotted in linear regression plots, and the
probability of observing the correlation by chance alone was calculated
by one-sided t test (null hypothesis R = 0). Pearson correlation and linear
regression were calculated in Winstat. Genes were mapped across different
platforms using Unigene identifiers for the 512 wound signatures genes and
LLID for the 50 proteasome module genes. When multiple probes were
mapped to one Unigene cluster or LLID, expression data of duplicate probes
were averaged. For Affymetrix data, expression values were log transformed
and mean centered across genes. Data from platforms that used a
nonbreast cancer reference were mean centered across genes. Data from
platforms that used a breast cancer reference were not centered.

Survival analysis. We compared metastasis-free survival and overall
survival of patients with breast cancers that have activated versus repressed
signatures using Kaplan-Meier survival plots by the Cox-Mantel log-rank
test with the program Winstat (R. Fitch Software). Overall survival was
defined by death from any cause and patients were censored at last followup. Distant metastasis was scored only if it was the first recurrence event as
previously described (11, 20). If a patient developed a local recurrence, an
axillary recurrence, a contralateral breast cancer, or a second primary
cancer (except for nonmelanoma skin cancer), the patient was censored at
this time. This is based on the theoretical possibility that these cancers can
be a source for distant metastases. An ipsilateral supraclavicular recurrence
shortly preceded distant metastasis in all but one patient. An ipsilateral
supraclavicular recurrence was thus considered the first clinical evidence
for metastatic disease in this analysis. Therefore, these patients were not
censored at time of ipsilateral supraclavicular recurrence.
Forty-five percent of the 295 primary breast cancers have an activated
wound signature, 48% have an activated mitochondria signature, and 44%
have an activated proteasome signature. Seventy-three percent of the
mitochondria-activated cancers have an activated wound signature, and
80% of the mitochondria-repressed cancers have a repressed wound
signature. Similarly, 81% of the proteasome-activated cancers have an
activated wound signature and 83% of the proteasome-repressed cancers
have a repressed wound signature.
Cell culture and drug treatment. MCF10A cell lines were stably
transduced with vector only, E2F3, CSN5, MYC, or MYC and CSN5, as
previously described (19). MCF10A cells were grown in DMEM/F-12
(Invitrogen/Cambrex) with 5% fetal bovine serum (FBS), supplemented
with epidermal growth factor (20 ng/mL), insulin (10 Ag/mL), and
hydrocortisone (0.5 Ag/mL). All breast cancer cell lines were obtained from
the NKI cryo-bank. Breast cancer cells were grown in DMEM (Invitrogen)
with 10% FBS. 3-Bromopyruvic acid (Sigma) was dissolved in water and
neutralized with NaOH immediately before use. Bortezomib was purchased
from Millenium Pharmaceuticals. Proteasome blockade was confirmed
12 h after treatment with 1 or 10 Amol/L bortezomib by measuring
proteolytic activity with a luminogenic proteasome substrate relative to
untreated cells per manufacturer’s instructions (Promega). For the cell
killing assays, 104 cells were plated per well in 96-well plates. Cells were
exposed to various concentrations of the indicated drugs in DMEM/F-12
and low FBS (0.1%). Because bortezomib was in DMSO, cells were exposed
to the vehicle (DMSO) and the same medium as a control. Viable cells
were quantified by 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium
(MTT; Roche) assay after 18 h of 3-bromopyruvic acid treatment; 24 h of
MG132, calpain, or lysosome treatment; or 48 h of bortezomib treatment.
Terminal deoxyribonucleotidyl transferase–mediated dUTP nick end
labeling (TUNEL) assay for detection of apoptotic DNA fragmentation
was done per manufacturer’s instruction (Roche).
Microarrays. MCF10A cell lines and the breast cancer cell lines were
cultured until reaching 70% confluence, then switched to low serum
(0.1% FBS) for 48 h. The wound signature is induced by serum, and serum
deprivation was necessary to quantify the inherent activation of wound
signature in cancer cell lines. Total RNA was extracted using Trizol
(Invitrogen). Amplification, labeling, and hybridization of the MCF10A cell
lines were done on human cDNA microarrays with the Stratagene universal
human reference RNA as previously described (19). Amplification, labeling,
and hybridization of the breast cancer cell lines were carried out according
to the NKI protocol8 using the NKI human 35k oligonucleotide array.
The breast cancer cell line samples were hybridized against the NKI human
breast cancer reference pool (consisting of 100 human breast tumors) and
all experiments were carried out in duplicate (dye-swap). For bortezomib
treatment, we examined gene expression changes in response to
bortezomib after 24 h of treatment, before the onset of cell death (based
on MTT assay after 24 h of bortezomib treatment; data not shown). Each
cancer cell line was treated with 1 Amol/L bortezomib in low serum

8

Results
Mitochondria module and proteasome module are coactivated with wound signature in human breast cancer. To
identify novel therapeutic strategies for breast cancers with the
poor prognosis wound signature, we used gene module map as an
unbiased approach to discover new gene modules that are
coactivated with the wound signature (Fig. 1A). We analyzed
1,256 gene sets defined by Gene Ontology (21) terms in the gene
expression profiles of 295 human primary breast cancers from NKI
(20). For each microarray profile, the algorithm first compares
genes that are induced (or repressed) by 3-fold versus their
membership in gene sets and identifies gene sets that show
enrichment in induced (or repressed) genes more than expected by
chance (P < 0.05). P value of enrichment was determined by the
hypergeometric distribution, and a false discovery rate (FDR)
calculation was used to account for multiple hypothesis testing.
The resulting gene module map is shown (Fig. 1B). Second, tumors
that exhibited the poor-prognosis wound signature were identified
(using hierarchical clustering of 512 wound signature genes as
previously described; ref. 11), and we identified enriched gene sets
that were significantly coactivated with the wound signature more
than expected by chance alone and in at least 15 of the breast
cancers (P < 0.05, FDR<0.05, hypergeometric distribution; Fig. 1B
and Supplementary Table S1).
We observed that five gene sets associated with mitochondrion
were coordinately induced in tumors with an activated wound
signature: the Gene Ontology terms mitochondrion, NADH dehydrogenase activity, hydrogen ion transporter activity, cation transporter activity, and oxidoreductase activity (labeled in brown in
Fig. 1B). The member genes that enabled gene set hits in each of
the gene sets were fused together into a single gene module,
representing a refined group of coexpressed genes termed the
‘‘mitochondria module’’ (Fig. 2A). The resulting mitochondria
module is composed of 218 unique genes consisting exclusively of
genes encoded in the nuclear genome, most of which encode
proteins with known localization and/or function in the mitochondria (Supplementary Table S2). The module encompasses

http://microarrays.nki.nl/

www.aacrjournals.org

371

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (2). January 15, 2008

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

Figure 2. Mitochondria gene module in human breast cancers. A, gene module map highlights the association of mitochondria module with activated wound signature.
Top, wound signature status and identity of gene sets derived from Gene Ontology terms contributing to the mitochondria gene module. Five gene sets related to
mitochondria were coordinately induced in tumor samples that had an activated wound signature; the average expression of their member genes in each array is
displayed. Shown are the subset of breast cancer samples with the strongest coordinate activation or deactivation of the mitochondria module after accounting for
multiple hypothesis testing (FDR <0.05, P < 0.05). Bottom, raw expression levels for the 218 genes that compose the mitochondria module along with their respective
membership in each of the five gene sets (left). B, induction of mitochondria module in primary breast tumors predicts increased probability of death. Kaplan-Meier
survival curve is shown. C, validation of the mitochondria module in an independent set of locally advanced breast cancers (2). Shown is a Kaplan-Meier relapse-free
survival curve of patients in which the average expression of the mitochondria module in the primary breast tumor is above (induced) or below (repressed) zero,
showing that the mitochondria module is a good predictor of survival in breast cancer in another data set.

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (2). January 15, 2008

372

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Revealing Targeted Therapy for Human Cancer

expression of mitochondria genes in poor prognosis breast cancers
suggested that this subset of breast cancers with activated wound
signature may have a mitochondrial respiratory defect and have
increased dependence on glycolysis for ATP production. Thus, we
examined whether cells with an activated wound signature are more
susceptible to a drug that blocks glycolysis. We have previously
shown that immortalized but untransformed MCF10A breast
epithelial cells do not express the wound signature, but the wound
signature is partially or fully induced by overexpression of MYC or
MYC plus CSN5, respectively (19). Expression of CSN5 alone does
not induce the wound signature. In addition, we found that the
oncogene E2F3 (23) is sufficient to drive MCF10A cells into
proliferation in low serum but has only a modest effect on the
wound signature (Supplementary Table S4 and data not shown). We
also found that the mitochondrial signature is induced by
overexpression of MYC or MYC plus CSN5, but not by CSN5 alone
or E2F3 (Fig. 4A). We first treated these MCF10A cells of different
genotypes with 3-bromopyruvic acid, which inhibits glycolysis and
has been shown in previous studies to have selective killing in
animal models of hepatocellular carcinoma (24, 25). We found that
the MCF10A cells expressing MYC or MYC plus CSN5 were
selectively killed by 10 Amol/L 3-bromopyruvic acid compared with
those expressing vector control, CSN5, or E2F3 (Fig. 4B). This
selective pharmacologic effect is not simply due to increased
proliferation because MCF10A cells expressing CSN5 alone or E2F3
have increased proliferation but are not killed (Fig. 4B). However,
there was only a small increase in susceptibility to 3-bromopyruvic
acid by MCF10A cells expressing MYC plus CSN5 at the 5 Amol/L
dose and all of the MCF10A cells were equally killed at the 20 Amol/L
dose (Fig. 4B), showing that the therapeutic margin of 3-bromopyruvic acid in selective killing of breast cells expressing the wound
signature is narrow.
Cells with activated wound signature are selectively killed
by bortezomib. Based on our discovery of the induction of the
proteasome signature in poor-prognosis breast cancers with
activated wound signature, we examined whether MCF10A cells
with activated wound signature were more susceptible to death by
drugs that inhibit the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway. MCF10A cells
expressing MYC or MYC plus CSN5 also induced the proteasome
signature (Fig. 4A). In contrast, MCF10A cells expressing E2F3 or
CSN5 alone did not induce the proteasome signature (Fig. 4A). We
treated these MCF10A cells of different genotypes with proteasome
inhibitors to determine whether we may achieve genotype-specific
targeting of these cells. Cells expressing MYC or MYC plus CSN5
were preferentially killed by the proteasome inhibitor MG132
but not by protease inhibitors of calpain (LLM) or lysosome
(E64; Fig. 4C and Supplementary Fig. S1). Based on dose titration,
cells engineered to express the wound signature were exquisitely
sensitive to proteasome inhibition (KD50 of MG132, 1 Amol/L),
whereas cells without the wound signature were not significantly
affected at 50-fold the dose (Fig. 4C). Bortezomib, a boroncontaining dipeptide derivative, is a potent and specific inhibitor of
the proteasome with an inhibitory constant of 0.6 nmol/L (26).
Bortezomib is approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration
for the treatment of refractory multiple myeloma and is currently
being investigated for solid tumors (26). Cells exhibiting the wound
signature were also significantly more sensitive to killing by
bortezomib; the KD50 of control cells expressing E2F3 or CSN5
alone was at least higher by 100-fold (Fig. 4C). Nuclear morphology
and TUNEL staining confirmed that genotype-specific cell killing
occurs through apoptosis (Fig. 4D). These results show that breast

multiple processes associated with the mitochondria, including
respiration/oxidative phosphorylation, various other metabolic
processes, apoptosis, mitochondrial biogenesis, and transport
processes. Importantly, the genes in the mitochondria module
were not simply an enriched subset of the wound signature: the
overlap between the mitochondria module and wound signature
was only seven genes.
We also similarly observed that gene sets associated with the
ubiquitin-proteasome pathway were coordinately induced in
tumors with an activated wound signature: ubiquitin cycle,
proteasome complex, proteasome core complex , and protein
ubiquitination (labeled in blue in Fig. 1B). The member genes that
enabled gene set hits in each of the four sets were similarly fused
together into a single gene module, representing the ‘‘proteasome
module’’ (Fig. 3A). The resulting proteasome module is composed
of 50 unique genes, which are listed in Supplementary Table S3.
The proteasome module is strongly induced in tumors with the
wound signature (P < 0.05, FDR <0.05, hypergeometric distribution;
Fig. 3A). In particular, genes that encode components of the 19S
regulatory and 20S proteasome core subunits are most strongly
associated with activation of the wound signature (P < 10 4,
hypergeometric distribution). Only four genes of the proteasome
module are part of the 512-gene wound signature; thus, this
analysis also identified an expanded and coordinate activity of
proteasome genes with the wound signature that we previously did
not appreciate.
Mitochondria and proteasome modules associated with
poor prognosis in human breast cancers. Across all 295 tumors,
the primary breast tumors that had increased expression of the
proteasome module had significantly worse subsequent metastasis-free and overall survival (P < 10 3 and P < 10 7, respectively;
Fig. 3B). The mitochondria module was not significantly associated
with survival across all 295 samples; however, the 50 tumors that
had the highest average expression of the mitochondria module
had a statistically significant association with poor survival
compared with the 50 tumors that had the lowest average
expression (P < 0.02, Fig. 2B). Activity of the mitochondria module
was not associated with survival in the remaining 195 tumors with
modest or no coregulation of the mitochondria module. We also
examined the prognostic value of the mitochondria module in an
additional data set of 120 locally advanced breast cancers obtained
with a different microarray platform for which relapse-free survival
data were available (2). We carried out the exact same analysis
and identified 50 tumors with the highest and 50 tumors with the
lowest average expression of the mitochondria module. Tumors
with an induced mitochondria module showed a significantly
increased risk of cancer relapse (P < 0.05; Fig. 2C). Applying the
mitochondria module to all 120 tumors (yielding 60 tumors with an
average expression level of the mitochondria module above zero
and 60 tumors with an average expression level below zero) also
showed a significant increased risk of relapse for tumors with
induced mitochondria module (P = 0.03; data not shown). Thus,
similar to the wound signature, both the mitochondria and
proteasome modules are associated with poor prognosis in human
breast cancers.
Cells with activated wound signature are selectively killed
by 3-bromopyruvic acid. More than 70 years ago, Warburg (22)
observed that cancer cells frequently induce glycolysis at the
expense of mitochondrial respiration for energy production, and
hypothesized that mitochondrial ‘‘respiration injury’’ is a fundamental defect in cancer. Our discovery of an alteration in the

www.aacrjournals.org

373

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (2). January 15, 2008

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

Figure 3. Proteasome gene module in human breast cancers. A, gene module map highlights the association of a proteasome module with activated wound signature.
Top, wound signature status and identity of gene sets derived from Gene Ontology terms contributing to the proteasome gene module. Four gene sets related to the
proteasome were coordinately induced in tumor samples that had an activated wound signature; the average expression of their member genes in each array is
displayed. Shown are the subset of breast cancer samples with the strongest coordinate activation or deactivation of the proteasome module after accounting for
multiple hypothesis testing (FDR <0.05, P < 0.05). Middle, raw expression levels for the 50 genes that compose the proteasome module along with their respective
membership in each of the four gene sets (left ). Bottom, enrichment of high-grade histology and poor clinical outcomes in tumors with high proteasome module.
B, induction of proteasome module in primary breast tumors predicts increased probability of distant metastasis and death. Kaplan-Meier survival curves are shown.

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (2). January 15, 2008

374

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Revealing Targeted Therapy for Human Cancer

Figure 4. Glycolysis or proteasome inhibition selectively kills breast epithelial cells exhibiting the wound signature. A, mitochondria and proteasome scores
of the transduced MCF10A breast epithelial cells. The degree of activation of the wound signature in the MCF10A cells is coded. B, genotype-specific killing
of MCF10A breast epithelial cells exhibiting the wound signature by a glycolysis inhibitor, 3-bromopyruvic acid (3BrPA ), after 18 h. Columns, mean; bars, SE.
C, genotype-specific killing of MCF10A breast epithelial cells exhibiting the wound signature by proteasome inhibitors, MG132 and bortezomib, after 24 and 48 h,
respectively. Dose-response curves (mean F SE) are shown. D, bortezomib-mediated killing induces features of apoptosis. Pyknotic nuclei (Hoechst 334) and DNA
fragmentation (TUNEL) are visualized. Percent of cells positive for TUNEL staining (mean F SE) is reported based on three independent experiments.

luminescent proteasome substrate (data not shown), suggesting
that genotype-specific killing is not due to differential degrees of
proteasome inhibition but rather due to differential susceptibility
to death from proteasome inhibition.

epithelial cells expressing the wound signature are selectively killed
through apoptosis by the proteasome inhibitor bortezomib.
Bortezomib at both 1 and 10 Amol/L completely inhibited the
ability of all of the transduced MCF10A cells to cleave a

www.aacrjournals.org

375

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (2). January 15, 2008

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

coordinate activities of the proteasome module and wound
signature in multiple patient populations representing the full
spectrum of breast cancer progression. As shown in Table 1,
activation of the proteasome module and the wound signature are
strongly and positively correlated in six independent cohorts of
human breast cancers (P < 10 7 in all cases). These include primary
stage I and II breast cancer, locally advanced disease (stage IIb,
IIIa), lymph node–positive disease, and metastatic breast carcinomas (Table 1). Thus, the activity of the proteasome module and the
wound signature are intimately linked in breast cancer initiation
and progression.

Wound signature predicts response to bortezomib. We next
examined whether established breast cancer cell lines may also be
targeted by bortezomib in a genotype-specific fashion. Breast
cancer cell lines are often established from advanced breast
carcinomas and have been adapted to in vitro growth. Thus, when
we profiled eight breast cancer cell lines, we found that all eight
had activated the wound signature, similar to MCF10A breast
epithelial cells expressing MYC or MYC plus CSN5. Remarkably, the
KD50 of bortezomib for the breast cancer lines and the transduced
MCF10A cells was highly correlated with their wound signature
scores as well as their proteasome signature scores (Fig. 5 and
Supplementary Table S4), suggesting that the wound signature as
well as the proteasome signature is a strong predictor for response
to bortezomib. In addition, comparison of gene expression profiles
before and after bortezomib treatment showed that bortezomib
substantially decreased wound signature expression in six of eight
breast cancer lines before induction of cell death (Supplementary
Fig. S2A). The extent of the decrease in the wound signature after
bortezomib treatment was modestly correlated with the efficacy of
killing by proteasome inhibition (R = 0.56, P = 0.07; Supplementary Fig. S2B). Proteasome inhibition may be a pharmacologically
tractable method to specifically kill breast tumor cells exhibiting
the wound signature.
Validation of the association between proteasome module
and wound signature in six independent breast cancer data
sets. To test the strength of the association between the
proteasome gene module and wound signature, we examined the

Discussion
The modern pharmacopeia contains a full armamentarium
against diverse molecular targets; thus, the challenge in postgenomic medicine is to match the right drug with the right disease.
Here, we illustrate a general prospective strategy to identify
targeted therapies for molecular subtypes of cancer identified by
gene expression signatures. The gene module map method is
general and may be applicable to other diseases such as inflammatory or metabolic disorders. We suggest that by providing a
holistic view of the cellular network of the patient’s tumors in vivo
through gene module map, investigators can identify integral but
previously unrecognized consequences of oncogenic transformation. These additional molecular features may be amenable to
interference by a drug already available for human use, becoming

Figure 5. Wound signature predicts breast tumor cell killing by
proteasome inhibition. A, list of breast cell lines analyzed. B, correlation
of wound signature score with sensitivity to bortezomib in breast cell
lines. Linear regression of wound score with bortezomib KD50. Numbers
correspond to cell lines listed in A. C, correlation of proteasome signature
score with sensitivity to bortezomib in breast cell lines.

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (2). January 15, 2008

376

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Revealing Targeted Therapy for Human Cancer

Table 1. Correlation between wound signature and proteasome signature in six independent breast cancer data sets
First author

Samples (n)

Van de Vijver (20)

295

Wang (33)
Sorlie (2)
Minn (34)
Ma (35)

286
163
99
60

Weigelt (36)

169

R

Characteristics
Stage I and II; lymph node negative and positive; untreated
and treated adjuvantly (chemo and hormonal); ER+/
97% T1-T2N0, 3% T3-4N0; no adjuvant treatment; ER+/
Stage I-IV; mostly T2N1 or greater; treated neoadjuvantly; ER+/
T1N0–T3N3a; no treatment data provided; ER+/ , PR+/ , Her-2/neu+/
T1N0–T2N3a/T3N2a; all but four, ER+, PR+/ , mostly Her-2/neu ;
adjuvant tamoxifen; no chemotherapy
114 patients; 55 samples from various metastatic sites

P

0.76

<10

56

0.60
0.65
0.76
0.63

<10
<10
<10
<10

29

0.78

<10

35

20
19
13

Abbreviations: ER, estrogen receptor; PR, progesterone receptor.

transcription factor turnover in gene activation (32) and the
recent identification of the ubiquitin ligase activator CSN5 and its
substrate MYC as oncogenes for breast cancers exhibiting wound
signature (19).
In summary, gene module analysis highlighted the potential role
of genes with mitochondrial and proteasome function in a subset
of poor prognosis breast cancers, which led to experimentally
testable hypotheses for its mechanism and suggested possible
therapeutic strategies. Previous gene-level analysis of the seven
published breast cancer data sets did not detect the association
between mitochondria-related genes or proteasome-related genes
and cancer progression. As more genomic, epigenomic, and
proteomic data sets are being generated, we believe that
integration of these diverse streams of information via module
maps will streamline studies of cancer and other diseases to
provide robust biological and mechanistic insights. To facilitate
such discoveries, we have implemented our method in a software
tool called Genomica,9 and made it freely available for academic
use, along with detailed tutorials on how to readily reproduce the
results presented here and how to generate new module maps
from other expression data and gene set collections. Judicious
use of the gene module map may facilitate rapid translation of
genomic and proteomic knowledge to specific therapies for
patients.

Achilles’ heels for the cancer cell. Illustrating this concept, our
observation herein that mitochondria and proteasome signatures
are coactivated with the wound signature led to the discovery
that the glycolysis inhibitor 3-bromopyruvic acid and the
currently available proteasome inhibitor bortezomib specifically
kill breast epithelial cells that exhibit the poor-prognosis wound
signature.
The coactivation of a mitochondria gene module and the poorprognosis wound signature is likely explained as a different facet
of MYC activation in these tumors. MYC has previously been
shown to induce nuclearly encoded mitochondrial genes and
mitochondrial biogenesis (27). We observed that breast epithelial
cells that express the wound signature have only a 2-fold
difference in susceptibility to 3-bromopyruvic acid. This narrow
therapeutic window may be because 3-bromopyruvic acid also has
some inhibitory activity on mitochondrial respiration (28), which
would render cells with intact mitochondrial metabolism
susceptible to this drug. Drugs that more specifically target
glycolysis are being developed (29), and our findings suggest that
this class of drugs should be examined in the future for their
potential therapeutic use in breast cancers with the poor
prognosis wound signature.
The association of a proteasome gene module and the wound
signature was particularly intriguing and consonant with additional evidence. From an independent genetic analysis (19), we
had discovered that the wound signature in human breast cancer
is caused by coordinate amplification of CSN5, which encodes an
activator of cullin-based E3 ubiquitin ligases, and MYC, which
encodes an oncogenic transcription factor. CSN5 induces the
ubiquitination of MYC, recruiting the proteasome to MYC, and
increases transcriptional activation of MYC target genes. Thus, we
reasoned that when MYC and CSN5 activate a metastatic gene
expression program in breast epithelial cells, such cells may
become uniquely dependent on abnormal protein turnover
mediated by the proteasome for survival. Bortezomib has been
shown to be effective in inhibiting the growth of murine
mammary tumors (30), but preliminary clinical trials of bortezomib in human breast cancer patients have been disappointing
(31). We suggest that a critical determinant of bortezomib
response in breast cancer is the wound signature (Fig. 4C), which
should be incorporated in future clinical studies of bortezomib.
The inhibition of wound signature expression by bortezomib is
consistent with the essential roles of the proteasome in

www.aacrjournals.org

Acknowledgments
Received 1/30/2007; revised 10/12/2007; accepted 11/15/2007.
Grant support: NIH/National Cancer Institute grant R01-CA118759 (H.Y. Chang),
American Cancer Society (H.Y. Chang), California Breast Cancer Research Program
(H.Y. Chang and A.S. Adler), NIH/National Cancer Institute (E. Segal), Dutch Cancer
Society grant NKB 2002-2575 (D.S.A. Nuyten and M.J. van de Vijver), Dean’s
Fellowship at Stanford University (D.J. Wong), and Dermatology Foundation Research
Fellowship and Research Career Development Award (D.J. Wong). E. Segal is the
incumbent of the Soretta and Henry Shapiro career development chair. H.Y. Chang is
a Kenneth G. and Elaine A. Langone Scholar of the Damon Runyon Cancer Research
Foundation.
The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of page
charges. This article must therefore be hereby marked advertisement in accordance
with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact.
We thank Nir Friedman, Daphne Koller, and Stacey Wirt for useful discussions and
experimental contributions.

9

377

http://genomica.weizmann.ac.il

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (2). January 15, 2008

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

1. Perou CM, Sorlie T, Eisen MB, et al. Molecular
portraits of human breast tumours. Nature 2000;406:
747–52.
2. Sorlie T, Tibshirani R, Parker J, et al. Repeated
observation of breast tumor subtypes in independent
gene expression data sets. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
2003;100:8418–23.
3. van ’t Veer LJ, Dai H, van de Vijver MJ, et al. Gene
expression profiling predicts clinical outcome of breast
cancer. Nature 2002;415:530–6.
4. Pittman J, Huang E, Dressman H, et al. Integrated
modeling of clinical and gene expression information
for personalized prediction of disease outcomes. Proc
Natl Acad Sci U S A 2004;101:8431–6.
5. Ayers M, Symmans WF, Stec J, et al. Gene expression
profiles predict complete pathologic response to neoadjuvant paclitaxel and fluorouracil, doxorubicin, and
cyclophosphamide chemotherapy in breast cancer.
J Clin Oncol 2004;22:2284–93.
6. Chang JC, Wooten EC, Tsimelzon A, et al. Gene
expression profiling for the prediction of therapeutic
response to docetaxel in patients with breast cancer.
Lancet 2003;362:362–9.
7. Lynch TJ, Bell DW, Sordella R, et al. Activating
mutations in the epidermal growth factor receptor
underlying responsiveness of non-small-cell lung cancer
to gefitinib. N Engl J Med 2004;350:2129–39.
8. Paez JG, Janne PA, Lee JC, et al. EGFR mutations in
lung cancer: correlation with clinical response to
gefitinib therapy. Science 2004;304:1497–500.
9. Piccart-Gebhart MJ, Procter M, Leyland-Jones B, et al.
Trastuzumab after adjuvant chemotherapy in HER2positive breast cancer. N Engl J Med 2005;353:1659–72.
10. Romond EH, Perez EA, Bryant J, et al. Trastuzumab
plus adjuvant chemotherapy for operable HER2-positive
breast cancer. N Engl J Med 2005;353:1673–84.
11. Chang HY, Nuyten DS, Sneddon JB, et al. Robustness,
scalability, and integration of a wound-response gene
expression signature in predicting breast cancer survival.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2005;102:3738–43.

12. Bild AH, Yao G, Chang JT, et al. Oncogenic pathway
signatures in human cancers as a guide to targeted
therapies. Nature 2006;439:353–7.
13. Potti A, Dressman HK, Bild A, et al. Genomic
signatures to guide the use of chemotherapeutics. Nat
Med 2006;12:1294–300.
14. Stegmaier K, Ross KN, Colavito SA, O’Malley S,
Stockwell BR, Golub TR. Gene expression-based highthroughput screening (GE-HTS) and application to
leukemia differentiation. Nat Genet 2004;36:257–63.
15. Wei G, Twomey D, Lamb J, et al. Gene expressionbased chemical genomics identifies rapamycin as a
modulator of MCL1 and glucocorticoid resistance.
Cancer Cell 2006;10:331–42.
16. Lamb J, Crawford ED, Peck D, et al. The Connectivity Map: using gene-expression signatures to connect
small molecules, genes, and disease. Science 2006;313:
1929–35.
17. Segal E, Friedman N, Koller D, Regev A. A module
map showing conditional activity of expression modules
in cancer. Nat Genet 2004;36:1090–8.
18. Chang HY, Sneddon JB, Alizadeh AA, et al. Gene
expression signature of fibroblast serum response
predicts human cancer progression: similarities between
tumors and wounds. PLoS Biol 2004;2:E7.
19. Adler AS, Lin M, Horlings H, Nuyten DS, van de Vijver
MJ, Chang HY. Genetic regulators of large-scale
transcriptional signatures in cancer. Nat Genet 2006;
38:421–30.
20. van de Vijver MJ, He YD, van’t Veer LJ, et al. A geneexpression signature as a predictor of survival in breast
cancer. N Engl J Med 2002;347:1999–2009.
21. Ashburner M, Ball CA, Blake JA, et al. Gene ontology:
tool for the unification of biology. The Gene Ontology
Consortium. Nat Genet 2000;25:25–9.
22. Warburg O. The metabolism of tumors. London:
Constable Co. Ltd.; 1930.
23. Leone G, DeGregori J, Yan Z, et al. E2F3 activity is
regulated during the cell cycle and is required for the
induction of S phase. Genes Dev 1998;12:2120–30.
24. Geschwind JF, Ko YH, Torbenson MS, Magee C,
Pedersen PL. Novel therapy for liver cancer: direct

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (2). January 15, 2008

378

References

intraarterial injection of a potent inhibitor of ATP
production. Cancer Res 2002;62:3909–13.
25. Ko YH, McFadden BA. Alkylation of isocitrate lyase
from Escherichia coli by 3-bromopyruvate. Arch Biochem Biophys 1990;278:373–80.
26. Mitchell BS. The proteasome-an emerging therapeutic target in cancer. N Engl J Med 2003;348:2597–8.
27. Li F, Wang Y, Zeller KI, et al. Myc stimulates nuclearly
encoded mitochondrial genes and mitochondrial biogenesis. Mol Cell Biol 2005;25:6225–34.
28. Ko YH, Pedersen PL, Geschwind JF. Glucose catabolism in the rabbit VX2 tumor model for liver cancer:
characterization and targeting hexokinase. Cancer Lett
2001;173:83–91.
29. Geschwind JF, Georgiades CS, Ko YH, Pedersen PL.
Recently elucidated energy catabolism pathways
provide opportunities for novel treatments in hepatocellular carcinoma. Expert Rev Anticancer Ther 2004;
4:449–57.
30. Teicher BA, Ara G, Herbst R, Palombella VJ, Adams J.
The proteasome inhibitor PS-341 in cancer therapy. Clin
Cancer Res 1999;5:2638–45.
31. Yang CH, Gonzalez-Angulo AM, Reuben JM, et al.
Bortezomib (VELCADE) in metastatic breast cancer:
pharmacodynamics, biological effects, and prediction of
clinical benefits. Ann Oncol 2006;17:813–7.
32. Lipford JR, Smith GT, Chi Y, Deshaies RJ. A putative
stimulatory role for activator turnover in gene expression. Nature 2005;438:113–6.
33. Wang Y, Klijn JG, Zhang Y, et al. Gene-expression
profiles to predict distant metastasis of lymph-nodenegative primary breast cancer. Lancet 2005;365:671–9.
34. Minn AJ, Gupta GP, Siegel PM, et al. Genes that
mediate breast cancer metastasis to lung. Nature 2005;
436:518–24.
35. Ma XJ, Wang Z, Ryan PD, et al. A two-gene expression
ratio predicts clinical outcome in breast cancer patients
treated with tamoxifen. Cancer Cell 2004;5:607–16.
36. Weigelt B, Hu Z, He X, et al. Molecular portraits and
70-gene prognosis signature are preserved throughout
the metastatic process of breast cancer. Cancer Res
2005;65:9155–8.

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Revealing Targeted Therapy for Human Cancer by Gene
Module Maps
David J. Wong, Dimitry S.A. Nuyten, Aviv Regev, et al.
Cancer Res 2008;68:369-378.

Updated version
Supplementary
Material

Cited articles
Citing articles

E-mail alerts
Reprints and
Subscriptions
Permissions

Access the most recent version of this article at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/68/2/369
Access the most recent supplemental material at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/suppl/2008/01/31/68.2.369.DC1

This article cites 35 articles, 11 of which you can access for free at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/68/2/369.full#ref-list-1
This article has been cited by 4 HighWire-hosted articles. Access the articles at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/68/2/369.full#related-urls

Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal.
To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications
Department at pubs@aacr.org.
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications
Department at permissions@aacr.org.

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

