Oncotarget, Vol. 7, No. 5

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Induction of autophagy promotes
preneoplastic rat liver nodules

the

growth

of

early

Marta Anna Kowalik1, Andrea Perra1, Giovanna Maria Ledda-Columbano1, Giuseppe
Ippolito3, Mauro Piacentini2,3, Amedeo Columbano1 and Laura Falasca3
1

Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of Cagliari, Cagliari, Italy

2

Department of Biology, University of Rome “Tor Vergata”, Rome, Italy

3

National Institute for Infectious Disease, IRCCS “Lazzaro Spallanzani”, Rome, Italy

Correspondence to: Mauro Piacentini, email: mauro.piacentini@uniroma2.it
Correspondence to: Amedeo Columbano, email: columbano@unica.it
Keywords: preneoplastic nodules, autophagy, amiodarone, chloroquine, miR-224
Received: November 18, 2015	

Accepted: December 23, 2015	

Published: December 31, 2015

ABSTRACT
Although inhibition of autophagy has been implicated in the onset and progression
of cancer cells, it is still unclear whether its dysregulation at early stages of
tumorigenesis plays an oncogenic or a tumor suppressor role. To address this question,
we employed the Resistant-Hepatocyte rat model to study the very early stages of
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) development. We detected a different autophagyrelated gene expression and changes in the ultrastructural profile comparing the most
aggressive preneoplastic lesions, namely those positive for the putative progenitor
cell marker cytokeratin-19 (KRT-19) with the negative ones. The ultrastructural and
immunohistochemical analyses of KRT-19-positive preneoplastic hepatocytes showed
the presence of autophagic vacuoles which was associated with p62, Ambra1 and
Beclin1 protein accumulation suggesting that a differential modulation of autophagy
occurs at early stages of the oncogenesis in KRT-19-positive vs negative lesions.
We observed an overall decrease of the autophagy-related genes transcripts and a
strong up-regulation of miR-224 in the KRT-19-positive nodules. Interestingly, the
treatment with the autophagy inducer, Amiodarone, caused a marked increase in
the proliferation of KRT-19 positive preneoplastic lesions associated with a strong
increase of their size; by contrast, Chloroquine, an inhibitor of the autophagic process,
led to their reduction. These results show that autophagy modulation is a very early
event in hepatocarcinogenesis and is restricted to a hepatocytes subset in the most
aggressive preneoplastic lesions. Our findings highlight the induction of autophagy
as a permissive condition favouring cancer progression indicating in its inhibition a
therapeutic goal to interfere with the development of HCC.

INTRODUCTION

pressure overload to catabolize cellular substrates and
generate energy [4]. Defects in the autophagy machinery
have been associated with the pathogenesis of the major
human diseases including cancer [1,4]. Three major
forms of autophagy have been described: micro-, macroand chaperone-mediated autophagy, all involving the
lysosomal breakdown of sequestered material [4,5]. The
emerging role of macro-autophagy (from here on referred
to as autophagy) has been the focus of recent cutting edge
research and it is now accepted that it plays a critical role
in both health and disease [1-3]. Autophagy is a multistep
process involving its induction, the development of an

The term autophagy identifies the basic selfdegradative physiological process by which the cell
removes worn-out or damaged components, such as
protein aggregates, mitochondria, Endoplasmic Reticulum
(ER), peroxisomes and intracellular pathogens [1-3].
Autophagy is evolutionarily conserved and involves
the double-membrane sequestration and lysosomal
breakdown of the cargo [1-3]. Although there is a basal
autophagy in the cell, this process is further induced in
response to stress, e.g. nutrient deprivation, hypoxia and
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

5788

Oncotarget

isolation membrane, the completion and maturation of
an ‘autophagosome’ containing cytosolic components
for recycling and the ultimate fusion with a lysosome
(forming the autophagolysosome) for degradation by
lysosomal enzymes [1-3].
While oncogenic transformation and tumour
development are associated with resistance to, or loss
of, the apoptotic pathway, an increasingly number of
experimental data suggest that autophagy imbalance
plays an important role in tumorigenesis and is a relevant
target for cancer therapy [1, 5-7]. Indeed, autophagydeficient mice develop a large number of spontaneous
tumours, supporting the idea that autophagy acts as
tumor suppression mechanism [6-7]. Moreover, the
heterozygous deletion in mice of essential autophagy
genes such as Beclin1 and Ambra1 leads to high incidence
of spontaneous tumours [8, 9]. The role played by Beclin
1 and Ambra1 as tumour suppressors is also evidenced
by the identification of their binding partners, most of
which are implicated in tumorigenesis, such as Bcl-2. The
anti-apoptotic member of the bcl-2 family constitutively
binds to Beclin1 and Ambra1 complex inhibiting
autophagy induction [10]. Furthermore, overexpression
of the positive regulator of Beclin1 UVRAG activates
autophagy and suppresses tumour cell growth, whereas
its down-regulation results in decreases autophagy levels
and triggers uncontrolled cell proliferation [7, 8]. Finally,
it has been recently published that Ambra1 regulates cell
proliferation by facilitating the degradation of the protooncogene c-Myc by favouring its dephosphorylation by
PP2A and thereby reducing the cell division rate [8].
Although the current view is that autophagy acts as
a tumour suppressor process it is now also emerging that
some established cancers require autophagy to survive,
thus suggesting a pro-tumour autophagy activity. In
keeping with this notion, the Ras-dependent tumorigenesis
has been shown to be associated to autophagy induction
[11, 12]. It is also now clear that the genotype of an
individual tumor influences the autophagic function.
For instance, in melanoma, BRAF has a direct effect
on autophagy regulation. In fact, the overexpression
of the wild type BRAF vs the mutated BRAFV600E
in melanoma cells leads to increased basal levels of
autophagy [13].
The paradox of autophagy acting as both a cell
survival pathway and a tumour suppressor pathway is
now being in some way reconciled; the current view is that
while autophagy suppresses tumour growth at early stages
of oncogenesis, it promotes growth in established tumors
[6, 11, 12]. However, due to several controversial data the
exact role of autophagy in the different steps of cancer
development, especially in hepatocellular carcinoma
(HCC), remains elusive [14-16].
HCC is the third cause of cancer-related deaths
worldwide, and is characterized by poor prognosis and
few treatment options [17]. The development of HCC
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

is a multistep process. HCCs arise most frequently in
the setting of chronic liver inflammation and fibrosis
due to viral infection, metabolic injury, toxic insults,
or autoimmune reactions. These tumors originate from
premalignant lesions, ranging from dysplastic foci to
dysplastic hepatocyte nodules that are often seen in
damaged and cirrhotic livers, and are more proliferative
than the surrounding parenchyma [18]. Since no effective
treatment for HCC exists and, upon diagnosis, most
patients with advanced disease have a remaining lifespan
of only 4–6 months, it is critical to detect cellular and
molecular changes taking place in preneoplastic lesions
and identify biomarkers and molecular targets useful for
an early diagnosis and for therapy.
Since the knowledge of molecular events occurring
in early stages of HCC development is hampered by
the difficulties in the histomorphologic distinction
between non-malignant nodular lesions and early HCCs,
animal models allowing the study of different stages of
hepatocarcinogenesis, represent a very helpful tool to
detect cellular and molecular alterations occurring in early
preneoplastic stages. Therefore, in our present study, we
employed the Resistant-Hepatocyte (R-H) model which
allows dissecting the several steps of hepatocarcinogenesis
and whose translational value has already been
demonstrated [19-21], to investigate the role of autophagy
in the early stages of HCC development.

RESULTS
Differential autophagy modulation takes place in
early preneoplastic nodules
The R-H model allows dissecting the different
steps of the carcinogenic process, as phenotypically
distinct lesions can be identified at well-defined timings
[19]. Therefore, it is possible to investigate changes in
the autophagic machinery at very early times in HCC
development. To this aim, we performed ultrastructural
examination of preneoplastic nodules dissected from
the surface of the liver exposed to the R-H model
and developed 10 weeks after treatment with DENA.
Electron microscopy of hepatocytes in the preneoplastic
nodules revealed extensive morphological alterations
of cytoplasmic organelles (Figure 1B) compared with
control liver (Figure 1A). Most hepatocytes in the
nodules displayed abnormal mitochondria (Figure
1C), which appeared swollen with loss of cristae and
ruptures of the outer membrane. No sign of clearance
by autophagy of the degenerating mitochondria was
visible. Autophagic vacuoles containing only partially
degraded materials (Figure 1C) and lipid droplets
accumulation were frequently observed (Figure 1D).
All these features are indicative of an impairment of the
5789

Oncotarget

Table 1: Percentage and number of KRT-19+/Ambra1+, KRT-19+/p62+ and KRT-19+/Beclin1+ nodules with respect to
the total amount of KRT-19+ nodules.
N° of Mean N° of
% of
Mean N° of
Mean N° of
% of
Mean N° of Mean
% of p62+
KRT 19+
Ambra1+
Ambra1+
p62+
Beclin1+
Beclin1+
+
GST-P+
/KRT-19
/GST-P+
/KRT-19+
/KRT-19+
/KRT-19+
/KRT-19+
/KRT-19+
nodules
nodules
nodules
nodules
nodules
nodules
nodules
nodules
74.6 ± 13.3

18.4 ± 4.0

18.2 ± 4.0

99.0

17.3 ± 4.0

94.0

13.0 ± 2.2

70.6

The analysis of serial liver sections was performed on a total number of 373 nodules, obtained from 5 rats.
autophagic process, demonstrating that derangement of the
autophagic machinery occurs at very early stages of HCC
development.

the putative progenitor cell marker cytokeratin-19 (KRT19+) represent a minority of the total preneoplastic lesions,
most HCCs are positive for this marker. This suggests that
KRT-19+ preneoplastic nodules have an advantage in the
progression to malignancy, while KRT-19- lesions undergo
spontaneous remodeling during the carcinogenic process,
a previously described phenomenon [22]. Therefore, we
wished to investigate as to whether autophagy modulation
could be a general phenomenon of preneoplastic stages or
it is restricted to the most aggressive (KRT-19+) lesions.

Autophagy modulation in KRT-19+ negative vs
positive preneoplastic nodules
We have previously shown in the R-H model
[20,21] that although preneoplastic nodules positive for

Figure 1: Transmission electron microscopy of preneoplastic nodules. A. Representative image of control liver. Hepatocytes (H)

typically display a large, round nucleus (N); numerous mitochondria (m) with regular matrix and prominent cristae. B. Ultrastructure of a
preneoplastic hepatocyte (H). Irregular nucleus (N), extensive vacuolation (asterisks), lipid droplets accumulation (see arrows) characterize
the preneoplastic modifications. C. Higher magnification of nodule hepatocytes revealed that mitochondria undergo pathological
modifications, consisting of swelling and progressive loss of cristae. Autophagosomes containing only partially digested material are also
visible (arrows). D. Lipid inclusions (LL) accumulation in the cytoplasm of preneoplastic hepatocytes. Original magnifications: A, B=
x3000; C, D= x30000.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

5790

Oncotarget

To this aim, immunohistochemistry analysis of typical
autophagic markers, such as p62, Ambra1 and Beclin1,
that are involved in the multistep process of autophagy,
was performed on serial sections of livers from rats
subjected to the R-H protocol and sacrificed 10 weeks
after DENA. Interestingly, specific staining of KRT-19+ but not of KRT-19- -preneoplastic lesions was observed by
positivity of the liver sections for two other proteins, such
as Ambra1 and Beclin1, involved in the early regulatory
steps of the autophagic process and p62 which is mediating
the recruitment of cargos in the autophagosomes (Figure
2A, 2B). Remarkably, 99%, 94% and 71% of GST-P+/
KRT-19+ nodules were also positive for Ambra1, p62
and Beclin1, respectively (Table 1). Almost none of
KRT-19- nodules – nor the surrounding parenchymal
tissue- exhibited staining for these proteins. As shown in
Figure 2A and 2B, IHC revealed cytoplasmic and nuclear
accumulation of p62 only in a subset of hepatocytes (about
50% of the total) in the GST-P+/KRT-19+ nodules, but not

in GST-P+/KRT-19- preneoplastic lesions, indicating that a
marked differential modulation of the autophagic process
occurs also inside the GST-P+/KRT-19+ nodules.

Enhanced transcription is not the cause of the
increased accumulation of p62, Ambra1 and
Beclin1
To assess whether the accumulation of p62, Ambra1
and Beclin1 is the consequence of transcriptional or posttranscriptional modifications of genes/gene products
involved in the autophagic process, we performed
qRT-PCR analysis of the expression of these and other
autophagy-associated genes, on laser micro-dissected
GST-P+/KRT-19+ preneoplastic nodules. As shown in
Figure 3A and 3B, no increased transcription of any of
the examined genes involved in the autophagic process
was observed. Rather, we found down-regulation of some

Figure 2: Autophagy impairment is restricted to a more aggressive subset of preneoplastic hepatic nodules. IHC on serial
sections of liver from rats subjected to the R-H protocol and sacrificed 10 weeks after DENA. A. Presence of intense staining for Ambra1,
Beclin1 and p62 in a nodule positive for GST-P and KRT-19 (magnification x4). A higher enlargement of the same nodule showing nuclear
p62 staining (magnification x20). B. Absence of Ambra1, Beclin1 and p62 staining in a GST-P+/KRT-19- nodule (magnification x4).

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

5791

Oncotarget

of them, such as Ulk1, Ambra1, p62, LC3 and FoxO3.
These results clearly demonstrate that the accumulation
of these proteins in aggressive preneoplastic lesions is not
due to an active transcription. However, the interpretation
of these findings should take into consideration that, as
highlighted by the IHC, the accumulation of the Ambra1,
p62 and Beclin1 has been detected only in about 50% of
the hepatocytes.

miR-224 expression found in experimental and human
HCC is most likely the consequence of its accumulation
when autophagic machinery is deregulated.

The autophagic inducer, Amiodarone, stimulates
the growth of KRT-19+ nodules
The results so far obtained demonstrate that
autophagy deregulation is an early event in HCC
development and characterizes about 50% of the
parenchymal cells in the most aggressive lesions.
Since previous works suggested that autophagy mainly
contributes to tumor suppression during the early stage of
tumorigenesis, we wished to further investigate whether
impairment of the autophagic process favours cancer
progression. To address this question, we administered
Amiodarone, an autophagy inducer [26], or chloroquine
(CQ), an autophagy inhibitor [27], to nodule-bearing
rats developed 6 weeks after DENA. Interestingly, while
Amiodarone did not significantly modify the number of
GST-P+ preneoplastic lesions (Figure 4A), an impressive

MiR-224 is highly expressed in KRT-19 positive
nodules
Recently, it was reported that inhibition of
autophagy in hepatitis B-associated human HCCs is
responsible for the strong accumulation of miR-224 one of the most up-regulated miRs in human cancer [23,
24] - in these tumors [25]. Therefore, we investigated the
expression of miR-224 in KRT-19+ preneoplastic lesions.
As shown in Figure 3C, miR-224 was strongly upregulated in KRT-19 positive lesions (150-fold) compared
to normal liver, supporting the notion that the increased

Figure 3: Analysis of mRNA levels of autophagy-associated genes and miRNA-224. A. qRT-PCR analysis of Ulk1, Ambra1,
Beclin1, Atg12, Atg5, p62 and FoxO3 mRNA in KRT-19+ nodules generated 10 weeks after treatment with DENA. Gene expression is
reported as fold-change relative to age-matched controls; ***P<0.001, **P<0.01, NS: not significant. B. LC3 expression in KRT-19+
preneoplastic nodules. Gene expression is reported as fold-change relative to age-matched controls; *P<0.05. C. qRT-PCR analysis of
miR-224 expression in KRT-19+ nodules. miR-224 expression is reported as fold-change relative to age-matched controls; ***P<0.0001.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

5792

Oncotarget

increase of the size (Figure 4B, 4E) and of the % hepatic
area (Figure 4C, 4E) occupied by these lesions was
observed compared to the control group. These enhancing
effects were associated with a strong increase in nodule
hepatocyte proliferation (Figure 5A, 5B). Interestingly,
Amiodarone also led to an increase of the percentage of
KRT-19+ nodules (Figure 4D, 4E). On the opposite, when
compared to untreated animals, the autophagic inhibitor
CQ caused a decrease of the size and of the % hepatic
area occupied by these lesions (Figure 4A-4C, 4E).
Moreover, the % of KRT-19+ nodules was found to be
significantly lower than that of the Amiodarone-treated
group. Remarkably, treatment with CQ strongly inhibited
proliferation of nodule hepatocytes (Figure 5C) when
compared to either control- or Amiodarone-treated group.

Previous report [25] has shown that Amiodaroneinduced autophagy leads to a reduction of the tumor
weight. Therefore, we wished to establish if the
observed promoting effects on nodule growth induced by
Amiodarone was associated with increased autophagy.
To this aim, electron microscopy examination of nodules
scooped out from the liver surface was performed. As
shown in (Figure 6A), the fine structure of Amiodaronetreated hepatocytes revealed a less damaged morphology;
lipid droplets scattered in the cytoplasm and dilated
intercellular space were observed; however, after
Amiodarone treatment cells in the nodules displayed
intact rough endoplasmic reticulum and mitochondria
which were similar to that of normal untreated hepatocytes
(Figure 6C). Electron microscopy was also performed

Figure 4: Effect of Amiodarone and Chloroquine on the number of GST-P+ nodules, the mean GST-P+ area, the
percentage of the area occupied by GST-P+ hepatocytes and the number of KRT-19+ nodules. Rats exposed to the R-H

protocol were injected intraperitoneally with Amiodarone (30 mg/kg, four doses) or Chloroquine (CQ, 50 mg/kg, 4 doses) starting 2 weeks
after 2-AAF withdrawal (6 weeks after treatment with DENA). Animals were euthanized 7 days after the treatment. Effect of Amiodarone
and Chloroquine administration on the number of GSTP-positive nodules A., the mean GST-P-positive area B., the percentage of the area
occupied by GST-P-positive hepatocytes C. and the number of KRT-19+ nodules D. Values are expressed as mean ± SEM. ***P<0.001,
**P<0.01, *P<0.05, NS: not significant. E. GST-P and KRT-19 immunohistochemistry of liver sections from rats treated with Amiodarone
and CQ (magnification x1.25).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

5793

Oncotarget

after CQ treatment; since the small size of CQ-treated rat
nodules hampered the possibility of dissecting them from
the liver, electron microscopy examination was performed
in randomly selected areas of the liver. As shown in
Figure 6B, EM analysis confirmed the inhibitory effect
of CQ on autophagy; indeed, many vacuoles containing
undigested cytoplasmic materials were observed. In
addition, apoptotic and necrotic hepatocytes were often
observed (data not shown). These findings indicate that
while induction of autophagy stimulates the growth of
preneoplastic lesions to HCC progression, inhibition of
autophagy exerts the opposite effect.

nonetheless, its role is not completely understood.
Paradoxically, autophagy seems to play a dual role, acting
as tumor promoter or tumor suppressor, depending on the
tumor stage [28]. Numerous studies suggest that autophagy
contributes to tumor suppression during the early stages
of tumorigenesis [28-29]. This suppressive effect is
likely due to some important functions of autophagy,
such as defective organelle elimination in order to reduce
oxidative stress and prevent DNA damage. During the late
phases of tumorigenesis, autophagy is supposed to act as
tumor promoter mechanism, enabling tumor cells to cope
with high metabolic demand [6, 11].
As far as the role of autophagy in HCC development
is concerned, it was reported that homozygous deficient
mice for the autophagy genes ATG5 or ATG7 develop
benign liver tumors that do not progress to metastatic
cancer, which suggests that loss of autophagy may be
sufficient for the initiation of tumorigenesis, but residual
autophagy is required for the progression to cancer
[6]. In line with these results, it was also reported that

DISCUSSION
Recent years have brought an enormous advance in
the elucidation of the molecular machinery involved in
mammalian autophagy [1-3]. Although the contribution
of autophagy in tumour development is unquestioned,

Figure 5: Effect of Amiodarone and Chloroquine administration on hepatocyte proliferation. A. GST-P, KRT-19 and BrdU

IHC on serial sections of liver from rats subjected to the R-H protocol and sacrificed 7 weeks after DENA (magnification x4, inset x10). B.
GST-P, KRT-19 and BrdU IHC on serial sections of liver from rats subjected to the R-H protocol, treated with four doses of Amiodarone
and sacrificed 7 days after treatment (magnification x4, inset x10). C. GST-P, KRT-19 and BrdU IHC on serial sections of liver from rats
subjected to the R-H protocol, treated with four doses of Chloroquine (CQ) and sacrificed 7 days after treatments (magnification x4, inset
x10).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

5794

Oncotarget

autophagy suppressed hepatocarcinogenesis at early
stages by protecting normal cell stability and promoted
hepatocarcinogenesis at late stages by supporting tumor
cells growth [28, 29]. Finally, Ambra1 haplodeficiency
in mice leads to the development of liver tumors, and, in
humans, Beclin1 expression was decreased in HCC tissues
compared with adjacent non-tumoral tissues and Ambra1
[4, 5].
In this study, we attempted to investigate the
status of the autophagic process in the very early stages
of hepatocarcinogenesis, taking advantage of the wellestablished R-H model in the rat. The main findings
stemming from our work indicate that modulation of
autophagy i) is a very early event in the multistage process
of hepatocarcinogenesis, and, ii) takes place selectively
in in KRT-19+ preneoplastic lesions, but not in KRT-19lesions. We have previously shown that although KRT19+ lesions represent a minority of the total preneoplastic
lesions, most HCCs arising in this model are KRT-19+ [20,

21]. Therefore, our results are in line with the observation
that autophagy defects favour cancer development and
loss of autophagy may increase the propensity of cells
toward oncogenic transformation [30, 31].
Another relevant finding of the present work is
the association between high miR-224 expression and
autophagy impairment. A recent study demonstrated that
inhibition of autophagy in HBV-associated human HCCs
is the mechanism responsible for the strong accumulation
of the mature form miR-224 in these tumors [25]. These
results were also confirmed in liver tumors of HBV X
gene transgenic mice. Importantly, miRNA-224, involved
in cell proliferation, migration and invasion [32], is one
of the most up-regulated miRs in rodent and human HCC
[21-23, 24]. Indeed, our data show a drastic upregulation
of miRNA-224 in those subset of nodules which are more
aggressive and develop HCC.
An additional and novel finding of the present
study is that while the autophagic inducer, Amiodarone,

Figure 6: Ultrastructure of livers from nodule-bearing rats receiving amiodarone and chloroquine. A. TEM examination
of liver tissues from rats receiving amiodarone show that endoplasmic reticulum (ER) appears well preserved and mitochondria (m) swelling
and vacuolation are reduced compared to untreated preneoplastic liver D.; Few lipid inclusions (LL) are displayed by these hepatocytes
compared to control liver C. B. Massive accumulation of autophagic vesicles is observed following treatment with chloroquine. Original
magnifications: x3000.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

5795

Oncotarget

promotes a striking increase in the proliferation of nodular
hepatocytes and the size of preneoplastic lesions, the
inhibitor of autophagy, CQ, induces the opposite, thus
leading to a decrease of the size of preneoplastic nodules.
Similarly, Sun et al. [29] demonstrated that autophagy
inhibition by CQ in the tumor-forming stage of DENAinduced HCC, remarkably reduced tumor growth by
decreasing cell survival and proliferation. Moreover, it has
been also reported that the combination of sorafenib with
chloroquine produced more pronounced tumor suppression
in HCC, both in vivo and in vitro [33]. In further support
of the hypothesis that inhibition of autophagy plays an
anti-tumoral effect in the early stages of the carcinogenic
process, Amiodarone increases the percentage of KRT-19+
nodules, endowed with a higher proliferative capacity.
By contrast, inhibition of autophagy by CQ resulted in an
almost complete loss of nodules positive for this marker.
These results, in turn, suggest a link between autophagy
and the accumulation of KRT-19. Indeed, we found that
the most aggressive KRT-19-positive nodules express
high level of Ambra1 that, through its interaction with
the protein phosphatase PP2A, regulates the stability of
the oncoprotein and pro-mitotic factor c-Myc [8]. Thus,
the expression of Ambra1 can both potentiates autophagy
through its interaction with Beclin1 and VPS34, as well as
favours the proliferation of the most aggressive nodules
by binding to PP2A.
In conclusion, the present work raised the
interesting hypothesis that autophagy in the liver may act
as an homeostatic mechanism limiting the progression
of preneoplastic cells to a more malignant stage. The
finding that the administration of chloroquine is able to
rapidly reduce the size of the KRT-19+ preneoplastic
lesions suggests that the pharmacological modulation of
autophagy may represent a possible therapeutic approach
to interfere with the development of HCC.

Another group of rats exposed to R-H protocol
was given four doses of Chloroquine (50 mg/kg, SigmaAldrich, C6628) or Amiodarone (30 mg/kg, SigmaAldrich, A8423) starting 2 weeks after 2-AAF withdrawal
(6 weeks after treatment with DENA). Rats were sacrificed
7 days after the first dose (See Supp. Figure 1B and 1C).
BrdU was given in drinking water (1mg/1ml) for 5 days
before the sacrifice.

Histology and immunohistochemistry
Liver sections were fixed in 10% formalin and
included in paraffin or quickly frozen by immersion in
liquid nitrogen and processed for hematoxylin-eosin, or
GST-P and KRT-19 immunohistochemistry, as described
[21]. We considered as KRT-19 positive, all those lesions
exhibiting a KRT-19 positive area of at least 5% of the
total area of the preneoplastic lesion. The average area
occupied by KRT-19 positive hepatocytes was at least
20% of the total area of the nodules microdissected for
further analyses. Paraffin-embedded liver sections were
used for p62, Ambra and Beclin 1 immunohistochemistry.
Sections, were deparaffinized in xylene, incubated for
5 min each in 100%, 90%, 70%, and 50% ethanol for
rehydration and immersed in 10 mM sodium citrate, pH
6.0, and microwaved for antigen retrieval. Endogenous
peroxidase activity was blocked by 3% H2O2 for 5 min.
After rinsing in phosphate-saline buffer (PBS) nonspecific
antibody binding was reduced by incubating the sections
with normal goat serum for 5 min. Sections were washed
in PBS/1% BSA buffer and incubated with primary
antibodies: rabbit anti-p62/SQSTM1 from MBL (Woburn,
MA, USA) 1:400, rabbit anti AMBRA1 (ProSci) 1:100
and rabbit anti-BECN1 Antibody (Santa Cruz) 1:50 were
used. Reactions were visualized using a streptavidinbiotin-immunoperoxidase system with DAB (Biogenex,
San Ramon, CA) as chromogen substrates. Negative
control staining was performed by omitting the primary
antibody. Sections were counterstained in Mayer’s acid
hemalum.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Animals and treatment

RNA extraction and qRT-PCR

Male Fischer rats were obtained from Charles
River (Milano, Italy). Guidelines for Care and Use
of Laboratory Animals were followed during the
investigation. All animal procedures were approved by
the Ethical Commission of the University of Cagliari and
the Italian Ministry of Health. Animals were treated with
a single dose of diethylnitrosamine (DENA, 150 mg/kg)
and, two weeks later, were subjected to the R-H protocol,
consisting of a 2 week-diet supplemented with 0.02%
2-acetylaminofluorene (2-AAF) and a two/third partial
hepatectomy (PH) [19]. Rats were then switched to basal
diet all throughout the experiment and sacrificed 10 weeks
after DENA administration (See Supp. Figure 1A.)
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Total RNA was extracted from preneoplastic lesions
with the MirVana kit (Life Technologies) and stored at
-80ºC until needed. While RNA quantity was measured
by NanoDrop ND1000 (Thermo Scientific), RNA integrity
was assessed by Agilent Bioanalyzer 2100. Only RNA
samples with a RIN (RNA Integrity Number) ≥ 7 were
included in the study. RNA was retrotranscribed with
High Capacity cDNA Reverse Transcription Kit (Life
Technologies) using random primers. The expression
levels of the examined genes were evaluated by Real-Time
PCR analysis with an ABI PRISM 7300HT thermocycler
(Life Technologies) on 6 samples of GST-P-positive
5796

Oncotarget

Abbreviations

preneoplastic nodules. All samples were run in triplicate.
For qRT-PCR, The Power SYBR Green PCR Master Mix
(Life Technologies) was used. The complete list of primer
sequences used is listed in Supp. Table 1. After checking
the specificity of the PCR products with the melting curve,
data were then normalized to GAPDH expression and the
expression level of different targets was calculated by
2-∆∆Ct. Analysis of LC3 expression was performed using
specific TaqMan probes (Life Technologies) and GAPDH
as endogenous control.

2-AAF, 2-acetylaminofluorene; Atg, autophagyrelated genes; BrdU, 5-bromo-2’-deoxyuridine; CQ,
chloroquine; DENA, diethylnitrosamine; GAPDH;
glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase; GST-P,
placental glutathione S-transferase; HBV, hepatitis
B virus; HCC, hepatocellular carcinoma; IHC,
immunohistochemistry; KRT-19, cytokeratin-19; PH,
partial hepatectomy; qRT-PCR, quantitative reverse
transcriptase polymerase chain reaction; R-H model,
Resistant-Hepatocyte model.

Analysis of MicroRNA-224

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

cDNA was synthesized using the TaqMan
MicroRNA Reverse Transcription Kit (Life Technologies)
in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions.
qRT-PCR amplification was performed with the reverse
transcription product, TaqMan 2X Universal PCR Master
Mix, No AmpErase UNG, miRNA-224 primers and probe
mix (Life Technologies). The endogenous control 4.5S
RNA(H) was used to normalize miRNA expression levels.

This work was supported by grants from the Italian
Ministry of University and Research (FIRB Accordi di
Programma 2011), the Italian Ministry of Health (Ricerca
Finalizzata and Ricerca Corrente), and from Associazione
Italiana Ricerca sul Cancro (AIRC, Grants to AC (IG15279), MP), Ministero Università e Ricerca Scientifica
(PRIN-2010LC747T to AC), R.A.S. 2012 to AC and
Fondazione Banco di Sardegna to AC, GMLC and A Perra.

Laser capture microdissection

Authors’ contribution

GST-P+/KRT-19+ nodules were identified by
immunohistochemical staining of 6µm-thick frozen liver
sections. Nodules microdissection was done on 16µm
serial sections with a Leica LMD6000, as previously
described [21].

L. Falasca: TEM analysis, study concept, critical
revision of the manuscript; MA. Kowalik: study concept,
design, immunohistochemical, qRT-PCR analyses, critical
revision of the manuscript; A. Perra: laser microdissection,
RNA extraction, immunohistochemistry; GM. LeddaColumbano: pathological analysis of liver samples,
acquisition and interpretation of data, critical revision of
the manuscript; M. G Ippolito, M interpretation of data,
critical revision; Piacentini, A. Columbano: study concept
and design, analysis and interpretation of data, drafting of
the manuscript.

Electron microscopy
Tissue samples were fixed with 2.5% glutaraldehyde
(Assing Spa, R1012) in 0.1 M cacodylate buffer for 1 h
at 4°C (sodium cacodylate trihydrate, Sigma-Aldrich,
C4945), and postfixed in 1% osmium tetroxide (SigmaAldrich, 75632) in 0.1 M cacodylate buffer for 1 h.
Samples were then dehydrated in graded ethanol and
embedded in Epon resin (AGAR 100, Agar Scientific
R1045). Ultrathin sections were stained with 2% uranyl
acetate (Sigma-Aldrich, 73943) and observed under a
Zeiss EM900 transmission electron microscope. Images
were captured digitally with a Mega View II digital
camera (SIS; Zeiss).

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
No conflict of interest to declare.

REFERENCES

Statistics

1.	 Levine B, Kroemer G. Autophagy in the pathogenesis of
disease. Cell. 2008; 132: 27-42.

Data are expressed as mean ± standard deviation
(SD) or mean ± standard error (SEM). Analysis of
significance was done by t Student’s test using the
GraphPad software (La Jolla, California).

3.	 Ashrafi G, Schwarz TL. The pathways of mitophagy for
quality control and clearance of mitochondria. Cell Death
Differ. 2013; 20: 31-42.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

2.	 Shaid S, Brandts CH, Serve H, Dikic I. Ubiquitination and
selective autophagy. Cell Death Differ. 2013; 20: 21-30.

4.	

5797

Garg AD, Martin S, Golab J, Agostinis P. Danger signalling
during cancer cell death: origins, plasticity and regulation.
Cell Death Differ. 2014; 21: 26-38.
Oncotarget

5.	 Galluzzi L, Pietrocola F, Bravo-San Pedro JM, Amaravadi
RK, Baehrecke EH, Cecconi F, Codogno P, Debnath J,
Gewirtz DA, Karantza V, Kimmelman A, Kumar S, et
al. Autophagy in malignant transformation and cancer
progression. EMBO J. 2015; 34: 856-880.
6.	 Ko A, Kanehisa A, Martins I, Senovilla L, Chargari
C, Dugue D, Mariño G, Kepp O, Michaud M, Perfettini
JL, Kroemer G, Deutsch E. Autophagy inhibition
radiosensitizes in vitro, yet reduces radioresponses in vivo
due to deficient immunogenic signaling. Cell Death Differ.
2014; 21: 92-99.

18.	

Thorgeirsson SS, Lee JS, Grisham JW. Functional
genomics of hepatocellular carcinoma. Hepatology. 2006;
43: S145-150.

19.	

Solt DB, Medline A, Farber E. Rapid emergence of
carcinogen-induced hyperplastic lesions in a new model for
the sequential analysis of liver carcinogenesis. Am J Pathol.
1977; 88: 595-618.

20.	 Andersen JB, Loi R, Perra A, Factor VM, LeddaColumbano GM, Columbano A, Thorgeirsson SS.
Progenitor-derived hepatocellular carcinoma model in the
rat. Hepatology. 2010; 51: 1401-1409.

7.	 Sui X, Chen R, Wang Z, Huang Z, Kong N, Zhang M,
Han W, Lou F, Yang J, Zhang Q, Wang X, He C, Pan
H. Autophagy and chemotherapy resistance: a promising
therapeutic target for cancer treatment. Cell Death Dis.
2013; 4: e838.

21.	 Petrelli A, Perra A, Cora D, Sulas P, Menegon S, Manca
C, Migliore C, Kowalik MA, Ledda-Columbano GM,
Giordano S, Columbano A. MicroRNA/gene profiling
unveils early molecular changes and nuclear factor
erythroid related factor 2 (NRF2) activation in a rat model
recapitulating human hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC).
Hepatology 2014; 59: 228-241

8.	 Cianfanelli V, Fuoco C, Lorente M, Salazar M,
Quondamatteo F, Gherardini PF, De Zio D, Nazio F,
Antonioli M, D’Orazio M, Skobo T, Bordi M, Rohde M
et al. AMBRA1 links autophagy to cell proliferation and
tumorigenesis by promoting c-Myc dephosphorylation and
degradation. Nat Cell Biol. 2015; 17: 20-30.

22.	 Enomoto K, Farber E. Kinetics of phenotypic maturation
of remodeling of hyperplastic nodules during liver
carcinogenesis. Cancer Res. 1982; 42: 2330-2335.
23.	 Wang Y, Lee AT, Ma JZ, Wang J, Ren J, Yang Y,
Tantoso E, Li KB, Ooi LL, Tan P, Lee CG. Profiling
microRNA expression in hepatocellular carcinoma reveals
microRNA-224 up-regulation and apoptosis inhibitor-5 as
a microRNA-224-specific target. J Biol Chem. 2008; 283:
13205-13215.

9.	 Qu X, Yu J, Bhagat G, Furuya N, Hibshoosh H, Troxel A,
Rosen J, Eskelinen EL, Mizushima N, Ohsumi Y, Cattoretti
G, Levine B. Promotion of tumorigenesis by heterozygous
disruption of the beclin 1 autophagy gene. J Clin Invest.
2003; 112: 1809-1820.
10.	 Strappazzon F, Vietri-Rudan M, Campello S, Nazio F,
Florenzano F, Fimia GM, Piacentini M, Levine B, Cecconi
F. Mitochondrial BCL-2 inhibits AMBRA1-induced
autophagy. EMBO J. 2011; 30: 1195-1208.

24.	 Ladeiro Y, Couchy G, Balabaud C, Bioulac-Sage P,
Pelletier L, Rebouissou S, Zucman-Rossi J. MicroRNA
profiling in hepatocellular tumors is associated with clinical
features and oncogene/tumor suppressor gene mutations.
Hepatology. 2008; 47: 1955-1963.

11.	 Schmukler E, Kloog Y, Pinkas-Kramarski R. Ras and
autophagy in cancer development and therapy. Oncotarget.
2014; 5: 577-586. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.1775.
12.	 Vessoni AT, Filippi-Chiela EC, Menck CF, Lenz G.
Autophagy and genomic integrity. Cell Death Differ. 2013;
20: 1444-1454.

25.	 Lan SH, Wu SY, Zuchini R, Lin XZ, Su IJ, Tsai TF, Lin
YJ, Wu CT, Liu HS. Autophagy suppresses tumorigenesis
of hepatitis B virus-associated hepatocellular carcinoma
through degradation of microRNA-224. Hepatology. 2014;
59: 505-517.

13.	 Corazzari M, Rapino F, Ciccosanti F, Giglio P, Antonioli
M, Conti B, Fimia GM, Lovat PE, Piacentini M. Oncogenic
BRAF induces chronic ER stress condition resulting in
increased basal autophagy and apoptotic resistance of
cutaneous melanoma. Cell Death Differ. 2015; 22: 946-958.

26.	 Lin CW, Chen YS, Lin CC, Chen YJ, Lo GH, Lee PH, Kuo
PL, Dai CY, Huang JF, Chung WL, Yu ML. Amiodarone
as an autophagy promoter reduces liver injury and enhances
liver regeneration and survival in mice after partial
hepatectomy. Sci Rep. 2015; 5: 15807.

14.	 He Z, Simon HU. Autophagy protects from liver injury.
Cell Death Differ. 2013; 20: 850-851.
15.	 Zhang W, Hou J, Wang X, Jiang R, Yin Y, Ji J, Deng L,
Huang X, Wang K, Sun B. PTPRO-mediated autophagy
prevents hepatosteatosis and tumorigenesis. Oncotarget.
2015; 6: 9420-9433. Doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.3353.

27.	 Chen P, Hu T, Liang Y, Jiang Y, Pan Y, Li C, Zhang
P, Wei D, Li P, Jeong LS, Chu Y, Qi H, Yang M et al.
Synergistic inhibition of autophagy and neddylation
pathways as a novel therapeutic approach for targeting liver
cancer. Oncotarget. 2015; 6: 9002-9017. doi: 10.18632/
oncotarget.3282.

16.	 Tian Y, Kuo CF, Sir D, Wang L, Govindarajan S, Petrovic
LM, Ou JH. Autophagy inhibits oxidative stress and tumor
suppressors to exert its dual effect on hepatocarcinogenesis.
Cell Death Differ. 2015; 22: 1025-1034.

28.	 Sun K, Deng W, Zhang S, Cai N, Jiao S, Song J, Wei
L. Paradoxical roles of autophagy in different stages of
tumorigenesis: protector for normal or cancer cells. Cell
Biosci. 2013; 3: 35.

17.	 Siegel R, Ma J, Zou Z, Jemal A. Cancer statistics, 2014. CA
Cancer J Clin. 2014; 64: 9-29.

29.	 Sun K, Guo XL, Zhao QD, Jing YY, Kou XR, Xie XQ,
Zhou Y, Cai N, Gao L, Zhao X, Zhang SS, Song JR, Li D

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

5798

Oncotarget

et al. Paradoxical role of autophagy in the dysplastic and
tumor-forming stages of hepatocarcinoma development in
rats. Cell Death Dis. 2013; 4: e501.
30.	 Mathew R, White E. Autophagy in tumorigenesis and
energy metabolism: friend by day, foe by night. Curr Opin
Genet Dev. 2011; 21: 113-119.
31.	 Kimmelman AC. The dynamic nature of autophagy in
cancer. Genes Dev. 2011; 25: 1999-2010.
32.	 Li Q, Wang G, Shan JL, Yang ZX, Wang HZ, Feng J,
Zhen JJ, Chen C, Zhang ZM, Xu W, Luo XZ, Wang D.
MicroRNA-224 is upregulated in HepG2 cells and involved
in cellular migration and invasion. J Gastroenterol Hepatol.
2010; 25: 164-171.
33.	 Shi YH, Ding ZB, Zhou J, Hui B, Shi GM, Ke AW, Wang
XY, Dai Z, Peng YF, Gu CY, Qiu SJ, Fan J. Targeting
autophagy enhances sorafenib lethality for hepatocellular
carcinoma via ER stress-related apoptosis. Autophagy.
2011; 7: 1159-1172.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

5799

Oncotarget

