Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No. 28

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Disruption and inactivation of the PP2A complex promotes the
proliferation and angiogenesis of hemangioma endothelial cells
through activating AKT and ERK
Furong Xie1, Xin Bao1,
Zhiyuan Zhang1, Qin Xu1

Jingshuang

Yu1,

Wantao

Chen1,

Lizhen

Wang2,

1

 epartment of Oral and Maxillofacial-Head Neck Oncology, Ninth People’s Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of
D
Medicine, Shanghai Key Laboratory of Stomatology, Shanghai 200011, China

2

 epartment of Oral Pathology, Ninth People’s Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai 200011,
D
China

Correspondence to:
Zhiyuan Zhang, e-mail: zhzhy@omschina.org.cn
Qin Xu, e-mail: xuqin_2004@hotmail.com
Keywords: hemangioma, PP2A, middle T antigen, endothelial cell
Received: April 16, 2015 	Accepted: July 15, 2015 	Published: July 27, 2015

ABSTRACT
Hemangioma is a benign vascular neoplasm of unknown etiology. In this study,
we generated an endothelial-specific PyMT gene-expressing transgenic mouse model
that spontaneously develops hemangioma. Based on this transgenic model, a specific
binding between PyMT and the core AC dimer of protein phosphatase 2A (PP2A) was
verified in hemangioma vascular endothelial cells. The binding between PyMT and the
PP2A AC dimer resulted in dissociation of the B subunit from the PP2A complex and
inactivation of PP2A phosphatases, which in turn activated AKT and ERK signaling and
promoted cell proliferation, migration and angiogenesis in vitro and tumorigenesis
in vivo. Consistent with the in vitro findings, decreased PP2A phosphatase activity and
disruption of the PP2A heterotrimeric complex were also observed in both primary
transgene-positive TG(+) mouse hemangioma endothelial cells (TG(+) HEC cells) and
human proliferating phase hemangioma endothelial (human HEC-P) cells, but not in
transgene-negative TG(-) mouse normal vascular endothelial cells (TG(-) NEC cells) and
human involuting phase hemangioma endothelial (human HEC-I) cells. Further, it was
observed that in human hemangioma cells, endoglin could compete with the PP2A/A,
C subunits for binding to the PP2A/B subunit, thereby resulting in dissociation of the
B subunit from the PP2A complex. Treatment of Tie2/PyMT transgenic mice with the
PP2A activator FTY720 significantly delayed the occurrence of hemangioma. Our data
provide evidence of a previously unreported anti-proliferation and anti-angiogenesis
effect of PP2A in vascular endothelial cells, and show the therapeutic value of PP2A
activators in hemangioma.

To investigate the etiology of this disease, we and
others reported a transgenic model of hemangioma that
expresses the polyoma middle T antigen (PyMT),
the principal oncoprotein of the murine polyomavirus.
The transgenic mice were characterized by spontaneous
hemangiomas [3, 4]. However, there are still some
unresolved problems in this model that limit its
application. First, constitutive PyMT overexpression can
cause embryonic lethality, resulting in a low frequency
of transgenic founders and failure to generate offspring.
Second, it is difficult to distinguish between direct and

INTRODUCTION
Hemangioma, the most common tumor of infancy,
is a benign vascular neoplasm resulting from the abnormal
proliferation of endothelial cells, with an estimated
prevalence of 5 to 10% [1]. These tumors are characterized
by a rapid growth phase during the first year of life,
followed by slow involution, which may continue until
the age of 10–12 years. Despite the progress that has
been achieved in the clinical observation and treatment of
hemangioma, its etiology remains elusive [2].
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

25660

Oncotarget

RESULTS

indirect effects of the PyMT protein on endothelial
cells during hemangioma formation. Advances in
the development of conditional transgenic mice allow
type-/tissue-specific transgene expression, overcoming
many lethal phenotypes and potentially reflecting direct
effects of the transgene on specific tissues/cells [5]. In
this study, we generated transgenic mice overexpressing
PyMT under the control of the endothelial-specific Tie2
promoter/enhancer [6]. Transgenic mouse lines with
a hemangioma phenotype were successfully established.
Using this model, we sought to determine the molecular
mechanisms underlying the etiology of hemangioma.
Similar to all polyomavirus T antigens, PyMT
functions largely via its binding proteins [7]. It was
previously reported that PyMT can associate with protein
phosphatase 2A (PP2A), a phosphatase known to act as
a negative regulator of several survival and proliferation
pathways [8]. However, the details of their binding
patterns and functions are poorly understood. PP2A is
a heterotrimeric holoenzyme composed of a regulatory
B subunit associated with a core dimer of a scaffolding A
subunit (PP2A/A) and a catalytic C subunit (PP2A/C) [9].
In general, the C subunit always associates with the
A subunit in vivo. Free C subunits are not found in the
cell [10]. The AC core dimer binds to a regulatory B subunit
to form the heterotrimeric holoenzyme. At least four
families of the regulatory subunits, B (B55), B’ (B56), B’’
(PR72), and B’’’ (PR93), have been identified. The B (B55)
subunit is widely distributed, and the other B subunits show
differential tissue and developmental distribution [11].
In the present study, based on the Tie2/PyMT
transgenic mouse model, a specific binding between PyMT
and the PP2A AC core enzyme and subsequent disruption
and inactivation of the PP2A complex was observed.
Decreased PP2A activity induced downstream AKT and
ERK phosphorylation, resulting in rapid growth and
increases in the in vitro migration and angiogenic ability
and in vivo tumorigenesis ability of vascular endothelial
cells. Disruption of trimeric PP2A holoenzymes and
inactivation of PP2A as well as activation of the AKT
and ERK pathways were also detected in both primary
TG (+) endothelial cells and human proliferating phase
hemangioma endothelial cells, which may contribute to
hemangioma formation. Moreover, endoglin, a molecule
that is specific to newly formed endothelial cells, was
found to cause dissociation of the B subunit from the
PP2A AC core enzyme in primary human proliferating
hemangioma endothelial cells. In addition, treatment with
the PP2A activator FTY720 significantly delayed the
occurrence of hemangiomas in PyMT transgenic mice.
The results of this study provide insights into cellular
control mechanisms involved in hemangiomagenesis,
showing that disruption and inactivation of the PP2A
complex promotes hemangioma formation. Increasing
PP2A activity therefore represents a potential approach
for hemangioma therapy.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Direct expression of the PyMT gene in vascular
endothelial cells induced hemangioma formation
To reveal the precise role of the PyMT gene in
vascular endothelial cells and to minimize the risk of
embryonic lethality in conventional transgenic mice, a
strategy for conditional expression of the PyMT gene under
the control of the Tie2 promoter/enhancer was adopted
(Fig. 1A). TG(+) mice were identified via PCR genotyping,
and the phenotypes of these mice were examined. At
approximately 45 days of age, all of the TG(+) mice
spontaneously developed hemangioma-like neoplasms
in multiple organs, such as the skin, tongue and liver
(Fig. 1B, C). The neoplasms were composed of numerous
blood vessels lined by plump endothelial cells protruding
into the lumen, which agrees with the histological structure
of hemangioma (Fig. 1C). Immunohistochemical staining
showed that the endothelial cells of the neoplasms were
positive for both PyMT and CD31 (Fig. 1C). In addition,
the positive staining of Glut-1, a marker that differentiates
hemangioma from other vascular anomalies and Ki-67,
a proliferative marker were also detected in endothelial
cells (Fig. 1C, Fig. 2A). However, no obvious revoluting
phase was observed in the transgenic mice.
It has been demonstrated that hemangioma is
a primitive mesoderm-derived haemogenic endothelium
with a neural crest phenotype. Several primitive markers
of human hemangioma endothelial cells have been
well documented [12, 13]. In this study, the expression
of these primitive markers was also investigated in
the TG(+) mice. CD133; the haematopoietic stem cell
marker, CD34; the endothelial haematopoietic stem
marker, p75; a cell surface marker of neural crest
cells, Sox-10; the neural crest stem cell marker, Oct-4;
STAT-3; the human embryonic stem cell markers and
vimentin; the mesenchymal stem cell marker, were
all detected in tumor tissues of the transgenic animals
(Fig. 2B, 2C, 2D, 2E, 2F, 2G, 2H). This result is
consistent with the findings in human hemangiomas,
indicating the tumors of this animal model and human
hemangiomas have a similar origin.
Subcutaneous injection of bEnd.3 parental cells, a
mouse endothelial cell line immortalized by PyMT, into
nu/nu mice resulted in the appearance of hemangiomas
within 3 days at site of injection in all animals (Fig. 3A).
The hemangiomas were characterized via histological
examination and CD31 staining (Fig. 3C). Knockdown
of the PyMT gene in bEnd.3 cells (Fig. 3B) markedly
reduced the ability of bEnd.3 cells to form hemangiomas
(Fig. 3D) (P < 0.001).
The formation of hemangiomas in both transgenic
and tumor-bearing models indicates that direct expression
of the PyMT gene in vascular endothelial cells can trigger
the development of hemangioma.
25661

Oncotarget

Figure 1: Production and characterization of transgenic mice harboring the Tie2/PyMT gene. A. Diagram of the Tie2

promoter-driven PyMT transgene. A 2 kb Tie2 promoter is followed by a gene encoding PyMT and a 1.6 kb Tie2 enhancer. B. TG(+) mice
spontaneously developed hemangiomas in multiple organs (indicated with arrows). C. The neoplasms that developed in the ear, palm, liver
and tail showed the typical morphological appearance of hemangioma (indicated with arrows). Histological observations showed that the
neoplasms were composed of numerous blood vessels lined by plump endothelial cells protruding into the lumen (indicated with arrows).
Immunohistochemical staining showed that the endothelial cells of the neoplasms were positive for PyMT, CD31 and Glut-1 (indicated
with arrows). Bar = 100 μm

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

25662

Oncotarget

Figure 2: Expression of the proliferation and primitive markers in neoplasms of the transgenic animal. A. Ki-67, the
proliferation marker, B. CD133, the haematopoietic stem cell marker, C. CD34, the endothelial haematopoietic stem marker, D. p75,
a cell surface marker of neural crest cells, E. Sox-10, the neural crest stem cell marker, F. Oct-4, the human embryonic stem cell markers,
G. STAT-3, another human embryonic stem cell marker, and H. vimentin, the mesenchymal stem cell marker, were all positive staining in
endothelial cells (indicated with arrows). Bar = 100 μm

Figure 3: Subcutaneous inoculation of PyMT-expressing endothelial cells induced hemangioma in a murine model.

A. Subcutaneous inoculation of bEnd.3 parental cells, bEnd.3 NC cells (bEnd.3 cells transfected with negative control siRNA) and two
PyMT-silenced cell lines (bEnd.3 PyMT S1 and bEnd.3 PyMT S2) into nu/nu mice resulted in the appearance of hemangiomas at the
site of injection, and knockdown of the PyMT gene in bEnd.3 cells markedly reduced the ability of bEnd.3 cells to form hemangioma.
(n = 5/group, two sites per mouse) B. Western blotting analysis confirmed PyMT silencing in bEnd.3 cell lines using RNA interference.
The resultant stable cells lines were designated bEnd.3 PyMT S1 and bEnd.3 PyMT S2. C. Neoplasms from tumor-bearing mice were
characterized via histological examination and CD31 staining. Bar = 100 μm D. The tumor growth curve showed that silencing PyMT
resulted in a decrease in tumor volume. (n = 5/group, two sites per mouse, one-way ANOVA) *P < 0.05
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

25663

Oncotarget

PyMT inhibits PP2A activity by binding to the
core PP2A A/C dimer

led to a marked activation of PP2A. PP2A activity was
increased nearly four-fold in bEnd.3 Si cells compared
with bEnd.3 cells. Treatment with okadaic acid (OA),
a PP2A-selective inhibitor, significantly attenuated the
PyMT silencing-induced PP2A activation (P < 0.001)
(Fig. 4E). Moreover, the ectopic expression of the PP2A/B
subunit in bEnd.3 cells also led to an increase of PP2A
activity (P < 0.001) (Fig. 4F).This result indicates that
PyMT does not induce alterations in the expression of
PP2A, but can inhibit PP2A activity by replacing the B
subunit.

To identify the mechanism through which PyMT
induces hemangioma, the bindings between PyMT
and PP2A were investigated. We first examined the
protein levels of various PP2A subunits in 5 types
of vascular endothelial cells, including bEnd.3 cells,
primary TG(+) hemangioma endothelial cells, TG(-)
normal endothelial cells, primary human proliferating
phase and involuting phase hemangioma endothelial
cells. As shown in Fig. 4A, the PP2A/A, PP2A/C and
PP2A/B subunits were abundantly expressed in these
endothelial cells. In contrast, the PP2A/B’ subunit was
weakly expressed, and the PP2A/B’’ and PP2A/B’’’
subunits were not detected (data not shown). This result
indicates that PP2A/A, PP2A/B and PP2A/C are the
major subunits of PP2A in vascular endothelial cells.
Based on this result, we narrowed our focus to these
subunits to see if PyMT could associate with the subunits.
Reciprocal immunoprecipitation was performed in
both PyMT-expressing cells (bEnd.3 cells, TG(+) HEC
cells) and PyMT-deficient cells (PyMT-silenced bEnd.3
cells (bEnd.3 PyMT Si), TG(-) NEC cells). As shown
in Fig. 4B, binding between the PP2A/A and PP2A/C
subunits was observed in both PyMT-expressing cells and
PyMT-deficient cells, which agrees with previous reports
that the PP2A/A subunit always binds to the catalytic
C subunit to form a stable AC core dimer in vivo [10].
In PyMT-deficient cells, the PP2A/B subunit was found
to bind to both the PP2A/A and PP2A/C subunits. In
contrast, in PyMT-expressing cells, the PP2A/B subunit
showed only a weak or no association with the PP2A/A
and PP2A/C subunits, and PyMT was detected only in
immunoprecipitates of the PP2A/A and PP2A/C subunits,
but not in immunoprecipitates of the PP2A/B subunit. The
binding of the PyMT protein to the AC heterodimer in a
manner that was mutually exclusive with the regulatory B
subunit suggests that expression of PyMT can replace the
B subunit in PP2A trimeric complexes.
If PyMT can displace the B subunit, then the
PP2A/B subunit might also compete with PyMT for
binding to the AC core dimer. We therefore performed
the competition assays. bEnd.3 cells were transiently
transfected with the PP2A/B plasmid. As shown in
Fig. 4C, ectopic expression of the PP2A/B subunit
abolished both the PyMT-PP2A/A and PyMT-PP2A/C
bindings, which supported the existence of competitive
binding between PyMT and the PP2A/B subunit with the
core PP2A A/C dimer.
Then, the effects of replacement of the B subunit
with PyMT on PP2A were investigated. In both PyMTexpressing cells and PyMT-deficient cells, the protein
expression levels of each of the PP2A/A, B and C subunits
were not significantly changed following PyMT silencing
(Fig. 4D). In contrast, down-regulation of the PyMT gene
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

The binding between PyMT and PP2A blocks the
dephosphorylation of AKT and ERK
PP2A impacts multiple cell signaling pathways
by causing dephosphorylation of signaling proteins.
AKT and ERK, two critical signaling molecules, are
dephosphorylated by PP2A. To verify the biological
impact of the PyMT-induced inhibition of PP2A activity in
vascular endothelial cells, we analyzed the phosphorylation
status of AKT and ERK in both bEnd.3 parental cells
and PyMT-silenced cells. Immunoblot data showed that
bEnd.3 cells presented high levels of phosphorylated
(active) AKT and ERK. In contrast, silencing of PyMT
in bEnd.3 cells resulted in dephosphorylation of both
AKT and ERK (Fig. 4G, 4H). This result suggested that
PyMT-induced PP2A inactivation enhances AKT and ERK
activity by preventing their dephosphorylation. Moreover,
OA was shown to reverse PyMT silencing-induced AKT
and ERK dephosphorylation, which further supports the
role of PyMT in activating AKT and ERK signaling via
binding to PP2A.

PyMT activates AKT and ERK leading to
increased cell proliferation, migration and
angiogenesis
AKT and ERK pathway have been implicated to
promote cellular growth and proliferation, migration and
angiogenesis. We then explored the effects of PyMTactivated AKT and ERK signaling on cell proliferation,
cell cycle, cell apoptosis, migration and angiogenesis
in both bEnd.3 parental cells and PyMT-silenced cells.
Consistent with the phosphorylation status of AKT and
ERK, bEnd.3 cells displayed higher proliferation than
bEnd.3 PyMT Si cells (P < 0.001) (Fig. 5A). Obvious
G1 cell arrest was also observed in bEnd.3 PyMT Si cells
(P < 0.001) (Fig. 5B, 5C). While, no significant difference
in the number of apoptotic cells was observed between
bEnd.3 and bEnd.3 PyMT Si cells (Fig. 5D, 5E), indicating
that PyMT-activated AKT and ERK signaling promotes
endothelial cells proliferation, but has no inhibitory effect
on apoptosis. Transwell assays demonstrated that PyMT
silencing in bEnd.3 Si cells resulted in an approximately
70 percent decrease in migration (P < 0.001) (Fig. 5F, 5G).
25664

Oncotarget

Figure 4: PyMT inhibits PP2A activity by binding to the core PP2A A/C dimer. A. Expression levels of various PP2A subunits

were detected by Western blotting in 5 types of vascular endothelial cells, including bEnd.3 cells, TG(+) HEC cells, TG(-) NEC cells,
human HEC-P cell and human HEC-I cells. B. The bindings between the PP2A subunits and PyMT were tested via immunoprecipitation
(IP) and immunoblot (IB) in both PyMT-expressing cells (bEnd.3 cells, TG(+) HEC cells) and PyMT-deficient cells (bEnd.3 PyMT Si cells,
TG(-) NEC cells). Binding between the PP2A/A and PP2A/C subunits was observed in both PyMT-expressing cells and PyMT-deficient
cells. In PyMT-deficient cells, the PP2A/B subunit was found to bind to both the PP2A/A and PP2A/C subunits. In PyMT-expressing
cells, the PP2A/B subunit showed only a weak or no association with the PP2A/A and PP2A/C subunits, and PyMT was detected only
in immunoprecipitates of the PP2A/A and PP2A/C subunits, but not in immunoprecipitates of the PP2A/B subunit. C. bEnd.3 cells were
transiently transfected with the PP2A/B subunit expression plasmids and cell lysates were subjected to immunoprecipitation with PyMT
and probed with anti- PP2A/A, B, C antibody. Competition assay results showed that ectopic expression of the PP2A/B subunit in bEnd.3
cells abolished both the PyMT-PP2A/A and PyMT-PP2A/C bindings. D. Expression levels of various PP2A subunits were detected by
Western blotting in bEnd.3 cells, bEnd.3 NC cells, bEnd.3 PyMT S1 and bEnd.3 PyMT S2 cells. PyMT silencing did not decrease the
protein expression levels of the PP2A subunits. E. Phosphatase activity assay results showed that silencing of the PyMT gene led to marked
activation of PP2A. Treatment with the PP2A-selective inhibitor OA attenuated the PyMT silencing-induced PP2A activation.(n = 3/group,
one-way ANOVA) *P < 0.05 F. Phosphatase activity assay results showed ectopic expression of the PP2A/B subunit in bEnd.3 cells also led
to an increase of PP2A activity. (n = 3/group, t test) *P < 0.05 G. Western blotting results showed that bEnd.3 cells presented high levels of
phosphorylated (active) AKT and ERK, whereas the phosphorylation of both AKT and ERK was down-regulated in PyMT-silenced cells,
which could be rescued by OA treatment. H. Quantitative analysis of the phosphorylation status of AKT and ERK.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

25665

Oncotarget

Figure 5: PyMT activates AKT and ERK leading to increased cell proliferation, migration and angiogenesis.

A. bEnd.3 cells displayed higher proliferation than bEnd.3 PyMT Si cells, and bEnd.3 PyMT Si cells regained rapid growth after treatment
with OA. (n = 3/group, one-way ANOVA) *P < 0.05 B. Cell cycles analyzed via FACS. C. Obvious G1 cell arrest was observed in
bEnd.3 PyMT Si cells compared with bEnd.3 cells, which could also be rescued by OA treatment. (n = 3/group, one-way ANOVA) *P < 0.05
D. Apoptosis was determined via AnnexinV and PI co-staining. E. No significant difference in the number of apoptotic cells was observed
between bEnd.3 and bEnd.3 PyMT Si cells. F. Transwell assays demonstrated that PyMT silencing in bEnd.3 PyMT Si cells resulted in
an approximately 70 percent decrease in migration. OA treatment could rescue this suppression effect. G. Quantitative analysis of cell
migration. (n = 3/group, one-way ANOVA) *P< 0.05 H. In vitro angiogenesis tube formation assay results showed that bEnd.3 parental
cells and bEnd.3 NC cells exhibited an ability to organize and form networks of cords on Matrigel after 48 h of culture, while PyMT-silenced
bEnd.3 PyMT Si cells only formed islands of cells, with a few cells migrating out. Treatment with OA partially restored the angiogenic ability
of bEnd.3 PyMT Si cells. I. Quantitative analysis of junctions number in angiogenesis tube formation assay. (n = 3/group, one-way ANOVA)
*P < 0.05

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

25666

Oncotarget

A distinguishing characteristic of vascular endothelial
cells is their ability to form vessel /tube-like structures
when cultured on three-dimensional extracellular matrices,
which reflects their distinct angiogenic ability. Our results
indicated that bEnd.3 parental cells formed extensively
branched cords of cells on Matrigel after 48 h of culture,
whereas PyMT-silenced cells only formed islands of cells,
with a few cells migrating out (Fig. 5H, I). In the rescue
experiment, treatment of bEnd.3 PyMT Si cells with OA
restored AKT and ERK phosphorylation, accompanied
by enhanced cell proliferation, cell cycle progression,
cell migration and an increased angiogenic ability
(Fig. 5A–5I).

endothelial cells. Bindings between PP2A and several
vascular endothelial cell-specific proteins, such as CD31,
CD34, KDR and endoglin, were tested. Among these
molecules, only endoglin was found to bind to and disrupt
the PP2A complex.
Endoglin is predominantly expressed in proliferating
endothelial cells and represents a specific marker of
neovascularization. Strong expression of Endoglin
was detected in all 26 proliferating phase hemangioma
specimens, and endoglin staining was decreased
dramatically in the 10 involuting phase hemangioma
specimens (Fig. 7A, 7B).
As shown in Fig. 7C, binding between endoglin
and the PP2A/B subunit was observed in human HEC-P
cells, and this binding was relatively weak in human
HEC-I cells. In the competition assay, ectopic expression
of the PP2A/A and C subunits abolished the endoglinPP2A/B binding (Fig. 7D) and increased PP2A activity
in human HEC-P cells (P = 0.0036) (Fig. 7F), and ectopic
expression of endoglin decreased the PP2A/B-PP2A/A, C
binding (Fig. 7E) and decreased PP2A activity in human
HEC-I cells (P = 0.0417) (Fig. 7F). This result indicates
that endoglin can compete with the PP2A/A, C subunits
for binding to the PP2A/B subunit.

Status of PP2A activity, AKT and ERK
phosphorylation and PP2A subunit associations
in primary hemangioma endothelial cells
To confirm the importance of in vitro cell model
findings, we examined PP2A activity and the downstream
AKT and ERK phosphorylation status as well as PP2A
subunit associations in primary transgenic mouse
and human hemangioma endothelial cells. Human
HEC-P cells, human HEC-I cells, TG(+) HEC cells and
TG(-) NEC cells were isolated from human proliferating
phase hemangioma specimens, human involuting phase
hemangioma specimens, PyMT transgene-positive mice
and PyMT transgene-negative mice, respectively. As
shown in Fig. 6A–6G, human HEC-P cells and TG(+)
HEC cells displayed higher proliferation, migration and
angiogenesis ability than that of human HEC-I cells and
TG(-) HEC cells. Inactivation of PP2A was observed
in TG(+) HEC cells and human HEC-P cells, but not in
TG(-) NEC cells and human HEC-I cells (P < 0.001)
(Fig. 6H), and was accompanied by activated AKT and
ERK phosphorylation (Fig. 6I, 6J). Moreover, similar to
the observations in bEnd.3 cells, decreased association of
the PP2A/B subunit and the PP2A A, C subunits was also
observed in human HEC-P cells, while the heterotrimeric
PP2A/A-B-C complex remained intact in human HEC-I
cells (Fig. 6K). These results suggest that disruption and
inactivation of the PP2A complex and the associated
changes in downstream pathways are key molecular and
pathway alterations in hemangioma endothelial cells.

Effect of FTY720 on inhibiting hemangioma
formation in transgenic mice
Our observation that the inactivation of PP2A
promotes hemangioma formation prompted us to
investigate the therapeutic effect of a PP2A activator on
this disease. There was a significant difference in the
tumor-free time (P = 0.0031) observed between control
PyMT transgenic mice (45.1 ± 9.6 days) and PyMT
transgenic mice treated with FTY720, a PP2A activator
(64.3 ± 11.4 days) (Fig. 7G), revealing a previously
unknown therapeutic effect of this drug.

DISCUSSION
Hemangioma is a benign type of tumor derived
from strongly over-proliferative endothelial cell growth.
The pathogenesis of the abnormal angiogenesis of
hemangiomas is still unclear. In this study, we generated
transgenic mice overexpressing PyMT under the control
of the endothelial-specific Tie2 promoter/enhancer [5, 6].
The conditional transgenic Tie2/PyMT mice displayed a
hemangioma phenotype and sustained fertility in adult
mice due to avoiding embryonic lethality problems.
Employing this model, we investigated the underlying
generative molecular mechanism of hemangioma.
Our results showed that expression of the middle
T antigen in endothelial cells can rapidly induce
hemangiomas in animals, which suggests that PyMT can
trigger the formation of hemangiomas in a direct manner.

The binding between endoglin and the PP2A/B
subunit is involved in the disruption of the PP2A
complex in human hemangioma specimens
Humans are not the natural hosts of polyomavirus,
suggesting that PyMT is not the natural cause of the
dissociation of the PP2A/B subunit from the PP2A AC
dimer in human hemangioma. Hence, we searched for
the “X” factor that leads to the disruption and inactivation
of PP2A in human proliferating phase hemangioma

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

25667

Oncotarget

Figure 6: Status of PP2A activity, AKT and ERK phosphorylation and PP2A subunit associations in primary
hemangioma endothelial cells. A. Growth curve shows human HEC-P cells (two lines) and TG(+) HEC cells (two lines) displayed
higher proliferation ability than that of human HEC-I cells and TG(-) HEC cells. (n = 3/group, one-way ANOVA) *P < 0.05 B. Obvious G1
cell arrest was observed in human HEC-I cells and TG(-) HEC cells. (n = 3/group, one-way ANOVA) *P < 0.05 C. No significant difference
in the number of apoptotic cells was observed during these cells. D. Transwell assays indicated that human HEC-P cells and TG(+) HEC
cells displayed higher migration ability than that of human HEC-I cells and TG(-) HEC cells. G. Quantitative analysis of cell migration.
(n = 3/group, one-way ANOVA) *P < 0.05 H. In vitro angiogenesis tube formation assay showed that human HEC-P cells and TG(+)
HEC cells exhibited higher angiogenic ability than that of human HEC-I cells and TG(-) HEC cells. I. Quantitative analysis of junctions
number in angiogenesis tube formation assay. (n = 3/group, one-way ANOVA) *P < 0.05 H. Phosphatase activity assay results showed
that inactivation of PP2A was observed in human HEC-P cell lines and TG(+) HEC cell lines compared with human HEC-I cells and TG(-)
NEC cells. (n = 3/group, one-way ANOVA) *P < 0.05 I. Western blotting results showed high levels of phosphorylated AKT and ERK
in indicated cell lines. J. Quantitative analysis of the phosphorylation status of AKT and ERK. K. Immunoprecipitation and immunoblot
results indicated the dissociation of the PP2A/B subunit from the PP2A AC core in human HEC-P cells, but not in human HEC-I cells.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

25668

Oncotarget

Figure 7: The binding between endoglin and the PP2A/B subunit is involved in the disruption of the PP2A complex in
human hemangioma specimens. A. Representative images of immunohistochemical staining of endoglin in human proliferating phase

hemangioma specimens and involuting phase hemangioma specimens. Bar = 50 μm B. Quantitative analysis of the IOD value of endoglin
staining. (n = 36, t test) *P < 0.05 C. Binding between endoglin and the PP2A/B subunit in HEC-P cells and HEC-I cells was determined
by immunoprecipitation and immunoblot. D. Human HEC-P cells were transiently transfected with the PP2A/A and C plasmids and cell
lysates were subjected to immunoprecipitation with endoglin and probed with anti-PP2A/A, B, C antibody. Competition assay results
showed that ectopic expression of the PP2A/A, C subunits abolished the endoglin-PP2A/B binding. E. Human HEC-I cells were transiently
transfected with the endoglin expression plasmids and cell lysates were subjected to immunoprecipitation with PP2A/A, C and probed
with anti-PP2A/A, B, C antibody. Competition assay results showed that ectopic expression of endoglin abolished the PP2A/B -PP2A/A,
C binding. F. Phosphatase activity assay results showed that increased PP2A activity was detected when the PP2A/A, C subunits were
overexpressed in HEC-P cells. In contrast, PP2A activity was decreased when endoglin was overexpressed in HEC-I cells. (n = 3/group,
t test) *P < 0.05 G. There was a significant difference in the tumor-free time between the control PyMT TG(+) mice and TG(+) mice treated
with PP2A activator FTY720. (n = 7/group, one-way ANOVA) *P < 0.05

It has been demonstrated that the T antigen mediates
many of its functions through binding to important
cellular factors [7]. Therefore, we focused on the bindings
between PyMT and its associated proteins to identify the
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

mechanism through which PyMT induces hemangioma.
In the present study, a specific binding between PyMT
and PP2A was observed in PyMT-expressing endothelial
cells. The PyMT protein was only found to bind to the
25669

Oncotarget

AC core dimer, and not the regulatory B subunit of PP2A.
Meanwhile, the dissociation of the PP2A/B subunit
from the PP2A AC core dimer was observed, indicating
that PyMT is able to competitively displace the PP2A/B
subunit from the PP2A complex. Our findings not
only demonstrate distinct patterns of binding between
PyMT and PP2A in vascular endothelial cells, but also
provide a possible mechanism responsible for the PyMT
hemangioma transgenic mouse model.
PP2A is one of the major Ser/Thr phosphatases
implicated in the regulation of many cellular processes
[14–16]. Evidence suggests that PP2A can inhibit
signaling pathways related to the pathogenesis of cancer
cells [17–19]. These observations implicate PP2A as a
potential tumor suppressor [20, 21]. However, its role
in angiogenesis and hemangioma has not been reported.
Our data indicate that the primary effect of the binding
between PyMT and the PP2A AC core dimer is inhibition
of PP2A phosphatase activity. A significant decrease in
PP2A activity was observed in PyMT-expressing cells.
In contrast, PP2A activity was restored when the binding
was removed in PyMT-silenced cells. Considering that
the protein levels of the PP2A subunits were not altered
in response to PyMT expression, the inactivation of
PP2A observed in PyMT-expressing cells was due to
the dissociation of PP2A/B from the PP2A complex.
Our data revealed a previously unknown mechanism by
which PyMT inhibits PP2A activity. The finding agrees
with the known functions of the PP2A/B subunit. A major
function of the B subunit is to maintain the activity of
PP2A. Reports from other investigators have shown that
disruption of PP2A complexes via suppression of the B
subunit or dissociation of the B subunit from the AC core
dimer decreases PP2A activity [22–24].
Previous observations have shown that PP2A can
directly dephosphorylate AKT and ERK [25–27]. To
examine the biological impacts of the inactivation of PP2A
on hemangioma endothelial cells, the phosphorylation
status of AKT and ERK, cell proliferation, the cell cycle,
apoptosis, migration and angiogenesis were evaluated.
As expected, consistent with the relative PP2A activity of
the cells, high levels of the phosphorylated/active forms
of AKT and ERK were detected in PyMT-expressing
endothelial cell, comparing with the PyMT-deficient cells.
Meanwhile, PyMT-expressing endothelial cells displayed
higher proliferation, an enhanced in vitro migration and
angiogenic ability and increased in vivo tumorigenesis
ability. For the first time to our knowledge, our data
provide evidence of an anti-proliferating effect of PP2A
in vascular endothelial cells, showing that inactivation
of PP2A blocks the dephosphorylation of AKT and
ERK and increases their activity, which subsequently
promotes the proliferation, migration and angiogenic
ability of endothelial cells. The acquisition of rapid
growth and angiogenic ability of endothelial cells might
subsequently lead to hemangioma formation. Treatment
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

with OA, a PP2A inhibitor [28], not only markedly
reversed the PyMT silencing-induced PP2A activation
but also activated AKT and ERK signaling and resulted in
increases in cell growth, migration and angiogenic ability,
further confirming the anti-proliferating effect of PP2A in
endothelial cell biology.
We then confirmed the importance of in vitro cell
model findings in primary human hemangioma endothelial
cells and primary transgenic mouse endothelial cells.
Similar to the observations in in vitro cell model, reduced
PP2A activity and high levels of p-AKT and p-ERK
expression were also found in both primary TG(+) HEC
cells and human HEC-P cells compared with TG(-) NEC
cells and human HEC-I cells. Simultaneously, dissociation
of the B subunit from the PP2A complex was detected in
human HEC-P cells, but not in human HEC-I cells. These
findings demonstrate that disruption and inactivation of
the PP2A complex is a common molecular event in both
animal models and hemangioma patients.
Then, a question arose regarding the fact that
polyomavirus is a murine virus, and humans are not
the natural host for polyomavirus. Therefore, in human
hemangioma patients, some other factor may disrupt the
heterotrimeric PP2A holoenzyme and, in turn, inhibit
PP2A activity, which functions similarly to PyMT in
mice. Considering that disruption of the PP2A complex
was only observed in human proliferating hemangioma
endothelial cells, but not in involuting endothelial cells,
it is reasonable to speculate that this factor is a specific
molecule expressed in proliferating hemangioma
endothelial cells. We then tested the bindings between
PP2A and several proliferating vascular endothelial cell
markers, such as CD31, CD34, KDR and endoglin to
identify the “X” factor. It was observed that only endoglin
could bind to the PP2A subunits. Unlike pan-endothelial
cell markers, endoglin is reported to be more specific for
newly formed endothelial cells and represents a specific
marker of neovascularization [29, 30]. Endoglin was
found to compete with the PP2A/A, C subunits for binding
to the PP2A/B subunit. These results imply a possible role
of endoglin in hemangioma initiation, such that, under
certain conditions, overexpression of endoglin in earlystage hemangioma endothelial cells may disrupt the PP2A
complex and reduce PP2A activity, in turn prompting
endothelial cell growth, migration and angiogenesis by
activating AKT and ERK. While, in the revoluting phase
of hemangioma, the decreased level of endoglin abolishes
its binding to PP2A, resulting in restoration of PP2A
activity and the regression of hemangioma. This may
also explain why the lack of a revoluting phase in PyMT
transgenic hemangioma mice, because constitutively
expression of PyMT causes continuous suppression of
PP2A activity as well as disease progression.
At present, the chemical treatment of hemangioma
remains largely empirical [31]. Although some drugs, such
as rapamycin and propranolol, appear a therapeutic effect
25670

Oncotarget

on hemangioma, the underlying mechanism is still unclear
[32, 33]. Our data demonstrate an anti-proliferation
and anti-angiogenesis role of PP2A in endothelial cell
during the formation of hemangioma, which provides
support for the development of PP2A-targeted molecular
therapies. Hence, the efficacy of FTY720, a PP2A
activator, regarding the treatment of hemangioma was
assessed. FTY720 was originally approved by the FDA
as an immunosuppressive drug [34]. Recently, this
drug has been shown to exert certain anti-cancer effects
via the activation of PP2A [35]. However, there are
no available reports concerning the curative effect of
FTY720 on hemangioma. In the present study, it was
shown that treatment with FTY720 significantly delayed
the occurrence of hemangioma in PyMT transgenic mice.
This finding supports our previous results and indicates

that restoration of PP2A represents a potential therapeutic
strategy for this disease.
In summary, our study reveals a previously
unreported anti-proliferation and anti-angiogenesis effect
of PP2A in vascular endothelial cells. The inactivation
of PP2A caused by dissociation of the B subunit from
the PP2A core dimer and the subsequent activation of
AKT and ERK promote hemangiomagenesis (Fig. 8).
In addition, many studies have shown that, apart from
endothelial cells, PyMT can transform epithelial cells
leading to mammary tumors and other neoplasms of
epithelial origin [36, 37], which impels us to think whether
the PyMT-induced disruption and inactivation of the PP2A
promotes tumorogenesis in these cases. Therefore, further
studies are needed to confirm this mechanism in different
types of tumors.

Figure 8: Schematic representation of the role of PP2A in regulating the biological behaviors of hemangioma endothelial
cells identified in the present study.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

25671

Oncotarget

MATERIALS AND METHODS

C57BL/6J zygotes as previously described [39]. Eggs that
survived microinjection were transferred into the oviducts
of pseudo-pregnant foster females. TG(+) and TG(-) mice
were selected via PCR screening of genomic DNA from
tail biopsies. Then, the transgenic founders were bred to
produce offspring.

Cells culture and DNA transfection
The bEnd.3 cell line was purchased from the
American Type Culture Collection (ATCC) and maintained
in Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle’s Medium (DMEM)
supplemented with 10% FBS, penicillin (100 U/ml) and
streptomycin (100 mg/ml) at 37°C under 5% CO2 [38].
PP2A/A, B, C subunit and endoglin expression plasmids
were purchased from Shanghai Genechem Co. For
transient transfection, the cells were transfected with the
corresponding plasmid using the Lipofectamine™2000
(Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA) reagent according to the
manufacturer’s instructions.

Histological and immunohistochemical (IHC)
examination in transgenic mice
For histological examination, sample tissues were
collected from the ear mucosa, the skin of the palm, and the
stomach, lung, liver, kidney, and spleen of the transgenic
mice. Following standard protocols, formalin-fixed samples
were paraffin embedded, sectioned, and then stained with
hematoxylin and eosin. Immunohistochemistry for the
examination of the PyMT, CD31, Glut-1, Ki-67, CD133,
CD34, p-75, Sox-10, Oct-4, STAT-3 and vimentin was
performed using standard methods. The tissue sections were
incubated with a rat monoclonal PyMT antibody (Abcam)
(1:100 dilution), a rabbit polyclonal CD31antibody
(Abcam) (1:100 dilution), a rabbit polyclonal Glut-1
antibody (Abcam) (1:100 dilution), a rabbit polyclonal
Ki-67
antibody
(Abcam)
(1:200
dilution),
a rabbit polyclonal CD133 antibody (Proteintech)
(1:100 dilution), a rabbit monoclonal CD34 antibody
(Abcam) (1:50 dilution), a rabbit polyclonal p-75 antibody
(Abcam) (1:50 dilution), a rabbit polyclonal Sox-10
antibody (Abcam) (1:50 dilution), a rabbit monoclonal
Oct-4 antibody (Abcam) (1:50 dilution), a goat polyclonal
STAT-3 antibody (Abcam) (1:50 dilution) or a rabbit
monoclonal vimentin antibody (Abcam) (1:50 dilution)
overnight at 4°C. The bound antibody was detected with
a goat anti-rat or goat anti-rabbit secondary biotinylated
antibody for 30 min at room temperature (Abcam)
(1:200 dilution) and visualized using diaminobenzidine as
achromogenic substrate. The sections were then counter
stained with hematoxylin.

Animals
C57BL/6J mice and nude mice were obtained from
the Shanghai Research Center for Model Organisms. All
animal experiments were performed according to the
standards of animal care outlined in the Guide for the Care
and Use of Experimental Animals of the Medical College
of Shanghai Jiao Tong University.

Chemicals and treatment
The PP2A inhibitor okadaic acid (OA) and the
PP2A activator, FTY720 were purchased from SigmaAldrich (Louis, MO, USA). OA was prepared at a final
concentration of 15 nmol/L in cell culture medium. For
the pharmaceutical intervention experiment, four-weekold PyMT transgenic mice (n = 7/group) were treated with
FTY720 (5 /mg/kg/d) or vehicle (normal saline, NS) via
oral gavage for 10 days.

Cloning, transgene construction and production
of transgenic mice
The pPyMT1 plasmid, containing the full-length
of PyMT gene, was obtained from ATCC. The Tie2
promoter and enhancer were isolated via PCR from
C57BL/6J mouse genomic DNA, with KpnI and SalI ends
or ClaI and SalI ends, respectively. A Kozak consensus
sequence and PyMT DNA was PCR amplified with
XhoI and NheI ends. A junction fragment with XbaI and
ClaI ends was amplified using the pGL3 Basic plasmid
(Promega, Madison, WI, USA) as a template (all PCR
primers are listed in Supplemental Table S1). Then, the
Tie2 promoter, PyMT cDNA, junction fragment and
Tie2 enhancer segments were sequentially subcloned
into the pGL3 Basic vector between the KpnI and SalI
sites. This modified plasmid is referred to as ­pTie2-PyMT.
The Tie2/PyMT insert DNA was excised from pTie2PyMT through PvuI digestion. Transgenic mice were
generated through pronuclear microinjection of the
purified DNA fragments into the male pronucleus of
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Tissue specimens from hemangiomas and IHC
examination
Specimens were obtained from 26 proliferating phase
hemangiomas (patients aged 3 to 14 months) and from 10
involuting phase hemangiomas (patients aged 2 to 6 years)
patients who underwent surgical resection between 2000 and
2014 in the Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery.
The clinical diagnosis was confirmed through histological
analyses performed in the Department of Oral Pathology.
The IHC analysis of endoglin (Abcam) (1:100 dilution) was
performed according to the method described previously.
The level of IHC staining was quantified using
a semiautomated computerized image analysis system
(Image Pro Plus 6.0; Media Cybernetics, USA) [40].
Integrated optical density (IOD) of positive staining
was calculated for each tissue section.
25672

Oncotarget

Isolation of hemangioma endothelial cells

Immunoprecipitation and immunoblotting

Human HEC-P cells, human HEC-I cells, and TG(+)
HEC cells were isolated from human proliferating phase
hemangioma specimens, involuting phase hemangioma
specimens and PyMT transgene-positive mice,
respectively based on the previously described methods
[41, 42]. Briefly, hemangioma tissues were cut into small
pieces, which were first digested in DMEM containing
0.2% collagenase for 15 min at 37°C and then in 0.1%
trypsin/0.1% ethylene diamine tetraacetic acid (EDTA)
for another 5 min. The mixtures were subsequently
centrifuged at 500 g for 5 min. The pellet was resuspended
and seeded in 2% gelatin-precoated flasks and incubated
at 37°C. TG(-) NEC cells were isolated from transgenenegative mice and then separated and purified via
enzymatic digestion and density gradient centrifugation as
previously reported [43]. Briefly, cerebral cortices devoid
of cerebella, white matter, and leptomeninges were cut
into small pieces and homogenized. The homogenates
were suspended and centrifuged. The pellet was digested
in 0.1% collagenase/dispase for 6 h at 37°C. Then, the
digested microvessels and individual endothelial cells
were subsequently seeded in 2% gelatin-precoated flasks
and incubated at 37°C.

Cells were lysed in a buffer containing 50 mmol/L
Tris-HCl, pH 7.5, 150 mmol/L NaCl, 1 mmol/L EDTA,
a protease inhibitor cocktail, and 0.3% CHAPS. Cell
lysates were incubated overnight at 4°C with the indicated
antibodies with constant shaking prior to incubation with
protein A/G magnetic beads. Then, the samples were
spun down for 1 min and the pelleted beads were washed
sequentially with PBS with 1% Triton-X-100, PBS with
0.5% Triton-X-100, and PBS with 0.1% Triton-X-100.
The pellets were subsequently re-suspended in SDS
sample buffer and subjected to Western blotting. The
antibodies used in these experiments included PP2A/A
(Millipore, Darmstadt, Germany), PP2A/B (Millipore),
PP2A/B’ (Millipore), PP2A/C (Millipore), PyMT
(Abcam), endoglin (Abcam), ERK 1/2(Abcam), phosphoERK 1/2 (Abcam), AKT (Abcam) and phospho-AKT
(Abcam).

Competition assay
bEnd.3 cells, human HEC-P cells or human HEC-I
cells were transiently transfected with the PP2A/B subunit,
PP2A/A and PP2A/C subunit expression plasmids or
endoglin expression plasmid, and the associations between
PyMT and the PP2A subunits, endoglin and the PP2A
subunits or PP2A/A, C and PP2A/B subunits were then
examined via IP-Western blotting.

Lentiviral shRNA knockdown of PyMT in
bEND.3 cells
Stable PyMT silencing in bEnd.3 cell lines (bEnd.3
PyMT Si) was achieved using RNA interference. Two
PyMT small interfering RNA (siRNA) sequences
(PyMT S1: GGAAGAATGCAGCAGGCATAT, PyMT
S2: GGTGGAAGCCATGCCTTAATG) were designed
using the software siRNA Target Designer. Knockdown
of the PyMT gene in bEND.3 cells was performed using
an shRNA lentivirus (GeneChem, Shanghai, China).
Two stable cell lines with down-regulated expression of
PyMT(designated bEnd.3 PyMT S1 and bEnd.3 PyMT S2)
were employed for further experiments. Cells transfected
with the viral vector containing scrambled shRNA
(GCACTACCAGAGCTAACTCAGATAGTACT) were
used as the negative control (designated bEnd.3 NC).

Phosphatase activity assay
Cells were washed with pre-chilled PBS once and
incubated with phosphatase lysis buffer on ice for 10 min.
Then, the cells were collected and centrifuged at 2 000 g
for 5 min at 4°C. The supernatant was collected, and
the protein concentration was measured. PP2A activity
was determined using a PP2A immunoprecipitation
phosphatase assay kit (Millipore), following the
manufacturer’s protocol.

Proliferation assay
The MTT (3-[4, 5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl]-2,
5-diphenyltetrazoliumbromide) colorimetric assay was
employed to screen for cell proliferation. Briefly, cells
were seeded in 96-well plates at a density of 2 × 103 cells/
well. Twenty microliters of MTT (5 mg/ml) was added
to each well, and cell culture was continued for 4 h.
After aspiration of the medium, the cells were lysed with
DMSO. The absorbance was measured using a microplate
reader at a wavelength of 490 nm. These measurements
were carried out for 6 consecutive days, and the cell
growth curve was plotted. The experiment was performed
in triplicate.

Tumorigenesis assay
Cells (2×106) from the bEnd.3 parental line, bEnd.3
NC cells, and bEnd.3 PyMT S1 cells and bnd.3 PyMT
S2 cells were injected subcutaneously on each side into
the rear flanks of 6-week-old male nude mice (two sites
per mouse and five mice per cell line). Tumor sizes were
monitored with calipers twice a week. At the end of the
experiment, mice were euthanized by cervical dislocation.
The tumor volume (cm3) was calculated as (L × W2)/2,
where L = length (cm) and W = width (cm).

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

25673

Oncotarget

Apoptosis detection assay

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The Annexin V-FITC/PI Apoptosis Detection Kit
(BD Biosciences, San Jose, CA, USA) was used following
the manufacturer’s instructions. Cells showing Annexin
V+/PI− staining were considered early apoptotic cells, and
those showing Annexin V+/PI+ staining were considered
late apoptotic cells. After the staining, cells were
immediately analyzed using a BD FACS Calibur flow
cytometer and the CELL Quest software. The experiment
was performed in triplicate.

We thank the Shanghai Research Center for
Biomodel Organisms for their excellent technical
assistance in generating PyMT transgenic mice. This
work was supported by Chinese National Natural Science
Foundation (81070845, 81472518 and 81272977);
Shanghai Science and Technology Committee project
(12140901100).

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST

Cell cycle analysis

The authors declare no conflict of interest.

Cells were collected and fixed in 70% ethanol,
washed two times with ice-cold PBS and resuspended
in 500 μL of PBS. Cell suspensions were incubated with
RNase A (50 μg/ml) for 30 min at 37°C and sequentially
stained with PI (50 μg/ml) for 1 h and analyzed via
flow cytometry. Three independent experiments were
performed.

REFERENCES
1.	 Lee KC, Bercovitch L. Update on infantile hemangiomas.
Semin Perinatol. 2013; 37:49–58.
2.	 Boye E, Jinnin M, Olsen BR. Infantile hemangioma:
challenges, new insights, and therapeutic promise.
­
J Craniofac Surg. 2009; 20:678–84.

Transwell migration assay

3.	 Xu Q, Chen W, Wang Z, Zheng J, Zhang Z. Mice transgenic
with SV40-late-promoter-driven Polyomavirus Middle T
oncogene exclusively develop hemangiomas. Transgenic
Res. 2009; 18:399–406.

Cell migration was evaluated using 24-well
Transwell units with 8 μm-porosity polycarbonate filters.
A 200 μl aliquot of serum-starved cells (5 × 105 cells/ml)
was added to the upper polycarbonate membrane
insert, and 600 μl of cultured medium with 10% fetal
bovine serum was added to the lower chamber. After
24 h of incubation, the membranes were fixed with 5%
glutaraldehyde in PBS for 10 min and then stained with
0.5% toluidine blue. The number of migratory cells was
counted five times in random fields under a microscope.
Experiments were performed in triplicate.

4.	 Williams RL, Risau W, Zerwes HG, Drexler H, Aguzzi A,
Wagner EF. Endothelioma cells expressing the polyoma
middle T oncogene induce hemangiomas by host cell
recruitment. Cell. 1989; 57:1053–63.
5.	 Schlaeger TM, Bartunkova S, Lawitts JA, Teichmann G,
Risau W, Deutsch U, Sato TN. Uniform vascular-­
endothelial-cell-specific gene expression in both embryonic
and adult transgenic mice. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1997;
94:3058–63.

In vitro angiogenesis tube formation assay

6.	 Gerstel D, Wegwitz F, Jannasch K, Ludewig P, Scheike K,
Alves F, Beauchemin N, Deppert W, Wagener C,
Horst AK. CEACAM1 creates a pro-angiogenic tumor
microenvironment that supports tumor vessel maturation.
Oncogene. 2011; 30:4275–88.

Matrigel (10 mg/ml, BD Biosciences) was plated
into flat-bottomed 6-well tissue culture plates and
incubated at 37°C for 30 min to allow the Matrigel
to polymerize. Then, 1 × 105 cells were seeded into
the Matrigel-coated plates. After 48 h, the plates were
monitored and photographed. Results were quantified by
measuring the joint numbers in the field [44]. Experiments
were performed in triplicate.

7.	 Hwang JH, Pores Fernando AT, Faure N, Andrabi S,
Hahn WC, Schaffhausen BS, Roberts TM. Polyomavirus
small T antigen interacts with yes-associated protein to
regulate cell survival and differentiation. J Virol. 2014;
88:12055–64.
8.	 Ogris E, Mudrak I, Mak E, Gibson D, Pallas DC.
Catalytically inactive protein phosphatase 2A can bind to
polyomavirus middle tumor antigen and support complex
formation with pp60(c-src). J Virol. 1999; 73:7390–8.

Statistics
All values are expressed as the average ± SD.
Data sets were analyzed with the aid of GraphPad Prism
Software, version 6 (GraphPad). Differences between
groups were assessed with either 2-tailed Student’s t tests
or, in the case of multiple groups, one-way ANOVA with
Tukey’s multiple comparison test. P values of less than
0.05 were considered to be significant.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

9.	 Mo ST, Chiang SJ, Lai TY, Cheng YL, Chung CE,
Kuo SC, Reece KM, Chen YC, Chang NS, Wadzinski BE,
Chiang CW. Visualization of subunit interactions and
ternary complexes of protein phosphatase 2A in mammalian
cells. PLoS One. 2014; 9:e116074.

25674

Oncotarget

10.	 Zhu D, Tate R, Ruediger R, Meigs TE, Denker BM.
Domains necessary for Galpha12 binding and stimulation
of protein phosphatase-2A (PP2A): Is Galpha12 a novel
regulatory subunit of PP2A?. Mol Pharmacol. 2007;
71:1268–76.

22.	 Ruvolo VR, Kurinna SM, Karanjeet KB, Schuster TF,
Martelli AM, McCubrey JA, Ruvolo PP. PKR regulates
B56(alpha)-mediated BCL2 phosphatase activity in acute
lymphoblastic leukemia-derived REH cells. J Biol Chem.
2008; 283:35474–85.

11.	 Guo CY, Brautigan DL, Larner JM. ATM-dependent
dissociation of B55 regulatory subunit from nuclear PP2A
in response to ionizing radiation. J Biol Chem. 2002;
277:4839–44.

23.	 Chen CL, Lin CF, Chiang CW, Jan MS, Lin YS. Lithium
inhibits ceramide- and etoposide-induced protein phosphatase 2A methylation, Bcl-2 dephosphorylation, caspase-2
activation, and apoptosis. Mol Pharmacol. 2006; 70:510–7.

12.	 Itinteang T, Tan ST, Brasch H, Day DJ. Primitive
mesodermal cells with a neural crest stem cell phenotype
predominate proliferating infantile haemangioma. J Clin
Pathol. 2010; 63:771–6.

24.	 Guo CY, Brautigan DL, Larner JM. ATM-dependent
dissociation of B55 regulatory subunit from nuclear PP2A
in response to ionizing radiation. J Biol Chem. 2002;
277:4839–44.

13.	 Itinteang T, Tan ST, Brasch HD, Steel R, Best HA,
Vishvanath A, Jia J, Day DJ. Infantile haemangioma
expresses embryonic stem cell markers. J Clin Pathol. 2012;
65:394–8.

25.	 Wandzioch E, Pusey M, Werda A, Bail S, Bhaskar A,
Nestor M, Yang JJ, Rice LM. PME-1 modulates protein
phosphatase 2A activity to promote the malignant
phenotype of endometrial cancer cells. Cancer Res. 2014;
74:4295–305.

14.	 Lambrecht C, Haesen D, Sents W, Ivanova E, Janssens V.
Structure, regulation, and pharmacological modulation
of PP2A phosphatases. Methods Mol Biol. 2013;
1053:283–305.

26.	 Khanna A, Pimanda JE, Westermarck J. Cancerous
inhibitor of protein phosphatase 2A, an emerging human
oncoprotein and a potential cancer therapy target. Cancer
Res. 2013; 73:6548–53.

15.	 Yi K, Wang X, Emmett MR, Marshall AG, Stewart M,
Roberts TM. Dephosphorylation of major sperm protein
(MSP) fiber protein 3 by protein phosphatase 2A during
cell body retraction in the MSP-based amoeboid motility of
Ascaris sperm. Mol Biol Cell. 2009; 20:3200–8.

27.	 Park MC, Kang T, Jin D, Han JM, Kim SB, Park YJ,
Cho K, Park YW, Guo M, He W, Yang XL, Schimmel P,
Kim S. Secreted human glycyl-tRNA synthetase implicated
in defense against ERK-activated tumorigenesis. Proc Natl
Acad Sci U S A. 2012; 109:E640–7.

16.	 Strack S, Cribbs JT, Gomez L. Critical role for protein
phosphatase 2A heterotrimers in mammalian cell survival.
J Biol Chem. 2004; 279:47732–9.

28.	 Okamura H, Yoshida K, Ochiai K, Haneji T. Reduction
of protein phosphatase 2A Cα enhances bone formation
and osteoblast differentiation through the expression of
bone-specific transcription factor Osterix. Bone. 2011;
49:368–75.

17.	 Dedinszki D, Kiss A, Márkász L, Márton A, Tóth E1,
Székely L, Erdődi F. Inhibition of protein phosphatase-1
and -2A decreases the chemosensitivity of leukemic cells
to chemotherapeutic drugs. Cell Signal. 2015; 27:363–72.

29.	 Banerjee S, Dhara SK, Bacanamwo M. Endoglin is a novel
endothelial cell specification gene. Stem Cell Res. 2012;
8:85–96.

18.	 Umberger NL, Caspary T. Ciliary transport regulates
PDGF-AA/αα signaling via elevated mammalian target of
rapamycin signaling and diminished PP2A activity. Mol
Biol Cell. 2015; 26:350–8.

30.	 Zijlmans HJ, Fleuren GJ, Hazelbag S, Sier CF, Dreef EJ,
Kenter GG, Gorter A. Expression of endoglin (CD105) in
cervical cancer. Br J Cancer. 2009; 100:1617–26.

19.	 Ravi A, Kaushik S, Ravichandran A, Pan CQ, Low BC.
Epidermal Growth Factor Activates the Rho GTPaseactivating Protein (GAP) Deleted in Liver Cancer 1 via
Focal Adhesion Kinase and Protein Phosphatase 2A. J Biol
Chem. 2015; 290:4149–62.

31.	 Itinteang T, Withers AH, Leadbitter P, Day DJ, Tan ST.
Pharmacologic therapies for infantile hemangioma:
is there a rational basis?. Plast Reconstr Surg. 2011;
128:499–507.

20.	 Chien W, Sun QY, Lee KL, Ding LW, Wuensche P,
Torres-Fernandez LA, Tan SZ, Tokatly I, Zaiden N,
Poellinger L, Mori S, Yang H, Tyner JW, Koeffler HP.
Activation of protein phosphatase 2A tumor suppressor as
potential treatment of pancreatic cancer. Mol Oncol. 2015;
9:889–905.

32.	 Lamming DW, Ye L, Sabatini DM, Baur JA. Rapalogs and
mTOR inhibitors as anti-aging therapeutics. J Clin Invest.
2013; 123:980–9.

21.	 Cristóbal I, Manso R, Rincón R, Caramés C, Zazo S,
Del Pulgar TG, Cebrián A, Madoz-Gúrpide J, Rojo F,
García-Foncillas J. Phosphorylated protein phosphatase
2A determines poor outcome in patients with metastatic
colorectal cancer. Br J Cancer. 2014; 111:756–62.

34.	 Hait NC, Wise LE, Allegood JC, O’Brien M, Avni D,
Reeves TM, Knapp PE, Lu J, Luo C, Miles MF, Milstien S,
Lichtman AH, Spiegel S. Active, phosphorylated
fingolimod inhibits histone deacetylases and facilitates fear
extinction memory. Nat Neurosci. 2014; 17:971–80.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

33.	 Arevalo JF, Arias JD, Serrano MA. Oral propranolol
for exudative retinal detachment in diffuse choroidal
hemangioma. Arch Ophthalmol. 2011; 129:1373–5.

25675

Oncotarget

35.	 Mani R, Mao Y, Frissora FW, Chiang CL, Wang J, Zhao Y,
Wu Y, Yu B, Yan R, Mo X, Yu L, Flynn J, Jones J,
et al. Tumor antigen ROR1 targeted drug delivery mediated
selective leukemic but not normal B-cell cytotoxicity in
chronic lymphocytic leukemia. Leukemia. 2015; 29:346–55.

41.	 Yamaguchi T, Ichise T, Iwata O, Hori A, Adachi T,
Nakamura M, Yoshida N, Ichise H. Development of a
new method for isolation and long-term culture of organspecific blood vascular and lymphatic endothelial cells of
the mouse. FEBS J. 2008; 275:1988–98.

36.	 Cuevas BD, Winter-Vann AM, Johnson NL, Johnson GL.
MEKK1 controls matrix degradation and tumor cell
dissemination during metastasis of polyoma middle-T
driven mammary cancer. Oncogene. 2006; 25:4998–5010.

42.	 Cho JH, Han I, Lee MR, Cho HS, Oh JH, Kim HS. Isolation
and characterization of endothelial cells from intramuscular
hemangioma. J Orthop Sci. 2013; 18:137–44.
43.	 Zhu H, Wang Z, Xing Y, Gao Y, Ma T, Lou L, Lou J,
Gao Y, Wang S, Wang Y. Baicalin reduces the permeability
of the blood-brain barrier during hypoxia in vitro by
increasing the expression of tight junction proteins in brain
microvascular endothelial cells. J Ethnopharmacol. 2012;
141:714–20.

37.	 Lewis BC, Klimstra DS, Varmus HE. The c-myc and PyMT
oncogenes induce different tumor types in a somatic mouse
model for pancreatic cancer. Genes Dev. 2003; 17:3127–38.
38.	 Meens MJ1, Pfenniger A, Kwak BR, Delmar M. Regulation
of cardiovascular connexins by mechanical forces and
junctions. Cardiovasc Res. 2013; 99:304–14.

44.	 Calvani M, Pelon F, Comito G, Taddei ML, Moretti S,
Innocenti S, Nassini R, Gerlini G, Borgognoni L, Bambi F,
Giannoni E, Filippi L, Chiarugi P. Norepinephrine
promotes tumor microenvironment reactivity through
β3-adrenoreceptors during melanoma progression.
Oncotarget. 2015; 6:4615–32.

39.	 Brinster RL, Chen HY, Trumbauer ME, Yagle MK,
Palmiter RD. Factors affecting the efficiency of introducing
foreign DNA into mice by microinjecting eggs. Proc Natl
Acad Sci U S A. 1985; 82:4438–42.
40.	 Xu Q, Liu X, Cai Y, Yu Y, Chen W. RNAi-mediated
ADAM9 gene silencing inhibits metastasis of adenoid
cystic carcinoma cells. Tumour Biol. 2010; 31:217–24.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

25676

Oncotarget

