Review Article

A Review and Characterization of the
Various Perceptions of Quality Cancer Care
Ann D. Colosia, PhD1; Gerson Peltz, MD, MPH2; Gerhardt Pohl, PhD2; Esther Liu, PharmD, RAC2;
Kati Copley-Merriman, MS, MBA3; Shahnaz Khan, MPH1; and James A. Kaye, MD, DrPH4

BACKGROUND: It is important to maintain high-quality cancer care while reducing spending. This requires an understanding of how stakeholders define ‘‘quality.’’ The objective of this literature review was to understand the perceptions patients, physicians, and managed care professionals have about quality cancer care, especially chemotherapy.
METHODS: A computerized literature search was conducted for articles concerning quality cancer care in patients
who received chemotherapy. Among >1100 identified sources, 25 presented interviews/survey results from stakeholders. RESULTS: Patients defined quality cancer care as being treated well by providers, having multiple treatment
options, and being part of the decision-making process. Waiting to see providers, having problems with referrals,
going to different locations for treatment, experiencing billing inaccuracies, and navigating managed care reimbursement negatively affected patients’ quality-of-care perceptions. Providers perceived quality cancer care as making
decisions based on the risks-benefits of specific chemotherapy regimens and patients’ health status rather than
costs. Providers objected to spending substantial time interacting with payers instead of delivering care to patients.
Payers must control the costs of cancer care but do not want an adversarial relationship with providers and patients.
Payers’ methods of managing cancer more efficiently involved working with providers to develop assessment and decision-assist tools. CONCLUSIONS: Delivering quality cancer care is increasingly difficult because of the shortage of
oncologists and rising costs of chemotherapy agents, radiation therapy, and imaging tests. The definition of quality
cancer care differed among stakeholders, and healthcare reform must reflect these various needs to maintain and
C 2010 American Cancer Society
improve quality while controlling costs. Cancer 2011;117:884–96. V
KEYWORDS: quality of healthcare, quality indicators, quality assurance, neoplasms/drug therapy, cancer care
facilities, hospital oncology service.

Leading cancer experts and organizations in the United States are seeking ways to assess quality cancer care and ensure
its delivery because of increasing costs to patients and healthcare plans,1,2 including rising out-of-pocket costs for cancer
medications.3 The anticipated shortage of oncologists4,5 also will challenge the delivery of quality cancer care. According
to the Institute of Medicine, quality care should be consistent with current professional knowledge about a disease, including its diagnosis, staging, and treatment, and should produce the desired health outcomes.6 The objective of this literature
review was to identify the perceptions of stakeholders—providers, patients, and payers—of quality cancer care in the
United States, particularly for patients who receive chemotherapy. On the basis of these perceptions, this review offers several recommendations for improving the quality of cancer care.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
The PubMed database, the Excerpta Medica Database (EMBASE), and Cochrane Reviews were searched systematically
for publications related to cancer. PubMed medical subject heading (MeSH) terms included ‘‘Neoplasms/Drug Therapy’’;
‘‘Neoplasms/Radiotherapy’’; ‘‘Neoplasms/Surgery’’; ‘‘Cancer Care Facilities’’; ‘‘Oncology Service, Hospital’’; and ‘‘Radiation Oncology.’’ MeSH terms to capture studies on quality of care were ‘‘Quality of Health Care’’; ‘‘Quality Assurance,
Health Care’’; and ‘‘Quality Indicators, Health Care.’’ For this study, we reviewed 875 article abstracts and applied inclusion/exclusion criteria (Fig. 1). The primary focus of the study was quality of cancer care for patients who were receiving
chemotherapy. Of the 875 article abstracts, 140 publications of interest were obtained for full review. Two hundred
Corresponding author: Ann D. Colosia, PhD, RTI Health Solutions, PO Box 12194, Research Triangle Park, NC 27709-2194; Fax: (919) 541-1275; acolosia@rti.org
1
Market Access and Outcomes Strategy, RTI Health Solutions, Research Triangle Park, North Carolina; 2Global Health Outcomes Oncology, Eli Lilly and Company,
Indianapolis, Indiana; 3Market Access and Outcomes Strategy, RTI Health Solutions, Ann Arbor, Michigan; 4Epidemiology, RTI Health Solutions, Waltham,
Massachusetts

DOI: 10.1002/cncr.25644, Received: July 27, 2010; Accepted: August 12, 2010, Published online October 11, 2010 in Wiley Online Library
(wileyonlinelibrary.com)

884

Cancer

March 1, 2011

Various Perceptions of Cancer Care/Colosia et al

Figure 1. This flow diagram shows the number of abstracts and full-text sources reviewed for the current literature review and
reasons for exclusion. EMBASE indicates Excerpta Medica Database; ASCO, American Society of Clinical Oncology; ECCO, European Cancer Organization; ESMO, European Society for Medical Oncology; PRO, patient-reported outcome.

thirty-six conference abstracts also were identified from
the American Society of Clinical Oncology 2008 and
2009 meetings and from the European Cancer Organization/European Society of Medical Oncology 2009 meeting. The conference abstracts were searched using the
following terms: ‘‘quality of healthcare,’’ ‘‘quality of
healthcare,’’ ‘‘quality assurance,’’ ‘‘quality indicators,’’
‘‘quality care,’’ and ‘‘quality of care.’’ Additional articles
were obtained from the selected article bibliographies and
from online searches informed by content from the
selected articles. Online searches were needed in particular
to obtain perspectives of managed care professionals. The
Internet was searched for ‘‘managed care’’ with ‘‘journal’’
to identify publications that specifically addressed managed care, and then the tables of contents were searched
when available online. To ensure a varied managed care
perspective, this review included publications from professionals in the field that related their experiences and/or
described their insurance companies’ programs to manage
cancer patients.

Cancer

March 1, 2011

RESULTS
Although the quality of cancer care was discussed frequently in conferences and publications, there were few
structured studies that obtained patients’ views, and even
fewer reported interviews with providers and managed
care professionals. In total, 25 sources described surveys
or interviews with patients, providers, or professionals in
managed care settings.
Patient Perspectives
Thirteen studies reported patient perceptions of quality cancer care from >9000 patients (Table 1). Five of those 13
studies enrolled exclusively patients with breast cancer (N ¼
1039), whereas 1 study enrolled only patients with colorectal
cancer (N ¼ 1067). Four studies included 6905 patients
with any cancer or with 1 of several kinds of cancer.
Promoters of and barriers to quality care:
Information and interactions

Studies of patient perceptions revealed that patients
report receiving high-quality cancer care when they are

885

Review Article
Table 1. Sources Reporting Patients’ Perceptions of Quality Cancer Care

Study

Study Design

Type of Cancer in
Patient Population

Sample
Size

Liang 20027
Goodwin 20038
Brearley 200911
Bourjolly 200418
Wenzel & Steeves 200817
Lunik 199612
Arora 200913
Gesell & Gregory 200415
Ayanian 200510
Franco 200942
Williams 19989
Nguyen 200943

Interview
Interview
Interview
Interviewa
Interview
Interview
Patient’s recounting
Survey/questionnaire
Survey/questionnaire
Survey/questionnaire
Instrument (HCI)
Instrument (EORTC QLQ-C30/
questionnaire)
Instrument (SERVQUAL)

Breast
Breast
Gastrointestinal
Breast
Breast
Lymphoma
Lymphoma
Any (16 types)
Colorectal
Breast
Any
Breast, prostate, lung, head
and neck, rectal
Breast, leukemia, gastrointestinal, any
requiring bone marrow aspiration
9126 (9032 With cancer)

613
169
19
33
14
1
1
5907
1067
210
259 (165 With cancer)
686

Anderson & Zwelling 199616
Total no. of patients

147

HCI indicates Holistic Caring Inventory; EORTC QLQ-C30, European Organization for Research and Treatment of Cancer Quality-of-Life Questionnaire;
SERVQUAL, service quality questionnaire.
a
Bourjolly and colleagues also interviewed providers.

able to obtain information about their health and treatment, participate in decision making, trust their physician, communicate their feelings to providers, and believe
that care from various professionals is well coordinated
(Table 2). In a study among 613 women aged 67 years
with breast cancer, surgeon-initiated communication and
being presented with multiple treatment options gave
patients the perception of having a choice of treatment.7
Women who reported high levels of surgeon-initiated
communication were 2.13 times more likely to be satisfied
with their care than women who reported low levels of
surgeon-initiated communication. Provision of information from nurse case managers also led to a higher level of
patient comfort. In a randomized, prospective trial of
women aged 65 years with breast cancer, 169 women
who were assigned a case manager were more likely to perceive that they had a real choice in their treatment compared with 166 women who did not have a case manager.8
Patients were concerned about their personal interactions with providers and were more likely to notice a
lack of positive interactions than the presence of quality
interactions.9 In an analysis of 3 studies and that included
a total of 259 patients, mean responses to the Holistic
Caring Inventory, which consists of physical, psychological, sociocultural, and spiritual domains, indicated that
patients perceived that they received more physical and
sensitive caring than interpretive and spiritual caring from
nurses. Interpretive caring, as defined in the studies,
required that the nurse have more conversations with the

886

patient’s family, share feelings and information, and be
aware of specific circumstances of the patient’s life to
explain how cancer and treatment would affect these
areas. Nurses may not have time to provide the depth of
interactions required to offer spiritual care. Patients
expressed that they did not expect spiritual care but did
expect to be treated as a unique individual and with care,
gentleness, respect, and attention.9
When information was difficult to obtain, trust was
limited, or care was not well coordinated, patients experienced reduced quality of care. In a survey of >1000
patients with colorectal cancer, results across all racial and
ethnic groups indicated that the domains of care with the
highest problem scores (indicating poor perceptions) were
reported for health information, treatment information,
psychosocial care, and coordination of care. Lower problem scores (indicating better perceptions) were reported
for confidence in providers and access to cancer care.
Approximately 50% of patients reported receiving insufficient health information about changes in their work or
usual activities, relationship with their spouse or partner,
or sexual activity. Approximately 25% to 29% of patients
reported problems that included lack of sufficient information regarding treatments, lack of coordination among
providers, and lack of involvement in decision making.
Among patients who were eligible for chemotherapy after
surgery, those who did not receive it were more likely to
report problems with confidence in their providers and
access to care.10

Cancer

March 1, 2011

Various Perceptions of Cancer Care/Colosia et al

Table 2. Patients’ Perception of Relevant Factors for Quality Cancer Care

Factor

Reference Source

Promoters of quality care
Communication
Surgeon-initiated communication
Better patient-physician communication
Knowledge of which provider to approach with questions
Other (nonsurgeon) healthcare professionals as source of communication (eg, case
manager)
Trust in physician (consistent across races)
Caring behavior and attitudes from nurses (treated with care, gentleness, respect,
and attention)
Better treatment by staff/staff courtesy/staff concern for patient comfort

Liang 20027
Franco 200942
Franco 200942
Goodwin 20038
Franco 200942; Schrag 200544
Williams 19989
Gesell & Gregory 200415; Franco 2009.42

Support
Lunik 199612; Arora 200913; Weingart 200714;
Ashing 200345
Ashing 200345
Liang 20027
Gesell & Gregory 200415

Strong support system of family and friends
Spiritual support
Multiple treatment options
Clean facility

Barriers to quality care
Difficulty of attaining the cancer diagnosis
Problems obtaining health information
Problems obtaining treatment information
Problems with psychosocial care/patient’s emotional needs not addressed
Lack of involvement in decision making
Lack of coordination of care among providers
Lack of awareness, trust, and familiarity with healthcare system and lack of insurance or transportation among Asian-American women
Unsafe care (adverse events, close calls, and medical errors)
Service quality incidents (waits and delays in service, poor care coordination, communication issues resulting in lack of access to care)
Difficulty reaching staff
Billing inaccuracies
Difficulty with managed care tasks
Managing or mediating between the managed care organization and the cancer

Patient perceptions may change over time and with
stage of disease. In a recent study in the United Kingdom,
interviews with 19 patients who had gastrointestinal cancers revealed that, during the initial, acute treatment
phases (diagnosis and 3 months after diagnosis), quality of
life, daily function, and treatment-related symptoms were
the most important issues for patients among those investigated. During the later phases (6 months and 12 months
after diagnosis), patients’ concerns shifted from worries
about physical symptoms to worries about recurrence,
lack of new treatment options, gaining independence, getting clear information on long-term care options, and
social and financial survivorship.11
Support systems

An essential part of receiving quality cancer care for
patients was feeling that they had a strong support system,

Cancer

March 1, 2011

Lunik 199612; Arora 200913
Ayanian 200510
Ayanian 200510
Ayanian 200510; Gesell & Gregory 200415
Ayanian 200510
Ayanian 200510
Ashing 200345
Weingart 200714
Weingart 200714; Anderson & Zwelling 199616;
Ayanian 200510; Gesell & Gregory 200415
Gesell & Gregory 200415
Anderson and Zwelling16
Wenzel and Steeves17
Wenzel and Steeves17

consisting of family and friends who would ask difficult
questions when the patients, for any reason, could
not.12,13 In addition, family and friends helped patients
avoid potential harm from medication errors, such as
pointing out the existence of a drug allergy that was not
noted in the patient records.14
Service quality

A survey of almost 6000 cancer outpatients who
received treatment at 23 US hospitals assessed patients’
experiences encompassed under the umbrella of service
quality. The service quality areas with the highest scores
(indicating patient satisfaction) were staff courtesy, cleanliness of the facility, and staff concern for patient comfort.
The ‘‘likelihood of recommending the hospital’s services
to others,’’ which captured overall satisfaction with service
quality, also received 1 of the highest scores. The areas

887

Review Article

with the lowest scores (indicating dissatisfaction) were
waiting time, ease of reaching the office staff, and the
degree to which the staff addressed the patient’s emotional
needs.15
Results from another service quality study indicated
that, from a patient perspective, billing accuracy and waiting times were significant problems.16 The SERVQUAL
questionnaire was administered to 200 patients at each of
4 clinics (N ¼ 800): medical breast, leukemia, medical
gastrointestinal, and bone marrow aspiration. Across all 4
clinics, the attribute of reliability (which included service
provided at the time promised, sympathetic and reassuring manners, and billing accuracy) was rated consistently
by patients as the most important attribute and also
received the lowest ratings in terms of quality.16
Patient perceptions of US managed care
quality of care

Interviews of patients with breast cancer revealed
that interactions with managed care organizations
(MCOs), including issues with billing accuracy, copayments, and referrals, were a major burden and affected
perceptions of the quality of care.17 Two major themes
emerged from this research. The first was that patients
had ‘‘difficulty completing managed care tasks’’ (involving
issues such as getting a referral; clarifying copayment levels; finding knowledgeable and helpful MCO staff; and
getting assistance with paperwork, billing, and treatment
approvals). In addition, patients perceived a lack of logical
and caring decision making on the part of the MCO.
Delays in determining out-of-pocket expenses resulted in
distress and difficulty in planning future treatments. In
addition to the physical vulnerability associated with their
condition, patients were subject to a financial vulnerability related to payment for care, because they worried
about discontinuation of coverage and inability to get further treatment if coverage was discontinued. Most
patients expressed a lack of confidence that there would be
improvements in the MCO system over time. The second
major theme was problems in ‘‘managing or mediating
between the MCO and the cancer [care providers],’’ in
which patients perceived MCO management and cancer
care as separate entities that had to be linked by the patient
to achieve the best outcomes. Whereas some patients
accepted assistance from the cancer center about billing
issues when possible, others used a more take-charge
approach and expressed frustration at the extra level of
complication caused by this paperwork. In addition,
patients felt burdened with having to coordinate between

888

the provider and the payer while also taking care of their
physical needs related to the disease.17
A study by Bourjolly and colleagues18 that involved
interviews with 33 women who had breast cancer revealed
2 main areas of difficulty with insurance: obtaining referrals and receiving medical services in different locations.
The patients’ primary concern was finding the best care to
treat their disease regardless of the type of insurance they
had. Having to get referrals was regarded as a very frustrating experience. None of the women reported being denied
any treatment options because of insurance restrictions;
however, 1 woman’s insurance refused to pay for a bone
scan because of problems with the referral. Having various
aspects of one’s treatment in different locations based on
insurance requirements was observed as an inconvenience.
Although the women received chemotherapy or radiation
treatment at a cancer center, some had to get mammograms and laboratory work at other locations.18
Patient characteristics associated with unfavorable
perceptions of care quality

Three studies identified patient and clinical characteristics that were associated with unfavorable perceptions
of quality care. These characteristics included factors
related to health status, type of treatment, living conditions, and sociodemographic characteristics of the
patients, including age, income level, ethnicity, and language spoken (Table 3).
Provider Perspectives
Seven studies captured perspectives on aspects of quality
cancer care from >2200 providers (Table 4), including 1
study that also surveyed patients.18
Physician reports on quality indicators

Three studies were identified that asked physicians
about multidisciplinary care, appropriate receipt of chemotherapy, and practice processes. A survey of 312 surgeons
who treated breast cancer in 2 large metropolitan cities
(Los Angeles and Detroit) revealed low use of patient and
practice management processes. Approximately 10% of
surgeons reported that 50% of their patients had multidisciplinary physician communication. Only 5% of surgeons reported that 50% of their patients were provided
with presurgical decision and care support services (eg,
viewing a video about breast cancer). Surgeons who specialized and surgeons in teaching programs were more likely
to use practice management processes.19

Cancer

March 1, 2011

Various Perceptions of Cancer Care/Colosia et al

Table 3. Predictors of Patient Dissatisfaction With Cancer Care

Predictive Factor

Instrument

Reference Source

Poor global health in patients with head-and-neck
cancer
Receipt of radiotherapy in patients with head-and-neck
cancer
Living alonea
Young age (<55 y vs >55 y; for physicians’ availability)
High income (for provision of information from nurses)
African-American race (associated with less trust in physician, perception of greater difficulty with psychosocial care, care coordination, access to care, obtaining
health information)
Asian or Pacific Islander (associated with perception of
greater difficulty with care coordination, access to
care, obtaining health information)
Nonwhiteb
Non–English-speakingb

EORTC QLQ-C30 for sociodemographic,
clinical characteristics, and quality of life
data; OUT-PATSAT35 for satisfaction with
providers, care organization, and services

Nguyen 200943

Five-item questionnaire assessing physician
communication (Franco 200942); adapted
Picker Institute survey (Ayanian 200510)

Ayanian 200510; Franco 200942

Adapted Picker Institute survey

Ayanian 200510

EORTC QLQ indicates European Organization for Research and Treatment of Cancer Quality of Life Questionnaire; OUT-PATSAT35, The EORTC Cancer Outpatient Satisfaction With Care Questionnaire.
a
For provision of information from physicians and nurses.
b
Less likely to rate overall quality of cancer care as excellent or very good.

Table 4. Sources That Reported Providers’ Perceptions of Quality Cancer Care

Reference

Study Design

Type of Provider

Type of Cancer
in Patients Treated

Sample
Size

Bickell 200722
Bourjolly 200418
Keating 200823
Lamkin 200224
Tisnado 200826
Katz 200919
Genentech 200825
Total no. of providers

Interview
Interviewa
Survey/questionnaire
Survey/questionnaire
Survey/questionnaire
Survey/questionnaire
Survey/questionnaire

Surgeons
Physicians, nurses business office staff
Medical oncologists, surgeons
Registered nurses specializing in oncology
Medical oncologists, radiation oncologists, surgeons
Surgeons
Oncologists

Breast
Breast
Colorectal
Any
Any
Breast
Any

35
10
1096
463
348
312
NRb
2264b

NR indicates not reported.
a
Bourjolly and colleagues also interviewed patients.
b
The survey for Genentech was mailed to 5000 medical oncologists; the response rate was low, but the number of responses was not reported.

Interviews were conducted with surgeons who
treated women for primary stage I or II breast cancer to
determine why 21% of the women in an earlier study20
did not receive adjuvant therapy that would have been
consistent with then current National Comprehensive
Cancer Network (NCCN) guidelines.21 Underuse of adjuvant therapy was highest among African-American
women (34%), followed by Hispanic women (23%), and
white women (16%). Of the original study’s 37 surgeons,
35 were available to be interviewed about the underuse of
adjuvant therapy for the 119 women they had treated (Table 5). For 34% of the women, surgeons did not recommend adjuvant therapy based on valid health
considerations. Lack of physician knowledge was the
underlying reason for adjuvant therapy underuse in 3% of
patients.22 Another 31% of the women declined adjuvant

Cancer

March 1, 2011

therapy. The surgeons were asked about which practical
barriers could have played a role in each of their patients’
decisions to decline therapy, but the respondents often
did not know whether patients had difficulty with various
forms of support. For the 119 women who underused adjuvant chemotherapy, physicians did not know their circumstances in terms of financial support (45%),
emotional support (58%), and social support (57%). The
surgeons also often did not know whether patients were
resistant to receiving adjuvant treatment (56%), understood the risks and benefits of adjuvant therapy (54%), or
were unable to tolerate adjuvant therapy (52%).22
For the remaining 34% of patients, surgeons could
not identify why adjuvant therapy was not administered.
Among these patients, referral to an oncology clinic rather
than a specific oncologist was the only risk factor

889

Review Article
Table 5. Physician Responses to Questions About Chemotherapy Use

Study

Population Queried

Quality Measure/Outcome

Bickell 200722

Surgeons (n¼35) who treated 119 women for primary stage
I or II breast cancer and who did not receive NCCN
guideline-recommended adjuvant therapy

Keating 200823

Physicians (n¼1096) were queried about chemotherapy use
in 6 case scenarios

Reasons offered for not receiving guideline-recommended
therapy: therapy was recommended but patients declined
(31%); therapy was recommended but physician could
not identify a reason for its not being administered (system failure; 34%); therapy was not recommended (all
valid health reasons; 34%)
Chemotherapy recommended

Variable

Comorbidity

Chemotherapy Recommended, Adjusted % of
Physicians

None
None
Moderate CHF
Moderate CHF
Severe CHF
Severe CHF

99
92.6
88.6
47.3
24.9
8.9
<.001

Keating 200823

Patient age, ya
55
80
55
80
55
80
P

Physician age, yb
<40
40-49
50-54
55-59
‡60
P

62.6
62.2
62.1
58.3
54
<.001

NCCN indicates National Comprehensive Cancer Network; CHF, congestive heart failure.
a
The strongest predictors of recommending chemotherapy were patient age and comorbidity.
b
The strongest physician predictor for recommending chemotherapy was young age.

identified for not receiving guideline-appropriate adjuvant therapy (odds ratio, 4.8; 95% confidence interval,
1.1-21.3; P < .01). Few of the surgeons had mechanisms
in place to determine whether a patient followed through
with a recommended referral or treatment. This may be
because the US healthcare system is relatively nonpaternalistic and regards patients as autonomous decision makers who have the skills to determine their own care.22
In a physician survey that was conducted by Cancer
Care Outcomes Research and Surveillance Consortium
investigators, both patient and clinician characteristics
influenced the decision to use chemotherapy for older or
sicker patients (Table 5). In the study, 1096 physicians
were asked whether they would recommend chemotherapy in 6 case scenarios of patients who underwent curative
resection for stage III colon cancer. In linear regression
analyses adjusting for physician and patient characteristics, the strongest predictors of chemotherapy recommendation were patient age (aged 55 years vs 80 years) and the
level of comorbidity (none, moderate congestive heart
failure, or severe congestive heart failure). Physicians were

890

less likely to recommend chemotherapy when the patient
was both sicker and older (P < .001) (Table 5). In
adjusted analyses, younger physicians were more likely to
recommend chemotherapy than older physicians.23
Workload and quality care

A survey in 2000 of 463 registered nurses (RNs)
who specialized in oncology indicated that nurses believed
that the quality of cancer care had decreased because of
shorter hospital stays. These nurses, who worked in inpatient and outpatient settings, also indicated that both their
workload and their paperwork had increased during the
previous year. Table 6 compares the mean number of
patients cared for and the perceptions of the appropriate
mean number of patients cared for per shift per RN by
employment setting and type of unit. In all cases, the
mean number of patients cared for was greater than the
number the RNs perceived as being appropriate. Most
inpatient and outpatient RNs (72%) said they believed
that double shifts and overtime work in response to staffing shortfalls harmed the care of cancer patients.24

Cancer

March 1, 2011

Various Perceptions of Cancer Care/Colosia et al

Table 6. Mean Number of Patients Cared for Per Shift by Registered Nurses in the Inpatient or Outpatient Setting and by
Oncology or Mixed Care Unitsa

Employment Setting

Mean No. of Patients
Actually Cared for
Per RN Per Shift

Mean No. of Patients
Judged by RN as
Appropriate Per Shift

Excess No. of
Patients Per
RN Per Shift

Inpatient dedicated oncology unit
Inpatient mixed unit
Outpatient dedicated oncology unit
Outpatient mixed unit

5.26
7.30
18.70
13.54

3.97
5.16
12.25
9.73

1.29
2.14
6.45
3.81

RN indicates registered nurse.
a
Source: Lamkin 2002.24

Provider views on managed care impact
on quality care

Four physicians, 3 nurses, and 3 business office staff
members working with breast cancer patients were interviewed about their views on how managed care impacts
cancer patients. Business office staff spent initial time
helping the patients understand their insurance plans and
how these plans affected their need for referrals and ancillary services. The nurses reported that a large portion of
their time was spent calling insurance providers rather
than providing patient care. The MCOs were viewed as
very bureaucratic; nurses had difficulty contacting the
right individual and getting answers to their questions.
The purpose of many telephone calls was justifying why
patients needed to have certain tests performed. Providers
felt that care was fragmented and uncoordinated when a
patient had to go to a primary care physician or to another
physician’s office for a referral, to another location for a
test, and then back to the oncologist for radiation or
chemotherapy. Providers also were concerned about their
patients having to return to the primary care provider for
follow-up care rather than being seen by the specialist.
The providers thought that personnel at MCOs did not
realize the burden that disjointed delivery of care placed
on patients. Although most patients in the study were covered by managed care insurance, medical providers
thought that the type of treatment received was based on
medical necessity, and they did not believe that treatment
was influenced by insurance type. In most cases, physicians did not know what type of insurance a woman had.
However, physicians expressed concern about how the
lowering of cancer drug reimbursements may affect drug
choices in some practices.18 In a separate survey of oncologists, 58% said they considered revenue when making
treatment recommendations.25 If a particular treatment
would result in revenue loss, then most said they would
choose to refer patients to a hospital (69%) or would pre-

Cancer

March 1, 2011

scribe an alternative medication (59%). In that survey,
76% of respondents worked in small community practices
(1-3 physicians).
Pay for performance

A survey of 348 medical oncologists, radiation
oncologists, and surgeons was conducted in California in
2000 to assess the use of financial incentives related to performance on quality measures. Overall, 35% of respondents reported being subject to incentives based on quality
measures. Incentives were based on patient satisfaction
surveys for 20% of the 348 respondents and on other
quality measures, such as adherence to practice guidelines,
for 15% of the respondents. Physicians most likely to be
subject to quality incentives worked in staff-model or
group-model health maintenance organizations or in large
practices (>50 physicians). Quality incentives were more
common among physicians who had a partial ownership
interest in their practice, those who were paid predominantly by means other than fee for service, and those who
were not reimbursed through capitation.26
Managed Care/Reimbursement Perspective
Five sources presented views on quality cancer care from
leaders in managed care industries (Table 7). The number
of views represented was small; in 4 of the sources, only 6
leaders were interviewed or reported on their companies’
strategies to address quality while controlling costs. The
report of results from the survey commissioned by Genentech,25 which was mailed to nearly 4000 managed care
professionals, did not specify the number of respondents.
Cost-reduction strategies

Managing the availability of cancer treatment and
individual patients’ access to that treatment presents a significant challenge to payers as the costs of cancer interventions rise. Medical expenditures for cancer rank in the top

891

Review Article
Table 7. Sources Reporting Perceptions of Managed Care Professional About Quality Cancer Care

Reference Source

Study Design or Type of
Publication

Type of Professional

Sample
Size

Genentech 200825

Survey/questionnaire

NRa

NCCN 200927

Interview

200830

Interview

Wong 200828

Recounting of innovation impact on
quality of care
Recounting of innovation impact on
quality of care

Medical directors, pharmacy directors, clinical
pharmacists, other administrators; (>80% served
on P&T committees)
Senior managers from 3 managed care
organizations
Industry thought leader (Director of Medical Oncology at Pittsburgh Medical Center Cancer Centers)
Vice president of pharmacy management at BCBS
Director of clinical pharmacy programs at BCBS of
Florida

1

Fenrick 200929

3
1
1

6a

Total no. of managed care
professionals/industry
thought leaders

P&T indicates pharmacy and therapeutics; NR, not reported; NCCN, National Comprehensive Cancer Network; BCBS, Blue Cross Blue Shield.
a
The survey for Genentech was mailed to 3691 managed care professionals; the response rate was low, but the number of responses was not reported.

3 disease states for typical MCOs.27 Cancer chemotherapy represents a large share of drug costs to payers. For
example, chemotherapy accounted for 35% to 40% of the
$300 million in drug costs that were covered under medical benefits for 1 payer located in the mid-Atlantic region
of the United States, and that payer’s chemotherapy costs
rose 25% each year.28 Payers are seeking cost-reduction
strategies that still allow them to provide high-quality,
optimal, evidence-based care. Payers are mindful of avoiding adversarial relationships with patient advocacy groups
and the media27 and of making changes that lead to physicians withdrawing from their networks.25
Examples of specific strategies come from Blue
Cross Blue Shield (BCBS) of Florida (BCBSF),29 which
has developed frequently updated, detailed drug coverage
guidelines; established its own care management program
(rather than outsourcing this need); and set up an ambulatory infusion suite network that reportedly is more costeffective than administering intravenous medications in a
hospital. BCBSF also is developing retrospective drug use
reviews to evaluate compliance with oral cancer drugs in
the hope that better compliance will lead to better outcomes for patients with less cost to payers. To assist members, BCBSF is developing a self-service shopping tool
that will allow members to view their copayment at various pharmacies before they fill an oral cancer drug
prescription.
Clinical pathways are another tool that payers are
using to control costs by reducing variation in care. The
principle behind clinical pathways is that use of the same
proven treatment regimens by all providers may produce
more consistent outcomes and cost savings. Some of the

892

money saved can be given back to providers as incentives
for complying with the clinical pathways. The pathways
are developed by clinicians without payer involvement,
and compliance is monitored through electronic claims. A
BCBS program (CareFirst) offers a higher reimbursement
rate for chemotherapy agents if physicians have at least a
65% compliance rate with chemotherapy regimens for
their patients overall. For supportive care, the minimum
accepted compliance rate is 80%. BCBS does not plan to
increase the minimum compliance for chemotherapy
beyond 90% given the individualized nature of cancer
treatment.28
A clinical pathway program at the University of
Pittsburgh Medical Center uses a web-based decision support tool that is incorporated into the physician’s workflow by containing the list of patients the physician will
see and their histories related to the pathway. Decision
aids include standard regimen-order sets, standard dose
adjustments, patient education materials, and clinical trial
literature related to the pathway regimens. This pathways
program reportedly saved Highmark BCBS $1 million for
a single biologic (bevacizumab; Genentech Inc., San Francisco, Calif) within 6 months.30
Increasing costs of oncology-related drugs

The NCCN discussed current practices with executives from 3 major MCOs to gain the payer’s perspective
on the rising cost of cancer treatment and to learn how
patients, providers, and industry might be affected.27
Approaches varied among the 3 payers, with 1 payer
imposing few restrictions on oncology-related drugs. That
payer offered extensive coverage for cancer clinical trials

Cancer

March 1, 2011

Various Perceptions of Cancer Care/Colosia et al

Figure 2. Managed care issues in oncology are listed from the point of view of patients, providers, and managed care organizations (MCOs).

and did not review or restrict access to experimental drugs
when these were offered through its centers of excellence
programs (practices that have high-volume experience
with rare or complex cancers). The other payers required
precertification, especially of expensive biologics. The second payer was considering proposals to manage cancer
drug costs by establishing tiers for infusible drugs, which
is a common practice with oral agents. In this approach,
the patient’s out-of-pocket costs increase with each tier
level of the prescribed drug. This payer also was considering ways to encourage physicians to obtain drugs through
a specialty pharmacy (eg, by limiting the reimbursement
for a particular drug to what it would cost from the specialty pharmacy). The third payer more closely scrutinized
the chemotherapy doses and the types of drugs used in
combination regimens as a way to ensure that there was
less variability in care. In keeping with reducing variability, this payer also was piloting an approach that reimbursed for an episode of care instead of directly
reimbursing for infusion drugs.27
In a survey conducted for Genentech, 62% of
responding MCO professionals indicated that their companies had created or planned to create separate benefit
designs for injectable specialty cancer drugs, putting them
on fourth and fifth tiers (with higher cost sharing for
patients).25 MCO professionals believed that prior
authorizations were important or very important for lim-

Cancer

March 1, 2011

iting the use of biologics or injectables to indications
approved by the US Food and Drug Administration
(FDA) (79% of respondents) or to indications described
in compendia (83%). Regarding reimbursements to practices for chemotherapy drugs, 53% of respondents had
adopted or planned to adopt reimbursement based on average sales price, a method chosen by Medicare in 2005
that provides lower reimbursements than were paid historically. However, 57% of those who responded affirmatively to the question on average sales price did reimburse
or planned to reimburse at higher rates than Medicare.
Figure 2 provides a side-by-side summary of the patients’,
providers’, and managed care professionals’ perspectives
on managed care in the oncology setting.

DISCUSSION
In this literature review, we attempted to search the published literature comprehensively for stakeholder perceptions on quality of cancer care regarding chemotherapy;
however, electronic searches have a limited capacity to capture all citations on a topic.31 Despite this limitation, the
small number of studies that we identified probably was
because of the paucity of scientific exploration on the topic.
High-quality cancer care cannot be achieved without an
understanding of perceptions of quality. Efforts to understand stakeholder needs better are even more essential

893

Review Article

during this time of change in the US healthcare system to
assure that quality of cancer care is maintained and
improved.
The quality of cancer care is under pressure in part
because of the rising number of cancer patients in the
United States.32 Efforts to deliver quality cancer care also
will be challenged increasingly by a shortage of practitioners and support staff,33 especially as the administrative
burden of managed care increases. By 2020, it is expected
that the shortage of oncologists in the United States will
be between 2350 and 3800, which represents a capacity of
between 9.5 million and 15 million office visits. This
workforce shortage largely will be caused by a slower
increase in the number of oncologists compared with the
increased demand.4,5
To compensate for physician shortages, nurse practitioners and physician assistants likely will be used increasingly in the future.34 Education programs must be
developed to address cancer-specific procedures, clinical
situations, and reimbursement issues as the roles of these
professionals in cancer care increase.35,36
The personal interactions that patients desire will
require changes in managed care processes and systems for
information gathering that increase the availability of providers to care for patients. The assignment of case managers
can help patients navigate the extensive number of clinical,
financial, and reimbursement decisions; however, this
requires sufficient training of personnel, more uniformity
in procedures, and adequate funding by insurers. Scientific
evidence that case management can increase the efficiency
and quality of cancer care continues to be important in
bringing about change in the healthcare system.
Current national legislative efforts to reform the US
healthcare system have several different goals, among
which are to increase access to affordable health insurance
and to control ongoing increases in healthcare costs. The
development and marketing of new cancer therapies does
not promise to make controlling healthcare costs any easier. The cost of innovative treatments is a concern for
payers, although clinical evidence often indicates that the
use of these treatments is appropriate. Payers are concerned that physicians may choose the regimen that provides greater revenue for their practice, whereas physicians
have expressed (see Provider Prospective, above) that their
concern is with revenue loss from certain therapies, which
can make it difficult to sustain their practices.25,37
Current cancer drug reimbursement is rooted in the
system of compensating physicians for their time, which
relies on the Resource-Based Relative Value Scale

894

(RBRVS). This system discriminates against services in
which cognition is dominant, favoring reimbursement of
procedures and imaging over tasks such as supervising
nurses, contacting other treating physicians, and checking
laboratory results.38 In the past, when oncologists could
make up lost earnings through higher drug reimbursements, they were not as concerned about the issues with the
RBRVS system. After Medicare tied drug reimbursements
to the actual average sales price of drugs in 2005, profit
margins on chemotherapy decreased, and oncologists could
no longer compensate for lost earnings.38 Nongovernment
payers were slow to adopt Medicare reimbursement methods, but a growing number of those payers planned to
implement these changes in 2007 and 2008.39
Innovative cancer drugs can cost payers an additional $10,000 to $20,000 or more for just the initial
phase of treatment,40 with higher costs incurred if the
agent is administered chronically. Payers require prior
authorizations to ensure that these drugs are used according to FDA guidelines or compendia recommendations.
However, the cost of chemotherapy or supportive drugs
increases indirectly when considerable time is required to
fill out extensive prior authorization forms.37 In addition,
requiring prior authorizations for various treatments
reduces the time that providers, especially nurses, can spend
with patients, which may negatively affect providers’ perceptions of the quality of care they administer.18
Patients’ abilities to comply with oncology prescriptions also are affected by insurance policies, such as high
coinsurance. If patients cannot afford to pay their part,
then they may have to take a different medication that
may not be as effective, or they may not receive an oncologic agent to treat their disease.
Physicians and patients may value newer agents and
regimens that extend life longer than established therapy
but that still do not offer substantial gains in life expectancy (eg, just a few months of extra survival time).
Patients with cancer may be willing to take substantial financial risks to extend their lives.32 However, many
patients have fewer financial resources to risk; and, from
an ethical standpoint, access to beneficial therapies should
not be restricted to wealthier patients.41 Instituting measures to satisfy the perceived needs identified in this study
are a way to assure improved quality of cancer care.

CONFLICT OF INTEREST DISCLOSURES
Eli Lilly and Company provided funding in support of this
research. Drs. Pohl, Liu, and Peltz are employed by Eli Lilly and

Cancer

March 1, 2011

Various Perceptions of Cancer Care/Colosia et al

Company and own stock in the company. Dr. Colosia, Ms. Copley-Merriman, Ms. Khan, and Dr. Kaye are employed by RTI
Health Solutions, a business unit of RTI International.

REFERENCES
1. Willey VJ, Pollack MF, Lawless GD. Oncology healthcare
and patient out-of-pocket cost trends in a commercially
insured population [abstract]. J Clin Oncol. 2008;26(15S).
Abstract 6503.
2. Claxton G, DiJulio B, Finder B, et al. Employer Health Benefits 2007 Annual Survey. Menlo Park, CA: Kaiser Family Foundation and Health Research and Educational Trust; 2007.
3. Pelletier E, Tierce J, Yim Y, Reyes C. Patient out-of-pocket
payments for oral oncologic therapies: updated results from
a U.S. claims data analysis [abstract]. J Clin Oncol.
2009;27(15S). Abstract 6582.
4. Erikson C, Salsberg E, Forte G, Bruinooge S, Goldstein M.
Future supply and demand for oncologists: challenging to
assuring access to oncology services. J Oncol Pract.
2007;3:79-86.
5. Association of American Medical Colleges Center for Workforce Studies. Forecasting the Supply of and Demand for
Oncologists: A Report to the American Society of Clinical
Oncology (ASCO) from the AAMC Center for Workforce
Studies. Washington, DC: Association of American Medical
Colleges; 2007. http: //www.asco.org/ASCO/Downloads/
Cancer%20Research/Oncology%20Workforce%20Report%
20FINAL.pdf. Accessed February 19, 2010.
6. Institute of Medicine Board on Health Care Services. Crossing the Quality Chasm: A New Health System for the
21st Century.Washington, DC: National Academies Press;
2001. http: //www.nap.edu/html/quality_chasm/reportbrief.pdf.
Accessed February 23, 2010.
7. Liang W, Burnett CB, Rowland JH, et al. Communication
between physicians and older women with localized breast
cancer: implications for treatment and patient satisfaction.
J Clin Oncol. 2002;20:1008-1016.
8. Goodwin JS, Satish S, Anderson ET, Nattinger AB, Freeman
JL. Effect of nurse case management on the treatment of
older women with breast cancer. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2003;51:
1252-1259.
9. Williams SA. Quality and care: patients’ perceptions. J Nurs
Care Qual. 1998;12:18-25.
10. Ayanian JZ, Zaslavsky AM, Guadagnoli E, et al. Patients’
perceptions of quality of care for colorectal cancer by race,
ethnicity, and language. J Clin Oncol. 2005;23:6576-6586.
11. Brearley SG, Craven O, Wilson B, Brunton L, Molassiotis A.
Gastro-intestinal cancer patients: how they perceive and cope
with disease and treatment-related symptoms over a 12month period [abstract]. Eur J Cancer. 2009;7(suppl):234.
Abstract 4166.
12. Lunik MC. Reality check: the patient perspective. Pharm
Pract Manag Q. 1996;16:66-71.
13. Arora NK. Importance of patient-centered care in enhancing
patient well being: a cancer survivor’s perspective. Qual Life
Res. 2009;18:1-4.
14. Weingart SN, Price J, Duncombe D, et al. Patient-reported
safety and quality of care in outpatient oncology. Jt Comm J
Qual Patient Saf. 2007;33:83-94.

Cancer

March 1, 2011

15. Gesell SB, Gregory N. Identifying priority actions for
improving patient satisfaction with outpatient cancer care. J
Nurs Care Qual. 2004;19:226-233.
16. Anderson EA, Zwelling LA. Measuring service quality at the
University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center. Int J
Health Care Qual Assur. 1996;9:9-22.
17. Wenzel J, Steeves RH. Experiencing breast cancer in managed care. Qual Health Res. 2008;18:1477-1488.
18. Bourjolly JN, Hirschman KB, Zieber NA. The impact of
managed healthcare in the United States on women with
breast cancer and the providers who treat them. Cancer
Nurs. 2004;27:45-54.
19. Katz SJ, Hawley ST, Griggs JJ, Morrow M, Hofer TP. Integrating cancer care: patient and practice management processes among surgeons who treat breast cancer [abstract].
J Clin Oncol. 2009;27(15S). Abstract 6526.
20. Bickell NA, Wang JJ, Oluwole S, et al. Missed opportunities: racial disparities in adjuvant breast cancer treatment.
J Clin Oncol. 2006;24:1357-1362.
21. Carlson RW, Anderson BO, Bensinger W, et al. NCCN
Practice Guidelines for Breast Cancer. Oncology (Williston
Park). 2000;14:33-49.
22. Bickell NA, LePar F, Wang JJ, Leventhal H. Lost opportunities: physicians’ reasons and disparities in breast cancer
treatment. J Clin Oncol. 2007;25:2516-2521.
23. Keating NL, Landrum MB, Klabunde CN, et al. Adjuvant
chemotherapy for stage III colon cancer: do physicians agree
about the importance of patient age and comorbidity? J
Clin Oncol. 2008;26:2532-2537.
24. Lamkin L, Rosiak J, Buerhaus P, Mallory G, Williams M.
Oncology Nursing Society Workforce Survey, part II: perceptions of the nursing workforce environment and adequacy of nurse staffing in outpatient and inpatient oncology
settings. Oncol Nurs Forum. 2002;29:93-100.
25. Genentech. The Genentech Oncology Trend Report: a private study commissioned by Genentech Bio Oncology [slide
presentation]. September 2008. http: //namcp.org/seemedia/
OncTrends_files/Default.htm#autostart¼1&nopreload¼1&
event¼1. Accessed February 23, 2010.
26. Tisnado DM, Rose-Ash DE, Malin JL, Adams JL, Ganz
PA, Kahn KL. Financial incentives for quality in breast cancer care. Am J Manag Care. 2008;14:457-466.
27. National Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN). Managed Care and Medical Oncology: Cancer is Now on the
Table. Report 1. 2009. NCCN Oncology Insights Report.
Jenkintown, Pa: NCCN; 2009.
28. Wong W. Managing utilization and controlling costs
through evidence-based clinical pathways. Manag Care
Oncol. 2008; Quarter 4:9-12.
29. Fenrick B. Ongoing efforts to manage cancer treatment.
Manag Care Oncol. 2009; Quarter 3:13-16.
30. A discussion with Peter G. Ellis, MD, Director of Medical
Oncology Network, University of Pittsburgh Medical Center Cancer Centers. Manag Care Oncol. 2008; Quarter 4:2023.
31. Helmer D, Savoie I, Green C, Kazanjian A. Evidencebased practice: extending the search to find material for
the systematic review. Bull Med Libr Assoc. 2001;89:346352.
32. Meropol NJ, Schulman KA. Cost of cancer care: issues and
implications. J Clin Oncol. 2007;25:180-186.
33. Patlak M, Levit L. Ensuring Quality Cancer Care Through
the Oncology Workforce: Sustaining Care in the 21st

895

Review Article

34.

35.

36.

37.
38.

Century: Workshop Summary. Washington, DC: National
Academies Press; 2009. http: //www.nap.edu/catalog.
php?record_id¼12613. Accessed February 19, 2010.
Polansky M, Ross AC, Coniglio D. Physician assistant perspective on the ASCO Workforce Study regarding the use
of physician assistants and nurse practitioners. J Oncol Pract.
2010;6:31-33.
Rosenzweig M, Giblin J, Mickle M, Morse A, Sheehy P,
Sommer V. Exploring the gap between oncology nurse practitioner education and entry to practice [abstract]. Oncol
Nurs Forum. 2009;36:E346. Abstract 4058.
Nevidjon B, Rieger P, Miller Murphy C, Rosenzweig MQ,
McCorkle MR, Baileys K. Filling the gap: development of
the oncology nurse practitioner workforce. J Oncol Pract.
2010;6:2-6.
Buell RL. Why cancer patients are going to the hospital—
and what payors can do about it. Manag Care Oncol. 2009;
Quarter 2:49-52.
Buell RL. How to pay medical oncologists: the dilemma of
the future. Manag Care Oncol. 2008; Quarter 4:48-53.

896

39. Facts and figures: timing of implementation for plans who have
changed to ASP-based reimbursement for provider-administered
injectables [table]. Manag Care Oncol. 2008; Quarter 4:7-7.
40. Schrag D. The price tag on progress—chemotherapy for
colorectal cancer. N Engl J Med. 2004;351:317-319.
41. Lee TH, Emanuel EJ. Tier 4 drugs and the fraying of the
social compact. N Engl J Med. 2008;359:333-335.
42. Franco R, Joseph KP, Fei K, Bickell N. Breast cancer patients’
perceived quality of care: the importance of trust and communication [abstract]. J Clin Oncol. 2009;27(15S). Abstract 6554.
43. Nguyen TV, Bosset JF, Monnier A, Perrin V, Fournier J,
Mercier M. Determinants of patient satisfaction in ambulatory oncology: a prospective study based on the EORTC
OUT-PATSAT35 questionnaire [abstract]. Eur J Cancer.
2009;7(suppl):241. Abstract P-4210.
44. Schrag D. Communication and coordination: the keys to
quality. J Clin Oncol. 2005;23:6452-6455.
45. Ashing KT, Padilla G, Tejero J, Kagawa-Singer M. Understanding the breast cancer experience of Asian American
women. Psychooncology. 2003;12:38-58.

Cancer

March 1, 2011

