Commentary

Cancer Research in the United States: Dying by a Thousand
Paper Cuts
Hagop Kantarjian, MD1; David J. Stewart, MD, RCPC2; and Leonard Zwelling, MD3

Clinical research is not clinical care. When physicians care for patients, their only concern is improving the health and life
of that one patient in any way possible. There are reasonable guidelines for diagnostic testing and therapeutic interventions, but the physician and patient together outline the care pathway to improved health, based on the knowledge of one
and the informed preferences of the other.
Clinical research is different. Historically, experimentation with individuals, now called human subjects research,
had a checkered past. The 20th century, a time of great medical progress, was also full of abuses of the rights of patients
and clinical research subjects alike. Examples include experimentations in the Nazi death camps, testing the effects of
atomic bombs on innocent bystanders, the use of LSD on soldiers, and withholding treatment from black Americans
infected with syphilis in the Tuskegee experiments long after the benefits of penicillin were known.
After the horrible inhuman experimentations conducted by the Nazis during the 1930s and early 1940s, various codes
for the conduct of human experimentation in medical research were implemented. These included the Nuremberg Code in
1947, the Declaration of Helsinki in 1964 (which was revised in 1975), and the 1971 Guidelines of the US Department of
Health, Education, and Welfare (which was renamed the Department of Health and Human Services in 1979). The Tuskegee study uncovered weaknesses in the oversight of medical experimentation, resulting in the Belmont Report, which was
released in 1978 by the National Commission for the Protection for Human Subjects of Biomedical and Behavioral
Research. The Belmont Report identified 3 basic ethical principles for all future research in humans: respect for persons
(proper understanding of research, free-will participation); beneficence (maximize benefit and minimize risk); and justice
(avoidance of prejudices).1 Since then, research on human subjects in the United States is overseen by the Office for Human
Research Protections (OHRP), which is part of the federal Department of Health and Human Services. It is guided by clear
stipulations in the Code of Federal Regulations and overseen at the sites at which it is performed by Institutional Review
Boards (IRBs), ethics panels that review and monitor all proposed human subjects research. The IRBs report directly to the
federal government and not to the institutions in which the research is performed.
When this system was established by the Belmont Report, it appeared as if human subjects research had finally turned
a corner from the darkness to the light. No one would have anticipated what would happen over the next 30 years.
The rules set by the OHRP have not changed in the past 30-plus years. Yet the burden of cancer research has
increased multifold in an increasingly risk-adverse society. In a genuine effort to protect patients from adverse events, regulatory burdens and research rigidity in clinical trials have increased to a point at which such protection is outweighing the
benefits, and actually harming patients who are unable to be involved in clinical trials. Although a high degree of risk
adversity in medical research is reasonable for most medical conditions, it may need to be different for lethal conditions
such as cancer. The rapid advances that occurred against the acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) as a direct
consequence of clinical research regulations being relaxed illustrate the potential. After the principle of “Primum non
nocere” or “first do no harm,” we believe that in cancer the worst harm to patients is an inability to be treated for the cancer
when standards of care have been exhausted.

Corresponding author: Hagop Kantarjian, MD, Department of Leukemia, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, 1400 Holcombe Blvd, Unit 428,
Houston, TX 77030; Fax: (713) 794-4297; hkantarj@mdanderson.org
1
Department of Leukemia, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas; 2Division of Medical Oncology, Department of Medicine, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada; 3Department of Experimental Therapeutics, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas

DOI: 10.1002/cncr.28193, Received: April 4, 2013; Revised: April 30, 2013; Accepted: May 1, 2013, Published online June 6, 2013 in Wiley Online Library
(wileyonlinelibrary.com)

3742

Cancer

November 1, 2013

Cancer Research in the United States/Kantarjian et al

How did we get to this unbearable situation in cancer research? Numerous parties were involved: the US
Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and other regulatory agencies, OHRP, the National Cancer Institute
(NCI), the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA), the Office of the Inspector General, the
US Patent and Trademark Office, the Joint Commission,
pharmaceutical companies, insurance companies, lawyers,
contract research organizations (CROs), and others. Critical evaluation of cancer research in the United States and
remedial steps are urgently needed for the following reasons: 1) to reduce the cost of research (and consequently
the cost of health care and drug prices); 2) to speed access
to effective new agents, thereby reducing avoidable loss of
life; 3) to improve and encourage patient participation on
trials; 4) to simplify research protocols, shorten time to
study initiation, and improve time-dependent accrual;
5) to reduce perceived protocol “deviations” and
“violations”; 6) to reduce research penalties and encourage
research specialization; 7) to reduce interference by financially beneficiary CROs; 8) to encourage conduct of
research in the United States (vs elsewhere); and 9) to
enhance investigator-initiated cancer research (vs pharmaceutical company-driven research).
The estimated combined costs per patient entered in
a clinical trial was reported to be < $10,000 in the 1980s,
but for phase 3 trials, it had increased to approximately
$26,000 by 20062 and to $47,000 by 2011,3 with costs as
high as $87,000 reported for some trials.4 Costs are rising
much faster than the rate of inflation. The estimated cost
per life-year saved under these regulations is approximately $2.7 million5; the consensus among oncologists is
that a reasonable cost per life-year saved by therapies is
$100,000.6 We estimate that the cost is now as much as
$100,000 to $120,000 for some clinical trials, and this
increases the estimated cost per life-year saved
several-fold. While the usual justification for the
increasing regulatory burden is patient safety, objective
data have demonstrated little if any translation into
added safety. This massive increase in the cost of
research per patient over the past decade has coincided
with the burgeoning of the CRO industry, which may
have added layers of unnecessary bureaucracy in cancer
research.
The regulatory burden is impeding progress in cancer research. As a result of excessive restriction eligibilities
and mandated treatment schedules and plans that are
impractical and/or socioeconomically impossible for
patients, <5% of adults with cancer participate in clinical
trials.7,8
Cancer

November 1, 2013

Not only does this massively excessive regulatory
burden markedly increase health care costs, but it also
costs lives. Compared with the 1960s, the current regulatory burden has increased the average time from drug discovery to marketing by approximately 5 years.5 Although
it is calculated that improved safety as a result of more
stringent regulations may save an average of up to 16 lifeyears during the process of bringing 1 new anticancer
agent to market, this 5-year regulation-induced delay
in access to effective new agents may cost millions of lifeyears worldwide.5 For example, if a new therapy increased
the cure rate of lung cancer by just 1% (through improved
adjuvant therapy) and increased the average life expectancy of uncured patients by just 3 months, the regulationinduced delay would cost more than 2,000,000 life-years
worldwide.5 In the United States, it would cost 1 life-year
for every 9.3 minutes of regulatory delay. The current
situation could be considered ethical only if nearly all new
anticancer agents being tested were completely ineffective.
Is someone asleep at the switch?
The regulatory traffic jam results in many research
protocols facing significant delays in activation and in
patient accrual. This causes a major waste of researchers’
time and patients’ resources. Delays in protocols result in
failure to accrue. Approximately 40% of all NCI-sponsored protocols never achieve minimum patient accrual
objectives, with the major culprit being delays in protocol
activation.9 A range of 300 to 600 regulatory steps,
approximately one-half of which are judged unnecessary,
are required to activate trials, with a median time of 400
to 700 days to initiation.10
Numerous protocols stipulate studies that are too
frequent and unnecessary, including frequent physical
examinations, measurements of vital signs, performance
of electrocardiography and cardiac monitoring, blood
draws, etc. These add to the cost, to the patients’ social
and financial burdens, and to treatment hurdles, without
added patient safety. The nightmarish regulatory burden
adds not only to the cost of research but to significant
increases in the frequency of protocol “violations and
deviations,” which in turn penalize investigators for
“faulty research.” Suspending protocols and researchers
for poor compliance discourages further research, and has
resulted in a gradual decrease in bright young academic
physicians pursuing research careers, having observed
their mentors and senior researchers threatened, censored,
and penalized by IRBs and other compliance and regulatory agencies.5,11,12
Cancer research is drowning in paperwork and paralyzed by red tape. In the 1980s, protocols used to be
3743

Commentary

guidelines for researchers to conduct proper research, and
followed the spirit of the law. Protocol documents were
10-page to 20-page-long descriptions; consent forms were
3-pages to 5-pages long. They were informative and concise. The increasing regulatory burden and litigation have
now resulted in protocols becoming “contractual
agreements” that follow the letter of the law. Any deviations may result in penalties. Today, an average protocol
may be 100-pages to 200-pages long and a consent form
may be 20-pages to 30-pages long. This makes it very difficult to find pertinent information or to truly inform
patients. Sick patients often do not have the energy or the
stamina to read the consent forms or understand the
research. They often sign consent documents without
attempting to read them, with the often-quoted patient
statement being “Doctor, just show me where to sign.”
Thus, in our desire to inform patients about protocols and
details of research, we have made them less informed.
There has been a marked shift from “regulatory rationalism” to “regulatory fundamentalism.”5
The US FDA is the final arbiter of the usefulness of
any clinical trial of a new drug or device. Until the FDA
says a new therapy can be marketed, investigators and
manufacturers alike are beholden to the federal agency
that holds the key to the kingdom of medical commerce.
To make the FDA happy, an entire industry has grown
in the form of CROs, which administer trials for the
pharmaceutical companies at the academic centers and
community offices, monitoring studies and gathering the
paperwork so that the trial drug or device will look as
good as possible to the federal regulators who stand
between the manufacturers and the market. We believe
CROs may be major contributors to both the increased
regulatory burdens and the cost of research. In the early
1980s, the only CRO known to cancer researchers was
the Clinical Trials Monitoring Service (CTMS),
launched by an NCI contract to an organization (which
in 1982 became Theradex Systems Inc) to monitor NCI
protocols. Today there are >1100 CROs worldwide,
including >300 in the United States. CRO industry revenues were projected to be between $20 billion and $24
billion in 2010, representing approximately one-third of
the total spending on research and development by pharmaceutical and biotechnology companies.13 According
to some cancer researchers, CROs may have become a
“cancer within cancer research.” They employ more than
66,000 people worldwide, and include armies of monitors who may not be well versed or trained in their
knowledge or monitoring of particular cancer trials.
They are paid by the hour, a disincentive to cost-efficient
3744

monitoring. The added value of CROs in improving the
quality of research or in protecting patients from adversity has not been objectively proven.
Last, one of the most serious implications of the
burden of bureaucracy is a shift in cancer research
from academic centers to pharmaceutical-based
research. With the cost of research reported to be
$100,000 per patient on trial, the voluminous protocols and consent forms, and the extremely time-consuming processes to nurture a protocol from
conception to accrual, it has become nearly impossible
for investigators to conduct independent investigatorinitiated studies. Much of the cancer research is now
conceived, generated, conducted, analyzed, published,
paid for, and advertised through pharmaceutical-associated infrastructures and resources. This raises very serious concerns regarding the future and credibility of
cancer research.14 Cancer researchers at academic institutions may have become “glorified” employees and
extensions of pharmaceutical companies, rather than
being independent researchers. A high percentage of
cancer researchers now simply wait for the next protocol offered by the next drug company and CRO, who
impose their rules and regulations, with a major focus
on cost and narrow financial aims rather than a
broader vision of research devoted to curing cancer.
Cancer research in the United States has reached a
state of paralysis. Much of the cancer research is moving
outside of the country to Europe and other countries,
where regulation is better streamlined and the cost of
research is lower. We propose to highlight the 10 to 20
most common hurdles in cancer research, analyze them
for their cost-benefit and value added to patient safety,
and initiate deregulatory processes to shift back research
to a more rational approach. Our aim should be to markedly reduce the cost of clinical research (reasonably
to < $20,000 per patient), reduce the time from a research
concept to implementation to an average of < 3 months,
reduce the burdens of regulation on patients themselves so
they are more willing to participate in clinical trials, and
overall rebalance the risks and benefits perceived in cancer
research trials.
As oncologists, we believe a far simpler system is
needed to hasten the development, testing, and marketing
of drugs and devices for potentially lethal conditions such
as cancer. Potential solutions include:
1. Protocol documents need to be no longer than necessary to adequately describe the research so that peerreview can be completed quickly.
Cancer

November 1, 2013

Cancer Research in the United States/Kantarjian et al

2. Testing (blood tests or imaging) within trials should be
kept to a minimum and only up to the standards of
good clinical care. Excessive electrocardiograms, chest
x-rays, computed tomography scans, and magnetic resonance imaging increase cost and may not contribute
to the patient’s well-being or the information generated. More importantly, most tests do not really add to
safety at all.
3. Consent documents should describe the risks and benefits concisely and simply, but should not resemble
legal documents that make sure no one is accountable
or liable for an adverse effect that could not have been
predicted.
4. The US FDA should focus on meaningful endpoints
in cancer trials, mostly quantity and quality of life.
Having a fifth or sixth drug with a mechanism that is
identical to that of past drugs with equally suboptimal
effects is jamming up the regulatory pipeline.
5. CROs would be less necessary if these changes were
made, which alone would save a great deal of time and
money.
The rules governing clinical research are necessary to
curb the abuses that history has shown can infect the
behavior of well-meaning caregivers who see the ends justifying the means. In human subjects research, this should
never be the case. However, the current system needs an
overhaul to reduce the expense of discovering new treatments and to categorize the rules for research on potentially fatal diseases differently from those that govern
research for the next head cold reliever. There is a lot at
stake for everyone. Much of the wasted research infrastructure and resources could then be used for more and
better research rather than to pay a series of middlemen
who contribute little or nothing to the well-being of
patients with cancer.
What is the probability of successfully changing the
current situation? We have had colleagues tell us “The situation is hopeless. Our current system is incompetent and
cannot be changed.” But it is our system. The current situation could not have come to exist without our apathy

Cancer

November 1, 2013

and complicity. We have the responsibility and the ability
to bring about the changes needed, but these changes will
only be possible if physicians face up to their responsibility and take the lead.
FUNDING SUPPORT
No specific funding was disclosed.

CONFLICT OF INTEREST DISCLOSURES
The authors made no disclosures.

REFERENCES
1. US Department of Health and Human Services. The Belmont Report.
hhs.gov/ohrp/humansubjects/guidance/belmont.html. Accessed March
7, 2013.
2. Life Sciences World Inc. Phase 3 Clinical Trial Costs Exceed $26,000
per Patient. lifesciencesworld.com/news/view/11080. Accessed March
7, 2013.
3. Silverman E. Pharmalot: Clinical Trials Costs Are Rising Rapidly.
pharmalotcom/2011/07/clinical-trial-costs-for-each-patient-rose-rapidly/. Access date.
4. Patlak M, Nass S, Rapporteurs. Improving the Quality of Cancer
Clinical Trials: Workshop Summary. Washington, DC: National
Academies Press; 2008.
5. Stewart DJ, Whitney SN, Kurzrock R. Equipoise lost: ethics, costs,
and the regulation of cancer clinical research. J Clin Oncol. 2010;
28:2925-2935.
6. Berry SR, Neumann PJ, Bell C, et al. What price for a year of life?
A survey of US and Canadian oncologists [abstract]. J Clin Oncol.
2009;27:339s. Abstract 6565.
7. Sateren WB, Trimble EL, Abrams J, et al. How sociodemographics,
presence of oncology specialists, and hospital cancer programs affect
accrual to cancer treatment trials. J Clin Oncol. 2002;20:2109-2117.
8. Vickers AJ. Do we want more cancer patients on clinical trials if so,
what are the barriers to greater accrual. Trials. 2008;9:31.
9. Cheng SK, Dietrich MS, Finnigan S, et al. A sense of urgency: evaluating the link between clinical trial development time and the
accrual performance of CTEP-sponsored studies [abstract]. J Clin
Oncol. 2009;27:325s. Abstract CRA6509.
10. Dilts DM, Sandler AB, Cheng SK, et al. Steps and time to process
clinical trials at the Cancer Therapy Evaluation Program. J Clin
Oncol. 2009;27:1761-1766.
11. Schechter AN. The crisis in clinical research: endangering the halfcentury National Institutes of Health Consensus. JAMA. 1998;
280:1440-1442.
12. Bardach E, Kagan RA. Going by the Book: The Problem of Regulatory Unreasonableness. 2nd ed. New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction
Books; 2002.
13. Wikipedia. Contract Research Organizations. en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
Contract_research_organization#Market_size_and_growth. Accessed
March 7, 2013.
14. Bauchner H, Fontanarosa P. Restoring confidence in the pharmaceutical industry. JAMA. 2013;309:607-609.

3745

