Oncotarget, Vol. 5, No. 14

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Immunogenic cell death inducers as anticancer agents
Oliver Kepp, Laura Senovilla, and Guido Kroemer
promote engulfment of dying cells, attraction of dendritic
cells into the tumor bed, production of interleukin-1β and
presentation of tumor antigens, respectively [2].
Since (some of) the molecular characteristics of ICD
are well studied, it has been possible to screen compound
libraries for the presence of ICD inducers, which would
cause (i) CRT exposure, (ii) ATP release and (iii) HMGB1
exodus in cultured human cancer cells [3]. Agents that
induce the hallmarks of ICD in vitro could be validated
by in vivo experiments using two complementary
assays. First, it was possible to test the capacity of
candidate ICD inducers to kill mouse cancer cell lines
in vitro so that the resulting dead-cell preparation would
elicit protective anticancer immune responses upon its
subcutaneous injection into immunocompetent, syngenic
mice. Second, the anticancer effects of ICD inducers on
established tumors were found to be more efficient if
such tumors evolved in immunocompetent (as opposed to
immunodeficient) mice [2].
Using a combined in vitro screening assay, followed
by in vivo validation experiments, we screened three
chemical libraries (Table 1): (i) a collection of FDAapproved anticancer agents, (ii) the sum of all other FDAapproved molecules, and (iii) a series of 879 anticancer
agents that constitute the “mechanistic diversity set” of
the National Cancer Institute (NCI). This latter collection
is composed by candidate drugs that have been selected
based on their preclinical activity, mostly on human
cancer cell lines, either in vitro or in vivo, in xenografted
(immunodeficent) mice. Using a similar cutoff for
distinguishing in vitro ICD inducers from agents that
fail to induced ICD for all these chemical libraries, we

It has been widely thought that the occasional
success of anticancer chemotherapies is mediated by
direct, efficient cytostatic or (better) cytotoxic effects
of the antineoplastic agent on tumor cells. Nonetheless,
there is accumulating evidence for the hypothesis that
long-term clinical success (which is measured in years
and decades rather than weeks and months) involves
anticancer immune responses that are often mediated by T
lymphocytes recognizing tumor-specific antigens. During
recent years, a whole catalogue of mechanisms through
which chemotherapeutics can stimulate immune responses
has emerged. Thus, some therapeutic agents can stimulate
immune effector cells either directly or – more frequently
– by subverting the immunosuppressive circuitries that
block antitumor immune responses [1]. In addition, some
chemotherapeutic agents provoke immunogenic cancer
cell death (ICD), meaning that they induce tumor cell
death in a way that those cells elicit a specific immune
response. ICD is characterized by a series of alterations
that usually do not occur in the context of apoptosis: (i) the
pre-apoptotic exposure of calreticulin (CRT) on the cell
surface, (ii) release of ATP during the blebbing phase of
apoptosis, and (iii) post-apoptotic exodus of the chromatinbinding protein high mobility group B1 (HMGB1). CRT
exposure critically depends on a premortem endoplasmic
reticulum stress response, ATP release on premortem
autophagy, and HMGB1 exodus on secondary necrosis.
CRT, ATP and HMGB1 bind to three receptor types (CD91
receptor, purinergic P2Y2 or P2X7 receptors, and tolllike receptor 4, respectively) that are present on dendritic
cells or their precursors. CD91, P2Y2, P2RX7 and TLR4

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

5190

Oncotarget

REFERENCES

observed that 7 among 114 approved anticancer agents
could elicit the hallmarks of ICD in vitro [3], and we
validated the capacity to stimulate ICD in vivo for 6 of
those components [3, 4]. Among the 1040 FDA-approved
drugs with indications different from antineoplastic, only a
few components (which all were cardiac glycosides) were
found to induce ICD [3, 5], meaning that – as expected –
the frequency of ICD inducers is higher among anticancer
agents than among the remaining pharmaceutical
specialties. Importantly, among the NCI mechanistic
diversity set, only 12 among 879 components were able to
elicit the characteristics of ICD in vitro and only one agent
withstood the rigors of in vivo validation [6].
Although the methods that lead to the identification
of ICD inducers can be criticized (and actually may fail
to identify ICD inducers) [7, 8], these results support the
contention that FDA-approved anticancer agents have a
higher chance to elicit ICD than the drug candidates from
the NCI (see Table 1 for statistical analyses). How can this
difference be explained?
While FDA-approved drugs have passed the
selection process of clinical evaluation, agents contained
in the NCI panel are merely characterized for their
preclinical ability to directly interfere with human cancer
cell growth. We surmise here that clinical trials leading
to FDA approval (as well as the subsequent clinical
evaluation leading to the discontinuation of inefficacious
therapies) has created an intrinsic bias in which those
drugs that stimulate anticancer immune responses and
thus superior efficiency have been selected for. If this
contention would be correct, it will be important to
shift the selection of immunostimulatory drugs from the
clinical to the preclinical stage, obviously by means of
their precocious immunological evaluation. This could
be achieved by testing drugs for the induction of ICD
hallmarks in human cancer cell lines, by their evaluation
on cocultures of human cancer cells and leukocyte
subpopulations, as well as by their preclinical testing on
mouse tumors developing in immunocompetent mice, or
preferentially on human cancers evolving on “humanized”
rodents, i.e. mice that have been engineered to carry a
human immune system.

1.	

Zitvogel L et al. Immunity. 2013; 39(1):74-88.

2.	 Kroemer G et al. Annual review of immunology. 2013;
31:51-72.
3.	 Menger L et al. Science translational medicine. 2012;
4(143):143ra199.
4.	

Senovilla L et al. Science. 2012; 337(6102):1678-1684.

5.	

Menger L et al. Oncoimmunology. 2013; 2(2):e23082.

6.	

Sukkurwala AQ et al. Oncoimmunology. 2014; 3(3):e28473.

7.	

Kepp O et al. Oncoimmunology. 2013; 2(11):e27157.

8.	

Vacchelli E et al. Oncoimmunology. 2013; 2(3):e23510.

Guido Kroemer: Equipe 11 labellisée par la Ligue Nationale
contre le cancer, INSERM U1138, Centre de Recherche
des Cordeliers, Paris, France
Correspondence: Guido Kroemer, email kroemer@orange.fr
Received: May 05, 2014;
Published: July 26, 2014;

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

5191

Oncotarget

