Correspondence

Myelosuppression After Frontline
Fludarabine, Cyclophosphamide,
and Rituximab in Patients With
Chronic Lymphocytic Leukemia
Analysis of Persistent and New-Onset
Cytopenia
We strongly agree with Strati et al1 regarding the combination of fludarabine, cyclophosphamide, and rituximab
(FCR) and myelosuppression in patients with chronic
lymphocytic leukemia (CLL), namely that cytopenia is a
common toxicity and surveillance of bacterial infections
is needed. The authors demonstrated results from
approximately 207 patients with CLL who were treated
with FCR, and reported myelotoxicity in 35% of the
patients at 3 months after therapy, and 24% and 12% of
patients, respectively, at 6 months and 9 months after
therapy. Not surprisingly, myelotoxicity rates were superior in the older patients; however, the median age in
their study was younger than 60 years. Even though it
has been reported by some authors that reduced doses of
intravenous fludarabine and cyclophosphamide can
reduce toxicities,2 we know that the median age at diagnosis for patients with CLL is currently 72 years and,
based on this fact, the majority of patients do not receive
therapy with FCR.
We previously demonstrated that fludarabine and
cyclophosphamide given intravenously at low doses
(FC-low dose oral) in patients with recurrent or refractory chronic lymphoproliferative disorders (CLD) can
decrease the incidence of severe myelosuppression and
infectious complications.3,4 Bioavailability of the oral
formation of fludarabine in the blood is inferior compared with the intravenous formulation. In fact, oral
doses of 40 mg/m2/day are comparable to intravenous
doses of 25 mg/m2/day. We would like to report our experience because we treated 112 patients with CLDs (62
with CLL and 50 with indolent non-Hodgkin lymphoma [NHL]) with a median age of 73 years at a single
center with low doses of oral fludarabine and cyclophosphamide, with the recent addition of rituximab, with
very few side effects and minimal hematological toxicity
reported.
We reported previously that FC-low dose oral given
to pretreated elderly patients with CLDs enabled response
rates that were comparable to those obtained with standard intravenous regimens, with very few side effects and
Cancer

February 1, 2014

complications.5 These responses were confirmed in a population of untreated elderly patients with low-grade
NHL.6 Finally, we demonstrated that FC low-dose oral
led to good responses in patients with CLL who do not
benefit from a more aggressive schedule, with minimal
toxicities.7
We recently added rituximab to the oral dose of FC
given at day 1 of each cycle to treat 52 untreated elderly
patients with CLDs (27 with CLL and 25 with indolent
NHL8) and compared results with 60 patients previously
treated with FC-low dose oral (32 with CLL and 25 with
indolent NHL)(unpublished data). Hematological toxicity was acceptable and manageable in both groups (grade
3-4 according to NCI-CTAE criteria: 15%) considering
also the median age (75 years) of treated patients and efficacy results were satisfactory (78% complete response rate
for patients with CLL and a 48% complete response rate
for patients with indolent NHL) in a very elderly population of patients.
Considering the high rate of myelosuppression
noted with standard intravenous FCR as well as that the
median age of patients with CLL patients is currently 72
years, we have to consider hematological toxicity as a
major problem and, especially in elderly patients with
CLL, the concept of “disease control” must be balanced
with disease “cure.”
CONFLICT OF INTEREST DISCLOSURES
The authors made no disclosures.

REFERENCES
1. Strati P, Wierda W, Burger J, et al. Myelosuppression after frontline
fludarabine, cyclophosphamide, and rituximab in patients with
chronic lymphocytic leukemia: analysis of persistent and new-onset
cytopenia [published online ahead of print August 13, 2013]. Cancer.
doi: 10.1002/cncr.28318.
2. Foon KA, Mehta D, Lentzsch S, et al. Long-term results of chemoimmunotherapy with low-dose fludarabine, cyclophosphamide and
high-dose rituximab as initial treatment for patients with chronic
lymphocytic leukemia. Blood. 2012;119:3184-3185.
3. Bocchia M, Bigazzi C, Marconcini S, et al. Favorable impact of
low-dose fludarabine plus epirubicin and cyclophosphamide regimen
(FLEC) as treatment for low-grade non-Hodgkin’s lymphomas.
Haematologica. 1999;84:716-720.
4. Marotta G, Bigazzi C, Lenoci M, et al. Low-dose fludarabine and
cyclophosphamide in elderly patients with B-cell chronic lymphocytic
leukemia. Haematologica. 2000;85:1268-1270.
5. Fabbri A, Lenoci M, Gozzetti A, et al. Low-dose oral fludarabine plus
cyclophosphamide in elderly patients with chronic lymphoproliferative
disorders. Hematol J. 2004;5:472-474.
6. Fabbri A, Lenoci M, Gozzetti A, et al. Low-dose fludarabine plus cyclophosphamide as first-line treatment in elderly patients with indolent non-Hodgkin lymphoma. Br J Haematol. 2007;139:90-93.
7. Forconi F, Fabbri A, Lenoci M, et al. Low-dose fludarabine plus
cyclophosphamide in elderly patients with untreated and relapsed or
refractory chronic lymphocytic leukemia. Haematol Oncol. 2008;26:
247-251.

451

Correspondence
8. Fabbri A, Cencini E, Rigacci L, et al. Efficacy and safety of rituximab plus low-dose oral fludarabine and cyclophosphamide as
first-line treatment of elderly patients with indolent non-Hodgkin
lymphomas [published online ahead of print July 22, 2013]. Leuk
Lymphoma.

Alessandro Gozzetti, MD
Marzia Defina, MD
Alberto Fabbri, MD
Division of Hematology
University Medical Center of Siena
Siena, Italy
DOI: 10.1002/cncr.28443, Published online October 22, 2013
in Wiley Online Library (wileyonlinelibrary.com)

FCR among patients with a median age of 55 years
produced a significant reduction in the rate of severe
infections, albeit comparable rates of CR and grade 3 to 4
neutropenia per cycle and per patient.4 Together with the
fact that the addition of rituximab to FCR did not
increase the frequency of infections despite a higher rate
of neutropenia,3 these data raise the question of whether
limiting hematological toxicity will translate into an
actual clinical benefit.
CONFLICT OF INTEREST DISCLOSURES
The authors made no disclosures.

Reply to Myelosuppression After
Frontline Fludarabine,
Cyclophosphamide, and
Rituximab in Patients With
Chronic Lymphocytic Leukemia
Analysis of Persistent and New-Onset
Cytopenia
Myelosuppression can persist after the completion of
frontline therapy with fludarabine, cyclophosphamide,
and rituximab (FCR) in patients with chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL), mostly among elderly patients with
baseline cytopenia. Its frequency decreases over time, with
no association noted with disease progression, second
myeloid malignancies, or infections (unless persisting up
to 9 months).1 The data shown by Gozzetti et al describe
grade 3 to 4 hematological toxicity (rather than grade 2
to 4) during treatment (rather than after) in elderly
patients with CLL receiving frontline oral FC with rituximab. The observed complete response (CR) rate was 78%
and the rate of grade 3 to 4 cytopenia was 15%. In our initial phase 2 study of FCR among patients with a median
age of 58 years, the reported CR rate was 70% and grade 3
to 4 neutropenia (the most common hematological toxicity) complicated 52% of courses.2 During the CLL8 trial
(among patients with a median age of 61 years), the CR
rate was 44% and grade 3 to 4 neutropenia was observed
in 34% of patients.3 Either calculated per person or cycle,
the toxicity reported by Gozzetti et al is lower. It is not
clear how many patients had baseline cytopenia, another
factor that is significantly associated with myelosuppression in our analysis, and how many received support with
growth factor. It is interesting to note that the addition of
granulocyte-macrophage–colony-stimulating factor to
452

REFERENCES
1. Strati P, Wierda W, Burger J, et al. Myelosuppression after frontline
fludarabine, cyclophosphamide, and rituximab in patients with
chronic lymphocytic leukemia: analysis of persistent and new-onset
cytopenia [published online ahead of print August 13, 2013]. Cancer.
doi: 10.1002/cncr.28318.
2. Keating MJ, O’Brien S, Albitar M, et al. Early results of a chemoimmunotherapy regimen of fludarabine, cyclophosphamide, and rituximab as initial therapy for chronic lymphocytic leukemia. J Clin
Oncol. 2005;23:4079-4088.
3. Hallek M, Fischer K, Fingerle-Rowson G, et al. Addition of rituximab to fludarabine and cyclophosphamide in patients with chronic
lymphocytic leukaemia: a randomised, open-label, phase 3 trial.
Lancet. 2010;376:1164-1174.
4. Strati P, Ferrajoli A, Lerner S, et al. Fludarabine, cyclophosphamide
and rituximab plus granulocyte macrophage colony-stimulating
factor as frontline treatment for patients with chronic lymphocytic
leukemia [published online ahead of print July 29, 2013]. Leuk
Lymphoma.

Paolo Strati, MD
Susan O’Brien, MD
Department of Leukemia
The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center
Houston, Texas
DOI: 10.1002/cncr.28442, Published online October 22, 2013
in Wiley Online Library (wileyonlinelibrary.com)

Margin Assessment in Oral
Squamous Cell Carcinoma
We have read with great interest the study by Ch’ng et al
in which the authors attempt to show that surgical treatment alone achieves an “acceptable” local control among
patients with close margins.1 This study appears to reasonably show that increase in the number of adverse parameters is associated with higher rates of local and
regional failure. However, we are concerned by the
authors’ methods for characterization of margins, heterogeneity of studied cases (in terms of anatomic subsites and
Cancer

February 1, 2014

