Published OnlineFirst January 11, 2012; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-11-3080

Cancer
Research

Meeting Report

Twenty-Third Annual Pezcoller Symposium: Engineering
Inﬂuences in Cancer Research
Peter Friedl1, Jeff Hubbell2, David Livingston3, and Enrico Mihich3

Abstract
The cross-disciplinary focus of the meeting highlighted recent progress in physical and genetic analysis and
engineering of cancer disease models. As the central theme, mechanical forces affecting cell signaling, growth,
differentiation, and metastasis were discussed with emphasis on the tumor microenvironment and cellular
immunity, taking into account novel nanotechnology, biosensing, and intravital microscopy tools to monitor
animal cancer models and human cancer. Emerging themes were the role of extracellular matrix imposing
mechanical mechanisms on tumor cell function, including microenvironmental cues controlling the movement
of tumor and immune cells, advanced genetic animal models for cancer that better recapitulate human disease,
and preclinical and clinical molecular imaging of tumor architecture and stiffness, as well as novel nanotechnologies for anticancer drug delivery. Cancer Res; 72(4); 841–4. 2012 AACR.

Rakesh K. Jain (Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston,
MA) gave the keynote address on normalization of tumor
microenvironment to treat cancer as shown by mathematical
models and experimentation in mouse and humans. Blood and
lymphatic vessels and matrix associated with tumors are
abnormal; these abnormalities can fuel tumor progression and
prevent drugs from reaching tumor cells. In vivo imaging of
tumors allowed the study of the effects of microenvironment
on tumor cells and vice versa. Relaxin decreases collagen
production and increases responses. Angiogenic drugs can
also "normalize" tumor microenvironment. More recently,
antihypertensive drugs were shown to "normalize" the collagen
matrix and improve the delivery and efﬁcacy of therapeutics.
Stefano Piccolo (University of Padova, Italy) discussed the
role of Yorkie-homologs YAP and TAZ in mechanotransduction
and control of cell differentiation and growth. Cells perceive
their microenvironment through soluble signals and physical
and mechanical cues, such as extracellular matrix (ECM)
stiffness. By mechanotransduction systems, cells translate
these stimuli into biochemical signals controlling multiple
aspects of cell behavior. YAP and TAZ are nuclear relays of
mechanical signals exerted by ECM cell shape: ECM stiffness
causes their localization in nucleus, ECM relaxation their
localization in cytoplasm. YAP/TAZ are functionally required
Authors' Afﬁliations: 1Nijmegen Centre for Molecular Life Sciences
(NCMLS), Nijmegen, The Netherlands; 2Ecole Polytechnique Federale de
Lausanne (EPFL), Lausanne, Switzerland; and 3Dana Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, Massachusetts
Note: The ﬁndings of this article were presented in the 23rd annual
Pezcoller Symposium titled "Engineering Inﬂuences in Cancer Research"
which was held in Trento, Italy, on June 16–18, 2011.
Corresponding Author: Enrico Mihich, Dana Farber Cancer Institute, 450
Brookline Ave, Boston, MA 02115. Phone: 716-316-7782; Fax: 617-5828550; E-mail: enrico_mihich@dfci.harvard.edu
doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-11-3080
2012 American Association for Cancer Research.

for differentiation of mesenchymal stem cells induced by ECM
stiffness and for survival of endothelial cells regulated by cell
geometry. Indeed, YAP/TAZ are sensors of cell architecture and
mediators of mechanical cues from microenvironment.
Joachim Spatz (Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems
and University of Heidelberg, Germany) indicated that cell
signaling depends on the interplay of cell adhesion ligand
spacing and elasticity of their environment. Individual control
of substrate stiffness, single ligand density, and spacing was
obtained by using micelle nanolithography on elastic polyethylene glycol (PEG) polymers of different degrees of stiffness. Through live-cell imaging and single-cell force microscopy, it was found that substrate elasticity and ligand
density are independent from each other with respect to
cell adhesion response, which was displayed in a phase
diagram for adhesion.
David Weitz (Harvard University School of Engineering
and Applied Sciences, Cambridge, MA) discussed the relationships between cell volume and stiffness and the role of
ECM. Cell stiffness and shape depend on substrate stiffness.
The size of the nucleus also changes with changes in cell size,
as does the motion of particles within cells. Cells exert forces
through ECM which affect motion and deformation.
Dennis Discher (University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia,
PA) discussed the effects of matrix stiffness on migration and
differentiation. Crosslinked tissue matrices were imitated in
their elasticity with polymeric hydrogels, showing the potent
inﬂuence of matrix elasticity on basic processes such as stem
cell differentiation. Nuclear structure function and conformational ﬂexibility were focused upon with novel mass
spectromatic proteomic approaches, and the plasticity of
the nucleus in stem cell differentiation was highlighted. In
parallel studies with a more therapeutic focus on ﬂexibility,
Worm-like polymer micelles that easily deform were shown
to better deliver anticancer agents such as paclitaxel compared with nanospherical shapes. The interplay between

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 4, 2017. © 2012 American Association for Cancer Research.

841

Published OnlineFirst January 11, 2012; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-11-3080

Friedl et al.

materials biophysics and biomolecular engineering was thus
illustrated with diverse examples.
Paul Janmey (University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA)
indicated that cell proliferation, morphology, motility, and
protein expression are modulated in response to substrate
stiffness. This can vary and reﬂects the elastic modulus of the
tissue from which these cells were isolated. The viscoelastic
properties of different ECM and cytoskeletal elements inﬂuence the cell responses to mechanical signals; nonlinear
elasticity of biopolymer gels leads to novel mechanisms by
which cells alter their stiffness through engaging molecular
motors producing internal stresses. Hepatic stellate cells
convert into a spread phenotype, depending upon the stiffness of ECM. The simultaneous control of substrate stiffness
and adhesive patterns suggests that stiffness sensing occurs
on a scale much larger than single molecular linkages and
that the time needed for mechanosensing is on the order of a
few seconds.
Cynthia Reinhart-King (Cornell University, Ithaca, NY)
indicated that cellular traction stresses play a critical role
in establishing the balance between cell–cell and cell–matrix
adhesion and that establishing this balance is a necessity
during angiogenesis. Matrix stiffening, a frequent hallmark of
solid tumor progression, drives increased endothelial cell–
matrix adhesion and weakening of endothelial cell–cell contacts; more compliant matrices decrease cell–substrate binding and increase the formation of tight cell–cell junctions and
the assembly of cells into network structures. Tissue stiffening may thus contribute to the disorganized vasculature in
growing tumors.
David Mooney (Harvard University, Cambridge, MA) proposed that materials mimicking aspects of microbial infection may directly and beneﬁcially control immune cell trafﬁcking and activation. A macroporous system fabricated
from poly(lactide-co-glycolide) was used to provide sustained
delivery of granulocyte macrophage colony–stimulating factor creating gradient in surrounding tissues and recruiting
host dendritic cells (DC). The local presentation of CpG
oligonucleotides and cancer antigens to DCs was sufﬁcient
to activate resident DCs and induce them to home to the
lymph nodes; complete regression of distant and established
melanomas were seen in a therapeutic model. Thus, appropriately designed polymeric delivery systems may replace
current cell therapies.
Micheal Sixt (Institute of Science and Technology, Vienna,
Austria) indicated that immune cells migrate much faster and
are more ﬂexible than epithelial and mesenchymal cell types.
This is partially due to their ability to instantaneously shift
between adhesion receptor–dependent and adhesion receptor–independent migration modes. He further showed that
the distribution of important guidance cues (i.e., a chemokine) can determine whether leukocytes migrate in the adhesive versus nonadhesive mode.
Valerie Weaver (University of California at San Francisco,
San Francisco, CA) indicated that oncogenic transformation
is frequently accompanied by ECM deposition, crosslinking,
and matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)–dependent remodeling. Tumors are frequently stiffer than normal tissue. The

842

Cancer Res; 72(4) February 15, 2012

consequences of extrinsic ECM stiffening and cell contractility malignant progression of breast, skin, pancreatic, and
brain cancers were studied. Positive association between
ECM stiffening, tissue ﬁbrosis, and invasive phenotype was
shown. Inhibiting ECM tension prevented breast and skin
tumor proliferation and invasion, and also repressed lung
metastasis. Employing ECMs with calibrated stiffness
showed that ECM crosslinking and stiffness collaborate with
oncogenes to promote the invasive behavior of an epithelial
tissue: increased cell contractility promoted focal adhesion
assembly and enhanced growth factor signaling. In breast and
skin cancer, inhibiting integrin or focal adhesion activity
prevented oncogene-initiated tumor progression and ECM
remodeling. Ras sensitized epithelial cells to mechanical cues
and elevated a5 integrin and ﬁbronectin expression and
thereby potentiated cell force generation. Induced ECM
remodeling thus directs the persistent migration and invasion of tumor cells into interstitial matrix.
Peter Friedl (Nijmegen Centre for Molecular Life Sciences,
Nijmegen, The Netherlands) outlined the use of infraredexcited multiphoton microscopy (IR-)MPM at wavelengths
above 1,080 nm that enhances deep and nontoxic tissue
microscopy; in orthotopic ﬁbrosarcoma xenografts fast collective invasion of several hundred connected cells was
shown. Invasion-associated radioresistence of perivascular
strands was sensitive to the simultaneous inhibition of b1 and
b3 integrins. A combination of anti-integrin therapy with
irradiation may be a viable treatment option in the clinic for
locally destructive and otherwise radioresistant tumor
lesions.
Melody Swartz (Ecole Polytechnique Federale de Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland) indicated that tumor expression of VEGF-C promotes protumor immune tolerance; it
enhances interstitial ﬂuid drainage to the draining LN, where
tumor antigens along with suppressive cytokines could affect
B- and T-cell education. Tumor VEGF-C led to increased
inﬁltrations of regulatory T cells and myeloid-derived suppressor cells, and increased levels of regulatory cytokines.
VEGF-C expressing tumors were impervious to immunization against tumor antigen, and cytotoxic T cells were deleted
in the tumor and draining lymph node. Thus, tumors may use
VEGF-C to hijack the normal lymphatic functions of peripheral tolerance to escape host immunity.
Kazunori Kataoka (University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan)
indicated that currently micellar anticancer drugs are in
phase I to II clinical trials. Physicochemical and biologic
performances of polymeric micelles, such as size, stability,
longevity in the blood stream, targetability for speciﬁc tissues,
intracellular trafﬁcking, and drug-releasing proﬁles have
been determined. A hypovascular pancreatic tumor signiﬁcantly impeded the tissue penetration of a PEG-modiﬁed
liposomal carrier with the size of approximately 100 nm. To
overcome impaired delivery, (1,2-diaminocyclohexane)platinum(II)-loaded micelles with varying diameters were constructed from PEG-polyglutamate (PGlu) block copolymers
and the effect of micellar size on tumor tissue penetration and
antitumor activity was examined. Only 30-nm micelles penetrated the pancreatic tumor and achieved signiﬁcant

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 4, 2017. © 2012 American Association for Cancer Research.

Published OnlineFirst January 11, 2012; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-11-3080

Twenty-Third Annual Pezcoller Report

antitumor activity, but all the micelles tested were active
against colon tumor (C26) following its penetration. These
micelles were found to overcome oxaliplatin-resistant
tumors. Consequently, polymeric micelles smaller than
approximately 100 nm accumulate in tumor lesions, whereby
tumor tissue penetration depends on their size and also on
the tumor model.
Mauro Ferrari (The Methodist Hospital Research Institute,
Houston, TX) discussed multistage vectors for therapeutic
agent localization, nanotextured chips for proteomic and
peptidomic content proﬁling of biologic samples, nanochannel delivery systems for intelligent time release from
implants, and bionanoscaffolds for tissue regeneration. Multistage vectors can deliver therapy and imaging contrast
agents in individualized manners. Treatment individualization is attained by individualizing vectors to the characteristics of blood ﬂow in the neovascular bed supplying the
lesion. Other topics discussed in this presentation included
delivery of therapeutic siRNA in murine ovarian cancer
models and of cytotoxic agents in orthotopic mouse breast
cancer models, and the role of MRI contrast agents in these
treatment approaches.
Jeffrey Hubbell (Ecole Polytechnique Federale de Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland) discussed 2 examples of
modulating cellular and immune responses with proteinbased synthetic materials, one on signaling from parallel
cell-surface receptor systems with recombinant ECM ﬁbronectin variants and one on using nanomaterials to modulate
the immune microenvironment within tumor-draining
lymph nodes. Fibronectin was shown to modulate its signaling by coassociation of VEGF-R2 and integrins. A ﬁbrinbinding domain of ﬁbronectin was engineered which bound
platelet-derived growth factors (PDGF), ﬁbroblast growth
factor, TGFb, and neurotrophin families. Overall, 25 new
binding interactions were shown, implicating growth factor
binding as one of main physiologic functions of ﬁbronectin.
The binding domain is close to the major ﬁbronectin integrin–binding domain. Synergistic signaling between this
integrin and the VEGF-A165, PDGF, and BMP-2 receptors
was explored for angiogenesis (in response to VEGF and
PDGF) and mesenchymal stem cell migration and osteogenesis (in response to BMP-2 and PDGF); synergy was seen only
when the growth factors were templated by a fusion protein
of the two domains appropriately spaced. Polymeric nanomaterials were developed that are rapidly cleared into
lymphatics draining the injection site and paclitaxel was
encapsulated. When injected intradermally into a tissue bed
draining to the same lymph node as a tumor, tumor growth
was inhibited and the number of tumor antigen–speciﬁc
CD8þ T cells was elevated even though paclitaxel systemic
doses were too low to show direct antitumor effects.
Mehmet Toner (Harvard Medical School, Cambridge, MA)
introduced novel microﬂuid chips for the isolation of circulating tumor cells (CTC) in metastatic cancer allowing the
monitoring of patient response and changes in tumor genotypes during treatment. The CTC-Chip captured rare CTCs
using antibody-coated microposts under laminar ﬂow conditions. A chip based on high-throughput microﬂuid mixing

www.aacrjournals.org

provided enhanced CTC isolation. In patients with metastatic
cancer, temporal changes in CTC numbers correlated well
with disease clinical course. In patients with metastatic non–
small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC), T790M mutation, which
confers drug resistance, was detected in CTCs from patients.
CTCs were also isolated from the blood of patients with
metastatic or localized prostate cancer.
Tyler Jacks (Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Boston, MA) discussed the molecular analysis of lung cancer
progression using a mouse model of the disease. These
models share both genetic and pathologic features of human
NSCLC. Tumors are initiated through somatic activation of
oncogenic K-ras, and oncogenic signaling ampliﬁcation is
associated with progression to adenocarcinoma. p53 limits
tumor progression in this model. K-ras expression in the
absence of p53 leads to the development of distant metastases. A metastasis-associated gene expression signature was
uncovered, which highlighted the importance of the downregulation of the transcription factor Nkx2.1. Furthermore,
using nanofabricated devices, patterns of ECM components
were identiﬁed that distinguish adhesion by metastatic and
nonmetastatic cell lines.
Anton Berns (The Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam, The Netherlands) indicated that mouse small-cell lung
carcinoma (SCLC) tumors are often composed of phenotypically different cells, characterized by mesenchymal and
neuroendocrine markers. Cross-talk between mesenchymal
and neuroendocrine cells can endow neuroendocrine cells
with metastatic capacity. Neuroendocrine cells can convert
into a mesenchymal component by Ras activation. Trp53 and
Rb1 in distinct cell types of the adult lung were inactivated by
targeting Cre-recombinase expression to Clara (CC10 positive) cells, neuroendocrine (CGRP positive) cells, and alveolar
type 2 (SPC positive) cells using adenoviral vectors. As
mechanism, Trp53 and Rb1 inactivation in CGRP-expressing
cells causes SCLC with high efﬁciency. Likewise, inactivation
of trp53 and Rb in alveolar type II cells gave rise to SCLC but
with much lower efﬁciency, whereas inactivation in CC10expressing Clara cells only rarely caused SCLC. Thus, neuroendocrine cells serve as the predominant cell of origin of
SCLC.
Viola Vogel (Swiss Federal Institute of Technology, Zurich,
Switzerland) discussed how forces can tune the chemical
display of ECM ﬁbers, how rigidity of the stroma might be
altered during cancer progression, how ﬁbroblasts alter ECM
composition and architecture as function of time, and how the
stretching or cleavage of ECM ﬁbers alters the display of ECM
ﬁbrils. The display of the ECM ﬁbronectin can be switched on
or off by stretching it, and this regulates the architecture of
newly deposited collagen matrix. Stretch assays revealed how
the mechanical strain can activate binding sites and deactivate
others. Deciphering how proteins serve as mechanochemical
signaling switches sheds new light on the question of how
cancer cells probe and respond to their environments.
Philippe Bousso (Pasteur Institute, Paris, France) discussed
the mechanisms by which tumor microenvironment inhibits
CTL and NK killing within tumors. Intravital 2-photon
imaging combined with ﬂuorescent probes provided direct

Cancer Res; 72(4) February 15, 2012

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 4, 2017. © 2012 American Association for Cancer Research.

843

Published OnlineFirst January 11, 2012; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-11-3080

Friedl et al.

visualization and quantitative information on tumor cell
killing in situ.
Michal Neeman (The Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, Israel) indicated that molecular imaging monitors speciﬁc genes expression, changes in cell surface markers, and
alterations in differentiation, proliferation, migration, and
survival of endothelial and perivascular cells. ECM is altered
during angiogenesis; changes in collagen deposition, and its
degradation by MMPs, ﬁbrinogen extravasation, and ﬁbrin
crosslinking to form a provisional matrix were seen. The highmolecular-weight hyaluronan is degraded by tumor-derived
hyaluronidase from anti- to proangiogenic fragments. In
tumors, part of the properties of mature vessels are gained
by ﬁbroblasts and myoﬁbroblasts recruitment which significantly alters vascular morphology.
Ralph Weissleder (Massachusetts General Hospital, Cambridge, MA) outlined the use of a newly developed quantitative microNMR (nuclear magnetic resonance) for rapid
molecular analysis of scant human cancer cells. The NMR
instrument is extremely small, the size of the palm of the
hand. Markers and combinations of markers indicated vari-

844

Cancer Res; 72(4) February 15, 2012

abilities of tumor cells obtained directly from patients with
great accuracy and sensitivity. Temporal variability of markers could also be detected. The results showed that cancer
diagnostic accuracies with microNMR surpass those
obtained using conventional analyses.

Summary
Discussed were the roles of ECM-related mechanical
mechanisms in altering tumor cell function, mechanicsinduced signaling from the microenvironment in affecting
ECM assembly, movement of tumor and immune cells, use of
lung cancer mouse models, new advances in molecular imaging, and the effectiveness of nanotechnologies for anticancer
drug delivery.
Disclosure of Potential Conﬂicts of Interest
No potential conﬂicts of interest were disclosed.
Received September 13, 2011; accepted December 4, 2011; published
OnlineFirst January 11, 2012.

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 4, 2017. © 2012 American Association for Cancer Research.

Published OnlineFirst January 11, 2012; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-11-3080

Twenty-Third Annual Pezcoller Symposium: Engineering Influences
in Cancer Research
Peter Friedl, Jeff Hubbell, David Livingston, et al.
Cancer Res 2012;72:841-844. Published OnlineFirst January 11, 2012.

Updated version
Supplementary
Material

E-mail alerts
Reprints and
Subscriptions
Permissions

Access the most recent version of this article at:
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-11-3080
Access the most recent supplemental material at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/suppl/2012/01/05/0008-5472.CAN-11-3080.DC1

Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal.
To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications Department at
pubs@aacr.org.
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications Department at
permissions@aacr.org.

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 4, 2017. © 2012 American Association for Cancer Research.

