NIH Public Access
Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 November 14.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Published in final edited form as:
Nature. 2010 February 11; 463(7282): 823–827. doi:10.1038/nature08724.

Mical links semaphorins to F-actin disassembly
Ruei-Jiun Hung1,*, Umar Yazdani1,*, Jimok Yoon1, Heng Wu1, Taehong Yang1, Nidhi
Gupta1, Zhiyu Huang1, Willem J. H. van Berkel2, and Jonathan R. Terman1
1Departments

of Neuroscience and Pharmacology and Neuroscience Graduate Program, The
University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas 75390, USA. 2Laboratory of
Biochemistry, Wageningen University, Dreijenlaan 3, 6703 HA Wageningen, The Netherlands.

Abstract

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

How instructive cues present on the cell surface have their precise effects on the actin cytoskeleton
is poorly understood. Semaphorins are one of the largest families of these instructive cues and are
widely studied for their effects on cell movement, navigation, angiogenesis, immunology and
cancer1. Semaphorins/collapsins were characterized in part on the basis of their ability to
drastically alter actin cytoskeletal dynamics in neuronal processes2, but despite considerable
progress in the identification of semaphorin receptors and their signalling pathways3, the
molecules linking them to the precise control of cytoskeletal elements remain unknown. Recently,
highly unusual proteins of the Mical family of enzymes have been found to associate with the
cytoplasmic portion of plexins, which are large cell-surface semaphorin receptors, and to mediate
axon guidance, synaptogenesis, dendritic pruning and other cell morphological changes4–7. Mical
enzymes perform reduction–oxidation (redox) enzymatic reactions4,5,8–10 and also contain
domains found in proteins that regulate cell morphology4,11. However, nothing is known of the
role of Mical or its redox activity in mediating morphological changes. Here we report that Mical
directly links semaphorins and their plexin receptors to the precise control of actin filament (Factin) dynamics. We found that Mical is both necessary and sufficient for semaphorin–plexinmediated F-actin reorganization in vivo. Likewise, we purified Mical protein and found that it
directly binds F-actin and disassembles both individual and bundled actin filaments. We also
found that Mical utilizes its redox activity to alter F-actin dynamics in vivo and in vitro, indicating
a previously unknown role for specific redox signalling events in actin cytoskeletal regulation.
Mical therefore is a novel F-actin-disassembly factor that provides a molecular conduit through
which actin reorganization—a hallmark of cell morphological changes including axon navigation
—can be precisely achieved spatiotemporally in response to semaphorins.
Multidomain cytosolic proteins of the Mical family (Fig. 1a) mediate semaphorin–plexin
repulsive axon guidance and cell morphological changes4,5, but their role in controlling
these events is unknown. While characterizing new hypomorphic Mical alleles, we found
that surviving homozygous (Mical−/−) mutant adult flies had abnormally shaped bristle cell

©2010 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to J.R.T. (jonathan.terman@utsouthwestern.edu).
*These authors contributed equally to this work.
Supplementary Information is linked to the online version of the paper at www.nature.com/nature.
Author Contributions All authors contributed critical reagents, discussed the results and commented on the manuscript; R.-J.H.,
U.Y., J.Y., H.W., T.Y. and J.R.T. performed experiments, collected and analysed data, and prepared the manuscript; and J.R.T.
oversaw all aspects of the project and wrote the paper.
Author Information Reprints and permissions information is available at www.nature.com/reprints. The authors declare no
competing financial interests.

Hung et al.

Page 2

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

processes that were variously straight, thick, bent, twisted and/or had abnormal ‘club-like’ or
blunt tips (Fig. 1b, c and Supplementary Figs 1–3). These morphological defects were
rescued by expressing Mical specifically in Mical−/− mutant bristles (Fig. 1c), which
showed that Mical is required for normal bristle process morphology. Bristle process
elongation, like neuronal process extension, is actin dependent such that bristles are formed
during pupal development when a bristle cell extends an unbranched, slightly curved, actinrich cellular process (Supplementary Fig. 2). As development continues, a chitin-cuticle
external skeleton forms around the membrane of the elongated bristle, preserving a record in
the adult fly of the actin organization in the developing bristle (Fig. 1b and Supplementary
Fig. 2; ref. 12). Consequently, the bristle process provides a simple, high-resolution model
for characterizing the molecules and mechanisms that regulate actin filament
dynamics12,13. We therefore considered whether the increased expression of Mical was
sufficient to induce changes to bristle process morphology. Notably, Mical overexpression
specifically in wild-type bristles generated branched bristles (Fig. 1d, e, i and Supplementary
Figs 4, 5 and 7). To our knowledge, these bristle branching defects are more severe than any
previously reported, and we did not find any defects in bristle cell numbers or positioning,
indicating that Mical has specific effects on cell morphology.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Mical proteins are unusual in that they each contain a redox enzymatic domain, and we
wondered whether their redox activity was necessary for their specific effects on bristle
shape. Point mutations that selectively disrupted the redox domain as well as bristle-specific
expression of a MicalΔredox protein revealed that redox activity of Mical was required for
both normal bristle morphology and Mical-dependent bristle branching (Fig. 1f, i
andSupplementary Figs 6 and 7). In contrast, bristle-specific expression of the Mical redox
domain alone (Micalredox) was not sufficient for bristle branching (Supplementary Fig. 7),
showing that Mical also requires at least some of its other domains to mediate its full effect.
Immediately carboxy-terminal to its redox domain, Mical contains a protein motif that is
found in a number of cytoskeleton-associated proteins, namely a calponin homology domain
(Fig. 1a). Notably, bristle-specific expression of both the Mical redox and calponin
homology domains alone (MicalredoxCH) further increased bristle branching (Fig. 1h, i and
Supplementary Fig. 7), indicating that MicalredoxCH is constitutively active. These results, in
combination with observations that bristle-specific expression of a MicalΔCH protein acted
dominant negatively (Fig. 1g, i and Supplementary Fig. 7), demonstrate that the redox and
calponin homology domains of Mical are both necessary and sufficient to orchestrate
specific cell morphological changes.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

To better study the mechanisms underlying Mical-mediated morphological changes, we
directly examined developing bristles. During bristle process elongation, Mical localized to
growing bristle tips in close proximity to the bristle cell membrane and at sites of bristle
branching and actin localization (Fig 2b and Fig 3A, B). Removing either the calponin
homology domain or the C terminus of Mical altered this selective localization
(Supplementary Fig. 7), indicating that Mical might be locally regulating the actin
cytoskeletal network that specifies bristle morphology. In motile cells and neuronal growth
cones, the majority of F-actin forms two array types: the parallel arrays of bundled F-actin
found in filopodia and the meshwork F-actin arrays found in lamellipodia. Like filopodia,
Drosophila bristle processes contain pillar-like bundles of F-actin comprising many
individual actin filaments (Fig. 2a and Supplementary Fig. 2; ref. 12). A record of this Factin organization was observed in the highly ordered, parallel arrangement of grooves in
adult wild-type bristles but not in Mical−/− mutants, whose adult bristles indicated
disorganized, intersecting and larger-than-normal F-actin bundles (Supplementary Fig. 3).
Direct visualization of actin in developing bristles also showed that the F-actin bundles in
Mical−/− mutants were significantly larger than wild-type F-actin bundles, were abnormally
positioned and were intersecting (Fig. 2c, d and Supplementary Figs 2 and 3). These
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 November 14.

Hung et al.

Page 3

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Mical−/− mutant bristles resembled those generated by overexpressing F-actin-stabilizing
proteins such as actin-bundling/crosslinking proteins12, further indicating that Mical limits
the size, abundance and bundling of F-actin.
To further characterize Mical-mediated actin cytoskeletal regulation, we studied the
transgenic flies expressing the different forms of Mical described above. In contrast to
Mical−/− mutants, increasing the expression of full-length Mical or MicalredoxCH, but not
MicalΔredox or MicalΔCH, in bristles generated bundles of F-actin that were significantly
thinner than normal (Fig. 2c, d and Supplementary Fig. 4). Increasing Mical activity in
bristles also induced a pronounced rearrangement of F-actin: a change from the normal,
parallel, organization of bundled F-actin into a complex meshwork of short actin filaments
(Fig. 2c and Supplementary Fig. 4). These Mical-mediated bristle alterations are similar to
those seen when F-actin is destabilized in bristles using either cytochalasin treatment 14–17
or loss-of-function mutations in actin-bundling/crosslinking proteins12. Therefore, Mical is
a critical regulator of F-actin instability that is sufficient to reorganize parallel F-actin
networks into complex meshwork arrays.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Previous results have indicated that the generation of short bundles of F-actin is required for
the characteristic, slightly curved morphology of Drosophila bristles12. Neuronal dendrites
that extend alongside elongating bristles determine this actin arrangement and curved bristle
shape (Supplementary Fig. 2), but little is known of the extra-cellular signals present on
dendrites that direct these bristle alterations. Because Mical associates with the cytoplasmic
portion of the semaphorin receptor plexA4, we wondered whether Mical-mediated actin
destabilization in bristles occurred in response to semaphorin signals present on dendrites.
Consistent with this hypothesis, we found that semaphorins localized to bristle-innervating
dendrites whereas plexA co-localized with Mical within bristles (Fig. 3A and
Supplementary Figs 8 and 10). Likewise, increasing or decreasing the expression of plexA
or either of its transmembrane Sema-1a or Sema-1b ligands caused morphological and Factin defects resembling those seen after similar manipulations of Mical (Fig 2d and Fig 3A
and Supplementary Figs 8–13). Moreover, decreasing semaphorin–plexin signalling limited
the actin-destabilizing activity of full-length Mical, but not that of constitutively active
MicalredoxCH or Mical proteins missing their plexin-interacting regions (MicalΔPIR; Fig. 3A
and Supplementary Fig. 13). Indeed, both loss-of-function and dominant-negative Mical
mutants significantly suppressed or eliminated plexA-dependent bristle branching (Fig. 3A
and Supplementary Fig. 7). These results indicate that Mical is both activated and required
for semaphorin-induced F-actin destabilization.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Our genetic results, therefore, coupled with our observations that Mical and F-actin colocalize in vivo, indicate that Mical associates with F-actin or an F-actin regulatory protein
and thereby targets the actin cytoskeleton for semaphorin-dependent reorganization. To
further address this, we performed in vitro assays and found that different forms of purified
Mical protein (Micalredox and MicalredoxCH), but not negative controls (bovine serum
albumin and the Nus solubility tag), directly associated with in vitro-generated actin
filaments (Fig. 3B and Supplementary Fig. 14). In contrast, neither of the purified Mical
proteins associated with in vitro-generated microtubules (Fig. 3B and Supplementary Fig.
16), showing that Mical selectively associates with F-actin. Likewise, the Mical-related
redox enzyme p-hydroxybenzoate hydroxylase did not associate with F-actin (Fig. 3B and
Supplementary Fig. 14), indicating that the redox domain of Mical is a specific F-actinbinding module. In light of previous findings that Mical interacts with the cytoplasmic
portion of the plexA receptor4,5, our results identify Mical as a direct physical link between
the semaphorin-receptor plexin, which is present on the cell surface, and the F-actin
cytoskeleton.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 November 14.

Hung et al.

Page 4

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

We next investigated whether Mical directly alters actin dynamics. Mical uses the pyridine
nucleotide NADPH as a required coenzyme for its redox activity5,9, and our in vivo results
show that it also requires its redox domain to alter the actin cytoskeleton. Activating purified
Micalredox or MicalredoxCH protein using NADPH substantially decreased the rate, extent,
and steady-state level of actin polymerization (Fig. 3C, a and Supplementary Fig. 14). These
robust effects of Mical on actin dynamics were dependent on NADPH concentration, were
substantially reduced in the presence of the related pyridine nucleotide coenzyme NADH
and were eliminated in the presence of NADP+ (Supplementary Figs 14 and 15). Likewise,
these actin alterations were observed using very low, substoichiometric, amounts of Mical
(Supplementary Fig. 14), further indicating that Mical regulates actin dynamics through its
enzymatic activity. In contrast, a Mical-related redox enzyme (p-hydroxybenzoate
hydroxylase) and general redox reaction products (H2O2 and/or NADP+) had little to no
effect on actin dynamics (Fig. 3C, b and Supplementary Figs 14 and 15), further indicating
the specificity of Mical-mediated F-actin alterations in vivo and in vitro. Moreover, activated
Mical does not affect tubulin polymerization (Supplementary Fig. 16), showing that Mical is
a specific and selective regulator of F-actin dynamics.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Semaphorins were identified in part on the basis of their ability to rapidly disassemble Factin and ‘collapse’ elongating neuronal growth cones2,18, but the molecules directly
mediating this effect remain unknown. Using actin depolymerization assays and electron
microscopic analysis of purified proteins, we found that activated Mical directly induced
actin depolymerization and significantly decreased actin filament length (Fig 3C, b, c and
Fig 4A and Supplementary Fig. 14). These results are consistent with our in vivo
observations and show that the critical semaphorin-signalling molecule Mical is a direct
effector of F-actin disassembly. In contrast, we found no evidence that activated Mical
directly induced actin branching or altered the bundling ability of actin-bundling/
crosslinking proteins (Fig 3C and Fig 4A and Supplementary Figs 17 and 18), suggesting
that Mical-dependent effects on branching and bundling in vivo are likely to be secondary to
the ability of Mical to destabilize F-actin directly. To test this, we set up an in vitro assay
using purified proteins that resembled the bundled organization of F-actin within our in vivo
bristle model. We found that activated Mical also directly disassembled bundled actin
filaments, decreasing both their length and their width (Fig. 4B and Supplementary Fig. 18).
Therefore, Mical is an F-actin-disassembly factor that directly destabilizes both individual
and bundled actin filaments.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Finally, we wondered whether the expression of Mical was also sufficient to reorganize the
actin cytoskeleton of navigating axons. Semaphorins mediate axon repulsion in part by
locally disassembling the actin cytoskeleton within neuronal growth cones. We found that
Mical likewise strongly localized to growth cones in vivo and had a critical role in the
repulsion of Sema-1a–plexA-responsive axons (Supplementary Figs 19 and 20; refs 4, 5).
Furthermore, using GFP–actin to directly visualize actin cytoskeletal organization and
growth cone complexity in vivo19, we found that individual growth cones became
significantly more complex, with increased numbers of filopodia, when constitutively active
(but not dominant-negative) forms of Mical were expressed within them (Fig. 4C). These
observations indicate that the redistribution of actin we see in neuronal growth cones, like
that which we observe in developing bristle processes and with purified Mical, is likely to
result from direct Mical-mediated disassembly of actin filaments and F-actin bundles.
We have identified a previously unknown, redox-dependent actin-disassembly pathway that
provides critical insights into the means by which semaphorins alter actin cytoskeletal
dynamics and serve as navigational signals. Semaphorins have long been known to have
localized destabilizing effects on F-actin2,18,20 that include a loss of F-actin18, a decreased
ability to polymerize new F-actin18, a decrease in the number of F-actin bundles21 and the

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 November 14.

Hung et al.

Page 5

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

extension of new branches22–26. Our results are consistent with these observations and
indicate that Mical is sufficient to trigger each of these semaphorin–plexin-dependent
events. Specifically, we find that semaphorin–plexin–Mical signalling directly destabilizes
F-actin, which triggers a secondary response that produces branched meshwork actin and
actin-rich extensions (Supplementary Fig. 21).

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Our observations also provide a more complete understanding of the roles of repulsive
guidance cues in vivo. In particular, we propose that repellents such as semaphorins
disassemble or ‘prune back’ the actin network in vivo, and that this pruning process initiates
a cascade of secondary events that enhances cellular complexity/plasticity. These
semaphorin–plexin–Mical-induced actin rearrangements, therefore, in combination with
what are likely to be semaphorin–plexin-dependent, but Mical-independent, effects on
microtubules and substrate adhesion1,3, would enable navigating cells/axons to identify
new, more permissive substrates and could underlie the directional changes associated with
semaphorin repulsive guidance. Indeed, neuronal growth cones develop complex
morphologies with multiple extending filopodia when they encounter directional choice
points in vivo27–30, and these new filopodia probe the environment and ultimately lead the
growth cone to a more permissive substrate. Future work will seek to better understand these
Mical-mediated events. These research directions are likely to be of significant biomedical
importance given the roles of the more than twenty semaphorins in directing actindependent processes in neural connectivity, angiogenesis, immunity and cancer.

METHODS SUMMARY

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

We performed complementation analysis, genetics, molecular biology, western blotting,
immunostaining and generation of transgenic animals using standard techniques4. Multiple
new lines of the full-length ‘short’ isoform of Mical, the MicalΔredox mutation (MicalG→W;
ref. 4) and the other transgenic animals were generated and used for all experiments. Adult
bristles were examined and quantified by crossing adults at 25 °C: adult offspring from these
crosses were first sorted according to genotype and then examined under a dissecting
microscope. We genotyped pupae using a Zeiss Discovery M2 Bio fluorescence
stereomicroscope, and all preparation, staging and dissection of pupae were done using
standard approaches. We imaged, drew and quantified the adult bristles with the aid of the
Discovery M2 Bio stereomicroscope, a motorized focus and zoom, a Zeiss AxioCam HR
camera and three-dimensional-reconstruction software (Zeiss AxioVision, version 4.6.3, and
Extended Focus software). All other bright-field, dark-field, differential interference contrast
and fluorescence visualization, and imaging of bristles, embryos and growth cones, was
done using a Zeiss Axio Imager upright microscope with motorized focus and zoom and an
ApoTome module, and images were captured and quantified using the AxioCam HR camera
and AxioVision software. All electron microscopy of pupae and negative staining of purified
proteins was done using a FEI Tecnai G2 Spirit BioTWIN transmission electron microscope.
We purified recombinant Mical proteins10 and recombinant p-hydroxybenzoate hydroxylase
using our previously developed approaches. Drosophila fascin (also known as singed)
complementary DNA was inserted in a bacterial expression vector, and recombinant
Drosophila fascin protein was purified. All F-actin and Mical co-sedimentation assays and
G-actin/F-actin ratio experiments were performed using standard approaches, as were all
pyrene-labelled actin polymerization and depolymerization assays, actin bundling assays,
tubulin polymerization assays and microtubule co-sedimentation assays.

Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 November 14.

Hung et al.

Page 6

Acknowledgments
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

We thank C. Cowan, M. Rosen and T. Südhof for comments on drafts of our manuscript and M. Bailey, C. Gilpin,
H. He, T. Januszewski, H. Krämer, W. Lin, T. Wedgeworth, X. Zhang and the University of Texas Southwestern
Electron Microscopy Core Facility for discussions and assistance. We also thank the Bloomington, Harvard and
Japanese stock centres for flies and H. Aberle, L. Cooley, C. Goodman, A. Kolodkin, B. Lee, L. Luo, J. Merriam
and X. Zhang for flies and/or reagents. This work was supported by the US National Institute of Mental Health
(MH085923) and a Basil O’Connor Starter Scholar Research Award to J.R.T. J.R.T. is a Klingenstein Fellow and
the Rita C. and William P. Clements, Jr, Scholar in Medical Research.

References

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

1. Tran TS, Kolodkin AL, Bharadwaj R. Semaphorin regulation of cellular morphology. Annu. Rev.
Cell Dev. Biol. 2007; 23:263–292. [PubMed: 17539753]
2. Luo Y, Raible D, Raper JA. Collapsin: a protein in brain that induces the collapse and paralysis of
neuronal growth cones. Cell. 1993; 75:217–227. [PubMed: 8402908]
3. Zhou Y, Gunput RA, Pasterkamp RJ. Semaphorin signaling: progress made and promises ahead.
Trends Biochem. Sci. 2008; 33:161–170. [PubMed: 18374575]
4. Terman JR, Mao T, Pasterkamp RJ, Yu HH, Kolodkin AL. MICALs, a family of conserved
flavoprotein oxidoreductases, function in plexin-mediated axonal repulsion. Cell. 2002; 109:887–
900. [PubMed: 12110185]
5. Schmidt EF, Shim SO, Strittmatter SM. Release of MICAL autoinhibition by semaphorin-plexin
signaling promotes interaction with collapsin response mediator protein. J. Neurosci. 2008;
28:2287–2297. [PubMed: 18305261]
6. Beuchle D, Schwarz H, Langegger M, Koch I, Aberle H. Drosophila MICAL regulates myofilament
organization and synaptic structure. Mech. Dev. 2007; 124:390–406. [PubMed: 17350233]
7. Kirilly D, et al. A genetic pathway composed of Sox14 and Mical governs severing of dendrites
during pruning. Nature Neurosci. 2009; 12:1497–1505. [PubMed: 19881505]
8. Siebold C, et al. High-resolution structure of the catalytic region of MICAL (molecule interacting
with CasL), a multidomain flavoenzyme-signaling molecule. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA. 2005;
102:16836–16841. [PubMed: 16275925]
9. Nadella M, Bianchet MA, Gabelli SB, Barrila J, Amzel LM. Structure and activity of the axon
guidance protein MICAL. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA. 2005; 102:16830–16835. [PubMed:
16275926]
10. Gupta, N.; Terman, JR. Flavins and Flavoproteins 2008. In: Frago, S.; Gómez-Moreno, C.;
Medina, M., editors. Proc. 16th Int. Symp. Flavins Flavoproteins; Prensas Univ. Zaragoza. 2008.
p. 345-350.
11. Suzuki T, et al. MICAL, a novel CasL interacting molecule, associates with vimentin. J. Biol.
Chem. 2002; 277:14933–14941. [PubMed: 11827972]
12. Tilney LG, DeRosier DJ. How to make a curved Drosophila bristle using straight actin bundles.
Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA. 2005; 102:18785–18792. [PubMed: 16357198]
13. Sutherland JD, Witke W. Molecular genetic approaches to understanding the actin cytoskeleton.
Curr. Opin. Cell Biol. 1999; 11:142–151. [PubMed: 10047521]
14. Turner CM, Adler PN. Distinct roles for the actin and microtubule cytoskeletons in the
morphogenesis of epidermal hairs during wing development in Drosophila. Mech. Dev. 1998;
70:181–192. [PubMed: 9510034]
15. Tilney LG, Connelly PS, Vranich KA, Shaw MK, Guild GM. Actin filaments and microtubules
play different roles during bristle elongation in Drosophila. J. Cell Sci. 2000; 113:1255–1265.
[PubMed: 10704376]
16. Guild GM, Connelly PS, Vranich KA, Shaw MK, Tilney LG. Actin filament turnover removes
bundles from Drosophila bristle cells. J. Cell Sci. 2002; 115:641–653. [PubMed: 11861770]
17. Geng W, He B, Wang M, Adler PN. The tricornered gene, which is required for the integrity of
epidermal cell extensions, encodes the Drosophila nuclear DBF2-related kinase. Genetics. 2000;
156:1817–1828. [PubMed: 11102376]

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 November 14.

Hung et al.

Page 7

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

18. Fan J, et al. The organization of F-actin and microtubules in growth cones exposed to a brainderived collapsing factor. J. Cell Biol. 1993; 121:867–878. [PubMed: 8491778]
19. Sánchez-Soriano N, Prokop A. The influence of pioneer neurons on a growing motor nerve in
Drosophila requires the neural cell adhesion molecule homolog FasciclinII. J. Neurosci. 2005;
25:78–87. [PubMed: 15634769]
20. Fan J, Raper JA. Localized collapsing cues can steer growth cones without inducing their full
collapse. Neuron. 1995; 14:263–274. [PubMed: 7857638]
21. Dent EW, Barnes AM, Tang F, Kalil K. Netrin-1 and semaphorin 3A promote or inhibit cortical
axon branching, respectively, by reorganization of the cytoskeleton. J. Neurosci. 2004; 24:3002–
3012. [PubMed: 15044539]
22. Kapfhammer JP, Raper JA. Collapse of growth cone structure on contact with specific neurites in
culture. J. Neurosci. 1987; 7:201–212. [PubMed: 3543248]
23. Campbell DS, et al. Semaphorin 3A elicits stage-dependent collapse, turning, and branching in
Xenopus retinal growth cones. J. Neurosci. 2001; 21:8538–8547. [PubMed: 11606642]
24. Fenstermaker V, Chen Y, Ghosh A, Yuste R. Regulation of dendritic length and branching by
semaphorin 3A. J. Neurobiol. 2004; 58:403–412. [PubMed: 14750152]
25. Liu Y, Halloran MC. Central and peripheral axon branches from one neuron are guided
differentially by Semaphorin3D and transient axonal glycoprotein-1. J. Neurosci. 2005; 25:10556–
10563. [PubMed: 16280593]
26. Sakai JA, Halloran MC. Semaphorin 3d guides laterality of retinal ganglion cell projections in
zebrafish. Development. 2006; 133:1035–1044. [PubMed: 16467361]
27. Tosney KW, Landmesser LT. Growth cone morphology and trajectory in the lumbosacral region of
the chick embryo. J. Neurosci. 1985; 5:2345–2358. [PubMed: 4032000]
28. Broadie K, et al. From growth cone to synapse: the life history of the RP3 motor neuron. Dev.,
Suppl. 1993:227–238. [PubMed: 8049478]
29. Godement P, Wang LC, Mason CA. Retinal axon divergence in the optic chiasm: dynamics of
growth cone behavior at the midline. J. Neurosci. 1994; 14:7024–7039. [PubMed: 7965096]
30. Murray MJ, Merritt DJ, Brand AH, Whitington PM. In vivo dynamics of axon pathfinding in the
Drosophila CNS: a time-lapse study of an identified motorneuron. J. Neurobiol. 1998; 37:607–
621. [PubMed: 9858262]

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 November 14.

Hung et al.

Page 8

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Figure 1. Mical regulates actin-rich cellular process morphology

a, Mical protein organization. FAD, flavin adenine dinucleotide; CH, calponin homology. b,
Adult Drosophila bristles (arrowheads, drawings) are of varying length, unbranched and
slightly curved. c–h, Mical is necessary for normal bristle morphology and is also sufficient
to alter morphology when one (×1) or two (×2) copies of different Mical transgenes are
expressed specifically within bristles. Mutant, MicalDf(3R)Swp2 (ref. 4). n ≥ 25 animals per
genotype; chi-squared test; ***P < 0.0001. i, Bristles resulting from Mical−/− and Mical
overexpression are quantitatively distinct and the redox and calponin homology domains of
Mical are both required and together are sufficient for Mical-like bristle branching. For wild
type, transgene or bristle-specific driver only, there is 0% branching. n ≥ 25 bristles per
genotype; data shown, mean ± s.e.m.; scale bars, 25 µm.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 November 14.

Hung et al.

Page 9

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Figure 2. Semaphorin, plexin and Mical control F-actin organization and bundling

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

a, A pupal bristle cell extends a membranous process containing F-actin (green lines, and
circles seen in cross-section) bundled together adjacent to the membrane. b, GFPMical
(green) localizes to elongating pupal bristle tips (arrows) and adjacent (black arrowheads in
a ×3 magnified view, inset) to filopodia-like extensions/branches, which were not seen in
wild-type bristles. At older pupal ages, Mical localization forms an actin-like striped pattern
(open arrowheads). The white arrowhead shows which region is seen at higher
magnification in the inset. GFP, green fluorescent protein. c, d, Images and drawings of Factin bundles. EM, electron microscopy. Membrane-associated (for example, arrows) and
abnormally positioned (for example, arrowheads) bundles are drawn. n > 80 F-actin bundles
per genotype; ***P < 0.0001 (compared with wild type); data shown, mean ± s.e.m.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 November 14.

Hung et al.

Page 10

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Figure 3. Semaphorin–plexin-mediated actin rearrangements require Mical, which binds and
directly regulates actin dynamics

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

A, Mical (GFPMical) co-localizes (yellow) with plexA at sites of bristle branch formation
(arrowhead and inset at a ×2 magnified view) and is activated and required for semaphorin–
plexin-dependent branching. PIR, plexin-interacting region; cyto, cytoplasmic portion. n ≥
28 bristles per genotype; t-test; **P < 0.001, ***P < 0.0001; data shown, mean ± s.e.m. B,
Mical co-localizes (yellow) with F-actin during early and late (inset) stages of bristle
elongation (a). Purified Mical robustly and selectively associates with F-actin as revealed by
dot-blot (b) and actin and microtubule co-sedimentation/pelleting (c, d) assays. Arrowheads,
MicalredoxCH; dots, Nus; MT, microtubules; BSA, bovine serum albumin; PHBH, phydroxybenzoate hydroxylase; MAPs, microtubule-associated proteins; Sol, G-actin
(soluble); Pel, F-actin (pellet). n ≥ 2 per condition; data shown, mean ± s.e.m. C, Pyreneactin assays, where the fluorescence of polymerized pyrene-actin is higher than monomeric
pyrene-actin, reveal that purified MicalredoxCH + NADPH directly alters actin
polymerization (a) and induces depolymerization (b), as do high-speed sedimentation/
Coomassie staining assays (c; arrow). a.u., arbitrary units.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 November 14.

Hung et al.

Page 11

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Figure 4. Mical directly disassembles F-actin and regulates growth cone morphology

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

A, Negative-staining electron microscopy shows that MicalredoxCH + NADPH significantly
decreases F-actin length. n > 120 per treatment; t-test; P < 0.0001. B, Actin (green)
filaments bundled with fascin (yellow) are disassembled by MicalredoxCH + NADPH, as seen
using pyrene-labelled actin (a), low-speed sedimentation/Coomassie staining (b;arrowhead)
and electron microscopy (c). Electron microscopy shows that, similar to untreated controls,
F-actin bundles treated with MicalredoxCH (black triangles in graph) are well organized, long
and thick with ‘horizontally’ arranged individual actin filaments (arrowheads) and repeating
‘vertical stripes’ of fascin (dots). F-actin bundles treated with MicalredoxCH + NADPH
(green squares in graph) are significantly shorter and thinner (n > 21 per treatment; t-test; P
< 0.0001) and disassemble into single actin filaments (arrowheads). C, Measuring the area
occupied by GFP-actin (red) shows that Mical significantly alters growth cone size. Cb,
neuronal cell body. n > 40 growth cones per genotype; t-test; ***P < 0.0001; data shown,
mean ± s.e.m.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 November 14.

