www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Oncotarget, 2017, Vol. 8, (No. 9), pp: 14655-14665
Research Paper

Chemotherapy-mediated miR-29b expression
invasion and angiogenesis of cervical cancer

inhibits

the

Yunyun Li1,*, Zhongzu Zhang2,*, Zhenghua Xiao1, Ying Lin1, Tangshu Luo1, Qin Zhou3,
Xiaojing Zhang1
1

Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics, The Yongchuan Hospital of Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing 402160,
PR China

2

Department of Orthopedics, The Yongchuan Hospital of Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing 402160, PR China

3

Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics, The First Affiliated Hospital of Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing 400016,
PR China

*

These authors contributes to this work

Correspondence to: Qin Zhou, email: zhouqin_doctor@126.com
Xiaojing Zhang, email: zhangxj_gyn@163.com
Keywords: cervical cancer, miR-29b, STAT3, chemotherapy, EMT
Received: November 14, 2016     Accepted: January 11, 2017     Published: January 19, 2017

ABSTRACT
Radiotherapy combined with platinum-based chemotherapy is the standard-ofcare of locally advanced cervical cancer (CC) patients, while nearly 50% of patients
do not respond to standard chemotherapy. Thus, identification of relative molecules
participated in chemotherapy might provide new insights in the treatment of CC. In
this study, we found a cohort of miRNAs were dysregulated upon treatment with
cisplatin, among of which miR-29b was the most upregulated one. We further detected
its expression in CC tissues, and found that miR-29b was significantly suppressed in
CC and its precancerous lesions, HSIL tissues, and was negatively related with tumor
invasion. However, upon treatment with cisplatin, the expression of miR-29b was
significantly up-regulated. The biological function assays showed that overexpression
of miR-29b suppressed the invasion, EMT procedure and angiogenesis of cervical
cancer cells in vitro and inhibited tumor growth and neovascularization in vivo
through targeting STAT3 signal pathway. While, inhibition of miR-29b could prevent
the cisplatin-induced epithelial features, cell movement and angiogenesis of CC cells,
which means miR-29b/STAT3 axis participates in the chemotherapy of cisplatin in
CC. Collectively, our data suggest that chemotherapy-mediated miR-29b expression
participates in the initiation and progression of cervical cancer through suppressing
the proliferation, EMT procedure and angiogenesis of cervical cancer cells by targeting
STAT3 signal pathway.

INTRODUCTION

factors for recurrence [3]. However, the intrinsic molecular
mechanisms of chemotherapeutic drugs used for cervical
cancer treatment are not well established.
MicroRNAs (miRNAs), a kind of small, non-coding
RNAs, are considered to be important components of cancer
signaling network and are emerging as novel biomarkers
of diseases [4, 5]. Through partially complementing with
the 3’-untranslated region of relative mRNAs, miRNAs
modulate putative target gene expression by suppressing the
translational efficiency or cleavage of target mRNAs [6].
The disruption of homeostasis in the miRNA/mRNA axis
would lead to relevant pathologic events. Recently, the
pivotal role of miRNAs in the chemotherapy of variety

Cervical cancer (CC) is the second most common
cancer in women worldwide. Despite the introduction
of vaccines to high-risk human papilloma viral (hrHPV)
strains, CC remains a major source of cancer related
death, particularly in under-developed countries [1, 2]. The
standard-of-care of locally advanced CC patients (stages
IB2 to stages IVA according to FIGO) is surgery and/
or radiotherapy (RT) in combination with chemotherapy.
The addition of platinum-based chemotherapy to RT
could significantly reduce the risk of death and disease
progression for the early stage CC patients with risk
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

14655

Oncotarget

of cancers have been widely reported, such as miR-135a
promotes the gastric cancer resistance to oxaliplatin through
suppressing the E2F1/Sp1/DAPK2 pathway signaling [7];
overexpression of miR-126 could increase chemosensitivity
in drug-resistant gastric cancer cells by targeting EZH2 [8].
For cervical cancer, through comparing the miRNAs profile
between the non-response and complete-response patients
upon chemotherapy with cisplatin, Abraham et al. identified
a molecular signature consisting of seven validated
miRNAs [9], while whether these miRNAs are all involved
in the chemotherapy of cisplatin in cervical cancer, and the
intrinsic mechanisms involved are less known.
In this study, we profiled the cervical cancer cells
upon treatment with cisplatin, and found that miR-29b
was significantly up-regulated upon treatment with
cisplatin. Further biological experiments showed that
overexpression of miR-29b not only suppressed the
proliferation, metastasis and EMT procedure of cervical
cancer cells, but also inhibited its angiogenesis, which
suggests its suppressive effects in the chemotherapy of
cisplatin in cervical cancer.

before and after chemotherapy of cisplatin. As expected,
the expression level of miR-29b in CC patients after
chemotherapy of cisplatin was much higher than which in
the untreated group (Figure 1C). These results proposed
that miR-29b-mediated program was involved in the
chemotherapy with cisplatin, which might hold clinical
promise for CC patients who are resistant for cisplatin.

miR-29b was suppressed in cervical cancer
tissues and negatively related to tumor invasion
We next examined the correlation between miR29b expression and cervical cancer development. qRTPCR assays were performed to assess miR-29b level in a
cohort of 22 cases of cervical cancers, 10 cases of highgrade squamous intraepithelial lesions (HSIL) and 5 cases
of normal cervical tissues. As shown in Figure 1D, the
expression of miR-29b was significantly suppressed in
cancer and HSIL tissues compared with the normal tissues,
while no statistically difference were found in the expression
of miR-29b between the cancer and HSIL tissues.
Moreover, the pathological and clinical
characteristics of the 22 cases of cancer patients, including
patients’ age at diagnosis, tumor size, whether infected
with HPV-16 type and clinical stages were collected and
supplemented in Table 1. The expression of miR-29b
showed significant association with clinical stages, as
tumors with latter stages (stage IIA and IIB) expressed
lower level of miR-29b (Figure 1E). However, no
statistical correlations were observed between the miR29b expression with age, tumor size and HPVs infected
subtype (Table 1). These results demonstrated that miR29b might be involved in the cervical cancer invasion.

RESULTS
miR-29b expression is activated by cisplatin in
cervical cancer cells
To identify putative miRNAs participating in
the chemotherapy of cervical cancer, we analyzed the
miRNAs expression profile in two cervical cancer cells
(HeLa and Caski) upon treatment with cisplatin. Before
the miRNA array profile, we treated HeLa and Caski
cells with cisplatin (named CR-HeLa and CR-Caski cells,
respectively), and estimated relative IC50 values of each
cell lines (Supplementary Figure 1). The IC50 values were
(14.42 ± 3.34) µM and (23.65 ± 1.83) µM in HeLa and
Caski cells, respectively. Upon treatment, a total of 20
differentially expressed miRNAs were detected in cisplatintreated cervical cancer cells, including 6 downregulated
miRNAs and 14 upregulated miRNAs (Figure 1A,
the detailed miRNAs were supplied in Supplementary
Table 2). To further validate the miRNA array chip results,
we selected 6 miRNAs (two downregulated miRNAs,
miR-106a and miR-155, and 4 upregulated miRNAs,
miR-29a/29b, miR-99a and miR-124) to determine their
expression by qRT-PCR assays. The results were consistent
with the miRNA array experiments (Figure 1B). Among of
which, miR-29b was the most differently expressed miRNA
detected, with more than twenty-five-fold and fifteen-fold
augmented level upon treatment with cisplatin in HeLa and
Caski cells, respectively. Since miR-29 family was reported
to be associated with the chemotherapy in many cancers, we
hypothesized that miR-29b might perform a prominent role
in the chemotherapy of cervical cancer.
Thus, we further detected the expression of miR29b in a cohort of 19 paired of cervical cancer tissues
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Ectopic expression of miR-29b inhibits
proliferation and invasion of cervical cancer cells
in vitro
From these analyses, we postulated that miR-29b
might perform as a tumor suppressor in cervical cancer.
To test this hypothesis, miR-29b overexpression models
were established in cervical cancer cell lines, HeLa and
Caski cells, by transiently transfection with miR-29b
mimic (Figure 2A). Then, we investigated the effects of
miR-29b overexpression on the proliferation rate of both
cell lines. As shown in Figure 2B, overexpression of miR29b suppressed the cell proliferation rates of both cells,
and resulted in a significant increased number of cells in
the G1-phase of cells cycle as well as a reduced amount
of S-phase cells (Figure 2C). The suppression of miR29b in the latter clinical stages of CC patients promoted
us to examine its effects on the invasive capacity of
HeLa and Caski cells. Transient miR-29b overexpression
significantly inhibited migration and invasion of both
HeLa and Caski cells as assessed by trans-well matrigel
migration and invasion assays, respectively (Figure 2D
14656

Oncotarget

Table 1: Relationship between miR-29b expression and their clinicopathological parameters in
cervical cancer patients
Clinicolpathological parameters

Number of cases

Expression of miR-29b

P-value

Age (years):
< 40
15
2.678 ± 1.185
0.918
≥ 40
7
2.486 ± 0.768
Histology:
Squamous-cell carcinoma
18
2.638 ± 1.003
0.958
Adenocarcinoma
4
2.520 ± 1.009
Tumor size before chemotherapy (cm):
<4
16
3.095 ± 1.114
0.360
≥4
6
1.341 ± 0.528
Nodal status:
Positive
20
2.268 ± 0.388
0.898
Negative
2
2.651 ± 0.917
Clinical stages:
Stage IB
5
6.984 ± 3.003
0.002**
Stage IIA and IIB
17
1.332 ± 0.243
HPV types:
HPV 16
19
2.594 ± 0.949
0.947
Other types
3
2.760 ± 1.386
Abbreviations: P-value represents the probability from a Student’s t-test for miR-29b expression between variable
subgroups. *P < 0.05 and **P < 0.01 were considered to have a significant difference.
and 2E). Overexpression of miR-29b significantly
inhibited cells passing through the trans-well chambers
in both experiments. These results further supported our
proposition that miR-29b performs as a tumor suppressor
in cervical cancer.

(VM), which would provide the nutrition for the tumors
cells in the central. The former has been identified using
the Matrigel chamber Transwell assays, which showed
overexpression of miR-124 inhibited cells passing through
the chambers coated with Matrigel. Thus, we further
explored the effects of miR-29b on formation of VM
using tube-like channel formation assays. As expected,
overexpression of miR-29b decreased approximately
50% and 48% of the tube-like channels in HeLa and Caski
cells, respectively (Figure 3C). These results demonstrated
that miR-29b not only performs suppressive effects on the
migratory and invasive capacity of cervical cancer cells,
but also inhibits its EMT and angiogenesis procedure.

Inducible miR-29b expression inhibits the EMT
procedure and angiogenesis of cervical cancer
The suppressive effects of miR-29b on the invasion
of cervical cancer made us speculate that whether it
performs impacts on the EMT procedure and angiogenesis
of cervical cancer, since both of which perform pivotal
role in tumor invasion and metastasis. As expected, cells
overexpressing miR-29b increased the expression of
epithelial markers (E-cadherin and KIRT1), and decreased
the expression of mesenchymal markers (N-cadherin
and SNAI2) (Figure 3A). The same results were further
identified by immunofluorescence staining assays. The
expression of epithelial marker, E-cadherin was induced
and localized to the plasma membrane in miR-124
treated cells. On the opposite, the mesenchymal marker
N-cadherin expression was notably decreased (Figure 3B).
The next important steps for tumor invasion are
the degradation of basal membranes and the extracellular
matrix (ECM), and formation of vasculogenic mimicry
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

miR-29b inhibits STAT3 expression through
binding to its 3′UTR
Although miR-29b tunes the expression of variety
genes, its mechanisms mediated in the regulation of
cervical cancer cells remain less known. Previous studies
have indicated that miR-29b directly targets signal
transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3), which
perform a pivotal role in the cellular signal pathway.
To comfier whether the miR-29b/STAT3 axis performs
function in cervical cancer, we analyzed the binding ability
of miR-29b to wild or mutant STAT3 3′UTR using the
14657

Oncotarget

Drug treatment of cisplatin suppresses cervical
cancer cell movement and angiogenesis via
regulating miR-29b/STAT3 axis

dual-luciferase reporter assays. Our results indicated that
miR-29b overexpression partly inhibited the transcriptional
activity of luciferase reporter containing mutant STAT3
3′UTR construct, but did not alter the luciferase activity
of the mutated reporter construct lacking the miR-29b
binding site (Figure 4A). Restored the expression of miR29b reduced the mRNA and protein level of STAT3 in
HeLa and Caski cervical cancer cells (Figure 4B and 4C).
Moreover, the active form of STAT3, phospho-STAT3
(p-STAT3), and two identified downstream genes of
STAT3, BCL-2 and MMP-2, were consistently suppressed
(Figure 4C), which demonstrated that STAT3 is a target
gene of miR-29b in cervical cancer cells.

To investigate whether cisplatin represented its
suppressive effects on cervical cancer via regulating miR29b/STAT3 axis, rescue assays were performed. In doing
so, inhibitor for miR-29b (anti-miR-29b) was transfected
into HeLa and Caski cells upon treatment with cisplatin
to re-modify the miR-29b-mediated STAT3 axis. As
shown in Figure 5A, cisplatin treatment led to an increase
of miR-29b expression which was further dampened by
anti-miR-29b transfection. We also observed that STAT3

Figure 1: miR-29b was up-regulated upon treatment with cisplatin. (A) Heat-map showing the expression profiles significantly

differentially expressed in HeLa and Caski cells upon treatment with miR-29b. (B) The expression of six miRNAs in HeLa and Caski
cells upon treatment with cisplatin was detected by quantitative RT-PCR. Data are shown as log10 of relative ratio change of the miRNAs
relative to GAPDH; (C) Statistical analysis of relative mean level of miR-29b expression in 19 paired of cervical cancer tissues before and
after chemotherapy with cisplatin; The expression of miR-29b was significantly increased upon treatment with cisplatin. (D) Statistical
analysis of relative mean level of miR-29b expression in cervical cancer, HSIL tissues and normal tissues. Statistical analysis of relative
mean level of miR-29b expression in a cohort of 22 cases of cervical cancers, 10 cases of high-grade squamous intraepithelial lesions
(HSIL) and 5 cases of normal cervical tissues. The expression of miR-29b was suppressed in CC and HSIL tissues compared to normal
tissues. (E) Statistical analysis of relative mean level of miR-29b expression in CC patients with different clinical stages. The expression
of miR-29b was suppressed in later stages (stages IB compared with stages IIA and IIB). The data are representative of at least three
independent experiments. Error bars represent s.e.m. **P < 0.01.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

14658

Oncotarget

protein as well its downstream genes, BCL2 and MMP2,
were all decreased upon drug treatment and increased with
anti-miR-29b transfection (Figure 5B). The following
immunoblot and invasion assays indicated that miR-29b
inhibition to prevent its induction by cisplatin treatment
led to increased epithelial phenotype and cell movement
(Figure 5B and 5C). Lastly, the similarity was also found in
vasculogenic mimicry assays, as anti-miR-29b significantly
restored the suppressive effects of cisplatin on vasculogenic
mimicry of HeLa and Caski cells (Figure 5D). These
findings suggest that the miR-29b-mediated STAT3 axis is
a target of cisplatin treatment in cervical cancer cells.

reduction in the average tumor volume and weight (Figure
6D). RT-PCR was adopted to confirm the expression
of miR-29b in HeLa cells from the tumor masses. As
expected, miR-29b was upregulated in the tumor masses
(Figure 6D), which demonstrated that the treatment is
effective. Moreover, the expression of p-STAT3 and VEGF,
which present the formation of vessel in tumor mass, was
significantly suppressed in miR-29b-injected tumors (Figure
6E). These results indicate that miR-29b reduces mouse
tumor growth and vasculogenic mimicry of cervical cancer
in vivo, and the STAT3 mediated signaling pathway was
involved in its suppressive effects.

Ectopic expression of miR-29b impairs the
xenografts formation of HeLa cells in vivo

DISCUSSION
Cisplatin is a front-line chemotherapeutic agent for
treating cervical cancer. Unfortunately, nearly 50% of CC
patients do not respond to the standard chemotherapy, and
these patients have a high recurrence rat and worse survival
in the first five years [10]. Thus, understanding the putative
mechanisms involved in chemotherapy of cisplatin might
provide new insights in the treatment of cervical cancer,

To validate the function of miR-29b in vivo, miR-29b
and relative scramble mimic were used to treat the mice
xenograft models where approximately HeLa cells were
subcutaneously injected into the immunocompromised mice
(Figure 6A). MiR-29b induced a slight inhibition of tumor
growth (Figure 6B and 6C), resulting in a significantly

Figure 2: miR-29b functions as a tumor suppressor in cervical cancer. (A) RT-PCR was performed to detect the expression of

miR-29b in cervical cancer cells upon transfection with miR-29b mimic; (B) CCK-8 assays were performed to analyze the effect of miR29b on cell proliferation of both cell lines. Overexpression of miR-29b suppressed the cell proliferation of both cell lines; (C) Cell cycle
analysis, by fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS) at 48h after transfection, were performed to analyze the effect of miR-29b on cell
cycle progression of both cell lines; (D, E) The effects of miR-29b on cell migration and invasion were detected using trans-well chamber
assays. Panel D showed the results on migration (×400); Panel E showed the results on invasion (×400). The data are representative of three
independent experiments. Error bars represent s.e.m. *P < 0.05; **P < 0.01.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

14659

Oncotarget

Figure 3: miR-29b suppressed the EMT procedure and angiogenesis of CC. (A) Western blot analysis of the expression of

epithelial and mesechymal marker proteins in cervical cancer cells transfected with miR-29b mimic was performed. (B) Immunofluorescence
staining assays were further used to detect the expression of E-cadherin and N-cadherin in cervical cancer cells. The expression of
N-cadherin was suppressed in cells transfected with miR-29b, while the expression of N-cadherin was increased in miR-29b group.
(C) Vasculogenic mimicry (VM) assays were performed to explored the effects of miR-29b on the angiogenesis of CC cells. Left panel
showed the represent images of vasculogenic mimicry; right panel showed the statistical significance of experiments. The data are
representative of three independent experiments. Error bars represent s.e.m. *P < 0.05; **P < 0.01.

Figure 4: STAT3 is the target gene of miR-29b. (A) Relative luciferase activity of the indicated STAT3 reporter construct in cervical

cancer cells, co-transfected with miR-29b mimic or scramble mimic, is shown; (B) Quantitation RT-PCR of the expression level of STAT3
mRNA in cervical cancer cells treated with miR-29b mimic; (C) Western blot analysis showed the expression level of STAT3 and its downstream
protein in CC cells treated with miR-29b mimic.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

14660

Oncotarget

Figure 5: miR-29b/STAT3 axis was involved in the chemotherapy of cisplatin. (A) The expression of miR-29b in cervical

cancer cells transfected with anti-miR-29b or scramble mimic after treated with cisplatin or PBS; (B) Western blot assays were performed
to explored the expression of STAT3, p-STAT3, MMP2, BCL2, E-cadherin, KIRT1, SNAI2 and N-cadherin in cervical cells showed in A;
(C) Matrigel invasion assays were performed to explore the effects of miR-29b on the invasion of CC cells showed in A; (D) vasculogenic
mimicry (VM) assays were performed to explored the effects of miR-29b on the angiogenesis of CC cells showed in A. The data are
representative of three independent experiments. Error bars represent s.e.m. *P < 0.05; **P < 0.01.

Figure 6: MiR-29b inhibits cervical cancer growth in vivo. (A) Graphic representing tumor volumes at the end of the experiment
for mice treated with miR-29b mimic or scramble mimic. Five mice per group; (B) Tumor volume averages between scramble and miR-29b
mimic treated mice groups at the indicated days during the experiment; (C) Tumor weight averages between scramble and miR-29b mimic
treated mice groups at the end of the experiment (28 days); (D) Quantitative RT-PCR analysis showed the relative expression of miR-29b
in injected tumor tissues (normalized to U6); (E) Representative images of the immunohistochemistry analysis of p-STAT3 and VEGF in
tumors from xenograft mice. Data are presented as means ± SD. **P < 0.01.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

14661

Oncotarget

especially the one with chemoresistance or non-response.
In this study, we reported a cohort of miRNAs dysregulated
upon treatment with cisplatin, from which miR-29b was
validated to be correlated with cisplatin chemotherapy, and
performed as a tumor suppressor through suppressing the
invasion and angiogenesis of cervical cancer cells.
MiR-29b belongs to the miR-29s family, which
was a subclass of “epi-miRNAs”, as they target a subset
of epigenetic regulators such as DNA methyltransferases
(DNMTs), histone deacetylases (HDACs), and revert
aberrant epigenetic alterations in cancers [11]; For
example miR-29b could turn off the synthesis of key
OBL-inhibitor proteins, TGFβ3 and HDAC4, allowing the
expression of Runx2 and suppression of the Wnt pathway
inhibitor catenin beta interacting protein 1 (CTNNBIP1),
thus contributes to the osteoblast differentiation [12].
However, the putative effects of miR-29b in cervical
cancer is still less known. Herein, we found that miR29b was suppressed in cervical cancer tissues and its
precancerous lesions, HSIL tissues. These results are
partially consistent with Li et al., who reported that
miR-29a was involved in HPV infection, and promoted
malignant transformation of CC cells through targeting
YY1 and CDK6 [13]. They also found that miR-29a was
significantly suppressed in cervical cancer tissues, while
they did not found any differences between the HSIL
and normal tissues. Thus, they proposed that aberrant
expression of miR-29a did not occur at the initial stage
of HPV infection prior to the morphology change. The
difference might due to the different HPV infection status
between two sample groups. Although we did not identify
the putative relation between miR-29b expression and
HPV infection, we found that miR-29b was involved in
chemotherapy of cisplatin, as treatment with cisplatin
could up-regulate the expression of miR-29b in cervical
cancer cells and tissues.
To further identify the mechanisms of miR-29b
involved in chemotherapy, we detected the effects of miR29b on the biological function of cervical cancer cells.
As expected, overexpression of miR-29b significantly
suppressed the cell proliferation and cell cycle progression
of both cervical cancer cells. On the other hand, since
the expression of miR-29b was related to the clinical
stages of cervical cancer, we proposed that miR-29b
might participate in the regulation of tumor invasion.
Not only the suppression on the migratory and invasive
capacity, but also rearrangements from a mesenchymal to
an epithelial-like state were found in cervical cancer cells
transfected with miR-29b. Tumor cells that undergo the
EMT procedure which makes cells gain a fibroblast-like
elongated morphology, and lose their cell-cell contacts,
were more resistant to chemotherapy, and these cells have
undergone mesenchymal-to-epithelial transition (MET) in
the metastatic organs [14]. For cervical cancer, EMT has
been reported to be associated with greater tumor invasion
and progression, and be associated with the expression of
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

EGFR, which plays a vital role in chemo and radiotherapy
responses [14]; Herein, we also found that miR-29b could
reverse the EMT procedure and inhibits the angiogenesis
of cervical cancer cells in vitro and in vivo, and miR-29b
inhibition could prevent the induction of cisplatin treatment
to epithelial phenotype and cell movement, as well as
vasculogenic mimicry formation. These data suggested
that miR-29b participated in the chemotherapy of cisplatin
through regulating the EMT procedure and angiogenesis
of cervical cancer cells. Thus, administration of miR-29b
mimic to cervical cancer patients may provide a novel
therapy to block cervical carcinogenesis and progression.
Lastly, to further figure out the putative mechanisms
involved in miR-29b-mediated suppressive effects, the target
genes of miR-29b were searched. Variety of oncogenes
have been reported to be target genes of miR-29b, among
of which, STAT3 attracted our attention most. STAT3
is a critical member of signal transducer and activator of
transcription (STAT) protein family. By modulating the
transcription of many genes that regulate a wide variety
of biological processes, including cell growth, apoptosis,
immune response and angiogenesis, the STAT3 oncoprotein
drives tumorigenesis in many tissue types, especially in the
gynecology tumors as we previously mentioned [5, 15]. We
identified that STAT3 was a functional target gene of miR29b in cervical cancer cells, and might be involved in the
miR-29b axis on cervical cancer chemotherapy of cisplatin.
Except for STAT3, VEGF, which plays a pivotal role in
promoting neovascularization, was reported to be another
target gene of miR-29b in endothelial cells [16]. This might
also explain the putative mechanisms involved in miR-29bmediated suppression on neovascularization of cervical
cancer. Moreover, cyclin-dependent kinase-6 (CDK6),
an important cell cycle-related protein that regulates the
phosphorylateion level of the downstream gene of p53,
Rb [17], was also reported to be the target gene of miR-29b.
Li Yang et al. proposed that miR-29b might participate in the
cervical carcinogenesis through targeting YY1 and CDK6,
since E6 and E7 oncoproteins encoded by HPV genome
could deregulate the cellular proliferation and apoptosis
through targeting p53 and pRb, respectively. This might
also be another important mechanism involved in miR29b-mediated cervical tumorigenesis, however, the exact
mechanisms involved need more experiments to identify.
Taken together, our work demonstrated that
chemotherapy with cisplatin-mediated expression of miR29b functions as a tumor suppressor through targeting STAT3
signal pathway mediated suppression on proliferation,
invasion, EMT procedure and angiogenesis of cervical cancer.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Patients and tissue specimens
A total of 22 cases of cervical cancer, 10 cases of
high-grade squamous intraepithelial lesions (HSIL) and 5
14662

Oncotarget

cases of normal cervical tissues were collected between
2014 and 2016 at Yongchuan Hospital of Chongqing
Medical University. The tissues of cervical cancer patients
were collected at the time of surgery and were confirmed
by pathologists. Among the cancer tissues, only 19 paired
of samples were collected when they were validated
and before chemotherapy. The detailed pathological and
clinical characteristics were supplied in Table 1. Upon
resection, human surgical specimens were immediately
frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at –80°C in the
refrigerator. The RNA of tissues was isolated from the
paraffin tissues of biopsy. All patients did not undergo
any therapy before recruitment to this research. Use of the
tissue samples for all experiments was approved by Ethics
Committee of the instruction.

cell sorting (FACS). All experiments were performed four
times and the average percentages of cells are shown.

Cell migration and invasion assays
Migration assays were carried out in modified
Boyden chambers (BD Biosciences, San Jose, CA,
USA) with 8 µm pore filter inserts in 24-well plates.
24 h after transfection, 2 × 105 cells suspended in serumfree medium were added to the upper chamber. Medium
containing 20% FBS were added to the lower chambers as
a chemoattractant. After 24 h transfection, the non-filtered
cells were gently removed with a cotton swab. Filtered
cells located on the lower side of the chamber were
stained with crystal violet, air-dried and photographed.
For analysis of invasive capacity, the transwell migration
chambers were coated with Matrigel (BD Biosciences, San
Jose, CA, USA) and incubated at 37°C for 3 h, allowing
it to solidify. After 24 h of transfection, 4 × 105 cells
suspended in serum-free medium were added to the upper
chamber. The remaining steps were the same as migration
assays. Three independent experiments were performed.

Cell culture and transfection
Human cervical caner cell lines (HeLa and Caski
cells) were obtained from the American Type Culture
Collection. These cell lines have been authenticated
(Hybribio Bioscience & Technology Inc., Guangzhou,
China). All cells were immediately expanded and frozen
such that they could be restarted every 3 to 4 months
from a frozen vial of the same batch of cells. HeLa and
Caski cells were maintained in DMEM medium (PAA,
Austria) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS;
PAA, Austria), streptomycin (100 µg/ml), and penicillin
(100 U/ml). All cells were incubated in a humidified
atmosphere of 5% CO2 at 37°C as previously reported.
MiR-29b/scramble mimic constructs were purchased
from Dharmacon (Austin, TX, USA). According
to manufacturer’s instructions, all oligonucleotides
were transfected into HeLa and Caski cells to a final
concentration of 50 nM by Dhamafect 1 (Dharmacon,
Lafayette, CO, USA). Cells were collected for further
experiments 48 h post-transfection.

RNA extraction and quantitative real-time PCR
For analysis the expression of relative miRNAs
in cervical cancer, total RNA was isolated from human
surgical specimens and cells according to the protocol of
Recover All Total Nucleic Acid Isolation Kit (Ambion,
Austin, TX, USA). Following gel electrophoresis
verification of RNA integrity, total RNA was reverse
transcribed using a First-Strand cDNA Synthesis kit
(Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA) with specific primers.
The expression of small nuclear U6 was used as internal
control. Then, quantitative real-time PCR was performed
to quantify relative expression of miRNAs using the
Quanti-Tect SYBR Green PCR mixture on an ABI PRISM
7900 Sequence Detection System (Applied Biosystems,
Carlsbad, CA, USA). For analysis of mRNA expression,
the expression of GAPDH was used as internal control and
Oligo (dT) was used as the primer for reverse transcription.
PCR efficiencies were calculated with a relative standard
curve derived from a complementary DNA mixture and
gave regression coefficients > 0.95. The relative expression
levels were evaluated using the 2−∆∆Ct method. All
experiments repeated four times. The primers mentioned
above were summarized in Supplementary Table 1.

Cell proliferation and FACS analyses
For cell proliferation analysis, HeLa and Caski
cells were seeded into 24-well plates at 8 × 103 cells
per well, and then incubated in 10% Cell Counting Kit8 buffer (CCK-8, Dojindo, Japan) diluted in normal
culture medium at 37°C until visible color conversion
occurred. The proliferation rate was determined 0, 24, 48,
and 72 h after transfection. The absorbance in each well
was measured at 450 nM and 630 nM using a microplate
reader. To analyze the effects of cisplatin, cells were
treated at concentrations of 0, 8, 16, 32, 64, 128 μM with
cisplatin for 24 h. The IC50 value was calculated as the
concentration of paclitaxel that reduced cell viability by
50%. For cell cycle analysis, cells were harvested 48 h
after transfection, washed twice with cold PBS, fixed in
ice-cold 70% ethanol, incubated with propidium iodide
and RNase A, and then analyzed by fluorescence-activated
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Luciferase reporter assays
To further identify the target role of STAT3, the
complete STAT3 3′UTRs were amplified from genomic
DNA and cloned into the pGL-3-vector (Promega, San
Luis, CA, USA), respectively. The QuickChange SiteDirected Mutagenesis kit (Stratagene, Santa Clara, CA,
USA) was used to mutate the 3′UTRs of both target genes.
14663

Oncotarget

The luciferase reporter construct containing the miR-29b
consensus target sequence served as a positive control
(PC). About 1 × 105 cells per well were seeded into 24well plates and grown for 24 h prior to transfection. Cells
were transfected with the pGL-3 firefly luciferase reporter
(50 ng per well), pRL-TK Renilla luciferase reporter (10
ng per well), and the miR-29b mimics (50 nM). The pRLTK vector served as an internal control. All transfections
were carried out in triplicate using Lipofectamine 2000
(Invitrogen, USA). Cell lysates were prepared using Passive
Lysis Buffer (Promega, San Luis, CA, USA) 48 h after
transfection, and luciferase activity was measured using the
Dual-Luciferase Reporter Assay (Promega, San Luis, CA,
USA) and normalized to Renilla luciferase activity.

antibodies (1:200; Cell Signaling Technology Company)
overnight at 4°C. The primary antibody was detected
using anti-rabbit-Alexa 594-conjugated antibodies (1:200;
Invitrogen). To detect nuclei, cells were co-stained with 4’,
6-diamidino-2-phenylindole. Fluorescence was observed
and imaged using a Nikon Eclipse TE300 confocal laser
microscope.

In vivo assays
Five-week-old BALB/C-nu/nu nude male mice were
used for animal studies, and all animals were maintained in
the pathogen-free conditions at our institution. For animal
xengraft model assays, ten mice were divided into two
groups randomly. 2 × 106 HeLa cells were subcutaneously
injected into the posterior flanks of each mice. When
tumors reached 50 mm3, miR-29b or scramble mimic
(100 nmol) was suspended in Lipofectamine 2000 (100 μl)
and was injected into the tumors directly every 3 days for
a total of 7 times. Tumor diameters were measured after
7 days from injection and then every 3 days. At 28 days
after injection, mice were killed and tumors were weighted
after necropsy. Tumor volume was calculated as follows:
length × width2 × 1/2. The mice xenograft model assays
were performed according to institutional guidelines.

Westernblot analysis
For the westernblot assay, cells were harvested in icecold PBS 48 h after transfection and lysed on ice in coldmodified radioimmunoprecipitation buffer supplemented
with protease inhibitors. Protein concentration was
determined using the BCA Protein Assay Kit (Bio-Rad,
CA, USA) and equal amounts of protein were analyzed by
SDS-PAGE. Gels were electroblotted onto nitrocellulose
membranes (Millipore, WI, USA). After blocked with
5% non-fat dry milk in Tris-buffered saline containing
0.1% Tween-20 2 h, membranes were incubated at 4℃
over night with primary antibody. Primary antibodies
used were anti-STAT3, anti-p-STAT3, anti-MMP2, antiBCL2, anti-E-cadherin, anti-KIRT1, anti-SNAI2, anti-Ncadherin (Cell Signaling, USA) and GAPDH (Zhong-Shan
JinQiao, China). Then, membranes were incubated with
respective second antibodies and detected by peroxidaseconjugated secondary antibodies using the enhanced
chemiluminescence system (ECL) (Millipore, WI, USA).
The experiment was repeated three times.

Statistical analysis
Data were expressed as the mean ± standard
deviation of at least three independent experiments.
Statistical analysis was carried out using SPSS 15.0
software. The Student’s t-test was used for comparisons
between two groups, and analysis of variance was used
for comparisons among three groups. The chi-squared test
was used for occurrence analysis. P values of less than 0.05
were considered to be significant.

Vasculogenic mimicry formation assays

Abbreviations

To test the effects of miR-29b on the formation of
vasculogenic mimicry of cervical cancer cells, Matrigel was
plated on the 24-well plate, and 5 × 105 HeLa and Caski
cells were seeded on it. Twelve hours after seeding, the
tube-like structures were examined by light microscopy,
photographed and counted.

cervical cancer (CC); epithelial to mesenchymal
transition (EMT); microRNAs (miRNAs); 3’-untranslated
region (3’UTR); high-risk human papilloma viral (hrHPV);
radiotherapy (RT); high-grade squamous intraepithelial
lesions (HSIL); extracellular matrix (ECM); vasculogenic
mimicry (VM); DNA methyltransferases (DNMTs); histone
deacetylases (HDACs); catenin beta interacting protein 1
(CTNNBIP1); mesenchymal-to-epithelial transition (MET);
signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT);
cyclin-dependent kinase-6 (CDK6); Cell Counting Kit8 (CCK-8); fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS);
enhanced chemiluminescence system (ECL).

Immunofluorescent staining
Cervical cancer cells were seeded onto coverslips
in six-well culture plates and transiently transfected
with miR-29b or scramble mimic. Cells were fixed with
4% paraformaldehyde at room temperature for 20 min,
washed in PBS, permeabilized with PBS containing 0.1%
Triton X-100 (PBS-T) at room temperature for 90 min,
and blocked with 1% BSA in PBS-T. Cells were then
incubated with human anti-E-cadherin and anti-N-cadherin
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This project is supported by National Natural Science
Foundation of China (Grant No. 81502329); Program of
14664

Oncotarget

Science and Technology of Chongqing Commission (Grant
No. KJ1600228); the National Natural Science Foundation
of Yongchuan District (Grant No. Ycstc, 2014nc5004);
Programs of Yongchuan Hospital of Chongqing Medical
University (Grant Nos. YJYB20120012; YJZQN 201514;
YCZQN 201511).

cells by targeting EZH2. Biochem Biophys Res Commun.
2016; 479:91–96.
  9.	 Pedroza-Torres A, Fernandez-Retana J, Peralta-Zaragoza O,
Jacobo-Herrera N, Cantu de Leon D, Cerna-Cortes JF, LopezCamarilloC, Perez-Plasencia C. A microRNA expression
signature for clinical response in locally advanced cervical
cancer. Gynecol Oncol. 2016; 142:557–565.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST

10.	 Green JA, Kirwan JM, Tierney JF, Symonds P, Fresco L,
CollingwoodM, Williams CJ. Survival and recurrence after
concomitant chemotherapy and radiotherapy for cancer of
the uterine cervix: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
Lancet (London, England). 2001; 358:781–786.

None declared.

Author's contributions

11.	 Amodio N, Rossi M, Raimondi L, Pitari MR, Botta C,
TagliaferriP, Tassone P. miR-29s: a family of epi-miRNAs
with therapeutic implications in hematologic malignancies.
Oncotarget. 2015; 6:12837–12861. doi: 10.18632/
oncotarget.3805.

Qin Zhou and Xiaojing Zhang: study design and
data interpretation; Yunyun Li and Zhongzu Zhang:
acquisition of data, analysis and interpretation of data,
and manuscript preparation; Zhenghua Xiao, Ying Lin and
Tangshu Luo: acquisition of data.

12.	 Li Z, Hassan MQ, Jafferji M, Aqeilan RI, Garzon R,
Croce CM, van Wijnen AJ, Stein JL, SteinGS, Lian JB.
Biological functions of miR-29b contribute to positive
regulation of osteoblast differentiation. J Biol Chem. 2009;
284:15676–15684.

REFERENCES
1.	 Ginsburg O, Bray F, Coleman MP, Vanderpuye V, Eniu A,
Kotha SR, Sarker M, Huong TT, Allemani C, Dvaladze A,
Gralow J, Yeates K, Taylor C, et al. The global burden of
women’s cancers: a grand challenge in global health. Lancet
(London, England). 2016.
2.	

13.	 Li Y, Wang F, Xu J, Ye F, Shen Y, Zhou J, Lu W, Wan X,
MaD, Xie X. Progressive miRNA expression profiles in
cervical carcinogenesis and identification of HPV-related
target genes for miR-29. J Pathol. 2011; 224:484–495.

Yang A, Farmer E, WuTC, Hung CF. Perspectives for therapeutic
HPV vaccine development. J Biomed Sci. 2016; 23:75.

14.	 Fischer KR, Durrans A, Lee S, Sheng J, Li F, Wong ST,
Choi H, El Rayes T, Ryu S, Troeger J, Schwabe RF,
Vahdat LT, Altorki NK, MittalV, Gao D. Epithelial-tomesenchymal transition is not required for lung metastasis but
contributes to chemoresistance. Nature. 2015; 527:472–476.

3.	 Rosa DD, Medeiros LR, Edelweiss MI, PohlmannPR,
Stein AT. Adjuvant platinum-based chemotherapy for early
stage cervical cancer. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2012;
CD005342.

15.	 Li Y, Zhang Z, Liu X, Huang T, He W, Shen Y, Liu X,
HongK, Cao Q. miR-124 functions as a tumor suppressor
in the endometrial carcinoma cell line HEC-1B partly by
suppressing STAT3. Mol Cell Biochem. 2014; 388:219–231.

4.	 Kong YW, Ferland-McCollough D, JacksonTJ, Bushell M.
microRNAs in cancer management. Lancet Oncol. 2012;
13:e249–258.
5.	 Cao Q, Li YY, He WF, Zhang ZZ, Zhou Q, Liu X, ShenY,
Huang TT. Interplay between microRNAs and the STAT3
signaling pathway in human cancers. Physiol Genomics.
2013; 45:1206–1214.
6.	

16.	 Zhang K, Cai HX, Gao S, Yang GL, Deng HT, Xu GC, Han J,
ZhangQZ, Li LY. TNFSF15 suppresses VEGF production
in endothelial cells by stimulating miR-29b expression
via activation of JNK-GATA3 signals. Oncotarget. 2016;
7:69436–69449. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.11683.

Bartel DP. MicroRNAs: genomics, biogenesis, mechanism,
and function. Cell. 2004; 116:281–297.

17.	 Zhang Z, Li Y, Huang L, Xiao Q, Chen X, Zhong J, Chen Y,
Yang D, Han Z, Shu Y, DaiM, Cao K. Let-7a suppresses
macrophage infiltrations and malignant phenotype of Ewing
sarcoma via STAT3/NF-kappaB positive regulatory circuit.
Cancer Lett. 2016; 374:192–201.

7.	 Yan LH, Chen ZN, Li L, Chen J, Wei WE, Mo XW,
Qin YZ, LinY, Chen JS. miR-135a promotes gastric cancer
progression and resistance to oxaliplatin. Oncotarget. 2016;
7:70699–70714. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.12208.
8.	

Wang P, Li Z, Liu H, Zhou D, FuA, Zhang E. MicroRNA-126
increases chemosensitivity in drug-resistant gastric cancer

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

14665

Oncotarget

