2322

CORRESPONDENCE

Duration of Testosterone Suppression and the
Risk of Death From Prostate Cancer in Men
Treated With Radiation and
6 Months of Hormone Therapy

W

e would like to thank Dr. D’Amico and his coauthors for elucidating a link between duration of androgen suppression after
hormone therapy and risk of death from prostate cancer.1 Although
all men in their study received 6 months of hormone therapy, a prolonged physiological effect from hormone therapy predicted
improved prostate-cancer–speciﬁc survival. This is analogous to
data from literature on breast cancer and hormone therapy.
Tamoxifen is metabolized to endoxifen, which may be tamoxifen’s
most active metabolite, on the basis of individual cytochrome activity. In women who are prescribed equal doses of tamoxifen, individual rates of metabolism to endoxifen are predictive of relapse
risk.2 In both of these studies, clinical outcome depended on individual exposure to the intended ‘‘agent’’ (estrogen blockade or testosterone blockade) rather than on the dose and duration of the
prescription.
The phenomenon of prolonged androgen suppression after cessation of hormone therapy in a cohort of patients from our institution was previously reported in Cancer.3 In that study, we
demonstrated that factors associated with prolonged androgen suppression included advanced age, low baseline testosterone, and use
of 3-month luteinizing-hormone–releasing hormone agonists
(LHRH-a), compared to 1-month LHRH-a. In response to the current article by D’Amico et al, we analyzed outcomes—disease-speciﬁc survival and overall survival—for the same cohort that we have
described previously.3 Prognostic factors including age, prostatespeciﬁc antigen (PSA), stage, Gleason score, radiotherapy dose,
treatment year, hormone therapy duration, and androgen suppression duration (with recovery deﬁned as 5 nmol/L testosterone) were
examined by using Cox univariate and multivariate analyses. In the
cohort as a whole, androgen-suppression duration after the end of
hormone therapy was not predictive of outcomes. However, in men
with Gleason scores of 8–10, androgen-suppression duration was
the only predictor of disease-speciﬁc survival (hazard ratio [HR],
0.89 per month of androgen suppression; P ¼ .035), and androgensuppression duration showed a trend toward prediction of overall
survival (HR, 0.93 per month of androgen suppression; P ¼ .06). In
contrast, hormone therapy duration did not predict either outcome.
These results support ﬁndings by D’Amico and colleagues.
D’Amico et al’s article has drawn attention to the fact that as
oncologists, we should endeavor to go beyond universally prescribed doses of hormonal agents. Further research should attempt
to titrate these drugs to achieve the necessary effect in our patients,
to maximize beneﬁt, and to simultaneously minimize exposure to
adverse effects.
ª 2008 American Cancer Society

Correspondence

REFERENCES
1.

2.

3.

D’Amico AV, Renshaw AA, Loffredo B, Chen MH. Duration
of testosterone suppression and the risk of death from
prostate cancer in men treated using radiation and
6 months of hormone therapy. Cancer. 2007;110:1723–1728.
Goetz MP, Rae JM, Suman VJ, et al. Pharmacogenetics of
tamoxifen biotransformation is associated with clinical
outcomes of efﬁcacy and hot ﬂashes. J Clin Oncol. 2005;
23:9312–9318.
Pickles T, Agranovich A, Berthelet E et al. Testosterone recovery following prolonged adjuvant androgen ablation for
prostate carcinoma. Cancer. 2002;94:362–367.

David Palma, MD
Tom Pickles, MD
Radiation Oncology Program
British Columbia Cancer Agency
Vancouver, British Columbia
Canada
DOI 10.1002/cncr.23423
Published online 7 March 2008 in Wiley InterScience
(www.interscience.wiley.com).

Reply to Duration of Testosterone
Suppression and the Risk of Death
From Prostate Cancer in Men
Treated Using Radiation and 6
Months of Hormone Therapy

ing that some, but not all, men beneﬁted from 3 years
of hormone therapy. Because the median age was 69
years, it is possible that only the younger men may
have beneﬁted as their TTR after 6 months of hormone
therapy would be expected to be shorter than that of
the older men.1 This hypothesis has generated a subgroup analysis, which is underway. Moreover, a
report4 from an analysis of Radiation Therapy Oncology Group trials has shown a signiﬁcant association
between a shorter time to metastasis and younger
age after adjusting for hormone therapy duration and
known prognostic factors. Therefore, although a prospective study proving causation is needed, it
appears that survival time is determined by the
length of testosterone suppression and not simply
the length of hormone therapy administration.

REFERENCES
1.

2.

3.

4.

oncerning our study,1 we would like to thank
Dr’s Palma and Pickles for their letter, which
validates the association they2 noted in men who have
Gleason score 8 to 10 prostate cancers. Speciﬁcally, after adjusting for known prognostic factors, we noted a
signiﬁcant association between the risk of prostatecancer–speciﬁc mortality and the time to testosterone
rebound (TTR) in men who were undergoing radiation
therapy and 6 months of hormonal therapy for prostate cancer. Lending further support to this association
are results of the European Organization for Research
in the Treatment of Cancer randomized trial,3 which
compared radiation therapy and 3 years of hormone
therapy to radiation therapy and 6 months of hormone
therapy. Whereas the equivalence of overall survival
between the 2 randomized treatment arms was not
shown, superiority was also not shown, thus suggest-

C

2323

D’Amico AV, Renshaw AA, Loffredo M, Chen MH. Duration
of testosterone suppression and the risk of death from
prostate cancer in men treated using radiation and 6
months of hormone therapy. Cancer. 2007;110:1723–1728.
Pickles T, Agranovich A, Berthelet E, et al. Testosterone recovery following prolonged androgen ablation for prostate
carcinoma. Cancer. 2002;94:362–367.
Bolla M, van Tienhoven G, de Reijke TM, et al. Concomitant and adjuvant androgen deprivation (ADT) with
external beam irradiation (RT) for locally advanced prostate cancer: 6 months versus 3 years ADT—results of the
randomized EORTC phase III trial 22961 [abstract]. J
Clin Oncol. ASCO Annual Meeting Proceedings Part I.
2007;25:(June 20 suppl). Abstract 5014.
Parikh PJ, Bae K, Hanks GE, Shipley WU, Pilepich MV,
Sandler HM. The inﬂuence of age as a predictor of outcome in prostate cancer patients treated on RTOG Trials
[abstract]. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. American Society
for Therapeutic Radiology and Oncology 49th Annual
Meeting. 2007;69:(suppl S). Abstract S175.

Anthony V. D’Amico, MD, PhD
Department of Radiation Oncology
Dana Farber Cancer Institute
Brigham and Women’s Hospital
Boston, Massachusetts
Ming-Hui Chen, PhD
Department of Statistics
University of Connecticut
Storrs, Connecticut
DOI 10.1002/cncr.23426
Published online 7 March 2008 in Wiley InterScience
(www.interscience.wiley.com).

