Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No. 1

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Editorial

Mcl-1 and tumor cell persistence
Lukas W. Pfannenstiel and Brian R. Gastman
Comment on: Jonchère B, et al. Irinotecan treatment and senescence failure promote the emergence of more transformed and
invasive cells that depend on anti-apoptotic Mcl-1. Oncotarget. 2015 Jan 1;6(1):409-26.

Effective genotoxic cancer therapies induce not
only classical apoptotic cell death, but also senescence, a
persistent state of cell cycle arrest accompanied by distinct
morphological and biochemical changes. A number of
studies in both animal and human models demonstrate that
senescence plays a key role in limiting tumor growth and
correlate with favorable clinical responses and prognosis
[1,2]. As a result, the induction of senescence is now
recognized as a primary target for a number of established
chemotherapy drugs and experimental therapies [3].
Tumor suppressor genes (TSGs) like p53 and Rb
are major upstream inducers of senescence in response
to a variety of stresses, including chemotherapy and
oncogenic activation. Consequently, the functional losses
of TSGs are key events in the process of oncogenesis.
Chemotherapy induced senescence, however, can occur
even in the absence of TSGs, adding to the complexity
of senescence induction. When and how chemotherapyinduced senescence creates a true permanent growth arrest
and not merely quiescence (a reversible state) remains
controversial. Clinically, chemotherapy can induce
histologic findings of senescence that can be correlated
with treatment success in many cancer types. However,
these lines of therapies are also observed to arrest tumor
growth for a period of time, only to later give way to rapid
cancer proliferation similar to a quiescent state giving rise
to a period of adaptation.
Mcl-1 and Bcl-xL are pro-survival proteins of the
Bcl-2 family and are well-known for their anti-apoptotic
activity via their shared Bcl-2 homology (BH) binding
domains. Mcl-1 and Bcl-xL are highly conserved, and
the loci containing these genes are amplified in a wide
variety of human cancers [4]. Recent studies have also
found a novel anti-senescence activity unique to Mcl-1
that appears to be mediated by a domain outside of the
BH binding pocket [5].
A recent study by Barbara Jonchére and colleagues
further explores the relationship between Mcl-1/BclxL expression and apparently reversible forms of
chemotherapy-induced senescence in colorectal cancer
(CRC) cells [6]. Building upon their previous work on
oncogenic-RAS mediated senescence in HCT116 and
LS174T CRC cells, the authors induced senescence in
these cells by treatment with the active metabolite of
irinotecan, a topoisomerase I inhibitor used as a frontline

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

therapeutic for colorectal cancer. After treatment, both
cell lines underwent senescence. Subsequent culture of
treated cells in colony assays revealed a small population
of cells that persisted through irinotecan treatment and
resumed growth. Though these persistent cells were
still largely senescent in vitro based on standard assays,
they readily formed xenograft tumors in mice with
growth kinetics identical to untreated cells. Interestingly,
persistent LS174T cells appeared more transformed
and invasive than untreated cells in that they contained
a large percentage of cells with polyploid DNA content
and readily grew in low-adherence soft-agar and matrigel
culture assays. Persistent cells were determined to not
express any known colorectal cancer stem cell or cancer
initiating cell (CIC) markers, and were not sensitive to
treatment with salinomycin, a compound known to be
specifically toxic to colorectal CIC.
Building on their work with oncogene induced
senescence, Jonchére et al. evaluated the expression
of both Bcl-xL and Mcl-1 in this model. Both proteins
were found to be selectively enhanced in these
irinotecan-treated, persistent cells. Knockdown of Mcl1 by siRNA and the inhibition of Bcl-xL by chemical
inhibitor (ABT-737) significantly increased cell death
and decreased the number of persistent cells. Perhaps
most intriguingly, persistent LS174T cells were found to
consist of two populations based on apparent senescent
state: a more “senescent” population that demonstrated
higher β-galactosidase activity and p21 expression; and a
population that more closely resembled dividing cells with
less senescence markers, and greater proliferative capacity
in normal clonogenic assays. Contrary to appearances,
however, it was the more “senescent” population that
demonstrated higher Mcl-1 and Bcl-xL expression, as well
as significantly greater growth in soft agar and matrigel
assays.
The mechanism by which the heterogeneity that
arises in LS174T cells during chemotherapy treatment
remains undefined. It is clear, however, that this
heterogeneity can affect the sensitivity of individual cells
to treatment-induced senescence and apoptosis. Although
this finding is consistent with the classic observation
that senescent cells are relatively resistant to apoptotic
signals, it is novel in that they can later proliferate in such
an aggressive manner. It is not surprising that Mcl-1 and

5

Oncotarget

Bcl-xL were found to be significant in the development
of persistence after drug treatment as both are known to
contribute to resistance to drug treatment [7]. Failure of
irinotecan treatment in colorectal cancer is a well-known
clinical phenomenon, and the study by Jonchére et al.
suggests that development of more efficacious treatment
regimens can still include the induction of senescence
but would have to address the development of small
populations of persistent cells through targeting Bcl-2
family members, like Bcl-xL and Mcl-1. This study adds to
the growing acceptance amongst clinicians and scientists
that multiple simultaneous combination therapies will be
required to enhance multiple forms of cellular demise in
order to maximize clinical outcome.
Brian R. Gastman: Lerner Research Institute Department
of Immunology, Dermatology and Plastic Surgery
Institute, Taussig Cancer Center, and Head and Neck
Institute, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH
Correspondence: Brian R. Gastman, email gastmab@ccf.
org
Received: December 19, 2014
Published: December 26, 2014

REFERENCES
1.	

Haugstetter AM et al., Br J Cancer. 2010; 103(4):505-9.

2.	

Kuilman T et al. Genes Dev. 2010; 24(22):2463-79.

3.	 Nardella C et al. Nature Reviews Cancer. 2011; 11: 503511.
4.	

Beroukhim R et al., Nature. 2010; 4:899–905.

5.	

Bolesta E et al., Mol Cell Biol. 2012; 4:1879–1892.

6.	

Jonchére B et al., Oncotarget. 2015 Jan 1;6(1):409-26.

7.	

Wei G et al., Cancer Cell. 2012;4:547–562.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

6

Oncotarget

