Editorial

Lung Cancer in China: The New Frontier?
Suresh S. Ramalingam, MD and Fadlo R. Khuri, MD

Fadlo R. Khuri, MD and Suresh S. Ramalingam, MD. Photo credit: Jack Kearse, Emory University.

The burden of lung cancer has started to decline in the United States in recent years.1 In contrast, in China, the world’s
most populous nation, nearly 650,000 new cases are diagnosed each year, with an estimated 1 million new cases expected
to be diagnosed in the year 2025.2 These staggering statistics call for urgent action at multiple levels of society to reduce
the burden of lung cancer in China. Efforts to reduce cigarette smoking and early detection with computed tomography
screening among high-risk individuals must therefore be undertaken on an unprecedented scale. Given the high prevalence of smoking and the size of the population at risk, one cannot underestimate the complexity and scale of the efforts
required to accomplish these objectives. At the same time, a greater understanding of the molecular characteristics of lung
cancer among the Chinese patient population and the development of novel therapeutic options tailored to these individuals should be accorded high priority.
In this special issue of Cancer focused on lung cancer in China, Gou et al described the differences in driver mutations between patients with non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) with and without a history of cigarette smoking.3
Although certain driver mutations occur at a similar frequency as in the Western population with lung cancer, epidermal
growth factor receptor (EGFR) mutations are more common. In a series of 506 patients with NSCLC, EGFR mutations
were observed in 15% of smokers and 45% of never-smokers.4 The prevalence of anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK),
ROS1, human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER-2), and RET gene abnormalities are similar to those of the Western patient population. Among smoking-related lung cancers, phosphatase and tensin homolog (PTEN) loss, BRAF and
discoidin domain receptor tyrosine kinase 2 (DDR2) mutations, and fibroblast growth factor receptor (FGFR) amplifications were frequently present. Furthermore, smoking-related lung cancers are associated with a higher mutation burden
and complex genetic aberrations. Although many of these findings have been reported previously, the overview by Gou
et al provides an excellent snapshot of the genomic landscape of lung cancer in Chinese patients. It reinforces the notion
that lung cancers in never-smokers tend to be genetically less complex, with a higher likelihood of harboring a “driver”
mutation. Conversely, although the mutation load is higher in patients with tobacco-related lung cancer, few of them are
Corresponding author: Suresh S. Ramalingam MD, Director of Medical Oncology, 1365 Clifton Road NE, Room C-3090, Atlanta, GA 30322; Fax: (404) 778-5520;
suresh.ramalingam@emory.edu
See referenced original articles on pages 3069-79, 3089-96, and 3146-56.
Department of Hematology and Medical Oncology, Winship Cancer Institute, Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia
DOI: 10.1002/cncr.29569, Received: June 22, 2015; Accepted: June 22, 2015, Published online September 1, 2015 in Wiley Online Library (wileyonlinelibrary.
com)

3058

Cancer

September 1, 2015

Lung Cancer in China: The New Frontier?/Ramalingam and Khuri

driver events and therefore are less amenable to direct inhibition of a single target. An ongoing study in the United
States (S1400) is to our knowledge the first large-scale
attempt to evaluate the therapeutic usefulness of targeting
amplification of FGFR, phosphatidylinositol-4,5bisphosphate 3-kinase, catalytic subunit alpha (PIK3CA)
mutation, and cyclin-dependent kinases (CDK) pathway
aberrations in patients with squamous cell lung cancer
(ClinicalTrials.gov identifier NCT02154490). It is likely
that novel combination approaches will be necessary to
achieve favorable therapeutic outcomes in patients with a
heavy mutation burden acquired from cigarette smoking.
The review by Liu et al provides an excellent summary of targeted agents currently under development for
lung cancer in Chinese patients.5 The authors noted that
nearly 53% of patients with NSCLC in China do not harbor a driver mutation and currently are treated with
chemotherapy. A number of novel agents that are specifically being developed in China, and are not familiar to the
Western world, are described in their review. In particular,
multiple agents that inhibit the vascular endothelial
growth factor receptor (VEGFR) pathway are being developed in China. Given the limited success of multikinase
inhibitors in the West in patients with advanced NSCLC,
the particular relevance of this strategy in China is questionable at best. It is more likely that the new mutationspecific EGFR inhibitors such as avitinib are likely to find
a place in the treatment algorithm in China, given the target specificity and the clinical efficacy of agents of this
class in patients with acquired resistance to EGFR tyrosine
kinase inhibitors.6
Among the first-generation EGFR inhibitors, icotinib hydrochloride is an indigenously developed EGFR inhibitor in China. In a phase 3 study of icotinib versus
gefitinib, the former was associated with comparable efficacy and a slightly more favorable tolerability profile.7
This allows Chinese patients access to an effective EGFR
inhibitor at a lower cost. In another article in this special
issue, Ni et al reported on a phase 1 study of icotinib in
patients with advanced NSCLC.8 They conducted
detailed pharmacokinetic analyses and observed some intriguing correlations between certain pharmacokinetic parameters and efficacy. Given the small sample size (30
patients) in their study, these observations are hard to generalize and require confirmation in larger studies. The relatively small number of patients with EGFR mutations
also limits the findings of this phase 1 study. The efficacy
results are consistent with prior reports with EGFR inhibitors in this patient population, although relatively little
information has been provided regarding the dose delivCancer

September 1, 2015

ery, duration of therapy, and dose reductions from toxicity. Of concern, 3 patients in the study by Ni et al
developed pulmonary toxicity, including a grade 5 event.5
Notably, in this phase 3 study of icotinib versus gefitinib,
no cases of pulmonary toxicity were observed. The higher
predilection of Asian patients to develop pulmonary toxicity with EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors has been
reported previously. It appears that icotinib is no
exception.
These 3 articles provide a number of insights that
will be critical for drug development against lung cancer
in China. Given the limited success of antiangiogenic
therapies in patients with lung cancer, the wisdom of
developing more agents with minimal differences from
currently existing compounds of this class is misdirected
and will result in an inappropriate use of resources. Conversely, drugs such as icotinib will provide meaningful
benefits to Chinese patients at a lower cost. Comparative
studies to assess the efficacy of icotinib in patients with an
EGFR mutation will be necessary to guide the optimal use
of this agent.
Given the magnitude of the problem, several important steps should be taken to accelerate research efforts
directed toward lung cancer in China. Drug development
focused on new targets should be preferred over additional
agents for a well-established target. The CLUSTER study,
which was initiated in China in 2014, uses an umbrella
design to match to specific targets based on their molecular profile (ClinicalTrials.gov identifier NCT02276027).
Such efforts should be expanded to identify new
approaches and combinations for the treatment of lung
cancer. In conjunction with efforts to develop new agents,
studies should be undertaken to examine barriers to participation in clinical trials among Chinese patients, which
currently appear to be limited to a disturbingly small percentage of individuals. Increasing the percentage of
patients participating in clinical trials will help to accelerate the pace of drug development in China and elsewhere.
As observed by Liu et al,5 the regulatory process for drugs
should be streamlined to allow for faster review and approval of efficacious agents. The recent success of immune
checkpoint inhibitors in lung cancer calls for the rapid
evaluation of these agents in the Chinese patient population. China is home to advanced technology, prestigious
academic institutions, outstanding cadres of physician
investigators, and a successful economy. It is critical to leverage all of these strengths into effective public health
policy, research, education, and health care delivery to
address the lung cancer issue in China. A problem of this
magnitude deserves nothing less.
3059

Editorial

FUNDING SUPPORT
No specific funding was disclosed.

CONFLICT OF INTEREST DISCLOSURES
The authors made no disclosures.

REFERENCES
1. Siegel RL, Miller KD, Jemal A. Cancer statistics, 2015. CA Cancer J
Clin. 2015;65:5-29.
2. Chen W, Zheng R, Zeng H, Zhang S, He J. Annual report on status
of cancer in China, 2011. Chin J Cancer Res. 2015;27:2-12.
3. Gou L, Niu F, Wu Y, Zhong W. Differences in Driver Genes
Between Smoking-Related and Non–Smoking-Related Lung Cancer
in the Chinese Population. Cancer. 2015;121:3069-3079.

3060

4. Wu YL, Zhong WZ, Li LY, et al. Epidermal growth factor receptor
mutations and their correlation with gefitinib therapy in patients with
non-small cell lung cancer: a meta-analysis based on updated individual patient data from six medical centers in mainland China. J Thorac
Oncol. 2007;2:430-439.
5. Liu S, Mok T, Wu YL. Novel targeted agents for the treatment of
lung cancer in China. Cancer. 2015;121:3089-3096.
6. Janne PA, Yang JC, Kim DW, et al. AZD9291 in EGFR inhibitorresistant non-small-cell lung cancer. N Engl J Med. 2015;372:16891699.
7. Shi Y, Zhang L, Liu X, et al. Icotinib versus gefitinib in previously
treated advanced non-small-cell lung cancer (ICOGEN): a randomised, double-blind phase 3 non-inferiority trial. Lancet Oncol. 2013;
14:953-961.
8. Ni J, Liu D, Hu B, et al. Relationship between icotinib hydrochloride
exposure and clinical outcome in Chinese patients with advanced
non-small cell lung cancer. Cancer. 2015;121:3146-3156.

Cancer

September 1, 2015

