Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No. 19

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

CEMTDD: The database for elucidating the relationships among
herbs, compounds, targets and related diseases for Chinese
ethnic minority traditional drugs
Jian Huang1,*, Yaxin Zheng1,*, Wenxi Wu1,*, Tao Xie2, Hong Yao1, Xiaobo Pang1,
Fuzhou Sun1, Liang Ouyang2, Jinhui Wang1,3
1

 ey Laboratory of Structure-Based Drug Design & Discovery of Ministry of Education, School of Traditional Chinese Materia
K
Medica, Shenyang Pharmaceutical University, Shenyang, China

2

 tate Key Laboratory of Biotherapy, Collaborative Innovation Center of Biotherapy, West China Hospital, Sichuan University,
S
Chengdu, China

3

School of Pharmacy, Shihezi University, Shihezi, China

*

These authors have contributed equally to this work

Correspondence to:
Jinhui Wang, e-mail: profwjh@126.com
Liang Ouyang, e-mail: ouyangliang@scu.edu.cn
Keywords: chinese ethnic minority traditional drug (CEMTD), xinjiang uygur autonomous region, database, herb, gerontology
Received: March 16, 2015 	Accepted: April 06, 2015 	Published: April 20, 2015

ABSTRACT
China has different ethnic minorities that establish their own medical
systems and practice experience for thousand years, thereafter named Chinese Ethnic
Minority Traditional Drugs (CEMTDs) (http://www.cemtdd.com/index. html). Since
many compounds from CEMTDs have been reported to perturb human’s dysfunction
network and restore human normal physiological conditions, the relationships
amongst a series of compounds from specific herbs, their targets and relevant
diseases have become our main focus in CEMTD modernization. Herein, we have
constructed the first Chinese Ethnic Minority Traditional Drug Database (CEMTDD)
mainly from Xinjiang Uygur Autonomous Region (XUAR), retrieving CEMTD-related
information from different resources. CEMTDD contains about 621 herbs, 4, 060
compounds, 2, 163 targets and 210 diseases, among which most of herbs can be
applied into gerontology therapy including inflammation, cardiovascular disease
and neurodegenerative disease. Gerontology is highly occurred in XUAR, and has
abundant experience in treating such diseases, which may benefit for developing
a new gerontology therapeutic strategy. CEMTDD displays networks for intricate
relationships between CEMTDs and treated diseases, as well as the interrelations
between active compounds and action targets, which may shed new light on the
combination therapy of CEMTDs and further understanding of their herb molecular
mechanisms for better modernized utilizations of CEMTDs, especially in gerontology.

widely used to treat almost all human diseases, especially
gerontology diseases, such as cancer, inflammation,
cardiovascular disease and neurodegenerative diseases
etc. However, CEMTDs are basically based upon some
unpopular theories in the minority area, which are
different from the philosophy of both modern western
medicine and traditional Chinese medicine (TCM);
thereby, they are largely prevented from being recognized
by the mainland of China. To facilitate the research on

INTRODUCTION
Chinese Ethnic Minority Traditional Drugs
(CEMTDs), originated from different nations in China,
have been widely used as therapeutic regimen for
thousands of years [1]. Currently, CEMTDs have been
playing their important roles in maintaining health
of Chinese minority people, and drawing much more
attention around the world. These CEMTDs have been

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

17675

Oncotarget

CEMTDs, it is essential to combine ancient practices of
CEMTDs with modern standards, especially focusing
on exploring herb molecular mechanisms in their
treatment [2].
In the past few decades, some Chinese scientists
have made their great efforts to explore various CEMTDs
and decompose their isolated bioactive compounds, in
which different action targets are also identified. These
findings may provide precious resources and useful
guidance for developing and utilizing CEMTDs to treat
human diseases at the system level. Besides, CEMTDs
can improve the efficacy of treatment from synergistic
interactions amongst a various number of compounds.
Moreover, we may extract different kinds of compounds
from herbs, and these compounds have their own targets;
thus this relation relates herbs to diseases. Thus, the
links between CEMTDs and their targets in different
diseases may provide useful information to demystify
the theory underlying treatment of CEMTDs [3, 4]. To
truly modernize CEMTDs, current systematic methods
should be updated, and active compounds in CEMTDs
should all be simultaneously taken into consideration [5].
Additionally, current strategy for drug discovery is mainly
focusing on the “one gene-one drug-one disease” code,
which has caused limitations since the drug’s efficacy is
impaired by the robustness of protein-protein interaction
(PPI) network in the treated objectives [6]. To overcome
such limitations, there is an urgent need to use systemsoriented approaches for effective combinatorial drugs.
Therefore, turning to CEMTDs may be a sensible solution
because they may treat diverse diseases in a holistic way.
Considering the above-mentioned reasons, we built
this CEMTD-integration database, especially focusing
on Kazakhstan and Uygur drugs, with big data from
different aspects, such as herbs, compounds, targets and
diseases [7]. Moreover, since both TCM and CEMTDs
can be utilized to treat diseases by applying compounds
to interact with disease-specific function networks to
maintain human health, this common aspect can be used
as a fundamental factor to bridge the gap between these
two groups of traditional drugs in China [8, 9].
As a general term to describe diseases that are specific
or common diseases in the elders, gerontology is associated
to features of aging and diversified across different locations,
environment and climate [10]. With the increase of life
expectancy and the steadily growing of aging population
worldwide, the study of aging and gerontology therapy
have drawn extensive attention for the recent years [11]. The
most common gerontology includes Cardiovascular Disease,
Inflammations, Neurodegenerative Disease and Cancer etc.,
which have been researched and implemented for thousands
of years by practicing CEMTDs. Utilizations of CEMTDs
in geriatric treatment with minor side effects are worthy of
further investigation for future development of gerontology
therapy, however, systematic elucidation and specific target
of CEMTDs in gerontology remain to be uncovered [12].
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

In this study, we constructed CEMTDD for the
first time to collect a wealthy number of data about
CEMTDs from’ Xinjiang Uygur autonomous region.
And through comprehensive integration of various data
and information, our CEMTDD records a wealthy of
information especially from Kazakhstan and Uygur drugs,
in different aspects including herbs, compounds, targets,
and diseases, indicating how herbal compounds regulate
their specific targets that are related to different diseases
(herb molecular mechanisms); thereby this database may
provide more new clues on future combination therapy
and further better utilizations of CEMTDs, especially in
gerontology therapy.

RESULTS
Database query
CEMTDD has collected all information resources
from four different intricately connected fields, such as
herbs, compounds, targets and diseases. Users can use
any data field to query the database and follow the link to
retrieve related information. For example, users can enter
the serial number or the herb name to query information
of a certain compound. The result page will not only
show the related information of the inquired targets, but
corresponding information about herbs, compounds,
targets and treated diseases. Additionally, users can use
these provided hyperlinks to search for further detailed
information. Besides, the hyperlinks of compounds,
targets and diseases can also be linked to other databases,
such as UniProt, OMIM and etc. (Figure 1A).

Network display
To virtually screen the relationships among herbs,
compounds, targets and diseases, we have developed
network-display tools, which provide more detailed
network information. We also constructed PPI network
to help users to check the potential combinational
effects. After integrating data PPI network for targets,
users can get a visually global connection blueprint of the
“herb-compound-target-disease” standard (Figure 1B).

Herb-disease network
In traditional medical science of Chinese minority,
different types of herbs have been widely used to treat
several specific diseases for a long time, even though
the exact mechanisms are not clearly elaborated. Thus, it
is beneficial to link herbs and their treated diseases. We
established the schema of herbs and their corresponding
traditional medicine theories; thereby drawing a blueprint
of “herb-disease” relation (Figure 1C).
For instance, our database has collected studies on
the identification of medical materials in Salvia deserta
17676

Oncotarget

Figure 1: Database structure. A. The structure of the database is mainly composed of herb properties, herb-compound relationship,
and compound-protein relationship. B, C. All of these features could be further trivialized and interconnected with each other.

Schang, including traditional functional treatment,
prescription application, pharmacology and toxicity
(Figure 2). As previously reported, S. deserta Schang
can be used in the treatment of cardiovascular and
cerebrovascular diseases, cancer, diabetes, inflammation
and etc. Meanwhile, we offered the physicochemical
property and spectrum data of 28 compounds contained
in S. deserta Schang, mainly including 9 triterpenes,
9 diterpenes, and 5 phenolic acids. Twelve of these
28 compounds, such as Oleanolic acid, Ursolic acid,
β-sitosterol, Rosmarinc acid, Salvianolic acid A,
Taxodione, Ferruginol, Daucosterol, Maslinic acid,
Lithospermic acid B, and D-Mannitol, have been reported
to exert biological functions that are closely linked to

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

inflammation, cell cycle, apoptosis, and oxidative stress.
Salvianolic acid A (SAA) and Lithospermic acid B are
key two that have multiple targets. For example, SAA
can target mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK),
AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK), Nuclear factor
erythroid 2-related factor 3 (NFE2L3), cystathionine
β-synthase (CBS), cystathionase, vascular endothelial
growth factor (VEGF), gelatinase A, nitric oxide
synthase (NOS), inhibitor of NF-κB (IκB), sirtuin-1
(SIRT1), caspase-3, matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)-9,
dimethylarginine dimethylaminohydrolase (DDAH), liver
kinase B1, serine-threonine protein kinase (STK), NADPH
oxidase 4 (NOX4), Bcl-2, and cell adhesion molecule
(CAM)-1 [23–27]. Lithospermic acid B aims at some

17677

Oncotarget

Figure 2: The Kazakh drug Salvia deserta Schang serves as an example for the use of CEMTDD web interface to find
its target information. The CEMTDD web interface provides target information of different herbs, taking Salvia deserta Schang as
an example, U00533 is the recorded number of Salvia deserta Schang in CEMTDD, U00533S001-U00533S029 represent compounds of
Salvia deserta Schang. Protein targets of each compound are graphical represented by AC number.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

17678

Oncotarget

protein targets such as c-Jun N-terminal kinases (JNKs),
caspase-3, heme-oxygenase (HO), SIRT-1, monocyte
chemoattractant protein-1 (MCP-1), transforming
growth factor (TGF)-β [28, 29, 30, 31]. Moreover, other
compounds including Taxodione and Ferruginol can target
Bax, caspase-3 and PARP1 or caspase-8, AIF and PI3K,
respectively [32, 33] (Figure 3). These above-mentioned
data have revealed that an herb, like S. deserta Schang,
may contain a number of compounds, which have similar
or specific targets in above-mentioned human diseases.

“herb-compound-target-disease” standard. Users may use
these potential connections to find possible novel therapeutic
effects of different herbs, or new herbs for the same disease.
Herein, the expected types of Kazakhstan and Uygur
traditional drugs are over 600; however, there are 152 types
of true medical materials, and the drugs that we have
extracted compounds from are up to 370 types. In addition,
the number of compounds reaches 4, 060 with an average
of 10.9 in each medicinal material. Through searching data
from text mining and several online databases, we have
found 491 compounds with specific targets, which account
for 12.1% in all compounds (Figure 1).
Gerontology is considerably related to the process
of aging, which participates in either the promotion of
degenerative pathologies that correspond to the losses
biological functions, or the promotion of hyperplastic
pathologies such as cancer. Including nutrient sensors
such as the kinase mTOR, AMPK, SIRT and IGF-1,
stress response genes like HSF-1 and HIF-1, different
signaling pathways have been revealed involving in the

Gerontology therapeutic implications
in CEMTDD
In this database, we have integrated PPI data from
several protein interaction databases to this network; thereby,
users may find whether different targets in different herbs
can be inner-connected. In addition, with integration of
data about genes and diseases from different databases, we
have connected herbs to diseases under the guidance of the

Figure 3: The interrelationships among CEMTDs, chemical compounds, targets and treated diseases. Relationships of
four key modules in CEMTDD are described.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

17679

Oncotarget

process of aging and thus may cause gerontology [34].
Concerning the increasingly complicated interaction of
proteins in gerontology, a convergence of methods in both
biomedical science and database retrieving are essential
for gerontology therapy development. From herbs to
diseases, CEMTDD may bridge the gap between national
herbs and gerontology, especially in some well-studied
common gerontology diseases, such as neurodegenerative
diseases, cardiovascular disease and cancers.
One of the most consistent risk factor for developing
neurodegenerative diseases is aging, which often comes a
decline volume and function of brain or permanent loss
of neurons, attributing to the neurodegenerative disease,
such as Alzheimer’s Diseases, Parkinson’s disease and
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis [35]. For instance, Ferula
ferulaeoides, record number in CEMTDD is U00136,
was found interacted with neprilysin, currently conceived
as major enzyme for degradation of Aβ in Alzheimer’s
Diseases [36]. Extract of Rhodiola rosea L. (U00648),
Salidroside, is reported to exert protective effects of in
the MPTP/MPP(+)-induced model of Parkinson’s disease
through ROS-NO-Related mitochondrion pathway [37].
Meanwhile, the incidence of cardiovascular disease
(CVD), such as schemic heart disease (IHD), stroke
and hypertensive heart disease, increases with age [38].
In CVD, regulation of blood pressure, regulation of
vasculogenesis and nitric oxide biosynthetic process
are selected for targets screening, while many proteins
associated with CEMTDs were found. Cichorium
intybus L., U00249, used to be applied for its implication
of hepatic disorders and dyspepsia therapy in CEMTD;
however, its compound U00249S053 is in correlation with
Prostaglandin G/H synthase 2, annotated for regulation
of blood pressure, and may have CVD therapeutic
applications [39]. Moreover, a well-known herbs in
treating inflammation, such as pharyngitis and pneumonia,
Terminalia chebula Retz (U00184) is found associated
with Sepiapterin reductase, an enzyme that responsible
for nitric oxide biosynthetic process, thus, it may also be
applied in CVD treatment [40].
Furthermore, CEMTDD could provide us with clues
in cancer treatment. Several cancer associated proteins,
such as p53, caspase and Chk2, all map well in one or
several compounds within these herbs such as Rhodiola
rosea L.(U00648), Cichorium intybus L. (U00249) and
Ferula ferulaeoides (U00136), among which Rhodiola
rosea L. is widely used in traditional medicine in
Uyghur, renowned for its efficacy in work performance
improvement and fatigue remission. Now researches in
lung cancer A549 cells and fibrosarcoma HT1080 cells
revealed the anti-tumor capacity of Rhodiola rosea L.
compound Salidroside [41, 42].
Due to the systematic complexity and a progressive
decline of many physiological functions of the elders,
diseases of gerontology are normally synergistic and

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

face clinical treatment difficulties. Therefore, therapy
of gerontology requires multi-target and combination
therapy, which is corresponded to CEMTD strategy:
“Multi-components, Multi-target and Collaborative
treatment”. Most of herbs in CEMTDD have been reported
or practiced to treat common diseases of gerontology, and
based on the integrated information of herbs, compounds,
targets, diseases and PPI network in CEMTDD, our
study may provide with in-depth clues regarding how the
compounds are interacted with established bio-gerontology
processes through the presumed targets.

DISCUSSION
Hitherto, different nations from China have had
their own biomedical theories and systems, and the
empirical evidence-based theories and systems have
contributed a lot to the health of Chinese minority
people; thereby, medical resource from nature is our
huge treasure. And a thoroughly modernized database of
most ethnic traditional drugs is necessary for elucidating
CEMTDs systematically; accordingly, CEMTDD contains
plants (medicinal materials), metabolites, indications,
compounds, target proteins, molecular mechanisms and
other related information of CEMTDs, integrating to
establish a serviceable source of natural products to benefit
drug discovery.
Uygur traditional drugs, an important component
of Islamic Medicine, are normally used in Xinjiang
Autonomous Region Range. According to Uygur
medicine Blog, there are 124 kinds from more than
600 Uygur traditional drugs that are usually used by
Uygur people. Additionally, Kazakh Drug Blog has
established a comparatively scientific and intact theory
system, suggesting that origins, proliferation, development
and death of human beings have their own specific
substances. For long-time clinical practices, Uygur and
Kazakh people have found many suitable drugs according
to their different gene polymorphism and epigenetics
especially in the fields such as blood fat, tumor, heart and
cerebral diseases, as well as metabolic enzymes [43, 44].
Therefore, through systematical mining, we have provided
a number of new targets and relevant drugs especially for
Uygur and Kazakh traditional drugs. Since Uygur and
Kazakh people have a faith in Mohammedanism, they
usually use oil instead of wine to prepare drugs, among
which the oil processed Rosa rugosa can be used for
improving sleep. Due to their own cultural transmission
and habitation of different nations, there are obvious
distinctions in national medical components of different
ethnic minority traditional drugs. For instance, Uygur
traditional drugs are greatly influenced by the culture of
Persian and Islamic, and thus most of these drugs are
from central Asia and minor Asia, while Kazakh drugs,

17680

Oncotarget

such as Ferula ferulaeoides (Steud.) Korov and Rhodiola
rosea L are mainly based upon local resources of XUAR
from Mount Tianshan, Mount Aertai and Junggar Basin.
Although Uygur and Kazakhstan traditional drugs have a
long history of pharmacy and have been used in clinical
practices to help many patients, however, their underlying
mechanisms and pharmaceutical effects were still poorly
understood. Thus, developing modernized medicinal
methods and tools to explain drug action foundation of
CEMTDs is urgently needed.
To develop these ethnic traditional drugs and
improve public recognition about them, CEMTDD aims
to systematically collect research of different aspects,
including sources, chemical compounds, therapeutic targets,
and treatment of diseases. Besides, we have collected
physicochemical properties, biological activities and
active targets mainly by text mining from books, published
articles and online databases; thereby, the relations between
chemical compounds of specific drugs and their disease­
related protein modulations are established. We have also
applied different computational methods, such as SEA
DOCK, Reversing Docking, Cytoscape Web and PrePPI
to predict select related compounds and potential targets.
Therefore, we have established the standard of “herb­
compound-target-disease” to construct our CEMTDD.
Moreover, our database has collected the drug use of ethnic
minority traditional drugs under the guidance of Uygur
drug and Kazakh drug theories.
As far as we concern, our database will provide
ethnic traditional drug researchers with systematical search
and “herb-compound-target-disease” standard; thereby
exerting an influence on different parts. Firstly, CEMTDD
may provide a reference to clinical medication of ethnic
drugs with system information of chemical compounds
and pharmacology. Herbs with the same compounds or
targets may have inner connections and similar functions,
accordingly, the relation between those herbs and
offering a theoretical foundation of combination therapy.
For example, the whole plant of Kazakh drug Salvia
deserta Schang can clear heating and toxic materials,
exert anti-bacterial and anti-inflammatory effects, resist
diabetes, reduce fever, relieve pain, and reduce phlegm.
Some papers have reported that S. deserta Schang and
Salvia miltiorrhiza Bge hold similar effects in the same
diseases such as cardiovascular and cerebrovascular
diseases, since both of them can be used for promoting
blood circulation and removing blood stasis and pain.
So, it is reasonable to believe Salvia deserta Schang may
replace S. miltiorrhiza to treat CVD by targeting same
genes/proteins. Many different targets have been studied
thoroughly in S. miltiorrhiza, and such targets are also
found in S. deserta Schang. We have collected information
about these targets in CEMTDD, thereby providing an
important foundation for clinical doctors to take advantage
of S. deserta Schang, which shares similar features with
S. miltiorrhiza Bge. Additionally, CEMTDD can provide
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

fundamental data in different aspects, such as ethnic
traditional drug theory, modernized medication system,
and effective element information with their direct or
indirect targets for pharmacologists. Thirdly, CEMTDD
can offer specific targets in different drugs and their
related functions. CEMTDD has also developed robust
function in finding clues for specific disease in aid of GO
annotation. To facilitate the study of gerontology, several
targets were confirmed associated with specific chemicals
within four different herbs. The study of gerontology may
largely include cancer, neurodegenerative diseases, and
cardiovascular diseases.
Generally, CEMTDD provides us a basis for a
bridge between western medicine and ethnic medication
by drug screening with bioinformatics approaches. It
also promotes the development of ethnic traditional
drugs while popularizes their information about research
progresses and medication of ethnic traditional drugs. In
this database, 112 from 621 ethnic minority traditional
drugs have also be recognized and utilized as traditional
Chinese medicines (TCMs). Compared to TCM, some
ethnic minority traditional drugs absorb the essence of
TCMs, but most drugs are exclusive in their own nations
(509 from 621 ethnic minority traditional drugs), with
their own national features of application. For example,
Veratrum nigrum is mainly used for promoting emesis
in TCMs, while as a Uygur traditional drug it can be
used for treating hearing loss. Moreover, the nomadic
life of Kazakh people has made them vulnerable to
rheumatic arthritis, fall damage, malnutrition, and altitude
stress; thereby their ethnic traditional drugs have more
prominent characteristics in the related fields. Different
epigenetics may cause special characteristics, and thus
CEMTDs may be beneficial for future personalized
therapeutics. Therefore, this database would provide
a new insight into the herb molecular mechanisms for
better CEMTDs modernization from Xinjiang Uygur
autonomous region.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Data collection
CEMTDD, especially focusing on Kazakhstan
and Uygur traditional drugs, is comprised of four data
fields, including herbs, compounds, targets and diseases.
The information and data in these different fields were
integrated from related web-based databases and text
mining of books and published articles.
The information of herbs, such as name and
structure, was collected mainly through text-mining
methods from books and published articles including
Kazakh drug Blog, Uygur medicine Blog, Chinese
Pharmacopoeia and Uygur medicine branch released
by ministry of health in P.R. China. For the data field of
compounds, we collected most corresponding information
17681

Oncotarget

Table 1: Data resource
Data field

Data source

Amount of data

Herb

Kazakh medicine Blog, Uygur medicine Blog, Chinese Pharmacopoeia, and Chinese
Materia Medica (Uygur medicine volume), text-mining

621

Compound CNKI, SCI finder, Web of Science, Google, Text-mining

4, 060

Target

SEA Dock, Google, Text-mining

2, 163

Disease

PubMed, CNKI, SCI finder, Web of Science, Google, Text-mining

from a series of online databases, such as CNKI, SCI
finder, web of science and Google, including published
papers in both English and Chinese. Importantly, our lab
has isolated, purified, and identified a series of bioactive
compounds, for which we have proved structures and
action mechanisms, thus providing a supplement to
the current known compounds retrieved from online
databases. We have also used Similarity Ensemble
Approach (SEA) DOCK [13] to predict a series of
potential targets besides from the already existed targets.
In addition, we converted the information of targets into
UniProt accession number, which is a comprehensive,
high-quality and freely accessible resource of protein
sequence and functional information (Table 1).

and title for each article. The result of SEA Dock also
shows that there are N computational predicted targets for
these 491 compounds.
Then, we established the related protein-protein
interaction (PPI) network for the data field of all the
targets. We firstly extracted useful information of targets
by text-mining methods from some online databases
including Uniprot and OMIM [17, 18]. Subsequently, we
collected diverse PPIs from DIP [19], IntAct [20], and
PrePPI [21], and built PPI network for both known and
predicted targets. We have also taken advantage of the
network tool Cytoscape Web [22], and thereby generating
visual network.
The four data fields in our database system are interconnected with their intrinsic relations depending on the
standard of “herb-compound-target-disease” (Figure 1):
an herb is composed of compounds, a compound can
interact with its target, and a disease may be caused by the
dysfunction of genes/proteins.

Data integration
The goal of our database was to build connections
between herbs (including herbal compounds) and diseases
through disease-related genes/proteins (potential drug
targets). Accordingly, we have applied different methods
as follows:
Firstly, besides from using methods such as text
mining and searching for data from online databases,
we have predicted some potential targets of compounds
from SEA DOCK, and Reversing Docking [14, 15].
The similarity score between each set was calculated by
ligand topology. By inputting the compound’s SMILES
and a specific identifier, target names, reference names,
scores and structures can be obtained. Moreover, we
have developed an assistant tool to simplify this DOCK
process, and get results more quickly and easily. Using
Reversing docking, we ranked the potential targets of
the compounds by Libdock score. The targets were
downloaded from sc-PDB, an annotated database of
druggable binding sites from the Protein DataBank [16].
Subsequently, the information from different
books and published articles in Kazakhstan and Uygur
traditional drugs and related results were mainly published
in Chinese; thereby, we collected and manually extracted
the related data of compounds and their targets. In total,
we collected 4, 060 compounds, and 491 of them have
specific targets from diverse sources. We also recorded
descriptions for experimental evidence, related URL,

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

210

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported in part by grants
from  the  National 973 Basic Research Program of
China (No. 2013CB911300), Key Projects of the
National Science and Technology Pillar Program
(No. 2012BAI30B02), Liaoning Science and Technology
Project (No. 2013226027–4), and National Natural
Science Foundation of China (No. U1170302, U1303124,
81473091, 81260628 and 81303270), and Shenyang
Pharmaceutical University Scientific Research Fund
(No. ZCJJ2013407).

Author Contributions
Conceived and designed the database: JH JHW
LO. Collected the data: WXW YXZ XBP FZS HY JH.
Analyzed the data: TX JHW. Constructed Website and
Auxiliary tools: TX LO. Wrote the paper: JH JHW LO.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
We declare that we have no conflicts of interest.

17682

Oncotarget

REFERENCES

18.	 Hamosh A, Scott AF, Amberger JS, Bocchini CA,
McKusick VA. Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man
(OMIM), a knowledgebase of human genes and genetic
disorders. Nucleic Acids Res. 2005; 33:D514–D517.

1.	 Qiu J. Traditional medicine: a culture in the balance.
Nature. 2007; 448:126–128.

19.	 Xenarioas I, Salwínski L, Duan XJ, Higney P, Kim SM,
Eisenberg D. DIP, the Database of Interacting Proteins: a
research tool for studying cellular networks of protein interactions. Nucleic Acids Res. 2002; 30:303–305.

2.	 Qiu J. China plans to modernize traditional medicine.
Nature. 2007; 446:590–591.
3.	 Normile D. Asian medicine. The new face of traditional
Chinese medicine. Science. 2003; 299:188–190.

20.	 Hermjakob H, Montecchi-Palazzi L, Lewington C,
Mudali S, Kerrien S, Orchard S, Vingron M, Roechert B,
Roepstorff P, Valencia A, Margalit H, Armstrong J, et al.
IntAct: an open source molecular interaction database.
Nucleic Acids Res. 2004; 32:D452–D455.

4.	 Xue T, Roy R. Studying traditional Chinese medicine.
Science. 2003; 300:740–741.
5.	 Kitano H. Towards a theory of biological robustness. Mol
Syst Biol. 2007; 3:137.
6.	 Kitano HA. Robustness-based approach to systems-oriented
drug design. Nat Rev Drug Discov. 2007; 6:202–210.

21.	 Zhang QC, Petrey D, Deng L, Qiang L, Shi Y, Thu CA,
Bisikirska B, Lefebvre C, Accili D, Hunter T, Maniatis T,
Califano A, Honig B. Structure-based prediction of proteinprotein interactions on a genome-wide scale. Nature. 2012;
490:556–560.

7.	 Chen X, Zhou H, Liu YB, Wang JF, Li H, Ung CY,
Han  LY, Cao ZW, Chen YZ. Database of traditional
Chinese medicine and its application to studies of mechanism and to prescription validation. Br J Pharmacol. 2006;
149:1092–1103.

22.	 Shannon P, Markiel A, Ozier O, Baliga NS, Wang  JT,
Ramage D, Amin N, Schwikowski B, Ideker T. Cytoscape:
a software environment for integrated models of bio­
molecular interaction networks. Genome Res. 2003;
13:2498–2504.

8.	 Chen CY. TCM Database@Taiwan: the world’s largest
­traditional Chinese medicine database for drug screening in
silico. PLoS One. 2011; 6:e15939.
9.	 Lopes CT, Franz M, Kazi F, Donaldson SL, Morris Q,
Bader GD. Cytoscape Web: an interactive web-based
­network browser. Bioinformatics. 2010; 26:2347–2348.

23.	 Zhang H, Liu YY, Jiang Q, Li KR, Zhao YX, Cao C,
Yao J. Salvianolic acid A protects RPE cells against oxidative stress through activation of Nrf2/HO-1 signaling. Free
Radic Biol Med. 2014; 69:219–228.

10.	 Lezhava T, Monaselidze J, Jokhadze T, Kakauridze N,
Khodeli N, Rogava M, Bochorishvili T, Gorgoshidze M,
Khachidze D, Lomidze E, Tkemaladze J, Chichinadze K,
Koridze M, et al. Gerontology research in Georgia.
Biogerontology. 2011; 12:87–91.

24.	 Zhang W, He H, Wang H, Wang S, Li X, Liu Y, Jiang H,
Jiang H, Yan Y, Wang Y, Liu X. Activation of trans­
sulfuration pathway by salvianolic acid a treatment: a
homocysteine-lowering approach with beneficial effects on
redox homeostasis in high-fat diet-induced hyperlipidemic
rats. Nutr Metab (Lond). 2013; 10:68.

11.	 Stewart L. Gerontology: Will you still need me, will you
still feed me? Nature. 2014; 514:S14–5.
12.	 O’Neill D. Geriatric medicine and cultural gerontology.
Age Ageing. 2015; 44:353–5.

25.	 Li YJ, Duan CL, Liu JX. Salvianolic acid A promotes the
acceleration of neovascularization in the ischemic rat myocardium and the functions of endothelial progenitor cells.
J Ethnopharmacol. 2014; 151:218–227.

13.	 Keiser MJ, Roth BL, Armbruster BN, Ernsberger P,
Irwin JJ, Shoichet BK. Relating protein pharmacology by
ligand chemistry. Nat Biotechnol. 2007; 25:197–206.

26.	 Huang J, Qin Y, Liu B, Li GY, Ouyang L, Wang JH. In
silico analysis and experimental validation of molecular
mechanisms of salvianolic acid A-inhibited LPS-stimulated
inflammation, in RAW264.7 macrophages. Cell Prolif.
2013; 46:595–605.

14.	 Li H, Gao Z, Kang L, Zhang H, Yang K, Yu K, Luo X,
Zhu W, Chen K, Shen J, Wang X, Jiang H. TarFisDock:
a web server for identifying drug targets with docking
approach. Nucleic Acids Res. 2006; 34:W219–W224.
15.	 Gao Z, Li H, Zhang H, Liu X, Kang L, Luo X, Zhu W,
Chen K, Wang X, Jiang H. PDTD: a web-accessible protein
database for drug target identification. BMC Bioinformatics.
2008; 9:104.

27.	 Xu X, Hu Y, Zhai X, Lin M, Chen Z, Tian X, Zhang F,
Gao D, Ma X, Lv L, Yao J. Salvianolic acid A preconditioning confers protection against concanavalin A-induced
liver injury through SIRT1-mediated repression of p66shc
in mice. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2013; 273:68–76.

16.	 Kellenberger E, Muller P, Schalon C, Bret G, Foata N,
Rognan D. sc-PDB: an annotated database of druggable
binding sites from the Protein Data Bank. J Chem Inf
Model. 2006; 46:717–727.

28.	 Lin YL, Lee TF, Huang YJ, Huang YT. Antiproliferative
effect of alvianolic acid A on rat hepatic stellate cells.
J Pharm Pharmacol. 2006; 58:933–939.

17.	 UniProt Consortium Activities at the Universal
Protein Resource (UniProt). Nucleic Acids Res. 2014;
42:D191–D198.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

29.	 Tayarani-Najaran Z, Mousavi SH, Tajfard F, Asili J,
Soltani S, Hatamipour M, Emami SA. Cytotoxic and apoptogenic properties of three isolated diterpenoids from Salvia

17683

Oncotarget

chorassanica through bioassay-guided fractionation. Food
Chem Toxicol. 2013; 57:346–351.

MPP(+)-Induced Model of Parkinson’s Disease through
ROS-NO-Related Mitochondrion Pathway. Mol Neurobiol.
2015; 51:718–728.

30.	 Lee BW, Chun SW, Kim SH, Lee Y, Kang ES, Cha
BS, Lee  HC. Lithospermic acid B protects β-cells from
cytokine-induced apoptosis by alleviating apoptotic pathways and activating anti-apoptotic pathways of Nrf2-HO-1
and Sirt1. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2011; 252:47–54.

38.	 Qiu C, Fratiglioni L. A major role for cardiovascular ­burden
in age-related cognitive decline. Nat Rev Cardiol. 2015; doi:
10.1038/nrcardio.2014.223.
39.	 Wang Q, Xie B, Wu C, Chen G, Wang Z, Cui J, Hu T,
Wiatrak P. Models analyses for allelopathic effects of
chicory at equivalent coupling of nitrogen supply and pH
level on F. arundinacea, T. repens and M. sativa. PLoS One.
2012; 7:e31670.

31.	 Kang ES, Lee GT, Kim BS, Kim CH, Seo GH, Han SJ,
Hur KY, Ahn CW, Ha H, Jung M, Ahn YS, Cha BS,
Lee HC. Lithospermic acid B ameliorates the development
of diabetic nephropathy in OLETF rats. Eur J Pharmacol.
2008; 579:418–425.

40.	 Manosroi A, Jantrawut P, Akazawa H, Akihisa T,
Manosroi J. Biological activities of phenolic compounds isolated from galls of Terminalia chebula Retz.
(Combretaceae). Nat Prod Res. 2010; 24:1915–1926.

32.	 Bispo J, Zambuzzi WF, Ruela de Sousa RR, Areche  C,
Santos de Souza AC, Aoyama H, Schmeda-Hirschmann G,
Rodríguez JA, Monteiro de Souza Brito AR,
Peppelenbosch MP, den Hertog J, de Paula E, Ferreira CV.
Ferruginol suppresses survival signaling pathways in androgen-independent human prostate cancer cells. Biochimie.
2008; 90:843–854.

41.	 Wang J, Li JZ, Lu AX, Zhang KF, Li BJ. Anticancer effect
of salidroside on A549 lung cancer cells through inhibition
of oxidative stress and phospho-p38 expression. Oncol Lett.
2014; 7:1159–1164.

33.	 Akei M, Umeyama A, Arihara S. Epicubenol and
Ferruginol induce DC from human monocytes and differ­
entiate IL-10-producing regulatory T cells in vitro. Biochem
Biophys Res Commun. 2005; 337:730–738.

42.	 Sun C, Wang Z, Zheng Q, Zhang H. Salidroside inhibits
migration and invasion of human fibrosarcoma HT1080
cells. Phytomedicine. 2012; 19:355–363.
43.	 Guo SX, Li N, Cheng J, Zhang JY, Xu SZ, Guo H, Niu Q,
Zhang YH, Sun F, Ding YL. Study on relation of hypertension, high blood glucose and high blood lipid with different BMI among Kazakh in Xinjiang. ChinJ Public Health.
2008; 24:279–284.

34.	 Guarente L. Aging research-where do we stand and where
are we going? Cell. 2014; 159:15–19.
35.	 Jeppesen DK, Bohr VA, Stevnsner T. DNA repair ­deficiency
in neurodegeneration. Prog Neurobiol. 2011; 94:166–200.
36.	 Russo R, Borghi R, Markesbery W, Tabaton M, Piccini A.
Neprylisin decreases uniformly in Alzheimer’s disease and
in normal aging. FEBS Lett. 2005; 579:6027–6030.

44.	 Guzalinur A, Lin W, Peng ZL, Zufeiya A. Detection
of Human Papillomavirus DNA in Cervical Carcinoma
in Uighur Women from Xinjiang Uygur Autonomy
Region. Sichuan Journal of Cancer Control. 2001;
16:271–274.

37.	 Wang S, He H, Chen L, Zhang W, Zhang X, Chen  J.
Protective Effects of Salidroside in the MPTP/

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

17684

Oncotarget

