Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No. 37

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Impact of wall shear stress and ligand avidity on binding of
anti-CD146-coated nanoparticles to murine tumor endothelium
under flow
Stefan Thomann1,2,*, Sunhwa Baek1,*, Eduard Ryschich1
1

Department of Surgery, University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany

2

Department of Pathology, University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany

*

These authors have contributed equally to this work

Correspondence to:
Eduard Ryschich, e-mail: eduard.ryschich@med.uni-heidelberg.de
Keywords: HCC, shear stress, nanoparticle, surface avidity, tumor endothelial marker
Received: August 03, 2015 	Accepted: October 02, 2015 	Published: October 14, 2015

ABSTRACT
The endothelial phenotype of tumor blood vessels differs from the liver and
forms an important base for endothelium-specific targeting by antibody-coated
nanoparticles. Although differences of shear stress and ligand avidity can modulate
the nanoparticle binding to endothelium, these mechanisms are still poorly studied.
This study analyzed the binding of antibody-coated nanoparticles to tumor and liver
endothelium under controlled flow conditions and verified this binding in tumor
models in vivo. Binding of anti-CD146-coated nanoparticles, but not of antibody was
significantly reduced under increased wall shear stress and the degree of nanoparticle
binding correlated with the avidity of the coating. The intravascular wall shear
stress favors nanoparticle binding at the site of higher avidity of endothelial epitope
which additionally promotes the selectivity to tumor endothelium. After intravenous
application in vivo, pegylated self-coated nanoparticles showed specific binding
to tumor endothelium, whereas the nanoparticle binding to the liver endothelium
was very low. This study provides a rationale that selective binding of mAb-coated
nanoparticles to tumor endothelium is achieved by two factors: higher expression
of endothelial epitope and higher nanoparticle shearing from liver endothelium. The
combination of endothelial marker targeting and the use of shear stress-controlled
nanoparticle capture can be used for selective intratumoral drug delivery.

Superparamagnetic
nanoparticles
represent
another class of nanoparticles that have been developed
for diagnostic aims. These nanoparticles have been
initially used only for magnetic imaging via passive
tumor targeting, but recent advances have opened new
opportunities for tumor-specific targeting and drug
delivery [3]. The practicability of magnetic nanoparticles
in purification and their potential implication in
magnetic resonance imaging make these nanoparticles
an intensively investigated subject. Current studies
are mainly focused on the surface modification of
nanoparticles to improve their bioavailability and tumor
specificity. The additional coating of nanoparticles with
tumor-specifc mAb increases specific drug delivery into
the tumor [4].

INTRODUCTION
Advances in nanotechnology enabled the
development of nanoparticles with specific functional
properties that address the shortcoming of traditional
diagnostic and therapeutic agents. In contrast to singlemolecule applications, one nanoparticle can carry a high
amount of different imaging or therapeutic substances.
Nanoparticle therapeutics such as immunoliposomal drugs
and magnetic nanocarriers represent a rapid developing
area in cancer therapy and some successful efforts in their
clinical application have been achieved. For example,
immunoliposomal doxorubicin formulation is clinically
approved and used in treatment of different human
cancer types [1, 2].
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

39960

Oncotarget

So far, most of the nanoparticles have been
developed to target molecules expressed on the tumor cell
surface. For HCC, the potential value of EGFP-targeting
immunoliposomes [5] and α-fetoprotein-targeting SNP [6]
has been shown through the murine models. However,
this type of strategy requires the transport of nanoparticles
through the vascular wall and its subsequent diffusion in
the extracellular matrix toward the tumor cells. In contrast
to tumor cell-targeting strategies, vascular-targeting
permits direct access to the tumor endothelial cell surface
after systemic application of nanoparticles [7, 8].
Intravascular behaviour of coated nanoparticles
differs sufficiently from single molecule binding because
it additionally depends on hydrodynamic forces of
microperfusion. In general, the binding of adhesive
nanoparticles to endothelium follows the principle of
avidity-dependent binding to endothelial cells as used
by leukocytes adhering to endothelium (Fig. 1A) [7, 8].
According to this principle, leukocytes and endothelial cells
express adhesion molecules under normal conditions, but the
avidity of expression is low and thus, insufficient to support
stable adhesion under shear stress in microvessels  [9].
It has been previously demonstrated that the binding of
anti-ICAM-1 mAb- [10] and glycocalicin-coated [7]
nanocarriers to endothelium under flow is controlled by
ligand avidity and shear stress. Previous studies of avidityand shear stress-dependent binding of coated nanocarriers
were mainly focused on normal endothelium. Although the
shear stress and ligand avidity may significantly modulate
the nanoparticle binding to tumor vasculature, this principle
was only demonstrated using a computational model [11].
Experimental data of specific nanoparticle binding to tumor
endothelium under different flow conditions and ligand
avidities are still not available.
This study investigates the interrelationship of three
individual factors: shear stress, avidity of endothelial
epitope and nanoparticle coating, and their influence on
nanoparticle binding to tumor endothelium in vitro and
in vivo. CD146, an ubiquitous endothelial marker which
is overexpressed in murine and human tumor tissue [12],
was used as an endothelial ligand. A monoclonal antibody
against CD146 (ME-9F1) was utilized as coating molecule
for nanoparticle anchoring to its endothelial epitope.

reduced the nanoparticle binding to tumor endothelium
(p < 0.05, Fig. 1B).
Next the capture of commercially CD146(LSEC)MicroBeads was studied under 0.5 and 10 dyn/cm2 shear
stress. These nanoparticles resembled the binding pattern
of self-coatable nanoparticles and were well bound
under low shear stress, and their binding under high
shear stress was equally low (Fig. 1C, n = 3). In contrast
to nanoparticles, ME-9F1 mAb binding did not show
significant differences between shear stress rates of
0.5 and 10 dyn/cm2 (n = 2, Fig. 1D).

Higher epitope avidity on tumor endothelium
enhances nanoparticle binding compared to liver
endothelial cells under laminar flow
The increased expression of CD146 on tumor
endothelium was verified using immunofluorescence
and image-based fluorimetry. In accordance with
previous studies, we found that CD146 was significantly
higher expressed on tumor endothelium than on the liver
(Fig.  2A–2B). Next, we compared the binding of ME9F1-coated nanoparticles to liver and tumor endothelium
under different shear stress rates. The nanoparticle binding
to endothelium was significantly higher in tumor than in
liver tissue both under high and low shear stress (p < 0.05,
Fig. 2C–2D). Interestingly, the selectivity of nanoparticle
binding was higher at 10 dyn/cm2 (tumor ÷ liver ratio = 8.5)
than at 0.5 dyn/cm2 (tumor ÷ liver ratio = 5.2) (p < 0.05, Fig.
2C) (n = 5/group).

Nanoparticle binding under flow correlates with
coated mAb avidity
To study the effect of coated mAb avidity on
nanoparticle adhesion, nanoparticles with different coating
densities were produced and analyzed. It was found that the
coating efficacy enhanced as the amount of coated mAb was
increased from 5 to 20 μg/mg maleimide nanoparticle and
achieved the saturation level at 20 μg per mg (Fig. 3A).
Next, the binding of these nanoparticles to
endothelium under laminar flow and varying shear
stress was studied. Anti-CD146 nanoparticle binding
was maximal at the highest coating density and at
the lowest shear stress and continuously decreased
with lower coating density of mAb (Fig. 3B–3C).
The lowest coating density (12.5%) resulted only in
detection of bound nanoparticles at 0.5dyn/cm2, whereas
no nanoparticle binding was detected at 10 dyn/cm2
(n  = 3/group). The signal of bound NP with 25%
avidity was almost 6 times higher at 0.5 dyn/cm2 than at
10 dyn/cm2 (Fig. 3B–3C).

RESULTS
The binding of mAb-coated nanoparticles, but
not of mAb depends on wall shear stress
Specific binding of ME-9F1 mAb-coated
nanoparticles and ME-9F1 mAb to endothelium on tissue
slides was studied using a microfluidic chamber and
image-based fluorimetry. It was found that the endothelial
binding of self-coated nanoparticles with a coating avidity
of 50% (see Table 1) decreased with increasing shear
stress (Fig. 1B, n = 7). In particular, an increase of shear
stress from 0.5 to 5 and from 5 to 10 dyn/cm2 significantly
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Tissue-specific biodistribution of ME-9F1
mAb-coated nanoparticles in vivo
To examine the endothelial NP binding in vivo both
NP and mAb were administered intravenously to tumor
39961

Oncotarget

Figure 1: Influence of wall shear stress on nanoparticle binding to endothelium under flow. A. Scheme of shear stress

determinants in nanocarrier binding to endothelium. B–D. Binding of mAb-coated nanoparticles or mAb to endothelium on tissue
slides was studied using a microfluidic chamber and image-based fluorimetry. Endothelial binding of self-coated nanoparticles (B) and
CD146(LSEC)-Microbeads (C) decreased with increasing shear stress, whereas no significant difference of ME-9F1 mAb binding was
found (D) E. Representative immunofluorescence imaging of nanoparticle and mAb binding to endothelium on microfluidic tissue slides.
Fluorescence labeling of NP was performed by PE-conjugated secondary antibody. Scale bar (50 μm) as indicated.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

39962

Oncotarget

Table 1: NP / mAb ratios for production of nanoparticles with different surface avidity
% of maximum avidity

Nanoparticles / ME-9F1 mAb ratio

100

1mg / 20 μg

50

1mg / 10 μg

25

1mg / 5 μg

12.5

1mg / 2.5 μg

Nanomag®-D-spio nanoparticles with a maleimide surface were conjugated with varying concentrations of thiolated
ME-9F1 to produce antibody-coated nanoparticles with different coating concentrations. The nanoparticle coating ratio of
1 mg NP: 20 µg mAb was fluorimetrically defined as maximum avidity of 100%.

Figure 2: Avidity of endothelial epitope affects shear stress-dependent nanoparticle binding in vitro. A–B. Expression

of CD146 was significantly higher in tumor than in liver tissue. Quantitative analysis of CD146 mean fluorescence intensity (A) and
representative immunofluorescence images (B). Scale bar (100 μm) as indicated. C. Differential nanoparticle binding to tumor and liver
endothelium under flow. The nanoparticle binding to endothelium was significantly higher in tumor than in liver tissue both under high
and low shear stress (p < 0.05), whereas the selectivity of nanoparticle binding (tumor/liver ratio) was increased at higher shear stress
rates of 10 dyn/cm2. D. Representative immunofluorescence images of nanoparticle binding to tumor endothelium. Only autofluorescence
(granules) was detected in liver tissue. Scale bar (100 μm) as indicated.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

39963

Oncotarget

Figure 3: Nanoparticle coating avidity determines the degree of shear stress-dependent binding to endothelium under
flow. A. Nanoparticles with different coating avidity were produced. The amount of coated mAb was measured using fluorimetry. The
coating efficacy increased with increasing amount of coating mAb from 10 to 20 μg/mg maleimide nanoparticle and achieved the saturation
level at 20 μg per mg. B–C. The binding of these nanoparticles to endothelium under laminar flow at varying shear stress was studied. It
was maximal at the highest coating density and at the lowest shear stress and continuously decreased with reduced coating density of mAb.
Magnification bar (100 μm) as indicated.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

39964

Oncotarget

DISCUSSION

bearing AlbTag mice. Intravenous injection of ME-9F1 mAb
resulted in the staining of blood vessels including tumor,
liver, lung, intestinal mucosa and splenic blood vessels (Fig.
4A). Self-coated nanoparticles bound specifically to tumor
endothelium, with low binding to liver vessels and partial
endocytosis in peritumoral liver and spleen (Fig. 4B). The
exact assessment of nanoparticle binding in lung tissue was
not feasible because pulmonary capillaries were not clearly
contrasted after nanoparticle injection. The nanoparticle
binding in intestinal villi was almost absent (Fig. 4B).

The present work is the first study which analyzed
the relationship between nanoparticle binding to tumor and
liver vascular endothelium and flow shear stress, as well
as between avidity of nanoparticle coating and endothelial
epitope avidity. The binding of nanoparticles was studied
under static conditions as well as under laminar flow using
shear stress of 0.5 dyn/cm2 and of 10 dyn/cm2. Shear stress of
10 dyn/cm2 approximately corresponds to physiological

Figure 4: The binding of anti-CD146 mAb (A) and anti-CD146 coated nanoparticles (B) in vivo was studied using
fluorescence microscopy. Injection of mAb resulted in the staining of blood vessels in tumor, liver, lung, spleen and intestinal
mucosa (A) Anti-CD146 coated nanoparticles were distinctly bound to tumor endothelium, whereas low binding in peritumoral
liver was found (B) Images of two different magnifications are shown (see respective vertical rows) and magnification bars
(50 or 200 μm) are indicated.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

39965

Oncotarget

flow in the liver as shown in previous studies [13], whereas
shear stress of 0.5 dyn/cm2 reflects very low flow conditions
as a correlate of shear stress in dilated tumor vessels.
CD146 was used as ligand on the endothelial surface for
nanoparticle capture. It has been shown in previous work
[13] and confirmed in this study that this endothelial marker
is overexpressed on tumor endothelium in murine models
of liver and pancreatic cancer [12]. It was found that the
binding of coated nanoparticles and antibody was higher
in tumor endothelium than in the liver both under nearstatic and high flow conditions. However, wall shear stress
did not significantly influence antibody binding, whereas
nanoparticle binding significantly varied in a shear stressdependent manner. This binding pattern reflects a universal
mechanism, as both self-coated pegylated and nonspecialized (CD146(LSEC)-MicroBeads) nanoparticles
showed identical binding properties under flow.
Furthermore, the tumor:liver ratio of nanoparticle binding
was substantially higher at shear stress of 10 dyn/cm2
(ratio = 8.5) than at 0.5 dyn/cm2 (ratio = 5.2). These results
demonstrate two important findings. First, the nanoparticle
binding to endothelium follows the principle of leukocyte
adhesion under constant laminar flow. According to this
principle, the avidity of interacting ligands on endothelium
and on leukocytes control the number of adherent cells.
This mechanism can be exemplified by the molecular
interaction between LFA-1 on the circulating leukocyte
and ICAM-1 on the endothelial surface [9–14]. Proinflammatory stimulation causes the clustering of LFA-1
on cell surface which increases its avidity and promotes
leukocyte binding to endothelium [9, 14].
Second, the intravascular wall shear stress impacts
nanoparticle capture and favors selectivity of nanoparticle
binding at the site of higher endothelial epitope avidity.
Therefore, the overexpression of endothelial markers
on tumor endothelium may additionally promote tumorselective nanoparticle binding. The present study identifies
endothelial surface marker overexpression as a relevant
variable of nanoparticle binding by flow chamber
experimentation and use of in vivo tumor models. We
propose that for selective tumor endothelial targeting, the
mAb avidity of the nanoparticle surface must be adjusted
to the level by which physiological flow conditions
selectively shear nanoparticles from normal endothelium
and thereby promote preferential nanoparticle binding to
the low shear stress environment of tumor microvessels.
Taken together, the selective binding of ME9F1-coated nanoparticles to tumor endothelium is
achieved  by two factors: higher tumoral expression of
endothelial epitopes and higher nanoparticle shearing from
physiological liver endothelium. Furthermore, previous
studies demonstrated that the averaged blood flow and
wall shear stress are frequently decreased in tumors in
comparison with normal tissue [15, 16]. Therefore, it
can be concluded that the decreased shear stress in the
morphologically abnormal tumor microvasculature can
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

additionally contribute to the preferential enrichment
of mAb-coated nanoparticles on tumor-associated
endothelium.
For in vivo experiments, anti-CD146 mAb
coated nanoparticles were systemically applied. These
experiments confirmed the results of nanoparticle
binding in vitro. They demonstrated that antibodies
and
nanoparticles
have
different
distribution
patterns: nanoparticles were preferentially bound to
tumor endothelium, whereas antibody binding was
homogeneously distributed in different organs according
to the CD146 expression level.
Numerous previous studies described the
general phenomenon of nanoparticle endocytosis
and accumulation in hepatic and splenic tissue [17,
18]. It mainly occurs in LSEC, Kupffer cells and
other macrophages [17] and substantially reduces the
circulation time of systemically injected nanoparticles
[19]. Many factors such as nanoparticle composition,
size, geometry and surface charge influence nanoparticle
endocytosis [3, 17, 18] certainly represents a problem
for practical nanoparticle application in vivo.
However, the improvement in production of more
applicable nanoparticle types and in modification of
the coating procedure itself can substantially prevent
non-specific uptake as demonstrated by the use of
alternative nanoparticle types in this study and in studies
of other authors [19]. Nanoparticle surface pegylation
is a common surface modfication for the improvement
of the nanoparticle biocomatibility and circulation time
[19]. Therefore, pegylated nanoparticles were used in
the present study. As expected, systemic injection of
pegylated NP led to reduced accumulation in RES of the
liver and the spleen.
In the present study, iron-containg nanoparticles
were used. These nanoparticles are very small (20 nm) and
have superparamagnetic properties which simplify their
preparation and handling e. g. repeated washing. Magnetic
nanoparticles have been previously suggested for practical
use in magnetic resonance imaging for tumor and vascular
targeting [20]. Recently, a new persuasive method based
on magnetic heating of iron-containing nanoparticles was
introduced for treatment of human recurrent glioblastoma
[21].The results of the present study may provide
important information on further development of magnetic
nanoparticles which may help achieve higher intratumoral
enrichment of coated nanoparticles. Production of
nanoparticles with known coating avidity which is adapted
to the tissue-specific shear stress may increase selectivity
of local nanoparticle binding.
In summary, the selectivity of tumor-specific
binding of mAb-coated nanoparticles depends on
the epitope expression on tumor endothelium and on
nanoparticle shearing from normal endothelium by shear
stress. The targeting of endothelial markers such as
CD146 and the use of shear stress-controlled nanoparticle
39966

Oncotarget

capture can provide a useful tool for the selective drug
delivery to tumor tissue.

fixed 7 μm thick tissue sections of liver or tumor tissue-coated
coverslips (Knittelgläser Braunschweig, Germany). A sticky
flow chamber (Ibidi Sticky-Slide I 0.4 Luer, Ibidi GmbH,
Martinsried, Germany) was placed on top of the tissue
specimen and additionally sealed using clips. A microfluidic
chamber was perfused with 4 mg of self-coated or 80 μl of
anti-CD146 mAb-coated nanoparticles (CD146(LSEC)Microbeads, Miltenyi Biotec, Bergisch Gladbach, Germany,
n = 3) dissolved in 8 ml of PBS-EDTA using a micropump
system (Ibidi GmbH, Munich, Germany) under defined
shear stress and laminar flow. To ensure a identical perfusion
volume under different flow rates to each histological
section, the microperfusion duration was modified and
adapted (n = 7 for nanoparticles, n = 2 for mAb). Bound
nanoparticles or mAb on the tissue section were stained using
PE-conjugated anti-rat IgG (Biolegend) and quantified as
described above.

MATERIAL AND METHODS
Mouse tumor models
Transgenic AlbTag mice were used at the stage of
spontaneous HCC development between 10–12 weeks
of age as previously described [22]. Tumor and normal
tissue was dissected and shock-frozen in liquid nitrogen
for histological preparation. All animal experiments
were approved by the local committee of animal care
(Regierungspräsidium Karlsruhe).

Immunofluorescence and image-based
fluorimetry
Endothelial CD146 expression was analyzed using
7 μm thick tissue sections of mouse liver and tumor tissue
(n = 6) after staining with PE-conjugated anti-mouse
CD146 mAb (ME-9F1, Biolegend, San Diego, USA).
Mean fluorescence intensity (MFI) was measured as
previously described [12] at three different areas per power
field (three power fields per sample) containing at least
five vessels and corrected by background fluorescence
using Image J (NIH, Bethesda, USA).

Nanoparticle injections in tumor-bearing mice
and biodistribution analysis
To study nanoparticle binding in vivo, self-coated
nanoparticles (6-7.5 mg/mouse, n = 4) were systemically
injected in tumor-bearing mice. The tissue was dissected
30 min after injection, frozen and cut as described above.
Nanoparticles were detected using immunofluorescence
labeling with PE-conjugated anti-rat IgG mAb (Biolegend)
and analyzed using fluorescence microscopy (Observer.
Z1; Zeiss, Jena, Germany) or laser scanning confocal
microscopy (Nikon A1R, Nikon Instruments, Düsseldorf,
Germany). Antibody binding was studied using intravenous
injection of PE-conjugated ME-9F1 mAb (500 ng/g BW, n
= 3) and subsequent fluorescence microscopy of the wholemount tissue as previously described [12].

Nanoparticle coating procedure and fluorimetry
avidity analysis
20 nm aminated pegylated magnetic nanoparticles
(nanomag®-D-spio, Micromod, Rostock, Germany)
were conjugated with ME-9F1 mAb using a three step
process according to manufacturer’s protocol. In brief,
the coating protocol included activation of the maleimide
nanoparticle surface, thiolation of the protein of interest
with Traut’s reagent and conjugation of the thiolated mAb
with the maleimide activated nanoparticle. Antibodycoated nanoparticles were then magnetically separated in
columns, washed and stored in PBS-EDTA buffer (0.01M
PBS buffer, 1 mM EDTA, pH = 7.4).
For the generation of nanoparticles with different
avidity of mAb coating, different quantities of thiolated
mAb were processed with maleimide activated
nanoparticles. The avidity of the nanoparticles was
controlled by fluorescent detection of bound primary mAb
to nanoparticles by PE-conjugated anti-rat IgG (clone
Poly4054, Biolegend) and measured using fluorimetry
(Fluostar Optima, BMG Labtech, Ortenberg, Germany).

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Claudia Bernardi-Neuwirth for her excellent
technical assistance. We thank Dr. Christian Ackermann
(Nikon Imaging Center, University of Heidelberg) for the
help in laser scanning confocal microscopy.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

Abbreviations
HCC, hepatocellular carcinoma; MFI, mean
fluorescence intensity; mAb, monoclonal antibody; BW,
body weight; NP, nanoparticle; RES, reticuloendothelial
system; LSEC, liver sinus endothelial cells;
PE, Phycoerythrin; n. s., not significant.

Microfluidic chamber
To analyze the nanoparticle binding under laminar flow,
a microfluidic chamber was constructed using shock frozen

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

39967

Oncotarget

FINANCIAL SUPPORT

cancer with the endothelial marker CD146. Oncotarget.
2014; 5:8614–24.

Grant from the German Research Foundation
(DFG – TRR 77) and FRONTIER innovation fund.

13.	 Gock M, Eipel C, Linnebacher M, Klar E, Vollmar B.
Impact of portal branch ligation on tissue regeneration,
microcirculatory response and microarchitecture in portal
blood-deprived and undeprived liver tissue. Microvasc Res.
2011; 81:274–80.

REFERENCE LIST
1.	 Staropoli N, Ciliberto D, Botta C, Fiorillo L, Gualtieri S,
Salvino A, Tassone P, Tagliaferri P. Pegylated liposomal doxorubicin in ovarian cancer treatment: A  mono-­
institutional retrospective analysis. Do we still need it?
J Ovarian Res. 2013; 6:10.

14.	 Lum AF, Green CE, Lee GR, Staunton DE, Simon SI.
Dynamic regulation of LFA-1 activation and neutrophil
arrest on intercellular adhesion molecule 1 (ICAM-1) in
shear flow. J Biol Chem. 2002; 277:20660–70.
15.	 Jain RK, Koenig G, Dellian M, Fukumura D, Munn LL,
Melder RJ. Leukocyte endothelial adhesion and angiogenesis in tumors. Cancer Metastasis Rev. 1996; 15:195–204.

2.	 Tacar O, Sriamornsak P, Dass CR. Doxorubicin: an update
on anticancer molecular action, toxicity and novel drug
delivery systems. J Pharm Pharmacol. 2013; 65:157–70.

16.	 Schmidt J, Ryschich E, Daniel V, Herzog L, Werner  J,
Herfarth Ch, Longnecker DS, Gebhard MM, Klar E.
Vascular structure and microcirculation of experimental pancreatic carcinoma in the rat. Eur J Surg. 2000; 166:328–35.

3.	 Veiseh O, Gunn JW, Zhang M. Design and fabrication of
magnetic nanoparticles for targeted drug delivery and imaging. Adv Drug Deliv Rev. 2010; 62:284–304.
4.	 ElBayoumi TA, Torchilin VP. Tumor-targeted
nanomedicines: enhanced antitumor efficacy in vivo of
doxorubicin-loaded, long-circulating liposomes modified
with cancer-specific monoclonal antibody. Clin Cancer Res.
2009; 15:1973–80.

17.	 Sadauskas E, Wallin H, Stoltenberg M, Vogel U, Doering P,
Larsen A, Danscher G. Kupffer cells are central in the
removal of nanoparticles from the organism. Part Fibre
Toxicol. 2007; 4:10.
18.	 Xiao K, Li Y, Luo J, Lee JS, Xiao W, Gonik AM,
Agarwal  RG, Lam KS. The effect of surface charge on
in vivo biodistribution of PEG-oligocholic acid based micellar nanoparticles. Biomaterials. 2011; 32:3435–46.

5.	 Gao J, Yu Y, Zhang Y, Song J, Chen H, Li W, Qian W,
Deng L, Kou G, Chen J, Guo Y. EGFR-specific PEGylated
immunoliposomes for active siRNA delivery in hepatocellular carcinoma. Biomaterials. 2012; 33:270–82.
6.	 Chieh JJ, Huang KW, Lee YD, Horng HE, Yang HC,
Hong CY. In vivo screening of hepatocellular carcinoma
using AC susceptibility of anti-alpha fetoprotein-activated
magnetic nanoparticles. PLoS ONE. 2012; 7:e46756.

19.	 Maruyama K, Takahashi N, Tagawa T, Nagaike K,
Iwatsuru M. Immunoliposomes bearing polyethyleneglycolcoupled Fab’ fragment show prolonged circulation time and
high extravasation into targeted solid tumors in vivo. FEBS
Lett. 1997; 413:177–80.

7.	 Lin A, Sabnis A, Kona S, Nattama S, Patel H, Dong JF,
Nguyen KT. Shear-regulated uptake of nanoparticles by
endothelial cells and development of endothelial-targeting
nanoparticles. J Biomed Mater Res A. 2010; 93:833–42.

20.	 Rimkus G, Bremer-Streck S, Gruttner C, Kaiser WA, Hilger I.
Can we accurately quantify nanoparticle associated proteins
when constructing high-affinity MRI molecular imaging
probes?. Contrast Media Mol Imaging. 2011; 6:119–25.

8.	 Decuzzi P, Ferrari M. Design maps for nanoparticles targeting the diseased microvasculature. Biomaterials. 2008;
29:377–84.
9.	 van Kooyk Y, Figdor CG. Avidity regulation of integrins:
the driving force in leukocyte adhesion. Curr Opin Cell
Biol. 2000; 12:542–7.

21.	 Maier-Hauff K, Ulrich F, Nestler D, Niehoff H, Wust P,
Thiesen B, Orawa H, Budach V, Jordan A. Efficacy and
safety of intratumoral thermotherapy using magnetic ironoxide nanoparticles combined with external beam radiotherapy on patients with recurrent glioblastoma multiforme.
J Neurooncol. 2011; 103:317–24.

10.	 Calderon AJ, Bhowmick T, Leferovich J, Burman B,
Pichette B, Muzykantov V, Eckmann DM, Muro S.
Optimizing endothelial targeting by modulating the antibody density and particle concentration of anti-ICAM
coated carriers. J Control Release. 2011; 150:37–44.

22.	 Ryschich E, Lizdenis P, Ittrich C, Benner A, Stahl S,
Hamann A, Schmidt J, Knolle P, Arnold B, Hammerling GJ,
Ganss R. Molecular fingerprinting and autocrine growth
regulation of endothelial cells in a murine model of hepatocellular carcinoma. Cancer Res. 2006; 66:198–211.

11.	 Frieboes HB, Wu M, Lowengrub J, Decuzzi P, Cristini V.
A computational model for predicting nanoparticle accumulation in tumor vasculature. PLoS ONE. 2013; 8:e56876.

23.	 Takeichi T, Mocevicius P, Deduchovas O, Salnikova O,
Castro-Santa E, Buchler MW, Schmidt J, Ryschich E.
alpha(L) beta(2) integrin is indispensable for CD8+ T-cell
recruitment in experimental pancreatic and hepatocellular
cancer. Int J Cancer. 2011; 130:2067–76.

12.	 Thomann S, Longerich T, Bazhin A, Mier W,
Schemmer  P, Ryschich E. Selective targeting of liver

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

39968

Oncotarget

