Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No. 42

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Estrogen and estrogen receptor alpha promotes malignancy and
osteoblastic tumorigenesis in prostate cancer
Sweta Mishra1, Qin Tai1,7, Xiang Gu1, James Schmitz2, Ashley Poullard6, Roberto J.
Fajardo2, Devalingam Mahalingam3, Xiaodong Chen4, Xueqiong Zhu5, Lu-Zhe Sun1,3
1

Department of Cellular and Structural Biology, University of Texas Health Science Center, San Antonio, Texas, USA

2

Department of Orthopedic Surgery, University of Texas Health Science Center, San Antonio, Texas, USA

3

Cancer Therapy and Research Center, University of Texas Health Science Center, San Antonio, Texas, USA

4

Dental School, University of Texas Health Science Center, San Antonio, Texas, USA

5

Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, the Second Affiliated Hospital of Wenzhou Medical University, Wenzhou, China

6

Department of Medicine, Brown University, Providence, Rhode Island, USA

7

 epartment of Vascular Surgery, The Second Xiangya Hospital and Xiangya School of Medicine, Central South University,
D
Changsha, Hunan, China

Correspondence to: Lu-Zhe Sun, e-mail: SUNL@UTHSCSA.EDU
Keywords: prostate cancer, estrogen receptor, bone, osteoblastic, metastasis
Received: May 31, 2015 	Accepted: October 22, 2015 	Published: October 31, 2015

ABSTRACT
The role of estrogen signaling in regulating prostate tumorigenesis is relatively
underexplored. Although, an increasing body of evidence has linked estrogen receptor
beta (ERß) to prostate cancer, the function of estrogen receptor alpha (ER`) in
prostate cancer is not very well studied. We have discovered a novel role of ER` in
the pathogenesis of prostate tumors. Here, we show that prostate cancer cells express
ER` and estrogen induces oncogenic properties in prostate cancer cells through ER`.
Importantly, ER` knockdown in the human prostate cancer PacMetUT1 cells as well
as pharmacological inhibition of ER` with ICI 182,780 inhibited osteoblastic lesion
formation and lung metastasis in vivo. Co-culture of pre-osteoblasts with cancer
cells showed a significant induction of osteogenic markers in the pre-osteoblasts,
which was attenuated by knockdown of ER` in cancer cells suggesting that estrogen/
ER` signaling promotes crosstalk between cancer and osteoblastic progenitors to
stimulate osteoblastic tumorigenesis. These results suggest that ER` expression in
prostate cancer cells is essential for osteoblastic lesion formation and lung metastasis.
Thus, inhibition of ER` signaling in prostate cancer cells may be a novel therapeutic
strategy to inhibit the osteoblastic lesion development as well as lung metastasis in
patients with advanced prostate cancer.

alternative treatment strategies. Although the growth and
differentiation of prostate gland is primarily controlled by
androgens, estrogens are also hormonal risk factors in the
development of benign prostatic hyperplasia and prostate
cancer [2, 3]. Although estrogen therapy was historically
used to reduce the androgen levels in men with advanced
prostate cancer [4], more recent studies have also shown
its involvement in prostate carcinogenesis. For example,
estrogen can induce neoplastic epithelial morphology
in both human and rat prostates and regulated prostate
specific gene expression [5, 6]. Prolonged treatment

INTRODUCTION
Prostate cancer is the second leading cause
of cancer-related death in the United States with an
estimated 233,000 new cancer cases and 29,480 deaths
reported in 2014 [1]. Given the widely recognized role of
androgens in the development and progression of prostate
cancer, androgen ablation therapy is the mainstay for the
treatment of metastatic prostate cancer. However, most
patients will eventually develop androgen-independent
prostate cancer, highlighting an urgent need for the

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

44388

Oncotarget

of rodents with a high combined dose of androgen and
estrogen induces stromal hypertrophy, epithelial dysplasia
and enlargement of the prostate gland [7, 8]. Studies have
suggested that anti-estrogens inhibit the development and
progression of prostate cancer under experimental and
clinical conditions [9, 10]. Some of these anti-estrogen
compounds are in clinical trials to study their efficacy
in prostate cancer prevention [11, 12]. The combination
therapy of an estrogen receptor antagonist, tamoxifen with
an anti-androgen bicalutamide, reduced gynecomastia
and breast pain in prostate cancer patients receiving antiandrogen therapy in a multicenter trial [13]. Recently, a
phase III clinical trial with a selective estrogen receptor
modulator Toremifene, showed a significant reduction
in new vertebral fractures in men with prostate cancer
receiving androgen ablation therapy [11, 14]. Thus,
understanding the oncogenic role of estrogen signaling in
prostate carcinogenesis might provide a new therapeutic
avenue for treating patients with advanced prostate cancer.
The presence of estrogen receptors (ER) in prostate
suggests that estrogens may act directly in prostate
epithelial cells [15]. The two ER subtypes, ERα and ERß,
have different expression patterns with several studies
presenting conflicting results in their expression as well as
function during prostate carcinogenesis. ERß is regarded
as the predominant subtype in majority of the epithelial
cells, as well as in some stromal cells of the prostate. ERß
is considered to be tumor suppressive in many cancers
including the prostate [16–19]. ERß can cause antiproliferative effects as well as apoptosis in the castrationresistant basal epithelial cells in the prostates of aromatase
knockout mice [20, 21]. Anti-estrogens can inhibit tumor
growth through ERß-mediated regulation of the tumorsuppressing transcription factor KLF5 in prostate cancer
cells [22]. However, a study by Zellweger et al. showed
that ERß expression and AR phosphorylation correlated
with poor clinical outcome in hormone-naïve prostate
cancer and found increased ERß in castration-resistant
phase of the disease [23]. The study by Leav et al. showed
a reappearance of ERß expression in bone and lymph node
metastasis, suggesting a causal link to the development of
late stage disease [24]. A recent study showed that the ERß
splice variant 2 (ERß2) had oncogenic properties and was
involved in osteolytic bone metastasis in strong contrast
to the tumor suppressing effects of the other isoform
ERß1 [25]. Thus, differentiating the functions of splice
variants for estrogen receptors will further elucidate our
understanding of their roles in prostate cancer progression.
While the role of ERß in prostate cancer is well studied,
there are relatively few studies on the functional role
of ERα in prostate tumorigenesis. Estrogen was shown
to mediate prostate cancer progression through ERα
in a genetic knockout mouse model for both ERα and
ERß receptors [26]. While the prostates of wild type
and ERß knockout mouse showed hyperplasia and PIN
(prostatic intra-epithelial neoplasia) lesions when treated
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

with testosterone and estrogen for four months, the
prostates of ERα knockout animal did not develop these
pathologies [26]. Furthermore, high ERα mRNA and
protein levels were detected in hormone refractory and
metastatic lesions with lymph node and bone metastatic
samples [27]. However, the exact role of ERα in prostate
tumorigenesis and formation of metastatic lesions has not
been extensively investigated.
More than 80% of prostate cancer patients
develop bone metastasis in the advanced stages of the
disease [28]. The types of lesions that patients develop
are predominantly osteoblastic or bone forming. The
mechanism for the osteoblastic lesion development is
poorly understood partly due to a lack of suitable model
systems that recapitulates bone formation in the prostate
cancer patients. The transgenic PTEN knockout mouse
models have only a 27% bone metastasis incidence rate
[29]. Prostate cancer cell lines such as PC-3, LNCaP,
LuCaP, and LAPC-9 develop osteolytic or mixed lesions
in immunocompromised mouse xenograft models [30].
We have shown previously that the human prostate cancer
PacMetUT1 cell line induced extensive bone formation in
vivo and could serve as a useful model for investigating
the mechanism of osteoblastic lesion formation [31]. In
this study, we have investigated the oncogenic roles of
estrogen and ERα in various prostate cancer cell lines
including PacMetUT1. Our results suggest that estrogeninduced osteoblastic bone formation and lung metastasis
is mediated through ERα. Thus, targeting ERα in prostate
cancer patients with advanced metastatic disease might be
a novel and efficient therapeutic strategy to reduce bone
lesions and lung metastasis.

RESULTS
Prostate cancer cells express ERα and are
estrogen responsive
The effects of estrogen are mediated by the
intracellular estrogen receptors (ERs), which regulate
transcription through binding to specific DNA sequences
called EREs (estrogen response elements) in the promoter
regions of their target genes. When we checked the ERα,
ERß and AR status in different prostate cancer cells as
well as in a benign prostatic hyperplasia cell line (BPH1), we detected ERα protein in some prostate cancer
cells and ERß protein in all cell lines (Figure 1A and
supplementary Figure 1A) even though ERα mRNA was
detected in all the cells tested (Figure 1B). AR expression
showed expected results with 22Rv1, LNCaP, and MDAPCa-2b known to be AR positive, a moderate expression
in PacMetUT1, and no expression in PC-3 and BPH-1
(Figure 1A and 1B). These cells were also responsive
to estrogen as measured with the estrogen-responsive
ERE-luciferase assay (Figure 1C). The responsiveness to
44389

Oncotarget

estrogen was in part mediated by ERα as ERα agonist PPT
also stimulated luciferase activity whereas ERα antagonist
MPP reduced the basal luciferase activity driven by the
ERE promoter (Figure 1D).

cancer cells, we also examined its effect on anchorageindependent growth and cell migration. Estrogen
significantly increased the number of spheres formed by
PacMetUT1 cells in suspension culture (Figure 2B) and
soft agar colonies (Figure 2C), which were antagonized
by ICI. Estrogen also significantly increased the cell
migration of both PacMetUT1 and 22Rv1 cells (Figure
2D) and in C4–2 cells (another bone metastatic cell line;
Supplementary Figure 1C). Interestingly, unlike its effect
on cell growth, the treatment with ICI itself had no effect
on the basal level of cell migration (Figure 2D). This
could be due to the shorter time treatment with ICI for the
migration assay (16 hr of treatment) than for the growth
assays (5 days on plastic, 2 days in suspension culture,
or 7 days in soft agar) and/or insufficient basal level of
estrogen in the system. Nevertheless, the treatment with
ICI did abrogate the effect of exogenous estrogen-induced
cell migration (Figure 2D). Consistently, treatment with
ERα agonist PPT significantly increased the migration
of PacMetUT1 whereas ERα antagonist MPP showed no

Estrogen increases prostate cancer cell growth
To check the effect of estrogen on cell growth, we
treated PacMetUT1 with estrogen and two different ER
antagonists, tamoxifen and ICI 182,780 (ICI) respectively.
Estrogen significantly increased the cell growth after 5
days of treatment (Figure 2A and supplementary Figure
1B). Both tamoxifen and ICI decreased the cell growth,
which was reversed by the addition of estrogen (Figure
2A) suggesting the functional involvement of ERs in
the regulation of PacMetUT1 cell growth. Furthermore,
using an ERα specific antagonist, MPP also reduced
the cell growth that was regained by the addition of
estrogen (Figure 2A). To determine the role of estrogen
signaling in regulating the malignant properties of prostate

Figure 1: Prostate cancer cells are estrogen responsive. A and B. Cell lysates and cDNAs were used for ERα, ERß and AR

expression analysis in different prostate cancer cell lines and the benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH-1) cell line by Western blot and realtime RT-PCR respectively. The mRNA level of ERα and AR from real-time RT-PCR assays were normalized with the mRNA level of
actin in each sample and presented as mean ± sem from triplicate measurements. C. Estrogen responsiveness of prostate cancer cells was
assessed using ERE-Luciferase reporter assay. **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001 and ****P < 0.0001 with two-tailed student’s t-test. D. EREluciferase assay in PacMetUT1 cells with estrogen and ERα agonist PPT and antagonist MPP. ß-galactosidase normalized luciferase activity
in both Panels C and D is presented as mean ± sem from triplicate measurements. E2 and E have been used interchangeably. **P < 0.01
and ****P < 0.0001 with one-way ANOVA analysis.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

44390

Oncotarget

Figure 2: Estrogen increases anchorage-dependent and independent cell growth, migration and growth in suspension
culture of prostate cancer cells. A. PacMetUT1 cells (1,000 cells/well) were treated with estrogen (10 nM), ICI (100 nM), Tamoxifen

(100 nM), or in combination for 5 days. Cell growth was analyzed by MTT assay. Data presented are mean ± sem from five measurements.
PacMetUT1 cells (1,000 cells/well) were treated with estrogen (10nM) and MPP (100nM), or in combination for 5 days. Cell proliferation
was checked with MTT assay from six measurements. *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001 and ****P < 0.0001 with one-way ANOVA
analysis. B. PacMetUT1 cells (1,000 cells/100 μL) were plated in Epicult basal medium in a 96-well low attachment plate. Cells were
treated at the time of plating with estrogen (0.01 μM), ICI (1 μM), or in combination. After 48 h, colonies were quantified and presented as
mean ± sem from triplicate wells. ***P < 0.001 and ****P < 0.0001 with one-way ANOVA analysis. C. Anchorage-independent growth
of PacMetUT1 treated with estrogen (10 nM), ICI (1 μM), or in combination was measured after 7 days of growth in soft agar. Figures
presented are from triplicate measurements with mean ± sem. ****P < 0.0001 with one-way ANOVA analysis. D. Migration of PacMetUT1
and 22Rv1 cells after treatment with estrogen (10nM), ICI (100nM) and in combination were counted in whole inserts after 18 h. Data
presented are mean ± sem from triplicate wells. *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01 and ***P < 0.001 with one-way ANOVA analysis. E. Migration of
PacMetUT1 cells after treatment with estrogen (10nM), PPT and MPP (100nM) after 18 h were counted in five high power fields (HPF)
per well. Data presented are mean ± sem from triplicate wells. *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01 and ***P < 0.001 with one-way ANOVA analysis. ns
denotes no statistical difference.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

44391

Oncotarget

effect (Figure 2E) as was observed with ICI (Figure 2D).
These results again indicate the involvement of ERα in
driving the malignant properties of prostate cancer cells.

and Osteocalcin) in prostate cancer cells when cultured in
osteogenic differentiation medium (Figure 4A), but not in
the regular proliferation medium (Supplementary Figure
1D). Conversely, stable knockdown of ERα in PacMetUT1
cells with shRNA and a transient knockdown of ERα in
22Rv1 and LNCaP with siRNA significantly reduced the
expression of osteogenic markers (Figure 4B). Culture of
PacMetUT1 and 22Rv1 cells in osteoblastic differentiation
medium increased the activity of alkaline phosphatase,
another marker of osteoblast differentiation (Figure 4C). In
contrast, the alkaline phosphatase activity did not change
in PC-3 cells (Figure 4C), which does not express ERα
and induces osteolytic lesions [25]. Knockdown of ERα
in PacMetUT1 attenuated the induction of the alkaline
phosphatase activity in osteogenic medium (Figure 4D).
These results suggest that prostate cancer cells have
osteoblast-like properties as they express osteogenic
markers that are further elevated when cultured in
osteogenic medium and stimulated by estrogen signaling
through ERα. They are consistent with the published reports
describing osteomimicry in prostate cancer cells [36, 37].

Estrogen/ERα signaling induces epithelial-tomesenchymal transition
Epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is a
developmental process involved in cell differentiation,
migration, and morphogenesis. During tumor progression,
local microenvironmental factors in a primary tumor
activate the EMT program in cancer cells, which
triggers tumor cell invasion [32]. We noticed a change in
morphology of PacMetUT1 cells with estrogen resembling
the EMT process (Figure 3A). This was confirmed by a
down-regulation in E-cadherin expression and an increase
in Snail upon estrogen treatment (Figure 3B–3C). There
was a decrease in E-cadherin mRNA expression after
both 48 and 72 hours of treatment with estrogen, and
an upregulation in Vimentin mRNA level, which is a
mesenchymal marker (Figure 3D). These results indicate
that estrogen signaling can stimulate EMT of the prostate
cancer cells, likely through ERα as ERß was shown to
inhibit EMT in earlier studies [33]. To test this hypothesis,
we stably knocked down ERα in PacMetUT1 with two
different shRNA sequences delivered by a lentiviral vector.
As shown in Figure 3E, shRNA2 was more effective in
knocking down ERα expression than shRNA1. Thus,
shRNA2-transfected PacMetUT1 was used in subsequent
experiments. The level of ERß was not altered when
ERα was knocked down. ERα knockdown with shRNA2
moderately reduced the growth rate of PacMetUT1 cells
when compared to the control and shRNA1 cells (Figure
3F). Interestingly, estrogen mediated down-regulation in
E-cadherin was completely abrogated in ERα knockdown
PacMetUT1 cells (Figure 3G). Instead, we observed an
induction in the basal level of E-cadherin with ERα knock
down (Figure 3G). Similar effects were observed in both
PacMetUT1 and LNCaP cells treated with ICI, which
increased E-cadherin and decreased Snail or Vimentin
(Figure 3H). All these results confirm the involvement of
ERα signaling in estrogen-induced EMT.

ERα knockdown inhibits osteoblastic lesion
formation in vivo
Since estrogen signaling through ERα enhanced the
mesenchymal and osteoblast-like features of PacMetUT1
cells, we next examined the role of ERα in osteoblastic
tumorigenesis in vivo. The control and ERα knockdown
PacMetUT1/Luc-GFP cells were injected into the right
tibia of 5-week-old male nude mice at 1 × 105 cells/mouse.
PBS was injected into the contralateral left tibia as control.
Bioluminescence imaging revealed a slower growth rate of
intratibia tumors formed by ERα knockdown cells than the
control cells although the differences were not significant
at all time points (Figure 5A). At the end of 7 weeks after
tumor cell inoculation, we harvested the tibiae and lungs
to check for bone remodeling and lung metastasis. MicroCT analysis showed a high intensity of trabecular bone in
tibiae injected with cancer cells (Figure 5B) demonstrating
the robust osteogenic activity of PacMetUT1 cells as
previously published [31]. Furthermore, ERα knockdown
in PacMetUT1 led to a remarkable reduction in trabecular
bone formation (Figure 5B). We detected a reduced
immunostaining of mouse specific type I collagen in
the bone matrix (Figure 5C) and a significant reduction
in bone volume (Figure 5D) in ERα knockdown tumor
cells. The ERα knockdown in PacMetUT1 did not result
in changes in AR or ERß expression in the mouse tibia
(Supplementary Figure 2A–2B). These results suggest
that ERα expression in the PacMetUT1 cell is essential
for its osteoblastic tumorigenic property. Consistent with
the notion that EMT promotes metastasis, we detected
metastasis to lungs by examining GFP-positive metastatic
nodules under an epi-fluorescence microscope as done
previously [31]. We observed a significant reduction of

Estrogen/ERα signaling induces osteoblast-like
features in prostate cancer cells
Because estrogen/ERα signaling induced EMT and
is known to promote mesenchymal stem cell differentiation
to osteoblasts and bone formation (our unpublished data,
[34, 35], we hypothesized that estrogen/ERα signaling
may induce prostate cancer cells to become bone-forming
osteoblast-like cells, a phenomenon widely reported
by others as osteomimicry phenotype [36, 37]. We
found that, similar to the osteoblast precursor -human
mesenchymal stem cells (hMSC), estrogen upregulated
osteoblastic marker expression (Runx-2, Type I Collagen,
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

44392

Oncotarget

effect of pharmacological inhibition of ERα with ICI
182,780 on osteoblastic lesion formation. The male nude
mice were injected with PacMetUT1/Luc-GFP cells in the
right tibiae and PBS in the left tibiae, and treated with ICI
at 5mg/kg once a week for 7 weeks. There was no change in
tumor growth rate in bone with ICI treatment (Figure 6A).
However, there was a significant reduction in bone
formation in the ICI treatment group with both radiographic
imaging (Figure 6B) and histologic staining in comparison

50% (P < 0.05, Fisher’s Exact Test) in lung metastasis
incidence rate in ERα knockdown group in comparison
with the control group (Figure 5E).

Treatment with ERα inhibitor ICI 182,780
inhibits osteoblastic bone formation
As ERα in PacMetUT1 cells contributes to
osteoblastic tumor formation, we next investigated the

Figure 3: Estrogen/ERα induces epithelial-to-mesenchymal (EMT) transition. A. PacMetUT1 cell morphology change with

estrogen (100 nM) treatment for 72 hours. B. EMT markers, E-cadherin and Snail, were detected in PacMetUT1 cells after 24, 48 and
72 hours of treatment with estrogen (100 nM) by Western blot. C. Immunocytochemical staining of E-cadherin in the control and estrogentreated (100 nM for 72 h) PacMetUT1 cells. D. Relative mRNA levels of E-cadherin and Vimentin in PacMetUT1 cells after 24, 48 and
72 hours of treatment with estrogen (100 nM). Data are presented as mean ± sem from three measurements with real time RT-PCR assays.
* P < 0.05 and ** P < 0.01 with two-tailed student’s t-test. E. ERα protein expression was stably knocked down in PacMetUT1 with
two different shRNA’s (denoted as sh1 and sh2 in the figure). F. Control and ERα knockdown PacMetUT1 cells were plated in 96-well
plates at 1,000 cells/well. Their growth at the indicated time points was measured with MTT assay. Data presented are mean ± sem
from quadruplicate measurements. ****P < 0.0001 with one-way ANOVA. G. E-cadherin protein in the control and ERα knockdown
PacMetUT1 cells was measured with Western blot after 72 hours of estrogen (100 nM) treatment. H. E-cadherin, Snail, and Vimentin
protein levels were measured in the lysates of PacMetUT1 and LNCaP cells after 72 hours of estrogen (100 nM) and ICI (1 μM) treatment.
Both short and long time exposures with Snail are shown. * P < 0.05, **P < 0.01 and ***P < 0.001.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

44393

Oncotarget

could form calcium nodules in vitro and trabecular bone
in vivo. However, we did not observe a positive alizarin
red staining for mineralization when PacMetUT1 cells
were cultured in mineralization-inducing medium for 3
weeks. This is in contrast to some of the published reports
observing a positive staining with other prostate cancer
cells [38, 39]. Consistent with our in vitro findings, we did
not detect a positive staining of human type I collagen in
tibiae sections with new trabecular bones after PacMetUT1
injection (Figure 7A). Although PacMetUT1 cells were
stained positive with anti-human type I collagen antibody
(Figure 7A) suggesting that tumor cells themselves do not
form bones. Hence, we tested the possibility that tumor
cells could induce pre-osteoblasts to form excessive
amount of osseous tissues. Indeed, co-culture of hMSCs
with prostate cancer cells upregulated osteogenic markers

with the vehicle treated group (Figure 6C). There was a
significant reduction in bone formation in ICI treated group
with histomorphometry analysis (Figure 6D). Similar to the
ERα knockdown, ICI treatment also significantly (P < 0.01,
Fisher’s Exact Test) reduced lung metastasis incidence to
20% from 100% in the vehicle treated group (Figure 6E).
All these results indicate a positive role of ERα in promoting
bone formation and lung metastasis in PacMetUT1 cell
model in vivo and the potential utility of ERα inhibitors for
the intervention of osteoblastic lesion formation.

ERα mediates cross-talk between prostate cancer
cells and pre-osteoblasts
The osteomimicry properties of prostate cancer
cells led us to examine whether cancer cells themselves

Figure 4: Estrogen/ERα signaling induces osteoblast-like properties in prostate cancer cells. A. Estrogen induces osteogenic

markers determined by real-time RT-PCR in PacMetUT1, LNCaP and hMSC cells when cultured in osteogenic differentiation medium
for 5 days. B. ERα knockdown in prostate cancer cells reduces osteogenic marker expression in cells as determined by real-time RT-PCR
analysis. *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001 and ****P < 0.0001 with one-way ANOVA analysis. C. Alkaline phosphatase activity
assay was performed in the lysate of PacMetUT1, PC-3 and 22Rv1 cells after 4 days of culture in the presence and absence of osteogenic
differentiation medium. Results are normalized to total protein concentration. D. Alkaline phosphatase activity was measured in control and
ERα knockdown PacMetUT1 cells in the presence and absence of osteogenic differentiation medium. Data are presented as mean ± sem
from three measurements for the alkaline phosphatase assays. *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001 and ****P < 0.0001.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

44394

Oncotarget

in hMSCs (Figure 7B). The knockdown of ERα in cancer
cells decreased their potency in stimulating osteogenic
marker expression in hMSCs under co-culture condition
(Figure 7C). Interestingly, there was a reduced expression
of osteocalcin in the tibiae injected with ERα knock down
PacMetUT1 tumors (Figure 7D). These results suggest
that the tumor cells can induce osteoblast differentiation
and bone formation by pre-osteoblasts by secreting factors
that are regulated by estrogen/ ERα.

[41], and Wnts [42]. Other factors, such as parathyroid
hormone-related protein (PTHrP) and RANKL have been
reported to mediate osteolytic metastasis of prostate cancer
[43]. One major challenge in the field is the lack of model
systems that mimics osteoblastic lesions [44, 45]. We have
established a novel osteoblastic model in vivo using a
human prostate cancer derived cell line, PacMetUT1 [31].
In the present study, we took advantage of this system to
discover a new role of estrogen and ERα in osteoblastic
tumorigenesis.
Estrogens have been considered to be significant
risk factors in the development of benign prostatic
hyperplasia and prostate cancer. The presence of estrogen
receptors in the prostate tissue suggests that estrogens can
have functional roles in the prostate. It has been widely
reported that ERß is the predominant subtype, expressed
in the majority of prostate epithelial cells, whereas ERα
is expressed typically in the prostate stromal cells. ERαpositive cells have also been found in the hyperplastic
epithelium of the prostatic ducts, but its functional role

DISCUSSION
Metastasis is the primary reason of mortality in
cancer. Prostate cancer patients who are in the advanced
stage of the disease often develop bone metastasis that
is predominantly osteoblastic. The mechanisms of
osteoblastic lesion development are not well defined.
A variety of factors have been implicated as potential
mediators such as endothelin-1 [40], fibroblast growth
factors (FGFs), bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs)

Figure 5: ERα knockdown in PacMetUT1 cells reduces osteoblastic lesion formation and lung metastasis. A. Total

photon flux of intratibia tumors was obtained through whole body bioluminescence imaging of mice inoculated with PacMetUT1 control
and ERα knockdown cells. Data are presented as mean ± sem from nine control and eight ERα knockdown mice containing tumors. B.
Representative micro-CT images are presented for tibiae injected with PBS or PacMet/Luc-GFP cells transfected control or ERα shRNA.
C. Representative images of immunohistochemical staining of tibia sections for ERα and Type I collagen are presented. Corresponding
H&E stained images are also shown. Arrow indicates PacMetUT1 tumor cells that are less stained than the bone tissue. D. The total bone
volume expressed as percentage of a defined section of tibia volume was plotted from micro-CT imaging data. Data are presented as
mean ± sem from 4–5 tibiae in each group. ****P < 0.0001 with one-way ANOVA. E. Lung metastasis incidence in the control and ERα
knockdown group was confirmed in the excised whole lungs with green fluorescence imaging for GFP positive tumor colonies after the
termination of experiment at 7 weeks.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

44395

Oncotarget

Figure 6: Treatment with pharmacological inhibitor ICI reduces osteoblastic lesion development and lung metastasis. A.

Whole body bioluminescence imaging was performed to measure tumor growth over time in the tibiae. B. and C. Representative images
from X-ray radiography and H&E staining are shown. Arrow shows new bone formation inside the tibia. D. Bone area to total tissue
area was quantified with BIOQUANT analysis software. Data are presented as mean ± sem with each dot representing one tibia. E. Lung
metastasis incidence was confirmed in the excised whole lungs after the termination of experiment at 7 weeks. ****P < 0.0001.

Figure 7: ERα knockdown in prostate cancer cells attenuates their ability to induce osteoblastic marker expression
in pre-osteoblasts. A. Immunohistochemistry with human and mouse Type I Collagen antibody in two consecutive tibia section with
PacMetUT1-formed tumor indicates new bone formed is stained only with mouse collagen, while tumor cells are stained with human
collagen with little overlapping staining. Scale bar = 200 μm. B. Osteogenic markers, Type I collagen and Runx-2, in hMSC cells were
measured with real-time RT-PCR after being co-cultured with PacMetUT1 cells for 4 days. C. Cells with or without ERα knockdown were
co-cultured with hMSC for 4 days. Osteogenic markers were then measured in hMSC with real-time RT-PCR. D. Immunohistochemistry
for osteoblast marker (osteocalcin) was performed in tibiae injected with control and ERα knockdown PacMetUT1/Luc-GFP cells. Arrow
indicates a positive staining. Data in the panel B and C are presented as mean ± sem from triplicate measurements. *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01
and ****P < 0.0001.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

44396

Oncotarget

remains undefined [46]. Studies by Bankoff et al. showed
ERα expression in prostate cancer and in premalignant
prostatic lesions [27]. Due to our limited understanding of
ERα contribution in prostate cancer, we investigated the
role of estrogen and ERα in prostate cancer malignancy.
ERα is expressed in prostate cancer cells at varying
levels with PacMetUT1, C4–2, 22Rv1 and LNCaP cells
expressing higher level of ERα compared to BPH-1.
We further found that estrogen had an oncogenic effect
on prostate cancer cells by increasing cell migration
and anchorage-independent growth. It was shown
previously that stimuli such as TGFß and hypoxia could
inhibit ERß expression in prostate cancer cells, and the
loss of ERß promoted EMT [33]. We observed a downregulation in E-cadherin and an increased Snail and
Vimentin expression in prostate cancer cells with estrogen
treatment. The knockdown of ERα in PacMetUT1
abrogated these effects of estrogen suggesting that the
estrogen induced EMT is mediated by ERα. To further
check the role of ERα in osteoblastic lesion formation,
we injected the control and ERα knockdown PacMetUT1
cells directly in the tibia of male nude mice. The microCT analysis of tibiae sections showed significant reduction
in bone formation by the PacMetUT1 cells when ERα
was knocked down suggesting that ERα expression in
PacMetUT1 is essential for osteoblastic tumor formation
in vivo. Systemic treatment of mice with an ERα inhibitor,
ICI 182, 780, also significantly reduced osteoblastic
tumor formation. These results suggest that the blockade
of ERα signaling may prevent prostate cancer-induced
bone impairment and maintain bone health. This notion
is consistent with a recent phase III clinical trial using
a selective estrogen receptor modulator Toremifene in
prostate cancer demonstrating a significant decrease in
the incidence of new vertebral fractures in men receiving
androgen deprivation therapy for prostate cancer [11].
Some studies suggest that tumor cells can survive
and proliferate in bone tissues by acquiring a bone-cell
phenotype and osteoblastic features termed osteomimicry
[36, 47]. We also observed expression of osteogenic
markers and alkaline phosphatase activity when prostate
cancer cells were cultured in osteogenic differentiation
medium. Estrogen enhanced the increase in osteogenic
markers whereas ERα knockdown attenuated the
osteoblast-like features in prostate tumor cells. However,
analysis of tibiae sections in PacMetUT1 osteoblastic
in vivo model revealed staining of newly formed bone
tissues with mouse collagen antibody. This suggests that
the human prostate cancer cells themselves did not form
bones, but likely induced the differentiation of mouse
pre-osteoblasts. Indeed, co-culture of human osteoblast
precursor cells (hMSC) with prostate cancer cells induced
osteoblastic marker expression in hMSCs. Inhibition of
ERα in prostate cancer cells further abrogated this effect.
Further studies are required to delineate the key factors

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

involved in the tumor-bone stroma crosstalk that is
affected by estrogen/ ERα signaling. Since PacMetUT1
has unique features in expressing low AR and high levels
of ERα, we queried the cancer genome atlas database
(TCGA) to check how many tumor samples have similar
expression patterns. Out of 419 tumor samples, we found
that 43 samples have high levels of ERα compared to
AR, which represents about 10.26% of the total tumor
population examined (supplementary Figure 3A–3G).
Pulmonary metastasis commonly develops in
prostate cancer patients who have bone metastasis [48].
We found a significant reduction in lung metastasis in vivo
with both genetic and pharmacological inhibition of ERα
in tumor cells. This could be due to the reduced ability of
ERα knockdown PacMetUT1 to invade and migrate into
the bone marrow as our in vitro studies suggested that the
blockade of ERα signaling inhibited EMT, which is known
to promote tumor cell migration and invasion.
In summary, our study revealed a novel role of
estrogen signaling in promoting osteoblastic tumor
formation in human prostate cancer cell lines. This
oncogenic role of estrogen is mediated by ERα. Thus,
inhibition of ERα signaling in prostate cancer cells may be
a novel therapeutic strategy to inhibit the osteoblastic lesion
development in patients with advanced stage prostate cancer.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Cell cultures
LNCaP, 22Rv1, MDA-MB-231, MCF-7 and
MDA-PCa-2b cell lines were purchased from American
Type Culture Collection (ATCC, Manassas, VA, USA).
These cells were cultured in medium recommended
by ATCC. BPH-1 cell line was obtained from Dr. Scott
Lucia’s laboratory and cultured in a RPMI1640 medium
containing 10% fetal bovine serum. PacMetUT1 was
isolated from the lymph node metastasis of a 57year old prostate cancer patient at our university [49].
Freshly isolated human bone marrow mononuclear cells,
containing BM-MSCs (primary cells) from 20–25 year old
donors, were purchased from Lonza (Walkersville, MD)
and cultured in alpha-minimum essential medium (MEM;
Gibco BRL, Life Technologies, NY, USA) supplemented
with 15% fetal bovine serum (FBS, Gibco). All the
cells were maintained at 37°C in a 5% CO2 humidified
incubator.

Chemicals
Estrogen (17ß-estradiol) and tamoxifen were
purchased from Sigma (St. Louis, MO, US), ICI
182,780, 1,3-Bis(4-hydroxyphenyl)-4-methyl-5-[4-(2piperidinylethoxy)phenol]-1H-pyrazole dihydrochloride

44397

Oncotarget

(MPP dihydrochoride), and 4,4′,4′’-(4-Propyl-[1H]pyrazole-1,3,5-triyl)trisphenol (PPT) were purchased from
Tocris Bioscience (Bristol, United Kingdom).

Committee. Animals were housed under the care and
supervision of Laboratory Animal Research Facility at the
University of Texas Health Science Center, San Antonio,
Texas, US.

In Vitro luciferase assay

Intratibia injections

For transient transfection, cells were seeded in
triplicates in a 12-well plate at a density of 1.5–2.0 × 105
cells/well in the culture medium containg 10% charcoalstripped fetal bovine serum. When the cultures were 80%
confluent, they were co-transfected with 500 ng of an
estrogen responsive promoter-luciferase construct (ERELuc) and 100 ng of a ß-galactosidase expression plasmid
using 1.8 μL of Lipofectamine 2000 (Invitrogen, Carlsbad,
CA, USA). After 5 hours, the medium was replenished
containing estrogen (10 nM) or vehicle. Luciferase assay
was performed as described previously [31, 50] after 24
hour of incubation.

Animal surgery was performed under constant
anesthesia with isofluorane inhalation. PacMetUT1 cells
(1 × 105 in 10 μL PBS) were inoculated into the bone
marrow area of right tibiae through a pre-made hole
using a Hamilton syringe fitted with 27-gauge needle as
described previously [31]. The left tibiae were injected
with PBS as controls for the surgery.

Bioluminescence imaging analysis
After mice were anesthetized with isofluorane
inhalation, D-luciferin (Xenogen) was injected i.p. at
75mg/Kg body weight in PBS with a 1 min interval for
each mouse. Ten minutes later, bioluminescence images
were acquired with IVIS spectrum Imaging system
(Xenogen) at 1 min interval for each mouse as described
previously [31].

Cell proliferation assay
Cells were plated in 96-well plate at 2,000 cells
per well in five-well replicate. After 4 hours, cells were
treated with different chemicals for 5 days. MTT assays
were used for quantifying numbers of viable cells with
a Biotek plate reader (Biotek Instruments, Winooski, VT,
US) as described previously [31].

Radiographic analysis
Mice were exposed with an X-ray at 35 KVP for 5
sec by using a Faxitron Digital Radiographic Inspection
unit against the detector as described [51].

Western blot analysis
Cells after harvesting were lysed in Laemmli buffer
containing protease inhibitors and processed as described
previously [31]. The antibodies to ERα and ERβ were
purchased from Millipore, to GAPDH from Calbiochem
(Billerica, MA, US), to actin from Sigma (St. Louis, MO,
US), to E-cadherin from BD Biosciences (San Jose, CA,
US), and to Snail from Abcam (Cambridge, MA, US).

Bone histomorphometry analysis
Bone tissues were fixed in 70% ethanol for 24–
48 h at room temperature, decalcified in 10% EDTA,
and embedded in paraffin. Sections were stained with
hematoxyoin and esosin, orange G and phloxine. The
trabecular bone and tumor areas in a tibia section were
examined under a Nikon Eclipse E800 microscope
equipped with a QImaging QICAM-F fast color digital
camera and quantified using Bioquant Osteo System
(Bioquant Image Analysis Corporation, Nashville, TN,
US) as was described previously [31].

Alkaline phosphatase activity assay
Cells were seeded in 12-well plates, proliferation
and osteogenesis induction medium (Chemicon, EMD
Millipore, Billerica, MA, USA), which consisted of 0.1
μM dexamethasone, 0.2 mM ascorbic acid-2-phosphate
and 10 mM Glycerol-2-phosphate. Medium was
replenished every 2 days. ALP activity was measured after
5 days using Quantichrom alkaline phosphatase assay kit
(DALP - 250, BioAssay Systems, Hayward, CA, USA).

MicroCT analysis
Micro-Computed
tomography
(μCT)
was
performed on the tibia using a desktop SkyScan 1172
(Bruker, Aartselaar, Belgium) system. Each specimen
was submerged in 70% ethanol, positioned with the
proximal tibia pointing upward and the tube was sealed
with parafilm. Samples were scanned at 60 kV, 167 μA
beam intensity, 10 μm image pixel size, 0.7° rotation step,
4 frames averaging, and a 700-millisecond exposure time
at each step. The structural properties of the trabecular

Animal experiments
Four- to five-week old male athymic nude mice
were purchased from Harlan Sprague-Dawley, Inc.
(Indianapolis, IN, US). The animal protocol was approved
and monitored by the Institutional Animal Care and Use

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

44398

Oncotarget

bone were evaluated in the proximal metaphysis. The
volume of interest (VOI) started 0.5 mm distally from
the proximal growth plate and continued distally for 1.5
mm. The trabecular boundary was outlined manually. 3D
morphometric analyses were performed on the trabecular
VOIs.

1: 200) and ERß (Santa Cruz, sc-8974) antigen retrieval
was done with 0.5% trypsin at 37°C for 30 min and for
estrogen receptor alpha (Santa Cruz 8002, 1:150), antigen
retrieval was done in 10 mM sodium citrate, pH 6, at 95°C
for 15 min.

The cancer genome atlas database (TCGA)
data analysis

RNA isolation and real time PCR analysis
Cells were lysed in TRIzol reagent (Sigma) for
dissociation of any RNA-protein complexes and RNA was
isolated as previously described [52]. Primer sequences
are available upon request.

Level3 data of gene expression reads count
estimated by RSEM [53] of 419 tumor and 52 normal
samples of prostate adenocarcinoma (PRAD) in TCGA
were downloaded. Reads Per Kilobase of transcript per
Million mapped reads (RPKM) values of gene g in sample
s were calculated from estimated reads counts by the
modified formula below [54]:

Co-culture assay
Human mesenchymal stem cells were seeded in 24well plates, grown for 24 h, and then co-cultured with or
without control and ERα knockdown PacMetUT1/LucGFP, 22Rv1 or LNCaP cells in cell culture inserts (1.0-μm
pore size, Becton Dickinson, Durham, NC, USA). After 4
days of co-culture, inserts containing prostate cancer cells
were removed and total RNA was isolated from hMSC
cells for quantitative real-time PCR analysis.

RPKMg, s =

(Σg in sReadCountg, s) × GeneLengthg

Gene lengths are the summed lengths of reduced
exons from annotation package Homo.sapiens in
Bioconductor/R. Log2 (RPKM + 1) values were used
as Log2 Expression values to compare gene expression
across samples. Gene expression values of ESR1, ESR2
and AR were used for generating Heatmaps using
heatmap.2 from package gplots/R. Sample distance
were calculated in Pearson Correlation and hierarchical
clustering were performed in complete linkage method.
Significance of difference between gene expression levels
of ESR1 and AR were called based on cutoff at one-tail p
value 0.1 on the transformed z scores.

Migration assay
Cells were seeded in the upper 24-well Boyden
chambers with 8 micron-size inserts (BD Biosciences,
Durham, NC, USA) with or without treatments in serumfree containing medium. Serum-containing medium was
added to the lower chamber. Cell migration was counted
after 18 hours by fixing and staining the cells with Hema
3 Stain 18 kit (Fischer Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA)
according to the manufacturer’s protocol.

Statistical analysis

Immunohistochemistry

Two-tailed Student’s t-test was used to compare
two groups. One-way analysis of variance was used for
analyzing data when more than two groups were used
with Tukey-Kramer post hoc test. Results are expressed
as mean ± sem. P < 0.05 was considered to be statistically
significant.

Bone tissue sections were rehydrated through
xylene and graded ethanol, incubated in the proteinase
K (20 μg/ml) for 10 min and then sections were blocked
for endogenous peroxidase with 3% hydrogen peroxide
(Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) for 30
min in room temperature. Sections were permeabilized
and blocked in 10% goat serum for 1 hr. The primary
antibodies were anti-collagen I (1:600, ab138492 and
ab21286, Abcam, Cambridge, MA, USA) diluted in the
5% goat serum and incubated at 4°C overnight. Sections
were then incubated with a biotinylated goat anti-rabbit
antibody (BD Pharmingen, San Diego, CA, USA). For
detection, Streptavidin-Horseradish Peroxidase and
DAB Substrate Kit (BD Pharmingen, San Diego, CA,
USA) were used and the counterstain was done with
hematoxylin. For osteocalcin (AbD Serotec 7060–1815,
1:1200 dilution), androgen receptor (Santa Cruz, sc-816,

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

ReadCountg, s × 109

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank the institutional cores of Optical
Imaging, Pathology, Micro-Computed Tomography for
their assistance in obtaining part of the presented data.
The authors also thank Dr. Brian Rabinovich at MD
Anderson Cancer Center for the pLV411G effLuc-flagIRES-hrGFP vector, Dr. John A Copland for the lentiviral
ERα shRNA constructs and Dr. Scott Lucia at University
of Colorado Health Science Center for providing us with
BPH-1 cells.

44399

Oncotarget

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST

Toremifene to reduce fracture risk in men receiving androgen deprivation therapy for prostate cancer. The Journal of
urology. 2013; 189(1 Suppl):S45–50.

The authors declare no potential conflicts of interest.

12.	 Smith MR, Fallon MA, Lee H and Finkelstein JS.
Raloxifene to prevent gonadotropin-releasing hormone
agonist-induced bone loss in men with prostate cancer: a
randomized controlled trial. The Journal of clinical endocrinology and metabolism. 2004; 89:3841–3846.

FUNDING
This study was in part supported by RP120290IIRA from Cancer Prevention and Research Institute of
Texas (CPRIT), and R01CA172886 from NIH, and the
Cancer Therapy and Research Center at the University of
Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio (UTHSCSA)
through the NCI Cancer Center Support Grant 2 P30
CA054174.

13.	 Saltzstein D, Sieber P, Morris T and Gallo J. Prevention and
management of bicalutamide-induced gynecomastia and
breast pain: randomized endocrinologic and clinical studies
with tamoxifen and anastrozole. Prostate cancer and prostatic diseases. 2005; 8:75–83.
14.	 Kunath F, Keck B, Antes G, Wullich B and Meerpohl JJ.
Tamoxifen for the management of breast events induced by
non-steroidal antiandrogens in patients with prostate cancer:
a systematic review. BMC medicine. 2012; 10:96.

REFERENCES
1.	 Siegel R, Ma J, Zou Z and Jemal A. Cancer statistics, 2014.
CA: a cancer journal for clinicians. 2014; 64:9–29.

15.	 Prins GS and Korach KS. The role of estrogens and estrogen receptors in normal prostate growth and disease.
Steroids. 2008; 73:233–244.

2.	 Bosland MC. The role of steroid hormones in prostate
carcinogenesis. Journal of the National Cancer Institute
Monographs. 2000; :39–66.

16.	 Bossard C, Busson M, Vindrieux D, Gaudin F, Machelon
V, Brigitte M, Jacquard C, Pillon A, Balaguer P, Balabanian
K and Lazennec G. Potential role of estrogen receptor beta
as a tumor suppressor of epithelial ovarian cancer. PloS one.
2012; 7:e44787.

3.	 Xiang-Yun L, Ying-Wen X, Chen-Jing X, Jiu-Jiu W, Qi
P, Bo G and Zu-Yue S. Possible mechanism of benign
prostatic hyperplasia induced by androgen-estrogen ratios
in castrated rats. Indian journal of pharmacology. 2010;
42:312–317.

17.	 Slusarz A, Jackson GA, Day JK, Shenouda NS, Bogener
JL, Browning JD, Fritsche KL, MacDonald RS, BeschWilliford CL and Lubahn DB. Aggressive prostate cancer is
prevented in ERalphaKO mice and stimulated in ERbetaKO
TRAMP mice. Endocrinology. 2012; 153:4160–4170.

4.	 Citrin DL, Resnick MI, Guinan P, al-Bussam N, Scott M,
Gau TC and Kennealey GT. A comparison of Zoladex
and DES in the treatment of advanced prostate cancer:
results of a randomized, multicenter trial. Prostate. 1991;
18:139–146.

18.	 Paruthiyil S, Parmar H, Kerekatte V, Cunha GR, Firestone
GL and Leitman DC. Estrogen receptor beta inhibits
human breast cancer cell proliferation and tumor formation
by causing a G2 cell cycle arrest. Cancer research. 2004;
64:423–428.

5.	 Nevalainen MT, Valve EM, Makela SI, Blauer M,
Tuohimaa PJ and Harkonen PL. Estrogen and prolactin
regulation of rat dorsal and lateral prostate in organ culture.
Endocrinology. 1991; 129:612–622.
6.	 Martikainen P, Harkonen P, Vanhala T, Makela S, Viljanen
M and Suominen J. Multihormonal control of synthesis
and secretion of prostatein in cultured rat ventral prostate.
Endocrinology. 1987; 121:604–611.

19.	 Muthusamy S, Andersson S, Kim HJ, Butler R, Waage
L, Bergerheim U and Gustafsson JA. Estrogen receptor
beta and 17beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 6, a
growth regulatory pathway that is lost in prostate cancer.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the
United States of America. 2011; 108:20090–20094.

7.	 Risbridger GP, Wang H, Frydenberg M and Cunha G.
The metaplastic effects of estrogen on mouse prostate epithelium: proliferation of cells with basal cell phenotype.
Endocrinology. 2001; 142:2443–2450.

20.	 McPherson SJ, Hussain S, Balanathan P, Hedwards SL,
Niranjan B, Grant M, Chandrasiri UP, Toivanen R, Wang
Y, Taylor RA and Risbridger GP. Estrogen receptor-beta
activated apoptosis in benign hyperplasia and cancer of the
prostate is androgen independent and TNFalpha mediated.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the
United States of America. 2010; 107:3123–3128.

8.	 Leav I, Merk FB, Kwan PW and Ho SM. Androgensupported estrogen-enhanced epithelial proliferation in the
prostates of intact Noble rats. Prostate. 1989; 15:23–40.
9.	 Ho SM. Estrogens and anti-estrogens: key mediators of
prostate carcinogenesis and new therapeutic candidates.
Journal of cellular biochemistry. 2004; 91:491–503.

21.	 Hussain S, Lawrence MG, Taylor RA, Lo CY, Frydenberg
M, Ellem SJ, Furic L and Risbridger GP. Estrogen receptor
beta activation impairs prostatic regeneration by inducing
apoptosis in murine and human stem/progenitor enriched
cell populations. PloS one. 2012; 7:e40732.

10.	 Steiner MS and Raghow S. Antiestrogens and selective
estrogen receptor modulators reduce prostate cancer risk.
World journal of urology. 2003; 21:31–36.
11.	 Smith MR, Morton RA, Barnette KG, Sieber PR,
Malkowicz SB, Rodriguez D, Hancock ML and Steiner MS.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

44400

Oncotarget

22.	 Nakajima Y, Akaogi K, Suzuki T, Osakabe A, Yamaguchi
C, Sunahara N, Ishida J, Kako K, Ogawa S, Fujimura T,
Homma Y, Fukamizu A, Murayama A, Kimura K, Inoue S
and Yanagisawa J. Estrogen regulates tumor growth through
a nonclassical pathway that includes the transcription factors ERbeta and KLF5. Science signaling. 2011; 4:ra22.

implications for Gleason grading. Cancer cell. 2010;
17:319–332.
34.	 Windahl SH, Borjesson AE, Farman HH, Engdahl C,
Moverare-Skrtic S, Sjogren K, Lagerquist MK, Kindblom
JM, Koskela A, Tuukkanen J, Divieti Pajevic P, Feng
JQ, Dahlman-Wright K, Antonson P, Gustafsson JA
and Ohlsson C. Estrogen receptor-alpha in osteocytes
is important for trabecular bone formation in male mice.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the
United States of America. 2013; 110:2294–2299.

23.	 Zellweger T, Sturm S, Rey S, Zlobec I, Gsponer JR,
Rentsch CA, Terracciano LM, Bachmann A, Bubendorf L
and Ruiz C. Estrogen receptor beta expression and androgen receptor phosphorylation correlate with a poor clinical
outcome in hormone-naive prostate cancer and are elevated
in castration-resistant disease. Endocrine-related cancer.
2013; 20:403–413.

35.	 Khosla S, Oursler MJ and Monroe DG. Estrogen and the
skeleton. Trends in endocrinology and metabolism. 2012;
23:576–581.

24.	 Leav I, Lau KM, Adams JY, McNeal JE, Taplin ME, Wang
J, Singh H and Ho SM. Comparative studies of the estrogen receptors beta and alpha and the androgen receptor in
normal human prostate glands, dysplasia, and in primary
and metastatic carcinoma. Am J Pathol. 2001; 159:79–92.

36.	 Rucci N and Teti A. Osteomimicry: how tumor cells try to
deceive the bone. Frontiers in bioscience. 2010; 2:907–915.
37.	 Koeneman KS, Yeung F and Chung LW. Osteomimetic
properties of prostate cancer cells: a hypothesis supporting
the predilection of prostate cancer metastasis and growth in
the bone environment. Prostate. 1999; 39:246–261.

25.	 Dey P, Jonsson P, Hartman J, Williams C, Strom A and
Gustafsson JA. Estrogen receptors beta1 and beta2 have
opposing roles in regulating proliferation and bone metastasis genes in the prostate cancer cell line PC3. Molecular
endocrinology. 2012; 26:1991–2003.

38.	 Lin DL, Tarnowski CP, Zhang J, Dai J, Rohn E, Patel
AH, Morris MD and Keller ET. Bone metastatic LNCaPderivative C4–2B prostate cancer cell line mineralizes in
vitro. Prostate. 2001; 47:212–221.

26.	 Ricke WA, McPherson SJ, Bianco JJ, Cunha GR, Wang
Y and Risbridger GP. Prostatic hormonal carcinogenesis is
mediated by in situ estrogen production and estrogen receptor alpha signaling. Faseb J. 2008; 22:1512–1520.

39.	 Zhau HE, He H, Wang CY, Zayzafoon M, Morrissey C,
Vessella RL, Marshall FF, Chung LW and Wang R. Human
prostate cancer harbors the stem cell properties of bone
marrow mesenchymal stem cells. Clinical cancer research.
2011; 17:2159–2169.

27.	 Bonkhoff H, Fixemer T, Hunsicker I and Remberger K.
Estrogen receptor expression in prostate cancer and premalignant prostatic lesions. Am J Pathol. 1999; 155:641–647.

40.	 Nelson JB, Hedican SP, George DJ, Reddi AH, Piantadosi
S, Eisenberger MA and Simons JW. Identification of endothelin-1 in the pathophysiology of metastatic adenocarcinoma of the prostate. Nature medicine. 1995; 1:944–949.

28.	 Mundy GR. Metastasis to bone: causes, consequences and
therapeutic opportunities. Nature reviews Cancer. 2002;
2:584–593.

41.	 Dai J, Keller J, Zhang J, Lu Y, Yao Z and Keller ET. Bone
morphogenetic protein-6 promotes osteoblastic prostate
cancer bone metastases through a dual mechanism. Cancer
research. 2005; 65:8274–8285.

29.	 Wang S, Gao J, Lei Q, Rozengurt N, Pritchard C, Jiao J,
Thomas GV, Li G, Roy-Burman P, Nelson PS, Liu X and
Wu H. Prostate-specific deletion of the murine Pten tumor
suppressor gene leads to metastatic prostate cancer. Cancer
cell. 2003; 4:209–221.
30.	 Singh AS and Figg WD. In vivo models of prostate cancer metastasis to bone. The Journal of urology. 2005;
174:820–826.

42.	 Dai J, Hall CL, Escara-Wilke J, Mizokami A, Keller JM
and Keller ET. Prostate cancer induces bone metastasis
through Wnt-induced bone morphogenetic protein-dependent and independent mechanisms. Cancer research. 2008;
68:5785–5794.

31.	 Mishra S, Tang Y, Wang L, deGraffenried L, Yeh IT,
Werner S, Troyer D, Copland JA and Sun LZ. Blockade of
transforming growth factor-beta (TGFbeta) signaling inhibits osteoblastic tumorigenesis by a novel human prostate
cancer cell line. Prostate. 2011; 71:1441–1454.

43.	 Virk MS, Petrigliano FA, Liu NQ, Chatziioannou AF, Stout
D, Kang CO, Dougall WC and Lieberman JR. Influence of
simultaneous targeting of the bone morphogenetic protein
pathway and RANK/RANKL axis in osteolytic prostate
cancer lesion in bone. Bone. 2009; 44:160–167.

32.	 Tsai JH, Donaher JL, Murphy DA, Chau S and Yang J.
Spatiotemporal regulation of epithelial-mesenchymal transition is essential for squamous cell carcinoma metastasis.
Cancer cell. 2012; 22:725–736.

44.	 Fradet A, Sorel H, Depalle B, Serre CM, Farlay D, Turtoi
A, Bellahcene A, Follet H, Castronovo V, Clezardin P and
Bonnelye E. A new murine model of osteoblastic/osteolytic
lesions from human androgen-resistant prostate cancer.
PloS one. 2013; 8:e75092.

33.	 Mak P, Leav I, Pursell B, Bae D, Yang X, Taglienti CA,
Gouvin LM, Sharma VM and Mercurio AM. ERbeta
impedes prostate cancer EMT by destabilizing HIF-1alpha
and inhibiting VEGF-mediated snail nuclear localization:
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

45.	 Wu TT, Sikes RA, Cui Q, Thalmann GN, Kao C, Murphy
CF, Yang H, Zhau HE, Balian G and Chung LW.
Establishing human prostate cancer cell xenografts in bone:
44401

Oncotarget

induction of osteoblastic reaction by prostate-specific
antigen-producing tumors in athymic and SCID/bg mice
using LNCaP and lineage-derived metastatic sublines.
International journal of cancer. 1998; 77:887–894.

50.	 Mishra S, Lin CL, Huang TH, Bouamar H and Sun LZ.
MicroRNA-21 inhibits p57Kip2 expression in prostate cancer. Molecular cancer. 2014; 13:212.
51.	 Guise TA, Yin JJ, Taylor SD, Kumagai Y, Dallas M, Boyce
BF, Yoneda T and Mundy GR. Evidence for a causal role
of parathyroid hormone-related protein in the pathogenesis
of human breast cancer-mediated osteolysis. The Journal of
clinical investigation. 1996; 98:1544–1549.

46.	 Harkonen PL and Makela SI. Role of estrogens in development of prostate cancer. The Journal of steroid biochemistry
and molecular biology. 2004; 92:297–305.
47.	 Zayzafoon M, Abdulkadir SA and McDonald JM. Notch
signaling and ERK activation are important for the osteomimetic properties of prostate cancer bone metastatic
cell lines. The Journal of biological chemistry. 2004;
279:3662–3670.

52.	 Mishra S, Deng JJ, Gowda PS, Rao MK, Lin CL, Chen CL,
Huang T and Sun LZ. Androgen receptor and microRNA-21
axis downregulates transforming growth factor beta receptor II (TGFBR2) expression in prostate cancer. Oncogene.
2014; 33:4097–4106.

48.	 Tohfe M, Baki SA, Saliba W, Ghandour F, Ashou R,
Ghazal G, Bahous J and Chamseddine N. Metastatic prostate adenocarcinoma presenting with pulmonary symptoms:
a case report and review of the literature. Cases journal.
2008; 1:316.

53.	 Li B and Dewey CN. RSEM: accurate transcript quantification from RNA-Seq data with or without a reference
genome. BMC Bioinformatics. 2011; 12:323.
54.	 Mortazavi A, Williams BA, McCue K, Schaeffer L and
Wold B. Mapping and quantifying mammalian transcriptomes by RNA-Seq. Nat Methods. 2008; 5:621–628.

49.	 Troyer DA, Tang Y, Bedolla R, Adhvaryu SG, Thompson
IM, Abboud-Werner S, Sun LZ, Friedrichs WE and
deGraffenried LA. Characterization of PacMetUT1, a
recently isolated human prostate cancer cell line. Prostate.
2008; 68:883–892.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

44402

Oncotarget

