Priority Report

Mammalian Tumor Xenografts Induce Neovascularization
in Zebrafish Embryos
1

2

3

1

Stefania Nicoli, Domenico Ribatti, Franco Cotelli, and Marco Presta

1
Unit of General Pathology and Immunology, Department of Biomedical Sciences and Biotechnology, University of Brescia,
Brescia, Italy; 2Department of Human Anatomy and Histology, University of Bari, Bari, Italy; and
3
Department of Biology, University of Milano, Milan, Italy

Abstract
The zebrafish (Danio rerio)/tumor xenograft model represents
a powerful new model system in cancer. Here, we describe a
novel exploitation of the zebrafish model to investigate tumor
angiogenesis, a pivotal step in cancer progression and target
for antitumor therapies. Human and murine tumor cell lines
that express the angiogenic fibroblast growth factor (FGF) 2
and/or vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) induce the
rapid formation of a new microvasculature when grafted close
to the developing subintestinal vessels of zebrafish embryos at
48 h postfertilization. Instead, no angiogenic response was
exerted by related cell clones defective in the production of
these angiogenic growth factors. The newly formed blood
vessels sprout from the subintestinal plexus of the zebrafish
embryo, penetrate the tumor graft, and express the transcripts
for the zebrafish orthologues of the early endothelial markers
Fli-1, VEGF receptor-2 (VEGFR2/KDR), and VE-cadherin.
Accordingly, green fluorescent protein–positive neovessels
infiltrate the graft when tumor cells are injected in transgenic
VEGFR2:G-RCFP zebrafish embryos that express green fluorescent protein under the control of the VEGFR2/KDR
promoter. Systemic exposure of zebrafish embryos immediately after tumor cell injection to prototypic antiangiogenic
inhibitors, including the FGF receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitor SU5402 and the VEGFR2/KDR tyrosine kinase inhibitor
SU5416, suppresses tumor-induced angiogenesis without
affecting normal blood vessel development. Accordingly,
VE-cadherin gene inactivation by antisense morpholino
oligonucleotide injection inhibits tumor neovascularization
without affecting the development of intersegmental and
subintestinal vessels. These data show that the zebrafish/
tumor xenograft model represents a novel tool for investigating the neovascularization process exploitable for drug
discovery and gene targeting in tumor angiogenesis. [Cancer
Res 2007;67(7):2927–31]

Introduction
Angiogenesis plays a key role in tumor progression and
metastatic spread (1). The angiogenic growth factors released by
neoplastic cells, including members of the vascular endothelial
growth factor (VEGF; ref. 2) and fibroblast growth factor (FGF;

Note: Supplementary data for this article are available at Cancer Research Online
(http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/).
Requests for reprints: Marco Presta, Unit of General Pathology, Department of
Biomedical Sciences and Biotechnology, Viale Europa 11, 25123 Brescia, Italy. Phone:
39-030371-7311; Fax: 39-030370-1157; E-mail: presta@med.unibs.it.
I2007 American Association for Cancer Research.
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-06-4268

www.aacrjournals.org

ref. 3) families, are responsible for tumor neovascularization. In its
absence, the tumor remains in a state of dormancy (1). Thus, the
identification of selective targets in tumor-induced endothelium
may have significant implications for the development of
antineoplastic therapies, as shown by the positive outcomes in
the treatment of cancer patients with the monoclonal anti-VEGF
antibody bevacizumab (2).
The use of tumor cell syngrafts or xenografts in animal models
may allow the continuous delivery of angiogenic factors produced
by a limited number of tumor cells, thus mimicking the initial
stages of tumor angiogenesis and metastasis. Various animal
models have been developed in rodents and in the chick embryo to
investigate the angiogenic process and for the screening of
proangiogenic and antiangiogenic compounds, each with its own
unique characteristics and disadvantages (4).
The teleost zebrafish (Danio rerio)/tumor xenograft model
represents a promising alternative model in cancer research (5).
When compared with other vertebrate model systems, the zebrafish model offers many advantages, including ease of experimentation, drug administration, amenability to in vivo manipulation,
and feasibility of reverse and forward genetic approaches (6). Also,
the zebrafish possesses a complex circulatory system similar to
that of mammals and the optical transparency and ability to
survive for 3 to 4 days without a functioning circulation make the
zebrafish embryo especially amenable for vascular biology studies
(7). Here, we investigated the possibility that the implantation of
murine and human tumor cells could elicit an angiogenic response
in zebrafish embryos suitable for studying the effect of antiangiogenic chemicals and for the identification of genes involved in
tumor angiogenesis.

Materials and Methods
Cell cultures. Murine aortic endothelial (MAE) cells (obtained from R.
Auerbach, University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI) and tumorigenic FGF2overexpressing FGF2-T-MAE cells (8) were grown in DMEM plus 10% FCS.
Human adenocarcinoma Tet-FGF2 cells and VEGF antisense–transfected
AS-VEGF/Tet-FGF2 cells were grown as described (9). A2780, MDA-MB-435,
and B16-BL16 cells were provided by R. Giavazzi (Mario Negri Institute,
Bergamo, Italy).
Fish care, cell and morpholino injection. A zebrafish (D. rerio)
breeding colony (wild-type AB strain) and the transgenic VEGFR2:G-RCFP
(10) zebrafish line (provided by A. Rubinstein, Zygogen, Atlanta, GA) were
maintained at 28jC, as previously described (11), at the Zebrafish Facilities
of the University of Brescia and University of Milan. Dechorionated embryos
at 48 h postfertilization (hpf) were anesthetized with 0.04 mg/mL of tricaine
(Sigma, St. Louis, MO) and injected with 1,000 to 2,000 cells per embryo
resuspended in 3 to 4 nL of Matrigel (Becton Dickinson, Milan, Italy) using a
Picospritzer microinjector (Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany). SU5402 and
SU5416 (Calbiochem Biochemicals, La Jolla, CA) were diluted in system
water and added to 48 hpf embryos immediately after cell injection.
Zebrafish VE-cadherin splice site (5¶-TTTACAAGACCGTCTACCTTTCCAA-3¶)

2927

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (7). April 1, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research
and control (5¶-CCTCTTACCTCAGTTACAATTTATA-3¶) morpholinos (Gene
Tools, Philomath, OR) were microinjected into one-cell stage embryos
(0.4 pmol/embryo).
Whole-mount alkaline phosphatase staining. Zebrafish embryos were
fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde for 2 h at room temperature and stained for
endogenous alkaline phosphatase activity (12). Then, embryos were
mounted in agarose-coated Petri dishes and photographed under an
epifluorescence Leica MZ16 F stereomicroscope equipped with a DFC480
digital camera and ICM50 software (Leica, Solms, Germany). For transgenic
VEGFR2:G-RCFP zebrafish embryos, epifluorescence images were acquired
before fixation and alkaline phosphatase staining. When indicated, 5-Am
transversal sections of paraffin-embedded stained embryos were mounted
and photographed.
4¶,6-Diamidino-2-phenylindole staining and visualization of green
fluorescent protein–positive vessels. Transgenic VEGFR2:G-RCFP embryos at 72 hpf were incubated overnight at 4jC in 4% paraformaldehyde/PBS
and sequentially incubated with 5% sucrose/PBS for 1 h and with 15%
sucrose/PBS for 3 h. Finally, embryos were embedded in gelatin solution
(7.5% gelatin plus 15% sucrose in PBS) for 4 h and snap-frozen. Cryosections
(15 Am) were processed in PBT [3% bovine serum albumin, 0.1% Triton
X-100 in PBS (pH 7.3)] and sequentially stained with anti–a-tubulin
antibody (1:200) and 4¶,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI) solution (1:2,000;
Sigma). Sections were then mounted in DAKO (Glostrup, Denmark) fluorescent mounting medium and double-fluorescence images were acquired
using an epifluorescence Zeiss Axiovert 200 M microscope equipped with
Hal 100 digital camera and AxioVisionLE software. The percentage of
tumor area occupied by green fluorescent protein (GFP)-KDR+ vessels was
calculated by computerized image analysis (Image-Pro Plus; MediaCybernetics, Silver Spring, MD) on four sections per experimental point.
In situ RNA hybridization and reverse transcription-PCR analysis.
Whole-mount in situ RNA hybridization was done on 72 hpf zebrafish
embryos using digoxigenin-labeled antisense RNA probes for the zebrafish
orthologues of the endothelial cell markers VEGFR2/KDR (13), Fli-1 (14),
and VE-cadherin (15). Probes were prepared with the DIG System nucleic
acid labeling kit (Roche Applied Science, Basel, Switzerland) and visualized
using an alkaline phosphatase nitroblue tetrazolium/5-bromo-4-chloro-3indolyl phosphate substrate (Boehringer Mannheim, Mannheim, Germany).
Total RNA was extracted from tumor cell–injected embryos using Trizol
reagent (Invitrogen, San Diego, CA). PCRs were done on the retrotranscribed total RNA using Pre-Aliquoted ReadyMix PCR Master Mix
(Abgene, Epsom, United Kingdom) with annealing temperature equal to
60jC or 55jC for mammalian and zebrafish transcripts, respectively. The
species-specific primers used were:

types remain viable in situ, as shown by the presence of mitotic
figures within the grafts and by the expression of murine tubulin
mRNA (in both cell types) and human FGF2 mRNA (in FGF2
transfectants only) throughout the whole experimental period
(Supplementary Fig. S1). Because of the immaturity of the immune
system in zebrafish embryos at 48 to 72 hpf, no graft rejection
occurs at this stage.
From 48 to 72 hpf, SIVs form a vascular plexus. Injection of
FGF2-T-MAE cells caused the appearance of newly formed alkaline
phosphatase–positive blood vessels projecting from the SIV plexus
and infiltrating the xenograft. Only limited, if any, change in SIV
architecture was instead induced by MAE cell grafts (Fig. 1C). As
observed in mammalian models (8), neovascularization occurred in
100% of FGF2-T-MAE cell implants (n = 60) when compared with

human FGF2 forward, 5¶-AAGCGGCTGTACTGCAAAAACG-3¶;
human FGF2 reverse, 5¶-AACTGGTGTATTTCCTTGACCGGTA-3¶;
murine tubulin forward, 5¶-TCACTGTGCCTGAACTTACC-3¶;
murine tubulin reverse, 5¶-GGAACATAGCCGTAAACTGC-3¶;
zebrafish VE-cadherin forward, 5¶-GATGACTGAGCCTGTCTTCAGGGTT-3¶;
zebrafish VE-cadherin reverse, 5¶-TCTTTCTGATAGCGCCGTCTC-3¶;
zebrafish EF-1 forward, 5¶-GGTACTTCTCAGGCTGACTGT-3¶;
zebrafish EF-1 reverse, 5¶-CAGACTTGACCTCAGTGGTTA-3¶.

Results and Discussion
Tumorigenic FGF2-overexpressing mouse aortic endothelial cells
(FGF2-T-MAE) trigger a potent angiogenic response when compared with the poorly angiogenic, parental MAE cells in a rabbit
cornea or in a chick embryo chorioallantoic membrane angiogenesis assay (ref. 8 and references therein). On this basis, the two cell
lines were compared for their capacity to induce neovascularization when injected in zebrafish embryos. To this purpose, cells were
resuspended in Matrigel and microinjected in zebrafish embryos at
48 hpf (1,000–2,000 cells/embryo) through the perivitelline space
between the yolk and the periderm (duct of Cuvier area), close to
the developing subintestinal vessels (SIV; Fig. 1A and B). Both cell

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (7). April 1, 2007

Figure 1. Tumor cell xenografts induce angiogenesis in zebrafish embryo.
A, zebrafish embryo grafted with GFP-transduced cells to highlight the site of
injection (arrow). B, tumorigenic murine FGF2-T-MAE cells (a) and parental
MAE cells (b ) were injected in the perivitelline space of zebrafish embryos at
48 hpf. After 24 h, transverse sections of the embryos were stained with DAPI to
visualize the cell graft (arrow ); areas within the boxes are shown at higher
magnification in Supplementary Fig. S1 (nc, notochord; original magnification,
200). C, alkaline phosphatase staining of FGF2-T-MAE cell–injected (a and b)
and MAE cell–injected (c and d) embryos at 72 hpf. a and c, whole-mount lateral
view showing numerous neovessels originating from the SIV basket that migrate
and infiltrate the FGF2-T-MAE cell graft (arrow in a ), whereas no neovessel
formation is observed in embryos injected with MAE cells (c). b and d,
transverse sections of the cell grafts; alkaline phosphatase-positive intratumor
blood vessels in the FGF2-T-MAE cell graft (arrowheads; original magnification,
400). a to d, cell graft (*).

2928

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Angiogenesis in Zebrafish/Tumor Xenografts

5% of MAE cell grafts (n = 40, P < 0.01), no effect being exerted by
the injection of Matrigel alone (n = 15). In situ RNA hybridization
confirmed that the novel, tumor-infiltrating alkaline phosphatase–
positive SIV structures were formed by zebrafish endothelial cells.
Indeed, FGF2-T-MAE cell–induced neovessels highly express the
transcripts for the zebrafish orthologues of the early endothelial
markers Fli-1 (14), VEGFR2/KDR (13), and VE-cadherin (ref. 15;
Fig. 2A and B). Accordingly, neovessels express GFP under the
control of the VEGFR2/KDR promoter when FGF2-T-MAE cells are
injected in transgenic VEGFR2:G-RCFP zebrafish embryos (ref. 10;
Fig. 2C).
To further confirm the ability of the zebrafish/tumor xenograft
model to discriminate between highly angiogenic and poorly
angiogenic tumor cell variants, we took advantage of two closely
related human endometrial adenocarcinoma cell lines (Tet-FGF2
and AS-VEGF/Tet-FGF2 cells) that differ for VEGF and/or FGF2
expression (9). Indeed, Tet-FGF2 cells constitutively express VEGF
and overexpress FGF2 under the control of the tetracyclineresponsive promoter (tet-off system); when grafted s.c. in nude
mice, Tet-FGF2 cells cause the appearance of fast-growing tumors
characterized by high blood vessel density (9). AS-VEGF/Tet-FGF2
cells were generated from Tet-FGF2 cells by stable VEGF
antisense transfection. The consequent down-regulation of VEGF
production resulted in a significant reduction in the tumorigenic
and angiogenic potential of these cells that was further suppressed by the simultaneous inhibition of FGF2 expression
following tetracycline administration (9). In keeping with the
data obtained in nude mice, angiogenesis occurred in 75% of
zebrafish embryos injected with highly angiogenic Tet-FGF2 cells,
whereas no response was observed in any of the embryos injected
with tetracycline-treated, VEGF antisense–transfected AS-VEGF/
Tet-FGF2 cells (n = 16, P < 0.05). Moreover, neovascularization
was observed in 64% of zebrafish embryos (n = 36) injected with
the proangiogenic human ovarian carcinoma A2780 cells, human
breast carcinoma MDA-MB-435 cells, or murine melanoma
B16-BL16 cells, showing that this effect was not limited to
FGF2 transfectants. Even though only the parallel screening of a
variety of cell lines will establish whether the zebrafish-based
assay could provide results fully overimposable with those
obtained with the classic rodent and chick embryo angiogenesis
assays, the data shows the capacity of the zebrafish/tumor
xenograft model to discriminate between highly angiogenic and
poorly angiogenic tumor cell lines.
Because of the permeability of its embryos to small molecules,
the zebrafish model allows disease-driven drug target identification and in vivo validation, thus representing an interesting
bioassay tool for small molecule testing and dissection of
biological pathways alternative to other vertebrate models (16).
On this basis, to assess the susceptibility of tumor-induced
neovessels to systemic exposure of zebrafish embryos to
antiangiogenic compounds, live fishes ( five embryos per group)
were incubated with the FGF receptor-1 tyrosine kinase inhibitor
SU5402 (1.0 Amol/L) or the VEGF receptor-2 (VEGFR2/KDR)
tyrosine kinase inhibitor SU5416 (2.5 Amol/L; refs. 2, 3)
immediately after injection of FGF2-T-MAE cells. In keeping with
the role of FGF and VEGF signaling in tumor angiogenesis (2, 3),
both prototypic antiangiogenic compounds abrogated tumor
neovascularization in all the embryos, even though the two
molecules did not affect physiologic SIV development at the dose
and time point tested (Supplementary Fig. S2). These proof-ofconcept experiments indicate that the zebrafish/tumor xenograft

www.aacrjournals.org

Figure 2. Tumor-induced zebrafish neovessels express endothelial cell
markers. A, whole-mount in situ RNA hybridization of 72 hpf zebrafish embryos
injected on the right flank with FGF2-T-MAE cells (top view ). Embryos were
hybridized with specific probes for the zebrafish VE-cadherin (a ), Fli-1 (b), or
VEGFR2/KDR (c ) orthologues; intratumor newly formed blood structures are
highlighted in the corresponding insets. B, transversal sections of the tumor
xenografts shown in (A) allow the visualization of intratumor neovessels positive
for the corresponding gene transcripts (arrowheads ; original magnification,
1,000). C, tumor angiogenesis in transgenic VEGFR2:G-RCFP zebrafish
embryos. Embryos were injected at 48 hpf with FGF2-T-MAE cells and
processed 24 h thereafter. a, note the GFP-KDR+ neovessels (green )
penetrating the graft of FGF2-T-MAE cells (arrowhead) preloaded with the
fluorescent dye DiI (red; original magnification, 200). b, cryosection of a
FGF2-T-MAE tumor xenograft (*) stained with an anti–murine a-tubulin antibody
(red ); nuclear counterstaining with DAPI (blue ). Note the GFP-KDR+ neovessels
(green ) within the tumor graft (arrowheads ; original magnification, 600).

model may represent a short-term assay suitable for the
identification of novel tumor angiogenesis inhibitors. In this
context, it is interesting to note the rapid response of this model
to angiogenesis inhibitors (24 h) when compared with other
tumor graft/angiogenesis assays, including the chick embryo
chorioallantoic membrane assay (3–4 days), the s.c. murine
Matrigel plug assay (5–7 days), the murine (1 week) and rabbit
(2–3 weeks) cornea assays, and the s.c. mouse syngraft and
xenograft assays (several weeks; ref. 4). Also, a large number of
zebrafish embryos can be injected and maintained in 96-well
plates, thus allowing systemic in vivo treatment of the animals
with minimal amounts of compound. Therefore, dose-response
experiments could be done and numerous compounds can be
tested in an effective manner.
The identification of genes essential for blood vessel formation is
of pivotal importance for the understanding of the angiogenic
process and for the discovery of novel therapeutic targets. In
zebrafish, antisense morpholino oligonucleotides (MO) induce a
translational block in gene function, a very rapid experimental
procedure compared with gene knockdown in mice (17). The

2929

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (7). April 1, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

adherens junction component VE-cadherin plays an essential role
in tumor angiogenesis in mice (18). On this basis, transgenic
VEGFR2:G-RCFP zebrafish embryos were injected at the one-cell
stage with a splice site MO targeting the zebrafish VE-cadherin.
VE-cadherin MO (0.4 pmol/embryo) fully suppresses the maturation of the VE-cadherin transcript (Fig. 3A), causing the arrest of
blood flow and enlargement of the pericardial cavity without
affecting the development of normal intersegmental vessels and
SIVs (Fig. 3B). However, the penetrance of the VE-cadherin MO
was sufficient to cause a significant decrease in tumor vascularity
triggered by FGF2-T-MAE cell implants as shown by alkaline
phosphatase staining and quantification of the GFP-KDR+ vascular
area within the tumor graft (Fig. 4). Instead, no effect on tumor
vascularization was exerted by control MO. It must be pointed out
that the arrest of blood flow following systemic exposure of
zebrafish embryos from 24 to 72 hpf with the myofibril ATPase
inhibitor 2,3-butanedione monoxime (7.0 mmol/L; ref. 19) had no
effect on tumor vascularization, ruling out the possibility that
inhibition of tumor-induced neovascularization by VE-cadherin
MO may represent a mere consequence of the arrest of blood
circulation (data not shown). The capacity of VE-cadherin MO to
hamper tumor vascularization without affecting the development
of normal embryo vasculature is in keeping with the well-known
morphofunctional differences between normal and tumor blood
vessels (1), and represents the proof-of-concept that MOs could be
used in zebrafish embryos for the rapid in vivo identification of
genes involved in tumor angiogenesis.
The zebrafish model has exceptional utility as a human disease
model system and is suitable for forward genetic screens and
transient or permanent gene inactivation via MOs or ‘‘targetinginduced local lesions in genes,’’ respectively. Recent studies have
shown the feasibility of injecting human melanoma cells in
zebrafish embryo to follow their fate and to study their effect on
zebrafish development (20). Here, we extend these observations by

Figure 4. VE-cadherin MO inhibits tumor angiogenesis in zebrafish embryo.
A, whole-mount alkaline-phosphatase staining of FGF2-T-MAE cell–grafted
VEGFR2:G-RCFP control (a) and VE-cadherin (b) morphants at 72 hpf (lateral
view ). B, DAPI-stained transverse sections of tumor-injected control (a) and
VE-cadherin (b ) morphants [nt, neuronal tube; *, cell graft; green boxes,
areas enlarged in (C ); original magnification, 200]. C, GFP-KDR+ neovessels
(green ) within the tumor graft (white line ) in VEGFR2:G-RCFP control (a ) and
VE-cadherin (b ) morphants (original magnification, 600). D, quantification by
computerized image analysis of the GFP-KDR+ area in tumors of control and
VE-cadherin morphants (n = 8; P < 0.01).

showing that human and murine tumor xenografts induce
angiogenesis in the zebrafish embryo. This process is hampered
by the systemic exposure of live embryos to antiangiogenic
chemicals or by MO-targeted gene inactivation. The zebrafish/
tumor xenograft model represents a novel tool for studying the
mechanisms of tumor-induced neovascularization. Its use for
chemical discovery and gene targeting in tumor angiogenesis may
offer significant advantages when compared with other animal
models.
Figure 3. VE-cadherin zebrafish morphants. Transgenic VEGFR2:G-RCFP
zebrafish embryos were injected at the one-cell stage with control MO or with
VE-cadherin MO (0.4 pmol/embryo). A, reverse transcription-PCR analysis done
at 24 hpf on total RNA extracted from untreated (–), control MO-injected (C ),
or VE-cadherin MO-injected (VE) embryos using specific primers for zebrafish
EF-1 and VE-cadherin . B, VE-cadherin MO causes arrest of blood flow and
enlargement of pericardial cavity in 72 hpf embryos (arrow; b) when compared
with control MO embryos (a). However, no gross alterations in GFP-KDR+ blood
vessel formation were observed both in control (c ) and VE-cadherin (d )
morphants (lateral view ). No significant differences in vascular development
were observed between control and VE-cadherin morphants also at 24 hpf
(data not shown). Arrows, SIVs; arrowheads, intersegmental vessels.

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (7). April 1, 2007

Acknowledgments
Received 11/24/2006; accepted 2/12/2007.
Grant support: Associazione Italiana per la Ricerca sul Cancro, MIUR (Centro
d’Eccellenza IDET and Cofin projects), Fondazione Berlucchi, Istituto Superiore di
Sanità (Progetto Oncotecnologico), and EU-FP6 (LSHC-CT-2003-503233, subcontractor) to M. Presta and by MIUR (FIRB) and NOBEL Cariplo to F. Cotelli.
The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of page
charges. This article must therefore be hereby marked advertisement in accordance
with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact.
We thank M. Beltrame (University of Milan) for helpful discussion.

2930

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Angiogenesis in Zebrafish/Tumor Xenografts

References
1. Carmeliet P, Jain RK. Angiogenesis in cancer and other
diseases. Nature 2000;407:249–57.
2. Ferrara N. Vascular endothelial growth factor: basic
science and clinical progress. Endocr Rev 2004;25:
581–611.
3. Presta M, Dell’Era P, Mitola S, Moroni E, Ronca R,
Rusnati M. Fibroblast growth factor/fibroblast growth
factor receptor system in angiogenesis. Cytokine
Growth Factor Rev 2005;16:159–78.
4. Hasan J, Shnyder SD, Bibby M, Double JA, Bicknel R,
Jayson GC. Quantitative angiogenesis assays in vivo —a
review. Angiogenesis 2004;7:1–16.
5. Lam SH, Wu YL, Vega VB, et al. Conservation of gene
expression signatures between zebrafish and human
liver tumors and tumor progression. Nat Biotechnol
2006;24:73–5.
6. Thisse C, Zon LI. Organogenesis—heart and blood
formation from the zebrafish point of view. Science
2002;295:457–62.
7. Weinstein B. Vascular cell biology in vivo : a new
piscine paradigm? Trends Cell Biol 2002;12:439–45.

www.aacrjournals.org

8. Ribatti D, Gualandris A, Belleri M, et al. Alterations of
blood vessel development by endothelial cells overexpressing fibroblast growth factor-2. J Pathol 1999;189:
590–9.
9. Giavazzi R, Sennino B, Coltrini D, et al. Distinct role of
fibroblast growth factor-2 and vascular endothelial
growth factor on tumor growth and angiogenesis. Am
J Pathol 2003;162:1913–26.
10. Cross LM, Cook MA, Lin S, Chen JN, Rubinstein AL.
Rapid analysis of angiogenesis drugs in a live fluorescent
zebrafish assay. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol 2003;23:
911–2.
11. Westerfield M. The Zebrafish book. Eugene (OR):
University of Oregon Press; 1995.
12. Serbedzija GN, Flynn E, Willett CE. Zebrafish
angiogenesis: a new model for drug screening. Angiogenesis 1999;3:353–9.
13. Habeck H, Odenthal J, Walderich B, Maischein H,
Schulte-Merker S. Analysis of a zebrafish VEGF receptor
mutant reveals specific disruption of angiogenesis. Curr
Biol 2002;12:1405–12.
14. Brown LA, Rodaway AR, Schilling TF, et al. Insights
into early vasculogenesis revealed by expression of the

2931

ETS-domain transcription factor Fli-1 in wild-type and
mutant zebrafish embryos. Mech Dev 2000;90:237–52.
15. Larson JD, Wadman SA, Chen E, et al. Expression
of VE-cadherin in zebrafish embryos: a new tool to
evaluate vascular development. Dev Dyn 2004;231:
204–13.
16. Pichler FB, Laurenson S, Williams LC, Dodd A, Copp
BR, Love DR. Chemical discovery and global gene
expression analysis in zebrafish. Nat Biotechnol 2003;21:
879–83.
17. Nasevicius A, Ekker SC. Effective targeted gene
‘knockdown’ in zebrafish. Nat Genet 2000;26:216–20.
18. Liao F, Li Y, O’Connor W, et al. Monoclonal antibody
to vascular endothelial-cadherin is a potent inhibitor of
angiogenesis, tumor growth, and metastasis. Cancer Res
2000;60:6805–10.
19. Bartman T, Walsh EC, Wen KK, et al. Early
myocardial function affects endocardial cushion development in zebrafish. PLoS Biol 2004;2:673–81.
20. Topczewska JM, Postovit LM, Margaryan NV, et al.
Embryonic and tumorigenic pathways converge via
nodal signaling: role in melanoma aggressiveness. Nat
Med 2006;12:925–32.

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (7). April 1, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Mammalian Tumor Xenografts Induce Neovascularization in
Zebrafish Embryos
Stefania Nicoli, Domenico Ribatti, Franco Cotelli, et al.
Cancer Res 2007;67:2927-2931.

Updated version
Supplementary
Material

Cited articles
Citing articles

E-mail alerts
Reprints and
Subscriptions
Permissions

Access the most recent version of this article at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/67/7/2927
Access the most recent supplemental material at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/suppl/2007/09/10/67.7.2927.DC1

This article cites 19 articles, 3 of which you can access for free at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/67/7/2927.full#ref-list-1
This article has been cited by 28 HighWire-hosted articles. Access the articles at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/67/7/2927.full#related-urls

Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal.
To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications
Department at pubs@aacr.org.
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications
Department at permissions@aacr.org.

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

