One explanation for the latter findings is that many elderly
people have comorbidities, so even those who do not have cancer
may well have other medical problems that lead to higher medical
expenditures and greater productivity loss, Dr. Zheng says.
Dr. Zheng and his colleagues conclude that the economic
burden of cancer varies by cancer site and age group and
that nonelderly cancer survivors experience a greater overall
economic burden than elderly cancer survivors.
“It’s nice to have it quantified, but the findings are not at
all surprising,” says Shelley Fuld Nasso, chief executive officer
for the National Coalition for Cancer Survivorship. “It reflects
the costs of reduced work that some survivors experience and
the additional medical expenditures and side effects that most
have to deal with.” Fuld Nasso says she wonders if the reduction
of productivity might actually be a choice on the part of some
survivors, as in Laura Szalay’s case, rather than something
imposed on them. “Cancer changes their lives, and it may be
they decide to approach life differently and not go back to their
jobs,” she says.
Smita Bhatia, MD, MPH, a pediatric oncologist and
epidemiologist who directs the Institute for Cancer Survivorship
at the University of Alabama at Birmingham, praises the study
for providing new information.
“While we all have speculated and thought that the
economic burden would be high for cancer survivors, no one
has quantitated it, and it’s a nice study to show the amount
of economic burden survivors are incurring with the 3 most
common cancer diagnoses,” Dr. Bhatia says.

Additional Research Needed
Future research should explore the causes of both excess medical
expenditures and productivity loss, which could include disease
relapse or treatment complications, to find ways to mitigate
them, Dr. Bhatia says. Helping the most vulnerable survivors
cope with these issues in ways that will improve their morbidity
and mortality is vital, she says. “Before we can take steps to ease
the burden, we need to understand what’s causing the burden,”
she notes.
At the same time, the data from the current study can help
inform policymakers about the economic impact. Currently, the

nation has 12 million cancer survivors, and that number will
only continue to grow and have a greater effect in the workplace
and on health care costs, Dr. Bhatia adds.
Dr. Zheng and his colleagues also point out that their study
was conducted before the Accountable Care Act went into effect.
Future studies will evaluate how some of these survivorship data
may change as a result of the Accountable Care Act, and the
current study will provide a good benchmark for comparison,
he says. The study findings also could help oncologists discuss
with patients the issues that they may face after treatment is
completed, he notes.
Total Annual Economic Burden on Cancer Survivors
Nonelderly Survivors

Elderly Survivors

Colorectal cancer

$20,238

$18,860

Breast cancer

$14,202

$14,351

Prostate cancer

$9278

$16,851

Because the American Cancer Society study was limited to
medical expenditures and lost productivity, it would be helpful
for future research to focus on other economic burdens faced
by survivors, including transportation and lodging costs, the
amount of work time that family members must sacrifice to care
for patients, and the length of time that patients must wait to see
specialists, Dr. Zheng says.
In addition, he would like to follow cancer survivors
longitudinally to see how their cancer burden changes over time
from their diagnosis until the end of their lives. Those data—on
a large-scale, national basis—may be difficult to gather because
they are quite limited, he says.
Meanwhile, Dr. Bhatia and her colleagues at the City of
Hope Cancer Center in Duarte, California, and the University
of Minnesota in Minneapolis have been following a group of
nearly 10,000 cancer survivors who received bone marrow
transplants between 1974 and 2010, and they have queried
them about when they returned to work, their medical expenses,
and the causes of these excess economic burdens. They hope to
report findings in the next 2 to 3 years.
DOI: 10.1002/cncr.29004

Immunotherapy Drug Improves Survival of Patients With
Squamous Non–Small Cell Lung Cancer

W

hen the immunotherapy drug nivolumab was compared
with standard chemotherapy in a clinical trial,
investigators found that squamous non–small cell lung cancer
patients lived, on average, 3.2 months longer than patients
receiving chemotherapy alone.
The trial results were reported in The New England Journal
of Medicine and presented at the 2015 annual meeting of the
American Society of Clinical Oncology.1 In addition, findings
showed that after a year, patients on nivolumab had a survival
rate nearly double (42%) that of patients who received
chemotherapy alone (24%).

3562

Julie Brahmer, MD, director of the Thoracic Oncology
Program at the Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer
Center at Johns Hopkins in Baltimore, says that the results
helped researchers win approval from the US Food and Drug
Administration in March to treat patients whose lung cancer
had progressed with nivolumab while they were being treated
with standard chemotherapy.
The relatively small increase in median survival with the new
immunotherapy drugs may be rather misleading because patients
who respond to immunotherapy continue to respond for long
durations, Dr. Brahmer adds. These lengthier responses are cut

Cancer

October 15, 2015

off in calculations of median overall survival; therefore,
1- and 2-year survival data may offer additional
information about the drugs’ effectiveness in
comparison with median survival rates. Dr.
Brahmer also led an earlier multicenter
clinical trial of nivolumab in 2013, which
led to the current phase 3 trial of 260
patients at hospitals around the world.
Nivolumab, a checkpoint inhibitor,
alerts immune cells to cancer cells and
targets them for destruction. In this study,
researchers randomly selected 135 patients to
receive nivolumab, sold under the name Opdivo,
and 137 others to randomly receive the chemotherapy
drug docetaxel. Median overall survival for the nivolumab
group was 9.2 months, whereas it was 6 months for patients
who received docetaxel. At 1 year, 57 patients (42%) taking
nivolumab were alive, whereas 33 patients (24%) taking
docetaxel were.
Findings also showed that nivolumab reduced the relative
risk of dying of lung cancer by 41% among those who took the

immunotherapy drug versus those who took docetaxel.
In addition, severe side effects were more frequent
in the docetaxel group (55%) versus the
nivolumab group (6.9%). Side effects for the
former included hair loss, fatigue, nausea,
diarrhea, and low white blood cell counts.
For the latter, they were fatigue, decreased
appetite, weakness, and colon, kidney, and
lung inflammation.
Dr. Brahmer notes that approximately
20% to 25% of patients with lung cancer
respond to checkpoint blockade inhibitors. It
is important to determine which patients respond
well to these drugs because they tend to be extremely
expensive, she adds.

Reference
1. Brahmer J, Reckamp KL, Baas P, et al. Nivolumab versus docetaxel
in advanced squamous-cell non–small-cell lung cancer. N Engl J Med.
2015;373:123-135.
DOI: 10.1002/cncr.29700

Diastolic Dysfunction Common Among Breast Cancer Patients
Receiving Anthracycline

A

Echocardiogram.

dysfunction that persisted through the final follow-up visit. In
13 of the patients, diastolic dysfunction was reversed by the end
of the study.
Four patients with diastolic dysfunction developed overt
cardiac dysfunction, including left ventricle systolic dysfunction
(3) and sudden cardiac death (1). Patients older than 50 years
were 4 times more likely than younger patients to develop
diastolic dysfunction after anthracycline-based chemotherapy.
In addition, diastolic dysfunction was 3 times more likely in
overweight patients versus normal-weight patients, and it was
more than 7 times more likely in obese patients.
Dr. Serrano and his colleagues found that diastolic
dysfunction after treatment is common in older patients and
those with a higher body mass index. As a result, this knowledge
could lead to more intensive monitoring programs, he notes.

Reference
1. Serrano JM, Gonzalez I, Del Castillo S, et al. Diastolic dysfunction following
anthracycline-based chemotherapy in breast cancer patients: incidence and
predictors. Oncologist. 2015;20:864-872.
DOI: 10.1002/cncr.29701

© SEMNIC; SANTOL / SHUTTERSTOCK.COM

new study shows that 57% of breast cancer patients who
received anthracycline-based chemotherapy had changes
on their echocardiograms consistent with diastolic dysfunction
within 12 months of treatment.
The study, published in the July 16, 2015, issue of The
Oncologist, was led by Jose M. Serrano, MD, of Hospital
Universitario de Fuenlabrada in Madrid.1 Dr. Serrano and his
colleagues examined cardiac function before and after treatment
with anthracycline-based chemotherapy in an effort to quantify
the incidence of diastolic dysfunction and identify risk factors
for cardiovascular side effects related to this therapy.
Anthracyclines are a broad-spectrum class of chemotherapeutic agents commonly used in adjuvant and metastatic
breast cancer. Trastuzumab, a potent antibody against human
epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2), is used sequentially
after anthracycline chemotherapy in 20% of patients who are
HER2–positive.
Although the drugs are beneficial, trastuzumab is known to
exacerbate the cardiotoxicity of anthracycline, which can lead to
heart failure and left ventricular dysfunction. The risk of these
conditions from use of these therapies, however, is not well
understood.
The observational study involved 100 patients with breast
cancer who were treated with anthracycline-based chemotherapy
alone or in combination with trastuzumab. All patients underwent
an echocardiogram before they started anthracycline, at the end
of treatment, and 12 months after the last treatment dose.
Of the 85 patients who received anthracyclines, 49 (58%)
developed diastolic dysfunction during the median followup period of 12 months. Of those, 36 (73%) had diastolic

Content in this section does not reﬂect any ofﬁcial policy or medical opinion of the American Cancer Society or of the publisher unless otherwise noted. © American Cancer Society, 2015.

Cancer

October 15, 2015

3563

