Oncotarget, April, Vol.3, No 4

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Accelerating cancer evolution: a dark side of SIRT1 in genome
maintenance
WenYong Chen
One important aim in cancer treatment is to
kill cancer cells to control tumor growth and achieve
remission. However, cancer cells have strong capability
to adapt to hostile environment and evolve under stress.
This posts a major challenge to the treatment as most of
current therapeutic strategies fail to address how to prevent
cancer cells from evolution while trying to kill them. The
outcome of such therapeutic strategies is the emergence
of harder-to-treat malignancies once they relapse. This
has been clearly recognized in targeted cancer therapy
using tyrosine kinase inhibitors [1]. For instance, chronic
myelogenous leukemia (CML) can be effectively treated
with imatinib mesylate, an inhibitor of BCR-ABL
tyrosine kinase that causes the disease. However, CML
cells, especially those in advanced phases of the disease,
can rapidly develop resistance by acquisition of genetic
mutations of BCR-ABL that in turn require stronger
inhibitors to treat. Acquisition of genetic mutations of the
targeted oncogenes or their closely related genes widely
occurs in targeted cancer therapy [1]. Understanding the
mechanisms how cancer cells evolve under therapeutic
stress may help devise new strategies to improve cancer
treatment.
In a recent study, Wang et al showed that mammalian
stress response gene SIRT1 is a key player promoting
acquisition of genetic mutations for CML drug resistance
[2]. SIRT1 encodes a protein deacetylase that deacetylates
histones and non-histone proteins for diverse cellular
functions including DNA damage repair. In the model
system the authors used, BCR-ABL mutations are acquired
through a de novo process that is dependent on BCRABL expression [3]. SIRT1 inhibition by small molecule
inhibitors or gene knockdown blocks de novo acquisition
of BCR-ABL mutations in blast crisis CML cells and
prevents CML cell relapse from imatinib treatment. Two
more recent reports have shown that SIRT1 is activated
by BCR-ABL in both kinase dependent and independent
manners, and that SIRT1 activation promotes BCR-ABL
mediated leukemogenesis and CML stem/progenitor cell
survival from imatinib treatment [4, 5]. The study by Wang
et al provides new insight that SIRT1 pathway may remain
active after BCR-ABL kinase activity is inhibited and
mediate subsequent acquisition of genetic mutations under
imatinib therapeutic stress. The effect of SIRT1 is not
limited to BCR-ABL and CML cells, as SIRT1 inhibition
also effectively suppresses de novo mutation acquisition of
HPRT (hypoxanthine phosphoribosyl transferase) gene in
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

CML and prostate cancer cells when they are treated with
the chemotherapeutic agent camptothecin. Interestingly,
the authors showed that the role of SIRT1 in promoting
mutation acquisition is associated with its ability to
enhance aberrant DNA damage repair, in particular, the
error-prone non-homologous end joining (NHEJ) repair.
The findings by Wang et al apparently contrast with
previous reports that SIRT1 maintains genome integrity
[6, 7], which would predict that loss of SIRT1 could
increase genetic instability and mutagenesis. Intriguingly,
whereas chromosomal abnormality is observed in
SIRT1-/- embryonic stem cells [6, 7], impaired DNA
damage response is similarly observed in SIRT1-/- mouse
embryonic fibroblasts [7] and in SIRT1 knockdown CML
cells [2]. Furthermore, SIRT1 knockdown reduces the
efficiency of NHEJ and homologous recombination repair
in CML cells [2] and previously, osteosarcoma cells [6].
Therefore, one plausible explanation for the difference
is that SIRT1 may play a role for genome maintenance
in both normal and cancer cells; but, there may be an
important distinction of SIRT1 functions in normal versus
cancer cells in this regard. In embryonic cells, loss of
SIRT1 leads to gross chromosomal abnormality; however,
cells bearing abnormal chromosomes may not survive.
The impact of SIRT1 knockout on genome integrity
in normal somatic cells has not been examined, but is
expected less than in embryonic cells. This is supported
by the fact that SIRT1-/- mice, once they survive from
early developmental defect, do not exhibit the increased
incidence of spontaneous tumors [4] and referenced
therein. In contrast to normal cells, roles of SIRT1 in
cancer cells may be more complicated. SIRT1 may help
cancer genome maintenance by increasing DNA damage
repair in response to the increased production of reactive
oxygen species as a result of tumorigenesis. However,
as the fidelity of DNA damage repair is compromised
in cancer cells [8], new genetic mutations may arise as
a consequence of misrepair. With the increased SIRT1
expression in cancer cells to enhance survival, genetic
mutations or chromosomal lesions may be better tolerated,
allowing cells to bypass apoptosis. Chemotherapy likely
accentuates this process and stimulates evolution of
mutant cells in response to therapeutic stress. Wang et al
showed that SIRT1 may promote cancer evolution through
enhancing Ku70-mediated error-prone NHEJ repair [2].
Interestingly, this process resembles adaptive mutations
in bacteria induced by environmental stress, which is
363

Oncotarget 2012; 3: 363-364

promoted by activation of stress response genes and errorprone DNA damage repair [9]. It is provocative to suggest
that stress-induced mutagenesis may be a conserved
pathway from bacteria to certain mammalian (cancer) cells
to survive hostile environment, which involves cellular
stress response and error-prone DNA damage repair.
Although molecular details how therapeutic stress
signals mutation acquisition and cancer evolution are yet
to be worked out, the findings by Wang et al have clear
translational implication. Given the roles of SIRT1 in
CML molecular pathobiology and drug resistance, SIRT1
inhibition in combination with BCR-ABL inhibitors may
not only help eradicate residual CML stem cells but also
prevent them from acquiring resistant mutations and
evolution. Such a strategy may benefit treatment of other
types of malignancies as well.
WenYong Chen: Department of Cancer Biology, Beckman
Research Institute, City of Hope, Duarte, CA.
Email: WenYong Chen, wechen@coh.org
Received: April 27, 2012;
Published: May 9, 2012;

REFERENCES
1.	

Baselga J. Science. 2006; 312:1175-1178.

2.	 Wang Z, Yuan H, Roth M, et al. Oncogene. 2012; March
12. DOI: 10.1038/onc.2012.83.
3.	 Yuan H, Wang Z, Gao C, et al. J Biol Chem. 2010;
285:5085-5096.
4.	

Yuan H, Wang Z, Li L, et al. Blood. 2012; 119:1904-1914.

5.	 Li L, Wang L, Wang Z, et al. Cancer Cell. 2012; 21:266281.
6.	 Oberdoerffer P, Michan S, McVay M, et al. Cell. 2008;
135:907-918.
7.	 Wang RH, Sengupta K, Li C, et al. Cancer Cell. 2008;
14:312-323.
8.	 Nowicki MO, Falinski R, Koptyra M, et al. Blood. 2004;
104:3746-3753.
9.	 Ponder RG, Fonville NC and Rosenberg SM. Mol Cell.
2005; 19:791-804.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

364

Oncotarget 2012; 3: 363-364

