www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Oncotarget, 2016, Vol. 7, (No. 50), pp: 82864-82875
Research Paper

Plumbagin protects liver against fulminant hepatic failure and
chronic liver fibrosis via inhibiting inflammation and collagen
production
Huafeng Wang1,2,3,*, Huan Zhang1,4,*, Yuqing Zhang5,*, Dan Wang1,*, Xixi Cheng1,
Fengrui Yang1,2, Qi Zhang1, Zhenyi Xue1,2, Yan Li1,2, Lijuan Zhang1,2, Luhong Yang3,
Guolin Miao1,2, Daiqing Li6, Zhiyu Guan7, Yurong Da1,2, Zhi Yao2, Fei Gao8, Liang
Qiao9, Li Kong10, Rongxin Zhang1,2
  1Laboratory of Immunology and Inflammation, Department of Immunology and Research Center of Basic Medical Sciences,
Tianjin Medical University, Tianjin, China
  2Department of Immunology, Tianjin Key Laboratory of Cellular and Molecular Immunology, Key Laboratory of Immune
Microenvironment and Diseases, Ministry of Education of China, Tianjin Medical University, Tianjin, China
  3School of Life Science, Shanxi Normal University, Linfen, China
  4Clinical Laboratory, Tianjin Academy of Traditional Chinese Medicine Affiliated Hospital, Tianjin, China
  5Department of Hepatobiliary and Pancreatic Surgery, Tianjin Nankai Hospital, Nankai Clinical School of Medicine, Tianjin
Medical University, Tianjin, China
  6Key Laboratory of Hormones and Development (Ministry of Health), Metabolic Diseases Hospital and Tianjin Institute of
Endocrinology, Tianjin Medical University, Tianjin, China
  7Department of Pathogenic Biology, Weifang Medical University, Shandong, China
  8State Key Laboratory of Reproductive Biology, Institute of Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
  9Storr Liver Unit, Westmead Millennium Institute, The Western Clinical School of the University of Sydney, Westmead, NSW,
Australia
10

Department of Histology and Embryology, Dalian Medical University, Dalian, China

*

These authors have contributed equally to this work

Correspondence to: Rongxin Zhang, email: rxzhang@tmu.edu.cn, rongxinz@yahoo.com
Li Kong, email: kongli@dmu.edu.cn
Keywords: plumbagin, fulminant hepatic failure, liver fibrosis, hepatic stellate cell, inflammation
Received: August 08, 2016     Accepted: October 04, 2016     Published: October 14, 2016

ABSTRACT
Plumbagin is a quinonoid constituent extracted from Plumbago genus, and
it exhibits diverse pharmacological effects. This study thoroughly investigated
the effects of plumbagin on thioacetamide-induced acute and chronic liver injury.
Results shown that plumbagin increased survival rate, reduced liver congestion and
inflammation, and decreased macrophages and neutrophils in the fulminant hepatic
failure model, and remarkably diminished liver fibrosis and inflammation in the
chronic liver injury model. Furthermore, plumbagin significantly suppress the HSCs/
myofibroblasts activation by reduced expression of markers a-SMA and COL-1/3,
and reduced macrophage in liver. In the in vitro study, plumbagin induced apoptosis
and suppressed the proliferation of LX-2 cells (human HSCs). Plumbagin treatment
increased AMPK phosphorylation and attenuated NF-kB, STAT3, and Akt/mTOR signals
in LX-2 cells, while SMAD2 phosphorylation was not changed. Noticeably, plumbagin
promoted AMPK binding to p300 which is a cofactor of SMAD complex, this may
further competitively decreases the p300/SMAD complex initiated transcription of
COL-1/3 and a-SMA. Additionally, plumbagin hampered inflammation related NF-κB
signal in RAW 264.7 cells. In conclusion, these findings indicate that plumbagin may
be a powerful drug candidate to protect the liver from acute and chronic damage by
inhibiting inflammation and collagen production.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

82864

Oncotarget

INTRODUCTION

effects of plumbagin on acute and chronic liver injury.
We constructed the animal models of TAA-induced liver
damage [14, 15] and examined the protective effects of
plumbagin on acute and chronic liver injury in mice using
inflammatory infiltration, hepatocytes protection, and
fibrogenesis. We also investigated the possible molecular
mechanism involved in plumbagin protective effects using
LX-2 cells and RAW264.7 cells in vitro.

The liver is the largest solid organ in the body,
and it plays a pivotal role in metabolism and exhibits
an alexipharmic function in the body [1]. Liver damage
is a major disease that seriously threatens human health
worldwide, especially in Asian countries. Fulminant
hepatic failure (FHF) is caused by a variety of factors,
such as viral infection, drug damage and food poisoning
[2]. FHF often presents with extensive hepatocyte necrosis
and severe liver function abnormalities. FHF is a concern
because of its acute onset, rapid progression and high
fatality rate. Liver fibrosis is a common chronic liver
disease that is caused by variety of pathogenic factors
[3]. Liver fibrosis is not an independent disease, and it is
always accompanied with chronic hepatitis.
The root of Plumbago zeylanica L has been used for
centuries in traditional Indian and Chinese medicine for the
treatment of various ailments. Plumbagin (5-hydroxy-2methyl-1,4 naphthoquinone) is a quinonoid constituent that
is found in the roots of medicinal herbs of the Plumbago
genus [4], and it exhibits diverse pharmacological
effects. Hyperlipidemic rabbits that received plumbagin
exhibited a definite regression of atheroma and reduced
accumulation of cholesterol and triglycerides in the
liver and aorta [5]. Plumbagin induces tumor regression
in 3-methyl-4-dimethyl aminoazobenzene -induced
hepatoma in Wistar male rats when administered orally
at a dose of 4 mg/kg body weight [6]. Plumbagin also
inhibits azoxymethane-induced intestinal carcinogenesis
in rats [7]. Plumbagin treatment exerted negative effects
on the invasion, migration and adhesion of HepG2 cells
in vitro by decreasing MMP-2 and u-PA expression and
enhancing TIMP-2 and PAI-1 expression [8]. Previous
research reported the protective effects of plumbagin on
liver disease, but these studies focused more on glucose
metabolism and hepatocarcinogenesis [6, 8]. Therefore,
knowledge of the effects of plumbagin on FHF and liver
fibrosis is very poor.
Recently, we have found that several herbal
compounds derived from medicinal plants exerts potent
the anti-inflammatory and anti-tumor effects [9–12], the
herbal compound plumbagin exerts anti-inflammatory
effects on central nervous system inflammation in
experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis [13], these
suggests that plumbagin may also play anti-inflammatory
role in other inflammatory diseases such as inflammatory
liver injury. Thioacetamide (TAA)-induced liver injury
model is widely used to study the acute-toxic liver injury
and chronic liver inflammation and fibrosis. We have
reported that adiponectin-derived active peptide ADP355
exerts anti-inflammatory and anti-fibrotic activities in
TAA-induced liver injury [14], and mesenchymal stem
cells (MSCs) secreted molecules predominantly ameliorate
TAA-induced fulminant hepatic failure [15]. In this study
we performed a deeper and extensive investigation of the
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

RESULTS
Plumbagin improved survival rate and reduced
the risk of thrombosis in the FHF model
To verify the protective effect of plumbagin on
acute liver injury, plumbagin (2 μg/g bw, once daily) [16]
was administered intragastrically to ICR female mice
before TAA injection until the end of the experiment
and 2 days later FHF model was induced using a single
intraperitoneal injection of TAA (300 μg/g bw) [14, 15].
Survival rates after TAA administration in TAA mice
(n=16) were 81.3% (12 h), 56.3% (24 h), and 37.5% (48
h), and remained 37.5% to 96 h later. Survival rates in
PL+TAA mice (n=14) were 85.7% (24 h) and remained
85.7% to 96 h later. There was a significant difference
in survival rates after TAA administration between TAA
and PL+TAA mice (P= 0.013 using the log-rank test, P=
0.017 using Wilcoxon’s test) (Figure 1A). ALP and ALT
levels, which are markers of liver function, were higher in
TAA mice 96 h after TAA administration, but these levels
were lower with plumbagin treatment (Figure 1B). Livers
from the TAA group were obviously congested after TAA
injection, but this congestion was remarkably attenuated in
PL+TAA mice (Figure 1C).

Plumbagin inhibited the inflammatoryreaction
and depressed macrophage and neutrophil in
the FHF model
Histological analyses of livers using HE staining
revealed massive congestion around the central veins
in TAA mice, and this congestion was attenuated
in PL+TAA mice 24 h after TAA injection. Some
inflammatory responses remained in TAA mice, but the
primary damaged areas were repaired in PL+TAA mice
96 h after TAA administration (Figure 2A). Histology
analysis by the Ishak’s scoring system [14, 15] showed
that necroinflammation was significantly reduced with
plumbagin (Figure 2B). We next addressed whether
macrophages increased in livers. The expression of F4/80
protein (macrophage marker) increased sharply in the
TAA group 48 h after TAA administration. Differences
between the TAA and PL+TAA groups were prominent
(Figure 2C, 2D). It was demonstrated that hepatic
infiltration of neutrophils (indicated as myeloperoxidase
(MPO), Figure 2E) and hepatic production of monocyte
82865

Oncotarget

chemotactic protein 1(MCP-1) (Figure 2F) were reduced
with plumbagin treatment in TAA-induced fulminant liver
failure model.

3B). The expression of the macrophage marker F4/80
was suppressed by plumbagin in TAA+PL mice (Figure
3C). The liver function abnormalities in TAA mice, such
as increased serum ALP/ALT levels, were reversed by
plumbagin in TAA+PL mice. Glycogen metabolism is
an important function of the liver [14, 15]. A cytoplasm
filled with red glycogen particles was observed using
periodic acid Schiff (PAS) staining. Glycogen massively
disappeared due to reduced hepatocytes in livers from
TAA mice, and many of these cells reappeared in livers
from TAA+PL mice (Figure 3E).

Plumbagin reversed TAA-induced liver fibrosis,
inflammation and liver function abnormalities in
chronic liver model
To further clarify the protective effect of plumbagin
on chronic liver damage, An experimental hepatic fibrosis
model was established with TAA (200 μg/g bw ip, 3
times weekly) injection intraperitoneally into mice for six
weeks. Plumbagin (2 μg/g/day bw ig) was administered
after 6 TAA administrations until end of experiment. Liver
fibrogenesis and inflammation were remarkably hampered
by plumbagin treatment (Figure 3A, 3B). Liver fibrosis
stage and necroinflammatory scores in the Ishak system
demonstrated that the differences between TAA mice and
TAA+PL mice were statistically significant (Figure 3A,

Plumbagin therapy diminished chronic liver
fibrosis by targeting HSCs/myofibroblasts
HSCs/myofibroblasts stimulate the process of liver
fibrosis [14, 17]. As expected, strong positive staining for
α-SMA, which is a marker of HSCs/myofibroblasts [14],
was detected in TAA mice, and this staining was greatly

Figure 1: Plumbagin protected mice from fulminant hepatic failure. A. Survival rates of PL+TAA and TAA mice. Acute liver

injury was established using a single injection of 4% TAA (300 μg/g bw ip). The presence of plumbagin (2 μg/g bw ig) effectively reduced
TAA-induced death. B. The level of ALP/ALT 96 h after intraperitoneal TAA infusions. C. Gross histology of livers. Acute liver injury was
induced, and mice were sacrificed at the progressive daily points. Left: Gross liver histology. Right: Enlargement of liver tissues (in red
circle of the left). The presence of plumbagin significantly diminished the congestion (arrows denote) due to TAA-induced hemorrhage.
Representative images are shown for all panels. Mean ± SD, ns (not significant), * p<0.05, **p<0.01 were calculated using two-tailed
Student’s t test (T TEST).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

82866

Oncotarget

reduced in TAA+PL mice (Figure 4A). The deposition
of liver ECM indicated that the production of type 1/3
collagens was markedly suppressed in TAA+PL mice
compared to TAA mice (Figure 4B, 4C). TGF-β1 signaling
is required for HSC/myofibroblasts activation [14, 18].
Immunostaining revealed that plumbagin treatment
decreased the expression of TGF-β1 proteins in TAAinduced chronic liver fibrosis (Figure 4D).

apoptosis in the TAA+PL group (Figure 5B). It was
suggested that PL exerts its beneficial effect on liver
regeneration predominantly through enhancing the
proliferation of hepatocytes.

Plumbagin enhanced liver regeneration and
reduced liver apoptosis in the TAA-induced
chronic liver fibrosis model

We addressed whether plumbagin suppressed HSCs
in vitro. The inactivation of HSCs is associated AMPK [14,
19]. Plumbagin induced AMPK phosphorylation in LX-2
cells, and peak phosphorylation occurred at 1 h (Figure
6A). pSMAD2 levels were not significantly different
between groups with or without plumbagin (Figure 6B).
AMPK is a powerful competitor of SMAD complex for
the interaction with p300 [20] and plumbagin-stimulated
AMPK highly interacted with p300 (Figure 6C and Figure
7). The expression of TGF-β1 signal downstream genes
(also liver fibrosis-associated genes) such as COL1,

Plumbagin suppressed TGF-β1 signal by the
activation of AMPK in human hepatic
stellate cells (LX-2) in vitro

We hypothesized that the restoration of liver
function in TAA+PL mice was related to liver
regeneration. Liver regeneration marked by Ki67 occurred
in response to damage in TAA and TAA+PL mice, but
liver regeneration in TAA+PL mice was higher (Figure
5A). Liver apoptosis levels were detected using cleaved
caspase-3 staining. Plumbagin therapy diminished liver

Figure 2: Plumbagin decreased congestion and inflammatory cell infiltration and macrophage recruitment in the
FHF model. A. Congestion (cyan arrows) and inflammatory cell infiltration (yellow arrows) was assayed using HE staining. B.
Necroinflammatory scores were determined using the Ishak classification. C. Immunostaining of F4/80 (black arrows). D. Positive cells
of F4/80 were assessed by manual method. E. Immunostaining of MPO. Left panel, pictures; right panel, quantification of left images. F.
Hepatic content of MCP-1. Representative images are shown for all panels. ns (not significant), * p<0.05, **p< 0.01; ***p< 0.001. Data
are expressed as means ± SD. Statistical analyses were performed using Student’s t test.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

82867

Oncotarget

COL3 and α-SMA in LX-2 cells was greatly reduced by
plumbagin (Figure 6D).
It was also observed that plumbagin sharply
inhibited other signals, such as pSTAT3, NF-κB/p65,
and Akt/mTOR in LX-2 cells (Figure 6B), which all are
involved in inflammation and liver fibrosis [21–25]. In
addition, NF-κB/p65 activation in RAW 264.7 cells was
decreased by plumbagin (Supplementary Figure 1).

at beginning, and conscious until to advanced stage,
featured as liver cirrhosis or developed into the hepatoma
[3]. Whether liver failure is acute or chronic, orthotopic
liver transplantation is the current gold standard of care,
but its application is limited because of organ donor
shortage, financial considerations, and the requirement
for lifelong immunosuppression [2, 3]. In the present
animal model of FHF, we found that plumbagin treatment
protected the mice against substantial lethality, and
significantly decreased serum ALT and ALP levels in the
TAA-induced acute inflammatory response. Plumbagin
treatment simultaneously improved histological changes
in hepatic lobules, such as hemorrhaging and necrosis. In
the experiments of chronic liver injury, we demonstrated
that plumbagin treatment remarkably suppressed
liver fibrogenesis and inflammation and promoted the
restoration of liver function indicated with serum ALP/
ALT levels and glycogen metabolism, which related with
liver regeneration and apoptosis [14, 15]. Stimulation of

DISCUSSION
Plumbago genus has been shown diverse
pharmacological effects on various ailments, and its
extractive, known as plumbagin [4–8]. Acute liver failure
(also referred to as fulminant hepatic failure) is a rare
disorder that is associated with very high mortality [2].
Chronic liver failure, featured as fibrosis, is common over
the world [3]. Owing to overcapacity of liver function,
people with chronic liver injury are often unconscious

Figure 3: Plumbagin suppressed TAA-induced collagen deposition, inflammatory cell infiltration, and liver function
abnormalities in a chronic liver damage model. A. Fibrosis (green arrows) was determined using sirius red staining. B. Infiltration

of immune cells (yellow arrows) was shown using HE. C. F4/80 protein (black arrows) was measured using immunohistochemical staining
(brown, HRP-conjugated and developed using DAB). Sections were counterstained with hematoxylin (dark blue). D. ALP and ALT levels.
E. Periodic acid Schiff staining for hepatocellular glycogen storage (glycogen in red). Patches of periodic acid Schiff negative, nonfunctional
hepatocytes were shown by blue arrows. Histopathological evaluations were conducted using Ishak’s scoring system and Image-Pro Plus 6
Windows Software. Representative images are shown for all panels. Data are expressed as means ± SD. ns (not significant), *p< 0.05; **p<
0.01. p values were calculated using two-sided Student’s t tests.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

82868

Oncotarget

hepatocytes proliferation is tightly correlated with the
restoration of liver structure and function. Our results
also showed that expression of Ki67 (marked as liver
regeneration) increased while cleaved caspase-3 (marked
as liver apoptosis) decreased in livers with plumbagin
treatment. Taken together, it was suggested that plumbagin
can exert pharmacological effects on acute and chronic
liver injury. However, in the present study, action of
plumbagin was prophylactic in FHF model and detail
therapeutic effects will be needed to examine in the future.
The massive infiltration of inflammatory cells
is generally accompanied with the recruitment of
macrophages in acute and chronic liver damage [15, 26].
Macrophages play a crucial role in the regulation of liver
inflammation [26]. The number of macrophages rises

significantly in damaged livers, and these cells primarily
distribute over regions of injury and fibrosis [14, 15,
27, 28]. In addition, neutrophils are also correlated with
initiation of liver injury and inflammatory responses in
experimental model of acute liver failure [29, 30]. Our
study demonstrated a significant increase in macrophage
recruitment and other inflammatory cell infiltration such
as neutrophil, and related inflammatory cytokine MCP1, as a result of liver damage, and plumbagin treatment
strikingly decreased these factors in acute and chronic
liver injury models. The pro-inflammatory function of
hepatic macrophages was associated with the NF-κB
signaling pathway in an alcohol-induced inflammation
model [31]. Plumbagin suppressed the NF-κB signaling
pathway in RAW264.7 cells in vitro in our study, which

Figure 4: Immunofluorescence assays of HSCs/myofibroblasts. A. α-SMA, a marker of activated HSCs/myofibroblasts; B. COL-

1 and C. COL-3, markers of ECM produced by HSCs/myofibroblasts; D. TGF-β1. The TGF-β1 signal is involved in HSCs/myofibroblasts.
HRP-(brown) or Alexa 555 (red)-conjugated secondary antibodies were used. The sections were counterstained with hematoxylin (dark
blue) or DAPI (blue). Representative images are shown for all panels. The column charts given in figure are means ± SD values from three
separate experiments.*p< 0.05; **p< 0.01. Statistical analyses were performed using Student’s t test.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

82869

Oncotarget

Figure 5: Plumbagin enhanced hepatocellular proliferation and inhibited hepatocellular apoptosis in a chronic liver
fibrosis model. A. Ki67 (yellow arrows), a marker of proliferation. B. Cleaved caspase-3, a marker of apoptosis (black arrows). The
sections were incubated with HRP-conjugated secondary antibodies and developed using DAB (brown). The sections were counterstained
with hematoxylin (dark blue). Data are expressed as means ± SD, and data are representative of 4-6 mice/group. *p< 0.05; **p< 0.01.
Statistical analyses were performed using Student’s t tests.

Figure 6: Effects of plumbagin on human hepatic stellate cells. A. Plumbagin promoted pAMPK levels in a time-dependent

manner. LX-2 cells were treated with 10 μM plumbagin for the indicated times, and pAMPK levels were analyzed. B. Plumbagin inhibited
pSTAT3, p-p65, pAkt and p-mTOR levels in a dose-dependent manner. However, plumbagin had no effect on pSMAD2. LX-2 cells were
first treated with the indicated concentrations of plumbagin for 1 h after incubation. Whole cells were harvested and analyzed using Western
blots for pAMPK, pSTAT3, p-p65, pAkt, p-mTOR and pSMAD2. GAPDH was used as a loading control. C. Plumbagin facilitated the
bind of AMPK with p300. LX-2 cells were treated with 10 μM plumbagin for 1 h, and cell lysates were immunoprecipitated using an antiAMPK antibody, followed by immunoblotting with an anti-p300 or anti-AMPK antibody. D. Plumbagin decreased mRNA level of fibrosisassociated genes. LX-2 cells were treated with plumbagin (200 ng/ml) or TGF-β1 (2 ng/ml) or combination for 24 h, and then total RNA
were extracted for quantitative PCR of COL-1, COL-3 and α-SMA. Representative images are shown for all panels. Data are expressed as
means ± SD. *p< 0.05; **p< 0.01. p values were calculated using a two-sided Student’s t test.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

82870

Oncotarget

is consistent with previous studies [32, 33]. These
results support the conclusion that plumbagin inhibits
macrophage recruitment and suppresses NF-κB activation
in macrophages.
Liver fibrosis results from the deposition of
extracellular matrix proteins that are primarily produced
by α-SMA-positive HSCs/myofibroblasts [14, 17]. The
present study demonstrated that plumbagin treatment
suppressed HSCs/myofibroblasts activation (measured
as α-SMA) in livers in vivo and the induction of LX-2
cell apoptosis in vitro. Plumbagin therapy remarkably
diminished TAA-induced fibrogenesis, which was verified
using picrosirius red staining, the Ishak fibrosis score and
immunostaining for COL-1/3 in liver sections from mice
in the present experimental model. TGF-β1 signaling
is tightly associated with the fibrotic response. In the
present study, we found that plumbagin treatment reduced
expression of TGF-β1 in livers.
AMPK activation is relevant for the development
of hepatic fibrosis due to its inactivation of HSCs.
Activation of AMPK suppresses the activity of HSCs by
inhibiting platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF)-induced
mitogenesis and migration, in addition to downregulating
monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 (MCP-1) protein
secretion [19]. Activation of AMPK reduces HSC
proliferation and sensitizes activated HSCs to apoptosis
by modulating suppressors of cytokine signaling
(SOCS-3) expression [34]. In our recent study, we found
that activation of AMPK can dampen the activation

and proliferation of hepatic stellate cells induced by
TGF-β1 [14, 15]. AMPK activation can interrupt SMAD
complex association with p300 [18], which, as a SMAD
transcriptional cofactor, is required by the induction of
fibrosis gene expression by SMAD complex [20, 35]. In
the present study, we showed the highly affinity of AMPK
to p300 in the presence of plumbagin in vitro. Moreover,
plumbagin decreased mRNA level of fibrosis-associated
genes, such as COL1, COL3 and α-SMA, which all were
downstream gene of TGF-β1 pathway.
NF-κB is a previously confirmed HSC survival
factor [36]. Macrophages also contribute to liver fibrosis
via the promotion of NF-κB activation in HSCs [21].
The Akt/mTOR pathway correlates HSC survival and
proliferation [22–24]. Activated Akt is a key survival
factor that directly phosphorylates mTOR, which
ultimately stimulates HSC proliferation [25]. STAT3
actively promotes HSC activation [37, 38]. Plumbagin
treatment inhibited all of the aforementioned signals
that are associated with HSCs activation in LX-2 cells in
vitro. These results support that plumbagin inhibited liver
fibrogenesis by targeting HSCs.
In summary, the present study demonstrated that
plumbagin can exert protective effects on liver injury. As
summarized in Figure 7, plumbagin increased survival
rate, reduced liver congestion and inflammation, and
blocked the recruitment of macrophages in the FHF model.
In addition, plumbagin treatment remarkably diminished
liver fibrosis and inflammation in the chronic liver injury

Figure 7: Liver protection mechanism of plumbagin. Plumbagin increased AMPK phosphorylation that promoted AMPK binding
to p300, which is a SMAD transcriptional cofactor. This may further competitively decreases the p300/SMAD complex initiated transcription
for COL-1/3 and α-SMA. Plumbagin also attenuated NF-κB, STAT3, and Akt/mTOR signals in LX-2 cells, which were involved in proinflammation and survival of HSCs/myofibroblasts. In conclusion, these findings indicate that plumbagin may be a powerful drug candidate
to protect the liver from acute and chronic damage by inhibiting inflammation and collagen production.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

82871

Oncotarget

model. Furthermore, plumbagin significantly suppress
the HSC/myofibroblasts activation by reduced expression
of markers α-SMA and COL-1/3, and reduced F4/80
positive macrophage in liver. Plumbagin increased AMPK
phosphorylation that promoted AMPK binding to p300,
which is a SMAD transcriptional cofactor. This decreases
the p300/SMAD complex initiated transcription for COL1/3 and α-SMA. Moreover, plumbagin attenuated NF-κB,
STAT3, and Akt/mTOR signals in LX-2 cells, which were
involved in pro-inflammation and survival of HSCs. In
addition, NF-κB signal also hampered with plumbagin. It
is expected that plumbagin may be a powerful candidate
to protect the liver from acute and chronic damage by
inhibiting inflammation and collagen production.

transaminase (ALT) and alkaline phosphatase (ALP)
activities were determined using an EnzyChromTM
Alanine Transaminase Assay Kit (BioAssay Systems)
and a QuantiChromTM Alkaline Phosphatase Assay Kit
(BioAssay Systems) [14, 15], respectively.

Histology
Livers were perfused with PBS and removed.
Images were obtained, and livers were weighed and cut
into pieces. Liver specimens were fixed in a neutralbuffered formalin solution, embedded in paraffin, and cut
into 7 μm sections.
Liver slices were stained with hematoxylin-eosin
(HE) to identify inflammation and necrosis, picrosirius
red for fibrosis identification and Necroinflammation
and fibrosis were scored using an Ishak system [14, 15,
39] (Details are described in Supplementary Table 1, 2).
Liver slices were stained with periodic acid–Schiff (PAS)
staining for analyses of glycogen metabolism. Positive
staining was quantified using Image-Pro Plus 6 Windows
Software (Media Cybernetics, USA).

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Reagents and animals
TAA, sirius red, and a 10% formalin solution
were purchased from Sigma Aldrich (St. Louis, MO,
USA). Plumbagin (J&K, Beijing, China) was prepared in
dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) and diluted with PBS. ICR
female mice were purchased from the Academy of Military
Medical Science (Beijing, China) and weighed 20-22 g at
the time of experiments. All mice were acclimatized for
1 week prior to the beginning of all experiments. Mice
were housed in an animal room with a 12-hour light/
dark cycle. All experimental protocols were approved
by Tianjin Medical University Animal Ethics Committee
and all methods were carried out in accordance with the
approved guidelines.

Immunostaining
Tissue sections were incubated with the following
primary antibodies: rabbit anti-α-SMA (1:200;
Abcam), anti-F4/80 (AbD Serotec, Oxford, UK), antimyeloperoxidase antibody (1:200; Abcam), rabbit anticollagen 1 (1:200; Abcam), anti-collagen 3 (1:1,000;
Abcam), rabbit anti-TGFβ1 (1:100; Sigma-Aldrich),
anti-Ki67 (Abcam, ab66155), and anti-cleaved caspase-3
(Asp 175) (Cell Signaling Technology, Inc., CAT#: 9664).
Sections for immunohistochemistry were incubated with
horseradish peroxidase (HRP)-conjugated secondary
antibodies (1:1000; Jackson, 11-GAR007, distributed by
MμltiSciences Biotech Co., Ltd.) and developed using
3,3’-diaminobenzidine (DAB). Alexa 555-conjugated
secondary antibodies (1:200; Molecular Probes) were used
for immunofluorescence. Sections were counterstained with
hematoxylin or DAPI (eBioscience, 00-4959). Positive
staining was quantified by manual method or Image-Pro
Plus 6 Windows Software (Media Cybernetics, USA).

Experimental model
FHF model (diagrammed in Supplementary Figure
2A) was induced using a single intraperitoneal injection
of TAA (300 μg/g bw) [14, 15]. Plumbagin (2 μg/g bw)
[16] was administered intragastrically to PL+TAA mice 2
days before TAA injection until the end of the experiment.
Chronic liver fibrosis model [14, 15] (diagrammed
in Supplementary Figure 2B). TAA (100 μg/g bw ip, 3
times weekly) was injected intraperitoneally into TAA+PL
and TAA mice for the first two weeks, and the dose of
TAA was increased to 200 μg/g until the sixth week.
Plumbagin (2 μg/g/day bw ig) was administered after
6 TAA administrations. Mice were randomized into 3
groups: (i) Control group; (ii) TAA+PL mice, which were
treated with TAA and plumbagin; and (iii) TAA mice,
which were treated with TAA only.
All mice were sacrificed at specific times after TAA
administration.

Hepatic MCP-1 assay
Liver tissues were homogenized in RIPA (Applygen
Technologies Inc, Beijing, China) by Bullet Blender
Homogenizer (USA). Hepatic MCP-1 content was
determined with Mouse monocyte chemotactic protein 1
ELISA Kit (Suobio, China). The procedures are according
to manufacturers’ protocols.

ALT and ALP

Western blotting

Serum samples were collected using orbital
venous plexus bleeding in anesthetized mice. Alanine

Total protein from LX-2 were extracted using
RIPA Lysis Buffer (Beijing Biomed) and the protease

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

82872

Oncotarget

Author contributions

inhibitor PMSF, and the nuclear proteins were extracted
using the Nucleoprotein Extraction Kit (Sangon Biotech,
Shanghai). Cell lysates were separated using SDS–PAGE
and transferred to Immobilon-P membranes (Millipore).
Membranes were incubated with primary antibodies
for AMPK (Cell Signaling Technology), pAMPK
(Cell Signaling Technology), pSTAT3 (Cell Signaling
Technology), pAkt (Cell Signaling Technology), p-mTOR
(Cell Signaling Technology), p-SMAD2 (Sigma-Aldrich),
and GAPDH (Santa Cruz Biotechnology) followed by
HRP-conjugated secondary antibodies (1:2,000; Sungene
Biotech Co., Ltd) that were specific to the species of the
primary antibodies.

H. Z. and R. Z. conception and design of research;
H. Z., X. C., Y. Z., Z. G., G. M. and D. W. performed
experiments; H. Z., and H. W. analyzed data; H. Z., F.
Y., Q. Z., Z. X., D. L., Y. L., L. Z. and H. W. interpreted
results of experiments; H. Z., Y. D. and H. W. prepared
figures; H. Z., and H. W. drafted manuscript; F. G., Z. Y.,
L. Q., L. K. and R. Z. edited and revised manuscript; R. Z.
approved final version of manuscript.

REFERENCES
1.	 Wallace K, Burt A, Wright M. Liver fibrosis. Biochem J.
2008; 411:1-18.

Immunoprecipitation

2.	 Bernal W, Auzinger G, Dhawan A, Wendon J. Acute liver
failure. The Lancet. 2010; 376:190-201.

The primary antibodies were AMPK and p300 (Cell
Signaling Technology), and HRP-conjugated secondary
antibodies (1:2,000; Sungene Biotech Co., Ltd.) that were
specific to the species of the primary antibodies were used.
Immunoprecipitation was performed in accordance with
the protocol of Dynabeads® Protein G (Life Technologies
AS, Norway).

3.	 Wallace K, Burt AD, Wright MC. Liver fibrosis.
Biochemical Journal. 2008; 411:1-18.
4.	 Parimala R, Sachdanandam P. Effect of Plumbagin on
some glucose metabolising enzymes studied in rats
in experimental hepatoma. Molecular and cellular
biochemistry. 1993; 125:59-63.
5.	 Sharma I, Gusain D, Dixit VP. Hypolipidaemic and
antiatherosclerotic effects of plumbagin in rabbits. Indian
journal of physiology and pharmacology. 1991; 35:10-14.

Gene expression
LX-2 cells were treated with plumbagin (200 ng/ml)
or TGF-β1 (2 ng/ml) or combination for 24 h, and then
total RNA was extracted by using Trizol reagent according
to the manufacturer's instructions (Invitrogen, Carlsbad,
USA). The RNA was converted into cDNA with random
hexamers and M-MLV reverse transcriptase (Invitrogen,
Oregon, USA). PCR was performed for COL-1/3, α-SMA
and GAPDH detection. Primers were from BGI, China
(Supplementary Table 3).

6.	 Parimala R, Sachdanandam P. Effect of Plumbagin on
some glucose metabolising enzymes studied in rats
in experimental hepatoma. Mol Cell Biochem. 1993;
125:59-63.
7.	 Sugie S, Okamoto K, Rahman KM, Tanaka T, Kawai K,
Yamahara J, Mori H. Inhibitory effects of plumbagin and
juglone on azoxymethane-induced intestinal carcinogenesis
in rats. Cancer letters. 1998; 127:177-183.
8.	 Shih YW, Lee YC, Wu PF, Lee YB, Chiang TA. Plumbagin
inhibits invasion and migration of liver cancer HepG2 cells
by decreasing productions of matrix metalloproteinase-2
and urokinase- plasminogen activator. Hepatology research.
2009; 39:998-1009.

Statistical analysis
Data are expressed as means ± SD (standard
deviation). Statistical comparisons between experimental
groups were performed using Student’s t-test.

9.	 Xue Z, Ge Z, Zhang K, Sun R, Yang J, Han R, Peng M, Li
Y, Li W, Zhang D, Hao J, Da Y, Yao Z, Zhang R. Embelin
suppresses dendritic cell functions and limits autoimmune
encephalomyelitis through the TGF-beta/beta-catenin and
STAT3 signaling pathways. Molecular neurobiology. 2014;
49:1087-1101.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work is supported by the Ministry of
Science and Technology of China through Grant No.
2012CB932503; the National Natural Science Foundation
of China through Grant 81172864, 81272317, 81270891,
81302568 and 81301026; Shandong College Outstanding
Young Teacher Domestic Visiting Scholar Project.

10.	 Ge Z, Da Y, Xue Z, Zhang K, Zhuang H, Peng M, Li Y, Li
W, Simard A, Hao J, Yao Z, Zhang R. Vorinostat, a histone
deacetylase inhibitor, suppresses dendritic cell function and
ameliorates experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis.
Experimental neurology. 2013; 241:56-66.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST

11.	 Li W, Zhang Z, Zhang K, Xue Z, Li Y, Zhang Z, Zhang
L, Gu C, Zhang Q, Hao J, Da Y, Yao Z, Kong Y, Zhang
R. Arctigenin Suppress Th17 Cells and Ameliorates

Competing financial interests: The authors declare
no competing financial interests.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

82873

Oncotarget

Experimental Autoimmune Encephalomyelitis Through
AMPK, PPAR-gamma/ROR-gammat Signaling. Molecular
neurobiology. 2016; 53:5356-5366.

stellate cell proliferation and type I collagen expression.
The Journal of biological chemistry. 2003; 278:8083-8090.
23.	 Foo NP, Lin SH, Lee YH, Wu MJ, Wang YJ. alpha-Lipoic
acid inhibits liver fibrosis through the attenuation of ROStriggered signaling in hepatic stellate cells activated by
PDGF, TGF-beta. Toxicology. 2011; 282:39-46.

12.	 Zhang K, Ge Z, Xue Z, Huang W, Mei M, Zhang Q, Li
Y, Li W, Zhang Z, Zhang Z. Chrysin suppresses human
CD14+ monocyte-derived dendritic cells and ameliorates
experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis. Journal of
neuroimmunology. 2015; 288:13-20.

24.	 Saxena NK, Titus MA, Ding X, Floyd J, Srinivasan S,
Sitaraman SV, Anania FA. Leptin as a novel profibrogenic
cytokine in hepatic stellate cells: mitogenesis and inhibition
of apoptosis mediated by extracellular regulated kinase
(Erk) and Akt phosphorylation. The FASEB journal. 2004;
18:1612-1614.

13.	 Zhang K, Ge Z, Da Y, Wang D, Liu Y, Xue Z, Li Y, Li
W, Zhang L, Wang H, Zhang H, Peng M, Hao J, Yao Z,
Zhang R. Plumbagin suppresses dendritic cell functions
and alleviates experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis.
Journal of neuroimmunology. 2014; 273:42-52.

25.	 Liu Q, Chen J, Wang X, Yu L, Hu LH, Shen X. Withagulatin
A inhibits hepatic stellate cell viability and procollagen I
production through Akt and Smad signaling pathways. Acta
pharmacologica Sinica. 2010; 31:944-952.

14.	 Wang H, Zhang H, Zhang Z, Huang B, Cheng X, Wang D,
la Gahu Z, Xue Z, Da Y, Li D. Adiponectin-derived active
peptide ADP355 exerts anti-inflammatory and anti-fibrotic
activities in thioacetamide-induced liver injury. Scientific
reports. 2016; 6:19445.

26.	 Wynn TA, Barron L. Macrophages: master regulators of
inflammation and fibrosis. Seminars in liver disease. 2010;
30:245-257.

15.	 Huang B, Cheng X, Wang H, Huang W, la Ga Hu Z, Wang
D, Zhang K, Zhang H, Xue Z, Da Y, Zhang N, Hu Y, Yao
Z, Qiao L, Gao F, Zhang R. Mesenchymal stem cells
and their secreted molecules predominantly ameliorate
fulminant hepatic failure and chronic liver fibrosis in mice
respectively. J Transl Med. 2016; 14:45.

27.	 Duffield JS, Forbes SJ, Constandinou CM, Clay S, Partolina
M, Vuthoori S, Wu S, Lang R, Iredale JP. Selective depletion
of macrophages reveals distinct, opposing roles during liver
injury and repair. Journal of Clinical Investigation. 2005;
115:56-65.

16.	 Sung B, Oyajobi B, Aggarwal BB. Plumbagin inhibits
osteoclastogenesis and reduces human breast cancerinduced osteolytic bone metastasis in mice through
suppression of RANKL signaling. Molecular cancer
therapeutics. 2012; 11:350-359.

28.	 Leibovich S, Ross R. The role of the macrophage in wound
repair. A study with hydrocortisone and antimacrophage
serum. The American journal of pathology. 1975; 78:71.

17.	 Bedossa P, Paradis V. Liver extracellular matrix in health
and disease. J Pathol. 2003; 200:504-515.

30.	 Jaeschke H, Hasegawa T. Role of neutrophils in acute
inflammatory liver injury. Liver International. 2006;
26:912-919.

29.	 Phillipson M, Kubes P. The neutrophil in vascular
inflammation. Nature medicine. 2011; 17:1381-1390.

18.	 Leask A, Abraham DJ. TGF-beta signaling and the fibrotic
response. FASEB journal. 2004; 18:816-827.

31.	 Mandrekar P, Szabo G. Signalling pathways in alcoholinduced liver inflammation. J Hepatol. 2009; 50:1258-1266.

19.	 Caligiuri A, Bertolani C, Guerra CT, Aleffi S, Galastri S,
Trappoliere M, Vizzutti F, Gelmini S, Laffi G, Pinzani
M. Adenosine monophosphate–activated protein kinase
modulates the activated phenotype of hepatic stellate cells.
Hepatology. 2008; 47:668-676.

32.	 Wang T, Wu F, Jin Z, Zhai Z, Wang Y, Tu B, Yan W, Tang
T. Plumbagin inhibits LPS-induced inflammation through
the inactivation of the nuclear factor-kappa B and mitogen
activated protein kinase signaling pathways in RAW 264.7
cells. Food and Chemical Toxicology. 2014; 64:177-183.

20.	 Lim JY, Oh MA, Kim WH, Sohn HY, Park SI. AMPactivated protein kinase inhibits TGF-beta-induced
fibrogenic responses of hepatic stellate cells by targeting
transcriptional coactivator p300. Journal of cellular
physiology. 2012; 227:1081-1089.

33.	 Checker R, Patwardhan RS, Sharma D, Menon J, Thoh M,
Sandur SK, Sainis KB, Poduval TB. Plumbagin, a vitamin
K3 analogue, abrogates lipopolysaccharide-induced
oxidative stress, inflammation and endotoxic shock via
NF-kappaB suppression. Inflammation. 2014; 37:542-554.

21.	 Pradere JP, Kluwe J, Minicis S, Jiao JJ, Gwak GY, Dapito
DH, Jang MK, Guenther ND, Mederacke I, Friedman R.
Hepatic macrophages but not dendritic cells contribute to
liver fibrosis by promoting the survival of activated hepatic
stellate cells in mice. Hepatology. 2013; 58:1461-1473.

34.	 Handy JA, Saxena NK, Fu P, Lin S, Mells JE, Gupta NA,
Anania FA. Adiponectin activation of AMPK disrupts
leptin-mediated hepatic fibrosis via suppressors of cytokine
signaling (SOCS-3). Journal of cellular biochemistry. 2010;
110:1195-1207.

22.	 Reif S, Lang A, Lindquist JN, Yata Y, Gabele E, Scanga A,
Brenner DA, Rippe RA. The role of focal adhesion kinasephosphatidylinositol 3-kinase-akt signaling in hepatic

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

35.	 Park SR, Jung MH, Jeon SH, Park MH, Park KH, Lee MR,
Kim PH. IFN-gamma down-regulates TGF-beta1-induced

82874

Oncotarget

IgA expression through Stat1 and p300 signaling. Molecules
and cells. 2010; 29:57-62.

and hepatic stellate cells exacerbates liver fibrosis in mice.
Gastroenterology. 2012; 143:765-776. e763.

36.	 Oakley F, Meso M, Iredale JP, Green K, Marek CJ, Zhou
X, May MJ, Millward-Sadler H, Wright MC, Mann DA.
Inhibition of inhibitor of κB kinases stimulates hepatic
stellate cell apoptosis and accelerated recovery from rat
liver fibrosis. Gastroenterology. 2005; 128:108-120.

38.	 Wang H, Lafdil F, Kong X, Gao B. Signal transducer
and activator of transcription 3 in liver diseases: a novel
therapeutic target. International journal of biological
sciences. 2011; 7:536.
39.	 Ishak K, Baptista A, Bianchi L, Callea F, De Groote J,
Gudat F, Denk H, Desmet V, Korb G, MacSween RN.
Histological grading and staging of chronic hepatitis. J
hepatol. 1995; 22:696-699.

37.	 Meng F, Wang K, Aoyama T, Grivennikov SI, Paik Y,
Scholten D, Cong M, Iwaisako K, Liu X, Zhang M.
Interleukin-17 signaling in inflammatory, Kupffer cells,

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

82875

Oncotarget

