Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No. 42

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Expression of androgen receptor splice variants in clinical breast
cancers
Theresa E. Hickey1,*, Connie M. Irvine1,*, Heidi Dvinge2,3, Gerard A. Tarulli1,
Adrienne R. Hanson1, Natalie K. Ryan1, Marie A. Pickering1, Stephen N. Birrell1,
Dong Gui Hu4, Peter I. Mackenzie4, Roslin Russell5, Carlos Caldas5, Ganesh V. Raj6,
Scott M. Dehm7,8, Stephen R. Plymate9, Robert K. Bradley2,3, Wayne D. Tilley1,10,
Luke A. Selth1,10
1

Dame Roma Mitchell Cancer Research Laboratories, Discipline of Medicine, The University of Adelaide, SA 5005, Australia

2

Computational Biology Program, Public Health Sciences Division, Seattle, WA 98109, USA

3

Basic Sciences Division, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, WA 98109, USA

4

 epartment of Clinical Pharmacology, Flinders University School of Medicine, Flinders Medical Centre, Bedford Park, SA
D
5042, Australia

5

Cancer Research UK Cambridge Research Institute, Li Ka Shing Centre, Robinson Way, Cambridge, CB2 0RE, UK

6

Department of Urology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75390, USA

7

Masonic Cancer Center, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55905, USA

8

Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55905, USA

9

Department of Medicine and VAPSHCS, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98109, USA

10

Freemasons Foundation Centre for Men’s Health, School of Medicine, The University of Adelaide, SA 5005, Australia

*

These authors have contributed equally to this work

Correspondence to: Luke A. Selth, e-mail: luke.selth@adelaide.edu.au
Wayne D. Tilley, e-mail: wayne.tilley@adelaide.edu.au
Keywords: androgen receptor, breast cancer, androgen deprivation therapy, alternative splicing, biomarker
Received: October 19, 2015     Accepted: October 26, 2015     Published: November 05, 2015

ABSTRACT
The importance of androgen receptor (AR) signaling is increasingly being
recognized in breast cancer, which has elicited clinical trials aimed at assessing the
efficacy of androgen deprivation therapy (ADT) for metastatic disease. In prostate
cancer, resistance to ADT is frequently associated with the emergence of androgenindependent splice variants of the AR (AR variants, AR-Vs) that lack the LBD and
are constitutively active. Women with breast cancer may be prone to a similar
phenomenon. Herein, we show that in addition to the prototypical transcript, the AR
gene produces a diverse range of AR-V transcripts in primary breast tumors. The most
frequently and highly expressed variant was AR-V7 (exons 1/2/3/CE3), which was
detectable at the mRNA level in > 50% of all breast cancers and at the protein level in a
subset of ERα-negative tumors. Functionally, AR-V7 is a constitutively active and ADTresistant transcription factor that promotes growth and regulates a transcriptional
program distinct from AR in ERα-negative breast cancer cells. Importantly, we provide
ex vivo evidence that AR-V7 is upregulated by the AR antagonist enzalutamide in
primary breast tumors. These findings have implications for treatment response in
the ongoing clinical trials of ADT in breast cancer.

breast epithelial cells. As such, inhibition of ERα signaling
by ERα antagonists or drugs that block the biosynthesis
of estrogens (i.e. aromatase inhibitors) are the mainstay
adjuvant treatments for estrogen-sensitive breast cancer,
which encompasses approximately 70% of all cases.

INTRODUCTION
Estrogen signaling, mediated via the estrogen
receptor alpha (ERα), is a key determinant of the growth
and survival of normal and the majority of malignant
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

44728

Oncotarget

The remaining breast cancers lack ERα and women with
this type of disease do not gain benefit from current adjuvant
hormone therapies. A subset of ERα-negative cancers are
characterized by amplification or overexpression of human
epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2) and can be
treated with HER2-targeting agents. However, 15–20%
of breast tumors lack ERα, HER2 and a clinically relevant
biomarker of ERα signaling, progesterone receptor (PGR);
this subtype is termed triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC)
[1]. TNBC is particularly aggressive and adjuvant treatment
strategies are limited to chemotherapeutics, which are
commonly associated with rapid relapse [2]. Identification
of alternative therapeutic targets for TNBC is a current
clinical imperative.
The androgen receptor (AR) is a steroid hormone
receptor structurally related to ERα that mediates the
action of androgen hormones, is critical for development
of the male phenotype and has a role in modulating the
female phenotype. AR signaling has primarily been
studied in prostate cancer, where it plays a central role
in both the initiation and progression of disease [3], but
more recent studies have demonstrated the critical role
of this pathway in breast cancer [4]. AR is expressed in
80–90% of all breast cancers, including up to 55% of ERαnegative breast cancers overall and up to 35% of those
classified as TNBC [5, 6]. The role of AR in breast cancer
appears to be dichotomous depending on ERα status and
molecular subtype [4]; in luminal ERα-positive breast
cancers, AR expression is associated with more favorable
outcomes and the role of AR signaling is predominantly
anti-proliferative, but in ERα-negative breast cancers
the clinical implications of AR expression and activity
remain equivocal. In certain ERα-negative breast cancer
cell lines, AR can stimulate growth and survival [7–11].
Interestingly, a subset of ERα-negative/AR-positive
cancers, sub-classified as “molecular apocrine” for
histological reasons, exhibited transcriptomic profiles
that were similar to those stimulated by AR signaling
in prostate cancer cells [8, 9]. Recent studies of MDAMB-453, a cell line model of molecular apocrine breast
cancer, revealed that the AR cistrome has a similar
profile to the ERα cistrome in MCF7 breast cancer cells,
thereby stimulating a luminal gene signature [12], and
that AR promotes HER2 signaling by activating Wnt and
c-MYC signaling pathways [13–15]. Collectively, these
observations provide evidence for the hypothesis that AR
can be an oncogene in certain ERα-negative breast cancers
by acting as a “surrogate” ERα or by recapitulating the
oncogenic program that stimulates growth of prostate
cancer cells [4]. This concept is supported by studies
demonstrating that the growth of cell line and xenograft
models of AR-positive TNBC is inhibited by treatment
with the AR antagonist bicalutamide, a drug historically
developed to treat men with prostate cancer [11, 12, 14].
The concept of AR as a breast cancer oncogene, and
the availability of effective AR-targeting agents used to
treat prostate cancer, has elicited clinical trials assessing
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

the efficacy of AR antagonists and androgen biosynthesis
inhibitors in preventing disease progression in women
with advanced, metastatic breast cancer. These agents,
along with gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH)
agonists/antagonists, are components of androgen
deprivation therapy (ADT), the current mainstay of
treatment for men with metastatic prostate cancer. ADT
is initially effective in most men but inevitably fails and
the resultant disease, termed castration-resistant prostate
cancer (CRPC), is incurable and the primary cause of
prostate cancer mortality. The totality of research over
the past decade has revealed that the most common
event associated with failure of ADT is the inappropriate
activation or maintenance of AR signaling [16]. Based on
this knowledge, we propose that women treated with ADT
for advanced breast cancer may be susceptible to a similar
evolution of disease.
Androgen signaling in the “castrate” environment
is often mediated by direct changes to AR, including
upregulation of its expression [17], amplification of the
AR gene [18, 19] and mutations that result in aberrantly
active receptors [18, 20–25]. More recent research has
demonstrated that sustained AR signaling in CRPC can also
be driven by the emergence of C-terminally truncated AR
variants (AR-Vs) [26–28]. These variants, which arise due
to alternative splicing and/or structural rearrangements of
the AR gene, have variable structures but each lacks all or
a portion of the ligand-binding domain (LBD) [29]. This
can produce constitutively-active (ligand-independent)
transcription factors resistant to drugs that inhibit androgen
production and biosynthesis (i.e. GnRH modulators,
abiraterone) or directly target the LBD (i.e. bicalutamide
and enzalutamide) [30]. It is now generally recognized that
increased AR-V expression is an important mechanism
underlying resistance to ADT and the development and
progression of CRPC [19, 26, 31–34].
Given the arrival of AR-targeting agents to the
breast cancer clinical arena, the heterogeneous nature of
this disease and the dichotomous actions of AR in different
breast cancer contexts, the question of whether AR-Vs are
expressed in breast malignancies is critically important.
Herein, we demonstrate that the AR-V7 variant is
commonly expressed in primary breast cancers and breast
cancer cell lines and provide evidence that this factor
could promote growth and mediate resistance to ADT in a
subset of breast tumors.

RESULTS
Diversity of AR splicing in breast cancer
An RNA-seq breast cancer dataset from The
Cancer Genome Atlas, comprised of 1057 cancers and
111 peri-tumoral samples of normal histology, was used
to examine transcripts associated with the AR gene. For
data presentation, the tumors are classified into five ­sub­
groups based on the PAM50 classification system. In this
44729

Oncotarget

cohort, the prototypical, full length AR transcript (AR-FL)
was expressed at the highest average levels in Luminal A
and lowest levels in Basal tumor sub-groups (Figure 1A).
This pattern was also observed in the larger METABRIC
breast cancer cohort (1992 tumors) [35] (Supplementary
Figure S1), indicating that the TCGA dataset adequately
encompasses the heterogeneous scope of this disease.
Examination of RNA sequence reads spanning canonical
and non-canonical exons of the AR gene revealed that
the AR-FL transcript was the predominant species
in the majority of peri-tumoral and malignant breast
tissues (Figure 1B). However, reads indicative of noncanonical splicing events were also identified (Figure 1B;
Supplementary Figure S2). The most common and more
highly expressed non-canonical reads were those that
spanned exons 3-CE3, evident in 544 tumors (51.5%) and
51 peri-tumoral tissues (45.9%), which are predicted to
be derived from transcripts encoding the AR-V7 splice
variant. The AR-V7 transcript was most abundant in
tumors that exhibited amplification of the HER2 oncogene,
which are referred to as HER2-enriched (Figures 1C,
1D and Supplementary Figure S2). Estimation of the
amount of exon 3-CE3 splicing as a proportion of ARFL expression identified a subset of HER2-enriched and
Luminal A or B tumors in which AR-V7 was detected
at levels roughly equivalent to the canonical transcript
(Figure 1D).
Other relatively common non-canonical splicing
events found in the TCGA RNA-seq data and predicted
variant receptors encoded by such events were: exon 1a-2
(AR45; 25.0%), 3-CE1 (AR-V1, AR-V2 or AR-V4; 9.3%),
2-CE4 (AR-V3; 16.3%), 3-CE5 (AR-V9; 13.7%) and
6–9 (AR-V13, AR-V15 or AR-V18; 19.5%). In general,
the number of reads for predicted AR variant transcripts
correlated with total AR read counts and with each other
(Supplementary Table S1 and Figure S3), indicating
that non-canonical variant transcripts tend to increase
concordantly with AR-FL gene transcription. Collectively,
these data are in accord with the ENCODE and recent
deep RNA sequencing studies, which demonstrated that
most genes are characterized by frequent and complex
alternative splicing [36–38].

with the exception of 3 ERα-negative tumors (Figure 2A).
Copy numbers for AR-V7 were generally < 10% of those
for AR-FL, although 4 ERα-negative tumors, including
the 3 with relatively high AR-V7 (colored dots) and one
with intermediate AR-V7 expression (black dot), had
roughly equivalent levels of the two transcripts (Figure
2B). Similar to the TCGA dataset, a positive correlation
between AR-V7 and AR-FL mRNA levels was observed
(Figure 2C).
The three ERα-negative samples with relatively
high AR-V7 transcript copy numbers had readily
detectable AR-V7 protein by IHC (Figure 2D).
No staining was evident in tumors that had low or
undetectable expression of AR-V7 mRNA (Figure
2D shows a representative negative tumor). IHC was
done using a new rabbit monoclonal antibody (Abcam
EPR15656) that we demonstrated to be specific for ARV7 by siRNA-mediated knockdown (Supplementary
Figure S4). Dual label immunofluorescence revealed that
AR-V7 and AR-FL proteins predominantly co-localized in
the nuclei of breast cancer cells (Figure 2E, left panels).
In accord with the mRNA data, the presence of AR-FL
protein did not always correspond to the presence of ARV7 protein (Figure 2E, middle panels). Western blotting
verified that in a representative sample positive for ARV7 by IHC and IF, a protein migrated at the expected
molecular weight for AR-V7, confirming specificity
(Supplementary Figure S5).
Collectively, the TCGA and our cohort indicate
that AR-V7 is expressed in about 50% of primary breast
tumors, is positively correlated with AR-FL expression,
but is much less abundant than the prototypical transcript
in the majority of cases. These data also confirm that some
ERα-negative breast tumors have an altered pattern of ARV7 mRNA and protein expression in which the variant is
present at similar levels to AR-FL.

Expression of the AR-V7 variant in cell line
models of breast cancer
To identify an appropriate model to investigate
AR-V7 function in breast cancer, qRT-PCR was used to
quantify its expression in a panel of breast cancer cell
lines. Prostate cancer cell lines 22Rv1 and VCaP, which
express high and medium levels of AR-V7, respectively
[19], were included as positive controls. AR-V7 transcript
was detected in all of the breast cancer cell lines except for
MDA-MB-231 and CAL-51 (Figure 3A), which express
the lowest levels of AR-FL (Figure 3B). As a proportion of
AR-FL, AR-V7 in the breast cancer cell lines ranged from
0.4% (MCF7) to 1.1% (ZR-75–1) (Figure 3A). Similar to
the primary breast tissue results, the levels of AR-V7 and
AR-FL were highly correlated in breast cancer cell lines
(Spearman r = 0.982, p < 0.0001).
We next tested whether AR-V7 protein was
produced in breast cancer cell lines by Western blotting
with an AR-V7-specific antibody. A band migrating at the

Expression of the AR-V7 variant in clinical
breast cancer
Given the relative abundance of AR-V7 transcripts
compared to other AR splice variants in the TCGA dataset,
we validated its expression in an independent cohort of
prospectively collected primary breast cancers (n = 54),
comprised of the expected proportion of ERα-positive
(64.8%) and ERα-negative (35.2%) cases (Supplementary
Table S2). Transcripts encoding AR-FL were detected in
53 tumors (98.1%) and transcripts encoding AR-V7 were
detected in 29 tumors (53.7%), which closely matched
the frequency of occurrence in the TCGA cohort. Most of
the tumors had relatively low levels of AR-V7 transcript,
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

44730

Oncotarget

Figure 1: The diversity and frequency of AR splicing in breast cancer. A. Relative expression of AR by PAM50 subtype in

the TCGA cohort. B. Proportion of TCGA tumor or normal samples with the indicated splicing event. Tumors were subtyped using the
PAM50 classification system. C. Quantitation of exon 3-CE3 spanning reads, predicted to encode the AR-V7 variant, in breast cancer and
peri-tumoral breast tissues. D. Normalized quantitation of exon 3-CE3 spanning reads in breast cancer and peri-tumoral breast tissues. Exon
3-CE3 reads were scaled by the sum of exon 1–2 and exon 1a-2 reads (see Materials and Methods for more detail).

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

44731

Oncotarget

Figure 2: The AR variant AR-V7 is expressed in clinical breast cancer samples. A. Expression of AR-V7 in ERα-positive (n = 35)

and ERα-negative (n = 19) breast cancers, as determined by qRT-PCR. A Cq < 35 was used as a cut-off for determining AR-V7 positivity. AR-V7
copy number was calculated as described in Materials and Methods. B. Ratio of AR-V7 as a proportion of AR-FL (in AR-V7-positive tumors).
C. Correlation between AR-V7 and AR-FL copy number in AR-V7-positive tumors. Pearson’s correlation rho and p values are shown. Note that
three tumors with high AR-V7 mRNA levels (red, blue green) or a high AR-V7:AR-FL ratio (black) are identifiable in (A)-(C) by color. D. Detection
of AR-V7 protein by IHC in 3 breast tumors with high levels of AR-V7 mRNA expression (left). Positive staining was not detected in specimens
that do not express AR-V7 mRNA (a representative is shown on the right). Inset images of higher magnification demonstrate strong nuclear
staining. Colored dots enable matching of samples to (A)-(C) Scale bars are 100 microns. E. Detection of AR-V7 protein by IF and co-localization
with AR-FL. Shown are an AR-V7 positive tumor (left), an AR-V7-negative but AR-positive tumor (middle), and a dual-negative tumor (right).
Nuclei were stained with DAPI. In the bottom left image, a yellow arrow indicates a representative cell with strong AR-FL and AR-V7 staining
and a red arrow indicates a representative cell with strong AR-FL staining but weak or no AR-V7 staining. Scale bars are 50 microns.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

44732

Oncotarget

Figure 3: Expression of AR-V7 in breast cancer cell line models. A–B. qRT-PCR was used to quantify AR-V7 (A) and AR-FL (B) in

a panel of 8 breast cancer cell lines and 2 prostate cancer cell line controls (22Rv1 and VCaP). AR-V7 levels as a percentage of AR-FL transcript
are shown above the columns in panel A. Values are the mean (± SEM) of triplicate samples. C. Protein lysates were collected from the
indicated cell lines used above and subjected to Western blot analysis using AR-V7 (Precision Biosciences), AR (N20) and GAPDH (loading
control) antibodies. Short and long exposures are shown. Note that AR-FL from 22Rv1 cells migrates more slowly because it contains two
copies of the second zinc finger domain as a result of a genomic duplication. D. MDA-MB-453 and 22Rv1 cells were transfected with a nonspecific control siRNA (NC) or siRNAs specific for AR-FL or AR-V7. After 72 h, protein lysates were analyzed by Western blotting as in (C).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

44733

Oncotarget

expected molecular weight (~75 kDa) was observed in the
two ERα-negative breast cancer lines that had the highest
levels of AR-V7 mRNA, MDA-MD-453 and MFM-223,
but was not apparent in lines with lower (ZR-75–1, T47D)
or no (MDA-MB-231) expression of AR-V7 and AR-FL
transcripts (Figure 3C). Transfection of MDA-MB-453
cells with an AR-V7-specific siRNA resulted in loss of the
75-kDa protein band (Figure 3D), confirming its identity.

the presence or absence of DHT (Supplementary Figure
S6A). In the absence of androgen, AR-V7 overexpression
significantly altered transcript levels of 47 genes compared
to the empty vector control (Supplementary Table S3).
Interestingly, 43/47 (91.5%) of these transcripts were
down-regulated. In the context of DHT stimulation,
AR-V7 over-expression resulted in significantly altered
expression of 64 transcripts, 28 of which were common
between the two experimental conditions and represent
core AR-V7 targets (Supplementary Table S3). One
striking observation was that 27/28 (96.4%) of the core
AR-V7 targets and 70/85 (82.4%) of all AR-V7 targets
(i.e. regulated in either the presence or absence of DHT)
were down-regulated (Supplementary Table S3). Selected
genes identified in the microarray were validated by qRTPCR following over-expression or knockdown of AR-V7
(Supplementary Figures S6B and S6C). Interestingly,
genes altered by AR-V7 over-expression in the presence
or absence of DHT were largely distinct from those
regulated by hormone treatment of non-transfected cells,
a finding evident by both comparison of the differentially
regulated gene sets (Figure 4C) and gene set enrichment
analysis (Figure 4D). To determine whether the ARV7 gene set could be an artefact of its high transient
expression, expression profiling was also performed in
the context of over-expression of AR-FL. None of the
core AR-V7 targets were significantly altered by AR-FL
over-expression (Figure 4E). Importantly, we observed
a highly significant overlap between the androgenregulated transcriptome in AR-FL-overexpressing cells
(this study) and a previously published gene set of DHT
response in MDA-MB-453 cells [39], further verifying
that over-expression was not generating artefactual data
(Supplementary Table S4). Collectively, these findings
suggest that AR-V7 has molecular functions that are
disparate from those of AR-FL in MDA-MB-453 cells.
Interestingly, comparison of genes regulated by
forced over-expression of AR-V7 in MDA-MB-453
cells (this study) versus LNCaP prostate cancer cells
[40] revealed a complete absence of overlapping targets
(Supplementary Table S5), further supporting the concept
of a unique AR-V7-driven transcriptome in ERα-negative
breast cancer. Indeed, while over-expression of AR-V7 in
LNCaP cells resulted in changes primarily to cell cycleassociated genes, the gene set altered by AR-V7 in breast
cancer was highly enriched for factors involved in immune
function and signaling (i.e. interleukins, interferons) and
cell movement (chemokines) (Supplementary Table S6).
Finally, we also compared transcriptomes regulated by
AR-V7 and ERα [41] and found no substantial overlap
(Supplementary Table S7).
AR-V7-regulated genes were examined in a large
clinical breast cancer dataset recently published by
Ringner and colleagues, which is comprised of multiple
different cohorts with long-term outcome data [42]. The
core AR-V7 gene set was more highly expressed in basal

AR-V7 exhibits constitutive, AR antagonistresistant transcriptional activity in breast cancer
cells
Functional studies were undertaken to assess the
potential biological relevance of AR-V7 in an ERαnegative breast cancer context. The MDA-MB-453
cell line was chosen as the primary model for further
investigations based on our finding that it expresses
detectable levels of AR-V7 protein. Moreover, AR-FL
promotes the growth of MDA-MB-453 cells and research
in this model represents a key component of the basis
for targeting AR signaling in breast cancer [11, 12, 14,
39]. The AR Q865H mutation, identified recently in this
cell line [39], lies within the LBD and is therefore not
present within the AR-V7 protein. We also performed
limited functional analysis of AR-V7 in the MFM-223
model, which had detectable levels of AR-V7 protein and
represents a less well-studied model of ERα-negative,
AR-positive breast cancer. The activity of AR-V7 was
first investigated by measuring transactivation of ARresponsive promoters. In MDA-MB-453 and MFM-223
cells, the presence of androgen (DHT) was required to
activate the AR-specific probasin reporter, and this activity
was significantly inhibited by the AR-FL antagonists,
bicalutamide and enzalutamide (Figure 4A). By contrast,
AR-V7 activated the probasin reporter in the absence of
androgen and this activity was not significantly altered by
treatment with the AR-LBD antagonists (Figure 4A).
The functionality of AR-V7 in the MDA-MB-453
cell line was further assessed by analyzing its subcellular
localization. In prostate cells, AR-FL localizes to the
cytoplasm in the absence of androgen stimulation and
undergoes rapid nuclear translocation upon hormone
treatment. This feature was also characteristic of the
prototypical AR in MDA-MB-453 breast cancer cells
(Figure 4B). By contrast, AR-V7 was predominantly
nuclear in the absence of androgen, exhibiting minimal
cytoplasmic staining, and this pattern was unchanged by
the addition of androgen (Figure 4B).

AR-V7 regulates a transcriptome distinct from
AR-FL in breast cancer cells
To investigate the target genes of AR-V7 in MDAMB-453 breast cancer cells, we undertook microarray
profiling following transient over-expression of AR-V7 in
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

44734

Oncotarget

Figure 4: AR-V7 is constitutively active, resistant to AR antagonists and regulates a transcriptome distinct from ARFL. A. MDA-MB-453 and MFM-223 cells were transfected with plasmids expressing full-length AR-FL or AR-V7 and an AR-responsive

reporter construct and subsequently treated with 1 nM DHT, 1 μM bicalutamide and/or 1 μM enzalutamide. Luciferase activity values represent
the mean (±SEM) of 6 biological replicates; results are representative of three independent experiments. ANOVA followed by Tukey’s multiple
comparisons tests were used to assess changes in luciferase activity (**, p < 0.01; *, p < 0.05): for AR-FL, comparisons were with DHT; for
AR-V7, comparisons were with vehicle (Veh). None of the treatments caused a statistically significant change in AR-V7 activity. B. MDAMB-453 cells grown in androgen-depleted media were transfected with GFP-tagged forms of full-length AR-FL or AR-V7 and treated with
10 nM DHT or vehicle control (ethanol) for 24 h. Nuclei were stained with DAPI and cytoskeletons with phalloidin. Representative images
are shown for four color channels (GFP, DAPI, phalloidin and merge). C. Venn diagram showing the overlap between genes differentially
expressed in response to AR-V7 expression and DHT treatments. D. No association between DHT-regulated and AR-V7-regulated genes in
the MDA-MB-453 model, as demonstrated by gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA). E. Heat map demonstrating that AR-FL over-expression
does not alter expression of the core AR-V7 regulated gene set. F. Expression of the core AR-V7-regulated gene set according to PAM50 breast
cancer subtype in the GOBO cohort. The gene set was highest in basal tumors compared to all other subtypes (ANOVA, followed by Tukey’s
multiple comparisons test). G. Kaplan-Meier survival plot showing metastasis-free survival in HER2-enriched patients from the Ringner et al
cohort (left) and disease-specific survival in HER2-enriched patients from the METABRIC cohort (right). Patients were stratified by median
expression of the core AR-V7 regulated gene set into low and high groups. Log rank test p values: ****, p < 0.0001; *, p < 0.05.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

44735

Oncotarget

tumors compared to all other subtypes and lowest in
luminal tumors (Figure 4F). Interestingly, low expression
of this gene signature – potentially driven by high AR-V7
activity – was predictive of metastasis in HER2-enriched
patients (Figure 4G, left) but not other PAM50 subtypes
(Supplementary Figure S7). This finding was validated
in the METABRIC cohort [35], in which low expression
of the AR-V7 signature was predictive of breast cancerspecific death only in the HER2-enriched subtype (Figure
4G, right; Supplementary Figure S7).

To investigate the relationship between AR
antagonism and AR gene transcription in a more
biologically relevant system, the response of AR and
AR-V7 expression to enzalutamide was assessed in a
prospectively collected cohort of primary human breast
tumours cultured ex vivo. Expression of AR-FL was
significantly increased in 11/14 tumours (average =
1.42-fold) in response to treatment with enzalutamide
(one sided t test p = 0.004) (Figure 5F, left panel). ARV7 was detected in 10/14 of the ex vivo cultured tumours
and, similar to the prototypical transcript, was induced
by enzalutamide (8/10 samples, average = 2.29-fold; one
sided t test p = 0.019) (Figure 5F, right panel). Overall,
these results are consistent with androgen deprivation
therapy promoting increased transcription of the AR gene
and concomitant accumulation of AR-V7 protein in ERαnegative breast cancer cells.

AR-V7 is involved in breast cancer cell growth
and mediates resistance to anti-androgens
Previous studies have shown that AR-FL is required
for optimal growth of the MDA-MB-453 cell line [12,
14], which we recapitulated using MTT (Figure 5A) and
Trypan Blue (Figure 5B) growth assays. Despite being
expressed at much lower levels than AR-FL, knock-down
of AR-V7 resulted in an equivalent growth reduction
(Figure 5A, 5B). A distinct AR-V7-targeted siRNA
validated these findings (Supplementary Figure S8).
Importantly, knockdown of AR-V7 had no significant
inhibitory effect on induction of known androgenregulated genes (Supplementary Figure S9), suggesting
that it predominantly promotes growth of breast cancer
cells through molecular activities distinct from AR-FL and
thereby reinforcing the findings from the microarray study.
To assess whether AR-V7 could mediate resistance
to an AR antagonist in breast cancer, we transiently
transduced MDA-MB-453 cells with a lentivirus designed
to over-express AR-V7 (Supplementary Figure S10) and
assessed cell growth in response to treatment with a
contemporary AR antagonist, enzalutamide, using Crystal
Violet assays. Cells expressing a control protein (GFP)
exhibited reduced growth in the presence of enzalutamide,
whereas over-expression of AR-V7 abrogated this effect
(Figure 5C).

DISCUSSION
Clinical trials are underway that repurpose ADT
agents approved for prostate cancer to different breast
cancer subtypes, particularly TNBC (e.g. NCT01889238,
NCT01990209,
NCT02348281,
NCT02000375,
NCT02091960, NCT00755885). These trials arose
from the recognition that a subset of TNBCs that
lack viable targets for therapy are positive for AR,
combined with pre-clinical studies suggesting that ARFL signalling promotes growth in this context. There
are two caveats to this approach: first, AR expression
is used as a biomarker for patient selection but ARFL activity markedly varies depending on ERα status
and molecular subtype [4]; and second, ADT in men
inevitably leads to therapy resistant, lethal disease, but
whether such treatment-associated selection pressure
will occur in breast cancer is unknown. Herein, we
present data showing that transcription of the AR gene
in primary non-malignant and malignant breast tissues
generates a diverse array of splice variants, particularly
the C-terminal truncated variant AR-V7, which has been
linked to ADT resistance in men with prostate cancer
[27, 28, 30, 34]. Moreover, we show for the first time
that this transcript is highly expressed at the protein
level in a subset of ERα-negative breast cancers, and
that treatment with the ADT agent enzalutamide can
induce expression of the AR gene, and consequently the
AR-V7 transcript, in MDA-MB-453 cells and primary
breast tumours. Functional studies further confirmed
the growth-promoting activity of AR-V7 in an ERαnegative breast cancer context and provided an AR-V7regulated gene signature that predicted a worse survival
outcome in women with HER2+ disease. Collectively,
our data raises a cautionary note to those engaged in
trials exploring ADT agents in women with breast cancer

Regulation of AR and AR-V7 expression by DHT
and enzalutamide in breast cancer
To evaluate whether AR agonism or antagonism
affects the expression and/or stability of AR-V7 in breast
cancer, RNA and protein were isolated from MDAMB-453 cells treated for 24 h with DHT, bicalutamide
or enzalutamide. Treatment with enzalutamide caused an
accumulation of AR-FL and AR-V7 transcripts, whereas
treatment with DHT inhibited transcription of the AR gene
(Figure 5D). Bicalutamide, a weaker AR antagonist, did
not alter the expression of either AR-FL or AR-V7. Western
blotting revealed that treatment with both anti-androgens
led to a reduction of AR-FL (Figure 5E). By contrast,
enzalutamide caused an increase in the levels of AR-V7
protein (Figure 5E).

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

44736

Oncotarget

and provides a rationale for examining the expression of
AR-V7, or AR-V7-regulated gene(s) identified herein,
as potential predictive biomarkers of treatment response.
AR-V7 transcript was expressed at low levels in
about half of all breast cancers, with highest expression

in ERα-negative cases that were HER2-enriched. It is
noteworthy that the ratio of AR-V7 to AR-FL mRNA
ranged from 0–100% in the TCGA cohort and 0–86% in
our prospective cohort, a greater range than that observed
in a collection of CRPC bone metastases that would be

Figure 5: AR-V7 regulates the growth of MDA-MB-453 cells and response to enzalutamide. A–B. MDA-MB-453 cells were

transfected with siRNAs specific for AR-FL and AR-V7 or a control siRNA and growth was assessed in androgen-replete media using MTT
(A) and Trypan Blue (B) growth assays. Values are the mean (±SEM) of 3 biological replicates; results are representative of three independent
experiments. C. MDA-MB-453 cells were transduced with lentivirus designed to overexpress AR-V7 or GFP (negative control) and cell
growth assessed using Crystal Violet assays in response to the enzalutamide. The relative change in growth compared to vehicle control is
shown at 6 and 9 days. Values are the mean (±SEM) of 6 biological replicates comprising two independent experiments. D. Treatment with
AR antagonists induces AR gene transcription in MDA-MB-453 cells. Cells were grown in androgen depleted media and treated with 10 nM
DHT, 10 μM bicalutamide, 10 μM enzalutamide or vehicle control for 24 h. AR-FL and AR-V7 mRNA was measured by qRT-PCR. Values are
normalized to GAPDH and represent the mean (± SEM) of triplicate samples, with vehicle control treatment set to 1. Results are representative
of three independent experiments. E. Matched samples from (D) were analyzed by Western blotting using AR-V7 (Precision Biosciences), AR
(N20) and GAPDH (loading control) antibodies. F. Human breast tumor explants were cultured with vehicle (DMSO) or enzalutamide (50 μM)
for 48 h. AR-FL and AR-V7 transcripts were measured by qRT-PCR and normalized to GAPDH. Values are expressed as fold-change relative to
DMSO for each individual tumor. Statistically significant differences compared to the control treatment were assessed using a Wilcoxon signed
rank test; p values are shown. Four of the tumors did not express AR-V7 (shown by a # symbol).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

44737

Oncotarget

expected to have high levels of this variant [31]. High
levels of AR-V7 mRNA corresponded to detection of
immunoreactive protein in our prospectively collected,
treatment-naïve cohort, consistent with AR-V7 being
biologically relevant. In breast cancer, AR is positively
correlated with HER2 overexpression and reciprocal
activation between AR and HER2 occurs in both breast
and prostate cancer cell lines [13–15, 43]. Hence, it is
perhaps not surprising that in the TCGA cohort the highest
levels of AR-V7 occurred in the PAM50 HER2-enriched
molecular subgroup. In our prospectively-collected
validation cohort, we detected high levels of AR-V7
transcript and protein in TNBCs as well as HER2-enriched
cases. Importantly, these are the subtypes in which AR
signaling is thought to be oncogenic in certain contexts,
further highlighting the potential biological relevance of
constitutively active AR-Vs.
Many aspects of AR-V7 functionality and AR gene
regulation identified herein recapitulate findings in the
prostate cancer context, which is not surprising given
the known similarities between these two malignancies,
particularly in terms of endocrine signaling [44]. First,
AR-V7 exhibited ligand-independent transcriptional
activity and could drive resistance to AR antagonists.
Second, expression of AR-V transcripts in breast cancer
generally tracked with that of AR-FL, a feature observed
in prostate cancer cells and tissues [45]. Mechanistically,
this correlation is explained by the concept that noncanonical AR splicing is ubiquitous, such that increased
AR gene transcription results in increased levels of ARV transcripts [46]. Third, the known auto-regulatory
activity of ligand-bound AR-FL on its own gene [47] was
functional in breast cancer cells, since DHT decreased
whereas enzalutamide increased AR gene transcription.
These similarities suggest that AR-V-targeted agents,
which are under clinical development for treatment of
prostate cancer [46], could be applicable in breast cancer
if the clinical relevance of AR-V7 is validated.
Although we report many similarities between ARV7 in breast and prostate contexts, a striking difference
was that this factor governed a gene expression program
highly disparate from that of the prototypical receptor. In
prostate cancer cell lines, studies aimed at elucidating the
AR-V7-driven transcriptome have been equivocal: while
some have suggested that this variant primarily regulates
a classical androgen-regulated gene set [28, 30], others
identified an AR-V7-specific gene signature enriched
for cell cycle-associated genes and pathways [40]. An
explanation for these potential contradictions was provided
by the observation that the AR-V7 “specific” gene set was
shown to display a biphasic response to signals from both
ligand-bound AR-FL and AR-V7: more specifically, it is
induced at lower, proliferative levels of AR-FL signalling
output but repressed at higher, anti-proliferative levels of
AR-FL signalling output [30]. Interestingly, the AR-V7regulated gene set in MDA-MB-453 cells was completely
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

distinct, matching neither DHT-regulated genes in
this cell line nor the proliferative AR/AR-V mitotic
signature identified in prostate cancer models, but rather
comprising factors involved in immune function and cell
movement. Moreover, low expression of the AR-V7 breast
cancer gene set was predictive of metastasis in patients
with HER2-enriched cancers, supporting its biological
relevance. The differences between the breast and prostate
AR-V7-driven transcriptional programs demonstrates that,
much like the canonical receptor [44, 48, 49], the activity
of this factor is likely to be context specific, perhaps due
to differential expression of co-regulators and pioneer
factors that dictate transcription factor DNA binding and
transcriptional capacity [48].
Recent studies exploiting the power of deep
RNA sequencing have demonstrated that most genes
are characterized by frequent and complex alternative
splicing, which may represent a ‘readiness’ for
adaptation to changing environmental conditions [36,
37]. We propose that this concept is exemplified in
prostate and breast tissues by the increased expression
of AR-Vs (and perhaps most importantly, AR-V7)
under conditions of androgen deprivation or direct
AR inhibition, an adaptation that serves to sustain AR
activity. We recently reported that a variety of AR-V
transcripts could be detected in additional tissue types,
including other hormone sensitive tissues such as the
ovary, placenta and testis as well as non-reproductive
tissues such as the colon, liver, lung, bladder and brain
[50]. With the recent clinical trials of AR-targeted
therapies for ovarian, peritoneal or fallopian tube cancer
(NCT01974765) and another involving all solid tumors
that are immunopositive for AR (NCT02144051), the
potential for selection of AR-Vs that are able to drive
ligand-independent growth takes on greater significance.
In summary, we demonstrate that AR-V7 is
expressed in a subset of breast cancers and present
evidence that this factor plays a role in regulating response
to ADT. This concept suggests that testing for AR-V7 in
tumors from women in current clinical trials employing
ADT therapy, which to date have demonstrated significant
variability in patient response, is warranted.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Analysis of breast cancer RNA-seq data from
the cancer genome atlas (TCGA)
Obtaining TCGA RNA-seq samples
Unprocessed RNA-seq data representing tumors and
matched normal samples within the TCGA breast cancer
cohort were downloaded from CGHub (July 2013 to Sep
2014). For samples where the data was available as BAM
files (generated by MapSplice) and not in FASTQ format,
the raw reads were extracted using sam2fastq v1.2 from
UNC Bioinformatics Utilities.
44738

Oncotarget

Genome annotations

exon 1a-2). To avoid skewing towards high 3-CE3:AR
ratios due to low AR expression, only samples with ≥ 10
reads spanning exons 1–2/1a-2 were included in the graph
shown in Figure 1D.

RNA transcript annotation was combined using
isoforms from: 1) MISO v2.0 [51]; 2) UCSC knownGene
[52]; 3) the Ensembl 71 gene annotation [53] and; 4) a
manually curated list of all androgen receptor splice
variants identified from an exhaustive literature search.

Reagents

RNA-seq read mapping

Bicalutamide was obtained from AstraZeneca
(North Ryde, NSW, Australia) and dissolved in
ethanol. Enzalutamide (MDV3100) was obtained from
SelleckChem (Houston, TX, USA) and dissolved in
dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO).

The raw RNA-seq reads were processed using
the following pipeline: 1) Map all reads to the UCSC
hg19 (NCBI GRCh37) human genome assembly using
Bowtie v1.0.0 with the -v 2 parameter [54] and RSEM
v1.2.4 with the arguments —bowtie-m 100 —bowtiechunkmbs 500 —calc-ci —output-genome- bam [55]; 2)
Filter the resulting BAM file to remove alignments with
mapq scores of 0 and with a splice junction overhang
below 6 bp; 3) Align all previously unaligned reads to
a splice junction file with TopHat v2.0.8b [56] with the
arguments —bowtie1 —read-mismatches 3 — read-editdist 2 —no-mixed —no-discordant —min-anchor-length
6 —splice-mismatches 0 —min- intron-length 10 —maxintron-length 1000000 —min-isoform-fraction 0.0 —nonovel-juncs —no- novel-indels —raw-juncs; 4) Filter the
resulting alignments as in step 2; 5) Merge the results from
TopHat and RSEM to generate a final BAM file.

Plasmid constructs
pcDNA-AR and pcDNA AR-V7 expression
plasmids have been described [40]. pEGFP-AR-V7 and
pEGFP-AR were generously provided by M. Marcelli
[59]. Lentiviral expression constructs harboring GFP and
AR-V7 have been described [60]. The probasin (ARR3-tkluc), MMTV (MMTV-LUC), and PSA enhancer/promoter
constructs have been used previously by our group [61].

Breast cancer samples
Fresh breast cancer specimens were obtained with
written informed consent from women undergoing breast
surgery at Burnside War Memorial Hospital or Flinders
Medical Centre (Adelaide, SA, Australia). Ethical
approval for this study was granted by the University
of Adelaide Human Research Ethics Committee and the
individual hospitals (approval numbers H-065–2005,
H-169–2011, H-215–2011, 21.11). Excised tissue
samples were delivered to the laboratory on ice in a
sterile container within one hour following surgery and
washed in culture medium comprised of phenol red-free
RPMI. Representative pieces of tissue were fixed in 4%
formalin in phosphate-buffered saline at 4°C overnight
and subsequently processed into paraffin blocks. Sections
(2 μm) were stained with hematoxylin and eosin and
examined by a pathologist to assess histology and
pathology.

Classification of primary tumor samples into the
intrinsic subtypes
RNA transcript levels were normalized with the
trimmed mean of M values (TMM) method [57] using
a scaling factor calculated based on protein-coding
transcripts only. Tumor samples were divided into the five
intrinsic molecular subtypes using the fifty genes included
in the PAM50 classifier [58], with subtypes predicted
using the scaled centroids from pam50.robust in the
‘genefu’ R package.
Detection of androgen receptor splice variants
All reads mapping within the AR locus were
extracted directly from the BAM files and compared to
the manually curated list of AR splice variants. Reads
mapping within exons were discarded and only gapped
reads spanning splice junctions were used as a measure of
the presence of processed RNA variants, to exclude reads
possibly originating from unprocessed transcripts or DNA
contamination. AR variants containing cryptic exons were
considered ‘detected’ in a given sample if there was at
least one read spanning the 3′ end of the upstream exon
and the 5′ end of the cryptic exon. Exon-skipping AR
variants were ‘detected’ if there was one or more reads
spanning the splice junction between the 3′ end of the
upstream exon and the 5′ site of the exon downstream
of the skipped exon(s). There are no junctions that are
unique to the full-length AR transcript, so to normalize
3-CE3 reads by AR expression (Figure 1D) the number of
reads spanning 3-CE3 were scaled using the total number
of reads spanning the first splice junctions (exon 1–2 or
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Cell culture
MDA-MB-453, T-47D, 22Rv1, VCaP, ZR75–1,
MDA-MB-231, MCF7 and HEK293T/17 cells were
obtained from the American Type Culture Collection
(Manassas, VA, USA). MFM-223, Cal-51 and Cal-148
cells were obtained from the Leibniz Institute DSMZGerman Collection of Microorganisms and Cell Cultures
(Braunschweig, Germany). LNCaP-95 cells were a kind
gift from Dr. Alan K. Meeker (Johns Hopkins University).
MDA-MB-453, T-47D, ZR75–1 and 22Rv1 cells were
maintained in RPMI-1640 medium containing 10%
fetal bovine serum (FBS); VCaP cells were maintained
in Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle’s Medium (DMEM)
44739

Oncotarget

containing 10% FBS, 1% sodium pyruvate, 1% MEM nonessential amino acids and 0.1 nM 5α-dihydrotestosterone
(DHT; Sigma, St. Louis, MO, USA); MDA-MB-231 cells
were maintained in RPMI-1640 medium containing 5%
FBS; MCF7 cells were maintained in Eagle’s Minimum
Essential Medium (EMEM) containing 10% FBS, 2 mM
L-glutamine, sodium pyruvate and 0.2 U/mL insulin;
MFM-223 cells were maintained in EMEM containing
10% FBS, 2 mM L-glutamine, and insulin-transferrinsodium selenite (ITS) supplement; Cal-51 cells were
maintained in DMEM containing 10% FBS; Cal-148 cells
were maintained in DMEM containing 10%FBS, 2 mM
L-Glutamine and EGF (1ug/100mL); HEK293T/17 cells
were maintained in DMEM containing 10% FBS and 20
mM HEPES.

performed in 600 mL of 10 mM Tris base and 1 mM NaEDTA (pH 9.0) by heating in a 1100W microwave at full
power for 5 min and subsequently heating at 50% power
for an additional 5 min. Primary antibodies used for
immunofluorescence were AR-441 (M3562, 1:50, DAKO)
and AR-V7 (EPR15656, 1:400). Primary antibodies were
detected using secondary antibodies conjugated to either
Alexa-Fluor 488 (A11029; Life Technologies) or AlexFluor 568 (A11036; Life Technologies). Images were
acquired sequentially on a Zeiss 700 confocal microscope
with a pinhole aperture of 2 airy units.

siRNA knockdown of AR-V7 and AR
Small interfering RNAs were purchased from
Ambion (Life Technologies) and had the following
target sequences: AR (GGAACUCGAUCGUAUCAUU)
and AR-V7 (GUAGUUGUGAGUAUCAUGA) [28].
An additional AR-V7 siRNA (target sequence GACCA
GACCCUGAAGAAAG) was purchased from Thermo
Scientific (Fremont, CA, USA). A nonspecific siRNA
duplex (Ambion) was used as a negative control in all
experiments. To test the specificity of the siRNAs, MDAMB-453 and 22Rv1 cells (6.6 × 105 cells/well in 6-well
plates) were transfected in suspension with 100 nM siRNA
using RNAiMax (Invitrogen, Life Technologies) and
protein lysates were collected 72 h post-transfection and
analyzed by immunoblotting.

RNA extraction and quantitative RT-PCR
Extraction of RNA from cells was done as described
[39]. RNA was extracted from breast tissue using a
Precellys system (Sapphire Biosciences, Waterloo, NSW,
AUS) and purified using RNeasy kits (Qiagen, Venlo,
Limburg, Netherlands). Reverse transcription quantitative
PCR was done as described previously [39]. Primers
sequences are available on request. Gene expression
was normalized to GAPDH mRNA levels. For absolute
quantification, Ct values obtained from plasmid standards
were used to construct Ct versus cDNA copy number
standard curves.

Transactivation assays

Immunoblotting
Preparation of whole cell lysates from breast and
prostate cancer cell lines and Western blotting were done
as described previously [39]. Primary antibodies used
were rabbit polyclonal AR-N20 (sc-816, 1:1000) (SantaCruz Biotechnology Inc, Santa Cruz, CA, USA), mouse
monoclonal AR-V7 (AG-10008, 1:1000) (Precision
Antibodies, Columbia, MD, USA), rabbit monoclonal ARV7 (EPR15656, 1:1000) (Abcam, Cambridge, MA, USA)
and GAPDH (MAB374, 1:2000) (Millipore, Billerica,
MA, USA).

[65].

Visualization of GFP-tagged proteins in breast
cancer cells
MDA-MB-453 cells were seeded at a density of 6.0
× 104 cells/well onto glass coverslips in 12-well plates.
Once seeded, cells were transfected with 100 ng/well
of plasmids designed to express GFP, GFP-AR or GFPAR-V7 by mixing plasmid DNA and polyethylenimine
at a ratio of 1:3.1 in 0.9% sodium chloride. Cells were
subsequently treated with 10 nM DHT or ethanol (vehicle
control) and left overnight. The cells were fixed with 4%
paraformaldehyde for 10 min at room temperature. AlexaFluor 568 phalloidin (A12380; Life Technologies) was
used according to the manufacturer’s protocol to visualize
actin. ProLong Gold Antifade Reagent with DAPI (Life
Technologies) was used as mounting media and to detect
cell nuclei. Cells were viewed using Zeiss 700 confocal
microscope with a pinhole aperture of 1.5 airy units.

Immunohistochemistry and immunofluorescence
Immunohistochemical staining for AR-V7
was done on serial 4 μm breast tissue sections as
described previously [62] using the AR-V7 EPR15656
antibody (1:200), biotinylated anti-rabbit antibody
(1:400, DAKO Corp., Carpinteria, CA), streptavidinhorseradish peroxidase complex (1:500, DAKO),
and diaminobenzidine tetrahydrochloride. To analyze
22Rv1 cells (Supplementary Figure S4), a standard
cytospin protocol was utilized [63] followed by
immunohistochemistry as above.
Preparation of formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded
tissue sections for immunofluorescence was done as
described previously [64]. For all antigens, retrieval was
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Transactivation assays were performed as described

Microarray analysis
MDA-MB-453 cells (6.6 × 105 cells/well in a 6-well
plate) were transiently transfected with 1 μg of plasmid
DNA designed to express AR or AR-V7 (or an empty
44740

Oncotarget

vector control) using Lipofectamine-2000. After 4 h, cells
were treated with 1 nM DHT or ethanol (vehicle control).
After 24 h, RNA was extracted using TRIzol (Invitrogen,
Life Technologies) and purified using an RNeasy Mini
Kit (Qiagen). Prior to microarray analysis, AR and ARV7 overexpression and evidence of efficacy of DHT
treatment (i.e. FKBP5 induction) was confirmed by qRTPCR. Subsequently, RNA was analyzed using Affymetrix
Human Gene 2.0 ST arrays by the Adelaide Microarray
Centre, as described previously [39]. Differential gene
expression was assessed by ANOVA, with the p-value
adjusted using a step-up multiple test correction to control
the false discovery rate. Adjusted p-values < 0.05 were
considered to be significant. Raw and normalized data
have been deposited in the Gene Expression Omnibus
database (accession number GSE65738).

concentrated lentivirus using a MOI of 1 and 6 μg/mL
Polybrene (Sigma) in normal growth media.

MTT assays

MDA-MB-453 cells (3 × 105 cells/well in 12-well
plate) were seeded in phenol red-free RPMI containing
10% charcoal-stripped FBS. After 24 h, the media was
removed and replaced with media containing 10 nM DHT,
10 μM bicalutamide, 10 μM enzalutamide or ethanol/
DMSO (vehicle control) for 24 h. RNA and protein
samples were analyzed by qRT-PCR or Western blotting,
respectively.

Crystal violet mitogenic assay
Cell growth of lentivirus-transduced MDA-MB-453
cells expressing AR and AR-V7 was assessed by Crystal
Violet assay, essentially as described [66]. Briefly, cells
were seeded in RPMI-1640 medium containing 10% CSS
at 1 × 105 cells/well in 24-well plates and left to adhere
overnight. Cells were treated the next day with vehicle
control (DMSO) or 10 μM enzalutamide. At the indicated
time points, cells were fixed and stained with Crystal
Violet.

Treatment of cells with AR antagonists

MTT (3-(4,5-Dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-Diphenyl
Tetrazolium Bromide) assays were performed on MDAMB-453 cells treated with siRNAs targeting AR or AR-V7.
MDA-MB-453 cells in RPMI-1640 medium containing
10% charcoal stripped serum (CSS) were transfected in
suspension with 100 nM siRNA using RNAiMax (Life
Technologies), seeded in 96 well plates (6 × 103 cells/
well) and left to adhere overnight. The following day, day
zero and standard curve plates were assayed by adding 10
μl of 10 mg/mL MTT (Sigma) per well and incubated at
37°C for 4 hours. 100 μl of 20% SDS (in 0.2 M HCl) was
then added to each well and left to solubilize overnight.
The next day the absorbance at 570 nm in each well was
measured using a FluoStar Omega plate reader (BMG
Labtech, Durham, NC, USA). All experimental plates
were treated with 10 nM DHT at day zero and assayed
using the procedure above at the indicated time points.

Ex vivo culture and hormone treatment
Primary breast tumors were cultured ex vivo as
described previously [67] in media containing DMSO
(vehicle control) or 50 μM enzalutamide. After 48 h of
culture, tissues were collected and stored in RNAlater
(Invitrogen, Life Technologies) at −80°C before being
processed for RNA extraction as described above.

Statistical analysis
Statistical tests were done using GraphPad Prism v
6.00 (GraphPad Software; San Diego, CA, USA).

Trypan blue growth assay
Trypan blue exclusion counts were performed on
MDA-MB-453 cells treated with siRNAs targeting AR or
AR-V7. Cells were seeded at 4 × 104 cells/well in RPMI1640 medium containing 10% CSSS in 24-well plates
and transfected in suspension with 100 nM siRNA using
RNAiMax (Life Technologies). 72 h post-transfection, day
zero counts were taken and cells were treated with 10 nM
DHT (vehicle control). Live and dead cells were quantified
at indicated time points using Trypan blue.

Data and materials availability
Raw and normalized microarray data from this study
have been deposited in the Gene Expression Omnibus
database (accession number GSE65738).

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors thank Dr. Lisa Butler for useful
discussions and Dr. Shalini Jindal for assessment of
tissue histology. We are also grateful to the surgeons who
provided clinical specimens, the staff at Burnside War
Memorial Hospital Breast Clinic and Flinders Medical
Centre, and the women who consented to this study. The
results published here are in part based on data generated
by The Cancer Genome Atlas, established by the National
Cancer Institute and the National Human Genome Research

Lentivirus packaging and transduction
Lentivirus particles designed to express GFP and
AR-V7 were prepared using a standard third generation
packaging system in HEK293T/17 cells. For viral
transduction experiments, MDA-MB-453 cells were
seeded at 1.65 × 106 cells per T25 flask and left overnight
to adhere. The next day, cells were transduced with
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

44741

Oncotarget

Institute, and we are grateful to the specimen donors and
relevant research groups associated with this project.

and prognostic associations. American journal of clinical
pathology. 2003; 120:725–731.
6.	 Park S, Koo J, Park HS, Kim JH, Choi SY, Lee JH, Park
BW and Lee KS. Expression of androgen receptors in primary breast cancer. Annals of oncology. 2010; 21:488–492.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
No potential conflicts of interest were disclosed.

7.	 Birrell SN, Bentel JM, Hickey TE, Ricciardelli C, Weger
MA, Horsfall DJ and Tilley WD. Androgens induce divergent proliferative responses in human breast cancer cell
lines. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol. 1995; 52:459–467.

GRANT SUPPORT
This work was supported by grants from: Susan G.
Komen for the Cure (BCTR0601118; WDT and TEH);
the National Breast Cancer Foundation of Australia (NC12-21; WDT and TEH); the Prostate Cancer Foundation of
Australia/Cancer Australia (Grant ID 1043482; WDT and
LAS); the Ray and Shirl Norman Cancer Research Trust
(WDT and LAS); the U.S. Department of Defense Prostate
Cancer Research Program (Transformative Impact Award
W81XWH-13-2-0093; SRP, SMD, WDT and LAS); the
National Health and Medical Research Council of Australia
(1008349); and a National Institutes of Health/National
Cancer Institute P50 CA138293 career development award
(RKB). LAS is supported by a Young Investigator Award
from the Prostate Cancer Foundation (the Foundation 14
award; LAS) and TEH/HD by postdoctoral fellowships
from the US Department of Defense Breast Cancer
Research Program (W81XWH-11-1-0592 (TEH) and
W81XWH-14-1-0044 (HD)).

8.	 Doane AS, Danso M, Lal P, Donaton M, Zhang L, Hudis
C and Gerald WL. An estrogen receptor-negative breast
cancer subset characterized by a hormonally regulated transcriptional program and response to androgen. Oncogene.
2006; 25:3994–4008.
9.	 Farmer P, Bonnefoi H, Becette V, Tubiana-Hulin M, Fumoleau
P, Larsimont D, Macgrogan G, Bergh J, Cameron D, Goldstein
D, Duss S, Nicoulaz AL, Brisken C, Fiche M, Delorenzi M and
Iggo R. Identification of molecular apocrine breast tumours by
microarray analysis. Oncogene. 2005; 24:4660–4671.
10.	 Hall RE, Birrell SN, Tilley WD and Sutherland RL.
MDA-MB-453, an androgen-responsive human breast carcinoma cell line with high level androgen receptor expression. European journal of cancer. 1994; 30A:484–490.
11.	 Lehmann BD, Bauer JA, Chen X, Sanders ME,
Chakravarthy AB, Shyr Y and Pietenpol JA. Identification
of human triple-negative breast cancer subtypes and preclinical models for selection of targeted therapies. J Clin
Invest. 2011; 121:2750–2767.

Editorial note
This paper has been accepted based in part on peerreview conducted by another journal and the authors’
response and revisions as well as expedited peer-review in
Oncotarget.

12.	 Robinson JL, Macarthur S, Ross-Innes CS, Tilley WD, Neal
DE, Mills IG and Carroll JS. Androgen receptor driven transcription in molecular apocrine breast cancer is mediated by
FoxA1. The EMBO journal. 2011; 30:3019–3027.

REFERENCES

13.	 Ni M, Chen Y, Fei T, Li D, Lim E, Liu XS and Brown M.
Amplitude modulation of androgen signaling by c-MYC.
Genes & development. 2013; 27:734–748.
14.	 Ni M, Chen Y, Lim E, Wimberly H, Bailey ST, Imai Y,
Rimm DL, Liu XS and Brown M. Targeting androgen
receptor in estrogen receptor-negative breast cancer. Cancer
Cell. 2011; 20:119–131.

1.	 Bauer KR, Brown M, Cress RD, Parise CA and
Caggiano  V. Descriptive analysis of estrogen receptor
(ER)-negative, progesterone receptor (PR)-negative, and
HER2-negative invasive breast cancer, the so-called triple-negative phenotype: a population-based study from the
California cancer Registry. Cancer. 2007; 109:1721–1728.

15.	 Naderi A and Hughes-Davies L. A functionally significant
cross-talk between androgen receptor and ErbB2 pathways
in estrogen receptor negative breast cancer. Neoplasia.
2008; 10:542–548.

2.	 Hudis CA and Gianni L. Triple-negative breast cancer: an
unmet medical need. The oncologist. 2011; 16:1–11.
3.	 Green SM, Mostaghel EA and Nelson PS. Androgen action
and metabolism in prostate cancer. Molecular and cellular
endocrinology. 2012; 360:3–13.

16.	 Scher HI, Buchanan G, Gerald W, Butler LM and Tilley
WD. Targeting the androgen receptor: improving outcomes for castration-resistant prostate cancer. Endocr Relat
Cancer. 2004; 11:459–476.

4.	 Hickey TE, Robinson JL, Carroll JS and Tilley WD.
Minireview: The androgen receptor in breast tissues:
growth inhibitor, tumor suppressor, oncogene? Molecular
endocrinology. 2012; 26:1252–1267.

17.	 Chen CD, Welsbie DS, Tran C, Baek SH, Chen R, Vessella R,
Rosenfeld MG and Sawyers CL. Molecular determinants of
resistance to antiandrogen therapy. Nat Med. 2004; 10:33–39.

5.	 Agoff SN, Swanson PE, Linden H, Hawes SE and Lawton
TJ. Androgen receptor expression in estrogen receptornegative breast cancer. Immunohistochemical, clinical,

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

18.	 Buchanan G, Greenberg NM, Scher HI, Harris JM, Marshall VR
and Tilley WD. Collocation of androgen receptor gene mutations in prostate cancer. Clin Cancer Res. 2001; 7:1273–1281.

44742

Oncotarget

19.	 Haile S and Sadar MD. Androgen receptor and its splice variants in prostate cancer. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2011; 68:3971–3981.

Bone Metastases is Associated with Castration-Resistance
and Short Survival. PLoS One. 2011; 6:e19059.

20.	 Buchanan G, Ricciardelli C, Harris JM, Prescott J, Yu ZC,
Jia L, Butler LM, Marshall VR, Scher HI, Gerald WL,
Coetzee GA and Tilley WD. Control of androgen receptor
signaling in prostate cancer by the cochaperone small glutamine rich tetratricopeptide repeat containing protein alpha.
Cancer Res. 2007; 67:10087–10096.

32.	 Sun S, Sprenger CC, Vessella RL, Haugk K, Soriano K,
Mostaghel EA, Page ST, Coleman IM, Nguyen HM, Sun H,
Nelson PS and Plymate SR. Castration resistance in human
prostate cancer is conferred by a frequently occurring androgen
receptor splice variant. J Clin Invest. 2010; 120:2715–2730.
33.	 Watson PA, Chen YF, Balbas MD, Wongvipat J, Socci
ND, Viale A, Kim K and Sawyers CL. Constitutively active
androgen receptor splice variants expressed in castrationresistant prostate cancer require full-length androgen receptor. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010; 107:16759–16765.

21.	 Hyytinen ER, Haapala K, Thompson J, Lappalainen
I, Roiha M, Rantala I, Helin HJ, Janne OA, Vihinen M,
Palvimo JJ and Koivisto PA. Pattern of somatic androgen
receptor gene mutations in patients with hormone-refractory
prostate cancer. Lab Invest. 2002; 82:1591–1598.

34.	 Antonarakis ES, Lu C, Wang H, Luber B, Nakazawa M,
Roeser JC, Chen Y, Mohammad TA, Chen Y, Fedor HL, Lotan
TL, Zheng Q, De Marzo AM, Isaacs JT, Isaacs WB, Nadal R,
et al. AR-V7 and resistance to enzalutamide and abiraterone in
prostate cancer. N Engl J Med. 2014; 371:1028–1038.

22.	 Cai C and Balk SP. Intratumoral androgen biosynthesis
in prostate cancer pathogenesis and response to therapy.
Endocr Relat Cancer. 2011; 18:R175–182.
23.	 Greenberg NM, DeMayo F, Finegold MJ, Medina D, Tilley
WD, Aspinall JO, Cunha GR, Donjacour AA, Matusik RJ
and Rosen JM. Prostate cancer in a transgenic mouse. Proc
Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1995; 92:3439–3443.

35.	 Curtis C, Shah SP, Chin SF, Turashvili G, Rueda OM,
Dunning MJ, Speed D, Lynch AG, Samarajiwa S, Yuan
Y, Graf S, Ha G, Haffari G, Bashashati A, Russell R,
McKinney S, et al. The genomic and transcriptomic architecture of 2,000 breast tumours reveals novel subgroups.
Nature. 2012; 486:346–352.

24.	 Han G, Buchanan G, Ittmann M, Harris JM, Yu X, Demayo
FJ, Tilley W and Greenberg NM. Mutation of the androgen
receptor causes oncogenic transformation of the prostate.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2005; 102:1151–1156.
25.	 Buchanan G, Need EF, Bianco-Miotto T, Greenberg NM,
Scher HI, Centenera MM, Butler LM, Robins DM and
Tilley WD. (2009). Insights from AR gene mutations. In:
Tindall DJ and Mohler JL, eds. Androgen action in prostate
cancer. (New York: Springer), pp. 207–240.

36.	 Tress ML, Martelli PL, Frankish A, Reeves GA, Wesselink
JJ, Yeats C, Olason PI, Albrecht M, Hegyi H, Giorgetti
A, Raimondo D, Lagarde J, Laskowski RA, Lopez G,
Sadowski MI, Watson JD, et al. The implications of alternative splicing in the ENCODE protein complement. Proc
Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007; 104:5495–5500.

26.	 Dehm SM, Schmidt LJ, Heemers HV, Vessella RL and Tindall
DJ. Splicing of a novel androgen receptor exon generates a
constitutively active androgen receptor that mediates prostate
cancer therapy resistance. Cancer Res. 2008; 68:5469–5477.

37.	 Wang ET, Sandberg R, Luo S, Khrebtukova I, Zhang
L, Mayr C, Kingsmore SF, Schroth GP and Burge CB.
Alternative isoform regulation in human tissue transcriptomes. Nature. 2008; 456:470–476.

27.	 Guo Z, Yang X, Sun F, Jiang R, Linn DE, Chen H, Kong X,
Melamed J, Tepper CG, Kung HJ, Brodie AM, Edwards J
and Qiu Y. A novel androgen receptor splice variant is upregulated during prostate cancer progression and promotes
androgen depletion-resistant growth. Cancer Res. 2009;
69:2305–2313.

38.	 Djebali S, Davis CA, Merkel A, Dobin A, Lassmann T,
Mortazavi A, Tanzer A, Lagarde J, Lin W, Schlesinger F,
Xue C, Marinov GK, Khatun J, Williams BA, Zaleski C,
Rozowsky J, et al. Landscape of transcription in human
cells. Nature. 2012; 489:101–108.
39.	 Moore NL, Buchanan G, Harris JM, Selth LA, Bianco-Miotto
T, Hanson AR, Birrell SN, Butler LM, Hickey TE and Tilley
WD. An androgen receptor mutation in the MDA-MB-453 cell
line model of molecular apocrine breast cancer compromises
receptor activity. Endocr Relat Cancer. 2012; 19:599–613.

28.	 Hu R, Dunn TA, Wei S, Isharwal S, Veltri RW,
Humphreys E, Han M, Partin AW, Vessella RL, Isaacs
WB, Bova GS and Luo J. Ligand-independent androgen
receptor variants derived from splicing of cryptic exons
signify hormone-refractory prostate cancer. Cancer Res.
2009; 69:16–22.

40.	 Hu R, Lu C, Mostaghel EA, Yegnasubramanian S, Gurel M,
Tannahill C, Edwards J, Isaacs WB, Nelson PS, Bluemn E,
Plymate SR and Luo J. Distinct transcriptional programs
mediated by the ligand-dependent full-length androgen
receptor and its splice variants in castration-resistant prostate cancer. Cancer Res. 2012; 72:3457–3462.

29.	 Dehm SM and Tindall DJ. Alternatively spliced androgen
receptor variants. Endocr Relat Cancer. 2011; 18:R183–196.
30.	 Li Y, Chan SC, Brand LJ, Hwang TH, Silverstein KA
and Dehm SM. Androgen receptor splice variants mediate
enzalutamide resistance in castration-resistant prostate cancer cell lines. Cancer Res. 2013; 73:483–489.

41.	 Dutertre M, Gratadou L, Dardenne E, Germann S, Samaan
S, Lidereau R, Driouch K, de la Grange P and Auboeuf D.
Estrogen regulation and physiopathologic significance of
alternative promoters in breast cancer. Cancer Res. 2010;
70:3760–3770.

31.	 Hornberg E, Ylitalo EB, Crnalic S, Antti H, Stattin P,
Widmark A, Bergh A and Wikstrom P. Expression of
Androgen Receptor Splice Variants in Prostate Cancer
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

44743

Oncotarget

42.	 Ringner M, Fredlund E, Hakkinen J, Borg A and Staaf J.
GOBO: gene expression-based outcome for breast cancer
online. PLoS One. 2011; 6:e17911.

56.	 Trapnell C, Pachter L and Salzberg SL. TopHat: discovering splice junctions with RNA-Seq. Bioinformatics. 2009;
25:1105–1111.

43.	 Mellinghoff IK, Vivanco I, Kwon A, Tran C, Wongvipat
J and Sawyers CL. HER2/neu kinase-dependent modulation of androgen receptor function through effects on DNA
binding and stability. Cancer Cell. 2004; 6:517–527.

57.	 Robinson MD and Oshlack A. A scaling normalization
method for differential expression analysis of RNA-seq
data. Genome Biol. 2010; 11:R25.
58.	 Parker JS, Mullins M, Cheang MC, Leung S, Voduc D,
Vickery T, Davies S, Fauron C, He X, Hu Z, Quackenbush JF,
Stijleman IJ, Palazzo J, Marron JS, Nobel AB, Mardis E, et al.
Supervised risk predictor of breast cancer based on intrinsic
subtypes. Journal of clinical oncology. 2009; 27:1160–1167.

44.	 Risbridger GP, Davis ID, Birrell SN and Tilley WD. Breast
and prostate cancer: more similar than different. Nature
reviews Cancer. 2010; 10:205–212.
45.	 Liu LL, Xie N, Sun S, Plymate S, Mostaghel E and Dong X.
Mechanisms of the androgen receptor splicing in prostate
cancer cells. Oncogene. 2013.

59.	 Mediwala SN, Sun H, Szafran AT, Hartig SM, Sonpavde
G, Hayes TG, Thiagarajan P, Mancini MA and Marcelli
M. The activity of the androgen receptor variant AR-V7
is regulated by FOXO1 in a PTEN-PI3K-AKT-dependent
way. The Prostate. 2012.

46.	 Chan SC and Dehm SM. Constitutive activity of the androgen receptor. Advances in pharmacology. 2014; 70:327–366.
47.	 Cai C, He HH, Chen S, Coleman I, Wang H, Fang Z, Chen S,
Nelson PS, Liu XS, Brown M and Balk SP. Androgen receptor gene expression in prostate cancer is directly suppressed
by the androgen receptor through recruitment of lysine-specific demethylase 1. Cancer Cell. 2011; 20:457–471.

60.	 Chan SC, Li Y and Dehm SM. Androgen receptor splice
variants activate androgen receptor target genes and support aberrant prostate cancer cell growth independent of
canonical androgen receptor nuclear localization signal. J
Biol Chem. 2012; 287:19736–19749.

48.	 Pihlajamaa P, Sahu B, Lyly L, Aittomaki V, Hautaniemi
S and Janne OA. Tissue-specific pioneer factors associate
with androgen receptor cistromes and transcription programs. The EMBO journal. 2014; 33:312–326.

61.	 Buchanan G, Yang M, Cheong A, Harris JM, Irvine RA,
Lambert PF, Moore NL, Raynor M, Neufing PJ, Coetzee
GA and Tilley WD. Structural and functional consequences
of glutamine tract variation in the androgen receptor.
Human molecular genetics. 2004; 13:1677–1692.

49.	 Chang C, Lee SO, Yeh S and Chang TM. Androgen receptor (AR) differential roles in hormone-related tumors
including prostate, bladder, kidney, lung, breast and liver.
Oncogene. 2014; 33:3225–3234.

62.	 Buchanan G, Birrell SN, Peters AA, Bianco-Miotto T,
Ramsay K, Cops EJ, Yang M, Harris JM, Simila HA,
Moore NL, Bentel JM, Ricciardelli C, Horsfall DJ, Butler
LM and Tilley WD. Decreased androgen receptor levels
and receptor function in breast cancer contribute to the failure of response to medroxyprogesterone acetate. Cancer
Res. 2005; 65:8487–8496.

50.	 Hu DG, Hickey TE, Irvine C, Wijayakumara DD, Lu L, Tilley
WD, Selth LA and Mackenzie PI. Identification of Androgen
Receptor Splice Variant Transcripts in Breast Cancer Cell
Lines and Human Tissues. Hormones & cancer. 2014.
51.	 Katz Y, Wang ET, Airoldi EM and Burge CB. Analysis
and design of RNA sequencing experiments for identifying
isoform regulation. Nature methods. 2010; 7:1009–1015.

63.	 Koh CM. Preparation of cells for microscopy using cytospin. Methods in enzymology. 2013; 533:235–240.
64.	 Tarulli GA, De Silva D, Ho V, Kunasegaran K, Ghosh K,
Tan BC, Bulavin DV and Pietersen AM. Hormone-sensing
cells require Wip1 for paracrine stimulation in normal and
premalignant mammary epithelium. Breast cancer research.
2013; 15:R10.

52.	 Meyer LR, Zweig AS, Hinrichs AS, Karolchik D, Kuhn
RM, Wong M, Sloan CA, Rosenbloom KR, Roe G,
Rhead B, Raney BJ, Pohl A, Malladi VS, Li CH, Lee BT,
Learned K, et al. The UCSC Genome Browser database:
extensions and updates 2013. Nucleic acids research.
2013; 41:D64–69.

65.	 Gillis JL, Selth LA, Centenera MM, Townley SL, Sun S,
Plymate SR, Tilley WD and Butler LM. Constitutively-active
androgen receptor variants function independently of the HSP90
chaperone but do not confer resistance to HSP90 inhibitors.
Oncotarget. 2013; 4:691–704. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.975.

53.	 Flicek P, Ahmed I, Amode MR, Barrell D, Beal K, Brent S,
Carvalho-Silva D, Clapham P, Coates G, Fairley S, Fitzgerald
S, Gil L, Garcia-Giron C, Gordon L, Hourlier T, Hunt S, et
al. Ensembl 2013. Nucleic acids research. 2013; 41:D48–55.

66.	 Zivadinovic D and Watson CS. Membrane estrogen receptor-alpha levels predict estrogen-induced ERK1/2 activation
in MCF-7 cells. Breast cancer research. 2005; 7:R130–144.

54.	 Langmead B, Trapnell C, Pop M and Salzberg SL. Ultrafast
and memory-efficient alignment of short DNA sequences to
the human genome. Genome Biol. 2009; 10:R25.

67.	 Dean JL, McClendon AK, Hickey TE, Butler LM, Tilley
WD, Witkiewicz AK and Knudsen ES. Therapeutic response
to CDK4/6 inhibition in breast cancer defined by ex vivo
analyses of human tumors. Cell cycle. 2012; 11:2756–2761.

55.	 Li B and Dewey CN. RSEM: accurate transcript quantification from RNA-Seq data with or without a reference
genome. BMC bioinformatics. 2011; 12:323.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

44744

Oncotarget

