HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Author Manuscript

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 July 01.
Published in final edited form as:
Nature. 2014 July 17; 511(7509): 319–325. doi:10.1038/nature13535.

The cancer glycocalyx mechanically primes integrin-mediated
growth and survival

Author Manuscript

Matthew J. Paszek1,2,3,4, Christopher C. DuFort1,2, Olivier Rossier5,6, Russell Bainer1,2,
Janna K. Mouw1, Kamil Godula7,8,†, Jason E. Hudak7, Jonathon N. Lakins1, Amanda C.
Wijekoon1,2, Luke Cassereau1,2, Matthew G. Rubashkin1,2, Mark J. Magbanua9,10, Kurt S.
Thorn11, Michael W. Davidson12, Hope S. Rugo9,10, John W. Park9,10, Daniel A. Hammer13,
Grégory Giannone5,6, Carolyn R. Bertozzi7,14,15, and Valerie M. Weaver1,2,9,16
1Department

of Surgery and Center for Bioengineering and Tissue Regeneration, University of
California, San Francisco, California 94143, USA
2Bay

Area Physical Sciences-Oncology Program, University of California, Berkeley, California
94720, USA

3School

of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, Cornell University, Ithaca, New York 14853,

USA
4Laboratory

for Atomic and Solid State Physics and Kavli Institute at Cornell for Nanoscale
Science, Cornell University, Ithaca, New York 14853, USA

5Interdisciplinary

Author Manuscript

Institute for Neuroscience, University of Bordeaux, UMR 5297, F-33000
Bordeaux, France
6CNRS,

Interdisciplinary Institute for Neuroscience, University of Bordeaux, UMR 5297, F-33000
Bordeaux, France

7Department
8The

of Chemistry, University of California, Berkeley, California 94720, USA

Molecular Foundry, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, California 94720,

USA
9Helen

Diller Family Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of California, San Francisco,
California 94143, USA

Author Manuscript

Reprints and permissions information is available at www.nature.com/reprints.
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to V.M.W. (Valerie.Weaver@ucsfmedctr.org).
†Present address: Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of California, San Diego, California 92093, USA.
Supplementary Information is available in the online version of the paper.
Author Contributions V.M.W. and M.J.P. conceived the project. V.M.W., M.J.P. and C.R.B. provided project management. M.J.P.,
A.C.W., M.W.D. and J.N.L. designed and constructed expression constructs. C.C.D. and M.J.P conducted single cell force
spectroscopy measurements. M.J.P. and K.S.T. designed and implemented the interference microscope. M.J.P., L.C. and M.G.R.
performed fluorescence, FRET and interferometric imaging and M.J.P. wrote the accompanying analysis software. O.R. and G.G.
conducted sptPALM experiments and analysed the results. V.M.W., R.B. and M.J.P. designed the bioinformatics pipeline and R.B.
implemented the pipeline and performed the large-scale gene expression analysis. J.K.M., A.C.W. and M.J.P. fabricated and
conducted experiments on compliant hydrogels. M.J.M., H.S.R. and J.W.P. isolated CTCs and measured CTC gene and protein
expression. K.G., J.E.H. and C.R.B. designed, synthesized and characterized the glycoprotein mimetics. M.J.P and D.A.H. constructed
and implemented the computational model. M.J.P. and V.M.W wrote the manuscript with input from all authors.
The authors declare no competing financial interests.

Paszek et al.
10Division

Page 2

of Hematology/Oncology, University of California, San Francisco, California 94143,

Author Manuscript

USA
11Department

of Biochemistry and Biophysics, University of California, San Francisco, California

94158, USA
12National

High Magnetic Field Laboratory and Department of Biological Science, The Florida
State University, Tallahassee, Florida 32310, USA

13Departments

of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering and Bioengineering, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA

14Department
15Howard

of Molecular Biology, University of California, Berkeley, California 94720, USA

Hughes Medical Institute, University of California, Berkeley, California 94720, USA

Author Manuscript

16Departments

of Anatomy and Bioengineering and Therapeutic Sciences and Eli and Edythe
Broad Center for Regeneration Medicine and Stem Cell Research, University of California, San
Francisco, California 94143, USA

Abstract

Author Manuscript

Malignancy is associated with altered expression of glycans and glycoproteins that contribute to
the cellular glycocalyx. We constructed a glycoprotein expression signature, which revealed that
metastatic tumours upregulate expression of bulky glycoproteins. A computational model
predicted that these glycoproteins would influence transmembrane receptor spatial organization
and function. We tested this prediction by investigating whether bulky glycoproteins in the
glycocalyx promote a tumour phenotype in human cells by increasing integrin adhesion and
signalling. Our data revealed that a bulky glycocalyx facilitates integrin clustering by funnelling
active integrins into adhesions and altering integrin state by applying tension to matrix-bound
integrins, independent of actomyosin contractility. Expression of large tumour-associated
glycoproteins in non-transformed mammary cells promoted focal adhesion assembly and
facilitated integrin-dependent growth factor signalling to support cell growth and survival. Clinical
studies revealed that large glycoproteins are abundantly expressed on circulating tumour cells
from patients with advanced disease. Thus, a bulky glycocalyx is a feature of tumour cells that
could foster metastasis by mechanically enhancing cell-surface receptor function.

Author Manuscript

The composition of cell surface glycans and glycoproteins changes markedly and in tandem
with cell fate transitions occurring in embryogenesis, tissue development, stem-cell
differentiation and diseases such as cancer1–3. Nevertheless, our understanding of the
biochemical functions of glycans fails to explain fully why broad changes in glycosylation
and glycoprotein expression are critical to cell fate specification and in what ways are they
linked to disease. It is currently unclear whether changes in glycan and glycoprotein
expression reflect a global and more general mechanism that directs cell and tissue
behaviour.
From a materials perspective, glycan and glycoprotein expression dictates the bulk physical
properties of the glycocalyx—the exterior cell surface layer across which information flows
from the microenvironment to signal transduction pathways originating at the plasma

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 July 01.

Paszek et al.

Page 3

Author Manuscript

membrane. Although the biophysical functions of the glycocalyx are largely untested,
computational models predict that bulky glycoproteins can promote transmembrane receptor
organization, including the clustering of integrins at adhesion sites4. These models suggest
that glycocalyx-mediated integrin clustering would promote the assembly of mature
adhesion complexes and collaborate to enhance growth factor signalling5—phenotypes that
are associated with cancer6,7. We demonstrate that a global modulation of the physical
properties of the glycocalyx alters integrin organization and function, and present evidence
for how the glycocalyx can be co-opted in malignancy to support tumour cell growth and
survival.

Regulation of integrin assembly by bulky glycoproteins

Author Manuscript

To determine whether glycocalyx bulk contributes to a cancer phenotype, we used gene
expression microarray data to relate metastasis to expression of genes for which protein
products contribute to the glycocalyx. The likely contribution of gene product to glycocalyx
bulk was estimated based on the protein’s extracellular domain structure and predicted
number of glycosylation sites (Extended Data Fig. 1). Using these estimates we obtained
evidence for upregulation of transcripts encoding bulky glycoproteins and some classes of
glycosyltransferases, which catalyse the glycosylation of cell surface proteins, in primary
tumours of patients with distant metastases relative to those with localized tumour growth (P
= 0.032 for bulky transmembrane proteins, Kolmogorov–Smirnov test; Fig. 1a and Extended
Data Fig. 1).

Author Manuscript

To understand whether bulky glycoproteins could promote tumour aggression by regulating
integrin adhesions, we developed an integrated biochemical and mechanical model that
incorporates integrins, the extracellular matrix (ECM), the cell membrane and the
glycocalyx (Extended Data Fig. 2). The model revealed that the kinetic rates of integrin–
ECM interactions are tightly coupled to the distances between receptor–ligand pairs and,
thus, the physical constraints imposed by the glycocalyx. In the presence of bulky
glycoproteins, the model predicted that integrin–ECM binding is most favourable at sites of
pre-existing adhesive contact, where the membrane and ECM substrate are in closest
proximity (Fig. 1b). Elsewhere, bulky glycoproteins sterically restrict efficient integrin–
matrix engagement (Fig. 1b) by increasing the gap between the plasma membrane and ECM.
Thus, the model predicted that whereas bulky glycoproteins reduce the overall integrinbinding rate, they enhance, rather than impede, integrin clustering and focal adhesion
assembly by generating a physically based kinetic trap (Fig. 1c).

Author Manuscript

To test experimentally whether bulky glycoproteins could drive integrin clustering and focal
adhesion assembly, we generated a series of synthetic mucin glycoprotein mimetics of
increasing length that rapidly intercalate into the plasma membrane and project
perpendicularly to the cell surface8,9. These glycopolymers consisted of a long-chain
polymer backbone, pendant glycan chains that mimic the structures of natural mucin Oglycans, a phospholipid for membrane insertion, and a fluorophore for imaging (Fig. 1d and
Extended Data Fig. 3a–c). We found that large glycopolymers with lengths of 80 nm,
significantly longer than the reported integrin length of 20 nm10, are consistently excluded
from sites of integrin adhesion on the surface of non-malignant mammary epithelial cells

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 July 01.

Paszek et al.

Page 4

Author Manuscript

(MECs; Fig. 1e). Shorter polymers with lengths of 3 or 30 nm were not excluded (Fig. 1e).
Because the mimetics possessed minimal biochemical interactivity with cell surface proteins
(Extended Data Fig. 3d), the data suggest a physical interplay between bulky glycoproteins
and integrin receptors.

Author Manuscript

To determine how the largest polymer mimetics influence the nanoscale spatial features of
the cell–ECM interface, we measured the topography of the ventral cell membrane using
scanning angle interference microscopy (SAIM), a fluorescence-based microscopy
technique that enables imaging with 5–10-nm axial resolution and diffraction-limited (~250
nm) lateral resolution11. Polymers designed to mimic large native glycoproteins (~80 nm)
expanded the membrane–ECM gap by 19 nm (Fig. 1f). Consistent with computational
predictions, the large glycoprotein mimetics reduced the overall rate of integrin bond
formation, but significantly enhanced clustering of integrins into focal adhesions (Fig. 1g,
h). Shorter glycoprotein mimetics (3 and 30 nm) did not have an impact on integrin
clustering, even when incorporated at higher surface densities (Fig. 1h).
We next asked whether cancer-associated glycoproteins could similarly influence the spatial
distribution of integrins and the assembly of focal adhesions. On the basis of our large-scale
gene expression analysis, we determined that the transmembrane mucin glycoprotein,
MUC1, which has a highly glycosylated ectodomain that projects out up to 200 nm from the
cell surface12, was upregulated in metastatic tumours (nominal P = 0.0028 via one-sided ttest). In agreement with our analysis, we measured high levels of MUC1 on the surface of
several breast cancer cell lines, as well as v-Src and HRAS-transformed MECs (Fig. 2a).

Author Manuscript

To assess the impact of MUC1 on focal adhesion assembly, we expressed MUC1 on the
surface of non-malignant MECs, to levels comparable to those of transformed MECs and
breast cancer lines. MUC1 expression induced striking membrane topographical features,
which included regions of high curvature, and a significant expansion of the cell membrane–
ECM gap (Fig. 2b, c and Extended Data Fig. 4a). Expression of an ectodomain-truncated
MUC1 construct did not significantly change the gap compared to control MECs (Fig. 2c
and Extended Data Fig. 4a). Our model predicted that the membrane topographies we
observed in MUC1-expresing cells would facilitate integrin clustering through the kinetic
trap. In agreement with these predictions, expression of full-length MUC1 significantly
enhanced the size of adhesion clusters and the total adhesion area per cell (Fig. 2d, e and
Extended Data Fig. 5a). The adhesion assembly phenotype did not require the MUC1
cytoplasmic tail, which mediates MUC1’s biochemical activity (Fig. 2e)13, or direct
interactions between MUC1 and fibronectin (Extended Data Fig. 5b). Together, these results
are consistent with a physically based mechanism of integrin clustering.

Author Manuscript

To gain additional insight into the coupled dynamics between integrins and MUC1, we
conducted time-lapse imaging of fluorescently labelled MUC1 and the adhesion plaque
protein vinculin. We observed that MUC1 and integrin adhesions spatially segregate on the
cell surface in a temporally correlated manner (Fig. 2d, Extended Data Fig. 5c and
Supplementary Movie 1), suggesting a physical communication between these molecules.
Further evidence for a physical interplay between MUC1 and integrins was obtained in
mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) using single-particle tracking photo-activation

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 July 01.

Paszek et al.

Page 5

Author Manuscript

localization microscopy (sptPALM14,15) to track MUC1 diffusive trajectories. We noted that
whereas MUC1 was mobile in the plasma membrane, it rarely crossed into integrin adhesion
zones (Fig. 2f and Extended Data Fig. 6a).

Author Manuscript

We next tested our model’s prediction that MUC1 would favour integrin clustering by
physically impeding integrin–ECM binding outside of adhesive contacts. We recorded the
trajectories of individual β3 integrin molecules using sptPALM to determine the location and
fraction of mobile (confined and freely diffusive) and matrix-bound, immobilized integrin15.
Analysis of β3 integrin trajectories after manganese activation in MEFs revealed a
significant increase in the total level of immobilized integrin at the plasma membrane, both
inside and outside adhesive contacts (Fig. 3a and Extended Data Fig. 6b–e). By contrast, the
immobilized β3 integrin in MEFs expressing high MUC1 was restricted to sites of adhesion
(Fig. 3a–c and Extended Data Fig. 6e). These results are consistent with single-cell force
spectroscopy measurements, which indicated that MUC1 expression reduces the net rate of
integrin–ECM bond formation (Extended Data Fig. 5d). Mucin expression did not have a
significant impact on the free diffusion of integrins (Extended Data Fig. 6b–d). Importantly,
we observed that integrins frequently diffused across the mucin–adhesive zone boundary
and could immobilize rapidly once in the adhesive zone (Fig. 3d, Extended Data Fig. 6f, g
and Supplementary Movie 2). Together, our results indicate that large glycoproteins act as
physical ‘steric’ barriers that impede integrin immobilization and thus funnel integrins into
adhesive contacts.

Bulky glycoproteins exert force on integrin bonds

Author Manuscript

Integrins switch between activity states by undergoing a conformational change that is
facilitated by tensile force16,17. Given the order of magnitude difference in the size of
MUC1 (~200 nm12) as compared to integrins (~20 nm10), and the close proximity of these
molecules within the cell–ECM interface, we hypothesized that large glycoproteins, such as
MUC1, modify integrin structure and function by applying force to matrix-bound receptors.
Abiding by Newton’s third law, if large glycoproteins exert a tensile force on integrins, then
we should detect a reciprocal strain on the glycoproteins. Consistent with this hypothesis,
mucins imaged with SAIM appeared compressed or mechanically bent near integrin
adhesive contacts (Fig. 4a and Extended Data Fig. 4a). Furthermore, single-cell force
spectroscopy revealed that MECs expressing high levels of exogenous MUC1 required
higher compressive force application at the ECM–substrate interface to promote integrinmediated adhesion when compared to control MECs (Fig. 4b).

Author Manuscript

To test further whether integrin adhesions strain bulky transmembrane glycoproteins, we
generated a genetically encoded construct conceptually similar to a strain gauge, consisting
of a cysteine-free cyan and yellow fluorescent protein pair (CFP and YFP) separated by an
elastic linker18, which we inserted into the ectodomain of full-length and truncated MUC1
proteins (Fig. 4c and Extended Data Fig. 4b). Fluorescence resonance energy transfer
(FRET) served as the readout of distance between the CFP and YFP pair and, thus,
functioned as a reporter of molecular strain. When the full-length reporter was expressed in
MECs, we observed high FRET efficiencies in the cell–substrate interface (Fig. 4d, e and
Extended Data Fig. 7). FRET efficiency was significantly lower in MECs expressing the

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 July 01.

Paszek et al.

Page 6

Author Manuscript

ectodomain-truncated construct, indicative of lower molecular strain (Fig. 4d, e). The
highest FRET efficiencies correlated spatially with sites of adhesive contact, consistent with
integrin adhesions straining bulky transmembrane glycoproteins and glycoproteins exerting
a reciprocal restoring force on integrins (Fig. 4d and Extended Data Fig. 7e, f).

Author Manuscript

We next examined whether the bulky glycoprotein MUC1 could induce conformational
changes that would activate integrins independent of the contractile cytoskeleton. We used a
bi-functional crosslinker that can specifically link extracellular fibronectin and bound α5β1
integrins that are in a tension-dependent conformation17. Inhibition of actomyosin
contractility, using the myosin inhibitor blebbistatin or the Rho kinase inhibitor Y-27632,
abrogated most of the fibronectin crosslinked integrins in MECs expressing empty vector
(Fig. 4f and Extended Data Fig. 8a). By contrast, MUC1-expressing MECs formed
tensioned bonds with the ECM substrate, even when cells were pre-treated with contractility
inhibitors before plating (Fig. 4f and Extended Data Fig. 8a). Of note, the myosinindependent integrin clusters observed in the MUC1-expressing MECs recruited activated
cytoplasmic adaptors typically associated with mature adhesion structures and nucleated
actin (Extended Data Fig. 8b). These results suggest that large, cancer-associated
glycoproteins not only facilitate integrin clustering but also physically alter integrin state
and do so, at least in part, independently of cytoskeletal tension.

Bulky glycoproteins promote growth and survival

Author Manuscript

Tumour metastasis is a multi-step process that depends on the efficient dissemination of
primary cancer cells and their subsequent colonization at distant metastatic sites19. Thus, the
ability to survive, particularly within unfavourable microenvironments and under minimally
adhesive conditions, is a prerequisite for efficient tumour cell metastasis19. Given their
ability to promote integrin adhesion assembly, we hypothesized that bulky glycoproteins
could facilitate metastasis by promoting focal adhesion signalling to enhance tumour cell
growth and survival. Consistent with this notion, analysis of human data sets revealed that
patients with aggressive breast cancers that presented with circulating tumour cells (CTCs)
express disproportionately high amounts of bulky glycoproteins and have altered
glycosyltransferase expression profiles (Fig. 5a and Extended Data Fig. 1d, e). Furthermore,
analysis of genes expressed within CTCs isolated from a cohort of breast cancer patients
with metastatic disease confirmed that several predicted bulky glycoproteins could be
detected in these patient samples (Fig. 5b).

Author Manuscript

We next examined whether a bulky glycocalyx could promote growth and survival of nonmalignant MECs. Using our glycoprotein mimetics, we observed that untreated MECs or
MECs incorporated with short (3 nm) or medium (30 nm) length mimetics were not viable
24–48 h after they were plated on highly compliant hydrogel substrates that mimic the
stiffness of soft sites of colonization, like lung or brain (Young’s modulus, E = 140 Pa; Fig.
5c). By contrast, MECs incorporated with long glycoprotein mimetics (80 nm) remained
viable (Fig. 5c). Analysis of gene expression profiles and immunofluorescence analysis of
freshly isolated CTCs in our human metastatic breast cancer cohort revealed that MUC1
could be detected in most of the samples examined (Fig. 5b). Similar to results with the
synthetic mimetics, we observed that ectopic expression of either full-length or a tailless,

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 July 01.

Paszek et al.

Page 7

Author Manuscript

signalling-defective MUC1 in non-malignant MECs permitted their growth and survival
even when plated as single cells on compliant hydrogels (Fig. 5d and Extended Data Fig.
9a).

Author Manuscript

We noted that the CTCs in our cohort also expressed high levels of CD44, a receptor that
binds and retains bulky hyaluronic acid (HA) glycan structures on the cell surface (Extended
Data Fig. 10a)20. Similar to our observations with MUC1 and bulky glycoprotein mimetics,
we observed that HA and integrins exhibit an anti-correlated spatial distribution on the
surface of transformed MECs (Extended Data Fig. 10b). Inhibition of HA synthesis or HA
cell-surface retention significantly reduced the growth of transformed MECs on compliant
hydrogels, raising the possibility that bulky cell-surface constituents, in addition to MUC1,
could similarly promote tumour aggression (Extended Data Fig. 10b). However, unlike the
experiments with tailless MUC1 or the glycoprotein mimetics, which lack signalling
capability, we cannot exclude that HA-induced growth and survival phenotypes are not also,
at least in part, induced through HA’s direct biochemical signalling activity20,21.

Author Manuscript

We next addressed whether a bulky glycocalyx promotes MEC growth and survival by
regulating focal adhesion assembly and crosstalk with growth factor signalling pathways5,7.
We found that pharmacological inhibition of kinases linked to growth factor signalling,
including phosphoinositide 3-kianse (PI(3)K), mitogen-activated kinase, and Src kinase,
each independently inhibited the growth and survival of MUC1-expressing MECs on highly
compliant substrates (Fig. 5e). We also noted that the MUC1 growth and survival phenotype
requires integrin engagement and integrin signalling through focal adhesion kinase (FAK),
which mediates crosstalk between integrin and growth factor signalling pathways (Fig. 5f
and Extended Data Fig. 9b)5,6. Non-malignant MECs expressing the MUC1 ectodomain, but
not control MECs, assembled distinct focal adhesion structures with activated Y397phosphorylated FAK on compliant substrates (Extended Data Fig. 8c). Furthermore, MECs
expressing wild-type or tailless, signalling defective MUC1, and plated on the compliant
substrates showed enhanced Y118-phosphorylated paxillin, ERK and AKT activation in
response to epidermal growth factor stimulation (Fig. 5g and Extended Data Fig. 8d). This
response was attenuated by FAK inhibition (Fig. 5g, h and Extended Data Fig. 8d).
Together, these findings indicate that a bulky glycocalyx can promote tumour aggression by
enhancing integrin-dependent growth and survival (Fig. 5i).

Discussion

Author Manuscript

We present evidence to support a new paradigm for the biological function of cell surface
glycans and glycoproteins. Independent of, and in addition to, their biochemical properties,
we demonstrate how bulky constituents of the glycocalyx can physically influence receptor
organization and activity. Although the current investigation focuses on integrins, a bulky
glycocalyx could, in principle, regulate any transmembrane receptor that interacts with a
tethered ligand. Candidate systems include neurological and immunological synapses22,
cell–celladhesions23, and juxtacrine signalling complexes composed of receptors, like
ephrin24. Membrane topographical features imprinted by large glycoproteins could also
directly influence plasma membrane lipid organization, protein sorting and endocytosis25,26.
The diversity of these processes suggests that the physiological relevance of the glycocalyx

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 July 01.

Paszek et al.

Page 8

Author Manuscript

may be broad. For example, bulky glycoproteins and glycan structures, such as neuroligins,
neurexins and polysialic acid, have a crucial role in neuronal development, maintenance and
plasticity27,28. Thus, it is plausible that the glycocalyx has a prominent role in orchestrating
multiple biological processes occurring at the plasma membrane.

Author Manuscript

Our observations provide a tractable explanation for why large glycan structures and
glycoproteins, like HA and mucins, as well as regulatory enzymes, are so frequently
elevated in many solid tumours13,20. Indeed, the growth and survival advantages afforded by
these molecules may preferentially select for cancer cells with a prominent glycocalyx and
favour tumour cell dissemination and metastasis. Mechanical perturbations to cell and tissue
structure have a causal role in tumour development and progression29,30, and we now
implicate the glycocalyx’s importance in the metastatic mechano-phenotype. Our results
suggest that the glycocalyx and its molecular constituents are attractive targets for
therapeutic interventions aimed at normalizing transmembrane receptor signalling.

METHODS
Bioinformatics

Author Manuscript

To estimate protein-level contributions to extracellular membrane bulkiness, we used
TMHMM to identify extracellular domains within each isoform sequence (RefSeq v47) and
counted the number of putative extracellular glycosylation sites predicted by NetOGlyc 3.1
and search of N-glycosylation motifs. Gene-wise enrichment of mRNA upregulation among
bulkyproteins in clinical data (GEO accessions GSE12276 and GSE31364) was tested by
permuting P values quantifying evidence for upregulation in the appropriate samples.
Variance in mRNA upregulation explained by membrane bulkiness was estimated by
regressing the negative log-transformed P values on the square root of the combined N- and
O-glycosylation sites and comparing the residuals with the intercept model. Additional
details of the analysis and models are provided in Supplementary Note 1.
Computational model
A mechanical model of the cell–ECM interface was constructed as described previously4. A
summary of the model is described in Supplementary Note 2 and parameters are detailed in
Supplementary Table 1.
Antibodies and reagents

Author Manuscript

Antibodies used include: mouse monoclonal antibody (mAb) vinculin (MAB674;
Millipore), mouse mAb talin (8d4; Sigma), rat mAbβ1-integrin (AIIBII), rabbit mAb paxillin
(Y113; Abcam), rabbit mAb FAK pY397 (141-9; Invitrogen), rabbit polyclonal antibody
(pAb) α5-integrin (AB1928; Millipore), mouse mAb MUC1 (HMPV; BD Pharminigen),
hamster mAb MUC1 (CT2; Thermo Scientific), rabbit mAb Src Family pY416 (D49G4;
Cell Signaling), mouse mAb FAK (77; BD Transduction Laboratories), rabbit pAb paxillin
pY118 (2541; Cell Signaling), rabbit mAb pan-AKT (C67E7; Cell Signaling), rabbit pAb
AKT pS473 (9271; Cell Signaling); rabbit mAb ERK1/2 pT202/pT204 (197G2; Cell
Signaling); rabbit pAb ERK1/2 (9102; Cell Signaling); rabbit mAb Gapdh (14C10; Cell
Signaling); Alexa 488 and Alexa 568 conjugated goat anti-mouse and anti-rabbit mAbs

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 July 01.

Paszek et al.

Page 9

Author Manuscript

(Invitrogen); FITC conjugated anti-hamster mAbs; Cy5-conjugated goat anti-mouse and
rabbit mAbs (Jackson); and HRP conjugated anti-rabbit and anti-mouse mAbs. Chemical
inhibitors used in these studies include ROCK inhibitor Y-27632 (Cayman Chemical),
myosin-II inhibitor (−)-blebbistatin (Cayman Chemical), FAK inhibitor FAK inhibitor 14
(Tocris), MEK inhibitor U0126 (Cell Signaling), PI(3)K inhibitor Wortmannin (Cell
Signaling), Src inhibitor Src I1 (Sigma), and DiI (Molecular Probes).
Cell culture conditions

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

All cells were maintained at 37 °C and 5%CO2. MCF10A human MECs (ATCC) were
cultured in DMEMF12 (Invitrogen) supplemented with 5%donorhorse serum (Invitrogen),
20 ng ml−1 epidermal growth factor (Peprotech), 10 µg ml−1 insulin (Sigma), 0.5 µg ml−1
hydrocortisone (Sigma), 0.1 µg ml−1 cholera toxin (Sigma), and 100 units ml−1 penicillin/
streptomycin. MCF7 and T47D breast tumour lines (ATCC) were grown in DMEM
supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (Hyclone) and 100 units ml−1 penicillin/
streptomycin. 293T cells (ATCC) were maintained in DMEM supplemented with 10%
donor horse serum, 2 mM L-glutamine, and penicillin/streptomycin. Mouse embryonic
fibroblasts (MEFs) were cultured in DMEM with 10% fetal bovine serum. Cell lines were
tested routinely for mycoplasma contamination. For transient gene expression in MECs,
constructs in pcDNA3.1 or Clonetech-style vectors were nucleofected with Kit V (Lonza)
using program T-024 24 h before experimentation. Transient transfection in MEFs was
conducted 48 h before experimentation using Fugene 6 (Roche) or nucleofection. For stable
cell lines harbouring tetracycline inducible transgenes, expression was induced with 0.2 ng
ml−1 doxycycline 24 h before experimentation. The conditional v-Src oestrogen receptor
fusion (v-Src–ER) was activated with 1 µM 4-hydroxytamoxifen 48 h before
experimentation to achieve transformation. For pERK, pY118paxillin, and pAKT studies,
cells were plated on fibronectin-conjugated polyacrylamide hydrogels, serum-starved
overnight, and stimulated with 20 ng ml−1 EGF before collecting protein lysates. Data are
reported as the fold increase of phosphorylated protein relative to total protein, following
EGF stimulation.
Preparation of cellular substrates

Author Manuscript

Glass and silicon substrates were prepared by glutaraldehyde activation followed by
conjugation with 10 µg ml−1 (glass) or 20 µg ml−1 (silicon) fibronectin as described11.
Compliant polyacrylamide hydrogel substrates (soft: 2.5% acrylamide, 0.03% Bisacrylamide; stiff: 10% acrylamide, 0.5% Bisacrylamide) were prepared as previously
described with one modification: functionalization with succinimidyl ester was with 0.01%
N6, 0.01% Bis-acrylamide, 0.025% Irgacure 2959, and 0.002% Di(trimethylolpropane)
tetraacrylate (Sigma)31. Following functionalization with succinimidyl ester, hydrogels were
conjugated overnight with 20 µg ml−1 fibronectin at 4 °C and rinsed twice with PBS and
DMEM before cell plating.
Generation of expression constructs
A description of cDNA constructs and their construction is provided in Supplementary Note
3.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 July 01.

Paszek et al.

Page 10

Generation of stable cell lines

Author Manuscript

Stable transgene expression was achieved through retroviral or lentiviral transduction as
previously described11,30.
Flow cytometry and cell sorting
Cell surface MUC1 was labelled directly with FITC-conjugated mAb MUC1 (clone
HMPV). Cytometry and sorting were conducted on a FACSAria II (BD Biosciences).
Immunofluorescence and imaging
Cells were fixed and labelled as previously described and imaged at random on a Zeiss LSM
510 microscope system with a 100× Plan Apochromat NA 1.4 objective and 488 nm Argon,
543 nm HeNe, and 633 nm HeNe excitation lines30.

Author Manuscript

Live epithelial cell imaging and FRET
Normal growth media was exchanged for a similar formulation lacking phenol red and
supplemented with 15 mM HEPES buffer, pH7.4. Cells were imaged on a Ti-E Perfect
Focus System (Nikon) equipped with a CSU-X1 spinning disk confocal unit; 454 nm, 488
nm, 515 nm and 561 nm lasers; an Apo TIRF 60×NA 1.49 objective; electronic shutters; a
charged-coupled device camera (Clara; Andor) and controlled by NIS-Elements software
(Nikon).

Author Manuscript

For measurement of FRET efficiency, the acceptor photobleaching method pbFRET was
implemented with live cells on the spinning disk confocal. Cyan fluorescent protein (CFP)
was first imaged with 454 nm excitation and a 480/20 emission filter, yellow fluorescent
protein (YFP) was subsequently bleached using a 100 mW 515 nm laser for 10 s, and CFP
was imaged again following bleaching of YFP. Microscope Z-focus was maintained during
image acquisition using the Perfect Focus System. Background images were constructed by
imaging 10 unique cell-free regions on the coverslip and averaging the intensity at each
pixel. The FRET efficiency was calculated on a pixel-by-pixel basis according to:

Author Manuscript

where Ipre is the CFP intensity before bleaching YFP, Bpre is the CFP-channel background
intensity before bleaching YFP, Ipost is the CFP intensity after bleaching YFP, and Bpost is
the CFP-channel background intensity after bleaching YFP. Appropriate controls were
implemented to account for inadvertent CFP photobleaching, incomplete YFP
photobleaching, and intermolecular FRET (see Supplementary Note 4).
Time-domain fluorescence lifetime imaging microscopy (FLIM) for additional FRET sensor
characterization was implemented with an inverted Zeiss LSM510 Axiovert 200M
microscope with a Plan NeoFLUAR 40×/1.3 NA DIC oil-immersion objective lens,
equipped with a TCSPC controller (SPC-830 card; Becker & Hickl, Berlin, Germany) as
described previously32. CFP was excited with 440 nm light generated by frequency doubling

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 July 01.

Paszek et al.

Page 11

Author Manuscript

of 880 nm pulses from a mode-locked Ti:sapphire laser(Mai-Tai, Spectra-Physics, 120–150
fs pulse width, 80 MHz repetition rate, and Frequency Doubler and Pulse Selector, SpectraPhysics, Model 3980). The emission light was passed through a NFT 440 beamsplitter,
directed to the fibre-out port of the confocal scan-head, filtered with a 480BP40 filter
(ChromaTechnology, Rockingham, VT) and detected by a PMC-100 photomultiplier
(Becker & Hickl). The pinhole was set to give an optical slice of <4.0 µm. Images of 386 ×
386 pixels were averaged over <120 s. Data analysis to produce an intensity image and a
FLIM image was done offline using the pixel-based fitting software SPCImage (Becker &
Hickl), assuming double exponential decay during the first 8.5 ns of the 12.5 ns interval
between laser pulses. Images were scaled to 256 × 256 pixels and no binning was used.
Lifetime distributions were calculated for a masked portion of the FLIM image, generated
with a triangle algorithm threshold of the photo count intensity image.

Author Manuscript

Scanning angle interference microscopy
Cells were plated overnight on reflective silicon substrates, fixed or roofed to remove the
dorsal membrane (for MUC1–GFP imaging) and then fixed, and imaged randomly as
previously described, scanning the incident angle of excitation light from 0° to 42° with a
one-degree sampling rate11. Z-positions were localized with custom algorithms previously
described and available on request11.
Single particle tracking photo-activation localization microscopy (sptPALM)

Author Manuscript

sptPALM experiments were performed and analysed as previously described15. Briefly, live
MEFs were imaged at 37 °C in a Ludin chamber on a Ti Perfect Focus System equipped
with a Plan Apo 100× NA 1.45 objective, and an electron multiplying charge-coupled device
(Evolve; Photometrics). For photo-activation localization, cells expressing mEOS2-tagged
constructs were activated using a 405 nm laser (Omicron) and the photo-activated
fluorophores were excited simultaneously with a 561 nm laser (Cobolt Jive). The powers of
the activation and excitation lasers were adjusted to keep the number of activated molecules
constant and well separated. GFP fusions of paxillin or MUC1 were imaged in between each
sptPALM sequence by imaging the GFP signal above the unconverted mEOS2 background.
The acquisition was driven by Metamorph software (Molecular Devices) in streaming mode
at 50 Hz. For tracking, single-molecules were localized and tracked over time using a
combination of wavelet segmentation and simulated annealing algorithms. Trajectories
lasting at least 20 frames were selected for further quantification, including calculation of
immobile, confined and free-diffusing fraction (see Supplementary Note 5)15.
Preparation of glycopolymer-coated cell surfaces

Author Manuscript

Mucin mimetic glycopolymers with lipid insertion domains were synthesized and
characterized as described in Supplementary Note 6. For incorporation into the plasma
membrane, cells were suspended in DMEM and incubated with 2 µM glycopolymer for 1 h.
Cells were pelleted by centrifugation and re-suspended in growth media to remove
unincorporated polymer.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 July 01.

Paszek et al.

Page 12

Quantification of adhesion complexes

Author Manuscript

Images of adhesions in fixed, immuno-labelled cells or cells expressing paxillin–mCherry
were randomly acquired, smoothed with a median filter, and background subtracted (12
pixel diameter) in ImageJ. Adhesion sizes and the number of adhesions per cell were
subsequently quantified in ImageJ with the ‘Analyze Particles’ tool.
Integrin crosslinking assay

Author Manuscript

Cells were incubated in suspension with inhibitor (Y-27632 or Blebbistatin) or control
solvent for 1 h before plating on glass substrates. Integrin was crosslinked to fibronectin
with 1 mM 3,3′-dithiobis(sulfosuccinimidylpropionate) (Pierce Chemical) and cells were
extracted with SDS buffer as previously described17. Crosslinked α5 integrin was immunolabelled and imaged at random with a Plan Apo VC 60× objective on a Nikon TE2000 epifluorescence microscope equipped with a charged-coupled device camera (HQ2;
Photometrics).
Single cell force spectroscopy
Measurements were performed on an Asylum MFP-3D-BIO atomic force microscope as
previously described33. Briefly, cells were attached to a streptavidin-coated, tipless
cantilever using biotinylated jacalin (MUC1-expressing cells) or concanavalin A (all other
cells) and pressed against the adhesive substrate with a calibrated force and duration before
measuring the force required to detach the cell from the substrate. All measurements were
conducted on fibronectin- or BSA-coated glass slides at room temperature. The relative rate
of adhesion was calculated as the slope of a linear fit of cellular detachment force against
contact time.

Author Manuscript

Assessment of fibronectin–fibrillogenesis
Human recombinant fibronectin was labelled with N-hydroxysuccinimide Alexa568
(Invitrogen) according to manufacturer’s protocol and dialysed extensively in PBS.
Conversion of soluble, fluorescently labelled fibronectin from the growth media into
insoluble fibrils was imaged according to published protocol34. Briefly, MCF10A complete
growth media was prepared with donor horse serum that was depleted of fibronectin using
gelatin Sepharose 4B (GE Healthcare). MCF10A cells were plated in the depleted media on
fibronectin-conjugated glass coverslips and incubated the next day in 10 µg ml−1 labelled
fibronectin for one hour. Cells were quickly rinsed in PBS, fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde,
and imaged at random on a spinning disk confocal.

Author Manuscript

Isolation and gene expression profiling of CTCs
Twenty CTC samples were isolated from the blood of 18 metastatic breast cancer patients as
previously described35. Briefly, whole blood was subjected to EpCAM-based
immunomagnetic enrichment followed by fluorescence-activated cell sorting of CTCs
defined as nucleated, EpCAM-positive, CD45-negative cells. CTCs were sorted directly
onto lysis buffer (Taqman PreAmp Cells-to-Ct kit, Life Technologies). cDNA of target
genes were pre-amplified (14 cycles) and measured via qPCR analysis. The mean Ct for
ACTB and GAPDH was used for normalization to calculate relative gene expression (ΔCt).

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 July 01.

Paszek et al.

Page 13

Author Manuscript

Studies involving CTCs were approved by the UCSF Committee on Human Research.
Samples were obtained with IRB approved consent from all patients.
Immunofluorescence labelling of CTCs
CTC samples were isolated from the blood of three metastatic breast cancer patients as
described for gene expression profiling. Isolated CTCs were mounted and fixed on poly-Llysine-coated slides and labelled with FITC-conjugated MUC1 mAb (Clone HPMV). As a
control, purified white blood cells from the same patients were prepared similarly, and their
immunofluorescence was compared to CTC samples.
Statistics

Author Manuscript

Statistical significance of experimental data sets was determined by Student’s t-test after
confirming that the data met appropriate assumptions (normality, homogenous variance and
independent sampling). Statistical analyses of microarray gene expression data sets are
described in detail in Supplementary Note 1. All public microarray data were downloaded
from the NCBI Gene Expression Omnibus website and analysed using custom R scripts (all
Perl, PHP and R scripts used in this work are available on request).

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 July 01.

Paszek et al.

Page 14

Author Manuscript

Extended Data

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Extended Data Figure 1. Large-scale gene expression analysis reveals increased expression of
genes encoding bulky glycoproteins and glycan-modifying enzymes in primary tumours of
patients with disseminated disease

a, Bioinformatics pipeline to estimate the extracellular bulkiness of a protein from its
corresponding amino acid sequence. For each isoform sequence, the transmembrane and
extramembrane domains were identified using a hidden Markov model (TMHMM). A
combination of motif searches and neural network prediction then identified likely N- and
O-glycosylation sites within each sequence. Isoform-level bulkiness estimates were
generated by summing the number of predicted N- and O-glycosylation sites located within

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 July 01.

Paszek et al.

Page 15

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

the extramembrane regions of the isoform. b, Heat map depicting the pairwise spearman
correlation coefficients calculated by comparing all per-gene estimates of the total number
of extra-membrane amino acids (AAoutside), N-glycosylation sites (Nglyc), Oglycosylation sites (Oglyc), and the overall bulkiness measure (total sites; for example, the
sum of extra-membrane N- and O- glycosylation sites). Correlation coefficients relating the
corresponding gene-wise measures are listed in the corresponding cells and depicted on a
colour scale, where white corresponds to perfect correlation (rho = 1), and the dendrograms
indicate the overall relationship between the parameters, estimated by Euclidean distance.
High correlation coefficients indicate that gene-wise estimates of the compared parameters
are similarly ranked (for example, genes with high values of X also tend to have high values
of Y). The data indicate that the number of extracellular N-glycosylation sites and Oglycosylation sites identified within a gene are only weakly correlated, and neither
dominates the total number of sites estimated per gene. c, Violin plots contrasting the
distributions of gene-wise one-sided P values (y axis) quantifying evidence for
transcriptional upregulation of glycosidases and glycosyltransferases, and subsets of
glycosyltransferases (sialyltransferases and N-acetylgalactosaminyltransferases) with the
full distribution. White dots and thick black lines indicate the median and interquartile range
of the gene-wise P-value distribution among category members, and the width of the violin
along the y axis indicates the density of the corresponding values. P values are derived from
comparisons of expression levels in primary tumours of patients with or without distant
metastases using a t-test. Indicated P values were estimated using a one-sided Kolmogorov–
Smirnov test. d, Violin plots quantifying transcriptional upregulation of glycan-modifying
enzymes in primary tumours of patients presenting with circulating tumour cells compared
to tumours without detectable circulating tumour cells. e, Table of bulky glycoproteins and
potential bulk-adding glycosyltransferases whose expression is upregulated in tumours that
present with circulating tumour cells.

Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 July 01.

Paszek et al.

Page 16

Extended Data Figure 2. Computational model of the cell–ECM interface

Author Manuscript

Schematic of an integrated model that describes how the physical properties of the
glycocalyx influence integrin–ECM interactions. The cell surface is modelled as a threedimensional elastic plate; the ECM as a rigid substrate underneath the cell surface; and the
glycocalyx as a repulsive potential between the plate and substrate. To compute stress–strain
behaviour, the model is discretized using the three-dimensional lattice spring method, the
cross-section of which is depicted above. Integrins are tethered to the cell surface and their
distance-dependent binding to the ECM–substrate is calculated according to the Bell model.
To calculate integrin-binding rate as a function of lateral distance from an adhesion cluster,
an adhesion cluster is first constructed by assembling a 3 × 3 bond structure. The rates for
additional integrin–ECM bonds then are computed at various distances from the cluster.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 July 01.

Paszek et al.

Page 17

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Extended Data Figure 3. Synthesis and characterization of glycoprotein mimetics

Author Manuscript

a, Scheme for synthesis of lipid-terminated mucin mimetics labelled with Alexa Fluor 488
(AF488). b, Reagents and yields for the synthesis of polymers 3a–c. c, Characteristics of
polymers 6a–c based on 1H NMR spectra. Glycoprotien mimetics were engineered to have
minimal biochemical interactivity with cell surface lectins. d, Flow cytometry results
quantifying incorporation of polymer on the surface of mammary epithelial cells (left) and
binding with recombinant Alexa568-labelled galectin-3 with or without competitive
inhibitor, β-lactose (right). Although a weak affinity between galectin-3 and the pendant Nacetylgalactosimes has previously been reported, the results suggest that incorporation of
polymer does not significantly change the affinity of the cell surface for lectins.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 July 01.

Paszek et al.

Page 18

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Extended Data Figure 4. MUC1 expression constructs

a, Schematic of MUC1 expression constructs. Full-length MUC1 consists of a large
ectodomain with 42 mucin-type tandem repeats, a transmembrane domain, and short
cytoplasmic tail. The tandem repeats and cytoplasmic tail are deleted in MUC1(ΔTR) and
MUC1(ΔCT), respectively. For fluorescent protein fusions, mEmerald (GFP) and mEOS2
are fused to the C terminus of full-length MUC1 or MUC1(ΔCT). b, Schematic of MUC1
strain sensor and control constructs. Cysteine-free mTurqoiuse2 (CFP), Venus (YFP), or a
FRET module consisting of the fluorescent proteins separated by an elastic linker (8 repeats

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 July 01.

Paszek et al.

Page 19

Author Manuscript

of GPGGA) are inserted into the MUC1 ectodomain adjacent to the MUC1 tandem repeats.
The mucin tandem repeats are deleted in ectodomain-truncated variants (ΔTR).

Author Manuscript
Extended Data Figure 5. MUC1-mediated adhesion formation

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

a, Quantification of the average number of large adhesions, greater than 1 µm2, per area of
cell in control epithelial cells (Control) and those ectopically expressing ectodomaintruncated MUC1 (+MUC1(ΔTR)), wild-type MUC1 (+MUC1), or cytoplasmic-tail-deleted
MUC1 (+MUC1(ΔCT)). Results are the mean ± s.e.m. of three separate experiments. b,
Fluorescence micrographs showing immuno-labelled MUC1 and fluorescently labelled
fibronectin fibrils in control and MUC1-expressing epithelial cells. Soluble, labelled
fibronectin in the growth media was deposited by cells at sites of cell–matrix adhesion.
Binding of soluble fibronectin to MUC1 was not detected. Scale bar, 10 µm. c, Time lapse
images of MUC1–YFP and vinculin–mCherry, showing the dynamics of adhesion assembly
(Vinc.) and MUC1 patterning (MUC1). Scale bar, 1 µm. d, Rate of adhesion measured with
single cell force spectroscopy of control (Cont.), α5 integrin-blocked (anti-α5), and MUC1expressing cells (+MUC1) to fibronectin-coated surfaces and control cells to BSA-coated
surfaces (BSA). Results are the mean ± s.e.m. of at least 15 cell measurements. Statistical
significance is given by *P < 0.05; **P < 0.01; ***P < 0.001.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 July 01.

Paszek et al.

Page 20

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Extended Data Figure 6. β3 integrin mobility in MUC1-expressing cells

Author Manuscript

a, Molecular diffusivity and adhesion enrichment measured with sptPALM in mouse
embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs). Adhesion enrichment is reported as the ratio of the number
of molecules detected inside focal adhesions per unit area to the number of molecules
detected outside focal adhesions per unit area. b, Mean diffusion coefficients measured for
freely diffusive β3 integrin tracks outside of adhesive contacts in control (Cont.) and MUC1transfected (+MUC1) MEFs with and without Mn2+ to activate β3. c, Mean diffusion
coefficients measured for confined β3 integrin tracks outside of adhesive contacts in MEFs
with and without Mn2+. d, Mean radius of confinement measured for confined β3 integrin
tracks outside of adhesive contacts in MEFs with and without Mn2+. e, Fraction of
immobilized (Imm.), confined (Conf.), and freely diffusive (Free) β3 integrins inside of
adhesive contacts in control and MUC1-transfected MEFs with and without Mn2+ treatment.
f, From left to right, panels show GFP-tagged wild-type MUC1 (red) and positions of
individual β3 integrins (green) in MEFs without Mn2+ treatment (left panel) and individual
integrin trajectories recorded with sptPALM within MUC1-rich regions, outside MUC1-rich
regions, and that cross MUC1 boundaries (scale bar, 2 µm). The ratio of integrins crossing
out versus crossing in the MUC1 boundaries per cell is close to one (1.0 ± 0.1, n = 9 cells,

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 July 01.

Paszek et al.

Page 21

Author Manuscript

4,145 trajectories) showing that the flux of free diffusing integrins crossing in or out the
mucin region is the same. g, From left to right, panels show integrin trajectories within an
arbitrary region drawn in a MUC1-rich area (dashed white circles), outside of the circled
region, and that cross the circled region (scale bar, 2 µm). The ratio of integrins crossing the
MUC1-rich boundaries versus the fictive boundaries per cell is close to one (1.2 ± 0.2, n = 9
cells, 9,321 trajectories), showing that the MUC1–adhesive zone boundary does not affect
the diffusive crossing of integrins. For all bar graphs, results are the mean ± s.e.m.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 July 01.

Paszek et al.

Page 22

Extended Data Figure 7. MUC1 strain gauge

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

a, Western blot of indicated construct expressed in HEK 293T cells and probed with antiGFP family antibody, or full-length MUC1 construct expressed in HEK 293T cells and
probed with an antibody against the MUC1 tandem repeats. b, Pseudocoloured images
showing similar FRET efficiencies measured by the photobleaching FRET method for
mammary epithelial cells (MECs) expressing low (Low) and high (High) levels of the sensor
construct. Scale bar, 5 µm. c, Plot showing the level of CFP bleaching per CFP imaging
cycle in MECs. d, Control images showing minimal intermolecular FRET in MECs
expressing similar levels of bothMUC1 CFP and MUC1 YFP. e, Micrographs showing the
emitted photons from CFP and their fluorescence lifetimes in MECs expressing ectodomaintruncated (MUC1(ΔTR) sensor) or full-length MUC1 strain sensors (MUC1 sensor). Shorter
lifetimes are indicative of higher energy transfer between the CFP donor and YFP acceptor,
and thus closer spatial proximity of the donor and acceptor (scale bar, 10 µm). f,
Representative profile of CFP lifetimes and emitted photons of the full-length MUC1 sensor
along the red line in panel e. Pixels 0 and 40 correspond to the base and tip of the arrow,
respectively. A drop in fluorescence lifetime (Lifetime) is often observed before the drop in
MUC1 molecular density (Photons) as an adhesive zone is approached.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 July 01.

Paszek et al.

Page 23

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Extended Data Figure 8. Tension-dependent integrin activation and focal adhesion assembly in
MUC1-expressing cells

Author Manuscript

a, Fluorescence micrographs of fibronectin-crosslinked α5 integrin in control and MUC1expressing mammary epithelial cells (MECs) treated with solvent alone (DMSO), myosin-II
inhibitor (blebbistatin; 50 µM), or Rho kinase inhibitor (Y-27632; 10 µM) for 1 h and
detergent-extracted following crosslinking. Only fibronectin-bound integrins under
mechanical tension are crosslinked and visualized following detergent extraction (scale bar,
15 µm). b, Fluorescence micrographs showing formation of myosin-independent adhesion
complexes in MUC1-expressing MECs. Cells were pre-treated for 1 h and plated for 2 h in
50 µM blebbistatin (scale bar, 10 µm). c, Fluorescence micrographs of paxillin–mCherry and
immuno-labelled activated FAK (pY397) in control and MUC1(ΔCT) expressing MECs
plated on compliant fibronectin-conjugated hydrogels (E = 140 Pa; scale bar, 3 µm; ROI
scale bar, 0.5 µm). d, Western blots showing phosphorylation of paxillin (pY118) in control
and MUC1-expressing MECs on compliant substrates (E = 140 Pa) following overnight
serum starvation and stimulation with EGF. MUC1-expressing cells treated with a

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 July 01.

Paszek et al.

Page 24

Author Manuscript

pharmacological inhibitor of focal adhesion kinase (+FAKi) for 1 h before EGF stimulation
did not exhibit robust paxillin phosphorylation.

Author Manuscript

Extended Data Figure 9. Cell proliferation on soft ECM

Author Manuscript

a, Fluorescence micrographs showing DAPI-stained nuclei of control and MUC1(ΔCT)expressing MECs after 24 h of plating on soft, fibronectin-conjugated hydrogels (E = 140
Pa; scale bar, 250 µm). The majority of cells plated as single cells, indicating that multi-cell
colonies that formed at later time points were largely attributed to cell proliferation. b,
Quantification of cell proliferation of MUC1(ΔCT)-expressing epithelial cells on soft
hydrogels conjugated with bovine serum albumin (BSA) or fibronectin (Fn). Cells plated
similarly on BSA– and Fn–hydrogels, but cell proliferation was significantly enhanced on
Fn–hydrogels. Results are the mean ± s.e.m with statistical significance given by *P < 0.05;
**P < 0.01; ***P < 0.001.

Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 July 01.

Paszek et al.

Page 25

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Extended Data Figure 10. Hyaluronic acid production by tumour cells promotes cellular growth

Author Manuscript

a, Quantification of hyaluronic acid (HA) cell surface levels on control (10A-Cont.),
transformed (10A-v-Src, 10A-HRAS) and malignant (MCF7, T47D) mammary epithelial
cells (MECs). b, Fluorescence micrographs of HA and immuno-labelled paxillin on the vSrc transformed MECs (scale bars, 3 µm). c, Quantification of the number of v-Srctransformed MECs per colony 48 h after plating on soft polyacrylamide gels (fibronectinconjugated) and treated with vehicle (DMSO), hyaluronic acid synthesis inhibitor 4methylumbelliferone (+4MU; 0.3 µM), or competitive inhibitor HA oligonucleotides
(+Oligo; 12-mer average oligonucleotide size; 100 mg ml−1). Results are the mean ± s.e.m
with statistical significance is given by *P < 0.05; **P < 0.01; ***P < 0.001.

Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 July 01.

Paszek et al.

Page 26

Author Manuscript

Acknowledgements
We thank S. Gendler, J. Goedhart and M. McMahon for cDNAs, as indicated in the Methods section. We thank A.
Walker for bioinformatics support, L. Hauranieh for assistance in CTC analysis, H. Aaron for assistance with
FLIM, J. B. Sibarita and M. Lagardère for support in sptPALM analysis, B. Hoffman in design of the FRET sensor,
and T. Wittmann in assistance with pbFRET measurements. Image acquisition was partly performed at the Nikon
Imaging Center and Biological Imaging Development Center at UCSF and the Berkeley Molecular Imaging Center.
This work was supported by the Kavli Institute and UCSF Program for Biomedical Breakthrough postdoctoral
fellowships to M.J.P.; DoD NDSEG Fellowship to M.G.R.; NIH GM59907 to C.R.B.; NIH Pathway to
Independence Award K99 EB013446-02 to K.G.; French Ministry of Research, CNRS, ANR grant Nanomotility,
INSERM, Fondation ARC pour la Recherche sur le Cancer, France BioImaging ANR-10-INBS-04-01, and Conseil
Régional Aquitaine to O.R. and G.G.; NIH AI082292-03A1 to D.A.H.; The Breast Cancer Research Foundation to
M.J.M., H.S.R. and J.W.P.; NIH 2R01GM059907-13 to C.R.B. and V.M.W.; and BCRP DOD Era of Hope Scholar
Expansion grant BC122990, and NIH NCI grants U54CA163155-01, U54CA143836-01, 1U01 ES019458-01, and
CA138818-01A1 to V.M.W.

References
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

1. Lanctot PM, Gage FH, Varki AP. The glycans of stem cells. Curr. Opin. Chem. Biol. 2007; 11:373–
380. [PubMed: 17681848]
2. Haltiwanger RS, Lowe JB. Role of glycosylation in development. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 2004;
73:491–537. [PubMed: 15189151]
3. Varki, A.; Kannagi, R.; Toole, BP. Essentials Glycobiol. Varki, A., et al., editors. Cold Spring
Harbor Laboratory Press; 2009. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK1963/
4. Paszek MJ, Boettiger D, Weaver VM, Hammer DA. Integrin clustering is driven by mechanical
resistance from the glycocalyx and the substrate. PLOS Comput. Biol. 2009; 5:e1000604. [PubMed:
20011123]
5. Walker JL, Fournier AK, Assoian RK. Regulation of growth factor signaling and cell cycle
progression by cell adhesion and adhesion-dependent changes in cellular tension. Cytokine Growth
Factor Rev. 2005; 16:395–405. [PubMed: 15886049]
6. Desgrosellier JS, Cheresh DA. Integrins in cancer: biological implications and therapeutic
opportunities. Nature Rev. Cancer. 2010; 10:9–22. [PubMed: 20029421]
7. Shibue T, Weinberg RA. Integrin β1-focal adhesion kinase signaling directs the proliferation of
metastatic cancer cells disseminated in the lungs. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA. 2009; 106:10290–
10295. [PubMed: 19502425]
8. Godula K, et al. Control of the molecular orientation of membrane-anchored biomimetic
glycopolymers. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2009; 131:10263–10268. [PubMed: 19580278]
9. Godula K, Rabuka D, Nam KT, Bertozzi CR. Synthesis and microcontact printing of dual endfunctionalized mucin-like glycopolymers for microarray applications. Angew. Chem. Int. Edn Engl.
2009; 48:4973–4976.
10. Eng ET, Smagghe BJ, Walz T, Springer TA. Intact αIIbβ3 integrin is extended after activation as
measured by solution X-ray scattering and electron microscopy. J. Biol. Chem. 2011; 286:35218–
35226. [PubMed: 21832081]
11. Paszek MJ, et al. Scanning angle interference microscopy reveals cell dynamics at the nanoscale.
Nature Methods. 2012; 9:825–827. [PubMed: 22751201]
12. Hattrup CL, Gendler SJ. Structure and function of the cell surface (tethered) mucins. Annu. Rev.
Physiol. 2008; 70:431–457. [PubMed: 17850209]
13. Kufe DW. Mucins in cancer: function, prognosis and therapy. Nature Rev. Cancer. 2009; 9:874–
885. [PubMed: 19935676]
14. Manley S, et al. High-density mapping of single-molecule trajectories with photoactivated
localization microscopy. Nature Methods. 2008; 5:155–157. [PubMed: 18193054]
15. Rossier O, et al. Integrins β1 and β3 exhibit distinct dynamic nanoscale organizations inside focal
adhesions. Nature Cell Biol. 2012; 14:1057–1067. [PubMed: 23023225]
16. Chen W, Lou J, Evans EA, Zhu C. Observing force-regulated conformational changes and ligand
dissociation from a single integrin on cells. J. Cell Biol. 2012; 199:497–512. [PubMed: 23109670]

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 July 01.

Paszek et al.

Page 27

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

17. Friedland JC, Lee MH, Boettiger D. Mechanically activated integrin switch controls alpha5beta1
function. Science. 2009; 323:642–644. [PubMed: 19179533]
18. Grashoff C, et al. Measuring mechanical tension across vinculin reveals regulation of focal
adhesion dynamics. Nature. 2010; 466:263–266. [PubMed: 20613844]
19. Nguyen DX, Bos PD, Massagué J. Metastasis: from dissemination to organ-specific colonization.
Nature Rev. Cancer. 2009; 9:274–284. [PubMed: 19308067]
20. Toole BP. Hyaluronan: from extracellular glue to pericellular cue. Nature Rev. Cancer. 2004;
4:528–539. [PubMed: 15229478]
21. Bono P, Rubin K, Higgins JM, Hynes RO. Layilin, a novel integral membrane protein, is a
hyaluronan receptor. Mol. Biol. Cell. 2001; 12:891–900. [PubMed: 11294894]
22. Dustin ML. Signaling at neuro/immune synapses. J. Clin. Invest. 2012; 122:1149–1155. [PubMed:
22466656]
23. Coombs D, Dembo M, Wofsy C, Goldstein B. Equilibrium thermodynamics of cell-cell adhesion
mediated by multiple ligand-receptor pairs. Biophys. J. 2004; 86:1408–1423. [PubMed: 14990470]
24. Salaita K, et al. Restriction of receptor movement alters cellular response: physical force sensing
by EphA2. Science. 2010; 327:1380–1385. [PubMed: 20223987]
25. Groves JT. Bending mechanics and molecular organization in biological membranes. Annu. Rev.
Phys. Chem. 2007; 58:697–717. [PubMed: 17430092]
26. Lundmark R, Carlsson SR. Driving membrane curvature in clathrin-dependent and clathrinindependent endocytosis. Semin. Cell Dev. Biol. 2010; 21:363–370. [PubMed: 19931628]
27. Comoletti D, et al. Synaptic arrangement of the neuroligin/β-neurexin complex revealed by X-ray
and neutron scattering. Structure. 2007; 15:693–705. [PubMed: 17562316]
28. Hildebrandt H, Mühlenhoff M, Weinhold B, Gerardy-Schahn R. Dissecting polysialic acid and
NCAM functions in brain development. J. Neurochem. 2007; 103(Suppl. 1):56–64. [PubMed:
17986140]
29. Levental KR, et al. Matrix crosslinking forces tumor progression by enhancing integrin signaling.
Cell. 2009; 139:891–906. [PubMed: 19931152]
30. Paszek MJ, et al. Tensional homeostasis and the malignant phenotype. Cancer Cell. 2005; 8:241–
254. [PubMed: 16169468]
31. Lakins JN, Chin AR, Weaver VM. Exploring the link between human embryonic stem cell
organization and fate using tension-calibrated extracellular matrix functionalized polyacrylamide
gels. Methods Mol. Biol. 2012; 916:317–350. [PubMed: 22914951]
32. Bruns N, Pustelny K, Bergeron LM, Whitehead TA, Clark DS. Mechanical nanosensor based on
FRET within a thermosome: damage-reporting polymeric materials. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2009;
48:5666–5669.
33. Friedrichs J, Helenius J, Muller DJ. Quantifying cellular adhesion to extracellular matrix
components by single-cell force spectroscopy. Nature Protocols. 2010; 5:1353–1361.
34. Pankov R, Momchilova A. Fluorescent labeling techniques for investigation of fibronectin
fibrillogenesis (labeling fibronectin fibrillogenesis). Methods Mol. Biol. 2009; 522:261–274.
[PubMed: 19247612]
35. Magbanua MJM, et al. Genomic profiling of isolated circulating tumor cells from metastatic breast
cancer patients. Cancer Res. 2013; 73:30–40. [PubMed: 23135909]

Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 July 01.

Paszek et al.

Page 28

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 1. The cancer glycocalyx drives integrin clustering

Author Manuscript

a, Violin plots showing increased expression of genes encoding bulky transmembrane
proteins in primary tumours of patients with distant metastases relative to those with local
invasion. White dots and thick black lines indicate the median and interquartile range of the
P value distribution of all transcripts within each class: all genes, all membrane proteins
(Mem.), and bulky transmembrane proteins (Bulky). b, Computed relative rate of integrin–
ECM ligand bond formation as a function of distance from a pre-existing adhesion cluster. c,
Model of proposed glycocalyx-mediated integrin clustering. Shorter distances between
integrin–ligand pairs result in faster kinetic rates of binding. d, Cartoon showing structure of
glycoprotein mimetics with lipid insertion domain. e, Fluorescence micrographs of MEC
adhesion complexes (vinculin–mCherry) and glycomimetics of the indicated length (scale
bar, 3 µm). f, SAIM images of DiI-labelled ventral plasma membrane topography in MECs
incorporated with glycomimetics (scale bar, 2.5 µm). g, Rate of integrin–substrate adhesion
measured using single cell force spectroscopy in MECs with incorporated glycomimetics. h,
Quantification of the total adhesion complex area per cell in MECs with incorporated
glycomimetics. All results are the mean ± s.e.m. of three separate experiments. Statistical
significance is given by *P < 0.05; **P < 0.01; ***P < 0.001.

Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 July 01.

Paszek et al.

Page 29

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 2. The bulky cancer-associated glycoprotein MUC1 drives integrin clustering

a, Cartoon of MUC1 and quantification of MUC1 cell-surface levels on control (10A-Cont.),
transformed (10A-v-Src, 10A-HRAS) and tumour (MCF7, T47D) cells. b, Topographical
SAIM images of representative mCherry–CAAX-labelled ventral plasma membranes in
control and MUC1–GFP-expressing (+MUC1) MECs (Scale bar, 5 µm; region of interest
(ROI) scale bar, 2 µm). c, Quantification of mean plasma membrane height in control MECs
and those ectopically expressing ectodomain-truncated MUC1–GFP (+MUC1(ΔTR)) and
wild-type MUC1–GFP (+MUC1). Results are the mean ± s.e.m. of at least 15 cell

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 July 01.

Paszek et al.

Page 30

Author Manuscript

measurements in duplicate experiments. d, Fluorescence micrographs of MUC1 (ΔTR) or
wild-type MUC1 expressed in MECs and their focal adhesions labelled with vinculin–
mCherry (scale bar, 3 µm; ROI scale bar, 1.5 µm). e, Quantification of the total adhesion
complex area per cell in control non-malignant MECs (control) and those ectopically
expressing MUC1 (ΔTR), wild-type MUC1, or cytoplasmic-tail-deleted MUC1
(+MUC1(ΔCT)). Results are the mean ± s.e.m. of three separate experiments. f, Left panel:
trajectories of individual mEOS2-tagged MUC1 proteins recorded at 50 Hz using sptPALM
(green) and focal adhesions visualized with paxillin–GFP (red) in MEFs (scale bar, 3 µm).
Right panel: the ROI from the left panel with individual MUC1 tracks displayed in multiple
colours (scale bar, 1 µm). Statistical significance is given by *P < 0.05; **P < 0.01; ***P <
0.001.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 July 01.

Paszek et al.

Page 31

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 3. Bulky glycoproteins spatially regulate immobilization of activated integrins

Author Manuscript

a, Left panels: fluorescence micrographs displaying paxillin–GFP-labelled focal adhesions
in control cells or MUC1-rich regions in MUC1–GFP-expressing MEFs, and positions of
individual mEOS2-fused β3 integrins. Cells were treated without or with Mn2+ to activate
integrins (scale bar, 3 µm). Right panels: magnified area of interest showing fluorescence
micrographs of focal adhesions visualized with paxillin–GFP in control MEFs or MUC1 in
MUC1–GFP-expressing MEFs, and individual β3 integrin trajectories recorded with
sptPALM. Single molecule trajectories are colour-coded to indicate immobile and mobile
(confined and freely diffusive) β3 integrins (scale bar, 1 µm). b, Distribution of β3 integrin
diffusion coefficients recorded before or after Mn2+ treatment in control MEFs outside of
adhesive contacts (left), MUC1-transfected MEFs inside MUC1-rich areas (middle), and
MUC1-transfected MEFs outside MUC1-rich areas, including adhesive contacts (right). c,
Fraction of immobilized, confined and freely diffusive β3 integrins outside of adhesive
contacts in control MEFs (Ctrl) and MUC1-transfected cells (MUC1) before and after Mn2+
treatment. Results are the mean ± s.e.m. Statistical significance is given by *P < 0.05; **P <
0.01; ***P < 0.001. d, Fluorescence micrograph of MUC1–GFP and an illustrative single
integrin trajectory in MEFs treated with Mn2+ (scale bar, 1 µm).

Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 July 01.

Paszek et al.

Page 32

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 4. Integrins are mechanically loaded and re-enforced by bulky glycoproteins

Author Manuscript

a, GFP-fluorescence and topographic SAIM images of MUC1–GFP (scale bars, 3 µm) and
the corresponding focal adhesions visualized with vinculin–mCherry. b, Adhesion rate
versus force of contact between cell and substrate (compressive force) measured with singlecell force spectroscopy for control and MUC1-expressing MECs. Results are the mean ±
s.e.m. of at least 10 cell measurements per point. c, Schematic of FRET-based MUC1
compressive strain gauge. d, FRET efficiency maps of ectodomain-truncated
(+MUC1(ΔTR) sensor) and wild-type (+MUC1 sensor) strain gauges measured at the
ventral cell surface of MECs and the corresponding vinculin–mCherry-labelled focal
adhesions (scale bar, 8 µm; ROI scale bar, 1 µm). e, Histogram of observed FRET
efficiencies of wild-type MUC1 and MUC1 (ΔTR) strain gauges. f, Quantification of
fibronectin-crosslinked α5 integrin in control and MUC1-expressing normal MECs treated
with solvent alone (DMSO), myosin-II inhibitor (blebbistatin; 50 µM), or Rho kinase
inhibitor (Y-27632; 10 µM) for 1 h followed by detergent-extraction to reveal the fibronectin
bound integrin that is under mechanical tension. Results are the mean ± s.e.m. of three
separate experiments. Statistical significance is given by *P < 0.05; **P < 0.01; ***P <
0.001.

Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 July 01.

Paszek et al.

Page 33

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 5. Bulky glycoproteins promote cell survival and are expressed in CTCs

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

a, Violin plots showing that genes encoding bulky transmembrane proteins are more highly
expressed in primary human tumours in patients with circulating tumour cells (CTCs).
White dots and thick black lines indicate the median and interquartile range of the P-value
distribution of transcripts of all cellular genes (all genes), all transmembrane proteins
(membrane), and bulky transmembrane proteins (bulky). b, Heat map quantifying gene
expression of bulky glycoproteins in CTCs isolated from 18 breast cancer patients (x axis;
left), and representative immunofluorescence micrograph of MUC1 detected on human
patient CTCs (right; scale bar, 5 µm). Quantification of the percentage of CTCs with
detectable MUC1 is shown. c, Cell death in control non-malignant MECs and those with
incorporated glycomimetics quantified 24 h after plating on a soft (140 Pa) fibronectinconjugated hydrogel substrate. d, Cell death (left graph) and growth (right graph) of control
MECs and those expressing cytoplasmic-tail-deleted MUC1 (+MUC1(ΔCT)) quantified 48 h
after plating on a soft hydrogel. e, Quantification of the number of vehicle (DMSO), PI(3)K
inhibitor, MEK inhibitor, or Src inhibitor-treated control and MUC1(ΔCT)-expressing
MECs per colony 48 h after plating on a soft hydrogel. f, Proliferation of solvent (DMSO) or
FAK-inhibitor-treated MUC1(ΔCT)-expressing MECs quantified at the indicated day after
plating on soft hydrogels. g, Representative western blots showing phosphorylated and total
ERK in control and MUC1(ΔCT)-expressing MECs plated on soft hydrogels unstimulated or
stimulated with EGF. Cells were treated with solvent (control, +MUC1(ΔCT)) or FAK
inhibitor (+MUC1(ΔCT) + FAKi) before stimulation. h, Bar graphs showing quantification
of immunoblots probed for activated AKT in control and MUC1(ΔCT)-expressing nonmalignant MECs 24 h after plating on soft versus stiff hydrogels. i, Model summarizing
biophysical regulation of integrin-dependent growth and survival by bulky glycoproteins. In
all bar graphs, results are the mean ± s.e.m. of at least 2–3 separate experiments (*P < 0.05;
**P < 0.01; ***P < 0.001).

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 July 01.

