HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Author Manuscript

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 December 16.
Published in final edited form as:
Nature. ; 534(7607): 407–411. doi:10.1038/nature17988.

Image based detection and targeting of therapy resistance in
pancreatic adenocarcinoma

Author Manuscript

Raymond G. Fox#1,2,3, Nikki K. Lytle#1,2,3, Dawn V. Jaquish3,4, Frederick D. Park1,2,3,5,
Takahiro Ito1,2,3, Jeevisha Bajaj1,2,3, Claire S. Koechlein1,2,3, Bryan Zimdahl1,2,3, Masato
Yano6,#, Janel Kopp2,7, Marcie Kritzik1,2,3, Jason Sicklick3,4, Maike Sander2,7, Paul M.
Grandgenett8, Michael A. Hollingsworth8, Shinsuke Shibata6, Donald Pizzo9, Mark
Valasek9, Roman Sasik10, Miriam Scadeng11, Hideyuki Okano6, Youngsoo Kim12, A. Robert
MacLeod12, Andrew M. Lowy3,4, and Tannishtha Reya1,2,3
1Departments

of Pharmacology and Medicine, University of California San Diego School of
Medicine La Jolla, CA

2

Sanford Consortium for Regenerative Medicine, La Jolla, CA

3Moores

Cancer Center, University of California San Diego School of Medicine, La Jolla, CA

4Department

of Surgery, Division of Surgical Oncology, University of California San Diego School
of Medicine, La Jolla, CA
5Department

of Medicine, Division of Gastroenterology, University of California San Diego School
of Medicine, La Jolla, CA

Author Manuscript

6Department

of Physiology, Graduate School of Medicine, Keio University, Keio, Japan

7Department

of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of California San Diego School of
Medicine, La Jolla, CA
8Eppley

Institute For Research in Cancer and Allied Diseases, Department of Pathology,
University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE

9

Department of Pathology, University of California San Diego School of Medicine, La Jolla, CA

Author Manuscript

Users may view, print, copy, and download text and data-mine the content in such documents, for the purposes of academic research,
subject always to the full Conditions of use:http://www.nature.com/authors/editorial_policies/license.html#terms
Correspondence to: Andrew M. Lowy; Tannishtha Reya.
#Present Address: Division of Neurobiology and Anatomy, Graduate School of Medical and Dental Sciences, Niigata University,
1-757, Asahimachidori, Chuo-ku, Niigata 951-8510, Japan
Author Contributions
R.F. designed and performed all experiments related to Msi expression and deletion, whole genome and target analysis and ASO
delivery in pancreatic cancer; N.K.L. designed and performed all live imaging of Msi reporter pancreatic tumors, and provided
functional analysis of cancer stem cells, circulating tumor cells and therapy resistance; R.F., N.K.L. and M.K. helped write the paper;
D.V.J. performed histological analysis, and provided mouse and xenograft models; F.P., T.I., J.B., C.K. and B.Z. provided experimental
data and advice; R.S. performed all bioinformatics analysis; M.Y., S.S. and H.O. provided Msi1−/− mice and CLIP-Seq analysis; M.V.
and D.P. performed pathology/ ISH analysis; M. S. (Scadeng) performed MRI analysis; J.K. and M. S. (Sander) provided experimental
advice, tumor samples and mouse models; J.S., A.M.L., M.V., P.A.G and M.A.H provided patient samples; Y.K. and R.M. designed,
synthesized and screened MSI ASOs, and provided advice on ASO related experiments. A.M.L and T.R. conceived of the project,
planned and guided the research, and wrote the paper.
Accession codes. Microarray and RNA-seq data reported here have been deposited in the Gene Expression Omnibus (accession
GSE73312 and GSE75797).

Fox et al.

Page 2

10Center

Author Manuscript

for Computational Biology and Bioinformatics, University of California San Diego School
of Medicine, La Jolla, CA
11Department

of Radiology, University of California San Diego School of Medicine, La Jolla, CA

12Department

of Oncology Drug Discovery, Ionis pharmaceuticals, Carlsbad, CA

#

These authors contributed equally to this work.

Abstract

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Pancreatic intraepithelial neoplasia (PanIN) is a premalignant lesion that can progress to
pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma, a highly lethal malignancy marked by its late stage at clinical
presentation and profound drug resistance1. The genomic alterations that commonly occur in
pancreatic cancer include activation of KRAS2 and inactivation of p53, and SMAD42-4. To date,
however, it has been challenging to target these pathways therapeutically; thus the search for other
key mediators of pancreatic cancer growth remains an important endeavor. Here we show that the
stem cell determinant Musashi (Msi) is a critical element of pancreatic cancer progression in both
genetic models and patient derived xenografts. Specifically, we developed Msi reporter mice that
allowed image based tracking of stem cell signals within cancers, revealing that Msi expression
rises as PanIN progresses to adenocarcinoma, and that Msi-expressing cells are key drivers of
pancreatic cancer: they preferentially harbor the capacity to propagate adenocarcinoma, are
enriched in circulating tumor cells, and are markedly drug resistant. This population could be
effectively targeted by deletion of either Msi1 or Msi2, which led to a striking defect in PanIN
progression to adenocarcinoma and an improvement in overall survival. Msi inhibition also
blocked the growth of primary patient-derived tumors, suggesting that this signal is required for
human disease. To define the translational potential of this work we developed antisense
oligonucleotides against Msi; these showed reliable tumor penetration, uptake and target
inhibition, and effectively blocked pancreatic cancer growth. Collectively, these studies highlight
Msi reporters as a unique tool to identify therapy resistance, and define Msi signaling as a central
regulator of pancreatic cancer.

Author Manuscript

To understand the mechanisms that underlie pancreatic cancer development and progression,
we investigated signals that control self-renewal, a key stem cell property often hijacked in
cancer. In particular, we focused on the role of Musashi (Msi), a highly conserved RNA
binding protein originally identified in drosophila5. While Msi has long been used as a
marker of stem/progenitor cells6, the breadth of its functional impact is only beginning to
emerge: genetic loss-of-function models have shown that Msi signaling is important for
maintaining stem cells in the mammalian nervous system7, and more recently in normal and
malignant hematopoiesis8-12. However, the role of Msi in pancreatic cancer biology and
whether it may be a viable therapeutic target remains unknown.
To address these questions, we first analyzed MSI expression in human pancreatic cancers.
MSI1 and MSI2 were expressed in all primary tumor samples analyzed, with expression
increasing during progression (Extended Data Fig. 1). To track the function of Msiexpressing cells, we developed Msi knock-in reporters (Reporter for Musashi, REM) in
which fluorescent signals reflected endogenous Msi expression (Fig. 1a-b; Extended Data
Fig. 2a-c). To define if Msi-expressing cells contribute to pancreatic cancer, we crossed
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 December 16.

Fox et al.

Page 3

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

REM mice to the KrasLSL-G12D/+;p53f/f; Ptf1aCRE/+ model13-15 (Extended Data Fig. 2d-h).
In vivo imaging of living tumors revealed clear Msi1 and Msi2 reporter activity within
remarkable spatially restricted domains frequently surrounded by blood vessels (Fig. 1c-d;
Extended Data Fig. 2i, Supplementary Video S1). Cells with high levels of Msi reporter
expression were rare, and detected in 1.18% and 9.7% of REM1 and REM2 cancers (Fig.
1e-f). Because cancer stem cells can be similarly rare16,17, we tested if Msi-expressing cells
have preferential capacity for tumor propagation18. Consistent with this possibility, Msi+
cells expressed ALDH19, and were dramatically more tumorigenic in vitro and in vivo (Fig.
1g-i; Extended Data Fig. 3a-g). Most importantly, Msi2+ cells were highly lethal: while
100% of mice orthotopically transplanted with Msi2+ cells developed invasive tumors and
died, none of the mice receiving Msi2− cells showed signs of disease (Fig. 1j, Extended Data
Fig. 3h). Given the suggestion that certain markers may not consistently enrich for tumor
propagating ability20, our findings indicate that Msi-expression can identify cancer stem
cells at least in some contexts, and that Msi2 + cells preferentially drive pancreatic cancer
growth, invasion and lethality.
Msi2+ cells also represented a high proportion of circulating tumor cells, and were more
tumorigenic than Msi2− CTCs (Fig. 1k-l). While this suggests that Msi2+ CTCs may pose a
greater risk for tumor dissemination21, the fact that Msi was not consistently elevated in
metastatic patient-samples analyzed leaves the question of Msi's role in metastasis open. The
Msi reporter also provided an opportunity to define if it could be used to identify therapy
resistance. Exposure to gemcitabine led to preferential survival of Msi2+ cells even at high
doses (Fig. 1m-n; Extended Data Fig. 3i-k). These experiments show that Msi2+ cells are a
predominant gemcitabine-resistant population, and suggest Msi reporters could serve as a
tool to visualize drug resistant cells, and identify therapies to target them.

Author Manuscript

Because Msi expression rose during progression (Extended Data Fig. 1f-k, 4a), and marked
therapy resistant cells, we tested if genetic or pharmacologic targeting of Msi could eradicate
this ‘high risk’ population. Deletion of Msi1 led to a 5-fold reduction in tumor volume by
MRI (Fig. 2a-b, Extended Data Fig. 4b, Supplementary Videos S2-S4). Histologically,
adenocarcinoma areas comprised 67% of WT-KPf/fC but less than 10% of Msi1−/−KPf/fC
pancreata; further while Msi1 loss allowed low grade PanINs to form, it largely blocked
progression to adenocarcinoma (Fig. 2c-f, Extended Data Fig. 4 c, d). Finally, Msi1 deletion
improved survival in orthotopic grafts: median survival for WT-KPf/fC graft recipients was
28.5 days, and for Msi1−/−-KPf/fC grafts was 70.5 days, representing a 2.5-fold increase in
survival time and a 23-fold decrease in risk of death (Fig. 2g).

Author Manuscript

Because both Msi1 and Msi2 are expressed in pancreatic cancer, we also analyzed the
impact of deleting Msi29. MRI showed no detectable tumor mass in most Msi2−/−-KPf/fC
mice (Fig. 2h-i; Extended Data Fig. 4e, Supplementary Videos S2, S5-S6). Histologically,
KPf/fC pancreata were mostly replaced by adenocarcinoma, often accompanied by
extracapsular invasion into surrounding structures; in contrast, Msi2−/−-KPf/fC pancreata
contained low-grade PanIN with rare high-grade PanIN and microscopic foci of
adenocarcinoma within predominantly normal tissue (Fig. 2j-o). Median survival, tracked in
the autochthonous model, was 122 days for Msi2−/−-KPf/fC vs. 87 days for WT-KPf/fC mice
(Fig. 2p), representing a 4-fold decreased risk of death. Collectively, our data show that Msi

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 December 16.

Fox et al.

Page 4

Author Manuscript

inhibition significantly improves disease trajectory, leading to an approximate doubling of
survival. The fact that the mice ultimately succumbed to disease is likely due to the strong
selection for escaper cells in Msi1 and Msi2 single, or double knockout mice (Extended
Data Fig. 5). Additionally, some redundancy between Msi1 and Msi2, as well as a partial
gene fragment present in Msi1−/− mice (data not shown) may also exert compensatory
activity.

Author Manuscript

To understand the molecular basis of the effects of Msi loss, we genomically profiled Msi
deficient tumor cells (Extended Data Fig. 6, 7a-d). Msi loss led to down-regulation of many
key genes, including regulators of stem cell function (Wnt7a, Aldh, Lin28), proto-oncogenes
(c-Met, Fos, Fyn) and Regenerating (Reg) family genes, linked to gastrointestinal cancers.
Among these, analysis of 3'UTRs for Msi binding-sites and RIP-PCR identified BRD4, cMET and HMGA2 as potential direct targets (Extended Data Fig. 7e, Fig. 3a). We focused
on c-MET22, which was diminished in Msi null pancreatic cancer and also bound MSI1 in
CLIP-seq experiments (Fig. 3b-d, Extended Data 7f, g). c-Met could not only be activated
molecularly by MSI but also effectively complemented MSI loss (Fig. 3e, f; Extended Data
Fig. 7h). While these suggest that c-Met is a direct functional target of Msi, it is almost
certainly one of many. In fact, Msi's powerful impact on cancer is probably because of its
ability to control a broad range of programs (Extended Data Fig. 6). In this context, BRD4
and HMGA2 may be particularly attractive targets23,24, as they could act at an epigenetic
level with c-Met to collectively mediate Msi function. Underscoring such a potential
convergence of epigenetic and oncogenic pathways, inhibitors of both Brd4 and c-Met
effectively targeted gemcitabine-resistant Msi2+ cells (Fig. 3g-h).

Author Manuscript

To complement the mouse models, we tested the impact of MSI inhibition on primary
patient samples, which harbor more complex mutations, and are uniformly drug resistant.
Primary pancreatic cancer cells were infected with MSI shRNAs and xenografted (Extended
Data Fig. 8a). While shMSI cells were equivalently present at time of transplant, their ability
to contribute to the tumor mass in vivo was reduced by 4.9-6.5 fold (Fig. 4a-b, Extended
Data Fig. 8b-c), demonstrating that inhibition of either MSI1 or MSI2 results in marked
suppression of primary human pancreatic cancer growth. Interestingly, MSI2 expression was
more homogeneous in patients than in mouse models (Extended Data Fig. 1a-b, 2d-e). This
could be a consequence of selection due to treatment and end-stage disease in patients, or
because MSI2 patterns differ between mouse models and human disease. However,
regardless of the level of heterogeneity, our loss-of-function studies indicate that the mouse
and human disease are both highly dependent on Msi signaling.

Author Manuscript

Given that inhibition of Msi has profound effects on pancreatic cancer progression, we
explored its potential as a therapeutic target by developing antisense oligonucleotides
(ASOs)25,26 specific for MSI1. Because ASO inhibitors are designed based on target RNA
sequences, they can be a powerful approach for inhibiting proteins like Msi, considered
“undruggable” by traditional approaches27. Of 400 candidate MSI1- ASOs screened, the two
most potent markedly reduced colony formation, as well as human cell line and KPf/fC
derived tumor growth in vivo (Fig. 4c-g, Extended Data Fig. 8d, e). The MSI1-ASOs have
not yet been lead-optimized, a longer-term process designed to maximize therapeutic level
efficacy with systemic delivery. To test if a lead-optimized ASO can penetrate the tumor

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 December 16.

Fox et al.

Page 5

Author Manuscript

microenvironment, a lead-optimized ASO against Malat1 was delivered intraperitoneally
and was effective in knocking down its target in both stem and non-stem cell fractions (Fig.
4h; Extended Data Fig. 8f-j). These studies provide proof-of-principle that deliverable Msi
inhibitors can antagonize pancreatic cancer growth in vivo, and suggest that ASOs should be
explored further as a new class of therapeutics in this disease.

Author Manuscript

The Msi reporters we describe here may be broadly applicable for cancer diagnostic and
therapeutic studies. Because Msi reporter activity can be visualized through live imaging,
these mice can be used to track cancer stem cells in vivo, and provide a dynamic view of
cancer growth and dissemination within the native microenvironment. The fact that reporterpositive cells are gemcitabine-resistant raises the exciting possibility that this could serve as
a platform to visualize resistance in vivo. Integration of such reporters during drug
development may provide a powerful complement to conventional screens, and allow
identification of therapies that can better target therapy-resistant disease. Further, the
spatially restricted distribution of Msi+ cells could have important implications for designing
strategies to loco-regionally target cells that drive residual disease and relapse.

Author Manuscript

One of the biggest disappointments in pancreatic cancer therapy has been the failure of
targeted agents to make a meaningful impact. Our data demonstrate that Msi function is
critical for growth and progression of pancreatic cancer, and Msi therefore represents an
attractive therapeutic target. Here we show that cell-penetrating antisense oligonucleotides
are able to antagonize Msi and inhibit growth of pancreatic cancer. These findings highlight
the value of targeting Msi, and suggest that ASOs27-30 and other antagonists should be
developed for pancreatic and other cancers marked by high Msi expression. Finally, the rise
of Msi in pancreatitis (Extended Data Fig. 9) raises the possibility that Msi inhibition could
serve as a strategy to decrease the risk of developing pancreatic cancer. In the long term,
blocking Msi signaling could provide a new approach to controlling cancer establishment,
progression, and therapy resistance.

Methods
Mice

Author Manuscript

REM1 (Msi1eYFP/+) and REM2 (Msi2eGFP/+) reporter mice were generated by conventional
gene targeting (Genoway, France; Fig. 1); all of the reporter mice used in experiments were
heterozygous for the corresponding Msi allele. The Msi1f/f (Msi1flox/flox) mice were
generated by conventional gene targeting by inserting LoxP sites around Exons 1-4
(Genoway, France). The Msi2 mutant mouse, B6; CB-Msi2Gt(pU-21T)2Imeg (Msi2−/−) was
established by gene trap mutagenesis as previously described9. Dr. Hideyuki Okano
provided the Msi1−/− mice as previously described7. The LSL-Kras G12D mouse,
B6.129S4-Krastm4Tyj/J (Stock No: 008179) and the p53flox/flox mouse, B6.129P2Trp53tm1Brn/J (Stock No: 008462), were purchased from The Jackson Laboratory. Dr. Maike
Sander provided Ptf1a-Cre mice as previously described14. Dr. Andrew Lowy provided
Pdx1-Cre mice as previously described13. Mice were bred and maintained in the animal care
facilities at the University of California San Diego. All animal experiments were performed
according to protocols approved by the University of California San Diego Institutional
Animal Care and Use Committee. No sexual dimorphism was noted in all mouse models.
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 December 16.

Fox et al.

Page 6

Author Manuscript

Therefore males and females were equally used for experimental purposes and both sexes
are represented in all data sets.
Tissue dissociation and cell isolation

Author Manuscript

(A) Mouse pancreatic tumors were washed in RPMI 1640 (Gibco, Life Technologies) and
cut into 2-4mm pieces immediately following resection. Dissociation into a single cell
suspension was performed using the Miltenyi Biotec Mouse Tumor Dissociation Kit
(130-096-730). Briefly, tumor pieces were collected into gentleMACS C tubes containing
RPMI 1640 dissociation enzymes, and further homogenized using the gentleMACS
Dissociator. Samples were incubated for 40 minutes at 37°C under continuous rotation, then
passaged through a 70 μm nylon mesh (Corning). Red blood cells were lysed using RBC
Lysis Buffer (eBioscience), and the remaining tumor cells were used for FACS analysis and
cell sorting. (B) Freshly resected mouse brains were rinsed in PBS, placed in accutase (Life
Technologies), and cut into <2mm pieces. Samples were incubated 15 minutes at 37°C, then
passaged through a 70 μm nylon mesh (Corning). Red blood cells were lysed as above prior
to FACS analysis and sorting of brain cells. (C) Bone marrow cells were suspended in HBSS
(Gibco, Life Technologies) containing 5% FBS and 2 mM EDTA and were prepared for
FACS analysis and sorting as previously described31. Analysis and cell sorting were carried
out on a FACSAria III machine (Becton Dickinson), and data were analyzed with FlowJo
software (Tree Star).
Immunofluorescence and immunohistochemical staining

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

(A) Human primary pancreatic cancer tissues were fixed in 10% neutral buffered formalin
and paraffin embedded at the Moores Cancer Center at UCSD according to standard
protocols. 7μm sections were obtained and deparaffinized in xylene. The UNMC Rapid
Autopsy Pancreas (RAP) Program provided a second cohort of human primary pancreatic
cancer tissues and matched liver metastases. Pancreatic cancer tissue from KPf/fC mice were
fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde and paraffin embedded at the UCSD Histology and
Immunohistochemistry Core at The Sanford Consortium for Regenerative Medicine
according to standard protocols. 5μm sections were obtained and deparaffinized in xylene.
Antigen retrieval was performed for 20-40 minutes in 95-100°C 1x Citrate Buffer, pH 6.0
(eBioscience). Sections were blocked in TBS or PBS containing 0.1% Triton X100 (SigmaAldrich), 10% Goat or Donkey Serum (Sigma Aldrich), and 5% bovine serum albumin. (B)
Single cell suspensions from mouse pancreatic tumors and brain. Cells isolated by FACS
were suspended in DMEM (Gibco, Life Technologies) supplemented with 50% FBS and
adhered to slides by centrifugation at 500rpm. 24 hours later, cells were fixed with 4%
paraformaldehyde (USB Corporation), washed in PBS containing 0.1% Tween-20 (SigmaAldrich), and blocked with PBS containing 0.1% Triton X-100 (Sigma-Aldrich), 10% Goat
serum (Invitrogen), and 5% bovine serum albumin (Invitrogen). (C) Single cell suspensions
from mouse bone marrow. Cells were allowed to settle onto chambered cover glass (LabTek)
coated with poly-llysine (Sigma) at 37°C, fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde (USB
Corporation), washed in 1× Dako wash buffer (Dako), and blocked with Dako wash buffer
containing 10% Goat serum (Invitrogen). All incubations with primary antibodies were
carried out overnight at 4 °C. For immunofluorescent staining, incubation with Alexafluorconjugated secondary antibodies (Molecular Probes) was performed for 1 hour at room
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 December 16.

Fox et al.

Page 7

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

temperature. DAPI (Molecular Probes) was used to detect DNA and images were obtained
with a Confocal Leica TCS SP5 II (Leica Microsystems) or with a Nikon Eclipse E600
fluorescent microscope. For immunohistochemical staining, endogenous peroxidase was
blocked by incubating slides in 3% H2O2 for 15 minutes prior to primary antibody.
Incubation with Biotinylated secondary antibodies (Vector Laboratories) was performed for
45 minutes at room temperature. ImmPACT NovaRED Kit (Vector Laboratories) was used
per manufacturer's protocol. Sections were counterstained with hematoxylin. The following
primary antibodies were used for human tissue sections: rabbit anti-Msi1 (Abcam, ab52865)
4μg/ml; rabbit anti-Msi2 (Abcam, ab76148) 1μg/ml; and mouse anti-Keratin (Abcam,
ab8068) 1:20. The following primary antibodies were used to stain mouse tissues: rabbit
anti-ALDH1 (Abcam, ab24343) 1:200; rabbit anti-cMet (Abcam, ab5662) 1:250; chicken
anti-GFP (Abcam, ab13970) 1:250 (for pancreatic tumors and brain) or 1:200 (for bone
marrow); rabbit anti-Msi2 (Abcam, ab76148) 1:500 (for pancreatic tumors and brain) or
1:200 (for bone marrow); rat anti-Ki67 (eBioscience, 14-5698) 1:1000; rat anti-Msi1
(eBioscience, 14-9896-82) 1:500; mouse anti-Keratin (Abcam, ab8068) 1:10; and
biotinylated DBA (Vector Laboratories, B-1035) 1:1000.
Pancreatic tumorsphere formation assay

Author Manuscript

(A) Pancreatic tumorsphere formation assays were performed on freshly isolated mouse
pancreatic tumor cells or circulating tumor cells from peripheral blood modified from
Rovira, et al32. Briefly, pancreatic tumors from 10-13 week old REM1-KPf/fC or REM2KPf/fC mice were dissociated and FACS sorted for YFP+ and YFP- or EpCAM+/GFP+ and
EpCAM+/GFP- cells, respectively. 100-500 cells were suspended in 100μl DMEM F-12
(Gibco, Life Technologies) containing 1x B-27 supplement (Gibco, Life Technologies), 3%
FBS, 100mM-mercaptoethanol (Gibco, Life Technologies), 1x non-essential amino acids
(Gibco, Life Technologies), 1x N2 supplement (Gibco, Life Technologies), 20ng/ml EGF
(Gibco, Life Technologies), 20ng/ml FGF2 (Gibco, Life Technologies), and 10ng/ml
ESGRO mLIF (Millipore). Culture media for circulating tumor cells also contained 20ng/ml
mHGF (R&D Systems). Cells in media were plated in 96-well ultra-low adhesion culture
plates (Costar) and incubated at 37°C for 7 days. Sphere images were obtained with a
Nikon80i. Sphere size was measured using ImageJ 1.47v software.
Lentiviral constructs and production

Author Manuscript

Short hairpin RNA (shRNA) constructs were designed and cloned into plenti-hU6BX vector
with a GFP tag by Cellogenetics. The target sequences are 5’CCCAGATAGCCTTAGAGACTAT-3’ for MSI1, 5’-CCCAGATAGCCTTAGAGACTAT-3’
for MSI2 and 5’-CTGTGCCAGAGTCCTTCGATAG-3’ for the control scrambled sequence.
Additional (shRNA) target sequences were cloned into a plenty-FG12 vector with a Tomato
Red tag. These target sequences are 5’-ATGAGTTAGATTCCAAGACGAT-3’ for MSI2 and
5’-AGGATTCCAATTCAGCGGGAGC-3’ for control scrambled sequence. Virus was
produced in 293T cells transfected with plenti-shRNA constructs along with pRSV/REV,
pMDLg/pRRE, and pHCMVG constructs. Viral supernatants were collected for three days
followed by ultracentrifugal concentration at 50,000xg for 2h.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 December 16.

Fox et al.

Page 8

Agarose colony formation assays

Author Manuscript

MIA PaCa-2, Panc-1, Capan-2, and HPAC human pancreatic cancer cell lines were
purchased from ATCC, and cultured in the appropriate growth media as recommended by
ATCC. ASPC1, FG, and AA0779E human pancreatic cancer cell lines were provided by Dr.
Andrew Lowy, and grown in DMEM containing 10% FBS, 1x Glutamax, and 1x PS (pen/
strep). Human pancreatic cancer cell lines were infected with GFP-tagged or TomatoRedtagged lentiviral particles containing shRNAs for MSI1, MSI2, and a scrambled control.
Positively infected cells were sorted 72 hours after transduction. For colony assays, 24-well
plates were first coated with 0.6% agarose in DMEM without supplements. Cells were
plated at a density of 2000 cells per well in 0.3% agarose containing DMEM, 10% FBS,
NEAA, PS, and Glutamax. Growth medium was placed over the solidified agarose layers
and was supplemented every three days. Colonies were counted 14 days after plating.

Author Manuscript

MRI
Magnetic resonance imaging was used to determine the pancreatic volumes of the mice in
vivo. Mice were anesthetized using 1.5% isoflurane and imaged in a 7.0 Tesla small animal
scanner (Bruker-Biospin, Ettlingen, Germany). Contiguous coronal slices were acquired
using a multi-slice, RARE sequence: repetition time/echo time = 4826 ms/33 ms, Field of
View = 6×3 cm, and Matrix = 126 ×128 with up to 44 slices with a thickness of 0.5mm.
Segmentation and volume rendering were performed using Amira software (FEI
Visualization Sciences Group, Burlington, MA).
Histological analysis/Quantification of PanIN and PDAC

Author Manuscript

Mouse tumors from 4.5-13 week old Msi1−/−-KPf/fC, Msi2−/−-KPf/fC mice, and WT-KPf/fC
littermates were isolated, fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde, and paraffin embedded according
to standard protocols. 5μm sections were obtained for hematoxylin and eosin and periodic
acid-Schiff/Alcian Blue staining. To quantify tumor areas, each slide was digitally scanned
with an Aperio slide scanner. Imagescope software was used to measure PDAC area, PanIN
area, and normal pancreas area.
Gene expression microarray, RNA-Seq, and data analysis

Author Manuscript

(A) WT-KPf/fC or Msi1−/−-KPf/fC mice were euthanized at 11 weeks of age. Tumors were
harvested and total cellular RNAs were purified, labeled and hybridized onto Affymetrix
GeneChip Mouse Genome 430 2.0 Arrays and raw hybridization data were collected (VA/
VMRF Microarray & NGS Core, UCSD). Expression level data were extracted using R
package gcrma14, and normalized using a multiple-loess algorithm as previously
described33,34. Probes whose expression levels exceed a threshold value in at least one
sample were considered detected. The threshold value is found by inspection from the
distribution plots of log2 expression levels. Detected probes were sorted according to their qvalue, which is the smallest false discovery rate (FDR) at which a probe is called
significant13,35. An FDR value of α is the expected fraction of false positives among all
genes with q ≤α. FDR was evaluated using Significance Analysis of Microarrays (SAM) and
its implementation in the official statistical package samr36,37. The samples were treated as
“Two class paired” according to the date of RNA extraction. No genes reached a significance

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 December 16.

Fox et al.

Page 9

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

level of α=0.1. A heat map of selected genes was created using in-house software. (B) MIA
PaCa2 cells were infected with GFP-tagged or TomatoRed-tagged lentiviral particles
containing shRNAs for MSI1, MSI2, MSI1+MSI2, and a scrambled control. At 72 hours
post-infection, positively infected cells were sorted and total cellular RNAs were isolated
using a Qiagen RNeasy mini kit. RNA-seq fastq files were processed into transcript-level
summaries using kallisto, an ultrafast pseudo-alignment algorithm with expectation
maximization. Transcript-level summaries were processed into gene-level summaries by
adding all transcript counts from the same gene. Gene counts were normalized across
samples using DESeq normalization38, and the gene list was filtered based on mean
abundance, which left 13,684 “detected” genes for further analysis. Differential expression
was assessed with an R package limma39 applied to log2-transformed counts. Statistical
significance of each test was expressed in terms of posterior error probability pE using the
limma function eBayes40,41. Posterior error probability, also called local false discovery rate,
is the probability that a particular gene is not differentially expressed, given the prior
probabilities of the model. The list of genes sorted by pE (in ascending order) were analyzed
for over-represented biological processes and pathways using a non-parametric version of
Gene Set Enrichment Analysis42,43. Denoting pE(1) the probability that a gene is not
differentially expressed in the Msi1 knockdown and pE(2) the probability that a gene is not
differentially expressed in the Msi2 knockdown, the probability that a gene is differentially
expressed in both samples was estimated as [1-pE(1)][1- pE(2)]. By the same token, the
probability that a gene is differentially expressed in the Msi1 knockdown but not in the Msi2
knockdown was estimated as [1-pE(1)]pE(2); likewise with indices 1 and 2 switched.
RT-PCR analysis

Author Manuscript

RNA was isolated using RNeasy Micro and Mini kits (Qiagen) and converted to cDNA
using Superscript III (Invitrogen). Quantitative real-time PCR was performed using an
iCycler (BioRad) by mixing cDNAs, iQ SYBR Green Supermix (BioRad) and gene specific
primers. Primer sequences are available upon request. All real time data was normalized to
actin or Gapdh.
In vivo transplantation assay and analysis

Author Manuscript

In vivo we focused on the tumorigenic potential of Msi2 reporter cells since Msi1+ cells
were unable to form tumors in small numbers (100, 1000), possibly because they are less
tumorigenic or more quiescent (data not shown). Pancreatic tumors from 10-13 week-old
REM2-KPf/fC mice were dissociated and FACS sorted for EpCAM+/reporter+ (GFP+) and
EpCAM+/reporter- (GFP-) cells. 100, 500, 1000, or 5000 GFP+ and GFP- cells were
suspended in DMEM (Gibco, Life Technologies) containing 10% FBS, then mixed 1:1 with
matrigel (BD Biosciences). Cells were injected subcutaneously into the left or right flank or
orthotopically into the tail of the pancreas of 5-8 week-old NOD/SCID Il2ry−/− (NSG)
recipient mice. Subcutaneous tumor dimensions were measured with calipers every 7 days
for 8-12 weeks. Tumor volume was calculated using the standard modified ellipsoid
formula, ½(Length × Width2). At endpoint, flank tumors were removed and dissociated as
described above. Tumor cells were stained with anti-mouse EpCAM antibody
(eBiosciences) then analyzed for GFP expression by flow cytometry on a FACSAria III
machine (Becton Dickinson), and data analyzed with FlowJo software (Tree Star).
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 December 16.

Fox et al.

Page 10

Author Manuscript

Subcutaneous tumors did not exceed 2cm in diameter as per the University of California San
Diego Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee Policy on Experimental Neoplasia.
Patient-derived xenograft infection and in vivo transplant

Author Manuscript

Patient samples were obtained from Moores UCSD Cancer Center from Institutional Review
Board-approved protocols with written informed consent in accordance with the Declaration
of Helsinki. All knockdown experiments were conducted with the construct shCTRL
(scrambled), shMSI1, and shMSI2. Briefly, freshly dissociated (GentleMACS Dissociator,
Miltenyi) patient-derived xenograft cells were plated in RPMI-1640 with 20% FBS, 1x
glutamax, 1x non-essential amino acids, 100 IU/ml penicillin, and 100μg/ml streptomycin.
Cells were transduced with GFP-tagged lentiviral shRNAs, and FACS analysis was
performed after 24 hours on a portion of the cells; the remaining cells were transplanted into
the flank of 5-8 week-old NSG recipient mice. Tumor size was monitored by caliper
measurement, and mice were euthanized when tumors reached 2 cm in diameter.
Subcutaneous tumors did not exceed 2cm in diameter as per the University of California San
Diego Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee Policy on Experimental Neoplasia.
Tumors were harvested, dissociated, and analyzed by FACS.
RIP-qPCR
HEK 293T cells were transfected with MSCV-Flag-Msi2-IRES-tNGFR and lysed 72 hours
post-transfection. RNA-immunoprecipitation was carried out with anti-Flag antibody
(Sigma-Aldrich) or control IgG using the EZ-Magna RIP kit as per the manufacturers’
protocol (Millipore). Immunoprecipitated RNA was converted to cDNA and analyzed for the
expression of indicated genes by real-time PCR.

Author Manuscript

CLIP SEQ
Briefly, MIA PaCa-2 cells were UV cross-linked with a Stratalinker (Model 2400,
Stratagene). Cells were lysed and supernatant added to Dynabeads conjugated to MSI1
antibody (clone 14H1, eBiosciences). CLIP library preparation and sequencing, as well as
sample preparation and sequencing, were performed as previously described44. 73,329
unique tags were obtained from MSI1-bound targets including tags with the binding core
sequence “rUAG” site, as reported previously45.
MET rescue Assay

Author Manuscript

Using gateway technology, pENTR-Human c-MET was engineered into the pLENTIPGKPURO DEST vector. MIA PaCa-2 cells were infected with pLENTI PGK-MET or pLENTI
PGK-EMPTY virus. Following the establishment of the stable cell line over expressing cMET; lentiviruses containing shRNAs for Control, MSI1, or MSI2 were delivered. Cells
were sorted for GFP expression and plated into a soft agar colony assay. Colonies were
counted 14 days after plating.
in vivo and in vitro drug the rapy
9-10 week old REM2-KPf/fC mice were treated with Gemcitabine alone or in combination
with Crizotinib or iBet762 for 6 days. On day 6, tumors were removed, dissociated (as

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 December 16.

Fox et al.

Page 11

Author Manuscript

described above), counted for total cellular content, stained with anti-mouse EpCAM
antibody and analyzed for reporter expression by flow cytometry. Gemcitabine (Sigma,
G6423) was resuspended in H2O at 20mg/ml and delivered at 200mg/kg or 500mg/kg by IP
injection twice over 6 days (on day 0 and 3). Crizotinib (Seleckchem PF-02341066) was
resuspended in DMSO at 50mg/ml, diluted 1:10 in H2O, and delivered at 100mg/kg/day for
6 days by oral gavage. iBet762 (Selleckchem S7189) was resuspended in DMSO at
50mg/ml, diluted 1:10 in H2O, and delivered at 30mg/kg/day by IP injection for 6 days. For
in vitro drug assay, low passage Msi2 Reporter KPf/fC cells loaded with 2μM DiI and
imaged continuously for up to 48 hours while receiving 10μM gemcitabine treatment.
ASO inhibitors

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

To identify human Msi ASO inhibitors, rapid throughput screens were performed to identify
effective ASOs as previously described46,47. ASOs were tested in full dose-response
experiments to determine potency. The top 2 most effective ASOs were chosen to test free
uptake and verify target knockdown in MIA PaCa-2 cells. The sequences of Gen 2.5 MSI1
ASOs used for the study were ASO-1, 5’- ATATGATACAGGACGG -3’, and ASO-2, 5’TTACATATGATACAGG -3’, with underlined letters indicating cEt modified bases. The
sequence of Gen 2.5 scrambled (5’- GGCTACTACGCCGTCA -3’) ASO with no perfect
match for any known transcript was included as a negative control. (A) In Vitro: MIA
PaCa-2 cells were treated with 0.5μM-20μM of antisense compound for 24 hours, after
which cells were lysed and RNA isolated. Gene expression was assessed with Taqman
probes for MSI1 and MSI2. Actin was used to normalize all real time data. For functional
testing, MIA PaCa-2 cells were plated in the colony assay as previously described. The
growth medium was supplemented with 0.25μM-10μM of ASO. Cells were supplemented
weekly with fresh antisense compound. Colonies were counted 21 days after the first ASO
treatment. (B) In Vivo: 5×105 MIA PaCa-2 cells were transplanted into the flank of 5-8
week-old NSG recipient mice. Once tumors were measureable at 2 weeks post transplant,
50μg of either Control ASO or MSI1 ASO-1 in PBS was administered intratumorally. ASOs
were delivered daily over the course of the study. Tumor measurements were recorded every
3 days. Subcutaneous tumors did not exceed 2cm in diameter as per the University of
California San Diego Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee Policy on Experimental
Neoplasia. (C) In Vivo: In 8 week-old WT-KPf/fC mice, either Control ASO or Malat1 ASO
was delivered by intraperitoneal injection at a dose of 50mg/kg. ASOs were delivered daily
for 14 days. On day 15, mice were sacrificed and the tumor removed. Tumors were
harvested and used as follows: (1) flash frozen for RNA isolation and qPCR analysis for
Malat1; (2) placed into 4% paraformaldehyde for paraffin embedding, sectioning, and in situ
hybridization analysis for Malat1; and (3) dissociated and sorted for RNA isolation to
compare Malat1 expression in EpCAM+/ALDH+ and EpCAM+/ALDH- populations.
Tumor imaging
11-12 week old REM-KPf/fC mice were anesthetized by intraperitoneal injection of
ketamine and xylazine (100/20 mg/kg). In order to visualize blood vessels and nuclei, mice
were injected retro-orbitally with AlexaFluor 647 anti-mouse CD144 (VE-cadherin)
antibody and Hoechst 33342 immediately following anesthesia induction. Pancreatic tumors
were removed and placed in HBSS containing 5% FBS and 2mM EDTA. 80-100 micron
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 December 16.

Fox et al.

Page 12

Author Manuscript

images in 1024 × 1024 format were acquired with an HCX APO L20x objective on an
upright Leica SP5 confocal system using Leica LAS AF 1.8.2 software. Videos were
generated using Volocity 3D Image Analysis Software and compressed using Microsoft
Video 1 compression.
Circulating tumor cell analysis
10-13 week old REM2-KPf/fC mice were anesthetized and approximately 100μl of
peripheral blood and ascites was collected in PBS containing 5mM EDTA and 2% Dextran.
Samples were incubated at 37°C and red blood cells were lysed using RBC lysis buffer
(eBiosciences). Remaining cells were stained with anti-mouse EpCAM-PE (eBiosciences)
and anti-mouse CD45-PE-Cy7 (eBiosciences) antibodies. Analysis was carried out on a
FACSAria III machine (Becton Dickinson) and data analyzed with FlowJo software (Tree
Star).

Author Manuscript

In situ hybridization

Author Manuscript

Msi1 and Msi2 mRNA were detected in tumor samples using RNAscope, an RNA in situ
hybridization method that permits signal amplification and background suppression. Human
tissue was drop-fixed in neutral-buffered formalin and processed and embedded in paraffin.
4μm tissue sections were collected in RNase-fee manner and dried at room temperature
overnight. Staining was initiated by baking the slides for 32 min at 60 degrees, then they
were deparaffinized, subjected to antigen retrieval and treated with protease (two sequential
incubations at 65 and 75 degrees for 12 min each) to enhance probe penetration, as described
by the manufacturer (Advanced Cell Diagnostics). Msi1-specific and Msi2-specific RNA
target probe sets were generated and supplied by the manufacturer (Advanced Cell
Diagnostics). Sequential amplification steps result in a large number of horseradish
peroxidase molecules per mRNA. The probe was visualized by incubation with 3,3’
diaminobenzidine (DAB). Sections were counterstained with hematoxylin. All steps of this
procedure were performed using a Ventana Discovery Ultra (Roche). Slides were analyzed
by conventional light microscopy.
Msi1−/−KPf/fC Survival Curve

Author Manuscript

For the Msi1−/−-KPf/fC mice, tracking survival was complicated by the incidence of
hydrocephaly observed in the knockout mice reported previously7. To avoid confounding the
data with deaths due to non-tumorigenic events, we carried out orthotopic transplants.
Briefly, Msi1−/−KPf/fC and WT KPf/fC mice at 8 weeks of age were sacrificed and tumors
collected. Tumors were divided into four equal chunks, and then surgically transplanted into
the pancreas of 8-week-old NSG mice. After surgery, the orthotopically transplanted mice
were tracked for survival.
Luciferase assay
A Lightswitch Luciferase Assay System (Active Motif, Inc) was used for the assessment of
MSI1 regulation of cMET. Briefly, 1×104 MIA PaCa-2 cells were plated into 96 well plates
and cultured for 24 hours. 50ng of cMET 3'UTR GoClone (S811259, Active Motif, Inc)
plasmid DNA and increasing concentrations (0ng, 50ng, and 100ng) of either PGK-GFP or

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 December 16.

Fox et al.

Page 13

Author Manuscript

PGK-MSI1 plasmid vector DNA were co-transfected into MIA PaCa-2 cells. After 24 hours,
cells were lysed using the Lightswitch Luciferase Assay Reagent (LS100, Active Motif, Inc)
and luciferase activity measured using a plate scanner (Infinite 200, Tecan).
Caerulein-induced pancreatitis
4-week-old C57BL/6 mice received 8 injections of 50μg/kg caerulein (Sigma-Aldrich) or
PBS hourly each day for two consecutive days (for a total of 16 injections). Pancreata were
isolated 2 days after the last injection, fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde and paraffin embedded
according to standard protocols. 7μm sections were obtained, deparaffinized in xylene, and
stained as described above.
Statistical analysis

Author Manuscript

Statistical analyses were carried out using GraphPad Prism software version 6.0d (GraphPad
Software Inc.). Sample sizes were determined based on the variability of pancreatic tumor
models used. Tumor bearing animals within each group were randomly assigned to
treatment groups. Data are shown as the mean ± SEM. Two-tailed unpaired Student's t-tests
with Welch's correction or One-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) for multiple
comparisons when appropriate were used to determine statistical significance (*P<0.05,
**P<0.01, ***P<0.001, ****P<0.0001).

Extended Data

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 December 16.

Fox et al.

Page 14

Author Manuscript

Extended Data Figure 1. The Musashi genes MSI1 and MSI1 are expressed in human pancreatic
adenocarcinoma

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

(a, top row) Representative images of a primary patient pancreatic adenocarcinoma sample
stained with anti-keratin (green), DAPI (blue), and anti-MSI1 (red) antibodies. White arrows
indicate MSI1 negative cells; yellow arrow indicates a MSI1 positive cell (a, bottom row)
Representative images of a primary patient pancreatic adenocarcinoma sample stained with
anti-keratin (green), DAPI (blue), and anti-MSI2 (red) antibodies. White dotted regions
indicate MSI2 negative cells while yellow dotted regions indicate MSI2 positive cells. (b,
top row) Representative images of a primary patient pancreatic adenocarcinoma sample
stained with anti-keratin (green), DAPI (blue), and anti-MSI1 (red) antibodies. White arrows
indicate MSI1 negative cells; yellow arrow indicates a MSI1 positive cell. (b, bottom row)
Representative images of a primary patient pancreatic adenocarcinoma sample stained with
anti-keratin (green), DAPI (blue), and anti-MSI2 (red) antibodies. Yellow dotted region
indicates MSI2 positive cells. (c, top row) Representative images of a matched liver
metastasis from a patient with pancreatic adenocarcinoma stained with anti-keratin (green),
DAPI (blue), and anti-MSI1 (red) antibodies. White arrows indicate MSI1 negative cells;
yellow arrows indicate MSI1 positive cells. (c, bottom row) Representative images of a
matched liver metastasis from a patient with pancreatic adenocarcinoma stained with antikeratin (green), DAPI (blue), and anti-MSI2 (red) antibodies. Yellow dotted region indicates
MSI2 positive cells. (d) Quantification of MSI1 and MSI2 expression in four patients
comparing primary pancreatic adenocarcinoma to the patient matched liver metastasis; 4
images analyzed per patient. (e) Quantification of the frequency of MSI1 and MSI2 positive
cells in four patients comparing primary pancreatic adenocarcinoma to the patient matched
liver metastasis; 4 images analyzed per patient. (f) MSI1 and (g) MSI2 expression in normal
pancreas (n=1), PanIN (n=9), and pancreatic adenocarcinoma samples (n=9). (h)
Quantification of MSI2 expression from a human tissue array comparing Grade 1 (welldifferentiated, n=9), Grade 2 (moderately differentiated, n=12), and Grade 3 (poorly
differentiated, n=16) adenocarcinoma relative to normal pancreas (n=14) and normal
adjacent pancreas (n=16). (i) MSI1 and (j) MSI2 expression in well-differentiated,
moderately differentiated, and poorly differentiated human pancreatic cancer cell lines (n=3
independent experiments). (k) Colony formation of well-differentiated, moderately
differentiated, and poorly differentiated human pancreatic cancer cell lines (n=3 independent
experiments). Data are represented as mean ± SEM. Total Magnification 200x A-B. Source
Data for all panels are available online.

Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 December 16.

Fox et al.

Page 15

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Extended Data Figure 2. Validation of Msi1 and Msi2 reporter mice

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

(a) FACs analysis of Msi2 reporter expression in hematopoietic stem cells, progenitors and
lineage-positive differentiated cells. (b) Representative image of Msi1 expression in FACs
sorted YFP+ neuronal cells; YFP (green), Msi1 (red), and DAPI (blue). (c) Representative
image of Msi2 expression in FACs sorted GFP+ hematopoietic cells; GFP (green), Msi1
(red), and DAPI (blue). (d-e) Msi-expression in keratin+ cells. (d) Msi1-YFP reporter
(green, white arrows) and keratin (red) staining was performed on tissue sections of REM1KPf/fC mice; (e) Msi2-GFP reporter (green, white arrows) and keratin (red) staining was
performed on tissue sections of REM2-KPf/fC mice. DAPI staining is shown in blue. Rare
cells (<5%) were found to be keratin-negative (possibly mesenchymal population). (f)
Immunofluorescence analysis of Msi1 and Msi2 expression overlap in isolated EpCAM+
KPf/fC cells (n=3, 1000 total cells analyzed from 3 independent experiments). Data are
represented as mean ± SEM. (g-h) Survival of Msi reporter-KPf/fC and WT-KPf/fC mice.
Survival curves of (g) Msi1YFP/+-KPf/fC (REM1-KPf/fC, n=21) or WT-KPf/fC (n=18) mice,
and (h) Msi2GFP/+-KPf/fC (REM2-KPf/fC, n=65) or WT-KPf/fC (n=54) mice. (i) Live image
of Msi2 reporter cells in REM2-KPf/fC tumor; VE-cadherin (magenta), Hoescht (blue), Msi
reporter (green). See also Figure 1c-d. Source Data for all panels are available online.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 December 16.

Fox et al.

Page 16

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Extended Data Figure 3. Analysis of stem cell traits in Msi1 and Msi2 reporter+ KPf/fC
populations

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

(a) ALDH expression in reporter positive tumor cells sorted from REM1-KPf/fC (top row)
and REM2-KPf/fC (bottom row) mice; ALDH1 (red), DAPI (blue) and GFP or YFP
(green). (b) Average ALDH expression in bulk or Msi1 and Msi2 reporter positive tumor
cells (n=3 each; 90 total cells analyzed from 3 REM1-KPf/fC and 150 total cells analyzed
from 3 REM2-KPf/fC). (c) Average Msi expression in ALDH+ cells from REM1-KPf/fC and
REM2-KPf/fC tumors (n=3 independent experiments for each genotype). (d-e)
Representative images of spheres formed from (d) Msi1 and (e) Msi2 reporter+ and reportertumor cells. See also Figure 1g-h. (f-g) In vivo tumor growth of Msi2 reporter+ or Msi
reporter- KPf/fC cells at (f) 500 or (g) 1000 cells (n=16). See also Figure 1i. (h) Survival of
mice orthotopically transplanted with 10,000 Msi2 reporter+ and reporter- KPf/fC tumor
cells (n=6). See also Figure 1j. Log-rank (Mantel-Cox) survival analysis (p<0.05). (i-j)
Reporter frequency in REM2-KPf/fC mice treated with vehicle or 200mg/kg Gemcitabine
(n=3 each). See also Figure 1m-n for high dose (500mg/kg) Gemcitabine. Data are
represented as mean ± SEM. *** P < 0.001 by Student's t-test or One-way ANOVA. (k)
Msi2 reporter-negative KPf/fC cells do not turn on Msi2 expression following in vitro
gemcitabine treatment, suggesting that Msi-reporter+ cells are differentially resistant to
Gemcitabine. Low passage Msi2 reporter KPf/fC cells loaded with DiI were live-imaged
continuously for up to 48 hours. Representative series of images from 10μM gemcitabine
treatment. Reporter-negative cells (red); GFP reporter-positive cells (green); tracking of
Msi2 reporter-negative cells (white arrows); tracking of Msi2 reporter-positive cells (yellow
arrows) (n=3 independent experiments). Source Data for all panels are available online.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 December 16.

Fox et al.

Page 17

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Extended Data Figure 4. Analysis of tumors from Msi null KPf/fC mice

Author Manuscript

(a) Msi2 (green) and Keratin (red) immunofluorescent staining was performed on tissue
sections from WT pancreas (Normal, n=3 samples), KRASG12D/+;Ptf1aCre/+ (PanIN, n=2
samples), and KRASG12D/+;p53f/f;Ptf1aCre/+ (PDAC, n=3 samples) mice with quantification
of Msi2 fluorescence in Keratin positive cells. (b) Average weights of WT-KPf/fC (n=13)
and Msi1−/−-KPf/fC tumors (n=9). See also Figure 2h-i. for tumor volume analysis (c) PAS
and Alcian Blue stained sections of pancreata isolated from WT-KPf/fC represent areas used
to identify the stages of PanINs (yellow boxes) and adenocarcinoma (red box). (d) Tumors
from 11-13 week old WT-KPf/fC (n=6), Msi1−/−-KPf/fC (n=3), and Msi2−/−-KPf/fC (n=3)
mice were stained and quantified for percent of Keratin+ tumor cells (red) expressing Ki67
(green); DAPI staining is shown in blue. (e) Average weights of WT-KPf/fC (n=5) and
Msi2−/−-KPf/fC tumors (n=7). See also Figure 2h-I for tumor volume analysis. Data are
represented as mean ± SEM. * P < 0.05, ** P < 0.01, *** P < 0.001 by Student's t-test or
One-way ANOVA. Source Data for all panels are available online.

Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 December 16.

Fox et al.

Page 18

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Extended Data Figure 5. Selection for escaper Msi expressing cells in Msi1, Ms2 single and
double knockout KPf/fC mice

(a-c) Immunohistochemical staining for (a) IgG control (n=4), or (b-c, red) Msi2 in 13 week
old WT-KPf/fC (n=4) and Msi2−/−KPf/fC (n=4) mice. (d) Immunohistochemical staining for
Msi2 (red) in 22 week old Msi2−/−KPf/fC mouse (n=1). (e-g) Immunohistochemical staining
for (e) IgG control, (f, red) Msi1 and (g, red) Msi2 in 15-week-old Msi1f/fMsi2−/− double
knockout KPf/fC mouse (n=1). (h) Survival curves of Msi1f/fMsi2−/−-KPf/fC (n=6) or WTKPf/fC tumors (n=35). Source Data for all panels are available online.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Extended Data Figure 6. Genome wide analysis of Msi controlled programs in pancreatic cancer

(a) Genome wide expression analysis of dissociated pancreatic tumors. Microarray analysis
was performed on RNA from 3 pairs of WT-KPf/fC and Msi1−/−-KPf/fC matched littermates.
Heat map shows differential expression of selected mRNAs identified as part of a stem cell
associated gene signature. (b) Concordantly (upper right and lower left quadrants) and
discordantly (upper left and lower right quadrants) regulated genes (red) in MSI1Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 December 16.

Fox et al.

Page 19

Author Manuscript

knockdown and MSI2-knockdown MIA PaCa2 cells. (c) Gene changes specific to MSI1knockdown (turquoise) or MSI2-knockdown (purple) in MIA PaCa2 cells. (d) Heat maps
indicating concordant, MSI1 specific, and MSI2 specific genes. (e) Venn diagram displaying
the intersection of probe sets that are differentially regulated in MSI1-knockdown, MSI2knockdown and double knockdown of MSI1 and MSI2 in MIA PaCa2 cells. Within
scatterplots, lighter color corresponds to a probability >0.5 and the darker color corresponds
to a probability >0.75. Source Data for all panels are available online.

Author Manuscript
Extended Data Figure 7. Molecular targets of Msi signaling

Author Manuscript

(a-b) Real-time PCR analysis of (a) Msi1 and (b) Msi2 expression in MIA PaCa-2 human
pancreatic cancer cells relative to normal pancreas (n=3 independent experiments). (c-d)
Analysis of shRNA knockdown efficiency in GFP+ sorted MIA PaCA-2 cells infected with
GFP tagged lentiviral shRNA against scrambled control sequences, (c) MSI1 or (d) MSI2
(n=3 independent experiments). Analysis of direct Msi targets (e) Msi consensus binding
sites in 3'UTR of Brd4, Hmga2 and c-Met transcripts. (f-g) Phospho-c-Met staining in WTKPf/fC and (f) Msi1−/−-KPf/fC, (g) Msi2−/−-KPf/fC mice; Keratin (magenta), phospho-c-Met
(green), DAPI (blue). See Figure 3b-c for quantified data. (h) Colony formation of MIA
PaCa-2 cells infected with empty vector or c-MET overexpression vector (3 independent
experiments) shows no impact of overexpressed c-Met on control MIA PaCa-2 (control for
c-Met mediated rescue of MSI knockdown in Figure 3f). Data are represented as mean ±
SEM. *** P < 0.001, **** P < 0.0001 by Student's t-test. Source Data for all panels are
available online.

Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 December 16.

Fox et al.

Page 20

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Extended Data Figure 8. Analysis of impaired pancreatic cancer growth with shMSI and MSI1ASOs

Author Manuscript

(a) Schematic for inhibiting MSI in primary patient-derived xenografts. (b-c) Frequency of
GFP+ patient tumor cells before and after transplantation. See also Figure 4a-b for
Patient#1, #2. ASO delivery in vivo (d, e) MSI1 expression following free uptake of (d)
control ASO or (e) MSI1-ASO2 in human pancreatic cancer line (n=3 per condition). See
also Figure 4c for impact of MSI1-ASO1. Target knockdown efficacy of lead optimized
ASO in KPf/fC stem cells (f) Malat1 expression in EpCAM+/ALDH+ and EpCAM+/ALDHcells following systemic delivery of lead-optimized control ASO or Malat1-ASO in
autocthonous KPf/fC model (n=3 independent experiments) See also Figure 4h for target
knockdown in unfractionated Epcam+ cells. Analysis of potential toxicity of MSI-ASO (g)
Cage weight of mice receiving daily treatment of MSI1 ASO-1 (50mg/kg) or vehicle by IP
injection; 4 mice per cage; cage weight was measured every 3 days. (h) Average body
weight of mice following 3 weeks of daily treatment with MSI1 ASO-1 (50mg/kg) or
vehicle by IP injection (n=4 mice/cohort). In vivo delivery of MSI1 ASOs (50mg/kg) had no
deleterious impact on body weight and maintained plasma chemistry markers (AST, ALT,
BUN, T.Bil) within 3x ULN (upper limit of normal). (i-j) Representative images of in situ
hybridization for Malat1 (purple) in pancreatic tumors isolated from KPf/fC mice treated by
daily IP injection with (i) control ASO (50mg/kg) or (j) Malat1-ASO (50mg/kg) for 14 days.
Source Data for all panels are available online.

Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 December 16.

Fox et al.

Page 21

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Extended Data Figure 9. Elevated expression of Msi in pancreatitis

Author Manuscript

Msi2 expression in a caerulein-induced mouse model of pancreatitis, and in human
pancreatitis. (a) Msi2 staining and (b) quantification of 10 images per group in pancreas
from PBS-treated (a, top panels, n=1) and caerulein-treated mice (a, bottom panels, n=1). (c)
Msi2 immunohistochemical staining in islets (purple circles) and acinar cells (blue squares)
in caerulein or PBS treated mice (n=1 for each group). (d) Immunofluorescent staining of
Msi2 (green) in DBA+ ductal cells (red) treated with PBS (left panels) or caerulein (right
panels) (n=1 for each group); DAPI is shown in blue. (e) MSI2 expression in human tissue
arrays from patients presenting with mild chronic inflammation (n=4) and chronic
pancreatitis (n=6) compared to normal pancreas (n=14). Data are represented as mean ±
SEM. **** P < 0.0001 by Student's t-test. Source Data for all panels are available online.

Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.

Acknowledgements

Author Manuscript

We are grateful to Inder Verma, Michael Karin, and David Cheresh for advice and comments on the manuscript,
Annette Luo for technical support, Gene Yeo for advice on Msi targeting, Keith Jenne for advice on MRI imaging,
Nisha Patel and Paul Mischel for reagents and experimental advice, and Eric O’Conner and Karl Marquez for cell
sorting. R.F is a recipient of a California Institute for Regenerative Medicine interdisciplinary stem cell training
program fellowship and also received support from T32 HL086344 and T32 CA009523, N.L and C.K received
support from T32 GM007752, B.Z. received support from T32 GM007184-33 (Duke University). F.P. is a recipient
of a California Institute for Regenerative Medicine interdisciplinary stem cell training program fellowship and the
UCSD Clinical and Translational Research Institute KL2 Award. T.I. is the recipient of a California Institute for
Regenerative Medicine interdisciplinary stem cell training program fellowship, J.B. is supported by a postdoctoral
fellowship from National Cancer Center, and T.R. was supported in part by the Leukemia and Lymphoma Society
Scholar Award. P.M.G and M.A.H are supported by a SPORE in Pancreatic Cancer, CA127297, a TMEN Tumor
Microenvironment Network U54, an NCI Cancer Center Support Grant P30 CA36727 and an EDRN U01
CA111294. A.M.L. was generously supported by donations from Ride The Point. This work was also supported by
CA155620 to A.M.L, DK63031, HL097767, DP1 CA174422 and R35 CA197699 to T.R, and CA186043 to A.M.L
and T.R.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 December 16.

Fox et al.

Page 22

Author Manuscript

References and Notes

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

1. Yachida S, Iacobuzio-Donahue CA. The pathology and genetics of metastatic pancreatic cancer.
Arch Pathol Lab Med. 2009; 133:413–422. doi:10.1043/1543-2165-133.3.413. [PubMed:
19260747]
2. Almoguera C, et al. Most human carcinomas of the exocrine pancreas contain mutant c-K-ras genes.
Cell. 1988; 53:549–554. [PubMed: 2453289]
3. Hahn SA, et al. DPC4, a candidate tumor suppressor gene at human chromosome 18q21.1. Science.
1996; 271:350–353. [PubMed: 8553070]
4. Redston MS, et al. p53 mutations in pancreatic carcinoma and evidence of common involvement of
homocopolymer tracts in DNA microdeletions. Cancer Res. 1994; 54:3025–3033. [PubMed:
8187092]
5. Nakamura M, Okano H, Blendy JA, Montell C. Musashi, a neural RNA-binding protein required for
Drosophila adult external sensory organ development. Neuron. 1994; 13:67–81. [PubMed:
8043282]
6. Okano H, Imai T, Okabe M. Musashi: a translational regulator of cell fate. J Cell Sci. 2002;
115:1355–1359. [PubMed: 11896183]
7. Sakakibara S, et al. RNA-binding protein Musashi family: roles for CNS stem cells and a
subpopulation of ependymal cells revealed by targeted disruption and antisense ablation. Proc Natl
Acad Sci U S A. 2002; 99:15194–15199. doi:10.1073/pnas.232087499. [PubMed: 12407178]
8. Hope KJ, et al. An RNAi screen identifies Msi2 and Prox1 as having opposite roles in the regulation
of hematopoietic stem cell activity. Cell Stem Cell. 2010; 7:101–113. doi:10.1016/j.stem.
2010.06.007. [PubMed: 20621054]
9. Ito T, et al. Regulation of myeloid leukaemia by the cell-fate determinant Musashi. Nature. 2010;
466:765–768. doi:10.1038/nature09171. [PubMed: 20639863]
10. Kharas MG, et al. Musashi-2 regulates normal hematopoiesis and promotes aggressive myeloid
leukemia. Nat Med. 2010; 16:903–908. doi:10.1038/nm.2187. [PubMed: 20616797]
11. Kwon HY, et al. Tetraspanin 3 Is Required for the Development and Propagation of Acute
Myelogenous Leukemia. Cell Stem Cell. 2015; 17:152–164. doi:10.1016/j.stem.2015.06.006.
[PubMed: 26212080]
12. de Andres-Aguayo L, et al. Musashi 2 is a regulator of the HSC compartment identified by a
retroviral insertion screen and knockout mice. Blood. 2011; 118:554–564. doi:10.1182/
blood-2010-12-322081. [PubMed: 21613258]
13. Hingorani SR, et al. Preinvasive and invasive ductal pancreatic cancer and its early detection in the
mouse. Cancer Cell. 2003; 4:437–450. [PubMed: 14706336]
14. Kawaguchi Y, et al. The role of the transcriptional regulator Ptf1a in converting intestinal to
pancreatic progenitors. Nat Genet. 2002; 32:128–134. doi:10.1038/ng959. [PubMed: 12185368]
15. Tuveson DA, et al. Endogenous oncogenic K-ras(G12D) stimulates proliferation and widespread
neoplastic and developmental defects. Cancer Cell. 2004; 5:375–387. [PubMed: 15093544]
16. Reya T, Morrison SJ, Clarke MF, Weissman IL. Stem cells, cancer, and cancer stem cells. Nature.
2001; 414:105–111. doi:10.1038/35102167. [PubMed: 11689955]
17. Wang JC, Dick JE. Cancer stem cells: lessons from leukemia. Trends Cell Biol. 2005; 15:494–501.
doi:10.1016/j.tcb.2005.07.004. [PubMed: 16084092]
18. Hermann PC, et al. Distinct populations of cancer stem cells determine tumor growth and
metastatic activity in human pancreatic cancer. Cell Stem Cell. 2007; 1:313–323. doi:10.1016/
j.stem.2007.06.002. [PubMed: 18371365]
19. Kim MP, et al. ALDH activity selectively defines an enhanced tumor-initiating cell population
relative to CD133 expression in human pancreatic adenocarcinoma. PLoS One. 2011; 6:e20636.
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0020636. [PubMed: 21695188]
20. Dosch JS, Ziemke EK, Shettigar A, Rehemtulla A, Sebolt-Leopold JS. Cancer stem cell marker
phenotypes are reversible and functionally homogeneous in a preclinical model of pancreatic
cancer. Cancer Res. 2015; 75:4582–4592. doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-2793. [PubMed:
26359451]

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 December 16.

Fox et al.

Page 23

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

21. Rhim AD, et al. EMT and dissemination precede pancreatic tumor formation. Cell. 2012; 148:349–
361. doi:10.1016/j.cell.2011.11.025. [PubMed: 22265420]
22. Li C, et al. c-Met is a marker of pancreatic cancer stem cells and therapeutic target.
Gastroenterology. 2011; 141:2218–2227. e2215. doi:10.1053/j.gastro.2011.08.009. [PubMed:
21864475]
23. Belkina AC, Denis GV. BET domain co-regulators in obesity, inflammation and cancer. Nat Rev
Cancer. 2012; 12:465–477. doi:10.1038/nrc3256. [PubMed: 22722403]
24. Cleynen I, Van de Ven WJ. The HMGA proteins: a myriad of functions (Review). Int J Oncol.
2008; 32:289–305. [PubMed: 18202751]
25. Hung G, et al. Characterization of target mRNA reduction through in situ RNA hybridization in
multiple organ systems following systemic antisense treatment in animals. Nucleic Acid Ther.
2013; 23:369–378. doi:10.1089/nat.2013.0443. [PubMed: 24161045]
26. Seth PP, et al. Short antisense oligonucleotides with novel 2′-4′ conformationaly restricted
nucleoside analogues show improved potency without increased toxicity in animals. J Med Chem.
2009; 52:10–13. doi:10.1021/jm801294h. [PubMed: 19086780]
27. Li N, Li Q, Tian XQ, Qian HY, Yang YJ. Mipomersen is a promising therapy in the management of
hypercholesterolemia: a meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Am J Cardiovasc Drugs.
2014; 14:367–376. doi:10.1007/s40256-014-0077-0. [PubMed: 25027352]
28. Hong D, et al. AZD9150, a next-generation antisense oligonucleotide inhibitor of STAT3 with
early evidence of clinical activity in lymphoma and lung cancer. Sci Transl Med. 2015;
7:314ra185. doi:10.1126/scitranslmed.aac5272.
29. Lee RG, Crosby J, Baker BF, Graham MJ, Crooke RM. Antisense technology: an emerging
platform for cardiovascular disease therapeutics. J Cardiovasc Transl Res. 2013; 6:969–980. doi:
10.1007/s12265-013-9495-7. [PubMed: 23856914]
30. Saad F, et al. Randomized phase II trial of Custirsen (OGX-011) in combination with docetaxel or
mitoxantrone as second-line therapy in patients with metastatic castrate-resistant prostate cancer
progressing after first-line docetaxel: CUOG trial P-06c. Clin Cancer Res. 2011; 17:5765–5773.
doi:10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-11-0859. [PubMed: 21788353]
31. Domen J, Cheshier SH, Weissman IL. The role of apoptosis in the regulation of hematopoietic
stem cells: Overexpression of Bcl-2 increases both their number and repopulation potential. J Exp
Med. 2000; 191:253–264. [PubMed: 10637270]
32. Rovira M, et al. Isolation and characterization of centroacinar/terminal ductal progenitor cells in
adult mouse pancreas. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010; 107:75–80. doi:10.1073/pnas.
0912589107. [PubMed: 20018761]
33. Marino S, Vooijs M, van Der Gulden H, Jonkers J, Berns A. Induction of medulloblastomas in p53null mutant mice by somatic inactivation of Rb in the external granular layer cells of the
cerebellum. Genes Dev. 2000; 14:994–1004. [PubMed: 10783170]
34. Sasik R, Woelk CH, Corbeil J. Microarray truths and consequences. J Mol Endocrinol. 2004; 33:1–
9. [PubMed: 15291738]
35. Benjamini Y, Hochberg Y. Controlling the False Discovery Rate - a Practical and Powerful
Approach to Multiple Testing. J Roy Stat Soc B Met. 1995; 57:289–300.
36. Bardeesy N, et al. Both p16(Ink4a) and the p19(Arf)-p53 pathway constrain progression of
pancreatic adenocarcinoma in the mouse. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2006; 103:5947–5952. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0601273103. [PubMed: 16585505]
37. Tusher VG, Tibshirani R, Chu G. Significance analysis of microarrays applied to the ionizing
radiation response. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2001; 98:5116–5121. doi:10.1073/pnas.091062498.
[PubMed: 11309499]
38. Anders S, Huber W. Differential expression analysis for sequence count data. Genome Biol. 2010;
11:R106. doi:10.1186/gb-2010-11-10-r106. [PubMed: 20979621]
39. Ritchie ME, et al. limma powers differential expression analyses for RNA-sequencing and
microarray studies. Nucleic Acids Res. 2015; 43:e47. doi:10.1093/nar/gkv007. [PubMed:
25605792]
40. Efron B. Microarrays, empirical Bayes and the two-groups model. Stat Sci. 2008; 23:1–22. doi:
10.1214/07-Sts236.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 December 16.

Fox et al.

Page 24

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

41. Lonnstedt I, Speed T. Replicated microarray data. Stat Sinica. 2002; 12:31–46.
42. Mootha VK, et al. PGC-1alpha-responsive genes involved in oxidative phosphorylation are
coordinately downregulated in human diabetes. Nat Genet. 2003; 34:267–273. doi:10.1038/
ng1180. [PubMed: 12808457]
43. Zimdahl B, et al. Lis1 regulates asymmetric division in hematopoietic stem cells and in leukemia.
Nat Genet. 2014; 46:245–252. doi:10.1038/ng.2889. [PubMed: 24487275]
44. Licatalosi DD, et al. HITS-CLIP yields genome-wide insights into brain alternative RNA
processing. Nature. 2008; 456:464–469. doi:10.1038/nature07488. [PubMed: 18978773]
45. Ohyama T, et al. Structure of Musashi1 in a complex with target RNA: the role of aromatic
stacking interactions. Nucleic Acids Res. 2012; 40:3218–3231. doi:10.1093/nar/gkr1139.
[PubMed: 22140116]
46. Carroll JB, et al. Potent and selective antisense oligonucleotides targeting single-nucleotide
polymorphisms in the Huntington disease gene / allele-specific silencing of mutant huntingtin.
Mol Ther. 2011; 19:2178–2185. doi:10.1038/mt.2011.201. [PubMed: 21971427]
47. Samuel VT, et al. Targeting foxo1 in mice using antisense oligonucleotide improves hepatic and
peripheral insulin action. Diabetes. 2006; 55:2042–2050. doi:10.2337/db05-0705. [PubMed:
16804074]

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 December 16.

Fox et al.

Page 25

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Figure 1. Msi reporter positive pancreatic cancer cells are enriched for tumor initiating capacity

Author Manuscript

(a-b) Design of Msi reporter constructs (REM1, Msi1eYFP/+; REM2, Msi2eGFP/+). (c-d) Live
images of Msi reporter cells in (c) REM1-KPf/fC and (d) REM2-KPf/fC tumors; VEcadherin (magenta), Hoechst (blue), Msi reporter (green). (e-f) Msi1 and Msi2 reporter
expression in dissociated tumors (n=6). (g-h) Sphere-forming ability of Msi-reporter+ and
reporter- cells (g, n=8; h, n=6). (i) In vivo growth of Msi2 reporter+ tumor cells (n=8). (j)
Survival of mice orthotopically transplanted with Msi2 reporter+ and reporter- KPf/fC tumor
cells (n=6). Log-rank (Mantel-Cox) survival analysis (p<0.05). (k) Reporter frequency in
primary tumors (n=3), and CTCs from ascites (n=3) or peripheral blood (n=4). (l) Average
frequency of tumor-spheres from Msi2 reporter+ and reporter- CTCs (n=3 technical
replicates). (m-n) Reporter frequency in REM2-KPf/fC mice treated with vehicle or
500mg/kg Gemcitabine (n=6). Data are represented as mean ± SEM. * P < 0.05, ** P <
0.01, *** P < 0.001, **** P < 0.0001 by Student's t-test or One-way ANOVA. Source Data
for all panels are available online.

Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 December 16.

Fox et al.

Page 26

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Figure 2. Loss of Msi1 or Msi2 impairs tumor initiation and progression in a genetic mouse
model of pancreatic cancer

Author Manuscript

(a) Coronal and sagittal MRI images of normal, WT-KPf/fC and Msi1−/−-KPf/fC mice with
3-dimensional volume rendering of tumor mass (red). (b) Average volumes of isolated WTKPf/fC (n=13) and Msi1−/−-KPf/fC tumors (n=9). (c-d) Histology and (e-f) quantification of
PanIN and/or adenocarcinoma areas in WT-KPf/fC and Msi1−/−-KPf/fC tumors. (g) Survival
of mice orthotopically grafted with Msi1−/−-KPf/fC or WTKPf/fC tumors (n=16). Analysis of
Msi2−/−-KPf/fC tumors (h) by MRI and (i) after isolation, WT-KPf/fC (n=5), Msi2−/−-KPf/fC
(n=7). (j-m) Histology of WT-KPf/fC and Msi2−/−-KPf/fC pancreatic tumors (40x
magnification); (k) Adenocarcinoma, liver invasion (green arrows), (l) adenocarcinoma
(yellow arrows), (m) PanINs (blue arrows). (n-o) quantification of PanIN and/or
adenocarcinoma areas in WT-KPf/fC and Msi2−/−-KPf/fC tumors (n=6). (p) Survival of
autochthonous Msi2−/−-KPf/fC (n=19) or WT-KPf/fC (n=32) mice. Log-rank (Mantel-Cox)
survival analysis (p<0.0001). Data represented as mean ± SEM. ** P < 0.01, *** P < 0.001
by Student's t-test. Source Data for all panels are available online.

Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 December 16.

Fox et al.

Page 27

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Figure 3. Msi controls expression of key oncogenic and epigenetic signals

Author Manuscript

(a) Msi RIP-PCR for indicated transcripts. (b-c) Frequency of phospho-c-Met+ cells in WTKPf/fC, Msi1−/−-KPf/fC, and Msi2−/−-KPf/fC mice, (b, n=8; c, n=6). (d) Schematic of c-MET
exons and 3'UTR. CLIP tags (red triangles) indicate MSI1 binding in 3'UTR. (e) c-MET
3'UTR luciferase reporter activity in the presence or absence of MSI1 or MSI2 (n=3
independent experiments). (f) Colony formation of MSI1 or MSI2 knockdown cells with or
without c-MET (n=4 independent experiments). (g-h) FACs analysis of tumors from
Gemcitabine-treated REM2-KPf/fC mice, in the presence or absence of Crizotinib and
iBet762; Vehicle (n=7), Gemcitabine (n=3), Gemcitabine+iBet762 (n=3), Gemcitabine
+Crizotinib (n=3). Data represented as mean ± SEM. * P < 0.05, ** P < 0.01, *** P < 0.001
by Student's t-test or One-way ANOVA. ns, not significant. Source Data for all panels are
available online.

Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 December 16.

Fox et al.

Page 28

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Figure 4. Targeting MSI inhibits pancreatic cancer growth in patient-derived xenografts

Author Manuscript

(a-b) Frequency of GFP+ tumor cells before and after transplantation. (c) MSI1 expression
following MSI1-ASO free uptake in human pancreatic cancer line (n=3 independent
experiments/dose). (d) Colony formation of control or MSI1-ASO treated human pancreatic
cancer line (n=3 independent experiments). (e) In vivo growth of human cell line-derived
tumors in control or MSI1-ASO treated mice (n=10). (f) Relative tumor volume and (g) rate
of growth of KPf/fC-derived tumors in control or MSI1-ASO treated mice (n=8). (h) Malat1
expression in autocthonous KPf/fC tumors following systemic delivery of lead-optimized
control or Malat1-ASO (n=6). Data represented as mean ± SEM. * P < 0.05, ** P < 0.01,
*** P < 0.001 by One-way ANOVA. ns, not significant. Source Data for all panels are
available online.

Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 December 16.

