Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No. 23

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Epithelial to mesenchymal transition is associated with rapamycin
resistance
Ashley M. Holder1,2, Argun Akcakanat3, Farrell Adkins4, Kurt Evans3,
Huiqin Chen5, Caimiao Wei5, Denai R. Milton5, Yisheng Li5, Kim-Anh Do5, Filip Janku3,
Funda Meric-Bernstam1,3
1

Department of Surgical Oncology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA

2

Department of Surgery, Washington University in St. Louis, St. Louis, MO, USA

3

Department of Investigational Cancer Therapeutics, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA

4

Department of Colorectal Surgery, Cleveland Clinic Florida, Weston, FL, USA

5

Department of Biostatistics, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA

Correspondence to:
Funda Meric-Bernstam, e-mail: fmeric@mdanderson.org
Keywords: epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT), rapamycin, trametinib, biomarker, E-cadherin
Received: September 02, 2014	Accepted: March 25, 2015	Published: April 13, 2015

ABSTRACT
Rapamycin analogues have antitumor efficacy in several tumor types, however
few patients demonstrate tumor regression. Thus, there is a pressing need for markers
of intrinsic response/resistance and rational combination therapies. We hypothesized
that epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) confers rapamycin resistance. We
found that the epithelial marker E-cadherin protein is higher in rapamycin sensitive
(RS) cells and mesenchymal breast cancer cell lines selected by transcriptional EMT
signatures are less sensitive to rapamycin. MCF7 cells, transfected with constitutively
active mutant Snail, had increased rapamycin resistance (RR) compared to cells
transfected with wild-type Snail. Conversely, we transfected two RR mesenchymal
cell lines—ACHN and MDA-MB-231—with miR-200b/c or ZEB1 siRNA to promote
mesenchymal-to-epithelial transition. This induced E-cadherin expression in both
cell lines, and ACHN demonstrated a significant increase in RS. Treatment of ACHN
and MDA-MB-231 with trametinib modulated EMT in ACHN cells in vitro. Treatment
of MDA-MB-231 and ACHN xenografts with trametinib in combination with rapamycin
resulted in significant growth inhibition in both but without an apparent effect on EMT.
Future studies are needed to determine whether EMT status is predictive of sensitivity
to rapalogs and to determine whether combination therapy with EMT modulating
agents can enhance antitumor effects of PI3K/mTOR inhibitors.

astrocytoma associated with tuberous sclerosis, and the
treatment of hormone-receptor positive breast cancer (in
combination with exemestane). However, rapalogs have
shown objective responses in only a minority of patients.
Mechanisms of intrinsic sensitivity and resistance to
rapalogs remain largely unknown.
The epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT) is
defined by the loss of intracellular links along with the gain
of migratory and invasive abilities [3]. Plasticity exists within
this process, allowing cells to transition from epithelial to
mesenchymal and then resume an epithelial phenotype [4].
Snail and ZEB transcription factors are known EMT drivers,
through inducing the crucial step of loss of cell polarity; their

INTRODUCTION
The PI3K/mTOR pathway performs essential
functions for maintaining the malignant phenotype
including controlling cell growth, metabolism, and
autophagy [1, 2]. Rapamycin and its analogs are allosteric
mTOR inhibitors that bind FKBP12 and mTOR, and
predominantly inhibit mTORC1. The rapamycin
analog temsirolimus is approved by the Food and Drug
Administration for the treatment of advanced renal cell
carcinoma and the rapamycin analog everolimus is FDAapproved for the treatment of pancreatic neuroendocrine
tumors, renal cell carcinoma, sub-ependymal giant cell
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

19500

Oncotarget

expression correlates with time to recurrence and survival
in patients with breast carcinoma [3, 5]. Cell lines without
E-cadherin expression or with mutations in E-cadherin
have increased tumorigenicity and metastasis in mice
[6–9]. Conversely, miR-200 has been shown to decrease
the expression of ZEB transcription factors to maintain the
epithelial phenotype [3, 10–14]. Forced expression of miR200c restores the chemotherapeutic sensitivity of breast
cancer cells [15], while loss of miR-200 correlates with
increased vimentin expression and decreased E-cadherin
expression in breast cancer cells [11, 13, 14].
Type 3 EMT is involved in cancer progression
and metastasis, and thus it is a potential mechanism of
attaining the malignant phenotype [4]. This phenotype is
achieved through other common cancer signaling networks
including MAPK, PI3K, and Smad [3]. MEK inhibitors,
which target the MAPK pathway, have previously been
shown to decrease vimentin expression and invasion in the
triple negative breast cancer cell line MDA-MB-231 [16].
Trametinib (GSK1120212) is an orally bioavailable
selective allosteric MEK1/MEK2 inhibitor that has
been approved by the Food and Drug Administration
(FDA) for treatment of BRAF V600 mutant melanoma
in combination with dabrafenib and that is effective for
inhibiting growth in triple negative breast cancer cell lines
in vitro [17]. Histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors, a
class of antitumor agents, reverse EMT. Vorinostat, an
FDA approved drug for the treatment of cutaneous T-cell
lymphoma, is an inhibitor in this group that induces
E-cadherin and inhibits vimentin expression [18].
Despite the cross-talk between EMT programming
and the mTOR pathway, the relationship between
rapamycin sensitivity in immortalized cancer cells lines
and markers of EMT has not been previously investigated.
We performed a functional proteomic screen with reverse
phase protein array (RPPA) to determine biomarkers
associated with sensitivity and resistance to rapamycin,
and we found and association with EMT and rapamycin
resistance. We hypothesized that the mesenchymal status
of cancer cells imparts resistance to rapamycin. Thus,
we proposed to modulate EMT in immortalized cancer
cell lines and determine whether alterations in EMT
biomarkers correlated with sensitivity to rapamycin both
in vitro and in mouse xenografts.

Reverse phase protein arrays were used to compare the
functional proteomics profiles. We assessed whether EMT
markers are differentially expressed in rapamycin sensitive
(RS) compared to resistant (RR) immortalized cell lines.
RS cell lines demonstrated increased expression of
epithelial marker E-cadherin while RR cell lines showed
increased expression of mesenchymal marker Smad3
(Figure 1A). To validate these findings, western blotting
for markers of EMT was performed in selected RR and RS
cell lines. E-cadherin expression differentiated cell lines
sensitive to rapamycin from those resistant to rapamycin,
which expressed vimentin (Figure 1B). Thus, RS cell lines
tended to display epithelial markers while RR cell lines
exhibited mesenchymal markers.
Transcriptional signatures of EMT are being
pursued as a predictor of response/sensitivity to selected
therapies. We sought to determine whether transcriptional
signature of EMT is associated with rapamycin sensitivity.
Daemen et al. recently studied a panel of breast cancer
cell lines and shared their gene expression profiles as well
as sensitivity to experimental or approved therapeutic
agents including rapamycin, as well a rapalogs everolimus
and temsirolimus [20]. We classified these breast cancer
cell lines as epithelial or mesenchymal based on their
transcriptional profiles using genes within the EMT
signature described by Byers et al. as a classifier [21].
Based on 2-way hierarchical clustering, 11 cell lines
were clustered into the mesenchymal group (red bar) and
40 were clustered into the epithelial (green bar) group
(Figure 2A). The ranks and the median of Log10GI50 of
rapamycin were significantly lower in the epithelial group
than the mesenchymal group (  p = 0.004, Figure 2B).
The median Log10GI50 of everolimus was lower in the
epithelial group than the mesenchymal group ( p = 0.096).
The median Log10GI50 of temsirolimus was lower in
the epithelial group than the mesenchymal group, but
this difference did not achieve statistical significance.
We also classified the breast cancer cell lines with 261
probe sets mapping to the 125 gene symbols of a EMT
signature described Gröger et al. [22]. Based on 2-way
hierarchical clustering, the classification of cell lines
with this signature was very similar with 10 cell lines
clustered as mesenchymal and 41 clustered as epithelial;
HCC1569 was classified into the mesenchymal group by
Byers’ signature but epithelial group by Gröger’s signature
(Supplementary Figure 1). The median Log10GI50 of
rapamycin was significantly lower in the epithelial group
than that in the mesenchymal group with this classification
as well (  p = 0.004; Supplementary Figure 2).

RESULTS
Rapamycin sensitivity correlates with EMT
status in vitro
To determine sensitivity to rapamycin in
immortalized cancer cell lines, sulforhodamine B (SRB)
assay was performed to classify cell lines as resistant or
sensitive. Twelve cell lines with an IC50 of rapamycin
greater than 100 nM were classified as resistant
and 31 with IC50s less than 100 nM as sensitive [19].
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Induction of EMT alters Erk phosphorylation
and decreases rapamycin sensitivity
To explore this correlation between rapamycin
sensitivity and EMT further, we sought to modulate
EMT and then study the effect on rapamycin sensitivity
19501

Oncotarget

Figure 1: Rapamycin sensitive cell lines have increased E-cadherin expression compared to rapamycin resistant cell
lines. A. Forty three cell lines, with known rapamycin IC50 values, were treated with vehicle or increasing doses of rapamycin for 2,

24 or 72 hours in triplicates. Specific EMT markers were differentially expressed in RS compared to RR immortalized cell lines by RPPA.
B. Western blotting assessed baseline expression of EMT markers in a panel of RS and RR cell lines.

and mTOR signaling. To modulate EMT status in a
stable manner, the epithelial breast carcinoma cell line,
MCF7, had previously been transfected with a wild-type
Snail (Snail-WT), and two mutant Snails (Snail-2SA and
Snail-6SA) [23]. Snail-2SA is resistant to degradation by
GSK-3β. Snail-6SA variant is also stable and a potent
inducer of EMT in MCF7 cells. Western blotting for
Snail, E-cadherin, and vimentin expression confirmed
previous findings that MCF7 transfected with Snail-6SA
mutant resulted in loss of E-cadherin expression and
gain of vimentin expression (Figure 3A). The expression
and phosphorylation of MAPK and Akt/mTOR pathway
markers showed differences between MCF7 Snail-WT
and Snail-6SA variants (Figure 3B). In Snail-6SA,

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

rapamycin did not completely inhibit S6 phosphorylation.
There was an increase in Akt phosphorylation but a
decrease in total Akt expression. Total MEK expression
was increased, which was accompanied by an increase
in phospho-MEK (p-MEK). Contrary to this finding, Erk
phosphorylation was decreased. In both Snail-WT and
-6SA variants, rapamycin increased Erk phosphorylation,
more significantly in Snail-6SA. To test the hypothesis
that induction of EMT decreases sensitivity to rapamycin,
MCF7 Snail-WT and MCF7 Snail-6SA were treated
with varied doses of rapamycin. SRB assay exhibited
statistically significant decrease in growth inhibition in
MCF7 Snail-6SA at doses of rapamycin 0.01–1000 nM
compared to MCF7 Snail-WT (Figure 3C). Induction of

19502

Oncotarget

Figure 2: Sensitivity to rapamycin and analogs in epithelial and mesenchymal cell lines. A. Breast cancer cell lines were
grouped into epithelial (green bar) and mesenchymal (red bar) based on the Byers’ EMT signature. Each row represents a gene, and
each column a cell line. B. Wilcoxon rank sum test was performed to compare the Log10GI50 values between epithelial and mesenchymal
cell lines.

EMT in MCF7 resulted in increased baseline Erk
phosphorylation, which was not regulated by rapamycin,
and decreased sensitivity to rapamycin at higher doses,
supporting our hypothesis that acquisition of mesenchymal
markers and loss of epithelial markers imparts resistance
to rapamycin.

program through transfection of miR-200b/c mimics and
siRNA knockdown of ZEB1. We selected to attempt EMT
modulation in two RR cell lines: the triple-negative breast
carcinoma cell line, MDA-MB-231, and the renal cell
carcinoma cell line, ACHN.
Both cell lines demonstrated increased E-cadherin
expression with miR-200b/c transfection (Figure 4A).
Despite increased E-cadherin expression in MDAMB-231, there was no change in rapamycin sensitivity
by SRB assay (data not shown). However, ACHN had
increased sensitivity to rapamycin compared to control
at all doses tested following miR-200b/c transfection,
transforming from a RR to a RS cell line (Figure 4B).

Modulation of EMT Increases Rapamycin
Sensitivity in ACHN In Vitro
To test whether modulation of EMT to a more
epithelial phenotype could increase rapamycin sensitivity
in RR mesenchymal cell lines, we targeted the EMT
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

19503

Oncotarget

Figure 3: MCF7 Snail-6SA has increased Erk phosphorylation and decreased sensitivity to higher doses of rapamycin.

A. Snail, E-cadherin and vimentin expression was assessed in stably transfected MCF7 snail wild-type (Sn-WT) and MCF7 snail mutant
(Sn-2SA and Sn-6SA) cell lines by western blotting. B. MCF7 snail wild-type (Snail-WT) and mutant (Snail-6SA) cell lines were treated
with DMSO 0.1% or rapamycin 100 nM daily for 3 days. EMT, MAPK and mTOR pathway markers were assessed by western blotting.
C. Rapamycin sensitivity in MCF7 snail wild-type (Snail-WT) or mutant (Snail-6SA) cell lines were assessed by SRB assay following
96-hour treatment with increasing doses of rapamycin. **p < 0.01. Experiments were performed three times in triplicates and a representative
set of results is displayed.

Similarly, siRNA against ZEB1 was successful
in abolishing ZEB1 expression in both ACHN and
MDA-MB-231 compared to non-targeting siRNA, with
concurrent increased expression of E-cadherin in both cell
lines (Figure 4C). Similar to the miR-200b/c transfection,
ZEB1 siRNA knockdown of MDA-MB-231 did not
result in increased sensitivity to rapamycin compared to
control (data not shown). However, ACHN demonstrated
increased sensitivity to rapamycin 0.1–1000 nM following
ZEB1 siRNA knockdown—once again converting from a
RR to a RS cell line (Figure 4D).
Therefore, miR-200b/c transfection and ZEB1
siRNA knockdown modulated EMT in both ACHN and
MDA-MB-231 but only increased the sensitivity of ACHN
to rapamycin.

lines ACHN and MDA-MB-231. Treatment of these cell
lines with vorinostat indeed increased E-cadherin levels
(Figure 5A), demonstrating reversion of EMT. Increasing
vorinostat dose did not increase E-cadherin expression
(Supplementary Figure 3). The combination of rapamycin
and vorinostat was strongly synergistic in ACHN at all
concentrations and synergistic in MDA-MB-231 at lower
concentrations (Figure 5B). To determine if vorinostat
increased sensitivity to rapamycin in vivo, vorinostat
alone or in combination with rapamycin was administered
to MDA-MB-231 xenograft bearing mice for 38 days.
Although the tumor volume in combination treatment group
was slightly smaller than the single drug groups, there was
no significant difference among the groups (Figure 5C).
Notably, when expression of E-cadherin in MDA-MB-231
xenografts was analyzed by RPPA, there was no significant
increase in E-Cadherin with treatment. To the contrary,
there was a statistically significant decrease in E-Cadherin
with vorinostat treatment (  p = 0.0003); therefore vorinostat
appeared to be unable to reverse EMT in vivo in this model.
In addition, vorinostat alone or in combination with
two different doses of rapamycin was administered to

HDAC inhibition modulates EMT and
rapamycin sensitivity in vitro
As histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors, have
been reported to reverse EMT [18, 24], we determined
if vorinostat reversed EMT in rapamycin resistant cell
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

19504

Oncotarget

Figure 4: miR-200b/c transfection and ZEB1 siRNA knockdown modulated EMT in ACHN and MDA-MB-231 but
increased sensitivity to rapamycin only in ACHN. A. ACHN and MDA-MB-231 were transfected with miR-200b/c (+) and

72 hours later cells were harvested. EMT markers were assessed by western blotting. B. ACHN cell line was transfected with miR-200b/c
(+) and 96 hours later growth inhibition was assessed by SRB assay following treatment with increasing doses of rapamycin. **p < 0.01;
***p < 0.001; ****p < 0.0001. Experiments were performed three times in triplicates and a representative set of results is displayed.
C. ACHN and MDA-MB-231 were transfected with ZEB1 siRNA and 72 hours later cells were harvested. EMT markers were assessed by
western blotting. D. Following ZEB1 siRNA knockdown, ACHN cells were treated with increasing doses of rapamycin for 96 hours. Cell
growth inhibition was assessed by SRB assay. ***p < 0.001; ****p < 0.0001. Experiments were performed three times in triplicates and a
representative set of results is displayed.

ACHN bearing mice for 19 days. Compared to control,
mean tumor volume decreased only in rapamycin 4 mg/kg
group and was smaller in combination groups. There was
no statistically significant difference among groups.

In contrast, in ACHN cells, trametinib demonstrated
an increase in E-cadherin levels, demonstrating some
reversion of EMT. Also of interest is that in ACHN
cells, rapamycin only partially abrogated ribosomal
S6 phosphorylation. Although trametinib alone did not
modulate ribosomal S6 phosphorylation, trametinib added
to rapamycin completely inhibited S6 phosphorylation.
To determine if MEK inhibition increases sensitivity
to rapamycin in vivo, effects of the combination of
trametinib and rapamycin compared to single agent
therapy was tested. Trametinib alone or in combination
with rapamycin for 14 days caused tumor regression
in MDA-MB-231 xenografts (Figure 6B), but the
combination with rapamycin did not cause greater tumor
regression than trametinib alone. Percent change in tumor
volume from initiation of treatment (Day 0) was compared

MEK inhibition modulates EMT in vitro and
the combination of MEK and mTOR inhibition
enhances antitumor efficacy in ACHN models
in vivo
Previous studies have reported that MEK inhibition
modulates EMT [16]. We thus tested whether the MEK
inhibitor trametinib modulates EMT in ACHN and MDAMB-231 cell lines. Trametinib inhibited MEK signaling
without a significant decrease in vimentin or increase
in E-cadherin in MDA-MB-231 cells (Figure 6A).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

19505

Oncotarget

Figure 5: Vorinostat modulated EMT and showed synergistic effect with rapamycin in vitro but not in vivo. A. ACHN
and MDA-MB-231 cells were treated with vorinostat 5 μM for 24, 48 or 72 hours. Western blotting was conducted to assess EMT markers
E-cadherin and vimentin. B. ACHN and MDA-MB-231 cell lines were treated with rapamycin and vorinostat for 96 hours. Rapamycin and
vorinostat combination drug ratios were 20:1, 40:1, and 80:1. The effect on cell growth was assessed by SRB assay, and combination index
(CI) values were calculated. The graph represents the CI of rapamycin and vorinostat combination at ED50, ED75, and ED90. Range of CI:
<0.9, synergism; 0.9–1.1, nearly additive; >1.1, antagonism. C. ACHN xenografts were treated with vehicle, rapamycin 1 mg/kg (Rapa 1),
rapamycin 4 mg/kg (Rapa 4), vorinostat 80 mg/kg, combination rapamycin 1 mg/kg and vorinostat 80 mg/kg (Vori/Rapa 1) or rapamycin
4 mg/kg and vorinostat 80 mg/kg (Vori/Rapa 4) for 19 days. MDA-MB-231 xenografts were treated with vehicle, rapamycin 1 mg/kg,
vorinostat 80 mg/kg, or a combination of rapamycin and vorinostat (Rapa/Vori) at the same doses for 38 days.

to that on the last day of treatment (Day 14). Percent
change in tumor volume for all treatment groups were
significantly less than control, but there was no difference
in percent change in tumor volume between the mice
treated with trametinib alone or with the combination of
trametinib and rapamycin (Figure 6B). Notably western
blotting for EMT markers did not demonstrate modulation
of EMT with trametinib treatment despite inhibition of
MAPK signaling (data not shown). Thus, trametinib
caused tumor regression in MDA-MB-231 xenografts
but did markedly modulate EMT nor did it further show
antitumor efficacy in combination with rapamycin.
Given the differential response to EMT modulation
with trametinib in vitro and the increased sensitivity to
rapamycin observed with miR-200 transfection and ZEB1
knockdown, we next sought to evaluate the effect of
trametinib on EMT markers and rapamycin sensitivity in an
ACHN xenograft model. Similar to our results for MDAMB-231 xenografts, trametinib caused tumor regression
alone or in combination with rapamycin following 22-day
treatment. However, the ACHN xenografts demonstrated
greater tumor regression with trametinib in combination
with rapamycin, whether trametinib was given prior to
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

rapamycin treatment or simultaneously (Figure 6B). The
percent change in tumor volume from Day 0 to Day 22
of treatment demonstrated greater tumor regression with
the combination of trametinib and rapamycin and a trend
towards greater tumor regression with the pre-treatment
trametinib combination group compared to simultaneous
treatment (Figure 6B).
As trametinib not only modulates EMT, but also
inhibits MAPK signaling, we further investigated the
role of trametinib on cell growth on a MAPK-activated
model. HMLER is an immortalized human mammary
epithelial cell line (HMLE) transformed with V12H-Ras
oncogene and rendered oncogenic [25, 26]. HMLER
and HMLER-pWB (control vector) both had baseline
activation of MAPK signaling. MAPK pathway signaling
was further activated in HMLER-Snail and blocked
with trametinib alone or in combination with rapamycin
(Figure 6C). Trametinib alone inhibited both pathways but
there was only a slight decrease in vimentin expression,
not suggesting reverting EMT. Rapamycin was not able
to block S6 phosphorylation completely. Of the markers
examined, combination treatment did not result in more
inhibition compared to trametinib alone. Tubulin was
19506

Oncotarget

Figure 6: Trametinib modulated EMT in ACHN and increased sensitivity of ACHN to lower doses of rapamycin.

A. ACHN (left) and MDA-MB-231 (right) were treated daily with DMSO 0.1% (D), rapamycin 10 nM (R10), rapamycin 100 nM (R100),
trametinib 10 μM (T), or in combination with each rapamycin dose (T+R10, T+R100) for 3 days and harvested for western blotting 24 hours
later to assess EMT, MAPK and mTOR signaling. B. ACHN xenografts were treated with DMSO/Vehicle (Vehicle), rapamycin 1 mg/kg /
vehicle (Rapamycin), DMSO/trametinib 0.3 mg/kg (Trametinib), rapamycin/trametinib (Rapa/Tram) at the same doses, or trametinib daily
for three days then followed by rapamycin/trametinib (Del Rapa/Tram) at the same doses daily for a total of 14 days. *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01.
MDA-MB-231 xenografts were treated with DMSO/Vehicle (Vehicle), rapamycin 1 mg/kg /vehicle (Rapamycin), DMSO/trametinib
0.3 mg/kg (Trametinib), or rapamycin/trametinib (Rapa/Tram) at the same doses daily for 14 days. *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ****p < 0.0001.
C. HMLER, HMLER-pWB, and HMLER-Snail cell lines were treated daily with DMSO 0.1%, rapamycin 100 nM (R), trametinib 10 μM
(T), or rapamycin and trametinib combination (R+T) with the same doses for 3 days. Cells were harvested for western blotting 24 hours
after the last treatment and assessed for EMT, MAPK and mTOR signaling. D. HMLER (parenteral), HMLER-pWB (control vector), and
HMLER-Snail were treated with various doses of rapamycin (R), trametinib (T) or their combination (R+T) for 4 days. Rapamycin:trametinib
combination ratio was 1:1. Sensitivity to drugs was assessed by SRB assay. Results were normalized to DMSO control.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

19507

Oncotarget

also increased in HMLER-Snail cell line; consistent
with previous reports that reorganization of cytoskeleton
causes increase in actin and tubulin expression [27–29].
A similar increase was also observed in MEK, Erk, and
Akt. We have treated HMLER (parenteral), HMLER-pWB
(control vector), and HMLER-Snail cells with increasing
doses rapamycin and trametinib alone and in combination
(Figure 6D). Trametinib alone or in combination with
rapamycin inhibited cell growth in all three panels at
doses of 25 nM or higher. However, in HMLER-Snail
model, reverting EMT did not provide more growth
inhibition to combination with rapamycin compared to
trametinib alone.

There were differences in expression and
phosphorylation of MAPK and Akt/mTOR pathway
markers in MCF7 Snail-WT and Snail-6SA cell lines.
Rapamycin was reported to activate MAPK pathway
through S6K-PI3K-Ras feedback loop in various models
[34, 35]. MAPK activation accompanied with incomplete
inhibition of S6 phosphorylation and Akt activation
indicated resistance to rapamycin, and provided rationale
for a combination of MAPK and mTOR inhibitors in
treatment of cancer.
EMT has been associated with chemoresistance to
several chemotherapeutic agents including paclitaxel [36],
oxaliplatin [37], gemcitabine [38], 5-fluororacil [39]
as well as targeted therapies such as tamoxifen [40],
erlotinib and PI3K/Akt inhibitors [21]. RNA-based
multiplex predictors such as Oncotype Dx Recurrence
Score and MammaPrint have been effectively transitioned
to clinical use; thus, it would be important to determine
whether a RNA- or protein-based predictor can indeed
have predictive utility. In our study, cell lines that were
classified as mesenchymal based on two EMT signatures
were less sensitive to rapamycin; although sensitivity to
everolimus and temsirolimus was less, this difference
did not reach statistical significance. It is worthy of note
that in contrast to our in vitro findings, metaplastic breast
cancer, a mesenchymal tumor type, has previously been
reported to be especially responsive to a temsirolimus
containing therapy regimen; 42% objective response
rate was reported for temsirolimus, bevacizumab and
liposomal doxorubicin [41]. Whether this sensitivity is
attributable to sensitivity to temsirolimus or bevacizumab
and liposomal doxorubicin remains unclear. Thus, further
study is needed to determine whether EMT correlates with
clinical resistance (early progression or lack of clinical
benefit) to rapalogs as single agent as well in combination
therapy.
A variety of preclinical approaches has been
proposed to reverse EMT. In our experiments, in
each mechanism of EMT modulation in vitro, ACHN
demonstrated increased E-cadherin expression and
increased sensitivity to rapamycin. In addition, vorinostat
and trametinib treatments induced E-cadherin expression.
However, in vivo neither of the drugs increased E-cadherin
expression, and rapamycin and vorinostat combination had
no effect on tumor growth. Thus, in vitro findings were
not capitulated with in vivo results. Notably our results
differ than those reported in epidermoid squamous cell
carcinoma xenografts, where vorinostat both reversed
EMT and inhibited tumor growth [24]. In addition to
differences in cell lines used to establish the xenografts,
at least one difference may be that in our model we started
treatment after tumors were established (mean volume ±
SEM, 118 ± 15 mm3) whereas the other model introduced
an early treatment protocol that started on day 3 [24].

DISCUSSION
We found an association with EMT and rapamycin
resistance on a functional proteomic screen. Further, we
demonstrated that mesenchymal cell lines selected by
an EMT signature are more resistant to rapamycin. We
thus hypothesized that the mesenchymal status of cancer
cells, exhibited through absence of E-cadherin expression
and presence of vimentin expression, correlated with
resistance to rapamycin both in vitro and in mouse
xenografts. However, some, but not all mechanisms of
EMT modulation resulted in increased sensitivity to
rapamycin in cancer cell lines in vitro and in vivo.
The rapamycin analog temsirolimus is approved
by the Food and Drug Administration for the treatment
of advanced renal cell carcinoma, and the rapamycin
analog everolimus is FDA-approved for the treatment of
pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors, renal cell carcinoma,
sub-ependymal giant cell astrocytoma associated with
tuberous sclerosis, and hormone-receptor positive breast
cancer (in combination with exemestane). There has been
intensive study on mechanism of action and mechanisms
of intrinsic sensitivity and resistance to rapamycin, but
largely, biomarkers predictive for response to rapalogs
have not been identified. Although both somatic TSC1
mutation [30] and mTOR mutations [31] have been
reported in exceptional responders, these alterations are
relatively rare in tumor types such as hormone–receptor
positive breast cancer and neuroendocrine tumors, where
rapalogs are commonly used. In preclinical studies
PIK3CA/PTEN mutations were associated with rapalog
sensitivity [19], but to date PIK3CA mutations have
not been confirmed to predict response to rapalogs in
clinical trials [32]. It is also worth noting that rapalogs
are associated with toxicities, including stomatitis of
mild- to moderate severity including, pneumonitis, and
hyperglycemia [33]. Although these side effects are
usually manageable, they highlight the need to identify
biomarkers of response to spare patients who will not
benefit from these agents these side effects.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

19508

Oncotarget

However, we feel treatment of established tumors better
models treatment of patients with advanced disease in
early phase clinical trials.
We observed an increase in E-cadherin expression
in MDA-MB-231 by miR200b/c transfection and ZEB1
knockdown, however, there was no growth inhibition.
MDA-MB-231 has BRAF and RAS mutations that may
render MDA-MB-231 resistant to rapamycin regardless
of EMT status. This was further supported by our
findings with HMLER cell line, and in the presence of
RAS mutation, reverting EMT by trametinib treatment
did not induce sensitivity to rapamycin. In ACHN cell
line, E-cadherin was increased after miR200b/c or
ZEB1 transfections and trametinib treatment, which may
have been adequate to alter EMT and its crosstalk with
PI3K/mTOR signaling, ultimately to result in increased
sensitivity to rapamycin. Simultaneous targeting of Ras/
Raf/MEK/Erk and PI3K/Akt/mTOR pathways has already
been proposed as an approach to overcome resistance
to Raf-i or MEK inhibitors [42, 43]. In both MDAMB-231 and ACHN cell lines, trametinib alone or in
combination with rapamycin was better than rapamycin
alone, but we were unable to demonstrate reversion of
EMT in these models. In HMLER cell lines, trametinib
alone or in combination with rapamycin inhibited growth
more than rapamycin alone. There was a decrease in
vimentin expression but we did not capture an increase
in E-cadherin expression and we were not able to
demonstrate reversion of EMT clearly. We did not capture
an increase in p-S6K (data not shown), which is upstream
S6. Although p-S6 was increased in HMLER-Snail cell
line, probably PI3K pathway was not activated but rather
MEK/Erk/p90RSK axis phosphorylated S6. Trametinib
alone was able to inhibit activity of both MAPK and
PI3K/mTOR pathways. Our finding raises the possibility
that trametinib’s synergy with rapamycin may be through
mechanisms independent of MET.
Future studies are needed to determine optimal
agents for reversion of EMT modulation and to determine
the effect of combinations of these agents with PI3K/Akt/
mTOR inhibitors.

lines containing Snail-WT, Snail-2SA or Snail-6SA were
created as previously described [23] and grown in DMEM/
F12 supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum and
G418 400 μg/ml. HMLER (parenteral), HMLER-pWB
(control vector) and HMLER-Snail cells were cultured in
DMEM/F12:MEGM (with BPE supplement) (1:1) media
supplemented with hEGF 5 ng/ml, hydrocortisone 0.25
μg/ml, insulin 2.5 μg/ml, and blasticidin 4 μg/ml.

Reagents
Rapamycin and vorinostat were purchased from
LC Laboratories, Inc. Trametinib was purchased from
Selleck Chemicals. For in vivo experiments, 0.5%
hydroxypropylmethylcellulose (Sigma) and 0.2%
Tween-80 (Sigma) in distilled water (pH 8.0) was used
as oral gavage vehicle as previously described [17].
DMSO (vehicle for rapamycin for in vitro and in vivo
experiments), polyethylene glycol (vehicle for vorinostat
for in vivo experiments), and G418 were purchased from
Sigma.

Western blotting
Cells were washed with cold PBS and lysed in
100 mM Tris-HCl (pH 6.8), 4% SDS, and 20% glycerol,
and then protein were separated by SDS-PAGE. The
protein was transferred to a 0.2 μm nitrocellulose
membrane (Bio-Rad Laboratories). Membranes were
blocked with 0.1% casein in TBS. Immunoblotting was
performed with the following antibodies: caveolin-1,
pan-cytokeratin, E-cadherin, Erk 1/2, p-Erk 1/2 (Thr202/
Tyr204), MEK1/2, p-MEK1/2 (S217/221), p-S6
(Ser240/244), p-S6 (Ser235/236), S6, p-Akt T308, p-Akt
S473, Akt, p90RSK S380, α-tubulin (Cell Signaling
Technology), fibronectin, ERα, smad3 (Epitomics), Snail,
vimentin (Abcam), actin (Sigma), and ZEB1 (Bethyl).
The immunoblots were visualized using the Odyssey IR
imaging system and software (Li-Cor Biosciences).

Reverse phase protein arrays
Reverse phase protein array (RPPA) was performed
at the MD Anderson Cancer Center Functional Proteomics
RPPA Core Facility as described previously [44–46],
and specifically represents cells and samples with two
biological replicates prepared as previously described [19].
Protein levels were presented as log2 of mean expression
values.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Cell lines and culture
ACHN, BT-474, BT-483, MCF7, MDA-MB-231,
MDA-MB-453, and ZR75–1 cell lines were obtained from
the American Type Culture Collection. MDA-MB-435
and NCI/ADR-RES cells were obtained from the National
Cancer Institute. Cell lines were passaged for less than six
months following resuscitation, and thus were not tested
for characterization. ATCC utilizes Short Tandem Repeat
(STR) profiling to verify cell line identity. Cells were
cultured in DMEM/F12 supplemented with 10% fetal
bovine serum at 37°C and humidified 5% CO2. MCF7 cell
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Small interfering RNA
The silencing of ZEB1 with small interfering
RNA (siRNA) was performed using DharmaFECT 1
transfection reagent and siGENOME SMARTpool
Human ZEB1 siRNA (GAACCACCCUUGAAAGUGA,
19509

Oncotarget

GAAGCAGGAUGUACAGUAA, AAACUGAACCUGU
GGAUUA,
GAUAGCACUUGUCUUCUGU)
or
siGENOME Non-targeting siRNA Pool #2 (Dharmacon).
Cells were harvested after 72 hours and lysates obtained
for western blotting or trypsinized and plated for growth
assay experiments.

(DMSO IP weekly/oral gavage vehicle daily, DMSO IP
weekly/trametinib 0.3 mg/kg body weight oral gavage
daily, rapamycin 1 mg/kg IP weekly/oral gavage vehicle
daily, rapamycin 1 mg/kg IP weekly/trametinib 0.3 mg/kg
body weight oral gavage daily, or trametinib 0.3 mg/kg
body weight oral gavage daily for three days followed by
simultaneous rapamycin 1 mg/kg IP weekly/trametinib
0.3 mg/kg body weight oral gavage daily n = 8). In
vorinostat-rapamycin study, after tumors formed, MDAMB-231 xenografts were randomized into 4 groups
(vehicle 10% DMSO-PEG:water IP three times per
week, rapamycin 1 mg/kg IP weekly, vorinostat 80 mg/kg
IP three times per week, rapamycin 1 mg/kg IP weekly/
vorinostat 80 mg/kg IP three times per week, n = 5). After
tumors formed, ACHN xenografts were randomized into
6 groups (vehicle 10% DMSO-PEG:water IP three times per
week, rapamycin 1 mg/kg IP weekly, rapamycin 4 mg/kg
IP weekly, vorinostat 80 mg/kg IP three times per week,
rapamycin 1 mg/kg IP weekly/vorinostat 80 mg/kg IP three
times per week, rapamycin 4 mg/kg IP weekly/vorinostat
80 mg/kg IP three times per week, n = 8). The tumor
growth was followed by caliper measurements and tumor
volumes were calculated as previously described [49].
Mice were euthanized 24 hours after the last treatment,
and half of each tumor was snap-frozen while the other
half was fixed in formalin and embedded in paraffin.

MicroRNA
The transient transfection of miR-200b
(CCAGCUCGGGCAGCCGUGGCCAUCUUACUGGG
CAGCAUUGGAUGGAGUCAGGUCUCUAAUACUG
CCUGGUAAUGAUGACGGCGGAGCCCUGCACG)
and miR-200c (CCCUCGUCUUACCCAGCAGUGUUU
GGGUGCGGUUGGGAGUCUCUAAUACUGCCGGG
UAAUGAUGGAGG) in a 50:50 ratio or Negative Control
miRNA #1 was performed using reverse transfection
method and siPORT NeoFX transfection reagent
(Ambion). Cells were harvested after 72 hours and lysates
obtained for western blotting or trypsinized and plated for
growth assay experiments.

Growth assays
For rapamycin antiproliferative activity, cells were
plated in triplicate in 96-well plates at densities of 500 to
5, 000 cells per well depending on growth characteristics
of each cell line. Cell growth was measured at 5 days
(baseline rapamycin sensitivity classification) and
4 days (miR-200 transfection and ZEB1 knockdown)
using sulforhodamine B (SRB) assay as previously
described [47]. The median inhibitory concentration (IC50)
and combination index (CI) were determined from doseresponse curves as previously described [48]. Cells were
categorized as rapamycin sensitive (RS) or rapamycin
resistant (RR) based on IC50 cutoff value of 100 nM.

Statistical analysis
The cell line RPPA slide data was analyzed for
differences in expression between RS and RR cell lines
using linear mixed effects model with fixed effect of
sensitivity and time point, and random effect of cell
line. To account for multiple testing, we estimated
the false discovery rates (FDR) of the F-tests of the
cell line sensitivity effect using beta-uniform mixture
model. All results shown in bar graphs and line graphs
are presented as means ± SE. Growth inhibition (SRB
data) of MCF7 Snail-WT v. MCF7 Snail-6SA following
rapamycin treatment was compared with a Student’s
t-test. Growth inhibition with rapamycin (SRB data)
for miR-200 transfection and ZEB1 knockdown was
compared to respective control using 2-Way ANOVA for
treatment v. rapamycin/DMSO followed by Bonferroni
multiple comparison tests. For trametinib-rapamycin and
vorinostat-rapamycin in vivo experiments, tumor volume
at the last day and percent change in tumor volume from
day 0 to the last day were both compared among all
treatment groups by 1-way ANOVA followed by Tukey
multiple comparison test or Kruskal Wallis test followed
by Dunn’s multiple comparison test. All statistical tests
used a significance level of 5%.
For the analysis of association between breast
cancer cell line sensitivity and EMT signature, we defined
the cell line sensitivity by using the average of GI50 values

In vivo studies
All animal studies were conducted according to the
guidelines of the American Association of Laboratory
Animal Care under a protocol approved by the MD
Anderson Animal Care and Use Committee. ACHN
(6.67 × 106) and MDA-MB-231 (1 × 107) cells, mixed
with Matrigel (BD Biosciences), were inoculated into the
mammary fat pads of six-week-old female athymic nude
(nu/nu) mice (Department of Experimental Radiation
Oncology, MD Anderson). In trametinib-rapamycin study,
after tumors formed, MDA-MB-231 xenografts were
randomized into 4 groups (DMSO intraperitoneal injection
(IP) weekly/oral gavage vehicle daily, DMSO IP weekly/
trametinib 0.3 mg/kg body weight oral gavage daily,
rapamycin 1 mg/kg IP weekly/oral gavage vehicle daily,
or rapamycin 1 mg/kg IP weekly/trametinib 0.3 mg/kg
body weight oral gavage daily, n = 7–8). After tumors
formed, ACHN xenografts were randomized into 5 groups
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

19510

Oncotarget

on Log10 scale of all cell lines available in GI50 data from
Daemen et al. for rapamycin, everolimus or temsirolimus
respectively [20]. We extracted the gene expression
information from data from Daemen et al. that matches
Byers and Gröger EMT signature genes for the cell lines
with GI50 and sensitivity information for the compounds
of interest. For the Byers EMT signature, probe set ID
was used as the identifier. There are 48 probe sets in
Daemens’s Affymetrix U133A data mapping to Byers’ 97
probe sets signature from Affymetrix U133plus2 data. For
Gröger’s signature, gene symbol was used as identifier
and multiple probe sets for the same gene symbols were
extracted when available. We conducted similar analysis
for Byers’ and Gröger’s EMT signatures on the probe set
level. Two-way hierarchical clustering was conducted to
cluster Affymetrix probe sets corresponding to the EMT
signature genes using Pearson correlation distance metric
and cluster cell lines using Euclidean distance metric with
the Ward’s linkage rule. The cell lines were grouped into
epithelial (green bar) and mesenchymal (red bar) groups
at the first major branching of the dendrogram. Wilcoxon
rank sum tests were used to compare the Log10GI50 values
between epithelial and mesenchymal cell lines.

2.	 McAuliffe PF, Meric-Bernstam F, Mills GB, GonzalezAngulo AM. Deciphering the role of PIK/Akt/mTOR pathway in breast cancer biology and pathogenesis. Clin Breast
Cancer. 2010; 10:S59–65.
3.	 Thiery JP, Acloque H, Huang RY, Nieto MA. Epithelialmesenchymal transitions in development and disease. Cell.
2009; 139:871–890.
4.	 Kalluri R, Weinberg RA. The basics of epithelialmesenchymal transition. J Clin Invest. 2009; 119:1420–1428.
5.	 Vincent-Salomon A, Thiery JP. Host microenvironment in
breast cancer development: epithelial-mesenchymal transition in breast cancer development. Breast Cancer Res. 2003;
5:101–106.
6.	 Muta H, Noguchi M, Kanai Y, Ochiai A, Nawata H,
Hirohashi S. E-cadherin gene mutations in signet ring
cell carcinoma of the stomach. Jpn J Cancer Res. 1996;
87:843–848.
7.	 Saito A, Kanai Y, Maesawa C, Ochiai A, Torii A, Hirohashi S.
Disruption of E-cadherin-mediated cell adhesion systems in
gastric cancers in young patients. Jpn J Cancer Res. 1999;
90:993–999.
8.	 Hirohashi S. Inactivation of the E-cadherin-mediated cell
adhesion system in human cancers. Am J Pathol. 1998;
153:333–339.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

9.	 Birchmeier W, Behrens J. Cadherin expression in carcinomas: role in the formation of cell junctions and the
prevention of invasiveness. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1994;
1198:11–26.

We thank Dr. Mien-Chie Hung for the MCF7
Snail-WT, Snail-2SA, and Snail-6SA cell lines. We thank
Dr. Robert Weinberg for the HMLER, HMLER-pWB, and
HMLER-Snail cell lines.

10.	 Christoffersen NR, Silahtaroglu A, Orom UA, Kauppinen S,
Lund AH. miR-200b mediates post-transcriptional repression of ZFHX1B. RNA. 2007; 13:1172–1178.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST

11.	 Gregory PA, Bert AG, Paterson EL, Barry SC, Tsykin A,
Farshid G, Vadas MA, Khew-Goodall Y, Goodall GJ. The
miR-200 family and miR-205 regulate epithelial to mesenchymal transition by targeting ZEB1 and SIP1. Nat Cell
Biol. 2008; 10:593–601.

The authors declare that they have no conflict
of interest.

FINANCIAL SUPPORT
This research was supported in part by the National
Cancer Institute T32 CA009599–23 (AMH, FA, FMB),
Susan G. Komen for the Cure SAC10006 (FMB,
KAD), Stand Up to Cancer Dream Team Translational
Research Grant, a Program of the Entertainment Industry
Foundation (SU2C-AACR-DT0209) (FMB, AA, YL),
Nellie B Connally Breast Cancer Research Chair (FMB),
and the National Center for Research Resources Grants
3UL1RR024148 (FMB, KAD) and UL1TR000371 (FMB,
AA and KAD) and the Cancer Center Support Grant
CCSG P30 CA016672 (FMB, KAD, YL).

12.	 Hurteau GJ, Carlson JA, Spivack SD, Brock GJ.
Overexpression of the microRNA hsa-miR-200c leads to
reduced expression of transcription factor 8 and increased
expression of E-cadherin. Cancer Res. 2007; 67:7972–7976.
13.	 Korpal M, Lee ES, Hu G, Kang Y. The miR-200 ­family
inhibits epithelial-mesenchymal transition and cancer
cell migration by direct targeting of E-cadherin transcriptional repressors ZEB1 and ZEB2. J Biol Chem. 2008;
283:14910–14914.
14.	 Park SM, Gaur AB, Lengyel E, Peter ME. The miR-200
family determines the epithelial phenotype of cancer cells
by targeting the E-cadherin repressors ZEB1 and ZEB2.
Genes Dev. 2008; 22:894–907.

REFERENCES

15.	 Cochrane DR, Spoelstra NS, Howe EN, Nordeen SK,
Richer JK. MicroRNA-200c mitigates invasiveness and
restores sensitivity to microtubule-targeting chemotherapeutic agents. Mol Cancer Ther. 2009; 8:1055–1066.

1.	 Meric-Bernstam F, Gonzalez-Angulo AM. Targeting the
mTOR signaling network for cancer therapy. J Clin Oncol.
2009; 27:2278–2287.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

19511

Oncotarget

16.	 Li Q, Chen C, Kapadia A, Zhou Q, Harper MK, Schaack J,
LaBarbera DV. 3D models of epithelial-mesenchymal
transition in breast cancer metastasis: high-throughput
screening assay development, validation, and pilot screen.
J Biomol Screen. 2011; 16:141–154.

26.	 Mani SA, Guo W, Liao MJ, Eaton EN, Ayyanan A,
Zhou AY, Brooks M, Reinhard F, Zhang CC, Shipitsin M,
Campbell LL, Polyak K, Brisken C, Yang J, Weinberg RA.
The epithelial-mesenchymal transition generates cells with
properties of stem cells. Cell. 2008; 133:704–715.

17.	 Gilmartin AG, Bleam MR, Groy A, Moss KG, Minthorn EA,
Kulkarni SG, Rominger CM, Erskine S, Fisher KE,
Yang J, Zappacosta F, Annan R, Sutton D, Laquerre SG.
GSK1120212 (JTP-74057) is an inhibitor of MEK activity
and activation with favorable pharmacokinetic properties
for sustained in vivo pathway inhibition. Clin Cancer Res.
2011; 17:989–1000.

27.	 Haynes J, Srivastava J, Madson N, Wittmann T, Barber DL.
Dynamic actin remodeling during epithelial-mesenchymal
transition depends on increased moesin expression. Mol
Biol Cell. 2011; 22:4750–4764.
28.	 Oyanagi J, Ogawa T, Sato H, Higashi S, Miyazaki K.
Epithelial-mesenchymal transition stimulates human cancer
cells to extend microtubule-based invasive protrusions and
suppresses cell growth in collagen gel. PLoS One. 2012;
7:e53209.

18.	 Bruzzese F, Leone A, Rocco M, Carbone C, Piro G,
Caraglia M, Di Gennaro E, Budillon A. HDAC inhibitor
vorinostat enhances the antitumor effect of gefitinib in squamous cell carcinoma of head and neck by modulating ErbB
receptor expression and reverting EMT. J Cell Physiol.
2011; 226:2378–2390.

29.	 Whipple RA, Matrone MA, Cho EH, Balzer EM, Vitolo MI,
Yoon JR, Ioffe OB, Tuttle KC, Yang J, Martin SS.
Epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition promotes tubulin
detyrosination and microtentacles that enhance endothelial
engagement. Cancer Res. 2010; 70:8127–8137.

19.	 Meric-Bernstam F, Akcakanat A, Chen H, Do KA, Sangai T,
Adkins F, Gonzalez-Angulo AM, Rashid A, Crosby K,
Dong M, Phan AT, Wolff RA, Gupta S, Mills GB, Yao J.
PIK3CA/PTEN mutations and Akt activation as markers of
sensitivity to allosteric mTOR inhibitors. Clin Cancer Res.
2012; 18:1777–1789.

30.	 Iyer G, Hanrahan AJ, Milowsky MI, Al-Ahmadie H,
Scott SN, Janakiraman M, Pirun M, Sander C, Socci ND,
Ostrovnaya I, Viale A, Heguy A, Peng L, Chan TA,
Bochner B, Bajorin DF, et al. Genome sequencing identifies
a basis for everolimus sensitivity. Science. 2012; 338:221.

20.	 Daemen A, Griffith OL, Heiser LM, Wang NJ, Enache OM,
Sanborn Z, Pepin F, Durinck S, Korkola JE, Griffith M, Hur JS,
Huh N, Chung J, Cope L, Fackler MJ, Umbricht C, et al.
Modeling precision treatment of breast cancer. Genome Biol.
2013; 14:R110.

31.	 Wagle N, Grabiner BC, Van Allen EM, Hodis E, Jacobus S,
Supko JG, Stewart M, Choueiri TK, Gandhi L, Cleary JM,
Elfiky AA, Taplin ME, Stack EC, Signoretti S, Loda M,
Shapiro GI, et al. Activating mTOR mutations in a patient
with an extraordinary response on a phase I trial of everolimus and pazopanib. Cancer Discov. 2014; 4:546–553.

21.	 Byers LA, Diao L, Wang J, Saintigny P, Girard L, Peyton M,
Shen L, Fan Y, Giri U, Tumula PK, Nilsson MB, Gudikote J,
Tran H, Cardnell RJ, Bearss DJ, Warner SL, et al. An
epithelial-mesenchymal transition gene signature predicts
resistance to EGFR and PI3K inhibitors and identifies Axl
as a therapeutic target for overcoming EGFR inhibitor resistance. Clin Cancer Res. 2013; 19:279–290.

32.	 Hortobagyi G, Piccart-Gebhart MJ, Rugo HS, Burris HA,
Campone M, Noguchi S, Perez AT, Deleu I, Shtivelband M,
Provencher L, Masuda N, Dakhil SR, Anderson I, Chen D,
Damask A, Huang A, et al. Correlation of molecular alterations with efficacy of everolimus in hormone receptor-­
positive, HER2-negative advanced breast cancer: Results
from BOLERO-2. J Clin Oncol. 2013; 31.

22.	 Groger CJ, Grubinger M, Waldhor T, Vierlinger K,
Mikulits W. Meta-analysis of gene expression signatures
defining the epithelial to mesenchymal transition during
cancer progression. PLoS ONE. 2012; 7:e51136.
23.	 Zhou BP, Deng J, Xia W, Xu J, Li YM, Gunduz M,
Hung MC. Dual regulation of Snail by GSK-3beta-mediated
phosphorylation in control of epithelial-mesenchymal transition. Nat Cell Biol. 2004; 6:931–940.

33.	 Rugo HS, Pritchard KI, Gnant M, Noguchi S, Piccart M,
Hortobagyi G, Baselga J, Perez A, Geberth M, Csoszi T,
Chouinard E, Srimuninnimit V, Puttawibul P, Eakle J, Feng W,
Bauly H, et al. Incidence and time course of everolimusrelated adverse events in postmenopausal women with hormone receptor-positive advanced breast cancer: insights from
BOLERO-2. Ann Oncol. 2014; 25:808–815.

24.	 Kurundkar D, Srivastava RK, Chaudhary SC, Ballestas ME,
Kopelovich L, Elmets CA, Athar M. Vorinostat, an HDAC
inhibitor attenuates epidermoid squamous cell carcinoma
growth by dampening mTOR signaling pathway in a human
xenograft murine model. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2013;
266:233–244.

34.	 Carracedo A, Ma L, Teruya-Feldstein J, Rojo F, Salmena L,
Alimonti A, Egia A, Sasaki AT, Thomas G, Kozma SC,
Papa A, Nardella C, Cantley LC, Baselga J, Pandolfi PP.
Inhibition of mTORC1 leads to MAPK pathway activation
through a PI3K-dependent feedback loop in human cancer.
J Clin Invest. 2008; 118:3065–3074.

25.	 Elenbaas B, Spirio L, Koerner F, Fleming MD, Zimonjic DB,
Donaher JL, Popescu NC, Hahn WC, Weinberg RA.
Human breast cancer cells generated by oncogenic transformation of primary mammary epithelial cells. Genes Dev.
2001; 15:50–65.

35.	 Albert L, Karsy M, Murali R, Jhanwar-Uniyal M. Inhibition
of mTOR Activates the MAPK Pathway in Glioblastoma
Multiforme. Cancer Genomics Proteomics. 2009;
6:255–261.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

19512

Oncotarget

36.	 Kajiyama H, Shibata K, Terauchi M, Yamashita M, Ino K,
Nawa A, Kikkawa F. Chemoresistance to paclitaxel induces
epithelial-mesenchymal transition and enhances metastatic
potential for epithelial ovarian carcinoma cells. Int J Oncol.
2007; 31:277–283.

43.	 Su F, Bradley WD, Wang Q, Yang H, Xu L, Higgins B,
Kolinsky K, Packman K, Kim MJ, Trunzer K, Lee RJ,
Schostack K, Carter J, Albert T, Germer S, Rosinski J, et al.
Resistance to selective BRAF inhibition can be mediated
by modest upstream pathway activation. Cancer Res. 2012;
72:969–978.

37.	 Virag P, Fischer-Fodor E, Perde-Schrepler M, Brie I,
Tatomir C, Balacescu L, Berindan-Neagoe I, Victor B,
Balacescu O. Oxaliplatin induces different cellular and
molecular chemoresistance patterns in colorectal cancer cell
lines of identical origins. BMC Genomics. 2013; 14:480.

44.	 Tibes R, Qiu Y, Lu Y, Hennessy B, Andreeff M, Mills GB,
Kornblau SM. Reverse phase protein array: validation of
a novel proteomic technology and utility for analysis of
primary leukemia specimens and hematopoietic stem cells.
Mol Cancer Ther. 2006; 5:2512–2521.

38.	 Shah AN, Summy JM, Zhang J, Park SI, Parikh NU,
Gallick GE. Development and characterization of
­gemcitabine-resistant pancreatic tumor cells. Ann Surg
Oncol. 2007; 14:3629–3637.

45.	 Hennessy BT, Lu Y, Poradosu E, Yu Q, Yu S, Hall H,
Carey MS, Ravoori M, Gonzalez-Angulo AM, Birch R,
Henderson IC, Kundra V, Mills GB. Pharmacodynamic
markers of perifosine efficacy. Clin Cancer Res. 2007;
13:7421–7431.

39.	 Zhang W, Feng M, Zheng G, Chen Y, Wang X, Pen B, Yin J,
Yu Y, He Z. Chemoresistance to 5-fluorouracil induces
epithelial-mesenchymal transition via up-regulation of Snail
in MCF7 human breast cancer cells. Biochem Biophys Res
Commun. 2012; 417:679–685.

46.	 Gonzalez-Angulo AM, Hennessy BT, Meric-Bernstam F,
Sahin A, Liu W, Ju Z, Carey MS, Myhre S, Speers C, Deng L,
Broaddus R, Lluch A, Aparicio S, Brown P, Pusztai L,
Symmans WF, et al. Functional proteomics can define prognosis and predict pathologic complete response in patients
with breast cancer. Clin Proteomics. 2011; 8:11.

40.	 Hiscox S, Jiang WG, Obermeier K, Taylor K, Morgan L,
Burmi R, Barrow D, Nicholson RI. Tamoxifen resistance
in MCF7 cells promotes EMT-like behaviour and involves
modulation of β-catenin phosphorylation. Int J Cancer.
2006; 118:290–301.

47.	 Moreno A, Akcakanat A, Munsell MF, Soni A, Yao JC,
Meric-Bernstam F. Antitumor activity of rapamycin and
octreotide as single agents or in combination in neuroendocrine tumors. Endocr Relat Cancer. 2008; 15:257–266.

41.	 Moroney J, Fu S, Moulder S, Falchook G, Helgason T,
Levenback C, Hong D, Naing A, Wheler J, Kurzrock R.
Phase I study of the antiangiogenic antibody bevacizumab
and the mTOR/hypoxia-inducible factor inhibitor temsirolimus combined with liposomal doxorubicin: tolerance and
biological activity. Clin Cancer Res. 2012; 18:5796–5805.

48.	 Akcakanat A, Sahin A, Shaye AN, Velasco MA, MericBernstam F. Comparison of Akt/mTOR signaling in primary breast tumors and matched distant metastases. Cancer.
2008; 112:2352–2358.

42.	 Atefi M, von Euw E, Attar N, Ng C, Chu C, Guo D,
Nazarian R, Chmielowski B, Glaspy JA, Comin-Anduix B,
Mischel PS, Lo RS, Ribas A. Reversing melanoma crossresistance to BRAF and MEK inhibitors by co-targeting the
AKT/mTOR pathway. PLoS ONE. 2011; 6:e28973.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

49.	 Mondesire WH, Jian W, Zhang H, Ensor J, Hung MC,
Mills GB, Meric-Bernstam F. Targeting mammalian ­target
of rapamycin synergistically enhances chemotherapyinduced cytotoxicity in breast cancer cells. Clin Cancer Res.
2004; 10:7031–7042.

19513

Oncotarget

