Oncotarget, Vol. 7, No. 46

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Research Paper

Exocytosis of polyubiquitinated proteins in bortezomib-resistant
leukemia cells: a role for MARCKS in acquired resistance to
proteasome inhibitors
Niels E. Franke1, Gertjan L. Kaspers1, Yehuda G. Assaraf2, Johan van Meerloo1,3,
Denise Niewerth1, Floortje L. Kessler3, Pino J. Poddighe4, Jeroen Kole9, Serge J.
Smeets5, Bauke Ylstra5, Chonglei Bi6,11, Wee Joo Chng6, Terzah M. Horton7, Rene
X. Menezes8, Renée J.P. Musters9, Sonja Zweegman3, Gerrit Jansen10,*, Jacqueline
Cloos1,3,*
1

Department of Pediatric Oncology/Hematology, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands

2

The Fred Wyszkowski Cancer Research Laboratory, Technion-Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel

3

Department of Hematology, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands

4

Department of Clinical Genetics, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands

5

Department of Pathology, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands

6

Department of Experimental Therapeutics, Cancer Science Institute of Singapore, National University of Singapore,
Singapore

7

Texas Children’s Cancer Center, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA

8

Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands

9

Department of Physiology, VU University, Amsterdam, The Netherlands

10

Department of Rheumatology, Amsterdam Rheumatology and immunology Center, VU University Medical Center,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands

11

Current address: BGI-Shenzhen, Shenzhen, China

*

Joint senior authors

Correspondence to: Jacqueline Cloos, email: j.cloos@vumc.nl
Keywords: bortezomib, resistance, proteasome, MARCKS, leukemia
Received: October 19, 2015     Accepted: July 26, 2016     Published: August 17, 2016

ABSTRACT
PSMB5 mutations and upregulation of the β5 subunit of the proteasome represent
key determinants of acquired resistance to the proteasome inhibitor bortezomib
(BTZ) in leukemic cells in vitro. We here undertook a multi-modality (DNA, mRNA,
miRNA) array-based analysis of human CCRF-CEM leukemia cells and BTZ-resistant
subclones to determine whether or not complementary mechanisms contribute to
BTZ resistance. These studies revealed signatures of markedly reduced expression
of proteolytic stress related genes in drug resistant cells over a broad range of BTZ
concentrations along with a high upregulation of myristoylated alanine-rich C-kinase
substrate (MARCKS) gene expression. MARCKS upregulation was confirmed on protein
level and also observed in other BTZ-resistant tumor cell lines as well as in leukemia
cells with acquired resistance to other proteasome inhibitors. Moreover, when
MARCKS protein expression was demonstrated in specimens derived from therapyrefractory pediatric leukemia patients (n = 44), higher MARCKS protein expression
trended (p = 0.073) towards a dismal response to BTZ-containing chemotherapy.
Mechanistically, we show a BTZ concentration-dependent association of MARCKS
protein levels with the emergence of ubiquitin-containing vesicles in BTZ-resistant
CEM cells. These vesicles were found to be extruded and taken up in co-cultures with
proteasome-proficient acceptor cells. Consistent with these observations, MARCKS
protein associated with ubiquitin-containing vesicles was also more prominent in
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

74779

Oncotarget

clinical leukemic specimen with ex vivo BTZ resistance compared to BTZ-sensitive
leukemia cells. Collectively, we propose a role for MARCKS in a novel mechanism of
BTZ resistance via exocytosis of ubiquitinated proteins in BTZ-resistant cells leading
to quenching of proteolytic stress.

INTRODUCTION

differential capacities to overcome BTZ in hematological
cells, but appeared themselves prone to the development
of drug resistance by mechanisms including PSMB5
mutations [41, 42]. A currently open question is how
BTZ-resistant cells harboring PSMB5 mutations handle
proteolytic stress upon exposure of increasing BTZ
concentrations. Examining the ability of BTZ to inhibit
the catalytic activity of the mutated β5 subunit revealed
a 2-fold lower potency as compared to non-mutated β5
subunits, whereas the cell growth inhibitory capacity was
repressed by a factor of > 100 fold [29, 41]. These findings
suggest that BTZ resistant cells acquired additional
compensatory mechanism(s) to cope with the proteolytic
stress. To gain further insight into these underlying
molecular mechanisms, we undertook a multi-modality
(DNA, mRNA, miRNA) array-based analysis of human
CCRF-CEM leukemia cells and two subclones harboring
PSMB5 mutations, one with a moderate and one with a
high level BTZ resistance. These studies revealed a highly
upregulated myristoylated alanine-rich C-kinase substrate
(MARCKS) gene expression which correlated with protein
expression. Moreover, MARCKS protein expression was
associated with a BTZ concentration-dependent vesicular
secretion of ubiquitinated proteins. The relevance of this
novel function of MARCKs in BTZ resistance was further
corroborated in BTZ and second generation proteasome
inhibitor resistant hematological cell lines, ex vivo BTZresistant pediatric ALL cells, and clinical specimens of
ALL children receiving BTZ-containing chemotherapy.

The proteasome inhibitor Bortezomib (BTZ,
Velcade®) is registered for the treatment of multiple
myeloma (MM) and mantle cell lymphoma [1, 2] and
is currently undergoing clinical evaluation in other
hematological malignancies, such as pediatric acute
leukemia [3]. Through reversible inhibition of the
chymotrypsin-like activity of the β5 subunit and to a lesser
extent the caspase-like activity of the β1 subunit of the
20S proteasome, BTZ specifically blocks proteasomal
degradation of ubiquitinated proteins [4, 5]. Consequently,
misfolded and poly-ubiquitinated proteins accumulate
thereby activating the unfolded protein response (UPR)
[6, 7]. The balance between protein production and the
extent of degradation inhibition plays a key role in the
cytotoxic activity exerted by BTZ [7]. Moreover, inhibition
of multiple pro-survival pathways [8–13] contribute to
the BTZ induced apoptosis. Despite the proven efficacy
of BTZ, development of drug resistance is an emerging
obstacle [14]. Although the mechanism underlying BTZ
resistance in hematological malignancies is only partly
understood, several proteasomal and non proteasomalrelated factors involved in BTZ resistance have been
suggested [14–17]. With respect to the latter, upregulation
of heat shock proteins [18–20], drug extrusion by
P-glycoprotein [21–23], upregulation of P21(WAF1/CIP1)
[24], activation of the AKT/mTOR pro-survival pathway
[25], downregulation of XBP1s [26], decreased CIP2A
activity [27] and Noxa/Bcl-2 protein interactions [28]
have been suggested to be implicated in BTZ-resistance.
Proteasome-related mechanisms of BTZ resistance are
associated with differential upregulation of β5 subunit
along with downregulation of immunoproteasome subunit
[21, 29–34]. Specifically, in acute leukemia cell lines and
childhood ALL and AML leukemic blast cells, a lower
ratio of immunoproteasome subunits over constitutive
subunits was associated with a decreased sensitivity to
BTZ [35]. Remarkably, reversing this balance towards
increased immunoproteasome subunits upon treatment
with interferon-γ exposure restored BTZ sensitivity in
BTZ-resistant leukemic cells [31]. Moreover, acquisition
of PSMB5 mutations and upregulation of mutated β5
subunits were frequently identified in hematological
tumor and various solid tumor cell lines which conferred
high levels of BTZ resistance in vitro [14, 17, 21, 29,
32, 36–39]. The identified mutations in PSMB5 form a
cluster in a region that encodes for critical amino acids
within or in close proximity to the BTZ- binding pocket
of the β5 subunit resulting in decreased BTZ binding
[29, 40]. Next generation proteasome inhibitors displayed
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

RESULTS
To identify novel mechanisms of BTZ resistance,
the human CCRF-CEM leukemia cell line and its BTZresistant sublines, i.e. CEM/BTZ7 (10-fold resistance),
CEM/BTZ100 (140-fold resistance) and CEM/BTZ200
cells (170-fold resistance) [31, 43] were studied and
analyzed in a multi-modality array-based analyses
including comparative genomic hybridization (CGH),
micro-RNA (miRNA) and gene expression (GEP) arrays.

ArrayCGH analysis
ArrayCGH analyses of two BTZ-resistant subclones
were compared to parental CEM/WT cells. Genetic
alterations identified in CEM/BTZ7 cells included: a
deletion of small area of the long arm of chromosome 5,
a duplication of a large area on the end of the long arm of
chromosome 11, a near complete duplication of the long
arm of chromosome 14 as well as a complete loss of one
of the three X-chromosomes (Supplementary Figure S1A).
74780

Oncotarget

Of note, chromosome 14 harbors multiple proteasomal
subunits, including PSMB5 (β5) and PSMA3 (α7) which
we were previously shown to be upregulated at the protein
level in the BTZ-resistant CEM lines [29]. In addition, a
limited number of small duplications and deletions on
different chromosomes were observed. Similar genetic
alterations were identified in CEM/BTZ200 cells
(Supplementary Figure S1B). Karyotype analysis of
CEM/WT and CEM/BTZ200 cells confirmed the loss
of chromosome X and duplication of chromosome 14
(Supplementary Figure S1C and S1D).

to target the proteasome subunit PSME4 and disrupt the
autophagosome pathway in BTZ-resistant MM cells [54],
was not down-regulated in CEM/BTZ cells, indicating
non-overlapping profiles in BTZ-resistant acute leukemia
and MM cells. An overview of expression validated target
genes of the differentially expressed miRNAs is presented
in Supplementary Table S1. Differentially expressed
miRNAs were not located on amplified or deleted genomic
regions identified in the arrayCGH analysis.

miRNA array analysis

In order to identify differences in response to BTZ
exposure in sensitive and BTZ resistant CEM cells,
parental CEM/WT cells were treated with 7 nM BTZ for
24 hours (CEM/WT_BTZ) and compared to the different
resistant sublines, treated for 24 hours with a concentration
of BTZ on which they normally thrive (CEM/BTZ7 with
7 nM, CEM/BTZ100 with 100 nM and the CEM/BTZ200
with 200 nM of BTZ). Ratios of gene expression were
calculated as compared to untreated parental CEM/WT.
Figure 2 shows the 50 most upregulated and downregulated
genes after treatment of CEM/WT cells with BTZ
for 24 hours. After clustering, 2 groups with highly
differentially expressed genes between CEM/WT_BTZ and
all resistant subtypes were identified. The right top side of
Figure 2 shows a closer view of cluster 1, containing genes
highly down-regulated in CEM/WT_BTZ cells which were
essentially unchanged in the BTZ-resistant CEM sublines.
The functions of the genes in cluster 1 were diverse and
affected pathways including: cell proliferation, immune
response, TGF-β pathway and transcriptional regulation.
When focusing on cluster 2, the genes upregulated in the

Gene expression profile (GEP) analysis

miRNA array analysis was performed to identify
possible regulatory miRNAs involved in BTZ resistance.
Figure 1 shows all differentially expressed miRNAs in
CEM/BTZ100 and CEM/BTZ200 cells as compared to
parental CEM/WT cells. Among the most down-regulated
miRNAs were the hypoxia-induced miR-210 [43], the
Myc down-regulated miR-23a [44], the hematological
differentiation inducing miR-150 (reviewed in [45])
and the possible tumor suppressor miR-149 [46]. Of the
upregulated miRNAs, miR-181c has been associated
with cell proliferation [47, 48] and miR-19b has been
correlated with 5-FU resistance [49]. In contrast to these
miRNAs supporting pro-survival, two other upregulated
miRNA’s have been described to have the opposite effect.
miR- 101 has been described to be a pro-apoptotic factor
in childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia [50] and miR-7
as an tumor suppressor inhibiting various receptor tyrosine
kinases such as EGFR [51], IGF-1R [52] and p21 activated
kinase (PAK1) [53]. miR-29b, which was recently shown

Figure 1: Differential miRNA expression between BTZ-resistant CEM cells and CEM/WT. Red color represents
upregulation, green color downregulation.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

74781

Oncotarget

CEM/WT_BTZ and unchanged in the BTZ-resistant cell
lines are nearly all involved in UPR, apoptosis or JNK
cascade signaling (Figure 2 right, bottom). Clearly, the
stress response observed in the CEM/WT cells by BTZ was
not observed in the BTZ-resistant CEM cells.
Of the highest differentially expressed genes
comparing the CEM/WT_BTZ to the CEM/BTZ7,
several genes overlapped with the genes found in clusters
1 and 2 (Figure 2) and several other genes were identified
(Figure 3A). Among the genes that were down-regulated
in the BTZ-resistant CEM lines as compared to the
CEM/WT_BTZ cells were several stress-related genes
(including DNAJB1, DDIT3, HSP1 and HSPA1A) and
immune-related genes (including CXCL2, CXCL3, and
IL-8). The most down-regulated gene was XIST, which
resides on the X-chromosome and which is in concordance
with our array CGH analysis.

The list of upregulated genes contains several
genes encoding for enzymes involved in detoxification
(including ALDH7A1, ALH2, GSTM3 and DHRS2),
CD1 genes (CD1A, CD1D and CD1E), the cell cycle
gene TERT and several genes involved in cytoskeleton
regulation and vesicle migration (ENAH, SCRN1 (SES1),
SGEF, TMSB15A, C9orf58 (AIF1L) and MARCKS. Of
all genes, MARCKS (myristoylated alanine-rich C-kinase
substrate) was the most differentially overexpressed gene
with a 25- to 42-fold upregulation in the BTZ-resistant
leukemia cell lines.
It has been shown that BTZ induces upregulation of
multiple proteasomal genes after short-term drug exposure
[10]. The expression of constitutive proteasomal genes
in CEM/WT cells was upregulated upon BTZ exposure
(Figure 3B). Interestingly, only a small difference was
observed in proteasomal gene expression when comparing

Figure 2: Top 50 upregulated and top 50 significantly down-regulated genes (p < 0.05) comparing CEM/WT_BTZ
(CEM/WT cells incubated for 24 hrs with 7 nM BTZ) to CEM/BTZ7 (CEM cells resistant to 7 nM BTZ). The figure
depicts this selection of genes for all CEM variations as a ratio of the untreated CEM/WT cells. (Clustering performed using Cluster 3.0)
An overview of top 50 upregulated and top 50 down-regulated genes is depicted. For genes in cluster 1 and cluster 2, gene annotation and
function are provided.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

74782

Oncotarget

parental cells and BTZ-resistant tumor cell lines after
24 hours of BTZ treatment. Upon BTZ treatment, CEM/
WT cells displayed an upregulation of the constitutive
proteasome along with down-regulation of the immune
proteasome (i.e. subunits PSMB8, PSMB9 and PSMB10).
In BTZ-resistant cell lines, apart from upregulation
of the constitutive proteasome, expression of immune
proteasome was largely normalized to CEM/WT levels.
To gain more insight into the interaction between
upregulated and downregulated genes, pathway as well as
gene set enrichment analysis was performed. Using the
GeneGo tool, several protein stress pathways known to be
involved in BTZ-induced cytotoxicity [6, 7, 55], including
“apoptosis and survival endoplasmic reticulum stress
response” and “protein folding response to proteins stress”
were identified showing upregulation of several genes
in CEM/WT_BTZ as compared to untreated parental
CEM/WT cells (Supplementary Figure S2A and  S2B).
When CEM/BTZ7 was compared with CEM/WT_BTZ,
a downregulation of these pathways was observed

(Supplementary Figure S2A and S2C). An overview of
the top identified affected network processes including
these protein stress pathways when comparing CEM/WT_
BTZ to the untreated parental CEM/WT cells is shown in
Table 1 (left column). In contrast, when the resistant CEM/
BTZ7 cells were compared with CEM/WT_BTZ, the
opposite trend was observed in these pathways (Table 1,
right column) indicating a lack of stress in these BTZresistant cells.
Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA) confirmed
upregulation of several stress-related gene sets in CEM/
BTZ cells, including the set of genes most significantly
changed after exposure to the proteasome inhibitor
epoxomicin (gene set CONCANNON_APOPTOSIS_
BY_EPOXOMICIN_UP [56]). Proliferation, protein
metabolism and MYC-related gene sets were downregulated. In contrast, the CEM/BTZ7 gene expression
profile was enriched for MYC-regulated genes and
did not show upregulation of protein stress gene sets.
(Supplementary Table S2). In addition, miRNA expression

Figure 3: (A) Top 20 up- and downregulated genes (p < 0.05) and (B) proteasomal genes comparing CEM/WT_BTZ with CEM/BTZ7
(p < 0.05). Results for all CEM variations are depicted as a ratio of the untreated CEM/WT. Red color represents upregulation, whereas
green downregulation of expression.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

74783

Oncotarget

Table 1: Overview of network processes identified using GeneGO pathway analysis based on GEP
CEM/WT_BTZ vs CEM/WT
Process –networks

P value

CEM/BTZ7 vs CEM/WT_BTZ
Process –networks

P value

Protein folding_Response to unfolded
proteins

9,87E-11

Protein folding_Response to unfolded proteins

6,19E-11

Protein folding_Folding in normal condition

4,06E-07

Apoptosis_Endoplasmic
pathway

1,17E-05

Apoptosis_Endoplasmic reticulum stress
pathway

3,34E-05

Protein folding_Folding in normal condition

2,42E-05

Apoptosis_Apoptotic mitochondria

1,27E-03

Apoptosis_Apoptotic mitochondria

2,60E-04

Protein folding_Protein folding nucleus

3,20E-03

Reproduction_Male sex differentiation

7,11E-04

Proteolysis_Ubiquitin-proteasomal
proteolysis

8,27E-03

Immune response_Th17-derived cytokines

1,12E-03

Inflammation_IL-6 signaling

8,34E-03

Reproduction_FSH-beta signaling pathway

1,21E-03

Inflammation_Neutrophil activation

9,02E-03

Protein folding_Protein folding nucleus

2,58E-03

Cytoskeleton_Intermediate filaments

1,05E-02

Inflammation_IL-6 signaling

3,43E-03

Protein folding_ER and cytoplasm

1,18E-02

Reproduction_Spermatogenesis, motility and
copulation

4,45E-03

reticulum

stress

Corresponding P-values are given for the identified pathways. Pathways analysis was performed using GeneGO on significant
altered genes (P < 0.05) and with a fold change > Log2.
was correlated with GEP. In this selected gene list,
pathway analysis was performed as well. An overview of
the highly affected pathways is depicted in Table 2. Apart
from comparable pathways including protein handling
and apoptosis, several cytoskeleton-associated pathways
were identified. Collectively, these data indicate that ER
stress is most likely to be the dominant mechanism of
BTZ-induced cytotoxicity in parental CCRF-CEM cells.
Whereas, the diminished stress observed in drug resistant
CEM/BTZ7 cells suggests a novel resistance mechanism
circumventing the UPR.

of phosphorylated MARCKS were examined in CEM/
WT and CEM/BT200 cells. Notably, CEM/BTZ200 cells
expressed a low basal level of phosphorylated MARCKS,
which was inducible upon stimulation of cells with PMA
and only partially blocked (35% pMARCKS reduction) by
treatment with MANS [57] (Figure 4C).

Vesicle-mediated ubiquitin exocytosis
MARCKS protein was previously shown to be
involved in multiple exocytosis pathways [58], e.g.
mucin secretion [59], mast cell degranulation [60] and
membrane targeting of plasmalemmal precursor vesicles
during axon development [61]. Since gene expression
profiling studies for CEM/BTZ cells (Figure 3) revealed
that apart from MARCKS, several other genes involved in
exocytosis, mostly cytoskeleton rearrangement genes, were
also upregulated, we hypothesized that vesicle-mediated
export of accumulated ubiquitinated proteins contributes
to BTZ resistance through bypassing the proteasome and
the UPR. To explore this hypothesis we first investigated
whether or not the ubiquitinated proteins co-localized
with MARCKS in vesicles in BTZ-resistant sublines. We
subsequently determined the secretion of vesicles by BTZresistant sublines by following the uptake of vesicles by
recipient HeLa cells after 24 hour exposure to supernatant
derived from BTZ-resistant sublines. Figure 5A depicts
the results of the background staining in the untreated
parental CEM/WT showing hardly any MARCKS protein

MARCKS upregulation
To confirm the upregulation of MARCKS in BTZresistant leukemia cell lines at the protein level, Western
blot analysis was performed as described previously
[29]. Figure 4A shows a marked 500 fold upregulation
of MARCKS in CEM/BTZ200 cells as compared to
parental CEM cells. Consistently, a 60 fold upregulation
was found in the previously described BTZ-resistant
AML cells (THP-1/BTZ200) [32] as compared to THP1/WT (Figure 4A). Remarkably, MARCKS was also
upregulated in the recently established CEM and THP-1
(1500 fold and 5 fold respectively) sublines with acquired
resistance to the immunoproteasome inhibitor PR-924 [42]
and a CEM subline (630 fold) with acquired resistance to
the proteasome inhibitor salinosporamide A (marizomib)
[41] (Figure 4B). Next to MARCKS expression, levels
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

74784

Oncotarget

Table 2: Overview of process-networks and gene ontology processes based on miRNA analysis
Process -networks

P-value

GO-Processes

P-value

Proteolysis_Ubiquitin-proteasomal proteolysis

2,95 -03

Apoptotic process

1,35E-07

Protein folding_Protein folding nucleus

6,19E-03

Programmed cell death

2,23E-07

Cell adhesion_Leucocyte chemotaxis

1,51E-02

Cellular response to stress

2,63E-07

Cytoskeleton_Regulation of cytoskeleton
rearrangement

1,64E-02

Regulation of molecular function

1,21E-06

Cell adhesion_Synaptic contact

1,71E-02

Cell death

1,48E-06

Cell adhesion_Cell junctions

1,84E-02

Cellular response to oxidative stress

1,55E-06

Cytoskeleton_Intermediate filaments

2,89E-02

Death

1,68E-06

Cytoskeleton_Actin filaments

3,06E-02

Cellular protein metabolic process

1,73E-06

Apoptosis_Apoptotic nucleus

3,99E-02

Cellular protein modification process

2,47E-06

Reproduction_Progesterone signaling

4,36E-02

Protein modification process

2,47E-06

E

Corresponding P-values are given for the identified pathways. Pathways analysis was performed using GeneGO on targets
genes of the top10 miRNA’s of which expression is correlating with gene expression.
and moderate levels of ubiquitin. After 24 hour exposure
of CEM/BTZ7 cells to 30 nM BTZ, MARCKS was
upregulated when compared to parental CEM/WT cells.
Moreover, ubiquitin was increased, partly in vesicular
structures, and partly as a diffuse cytoplasmic distribution.
CEM/BTZ200 cells exposed to 400 nM BTZ displayed a

clear co-localization of ubiquitin with MARCKS mostly
in vesicle-like structures (Figure 5A and Supplementary
Figure S4). Of note, co-localization was not observed with
phosphorylated MARCKS (not shown). After exposure of
HeLa cells to supernatant of CEM/WT cells we performed
immunocytochemical staining to detect possible ubiquitin-

Figure 4: (A)  MARCKS protein expression of CEM and THP-1 cells and their BTZ resistant sublines CEM/BTZ200 and THP-1/
BTZ200. In addition, the CEM/BTZ200 cultured in absence of BTZ for several months (CEM/BTZ-200) is also included. Western blot
analysis of MARCKS (green) and β-actin (red) as a loading control, (B) Ratio of the quantification of MARCKS protein expression (β-actin
normalized) of proteasome inhibitor (PR924 and Marizomib) resistant THP-1 and CEM cells relative to their parental cells. (C) Basal levels
of phosphorylated MARCKS expression in CEM/WT and CEM/BTZ cells before and after incubation with PMA (50 nM for 1 hour,), and
a combination of PMA and RNS (1 hour 100 nM) or MANS (1 hour 100 µM).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

74785

Oncotarget

containing vesicles (Figure 5B). These vesicles were not
identified in HeLa cells exposed to supernatants of any of
the untreated CEM/WT or BTZ-resistant sublines. When
CEM/BTZ7 cells were exposed to 7 nM BTZ, a drug
concentration on which they normally thrive, no uptake of
vesicles was noted in HeLa cells. However, when CEM/
BTZ7 cells were more stringently stressed with 30 nM of
BTZ, uptake of ubiquitin-containing vesicles started to
appear; the most pronounced uptake of ubiquitin-containing
vesicles by HeLa cells was observed after the addition of
a supernatant of CEM/BTZ200 cells treated with 400 nM
BTZ. Further support to the hypothesis that the secretion
of ubiquitin is indeed vesicle-mediated, was achieved
by PKH67 staining. Figure 5C shows co-localization of
ubiquitin and PKH in CEM/BTZ7 and CEM/BTZ200
after treatment with 30 nM and 400 nM BTZ, respectively.
Moreover, when supernatants of these cell cultures were
added to HeLa cells, co-localization of ubiquitin and PKH
was observed in recipient cells (Figure  5D), indicating
the uptake of ubiquitin-containing vesicles. No uptake
was seen in untreated WT and BTZ-resistant cells. Taken
together, these data strongly suggest that the ER stress
that is normally observed after aggresome formation of
aggregated ubiquitinated proteins is circumvented in BTZresistant CEM cells by exocytosis of vesicles containing
the aggregated ubiquitinated proteins.
To confirm these findings for primary patient
samples, we selected a pediatric ALL patient displaying
ex vivo sensitivity to BTZ (LC50: 6 nM, Figure 5) and
compared it to a BTZ-resistant patient sample (LC50:
262 nM). Figure 5E and 5F show MARCKS and ubiquitin
expression in these leukemic cells after 24 h exposure to a
low dose (7 nM) and a high dose (400 nM) of BTZ. At low
BTZ concentrations, the sensitive patient sample readily
shows high ubiquitin and MARCKS expression with some
co-localization. When this sample was incubated with high
concentration of BTZ, vitality of the cells was heavily
compromised along with diffuse staining of both proteins.
The BTZ-resistant patient sample exposed to a low dose of
BTZ shows some diffuse upregulation of ubiquitin as well
as MARCKS expression. When this sample was incubated
with 400 nM BTZ, ubiquitin and MARCKS show clear colocalization in small vesicular structures inside as well as
outside the cell. The level of co-localization is quantified in
the corresponding line scan. Together, these data show that
the phenomenon of ubiquitin exocytosis by BTZ-exposed
cells is also observed in primary patient samples.

of these conditions appeared to alter BTZ sensitivity
(Supplementary Figure S3; (A); BTZ dose response
curve after PMA stimulation or MANS inhibition; (B)
co-incubation with a concentration range of UCN-01
or (C) staurosporine). Moreover, siRNA knockdown of
MARCKS by 56% (Supplementary Figure S3D) did not
influence BTZ sensitivity (Supplementary Figure S3E;
BTZ dose response curve after MARCKS siRNA). These
data do not support a causal role of MARCKS in the
described exocytosis mechanism and show that partial
knockdown of MARCKS is insufficient to restore BTZ
sensitivity.

Clinical prognostic value of MARCKS expression
Given the overexpression of MARCKS in BTZresistant leukemia cells, we explored whether or not
MARCKS overexpression may serve as predictive
marker of BTZ unresponsiveness in clinical samples
of acute leukemia patients. To this end, we examined
primary leukemic specimens of patients from the phase
II childhood refractory/relapsed ALL trial (AALL07P1
study, NCT00873093) in which BTZ is administered
in two intensive re-induction regimens containing
vincristine, prednisone, PEG-asparaginase, doxorubicin
or cyclophosphamide and etoposide followed by
methotrexate treatment. In these pretreatment samples
we determined MARCKS expression levels using
Western blot analysis and explored the correlation
with the clinical response [Complete remission (CR)
or no complete remission (No-CR)]. Figure 6 shows
MACRKS expression in the CR and no-CR groups
(β-actin and CEM/WT normalized). Twelve out of
30 patient specimens (40%) in the CR group did not
show MARCKS expression when compared to 4 out
of 14 (29%) in the no-CR group. MARCKS expression
in the CR group was lower as compared with no-CR
group (median 13.4 vs 50.3), with a trend for statistical
significance (P = 0.073).

DISCUSSION
The current study reports a novel mechanism of
exocytosis-mediated extrusion of vesicle-like structures
containing ubiquitinated proteins in BTZ-resistant
CEM leukemia cells as a novel modality to overcome
proteolytic stress over a broad range of cytotoxic BTZ
concentrations. MARCKS protein was identified as a
BTZ resistance biomarker associated with the intracellular
emergence of these vesicle-like structures. Furthermore,
ubiquitin-containing vesicles from supernatants of
BTZ-treated resistant CEM/BTZ cells were taken up by
HeLa cells, hence confirming actual exocytosis of the
ubiquitin-containing vesicles. Thus, through exocytosis of
ubiquitinated proteins, the proteasomal load is decreased
during proteasome inhibition, leading to cell survival.

MARCKS and BTZ resistance
We assessed whether PMA-stimulation of
MARCKS phosphorylation or inhibition of MARCKS
phosphorylation by either the inhibitory peptide MANS
[62] or inhibition of protein kinase C (PKC) activity
by staurosporine or UCN01 had an impact on BTZ
sensitivity in CEM/BTZ200 cells. However, neither
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

74786

Oncotarget

Figure 5: Fluorescence microscopy of vesicles staining in WT and BTZ-resistant CEM cells, primary patient samples,
and HeLa cells. (A) MARCKS and ubiquitin protein expression in CEM/WT cells, CEM/BTZ7 cells treated with 30 nM BTZ for

24 hours and CEM/BTZ200 cells treated with 400 nM BTZ for 24 hours. Left panel: DAPI nuclear staining (Blue), ubiquitin (Green), and
MARCKS (Red), right panel: level of co-localization of MARCKS with ubiquitin as calculated by the SlideBook microscope software as
depicted in blue (normal) to magenta (strong co-localization). Single channel images are shown in Supplementary Figure S4. (B) Ubiquitin
(green) and DAPI (blue) staining in HeLa cells after 24 hour incubation with the supernatants of cultures of CEM/WT, CEM/BTZ7 and
CEM/BTZ200 cells untreated or treated with the indicated concentrations of BTZ for 1 hour. (C) PKH labeling and ubiquitin protein
expression in CEM/WT cells, CEM/BTZ7 and CEM/BTZ200 cells treated with the abovementioned concentrations of BTZ for 24 hours.
DAPI nuclear staining (Blue), PKH (Green), and ubiquitin (Red) and level of colocalization of MARCKS with ubiquitin as calculated by
the SlideBook microscope software as depicted in blue to magenta (Right panel). (D) Ubiquitin (red) and PKH (green) staining in HeLa
cells after 24 hour incubation with the supernatants of cultures of CEM/WT, CEM/BTZ7 and CEM/BTZ200 cells untreated or treated with
the indicated concentrations of BTZ. Calculated co-localization is depicted in yellow. (E) Ubiquitin (green) and MARCKS (red) staining
in a primary ALL patient samples, one sensitive to BTZ (LC50: BTZ 6 nM) and one resistant to BTZ (LC50 BTZ: 262 nM) (F) without
and after incubation with low concentration (7 nM) or high concentration of BTZ (400 nM). In the merge figure, the co-localization of the
two proteins is shown in yellow. The right top of the figures depict a quantification using a line scan through the corresponding area of
interest (α and β).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

74787

Oncotarget

As proof of principle, this phenomenon was confirmed
in two primary ALL patient samples. To our knowledge,
this is the first report showing an association between
resistance to proteasome inhibitors and exocytosis of
ubiquitinated proteins.
The concept of disposal of abundant ubiquitinated
proteins is supported by our gene expression profiling
and miRNA data. It is well established that accumulation
of polyubiquitinated proteins as a result of proteasome
inhibition induces an unfolded protein response (UPR)
in several tumor models [6, 14, 63–65]. Pathway analysis
of BTZ-treated CEM/WT cells also showed enrichment
for unfolded protein response and ER-stress pathways.
Interestingly, upon BTZ exposure, BTZ-resistant
leukemia cell lines showed a major reduction of active
protein stress-related pathways, indicating a resistance
mechanism circumventing UPR. This phenomenon has
also been found to be reduced in BTZ-resistant mantle cell
lymphoma (MCL) [66] and multiple myeloma [67, 68].
Apart from stress-related pathways, correlation of miRNA
expression with gene expression identified cytoskeletonassociated pathways as being altered in BTZ-resistant
CEM cells (Table 2). This latter pathway is involved in
transport of vesicles, hence lending further support to the
exocytosis hypothesis (reviewed in [69]). In addition,
pan-genomic profiling of CEM/BTZ cells confirmed
the genetic basis of the previously reported upregulated
expression of mutated PSMB5 (β5) as a mechanism of
BTZ resistance [29].
Apart from proteasomal degradation, the endosomal
sorting complexes required for transport (ESCRT)
pathway and autophagy have been described in transport
and selective removal of ubiquitinated proteins. In the
ESCRT pathway, membrane proteins are taken up in
endosomes and fuse with lysosomes resulting in the
degradation of its content [70]. However, since ubiquitin

is removed from membrane proteins before endocytosis
through the ESCRT, ubiquitin-containing vesicles would
not be present. Hence, this mechanism is not likely to be
involved in the BTZ-resistant CEM cells.
Secondly, under conditions of proteasome protein
overload or energy deprivation, proteins and intact
organelles can be degraded by lysosomes through
autophagy [71]. In the context of proteasome inhibition or
overload, autophagy of ubiquitinated protein aggregates is
of interest [72, 73]. While autophagosomes normally fuse
with lysosomes resulting in degradation of the aggresome,
exocytosis of phagosomes has been opted in a process
called exophagy [74]. Although increased autophagy,
mediated by increased HSPB8 expression, has recently
been demonstrated to be involved in BTZ resistance
in multiple myeloma cells [20], we found no increased
activity of this pathway in BTZ-resistant CEM cells. Our
GEP data showed no upregulation of autophagy-related
proteins, including HSPB8, while even a downregulation
of the autophagy initiator SQSTM1 was seen (data not
shown). In addition, the autophagy marker LC3B was
not increased in BTZ-resistant cell lines as determined by
Western blot and immunocytochemistry (data not shown)
and hence does not explain the phenomenon of vesicular
exocytosis of ubiquitinated proteins we describe in this
paper.
Buschow et al. [75] recently showed exosomes
that were relatively enriched for ubiquitinated proteins as
compared to total cell lysates [76]. Although their model
was postulated, the exact mechanism of biogenesis and
release of these exosomes was not elucidated. Since
autophagy/exophagy and an ESCRT-dependent pathway
are not supported by our data, BTZ- resistant CEM cells
may have adopted the activation of an ESCRT-independent
pathway as has been described by Buschow et al. By PKH
labeling, ubiquitin-containing vesicles/exosomes emerging

Figure 6: Pre-treatment MARCKS protein expression (Western blot) in primary ALL samples stratified according to
response to BTZ-containing treatment (Complete remission (CR) after induction chemotherapy vs no CR). Data are
presented after normalization to β-actin. For both groups, the mean and standard error of the mean (SEM) is depicted.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

74788

Oncotarget

in CEM/BTZ cells during increasing BTZ concentrations
were characterized by double membrane structures which
remained intact during cellular release, interaction and
accumulation in HeLa recipient cells. As such, these cells
which are proteasome activity proficient have the capacity
to process polyubiquitinated proteins.
Our GEP studies identified the MARCKS gene
to be highly overexpressed in BTZ-resistant CEM
cells. The association of MARCKS protein with BTZ
resistance was originally identified by Micallef et al. [77]
in MM RPMI 8226-R5 cells with acquired resistance
to the farnesyltransferase inhibitor R115777 and 3-fold
cross-resistant to BTZ [78]. Unlike CEM/BTZ cells,
RPMI8226-R5 cells had no mutations in the PSBM5 gene.
Recently, Yang et al. [79] showed that upregulation of
phosphorylated MARCKS in three BTZ-resistant multiple
myeloma cell lines as well as in primary resistant MM
specimens. They showed that low levels of BTZ resistance
achieved through MARCKS regulating the SKP2/p27Kip1
cell cycle pathway [79, 80]. Consistently, in leukemia
cells we show here the upregulation of MARCKS protein
in CEM/BTZ cells as well as CEM cells with acquired
resistance to new generation proteasome inhibitors
Marizomib and PR924 [41, 42]. However, unlike MM
cells, in leukemia cells we noted marginal basal levels

of MARCKS phosphorylation suggesting no major
involvement in leukemia cells that were selected for BTZ
resistance. Notably, high levels of unphosphorylated
MARCKS may be concordant with other well
established functions of MARCKS in secretion processes
[58–62]. Specifically, membrane-bound unphosphorylated
MARCKS, rather than cytoplasmic phosphorylated
MARCKS, can be a partner protein in facilitating
transport of vesicles along the cytoskeletal axis and their
secretion [61, 81]. This function would be consistent
with co-localization studies of intracellular MARCKS
and ubiquitin-containing vesicles and MARCKS not
being associated with secreted vesicles. To this end,
our encouraging preliminary correlations of MARCKS
expression and BTZ response in pediatric acute leukemia
patients warrant follow up study in a large cohort of BTZtreated ALL.
In conclusion, BTZ resistant T-ALL CEM cells
displaying upregulation of mutant PSMB5, have a
coexisting novel mechanism of exocytosis of ubiquitinated
proteins, hence circumventing UPR (Figure 7). Both
mechanisms are readily observed in resistance to several
proteasome inhibitors indicating common resistance
adaptation to proteasome inhibitors rather than limited
to BTZ only. Further research is warranted to determine

Figure 7: Summary model of the involvement of MARCKS and vesicular exocytosis of ubiquitinated proteins in
BTZ-resistant leukemia cells. CEM/BTZ cells harboring PSMB5 mutations (indicated by *) have a diminished capacity of inhibition
of proteasomal catalytic activity by BTZ [29, 31]. Upon exposure of CEM/BTZ7 and CEM/BTZ200 cells to BTZ concentrations that
block PSMB5 activity (30 nM and 400 nM BTZ, respectively), these cells accumulate polyubiquitinated proteins. This coincides with the
biogenesis of vesicle-like structures incorporating these ubiquitinated proteins. These vesicles then traffic along actin/cytoskeleton axis to
the plasma membrane with MARCKS protein serving as partner protein. Here myristoylated-anchored MARCKS facilitates exocytosis
of vesicles which subsequently can be taken up by recipient (HeLa) cells. Proficient proteasomal activity in recipient cells would allow
degradation of ubiquitinated proteins from BTZ-resistant cells. Through a mechanism of exocytosis-mediated extrusion of vesicles
containing ubiquitinated proteins, BTZ-resistant cells can overcome proteolytic stress over a broad range of BTZ concentrations.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

74789

Oncotarget

whether or not MARCKS is a clinical biomarker which
can predict proteasome inhibitor resistance and may aid
to select patients for BTZ- containing treatment strategies.

Netherlands). DNA quantity and quality were determined
spectrophotometrically (Nanodrop, Wilmington, USA),
only including samples with an A260/230 ratio above 1.8.
DNA from Kreatech (Megapool reference DNA female,
EA-100F) was used as reference DNA. Labeling and
hybridization, and data analysis was performed according
to the methods described by Haan et al. [83] In short,
after DNA isolation, labeling (Enzo Genomic DNA
Labeling kit, Enzo Life Sciences, Raamsdonksveer, The
Netherlands) and purification were undertaken (QIAGEN
MinElute PCR Purification Kit, Westburg, Leusden,
The Netherlands) with an elution volume of 2 × 10.5 μl,
according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Cy3- and
Cy5-labelled DNA samples were combined with Cot-1
DNA (Invitrogen, Breda, The Netherlands) and blocking
agent in hybridization buffer (Agilent Technologies).

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Antibodies and chemicals
Anti-β-actin (clone c4) mouse mAb was purchased
from Boehringer Mannheim (Almere, The Netherlands),
α-Tubulin (B-7) mouse mAb and Ubiquitin (P4D1) mouse
mAb from Santa Cruz Biotechnology (Santa Cruz, CA,
USA), MARCKS (D88D11) XP® Rabbit mAb #5607 and
phospho-MARCKS (D13D2) (S159/S163) Rabbit mAb
#11992S from Cell Signaling (Danvers, MA, USA), the
IRDye infrared secondary labeled antibodies from LICOR Biosciences (Lincoln, NE, USA) and the Polyclonal
goat anti-mouse Immunoglobulins/FITC (Goat F(ab’)2)
from Dako (Glostrup, Denmark).
Trypsin was purchased from Lonza (Basel,
Switzerland), PKH67 labeling kit, paraformaldehyde
(PFA), Triton-X100, 4ʹ, 6-diamidino-2-phenylindole
(DAPI) and phorbol-myristic acid (PMA) from SigmaAldrich (Zwijndrecht, The Netherlands). BTZ was
obtained via the VUmc hospital pharmacy department.
MARCKS inhibitory peptide (MANS) was from Genemed
Synthesis Inc (San Antonio, Texas, USA).

Hybridization
Hybridization on an Agilent SurePrint G3 Human
CGH Microarray 4 × 180 K array the design of which
can be found in the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO)[84]
platform GPL8687 (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo) was
performed for 24 h at 65°C. Microarrays were scanned
using the Agilent Technologies Scanner G2505C (Agilent
Technologies), and scans were quantified using the
Agilent Feature Extraction software (version 10.5.1.1;
Agilent Technologies, protocol CGH_105_Dec08)
using default settings. The oligonucleotides were mapped
along the  genome according to the NCBI36/hg18 built
(March 2006).

Human tumor cell lines and patient samples
The generation, cell culture conditions and mutation
status of the PSMB5 gene of human leukemic CCRF-CEM
cells and BTZ-resistant sublines, selected at 7, 100 and
200 nM BTZ, was previously described [29]. HeLa cells
were obtained from ATCC (Manassas, VA, USA). Pretreatment primary leukemic specimens were obtained from
patients included in the phase II childhood refractory/
relapsed ALL trial (AALL07P1 study, NCT00873093).
After thawing the vials blast percentage was determined
using May-Grunwald/Giemsa staining. Inclusion criteria
for analysis was a blast percentage of > 20%. The samples
were snap-frozen for MARCKS protein analysis.

DNA copy number data pre-processing
Genome data analysis was performed using R
Version 2.6.2. The aCGH profiles were dewaved [85], and
median was normalized. Segmentation was performed
using the Bioconductor R-package DNAcopy version
1.22.1 [86] and subsequently DNA copy number calls for
loss, normal, gain or amplification were made using the
using R-package CGHcall version 2.8.0 [87]. Accuracy of
normalization, segmentation and calling was verified by
visual inspection using Nexus Copy Number (version 5,
www.BioDiscovery.com).
Raw
and
normalized
data are online available on the GEO [84] platform
GSE74633. (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/query/acc.
cgi?acc=GSE74633).

Karyotyping
Karyotyping was performed on GTG banded
metaphase cells and described according ISCN 2013 [82].

Microarray comparative genome hybridization
(arrayCGH) for DNA copy number analysis

Gene expression microarray
Sample preparation

Sample preparation and DNA isolation

Wild type CCRF-CEM cells were harvested for
RNA isolation after 24 hours of incubation with 7 nM
BTZ (CEM/WT_BTZ). The several BTZ resistant
sublines were cultured without BTZ for 7 days, prior to a
24 hour exposure on the BTZ concentration on which they

Prior to DNA isolation, BTZ-resistant sublines were
cultured in bortezomib-free medium for a week. DNA
isolation was performed using column-based method
(QIAamp DNA Mini Kit, Westburg, Leusden, The
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

74790

Oncotarget

miRNA expression array

normally thrive (CEM/BTZ7 with 7 nM, CEM/BTZ100
with 100 nM and the CEM/BTZ200 with 200 nM of BTZ).
Expression ratios were calculated using the untreated
CEM/WT as a reference. CEM/BTZ-200, referring to
CEM/BTZ200 cells cultured in absence of BTZ for
several weeks, were included as an additional reference
but were not exposed to BTZ prior to gene expression
array experiments.

The miRNA expression profiles of the samples
were profiled using Agilent human miRNA Microarray
V2 (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA). Each array
contained 60-mer probes representing 723 human and
76 human viral miRNAs from the miRBase (Version 10.1)
the design of which can be found in the GEO [84] platform
GPL8227 (http://www.ncbi. nlm.nih.gov/geo). The array
experiment was carried out using Agilent miRNA system
protocol v2.0. Briefly, each RNA sample was labeled
with Cyanine3-pCp and hybridized to the Agilent human
miRNA microarray using the miRNA Complete Labeling
and Hyb Kit (Agilent p/n 5190–0456). The slide was
washed using Gene Expression Wash Buffer kit (Agilent
p/n 5188–5327), and then scanned using an Agilent DNA
microarray scanner. The raw miRNA expression data were
extracted from the scanned image using Agilent Feature
Extraction Software V10. Coefficient of variation (CV)
within groups of replicate probes was used as a quality
control measure to reflect the intra-array reproducibility.
The raw expression values of miRNA were imported into
Agilent GeneSpring Software V10 for normalization and
identification of differentially expressed miRNAs between
bortezomib-resistant and wild-type cells.

RNA isolation and quality control
Total RNA was isolated using RNAbee
(AMSBiotechnology), according to the protocol provided
by AMSBiotechnology. Nanodrop ND-1000 was used
for accurate nucleic acid concentration measurements.
Quality control was performed using Agilent 2100
Bioanalyzer (Agilent Technologies) in combination with
the Agilent RNA 6000 NanoLabChip kit to visualize
and quantify the amount of RNA. Samples with a RNA
Integrity Number (RIN) of > 7, concentration of > 5 µg/ml
and two distinct peaks corresponding to the 28S and 18S
ribosomal RNA bands at a ratio of 1.8–2.0 as seen on
Agilent electrophorogram were used.

Expression microarray

Data analysis

After RNA isolation, labeling (labeling
performed with Agilent Low RNA Input Fluorescent
Linear Amplification Kit, Agilent Technologies) and
purification were undertaken (RNeasy Mini Kit, Agilent
Technologies). Equal amounts of Cy3-CTP and Cy5-CTP
labeled samples were hybridized to Agilent 4 × 44 K
Whole Human Genome arrays (Agilent Technologies) the
design of which can be found in the GEO [84] platform
GPL4133 (http://www.ncbi. nlm.nih.gov/geo), according
to the manufacturer’s instructions. Hybridization was
carried out for 17 h with rotation at 65°C in a hybridization
oven. Microarrays were scanned using the Agilent DNA
Microarray Scanner (Agilent Technologies), and scans
were quantified using the Agilent Feature Extraction
software (Agilent Technologies).

After normalization as described above, basic
data handling and data preparation for further analysis
was performed using Microsoft Excel 2010, clustering
and subsequent visualization was performed using
Cluster 3.0 and Treeview [91]. GO gene annotation was
obtained from Database for Annotation, Visualization and
Integrated Discovery (DAVID) [92], pathway analysis
and gene set enrichment analysis were performed using
GeneGoMetacore (http://www.genego.com/metacore.
php) and Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA, Broad
institute) [93, 94]. Integrated analyses of DNA copy
number, gene expression microarray and miRNA
expression data were performed as described by Menezes
et al. [95] and Van Iterson et al. [96]. Raw and normalized
data are online available on the GEO [84] platform
GSE74632. (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/query/acc.
cgi?acc=GSE74632).

Expression data pre-processing
Raw expression data generated by the Feature
Extraction software were imported into the R statistical
environment using the LIMMA package [88] in
bioconductor (http://www.bioconductor.org). After
background correction, the intensity distributions within
and between arrays were normalized using the Loess
[89] and quantile [90] algorithm, respectively. Raw and
normalized data are online available on the GEO [84]
platform GSE74634. (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/
query/acc.cgi?acc=GSE74634).

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Immunocytochemistry
Cytospins were fixed for 10 min with 4% of
paraformaldehyde (PFA) in PBS pH 7.4, permeabilized
for 10 min with 0.1% of Triton-X100 in PBS and blocked
with 10% of fetal calf serum (FCS) in PBS for 1 hour.
Primary (anti-MARCKS diluted 1:50, anti-ubiquitin 1:20)
and secondary antibodies (diluted 1:100) were incubated
for 1 hour each at 4°C. Nuclei were stained with 300 nM

74791

Oncotarget

4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI). Images of the cell
line experiments were obtained using the Zeiss Axiovert
200M Marianas™ inverted microscope connected to a
cooled Cooke Sensicam SVGA CCD camera [Cooke
Co., Tonawanda, NY] as previously described by
Wojtuszkiewicz et al. [97]. DAPI, Alexa 488 and Alexa
647 were irradiated with a pulsed laser at 405 nM, 499 nm
and 654 nm respectively. A 63× oil objective with NA
1.4 was used to image the sample. Data collected were
processed using SlideBook™ software (SlideBook™
version 5.5.2.0 [Intelligent Imaging Innovations, Denver,
CO]). The data acquisition protocol included optical
planes to obtain 3-D definition.
Confocal scanning laser microscopy was performed
on a Leica TCS SP8 STED 3X (Leica Microsystems)
as previously described by Wojtuszkiewicz et al. [97].
Abberior STAR 580 and Alexa 647 were irradiated
with a pulsed white light laser at 588 nm and 654 nm
respectively. A 100× oil objective with NA 1.4 was used
to image the sample. Detection of the fluorescent signal
was performed with gated Hybrid Detectors. Finally, the
images were deconvolved using Huygens Professional
(Scientific Volume Imaging).

specificity of the proteasome inhibitors BzLLLCOCHO,
PS-341, and MG-132. Cancer Res. 2006; 66:6379–6386.
5. 	 Ruschak AM, Slassi M, Kay LE, Schimmer AD. Novel
proteasome inhibitors to overcome bortezomib resistance.
J Natl Cancer Inst. 2011; 103:1007–1017.
6. 	 Fribley A, Zeng Q, Wang CY. Proteasome inhibitor
PS-341 induces apoptosis through induction of endoplasmic
reticulum stress-reactive oxygen species in head and neck
squamous cell carcinoma cells. Mol Cell Biol. 2004;
24:9695–9704.
  7. 	 Obeng EA, Carlson LM, Gutman DM, Harrington WJ Jr,
Lee KP, Boise LH. Proteasome inhibitors induce a terminal
unfolded protein response in multiple myeloma cells.
Blood. 2006; 107:4907–4916.
  8. 	 Mitsiades N, Mitsiades CS, Richardson PG, Poulaki  V,
Tai YT, Chauhan D, Fanourakis G, Gu X, Bailey C, Joseph M,
Libermann TA, Schlossman R, Munshi NC, et al. The
proteasome inhibitor PS-341 potentiates sensitivity of multiple
myeloma cells to conventional chemotherapeutic  agents:
therapeutic applications. Blood. 2003; 101:2377–2380.
  9.	 Hideshima T, Mitsiades C, Akiyama M, Hayashi T,
Chauhan  D, Richardson P, Schlossman R, Podar K,
Munshi  NC, Mitsiades N, Anderson KC. Molecular
mechanisms mediating antimyeloma activity of proteasome
inhibitor PS-341. Blood. 2003; 101:1530–1534.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS AND FUNDING
This study was supported by grants from the
Stichting Translational Research, Cancer Center
Amsterdam (to JC), NWO-AGIKO (to NEF), and KIKA
(to GJK and JC).
YG Assaraf is recipient of visiting professor
fellowships from the Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts
and Sciences (KNAW) and the Netherlands Organization
for Scientiﬁc Research (NWO) and his scientiﬁc
contributions are also supported by the Dutch Foundation
Children Cancer-free (KIKA).

10. 	 Mitsiades N, Mitsiades CS, Poulaki V, Chauhan D,
Fanourakis G, Gu X, Bailey C, Joseph M, Libermann TA,
Treon SP, Munshi NC, Richardson PG, Hideshima T, et al.
Molecular sequelae of proteasome inhibition in human
multiple myeloma cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2002;
99:14374–14379.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST

12. 	 Fang J, Rhyasen G, Bolanos L, Rasch C, Varney M,
Wunderlich M, Goyama S, Jansen G, Cloos J, Rigolino C,
Cortelezzi A, Mulloy JC, Oliva EN, et al. Cytotoxic effects
of bortezomib in myelodysplastic syndrome/acute myeloid
leukemia depend on autophagy-mediated lysosomal
degradation of TRAF6 and repression of PSMA1. Blood.
2012; 120:858–867.

11. 	 Hideshima T, Richardson P, Chauhan D, Palombella VJ,
Elliott PJ, Adams J, Anderson KC. The proteasome inhibitor
PS-341 inhibits growth, induces apoptosis, and overcomes
drug resistance in human multiple myeloma cells. Cancer
Res. 2001; 61:3071–3076.

The authors declare that they have no conflicts of
interest pertaining to this manuscript.

REFERENCES

13. 	Qin JZ, Ziffra J, Stennett L, Bodner B, Bonish BK,
Chaturvedi V, Bennett F, Pollock PM, Trent JM,
Hendrix MJ, Rizzo P, Miele L, Nickoloff BJ. Proteasome
inhibitors trigger NOXA-mediated apoptosis in melanoma
and myeloma cells. Cancer Res. 2005; 65:6282–6293.

1. 	 Anderson KC. The 39th David A. Karnofsky Lecture:
bench-to-bedside translation of targeted therapies in
multiple myeloma. J Clin Oncol. 2012; 30:445–452.
2. 	Shah JJ, Orlowski RZ. Proteasome inhibitors in
the treatment of multiple myeloma. Leukemia. 2009;
23:1964–1979.
3. 	 Niewerth D, Dingjan I, Cloos J, Jansen G, Kaspers G.
Proteasome inhibitors in acute leukemia. Expert Rev
Anticancer Ther. 2013; 13:327–337.

14. 	 Niewerth D, Jansen G, Assaraf YG, Zweegman S,
Kaspers  GJ, Cloos J. Molecular basis of resistance to
proteasome inhibitors in hematological malignancies. Drug
Resist Updat. 2015; 18:18–35.

4. 	 Crawford LJ, Walker B, Ovaa H, Chauhan D, Anderson KC,
Morris TC, Irvine AE. Comparative selectivity and

15. 	 Cloos J, Niewerth D, Jansen G. Pre-clinical studies on the
molecular basis of resistance and modalities to overcome

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

74792

Oncotarget

resisance in hematological malignancies. In: Ping Dou.Q
(ed.), Resistance to Proteasome Inhibitors in Cancer. Berlin
and Heidelberg: Springer-Verlag. 2014; 181–204.

resistance in mantle cell lymphoma cells. Leuk Res. 2012;
36:912–920.
26. 	 Leung-Hagesteijn C, Erdmann N, Cheung G, Keats JJ,
Stewart AK, Reece DE, Chung KC, Tiedemann RE.
Xbp1s-negative tumor B cells and pre-plasmablasts mediate
therapeutic proteasome inhibitor resistance in multiple
myeloma. Cancer Cell. 2013; 24:289–304.

16. 	 Kale AJ, Moore BS. Molecular mechanisms of acquired
proteasome inhibitor resistance. J Med Chem. 2012;
55:10317–10327.
17. 	 McConkey DJ, Zhu K. Mechanisms of proteasome inhibitor
action and resistance in cancer. Drug Resist Updat. 2008;
11:164–179.

27. 	 Liu CY, Shiau CW, Kuo HY, Huang HP, Chen MH,
Tzeng  CH, Chen KF. Cancerous inhibitor of protein
phosphatase 2A determines bortezomib-induced apoptosis
in leukemia cells. Haematologica. 2013; 98:729–738.

18. 	 Filipczak PT, Piglowski W, Glowala-Kosinska M,
Krawczyk Z, Scieglinska D. HSPA2 overexpression
protects V79 fibroblasts against bortezomib-induced
apoptosis. Biochem Cell Biol. 2012; 90:224–231.
19. 	 Shringarpure R, Catley L, Bhole D, Burger R, Podar  K,
Tai  YT, Kessler B, Galardy P, Ploegh H, Tassone P,
Hideshima T, Mitsiades C, Munshi NC, et al. Gene
expression analysis of B-lymphoma cells resistant and
sensitive to bortezomib. Br J Haematol. 2006; 134:145–156.
20. 	 Hamouda MA, Belhacene N, Puissant A, Colosetti P,
Robert G, Jacquel A, Mari B, Auberger P, Luciano F. The
small heat shock protein B8 (HSPB8) confers resistance to
bortezomib by promoting autophagic removal of misfolded
proteins in multiple myeloma cells. Oncotarget. 2014;
5:6252–6266. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.2193.
21. 	 Verbrugge SE, Assaraf YG, Dijkmans BA, Scheffer GL,
Al M, den Uyl D, Oerlemans R, Chan ET, Kirk CJ,
Peters GJ, van der Heijden JW, de Gruijl TD, Scheper RJ,
et  al. Inactivating PSMB5 mutations and P-glycoprotein
(multidrug resistance-associated protein/ATP-binding
cassette B1) mediate resistance to proteasome inhibitors:
ex vivo efficacy of (immuno)proteasome inhibitors in
mononuclear blood cells from patients with rheumatoid
arthritis. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2012; 341:174–182.
22. 	 Minderman H, Zhou Y, O’Loughlin KL, Baer MR.
Bortezomib activity and in vitro interactions with
anthracyclines and cytarabine in acute myeloid leukemia
cells are independent of multidrug resistance mechanisms
and p53 status. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol. 2007;
60:245–255.
23.	 O’Connor R, Ooi MG, Meiller J, Jakubikova J, Klippel S,
Delmore J, Richardson P, Anderson K, Clynes M,
Mitsiades CS, O’Gorman P. The interaction of bortezomib
with multidrug transporters: implications for therapeutic
applications in advanced multiple myeloma and
other  neoplasias. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol. 2013;
71:1357–1368.
24. 	 Gareau C, Fournier MJ, Filion C, Coudert L, Martel D,
Labelle Y, Mazroui R. p21(WAF1/CIP1) upregulation
through the stress granule-associated protein CUGBP1
confers resistance to bortezomib-mediated apoptosis. PLoS
One. 2011; 6:e20254.
25. 	 Kim A, Park S, Lee JE, Jang WS, Lee SJ, Kang HJ, Lee SS.
The dual PI3K and mTOR inhibitor NVP-BEZ235 exhibits
anti-proliferative activity and overcomes bortezomib

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

28. 	 Smith AJ, Dai H, Correia C, Takahashi R, Lee SH,
Schmitz I, Kaufmann SH. Noxa/Bcl-2 protein interactions
contribute to bortezomib resistance in human lymphoid
cells. J Biol Chem. 2011; 20; 286:17682–17692.
29. 	 Franke NE, Niewerth D, Assaraf YG, van Meerloo J,
Vojtekova K, van Zantwijk CH, Zweegman S, Chan ET,
Kirk CJ, Geerke DP, Schimmer AD, Kaspers GJ, Jansen G,
et al. Impaired bortezomib binding to mutant beta5 subunit
of the proteasome is the underlying basis for bortezomib
resistance in leukemia cells. Leukemia. 2012; 26:757–768.
30. 	 Fuchs D, Berges C, Opelz G, Daniel V, Naujokat C. Increased
expression and altered subunit composition of proteasomes
induced by continuous proteasome inhibition establish
apoptosis resistance and hyperproliferation of Burkitt
lymphoma cells. J Cell Biochem. 2008; 103:270–283.
31. 	 Niewerth D, Kaspers GJ, Assaraf YG, van Meerloo J,
Kirk CJ, Anderl J, Blank JL, van de Ven PM, Zweegman S,
Jansen G, Cloos J. Interferon-gamma-induced upregulation
of immunoproteasome subunit assembly overcomes
bortezomib resistance in human hematological cell lines. J
Hematol Oncol. 2014; 7:7.
32. 	 Oerlemans R, Franke NE, Assaraf YG, Cloos J, van
Zantwijk I, Berkers CR, Scheffer GL, Debipersad K,
Vojtekova K, Lemos C, van der Heijden JW, Ylstra B,
Peters GJ, et al. Molecular basis of bortezomib resistance:
proteasome subunit beta5 (PSMB5) gene mutation
and  overexpression of PSMB5 protein. Blood. 2008;
112:2489–2499.
33. 	 Perez-Galan P, Mora-Jensen H, Weniger MA, Shaffer AL,
III, Rizzatti EG, Chapman CM, Mo CC, Stennett LS,
Rader C, Liu P, Raghavachari N, Stetler-Stevenson M,
et al. Bortezomib resistance in mantle cell lymphoma
is associated with plasmacytic differentiation. Blood. 2011;
117:542–552.
34. 	 Ruckrich T, Kraus M, Gogel J, Beck A, Ovaa H, Verdoes M,
Overkleeft HS, Kalbacher H, Driessen C. Characterization
of the ubiquitin-proteasome system in bortezomib-adapted
cells. Leukemia. 2009; 23:1098–1105.
35. 	 Niewerth D, Franke NE, Jansen G, Assaraf YG, van
Meerloo J, Kirk CJ, Degenhardt J, Anderl J, Schimmer AD,
Zweegman S, de H, V, Horton TM, et al. Higher ratio
immune versus constitutive proteasome level as novel

74793

Oncotarget

indicator of sensitivity of pediatric acute leukemia
cells  to  proteasome inhibitors. Haematologica. 2013;
98:1896–1904.

47. 	 Rio P, Agirre X, Garate L, Banos R, Alvarez L, San
Jose-Eneriz E, Badell I, Casado JA, Garin M, Prosper F,
Bueren JA. Down-regulated expression of hsa-miR-181c
in Fanconi anemia patients: implications in TNFalpha
regulation and proliferation of hematopoietic progenitor
cells. Blood. 2012; 119:3042–3049.

36. 	 de Wilt LH, Jansen G, Assaraf YG, van Meerloo J, Cloos J,
Schimmer AD, Chan ET, Kirk CJ, Peters GJ, Kruyt FA.
Proteasome-based mechanisms of intrinsic and acquired
bortezomib resistance in non-small cell lung cancer.
Biochem Pharmacol. 2012; 83:207–217.

48. 	 Sanchez-Diaz PC, Hsiao TH, Chang JC, Yue D, Tan MC,
Chen HI, Tomlinson GE, Huang Y, Chen Y, Hung JY. Deregulated microRNAs in pediatric cancer stem cells target
pathways involved in cell proliferation, cell cycle and
development. PLoS One. 2013; 8:e61622.

37. 	 Lu S, Yang J, Chen Z, Gong S, Zhou H, Xu X, Wang J.
Different mutants of PSMB5 confer varying bortezomib
resistance in T lymphoblastic lymphoma/leukemia cells
derived from the Jurkat cell line. Exp Hematol. 2009;
37:831–837.

49. 	 Kurokawa K, Tanahashi T, Iima T, Yamamoto Y, Akaike Y,
Nishida K, Masuda K, Kuwano Y, Murakami Y, Fukushima
M, Rokutan K. Role of miR-19b and its target mRNAs in
5-fluorouracil resistance in colon cancer cells. J Gastroenterol.
2012; 47:883–895.

38. 	 Ri M, Iida S, Nakashima T, Miyazaki H, Mori F, Ito A,
Inagaki A, Kusumoto S, Ishida T, Komatsu H, Shiotsu Y,
Ueda R. Bortezomib-resistant myeloma cell lines: a role
for mutated PSMB5 in preventing the accumulation of
unfolded proteins and fatal ER stress. Leukemia. 2010;
24:1506–1512.

50. 	 Liu X, Zou L, Zhu L, Zhang H, Du C, Li Z, Gao C,
Zhao X, Bao S, Zheng H. miRNA mediated up-regulation
of cochaperone p23 acts as an anti-apoptotic factor in
childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Leuk Res. 2012;
36:1098–1104.

39. 	Suzuki E, Demo S, Deu E, Keats J, rastu-Kapur S,
Bergsagel  PL, Bennett MK, Kirk CJ. Molecular
mechanisms of bortezomib resistant adenocarcinoma cells.
PLoS One. 2011; 6:e27996.
40. 	 Huber EM, Heinemeyer W, Groll M. Bortezomibresistant mutant proteasomes: structural and biochemical
evaluation  with carfilzomib and ONX 0914. Structure.
2015; 23:407–417.

51. 	 Kefas B, Godlewski J, Comeau L, Li Y, Abounader R,
Hawkinson M, Lee J, Fine H, Chiocca EA, Lawler S,
Purow B. microRNA-7 inhibits the epidermal growth
factor receptor and the Akt pathway and is down-regulated
in glioblastoma. Cancer Res. 2008; 68:3566–3572.
52. 	 Jiang L, Liu X, Chen Z, Jin Y, Heidbreder CE, Kolokythas A,
Wang A, Dai Y, Zhou X. MicroRNA-7 targets IGF1R
(insulin-like growth factor 1 receptor) in tongue squamous
cell carcinoma cells. Biochem J. 2010; 432:199–205.

41. 	 Niewerth D, Jansen G, Riethoff LF, van Meerloo J,
Kale AJ, Moore BS, Assaraf YG, Anderl JL, Zweegman S,
Kaspers GJ, Cloos J. Antileukemic activity and mechanism
of drug resistance to the marine Salinispora tropica
proteasome inhibitor salinosporamide A (Marizomib). Mol
Pharmacol. 2014; 86:12–19.

53. 	 Reddy SD, Ohshiro K, Rayala SK, Kumar R. MicroRNA-7,
a homeobox D10 target, inhibits p21-activated kinase 1 and
regulates its functions. Cancer Res. 2008; 68:8195–8200.

42. 	 Niewerth D, van Meerloo J, Jansen G, Assaraf YG,
Hendrickx TC, Kirk CJ, Anderl JL, Zweegman S,
Kaspers GJ, Cloos J. Anti-leukemic activity and mechanisms
underlying resistance to the novel immunoproteasome
inhibitor PR-924. Biochem Pharmacol. 2014; 89:43–51.

54. 	 Jagannathan S, Vad N, Vallabhapurapu S, Vallabhapurapu S,
Anderson KC, Driscoll JJ. MiR-29b replacement inhibits
proteasomes and disrupts aggresome+autophagosome
formation to enhance the antimyeloma benefit of
bortezomib. Leukemia. 2015; 29:727–738.

43. 	 Devlin C, Greco S, Martelli F, Ivan M. miR-210: More than
a silent player in hypoxia. IUBMB Life. 2011; 63:94–100.

55. 	 Milani M, Rzymski T, Mellor HR, Pike L, Bottini A,
Generali D, Harris AL. The role of ATF4 stabilization and
autophagy in resistance of breast cancer cells treated with
Bortezomib. Cancer Res. 2009; 69:4415–4423.

44. 	 Gao P, Tchernyshyov I, Chang TC, Lee YS, Kita K,
Ochi T, Zeller KI, De Marzo AM, Van Eyk JE, Mendell JT,
Dang CV. c-Myc suppression of miR-23a/b enhances
mitochondrial glutaminase expression and glutamine
metabolism. Nature. 2009; 458:762–765.

56. 	 Concannon CG, Koehler BF, Reimertz C, Murphy BM,
Bonner C, Thurow N, Ward MW, Villunger A, Strasser A,
Kogel D, Prehn JH. Apoptosis induced by proteasome
inhibition in cancer cells: predominant role of the p53/
PUMA pathway. Oncogene. 2007; 26:1681–1692.

45. 	 Vasilatou D, Papageorgiou S, Pappa V, Papageorgiou E,
Dervenoulas J. The role of microRNAs in normal and
malignant hematopoiesis. Eur J Haematol. 2010; 84:1–16.

57. 	 Chen CH, Thai P, Yoneda K, Adler KB, Yang PC, Wu R.
A peptide that inhibits function of Myristoylated AlanineRich C Kinase Substrate (MARCKS) reduces lung cancer
metastasis. Oncogene. 2014; 33:3696–3706.

46. 	 Wang Y, Zheng X, Zhang Z, Zhou J, Zhao G, Yang J,
Xia L, Wang R, Cai X, Hu H, Zhu C, Nie Y, Wu K, et al.
MicroRNA-149 inhibits proliferation and cell cycle
progression through the targeting of ZBTB2 in human
gastric cancer. PLoS One. 2012; 7:e41693.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

58. 	 Green TD, Crews AL, Park J, Fang S, Adler KB. Regulation
of mucin secretion and inflammation in asthma: a role

74794

Oncotarget

for MARCKS protein? Biochim Biophys Acta. 2011;
1810:1110–1113.

71. 	 Mizushima N, Levine B, Cuervo AM, Klionsky DJ.
Autophagy fights disease through cellular self-digestion.
Nature. 2008; 451:1069–1075.

59. 	 Park J, Fang S, Crews AL, Lin KW, Adler KB. MARCKS
regulation of mucin secretion by airway epithelium in vitro:
interaction with chaperones. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol.
2008; 39:68–76.

72. 	 Kirkin V, McEwan DG, Novak I, Dikic I. A role
for  ubiquitin in selective autophagy. Mol Cell. 2009;
34:259–269.
73. 	 McConkey DJ, White M, Yan W. HDAC inhibitor
modulation of proteotoxicity as a therapeutic approach in
cancer. Adv Cancer Res. 2012; 116:131–163.

60. 	 Gadi D, Wagenknecht-Wiesner A, Holowka D, Baird B.
Sequestration of phosphoinositides by mutated MARCKS
effector domain inhibits stimulated Ca(2+) mobilization
and  degranulation in mast cells. Mol Biol Cell. 2011;
22:4908–4917.

74. 	 Abrahamsen H, Stenmark H. Protein secretion:
unconventional exit by exophagy. Curr Biol. 2010;
20:R415-R418.

61. 	 Xu XH, Deng CY, Liu Y, He M, Peng J, Wang T, Yuan L,
Zheng ZS, Blackshear PJ, Luo ZG. MARCKS regulates
membrane targeting of Rab10 vesicles to promote axon
development. Cell Res. 2014; 24:576–594.

75. 	 Buschow SI, Liefhebber JM, Wubbolts R, Stoorvogel W.
Exosomes contain ubiquitinated proteins. Blood Cells Mol
Dis. 2005; 35:398–403.
76. 	 Raposo G, Stoorvogel W. Extracellular vesicles: exosomes,
microvesicles, and friends. J Cell Biol. 2013; 200:373–383.
77. 	 Micallef J, Dharsee M, Chen J, Ackloo S, Evans K, Qiu L,
Chang H. Applying mass spectrometry based proteomic
technology to advance the understanding of multiple
myeloma. J Hematol Oncol. 2010; 3:13.
78. 	Buzzeo R, Enkemann S, Nimmanapalli R, Alsina M,
Lichtenheld MG, Dalton WS, Beaupre DM.
Characterization of a R115777-resistant human multiple
myeloma cell line with cross-resistance to PS-341. Clin
Cancer Res. 2005; 11:6057–6064.
79. 	 Yang Y, Chen Y, Saha MN, Chen J, Evans K, Qiu L,
Reece D, Chen GA, Chang H. Targeting phospho-MARCKS
overcomes drug-resistance and induces antitumor activity in
preclinical models of multiple myeloma. Leukemia. 2015;
29:715–726.
80. 	 Yang Y, Saha MN, Qui L, Reece DE, Chang H. Novel
targeting of phospho-MARCKS overcomes drug resistance
and induces anti-tumor activity in preclinical models of
multiple myeloma. Blood. 2013; 122:282.
81. 	 Laux T, Fukami K, Thelen M, Golub T, Frey D, Caroni P.
GAP43, MARCKS, and CAP23 modulate PI(4,5)P(2)
at plasmalemmal rafts, and regulate cell cortex actin
dynamics through a common mechanism. J Cell Biol. 2000;
149:1455–1472.
82. 	 Schaffer LG, McGowan-Joran J, Schmid M. ISCN 2013: an
international system for human cytogenetic nomenclature.
Basel: Karger; 2013.
83. 	 Haan JC, Labots M, Rausch C, Koopman M, Tol J,
Mekenkamp LJ, van de Wiel MA, Israeli D, van Essen HF,
van Grieken NC, Voorham QJ, Bosch LJ, Qu X, et al.
Genomic landscape of metastatic colorectal cancer. Nat
Commun. 2014; 5:5457.
84. 	 Edgar R, Domrachev M, Lash AE. Gene Expression
Omnibus: NCBI gene expression and hybridization array
data repository. Nucleic Acids Res. 2002; 30:207–210.
85. 	 van de Wiel MA, Brosens R, Eilers PH, Kumps C,
Meijer  GA, Menten B, Sistermans E, Speleman F,
Timmerman ME, Ylstra B. Smoothing waves in array CGH
tumor profiles. Bioinformatics. 2009; 25:1099–1104.

62. 	 Li Y, Martin LD, Spizz G, Adler KB. MARCKS protein
is a key molecule regulating mucin secretion by human
airway epithelial cells in vitro. J Biol Chem. 2001;
276:40982–40990.
63. 	 Brennan SK, Meade B, Wang Q, Merchant AA, Kowalski J,
Matsui W. Mantle cell lymphoma activation enhances
bortezomib sensitivity. Blood. 2010; 116:4185–4191.
64. 	 Mozos A, Roue G, Lopez-Guillermo A, Jares P, Campo E,
Colomer D, Martinez A. The expression of the endoplasmic
reticulum stress sensor BiP/GRP78 predicts response to
chemotherapy and determines the efficacy of proteasome
inhibitors in diffuse large b-cell lymphoma. Am J Pathol.
2011; 179:2601–2610.
65. 	 Thomas CG, Spyrou G. ERdj5 sensitizes neuroblastoma
cells to endoplasmic reticulum stress-induced apoptosis.
J Biol Chem. 2009; 284:6282–6290.
66. 	 Weniger MA, Rizzatti EG, Perez-Galan P, Liu D, Wang Q,
Munson PJ, Raghavachari N, White T, Tweito MM,
Dunleavy K, Ye Y, Wilson WH, Wiestner A. Treatmentinduced oxidative stress and cellular antioxidant capacity
determine response to bortezomib in mantle cell lymphoma.
Clin Cancer Res. 2011; 17:5101–5112.
67. 	 Ling SC, Lau EK, Al-Shabeeb A, Nikolic A, Catalano A,
Iland H, Horvath N, Ho PJ, Harrison S, Fleming S,
Joshua DE, Allen JD. Response of myeloma to the
proteasome inhibitor bortezomib is correlated with the
unfolded protein response regulator XBP-1. Haematologica.
2012; 97:64–72.
68. 	 Stessman HA, Baughn LB, Sarver A, Xia T, Deshpande R,
Mansoor A, Walsh SA, Sunderland JJ, Dolloff NG,
Linden  MA, Zhan F, Janz S, Myers CL, et al. Profiling
bortezomib resistance identifies secondary therapies in a mouse
myeloma model. Mol Cancer Ther. 2013; 12:1140–1150.
69. 	 Porat-Shliom N, Milberg O, Masedunskas A, Weigert R.
Multiple roles for the actin cytoskeleton during regulated
exocytosis. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2013; 70:2099–2121.
70. 	 Raiborg C, Stenmark H. The ESCRT machinery in
endosomal sorting of ubiquitylated membrane proteins.
Nature. 2009; 458:445–452.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

74795

Oncotarget

86. 	 Olshen AB, Venkatraman ES, Lucito R, Wigler M. Circular
binary segmentation for the analysis of array-based DNA
copy number data. Biostatistics. 2004; 5:557–572.

analysis: a knowledge-based approach for interpreting
genome-wide expression profiles. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA.
2005; 102:15545–15550.

87. 	 van de Wiel MA, Kim KI, Vosse SJ, van Wieringen WN,
Wilting SM, Ylstra B. CGHcall: calling aberrations for array
CGH tumor profiles. Bioinformatics. 2007; 23:892–894.
88. 	 Smyth G. Limma: linear models for microarray data. In:
Gentleman R, Carey V, Dudoit S, Irizarry R, Huber  W
(eds.), Bioinformatics and Computational Biology
Solutions Using R and Bioconductor. New York: Springer;
2005:397–420.
89. 	 Yang YH, Dudoit S, Luu P, Lin DM, Peng V, Ngai J, Speed
TP. Normalization for cDNA microarray data: a robust
composite method addressing single and multiple slide
systematic variation. Nucleic Acids Res. 2002; 30:e15.
90. 	 Eilers PH, de Menezes RX. Quantile smoothing of array
CGH data. Bioinformatics. 2005; 21:1146–1153.

94. 	 Mootha VK, Lindgren CM, Eriksson KF, Subramanian A,
Sihag S, Lehar J, Puigserver P, Carlsson E, Ridderstrale M,
Laurila E, Houstis N, Daly MJ, Patterson N, et al.
PGC-1alpha-responsive genes involved in oxidative
phosphorylation are coordinately downregulated in human
diabetes. Nat Genet. 2003; 34:267–273.
95. 	 Menezes RX, Boetzer M, Sieswerda M, van Ommen GJ,
Boer JM. Integrated analysis of DNA copy number and
gene expression microarray data using gene sets. BMC
Bioinformatics. 2009; 10:203.
96. 	 van Iterson M, Bervoets S, de Meijer EJ, Buermans HP, ‘t
Hoen PA, Menezes RX, Boer JM. Integrated analysis
of microRNA and mRNA expression: adding biological
significance to microRNA target predictions. Nucleic Acids
Res. 2013; 41:e146.

91. 	 Eisen MB, Spellman PT, Brown PO, Botstein D. Cluster
analysis and display of genome-wide expression patterns.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1998; 95:14863–14868.

97. 	 Wojtuszkiewicz A, Schuurhuis GJ, Kessler FL, Piersma SR,
Knol JC, Pham TV, Jansen G, Musters RJ, van MJ,
Assaraf  YG, Kaspers GJ, Zweegman S, Cloos J, et al.
Exosomes secreted by apoptosis-resistant Acute Myeloid
Leukemia (AML) blasts harbor regulatory network proteins
potentially involved in antagonism of apoptosis. Mol Cell
Proteomics. 2016; 15:1281–1298.

92. 	 Huang dW, Sherman BT, Lempicki RA. Systematic and
integrative analysis of large gene lists using DAVID
bioinformatics resources. Nat Protoc. 2009; 4:44–57.
93. 	 Subramanian A, Tamayo P, Mootha VK, Mukherjee  S,
Ebert  BL, Gillette MA, Paulovich A, Pomeroy SL,
Golub TR, Lander ES, Mesirov JP. Gene set enrichment

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

74796

Oncotarget

