Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No. 16

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Cytogenomic profiling of breast cancer brain metastases reveals
potential for repurposing targeted therapeutics
Aliccia Bollig-Fischer1,5, Sharon K. Michelhaugh2,5, Priyanga Wijesinghe1,5,
Greg Dyson1,5, Adele Kruger3, Nallasivam Palanisamy6, Lydia Choi1,5, Baraa Alosh4,
Rouba Ali-Fehmi4,5, Sandeep Mittal1,2,5
1

Department of Oncology, Wayne State University, Detroit, Michigan, USA

2

Department of Neurosurgery, Wayne State University, Detroit, Michigan, USA

3

Department of Obstetrics/Gynecology, Wayne State University, Detroit, Michigan, USA

4

Department of Pathology, Wayne State University, Detroit, Michigan, USA

5

Karmanos Cancer Institute, Detroit, Michigan, USA

6

Henry Ford Health System, Detroit, Michigan, USA

Correspondence to:
Aliccia Bollig-Fischer, e-mail: bollig@karmanos.org
Keywords: breast cancer, brain metastases, copy number variation, oncogenes, targeted therapy
Received: March 12, 2015	

Accepted: April 11, 2015	Published: April 24, 2015

ABSTRACT
Breast cancer brain metastases remain a significant clinical problem.
Chemotherapy is ineffective and a lack of treatment options result in poor patient
outcomes. Targeted therapeutics have proven to be highly effective in primary breast
cancer, but lack of molecular genomic characterization of metastatic brain tumors is
hindering the development of new treatment regimens. Here we contribute to fill this
void by reporting on gene copy number variation (CNV) in 10 breast cancer metastatic
brain tumors, assayed by array comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH). Results
were compared to a list of cancer genes verified by others to influence cancer. Cancer
gene aberrations were identified in all specimens and pathway-level analysis was
applied to aggregate data, which identified stem cell pluripotency pathway enrichment
and highlighted recurring, significant amplification of SOX2, PIK3CA, NTRK1, GNAS,
CTNNB1, and FGFR1. For a subset of the metastatic brain tumor samples (n = 4) we
compared patient-matched primary breast cancer specimens. The results of our CGH
analysis and validation by alternative methods indicate that oncogenic signals driving
growth of metastatic tumors exist in the original cancer. This report contributes
support for more rapid development of new treatments of metastatic brain tumors,
the use of genomic-based diagnostic tools and repurposed drug treatments.

respond to chemotherapy leaving only surgical resection
and radiotherapy as treatment options with an average
survival of only 6–9 months. If left untreated, the median
survival for a patient is 1 month.
The brain presents a unique and complex tissue
microenvironment and the colonization and formation of
metastatic tumors depends on interactions of the properties
of the microenvironment and the phenotype of the
colonizing metastatic breast cancer cells [3, 4]. This concept
must now be reconciled with knowledge that cancer is
ultimately a genetic disease with pathobiology driven by
somatic gene mutations, i.e., gain-of-function mutations

INTRODUCTION
Despite advances in the treatments for breast cancer,
effective treatments for brain metastases remain elusive.
It is estimated that 30% of breast cancer patients will
develop a brain metastasis, and with extended patient
survival times due to improved drug management this
rate is expected to increase [1, 2]. There are currently
no biomarkers or tests to predict which patients will be
afflicted and typically a brain tumor is only discovered
when a patient exhibits debilitating neurological
symptoms. Patients with metastatic brain tumors do not
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

14614

Oncotarget

in oncogenes and loss-of-function mutations in tumor
suppressors. Yet an examination of the biomedical
literature reveals a relative lack of molecular genomic
characterization of brain metastases [5], which could lead
to effective therapeutic interventions and better patient
outcomes as evidenced by advancements in therapies
guided by molecular targets to treat primary breast tumors,
e.g., drugs targeting estrogen receptor-alpha (ERα) or the
epidermal growth factor receptor ERBB2/HER2 [6]. The
projected feasibility of molecularly-targeted therapies for
metastatic brain tumors is supported by a growing body
of empirical evidence that small tyrosine kinase inhibitors
and antigen-targeted drugs can traverse the blood-brain
barrier and result in clinical benefit for patients harboring
metastatic brain lesions [7–12].
By analyzing copy number aberrations in surgicallyresected metastatic brain tumors and matched primary
breast tumor specimens, the present work provides insights
as to the nature of the genomic lesions that are likely
molecular contributors to brain metastases. Furthermore,
our bioinformatics analysis highlights various oncogene
amplification events that are the focus of molecularly
targeted FDA-approved drugs and drugs in clinical trials
that might be redirected to treat metastatic brain tumors
thus providing a shorter timeline for the design of new
treatment strategies over the development of novel
therapeutic agents.

ratio greater or equal to +/−0.4 (Supplementary Table 2).
According to these criteria there were no recurring gene
losses. Among the recurrent gene amplifications were
oncogenes PIK3CA and MYC, also known to be frequently
amplified in breast cancers. Ingenuity Pathways Analysis
(IPA) of the 55 gene set showed over-representation for
canonical pathways categorized under Cellular Growth,
Proliferation and Development descriptors; and the most
over-represented was the Stem Cell Pluripotency pathway
(p < 0.01; Figure 1); genes in this pathway showing
copy number aberrations in the metastatic tumors were
PIK3CA, SOX2 and the neurotrophin receptor NTRK1.

Cancer gene lesions with highest amplitude
and potential for therapy
We then identified genes showing the highest
levels of amplification in patient tumor specimens with
the rationale that patients receiving the greatest benefit
from molecularly targeted drugs have tumors with high
target levels. We set the minimum amplitude threshold at
a log2 ratio of +/−0.8 and producing a list of 109 genes
(Supplementary Table 3). It was subjected to IPA and again
the Stem Cell Pluripotency pathway rose to significance.
By focusing on genes showing higher amplitude copy
number aberrations as opposed to those that were
recurrent, the numbers of analyzed genes mapping to this
pathway increased, to include SOX2, PIK3CA, NTRK1
as well as GNAS, CTNNB1, and FGFR1 (Figure 2). In
addition, among all the genes in this analyzed data set
13  amplified genes were identified as potential drug
targets, or clinically informative biomarkers (Table 2).

RESULTS
Patient population
As shown in Table 1, all 10 study patients were
female with an average age at primary breast cancer
diagnosis of 51 ± 11 years. The average interval to the
diagnosis of brain metastasis was 3.5 ± 2 years. Out of the
10 patients, 5 were hormone receptor positive (with 3 of
those also ERBB2/HER2 positive), 4 were triple negative,
and the hormone receptor profile was unknown in
1 patient.

Comparing brain metastases with matched
primary cancer tissue
The relationship between cancer driver genes
in primary breast cancer and those in metastatic brain
tumors remains incompletely understood. Here, we pose
the hypothesis that brain colonizing lesions pre-exist in
the primary tumor specimen. It is an attractive hypothesis
because, if true, this knowledge could allow development
of lab tests to predict the propensity toward a metastatic
event in the brain, or suggest therapeutic interventions
to thwart the development of impending metastatic
brain tumors. On the other hand, others put forth the
possibility that important genomic lesions develop
beyond the primary tumor or at the site of metastases [17].
Considering both concepts, we undertook a descriptive
comparison of gene lesions for 4 sets of matched primary
and metastatic specimens. Because only FFPE primary
breast tumor specimens were available, we analyzed FFPE
and fresh frozen metastatic brain tumor tissue samples
and discovered the same cancer gene CNV results for the
same patient specimens exposed to different preparation
and storage. Graphs in Figure 3 display gene symbols and

Re-occurring cancer gene amplifications in
breast metastatic brain tumors
Macro-colonization is described as the rate-limiting
step in metastatic tumor formation, accounting for fewer
than 0.1% of cancer cells that enter the circulatory system
[13–16]. This suggests that the spectrum of mutationactivated oncogenes driving the processes of colonization
and/or metastatic tumor outgrowth is limited, and that
causative lesions would be recurrent in patient specimens.
We investigated this using the copy number aberration
data from our aCGH analysis of 10 metastatic brain tumors
and identified recurring amplifications in 55  cancerlinked genes based on the minimum condition that gene
amplification occurred in 40% of specimens at a log2
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

14615

Oncotarget

Table 1: Study population demographics, breast tumor profiles and systemic treatments
Subject ID

Age at
Interval Primary Tumor
Diagnosis to Brain
Receptor
(years) Metastasis
Profile
(years)

Primary
Tumor
Histologic
Subtype

Systemic Treatment for Primary Tumor

ER+PR+H2N-

HR+

neoadjuvant AC x 4 cycles, no docetaxel, little
response to chemotherapy, proceeded to MRM
with T4N2 disease

5

n/a

n/a

chemotherapy (unspecified) and breast RT after
with primary disease

65

3

ER/PR+

HR+

12–23

41

1

ER-PR-H2N-

TNBC

No chemotherapy because of multiple medical
comorbidities (ESRD, DM)

12–25

58

2.5

ER+PR-H2N+

HR+ HER2+

chemotherapy (unspecified), whole breast RT
after lumpectomy

12–33

39

5

ER+PR+H2N+

HR+ HER2+

AC x 6 cycles, TH, anastrozole, and
zoledronic acid

09–34

38

6.5

09–35

50

12–16

AC+T, post-mastectomy chest wall RT,
anastrozole

12–37

41

6

ER-PR-H2N-

TNBC

5-FU, epirubicin and cyclophosphamide x 6
cycles, whole breast RT then MRM 2 months
later followed by post-mastectomy RT, then
incisional recurrence treated with RT and
capecitabine, then lung metastasis treated with
surgery and docetaxel, then gemcitabine, then
paclitaxel (each drug for disease progression
while on previous chemotherapy agent)

13–02

62

2

ER-PR-H2N-

TNBC

AC+T 2011, post-mastectomy RT

13–03

60

1.5

ER-PR-H2N-

TNBC

neoadjuvant AC+T, whole breast RT after
lumpectomy

13–19

58

2.5

ER-PR+H2N+

HR+ HER2+

ACTH, whole breast RT after lumpectomy

Abbreviations: n/a: not available; ER: estrogen receptor; PR: progesterone receptor; H2N: HER-2/neu; TNBC: triple
negative breast cancer; AC: doxorubicin and cyclophosphamide; AC+T: doxorubicin, cyclophosphamide, and docetaxel;
5-FU: fluorouracil; MRM: modified-radical mastectomy; RT: radiation therapy; ESRD: end-stage renal disease;
DM: diabetes mellitus; TH: docetaxel and trastuzumab (Herceptin); ACTH: doxorubicin and cyclophosphamide
followed by paclitaxel and trastuzumab
entire ERBB2 gene on chromosome 17q12 (Figure 4a).
Analysis of the matched primary tumor by aCGH showed
that specimen was negative for ERBB2 amplification.
This negative result concurs with the clinical pathology
report for the original breast cancer biopsy specimen,
where ERBB2 gene was not amplified according to
FISH (Figure  4b). However, the original pathology
report also describes the primary breast cancer specimen
as being ERBB2 positive (HER2 positive score 3+)
according to IHC testing, which we also demonstrated by
repeating ERBB2 protein-level staining of the primary
specimen (Figure 4c). In addition, IHC analysis of the
13–19 metastatic brain tumor specimen showed strong
ERBB2 staining (Figure 4d).

associated aberrant copy number (log2 ratio) identified in
each FFPE metastatic or primary specimen; the graphs
show if a particular gene lesion was identified in both the
primary and metastatic tumor or if it was unique to either
tumor in each set. Thus evidence from analysis of cancer
gene copy number aberrations indicates that at a gene
lesion level metastatic brain tumors can be highly similar
or divergent from the cancer of origin.
Another important facet to our study of these paired
specimens emerged that underscores the complexities of
measuring oncogene mutations in tumor samples. Figure 4
provides an illustrative case. A graph of data from aCGH
analysis of the metastatic tumor labeled 13–19 shows
a high-level, focused amplification encompassing the
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

14616

Oncotarget

Figure 1: Result of pathways analysis of the set of genes showing repeated copy number gains in DNA from metastatic
brain tumor tissue. a. Significant over-representation (p ≤ 0.05) is observed for each of the displayed canonical pathways and the most
over-represented was the Stem Cell Pluripotency pathway (p < 0.01). Ratio on the right vertical axis refers to the number of genes from the
analyzed data set mapping to each pathway divided by the total number of genes in the pathway. b. The genes mapping to the Stem Cell
Pluripotency pathway from the analyzed data set that showed CNV ≥ 0.4 log2 ratio in ≥40% of the breast metastatic brain tumors included
in the study. The complete list of 55 genes meeting these thresholds is in Supplementary Table 2.

DISCUSSION

specimens? Our analyses describe 10 individual metastatic
specimens and a subset of 4 available matched primary
cancer specimens to appreciate the gene copy number
lesions that are found in the metastatic tumors; honing in
those that may present therapeutic options or important
insights to tumor development.
The amplified oncogenes identified in metastatic
tumor specimens included genes known to be frequently
amplified in breast cancers such as PIK3CA and MYC.
Pathway analysis of gene sets comprising amplifications
showed significant enrichment for the Stem Cell
Pluripotency pathway, highlighting our discovery of
recurring significant amplification of SOX2, PIK3CA,
NTRK1, GNAS, CTNNB1, and FGFR1 in the samples
analyzed. This contributes genomic evidence to reinforce

Breast cancer patients who suffer metastatic brain
tumors are in dire need of improved treatment options.
There is mounting evidence that metastatic cancer patients
will one day benefit from informed molecularly-targeted
therapies based on each individual’s clinical and oncologic
profile. There is growing literature on the molecular
underpinnings of breast cancer metastatic brain tumor
growth [5, 17–27], but even collectively from the literature
the numbers of specimens reported on remain limited; also
for many reports the number of features analyzed were
limited. As such, what remains to be understood is the
topic of this report: what are the mutated oncogenes or
tumor suppressors found in breast metastatic brain tumor

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

14617

Oncotarget

Figure 2: Genes that showed high-level amplification in the breast metastatic brain tumors that map to the stem cell
pluripotency pathway. The figure is the output of Ingenuity Systems pathway analysis (IPA) tool. Genes included in the analysis

demonstrated ≥ 0.8 log2 ratio in at least one specimen of 10. Intensity of color reflects relative amplitude of copy number gain detected,
where darkest red indicates highest amplitude (the copy number log2 ratio data for genes here are in Supplementary Table 3). The orange
Rx symbol points to those genes where targeted inhibitory drugs are available.

Table 2: Copy number variations detected in breast metastatic brain tumors for cancer genes that
are the target of existing drugs
Gene

Number Samples
Identified

Amplification
Range(log2 ratio)

Gene Function

Inhibitor Drug
Examples*

CCND1

1

2.11

other

daunorubicin,
gemtuzumab

DDR2

1

0.85

kinase

regorafenib

ERBB2

2

1.83–2.54

kinase

trastuzumab, lapatinib,
erlotinib

FGFR1

1

1.75

kinase

sorafenib,
dexamethasone

JAK2

1

2.17

kinase

ruxolitinib

JAK3

1

0.81

kinase

tofacitinib, R-348
(Continued )

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

14618

Oncotarget

Gene

Number Samples
Identified

Amplification
Range(log2 ratio)

Gene Function

Inhibitor Drug
Examples*

KDR

1

0.88

kinase

KIT

2

0.86–0.88

transmembrane
receptor

MUC1

2

0.85–0.92

NTRK1

1

0.85

kinase

regorafenib

PDGFRA

2

0.88–2.26

kinase

sunitinib, pazopanib,
imatinib

PIK3CA

2

0.84–1.05

kinase

SF1126, PX-866

RAF1

1

0.86

kinase

vemurafenib, sorafenib

cabozantinib,
bevacizumab
dasatinib, sunitinib

transcription regulator HuHMFG1

Not a complete list.

*

the importance of cancer stem-like cells in promoting
metastatic brain tumors. Cancer stem-like cells represent
a minor subset of cells within a tumor and similarly to
stem cells, they maintain the capability for unlimited selfrenewal and are a potential cell type from the primary
tumor that is motile and invasive and initiates a metastatic
lesion [28–30].
Copy number gains are activating for oncogenes
such as ERBB2 (identified in 2 of 10 metastatic tumor
specimens analyzed) because they cause corresponding
aberrant overexpression of gene transcripts. Among the
more novel genes we uncovered in our analysis (amplified
in 4 of 10 metastatic tumors analyzed) was the neurotrophin
receptor NTRK1, a tyrosine kinase growth factor receptor.
According to database queries NTRK1 is normally highly
expressed in central and peripheral nervous system tissues
and only the lowest levels of expression is detected
in benign breast tissues [31, 32]. Also of interest to the
outcomes of our study, according to data from The Cancer
Genome Atlas (TCGA) — accessed and analyzed via the
cBioPortal — NTRK1 copy number gains occur in 12%
of invasive breast carcinomas (of 962 samples) [33, 34].
Altogether, the data provide early evidence to indicate
that amplification and/or overexpression of NTRK1 has a
potential role in the incidence of metastatic breast tumors
and warrants further study.
The last topic of our discussion addresses whether or
not primary breast cancers harbor the genomic lesions that
are causal in the development of metastatic brain tumors;
as opposed to a scenario where mutations evolve outside
of the primary tumor, perhaps at the site of metastases
prior to macro-colonization. The number of primary
specimens available to us for this study was particularly
limited because often patients with advanced or metastatic
cancers come to the Karmanos Cancer Institute after

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

having had their primary cancer diagnosed and treated
elsewhere. However, based on our analyses of cancer gene
CNV in 4 matched primary breast and metastatic brain
tumors, we witnessed the full spectrum of what might be
observed.
One primary and metastatic tumor set showed nearly
identical cancer gene aberration profiles (Figure  3a).
For this pair CCND1 specifically demonstrated a high
amplification in the primary cancer (1.32 log2 ratio
amplification spanning 1.5 Mb sequence and 13 genes);
a similar amplified region containing CCND1 was more
focused and of increased amplitude in the metastatic
tumor (a 752,615 base pair, 2.2 log2 ratio amplification
comprising only 6 genes, including CCND1, MRGPRD,
MRGPRF, TPCN2, MYEOV and ORAOV1). AKT2
amplification was detected only in the metastatic tumor
samples, as part of a broad low level amplification
event (0.4 log2 ratio, 2.5Mb comprising more than
75 genes/transcripts). Together, the data suggest that AKT2
is not causal for the metastatic lesion, but that CCND1
likely has a role in the primary breast cancer that is
reinforced in the metastatic cancer.
Two paired primary-metastatic tumor sets
demonstrated a set of conserved cancer gene aberrations,
though one set showed additional cancer gene lesions in
the primary cancer specimen and the other had gains in the
metastasis. In one instance, for only the primary tumor (set
13–02 Figure 3b) MET was part of a focal amplification
event (1.1 log2 ratio spanning 287,678 base pairs and
2 genes: MET and CAV1); also, broad amplification
events comprising MYC and DDR2 were identified in
both primary and metastatic samples (≤ 0.8 log2 ratio,
spanning from 5Mb to 40Mb of sequence and upwards
of 100 genes; Figure 3b). Here the trend holds, cancer
gene amplifications at relatively lower log2 ratios were

14619

Oncotarget

Figure 3: Plot of log2 ratio data for cancer gene aberrations discovered in matched primary and metastatic tumor
specimens. Panels a-d. show the individual results of analysis of matched primary breast and metastatic cancer specimens from four
patients. Representing one side of the possible outcomes spectrum, a displays outcomes where the log2 ratios for cancer gene aberrations
were identical in the primary and metastatic tumors. d shows the extreme example where no lesions were discovered in the primary tumor,
but 6 cancer gene aberrations were observed in the metastatic tumor with ERBB2 having the highest copy number gain.

aCGH ERBB2-negative results in the cancer-of-origin
specimen, but the alternative measure that detected high
ERBB2 protein-levels in the specimen by IHC leads to a
conclusion that the dependence of this patient’s cancer on
ERBB2 was sustained in both the primary and metastatic
sites by more than one mechanism. Of note, in the course
of treatment for this primary breast cancer, the patient
did receive anti-ERBB2 therapy as part of her treatment
regimen, which a recent study has shown may actually

associated with broad amplicons comprising many genes,
and thus are less likely indicative of a driver lesion that
would predict response to targeted treatment [35].
The fourth and final matched tumor set showed
no cancer gene aberrations in the primary specimen
according to aCGH analysis, but significant copy number
aberrations were detected for a number of genes in
the metastatic tumor sample; including focused, high
copy number gain for ERBB2. FISH analysis verified
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

14620

Oncotarget

Figure 4: Various clinically viable approaches to measure ERBB2 in metastatic and primary tumors from a single
patient both verify results and reveal complexities in interpreting outcomes. In this specific patient example, a. according
to aCGH analysis high copy number gain for ERBB2 was observed in the metastatic brain tumor specimen. ERBB2 is the only translated
gene that mapped to the focal amplification coordinates HG19: Chr17: 37863329–37866691. b. The result of FISH analysis of the original
biopsied breast cancer specimen concluded that there was normal diploid copy number for ERBB2 in DNA, and this agrees with results of
our aCGH analysis of the primary specimen that were also negative for ERBB2 amplification. c. IHC analysis of the primary breast cancer
specimen indicates that although not DNA amplified, ERBB2 is upregulated at the protein level in the primary specimen. d. MRI scan
of patient (13–19) with right temporal brain metastasis from primary breast cancer. e. IHC of the metastatic brain lesion shows relatively
homogenous immunostaining for ERBB2. Scale bar is 50 μM and also applies to panel c.

contribute to the development of brain metastases [36].
This specific scenario challenges mutation or oncogene
testing algorithms where the objective is to discover an
actionable, activated oncogene in a patient specimen.
While genomic approaches (e.g., aCGH, high-throughput
sequencing of targeted exons or exome sequencing)
conveniently allow for multi-gene testing and thus may
provide benefit over single gene analysis such as by FISH,
all efforts to analyze cancer specimen DNA genomic
methods or by FISH can result in false negatives when
an unforeseen mechanism upregulates an oncogene at
the transcript or protein level. In line with the result we
report here, signaling mechanisms are known to drive
transcription and upregulation of ERBB2 in breast cancer
absent any copy number gain [37].
To conclude, the results of this study demonstrate
the potential to identify an array of known, druggable
oncogenic lesions in breast metastatic brain tumor
specimens – with links to the stem cell pluripotency
pathway. All in all bolstering the expectation that
continued molecular genomic study of primary breast
cancer and metastatic brain tumors will lead to improved
targeted, individualized therapies.

Board and written informed consent was obtained from
all participants. Patients included in this study underwent
craniotomy with microsurgical brain tumor resection as
part of the standard-of-care for the treatment of breast
cancer brain metastases. The study procurement period
was 2009–2013. Fresh tissue specimens were collected
and frozen in liquid nitrogen within 30 min post-resection
and stored at −80°C until analysis. Formalin-fixed
paraffin-embedded (FFPE) specimens were obtained from
the Pathology archive. Patient demographic and clinical
outcomes data collected included: date of birth, gender,
age at diagnosis of primary breast cancer and metastatic
brain tumor, and histopathological features of primary and
metastatic tumors. A description of each specimen from
all 10 patients who contributed to this study – including
ER, ERBB2/HER2 and progesterone receptor (PR) status
and treatments – is provided in Table 1.

Array Comparative Genomic Hybridization
(aCGH) analysis
The analyses were done in a CLIA-certified
laboratory and CGH was run using a methodology
established in that laboratory that is reviewed and
accredited by the College of American Pathologists
(CAP). DNA was isolated from paraffin-embedded tissue
or frozen tissue using the EZ1 Advanced XL magnetic
bead technology, the EZ1 DNA de-paraffinization
method (where appropriate), and the EZ1 DNA Tissue
kit (Qiagen, Valencia, CA). Cytogenomic analysis

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Patients and tissues
This study was approved by the Wayne State
University School of Medicine Institutional Review

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

14621

Oncotarget

were counterstained with Mayer’s hematoxylin before
permanent mounting.
FISH was performed on FFPE tissue using
the Vysis PathVysion ERBB2/HER2 DNA probe kit
(Abbott Molecular Inc., Abbott Park, IL) following the
manufacturer’s protocol. The LSI ERBB2/HER2 DNA
probe (labeled with SpectrumOrange) is specific for the
ERBB2/HER2 gene locus on 17q11.2–q12 while the
CEP 17 DNA control probe (labeled with SpectrumGreen
is specific for the centromeric region of chromosome
17 (17q11.1–q11.1). At least 20 non-overlapping cells
in two separate areas of invasive cancer were scored
following the American Society of Clinical Oncology
(ASCO) and the College of American Pathologists (CAP)
guidelines [41].

was done by array comparative genomic hybridization
(aCGH) method. Sample DNA was pre-assessed
and selected based on Nanodrop spectrophotometer
outcomes to estimate quantity and contaminating
factors and TapeStation (Agilent Technologies, Santa
Clara, CA) digital gel technology to estimate degree
of degradation, where all FFPE samples analyzed
and corresponding heat-treated reference DNA were
observed to be similarly fragmented (range of 1000–
2000bp). aCGH was performed with Agilent SurePrint
G3 ISCA CGH+SNP 180K using a normal characterized
female DNA reference (Agilent Technologies). Cancer
and reference DNA (500ng each) were labeled with
fluorescent dyes, Cy5 and Cy3 respectively, using
the SureTag Complete DNA Labeling Kit (Agilent
Technologies) or Universal Linkage System labeling kit
for DNA from FFPE specimens (Agilent Technologies) as
in [38]. Slides were scanned using an Agilent G4900DA
SureScan Microarray Scanner System, and Log2
ratios for coordinates showing copy number variation
(CNV) were extracted using Agilent CytoGenomics
Edition 2.5.8.1 using the ADM2 threshold set at 6; an
8 probe minimum; and an additional absolute log2 ratio
threshold minimum set at 0.4 for analysis of reoccurring
lesions or minimum of log2 ratio 0.8 to study high
amplitude copy number aberrations. To identify genes
with well-characterized roles in cancer, gene-level data
were compared to a cancer gene list comprising known
cancer promoting genes, oncogenes or tumor suppressor
genes (Supplementary Table 1); the listed genes were
compiled from the Cancer Gene Census (a cancer
atlas project supported by the Wellcome Trust Sanger
Institute, London, UK), and work by Lawrence et al. and
Vogelstein et al. [39, 40]. Ingenuity Systems software
and databases (Qiagen Silicon Valley, Redwood City,
CA) were used for Pathways Enrichment Analysis and
to highlight potentially druggable pathways and genes.
Here the p-value associated with a pathway annotation
is a measure of its statistical significance with respect to
genes in the canonical pathway, eligible genes equal to
the analyzed dataset of interest and a reference set equal
to all human genes probed in the microarray. The p-value
was calculated with the right-tailed Fisher’s Exact Test.
CGH data, raw and processed, are available at http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/query/acc.cgi?token=ozkde
uiwjvkbbij&acc=GSE62009.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
The authors declare that they have no conflict of
interest.

GRANT SUPPORT
This study was supported by a Strategic Research
Initiative Grant awarded by the Karmanos Cancer Institute
(ABF and SM). The Genomics Core and the Biobanking
and Correlative Sciences Core are supported by NIH
Center grant P30 CA022453 to the Karmanos Cancer
Institute at Wayne State University.

Editorial note
This paper has been accepted based in part on peerreview conducted by another journal and the authors’
response and revisions as well as expedited peer-review
in Oncotarget.

REFERENCES
1.	 Nathoo N, Chahlavi A, Barnett GH, Toms SA. Pathobiology
of brain metastases. Journal of clinical pathology. 2005;
58:237–242.
2.	 Niwinska A, Murawska M, Pogoda K. Breast cancer subtypes and response to systemic treatment after whole-brain
radiotherapy in patients with brain metastases. Cancer.
2010; 116:4238–4247.

Immunohistochemistry (IHC) and Fluorescent
In Situ Hybridization (FISH) assays

3.	 Paget S. The distribution of secondary growths in cancer of the breast. 1889. Cancer metastasis reviews. 1989;
8:98–101.

IHC was performed using standard protocols on
5 mM FFPE tissue sections after citrate buffer antigen
retrieval. The ERBB2/HER2 antibody (rabbit clone 29D8,
Cell Signaling Technology, Danvers, MA) was diluted
1:75 and incubated overnight at 4°C. Antibody binding
was visualized with 3,3′-diaminobenzidine and sections

4.	 Hart IR, Fidler IJ. Role of organ selectivity in the determination of metastatic patterns of B16 melanoma. Cancer
research. 1980; 40:2281–2287.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

5.	 Bollig-Fischer A, Michelhaugh SK, Ali-Fehmi R, Mittal S.
The molecular genomics of metastatic brain tumors.
OA Molecular Oncology. 2013; 1:6.
14622

Oncotarget

dormancy, and location dependence of metastatic
­inefficiency. Cancer research. 2000; 60:2541–2546.

6.	 Sharma SV, Settleman J. Oncogene addiction: setting the
stage for molecularly targeted cancer therapy. Genes Dev.
2007; 21:3214–3231.

17.	 Shah SP, Morin RD, Khattra J, Prentice L, Pugh T,
Burleigh  A, Delaney A, Gelmon K, Guliany R, Senz  J,
Steidl C, Holt RA, Jones S, Sun M, Leung G, Moore R, et al.
Mutational evolution in a lobular breast tumour profiled at
single nucleotide resolution. Nature. 2009; 461:809–813.

7.	 Heimberger AB, Learn CA, Archer GE, McLendon RE,
Chewning TA, Tuck FL, Pracyk JB, Friedman AH,
Friedman HS, Bigner DD, Sampson JH. Brain tumors in
mice are susceptible to blockade of epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) with the oral, specific, EGFR-tyrosine
kinase inhibitor ZD139 (iressa). Clinical cancer research :
an official journal of the American Association for Cancer
Research. 2002; 8:3496–3502.

18.	 Kroigard AB, Larsen MJ, Laenkholm AV, Knoop  AS,
Jensen JD, Bak M, Mollenhauer J, Kruse TA, Thomassen M.
Clonal expansion and linear genome e­volution through
breast cancer progression from pre-­
invasive stages to
­asynchronous metastasis. Oncotarget. 2015.

8.	 Gluck S, Castrellon A. Lapatinib plus capecitabine resolved
human epidermal growth factor receptor 2-positive brain
metastases. American journal of therapeutics. 2009;
16:585–590.

19.	 Moelans CB, van der Groep P, Hoefnagel LD,
van de Vijver MJ, Wesseling P, Wesseling J,
van der Wall E, van Diest PJ. Genomic evolution from
primary breast carcinoma to distant metastasis: Few copy
number changes of breast cancer related genes. Cancer
­letters. 2014; 344:138–146.

9.	 Geyer CE, Forster J, Lindquist D, Chan S, Romieu  CG,
Pienkowski T, Jagiello-Gruszfeld A, Crown J, Chan A,
Kaufman B, Skarlos D, Campone M, Davidson N,
Berger  M, Oliva C, Rubin SD, et al. Lapatinib plus
capecitabine for HER2-positive advanced breast cancer.
N Engl J Med. 2006; 355:2733–2743.

20.	 Ding L, Ellis MJ, Li S, Larson DE, Chen K, Wallis JW,
Harris CC, McLellan MD, Fulton RS, Fulton LL,
Abbott RM, Hoog J, Dooling DJ, Koboldt DC, Schmidt H,
Kalicki J, et al. Genome remodelling in a basal-like
breast cancer metastasis and xenograft. Nature. 2010;
464:999–1005.

10.	 Lin NU, Dieras V, Paul D, Lossignol D, Christodoulou C,
Stemmler HJ, Roche H, Liu MC, Greil R, Ciruelos E, Loibl S,
Gori S, Wardley A, Yardley D, Brufsky A, Blum JL, et al.
Multicenter phase II study of lapatinib in patients with brain
metastases from HER2-positive breast cancer. Clinical cancer
research : an official journal of the American Association for
Cancer Research. 2009; 15:1452–1459.

21.	 Da Silva L, Simpson PT, Smart CE, Cocciardi S,
Waddell N, Lane A, Morrison BJ, Vargas AC, Healey S,
Beesley J, Pakkiri P, Parry S, Kurniawan N, Reid L,
Keith P, Faria P, et al. HER3 and downstream pathways
are involved in colonization of brain metastases from breast
cancer. Breast cancer research : BCR. 2010; 12:R46.

11.	 Narayana A, Mathew M, Tam M, Kannan R, Madden KM,
Golfinos JG, Parker EC, Ott PA, Pavlick AC. Vemurafenib
and radiation therapy in melanoma brain metastases.
Journal of neuro-oncology. 2013; 113:411–416.

22.	 Wikman H, Lamszus K, Detels N, Uslar L, Wrage M,
Benner C, Hohensee I, Ylstra B, Eylmann K,
Zapatka M, Sauter G, Kemming D, Glatzel M, Muller V,
Westphal M, Pantel K. Relevance of PTEN loss in brain
metastasis formation in breast cancer patients. Breast cancer
research : BCR. 2012; 14:R49.

12.	 Slamon DJ, Leyland-Jones B, Shak S, Fuchs H, Paton V,
Bajamonde A, Fleming T, Eiermann W, Wolter J,
Pegram M, Baselga J, Norton L. Use of chemotherapy plus
a monoclonal antibody against HER2 for metastatic breast
cancer that overexpresses HER2. N Engl J Med. 2001;
344:783–792.

23.	 Hohensee I, Lamszus K, Riethdorf S, Meyer-Staeckling S,
Glatzel M, Matschke J, Witzel I, Westphal M, Brandt B,
Muller V, Pantel K, Wikman H. Frequent genetic ­alterations
in EGFR- and HER2-driven pathways in breast cancer brain
metastases. The American journal of pathology. 2013;
183:83–95.

13.	 Valastyan S, Weinberg RA. Tumor metastasis: molecular
insights and evolving paradigms. Cell. 2011; 147:275–292.
14.	 Nagrath S, Sequist LV, Maheswaran S, Bell DW,
Irimia D, Ulkus L, Smith MR, Kwak EL, Digumarthy S,
Muzikansky A, Ryan P, Balis UJ, Tompkins RG,
Haber DA, Toner M. Isolation of rare circulating tumour
cells in cancer patients by microchip technology. Nature.
2007; 450:1235–1239.

24.	 Ramaswamy S, Ross KN, Lander ES, Golub TR.
A ­
molecular signature of metastasis in primary solid
tumors. Nature genetics. 2003; 33:49–54.
25.	 Weigelt B, Hu Z, He X, Livasy C, Carey LA, Ewend MG,
Glas AM, Perou CM, Van’t Veer LJ. Molecular portraits
and 70-gene prognosis signature are preserved throughout
the metastatic process of breast cancer. Cancer research.
2005; 65:9155–9158.

15.	 Luzzi KJ, MacDonald IC, Schmidt EE, Kerkvliet N,
Morris VL, Chambers AF, Groom AC. Multistep nature
of metastatic inefficiency: dormancy of solitary cells after
successful extravasation and limited survival of early
­
­micrometastases. The American journal of pathology. 1998;
153:865–873.

26.	 Salhia B, Kiefer J, Ross JT, Metapally R, Martinez RA,
Johnson KN, DiPerna DM, Paquette KM, Jung S, Nasser S,
Wallstrom G, Tembe W, Baker A, Carpten J, Resau J,
Ryken T, et al. Integrated genomic and epigenomic analysis
of breast cancer brain metastasis. PloS one. 2014; 9:e85448.

16.	 Cameron MD, Schmidt EE, Kerkvliet N, Nadkarni KV,
Morris VL, Groom AC, Chambers AF, MacDonald IC.
Temporal progression of metastasis in lung: cell s­ urvival,
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

14623

Oncotarget

27.	 Ahmad A, Ginnebaugh KR, Sethi S, Chen W, Ali R,
Mittal  S, Sarkar FH. miR-20b is up-regulated in brain
­metastases from primary breast cancers. Oncotarget. 2015;
In Press.

Del Valle E, Vilardell F, Iglesias M, Fernandez S,
Landolfi S, et al. Level of HER2 gene amplification predicts
response and overall survival in HER2-positive advanced
gastric cancer treated with trastuzumab. Journal of clinical oncology : official journal of the American Society of
Clinical Oncology. 2013; 31:4445–4452.

28.	 Mani SA, Guo W, Liao MJ, Eaton EN, Ayyanan  A,
Zhou AY, Brooks M, Reinhard F, Zhang CC,
Shipitsin M, Campbell LL, Polyak K, Brisken C, Yang J,
Weinberg RA. The epithelial-mesenchymal transition
generates cells with properties of stem cells. Cell. 2008;
133:704–715.

36.	 Kaplan MA, Ertugrul H, Firat U, Kucukoner M, Inal A,
Urakci Z, Pekkolay Z, Isikdogan A. Brain metastases
in HER2-positive metastatic breast cancer patients who
received chemotherapy with or without trastuzumab. Breast
cancer. 2014.

29.	 Ocana OH, Corcoles R, Fabra A, Moreno-Bueno G,
Acloque H, Vega S, Barrallo-Gimeno A, Cano A,
Nieto MA. Metastatic colonization requires the repression
of the epithelial-mesenchymal transition inducer Prrx1.
Cancer cell. 2012; 22:709–724.

37.	 Ithimakin S, Day KC, Malik F, Zen Q, Dawsey SJ,
Bersano-Begey TF, Quraishi AA, Ignatoski KW,
Daignault S, Davis A, Hall CL, Palanisamy N, Heath AN,
Tawakkol N, Luther TK, Clouthier SG, et al. HER2 drives
luminal breast cancer stem cells in the absence of HER2
amplification: implications for efficacy of adjuvant trastuzumab. Cancer research. 2013; 73:1635–1646.

30.	 Tsai JH, Donaher JL, Murphy DA, Chau S, Yang J.
Spatiotemporal regulation of epithelial-mesenchymal transition is essential for squamous cell carcinoma metastasis.
Cancer cell. 2012; 22:725–736.

38.	 Salawu A, Ul-Hassan A, Hammond D, Fernando M,
Reed M, Sisley K. High quality genomic copy number data
from archival formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded leiomyosarcoma: optimisation of universal linkage system labelling.
PloS one. 2012; 7:e50415.

31.	 Liu X, Yu X, Zack DJ, Zhu H, Qian J. TiGER: a database
for tissue-specific gene expression and regulation. BMC
bioinformatics. 2008; 9:271.
32.	 Uhlen M, Oksvold P, Fagerberg L, Lundberg E,
Jonasson K, Forsberg M, Zwahlen M, Kampf C, Wester K,
Hober S, Wernerus H, Bjorling L, Ponten F. Towards a
knowledge-based Human Protein Atlas. Nature biotechnology. 2010; 28:1248–1250.

39.	 Vogelstein B, Papadopoulos N, Velculescu VE, Zhou S,
Diaz LA Jr, Kinzler KW. Cancer genome landscapes.
Science. 2013; 339:1546–1558.
40.	 Lawrence MS, Stojanov P, Mermel CH, Robinson JT,
Garraway LA, Golub TR, Meyerson M, Gabriel SB,
Lander  ES, Getz G. Discovery and saturation analysis
of cancer genes across 21 tumour types. Nature. 2014;
505:495–501.

33.	 Cerami E, Gao J, Dogrusoz U, Gross BE, Sumer SO,
Aksoy BA, Jacobsen A, Byrne CJ, Heuer ML, Larsson E,
Antipin Y, Reva B, Goldberg AP, Sander C, Schultz N. The
cBio cancer genomics portal: an open platform for exploring multidimensional cancer genomics data. Cancer discovery. 2012; 2:401–404.

41.	 Wolff AC, Hammond ME, Hicks DG, Dowsett M,
McShane  LM, Allison KH, Allred DC, Bartlett JM,
Bilous M, Fitzgibbons P, Hanna W, Jenkins RB, Mangu PB,
Paik S, Perez EA, Press MF, et al. Recommendations for
human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 testing in breast
cancer: American Society of Clinical Oncology/College of
American Pathologists clinical practice guideline update.
Archives of pathology & laboratory medicine. 2014;
138:241–256.

34.	 Gao J, Aksoy BA, Dogrusoz U, Dresdner G, Gross B,
Sumer SO, Sun Y, Jacobsen A, Sinha R, Larsson E,
Cerami  E, Sander C, Schultz N. Integrative analysis of
complex cancer genomics and clinical profiles using the
cBioPortal. Science signaling. 2013; 6:l1.
35.	 Gomez-Martin C, Plaza JC, Pazo-Cid R, Salud A, Pons F,
Fonseca P, Leon A, Alsina M, Visa L, Rivera F, Galan MC,

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

14624

Oncotarget

