Original Article

Clinical Practice Patterns and Cost
Effectiveness of Human Epidermal
Growth Receptor 2 Testing Strategies
in Breast Cancer Patients
Kathryn A. Phillips, PhD1; Deborah A. Marshall, PhD2; Jennifer S. Haas, MD, MSPH3; Elena B. Elkin, PhD4;
Su-Ying Liang, PhD1; Michael J. Hassett, MD5; Ilia Ferrusi, BSc6; Jane E. Brock, MBBS, PhD7; and
Stephanie L. Van Bebber, MSc1

BACKGROUND: Testing technologies are increasingly used to target cancer therapies. Human epidermal
growth factor receptor 2 (HER2) testing to target trastuzumab for patients with breast cancer provides
insights into the evidence needed for emerging testing technologies. METHODS: The authors reviewed literature on HER2 test utilization and cost effectiveness of HER2 testing for patients with breast cancer.
They examined available evidence on: percentage of eligible patients tested for HER2; test methods used;
concordance of test results between community and central/reference laboratories; use of trastuzumab by
HER2 test result; and cost effectiveness of testing strategies. RESULTS: Little evidence was available to
determine whether all eligible patients are tested, how many are retested to confirm results, and how many
with negative HER2 test results still receive trastuzumab. Studies suggested that up to 66% of eligible
patients had no documentation of testing in claims records, up to 20% of patients receiving trastuzumab
were not tested or had no documentation of a positive test, and 20% of HER2 results may be incorrect.
Few cost-effectiveness analyses of trastuzumab explicitly considered the economic implications of various
testing strategies. CONCLUSIONS: There was little information about the actual use of HER2 testing in clinical practice, but evidence suggested important variations in testing practices and key gaps in knowledge

Corresponding author: Kathryn A. Phillips, PhD, Center for Translational and Policy Research on Personalized Medicine (TRANSPERS Center),
Department of Clinical Pharmacy, University of California, San Francisco, 3333 California Street #420, San Francisco, CA 94143-0613; Fax: (415)
502-0792; PhillipsK@pharmacy.ucsf.edu
1
Department of Clinical Pharmacy, University of California-San Francisco, San Francisco, California; 2Department of Clinical Epidemiology and
Biostatistics, McMaster University, and Centre for Evaluation of Medicines, St. Joseph’s Healthcare, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada; 3Division of General
Medicine, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts; 4Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Memorial-Sloan Kettering Cancer
Center, New York, New York; 5Center for Outcomes and Policy Research, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, Massachusetts; 6Department of
Clinical Epidemiology and Biostatistics, McMaster University and Centre for Evaluation of Medicines, St. Joseph’s Healthcare, Hamilton, ON, Canada;
7
Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts

We thank i3 Innovus, Julia Trosman, and the Center for Business Models in Healthcare for their commissioned reports developed for the
Department of Clinical Pharmacy at the University of California-San Francisco. We also thank Mr. Kuo Tong, president and founder of Quorum
Consulting in San Francisco, California, for the use of results from his poster presentation given at the 2007 Breast Cancer Symposium.
Dr. Phillips obtained funding, drafted and revised the manuscript, and provided leadership and supervision in conceptualization and design of the
study, acquisition of data, and analysis and interpretation of data. Drs. Liang and Marshall participated in conceptualization and design of the
study, acquisition of data, analysis and interpretation of data, supervision, and revisions to the manuscript. Dr. Haas participated in
conceptualization and design of the study, analysis and interpretation of the data, and revisions to the manuscript. Drs. Elkin, Hassett, and Brock,
and Ms. Van Bebber participated in design of the study, analysis and interpretation of the data, and revisions to the manuscript. Ms Ferrusi
participated in design of the study, acquisition of the data, analysis and interpretation of the data, and revisions to the manuscript.
Received: November 7, 2008; Revised: January 16, 2009; Accepted: February 5, 2009
Published online September 14, 2009 in Wiley InterScience (www.interscience.wiley.com)
DOI: 10.1002/cncr.24574, www.interscience.wiley.com

5166

Cancer

November 15, 2009

HER2 Testing Practice Patterns/Phillips et al

exist. Given the increasing use of targeted therapies, it is critical to build an evidence base that supports
informed decision making on emerging testing technologies in cancer care. Cancer 2009;115:5166–74.
C 2009 American Cancer Society.
V
KEY WORDS: personalized medicine, targeted therapies, genomics, HER2, trastuzumab, breast cancer,
utilization, cost effectiveness, clinical practice patterns.

Testing technologies have emerged as important
components of healthcare and are accelerating rapidly for
cancer therapies. There are already several well-known
examples of the use of testing and molecular targeted
therapies with more such therapeutics in the pipeline.1
These new testing technologies are essential ingredients in
a shift towards personalized medicine (healthcare targeting medical interventions to patients based on their
individual characteristics, particularly their genetics), and
there is hope that they can improve health outcomes and
reduce expenditures. A critical challenge to the implementation of targeted therapies in oncology is determining
whether and how they will be provided to the individuals
who will benefit most from them.
Human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2)
testing to target trastuzumab treatment (Herceptin, Genentech, Inc., South San Francisco, Calif) for patients with
breast cancer provides an instructive case study to inform
discussion of the use of emerging testing technologies in
clinical practice. HER2 testing was developed to determine which patients have breast cancers that overexpress
the gene HER2, and for those 20%–30% of patients,
treatment with trastuzumab, a humanized monoclonal
antibody, proved to be highly effective. Without the ability to target the drug to this specific population, the drug
would not have been approved.2 HER2 testing is a wellknown example of the successful use of testing to target
cancer treatment that has been used in clinical practice for
older than 10 years. In 1998, the US Food and Drug
Administration (FDA) approved trastuzumab and an
accompanying test for use in patients with metastatic
breast cancer. Their use was expanded to patients with
early-stage breast cancer after 2005, and testing is now recommended for all patients with invasive breast cancer.
Our objective was to examine what is known about
the utilization and cost effectiveness of HER2 testing in
clinical practice in the United States. We restricted our examination to testing practices in the United States because
practice patterns are likely influenced by healthcare coverCancer

November 15, 2009

age and reimbursement policies, which vary substantially
across countries.3
Despite the clinical success of trastuzumab, there is
growing debate among patients, providers, and payers
regarding the best methods for selecting patients for treatment based on HER2 test results. In particular, there is
uncertainty regarding the most appropriate and efficient
testing strategy and concerns about the reliability and
interpretation of test results. This study provides an indepth analysis and illustration of the broader issue of evidence gaps for new testing technologies4 and the issues
emerging because of an increased emphasis on the need to
translate basic science findings into clinical therapies and
health benefits.5,6
Description of HER2 Testing
The FDA has approved 3 types of tests to assess HER2
status in breast tissue: immunohistochemistry (IHC), fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH), and, most recently,
chromogen in situ hybridization (CISH). There are several
commercially available test kits for both the IHC and the
FISH tests with different performance characteristics, and
there is no consensus about what the optimal methods
are. Current guidelines from the American Society of
Clinical Oncology (ASCO), the College of American
Pathologists (CAP),7 and the National Comprehensive
Cancer Network (NCCN)8 recommend using either IHC
(with confirmation of indeterminate results by FISH) or
FISH to determine HER2 status. Although FISH has
been shown to be a better predictor of response to treatment, IHC is approximately one quarter to one third the
cost of FISH and is more easily performed in community
laboratories.7 Current guidelines state that a tumor with
an IHC score of 3 þ, an average HER2 gene:chromosome
17 ratio of greater than 2.2 by FISH, or an average number of HER2 gene copies per cell of 6 or greater, is considered HER2 positive. A tumor with an IHC score of 2 þ
should be further tested using FISH, with HER2 status
determined by the FISH result, although there is debate
5167

Original Article

FIGURE 1. The sequence of events for diagnostic testing is
shown.

over the benefit of trastuzumab in patients with indeterminate FISH results.7 Testing decisions have recently
become even more complex because of preliminary reports
that women with test results that are negative based on
recommended thresholds may actually benefit from trastuzumab.9 Thus, methods of evaluating eligibility for trastuzumab are still in flux.
Framework for Evaluating the Use and Cost
effectiveness of Testing
The effectiveness and efficiency of diagnostic testing in
actual practice is based on a sequence of events1: a test is
ordered,2 test results are reviewed and interpreted to assess
whether a patient is likely to benefit from a specific therapy, and3 treatment is offered and accepted or declined in
accordance with test results (Fig. 1). Variation in these
factors influences the actual effectiveness and cost effectiveness of testing and treatment.
Research Questions
1. Percentage of eligible patients tested for
HER2 and methods used

Although there is clinical consensus that all patients
with invasive breast cancer should be tested, some patients
may not receive testing. In some cases patients may
be tested, but their test results may not be properly
documented.
We examined available evidence addressing the
following questions:

because it has only recently been an FDA-approved
option for clinical practice. Although there is no consensus about whether IHC or FISH should be used for initial
testing, there is agreement that patients with indeterminate IHC results (approximately 15% of patients7) should
have a FISH test. However, some patients with indeterminate IHC results may not get confirmatory testing and
there is continuing debate over the cutoff used. We
examined available evidence addressing the following
questions:
• What percentage of patients receives IHC, FISH, or both
tests?

• Do patients with indeterminate IHC results get confirmatory FISH testing?

• Does the use of IHC or FISH vary by personal characteristics, such as insurance status, socioeconomic status, and
race/ethnicity, or by physician, health plan, or geographic
characteristics?

2. Percentage of tests with concordant
results between community and central or
reference laboratories

Even if positivity criteria can be determined so that
only patients defined as having positive HER2 results are
those who will benefit from trastuzumab, HER2 test performance in actual practice will be influenced by variability in laboratory procedures. Because the purpose of this
study is to examine actual testing practices, our literature
review focused on laboratory concordance rather than predetermined thresholds for determining positive results.
We examined available evidence addressing the following
question:
• What is the concordance between HER2 tests performed
in community laboratories as compared with central or
reference laboratories?

• Do all patients with invasive breast cancer receive HER2
testing?
• Does test utilization vary according to personal characteristics, such as insurance status, socioeconomic status, and
race/ethnicity, or by physician, health plan, or geographic
characteristics?

We considered that patients may be tested by using
IHC, FISH, or both methods but did not examine CISH
5168

3. Percentage of patients who
receive trastuzumab

Although clinical guidelines state that only patients
testing HER2 positive according to established algorithms
should receive trastuzumab, patients who either are not
tested or have negative results may still receive trastuzumab because of doubts about test accuracy, clinical
Cancer

November 15, 2009

HER2 Testing Practice Patterns/Phillips et al

factors, personal or healthcare system factors, or human
error. Patients with positive HER2 test results may not
receive trastuzumab because of the same factors. We
examined available evidence addressing the following
questions:
• What is the percentage of patients with positive, negative,
or no test results who receive trastuzumab?

language publications through May 2008. Details of the
search are provided in Table 1.

RESULTS
Evidence regarding testing practice patterns is summarized in Table 2 and described below.

• Does the use of trastuzumab (conditional on test results)
vary by personal characteristics such as insurance status,
socioeconomic status, and race/ethnicity, or by physician,
health plan, or geographic characteristics?

4. Cost effectiveness of HER2 testing in clinical
practice

Studies that have examined the cost effectiveness of
trastuzumab in a population of patients already identified
as HER2 positive have found that adding it to chemotherapy is relatively cost-effective.10-12 These studies, however,
do not address the cost effectiveness of different HER2
testing strategies in the adjuvant setting. For example, if
patients who would benefit from treatment are not tested,
if the most efficient testing algorithm is not used, if tests
are inaccurate, or if patients receive treatment that is inappropriate based on their test results, then the cost effectiveness of testing and treatment in actual practice will be
lower than the estimated cost effectiveness. We examined
the available evidence on the following question:
• What is the cost effectiveness of HER2 testing strategies?

Literature Review
We conducted an extensive search to identify evidence on
the HER2 testing practice patterns just described. To
obtain data on actual use, we searched electronic databases, performed hand searches of relevant publications,
did Internet searches, and reviewed key guidelines.
Because much of this evidence is not in peer-reviewed
publications due to its recency, we also included newspaper articles, abstracts, guidelines, and industry reports. To
obtain data on cost effectiveness, we conducted a systematic search for cost effectiveness analyses of HER2 testing
by using electronic databases and hand searching of relevant publications. For all searches, we included EnglishCancer

November 15, 2009

Percentage of Eligible Patients Tested
for HER2
Stark et al (2004), in a study of patients with metastatic
breast cancer in the Henry Ford Health Care System (MI)
shortly after the FDA approval of trastuzumab for patients
with metastatic breast cancer (1999-2000), found that
52% were tested for HER2.13 Women with an absence of
estrogen receptors, those with physicians in the surgery
specialties, and those who had capitated insurance were
more likely to be tested. A study of a 5% sample of Medicare enrollees in 2005 (N ¼ 6588)— reported only in
abstract form— showed that 32% of patients newly diagnosed with invasive breast cancer had documentation in
claims data of having undergone a HER2 test.14 Of those
with documentation of having received trastuzumab,
68% had documentation of having had a HER2 test.
Among those receiving trastuzumab, older women and
white women were more likely to have been tested.
Percentage of Patients Tested Using IHC
and/or FISH Methods
The study noted above in the Medicare population also
showed that 93% of the women tested received only IHC,
0.3% received only FISH, and 6% received both tests,
although it is not known whether FISH was used for initial or confirmatory testing.14
Percentage of Tests With Concordant
Results Between Community and Central or
Reference Laboratories
We found no studies of laboratory concordance in routine
practice, although several studies have examined concordance in conjunction with enrollment into clinical trials
and can be presumed to reflect routine practice in general.15-18 The ASCO/CAP guidelines reviewed such studies and found that approximately 20% of IHC tests done
5169

5170

HER2 Testing Practice Patterns

PubMed Database
BIOSIS Previews Database
International Pharmaceutical Abstracts Database
National Cancer Institute Website
Google Search Engine

PubMed
BIOSIS
Cochrane
Centre for Reviews and Dissemination (CRD)
EconLit
EMBASE
Health Economic Evaluations Database (HEED)

Cancer

* Abstracts and reports were excluded because these provided insufficient information for analysis.
þ
Criteria for inclusion: original research, cost-effectiveness analysis study, evaluation of HER2 testing strategies or trastuzumab treatment of HER2-positive breast cancer (early-stage or metastatic, and U.S.
population.

2. Abstracts from the 2004-2006 San Antonio Breast Cancer Symposium were manually searched by authors
3. Technology appraisals from the National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence (NICE) were manually searched by authors

 economic (cost and cost-analysis, health economics, economic evaluation, pharmacoeconomics, cost-effectiveness analysis, cost-benefit analysis, cost-utility analysis)
 breast cancer (breast tumor, breast carcinoma, breast neoplasm, mammary or breast and [tumor or carcinoma or neoplasm or cancer])
 trastuzumab or HER2 (ERB2 receptor, epidermal growth factor receptor, Herceptin, trastuzumab, HER2/neu)

MeSH search terms and other Keywords included:









1. The following search engines and electronic databases were queried:

Cost-Effectiveness Analyses of HER2 Testing or Treatment1

2. Popular medical and scientific peer-reviewed journals were manually searched: JAMA, New England Journal of Medicine, Health Services Research, Health Affairs, and Science
3. Abstracts presented at ASCO meetings were manually searched by authors
4. Guidelines released by ASCO/CAP and NCCN were manually searched by authors

 MeSH terms: ‘‘trastuzumab,’’ ‘‘HER2,’’ ‘‘Immunohistochemistry,’’ ‘‘In Situ Hybridization, Fluorescence,’’ ‘‘Genes, erbB-2,’’ ‘‘Receptor, erbB-2,’’ ‘‘receptor, epidermal growth factor,’’
‘‘Breast Neoplasms/drug therapy,’’ ‘‘Breast Neoplasms/genetics,’’ ‘‘Antibodies, Monoclonal/therapeutic use’’
 Keywords: ‘‘HER2,’’ ‘‘erbB2,’’ ‘‘trastuzumab,’’ ‘‘Herceptin,’’ ‘‘use’’ or ‘‘utilization’’

Search terms included:







1. The following search engines and electronic databases were queried:

Table 1. Literature Review Methods*

Original Article

November 15, 2009

HER2 Testing Practice Patterns/Phillips et al

Table 2. HER2 Testing Practice Patterns

Research Questions

Summary of Evidence

Percentage of patients tested for HER2

 52% of metastatic breast cancer patients at Henry Ford Health System (MI)
in 1999/2000 (Stark 200413)
 32% of Medicare enrollees with newly diagnosed breast cancer in 2005 (Tong 200714)
 Among Medicare enrollees with metastatic breast cancer in 2005, 93% received only
IHC, 0.3% received only FISH, 6% received both (Tong 200714)
 Approximately 20% of HER2 tests performed by community laboratories are incorrect
based on comparison to central or reference labs (Wolff 20077)
 12%-20% of women who received trastuzumab in a large health plan had either not
had the test or no conclusive evidence of a positive test (Renshaw 200619;
Culliton 200820; Lee Newcomer, oral and written communication, July 18, 2008)

Percentage of patients tested by using IHC and/or
FISH methods
Percentage of tests with concordant results between
community and central or reference labs
Percentage of patients testing positive or negative who
received trastuzumab

HER2 indicates human epidermal growth factor receptor 2; IHC, immunohistochemistry; FISH, fluorescence in situ hybridization.

by local, community-based laboratories are inaccurate
when compared with central or reference laboratory
results.7

Percentage of Patients Testing Positive or
Negative Who Received Trastuzumab
One study of patients with early-stage or metastatic breast
cancer in a privately insured population was conducted by
using 2005 United HealthCare data (Lee Newcomer, oral
and written communication, July 2008).19,20 They found
that at least 12% and ‘‘probably’’ 20% of women receiving trastuzumab either did not have a HER2 test or had a
test that showed no conclusive evidence of HER2 overexpression. More specifically, it was estimated that 8% were
underexpressed, 4% had not been tested, and 8% were
unknown because the physician did not provide the record. Details of this study have not been published in the
peer-reviewed literature.

Cost Effectiveness of HER2 Testing in
Clinical Practice
Of 621 studies screened, we found 4 cost-effectiveness
analyses of HER2 testing or trastuzumab treatment in US
populations.10-12,21 Two of these studies did not consider
HER2 testing and examined only treatment strategies,
assuming that the patients had already been tested.11,12
Another study included testing in their model but did not
compare different testing strategies.10 One study examined HER2 testing strategies in a US population by analyzing 7 possible test-treat strategies for patients with
Cancer

November 15, 2009

metastatic breast cancer.21 We did not find any analyses
that examined testing strategies in the adjuvant setting.

DISCUSSION
Summary and Implications for
HER2 Testing
There is little evidence about the use of HER2 testing in
routine clinical practice that can inform the current debate
about selection of patients for treatment or the relative
advantages and disadvantages of alternative testing strategies. The limited evidence available suggests that there
are important variations in testing practices and key gaps
in knowledge about those practices.
This study illustrates the gaps in what is known and
the weaknesses in available evidence. Studies are generally
of selected populations, use outdated data, and often are
not published in peer-reviewed journals.
Understanding the use of HER2 testing in cancer
care is important because of its critical role in targeting
therapy. Withholding trastuzumab from a patient with
HER2-positive breast cancer (underuse) or giving trastuzumab to a patient with HER2 negative breast cancer
(overuse) will result in suboptimal outcomes. In the former situation, patients may not benefit from the substantial reduction in the risk of death from breast cancer
conferred by trastuzumab.22 In the latter situation,
patients who will not benefit from treatment are exposed
to an unnecessary risk of heart failure and the healthcare
system incurs unnecessary costs of about $100,000 annually for trastuzumab.7
5171

Original Article

Our results do not challenge the efficacy of HER2
testing and trastuzumab treatment; rather, they suggest a
need to collect data on the utilization of tests and treatment and incorporate this information into rigorous analyses of best testing practices. It appears that some clinicians
and payers assume that all eligible patients are being tested,
tests are accurate, and only patients with positive test
results are receiving trastuzumab. Our review suggests that
gaps in the literature are substantial, and that these important assumptions cannot yet be verified. Although it is
likely that testing has improved over time, this study demonstrates that even if one assumes that these problems are
no longer issues, the paradigm outlined by HER2 and trastuzumab is likely to be repeated over and over as new, targeted therapies are developed. If we do not understand the
mistakes that were made as this test-treatment combination was introduced, then we are likely to repeat them.
Testing is now recommended for all invasive breast
cancers, but no studies examine how utilization has
changed since 2005, when testing indications were
expanded to include women with early stage breast cancers. It is particularly concerning that there are no studies
of testing among typically underserved patients, including
the uninsured, Medicaid insured, and minorities.
Little is known about how many patients receive 1
or both of the tests currently recommended and to what
extent those patients are retested to confirm the results. As
guidelines recommend using either IHC or FISH, it is important to know which method is used and how that usage
varies by patient, provider, and healthcare system factors.
In addition, considering the substantial percentage of
patients who have indeterminate IHC results that require
FISH testing for confirmation, it is important to know
whether those patients actually get confirmatory testing.
It is not known how the introduction of a third FDAapproved test (CISH) will improve or further widen the
gap of evidence on tests used.
In contrast to the lack of evidence for our other
research questions, there is more solid evidence to suggest
that a substantial percentage of HER2 tests performed by
community laboratories are inaccurate, based on comparisons with higher-volume central or reference laboratories.
The available studies may not be representative of routine
practice, however, because they were conducted as a part
of clinical trials and may, therefore, underestimate the
extent of problems with test accuracy. However, there may
5172

be times when community labs have more accurate results,
eg, if the lesional tissue is small, then it may no longer be
present on samples submitted to the reference lab or if the
reference lab mistake DCIS for invasive carcinoma. However, we do not know of any studies that suggest the likelihood a patient will respond to the drug is more consistent
with data from community versus central labs.
Reasons for discordance between laboratory results are
complex and include differences in how laboratories perform
and interpret tests as well as the lack of consensus about
accepted procedures. Several initiatives are being pursued to
resolve these issues and standardize laboratory performance,
and there is increasing scrutiny of in house laboratory
(‘‘homebrew’’) tests; for example, recently developed guidelines recommend that HER2 testing be done in a CAPaccredited laboratory.7 Considering the serious implications
of inaccurate tests for patients’’ lives and the impact on the
healthcare system, it is essential to have more data on test
quality and interpretation. As one industry observer noted,
‘‘We need more rigorous validation processes. It has been
like the wild, wild West out there.’’23
It is also important to note that one study found that
up to 20% of women receiving trastuzumab had no documentation of a positive HER2 test, and one study found
that up to 66% of eligible patients had no documentation
of testing in claims records. However, these findings have
not been published in detail, are not based on recent data,
and do not distinguish between women who were not
tested and those who had been tested but were missing
documentation of testing or results in claims records. We
found similar results in a pilot study of one health plan,
and we have a larger and more recent study underway (i3
Innovus, unpublished data, 2007). These findings argue
for more standardized test reporting practices, with
requirements such as the inclusion of both quantitative
and qualitative assessments from pathology reports.
Actual practice patterns may have a substantial
impact on the costs and effectiveness of testing and treatment in the adjuvant setting, yet such analyses have not
been conducted. Analyses examining the costs and effectiveness of current testing guidelines and how they might
vary in actual practice are sorely needed.
Implications
Our findings regarding HER2 testing illustrate both the
challenges and the opportunities in building an evidence
Cancer

November 15, 2009

HER2 Testing Practice Patterns/Phillips et al

base to support effective and efficient decision making
about emerging testing technologies in cancer care. HER2
testing provides an example of a test that is clinically beneficial but that faces quality and implementation challenges, and such challenges will increasingly become
relevant as more new testing technologies and targeted
therapies emerge.24,25 The underlying science and associated guidelines for testing technologies are evolving
quickly, and the different, new technologies make it
harder to ensure that testing is done correctly and the
results are interpreted appropriately. HER2 testing, as
with many diagnostic tests, does not provide a black and
white answer about treatment decisions.
With complex testing scenarios, there is ample room
for mistakes and misinterpretation along the entire testing
sequence.23 Thus, one solution is greater standardization
of test procedures and processes. Communication
between the laboratory and the clinician may be of particular importance; for example, in the case of HER2 testing,
the speculation is that patients with indeterminate scores
are being treated as positive results.23 Decision analytic
tools for clinicians could facilitate improved interpretations and communications.
Another solution is increasing the amount of data
available on testing technologies. Historically, there have
been less data available on diagnostics than on other
interventions, such as pharmaceuticals or surgical procedures, a gap that has taken on greater significance as the
use of diagnostics to target therapies has accelerated. One
major gap is the lack of administrative databases linking
testing, test results, treatment, and outcomes. In the case
of HER2 testing, claims databases do not typically
include information on test results. Moreover, it is often
impossible to identify the use of testing in administrative
databases because of a lack of billing codes specific to
each test or type of test received by a patient. In health
insurance claims, the use of IHC and FISH tests for
HER2 detection cannot be reliably distinguished from
the same types of assays performed for other indications.
Although Current Procedural Terminology code modifiers have been developed by the American Medical Association to differentiate specific tests, these modifiers are
not commonly used in clinical practice. In addition, test
codes may be bundled into a common pathology code
that does not permit the identification of individual
tests.
Cancer

November 15, 2009

Conclusions
The trend toward greater use of testing to target healthcare
is inevitable and has the potential to improve the quality
and efficiency of healthcare. Our findings should not be
construed as reasons for attempting to slow the diffusion
of new testing technologies into clinical practice and cancer care or as a critique on oncologists’ treatment decisions. Rather, this case study highlights how and what
evidence might be improved to help guide decisions
regarding emerging tests and associated therapies in cancer care. Given the rapid growth in this area— for example, there are more than 6000 articles on gene-disease
associations each year and more than 1300 genetic tests
making their way to market—, evidence-based information will become a necessity if these new technologies are
to be used wisely.26
It is crucial to build an evidence base that can support effective and efficient decision making in regard to
emerging testing technologies in clinical practice, considering their impact on clinical care and the healthcare system.27 A comprehensive agenda for translational research
is needed to move new discoveries, such as those in human
genomics, into health practice in a manner that maximizes
health benefits and minimizes harm to individual people
and populations.6,26 This agenda will require increased
attention to the translation of not only basic research findings into new therapeutic options but also research into
actual practice.5 By examining translational issues, we can
improve the effectiveness and efficiency of care, reduce
disparities, and ensure that the patients who will most
benefit from treatment will get it.
Conflict of Interest Disclosures
This study was funded by 2 grants to Dr. Phillips from the
National Cancer Institute (R01CA101849 and P01CA130818)
and a grant from the Blue Shield Foundation of California
(unrestricted). Funding agencies had no review of any portion of
this work.
Drs. Phillips and Haas have an unrestricted grant from the
Aetna Foundation to examine the utilization of HER2 testing
and gene expression profiling for breast cancer. Dr. Haas has a
research grant from Pfizer for unrelated work (on adverse drug
event reporting).

References
1.

Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality. Genetic Tests
for Cancer. Available at: http://www.ahrq.gov/clinic/ta/

5173

Original Article
gentests/gentests.pdf#search¼%22horizon%20scanning%
20genetic%20tests%22. Accessed August 22, 2006.
2.

Bazell R. Her-2 The Making of Herceptin, a Revolutionary
Treatment for Breast Cancer. New York: Random House;
1998.

3.

Bilous M, Dowsett M, Hanna W, et al. Current perspectives on HER2 testing: a review of national testing guidelines. Mod Pathol. 2003;16:173-182.

4.

Phillips KA. Closing the evidence gap in the use of emerging testing technologies in clinical practice. JAMA.
2008;300:2542-2544.

5.

Woolf SH. The meaning of translational research and why
it matters. JAMA. 2008;299:211-213.

6.

Guttmacher AE, Collins FS. Realizing the promise of
genomics in biomedical research. JAMA. 2005;294:13991402.

7.

Wolff AC, Hammond ME, Schwartz JN, et al. American
Society of Clinical Oncology/College of American Pathologists guideline recommendations for human epidermal
growth factor receptor 2 testing in breast cancer. J Clin
Oncol. 2007;25:118-145.

8.

Carlson RW, Moench SJ, Hammond ME, et al. HER2
testing in breast cancer: NCCN Task Force report and recommendations. J Natl Compr Canc Netw. 2006;4(suppl
3):S1-S22; quiz S23-24.

9.

Paik S, Kim C, Jeong J. Benefit from adjuvant trastuzumab
may not be confined to patients with IHC 3p and/or
FISH-positive tumors: central testing results from NSABP
B-31 [abstract]. J Clin Oncol. 2007 ASCO Annu Meeting
Proc. Part I. 2007;25(18S): 511.

10. Garrison LP, Perez EA, Dueck A, Lalla D, Paton V,
Lubeck D. Cost-effectiveness analysis of trastuzumab in the
adjuvant setting for treatment of HER2þ breast cancer.
Cancer. 2007;110:489-498.
11. Liberato NL, Marchetti M, Barosi G. Cost effectiveness of
adjuvant trastuzumab in human epidermal growth factor receptor 2-positive breast cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2007;25:625633.
12. Kurian AW, Thompson RN, Gaw AF, Arai S, Ortiz R,
Garber AM. A cost-effectiveness analysis of adjuvant trastuzumab regimens in early HER2/neu-positive breast cancer.
J Clin Oncol. 2007;25:634-641.
13. Stark A, Kucera G, Lu M, Claud S, Griggs J. Influence of
health insurance status on inclusion of HER-2/neu testing
in the diagnostic workup of breast cancer patients. Int J
Qual Health Care. 2004;16:517-521.
14. Tong KB, Chen E, Gregory C, Kim D. HER-2 testing and
trastuzumab use in the medicare population (abstract). Paper presented at: Book and abstracts of the 2007 Breast
Cancer Symposium; September 7-8, 2007; San Francisco,
CA. Abstract 141.

5174

15. Paik S, Bryant J, Tan-Chiu E, et al. Real-world performance of HER2 testing–National Surgical Adjuvant Breast
and Bowel Project experience. J Natl Cancer Inst.
2002;94:852-854.
16. Roche PC, Suman VJ, Jenkins RB, et al. Concordance
between local and central laboratory HER2 testing in the
breast intergroup trial N9831. J Natl Cancer Inst.
2002;94:855-857.
17. Dressler LG, Berry DA, Broadwater G, et al. Comparison
of HER2 status by fluorescence in situ hybridization and
immunohistochemistry to predict benefit from dose escalation of adjuvant doxorubicin-based therapy in node-positive
breast cancer patients. J Clin Oncol. 2005;23:4287-4297.
18. Reddy JC, Reimann JD, Anderson SM, Klein PM. Concordance between central and local laboratory HER2 testing
from a community-based clinical study. Clin Breast Cancer.
2006:153-157.
19. Renshaw RM. Outcomes-based access: what will it mean
for biologics? Biotechnology Healthcare. 2006; June: 39-44.
Available at: http://www.biotechnologyhealthcare.com/
journal/fulltext/3/3/BH0303039.pdf?CFID¼41122935&
CFTOKEN¼93433706.
20. Culliton BJ. Insurers and ‘targeted biologics’ for cancer: a
conversation with Lee N. Newcomer. Health Aff (Millwood). 2008;27:w41-w51.
21. Elkin EB, Weinstein MC, Winer EP, Kuntz KM, Schnitt
SJ, Weeks JC. HER-2 testing and trastuzumab therapy for
metastatic breast cancer: a cost-effectiveness analysis. J Clin
Oncol. 2004;22:854-863.
22. Perez EA, Romond EH, Suman VJ. Updated results of the
combined analysis of NCCTG N9831 and NSABP
B-31 adjuvant chemotherapy with/without trastuzumab in
patients with HER2-positive breast cancer [abstract]. J Clin
Oncol. 2007;25(suppl)6S. Abstract 512.
23. Allison M. Is personalized medicine finally arriving? Nat
Biotechnol. 2008;26:509-517.
24. Billings PR. Three barriers to innovative diagnostics. Nat
Biotechnol. 2006;24:917-918.
25. Garrison LP, Jr, Carlson RJ, Carlson JJ, Kuszler PC, Meckley LM, Veenstra DL. A review of public policy issues in
promoting the development and commercialization of pharmacogenomic applications: challenges and implications.
Drug Metab Rev. 2008;40:377-401.
26. Khoury MJ, Gwinn M, Yoon PW, Dowling N, Moore
CA, Bradley L. The continuum of translation research in
genomic medicine: how can we accelerate the appropriate
integration of human genome discoveries into health care
and disease prevention? Genet Med. 2007;9:665-674.
27. Teutsch SM, Berger ML, Weinstein MC. Comparative
effectiveness: asking the right questions, choosing the right
method. Health Aff (Millwood). 2005;24:128-132.

Cancer

November 15, 2009

