NIH Public Access
Author Manuscript
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 June 13.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Published in final edited form as:
Cell. 2009 June 26; 137(7): 1259–1271. doi:10.1016/j.cell.2009.04.043.

A Genomic Mechanism for Antagonism Between Retinoic Acid
and Estrogen Signaling in Breast Cancer
Sujun Hua1,2,3, Ralf Kittler1,3, and Kevin P. White1,*
1Institute of Genomics and Systems Biology and Department of Human Genetics, The University
of Chicago, 920 East 58th Street, Illinois 60637, USA
2Interdepartmental

Program in Computational Biology and Bioinformatics, Yale University, New
Haven, Connecticut 06520, USA

SUMMARY
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Retinoic acid (RA) triggers growth-suppressive effects in tumor cells and therefore RA has and its
synthetic analogs have great potential as anti-carcinogenic agent. RA effects are mediated by
Retinoic Acid Receptors (RARs), which regulate gene expression in an RA-dependent manner. To
define the genetic network regulated by RARs in breast cancer, we identified RAR genomic
targets using chromatin immunoprecipitation and expression analysis. We found that RAR binding
throughout the genome is highly co-incident with estrogen receptor α (ERα) binding, and
identified a widespread crosstalk of RA and estrogen signaling to antagonistically regulate breast
cancer-associated genes. ERα and RAR binding sites appear to be co-evolved on a large scale
throughout the human genome, allowing for competitive binding between these transcription
factors via nearby or overlapping cis-regulatory elements. Together these data indicate the
existence of a highly coordinated intersection between these two critical nuclear hormone receptor
signaling pathways providing a global mechanism for balancing gene expression output via local
regulatory interactions dispersed throughout the genome.

INTRODUCTION

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Retinoic acid (RA) plays a major role in physiological processes ranging from embryonic
development to homeostasis of adult tissues and organs (Niederreither and Dolle, 2008).
Importantly, RA inhibits the growth and survival of cancer cells at pharmacological doses.
The potent anti-carcinogenic activity of RA is generally thought to result from direct and
indirect effects on gene expression. Therefore a comprehensive analysis of the genomic
targets of RA action should provide a better understanding of the mechanism of RA action
in the prevention and treatment of cancer, as well as providing a framework that can be
extended to other RA functions in organ development and homeostasis.

© 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
*

Correspondence: kpwhite@uchicago.edu (K.P.W.).
3These authors contributed equally to this work.
ACCESSION NUMBERS
Data are available at GEO under GSE15244.
SUPPLEMENTAL DATA
Supplemental data include Supplemental Experimental Procedures, 15 figures, 9 tables, and Supplemental References and can be
found with this article online at http://www.cell.com/XXXXX-XXXX(XX)XXXXX-X.
Publisher's Disclaimer: This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our
customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of
the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be
discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.

Hua et al.

Page 2

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Previous work has identified two subfamilies of nuclear receptors as major mediators of RA
signaling, the retinoic acid receptors (RARs) and the retinoid X receptors (RXRs) (Evans,
1988; Giguere et al., 1987; Mangelsdorf and Evans, 1995; Petkovich et al., 1987). RARs
dimerize with RXRs; the resulting heterodimers function as transcription factors, thereby
eliciting the transcriptional effects of RA signaling. However, little is known about the
genomic targets and effects of the different isoforms of the RARs. There is similarly scant
information about the mechanism or extent of crosstalk between RA signaling and other
nuclear hormone signaling pathways in a cellular context.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

In breast cancer cells, RA and retinoids have been previously shown to be associated with
down-regulation of several genes essential for proliferation and survival (Liu et al., 1998;
Zhou et al., 1997). However, it has been unclear if such genes are directly or indirectly
regulated by RARs, since liganded RAR-RXR heterodimers are thought to function
primarily as transcriptional activators while repression is thought to be primarily mediated
by unliganded heterodimers interfering with basal transcription (Chambon, 1996; Glass and
Rosenfeld, 2000; Hu and Lazar, 2000; Niederreither and Dolle, 2008). Also, RA-induced
apoptosis in breast cancer cells has been shown to be associated with up-regulated
expression of a handful of proapoptotic genes (Donato and Noy, 2005; Donato et al., 2007).
However, although several genes implicated in the negative regulation of breast cancer cell
proliferation and survival have been identified as RA-responsive, the knowledge of the
mechanism of transcriptional regulation by RARs is fragmentary. Whether and how RA
signaling intersects with estrogen signaling, which promotes proliferation, has not been
investigated on a genomic scale.
We therefore analyzed the genomic actions of RA through RARα and RARγ, which exert
anti-proliferative and apoptotic effects of RA in the breast cancer cell line MCF-7. MCF-7 is
the most commonly used experimental system for the study of estrogen receptor α (ERα)positive breast tumors, affording us the opportunity to compare the genomic effects of RA
and estrogen signaling (Levenson and Jordan, 1997). Estrogen signaling, in contrast to RA
signaling, drives proliferation and promotes survival and has been extensively studied in this
cell line. To uncover the transcriptional networks of RARα and RARγ, we have integrated
genome-wide binding site mapping with gene expression profiling. We found that RA
signaling regulates the expression of many genes that have been implicated in breast
carcinogenesis and/or whose expression is indicative for the clinical outcome of breast
cancer. Interestingly, we found that RARα/RARγ exhibit extensive co-localization of their
genomic binding regions with ERα in the vicinity of genes that are antagonistically
regulated by estrogen and RA.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

RESULTS
Identification of genomic RAR target sites
To define the RAR transcriptional network, we first mapped the genomic binding sites of
RARα and RARγ. Because none of the commercially available isoform-specific antibodies
were adequate to render high quality ChIP (data not shown) we used bacterial artificial
chromosome (BAC) transgenesis (Poser et al., 2008) to generate two transgenic MCF-7
lines, which stably express RARα and RARγ tagged with eGFP at their C-termini at
physiological levels (Figure S1). A total of 7,346 high-confidence RARα binding sites and
3,916 RARγ sites were identified by ChIP-chip analysis in the transgenic cells treated with
synthetic receptor-selective agonists for one hour (Table S1 and Figure S2). We validated 40
randomly selected binding regions by ChIP-qPCR and found all of the tested regions
significantly enriched compared to genomic input DNA (Figure S3) indicating a very low
number of false-positives in the ChIP-chip experiments. The binding sites of the two
isoforms showed a marked overlap as 3,238 (82.7%) of the RARγ sites were found to be
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 June 13.

Hua et al.

Page 3

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

within 1 kilobase (kb) to RARα sites. Since RARα is expressed at a higher level than
RARγ, the larger number of sites for RARα might reflect an increased binding probability
due to the higher abundance of this transcription factor. Overall, the large proportion of
RARα/RARγ common target sites indicates a high degree of functional redundancy as
suggested by mouse knockout studies (Lohnes et al., 1994).
Identification of RAR binding sites has previously focused on promoter and promoterproximal regions of RA-regulated genes, and so far only a small number of direct targets are
known (Balmer and Blomhoff, 2002; Niederreither and Dolle, 2008). However, we found
only a small portion of RAR binding sites mapped to promoter-proximal regions (Figures
1A and 1B). Hence, most RAR binding sites were found in intronic or promoter-distal
intergenic regions previously undefined as RAR binding sites. Within the list of RAR
binding sites in promoter or in promoter-proximal regions, we confirmed a number of
previously characterized functional RAR sites for known RA-inducible genes, including
several HOX family genes (Figures 1C–1E), CYP26A1 (Figure 1F), and FOXA1 (Figure
1G) (Balmer and Blomhoff, 2002). Interestingly, we found additional novel RAR binding
sites nearby some of these genes, such as 3′ binding sites for FOXA1 and CYP26A1
(Figures 1F and 1G). We tested whether these sites could act as regulatory elements using a
luciferase reporter assay, and both were able to drive the reporter gene expression in an RA
agonist-dependent manner (Figures 1H and 1I).

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

RAR-dependent regulation of gene expression
To correlate the binding site data with the transcriptional effects of the RARs, we performed
gene expression profiling after ligand treatment. Because the physiological ligand all-trans
retinoic acid (ATRA) can elicit transcriptional effects independent from binding to RARs,
e.g. through PPARδ (Schug et al., 2007), we generated expression profiles for ATRA, and
RAR-selective agonists AM580 (RARα-specific) and CD437 (RARγ-specific).
Comparisons between these expression profiles showed a high degree of correlation (Figure
S4). CD437 and AM580 elicited similar transcriptional effects, consistent with the large
overlap observed for the binding sites of RARα and RARγ.
To test whether the transcriptional response of the two selective agonists is mediated by
RARs, we analyzed gene expression changes upon RAR depletion in the presence and
absence of the agonists by RNAi. Knockdown of RARα and RARγ decreased or reverted
most transcriptional changes caused by AM580 and CD437 (Figure 2A). This result
demonstrates that both activation and repression of most genes in MCF-7 cells by RA
agonists require RARs.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

We analyzed expression changes after treatment with all individual ligands and the
combination of AM580 and CD437 in triplicates over a time course (0, 24, 48, 72 hrs). We
also compared the gene expression profiles upon ligand treatment in a gene expression time
course aimed at identifying early-response direct targets (0, 4, 12, 24 hrs). We observed a
relatively small number of significant transcript changes in the 0–24 hr time course
compared to the 0–72 hr time course. Overall, we identified a total of 1,413 genes
(Benjamini-Hochberg adjusted P <= 0.0005) (Table S3), which were significantly regulated
by RA and RA agonists. 306 showed differential expression within the first 24 hours of
ligand treatment. For a large proportion of transcripts differentially expressed in the 0–72 hr
time course (46.5%) (hypergeometric test, P = 2.30e-140), we observed RAR binding sites
within 50 kb to the TSS of the regulated gene, indicating that about half of the RA-regulated
genes represent direct effects of liganded RAR rather than secondary effects. Previous work
investigating the role of liganded RARs in the regulation of transcription has mainly focused
on activation of expression, while the repressive function has been thought to be mediated
mainly by unliganded RARs. However, down-regulated transcripts constitute a large
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 June 13.

Hua et al.

Page 4

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

fraction (52.8%) of RA-dependent expression changes in MCF-7 cells; and we observed no
marked bias of RAR binding toward ligand activated or repressed genes (52.5% and 41.2%,
respectively). RAR regions are highly significantly enriched in both up- and down-regulated
genes (P = 4.03e-92 and P = 2.20e-50, respectively). Further, we demonstrate for six
putative RAR direct target genes, which were significantly down-regulated or up-regulated
by RA agonists that both RA-mediated repression and activation do not require de novo
protein synthesis (Figure S5). Collectively, these findings support the hypothesis that both
activation and repression involves binding of liganded RARs at target genes.
ERα and RAR binding regions co-localize and mediate antagonistic actions on gene
expression
We and others have mapped ERα binding genome wide in MCF-7 cells (Carroll et al., 2006;
Hua et al., 2008; Lin et al., 2007). When we compared RAR binding regions with ERα
regions, we found a marked co-localization. 39.3% of ERα regions were observed within 1
kb of RAR binding regions (Figure 2B). At the gene level there was even a larger overlap;
ERα and RARs share 59.8% of their putative target genes as defined by the presence of at
least one binding region within 50 kb to the TSS (Figure 2C).

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

The extensive co-localization of RAR and ERα genomic binding sites suggested potential
crosstalk of RA and estrogen signaling in the regulation of gene expression. To
systematically identify transcripts that are differentially regulated by RA agonists and
estrogen, we analyzed changes in gene expression after treatment with estrogen, and
compared these results with our RA agonist data (Figures 2D and 2E). We found 139 genes
down-regulated by RA agonists to be up-regulated by estrogen, while 185 estrogenrepressed genes were up-regulated by RA agonists. A considerably smaller number of genes
were up-regulated (37) or down-regulated (103) by both estrogen and RA agonists. Thus, the
RA and estrogen signaling pathways appear to mainly antagonize each other. We further
validated this result by testing the effects of RA agonists before and after the RNAi
depletion of ERα. Knockdown of ERα increased the number of both up-regulated and
down-regulated transcripts upon RA treatment (Figure 2F). We also analyzed the effects of
single treatment with RA agonists and E2, or simultaneously co-treatment on the expression
of nine individual target genes that were associated with unique RAR or ERα, and ERα/
RAR binding regions (Figure S6). RA agonists and E2 had an antagonistic effect on the
expression levels of common target genes but not on unique targets of RARs or ERα, whose
expression levels were affected by RA agonists or E2, respectively (Figure S6). Collectively,
these findings indicate an extensive crosstalk of ERα and RARs to regulate gene expression.
However, despite their opposing effects on the majority of target genes, ERα and RARα
appear to activate each other. We observed ERα binding in the proximity of the RARA TSS
(Figure S12A) and up-regulated expression of RARA upon estrogen treatment. Likewise
RARα bound near the TSS of ESR1 (Figure S12B) and RA agonist treatment led to upregulated expression of ESR1. This cross-regulation between the two antagonizing
transcription factors presents an additional level of control for achieving a balanced
regulation of gene expression by the two signaling pathways.
Antagonistic actions of RARs and ERα bound to shared regulatory elements
In order to determine the major mechanism of the global ERα/RAR antagonism we
performed a series of additional computational analyses and experiments. First, we analyzed
the distance between the putative binding sites of ERα and RARs in overlapping binding
regions. Using the center of a binding region as the putative binding site, we found that most
ERα and RAR binding sites occur within 100 nt (Figure 3A and 3B). Considering the
resolution limit of ChIP-chip this finding indicates that most binding sites of ERα and RARs
occur very close to each other, overlap or are identical. This finding suggests competitive

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 June 13.

Hua et al.

Page 5

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

binding for the same genomic binding sites or steric hindrance between close sites. By
manual inspection of ERα and RAR binding events using normalized ChIP-chip intensities
we found that many overlapping regions have nearly identical peaks (Figure S7). RARα as
well as RARα-RXR dimers bind in vitro to synthetic and natural EREs (IR3) by gel shift
assays (Klinge et al., 1997; (Naar et al., 1991), and can compete with ERα for binding to
EREs (Joyeux et al., 1996) (Kittler, Hua and White, data not shown). To test the model of
competitive binding in vivo we chose two example elements where RARs and ERα overlap:
the first was a putative regulatory element of FOXA1, whose gene expression is upregulated by RA agonists and down-regulated by E2 (Figure 3C). The second was a putative
regulatory element of FOS, whose gene expression is up-regulated by E2 and downregulated by RA agonists (Figure 3D). We tested the effects of RA agonists and E2
treatment on H3 acetylation and ERα and RARγ recruitment at these two ERα/RAR
binding regions. E2 decreases and RA agonists increase H3 acetylation for the FOXA1
element (Figure 3E), while opposite effects were observed for the FOS regulatory element
(Figure 3F) indicating that the antagonistic effects of RA and E2 on gene expression are
mediated through opposite effects on cofactor recruitment to common ERα/RAR sites.
These opposite effects on H3 acetylation were also correlated with changes in ERα and
RARγ recruitment. Upon initial E2 treatment ERα recruitment was found to be increased
for both regions, but subsequent treatment with RA agonists in absence of E2 led to a
decrease in ERα binding and an increase in RARγ binding, which could be reverted by
simultaneous co-treatment with E2 and RA agonists (Figure 3G–3J). This finding supports a
model of competitive binding of ERα and RARγ. To further corroborate this hypothesis, we
tested whether ERα and RAR were co-bound to the FOXA1 and FOS elements by Re-ChIP
and qPCR. Consistent with a competitive binding mechanism no simultaneous co-binding of
RAR and ERα at these regulatory elements was observed in vivo (Figure 3K and 3L).
Taking these results together, we propose that competition for the same binding element,
overlapping or very close elements presents one mechanism for the antagonistic regulation
of genes with common ERα/RAR binding regions. Such closely overlapping binding sites
are found within the majority of ERα and RAR target genes (71%). In addition, it is notable
that 557 out of the 1,913 (29.1%) ERα and RAR common putative target genes do not
contain co-localized ERα and RAR binding sites. Thus, while convergent regulation of
common target genes by RA and estrogen signaling may occur predominantly through
binding shared regulatory regions, it may in a substantial minority of cases also occur
through independent regulatory regions via longer range effects.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

To determine whether genomic regions with shared ERα and RAR binding have regulatory
potential when removed from their genomic context we used a simple luciferase reporter
assay. We tested the responsiveness to RA agonists and E2 for seven ERα/RAR binding
regions as well as two unique RAR binding regions. RAR only regions were responsive to
RA agonists, but not to E2. Two of the ERα/RAR binding regions (a GREB1 element and
the FOS element shown in Figure S8 and Figures 3D, 3F, 3H, 3J, 3L and 3N) mediated an
antagonistic response to E2 and RA agonists, while the other elements were responsive to
either E2 or RA agonists (including the FOXA1 element shown in Figures 3C, 3E, 3G, 3I,
3K and 3M), or did not show any response (Figure S8). These results indicate that colocalized binding elements for ERα and RARs can sometimes be sufficient to cause the
antagonizing effect of estrogen and RA on gene expression. However, there might be
alternative mechanisms that require the integrated action of multiple cis-regulatory elements
to differentially regulate expression by estrogen and RA. In this context, we note that a
considerable proportion of putative direct ERα or RAR target genes (25.5% and 35.6% for
ERα and RARs, respectively) contain more than one binding site within 50 kb to the TSSs.
Also, RAR and/or ERα actions at common regions may require a specific chromatin status
that cannot be recapitulated with reporter plasmids.
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 June 13.

Hua et al.

Page 6

Enriched HREs and evolutionary conservation of RAR binding sites

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

We searched all RAR binding sites for the presence of putative retinoic acid response
elements (RAREs). To perform an unbiased analysis, we calculated the enrichment for all
canonical hormone response elements (HREs), i.e. two direct (DR), inverted (IR) and
everted (ER) hexameric PuGGTCA repeats with half-site spacer lengths from 0 to 10
(Figure 4A). This analysis identified DR5, which is frequently present in known RAR
binding sites, as the most significantly enriched HRE in our in vivo RAR binding regions
(Figure 4B). We also noticed a significant enrichment for several other types of HREs. For
some of them, e.g. DR0, DR1, DR10, IR0 and ER8, there is experimental evidence
supporting their role as RAREs (Mangelsdorf, 1994). However, we also found HREs
significantly enriched that have not been implicated as RAREs before, e.g. ER2.
Regions with co-localization of ERα and RAR binding showed a significant enrichment for
the canonical estrogen response element (ERE) IR3 and several known RAREs such as
DR5, indicating that ERα and RARs may bind to canonical response elements in shared
binding regions. However, when we compared the enrichment of IR3 and DR5 between
unique and co-localizing ERα and RAR binding regions, respectively, we observed a
reduced enrichment in the co-localizing regions (Figures S9A and S9B). This latter result
indicates that an indirect binding mechanism may play an important role for the recruitment
of both RARs and ERα to these elements.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

We examined the evolutionary conservation of regions bound by ERα and RAR among
vertebrates. Both ERα- and RAR binding regions showed relatively high sequence
conservation as compared to genomic background (Figure 4C). Likewise, IR3 and DR5
elements were found to be conserved in these regions (Figure 4D) supporting their putative
roles as functional cis-regulatory elements. Interestingly, co-localizing binding regions for
ERα- and RARs showed a slight but significantly higher conservation than ERα- or RAR
unique sites (P = 1.21e-10 and P = 2.29e-5, respectively), which may indicate a higher
functional constraint for the shared cis-regulatory regions. We observed for these regions a
markedly higher conservation for IR3 elements than for unique ERα- or RAR binding
regions, which may indicate a prevalent role of IR3 for the function of ER/RAR binding
regions.
Transcription factor motifs in RAR binding sites

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

To identify putative transcription factors that specifically facilitate the binding and/or coregulate transcriptional effects of RARs, we searched all RAR binding regions for
enrichment of known transcription factor motifs. This analysis identified a number of
putative binding motifs from several transcription factor families (Figure S9C and Table
S4). Significantly enriched motifs were found for AP-1, Forkhead and GATA transcription
factors, which all have been previously reported to be highly enriched in ERα binding sites
(Carroll et al., 2006; Hua et al., 2008).
While motifs for these factors were significantly enriched when we considered all RAR
sites, the most significant enrichment of Forkhead and GATA motifs was found in ERα/
RAR common binding regions. For the AP-1 (Fos) motif we observed a markedly higher
enrichment in both unique RAR binding regions and ERα/RAR common binding regions
compared to unique ERα binding regions (Figure S9C).
FoxA1 and GATA3 binding coincides with RAR and ER binding
FoxA1 and GATA3 are likely candidates for Forkhead and GATA family members that are
binding to the motifs enriched in regions with RAR genomic binding. Transcription factors
such as FoxA1 have been proposed to act as pioneering transcription factors that facilitate

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 June 13.

Hua et al.

Page 7

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

the binding of ERα to enhancer elements (Carroll et al., 2005; Laganiere et al., 2005; Lupien
et al., 2008). GATA transcription factors have been shown to mediate long-range chromatin
interactions (Ansel et al., 2006). In particular, GATA3 is an essential regulator of mammary
luminal cell fate, is co-expressed with ERα in breast carcinomas, and is a strong predictor of
breast cancer differentiation (Kouros-Mehr et al., 2008); (Lacroix and Leclercq, 2004). To
validate specific FoxA1 and GATA3 associations with the enriched Forkhead and GATA
motifs in RAR binding sites, we performed ChIP-chip analysis using a FoxA1-specific
antibody or a GFP antibody with BAC-transgenic GATA3-eGFP cell line, respectively. We
identified 8,061 high-confidence FoxA1 and 972 GATA3 binding regions, which we
typically found distal to TSSs (Figures S1C and S1D) as observed for ERα and RAR
binding regions. These regions significantly co-localized with ERα and RAR binding
regions (Figures 5A and 5B). Also, FoxA1 and GATA3 binding regions exhibited a marked
co-localization (Figure S10). As predicted by the motif enrichment analysis, FoxA1 and
GATA3 binding sites showed the highest overlap with shared ERα/RAR elements (Figures
5C and 5D). Unique RAR binding regions exhibited a lower frequency of FoxA1 and
GATA3 binding, which further decreased for unique ERα binding regions. These findings
indicate that both FoxA1 and GATA3 may be bona fide co-regulators for RARs and ERα
and play in particular an important role for the function of shared ERα/RAR binding
elements.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

FoxA1 is required for RAR recruitment
FoxA1 was recently shown to facilitate ERα recruitment by inducing chromatin opening at
ERα enhancers (Carroll et al., 2005; Lupien et al., 2008). To determine whether there is a
similar role of FoxA1 for RAR recruitment, we quantified RARγ binding upon FoxA1
knockdown by quantitative PCR. For this analysis we selected from our ChIP-chip data
seven sites that were found to bind both RARγ and FoxA1, two sites that bound RARγ but
not FoxA1, and a negative control site that bound neither RARγ nor FoxA1. We found that
FoxA1 depletion significantly decreased RARγ binding for all seven RARγ/FoxA1 binding
sites tested, but not for the RARγ sites without FoxA1 binding (Figure 5E). Thus, FoxA1 is
required for RAR recruitment to specific target sites. We also tested whether GATA3 is
required for RAR binding and found that GATA3 depletion had no effect on RAR
recruitment (data not shown) suggesting that GATA3 function may be compensated by
FoxA1 or other GATA family factors. To further investigate the role of FoxA1 and GATA3
in RA signaling, we profiled the effects of FoxA1 and GATA3 depletion on RA-regulated
gene expression. Knockdown of FoxA1 had a significant effect, while GATA3 depletion
had only a minor effect on many RA-regulated transcripts (Figure S11). Importantly, FoxA1
depletion affected the expression of genes with adjacent FoxA1/RAR regions but had
typically no effect on RA-regulated genes adjacent to unique binding RAR regions.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Together, these findings indicate that the primary interaction of RARs with chromatin might
utilize similar mechanisms as have been proposed for ERα. Importantly, the motif
enrichment analysis predicts that HRE-independent recruitment requiring FoxA1, GATA3
and AP-1 may play a key role for the binding of ERα and RARs to shared binding elements.
In this context it is worthy to note that FOXA1, GATA3 and FOS are also putative direct
targets of ERα and RARs with overlapping binding regions (Figures S7C–S7E) that are
antagonistically regulated by estrogen and RA. While the expression of FOS and GATA3
(Eeckhoute et al., 2007) is activated by estrogen and according to our data repressed by RA,
we found the expression of FOXA1 up-regulated by RA and down-regulated by estrogen.
These cross-regulatory loops for putative common co-factors may be a key part of the
transcriptional ERα/RAR circuitry mediating the antagonizing effects of estrogen and RA
signaling in breast cancer cells.

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 June 13.

Hua et al.

Page 8

ERα and RAR-dependent gene regulation in breast cancer

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

RAR binding site mapping and expression profiling in MCF-7 cells revealed a marked
antagonistic crosstalk between RA and estrogen signaling in this breast cancer model.
Because estrogen signaling is a key pathway in breast carcinogenesis, we surmised that
genes regulated by RA might also play a major role and thus have an important diagnostic
and therapeutic value. Indeed, many putative RAR direct targets that are frequently also
ERα direct targets have an established role in breast cancer or important cellular pathways
(see Table S5 and Figures S12 and S13 for a selection of genes).

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

To systematically validate the role of RAR-mediated transcriptional regulation in breast
cancer, we analyzed the enrichment of RA-regulated genes in MCF-7 cells in functional
modules (Subramanian et al., 2005) or gene signatures that have been previously associated
with breast cancer. RA-regulated genes in MCF-7 cells are highly enriched in a number of
breast cancer relevant signatures (Figure 6A). Notably, the signature BC1000 comprising
1,347 manually curated genes implicated in breast cancer (Witt et al., 2006), is among the
most enriched modules for RA-regulated genes. 229 out of these 1,347 (17.0%, multiple
testing adjusted P = 3.03e-19) putative breast cancer genes are significantly regulated by RA
in MCF-7 cells and 108 out of those 229 RA-targets have RAR-binding elements within 50
kb of the TSS (Figure 6A and Table S6). We also observed a very significant enrichment
(multiple testing adjusted P = 5.32e-22) of the signature composed of genes regulated by
GATA3 (Oh et al., 2006). RA-regulated genes in MCF-7 cells were found to be enriched in
sets of genes that are both positively and negatively correlated with ER status in breast
tumors (P = 1.24e-14 and P = 1.72e-10, respectively). Finally, we observed that RAregulated genes are enriched in several cancer modules or functionally related genes that are
conditionally activated or repressed in a variety of cancer types (Segal et al., 2004),
indicating that RAR might act as a direct transcriptional regulator for a subset of genes
within these cancer modules.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

The meta-analysis described above suggests that many genes regulated by RA in MCF-7
cells are breast cancer-relevant. We next analyzed the expression of putative direct RAR
targets that were derived from our cell line experiments in breast tumor cells from patient
samples. For this purpose, we analyzed gene expression profiles of 146 breast cancer patient
samples (Hu et al., 2006). These expression profiles were previously used to classify breast
tumors into distinct intrinsic subtypes (e.g. Luminal, Basal-like, HER2+/ER−) that differ in
their clinical outcome (Hu et al., 2006). When we analyzed RAR and ERα binding in the
genes comprising these expression profiles, we observed that a gene cluster with high
expression in Luminal type but low expression in more aggressive subtypes (Basal-like and
HER2+/ER−) contains a high proportion of RAR targets as well as ERα targets (Figure 6B).
This group of genes is characterized by high expression of ERα, its putative co-regulators
(e.g. FOXA1, GATA3) and known direct targets (e.g. TFF1, KRT18). Interestingly, we also
found gene clusters with high expression in Basal-like and HER2−/ER− subtypes, but low
expression in Luminal and Normal-like types to contain a large fraction of genes that are
putative direct targets of RARα and RARγ, but not of ERα (Figure 6B).
Our observations that many RAR targets are breast-cancer relevant genes and are
specifically expressed in different breast cancer subtypes suggested that these genes might
possess a significant prognostic value. We therefore analyzed the clinical outcome for each
tumor sample dependent on the expression of putative direct targets of RARs. For this
analysis, we defined an RA signature score for each tumor sample, which measures the
correlation between RA-dependent gene expression profiles in MCF-7 cells and the gene
expression profile in a given tumor sample for putative RAR direct targets (See
Experimental Procedures). We first examined the correlation between RA signature scores
and clinical outcomes for a cohort of expression profiles from 295 breast tumor patients (van
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 June 13.

Hua et al.

Page 9

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

de Vijver et al., 2002). A total of 354 putative RAR direct targets were identified in this
dataset. Kaplan-Meier survival analysis demonstrated a highly significant correlation
between RA signatures and the patient overall survival (Log-rank test, P = 6.53e-6), and a
significant correlation for relapse-free survival (Log-rank test, P = 5.48e-3) (Figures 6C and
6D). Positive RA signature scores indicated good prognosis while negative scores strongly
indicated poor clinical outcomes. We also observed significant correlation between RA
signature and standard clinical-pathologic indexes, such as tumor grade, tumor size, and
ERα status (Table S8). These results were confirmed for two independent breast tumor
cohorts (Figure S14).

DISCUSSION

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Comparing the overlap of different transcription factors can be a powerful means of
inferring functional relationships, particularly when combined with expression data. Our
results indicate that RARα and RARγ binding sites frequently overlap in the human
genome, and comparisons of gene expression in response to isoform-specific agonists
indicate considerable redundant function. Previous models of gene regulation by these
crucial physiological and developmental regulators have been restricted by the focus on
binding to promoters or promoter-proximal gene regions (Balmer and Blomhoff, 2002;
Niederreither and Dolle, 2008). However, we found that the majority of RAR binding sites
occur distal to TSSs. These results are reminiscent of recent studies that have revealed a
similar tendency for ERα to bind to distal elements (Carroll et al., 2006; Hua et al., 2008;
Lin et al., 2007). The co-factor FoxA1 has been implicated in this recruitment of ERα to
distal sites (Carroll et al., 2005; Lupien et al., 2008), and our results indicate that FoxA1 is
similarly required for RAR recruitment to genomic binding sites. Likewise, GATA3 binding
frequently coincides with ERα and RAR binding, although it is not strictly required for
RAR recruitment. Strikingly, many of the genomic regions bound by RARs overlapped with
those previously identified to bind ERα. Subsequent transcriptional analysis demonstrated
that RARs and ERα tend to exhibit antagonistic effects on the transcription of target genes.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

This can occur either through independent cis-regulatory elements, or more frequently, via
shared binding regions of ERα and RARs (Figure 7A). In specific instances we tested, ERα
and RARs binding was mutually exclusive, indicating competitive binding of the two
nuclear receptors to the same element or nearby cis-regulatory elements. Based on the
known functions of their target genes in breast cancer, ERα and RARs appear to be “Yin
and Yang” for the genetic regulation of proliferation and survival that are promoted by ERα
and inhibited by RARs. The finding that binding sites of RARs and ERα are coincident
within the same enhancers or located in different enhancers for the same target genes, along
with the finding that these two nuclear receptor signalling systems antagonistically regulate
their target genes, indicates that these regulatory elements are co-evolving to balance target
gene expression. Interestingly, the ERα/RAR antagonism appears to regulate itself through
cross-regulatory loops between ERα, RARs and their co-factors (Figure 7B). This balanced
control of gene expression regulates fundamental cellular processes that when dysregulated
can lead to cancer.
The identification of the genes regulated by RARs in breast cancer cells, and in particular
the discovery of their extensive cross-talk with estrogen signalling, may benefit breast
cancer diagnostics and therapeutic intervention. Specifically, RAR and ERα binding data
can diagnostically differentiate tumor subtypes and patient outcome. Putative direct targets
of ERα and RARs in MCF-7 cells are highly expressed in Luminal type breast tumors,
indicating that their antagonistic effects may be relevant for primary ER-positive tumors.
However, RARs appear to be important regulators of cancer-relevant genes that are not
regulated by estrogen. We found such RAR targets expressed at high levels in Basal-like and

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 June 13.

Hua et al.

Page 10

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

HER2/ER− tumors that are typically highly aggressive and associated with poor prognosis.
Importantly, we demonstrated that in breast tumor samples that the expression of RAR
targets identified in MCF-7 cells predicts a positive clinical outcome. Some of these genes
may be targets for diagnosis and/or therapeutic intervention. Based on these findings, there
is a strong rationale for the use of RA agonists in breast cancer treatment. However, success
of RA-based therapies has been limited to treatment of acute promyelocytic leukaemia
(Altucci et al., 2007; Soprano et al., 2004), while clinical applications of RA in breast and
other solid tumors have shown limited effects due to RA resistance (Freemantle et al., 2003)
(Schug et al., 2007). To harness the RA-mediated anti-carcinogenic effects of RARs in
breast cancer this resistance must be overcome, perhaps via inhibition of FAB{5 to block
metabolism of RA into PPARδ agonists (Schug et al., 2008). Another potential approach
would be the use of selective agonists or combination therapy with anti-estrogens in ER+/
RAR+ patients. Alternatively, RA resistance could be bypassed by targeting RA-regulated
genes and pathways that mediate the anti-neoplastic effects of RA in breast cancer, whose
framework we have uncovered in this study.

EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES
Generation of BAC transgenic MCF-7 cell lines

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

The BACs CTD-2343G9 (RARA), CTD-2644H7 (RARG) and RP11-1103A14 (GATA3)
were obtained from Invitrogen. A LAP cassette was inserted as a C-terminal fusion using ET
cloning, BAC DNA was extracted and transfected into MCF-7 breast cancer cells (ATCC
HTB-22) for the generation of stable BAC transgenic cell lines as previously described
(Poser et al., 2008).
Luciferase reporter assays
RAR and ERα/RAR binding regions were cloned into pGL4.23 (Promega). MCF-7 cells
were transfected with pGL4.23 (containing the binding regions or the empty vector) and
pGL4.73 using Lipofectamine LTX (Invitrogen), treated with agonists or vehicle, and
assayed using the Dual-Glo Luciferase assay (Promega).
Reverse transfection with siRNAs
Reverse transfection was carried out at a co ncentration of 50 nM of control siRNA or 4
siRNAs (ON-TARGETplus SMARTpool, Dharmacon) directed against the same target gene
using Dharmafect 1 transfection reagent (Dharmacon).
Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) experiments

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Cells at 80% confluency (~5x106 cells per ChIP) were subjected to chromatin
immunoprecipitation as previously described with the following antibodies: goat anti-GFP
(raised against His-tagged full-length eGFP and affinity-purified with GST-tagged fulllength eGFP), goat anti-FoxA1 (ab5089) from Abcam, anti-panH3ac (06–599) from
Millipore, anti-ERα (MC-20, sc-542x) and normal goat IgG (sc-2028) from Santa Cruz
Biotechnologies.
For ChIP-qPCR assays, the fold enrichment of ChIPed DNA relative to input DNA at a
given genomic site was determined by comparative CT (ΔΔ CT) method using StepOnePlus
Real-Time PCR System and Power SYBR Green PCR Master Mix (Applied Biosystems)
according to the manufacturer’s protocol. An ACTB exonic region or 18S rRNA genomic
region was used for normalization. All primer sequences used for qPCR are described in
Table S9.

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 June 13.

Hua et al.

Page 11

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

For ChIP-chip, both ChIPed DNA and input DNA were subjected to linker-mediated PCR
amplification, fragmentation and end-labeled with biotin using the GeneChip® WT DoubleStranded DNA Terminal Labeling Kit (Affymetrix) as previously described. The resulting
labeled samples were hybridized to Affymetrix GeneChip® Human Tiling 2.0R Array Set
following the Affymetrix® Chromatin Immunoprecipitation Assay Protocol. Independent
biological triplicates were performed for each transcription factor, as well as the control
(input DNA).
qRT-PCR and microarray gene expression profiling experiments
qRT-PCR was performed with cDNA generated from total RNA from MCF-7 cells treated
with different agonists and/or transfected with siRNAs. Relative expression levels for
specific genes was determined using StepOnePlus Real-Time PCR System and Power
SYBR Green PCR Master Mix (Applied Biosystems). All primer sequences used for qRTPCR are described in Table S9. For expression profiling total RNA samples were labeled by
direct incorporation of cyanine 3-labeled CTP using the Agilent Low RNA Input Linear
Amplification Kit PLUS (One-Color) (Agilent Technologies) and hybridized to Agilent
Human Genome Oligo Microarrays (4 X 44K) (Agilent Technologies). Hybridized
microarrays were scanned using a GenePix 40040B Scan4ner (Molecular Devices) at 5 μm
resolution. All experiments were performed in triplicates.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Data analysis
ChIP-chip tiling array data were normalized and analyzed with Affymetrix Tiling Analysis
Software (TAS) as previously described (Bernstein et al., 2005). For the analysis of gene
expression data the software package LIMMA (Smyth, 2004) was applied to detect
significantly differentially expressed probes. The enrichment of known or predicted
transcription factor binding motifs in ChIP-identified RAR or FoxA1 binding regions was
were estimated by comparing the number of motifs in binding regions with the number of
motifs in randomly selected genomic regions. Associations between RA-responsive genes
and clinical and pathologic variables were examined using Chi-Square contingency test with
the JMP7 software package (SAS Institute Inc.) Patient sample data grouped into three RA
signature categories were used to plot Kaplan-Meier survival curves for patient overall
survival or relapse-free survival.

Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Acknowledgments
We thank E. Pendleton and all members of the Functional Genomics Facility of The University of Chicago for
technical assistance, T. Hyman and F. Buchholz for providing the LAP-IRES-neo/kan cassette, and D. Drechsel for
the production of the goat eGFP antibody. This work was supported by grants 1R01HG004428 and P50GM081892
to K.P.W. from the National Institutes of Health, and by a grant to K.P.W. from the Searle Funds at the Chicago
Community Trust from the Chicago Biomedical Consortium. R.K. is supported by a long-term fellowship of the
International Human Frontier Science Program Organization.

References
Altucci L, Leibowitz MD, Ogilvie KM, de Lera AR, Gronemeyer H. RAR and RXR modulation in
cancer and metabolic disease. Nat Rev Drug Discov. 2007; 6:793–810. [PubMed: 17906642]
Ansel KM, Djuretic I, Tanasa B, Rao A. Regulation of Th2 differentiation and Il4 locus accessibility.
Annu Rev Immunol. 2006; 24:607–656. [PubMed: 16551261]
Balmer JE, Blomhoff R. Gene expression regulation by retinoic acid. J Lipid Res. 2002; 43:1773–
1808. [PubMed: 12401878]
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 June 13.

Hua et al.

Page 12

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Bernstein BE, Kamal M, Lindblad-Toh K, Bekiranov S, Bailey DK, Huebert DJ, McMahon S,
Karlsson EK, Kulbokas EJ 3rd, Gingeras TR, et al. Genomic maps and comparative analysis of
histone modifications in human and mouse. Cell. 2005; 120:169–181. [PubMed: 15680324]
Carroll JS, Liu XS, Brodsky AS, Li W, Meyer CA, Szary AJ, Eeckhoute J, Shao W, Hestermann EV,
Geistlinger TR, et al. Chromosome-wide mapping of estrogen receptor binding reveals long-range
regulation requiring the forkhead protein FoxA1. Cell. 2005; 122:33–43. [PubMed: 16009131]
Carroll JS, Meyer CA, Song J, Li W, Geistlinger TR, Eeckhoute J, Brodsky AS, Keeton EK, Fertuck
KC, Hall GF, et al. Genome-wide analysis of estrogen receptor binding sites. Nat Genet. 2006;
38:1289–1297. [PubMed: 17013392]
Chambon P. A decade of molecular biology of retinoic acid receptors. Faseb J. 1996; 10:940–954.
[PubMed: 8801176]
Donato LJ, Noy N. Suppression of mammary carcinoma growth by retinoic acid: proapoptotic genes
are targets for retinoic acid receptor and cellular retinoic acid-binding protein II signaling. Cancer
Res. 2005; 65:8193–8199. [PubMed: 16166294]
Donato LJ, Suh JH, Noy N. Suppression of mammary carcinoma cell growth by retinoic acid: the cell
cycle control gene Btg2 is a direct target for retinoic acid receptor signaling. Cancer Res. 2007;
67:609–615. [PubMed: 17234770]
Eeckhoute J, Keeton EK, Lupien M, Krum SA, Carroll JS, Brown M. Positive cross-regulatory loop
ties GATA-3 to estrogen receptor alpha expression in breast cancer. Cancer Res. 2007; 67:6477–
6483. [PubMed: 17616709]
Evans RM. The steroid and thyroid hormone receptor superfamily. Science. 1988; 240:889–895.
[PubMed: 3283939]
Freemantle SJ, Spinella MJ, Dmitrovsky E. Retinoids in cancer therapy and chemoprevention: promise
meets resistance. Oncogene. 2003; 22:7305–7315. [PubMed: 14576840]
Giguere V, Ong ES, Segui P, Evans RM. Identification of a receptor for the morphogen retinoic acid.
Nature. 1987; 330:624–629. [PubMed: 2825036]
Glass CK, Rosenfeld MG. The coregulator exchange in transcriptional functions of nuclear receptors.
Genes Dev. 2000; 14:121–141. [PubMed: 10652267]
Hu X, Lazar MA. Transcriptional repression by nuclear hormone receptors. Trends Endocrinol Metab.
2000; 11:6–10. [PubMed: 10652499]
Hu Z, Fan C, Oh DS, Marron JS, He X, Qaqish BF, Livasy C, Carey LA, Reynolds E, Dressler L, et al.
The molecular portraits of breast tumors are conserved across microarray platforms. BMC
Genomics. 2006; 7:96. [PubMed: 16643655]
Hua S, Kallen CB, Dhar R, Baquero MT, Mason CE, Russell BA, Shah PK, Liu J, Khramtsov A,
Tretiakova MS, et al. Genomic analysis of estrogen cascade reveals histone variant H2A. Z
associated with breast cancer progression. Mol Syst Biol. 2008; 4:188. [PubMed: 18414489]
Joyeux A, Balaguer P, Gagne D, Nicolas JC. In vitro and in vivo interactions between nuclear
receptors at estrogen response elements. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol. 1996; 58:507–515.
[PubMed: 8918976]
Kouros-Mehr H, Kim JW, Bechis SK, Werb Z. GATA-3 and the regulation of the mammary luminal
cell fate. Curr Opin Cell Biol. 2008; 20:164–170. [PubMed: 18358709]
Lacroix M, Leclercq G. About GATA3, HNF3A, and XBP1, three genes co-expressed with the
oestrogen receptor-alpha gene (ESR1) in breast cancer. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2004; 219:1–7.
[PubMed: 15149721]
Laganiere J, Deblois G, Lefebvre C, Bataille AR, Robert F, Giguere V. From the Cover: Location
analysis of estrogen receptor alpha target promoters reveals that FOXA1 defines a domain of the
estrogen response. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2005; 102:11651–11656. [PubMed: 16087863]
Levenson AS, Jordan VC. MCF-7: the first hormone-responsive breast cancer cell line. Cancer Res.
1997; 57:3071–3078. [PubMed: 9242427]
Lin CY, Vega VB, Thomsen JS, Zhang T, Kong SL, Xie M, Chiu KP, Lipovich L, Barnett DH, Stossi
F, et al. Whole-genome cartography of estrogen receptor alpha binding sites. PLoS Genet. 2007;
3:e87. [PubMed: 17542648]

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 June 13.

Hua et al.

Page 13

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Liu R, Takayama S, Zheng Y, Froesch B, Chen GQ, Zhang X, Reed JC, Zhang XK. Interaction of
BAG-1 with retinoic acid receptor and its inhibition of retinoic acid-induced apoptosis in cancer
cells. J Biol Chem. 1998; 273:16985–16992. [PubMed: 9642262]
Lohnes D, Mark M, Mendelsohn C, Dolle P, Dierich A, Gorry P, Gansmuller A, Chambon P. Function
of the retinoic acid receptors (RARs) during development (I). Craniofacial and skeletal
abnormalities in RAR double mutants. Development. 1994; 120:2723–2748. [PubMed: 7607067]
Lupien M, Eeckhoute J, Meyer CA, Wang Q, Zhang Y, Li W, Carroll JS, Liu XS, Brown M. FoxA1
translates epigenetic signatures into enhancer-driven lineage-specific transcription. Cell. 2008;
132:958–970. [PubMed: 18358809]
Mangelsdorf DJ, Evans RM. The RXR heterodimers and orphan receptors. Cell. 1995; 83:841–850.
[PubMed: 8521508]
Mangelsdorf, DJ.; Umesono, K.; Evans, RM. The retinoid receptors. In: Sporn, MB.; Roberts, AB.;
Goodman, DS., editors. The Retinoids: Biology, Chemistry and Medicine. New York: Raven
Press; 1994. p. 319-349.
Naar AM, Boutin JM, Lipkin SM, Yu VC, Holloway JM, Glass CK, Rosenfeld MG. The orientation
and spacing of core DNA-binding motifs dictate selective transcriptional responses to three
nuclear receptors. Cell. 1991; 65:1267–1279. [PubMed: 1648451]
Niederreither K, Dolle P. Retinoic acid in development: towards an integrated view. Nat Rev Genet.
2008; 9:541–553. [PubMed: 18542081]
Oh DS, Troester MA, Usary J, Hu Z, He X, Fan C, Wu J, Carey LA, Perou CM. Estrogen-regulated
genes predict survival in hormone receptor-positive breast cancers. J Clin Oncol. 2006; 24:1656–
1664. [PubMed: 16505416]
Petkovich M, Brand NJ, Krust A, Chambon P. A human retinoic acid receptor which belongs to the
family of nuclear receptors. Nature. 1987; 330:444–450. [PubMed: 2825025]
Poser I, Sarov M, Hutchins JR, Heriche JK, Toyoda Y, Pozniakovsky A, Weigl D, Nitzsche A,
Hegemann B, Bird AW, et al. BAC TransgeneOmics: a high-throughput method for exploration of
protein function in mammals. Nat Methods. 2008; 5:409–415. [PubMed: 18391959]
Schug TT, Berry DC, Shaw NS, Travis SN, Noy N. Opposing effects of retinoic acid on cell growth
result from alternate activation of two different nuclear receptors. Cell. 2007; 129:723–733.
[PubMed: 17512406]
Schug TT, Berry DC, Toshkov IA, Cheng L, Nikitin AY, Noy N. Overcoming retinoic acid-resistance
of mammary carcinomas by diverting retinoic acid from PPARbeta/delta to RAR. Proc Natl Acad
Sci U S A. 2008; 105:7546–7551. [PubMed: 18495924]
Segal E, Friedman N, Koller D, Regev A. A module map showing conditional activity of expression
modules in cancer. Nat Genet. 2004; 36:1090–1098. [PubMed: 15448693]
Smyth GK. Linear models and empirical bayes methods for assessing differential expression in
microarray experiments. Stat Appl Genet Mol Biol. 2004; 3:Article3. [PubMed: 16646809]
Soprano DR, Qin P, Soprano KJ. Retinoic acid receptors and cancers. Annu Rev Nutr. 2004; 24:201–
221. [PubMed: 15189119]
Subramanian A, Tamayo P, Mootha VK, Mukherjee S, Ebert BL, Gillette MA, Paulovich A, Pomeroy
SL, Golub TR, Lander ES, Mesirov JP. Gene set enrichment analysis: a knowledge-based
approach for interpreting genome-wide expression profiles. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2005;
102:15545–15550. [PubMed: 16199517]
van de Vijver MJ, He YD, van’t Veer LJ, Dai H, Hart AA, Voskuil DW, Schreiber GJ, Peterse JL,
Roberts C, Marton MJ, et al. A gene-expression signature as a predictor of survival in breast
cancer. N Engl J Med. 2002; 347:1999–2009. [PubMed: 12490681]
Witt AE, Hines LM, Collins NL, Hu Y, Gunawardane RN, Moreira D, Raphael J, Jepson D,
Koundinya M, Rolfs A, et al. Functional proteomics approach to investigate the biological
activities of cDNAs implicated in breast cancer. J Proteome Res. 2006; 5:599–610. [PubMed:
16512675]
Zhou Q, Stetler-Stevenson M, Steeg PS. Inhibition of cyclin D expression in human breast carcinoma
cells by retinoids in vitro. Oncogene. 1997; 15:107–115. [PubMed: 9233783]

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 June 13.

Hua et al.

Page 14

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Figure 1. Genome-wide identification of RARγ and RARα binding sites in MCF-7 cells

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

(A) Distribution of RARγ, RARα and ERα binding sites residing within 10 kb upstream or
downstream to annotated transcription start sites (TSSs).
(B) Cumulative frequency of RARγ and RARα binding sites for each 1 kb interval within
10 kb upstream or downstream to known TSSs.
(C–G) Known RAR binding sites identified by ChIP-chip analyses. Black bars depict
binding regions for RARγ and RARα. Known promoter-proximal RAR binding sites for
HOXA1, HOXA4, HOXB1, CYP26A1, and FOXA1 were identified by genome-wide
mapping in MCF-7. In addition, novel RAR binding sites 3′ to FOXA1 (F) and CYP26A1
(G) (denoted by red rectangles) were identified
(H,I) Novel binding regions for CYP26A1 (H) and FOXA1 (I) enhance expression of
reporter constructs upon RA treatment. Upon RA agonist treatment these constructs
markedly enhanced firefly luciferase expression compared to the original pGL4.23
construct. Error bars represent s.d.

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 June 13.

Hua et al.

Page 15

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Figure 2. Co-localization of RARα, RARγ and ERα binding regions and antagonistic effects on
gene expression between RA and estrogen signaling

(A) Transcriptional response of RAs in MCF-7 cells is mediated by RARs. X-axis denotes
Log2 transformed fold changes in gene expression after RA agonist treatment (100 nM
AM580/CD437) relative to vehicle control (DMSO) treatment in mock RNAi experiments.
X-axis shows Log2 transformed fold changes in gene expression after RA treatment relative
to vehicle control treatment in mock RNAi experiment. Only genes with significant
expression changes (1.5 fold change) were shown. Y-axis shows Log2 transformed fold
changes in gene expression after RA treatment relative to vehicle control treatment in RARγ
and RARα knockdown cells (siRARs, blue spots) and in RNAi control cells (siNT1, red
spots).
(B) Venn diagram displaying shared regions bound by RARγ, RARα, and ERα. ERα
binding sites are based on the union of two recent genomic studies (Carroll et al., 2006; Hua
et al., 2008)
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 June 13.

Hua et al.

Page 16

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

(C) Venn diagram displaying shared putative target genes of RARγ, RARα, and ERα, as
defined by the presence of at least one binding region within 50 kb to the TSSs.
(D) Comparison of time-course gene expression profiles induced by estrogen and different
RA agonist treatment for 1,413 RA regulated genes. Genes containing binding sites within
50 kb to the TSSs are denoted by blue (RARγ, RARα or ERα) and red bars (RARs and
ERα).
(E,F) Comparison of gene expression changes in response to estrogen and RA agonists. Xaxis shows Log2 transformed fold changes in gene expression after estrogen (10 nM E2)
treatment relative to control (EtOH) treatment for 24 hours. Y-axis shows Log2 transformed
fold changes in gene expression after RA agonist treatment (100 nM AM580 and 100 nM
CD437) relative to vehicle control (DMSO) treatment for 72 hours in control-treated
(siNT1) MCF-7 cells (E) and ERα-depleted (siER) MCF-7 cells (F). Genes with fold
changes greater than 1.5 or less than -1.5 for both X- and Y-axes are highlighted in red or
blue, respectively.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 June 13.

Hua et al.

Page 17

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Figure 3. Antagonistic actions of RARs and ERα bound to shared regulatory elements

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

(A,B) Distance between binding region centers of ERα and RARα (A) or RARγ (B).
(C,D) Ratios of normalized ChIP versus input signal intensities for the putative FOXA1 and
FOS regulatory regions. Ratios were calculated from three replicates. Coordinates refer to
UCSC hg16
(E,F) Histone 3 (H3) acetylation is antagonistically regulated by E2 and RA agonists at
FOXA1 and FOS regulatory regions. RARγ-LAP MCF-7 cells grown in medium with
charcoal-stripped FBS were either treated with vehicle or E2 (10 nM) for 45 minutes. The
medium of E2-treated cells was then changed with medium containing vehicle (a), or
CD437 (100 nM) (b), or a mixture of E2 (10 nM) and CD437 (100 nM). RA denotes
CD437. Relative fold enrichment was determined by ChIP-qPCR using a pan-specific
antibody against Acetyl-H3.
(G–J) ERα and RARγ-LAP recruitment is antagonistically regulated by E2 and RA agonists
at FOXA1 and FOS regulatory regions. Relative fold enrichment was determined by ChIPqPCR using an antibody against ERα or eGFP using the chromatin obtained from the
experiment described above (E–F).
(K–L) FOXA1 and FOS regulatory regions do not co-bind ERα and RARγ-LAP. RARγLAP MCF-7 cells grown in medium with charcoal-stripped FBS were treated with E2 (10
nM) and CD437 (100 nM) for two hours. The first ChIP was performed with an antibody
against ERα. Immunoprecipitated chromatin was eluted and a second ChIP was performed
with IgG (negative control), or antibody against eGFP (targeting RARγ-LAP) or Acetyl-H3
(positive control). Relative enrichment was determined for the re-ChIPed chromatin by
qPCR.

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 June 13.

Hua et al.

Page 18

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

(M–N) ERα/RAR binding region for FOS exhibits a differential response to estrogen and
RA agonists. FOS and FOXA1 regulatory regions (FOS_2, FOXA1_1, Table S9) cloned
into Firefly luciferase vector pGL4.23 were co-transfected into MCF-7 cells with the Renilla
luciferase vector pGL4.73 used to correct for transfection efficiency. All error bars represent
s.d.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 June 13.

Hua et al.

Page 19

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Figure 4. Enriched hormone response elements (HREs) and evolutionary conservation of RAR
and ERα binding regions

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

(A) Canonical HREs are composed of two half-sites (PuGGTCA) separated by a variablelength spacer. HREs can be configured as direct repeats (IR), everted repeats (ER), or
inverted repeats (IR).
(B) Motif enrichment analysis for all HREs with spacer lengths from 0 to 10 in RARα or
RARγ, binding regions, RAR and ERα common regions (ERα/RAR), and RAR unique
regions (RAR only).
(C) Conservation profiles of RAR and ERα common sites (depicted in red), RAR unique
sites (depicted in green) and ERα unique sites (depicted in blue). The conservation profile of
local genomic background is depicted in black.
(D) Conservation profiles of IR3 and DR5 motifs and 30 bp flanking regions in RAR and
ERα common sites (depicted in red), RAR unique sites (depicted in green) and ERα unique
sites (depicted in blue). The conservation profile of all predicted IR3 or DR5 motifs and 30
bp flanking regions in the human genome is depicted in black.

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 June 13.

Hua et al.

Page 20

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Figure 5. FoxA1 and GATA3 binding coincides with ERα and RAR binding

(A,B) Venn diagram of FoxA1, ERα, and RARs binding sites (A) or GATA3, ERα, and
RARs sites (B).
(C,D) Percentages of ERα unique sites, RAR unique sites, and ERα and RAR common sites
co-localized with FoxA1 (C) or GATA3 (D) binding sites.
(E) Effect of FoxA1 knockdown on RAR recruitment. Recruitment of RARγ (defined as
fold enrichment relative to input DNA) was quantified by qPCR after ChIP using an eGFP
antibody comparing depleted (siFoxA1) and control cells (siNT1). Reduced RARγ
recruitment was only observed for seven RARγ sites co-localizing with FoxA1 sites but not
for two unique RARγ sites or a negative control site. Error bars represent s.d. ***P < 0.001.

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 June 13.

Hua et al.

Page 21

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Figure 6. RAR targets as breast cancer relevant genes

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

(A) Network view of functional modules enriched in RA-regulated genes. Each node
represents a functional module or set of biologically relevant genes (see also Table S7). The
node size is proportional to the minus logarithm of the adjusted P-value for testing the
module enrichment of RA-regulated genes. Edge width correlates with the minus logarithm
of the adjusted P-value for testing the enrichment between functional modules.
(B) Hierarchical clustering of 146-breast tumor set using the UNC Intrinsic gene set (Hu et
al.,2006). The density profiles for RARγ, RARα and ERα putative targets, as well as RAR
and ERα common targets, were plotted. The density was calculated as the proportion of
transcription factor putative targets in 50 neighbors for each gene in the cluster.
(C,D) RAR targets as prognostic indicators. Kaplan-Meier curves of overall survival (C) and
relapse-free survival (D) among the 295 patients (van de Vijver et al., 2002) classified by
RA signature values. The patient samples are grouped in three categories based on RA
signature scores: P (positive RA score) (n = 73), N (negative RA score) (n = 74), and U
(uncorrelated) (n = 148). P-values were obtained from log-rank tests.

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 June 13.

Hua et al.

Page 22

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Figure 7. A model for the antagonistic regulation of target genes by RAR and ERα

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

(A) The antagonistic regulation of target genes by RAR and ERα can occur either through
independent cis-regulatory elements, or as was most frequently found through shared
binding regions of ERα and RARs. FoxA1 and GATA3 may be essential for RAR and/or
ERα mediated gene regulation. FoxA1 may act as an initial chromatin binding factor and
facilitate further recruitment of the RAR/RXR heterodimer, ERα homodimer, and/or other
co-factors. The line and arrow width indicates the frequency that FoxA1 or GATA3
participates in different types of RAR or ER regulatory regions. Motif enrichment analysis
predicts a potential role for AP-1 in ERα and RAR recruitment to these sites.
(B) Transcriptional regulatory circuits composed of RAR, ERα, and their putative cofactors. The expression of FOXA1, GATA3, and FOS in MCF-7 cells is oppositely
regulated by RAR and ERα upon RA or estrogen treatment. A negative feedback is
achieved by positive cross-regulation between the two antagonizing transcription factors
RAR and ERα

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 June 13.

