Published OnlineFirst March 5, 2014; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-3568

Cancer
Research

Review

Noncanonical Functions of Telomerase: Implications in
Telomerase-Targeted Cancer Therapies
Yinghui Li1 and Vinay Tergaonkar1,2

Abstract
Telomerase plays a pivotal role in bypassing cellular senescence and maintaining telomere homeostasis,
essential properties required for the sustenance and progression of cancer. However, recent investigations have
uncovered extratelomeric properties of telomerase that are independent of its role in telomere extension. This
review summarizes recent insights to the noncanonical functions of telomerase reverse transcriptase (TERT)
catalytic subunit, in particular in cancer progression, and highlights two major signaling mechanisms involved in
the cross-talk with TERT—the NF-kB and Wnt/b-catenin pathways. We propose a feed-forward regulatory loop
mechanism underlying TERT activation in cancers in which TERT acts as a transcriptional modulator of
oncogenic signaling pathways that sustain its own levels and control the induction of target genes critical for
tumor cell survival and proliferation. Finally, we provide a new perspective on telomerase-targeted cancer
therapies and suggest possible interventions targeting the nontelomeric roles of TERT. This therapeutic strategy
can be used in the future targeting of other telomerase components that exhibit novel nontelomeric functions in
cancer and other ailments. Cancer Res; 74(6); 1639–44. 2014 AACR.

Telomere-Associated Proteins Have
Extratelomeric Roles in Regulating Diverse
Signaling Pathways in Mammals
Telomeres are tandem repeats of the sequence TTAGGG
found at chromosomal ends of eukaryotes. These nucleoprotein structures harbor binding sites for a group of telomeric
proteins, which collectively constitute the shelterin complex
that executes protective mechanisms against chromosomal
degradation, end-to-end fusions and DNA-damage responses.
The shelterin complex is composed of six members—telomeric repeat binding factor 1 (TRF1), TRF2, TRF1-interacting
nuclear factor (TIN2), protection of telomeres 1, TIN2 organizing protein, and repressor-activator protein 1 (RAP1).
Besides their role in capping chromosome ends, shelterin
components have been demonstrated to regulate telomerase
recruitment and activity at the telomere (1). Telomeres and
telomeric proteins play a nonredundant role in maintenance
of chromosomal stability and genomic integrity. However,
extratelomeric roles of shelterin components have been
uncovered by a number of recent studies, revealing a new
perspective on telomeres as biologic signaling hubs in mammals. Teo and colleagues identiﬁed a cytoplasmic function of
RAP1 in regulation of the NF-kB signaling cascade, which was
Authors' Afﬁliations: 1Division of Cancer Genetics and Therapeutics,
Laboratory of NF-kB Signaling, Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology
(IMCB), Agency for Science, Technology and Research (A STAR); and
2
Department of Biochemistry, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National
University of Singapore, Singapore
Corresponding Author: Vinay Tergaonkar, Institute of Molecular and Cell
Biology (A STAR), Proteos, 61, Biopolis Drive, 138673 Singapore. Phone:
65-6586-9836; Fax: 65-6779-1117. E-mail: vinayt@imcb.a-star.edu.sg
doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-3568
2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

distinct from its telomeric function (2). In particular, mammalian RAP1 was found to associate with the inhibitor of IkB
kinases (IKK), enzymes that facilitate NF-kB activation by
phosphorylating inhibitory IkBa proteins bound to NF-kB,
thereby leading to their subsequent ubiquitylation and degradation (2). This interaction between RAP1 and IKKs in the
cytosol was reported to be critical for recruiting IKK to the
NF-kB p65 subunit, resulting in its phosphorylation and
consequent transcriptional activation (2). The authors further
implicated elevated cytoplasmic RAP1 levels in mediating
constitutive IKK and hence NF-kB activity and function,
which is correlated with invasive human breast cancers (2).
In another independent study, Martinez and colleagues demonstrated the role of mammalian RAP1 in transcriptional
regulation at extratelomeric sites genome-wide, similar to its
ortholog in budding yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae (3).
Although RAP1-bound loci were identiﬁed at both telomeric
and extratelomeric regions containing TTAGGG repeats via
whole-genome chromatin immunoprecipitation sequencing
(ChIP-seq), increased occupancy of extratelomeric RAP1binding sites at subtelomeric regions correlated with preferential derepression of subtelomeric genes in RAP1-null cells,
thereby supporting the nontelomeric role of RAP1 in transcriptional control (3). More recently, RAP1 was also found to
regulate obesity through its involvement in signaling pathways connected to metabolism (4, 5). Till date, extratelomeric
functions of other shelterin proteins besides RAP1 have also
been described previously (1, 6, 7). Thus, collectively, evidence
depicting the diverse functions of telomeric proteins in a
myriad of signaling events at extratelomeric locations, reiterates the view that telomeres in mammals (much like in yeast)
function as critical "signaling hubs" that can regulate fundamental physiologic processes governing aging, cancer, inﬂammation, and metabolism.

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 2, 2017. © 2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

1639

Published OnlineFirst March 5, 2014; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-3568

Li and Tergaonkar

Telomerase Extends Telomeres, Thereby
Conferring Cellular Immortality
Telomerase is a ribonucleoprotein enzyme, which is well
recognized for its role in de novo telomeric DNA synthesis. Its
minimal catalytic core comprises of telomerase reverse transcriptase (TERT) and the RNA (TERC) components. TERT
protein catalyzes the addition of telomeric repeats at chromosome ends using TERC as the template for extension. In
addition to the minimal catalytic core, other proteins found to
be associated with the telomerase complex include the RNAbinding protein Dyskerin, Reptin, Pontin, telomerase Cajal
body protein 1, and several small ribonucleoproteins such as
NHP2, NOP10, and GAR1 (8, 9). This multisubunit telomerase
complex is essential for maintaining telomere homeostasis,
which has been traditionally viewed as a central regulator of
aging and cancer. This long-standing notion stems from past
observations of the progressive shortening of telomeres following each cycle of DNA replication, owing to the inability of
DNA polymerase to fully replicate chromosomal ends (10).
Following telomere shortening to a critical length, telomere
erosion and the consequential loss of telomere capping function occurs. This triggers a DNA-damage response that activates the p53 tumor suppressor pathway, thereby inducing
replicative senescence in primary human cells (8). Thus, most
somatic cells that possess limited telomere reserves due to
negligible telomerase activity exhibit a ﬁnite replicative potential. This can be circumvented through reactivation of telomerase, which confers cellular immortalization (8). Besides its
reverse transcriptase ability, nontelomeric functions have been
ascribed to various protein components in the telomerase
complex, including p53 biogenesis, DNA-damage repair, and
chromatin remodeling (9). In this review, we will focus mainly
on the noncanonical roles of the catalytic subunit, TERT, which
contribute to cancer development and progression.

Telomerase Reactivation Is a Critical Step in
Human Cancer Progression
In contrast with the constitutive expression of TERC and
other components of the telomerase complex in adult somatic
tissues and germ cells, TERT is normally present at low levels in
human stem cells and germ cells, while being virtually undetectable in most adult somatic tissues due to transcriptional
repression (11). However, during human tumorigenesis, telomerase is often reactivated via transcriptional upregulation of
TERT. The expression of telomerase can be stimulated by
transcription factors/coregulators that are well documented
for their cancer-promoting roles, such as c-Myc (12), NF-kB
(13) and b-catenin (14, 15). Telomerase upregulation enables
rapidly proliferating cancer cells to bypass checkpoint signaling pathways that are activated during critical telomere shortening to induce cellular senescence and cell death. Hence,
telomerase reactivation, which is found in nearly 90% of all
advanced cancers (11), is instrumental in endowing tumor cells
with an immortal growth potential that is believed to form a
key step in the adenoma–carcinoma transition during human
cancer development. In addition, as telomerase is constitutively expressed in stem cells, certain cancers are believed to

1640

Cancer Res; 74(6) March 15, 2014

arise from cancer stem cells with enhanced telomerase activity
(16).
Although early studies have attributed the prime function of
telomerase activation in cancer progression to its ability to
extend telomeres, there is mounting evidence highlighting that
additional activities of telomerase beyond telomeres could
contribute profoundly to tumorigenesis. In a study conducted
by Artandi and colleagues, which addressed past observations
of enhanced telomerase activity during tumor development in
laboratory mice despite them possessing long telomeres,
transgenic mice expressing reverse transcriptase telomerase,
mTERT, developed spontaneous neoplastic lesions in their
mammary glands that progressed to invasive mammary carcinomas (17). Although TERT activation promoted mammary
carcinogenesis in aging mice, mTERT overexpression in mouse
embryonic ﬁbroblasts could not overcome replicative senescence despite their extended telomeres, suggesting that mere
telomere elongation does not account for the prooncogenic
activity of telomerase. This ability of TERT to confer additional
oncogenic capabilities, independent of its telomeric function,
was further highlighted in an immortal human ﬁbroblast cell
line exhibiting alternative lengthening of telomeres (ALT). In a
separate study by colleagues from the Weinberg laboratory,
expression of oncogenic H-Ras in ALT cells was insufﬁcient to
confer tumorigenicity, whereas subsequent ectopic expression
of hTERT or a catalytically active mutant form of hTERT that
has lost the ability to elongate telomeres resulted in transformation (18). These data reinforce the view that telomerase
performs "extracurricular" activities beyond its function in
telomere stabilization, which promote carcinogenesis. Moreover, the ability of alternatively spliced variants of TERT, which
lack telomerase activity, to induce the expression of growthpromoting genes, stimulate cell proliferation, and protect
cancer cells from apoptosis provides further corroborating
evidence to the noncanonical functions of telomerase in
tumorigenesis (19–21). Interestingly, recent work by Mukherjee and colleagues, through ectopic expression of a panel of
hTERT mutants in human mammary epithelial cells, demonstrated that functions of hTERT in cellular proliferation, lifespan extension, and DNA-damage signaling are each separable
and distinct from its telomere elongation role (22). In addition,
the authors showed that the catalytic activity of hTERT,
independent of telomere elongation, was necessary for its
proproliferative function (22). These ﬁndings support the
earlier observations by Mukherjee and colleagues and provide
further insight to the noncanonical functions of TERT. We shall
discuss some of the mechanisms of action underscoring the
noncanonical roles of telomerase in cancer-promoting events
and suggest potential interventions for telomerase-targeted
cancer therapies in the following sections.

Noncanonical Functions of Telomerase That
Intersect with Signaling Pathways Controlling
Development, Oncogenesis, and Inﬂammation
Several recent reports have documented the noncanonical
functions of telomerase in signaling cascades that inﬂuence
cancer development and progression, including the NF-kB and

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 2, 2017. © 2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

Published OnlineFirst March 5, 2014; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-3568

Novel Telomerase-Targeted Therapies

Wnt/b-catenin pathways. The transcription factor NF-kB is a
key regulator of inﬂammatory and developmental processes in
which deregulation has been implicated in the pathogenesis of
various human ailments, including inﬂammation and cancer
(23). Although the transcription factor has been documented
to bind to the TERT promoter and activate its transcription
(13), the ﬁrst evidence for the direct interaction between NFkB p65 subunit (RelA) and TERT protein was demonstrated in
multiple myeloma cells in which p65 was found to modulate
nuclear translocation of TERT (24). However, it was nearly a
decade later before the mechanistic basis for the interaction
between TERT and the NF-kB signaling pathway was illuminated (25). The authors showed that ectopic expression of
telomerase resulted in increased cancer cell proliferation,
protection from cell death as well as larger tumors in a
xenograft model, which could be mitigated by dampening
NF-kB signaling (25). Conversely, hTERT abrogation by siRNAs
signiﬁcantly repressed tumor growth, a phenomenon that
could be reversed by p65 overexpression (25). These ﬁndings
support a functional interplay between telomerase and NF-kB
signaling, which was further reinforced by the observation that
telomerase overexpression resulted in enhanced expression of
NF-kB target genes, whereas telomerase-null mice were refractory to NF-kB activation. Intriguingly, TERT was found to bind
to p65 and localize to promoters of a subset of NF-kB target
genes, including interleukin (IL)-6, TNF-a, and IL-8—cytokines
known to sustain inﬂammation and cancer progression (25).
Moreover, inhibition of telomerase with MST-312 reduced the
expression of IL-6 in primary leukemic cells, further substantiating the role of telomerase as a modulator of NF-kB–
dependent transcription in human cancers (25).
This noncanonical activity of telomerase in the NF-kB
signaling pathway was also illustrated in a recent study by
Ding and colleagues. In particular, the authors demonstrated
that both hTERT and its catalytic mutant hTERT K626A, which
lacks reverse transcriptase activity, could activate NF-kB–
mediated transcription and regulate the expression of several
NF-kB target genes to similar extents (26). Furthermore, overexpression of hTERT or hTERT K626A promoted the nuclear
accumulation of NF-kB p65 as well as p65 DNA binding at both
basal and TNF-a–induced states (26). These data reiterate the
notion that telomerase can function as a transcriptional
modulator of the NF-kB signaling cascade in a fashion distinct
from its activity at telomeres. Moreover, the observation that
NF-kB can serve as a transcriptional inducer of TERT and vice
versa highlights the functional interconnectedness and likely
positive feedback regulation between NF-kB and hTERT. This
feed-forward regulatory loop may be one of the mechanisms
underlying the concomitant chronic inﬂammation and prolonged telomerase activity apparent in human cancers.
Besides NF-kB, telomerase has also been reported to regulate the transcriptional activity of the Wnt/b-catenin complex.
The Wnt/b-catenin signaling pathway is a central regulator of
embryogenesis and the self-renewal property of adult stem
cells in proliferating tissues such as the intestine, hair follicle,
and hematopoietic system (27). Being one of the key mechanisms governing cell proliferation, cell polarity, and cell fate
determination (27), deregulation of the Wnt/b-catenin signal-

www.aacrjournals.org

ing cascade is often connected to a variety of developmental
disorders and cancers. The ﬁrst connection between telomerase and the Wnt/b-catenin pathway was discovered in hair
follicle stem cells in which transgenic mice engineered to
conditionally express catalytically inactive TERT (TERTci) in
keratinocytes displayed an induction of anagen, a proliferative
phase of hair follicles, which requires activation of stem cells in
the hair follicle bulge region (28). This stimulation of anagen
following conditional TERTci upregulation occurred with similar efﬁciency as wild-type TERT (28), demonstrating the ability
of TERT to activate hair follicle stem cells and trigger hair
growth independent of its reverse transcriptase activity. Further microarray analyses of the transcriptional proﬁles of
mouse skin following acute perturbations in TERT levels
revealed differential expression of genes involved in development/morphogenesis, signal transduction, and cytoskeleton/
cell adhesion signaling pathways (28). Using pattern-matching
algorithms, this TERT-regulated transcriptional program was
found to overlap closely with those controlled by Wnt and Myc
(28). This close resemblance of the TERT signature to Wnt- and
Myc-regulated transcriptional programs suggests a potential
intersection of TERT in the Wnt and Myc pathways, which are
known to exert cancer-promoting effects by virtue of their
fundamental roles in controlling proliferation, differentiation,
and stem cell renewal. The ﬁrst evidence of the direct regulation of Wnt/b-catenin signaling by telomerase was subsequently uncovered by Park and colleagues in mouse embryonic
stem cells and Xenopus laevis embryos. In their study, TERT
was reported to act as a cofactor in the b-catenin transcriptional complex through its interaction with Brg1, a SWI/SNF
(SWItch/Sucrose NonFermentable)-related chromatin remodeling factor (29). Overexpression of TERT or TERTci resulted
in the activation of Wnt-dependent reporters in vitro and in
vivo, whereas chromatin immunoprecipitation assays revealed
TERT occupancy at promoters of Wnt target genes such as
cyclin D1 and c-Myc in mouse intestine (29). Intriguingly, TERT
or TERTci overexpression in Xenopus embryos, in conjunction
with b-catenin, promoted anterior–posterior axis duplication
(29). In contrast, mice deﬁcient in TERT displayed homeotic
transformations in their vertebrae (29). These observations
reveal a noncanonical function for TERT as a key regulatory
component of the Wnt/b-catenin transcriptional complex,
exerting a profound effect in developmental processes controlled by Wnt signaling. This synergistic role of telomerase on
the transcriptional activity of Wnt/b-catenin is independent of
its catalytic function at telomeres. In a more recent study by
Okamoto and colleagues, TERT was also illustrated to form a
complex with Brg1, together with nucleostemin (NS), a nucleolar GTP-binding protein and/or its family member GNL3L
(30). This NS/GNL3L–TERT–Brg1 complex was found to be
essential for maintenance of the tumor initiating cell phenotype in human cancer cells, thereby extending support for the
regulatory role of TERT in the Wnt/b-catenin pathway through
Brg1 interaction (30).
Although two recent studies from the Blackburn and Greider
laboratories have reported a lack of physical interaction
between TERT and Brg1 or b-catenin in Hela and breast cancer
cell lines (31) as well as the absence of developmental defects

Cancer Res; 74(6) March 15, 2014

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 2, 2017. © 2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

1641

Published OnlineFirst March 5, 2014; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-3568

Li and Tergaonkar

associated with defective Wnt signaling in TERT-deﬁcient
mice, respectively (32), the apparent discrepancies in effects
of TERT may be attributed to the different cell type, experimental setup, mouse strain background, or laboratory environment used in the three studies. As such, the role of
telomerase on Wnt signaling should not be dismissed
completely but rather, be viewed as one that is context
dependent and especially relevant in cancers in which multiple
signaling pathways such as NF-kB and Wnt are perturbed
concurrently. In addition, the ﬁnding that Wnt/b-catenin
signaling can in turn regulate telomerase transcriptionally in
embryonic stem cells and human cancer cells (14, 15) further
fuels the notion of a feed-forward regulatory cycle that sustains
telomerase activity and ampliﬁes oncogenic signaling mechanisms concurrently.
This feed-forward signaling loop that is proposed to exist
between TERT and NF-kB signaling as well as TERT and Wnt/
b-catenin signaling in cancers is a likely mechanism for the
concomitant activation of NF-kB- and Wnt/b-catenin–dependent transcription following TERT overexpression, thereby
driving the prolonged expression of target genes critical for
the maintenance of tumor survival and proliferation (Fig. 1).

Interestingly, the observations that c-Myc, a known transcriptional target of Wnt/b-catenin signaling, regulates TERT
expression (12) and that NF-kB modulates Wnt signaling
during tumorigenesis (33) add further complexity to the
cross-talk and functional cooperativity between telomerase
and multiple signaling networks associated with cancer progression. Wnt/b-Catenin signaling can also activate the transcription of TRF2, whereas b-catenin downregulation in cancer
cells aggravates telomere dysfunction (34). These data illustrate the interaction of Wnt/b-catenin signaling with telomere
stabilization pathways and further corroborate existing evidence of the cross-talk between telomerase and telomerebinding proteins with cancer-promoting signaling pathways.

Telomerase-Targeted Cancer Therapies:
Potential Interventions and Future Perspectives
In view of the evidence mentioned earlier linking the noncanonical functions of telomerase to cancer development and
progression, targeting telomerase as an anticancer strategy
seems to be an effective approach to simultaneously dampen
oncogenic signaling pathways that are augmented by telomerase and disrupt the feed-forward regulatory mechanism

NF-kB pathway

Wnt/b-catenin pathway

Cytokine/
ligand

Wnt

Cytoplasm
IKK
complex

Axin GSK3β
CK1
β-Catenin

APC
IkBα

Feed-forward
loop

p65 p50

β-Catenin

p65

p50

Nucleus
Brg1
β-Catenin
TCF

TERT

TERT
Transcription of
Wnt target genes

Proliferation

Stem cell
renewal

Cell
survival

Transcription of
NF-κB target genes

Chronic
inflammation

Apoptotic
resistance

p65 p50

Figure 1. The proposed model of
the feed-forward regulatory loop
underscoring the interaction of
TERT with the Wnt/b-catenin and
NF-kB signaling pathways
during cancer development.
Reactivated TERT acts as a
transcriptional modulator of Wnt/
b-catenin and NF-kB signaling,
resulting in the enhanced
expression of Wnt and NF-kB
target genes that exert cancerpromoting functions such as
proliferation, resistance to
apoptosis, and chronic
inﬂammation. As Wnt/b-catenin
and NF-kB are also transcriptional
activators of TERT, we suggest a
feed-forward pathway
(illustrated by blue arrows) that
sustains Wnt/b-catenin and
NF-kB–dependent transcription
as well as levels of telomerase in
cancer cells in a simpliﬁed
schematic of signaling events.

Proliferation

© 2014 American Association for Cancer Research

1642

Cancer Res; 74(6) March 15, 2014

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 2, 2017. © 2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

Published OnlineFirst March 5, 2014; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-3568

Novel Telomerase-Targeted Therapies

driving chronic inﬂammatory/oncogenic responses and sustained telomerase activity in cancers. Furthermore, as telomerase is often upregulated in cancer cells, whereas majority of
normal somatic cells have undetectable telomerase activities,
telomerase-targeted cancer therapies serve to selectively eliminate tumor cells and avoid the adverse side effects. Several
studies in the recent years have contributed to the rapid
emergence of data depicting the multiple noncanonical functions of telomerase in cancer progression in a manner that is
independent of its well-recognized role in telomere maintenance. This accumulating evidence indicates a compelling
rationale for the development of therapeutic approaches that
target the noncanonical roles of telomerase, instead of solely
relying on conventional small-molecule inhibitors that restrict
its enzymatic activity or accessibility/function at telomeres.
Taking into account the evidence that telomerase exerts its
tumor-promoting roles via transcriptional modulation of the
NF-kB and Wnt/b-catenin pathways, therapeutic approaches
that aim to impair the interactions of TERT with NF-kB or
b-catenin can be devised as a strategy to check tumor growth
and survival. Herein, further studies examining the interacting
domains essential for the physical association between TERT
and NF-kB or b-catenin may prove useful for the treatment of
cancers displaying aberrant NF-kB or Wnt/b-catenin signaling. This strategy can also be applied to other telomerase
components such as Pontin and Reptin, which have also been
found to interact with major oncogenic factors such as b-catenin and c-Myc (9). Meanwhile, the search for novel-interacting
partners of TERT and other telomerase components that are
involved in cancer-promoting pathways as well as novel epigenetic regulators essential for TERT recruitment to NF-kB or
Wnt/b-catenin target genes will generate a valuable resource
for the future development of drugs targeting the speciﬁc
oncogenic activity of relevant telomerase components. Therapeutic approaches that block the transcriptional activation of
telomerase can also be used as a way to disrupt the cross-talk

between telomerase and tumor-promoting pathways. Thus,
understanding how oncogenic transcription factors such as
NF-kB, c-Myc, and Wnt/b-catenin bind to the TERT promoter
and activate its expression will be useful for the design of drugs
or oligos that inhibit the recruitment of transcriptional activators at TERT promoter. This approach can be used in
combination with the current telomerase-based immunotherapy strategies that aim to elicit an immune response in
cytotoxic CD8þ T cells against tumor cells displaying TERT
peptides on their surface (9). Hence, inhibiting the expression
of telomerase as well as targeting telomerase-positive cancer
cells serves to interrupt the feed-forward regulatory loop that
sustains cancer-promoting signaling pathways. The discovery
of the noncanonical roles of telomerase in cancer creates a
promising avenue for the development of effective anticancer
therapies that speciﬁcally target the oncogenic abilities of
telomerase. Targeting the noncanonical functions of telomerase, in combination with drugs that inhibit the catalytic
activity of telomerase, as a therapeutic approach can prevent
the persistent activation of major oncogenic signaling pathways while concurrently inducing senescence in proliferating
tumor cells as a result of critical telomere shortening. This
strategy can be an efﬁcient way to trigger the regression of
telomerase-positive tumors with minimal cytotoxicity to normal tissues and may prove superior to the current anticancer
treatment options. Thus, future studies that explore the noncanonical functions of telomerase components, mechanisms
of action as well as novel coactivators, and interacting partners
are highly warranted for the rational design of effective therapeutic interventions against telomerase-active cancers.
Disclosure of Potential Conﬂicts of Interest
No potential conﬂicts of interest were disclosed.
Received December 11, 2013; revised January 6, 2014; accepted January 14,
2014; published OnlineFirst March 5, 2014.

References
1.

2.

3.

4.

5.

6.
7.

Martínez P, Blasco MA. Telomeric and extra-telomeric roles for telomerase and the telomere-binding proteins. Nat Rev Cancer 2011;
11:161–76.
Teo H, Ghosh S, Luesch H, Ghosh A, Wong ET, Malik N, et al.
Telomere-independent Rap1 is an IKK adaptor and regulates NF[kappa]B-dependent gene expression. Nat Cell Biol 2010;12:
758–67.
Martinez P, Thanasoula M, Carlos AR, Gomez-Lopez G, Tejera AM,
Schoeftner S, et al. Mammalian Rap1 controls telomere function and
gene expression through binding to telomeric and extratelomeric sites.
Nat Cell Biol. 2010;12:768–80.
 mez-Lo
 pez G, García F, Mercken E, Mitchell S, Flores
Martínez P, Go
Juana M, et al. RAP1 protects from obesity through its extratelomeric
role regulating gene expression. Cell Reports 2013;3:2059–74.
Yeung F, Ramírez Cristina M, Mateos-Gomez Pedro A, Pinzaru A,
Ceccarini G, Kabir S, et al. Nontelomeric role for Rap1 in regulating
metabolism and protecting against obesity. Cell Reports 2013;3:
1847–56.
McDaniel LD, Schultz RA, Friedberg EC. TERF2-XPF: caught in the
middle; beginnings from the end. DNA Repair 2006;5:868–72.
McKerlie M, Walker JR, Mitchell TRH, Wilson FR, Zhu X-D. Phosphorylated (pT371)TRF1 is recruited to sites of DNA damage to facilitate

www.aacrjournals.org

8.
9.
10.
11.

12.

13.
14.

15.

homologous recombination and checkpoint activation. Nucleic Acids
Res 2013;41:10268–82.
Artandi SE, DePinho RA. Telomeres and telomerase in cancer. Carcinogenesis 2010;31:9–18.
Low KC, Tergaonkar V. Telomerase: central regulator of all of the
hallmarks of cancer. Trends Biochem Sci 2013;38:426–34.
Harley CB, Futcher AB, Greider CW. Telomeres shorten during ageing
of human ﬁbroblasts. Nature 1990;345:458–60.
Kim N, Piatyszek M, Prowse K, Harley CB, West M, Ho P, et al. Speciﬁc
association of human telomerase activity with immortal cells and
cancer. Science 1994;266:2011–5.
Wu K-J, Grandori C, MAmacker M, Simon-Vermot N, Polack A, Lingner
J, et al. Direct activation of TERT transcription by c-MYC. Nat Genetic
1999;21:220–4.
Yin L, Hubbard AK, Giardina C. NF-kB regulates transcription of the
mouse telomerase catalytic subunit. J Biol Chem 2000;275:36671–5.
Hoffmeyer K, Raggioli A, Rudloff S, Anton R, Hierholzer A, Del Valle I,
et al. Wnt/b-Catenin signaling regulates telomerase in stem cells and
cancer cells. Science 2012;336:1549–54.
Zhang Y, Toh L, Lau P, Wang X. Human telomerase reverse transcriptase (hTERT) is a novel target of the Wnt/b-catenin pathway in human
cancer. J Biol Chem 2012;287:32494–511.

Cancer Res; 74(6) March 15, 2014

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 2, 2017. © 2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

1643

Published OnlineFirst March 5, 2014; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-3568

Li and Tergaonkar

16. Armanios M, Greider CW. Telomerase and cancer stem cells. Cold
Spring Harb Symp Quant Biol 2005;70:205–8.
17. Artandi SE, Alson S, Tietze MK, Sharpless NE, Ye S, Greenberg RA,
et al. Constitutive telomerase expression promotes mammary carcinomas in aging mice. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2002;99:8191–6.
18. Stewart SA, Hahn WC, O'Connor BF, Banner EN, Lundberg AS, Modha
P, et al. Telomerase contributes to tumorigenesis by a telomere lengthindependent mechanism. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2002;99:12606–11.
kova
 R, Nehyba J, Bose HR. Alternatively spliced telomerase
19. Hrdlic
reverse transcriptase variants lacking telomerase activity stimulate cell
proliferation. Mol Cell Biol 2012;32:4283–96.
20. Listerman I, Sun J, Gazzaniga FS, Lukas JL, Blackburn EH. The major
reverse transcriptase–incompetent splice variant of the human telomerase protein inhibits telomerase activity but protects from apoptosis. Cancer Res 2013;73:2817–28.
21. Smith LL, Coller HA, Roberts JM. Telomerase modulates expression of
growth-controlling genes and enhances cell proliferation. Nat Cell Biol
2003;5:474–9.
22. Mukherjee S, Firpo EJ, Wang Y, Roberts JM. Separation of telomerase
functions by reverse genetics. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2011;108:
E1363–E71.
23. Biswas SK, Tergaonkar V. Myeloid differentiation factor 88-independent Toll-like receptor pathway: sustaining inﬂammation or promoting
tolerance? Int J Biochem Cell Biol 2007;39:1582–92.
24. Akiyama M, Hideshima T, Hayashi T, Tai Y-T, Mitsiades CS, Mitsiades
N, et al. Nuclear factor-kB p65 mediates tumor necrosis factor
a-induced nuclear translocation of telomerase reverse transcriptase
protein. Cancer Res 2003;63:18–21.
25. Ghosh A, Saginc G, Leow SC, Khattar E, Shin EM, Yan TD, et al.
Telomerase directly regulates NF-kB–dependent transcription. Nat
Cell Biol 2012;14:1270–81.

1644

Cancer Res; 74(6) March 15, 2014

26. Ding D, Xi P, Zhou J, Wang M, Cong Y-S. Human telomerase reverse
transcriptase regulates MMP expression independently of telomerase
activity via NF-kB-dependent transcription. FASEB J 2013;27:
4375–83.
27. Clevers H, Nusse R. Wnt/b-Catenin signaling and disease. Cell 2012;
149:1192–205.
28. Choi J, Southworth LK, Sarin KY, Venteicher AS, Ma W, Chang W, et al.
TERT promotes epithelial proliferation through transcriptional control
of a Myc- and Wnt-related developmental program. PloS Genet
2008;4:e10.
29. Park J-I, Venteicher AS, Hong JY, Choi J, Jun S, Shkreli M, et al.
Telomerase modulates Wnt signalling by association with target gene
chromatin. Nature 2009;460:66–72.
30. Okamoto N, Yasukawa M, Nguyen C, Kasim V, Maida Y, Possemato
R, et al. Maintenance of tumor initiating cells of deﬁned genetic
composition by nucleostemin. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2011;108:
20388–93.
31. Listerman I, Gazzaniga FS, Blackburn EH. An investigation of the
effects of the telomerase core protein TERT on Wnt signaling in human
breast cancer cells. Mol Cell Biol 2013;34:280–9.
32. Strong MA, Vidal-Cardenas SL, Karim B, Yu H, Guo N, Greider CW.
Phenotypes in mTERTþ/ and mTERT/ mice are due to short
telomeres, not telomere-independent functions of telomerase reverse
transcriptase. Mol Cell Biol 2011;31:2369–79.
33. Schwitalla S, Fingerle Alexander A, Cammareri P, Nebelsiek T,
€ ktuna Serkan I, Ziegler Paul K, et al. Intestinal tumorigenesis
Go
initiated by dedifferentiation and acquisition of stem-cell-like properties. Cell 2013;152:25–38.
34. Diala I, Wagner N, Magdinier F, Shkreli M, Sirakov M, Bauwens S, et al.
Telomere protection and TRF2 expression are enhanced by the
canonical Wnt signalling pathway. EMBO Rep 2013;14:356–63.

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 2, 2017. © 2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

Published OnlineFirst March 5, 2014; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-3568

Noncanonical Functions of Telomerase: Implications in
Telomerase-Targeted Cancer Therapies
Yinghui Li and Vinay Tergaonkar
Cancer Res 2014;74:1639-1644. Published OnlineFirst March 5, 2014.

Updated version

Cited articles
Citing articles

E-mail alerts
Reprints and
Subscriptions
Permissions

Access the most recent version of this article at:
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-3568

This article cites 34 articles, 15 of which you can access for free at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/74/6/1639.full#ref-list-1
This article has been cited by 10 HighWire-hosted articles. Access the articles at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/74/6/1639.full#related-urls

Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal.
To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications Department at
pubs@aacr.org.
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications Department at
permissions@aacr.org.

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 2, 2017. © 2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

