Oncotarget, Vol. 7, No. 32

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Research Paper

Integrating heterogeneous drug sensitivity data from cancer
pharmacogenomic studies
Nikita Pozdeyev1, Minjae Yoo1, Ryan Mackie1, Rebecca E. Schweppe1, Aik Choon
Tan1,*, Bryan R. Haugen1,*
1

Department of Medicine, University of Colorado Cancer Center, University of Colorado School of Medicine, Aurora, CO, USA

*

Two senior authors contributed equally to this work

Correspondence to: Nikita Pozdeyev, email: nikita.pozdeyev@ucdenver.edu
Keywords: database integration, drug sensitivity, pharmacogenomics, cancer, cell line
Received: April 08, 2016     Accepted: May 29, 2016     Published: June 14, 2016

ABSTRACT
The consistency of in vitro drug sensitivity data is of key importance for cancer
pharmacogenomics. Previous attempts to correlate drug sensitivities from the large
pharmacogenomics databases, such as the Cancer Cell Line Encyclopedia (CCLE)
and the Genomics of Drug Sensitivity in Cancer (GDSC), have produced discordant
results. We developed a new drug sensitivity metric, the area under the dose response
curve adjusted for the range of tested drug concentrations, which allows integration
of heterogeneous drug sensitivity data from the CCLE, the GDSC, and the Cancer
Therapeutics Response Portal (CTRP). We show that there is moderate to good
agreement of drug sensitivity data for many targeted therapies, particularly kinase
inhibitors. The results of this largest cancer cell line drug sensitivity data analysis
to date are accessible through the online portal, which serves as a platform for high
power pharmacogenomics analysis.

drug sensitivity metrics employed by different studies.
These challenges were highlighted, when Haibe-Kains
et al. found inconsistencies in drug sensitivity data from
CCLE and GDSC [5]. In response, the authors of CCLE
and GDSC re-analyzed drug sensitivity data accounting
for the differences in the analytical approach employed
by the two studies and reported a significantly better
agreement [6].
In this study, we developed a new metric, area
under the dose-response curve adjusted for the range
of tested concentrations (adjusted AUC), to combine
heterogeneous drug sensitivity data generated by multiple
pharmacogenomics studies. To illustrate the utility of this
new metric, we performed an unbiased comparison of
the drug screening data from CCLE, GDSC and CTRP,
resolved analytical challenges of the previous comparative
analyses, and defined the variables associated with the
better or worse agreement of the drug sensitivities between
studies. We also developed a companion online portal, the
Quantitative Analysis of Pharmacogenomics in Cancer
(QAPC, http://tanlab.ucdenver.edu/QAPC), to explore
and download the summarized data for high-power
pharmacogenomic analysis by the scientific community.

INTRODUCTION
Systematic pharmacogenomics studies of large
panels of cancer cell lines have proven to be a useful preclinical resource in identifying clinically relevant drugs
and putative predictive biomarkers in cancer research.
For example, the Cancer Cell Line Encyclopedia (CCLE)
[1], the Genomics of Drug Sensitivity in Cancer (GDSC)
[2] and the Cancer Therapeutics Response Portal (CTRP)
[3] projects have systematically collected drug sensitivity
profiles and genomic information across hundreds of
compounds and cancer cell lines. These studies have
recapitulated known drugs and cancer-dependency
relationships as well as revealed novel biomarkers
associated with the drug sensitivity [1–4]. As large-scale
pharmacogenomics studies are becoming more available,
integrating these various data sets will provide a rich
resource for the robust novel hypothesis generation and
discovery in cancer therapeutics development. However,
integrating these diverse pharmacogenomics studies poses
a methodological and analytical challenge due to the
differences in the types of assays, maximum tested drug
concentration, the range of tested drug concentrations and

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

51619

Oncotarget

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

part of the high amplitude dose response curve with an EC50
exceeding maximal tested concentration, or a signal drift due
to the technical imperfections of the large scale screening.
Incomplete dose response curves (Figure 1A,
black) present a major challenge in interpreting drug
sensitivity data. Neither IC50 nor EC50 can be accurately
estimated from these drug responses. Other proposed
drug sensitivity metrics, such as Hill slope and Amax [8]
cannot be used as well. The three pharmacogenomic
projects handled this problem differently. The CCLE
assigned an IC50 of 8 µM (maximal tested concentration)
to incomplete dose response curves. This approach
provides a finite number for the downstream analysis,
but capped IC50 values are not always supported by
the experimental data. The GDSC extrapolated data
from incomplete curves outside of the range of tested
concentrations that produced high and inaccurate IC50
values. The CTRP used AUC as a measure of drug
sensitivity, but not IC50 or EC50.
Haibe-Kains et al. compared CCLE and GDSC IC50
data as published without considering the differences
in methodology [5]. This resulted in the expected poor
agreement between the two datasets. To account for the
analytical differences, Stransky et al. capped IC50 at a
maximal drug concentration tested by the GDSC study
(Supplementary Table S1) [6]. This produced a large
number of capped IC50 values, which are not supported
by the experimental data for the 15 drugs shared by
the two databases (Supplementary Table S2), and
overestimated the correlation between IC50 values. For

The CCLE and GDSC projects used half maximal
inhibitory concentration (IC50), defined as a drug
concentration producing absolute 50% inhibition of growth
in the proliferation assay (Figure 1A, blue). By definition, this
metric relies on the assumption, that at a high concentration
of the drug, 100% effect is achieved (all cells die in a
proliferation assay). This is true for potent cytotoxic drugs
such as doxorubicin and paclitaxel (see examples in the
QAPC portal, http://tanlab.ucdenver.edu/QAPC). However,
cancer pharmacogenomics increasingly focuses on the
targeted therapies, and many of these drugs, such as MEK
inhibitors, are cytostatic [7]. Dose response curves produced
for cytostatic drugs, such as MEK inhibitor selumetinib,
plateau at a percent inhibition (maximal drug effect, Amax) of
less than 100 % (Figure 1A, red). 4-point logistic regression
can estimate lower and upper asymptotes of the sigmoid
dose-response curve that differ from 0 and 100 % of an IC50
curve and calculate half maximal effective concentration
(EC50, also called relative IC50), which is defined as a
concentration of a drug causing an effect equal to the 50%
of the Amax. More flexible, EC50 curves model experimental
data better (median residuals standard error is 7.0 and 9.2
for EC50 and IC50 curve fits, respectively, Mann-WhitneyWilcoxon, p< 0.001, n = 478086) and may provide more
accurate measure of the drug sensitivity for cytostatic drugs.
However, EC50 is ambiguous for the low amplitude curves
(Figure 1A, green). Such a curve may represent a true low
amplitude drug response to a cytostatic drug, a beginning

Figure 1: The six drug sensitivity metrics and the agreement of pooled pharmacologic data between CCLE, GDSC
and CTRP databases. A. An IC50 dose-response curve has minimal (Amin) and maximal (Amax) asymptotes set to 0 and 100, respectively

(blue line, CCLE, paclitaxel, cell line REH); EC50 is estimated from the dose response data with flexible Amin and Amax (red line, CCLE,
selumetinib, cell line A375), but EC50 is ambiguous for low amplitude curves (green line, CCLE, selumetinib, cell line 639V, see detailed
explanation in the text). The IC50 or EC50 cannot be estimated from incomplete dose response curve (black line, CCLE, selumetinib, cell
line EFO27). B. AUCs calculated from the dose response curve (CCLE, crizotinib, cell line KMS26) using the range of drug concentrations
from CCLE (2.5-8000 nM, blue box) and GDSC (7.8125-2000 nM, green box) differ (0.58 and 0.13, respectively). Adjusted AUC is
calculated for the range of concentrations shared by the databases (green box). C. Pearson correlation coefficients (r) for the comparison
of drug sensitivity data in 3 databases using six drug sensitivity metrics. Pearson correlation was calculated for a subset of EC50 and IC50
with finite values (estimated to be within the range of tested concentrations). Adjusted AUC provides the best consistency among databases.
Error bars illustrate 95% confidence intervals (random permutations).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

51620

Oncotarget

the drugs reported to have the greatest IC50 correlation
between CCLE and GDSC, such as crtizotinib, lapatinib,
and nilotinib (Pearson correlation r = 0.74, 0.78, 0.89,
respectively), up to 98% of IC50 values were capped
(Supplementary Table S2)). Since the GDSC used
lower maximal tested concentrations for 14 out of 15
drugs shared with CCLE (Supplementary Table S1),
a portion of reliable CCLE IC50 estimates (IC50 values
within the range of tested drug concentrations) were
capped, eliminating potentially useful drug sensitivity
information. For the drugs with the least number of
capped IC50 values (17-AAG and paclitaxel, 19 % and
29 % capped IC50 values, respectively), no improvement
in the correlation was found by Stransky et al. (0.57
and 0.15 for 17-AAG and paclitaxel, respectively)
when compared to Haibe-Kains et al. analysis (0.61
and 0.16 for 17-AAG and paclitaxel, respectively). In
addition, four drugs analyzed by both studies have more
than one maximal tested concentration in the GDSC
dataset, adding ambiguity to this artificial IC50 cap
(Supplementary Table S1). The above considerations
suggest that IC50 calculations (and EC50 calculations,
following the same logic) are not suitable drug sensitivity
metrics to accurately compare and reconcile drug
sensitivities from the large pharmacogenomic studies,
which contain many incomplete dose response curves.
The AUC, on the other hand, (Figure 1B, red area) is
an attractive drug sensitivity metric, as it can be calculated
for any dose response curve. AUC is unambiguous,
combines information about the potency (EC50, IC50) and
efficacy (Amax) of the drug into a single measure, and has
been shown to be a robust metric for comparing a single
drug across cell lines [8], as well as a better measure of
cell line selectivity, when compared to IC50 [9]. However,
AUC depends on the range of tested drug concentrations,
which varies between studies. Figure 1B illustrates that
AUC calculated from the same dose-response data for the
range of concentrations used by GDSC (7.8-2000 nM)
and CCLE (2.5-8000 nM) differs by more than 4-fold
(0.13 and 0.58 respectively). The influence of the range
of concentration on AUC estimate is particularly obvious,
when maximal tested concentration differs significantly
between databases, such as for crizotinib. For example,
the median AUC calculated from the IC50 model of
crizotinib reponses in our analysis were 0.02, 0.14 and
0.84 for GDSC, CCLE and CTRP, respectively, reflecting
the marked differences in maximal tested concentrations
(2, 8 and 66 μM, respectively), and making meaningful
comparison of these data difficult (the distribution of AUC
estimates for crtizotinib and other drugs can be visualized
with the QAPC portal, Summary tab). To solve this
problem, we applied adjusted AUC, our new metric that
takes into account the differences in the range of tested
drug concentrations. The adjusted AUC uses sigmoid
curve parameters estimated with a standard logistic
regression (IC50 or EC50 models for adjusted AUCIC50 and
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

adjusted AUCEC50, respectively), however, it is calculated
only for the range of concentrations that is shared by the
dose-response curves being compared (Figure 1B, green
box). In contrast to IC50 capping, no data is discarded
(non-overlapping high drug concentration data points are
used for the sigmoid curve modeling).
To evaluate the performance of adjusted AUCIC50
and adjusted AUCEC50, and compare it to the traditional
drug sensitivity metrics (IC50,  EC50, and unadjusted
AUCIC50and AUCEC50), we correlated drug sensitivity data
obtained from CCLE, GDSC and CTRP (Figure 1C).
There is a significant overlap in the drugs and cell lines
analyzed by CCLE, GDSC and CTRP (Supplementary
Figure S1, Supplementary Tables S3 and S4), permitting
such analysis. Specifically, twelve drugs and 264 cell lines
are represented in all 3 databases and pairwise intersection
is even larger (Supplementary Figure S1).
First, we compared combined data for all compounds
for the purpose of identifying the sensitivity metric that
provides the best agreement between databases and,
therefore, is the most reproducible quantitative assessment
of the drug sensitivity for the pooled pharmacogenomic
analysis. IC50, EC50 and unadjusted AUC drug sensitivity
metrics produced mild to moderate agreement between the
pharmacogenomic databases (Figure 1C, Supplementary
Table S5, Supplementary Figures S2-S4, QAPC portal).
When adjusted for the range of drug concentrations tested,
CCLE drug sensitivity data agreed very well with that
of CTRP (Pearson correlation, r, for adjusted AUCIC50
= 0.82), and moderately well with the pharmacologic
data from GDSC (r for adjusted AUCIC50 = 0.69). An
improvement in the agreement between drug sensitivities
measured with adjusted AUC is particularly noticeable
when CTRP data is included, which is expected, because
the CTRP tested highest maximal drug concentration
among 3 studies (Supplementary Table S1) that skews
the CTRP unadjusted AUC data towards the higher
values. Both CCLE and CTRP projects were performed
by the Broad Institute and used the same proliferation
assay (CellTiterGlo), which likely contributed to the
good reproducibility between these two studies. The
correlation between CTRP and GDSC data was moderate
(r for adjusted AUCIC50 = 0.65). Flexible curve modeling
(EC50, AUCEC50) did not provide an additional advantage
(Figure 1C).
The main purpose of pharmacogenomics is to
associate molecular features with the sensitivity to
a particular drug, therefore we studied whether the
correlations hold when data is stratified by an individual
compound (Figure 2, Supplementary Table S5, QAPC
Portal). For most drugs the highest correlation was
achieved with the adjusted AUCIC50 (Supplementary Table
S5, QAPC Portal), supporting the superiority of our drug
sensitivity metric. The r value for the adjusted AUCIC50
was significantly higher than any other unadjusted drug
sensitivity metric for lapatinib (Supplementary Figure S5)
51621

Oncotarget

and selumetinib in the CCLE-CTRP comparison, and for
afatinib, axitinib, gefitinib, and nilotinib in the CTRPGDSC comparison (higher r with non-overlapping 95%
confidence intervals obtained with random permutations,
Supplementary Table S5). Because adjusted AUCIC50
outperformed other drug sensitivity metrics, we chose
it to assess the agreement between the databases and to
compare our analysis with previously published analyses.
Adjusted AUCIC50 resulted in an improved
correlation of the drug sensitivity data in CCLE and
GDSC, when compared to the similar analyses (that used
unadjusted AUC) performed by Haibe-Kains et al. [5]
and Stransky et al. [6] (Kruskal-Wallis, p = 0.02; paired
Mann-Whitney-Wilcoxon (this analysis vs Stransky et
al. analysis), p = 0.05). The correlation has improved
by > 0.1 for 6 out of 15 drugs: nilotinib, PD-0325901,
PLX-4720, nutlin-3, sorafenib, and erlotinib, (Figure
2A, Supplementary Table S5). As expected, CCLE and
CTRP drug sensitivities agreed well (Figure 2B), with 12

out of 17 drugs demonstrating at least a moderate degree
of correlation (r > 0.5). Sixty one drugs were analyzed
by both GDSC and CTRP allowing us to subdivide
compounds based on the primary mechanism of action.
The drug responses of kinase inhibitors showed the best
agreement with 12 out 35 (34%) drugs with r > 0.5. Only
4 out of 17 (24%) other targeted therapies demonstrated
moderate correlation. Surprisingly, drug sensitivity data
for cytotoxic drugs showed minimal or poor correlation.
(r < 0.5).
Close examination of the scatterplots and raw dose
response curves for the targeted therapies with the help
of the QAPC portal demonstrated that most drugs with
very low r show no or low activity in the proliferation
assay, explaining the lack of correlation. The variability
of drug responses for inactive compounds is likely due to
the intrinsic noise of the high-throughput screening and
has no biologic meaning. This is true for PHA−665752
(Supplementary Figure S6) and sorafenib (CCLE and

Figure 2: The correlations of cell line responses to individual drugs from CCLE, GDSC and CTRP. A. CCLE and GDSC

correlations. Pearson correlation (r) coefficients of adjusted AUCIC50 calculated by this study (blue bars) were matched to the similar
analyses performed by Haibe-Kains et al. [5] (red bars, unadjusted AUC, Spearman correlation (ρ)), and Stransky et al. [6] (green bars,
unadjusted AUC, r). B. CCLE and CTRP correlations (r, adjusted AUCIC50). C. CTRP and GDSC correlations (drugs are subdivided into
kinase inhibitors, other targeted therapies, and cytotoxic chemotherapies; r, adjusted AUCIC50). Horizontal dashed line shows a threshold
for moderate correlation (> 0.5).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

51622

Oncotarget

Calculations of drug sensitivity metrics

GDSC comparison), L−685458 and sorafenib (CCLE and
CTRP comparison), bexarotene, BIRB-796, CHIR−99021,
erlotinib, KU−55933, olaparib, PAC−1, parthenolide,
QS−11¸ serdemetan, sorafenib, TGX−221, veliparib, and
VX−680 (CTRP and GDSC comparison). The scatterplots
for the individual drugs are not included in this paper
due to the space limitations but can be examined using
the QAPC Portal (Correlation Plots tab) or downloaded
together with the with R bioinformatics pipeline (“fig”
folder, Supplementary Figures 2-4; http://tanlab.ucdenver.
edu/QAPC/Downloads/Drug_Sensitvity_Metrics.zip).
To improve the accessibility of the drug sensitivity
data, we re-calculated 6 drug sensitivity metrics for
all drugs and cell lines in CCLE, GDSC and CTRP
(including adjusted AUC for the drugs analyzed by more
than one database) and have made this data available for
downloading through the QAPC portal. Alternatively,
AUC can be calculated for the specified range of
drug concentrations using functions from the recently
published PharmacoGx package in R [10] (at this time,
the PharmacoGx analysis is limited to the data from
CCLE and GDSC databases) or by using the code from
our downloadable bioinformatics pipeline.
In conclusion, we developed a new drug
sensitivity metric, AUC adjusted for the range of tested
concentrations, which allows reconciliation of publicly
available heterogeneous pharmacologic data enabling
pooled analysis for drug/gene associations. Using this
methodology we have achieved the best correlation to
date between overlapping data in CCLE, GDSC and CTRP
databases, and we demonstrated that there is a moderateto-good agreement between the drug sensitivity data for
many targeted therapies, particularly for kinase inhibitors
with activity in an in vitro proliferation assay. We predict
that the adjusted AUC can be used to match in vitro drug
responses generated by the high-throughput testing of
patient-derived primary tumor cells with an existing pool
of data to rapidly identify outlier drug sensitivities with
potential therapeutic implications.
While our method accounts for several differences in
the data analysis and experimental design, we acknowledge,
that the variability introduced by the intrinsic features
of each study (proliferation assay, cell line passage,
growth media, plating density and others) outlined in the
supplementary data for Haibe-Kains et al. [5] is unlikely to
be alleviated with bioinformatics analysis alone.

Log-logistic regression was used to model sigmoid
dose response curve using the following formula:




 Amin − Amax 
y = Amax + 
Hill  			(1)
 1+  x  
  EC  
50
where Amin and Amax are lower and upper asymptotes of
the sigmoid curve (no response and the maximal response
to the drug, respectively), EC50 is drug concentration
causing the effect equal to the 50% of the Amax, and Hill
is a Hill slope of the dose response curve. R package drc
[11], www.bioassay.dk, was used for modeling. 4-point
regression analysis was performed first, and minimal and
maximal asymptotes were allowed within the following
ranges: Rmin ≤ Amin ≤ 0 and min(0, Rmin) ≤ Amax ≤ max (100,
Rmax), respectively. Rmin and Rmax are minimal and maximal
measured drug responses, respectively. The coordinate
of the upper bend point of the dose response curve was
calculated using the formula [12]:
 A − Amax 
xbend =  min
+ Amax 			(2)
 1 + 4.6805 
If two or more data points were present with the
drug concentration x > xbend, the curve was assumed to be
complete and the upper asymptote estimated accurately
[13]. Otherwise, regression analysis was repeated with
the Amax = 100 (for the lack of a better upper asymptote
estimate for incomplete curves). Amax = 100 was also set
for very low amplitude curves (Amax - Amin < 30) to avoid
the noise being misinterpreted as a true drug response.
To estimate IC50, Amin and Amax were set to 0 and 100,
respectively (by the definition of IC50). The parameters of
the sigmoid curve were used for AUC calculations.
AUC was estimated in between minimal (xmin)
and maximal (xmax) tested concentrations (nM) for the
curve. For the purpose of comparing two dose response
curves, an adjusted AUC was calculated for the range of
concentrations shared by both curves (Figure 2B, green
box). AUC was calculated using the following formula:

MATERIALS AND METHODS

AUC =

Data

∑

xmax
x = xmin

xmax

min

x = x min

max

min

where f(x) = formula (1)
To perform an unbiased comparison of EC50 and
IC50, the estimated values that exceed maximal tested
concentration were set to infinity acknowledging the fact,
that EC50 and IC50 cannot be accurately estimated from
incomplete dose response curves.

Raw dose-response data was downloaded from
CCLE portal (http://www.broadinstitute.org/ccle) [1],
GDSC website (http://www.cancerrxgene.org/downloads/)
[2], and The National Cancer Institute’s CTD2 Network
(CTRP2, https://ctd2.nci.nih.gov/dataPortal/) [3].
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

( f ( x) − A )
( max ( A ,100) − A ) 	(3)

∑

51623

Oncotarget

Comparisons of drug sensitivity metrics

4.	 Functionality to visualize dose-response curves for
each drug/cell line combination to evaluate the quality of
the raw data and the accuracy of the dose response model.
5.	 Graphic representation of the drug sensitivity
data agreement between CCLE, GDSC and CTRP
databases with 2D and 3D scatterplots.
6.	 Functionality to download raw data, EC50
and IC50 regression model parameters, adjusted AUC
calculations, and correlation statistics for the drug.
Detailed description of the QAPC controls and
interface can be accessed through the Help tab of the
online portal.

Pearson and Spearman correlations were used to
compare drug sensitivity data between studies. Pearson
correlation for pooled EC50 and IC50 data was calculated
for a subset of finite values. p-values were computed
by performing random permutations and bootstrapping
using published algorithm [6]. P-values and confidence
intervals calculated using random permutations are cited
in the text.

Implementation and source code
All data manipulations were performed in R
(https://www.r-project.org/). To ensure reproducibility,
all figures and tables of this manuscript were generated
programmatically from the raw data. R scripts and data
can be downloaded from: http://tanlab.ucdenver.edu/
QAPC/Downloads/Drug_Sensitvity_Metrics.zip

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
None of the authors report conflicts of interest.

GRANT SUPPORT

QAPC portal

This work was supported by the Paul R. Ohara II
Seed Grant Program and University of Colorado Cancer
Center ACS-IRG Grant to NP.

All aspects of this analysis can be explored
interactively using companion portal the Quantitative
Analysis of Pharmacogenomics in Cancer (QAPC, http://
tanlab.ucdenver.edu/QAPC/).
QAPC features include:
1.	 Interactive graphic interface to access drug
sensitivity data for 585 drugs/drug combinations and 1201
cell lines.
2.	 Choice of 6 drug sensitivity metrics:
EC50 – half maximal effective concentration
IC50 – half maximal inhibitory concentration
AUC EC50 – area under the dose response curve
calculated from EC50 model
AUC IC50 – area under the dose response curve
calculated from IC50 model
Adjusted AUC EC50 – 
area under the dose
response curve calculated
from EC50 model adjusted
for the range of tested
drug concentrations
Adjusted AUC IC50 – 
area under the dose
response curve calculated
from IC50 model adjusted
for the range of tested drug
concentrations

REFERENCES
1.	 Barretina J, Caponigro G, Stransky N, Venkatesan K,
Margolin AA, Kim S, Wilson CJ, Lehár J, Kryukov GV,
Sonkin D, Reddy A, Liu M, Murray L et al. The Cancer
Cell Line Encyclopedia enables predictive modelling of
anticancer drug sensitivity. Nature. 2012; 483: 603–607.
2.	 Garnett MJ, Edelman EJ, Heidorn SJ, Greenman CD, Dastur
A, Lau KW, Greninger P, Thompson IR, Luo X, Soares J,
Liu Q, Iorio F, Surdez D et al. Systematic identification of
genomic markers of drug sensitivity in cancer cells. Nature.
2012; 483: 570–575.
3.	 Seashore-Ludlow B, Rees MG, Cheah JH, Cokol M, Price E
V, Coletti ME, Jones V, Bodycombe NE, Soule CK, Gould
J, Alexander B, Li A, Montgomery P et al. Harnessing
Connectivity in a Large-Scale Small-Molecule Sensitivity
Dataset. Cancer Discov. 2015; 5: 1210–1223.
4.	 Basu A, Bodycombe NE, Cheah JH, Price EV, Liu K,
Schaefer GI, Ebright RY, Stewart ML, Ito D, Wang S,
Bracha AL, Liefeld T, Wawer M et al. An interactive
resource to identify cancer genetic and lineage
dependencies targeted by small molecules. Cell. 2013;
154: 1151–1161.

3.	 Option to reconcile data from up to three
databases using adjusted AUC EC50 or adjusted AUC
IC50. Adjusted AUC for the cell line/drug pairs analyzed
by more than one study are averaged. Adjusted AUC are
calculated even for the cell lines analyzed by one database
only, if the drug is represented in more than one database,
thus allowing a fair comparison of drug sensitivities across
studies and enabling high-power pharmacogenomics
analysis.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

5.	 Haibe-Kains B, El-Hachem N, Birkbak NJ, Jin AC, Beck
AH, Aerts HJ, Quackenbush J. Inconsistency in large
pharmacogenomic studies. Nature. 2013; 504: 389–393.
6.	 Stransky N, Ghandi M, Kryukov GV, Garraway LA,
Lehár J, Liu M, Sonkin D, Kauffmann A, Venkatesan K,
Edelman EJ, Riester M, Barretina J, Caponigro G et al.
Pharmacogenomic agreement between two cancer cell line
data sets. Nature. 2015; 528: 84–87.
51624

Oncotarget

7.	 Corcoran RB, Cheng KA, Hata AN, Faber AC, Ebi H,
Coffee EM, Greninger P, Brown RD, Godfrey JT, Cohoon
TJ, Song Y, Lifshits E, Hung KE et al. Synthetic lethal
interaction of combined BCL-XL and MEK inhibition
promotes tumor regressions in KRAS mutant cancer
models. Cancer Cell. 2013; 23: 121–128.

10.	 Smirnov P, Safikhani Z, El-Hachem N, Wang D, She A,
Olsen C, Freeman M, Selby H, Gendoo DM, Grossmann
P, Beck AH, Aerts HJ, Lupien M et al. PharmacoGx: an R
package for analysis of large pharmacogenomic datasets.
Bioinformatics. 2016; 32: 1244–1246.
11.	 Ritz C, Streibig JC. Bioassay Analysis using R. J. Stat.
Softw. 2005; 12: 1–21.

8.	 Fallahi-Sichani M, Honarnejad S, Heiser LM, Gray JW, Sorger
PK. Metrics other than potency reveal systematic variation in
responses to cancer drugs. Nat Chem Biol. 2013; 9: 708–714.

12.	 Sebaugh JL, McCray PD. Defining the linear portion of a
sigmoidshaped curve: bend points. Pharm. Stat. 2003; 2:
167–174.

9.	 Shimada K, Hayano M, Pagano NC, Stockwell BR.
Cell-Line Selectivity Improves the Predictive Power of
Pharmacogenomic Analyses and Helps Identify NADPH
as Biomarker for Ferroptosis Sensitivity. Cell Chem Biol.
2016; 23: 225–235.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

13.	 Sebaugh JL. Guidelines for accurate EC50/IC50 estimation.
Pharm. Stat. 2011; 10: 128–134.

51625

Oncotarget

