Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No. 41

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Metformin attenuates gefitinib-induced exacerbation of
pulmonary fibrosis by inhibition of TGF-β signaling pathway
Li Li1,*, Wenting Huang1,*, Kunlin Li1,*, Kejun Zhang2, Caiyu Lin1, Rui Han1, Conghua
Lu1, Yubo Wang1, Hengyi Chen1, Fenfen Sun1, Yong He1
1

Department of Respiratory Disease, Daping Hospital, Third Military Medical University, Chongqing, China

2

Department of Clinical Labratory, Daping Hospital, Third Military Medical University, Chongqing, China

*

These authors have contributed equally to this work

Correspondence to: Yong He, e-mail: heyong@dphospital.tmmu.edu.cn
Keywords: metformin, EGFR-TKI, pulmonary fibrosis, TGF-β
Received: June 13, 2015	

Accepted: October 05, 2015	

Published: October 20, 2015

ABSTRACT
Interstitial lung disease (ILD) is a serious side-effect of epidermal growth factor
receptor (EGFR)-tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI) treatment. Therefore, it is necessary
to study underlying mechanisms for the development of pulmonary fibrosis induced by
EGFR-TKI and potential approaches to attenuate it. Metformin is a well-established and
widely prescribed oral hypoglycemic drug, and has gained attention for its potential
anticancer effects. Recent reports have also demonstrated its role in inhibiting
epithelial-mesenchymal transition and fibrosis. However, it is unknown whether
metformin attenuates EGFR-TKI-induced pulmonary fibrosis. The effect of metformin
on EGFR-TKI-induced exacerbation of pulmonary fibrosis was examined in vitro and
in vivo using MTT, Ki67 incorporation assay, flow cytometry, immunostaining, Western
blot analysis, and a bleomycin-induced pulmonary fibrosis rat model. We found that
in lung HFL-1 fibroblast cells, TGF-β or conditioned medium from TKI-treated lung
cancer PC-9 cells or conditioned medium from TKI-resistant PC-9GR cells, induced
significant fibrosis, as shown by increased expression of Collegen1a1 and α-actin,
while metformin inhibited expression of fibrosis markers. Moreover, metformin
decreased activation of TGF-β signaling as shown by decreased expression of pSMAD2
and pSMAD3. In vivo, oral administration of gefitinib exacerbated bleomycin-induced
pulmonary fibrosis in rats, as demonstrated by HE staining and Masson staining.
Significantly, oral co-administration of metformin suppressed exacerbation of
bleomycin-induced pulmonary fibrosis by gefitinib. We have shown that metformin
attenuates gefitinib-induced exacerbation of TGF-β or bleomycin-induced pulmonary
fibrosis. These observations indicate metformin may be combined with EGFR-TKI to
treat NSCLC patients.

INTRODUCTION

that restricts the therapeutic efficacy of these agents [3].
The incidence of EGFR-TKI-associated ILD has been
described for both gefitinib (2.4%) and erlotinib (1%)
[4]. In addition, the incidence of EGFR-TKI-associated
ILD appears comparatively higher in Asians than
in Caucasians, as demonstrated in two large, multiinstitutional studies reporting its incidence in Japan at
3.5–4.0% [5, 6], as compared with that of 0.3% in the
U.S. [7]. No specific treatment is available for EGFR-TKIassociated ILD, and supportive therapy largely includes
oxygen, corticosteroids, or assisted ventilation, with an

Reversible small-molecule epidermal growth
factor receptor (EGFR)-tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs),
including gefitinib (Iressa) and erlotinib (Tarceva), display
dramatic therapeutic efficacy in NSCLC patients that
have EGFR-activating mutations, and are recommended
as the standard first-line therapy in NSCLC [1, 2].
However, despite excellent initial clinical responses,
these drugs might promote interstitial lung disease
(ILD), which is a less common but lethal side-effect

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

43605

Oncotarget

approximate 30%–40% mortality of the disease. Thus,
acute and innovative treatment strategies are urgently
needed to overcome the lethal side-effect of EGFR-TKIs.
Common presentations of ILD includes pulmonary
fibrosis and pneumonia. Molecular mechanisms
underlying TKI-induced interstitial pneumonia (i.e.,
pulmonary fibrosis) remain incompletely understood. A
key mediator in the pathogenesis of pulmonary fibrosis
is transforming growth factor (TGF)-β1 [8]. TGF-β1 is
a member of the TGF-β superfamily, and is a pleiotropic
cytokine that is ubiquitously expressed by all cells and
tissues that regulates a range of biological functions from
embryonic development to wound repair, and does so
primarily through a canonical Smad-dependent pathway
[9]. High expression of TGF-β1 is found in tissue samples
from both animal models of IPF [10] and patients with
IPF [11]. Over-expressing active TGF-β1 results in
persisting pulmonary fibrosis [12], whereas blocking
TGF-β signaling ameliorates pulmonary fibrosis in animal
models [13, 14].
The progressive pulmonary fibrotic reaction
was also associated with an epithelial-dependent
fibroblast-activating process, which is termed epithelial–
mesenchymal transition (EMT) [15, 16] . TGF-β
was shown to be a master inducer of EMT in normal
mammary epithelial cells and was further proven to
initiate and maintain EMT in the organ fibrogenic and
tumor metastasis model [17]. In the lung, repeated acute
injury provokes cell death and increases the proliferative
capacity and abnormal activation of alveolar epithelial cell
(AECs), which secrete latent TGF-β1. Collectively, this
promotes alveolar EMT in AECs and transdifferentiation
of quiescent fibroblasts into myofibroblasts, which
contribute to excessive production of fibrillar collagens
[18]. Importantly, IL-6, which is a downstream molecule
of TGF-β activation, is suggested to contribute to
the development or progression of acute interstitial
pneumonia [19, 20]. EGFR-TKI treatment increased IL-6
secretion in cancer cells, which further induces acute
interstitial pneumonia [21]. Thus, given the established
actions of TGF-β on EMT and collagen synthesis,
pharmacological inhibition of TGF-β signaling might
exhibit important therapeutic potential in the clinical
treatment of pulmonary fibrosis.
Up to now, no substantial therapeutic interventions
have been developed to reverse established fibrosis or even
halt chronic progression to respiratory failure. One of the
most widely used oral agents to lower blood glucose levels
in patients with type 2 diabetes and metabolic syndrome
is the biguanide derivative metformin. Earlier studies by
us revealed that clinically-relevant doses of metformin
notably reversed EGFR-TKI resistance by inhibiting the
IL-6 signaling pathway and reversing EMT [22]. This
observation prompted us to investigate whether metformin
could attenuate TKI-induced pulmonary fibrosis. Indeed,
studies have shown that metformin may play a role in
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

preventing fibrosis [23]. However, it is unknown whether
metformin attenuates EGFR-TKI-induced pulmonary
fibrosis.
Herein, we show that metformin effectively
decreased gefitinib-induced fibrosis in lung fibroblast
HFL-1 cells. In addition, metformin attenuates gefitinibexacerbated pulmonary fibrosis in a rat model of lung
injury that was induced by bleomycin. This effect
was associated with metformin-mediated decreases in
the activation of the TGF-β/IL-6 signaling pathway
and reversal of EMT. We thus provide a rationale and
experimental evidence for using metformin to attenuate
pulmonary fibrosis that is induced by EGFR-TKIs.

RESULTS
Metformin decreased TGF-β-induced pulmonary
fibrosis in vitro
We first aimed to determine whether metformin
could decrease TGF-β-induced pulmonary fibrosis. In
lung fibroblast HFL-1 cells, treatment with 10 ng/ml
TGF-β for 48 h induced expression of α-actin, a marker of
fibrosis, as demonstrated by immunofluorescence staining
(Figure  1A). Of note, addition of 5 mM metformin
decreased expression levels of α-actin, while metformin
alone also decreased α-actin expression (Figure 1A).
Western blot results further confirmed that metformin
decreased TGF-β-induced expression of α-actin and
Collagen 1A1 (COL1A1), another marker of fibrosis
(Figure 1B). Furthermore, TGF-β induced the activation
of pSMAD2, pSMAD3, pSTAT3, pAKT and dpERK1/2,
while addition of metformin decreased expression levels
of those phosphorylated proteins (Figure 1B). Taken
together, these data suggest that metformin decreased
TGF-β-induced pulmonary fibrosis in vitro.

Metformin decreased pulmonary fibrosis induced
by conditioned medium from EGFR-TKI-treated
lung cancer cells and EGFR-TKI resistant human
lung cancer cells in vitro
Next, we studied whether TKI treatment induced
pulmonary fibrosis and whether metformin could decrease
it. To this end, we used two cell-lines, the parental TKIsensitive PC-9 cells and TKI-resistant PC-9GR cells.
We treated HFL-1 cells with conditioned medium
from PC-9 cells, gefitinib-treated PC-9 cells or PC9GR cells, and examined the fibrotic condition by both
immunostaining and Western blot assay. As expected,
conditioned medium from PC-9 cells did not induce
fibrosis, since the expression of α-actin and COL1A1 were
quite similar to that of the control. Conditioned medium
from either gefitinib-stimulated PC-9 cells or from PC9GR cells induced high expression of both α-actin and
COL1A1. Importantly, the addition of 5 mM metformin
43606

Oncotarget

TGF-β was required for EGFR-TKI-treated lung
cancer cells and EGFR-TKI resistant human lung
cancer cells to induce pulmonary fibrosis

significantly decreased expression of both markers of
fibrosis (Figure  2A  and 2B). Furthermore, metformin
inhibited gefitinib-induced over-expression of pSMAD2,
pSMAD3, pSTAT3, pAKT and dpERK1/2. Based on these
findings, we concluded that metformin decreased EGFRTKI-induced pulmonary fibrosis in vitro.

We next asked whether metformin decreased EGFRTKI-induced pulmonary fibrosis by inhibiting the TGF-β

Figure 1: Metformin attenuates TGF-β-induced fibrosis. (A) Immunofluorescence staining showed that metformin decreased TGF-

β-induced expression of α-actin in HFL-1 cells. The nucleus were stained with 4′, 6-diamidino-2-phenylindole in the merged images. Scale
bars: 150 μm. (B) Metformin inhibited TGF-β-induced fibrosis as well as downstream signaling pathways, as determined by western blot
analysis. Whole cell protein lysates from HFL-1 cells of different treatments were immunoblotted with indicated antibodies. Similar results
were obtained in three independent experiments. Met, metformin.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

43607

Oncotarget

signaling pathway. We first performed ELISA assay, and
found higher levels of protein secretion of TGF-β in
gefitinib-treated PC-9 cells and gefitinib-resistant PC-9GR
cells. Metformin treatment significantly decreased TGF-β

protein secretion in both cell-lines (Figure 3A). We next
asked whether TGF-β was required for gefitinib treatmentinduced pulmonary fibrosis. Treatment with conditioned
medium from gefitinib-stimulated PC-9 cells or PC-9GR

Figure 2: Metformin attenuates fibrosis induced by conditioned medium from TKI-treated lung cancer PC-9 cells
or conditioned medium from TKI-resistant PC-9GR cells. (A) Immunofluorescence staining showed that metformin decreased
expression of α-actin in HFL-1 cells either induced by conditioned medium from TKI-treated lung cancer PC-9 cells or conditioned
medium from TKI-resistant PC-9GR cells. The nucleus were stained with 4′, 6-diamidino-2-phenylindole in the merged images. Scale bars:
150 μm. (B) Metformin decreased TKI-induced expression of COL1A1 and α-actin, and inhibited TKI-enhanced expression of pSMAD2,
pSMAD3, pSTAT3, pAKT, and dpERK1/2, as shown by western blot assay. Whole cell protein lysates from HFL-1 cells with different
treatments were immunoblotted with antibodies as indicated, and β-actin was used to confirm equal gel loading. Similar results were
obtained in three independent experiments. P9, PC-9 cells; R9, PC-9GR cells; CM, conditioned medium; Gef, gefitinib; Met, metformin.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

43608

Oncotarget

Metformin decreases TGF-β-induced fibrosis
depending on AMPK activation

cells induced high expression of COL1A1 and α-actin,
while addition of a TGF-β monoclonal antibody (mAb)
abolished the pro-fibrotic effects of both conditioned
medium. Also, TGF-β mAb decreased activation of
pSMAD2, pSMAD3 and pSTAT3. Thus, we conclude
that the TGF-β pathway plays a central role in gefitinibinduced fibrosis, and metformin decreased gefitinibinduced fibrosis by down-regulating the TGF-β pathway.

Previous studies have shown that activation of
AMPK by metformin prevents TGF-β-induced EMT and
attenuates tubulointerstitial fibrosis. Thus, we next ask
whether AMPK activation was required for metformin
to decrease TGF-β-induced fibrosis in HFL-1 cells. As

Figure 3: Metformin attenuates TKI-induced fibrosis through down-regulation of TGF-β signaling pathway.
(A) Metformin significantly decreased TGF-β secretion levels in TKI-treated PC-9 cells and PC-9GR cells as determined by ELISA
assays. *p < 0.01 compared with PC-9 cells of no treatment, respectively; †p < 0.01, compared with PC-9 cells with gefitinib treatment;
‡
p < 0.05, compared with untreated PC-9GR cells. Met, metformin; Gef, gefitinib. (B) Addition of TGF-β mAb abolished TKI-induced
fibrosis. HFL-1 cells were treated as indicated and whole cell protein lysates were immunoblotted with antibodies as indicated, and β-actin
was used to confirm equal gel loading. Similar results were obtained in three independent experiments. P9, PC-9 cells; R9, PC-9GR cells;
CM, conditioned medium; Gef, gefitinib.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

43609

Oncotarget

Metformin inhibits cell proliferation and induces
progressive apoptosis in HFL-1 cells

showen in Figure 4A, immunofluorescence staining
showed that metformin addition decreased expression
of α-actin induced by TGF-β, while further addition of
an AMPK inhibitor abolished this effect. Furthermore,
the use of an AMPK inhibitor abolished the effect of
metformin in decreasing the activation of downstream
signaling pathways of TGF-β (Figure 4B). These data
suggest that activation of AMPK by metformin was
required to decrease TGF-β-induced fibrosis.

Since fibroblasts undergo autonomous proliferation
and produce excessive matrix proteins that resemble a
wound-healing process during pulmonary fibrosis [24],
we subsequently investigated the ability of metformin to
modulate fibroblast proliferation and apoptosis in HFL-1
cells. As determined by MTT assay, TGF-β stimulation for

Figure 4: AMPK activation is required for metformin to attenuate TGF-β-induced fibrosis. (A) Cells were pre-treated

with 10 ng/ml TGF-β for 24 h, then 5 mM metformin and/or 1 uM (μM) dorsomorphin were added to the medium for another 24 h.
Immunofluorescence staining showed that AMPK inhibition abolished metformin’s effect of decreasing TGF-β-induced α-actin expression
in HFL-1 cells. The nucleus were stained with 4′, 6-diamidino-2-phenylindole in the merged images. Scale bars: 150  μm. (B) AMPK
inhibition abolished metformin’s effect of decreasing TGF-β signaling pathways, as determined by western blot analysis. Whole cell protein
lysates from HFL-1 cells of different treatments were immunoblotted with indicated antibodies. Similar results were obtained in three
independent experiments. Met, metformin; AMPKi, AMPK inhibition.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

43610

Oncotarget

Metformin attenuates EGFR-TKI-induced
exacerbation of pulmonary fibrosis in vivo

24 h increased the number of viable fibroblasts, whereas
the cell viability was reduced by metformin (Figure 5A).
As metformin disrupts mitochondrial respiration, which
may affect the performance and results of the MTT assay,
we explored the impact of metformin on cell growth using
the Ki67 assay. As shown in Figure 5B, DNA synthesis
was rapidly decreased in the cells following treatment with
metformin. We next analyzed the induction of apoptosis in
HFL-1 cells treated with TGF-β alone or in combination
with metformin. Flow cytometric analysis revealed that
TGF-β alone inhibited apoptosis of HFL-1 cells, while
metformin augmented cell apoptosis (Figure 5C). Taken
together, metformin inhibited cell proliferation and
induced progressive apoptosis in HFL-1 cells.

We next tested the possibility of whether metformin
attenuates EGFR-TKI-induced exacerbation of pulmonary
fibrosis. We first established an acute lung injury model
by bleomycin (BLM). As determined by hematoxylin
and eosin staining of lung sections, the intratracheal
injection of BLM led to the destruction of normal
pulmonary architecture, the prominent proliferation of
fibroblasts, the infiltration of inflammatory cells and the
extensive deposition of fibrillar collagen. Furthermore,
oral administration of gefitinib produced more severe
pulmonary damage. Impressively, we observed remarkable

Figure 5: Metformin inhibits cell proliferation and promotes apoptosis in HFL-1 cells. (A) HFL-1 cells were treated as

indicated for 24 h and 48 h, respectively. Cell viability, which was assessed by the MTT assay, was expressed as % of control for each time
point. *p < 0.05 compared with control of the same time point, †p < 0.05 compared with TGF-β alone of the same time point. (B) Metformin
inhibited TGF-β-induced proliferation of HFL-1 cells, as determined by ki67 incorporation assay. *p < 0.01 compared with control,
†
p < 0.01 compared with TGF-β alone. Scale bars, 150 μm. C. Metformin enhanced apoptosis of HFL-1 cells. Images are representative
of three independent experiments. *p < 0.05 compared with control; †p < 0.01 compared with control; ‡p < 0.01 compared with
TGF-β treatment.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

43611

Oncotarget

improvement in these pathological changes after the
administration of metformin (Figure 6A). Likewise,
the deposition of collagen fibers was largely increased
by gefitinib treatment in BLM-induced lung injury.
By contrast, it was significantly reduced following
administration of metformin, as illustrated by Masson’s
trichrome-positive staining (Figure 6A). We then measured
the pulmonary hydroxyproline (Hyp) content of eight
mice from each group to quantify the extent of pulmonary
fibrosis, as Hyp is a major constituent of collagen. Both
BLM and BLM plus gefitinib induced high levels of
Hyp; by contrast, metformin administration significantly
decreased Hyp levels. Taken together, these data suggest

a protective role of metformin in attenuating EGFR-TKIinduced exacerbation of pulmonary fibrosis in vivo.

Metformin inhibits the TGF-β signaling pathway
and the EMT phenotype in vivo
To clarify the underlying mechanism of why
metformin attenuates EGFR-TKI-induced exacerbation of
pulmonary fibrosis in vivo, we next analyzed the TGF-β
signaling pathway and EMT in harvested lung tissues.
As shown in Figure 7, we first confirmed that metformin
decreased expression of α-actin in lung tissues that was
induced by bleomycin and/or gefitinib treatment by

Figure 6: Metformin ameliorates TKI-induced exacerbation of bleomycin-induced pulmonary fibrosis in vivo. (A)
Pulmonary tissue sections were prepared at day 21 and subjected to hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) for routine examination and Masson’s
trichrome staining for the visualization of collagen deposition. Scale bars = 150  μm. (B) The hydroxyproline (Hyp) content of the
pulmonary tissues (n = 5 for each group) was measured at day 28 and is presented as micrograms of Hyp per gram of wet weight (mg/g).
*p < 0.01 compared with control; †p < 0.05 compared with bleomycin treatment alone; ‡p < 0.05 compared with bleomycin treatment alone;
§
p < 0.01 compared with bleomycin + gefitinib treatment. BLM, bleomycin; Gef, gefitinib; Met, metformin.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

43612

Oncotarget

Figure 7: Metformin inhibits TGF-β signaling pathway in vivo. (A) Metformin decreased expression of α-actin in fibrotic lung

tissues from different groups treated as indicated. Paraffin-embedded sections (4  μm) from lung tissues were stained for α-actin using
immunohistochemistry. The area indicated by the square is shown at higher magnification. Scale bars = 150  μm. (B) Western blotting
analyzed the expression of indicated markers on protein extracts obtained from lung tissues, and β-actin was used as a loading control.
BLM, bleomycin; Gef, gefitinib; Met, metformin.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

43613

Oncotarget

immunohistochemistry staining and Western blot assay.
Next, Western blot analysis showed that Smad2, Smad3,
STAT3, AKT and ERK1/2 were strongly phosphorylated
in the BLM group and the BLM plus Gef group, while
metformin inhibited the activation of those proteins.
Finally, we examined EMT phenotype in lung tissues.
As shown in Figure 8, very high expression of Vimentin

was found in both the BLM group and the BLM plus Gef
group, while metformin significantly decreased Vimentin
expression; however, the expression of E-cadherin did not
show much difference in each group. Taken together, these
data show that the therapeutic advantage of metformin
was associated with its ability to reverse EMT and inhibit
TGF-β signaling in vivo.

Figure 8: Metformin inhibits the EMT phenotype in vivo. (A) Metformin reversed EMT in fibrotic lung tissue, as shown

by immunefluorescence staining. Each image depicts a representative immunostaining of a paraffin-embedded section (4  μm) for
E-cadherin in green, Vimentin in red and counter-staining with 4′, 6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI) in blue. Scale bars = 100 μm. (B)
Immunohistochemistry was used to examine the expression of E-cadherin and Vimentin in lung tissues from different groups of mice
treated as indicated. The area indicated by the square is shown at higher magnification. Scale bars = 150  μm. BLM, bleomycin; Gef,
gefitinib; Met, metformin.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

43614

Oncotarget

DISCUSSION

an adjuvant in chemotherapy (https://www.clinicaltrials.
gov/ct2/results?term=metformin+AND+cancer&Search
=Search). In addition to the potential role of metformin
to prevent EGFR-TKI-induced pulmonary fibrosis, it
may simultaneously enhance the anti-tumor effect of
EGFR-TKI. One previous study showed that metformin
in combination with gefitinib significantly enhanced the
efficacy of targeted therapy [27]. Also, our group has
previously demonstrated that metformin not only enhances
the anti-tumor effect of gefitinib in PC-9 established
xenografts, but also reversed TKI resistance in TKIresistant cancer cells and in PC-9GR xenografts [22].
Also, a retrospective study from our group showed that in
advanced NSCLC patients with type 2 diabetes, metformin
together with EGFR-TKI resulted in longer PFS and OS
[28]. Thus, the dual effects of metformin to both enhance
TKI cytotoxicity and prevent TKI-induced pulmonary
fibrosis makes it an ideal candidate for combinatorial
therapy with EGFR-TKIs in NSCLC patients with
activated EGFR mutations with the aim of achieving
optimal clinical efficacy with minimal side-effect profiles.

Administration of EGFR-TKI is first-line therapy
in certain NSCLC patients. Although this class of agent
is considered relatively safe, the most serious, but
comparatively rare adverse reaction is drug-associated
interstitial lung disease (ILD). Therefore, it is necessary
to find novel strategies to prevent the development of this
adverse effect.

Clinical significance: metformin as a promising
new agent to both prevent EGFR-TKI induced
pulmonary fibrosis and enhance TKI efficacy
In the present study, we provide compelling
evidence that metformin attenuated pulmonary fibrosis
from the following aspects. First, we used TGF-β to
stimulate pulmonary fibrosis in lung fibroblast HFL-1
cells, since TGF-β is a well-established inducer of fibrosis.
TGF-β treatment induced fibrosis in HFL-1 cells, and
addition of metformin effectively decreased the expression
of those fibrotic markers. Thus, metformin can protect
against TGF-β-induced pulmonary fibrosis. Next, we
set up a cellular model in which fibrosis was induced by
conditioned medium from gefitinib-treated PC-9 cells or
PC-9GR cells. PC-9GR cells are gefitinib resistant and are
derived from parental sensitive PC-9 cells with an EGFR
exon 19 deletion. Conditioned medium from gefitinibtreated PC-9 cells or PC-9GR cells mimics the tumor
microenviroment of lung cancer patients that receive
gefitinib therapy. As expected, conditioned medium
from both systems induced high expression of fibrotic
markers (i.e., COL1A1 and α-actin), while metformin
addition significantly decreased expression of both of
those markers. These data confirmed that metformin
could protect against gefitinib-induced pulmonary fibrosis
in vitro. Lastly, we tested the effect of metformin to
attenuate TKI-induced pulmonary fibrosis in a rat model of
gefitinib-exacerbated pulmonary fibrosis, which was based
on bleomycin-induced acute lung injury, and as described
earlier by Takushi et al. [25]. Consistent with their reports,
oral administration of gefitinib significantly increased the
extent of lung injury and enhanced pulmonary fibrosis.
Interestingly, the use of metformin decreased the extent
of lung injury and lowered the expression levels of the
fibrosis markers COL1A1 and α-actin. Taken together, the
findings from the current study suggested that metformin
might be a promising agent to protect against the sideeffects of EGFR-TKI, and may block pulmonary fibrosis.
These results are of clinical significance. Metformin
is a safe and cheap oral antidiabetic drug that used for
many years. In recent years, a number of retrospective
epidemiological studies and pre-clinical studies have
supported the use of metformin as an adjuvant in
chemotherapy for cancer treatment [26]. Currently,
there are a number of clinical trails using metformin as
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Metformin protects against EGFR-TKI-induced
fibrosis by inhibiting TGF-β signaling
Understanding the molecular mechanisms that
underpin the ability of metformin to attenuate EGFR-TKIinduced fibrosis is pivotal in the development of this agent
as a novel therapeutic approach in NSCLC patients. It has
been reported previously, that inhibition of TGF-β alone
may inhibit pulmonary fibrosis [29, 30]. Given the pivotal
role of TGF-β in inducing fibrosis, in the present study, we
tested whether metformin prevented EGFR-TKI-induced
fibrosis by inhibiting the TGF-β signaling pathway. Using
ELISA, we found that metformin significantly decreased
TGF-β levels in EGFR-TKI-treated lung cancer cells.
Furthermore, the role of TGF-β in EGFR-TKI-induced
pulmonary fibrosis was determined using a TGF-β mAb.
Treatment with TGF-β mAb abolished gefitinib-induced
fibrosis, suggesting that TGF-β plays an essential role in
mediating TKI-induced fibrosis. Given that metformin
significantly decreased activation of the TGF-β signaling
pathway, and attenuated TGF-β-induced pulmonary
fibrosis, we concluded that metformin attenuated EGFRTKI-induced pulmonary fibrosis by inhibiting the TGF-β
signaling pathway.

Metformin attenuates EGFR-TKI-induced
pulmonary fibrosis by EMT reversal
EMT is a dynamic cellular process that allows
polarized, immotile epithelial cells to convert into motile
mesenchymal cells [31]. In addition to the essential
role that EMT plays in tissue remodeling and tumor
metastasis, emerging in vivo evidence also elucidates EMT
as an important source of myofibroblasts in progressive
43615

Oncotarget

pulmonary, renal and hepatic fibrosis [16, 32, 33]. Here,
we observed that metformin treatment diminished the
occurrence of the EMT phenotype in parenchymal alveolar
areas following BLM and/or Gef therapy, which suggested
that the anti-fibrotic effects of metformin is at least partly
due to its interference with TGF-β1-induced EMT.

Gefitinib-sensitive PC-9 cells and gefitinib-resistant
PC-9GR cells were a kind gift from Professor Jun Xu
and Dr. Ming Liu from Guangzhou Medical University,
China. The HFL1 (human fetal lung fibroblast) cell-line
was obtained from the American Type Culture Collection
(Manassas, VA, USA). HFL-1 cells were cultured in
F-12K medium (Gibco) and all other cells were cultured
in Roswell Park Memorial Institute 1640 medium (RPMI1640, HyClone) with Earle’s salts, and supplemented with
10% fetal bovine serum (FBS, Gibco), 2 mM L-glutamine
solution (Gibco), 100 U/ml penicillin (HyClone) and
100 μg/ml streptomycin sulfate (HyClone) at 37°C, with
5% CO2 in air and 90% humidity.

Limitations of the current study
The current study have several limitations. First,
for in vivo experiments, we used a rat model of gefitinibexacerbated pulmonary fibrosis based on bleomycininduced acute lung injury, which was reported by
Takushi et al [25]. Of note, there may be differences in
pathophysiological mechanisms of pulmonary fibrosis
induced by bleomycin and gefitinib. The best animal
model should be using gefitinib alone to induce pulmonary
fibrosis. However, the incidence of EGFR-TKIassociated ILD happens at a very low rate, which means
that hundreds of animals will be needed to get a single
experiment performed. So we chose the model reported
by Takushi et al, yet the potential difference of pulmonary
fibrosis induced by bleomycin and gefitinib should be
noted. Second, the complete toxic profiles of taking
metformin and EGFR-TKIs together was not studied
throughly in the current study. In in vivo experiments,
light to moderate diarrhea was noticed in BLM + MET
group and BLM + GEF + MET group. The weight of
each animal had been recorded and results showed that
there was no significant difference between each group.
So in the current study, we did not notice obvious adverse
reactions in in vivo experiments. However, detailed toxic
profiles of this drug combination should be studied before
clinical administration of these drugs to patients.
In summary, we have shown that metformin
attenuated EGFR-TKI-induced pulmonary fibrosis both
in vitro and in vivo by inhibiting the TGF-β signaling
pathway. Given that metformin is safe, cheap and widely
used to treat individuals with type 2 diabetes, obesity, and
polycystic ovarian syndrome, we propose that metformin
has potentially marked clinical utility in the future,
since ILD events are an important consideration in the
development of EGFR-TKIs. Metformin can also be used
in combination with EGFR-TKIs in selected NSCLC
patients to increase the efficacy of TKIs and in an attempt
to prevent the potential side-effect of pulmonary fibrosis.

Cell growth, and apoptosis assays
The cytotoxic effects of TGF-β plus metformin
were determined by the MTT dye reduction assay. A
total of 2000 cells were plated in 100 μl culture medium
in 96-well microtiter plates. After 24-h incubation,
10 ng/ml TGF-β, and/or 5 mM metformin were added
to each well as indicated, and cells were further cultured
for 48 h. Then, 10 μl of 5 mg/ml MTT reagent (Sigma)
in 100 μl culture medium was added to each well. After
4 h, medium was removed and 150  μl of DMSO was
added to each well to dissolve the formazan crystals.
Absorbance was measured at a wavelength of 490 nm
using a ThermoFisher Spectrophotometer1510 (Molecular
Devices, Inc.). Cell viability was determined by dividing
the absorbance values of treated cells to that of untreated
cells. Experiments were conducted in triplicates.
Cell proliferation was also assessed by the Ki67
incorporation assay using a Ki67 labeling and detection kit
(Sigma). Briefly, cells were treated with metformin (5 mM)
or 10 ng/ml TGF-β, or both, for 48 h, and then incubated
for 6 h with Ki67 (1:200 dilution) and fixed. Cell nuclei
were counterstained with 4′, 6-diamidino-2-phenylindole
(DAPI) and then viewed with a live cell station (Delta
Vision, API). At least 500 cells from three independent
experiments were counted. Data were expressed as the
mean value of the percentage of positive cells ± SEM.
Flow cytometric analysis was adopted to detect
apoptosis by examining altered plasma membrane
phospholipid packing by the lipophilic dye Annexin V.
Briefly, cells were treated with 10 ng/ml TGF-β and/or
5 mM metformin for 48 h, harvested by trypsin, washed
twice with PBS, and then resuspended at a density of
1 × 107 cells/mL. Thereafter, 5  μL of Annexin V-FITC
and 5 μL of propidium iodide (PI) were added to 100 μL
of the cell suspension and incubated for 30 min at room
temperature and in the dark. Next, labeled cells were
processed by flow cytometry. All early apoptotic cells
(i.e., Annexin V-positive, PI-negative), necrotic/ late
apoptotic cells (i.e., double positive), and living cells
(i.e., double negative) were detected by using a Cytomics
FC 500 (Beckman Coulter, Miami, FL, USA).

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Cell-lines and reagents
Gefitinib (Iressa) was purchased from Tocris
Bioscience and prepared in dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO)
to obtain a stock solution of 10 mM. Metformin (Sigma)
was dissolved in deionized water and stored at –20°C.
Dorsomorphin (an AMPK inhibitor) was got from Selleck.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

43616

Oncotarget

Western blot assay

monoclonal anti-Vimentin (Cell Signaling Technology,
Inc.). Then, cells or tumor sections were washed twice
with PBS and incubated with secondary antibodies at 37°C
for 30 min as follows: FITC-conjugated goat-anti-rabbit
IgG (Abcam) or TRITC-conjugated goat-anti-mouse IgG
(Sigma). The slides were mounted in mounting medium
with 4′,  6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI; Vector
Laboratories) and viewed with a live cell station (Delta
Vision, API).

Cells grown and treated as indicated were collected
and total protein was extracted. The following primary
antibodies were used: rabbit monoclonal anti-α-actin
(Abcam), monoclonal anti-COL1A1 (Millipore), rabbit
monoclonal anti-phosphorylated SMAD2, rabbit
monoclonal anti-phosphorylated SMAD3, rabbit
monoclonal anti- SMAD2/3, rabbit monoclonal antiERK1/2, or rabbit monoclonal anti-phosphorylated
ERK1/2, rabbit monoclonal anti-Akt, rabbit monoclonal
anti-phosphorylated Akt, rabbit monoclonal anti-STAT3,
or rabbit monoclonal anti-phosphorylated STAT3 (all from
Cell Signaling Technology, Inc.). Horseradish peroxidaseconjugated goat-anti-rabbit antibody (Thermo Scientific)
was used as a secondary antibody. The control for equal
protein loading was assessed with an anti-β-actin antibody
(Cell Signaling Technology, Inc.).

Hydroxyproline determination
Hydroxyproline content was determined as
previously described [34]. Briefly, the right lung was
removed and homogenized in 0.5 ml of 5% TCA. After
centrifugation, pellets were hydrolyzed in 0.5 ml of 10 N
HCl for 16 h at 110°C. Each sample was incubated for
20 min at room temperature after the addition of 0.5 ml of
1.4% (w/v) chloramine-T solution and then incubated at
65°C for 10 min after the addition of 0.5 ml of Ehrlich’s
reagent (1M DMBA, 70% (v/v) isopropanol and 30%
(v/v) perchloric acid). Absorbance was measured at a
wavelength of 550 nm and the amount of hydroxyproline
was determined.

Animal experiments
For animal experiments, male SD rats with an
average weight of approximately 200 g (Laboratory
Animal Center of Third Military Medical University,
Chongqing, China) were maintained under chloral
hydrate anesthesia (500 mg/kg) and given one
intratracheal injection of bleomycin (5 mg/kg) to
induce fibrosis. Gefitinib (200 mg/kg) was dissolved in
1% methylcellulose and administered orally once
per day for three days before animals received a
single intratracheal administration of bleomycin; the
administration of gefitinib and metformin (300 mg/kg) was
then continued, once every two days, for the following
21 days. The animals were kept in individual ventilated
cages in compliance with institutional guidelines. All
animal protocols were approved by the local Ethics
Committee of the Third Military Medical University. After
21 days, rats were sacrificed, and the lungs were harvested,
fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde and embedded in paraffin.

Statistical analysis
All data are presented as mean ± standard error
of the mean (SEM). Statistical analyses were carried
out using the unpaired, two-tailed Student’s t test and
statistical significance was assumed at an alpha value of
p < 0.05.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS AND FUNDINGS
We thank Professor Jun Xu and Dr. Ming Liu
from Guangzhou Medical University, China for kindly
providing the valuable cell-lines used in the current study.
Special thanks are given to Professor Min Zhao (Institute
for Regenerative Cures, University of California at Davis,
CA, USA) for his critical reading of this manuscript and
useful suggestions on the writing style.
This work was supported by a foundation for
PLA Young Scientists (13QNP117), National Nature
Science Foundation of China (81071912, 81301840
and 81472189), China 863 program (2012AA02A201),
and a foundation of Third Military Medical University
(2012XLC08).

Immunohistochemistry
For immunofluorescence, cells were washed
with PBS and fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde at room
temperature for 30 min. Lung tissues fixed in 4%
paraformaldehyde for 48 h were embedded in paraffin and
cut into 4-μm thick sections. Non-specific binding was
blocked using 10% normal goat serum (Sigma). Cells or
lung sections were incubated with the following primary
antibodies after being diluted in PBS with 1% bovine
serum albumin at 4°C overnight: mouse monoclonal anti
E-cadherin (Cell Signaling Technology, Inc.) and rabbit

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
The authors declare no potential conflicts of interest.

43617

Oncotarget

REFERENCES

13.	 Bonniaud P, Margetts PJ, Ask K, Flanders K, Gauldie J,
Kolb M. TGF-beta and Smad3 signaling link inflammation
to chronic fibrogenesis. Journal of immunology. 2005;
175:5390–5.

  1.	 Soria JC, Mok TS, Cappuzzo F, Janne PA. EGFR-mutated
oncogene-addicted non-small cell lung cancer: current
trends and future prospects. Cancer treatment reviews.
2012; 38:416–30.

14.	 Bonniaud P, Margetts PJ, Kolb M, Schroeder JA,
Kapoun AM, Damm D, et al. Progressive transforming
growth factor beta1-induced lung fibrosis is blocked by an
orally active ALK5 kinase inhibitor. American journal of
respiratory and critical care medicine. 2005; 171:889–98.

  2.	 Nguyen KS, Neal JW. First-line treatment of EGFR-mutant
non-small-cell lung cancer: the role of erlotinib and other
tyrosine kinase inhibitors. Biologics : targets & therapy.
2012; 6:337–45.

15.	 Willis BC, Liebler JM, Luby-Phelps K, Nicholson AG,
Crandall ED, du Bois RM, et al. Induction of epithelialmesenchymal transition in alveolar epithelial cells by
transforming growth factor-beta1: potential role in
idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis. The American journal of
pathology. 2005; 166:1321–32.

  3.	 Inoue A, Saijo Y, Maemondo M, Gomi K, Tokue Y,
Kimura Y, et al. Severe acute interstitial pneumonia and
gefitinib. Lancet. 2003; 361:137–9.
  4.	 Hotta K, Kiura K, Takigawa N, Yoshioka H, Harita S,
Kuyama S, et al. Comparison of the incidence and pattern of
interstitial lung disease during erlotinib and gefitinib treatment
in Japanese Patients with non-small cell lung cancer: the
Okayama Lung Cancer Study Group experience. Journal of
thoracic oncology : official publication of the International
Association for the Study of Lung Cancer. 2010; 5:179–84.

16.	 Kim KK, Kugler MC, Wolters PJ, Robillard L, Galvez MG,
Brumwell AN, et al. Alveolar epithelial cell mesenchymal
transition develops in vivo during pulmonary fibrosis and
is regulated by the extracellular matrix. Proc Natl Acad Sci
USA. 2006; 103:13180–5.
17.	 Zavadil J, Bottinger EP. TGF-beta and epithelial-tomesenchymal transitions. Oncogene. 2005; 24:5764–74.

  5.	 Kudoh S, Kato H, Nishiwaki Y, Fukuoka M, Nakata K,
Ichinose Y, et al. Interstitial lung disease in Japanese
patients with lung cancer: a cohort and nested case-control
study. American journal of respiratory and critical care
medicine. 2008; 177:1348–57.

18.	 Phan SH. Biology of fibroblasts and myofibroblasts.
Proceedings of the American Thoracic Society. 2008; 5:334–7.
19.	 Knight DA, Ernst M, Anderson GP, Moodley YP,
Mutsaers SE. The role of gp130/IL-6 cytokines in the
development of pulmonary fibrosis: critical determinants
of disease susceptibility and progression? Pharmacology &
therapeutics. 2003; 99:327–38.

  6.	 Nakagawa K, Kudoh S, Ohe Y, Johkoh T, Ando M,
Yamazaki N, et al. Postmarketing surveillance study of
erlotinib in Japanese patients with non-small-cell lung
cancer (NSCLC): an interim analysis of 3488 patients
(POLARSTAR). Journal of thoracic oncology : official
publication of the International Association for the Study of
Lung Cancer. 2012; 7:1296–303.

20.	 Moodley YP, Misso NL, Scaffidi AK, Fogel-Petrovic M,
McAnulty RJ, Laurent GJ, et al. Inverse effects of
interleukin-6 on apoptosis of fibroblasts from pulmonary
fibrosis and normal lungs. American journal of respiratory
cell and molecular biology. 2003; 29:490–8.

  7.	 Cohen MH, Johnson JR, Chattopadhyay S, Tang S,
Justice R, Sridhara R, et al. Approval summary: erlotinib
maintenance therapy of advanced/metastatic non-small cell
lung cancer (NSCLC). Oncologist. 2010; 15:1344–51.

21.	 Ishiguro Y, Ishiguro H, Miyamoto H. Epidermal Growth
Factor Receptor Tyrosine Kinase Inhibition Up-regulates
Interleukin-6 in Cancer Cells and Induces Subsequent
Development of Interstitial Pneumonia. Oncotarget.
2013; 4:550–9.

  8.	 Tatler AL, Jenkins G. TGF-beta activation and lung fibrosis.
Proceedings of the American Thoracic Society. 2012;9:130–6.
  9.	 Massague J, Chen YG. Controlling TGF-beta signaling.
Genes & development. 2000; 14:627–44.

22.	 Li L, Han R, Xiao H, Lin C, Wang Y, Liu H, et al. Metformin
sensitizes EGFR-TKI-resistant human lung cancer cells in
vitro and in vivo through inhibition of IL-6 signaling and
EMT reversal. Clin Cancer Res. 2014; 20:2714–26.

10.	 Coker RK, Laurent GJ, Shahzeidi S, Lympany PA, du
Bois RM, Jeffery PK, et al. Transforming growth factorsbeta 1, -beta 2, and -beta 3 stimulate fibroblast procollagen
production in vitro but are differentially expressed during
bleomycin-induced lung fibrosis. The American journal of
pathology. 1997; 150:981–91.

23.	 Cufi S, Vazquez-Martin A, Oliveras-Ferraros C, MartinCastillo B, Joven J, Menendez JA. Metformin against
TGFbeta-induced epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition
(EMT): from cancer stem cells to aging-associated fibrosis.
Cell Cycle. 2010; 9:4461–8.

11.	 Coker RK, Laurent GJ, Jeffery PK, du Bois RM, Black CM,
McAnulty RJ. Localisation of transforming growth factor
beta1 and beta3 mRNA transcripts in normal and fibrotic
human lung. Thorax. 2001; 56:549–56.

24.	 Vancheri C, Failla M, Crimi N, Raghu G. Idiopathic
pulmonary fibrosis: a disease with similarities and links
to cancer biology. The European respiratory journal. 2010;
35:496–504.

12.	 Sime PJ, Xing Z, Graham FL, Csaky KG, Gauldie J.
Adenovector-mediated gene transfer of active transforming
growth factor-beta1 induces prolonged severe fibrosis in rat
lung. The Journal of clinical investigation. 1997; 100:768–76.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

25.	 Namba T, Tanaka K, Hoshino T, Azuma A, Mizushima T.
Suppression of expression of heat shock protein 70 by
43618

Oncotarget

gefitinib and its contribution to pulmonary fibrosis. PLoS
One. 2011; 6:e27296.

fibrogenesis in primary human lung fibroblasts. Yonsei
medical journal. 2013; 54:437–44.

26.	 Zhang P, Li H, Tan X, Chen L, Wang S. Association of
metformin use with cancer incidence and mortality: A metaanalysis. Cancer epidemiology. 2013.

31.	 Thiery JP, Acloque H, Huang RY, Nieto MA. Epithelialmesenchymal transitions in development and disease. Cell.
2009; 139:871–90.

27.	 Morgillo F, Sasso FC, Della Corte CM, Vitagliano D,
D’Aiuto E, Troiani T, et al. Synergistic Effects of Metformin
Treatment in Combination with Gefitinib, a Selective EGFR
Tyrosine Kinase Inhibitor, in LKB1 Wild-type NSCLC Cell
Lines. Clin Cancer Res. 2013; 19:3508–19.

32.	 Tanjore H, Xu XC, Polosukhin VV, Degryse AL, Li B,
Han W, et al. Contribution of epithelial-derived fibroblasts
to bleomycin-induced lung fibrosis. American journal of
respiratory and critical care medicine. 2009; 180:657–65.

28.	 Chen H, Yao W, Chu Q, Han R, Wang Y, Sun J, et al.
Synergistic effects of metformin in combination with EGFRTKI in the treatment of patients with advanced non-small
cell lung cancer and type 2 diabetes. Cancer letters. 2015.

33.	 Wu Z, Yang L, Cai L, Zhang M, Cheng X, Yang X, et al.
Detection of epithelial to mesenchymal transition in airways
of a bleomycin induced pulmonary fibrosis model derived
from an alpha-smooth muscle actin-Cre transgenic mouse.
Respiratory research. 2007; 8:1.

29.	 Korfhagen TR, Le Cras TD, Davidson CR, Schmidt SM,
Ikegami M, Whitsett JA, et al. Rapamycin prevents
transforming growth factor-alpha-induced pulmonary
fibrosis. American journal of respiratory cell and molecular
biology. 2009;41: 562–72.

34.	 Tanaka K, Ishihara T, Azuma A, Kudoh S, Ebina M,
Nukiwa T, et al. Therapeutic effect of lecithinized
superoxide dismutase on bleomycin-induced pulmonary
fibrosis. American journal of physiology Lung cellular and
molecular physiology. 2010; 298:L348–60.

30.	 Gao Y, Xu X, Ding K, Liang Y, Jiang D, Dai H. Rapamycin
inhibits transforming growth factor beta1-induced

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

43619

Oncotarget

