NIH Public Access
Author Manuscript
Oncogene. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 March 03.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Published in final edited form as:
Oncogene. 2012 September 20; 31(38): 4171–4181. doi:10.1038/onc.2011.588.

Mer receptor tyrosine kinase inhibition impedes glioblastoma
multiforme migration and alters cellular morphology
AEJ Rogers1,2, JP Le1, S Sather1, BM Pernu1, DK Graham1,2, AM Pierce1, and AK Keating1,2
1Department of Pediatrics, University of Colorado School of Medicine, Aurora, CO, USA
2Department

of Pediatrics, Children’s Hospital Colorado, Aurora, CO, USA

Abstract

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is an aggressive brain tumor, fatal within 1 year from diagnosis
in most patients despite intensive multimodality therapy. The migratory and microscopically
invasive nature of GBM as well as its resistance to chemotherapy renders conventional therapies
inadequate in its treatment. Although Mer receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK) inhibition has been
shown to decrease the long-term survival and improve the chemo-sensitivity of GBM in vitro, its
role in malignant cellular migration has not been previously evaluated. In this study, we report for
the first time a role for Mer RTK in brain tumor migration and show that Mer inhibition
profoundly impedes GBM migration and alters cellular morphology. Our data demonstrate that
Mer RTK inhibition results in altered signaling through focal adhesion kinase (FAK) and RhoA
GTPase and a transformation of cytoskeletal organization, suggesting both molecular and
structural mechanisms for the abrogation of migration. We also describe a novel and translational
method of Mer RTK inhibition using a newly developed monoclonal antibody, providing proof of
principle for future evaluation of Mer-targeted translational therapies in the treatment of GBM.
Previous findings implicating Mer signaling in glioblastoma survival and chemotherapy resistance
coupled with our discovery of the role of Mer RTK in GBM cellular migration support the
development of novel Mer-targeted therapies for this devastating disease.

Keywords
MerTK; receptor tyrosine kinase; glioblastoma multiforme; migration; focal adhesion kinase;
morphology

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Introduction
Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is a highly aggressive brain tumor affecting both adults
and children. Despite advances in oncologic care, the prognosis of patients with this disease
is dismal with an average overall survival of 9–15 months from diagnosis (Souhami et al.,
2004; Stupp et al., 2005; Louis et al., 2007). Glioblastoma is highly migratory,
microscopically invasive and consistently resistant to chemotherapy rendering conventional
therapies inadequate in its treatment. The most recent clinical trial combining surgery and

© 2011 Macmillan Publishers Limited All rights reserved
Correspondence: Dr AK Keating, University of Colorado School of Medicine, Pediatrics MS 8302, 12800 East 19th Avenue, Rm.
P18-4105, Aurora, CO 80045, USA. amy.keating@ucdenver.edu.
Conflict of interest
The authors declare no conflicts of interest.
Supplementary Information accompanies the paper on the Oncogene website (http://www.nature.com/onc)

Rogers et al.

Page 2

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

radiotherapy with temozolomide advanced median overall survival from 12 to only 14
months (Stupp et al., 2005, 2009). Death from GBM is most commonly from progressive or
recurrent disease at the margins of the resected primary tumor bed (Hochberg and Pruitt,
1980); therefore, impeding cellular migration is essential for therapy and potential cure.
Improved understanding of the molecular mechanisms of GBM migration is needed to
facilitate development of new therapeutic approaches to treat this disease.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Abnormal activation of the TAM (Tyro-3, Axl and Mer) family of receptor tyrosine kinases
(RTKs) is implicated in the oncogenesis of many human cancers (Graham et al., 2006;
Linger et al., 2008, 2009). Upregulation of Mer and Axl RTK provides a survival advantage
to tumors through anti-apoptotic signaling via the PI3K/Akt and MAPK/Erk pathways
(Linger et al., 2008). Clinically, aberrant TAM RTK expression has been correlated with
poor prognosis in numerous cancers including GBM, non-small cell lung cancer, breast
cancer, pancreatic cancer and leukemia (Rochlitz et al., 1999; Hutterer et al., 2008; Koorstra
et al., 2009; Li et al., 2009; Gjerdrum et al., 2010). Coexpression of Mer and Axl in tumors
of patients with gastric carcinoma correlates with a poorer prognosis than expression of
either RTK alone (Wu et al., 2002). Previous research has demonstrated that aberrant Mer
expression in mouse hematopoietic cells increased spontaneous leukemia/lymphoma
development in vivo, while Mer inhibition led to increased chemosensitivity of
lymphoblasts in vitro and prolonged survival of mice with ALL in vivo (Keating et al.,
2006; Linger et al., 2009).
Mer and Axl RTK are important to the pathogenesis of GBM specifically. Axl inhibition
decreased glioblas-toma invasiveness and growth in a murine model (Vajkoczy et al., 2006).
Clinically, GBM patients with high levels of Axl expression showed decreased time to
recurrence/progression, from 9 to 4 months, and a trend toward decreased overall survival
(Hutterer et al., 2008). The recent first report of Mer RTK involvement in GBM shows that
Mer and Axl RTKs are highly expressed and often co-expressed in astrocytic cell lines and
patient tumors (Keating et al., 2010), which may be important clinically given the
correlation of TAM RTK coexpression and poor prognosis in gastric carcinoma.
Downregulation of Mer or Axl RTK resulted in increased apoptosis, decreased short- and
long-term survival, upregulation of autophagy and increased chemosensitivity of GBM in
vitro (Keating et al., 2010). Here for the first time, we report a role for Mer in GBM
migration. Given the role of migration in GBM tumor progression, understanding the role of
Mer in tumor migration is integral to the evaluation of its validity as a therapeutic target, and
may increase our understanding of the molecular mechanisms behind the therapeutic
resistance of GBM.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Results
Mer RTK inhibition with constitutive shRNA leads to decreased glioblastoma migration
We introduced stable shRNA constructs designed to inhibit the transcription of Mer, Axl
and GFP (control) into two astrocytoma cell lines, A172 and G12, as previously described
(Keating et al., 2010), and utilized these clonal RTK knockdown lines to evaluate migration.
Cells containing shRNA directed against Mer or Axl show effective knockdown of
respective RTK protein expression, whether cultured in complete or serum-deprived media
(Figures 1a and b).
Mer inhibition with shRNA led to significantly decreased glioblastoma migration in vitro
(Figure 1). Glioblastoma clones with constitutive Mer inhibition of the A172 cell line
(shMer1A and shMer1B) and G12 cell line (shMer1) were compared with control cells
(shCon-trol) containing shRNA to a non-human protein, GFP, and clones with constitutive
Axl inhibition (shAxl9, shAxl8) in transwell assays. Cells were serum deprived for 2–3h and
Oncogene. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 March 03.

Rogers et al.

Page 3

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

plated in serum-free media (SF media) in uniform densities in the upper chamber of a
transwell. Complete media was placed in the lower chamber to create a serum gradient for
stimulation of migration. Transwell migration was analyzed by two independent methods
that included staining and measurement of optic density at 21 h (Figures 1c – f), and
measurement of impedance on a continuous basis throughout the experiment generating a
cell index (Figure 1g). There were very consistent outcomes between the two analyses.
A172 cells that were Mer inhibited migrated at 10–40% of the shControl (Figures 1c, e and
g; shMer1A P = 0.02, shMer1B P <0.001) and migrated poorly throughout the entire
experiment when measured continuously by impedance (data not shown). G12 cells that
were Mer inhibited migrated at 20% of the shControl (Figures 1d and f; shMer1 P= 0.0013).
The degree of Mer inhibition appears to affect migration in a dose-dependent manner with
A172 shMer1B cells showing a greater degree of Mer inhibition and a corresponding 90%
inhibition of migration as compared with the shMer1A cells that exhibit a lesser degree of
knockdown and a 60% decrease in migration. The G12 shMer1 construct shows an 80%
decrease in migration correlating with its intermediate degree of Mer knockdown in
comparison to the two A172 clones. Interestingly, Axl inhibition with multiple different
constructs resulted in similar increased levels of migration, but there were no significant
differences when compared with the control in either cell line. There was no migration
difference between parental A172 and their respective shControl cells, whereas parental G12
cells showed lower levels of migration compared with shControl cells consistent with their
respective levels of Mer expression (data not shown).
The control and experimental cells were also compared in a chemokinesis assay. Cells were
plated in a transwell assay without serum deprivation and exposed to complete media for the
duration of the experiment. Mer knockdown cells again showed decreased migration in
comparison to control (P = 0.0073, Supplementary Figure 1), suggesting that Mer inhibition
primarily affects chemokinesis of GBM cells.
The observed differences in migration were not due to differences in viability or
proliferation. Viability of the control and experimental cells was evaluated using a flow
cytometry-based assay. Cells were prepared under the same conditions used for the transwell
assay, with serum deprivation followed by exposure to serum. Mer and Axl knockdown cells
had slightly higher rates of apoptosis than control cells following serum deprivation, but
only viable cells were plated in the assay, and cells recovered completely once placed in the
serum-replete experimental conditions. Final viable cell counts were equivalent among
control, Mer knockdown and Axl knockdown cells, at the short experimental time-point of
21 h, indicating that decreased migration is not a result of changes in viable cell number
(Supplementary Figure 2).

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Mer RTK inhibition with inducible shRNA leads to decreased glioblastoma migration
To confirm whether GBM migration was dependent upon Mer signaling, we developed
additional Mer and Axl knockdown lines with novel shRNA constructs under the control of
a doxycycline-inducible promoter designed to inhibit respective RTK transcription in a
controlled manner as well as a unique control using a non-targeting vector (NTV) shRNA in
the A172 cell line. Immunoblotting illustrated that there was a small degree of Mer
knockdown before doxycycline induction ((−)i-shMer), and that the degree of Mer RTK
knockdown following induction ((+)i-shMer) was less than that seen in the constitutive
constructs (Figure 2a).
Using these doxycycline-inducible shRNA cell lines, we confirmed that Mer inhibition
significantly decreased glioblastoma migration (Figure 2b). A172 cells with induced Mer
inhibition ((+)i-shMer) migrated at 65% of the control ((+)NTV, P = 0.028). Again, Axl
inhibition ((+)i-shAxl) did not affect GBM migration. The uninduced shMer line ((−)iOncogene. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 March 03.

Rogers et al.

Page 4

shMer) showed decreased migration, although not to a statistically significant level,
consistent with the decreased Mer expression level and a knockdown dose-dependence.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Mer RTK inhibition using monoclonal antibody inhibits GBM migration
To substantiate our hypothesis that the migratory differences we observed were due to Mer
RTK inhibition, we developed a novel monoclonal antibody to human Mer as an
independent and translational means to inhibit Mer signaling. A172 cells were treated with
monoclonal antibody and Mer expression was analyzed with immunoblot (Figure 3a). Mer
knockdown occurred consistently in each independent experiment and occurred at
concentrations ranging from 0.05 mg/ml to 2 mg/ml; Figure 3a displays antibody treatments
from 0.25 to 1µg/ml. Mer knockdown occurred within 4 h of initial treatment and lasted up
to 96 h (data not shown). The degress of Mer knockdown using monoclonal antibody
therapy was less than that seen with constitutive shRNA and was comparable with
knockdown achieved with inducible shRNA. Monoclonal antibody-mediated RTK inhibition
was specific to Mer and was associated with no change in Axl expression.
To evaluate the effect on migration, A172 parental cells were treated with 1 µg/ml
monoclonal antibody for 72 h and then plated in a transwell assay following 2–3 h of serum
deprivation. Treatment with monoclonal antibody resulted in a 50% decrease in migration of
glioblastoma cells (P = 0.0141) (Figure 3b).

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Reintroduction of Mer RTK expression rescues GBM migration
Mer RTK expression was reintroduced into the A172 constitutive shMer knockdown
(shMer1B) clone with retroviral vectors containing sequences for Mer RTK driven by a
cytomegaloviral promoter. This Mer gene construct lacks the 3’-untranslatated region that is
recognized by the shMer, therefore Mer will be expressed in its presence (shMer/Mer cells).
As a control, cells were also transduced with an empty vector (shMer/EV cells). Immunoblot
of shMer/Mer lysates demonstrated that there is Mer RTK expression following Mer addback, similar in expression level to that of the parental or shControl cells.
Following reintroduction of Mer RTK expression into Mer knockdown GBM cells there was
complete recovery of cellular motility with a return of 96% of migration compared with the
GFP (Figure 4).
Mer RTK inhibition causes morphological change in glioblastoma cells

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

The morphology of A172 (Figure 5a) and G12 (Figure 5b) clonal shControl glioblastoma
cells was evaluated and compared with Mer clonal knockdown (A172 shMer1A, A172
shMer1B, G12 Mer1) and Axl clonal knockdown (A172 shAxl8) cells using inverted light
microscopy and prominent differences were noted. Control cells exhibited large cell bodies
and diffuse granulation with thick axonal projections. Cells with Mer inhibition developed
slender cell bodies with focal granulations and thin, tortuous, beaded axonal projections.
Similar to control cells, Axl knockdown cells exhibited large cell bodies with thick axonal
projections but were more polygonal in shape.
Cells were stained for actin using rhodamine-tagged phalloidin and for the vinculin
component of focal adhesions using anti-vinculin antibody (secondary antibody tagged with
FITC). In both A172 (Figure 5a) and G12 (Figure 5b) shControl cells showed polarization
with coordinated actin collection in membrane ruffles. Mer-inhibited cells showed diffuse
and disorganized stress fiber and focal adhesion formation with considerably more abundant
focal adhesions than control cells. Axl knockdown cells had a similar appearance to control
cells, with organized membrane ruffles and cellular polarization.

Oncogene. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 March 03.

Rogers et al.

Page 5

Mer RTK inhibition alters activation and signaling of focal adhesion kinase (FAK) and
RhoA

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Cellular movement is a dynamic process requiring the coordinated assembly and
disassembly of actin structures. Alternation between cellular morphologies requires a
complex system of signaling. FAK is a protein tyrosine kinase ubiquitously expressed in the
cytoplasm of cells that regulates focal adhesion complexes or the sites of cellular attachment
to the extracellular matrix, the turnover of which in part allows the process of movement
(Schwock et al., 2010).

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

In order to assess Mer RTK involvement in FAK signaling, A172 shControl cells were
compared with A172 cells with constitutive Mer inhibition (A172 shMer1A and shMer1B)
or constitutive Axl inhibition (A172 shAxl9 and shAxl8). Cells were plated in equal
densities, serum starved and stimulated with the activating Mer/Axl RTK ligand, growth
arrest specific 6 (Gas6). Mer inhibition led to altered FAK signaling with increased
phosphorylation of FAK in comparison to the control or Axl-inhibited cells (Figure 6a). To
confirm this dysregulation of FAK activation, we utilized the doxycycline-inducible A172
cell lines, which consist of a NTV control, the uninduced control line (i-shMer(−)) and the
line with induced Mer inhibition (i-shMer(+)). Cells were plated in equal densities, serum
starved and then treated with serum replete media, left untreated (serum starved) or
stimulated with Gas6. Mer inhibition again led to alteration in FAK signaling with increased
phosphorylation of FAK in comparison to controls. This FAK dysregulation was present
regardless of media treatment (Figure 6b) and was not observed following Axl inhibition
(Supplementary Figure 3). Additionally, we tested FAK activation in the primary G12 cell
line and again found that whether cells were left untreated or stimulated with Gas6, there
was a large increase in FAK phosphorylation (Figure 6c) following Mer inhibition. These
data suggest that intact Mer RTK signaling is necessary for appropriate levels of FAK
activation, and this altered FAK signaling may be responsible in part for the aberrant
migration of Mer-inhibited GBM cells.
Actin assembly for cellular movement is in part controlled by the Rho family of GTPases,
namely Rac1 and RhoA. We evaluated total levels of Rac and Rho in our GBM cell lines
and found that in the Mer knockdown state, total levels of RhoA were elevated in both the
serum replete and serum starved states (Figure 6d). There was no difference in Rac1 levels
between the control and Mer knockdown glioblastoma cells.

Discussion
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Our laboratory previously established that Mer inhibition results in increased
chemosensitivity and decreased survival of GBM cells in vitro (Keating et al., 2010). The
current study represents the first report of Mer inhibition impeding GBM migration and
altering GBM morphology. In this study, we utilized multiple shRNA constructs and a novel
anti-Mer monoclonal antibody to minimize off-target effects and focus specifically on Mer
RTK downregulation; in all cases, we discovered that Mer inhibition of GBM cells led to
decreased in vitro migration. The importance of migration to GBM survival is evidenced by
the predilection of GBM to recur at the leading edge of tumor and at therapeutic margins.
This characteristic suggests that research into inhibitors of cancer cell migration is critical
for development of curative therapy. In this manuscript, we introduce the first translational
Mer inhibitor as a potential therapeutic for GBM. Though it is unknown at this time whether
a Mer-directed monoclonal antibody can reach the CNS, this data provides the proof of
principle for translational agents currently in development with ability to penetrate the blood
brain barrier.

Oncogene. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 March 03.

Rogers et al.

Page 6

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

We found that a threshold level of Mer is necessary to maintain normal migration of GBM
cells in vitro. Cells with moderate levels of Mer inhibition showed moderate decreases in
migration, while cells with profound Mer inhibition demonstrated very minimal ability to
migrate. Interestingly, although Axl has been shown to affect GBM survival and
chemosensitivity (Keating et al., 2010), Axl inhibition did not significantly affect
glioblastoma migration when explored with multiple shRNA constructs in two different cell
lines. Another study has shown that Axl inhibition can decrease GBM migration in vitro and
invasiveness in vivo; however, this report did not investigate the effects of Mer expression
or inhibition. Additionally the method used to inhibit Axl, introduction of a dominant
negative kinase, could have inadvertently led to decreased activity of Mer RTK signaling as
well (Vajkoczy et al., 2006).

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

We evaluated the viability and proliferation rates of Mer and Axl knockdown cells during
the short duration of the migration study and showed that although Mer and Axl inhibition
led to higher apoptotic rates with serum deprivation, only viable cells were plated and cell
counts following exposure to a serum gradient were equal. Contrary to expectation, the
control cells did not have increased proliferation relative to the Mer and Axl knockdown
cells in this short-term assay. The significant difference in migration observed is far greater
than would be expected due to minor variances in apoptosis occurring over the short serumdeprivation period. In addition, we have previously shown that Axl or Mer inhibition
increases apoptosis and decreases survival of GBM, more significantly following Axl
knockdown. As such, the lack of migratory difference following Axl inhibition serves as a
relative control against viability or proliferative confounders.
These findings strongly suggest that Mer RTK signaling is necessary for normal migration
of GBM cells. Our studies demonstrate that with inhibition of Mer RTK expression, we can
significantly impede GBM cellular migration, and that we can fully rescue the migratory
phenotype with the reintroduction of Mer expression.
Cellular movement is a dynamic process requiring the coordinated assembly and
disassembly of actin structures. Cells migrate by alternating between the formation of
membrane ruffles, or lamellipodia, at the leading edge of a cell, and the formation of stress
fibers and focal adhesions at the rear of a cell (Salhia et al., 2005). Alternation between
these very different cellular morphologies requires a complex system of signaling.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

FAK is a protein tyrosine kinase ubiquitously expressed in the cytoplasm of cells that
regulates focal adhesion complexes or the sites of cellular attachment to the extracellular
matrix (Schwock et al., 2010). Cells in motion must alternate between attachment to and
detachment from the extracellular matrix. It is the turnover, or cyclic assembly and
disassembly, of focal adhesions at the leading and rear ends of a cell, which in part allows
the process of movement. It has been suggested that FAK signaling may lead to both the
formation of focal adhesions and to the turnover of these contact points (Schlaepfer and
Mitra, 2004). Alteration in FAK signaling can lead to alterations in the rate of disassembly
and turnover of focal adhesions thereby affecting cellular movement (Goldberg and Kloog,
2006).
FAK also serves as a signaling hub and a regulator of the Rho-family of GTPases (Schwock
et al., 2010). GBM has been shown to have elevated levels of active Ras, a signaling
gateway GTPase involved in migration, cytoskeletal rearrangement and cell survival, and
whose properties also include the ability to regulate the Rac and Rho GTPases (Goldberg
and Kloog, 2006). Signaling via the Rho GTPases regulates cellular morphology thereby
affecting cellular processes dependent on the plasticity of cellular architecture, namely
cellular migration. Rac1 activation results in the formation of membrane ruffling inducing

Oncogene. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 March 03.

Rogers et al.

Page 7

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

membrane protrusion, whereas RhoA activation effects the assembly of stress fibers and
focal adhesions inducing contractility (Goldberg and Kloog, 2006). These proteins often act
antagonistically with the activation of one leading to inhibition of the other and thereby the
alternating actin organizations controlled by each protein (Ridley et al., 2003). Along with
other signaling pathways, the interplay between Rac1 and RhoA signaling allows the
alternating cellular phenotypes involved in cellular movement.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Any process that interferes with the balance between opposing signals can paralyze
movement. It has been shown that Ras inhibition leads to decreased GBM cell migration and
anchorage-independent growth in vitro via alteration in cellular morphology (Goldberg and
Kloog, 2006). Treatment of GBM cell lines with a Ras inhibitor led to decrease in Rac1 and
increase in RhoA levels thereby shifting the actin cytoskeleton toward formation of stress
fibers and focal adhesions with resultant decrease in migration (Goldberg and Kloog, 2006).
In addition to increased numbers of stress fibers and focal adhesions, treatment with the Ras
inhibitor also led to decreased phosphorylation of FAK, suggesting decreased disassembly
or turnover of these structures (Goldberg and Kloog, 2006). In contrast, a different study
showed that FAK signaling led to increased levels of activated RhoA (Schlaepfer and Mitra,
2004). FAK-null fibroblasts have been shown to have decreased motility in response to
motility stimuli due to increased formation of focal contacts associated with increased Rho
activity (Schlaepfer and Mitra, 2004). In summary, the signaling behind cellular motility is
highly complex and interconnected.
Our findings suggest that Mer RTK-mediated abrogation of migration and alteration of
cellular morphology involves altered signaling through FAK and RhoA. In this study, we
found that when Mer is inhibited, total levels of RhoA are elevated. Elevated levels of RhoA
lead to stress fiber and focal adhesion formation that in turn leads to cellular attachment to
the extracellular matrix. This attachment likely results in cellular fixation thereby
contributing to the immotility we have observed with Mer inhibition.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

In order to assess Mer RTK involvement in FAK signaling, shControl cells with maintained
Mer RTK signaling were compared with GBM cells with constitutive Mer and Axl
inhibition. Mer inhibition led to alteration in FAK signaling with increased phosphor-ylation
of FAK in comparison to control or Axl-inhibited cells. Mer RTK has multiple physiological
functions in normal cells; most relevant to this study is its role in phagocytosis. Phagocytosis
is a process dependent on cellular movement, and Mer RTK is necessary for phagocytic
activity with cellular engulf-ment of apoptotic cells. Animals lacking Mer expression have
inability to clear apoptotic cells and develop abnormalities including retinal blindness and
systemic autoimmune disease (Scott et al., 2001). It has been previously shown that in the
normal process of cellular phagocytosis, Mer activation leads to increased phos-phorylation
of FAK and thereby activation of Rac1 in phagocytes (Wu et al., 2005). Given the integral
role of Mer RTK in phagocyte function and motility, it is not surprising that Mer inhibition
would lead to decreased cellular movement as we have shown in GBM. It is interesting,
however, that Mer inhibition led to increased phosphorylation of FAK in GBM where the
opposite is found in phagocytes. The increased FAK activation either represents an
attempted compensatory mechanism for the lack of movement in Mer knockdown GBM
cells or it represents a dysregulation of migratory signaling such that excess phosphorylation
of FAK leads to a shift in the balance of migratory signals needed for movement.
Our findings of differences in cellular morphology correlate with the expected cellular
repercussions of the altered FAK and RhoA signaling observed with Mer RTK inhibition.
Control and Axl-inhibited cells exhibit large cell bodies and diffuse granulation with thick
axonal projections, while cells with Mer inhibition develop slender cell bodies with focal
granulations and thin, tortuous, beaded axonal projections. Additionally, we detected that

Oncogene. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 March 03.

Rogers et al.

Page 8

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

shControl and Axl knockdown cells show directed polarization with coordinated actin
collection in membrane ruffles, exhibiting the cellular morphology of active movement.
Both A172 and G12 glioblastoma cell lines with Mer inhibition, however, show diffuse and
disorganized stress fiber and focal adhesion formation with significantly higher number of
focal adhesions than control cells corresponding to the increased cellular RhoA and altered
FAK signaling observed. The increase in focal adhesion formation may result in cellular
fixation and thereby the decreased migration observed with Mer inhibition.
Inhibition of Mer RTK resulted in decreased survival and increased chemosensitivity of
glioblastoma in vitro. This is the first study to show that its inhibition also impedes
glioblastoma migration and alters cellular morphology, targeting an important molecular
mechanism of GBM resistance to therapy. These data support the need for further research
into Mer RTK inhibition as a novel treatment strategy for GBM.

Materials and methods
Cell lines
The A172 cell line was obtained from American Type Culture Collection (Manassas, VA,
USA) and maintained per culture guidelines. The G12 cell line was derived from a GBM
patient sample as previously described (Donson et al., 1999).

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Production of shRNA clones

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Constitutive shRNA cell lines (A172 shMer1A, shMer1B, shAxl9, shAxl8, shGFP and G12
shMer1, shAxl9, shAxl8, shGFP) were created as previously described (Keating et al.,
2010). Inducible shRNA cell lines (NTV, i-shMer and i-shAxl) were created using lentiviral
vectors containing doxycycline-inducible shRNA sequences targeting Mer (shMerA, oligo
ID: V2THS_1645), Axl (shAxlA, oligo ID: V2THS_234991) or non-silencing control vector
(NTV, #RHS4743) obtained from Open Biosystems (Huntsville, AL, USA). Stable clonal
lines were developed from heterogeneous RTK knockdown populations by single-cell flow
cytometry sorting and selected for inducible decrease in Mer or Axl expression. shRNA
induction was done with doxycycline treatment at 1:2000 for 72h before experimentation.
Mer add-back cell lines (shMer/Mer, shMer/EV) were created using retroviral vectors
(pLNCX2) (Clontech, Mountain View, CA, USA) containing sequences for MerTK
(pLNCX2-Mer) and GFP (pLNCX2-GFP) driven by the cytomegaloviral promoter. This
MerTK lacks the 3’-untran-slatated region, which is the binding site for the shMer RNA,
and therefore is resistant to Mer inhibition by shRNA. Replication incompetent viral
particles were generated by transfecting GP2–293 cells (Clontech), which stably express the
viral gag and pol genes, with pLNCX2, pLNCX2-Mer or pLNCX2-GFP. The retroviral
expression vectors were co-transfected with VSV-G plasmid (Clontech) that expresses a
cytomegaloviral-driven pantropic envelope sequence. Viral particles were transduced into
shMer1B cells using Turbofect (Fermentas, Glen Burnie, MD, USA), and stably transduced
cells were selected using 400 mg/ml hygromycin.
Monoclonal antibody development and treatment
Balb/C mice were immunized with recombinant human Mer extracellular domain/Fc
chimera produced in CHO cells. B cells from high anti-Mer/Fc titer mice were fused to
FoxNY mouse myeloma cells. Hybridoma clones secreting antibodies positive for
interaction with Mer/Fc and negative for human-Fc interaction by enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay were selected for screening. Flow cytometry was used to define clones
secreting antibodies with strong binding to cells with known Mer expression and lack of
interaction with Mer non-expressing cells. Mer binding specificity was confirmed by loss of
cell antibody labeling following shRNA-mediated Mer knockdown. Two hybridomas were
Oncogene. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 March 03.

Rogers et al.

Page 9

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

expanded, and secreted antibody was purified by Protein A Sepharose chromatography.
Parental A172 cells were treated with monoclonal antibody at the concentrations noted or
with isotype control mouse IgG1 at 1.0 mg/ml (R&D Systems, Minneapolis, MN, USA) for
72h before migratory experimentation set-up.
Immunoblotting of Mer/Axl RTK and downstream migratory signals
Whole cell protein lysates were prepared as previously described (Keating et al., 2010),
resolved by SDS–polyacryla-mide gel electrophoresis and transferred onto polyvinylidene
difluoride membranes. Immunoblots were probed with the following antibodies at
concentrations recommended by the manufacturers’ protocols: human Mer 348 (Caveo
Therapeutics, Aurora, CO, USA); human Axl (R&D Systems); phospho-FAK (Tyr397),
FAK and tubulin rabbit monoclonal (Cell Signaling Technology, Danvers, MA, USA);
RhoAand actin goat polyclonal (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Santa Cruz, CA, USA); RAC1
(Millipore, Billerica, MA, USA). Proteins were detected with horseradish peroxidase
chemiluminescence (PerkinElmer, Waltham, MA, USA). Immunoblots are representative of
a minimum of three independent experiments.
Preparation of cells for migration and viability assays

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Cells were plated in tissue culture plates and grown to 60–90% confluence. Cells were lifted
using EDTA into complete media, centrifuged (1200 rpm for 5min), supernatants were
removed and cells were resuspended in SF media or SF media with doxycycline (inducible
lines). Cells were again centrifuged, supernatant was removed and cells were resuspended in
SF media, SF media with antibody (antibody-treated cells) or SF media with doxycycline
(inducible lines). Cells were serum deprived for 2–3 h at room temperature in a conical tube
during which time they were resuspended every 30–60 min.
Functional assays of migration

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

A cell suspension containing 1.0–1.3 million viable A172 cells/ml or 1.3–1.5 million viable
G12 cells/ml was prepared as described and then plated in transwells containing an interchamber polycarbonate membrane with 8 µm pores (Cytose-lect Migration Assay, Cell
Biolabs Inc., San Diego, CA, USA). Each transwell was placed into 500 µl of complete
media with antibody or doxycycline as appropriate. 300 µl of cell suspension was gently
dripped into the inside of each insert. Transwells were incubated at 37 °C and 5% CO2 for
20–22 h (A172) or 48 h (G12). Following incubation, non-migratory cells remaining in the
upper chamber were wiped off and migratory cells in the lower chamber were stained per
product specifications, photographed using an Olympus CKX41 Inverted Microscope
(Olympus America, Center Valley, PA, USA) and images were collected using Q Capture
Pro Software (Q Imaging, Surrey, BC, Canada). Cell dye was extracted using the proprietary
Extraction Solution and the optic density (560 nm) was measured.
xCELLigence migration assay
Migration was assessed using the xCELLigence Real-Time Cell Analysis (RTCA) system
(Roche Diagnostics, Indianapolis, IN, USA, in partnership with ACEA Biosciences Inc., San
Diego, CA, USA) with Cell Invasion and Migration Plates 16 (CIM-plates-16) (Roche
Diagnostics). This analysis utilizes transwells in which the bottom surface of the 8 µm filter
is lined with electrodes. Following cellular migration and adherence to the bottom surface of
the filter there is an increase in measured impedance (Z) across these electrodes that
generates a cell index that correlates to total cell number (Chung et al., 2011; Steinle et al.,
2011). The upper and lower chambers of the transwells were loaded with 30 µl of SF
Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium and 162 µl of Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium
containing 10% FBS, respectively, and the assembled plate allowed to equilibrate at 37 °C

Oncogene. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 March 03.

Rogers et al.

Page 10

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

in 5% CO2 for 1 h. Cell suspensions containing 7.5 × 105 viable cells/ml were prepared as
described in SF Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium. Background impedance was
measured and 100 µl of cell suspension was added to the upper chamber of each well.
Migration was quantified and recorded every 15 min for 20 h.
Viability assessment
Cells were plated at 390 000 cells per well based on the viable cell count following serum
deprivation (the equivalent of the above described 300 µl aliquot of a 1.3 million/ml cell
solution) into 12 well plates in duplicate in complete media. Cells were incubated for 20–21
h, rinsed with PBS and lifted with trypsin. Cell suspensions were centrifuged, supernatants
were removed and cells were resuspended. Viable cells were counted using ViaCount.
Gating was performed to account for viable, early apoptotic and late apoptotic/dead cell
populations. All data described is representative of a minimum of three independent
experiments.
Migratory signaling analyses

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Cells were plated at equal density in tissue culture plates in complete media and allowed to
adhere overnight. Complete media was removed, cells were washed with PBS and cells were
incubated in SF media for 2h. Total RhoA and Rac1 levels were analyzed by immunoblot of
lysates from this timepoint, while P-FAK and FAK analysis was performed following these
same conditions, treatment with serum replete media (10% FBS) or Gas6 at 200nM for
10min as previously described.
Light microscopy
Cells were plated into six-well plates at densities of 40000–60000 cells per well and allowed
to incubate overnight in complete media. Cells were photographed using an Olympus
CKX41 Inverted Microscope and images were collected using Q Capture Pro Software.
Phalloidin/vinculin staining and confocal microscopy

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Cells were seeded onto glass coverslips in 12-well plates at densities of 20000–60000 cells
per well and allowed to incubate overnight in complete media. Cells were fixed with 10%
formalin for 10min, permeabilized with 0.1% Triton X-100 (Sigma Chemical Co., St Louis,
MO, USA) in PBS for 5min and blocked with 1 × (0.4µg/ml) human IgG1/PBS (SigmaAldrich, St Louis, MO, USA) for 30 min. Coverslips were incubated for 1 h with mouse
monoclonal Anti-Vinculin Antibody (Sigma-Aldrich) diluted 1:100 in 1 × hIgG/PBS,
washed and incubated for 30 min with Donkey Anti-Mouse-FITC (1:100, Jackson
ImmunoResearch, West Grove, PA, USA) and with Rhodamine Phalloidin (1:40, Molecular
Probes, Eugene, OR, USA) in 1 × hIgG/PBS. After washing, coverslips were mounted with
ProLong Gold Antifade Reagent (Molecular Probes) and imaged using an Olympus
FluoView FV-1000 FCS/RICS inverted confocal laser scanning microscope and Olympus
Fluoview Ver. 2.0b Viewer software.
Statistical analyses
Averages were compared using a Student’s paired t-test and analyzed with Prism software
(v.5. 03, GraphPad Software).

Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.

Oncogene. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 March 03.

Rogers et al.

Page 11

Acknowledgments
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

We thank Rachel Linger, PhD for her expertise and insight into this project. We thank Jennifer Schlegel for
production of the Mer add-back vector, the Advanced Light Microscopy Core Facility at the University of Colorado
School of Medicine for their technical support in microscopy, and the University of Colorado Cancer Center Tissue
Culture Core for their technical support in monoclonal antibody development. DKG is supported by NIH R01
1CA137078. AKK is generously supported by the St Baldrick’s Foundation and the NIH K12 HD068372Child
Health Research Career Development Award.

References

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Chung H, Suh EK, Han IO, Oh ES. Keratinocyte-derived laminin-332 promotes adhesion and
migration in melanocytes and melanoma. J Biol Chem. 2011; 286:13438–13447. [PubMed:
21349841]
Donson AM, Weil MD, Foreman NK. Tamoxifen radiosensitization in human glioblastoma cell lines.
J Neurosurg. 1999; 90:533–536. [PubMed: 10067924]
Gjerdrum C, Tiron C, Hoiby T, Stefansson I, Haugen H, Sandal T, et al. Axl is an essential epithelialto-mesenchymal transition-induced regulator of breast cancer metastasis and patient survival. Proc
Natl Acad Sci USA. 2010; 107:1124–1129. [PubMed: 20080645]
Goldberg L, Kloog Y. A Ras inhibitor tilts the balance between Rac and Rho and blocks
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase-dependent glioblastoma cell migration. Cancer Res. 2006; 66:11709–
11717. [PubMed: 17178866]
Graham DK, Salzberg DB, Kurtzberg J, Sather S, Matsushima GK, Keating AK, et al. Ectopic
expression of the proto-oncogene Mer in pediatric T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Clin Cancer
Res. 2006; 12:2662–2669. [PubMed: 16675557]
Hochberg FH, Pruitt A. Assumptions in the radiotherapy of glioblastoma. Neurology. 1980; 30:907–
911. [PubMed: 6252514]
Hutterer M, Knyazev P, Abate A, Reschke M, Maier H, Stefanova N, et al. Axl and growth arrestspecific gene 6 are frequently overexpressed in human gliomas and predict poor prognosis in
patients with glioblastoma multiforme. Clin Cancer Res. 2008; 14:130–138. [PubMed: 18172262]
Keating AK, Kim GK, Jones AE, Donson AM, Ware K, Mulcahy JM, et al. Inhibition of Mer and Axl
receptor tyrosine kinases in astrocytoma cells leads to increased apoptosis and improved
chemosensitivity. Mol Cancer Ther. 2010; 9:1298–1307. [PubMed: 20423999]
Keating AK, Salzberg DB, Sather S, Liang X, Nickoloff S, Anwar A, et al. Lymphoblastic leukemia/
lymphoma in mice over-expressing the Mer (MerTK) receptor tyrosine kinase. Oncogene. 2006;
25:6092–6100. [PubMed: 16652142]
Koorstra JB, Karikari CA, Feldmann G, Bisht S, Rojas PL, Offerhaus GJ, et al. The Axl receptor
tyrosine kinase confers an adverse prognostic influence in pancreatic cancer and represents a new
therapeutic target. Cancer Biol Ther. 2009; 8:618–626. [PubMed: 19252414]
Li Y, Ye X, Tan C, Hongo JA, Zha J, Liu J, et al. Axl as a potential therapeutic target in cancer: role of
Axl in tumor growth, metastasis and angiogenesis. Oncogene. 2009; 28:3442–3455. [PubMed:
19633687]
Linger RM, DeRyckere D, Brandao L, Sawczyn KK, Jacobsen KM, Liang X, et al. Mer receptor
tyrosine kinase is a novel therapeutic target in pediatric B-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia.
Blood. 2009; 114:2678–2687. [PubMed: 19643988]
Linger RM, Keating AK, Earp HS, Graham DK. TAM receptor tyrosine kinases: biologic functions,
signaling, and potential therapeutic targeting in human cancer. Adv Cancer Res. 2008; 100:35–83.
[PubMed: 18620092]
Louis DN, Ohgaki H, Wiestler OD, Cavenee WK, Burger PC, Jouvet A, et al. The 2007 WHO
classification of tumours of the central nervous system. Acta Neuropathol. 2007; 114:97–109.
[PubMed: 17618441]
Ridley AJ, Schwartz MA, Burridge K, Firtel RA, Ginsberg MH, Borisy G, et al. Cell migration:
integrating signals from front to back. Science. 2003; 302:1704–1709. [PubMed: 14657486]
Rochlitz C, Lohri A, Bacchi M, Schmidt M, Nagel S, Fopp M, et al. Axl expression is associated with
adverse prognosis and with expression of Bcl-2 and CD34 in de novo acute myeloid leukemia

Oncogene. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 March 03.

Rogers et al.

Page 12

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

(AML): results from a multicenter trial of the Swiss Group for Clinical Cancer Research (SAKK).
Leukemia. 1999; 13:1352–1358. [PubMed: 10482985]
Salhia B, Rutten F, Nakada M, Beaudry C, Berens M, Kwan A, et al. Inhibition of Rho-kinase affects
astrocytoma morphology, motility, and invasion through activation of Rac1. Cancer Res. 2005;
65:8792–8800. [PubMed: 16204049]
Schlaepfer DD, Mitra SK. Multiple connections link FAK to cell motility and invasion. Curr Opin
Genet Dev. 2004; 14:92–101. [PubMed: 15108811]
Schwock J, Dhani N, Hedley DW. Targeting focal adhesion kinase signaling in tumor growth and
metastasis. Expert Opin Ther Targets. 2010; 14:77–94. [PubMed: 20001212]
Scott RS, McMahon EJ, Pop SM, Reap EA, Caricchio R, Cohen PL, et al. Phagocytosis and clearance
of apoptotic cells is mediated by MER. Nature. 2001; 411:207–211. [PubMed: 11346799]
Souhami L, Seiferheld W, Brachman D, Podgorsak EB, Werner-Wasik M, Lustig R, et al. Randomized
comparison of stereotactic radiosurgery followed by conventional radiotherapy with carmustine to
conventional radiotherapy with carmustine for patients with glioblastoma multiforme: report of
Radiation Therapy Oncology Group 93-05 protocol. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2004; 60:853–
860. [PubMed: 15465203]
Steinle M, Palme D, Misovic M, Rudner J, Dittmann K, Lukowski R, et al. Ionizing radiation induces
migration of glioblastoma cells by activating BK K(+) channels. Radiother Oncol. 2011; 101:122–
126. [PubMed: 21704404]
Stupp R, Hegi ME, Mason WP, van den Bent MJ, Taphoorn MJ, Janzer RC, et al. Effects of
radiotherapy with concomitant and adjuvant temozolomide versus radiotherapy alone on survival
in glioblastoma in a randomised phase III study: 5-year analysis of the EORTC-NCIC trial. Lancet
Oncol. 2009; 10:459–466. [PubMed: 19269895]
Stupp R, Mason WP, van den Bent MJ, Weller M, Fisher B, Taphoorn MJ, et al. Radiotherapy plus
concomitant and adjuvant temozolomide for glioblastoma. N Engl J Med. 2005; 352:987–996.
[PubMed: 15758009]
Vajkoczy P, Knyazev P, Kunkel A, Capelle HH, Behrndt S, von Tengg-Kobligk H, et al. Dominantnegative inhibition of the Axl receptor tyrosine kinase suppresses brain tumor cell growth and
invasion and prolongs survival. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2006; 103:5799–5804. [PubMed:
16585512]
Wu CW, Li AF, Chi CW, Lai CH, Huang CL, Lo SS, et al. Clinical significance of AXL kinase family
in gastric cancer. Anticancer Res. 2002; 22:1071–1078. [PubMed: 12168903]
Wu Y, Singh S, Georgescu MM, Birge RB. A role for Mer tyrosine kinase in alphavbeta5 integrinmediated phagocytosis of apoptotic cells. J Cell Sci. 2005; 118:539–553. [PubMed: 15673687]

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Oncogene. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 March 03.

Rogers et al.

Page 13

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Figure 1.

Inhibition of Mer RTK impedes glioblastoma cell migration. Immunoblot of Mer and Axl
expression in the (a) A172 and (b) G12 glioblastoma cell lines following transduction with
constitutively expressed shRNA directed against Mer (shMer1), one of two independent
constructs targeting Axl (shAxl9 or shAxl8) or an shRNA targeting GFP (shControl). Two
independently isolated clones are shown for the A172 shMer line (shMer 1A and shMer1B).
Actin levels are shown as a protein loading control. A172 cells were cultured in complete
media (+) and following 3 h serum starvation (−) to illustrate that RTK expression is
comparable in all experimental conditions. (c) A172 and (d) G12 glioblastoma control
(shControl), Mer-inhibited (shMer1A, shMer1B, shMer1) and Axl-inhibited (shAxl9,
Oncogene. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 March 03.

Rogers et al.

Page 14

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

shAxl8) cells were plated at equal densities in the upper chamber of a transwell. Cells that
successfully migrated through a polycarbonate membrane with 8 µm pores were stained and
photographed. Optic density of stained migratory (e) A172 and (f) G12 control and RTKinhibited cells was measured. Bar graph represents migration relative to normalized
shControl. Mean values and standard error were derived from three independent
experiments. Means were statistically compared with the shControl with a Student’s paired
t-test. P-values for the (e) A172 cell line were as follows, shMer1A = 0.02 (*), shMer1B
<0.001 (***), shAxl9 =non-significant (NS), shAxl8 = NS. P-values for the (f) G12 cell line
were as follows, shMer1 = 0.0013 (**), shAxl9 = NS, and shAxl8 = NS. (g) A172
glioblastoma control (shControl), Mer-inhibited (shMer1B) and Axl-inhibited (shAxl8) cells
were plated at equal densities in the upper chamber of a transwell. Total cumulative number
of cells that successfully migrated through a polycarbonate membrane with 8 µm pores was
measured every 15min and is represented by a cell index that is normalized to shControl.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Oncogene. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 March 03.

Rogers et al.

Page 15

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Figure 2.

Inducible Mer RTK inhibition impedes migration. (a) Immunoblot of Mer and Axl
expression in the A172 glioblastoma cell line following transduction with doxycyclineinducible shRNA. NTV represents the parental line following introduction of a nontargeting vector. i-shMer and i-shAxl are clones derived from the parental line following
introduction of inducible shRNA constructs against Mer and Axl, respectively, shown
without (−) and with (+) doxycycline induction. Tubulin is shown as a protein loading
control. (b) Uninduced (−) and induced (+) control (NTV), Mer-inhibited (i-shMer) and
Axl-inhibited (i-shAxl) cells were plated at equal densities in the upper chamber of a
transwell. Cells that successfully migrated through a polycarbonate membrane with 8 µm
Oncogene. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 March 03.

Rogers et al.

Page 16

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

pores were stained and optic density was measured. Bar graph represents migration relative
to normalized induced (+) NTV. Mean values and standard error were derived from three
independent experiments. Means were statistically compared with the induced (+) NTV with
a Student’s t-test. P-value for induced (+) i-shMer = 0.028 (*), whereas all other statistical
comparisons were non-significant.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Oncogene. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 March 03.

Rogers et al.

Page 17

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Figure 3.

Inhibition of Mer RTK with monoclonal antibody impedes migration. (a) Immunoblot of
Mer and Axl protein expression following treatment of A172 cells with anti-Mer
monoclonal antibody over a range of concentrations or species-specific mouse isotype
control IgG1 at 1.0 µg/ml. Tubulin is shown as loading control. Following 72h of no
treatment (left), treatment with anti-Mer monoclonal antibody at 1.0 µg/ml (middle) or
treatment with mouse IgG (right), cells were plated at equal densities in the upper chamber
of a transwell. Cells that successfully migrated through a polycarbonate membrane with 8
mm pores were stained. (b) Optic density of stained migratory cells was measured. Bar

Oncogene. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 March 03.

Rogers et al.

Page 18

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

graph represents migration relative to untreated cells. Mean values and standard error were
derived from three independent experiments. Means were statistically compared with
untreated cells with a Student’s paired t-test. P = 0.0141 (*).

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Oncogene. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 March 03.

Rogers et al.

Page 19

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Figure 4.

Mer add-back rescues glioblastoma migration. (a) Control (shControl), Mer knockdown
(shMer/EV) and Mer add-back (shMer/Mer) cells were plated at equal densities in the upper
chamber of a transwell. Cells that successfully migrated through a polycarbonate membrane
with 8mm pores were measured by changes in impedance. Bar graph represents migration
relative to shControl cells. Student’s t-test in comparison to shControl showed a significant
difference in migration compared with shMer/EV P = 0.0008 (***), while there was no
significant difference when compared with the shMer/Mer.

Oncogene. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 March 03.

Rogers et al.

Page 20

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Figure 5.

Mer RTK inhibition alters glioblastoma cellular morphology. (a) A172 shControl, Mer
knockdown shMer1A and shMer1B, Axl knockdown shAxl8, and (b) G12 shControl and
Mer knockdown shMer1 clonal glioblastoma cells were plated at equal density in complete
media, incubated overnight and visualized using light microscopy. Cells were seeded onto
glass coverslips at equal densities, formalin fixed, permeabilized and treated with antiphalloidin primary with rhodamine (red) secondary and anti-vinculin primary with FITC
(green) secondary antibodies to stain actin stress fibers and highlight focal adhesions,

Oncogene. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 March 03.

Rogers et al.

Page 21

respectively, and visualized by confocal microscopy. Photomicrographs are representative of
three independent experiments.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Oncogene. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 March 03.

Rogers et al.

Page 22

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Figure 6.

Mer RTK alters FAK activation and Rho migratory signaling. (a) Immunoblot of phosphoFAK and FAK expression in the A172 glioblastoma cell line following transduction with
constitutively expressed shRNA. shControl represents the parental line following
introduction of shRNA against GFP. shMer1A and shMer1B are clones derived from the
parental line following introduction of an shRNA construct against Mer. shAxl9 and
shAxl8are clones derived from the parental line following introduction of two independent
constructs against Axl. Tubulin is shown as a protein loading control. Cells were serum
starved for 2 h and stimulated with 200 nM Gas6 for 10 min. (b) Immunoblot of phospho-

Oncogene. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 March 03.

Rogers et al.

Page 23

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

FAK and FAK expression in theA172 glioblastoma cell line following introduction of a
doxycycline-inducible shRNA against a non-targeting vector (NTV) or Mer (i-shMer). ishMer(−) represents the clone was not treated with doxycycline (Mer expression intact),
while i-shMer(+) was doxycycline treated (Mer expression inhibited). Cells were serum
starved for 2h then treated with complete media replacement (Serum +), left untreated
(Serum−, Gas6−) or treated with 200 nM Gas6 for 10 min (Serum −, Gas6 +). Tubulin is
shown as a protein loading control. (c) Immunoblot of phospho-FAK and FAK expression in
the G12 glioblastoma primary cell line following transduction with constitutively expressed
shRNA. shControl represents the parental line following introduction of shRNA against
GFP. shMer1 and shAxl8 are clones derived from the parental line following introduction of
an shRNA construct against Mer or Axl, respectively. Cells were serum starved for 2h then
left untreated (Gas6−) or treated with 200 nM Gas6 for 10 min (Gas6 +). Tubulin is shown
as a protein loading control. (d) Immunoblot of Mer, Axl, RhoA and Rac1 expression in the
A172 control (shControl) and Mer knockdown (shMer1B) clones. Actin is shown as loading
control. Cells are shown in the presence of complete media and after a 3 h serum
deprivation. Data presented is representative of three independent experiments.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Oncogene. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 March 03.

