Cancer
Research

Review

Colorectal Cancer Heterogeneity and Targeted
Therapy: A Case for Molecular Disease Subtypes
Janneke F. Linnekamp1, Xin Wang2, Jan Paul Medema1, and Louis Vermeulen1

Abstract
Personalized cancer medicine is becoming increasingly important in colorectal cancer treatment. Especially for targeted therapies, large variations between individual treatment responses
exist. Predicting therapy response is of utmost signiﬁcance, as it
prevents overtreatment and adverse effects in patients. For EGFRtargeted therapy, many mechanisms of resistance have been
uncovered, for example, mutations in KRAS and BRAF, and
upregulation of alternative receptors. Currently, routine testing
for all known modiﬁers of response is unpractical, and as a result,
decision-making for anti-EGFR therapy is still largely based on
assessing the mutation status of an individual gene (KRAS).
Recently, comprehensive classiﬁcations of colorectal cancer have

been presented that integrate many of the (epi-)genetic and
microenvironmental factors that contribute to colorectal cancer
heterogeneity. These classiﬁcation systems are not only of prognostic value but also predict therapy efﬁcacy, including the
response to anti-EGFR agents. Therefore, molecular subtype–
based stratiﬁcation to guide therapeutic decisions is a promising
new strategy that might overcome the shortcomings of single gene
testing in colorectal cancer as well as in other malignancies.
Furthermore, the development of new agents in a disease subtype–speciﬁc fashion has the potential to transform drug-discovery studies and generate novel, more effective therapies. Cancer Res;

Introduction

comprehensive molecular proﬁles of individual tumors, it will be
challenging to determine the presence of all these modiﬁers of
therapy efﬁcacy in clinical practice. A potential approach to this
problem is the introduction of a comprehensive molecular
classiﬁcation of colorectal cancer that integrates many aspects
that contribute to cancer heterogeneity and predicts the efﬁcacy
of targeted agents. Recently, several groups have reported on
such a taxonomy of colorectal cancer using gene expression
data to identify distinct subtypes of this disease (4–10). Indeed,
in some cases, these subtypes differ in response to anti-EGFR
therapy (4, 10). Intriguingly, individual molecular features or
mutations cannot identify the molecular colorectal cancer
subtypes. We propose that these classiﬁcations will be very
valuable in stratifying biologic subgroups with a more homogeneous biology that can help to identify patients that beneﬁt
from particular targeted agents. This will not only prevent
overtreatment and adverse effects in patients but also helps to
reduce healthcare costs. Furthermore, the novel molecular
stratiﬁcations will facilitate development of new targeted
agents. Herein, we will mainly focus on anti-EGFR therapy in
colorectal cancer, but the principles can be generalized to many
other cancer types and targeted agents.

Colorectal cancer is a heterogeneous disease. Colorectal cancers
differ in clinical presentation, molecular characteristics, and the
prognosis conveyed to the patient. Critically, the response to
therapy also greatly varies among cancers. In recent years, a wealth
of insights have been obtained that link molecular features of the
tumor to the efﬁcacy of, in particular, target therapies. In colorectal
cancer, these agents mainly involve antibodies that target the
VEGF and the EGFR. Although for anti–VEGF-based regimens,
predictors of therapy efﬁcacy remain largely elusive, mechanisms
of resistance to anti-EGFR therapy are abundant. The role of
mutations in KRAS as a selection marker for anti-EGFR therapy
has been extensively validated, but it is estimated that only 35% of
KRAS wild-type tumors do respond to anti-EGFR therapy (1). The
list of additional genetic and epigenetic characteristics that are
associated with anti-EGFR therapy resistance, albeit sometimes
only in preclinical models, is rapidly expanding and includes,
among others, mutations in BRAF and PIK3CA, epigenetic silencing of EGFR expression, augmented expression of other receptor
tyrosine kinases (RTK), including MET, and high expression of the
MET ligand hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) in the tumor microenvironment (2, 3). Until it will be feasible to routinely obtain

75(2); 245–9. 2014 AACR.

Cancer Heterogeneity and Its Origins
1
Laboratory of Experimental Oncology and Radiobiology, Center
for Experimental Molecular Medicine, Academic Medical Center,
Amsterdam, the Netherlands. 2Center for Biomedical Informatics,
Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts.

Corresponding Author: Louis Vermeulen, Laboratory of Experimental Oncology
and Radiobiology, Center for Experimental Molecular Medicine, Academic
Medical Center, Amsterdam, the Netherlands. Phone: 31-20-5664777; Fax:
31-20-6977192; E-mail: l.vermeulen@amc.nl
doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-2240
2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

That no two tumors are alike is a well-known fact. There are
many aspects of cancer biology that affect the detected heterogeneity. Naturally, the organ in which the cancer develops as well as
the particular cell type within the organ that transforms inﬂuences
the resulting phenotype of the tumor greatly. In addition, the
presence (or absence) of individual (epi-) genetic aberrations
affects tumor features considerably although the relationship
between individual alterations and clinical behavior is not always
very clear cut. For example the presence of KRAS mutations is
associated with a slightly worse prognosis although large patient

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

245

Linnekamp et al.

series were required to draw this conclusion, indicating that the
relevance for the individual patient is limited (11). Furthermore, microsatellite instable (MSI) colorectal cancers generally
have a better prognosis and relatively rarely metastasize, yet
around 5% of metastatic colorectal cancers are MSI (12). Often
the combination of several genomic aberrations relates much
stronger to the clinical presentation of the disease. A clear
example of this notion is that BRAF mutations, in general,
only impact modestly on disease outcome; however, when
combined with MSI status, the effects are much more marked
and the relatively rarer BRAF-mutant microsatellite stable cancers have dismal prognosis (11). Additional characteristics of
tumor development and host factors that impact on colorectal
cancer heterogeneity include the order in which mutations
occur, the particular nondriver mutations present, genetic polymorphisms of the host, the actual cell of origin, external
inﬂuences such as diet, the polyclonal composition of the
tumor, the properties of the immune response, the contents
of the intestinal microbiome, and many more (13–15). Furthermore, colorectal cancers that occur in a context of an
inﬂammatory condition (colitis) have distinct molecular features, for example, frequent TP53 mutations, and display speciﬁc clinical behavior with a poorer disease outcome (16).
Interestingly, in breast cancer, the major disease subtypes are
closely related to various stages of the tissue hierarchy with, for
example, Claudin-low breast cancers resembling primitive
mammary stem cells, basal-like cancers early (bi-potent) progenitors and luminal breast cancers differentiated luminal
epithelial cells (17). It is commonly believed that these parallels might be related to distinct cells of origin although this
needs to be formally demonstrated (17, 18). Compared with
the impact of mutations and the organ giving rise to the tumor,
these contributing aspects to the functional and phenotypical
properties of the resulting tumor are much less well characterized, but there is no reason to assume that their inﬂuence is
marginal.

Colorectal Cancer Heterogeneity and
Predictors of Response
Traditionally, colorectal cancer is classiﬁed on the basis of
histologic characteristics (e.g., differentiation grade) and tumor
stage. Increasingly, molecular features including deﬁciency in
mismatch repair genes leading to MSI and individual mutations
(e.g., KRAS) are assessed, as they have been demonstrated to
relate to therapy response. For example, MSI tumors do not
beneﬁt from 5-ﬂuorouracil (5-FU) containing regimes in the
adjuvant setting, and KRAS-mutant colorectal cancers are resistant to antibodies targeting the EGFR (1, 19). Unfortunately,
these classiﬁcations leave much of the heterogeneous responses
to therapy unanswered. Indeed, more recent insights suggest
that not all activating KRAS mutations provide equal resistance
to anti-EGFR agents, and furthermore that other mutations can
also convey resistance to this therapeutic modality. For example, mutations in the genes encoding the downstream KRAS
effectors BRAF and PIK3CA are associated with a lack of
cetuximab response (2). Moreover, gene expression signatures
that correspond to KRAS, BRAF, and PIK3CA-activating mutations predict efﬁcacy of anti-EGFR therapy, suggesting that it is a
shared downstream component of these pathways that mediates the resistance (20). Recently, several other modes of

246 Cancer Res; 75(2) January 15, 2015

resistance against anti-EGFR therapy have been detected that
involve direct mutations within EGFR that impair binding of
cetuximab, thereby preventing its effect (21). Interestingly,
tumors that harbor these mutations still respond to panitumumab as this binds to a distinct epitope of the molecule.
Furthermore, silencing of EGFR by EGFR gene methylation has
been reported to underlie the failure of anti-EGFR antibody
therapy (3).
Following increased interests in the role of the microenvironment in cancer biology, it was discovered that signals
produced by either the cancer cells themselves, or by stromal
ﬁbroblasts, such as HGF in some tumors, activate parallel RTK
pathways that render colorectal cancer cells insensitive to antiEGFR therapy (22). This notion was further supported by the
ﬁnding that the level of serum HGF relates to the efﬁcacy of
this treatment modality in patients with KRAS wild-type disease (23). In addition to HGF, overexpression of insulin-like
growth factor I produced by cancer cells itself has been suggested to mediate resistance to cetuximab (24). Intriguingly,
besides stimulation of parallel RTK pathways by ligands, also
ampliﬁcations and upregulation of alternative RTKs convey
resistance to anti-EGFR therapy as the case of HER2 shows
(25).
The variety of resistance mechanisms reveals that it will be
extremely difﬁcult to develop biomarkers that can be routinely
used in clinical practice to identify patients that are likely to
beneﬁt from anti-EGFR therapy. In fact, even comprehensive
genetic proﬁles of the cancer will not reveal all resistant
patients, as expression of microenvironmental factors also
inﬂuences response. In addition, it was recently revealed that
the inefﬁciency of BRAF inhibitors in most BRAFV600E-mutant
colorectal cancers is due to activation of the EGFR–PI3K pathway in colorectal cancer cells (26). This feedback loop is not
present in melanoma cells harboring the same mutation, thereby explaining the disparity in efﬁcacy of these inhibitors. This
example illustrates that the speciﬁc and complex context in
which mutations occur, in this case cell type, greatly affects the
effects of these mutations and their inﬂuence on the response
of targeted agents. Therefore, we propose a less mutationcentered view of patient stratiﬁcation to identify patients with
cancer who are likely to beneﬁt from particular therapeutic
interventions.

An Integrative Approach: Molecular Cancer
Subtypes
Recently, following developments in other cancer types, including breast cancer, pancreatic cancer, and brain cancer, we developed an unbiased classiﬁcation of colorectal cancer using wholegenome gene expression data. We identiﬁed three main colon
cancer subtypes (CCS) that are each characterized by distinct
(epi-)genetic and clinical properties (4). CCS1 tumors are characterized by mutations in KRAS and TP53 genes, display a high
activity of the Wnt signaling cascade, and show evidence of
marked chromosomal instability (CIN). CCS2 cancers are strongly enriched for MSI/CpG island methylator phenotype (CIMP)positive colorectal cancers with an immune cell rich inﬁltrate that
are often located in the ascending colon (right sided). To conclude, CCS3 tumors consist of both MSI and CIN tumors, but are
enriched for BRAF and PIK3CA mutations and display a mesenchymal phenotype. This molecular classiﬁcation sustained

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

Cancer Heterogeneity and Targeted Therapy

throughout patient-derived xenografting (4). Although CCS1 and
CCS2 tumors are characterized by a fairly good disease outcome,
CCS3 tumors have a dismal prognosis (Fig. 1). To explore the
origins of the various subtypes, we studied the relation of the
subtypes to common preneoplastic lesions in the intestine. We
found that CCS1 tumors display a strong adherence to tubular
adenomas and CCS3 cancers share an extensive gene expression
program with sessile serrated adenomas, suggesting a role of this
alternative route to colorectal cancer in the genesis of these
tumors. A number of groups have reported on similar classiﬁcations of colorectal cancer using comparable strategies (5, 7–10).
These additional taxonomies have been established on the basis
of their customized bioinformatic analysis on alternative datasets
and interpretation from different perspectives (27). In these

studies, the number of subtypes ranges from 3 to 6, but evident
relations between the subtypes can be detected (Fig. 1; ref. 28).
These molecular subtypes do show overlap with previous used
classiﬁcation systems (MSI, CIMP, CIN) or mutation status
(BRAF), but cannot be identiﬁed only based on single mutations
or (epi-)genetic features (Fig. 1).
Currently, much needed efforts are under way to obtain a
widely carried consensus on colorectal cancer subtypes to facilitate implementation in clinical practice and in prospective trials.
Critically, in this effort, a balance needs to be struck between
presentation of a comprehensive classiﬁcation of molecularly
distinct colorectal cancer subtypes, which can be very many, and
clinical relevance and applicability, which favors a rather limited
number of disease categories.

2.12, 2.22

CCS11

Low stroma3

Epithelial

Enriched for
KRAS mt
TP53 mt

Surface crypt4,
lower crypt4
CIN ++

Well
differentiated

WNT up

Better

+*

B-type5
CIN immune down6,
KRAS Mt6, CIN WNT up6
Goblet-like7, Enterocyte7,
TA7
CIN8
1.22

CCS21

Mucinous3
MSI

Enriched for
BRAF mt

CIMP ++
MSI ++

Poor
differentiated

Immune
response up

CIMP-H4
Better

?*

A-type5
dMMR6
Inﬂammatory7
MSI/CIMP-H8
1.12, 1.32

CCS31

Immunoglobuline3,
High stroma3
Mesenchymal

Mixed
group

CIN +
MSI +

Poor
differentiated,
mucinous

EMT up,
stroma
enriched

Poor

–*

Mesenchymal4, Mixed4
C-type5
CIN normal6, CSC6
Stem-like7
Invasive8

© 2015 American Association for Cancer Research

Figure 1.
Summary of the molecular classiﬁcation of colorectal cancers as reported in De Sousa E Melo et al. (4). Although the groups cannot be identiﬁed by a single mutation
or molecular feature, associations exist and are shown in orange. The red boxes represent the prognostic properties and the detected response to targeting
agents of the distinct subgroups in retrospective analysis. Other groups have reported on similar taxonomies that show a great overlap with the groups we found.
These relations based on similar associations with key molecular properties are illustrated in the violet column. dMMR, deﬁcient mismatch repair; CSC, cancer
1
2
3
4
5
stem cell; EMT, epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition. De Sousa e Melo et al. (4); Schlicker et al. (5); Perez-Villamil et al. (6); Budinska et al. (7); Roepman et al. (8);
6
7
8
Marisa et al. (9); Sadanandam et al. (10); TCGA (37).  , CCS1 are more sensitive toward monotherapy with EGFR-targeting agent cetuximab compared
with CCS3 tumors independent of KRAS mutational status. CCS2/MSI tumors infrequently metastasize.

www.aacrjournals.org

Cancer Res; 75(2) January 15, 2015

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

247

Linnekamp et al.

To date, most studies identifying colorectal cancer subtypes
mainly focus solely on gene expression data. However, in breast
cancer, for example, an increased molecular subtype resolution
with clinical relevance has also been obtained by including
copy number variation data in the classiﬁcation algorithm (29).
Furthermore, efforts emerge that use long noncoding RNA expression to identify colorectal cancer subtypes (30). It remains unresolved, however, how these subtypes relate to mRNA-based
classiﬁcations.

Disease Subtypes and Response to
Targeted Agents
The colorectal cancer disease subtypes that have been identiﬁed, besides being prognostic, also predict response to targeted therapies. For example, tumors belonging to the CCS3
subtype demonstrate resistance to cetuximab monotherapy in
metastatic colorectal cancer (4). Intriguingly, this effect was
independent of KRAS mutational status, suggesting that the
more comprehensive classiﬁcation of cancers can contribute
to predicting therapy sensitivity regardless of mutational status. Furthermore, also the tumor classiﬁcation presented by
Sadanandam and colleagues comprehends a molecular subtype that is resistant to anti-EGFR therapy (10). In addition, in
this study, a further subdivision of one of the subtypes was
proposed in which a previously detected gene set that predicts
anti-EGFR therapy efﬁcacy in colorectal cancer could identify
patients with high anti-EGFR response with very high accuracy.
This ﬁnding indicates that when speciﬁc molecular features are
critically predicting therapy sensitivity, such as mutations,
these are potentially subtype speciﬁc or might be more explicit
predictors within molecular subtypes rather than on the population as a whole. However, it remains unknown how the
other mutations that have been associated with therapy resistance, like BRAF and PIK3CA, are represented in the nonresponsive subgroups and to which degree the resistance of these
subtypes can be explained by the presence of aforementioned
mutations.
Besides anti-EGFR therapy, other agents have also been
proposed to be speciﬁcally active within particular colorectal
cancer subtypes such as detected within the studies described
above using genome-wide gene expression data. These include,
for example, anti-c-Met therapy to be predominantly effective
in the cetuximab-resistant transit amplifying (CR-TA) subtype
and FOLFIRI (a combination of irinotecan, 5-FU, and leucovorin) to be especially active within the poor-prognosis stemlike subtype (10). It will be critical, however, to validate these
observations in larger retrospective studies even before prospective clinical trials can be started on the basis of these
ﬁndings. Classiﬁcation of cell line panels such as from the
Sanger institute and Astra Zeneca, which have been studied
and proﬁled in large pharmacogenomics studies, within the
molecular subtypes such as detected in patients, identiﬁed
further subtype-speciﬁc vulnerabilities. These include, for
example, the sensitivity of the MSI, mesenchymal subtype
1.2 to Src inhibitors, and the good-prognosis, Wnt active
subtype 2.1 to Aurora kinase A inhibitors (5). However, these
interesting observations need to be further tested in preclinical
models.
Molecular subtypes detected in other cancer types are also
reportedly predictive of therapy response. For example, trastuzu-

248 Cancer Res; 75(2) January 15, 2015

mab, an antibody against HER2, is traditionally only used in
patients with breast cancer with an ampliﬁcation of the HER2
gene (31). More recently, however, no signiﬁcant association
between HER2 copy number status and beneﬁt could be
detected (32). In addition, not all HER2 ampliﬁed tumors
respond equally to trastuzumab (33). This suggests that trastuzumab response might not be HER2 speciﬁc and that other
tumor characteristics are involved. Again, more comprehensive
molecular subtype analysis might overcome the shortcoming
of single gene assessment. Indeed, breast cancer cell lines
representing the luminal subtype growth can be blocked by
trastuzumab, even in lines that do not display HER2 ampliﬁcation (34). In other preclinical studies, response to targeted
agents was also shown to be breast cancer subtype speciﬁc
(35). Finally, in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDA), an
unbiased classiﬁcation approach using gene expression data
identiﬁed three molecularly distinct subtypes with clinical
signiﬁcance (36). Also, in this case, marked distinct responses
to therapeutic interventions were detected. Of note, the "classical" PDA subtype with frequent KRAS mutations was demonstrated to be particularly sensitive to EGFR inhibition using
erlotinib (36). This supports the notion that KRAS mutation
status is an imperfect determinant of anti-EGFR therapy and
that identiﬁcation of subtype-speciﬁc vulnerabilities is a promising way forward. Clearly, molecular-based classiﬁcation as a
tool for treatment design has to be further investigated in
prospective trials before it can be implemented in clinical
practice.

Outlook
In the future, it is expected that development of novel
targeted therapeutic agents will take into account the extensive
heterogeneity that is present in colorectal cancer. This could be
achieved by performing vulnerability screens within series of
cell lines or primary cultures representative of the various
subtypes rather than on a cell line panel comprising the whole
range of colorectal cancer subtypes and stratiﬁed on the basis of
(individual) genetic aberrations. In this respect, it is interesting
to note that the colorectal cancer subtypes are so diverse that
the number of differentially expressed genes is >30% of all the
genes expressed. In comparison, the number of differentially
expressed genes between colorectal cancer and breast cancer
approaches a similar number (L. Vermeulen and X. Wang;
unpublished data). This fact stresses the notion that the molecular subtypes such as detected in colorectal cancer, most likely
beneﬁt from different therapeutic regimes, in a similar fashion
as patients with colorectal cancer beneﬁt from other therapies
than patients with breast cancer. Indeed, molecular colorectal
cancer subtypes should be considered distinct disease entities
and novel therapeutic modalities should be developed and
tested in clinical trials as such.

Disclosure of Potential Conﬂicts of Interest
No potential conﬂicts of interest were disclosed.

Grant Support
L. Vermeulen was supported by a Fellowship of the Dutch Cancer Society
(KWF) and an AICR grant (14-1164).
Received July 30, 2014; revised October 16, 2014; accepted November 3,
2014; published online January 15, 2015.

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

Cancer Heterogeneity and Targeted Therapy

References
1. De Roock W, Claes B, Bernasconi D, De Schutter J, Biesmans B, Fountzilas
G, et al. Effects of KRAS, BRAF, NRAS, and PIK3CA mutations on the efﬁcacy
of cetuximab plus chemotherapy in chemotherapy-refractory metastatic
colorectal cancer: a retrospective consortium analysis. Urol Oncol
2010;11:753–62.
2. De Roock W, De Vriendt V, Normanno N, Ciardiello F, Tejpar S.
KRAS, BRAF, PIK3CA, and PTEN mutations: implications for targeted
therapies in metastatic colorectal cancer. Urol Oncol 2011;12:
594–603.
3. Scartozzi M, Bearzi I, Mandolesi A, Giampieri R, Faloppi L, Galizia E, et al.
Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) gene promoter methylation and
cetuximab treatment in colorectal cancer patients. Br J Cancer 2011;104:
1786–90.
4. De Sousa E, Melo F, Wang X, Jansen M, Fessler E, Trinh A, de Rooij LPMH,
et al. Poor-prognosis colon cancer is deﬁned by a molecularly distinct
subtype and develops from serrated precursor lesions. Nat Med
2013;19:614–8.
5. Schlicker A, Beran G, Chresta CM, McWalter G, Pritchard A, Weston S, et al.
Subtypes of primary colorectal tumors correlate with response to targeted
treatment in colorectal cell lines. BMC Med Genomics 2012;5:66.
6. Perez-Villamil B, Romera-Lopez A, Hernandez-Prieto S, Lopez-Campos G,
Calles A, Lopez-Asenjo J-A, et al. Colon cancer molecular subtypes identiﬁed by expression proﬁling and associated to stroma, mucinous type and
different clinical behavior. BMC Cancer 2012;12:260.
7. Budinska E, Popovici V, Tejpar S, D'Ario G, Lapique N, Sikora KO, et al.
Gene expression patterns unveil a new level of molecular heterogeneity in
colorectal cancer. J Pathol 2013;231:63–76.
8. Roepman P, Schlicker A, Tabernero J, Majewski I, Tian S, Moreno V, et al.
Colorectal cancer intrinsic subtypes predict chemotherapy beneﬁt, deﬁcient mismatch repair and epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition. Int J
Cancer 2014;134:552–62.
9. Marisa L, de Reynies A, Duval A, Selves J, Gaub MP, Vescovo L, et al. Gene
expression classiﬁcation of colon cancer into molecular subtypes: characterization, validation, and prognostic value. PLoS Med 2013;10:e1001453.
10. Sadanandam A, Lyssiotis CA, Homicsko K, Collisson EA, Gibb WJ, Wullschleger S, et al. A colorectal cancer classiﬁcation system that associates
cellular phenotype and responses to therapy. Nat Med 2013;19:619–25.
11. Walther A, Johnstone E, Swanton C, Midgley R, Tomlinson I, Kerr D.
Genetic prognostic and predictive markers in colorectal cancer. Nat Rev
Cancer 2009;9:489–99.
12. Malesci A, Laghi L, Bianchi P, Delconte G, Randolph A, Torri V, et al.
Reduced likelihood of metastases in patients with microsatellite-unstable
colorectal cancer. Clin Cancer Res 2007;13:3831–9.
13. Abulí A, Lozano JJ, Rodríguez-Soler M, Jover R, Bessa X, Mu~
noz J, et al.
Genetic susceptibility variants associated with colorectal cancer prognosis.
Carcinogenesis 2013;34:2286–91.
14. Tosolini M, Kirilovsky A, Mlecnik B, Fredriksen T, Mauger S, Bindea G, et al.
Clinical impact of different classes of inﬁltrating T cytotoxic and helper cells
(Th1, th2, treg, th17) in patients with colorectal cancer. Cancer Res
2011;71:1263–71.
15. Iida N, Dzutsev A, Stewart CA, Smith L, Bouladoux N, Weingarten RA, et al.
Commensal bacteria control cancer response to therapy by modulating the
tumor microenvironment. Science 2013;342:967–70.
16. Jawad N, Direkze N, Leedham SJ. Inﬂammatory bowel disease and colon
cancer. Recent Results Cancer Res 2011;185:99–115.
17. Lim E, Vaillant F, Wu D, Forrest NC, Pal B, Hart AH, et al. Aberrant luminal
progenitors as the candidate target population for basal tumor development in BRCA1 mutation carriers. Nat Med 2009;15:907–13.
18. Visvader JE. Cells of origin in cancer. Nature 2011;469:314–22.
19. Ribic CM, Sargent DJ, Moore MJ, Thibodeau SN, French AJ, Goldberg RM,
et al. Tumor microsatellite-instability status as a predictor of beneﬁt from

www.aacrjournals.org

20.

21.

22.

23.

24.

25.

26.

27.

28.

29.

30.

31.

32.

33.

34.

35.

36.

37.

ﬂuorouracil-based adjuvant chemotherapy for colon cancer. N Engl J Med
2003;349:247–57.
Tian S, Simon I, Moreno V, Roepman P, Tabernero J, Snel M, et al. A
combined oncogenic pathway signature of BRAF, KRAS and PI3KCA
mutation improves colorectal cancer classiﬁcation and cetuximab treatment prediction. Gut 2013;62:540–9.
Montagut C, Dalmases A, Bellosillo B, Crespo M, Pairet S, Iglesias M, et al.
Identiﬁcation of a mutation in the extracellular domain of the Epidermal
Growth Factor Receptor conferring cetuximab resistance in colorectal
cancer. Nat Med 2012;18:221–3.
Luraghi P, Reato G, Cipriano E, Sassi F, Orzan F, Bigatto V, et al. MET
signaling in colon cancer stem-like cells blunts the therapeutic response to
EGFR inhibitors. Cancer Res 2014;74:1857–69.
Takahashi N, Yamada Y, Furuta K, Honma Y, Iwasa S, Takashima A, et al.
Serum levels of hepatocyte growth factor and epiregulin are associated with
the prognosis on anti-EGFR antibody treatment in KRAS wild-type metastatic colorectal cancer. Br J Cancer 2014;110:2716–27.
Scartozzi M, Mandolesi A, Giampieri R, Pierantoni C, Loupakis F, Zaniboni
A, et al. Insulin-like growth factor 1 expression correlates with clinical
outcome in K-RAS wild type colorectal cancer patients treated with cetuximab and irinotecan. Int J Cancer 2010;1947:1941–7.
Yonesaka K, Zejnullahu K, Okamoto I, Satoh T, Takeda M, Fujisaka Y, et al.
Activation of ERBB2 signaling causes resistance to the EGFR-directed
therapeutic antibody cetuximab. Sci Transl Med 2011;3:99ra86.
Prahallad A, Sun C, Huang S, Di Nicolantonio F, Salazar R, Zecchin D, et al.
Unresponsiveness of colon cancer to BRAF(V600E) inhibition through
feedback activation of EGFR. Nature 2012;483:100–3.
Wang X, Markowetz F, De Sousa E, Melo F, Medema JP, Vermeulen L.
Dissecting cancer heterogeneity–an unsupervised classiﬁcation approach.
Int J Biochem Cell Biol 2013;45:2574–9.
Sadanandam A, Wang X, Melo FDSE, Gray JW, Vermeulen L, Hanahan D,
et al. Reconciliation of classiﬁcation systems deﬁning molecular subtypes
of colorectal cancer -Interrelationships and clinical implications. Cell Cycle
2014;13:353–7.
Curtis C, Shah SP, Chin S-F, Turashvili G, Rueda OM, Dunning MJ, et al.
The genomic and transcriptomic architecture of 2,000 breast tumors
reveals novel subgroups. Nature 2012;486:346–52.
Chen H, Xu J, Hong J, Tang R, Zhang X, Fang J-Y. Long noncoding RNA
proﬁles identify ﬁve distinct molecular subtypes of colorectal cancer with
clinical relevance. Mol Oncol 2014;1–11.
Vogel CL, Cobleigh MA, Tripathy D, Gutheil JC, Harris LN, Fehrenbacher L,
et al. Efﬁcacy and safety of trastuzumab as a single agent in. J Clin Oncol
2002;20:719–26.
Paik S, Kim C, Wolmark N. HER2 status and beneﬁt from adjuvant
trastuzumab in breast cancer. N Engl J Med 2008;358:1409–11. Available
from: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/18367751
Nahta R, Yu D, Hung M-C, Hortobagyi GN, Esteva FJ. Mechanisms of
disease: understanding resistance to HER2-targeted therapy in human
breast cancer. Nat Clin Pract Oncol 2006;3:269–80.
Ithimakin S, Day KC, Malik F, Zen Q, Dawsey SJ, Bersano-Begey TF, et al.
HER2 drives luminal breast cancer stem cells in the absence of HER2
ampliﬁcation: implications for efﬁcacy of adjuvant trastuzumab. Cancer
Res 2013;73:1635–46.
Creighton CJ. Widespread molecular patterns associated with drug sensitivity in breast cancer cell lines, with implications for human tumors. PLoS
ONE 2013;8:e71158.
Collisson E a, Sadanandam A, Olson P, Gibb WJ, Truitt M, Gu S, et al.
Subtypes of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma and their differing
responses to therapy. Nat Med 2011;17:500–3.
The cancer genome atlas. Comprehensive molecular characterization of
human colon and rectal cancer. Nature 2012;487:330–7.

Cancer Res; 75(2) January 15, 2015

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

249

Colorectal Cancer Heterogeneity and Targeted Therapy: A Case for
Molecular Disease Subtypes
Janneke F. Linnekamp, Xin Wang, Jan Paul Medema, et al.
Cancer Res 2015;75:245-249.

Updated version

Cited articles
Citing articles

E-mail alerts
Reprints and
Subscriptions
Permissions

Access the most recent version of this article at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/75/2/245

This article cites 36 articles, 8 of which you can access for free at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/75/2/245.full#ref-list-1
This article has been cited by 3 HighWire-hosted articles. Access the articles at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/75/2/245.full#related-urls

Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal.
To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications Department at
pubs@aacr.org.
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications Department at
permissions@aacr.org.

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

