Oncotarget, Vol. 7, No. 3

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

The Toll-like receptor 5 agonist entolimod suppresses hepatic
metastases in a murine model of ocular melanoma via an NK
cell-dependent mechanism
Hua Yang1, Craig M. Brackett2, Vanessa Marie Morales-Tirado3, Zezhong Li1,
Qing Zhang1, Matthew W. Wilson3, Camille Benjamin2, Wayne Harris4, Edmund
K. Waller4, Andrei V. Gudkov2,5, Lyudmila G. Burdelya2, Hans E. Grossniklaus1
1

Department of Ophthalmology, Emory University, Atlanta, GA, USA

2

Department of Cell Stress Biology, Roswell Park Cancer Institute, Buffalo, NY, USA

3

 epartment of Ophthalmology, Hamilton Eye Institute, The University of Tennessee Health Science Center, Memphis, TN,
D
USA

4

Deparment of Hematology and Medical Oncology, Winship Cancer Institute, Emory University, Atlanta, GA, USA

5

Cleveland BioLabs, Inc., Buffalo, NY, USA

Correspondence to: H
 ans Grossniklaus, e-mail: ophtheg@emory.edu
	Lyudmila Burdelya, e-mail: Lyudmila.Burdelya@RoswellPark.org
Keywords: TLR5, entolimod, uveal melanoma, liver metastases
Received: November 10, 2015	

Accepted: November 23, 2015	

Published: December 08, 2015

ABSTRACT
Uveal melanoma (UM) is the most common primary cancer of the eye in adults
and progresses to metastatic disease predominantly of the liver in ~50% of patients.
In these cases, life expectancy averages just 9 months due to the lack of effective
treatment options. The Toll-like receptor 5 (TLR5) agonist entolimod (former name
CBLB502) rapidly activates TLR5-NF-κB signaling in hepatocytes and suppresses
growth of both TLR5-expressing and non-expressing tumors in the liver through
mobilization and activation of innate and adaptive immune mechanisms. The goal
of this study was to explore the potential of entolimod as an immunotherapeutic
agent against hepatic metastasis of UM using the TLR5-positive B16LS9 mouse
model of ocular melanoma. Mice were given seven subcutaneous injections of vehicle
or entolimod given 72 h apart started one day before, on the same day or three
days after intraocular injection of B16LS9 cells. All tested regimens of entolimod
treatment resulted in significantly reduced B16LS9 metastasis to the liver. Entolimod
induced mobilization of natural killer (NK) cells to the liver and stimulated their
maturation, differentiation and activation. Antibody-mediated depletion of NK cells
from mice abrogated entolimod's antimetastatic activity in the liver and eliminated
the entolimod-elicited in vitro cytotoxic activity of hepatic lymphocytes against
B16LS9 cells. These results provide pre-clinical evidence of entolimod's efficacy
against hepatometastasis of UM and support its further development as an anticancer
immunotherapeutic drug.

INTRODUCTION

to metastatic disease within 15 years of diagnosis. Most
metastasis of UM (80-90%) occurs in the liver [4, 5]. UM
patients with a “class 2” gene expression signature have an
extremely poor survival prognosis due to development of
detectable metastases in the liver within 3 years of primary
tumor diagnosis [6, 7]. There are currently no effective
treatments for metastatic UM and there is an average life
expectancy of 9 months from the time of detection of
metastases.

Uveal melanoma (UM) is the most common
primary cancer of the eye in adults, with 2,000–2,500
new diagnoses per year in the United States. Primary
UM tumors are usually treated with surgery (plaque
brachytherapy, enucleation of the tumor-bearing eye),
radiation therapy and/or thermotherapy [1–3]. Despite
these treatments, about 50% of all UM cases progress
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

2936

Oncotarget

Anticancer immunotherapy is emerging as a
powerful cancer treatment strategy, especially for patients
with recurrent and/or metastatic disease [8, 9]. One
approach to enhancing anti-tumor immune responses
is pharmacological activation of different Toll-like
receptors (TLRs), which play a key role in activation of
the innate immune system through their recognition of
specific pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs)
[10, 11]. Upon interaction with their ligand (the natural
PAMP or an engineered agonistic agent), TLRs engage
a set of adaptor proteins through homophilic interaction
of their Toll/IL-1 receptor (TIR) domains. This triggers
downstream signaling cascades leading to activation of the
transcription factor NF-κB. Activated NF-κB stimulates
expression of a number of target genes, including several
encoding pro-inflammatory cytokines and chemokines
that promote mobilization and activation of neutrophils,
Natural Killer (NK) cells and dendritic cells. These cells
play essential roles in innate immune responses and
are also involved in development of adaptive immune
responses through stimulation of T-cell activation.
Thus, recognition of PAMPs by TLRs is a key element
for induction of inflammatory responses, as well as for
instruction of immune responses against pathogens and
tumor cells.
The powerful immunoregulatory activity of TLRs
has led to consideration of agonists of several TLRs
(e.g., TLR7, TLR9) as anti-cancer immunotherapeutics
[12–14] and development of novel TLR agonistbased therapies aimed at stimulating host anti-tumor
immune responses [15, 16]. Our work has focused on
the immunotherapeutic potential of TLR5 stimulation
using the novel recombinant protein drug entolimod,
which is a pharmacologically optimized derivative of
the natural TLR5 ligand, bacterial flagellin. Details of
the high affinity interaction between flagellin/entolimod
and TLR5 were revealed by solving the crystal structure
of the complex [17], and the downstream signaling
cascade resulting from this interaction is well-established
[10, 11]. Compared to other TLR family members,
TLR5 has significant advantages in terms of safety for
potential clinical targeting due to the specific pattern of
TLR5 expression by mammalian tissues and the nature of
cytokines induced following TLR5 stimulation. Unlike
some other TLRs (e.g., TLR4), TLR5 signaling does not
result in a highly inflammatory, potentially dangerous
“cytokine storm.” Entolimod was originally described as
a radiation countermeasure based on its ability to reduce
radiation damage to normal tissues (but not tumors)
and improve their regeneration in mice and non-human
primates through TLR5-dependent activation of NF-κB
[18, 19]. The same TLR5-dependent cascade of molecular
events promoting cytokine expression and immune cell
stimulation provided the foundation for exploration of
TLR5 agonists as anticancer immunotherapeutics [20].

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Potent antitumor efficacy of flagellin and its
derivatives such as entolimod was demonstrated
in syngeneic and xenogeneic mouse models of
TLR5-expressing tumors of various origins and was
shown to involve stimulation of immune responses
[18, 20–24]. In addition, entolimod was found to
suppress growth of both TLR5-positive and TLR5negative tumors residing in the liver through activation
of TLR5 on hepatocytes. Syngeneic liver metastatic
models of colorectal CT26 and mammary 4T1 cancer
were used to show that the metastasis suppressive effects
of entolimod involved mobilization to and activation of
neutrophils and NK cells in the liver [20]. These data
led us to hypothesize that entolimod might effectively
suppress hepatic metastasis associated with UM.
We tested this hypothesis in a mouse model of UM
in which orthotopic intraocular B16LS9 UM tumors
spontaneously metastasize to the liver. Our results indicate
that systemic entolimod treatment led to a significant
reduction in the number of metastatic nodules in the
livers of mice in this model. This entolimod mediated
antimetastatic effect was associated with increased
blood-borne homing, maturation and activation of
NK cells in the liver, and was abrogated when mice
were depleted of NK cells before entolimod treatment.
Therefore, this study provides confirmation of entolimod’s
efficacy in suppressing hepatic metastasis through immune
stimulatory mechanisms involving NK cells and suggests
that entolimod could be used as a new therapy to treat
metastatic UM.

RESULTS
Entolimod treatment suppresses hepatic
metastasis of ocular melanoma
In this study, efficacy of entolimod in suppressing
liver metastasis was tested in the well-established and
previously described B16LS9 syngeneic UM mouse
model [25]. C57BL/6 mice were inoculated with B16LS9
tumor cells in the choroid of the right eye. Groups of mice
(n = 10 mice/group) were treated with seven s.c. injections
of vehicle (phosphate-buffered saline/ 0.1% Tween 80;
PBS-T) or entolimod (1 μg/mouse) given 72 h apart. The
vehicle treated group was treated beginning one day before
tumor cell inoculation. The three entolimod-treated groups
were treated beginning (i) one day before, (ii) on the same
day as, or (iii) three days after tumor cell inoculation.
Seven days after tumor cell inoculation, the tumor-bearing
eye was removed and intraocular tumor growth was
histologically confirmed in all mice (Figure 1A).
Although B16LS9 cells express functional TLR5
and respond to entolimod treatment with NF-κB
activation (indicated by p65 translocation to the
nucleus 30 min after in vitro treatment with entolimod

2937

Oncotarget

(Supplementary Figure S1)), there was no significant
difference in the size of primary melanomas in the eyes of
entolimod-treated (all three treatment schedules) versus
vehicle-treated mice as measured on Day 7 after tumor cell
administration (Figure 1A, Supplementary Figure S2A).
During following 3 weeks of observation, about 3–5 mice
in each group developed lung metastases and died on days
15–20 after tumor cell inoculation independently on
entolimod treatment (data not shown). On Day 21 after tumor
cell inoculation, the surviving mice (n = 5–7 per group) were
sacrificed to evaluate the effect of entolimod treatment on
livers and lung metastasis of B16LS9 tumors in this model.
The number of lung metastases was determined in one
section from each lung after hematoxylin and eosin staining.
There was not a significant difference in the number of lung
metastases in entolimod treated (all three treatment schedules)
versus vehicle-treated mice (P > 0.05, Supplementary Figure
S2B). In contrast, the number of metastases per liver was
significantly lower in all entolimod treated groups compared
to the vehicle treated control group (Figure 1B, 1C).
The lowest number of hepatic metastasis was observed
in the group of mice given entolimod beginning one day
before tumor cell inoculation (23.83 ± 11.37), slightly more
metastases were observed in the group given entolimod
beginning on the day of inoculation (34.2 ± 18.95), and the
highest number of hepatometastases was found in the group
that started entolimod treatment three days post-inoculation
(48.83 ± 23.24). The only statistically significant difference
between entolimod-treated groups was between the lowest
(treatment initiation one day before) and the highest
(treatment initiation three days after) numbers of metastases
(p < 0.05). There was no general toxicity observed in mice
due to entolimod treatment (no weight loss, mortality). Apart
from the presence of B16LS9 metastases, the hepatic tissue
from all mice exhibited normal morphology without any signs
of toxicity (no blood vessel damage, necrosis or vacuolar
changes in hepatocytes) at this time-point (data not shown).
These results demonstrate specific antitumor activity of
systemically administered entolimod against UM tumor
growth in the liver.

potential antitumor function [26–28], we next sought to
determine whether the increased number of NK cells in
the liver was due to proliferation of resident NK cells or
blood-borne homing of additional NK cells to the liver.
To assess NK cell proliferation, naïve mice were injected
s.c. with vehicle or entolimod (1 μg/mouse) followed
by BrdU as described in Materials and Methods. FACS
analysis performed at 5, 24, and 120 h post-treatment
showed a similar level of NK cell proliferation in the
livers of vehicle and entolimod-treated mice (~20% of
total NK cells in the liver incorporated BrdU) (Figure 2B).
This led us to hypothesize that entolimod stimulates
blood-borne homing of NK cells to the liver. To test
this hypothesis, we performed a homing assay in which
GFP-expressing splenocytes from naïve C57BL/6
mice were transfused via an intravenous injection into
naïve C57BL/6 mice immediately prior to entolimod
or vehicle treatment (single s.c. injection). Livers were
collected and processed for FACS analysis (including
staining with antibodies against NK cell-specific
markers) at different times post-treatment. This revealed
a significant increase in adoptively transferred (GFP+)
NK cells in the liver at 5 h after entolimod treatment
compared to vehicle treatment (Figure 2C). Levels of
these cells remained elevated for at least 24 h before
returning to control levels by 120 h post-treatment.
These results indicate that entolimod treatment of naïve
mice stimulates homing of NK cells to the liver via a
blood-borne mechanism.

Entolimod stimulates hepatic NK cell
maturation, differentiation, and activation
Immature NK cells within the liver undergo
maturation and differentiation following viral infections
[29, 30]. Using naïve non-tumor-bearing mice, we sought
to determine whether entolimod treatment stimulates
a similar pattern of hepatic NK cell maturation and
differentiation by following the acquisition of specific
markers of NK cell maturation [CD49b (DX5)] and
differentiation (CD11b and CD43) by cells in the hepatic
NK lineage (NK1.1+CD3ε-) using FACS as described
previously [29–31]. Within five hours after s.c injection
of entolimod (1 μg/mouse), the proportion of NK cells
in the liver with an immature phenotype decreased and
a corresponding increase in NK cells with a mature
phenotype was observed (Figure 3A). This shift continued
up to 24 h post-treatment, but then normalized by 120
h post-treatment. Mature, but not immature, NK cells
acquired a terminally differentiated phenotype within 5 h
of entolimod treatment, which was observed for at least 5
days after entolimod treatment (Figure 3B).
Having shown that entolimod promotes maturation
of NK cells in the liver, we next evaluated the effect of
entolimod on the activation status of both immature and
mature NK cells in the liver as indicated by Fas ligand

Entolimod treatment stimulates blood-borne
homing of NK cells to the liver
The previous studies in syngeneic liver metastatic
models of colorectal CT26 and mammary 4T1 cancer
demonstrated anti-metastasis activity of entolimod that
involved mobilization and activation of NK cells to the
liver [20]. Therefore, we investigated the role of NK cells
in the activity of entolimod in the UM model. In mice
given a single s.c. injection of entolimod, the number of
total NK cells in the liver was significantly increased at 5
h post-treatment and remained elevated for at least 24 h
before returning to normal levels by 120 h (Figure 2A).
Since the liver contains both resident and infiltrating
lymphocytes including NK cells in both populations with
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

2938

Oncotarget

Figure 1: Effect of entolimod treatment on liver metastasis of B16LS9 UM tumors following enucleation of the
tumor-bearing eye. (A) Representative pictures (4 × magnification) of H&E-stained sections of eyes with intraocular tumors from mice

injected with vehicle (PBS-T) or entolimod. Mice received two injections of entolimod (1 µg/mouse, s.c., on the day of tumor cell inoculation
and 72 h later) or vehicle control (PBS). Eyes were enucleated from mice seven days after B16LS9 cell inoculation. (B) Representative
photographs of H&E-stained sections of livers collected from mice 21 days after B16LS9 cell inoculation in the eye. Seven injections of
entolimod (1 µg/mouse, s.c., with 72 h intervals starting on the day of tumor cell inoculation) or vehicle control (PBS) were performed. Arrows
point to metastases. (C) Quantitative analysis of hepatometastases was performed by counting metastatic nodules in three H&E-stained
sections of each animal’s liver. The per-group mean number of metastases per liver ± SEM is shown with the number of analyzed
mice per group indicated in parentheses. Statistical significance was determined by Student’s t-test: *p = 0.0069; **p = 0.0233; and
***p = 0.0316 compared to vehicle group; #p = 0.0395 compared to entolimod treatment starting one day before inoculation.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

2939

Oncotarget

(FasL) and CD69 expression. Within the immature NK
cell population, the proportion of FasL-expressing cells
increased by 24 h after entolimod treatment and remained
elevated for at least 120 h (Figure 3C). Among mature
NK cells, the proportion of FasL-expressing cells was
not elevated until 120 h post-entolimod (Figure 3D). The
proportion of CD69+-expressing cells within both mature
and immature NK cell populations in the liver was elevated
at 5 h and 24 h after entolimod treatment (Figure 3C, 3D).
Taken together, these findings demonstrate that entolimod
treatment stimulates maturation, differentiation and
activation of NK cells within the liver.

reported23. This development program is associated with
progressive acquisition of effector function. Figure 4A
shows representative FACS plots for expression of CD27
and CD11b within the hepatic NK cell lineage isolated
from one mouse from each group treated with vehicle or
entolimod every 3 days starting on the day of B16LS9
tumor cell inoculation (7 injections total). Entolimod
treatment significantly reduced the less developed NK
cell populations (CD27–CD11b− and CD27+CD11b−).
In addition, entolimod treatment significantly increased
the more developed double positive CD11b+CD27+
population (p < 0.05), which is associated with a cytotoxic
phenotype. Entolimod had no effect on the most highly
developed CD27−CD11b+ NK cell population, which
is thought to lack effector function. Collectively, these
results demonstrate that the entolimod-induced NK cell
response in the liver is associated with an increase in the
development of NK cells into a more mature phenotype
equipped with effector function.
Next we assessed the effect of entolimod treatment
on the maturation status of NK cells in the livers of mice
bearing UM liver metastases 21 days after B16LS9 tumor
cell inoculation. Figure 4B shows representative FACS
plots (from one vehicle-treated mouse and one entolimodtreated mouse) for the hepatic NK lineage (NK1.1+CD3ε−)
with analysis of maturation marker CD49b, as described
above for non-tumor-bearing mice with percentage
indicating the proportion of mature and immature NK
cells among total liver lymphocytes and within NK cell
population. Figure 4C provides the quantitative results of

Entolimod stimulates NK cell development and
maturation in the livers of UM tumor-bearing
mice
Our finding that entolimod treatment results in
increased percentage of mature, differentiated and
activated NK cells in the livers of naïve C57BL/6 mice
suggests a role for NK cells in the antimetastatic effects
of entolimod observed in the B16LS9 UM model. First
we investigated the effect of entolimod on NK cell
development in the liver of mice with metastatic B16LS9
tumors. Four distinct stages of NK cell development
were defined based upon surface expression of CD27 and
CD11b that starts with low expression of both CD27 and
CD11b and leads through the following stages: high CD27
and low CD11b expression, then high CD27 and high
CD11b and then low CD27 and high CD11b, as previously

Figure 2: Entolimod-elicited NK cell response in the livers of naïve non-tumor-bearing mice. (A) Absolute numbers of NK

cells in livers of intact (0 h time point) and entolimod-treated C57BL/6 mice. Liver cells were harvested from mice 5, 24 or 120 h after
receiving a single s.c. injection of 1 μg entolimod by in vivo perfusion and in vitro digestion. The total cell population was stained with a
cocktail of antibodies against CD45, CD3ε, and NK1.1 in order to quantify NK cells (CD45+ CD3ε–NK1.1–) by FACS. (B) Percentage of
BrdU positive NK cells among total NK cells in the liver. Livers were collected as in (A) except that mice were injected with 1 mg BrdU
i.p. 2 hours before liver cells were harvested. Staining was performed using the antibody cocktail described in (A) plus anti-BrdU antibody.
(C) Absolute numbers of GFP+ NK cells in livers of mice given GFP-expressing splenocytes by i.v. adoptive transfer immediately before
treatment with vehicle (0 h) or entolimod as described in (A). Livers were collected at the indicated time points as in (A) and total liver cells
were analyzed by FACS. Transferred NK cells were defined as CD45 + GFP + CD3ε− NK1.1 +. For A–C, mean ± SEM values are shown for
groups of 5 mice. (*) Student t-test shows significant difference from untreated groups (0 h time point), P < 0.05.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

2940

Oncotarget

the analysis for groups of 3 mice treated with either vehicle
or entolimod (mean ± SEM). The average percentage of
NK cells among total liver lymphocytes was significantly
increased from 4.1% in the vehicle-treated group to 7.5%
in the entolimod-treated group (Figure 4C, left). Within
the total NK cell population in the liver, entolimod
treatment led to a reduced proportion of immature NK
cells (from 33.7% to 21.8%) and a concomitant increase in
the proportion of mature NK cells (from 58.8% to 72.4%)
(Figure 4C, right).
In addition to NK cells, NKT cells also reside in the
liver and can have anti-tumor functions [26, 32]. Since
entolimod treatment was previously shown to increase
the absolute number of NKT cells in the livers of naïve
mice [20], we sought to investigate whether entolimod
affects NKT cells in UM tumor-bearing livers. NKT cells
were defined as CD3+NK1.1+ cells and further subdivided
into CD49b+ mature and CD49b− immature populations.
FACS analysis with antibodies against the appropriate
markers was performed on total liver cells isolated from
UM bearing mice 21 days after B16LS9 tumor cell ocular
inoculation and treated with entolimod/PBS every 3 days

starting on the day of tumor cell inoculation (Figure 5).
In contrast to what was shown in the livers of naïve mice,
entolimod treatment had no effect on the percentage of
NKT cells or their maturation status in the livers of UM
tumor-bearing mice. Therefore, in mice bearing UM
tumors, entolimod specifically induces mobilization to
the liver and maturation of NK cells without having any
significant effect on NKT cells in the liver.

NK cells mediate the anti-tumor activity of
entolimod against UM liver metastases
To determine the relevance of the observed NK cell
response in the livers of entolimod-treated mice for the
drug’s antitumor activity, systemic administration of antiasialo GM1 antibody was used to deplete NK cells in the
context of the UM model. Mice were injected (i.p.) with
anti-asialo GM1 antibody (or isotype matched control
antibody) one day before intraocular B16LS9 tumor cell
inoculation, on the day of inoculation, and then once every
4 days for a total of 7 injections. Entolimod or PBS-T was
applied every 3 days starting on the day of tumor cell

Figure 3: Effect of entolimod treatment on the maturation and activation status of NK cells in the livers of nontumor-bearing mice. Liver cells were collected at the indicated time points (n = 6–30 mice/time point) after entolimod treatment

(single s.c. injection of 1 μg/mouse) by in vivo perfusion and in vitro digestion to assess the frequency of mature, differentiated, and
activated NK cells (CD45+ CD3ε–NK1.1+) by FACS (mean ± SEM). Data from a vehicle-treated group is shown as the “0” h time
point. (A) Mature NK cells were defined by acquisition of CD49b expression. (B) Intermediate differentiation status was defined as
CD11b+ CD43– and terminal differentiation status by CD11b+ CD43+. (C–D) Activated NK cells were defined by expression of FasL or
CD69. (*) Student t-test shows significant difference from untreated groups (0 h time point), P < 0.05.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

2941

Oncotarget

Figure 4: Entolimod induces development and maturation of NK cells in the liver of UM tumor-bearing mice.
(A) Hepatic lymphocytes were isolated from PBS-T (vehicle) and entolimod-treated mice 21 days after B16LS9 tumor cell inoculation
using Lymphocyte M separation media. Entolimod (1 μg/mouse) or PBS-T vehicle was administered by s.c. injection every 3 days starting
on the day of tumor cell inoculation (7 injections total). Representative images of FACS analysis of CD3−NK1.1+ cells divided based
on their expression of CD27 and CD11b. Four distinct populations, CD27+ CD11b−, CD27+ CD11b+ (double positive), CD27−CD11b+
and CD27−CD11b− (double negative) were examined. The bar graph on the right shows the cumulative results in each treatment group,
mean ± SEM, n = 3/group. (*) Student’s t-test shows significant difference between PBS-T- and entolimod-treated groups, P < 0.05.
(B) Representative images of FACS analysis and percentage of NK cells gated as CD3−NK1.1+ and then sub-gated based on CD49
expression. Red dashed arrow indicates the separation into CD49b− and CD49b+ populations. SSC, side scatter. (C) The average percentage
(mean ± SEM) of CD49b− and CD49b+ cells among total hepatic lymphocytes (CD3−) (left) and among CD3−NK1.1+ NK cells (right) per
liver was calculated for groups of mice treated as in (A). n = 3 mice/group. (*) Student t-test shows significant difference between PBS-Tand entolimod-treated groups, P < 0.05.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

2942

Oncotarget

inoculation (7 injections total). FACS analysis of liver cell
populations 21 day after B16LS9 tumor cell inoculation
confirmed reduction of NK cell levels in the liver by > 80%
following anti-asialo GM1 treatment (data not shown).
Seven days after tumor cell inoculation, the tumor-bearing
eye was enucleated. Histological examination of the
section of the tumor bearing eye with the largest tumor
area showed significantly increased intraocular tumor
burden in mice depleted of NK cells by anti-asialo GM1
antibody in comparison to those given isotype control
antibodies, regardless of whether the animals received
entolimod treatment or not (Supplementary Figure S2A).
This suggests the presence of a basal (entolimodindependent) level of innate NK cell-mediated antitumor
activity against UM. Pathological examination of lungs
collected from these mice 14 days after removal of the
tumor-bearing eye (i.e., on Day 21 post-inoculation)
showed that, with or without entolimod treatment, the
mean number of metastases in the lungs was significantly
higher in anti-asialo GM1 antibody-treated groups
compared to control IgG-treated groups. Thus, growth
of metastases in the lungs mirrored what was seen for
primary tumors in the eye, implying the presence of
systemic entolimod-independent innate NK cell activity
against UM tumors (Supplementary Figure S2B). This
was different in the liver, however, with entolimod
treatment leading to a significant reduction in the number
of metastatic nodules in mouse livers when comparing
entolimod-treated and vehicle-treated groups given no
antibody or control IgG antibodies (Figure 6A). The

mean number of hepatic metastases was reduced from
63.63 ± 12.55 to 30.38 ± 8.05 by entolimod treatment
in the absence of antibody (P = 0.04) and from 94.63 ±
10.94 to 54.63 ± 11.61 with IgG antibody treatment (P
= 0.03). In contrast, there was no significant difference
in liver metastasis between entolimod-treated and
vehicle-treated groups when the mice were pretreated
with anti-asialo GM1 antibody to deplete NK cells
(Figure 6A). This indicates that the effect of entolimod
on growth of B16LS9 metastases in the liver requires
NK cells. Consistent with the indication of a basal level
of entolimod-independent NK cell-mediated antitumor
activity in all organs (see above), the number of liver
metastases in NK cell-depleted mice (with or without
entolimod treatment) was significantly higher than that
seen in NK cell-sufficient mice (with or with entolimod
treatment). Taken together, these findings demonstrate
that the antimetastatic activity of entolimod in the liver is
mediated by an NK cell-dependent mechanism.
As a direct assay of the antitumor activity stimulated
by entolimod in vivo, we isolated the total lymphocyte
population from livers of naïve mice or mice inoculated
with B16LS9 tumor cells and treated with anti-asialo
GM1 antibodies (or control IgG) and entolimod (or
vehicle), as described above, and tested their cytotoxicity
towards B16LS9 target cells in vitro. In vitro cytotoxicity
(CT) assays were performed using different ratios of
effector cells (isolated liver lymphocytes) to target cells
(B16LS9 tumor cells). These assays revealed reduced CT
activity of the total hepatic lymphocyte population in UM

Figure 5: Entolimod has no effect on maturation of NKT cells in the liver. (A) Representative images of FACS analysis of

CD3+ lymphocytes analyzed for NK1.1 and CD49b expression. Left column, CD3+ cells were plotted against NK1.1. The double positive
population was gated. Right column, CD3+ cells were examined for NK1.1 and CD49b positivity, represented by the circle. The bar graph
on the right shows the cumulative results for each group, mean ± SEM, n = 3/group. Student’s t-test showed no significant difference
between PBS-T- and entolimod-treated groups.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

2943

Oncotarget

tumor-bearing mice compared with naive (nontumor-bearing) mice which could be explained by
immunosuppression developed in tumor-bearing animals
(Figure 6B). With entolimod treatment, however, CT
activity of liver lymphocytes against B16LS9 cells was not
only restored, but significantly increased. This effect was not
observed with hepatic lymphocytes isolated from anti-asialo
GM1 antibody-treated mice (Figure 6B), demonstrating a
requirement of in vivo entolimod-stimulated NK cells for
B16LS9 cell elimination. As seen with hepatic lymphocytes,
lymphocytes isolated from the spleens of naïve mice had a
higher level of CT towards B16LS9 cells than those isolated
from B16LS9 UM tumor-bearing mice (Supplementary
Figure S3). In addition, as for liver lymphocytes, the CT
of splenic lymphocytes was NK cell-dependent as indicated
by the effect of anti-asialo GM1 antibody treatment.
However, entolimod did not stimulate CT activity of splenic
lymphocytes. This provides additional evidence of the tissue
(liver) specificity of entolimod’s activity leading to NK cellmediated antitumor effects.

of liver metastasis observed in patients diagnosed with
uveal melanoma [33, 34]. We previously reported that
B16LS9 cells express low levels of MHC-I, but are highly
sensitive to interferon α2b via activation of intrinsic
hepatic NK cells [34]. Given our recent findings that
entolimod activates NK cells within the liver leading to
the development of powerful antitumor immune response
and suppression of colorectal and breast liver metastases,
we explored the ability of entolimod to suppress UM liver
metastases in B16LS9 model through NK cell-dependent
mechanism.
Our finding that B16LS9 cells respond directly to
entolimod treatment by NF-κB activation (Supplementary
Figure S1) indicates that entolimod might be expected to
have some antitumor effect through TLR5 stimulation on
B16LS9 tumor cells independently on TLR5 expression in
tumor microenvironment, as was previously demonstrated
in several other TLR5-positive tumor models [18, 21, 22].
However, entolimod did not show any antitumor
activity against intraocular B16LS9 tumor growth in
our experiments. This observation may be explained
by the eye being an immune privileged site [35] or by
the tested regimens of entolimod administration not
being optimal for producing an antitumor effect in
this particular tumor model. Similarly, B16LS9 lung
metastases rapidly developed without any signs of
tumor growth inhibition by entolimod treatment. In
contrast to what was seen for B16LS9 tumor growth in
the eye and metastasis to the lung, entolimod treatment

DISCUSSION
The goal of this study was to assess the antitumor
activity of the flagellin-based TLR5 agonist entolimod
against hepatic micrometastases that spontaneously
develop in mice with orthotopic uveal melanoma tumors in
the eye. We used a well-established mouse model of ocular
melanoma, B16LS9, which mimics the high frequency

Figure 6: Entolimod antitumor activity of against UM metastases is NK cell-dependent. (A) The number of hepatic

metastases per liver (mean ± SEM, n = 6 mice/group) on Day 21 after B16LS9 tumor cell inoculation is shown for groups treated with
vehicle (PBS-T), entolimod, PBS-T with control IgG antibody, entolimod with control IgG antibody, PBS-T with anti-asialo GM1 antibody
or entolimod with anti-asialo GM1 antibody (see text for details on treatments). Asterisks indicate statistically significant differences
(P ≤ 0.05) between groups determined by Student’s t-test. The difference between anti-asialo GM1 antibody treated groups and any other
group was statistically significant (p < 0.001). (B) In vitro cytotoxicity (CT) mediated by hepatic lymphocytes isolated from mouse livers on
Day 21 after B16LS9 tumor cell ocular inoculation (mean ± SD, 6 mice/group). Mice were treated as described in (A). Hepatic lymphocytes
were incubated with B16LS9 target cells at effector-to-target cell ratios of 12.5:1, 25:1 and 50:1. (*) Student t-test shows significant
difference between the indicated groups, P < 0.05.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

2944

Oncotarget

did have a significant suppressive effect on metastasis
to the liver. A course of seven subcutaneous entolimod
injections given three days apart led to a significantly
reduced number of hepatic metastasis developing from
intraocular B16LS9 tumors regardless of when treatment
was initiated (starting one day before, on the same day,
or three days after tumor cell inoculation (Figure 1). Of
the three tested regimens of entolimod treatment, initiation
of treatment before tumor cell inoculation was most
effective, followed by initiation of treatment on the day of
inoculation, and then by initiation of treatment four days
post-inoculation. These differences suggest development
of an immunosuppressive mechanism during the
initial stages of B16LS9 tumor establishment, growth
and metastasizing. Overall, these data support our
hypothesis that entolimod has a specific effect on the
liver microenvironment due to stimulation of TLR5 on
hepatocytes and that the modified microenvironment is not
conducive for B16LS9 UM metastatic growth, presumably
due to enhanced presence of immune cells with antitumor
activity.
Given that NK cells play an important role in host
immune responses against cancer [11] and in therapyinduced antitumor responses (as previously described in
treatments with interferon α2b [34] and entolimod [36]),
we sought to determine whether efficacy of entolimod
against B16LS9 liver metastasis involves NK cells.
The first step in this was to perform FACS analysis
of the immune cell content in livers from naïve and
B16LS9 tumor-bearing mice after entolimod treatment.
This showed that entolimod treatment increased the
percentage of NK cells in the livers of both naïve and
tumor-bearing mice. The NK cell response elicited by
entolimod was not due to proliferation of NK cells in the
liver, but rather blood-borne homing of new cells to the
tissue. In addition to promoting recruitment of NK cells
to the liver, entolimod stimulated maturation (CD49b
marker) and differentiation (CD11b and CD43 or CD27
markers) of NK cells equipped with effector function
in the liver [37, 38]. CD27 is a key marker of the NK
cell lineage, bisecting the mature NK cell pool into two
functionally distinct subsets: the NK cell subset with low
CD27 has a higher threshold for stimulation and appears
to be tightly regulated by the expression of NK cell
inhibitory receptors, while the NK cell subset with high
expression of CD27 displays a greater effector function,
exhibits a distinct tissue distribution and responsiveness
to chemokines, and interacts with dendritic cells [39]. Our
results showed a significant increase in the more highly
developed CD27+CD11b+ NK cell population in the mouse
liver after entolimod treatment (compared to vehicle
treatment) and a reduction in the less developed CD27CD11b- and CD27+CD11b- subsets (Figure 5A). Since
CD27-CD11b- and CD27+CD11b- subsets act as precursors
capable of giving rise to effector cells when needed
[37], we conclude that entolimod stimulated these two
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

less developed NK cell populations to differentiate into
CD11b+CD27+ NK cells with effector function [38, 40].
Interestingly, CD11b+CD27− NK cells, which are highly
developed but lack effector function, are not significantly
affected by entolimod treatment.
The changes in NK cell phenotype observed following
entolimod treatment are consistent with activity of this
cell population playing a role in the drug’s anti-metastatic
effects. This was demonstrated to indeed be the case by
comparing the effects of entolimod treatment on B16LS9
UM liver metastasis in NK cell depleted (anti-asialo GM1
antibody-treated) versus NK cell sufficient (isotype control
antibody-treated) mice (Figure 6). This experiment clearly
showed that the inhibitory effect of entolimod on growth
of B16LS9 metastases in the liver requires NK cells while
also revealing a basal level of entolimod-independent NK
cell-mediated antitumor activity. The involvement of NK cells
in the activity of entolimod in the UM model is in line with
our earlier studies demonstrating that entolimod treatment
suppressed liver metastasis of mouse 4T1 breast and CT26
colon tumors via an NK cell-dependent mechanism [20].
In contrast to what was observed for NK cells,
entolimod treatment did not have any significant impact on
the level of NKT (CD3+NK1.1+ ) cells in the mouse liver
(Figure 5B). Although these cells share some properties
with NK cells (e.g., cytolytic activity), NKT lymphocytes
are considered part of the adaptive immune system since
they express a T-cell receptor. Adaptive immune responses
differ from innate immune responses in that they are not
immediate, requiring 3–5 days for clonal expansion and
differentiation of antigen-specific effector lymphocytes
[41], and in that they display “memory” resulting in more
rapid and robust responses upon subsequent encounters
with a given antigen. NKT cells, in contrast to NK cells,
respond to antigen presented by the atypical MHC Class
I molecule. Our finding that entolimod did not stimulate
NKT cell fractions is consistent with the low MHC-I
expression of B16LS9 tumor cells [34].
The in vitro study of CT activity of lymphocytes
confirmed the critical role in entolimod mediated tumor cell
elimination by demonstrating the inhibited cytotoxicity of
hepatic lymphocytes isolated from mice after depletion of
NK cells with anti-asialo GM1 antibody with and without
entolimod treatment against B16LS9 tumor target cells. It
is important to note that innate CT activity of both hepatic
and splenic lymphocyte populations against B16LS9
tumor cells in vitro was lower in B16LS9 tumor-bearing
mice than in naïve (non-tumor-bearing) mice suggesting
the development of tumor-associated immunosuppression.
Entolimod specifically restored and, in fact, increased the
antitumor lymphocyte function in the liver, but not in
the spleen. This finding provides further support for the
key role of hepatocytes in entolimod-elicited antitumor
immune responses.
In summary, this study demonstrates that the TLR5
agonist entolimod potently suppresses hepatic metastasis
2945

Oncotarget

in the mouse B16LS9 ocular melanoma model when
administered before or after tumor cell inoculation.
Entolimod treatment stimulated mobilization of NK
cells to the mouse liver and promoted their maturation
and activation. Antibody mediated depletion of NK cells
from mice completely abrogated the antimetastatic effect
of entolimod in vivo and eliminated in vitro antitumor
cytotoxic activity from hepatic lymphocyte populations.
Together with other published studies demonstrating
sensitivity of uveal melanoma to NK cell cytotoxicity
in mouse and human xenograft models [34, 42], this
work suggests that entolimod could be used clinically to
effectively prevent and treat liver metastases arising from
ocular melanoma due to its potent effects on NK cells in
the liver.

sterile PBS containing 0.1% Tween 80 (PBS-T) to a
final concentration 0.01 mg/ml for treatment of mice by
s.c. injection. Entolimod was diluted in complete cell
culture medium for in vitro use. Tumor necrosis factoralpha (TNF) was ordered from PeproTech (Rocky Hill,
NJ) and used as a positive control for detection of NFκB activation using by the p65 nuclear translocation
immunofluorescence assay.

In vivo model of hepatic metastasis from
intraocular B16LS9 tumors
B16LS9 cells were inoculated into the posterior
compartment of the right eye using a transcorneal technique
that allows the inoculated cells to remain in the eye [34, 44].
For each inoculation, 5 × 105 cells were delivered in a volume
of 2.5 µl. The mice were anesthetized with intraperitoneal
injection of the ketamine/xylazine mixture and a tunnel
was prepared from the limbus within the cornea, sclera, and
ciliary body to the choroid with a 30-gauge needle under the
guidance of a dissection microscope. The tip of a 10 µl glass
syringe with a blunt metal needle (Hamilton, Reno, NV) was
used to introduce 2.5 µl of cell suspension (5 × 105 cells)
into the posterior compartment through the needle track. The
right eye was enucleated (removed) 7 days after tumor cell
inoculation [45].

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Mice
C57BL/6 mice were purchased from Jackson
Laboratories (Bar Harbor, ME). C57BL/6-Tg(UBC-GFP)
30Scha/J mice (referred to as GFP mice) were bred and
maintained at RPCI. The experiments with tumor-free
mice were performed at RPCI and followed protocols
approved by the RPCI Institutional Animal Care and Use
Committee (IACUC). All experiments with the B16LS9
spontaneous metastatic model were conducted at EMORY
according to the Guiding Principles in the Care and Use
of Animals and conformed to the ARVO Statement for the
Use of Animals in Ophthalmic and Vision Research.

Entolimod treatment
Each mouse received 1µg of entolimod in PBS
containing 0.1% Tween 80 (PBS-T) in an injection
volume of 100 ml or an equal volume of PBS-T (vehicle
control) by subcutaneous injection, repeated every 3 days.
Three groups of mice (n = 10 /group) were treated with
entolimod with different times of treatment initiation
relative to tumor cell inoculation: (i) 1 day before tumor
cell inoculation (7 total injections), (ii) on the day of tumor
cell inoculation (7 total injections), or (iii) on the 4th day
after tumor cell inoculation (6 total injections). A 4th
group of 10 mice was given vehicle (PBS-T) injections
starting 1 day before tumor cell inoculation, as a control
group. Mice were euthanized and livers were harvested 21
days after tumor cell inoculation.
For the experiment testing the effect of NK cell
depletion on entolimod’s efficacy against B16LS9
liver metastasis, mice were inoculated in the right eye
with B16LS9 tumor cells followed by enucleation and
entolimod/vehicle treatment starting on the day of tumor
cell inoculation (7 total injections). In addition, however,
the mice received intraperitoneal (i.p.) injections of
anti-asialo GM1 antibody or rabbit IgG isotype control
antibody (100 μg/200 µl per injection, Wako Laboratory
Chemicals, Richmond, VA), as previously described [20].
The antibody were injected 24 hours before tumor cell
inoculation, 30 minutes before the first entolimod/vehicle
injection, and every 4 days thereafter (8 injections total).

Tumor cells
The mouse B16LS9 melanoma cell line was kindly
provided by Dario Rusciano, Friedrich Miescher Institute,
Basel, Switzerland. These cells express high levels of
c-Met and spontaneously metastasize to the liver [43].
B16LS9 cells were maintained in RPMI 1640 medium
(MediaTech, Manassas, VA) supplemented with 10% fetal
bovine serum (Hyclone, Logan, Utah), 1% L-glutamine
(Hyclone), 2.5% HEPES (Lonza, Walkersville, MD),
1% sodium bicarbonate (Hyclone), 1% MEM essential
vitamins (Hyclone), and 1% penicillin/streptomycin
(Hyclone) in a 75-cm2 tissue culture flask (T-75; BD
Biosciences, Franklin Lakes, NJ) in a CO2 incubator
(Kendro, Asheville, NC) at 37°C with 5% CO2. For
inoculation into mice, a suspension of B16LS9 cells was
prepared in phosphate buffered saline (PBS) just prior to
inoculation.

Reagents
Entolimod was provided by Cleveland BioLabs,
Inc. (Buffalo, NY). Entolimod stock solution
(1 mg/ml in PBS) was stored at −80°C and diluted with
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

2946

Oncotarget

For entolimod treatment of naïve (non-tumorbearing) mice, a single s.c. injection of entolimod
(1 μg in 100 ml volume) was administered to each mouse.

% Specific release = [(Experimental release−
Spontaneous release)/(Maximum release−Spontaneous
release)] × 100.

Histological analysis of enucleated eyes and
lungs and livers collected from B16LS9
tumor-bearing mice

NK cell isolation and flow cytometry
For analysis of NK cells in naïve C57BL/6 mice,
livers were collected at the indicated times post-treatment
by in vivo perfusion with a solution of 0.5 µM EGTA
(Sigma-Aldrich) containing 0.2 mg/mL collagenase type
IV (Worthington Biochemical, Lakewood, NJ) followed
by mechanical disruption and in vitro digestion for 30
minutes at 37°C. Cells were then passed through a 70 µM
cell strainer. Single cell suspensions were stained for 20
minutes at 4°C with the following cocktails of monoclonal
antibodies (mAbs): (1) Pacific Blue CD45 (clone 30–F11),
Brilliant Violet (BV) 711 CD3ε (clone 145–2C11),
PE-Cy5 NK1.1 (clone 29A1.4); (2) Pacific Blue CD45
(clone 30–F11), BV711 CD3ε (clone 145–2C11),
PE-Cy5 NK1.1 (clone 29A1.4), PE-Cy7 CD49b (clone
DX5), Ax700 CD11b (clone M1/70), PE CD43 (clone
1B11); (3) Pacific Blue CD45 (clone 30–F11), BV711
CD3ε (clone 145–2C11), PE-Cy5 NK1.1 (clone 29A1.4),
PE-Cy7 CD49b (clone DX5), PE FasL (clone MFL3),
BV605 CD69 (clone H1.2F3). For the experiment
involving NK cell proliferation by BrdU incorporation,
1 mg BrdU was administered i.p. 2 h prior to collection
and processing of livers for FACS. Cells were stained
with antibodies in pane 1 in addition to an anti-BrdU
antibody according to manufacturer’s instructions
(BD Biosciences).
For NK cell analysis in UM tumor-bearing
mice, livers and spleens were excised from entolimod/
PBS-T treated mice (started on the day of tumor cell
inoculation, as described above) 21 day after tumor cell
inoculation and homogenized with glass slides. Cells
were gently forced through a sterile 70-µm nylon cell
strainer (BD Biosciences, Bedford, MA) with a sterile
syringe. Viable lymphocytes were isolated from the cell
suspension by density separation using Lympholyte-M
cell separation medium. After centrifugation at 1500 × g
for 20 minutes at room temperature, the second layer of
cells (containing lymphocytes) was carefully removed,
diluted with fresh medium and centrifuged at 800 x g for
10 minutes, washed three times in the medium, counted,
and used for staining with cell type-specific markers.
CD3− NK cells were identified by positive staining with
FITC anti-mouse NK1.1 (aka NKR-P1C, LY-55; PK136)
(BD Pharmingen, San Diego, CA), PE anti-mouse
pan-NK cells (BD Pharmingen, San Diego, CA) and
anti-mouse CD3 (17A2) (eBioscience, San Diego, CA).
The activation status and maturation stage of NK cells
were determined by staining the cells with mAbs against
CD11b (M1/70.15) (Invitrogen, Camarillo, CA) and CD27

Enucleated eyes removed from mice 7 days after
B16LS9 tumor cell inoculation were processed for light
microscopic examination. The eyes were fixed in formalin,
embedded in paraffin blocks and sectioned. Serial
5-μm-thick sections were stained with hematoxylin-eosin
(H&E) and evaluated for the presence and location of the
melanoma. The section with the largest tumor area in each
eye was photographed at x4, x10 and x40 magnification
(Olympus BX41; Olympus, Tokyo, Japan). The tumor size
was measured with ImageJ software (National Institutes of
Health, Bethesda, MD).
After enucleation, the mice were treated with
vehicle or entolimod as described and then euthanized
21 days after tumor cell inoculation. The livers and lungs
were collected from each mouse. The livers and lungs
were grossly examined, submerged in 4% neutral buffered
formaldehyde, and processed for light microscopic
examination. Three sections through the center of each
liver and one section of each lung were microscopically
evaluated (Olympus) for the presence of metastases,
the average number of metastases per liver (average for
three sections) and the number of lung metastases was
determined, as previously described [46, 47].

In vitro cytotoxicity assay
Liver and spleen lymphocytes were isolated using
Lympholyte-M cell separation medium (Cedarlane,
Hornby, Ontario, Canada) for use as effector cells in
in vitro cytotoxicity (CT) assays. CT was assessed using
the DELFIA® EuTDA Cytotoxicity kit (PerkinElmer,
Waltham, MA). Target cells (B16LS9 tumor cells) were
loaded with a fluorescence-enhancing ligand (BATDA, bis
(acetoxymethyl) 2,2′:6′,2′′-terpyridine-6,6′′ –dicarboxylate)
for 30 minutes at 37°C, then washed and co-incubated
with effector cells at 12.5:1, 25:1, 50:1 lymphocyteto-target cell ratios in V-bottom 96-well-plates in a total
volume of 200 µl of RPMI medium 1640 without phenol
red. Control wells contained target cells with no effector
cells (“spontaneous release”) or the lysed target cells by
supplemented lysis buffer for maximum fluorescence
release. CT was determined after 2 hours of incubation at
37°C by measuring the fluorescence released in 20 µl of
supernatant harvested from each well using a fluorescence
microplate reader. The percentage of specific lysis was
calculated as follows:

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

2947

Oncotarget

GRANT SUPPORT

(LG.7F9) (eBioscience, San Diego, CA). Data acquisition
and analysis were performed using a FACSAria instrument
(BD Biosciences, San Jose, CA) and FlowJo software
(Tree Star, Ashland, OR), respectively.

This work was supported by grants from NIH
(R01CA176001, P30EY06360) and Research to Prevent
Blindness, Inc. to H.E.G. and from Cleveland BioLabs,
Inc. to A.V.G. and L.G.B.

NK cell homing
Naïve splenocytes were collected from GFP mice
by mechanical disruption of spleens through a 40 µM cell
strainer followed by adoptive transfer via i.v. injection into
naïve C57BL/6 mice immediately prior to entolimod or
PBS treatment. Livers were harvested 5, 24, and 120 h
after treatment by in vivo perfusion followed by in vitro
digestion to assess presence of adoptively transferred NK
cells (CD45+ GFP+ CD3ε− NK1.1+) similarly as above by
FACS analysis.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
A.V.G. is a consultant and shareholder of and L.G.B.
has research support from Cleveland BioLabs. Inc., the
company developing entolimod for biodefense and
oncology applications. Other co-authors do not have any
conflicts of interest.

REFERENCES

In vitro p65 translocation assay

  1.	 Zimmerman LE, McLean IW, Foster WD. Statistical analysis
of follow-up data concerning uveal melanomas, and the
influence of enucleation. Ophthalmology. 1980; 87:557–564.

B16LS9 cells were cultured under standard
conditions and treated with 100 ng/ml entolimod, 10 ng/mL
TNF (positive control), or PBS (negative control) for 30
minutes at 37°C. For immunofluorescence staining, cells
were fixed with 10% paraformaldehyde for 5 min at room
temperature, then washed 3 times with PBS and incubated
with auto-fluorescence blocking solution containing 2%
glycine, 0.2% Tween 20, 0.2% Triton X-100 in PBS
(1 h, RT). The cells were then stained by the indirect
immunofluorescence method with 1:200 rabbit anti-p65
(Cell Signaling, Danvers, MA), followed by 1:500 donkey
anti-rabbit Alexa Fluor® 488 (Jackson Immuno Research
Laboratory, West Grove, PA) and 1:100 anti-phalloidin Alexa
Fluor® 647 (Invitrogen, Camarillo, CA). All antibodies were
diluted in blocking solution containing 5% normal donkey
serum, 0.2% Triton X-100, and 0.2% Tween 20 in PBS.
After staining, the cells were mounted with ProLong Gold
antifade reagent with DAPI (Invitrogen, Camarillo, CA) and
viewed under a confocal microscope. The DAPI counterstain
permits visualization of DNA in the blue channel and was
used to verify nuclear localization of p65.

  2.	 Bechrakis NE, Bornfeld N, Zoller I, Foerster MH. Iodine 125
plaque brachytherapy versus transscleral tumor resection in the
treatment of large uveal melanomas. Ophthalmology. 2002;
109:1855–1861.
 3.	 Desjardins L, Lumbroso-Le Rouic L, Levy-Gabriel C,
Dendale R, Delacroix S, Nauraye C, Esteve M, Plancher C,
Asselain B. Combined proton beam radiotherapy and
transpupillary thermotherapy for large uveal melanomas:
a randomized study of 151 patients. Ophthalmic Res. 2006;
38:255–260.
 4.	 Woodman SE. Metastatic uveal melanoma: biology and
emerging treatments. Cancer J. 2012; 18:148–152.
  5.	 Grossniklaus HE. Progression of ocular melanoma metastasis
to the liver: the 2012 Zimmerman lecture. JAMA Ophthalmol.
2013; 131:462–469.
  6.	 Onken MD, Worley LA, Tuscan MD, Harbour JW. An accurate,
clinically feasible multi-gene expression assay for predicting
metastasis in uveal melanoma. JMD. 2010; 12:461–468.
  7.	 Onken MD, Worley LA, Char DH, Augsburger JJ,
Correa ZM, Nudleman E, Aaberg TM, Jr., Altaweel MM,
Bardenstein DS, Finger PT, Gallie BL, Harocopos GJ, Hovland
PG, et al. Collaborative Ocular Oncology Group report number
1: prospective validation of a multi-gene prognostic assay in
uveal melanoma. Ophthalmology. 2012; 119:1596–1603.

Statistical analysis
The two-tailed unpaired Student’s t-test was
applied to determine whether the number and size of
metastatic melanoma nodules, amount of immune cells
and lymphocyte cytotoxic activity differed significantly
between vehicle-treated and entolimod-treated groups
(GraphPad Prism software). P values ≤ 0.05 were
considered statistically significant.

  8.	 Karan D, Holzbeierlein JM, Van Veldhuizen P, Thrasher JB.
Cancer immunotherapy: a paradigm shift for prostate cancer
treatment. Nature Rev Urol. 2012; 9:376–385.

ACKNOWLEGMENTS

  9.	 Mahoney KM, Rennert PD, Freeman GJ. Combination cancer
immunotherapy and new immunomodulatory targets. Nature
Rev Drug Discov. 2015; 14:561–584.

We wish to thank Tim Corson and Patricia Baker for
their help with manuscript preparation.

10.	 Rakoff-Nahoum S, Medzhitov R. Toll-like receptors and
cancer. Nature Rev. 2009; 9:57–63.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

2948

Oncotarget

11.	 Kawai T, Akira S. Toll-like receptors and their crosstalk with
other innate receptors in infection and immunity. Immunity.
2011; 34:637–650.

23.	 Rhee SH, Im E, Pothoulakis C. Toll-like receptor 5 engagement
modulates tumor development and growth in a mouse
xenograft model of human colon cancer. Gastroenterology.
2008; 135:518–528.

12.	 Adams S, O’Neill DW, Nonaka D, Hardin E, Chiriboga L,
Siu K, Cruz CM, Angiulli A, Angiulli F, Ritter E, Holman RM,
Shapiro RL, Berman RS, et al. Immunization of malignant
melanoma patients with full-length NYESO-1 protein using
TLR7 agonist imiquimod as vaccine adjuvant. J Immunol.
2008; 181: 776–784.

24.	 Sfondrini L, Rossini A, Besusso D, Merlo A, Tagliabue E,
Menard S, Balsari A. Antitumor activity of the TLR-5 ligand
flagellin in mouse models of cancer. J Immunol. 2006;
176:6624–6630.
25.	 Yang H, Jager MJ, Grossniklaus HE. Bevacizumab suppression
of establishment of micrometastases in experimental ocular
melanoma. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2010; 51:2835–2842.

13.	 Khan AL, Heys SD, Eremin O. Synthetic polyribonucleotides:
current role and potential use in oncological practice. Eur J
Surg Oncol. 1995; 21:224–227.

26.	 Racanelli V, Rehermann B. The liver as an immunological
organ. Hepatology. 2006; 43:S54–62.

14.	 Manegold C, Gravenor D, Woytowitz D, Mezger J, Hirsh V,
Albert G, Al-Adhami M, Readett D, Krieg AM, Leichman CG.
Randomized phase II trial of a toll-like receptor 9 agonist
oligodeoxynucleotide, PF-3512676, in combination with firstline taxane plus platinum chemotherapy for advanced-stage
non-small-cell lung cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2008; 26:3979–3986.

27.	 Hudspeth K, Pontarini E, Tentorio P, Cimino M, Donadon M,
Torzilli G, Lugli E, Della Bella S, Gershwin ME, Mavilio D.
The role of natural killer cells in autoimmune liver disease: a
comprehensive review. J Autoimmun. 2013; 46:55–65.
28.	 Nakagawa R, Serizawa I, Motoki K, Sato M, Ueno H, Iijima R,
Nakamura H, Shimosaka A, Koezuka Y. Antitumor activity
of alpha-galactosylceramide, KRN7000, in mice with the
melanoma B16 hepatic metastasis and immunohistological
study of tumor infiltrating cells. Oncology Res. 2000; 12:51–58.

15.	 Curigliano G, Spitaleri G, Dettori M, Locatelli M, Scarano E,
Goldhirsch A. Vaccine immunotherapy in breast cancer
treatment: promising, but still early. Expert Rev of Anticancer
Ther. 2007; 7:1225–1241.
16.	 Ahonen CL, Wasiuk A, Fuse S, Turk MJ, Ernstoff MS,
Suriawinata AA, Gorham JD, Kedl RM, Usherwood EJ,
Noelle RJ. Enhanced efficacy and reduced toxicity of
multifactorial adjuvants compared with unitary adjuvants as
cancer vaccines. Blood. 2008; 111:3116–3125.

29.	 Kim S, Iizuka K, Kang HS, Dokun A, French AR, Greco S,
Yokoyama WM. In vivo developmental stages in murine natural
killer cell maturation. Nature Immunol. 2002; 3:523–528.
30.	 Bahjat KS, Prell RA, Allen HE, Liu W, Lemmens EE,
Leong ML, Portnoy DA, Dubensky TW, Jr., Brockstedt DG,
Giedlin MA. Activation of immature hepatic NK cells as
immunotherapy for liver metastatic disease. J Immunol. 2007;
179:7376–7384.

17.	 Yoon SI, Kurnasov O, Natarajan V, Hong M, Gudkov AV,
Osterman AL, Wilson IA. Structural basis of TLR5-flagellin
recognition and signaling. Science. 2012; 335:859–864.
18.	 Burdelya LG, Gleiberman AS, Toshkov I, Aygun-Sunar S,
Bapardekar M, Manderscheid-Kern P, Bellnier D,
Krivokrysenko VI, Feinstein E, Gudkov AV. Toll-like receptor
5 agonist protects mice from dermatitis and oral mucositis
caused by local radiation: implications for headand-neck cancer
radiotherapy. IJROBP. 2012; 83:228–234.

31.	 Yokoyama WM, Kim S, French AR. The dynamic life of
natural killer cells. Annu Rev Immunol. 2004; 22:405–429.
32.	 Terabe M, Berzofsky JA. The role of NKT cells in tumor
immunity. Adv Cancer Res. 2008; 101:277–348.
33.	 Zhang Q, Yang H, Kang SJ, Wang Y, Wang GD, Coulthard T,
Grossniklaus HE. In vivo high-frequency, contrast-enhanced
ultrasonography of uveal melanoma in mice: imaging features
and histopathologic correlations. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci.
2011; 52:2662–2668.

19.	 Burdelya LG, Krivokrysenko VI, Tallant TC, Strom E,
Gleiberman AS, Gupta D, Kurnasov OV, Fort FL, Osterman AL,
Didonato JA, Feinstein E, Gudkov AV. An agonist of toll-like
receptor 5 has radioprotective activity in mouse and primate
models. Science. 2008; 320:226–230.

34.	 Yang H, Dithmar S, Grossniklaus HE. Interferon alpha 2b
decreases hepatic micrometastasis in a murine model of ocular
melanoma by activation of intrinsic hepatic natural killer cells.
Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci.2004; 45:2056–2064.

20.	 Burdelya LG, Brackett CM, Kojouharov B, Gitlin II,
Leonova KI, Gleiberman AS, Aygun-Sunar S, Veith J, Johnson C,
Haderski GJ, Stanhope-Baker P, Allamaneni S, Skitzki J, et al.
Central role of liver in anticancer and radioprotective activities
of Toll-like receptor 5 agonist. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2013;
110:E1857–1866.

35.	 Niederkorn JY. Immune privilege and immune regulation in the
eye. Adv Immunol. 1990; 48:191–226.
36.	 Leigh ND, Bian G, Ding X, Liu H, Aygun-Sunar S, Burdelya
LG, Gudkov AV, Cao X. A flagellin-derived toll-like receptor
5 agonist stimulates cytotoxic lymphocytemediated tumor
immunity. PloS one. 2014; 9:e85587.

21.	 Cai Z, Sanchez A, Shi Z, Zhang T, Liu M, Zhang D. Activation
of Toll-like receptor 5 on breast cancer cells by flagellin
suppresses cell proliferation and tumor growth. Cancer Res.
2011; 71:2466–2475.

37.	 Chiossone L, Chaix J, Fuseri N, Roth C, Vivier E, Walzer T.
Maturation of mouse NK cells is a 4-stage developmental
program. Blood. 2009; 113:5488–5496.

22.	 Rhee SH, Im E, Pothoulakis C. Toll-Like Receptor 5
Engagement Modulates Tumor Development and Growth
in a Mouse Xenograft Model of Human Colon Cancer.
Gastroenterology. 2008; 135:518–28.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

38.	 Hossain MS, Ramachandiran S, Gewirtz AT, Waller EK.
Recombinant TLR5 agonist CBLB502 promotes NK
2949

Oncotarget

cellmediated anti-CMV immunity in mice. PloS one. 2014;
9:e96165.

43.	 Rusciano D, Lorenzoni P, Burger M. Murine models of liver
metastasis. Invasion Metastasis. 1994; 14:349–361.

39.	 Hayakawa Y, Smyth MJ. CD27 dissects mature NK cells
into two subsets with distinct responsiveness and migratory
capacity. J Immunol. 2006; 176:1517–1524.

44.	 Dithmar S, Rusciano D, Grossniklaus HE. A new technique
for implantation of tissue culture melanoma cells in a murine
model of metastatic ocular melanoma. Melanoma Res. 2000;
10:2–8.

40.	 Walzer T, Chiossone L, Chaix J, Calver A, Carozzo C,
Garrigue-Antar L, Jacques Y, Baratin M, Tomasello E,
Vivier E. Natural killer cell trafficking in vivo requires a
dedicated sphingosine 1-phosphate receptor. Nature Immunol.
2007; 8:1337–1344.

45.	 Niederkorn JY. Enucleation in consort with immunologic
impairment promotes metastasis of intraocular melanomas in
mice. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci.1984; 25:1080–1086.
46.	 Diaz CE, Rusciano D, Dithmar S, Grossniklaus HE. B16LS9
melanoma cells spread to the liver from the murine ocular
posterior compartment (PC). Curr Eye Res. 1999; 18:125–129.

41.	 Medzhitov R, Janeway CA, Jr. Innate immune recognition and
control of adaptive immune responses. Sem Immunol. 1998;
10:351–353.

47.	 Dithmar S, Rusciano D, Lynn MJ, Lawson DH, Armstrong CA,
Grossniklaus HE. Neoadjuvant interferon alfa-2b treatment in
a murine model for metastatic ocular melanoma: a preliminary
study. Arch Ophthalmol. 2000; 118:1085–1089.

42.	 Alizadeh H, Howard K, Mellon J, Mayhew E, Rusciano D,
Niederkorn JY. Reduction of liver metastasis of intraocular
melanoma by interferon-beta gene transfer. Invest Ophthalmol
Vis Sci. 2003; 44:3042–3051.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

2950

Oncotarget

