Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No. 17

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Short-term expansion of breast circulating cancer cells predicts
response to anti-cancer therapy
Bee Luan Khoo1,*, Soo Chin Lee2,3,*, Prashant Kumar4,*, Tuan Zea Tan3, Majid
Ebrahimi Warkiani5,6, Samuel GW. Ow2, Sayantani Nandi4, Chwee Teck Lim4,5,7,8,*,
Jean Paul Thiery3,4,9,*
1

Mechanobiology Institute, National University of Singapore, Singapore

2

Department of Hematology-Oncology, National University Cancer Institute, National University Hospital, Singapore

3

Cancer Science Institute of Singapore, National University of Singapore, Singapore

4

Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, A*STAR (Agency for Science, Technology and Research), Singapore

5

 ioSystems and Micromechanics (BioSyM) IRG, Singapore-MIT Alliance for Research and Technology (SMART) Centre,
B
Singapore

6

School of Mechanical and Manufacturing Engineering, University of New South Wales, Sydney, Australia

7

Department of Biomedical Engineering, National University of Singapore, Singapore

8

Department of Mechanical Engineering, National University of Singapore, Singapore

9

Department of Biochemistry Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National University of Singapore, Singapore

*

These authors have contributed equally to this work

Correspondence to:
Jean Paul Thiery, e-mail: bchtjp@nus.edu.sg
Keywords: breast cancer, circulating tumor cells, CTCs, enrichment
Received: February 16, 2015      Accepted: April 24, 2015      Published: May 06, 2015

ABSTRACT
Circulating tumor cells (CTCs) are considered as surrogate markers for
prognosticating and evaluating patient treatment responses. Here, 226 blood samples
from 92 patients with breast cancer, including patients with newly diagnosed or
metastatic refractory cancer, and 16 blood samples from healthy subjects were
cultured in laser-ablated microwells. Clusters containing an increasing number of
cytokeratin-positive (CK+) cells appeared after 2 weeks, while most blood cells
disappeared with time. Cultures were heterogeneous and exhibited two distinct subpopulations of cells: ‘Small’ (≤ 25 μm; high nuclear/cytoplasmic ratio; CD45-) cells,
comprising CTCs, and ‘Large’ (> 25 μm; low nuclear/cytoplasmic ratio; CD68+ or
CD56+) cells, corresponding to macrophage and natural killer-like cells. The Small
cell fraction also showed copy number increases in six target genes (FGFR1, Myc,
CCND1, HER2, TOP2A and ZNF217) associated with breast cancer. These expanded
CTCs exhibited different proportions of epithelial–mesenchymal phenotypes and
were transferable for further expansion as spheroids in serum-free suspension
or 3D cultures. Cluster formation was affected by the presence and duration of
systemic therapy, and its persistence may reflect therapeutic resistance. This novel
and advanced method estimates CTC clonal heterogeneity and can predict, within a
relatively short time frame, patient responses to therapy.

progression [3, 4] as single cells or cell clusters and
exhibit a partial or complete epithelial–mesenchymal
transitioned (‘EMTed’) phenotype [5, 6]. These cells may
later colonize distant organs and develop into clinically
detectable metastases. Thus, studies have proposed
that CTCs could be used to provide an assessment of

INTRODUCTION
Circulating tumor cells (CTCs), derived from either
primary or metastatic tumors, have raised considerable
interest within the translational oncology community
[1, 2]. CTCs appear during the early stages of tumor
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

15578

Oncotarget

the current tumor status via “liquid biopsy” [7–9] or
may serve as surrogate markers for patient responses to
treatment [2, 10] and offer some guidance as to the choice
of therapeutic intervention.
Nonetheless, CTCs are rare events, and must
be enriched prior to genomic and proteomic analyses.
Conventional assays detect only low numbers of CTCs
and this poses a significant challenge for defining their
characteristics [10, 11], particularly since they do not
express a targetable marker. Consequently, there is an
urgent need for techniques that can successfully expand
CTCs. Recent studies have reported the establishment
of cell lines derived from CTCs of breast [12, 13], colon
[14] and prostate [15] cancer patients, obtained following
pre-enrichment with affinity binding [12], fluorescenceactivated cell sorting (FACS) [13], or negative selection
[15]. However, the efficiencies in obtaining CTC cultures
using these methods were low (< 20%), and the need
for pre-enrichment with each method resulted in a loss
of CTC count. Hence, there is still a need for a method
with improved efficiency and without the need for prior
enrichment for practical use in the clinic.
Non-adhesive substrates are typically recommended
for culturing cancer stem-like cells from primary tumors,
and these cultures tend to generate multilayered cell
clusters [16, 17]. Cluster formation can also be promoted
using microwells, as described elsewhere for embryonic
stem cells [18, 19] or cancer cell lines [20]. In addition,
it has been indicated that hypoxic conditions (1% O2)
can promote cellular reprogramming towards a cancer
stem cell (CSC) phenotype [21, 22]. In consideration
of these previous results, we designed and explored the
potential clinical utility of a novel culture scheme using
laser-ablated microwells that permits the expansion
of CTCs from the whole blood of patients with early
stage, locally advanced, or metastatic breast cancers.
We show that, within the nucleated blood cell fraction,
most blood cells (leukocytes, mesenchymal stem cells
[23]) and endothelial cells are progressively eliminated
from the culture over time, allowing for the selective
enrichment of CTCs, which go on to form proliferative
clusters. We also demonstrate that these cultured cells
comprise two distinct sub-populations: the smaller-sized
(≤  25 μm), CD45-negative CTC fraction, with a high
nuclear/cytoplasmic (N/C) ratio, and the larger (> 25
μm) CD68-positive monocytes/macrophages or CD56positive natural killer [24]-like cells, with a low N/C
ratio. In further assessment of the small cell fraction, we
show that these cells express either or both epithelial and
mesenchymal markers as well as copy number increases
in six genes previously identified to be altered in breast
cancers. Furthermore, cluster formation in cultures
is significantly reduced with samples obtained from
patients who had undergone at least one treatment cycle
as compared with those samples from untreated patients.
Therefore, we surmise that cluster formation may provide
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

a unique and predictive method for treatment response
and efficacy.

RESULTS
CTC culture, characterization and cluster
formation
A laser-ablated, microwell-based assay (Figure 1A–
1D) for CTC culture was established with nucleated cells
from patient blood samples (Supplementary Tables 1A–D)
after red blood cell (RBC) lysis (Figure 1D). We sought
to culture these cells for up to 14 days. At Day 8, most
cultures appeared as a monolayer of cells (Figure 1F, left).
By Day 14, the proliferative cultures proceeded to form
multilayered clusters, whereas the non-proliferative cultures
generated a noticeable amount of cell debris (Figure 1F,
right bottom). The clusters formed in the proliferative
cultures varied in diameter (Supplementary Figure 2B) and
predominantly consisted of a heterogeneous collection of
non-senescent cells (~90.1% of β-galactosidase-negative
cells; Supplementary Figure 3).
CTCs immunocaptured by EpCAM antibodies in
devices [25, 26], including the FDA-approved CellSearch
[27], are often identified as cytokeratin (CK)-positive,
CD45-negative cells exhibiting a high N/C ratio. We
therefore estimated the proportion of CTCs in our cultures
in a similar manner, using immunostaining for CK and
CD45 concomitant with a nuclear stain (Hoechst), and
using N/C ratio determination. Day 14 proliferative
cultures were harvested and analyzed, as summarized in the
flow chart in Supplementary Figure 1. Cells were separated
into two populations based on size using a spiral inertia
microfluidic device [28]. The resultant subpopulations,
hereafter referred to as ‘Small’ (≤ 25 μm) and ‘Large’ (>
25 μm) cells, were morphologically differentiated using
Papanicolaou [29] and Diff-QUIK staining (Supplementary
Figure 2A). The Large cells were well differentiated and
had a low N/C ratio, whereas the Small cells exhibited
strongly stained nuclei and a high N/C ratio, features of a
malignant phenotype. These cultures also showed variable
CK expression, with CK+ cells localized in the center
of the well, surrounded by CD45+ cells (Supplementary
Figure 4A). A significant number of these CK+ cells
also expressed vimentin (Supplementary Figure 4B),
suggesting a transition of these cells from an epithelial to
an intermediate EMT phenotype. Most of the large cells
within and outside the microwells expressed CD68, which
is suggestive of macrophages (Supplementary Figure 4C;
Supplementary Methods). The macrophage-like behavior
of these cells was confirmed with 1-μm fluorescein-labeled
polystyrene microbeads that were phagocytosed within a
24-h time frame (Supplementary Figure 4D). Outside
the microwells, we detected some detached cell clumps,
consisting of small cells only, and these cells were negative
for CD68 (Supplementary Figure 4C).
15579

Oncotarget

Figure 1: Overview of microwell-based culture technique for CTC expansion. A. Microwell assay is represented by an image

of an actual patterned dish with laser-ablated microwells B. Close-up of the microwells at 20 × magnification. C. Cross-section of a
polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) replica for one of the microwells. Scale bar, 10 μm. D. Preparation of the nucleated cell fraction from
peripheral blood via red blood cell (RBC) lysis. E. A schematic diagram displaying estimated dimensions of a microwell. The ellipsoidal
tapered microwell has major and minor diameters of 225 μm and 145 μm, respectively, at the opening of the well, and a depth of 150 μm.
F. At Day 8, cultures may appear as a monolayer of cells within microwells, while some of the non-proliferative cultures may have already
generated cell debris. Proliferative cultures (top right, patient sample) proceed to form multilayered clusters by Day 14, whereas nonproliferative cultures (second and bottom right, healthy and patient samples) generate cell debris. Scale bar, 100 μm.

We next sought to compare the proportions of CK+/
CD45- Small cells in cultures at Days 0 (nucleated fraction),
8, 14 and 21 (Figure 2A; Supplementary Figure 5) using
cytospot preparations of the cultures; the MDA-MB-231
cell line was used as a negative control. We found that the
Small CK+ CTC counts increased over time with respect
to total cell counts (Figure 2B), and that these increases
correlated with the initial abundance of CK+ CTCs in the
blood before culture; albeit, some blood samples that did not
initially contain detectable CK+ CTCs were later positive at
Day 14 (Supplementary Table 2). The proportion of CK+/
CD45- cells decreased significantly after Day 14 for most
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

samples (Figure 2B, Supplementary Figure 5); therefore, we
selected Day 14 as the end-point for culture phenotyping.
This time-point also correlated with the highest number of
Ki67-positive clusters (Supplementary Figure 6).
Interestingly, we noted that the proportion of
CTCs relative to the total cell count varied across the
samples examined (n = 10), ranging from 37.5% to 94.6%
(Figure 2B). Non-proliferative blood cells present in the
Day 0 nucleated fraction resulted in cell debris that was
progressively eliminated with media changes. Macrophages
(~33% ± 26%) and NK cells (~22.2% ± 9%) were identified
using leukocyte markers (CD45 and CD18; Figure 2C), a NK
15580

Oncotarget

Figure 2: Expansion of CK+ cells and depletion of blood cells in culture. A. Immunostaining (pan-CK-FITC, Hoechst) of

cytospots obtained from culturing blood samples harvested at different time points (Days 0, 8, 14 and 21). Scale bar, 20 μm. B. Percentage of
Small CK+ cells (15–25 μm) with respect to total cell count (Hoechst+) at various time points (Days 0, 8, 14 and 21). Significant expansion
of CK+ cells can be observed by Day 14. C. Immunostaining of hematopoietic precursors and leukocytes. Boxed images (marked in white)
provide examples of a distinct minority phenotype from the majority of cells. CD34+ cells (hematopoietic precursors) disappeared from
culture with time. A minority of CD45+ and CD18+ cells persist in culture. Negative control (MDA-MB-231 cell line) for each antibody
is provided (last column). Scale bar, 20 μm. D. Immunostaining for the natural killer cell marker, CD56. Minority populations of CD56+
(~22.2% ± 9%) persist in culture. Boxed images (marked in white) provide examples of a distinct minority phenotype from the majority
of cells. Negative control (MDA-MB-231 cell line) (to determine antibody specificity) is provided in the last column. Scale bar, 20 μm.
E. Immunostaining of specific white blood cell (WBC) and endothelial cell markers. Boxed images (marked in white) provide examples
of a distinct minority phenotype from the majority of cells. Cultured cells are generally negative for thrombospondin-1, CD14, CD16, von
Willebrand factor (VWF) and CD31. Minority populations of CD68+ and MIF+ (migration inhibitory factor) cells (~33% ± 26%) persist in
culture. Negative control (MDA-MB-231 cell line) for each antibody is provided (last column). Scale bar, 20 μm.

cell marker (CD56; Figure 2D), and macrophage markers
(migration inhibitory factor, MIF, and CD68; Figure 2E).
Blood cells of other lineages were rarely noted, as revealed
by immunostaining for hematopoietic precursors (CD34;
Figure 2C), monocytes (CD14 and CD16), megakaryocytes
(thrombospondin-1) and endothelial cells (CD31 and
von Willebrand factor; Figure 2D). Cells expressing
mesenchymal stem cell (MSC)-associated markers were
also rarely detected, as determined using antibodies against
CD90 and various markers of differentiation (aggrecan
for chondrocytes, FABP4 for adipocytes, osteocalcin
for osteocytes, and troponin T for cardiomyocytes;
Supplementary Figure 7). Overall, the data demonstrate that
cultured cells from cancer patients consisted predominantly
of CK+/CD45- CTCs, macrophages, and NK cells.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Finally, we compared these cultures with those
of blood samples taken from 16 healthy subjects
(Supplementary Table 3). Blood samples from healthy
subjects generated monolayers with cell debris (Figure 1E,
Supplementary Figure 8A). The cells from the monolayer
were CK+/Hoechst+/CD68+, confirming that they were
macrophages (Supplementary Figure 8B).

Enrichment of phenotypes with cancer stem cell
(CSC) markers
Tumor-initiating cells have been shown to carry
stem cell-like properties [17, 30], as well as drug resistance
[31, 32] and drug tolerance [33–35]. Breast cancer stem
cells (CSCs), initially identified as CD44+/CD24- cells
15581

Oncotarget

[17], are also known to express EMT markers [17, 36].
In several other studies, these CSCs have been detected
as a subpopulation in CTC cultures [37–40]. Thus, we
next sought to evaluate the presence of CD44+/CD24cells in our culture, and determined the impact of hypoxia
and a microwell-based culture system on the expansion
of these putative CSCs. Cultures were maintained in one
of three conditions, each performed in triplicate: hypoxia
(10% serum, 1% oxygen) in microwells, hypoxia on
2D-uncoated substrates, or normoxia in microwells. Blood
cells were present in all three conditions (Supplementary
Figure 9A), but clusters only formed in the hypoxia/
microwell condition after one week in culture. The
proportion of CD44+/CD24- cells was lower on the
2D-uncoated substrates or under normoxic conditions, as
compared with cultures maintained in microwells under
hypoxic conditions (Supplementary Figure 9B). The
estimated ratio of CD44+/CD24- cells was 1:0.62:0.42
(hypoxia/microwell: hypoxia/2D substrate: normoxia/
microwell; Supplementary Figure  10). Day 14 cultures
under hypoxia/microwell conditions were also positive
for Rex1, an embryonic stem cell (ESC) marker (78.5%
± 17%; Supplementary Figure 11), but negative for other
ESC markers, SOX2, Oct4 and Nanog. We also found
subpopulations of cells with stem cell-like properties,
as supported by spheroid formation in 3D Geltrex® or
on ultra-low adhesive dishes at Day 14 (Supplementary
Figure 12); this suggested the existence of tumorigenic
cells. CD44+/CD24- cells were distinctly absent
from cultures obtained from these healthy samples
(Supplementary Figure 8C).

CK19, CDH1, TFF1, FOXA1, AGR2 and GATA3) and
four mesenchymal genes (PTX3, SERPINE2, VIM,
FASCIN) (Supplementary Table 5, Supplementary Figure
13; Supplementary Methods). Cells were classified as
Epithelial (E; mostly green fluorescence), Epithelial–
Mesenchymal (EM; mixed fluorescence) or Mesenchymal
(M; mostly red fluorescence), and MCF-7 and MDAMB-231 cells were again used as phenotypic controls.
The results showed that the phenotypes of Day 14 samples
were indeed mixed, and this was irrespective of their
estrogen receptor (ER), progesterone receptor (PR) or
HER2 statuses.

Copy number increase in breast
cancer-associated genes
Six genes have been reported to contribute to about
44% of driver mutations in breast cancer (copy number
increase or amplicons): MYC, FGFR1 (Chromosome 8);
CCND1 (Chromosome 11); HER2, TOP2A (Chromosome
17); and ZNF217 (Chromosome 20) [24, 41]. We next
employed DNA FISH to evaluate the amplification
status of these six genes in Day 14 cultured cell samples
(Supplementary Table 5; Supplementary Methods). First,
we used single probes to ascertain the cells with copy
number increase for each of the six genes (Figure 4A),
with an increase defined as those cells with three or more
red signals. In the 10 samples tested, all (10/10, 100%)
showed a gain in at least one investigated gene locus.
However, only 6/10 samples (60%) showed 40% or more
cells with copy number increases in 1 or more genes
(Figure 4B).
Next, we compared the total proportion of cells
with a copy number increase in any of these probes
with a concomitant increase in CEN17 copy number
(an indicator of cell polyploidy and cancer progression).
This was performed using another 27 samples, with all six
probes used for each sample (Figure 4C). For this assay,
the threshold for signals was increased to ≥ 13 red signals
to indicate copy number increases in the target probe(s);
cells with ≥ 3 green signals were considered to have copy
number increase in CEN17. We found that cultured cells
with single or multiple CEN17 signals had a copy number
increase in one or more target probes, with 21/27 (77.8%)
samples showing a proportion of cells with target gene
copy number increase (range, 7.1%–80%; mean, 35.9%)
and 25/27 (92.6%) samples showing a proportion of cells
with a copy number increase in CEN17 (range, 10.3%–
85.7%; mean, 46.2%; Figure 4D). There was no distinct
correlation between CEN17 polysomy and target gene
amplification in cultured CTCs, which is similar to that
reported in other studies [42]. Overall, the detection of
copy number increases in cancer-associated genes within
the Small cultured cell population confirms the presence
of cancer cells, and we surmise that these Small cells were
likely derived from CTCs.

Cultured CTCs are heterogeneous and contain
mesenchymal-associated genes
We next characterized the expression of epithelial
and mesenchymal markers in the Small cell population
using six epithelial markers (E-cadherin, CK5, CK7,
CK18, CK19 and EpCAM) and two mesenchymal markers
(Vimentin and Fascin) (Supplementary Table 4). MCF-7
and MDA-MB-231 cell lines were used as references for
epithelial and mesenchymal carcinomas, respectively.
Individual CK immunolabelling demonstrated that
cultured cells express higher levels of CK5 and CK7 as
compared with CK18 and CK19. Furthermore, cultured
cells became increasingly more mesenchymal-like with
time in culture, with increased Vimentin and Fascin
staining and reduced or absent staining of epithelial
markers (E-cadherin and EpCAM; Figure 3). The EMT
status of CTCs at Day 14 was heterogeneous, with the
majority of cells staining positively for both pan-CK and
Vimentin antibodies (> 50%).
To better estimate the epithelial-like and
mesenchymal-like sub-populations in these cultured
CTCs, we used RNA FISH on 10 samples and assessed
the expression of nine epithelial genes (CK7, CK8, CK18,
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

15582

Oncotarget

Figure 3: Immunostaining of epithelial and mesenchymal markers for Day 14 cultures. Boxed images (marked in

white) provide examples of a distinct minority phenotype from the majority of cells. Cells generally demonstrated increased expression
of mesenchymal markers (Vimentin and Fascin), and decreased expression of epithelial markers (EpCAM and E-cadherin). Individual
cytokeratin staining (CK5, CK7, CK18 and CK19) demonstrates that the cultured cells are more positive for CK5 and CK7 than CK18 and
CK19. MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cell lines were used as references for epithelial and mesenchymal carcinoma cell lines,
respectively. Scale bar, 20 μm.

Cultures predict response to anti-cancer therapy

seen progressively less frequently in blood samples from
patients who had undergone longer durations of systemic
therapy (pre-treatment: 39/44 (88.6%); < 3 weeks posttreatment: 27/32 (84.4%); 3–5 weeks post-treatment:
24/36 (66.7%) > 5 weeks post-treatment: 26/61 (42.6%),
p < 0.001).
We thus next aimed to link clinicopathological
factors with cluster formation in these cultures. Of the
5/44 (11.3%) pre-treatment samples that did not form
clusters, two were from patients with invasive lobular
carcinoma (ILC). Of the 5/32 (15.6%) < 3 weeks posttreatment samples that did not form clusters, one was
from a patient with ILC whose baseline sample did not
form clusters, whereas another was from a patient who
went on to achieve pathological complete response after
12 weeks of neoadjuvant chemotherapy. These findings
suggest the potential for cultured CTCs to be used as an
early predictor of treatment response.

Given that CTCs are considered to be surrogate
markers for prognosticating and evaluating patient
treatment responses, we next sought to determine the
utility of the CTC cluster formation assay as a predictor
of treatment response. To this end, we analyzed 173 preand/or post-treatment blood samples from 60 patients with
early stage or metastatic breast cancer, who were receiving
anti-cancer therapy and who had clinically measurable
tumors. These patients had been enrolled into one of three
clinical studies—two neoadjuvant trials (Cohort P2A/2B,
Cohort PCL) and one metastatic study (Cohort CTB)
(Supplementary Tables 1A–1D)—and blood samples
were taken from each patient before treatment and at
various time points during their treatment course and used
for analysis. All patients gave their informed consent.
Overall, we found that cluster formation (Figure 1) was
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

15583

Oncotarget

Figure 4: Genomic characterization of cultured CTCs. A. Merged images (bright field, DAPI, spectrum green, spectrum orange)
of DNA fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH)-processed cultured cells processed separately with six target probes (FGFR1, MYC,
CCND1, HER2, TOP2A and ZNF217, all red) corresponding to 50% of breast cancer types. Copy number increase in these genes can be
observed in a proportion of the cultured cells (≥ 3 red signals per cell). Scale bar, 20 μm. B. Heat map representation of the proportion of cells
in cultures (n = 10) with copy number increase in each of the six genes. 6/10 samples have 40% or more cells with copy number increase in 1
or more genes. C. Merged images (bright field, DAPI, spectrum green, spectrum orange) of DNA FISH-processed cultured cells using all six
target probes (FGFR1, MYC, CCND1, HER2, TOP2A and ZNF217, all red) in each sample, demonstrating copy number increase for target
genes in contrast to copy number of centromere for chromosome 17 (CEN17, green). Scale bar, 20 μm. D. Quantification for the proportion
of ‘Small’ cells (15–25 μm) with target gene and/or CEN17 copy number increase in 27 cultured samples. Cells with copy number increase
in target genes were determined as those which expressed ≥ 13 red signals. Cells with copy number increase in CEN17 were determined as
those that expressed ≥ 3 green signals. Numerous samples (21/27) had a proportion of cells with target gene copy number increase, whereas
almost all samples (25/27) had a proportion of cells with CEN17 copy number increase. The prevalence of the six target gene copy number
increase is detected in ~44% of all breast cancers. Each bar corresponds to the respective sample as numbered (x-axis).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

15584

Oncotarget

To further investigate this correlation between
cluster formation and response, serial (4 or more)
samples (a total of 90) were collected from 18 patients
in Cohort P2A/B over a period of 12–16 weeks; this
cohort comprised patients with early-stage breast cancer
who had been treated with pre-operative doxorubicin/
cyclophosphamide (AC) with or without Sunitinib as part
of a clinical trial (Supplementary Table 1A, Figure 5A) and
then undergone breast conserving surgery or mastectomy
along with axillary lymph node clearance. We observed
a progressive reduction in cluster formation in samples
from patients who had undergone increasingly longer
treatments. Clusters formed in 30/35 (85.7%) of pretreatment and post-1-week Sunitinib pre-chemotherapy
(post-sutent, pre AC) samples (Figure 5A). More of the
post-chemotherapy samples (at least one AC cycle with or
without Sunitinib) did not form clusters (38/80; 47.5%) as
compared with pre-chemotherapy samples (5/35; 14.3%).
All of the negative cultures from post-treatment samples
generated cell debris either with or without residual blood

cells (Figure 1, Supplementary Table 1A). Interestingly,
none of 10 post-surgical samples after 12 weeks of
neoadjuvant chemotherapy formed clusters.
To correlate these treatment responses with
survival, samples were obtained from 22 patients with
refractory metastatic disease (Cohort CTB, Supplementary
Table 1B); these patients were enrolled when they
presented with progressive disease since their last
treatment regimen but before they commenced a new
treatment regimen (chemotherapy, endocrine therapy
or radiotherapy); blood was collected before and at 3–5
weeks after the new treatment regimen. Post-treatment
samples were available from 14/22 patients, and we found
an interesting correlation between cluster formation in
these samples and clinical response and survival. Cluster
formation from post-treatment samples was more common
in patients with early radiological progressive disease (3/4,
75%) as compared with those with radiological responsive
or stable disease (4/9, 44.4%; p = 0.308; Supplementary
Table 6). One patient was unassessed at this point in time.

Figure 5: Clinical correlation of cluster formation with patient survival. A. Treatment schedule for the patients (n = 31)
receiving doxorubicin/cyclophosphamide (AC) with or without Sunitinib. Cluster formation is reduced during therapy cycles, reflecting
response to chemotherapy for treatment efficacy. B. Comparison of overall survival in refractory metastatic patients who had or did not have
cluster formation in the post-treatment sample (n = 14).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

15585

Oncotarget

Here, we describe an effective method for the in vitro
expansion of CTCs from patients with early stage, locally
advanced, or metastatic breast cancers. We observed cell
clusters comprising hundreds of cells by Day 14 of culture,
comprising both ‘Small’ (≤ 25 μm) and ‘Large’ (> 25 μm)
cell fractions (Supplementary Figure 2). Most of the Large
cells were CD68+ with phagocytic activity and are likely
to be macrophages (Supplementary Figure 4). Indeed,
macrophage-like cells have been detected in blood samples
from various cancer patients by others who have speculated
a correlation between the presence of macrophages and the
metastasis potential of CTCs [45]. We also detected other
CD56+ blood cells that corresponded to NK cells, but could
not detect megakaryocytes, monocytes, endothelial cells or
MSCs or their lineages derivatives.
The Small cell fraction demonstrated a phenotype
that was consistent with the standard definition of CTCs
(pan-CK+/CD45-/Hoechst+ with a high N/C ratio [46]).
Immunofluorescence labeling revealed that the majority of
‘Small’ cells were positive for Vimentin and Fascin, and had
low levels of EpCAM and E-cadherin, further emphasizing
their mesenchymal-like phenotypes (Figure 3). Results
from RNA FISH, on the other hand, confirmed the
presence of epithelial, epithelial–mesenchymal and fully
mesenchymal phenotypes within these cultures, and
the varied proportions of these three phenotypes did not
appear to be related to the ER/PR/HER2 status of the tumor
(Supplementary Figure 13). This heterogeneous expression
of both epithelial and mesenchymal markers is consistent
with previous reports by others on CTCs in breast [29],
prostate [49, 50] and head and neck [51] cancers. We
further used pooled samples to carry out DNA FISH for six
genes previously reported to contribute to driver mutations
in breast cancer: MYC, FGFR1, CCND1, HER2, TOP2A,
and ZNF217 (Figure 4). Through this assay, we detected
locus copy number increase or amplicons in 6/10 (40%)
samples using single probes, and in another 21/27 (77.7%)
samples using combined probes.
Although initial CTC counts may not reflect the
potential of a sample to be cultured (due to cancer cell
dormancy [47, 48]), it will be worth reviewing the
relationship between cluster formation and initial CTC
counts among a larger sample cohort. We showed that
cultured cells could be transferred to Geltrex® or ultra-low
adhesive dishes and grown as spheroids, withstanding
multiple passages (Supplementary Figure 12). It is
possible that these spheroids could then be maintained
and used for ex vivo drug analysis, which has the potential
to guide the selection of drugs for therapy. If an ex vivo
drug analysis assay is validated and proven to be reliable,
then the relatively short turnaround time (14 day culture)
is feasible in clinical practice to guide drug selection in
the advanced and neoadjuvant, and even in the adjuvant,
settings. Future studies will be aimed at establishing
correlations between spheroid formation, cancer stage and
treatment time-points.

Kaplan–Meier survival analysis showed cluster formation
in the post-treatment sample correlated with shorter overall
survival, with a mean overall survival of 9.8 months
(95%CI, 5.9–13.7) for patients whose samples generated
clusters as compared with a mean overall survival of 16.6
months (95%CI, 10.4–22.8; log rank p-value, 0.087) for
patients whose samples did not yield clusters (Figure 5B).
Because of the limited sample size, further Cox regression
and adjusted analyses were not undertaken. However
limited, these findings are intriguing in terms of showing
a possible correlation between overall survival and cluster
formation, and a larger set of clinical samples is currently
being collated to validate these findings.
Finally, we attempted to evaluate the possibility
of detecting cultured CTCs in early-stage cancer. The
estimated relapse frequency for early-stage breast cancer
in Singapore is 10%–20% for stage I, 30%–40% for
stage II, and 50%–70% for stage III [43]. We analyzed
53 samples from 32 patients with early-stage breast
cancer (stages IA–IIIC) who had undergone surgery,
had no clinically measurable tumor, and were awaiting,
undergoing or had just completed adjuvant chemotherapy
(Supplementary Table 1D). Overall, 23/53 (43.4%)
samples formed clusters. Clusters were more commonly
observed in patients with pathological involvement of
4 or more lymph nodes (9/16 (56%)) as compared with
those with 0–3 lymph nodes (14/37 (38%); p = 0.214).
We also correlated cluster formation from cultured CTCs
with time since surgery, and found that 10/20 (50%)
samples taken shortly after surgery but before adjuvant
chemotherapy formed clusters. For samples taken shortly
after completing 3–6 months of adjuvant chemotherapy,
cluster formation reduced to just 26% (6/23) but this
rebounded to 70% (7/10) (p = 0.049) for samples obtained
1 year post-adjuvant chemotherapy. Among these ten
samples cluster formation occurred in 2/4 (50%) patients
with pT1N0M0 disease at later time points, as compared
to 5/6 (83%) patients with a higher pathological stage of
the disease (p = 0.260).

DISCUSSION
Monitoring CTC levels may offer a vast
improvement in the current diagnosis of cancer and
may help determine the efficacy of selected therapeutic
regimes. The copious technical approaches developed for
the detection of CTCs [24–27, 37, 44] have thus far failed
to retrieve an adequate number of viable cells for culture
and characterization, and these methods also require a
finicky, delicate or time-consuming procedure to do so.
More recent approaches to culture CTCs suffer from low
efficiencies (< 20%) [12, 13, 15] and the need for preenrichment steps that, paradoxically, result in the loss
of CTC counts. Hence, there is still a need for a novel
method with improved efficiency and without the need for
prior enrichment for practical use in the clinic.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

15586

Oncotarget

The maintenance of CTCs in culture after enrichment
has been challenging [37]. Most CTC enrichment devices
alter cell viability; possibly as a consequence of the
lengthy procedures and the loss of potentially clonogenic
CTCs. Few techniques have reported the enrichment of
viable CTCs [44, 52]. Affinity-based devices further limit
the detection of CTCs to various subpopulations due to
the pre-requisite of enriching cells with certain epithelial
markers (e.g., EpCAM) [27, 53] that may be downregulated during EMT [53, 54]. Recent methods for the
expansion of CTCs have been reported [12, 15], including
the initial proof-of-concept study for CTC cultures by
Zhang and colleagues [13]. However, these methods
are currently still unable to generate cultures efficiently.
Emerging inertial microfluidic devices may help to solve
this issue [28, 55, 56].
Our culture system enabled us to perform various
characterizations with primary cells after a short-term
culture of 14 days. This is more advantageous than using
cell lines, since prolonged culture and multiple passages
often lead to phenotypes that are no longer representative of
the original tumor in terms of the cell’s epigenetics and gene
expression [57, 58]. Our method also requires as little as
2.5 ml of blood per 60-mm dish to yield tens of thousands
of cells within two weeks, and provides a risk-free approach
to CTC harvesting and expansion, with no adverse effects to
cell viability, concomitant with the disappearance of WBCs
and other non-malignant circulating cells. Our microwell
geometry favors the expansion of CTCs by reducing cell–
substrate contact through the use of a non-adhesive plastic
substrate. We believe that the curvature of the tapered
microwells presents a topography that encourages cell
clustering, generating a suitable microenvironmental niche
that resembles the tumor microenvironment; this enables
CTCs and blood cells to cluster under hypoxic conditions
with limited nutrients, as in vivo. Cultures are sheltered
within microwells and experience minimal disturbance
during media changes, reducing shear stress and cell loss to
allow for subsequent expansion. These culture conditions
and minimal starting material provide an opportunity for
the deep characterization of CTCs, specific to each patient,
and a technique with these benefits will be of paramount
importance for optimal applications in the clinic, which
often require repeated sampling.
The proliferative potential of these cultured cells
varies between samples and critically depends on the type
and duration of therapy administered to the patients. The
absence of cell cluster formation in the microwells from
post-treatment samples may reflect treatment efficacy
[31], and may possibly reflect a lack of cancer-initiating
cells following one or several cycles of treatment. The
clusters described here may arise from either single CTCs
or microemboli [28, 59]. Interestingly, we also observed
that some of the blood samples that did not initially contain
detectable CK+ CTCs were later positive at Day 14 in
culture (Supplementary Table 2). This may be a result of
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

the proliferation of very few CTCs with heightened survival
characteristics. A previous attempt by Pizon et al. to expand
breast epithelial CTCs into spheroids also observed a similar
increase in spheroid formation from patients with more
aggressive tumors [60], despite variations in the enrichment
technique (which selects for epithelial cells under
normoxia). Hence, such studies strengthen the hypothesis
that CTC cultures may correlate with disease severity.
Our results lend to the hypothesis that systemic
therapy affects cluster formation and that a persistence
of the ability to cluster may reflect therapy resistance.
Cluster formation was seen progressively less frequently
in samples with a longer duration since systemic therapy.
Strikingly, none of 10 post-surgical samples (after
completing neoadjuvant chemotherapy) in the P2A/B
cohort demonstrated cluster formation (Supplementary
Table 1A). An early loss of cluster formation in this
cohort occurred in 1 of 2 patients; this patient achieved
pathological complete response after 12 weeks of
neoadjuvant chemotherapy. Also, samples from patients
with ILC had lower tendencies to form clusters, which
could be due to the E-cadherin status of the tumors.
However, our sample size of ILC is too small in this study
for us to draw firm conclusions about the relationship
between ILC, chemotherapy response and CTC cluster
formation. Persistent cluster formation in post-treatment
samples taken from refractory metastatic disease patients
at a time-point 3–5 weeks after treatment (CTB cohort;
Supplementary Table 1B)) correlated with early disease
progression (within 12 weeks of treatment) and shorter
overall survival. We also assessed cluster formation in
a small cohort of patients with early-stage breast cancer
(CES cohort; Supplementary Table 1D); these patients
had undergone surgery and were at sufficient risk
clinically to warrant subsequent adjuvant chemotherapy.
We were intrigued to find cluster formation in about half
of the patients who had no clinically measurable disease,
and noted that cluster formation was more frequent in
patients with higher lymph node involvement (≥ 4). The
positivity rate of 39% (7/18) for CTC cluster formation in
post-surgical specimens from early stage, pathologically
node-negative breast cancer patients reported in this
study is much higher than the EpCAM-independent CK19 mRNA positivity rate reported in a study involving
node-negative breast cancer (21.6%) [61]. It will be
relevant to investigate more closely the implications of
cluster formation in samples from node-negative patients.
Interestingly, cluster frequency was reduced from 50% in
immediate post-surgical samples to 26% in samples taken
after 3–6 months of adjuvant chemotherapy. Since we
already see a tendency for clusters to form or re-appear
in samples from node-positive patients at 1 year after
adjuvant chemotherapy, it will be important to ascertain
if there is any correlation between adjuvant chemotherapy
and the long-term outcomes for patients in a larger cohort
(using serial samples).
15587

Oncotarget

The current methods to evaluate response to
chemotherapy in the neoadjuvant setting suffer from poor
correlation between clinical response and the more relevant
endpoint of pathological complete response. A reliable early
test to predict pathological complete response is highly
desirable and may permit adaptive clinical trials to be
conducted in the neoadjuvant setting. The patients recruited
in this study are heterogeneous in terms of treatment choice,
metastatic sites, and other demographic characteristics.
Future studies involving a more homogeneous study
population may lead to better understanding of the effects of
treatment on cluster formation and the correlation between
presence and persistence of clusters with patient survival.
Overall, we established a method for the in vitro
expansion of CTCs using a significant number of blood
samples (n = 226) from patients with early stage, locally
advanced or metastatic breast cancers. Blood samples
from healthy subjects (n = 16) were also cultured in the
assay, which consisted of laser-ablated microwells. We
investigated the clinical impact of in vitro CTC-clustering
as a prognostic and predictive tool for therapy response and
explored the phenotypic and genotypic characteristics of the
heterogeneous CTCs after 2 weeks in culture. Although we
cannot yet confirm the clinical utility (due to small sample
cohort and lack of long-term outcomes), this method detects
more patients with CTCs than any other method described
to date, and can even induce the expansion of CTCs in
apparently initially negative samples. We believe that the
method is exploitable for the study of drug responses in
vitro for locally advanced or metastatic cancer treatment.

2010/00270, 2010/00691). Blood samples were obtained from
patients enrolled into four different studies, including two
neoadjuvant studies (doxorubicin/cyclophosphamide with or
without Sunitinib [P2A/2B cohort]; paclitaxel/carboplatin/
lapatinib [PCL cohort]), one study of refractory patients
treated with various treatment regimens (CTB cohort), and
one early-stage breast cancer study after definitive breast
cancer surgery (CES cohort). Sixteen healthy volunteers
(DSRB-2013/00542) were also recruited to provide control
blood samples for validation of culture assay specificity. All
patients gave their informed consent for inclusion in this
study. Clinicopathological information was recorded for each
patient. Samples were collected from each patient once in a
single draw, either before or after treatment, or at several timepoints over their treatment period. All blood specimens were
collected in sterile EDTA-coated vacutainer tubes (Becton
Dickinson) and kept on ice (Figure 1E). The demographic
and clinical treatment characteristics for the three cohorts of
60 patients with clinically measurable tumors (i.e., excluding
the CES cohort) are summarized in Table 1.
Samples were processed within 10 h after withdrawal
to reduce blood clotting and maintain cell viability. Whole
blood was lysed with RBC lysis buffer (Life Technologies,
Carlsbad, CA) for 3–5 min with gentle mixing, centrifuged
to remove plasma and lysed RBC fragments, and then
washed once with sterile phosphate-buffered saline (PBS).
Remnants of the buffer were removed quickly to reduce
cell damage upon prolonged exposure. Nucleated cells were
re-suspended in fresh, high-glucose Dulbecco’s modified
Eagle’s medium (DMEM) supplemented with 10% fetal
bovine serum (FBS) and 1% penicillin-streptomycin (all
from Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA). Each processed sample
(10 ml of whole blood) was split into four and each 2.5 ml
sample seeded into separate 60-mm patterned dishes.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Preparation of culture assay

Characterization of clusters in blood cultures

The culture assays were fabricated using uncoated
60-mm petri dishes (Becton Dickinson, Franklin Lakes,
NJ) and microwells were patterned using a commercial aircooled 10.6-μm CO2 laser engraving/cutting system at 10%
speed and 50% power (VLS-2.30, Universal Laser System
Inc., Scottsdale, AZ). Typically, each 60-mm patterned
dish contains 1350 ellipsoid-shaped tapered wells (Figure
1A). The dimensions of the microwell entrance (225 μm ×
145 μm) are outlined in Figure 1B and 1D, and the overall
structure of the microwell can be demonstrated with a PDMS
replica (Figure 1C) (Polydimethylsiloxane) (1:10 ratio
(Sylgard 184, Dow Corning, USA)) prepared and demolded,
as previously described [27]. Wells were rinsed and incubated
with 70% ethanol for at least 15 min for sterilization.

Samples were kept at 37°C in 5% (v/v) CO2 and
1% O2 under humidified conditions. The culture medium
was replaced every 48–72 h with minimal disturbance to
the microwell clusters to avoid cell loss. Clusters were
dissociated with pipetting following incubation for a
maximum of 3 min at 37°C with 0.01% trypsin and 5.3
mM EDTA (Lonza, Basel, Switzerland) solution in PBS.
Cultures were maintained for 2–8 weeks, imaged on
Days 0, 8, 14 and 21 with phase contrast microscopy and
analyzed with ImageJ (NIH, Bethesda, MD). The mean
diameters of the structures are the average maximum and
minimum dimensions along the same 2D plane of each
aggregate.

Sample preparation

Cell sorting with spiral inertia microfluidic
biochip

Blood samples were obtained from 92 breast cancer
patients (Supplementary Tables 1A–1D). This study was
approved by our institutional review board and local ethics
committee (DSRB Reference 2012/00105, 2012/00979,
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Cultured cells used for histopathological
characterization by PAP staining (see below) were sorted for
15588

Oncotarget

Table 1: Patients with clinically measurable tumors
Demographic or clinical
characteristics

No. of patients involved (n = 60)
%

Age (years)
Median

47.5

Range

33–78

Race
Chinese

38

63.3

Indian

5

8.3

Malay

11

18.3

Others

6

10

IDC

49

81.7

ILC or IDC with lobular features

5

8.3

Others

6

10

1

3

5

2

18

30

3

35

58.3

Not specified

4

6.7

Yes

25

41.7

No

35

58.3

I

0

0

II

16

26.7

III

19

31.7

IV

25

41.7

Negative

21

35

Positive

39

65

Negative

18

30

Positive

42

70

Negative

47

78.3

Positive

13

21.7

Histology

Tumor grade

Metastatic disease

AJCC stage

ER status

PR status

HER2 status

(Continued )

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

15589

Oncotarget

Demographic or clinical
characteristics

No. of patients involved (n = 60)
%

Treatment regimen
AC

15

25

AC+Sunitinib

16

26.7

Paclitaxel/carboplatin/lapatinib

7

11.7

Others

22

36.7

IDC = invasive ductal carcinoma; ILC = invasive lobular carcinoma; AJCC, American Joint Committee on Cancer;
ER = estrogen; PR = progesterone; HER2 = human epidermal growth factor receptor 2; AC = doxorubicin/
cyclophosphamide.
better contrast and comparison of morphological differences
between populations of different cell sizes. Cells were
trypsinized, re-suspended in 1 ml of media within a 10-ml
syringe and pumped at 100 μl/min through a PDMS spiral
inertia microfluidic biochip [27]. Cells were administered
together with the sheath fluid containing PBS at 800 μl/min
to obtain size-sorted cell populations for further analysis.
Sorted cells were concentrated via centrifugation.

Day 8, 14 and 21 cultures, cells were harvested and fixed
onto slides (as described above). Slides were then stained
with pan-cytokeratin-FITC, CD45-APC and Hoechst. The
entire cytospot was imaged to detect positive cells, and
the CK+/CD45-/Hoechst+ cell counts/ml were estimated
(Supplementary Table 2).

Immunophenotyping of cells

Cytospots were viewed after PAP staining at the
Advanced Molecular Pathology Laboratory at IMCB,
Singapore. Diff-QUIK Romanowski staining was
performed at the Pathology Department of the National
University Hospital, Singapore. Imaging was performed
with confocal (Olympus Fluoview FV1000, USA) or
epifluorescence (Nikon, Japan) microscopy.

Histological staining and imaging

Cells were fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde (PFA)
(Sigma-Aldrich, St Louis, MO) and permeabilized with
0.1% Triton X-100 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San José,
CA). Fluorescence microscopy was performed using
primary antibodies (Supplementary Table 4) and Dylight
488 or 594 secondary antibodies (Abcam, Cambridge,
United Kingdom) and counterstained with Hoechst dye
(Invitrogen) (See Supplemental Methods).

DNA and RNA Fluorescence in situ
hybridization (FISH)
Cytospots were fixed with acetic acid/methanol
(Sigma-Aldrich) in a 1:3 ratio, added drop-wise to the
cell spot at room temperature, and dehydrated through
a graded ethanol series (80%, 90%, and 100%). DNA
FISH and RNA FISH were performed as outlined in the
Supplemental Methods.

Immunophenotyping of cells via cytospots
CTC cultures or control cell lines (ESCs, MSCs,
macrophages, endothelial cells, MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231)
were trypsinized, concentrated in PBS, and prepared as
cytospots, as described in the Supplemental Methods using
a Cytospin 4 cytocentrifuge (Thermo Fisher Scientific).
Slides were fixed and permeabilized as above and incubated
with a range of primary antibodies (Supplementary Table
4), followed by appropriate Dylight 488 or 594 secondary
antibodies (Abcam) and counterstained with Hoechst
dye (Invitrogen). Antibody specificity was validated with
negative controls using either MCF7, MDA-MB-231 or
lysed blood samples at Day 0 before culture. Putative CTCs
were identified as CK+/CD45-/Hoechst+ cells.

Spheroidogenic assays
Cultures at Day 14 were harvested, separated into
single cells and mixed with Geltrex® (Invitrogen, cat. no.
12760–013) at recommended concentrations in wells of
16-well glass chamber slides (Lab-Tek Products, Miles
Laboratories, Naperville, IL). Cultures were maintained
under optimal conditions for 1 week, fixed and stained
with TRITC-phalloidin (1:1000, Sigma-Aldrich) and
Hoechst for 1 h. Chambers were washed and imaged
with a confocal microscope to obtain z-stacks of 1 μm.
Alternatively, spheroids were obtained by transferring Day
14 cultured cells to ultra-low adhesive dishes (Cat No;
3473 or 3473; Corning Inc., Corning, NY) and maintained
for 10 days in advanced DMEM/F12, reduced-serum

Enumeration of CTCs
Ten samples were analyzed to quantify CK+ subpopulations (Figure 2B, Supplementary Table 2). For Day
0 samples, 100 μl of freshly lysed samples were fixed onto
coated slides using cytospinning (as described above). For
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

15590

Oncotarget

References

medium (1:1) (Gibco, Life Technologies, Carlsbad, CA)
under normoxia prior to subsequent transfer to amplify the
spheroids.

1.	 Gupta GP, Massague J. Cancer metastasis: building a
framework. Cell. 2006; 127:679–695.

Statistical analysis

2.	 Pantel K, Alix-Panabieres C, Riethdorf S. Cancer micrometastases. Nat Rev Clin Oncol. 2009; 6:339–351.

The χ test (when the sample size was small) was
used to evaluate associations between categorical variables
and spheroid formation. A two-way analysis of variance
(ANOVA) was employed using Microsoft® Excel®
(Redmond, WA) to analyze the flow cytometry data.
2

3.	 Husemann Y, Geigl JB, Schubert F, Musiani P, Meyer M,
Burghart E, Forni G, Eils R, Fehm T, Riethmuller G,
Klein CA. Systemic spread is an early step in breast cancer.
Cancer Cell. 2008; 13:58–68.
4.	 Klein CA. Parallel progression of primary tumours and
metastases. Nat Rev Cancer. 2009; 9:302–312.

Acknowledgments

5.	 Thiery JP. Epithelial-mesenchymal transitions in tumour
progression. Nat Rev Cancer. 2002; 2:442–454.

We are grateful to Mr Ting Yuan for technical
assistance in assay fabrication. We also appreciate the
assistance in technical support and facility usage from
personnel at the Mechanobiology Institute (MBI), National
University of Singapore (NUS); The Institute of Molecular
and Cell Biology (IMCB), an A*STAR (Agency for
Science Technology and Research) Institute; and
BioSystem and Micromechanics (BioSyM) Department,
Singapore-MIT Alliance for Research and Technology
(SMART). This work was financially supported by IMCB,
A*STAR, and MBI, NUS core funding.

6.	 Thiery JP, Lim CT. Tumor dissemination: an EMT affair.
Cancer Cell. 2013; 23:272–273.
7.	 Cristofanilli M, Budd GT, Ellis MJ, Stopeck A,
Matera J, Miller MC, Reuben JM, Doyle GV, Allard WJ,
Terstappen LW, Hayes DF. Circulating tumor cells, disease progression, and survival in metastatic breast cancer.
N Engl J Med. 2004; 351:781–791.
8.	 Hayes DF, Cristofanilli M, Budd GT, Ellis MJ,
Stopeck A, Miller MC, Matera J, Allard WJ, Doyle GV,
Terstappen  LW. Circulating tumor cells at each followup time point during therapy of metastatic breast cancer
patients predict progression-free and overall survival. Clin
Cancer Res. 2006; 12:4218–4224.

Abbreviations
CTC, circulating tumor cell; EMT, epithelialmesenchymal transition; N/C nuclear/cytoplasmic ratio;
FISH, fluorescence in situ hybridization; CSC, cancer stem
cell; ES, embryonic stem; EGFR, epidermal growth factor
receptor; CK, cytokeratin; EM, Epithelial-Mesenchymal;
E, Epithelial; M, Mesenchymal; NK, natural killer cells;
MSC, mesenchymal stem cells; ER, estrogen receptor; PR,
progesterone receptor; HER2, human epidermal growth
factor receptor 2; PAP, Papanicolaou; AC, doxorubicin/
cyclophosphamide; DMEM, Dulbecco’s modified
Eagle’s medium; FBS, fetal bovine serum; BSA, bovine
serum albumin; PBS, phosphate-buffered saline; N,
Negative; Y, Positive; C, Chinese; M, Malay; I, Indian;
O, Others; IDC, invasive ductal carcinoma; ILC, invasive
lobular carcinoma; FAC, 5-fluouracil/doxorubicin/
cyclophosphamide.

9.	 Mocellin S, Keilholz U, Rossi CR, Nitti D. Circulating
tumor cells: the ‘leukemic phase’ of solid cancers. Trends
Mol Med. 2006; 12:130–139.
10.	 Smerage JB, Hayes DF. The measurement and therapeutic
implications of circulating tumour cells in breast cancer. Br
J Cancer. 2006; 94:8–12.
11.	 Yu M, Bardia A, Wittner BS, Stott SL, Smas ME,
Ting DT, Isakoff SJ, Ciciliano JC, Wells MN, Shah AM,
Concannon KF, Donaldson MC, Sequist LV, Brachtel E,
Sgroi D, Baselga J, et al. Circulating breast tumor cells
exhibit dynamic changes in epithelial and mesenchymal
composition. Science. 2013; 339:580–584.
12.	 Yu M, Bardia A, Aceto N, Bersani F, Madden MW,
Donaldson MC, Desai R, Zhu H, Comaills V, Zheng Z,
Wittner BS, Stojanov P, Brachtel E, Sgroi D, Kapur R,
Shioda T, et al. Cancer therapy. Ex vivo culture of circulating breast tumor cells for individualized testing of drug
susceptibility. Science. 2014; 345:216–220.

Author contributions
BLK, SCL, PK, CTL and JPT conceived and
designed the experiments. BLK and PK performed the
experiments. BLK, SCL, TZT, CTL, and JPT analyzed
the data. SCL, TZT, MEW, SGO, and SN contributed
reagents/materials/analysis tools. BLK, SCL, PK, CTL,
and JPT wrote the paper.

13.	 Zhang L, Ridgway LD, Wetzel MD, Ngo J, Yin W,
Kumar D, Goodman JC, Groves MD, Marchetti D. The identification and characterization of breast cancer CTCs competent for brain metastasis. Sci Transl Med. 2013; 5. 180ra148.
14.	 Cayrefourcq L, Mazard T, Joosse S, Solassol J, Ramos J,
Assenat E, Schumacher U, Costes V, Maudelonde  T,
Pantel K, Alix-Panabieres C. Establishment and characterization of a cell line from human circulating colon cancer
cells. Cancer Res. 2015; 75:892–901.

COMPETING INTERESTS
The authors disclose no competing interests.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

15591

Oncotarget

and retrieval of circulating tumor cells using centrifugal
forces. Sci Rep. 2013; 3:1259.
29.	 Kallergi G, Papadaki MA, Politaki E, Mavroudis D,
Georgoulias V, Agelaki S. Epithelial to mesenchymal transition markers expressed in circulating tumour cells of early
and metastatic breast cancer patients. Breast Cancer Res.
2011; 13:R59.
30.	 Ho MM, Ng AV, Lam S, Hung JY. Side population in
human lung cancer cell lines and tumors is enriched with
stem-like cancer cells. Cancer Res. 2007; 67:4827–4833.

15.	 Gao D, Vela I, Sboner A, Iaquinta PJ, Karthaus WR,
Gopalan A, Dowling C, Wanjala JN, Undvall EA, Arora VK,
Wongvipat J, Kossai M, Ramazanoglu S, Barboza LP, Di W,
Cao Z, et al. Organoid cultures derived from patients with
advanced prostate cancer. Cell. 2014; 159:176–187.
16.	 Tosoni D, Di Fiore PP, Pece S. Functional purification of
human and mouse mammary stem cells. Methods Mol Biol.
2012; 916:59–79.
17.	 Al-Hajj M, Wicha MS, Benito-Hernandez A, Morrison SJ,
Clarke MF. Prospective identification of tumorigenic breast
cancer cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2003; 100:3983–3988.
18.	 Lindstrom S, Eriksson M, Vazin T, Sandberg J,
Lundeberg J, Frisen J, Andersson-Svahn H. High-density
microwell chip for culture and analysis of stem cells. PLoS
One. 2009; 4:e6997.
19.	 Mohr JC, de Pablo JJ, Palecek SP. 3-D microwell culture of human embryonic stem cells. Biomaterials. 2006;
27:6032–6042.
20.	 Lu X, Kang Y. Hypoxia and hypoxia-inducible factors:
master regulators of metastasis. Clin Cancer Res. 2010;
16:5928–5935.
21.	 Tu, T. Y., Z. Wang, et al. (2014). “Rapid prototyping of
concave microwells for the formation of 3D multicellular
cancer aggregates for drug screening.” Adv Healthc Mater
3(4): 609–616.)

31.	 Li X, Lewis MT, Huang J, Gutierrez C, Osborne  CK,
Wu  MF, Hilsenbeck SG, Pavlick A, Zhang X,
Chamness GC, Wong H, Rosen J, Chang JC. Intrinsic resistance of tumorigenic breast cancer cells to chemotherapy.
J Natl Cancer Inst. 2008; 100:672–679.
32.	 Singh A, Settleman J. EMT, cancer stem cells and drug
resistance: an emerging axis of evil in the war on cancer.
Oncogene. 2010; 29:4741–4751.
33.	 Eyler CE, Rich JN. Survival of the fittest: cancer stem cells
in therapeutic resistance and angiogenesis. J Clin Oncol.
2008; 26:2839–2845.
34.	 Kang MK, Kang SK. Tumorigenesis of chemotherapeutic
drug-resistant cancer stem-like cells in brain glioma. Stem
Cells Dev. 2007; 16:837–847.
35.	 Sharma SV, Lee DY, Li B, Quinlan MP, Takahashi  F,
Maheswaran S, McDermott U, Azizian N, Zou L,
Fischbach  MA, Wong KK, Brandstetter K, Wittner B,
Ramaswamy S, Classon M, Settleman J. A chromatin-­
mediated reversible drug-tolerant state in cancer cell subpopulations. Cell. 2010; 141:69–80.

22.	 Soeda A, Park M, Lee D, Mintz A, AndroutsellisTheotokis A, McKay RD, Engh J, Iwama T, Kunisada T,
Kassam AB, Pollack IF, Park DM. Hypoxia promotes
expansion of the CD133-positive glioma stem cells through
activation of HIF-1alpha. Oncogene. 2009; 28:3949–3959.
23.	 Bianco P. “Mesenchymal” stem cells. Annu Rev Cell Dev
Biol. 2014; 30:677–704.
24.	 Magbanua MJ, Sosa EV, Scott JH, Simko J, Collins C,
Pinkel D, Ryan CJ, Park JW. Isolation and genomic analysis of circulating tumor cells from castration resistant metastatic prostate cancer. BMC Cancer. 2012; 12:78.
25.	 Stott SL, Hsu CH, Tsukrov DI, Yu M, Miyamoto DT,
Waltman BA, Rothenberg SM, Shah AM, Smas ME,
Korir GK, Floyd FP Jr, Gilman AJ, Lord JB, Winokur D,
Springer S, Irimia D, et al. Isolation of circulating tumor
cells using a microvortex-generating herringbone-chip. Proc
Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010; 107:18392–18397.
26.	 Nagrath S, Sequist LV, Maheswaran S, Bell DW, Irimia D,
Ulkus L, Smith MR, Kwak EL, Digumarthy S, Muzikansky A,
Ryan P, Balis UJ, Tompkins RG, Haber  DA, Toner M.
Isolation of rare circulating tumour cells in cancer patients by
microchip technology. Nature. 2007; 450:1235–1239.
27.	 Farace F, Massard C, Vimond N, Drusch F, Jacques  N,
Billiot F, Laplanche A, Chauchereau A, Lacroix L,
Planchard D, Le Moulec S, Andre F, Fizazi K, Soria JC,
Vielh P. A direct comparison of CellSearch and ISET for
circulating tumour-cell detection in patients with metastatic
carcinomas. Br J Cancer. 2011; 105:847–853.
28.	 Hou HW, Warkiani ME, Khoo BL, Li ZR, Soo RA,
Tan DS, Lim WT, Han J, Bhagat AA, Lim CT. Isolation
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

36.	 Mani SA, Guo W, Liao MJ, Eaton EN, Ayyanan A,
Zhou AY, Brooks M, Reinhard F, Zhang CC, Shipitsin M,
Campbell LL, Polyak K, Brisken C, Yang J, Weinberg RA.
The epithelial-mesenchymal transition generates cells with
properties of stem cells. Cell. 2008; 133:704–715.
37.	 Alix-Panabieres C, Vendrell JP, Pelle O, Rebillard X,
Riethdorf S, Muller V, Fabbro M, Pantel K. Detection and
characterization of putative metastatic precursor cells in
cancer patients. Clin Chem. 2007; 53:537–539.
38.	 Giordano A, Gao H, Anfossi S, Cohen E, Mego M, Lee BN,
Tin S, De Laurentiis M, Parker CA, Alvarez RH, Valero V,
Ueno NT, De Placido S, Mani SA, Esteva FJ, Cristofanilli M,
et al. Epithelial-mesenchymal transition and stem cell markers in patients with HER2-positive metastatic breast cancer.
Molecular cancer therapeutics. 2012; 11:2526–2534.
39.	 Sun YF, Xu Y, Yang XR, Guo W, Zhang X, Qiu SJ,
Shi RY, Hu B, Zhou J, Fan J. Circulating stem cell-like epithelial cell adhesion molecule-positive tumor cells indicate
poor prognosis of hepatocellular carcinoma after curative
resection. Hepatology. 2013; 57:1458–1468.
40.	 Sieuwerts AM, Kraan J, Bolt J, van der Spoel P, Elstrodt F,
Schutte M, Martens JW, Gratama JW, Sleijfer S,
Foekens JA. Anti-epithelial cell adhesion molecule antibodies and the detection of circulating normal-like breast tumor
cells. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2009; 101:61–66.
15592

Oncotarget

41.	 Davies H, Bignell GR, Cox C, Stephens P, Edkins S,
Clegg S, Teague J, Woffendin H, Garnett MJ, Bottomley W,
Davis N, Dicks E, Ewing R, Floyd Y, Gray K, Hall S, et al.
Mutations of the BRAF gene in human cancer. Nature.
2002; 417:949–954.
42.	 Lehmann-Che J, Amira-Bouhidel F, Turpin E, Antoine M,
Soliman H, Legres L, Bocquet C, Bernoud R, Flandre E,
Varna M, de Roquancourt A, Plassa LF, Giacchetti  S,
Espie M, de Bazelaire C, Cahen-Doidy L, et al.
Immunohistochemical and molecular analyses of HER2
status in breast cancers are highly concordant and complementary approaches. Br J Cancer. 2011; 104:1739–1746.
43.	 Saxena N, Hartman M, Bhoo-Pathy N, Lim JN, Aw TC,
Iau P, Taib NA, Lee SC, Yip CH, Verkooijen HM. Breast
cancer in South East Asia: comparison of presentation and
outcome between a middle income and a high income country. World journal of surgery. 2012; 36:2838–2846.
44.	 Khoo BL, Warkiani ME, Tan DS, Bhagat AA, Irwin D,
Lau DP, Lim AS, Lim KH, Krisna SS, Lim WT, Yap YS,
Lee SC, Soo RA, Han J, Lim CT. Clinical validation of an
ultra high-throughput spiral microfluidics for the detection
and enrichment of viable circulating tumor cells. PLoS One.
2014; 9:e99409.
45.	 Adams DL, Martin SS, Alpaugh RK, Charpentier M,
Tsai S, Bergan RC, Ogden IM, Catalona W, Chumsri S,
Tang CM, Cristofanilli M. Circulating giant macrophages
as a potential biomarker of solid tumors. Proc Natl Acad Sci
U S A. 2014; 111:3514–3519.
46.	 Marrinucci D, Bethel K, Lazar D, Fisher J, Huynh E,
Clark P, Bruce R, Nieva J, Kuhn P. Cytomorphology of circulating colorectal tumor cells:a small case series. J Oncol.
2010; 2010:861341.
47.	 Muller V, Stahmann N, Riethdorf S, Rau T, Zabel T,
Goetz A, Janicke F, Pantel K. Circulating tumor cells in
breast cancer: correlation to bone marrow micrometastases,
heterogeneous response to systemic therapy and low proliferative activity. Clin Cancer Res. 2005; 11:3678–3685.
48.	 Braun S, Kentenich C, Janni W, Hepp F, de Waal J,
Willgeroth F, Sommer H, Pantel K. Lack of effect of adjuvant chemotherapy on the elimination of single dormant
tumor cells in bone marrow of high-risk breast cancer
patients. J Clin Oncol. 2000; 18:80–86.
49.	 Armstrong AJ, Marengo MS, Oltean S, Kemeny G,
Bitting  RL, Turnbull JD, Herold CI, Marcom PK,
George  DJ, Garcia-Blanco MA. Circulating tumor cells
from patients with advanced prostate and breast cancer display both epithelial and mesenchymal markers. Mol Cancer
Res. 2011; 9:997–1007.
50.	 Chen CL, Mahalingam D, Osmulski P, Jadhav RR,
Wang CM, Leach RJ, Chang TC, Weitman SD, Kumar AP,
Sun L, Gaczynska ME, Thompson IM, Huang TH. Singlecell analysis of circulating tumor cells identifies cumulative expression patterns of EMT-related genes in metastatic
prostate cancer. Prostate. 2013; 73:813–826.
51.	 Balasubramanian P, Lang JC, Jatana KR, Miller B, Ozer E,
Old M, Schuller DE, Agrawal A, Teknos TN, Summers TA Jr,
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Lustberg MB, Zborowski M, Chalmers JJ. Multiparameter
analysis, including EMT markers, on negatively enriched
blood samples from patients with squamous cell carcinoma
of the head and neck. PLoS One. 2012; 7:e42048.
52.	 Hodgkinson CL, Morrow CJ, Li Y, Metcalf RL,
Rothwell DG, Trapani F, Polanski R, Burt DJ, Simpson KL,
Morris K, Pepper SD, Nonaka D, Greystoke A, Kelly P,
Bola B, Krebs MG, et al. Tumorigenicity and genetic profiling of circulating tumor cells in small-cell lung cancer. Nat
Med. 2014; 20:897–903.
53.	 Pantel K, Brakenhoff RH, Brandt B. Detection, clinical relevance and specific biological properties of disseminating
tumour cells. Nat Rev Cancer. 2008; 8:329–340.
54.	 Spizzo G, Went P, Dirnhofer S, Obrist P, Simon R,
Spichtin  H, Maurer R, Metzger U, von Castelberg B,
Bart R, Stopatschinskaya S, Kochli OR, Haas P, Mross F,
Zuber M, Dietrich H, et al. High Ep-CAM expression is
associated with poor prognosis in node-positive breast cancer. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2004; 86:207–213.
55.	 Warkiani ME, Khoo BL, Tan DS, Bhagat AA, Lim WT,
Yap YS, Lee SC, Soo RA, Han J, Lim CT. An ultrahigh-throughput spiral microfluidic biochip for the
enrichment of circulating tumor cells. Analyst. 2014;
139:3245–3255.
56.	 Warkiani ME, Guan G, Luan KB, Lee WC, Bhagat AA,
Chaudhuri PK, Tan DS, Lim WT, Lee SC, Chen PC,
Lim CT, Han J. Slanted spiral microfluidics for the ultrafast, label-free isolation of circulating tumor cells. Lab
Chip. 2014; 14:128–137.
57.	 Lacroix M, Leclercq G. Relevance of breast cancer cell
lines as models for breast tumours: an update. Breast Cancer
Res Treat. 2004; 83:249–289.
58.	 van Staveren WC, Solis DY, Hebrant A, Detours V,
Dumont JE, Maenhaut C. Human cancer cell lines:
Experimental models for cancer cells in situ? For cancer
stem cells? Biochim Biophys Acta. 2009; 2:92–103.
59.	 Aceto N, Bardia A, Miyamoto DT, Donaldson MC,
Wittner BS, Spencer JA, Yu M, Pely A, Engstrom A,
Zhu H, Brannigan BW, Kapur R, Stott SL, Shioda T,
Ramaswamy S, Ting DT, et al. Circulating tumor cell clusters are oligoclonal precursors of breast cancer metastasis.
Cell. 2014; 158:1110–1122.
60.	 Pizon M, Zimon D, Carl S, Pachmann U, Pachmann K,
Camara O. Heterogeneity of circulating epithelial tumour
cells from individual patients with respect to expression
profiles and clonal growth (sphere formation) in breast cancer. Ecancermedicalscience. 2013; 7:343.
61.	 Xenidis N, Perraki M, Kafousi M, Apostolaki S, Bolonaki I,
Stathopoulou A, Kalbakis K, Androulakis N, Kouroussis C,
Pallis T, Christophylakis C, Argyraki K, Lianidou ES,
Stathopoulos S, Georgoulias V, Mavroudis D. Predictive
and prognostic value of peripheral blood cytokeratin-19
mRNA-positive cells detected by real-time polymerase
chain reaction in node-negative breast cancer patients.
J Clin Oncol. 2006; 24:3756–3762.
15593

Oncotarget

