Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No. 20

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Editorial

Trithorax group genes in hematopoiesis
Jennifer Chase, Jolanta Grembecka and Ivan Maillard

Hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells maintain
blood homeostasis by giving rise to all mature blood cells
and lymphocytes. A recent study identified the trithorax
group gene ash1l as a critical regulator of quiescence
and self-renewal potential in adult hematopoietic stem
cells [1]. Ash1l encodes a large protein with histone
methyltransferase activity that cooperates with the
leukemia-associated gene Mll1 to regulate hematopoiesis
in mice.
Epigenetic modifiers have essential functions in
normal hematopoiesis and are frequently dysregulated
in hematological malignancies. Trithorax group (TrxG)
genes were discovered in Drosophila melanogaster
for their role in inducing normal body patterning by
positively regulating Homeobox (Hox) gene expression
[2]. Hox genes also play critical roles in mammalian
development and in specific adult tissues, including the
hematopoietic system. Although multiple members of the
TrxG gene network interact genetically in flies [3], much
less is known about their crosstalk and cooperativity in
mammals.
Mixed Lineage Leukemia 1 (MLL1) is the
mammalian homolog of fly trithorax. MLL1 was originally
discovered as a recurrent translocation partner in acute
leukemias (reviewed in [4]). MLL1 maintains expression
of HOX genes during development and regulates the
function of normal hematopoietic stem cells. MLL1-driven
leukemias are characterized by upregulated expression
of HOXA cluster genes. Endogenous MLL1 contains
a Su(var)3-9, Enhancer-of-zeste and Trithorax (SET)
domain with H3K4 histone methyltransferase (HMT)
activity that is lost in MLL1 fusion proteins [4]. MLL1
functions as part of a multiprotein complex that includes
RBP4, WDR5, ASH2L, and the cofactor menin. In
contrast, MLL1 fusion proteins consist of the N-terminal
domain of MLL1 fused to an oncogenic partner. This
complex also associates with the cofactor menin, but lacks
intrinsic H3K4 HMT activity, which can be provided by
endogenous MLL1 encoded by the non-rearranged allele
[4]. In addition, the H3K79 histone methyltransferase
DOT1L is recruited to the oncogenic complex at least in
part through interactions with the MLL1 fusion partners
AF10, AF4, AF9 or ENL [4]. Multiple research groups
are focusing on targeting members of this complex
in leukemia. Careful consideration must be given to
disrupting oncogenic transformation while maintaining
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

normal hematopoiesis, for example by targeting regulatory
features of the complex that are unique or dominant in
malignant cells.
Besides MLL1, other TrxG members are poorly
characterized in mammals. The TrxG gene ash1 (absent,
small, or homeotic discs 1) was discovered in flies and
shown to interact genetically with other TrxG genes [3].
Its mammalian homolog Ash1-like (Ash1l) encodes a
large protein that contains a SET domain with in vitro
H3K36 histone methyltransferase activity [5]. We recently
discovered that Ash1l is a critical regulator of adult
hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) [1]. Ash1l-deficient mice
generate normal numbers of fetal and neonatal long-term
HSCs, but these cells become rapidly depleted in young
adult mice. Phenotypically defined Ash1l-deficient HSCs
display decreased quiescence and fail to give rise to longterm tri-lineage hematopoietic output after transplantation
to irradiated recipients, indicating profoundly defective
function. Moreover, Ash1l-deficient HSCs compete poorly
for niche space, as evidenced by potent engraftment of
wild-type HSCs in Ash1l-deficient recipients even in
the absence of irradiation. Despite these defects, Ash1ldeficient mice maintain steady-state hematopoiesis and
display enhanced self-renewal of progenitors downstream
of HSCs. As observed for Mll1 in normal and malignant
hematopoiesis, Ash1l regulates expression of Hoxa cluster
genes [1]. Individual deficiency of Ash1l or Mll1 results
in decreased but not abolished Hoxa expression [1, 6].
Functionally, inactivation of both Mll1 and Ash1l but
not either gene alone leads to rapid hematopoietic failure
[1]. Altogether, this is the first in vivo demonstration of
cooperativity between mammalian TrxG proteins. More
work is needed to define the critical pathways operating
downstream of Ash1l and Mll1 in HSCs and the molecular
mechanisms of their cooperative effects.
As the field moves forward in targeting TrxG
proteins in leukemia, careful consideration should be
given to understanding how these proteins function during
steady-state hematopoiesis in order to exploit critical
structural and functional differences. For example, recent
work showed that small molecular inhibitors of the menin/
MLL1 interaction have substantial in vivo therapeutic
activity in mouse models of MLL1-driven leukemia,
but minimal negative impact on normal hematopoiesis
[7]. Menin is an MLL1 cofactor that is essential for its
recruitment to a subset of target genes [6] and is part of the
17855

Oncotarget

MLL1 complex in normal hematopoiesis and leukemia.
Combined deficiency of Men1 and Ash1l in mice results
in bone marrow hypocellularity and HSC loss [1]. Thus,
the modest impact of Men1 loss alone or menin/MLL1
disruption in normal hematopoiesis may result from
compensatory activity of the TrxG gene Ash1l. It is also
possible that individual molecular pathways differentially
regulate recruitment of MLL1 and MLL1 fusion proteins
to target genes, opening a therapeutic window. Systematic
studies of TrxG gene networks in normal and malignant
hematopoiesis could point to the Achilles’ heel of MLL1driven leukemia.
Ivan Maillard: Center for Stem Cell Biology, Life Sciences
Institute, Division of Hematology-Oncology, Department of
Internal Medicine, Department of Cell and Developmental
Biology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA
Correspondence to: Ivan Maillard, email imaillar@umich.
edu
Received: June 26, 2015
Published: July 19, 2015

References
1.	

Jones M et al. Journal of Clinical Investigation. 2015; 125:
2007-20.

2.	 Schuettengruber B et al. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2011; 12:
799-814.
3.	

Tripoulas NA et al. Genetics. 1994; 137: 1027-1038.

4.	

Yokoyama A. Int J Hematol. 2015; 101: 352-361.

5.	

An S et al. Journal of Biological Chemistry. 2011; 1-6.

6.	

Artinger EL et al. PNAS. 2013; 110: 12000-5.

7.	

Borkin D et al. Cancer Cell. 2015; 27: 589-602.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

17856

Oncotarget

