Research Article

Membrane-Bound Heparin-Binding Epidermal Growth
Factor–Like Growth Factor Regulates E-Cadherin
Expression in Pancreatic Carcinoma Cells
1

1

2

3

1

Fang Wang, Callum Sloss, Xiaobo Zhang, Sam W. Lee, and James C. Cusack
1

Division of Surgical Oncology and 2Gastrointestinal Unit and Department of Surgery, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard
Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts and 3Cutaneous Biology Research Center, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard
Medical School, Charlestown, Massachusetts

Abstract
Heparin-binding epidermal growth factor-like growth factor
(HB-EGF) is a member of the EGF growth factor family. Initially
synthesized as a membrane-bound precursor (pro-HB-EGF), it
is cleaved at the juxtamembrane domain to release the soluble
form of HB-EGF (s-HB-EGF) by sheddases, including matrix
metalloproteinases (MMP) and a disintegrin and metalloproteinases. This is a process referred to as ectodomain shedding
and is implicated in the process of all ligands of the EGF
receptor (EGFR) family. The tumorigenic potential of s-HB-EGF
has been studied extensively; however, the role of pro-HB-EGF
in tumor progression is unknown, despite the fact that a
considerable amount of pro-HB-EGF remains on the cell
membrane. Our data here clearly indicated the distinct role
of pro-HB-EGF in the regulation of E-cadherin expression and
the epithelial-mesenchymal transition. We showed here that
the expression of pro-HB-EGF was associated with the
differentiation status in pancreatic tumors and cell lines.
Expression of noncleaved pro-HB-EGF in pancreatic cells
resulted in the up-regulation of E-cadherin through suppression of ZEB1 , which is a transcriptional repressor of
E-cadherin. Inhibition of HB-EGF shedding using a MMP
inhibitor, GM6001, also dramatically augmented the
E-cadherin expression while suppressing the EGFR activation.
Moreover, up-regulation of E-cadherin by pro-HB-EGF not only
resulted in cellular morphologic change but also decreased
cell motility and enhanced apoptotic sensitivity in response
to gemcitabine-erlotinib treatment. Collectively, our data
defined a distinct role of pro-HB-EGF in the regulation of
E-cadherin, suggesting that inhibition of shedding may be a
novel approach to suppress pancreatic metastasis and sensitize
cells to cancer therapy. [Cancer Res 2007;67(18):8486–93]

Introduction
Heparin-binding epidermal growth factor-like growth factor
(HB-EGF) is a member of the EGF growth factor family. It is
initially synthesized as a membrane-bound precursor (pro-HBEGF), which is subsequently cleaved at the juxtamembrane domain
by matrix metalloproteinases (MMP) and a disintegrin and

Requests for reprints: James C. Cusack, Division of Surgical Oncology,
Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical School, 7th Floor, Yawkey
Building, 55 Fruit Street, Boston, MA 02114. Phone: 617-724-4093; Fax: 617-724-3895; Email: jcusack@partners.org or Fang Wang, Division of Surgical Oncology,
Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Jackson Building 904,
55 Fruit Street, Boston, MA 02114. Phone: 617-726-5165; Fax: 617-726-8623;
E-mail: fwang6@partners.org.
I2007 American Association for Cancer Research.
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-07-0498

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (18). September 15, 2007

metalloproteinases, a process often referred as ectodomain
shedding (1–3). The soluble form of HB-EGF (s-HB-EGF) is then
released from the cell membrane and exerts its mitogenic activity
via activating the EGF receptor (EGFR) or other ErbB receptors
(4–7). Recent studies have indicated that s-HB-EGF plays a key
role in the acquisition of malignancy, such as tumorigenicity (8, 9)
and resistance to chemotherapy (10). However, little is known of
the pro-HB-EGF and its involvements in tumor development
and cancer therapy despite the fact that a considerable amount of
pro-HB-EGF remains on the cell membrane uncleaved.
Singh et al. (11) reported recently that pro-HB-EGF modulated
hepatocyte growth factor/scatter factor (HGF/SF)–induced cellular
responses in Madin-Darby canine kidney cells cells. Expression
of mutated noncleavable membrane-bound HB-EGF promoted
cell-matrix and cell-cell interaction, decreased cell migration,
and HGF/SF–induced cell scattering. By contrast, expression of
s-HB-EGF not only increased cell migration but also decreased cellmatrix and cell-cell interactions and promoted the development of
long unbranched tubular structures in response to HGF/SF. These
findings suggested that pro-HB-EGF and s-HB-EGF had different
effects on cell-cell and cell-extracellular matrix interactions.
Meanwhile, Iwamoto et al. (12) observed that when interleukin3–dependent hematopoietic 32D cells were cocultured on a monolayer of Vero-H cells overexpressing pro-HB-EGF, growth inhibition
and subsequent apoptosis were induced in the DER cells even in
the presence of excess amounts of EGF or s-HB-EGF. They also
showed that the inhibitory signal induced by pro-HB-EGF was
mediated via EGFR and that the cytoplasmic domain of EGFR was
essential for pro-HB-EGF–induced apoptosis. The involvement of
pro-HB-EGF in cell-cell contact was also supported by the study
showing that coexpression of pro-HB-EGF and CD9 might render
the renal epithelial cells more resistant to the disruption of cell-cell
and cell-matrix interactions (13).
Our study found that pro-HB-EGF is involved in the epithelialmesenchymal transition (EMT) via regulating E-cadherin (CDH1)
expression in pancreatic carcinoma cells. EMT is a central process
implicated in the progression of primary tumors toward metastasis
(a switch from the polarized, epithelial phenotype to a highly
motile fibroblastoid or mesenchymal phenotype). Associated with
these phenotypic changes, loss of E-cadherin is the hallmark of
EMT (14). During tumor progression, E-cadherin can be silenced by
different mechanisms, such as the promoter hypermethylation (15)
or transcriptional repression (16, 17). The primary transcriptional
repressors of E-cadherin are zinc finger transcription factors,
including Snail, Slug, SIP/ZEB-2, and yEF/ZEB-1 (18–23). These
transcription factors down-regulate the expression of E-cadherin
via interacting with two 5¶-CACCTG (E-box) sequences of the
E-cadherin promoter (19, 24).

8486

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Pro-HB-EGF Up-regulates E-Cadherin Expression

In this study, we showed a distinct role of pro-HB-EGF in the
regulation of E-cadherin. Exogenous pro-HB-EGF was sufficient
to augment E-cadherin transcription through the suppression of
ZEB1 expression. Furthermore, up-regulation of E-cadherin by proHB-EGF not only caused cell morphology change but also resulted
in higher sensitivity to chemotherapy treatment. Our data suggest
that inhibition of HB-EGF shedding to preserve more pro-HB-EGF
may be a novel approach in cancer therapy.

Materials and Methods
Reagents. Polyclonal antibody against HB-EGF was purchased from
R&D Systems, Inc., which recognizes predominantly the membrane-bound
HB-EGF. Polyclonal antibodies against E-cadherin, phospho-EGFR, EGFR,
and glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH), respectively,
were purchased from Cell Signaling. ZEB1 antibody was purchased from
Abcam. FITC-labeled E-cadherin antibody was purchased from BD
Biosciences. SMARTpool small interfering RNA (siRNA) kits against HBEGF, ZEB1, and nontargeting scramble siRNA were purchased from
Dharmacon, Inc. ZEB1-expressing construct was generously provided by
Dr. Michel M. Sanders (Department of Biochemistry, Molecular Biology &
Biophysics, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN). Apoptosis assay kit
Annexin V-CY5 was purchased from BD PharMingen (BD Biosciences).
Cell culture and generation of stable clones expressing different
forms of HB-EGFs. Human pancreatic carcinoma cell lines, including
PANC-1, Capan-1, Capan-2, BxPc-3, and MiaPaCa-2, were purchased from
the American Type Culture Collection (ATCC) and cultured according to
ATCC recommendation. Generation of stable PANC-1 clones expressing
wild-type membrane-bound HB-EGF (wt-pro-HB-EGF) and mutated
uncleaved pro-HB-EGF (mut-pro-HB-EGF) was described previously (8, 10).

Wound healing assay. The wound healing assay was done as described
(25). Briefly, cells were grown to confluence in six-well plates. Cells were
treated with 100 mmol/L hydroxyurea (Sigma-Aldrich) for 24 h in serumfree medium to block cell proliferation. The cross-shaped wound was made
on the monolayer using a sterile 200-AL pipette tip. Cells were rinsed with
PBS and maintained in serum-free medium for an additional 18 h, and the
cross-shaped wounds were photographed.
Immunocytochemistry. Cells were fixed in PBS containing 4%
paraformaldehyde for 20 min and washed thrice with PBS followed by
permeabilization with 0.1% Triton X-100 for 5 min. Antibodies were diluted
in PBS containing 5 mg/mL bovine serum albumin. In membrane
localization of E-cadherin, HB-EGF was detected by labeling nonpermeablized cells. Fixed cells were incubated with primary antibodies overnight at
4jC followed by incubation with secondary antibodies for another 60 min.
Images were acquired on an inverted immunofluorescence microscope
(100 objective, model IX70, Olympus).
Immunohistochemistry. Tissue samples from normal human pancreas
(n = 5) and pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) patients (n = 20)
were generously provided by Dr. Sarah Thayer (Division of General Surgery,
Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA) or obtained from Massachusetts General Hospital tumor bank. Freshly removed tissue samples were
fixed in 10% formaldehyde solution and paraffin embedded for histologic
analysis. Following antigen demasking for 20 min in the preheated water
bath (95–100jC), sections were subsequently deparaffinized in xylene. Slides
were then blocked with normal horse serum (diluted 1:20 in PBS) for
30 min. Antigens were detected using a standard three-step method with
primary goat anti–HB-EGF antibody (1:100 working dilution), biotinylated
secondary antibody (1:50 working dilution), and streptavidin-horseradish
peroxidase (1:300 in PBS). After blocking the endogenous peroxidase activity
by 0.3% hydrogen peroxide in methanol and after two washes in PBS, the
reaction was visualized with 3,3¶-diaminobenzidine (DAKO) according to

Figure 1. HB-EGF mRNA and protein expression in human PDAC tissues (A ) and in human pancreatic cancer cell lines (B and C ). A, HB-EGF immunostaining
of specimens from normal pancreas and PDACs. HB-EGF immunoreactivity was faint in normal pancreas and poorly differentiated PDACs, whereas it was
abundant in well-differentiated to moderately differentiated PDACs. Original magnification, 20. B, HB-EGF mRNA expression was analyzed by q-RT-PCR in
normal pancreas and pancreatic carcinoma cell lines, including Capan-1, Capan-2, and BxPc-3 (well differentiated to moderately differentiated) and PANC-1 and
MiaPaCa-2 (poorly differentiated). C, pro-HB-EGF protein was analyzed by Western blotting in normal pancreas and pancreatic carcinoma cell lines. Housekeeping
gene GAPDH was used as internal control. Pro-HB-EGF was highly expressed in well-differentiated to moderately differentiated cell lines.

www.aacrjournals.org

8487

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (18). September 15, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

Figure 2. Pro-HB-EGF expression changes cell morphology via up-regulating E-cadherin expression. A, mut-pro-HB-EGF induces the expression of E-cadherin
protein in PANC-1 and Capan-1 cells. B, mut-pro-HB-EGF expression promoted the transcriptional activity of E-cadherin . The mRNA level of E-cadherin in PANC-1 and
Capan-1 cells was measured by q-RT-PCR. GAPDH expression was used as endogenous control. C, expression of mut-pro-HB-EGF induces morphologic change
in PANC-1 cells. Phase-contrast images of cells (PANC-1/vector and PANC-1/mut-pro-HB-EGF) were cultured for 3 d on collagen I–coated plate. Mut-pro-HB-EGF–
expressing cells show highly packed cuboidal epithelial-like morphology, whereas vector cells form a fibroblastic spindle-like morphology. D, immunofluorescent
staining of PANC-1/vector– and PANC-1/mut-pro-HB-EGF–expressing cells. Fluorescence signals specific to E-cadherin antibody was visualized as green,
and fluorescence signals specific to HB-EGF were visualized as red. DAPI (blue ) was used to indicate nuclear. The induced E-cadherin by mut-pro-HB-EGF was
expressed exclusively in the cellular basolateral membrane, whereas, in the vector control cells, E-cadherin was stained randomly in and around the cytoplasm.

the manufacturer’s instructions. A negative control was set up by
replacement of the polyclonal anti–HB-EGF antibody with normal goat
IgG. All negative control specimens showed no nonspecific staining.
siRNA-mediated gene silencing of HB-EGF and ZEB1. Cells were
grown to 60% to 80% confluence and SMARTpool siRNAs against HB-EGF
or ZEB1 were transfected into cells using the TransIT-TKO (Mirus) or
DharmaFECT2/4 transfection reagents (Dharmacon) according to the
manufacturer’s instructions. Nontargeting scramble siRNA was used as a
negative control. Briefly, transfection reagent was incubated in serum-free
medium for 5 min. Subsequently, the respective siRNA was added. After
incubation for 15 min at room temperature, the mixture was diluted with
medium and added to each well. The final concentration of each siRNA in
transfection was 50 nmol/L. After incubation for 24 h, cells were washed
and resuspended in fresh culture medium for an additional 24 to 48 h before
harvest.
Detection of gene expression using quantitative reverse transcription-PCR. Expression of HB-EGF, E-cadherin , and ZEB1 genes were
measured by quantitative reverse transcription-PCR (q-RT-PCR). Taqmanlabeled specific probes of HB-EGF, E-cadherin, and ZEB1 genes were
purchased from Applied Biosystems. The reaction of q-RT-PCR was done
using Taqman Gene Expression Assays on Applied Biosystems 7300 Realtime PCR Systems (Applied Biosystems). Human endogenous GAPDH gene
was used as control group.
Cell motility assay. Motility assay was done in 6.5-mm-diameter
Transwell chambers (Costar) with a porous polycarbonate membrane
(8.0 micron pore size). In the experiment, after 6 h of serum starvation, the
cells (104 each per well) were seeded on the upper side of the filter in serumfree medium and 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS)–containing medium was
added to the lower chambers. After 12 h, cells on the upper side of the filters

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (18). September 15, 2007

were mechanically removed. Cells migrated to the lower side were fixed
with 4% paraformaldehyde and stained with 0.25% Coomassie blue. The
filters were photographed and the cells were counted.
Flow cytometry assay. Apoptosis was assessed by fluorescenceactivated cell sorting analysis using Annexin V staining (Roche Diagnostics)
as described previously (10). Flow cytometric analysis of stained cells was
done on the Becton Dickinson FACSCalibur (Becton Dickinson).

Results
Expression of membrane-bound HB-EGF in PDAC tissues
and cell lines. Previous clinical studies have indicated that the
pro-HB-EGF expression was correlated with small size and earlystage tumor formation and inversely related to lymph node
metastasis in colonic neoplasm, hepatocellular carcinoma, and
breast cancer (26–29). To investigate the pro-HB-EGF expression in
pancreatic cancer, we first analyzed the expression of HB-EGF in
PDAC tissue samples using immunohistochemistry. The primary
antibody against HB-EGF recognized predominantly the pro-HBEGF. Stronger HB-EGF immunoreactivity was observed in welldifferentiated and moderately differentiated PDAC tissues, whereas
faint HB-EGF staining was present in normal pancreatic tissue and
poorly differentiated PDACs (Fig. 1A). Then, the expression of HBEGF mRNA was analyzed in a panel of pancreatic carcinoma cell
lines with different differentiation status (30) compared with
normal pancreas using q-RT-PCR. As shown in Fig. 1B, higher
expression of HB-EGF mRNA was observed in well-differentiated to
moderately differentiated cell lines, including Capan-1, Capan-2,

8488

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Pro-HB-EGF Up-regulates E-Cadherin Expression

and BxPc-3 cells, whereas in poorly differentiated cell lines, HBEGF mRNA level was relatively low (in PANC-1 cells) or
undetectable (in MiaPaCa-2 cells). Similar results were obtained
at the protein level, as we observed that the expression of pro-HBEGF protein was relatively higher in well-differentiated to
moderately differentiated cell lines compared with poorly differentiated cell lines using Western blotting (Fig. 1C). These data
indicated that pro-HB-EGF expression in pancreatic carcinoma
cells was associated with cell differentiation status.
HB-EGF expression changes cell morphology via up-regulation of E-cadherin. Because the process of cell differentiation is
often related to EMT, we attempted to investigate the potential role
of pro-HB-EGF in the regulation of EMT-related gene expression.
To differentiate the roles of membrane-bound and s-HB-EGF, we
developed stably transfected PANC-1 cells expressing mutated
uncleaved pro-HB-EGF (PANC-1/mut-pro-HB-EGF) and vectortransfected control (PANC-1/vector). Meanwhile, Capan-1 cells
were also transiently transfected with vector or mut-pro-HB-EGF
constructs. We detected stronger expression of E-cadherin in mutpro-HB-EGF–expressing cells compared with vector control cells
by use of Western blotting and q-RT-PCR (Fig. 2A and B). When
cells were grown on collagen-coated two-dimensional surface,
PANC-1/mut-pro-HB-EGF cells retained tightly packed cuboidal
epithelial-like morphology, whereas PANC-1/vector cells exhibited
a fibroblastic spindle-shaped morphology (Fig. 2C). Immunocytochemistry was further done to monitor the subcellular distribution
of E-cadherin (Fig. 2D). The induced E-cadherin by mut-pro-HBEGF expression was observed exclusively in the cellular basolateral
membrane, whereas, in the vector control cells, E-cadherin was
stained randomly in and around the cytoplasm. Because mut-proHB-EGF and E-cadherin were both present at the cell membrane,
we attempted to detect whether mut-pro-HB-EGF could physically

interact with E-cadherin using coimmunoprecipitation. However,
we did not observe any interaction between E-cadherin and mutpro-HB-EGF or wt-pro-HB-EGF (data not shown).
Suppression of endogenous HB-EGF expression using siRNA
down-regulates E-cadherin expression. To investigate the role of
endogenous HB-EGF in the regulation of E-cadherin expression, we
transiently transfected PANC-1, BxPc-3, and Capan-2 cells with
siRNA against the HB-EGF gene. Seventy-two hours later, we
observed that endogenous HB-EGF and E-cadherin expression were
both suppressed as measured by q-RT-PCR and Western blotting
(Fig. 3A and B). These data suggested that HB-EGF expression was
necessary to sustain E-cadherin expression.
Mut-pro-HB-EGF up-regulates E-cadherin due to the suppression of ZEB1 expression. Two major causes of aberrant
E-cadherin expression have been established: the promoter hypermethylation (15) and the transcription repression (16, 17). In
PANC-1 cells, the promoter of E-cadherin gene remains intact and
the expression of E-cadherin is regulated by collagen type I and II
(31). Based on these findings, we suspected that pro-HB-EGF
expression might regulate the transcriptional repressor genes.
Because the primary transcriptional repressors that suppress
E-cadherin expression are zinc finger proteins including the
members of Slug/Snail family, we attempted to detect the
expression level of these repressors in response to mut-pro-HBEGF expression. We did not observe any significant change of Snail,
Slug, Twist, or SIP mRNA or protein in mut-pro-HB-EGF cells as
evidenced by Western blotting or q-RT-PCR (data not shown).
However, ZEB1 expression was suppressed by mut-pro-HB-EGF, as
we observed a 50% inhibition of the endogenous ZEB1 expression
in PANC-1/mut-pro-HB-EGF cells compared with PANC-1/vector
control (Fig. 4A). Transient transfection of siRNA against the
endogenous ZEB1 gene in PANC-1 cells resulted in a 4.2-fold

Figure 3. siRNA-mediated silencing of HB-EGF gene results in the down-regulation of E-cadherin expression. A, PANC-1, BxPc-3, and Capan-2 cells were
transiently transfected with SMARTpool siRNA against HB-EGF . Nontargeting scramble siRNA was used as negative control. Seventy-two hours later, the mRNA
was extracted and the expression of HB-EGF and E-cadherin mRNA was analyzed by q-RT-PCR. B, the protein level of HB-EGF and E-cadherin was analyzed by
Western blotting after transient transfection with siRNA against HB-EGF . Depletion of HB-EGF resulted in the inhibition of E-cadherin expression.

www.aacrjournals.org

8489

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (18). September 15, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

Figure 4. Mut-pro-HB-EGF promotes E-cadherin expression via suppressing ZEB1 expression. A, mut-pro-HB-EGF expression down-regulated the transcriptional
activity of ZEB1 by 50% as confirmed by q-RT-PCR in PANC-1/mut-pro-HB-EGF cells compared with PANC-1/vector cells. B, suppression of endogenous ZEB1
expression using siRNA increased the endogenous mRNA level of E-cadherin by 4.2-fold as supported by q-RT-PCR. C, exogenous expression of ZEB1 abrogated the
E-cadherin expression in both PANC-1/vector and PANC-1/mut-pro-HB-EGF cells. D, PANC-1, BxPc-3, and Capan-2 cells were transiently transfected with siRNA
against HB-EGF . Seventy-two hours later, the expression of ZEB1 mRNA was analyzed by q-RT-PCR. Suppression of endogenous HB-EGF expression using siRNA
increased the transcriptional activity of ZEB1 .

increase of the endogenous E-cadherin expression compared with
scramble siRNA control transfection (Fig. 4B). We then transiently
transfected cells with ZEB1-expressing construct and observed that
ZEB1 dramatically down-regulated E-cadherin expression in both
mut-pro-HB-EGF cells and vector control PANC-1 cells (Fig. 4C).
Meanwhile, depletion of HB-EGF expression by use of siRNA
resulted in the up-regulation of ZEB1 in PANC-1, BxPc-3, and
Capan-2 cells as measured by q-RT-PCR (Fig. 4D). These data
suggested the potential link of ZEB1 in pro-HB-EGF–mediated
E-cadherin induction, although the mechanism underlying this
regulation is unknown.
Inhibition of the ectodomain shedding by MMP inhibitor
up-regulates E-cadherin expression. Lu et al. (32) showed
previously that activation of EGFR inhibited E-cadherin expression
through up-regulation of Snail. Therefore, we suspected that
inhibition of HB-EGF shedding using MMP inhibitor might produce
more pro-HB-EGF and abrogate EGFR activation, resulting in the
up-regulation of E-cadherin. As we anticipated, treatment of
GM6001, a broad range of MMP inhibitor that has been shown to
inhibit HB-EGF shedding (10, 33, 34), resulted in a dramatic
increase of E-cadherin in wt-pro-HB-EGF–expressing cells (Fig. 5A).
Although the endogenous pro-HB-EGF expression remains very low
in PANC-1 cells, the treatment of GM6001 still had an effect on
E-cadherin induction, as we observed the increased level of proHB-EGF along with E-cadherin up-regulation under GM6001
treatment (Fig. 5A). These data indicated the importance of
endogenous pro-HB-EGF in the regulation of E-cadherin expression. Meanwhile, the phosphorylation of EGFR was dramatically
diminished in the presence of GM6001, which led us to suspect that
direct inhibition of EGFR activation may also augment E-cadherin

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (18). September 15, 2007

expression. This was confirmed by the treatment of EGFR inhibitor
AG1478, which resulted in the inhibition of EGFR phosphorylation
and up-regulation of E-cadherin expression in both wt-pro-HB-EGF
cells and vector cells (Fig. 5A). Inhibition of EGFR signaling
transduction and shedding activity also had a dramatic effect on
cell morphology, as we observed that treatment of AG1478 or
GM6001 switched cells from fibroblast-like to epithelial-like
morphology on collagen-coated culture surface (Fig. 5B).
Pro-HB-EGF down-regulates cell migration and motility. To
determine whether this up-regulation of E-cadherin was reflected
in the change of cell motility, we first evaluated the ability of
migration of PANC-1/vector cells and PANC-1/mut-pro-HB-EGF
cells. Cells were grown to reach confluence and treated with
hydroxyurea for 24 h in serum-free medium. A cross-shaped wound
was created in the monolayer, and cells were cultured in the serumfree medium for another 18 h. Figure 5C showed the representative
digital images of the wounded region before and after the
incubation time. Our data showed that mut-pro-HB-EGF expression significantly reduced the migration ability compared with
vector cells. Similar results were obtained when motility assay was
done. The PANC-1/mut-pro-HB-EGF cells showed less ability to
invade the basement membrane (70% decrease) even in presence of
10% FBS compared with PANC-1/vector cells (Fig. 5D).
Mut-pro-HB-EGF enhances gemcitabine/erlotinib–induced
apoptosis. Studies have shown the correlation between sensitivity to gefitinib (EGFR inhibitor) and the expression of E-cadherin
and ZEB1, suggesting their predictive value for the responsiveness to EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors. The up-regulation of
E-cadherin expression increased the sensitivity to EGFR inhibition in vitro and in vivo in non–small cell lung carcinoma

8490

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Pro-HB-EGF Up-regulates E-Cadherin Expression

(35–37). Based on our findings, we suspected that mut-pro-HBEGF expression may augment the sensitivity of chemotherapy
and EGFR inhibition therapy. We treated PANC-1 cells with
erlotinib (EGFR inhibitor) alone or combined with gemcitabine,
which has been approved for locally advanced pancreatic cancer
or metastatic cancer patients. The effect of mut-pro-HB-EGF on
apoptosis in the presence of gemcitabine/erlotinib was analyzed
by flow cytometry. As shown in Fig. 6A, we observed the
increased apoptotic sensitivity in mut-pro-HB-EGF cells in all
three treatments (a 1.73-fold increase in gemcitabine treatment, a
1.36-fold increase in erlotinib treatment, and a 1.81-fold increase
in gemcitabine/erlotinib combination) compared with the same
treatments in control groups. Pretreatment of GM6001 to inhibit
shedding activity also achieved higher sensitivity in all three
treatments (a 1.57-fold increase in gemcitabine treatment, a 1.87fold increase in erlotinib treatment, and a 2.41-fold increase in
gemcitabine/erlotinib combination) compared with the group
without GM6001 pretreatment (Fig. 6A). These data indicated

that up-regulation of E-cadherin by pro-HB-EGF enhanced the
apoptotic response to gemcitabine/erlotinib.

Discussion
Our interest in pro-HB-EGF stems from a previous study by
Ongusaha et al. (8) and prior findings in our laboratory that
suggested the dual roles of s-HB-EGF and pro-HB-EGF in the
regulation of tumor progression and chemotherapy response (10).
s-HB-EGF has been extensively studied as a growth factor of EGF
family as it exerts the mitogenic function via activation of the
EGFR signaling transduction. However, a considerable amount of
pro-HB-EGF retains on the cell membrane, and the functional
consequence of pro-HB-EGF is largely unknown. Our results as
well as the work of others (8, 11, 12, 38) suggest that s-HB-EGF and
pro-HB-EGF have distinct roles in tumor development, especially in
the regulation of cell-cell contact and chemotherapy sensitivity.
In our study, we observed a significant increase of E-cadherin
mRNA as well as protein level in mut-pro-HB-EGF–expressing cells.

Figure 5. Inhibition of HB-EGF shedding by use of GM6001 up-regulates E-cadherin via suppressing the EGFR activation. A, PANC-1/vector and PANC-1/wtpro-HB-EGF cells were treated with MMP inhibitor (GM6001, 10 Amol/L) or EGFR inhibitor (AG1478, 10 Amol/L) for indicated time. The expression of E-cadherin,
phospho-EGFR, and total EGFR and the shedding of HB-EGF were detected using Western blotting. Inhibition of MMP activity abolished HB-EGF shedding as
supported by the disappearance of tail fragment (10–15 kDa, representing the proteolytic COOH-terminal fragments) and the increased pro-HB-EGF expression
(29 kDa). Treatment of GM6001 or AG1478 both augmented wt-pro-HB-EGF–induced E-cadherin expression via inhibiting EGFR activation. B, treatment of
GM6001 or AG1478 induced the morphology changes. Phase-contrast images of cells (PANC-1/vector and PANC-1/mut-pro-HB-EGF) cultured for 3 d on collagen
I–coated plate in the presence of GM6001 (10 Amol/L) or AG1478 (10 Amol/L). PANC-1/wt-pro-HB-EGF–expressing cells showed highly packed cuboidal epitheliallike morphology, whereas vector cells exhibited the fibroblastic morphology. C, mut-pro-HB-EGF expression inhibited cell migration. A cross-shaped wound was created
in the monolayer of PANC-1 cells and the representative digital images of the wounded region before and after the incubation periods were visualized. D, effects of
mut-pro-HB-EGF expression on motility of PANC-1 cells were assessed using BD Transwell chamber assays. Cells that migrated to the filter lower side were stained,
photographed, and counted. Histogram showed the inhibition of motility in PANC-1/mut-pro-HB-EGF cells by 70% compared with PANC-1/vector cells. The cells in
eight different fields were counted.

www.aacrjournals.org

8491

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (18). September 15, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

Figure 6. Mut-pro-HB-EGF modulates gemcitabine/erlotinib induced apoptosis (A ) and the model of the roles of HB-EGF in the regulation of EMT (B). A,
PANC-1/vector and PANC-1/mut-pro-HB-EGF cells were treated with gemcitabine (Gem ; 1 Ag/mL) and/or erlotinib (1 Amol/L) for 48 h. Cells were stained with Annexin
V and 7-amino-actinomycin D. Chemotherapy-induced apoptosis was measured by flow cytometry. Mut-pro-HB-EGF expression increased the chemosensitivity of
PANC-1 cells to gemcitabine/erlotinib–induced apoptosis compared with PANC-1/vector cells. Pretreatment of GM6001 also increased the chemotherapy sensitivity
in all three treatments compared with the group without GM6001 pretreatment. B, model of the distinct roles of HB-EGF in the regulation of EMT. s-HB-EGF activates
EGFR or other ErbB receptors to promote cell proliferation, tumorigenesis, and EMT. In contrast, pro-HB-EGF up-regulates E-cadherin via suppressing ZEB1
expression, which results in the negative regulation of EMT and sensitizes cells to chemotherapy. Therefore, the shedding activity of HB-EGF is a rather critical
step in balancing the protumorigenesis or antitumorigenesis function of HB-EGF and other ligands of EGFR family. ADAMs, a disintegrin and metalloproteinases.

The induced E-cadherin seemed to localize on the cell membrane
and promoted the E-cadherin expression. Inhibition of endogenous
HB-EGF expression by siRNA clearly showed the down-regulation
of E-cadherin expression. Moreover, the expression of E-cadherin
was negatively associated with EGFR activation and inhibition of
EGFR activation either by EGFR inhibitor (AG1478) or by MMP
inhibitor (GM6001) significantly restored E-cadherin expression.
Multiple zinc finger repressors, including Snail, Slug, Twist, ZEB1,
and SIP, negatively regulate E-cadherin transcription and this
mechanism accounts for most cases of transcriptional repression of
E-cadherin (14, 16, 17, 19, 20, 22, 23). Of those well-known transcription
repressors, we found that only the ZEB1 gene expression was
suppressed by mut-pro-HB-EGF, and the inhibition of endogenous
HB-EGF expression by siRNA was accompanied by 1.6-fold increase of
the endogenous ZEB1 mRNA and decreased E-cadherin expression.
Exogenous ZEB1 restored the suppression of E-cadherin expression in
mut-pro-HB-EGF cells, indicating that mut-pro-HB-EGF regulates
E-cadherin expression via suppressing ZEB1 expression. However, the
mechanism underlying such regulation is unknown yet.
The involvement of pro-HB-EGF in EMT was most evident in the
morphologic change and its effect on cell migration and motility. Mutpro-HB-EGF–expressing cells retained epithelial-like shape compared
with vector cells with fibroblastic morphology when cultured on the
collagen-coated surface. Cell motility was also suppressed by mut-proHB-EGF expression as supported by wound healing assay and cell
motility assay. Most importantly, exogenous mut-pro-HB-EGF expression achieved higher sensitivity to gemcitabine/erlotinib–induced
apoptosis compared with the vector group. Suppression of MMP
activity by GM6001 pretreatment also dramatically enhanced
gemcitabine/erlotinib–induced apoptosis compared with vector
groups. These data provided strong evidence indicating the applicability of combining MMP inhibitors in pancreatic cancer treatment.
There are several clinical studies indicating the negative
involvement of pro-HB-EGF and metastasis. In colonic neoplasm,

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (18). September 15, 2007

hepatocellular carcinoma, breast cancer, and pancreatic adenocarcinoma, pro-HB-EGF expression was correlated with small size and
early-stage tumor formation and inversely related to lymph node
metastasis (26–29). In these studies, immunohistochemistry had
been used to detect the expression of HB-EGF in patients with
different cancers, and the expression of HB-EGF detected in tumor
samples was predominantly membrane-bound HB-EGF. These data
coincided with our immunohistochemical study of the pancreatic
tumors and cell lines, which indicated that the expression of proHB-EGF was associated with differentiation status and might be
negatively involved in the regulation of EMT. However, it remains
unclear whether the transcription activity of HB-EGF gradually
decreases during tumor progression or rather it is the shedding
activity increased so that the pro-HB-EGF is not detectable at late
stage of tumor development? Further studies are needed to address
these questions.
Based on our findings, we propose a model of HB-EGF in tumor
development (Fig. 6B). After shedding, the s-HB-EGF activates
EGFR or other ErbB receptors to promote cell proliferation,
tumorigenesis, and EMT. In contrast, pro-HB-EGF up-regulates
E-cadherin via suppression of ZEB1 expression, which results in the
negative control of EMT and sensitizes cells to chemotherapy.
Therefore, the shedding activity of HB-EGF is a rather critical step
in balancing the protumorigenesis or antitumorigenesis function of
HB-EGF, and inhibition of shedding activity may represent a critical
target to inhibit pancreatic metastasis and promote the efficacy of
cancer therapy.

Acknowledgments
Received 2/5/2007; revised 6/19/2007; accepted 6/29/2007.
Grant support: NIH grants CA77278-01A1 and CA98871-01 (J.C. Cusack).
The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of page
charges. This article must therefore be hereby marked advertisement in accordance
with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact.
We thank Dr. Gregory Lauwers for his assistance with the histopathology.

8492

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Pro-HB-EGF Up-regulates E-Cadherin Expression

References
1. Izumi Y, Hirata M, Hasuwa H, et al. A metalloproteasedisintegrin, MDC9/meltrin-g/ADAM9 and PKCy are
involved in TPA-induced ectodomain shedding of
membrane-anchored heparin-binding EGF-like growth
factor. EMBO J 1998;17:7260–72.
2. Asakura M, Kitakaze M, Takashima S, et al. Cardiac
hypertrophy is inhibited by antagonism of ADAM12
processing of HB-EGF: metalloproteinase inhibitors as a
new therapy. Nat Med 2002;8:35–40.
3. Higashiyama S, Nanba D. ADAM-mediated ectodomain shedding of HB-EGF in receptor cross-talk.
Biochim Biophys Acta 2005;1751:110–7.
4. Freeman MR, Yoo JJ, Raab G, et al. Heparin-binding
EGF-like growth factor is an autocrine growth factor for
human urothelial cells and is synthesized by epithelial
and smooth muscle cells in the human bladder. J Clin
Invest 1997;99:1028–36.
5. Elenius K, Paul S, Allison G, Sun J, Klagsbrun M.
Activation of HER4 by heparin-binding EGF-like growth
factor stimulates chemotaxis but not proliferation.
EMBO J 1997;16:1268–78.
6. Raab G, Klagsbrun M. Heparin-binding EGF-like
growth factor. Biochim Biophys Acta 1997;1333:F179–99.
7. Iwamoto R, Yamazaki S, Asakura M, et al. Heparinbinding EGF-like growth factor and ErbB signaling is
essential for heart function. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
2003;100:3221–6.
8. Ongusaha PP, Kwak JC, Zwible AJ, et al. HB-EGF is a
potent inducer of tumor growth and angiogenesis.
Cancer Res 2004;64:5283–90.
9. Miyamoto S, Hirata M, Yamazaki A, et al. Heparinbinding EGF-like growth factor is a promising target for
ovarian cancer therapy. Cancer Res 2004;64:5720–7.
10. Wang F, Liu R, Lee SW, Sloss CM, Couget J, Cusack JC.
Heparin-binding EGF-like growth factor is an early
response gene to chemotherapy and contributes to
chemotherapy resistance. Oncogene 2007;26:2006–14.
11. Singh AB, Tsukada T, Zent R, Harris RC. Membraneassociated HB-EGF modulates HGF-induced cellular
responses in MDCK cells. J Cell Sci 2004;117:1365–79.
12. Iwamoto R, Handa K, Mekada E. Contact-dependent
growth inhibition and apoptosis of epidermal growth
factor (EGF) receptor-expressing cells by the membrane-anchored form of heparin-binding EGF-like
growth factor. J Biol Chem 1999;274:25906–12.
13. Takemura T, Hino S, Murata Y, et al. Coexpression of
CD9 augments the ability of membrane-bound heparinbinding epidermal growth factor-like growth factor
(proHB-EGF) to preserve renal epithelial cell viability.
Kidney Int 1999;55:71–81.

www.aacrjournals.org

14. Kang Y, Massague J. Epithelial-mesenchymal transitions: twist in development and metastasis. Cell 2004;
118:277–9.
15. Auerkari EI. Methylation of tumor suppressor genes
p16(INK4a), p27(Kip1), and E-cadherin in carcinogenesis. Oral Oncol 2006;42:5–13.
16. Huber MA, Kraut N, Beug H. Molecular requirements
for epithelial-mesenchymal transition during tumor
progression. Curr Opin Cell Biol 2005;17:548–58.
17. Vernon AE, LaBonne C. Tumor metastasis: a new
twist on epithelial-mesenchymal transitions. Curr Biol
2004;14:R719–21.
18. Cano A, Perez-Moreno MA, Rodrigo I, et al. The
transcription factor snail controls epithelial-mesenchymal transitions by repressing E-cadherin expression. Nat
Cell Biol 2000;2:76–83.
19. Hajra KM, Chen DY, Fearon ER. The SLUG zinc-finger
protein represses E-cadherin in breast cancer. Cancer
Res 2002;62:1613–8.
20. Chua HL, Bhat-Nakshatri P, Clare SE, Morimiya A,
Badve S, Nakshatri H. NF-nB represses E-cadherin
expression and enhances epithelial to mesenchymal
transition of mammary epithelial cells: potential involvement of ZEB-1 and ZEB-2. Oncogene 2007;26:711–24.
21. Krishnamachary B, Zagzag D, Nagasawa H, et al.
Hypoxia-inducible factor-1-dependent repression of
E-cadherin in von Hippel-Lindau tumor suppressor-null
renal cell carcinoma mediated by TCF3, ZFHX1A,
ZFHX1B. Cancer Res 2006;66:2725–31.
22. Guaita S, Puig I, Franci C, et al. Snail induction of
epithelial to mesenchymal transition in tumor cells is
accompanied by MUC1 repression and ZEB1 expression.
J Biol Chem 2002;277:39209–16.
23. Pena C, Garcia JM, Silva J, et al. E-cadherin and
vitamin D receptor regulation by SNAIL and ZEB1 in
colon cancer: clinicopathological correlations. Hum Mol
Genet 2005;14:3361–70.
24. Comijn J, Berx G, Vermassen P, et al. The two-handed
E box binding zinc finger protein SIP1 downregulates Ecadherin and induces invasion. Mol Cell 2001;7:1267–78.
25. Gambarotta G, Garzotto D, Destro E, et al. ErbB4
expression in neural progenitor cells (ST14A) is
necessary to mediate neuregulin-1h1-induced migration. J Biol Chem 2004;279:48808–16.
26. Ito Y, Higashiyama S, Takeda T, Okada M, Matsuura
N. Bimodal expression of heparin-binding EGF-like
growth factor in colonic neoplasms. Anticancer Res
2001;21:1391–4.
27. Ito Y, Takeda T, Higashiyama S, et al. Expression of
heparin binding epidermal growth factor-like growth
factor in hepatocellular carcinoma: an immunohistochemical study. Oncol Rep 2001;8:903–7.

8493

28. Ito Y, Higashiyama S, Takeda T, Yamamoto Y, Wakasa
KI, Matsuura N. Expression of heparin-binding epidermal growth factor-like growth factor in pancreatic
adenocarcinoma. Int J Gastrointest Cancer 2001;29:
47–52.
29. Ito Y, Takeda T, Higashiyama S, Noguchi S, Matsuura
N. Expression of heparin-binding epidermal growth
factor-like growth factor in breast carcinoma. Breast
Cancer Res Treat 2001;67:81–5.
30. Sipos B, Moser S, Kalthoff H, Torok V, Lohr M,
Kloppel G. A comprehensive characterization of pancreatic ductal carcinoma cell lines: towards the
establishment of an in vitro research platform. Virchows
Arch 2003;442:444–52.
31. Menke A, Philippi C, Vogelmann R, et al. Downregulation of E-cadherin gene expression by collagen
type I and type III in pancreatic cancer cell lines. Cancer
Res 2001;61:3508–17.
32. Lu Z, Ghosh S, Wang Z, Hunter T. Downregulation of
caveolin-1 function by EGF leads to the loss of Ecadherin, increased transcriptional activity of h-catenin,
and enhanced tumor cell invasion. Cancer Cell 2003;4:
499–515.
33. Xu KP, Ding Y, Ling J, Dong Z, Yu FS. Wound-induced
HB-EGF ectodomain shedding and EGFR activation in
corneal epithelial cells. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2004;
45:813–20.
34. Zhao Y, He D, Saatian B, et al. Regulation of
lysophosphatidic acid-induced epidermal growth factor
receptor transactivation and interleukin-8 secretion in
human bronchial epithelial cells by protein kinase Cy,
Lyn kinase, and matrix metalloproteinases. J Biol Chem
2006;281:19501–11.
35. Thomson S, Buck E, Petti F, et al. Epithelial to
mesenchymal transition is a determinant of sensitivity
of non-small-cell lung carcinoma cell lines and xenografts to epidermal growth factor receptor inhibition.
Cancer Res 2005;65:9455–62.
36. Witta SE, Gemmill RM, Hirsch FR, et al. Restoring
E-cadherin expression increases sensitivity to epidermal
growth factor receptor inhibitors in lung cancer cell
lines. Cancer Res 2006;66:944–50.
37. Yauch RL, Januario T, Eberhard DA, et al. Epithelial
versus mesenchymal phenotype determines in vitro
sensitivity and predicts clinical activity of erlotinib in
lung cancer patients. Clin Cancer Res 2005;11:8686–98.
38. Nakamura K, Iwamoto R, Mekada E. Membraneanchored heparin-binding EGF-like growth factor
(HB-EGF) and diphtheria toxin receptor-associated
protein (DRAP27)/CD9 form a complex with integrin
a3h1 at cell-cell contact sites. J Cell Biol 1995;129:
1691–705.

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (18). September 15, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Membrane-Bound Heparin-Binding Epidermal Growth Factor
−Like Growth Factor Regulates E-Cadherin Expression in
Pancreatic Carcinoma Cells
Fang Wang, Callum Sloss, Xiaobo Zhang, et al.
Cancer Res 2007;67:8486-8493.

Updated version

Cited articles
Citing articles

E-mail alerts
Reprints and
Subscriptions
Permissions

Access the most recent version of this article at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/67/18/8486

This article cites 38 articles, 18 of which you can access for free at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/67/18/8486.full#ref-list-1
This article has been cited by 5 HighWire-hosted articles. Access the articles at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/67/18/8486.full#related-urls

Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal.
To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications
Department at pubs@aacr.org.
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications
Department at permissions@aacr.org.

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

