Original Article

Treatment Selection for Patients With
Metastatic Renal Cell Carcinoma*
Michael B. Atkins, MD1,2, Toni K. Choueiri, MD2,3, Daniel Cho, MD1,2, Meredith Regan, ScD2,4,
and Sabina Signoretti, MD2,5

The availability of approved agents with distinct mechanisms of action has encouraged investigations to
identify optimal treatment strategies for specific patients and specific tumor features. Study of tumors
from patients treated with interleukin-2 (IL-2 ) has suggested that response was unlikely in patients with
tumors with papillary features or low carbonic anhydrase IX (CAIX) expression. A model combining histologic features and CAIX expression separated patients into 2 groups of roughly equal size, with 96% of the
responding patients being in the favorable prognostic group. Additional studies have begun to identify molecular features that might predict response to IL-2 therapy. In contrast, clinical trial data suggest that temsirolimus was relatively more active than interferon in patients with tumors containing non–clear cell
features. Furthermore, pathologic examination showed no correlation of response with CAIX expression,
but an apparent association with high expression of either phospho-AKT or phospho-S6, proteins either
upstream or downstream of mammalian target of rapamycin. Preliminary investigations of tumor specimens
from patients receiving vascular endothelial growth factor–targeted therapy suggested that high hypoxiainducible factor expression might predict response. In addition, response appeared more likely in tumors
with mutated or methylated VHL genes; however, substantial antitumor activity was still observed in
patients with VHL wild-type tumors, particularly in patients treated with either sunitinib or axitinib, rather
than bevacizumab or sorafenib. Although these data provide some guidance in treatment selection, considerably more research is needed to identify and validate selection models for particular treatment
approaches, and to enable rational and optimal utilization of the available treatment options. Cancer
C 2009 American Cancer Society.
2009;115(10 suppl):2327–33. V
KEY WORDS: renal cell carcinoma, immunotherapy, antiangiogenic therapy, target of rapamycin (TOR),
inhibitors, treatment selection.

The availability of approved agents with distinct mechanisms of action (immunotherapy, vascular endothelial
growth factor [VEGF] pathway, and mammalian target of rapamycin [mTOR] inhibitors) has complicated
treatment decisions for patients with advanced kidney cancer. Although randomized phase 3 trials can provide
guidance for the average patient in a specific clinical situation, individual patients and tumors have distinct

Corresponding author: Michael B. Atkins, MD, Division of Hematology/Oncology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, MASCO Bldg., Room 412,
375 Longwood Avenue, Boston, MA 02115; Fax: (617) 632-9260; Matkins@bidmc.harvard.edu
1
Division of Hematology/Oncology Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Boston, Massachusetts; 2Kidney Cancer Program, Dana Farber Harvard
Cancer Center, Boston, Massachusetts; 3Department of Medical Oncology, Dana Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, Massachusetts; 4Department of Biostatistics, Dana Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, Massachusetts; 5Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts

This educational proceedings publication is based on a symposium held on June 27-28, 2008, in Cambridge, Massachusetts.
*Innovations and Challenges in Renal Cancer: Proceedings of the Third Cambridge Conference, Supplement to Cancer
Received: September 18, 2008; Revised: December 1, 2008; Accepted: December 10, 2008
C 2009 American Cancer Society
Published online: April 30, 2009 V

DOI: 10.1002/cncr.24231, www.interscience.wiley.com

Cancer

May 15, 2009

2327

Original Article
Table 1. New Standards for Clear Cell RCC Therapy

Setting

Phase 3

Alternative

Sunitinib or
bevacizumab
plus interferon
Temsirolimus

High-dose IL-2

Prior cytokine

Sorafenib

Prior VEGFR inhibitor
Prior mTOR inhibitor

RAD-001
Clinical trials

Sunitinib or
bevacizumab
Clinical trials
Clinical trials

First-line therapy
Good or intermediate risk*

Poor risk*

Sunitinib

Second-line therapy

RCC indicates renal cell carcinoma; IL-2, interleukin-2; VEGFR, vascular
endothelial growth factor receptor; mTOR, mammalian target of rapamycin.
* According to Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center risk status.

characteristics that may greatly influence their response to
different treatments. Identifying the optimal treatment for a
particular patient has become an important goal of current
investigation.
Recent clinical trials have focused on either frontline
or cytokine-refractory patients, and have been stratified
by clinical prognostic factors developed by Motzer et al1
from patients treated with interferon (IFN)-a. Taken together, these studies have led to the creation of an ‘‘evidence-based’’ algorithm (Table 1) for treatment selection,
with sunitinib or bevacizumab plus IFN being favored for
frontline therapy in patients with good or intermediate
prognosis, temsirolimus being favored for patients with
poor prognostic features, sorafenib being favored for
patients whose disease has progressed after cytokines, and
everolimus being the choice for patients whose disease has
progressed after VEGF receptor (VEGFR) inhibitor therapy.2-7 It bears mentioning, however, that the absence of
information regarding a particular treatment in a particular patient population is not equivalent to the absence of
effectiveness. Furthermore, although treatment selection
based on clinical criteria is useful, it is far from ideal. The
ultimate goal is to be able to choose treatment strategies that
take into consideration the pathologic, molecular, and/or
biologic features of the tumor. This article reviews current
investigations into predictive biomarkers for immunotherapy, antiangiogenic therapy, and mTOR-targeted therapy in
patients with advanced renal cell carcinoma (RCC).
Immunotherapy
Recent phase 3 trials have established the superiority of
regimens that contain sunitinib, temsirolimus, and beva2328

cizumab plus IFN over IFN-a as frontline therapy for
patients with advanced RCC.2,5,8 These studies have
clearly limited the role of single-agent IFN in the treatment of this disease. However, a randomized phase 2 trial
of sorafenib versus IFN demonstrated similar median progression-free survival (PFS) for the 2 treatments, with IFN
therapy performing better than sorafenib for a substantial
minority of patients.9 Furthermore, high-dose interleukin
(IL)-2 has been reported in 2 randomized phase 3 trials to
produce higher response rates and more durable complete
responses than lower-dose cytokine regimens.4,10,11 Thus,
cytokine therapy, particularly high-dose intravenous IL-2,
remains a reasonable initial treatment option for some
patients with metastatic RCC. Correlative biomarker investigations suggest that the potential exists for identifying predictors of response (or resistance) to IL-2 therapy, limiting
its use to those most likely to benefit.
Pathology studies

Responses to immunotherapy are most frequently
seen in patients with RCC of the clear cell histologic
type.12-14 This observation was detailed in a retrospective
analysis of pathology specimens obtained from 231
patients (including 163 primary tumor specimens) who
had received IL-2 therapy in Cytokine Working Group
clinical trials.12 The response rate to IL-2 was 21% (30 of
146) for patients with clear cell histology in their primary
tumors compared with 6% for patients with non–clear
cell histology (1 responder in 17 patients). Among the
patients with clear cell carcinoma, response to IL-2 was
also associated with the presence of ‘‘good’’ predictive features (eg, >50% alveolar and no granular or papillary features) and the absence of ‘‘poor’’ predictive features (eg,
>50% granular or any papillary features). As a result of these
data, it may be appropriate for patients whose primary tumor is of non-clear cell histology or of clear cell histology but
with ‘‘poor’’ predictive features to forgo IL-2–based treatment altogether. However, given that even in the most favorable predictive group >50% of patients did not respond to
IL-2 therapy, additional investigations into tumor-associated
predictors of responsiveness to IL-2 are still necessary.
Immunohistochemistry studies

Carbonic anhydrase IX (CAIX) has been identified
as an immunohistochemical marker that might predict
the outcomes of patients with RCC. CAIX is an enzyme
Cancer

May 15, 2009

Treatment Selection for Advanced RCC/Atkins et al

whose expression is mediated by the hypoxia-inducible
factor (HIF) transcriptional complex, which is up-regulated with VHL inactivation observed in clear cell RCC.15
This enzyme is believed to regulate intracellular pH during periods of hypoxic stress. CAIX protein is expressed in
most RCC specimens but not in normal renal tissue.16,17
In an analysis by Bui et al,16 CAIX expression in >85% of
tumor cells (high CAIX expression) has been associated
with improved survival and a higher objective response
rate in IL-2–treated patients. Building on this work,
Atkins et al17 developed a 2-component model that combined pathology analysis and immunohistochemical
staining for CAIX. In a retrospective analysis, this model
was able to identify a ‘‘good risk’’ group that contained
26 (96%) of 27 responders to IL-2 compared with only 18
(46%) of 39 nonresponders (odds ratio, 30; P < .01). A
significant survival benefit was also seen for this group
(P < .01). The Cytokine Working Group has launched
the high-dose IL-2 ‘‘Select’’ Trial to determine, in a prospective fashion, if this model17 can identify a group of
patients with advanced RCC who are significantly more
likely to respond to high-dose IL-2–based therapy (‘‘good’’
risk) than a historical, unselected patient population.
Genetic and gene expression studies

Gene expression profiling of tumor specimens to
identify patterns of gene expression associated with IL-2
responsiveness may eventually help to further narrow the
application of IL-2 therapy to those who will benefit the
most. By using this approach, Pantuck et al18 were able to
identify a set of 73 genes whose expression distinguished
complete responders from nonresponders after IL-2 therapy. In their hands, complete responders to IL-2 have a
signature gene and protein expression pattern that
includes CAIX, PTEN, and CXCR4. More recent studies
with array-based comparative genomic hybridization
showed that tumors from complete responders to IL-2
had fewer whole chromosome losses than nonresponders.19 The concentration of losses in sections of chromosome 9p (65% in nonresponders vs 0 in complete
responders) that encompass genes for CAIX, pS6, and
B7H1 adds some potential mechanistic significance to
this observation. Although these results require prospective validation, these approaches may provide powerful
tools for clinicians in selecting appropriate treatment
options for specific patients and to investigators seeking to
Cancer

May 15, 2009

understand the molecular biology underlying tumor sensitivity to immunotherapy.
mTOR Inhibitors
Pathologic features

Although the clinical benefit of high-dose IL-2 may
be limited to those patients who have clear cell RCC, this
may not be the case with inhibitors of the mTOR pathway. A subsequent analysis of the randomized phase 3 trial
of temsirolimus demonstrated that the median overall survival (OS) of patients with non–clear cell RCC (75% of
whom had the papillary subtype) was 11.6 months in the
temsirolimus group versus 4.3 months in the IFN
group.20 This differential contrasts with the relatively
minor improvement over IFN in patients with clear cell
RCC (10.7 months with temsirolimus vs 8.2 months with
IFN). The preferential activity of temsirolimus in non–
clear cell carcinoma also contrasts with what is seen with
the VEGFR antagonists sorafenib and sunitinib, both of
which have only limited activity against these RCC variants.21 These observations suggest that the mechanism of
action of mTOR inhibitors may be distinct from those of
agents primarily inhibiting VEGFR signaling in the tumor endothelium. During the clinical development of
mTOR inhibitors, the antagonism of HIF-1a expression
by these drugs has always presented an attractive and logical explanation for their clinical efficacy in RCC.22 However, these recent observations highlight the need for
further investigation into the mechanism of action of
mTOR inhibitors and the need to identify molecular features that may predict response to these agents.
Predictive biomarkers

Preliminary efforts to identify such predictive biomarkers have focused on pathologic surrogates of the basal
activation status of the presumptive molecular targets of
mTOR inhibitors. A small retrospective analysis of pretreatment tumor specimens from a subset of patients with
RCC treated with temsirolimus as part of the randomized
phase 2 trial23 reported an association of high expression
of either phospho-Akt or phospho-S6 ribosomal protein,
substrates upstream and downstream of mTOR, respectively, with objective response to temsirolimus.24 In contrast, no apparent correlation was found of CAIX or
PTEN expression with response to temsirolimus. A larger
2329

Original Article

analysis of tumor specimens from patients treated with
temsirolimus as part of the randomized phase 3 trial also
found no correlation between tumor PTEN expression
and either tumor response or OS or PFS. In addition, no
such correlations were observed with baseline HIF-1a
expression.25 Although the stability of certain phosphoproteins, in particular phospho-Akt, has been called into
question,26 phospho-S6 appears to be a promising potential predictive biomarker for response to mTOR inhibitors, which must be validated through both larger
retrospective analysis and prospective studies.
Current and future efforts

Future efforts to identify predictive biomarkers of
response to mTOR inhibitors must be guided by insights
into the mechanism of both response and resistance to
mTOR inhibitors. For example, overexpression of eurokaryotic initiation factor 4E (eIF4E) would be expected to
make a cell relatively resistant to the growth inhibitory
effects of mTOR inhibition.27 The frequency of basal
overexpression of eIF4E in RCC remains to be investigated. Although the groups of patients deriving clinical
benefit from mTOR inhibitors and VEGF-targeted therapies appear to overlap, ideally these molecular and pathologic features can be incorporated into a selection scheme
to direct the use of mTOR inhibitors in first-line, sequential, and combinational therapy for patients with RCC.
Antiangiogenic (VEGF Pathway–targeted)
Therapy
Clinical prognostic variables

Recent studies have addressed the issue of clinical variables that predict outcome in the setting of VEGF-targeted
therapy as opposed to previous models focused on IFNtreated patients.1 Patient baseline characteristics, Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) performance status
(PS) (0 vs 1), time from diagnosis to treatment (1 year vs
<1 year), and corrected calcium level (10 vs >10 mg/dL)
were found to be independent pretherapy features associated
with PFS in patients receiving frontline sunitinib therapy.28
Choueiri et al29 reported on the outcome of 120 patients
with metastatic RCC treated with sorafenib, sunitinib, bevacizumab, and axitinib. The authors identified 5 independent
poor prognostic factors by multivariate analysis: time from
diagnosis to current treatment <2 years, corrected serum cal2330

cium level <8.5 mg/dL or >10 mg/dL, ECOG PS >0, and
baseline platelet and neutrophil counts >300 K/lL and
>4.5 K/lL, respectively. From these factors, 3 prognostic
subgroups were identified, with a median PFS of 20.1
months, 13 months, and 3.9 months, respectively.29 Both
prognostic models need external validation before they can
be routinely adapted into clinical practice.
Biologic and molecular biomarkers associated
with outcome in advanced RCC

The Treatment Approaches in Renal cancer Global
Evaluation Trial (TARGETs) and the AVastin fOr RENal cell cancer (AVOREN) phase 3 trials addressed the
value of serum VEGF levels in patients who received sorafenib or the combination of bevacizumab and IFN-a,
respectively.30,31 Although high baseline VEGF levels
have been associated with poor outcome, in both trials,
patients with high and low baseline VEGF levels benefited
from sorafenib and bevacizumab in term of PFS. This
suggests that serum VEGF, although having prognostic
significance, is not a predictive biomarker for benefit from
VEGF-targeted therapy. A recently reported biomarker
analysis from a phase 2 sunitinib trial in cytokine-refractory disease found significantly larger changes in VEGF,
soluble form of VEGFR-2 (sVEGFR-2), and sVEGFR-3
(expressed mainly on lymphatic endothelial cells) levels at
Day 28 in patients exhibiting a response compared with
stable disease or disease progression.32,33 Similarly, data
from a trial of pazopanib, another potent VEGFR inhibitor, demonstrated that a more profound sVEGFR-2 level
decrease at Day 14 of therapy predicted a better outcome in
terms of response and PFS.34 Finally, Rini et al suggested
that lower baseline levels of sVEGFR-3 and VEGF-C were
associated with longer PFS and better tumor response in
patients receiving sunitinib after disease progression on
bevacizumab.35 Whether these tests can be used to distinguish early in treatment those patients most likely to be resistant to VEGF inhibitor therapy deserves further study.
HIF levels

Recently, Klatte et al36 demonstrated that HIF-1a
expression is an independent prognostic factor for patients
with metastatic clear cell RCC. Patients with tumors
exhibiting high HIF-1a expression (>35% by immunohistochemical analysis) had significantly worse survival
than patients with low expression (35%), with a median
Cancer

May 15, 2009

Treatment Selection for Advanced RCC/Atkins et al

survival of 13.5 versus 24.4 months (P ¼ .005). In addition,
Patel et al37 reported on the predictive value of HIF expression in pretreatment tumor specimens by Western blot analysis in a small cohort of 43 patients with clear cell RCC
treated with sunitinib. Interestingly, 12 (92%) of 13 patients
with tumors that exhibited high HIF-2a expression (defined
as >50% level relative to cell line control) responded to sunitinib, compared with 4 (27%) of 15 patients whose tumors
had low expression (10%-50% level) and 2 (13%) of 15
patients with tumors showing no expression (<10% level)
(P < .0001). Additional studies are needed to confirm the
predictive value of HIF-2 for sunitinib and other VEGF-targeted agents in patients with metastatic RCC.
VHL gene status

In view of the crucial role of VHL gene inactivation in
RCC tumor biology, Choueiri et al38 reported on the VHL
status of 123 patients with metastatic clear cell RCC who
received VEGF-targeted agents. Patients with VHL inactivation (VHL mutated or methylated) had a response rate of
41% compared with 31% for patients with a wild-type
VHL (P ¼ .34). On subgroup analysis, the presence of ‘‘loss
of function’’ mutations (defined as frameshift, nonsense,
splice, and in-frame deletions or insertions) was an independent prognostic factor associated with improved
response (P ¼ .03). Another interesting finding is that
patients who were treated with sorafenib and bevacizumab
responded only if their VHL gene status was inactivated, in
contrast to patients treated with sunitinib or axitinib, who
experienced responses irrespective of their VHL gene status.
In other studies, VHL status did not appear to be predictive
of response to axitinib (N ¼ 13)39 or pazopanib (N ¼
78).34 Although data concerning the impact of VHL gene
status on PFS and OS in patients receiving VEGF-targeted
therapy may be more clinically relevant, these results are
nonetheless of potential therapeutic significance. They suggest that either sunitinib, axitinib, and, possibly, pazopanib
have additional non–VHL-related antitumor effects in
RCC, or that the VHL/HIF/VEGF pathway remains an
important target in VHL wild-type RCC but requires more
potent inhibition for clinical activity to be manifest.
Conclusions
Investigations into the treatment selection factors for
patients with advanced RCC is a work in progress.
Cancer

May 15, 2009

Table 2. Summary of Selection Issues*

Treatment

Response Predictor

IL-2
Temsirolimus

CA 9, histology, expression factors
Nonclear cell, high phospho-AKT,
phospho-S6, PET uptake
High CAIX, VHL/, high baseline perfusion
High HIF-2a, VHL-WT

Sorafenib
Sunitinib

IL-2 indicates interleukin-2; PET, positron emission tomography; CAIX, carbonic anhydrase IX; HIF, hypoxia-inducible factor; WT, wild-type.
* This is a work in progress. Distinct groups of patients can likely be identified who respond best to specific therapies. More research, including prospective validation studies, is needed.

Although some information is currently available, considerably more research is needed to identify and validate
selection factors for particular treatment approaches (Table 2). In the future, these approaches are likely to include
not only clinical features and blood-based and tissuebased biomarkers but also sophisticated functional imaging studies. Such studies, including CAIX imaging for
immunotherapy, positron emission imaging for TOR
inhibitors, and perfusion imaging for antiangiogenic therapy, provide the potentially useful ability to noninvasively
examine the metastatic lesions that are the targets of systemic therapy. Because identification of the optimal firstline treatment for a particular patient is a prerequisite to
determining the optimal second-line therapy or treatment
sequence, initial treatment selection research remains a
priority.
Conflict of Interest Disclosures
The program was made possible by educational grants provided
by Genentech, Novartis Pharmaceuticals, Pfizer, Inc., and Wyeth
Pharmaceuticals. Program management and CME sponsorship
were provided by InforMEDical Communications, Inc., Carlisle,
Massachusetts.
Supported in part by DF/HCC Renal Cancer SPORE-NIH/
NCI P50CA101942.
Dr. Atkins has served as a consultant for Antigenics, Aveo,
Bayer, Bristol Myers Squibb, Genetech, Novartis, Onyx, and
Wyeth and has received research funding from Bayer and Novartis. Dr. Choueiri has served as a consultant for Genentech and
received honoraria from Pfizer. Dr. Cho has served as a consultant for Genentech, Novartis, and Wyeth and received honoraria
from Pfizer.

References
1.

Motzer RJ, Bacik J, Murphy BA, Russo P, Mazumdar M.
Interferon-alfa as a comparative treatment for clinical trials
2331

Original Article
of new therapies against advanced renal cell carcinoma.
J Clin Oncol. 2002;20:289–296.

HIF-1alpha in clear cell renal cell carcinoma. Oncogene.
2004;23:5624–5631.

2.

Hudes G, Carducci M, Tomczak P, et al. Temsirolimus,
interferon alfa, or both for advanced renal-cell carcinoma.
N Engl J Med. 2007;356:2271–2281.

3.

Motzer RJ, Michaelson MD, Rosenberg J, et al. Sunitinib
efficacy against advanced renal cell carcinoma. J Urol.
2007;178:1883–1887.

16. Bui MH, Seligson D, Han KR, et al. Carbonic anhydrase
IX is an independent predictor of survival in advanced renal
clear cell carcinoma: implications for prognosis and therapy.
Clin Cancer Res. 2003;9:802–811.

4.

5.

6.

McDermott DF, Regan MM, Clark JI, et al. Randomized
phase III trial of high-dose interleukin-2 versus subcutaneous interleukin-2 and interferon in patients with metastatic
renal cell carcinoma. J Clin Oncol. 2005;23:133–141.
Escudier B, Pluzanska A, Koralewski P, et al. Bevacizumab
plus interferon alfa-2a for treatment of metastatic renal cell
carcinoma: a randomised, double-blind phase III trial. Lancet. 2007;370:2103–2111.
Motzer RJ, Escudier B, Oudard S, et al. RAD001 vs placebo in patients with metastatic renal cell carcinoma (RCC)
after progression on VEGFr-TKI therapy: results from a
randomized, double-blind, multicenter phase-III study.
J Clin Oncol. 2008;26(suppl):LBA5026.

7.

Escudier B, Eisen T, Stadler WM, et al. Sorafenib in
advanced clear-cell renal-cell carcinoma. N Engl J Med.
2007;356:125–134.

8.

Motzer RJ, Hutson TE, Tomczak P, et al. Sunitinib versus
interferon alfa in metastatic renal-cell carcinoma. N Engl J
Med. 2007;356:115–124.

9.

Szczylik C, Demkow, T, Staehler, M, et al. Randomized
phase II trial of first-line treatment with sorafenib versus
interferon in patients with advanced renal cell carcinoma:
final results [abstract]. J Clin Oncol. 2007;25(18 suppl pt
I). Abstract 5025.

10. Furge KA, Lucas KA, Takahashi M, et al. Robust classification of renal cell carcinoma based on gene expression data
and predicted cytogenetic profiles. Cancer Res. 2004;64:
4117–4121.
11. Yang JC, Sherry RM, Stienberg SM, et al. A 3-arm
randomized comparison of high and low dose intravenous
and subcutaneous interleukin-2 in the treatment of metastatic renal cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2003;21:3127.
12. Upton MP, Parker RA, Youmans A, McDermott DF,
Atkins MB. Histologic predictors of renal cell carcinoma
response to interleukin-2 based therapy. J Immunother.
2005;28:488–495.
13. Cangiano T, Liao J, Naitoh J, Dorey F, Figlin R, Belldegrun A. Sarcomatoid renal cell carcinoma: biologic behavior, prognosis, and response to combined surgical resection
and immunotherapy. J Clin Oncol. 1999;17:523–528.
14. Motzer RJ, Bacik J, Mariani T, Russo P, Mazumdar M,
Reuter V. Treatment outcome and survival associated with
metastatic renal cell carcinoma of non-clear-cell histology.
J Clin Oncol. 2002;20:2376–2381.
15. Grabmaier K, A de Weijert MC, Verhaegh GW, Schalken
JA, Oosterwijk E. Strict regulation of CAIX(G250/MN) by

2332

17. Atkins M, Regan M, McDermott D, et al. Carbonic anhydrase IX expression predicts outcome of interleukin-2 therapy for renal cancer. Clin Cancer Res. 2005;11:3714–3721.
18. Pantuck AJ, Fang Z, Liu X, et al. Gene expression and tissue microarray analysis of interleukin-2 complete responders in patients with metastatic renal cell carcinoma
[abstract]. J Clin Oncol. 2005;23(16 suppl pt 1). Abstract
4535.
19. Jaeger E, Waldman F, Roydasgupta R, et al. Array-based
comparative genomic hybridization (CGH) identifies chromosomal imbalances between interleukin-2 complete and
non-responders [abstract]. J Clin Oncol. 2008;26(15 suppl).
Abstract 5043.
20. Dutcher JP, Szczylik C, Tannir N, et al. Correlation of survival with tumor histology, age, and prognostic risk group
for previously untreated patients with advanced renal cell
carcinoma (adv RCC) receiving temsirolimus (TEMSR) or
interferon-alpha (IFN). J Clin Oncol. 2007;25(18 suppl): 5033.
21. Plantade A, Choueiri B, Escudier B, et al. Treatment outcome for metastatic papillary and chromophobe renal cell
carcinoma (RCC) patients treated with tyrosine-kinase
inhibitors (TKIs) sunitinib and sorafenib. J Clin Oncol.
2007;25(18 suppl): 5037.
22. Thomas GV, Tran C, Mellinghoff IK, et al. Hypoxia-inducible factor determines sensitivity to inhibitors of mTOR
in kidney cancer. Nat Med. 2006;12:122–127.
23. Atkins MB, Hidalgo M, Stadler WM, et al. Randomized
phase II study of multiple dose levels of CCI-779, a novel
mammalian target of rapamycin kinase inhibitor, in
patients with advanced refractory renal cell carcinoma.
J Clin Oncol. 2004;22:909–918.
24. Cho D, Signoretti S, Dabora S, et al. Potential histologic
and molecular predictors of response to temsirolimus in
patients with advanced renal cell carcinoma. Clin Genitourin Cancer. 2007;5:379–385.
25. Figlin RA, De Souza P, McDermott D, et al. Analysis of
pten and hif1-a and correlation with efficacy in patients
with advanced renal cell carcinoma treated with temsirolimus versus interferon-a [abstract]. In: Proceedings of the
99th Annual Meeting of the American Association for Cancer Research, San Diego, California, April 12-16, 2008.
Abstract 4477.
26. Baker AF, Dragovich T, Ihle NT, Williams R, FenoglioPreiser C, Powis G. Stability of phosphoprotein as a biological marker of tumor signaling. Clin Cancer Res. 2005;11:
4338–4340.
27. De Benedetti A, Graff JR. eIF-4E expression and its role in
malignancies and metastases. Oncogene. 2004;23:3189–
3199.

Cancer

May 15, 2009

Treatment Selection for Advanced RCC/Atkins et al

28. Motzer RJ, Figlin RA, Hutson TE, et al. Sunitinib versus
interferon-alfa as first-line treatment of metastatic renal cell
carcinoma (mRCC): updated results and analysis of prognostic factors [abstract]. J Clin Oncol. 2007;25(suppl).
Abstract 5024.

34. Hutson T, Davis ID, Macheils JH, et al. Biomarker analysis and final efficacy and safety results of a phase II renal
cell carcinoma trial with pazopanib (GW786034), a multikinase angiogenesis inhibitor [abstract]. J Clin Oncol.
2008;26. Abstract 5046.

29. Choueiri TK, Garcia JA, Elson P, et al. Clinical factors
associated with outcome in patients with metastatic clearcell renal cell carcinoma treated with vascular endothelial
growth factor-targeted therapy. Cancer. 2007;110:543–550.

35. Rini BI, Michaelson D, Rosenberg JE, et al. Antitumor activity and biomarker analysis of sunitinib in patients with
bevacizumab-refractory metastatic renal cell carcinoma.
J Clin Oncol. 2008;26:3743–3748.

30. Bukowski RM, Eisen T, Szczylik C, et al. Final results of
the randomized phase III trial of sorafenib in advanced renal cell carcinoma: survival and biomarker analysis
[abstract]. J Clin Oncol. 2007;25. Abstract 5023.

36. Klatte T, Seligson DB, Riggs SB, et al. Hypoxia-inducible
factor 1 alpha in clear cell renal cell carcinoma. Clin Cancer
Res. 2007;13:7388–7393.

31. Escudier B, Ravaud A, Negrier S, et al. Update on AVOREN trial in metastatic renal cell carcinoma (mRCC): efficacy and safety in subgroups of patients (pts) and
pharmacokinetic (PK) analysis [abstract]. J Clin Oncol.
2008;26. Abstract 5025.
32. DePrimo SE, Bello C. Surrogate biomarkers in evaluating
response to anti-angiogenic agents: focus on sunitinib. Ann
Oncol. 2007;18(suppl 10):x11–x19.
33. Deprimo SE, Bello CL, Smeraglia J, et al. Circulating protein biomarkers of pharmacodynamic activity of sunitinib
in patients with metastatic renal cell carcinoma: modulation
of VEGF and VEGF-related proteins. J Transl Med.
2007;5:32.

Cancer

May 15, 2009

37. Patel PH, Chadalavada RS, Ishill NM, et al. Hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF) 1a and 2a levels in cell lines and
human tumor predicts response to sunitinib in renal cell
carcinoma (RCC) [abstract]. J Clin Oncol. 2008;26.
Abstract 5008.
38. Choueiri TK, Vaziri SA, Rini BI, et al. Use of Von-Hippel
Lindau (VHL) mutation status to predict objective response
to vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF)-targeted therapy in metastatic renal cell carcinoma (RCC) [abstract].
J Clin Oncol. 2007;25. Abstract 5012.
39. Gad S, Sultan-Amar V, Meric J, et al. Somatic von HippelLindau (VHL) gene analysis and clinical outcome under
antiangiogenic treatment in metastatic renal cell carcinoma:
preliminary results. Targeted Oncol. 2007;2:3–6.

2333

