Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No. 37

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Epithelial neoplasia coincides with exacerbated injury and
fibrotic response in the lungs of Gprc5a-knockout mice following
silica exposure
Xiaofei Wang1,2,*, Dongliang Xu3,4,*, Yueling Liao3,4,*, Shuangshuang Zhong3,4,
Hongyong Song3,4, Beibei Sun5, Binhua P. Zhou6, Jiong Deng3,4,5, Baohui Han1,5
1

Department of Pulmonary Medicine, Shanghai Chest Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China

2

Department of Pulmonary Medicine, Ruijin Hospital, School of Medicine, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China

3

 ey Laboratory of Cell Differentiation and Apoptosis of Chinese Minister of Education, Department of Pathophysiology,
K
Shanghai, China

4

 hanghai Key Laboratory for Tumor Microenvironment and Inflammation, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine,
S
Shanghai, China

5

Translation Medicine Center, Shanghai Chest Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China

6

 epartment of Molecular and Cellular Biochemistry, Markey Cancer Center, University of Kentucky College of Medicine,
D
Lexington, KY, USA

*

These authors have contributed equally to this work

Correspondence to:
Jiong Deng, e-mail: jiongdeng@shsmu.edu.cn
Baohui Han, e-mail: xkyyhan@gmail.com
Keywords: SiO2, Gprc5a, fibrosis, lung cancer, neoplasia

Received: June 11, 2015      Accepted: September 21, 2015      Published: October 02, 2015

ABSTRACT
Exposure to crystalline silica is suggested to increase the risk for a variety of
lung diseases, including fibrosis and lung cancer. However, epidemiological evidences
for the exposure-risk relationship are ambiguous and conflicting, and experimental
study from a reliable animal model to explore the relationship is lacking. We reasoned
that a mouse model that is sensitive to both lung injury and tumorigenesis would
be appropriate to evaluate the exposure-risk relationship. Previously, we showed
that, Gprc5a–/– mice are susceptible to both lung tumorigenesis and endotoxininduced acute lung injury. In this study, we investigated the biological consequences
in Gprc5a–/– mouse model following silica exposure. Intra-tracheal administration
of fine silica particles in Gprc5a–/– mice resulted in more severe lung injury and
pulmonary inflammation than in wild-type mice. Moreover, an enhanced fibrogenic
response, including EMT-like characteristics, was induced in the lungs of Gprc5a–/–
mice compared to those from wild-type ones. Importantly, increased hyperplasia
or neoplasia coincided with silica-induced tissue injury and fibrogenic response in
lungs from Gprc5a–/– mice. Consistently, expression of MMP9, TGFβ1 and EGFR was
significantly increased in lungs from silica-treated Gprc5a–/– mice compared to those
untreated or wild-type ones. These results suggest that, the process of tissue repair
coincides with tissue damages; whereas persistent tissue damages leads to abnormal
repair or neoplasia. Thus, silica-induced pulmonary inflammation and injury contribute
to increased neoplasia development in lungs from Gprc5a–/– mouse model.

cells in the lung, and leads to tissue damage. Persistent
tissue damage and abnormal repair ultimately leads to
fibrosis and a variety of chronic pulmonary diseases such
as silicosis [1]. An estimated 200,000 miners and 1.7
million non-mining workers have occupational exposures

INTRODUCTION
Chronic respiratory exposure to crystalline silica
(CS), either occupational or environmental, causes an
accumulation of injuries with activation of inflammatory
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

39578

Oncotarget

RESULTS

to inhaled silica in the United States alone [2]. Data from
high-quality epidemiologic studies in Asia, Europe, and
North America consistently show positive associations
between lung cancer and particulate matter (PM) exposure
or other forms of air pollution, and these correlations
persist after adjustment for important lung cancer risk
factors, such as tobacco smoking [3]. Particles of silica are
an important component of PM 2.5, a designation for fine
particulates in the air, especially in the western regions of
mainland China [4].
Fine-grained quartz and silica are known to cause
silicosis in humans, and the co-occurrence of lung cancer
and silicosis implies a causal relationship between silicosis
and lung cancer. However, other studies show no evidence
of an exposure-response relationship for silica dust and
the severity of silicosis, lung cancer or death [5, 6]; and
there is lack of experimental study from mouse or hamster
models to show an elevated lung cancer risk in response
to CS exposure. For the development of silicosis, extrinsic
factors such as duration, total exposure, and content of free
crystalline silica are critical determinants [2]. However,
intrinsic (genetic) factors also influence the susceptibility
to silicosis. For example, the human leukocyte antigen
(HLA) haplotype has been associated with silicosis [7] and
pneumoconiosis [8]. In addition, gene polymorphisms of
pro-inflammatory cytokines (e.g. TNFα, IL-1β) have been
associated with silicosis [ 9–11]. Thus, both extrinsic and
intrinsic factors are important in lung cancer development.
We reasoned that the causal relationship of silica exposure
to lung neoplasia might be reproduced in a mouse model
that is sensitive to both silica-induced fibrosis and lung
tumorigenesis.
G-protein coupled receptor family C group 5 type
A (GPRC5A), also known as RAIG1 or RAI3, is a retinoic
acid-inducible gene that is predominately expressed in
type I and type II epithelial cells of the lung [ 12–15].
Gprc5a-knockout (Gprc5a–/–) mice develop spontaneous
lung tumors and are more susceptible than wild-type
mice to development of eosinophilic macrophage
pneumonia [16]. Moreover, Gprc5a–/– mice were sensitive
to inflammation-promoted lung tumorigenesis and
endotoxin-induced acute lung injury [17, 18]. Thus, the
causal relationship between silica exposure and neoplasia
may be reproduced in Gprc5a–/– mouse model that is
susceptible to both pulmonary inflammation and lung
tumorigenesis.
In this study, we examined and compared the
biological response of lungs from both wild-type and
Gprc5a–/– mice following exposure to fine silica particles.
The results show that the lungs of Gprc5a–/– mice were
not only susceptible to silica-induced inflammation, but
also experienced tissue damage, fibrogenic response, and
increased hyperplasia or neoplasia.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Lungs from Gprc5a–/– mice are susceptible to
silica-induced edema, lesions and inflammation
To investigate the biological effects of silica
exposure, we first examined histological changes in
lungs from wild-type (WT) and Gprc5a–/– mice three
months after intra-tracheal instillation of crystalline
silica particles. Lungs from wild-type mice exhibited
many but small nodules on the surface (Figure 1A). On
contrast, lungs from Gprc5a–/– mice showed large area of
severe edema (Figure 1A) and increased wet lung weight
(Figure 1B). Although there were more nodules in lungs
from wild-type mice than in those from Gprc5a–/– ones, the
size (diameter) of nodules in lungs from Gprc5a–/– mice
were much bigger than those from wild-type ones (Figure
1C–1D). Consistently, H&E microscopic analysis showed
many small and confined silica-induced lesions in the
lungs of wild-type mice (Figure 1E–1F). In comparison,
the lesions from the lungs of the Gprc5a–/– mice were
more spread and intense, and therefore graded with an
increased inflammation score (IS) when compared to
wild-type lungs (Figure 1G–1H). Taken together, these
observations suggest that lung tissues from Gprc5a–/– mice
have an increased susceptibility to silica-induced lesions
and inflammation, and have lost the capacity to confine the
silica-induced lesions.

Gprc5a deficiency exacerbates the silica-induced
tissue damages and fibrogenic response in
mouse lungs
Pulmonary fibrosis is a hallmark of inappropriate
repair in response to chronic inflammation. The response
is characterized by excessive extracellular matrix
production, notably collagen deposition, and tissue
destruction. Pulmonary fibrosis, or scar formation,
appears as thickened alveolar walls, which causes reduced
oxygen to blood. The silica-induced fibrogenic response
produces nodular foci of collagen deposition, and is easily
demonstrated by Masson staining. We found limited
collagen deposition in untreated (saline) lungs from wildtype and Gprc5a–/– mice, and that the collagen was well
organized around bronchi and blood vessels, with minimal
reactivity in the alveolar septi. In contrast, collagen
deposition was increased dramatically in the lungs of
silica-treated mice. Of note, lungs from silica-treated
Gprc5a–/– mice showed increased fibrosis scores, dispersed
pattern of collagen deposition, destruction in bronchiolar
and alveolar structure, compared to those from wild-type
mice (Figure 2A–2B). Moreover, TUNEL analysis showed
an increased apoptotic index in lungs from silica-treated

39579

Oncotarget

Figure 1: Lungs from Gprc5a–/– mice are susceptible to silica-induced edema, injury and inflammation. A. Representative

images of lungs from wild-type and Gprc5a–/– mice following treatment with silica (n = 5) or saline (n = 3) for 3 months. B. Bar graph
indicates the ratio of wet lung weight over to body weight in tissues from wild-type and Gprc5a–/– mice. C. Graph represents the number of
surface nodules on lungs obtained from wild-type and Gprc5a–/– mice with treatment as described above. D. Graph represents the percentage
of nodules with diameter over 300 μm in lungs of wild-type and Gprc5a–/– mice. E. Representative H&E images of lung tissues from wildtype and Gprc5a–/– mice treated with saline or silica for 3 months. F. Graph represents the number of microscopic focal lesions on the lungs
from wild-type and Gprc5a–/– mice with treatments as indicated. Each lung section was systematically scanned at 100X magnification; five
successive fields were counted. After examination of the entire section, the mean foci number from all examined fields was calculated and
expressed as mean ± SEM. G. Representative H&E images of lung tissues with inflammation score (IS) from 0 to 4 in wild-type and Gprc5a–/–
mice following silica treatment. H. Graph of IS (F) was used as semi-quantitative assessment for pulmonary injury. *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

39580

Oncotarget

Figure 2: Gprc5a deficiency exacerbates the silica-induced tissue damages and fibrogenic response in mouse
lungs. A. Representative images of Masson staining, measuring collagen deposition, in lung tissues from wild-type and Gprc5a–/– mice

following silica (n = 5) or saline (n = 3) treatment for 3 months. B. Fibrosis score (FS) was used as semi-quantitative assessment for
pulmonary fibrosis. The scoring method, outlined in the Methods section, is analogous to that used for inflammation (0–4) but based on
Masson staining. *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01. C. Representative images of TUNEL staining in the lungs from Gprc5a+/+ and Gprc5a–/– mice
following treatment schedule described above. D. Tunnel score (TS) was used as semi-quantitative assessment for apoptotic index. The
scoring method, outlined in the Methods section is analogous to that used for inflammation (0–4). *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

39581

Oncotarget

Gprc5a–/– mice compared to those from wild-type mice
(Figure 2C–2D). Thus, an exacerbated tissue damage and
fibrogenic response was elicited in lungs from Gprc5a–/–
mice with silica exposure.

only showed minor changes with the same treatment
(Figure 4B-4C). These observations were confirmed by
immunofluorescence (IF) analysis, in which ZO-1 was
significantly suppressed in Gprc5a−/− MTEC but not wildtype MTEC following silica exposure (Figure 4D–4E).
Thus, Gprc5a-deficiency renders lung epithelial cells
susceptible to silica-induced EMT characteristics, which
is consistent with increased fibrogenic response in vivo.

Silica exposure induces EMT characteristics in
lungs from Gprc5a–/– mice in vivo
Lung epithelial cells are the targets of injury, and
injury drives epithelial repair. An emerging concept is
that epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) plays a key
role in the pathologic process of fibrotic lung diseases
[19]. To determine if EMT characteristics are induced in
vivo, we examined EMT-related markers in mouse lungs.
Western blot analysis showed a significant decrease in
expression for the epithelial tight-junction ZO-1 and
cell adhesion markers E-cadherin in lungs from silicatreated Gprc5a−/− mice, while the levels of vimentin, a
mesenchymal cell marker, were increased significantly
following silica treatment. Expression level changes for
these proteins were relatively minor in lungs from silicatreated wild-type mice (Figure 3A–3B). Consistently, RTPCR analysis showed that mRNA levels of E-cadherin
was significantly suppressed, whereas vimentin was
slightly increased in lungs from Gprc5a–/– mice following
silica treatment (Figure 3C). In comparison with, these
markers remained relatively constant in lungs from
wild-type mice (Figure 3C). The results were further
confirmed by immunohistochemistry (IHC) staining, in
which E-cadherin was suppressed whereas vimentin was
increased in lungs from Gprc5a–/– mice following silica
exposure. In contrast, E-cadherin was not significantly
suppressed in the lungs from wild-type mice, although
vimentin was increased following silica exposure (Figure
3D–3E). Taken together, these results indicate that silica
exposure induces EMT characters in lungs from Gprc5a–/–
mice in vivo, which is consistent with an exacerbated lung
injury and fibrogenic response.

Recruitment of alveolar-macrophages was
increased in lungs from Gprc5a–/– mice
Recruitment of alveolar macrophages is involved
in promotion of pulmonary inflammation in many
circumstances. To determine if infiltrated alveolar
macrophages were involved in silica-induced pulmonary
inflammation observed in the lungs of Gprc5a–/– mice,
we examined expression of CD68, a macrophage marker,
by IHC staining. We found a significant increase CD68
staining in lungs from Gprc5a–/– mice compared to lungs
from wild-type mice (Figure 5A–5B). This suggests
that recruitment of alveolar macrophages is involved in
pulmonary inflammation in Gprc5a–/– mice following
silica exposure. Two types of alveolar macrophages are
involved in pulmonary inflammation. M1 macrophages
produce the pro-inflammatory factors IL-12, IL-23,
and TNFα, whereas M2 macrophages express IL-1, IL6, and IL-10. RT-PCR analysis showed that M1 marker
IFN-γ was induced in the silica-exposed lungs from both
wild-type and Gprc5a–/– mice (Figure 5C), whereas M2
markers, IL-6 and IL-10, were only dramatically induced
in lungs from Gprc5a–/– mice (Figure 5C). These results
suggest that, while M1 macrophages were involved in
pulmonary inflammation in both types of mouse lungs, M2
macrophages are more actively involved in the distinctive
pulmonary inflammation in Gprc5a–/– mice than in wildtype ones.

Increased production of chemokines and
proinflammatory cytokines in Gprc5a–/–
MTEC following silica exposure

Silica induces EMT-like characteristics in
Gprc5a–/– mouse tracheal epithelial cells
(MTEC) in vitro

Chemokines produced by lung epithelial cells are
the key factors for recruitment of alveolar macrophages.
To investigate the causal factors for increased recruitment
of alveolar macrophages in Gprc5a–/– mice, we examined
the conditioned medium from MTEC for induction
of macrophage migration via transwell experiment.
Conditioned media from silica-treated MTEC induced
more macrophage migration than media from untreated
cells; and the conditioned media from Gprc5a–/– MTEC
induced more macrophage migration than those from wildtype MTEC with the same treatment (Figure 6A–6B).
Consistently, expression of GM-GSF (granulocytemacrophage colony stimulating factor) and chemokine
MCP-1 (monocyte chemotactic protein 1) was significantly

Next, we examined the net effects of silica particles
on mouse lung epithelial cells in vitro. Treatment of
Gprc5a−/− mouse tracheal epithelial cells (MTEC) with
silica particles for 72 hours resulted in morphologic
changes from epithelial to mesenchymal phenotype,
as some cells became spindle shape, a fibroblastlike phenotype, while wild-type (WT) MTEC did not
(Figure 4A). Moreover, Westernblots showed that,
following silica-treatment, Gprc5a–/– MTEC displayed
increased expression of the mesenchymal marker
vimentin, and significantly suppressed epithelial
marker ZO-1 although E-cadherin was only slightly
reduced (Figure 4B–4C). On contrast, wild-type MTEC
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

39582

Oncotarget

Figure 3: Silica exposure induces EMT characteristics in lungs from Gprc5a–/– mice in vivo. A. Western blot analysis for

ZO-1, E-cadherin, and vimentin in lung tissue lysates obtained from wild-type and Gprc5a–/– mice following treatment with silica or saline
for 3 months. B. Graphic representation of estimated proteins levels obtained from Western blot in (A). C. RT-PCR analysis of mRNA
expression (left) and quantified mRNA level (right) for E-cadherin and vimentin lung tissues obtained from wild-type and Gprc5a–/– mice
following treatment with silica or saline for 3 months. D. Representative images of IHC staining of E-cadherin and vimentin in lung tissue
from wild-type and Gprc5a–/– mice following treatment with silica or saline for 3 months. E. Bar graph represents the extent of IHC staining
(IS) in (D). The scoring method (0–4) was described in the Methods section.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

39583

Oncotarget

Figure 4: Silica induces EMT-like characteristics in Gprc5a–/– mouse tracheal epithelial cells (MTEC) in vitro. A.

Representative images of cell morphology of Gprc5a+/+ and Gprc5a–/– MTEC treated without or with silica (500 μg/ml) for 72 h. B.
Western blot analysis for ZO-1, E-cadherin, and vimentin in wild-type and Gprc5a–/– MTECs treated with or without silica as indicated. C.
Graphic representation of estimated proteins levels from Western blot (B). D. Representative images of immunofluorescence (IF) for ZO-1
in wild-type and Gprc5a–/– MTEC and treated without or with silica (500 μg/ml) for 72 h. E. Graphic representation of estimated IF in (D).

increased in Gprc5a–/– MTEC compared to that of wild-type
by both Q-PCR and protein-chip analysis (Figure 6C–6F).
Moreover, silica-exposure further increased the production
of GM-CSF and MCP-1 (Figure 6C–6F). Taken together,
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

silica exposure induced production of chemokines in
MTEC; which likely contributes to increased recruitment of
macrophage and pulmonary inflammation; whereas Gprc5a
deficiency further increased the intensity of the response.
39584

Oncotarget

Figure 5: Recruitment of alveolar-macrophages was increased in lungs from Gprc5a–/– mice. A. Representative images of

IHC staining for macrophage marker CD68 in lung tissue from wild-type and Gprc5a–/– mice three months after silica exposure. B. Graph
represents the extent of CD68 staining (IS) estimated from the IHC (A). The scoring method, outlined in the Methods section, used the
0–4 design. C. RT-PCR analysis of mRNA levels in lung tissues from wild-type and Gprc5a–/– mice following silica exposure as indicated.

Epithelial neoplasia coincides with exacerbated
tissue damage and fibrogenic response in
silica-exposed lungs from Gprc5a–/– mice

biological changes. IHC staining showed that silica
exposure significantly increased EGFR expression in lungs
from Gprc5a–/– mice compared to those from untreated
Gprc5a–/– or wild-type mice (Figure 8A–8B). This suggests
that lung epithelium from silica treated Gprc5a–/– mice are
more active in proliferation than other groups.
MMPs and TGFβ-1 expression are linked to tissue
injury, and fibrogenic response [20, 21], whereas EGFR
is actively involved in tissue repair. Next, we examined
expression of these genes by RT-PCR analysis. The results
showed that, mRNA expression of EGFR, TGFβ1 and
MMP9 were all significantly up-regulated in lungs from
Gprc5a–/– mice following silica exposure, whereas little
change was found in lungs from untreated Gprc5a–/–,
or either treated or control wild-type mice (Figure 8C).
Thus, the gene expression pattern correlates with the
pathological processes observed in vivo. Taken together,
the gene expression program for neoplasia in the lungs
of Gprc5a–/– mice following silica exposure coincided
with exacerbated tissue injury and increased fibrogenic
response.
To expand the relevance of the conclusion obtained
from mouse model to human tissues, we searched data
from Oncomine (www.oncomine.com). The report from
Hou et al [22], showed that expression of EGFR, MMP9
and TGFβ-1 were all upregulated in human lung cancer
samples, including LCL (large cell lung cancer), ADC

H&E staining showed that there were significantly
more lesions of neoplastic epithelial cell infiltration and
bronchiolar epithelium hyperplasia of lungs from Gprc5a–/–
mice following silica exposure than those from wild-type or
untreated groups (Figure 7A–7B). The areas of neoplastic
epithelial cells infiltration in lungs from Gprc5a–/– mice
were exaggerated and more wide-spread than in wild-type
lungs, which proportionally correlates with the intensity
of lung tissue damage and fibrogenic response. Taken
together, compared to those from wild-type mice, lungs
from Gprc5a–/– mice exhibited an increased neoplasia that
coincided with increased tissue damages and fibrogenic
response following silica exposure.

Molecular program for neoplasia coincided
with those for exacerbated tissue damage and
fibrogenic response in lungs from Gprc5a–/–
mice following silica exposure
EGFR promotes epithelial cell proliferation whereas
up-regulated EGFR is linked to hyperplasia or neoplasia
in lung epithelium. To correlate the biologic changes,
we examined gene expression pattern related to those
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

39585

Oncotarget

Figure 6: Increased production of chemokines and proinflammatory cytokines in Gprc5a–/– MTEC following silica
exposure. A. Representative images of migrated MH-S cells on transwell membranes following co-culture with conditioned media from

wild-type and Gprc5a–/– MTEC that were pre-treated with different doses of silica for 72 h. B. Graph represents the number of MH-S
cells migrated through transwell membrane. Presented data are the average ± SEM of cell counts from five successive fields at 100 ×
magnification. C, D. Q-PCR analysis of GM-CSF (C) and MCP-1 (D) expression in wild-type and Gprc5a–/– MTEC following silica
treatment as indicated. E, F. Protein chip analysis of GM-CSF (E) and MCP-1 (F) expression in cell-free supernatants of wild-type and
Gprc5a–/– MTEC pre-treated with different doses of silica over 72 h. *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01.

(adenocarcinoma) and SCC (squamous cell carcinoma),
compared to adjacent normal tissues (N) (Figure 8D–8F).
In contrast, the mRNA expression of GPRC5A was
significantly suppressed in the tissues of LCL, ADC,
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

and SCC compared to adjacent normal lung tissue (N)
(Figure 8G). These results suggest that the gene expression
pattern of injury, fibrogenic response and neoplasia are
consistent with lung tumor development in human. Taken
39586

Oncotarget

Figure 7: Epithelial neoplasia coincides with exacerbated tissue damage and fibrogenic response in silica-exposed
lungs from Gprc5a–/– mice. A. Representative H&E images demonstrating the morphology of alveolar epithelium (left) and bronchi

(right) obtained from wild-type and Gprc5a–/– mice following silica treatment as indicated. The areas of neoplastic epithelial cell infiltration
associated with immunoblasts and fibroblasts in silica-treated groups are shown in the red box (left). The bronchiolar epithelium hyperplasia
in silica-treated groups is shown in the red box (right). B. Graphic representation of the extent of hyperplasia and abnormal bronchiole area
in indicated treatments. The scoring method, outlined in the Methods section, used the 0–4 design.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

39587

Oncotarget

Figure 8: Molecular program for neoplasia coincided with those for exacerbated tissue damage and fibrogenic response
in lungs from Gprc5a–/– mice following silica exposure. A. Representative images of IHC staining for EGFR in lung tissues from

wild-type and Gprc5a–/– mice, with or without silica treatment as indicated. B. Graphic representation of the extent of EGFR staining (IS) in
(A) The scoring method, outline in the Methods section used the 0–4 design. C. RT-PCR analysis of mRNA expression for TGFβ1, MMP9
and EGFR in lung tissue obtained from wild-type and Gprc5a–/– mice following silica or saline treatment for 3 months. Relative mRNA
levels for EGFR D. TGFβ1 E. MMP9 F. and GPRC5A G. in four different histological types of NSCLC: N: adjacent normal lung samples;
LCLC: large cell lung cancer; LA: lung adenocarcinoma; SCC: squamous cell cancer. Data calculations are outlined in the Methods section.
*p < 0.05, **p < 0.01.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

39588

Oncotarget

together, these results strongly support the model that
hyperplasia or neoplasia coincide with the processes of
lung injury and tissue remodeling.

which triggers the secretion of proinflammatory cytokines
and chemokines [28]. Previously, we showed that
Gprc5a−/− MTEC produced more chemokines than wildtype ones, including MCP-1, RANTES, MEC, M-CSF,
CROα, CROβ, ENA78, and IP-10, which was attribute
to aberrantly activated NF-κB in Gprc5a−/− MTEC [29].
Increased production of chemokines is likely responsible
for increased infiltration of macrophages in Gprc5a−/−
mouse lungs following silica exposure. Macrophages,
especially apoptotic macrophages, have been reported
to induce pulmonary inflammation and fibrosis [30, 31].
Moreover, recruitment of M2 macrophages has been
linked to promotion of lung cancer development [32].
Thus, increased M2 macrophages in lungs of silicaexposed Gprc5a−/− mice is consistent with increased
tissue damages and fibrogenic response in these tissues.
Previously, in the model of endotoxin-induced acute lung
injury (ALI), NF-κB target gene expression was greatly
activated in lungs from Gprc5a−/− mice compared to wildtype ones following administration of endotoxin, with a
peak of activation within 2–24 hour [18]. However in this
study, the mouse model is silica-induced lung injury, in
which the samples of lung tissues were collected three
months after silica exposure. We also examined the
expression of several NF-κB downstream target genes
such as CCND, VEGF, and IκBα via Q-PCR analysis,
but no difference was found in lungs from wild-type and
Gprc5a–/– mice before and after silica exposure (data not
shown). This suggests that the chronic pathological effects
on NF-κB pathway in lung by silica exposure are different
from those of acute lung injury induced by endotoxin.
Gprc5a−/− mice are more sensitive than wild type
mice to silica-induced fibrogenic response in lung, not
only in morphology such as collagen deposition, but
also in gene expression pattern, including repression of
epithelial cell markers, ZO-1, and E-cadherin, induction
of mesenchymal marker vimentin, and expression of
TGFβ and MMP9. Persistent exposure of alveolar
epithelial cells to TGFβ has been shown to induce EMT,
which accounts for the appearance of myofibroblasts in
idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis [21, 33]. Thus, increased
TGFβ expression likely contributes to increased fibrogenic
response following silica exposure in pulmonary epithelial
cells in Gprc5a−/− mice. The expression pattern of EGFR,
TGFβ1 and MMP9 in lungs from Gprc5a–/– mice suggests
that these programs concurred in vivo. It appears that
persistent injury (MMP9 up-regulation) and inflammation
(M2 macrophage infiltration) leads to increased fibrogenic
response (TGFβ up-regulation) and dysregulated tissue
repair (EGFR up-regulation). Thus, persistently upregulated EGFR signaling for tissue repair appeared to be
hijacked for neoplasia program in the lungs of Gprc5a–/–
mice following silica exposure.
Lung carcinogenesis has been considered as a
multi-stage process in which pulmonary epithelial cells

DISCUSSION
In this study, we investigated the pathological effects
in Gprc5a−/− mouse model following silica exposure,
and found that the risk of neoplasia was associated
with exacerbated lung injury, increased pulmonary
inflammation and severe fibrogenic response induced by
silica exposure. This suggests that chronic respiratory
exposure to silica or PM2.5 particles would increase the
incidence of lung cancer development as well as lung
tissue damages and fibrosis.
Previous studies failed to induce neoplasia and
fibrosis in experimental model by silica-exposure, which
was probably due to the insensitivity or low response of
wild-type mice. Thus, application of Gprc5a−/− mice in this
study is important, which ensures that the pathological
effects induced by silica exposure was greatly amplified
or accelerated since Gprc5a−/− mice are susceptible to
lung tumorigenesis [15, 16, 23] and endotoxin-induced
lung injury [18]. In another word, Gprc5a mouse model
overcomes the limitation of experiment performed in wildtype mice.
Lung nodules are quite common in clinic. Usually, a
large nodule is more likely to be cancerous than a smaller
one [24]. Thus, small and confined nodules suggests
that wild-type mouse lungs had the ability to confine
or restrain the pathological effects of silica particles,
whereas Gprc5a−/− mouse lungs failed to do so, leading to
formation of neoplasia. For induction of lung injury and
fibrosis, although extrinsic factors, such as duration, total
exposure, and content of free crystalline silica, are critical
[2], intrinsic or genetic factors also affect the susceptibility
of lung tissue to injury and fibrogenic response. There are
many candidate genes implicated in pulmonary fibrosis,
such as IGF-I, IGFBPs [25], ELMOD2, TERT, TERC,
SFTPC, SFTPA2), and MUC5B [26]. And specific
HLA haplotypes were implicated to associate with the
susceptibility for development of pulmonary fibrosis [7].
Also, inbred strains of mice differ in their susceptibility
to fibrogenic agents [2]. Here, we showed that GPRC5A
genotype is a factor affecting host susceptibility to
silicosis.
There are more than 40 types of cells in lung tissues.
Epithelial cells interact with other resident cells in the
lung, including innate immune cells, endothelial cells,
and mesenchymal cells such as fibroblasts [19] [27]. Lung
epithelial cells serve as a functional unit for gas exchange
and a physical barrier to protect cells from damaging
environmental substances. When silica particles, or other
inhaled fine particles, deposit directly into the lower
respiratory airways, alveolar epithelial cells are injured,

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

39589

Oncotarget

are mutagenized by carcinogens [34]. However, other
factors, such as microenvironment and aging, also have
significant impact on cancer incidence, as suggested
recently by the evolutionary model of cancer [35]. From
the points of view, the pathological effects, such as chronic
inflammation, persistent injury, fibrogenic response, and
structural changes, are accelerated aging processes which
promote neoplasia or tumorigenesis [36, 37]. In other
words, silica exposure resulted in an accelerated aging
microenvironment favoring carcinogenesis in lung tissue
from Gprc5a−/− mice, but this effect was very limited or
restrained in wild-type mice.
In summary, Gprc5a deficiency exacerbated the
pathologic processes induced by silica exposure, with
increased lung injury, persistent pulmonary inflammation,
induction of EMT-like characteristics and neoplasia. These
observations suggest that respiratory exposure of silica
particles promotes lung tumorigenesis as well as persistent
lung injury, tissue damages and fibrogenic response. Thus,
prevention of respiratory exposure to silica or PM2.5
particles and chronic pulmonary inflammation would be
helpful in reducing the incidence of lung tumorigenesis.

saline (pH 7.2 ~ 7.4) for 24 h. The remaining lung tissues
were homogenated in liquid nitrogen for protein or RNA
extraction.

Cell culture and culture condition
Mouse tracheal epithelial cells (MTEC) derived
from normal tracheas of 3-week-old Gprc5a−/− and wildtype mice (C57BL/6 × 129sv) were described previously
[16, 39]. The epithelial cells were grown in keratinocyte
serum–free medium (K-SFM, Invitrogen) supplemented
with epidermal growth factor (EGF, 5 ng/mL) and
bovine pituitary extract (50 μg/mL, Invitrogen). The cell
lines were karyotyped by G banding at the Institutional
Molecular Cytogenetics Facility (MD Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, TX) and found to be of mouse origin.

Cell migration assay
The trans-well cell migration system consists
of cell culture inserts with an 8.0 μm pore size in a 24well plate (BD BioCoat #354578, San Jose, CA). MH-S
(mouse alveolar macrophage-like cell line) cells were resuspended with fetal bovine serum (FBS)-free DMEM,
and seeded on the insert membrane (2 × 104 cells).
Conditioned media from wild-type or Gprc5a–/– MTEC
cells (5.4 × 105), previously treated with different doses
of silica (0, 20, 500 μg/ml) for 72 h were loaded in the
lower chamber and the system maintained for 48 h.
Migrated cells, which attached to the lower side of the
filter, were fixed with 96% ethanol for 30 minutes and
stained with 1.5% crystal violet. Migrated cells in five
100× microscopic fields were counted using a Nikon
fluorescence microscope.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Experimental animals and silica administration
Gprc5a–/– mice were generated in a mixed back­
ground of 129sv × C57BL/6 as described previously
[15]. Genotyping of mouse progeny was performed as
described previously [16]. This study was carried out
in strict accordance with the recommendations from the
Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals of the
National Institutes of Health. The protocol was approved
by Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine
Animal Care and Use Committee (experimental animal
use permission No: SYXK (Shanghai) 2008–0050). All
surgery was performed under general anesthesia, and all
efforts were made to minimize suffering.
Crystalline silica particles (d50: 2.2 μm) were
purchased from Shanghai Huijing Sub-Nanoseale New
Material Co., Ltd. The particles were heated to 200°C
for 2 h immediately prior to administration in order to
sterilize the silica and inactivate any trace endotoxin.
Eight-week-old male wild-type and Gprc5a–/– mice
received either silica (2.5 mg suspended in 60 μl of saline;
n = 5) or saline alone (60 μl ; n = 3) through laryngoscope.
Previous studies indicated that this dose induced chronic
lung inflammation and fibrosis [38]. All instillations
were performed with 4% chloral hydrate anesthesia . At
the termination of the experiment (3 months after silica
installation) animals were sacrificed and lung tissues
collected; wet lung weights were obtained and tissues
processed for a variety of analyses. The left lung lobe was
fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde in phosphate-buffered

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Hematoxylin-Eosin (H&E), Masson and TUNEL
Staining
Fixed lungs were embedded in paraffin,
and sequential 5 μm sections were processed for
H&E, Masson or TUNEL staining. Each section of
lung samples was systematically scanned at 100 ×
magnification, 5 fields/slide, and graded according to
the degree of inflammatory infiltration or the area of
involved fibrosis. Grade 0 = normal tissue while grades
1~4 indicated the presence of pulmonary inflammation,
collagen deposition (Masson stain) or TUNEL positive
cells: 1 (< 25% of the slide), 2 (25% to 50% of the slide),
3 (50% to 75% of the slide), or 4 (>75% of the slide).
After examination, the mean score from all examined
fields was calculated and reported as the inflammation
score (IS) or fibrosis score (FS) or TUNEL score
(TS). Semi-quantifications of neoplastic epithelial cell
infiltration were also graded according to the extent of
pathology as described above.

39590

Oncotarget

Analysis of mRNA expression by RT-PCR
and Q-PCR

Immunohistochemistry (IHC)
The samples of lung tissues were fixed with
formalin buffer and embedded in paraffin. IHC staining
was performed on 5 μm de-paraffinized-tissue sections
with rabbit monoclonal antibody to: E-cadherin (Cell
Signaling), vimentin (Cell Signaling) or EGFR (Cell
Signaling) for overnight at 4°C. Tissue sections were
incubated with biotinylated rabbit immunoglobulin G
(for overnight at 4°C), followed by conjugated HRP
streptavidin, (both) for 1 hr at RT, and DAB working
solution until localization was visualized, with rinses
between each incubation, and finally counterstained
with hematoxylin. To quantify protein expression, the
mean percentage of positive cells was determined in at
least five random fields/slide at × 400 magnification and
scored as follows: 1 (<25% of the slide), 2 (25% to 50%
of the slide), 3 (50% to 75% of the slide), or 4 (>75% of
the slide). The intensity of the detected immunoreaction
was scored as follows: 1+, weak; 2+, moderate; and 3+,
intense. The immunohistochemical staining score (IS) was
calculated as the percentage of positive cells multiplied
by staining intensity. These judgments were made by two
independent pathologists.

Total RNA from lung tissues was extracted with TriPure Isolation Reagent (Roche, Switzerland) and cDNA
prepared from 1 mg of total RNA using the SuperScript III
System (Invitrogen Life Technologies). mRNA transcripts
were identified by RT-PCR (Reverse TranscriptionPolymerase Chain Reaction), using the following primers
(mouse origin):
Gprc5a (F: 5′-GACACACTCTATGCACCTTAT
TC-3′ and R: 5′-ACAGACCTTGTCTACTCCAG-3′);
internal standard β-actin (F: 5′-AACAGTCCGCCTAG
AAGCAC-3′ and R: 5′-CGTTGACATCCGTAAAGA
CC-3′); E-cadherin (F: 5′-CCAAGCACGTATCAG
GGTCA-3′ and R: 5′-ACTGCTGGTCAGGATCGTTG-3′);
vimentin (F: 5′-CTGCGAGAGAAATTGCAGGAG-3′
and R: 5′-CTTTCATACTGCTGGCGCAC-3′); MMP9:
(F: 5′-TGTCATCCAGTTTGGTGTCG-3′ and R: 5′-TGC
CGTCCTTATCGTAGTCA-3′); TGF-β1(F: 5′-CTGCTGC
TTTCTCCCTCAAC-3′ and R: 5′-GCGAGCCTTAGT
TTGGACAG); IFN-γ (F: 5′-GGCAAAAGGATGGTG
ACATGA and R: 5′- ACCTGTGGGTTGTTGACCTC) ;
EGFR (F: 5′- CCACTTTGCCTTCACTCCTC and R: 5′TCTCCAACAGATTGCCCAGT).
The Q-PCR (Quantitative Real-time PCR) reaction
proceeded using the Applied Biosystems 7500 Fast RealTime PCR System. Primers including Csf2 (GM-CSF) and
Ccl2 (MCP-1) were purchased from GeneCopeia™. Mouse
Actin was used as an internal control gene. The expression
data was normalized to actin and quantified using the 7500
Fast System Software.

Immunofluorescence (IF)
Cells treated with silica (500 μg/ml) or PBS (control)
for 72 h were fixed with cold methanol for 10 minutes
and blocked with 5% FCS. The cells were incubated with
primary antibodies (ZO-1 Abcam, 1 μg/ml) overnight at
4°C. Secondary antibodies were added to rinsed cells and
incubated at 37°C for 1 h. FITC-conjugated rabbit IgG
antibodies (Santa Cruz Biotechnology) identified positive
staining and washed cells were stained with DAPI and
viewed with a fluorescence microscope (Nikon).

Western blot analysis
Fresh tissues or cells were lysed with lysis buffer (20
mM Tris (pH 7.5), 1 mM EDTA, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM
EGTA, 1 mM β–glycerophosphate,1% Triton X-100,
2.5 mM sodium pyrophosphate, 1 mM Na3VO4, 4 μg/ml
aprotinin, 4 μg/ml leupeptin, 4 μg/ml pepstatin, and 1 mM
PMSF). Protein samples were separated by 10% SDSPAGE and electrophoretically transferred to a nitrocellulose
membrane. Nonspecific protein binding was blocked with
1 h incubation in 5% nonfat dried milk in Tris-buffer saline
containing 0.1% Tween 20 (TBS-T) at room temperature
(RT) with agitation. The nitrocellulose membrane was
incubated with the primary antibodies: anti-GAPDH
(Kangwei, China), anti-ZO-1 (Abcam), anti-vimentin and
anti-E-cadherin (Santa Cruz Biotechnology) for overnight
at 4°C rinsed with TBS/TBS-T, and subsequently incubated
with IR Dye-conjugated secondary antibodies (Rockland
Immunochemicals, Gilbertsville, PA) for 1 h at RT. Images
were quantified using the Odyssey infrared imaging system
(LI-COR Biosciences Lincoln, NE). The protein content
was normalized to the level of GAPDH.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Assessment of chemokines
Wild-type and Gprc5a–/– mouse tracheal epithelial
cells (MTEC) (2 × 105 cells) were treated with various
doses of silica (0, 20, 500 μg/ml) for 72 h. Cytokine levels
in conditioned media from treated cells were measured
using the Raybio® Mouse Cytokine Antibody Array III
according to the manufacturer’s instructions (RayBiotech,
CA.USA)

Analysis of raw data in a public database
Expression levels for GPRC5A, MMP9 and EGFβ-1
were determined in 91 non-small cell lung carcinoma and
65 adjacent normal lung samples based on available raw
data published as supporting information by Hou et al.
[22]. We extracted the expression value of GPRC5A,
MMP9 and EGFβ-1 from this dataset. The values used for

39591

Oncotarget

gene expression were rescaled, and negative values were
floored to 0, as described by the authors.

7.	 Honda K, Kimura A, Dong RP, Tamai H, Nagato H,
Nishimura Y, Sasazuki T. Immunogenetic analysis of silicosis in Japan. American journal of respiratory cell and
molecular biology. 1993; 8:106–111.

Statistical analysis

8.	 Rihs HP, Lipps P, May-Taube K, Jager D, Schmidt EW,
Hegemann JH, Baur X. Immunogenetic studies on HLA-DR
in German coal miners with and without coal worker’s
pneumoconiosis. Lung. 1994; 172:347–354.

Presented data are the mean ± SEM with statistical
analysis performed using the SPSS,19.0 statistics package
(SPSS Inc., Chicago, USA). Results were compared
using unpaired t-tests, assuming unequal distribution, and
statistical significance was set at p < 0.05.

9.	 Yucesoy B, Vallyathan V, Landsittel DP, Sharp DS,
Matheson J, Burleson F, Luster MI. Polymorphisms of the
IL-1 gene complex in coal miners with silicosis. American
journal of industrial medicine. 2001; 39:286–291.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS AND FUNDING

10.	 Yucesoy B, Vallyathan V, Landsittel DP, Sharp DS,
Weston A, Burleson GR, Simeonova P, McKinstry M,
Luster MI. Association of tumor necrosis factor-alpha
and interleukin-1 gene polymorphisms with silicosis.
Toxicology and applied pharmacology. 2001; 172:75–82.

We thank Dr. Reuben Lotan for his generosity by
providing Gprc5a–/– mice. This work was supported
by grants from, Ministry of Science and Technology
No. 2013CB910901 (J.Deng), National Nature Science
Foundation of China 91129303 (J.Deng), 81071923
(J.Deng), Science and Technology Commission of
Shanghai (10140902100) (J.Deng), and China Postdoctoral
Science Foundation Grant (2014M551421) (H. Song).

11.	 Corbett EL, Mozzato-Chamay N, Butterworth AE,
De Cock KM, Williams BG, Churchyard GJ, Conway DJ.
Polymorphisms in the tumor necrosis factor-alpha gene
promoter may predispose to severe silicosis in black South
African miners. American journal of respiratory and critical
care medicine. 2002; 165:690–693.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST

12.	 Cheng Y, Lotan R. Molecular cloning and characterization
of a novel retinoic acid-inducible gene that encodes a putative G protein-coupled receptor. The Journal of biological
chemistry. 1998; 273:35008–35015.

The authors have no conflicts of interests with the
studies presented here.

REFERENCES

13.	 Wu Q, Ding W, Mirza A, Van Arsdale T, Wei I, Bishop WR,
Basso A, McClanahan T, Luo L, Kirschmeier  P,
Gustafson E, Hernandez M, Liu S. Integrative genomics
revealed RAI3 is a cell growth-promoting gene and a novel
P53 transcriptional target. The Journal of biological chemistry. 2005; 280:12935–12943.

1.	 Leung CC, Yu IT, Chen W. Silicosis. Lancet. 2012;
379:2008–2018.
2.	 Ohtsuka Y, Wang XT, Saito J, Ishida T, Munakata M.
Genetic linkage analysis of pulmonary fibrotic response
to silica in mice. The European respiratory journal. 2006;
28:1013–1019.

14.	 Xu J, Tian J, Shapiro SD. Normal lung development in
RAIG1-deficient mice despite unique lung epithelium-­
specific expression. American journal of respiratory cell
and molecular biology. 2005; 32:381–387.

3.	 Raaschou-Nielsen O, Andersen ZJ, Beelen R, Samoli E,
Stafoggia M, Weinmayr G, Hoffmann B, Fischer P,
Nieuwenhuijsen MJ, Brunekreef B, Xun WW,
KatsouyanniK, Dimakopoulou K, Sommar J, Forsberg B,
Modig L, et al. Air pollution and lung cancer incidence
in 17 European cohorts: prospective analyses from the
European Study of Cohorts for Air Pollution Effects
(ESCAPE). The Lancet Oncology. 2013; :813–822.

15.	 Tao Q, Fujimoto J, Men T, Ye X, Deng J, Lacroix L,
Clifford JL, Mao L, Van Pelt CS, Lee JJ, Lotan D, Lotan R.
Identification of the retinoic acid-inducible Gprc5a as a
new lung tumor suppressor gene. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2007;
99:1668–1682.
16.	 Deng J, Fujimoto J, Ye XF, Men TY, Van Pelt CS,
ChenYL, Lin XF, Kadara H, Tao Q, Lotan D, Lotan R.
Knockout of the tumor suppressor gene Gprc5a in mice
leads to NF-kappaB activation in airway epithelium and
promotes lung inflammation and tumorigenesis. Cancer
prevention research. 2010; 3:424–437.

4.	 Zhenquan Wang, Shigong Wang, Jinxia Gao, Suqin Lian.
“Characteristic of Talldust in Sand-Storm in Northwest
Area of China”. J Environ Health. 2008; 25:1053–1055.
5.	 Wiebert P, Alderling M, Svartengren M, Gustavsson P,
Plato N. 0225 Cancer, mortality and acute myocardial
infarction in workers exposed to respirable crystalline silica
dust at a Swedish porcelain factory. Occupational and environmental medicine. 2014; 71:A31.

17.	 Barta P, Van Pelt C, Men T, Dickey BF, Lotan R,
Moghaddam SJ. Enhancement of lung tumorigenesis in
a Gprc5a Knockout mouse by chronic extrinsic airway
inflammation. Molecular Cancer. 2012; 11:4–15.

6.	 Allen EM, Alexander BH, MacLehose RF, Nelson HH,
RyanAD, Ramachandran G, Mandel JH. Occupational exposures and lung cancer risk among Minnesota taconite mining
workers. Occupational and environmental medicine. 2015.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

18.	 Liao Y, Song H, Xu D, Jiao H, Yao F, Liu J, Wu Y,
Zhong S, Yin H, Liu S, Wang X, Guo W, Sun B, Han B,
Chin YE, Deng J. Gprc5a-deficiency confers susceptibility
39592

Oncotarget

to endotoxin-induced acute lung injury via NF-kappaB
pathway. Cell cycle. 2015; 14:1403–1412.

promotes lung inflammation and tumorigenesis. Cancer
Prev Res (Phila Pa). 2010; 3:424–437.

19.	 Chapman HA. Epithelial-mesenchymal interactions in
pulmonary fibrosis. Annual review of physiology. 2011;
73:413–435.

30.	 Wang L, Antonini JM, Rojanasakul Y, Castranova V,
Scabilloni JF, Mercer RR. Potential role of apoptotic macrophages in pulmonary inflammation and fibrosis. Journal
of cellular physiology. 2003; 194:215–224.

20.	 Elkington PT, Friedland JS. Matrix metalloproteinases in destructive pulmonary pathology. Thorax. 2006;
61:259–266.

31.	 Wang L, Scabilloni JF, Antonini JM, Rojanasakul Y,
Castranova V, Mercer RR. Induction of secondary apoptosis, inflammation, and lung fibrosis after intratracheal
instillation of apoptotic cells in rats. American journal of
physiology Lung cellular and molecular physiology. 2006;
290:L695–L702.

21.	 Warburton D, Shi W, Xu B. TGF-beta-Smad3 signaling in
emphysema and pulmonary fibrosis: an epigenetic aberration
of normal development?. American journal of physiology
Lung cellular and molecular physiology. 2013; 304:L83–85.

32.	 Lievense LA, Bezemer K, Aerts JG, Hegmans JP. Tumorassociated macrophages in thoracic malignancies. Lung
cancer. 2013; 80:256–262.

22.	 Hou J, Aerts J, den Hamer B, van Ijcken W, den Bakker M,
Riegman P, van der Leest C, van der Spek P, Foekens JA,
Hoogsteden HC, Grosveld F, Philipsen S. Gene expressionbased classification of non-small cell lung carcinomas and
survival prediction. PloS one. 2010; 5:e10312.

33.	 Gharaee-Kermani M, Hu B, Phan SH, Gyetko MR. Recent
advances in molecular targets and treatment of idiopathic
pulmonary fibrosis: focus on TGFbeta signaling and
the myofibroblast. Current medicinal chemistry. 2009;
16:1400–1417.

23.	 Zhong S, Yin H, Liao Y, Yao F, Li Q, Zhang J, Jiao H,
Zhao Y, Xu D, Liu S, Song H, Gao Y, Liu J, Ma L,
Pang Z, Yang R, et al. Lung Tumor Suppressor GPRC5A
Binds EGFR, and Restrains Its Effector Signaling. Cancer
research. 2015; 75:1801–1814.

34.	 Walser T, Cui X, Yanagawa J, Lee JM, Heinrich E, Lee G,
Sharma S, Dubinett SM. Smoking and lung cancer: the role
of inflammation. Proceedings of the American Thoracic
Society. 2008; 5:811–815.

24.	 Hasegawa M, Sone S, Takashima S, Li F, Yang ZG,
Maruyama Y, Watanabe T. Growth rate of small lung cancers detected on mass CT screening. The British journal of
radiology. 2000; 73:1252–1259.

35.	 Rozhok AI, DeGregori J. Toward an evolutionary model
of cancer: Considering the mechanisms that govern the
fate of somatic mutations. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America.
2015; 112:8914–8921.

25.	 Pilewski JM, Liu L, Henry AC, Knauer AV, FeghaliBostwick CA. Insulin-like growth factor binding proteins
3 and 5 are overexpressed in idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis and contribute to extracellular matrix deposition. The
American journal of pathology. 2005; 166:399–407.

36.	 Landskron G, De la Fuente M, Thuwajit P, Thuwajit C,
Hermoso MA. Chronic inflammation and cytokines in the
tumor microenvironment. Journal of immunology research.
2014; 2014:149185.

26.	 Macneal K, Schwartz DA. The genetic and environmental
causes of pulmonary fibrosis. Proceedings of the American
Thoracic Society. 2012; 9:120–125.

37.	 Ito K, Barnes PJ. COPD as a disease of accelerated lung
aging. Chest. 2009; 135:173–180.

27.	 Prasse A, Pechkovsky DV, Toews GB, Jungraithmayr W,
Kollert F, Goldmann T, Vollmer E, Muller-Quernheim J,
Zissel G. A vicious circle of alveolar macrophages and
fibroblasts perpetuates pulmonary fibrosis via CCL18.
American journal of respiratory and critical care medicine.
2006; 173:781–792.

38.	 Giordano G, van den Brule S, Lo Re S, Triqueneaux  P,
Uwambayinema F, Yakoub Y, Couillin I, Ryffel B,
MichielsT, Renauld JC, Lison D, Huaux F. Type I interferon signaling contributes to chronic inflammation in
a murine model of silicosis. Toxicological sciences :
an official journal of the Society of Toxicology. 2010;
116:682–692.

28.	 Rimal B, Greenberg AK, Rom WN. Basic pathogenetic
mechanisms in silicosis: current understanding. Current
opinion in pulmonary medicine. 2005; 11:169–173.

39.	 Chen Y, Deng J, Fujimoto J, Kadara H, Men T, Lotan D,
Lotan R. Gprc5a deletion enhances the transformed phenotype in normal and malignant lung epithelial cells by eliciting persistent Stat3 signaling induced by autocrine leukemia
inhibitory factor. Cancer research. 2010; 70:8917–8926.

29.	 Deng J, Fujimoto J, Ye XF, Men TY, Van Pelt CS,
Chen YL, Lin XF, Kadara H, Tao Q, Lotan D, Lotan R.
Knockout of the tumor suppressor gene Gprc5a in mice
leads to NF-kappaB activation in airway epithelium and

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

39593

Oncotarget

