Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No. 26

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Regulation of sensitivity of tumor cells to antitubulin drugs by
Cdk1-TAZ signalling
Yulei Zhao1, Xiaolong Yang1
1

Department of Pathology and Molecular Medicine, Queen’s University, Kingston, ON K7L3N6, Canada

Correspondence to:
Xiaolong Yang, e-mail: yang@path.queensu.ca
Keywords: Hippo, TAZ (WWTR1), Cdk1, antitubulin drug, chemoresistance
Received: April 13, 2015     Accepted: May 22, 2015      Published: June 08, 2015

ABSTRACT
Antitubulin drugs are commonly used for the treatment of numerous cancers.
However, either the intrinsic or acquired resistances of patients to these drugs result
in the failure of the treatment and high mortality of cancers. Therefore, identifying
genes or signalling pathways involved in antitubulin drug resistances is critical for
future successful treatment of cancers.
TAZ (Transcriptional coactivator with PDZ-binding motif), which is a core
component of the Hippo pathway, is overexpressed in various cancers. We have
recently shown that high levels of TAZ in cancer cells result in Taxol resistance
through up-regulation of downstream targets Cyr61 and CTGF. However, how TAZ
is regulated in response to Taxol is largely unknown. In this study, we found that
Cdk1 (Cyclin-dependent kinase 1) directly phosphorylated TAZ on six novel sites
independent of the Hippo pathway, which further resulted in TAZ degradation through
proteasome system. Phosphorylation-mimicking TAZ mutant was unstable, and
therefore abolished TAZ-induced antitubulin drug resistances. This study provides first
evidence that Cdk1 is a novel kinase phosphorylating and regulating TAZ stability and
suggests that Cdk1-TAZ signalling is a critical regulator of antitubulin drug response
in cancer cells and may be a potential target for the treatment of antitubulin-drug
resistant cancer patients.

stem cell differentiation and renewal, etc [7–11]. It is
well-known that TAZ can be phosphorylated by LATS
(Large tumor suppressor) through four serine (S) sites,
which can cause TAZ either bind to 14–3–3 protein and is
anchored in cytoplasm or be degraded through ubiquitinproteasome-system (UPS) by interacting with E3 ubiquitin
ligase β-TRCP [12, 13]. High expression of TAZ is found
in several types of cancers and several studies suggest
that TAZ is related to the malignancy of breast cancer
and lung cancer as well as cancer stem cell property
maintenance and chemoresistance [14–19]. Our lab
previously identified that TAZ upregulates its downstream
targets, Cyr61(cysteine rich, angiogenic 61) and CTGF
(connective tissue growth factor), through interacting
with TEAD (TEAD domain)/TEF (transcriptional
enhancer factor) transcription factor, which further leads
to the resistance of breast cancer cells to antitubulin drug
Taxol [14]. However, the upstream genes regulating
TAZ-induced sensitivity to antitubulin drugs are largely
unknown. Here in this study, we found that TAZ was

INTRODUCTION
Antitubulin drugs including paclitaxel (Taxol) and
vinblastine are the chemotherapeutic drugs widely used for
clinical cancer treatment of several types of cancers such
as breast cancer, non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC),
ovarian cancer, etc [1–4]. However, cancer patients either
have intrinsic resistance to these drugs or gradually develop
acquired resistance during chemotherapy, which results
in the failure of chemotherapy and high mortality [5, 6].
Normally the resistance of certain drugs depends on the
molecular alterations of cancer cells. Therefore, studying
the molecular mechanisms underlying the responses of
cancer cells to chemotherapeutic drugs may provide useful
information in dealing with chemoresistance.
TAZ (Transcriptional co-activator with PDZ binding
motif), also named as WWTR1 (WW domain containing
transcription regulator 1), is one of the core components
(MST-LATS-YAP/TAZ) in the Hippo pathway that plays
important roles in tumorigenesis, organ size control,
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

21906

Oncotarget

phosphorylated and degraded in Taxol sensitive cells
during Taxol treatment. The phosphorylation of TAZ
was due to activated Cdk1 on six novel sites of TAZ,
which subsequently led to TAZ degradation and therefore
hindered the involvement of TAZ in drug resistance. This
study discovers an essential role of Cdk1-TAZ signalling
in determining the tumor cell sensitivity to antitubulin
drugs and suggests a novel signalling target for the
treatment of antitubulin drug-resistant cancers.

increased TAZ degradation (Figure 1B), suggesting
that Taxol reduces TAZ levels by causing TAZ protein
degradation. Besides, TAZ was phosphorylated and
degraded in different types of cancer cells with Taxol
treatment (Figure 1C), suggesting this Taxol-induced
TAZ degradation is not cell line specific. Moreover, TAZ
is degraded in wild-type (WT) rather than Taxol-resistant
(TR) SK-BR3 breast cancer cells (Figure 1D). Together,
these findings strongly suggest that degradation of TAZ is
correlated with the sensitivity of cancer cells to antitubulin
drug Taxol.

RESULTS

TAZ degradation after taxol treatment is not
due to the taxol-induced cell detachment or the
activation of the Hippo pathway

TAZ is phosphorylated and degraded during
Taxol treatment
To examine how TAZ responds to Taxol treatment,
TAZ levels were examined in HeLa cells treated with
Taxol at different dosage for 24 hours. TAZ was found
phosphorylated and degraded with the increase of Taxol
dosage and apoptosis indicated by cleaved PARP (cPARP),
an apoptotic marker (Figure 1A). To test whether reduced
levels of TAZ is due to increased TAZ turnover after Taxol
treatment, we treated cells with cycloheximide (CHX)
to inhibit protein synthesis in the absence or presence
of Taxol. Significantly, compared to cells treated only
with CHX, Taxol treatment together with CHX caused

Cells are usually detached from the cell culture plate
and remain in floating condition after Taxol treatment. To
exclude the possibility that TAZ degradation is due to the
detachment of cells instead of Taxol related regulation,
HeLa cells were trypsinized at both low cell density
(40%) and high cell density (90%). However, TAZ was
neither degraded nor phosphorylated after detachment
(Figure 2A). To test if the floating condition plays a role
in Taxol-induced TAZ alteration, HeLa cells were cultured
in Polyhema-coated plates to mimic the floating condition.

Figure 1: Taxol causes TAZ phosphorylation and degradation. A. HeLa cells were treated with Taxol at different concentrations

(0, 1, 5, 10, 50, 100, or 500 nM) for 24 hours before cells were lysed for western blot to detect the apoptotic marker, cleaved-PARP
(cPARP), and TAZ with related antibodies. β-actin was used as an internal loading control. B. Western blot analysis of TAZ turnover time
after Taxol treatment. HeLa cells were treated with cycloheximide (CHX, 60 μg/ml) to block TAZ protein synthesis in the absence (–) or
presence (+) of Taxol (100 nM). Cells were lysed at 0, 4, 8, or 12 h after drug treatments and subjected to western blot analysis of TAZ.
C. TAZ is also phosphorylated and degraded in other cell lines. Breast cancer cell lines, MDA-MB468 and MCF7 as well as colon cancer
cells HCT116 were treated with Taxol at 100 nM for 24 hours and floating cells were collected and lysed for western blotting to detect TAZ
protein phosphorylation and degradation. D. Loss of TAZ degradation after Taxol treatment in drug resistant SK-BR3-TR cells. Cells were
treated as described above. Wild-type SK-BR3 (SK-BR3-WT) as well as Taxol-resistant SK-BR3 cells (SK-BR3-TR) were cultured in the
absence or presence of Taxol for 24 hours and TAZ levels were examined by western blot.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

21907

Oncotarget

Figure 2: Taxol-induced TAZ degradation is independent of the Hippo pathway and cell detachment or floating. A. TAZ is

not degraded due to cell detachment. HeLa cells were trypsinized and lysed (D) or directly lysed (A) at either 40% or 90% confluency to mimic
cell detachment (D) and attachment (A) Then cell lysates were subjected to western blot to detect TAZ expression. B. TAZ is not degraded due to
cell floating. To check TAZ expression in floating conditions, HeLa cells were cultured in poly-hema coated plates which blocked cell attachment.
Taxol (100 nM) were added to one plate of cells at the right start of floating culture. Cells either cultured in floating condition alone or together
with Taxol treatment in floating culture were collected after 24 hours and lysed for western blot to detect TAZ expression with cells without
floating culture as a control. C. Taxol can still cause degradation of TAZ mutant with LATS1/2 phosphorylation site mutations [TAZ4SA (LS)].
HA-tagged wild-type TAZ or TAZ4SA (LS) was transfected into HeLa cells and subsequently treated with Taxol (100 nM) for either 6 hours or
24 hours. Floating cells were collected and lysed for western blot analysis of TAZ expression using anti-HA antibody. D, E. Taxol induced TAZ
degradation is independent of the upstream Hippo pathway. The siRNAs targeting the Hippo pathway core components, LATS1/2 (siLATS) (D)
or MST1/2 (siMST-A/B) (E), were introduced into HeLa cells, followed by untreated or treated with Taxol (100 nM) for 24 h. Cells were lysed
for western blot to detect TAZ expression with MST1/2 and LATS1/2 expression as controls for checking the efficiency of siRNA knocking down.

Figure 3: Taxol-induced TAZ phosphorylation and degradation is mediated by Cdk1. A. Phosphorylation of TAZ by Cdk1

In vitro. TAZ-GST or TAZ6A-GST was incubated with Cdk1 kinase, followed by in vitro kinase assay. YAP-GST was used as a positive
control for Cdk1 kinase activity. Upper panel: ponceau S staining of fusion proteins on the membrane; Lower panel: western blot analysis
of phosphorylated TAZ using SDS-PAGE gel and anti-thiophosphate antibody. B. Knockdown of Cyclin B blocks Taxol-induced TAZ
degradation. Cyclin B was knocked down by siRNA in HeLa cells in the absence (–) or presence (+) of Taxol (100 nM) for 24 hours.
Cells were lysed for western blot to detect TAZ expression. C. Knockdown of Cdk1 abolishes Taxol-induced Cdk1 degradation. Cdk1 was
targeted with siCdk1, shCdk1 [inducible system with Doxycyclin (Dox) to induce shCdk1] and the combination of siCdk1 and shCdk1 in
HeLa cells, and treated with Taxol (100 nM) for 24 hours. Cells were collected and lysed for western blot to detect TAZ expression. Since
BCL-2 is a known substrate of Cdk1, BCL-2 was used as a control to check the efficiency of Cdk1 knocking down.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

21908

Oncotarget

Cells were collected after 24 hours culture with or without
Taxol (100 nM) added. The expression level of TAZ was
only significantly decreased in floating cells treated with
Taxol (Figure 2B). Together these experiments indicate
that TAZ alteration was directly through Taxol treatment
rather than Taxol-induced cell detachment or floating.
It is well known that TAZ is directly regulated by
LATS kinase in the Hippo pathway (MST-LATS-TAZ).
LATS phosphorylates four “S” sites (S66, S89, S117, S311)
in TAZ, among which, S311 phosphorylation induces TAZ
degradation, while S89 phosphorylation can anchor TAZ
in the cytoplasm through interaction with 14–3–3 protein
[12, 13]. To detect if Taxol induces TAZ phosphorylation
and degradation through LATS, we first transfected WT
TAZ-HA or TAZ mutant, which has all the four LATS (LS)
phosphorylation sites mutated from “S” to Alanine (A)
[TAZ4SA (LS)], followed by Taxol treatment for 0, 6, and
24 h. Surprisingly, both TAZ-HA and TAZ-4SA(LS)-HA
were degraded after Taxol treatment for 24 hours (Figure
2C), suggesting that phosphorylation of TAZ by LATS is not
essential for Taxol-induced TAZ degradation. Interestingly,
TAZ levels were enhanced after 6 h Taxol treatment. Since
Taxol induces mitotic arrest during early stage of treatment,
it is possible that TAZ is activated to counter Taxol-induced
mitotic cell cycle arrest. To exclude the possibility that
Taxol may activate LATS to phosphorylate TAZ on sites
other than the known four LATS phosphorylation sites (4S)
to cause degradation, LATS1/2 (LATS) was knocked down
by siRNAs in HeLa cells, followed by Taxol treatment.
However, TAZ was still phosphorylated and degraded
after LATS knockdown (Figure 2D). Similar results
were obtained when LATS upstream kinase, MST1/2
(mammalian Hippo), were knocked down by siRNAs,
followed by Taxol treatment (Figure 2E). Together, these
results highly suggest Taxol-induced degradation of TAZ is
independent of the Hippo pathway.

suggesting Cdk1 can directly phosphorylate TAZ.
Furthermore, siRNA targeting Cyclin B, the functional
partner of Cdk1, was used together with Taxol treatment.
Taxol-induced TAZ degradation was blocked after knocking
down Cyclin B (Figure 3B). Moreover, siRNA/shRNAs
targeting Cdk1 were introduced into HeLa cells, followed
by Taxol treatment. Like BCL-2 positive control, TAZ was
found no longer phosphorylated and degraded in cells with
Cdk1 completely knocked down by the combination of
siCdk1 and shCdk1 (Figure 3C), further confirming that
Cdk1 is the kinase regulating TAZ during Taxol treatment.
To narrow down the actual Cdk1 phosphorylation sites,
two TAZ deletions (TAZ1–114 and TAZ1–340) containing
part of the potential phosphorylation sites mutated into A
(SA or TA) were constructed and transfected into HeLa cells,
followed by treatment with Taxol for 6 h at which time point
TAZ is significantly phosphorylated but less degraded (Figure
2C). Western blot analysis shows that three phosphorylation
sites (S90, S105, and T285) contribute to the band-shift
(phosphorylation) of TAZ protein after Taxol treatment
(Figure 4B). To further confirm whether these three sites are
the only major sites for Taxol-induced TAZ phosphorylation,
a phos-tag gel was used to identify any phosphorylation site
that does not cause band-shift on regular SDS-PAGE gel.
Since phosphorylation of TAZ by endogenous LATS also
causes multiple bands of wild type TAZ on phos-tag gel even
without Taxol treatment (Figure 4C), TAZ4SA (LS), which
mutates all four LATS “S” phosphorylation sites into “A”,
was used as a template to further have the Taxol-induced
three Cdk1 phosphorylation sites (S90, S105, and T285)
mutated into “A” [TAZ4SA (LS)+3A]. “Wild-type” (WT)
TAZ4SA (LS) had a band-shift after 6 h of Taxol treatment
(Figure 4C), indicating that Taxol-induced phosphorylation
of TAZ is independent of the four LATS phosphorylation
sites. However, the band-shift of TAZ4SA (LS) was
abolished by mutating the three potential Taxol-induced
Cdk1 phosphorylation sites [TAZ4SA (LS)+3A], verifying
that these three sites are fully responsible for Taxol-induced
TAZ phosphorylation by Cdk1 (Figure 4C). To examine if
this TAZ regulation is specific to Taxol, both TAZ4SA (LS)
and TAZ4SA (LS)+3A were treated with three different
antitubulin drugs (Taxol, Vinblastine, or Nocodazole), as
well as two DNA damage drugs (Cisplatin or Doxorubicin)
for 6 h. Then phosphorylations of TAZ with different drug
treatments were detected through running the cell lysates
on phos-tag gel (Figure 4D). Interestingly, TAZ4SA (LS)
(WT) was phosphorylated specifically after antitubulin
drug treatments and this phosphorylation was abolished on
TAZ4SA (LS)+3A (Figure 4D), suggesting that this Cdk1induced phosphorylation of TAZ is antitubulin drug specific.
Unlike YAP during antitubulin drug treatments [20],
TAZ is not only phosphorylated but also degraded (Figure
1A). But when Cdk1 was knocked down, TAZ was no longer
degraded (Figure 3C), suggesting Cdk1 is also responsible
for Taxol-induced TAZ degradation. Therefore, we started

Taxol induces TAZ phosphorylation and
degradation through Cdk1
In our previous work, YAP was phosphorylated by
Cdk1 on five phosphorylation sites during Taxol treatment
[20]. Since TAZ is the paralog of YAP, it is possible
Taxol-induced TAZ alteration is Cdk1 dependent. Cdk1
specifically recognizes “S” or Threonine (T) in a “SP/
TP” (P, Proline) motif [21]. By examining potential Cdk1
phosphorylation sites in TAZ, 6 S/T sites (S90, S105, T175,
T285, T326, and T346) with S/TP motifs were identified
(Figure 4A). To check if TAZ can be phosphorylated
by Cdk1, in vitro kinase assay with Cdk1 kinase was
performed using TAZ-GST or TAZ6A-GST (all 6 potential
S/T Cdk1 phosphorylation sites were mutated into A,
Figure 4A) fusion protein as the substrate and YAP-GST
protein as a positive control. TAZ rather than TAZ6A
was phosphorylated when Cdk1 was added (Figure 3A),

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

21909

Oncotarget

Figure 4: Mapping the Taxol-induced Cdk1 phosphorylation sites in TAZ. A. Schematic diagraph of TAZ functional domains

and potential phosphorylation sites. TB, TEAD binding domain; WW, WW domain; TA, transactivating domain. S90, S105, and T285 are
highlighted to indicate they are the phosphorylation sites causing band-shift after Taxol treatment for 6 h. B. Deletion and mutation analysis
of TAZ phosphorylation. TAZ 1–114 and TAZ 1–340 deletions were used as templates to mutate the potential “S/T” phosphorylation
sites into “A” singly or in combination. And these constructs were transfected into HeLa cells with Taxol treatment for 6 h to detect
the sites responsible for Taxol-induced TAZ phosphorylation (band-shift on the gel) through running the floating (dead) cell lysates on
western blot. C. Confirmation of Cdk1 phosphorylation sites by phos-tag gel. The three phosphorylation sites (S90, S105, and T285)
identified with TAZ deletions (A, B) were further mutated into “A” (3A) on full length TAZ4SA (LS) (all 4 LATS phosphorylation sites
are mutated). And this mutant [TAZ4SA (LS)+TAZ3A], TAZ4SA (LS) (WT) or wild-type TAZ was transfected into HeLa cells and treated
with Taxol for 6 h. Then the lysates of floating cells were subjected to phos-tag gel to detect the potential extra phosphorylation sites, which
only shift on phos-tag gel. Please note that phos-tag gel detects many LATS-phosphorylated TAZ proteins even without Taxol treatment.
D. TAZ phosphorylation is specifically induced by antitubulin drugs. TAZ4SA (LS) (LATS phosphorylation site mutant) or TAZ4SA
(LS)+3A (LATS phosphorylation site mutants plus 3A) were transfected into HeLa cells and treated with antitubulin drugs [Taxol, Vin
(Vinblastine), Noc (Nocodazole)] at 100 nM as well as DNA damage reagents [20 μM Cis (Cisplatin) and 1 uM Doxo (Doxorubucin)] for
6 h. Phosphorylation of TAZ was detected with phos-tag gel, and Cdk1 activity was detected by checking phosphorylation on Y15 of Cdk1
(pCdk1-Y15). Apoptosis was determined by detecting cPARP expression.

to examine if the three Cdk1 phosphorylation sites identified
were responsible for TAZ degradation as well. Therefore,
TAZ3A construct, which has three identified Taxol-induced
phosphorylation sites mutated, was transfected into HeLa
cells and treated with Taxol for 24 hours, followed by western
blot analysis of TAZ levels. To our surprise, both TAZ3A
(S90, S105 and T285 are mutated into “A”) and TAZ3A’
[T175, T326 and T346 mutated into “A” (Figure 4A)] were
still degraded after Taxol treatment (Figure 5A). Interestingly,
when all 6 potential Cdk1 phosphorylation sites were
mutated from “S” into “A” (TAZ6A), TAZ degradation was
completely abolished (Figure 5A), indicating that all the six
phosphorylation sites are indispensable for Cdk1-regulated
TAZ stability. To exclude the possibility that resistance
to Taxol-induced degradation in TAZ6A is due to protein
conformation changes caused by mutations themselves other
than the blockage of Cdk1 phosphorylation, expressions
of TAZ6A and TAZ were examined after transfection of
these constructs into HeLa cells and treated with various
drugs for 24 hours. TAZ6A was only stable after treatment
of antitubulin drugs but not DNA-damage related drugs
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

(Figure 5B), which confirmed that these six phosphorylation
sites in TAZ are Cdk1-specific and are responsible for
antitubulin drug-induced TAZ degradation. However, only
three sites were identified after 6 h of Taxol treatment (Figure
4A–4B), and this three site mutant (TAZ3A) could not block
TAZ degradation after 24 h of Taxol treatment (Figure 5A).
Since TAZ is dramatically degraded with Taxol treatment for
24 hours instead of 6 hours (Figure 2C), it is possible that
the rest three sites were phosphorylated after longer Taxol
treatment. To explore this possibility, TAZ4SA (LS) and
TAZ4SA (LS)+3A were treated with Taxol for 8 hours, 12
hours and 18 hours, followed by phos-tag gel analysis. As
expected, extra phosphorylation (shifted band) of TAZ4SA
(LS)+3A was identified with longer (12 h or 18 h) Taxol
treatment (Supplementary Figure 1). It is possible that with
longer drug treatments, Cdk1 will get more activated and as
a result, more sites on TAZ will be phosphorylated, which
finally cause TAZ degradation. In conclusion, these studies
strongly suggest that Taxol induces TAZ phosphorylation
and degradation through phosphorylation of six S/T sites
by Cdk1.
21910

Oncotarget

Figure 5: TAZ degradation after antitubulin drug treatment depends on six phosphorylation sites. A. Phosphorylation

of six S/T sites is essential for Taxol-induced TAZ degradation. TAZ, TAZ3A (S90A/S105A/T285A), TAZ3A’ (T175/T326A/T346A) or
TAZ6A (3A+3A′) were cloned into HA-tagged vector and transfected into HeLa cells and treated with Taxol (100 nM) for 24 h, followed
by western blot analysis of cPARP and TAZ. B. Mutations of Cdk1 phosphorylation in TAZ only block antitubulin drug-induced TAZ
degradation. TAZ-HA or TAZ6A-HA was overexpressed in HeLa cells and treated with 100 nM of antitubulin drugs (Taxol, Vin, Noc),
20 μM of Cis or 1 μM of Doxo for 24 h. The stability of TAZ or TAZ6A, Cdk1 activity (pCdk1-Y15) and apoptosis (cPARP) were examined
by western blot.

Taxol induces TAZ degradation through
ubiquitin-proteasome-system (UPS)

that phosphorylations of TAZ by Cdk1 indeed causes TAZ
instability through proteasome system. Interestingly, while
mutations of all the six sites (TAZ6A) are required to block
Taxol-induced TAZ degradation, TAZ3D, which mimics
phosphorylation of three sites (S90/S105/T285) in TAZ in
the early stage of antitubulin drug treatments, is sufficient to
cause TAZ instability (Figure 5A, 6C). To elucidate the roles
of other three Cdk1 phosphorylation sites (T175/T326/T346,
Figure 4A) in Taxol-induced TAZ degradation, we also
made another two constructs: TAZ3A-3D’, which further
mimic the phosphorylation of the rest three sites on TAZ3A,
and TAZ3D-3A’, which abolish the phosphorylation of
the rest three sites on phosphorylation mimicking TAZ3D
(Supplementary Figure 2A). Western blot analysis of
TAZ shows that TAZ3A-3D’ is stable while TAZ3D-3A’
significantly inhibits TAZ degradation (Supplementary
Figure 2B), suggesting that phosphorylation of other three
sites (T175/T326/T346) is required but not sufficient for
Taxol-induced TAZ degradation.
In general, protein targeted to be degraded by
proteasome needs to be tagged by ubiquitin first [23, 24]. And
this specific targeting process depends on the interactions
between the protein and the E3 ubiquitin ligases. Several
studies indicate that, the F-box family protein, β-TRCP, can

In present study, we found that TAZ is degraded
through Cdk1 in antitubulin drug sensitive cells. Most
intracellular proteins are targeted for degradation through
UPS [22]. Thus, we next examined weather TAZ degradation
was through proteasome. By co-treating HeLa cells with
Taxol together with MG132, a proteasome inhibitor, Taxolinduced TAZ degradation was inhibited (Figure 6A),
revealing TAZ degradation is through proteasome system.
In addition, we established Taxol-sensitive MCF10A
(immortalized mammary epithelial cells) cell lines stably
overexpressing different TAZ mutants [phosphorylation site
inactivating mutants, TAZ3A and TAZ6A; phosphorylation
mimicking mutants, TAZ3D and TAZ6D (D, aspartic acid)]
through lentiviral infection system. Each stable cell line
with equal mRNA levels of TAZ was selected according to
qRT-PCR analysis (Figure 6B). Both TAZ3A and TAZ6A
are as stable as wild-type TAZ (Figure 6C). However, the
phosphorylation mimicking mutants, TAZ3D and TAZ6D,
had dramatic decreased protein expressions (Figure 6C). And
these decreased expressions of TAZ3D and TAZ6D were
inhibited with MG132 treatments (Figure 6D), confirming

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

21911

Oncotarget

Figure 6: TAZ is degraded through the proteasome system independent of β-TRCP. A. MG132 blocks Taxol-induced TAZ

degradation. HeLa cells treated with MG132 (20 μM) singly or together with Taxol (100 nM) for 24 h before TAZ was detected by western
blot. B. Equal levels of mRNAs for TAZ and its mutants in MCF10A cells. MCF10A cells stably overexpressing different TAZ mutants
[TAZ, TAZ3A, TAZ3D, TAZ6A, and TAZ6D] were established through lentiviral infection. And RNA was extracted from each infected
cell lines for qRT-PCR to detect TAZ mRNA levels in each cell line. C. Phosphorylation-mimicking TAZ mutants are unstable. Each stable
cell line with similar TAZ mRNA expressions was lysed for western blot to detect the protein levels of TAZ. D. MG132 treatment restores
the stability of phosphorylation-mimicking TAZ. MG132 was used to treat MCF10A stably overexpressing the phosphorylation-mimicking
mutants TAZ3D and TAZ6D at four different concentrations (20, 40, 60, 80 μM) for 8 hours before cells were lysed for western blot. E.
Interaction of TAZ and β-TRCP is independent of TAZ phosphorylation. Co-IP was performed by transfecting HA-tagged TAZ or its mutant
alone (–) or together with β-TRCP-Flag (+) into HeLa cells. Two days after co-transfection, cells were treated with MG132 for 8 hours prior
to protein extractions. Immunoprecipitation was performed with Flag (M2) antibody to pull down β-TRCP-Flag protein, and different TAZ
mutants were detected in the pull down complexes by HA antibody. F. Taxol-induced TAZ degradation is not the result of apoptosis. HeLa
cells were treated with pan-caspase inhibitor (ZVAD) at different concentrations (0, 20, 50, 80, 100 μM) in the absence (–) or presence of
Taxol (100 nM) for 24 hours, followed by protein extraction and western blot analysis. cPARP was used as the marker for apoptosis.

Figure 7: TAZ phosphorylation by Cdk1 sensitizes cells to antitubulin drugs. MCF10A cells stably expressing WPI vector,

TAZ, or TAZ mutants (TAZ3A, TAZ3D, TAZ6A, or TAZ6D) were cultured in triplicate 12-well plate at 40% confluency before adding
Taxol or Vinblastin at concentration of 100 nM. Cells were cultured for 48 hours with drugs added before subjected to Trypan blue
exclusion assay. The experiments were repeated for three times and the average data and standard errors were calculated. * indicates the
difference between WPI control and TAZ-WT or TAZ-3A or TAZ-6A mutants is statistically significant (p < 0.05).

interact with and cause ubiquitinization and degradation of
TAZ [12, 25–27]. Besides, β-TRCP is also involved in Cdk1
regulated Wee1 degradation [28], suggesting a potential role
of β-TRCP in Cdk1-regulated TAZ degradation. To check
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

if β-TRCP is involved in Taxol-induced TAZ degradation,
we examined the interaction of β-TRCP with wild-type TAZ
(TAZ-WT) and its mutants [TAZ4SA (LS), TAZ3A, TAZ3D,
TAZ6A, or TAZ6D] through co-immunoprecipitation (co21912

Oncotarget

IP). TAZ4SA (LS) was used as negative control since it is
well known that LATS phosphorylation on TAZ promotes
the interaction between β-TRCP and TAZ, resulting in TAZ
degradation [12]. As expected, although TAZ-WT interacts
with β-TRCP strongly, TAZ4SA(LS) significantly reduces
its binding to β-TRCP (Figure 6E). However, no increased
interactions between β-TRCP and the two phosphorylation
mimicking mutants (TAZ3D and TAZ6D) were identified
(Figure 6E), indicating that Taxol-induced TAZ degradation
is independent of β-TRCP.
Since TAZ degradation is correlated with Taxolinduced apoptosis (Figure 1A), we investigated the
relation between TAZ degradation and apoptosis. It is
well-known that apoptosis results from activation of
caspases [29]. Therefore, a pan-caspase/apoptosis inhibitor
(Z-VAD) was used at different concentrations to treat
cells together with Taxol. TAZ was still degraded when
apoptosis was inhibited (Figure 6F), indicating that TAZ
degradation is the cause (upstream mediator) rather than
the result of Taxol-induced apoptosis.

TAZ degradation through ubiquitin-proteasome system,
which therefore eliminates TAZ’s functions in antiapoptosis and cell resistance to antitubulin drugs.
It is well-known that Cdk1 is the major kinase
essential for the progression of cell cycle from G2
phase into mitosis during cell proliferation. Since TAZ
is an oncogene and overexpression of TAZ increases
cell proliferation [13], therefore, it is also possible that
Cdk1 may phosphorylate and activate TAZ to promote
mitotic progression during cell proliferation. However,
it has also been shown that in response to antitubulin
drugs, Cdk1 kinase is dramatically activated, which can
trigger apoptosis [35, 36]. Therefore, cells with highly
activated Cdk1 are more sensitive to antitubulin drug
treatments, while Cdk1 inhibitors can protect cancer cells
from antitubulin-induced apoptosis [35, 36]. However,
why and how Cdk1 activity determines the sensitivity
of cells to antitubulin drugs is not fully understood. Our
studies suggest that phosphorylation and degradation
of TAZ by Cdk1 may play important roles in apoptosis
induced by antitubulin drugs. Under physiological
conditions, Cdk1 activity is low. Therefore, both TAZ
and other downstream Cdk1 targets could promote cell
cycle progression and cell proliferation. However, when
Cdk1 is activated by antitubulin drugs, it can lead to
significant TAZ phosphorylation and subsequent UPSmediated degradation, resulting in apoptotic cell death.
On the other hand, when TAZ is overexpressed in tumor
cells, there are not enough Cdk1 molecules in cells to
phosphorylate and inactivate TAZ, which will cause
resistance of tumor cells to antitubulin drug-induced
apoptosis. Therefore, the Cdk1-TAZ signalling axis may
be a critical sensor in determining cell proliferation or cell
death under physiological and stress (microtubule damage
by antitubulin drugs) conditions.
In our previous study, Cdk1 was identified to
contribute to antitubulin drugs-induced apoptosis by
phosphorylating YAP (Yes-associate protein), a paralog
of TAZ, and inhibiting its transactivating function [20].
We showed that Cdk1 phosphorylation on YAP decreases
the interaction between YAP and the transcriptional
factor TEAD, which therefore blocks the expressions of
downstream target genes (e.g., Cyr61 and CTGF) involved
in Taxol resistance [20]. In this study, we found Cdk1
can inactivate TAZ by a different mechanism. We have
provided convincing evidence that after Taxol treatment
Cdk1 can first phosphorylate TAZ on three sites (S90A/
S105/T285), which causes further phosphorylation on
other three sites (T175/T326/T346) and subsequently
leads to proteasome-mediated degradation. Although
TAZ3A (S90A/S105A/T285A) was degraded at similar
rate to TAZ-WT and TAZ3A′ (T175A/T326A/T346A)
was still partially degraded, TAZ6A was stable after
Taxol treatment, suggesting that phosphorylation of all
6 sites is essential for Taxol-induced TAZ degradation.
The molecular mechanism underlying this differential

TAZ phosphorylation by Cdk1 sensitizes cells to
antitubulin drugs
Since TAZ overexpression in MCF10A cells can
result in their resistance to Taxol [14], we next examined
the roles of TAZ phosphorylation by Cdk1 by treating
MCF10A cells stably overexpressing TAZ or different TAZ
phosphorylation mutants (TAZ, TAZ3A, TAZ3D, TAZ6A,
or TAZ6D) with antitubulin drugs, Taxol and Vinblastine
for 48 hours. Similar to wild-type TAZ, overexpression of
TAZ3A or TAZ6A in MCF10A cells caused resistant to
both Taxol and Vinblastine (Figure 7). On the other hand,
overexpression of TAZ with phosphorylation mimicking
mutations (TAZ3D and TAZ6D) had only minimum
effects on MCF10A cells in response to antitubulin drugs
(Figure 7), further confirming that phosphorylation of
TAZ by Cdk1 abolishes its anti-apoptotic function in drug
resistance.

DISCUSSION
TAZ is one of the core components of the Hippo
pathway that is involved in various physiological and
pathological activities, such as organ size control,
tumorigenesis, tissue homeostasis, energy homeostasis
[8–10, 30–33]. We and others have recently shown that
dysregulation of the core Hippo pathway components
such as LATS, YAP, and TAZ results in resistances
of tumors to various chemotherapeutic drugs such as
Taxol, Doxorubicin, erlotinib, RAF/MEK inhibitors, etc
[19, 34]. However, how the Hippo pathway is involved
in chemotherapeutic drug responses is still not fully
understood. Here in this study we found that TAZ is
regulated through Cdk1 rather than the canonical Hippo
pathway. Phosphorylation of TAZ by Cdk1 further induces
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

21913

Oncotarget

regulation of YAP and TAZ by Cdk1 is unknown.
However, by comparing the Cdk1 phosphorylation sites
in YAP (S128, S138, S217, S289, and S367) and TAZ
(S90, S105, T175, T285, T326, and T346), we found that
there are only two Cdk1 phosphorylation sites (TAZ:
S90, T326; YAP: S128 and T412) that are conserved.
Since phosphorylation of six sites in TAZ by Cdk1 is
required for Taxol-induced TAZ degradation (Figure 5,
Supplementary Figure 2), it is possible that YAP contains
only two conserved phosphorylation sites, which are
not sufficient to cause proteasome-induced degradation.
Besides, compare to YAP, TAZ has one extra degron,
which can interact with β-TRCP to be targeted for
protein degradation [12, 25, 26]. However, in our study,
although the mutations of both degron motifs on TAZ
partially reduce Taxol-induced TAZ degradation (data
not shown), the interactions between β-TRCP and Cdk1
phosphorylation mimicking TAZ mutants (TAZ3D and
TAZ6D) were not increased compared with TAZ- WT
(Figure 6E), strongly suggesting that the major E3
ubiquitin ligase binding to and causing TAZ degradation
during Cdk1 phosphorylation of TAZ may not be β-TRCP.
Moreover, we have also knocked down β-TRCP or other
potential ubiquitin ligases such as FBW7, which has
been shown to be involved in antitubulin-induced protein
degradation [37]. However, no significant suppression of
Taxol-induced TAZ degradation was found after β-TRCP
or FBW7 knockdown (data not shown). Therefore, further
screening for E3 ubiquitin ligases using a pool of E3 ligase
siRNA library may be required to identify the critical E3
ligase(s) responsible for Taxol-induced TAZ degradation.
In this study, we found that within short time
of antitubulin drug treatment (<=6 h), only three sites
(S90, S105, and T285) of TAZ were phosphorylated by
Cdk1, and the rest three sites (T175, T326, and T346)
were subsequently phosphorylated with the extension of
treatment (6 h˗24 h) (Supplementary Figure 1). There
are two possibilities that may cause this phenotype.
First, Cdk1 activity within 6 hours of drug treatment is
not high enough to phosphorylate all the 6 sites on TAZ.
And with the extension of treatment time, the activity of
Cdk1 may increase to fully phosphorylate all the sites on
TAZ. Second possibility is that the first three sites of TAZ
may be located on the surface of TAZ and are easy to be
targeted. With the phosphorylation of these three sites,
TAZ conformation changes, which may expose the rest
three sites for Cdk1 phosphorylation and subsequent E3
ligase binding and proteasome degradation. However, in
our study, we found that only TAZ6A instead of TAZ3A,
can block Cdk1-induced TAZ degradation, highly
supporting the first possibility that the phosphorylation of
TAZ depending on the activity of Cdk1.
Although in our studies TAZ is found degraded in
response to antitubulin drugs through Cdk1 activation,
it is also degraded when cells were treated with other
DNA damage reagents such as Cisplatin even when all
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

of the Cdk1 phosphorylation sites are mutated (TAZ6A)
(Figure 5B). This suggests that TAZ can be degraded through
a Cdk1-independent pathway when cells are exposed to other
apoptotic stimuli. Since overexpression of TAZ can also
cause resistance of tumor cells to other chemotherapeutic
drugs such as Doxorubicin [19], it is possible that loss of
TAZ may be also critical for cell death induced by other
chemotherapeutics. It will be very interesting to identify the
kinase(s) phosphorylating and inactivating TAZ in response
to other chemotherapeutic drugs.
In conclusion, our studies unveil a novel aspect
of TAZ stability regulation by Cdk1 in response to
antitubulin drug treatments. The phosphorylation status of
TAZ determines its function in antitubulin drug resistance
and the Cdk1-TAZ signalling may be potential biomarkers
for predicting the sensitivity of cancer patients to
antitubulin drugs. Modulating Cdk1 level and its activity
to cause TAZ degradation may be a potential target for the
treatment of TAZ-induced drug resistance in cancers.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Cell culture, treatments of cells with
chemotherapeutic drugs and cycloheximide
(CHX)
HEK293T (human kidney cells), HeLa (cervical
cancer), and MDA-MB468 and MCF7(human breast
cancer) cells were cultured in Dulbecco’s Modified
Eagle complete medium (DMEM) containing 10% heatinactivated fetal bovine serum (FBS) (Sigma-Aldrich)
and 1% penicillin/streptomycin (P/S); HCT116 (Colon
cancer), SK-BR3, and SK-BR3-TR cells were cultured
in McCoy’s 5A Modified Media (Sigma-Aldrich)
with 10% FBS and 1% P/S added. MCF10A (human
immortalized mammary epithelial cells) were cultured
in DMEM/Nutrient Mixture F12 Ham (Sigma-Aldrich)
supplemented with 5% horse serum (HS) (Invitrogen),
200 ug/mL hEGF, 5 mg/mL hydrocortisone, 2 mg/mL
insulin, 200 mM L-glutamine, 1mg/mL cholera toxin,
and 1% P/S. Cells were maintained at 37°C with 5%
CO2. Treatments of cells with chemotherapeutic drugs
were as described [20].
HeLa cells were cultured to 40% confluency before
treating with CHX at concentration of 60 μg/ml alone or
together with Taxol (100 nM) for different times (0 h,
4 h, 8 h, 12 h). At each time point, both attached (alive)
and floating (dead) cells were lysed with RIPA buffer
containing protease inhibitor (PI, Roche) and subjected to
western blot analysis.
To test if TAZ phosphorylation and degradation is
due to loss of anchorage of cells after antitubulin drug
treatment, HeLa cells were plated onto a 60 mm plate
coated with Polyhema (20 mg/ml, Sigma) and incubated
at 37°C for 24 h with or without adding Taxol (100
nM). Floating cells were collected for protein extraction
21914

Oncotarget

and western blot analysis. Besides, attached HeLa cells
were detached by trypsinization at either 40% or 90%
confluency before being lysed for protein extraction and
western blot analysis.

ALL-107 (NARD) added in resolving gel were used
for running the protein lysates. The gels were soaked in
transfer buffer (48 mM Tris, 39 mM glycine, 0.04% SDS,
20% methanol) with 1 mM EDTA added for 10 minutes at
room temperature and washed twice with transfer buffer
before transfer to polyvinyl difluoride (PVDF) memberane
at 4°C. The phosphorylated TAZ and its mutants were
detected using anti-HA antibody (1:1000, Abcam).

Plasmids construction and transfection
Expression plasmids with various mutations were
constructed through site-direct mutagenesis with methods
described [38]: TAZ, TAZ mutants and TAZ truncations
were cloned into HA-tagged pcDNA3, pGEX4T1 or HAtagged WPI lentiviral vector. β-TRCP was subcloned into
3 × FLAG-tagged pcDNA3.1-hygro vector. Plasmids
were transfected into cells using PolyJet (SignaGen) as
described by the manufacture.

Lentiviral production, infection and
establishment of stable cell lines
HEK293T cells were cultured in 60 mm tissue
culture dishes pre-coated with 0.1 mg/mL poly-L-lysine
(PLL) for transfection with packaging plasmid (psPAX),
envelop plasmid (pMD2G) and related transfer vectors
(e.g. WPI-TAZ-HA, WPI-TAZ3A-HA, WPI-TAZ3DHA, WPI-TAZ6A-HA, WPI-TAZ6D-HA) using PolyJet
reagent according to manufacturer’s protocol. Cells were
incubated in an incubator with 5% CO2 at 37°C overnight.
The media were refreshed with DMEM containing 10 mM
Sodium Butyrate and incubated for 24 hours. The medium
containing lentivirus was directly collected and used to
infect MCF10A cells with polybrene at 8 μg/ml.

Short interference RNA (siRNA)-mediated gene
expression knockdown
These experiments were performed as described [20].

GST fusion protein production, in vitro
kinase assay, and phos-tag analysis of TAZ
phosphorylation
For GST fusion protein production, TAZ and
TAZ6A cloned in pGET4T1 were transformed into BL21
bacteria. Production and purification of GST fusion
protein were as described [38]. In vitro kinase assay was
performed by mixing fusion proteins with or without
Cdk1 kinase (Signalchem) in a kinase buffer [1 × PBS
(pH 7.4), 20% glycerol, 4 mM MgCl2, 10 mM DTT,
Protease inhibitor] containing 1 mM of ATP-γ-S (SigmaAldrich). Mixed samples were incubated at 30°C for 30
min. Then p-Nitrobenzyl mesylate (PNBM) was added
at final concentration of 2.5 mM and the mixed samples
were incubated for 1 hour at room temperature. The
samples were mixed with equal amount of 2 × SDS loading
buffer (0.29M Tris HCl, 8.57% SDS, 30% glycerol, 4.2%
ß-mercaptoethanol, 0.2 mg bromophenol blue) and subjected
to western blot analysis. The phosphorylated substrates were
detected with anti-thiophosphate ester antibody (Abcam).
For detection of phosphorylated TAZ protein
by phos-tag gel, cells transfected with different TAZ
constructs and under different culture conditions (e.g.,
treat with drugs) were washed with TBS buffer [10 mM
Tris-HCl (pH 7.5), 100 mM NaCl] before lysed with RIPA
[20 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5), 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA,
1 mM EGTA, 1% NP-40, 1% sodium deoxycholate, 2.5
mM sodium pyrophosphate, 1 mM β-glycerophosphate,
1 mM Na3VO4, 1 μg/ml leupeptin, protease/phosphatase
inhibitors]. Protein lysates were mixed with 5× protein
loading buffer (0.29M Tris HCl, 8.57% SDS, 30%
glycerol, 4.2% ß-mercaptoethanol, 0.2 mg bromophenol
blue) and boiled for 5 min. The sodium dodecyl sulfate
polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) gel
with 10 mM MnCl2 and 5 mM phos-tag™ Acrylamide
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

RNA extraction and quantitative reverse
transcription PCR (qRT-PCR)
MCF10A cells stably expressing TAZ and its
mutants (TAZ, TAZ3A, TAZ3D, TAZ6A, TAZ6D) were
cultured until 70–80% confluency before RNA extraction
through RNA extraction and purification kit from
QIAGEN according to the manual. Real time qRT-PCR
analysis was performed as described [38].

Antibodies, western blot and
co-immunoprecipitation (co-IP)
Protein extract, western blot and co-IP were
performed as described [36]. Antibodies used were as
followings: mouse monoclonal anti-TAZ (1:1000) antibody
from BD Biosciences; mouse monoclonal anti-β-actin (1:10,
000) and anti-FLAG (M2; 1:500) antibodies from Sigma;
rabbit polyclonal anti-HA (1:1000) and anti-Thiophosphate
ester (1:1000) antibodies from Abcam; rabbit polyclonal
anti-MST1, MST2, LATS1, CyclinB1, Cdk1, cleavedPARP (c-PARP), BCL-2, and pCdk1 (all diluted at 1:1000)
antibodies from Cell Signalling Technology.

Analysis of cell death by Trypan blue exclusion
analysis
Cells were counted and plated at cell density of
40–50% for different drug treatments for 2 or 3 days.
After drug treatment, both floating and attached cells
were collected either directly or after trypsinization. Then
cells were mixed with 4% Trypan blue (Sigma-Aldrich)
21915

Oncotarget

at ratio of 1:1 and directly subjected to hemocytometer
for counting the stained cells and total cell numbers.
The ratio of stained cells (dead cells) in total cells
was calculated based on the counted cell number. The
experiments were repeated at least three times. The
mean and standard errors were calculated. The statistical
analysis was performed with unpaired student’s t-test. A
P value less than 0.05 is considered as significant. “*”
indicates P value is < 0.05.

9.	 Harvey KF, Zhang X, Thomas DM. The Hippo pathway
and human cancer. Nat Rev Cancer. 2013; 13:246–57.
10.	 Pan D. The hippo signaling pathway in development and
cancer. Dev Cell. 2010; 19:491–505.
11.	 Yu FX, Guan KL. The Hippo pathway: regulators and regulations. Genes Dev. 2013; 27:355–71.
12.	 Liu CY, Zha ZY, Zhou X, Zhang H, Huang W, Zhao D, Li
T, Chan SW, Lim CJ, Hong WJ, Zhao SM, Xiong Y, Lei
QY, et al. The hippo tumor pathway promotes TAZ degradation by phosphorylating a phosphodegron and recruiting the SCF{beta}-TrCP E3 ligase. J Biol Chem. 2010;
285:37159–69.

Acknowledgments AND FUNDING
We would like to thank Dr. Jianmin Zhang, Kunliang
Guan, and Qunying Lei for providing the TAZ4SA (LS)
plasmid, Dr. Min Tan for providing the SK-BR3-TR cell
line, and Yawei Hao for technical support. This work
was supported by Canadian Institute of Health Research
(CIHR) and Canadian Breast Cancer Foundation (CBCF)
to X. Y., and Y. Z. was supported by Ontario Trillium
Scholarship (Canada).

13.	 Lei QY, Zhang H, Zhao B, Zha Z-Y, Bai F, Pei XH, Zhao S,
Xiong Y, Guan KL. TAZ promotes cell proliferation and
epithelial-mesenchymal transition and is inhibited by the
hippo pathway. Mol Cell Biol. 2008; 28:2426–36.
14.	 Lai D, Ho KC, Hao Y, Yang X. Taxol resistance in breast
cancer cells is mediated by the hippo pathway component
TAZ and its downstream transcriptional targets Cyr61 and
CTGF. Cancer Res. 2011; 71:2728–38.
15.	 Chan SW, Lim CJ, Guo K, Ng CP, Lee I, Hunziker W,
Zeng Q, Hong W. A role for TAZ in migration, invasion,
and tumorigenesis of breast cancer cells. Cancer Res. 2008;
68:2592–8.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
The authors declare no conflict of interest.

REFERENCES

16.	 Bartucci M, Dattilo R, Moriconi C, Pagliuca A,
Mottolese M, Federici G, Benedetto AD, Todaro M, Stassi
G, Sperati F, Amabile MI, Pilozzi E, Patrizii M, et al. TAZ
is required for metastatic activity and chemoresistance of
breast cancer stem cells. Oncogene. 2015; 34:681–90.

1.	 Holmes FA, Walters RS, Theriault RL, Buzdar AU,
Frye DK, Hortobagyi CN, Forman AD, Newton LK,
Raber MN. Phase II Trial of Taxol, and Active Drug in the
Treatment of Metastatic Breast Cancer. JNCI J Natl Cancer
Inst. 1991; 83:1797–1797.

17.	 Cordenonsi M, Zanconato F, Azzolin L, Forcato M,
Rosato A, Frasson C, Inui M, Montagner M, Parenti AR,
Poletti A, Daidone MG, Dupont S, Basso G, et al. The
Hippo transducer TAZ confers cancer stem cell-related
traits on breast cancer cells. Cell. 2011; 147:759–72.

2.	 Rowinsky EK, Cazenave LA, Donehower RC. Taxol: A
Novel Investigational Antimicrotubule Agent. JNCI J Natl
Cancer Inst. 1990; 82:1247–59.
3.	 Murphy WK, Fossella F V, Winn RJ, Shin DM, Hynes HE,
Gross HM, Davilla E, Leimert J, Dhingra H, Raber MN,
Krakoff IH, Hong WK. Phase II Study of Taxol in Patients
With Untreated Advanced Non-Small-Cell Lung Cancer.
JNCI J Natl Cancer Inst. 1993; 85:384–8.

18.	 Zhou Z, Hao Y, Liu N, Raptis L, Tsao M-S, Yang X.
TAZ is a novel oncogene in non-small cell lung cancer.
Oncogene. 2011; 30:2181–6.

4.	 McGuire WP. Taxol: A Unique Antineoplastic Agent
with Significant Activity in Advanced Ovarian Epithelial
Neoplasms. Ann Intern Med. 1989; 111:273.

20.	 Zhao Y, Khanal P, Savage P, She YM, Cyr TD, Yang X.
YAP-induced resistance of cancer cells to antitubulin drugs
is modulated by a Hippo-independent pathway. Cancer Res.
2014; 74:4493–4503.

19.	 Zhao Y, Yang X. The Hippo pathway in chemotherapeutic drug
resistance. Int J Cancer Oct. 27:2014. [Epub ahead of print].

5.	 Coley HM. Mechanisms and strategies to overcome chemotherapy resistance in metastatic breast cancer. Cancer Treat
Rev. 2008; 34:378–90.

21.	 Nigg EA. Cellular substrates of p34cdc2 and its companion cyclin-dependent kinases. Trends Cell Biol. 1993;
3:296–301.

6.	 McGrogan BT, Gilmartin B, Carney DN, McCann A.
Taxanes, microtubules and chemoresistant breast cancer.
Biochim Biophys Acta. 2008; 1785:96–132.

22.	 Ciechanover A. Intracellular protein degradation: From a vague
idea through the lysosome and the ubiquitin-proteasome system
and onto human diseases and drug targeting. Bioorganic Med
Chem. 2013; 21:3400–10.

7.	 Grusche FA, Richardson HE, Harvey KF. Upstream regulation of the hippo size control pathway. Curr Biol. 2010;
20:R574–82.

23.	 Sumara I, Maerki S, Peter M. E3 ubiquitin ligases and
mitosis: embracing the complexity. Trends Cell Biol. 2008;
18:84–94.

8.	 Halder G, Johnson RL. Hippo signaling: growth control and
beyond. Development. 2011; 138:9–22.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

21916

Oncotarget

24.	 Sun Y. Targeting E3 Ubiquitin ligases for cancer therapy.
Cancer Biol Ther. 2003; 2:623–9.

32.	 Mo JS, Meng Z, Kim YC, Park HW, Hansen CG, Kim S,
Lim DS, Guan KL. Cellular energy stress induces AMPKmediated regulation of YAP and the Hippo pathway. Nat
Cell Biol. 2015; 17:500–10.

25.	 Huang W, Lv X, Liu C, Zha Z, Zhang H, Jiang Y, Xiong Y,
Lei QY, Guan KL. The N-terminal phosphodegron targets
TAZ/WWTR1 protein for SCFβ-TrCP-dependent degradation in response to phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase inhibition.
J Biol Chem. 2012; 287:26245–53.

33.	 Wang W, Xiao ZD, Li X, Aziz KE, Gan B, Johnson RL,
Chen J. AMPK modulates Hippo pathway activity to regulate energy homeostasis. Nat Cell Biol. 2015; 17:490–9.

26.	 Azzolin L, Zanconato F, Bresolin S, Forcato M, Basso G,
Bicciato S, Cordenonsi M, Piccolo S. Role of TAZ as mediator of Wnt signaling. Cell. 2012; 151:1443–56.

34.	 Lin L, Sabnis AJ, Chan E, Olivas V, Cade L, Pazarentzos
E, Asthana S, Neel D, Yan JJ, Lu XY, Pham L, Wang MM,
Karachaliou N, et al. The Hippo effector YAP promotes
resistance to RAF- and MEK-targeted cancer therapies. Nat
Genet. 2015; 47:250–6.

27.	 Tian Y, Kolb R, Hong J-H, Carroll J, Li D, You J, Bronson
R, Yaffe MB, Zhou J, Benjamin T. TAZ promotes PC2 degradation through a SCFbeta-Trcp E3 ligase complex. Mol
Cell Biol. 2007; 27:6383–95.

35.	 Castedo M, Perfettini J, Roumier T, Kroemer G. Cyclindependent kinase-1 : linking apoptosis to cell cycle and
mitotic catastrophe. Cell Death Differ. 2002; 9:1287–93.

28.	 Skaar JR, D’Angiolella V, Pagan JK, Pagano M. SnapShot:
F Box Proteins II. Cell. 2009; 137:1358. e1.

36.	 Nakayama S, Torikoshi Y, Takahashi T, Yoshida T, Sudo
T, Matsushima T, Kawasaki Y, Katayama A, Gohda
K, Hortobagyi GN, Noguchi S, Sakai T, Ishihara H, et al.
Prediction of paclitaxel sensitivity by CDK1 and CDK2 activity
in human breast cancer cells. Breast Cancer Res. 2009; 11:R12.

29.	 Budihardjo I, Oliver H, Lutter M, Luo X, Wang X.
Biochemical pathways of caspase activation during apoptosis. Annu Dev Biol. 1999; 15:269–90.
30.	 Harvey K, Tapon N. The Salvador-Warts-Hippo pathway an emerging tumour-suppressor network. Nat Rev Cancer.
2007; 7:182–91.

37.	 Wertz IE, Kusam S, Lam C, Okamoto T, Sandoval
W, Anderson DJ, Helgason E, Ernst JA, Eby M, Liu
J, Belmosnt LD, Kaminker JS, O'Rourke KM, et al.
Sensitivity to antitubulin chemotherapeutics is regulated by
MCL1 and FBW7. Nature. 2011; 471:110–4.

31.	 DeRan M, Yang J, Shen C-H, Peters EC, Fitamant
J, Chan P, Hsieh M, Zhu S, Asara JM, Zheng B,
Bardeesy N, Liu J, Wu X. Energy Stress Regulates
Hippo-YAP Signaling Involving AMPK-Mediated
Regulation of Angiomotin-like 1 Protein. Cell Rep.
2014; 9:495–503.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

38.	 Hao Y, Chun A, Cheung K, Rashidi B, Yang X. Tumor suppressor LATS1 is a negative regulator of oncogene YAP. J
Biol Chem. 2008; 283:5496–509.

21917

Oncotarget

