www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Oncotarget, 2017, Vol. 8, (No. 5), pp: 7276-7293
Research Paper: Gerotarget (Focus on Aging)

Drug-induced premature senescence model in human dental
follicle stem cells
Yuanfen Zhai1,*, Rongbin Wei1,*, Junjun Liu1, Huihui Wang2, Wenping Cai1,
Mengmeng Zhao1, Yongguang Hu1, Shuwei Wang3, Tianshu Yang1, Xiaodong Liu4,
Jianhua Yang1 and Shangfeng Liu1,3
1

Department of Ophthalmology, Shanghai Tenth People’s Hospital, Tongji University School of Medicine, Shanghai, P. R.
China
2

Department of Pediatric Dentistry, School of Stomatology, Tongji University, Shanghai Engineering Research Center,
Shanghai, P. R. China
3

Department of Stomatology, Huashan Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai, P. R. China

4

Department of Neurosurgery, Huashan Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai, P. R. China

*

These authors have contributed equally to this work

Correspondence to: Shangfeng Liu, email: liusf23@gmail.com
Correspondence to: Jianhua Yang, email: jianhuay@gmail.com
Correspondence to: Xiaodong Liu, email: hslxdzjj@gmail.com
Keywords: aging; dental stem cells; cellular senescence model; stress; DNA damage; Gerotarget
Received: September 18, 2016	

Accepted: December 12, 2016	

Published: December 21, 2016

ABSTRACT
Aging is identified by a progressive decline of physiological integrity leading
to age-related degenerative diseases, but its causes is unclear. Human dental pulp
stem cells (hDPSCs) has a remarkable rejuvenated capacity that relies on its resident
stem cells. However, because of the lack of proper senescence models, exploration
of the underlying molecular mechanisms has been hindered. Here, we established a
cellular model utilizing a hydroxyurea (HU) treatment protocol and effectively induced
Human dental pulp stem cells to undergo cellular senescence. Age-related phenotypic
changes were identified by augmented senescence-associated-β-galactosidase (SA-βgal) staining, declined proliferation and differentiation capacity, elevated G0/G1 cell
cycle arrest, increased apoptosis and reactive oxygen species levels. Furthermore,
we tested the expression of key genes in various DNA repair pathways including
nonhomologous end-joining (NHEJ) and homologous recombination (HR) pathways.
In addition, our results showed that Dental pulp stem cells from young donors are
more resistant to apoptosis and exhibit increased non-homologous end joining
activity compared to old donors. Further transcriptome analysis demonstrate that
multiple pathways are involved in the HU-induced Dental pulp stem cells ageing,
including genes associated with DNA damage and repair, mitochondrial dysfunction
and increased reactive oxygen species levels. Taken together, the cellular model have
important implications for understanding the molecular exploration of Dental pulp
stem cells senescence and aging.

INTRODUCTION

enter senescence by one of the mechanisms they indicated.
The rate of aging is regulated evolutionarily conserved
signaling pathways [3, 4]. The general mechanism of
aging is widely considered as the chronic accumulation
of cellular damage [4, 5]. The ability of adult stem cells to
transition from a inactive quiescent state (G0) to an active
proliferative state (G1, S, G2 and M) is paramount to

Aging generally experience a gradual loss in
physiological integrity and rejuvenated capacities
within adult tissues [1], which lead to impaired function,
increased susceptibility to disease and elevated risk of
death [2]. Hence, homeostasis of tissues is lost since cells
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

7276

Oncotarget

replenish the tissue, and an imbalance in these two states
may lead to pathologic consequences [6]. The mechanisms
for aging-relative stem cell decline is completely unclear.
Damaged DNA accumulation in aged stem cells may
constantly arise from internal and external factors
including DNA replication, transcription, recombination
errors, repair, spontaneous chemical reactions and assaults
metabolism-derived agents [7]. Rube C. found that aged
human hematopoietic stem cells (HSC) have compromised
capacity to repair experimentally induced DNA damage,
such as ionizing radiation and other clastogens [8]. In
addition, the mechanistic basis by which increased levels
of DNA damage in aged stem cell can decrease stem cell
dysfunction are still being illustrated. Genetic assaults may
increase stem cell ageing or apoptosis and may directly
trigger gene regulation, causing alterations in stem cell
differentiation and self-renewal.
Recent studies on the causes (or stresses), signaling
networks and machinery underlying the different types
of cell ageing is still initial stage and current insights
are largely using cell culture experiments. Further,
damaged DNA accumulation and DNA insufficient
repair often accompanied by stresses (oxidative stress
and mitochondrial dysfunction) stimulate stem cell
senescence and aging [9]. Oppositely, genomic integrity
which is maintained by DNA repair pathways may defer
cell senescence and aging [10]. Studies have shown that
mutations in DNA repair genes might result in human
monogenic progeroid syndromes (PS), and its deficiency
may also lead to premature aging in mouse models [11].
Resident stem cell senescence and eventual exhaustion
were triggered by DNA damage accumulation. Genotoxic
insult with DNA repair pathway components significantly
influence resident stem cell integrity throughout principal
machinery in murine model [11]. For instance, aged
hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) and muscle stem cells
show a higher levels of nuclear foci which was stained
by the phosphorylated form of H2AX (γH2A.X) [8, 12,
13], which is a highly sensitive technique to detect DNA
double-strand breaks, and this has shown that the kinetics
of γH2AX-foci loss strongly correlate with the time
course of DNA double-strand breaks (DSB) repair [14] .
DNA damage accumulation in these stem cells may also
be characterized through single cell gel electrophoresis
assays [13, 15]. Further, hematopoietic stem cells
(HSCs) deficiency and hematopoietic abnormalities in
aged hematopoietic stem cells may result from DNA
damage accumulation and defects in DNA damage repair
pathway[12, 16]. In addition, DNA assaults in stem cells
may reproduce both daughter stem cells and downstream
lineages. Thus, DNA damage in stem cells can
compromise cellular function such as genomic instability
and their offspring.
In addition, the age-associated increase in reactive
oxygen species has been considered as a causal factor
of the ageing progression [17], while mitochondrial
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

dysfunction is viewed an indicator of senescence [2], as
a consequence of reactive oxygen species accumulation.
This can take place through a lot of machinery; for
instance, mitochondrial deficiency might trigger apoptotic
pathway through elevating the propensity of mitochondria
to permeabilize in response to stress [18] and drive
inflammatory reactions by favoring reactive oxygen
species-mediated and/or permeabilization-facilitated
activation of inflammasomes [19].
In eukaryotes, the DNA repair mechanism has
demonstrated to compromises damaged DNA, and it
majorly contains a series of biologic processes including
homologous recombination repair (HRR), nonhomologous
end joining (NHEJ) (C-NHEJ and alt-NHEJ), mismatch
repair (MMR), nucleotide excision repair (NER) and base
excision repair (BER) [20]. The mismatch repair signaling
pathway copes with DNA replication errors, containing
mismatch base-pairing as well as nucleotide insertions
and deletions. Double-strand DNA breaks are traditionally
repaired by homologous recombination repair or nonhomologous end joining, whereas single-strand breaks
are mainly repaired by nucleotide excision repair or base
excision repair [21]. The efficiency and activity of the
DNA repair pathway seems to decline with advancing age,
causing DNA damage accrual in different organs [20]. In
mammals, genic mutations associated to the DNA repair
mechanisms lead to phenotypic differences that share
characteristics with age-related pathological conditions,
containing metabolic and cardiovascular abnormalities, as
well as being related to an elevated risk of malignancies
and a shortened lifespan [20, 22]. Studies in many
tissue systems suggest DNA repair can be in response to
damaged DNA to avoid further genomic instability by
cellular machinery [23]. Furthermore, The DNA damage
response mainly was triggered by sensors (the MRE11RAD50-NBS1 sensor complex, apical kinases ataxiatelangiectasia mutated (ATM), ataxia-telangiectasia- and
RAD3-related (ATR) and DNA-dependent protein kinase),
p53-binding protein 1), mediators (mediator of Claspin
and breast cancer type 1, DNA damage checkpoint 1)
and effectors (checkpoint kinase 1 (CHK1) and CHK2)
[24]. These key proteins have been involved in either
DNA repair and transient cell cycle arrest or damaged
cellular elimination through apoptosis and/or senescence.
Though stringent, the DNA repair pathways is not perfect
and might result in misrepaired lesion accrual or genomic
integrity [25].
In adult stem cells, DNA damage accumulation may
result in the outcome of defective offspring, stem cell
ageing or neoplastic transformation [26, 27], causing ageassociated lack of tissue function and homeostasis [1]. It
is now clear that activing DNA repair machinery in stem
cells may delay the age-associated defective accumulation
and then drive aged tissues to recover healthy function,
particularly if such an intervention might happen before
the establishment of damaged DNA in the genome [28]. In
7277

Oncotarget

addition, Additional DNA damage repair/response systems
under analogous inducible settings will be informative to
access the full rejuvenation potential of these systems.
These stresses share the similar situation in telomere
damage is that they activate the DNA damage response,
a signaling pathway in which apical kinases ataxiatelangiectasia mutated or ataxia-telangiectasia- and RAD3related kinases block cell cycle process by stabilization of
tumor protein p53 and transcriptional activation of p21.
Similarly, activation of oncogenes serve also as a major
cause of cell ageing. For instance, oncogenic Ras serves by
overexpression of Cell Division Cycle 6 and suppression
of nucleotide metabolism, leading to double stranded
DNA breaks, aberrant DNA replication, and activation
of the DNA damage repair signaling pathway [29, 30].
However, studies have shown that senescence result
from activation of E2F3 or inhibition of c-Myc is DDRindependent involving p19Arf and p16Ink4a [31, 32]. BRAF
(V600E), also DDR-independent protein, triggers cell
ageing by a metabolic machinery involving upregulation
of mitochondrial pyruvate dehydrogenase [33]. Kondoh
and Dörr et al. found that ageing is closely-related to
profound metabolic balance [34, 35]. Moreover, several
other experiments show that different tumour repressors
drive a senescent growth arrest when inactivated,
containing Neurofibromin 1, Phosphatase And Tensin
Homolog, Retinoblastoma 1 and Von Hippel-Lindau
Tumor Suppressor [31, 36]. Importantly, inactivation of
Retinoblastoma 1(Rb) recruits the DNA damage repair
[36], while the others are DDR-independent and serve by
p19Arf and p16Ink4a. A significant species-specific diversity
is that ageing signaling pathways of mouse cells are much
more dependent on p19Arf than ageing in human cells [37].
Pedro Sousa-Victor et al. demonstrate that p16INK4a
inhibition of Rb in geriatric stem cells triggers increasing
ageing, based on the known capacity of the p16INK4aRb pathway to form ageing-relatived heterochromatic
foci and accumulate DNA-repair foci staining by γH2AX,
at the cost of the normalmyogenic fate [38]. In addition,
Werner Syndrome RecQ Like Helicase (WRN) has a key
part in recombination, transcription, repair, and DNA
replication, as well as telomere maintenance, suggesting
that the prominent inducer for Werner syndrome
pathogenesis associated with genomic instability [2,
39]. Recent study show that WRN related to at least
three proteins including HP1 Alpha Homolog (HP1a),
Suppressor Of Variegation 3-9 Homolog 1(SUV39H1) and
nuclear lamina-heterochromatin anchoring protein LAP2b.
Targeted knock-in of catalytically inactive Suppressor Of
Variegation 3-9 Homolog 1 in wild-type mouse stem cells
recapitulates increasing cell ageing, resembling WRNdeficient mouse stem cells. Furthermore, decline in WRN
and heterochromatin hallmarks are identified in mouse
stem cells from advancing ageing individuals [40].
Biological understanding of ageing mechanisms
mediating stem cell survival, self-renewal, self-repair,
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

proliferation, differentiation and commitment to different
cellular lineages is essential to defining the triggers
and effectors of age-related stem cell disorganization.
Moreover, those studies will help to determine
interventions aimed at preventing and/or treating human
diseases. Nevertheless, It is reasonable to propose that
senescence accelerates the ratio of disease risk, resulting
in the emerging insight of age-dependent disorders
when mentioning conditions including metabolic,
cardiovascular, and neurodegenerative diseases and
tumorigenesis [41]. However, what triggers the senescence
progression and how the different aspects of senescence
biology affect health decline and disease incidence are
initially to be understood. Because of the lack of proper
model to demonstrate the important proteins and identify
the molecular machinery with a relative short-period
time. Dental stem cells can be obtained with ease, making
them an attractive source for research. Therefore, it is
vital to establish the vitro aging models using human
DFSC to recapitulate DFSC ageing machinery. In
addition, Hydroxyurea initially acted as an antineoplastic
prescription [42] suppresse the ribonucleotide reductase
and then decline the production of deoxyribonucleotides.
Therefore, it could trigger DNA double-strand breaks near
replication forks and act as a DNA replication inhibitor
for mitochondrial and nuclear DNA, leading to cellular
dysfunction and mitochondrial oxidative stress [43].
Here, we utilized hydroxyurea treatment to optimize
and carefully characterize human DFSC ageing model
that can recapitulate a number of the ageing attributes.
Furthermore, RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) analysis
unveiled molecular networks associated with different
senescence markers, showing the broad utilities of our
cellular model for mechanistic analysis of DFSC and
human dental follicle ageing.

RESULTS
Persistent DNA damage induced by HU treatment
DPSCs from dental follicle of donors were cultured
in DMEM/F12 medium with FBS and formed human
dental follicle stem cells in vitro. Characterisation of
DFSCs was performed using Human MSC Analysis Kit
(BD) by flow cytometry (Unpublished data were provided
by H.W. and J.L.).
In order to determine the right dose of hydroxyurea
to trigger double stranded DNA breaks and cellular age,
we treated DFSCs with three different doses of 0.5, 8
and 20mM for 2, 12 and 36 h. The sites of DNA damage
was stained by γH2AX foci to quantify the extent of
DNA double-strand breaks. DFSCs without hydroxyurea
treatment showed a basic expression of γH2AX foci.
DFSCs with 0.5mM hydroxyurea treatment for 2 or 12
7278

Oncotarget

h or with 8mM hydroxyurea treatment for 2 h triggered
a transient higher level in γH2AX foci amount which
decreased quickly and recovered the basic level after 36
h hydroxyurea treatment. DFSCs with 8 mM hydroxyurea
treatment for 12 h drived rapid accumulation in γH2AX
foci amount but that failed to descend even after 36 h
hydroxyurea treatment (Figures 1a and 1b).

than normal DFSCs (Figure 2b). Futhermore, we analyzed
osteogenic differentiation by Alizarin Red staining of
calcium phosphate precipitates, we also found the same
result: DFSCs with mild hydroxyurea treatment revealed
consistently lower osteogenic differentiation than normal
DFSCs. In addition, chondrogenic differentiation showed
the similar result (Figure 2). These results seem to support
the notion, that DFSC with mild hydroxyurea treatment
have a lower differentiation ability.

Proliferation and differentiation of HU-treated
DFSCs

Phenotypic characterization of mild HU-treated
DFSCs

The data showed that the low dose of hydroxyurea
only induced transient double stranded DNA breaks, while
the high dose of hydroxyurea was incompatible with
DFSC survivals. Thus, we determine to treat DFSC with
hydroxyurea (8mM hydroxyurea, 24 h) that established
persistent double stranded DNA breaks (Figure 1a).
To confirm whether a cellular DFSC aging model
was establish with 8mM hydroxyurea treatment, we
carried out a series of examinations. First, we performed
clone formation assays and these data revealed that
the ratio of dental follicle stem cell formation was
dramatically declined through the hydroxyurea treatment
(Figures 2a), revealing the self-renewal capacity of DFSCs
is significantly declined with hydroxyurea treatment.
Subsequently, we analyzed whether differentiation of
DFSCs were affected with hydroxyurea treatment in
vitro. The quantification of adipogenesis was identified by
the percentage of cells that acquired fat droplets within
two weeks. DFSCs with mild hydroxyurea treatment
revealed consistently lower adipogenic differentiation

To verify whether cell senescence was caused with
the mild DNA damage treatment in human DFSCs, the
human DFSCs were stained with senescence-associatedβ-galactosidase. The percentage of positive senescenceassociated-β-galactosidase DFSCs elevated from 8 % in
the untreated cells to 34 % in the hydroxyurea treatment
(Figure 3a). Cellular ageing is usually accompanied
by elevated Reactive oxygen species level in cells. In
accordance with that, DFSCs with hydroxyurea treatment
showed significant increase of Reactive oxygen species
level than the untreated cells (Figures 3c and d).

Molecular characterization of mild HU-treated
DFSCs
Recent studies reported that p53/p21 and p16INK4A
signaling pathway were involving in cellular response to

Figure 1: Persistent DNA damage induced by HU treatment. a. Formation of DNA double-strand breaks in DFSCs post HU

treatment. DFSCs were treated with 0.5, 8 and 20mM HU for for 2 or 12 h and and allowed to recover until 36 h post treatment. Cells
were fixed and stained for γH2AX foci (red) at the indicated time points post HU treatment. Scale bar: 5 mm. b. Graphical depiction of the
number of γH2AX foci in DFSCs treated with 0.5, 8 and 20mM HU over 36 h. Data are expressed as mean±S.E. from three independent
experiments. *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, two-way ANOVA with Fisher’s post hoc test
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

7279

Oncotarget

damaged DNA. The two signaling pathways play a role
in regulating cell cycle arrest and cellular ageing. As we
expected, 8mM hydroxyurea inducement result in a higher
expression level of p53, p21 and p16INK4A as observed
by Quantitative Real-time Polymerase Chain Reaction
and Western blotting (Figure 4a and 4h). In addition,
some major genes that involving HR repair pathway
(BRCA1 and xrcc2) non-homologous end joining repair
pathway (X-Ray Repair Cross Complementing 6 (Ku70),
Repair Cross Complementing 4 (xrcc4) and DNA ligase
IV (LigIV)) were observed by quantitative real-time

polymerase chain reaction
Furthermore, we present Fluorescence Activated
Cell Sorting assays. As determined by propidium iodide
(PI) staining, hydroxyurea inducement showed a notable
increase in G0/G1 phases and a notable decline in S
populations (Figures 4 d and e). We used the Annexin-V
FITC Apoptosis Detection Kit to analyze cell apoptosis.
As is expected, 8mM hydroxyurea inducement increased
apoptotic level in DFSCs compared to the control group
(Figure 4f and g).

Figure 2: Proliferation and differentiation of HU-treated DFSCs. a. In vitro proliferative capacity of DFSCs assayed by colony

formation experiment. Representative images of colony from control (Con) and HU-treated (HU) cells. The number of colony formed after
10 days was counted. D0 shows the plated DFSCs after single-cell dissociation at day 0. D10 shows the colony formed after 10 days of
culturing. Scale bar: 50 mm. b. In vitro proliferative capacity of DFSCs assayed by colony formation experiment. The number of DFSCs
formed after 10 days was counted. Statistics for the ratio of DFSCs formation after 10 days in vitro. Mean±S.E. from three independent
experiments. *P < 0.05, Student’s t-test. c. After Osteogenic differentiation, DFSCs with and without HU treatment were analyzed by
Alizarin Red staining after 3 weeks of culture (scale bar 50 μm). d. At day 14 after induction of differentiation, DFSCs with and without
HU treatment was stained with Oil Red O (scale bar 50 μm). e. After Chondrogenic differentiation, DFSCs with and without HU treatment
were stained with Alcian blue in combination with PAS (Periodic acid-Schiff) in an automated slide stainer and photo-documented (scale
bar 50 μm).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

7280

Oncotarget

Phenotypic and molecular characterization of
mild HU-treated DFSCs between young and old

foci number but that failed to descend even after 36 h
hydroxyurea inducement (Figures 5a and 5b).
We observed the cell apoptosis by the Annexin-V
FITC Apoptosis Detection Kit. As is expected, DFSCs
from old donors with 8mM hydroxyurea inducement
increased the percentage of apoptosis in DFSCs compared
to young donors (Figure 5c and d).

To determine phenotypic characterization of mild
HU-treated DFSCs between Young and Old, DFSCs from
young donors and old donors were treated for 2, 12 and
36 h at a dosing of 8mM. The sites of DNA damage was
stained by γH2AX foci to quantify the extent of DNA
double-strand breaks. DFSCs from young donors and old
donors showed a basic expression of γH2AX foci. DFSCs
from young donors with 8mM HU inducement for 2 or 12
h or with 8mM HU inducement for 2 h induced a transient
higher level in γH2AX foci amount that decreased rapidly
and recovered the basic level after 36 h HU inducement.
DFSCs from old donors with 8 mM hydroxyurea
inducement for 12 h drived rapid accumulation in γH2AX

Biological function analysis of the differentially
expressed proteins post HU inducement
We found that DFSC with 8mM hydroxyurea
not only reduced the capability of proliferation and
differentiation but also caused ageing-associated
phenotypic changes, suggesting that a premature

Figure 3: Phenotypic characterization of 8 mM HU-treated DFSCs. a. Images of SA-β-gal+ DFSCs. with or without HU

treatment. b. Statistics of the percentage of SA-β-gal+ DFSCs, mean±S.E. *P < 0.05, Student’s t-test, Scale bar: 50 mm. c. ROS were
detected using dihydroethidium (DHE) fluorescence. d. ROS level was normalized to that of control cells with statistics expressed as
mean±S.E. *P < 0.05, Student’s t-test. Scale bar: 60 mm.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

7281

Oncotarget

Figure 4: Molecular characterization of 8 mM HU-treated DFSCs. a. qRT-PCR analysis of p16, p21 and p53 expression

normalized by β-actin. Values represent mean±S.E. of two independent samples conducted in triplicate. *P < 0.05; **P < 0.01, Student’s
t-test. b. qRT-PCR analysis of HR (X-ray repair cross complementing 2 (xrcc2) and brca1) and NHEJ (ku70, ligase4 and X-ray repair cross
complementing 4 (xrcc4)) gene expression normalized by β-actin c. Values represent mean±S.E. of two independent samples conducted in
triplicate. *P < 0.05; **P < 0.01, Student’s t-test. d. Cell cycle arrest of DFSC cells was were treated with 8 mM HU and without HU (Con).
After 24 h of incubation, cells were harvested and stained with PI followed by Cellometer imaging and analysis. X-axis indicated the PI
fluorescence intensity that correlates to the DNA content. e. FACS analysis and percentages of different cell stages are presented as mean of
percentage±S.E. . f. DFSC cells were treated with HU (8 mM) and without HU for 48 h and examined by flow cytometry using Annexin-V/
PI staining to label apoptotic cells. g. FACS analysis and percentages of apoptotic cells are presented as mean of percentage±S.E. .(f)
Western blotting analysis of p16 and p21 expression. (g) Western blotting analysis of xxrc2 and brac1 expression. (j) Western blotting
analysis of ku70, ligade4 and xxrc4 expression
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

7282

Oncotarget

senescence model was successfully established. However,
it was still unclear whether our cellular aging model may
evolve bioligical machinery associated with senescence.
So, we then continue to confirm the ageing models by
observing well-known senescence-related proteins and
signaling pathways.
Here we performed a transcriptome-wide
characterization of DFSCs with or without hydroxyurea
treatment by RNA sequencing. Transcriptome analysis
unraveling key molecular pathways associated with
DFSC senescence, and we then use biological tool
including Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA) (http://www.
ingenuity.com) and DAVID Bioinformatics Resource 6.7
(http://david.abcc.ncifcrf.gov/) to present Bioinformatics
observation. The major different expressions are located
in the nucleus (32%), the lysosome (29%) and the
mitochondrion (12%) (Figure 6a). Furthermore, these

genes play a key role in the canonical pathways associated
with energy metabolism, mitochondrial dysfunction and
ageing (Figure 6b). There are five enriched biological
processes (P < 0.001) including cellular metabolic process,
cellular component organization or biogenesis, positive
regulation of cellular process, organonitrogen compound
metabolic process and small molecule metabolic process
(Figure 6c). Cell component majorly included organelle,
intracellular part, membrane-bounded organelle,
intracellular organelle and cytoplasm. For molecular
function, binding, protein binding, RNA binding, poly
(A) RNA binding and enzyme binding were among the
top (Figure 6c). Differentially expressed genes between
Con and hydroxyurea treatment of the human DFSCs were
visualized as heatmaps for RNA-seq (Figure 6d).

Figure 5: Phenotypic and molecular characterization of 8mM HU-treated DFSCs between Young and Old. a. Formation
of DNA double-strand breaks in DFSCs post HU treatment. DFSCs were treated with 0.5, 8 and 20mM HU for for 2 or 12 h and and allowed
to recover until 36 h post treatment. Cells were fixed and stained for γH2AX foci (red) at the indicated time points post HU treatment. Scale
bar: 5 mm. b. Graphical depiction of the number of γH2AX foci in DFSCs treated with 0.5, 8 and 20mM HU over 36 h. Data are expressed
as mean±S.E. from three independent experiments. *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, two-way ANOVA with Fisher’s post hoc test. c. DFSC cells were
treated with 8 mM HU for 48 h and examined by flow cytometry using Annexin-V/PI staining to label apoptotic cells. d. FACS analysis and
percentages of apoptotic cells are presented as mean of percentage±S.E. .
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

7283

Oncotarget

Candidate genes and pathways identified through
the DFSC cellular aging model associated with
aging characteristics

expression [51]. Consequently, we found that hydroxyurea
treatment caused cells to enter a state of irreversible cell
cycle arrest accompanied by ageing-like morphology,
functional alterations and dysfunction of damaged DNA
repair mechanism, which is similar to neural stem cells in
mouse [52]. The induction of cellular aging depends on
the repair pathways involving the p53 and Rb. Meanwhile,
the capacity of proliferation and differentiation of DFSCs
was also insulted. In addition, chronic accumulation
of DNA damage and a decrease in DNA repair ability
were accompanied by accelerated intracellular Reactive
oxygen species production and declined cellular apoptosis
(Figure 3c). A major production of low radiation exposure
in human mesenchymal stromal cells in can trigger the
cellular ageing, whereas it has been considered as minimal
contribution to apoptosis [53]. These data indicate that
premature senescence of cultured human DFSCs with HUinduced treatment may demonstrate major components of
the vivo ageing and thus can act as a useful ageing model.
Studies have showed that p53-p21 signaling
pathway plays a vital part in cellular response to DNA
damage [54] and p16INK4A prevents phosphorylation of
Rb though cyclin/cdk complexes. Hypophosphorylated
Rb prevents cellular proliferation by inhibitory binding
to E2F transcription factors, thus preventing them from
triggering genic transcription involved in DNA replication
and cellular proliferation [55]. Tumor protein p53-p21 and
p16INK4A-Rb signaling pathways are involving in cell
cycle arrest and cellular ageing [56]. As we expected,
the expression of tumor protein p53, p21 and p16INK4A
showed a significant increase with mild hydroxyurea
treatment by quantitative real-time polymerase chain
reaction (Figure 4a) and Western Blotting (Figure 4h).
Studies showed p16INK4A was an increased expression
in ageing human and murine organs [57] and an elevated
expression of tumor protein P53, p21 and p16INK4A all
result in declined proliferative capacity and neurogenesis
of neural stem cells (NSCs) [58, 59]. In our context,
the establishment of cell-cycle arrest was affected by
p16INK4A-Rb axis. For instance, DNA damage initially
harms cell-cycle process by tumor protein P53-mediated
induction of p21, but if insults persist, this triggers
p16Ink4a by P38 MAP Kinase-mediated reactive oxygen
species production and mitochondrial dysfunction [60,
61]. We then identified a decline in WRN expression in
response to the HU-induced (Figure 7b). Furthermore,
WRN-deficient mouse stem cells recapitulated the
progressive heterochromatin dysfunction and can serve as
a useful marker for physiological aging in human stem
cells [40]. Mechanistically Werner Syndrome RecQ Like
Helicase (WRN) relates to heterochromatin proteins
Suppressor Of Variegation 3-9 Homolog 1(SUV39H1)
and HP1 Alpha Homolog (HP1a) and nuclear laminaheterochromatin anchoring protein LAP2b. Targeted
knock-in of catalytically inactive SUV39H1 in wild-type

The establishment of cellular senescence model
makes us to utilize genome-wide approach and
systematically identify the machinery that recapitulate
the associated with decreases in an unbiased manner.
To demonstrate such utilities, we presented quantitative
transcriptome analysis and found explore main genes
and pathways modulating the senescence progression.
Functionally, of these genes are majorly related to
DNA damage response, repair, cell cycle arrest, cellular
senescence, Reactive oxygen species and stress response,
mitochondrial integrity, cell apoptosis and cell death
(Figure7a). Importantly, DFSCs with hydroxyurea
inducement, many of the genes underwent expression
changes in a greatly correlated manner and readily
formed some canonical pathways related to some
senescence markers such as superoxide dismutase 1
(SOD1), superoxide dismutase 2 (SOD2), WRN , NADH
dehydrogenase 1b subcomplex 9 (NDUFB9), NADH
dehydrogenase 1a subcomplex 4 (NDUFA4), NADH
dehydrogenase 1a subcomplex (NDUFA13), PTEN
Induced Putative Kinase 1(PINK1), and Bax [44-50] as
well as deregulated nutrient sensing and metabolisms
(oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS), tricarboxylic
acid (TCA) cycle, Parkinson’s disease and Fatty Acid-βoxidationⅡ) (Figure 7a).
We presented IPA pathway analysis to demonstrate
main cell functional networks altered in HU-induced
DFSCs, we found that a large number of proteins are
greatly interconnected within phenotypic changes.
For instance, WRN and superoxide dismutase 2 was
declined in the HU-induced group (Figure 7b and c), in
accordance with the elevated Reactive oxygen species and
DFSC ageing. In addition, we determined mitochondrial
aging-related genes such as bax and bcl2 (Figure 7d).
Furthermore, we draws the vital actors and signaling
pathways that can mechanistically contribute to the
phenotypic changes in the cellular aging model (Figure
7e).

DISCUSSION
In the present study, human DFSCs were treated
with 8mM hydroxyurea for 12 h and an increased cell
senescence model was successfully established. The
percentage of senescence-associated-β-galactosidase
positive DFSCs in the hydroxyurea treatment significantly
increased than in the control group. Similarly,
mesenchymal stromal cells (MSC) with replicative
exhaustion, doxorubicin treatment, oxidative stress and
X-ray irradiation showed an increase β-galactosidase
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

7284

Oncotarget

mouse stem cells demonstrates increased cell ageing,
resembling WRN-deficient mouse stem cells. Moreover,
decline in WRN and heterochromatin hallmarks are
observed in mouse stem cells from advancing ageing
individuals [40]. These results seem to support that WRN
play an important role in conserving heterochromatin
stability and highlight heterochromatin dysfunction as a
common hallmark of human cellular senescence.
We next analysed the regenerative capacity

of human DFSCs from physiologically three young
(20-years) and three old (55-years) donors, with Huinduced treatment. Compared to young donors DFSCs,
regeneration efficiency was reduced in old donors DFSCs,
but remarkably declined in old donors DFSCs (Figure 5a
and b). The number of γH2AX foci increased in old donors
DFSCs, but did not increase further in old donors DFSCs
(Figure 5a and b), suggesting that the sharp regenerative
decrease during Hu-induced treatment cannot be attributed

Figure 6: Biological function analysis of the differentially expressed proteins post HU treatment. a. The cellular component

annotations of differentially expressed proteins with GO analysis from DAVID database. b. Top canonical pathways altered post HU
treatment with mitochondrial dysfunction being the most significant one. c. GO annotation of identified age-related proteins in three
categories: biological process (BP), cellular component (CC) and molecular function (MF). d. Heat map visualization of significantly
regulated probe sets. A hierarchical clustering was analyzed on the probe sets and gene transcripts were selected from 6 chips in 2 arrays
(Con and HU treatment) through a filter criteria of at least 2-fold changes with P≤0.05 (F test). Columns: samples; rows: genes; color key
indicates gene expression value, green: lowest, red: highest.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

7285

Oncotarget

Figure 7: Candidate genes and pathways identified through the DFSC cellular aging model associated with aging
characteristics. a. The key regulatory networks underlying the HU-induced aging model. Proteomic data were imported into the IPA and

interacting pathways were constructed in protein expression. b. Western blotting analysis of lap2a, hp1a and wrn expression. c. Verification
of SOD2 expression by RT-PCR with β-actin as an internal control. The data are presented as mean±S.E. from three independent
experiments. d. Western blotting analysis of bal2 and bax expression. e. The schematic diagram outlines the key players and pathways that
may mechanistically contribute to the phenotypes in our DFSC aging model.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

7286

Oncotarget

to a diminished DFSC supply. The counterintuitive
demonstration revels an adaptive response: DFSCs
adopt a compromised state to prevent from being
completely excluded sub-lethal lesions including (8mM
hydroxyurea inducement) persistent DNA damage, greatly
recapitulating the ageing progression. In fact, similar
demonstrations have been observed in different stem cell
compartments including Human stem cells and mouse
neural stem cells [59, 62]. Taken together, the data imply
that DNA damage accrual is increased in stem cells with
age, and indicates that proliferative precursor cells are
either repaired more readily or are excluded on damaged
DNA accumulation.
To test the effect of non-homologous end joining on
DFSCs functional capacity with Hu-induced treatment,
we demonstrated several key genes of non-homologous
end joining pathway by QRT-PCR, including X-Ray
Repair Cross Complementing 6 (Ku70), Repair Cross
Complementing 4 (xrcc4) and DNA ligase IV (LigIV).
As we know, X-Ray Repair Cross Complementing 6
(Ku70) and X-Ray Repair Cross Complementing 5 (Ku80)
triggers DNA-PKcs, and together the three proteins form
the DNA-PK holoenzyme. DNA-PK activates Artemis,
which serves as an endonuclease to progression ends that
may not be directly rejoined. Finally, X-Ray Repair Cross
Complementing 4(xrcc4) and DNA Ligase IV, which
are likely recruited by Ku, function together to catalyze
end ligation itself. Non-homologous end joining often
occurs concomitant with loss of a few nucleotides at the
site of joining [63]. The expression of Non-homologous
end joining pathway genes declined with Hu-induced
treatment (Figures 4a and k), which might be underlying
HU-treated persistent DNA damage, resulting in DFSC
ageing. In addition, we then observed the importance
of hydroxyurea function in stem cell by western blot.
Similarly, the expression of HR pathway genes (Brca1
and xxrc2) increased with Hu-induced treatment (Figures
4b), Moreover, proliferate capacity of DFSCs from young
donors had reduced with hydroxyurea treatment, which
was significantly exacerbated with age (Figure 5a and b)
and was related to increased apoptosis (Figure 5c and d).
Cumulatively, these data identify some major genes in
maintaining DFSC function by maintaining the capacity
of reconstitution potential, self-renewal, proliferation and
stem cell viability under stresses.
Elevated production of reactive oxygen species has
long been considered another major marker in our DFSC
aging model (Figures 3c and d). The result show that the
level of superoxide dismutase 2, mitochondrial (SOD2)
expression is a significant decrease in HU-induced DFSCs
(Figures 7c). As we know, SOD2 traditionally scavenges
Reactive oxygen species in the inner mitochondrial matrix
and serves as a major defense against mitochondrial stress
[64]. Velarde’ Studies in the skin suggest that SOD2
deficiency lead to mitochondrial oxidative damage and
further triggered cellular senescence and senescence
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

phenotypes [65]. Recent study, WRN-deficient MSCs
recapitulated main phenotypes of premature senescence,
containing premature lack of proliferative potential, higher
number of senescence-associated-β-galactosidase positive
cells, upregulated expression of senescence-associated
genes p16Ink4a and p21Waf1, and activation of agingrelated secretory phenotype (SASP) [40]. In addition,
NADH dehydrogenase 1a subcomplex 4 (NDUFA4),
NADH dehydrogenase 1a subcomplex13 (NDUFA13) and
NADH dehydrogenase 1a subcomplex10 (NDUFB10),
components of the mitochondrial complex I, were
greatly downregulated in HU-induced DFSCs (Figure
7e) and their deficiency was related to mitochondrial
dysfunction [47]. Accumulating mitochondrial damage
is key element for an increase level of Reactive oxygen
species with age in a self-perpetuating cycle [66]. ROSinduced mitochondrial insult further led to higher Reactive
oxygen species production that resulted in even more
mitochondrial damage accumulation [20]. As unraveled
by our transcriptome analysis, lots of genes deregulated
in the cellular senescence model are associated with
mitochondrial oxidative stress (Figure 7a), suggesting the
importance of mitochondrial stabilization for senescence.
Furthermore, our data found that the level of Apoptosis
Regulator Bcl-2 and BAX expression is a decline in HUinduced DFSCs, which seem to support that the BCL-2
family genes are the major mediators of the intracellular
apoptotic signaling pathways because they regulate the
commitment of the cells to mitochondrial outer membrane
permeabilization (MOMP) [67].
The accelerated Reactive oxygen species levels
might also degrade the DNA damage response/repair
[68]. The transcriptome analysis showed that in HUinduced DFSCs the top enriched genes is associated
with DNA replication, DNA recombination, DNA repair,
Reactive oxygen species, energy production and nucleic
acid metabolism (Figure 7a). As we know, Reactive
oxygen species are linked to several cellular metabolic
and signaling progressions [69]. Our observation with
the DFSC ageing model reveal that the Reactive oxygen
species signaling pathways might perform in concert with
differences in oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS),
tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle, Parkinson’s disease
and Fatty Acid β-oxidationⅡ (Figure 6b), resulting
in deregulated nutrient sensing and metabolism, and
consequentially increased ageing.
Mediation of oxidative metabolism has further been
involved in stem cell senescence through studies of the
sirtuin family of NAD-dependent protein deacetylases,
which are key mediators of oxidative stress, ageing
and stem cell function. For instance, recent studies
show a role for Sirtuin 1 in conserving mesenchymal
stem cell proliferation and differentiation, which have
been suggested to decrease with age [70, 71]. Also,
the expression of BAX was greatly downregulated in
HU-treated DFSCs by the proteomic analysis (Figure
7287

Oncotarget

7d), which may be activated and translocated to the
mitochondria to initiate mitochondrial dysfunction and
apoptosis.
In conclusion, to understand the significance of
these changes in dental follicle stem cells with aging,
we have developed a protocol and established a cellular
senescence model using DFSCs that might detailly
demonstrate the ageing changes in vivo, we have tested
serial experiments by this model including some major
genes related to persistent DNA damage, cellular ageing,
G1/S cell cycle arrest, elevated reactive oxygen species
and declined proliferative and differentiative capability,
and regenerative process. Our data also showed that
DFSCs from young are more resistant to hydroxyurea due
to declined apoptosis, increased Non-homologous end
joining ability, and more-rapid DNA repair. The data has
enabled it possible to explore DFSC ageing machinery
detailly. The present demonstration that age-relative
phenotype in different age donors, DFSC function in an
age-dependent manner under stressful conditions shows
that DNA damage accrual can underlie the declined
capability of stem cells to mediate a return to homeostasis
after exposure to injury or stress. Importantly, the use
of genetically determined cellular senescence model of
specific molecular causes of ageing and proof‑of‑principle
assays in cellular senescence model will make it present
the ageing mechanisms. The studies could ultimately offer
a rational basis to predict which approaches of stem celldirected therapies are most promising to improve organ
maintenance and insult tumorigenesis in the associated
disorders and ageing humans.

γH2AX immunostaining.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Osteogenic, adipogenic and chondrogenic
differentiation of DFSCs was simultaneously performed
under the same differentiation conditions as described
before [73, 74]. After three weeks, osteogenic
differentiation was analyzed by Alizarin Red staining and
quantified with a method based on acetic acid extraction
and neutralization with ammonium hydroxide [75]. A
Tecan infinite M200 plate reader was employed to measure
the absorbance at 405 nm.
At day 14 after induction of adipogenic
differentiation, the cells were stained with Oil Red O
(Sigma, St. Louis, MO). Cells were washed twice with
phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) and fixed with 3.7%
formaldehyde in PBS for 30 min and then washed twice
with PBS. Cells were stained with 0.35% Oil Red O dye
in isopropyl alcohol for 30 min. Excess stain was removed
by washing with 70% ethanol and PBS. Visualization of
intracellular lipid accumulation was achieved via Oil Red
O staining.
Chondrogenic differentiation was induced in
micromass culture for three weeks. Subsequently the
pellets were fixed with 10% formalin and paraffin
embedded. 1 mm sections were stained with Alcian blue
in combination with PAS (Periodic acid-Schiff) in an

Cells were seeded at 1x105 cells per ml in 24-well
plates (Trueline, USA), treated with hydroxyurea (Sigma,
St. Louis, MO, USA) at a concentration of 0.5, 8 or 20
mM, and incubated at 37oC until the collection time points.
γH2AX was showed by using the SCIP hos (singlecell imaging of phosphorylation) assay [72]. In a word,
DFSC cells were sorted into droplets of PBS on poly
(L-lysine)-coated slides, then fixed, permeabilized and
stained with phospho-specific (Ser 139) histone H2AX
antibody (Abcam). After being washed, the cells were
stained with a secondary Alexa Fluor 488-conjugated
antibody
and
4,
6-diamidino-2-phenylindole.
Quantification of γH2AX foci was performed by
fluorescence microscopy and analysed statistically with
the Mann-Whitney U-test.

Clonogenic assay
Two replicates of 200 cells were seeded in two sixwell culture dishes with hydroxyurea (8mM) and without
hydroxyurea medium as that for cell culture and cultivated
for 10 days in a humidified atmosphere at 37°C and 5%
CO2. Medium was changed every fourth day. Colonies
were visually scored using an inverted microscope.

Osteogenic, adipogenic
differentiation

Human dental follicle stem cell culture and
identification.
Primary DFSCs were derived from donors. The
dental follicle cell was isolated and enzymatically
dissociated in Hank’s balanced saline solution buffer
(HBSS) (WISENT, Canada) containing 1 mg/ml trypsin
(WISENT) at 37oC for 10 min followed by 5 min of
centrifugation at 350g upon trypsin inhibition (Invitrogen).
The isolated cells were washed with HBSS and
resuspended in DMEM/F12 medium (WISENT). DFSC
formed over 7 days of incubation with 5% CO2 at 37oC.
Subculturing was done every 3-4 days. Characterisation
of DFSCs was performed using Human MSC Analysis Kit
(BD) by flow cytometry (Unpublished data were provided
by H.W.). Experiments were performed with cultured
cells between passages 2 and 12 except those otherwise
indicated.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

7288

and

chondrogenic

Oncotarget

Table 1: Primers used for qPCR
Primer name
Primer sequence (5’–3’)
P53-F
5’ GTTCCGAGAGCTGAATGAGG 3’
P53-R
5 ’ TCTGAGTCAGGCCCTTCTGT 3′
P21-F
5' GCCCGCTCTACATCTTCTG3'
P21-R
5' GTGCCATCTGTTTACTTCTCAA3'
P16-F
5' GACATCCCCGATTGAAAGAA3'
P16-R
5' CCTGTAGGACCTTCGGTGAC3'
BRCA1-F
5' CTTCTACCAGGCATAT 3'
BRCA1-R
5' TTGGCTTGTTACTCTT 3'
XXRC2-F
5' TGACTATCGCCTGGTT 3'
XXRC2-R
5' GGTTGCTGCTTTGAGA 3'
KU70-F
5' AGGAGTCGCTGGTGATTG 3'
KU70-R
5' CACCTGCTCTGGAGTTGC 3'
XXRC4-F
5' GCAGAATCCACCTTGT 3'
XXRC4-R
5' CCTGCTCCTGACAACA 3'
LIGASE4-R 5' TGGTGCTTCTCCTACT 3'
LIGASE4-F 5' CAAACTTAGTTCCCTTT 3'
SOD2-F
5' GCGGGCGTTTACTCTTAG 3'
SOD2-R
5' TCTCCTCGGTGACGTTCA 3'
β-actin- F
5’ TTTTCCAGCCTTCCTT 3’
β-actin-R
5’ TTGGCATACAGGTCTTT3’

Use
qPCR
qPCR
qPCR
qPCR
qPCR
qPCR
qPCR
qPCR
qPCR
qPCR
qPCR
qPCR
qPCR
qPCR
qPCR
qPCR
qPCR
qPCR
qPCR
qPCR

β-actin was used as housekeeping genes

RNA extraction and quantitative real-time
polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR)

automated slide stainer and photo-documented.

Senescence-associated-β-galactosidase assay

Total RNA was isolated from the cells at the
logarithmic phase by Trizol technology (Tiangen Biotech
Co., Ltd., Beijing, China). For the mRNA analysis, the
cDNA primed by oligo-dT was made with a prime Script
RT reagent kit (Tiangen Biotech Co., Ltd., Beijing, China)
and the mRNA level of the genes HOXC9 was quantified
by a duplex-qRT-PCR analysis where the Taqman probes
in a different fluorescence for the β-actin (provided by
Shing Gene, Shanghai, China) were used in the FTC3000P PCR instrument (Funglyn Biotech Inc, Canada).
Using the 2−ΔΔCt method, the normalization with the
β-actin level was performed before the relative level of
the target genes was compared. The sequences of primers
used for the qRT-PCR (Table 1).

Cellular senescence was determined by senescenceassociated-β-galactosidase staining. Staining was
performed using the Senescence Cells Histochemical
Staining Kit (Sigma) according to the manufacturer’s
guidelines. Positive staining was evaluated after 12-16
h incubation at 37oC in a CO2-free atmosphere. The blue
stained cells from 10 different fields were counted with
results presented as a percentage of positive cells.

Reactive oxygen species measurements
Cells were cultured in six-well plates (Corning
Incorporated, Corning, NY) in regular growth media until
reaching 70-80% confluence. Then, cells were treated
with hydroxyurea (8mM) and without hydroxyurea.
After incubation with agents, cells were harvested and
incubated for 30 min with dyes to detect Reactive oxygen
species [10 μM dihydroethidium (DHE) and 0.5-10μg/
ml 4, 6-diamidino 2-phenyl-indole (DAPI)]. Cells were
then washed twice with 1% BSA/PBS and analyzed for
fluorescence microscopy.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Cell cycle analysis
DFSCs cells were harvested from the culture flasks
and centrifuged at 1,000 rpm for 5 min. The pellet was
resuspended in fresh media with hydroxyurea (8mM) and
a control with only media. DFSCs cells were then cultured
for 24h in an incubator at 37 oC with 5% CO2. At the end
of the culture, DFSCs cells were centrifuged at 1,000
rpm for 5 min and the pellet was resuspended in 200 ul
phosphate buffered saline (PBS). The cells were fixed by
adding 400 ul of 200 proof ethanol (final percentage at
7289

Oncotarget

RNA sequence analysis

66%, Sigma Aldrich) and incubated for 15 min on ice. The
cells were then centrifuged at 1,500 rpm for 5 min and the
pellet was resuspended in 200 ul propidium iodide (PI)
solution containing 50 ug/ml PI (Biotium, Hayward, CA),
0.1 mg/ml RNase A (Sigma-Aldrich), and 0.05% Triton
X-100 (Sigma-Aldrich). DFSCs cells were incubated for
40 min at 37oC before performing flow cytometry analysis.

RNA sequencing library construction and
Illumina sequencing
Isolation and enrichment of mRNA from total RNA
was performed using oligo (dT) magnetic beads (Illumina,
CA, USA). Then, mRNA was fragmented to short
fragments to be used as templates for randomhexamerprimed synthesis of first strand cDNA by fragmentation
buffer. Second-strand cDNA was synthesized using buffer,
dNTPs, RNase H, and DNA polymerase I. A pairedend cDNA library was synthesized using the Genomic
Sample Preparation Kit (Illumina,CA, USA) according
to themanufacturer’s instructions. Short fragments were
purified with QIAQuick1 PCR extraction kit (QIAGEN,
Germany) and eluted in 10 μL of EB buffer (QIAGEN,
Germany). These short fragments were connected via
sequencing adapters (Illumina, CA, USA). Agarose
gel electrophoresis was used to select fragments
approximately 50 bp in size. Finally, cDNA libraries were
sequenced on an Illumina HiSeq™ 2500 (Novogene,
Beijing).

Cell apoptosis analysis
Cells were harvested and rinsed with PBS twice.
Then 5 μl of FITC-labeled enhanced annexinV and 5 μl
(20 μg/ml) of propidium iodide were added into 100 μl
cell suspension. Upon incubation in the dark for 15 min
at room temperature, samples were diluted with 400 μl
PBS. Apoptosis was determined by the Annexin-V FITC
Apoptosis Detection Kit, which was performed according
to the manufacturer’s instruction (BD Pharmingen).
Data were acquired on a FACS Calibur flow cytometer
(BD Biosciences). Results were obtained by analyzing
data with FlowJo Version 7.6.1 software (TreeStar).
Results represent the mean value of three independent
experiments. The result was analyzed according to
the manufacturer’s instruction. The experiments were
performed independently three times and a representative
was shown.

Protein pathway analysis

Western blot analysis

We annotated our database with G.O. terms for
cellular components, cellular processes, and cellular
functions. GO annotation of the identified proteins was
done using DAVID (V6.7: http://david.abcc.ncifcrf.gov/).
Differentially expressed proteins were analyzed using
IPA (Ingenuity Systems: http://www.ingenuity.com).
In addition, the overrepresented biological functions,
molecular networks and canonical pathways were
generated based on information in the Ingenuity Pathways
Knowledge Base.

Cultured DPSCs were washed with ice-cold
PBS and lysed with 2 X SDS lysis buffer. Protein
concentrations were determined by the BCA protein assay
kit (Pierce, Rockford, IL, USA). Proteins were separated
on 10% SDS-polyacrylamide gels (Bio-Rad Laboratories,
Inc., Hercules, CA, USA) and transferred to a PVDF
membrane (Millipore, Billerica, MA, USA). Membranes
were blocked in 5% non-fat milk powder in TBS-T (0.1%
Tween-20 in PBS), and incubated with primary antibodies
overnight at 4oC. After washing in PBS-T, membranes
were incubated with HRP-conjugated secondary
antibodies (Invitrogen) for 1 h at room temperature
with signals detected using ECL Super Signal (Pierce).
Quantifications were done using Image-Quant Software
(Molecular Dynamics, Sunnyvale, CA, USA). The
primary antibodies used include rabbit anti-p16INK4A
(Abclonal Technology, Wuhan, China), anti-p21 (Abclonal
Technology, Wuhan, China), anti-p53 (Abcam), anti-ku70
(Abcam), anti-Xrcc2 (Abclonal Technology, Wuhan,
China), anti-ligase4 (Abclonal Technology), anti-brca1
(Abclonal Technology),anti-Xrcc4 (Abclonal Technology)
and mouse anti-β-tublin (Abclonal Technology, Wuhan,
China), WRN (Abcam), Hp1a (Abcam), Lap2a (Abcam),
BCL2 (Abcam), BAX (Abcam).

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Statistical analysis
Data were analyzed by Student’s t-test and oneway analysis of variance (ANOVA) followed by post hoc
multiple comparison tests. Significance was accepted at
P < 0.05.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Shaobo Su (Tongji University School
of Medicine) for critical discussion for conception and
design. We thank Junjun Liu, HuiHui Wang, Ying Qi and
Shuwei Wang for isolation and identification of DFSCs.

7290

Oncotarget

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST

11.	Moskalev AA, Shaposhnikov MV, Plyusnina EN,
Zhavoronkov A, Budovsky A, Yanai H and Fraifeld VE.
The role of DNA damage and repair in aging through the
prism of Koch-like criteria. Ageing research reviews. 2013;
12(2):661-684.

The authors declare no conflict of interest.

GRANT SUPPORT

12.	 Rossi DJ, Bryder D, Seita J, Nussenzweig A, Hoeijmakers J
and Weissman IL. Deficiencies in DNA damage repair limit
the function of haematopoietic stem cells with age. Nature.
2007; 447(7145):725-729.

This work was supported by the Ministry of
Science and Technology of China (2013CB967500,
2015CB964600), the National Natural Science
Foundation of China (31401089, 31170824, 31470038,
31300741,81600881), the Natural Science Foundation
of Shanghai (12ZR1434200), Shanghai Municipal
Commission of Health and Family Planning (20134209).

13.	 Sinha M, Jang YC, Oh J, Khong D, Wu EY, Manohar
R, Miller C, Regalado SG, Loffredo FS and Pancoast JR.
Restoring systemic GDF11 levels reverses age-related
dysfunction in mouse skeletal muscle. Science. 2014;
344(6184):649-652.

Author contributions

14.	 Rube CE, Grudzenski S, Kuhne M, Dong X, Rief N,
Lobrich M and Rube C. DNA double-strand break repair
of blood lymphocytes and normal tissues analysed in a
preclinical mouse model: implications for radiosensitivity
testing. Clin Cancer Res. 2008; 14(20):6546-6555.

R. W.: performed the experiments, manuscript
writing and editing; Z.Y.: performed the experiments,
manuscript writing and editing; T. Y., J.L., H.W., W.C.
M.Z. Y.H. and S.W.: critical discussion for conception;
X. L., J. Y. and S.L.: conception and design, manuscript
writing and editing, final approval of manuscript.

15.	 Beerman I, Seita J, Inlay MA, Weissman IL and Rossi
DJ. Quiescent hematopoietic stem cells accumulate DNA
damage during aging that is repaired upon entry into cell
cycle. Cell Stem Cell. 2014; 15(1):37-50.
16.	 Nijnik A, Woodbine L, Marchetti C, Dawson S, Lambe T,
Liu C, Rodrigues NP, Crockford TL, Cabuy E and Vindigni
A. DNA repair is limiting for haematopoietic stem cells
during ageing. Nature. 2007; 447(7145):686-690.

REFERENCES
1.	 Kirkwood TB. Understanding the odd science of aging.
Cell. 2005; 120(4):437-447.

17.	 Forster MJ, Dubey A, Dawson KM, Stutts WA, Lal H and
Sohal RS. Age-related losses of cognitive function and
motor skills in mice are associated with oxidative protein
damage in the brain. Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences. 1996; 93(10):4765-4769.

2.	 López-Otín C, Blasco MA, Partridge L, Serrano M
and Kroemer G. The hallmarks of aging. Cell. 2013;
153(6):1194-1217.
3.	 Mohrin M, Shin J, Liu Y, Brown K, Luo H, Xi Y, Haynes
CM and Chen D. Stem cell aging. A mitochondrial UPRmediated metabolic checkpoint regulates hematopoietic
stem cell aging. Science. 2015; 347(6228):1374-1377.

18.	 Kroemer G, Galluzzi L and Brenner C. Mitochondrial
membrane permeabilization in cell death. Physiological
reviews. 2007; 87(1):99-163.

4.	 Lopez-Otin C, Blasco MA, Partridge L, Serrano M
and Kroemer G. The hallmarks of aging. Cell. 2013;
153(6):1194-1217.

19.	 Green DR, Galluzzi L and Kroemer G. Mitochondria and
the autophagy-inflammation-cell death axis in organismal
aging. Science. 2011; 333(6046):1109-1112.

5.	 Vijg J and Campisi J. Puzzles, promises and a cure for
ageing. Nature. 2008; 454(7208):1065-1071.

20.	 Lombard DB, Chua KF, Mostoslavsky R, Franco S,
Gostissa M and Alt FW. DNA repair, genome stability, and
aging. Cell. 2005; 120(4):497-512.

6.	 Malam Z and Cohn RD. Stem cells on alert: priming
quiescent stem cells after remote injury. Cell stem cell.
2014; 15(1):7-8.

21.	 Jiricny J. The multifaceted mismatch-repair system. Nature
reviews Molecular cell biology. 2006; 7(5):335-346.

7.	 Campisi J. Aging, cellular senescence, and cancer. Annual
review of physiology. 2013; 75:685-705.

22.	 Hasty P, Campisi J, Hoeijmakers J, van Steeg H and Vijg J.
Aging and genome maintenance: lessons from the mouse?
Science. 2003; 299(5611):1355-1359.

8.	 Rube C, Fricke A, Widmann TA, Furst T, Madry H,
Pfreundschuh M and Rube C. Accumulation of DNA
damage in hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells during
human aging. PloS one. 2011; 6(3):e17487.
9.	

23.	 Shimizu I, Yoshida Y, Suda M and Minamino T. DNA
damage response and metabolic disease. Cell metabolism.
2014; 20(6):967-977.

Signer RA and Morrison SJ. Mechanisms that regulate stem
cell aging and life span. Cell stem cell. 2013; 12(2):152165.

24.	 Harper JW and Elledge SJ. The DNA damage response: ten
years after. Molecular cell. 2007; 28(5):739-745.
25.	 Ciccia A and Elledge SJ. The DNA damage response:
making it safe to play with knives. Molecular cell. 2010;
40(2):179-204.

10.	 Campisi J. Aging, cellular senescence, and cancer. Annual
review of physiology. 2013; 75:685.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

7291

Oncotarget

26.	 Erol A. Deciphering the intricate regulatory mechanisms
for the cellular choice between cell repair, apoptosis or
senescence in response to damaging signals. Cellular
signalling. 2011; 23(7):1076-1081.

switch reversible quiescence into senescence. Nature. 2014;
506(7488):316-321.
39.	 Kudlow BA, Kennedy BK and Monnat RJ. Werner and
Hutchinson-Gilford progeria syndromes: mechanistic basis
of human progeroid diseases. Nature Reviews Molecular
Cell Biology. 2007; 8(5):394-404.

27.	 Mandal PK, Blanpain C and Rossi DJ. DNA damage
response in adult stem cells: pathways and consequences.
Nature Reviews Molecular Cell Biology. 2011; 12(3):198202.

40.	 Zhang W, Li J, Suzuki K, Qu J, Wang P, Zhou J, Liu X,
Ren R, Xu X and Ocampo A. A Werner syndrome stem
cell model unveils heterochromatin alterations as a driver
of human aging. Science. 2015; 348(6239):1160-1163.

28.	 Jaskelioff M, Muller FL, Paik J-H, Thomas E, Jiang S,
Adams AC, Sahin E, Kost-Alimova M, Protopopov A
and Cadinanos J. Telomerase reactivation reverses tissue
degeneration in aged telomerase-deficient mice. Nature.
2011; 469(7328):102-106.

41.	 Partridge L. Intervening in ageing to prevent the diseases
of ageing. Trends in Endocrinology & Metabolism. 2014;
25(11):555-557.

29.	 Aird KM, Zhang G, Li H, Tu Z, Bitler BG, Garipov A,
Wu H, Wei Z, Wagner SN and Herlyn M. Suppression
of nucleotide metabolism underlies the establishment and
maintenance of oncogene-induced senescence. Cell reports.
2013; 3(4):1252-1265.

42.	 Preziosi P. Hydroxyurea: new insights on an old drug.
Critical Reviews in Oncology/Hematology. 1999;
3(29):249-255.
43.	 Park J-I, Jeong J-S, Han J-Y, Kim D-I, Gao Y-H, Park
S-C, Rodgers GP and Kim I-H. Hydroxyurea induces a
senescence-like change of K562 human erythroleukemia
cell. Journal of cancer research and clinical oncology. 2000;
126(8):455-460.

30.	 Di Micco R, Fumagalli M, Cicalese A, Piccinin S,
Gasparini P, Luise C, Schurra C, Nuciforo PG, Bensimon
A and Maestro R. Oncogene-induced senescence is a DNA
damage response triggered by DNA hyper-replication.
Nature. 2006; 444(7119):638-642.

44.	 Antequera D, Vargas T, Ugalde C, Spuch C, Molina JA,
Ferrer I, Bermejo-Pareja F and Carro E. Cytoplasmic
gelsolin increases mitochondrial activity and reduces
Aβ burden in a mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease.
Neurobiology of disease. 2009; 36(1):42-50.

31.	 Nardella C, Clohessy JG, Alimonti A and Pandolfi PP. Prosenescence therapy for cancer treatment. Nature Reviews
Cancer. 2011; 11(7):503-511.
32.	 Denchi EL, Attwooll C, Pasini D and Helin K. Deregulated
E2F activity induces hyperplasia and senescence-like
features in the mouse pituitary gland. Molecular and cellular
biology. 2005; 25(7):2660-2672.

45.	 Hebert-Chatelain E, Jose C, Cortes NG, Dupuy J-W, Rocher
C, Dachary-Prigent J and Letellier T. Preservation of
NADH ubiquinone-oxidoreductase activity by Src kinasemediated phosphorylation of NDUFB10. Biochimica et
Biophysica Acta (BBA)-Bioenergetics. 2012; 1817(5):718725.

33.	 Kaplon J, Zheng L, Meissl K, Chaneton B, Selivanov VA,
Mackay G, van der Burg SH, Verdegaal EM, Cascante M
and Shlomi T. A key role for mitochondrial gatekeeper
pyruvate dehydrogenase in oncogene-induced senescence.
Nature. 2013; 498(7452):109-112.

46.	 Balsa E, Marco R, Perales-Clemente E, Szklarczyk R,
Calvo E, Landázuri MO and Enríquez JA. NDUFA4 is a
subunit of complex IV of the mammalian electron transport
chain. Cell metabolism. 2012; 16(3):378-386.

34.	 Kondoh H, Lleonart ME, Gil J, Wang J, Degan P, Peters G,
Martinez D, Carnero A and Beach D. Glycolytic enzymes
can modulate cellular life span. Cancer research. 2005;
65(1):177-185.

47.	 Schlehe JS, Journel MS, Taylor KP, Amodeo KD and
LaVoie MJ. The mitochondrial disease associated protein
Ndufaf2 is dispensable for Complex-1 assembly but critical
for the regulation of oxidative stress. Neurobiology of
disease. 2013; 58:57-67.

35.	 Dörr JR, Yu Y, Milanovic M, Beuster G, Zasada C, Däbritz
JHM, Lisec J, Lenze D, Gerhardt A and Schleicher K.
Synthetic lethal metabolic targeting of cellular senescence
in cancer therapy. Nature. 2013; 501(7467):421-425.

48.	 Jonckheere AI, Renkema GH, Bras M, van den Heuvel
LP, Hoischen A, Gilissen C, Nabuurs SB, Huynen MA, de
Vries MC and Smeitink JA. A complex V ATP5A1 defect
causes fatal neonatal mitochondrial encephalopathy. Brain.
2013:awt086.

36.	 Shamma A, Takegami Y, Miki T, Kitajima S, Noda M,
Obara T, Okamoto T and Takahashi C. Rb Regulates DNA
damage response and cellular senescence through E2Fdependent suppression of N-ras isoprenylation. Cancer cell.
2009; 15(4):255-269.

49.	 Nguyen TN, Padman BS and Lazarou M. Deciphering the
Molecular Signals of PINK1/Parkin Mitophagy. Trends in
cell biology. 2016.

37.	 Ben-Porath I and Weinberg RA. The signals and pathways
activating cellular senescence. The international journal of
biochemistry & cell biology. 2005; 37(5):961-976.

50.	 Abuelezz SA, Hendawy N and Abdel Gawad S. Alleviation
of renal mitochondrial dysfunction and apoptosis underlies
the protective effect of sitagliptin in gentamicin-induced
nephrotoxicity. Journal of Pharmacy and Pharmacology.
2016; 68(4):523-532.

38.	 Sousa-Victor P, Gutarra S, García-Prat L, RodriguezUbreva J, Ortet L, Ruiz-Bonilla V, Jardí M, Ballestar E,
González S and Serrano AL. Geriatric muscle stem cells
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

7292

Oncotarget

51.	 Capasso S, Alessio N, Squillaro T, Di Bernardo G, Melone
MA, Cipollaro M, Peluso G and Galderisi U. Changes
in autophagy, proteasome activity and metabolism to
determine a specific signature for acute and chronic
senescent mesenchymal stromal cells. Oncotarget. 2015;
6:39457-39468. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.6277.

63.	 Bassing CH and Alt FW. The cellular response to general
and programmed DNA double strand breaks. DNA repair.
2004; 3(8):781-796.
64.	 Hou Y, Ouyang X, Wan R, Cheng H, Mattson MP and
Cheng A. Mitochondrial superoxide production negatively
regulates neural progenitor proliferation and cerebral
cortical development. Stem Cells. 2012; 30(11):2535-2547.

52.	 Dong CM, Wang XL, Wang GM, Zhang WJ, Zhu L, Gao
S, Yang DJ, Qin Y, Liang QJ, Chen YL, Deng HT, Ning
K, Liang AB, Gao ZL and Xu J. A stress-induced cellular
aging model with postnatal neural stem cells. Cell Death
Dis. 2014; 5:e1116.

65.	 Velarde MC, Flynn JM, Day NU, Melov S and Campisi J.
Mitochondrial oxidative stress caused by Sod2 deficiency
promotes cellular senescence and aging phenotypes in the
skin. Aging (Albany NY). 2012; 4:3-12. doi: 10.18632/
aging.100423.

53.	 Alessio N, Del Gaudio S, Capasso S, Di Bernardo G,
Cappabianca S, Cipollaro M, Peluso G and Galderisi
U. Low dose radiation induced senescence of human
mesenchymal stromal cells and impaired the autophagy
process. Oncotarget. 2015; 6:8155-8166. doi: 10.18632/
oncotarget.2692.

66.	 Wallace DC. A mitochondrial paradigm of metabolic
and degenerative diseases, aging, and cancer: a dawn for
evolutionary medicine. Annual review of genetics. 2005;
39:359.
67.	 Chipuk JE, Moldoveanu T, Llambi F, Parsons MJ and
Green DR. The BCL-2 family reunion. Molecular cell.
2010; 37(3):299-310.

54.	 Kahlem P, Dörken B and Schmitt CA. Cellular senescence
in cancer treatment: friend or foe? Journal of Clinical
Investigation. 2004; 113(2):169.

68.	 Naka K, Muraguchi T, Hoshii T and Hirao A. Regulation
of reactive oxygen species and genomic stability in
hematopoietic stem cells. Antioxidants & redox signaling.
2008; 10(11):1883-1894.

55.	 Campisi J and di Fagagna FdA. Cellular senescence: when
bad things happen to good cells. Nature reviews Molecular
cell biology. 2007; 8(9):729-740.
56.	 Adams PD. Healing and hurting: molecular mechanisms,
functions, and pathologies of cellular senescence. Molecular
cell. 2009; 36(1):2-14.

69.	 Balaban RS, Nemoto S and Finkel T. Mitochondria,
oxidants, and aging. Cell. 2005; 120(4):483-495.
70.	 Yuan H-F, Zhai C, Yan X-L, Zhao D-D, Wang J-X, Zeng
Q, Chen L, Nan X, He L-J and Li S-T. SIRT1 is required
for long-term growth of human mesenchymal stem cells.
Journal of molecular medicine. 2012; 90(4):389-400.

57.	 Ressler S, Bartkova J, Niederegger H, Bartek J, ScharffetterKochanek K, Jansen-Dürr P and Wlaschek M. p16INK4A is
a robust in vivo biomarker of cellular aging in human skin.
Aging cell. 2006; 5(5):379-389.

71.	 Chen H, Liu X, Chen H, Cao J, Zhang L, Hu X and Wang
J. Role of SIRT1 and AMPK in mesenchymal stem cells
differentiation. Ageing research reviews. 2014; 13:55-64.

58.	 Molofsky AV, Slutsky SG, Joseph NM, He S, Pardal R,
Krishnamurthy J, Sharpless NE and Morrison SJ. Increasing
p16INK4a expression decreases forebrain progenitors and
neurogenesis during ageing. Nature. 2006; 443(7110):448452.

72.	 Seita J, Ema H, Ooehara J, Yamazaki S, Tadokoro Y,
Yamasaki A, Eto K, Takaki S, Takatsu K and Nakauchi
H. Lnk negatively regulates self-renewal of hematopoietic
stem cells by modifying thrombopoietin-mediated signal
transduction. Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences of the United States of America. 2007;
104(7):2349-2354.

59.	 Dong C, Wang X, Wang G, Zhang W, Zhu L, Gao S, Yang
D, Qin Y, Liang Q and Chen Y. A stress-induced cellular
aging model with postnatal neural stem cells. Cell Death
and Disease. 2014; 5:e1116.
60.	 Freund A, Patil CK and Campisi J. p38MAPK is a novel
DNA damage response-independent regulator of the
senescence-associated secretory phenotype. The EMBO
journal. 2011; 30(8):1536-1548.

73.	 Wagner W, Horn P, Castoldi M, Diehlmann A, Bork
S, Saffrich R, Benes V, Blake J, Pfister S and Eckstein
V. Replicative senescence of mesenchymal stem cells:
a continuous and organized process. PloS one. 2008;
3(5):e2213.

61.	 Passos JF, Nelson G, Wang C, Richter T, Simillion C,
Proctor CJ, Miwa S, Olijslagers S, Hallinan J and Wipat A.
Feedback between p21 and reactive oxygen production is
necessary for cell senescence. Molecular systems biology.
2010; 6(1):347.

74.	 Pittenger MF, Mackay AM, Beck SC, Jaiswal RK, Douglas
R, Mosca JD, Moorman MA, Simonetti DW, Craig S
and Marshak DR. Multilineage potential of adult human
mesenchymal stem cells. science. 1999; 284(5411):143147.

62.	 Rossi DJ, Seita J, Czechowicz A, Bhattacharya D, Bryder
D and Weissman IL. Hematopoietic stem cell quiescence
attenuates DNA damage response and permits DNA
damage accumulation during aging. Cell cycle. 2007;
6(19):2371-2376.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

75.	 Gregory CA, Gunn WG, Peister A and Prockop DJ. An
Alizarin red-based assay of mineralization by adherent
cells in culture: comparison with cetylpyridinium chloride
extraction. Analytical biochemistry. 2004; 329(1):77-84.

7293

Oncotarget

