www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Oncotarget, 2017, Vol. 8, (No. 10), pp: 16275-16292
Research Paper

In vivo histone H1 migration from necrotic to viable tissue
Keith A. Luhrs1,6, Desmond Pink2,4, Wendy Schulte2, Andries Zijlstra2,3, John D.
Lewis2,4 and Missag H. Parseghian5,6
1

Allergan Inc., Irvine, CA, USA

2

Innovascreen Inc., Halifax, NS, Canada

3

Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, TN, USA

4

University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada

5

Rubicon Biotechnology, Lake Forest, CA, USA

6

Previous address: Peregrine Pharmaceuticals Inc., Tustin, CA, USA

Correspondence to: Missag H. Parseghian, email: mparseghian@rubiconbio.com
Correspondence to: Andries Zijlstra, email: andries.zijlstra@vanderbilt.edu
Correspondence to: John D. Lewis, email: jdlewis@ualberta.ca
Keywords: tumor microenvironment, drug delivery, histone H1, protein trafficking, necrosis
Received: January 20, 2017	

Accepted: January 25, 2017	

Published: February 07, 2017

ABSTRACT
Necrosis is induced by ischemic conditions within the core of many solid tumors.
Using fluorescent fusion proteins, we provide in vivo evidence of histone trafficking
among cancer cells in implanted tumors. In particular, the most abundant H1 isoform
(H1.2) was found to be transported from necrotic tumor cells into surrounding viable
cells where histones are selectively taken up by energy-dependent endocytosis.
We propose that intercellular histone trafficking could function as a target for drug
delivery. This concept was validated using an anti-histone antibody that was cointernalized with histones from dead cells into viable ones surrounding the necrotic
regions of a tumor, where some of the most chemoresistant cells reside. These
findings demonstrate that cellular translocation of conjugated drugs using antihistone antibodies is a promising strategy for targeted drug delivery to chemoresistant
tumors.

INTRODUCTION

the observations are a fixation artifact and that proper
experimentation requires the use of unfixed, living cells
[5]. Interestingly, several studies have demonstrated
core histone [6, 7] and linker histone [8] translocations
across liposomes and cell membranes in vitro. In intact
cells, core histones exhibit different degrees of cellular
internalization independent of ATP-driven endocytosis
(clathrin or caveoloe-mediated) or pinocytosis [6].
Moreover, studies with fluorescently-labeled H1 have
revealed that translocation is dependent on the presence
of phosphatidyl serine (PS), which causes a pronounced
increase in H1 secondary structure and its aggregation
on the membrane surface, followed by uptake either
into liposomes or cultured leukemic T-cells [8]. Despite
mounting evidence for histone translocation in vitro, it has
remained unclear whether this is a physiologically relevant
phenomenon.
Regions of significant necrosis, such as the core
or perinecrotic regions of a solid tumor, are difficult to

The classical role of histones as organizers of
genomic DNA has evolved in recent decades with the
elucidation of their function in encoding epigenetic
information. Their roles have been further expanded by
work that implicates them in sophisticated cell signaling
pathways related to diverse processes that include innate
immunity (as reviewed in [1]). For instance, release of
a specific histone H1 subtype (H1.2) from the nucleus
into the cytoplasm, the result of a DNA double-strand
break, triggers the liberation of cytochrome C from the
mitochondria, resulting in apoptosis [2]. Histones have
also been found residing in the plasma membrane and
functioning as thyroglobulin receptors on macrophages
[3] and bacterial CpG oligodeoxynucleotide receptors
on teleost natural killer cells [4]. As an expanding body
of literature describing the cell penetrating properties
of histones has been accumulating, some suggest that
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

16275

Oncotarget

treat with existing therapies due to poor targeting, uptake
and chemoresistance. We have considered the intriguing
possibility that histones released from dead cells and
translocated into surrounding living cells in vivo could
provide a viable target for delivery of antibody-drug
conjugates into a tumor’s hypoxic core and adjacent
cells. In vitro evidence supporting such a mechanism
is seen in tumor cell cultures treated with low doses of
dexamethasone and vincristine, causing partial cell death
(~25%) and a 10- to 12-fold increase in extracellular
nucleosomes (NS). This, in turn, results in a 50-fold
increase in the binding of an anti-NS (MoAb 2C5) to the
surface of the surviving tumor cells [9]. 125I-labeled NS
have been observed translocating into cultured fibroblast
cells and their internalization rate increases when bound by
anti-histone or anti-DNA antibodies [10]. In light of these
observations, we have conducted further investigations
into histone H1 migration in vitro and in vivo. We
provide evidence demonstrating histone migration and
translocation of the most abundant H1 isoform (H1.2
or H1S-1) [11] can occur in vivo, and that translocating
histones can be targeted using a well-characterized antihistone/DNA antibody.

sequences [13]. ELISAs reveal that the epitope is detected
on histone proteins in a native conformation, however, the
structure is 100-fold more accessible when the histones
bind DNA (compare the signal obtained with each histone
[H] to its own histone-DNA complex [H/D] in Figure 1E).
To counter suggestions that increased binding is due to a
non-specific electrostatic interaction between the relatively
basic human IgG1 constant region on NHS76 (pI=8.5)
and the acidic DNA phosphate backbone, we denatured
NHS76 at 90oC for 15 minutes in Tris Buffered Saline
(TBS), then cooled it on ice prior to mixing it with its
undenatured form at 50:50 and 1:10 dilutions (Figure 1F).
Denatured and undenatured NHS76 were then tested in
a dose dependent manner against an H1/DNA complex
(1:5 weight ratio) to measure the binding potency of the
antibodies. An antibody constant region that binds DNA
non-specifically should not be affected by denaturation;
however, the results show that the binding potency of
the denatured NHS76 was nil and that the 50:50 and
1:10 dilutions resulted in 56.7% and 11.5% potencies
commensurate with the amount of denatured antibody in
the cocktails. Finally, functional NHS76 detects histones in
the nucleus and the cytoplasm of cells in vitro (Figure 1G).
Co-staining with DAPI, a DNA specific dye, illustrates the
presence of NHS76 at the cell nucleus. NHS76 can also
clearly detect histones in the cytoplasm that are ready for
transport into the cell nucleus [14].
The lengthier the DNA molecule, the greater number
of histones that can bind, therefore, affinity was studied
by creating a 1 histone : 1 DNA structure. The creation of
a cruciform structure using 4 distinct strands of DNA has
been described previously [15] and was modified by the
placement of a biotin molecule at the 5’ end of one strand.
A single molecule of subtype H1.2, will bind the cruciform
4-way DNA structure and provide a well-defined entity
for binding studies [16]. Biolayer interferometry [17], a
label-free kinetic method, was used to monitor assembly
of complexes produced on streptavidin coated biosensors
(see Supplementary Figure 1 for a full description).
NHS76 antibody was found to bind DNA alone, histone
H1 alone, as well as the DNA/H1 complex. Although
direct calculation of affinity is complicated by the
complex nature of the target, data suggests the interaction
to be in the mid-nanomolar to micromolar range, which
is relatively weak. Based on observations first described
in tumors [18], a relatively weaker affinity antibody can
be advantageous in allowing deeper penetration of the
antibody into the tumor core.

RESULTS
Characterization of a novel histone/DNA targeting
antibody
To study the possibility that histones released from
dead cells could provide a viable target for delivery of
antibody-drug conjugates into surrounding living cells,
we chose a human anti-histone antibody (NHS76) that
targets an epitope which is conformationally stable
upon histone binding to DNA. NHS76 was originally
generated to target the immunoaccessible H1 histones,
yet it was found to cross-react with all 4 types of core
histones as well. To rule out NHS76 cross-reactivity
with non-histone proteins, it was tested against whole
cell extracts using western blots and found only to bind
histones (Figure 1A). NHS76 detects the same epitope
across multiple mammalian species under the denaturing
conditions of an SDS-PAGE and it is sensitive enough
to detect minor amounts of degradation in the purified
H1 samples (Figure 1B). The epitope recognized by the
NHS76 antibody is present across nine of the known
H1 subtypes [12], allowing for a single subtype to be
representative in further characterization studies (Figure
1C). The epitope was identified using deletion mutants
of subtype H1o on a western blot, revealing its presence
on the C-terminal tail (Figure 1D). The increased signal
strength with the lengthier molecules suggests the epitope
may be a repeated motif across the tail sequence, which
would place it around the S/TPKK or KPKAA repeat
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Cellular uptake of histone H1 is mediated by
energy-dependent endocytosis
Previous studies have not clearly demonstrated
whether histone uptake uses energy-driven endocytosis
or a novel translocation mechanism [6, 8]. Part of the
confusion is related to the fact that several previous studies
16276

Oncotarget

Figure 1: NHS76 specificity studies. A. Increasing quantities of whole cell extracts were probed on western blots to verify NHS76

specificity (left panel: a general protein stain known as “Fast Stain” was used to reveal all of the proteins on the blot; right panel: immunoblot
with NHS76). Bands detected correspond to the apparent molecular weights for H1 and core histones characteristically seen for these highly
basic proteins, their degradation fragments and an aggregation of histones bound to DNA that barely penetrates the top of the gel. B. NHS76
detects a common motif present in all five families and across mammalian species despite denaturation of the proteins in the SDS-PAGE
(upper panel: Fast Stain; lower panel: NHS76). C. NHS76 was tested against a panel of nine known H1 isoforms (excluding gamete
specific H1Foo and HILS1). The common H1 nomenclature systems are listed (13, 40). The epitope is detected on all nine by western
blotting (upper panel: Fast Stain; lower panel: NHS76). D. Deletion mutants of a single H1 subtype were used to localize the epitope on
the histone to the C-terminal tail proximal to the globular domain (left panel: NHS76; middle panel: Fast Stain; right panel: Schematic of
bands and corresponding H1 fragments). E. The epitope is also detected in its native conformation when probing an ELISA plate containing
H1 histones from different species and all 4 types of core histones (H columns). The epitope is accentuated with the binding of histones
to DNA (H/D columns). Results from the negative control, consisting of wells probed only with the secondary antibody, were subtracted
from the corresponding wells probed with NHS76 as detailed in the Experimental Procedures. F. Denaturation of the human antibody,
NHS76, disrupts its binding to DNA (
,
) demonstrating interaction of undenatured antibody to the H1/DNA complex ( ) is not the
result of a non-specific attraction. G. In vitro staining of fixed cells with NHS76. Antibodies were localized to the histones in the nucleus
and cytoplasm using Alexa-594 conjugated goat anti-human (red). DNA was co-localized to the nucleus with DAPI (blue). Merged images
of red nuclei and blue DAPI gives the nuclei a lavender appearance. The cytoskeletal actin was illuminated with Alexa-488 conjugated
phalloidin (green).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

16277

Oncotarget

investigated histone uptake within 1 hour of exposure,
despite evidence suggesting it takes 16 hours before serum
DNAse I and plasmin begin degrading nucleohistones in
necrotic tissues [19]. To determine the cellular uptake
mechanism for histone H1, proteins were labeled with
Alexa-488, incubated with live cells and visualized using
fluorescence microscopy over 17 hours (Figure 2A).
CHO cells incubated with Alexa-488 labeled H1 (green)
showed visible intracellular vesicle staining within 30
minutes and significant accumulation of signal over 17
hours (Figures 2A and 2C). Extracellular signals were
quenched using 0.25 mg/mL crystal violet and 0.001%
Triton X-100; concentrations that did not cause cell
permeabilization (data not shown). Very little H1 uptake
was observed when cells were incubated at 4oC compared
to 37oC (Figure 2B). After 17 hours of incubation at 37oC,
significant colocalization was seen between histone H1
and the acidic endosomal compartment, visualized using
Lysotracker Red DND-99 (Figure 2C, upper panel).
Vesicle formation due to the Alexa-488 label was ruled
out when unlabeled H1 also stimulated endosomal vesicles
as seen with Lysotracker Red (Figure 2C, lower panel).
Similar results were obtained with N87 gastric carcinoma
cells (Supplementary Figure 2A).
To confirm the uptake path of histone H1 into
acidic endosomes without the complication of signal
quenching with crystal violet and Triton X-100, the
“latent fluorophore” maleimidourea-rhodamine-110trimethyl lock (Rh110-TML) was utilized [20]. A
rhodamine derivative that can be conjugated to proteins
with a maleimide linkage, Rh110-TML is a quenched
fluorophore that is unmasked upon esterase cleavage,
as occurs in endosomes and the cytosol (Figure 3A).
Incubation of CHO cells with H1-Rh110-TML at 37oC
and 4oC confirmed that, while significant endosomal
uptake is seen at 37oC, no uptake is seen at 4oC (Figure
3B). Co-localization of the H1 to acidic endosomes was
reconfirmed using Lysotracker Red (Figure 3C). Besides
indicating that H1 is internalized via an endocytic pathway,
the lack of endosomal vesicles when using a Bovine
Serum Albumin (BSA-Rh110-TML) control suggests that
the presence of H1 may stimulate endocytosis. Similar
results were obtained with N87 gastric carcinoma cells
(Supplementary Figure 2B). To quantitate the relative
difference in histone uptake to BSA, we chose two cell
lines that adhere to the bottom of a 96-well plate, allowing
for the reading of fluorescent signal from the internalized
Rh110-TML labelled proteins (Supplementary Figure 3A).

cells (HT1080). Donor cells were created by transfecting
with a vector encoding the most abundant isoform of
H1 (H1.2 Doenecke nomenclature; H1S-1 Parseghian
nomenclature) fused to mCherry [21] and encoding
the HSV1-tk gene to allow selective induction of cell
death upon exposure to ganciclovir. Untransfected
target cells were labeled with Cell Tracker Blue CMHC
(Invitrogen) (Figure 4). In this system, red-fluorescent
H1-mCherry/HSV1-tk expressing donor cells and viable
blue target cells can be positively identified in co-culture
(Figures 4A and 4B). Upon induction of cell death with
ganciclovir, mCherry H1.2 from dead and dying donor
cells was observed being taken up by blue-fluorescent
target cells (Figures 4C and 4D). For the subsequent in
vivo experiments, three stable transfectants were then
created: 1) “inducible death” donor cells expressing
mCherry-H1.2 and HSV1-tk, 2) inducible death control
donor cells, referred to as “mCherry-Empty” expressing
only mCherry and HSV1-tk, and 3) target cells expressing
Green Fluorescent Protein (GFP). A panel of stable
transfectants was created for each of the following tumor
lines: HT1080, MDA-MB-231, and MDA-MB-435.
To test whether H1 migration occurs in vivo, human
tumor xenografts were established on the chorioallantoic
membrane (CAM) of ex ovo chicken embryos [22]. Easily
accessible for experimental manipulation, the CAM is a
highly vascularized extraembryonic membrane connected
to the chick embryo through a continuous circulatory
system. Implantation of xenograft human tumors on
the membrane of ex ovo embryos permits real-time
visualization of intratumoral dynamics [22]. Tumors for
our in vivo system were generated from a 1:1 mixture
of cells expressing either mCherry-H1.2 or un-fused
mCherry with cells expressing cytoplasmic GFP (Figures
5A and 5B, respectively). Tumors were heterogeneous
with apparent spheroid masses, and areas of probable
necrosis were seen (Figure 5C). Tumors consisting of a
single cell type or as mixtures were compared by weight
to determine if expression of any particular transfectant
had an impact on tumor growth. No significant difference
in tumor mass was observed (Figure 5D). To locate nontumor cells in vivo, particularly endothelial cells, DAPI
was intravenously injected near the tumors prior to
imaging (Figure 5E).
Tumors with visible areas of necrosis were
harvested, fixed, frozen and sectioned for microscopy
followed by DAPI staining to visualize all nuclei. In the
tumors generated from a 1:1 mix of mCherry-Empty
and GFP cells, the unfused mCherry expressing cells
appeared intact and viable with the fluorescence restricted
only to these cells (Figure 5F). In tumors created from
a 1:1 mix of mCherry-H1.2 and GFP cells, distinct
areas of mCherry-H1.2 signal were observed within
the cells expressing GFP (Figures 5G-5K). Fluorescent
mCherry-H1.2 could be seen in both the cytoplasm and in
the nuclei of the GFP-expressing target cells (Figure 5G).

Histone H1.2 migration and translocation occurs
in vivo
To test the concept of H1 migration from necrotic
cells to viable ones in the tumor microenvironment, we
created a model in vitro system using human fibrosarcoma
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

16278

Oncotarget

Figure 2: Live Cell Imaging of H1 Uptake by Endocytosis. A. Live, unfixed, non-permeabilized CHO cells were incubated with

Alexa-488 labeled H1 (5 µg/ml) at 37oC and visually tracked over 6 hours. Before imaging, cells were incubated with DAPI at a high
enough concentration (10 µg/ml) to stain nuclei within intact cells. Endosomal vesicles were observed in all 4 repetitions of this study. B.
CHO cells were incubated for 3 hours with Alexa-488 H1 (10 µg/ml) at 37oC or 4oC. Vesicle formation can be seen in the 37oC cells while
the 4oC cells exhibit a dim peripheral staining. C. Cells incubated with Alexa-488 or unlabeled H1 (10 µg/ml) at 37oC for 17 hours were
further stained, during the last 30 minutes prior to microscopy, with 50 nM Lysotracker Red and 100 µg/ml Hoechst 33258, a cell permeable
DNA stain.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

16279

Oncotarget

Figure 3: Confirmation of uptake using a latent fluorophore. A. Upon cellular internalization, ester hydrolysis of the Rh110-

TML releases the trimethyl lock moiety through nucleophilic reactions (black arrows) and unmasks rhodamine fluorescence. B. CHO cells
were incubated for 3 hours with H1-Rh110-TML (10 µg/ml) at 37oC or 4oC. Vesicle formation can be seen in the 37oC cells. The 4oC cells
lacked any discernible staining so a focused image was not obtained. C. Rh110-TML-labeled BSA or histone H1 (both 10 µg/ml) were
incubated with CHO cells for 17 h. During the final 30 min, 50 nM LysoTracker Red and 100 µg/ml Hoechst 33258 were added. Images
were taken of live, unfixed cells. Endosomal vesicles were observed with H1-Rh110-TML in all 3 repetitions of this study. Exposure times
and image processing were identical for each image.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

16280

Oncotarget

in vivo suggests that they could provide a viable target
for delivery of antibody-drug conjugates into a tumor’s
hypoxic core. To demonstrate co-internalization of antihistone antibodies with their antigenic targets into cells,
the latent fluorophore Rh110-TML was conjugated to
NHS76. Internalization of labeled NHS76 is shown in
figure 6A. Since the NHS76 antibody has an IgG1 constant
region and a lambda light chain, a polyclonal mix of
human IgG1/lambda was labeled with Rh110-TML as a
control for internalization of non-specific antibody, which
did not occur (Figure 6B). For most of these experiments,
the antibodies were labeled with Rh110-TML and the
histones unlabeled, with the exception of the positive

The presence of mCherry-H1.2 on the surface of multiple
GFP cells suggests that the histones are widely dispersed
when necrosis leads to chromatin release (Figure 5H). The
presence of mCherry-H1.2 in the interior of GFP cells was
confirmed by 3D confocal analyses in Figure 5I, 5J, and
5K.

Translocating histones can be targeted in vivo
using NHS76
Our observation that histones are released from
dead cells and translocated into surrounding living cells

Figure 4: In vitro histone migration from necrotic cells to viable ones. A. To model the perinecrotic region of a tumor, HT1080

donor cells expressing red-fluorescent histone (mCherry-H1.2) and a suicide gene (HSV1-tk) are plated alongside target cells labeled
with 100 µM CMHC blue fluorescent tracer. CMHC penetrates viable cells and is converted into a cell-impermeant form; hence, it can
be passed to daughter cells through several generations but does not diffuse into surrounding donor cells. B. Viable donor and target cells
before selective induction of donor cell death. mCherry-H1.2 localizes in the nucleus, whereas CMHC is in the whole cell. C. Histones are
internalized by target cells in the vicinity of a dying donor cell after induction of donor cell death with 50µM ganciclovir. Red vesicles in
blue cells were lacking in tissue cultures not incubated with ganciclovir (data not shown). D. More viable target cells possessing histones
from necrotic donor cells.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

16281

Oncotarget

Figure 5: In vivo histone migration from necrotic cells to viable ones. A. Mixtures of mCherry-H1.2 donor cells and GFP target

cells exhibit green colored tumors with punctate red spots indicative of red nuclei from the MDA-MB-435 donor cells. B. Mixtures of
mCherry-Empty donors with GFP targets produced a brownish tumor due to the diffuse distribution of mCherry and GFP in the cytoplasm
of their respective cells. C. Section of a spheroid mass formed by GFP-expressing MDA-MB-435 cells reveals a significant amount of
necrosis (N) within these tumors grown on the CAM. The chicken vasculature (V) was visualized with Alexa-Fluor 750 labeled cowpea
mosaic virus (CPMV-AF750 in red; (41)) and reveals penetration of blood vessels into the tumor mass (bar = 260 µm). D. Distribution of
masses for tumors consisting of mCherry-Empty expressing cells (Empty), mCherry-H1.2 expressing cells (H1.2), GFP expressing cells
(GFP), 1:1 mixtures of GFP and mCherry-Empty, or 1:1 mixtures of GFP and mCherry-H1.2. E. Merged (left panel) and fluorophorespecific images (GFP, mCherry and DAPI from top to bottom on right panels) of MDA-MB-435 tumor section stained with DAPI (with
ProLong® Gold antifade) to reveal all intact nuclei including non-tumor cells. Merged images of red mCherry-H1.2 nuclei and blue DAPI
gives those nuclei a lavender appearance. F. Wide field image from 1:1 mix of mCherry-Empty:GFP tumor with magnification of two
regions (bar = 100 µm). Left panel, merged wide field image; top right panels, magnification of boxed region populated with viable tumor
cells; bottom right panels, magnification of region without tumor. Fluorophore-specific images (top: GFP, mCherry and DAPI; bottom:
GFP and DAPI) on the right and far right panels are false color and gray-scale images, respectively. G. Wide field image from 1:1 mix of
mCherry-H1.2 : GFP tumor (bars = 100 µm). Left panel, merged wide field image; middle panels, fluorophore-specific images of boxed
region; right panel, magnification of boxed region revealing mCherry-H1.2 signal in GFP cells, including the cytoplasm (arrowhead) and
nuclei (double arrowhead). H. Another example. Same legend as (G). I. Confocal image of 10µm tumor section. mCherry-H1.2 signal
is seen in the cytoplasm of GFP cells (arrows). J. Confocal image of another 10µm tumor section viewed from three angles confirms
mCherry-H1.2 signal in cytoplasm of GFP cells (circled) [XY (top right panel) XZ (bottom) and YZ (left) views]. K. Three-dimensional
confocal image of another 10 µm tumor section revealing mCherry-H1.2 signal in the GFP cytoplasm (arrow).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

16282

Oncotarget

DISCUSSION

control, in which H1-Rh110-TML was used to verify the
internalization process (data not shown). Anti-histone
internalization was successfully demonstrated in vitro
using CHO cells as well as tumor cell lines (HT1080,
MDA-MB-231, Supplementary Figure 3B). Washing the
cells with Hanks’ Balanced Salt solution (HBSS) buffer
3 times prior to antibody incubation (~933 nM) inhibited
NHS76 internalization compared to unwashed cells, as did
supplementation of the incubation buffer with excess H1.
Light trypsinization of cells prior to antibody incubation
greatly reduced NHS76 entry (data not shown). Trypsin
hydrolyses proteins at their lysine or arginine residues.
Histones are lysine and arginine-rich and thus are likely
to be susceptible to trypsin proteolysis. Translocation of
NHS76 into cells (Figure 6A) combined with the lack
of any signal from a polyclonal mix of human IgG1/
lambda antibodies (Figure 6B), indicates internalization
is incumbent upon antibody specificity, that is the binding
to histone or histone/DNA on the cellular surface, and not
due to antibody interactions with alternate targets on the
plasma membrane. To quantitate the relative difference in
uptake, we again chose adherent cell lines for the reading
of fluorescent signal from the internalized Rh110-TML
labelled proteins (Supplementary Figure 3B).
Tumors were generated on chick embryo CAMs
by topically applying a 1:1 mixture of MDA-MB-435
stable transfectants expressing mCherry-H1.2 or GFP.
Tumors were grown until areas of necrosis were clearly
visible, and then antibody was intravenously injected
24 hours prior to harvesting, fixing, embedding in OCT
and sectioning for microscopy. Extensive distribution of
NHS76 was observed in regions of necrotic nucleohistone
debris as well as among adjacent viable tumor cells
(Figures 6C and 6D). To localize NHS76 internalization
in surrounding cells, immunolocalization was investigated
either using two layers of secondary antibodies to amplify
the signal (rabbit anti-human IgG followed by goat
anti-rabbit conjugated to Alexa-750; Figures 6C and
6D) or using a goat anti-human secondary conjugated
to quantum dots (655 nm) (Figure 6E). Injection of the
negative control, tefibazumab, a humanized IgG1 targeting
Staphylococcus aureus (Figure 6F and 6G), did not reveal
significant localization in tumors. Even the vasculature,
which was stained by injecting the lectin Lens culinaris
agglutinin-A (LCA) 30 minutes prior to harvesting of
the tumors, followed by staining of the tissue sections
with a secondary antibody, goat anti-LCA conjugated to
Alexa-647, was bereft of control antibody (Figure 6F). As
a further control, injection of PBS and incubation of tissue
sections with secondary antibody alone did not reveal
any significant cross-reaction with cells (Figure 6H). In
summary, these data demonstrate that the anti-histone
antibody NHS76 accumulates in necrotic tumor tissue and
the adjacent viable tumor, and that histones internalized
by viable tumor cells in vivo are targeted by this antibody
after intravenous injection.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

The necrotic regions of a tumor represent the most
difficult to treat by conventional approaches such as
radiation or chemotherapy due to resistance mediated by
chronic hypoxia and impaired blood flow. Necrosis is an
important disease target due to the prevalence of necrotic
cell death in growing solid tumors and its contribution
to the tumor microenvironment once a tumor is >4 mm
in diameter [23]. The slow clearance of necrotic debris
from this environment [19] makes it a useful target for
antibody directed delivery of conjugated drugs to regions
of hypoxia, where selection pressures help create highly
resistant tumor cells. Two decades ago, researchers
demonstrated that antibody penetration into the necrotic
core of large solid tumors is feasible [24]. This was
later found to be particularly true when the antibody
has a weaker affinity for its target [18]. Here we present
evidence that targeting histones may provide an attractive
approach for drug delivery into cells located in these most
difficult to treat areas.
To fully evaluate this approach, we had to clarify
whether H1 translocation requires ATP energy-dependent
endocytosis [25] or an independent process with a
unique mechanism of internalization. If H1 translocation
were energy-independent, then these proteins, and any
antibodies targeting them, could passively diffuse into
surrounding cells, including those cells with depleted
ATP levels that are already on the verge of dying. An
energy-dependent histone translocation process is
advantageous for targeting viable tumor cells, particularly
ones thriving in the hypoxic core of a tumor and utilizing
ATP for endosomal internalization. Endocytosis can be
blocked at low temperatures [26], which was the case
when comparing H1 translocation at 37oC to 4oC using
H1 labeled either with Alexa-488 (Figure 2B) or Rh110TML (Figure 3B). Visually, H1 internalization involved
vesicle formation (Figure 2A) regardless if the cell
line is tumorigenic (N87) or not (CHO). Lysotracker
Red DND-99 colocalization confirmed the H1 vesicles
are acidic endosomes (Figures 2C and 3C). These
results appear to contradict data from the Loyter lab
suggesting histones translocate into cells independent of
endocytosis or pinocytosis, however, their data focused
on each of the core histones and not histone H1 [6]. We
do not discount their observations showing evidence
of histone internalization even when cultured cells are
incubated with colchicine or cytochalasin D (known to
inhibit microtubule function), nocodazole (known to
depolymerize microtubules), nystatin (known to disrupt
caveoloe formation) or sucrose (known to disrupt clathrin
formation), or even at 4oC [6]. In fact, the Loyter lab
has demonstrated core histone translocation into lipid
bilayers lacking any endosomal machinery [7] and the
Kinnunen lab has done the same for linker histones [8].
Our observations suggest that H1 internalization is largely
16283

Oncotarget

Figure 6: In vivo antibody migration from necrotic cells to viable ones. A. HT1080 cells were incubated for 6 hours with

NHS76-Rh110-TML (~933 nM) at 37oC in a 5% CO2 incubator. Vesicle formation correlates to ester hydrolysis of the Rh110-TML and
unmasking of fluorescence upon cellular internalization. B. No signal was discernible using a polyclonal mix of human IgG1 / lambda
antibodies (~933 nM). DAPI staining (10 µg/ml) provided dim staining of the nuclei within viable cells and bright illumination within
dead ones, hence, allowing us to differentiate the two and focus on cells with dimly stained nuclei. Exposure times and image processing
were identical for both figures. C. Merged images of tumor cells (left panel: GFP, mCherry and DAPI) and NHS76 antibody (middle
panel) reveals distribution of NHS76 in viable tumor (T) as well as necrotic regions (N) of cellular debris (right panel). NHS76 was
detected using a 2-step approach of rabbit anti-human IgG (5 µg/mL) followed by goat anti-rabbit conjugated to Alexa-750 (1 µg/mL).
Before imaging, cells were incubated with DAPI (with ProLong® Gold antifade) to reveal all intact nuclei including non-tumor cells.
Merged images of red mCherry-H1.2 nuclei and blue DAPI gives those nuclei a lavender appearance (bars = 90 µm). D. Another example
of NHS76 distribution among viable tumor cells. Same legend as (C). E. NHS76 internalization (arrowhead) is shown using a goat antihuman secondary conjugated to a quantum dot (655 nm) in the merged image (upper panel; bar = 100 µm; star used for image alignment)
generated from the fluorophore-specific images for GFP, mCherry, DAPI and NHS76 (lower panels). F. Merged images of tumor cells
and vasculature (left panel: GFP, mCherry, DAPI and LCA [arrowheads]) and the control antibody tefibazumab (middle panel) show no
detectable distribution within the tumor microenvironment (right panel). Secondary antibody and DAPI details same as (C); bars = 90 µm.
G. Internalization is not seen with tefibazumab either in the merged image (upper panel; bar = 100 µm; star used for image alignment) or
the fluorophore-specific images (lower panels). H. Lack of secondary antibody crossreactivity was verified by injecting PBS rather than
antibody and subsequently tissue staining with rabbit anti-human IgG followed by goat anti-rabbit conjugated to Alexa-750 (bars = 90 µm).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

16284

Oncotarget

driven by energy-dependent endocytosis, however, we
are open to the idea that an alternative translocation
mechanism also operates, albeit at a much lower rate, in
cell culture conditions, perhaps even in vivo, but that has
not been proven.
The most abundant isoform of H1 was chosen for
our tracking study. Not only is it one of two subtypes
critical for the functioning of a mammalian cell [12], it
also signals the liberation of cytochrome C from the
mitochondria during apoptosis in response to a DNA
double-strand break [2]. Unlike earlier studies tracking
exogenous histones applied to a culture of cells, we
wanted to track endogenous histone migration in vivo by
fusing the mCherry protein to the N-terminus of H1.2.
H1-fluorescent protein fusions do not appear to perturb
chromatin function in vivo [27], however, the C-tail is
critical to H1 function so mCherry was fused to the N-tail
[28]. Co-transfection of the HSV1-tk “suicide” gene
allowed for controlled destruction of labeled H1 cells
and the ability to track their histone content to cells not
expressing mCherry-H1.2. The creation of these cells also
allowed us a backup plan in the event sufficient necrosis
did not occur naturally in the tumor microenvironment
to allow tracking of mCherry-H1.2 migration from
necrotic to viable cells. Upon in vitro validation (Figure
4), stable transfectants expressing mCherry-H1.2 or
mCherry protein alone (“mCherry-Empty”) were mixed
with GFP expressing cells and implanted as a polyclonal
colony on a living CAM. Evaluation of tumor masses
showed no significant difference whether the tumors
were monoclonal or polyclonal in origin suggesting
no inhibition of cellular activity due to expression
of the fluorescent proteins (Figures 5A-5D). The use
of mCherry-Empty cells provided a critical control
showing the mCherry protein was not found in viable
GFP-expressing tumor cells or CAM cells either due to
fixation artifacts or any endosomal translocation process
(Figure 5F). In contrast, mCherry-H1.2 translocation is
documented with epifluorescent and confocal microscopy,
revealing a dispersion pattern for H1 that is not focused in
any one direction (Figures 5G-5K). We refer to this area
surrounding the necrotic cell as the histone “blast zone”
where histones and any molecules attached to them (e.g.
DNA or antibodies) may be co-transported into a viable
cell. Transfer of histones from donor cells to surrounding
CAM cells could not be ruled out, and is likely to occur,
however, the majority of necrotic cells in our tumor
sections were surrounded by other tumor cells.
Anti-histone antibodies have been available to
researchers for decades, largely derived from autoimmune diseases expressed in rodents and humans.
Given the origins of these reagents, they are not always
well-characterized and may exhibit cross-reactivity. Here
we used an anti-H1/DNA derived from a human library
screening [29] and provided the necessary characterization
to show its specificity for a histone epitope that is
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

accentuated upon binding to DNA (Figures 1). Naturally
occurring autoimmune antibodies tend to target only
a few epitopes on H1 despite the possible diversity of
structures one would expect to find given the random
structure of the histone tails [30]. The monoclonal NHS76
targets one of these epitopes, hence, providing a good
homologue for many naturally occurring auto-antibodies.
The role of naturally occurring anti-nuclear antibodies,
including anti-histone or anti-nucleosomal ones, in aging
individuals has been the topic of speculation recently with
the proposal put forth that these molecules help combat
cancer at a time when the immune system may be less
vigilant [31, 32]. Affinity to the epitope is in the midnanomolar to micromolar range (Supplementary Figure
1); an advantage for diffusion of antibodies into the tumor
core and interstitial spaces, although a smaller fraction of
histones on the cell surface may be bound by NHS76 due
to its weaker interaction strength [18].
Prior to in vivo testing, we verified NHS76
internalization in vitro using Rh110-TML labeled
molecules (Figure 6A). Lack of signal using a polyclonal
mix of human IgG1 / lambda indicates NHS76
internalization is not due to a general antibody receptor
on the cell surface (Figure 6B). Excess H1 added to the
incubation buffer inhibited translocation, as did light
trypsinization of cells prior to NHS76 addition (data
not shown). These results strongly suggest histones are
a mediator of NHS76 internalization. The ability of H1
histones to mediate translocation of other proteins (e.g.
thyroglobulin in cultured J774 macrophages [3]) and
a variety of nucleic acids (e.g. [33]) has already been
demonstrated in cell culture. The ability of histones to
translocate anti-nucleosomal antibodies has also been
demonstrated in culture [34]. Anti-nucleosomes were
increasingly localized in cytoplasmic vesicles over the
course of an 18 hour study, similar to what we saw with
H1 (Figures 2). Whether this can occur in vivo is an open
question. Readers versed in the autoimmune literature
may think translocation of these types of antibodies has
been well proven, however this work has largely been
done in cell culture (e.g. [35]) while papers purporting to
observe antibody translocations in vivo all the way into the
nucleus turned out to be fixation artifacts [34]. A single
electron micrograph illustrating vesicular translocation
of a natural anti-nucleosomal antibody into mouse
kidney cells is all that we are aware of as in vivo proof
(Figure 5 in [34]). That study involved injection of antinucleosome producing hybridomas into mice to simulate
an autoimmune condition. We have shown that antihistones not only bind extracellular chromatin in regions
of tumor necrosis (Figure 6C), they bind to viable cells
(Figure 6D) and internalize (Figure 6E). The implications
of anti-histone internalization in vivo are far reaching.
This phenomenon may be responsible for the lower cancer
mortality rates noted in some autoimmune patients [36,
37]. Aging individuals can have elevated anti-nucleosomal
16285

Oncotarget

antibodies without signs of overt disease; with some of
these antibodies able to selectively bind tumors rather
than normal cells (e.g. MoAb 2C5 [31]). This has led to
speculation that these non-pathogenic antibodies help
compensate for other deteriorating immune responses to
tumors in the aged [32]. While some suggest inducing
autoimmune disease may help a patient fight cancer [38],
we prefer using specific antibodies, such as NHS76, for
intracellular delivery of conjugated drugs.
The implications of histone internalization in
vivo are just as far reaching. While we have verified its
occurrence in the tumor microenvironment, we know little
about the physiological effects of histone release on viable
tumor cells in the blast zone. If observations regarding
another nuclear protein, HMGB1/amphoterin, are any
guide, effects would not be implausible. During necrosis,
HMGB1 diffuses out of necrotic cells and is known to
interact with at least one cell membrane receptor, known
as RAGE, as well as function as a cytokine mediator of
inflammation (reviewed in [39]). Ample evidence of
histones as agents of cell signaling and innate immunity
[1] compels us to investigate similar roles for these
proteins in the tumor microenvironment. Finally, it should
be noted that some researchers use recombinant H1s to
improve nucleic acid transfections of cultured cells (e.g.
[33]). We have provided in vivo evidence of histone
translocations into viable cells while others have provided
evidence of histone/DNA (nucleosomal) internalization
in vitro [10], however, the question remains for further
investigation whether there are any physiological effects
from the co-migration of DNA into viable tumor cells,
particularly if that DNA contains genes responsible for
further tumorigenesis.

and Alexa-Fluor 594 C5 maleimide (Cat. # A10256) ,
Lysotracker Red DND-99 (Cat. # L7528), Cell Tracker
Blue CMHC (4-Chloromethyl-7-Hydroxycoumarin;
Cat. # C2111) and trypsin (TrypLE™ Express, Cat. #
12604) were all purchased from Invitrogen. Calcein
AM (Cat. # C3099) was from Life Technologies. Traut’s
reagent (2-iminothiolane) was purchased from Thermo
Scientific (Cat. # 26101). SPDP (N-Succinimidyl
3-(2-pyridyldithio)-propionate) was purchased from
Thermo Scientific (Cat. # 21857). Maleimidourearhodamine-110-trimethyl lock (Rh110-TML) was
purchased from Dr. Ronald Raines (Univ. of Wisconsin).

In vitro internalization studies and microscopy
For the in vitro studies, Chinese Hamster Ovary
(CHO) fibroblast cells were grown in Ham’s F-12 media
with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS). N87 cells were grown
in RPMI with 10% FBS. HT1080, MDA-MB-231 and
MDA-MB-435 cells were grown in DMEM with 10%
FBS.
Conjugation of Alexa Fluor-488 to H1 using
a succinimidyl ester occurred per manufacturer’s
instructions (Invitrogen Cat. # A20100). CHO fibroblast
cells or N87 gastric carcinoma cells (ATCC, Manassas,
VA) were grown on 8-well culture slides (Corning Cat.
# 354108) incubated in a humidified 5% carbon dioxide
(CO2) atmosphere set at 37oC. Wells were seeded
with ~35,000 cells suspended in 0.2 mL media. Upon
adherence, cells were incubated with 5 µg/mL H1-Alexa
Fluor-488 in media at 37oC for 0, 10, 30, 180 or 360
minutes. Before imaging, cells were rinsed with HBSS
and incubated for 1.5 hours at 37oC and 5% CO2 with
DAPI in HBSS at a high enough concentration (10 µg/
ml) to allow for sufficient accumulation of DAPI within
intact cells and diffusion to the nucleus. The cells were
then incubated with buffer containing 0.25 mg/mL
crystal violet and 0.001% Triton X-100 to quench any
extracellular fluorescence prior to imaging.
Those cells stained with Lysotracker Red DND-99
were treated as above, however, they were incubated with
10 µg/ml H1-Alexa Fluor-488 in media for 17 hours at
37oC in a 5% CO2 incubator. Cell were then incubated
with 50 nM Lysotracker Red DND-99 (Invitrogen Cat. #
L7528) and 100 µg/ml Hoechst 33258 for 30 minutes at
37oC in a 5% CO2 incubator. The cells were then incubated
with buffer containing 0.25 mg/mL crystal violet and
0.001% Triton X-100 to quench any extracellular
fluorescence prior to imaging.
To investigate if H1 internalization is an energydependent process, CHO cells were plated at ~35,000/
well in 8-well culture slides and incubated in a 5% CO2
atmosphere set at 37oC until the cells adhered to the slide.
Cells were then incubated with 10 µg/mL H1-Alexa
Fluor-488 in media either at 37oC or on ice (4oC) for 3
hours in a 5% CO2 incubator. Cells were quickly removed

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Reagents
Crystal violet (Cat. # 61135), Triton X-100
(Cat. # X100), Ganciclovir (Cat. # G2536), DAPI
(Cat. # D9542), Hoechst 33258 (Cat. # B1155), DMF
(N,N-Dimethylformamide; Cat. # 319937), DMSO
(Dimethyl sulfoxide; Cat. # 472301), the cell culture
media and buffers were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich.
Chromatographically purified human IgG1 lambda (Cat.
# 02-7102) was purchased from Zymed. Bovine H1
(from thymus; Cat. # 11 004 875 001) and serum albumin
(Fraction V, protease free; Cat. # 03 117 332 001) were
purchased from Roche. All other H1s were purified by
Dr. Missag Parseghian. NHS76, a fully human IgG1,
was produced at Peregrine Pharmaceuticals, Inc. (Tustin,
CA). Tefibazumab, tradename Aurexis, was a kind gift
from Inhibitex. All proteins were stored at 2-8oC until
use. Alexa-Fluor 488 succinimidyl ester (Cat. # A20100)
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

16286

Oncotarget

from the incubator, rinsed with HBSS, and photographed.
Conjugation of Rh110-TMLto H1, BSA, NHS76 or
Human IgG1 used the maleimide linkage integral to the
molecule. Briefly, proteins were reduced under nitrogen
with a 10-fold molar excess of 2 mg/mL 2-iminothiolane
(2-IT) dissolved in dimethylformamide (DMF) for 2
hours before having the reaction stopped with a 10-fold
molar excess of glycine for every mole of 2-IT. Samples
were desalted on a Sephadex G-25 10/300 column with a
flow rate of 2 mL/min using PBS buffer. The sulfhydrylmodified proteins were eluted and resuspended in a 5%
DMF solution prior to incubation with a 10-fold molar
excess of Rh110-TML (10 mg/mL in DMF) under nitrogen
at 4oC for at least 16 hours. Samples were spun at 21,000
g for 5 minutes to remove insoluble material. Samples
were then concentrated to about 1 mL in Ultraspin 15R
centrifugal concentrators (Millipore). Concentrated
proteins were buffer exchanged into a storage solution of
150 mM NaCl, 10 mM acetate (pH 5) and kept at 4oC
until use.
Studies involving Rh110-TML labeled molecules
(Figure 3B, 3C, 6A and 6B) also had cells plated into
8-well culture slides at ~35,000/well and incubated at
37oC in a 5% CO2 incubator until they adhered. Cells were
then incubated with 10 µg/ml of the Rh110-TML labelled
protein in media at 37 oC for the studies in Figures 3 and
6, except the temperature dependence study where some
cells were incubated on ice (4 oC) as described above.
Incubations with DAPI (10 µg/ml) and Lysotracker Red
DND-99 (50 mM) were done as described above. Only
internalized molecules release a signal from the latent
fluorophore, therefore, no quenching with crystal violet
and 0.001% Triton X-100 was done for the experiments
using Rh110-TML labelled proteins.
Studies to evaluate whether H1 mediates antibody
internalization also required cells (~35,000/well) to be
plated into 8-well culture slides and incubated at 37oC
in a 5% CO2 incubator until they adhered. For the wash
studies, cells were rinsed 3X with 400 µL of HBSS and
replaced with 200 µL of fresh media containing 210 µg/
ml of NHS76-Rh110-TML or Human IgG1-Rh110-TML
(~933 nM). These cells, along with ones that were not
washed prior to antibody incubation, were photographed
6 hours later and compared to see if the washed cells had
less signal compared to the unwashed cells. For the H1
competition study, exogenous H1 and DNA, at a 1:5 ratio,
was supplemented to the media and the cells plated into
wells at ~70,000/well. After overnight incubation at 37oC
in a 5% CO2 incubator allowed for adherence, cells were
incubated with 300 µL of fresh media containing 140
µg/ml of NHS76-Rh110-TML or Human IgG1-Rh110TML (~933 mM) for 6 hours at 37oC and 5% CO2. Cells
were then imaged to see if excess H1 competed with the
antigens targeted on the cell surface by NHS76-Rh110TML. Finally, for the trypsinization study, ~35,000 cells/
well were plated into 8-well culture slides and incubated
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

at 37oC in a 5% CO2 incubator until they adhered. Cells
were then rinsed 3X with 400 µL of HBSS, incubated with
trypsin (TrypLE™ Express, Invitrogen) for 2 minutes,
rinsed 3X with 400 µL of HBSS again, and incubated for
3 hours with 200 µL of fresh media containing 210 µg/
ml of NHS76-Rh110-TML or Human IgG1-Rh110-TML
(~933 nM). After 3 hours, the cells were washed 3X with
400 µL of HBSS to remove traces of antibody that had
not internalized and then incubated for another 3 hours
in 200 µL of fresh media prior to imaging to determine if
trypsinization inhibited NHS76-Rh110-TML uptake into
the cells.
Quantitation of cellular uptake for the Rh110-TML
labelled molecules, involved having cells cultured in 96well plates at ~13,000/well and incubated at 37oC in a
5% CO2 incubator until they adhered. For Supplementary
Figure 3A, cells were next incubated with a 1:2 serial
dilution in cell culture media of Rh110-TML-H1.2 or
Rh110-TML-BSA starting at a concentration of 10 µg/
ml down to 156 ng/mL, in triplicate. For Supplementary
Figure 3B, cells were incubated with a 1:2 serial dilution
in cell culture media of NHS76-Rh110-TML or Human
IgG1-Rh110-TML starting at a concentration of 150 µg/ml
down to 2.3 µg/ml, in triplicate. Each well had a total final
volume of 150 µL. Cells were incubated at 37oC in a 5%
CO2 incubator overnight and then rinsed 2X with HBSS
prior to reading in a spectrophotometer using excitation,
emission and cut-off wavelengths of Ex = 464 nm, Em =
530 nm, cut-off = 475 nm.
Pictures were captured using a Reflected
Fluorescence System with a CKX41 inverted microscope,
oil immersion objective lens (100x) (all from Olympus),
and a temperature controlled digital CCD camera mounted
on top (ORCA-100 from Hamamatsu). The same exposure
(75-100 msec) was used for all DAPI stained cells and
exposure times were also kept consistent for Alexa
Fluor-488 (100 msec) or Rh110-TML (800 msec) and
Lysotracker Red (400 msec) photographs . Images were
stored in a 16-bit grayscale format and then analyzed,
colored and merged using Image J.

Construction of cell Lines and in vitro migration
study
HT1080, MDA-MB-231, and MDA-MB-435 cell
lines were transfected with plasmids either bearing Green
Fluorescent Protein (GFP), mCherry or mCherry-H1.2
using Lipofectamine 2000 (Invitrogen Cat. # 11668) per
manufacturer’s instructions. Plasmids were constructed
with well established recombinant techniques (42). Vectors
included a pUC origin for amplification in E. coli (DH5α)
and an SV40 origin for replication in mammalian cells.
The plasmids also included a CMV promoter 5’ to the
mCherry protein, the mCherry-H1.2 fusion and the GFP.
Plasmids were also created carrying the HSV1-tk coding
16287

Oncotarget

sequence and its own CMV promoter 3’ of the fluorescent
proteins and their H1 fusion sequences. Selection was
conducted using a gene for neomycin resistance.
For the study in Figure 4, 1) HT1080 cells
transiently transfected and expressing mCherry-H1.2 and
HSV1-tk were cultured until they reached an exponential
growth phase. 2) HT1080 cells transiently transfected and
expressing mCherry-H1.2 without HSV1-tk were used as
controls. 3) Untransfected HT1080s were grown in culture
and then rinsed 3X with HBSS prior to incubation with
CMHC (Invitrogen) in serum-free media at 37oC in a 5%
CO2 incubator. After 30 minutes, the CMHC stained cells
were rinsed 3X with serum-free media and then incubated
in phenol red-free media at 37oC and 5% CO2 until their
use in the experiment. Visual inspection with a microscope
found those cells stained with 100 µM CMHC were bright
enough for our study. Mixtures of CMHC stained “target”
and mCherry-H1.2 and HSV1-tk expressing “donor” cells
(15,000/well) were plated on to 8-well culture slides in
two ratios, 50% donor : 50% target or 90% donor : 10
% target. To this 250 µL solution was added 50 µL of
300 µM ganciclovir, for a final concentration of 50 µM
in 300 µL. Cells were allowed to adhere and grow in
phenol red-free media overnight and then observed by
microscopy. Mixtures of CMHC stained “target” and
mCherry-H1.2 expressing “donor” cells without HSV1-tk
were also cultured in the same manner as experimental
controls. Another set of controls were also run, both sets of
mixtures were cultured in the absence of ganciclovir with
50 µL more of phenol red-free media being added instead
of ganciclovir to bring the final volume of media in each
well to 300 µL.

30 minutes at 37oC (41). The tumors were then harvested,
fixed for 2 hours in a PBS solution containing 4%
formalin, 10% sucrose and then embedded in OCT for 24
hours at -80oC (43). Tumors were then prepared for slides
by sectioning (10 µm).
For the antibody migration studies in Figure 6,
on day 17, twenty embryos each had 5 µg of NHS76
or tefibazumab intravenously injected into the CAM
circulatory system in a volume of 50 µL. On day 18, tumor
bearing CAMs from each group were split into two subgroups. Ten of the embryos from each group were prepared
for hematoxylin and eosin staining as described above
(data not shown). The remaining ten embryos from each
group were injected with a PBS solution containing 12.5
µg of unconjugated Lens culinaris agglutinin-A (LCA) for
detection of the chicken vasculature and incubated for 30
minutes at 37oC. The tumors were then harvested, fixed for
2 hours in a PBS solution containing 4% formalin, 10%
sucrose and then embedded in OCT for 24 hours at -80oC
(43). Tumors were then prepared for slides by sectioning
(10 µm). Sections stained with a secondary antibody, goat
anti-LCA conjugated to Alexa-647 at 1 µg/mL, detected
the vasculature. NHS76 or tefibazumab was detected
by staining the tissue sections with a 2-step approach of
rabbit anti-human IgG (5 µg/mL) followed by goat antirabbit conjugated to Alexa-750 (1 µg/mL). Finally, some
tissue sections were also subjected to direct staining
with NHS76 or tefibazumab, followed by the secondary
antibodies. This was done to verify that the antigenic
targets for NHS76 were present in the tissues and that the
tefibazumab did not crossreact with other targets either
specifically or non-specifically. These were controls that
were done in the laboratory to verify the accuracy of our
results, and while the results were as expected, the data is
not presented in this study. The images seen in this paper
are strictly NHS76 or tefibazumab that was intravenously
injected before tissue harvesting and sectioning.
Non-tumorigenic cells were visualized, along with
tumorigenic ones, using DAPI for detection of chromatin
in the nuclei of all cells by staining tissue sections with
a solution of ProLong® Gold antifade with DAPI (Life
Technologies Cat. # P36931).
Imaging of the tumor sections was performed using
an upright epifluorescence microscope (AxioImager
Z1, Carl Zeiss, Thornwood, NY) controlled by
Volocity software (Improvision, Lexington, MA). Each
fluorochrome was imaged against both negative and
positive controls to establish optimal signal detection.
Images for different sections were captured using similar
exposure times for the different fluorochromes; images for
different sections were similarly contrasted.

In vivo migration and internalization studies and
microscopy
Chick embryos were extracted from their shells
and kept in sterile plastic trays in a 37oC incubator ex
ovo until tumor implantation as previously described
(22). MDA-MB-435 cells expressing mCherry-H1.2 or
mCherry-Empty were mixed 1:1 with MDA-MB-435
cells expressing GFP. Two million cells were topically
implanted on the CAM of day 10 chick embryos and
visualized directly using fluorescence microscopy.
For the H1 migration studies in Figure 5, polyclonal
or monoclonal tumor colonies were grown on groups of
10 embryos each. Once the tumors appeared to be highly
necrotic (day 18), CAMs from each group were divided
into two sub-groups. Five of the embryos from each
group were harvested, fixed in formaldehyde for 12 hours,
followed by 70% ethanol and processed for hematoxylin
and eosin staining (data not shown). For the remaining
five embryos, the CAM was intravenously injected with
a PBS solution containing CPMV labeled with Alexa-750
for detection of the chicken vasculature and incubated for
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Specificity studies
H1 and core histones were extracted from animal
tissues as described by Parseghian et al. (1993)(44), except
16288

Oncotarget

for bovine H1 (purchased from Roche) and the individual
bovine core histones: H2A, H2B, H3 and H4 (purchased
from Sigma-Aldrich). Creation of the H1o deletion mutants
used for epitope localization are the kind gift of Dr. Jeffrey
Hansen (Colorado State) and are described elsewhere (45).
For Figure 1A, whole cell extracts were derived
from Raji cells (ATCC, Manassas, VA), fractionated by
SDS-PAGE and transferred to nitrocellulose membranes
for western blotting using procedures described in
Parseghian et al. (1993) (44). Briefly, the extracts were
created by suspending a volume of concentrated Raji cells
in an equal volume of 2X SDS-PAGE loading dye and
boiling the sample at 95oC for 5-10 minutes. Four wells
were loaded on the SDS-PAGE for the analysis in Figure
1A with increasing volumes of 1.25 µL, 2.5 µL, 5 µL
and 10 µL. To verify the proper loading and transfer of
proteins to the nitrocellulose membranes, the protein bands
were visualized using a general protein stain (BLOTFast Stain) according to the manufacturer’s instructions
(G Biosciences, Maryland Heights, MO). Western analysis
occurred as described in Gao et al. (2004) (46), with a
3.6 µg/mL concentration of NHS76 used as the primary
antibody and a 1:5000 dilution of goat anti-human IgG
(Heavy & Light Chain) conjugated to alkaline phosphatase
(Jackson Immunoresearch) as a secondary antibody.
Histones, their subtypes and the H1o fragments
were resolved by SDS polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis
(PAGE) and then blotted onto nitrocellulose using
procedures described previously (44). For the gels in
Figure 1B, 1 µg of H1 was loaded from each species and 4
µg of core histones (containing ~1 µg from each family).
For Figure 1C, 0.5 µg of each H1 subtype was loaded per
well. For Figure 1D, 1 µg of each H1o deletion mutant was
loaded per well. To verify the proper loading and transfer
of proteins to the nitrocellulose membranes, the protein
bands were visualized using BLOT-Fast Stain according to
the manufacturer’s instructions (G Biosciences). Western
staining, blot washes and analysis occurred as described in
Gao et al. (2004) (46), with the exception of the secondary
antibodies. For Figure 1B and 1C, the antibodies were
detected with a goat anti-human IgG (Heavy & Light
Chain) conjugated to alkaline phosphatase (Jackson
Immunoresearch) at a 1:5000 dilution. For Figure 1D,
NHS76 was detected with a goat anti-human IgG (Heavy
& Light Chain) conjugated to horseradish peroxidase
(Pierce) at 1:5000.
For the ELISAs in Figure 1E characterizing the
binding of antibody to histones and DNA, 0.5 µg of
histones were placed into all wells, while those wells
containing histones and DNA had 2.5 µg of DNA. In
nature, the weight to weight ratio of histones:DNA in the
nucleus is generally 1:1 (47); therefore, each of the five
histone families has a ratio of only 1:5, which is what the
0.5 µg: 2.5 µg ratio was designed to mimic. Histones and

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

DNA were crosslinked to withstand the stringent wash
buffer used in these experiments. A crosslinking solution
(11% formaldehyde, 0.1 M NaCl, 1 mM EDTA in 50
mM MES, pH 6.1) was added to the histone/DNA wells
for a final concentration of 1% formaldehyde and then
incubated for 8 minutes at room temperature before rinsing
with water. All wells were then blocked (2% bovine serum
albumin, 10 mM Tris-HCl, 150 mM NaCl, pH 7.5, 0.1%
Micro-O-Protect) for 30 min, then incubated with 3 µg/
mL of TNT antibody in blocking buffer for 1.5 hr at 37oC,
before being washed (4% fish gelatin, 0.05% Tween 20,
10 mM Tris-HCl, 150 mM NaCl, pH 7.5) 3X for 5 min
each. The antibodies were detected with a goat anti-human
IgG (H & L Chain) conjugated to alkaline phosphatase at
a 1:5000 dilution by incubating for 1 hr at 37oC, washing
with fish gelatin 3X for 5 min each, rinsing with 10 mM
Tris-HCl, 150 mM NaCl, pH 7.5 for 5 min, and then
incubating with p-nitrophenyl phosphate substrate (Sigma
Fast pNPP tablets, Sigma-Aldrich). Colorimetric analysis
of the substrate cleavage was detected on a plate reader at
405 nm. Negative controls consisted of wells coated with
each of the histone and histone/DNA antigens which were
then probed only with the goat anti-human IgG conjugated
to alkaline phosphatase secondary antibody at a 1:5000
dilution. The background values obtained from the control
wells were subtracted from their respective wells that were
probed with the primary antibody.

Potency binding assay
Relative binding potency was determined in an
ELISA format using a dose-response assay previously
described in section 2.9 of Luhrs et al. (2009)(48). For
the NHS76 inactivation study in Figure 1F, there was a
modification to the secondary antibody step where the
wells were incubated with 4 µg/mL goat anti-human IgG
(H & L Chain) conjugated to Alexa Fluor 594 (Molecular
Probes/Invitrogen) for 2 hours and then washed and
read fluorometrically in a SpectraMax M5 (Molecular
Devices) plate reader (Ex = 590 nm, Em = 625 nm, Em
Cutoff = 610). To inactivate the NHS76, the antibody was
placed in an aluminum foil wrapped tube and denatured
by incubating it at 90oC for 15 minutes in Tris Buffered
Salinie (TBS) before being cooled on ice.

Immunohistochemistry
The HeLa cells used in Figure 1G were obtained
from ATCC (Manassas, VA) and grown on poly-Llysine coated coverslips. Cells were fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde/PBS for 10 minutes at room temperature,
permeabilized for 10 minutes with 0.1% Triton X-100/
PBS, then blocked with 10% Fetal Bovine Serum/PBS

16289

Oncotarget

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST

for 30 minutes. The cells were then stained with 5 µg/
mL of NHS76. The washing and incubation followed well
established procedures described elsewhere (49). The
Alexa 594 conjugated goat anti-human IgG secondary
antibody (1:200 dilution), Alexa 488 conjugated phalloidin
(1:200 dilution) and DAPI (10 µg/mL) were all used
according to the manufacturer’s instructions (all from
Molecular Probes/Invitrogen). Individual images were
taken for each fluorochrome and then merged using
ImageJ software from the NIH.

The authors have no conflicts of interest. Drs.
Luhrs and Parseghian are former employees of Peregrine
Pharmaceuticals, but have no financial interests in the
company.

FUNDING
This study
Pharmaceuticals.

Label-free binding studies

was

funded

by

Peregrine

Author contributions
Binding was observed using biolayer interferometry
(17), a label-free method that measures nanometer shifts in
the interference of light that is reflected from the tip of an
optical fiber probe (“a biosensor”) as the optical thickness
changes with the association and dissociation of molecular
interactions. Here we used an 8 biosensor system, the
Octet (forté BIO, Menlo Park, CA). Each probe had
a proprietary coating of streptavidin and all 8 were
immersed into wells containing buffer designed to keep
the cruciform DNA stable (10 mM MgCl2, 50 mM NaCl,
10 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5) (15). The cruciform structure
was created from synthetic DNA fragments first described
in Figure 1 of Bianchi (1988) (15) with the exception that
one of our fragments bore a biotin at the 5’ end.

KAL created the labeled molecules, transfected the
cell lines and conducted the in vitro histone translocation
experiments. MHP conducted the antibody specificity
studies. MHP and KAL conducted the complex binding
characterization studies. DP, WS, JL and AZ conducted
all experiments involving CAMs, including tumor growth,
tissue preparation and microscopy. MHP and KAL jointly
directed the experiments and interpreted the data.

REFERENCES
1 	 Parseghian MH and Luhrs KA. Beyond the walls of the
nucleus: The role of histones in cellular signaling and
innate immunity. Biochem Cell Biol. 2006; 84:589-604.

Abbreviations

2	

BSA: bovine serum albumin; C-terminal: carboxy
terminal; CAM: chorioallantoic membrane; CHO:
Chinese hamster ovary; CMHC: 4-chloromethyl-7hydroxycoumarin; DAPI: 4’,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole;
ELISA: enzyme linked immunosorbent assay; GFP: green
fluorescent protein; HMGB: high mobility group B; HSV:
herpes simplex virus; IgG: immunoglobulin; LCA: Lens
culinaris agglutinin-A; MoAb: monoclonal antibody;
NS: nucleosome; PS: phosphatidyl serine; Rh110-TML:
rhodamine-110-trimethyl lock; SDS-PAGE: sodium
dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis; TBS:
tris buffered saline; tk: thymidine kinase.

3 	 Brix K, Summa W, Lottspeich F and Herzog V.
Extracellularly occurring histone H1 mediates the binding
of thyroglobulin to the cell surface of mouse macrophages.
J Clin Invest. 1998; 102:283-293.
4 	 Evans DL, Kaur H, Leary III J, Praveen K and JasoFriedmann L. Molecular characterization of a novel pattern
recognition protein from nonspecific cytotoxic cells:
Sequence analysis, phylogenetic comparisons and antimicrobial activity of a recombinant homologue. Dev Comp
Immunol. 2005; 29:1049-1064.
5 	 Lundberg M and Johansson M. Positively charged
DNA-binding proteins cause apparent cell membrane
translocation. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2002;
291:367-371.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Aparna Roy and William Ito for
outstanding technical assistance in the transfection and
selection of cell lines. We thank Radhika Sood and Kelly
Felton for technical assistance with the western analysis.
We also thank Kathi Williams for excellent technical
assistance obtaining the kinetic binding data for NHS76
and Krista Witte for helpful discussions regarding binding
data analysis. The NHS76 antibody is proprietary to
Peregrine Pharmaceuticals Inc.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Konishi A, Shimizu S, Hirota J, Takao T, Fan Y, Matsuoka
Y, Zhang L, Yoneda Y, Fujii Y, Skoultchi AI and Tsujimoto
Y. Involvement of histone H1.2 in apoptosis induced by
DNA double-strand breaks. Cell. 2003; 114:673-688.

6	

Hariton-Gazal E, Rosenbluh J, Graessmann A, Gilon C and
Loyter A. Direct translocation of histone molecules across
cell membranes. J Cell Sci. 2003;116: 4577-4586.

7 	 Rosenbluh J, Hariton-Gazal E, Dagan A, Rottem S,
Graessmann A and Loyter A. Translocation of histone
proteins across lipid bilayers and Mycoplasma membranes.
J Mol Biol. 2005; 345:387-400.
8 	 Zhao H, Bose S, Tuominen EKJ and Kinnunen PKJ.
16290

Oncotarget

Interactions of histone H1 with phospholipids and
comparison of its binding to giant liposomes and human
leukemic T cells. Biochemistry. 2004; 43:10192-10202.

23 	 Li X-F, Carlin S, Urano M, Russell J, Ling CC and
O’Donoghue JA. Visualization of hypoxia in microscopic
tumors by immunofluorescent microscopy. Cancer Res.
2007; 67:7646-7653.

9 	 Iakoubov LZ and Torchilin VP. Nucleosome-releasing
treatment makes surviving tumor cells better targets for
nucleosome-specific anticancer antibodies. Cancer Detect
Prev. 1998; 22:470-475.

24 	 Chen F-M, Epstein AL, Li Z and Taylor CR. A comparative
autoradiographic study demonstrating differential
intratumor localization of monoclonal antibodies to cell
surface (Lym-1) and intracellular (TNT-1) antigens. J Nucl
Med. 1990; 31:1059-1066.

10 	 Koutouzov S, Cabrespines A, Amoura Z, Chabre H, Lotton
C and Bach JF. Binding of nucleosomes to a cell surface
receptor: redistribution and endocytosis in the presence of
lupus antibodies. Eur J Immunol. 1996; 26:472-486.

25 	 Schmid SL and Carter LL. ATP is required for receptormediated endocytosis in intact cells. J Cell Biol. 1990;
111:2307-2318.

11 	 Parseghian MH and Hamkalo BA. A compendium of the
histone H1 family of somatic subtypes: An elusive cast
of characters and their characteristics. Biochem Cell Biol.
2001; 79:289-304.

26 	 Kuismanen E and Saraste J. Low temperature-induced
transport blocks as tools to manipulate membrane traffic.
Methods Cell Biol. 1989; 32:257-274.

12 	 Parseghian MH. What is the role of histone H1
heterogeneity? A functional model emerges from a 50 year
mystery. AIMS Biophysics. 2015; 2(4):724-772.

27 	 Gunjan A, Alexander BT, Sittman DB and Brown DT.
Effects of H1 histone variant overexpression on chromatin
structure. J Biol Chem. 1999; 274:37950-37956.

13 	 Parseghian MH, Henschen AH, Krieglstein KG and
Hamkalo BA. A proposal for a coherent mammalian histone
H1 nomenclature correlated with amino acid sequences.
Protein Sci. 1994; 3:575-587.

28 	 Th’ng JPH, Sung R, Ye M and Hendzel MJ. H1 family
histones in the nucleus: Control of binding and localization
by the C-terminal domain. J Biol Chem. 2005; 280:2780927814.

14 	 Zlatanova JS, Srebreva LN, Banchev TB, Tasheva BT and
Tsanev RG. Cytoplasmic pool of histone H1 in mammalian
cells. J Cell Sci. 1990; 96:461-468.
15 	 Bianchi ME. Interaction of a protein from rat liver nuclei
with cruciform DNA. EMBO J. 1988; 7:843-849.

29 	 Sharifi J, Khawli LA, Hu P, King S and Epstein AL.
Characterization of a phage display-derived human
monoclonal antibody (NHS76) counterpart to chimeric
TNT-1 directed against necrotic regions of solid tumors.
Hybrid Hybridomics. 2001; 20:305-312.

16 	 Varga-Weisz P, Zlatanova JS, Leuba SH, Schroth GP and
van Holde KE. Binding of histones H1 and H5 and their
globular domains to four-way junction DNA. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA. 1994; 91:3525-3529.

30 	 Stemmer C, Briand JP and Muller S. Mapping of linear
epitopes of human histone H1 recognized by rabbit anti-H1/
H5 antisera and antibodies from autoimmune patients. Mol
Immunol. 1994; 31:1037-1046.

17 	 Concepcion J, Witte K, Wartchow C, Choo S, Yao D,
Persson H, Wei J, Li P, Heidecker B, Ma W, Varma
R, Zhao LS, Perillat D, et al. Label-free detection of
biomolecular interactions using BioLayer interferometry
for kinetic characterization. Comb Chem High Throughput
Screen. 2009; 12:791-800.

31 	 Iakoubov L, Rokhlin O and Torchilin V. Anti-nuclear
autoantibodies of the aged reactive against the surface of
tumor but not normal cells. Immunol Lett. 1995; 47:147149.
32 	 Torchilin VP, Iakoubov LZ and Estrov Z. Antinuclear
autoantibodies as potential antineoplastic agents. Trends
Immunol. 2001; 22:424-427.

18 	 Thurber GM, Schmidt MM and Wittrup KD. Factors
determining antibody distribution in tumors. Trends
Pharmacol Sci. 2008; 29:57-61.

33 	 Puebla I, Esseghir S, Mortlock A, Brown A, Crisanti A
and Low W. A recombinant H1 histone-based system for
efficient delivery of nucleic acids. J Biotechnol. 2003;
105:215-226.

19 	 Napirei M, Wulf S and Mannherz HG. Chromatin
breakdown during necrosis by serum DNAse1 and the
plasminogen system. Arthritis Rheum. 2004; 50:1873-1883.

34 	 Kramers K, van Bruggen MC, Rijke-Schilder TP, Dijkman
HB, Hylkema MN, Croes HJ, Fransen JA, Assmann KJ,
Tax WJ, Smeenk RJ and Berden JH. In vivo ANA is a
fixation artifact: nucleosome-complexed antinucleosome
autoantibodies bind to the cell surface and are internalized.
J Am Soc Nephrol. 1996; 7:946-954.

20 	 Lavis LD, Chao TY and Raines RT. Fluorogenic label for
biomolecular imaging. ACS Chem Biol. 2006; 1:252-260.
21 	 Shaner NC, Campbell RE, Steinbach PA, Giepmans BN,
Palmer AE and Tsien RY. Improved monomeric red, orange
and yellow fluorescent proteins derived from Discosoma
sp. red fluorescent protein. Nat Biotechnol. 2004; 22:15671572.

35 	 Golan TD, Gharavi AE and Elkon KB. Penetration of
autoantibodies into living epithelial cells. J Invest Dermatol.
1993; 100:316-322.

22 	 Pink DBS, Schulte W, Parseghian MH, Zijlstra A and Lewis
JD. Real-time visualization and quantitation of vascular
permeability in vivo: Implications for drug delivery. PLoS
ONE. 2012; 7:e33760.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

36 	 Palo J, Duchesne J and Wikstrom J. Malignant diseases
among patients with multiple sclerosis. J Neurol. 1977;
216:217-222.
16291

Oncotarget

37 	 Sadovnick AD, Eisen K, Ebers GC and Paty DW. Cause
of death in patients attending multiple sclerosis clinics.
Neurology, 1991; 41:1193-1196.

45 	 Lu X, Hamkalo BA, Parseghian MH and Hansen JC.
Chromatin condensing functions of the linker histone
C-terminal domain are mediated by specific amino acid
composition and intrinsic protein disorder. Biochemistry.
2009; 48:164-172.

38 	 Pardoll DM. Inducing autoimmune disease to treat cancer.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 1999; 96:5340-5342.

46 	 Gao S, Chung YG, Parseghian MH, King GJ, Adashi
EY and Latham KE. Rapid H1 linker histone transitions
following fertilization or somatic cell nuclear transfer:
evidence for a uniform developmental program in mice.
Dev Biol. 2004; 266:62-75.

39 	 Bianchi ME and Manfredi A. Chromatin and cell death.
Biochim Biophys Acta. 2004; 1677:181-186.
40 	 Albig W, Meergans T and Doenecke D. Characterization
of the H1.5 gene completes the set of human H1 subtype
genes. Gene. 1997; 184:141-148.

47 	 van Holde KE. Chromatin. Springer-Verlag: New York,
NY. 1988.

41 	 Leong HS, Steinmetz NF, Ablack A, Destito G, Zijlstra
A, Stuhlmann H, Manchester M and Lewis JD. Intravital
imaging of embryonic and tumor neovasculature using viral
nanoparticles. Nat Protoc. 2010; 5:1406-1417.

48 	 Luhrs KA, Harris DA, Summers S and Parseghian MH.
Evicting hitchhiker antigens from purified antibodies. J
Chromatogr B. 2009; 877:1543-1552.

42 	 Maniatis T, Fritsch EF and Sambrook J. Molecular Cloning:
A Laboratory Manual. Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
Press: Cold Spring Harbor, NY. 1982.

49 	 Harlow E and Lane D. Antibodies: A Laboratory Manual.
Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press: Cold Spring Harbor,
NY. 1988.

43 	 Kusser KL and Randall TD. Simultaneous detection of
EGFP and cell surface markers by fluorescence microscopy
in lymphoid tissues. J Histochem Cytochem. 2003; 51:5-14.
44 	 Parseghian MH, Clark RF, Hauser LJ, Dvorkin N, Harris
DA and Hamkalo BA. Fractionation of human H1 subtypes
and characterization of a subtype-specific antibody
exhibiting non-uniform nuclear staining. Chromosome Res.
1993; 1:127-139.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

16292

Oncotarget

