Research Article

The Multikinase Inhibitor Sorafenib Potentiates TRAIL Lethality
in Human Leukemia Cells in Association with Mcl-1 and
cFLIPL Down-regulation
1

1

1

1,2

Roberto R. Rosato, Jorge A. Almenara, Stefanie Coe, and Steven Grant

Departments of 1Medicine and 2Biochemistry, Massey Cancer Center, Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, Virginia

Abstract

Introduction

Interactions between the multikinase inhibitor sorafenib and
tumor necrosis factor–related apoptosis-inducing ligand
(TRAIL) were examined in malignant hematopoietic cells.
Pretreatment (24 h) of U937 leukemia cells with 7.5 Mmol/L
sorafenib dramatically increased apoptosis induced by
sublethal concentrations of TRAIL/Apo2L (75 ng/mL).
Similar interactions were observed in Raji, Jurkat, Karpas,
K562, U266 cells, primary acute myelogenous leukemia
blasts, but not in normal CD34+ bone marrow cells.
Sorafenib/TRAIL–induced cell death was accompanied by
mitochondrial injury and release of cytochrome c, Smac,
and AIF into the cytosol and caspase-9, caspase-3, caspase-7,
and caspase-8 activation. Sorafenib pretreatment downregulated Bcl-xL and abrogated Mcl-1 expression, whereas
addition of TRAIL sharply increased Bid activation, conformational change of Bak (ccBak) and Bax (ccBax), and Bax
translocation. Ectopic Mcl-1 expression significantly attenuated sorafenib/TRAIL–mediated lethality and dramatically
reduced ccBak while minimally affecting levels of ccBax.
Similarly, inhibition of the receptor-mediated apoptotic
cascade with a caspase-8 dominant-negative mutant significantly blocked sorafenib/TRAIL–induced lethality but not
Mcl-1 down-regulation or Bak/Bax conformational change,
indicating that TRAIL-mediated receptor pathway activation
is required for maximal lethality. Sorafenib/TRAIL did not
increase expression of DR4/DR5, or recruitment of procaspase-8 or FADD to the death-inducing signaling complex
(DISC), but strikingly increased DISC-associated procaspase-8
activation. Sorafenib also down-regulated cFLIPL, most likely
through a translational mechanism, in association with
diminished eIF4E phosphorylation, whereas ectopic expression of cFLIPL significantly reduced sorafenib/TRAIL lethality. Together, these results suggest that in human leukemia
cells, sorafenib potentiates TRAIL-induced lethality by downregulating Mcl-1 and cFLIPL, events that cooperate to engage
the intrinsic and extrinsic apoptotic cascades, culminating
in pronounced mitochondrial injury and apoptosis. [Cancer
Res 2007;67(19):9490–500]

Note: Supplementary data for this article are available at Cancer Research Online
(http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/).
Requests for reprints: Steven Grant, Massey Cancer Center, Virginia
Commonwealth University, Medical College of Virginia Campus, MCV Station Box
980035, Richmond, VA 23298. Phone: 804-828-5211; Fax: 804-225-3788; E-mail:
stgrant@hsc.vcu.edu.
I2007 American Association for Cancer Research.
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-07-0598

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (19). October 1, 2007

Sorafenib (Nexavar, BAY43-9006) was initially identified as a Raf1
kinase inhibitor by high-throughput screening, although subsequent studies showed that it has additional activity against the
serine/threonine kinases B-Raf, B-Raf(V600E); p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase; the receptor tyrosine kinases c-kit, Flt3, RET;
and the proangiogenic receptor kinases vascular endothelial
growth factor receptors 1, 2, 3; and platelet-derived growth factor
receptor (reviewed in ref. 1). Sorafenib was recently approved by
the Food and Drug Administration for treatment of advanced renal
cell carcinoma (2). Through these actions, sorafenib blocks
neoplastic cell signaling pathways, particularly those involved
in growth and vascularization (3, 4) and avoidance of cell death
(3, 5–7). Furthermore, we and others (3, 5, 6) recently showed that
sorafenib potently down-regulates the antiapoptotic protein Mcl-1,
a multidomain member of the Bcl-2 family implicated in malignant
hematopoietic cell survival (8). In human leukemia cells, sorafenibmediated Mcl-1 down-regulation is known to play a major
functional role in lethality (5, 6). Notably, sorafenib-mediated
Mcl-1 down-regulation stems from translation inhibition associated with diminished phosphorylation of the translation initiation
factor eIF4E (5). The ability of sorafenib to down-regulate Mcl-1
and inactivate eIF4E has been confirmed in vivo in a human
hepatocellular carcinoma tumor xenograft model (3).
Interactions between sorafenib and other targeted agents have
been examined in a limited number of preclinical studies. For
example, interactions between sorafenib and the proteasome
inhibitor bortezomib (9) or the PKCy inhibitor rottlerin (10) have
recently been described. In both cases, synergistic interactions were
observed in diverse neoplastic cell types, including epithelial
neoplasms and leukemias. In several cases, enhanced cell death
was associated with inactivation of prosurvival pathways such as
Raf/extracellular signal-regulated kinase 1/2 and AKT (9, 10).
The ability of sorafenib to reduce neoplastic cell Mcl-1
expression (3, 5, 6) raises the possibility that it might be particularly
effective in combination with agents whose actions are regulated
by this protein. In this context, several recent studies have shown
that Mcl-1 is a major modulator of tumor necrosis factor (TNF)–
related apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL)–induced lethality
(11–13), suggesting that this agent might be a candidate for such
a combination strategy. TRAIL is a member of the TNF family,
which includes Fas-ligand (Fas-L) and TNF, each of which induces
cell death through the receptor-mediated apoptotic pathway (14).
In contrast to Fas-L and TNF, TRAIL induces apoptosis in diverse
tumor cell types and xenografts while exhibiting little toxicity
toward normal cells (14). TRAIL binds to five receptors: four of
which are membrane-bound and one is a soluble receptor
(reviewed in ref. 15). Two of these receptors, death receptors 4
(DR4) and 5 (DR5), are agonistic receptors containing a

9490

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Sorafenib/TRAIL–Induced Lethality

cytoplasmic death domain activated by TRAIL. Two other receptors, decoy receptors 1 (DcR1) and 2 (DcR2) act as antagonistic
receptors. Upon binding of TRAIL homotrimer to DR4 or DR5,
which induces trimerization of the receptors, a death-inducing
signaling complex (DISC) is formed. The adaptor protein FADD is
then recruited to the complex, facilitating incorporation of the
initiator procaspase-8 prodomain into the DISC. This leads to
activation of procaspase-8, a potent activator of downstream effector caspases (e.g., caspase-3, caspase-6, and caspase-7; ref. 15). The
death receptor–initiated apoptotic pathway is referred to as the
extrinsic apoptotic pathway, in contrast to the intrinsic/mitochondrial pathway, which involves mitochondrial injury, release
of proapoptotic proteins into the cytosol (e.g., cytochrome c),
and activation of procaspase-9 (16). Cross-talk occurs between the
intrinsic and extrinsic pathways through Bid, a BH3-only protein
member of the Bcl-2 superfamily that is activated by caspase-8 and
triggers mitochondrial injury (8). When the intrinsic pathway is
activated, multidomain proapoptotic members of the Bcl-2 gene
family (e.g., Bax, which translocates to the mitochondria, and Bak,
which undergoes a conformational change; ref. 17), induce release
of cytochrome c and other mitochondrial factors into the cytosol,
leading to formation of the apoptosome and activation of caspase-9
and caspase-3 (15). Simultaneous activation of the intrinsic and
extrinsic apoptotic pathways leads to mutual amplification and a
marked potentiation of apoptosis (18, 19).
The present findings reveal that preexposure of human leukemia
cells to sorafenib dramatically sensitizes them to the lethal effects
of TRAIL and, as hypothesized, sorafenib-mediated Mcl-1 downregulation plays a significant functional role in these interactions.
They also show that down-regulation of the short-lived protein and
procaspase-8 regulatory molecule cFLIP, primarily through translation inhibition, contributes significantly to sorafenib/TRAIL
synergism. Specifically, sorafenib-mediated cFLIP down-regulation
triggers a pronounced engagement of the DISC and procaspase8 processing, resulting in the striking generation of truncated Bid
(tBid). Collectively, these findings suggest that in human leukemia
cells, sorafenib-mediated down-regulations of Mcl-1 and cFLIP
cooperate to activate both the intrinsic and extrinsic cell death
pathways, triggering a dramatic increase in leukemia cell death.

Materials and Methods
Cells and cell culture. U937 human leukemia cells were obtained from
American Type Culture Collection, and cultured and maintained as
described previously (20). U937 cells stably expressing either Mcl-1 or
dominant-negative caspase-8 or their empty vector counterparts were
obtained as reported previously (18, 21). U937 cells expressing cFLIP were
generated by cloning a cDNA containing the entire c-flip coding region
(CFLAR, Genbank accession no. NM_003879) in pcDNA3.1/V5-His-TOPO
vector (Invitrogen). All experiments used cells in logarithmic phase at
2.5  105/mL. Acute myelogenous leukemia (AML) blasts were obtained
with informed consent from patients with AML undergoing routine
diagnostic aspirations with approval from the Virginia Commonwealth
University Institutional Review Board. Informed consent was provided
according to the Declaration of Helsinki. AML blasts were isolated and
cultured as described previously (21). Normal mononuclear cells were also
obtained with informed consent from the bone marrow of patients with
nonmalignant hematopoietic disorders (e.g., iron deficiency anemia,
immune thrombocytopenia). Mononuclear cell preparations were obtained
as described for the isolation of AML blasts. CD34+ cells were purchased
from Cambrex.
Drugs and chemicals. Sorafenib (BAY43-9006, Bayer) was provided by
the Cancer Treatment and Evaluation Program, National Cancer Institute,

www.aacrjournals.org

NIH, dissolved in DMSO, and aliquots maintained at 80jC. TRAIL/Apo2L
was purchased from Alexis and stored in aliquots at 80jC. The pancaspase inhibitor BOC-D-fms was purchased from Enzyme System Products
and dissolved in DMSO.
Assessment of apoptosis. Apoptotic cells were evaluated by Annexin
V/propidium iodide (BD PharMingen) staining as per the manufacturer’s
instructions as previously described (21) and by morphologic assessment of
Wright-Giemsa–stained cytospin preparations.
Assessment of mitochondrial membrane potential (#y m). After
treatment, cells were harvested and 2  105 incubated with 40 nmol/L
DiOC6 (15 min, 37jC). Loss of mitochondrial membrane potential was
determined by flow cytometry as previously described (22).
Analysis of cytosolic cytochrome c and AIF. A previously described
technique was used to isolate the S-100 (cytosolic) cell fraction of treated
cells (22). For each condition, 30 mg of protein isolated from the S-100 cell
fraction were separated and detected by Western blot.
Western blot analysis. Whole cell-pellets were washed and resuspended
in PBS, and lysed with loading buffer (Invitrogen) as previously described
(22). Thirty micrograms of total protein for each condition were separated
by 4% to 12% Bis-Tris NuPAge precast gel system (Invitrogen) and
electroblotted to nitrocellulose. After incubation with the corresponding
primary and secondary antibodies, blots were developed by enhanced
chemiluminescence (New England Nuclear).
Antibodies for Western blot analysis. Primary antibodies for the
following proteins were used at the designated dilutions: poly(ADP)ribose
polymerase (PARP; 1:1,000; BioMol); Mcl-1; procaspase-3; cytochrome c;
XIAP (1:1,000, BD PharMingen); caspase-8 (1:2,000, Alexia Corporations); Bid
(1:1,000; Cell Signaling); phosphorylated eIF4E (1:500, Cell Signaling); eIF4E;
cFLIP (1:500, Santa Cruz Biotechnology); anti-His tag (1:500, Serotec); AIF
(1:1,000, Santa Cruz Biotechnology); actin (1:4,000; Sigma-Aldrich); DR4, DR5
(1:500, Imgenex). Secondary antibodies conjugated to horseradish peroxidase were obtained from Kirkegaard and Perry Laboratories, Inc.
Real-time reverse transcription-PCR. Real-time reverse transcriptionPCR (RT-PCR) was done in triplicate using the SensiMix One-Step SYBR
green solution (Bioline) and cFLAR QuantiTec Primer Assay (Qiagen).
Results for the experimental gene were normalized to 18S rRNA levels.
Determination of caspase-3/7 and caspase-9 activity. Treated cells
were lysed, and equivalent quantities were assayed according to the
manufacturer’s instructions (caspase-3/7 and caspase-9 assay kits; BioVision). The fold increase in activity was calculated as the ratio between
values obtained for treated samples versus those obtained in untreated
controls.
Isolation of the TRAIL DISC. DISC precipitation was done by using an
anti-His tag antibody. 6His-tagged recombinant TRAIL (Alexis) was
preincubated for 15 min with the primary anti-His antibody, after which
cells were treated for the times indicated in the corresponding figures.
Control U937 cells or cells exposed to sorafenib alone were incubated with
the primary anti-His tag antibody. DISC formation was then terminated,
and cells were washed thrice in ice-cold PBS. Cells were lysed in
radioimmunoprecipitation assay buffer (1% NP40, 0.5% sodium deoxycolate,
0.1% SDS, in PBS) containing Complete protease inhibitors (Roche
Molecular Biochemicals) for 30 min on ice followed by centrifugation at
15,000  g for 10 min at 4jC. The TRAIL DISC was then precipitated using
anti-mouse–conjugated Dynabeads (Invitrogen) at 4jC overnight. Precipitates were washed six times with lysis buffer, and receptor complexes
were eluted with 30 AL of sample buffer followed by Western blotting
analysis.
Bax/Bak conformational change. To analyze conformational change of
Bax and Bak, cells were lysed in CHAPS lysis buffer and immunoprecipitated in lysis buffer by using 500 Ag of total cell lysate and 2.5 Ag of either
anti-Bax 6A7 (Sigma-Aldrich) or anti–Bak-Ab1 (Calbiochem) antibodies that
recognize conformationally changed Bax and Bak, respectively. Resulting
immune complexes were analyzed by Western blot and probed with an antiBax or anti-Bak antiserum (Santa Cruz Biotechnology).
Statistical analysis. The significance of differences between experimental conditions was determined using the Student’s t test for unpaired
observations. To assess drug interaction, median dose analysis (23) was

9491

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (19). October 1, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

Figure 1. Preexposure to sorafenib
potently increases TRAIL-induced lethality
in human leukemia cells. A, U937 cells
were sequentially exposed to sorafenib
(S; 5 and 7.5 Amol/L) for 24 h after
which TRAIL (T ; 10, 25, 50, 75, and
100 ng/mL) was added. The extent of
apoptosis was then determined by
Annexin V/propidium iodide analysis as
described in Materials and Methods.
B, time course analysis of sorafenib/
TRAIL–induced cell death (left and right )
and loss of mitochondrial membrane
potential (Dw m, center and right ). U937
cells were preexposed to sorafenib for
24 h (S24) after which TRAIL (75 ng/mL)
was added; cells were collected at the
indicated time intervals and evaluated for
both cell death and loss of Dw m by flow
cytometry as described in Materials and
Methods. Columns, means for three
separate experiments; bars, SE.
*, significantly higher than percentages
observed with any drug administered alone
(A and B); #, significantly higher than
percentages of cell death (B, right ); in both
cases, P < 0.01. C, mitochondrial proteins
(cytochrome c , Smac, AIF) were
determined by Western blot in the S100
fraction whereas whole lysates were used
for caspase-8, caspase-3, and PARP
analysis. In all cases, 30 Ag of proteins
were separated by SDS-PAGE as
described in Materials and Methods and
probed with the indicated antibodies; blots
were probed with antibodies directed
against actin to ensure equivalent loading
and transfer. Representative blots are
shown. Two additional experiments gave
similar results. D, median dose-effect
analysis of apoptosis induction in U937
cells sequentially exposed 24 h to
sorafenib followed by TRAIL (24 h)
administered over a range of
concentrations at a ratio of 1:10. CI
values for each fraction affected <1.0
correspond to synergistic interactions.

used (CalcuSyn; Biosoft). The combination index (CI) was calculated for a
two-drug combination involving a fixed concentration ratio. CI values <1.0
indicate a synergistic interaction.

Results
Preexposure to sorafenib synergistically increases TRAILmediated lethality in human leukemia cells. Interactions
between sorafenib and TRAIL were first investigated in U937
human leukemia cells. To this end, various administration
sequences were tested, including coadministration or preexposure
(24 h) to one of the agents followed by addition of the second
agent. For these studies, TRAIL was administered at multiple

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (19). October 1, 2007

concentrations, including 10, 25, 50, 75, and 100 ng/mL, and
sorafenib was administered at concentrations of 5 or 7.5 Amol/L,
which were minimally or only modestly toxic alone (Fig. 1A).
Although either simultaneous exposure to sorafenib/TRAIL (24 h)
or preexposure to TRAIL followed by sorafenib (T24 h!S24 h)
resulted in modest activity (e.g., f45–50% lethality; data not
shown), 24 h exposure to sorafenib followed by addition of TRAIL
concentrations z50 ng/mL (i.e., 50, 75, 100 ng/mL) markedly
increased cell death, ranging from 60% for 5 Amol/L sorafenib to
>80% to 90% in the case of 7.5 Amol/L sorafenib (Fig. 1A).
Consequently, for all subsequent studies, the optimal sequence of
sorafenib (7.5 Amol/L) followed by TRAIL (75 ng/mL) was
investigated.

9492

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Sorafenib/TRAIL–Induced Lethality

Detailed time course analysis of sorafenib (7.5 Amol/L)/TRAIL
(75 ng/mL)–induced lethality revealed the rapid onset of cell death
as early as 2 h after TRAIL addition, and which was very extensive
by 8 h (Fig. 1B, left). Increased cell death correlated closely with a
pronounced increase in mitochondrial injury; that is, loss of
mitochondrial membrane potential (Dw m; Fig. 1B, center), an event
that preceded the induction of apoptosis (Fig. 1B, right), as well as
release of the proapoptotic mitochondrial proteins cytochrome c,
Smac/DIABLO, and AIF into the cytosol (Fig. 1C). These events
were accompanied by activation/cleavage of procaspase-8 as well
as procaspase-3, procaspase-7, and procaspase-9 (Fig. 1C; Supplementary Fig. S1), and degradation of PARP (Fig. 1C). Consistent
with these findings, sequential exposure of U937 to sorafenib/
TRAIL in the presence of the pan-caspase inhibitor BOC-D-fmk
(20 Amol/L) significantly diminished the extent of cell death
(P < 0.01; Supplementary Fig. S2), demonstrating the caspase
dependence of this interaction. Median dose-effect analysis of
apoptosis induction for cells exposed sequentially to these agents
at multiple concentrations administered at fixed ratios (i.e.,
sorafenib/TRAIL 1:10) yielded combination indices <1.0, indicating
synergistic interactions (Fig. 1D). Finally, administration of
sorafenib and TRAIL in a variety of malignant hematopoietic cell
lines, including Raji, Jurkat, and Karpas (human lymphoma); K562
(chronic myelogenous leukemia); and U266 cells (multiple myeloma; Supplementary Fig. S3); or in primary AML specimens
(Supplementary Fig. S4A), revealed similar synergistic interactions.
Interestingly, neither sorafenib nor TRAIL alone or in combination
significantly increased the extent of cell death in normal bone
marrow mononuclear or CD34+ cells treated in an identical manner

(Supplementary Fig. S4B). Collectively, these findings indicate that
sorafenib pretreatment markedly potentiates TRAIL lethality,
reflected by induction of mitochondrial injury, caspase activation,
and apoptosis.
Sequential exposure to sorafenib and TRAIL leads to the
marked down-regulation of Mcl-1, increased levels of tBid,
conformational change in Bax/Bak, and Bax translocation. To
identify mechanisms responsible for synergistic interactions
between sorafenib and TRAIL, expression patterns of several
proapoptotic and antiapoptotic proteins were investigated. As
shown in Fig. 2A, no changes were observed in total levels of Bcl-2
and survivin after combined exposure of U937 cells to sorafenib
and TRAIL, whereas a moderate reduction in Bcl-xL expression and
the appearance of an XIAP cleavage fragment were observed. As
previously reported (5), sorafenib markedly reduced Mcl-1 protein
levels, which was almost absent when TRAIL was administered (S24;
Fig. 2A). Furthermore, in sorafenib-pretreated cells, TRAIL
exposure induced a pronounced reduction in expression of the
BH3 domain–only protein Bid, which is cleaved by active caspase8 (24), and a concomitant increase in expression of tBid (Fig. 2A).
Although Bak or Bax total expression did not change with any
treatment, a dramatic increase in the expression of the active,
conformationally changed form of these proteins (25, 26) was noted
in sorafenib-pretreated cells exposed to TRAIL (Fig. 2B and C). Bax
and Bak conformational change appeared as early as 2 h after
addition of TRAIL to sorafenib-pretreated cells, and increased
progressively over the ensuing 6 h. Moreover, treatment of cells
individually with sorafenib (24 or 32 h) or TRAIL (8 h) minimally
affected or induced a modest change, respectively, in levels

Figure 2. Antiapoptotic and proapoptotic proteins in sorafenib/TRAIL–treated U937 cells. A, U937 cells were exposed to sorafenib (7.5 Ag), TRAIL (75 ng/mL), or their
combination for the indicated time intervals, and at the end cells were pelleted, lysed, and 30 Ag of protein were separated by SDS-PAGE. Blots were probed with the
corresponding antibodies and subsequently stripped and probed with antibodies directed against actin to ensure equivalent loading and transfer. The results of a
representative study are shown; two additional experiments yielded similar results. cf, cleavage fragment. B and C, analysis of Bak/Bax conformational change;
after treatment as described in A , conformationally changed Bak and Bax were determined by first immunoprecipitating lysates with an anti–Bak-Ab1 or anti–Bax-6A7
antibodies, which recognize only the conformationally changed protein, followed by immunoblotting with an anti-Bak or an anti-Bax antibody, respectively, as described
in Materials and Methods. Each lane was loaded with 30 Ag of protein; IgG controls confirm equivalent loading and transfer. C, bottom, translocation of Bax
was analyzed by monitoring expression of the protein in the cytosolic and pelleted fractions as described in Materials and Methods. The results of a representative
study are shown; two additional experiments yielded similar results. IP, immunoprecipitation; WB, Western blot.

www.aacrjournals.org

9493

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (19). October 1, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

Figure 3. Ectopic expression of Mcl-1 protects
cells against sorafenib/TRAIL–induced cell death.
A and B, U937 cells expressing either ectopic
Mcl-1 (U/Mcl-1, clones 14 and 16) or their empty
vector counterparts (U/EV ) were treated with
sorafenib (7.5 Amol/L) for 32 h, TRAIL for 8 h
(75 ng/mL), or their combination (S24!ST8 h), after
which both cell death (A) and loss of mitochondrial
membrane potential (B) were done as described
in Materials and Methods. Columns, means for
three separate experiments; bars, SE. *, P < 0.01,
significantly less than values for empty vector
controls (for A and B). C, both U937/EV and
U937/Mcl-1 cells were exposed to sorafenib
(7.5 Ag), TRAIL (75 ng/mL), or their combination for
the indicated time intervals, and at the end cells
were pelleted, lysed, and 30 Ag of protein were
separated by SDS-PAGE, blotted, and probed
with the corresponding anti–Mcl-1 and actin
(to ensure equivalent loading and transfer)
antibodies. The results of a representative study
are shown; two additional experiments yielded
similar results. D, analysis of Bak/Bax
conformational change. U937/EV and U937/Mcl-1
cells were exposed to sorafenib (7.5 Ag), TRAIL
(75 ng/mL), or their combination (S24!T) for the
indicated time intervals; lysates were prepared and
conformationally changed; Bak and Bax were
determined by first immunoprecipitating lysates
with an anti–Bak-Ab1 or anti–Bax-6A7 antibodies,
which recognize only the conformationally changed
protein, followed by immunoblotting with anti-Bak
or anti-Bax antibodies, respectively, as described
in Materials and Methods. Each lane was loaded
with 30 Ag of protein; IgG controls confirm
equivalent loading and transfer. The results of a
representative study are shown; two additional
experiments yielded similar results.

of cytosolic Bax (Fig. 2C). However, sequential administration
(S24 h!T) induced a marked redistribution of Bax from the
cytosolic to the particulate (mitochondrial) compartment within
2 to 4 h of addition of TRAIL to sorafenib-pretreated cells (Fig. 2C).
Thus, sequential exposure of leukemia cells to sorafenib followed
by TRAIL induced a striking decline in expression of Mcl-1, Bid
cleavage and increased levels of tBid, and a pronounced Bak/Bax
conformational change and Bax translocation.
Sorafenib-induced Mcl-1 down-regulation plays a significant
functional role in potentiation of TRAIL lethality. Mcl-1 is a
potent antiapoptotic member of the Bcl-2 family (8). To define the
functional role of Mcl-1 down-regulation in sorafenib/TRAIL
lethality, U937 cells ectopically expressing Mcl-1 (21) were used.
Ectopic Mcl-1 expression partially but significantly reduced
sorafenib/TRAIL–induced cell death (Fig. 3A) and loss of DW m
(Fig. 3B) compared with U937/empty vector cells (P < 0.005 in each
case). The protection noted in sorafenib/TRAIL–treated U937/Mcl1 cells was compatible with the observation that although
sorafenib (FTRAIL) clearly reduced expression of ectopic Mcl-1
in U937/Mcl-1 cells, residual Mcl-1 expression levels were
substantially greater than those of U937/empty vector cells treated
in a similar manner (Fig. 3C). Recent studies suggest that Mcl-1
antiapoptotic activity is related to its association with and
inactivation of Bak (27), prompting investigation of the effects of
ectopic Mcl-1 expression on the regulation of Bak activity/
conformational change. Notably, empty vector U937 cells pretreated with sorafenib displayed a rapid increase in conformationally changed Bak after TRAIL administration. A similar pattern was
observed with Bax (Fig. 3C). In contrast, U937/Mcl-1 cells exhibited

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (19). October 1, 2007

essentially no Bak conformational change and a more modest but
discernible reduction in Bax conformational change/activation.
These results suggest that sorafenib-induced Mcl-1 down-regulation plays a functional role in potentiation of TRAIL-induced Bak
and Bax conformational change and lethality, and that Bak
activation may be a particularly important contributor to
synergism.
Interactions between sorafenib and TRAIL require a
functional receptor-mediated apoptotic pathway. To determine
whether additional mechanisms might be involved in sorafenib/
TRAIL synergism, given the inability of ectopic Mcl-1 expression
to block sorafenib/TRAIL lethality completely, U937 cells
expressing a dominant-negative form of procaspase-8 (U/C8DN;
ref. 18) were used. As shown in Fig. 4A (left), the pronounced
induction of apoptosis by sorafenib/TRAIL was partially but
significantly attenuated by enforced expression of dominantnegative procaspase-8 (P < 0.005), as was loss of DW m (Fig. 4A,
right; P < 0.005). As anticipated, activation of procaspase-8 was
abolished in U/C8DN cells as was Bid activation and the
appearance of tBid (Fig. 4B). Notably, Mcl-1 down-regulation
was equivalent in U937/empty vector control cells and U937/
C8DN cells, indicating that this phenomenon occurred independently of the extrinsic cascade (Fig. 4C). Interestingly, the ability
of the sorafenib/TRAIL regimen to induce Bak and Bax
conformational change was substantially attenuated in lysates
from U/C8DN cells (Fig. 4C), arguing that in sorafenib-pretreated
cells, receptor pathway activation by TRAIL plays a critical
functional role in synergism between these agents. Moreover,
given the intrinsic TRAIL resistance of U937 cells, they suggest

9494

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Sorafenib/TRAIL–Induced Lethality

that in addition to effects on Mcl-1, sorafenib may also modulate
the receptor pathway to increase TRAIL sensitivity.
Sequential exposure to sorafenib and TRAIL is associated
with enhanced activation of the DISC but not DR4 or DR5
expression. Previous evidence in various cell types, including
leukemia cells, that certain agents increase TRAIL sensitivity by
modulating components of the extrinsic pathway, including upregulation of death receptors (28–31), prompted us to investigate
whether this phenomenon might be involved in sorafenib/TRAIL
synergism. However, analysis of DR4 and DR5 levels by Western
blot (Supplementary Fig. S5A), or monitoring receptors by flow
cytometry (Supplementary Fig. S5B), revealed no changes in total
expression under any experimental conditions. As a positive
control, Jurkat cells exposed to the histone deacetylase (HDAC)
inhibitor NVP-LAQ824 were investigated in parallel and, as
previously reported (32), displayed a clear increase, reflected by
an increase in fluorescence intensity and shift to the right, in the
number of DR5 receptors localized to the cell membrane
(Supplementary Fig. S5B). Together, these findings argue against
increased death receptor expression as a mechanism underlying
sorafenib/TRAIL synergism interactions.
The effects of preexposure to sorafenib were then examined with
respect to TRAIL-induced formation of the DISC (Fig. 5A).
Comparisons were made between recruitment of procaspase8 and FADD into the DISC by TRAIL, either administered alone

(left) or following prior exposure of cells to sorafenib (right). First,
sorafenib alone had no effect on recruitment of FADD or
procaspase-8 to the DISC. Second, the amount of procaspase-8
and FADD recruited to the DISC after TRAIL exposure was similar
in untreated versus sorafenib-pretreated cells. These findings
indicate that sorafenib is unlikely to act by enhancing the ability
of TRAIL to recruit these molecules to the DISC. However, whereas
in control cells TRAIL failed to induce processing of procaspase-8
into its p43 and p41 forms, a well-described characteristic of DISC
activation (30), in sorafenib-pretreated cells the appearance of the
activated procaspase-8 cleavage fragments occurred early and was
very pronounced (Fig. 5A, right). Collectively, these results indicate
that preincubation with sorafenib has little or no effect on levels of
death receptors or DISC formation in leukemia cells exposed to
TRAIL, but instead strikingly potentiates processing/activation of
procaspase-8 recruited to the DISC.
Sorafenib preexposure facilitates DISC-associated procaspase-8 activation by down-regulating cFLIPL. In view of the
preceding findings, attention then focused on the procaspase-8
inhibitor cFLIP (FLICE-inhibitory protein). As shown in Fig. 5B
(left), exposure of U937 cells to sorafenib alone induced a marked
and rapid decline in cFLIPL levels, which was detectable after 4 h
of exposure. When TRAIL was added to sorafenib-treated cells,
although residual cFLIPL expression was very low, a further decline
could be discerned that was accompanied by the appearance of a

Figure 4. Interference with the receptor apoptotic
pathway blocks sorafenib/TRAIL–induced
lethality. A, U937 cells expressing either ectopic
procaspase-8 dominant-negative (U/casp8DN ) or
their empty vector counterparts (U/EV ) were
treated with sorafenib (7.5 Amol/L) for 32 h,
TRAIL for 8 h (75 ng/mL), or the combination
(S24!ST8 h) after which both cell death (left ) and
loss of mitochondrial membrane potential (DW m;
right ) were done as described in Materials and
Methods. Columns, means for three separate
experiments; bars, SE. *, P < 0.01, significantly
less than values for empty vector controls.
B, Western blot analysis of protein lysates from
U/casp8DN and U/EV; cells were treated with
sorafenib (7.5 Ag) for 24 h after which TRAIL
(75 ng/mL) was added; cells were then collected at
the indicated intervals and processed as described
in Materials and Methods. Blots were probed
with the corresponding antibodies and
subsequently stripped and probed with antibodies
directed against actin to ensure equivalent loading
and transfer. The results of a representative
study are shown; two additional experiments
yielded similar results. C, expression levels of
Mcl-1 were determined in whole lysates of
U/casp8DN and U/EV cells exposed to sorafenib
(7.5 Amol/L), TRAIL (75 ng/mL), or the
combination (S24!T) as indicated; blots were
subsequently stripped and probed with an
antiactin antibody to ensure equivalent loading and
transfer. Analysis of conformational change in
Bax and Bak was done using extracts from
the same cells; lysates were prepared,
immunoprecipitated with either anti–Bak-Ab1– or
anti–Bax-6A7–specific antibodies, followed by
immunoblotting with anti-Bak or anti-Bax
antibodies, respectively, as described in Materials
and Methods. Each lane was loaded with 30 Ag of
protein; IgG controls confirm equivalent loading
and transfer. The results of a representative
study are shown; two additional experiments
yielded similar results.

www.aacrjournals.org

9495

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (19). October 1, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

Figure 5. Preexposure of U937 cells to sorafenib
facilitates DISC-associated procaspase-8 activation
by down-regulating cFLIPL. A, analysis of DISC
formation was done as described in Materials and
Methods in U937 cells exposed to sorafenib (7.5 Ag),
TRAIL (75 ng/mL), or the combination (S24!T) for
the indicated intervals; levels of component of the
DISC (e.g., procaspase-8 and FADD) were analyzed
by Western blotting. Data are representative of three
independent experiments. B, levels of cFLIPS/L
were determined by Western blot in samples from
U937 cells exposed to sorafenib (7.5 Ag), TRAIL
(75 ng/mL), or the combination (S24!T); 30 Ag of
protein were separated by SDS-PAGE, blotted,
and probed with the corresponding antibodies. The
results of a representative study are shown; two
additional experiments yielded similar results.
C, U937 cells were transiently transfected with either
the empty vector (U937/EV ) or with a construct
coding for full-length cFLIP. After transfection,
they were exposed to sorafenib (7.5 Ag), TRAIL
(75 ng/mL), or their combination (S24!T) as
indicated, and cell death was evaluated by
Annexin V/propidium iodide staining (left).
*, P < 0.01, significantly less than values obtained for
cells transfected with empty vector controls. Cells
were also collected for Western blot analysis (right )
of expression of cFLIP (determined by an anti-6His
tag), Mcl-1, and actin; a representative blot is
shown. D, levels of cFLIP were determined by
Western blot analysis in U937/Mcl-1 cells as
described in Materials and Methods; cells were
treated with sorafenib and TRAIL as described
above.

low molecular weight species, presumably representing a cleavage
fragment (Fig. 5B, right). No changes were detected in the 26-kDa
short form of cFLIP, cFLIPS (Fig. 5B, bottom). To investigate the
functional role of cFLIPL down-regulation in responses to this
regimen, U937 cells were transiently transfected with a cDNA
coding for cFLIPL containing a 6His tag. As shown, enforced
expression of cFLIPL significantly reduced sorafenib/TRAIL lethality (Fig. 5C, left; P < 0.01 versus empty vector), suggesting that
sorafenib-mediated cFLIPL down-regulation plays a functional role
in sensitizing U937 cells to TRAIL.
Levels of cFLIPL were also monitored in U937 cells ectopically
expressing Mcl-1 (U937/Mcl-1). In these cells, sorafenib continued
to induce a dramatic decline in cFLIPL expression (Fig. 5D),
suggesting that perturbations in these proteins act independently
and cooperatively to promote apoptosis in sorafenib/TRAIL–
treated cells.
Sorafenib-mediated cFLIPL down-regulation involves a
translational component. cFLIPL is a short-lived protein (33),

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (19). October 1, 2007

and several mechanisms have been implicated in its regulation,
including transcriptional modulation (34, 35) and ubiquitin- and
caspase-mediated degradation (30, 36, 37). To determine whether
cFLIPL down-regulation reflected secondary, caspase-dependent
events, sorafenib/TRAIL–treated cells were coincubated with the
pan-caspase inhibitor BOC-D-fmk (20 Amol/L). As shown in Fig. 6A
(left), in the presence of BOC-D-fmk, the low molecular weight
fragment previously described in Fig. 5B (cf ) was almost
completely eliminated, but the expression of cFLIPL was only
minimally restored. These findings indicate that although a
contribution of caspase-mediated degradation to the downregulation of cFLIPL after TRAIL administration cannot be
completely excluded, it is unlikely to represent the major
mechanism of reduced FLIPL expression. Moreover, no changes
in cFLIPL expression were observed in extracts obtained from cells
coexposed to the proteasome inhibitor MG-163 (Fig. 6A, M, right),
arguing against a posttranslational mechanism of cFLIPL downregulation. Finally, levels of cFLIPL mRNA were determined by real-

9496

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Sorafenib/TRAIL–Induced Lethality

time RT-PCR (Fig. 6B). As shown, exposure to sorafenib alone
(4–8 h) failed to reduce cFLIPL mRNA levels (P > 0.05 compared
with controls), despite the virtually complete reduction in protein
expression (Fig. 5B). At later intervals (e.g., 24–26 h), sorafenib only
modestly reduced cFLIP mRNA levels, and this effect was not
significantly enhanced by addition of TRAIL (P > 0.05 versus
sorafenib alone). Together, these findings argue that inhibition of
transcription is unlikely to play a major role in the observed
reduction in cFLIPL expression.
Previous studies showed that sorafenib-mediated Mcl-1 downregulation primarily involved inhibition of translation (5), an event
associated with the rapid dephosphorylation of the mRNA capbinding protein eIF4E (3, 5). Notably, exposure of cells to sorafenib
F TRAIL induced a dramatic decline in phosphorylation of eIF4E
without modifying protein levels (Fig. 6C). To further examine this
question, U937 cells were exposed to the transcription inhibitor
actinomycin D (5 Ag/mL) in the presence or absence of sorafenib
(Fig. 6D), as previously described in the case of studies involving
Mcl-1 (5). Our hypothesis was that if sorafenib modified cFLIPL
expression primarily at the transcriptional level, combined
exposure to actinomycin D and sorafenib would have little further
effect on cFLIPL down-regulation; conversely, simultaneous inhibition of both transcription and translation should have a greater
effect on cFLIPL levels than blocking transcription alone (i.e., by
actinomycin D). As shown, coexposure of cells to sorafenib and
actinomycin D reduced cFLIPL protein levels by f50% compared
with the effects of actinomycin D alone. Collectively, these findings
support the notion that as in the case of Mcl-1 (5), inhibition of
translation plays a significant functional role in sorafenib-mediated
cFLIPL down-regulation.

Discussion
The rationale for the present studies stemmed from recent
observations showing that, first, exposure of human leukemia cells
to sorafenib induced apoptosis through a mechanism involving Mcl-1
down-regulation via inhibition of translation (5); and second, evidence
that Mcl-1 plays an important role in regulating the sensitivity of cells
to TRAIL-induced apoptosis (11–13). The results of the present study
indicate that preexposing human leukemia cells to sorafenib markedly
sensitizes them to TRAIL and, as hypothesized, sorafenib-mediated
Mcl-1 down-regulation plays an important functional role in this
interaction. However, the present findings also suggest that sorafenibmediated Mcl-1 down-regulation is not solely responsible for
potentiation of TRAIL lethality, and that additional factors, particularly down-regulation of cFLIPL, represent important contributors to
the antileukemic synergism of this regimen.
Mcl-1 is a BH-multidomain member of the Bcl-2 family that
exhibits potent antiapoptotic activity (38) and plays a particularly
important role in the survival of malignant hematopoietic cells
(5, 32, 39). Mcl-1 modulates apoptosis through multiple mechanisms,
including interactions with proapoptotic members of the Bcl-2
family such as BH3-only domain proteins, for example, tBid (11) and
Bim (13), as well as multidomain members such as Bak (27). In
this context, several recent studies have shown that Mcl-1 cooperates with Bcl-xL to maintain Bak in an inactive state and that
interference with both of these antiapoptotic proteins is required for
full engagement of the apoptotic cascade (27). Therefore, it may be
significant that in addition to down-regulation of Mcl-1, sorafenib/
TRAIL–treated cells also exhibited a partial but clearly discernible
reduction in Bcl-xL expression (Fig. 2). The finding that enforced

Figure 6. Sorafenib-mediated inhibition of
translation contributes to cFLIPL down-regulation.
A, cFLIPL levels were determined by Western blot
in lysates from U937 cells exposed to sorafenib
(7.5 Ag) for 32 h, TRAIL (75 ng/mL) for 8 h, or the
combination (S24!T8) in the presence of the
pan-caspase inhibitor BOC-fmk (20 Amol/L).
To investigate the role of proteasome degradation,
cells were exposed to sorafenib (7.5 Ag) for
24 h either in the absence (S) or presence (SM ) of
the proteasome inhibitor MG163 (1 Amol/L) for 6 h,
after which cell lysates were prepared and
analyzed by Western blot for cFLIPL expression.
Right, analysis of cFLIPL mRNA expression by
real-time RT-PCR in U937 cells incubated with
sorafenib (7.5 Ag), TRAIL (75 ng/mL), or the
combination (S24!T2) for the indicated intervals.
Values for each condition are expressed as ratio of
specific cFLIPL(cFLAR)/18S mRNAs normalized to
levels corresponding to untreated control U937
cells. Columns, means for three separate
experiments done in triplicate; bars, SD.
*, P > 0.05, not significantly different from values
obtained for sorafenib alone. C, Western blot
analysis of phosphorylated eIF4E, total eIF4E, and
actin done in lysates from U937 cells treated with
sorafenib, TRAIL, or the combination for the
intervals indicated; 30 Ag of protein lysates were
separated and analyzed as described in Materials
and Methods. D, U937 cells were treated with
5 Ag/mL actinomycin D (Act D ) in the presence or
absence of sorafenib (7.5 Ag) for 2, 4, and 6 h, after
which cells lysates were prepared and subjected
to Western blot analysis to monitor cFLIP protein
levels. Each lane was loaded with 30 Ag of
protein; blots were subsequently reprobed with
antibodies directed against actin to control for
equal loading and transfer of proteins; two
additional experiments yielded similar results.

www.aacrjournals.org

9497

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (19). October 1, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

expression of Mcl-1 significantly diminished sorafenib/TRAIL–
induced Bak conformational change as well as lethality argues that
down-regulation of Mcl-1 plays an important role in Bak activation
and mitochondrial injury in cells exposed to this regimen.
Cooperation between activation of the intrinsic and extrinsic
apoptotic pathways has been extensively described (reviewed in
refs. 17, 40). Evidence that Mcl-1 plays a role in controlling
apoptosis by binding active Bid (tBid; ref. 11) therefore provides a
theoretical basis for the observed synergism between sorafenib and
TRAIL. For example, in receptor-mediated induction of apoptosis,
activation of Bid represents a critical component of the cascade
(41). Following activation of procaspase-8 at the level of the DISC,
death signals are transmitted to the mitochondria via cleavage of
Bid to generate tBid. tBid then interacts with Bax and Bak to
promote their oligomerization and insertion into the outer
mitochondrial membrane, leading to mitochondrial outer membrane permeabilization (41, 42). Previously, we and others reported
that sorafenib lethality in human leukemia cells could be explained
in part through Mcl-1 down-regulation (5, 6), and that this
phenomenon was associated with the inhibition of Mcl-1
translation (3, 5). In view of these findings, it is likely that
sorafenib-mediated Mcl-1 down-regulation potentiates TRAIL
lethality by two separate but related mechanisms: reduction in
Mcl-1 inhibitory effects on Bak and promotion of Bid activation
and proapoptotic actions.
Certain human leukemia cells, such as U937 cells, are
particularly resistant to TRAIL-induced apoptosis (18, 31) and are
classified as type II; that is, receptor-mediated apoptosis requires
engagement of the mitochondrial pathway for maximal efficiency.
In contrast, in type I cells, activation of the extrinsic pathway is
fully capable of triggering a robust apoptotic response (43).
Previous findings that U937 cells exhibited only modest cell killing
in response to concentrations of TRAIL up to 15-fold higher than
those used in the present study (i.e., f1 Ag/mL; refs. 18, 31), and
the observation that sorafenib/TRAIL lethality was dramatically
reduced in U937 cells ectopically expressing dominant-negative
procaspase-8, raised the possibility that sorafenib might modify the
TRAIL/receptor cascade through events unrelated to Mcl-1. For
example, it has been shown that cells normally resistant to TRAIL
can be sensitized to this molecule by coadministering agents that
modulate TRAIL receptors, including up-regulation of TRAIL-R1
(DR4) and TRAIL-R2 (DR5). Such agents include HDAC inhibitors
and various cytotoxic compounds (28, 29, 44). Alternatively, other
agents may act by down-regulating decoy receptors TRAIL-R3 and
TRAIL-R4 (45). In addition, modulation of antiapoptotic proteins
such as XIAP (31), or down-regulation of the procaspase-8 inhibitor
cFLIP (30), has been shown to enhance TRAIL sensitivity.
Preexposure to sorafenib had no effect on either expression of
death receptors or the formation of the DISC itself, arguing against
a contribution of these factors to the observed antileukemic
synergism. However, the most striking difference noted in
sorafenib/TRAIL–treated cells was activation of procaspase8 present within the DISC. At this level, the most potent inhibitor
of procaspase-8 is cFLIP, which is recruited along with procaspase8 and FADD to the DISC (46). cFLIP is a short-lived protein
structurally related to procaspase-8 but lacking enzymatic activity
(33, 46). As many as 11 distinct cFLIP splice variants have been
described, including cFLIPS (26 kDa), cFLIPR (a 24-kDa form that
was isolated from Raji cells), and the 55 kDa cFLIPL (review in ref.
46). Both cFLIPS and cFLIPL may form heterodimers with caspase8, thereby functioning as caspase-8 dominant-negative inhibitors

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (19). October 1, 2007

(46). Although no changes were observed in the short form of
cFLIP, sorafenib induced a dramatic decrease in cFLIPL that in all
likelihood potentiated activation of the extrinsic apoptotic cascade.
Diverse mechanisms have been implicated in the control of cFLIP
expression including transcriptional regulation through nuclear
factor-nB (34, 35) or, at the protein level, by modulation of both
proteasome- and caspase-mediated degradation (30, 37). However,
it is important to note that neither proteasome nor caspase
inhibition significantly restored cFLIPL expression to basal levels in
sorafenib/TRAIL–treated cells. Similarly, the modest reduction
(i.e., f25%) in levels of cFLIPL-specific mRNA in sorafenib/TRAIL–
treated cells was unlikely to account for the early and virtually
complete down-regulation of cFLIPL observed at the protein level.
Collectively, these observations suggest that factors other than or
in addition to inhibition of transcription contribute to abrogation
of cFLIPL expression in sorafenib/TRAIL–treated cells, and that
posttranslational (ubiquitination, proteasome degradation) or
caspase-dependent mechanisms are at most only partially involved.
They also suggest that the simultaneous down-regulation of Mcl-1
and FLIPL by sorafenib may provide a unique mechanism by which
otherwise TRAIL-resistant leukemia cells may be sensitized to this
agent.
The present results suggest that sorafenib-mediated inhibition
of translation, possibly stemming from inactivation of the
initiation factor eIFE4, represents an important component of
cFLIPL down-regulation, analogous to sorafenib-induced Mcl-1
down-regulation in human leukemia cells (5). Sorafenib-mediated
Mcl-1 down-regulation and inhibition of eIF4E phosphorylation
have also recently been observed in human hepatocellular
carcinoma cells (3). Notably, in the present study, inhibition of
eIF4E phosphorylation was observed in cells exposed to a
relatively low, marginally toxic concentration of sorafenib. eIF4E
represents the rate-limiting component of cap-dependent translation initiation, binds the methyl-7-guanosine cap at the 5¶
untranslated region of processed mRNA, and transports transcript to the ribosome (47). Its activity, which is tightly regulated,
plays an important role in cell growth and transformation, as
eIF4E dysregulation promotes inappropriate translation of mRNA
(48). Moreover, eIF4E has been implicated in cancer pathogenesis
(49). Collectively, these findings suggest that eIF4E may represent
a valid target for therapeutic intervention. Given that both Mcl-1
and cFLIPL are short-lived proteins, it follows that their
expression might be particularly susceptible to sorafenib-mediated
translation inhibition. However, because sorafenib-mediated
translation inhibition is most likely a global phenomenon, the
possibility that interference with the synthesis of other proteins
contributes to sorafenib/TRAIL lethality cannot be excluded. The
findings that in sorafenib-treated cells, cFLIPL expression was
substantially reduced at early intervals (e.g., 4–6 h) during which
mRNA levels were unperturbed under conditions of caspase
inactivation, and that sorafenib significantly reduced cFLIPL
expression in actinomycin-treated cells, suggest that as in the
case of Mcl-1, inhibition of transcription plays either no or a
relatively minor role in sorafenib-mediated cFLIPL down-regulation. Lastly, very recent studies from our group have uncovered a
novel mechanism of sorafenib-mediated lethality which involves
the induction of ER stress in association with phosphorylation/
inactivation of the translation initiation factor eIF2a (50).
Ongoing studies are currently addressing the possible role that
sorafenib-induced ER stress may play in the lethal actions of the
sorafenib/TRAIL regimen.

9498

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Sorafenib/TRAIL–Induced Lethality

Taken together, the preceding findings suggest a theoretical
model that might account for the observed interactions between
sorafenib and TRAIL. According to this model (Supplementary Fig.
S6), sorafenib acts largely via a translational mechanism to downregulate the key antiapoptotic proteins Mcl-1 and cFLIPL, events
that cooperate to sensitize human leukemia cells to TRAIL. A
corollary of this model is that certain human leukemia
cells may be resistant to TRAIL due to increased expression
of Mcl-1 and cFLIPL. By disrupting the translational machinery
and reducing expression of these proteins, sorafenib promotes cooperation between the intrinsic and extrinsic apoptotic
pathways. Specifically, by reducing Mcl-1 expression, sorafenib
releases Bak from one of its major inhibitory proteins (27). However,
elimination of Mcl-1 may be necessary but not sufficient to trigger
apoptosis, and additional events might be required. Such signals are
provided by TRAIL via activation of the receptor pathway and
recruitment of procaspase-8 through the death domain–containing
adaptor molecule FADD to the DISC. When cFLIPL, a potent
inhibitor of procaspase-8, is down-regulated by sorafenib, procaspase-8 is rapidly and extensively cleaved, leading to activation of its
effector substrates procaspase-3 and Bid. Finally, activated Bid (tBid)
provides a mechanism for cross-talk between the receptor and the
intrinsic pathways by interacting with both Bax as well as Bak,

References
1. Wilhelm S, Carter C, Lynch M, et al. Discovery and
development of sorafenib: a multikinase inhibitor for
treating cancer. Nat Rev Drug Discov 2006;5:835–44.
2. Kane RC, Farrell AT, Saber H, et al. Sorafenib for the
treatment of advanced renal cell carcinoma. Clin Cancer
Res 2006;12:7271–8.
3. Liu L, Cao Y, Chen C, et al. Sorafenib blocks the
RAF/MEK/ERK pathway, inhibits tumor angiogenesis,
and induces tumor cell apoptosis in hepatocellular
carcinoma model PLC/PRF/5. Cancer Res 2006;66:
11851–8.
4. Chang YS, Adnane J, Trail PA, et al. Sorafenib (BAY 439006) inhibits tumor growth and vascularization and
induces tumor apoptosis and hypoxia in RCC xenograft
models. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol 2007;59:561–74.
5. Rahmani M, Davis EM, Bauer C, Dent P, Grant S.
Apoptosis induced by the kinase inhibitor BAY 43-9006
in human leukemia cells involves down-regulation of
Mcl-1 through inhibition of translation. J Biol Chem
2005;280:35217–27.
6. Yu C, Bruzek LM, Meng XW, et al. The role of Mcl-1
down-regulation in the proapoptotic activity of the
multikinase inhibitor BAY 43-9006. Oncogene 2005;24:
6861–9.
7. Panka DJ, Wang W, Atkins MB, Mier JW. The Raf
inhibitor BAY 43-9006 (Sorafenib) induces caspaseindependent apoptosis in melanoma cells. Cancer Res
2006;66:1611–9.
8. Danial NN, Korsmeyer SJ. Cell death: critical control
points. Cell 2004;116:205–19.
9. Yu C, Friday BB, Lai JP, et al. Cytotoxic synergy
between the multikinase inhibitor sorafenib and the
proteasome inhibitor bortezomib in vitro : induction of
apoptosis through Akt and c-Jun NH2-terminal kinase
pathways. Mol Cancer Ther 2006;5:2378–87.
10. Jane EP, Premkumar DR, Pollack IF. Coadministration of sorafenib with rottlerin potently inhibits cell
proliferation and migration in human malignant glioma
cells. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 2006;319:1070–80.
11. Clohessy JG, Zhuang J, de Boer J, Gil-Gomez G, Brady
HJ. Mcl-1 interacts with truncated Bid and inhibits its
induction of cytochrome c release and its role in
receptor-mediated apoptosis. J Biol Chem 2006;281:
5750–9.
12. Vaculova A, Hofmanova J, Soucek K, Kozubik A.
Different modulation of TRAIL-induced apoptosis by
inhibition of pro-survival pathways in TRAIL-sensitive

www.aacrjournals.org

which has become untethered as a consequence of Mcl-1 downregulation. These events lead to Bax and Bak conformational
change and Bax translocation to the outer mitochondrial
membrane, culminating in oligomerization and permeabilization
of the mitochondria and release of cytochrome c, AIF, and Smac
into the cytosol (51). Thus, sorafenib acts through both the
intrinsic and extrinsic arms of the apoptotic pathway to lower the
threshold for TRAIL-induced lethality. The ultimate implications
of these findings will depend on several factors, including whether
these events occur in vivo and whether effective plasma
concentrations of these agents can be achieved. In this context,
steady-state plasma sorafenib concentrations in excess of those
used in the present study (e.g., >10 Amol/L) have been shown to
be achievable in humans (52). Additional preclinical studies
designed to address these issues are currently under way.

Acknowledgments
Received 2/19/2007; revised 5/8/2007; accepted 6/22/2007.
Grant support: National Cancer Institute grants CA63753, CA93738, and
CA100866; award R6059-06 from the Leukemia and Lymphoma Society of America;
an award from the V Foundation; and an award from the Department of Defense.
The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of page
charges. This article must therefore be hereby marked advertisement in accordance
with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact.

and TRAIL-resistant colon cancer cells. FEBS Lett 2006;
580:6565–9.
13. Han J, Goldstein LA, Gastman BR, Rabinowich H.
Interrelated roles for Mcl-1 and BIM in regulation of
TRAIL-mediated mitochondrial apoptosis. J Biol Chem
2006;281:10153–63.
14. Ashkenazi A. Targeting death and decoy receptors of
the tumour-necrosis factor superfamily. Nat Rev Cancer
2002;2:420–30.
15. Zauli G, Secchiero P. The role of the TRAIL/TRAIL
receptors system in hematopoiesis and endothelial cell
biology. Cytokine Growth Factor Rev 2006;17:245–57.
16. Sharpe JC, Arnoult D, Youle RJ. Control of mitochondrial permeability by Bcl-2 family members. Biochim
Biophys Acta 2004;1644:107–13.
17. Jin Z, El Deiry WS. Overview of cell death signaling
pathways. Cancer Biol Ther 2005;4:139–63.
18. Rosato RR, Almenara JA, Dai Y, Grant S. Simultaneous activation of the intrinsic and extrinsic pathways
by histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors and tumor
necrosis factor-related apoptosis-inducing ligand
(TRAIL) synergistically induces mitochondrial damage
and apoptosis in human leukemia cells. Mol Cancer
Ther 2003;2:1273–84.
19. Cartee L, Smith R, Dai Y, et al. Synergistic induction
of apoptosis in human myeloid leukemia cells by
phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate and flavopiridol proceeds via activation of both the intrinsic and tumor
necrosis factor-mediated extrinsic cell death pathways.
Mol Pharmacol 2002;61:1313–21.
20. Rosato RR, Almenara JA, Cartee L, et al. The cyclindependent kinase inhibitor flavopiridol disrupts sodium butyrate-induced p21WAF1/CIP1 expression and
maturation while reciprocally potentiating apoptosis
in human leukemia cells. Mol Cancer Ther 2002;1:
253–66.
21. Rosato RR, Almenara JA, Maggio SC, et al. Potentiation of the lethality of the histone deacetylase inhibitor
LAQ824 by the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor
roscovitine in human leukemia cells. Mol Cancer Ther
2005;4:1772–85.
22. Rosato RR, Almenara JA, Grant S. The histone
deacetylase inhibitor MS-275 promotes differentiation
or apoptosis in human leukemia cells through a process
regulated by generation of reactive oxygen species and
induction of p21CIP1/WAF1 1. Cancer Res 2003;63:
3637–45.
23. Chou TC, Talalay P. Quantitative analysis of doseeffect relationships: the combined effects of multiple

9499

drugs or enzyme inhibitors. Adv Enzyme Regul 1984;22:
27–55.
24. Li H, Zhu H, Xu CJ, Yuan J. Cleavage of BID by
caspase 8 mediates the mitochondrial damage in the
Fas pathway of apoptosis. Cell 1998;94:491–501.
25. Griffiths GJ, Dubrez L, Morgan CP, et al. Cell damageinduced conformational changes of the pro-apoptotic
protein Bak in vivo precede the onset of apoptosis. J Cell
Biol 1999;144:903–14.
26. Puthalakath H, Strasser A. Keeping killers on a tight
leash: transcriptional and post-translational control of
the pro-apoptotic activity of BH3-only proteins. Cell
Death Differ 2002;9:505–12.
27. Willis SN, Chen L, Dewson G, et al. Proapoptotic Bak
is sequestered by Mcl-1 and Bcl-xL, but not Bcl-2, until
displaced by BH3-only proteins. Genes Dev 2005;19:
1294–305.
28. Nebbioso A, Clarke N, Voltz E, et al. Tumorselective action of HDAC inhibitors involves TRAIL
induction in acute myeloid leukemia cells. Nat Med
2005;11:77–84.
29. Ganten TM, Koschny R, Haas T, et al. Proteasome inhibition sensitises hepatocellular carcinoma
cells but not primary human hepatocytes for trailinduced apoptosis through increased caspase-8 cleavage at the disc independent from NF-KB. J Hepatol
2004;40:87.
30. Palacios C, Yerbes R, Lopez-Rivas A. Flavopiridol
induces cellular FLICE-inhibitory protein degradation
by the proteasome and promotes TRAIL-induced early
signaling and apoptosis in breast tumor cells. Cancer
Res 2006;66:8858–69.
31. Rosato RR, Dai Y, Almenara JA, Maggio SC, Grant S.
Potent antileukemic interactions between flavopiridol
and TRAIL/Apo2L involve flavopiridol-mediated XIAP
downregulation. Leukemia 2004;18:1780–8.
32. Rosato RR, Maggio SC, Almenara JA, et al. The
histone deacetylase inhibitor LAQ-824 induces human
leukemia cell death through a process involving XIAP
down-regulation, oxidative injury, and the acid sphingomyelinase-dependent generation of ceramide. Mol
Pharmacol 2006;69:216–25.
33. Poukkula M, Kaunisto A, Hietakangas V, et al. Rapid
turnover of c-FLIPshort is determined by its unique
C-terminal tail. J Biol Chem 2005;280:27345–55.
34. Kreuz S, Siegmund D, Scheurich P, Wajant H. NF-nB
inducers upregulate cFLIP, a cycloheximide-sensitive
inhibitor of death receptor signaling. Mol Cell Biol 2001;
21:3964–73.

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (19). October 1, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

35. Micheau O, Lens S, Gaide O, Alevizopoulos K,
Tschopp J. NF-nB signals induce the expression of
c-FLIP. Mol Cell Biol 2001;21:5299–305.
36. Kim Y, Suh N, Sporn M, Reed JC. An inducible
pathway for degradation of FLIP protein sensitizes
tumor cells to TRAIL-induced apoptosis. J Biol Chem
2002;277:22320–9.
37. Krueger A, Schmitz I, Baumann S, Krammer PH,
Kirchhoff S. Cellular FLICE-inhibitory protein splice
variants inhibit different steps of caspase-8 activation at
the CD95 death-inducing signaling complex. J Biol
Chem 2001;276:20633–40.
38. Gelinas C, White E. BH3-only proteins in control:
specificity regulates MCL-1 and BAK-mediated apoptosis. Genes Dev 2005;19:1263–8.
39. Chen S, Dai Y, Harada H, Dent P, Grant S. Mcl-1
Down-regulation potentiates ABT-737 lethality by cooperatively inducing Bak activation and Bax translocation.
Cancer Res 2007;67:782–91.
40. Ghobrial IM, Witzig TE, Adjei AA. Targeting apoptosis pathways in cancer therapy. CA Cancer J Clin 2005;
55:178–94.

41. Kelley SK, Ashkenazi A. Targeting death receptors in
cancer with Apo2L/TRAIL. Curr Opin Pharmacol 2004;4:
333–9.
42. Kaufmann SH, Steensma DP. On the TRAIL of a new
therapy for leukemia. Leukemia 2005;19:2195–202.
43. Scaffidi C, Fulda S, Srinivasan A, et al. Two CD95
(APO-1/Fas) signaling pathways. EMBO J 1998;17:1675–87.
44. Insinga A, Monestiroli S, Ronzoni S, et al. Inhibitors
of histone deacetylases induce tumor-selective apoptosis through activation of the death receptor pathway.
Nat Med 2005;11:71–6.
45. Bouralexis S, Findlay DM, Atkins GJ, et al. Progressive
resistance of BTK-143 osteosarcoma cells to Apo2L/
TRAIL-induced apoptosis is mediated by acquisition of
DcR2/TRAIL-R4 expression: resensitisation with chemotherapy. Br J Cancer 2003;89:206–14.
46. Budd RC, Yeh WC, Tschopp J. cFLIP regulation of
lymphocyte activation and development. Nat Rev
Immunol 2006;6:196–204.
47. Richter JD, Sonenberg N. Regulation of cap-dependent
translation by eIF4E inhibitory proteins. Nature 2005;433:
477–80.

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (19). October 1, 2007

9500

48. Proud CG. The eukaryotic initiation factor 4Ebinding proteins and apoptosis. Cell Death Differ 2005;
12:541–6.
49. Sorrells DL, Jr., Ghali GE, De Benedetti A, Nathan CA,
Li BD. Progressive amplification and overexpression of
the eukaryotic initiation factor 4E gene in different
zones of head and neck cancers. J Oral Maxillofac Surg
1999;57:294–9.
50. Rahmani M, Davis EM, Crabtree TR, et al. The kinase
inhibitor sorafenib induces cell death through a process
involving induction of endoplasmic reticulum stress.
Mol Cell Biol 2007;27:5499–513.
51. Desagher S, Osen-Sand A, Nichols A, et al. Bidinduced conformational change of Bax is responsible for
mitochondrial cytochrome c release during apoptosis.
J Cell Biol 1999;144:891–901.
52. Strumberg D, Richly H, Hilger RA, et al. Phase I
clinical and pharmacokinetic study of the Novel Raf
kinase and vascular endothelial growth factor
receptor inhibitor BAY 43-9006 in patients with
advanced refractory solid tumors. J Clin Oncol 2005;
23:965–72.

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

The Multikinase Inhibitor Sorafenib Potentiates TRAIL
Lethality in Human Leukemia Cells in Association with Mcl-1
and cFLIPL Down-regulation
Roberto R. Rosato, Jorge A. Almenara, Stefanie Coe, et al.
Cancer Res 2007;67:9490-9500.

Updated version
Supplementary
Material

Cited articles
Citing articles

E-mail alerts
Reprints and
Subscriptions
Permissions

Access the most recent version of this article at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/67/19/9490
Access the most recent supplemental material at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/suppl/2007/09/25/67.19.9490.DC1

This article cites 52 articles, 28 of which you can access for free at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/67/19/9490.full#ref-list-1
This article has been cited by 21 HighWire-hosted articles. Access the articles at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/67/19/9490.full#related-urls

Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal.
To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications
Department at pubs@aacr.org.
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications
Department at permissions@aacr.org.

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

