Oncotarget, Vol. 7, No. 8

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Identifying anti-cancer drug response related genes using an
integrative analysis of transcriptomic and genomic variations
with cell line-based drug perturbations
Yi Sun1,*, Wei Zhang1,*, Yunqin Chen2, Qin Ma3, Jia Wei2, Qi Liu1
1

Department of Central Laboratory, Shanghai Tenth People’s Hospital, School of Life Sciences and Technology, Tongji
University, Shanghai, China

2

R & D Information, AstraZeneca, Shanghai, China

3

Department of Plant Science, South Dakota State University, Brookings, SD, USA

*

These authors contributed equally to this work

Correspondence to: Qi Liu, e-mail: qiliu@tongji.edu.cn
Jia Wei, e-mail: Jenny.Wei@astrazeneca.com
Keywords: drug response, drug sensitivity, drug resistance, cancer cell line, personalized treatment
Received: July 09, 2015	

Accepted: January 01, 2016	

Published: January 25, 2016

ABSTRACT
Background
Clinical responses to anti-cancer therapies often only benefit a defined subset of
patients. Predicting the best treatment strategy hinges on our ability to effectively
translate genomic data into actionable information on drug responses.
Results
To achieve this goal, we compiled a comprehensive collection of baseline cancer
genome data and drug response information derived from a large panel of cancer
cell lines. This data set was applied to identify the signature genes relevant to drug
sensitivity and their resistance by integrating CNVs and the gene expression of cell
lines with in vitro drug responses. We presented an efficient in-silico pipeline for
integrating heterogeneous cell line data sources with the simultaneous modeling of
drug response values across all the drugs and cell lines. Potential signature genes
correlated with drug response (sensitive or resistant) in different cancer types were
identified. Using signature genes, our collaborative filtering-based drug response
prediction model outperformed the 44 algorithms submitted to the DREAM competition
on breast cancer cells. The functions of the identified drug response related signature
genes were carefully analyzed at the pathway level and the synthetic lethality level.
Furthermore, we validated these signature genes by applying them to the classification
of the different subtypes of the TCGA tumor samples, and further uncovered their
in vivo implications using clinical patient data.
Conclusions
Our work may have promise in translating genomic data into customized
marker genes relevant to the response of specific drugs for a specific cancer type
of individual patients.

INTRODUCTION

compounds is poorly characterized. It remains a great
challenge to match the compounds with the subset of
patients most likely to benefit from them. The ideal data
set to achieve this goal would include the systematically
characterized drug responses/sensitivities across a large
cohort of patients. However, for most of the compounds

Massive chemical compounds are currently being
investigated for their potential use as anti-cancer drugs.
Although a few of the compounds have been successfully
used to treat defined patient subsets, a large set of the
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

9404

Oncotarget

tested, in vitro cell line systems provide the only available
experimental data that can be used to identify predictive
response signatures, and most of the compounds
have not been tested in clinical trials. Comparisons
have shown that cell lines mirror many aspects of tumor
molecular pathobiology. Measurements of their genetic
characteristics [1, 2] and therapeutic responses are wellsuited for the development of strategies to identify the
most predictive molecular signatures. For these reasons,
several researchers have made efforts to characterize
relationships between genomic profiles and drug responses
[3–5], as well as to propose drug response prediction
algorithms on the existing panel of cell lines [6–9].
Coupled with the accumulated in vitro cell line
data for drug response identification, another issue that
arises is drug resistance. It should be noted that a precise
definition of “drug response” includes both “sensitive”
and “resistant” response, where “sensitivity” refers to the
effectiveness of different cell line responses to different
drug perturbations, while “resistance” means the reduced
effectiveness of a drug in the perturbation of a cell
line. However previous literatures often mention “drug
response” and “drug sensitivity” as two alternative claims
of the same concept. Therefore in our study, for most cases
readers can take “drug sensitivity” and “drug response”
as identical terms. In addition, cancer drug resistance
can be broadly divided into two categories, primary
and acquired resistance [10, 11]. While primary drug
resistance exists prior to any given treatment, acquired
resistance occurs after the initial therapy. Understanding
the mechanisms of drug resistance, especially primary
resistance, is vital in the development of prospectively
defined therapeutic sequences. Since the choice of firstline therapy determines second and subsequent line
therapies, identification of the optimal first-line therapy
is a priority for clinicians to develop efficient treatment
strategies for patients. By pre-selecting those patients most
likely to respond to drug treatment, clinicians can begin to
optimize therapeutic strategies [12]. With the accumulated
cell line data coupled together with their various genomic
profiles and drug response data, in vitro cell line systems
also provide us with an irresistible opportunity to uncover
anti-cancer primary drug resistance mechanisms. Similar
studies to this will provide useful insights for clinical trials
if patient data are incorporated.
NCI-60 represents the pioneering cell line panel,
where the responses of 60 genomically characterized
cell lines have been measured for several thousands
of compounds [13]. Recently, the Cancer Cell Line
Encyclopedia (CCLE) cataloged genomic and drug
response data for nearly 1,000 cancer cell lines [3]. Also
the NIH launched the LINCS project, which aims to create
a network-based understanding of biology by cataloging
changes in gene expression and other cellular processes
that occur when cells are exposed to a variety of perturbing
agents [14]. As suggested in recent hallmark studies,
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

screening very large cell line collections are expected to
recapitulate known markers and identify novel molecular
genomic determinants of drug response and drug
resistance [4, 6]. The construction of a comprehensive
dataset by integrating these valuable data sources may
provide unprecedented power not only for drug sensitivity
analysis but also for the discovery of drug resistance
mechanisms. Nevertheless, a systematic screening for
such markers using a comprehensive panel of in vitro cell
line systems is still lacking. Furthermore, the implications
of in vitro screening for the in vivo samples is also worthy
of investigation.
In this study, we aimed to collect and curate
comprehensive drug-cell line response data from various
cell line data sources, and then based on this integrated
dataset, we achieved the following goals: First, we
designed a novel and efficient in-silico pipeline to identify
signature genes that may correlate with drug response,
especially primary drug resistance for different cancer
types. We achieved this by integrating an analysis of
transcriptional profiles with genomic characteristics,
specifically the copy number variation of cell lines based
on in vitro drug responses. Second, we presented a novel
collaborative filtering-based drug sensitivity prediction
model and measured it against the launched NCI-DREAM
challenge on breast cancer cells by using the signature
genes. Third, we conducted a comprehensive analysis of
the identified signature genes related to drug resistance
after excluding the cancer cell lines with disparate Copy
Number Variations (CNVs) or mutation profiles. Fourth,
we validated these signature genes and uncovered their
implications in vivo using clinical patient data.
It should be noted that in our study we focused
on the integration of the two cell line profiles, i.e., the
transcriptional profiles (the gene expression) and the CNV
profiles. As suggested in two high impact studies on drug
response analysis [4, 6], gene expression profiles were the
most informative profiles for cell line characterization,
therefore in our study this transcriptional feature was
utilized as a preliminary profile for drug response analysis
in different cell lines. In addition, previous studies have
suggested that transcriptional changes corresponding to
CNVs and alterations in gene dosage can be correlated
with changes in expression levels [15, 16]. It is reported
that in hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells, up to 28%
of strain-dependent expression variation is associated with
copy number variation, supporting the role of germline
CNVs as key contributors to natural phenotypic variations
in laboratory mice [17]. As indicated in the International
HapMap project, CNVs capture 17.7% of the total detected
genetic variations in gene expressions in 14,925 transcripts
[18]. In a lung cancer study, approximately 78% of genes
showed a positive correlation between CNV and gene
expression levels [19]. Nevertheless, we found that a
systematic investigation of drug perturbation integrated
with genomic variation profiles is still lacking. Therefore,
9405

Oncotarget

in our study we further combined gene expression profiles
with CNV information to improve the identification of
potential genes associated with drug responses. Our study
excluded somatic mutation profiles, mainly due to the
fact that: (1) The influence of somatic mutations on drug
sensitivity are well understood [20–24]; (2) The mutation
information for existing cell lines is very sparse, so it
is not suitable for a comprehensive study in its current
stage. (3) We already use the mutation information as a
baseline for cell line description, thus making it possible to
compare the cell line transcription and CNV profiles of the
same mutation background (See Materials and Methods).

cancer cell line data sources were used in our study to
construct the curated dataset (See Materials and Methods).
This dataset was applied to identify the signature genes
relevant to drug sensitivity and to further their resistance
by integrating CNVs and the gene expression of cell lines
with in vitro drug responses. We designed an efficient
in-silico pipeline to achieve this goal and identified the
signature genes with simultaneous modeling of drug
response values across all the drugs and cell lines. The
pipeline efficiently integrates heterogeneous cell line
data sources and has proven to be highly accurate in
in predicting sensitivity (Figure  1, See Materials and
Methods). Specifically, a collaborative filtering based
algorithm [25] incorporating group lasso was introduced
for drug sensitivity prediction and signature gene
identification. These two methods are explained in detail
in Additional file 1. Then for each drug, the signature
genes that may correlate to the drug resistance of a specific
cancer cell type were further screened (See Materials and
Methods).

RESULTS
Overview of the in-silico pipeline to identify
signature genes related to drug response
A large compilation of baseline cancer genome
data and drug response information derived from various

Figure 1: Standard pipeline. Drug response information for 94 drugs on 608 cell lines was curated, and the baseline data for the cancer

genome was carefully collected. A collaborative filtering based algorithm was applied to predict drug sensitivities in cancer cell lines, and
group sparse lasso was applied to select signature genes of drug sensitivities for a specified cancer type. We conducted a comprehensive
analysis of the identified signature genes through pathway enrichment analysis, synthetic lethality analysis, and validated these signature
genes using TCGA clinical patient data. We further selected the signature genes that may correlate well to the primary resistance of a
specific drug on a specific cancer cell type by incorporating CNV information with outlier detection and spearman correlation analyses.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

9406

Oncotarget

Performance of the in-silico drug sensitivity
prediction pipeline

NCI-DREAM drug sensitivity prediction challenge [6]. As
all the cell lines involved in the NCI-DREAM challenge
are breast cancer cell lines, the gene expression of the drug
response signature genes derived from breast cancer cells
were used to perform the prediction. Predictions from 44
different algorithms were experimentally assessed [6],
and our method surpassed all 44 algorithms. As shown in
(Figure 2B), our collaborative filtering model obtained a
weighted probabilistic concordance-index (wpc-index)
[6] of 0.589, while the best performed Bayesian multitask
kernel learning (MKL) method from the DREAM
challenge obtained a wpc-index of 0.583. The concordance
index (c-index) is a nonparametric scoring method that
provides a measure of similarity between two lists of
measurements or ranks [6]. The above results confirmed
that our model is very promising in predicting drug
sensitivities in cancer cell lines.

First, in order to evaluate the efficiency of our
collaborative filtering based drug response prediction
model, support vector regression (SVR) [26] was used
as the baseline method for comparison (See additional
file 1 for the description of SVR). We noted that the
collaborative filtering based method consistently
outperformed SVR on almost all tested drugs, and
showed an average RMSE (Root mean squared error)
that was 17% lower than SVR in the response prediction
of 94 collected drugs by using transcriptional profiles
(Figure  2A). RMSE is frequently used to measure the
differences between values predicted by a model or an
estimator and the values actually observed. Here, RMSE
was used to assess the difference between the observed
drug response measures (IC50) and the output of the fitted
model (a lower RMSE value indicating better performance
of the fitted model) [26].
Furthermore, Group Sparse Lasso was used to
derive signature genes relevant to drug responses of a
given cancer type based on transcriptional information
(See Materials and Methods). By using signature genes,
we tested our prediction method on data released from the

Signature genes related to drug sensitivity
Signature genes of drug sensitivity were derived for
five different cancer types respectively using Group Sparse
Lasso (Additional file 2): breast cancer (526  genes),
hematopoietic and lymphoid cancer (730 genes), small cell
lung cancer (SCLC; 520 genes), non small cell lung cancer

Figure 2: Performance assessment. (A) Performance comparison between SVR and collaborative filtering based drug sensitivity

predictions using gene expression profiles. (B) Performance of collaborative filtering based sensitivity predictions compared with the
NCI-Dream challenge based on the wpc-index.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

9407

Oncotarget

(NSCLC; 770  genes), and skin cancer (558  genes). As
shown in Figure 3, the signature genes selected for the five
cancer types were identified to have no specific enrichment
distribution in a particular chromosome. In addition, we
also found that “Ribosome” was the most significantly
enriched pathway for the signature genes of breast cancer,
SCLC, NSCLC and skin cancer (Additional File 3).
We also noticed that a large proportion of the signature
genes were specific to only one of the five cancer types
(Figure 3): 38.97% for breast cancer (205 genes), 58.08%
for hematopoietic and lymphoid cancer (424  genes),
44.23% for SCLC (230  genes), 46.62% for NSCLC
(359  genes), and 43.01% for skin cancer (240  genes).
“Complement and coagulation cascades”, “Hematopoietic
cell lineage”, “Histidine metabolism”, and “ECM-receptor
interaction” are the pathways that were significantly
enriched by signature genes specific to breast cancer,
hematopoietic and lymphoid cancer, NSCLC and skin
cancer respectively, while there were no significantly
enriched pathways found for SCLC (Additional File 3).
“Complement and coagulation cascades” play an
important role in immune response. The complement
system as a main column of innate immunity and the
coagulation system as a main column in hemostasis
undergo massive activation soon after injury. Complement
activation could potentially be a very important event in
anti-cancer immunity and immunotherapy as it may not
only help with tumor clearance but also promote tumor
growth [27, 28]. Coagulation disorders are common
in neoplastic patients. A hypercoagulable state may be
induced when malignant cells interact directly with a
hemostatic system and activate the coagulation cascade.
Thrombin is formed by the proteolytic cleavage of

coagulation factor II in the coagulation cascade and
acts, in turn, as a serine protease that converts soluble
fibrinogens into insoluble strands of fibrin, and catalyzes
many other coagulation-related reactions. It has already
been reported that thrombin could support tumor cell
malignancy [29]. Ana-Teresa et al. studied 12 candidate
genes that are implicated in the etiology of breast cancer
and found these genes were functionally involved in the
complement and coagulation cascades pathway [30].
All the significant gene sets identified in this
step provided an initial data set to analyze the cell line
characteristics correlated with drug sensitivities for
different cancer types. It should be noted that the current
gene sets were identified using input cell line based drug
response data. With the accumulation of more cell lines
and drug test data, we believe that such gene sets will
become more accurate to uncover drug response related
mechanisms. Although the former comparison with
NCI-DREAM validated, to some extent, the rationality
of selected genes from our study, more comprehensive
experimental validations are needed going forward.
The goal of this study was not to validate our identified
gene sets, but rather to provide an efficient approach for
identifying the gene sets. Nevertheless, we also discussed
these genes below based on various other analyses.

Functional association of signature genes with
synthetic lethality
A large body of evidence points out that the onset
of synthetic lethality (SL) may provide a useful tool for
overcoming drug resistance to anticancer regimens. Here,
we mapped the targets of the 94 collected drugs and the

Figure 3: Overlap and genomic distribution of signature genes as related to drug sensitivity.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

9408

Oncotarget

The expression patterns of drug sensitivity
related genes differ across various tumor sample
subtypes

selected signature genes to a well curated dataset of the
SL gene pairs and synthetic dosage lethality (SDL) gene
pairs, as presented in the work of Livnat Jerby-Arnon [31]
(See Materials and Methods). Only 21  non-redundant
SDL pairs (from 6 drugs) and 1 non-redundant SL pair
(from 1 drug) overlapped with the gene pairs, where gene
A comes from the drug targets and gene B comes from
the signature gene sets (See Additional file 4). Most of the
paired genes were distributed on different chromosomes,
while only a few of them were located on the same
chromosome (Figure 4). In most of these SDL pairs gene
B shows a higher expression value in the sensitive cells
than in the resistant ones. The scarcity of mapped results
such as these was probably due to several key facts:(1)
Our initial drug sets are relatively small (94 drugs), and
their targets (obtained from DrugBank) only account for
a very small proportion of the SDL and SL genes; (2) The
identification of SL and SDL pairs is still an open question,
and currently there is no golden standard gene pair list
in existence. Finally, (3) the synthetic lethality/synthetic
dosage lethality is only one possible mechanism of drug
sensitivity among various others, thus it is not surprising
that we only mapped a few of the genes we identified to
the background SDL and SL gene sets. Nevertheless, this
analysis indicated that correlating drug targets and drug
sensitivity related genes with SDL or SL pairs, may provide
new clues to uncover drug sensitivity related mechanisms.
One validated result in this study was a mapped gene
pair among these SDL pairs, i.e., EGFR (Gene A) and
IGFBP3 (Gene B) correlated to Gefitinib sensitivity.
It has been reported that IGFBP3 is under-expressed in
Gefitinib-resistant cells, and the addition of recombinant
IGFBP3 restored the ability of Gefitinib to downregulate
PI3K/AKT signaling and inhibit cell growth [32].
This indicates that the overexpression of IGFBP3 could
induce sensitivity to EGFR-TKI Gefitinib.

In this study we aimed to investigate the implications
of the drug sensitivity related genes identified in the in vitro
cell line systems for tumor samples. The gene expression
data of tumor samples were retrieved from the TCGA for
breast cancer and non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC),
given that other cancer types in our cell line study are not
included in the TCGA. The signature genes selected for the
two types of cancer cells were separately used to cluster
the breast tumor samples and the NSCLC samples. We
performed an unsupervised hierarchical cluster analysis
for breast tumor samples using signature genes related to
drug sensitivity in breast cancer cells. From Figure 5A, one
sees that the signature genes showed different expression
patterns across the four mRNA-expression subtypes:
luminal A, luminal B, HER2E, and basal-like. Similarly,
after conducting the unsupervised hierarchical clustering
for NSCLC, the expression patterns of the signature genes
for NSCLC also revealed obvious differences between
adenocarcinoma and squamous cell carcinoma samples
(Figure  5B). Generally, different drug treatments are
effective for different subtypes of cancer, which implies
that patients with different tumor subtypes respond
differently to the same medication. This indicated that our
selected signature genes derived from cancer cells could be
used to classify the tumor patients, and could be extended
to predict clinical responses to drug treatments in vivo.

Signature genes related to drug primary
resistance
Based on the selected signature genes related to
drug sensitivities, we further screened the drug primary

Figure 4: Genomic distribution of synthetic dosage lethality and synthetic lethality. The circle with orange lines represents

the SDL pairs, while the one with green lines represents the SL pairs, as documented in the work of Livnat Jerby-Arnon [26]. The black
lines were SDL/SL pairs mapped to the targets of the 94 drugs and the related signature genes.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

9409

Oncotarget

genes for breast cancer cell lines, we identified TOP2A
as a potential indicator of drug response to docetaxel
in breast cancer. In our cell line analysis, the expression
and CNV of TOP2A demonstrated a high correlation
with the cell line activity profile for the drug docetaxel.
TOP2A was downregulated in resistant tumor samples
in contrast to sensitive samples (Figure  6). A previous
study on NSCLC A549 cells reported that the induction
of apoptosis by docetaxel requires DNA replication, and
replication-medicated double-strand breaks (DSBs) are
critical triggers of docetaxel-induced apoptosis [34].
TOP2A encodes the key enzyme in DNA replication and
makes DSBs. This further supports the potential role of
TOP2A in drug response to docetaxel in breast cancer
cells. Interestingly, TOP2A presented the same trend of
gene expression change between the sensitive groups
and resistant groups of the tumor patients as observed
in the docetaxel sensitive and resistant cancer cells. This
indicates that TOP2A may be a marker gene relevant to
docetaxel resistance in breast cancer patients.

resistance related genes based on the integration of gene
expression profiles with CNV. Our basic assumptions for
primary drug resistance gene screening were that: (1) Drug
resistance genes were also drug response related. In other
words, we screened drug resistance genes from the former
selected signature genes related to drug sensitivities
(responses); (2) for each drug tested on multiple cell
lines for a specific cancer type, we sorted the cell lines
according to their response values (measured in pIC50) in
an ascending pattern, and the expression levels of the drug
resistance genes in the top activity as well as the bottom
activity of the cell lines needed to be well-correlated with
the corresponding cell line activities. This can be achieved
by, first, making discretization of the cell line activity
data to automatically categorize the cell line as sensitive,
moderate or resistant to the drug perturbation. Then the
spearman correlation of the expression levels of the genes
in the sensitive and resistant cell lines with the activity
of the sensitive and resistant cell lines can be calculated;
(3) the CNV levels of the drug resistance genes in the
top activity as well as the bottom activity of the cell lines
needed to be well-correlated with the corresponding cell
line activities.
Based on these criteria, for each drug we identified
signature genes related to primary drug resistance as listed
in Additional file 5. We further analyzed the functions of
these genes in the following section.

Genes associated with cell communication are
potentially relevant to cisplatin resistance in
breast cancer
A similar process was performed on the gene
expression data from 28 women with stage II or III triplenegative breast cancer (TNBC) [35]. The Miller-Payne
scoring system was used to assess tumor responses after
four cycles of cisplatin at 75 mg/m2 every 21 days. Four
marker genes (ID4, SOSTDC1, SLC26A2, TNC) relevant
to drug activity to cisplatin on breast cancer cells were
derived from the signature genes for breast cancers
(Figure  7). Upregulated ID4, SOSTDC1, SLC26A2 and
downregulated TNC may play a role in regulating drug
resistance. Among the genes presented, we found that TNC
were involved in cell adhesion and cell communication
which has been linked to cisplatin-induced cell death
[36]. The mechanisms responsible for cisplatin resistance

Downregulated TOP2A as a potential indicator
for docetaxel drug resistance in breast cancer
patients
To investigate the implications of the genes
identified in in vitro cell line systems for patient samples,
we collected gene expression microarray data obtained
from 24 breast cancer tumor biopsies through a clinical
trial, which measured the responses of patients to
docetaxel neoadjuvant treatment [33]. Based on our
previously identified drug resistance related signature

Figure 5: Tumor sample clustering using the identified drug sensitivity related genes. (A) Tumor sample clustering of breast
cancer. (B) Tumor sample clustering of NSCLC.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

9410

Oncotarget

were only reported sporadically, which included the loss
of p53 function, overexpression of HER2/neu, activation
of the PI3K/AKT pathway etc [37]. The indicator role of
SOSTDC1, ID4 and TNC for cisplatin resistance may lie
in the loss of p53 function and the activation of the PI3K/
Akt pathway. We were the first group to summarize the
potential role of SOSTDC1, ID4 and TNC in cisplatinresistance, as shown in (Figure 7B). It can be seen that the
gene expression of SOSTDC1 and ID4 is regulated via the
TP53 pathway in breast cancer [38–41], and that ID4 may
influence the expression of proangiogenic cytokines, such
as IL8 and GRO-alpha, increasing the angiogenic potential
of cancer cells [39]. [43, 44] Besides, TNC was found to be
a negative regulator of the AKT/PKB signal transduction
pathway [42]. However, the role of SLC26A2 in cisplatin
resistance is still unclear. Given that these genes showed
accordant trends of change in gene expression values in
the TNBC patients as in the breast cancer cells (Figure 7),
they may also be relevant to cisplatin resistance in TNBC
patients.

with primary resistance to doxorubicin in breast cancer
cells (Figure 8). Among the 19 genes, TOP2A showed a
higher expression value and higher CNV values in breast
cancer cells sensitive to doxorubicin than those in the
resistant cells, while S100P and S100A4 showed lower
expression values and lower CNV values in the sensitive
cells than those in the resistant ones. Doxorubicin induces
cancer cell death by many mechanisms, the most notable is
Top2A poisoning, and also the down-regulation of Top2A
is obviously detected in doxorubicin resistant MCF7 cells
[45]. Overexpression of S100P and S100A4 has been
described in doxorubicin-resistant cell lines [46, 47].
BLVRB, MGST1 and H19 have been linked to multidrug
resistance, including resistance to doxorubicin [48–50].
H19 has been found to increase cellular doxorubicin
accumulation levels via suppressing MDR1/P-glycoprotein
expression which is important in decreasing doxorubicin
accumulation levels [50]. Additionally, ST3GAL1 encodes
asialytransferase which participates in the sialylation
that is associated with doxorubicin resistance [51].
A possible mechanism responsible for sialytransferase
-related doxorubicin resistance may be due to the
PI3K/AKT signaling pathway. The manipulation of
the sialytransferase genes’ expression modulated the
activity of the PI3K/AKT signaling pathway and its
downstream target, thus regulating the proportionally
mutative expression of P-glycoprotein (P-gp) and
MDR-related protein 1 (MRP1) [51]. PRMT6 may also
relate to the PI3K/AKT mechanism via PTEN. PTEN is a
tumor suppressor gene that inhibits the PI3K pathway, and
lower PRMT6 expression may result in increased PTEN
expression, decreased cell cycle progression and increased
breast cancer cell apoptosis [52].

Genes modulating PI3K pathways demonstrate
a consistent trend of expression change in both
primary and acquired doxorubicin resistance
Doxorubicin is a naturally occurring anthracycline
antibiotic that is broadly considered the most active single
agent available for the treatment of breast cancer [43].
On the other hand, cancer drug resistance limits its use,
and ABCB1(MDR1, P-gp), ABCC1 (MRP1) as well as
other transporters have been characterized in previous
studies for their roles in drug resistance [44]. In our study,
19 genes were identified as potential markers associated

Figure 6: TOP2A gene expression and CNV in resistant and sensitive cell lines as well as in tumor samples. The dash line
represents spearman correlation cutoff: 0.7

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

9411

Oncotarget

Figure 7: Gene expression of 4 genes in the resistant and sensitive cell lines as well as in TNBC tumor samples.
The implications for the potential role of ID4, SOSTDC1 and TNC in cisplatin – resistance were presented. The expression value was
log2-transformed. The dash line represents spearman correlation cutoff: 0.7
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

9412

Oncotarget

DISCUSSION

further identifies drug resistance genes for different cancer
types, by using an integrative analysis of gene expression
profiles with copy number variations (CNVs) of cell lines
as well as their in vitro drug responses; (2) we presented
a novel collaborative filtering based drug sensitivity
prediction model, which outperformed the 44 algorithms
submitted to the DREAM competition using breast cancer
cell data; (3) the functions of the identified signature genes

In the current study, we collected a comprehensive
compilation of drug-cell line response data from a large
panel of cancer cell lines. Leveraging this dataset, we
achieved the following three goals: (1) we designed a
novel and efficient in-silico pipeline to identify signature
genes that may be relevant to drug sensitivity, and that

Figure 8: Gene expression and the CNVs of 19 genes in the resistant and sensitive cell lines. The dash line represents
spearman correlation cutoff: 0.7

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

9413

Oncotarget

related to drug sensitivities were carefully analyzed at the
pathway level, the synthetic lethality level, as well as
applied to the classification of the different subtypes of the
TCGA tumor samples. Additionally, our in-silico pipeline
has shown promise in: (1) translating genomic data into
customized maker genes relevant to the resistance of
specific drugs in individual patients with a specific cancer
type; and (2) serving as the bridge to explore common
mechanisms between primary resistance and acquired
resistance to a given drug.
Testing a large number of cell lines and compounds
is one important prerequisite for achieving remarkable
power in predicting drug responses. Here, we curated a
large compilation of drug-cell line response information,
consisting of 94 drugs on 608 cancer cell lines. Using the
simultaneous modeling of drug responses across all the drugs
and cell lines from the large dataset, our in-silico pipeline,
which incorporates collaborative filtering based algorithms
together with Group Sparse Lasso, achieved superior
performance in predicting drug responses and identifying
signature genes that may correlate with drug sensitivity and
drug resistance. This model allows for the integration of
different data sources unlike traditional statistical models.
According to the DREAM competition, gene expression
microarrays consistently provided the best predictive power
among the individual profiling data sets of DNA copynumber variations, transcript expressions, mutations, DNA
methylation and protein abundance [6]. When applying
our in-silico pipeline to the selected signature genes with
relevant drug sensitivities for breast cancer, we achieved a
wpc-index of 0.589 in the DREAM competition, which was
superior to all the other reported approaches.
A great disparity was observed in the signature genes
identified for the 5 different cancer types, which indicates
that genes relevant to drug resistance are highly dependent
on the disease type. As somatic mutations and genomic
plasticity associated with cancer are the foundation of
drug resistance [22], cancer heterogeneity explains why
every cancer expresses a different array of genes relevant
to drug sensitivity and resistance. Furthermore, we also
found that the selected signature genes for breast cancer
and NSCLC show distinct expression patterns across the
different subtypes of the TCGA tumor samples.
Based on previous studies which have demonstrated
that DNA CNVs are influential factors in altered gene
expression levels in cancer, CNV information on the
corresponding cancer cells was integrated with the
selected signature genes to help identify these potential
maker genes that may correlate to resistance of a specific
drug in a specific cancer cell type. To our knowledge,
this is the first time that baseline copy number variation
has been integrated with the gene expression of cancer
cell lines in identifying maker genes relevant to drug
resistance. The marker genes identified for each drug were
quite different, and this also implies that genes relevant
to drug resistance are highly drug-specific. The current
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

limitation of our method is that we can only identify
genes relevant to drug resistance in the pre-collected
drugs, totaling 94 at present. Nevertheless, with the rapid
accumulation of high-throughput experiments such as the
LINCS project, our method will eventually be applied to
massive compound data.
The potential indicator role of the genes in resistance
to the corresponding drugs was also explored in the
clinical cancer patients. For docetaxel, a well-established
clinically anti-mitotic chemotherapy medication that works
by interfering with cell division, the gene TOP2A, which
encodes the key enzyme involved in DNA replication was
proposed as the marker gene most relevant to docetaxelresistance in breast cancer patients. In addition, the potential
maker genes relevant to cisplatin-resistance in TNBC
patients were involved in cell communication, which has
been correlated with cell death induced by cisplatin [36].
Although the effectiveness of these indicator genes needs
further validation, our in-silico pipeline provides the
opportunity to translate genomic data derived from baseline
cancer cell lines into actionable, and individualized maker
genes relevant to the resistance of specific drugs in clinical
applications.
In addition to primary or intrinsic resistance,
acquired resistance also exists. Primary resistance is a
pre-existing resistance that is present prior to the exposure
to a given drug. In contrast, acquired resistance develops
in tumors that were initially sensitive to the drug, after
exposure to this drug [53]. In this work, a comprehensive
compilation of baseline data of cancer genomes and drugcell line response data were explored with the ultimate
aim to characterize the mechanism of primary resistance.
Unfortunately, the long-term effectiveness of these drugs
is hindered by the development of drug resistance due to
the mutation of the targeted protein, the amplification of
alternative oncogenes, or the inactivation of alternative
survival pathways [54]. Taking doxorubicin as an
example, we attempted to explore the association between
primary resistance and acquired resistance to drugs. Genes
modulating PI3K pathway showed a consistent trend of
gene expression changes, be it in a primary resistance or
acquired resistance setting for doxorubicin. These genes
may be the gateway to explore the association between
primary resistance and acquired resistance to doxorubicin.
Finally, the rational of our identified drug sensitivity
or resistance related genes remains to be further validated
by more comprehensive experimental tests, while the
basic goal of the current study was to provide an efficient
framework for identifying such genes based on the
accumulated in vitro cell line and drug perturbation data,
rather than the validation of the identified genes. Such
methods will prove invaluable in the exploration of cancer
resistance mechanisms when, in the near future, we will be
able to access millions of drug perturbation data generated
from in vitro cell line systems and the individual patients
receiving personalized medical care.
9414

Oncotarget

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Predicting drug sensitivity based on a
collaborative filtering method

Data collection

Collaborative filtering [25] was incorporated in
this work to predict drug sensitivities in cancer cell
lines and compare them with the methods from the
NCI-DREAM challenge. The collaborative filtering
algorithm has the advantage of simultaneously modeling
heterogeneous drug-cell line sensitivities across multiple
drugs. To implement our method, the following data
matrices were provided: (i) a drug sensitivity matrix
with −log (IC50nM) information of 94 drugs on 608

The gene expression, copy-number variation
(CNV), and cancer cell line mutation data was retrieved
from a website compiling genomic information on
947 human cancer cell lines, namely the Cancer Cell Line
Encyclopedia (CCLE) [3]. We used gene expression data
from Affymetrix U133 Plus 2.0 Arrays, CNV data from
Affymetrix SNP6.0 arrays, and Oncomap mutation data.
To exclude inconsistencies among different data sets
and/or different platforms, gene expressions, CNVs, the
mutation data of cancer cell lines from other studies were
not used in this work.
Drug information and drug response measures
(IC50) were retrieved and curated from the CCLE website
together with two other large pharmacogenomic studies,
including the Cancer Genome Project (CGP): Genomics
of Drug Sensitivity in Cancer (GDSC) [5], and the NCIDREAM project [6]. IC50  measurements across all
studies (IC50 represents the concentration of a drug that
is required for 50% inhibition in vitro) were all set to
pIC50 = −log10 (IC50M). In total, there were 168 drugs
tested on 608 cancer cell lines with all three genomic data
types of cancer cell lines available.
It should be noted that the IC50 data of some of the
168 drugs were scattered across multiple cancer types.
Drugs missing too much IC50 data (with missing data
on > 40% of the 608 cancer cell lines) were removed.
Finally, 94 drugs were included for further study. All of
these data are available in Additional file 6.

94 × 608

cell lines, denoted as S ∈
; (ii) a similarity
matrix of cell lines measured as the cosine similarity
of features of cell lines (gene expression profiles

Wij  ∈ 
of cell lines), denoted as =
W
; (iii) a similarity matrix of drugs measured using
Tanimoto coefficient [55, 56] based on drug features
(881 binary fingerprint from PubChem), denoted as
C

608 × 608

=
W D WijD  ∈  94×94 . Then, a matrix factorization
based model was applied to solve two matrices
T
×k
608×k
and V ∈  +
to represent S ≈ UV ,
U ∈  94
+

where k is the dimensionality of the low-dimensional
representation. (See Supplementary Materials)
We tested our collaborative filtering model on the
data released from the NCI-DREAM drug sensitivity
prediction challenge [6]. Participants in the challenge
were supplied with various profiling data for 53 breast
cancer cell lines, and the drug response data of 35 cell
lines for 28 compounds (training data). Participants were
challenged to predict a ranked list of the most sensitive
(to be ranked first) to most the resistant (to be ranked last)
cell lines for each individual drug across all remaining
18 cell lines (testing data). The assessment of predictions
was based on participant’s ranking of all 28 therapeutic
compounds across all 18 test cell lines. The same training
data and testing data used in the DREAM competition
were set for our collaborative filtering model. 7 cell lines
were excluded due to missing gene expression profiles.
Furthermore, the drug combination (4 – HC + Dox)
and the antibody (Trastuzumab) were removed due to
the unavailability of the 881 bit binary fingerprint from
Pubchem. –log10 (GI50) was used as the dose-response
value as it was used in DREAM algorithms. A weighted,
probabilistic concordance-index (wpc-index) was used
to evaluate the final performance of our collaborative
filtering model.

A general pipeline for drug sensitivity prediction
and signature gene identification
Once the baseline cancer genome and drug response
data were carefully collected and curated, an efficient insilico pipeline was set up to identify the signature genes
relevant to drug sensitivity and resistance for different
cancer types. A collaborative filtering based algorithm [25]
was applied to predict drug sensitivities in cancer cell
lines, and Group Sparse Lasso was applied to select
the signature genes of drug sensitivities for a specified
cancer type. The particular reasons for designing such
a pipeline included their highly accurate prediction
rates, simultaneous integration of multiple drug-cell
line data and the scalability for further significant gene
identification [53]. We further conducted a comprehensive
analysis of the identified signature genes using pathway
enrichment analysis, synthetic lethality analysis, and
validated these signature genes using TCGA clinical
patient data. We screened the signature genes that may
correlate with the primary resistance of a specific drug
on a specific cancer cell type by incorporating CNV
information with the outlier detection, cell line activity
discretization and spearman correlation analysis.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

c

Identifying drug sensitivity related genes for a
specified cancer type
Group Sparse Lasso was applied to select signature
genes related to drug responses for specified cancer types,
9415

Oncotarget

Clustering of the tumor samples using drug
sensitivity related genes from cancer cells

which was presented as a very robust identification feature
in the machine learning community [57]. This method can
be seamlessly incorporated into the collaborative filtering
based cell line response prediction model, and can be
used for feature selection across multiple drug samples. In
the aforementioned part of response prediction, we have
obtained two matrices U ∈  +

94×k

and V ∈  +

608×k

Gene expression data of breast cancer and non-small
cell lung cancer (NSCLC) tumor samples were retrieved
from TCGA. In total, gene expression profiles were
curated for 396 breast tumor samples with prior knowledge
of their mRNA-expression subtypes: luminal A, luminal B,
HER2E, and basal-like. Gene expression profiles were
also collected for 540 samples and 548 samples of
squamous NSCLC patients and adenocarcinoma NSCLC
patients respectively. First, the gene expression data on
breast tumor samples was picked out for the signature
genes derived from breast cancer cell lines. Then, the
gene expression data was used to perform unsupervised
hierarchical clustering of these tumor samples. The
NSCLC samples were clustered in a similar way. It should
be noted that the gene expression data on tumor samples
was not available for all of the selected signature genes
(Additional file 7). As this only accounts for a small
proportion of the signature genes, the gene expression
pattern for the tumor subtypes would barely be affected.

to

T

represent the sensitivity matrix as S ≈ UV . In the Group
Sparse Lasso process, with corresponding feature matrices

F D ∈  94×h1 and F D ∈  l×h2 , where h1 is the length
of Pubchem fingerprint and h2 represents the amount of
genes in the expression profile, l is the number of cell lines
for a specific cancer type. The feature selection task for
the drug structure or genes on the whole genome could be
treated as the 1 /  q -norm regularized multi-class least
squares problem, which resulted in two sparse feature
weight matrices

P ∈  h1×k and Q ∈  h2 ×k , where

U ≈ F D P and V ≈ F C Q . There were several rows in
these two feature matrices with zero elements, indicating
that the corresponding features were not important and
were not selected (See Supplementary Materials).

Identifying potential drug resistance genes for a
specific drug in a specific cancer type

Pathway analysis

As the main purpose of this study was to investigate
drug resistance with the cell line expression profiles,
interference from CNVs and mutations was excluded. An
outlier detection process was designed to make sure that
the cancer cell lines kept a concordant CNV and mutation
background but with different expression backgrounds.
Outlier detection was performed on CNV and mutation
data respectively. For each profile, a cell line was defined
as an outlier if the Euclidean Distance to the geometrical
center of these cell lines fell into the furthest 10% ranked
ones and was removed after further analysis. It should be
noted that all silent mutations were excluded, nor were
they used to perform the outlier detection.

Outlier detection

Gene set enrichment analyses were performed for
the functional annotation of the gene signatures for the
5 cancer types. Functional Annotation Tools in DAVID
Bioinformatics Resources [58] were used to carry out
these analyses. KEGG pathways with p-values of less
than 0.05 and more than two genes were considered
significantly enriched functional pathways and used for
further analysis.

Synthetic lethality analysis
Synthetic lethality (SL) occurs when the inhibition
of two genes is lethal while the inhibition of each
individual gene is not. Gene A and gene B form an SL
pair if the inactivation of gene A renders the essentiality
of gene B, while the two genes form a synthetic dosage
lethality (SDL) pair if the over-activity of gene A renders
gene B essential. In the work of Livnat Jerby-Arnon [31],
SL and SDL interactions in cancer were identified by
analyzing large volumes of cancer genomic data. We
mapped the targets of the 94 collected drugs to gene A, and
fished out the corresponding gene B from the identified SL
and SDL interactions by Livnat Jerby-Arnon et al. Then,
those SL and SDL pairs remained in drug targets (gene A),
and signature genes (gene B).

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Automatic discretization of cell line activity data
For each drug tested on multiple cell lines for a
specific cancer type, we sorted the cell lines according
to their response values (measured in pIC50) in an
ascending pattern, and the expression levels of the drug
resistance genes in the top activity as well as the bottom
activity of the cell lines needed to correlate well with the
corresponding cell line activities. This can be achieved by
firstly making discretization of the cell line activity data
to automatically categorize the cell line into sensitive,
moderate or resistant to drug perturbation. Such an
automatic discretization was performed by an Qualitative
Representation method, which was first introduced by us

9416

Oncotarget

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS AND FUNDING

to address the discretization of microarray data [59]. The
basic idea of this Qualitative Representation is to represent
the cell line activity in a qualitative or semi-quantitative
manner by considering the whole distribution of the
activities (Detailed algorithm can be referred in [59].
As a result, the qualitative representation of the cell
line activity is composed of signed integers and 0’s, i.e.
sensitive (+1), resistance (–1), or moderate (0). And all the
subsequent analyses are conducted only for sensitive and
resistance cell lines.

This work was supported by the Innovation Program
of Shanghai Municipal Education Commission (Grant
No. 20002360059), the Fundamental Research Funds
for the Central Universities (Grant No. 2000219084),
National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant
No. 61173117, No. 61572361) and National 863 Funding
(Grant No. 2012AA020405).

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST

Screening resistance related genes by spearman
correlation calculation

The authors declare that they have no competing
interests.

Drug resistance related genes were screened when
the following criteria were satisfied:
(1) The spearman correlation calculated between drug
activity in the sensitive and resistant cell lines and
the gene expression in the sensitive and resistant cell
lines was > 0.7.
(2) The genes should show the same tendency between
the spearman correlation value of drug activity and
the gene expression and that of drug activity and
CNV (both positive or both negative).

REFERENCES
  1.	 Heiser LM, Sadanandam A, Kuo WL, Benz SC, Goldstein TC,
Ng S, Gibb WJ, Wang NJ, Ziyad S, Tong F, Bayani N,
Hu Z, Billig JI, et al. Subtype and pathway specific
responses to anticancer compounds in breast cancer. Proc
Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012; 109:2724–2729.
  2.	 Domcke S, Sinha R, Levine DA, Sander C, Schultz N.
Evaluating cell lines as tumour models by comparison of
genomic profiles. Nat Commun. 2013; 4:2126.

Clinical trial datasets

  3.	 Barretina J, Caponigro G, Stransky N, Venkatesan K,
Margolin AA, Kim S, Wilson CJ, Lehar J, Kryukov GV,
Sonkin D, Reddy A, Liu M, Murray L, et al. The Cancer
Cell Line Encyclopedia enables predictive modelling of
anticancer drug sensitivity. Nature. 2012; 483:603–607.

We collected clinical trial datasets that assessed
tumor gene expression before drug treatment (using
expression microarrays) and subsequently measured a
clear drug response phenotype. Patients needed to have
been treated with monotherapeutic drugs among the
94 collected drugs tracked in this study. Additionally,
sensitivities to the particular drug needed to have been
quantified on the cell lines of the same cancer type. Finally,
we obtained two datasets with one for docetaxel [33]
(GEO accession number: GSE349; GSE350) and one for
cisplatin [35] (GEO accession number: GSE18864). Using
these data, we attempted to check whether our signature
genes derived from cancer cells could be used as marker
genes associated with clinical drug responses.

  4.	 Garnett MJ, Edelman EJ, Heidorn SJ, Greenman CD,
Dastur A, Lau KW, Greninger P, Thompson IR, Luo X,
Soares J, Liu Q, Iorio F, Surdez D, et al. Systematic
identification of genomic markers of drug sensitivity in
cancer cells. Nature. 2012; 483:570–575.
  5.	 Yang W, Soares J, Greninger P, Edelman EJ, Lightfoot H,
Forbes S, Bindal N, Beare D, Smith JA, Thompson IR,
Ramaswamy S, Futreal PA, Haber DA, et al. Genomics
of Drug Sensitivity in Cancer (GDSC): a resource for
therapeutic biomarker discovery in cancer cells. Nucleic
Acids Res. 2013; 41:D955–961.

Datasets of acquired resistance

  6.	 Costello JC, Heiser LM, Georgii E, Gonen M, Menden MP,
Wang NJ, Bansal M, Ammad-Ud-Din M, Hintsanen P,
Khan SA, Mpindi JP, Kallioniemi O, Honkela A, et al. A
community effort to assess and improve drug sensitivity
prediction algorithms. Nat Biotechnol. 2014; 32:1202–1212.

We also collected datasets of acquired resistance
with gene expression profiles at different stages during
the development of acquired resistance. As the tested drug
needed to fall within the 94 collected drugs, we obtained
only one eligible dataset for dororubicin [8] (ArrayExpress
accession number: E-MTAB-1643). Human breast cancer
MCF7 cells were selected for dororubicin resistance by
first treating the cells with 1 μM dororubicin for 48 hours.
The cells were then exposed to 100  nM dororubicin
for 2 weeks. After this period, the surviving cells were
resistant to further dororubicin treatment.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

  7.	 Daemen A, Griffith OL, Heiser LM, Wang NJ, Enache OM,
Sanborn Z, Pepin F, Durinck S, Korkola JE, Griffith M,
Hur JS, Huh N, Chung J, et al. Modeling precision treatment
of breast cancer. Genome Biol. 2013; 14:R110.
  8.	 Geeleher P, Cox NJ, Huang RS. Clinical drug response
can be predicted using baseline gene expression levels and
in vitro drug sensitivity in cell lines. Genome Biol. 2014;
15:R47.
9417

Oncotarget

  9.	 Masica DL, Karchin R. Collections of simultaneously
altered genes as biomarkers of cancer cell drug response.
Cancer Res. 2013; 73:1699–1708.

23.	 Soundararajan V, Aravamudan M. Global connectivity of
hub residues in Oncoprotein structures encodes genetic
factors dictating personalized drug response to targeted
Cancer therapy. Scientific reports. 2014; 4:7294.

10.	 Meads MB, Gatenby RA, Dalton WS. Environmentmediated drug resistance: a major contributor to minimal
residual disease. Nat Rev Cancer. 2009; 9:665–674.

24.	 Vuong H, Cheng F, Lin CC, Zhao Z. Functional conse­
quences of somatic mutations in cancer using protein
pocket-based prioritization approach. Genome medicine.
2014; 6:81.

11.	 Patch AM, Christie EL, Etemadmoghadam D, Garsed DW,
George J, Fereday S, Nones K, Cowin P, Alsop K, Bailey PJ,
Kassahn KS, Newell F, Quinn MC, et al. Whole-genome
characterization of chemoresistant ovarian cancer. Nature.
2015; 521:489–494.

25.	 Barranco M, Martínez L. A Method for Weighting Multivalued Features in Content-Based Filtering. In: GarcíaPedrajas N, Herrera F, Fyfe C, Benítez J, Ali M, eds. Trends
in Applied Intelligent Systems: Springer Berlin Heidelberg,
2010; 409–418.

12.	 Porta C, Sabbatini R, Procopio G, Paglino C, Galligioni E,
Ortega C. Primary resistance to tyrosine kinase inhibitors
in patients with advanced renal cell carcinoma: state-of-thescience. Expert Rev Anticancer Ther. 2012; 12:1571–1577.

26.	 C.-C. Chang C-JL. LIBSVM: a library for support vector
machines. ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and
Technology. 2011; 2:27:21–27:27.

13.	 Shoemaker RH. The NCI60  human tumour cell line
anticancer drug screen. Nat Rev Cancer. 2006; 6:813–823.
http://lincs.hms.harvard.edu/niepel-

27.	 Kolev M, Towner L, Donev R. Complement in cancer
and cancer immunotherapy. Archivum immunologiae et
therapiae experimentalis. 2011; 59:407–419.

15.	 Chaignat E, Yahya-Graison EA, Henrichsen CN, Chrast J,
Schutz F, Pradervand S, Reymond A. Copy number
variation modifies expression time courses. Genome Res.
2011; 21:106–113.

28.	 Markiewski MM, DeAngelis RA, Benencia F, RicklinLichtsteiner SK, Koutoulaki A, Gerard C, Coukos G,
Lambris JD. Modulation of the antitumor immune response
by complement. Nature immunology. 2008; 9:1225–1235.

16.	 Orozco LD, Cokus SJ, Ghazalpour A, Ingram-Drake L,
Wang S, van Nas A, Che N, Araujo JA, Pellegrini M, Lusis AJ.
Copy number variation influences gene expression and
metabolic traits in mice. Hum Mol Genet. 2009; 18:
4118–4129.

29.	 Hu L, Lee M, Campbell W, Perez-Soler R, Karpatkin S.
Role of endogenous thrombin in tumor implantation,
seeding, and spontaneous metastasis. Blood. 2004;
104:2746–2751.

14.	 Center. WotHL.
bmcbiol-2014/.

30.	 Maia AT, Spiteri I, Lee AJ, O’Reilly M, Jones L, Caldas C,
Ponder BA. Extent of differential allelic expression of
candidate breast cancer genes is similar in blood and breast.
Breast cancer research. 2009; 11:R88.

17.	 Cahan P, Li Y, Izumi M, Graubert TA. The impact of
copy number variation on local gene expression in mouse
hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells. Nat Genet. 2009;
41:430–437.

31.	 Jerby-Arnon L, Pfetzer N, Waldman YY, McGarry L, James D,
Shanks E, Seashore-Ludlow B, Weinstock A, Geiger T,
Clemons PA, Gottlieb E, Ruppin E. Predicting cancerspecific vulnerability via data-driven detection of synthetic
lethality. Cell. 2014; 158:1199–1209.

18.	 Stranger BE, Forrest MS, Dunning M, Ingle CE, Beazley C,
Thorne N, Redon R, Bird CP, de Grassi A, Lee C, TylerSmith C, Carter N, Scherer SW, et al. Relative impact of
nucleotide and copy number variation on gene expression
phenotypes. Science. 2007; 315:848–853.

32.	 Guix M, Faber AC, Wang SE, Olivares MG, Song Y, Qu S,
Rinehart C, Seidel B, Yee D, Arteaga CL, Engelman JA.
Acquired resistance to EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors in
cancer cells is mediated by loss of IGF-binding proteins. J
Clin Invest. 2008; 118:2609–2619.

19.	 Lu TP, Lai LC, Tsai MH, Chen PC, Hsu CP, Lee JM, Hsiao CK,
Chuang EY. Integrated analyses of copy number variations
and gene expression in lung adenocarcinoma. PLoS One.
2011; 6:e24829.

33.	 Chang JC, Wooten EC, Tsimelzon A, Hilsenbeck SG,
Gutierrez MC, Elledge R, Mohsin S, Osborne CK,
Chamness GC, Allred DC, O’Connell P. Gene expression
profiling for the prediction of therapeutic response to
docetaxel in patients with breast cancer. Lancet. 2003;
362:362–369.

20.	 Iyer G, Hanrahan AJ, Milowsky MI, Al-Ahmadie H,
Scott SN, Janakiraman M, Pirun M, Sander C, Socci ND,
Ostrovnaya I, Viale A, Heguy A, Peng L, et al. Genome
sequencing identifies a basis for everolimus sensitivity.
Science. 2012; 338:221.
21.	 Jia P, Jin H, Meador CB, Xia J, Ohashi K, Liu L, Pirazzoli V,
Dahlman KB, Politi K, Michor F, Zhao Z, Pao W. Nextgeneration sequencing of paired tyrosine kinase inhibitorsensitive and -resistant EGFR mutant lung cancer cell lines
identifies spectrum of DNA changes associated with drug
resistance. Genome Res. 2013; 23:1434–1445.

34.	 Zhang F, Zhang T, Qu Y, Jiang T, Cao YX, Li C, Fan L,
Mei QB. Replication-dependent gamma-H2AX formation
is involved in docetaxel-induced apoptosis in NSCLC A549
cells. Oncol Rep. 2010; 24:1297–1305.
35.	 Silver DP, Richardson AL, Eklund AC, Wang ZC, Szallasi Z,
Li Q, Juul N, Leong CO, Calogrias D, Buraimoh A, Fatima A,
Gelman RS, Ryan PD, et al. Efficacy of neoadjuvant

22.	 Kruh GD. Introduction to resistance to anticancer agents.
Oncogene. 2003; 22:7262–7264.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

9418

Oncotarget

Cisplatin in triple-negative breast cancer. J Clin Oncol.
2010; 28:1145–1153.

display reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction
and subtractive suppressive hybridization for the analysis
of differential gene expression. Anti-cancer drugs. 1998;
9:311–317.

36.	 Peterson-Roth E, Brdlik CM, Glazer PM. Src-Induced
cisplatin resistance mediated by cell-to-cell communication.
Cancer Res. 2009; 69:3619–3624.

48.	 Zeng X, Morgenstern R, Nystrom AM. Nanoparticle-directed
sub-cellular localization of doxorubicin and the sensitization
breast cancer cells by circumventing GST-mediated drug
resistance. Biomaterials. 2014; 35:1227–1239.

37.	 Siddik ZH. Cisplatin: mode of cytotoxic action and molecular
basis of resistance. Oncogene. 2003; 22:7265–7279.
38.	 Fontemaggi G, Dell’Orso S, Muti P, Blandino G, Strano S.
Id2 gene is a transcriptional target of the protein complex
mutant p53/E2F1. Cell cycle. 2010; 9:2464–2466.
39.	 Dell’Orso S, Ganci F, Strano S, Blandino G, Fontemaggi G.
ID4: a new player in the cancer arena. Oncotarget. 2010;
1:48–58. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.108.

49.	 Keshelava N, Davicioni E, Wan Z, Ji L, Sposto R, Triche TJ,
Reynolds CP. Histone deacetylase 1 gene expression and
sensitization of multidrug-resistant neuroblastoma cell lines
to cytotoxic agents by depsipeptide. Journal of the National
Cancer Institute. 2007; 99:1107–1119.

40.	 Tan BS, Tiong KH, Choo HL, Fei-Lei Chung F, Hii LW,
Tan SH, Yap IK, Pani S, Khor NT, Wong SF, Rosli R,
Cheong SK, Leong CO. Mutant p53-R273H mediates
cancer cell survival and anoikis resistance through AKTdependent suppression of BCL2-modifying factor (BMF).
Cell death & disease. 2015; 6:e1826.

50.	 Tsang WP, Kwok TT. Riboregulator H19 induction of
MDR1-associated drug resistance in human hepatocellular
carcinoma cells. Oncogene. 2007; 26:4877–4881.
51.	 Ma H, Zhou H, Song X, Shi S, Zhang J, Jia L. Modification of
sialylation is associated with multidrug resistance in human
acute myeloid leukemia. Oncogene. 2015; 34:726–740.

41.	 Alvarez Secord A, Bernardini MQ, Broadwater G,
Grace LA, Huang Z, Baba T, Kondoh E, Sfakianos G,
Havrilesky LJ, Murphy SK. TP53 Status is Associated
with Thrombospondin1 Expression In vitro. Frontiers in
oncology. 2013; 3:269.

52.	 Dowhan DH, Harrison MJ, Eriksson NA, Bailey P, Pearen MA,
Fuller PJ, Funder JW, Simpson ER, Leedman PJ, Tilley WD,
Brown MA, Clarke CL, Muscat GE. Protein arginine
methyltransferase 6-dependent gene expression and splicing:
association with breast cancer outcomes. Endocrine-related
cancer. 2012; 19:509–526.

42.	 Hafizi S, Ibraimi F, Dahlback B. C1-TEN is a negative
regulator of the Akt/PKB signal transduction pathway and
inhibits cell survival, proliferation, and migration. FASEB
journal. 2005; 19:971–973.

53.	 Tsuruo T, Naito M, Tomida A, Fujita N, Mashima T,
Sakamoto H, Haga N. Molecular targeting therapy of
cancer: drug resistance, apoptosis and survival signal.
Cancer Sci. 2003; 94:15–21.

43.	 Tassone P, Tagliaferri P, Perricelli A, Blotta S, Quaresima B,
Martelli ML, Goel A, Barbieri V, Costanzo F, Boland CR,
Venuta S. BRCA1 expression modulates chemosensitivity
of BRCA1-defective HCC1937 human breast cancer cells.
British journal of cancer. 2003; 88:1285–1291.

54.	 Holohan C, Van Schaeybroeck S, Longley DB, Johnston PG.
Cancer drug resistance: an evolving paradigm. Nat Rev
Cancer. 2013; 13:714–726.
55.	 Jaccard P. Distribution de la Flore Alpine: dans le Bassin des
dranses et dans quelques régions voisines. Rouge (1901).

44.	 Thorn CF, Oshiro C, Marsh S, Hernandez-Boussard T,
McLeod H, Klein TE, Altman RB. Doxorubicin pathways:
pharmacodynamics and adverse effects. Pharmacogenetics
and genomics. 2011; 21:440–446.

56.	 Tanimoto TT. IBM internal report. Nov. 1957; 17:1957.
57.	 Jun Liu, Shuiwang Ji, Ye J. SLEP: Sparse Learning with
Efficient Projections Arizona State University. 2009.

45.	 AbuHammad S, Zihlif M. Gene expression alterations
in doxorubicin resistant MCF7 breast cancer cell line.
Genomics. 2013; 101:213–220.

58.	 Huang da W, Sherman BT, Lempicki RA. Systematic
and integrative analysis of large gene lists using DAVID
bioinformatics resources. Nature protocols. 2009; 4:44–57.

46.	 Mencia N, Selga E, Rico I, de Almagro MC, Villalobos X,
Ramirez S, Adan J, Hernandez JL, Noe V, Ciudad CJ.
Overexpression of S100A4 in human cancer cell lines
resistant to methotrexate. BMC cancer. 2010; 10:250.

59.	 Li G, Ma Q, Tang H, Paterson AH, Xu Y. QUBIC: a
qualitative biclustering algorithm for analyses of gene
expression data. Nucleic Acids Res. 2009; 37:e101.

47.	 Bertram J, Palfner K, Hiddemann W, Kneba M. Elevated
expression of S100P, CAPL and MAGE 3 in doxorubicinresistant cell lines: comparison of mRNA differential

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

9419

Oncotarget

