Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No. 32

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

t-Darpp overexpression in HER2-positive breast cancer confers
a survival advantage in lapatinib
Jessica L. Christenson1,2, Erin C. Denny1,3, Susan E. Kane1
1

Department of Cancer Biology, Beckman Research Institute at City of Hope, Duarte, CA 91010, USA

2

Current address: Department of Pathology, University of Colorado Denver, Aurora, CO 80045, USA

3

Current address: Amgen, Thousand Oaks, CA 91320, USA

Correspondence to:
Susan E. Kane, e-mail: skane@coh.org
Keywords: t-Darpp, HER2, lapatinib, BIM, resistance,
Received: April 04, 2015 	Accepted: September 14, 2015 	Published: September 28, 2015

ABSTRACT
Drug resistance is a major barrier to successful cancer treatment. For patients
with HER2-positive breast cancer who initially respond to therapy, the majority develop
resistance within one year of treatment. Patient outcomes could improve significantly
if we can find and exploit common mechanisms of acquired resistance to different
targeted therapies. Overexpression of t-Darpp, a truncated form of the dual kinase/
phosphatase inhibitor Darpp-32, has been linked to acquired resistance to trastuzumab,
a front-line therapy for HER2-positive breast cancer. Darpp-32 reverses t-Darpp’s
effect on trastuzumab resistance. In this study, we examined whether t-Darpp could
be involved in resistance to lapatinib, another HER2-targeted therapeutic. Lapatinibresistant SKBR3 cells (SK/LapR) showed a marked change in the Darpp-32:t-Darpp ratio
toward a predominance of t-Darpp. Overexpression of t-Darpp alone was not sufficient
to confer lapatinib resistance, but cells that overexpress t-Darpp partially mimicked
the molecular resistance phenotype observed in SK/LapR cells exposed to lapatinib.
SK/LapR cells failed to down-regulate Survivin and failed to induce BIM accumulation
in response to lapatinib; cells overexpressing t-Darpp exhibited only the failed BIM
accumulation. t-Darpp knock-down reversed this phenotype. Using a fluorescencebased co-culture system, we found that cells overexpressing t-Darpp formed colonies
in lapatinib within 3–4 weeks, whereas parental cells in the same co-culture did not.
Overall, t-Darpp appears to mediate a survival advantage in lapatinib, possibly linked to
failed lapatinib-induced BIM accumulation. t-Darpp might also be relevant to acquired
resistance to other cancer drugs that rely on BIM accumulation to induce apoptosis.

Resistance to HER2-targeted agents can develop
through a variety of mechanisms. Resistant cells might
shift their signaling to a compensatory receptor or signal
transduction pathway or they might modulate genes
involved in proliferation or survival [2, 6]. Because many
different avenues are available, it is critical to understand
how cells acquire resistance and evade therapeutic effects,
with the goal of developing treatment strategies to target
those pro-survival pathways. It would be particularly
valuable to understand common mechanisms that might be
responsible for resistance to multiple agents used against
the same target.
t-Darpp is a protein that has been directly linked
to acquired trastuzumab resistance in HER2+ breast

INTRODUCTION
Trastuzumab,
a
humanized,
monoclonal
antibody targeted to HER2 (human epidermal growth
factor receptor 2), is the principal treatment for
patients with HER2-positive (HER2+) breast cancer.
Although it can be effective initially, the majority of
trastuzumab-responsive patients develop resistance
within one year of treatment [1, 2]. Newer, secondline HER2-targeted therapies, such as the small
molecule dual HER2/EGFR (epidermal growth factor
receptor) inhibitor lapatinib, seem to be following a
similar pattern of initial response followed by acquired
resistance [3–5].
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

33134

Oncotarget

cancer cells. Overexpression of endogenous t-Darpp
has been reported in several independently-developed
trastuzumab-resistant cell lines, and overexpression of
exogenous t-Darpp is sufficient to confer resistance in
otherwise trastuzumab-sensitive cells [7–10]. t-Darpp is
a truncated variant of Darpp-32 (dopamine and cAMPregulated phosphoprotein of 32 kDa), a protein that is wellcharacterized as a mediator of cell signaling in neuronal
cells and which might function as a tumor suppressor and
anti-metastatic protein in the context of cancer [8, 11–16].
t-Darpp was first discovered in gastric cancer patient
samples and subsequently was found to be expressed in
several types of adenocarcinoma including breast cancer
[17, 18]. Its normal cellular function is not known, but
it has been proposed as a putative oncogene, able to
increase cellular growth and inhibit apoptosis in addition
to conferring trastuzumab resistance [7–10, 17, 19–21].
Co-expression of exogenous Darpp-32 along with t-Darpp
reverses the trastuzumab resistance phenotype mediated
by t-Darpp [8]. This seems to suggest that Darpp-32 and
t-Darpp have antagonistic roles in modulating the cellular
response to trastuzumab, with t-Darpp acting as the progrowth, pro-resistance form of the protein. The purpose
of this study was to investigate whether t-Darpp could be
involved in resistance to other HER2-targeted therapeutic
agents such as the small-molecule inhibitor lapatinib.

no change in t-Darpp protein levels, even though t-Darpp
mRNA levels were moderately increased in several of the
SK/LapR cell lines (Fig. 1C and 1E). Instead, all lapatinibresistant cells exhibited a clear decrease in Darpp-32
protein and mRNA (Fig. 1C and 1E). In both SK/HerR and
SK/LapR cells, there was a significant decrease in the ratio
of Darpp-32 to t-Darpp protein, relative to that seen in
parental SKBR3 cells (Fig. 1D).

t-Darpp overexpression does not confer lapatinib
resistance
To determine if t-Darpp overexpression can confer
lapatinib resistance, we examined lapatinib sensitivity in
SK/HerR cells that overexpress endogenous t-Darpp and in
SK.tDp cells that stably overexpress exogenous t-Darpp
introduced by cDNA transfection. Neither cell line showed
a change in t-Darpp expression after 24-hour exposure to
lapatinib (Fig. 2A), and the lapatinib IC50 was the same
in SKBR3 and both of the cell lines that overexpress
t-Darpp (Fig. 2B). These results are consistent with
published reports suggesting no inherent cross-resistance
between trastuzumab and lapatinib in both cell lines and
patients [22, 23]. Furthermore, t-Darpp down-regulation
in SK/LapR cells did not significantly alter sensitivity to
lapatinib-mediated apoptosis (Supplementary Fig. 1),
again suggesting that t-Darpp is not responsible for the
lapatinib resistance phenotype in these cells.

RESULTS

t-Darpp overexpression partially mimics the
molecular resistance phenotype of SK/LapR cells

Resistant breast cancer cell lines show a shift in
the ratio of Darpp-32 to t-Darpp

As a further analysis of SK/LapR cells, we looked at
several molecular markers of signal transduction and cell
survival in response to lapatinib (Supplementary Fig. 2A).
We noted some key changes in the signaling status of SK/
LapR relative to SKBR3 cells. SK/LapR cells appeared
to have lower basal levels of total HER2, phosphorylated
HER2 (pHER2) and phosphorylated EGFR (pEGFR) than
SKBR3 cells, although both pHER2 and pEGFR were
completely down-regulated by lapatinib in both SK/LapR and
SKBR3 cells. In contrast, SK/LapR cells had fully or partially
sustained levels of phosphorylated Akt (pAkt; protein
kinase B) and phosphorylated ERK (pERK; extracellular
signal-regulated kinase) after exposure to lapatinib, both
of which were completely inhibited in SKBR3 cells
(Supplementary Fig. 2A). Changes were also observed in the
response of proteins essential for the induction of apoptosis
by lapatinib. Lapatinib causes apoptosis by simultaneously
down-regulating the anti-apoptotic protein Survivin and
upregulating the pro-apoptotic protein BIM (Bcl2 homology
domain 3(BH3)-only protein) [24]. We observed both of
these responses in parental SKBR3 cells, but lapatinib no
longer stimulated BIM nor down-regulated Survivin in
SK/LapR cells (Fig. 3A). The SK/LapR 2.0 I.C#4 clone,

To determine if t-Darpp plays a role in lapatinib
resistance, we first developed lapatinib-resistant cell lines.
SKBR3 cells were treated continuously with increasing
concentrations of lapatinib for 6–12 months until they
were able to proliferate in 2 μM lapatinib (Fig. 1A).
Multiple lapatinib-resistant cell lines (SK/LapR) were
derived, including two independently developed pooled
populations (I.P and II.P) and two clonal lines originally
isolated from the I.P selection before the colonies were
pooled (I.C#1 and I.C#4). The lapatinib IC50s of the
resistant cell lines were at least 25-fold higher, on average,
than the IC50 for parental SKBR3 cells (Fig. 1B).
If t-Darpp is involved in lapatinib resistance, we
would expect to see changes in its expression in SK/
LapR cell lines, as we and others saw in cells selected for
trastuzumab resistance [7–9, 19]. Because the relative
levels of Darpp-32 and t-Darpp seem to be important in
determining resistance, we examined both Darpp-32 and
t-Darpp protein (Fig. 1C and 1D) and mRNA (Fig. 1E)
in all resistant cells lines. Unlike trastuzumab-resistant
SK/HerR cells, which show a marked elevation of t-Darpp
relative to SKBR3 cells, SK/LapR cells showed little to

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

33135

Oncotarget

Figure 1: SK/LapR cells. A. Cell growth in the indicated cell lines was measured by CellTiter-Glo luminescence assay after a 5-day

exposure to 0.1% DMSO or 2 μM lapatinib. Data was normalized to the mean luminescence of DMSO-treated cells; mean ± standard
deviation. B. Proliferation in lapatinib was quantified by SRB assay after 5-day exposure to either 0.1% DMSO or increasing concentrations
of lapatinib. Data was normalized to the mean absorbance of DMSO-treated cells; mean ± standard deviation. C. Darpp-32 and t-Darpp
protein levels were measured by Western analysis. α-Tubulin was used as a loading control. D. Western data was quantified using ImageJ
software. Relative Darpp-32 and t-Darpp levels were calculated and each individual ratio from replicate experiments was plotted. The bar
indicates the mean. E. Darpp-32 and t-Darpp mRNA levels were measured by SYBR Green quantitative RT-PCR. Data was normalized
to GAPDH and SKBR3 expression levels; mean ± standard deviation. *p ≤ 0.05, **p ≤ 0.01, ***p ≤ 0.001, ╪ ╪p ≤ 0.0001 for each cell line
compared to SKBR3 cells.

unlike the other SK/LapR cells, did seem to induce BIM
accumulation in response to lapatinib. However, this cell line
expressed extremely low basal levels of BIM in the absence
of lapatinib. Even after lapatinib exposure, BIM levels in
clone 4 remained lower than those observed in SKBR3
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

cells exposed to lapatinib in parallel, consistent with the
established theory that low BIM levels are associated with
poor response to the drug [25].
To determine if cells overexpressing t-Darpp shared
any of the aberrant molecular signaling observed in
33136

Oncotarget

Figure 2: Lapatinib sensitivity in cell lines overexpressing t-Darpp. SK/HerR trastuzumab-resistant cells overexpress endogenous
t-Darpp and SK.tDp cells overexpress stably transfected exogenous t-Darpp. SK.empty (SK.e) cells carry a stably transfected empty vector
control. A. Darpp-32 and t-Darpp protein levels were measured by Western analysis in 0.1% DMSO (−) or 2 μM lapatinib (+) for 24 hours.
β-Actin was used as a loading control. B. Proliferation in lapatinib was determined by SRB assay after 7-day exposure to either 0.1%
DMSO or increasing concentrations of lapatinib. Data was normalized to the mean absorbance of DMSO-treated cells; mean ± standard
deviation.
SK/LapR cells, we examined the same set of signaling and
apoptotic proteins in SK/HerR and SK.tDp cells. HER2
signal transduction in response to lapatinib was essentially
the same in SK/HerR, SK.tDp and parental SKBR3 cells
(Supplementary Fig. 2B and 2C). Likewise, lapatinib
was still capable of suppressing Survivin in SK/HerR and
SK.tDp cells, as in SKBR3 cells (Fig. 3B). However,
lapatinib failed to induce BIM accumulation in either SK/
HerR or SK.tDp cells, similar to what was observed in SK/
LapR cells (Fig. 3B). Notably, t-Darpp down-regulation
in SK/LapR cells did not affect lapatinib-mediated BIM
induction, consistent with the earlier observation that
t-Darpp down-regulation did not alter lapatinib-mediated
apoptosis (Supplementary Fig. 1). We did observe a
small but statistically significant effect of t-Darpp downregulation on BIM and apoptosis levels in the absence
of lapatinib (Supplemental Fig. 1), suggestive of some
role for t-Darpp in regulating these effects without being
responsible for conferring the full lapatinib resistance
effect in SK/LapR cells.
The failure to induce BIM in cells that overexpress
t-Darpp (SK.tDp and SK/HerR) suggests that t-Darpp is
sufficient to mediate this effect in otherwise lapatinibresponsive SKBR3 cells. To determine if t-Darpp is
necessary for the failed accumulation of BIM in SK/
HerR cells, we used siRNA to down-regulate t-Darpp

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

in these cells (Fig. 3C). SK/HerR cells transfected with
control siRNA failed to induce BIM accumulation in
response to lapatinib, as previously observed, whereas
lapatinib-mediated BIM accumulation was rescued
in cells transfected with Darpp-specific siRNA, to a
degree comparable to that seen in parental SKBR3
cells (Fig. 3C). Since BIM upregulation is believed
to be necessary for a full lapatinib-induced apoptotic
response [24], these experiments suggest that t-Darpp
overexpression is both sufficient to confer a partial
lapatinib resistance phenotype (failed BIM accumulation)
in SKBR3 cells and required for the failed BIM
accumulation phenotype in SK/HerR cells.

t-Darpp overexpression promotes accelerated
colony formation in lapatinib
Based on the previous observations that
cells overexpressing t-Darpp failed to induce BIM
accumulation, thus partially mimicking the molecular
resistance phenotype of SK/LapR cells, we hypothesized
that t-Darpp overexpression might prime cells to become
fully resistant to lapatinib more quickly than cells with
low t-Darpp levels. To investigate this possibility,
we performed a preliminary experiment in which we
examined changes in lapatinib sensitivity after one or two

33137

Oncotarget

Figure 3: Survivin and BIM expression in response to lapatinib. Western analysis of Survivin and BIM protein levels after
24 hour exposure to 0.1% DMSO (−) or 2 μM lapatinib (+) in lapatinib-resistant cells (A), cells overexpressing t-Darpp (B), or SK/HerR
cells transiently transfected with siRNA targeted to GFP (siCtrl) or Darpp-32/t-Darpp (siDp) for 72 hours (C). α-Tubulin was used as a
loading control. Protein expression was quantified using ImageJ software. Data was normalized to α-Tubulin levels and expressed as the
fold change in protein level after lapatinib treatment, relative to the DMSO control, for each cell line.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

33138

Oncotarget

weeks of exposure to the drug. By two weeks, SK/HerR
and SK.tDp cells appeared to be less growth-inhibited
by lapatinib than parental cells, although only the
SK/HerR cells reached statistical significance (p = 0.007;
Supplementary Fig. 3).
To investigate more directly the role of t-Darpp
in the development, or priming, of lapatinib resistance,
we wanted to examine lapatinib sensitivity over a more
prolonged exposure to the drug. To accomplish this,
we developed a co-culture model in which we used
fluorescently-tagged cell lines to track relative cell survival
and colony formation over time. SKBR3 cells were stably
transfected with a vector encoding EGFP (SKBR3.EGFP)
while SK/HerR and SK.tDp cells were stably transfected
with a vector encoding mCherry (SK/HerR.mCherry
and SK.tDp2A.mCherry, respectively). No changes in
baseline Darpp-32 or t-Darpp expression (Supplementary
Fig. 4A) or lapatinib sensitivity (Supplementary Fig. 4B)
were observed in cells expressing EGFP or mCherry.
Co-cultures of SKBR3.EGFP and SK/HerR.mCherry cells
(1:1 ratio) were established and grown in the presence of
either 0.6 μM or 1.0 μM lapatinib or DMSO control for
five weeks. Cell survival and proliferation were tracked
weekly via fluorescent cell imaging and flow cytometry.
All data from lapatinib-treated cells was normalized
to DMSO-treated cells to account for any inherent
differences in growth between the co-cultured cell lines.
As expected, over the first two weeks of culturing,
SKBR3 and SK/HerR cells both underwent cell death
in response to lapatinib (Fig. 4A). By weeks 3 and 4,
however, a clear difference began to emerge, with SK/
HerR cells starting to form colonies but no apparent colony
formation by SKBR3 cells (Fig. 4A). This was reflected
in the flow cytometry measurements as a shift in the
population towards the mCherry-positive cells (Fig. 4B,
week 4). By week 5, the cultures were comprised mostly
of mCherry-positive cells by flow cytometry (p = 0.0001;
Fig. 4B) and there were significantly more mCherrypositive colonies present than EGFP-positive colonies
(p = 0.011 for 0.6 μM lapatinib, p = 0.0001 for 1.0 μM;
Fig. 4C). This suggests a clear survival advantage for
mCherry-positive SK/HerR cells, relative to SKBR3 cells,
in lapatinib.
To attribute the survival advantage in lapatinib
directly to t-Darpp overexpression, the previous
experiment was repeated with 1:1 co-cultures of SKBR3.
EGFP and SK.tDp2A.mCherry cells. Similar results were
observed, but with a faster progression. SK.tDp colony
formation in lapatinib was observed as early as two
weeks in drug (Fig. 5A) and a predominance of mCherrypositive cells was observed by flow cytometry after only
one week in lapatinib (Fig. 5B). This trend continued for
the following four weeks. By week 5, mCherry-positive
cells were the predominant cell type (p < 0.0001) and
the predominant colonies (p = 0.001) in the lapatinib

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

co-cultures (Fig. 5B and 5C). These results were verified
in non-fluorescent SK.tDp cells to rule out any effect of
mCherry itself (Supplementary Fig. 5).

DISCUSSION
HER2-targeted drugs are important components
of breast cancer therapy, both as frontline agents in the
case of trastuzumab and as secondary options when
trastuzumab resistance emerges. Finding either unique
or common mechanisms of resistance to HER2-targeted
therapies could help predict therapeutic response and also
might reveal additional targets for therapeutic intervention
in combination with currently available drugs. t-Darpp
was first discovered as a cancer-specific alternative form
of Darpp-32, a well-known effector of PKA signaling
in neuronal cells. t-Darpp expression tends to increase
while Darpp-32 expression decreases during malignant
transformation and tumor progression, both in humans
and mice [18, 26], and there have been multiple reports
demonstrating that t-Darpp overexpression confers
resistance to trastuzumab and other drugs [7–10]. We
have previously reported that Darpp-32 and t-Darpp
have antagonistic roles in determining a cell’s sensitivity
to trastuzumab [8]. The shift in the relative amounts
of Darpp-32 and t-Darpp in lapatinib-resistant cells
(Fig. 1) suggests that this ratio, with a need for excess
t-Darpp, might play a role in the development of lapatinib
resistance as well.
Consistent with the lack of immediate crossresistance to lapatinib in trastuzumab-resistant patients,
t-Darpp does not appear to confer outright resistance to
lapatinib as determined by a relatively short-term cell
proliferation assay (Fig. 2B). t-Darpp does appear to
confer a survival and/or growth advantage in lapatinib,
however, as evidenced by the more rapid emergence
of lapatinib-resistant colonies for SK/HerR and SK.tDp
cells (Fig. 4 and 5). This emphasizes the importance
of the assay in distinguishing between an endpoint
resistance phenotype and what could be an early stage
of progression to resistance. Indeed, if we want to
understand what is happening in the clinic, it might be
necessary to study the process of acquiring resistance
as well as the end product. In the case of lapatinib,
the drug was initially approved because trastuzumabresistant patients respond positively to treatment, but it
is becoming clear that secondary resistance to lapatinib
develops quickly, thus rendering the drug somewhat
ineffective overall [3, 5]. Our results provide a possible
mechanism by which trastuzumab-resistant tumors
might develop lapatinib resistance – by dysregulating
the apoptotic process – even after an initial response to
the therapy.
It is interesting to speculate about the mechanism
by which t-Darpp could prevent BIM upregulation

33139

Oncotarget

Figure 4: Colony formation by SK/HerR cells exposed to lapatinib. SKBR3 cells stably expressing EGFP (SKBR3.EGFP)

and SK/HerR cells stably expressing mCherry (SK/HerR.mCherry) were co-cultured at a ratio of 1:1 and continuously exposed to 0.1%
DMSO, 0.6 μM lapatinib or 1.0 μM lapatinib for 5 weeks. DMSO-treated cells were split twice-weekly (1:4 dilution). Lapatinib-treated
cells were grown without passaging. Each experiment was run in triplicate. A. Co-cultured cells were imaged weekly for fluorescence
(10x magnification, scale bar = 200 μm). Shown are representative fields for each condition and time point. B. The percentage of EGFPpositive and mCherry-positive cells in each co-culture was quantitatively measured weekly via flow cytometry. Data was normalized to
the mean percentage of EGFP-positive and mCherry-positive cells, respectively, in DMSO-treated co-cultures; mean ± standard deviation.
C.  For each co-culture the number of fluorescent colonies was counted after 5 weeks in lapatinib; mean ± standard deviation, *p ≤ 0.05,
***p ≤ 0.0001.

or accumulation in response to lapatinib (Fig. 3).
We know from the current work that t-Darpp must
be exerting its effect independently of Akt, since
Akt phosphorylation is completely inhibited in
response to lapatinib in cells that overexpress
t-Darpp (Supplementary Fig. 1). It is possible
that t-Darpp exerts its effect via protein kinase
A (PKA). Several groups, including our own,
have shown that t-Darpp upregulates PKA activity

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

[8, 27, 28]. PKA is capable of phosphorylating FoxO3a,
a transcriptional regulator of BIM, independent of
the PI3K pathway [29, 30]. Such phosphorylation
would promote FoxO3a degradation and prevent it from
stimulating BIM transcription. PKA is also capable of
phosphorylating BIM directly, although there are
conflicting reports on whether this phosphorylation
has a stabilizing or de-stabilizing effect [31–33]. Further
experimentation will resolve the question of whether

33140

Oncotarget

Figure 5: Colony formation by SK.tDp cells exposed to lapatinib. SKBR3 cells stably expressing EGFP (SKBR3.EGFP)
and SK.tDp cells stably expressing mCherry (SK.tDp2A.mCherry) were co-cultured at a ratio of 1:1 and continuously exposed to 0.1%
DMSO, 0.6 μM lapatinib or 1.0 μM lapatinib for 5 weeks. DMSO-treated cells were split twice-weekly (1:4 dilution). Lapatinib-treated
cells were grown without passaging. Each experiment was run in triplicate. A. Co-cultured cells were imaged weekly for fluorescence
(10x magnification, scale bar = 200 μm). Shown are representative fields for each condition and time point. B. The percentage of EGFPpositive and mCherry-positive cells in each co-culture was quantitatively measured weekly via flow cytometry. Data was normalized to
the mean percentage of EGFP-positive and mCherry-positive cells, respectively, in DMSO-treated co-cultures; mean ± standard deviation.
C. For each co-culture the number of fluorescent colonies was counted after 5 weeks in lapatinib; mean ± standard deviation, **p ≤ 0.01.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

t-Darpp acts via PKA, which could in turn prevent BIM
transcription or promote BIM degradation. In either
case, the end result would be a failure to accumulate
BIM to levels required for apoptosis [25, 34, 35]. Other
mechanisms are possible and there could be multiple
mechanisms leading to the same end result in lapatinibresistant patients. Nevertheless, our findings suggest that
t-Darpp is one factor that, when present, can play a role
in resistance to lapatinib and to other drugs that rely on
BIM upregulation to induce apoptosis.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Cell culture and reagents
The human HER2+, estrogen receptor-negative
breast cancer cell line, SKBR3 and a SKBR3-derived
trastuzumab-resistant cell line, SK/HerR, were kindly
provided in 2009 by Rita Nahta (Emory University,
Atlanta, GA) [36, 37]. The derivation of SK.empty (SK.e)
and SK.tDp cells was described previously [8]. Briefly,

33141

Oncotarget

SKBR3 cells obtained in 1999 from the American Type
Culture Collection (Rockville, MD) were transfected
with an empty pcDNA3.0/Neo vector (SK.e) or with
the same vector containing full-length t-Darpp cDNA
(SK.tDp). Cells were transfected used Lipofectamine
2000 (Invitrogen Life Technologies) according to the
manufacturer’s instructions and stably transfected
cells were selected and maintained in 1 mg/mL G418.
Selection conditions for lapatinib-resistant SK/LapR
cells are described in the Results and Discussion section.
The origins of SKBR3, SK/HerR, SK/LapR 2.0 I.P and
transfected SK.tDp cell lines were verified in 2014 by
the ATCC/Promega Cell Authentication Service. SKBR3
and SKBR3-derived cells were maintained in McCoy’s
Medium 5A with 10% FBS, 1% penicillin/streptomycin
and 1% L-glutamine in 5% CO2. SK/HerR and SK/LapR
cells were maintained in drug at their original selection
concentrations (4 mg/mL trastuzumab and 2 μM lapatinib,
respectively). Trastuzumab (Genentech San Francisco, CA)
and lapatinib (GlaxoSmithKline, Research Triangle
Park, NC) were obtained from the City of Hope National
Medical Center Pharmacy (Duarte, CA). Trastuzumab
was reconstituted in Bacteriostatic Water for Injection.
Lapatinib ditosylate monohydrate was purified from
the medicinal tablet via chromatography and diluted in
dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO). A minimum of five days
prior to each experiment all drugs were removed from the
culture medium to allow for drug clearance from cells.

Science (Indianapolis, IN). Protein concentrations were
determined by RC DC protein assay purchased from BioRad Laboratories (Hercules, CA). Proteins were separated
on either a 12% SDS-PAGE gel or a precast 4–12%
gradient NuPAGE® Bis-Tris gel from Life Technologies
(Grand Island, NY) and then transferred to a nitrocellulose
membrane. 5% non-fat dry milk was used for blocking
buffer and for primary antibody incubation. Primary
antibodies: an antibody that recognizes both Darpp-32
and t-Darpp (#H62) from Santa Cruz Biotechnology
(Santa Cruz, CA); antibodies to α-Tubulin (#T5168) and
β-Actin (#A4700) from Sigma-Aldrich Corporation (St.
Louis, MO); an antibody to Survivin (#NB-500–201)
from Novus Biologicals (Littleton, CO); and antibodies
to BIM (#2933), pHER2 (Y1248, #2243), total HER2
(#4290), pEGFR (Y2234, #2234), total EGFR (#2242),
pAkt (S473, #4058), total Akt (#4058), pERK (T202/
Y204, #4377) and total ERK (#9102) from Cell Signaling
Technology (Danvers, Massachusetts). Secondary
antibodies were horseradish peroxidase-conjugated antimouse IgG and anti-rabbit IgG antibodies from Cell
Signaling Technology. Secondary antibody was detected
using an ECL Plus kit from Thermo Fisher Scientific.
Protein expression was quantified using ImageJ software
and expressed as relative density, normalized to loading
control values. Each experiment was repeated a minimum
of two times.

RNA preparation and RT-PCR

Drug sensitivity assays
CellTiter-Glo luminescence assay: Cells were plated
at a density of 4 × 104 cells per well in 96-well plates. The
following day, media containing either 0.1% DMSO or
2 μM lapatinib was added. After 5 days of drug treatment,
cell number was determined by performing the Promega
CellTiter-Glo Luminescence Assay (Madison, WI)
according to the manufacturer’s instructions.
Luminescence was measured using a Veritas Microplate
Luminometer (Turner BioSystems, Sunnyvale, CA). Data
are presented as relative cell number and normalized to
the luminescence of DMSO-treated cells. Each experiment
was run in quadruplicate and repeated a minimum of three
times. Sulforhodamine B (SRB) assay: SRB assays were
performed as previously described [8]. Cells were treated
with media containing either 0.1% DMSO or lapatinib at
concentrations ranging from 0.01–10 μM for 5 or 7 days
before analysis. Each experiment was run in quadruplicate
and repeated a minimum of three times.

Total RNA was isolated and purified using
the Qiagen RNeasy kit (Valencia, CA). RNA was
reverse transcribed to cDNA using random primers
and SuperScript III Reverse Transcriptase from Life
Technologies. Darpp-32 and t-Darpp mRNA levels
were analyzed by quantitative RT-PCR (1 cycle of
3 min at 95°C, 40 cycles of 10 sec at 95°C, 30 sec
at 60°C, and a melting curve 55–95°C) using the
PerfeCTa® SYBR® Green SuperMix from Quanta
BioSciences (Gaithersburg, MD). Each experiment was
run in triplicate and repeated a minimum of three times.
Primers 5′- CCGCAAGAAGATCCAGTTCTCGGT -3′
and 5′- CTCCTCTGGTGAGGAGTGCTCTGA -3′
were used to measure Darpp-32 mRNA; primers
5′- TGCGCTGGCTCAGTCTCCTTC -3′ and 5′- GGGA
GGCTTCCTCCTCTGGTGAG -3′ were used to measure
t-Darpp mRNA; and primers 5′- GAGAAGGCTGGGG
CTCATTTGC -3′ and 5′- GTTGGTGGTGCAGGAGG
CATTG -3′ were used to measure GAPDH mRNA.

Western analysis

siRNA transfection

Cell lysates were collected on ice in SDS Lysis
Buffer from EMD Millipore (Billerica, MA) supplemented
with 1X protease inhibitor cocktail from Roche Applied

Cells were plated in 60-mm dishes at a density
of 2.5 × 105 cells per dish using media without
penicillin/streptomycin. The following day, cells

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

33142

Oncotarget

Fluorescent cell co-culture experiments

were transiently transfected with 60 pmol of
siRNA using Lipofectamine RNAiMAX from
Invitrogen by Life Technologies according to the
manufacturer’s instructions. Control siRNA against GFP
(5′- GCUGACCCUGAAGUUCAUCUG -3′) and a pool of
three target-specific siRNA against Darpp-32 and t-Darpp
from Santa Cruz Biotechnology (#sc-35173) were used.
48 hours post-transfection, media containing 0.1% DMSO
or 2 μM lapatinib was added for a period of 24 hours when
cell lysates were collected for Western analysis.

Fluorescent cell co-cultures were plated at a ratio
of 1:1 (EGFP:mCherry) at a density of 3 × 105 cells
per well in 6-well plates (for fluorescence imaging)
or 1.5 × 106 cells per dish in 10-cm dishes (for flow
cytometry). Cells were incubated with 0.1% DMSO,
0.6 μM lapatinib or 1.0 μM lapatinib. DMSO-treated
cells were split twice weekly, whereas media for cells
grown in lapatinib was changed weekly. Experiments
were run in triplicate and repeated a minimum of two
times. Live cell fluorescent imaging and colony counts:
For co-cultures maintained in 6-well plates, fluorescence
was imaged weekly using a Zeiss AxioVert 200 Inverted
microscope with a Zeiss Mr3 camera and 10X/0.3NA
EC Plan-Neofluar objective using Zeiss AxioVision
4.8 software. At the conclusion of the experiment
(five  weeks in drug), the number of EGFP- and
mCherry-fluorescent colonies per well was counted. For
non-fluorescence supplemental experiments, cells were
imaged in bright field and stained with methylene blue
for the purpose of counting colonies. Flow cytometry:
For co-cultures maintained in 10-cm dishes, the numbers
of EGFP- and mCherry-positive cells were determined
weekly. Triplicate plates of cells were trypsinized,
washed with cold PBS and suspended in ice cold
DNase Buffer (PBS, 1% FBS, 100 units/mL DNase,
1 mM MgCl2) containing 0.5 μg/mL DAPI. A Fortessa
SORP (Becton Dickinson) analytical cytometer with
DiVa 6.1.3 software was used to quantitatively analyze
fluorescence. 50,000 events were measured per sample,
and DAPI-positive cells were excluded from the
analysis.

Caspase-Glo 3/7 apoptosis assay
Cells were plated at a density of 4 × 104 (SKBR3)
or 1 × 105 (SK/LapR 2.0 I.P) cells per well in a 96-well
plate. A higher initial cell number was used for SK/LapR
cells because they are highly sensitive to transfection
with siRNA (data not shown). The following day cells
were transfected with 2 pmol of siRNA (see siRNA
transfection methods above). After a 48 hour exposure
to 0.1% DMSO or 2 μM lapatinib, the number of
cells undergoing apoptosis was quantified using the
Promega Caspase-Glo 3/7 Assay kit according to the
manufacturer’s instructions. Data are presented as
relative apoptosis and normalized to the luminescence
of siCtrl, DMSO-treated cells for each cell line. Each
experiment was run in triplicate and repeated a minimum
of two times.

Stable transfections
To establish cell lines stably expressing fluorescent
markers, we subcloned EGFP (enhanced green fluorescent
protein) cDNA and mCherry cDNA into the pcDNA3.0/
Neo vector. pcDNA.EGFP/Neo and pcDNA.mCherry/
Neo were transfected into SKBR3 and SK/HerR cells,
respectively, using Lipofectamine LTX/PLUS (Invitrogen
by Life Technologies) according to the manufacturer’s
instructions. Stably transfected populations (SKBR3.EGFP
and SK/HerR.mCherry) were selected and maintained in
1 mg/mL G418. To make the pcDNA.tDp/mCherry/Neo
vector, t-Darpp cDNA with a 2A peptide sequence [38]
attached to the C-terminus was subcloned into the pcDNA.
mCherry/Neo vector upstream of and in-frame with the
mCherry sequence. The plasmid was then transfected
into SKBR3 cells and the stably transfected population
(SK.tDp2A.mCherry) was selected and maintained in
1 mg/mL G418. Each transfected cell population was
fluorescently sorted via flow cytometry (using the Aria II
SORP cell sorter from Becton Dickinson, Franklin Lakes,
New Jersey) to isolate the cell populations with the
highest fluorescent protein expression. Sorted cells were
characterized as described in the Results and Discussion
section and then used in all subsequent co-culture
experiments.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Statistical analysis
Statistically significant differences were calculated
using the GraphPad Prism 6.0 statistical program.
Differences between groups were determined by the
two-tailed Student’s t-test or the two-way ANOVA.
p values < 0.05 were considered significant.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS AND FUNDING
The authors thank Dr. David Horne and the City
of Hope Drug Discovery and Structural Biology Core
for the purification of lapatinib; Lucy Brown and Ni
Feng from the City of Hope Analytical Cytometry
Core for their assistance with cell sorting and flow
cytometry; and Tina Patel from the City of Hope Light
Microscopy and Digital Imaging Core for her assistance
with fluorescent cell imaging. The authors would also
like to thank Dr. Jennifer Richer at the University of
Colorado Denver for the use of her laboratory during
the revision process.

33143

Oncotarget

This study was supported in part by grants
CA137914 (S.E. Kane) and CA33572 (Cancer
Center Support Grant, S.T. Rosen) from the National
Cancer Institute.

­ eurotransmission. Annu Rev Pharmacol Toxicol. 2004;
n
44:269–296.
13.	 Ebihara Y, Miyamoto M, Fukunaga A, Kato K,
Shichinohe T, Kawarada Y, Kurokawa T, Cho Y,
Murakami S, Uehara H, et al. DARPP-32 expression
arises after a phase of dysplasia in oesophageal squamous cell carcinoma. Br J Cancer. 2004; 91:119–123.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST

14.	 Zachariou V, Sgambato-Faure V, Sasaki T,
Svenningsson P, Berton O, Fienberg AA, Nairn AC,
Greengard P, Nestler EJ. Phosphorylation of ­DARPP-32
at Threonine-34 is required for cocaine action.
Neuropsychopharmacology. 2006; 31:555–562.

The authors declare having no competing interests.

REFERENCES
1.	 Nahta R. Molecular mechanisms of trastuzumab-based
treatment in HER2-overexpressing breast cancer. ISRN
Oncol. 2012; 2012:428062.
2.	 Fiszman GL, Jasnis MA. Molecular mechanisms of
trastuzumab resistance in HER2 overexpressing breast
cancer. Int J Breast Cancer. 2011; 2011:352182.

15.	 Pimenta FJ, Horta MC, Vidigal PV, De Souza BR,
De Marco L, Romano-Silva MA, Gomez RS. Decreased
expression of DARPP-32 in oral premalignant and
­malignant lesions. Anticancer Res. 2007; 27:2339–2343.
16.	 Hansen C, Howlin J, Tengholm A, Dyachok O,
Vogel WF, Nairn AC, Greengard P, Andersson T.
­Wnt-5a-induced phosphorylation of DARPP-32 ­inhibits
breast cancer cell migration in a CREB-dependent
­manner. J Biol Chem. 2009; 284:27533–27543.

3.	 Frampton JE. Lapatinib: a review of its use in the treatment of HER2-overexpressing, trastuzumab-refractory,
advanced or metastatic breast cancer. Drugs. 2009;
69:2125–2148.

17.	 El-Rifai W, Smith MF Jr, Li G, Beckler A,
Carl VS, Montgomery E, Knuutila S, Moskaluk CA,
Frierson HF Jr, Powell SM. Gastric cancers overexpress
DARPP-32 and a novel isoform, t-DARPP. Cancer Res.
2002; 62:4061–4064.

4.	 Moy B, Kirkpatrick P, Kar S, Goss P. Lapatinib. Nat Rev
Drug Discov. 2007; 6:431–432.
5.	 Verma S, Miles D, Gianni L. Updated overall survival
results for EMILIA, a phase 3 study of trastuzumab
emtansine (T-DM1) vs capecitabine and lapatinib in
HER2-positive locally advanced or metastatic breast
­cancer. 2012 ESMO Congress. October 1;2012.

18.	 Beckler A, Moskaluk CA, Zaika A, Hampton GM,
Powell SM, Frierson HF Jr, El-Rifai W. Overexpression
of the 32-kilodalton dopamine and cyclic adenosine
3′,5′-monophosphate-regulated phosphoprotein in common adenocarcinomas. Cancer. 2003; 98:1547–1551.

6.	 Sierra JR, Cepero V, Giordano S. Molecular mechanisms
of acquired resistance to tyrosine kinase targeted therapy.
Mol Cancer. 2010; 9:75.

19.	 Belkhiri A, Dar AA, Zaika A, Kelley M, El-Rifai W.
t-Darpp promotes cancer cell survival by up-regulation
of Bcl2 through Akt-dependent mechanism. Cancer Res.
2008; 68:395–403.

7.	 Hamel S, Bouchard A, Ferrario C, Hassan S, AguilarMahecha A, Buchanan M, Quenneville L, Miller W,
Basik M. Both t-Darpp and DARPP-32 can cause
resistance to trastuzumab in breast cancer cells and are
­frequently expressed in primary breast cancers. Breast
Cancer Res Treat. 2010; 120:47–57.

20.	 Vangamudi B, Peng DF, Cai Q, El-Rifai W, Zheng W,
Belkhiri A. t-DARPP regulates phosphatidylinositol3-­kinase-dependent cell growth in breast cancer. Mol
Cancer. 2010; 9:240.

8.	 Gu L, Waliany S, Kane SE. Darpp-32 and its truncated variant t-Darpp have antagonistic effects on breast cancer cell
growth and herceptin resistance. PLoS One. 2009; 4:e6220.

21.	 Vangamudi B, Zhu S, Soutto M, Belkhiri A, El-Rifai W.
Regulation of beta-catenin by t-DARPP in upper gastrointestinal cancer cells. Mol Cancer. 2011; 10:32.

9.	 Belkhiri A, Dar AA, Peng DF, Razvi MH, Rinehart C,
Arteaga CL, El-Rifai W. Expression of t-DARPP
­mediates trastuzumab resistance in breast cancer cells.
Clin Cancer Res. 2008; 14:4564–4571.

22.	 Konecny GE, Pegram MD, Venkatesan N, Finn R,
Yang G, Rahmeh M, Untch M, Rusnak DW, Spehar G,
Mullin  RJ, et al. Activity of the dual kinase inhibitor
lapatinib (GW572016) against HER-2-overexpressing
and trastuzumab-treated breast cancer cells. Cancer Res.
2006; 66:1630–1639.

10.	 Hong J, Katsha A, Lu P, Shyr Y, Belkhiri A, El-Rifai W.
Regulation of ERBB2 receptor by t-DARPP mediates
trastuzumab resistance in human esophageal adenocarcinoma. Cancer Res. 2012; 72:4504–4514.

23.	 Cameron D, Casey M, Press M, Lindquist D,
Pienkowski T, Romieu CG, Chan S, Jagiello-Gruszfeld A,
Kaufman B, Crown J, et al. A phase III randomized comparison of lapatinib plus capecitabine versus
capecitabine alone in women with advanced breast c­ ancer

11.	 Yger M, Girault JA. DARPP-32, Jack of all trades. Master
of which? Front Behav Neurosci. 2011; 5:56.
12.	 Svenningsson P, Nishi A, Fisone G, Girault JA,
Nairn AC, Greengard P. DARPP-32: an integrator of

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

33144

Oncotarget

that has progressed on trastuzumab: updated efficacy
and biomarker analyses. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2008;
112:533–543.

r­apamycin-hypersensitivity in TGFbeta1 enhancement of
FSH-stimulated steroidogenesis in rat ovarian granulosa
cells. J Endocrinol. 2007; 192:405–419.

24.	 Tanizaki J, Okamoto I, Fumita S, Okamoto W, Nishio K,
Nakagawa K. Roles of BIM induction and survivin
downregulation in lapatinib-induced apoptosis in breast
cancer cells with HER2 amplification. Oncogene. 2011;
30:4097–4106.

31.	 Coley AM, Moujalled D, Puthalakath H. The PKA paradox:
is Bim the answer? Cell Cycle. 2011; 10:729–730.

25.	 Faber AC, Corcoran RB, Ebi H, Sequist LV,
Waltman  BA, Chung E, Incio J, Digumarthy SR,
Pollack SF, Song Y, et al. BIM expression in treatmentnaive cancers predicts responsiveness to kinase inhibitors.
Cancer Discov. 2011; 1:352–365.

33.	 Moujalled D, Weston R, Anderton H, Ninnis R, Goel P,
Coley A, Huang DC, Wu L, Strasser A, Puthalakath H.
Cyclic-AMP-dependent protein kinase A regulates
­apoptosis by stabilizing the BH3-only protein Bim. EMBO
Rep. 2011; 12:77–83.

26.	 Christenson JL, Kane SE. Darpp-32 and t-Darpp are
­differentially expressed in normal and malignant mouse
mammary tissue. Mol Cancer. 2014; 13:192.

34.	 Hendrickson AW, Meng XW, Kaufmann SH. Anticancer
therapy: boosting the bang of Bim. J Clin Invest. 2008;
118:3582–3584.

27.	 Kunii Y, Hyde TM, Ye T, Li C, Kolachana B, Dickinson D,
Weinberger DR, Kleinman JE, Lipska BK. Revisiting
DARPP-32 in postmortem human brain: changes in
schizophrenia and bipolar disorder and genetic associations with t-DARPP-32 expression. Mol Psychiatry. 2014;
19:192–199.

35.	 Faber AC, Ebi H, Costa C, Engelman JA. Apoptosis
in ­
targeted therapy responses: the role of BIM. Adv
Pharmacol. 2012; 65:519–542.

28.	 Albert KA, Hemmings HC Jr, Adamo AI, Potkin SG,
Akbarian S, Sandman CA, Cotman CW, Bunney WE Jr,
Greengard P. Evidence for decreased DARPP-32 in the
prefrontal cortex of patients with schizophrenia. Arch Gen
Psychiatry. 2002; 59:705–712.

37.	 Nahta R, Takahashi T, Ueno NT, Hung MC, Esteva FJ.
P27(kip1) down-regulation is associated with trastuzumab resistance in breast cancer cells. Cancer Res. 2004;
64:3981–3986.

32.	 Hubner A, Barrett T, Flavell RA, Davis RJ. Multisite phosphorylation regulates Bim stability and apoptotic activity.
Mol Cell. 2008; 30:415–425.

36.	 Nahta R, Esteva FJ. In vitro effects of trastuzumab and
vinorelbine in trastuzumab-resistant breast cancer cells.
Cancer Chemother Pharmacol. 2004; 53:186–190.

38.	 Szymczak-Workman AL, Vignali KM, Vignali DA. Design
and construction of 2A peptide-linked multicistronic
­vectors. Cold Spring Harb Protoc. 2012; 2012:199–204.

29.	 Jag UR, Zavadil J, Stanley FM. Insulin acts through
FOXO3a to activate transcription of plasminogen activator inhibitor type 1. Mol Endocrinol. 2009; 23:1587–1602.
30.	 Chen YJ, Hsiao PW, Lee MT, Mason JI, Ke FC, Hwang JJ.
Interplay of PI3K and cAMP/PKA signaling, and

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

33145

Oncotarget

