Oncotarget, Vol. 7, No. 25

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Research Paper

Utility of patient-derived lymphoblastoid cell lines as an ex vivo
capecitabine sensitivity prediction model for breast cancer patients
Gladys Morrison1,2, Divya Lenkala1, Bonnie LaCroix1, Dana Ziliak1, Vandana
Abramson3, Phuong Khanh Morrow4, Andres Forero5, Catherine Van Poznak6, Hope
S Rugo7, Rita Nanda1, Peter H. O’Donnell1,2, R. Stephanie Huang1,2
1

Section of Hematology/Oncology, The University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA

2

Committee on Clinical Pharmacology and Pharmacogenomics, The University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA

3

Vanderbilt University Medical Center and Vanderbilt-Ingram Cancer Center, Nashville, TN, USA

4

Department of Breast Medical Oncology, The University of Texas, MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA

5

Department of Hematology and Oncology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, USA

6

Department of Medical Oncology, University of Michigan Comprehensive Cancer Center, Ann Arbor, MI, USA

7

University of California San Francisco Helen Diller Family Comprehensive Cancer Center, San Francisco, CA, USA

Correspondence to: R. Stephanie Huang, email: rhuang@medicine.bsd.uchicago.edu
Keywords: breast cancer, lymphoblastoid cell lines, patient-derived model, capecitabine, ex vivo model
Received: March 17, 2016     Accepted: April 27, 2016     Published: May 20, 2016

Abstract
Capecitabine is commonly used in treating breast cancer; however, therapeutic
response varies among patients and there is no clinically validated model to predict
individual outcomes. Here, we investigated whether drug sensitivity quantified in
ex vivo patients’ blood-derived cell lines can predict response to capecitabine in vivo.
Lymphoblastoid cell lines (LCLs) were established from a cohort of metastatic breast
cancer patients (n = 53) who were prospectively monitored during treatment with
single agent capecitabine at 2000 mg/m2/day. LCLs were treated with increasing
concentrations of 5’-DFUR, a major capecitabine metabolite, to assess patients’ ex vivo
sensitivity to this drug. Subsequently, ex vivo phenotype was compared to observed
patient disease response and drug induced-toxicities. We acquired an independent cohort
of breast cancer cell lines and LCLs derived from the same donors from ATCC, compared
their sensitivity to 5’-DFUR. As seen in the patient population, we observed large interindividual variability in response to 5’-DFUR treatment in patient-derived LCLs. Patients
whose LCLs were more sensitive to 5’-DFUR had a significantly longer median progression
free survival (9-month vs 6-month, log rank p-value = 0.017). In addition, this significant
positive correlation for 5’-DFUR sensitivity was replicated in an independent cohort of 8
breast cancer cell lines and LCLs derived from the same donor. Our data suggests that
at least a portion of the individual sensitivity to capecitabine is shared between germline
tissue and tumor tissue. It also supports the utility of patient-derived LCLs as a predictive
model for capecitabine treatment efficacy in breast cancer patients.

Introduction

monotherapy or in combination with other chemotherapeutic
agents. As monotherapy, and in combination with other
chemotherapies, clinical trials have shown that capecitabine
treatment results in a median overall survival range from
11–19 months and a median progression free survival (PFS)
ranging from 3–9 months [3–6].
To maximize efficacy, studies have been conducted
to identify patients who are likely to be non-responsive to
capecitabine therapy prior to beginning a capecitabine-based

Capecitabine is an oral fluopyrimidine prodrug
commonly used in treating breast and colorectal cancer
patients. It is metabolized to 5ʹ-deoxy-5-fluorouridine
(5ʹ-DFUR), which is further converted into the active
metabolite 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) in vivo [1, 2]. In breast
cancer patients, capecitabine is approved for the treatment
of taxane-resistant metastatic breast cancer either as
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

38359

Oncotarget

regimen. Genetic variants that result in enzyme (e.g. thymidine
phosphorylase (TP) and dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase
(DYPD)) activity deficiencies have also been shown to
independently predict toxicity and sensitivity to capecitabine
[7, 8]. More recently, the role of germline genetic variants in
capecitabine sensitivity has been explored using a human cellbased model: the International HapMap lymphoblastoid cell
lines (LCLs) [9].
Indeed, HapMap LCLs have previously been
successfully used for pharmacogenomic discoveries of
various drugs [10, 11]. Several genetic markers identified
in this model have been validated in vivo in different cancer
settings [9, 12]. However, HapMap LCLs were generated
from apparently healthy donors with no known morbidities
at the time of LCL establishment. Our study seeks direct
answers to the question of whether establishing LCLs from
diseased individuals is feasible and more importantly,
how relevant/useful is a patient-derived LCL model in the
clinical setting. In this study, we aimed at developing a
blood-based ex vivo model for prediction of capecitabine
sensitivity in breast cancer patients. Our rationale is
that human peripheral blood is readily accessible and
phenotypes obtained in this model can reflect both genetic
and environmental effects on an individual. Specifically,
we established LCLs from breast cancer patients and
examined the relationship between phenotypes obtained
in this ex vivo model and drug sensitivity phenotype
(efficacy) obtained from the actual patients. Our hypothesis
is that a patient-derived ex vivo LCL model can be used
to predict a patient’s clinical response to capecitabine.
Furthermore, the establishment of LCLs from patients
will provide materials for subsequent functional studies of
gene and/or other genetic/epigenetic components without
repeated clinical sampling, thus benefiting additional
scientific discovery and validation.

(success rate 85%). The reasons for failure to establish
LCLs include improper method of blood storage/shipment
(n = 4, blood received frozen and unable to isolate
peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs)), shortage of
EBV supplies from the vendor (n = 1), and failure to attain
persistent proliferating status (n = 3). To assess technical
variability and to verify that the variability of drug
response observed among LCLs is due to inter-patient
heterogeneity rather than possible heterogeneity caused
by the establishment process, patient PBMCs were split
into 2 vials and 2 independent LCLs from each individual
donor were developed. The established LCLs were treated
with increasing concentrations of 5ʹ-DFUR (0–160 μM)
and cell proliferation was assessed using Cell Titer Glo
reagent. We found that in the majority of patient samples,
there was no significant difference between the 2 batches
of LCLs and their response to 5ʹ-DFUR treatment (p-value
> 0.05 from two-way ANOVA test between the drug
sensitivity curves derived from each of the 2 batches of
LCLs, Supplementary Figure 1). Thus, one LCL per patient
was used for analysis. However, less than 8% of the patient
derived LCLs (n = 4) showed variable 5ʹ-DFUR sensitivity
(defined by >15% variability) in the 2 independent LCLs
created from the same individual. Both batches from each
of these patients were removed from further analysis.
Capecitabine response in patient-derived LCLs were
also grouped based on their site of enrollment, and using
one-way ANOVA, we found that there was no significant
difference in their response to 5ʹ-DFUR (p =  0.63).

Patient-derived LCLs’ sensitivity to 5ʹ-DFUR
We observed that increasing concentrations of
5ʹ-DFUR, correlated with a decrease in the cell viability
of patient-derived LCLs (Supplementary Figure 2).
Furthermore, large inter-individual variability e.g., 3-fold
difference at 10 μM, was observed in these patient-derived
LCLs within each treatment concentration. The median
percent viability after 5ʹ-DFUR exposure in the patient
derived LCLs, ranged from 60 percent (10 μM) to 34
percent (160 μM).

Results
Clinical response to capecitabine treatment
53 patients were included in this study and their
ages ranged from 36 to 79 with a median age of 51 years
old. The majority of patients were White (71%), with
17% African American and 1% Asian. Detailed clinical
response/toxicity assessment results are shown in Table
1. Both short term and long term clinical responses were
collected. The short term response was measured at 10–
12 weeks capecitabine treatment; while the long term
response was assessed using PFS, which range from 6
weeks to 32 months. Site of enrollment did not have an
effect on response to capecitabine (data not shown).

Relationship between drug sensitivity measured
in patient-derived LCLs and that observed
clinically
Clinical assessment and radiographic evaluation
were performed on the majority of the patients at 12- week
after initiation of capecitabine to assess their short term
disease response. Response evaluation criteria in solid
tumor (RECIST v1.1) criteria were applied and patient
short term response was defined as complete response
(CR), partial response (PR), stable disease (SD) or
progressive disease (PD). We performed regression
analysis between the 12-week RECIST response
categorization and patients’ 5ʹ-DFUR sensitivity obtained

Establishment of breast cancer patient-derived LCLs
Of the 53 patients who donated blood for our study,
we successfully established LCLs for 45 individuals
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

38360

Oncotarget

Table 1: Patient characteristics and clinical response
Patient Demographics (n = 53)*
Median Age (range)
51 (36–79) yrs
Ethnicity
number
%
White
38
71%
Black
9
17%
Asian
2
1%
Other/undisclosed
5
5%
Clinical response **
Short term response at 10–12 weeks
CR
1 (2.9%)
PR
7 (20%)
SD
12 (34.3%)
PD
10 (28.5%)
ND
5 (14.3%)
Number of patients with clinical response (percentages): Complete response (CR), Partial response (PR), Stable disease (SD),
Progressive disease (PD), Not Disclosed (ND). *45 out of the 53 patients included in the correlative study had successful
establishment of their LCLs. ** upon assessment of clinical data, some of these patients who had LCLs were lost to
follow-up.

In vitro assessment of capecitabine sensitivity
between matching breast cancer cell lines and
LCLs

in the LCL model (represented by Area under curve
(AUC)). There is no significant association between patient
RECIST-defined response at 12-week and response in their
LCL model. There was, however, a trend showing patients
with higher AUC in LCLs (representing resistance/less
sensitivity to capecitabine) were more likely to have
disease progression at 12-week (p = 0.086, Supplementary
Figure 3).
We also evaluated the relationship between
ex vivo phenotype and PFS (represented by time to tumor
progression). Among the 45 patients from whom we
successfully established LCLs, 10 patients were lost to
follow-up. Using AUC obtained from the remaining 35
patient-derived LCLs, Cox regression and Kaplan-Meier
analysis showed that patients with lower 5ʹ-DFUR AUC
(higher sensitivity) had significantly better outcomes
(Figure 1). These patients whose LCLs were more
sensitive to 5ʹ-DFUR (defined as the lower halves of
AUC distribution curve, Supplementary Figure 4), had
a significantly longer PFS when compared to those
patients whose LCLs were less sensitive to 5ʹ-DFUR
(median PFS: 9-month vs. 6-month, log rank p = 0.017).
In addition, after adjusting for other known important
prognostic clinical variables such as presence of hepatic
metastases and age, the positive correlation between ex
vivo phenotype and clinical survival remained significant
(p = 0.025). Overall, these data suggest that ex vivo
capecitabine sensitivity obtained from patient-derived
LCL models may predict patients’ clinical responses.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Given the observed correlation between LCL
sensitivity to 5ʹ-DFUR and patients’ PFS on capecitabine
treatment, we hypothesized that at least a portion of the
individual sensitivity to capecitabine is shared between
germline tissue and tumor. To test this hypothesis, we
took advantage of a collection of previously-established
matching LCLs (germline) and breast cancer cell lines
(tumor) [13]. We performed 5ʹ-DFUR sensitivity assays
in both breast cancer cell lines and their matched LCLs
derived from the same patient. Inter-individual differences
in response to 5ʹ-DFUR were observed in both LCLs and
breast cancer cell lines (Figure 2A). Using a Student T-test
to evaluate sensitivity between the 2 cell models, we found
that LCLs in general were more sensitive to 5ʹ-DFUR
than breast cancer cell lines (Figure 2B, p =  0.0004).
Interestingly, we found that 5ʹ-DFUR sensitivity in LCLs
was highly correlated with the sensitivity in their matched
breast cancer cell lines (Figure 2C) with the higher the
LCL sensitivity, the higher the tumor sensitivity to the
same drug treatment (Pearson correlation coefficient
r = 0.86 and p = 0.0067).
In addition, we hypothesized that for drugs that
are designed to target tumor-specific mutations and
amplifications, LCLs will not be a good model to predict
their tumor response. To test this we treated a pair of LCLs

38361

Oncotarget

Figure 1: 5ʹ-DFUR sensitivity obtained from patient-derived LCLs can be used to predict breast cancer patients’ PFS.
Kaplan-Meier curve represents PFS of stratified patients based on their LCL sensitivity to 5ʹ-DFUR. 18 patients who have greater than mean
ex vivo 5ʹ-DFUR treatment AUC were compared to 17 patients who have lesser than mean ex vivo 5’-DFUR treatment AUC. Patients with
lower AUC had a median 9 months PFS compared to those with higher AUC who only had a median of 6 months PFS (log rank p = 0.017).

Figure 2: Cellular sensitivity to 5ʹ-DFUR assessed in LCLs and their matched breast cancer cell lines. (A) Decreased
cellular viability was observed in both breast cancer (BC) cell lines and their matched LCLs when treated with increasing concentrations
of 5ʹ-DFUR for 72 hours. (B) Comparing cellular sensitivity to 5ʹ-DFUR in both the BC cell lines and their matched LCLs. Student’s
t-test p = 0.0004 shows a significant difference in cellular response between BC cell lines and their matched LCLs in Area under the %
viability curve (AUC) was calculated using trapezoidal rules. (C) AUC correlation between BC cell lines and their matched LCLs. Pearson
correlation: r = 0.857 and p = 0.0067.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

38362

Oncotarget

along with their matching breast cancer cell lines with
lapatinib, an epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) and
HER2 tyrosine kinase inhibitor. As expected, HCC1954,
a HER2-amplified breast cancer cell line, was highly
sensitive to lapatinib compared to its matched HCC1954
LCL line (P < 0.05, Figure 3A). Not surprisingly, in
a second breast cancer cell line, HCC1937 (estrogen
receptor (ER) and HER-2 negative), we observed very
little sensitivity to lapatinib; and no sensitivity in the LCL
derived from the same patient (Figure 3A). The minimal
sensitivity of the cell line HCC1937 to lapatinib, an EGFR
an HER2 inhibitor may be explained by its expression of
EGFR [14, 15].
To further explore whether the observed response
correlation between LCLs and cancer cell lines could be
expanded to other cytotoxic drugs, we evaluated two other
cytotoxic agents (daunorubicin and paclitaxel), and found
that HCC1937 LCLs were more sensitive to daunorubicin
and paclitaxel treatment than its matched HCC1937 breast
cancer cell line (Figure 3B, 3C). HCC1954 LCL similarly
showed more sensitivity to daunorubicin than its matched
HCC1954 breast cancer cell line. Interestingly, under
paclitaxel treatment, we observed similar high sensitivity
in both HCC1954 breast cancer cell line and LCL from the
same patient (HCC1954 LCL). This was consistent with
the previous report that patients with a HER2-negative

breast cancer benefitted from paclitaxel, regardless of
estrogen-receptor status, but paclitaxel treatment did
not benefit patients with HER2-negative cancers (like
that of HCC1937) [16]. Overall, our data suggest that
a germline model (like LCLs) may be used to predict
tumor sensitivity to cytotoxic agents, while characterizing
sensitivity to targeted therapy like lapatinib in LCLs is
unlikely to be of use in predicting tumor sensitivity.

Discussion
The International HapMap LCLs have been
extensively used to identify genetic predictors of
chemotherapy toxicity and sensitivity including 5ʹ-DFUR
[9, 17, 18]. However, HapMap cells were derived from
apparently healthy individuals. We therefore first sought
to investigate whether we could establish LCLs from
breast cancer patients. Our goal of establishing patientderived LCLs was successful (> 85% success rate).
We showed that LCLs can be established from patient
PBMCs isolated freshly or from whole blood preserved
on ice and isolated with 48 hours. This supports the
feasibility on incorporating LCL establishment in clinical
trials, even those across multiple sites. In addition, we
demonstrated that our method to develop LCLs resulted
in highly reproducible data with minimal intra-individual

Figure 3: Effects of other anti-tumor drugs on 2 pairs of matching BC cell lines and LCLs. HCC1954, HCC1937 and their
matched LCLs were treated with (A) lapatinib (B) daunorubicin and (C) paclitaxel at their pharmacological concentrations. Percent cell
viability was analyzed after 72 hours treatment with respective drugs. *p < 0.05.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

38363

Oncotarget

variability in response to 5ʹ-DFUR treatment. This allowed
observation of inter-individual variability in response
to 5ʹ-DFUR across different individuals. Given that
laboratory-established LCLs can be cryopreserved (this
will store donors’ genetic and gene expression information
at the time of collection), we created a research resource
that can be used for future experiments evaluating the
genetic contribution to drug sensitivity. Furthermore, the
drugs that may be evaluated in this model in the future are
not limited to capecitabine.
We next evaluated the role of patient-derived LCLs
in predicting both short term and long term capecitabine
treatment outcomes. Consistent with responses in previous
studies, approximately 26 percent of patients in our study
achieved CR+PR on single-agent capecitabine therapy [3].
We found no statistically significant correlation between
capecitabine sensitivity derived from patient LCLs and
their short term (10 to 12 weeks) response. However,
there is a trend of positive correlation between them. This
relationship is consistent with what was observed between
ex vivo phenotype and long term response (represented by
PFS). The lack of association may be due to the relatively
small sample size of our correlative study, the short duration
of treatment before response assessment, and/or decreased
statistical power when evaluating categorical variable (ie,
RECIST category) as compared to continuous variable (ie,
PFS). Upon checking patients’ medical record, most patients
remained on capecitabine treatment even after the end of the
trial, as well as those who received dose reductions.
Several clinical trials have shown that capecitabine
significantly prolongs overall survival and PFS in the
metastatic setting. Therefore, we also evaluated the
correlation between the ex vivo 5ʹ-DFUR sensitivity
phenotype to patients’ PFS. We found that patients with lower
AUCs (higher ex vivo 5ʹ-DFUR sensitivity) in LCLs had
a longer PFS than patients whose LCLs had higher AUCs.
Despite the confounder of the variable dose reductions that
patients received due to toxicities, studies have also shown
that lower dosage of capecitabine does not affect overall
efficacy of therapy [19, 20]. Previous studies have shown that
age and hepatic metastasis are independent prognostic factors
of capecitabine response [21]. When we adjusted for these
variables, patient-derived LCL sensitivity data remained an
independent, significant predictor of patient outcomes.
This significant correlation between patients’
ex vivo LCL and clinical outcome was further supported
by an independent in vitro study of a collection of breast
cancer cell lines with their matching LCLs. Our data seem
to suggest that those shared germline elements between
LCLs and tumor cells are important in cellular sensitivity
to the cytotoxic agents.
Overall, we demonstrated that establishing LCLs
from breast cancer patients is feasible and potentially
beneficial. If further validated, our data supports the
utility of patient-derived LCLs as a predictive model for
capecitabine treatment efficacy in breast cancer patients.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

We showed a shared response to cytotoxic agents among
LCLs and breast cancer cells derived from the same
individuals. Further development and optimization of
patient-derived LCLs or other germline, blood-based
ex vivo models might provide powerful tools in precision
medicine to tailor patients’ therapies.

Materials and Methods
Patients and clinical data collection
We conducted our study as part of a larger clinical
trial (TBCRC 015, NCT00977119) in which women with
metastatic breast cancer were enrolled in a clinical trial
examining genetic determinants of capecitabine toxicity.
The dose of capecitabine prescribed was standardized in
all patients as 2000 mg/m2/day. For our correlative study,
a subset of patients enrolled from six sites (University of
Chicago, University of Alabama, Vanderbilt University,
The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center,
University of Michigan and University of California San Francisco) were included with the goal to evaluate
the feasibility of creating ex vivo LCL models from breast
cancer patients, and how these ex vivo drug sensitivity
phenotypes related to patient capecitabine treatment
response/toxicity phenotypes. The study was approved
by the IRB of all participating institutions and informed
consent was obtained from all study participants.
Both short term and long term clinical responses
were collected. The short term response was measured
at 10–12 weeks capecitabine treatment; while the long
term response was assessed using PFS, which range
from 6  weeks to 32 months. Clinical assessment and
radiographic evaluation were performed on the majority
of the patients at 12-week after initiation of capecitabine
to assess their short term disease response. Response
evaluation criteria in solid tumor (RECIST v1.1) criteria
were applied and patient short term response was defined
as complete response (CR), partial response (PR), stable
disease (SD) or progressive disease (PD).

Peripheral blood mononuclear cells isolation and
LCL establishment
Ten milliliters of blood were drawn from each
patient through venous puncture into BD Vacutainer®
venous blood collection tubes (Lavender top), and inverted
8–10 times. Blood samples were processed immediately
(for all University of Chicago samples) or shipped on
ice overnight to University of Chicago for processing.
Peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) were
isolated using Accuspin™ System-Histopaque®-1077
tubes as instructed by the manufacturer (Sigma-Aldrich®,
St. Louis, MO) with some modifications.
A previously-described Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)
transformation protocol [22] was adapted to establish
38364

Oncotarget

LCLs from breast cancer patients enrolled into our study.
When the cells reached a total viability of 80% the flasks
were sub-cultured and further expanded to a total viable
cell count of 3 × 107. Two independent LCL colonies were
established from each patient’s peripheral blood sample.

that are more sensitive (n = 17 low AUC) or resistant
(n = 18 high AUC) to 5ʹ-DFUR. Cox regression was used
to adjust for multiple variables such as hepatic metastasis
and age. Student‘s T-test was used to compare cellular
response to 5ʹ-DFUR between patients’ LCLs and tumor
cell lines. Pearson correlation was also used to evaluate
correlation in 5ʹ-DFUR sensitivity between patientderived LCLs and their matched breast cancer cell lines.

Breast cancer cell lines and LCLs derived from
the same breast cancer donors
A collection of breast cancer cell lines (n = 8)
and their paired EBV transformed LCLs (n = 8) were
established previously [13] and obtained from the American
Tissue Culture Collection (ATCC®) (Manassas, VA). Of
the breast cancer cell lines, 2 were from patients who had
human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2+) cancers
(HCC1954 and HCC2218), 1 was from a patient with an
estrogen receptor positive (ER+) tumor (HCC1428) and 5
(HCC1937, HCC1143, HCC1187, HCC1599, HCC1395)
were from patients who had triple negative breast cancers.
Both the breast cancer cell lines and the matching LCLs
were cultured according to ATCC protocol [13].

Acknowledgments
We thank the Translational Breast Cancer Research
Consortium (TBCRC) investigators, research nurses,
and study coordinators for their efforts on behalf of the
patients.

Conflicts of Interest
All authors have no conflicts of interest to disclose.

Author’s contributions

Ex vivo phenotyping

Conception and design: GM, PHO, RSH, Data
acquisition: GM, DL, BL, DZ, PHO, Analysis and
interpretation of data: GM, PHO, RSH, Manuscript
writing, review and revisions: GM, PKM, CVP, RN, PHO,
RSH, Study supervision: VA, PKM, AF, CVP, HSR, RN,
PHO, RSH.
This study was supported by the National Institute of
Health grant U01GM61393, Circle of Service Foundation
Early Career Investigator award, University of Chicago
CTSA core subsidy grant, and a Conquer Cancer
Foundation of ASCO Translational Research Professorship
award In Memory of Merrill J. Egorin, MD (awarded to Dr.
M.J. Ratain, supporting RSH and PHO). The TBCRC trial
is supported by its three foundation partners, The AVON
Foundation, The Breast Cancer Research Foundation, and
The Susan G. Komen for the Cure.

Patient-derived LCLs from the TBCRC trial and
the ATCC purchased cell lines (both breast cancer cell
lines and their matching LCLs from the same donors)
were phenotyped for 5ʹ-DFUR sensitivity using Cell Titer
Glo® (Promega, Madison WI) [9]. Because LCLs lack
the expression of cytidine deaminase, an enzyme critical
for the conversion of capecitabine to its active form,
5ʹ-DFUR (10 μM, 20 μM, 40 μM, 80 μM and 160 μM),
a major metabolite of capecitabine was used to evaluate
capecitabine sensitivity in cell growth inhibition assays.
Cells with > 85% viability were plated in triplicate at
4000 cells per well in a 96-well plate (Corning, Corning
NY). Cells were incubated with various concentrations of
drug or vehicle control for 72 hours prior to the addition of
Cell Titer Glo reagent in order to measure ATP levels in the
culturing media. The area under curve (AUC) representing
overall cellular sensitivity to the drug was calculated using
the trapezoidal rule. For the matching breast cancer cell
lines and LCLs, varying (pharmacologically achievable)
concentrations of lapatinib (0.1–1 µM), daunorubicin
(0.0125–0.2 µM) and paclitaxel (0.001–10 µM) were used
to treat cells to confirm model validity. Each experiment
was repeated at least 2 times in triplicate.

Grant support
RSH also received support from National Institute
of Health grant K08GM089941, National Institute of
Health grant R21 CA139278, University of Chicago
Support Grant (#P30 CA14599), Breast Cancer SPORE
Career Development Award [CA125183] and the
National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences of
the National Institute of Health [UL1RR024999]. PHO
received additional support for this study from NIH/NCI
K12 CA139160-01A1, The University of Chicago Cancer
Research Center (Protocol-Specific Grant), and The
University of Chicago Clinical and Translational Science
Award Pilot and Collaborative Translational and Clinical
Studies Award. GM is supported by the NIH/NIGMS
Clinical Therapeutics training grant T32GM007019.

Statistics
Linear regression was performed between
in vivo RECIST defined patients’ response at 12 weeks
and response to 5ʹ-DFUR in patient-derived LCLs
(represented by the area under the curve (AUC)). Kaplan
Meier analysis on patients progression-free survival
(PFS) was used to evaluate difference between LCLs
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

38365

Oncotarget

References

12.	 Huang RS, Johnatty SE, Gamazon ER, Im HK, Ziliak D,
Duan S, Zhang W, Kistner EO, Chen P, Beesley J, Mi S,
O’Donnell PH, Fraiman YS, et al. Platinum sensitivity-related
germline polymorphism discovered via a cell-based approach
and analysis of its association with outcome in ovarian cancer
patients. Clin Cancer Res. 2011; 17:5490–5500.

  1.	 Tabata T, Katoh M, Tokudome S, Hosakawa M, Chiba K,
Nakajima M, Yokoi T. Bioactivation of capecitabine in
human liver: involvement of the cytosolic enzyme on
5ʹ-deoxy-5-fluorocytidine formation. Drug Metab Dispos.
2004; 32:762–767.

13.	 Gazdar AF, Kurvari V, Virmani A, Gollahon L, Sakaguchi M,
Westerfield M, Kodagoda D, Stasny V, Cunningham HT,
Wistuba, II, Tomlinson G, Tonk V, et al. Characterization
of paired tumor and non-tumor cell lines established from
patients with breast cancer. Int J Cancer. 1998; 78:766–774.

  2.	 Walko CM, Lindley C. Capecitabine: a review. Clin Ther.
2005; 27:23–44.
  3.	 Ershler WB. Capecitabine monotherapy: safe and effective
treatment for metastatic breast cancer. Oncologist. 2006;
11:325–335.

14.	 Cipriano R, Bryson BL, Miskimen KL, Bartel CA,
Hernandez-Sanchez W, Bruntz RC, Scott SA, Lindsley
CW, Brown HA, Jackson MW. Hyperactivation of EGFR
and downstream effector phospholipase D1 by oncogenic
FAM83B. Oncogene. 2014; 33:3298–3306.

  4.	 Reichardt P, Von Minckwitz G, Thuss-Patience PC, Jonat W,
Kolbl H, Janicke F, Kieback DG, Kuhn W, Schindler AE,
Mohrmann S, Kaufmann M, Luck HJ. Multicenter phase
II study of oral capecitabine (Xeloda(“)) in patients with
metastatic breast cancer relapsing after treatment with a taxanecontaining therapy. Ann Oncol. 2003; 14:1227–1233.

15.	 Chu B, Liu F, Li L, Ding C, Chen K, Sun Q, Shen Z, Tan Y,
Tan C, Jiang Y. A benzimidazole derivative exhibiting
antitumor activity blocks EGFR, HER2 activity and
upregulates DR5 in breast cancer cells. Cell Death Dis.
2015; 6:e1686.

  5.	 Blum JL, Jones SE, Buzdar AU, LoRusso PM, Kuter I,
Vogel C, Osterwalder B, Burger HU, Brown CS, Griffin T.
Multicenter phase II study of capecitabine in paclitaxelrefractory metastatic breast cancer. J Clin Oncol. 1999;
17:485–493.

16.	 Hayes DF, Thor AD, Dressler LG, Weaver D, Edgerton S,
Cowan D, Broadwater G, Goldstein LJ, Martino S,
Ingle JN, Henderson IC, Norton L, Winer EP, et al. HER2
and response to paclitaxel in node-positive breast cancer. N
Engl J Med. 2007; 357:1496–1506.

  6.	 Blum JL, Dieras V, Lo Russo PM, Horton J, Rutman O,
Buzdar A, Osterwalder B. Multicenter, Phase II study
of capecitabine in taxane-pretreated metastatic breast
carcinoma patients. Cancer. 2001; 92:1759–1768.

17.	 Zhang W, Ratain MJ, Dolan ME. The HapMap Resource is
Providing New Insights into Ourselves and its Application to
Pharmacogenomics. Bioinform Biol Insights. 2008; 2:15–23.

  7.	 Rosmarin D, Palles C, Church D, Domingo E, Jones A,
Johnstone E, Wang H, Love S, Julier P, Scudder C,
Nicholson G, Gonzalez-Neira A, Martin M, et al. Genetic
markers of toxicity from capecitabine and other fluorouracilbased regimens: investigation in the QUASAR2 study,
systematic review, and meta-analysis. J Clin Oncol. 2014;
32:1031–1039.

18.	 Moen EL, Godley LA, Zhang W, Dolan ME. Pharma­
cogenomics of chemotherapeutic susceptibility and toxicity.
Genome Med. 2012; 4:90.
19.	 Blum JL, Dees EC, Chacko A, Doane L, Ethirajan S,
Hopkins J, McMahon R, Merten S, Negron A, Neubauer M,
Ilegbodu D, Boehm KA, Asmar L, et al. Phase II trial of
capecitabine and weekly paclitaxel as first-line therapy for
metastatic breast cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2006; 24:4384–4390.

  8.	 Salonga D, Danenberg KD, Johnson M, Metzger R,
Groshen S, Tsao-Wei DD, Lenz HJ, Leichman CG,
Leichman L, Diasio RB, Danenberg PV. Colorectal tumors
responding to 5-fluorouracil have low gene expression
levels of dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase, thymidylate
synthase, and thymidine phosphorylase. Clin Cancer Res.
2000; 6:1322–1327.

20.	 Hennessy BT, Gauthier AM, Michaud LB, Hortobagyi G,
Valero V. Lower dose capecitabine has a more favorable
therapeutic index in metastatic breast cancer: retrospective
analysis of patients treated at M. D. Anderson Cancer Center
and a review of capecitabine toxicity in the literature. Ann
Oncol. 2005; 16:1289–1296.

  9.	 O’Donnell PH, Stark AL, Gamazon ER, Wheeler HE,
McIlwee  BE, Gorsic L, Im HK, Huang RS, Cox NJ,
Dolan  ME. Identification of novel germline polymor­
phisms governing capecitabine sensitivity. Cancer. 2012;
118:4063–4073.

21.	 Puente J, Lopez-Tarruella S, Ruiz A, Lluch A, Pastor M,
Alba E, de la Haba J, Ramos M, Cirera L, Anton A,
Llombart A, Plazaola A, Fernandez-Aramburo A, et al.
Practical prognostic index for patients with metastatic
recurrent breast cancer: retrospective analysis of 2,322
patients from the GEICAM Spanish El Alamo Register.
Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2010; 122:591–600.

10.	 Wheeler HE, Gamazon ER, Stark AL, O’Donnell PH,
Gorsic LK, Huang RS, Cox NJ, Dolan ME. Genome-wide
meta-analysis identifies variants associated with platinating
agent susceptibility across populations. Pharmacogenomics
J. 2013; 13:35–43.

22.	 Hui-Yuen J, McAllister S, Koganti S, Hill E, BhaduriMcIntosh S. Establishment of Epstein-Barr virus growthtransformed lymphoblastoid cell lines. J Vis Exp. 2011; doi:
10.3791/3321.

11.	 Zhang W, Huang RS, Dolan ME. Cell-based Models for
Discovery of Pharmacogenomic Markers of Anticancer
Agent Toxicity. Trends Cancer Res. 2008; 4:1–13.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

38366

Oncotarget

