Oncotarget, Vol. 7, No. 35

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Research Paper

Slowing down glioblastoma progression in mice by running
or the anti-malarial drug dihydroartemisinin? Induction of
oxidative stress in murine glioblastoma therapy
Dieter Lemke1,2,3, Hans-Werner Pledl1,2,3, Markus Zorn4, Manfred Jugold5, Ed
Green1,6, Jonas Blaes1,2, Sarah Löw1,2,3, Anne Hertenstein1,2,3, Martina Ott1,6, Felix
Sahm1,7,8, Ann-Catherine Steffen1,2, Markus Weiler1,2,3, Frank Winkler1,2,3, Michael
Platten1,3,6, Zhen Dong9,*, Wolfgang Wick1,2,3,*
1

German Cancer Consortium (DKTK), German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany

2

Clinical Cooperation Unit Neurooncology, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany

3

Neurology Clinic and National Center for Tumor Diseases, University of Heidelberg, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ),
Heidelberg, Germany

4

Central Laboratory of Heidelberg University Hospital, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany

5

Core Facility Small Animal Imaging Center, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany

6

Clinical Cooperation Unit Neuroimmunology and Brain Tumor Immunology, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ),
Heidelberg, Germany

7

Department of Neuropathology, Institute of Pathology, University of Heidelberg, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ),
Heidelberg, Germany

8

Clinical Cooperation Unit Neuropathology, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany

9

Department of Neurosurgery, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology,
Wuhan, China

*

These authors have shared senior authorship

Correspondence to: Zhen Dong, email: dongz@tjh.tjmu.edu.cn
Wolfgang Wick, email: wolfgang.wick@med.uni-heidelberg.de
Keywords: dihydroartemisinin, glioblastoma, physical exercises (PE), therapy, physical exercise
Received: May 11, 2016     Accepted: June 14, 2016     Published: July 20, 2016

ABSTRACT
Influencing cancer metabolism by lifestyle changes is an attractive strategy as
- if effective - exercise-induced problems may be less severe than those induced by
classical anti-cancer therapies. Pursuing this idea, clinical trials evaluated the benefit
of e.g. different diets such as the ketogenic diet, intermittent caloric restriction and
physical exercise (PE) in the primary and secondary prevention of different cancer
types. PE proved to be beneficial in the context of breast and colon cancer.
Glioblastoma has a dismal prognosis, with an average overall survival of about
one year despite maximal safe resection, concomitant radiochemotherapy with
temozolomide followed by adjuvant temozolomide therapy. Here, we focused on the
influence of PE as an isolated and adjuvant treatment in murine GB therapy.
PE did not reduce toxic side effects of chemotherapy in mice administered in a dose
escalating scheme as shown before for starvation. Although regular treadmill training
on its own had no obvious beneficial effects, its combination with temozolomide was
beneficial in the treatment of glioblastoma-bearing mice. As PE might partly act through
the induction of reactive oxygen species, dihydroartemisinin - an approved anti-malarial
drug which induces oxidative stress in glioma cells - was further evaluated in vitro and in
vivo. Dihydroartemisinin showed anti-glioma activity by promoting autophagy, reduced
the clonogenic survival and proliferation capacity of glioma cells, and prolonged the
survival of tumor bearing mice. Using the reactive oxygen species scavenger n-acetylcysteine these effects were in part reversible, suggesting that dihydroartemisinin partly
acts through the generation of reactive oxygen species.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

56713

Oncotarget

INTRODUCTION

than 2 years despite maximal safe resection, concomitant
radiochemotherapy with temozolomide (TMZ) followed
by adjuvant TMZ-therapy [23].
We were interested to test whether PE is suitable
to induce a DSR protecting non-tumor cells from TMZ
induced toxicity and would thus allow applying higher
doses of TMZ. We chose a forced exercise model with
treadmill (TM) training over voluntary free-wheel activity.
It has been demonstrated that this approach was more
effective in inducing the molecular correlates of physical
exercise, both in the muscle but also in the brain, where
elevated levels of the mitochondrial complexes I and V as
well as the anti-oxidative enzyme Mn-SOD were detected
[24, 25].
Given that PE’s mode of action might include
induction of ROS, we sought to model this in vitro using
the anti-malarial drug dihydroartemisinin (DHA), which
has been shown to form ROS in leukemia cells and
thereby induce anti-oxidative enzymes [26]. Artesunate
which is metabolized to DHA was suggested to be used in
the treatment for recurrent glioma in a cocktail with eight
other drugs [27, 28].
Given the limited preclinical data about DHA,
this approved anti-malarial drug might be a potentially
interesting agent when combined with TMZ or
radiotherapy in glioma therapy. It was demonstrated that
DHA increased TMZ-toxicity in C6 rat glioma cells in
vitro in a ROS-dependent mechanism [29]. Moreover,
DHA is supposed to induce autophagy, to reduce invasivity
of glioma cells and to target glioma stem cells [30–32].
DHA could therefore be an interesting agent in the
treatment of GB sharing in part the mechanism of action
with PE by inducing oxidative stress pharmacologically.

Cancer metabolism is an attractive target in tumors,
especially those that are largely resistant against radioand chemotherapy. As tumor cells rely more on anaerobic
glycolysis compared with non-tumor cells, which is called
the Warburg effect, glycolysis inhibitors were tested in
cancer therapy [1]. Unfortunately, although this strategy
has been pursued for many years and many different
compounds are available now, there is only a very limited
amount of clinical trials testing glycolysis inhibitors and,
to our knowledge, no inhibitor has been approved for
cancer therapy yet [2].
Similarly, life style factors which could influence
cancer metabolism have for many years been the focus of
epidemiologic studies [3–6], and indeed the influence of
eating habits and physical exercise (PE) on cardiovascular
morbidity and mortality is well known. Interest is growing
in deciphering the impact of these factors on both the
prevalence of different cancer types, as well as their
significance in cancer therapy. PE has been shown to have
beneficial effects in primary and secondary prevention
of breast and colon cancer [7–11] and may also reduce
cancer-related fatigue [12, 13].
Life style factors – such as caloric restriction and
PE - may influence cancer therapy by several mechanisms,
including changing the levels of growth factors (such as
insulin-like growth factors), sex hormone profiles, reactive
oxygen species (ROS), and inflammatory responses [14–
18]. Pedersen et al. recently demonstrated that PE in mice
on its own reduced tumor growth through epinephrineand IL6 dependent NK cell redistribution into tumor tissue
[19].
Interestingly, Rafaghello et al. showed that lowglucose or low-serum media protected primary glial cells,
but not glioma and neuroblastoma cell lines against toxic
levels of oxidative stress induced by hydrogen peroxide
or cyclophosphamide chemotherapy. They translated
their in vitro work into an in vivo model demonstrating
that a starvation period of 48 h reduced toxicity of
cyclophosphamide- and etoposide-chemotherapy in
starved mice allowing the use of higher dosages of
chemotherapy, which resulted in longer survival of
neuroblastoma bearing mice. This process was named
differential stress response (DSR), which they suggest
occurs due to the lower resistance of tumor cells to altering
levels of ROS compared with healthy cells [20]. Woolf
et al. give an interesting overview about the metabolic
changes induced by ketogenic diet which improve survival
in animal models of malignant gliomas and can potentiate
the anti-tumor effect of chemotherapies and radiation
treatment [21]. Although, the ketogenic diet on its own did
not show anti-glioma activity in a small clinical trial [22].
Here, we focused on the beneficial effects of PE as
an isolated and adjuvant treatment strategy in glioblastoma
(GB) therapy. GB has an average overall survival of less
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

RESULTS
PE slows down tumor growth but does not
induce a differential stress response
To test the effects of PE in the context of GB
chemotherapy with TMZ, mice were habituated to
daily moderate endurance training on a treadmill. Mice
were trained at a speed of 18 meters per minute for 45
minutes at 5 of 7 days per week reflecting a moderate
intensity which corresponds to 50-75% of the maximum
oxygen consumption as shown before in a mastocytoma
mouse model in vivo [33]. The detailed study protocol is
illustrated in Figure 1a. TMZ was administered in a doseintensified scheme of 7 days on and 7 days off for 2.5
cycles 10 days after the primary GB cell line T269 had
been orthotopically implanted in nude mice. To address
whether PE can induce a differential stress response with a
higher resistance of the hematopoietic cells against TMZtoxicity, the TMZ concentration was doubled in the second
week of chemotherapy to 84 mg/kg.

56714

Oncotarget

DHA, known to induce oxidative stress, which
could be one possible mechanism PE might act through,
was given four days per week to imitate regular endurance
training.
Blood counts and body weight were monitored to
address hematopoietic toxicity and tolerance to treatment.
Dose escalation of TMZ to 84 mg/kg showed toxic effects
on the hematopoietic system with a severe reduction of the
platelet and leucocyte counts in the TMZ-treated groups.
PE and the administration of DHA did not induce a
differential stress response with a reduced hematotoxicity.

This was also true for body weight as a more general
critical parameter for well-being. All animals treated at 84
mg/kg TMZ in the second week of chemotherapy suffered
from loss of body weight, which did not occur in the
untreated or PE-only-treated animals (Figure 1b).
Only PE combined with TMZ showed a significant
survival benefit when compared with untreated animals
in a pairwise analysis. The combined analysis of all the
treatment subgroups did not show a significant treatment
benefit in any subgroup with a p-value of 0.06 in the
Kaplan-Meier log-rank test. As T269 primary glioma

Figure 1: PE shows synergistic anti-tumor activity when combined with TMZ in vivo but does not protect against
chemotherapy-induced toxicity. a. Study protocol of the T269 in vivo experiment detailing the procedure timepoints. b. Kaplan-Meier

survival plot as well as the course of blood counts and bodyweight are depicted for the T269 animal experiment. The time line corresponds
to to days post operation. Only animals treated with PE combined with TMZ showed a significant benefit when compared with untreated
animals (* p<0.05).

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

56715

Oncotarget

cells form very invasive tumors (Figure 2 upper raw), we
were interested to see whether infiltration was reduced
by the combination of TMZ and PE or DHA compared
with single TMZ treatment. Untreated or only PE treated
animals showed the largest tumors at the end of the
treatment period which invaded into the contralateral
hemisphere passing the corpus callosum (Figure 2 upper
raw). After TMZ-monotherapy, invasion of T269 tumor
cells was massively reduced without detectable tumor cells
in the corpus callosum and the contralateral hemisphere
which impeded the detection of a further anti-invasive
effect in the combined treated mice (Figure 2 middle and
lower raw).
To further evaluate the effects of PE on tumor
growth, a second mouse experiment was conducted with
the GB cell line LN-Z308, which allows monitoring of
tumor growth with MRI because this cell line forms more
bulky, non-invasive tumors. The TMZ dose was reduced
to 21 mg/kg as LN-Z308 cells proved to be more sensitive
in vitro compared with T269 cells (Supplementary Figure
S1). Although T269 cells have an unmethylated MGMTpromoter status [34] suggesting that they might have a
higher resistance against TMZ-treatment [35], they do not
express MGMT protein and show an intermediate TMZsensitivity in vitro compared with the highly resistant
MGMT-unmethylated T98G and the sensitive methylated
LN-Z308 cells (Supplementary Figure S1).
MRI, which was performed during the last
chemotherapy week with TMZ, demonstrated that the
addition of PE or DHA to TMZ resulted in smaller
tumors compared with untreated or TMZ-only- treated
animals. TMZ alone reduced tumor size to ~ 55% while
the additional use of DHA or PE resulted in a tumor
size of less than 20% compared with untreated animals
(Figure 3).

effect in T269 cells treated with DHA. TMZ used at a
concentration of 10 μM had a significant anti-proliferative
effect on all the cells tested, although, after 72 h, this effect
was a lot weaker compared with DHA monotherapy. The
combination of TMZ and DHA at 9 μM proved to be more
anti-proliferative in LN-229 and T269 cells compared with
the monotherapies (Figure 4a).
We next evaluated the anti-clonogenic potential of
DHA in limiting dilution assays of LN-229, LN-Z308 and
T269 cells. Here again, DHA exerted a dose dependent
effect by reducing the clonogenic potential between 17x in
LN-Z308 cells to 40x in T269 cells at a concentration of 9
μM. Due to the additional toxicity of the ROS scavenger
NAC even at a lower concentration of 2 mM, this radical
scavenger could not rescue the DHA effects in LN-229
and T269 cells. In LN-Z308 cells, NAC at 5 mM could
partly antagonize the anti-clonogenic effect of DHA used
at the higher 9μM-dose illustrating that DHA acts in part
via the induction of oxidative stress. A single treatment
with TMZ at 10 mM was less anti-clonogenic than even
the lower dose of DHA monotherapy.
The combination of DHA at 9μM and TMZ 10μM
was more anti-clonogenic in LN-229 and T269 cells
compared with the monotherapies (Figure 4b) arguing for
a synergistic therapeutic effect.
As the rescue-experiments with NAC could only
give a hint that ROS play a role in the mode of action
of DHA we evaluated the mRNA-levels of enzymes
antagonizing products of oxidative stress. The mRNAexpression of catalase (CAT), superoxide dismutase
(SOD) 1 and 2, glutathione peroxidase (GPX) 1 and 4
as well as pyridoxine reductase 2 (PRX) were measured
by qPCR in LN-229 cells, human astrocytes and T269.
As a general marker of cellular stress we measured C/
EBP homologous protein (CHOP) mRNA in qPCR and
performed flow cytometric analysis with the fluorescent
oxidative stress marker H2DCFDA in LN-229 cells after
treatment with 5μM DHA.
H2DCFDA showed an increased fluorescence after
treatment with DHA at 5 μM (Figure 4c). DHA at 9 μM
induced cellular stress measured by a ~6-30x induction of
CHOP in the tested cells.
Anti-oxidative enzymes were up-regulated on the
mRNA-level for more than twofold exclusively in T269
primary glioma cells but not in human astrocytes or LN229 cells. In detail, T269 cells showed upregulation of
CAT, GPX1+4 and SOD2 (Figure 4c) after treatment with
DHA at 9 μM.
Moreover, as DHA is supposed to act via autophagy
[37], we addressed if it could induce autophagy in LN229, T269 and LN-Z308 cells by measuring the protein
levels of the early marker of autophagy, LC3 BII, in
western blot (Figure 4d). Here, DHA was able to induce
autophagy in all the cell lines tested as assessed by the
higher levels of LC3 BII.

Effects of DHA on human glioma cells in vitro
PE may act in many different ways on tumor tissue
such as e.g. altering levels of blood glucose, ketone
bodies, sex hormones and insulin, as well as stimulating
the immune system [14–19]. As this complexity cannot
be modelled in vitro we chose to further examine the role
of ROS induction by PE. We chose DHA as a chemical
compound to induce oxidative stress as this drug could,
if effective, be directly used in the clinical setting. We
used DHA in the dose range from 5-9 μM [36]. DHA
caused a dose-dependent reduction of the proliferation
rate in the glioma cell lines LN-229 and LN-Z308 as well
as in primary T269 glioma cells (Figure 4a) measured
by 3H-thymidine uptake. The use of the ROS scavenger
N-acetyl-cysteine (NAC) at 5 mM could partially rescue
the proliferation capacity in LN-Z308 cells. In LN-229
cells NAC, even when used with a lower concentration
of 2 mM, showed additional toxicity when combined with
DHA, while NAC at 2 mM had only a moderate rescuing
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

56716

Oncotarget

Figure 2: Combined treatment of DHA and/ or PE with TMZ as well as TMZ-monotherapy show a massive reduction
of invasiveness in orthotopically implanted T269 derived tumors in mice. Tumor cells are stained with anti-human nestin
antibody and appear in brown. The invasive pattern of the six treatment groups (control, PE only, TMZ, TMZ + PE, TMZ + DHA, TMZ
+ DHA + PE) are compared with the help of one overview image, and higher magnified images of the ipsilateral, corpus callosum- and
contralateral regions.

Figure 3: Combination therapy of either PE or DHA administered with TMZ is more effective than TMZ-monotherapy
against LN-Z308 derived tumors in mice. MR images and the statistical evaluation thereof demonstrate that in vivo the combined
treatment of TMZ and either DHA or PE is more effective than TMZ alone in treating a LN-Z308 derived orthotopically xenotransplanted GB.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

56717

Oncotarget

Figure 4: DHA exerts ROS-dependent anti-tumor activity. a. DHA treatment is anti-proliferative measured by 3H-thymidine uptake,

and anti-clonogenic, as measured by limiting dilution assay. b. Both effects are partially reversible by administration of the ROS-scavenger
NAC at 2 mM concentration in LN-229 and T269 cells and 5 mM in LN-Z308 cells. Co-treatment of DHA and TMZ has synergistic effects in
LN-229 and T269 cells. ( signifies a p-value <0.05 when comparing treated samples with DMSO-control, * signifies a p-value <0.05 when
comparing DHA-treated samples alone with DHA+NAC- or DHA+TMZ- treated samples). c. DHA 5 mM induces oxidative stress in LN-229
cells measured by H2DCFDA in flow cytometry. DHA 5 and 9 mM can induce the upregulation of the mRNA levels of diverse anti-oxidative
enzymes as well as CHOP. ( signifies a p-value <0.05 when comparing treated samples with DMSO-control). d. The combination of DHA
5 mM and 9 mM with TMZ induces autophagy measured after 72 h with LC3B II western blot in LN-229, T269 and LN-Z308 cells. e. TMZ
treatment induces the expression of p-NDRG1 in T269 and LN-Z308 cells. P-NDRG1 levels are reduced when TMZ is combined with DHA
5 and 9 mM treatment. f. DHA reduces the expression of the stem cell markers Sox2 and Nestin in T269 cells as shown on western blot.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

56718

Oncotarget

by drop outs during repeated oral gavage and training).
This is reinforced by the observation that the TMZ
monotherapy group (the current standard therapy for GB)
was itself not significantly different from the untreated
group. Furthermore, differences between the treatment
groups might have been masked by a very strong TMZ
effect in some animals, which required the termination of
the experiment after 220 days (Figure 1b).
This strong effect of TMZ might be explained by
the dosing strategy, in that we utilized the dosing scheme
established before in other mouse experiments [45, 46], in
a dose-dense regimen (7 days on/ 7 days off) resulting in
a cumulative TMZ dose of ~ 1g/kg over 3 weeks. During
the escalated dose phase this was sufficient to test whether
PE might induce a DSR, as mice clearly demonstrated
signs of toxicity (Figure 1). However, the 1g/kg total dose
would, in an average person weighing 75 kg and 180 cm
tall, equate to a total dose of 75 g – far above the ~18 g
a patient would receive over a standard 6 month therapy
(6 cycles over 6 months with a daily TMZ dose of 200
mg/m2 body surface on 5 of 28 days per cycle, including
the concomitant treatment during irradiation). Although
one must demonstrate caution when making inferences
between data from mouse models and the human situation,
given that we utilized human GB cells, the amount TMZ
might have been too high to detect any additional benefits
of its combination with PE or DHA (in addition to the
limitations of group size discussed above). This would
also hold true when analyzing invasiveness of T269
derived tumors, where again the efficacy of the TMZ
monotherapy in causing a massive decline of invasiveness
(Figure 2) precluded the identification of any additional
anti-invasive effect of PE and/or DHA.
We sought to determine if PE might induce an acute
DSR, in much the same way as has been demonstrated for
starvation [20], where non-tumor cells become resistant to
otherwise toxic doses of chemotherapy. Such a mechanism
would allow the use of higher doses of chemotherapy.
However we found that all groups receiving TMZ at
the escalated dose of 84 mg/kg bodyweight clearly
demonstrated severe signs of intoxication with a loss
of bodyweight and marked pancytopenia. This was by
itself an unexpected result given previous publications
suggesting that nude mice can tolerate up to 300 mg/m2 of
TMZ, which corresponds to 100 mg/kg [47]. Intriguingly,
the drop in body weight following TMZ therapy was less
pronounced in the group with PE (Figure 1).
Given the difficulties of resolving any combinatorial
effects of TMZ and PE or DHA in the first mouse
experiment, we performed a further experiment utilizing
LN-Z308 cells, which form non-invasive bulky tumors
which can be analyzed using contrast-enhanced-MRI
to compare treatment efficacy. We first performed a
preliminary experiment (Supplementary Figure S1)
to determine the relative sensitivity of LN-Z308 cells
towards TMZ compared with T269 cells; although neither

We further addressed phospho-p90RSK, phosphoAkt, phospho-p44/42 MAPK (Erk1/2) and phospho-S6
ribosomal protein levels in TMZ only or in TMZ and DHA
treated cells to analyze whether these oncogenic pathways,
which are in part responsible for resistance against TMZ
therapy [38], are differentially induced by the combined
versus the single agent treatment. DHA and TMZ did
not reduce any of the above-mentioned phospho-protein
levels compared with TMZ monotherapy. On the contrary,
at least one phospho-protein was more activated in the
different cell lines tested when comparing the combined
therapy with the TMZ-monotherapy. TMZ monotherapy
did not show an activation of the examined pathways
compared with control treatment in these short lasting 72
hour in vitro experiments (Supplementary Figure S2).
Interestingly, the protein level of phospho-NDRG1,
another gene responsible for TMZ-resistance [39], which
was upregulated in all the cell lines tested after a single
course of TMZ-chemotherapy, showed a reduction in the
combined DHA and TMZ treatment compared with TMZmonotherapy (Figure 4e).
Finally, we examined the protein levels of the stem
cell markers sox2 and nestin in the primary glioblastoma
cell line T269 after DHA treatment to assess whether DHA
can induce differentiation. Both markers were clearly
reduced after DHA treatment (Figure 4f).

DISCUSSION
It has been observed that PE has positive effects in
the primary and secondary prevention of breast and colon
cancer, and that exercise is a strong independent predictor
of survival in malignant recurrent glioma [5]. Clinical
trials demonstrate that PE is feasible for heavily treated
cancer patients and the adherence to PE e.g. in cancer
patients receiving allogeneic stem cell transplantation
was with 66% (inpatients) to nearly 80% (outpatients)
high [40, 41]. We therefore set out to assess whether the
addition of PE to standard TMZ treatment regime prolongs
survival of glioblastoma bearing mice. We chose an
orthotopic xenotransplanted tumor model of GB derived
from the primary glioma-initiating cell-line (GIC) T269
[42]. GIC-lines have two significant advantages when
modelling tumors: they better reflect the invasive growth
pattern of human gliomas than do tumors derived from
GB cell lines cultured in serum containing medium [43],
and they may also be enriched in cancer stem cells which
are thought to be responsible for therapy resistance and
recurrence [44].
We found that while moderate PE by itself did not
influence the survival of tumor-bearing CD1 nu/nu mice,
in combination with TMZ it appeared to prolong the
survival of mice. Although this only reached statistical
significance when comparing TMZ+PE mice to untreated
animals, we feel this is a particularly robust result given
the small group sizes in this experiment (exacerbated
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

56719

Oncotarget

line expresses MGMT at the protein level (a key resistance
factor to TMZ treatment) [35], LN-Z308 are about 4
times as sensitive as T269 (as shown by comparing TMZ
dosages required to induce a similar effect on G2-arrest).
We therefore lowered the dosage of TMZ to 21 mg/kg to
maintain a similar effective toxicity for the tumor cells.
Encouragingly, this model did show significantly
smaller tumors after a combination treatment of TMZ
and PE or DHA when compared with TMZ monotherapy
(Figure 3). For this second experiment we did not perform
the TMZ+DHA+PE regimen as this proved to be less
effective than TMZ combined with PE or DHA in the
Kaplan-Meier analysis of the first animal experiment,
probably due to accumulated toxicity.
We hypothesized that PE might mediate its effects
in part through the induction of oxidative stress. As PE
cannot be reproduced in vitro, we mimicked its potential
effects pharmacologically using DHA, a known inducer
of oxidative stress [29, 48, 49]. We confirmed that DHA
treatment resulted in up-regulation of the mRNA-levels
of anti-oxidative enzymes, especially in the primary
T269 GICs (Figure 4b). Furthermore, preclinical in vitro
data exist demonstrating various anti-glioma effects of
DHA, with evidence suggesting that DHA treatment can
also induce autophagy, exert an anti-invasive effect, and
target stem cells in glioma [30–32]. Xu et al. showed
that more than 80 proteins linked to the cytotoxicity of
DHA in prostate cancer cells are differentially expressed
in proteomic analysis including aminoacyl-tRNA
biosynthesis and metabolic pathways as well as heat shock
protein HSP70 underlining the complex mode of action of
this agent.
Using clinically relevant doses of DHA we
confirmed a dose dependent induction of the early
autophagy marker LC3 BII (Figure 4d) in both the glioma
lines LN-229 and LN-Z308, as well as the on primary
glioma line T269.
We then tested the anti-glioma properties of DHA
in our cell models, and observed a dose dependent
anti-clonogenic and anti-proliferative effect in all
three lines. These effects were in part reversible by the
administration of the ROS-scavenger compound NAC,
implying DHA might act through a ROS-dependent
mechanism. The combination of DHA with TMZ showed
synergistic anti-clonogenic and anti-proliferative action,
confirming similar observations obtained using C6-rat
glioma cells in vitro [29]. Many conflicting data exist
on the induction of authophagy to sensitize glioma
cells to TMZ showing that probably mild autophagy
will enhance resistance while a stronger induction
will lead to a higher sensitivity to TMZ [50, 51]. As
our data showed a very robust induction of autophagy
in the combined treatment of DHA and TMZ as well
as synergistic anti-glioma activity, we believe that
autophagy induced by DHA is beneficial in the treatment

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

of GB. However, the definite role of autophagy in the
combined treatment of TMZ and DHA would only be
deciphered by blocking autophagy e.g. by silencing
components of the autophagy pathway.
As recent studies suggest that TMZ can
significantly increase driver mutations in recurrent
glioma, particularly in the retinoblastoma and AktmTOR pathways [38], we examined the activity of these
pathways by measuring the phospho-protein levels of
p90RSK, Akt, p44/42 MAPK (Erk1/2) and S6 ribosomal
protein. As the combined treatment of DHA and TMZ
did not reduce the activity of the afore mentioned
pathways in 72 hour in vitro experiments, this is unlikely
to represent DHA’s therapeutic mechanism in our in
vitro experiments (Supplementary Figure S2).
Instead, we observed that protein levels of
phospho-NDRG1, which rise after TMZ treatment and
predict resistance against TMZ [39], were decreased
by combining DHA and TMZ treatment (Figure 4e). To
conclude, the inhibition of p-NDRG1 by DHA as well as
DHA-induced ROS represent two possible mechansims
how DHA might overcome therapy-induced resistance in
gliomas [52]. Moreover, DHA exerted a differentiating
effect on T269 cells leading to a down-regulation of the
stem cell markers Sox2 and nestin which argues again
for its use in the combination with TMZ to better target
glioma stem cells.
To summarize, we could show that PE has an
additive effect when combined with TMZ in the treatment
of GB-bearing mice. Our escalating dosing scheme
showed that PE does not mediate a DSR as shown before
for starvation.
Given that many patients have difficulty in
performing PE during treatment, we focused our efforts
on mimicking the PE mediated induction of ROS [24,
25] using the anti-malarial drug DHA. DHA showed antiglioma effects in vivo in mice. We were able to confirm
previously reported anti-proliferative, anti-clonogenic
and stem cell targeting effects of DHA in in vitro models
(including two different glioma cell lines and primary
T269 GIC).
As DHA is an approved drug which additionally
suppresses TMZ–induced activation of phospho-NDRG1,
a known mechanism of resistance, our data builds on
previous results to warrant initiating clinical trials
combining TMZ with DHA in the treatment of glioma
patients.
Finally, for those patients able to perform PE,
we believe various PE training paradigms should be
evaluated in mice to develop an ideal protocol (balancing
high versus low intensity training, or endurance versus
resistance training), possibly including a specialized
diet. Such a protocol could be translated into clinical
trials to improve the treatment of glioma patients with a
minimum risk of negative side effects.

56720

Oncotarget

MATERIALS AND METHODS

L-Calc free online software (STEMCELL Technologies,
Cologne, Germany). Stem cell frequency was expressed
by 1 divided by the minimum amount of cells necessary
to form a colony. To evaluate TMZ and DHA effects LDA
was also performed during treatment with these drugs
in the indicated doses. TMZ and n-acetyl cysteine were
administered once at the day of plating, DHA was given
three times, at the day of plating as well as after 24 and
48 hours.

Cell culture
The primary GB cell line T269 was established
from freshly dissected GB tissue from adult patients
after informed consent and cultured as described before
[42, 53]. Cells were seeded in neural sphere cell medium
(NSCM) containing Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium:
F12 medium enriched with B27 supplement, basic
fibroblast growth factor (bFGF) (20 ng/ml), epidermal
growth factor (EGF) (20 ng/ mL), and leukemia inhibitory
factor (20 ng/ml). To propagate cells in culture they
were split mechanically. The human glioma cell lines
LN-Z308, T98G and LN-229 (ATCC, Manassas, USA)
were kept in complete medium composed of Dulbecco‘s
modified Eagle Medium (DMEM, High glucose, 4,5 g/l,
PAA Laboratories) supplemented with 10% FBS and 1%
penicillin/streptomycin. Cells were treated with TMZ
(Sigma-Aldrich) diluted in dimethylsulfoxide (DMSO),
dihydoartemisinin (Biotrend chemicals; Switzerland) and
N-acetyl cysteine (Sigma-Aldrich). Concentrations are
detailed in the figures.

Quantitative real-time PCR (qRT-PCR)
Total RNA was extracted using a RNA purification
system (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany) and treated with
RNase-free DNase I to remove genomic DNA (Roche,
Mannheim, Germany). cDNA was prepared from 5 μg
of total RNA using the Superscript RNase H–Reverse
Transcriptase (Invitrogen, Karlsruhe, Germany) and
random hexamers (Sigma-Aldrich, Taufkirchen,
Germany). For qRT-PCR, gene expression was measured
in an ABI Prism 7000 Sequence Detection System
(Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA) with SYBR
Green Master Mix (Eurogentec, Cologne, Germany)
and primers at optimized concentrations [42]. Primers
(Sigma-Aldrich) were selected to span exon–exon
junctions if possible. Standard curves were generated for
each gene and the amplification was 90–100% efficient.
Relative quantification of gene expression was determined
by comparison of threshold values. All results were
normalized to glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase
(GAPDH). The sequences for the housekeeping gene
glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase and the genes
evaluated were as follows:

Clonogenicity
Clonogenic capacity was assessed by limiting
dilution assay (LDA) [54]. Shortly, cells were dissociated
with accutase. Afterwards, 96-well microwell plates were
plated with 300, 50, 8, and 1 cells in 0.2 mL of NSCM or
complete medium. After 3 weeks, microwell plates were
analyzed for wells showing clones and clonal frequency
as well as the level of significance were calculated with
CAT

forward: 5’---TTTCCCAGGAAGATCCTGAC---3’

 

reverse: 5’---ACCTTGGTGAGATCGAATGG---3’

CHOP

forward: 5’---CATCACCACACCTGAAAGCA---3’

 
GAPDH

reverse: 5’---TCAGCTGCCATCTCTGCA---3’
forward: 5′---CTCTCTGCTCCTCCTGTTCGAC---3′

 

reverse: 5′---TGAGCGATGTGGCTCGGCT---3′

GPX1

forward: 5’---TTCCCGTGCAACCAGTTTG---3’

 

reverse: 5’---TTCACCTCGCACTTCTCGAA---3’

GPX4
 

forward: 5’---TACGGACCCATGGAGGAG---3’
reverse: 5’---CCACACACTTGTGGAGCTAGAA---3’

PRX2

forward: 5’---CAGACGAGCATGGGGAAG---3’

 

reverse: 5’---ACGTTGGGCTTAATCGTGTC---3’

SOD1

forward: 5’---AGGGCATCATCAATTTCGAG---3’

 

reverse: 5’---TGCCTCTCTTCATCCTTTGG---3’

SOD2

forward: 5’---GGAAGCCATCAAACGTGACT---3’

 

reverse: 5’---CTGATTTGGACAAGCAGCAA---3’

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

56721

Oncotarget

Immunoblot analysis

T269 or LN-Z308 cells suspended in phosphate buffered
saline (PBS) orthotopically into the right striatum of 6–12
weeks old athymic female mice (CD1 nu/nu, Charles
River, Sulzfeld, Germany) by a stereotactic procedure.
In the first experiment with T269 cells 8 animals were
implanted per group. Six were used for Kaplan-Meier
analysis, 2 animals for histological examinations. In the
second experiment with LN-Z308 cells, 4 animals were
implanted per group, of which 3 were used for analysis of
tumor size by MRI.
To reduce pain, animals were anesthetized with
xylazine and ketamine. Neurological symptoms were
assessed daily. Symptomatic animals were rapidly
sacrificed and brains were snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen
for further analysis. Cryostat transverse brain sections (8
μm) were stained with hematoxylin/ eosin (H&E) or with
anti-human Nestin antibody (Chemicon International,
Billerica, USA) on a Ventana Benchmark Immunostainer
(Ventana Medical Systems, Tucson, USA) and analyzed
by AxioVision software (Carl Zeiss, Jena, Germany).
To evaluate the influence of PE and DHA alone
and in combination with TMZ in vivo, DHA (0,9 mg/
kg bodyweight) was administered subcutaneously after
preparation of a DHA stock solution containing 2.25 mg
DHA, 10 μl TWEEN 80, 1g NaCO3 and 20 ml distillated
water for four days of every chemotherapy cycle as
established for malaria therapy in rodents [56]. TMZ was
administered in a 0.5% methylcellulose solution in 0.9%
NaCl by oral gavage. PE was performed for 45 min on 5
days per week with a moderate intensity of up to 18 m/
min with an incline of the treadmill of 5°. The first week
of exercises speed was continuously increased until the
animals were used to it. If animals were too exhausted
due to therapy or tumor growth to keep up with the speed
of 18 m/min it was lowered. The slowest speed mice ran
was 16 m/min for 40 min. The details of the first mouse
experiment with T269 cells are provided in Figure 2a. In
the second experiment with LN-Z308 cells all TMZ cycles
were administered at 21 mg/kg bodyweight. This dose was
systematically established as shown in Supplementary
Figure S1.
Blood samples for the measurement of
chemotherapy toxicity were taken from the submandibular
vein, a maximum of 140 μl/25g bodyweight were
collected. Tumor volumes were determined via T1weighted magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) after
intraperitoneal injection of gadolinium-DTPA. MRI was
performed at day 40 of the LN-Z308 experiment during
the last week of TMZ administration.

Cells were lysed in 50 mmol/L Tris-HCl (pH
8) containing 120 mmol/L NaCl, 5 mmol/L EDTA,
0.5% Nonidet P-40, 2 μg/mL aprotinin, 10 μg/
mL leupeptin (Sigma-Aldrich), and 100 μg/mL
phenylmethylsulfonylfluoride. Protein levels were
analyzed by immunoblot using 30 μg of protein per
lane with the respective antibodies in concentrations
recommended by the manufacturer. The antibodies used
were rabbit anti-Nestin(1:200; Chemicon, Temecula,
CA, USA), goat anti-Sox2 (1:400; R&D-systems),
rabbit Phospho-NDRG1 (1:5000; Cell Signaling),
rabbit anti-LC3 B antibody (ab51520) (1:3000; Abcam,
Cambridge, UK), and the PathScan® Multiplex Western
Cocktail I from Cell Signalling (Boston, MA, USA)
was used to analyze the Phospho-p90RSK, PhosphoAkt, Phospho-p44/42 MAPK (Erk1/2) and Phospho-S6
Ribosomal Protein levels. Protein bands were visualized
using horseradish peroxidase-coupled secondary
antibodies (Sigma-Aldrich). Equal protein loading was
ascertained by Ponceau S staining as well as GAPDH
staining with goat anti-GAPDH antibody (1:5000;
Linaris, Germany) [42]. Densitometry of immunoblots
was performed with the help of ImageJ (National
Institutes of Health) after scanning of the blots with the
help of Photoshop software to create TIFF-files.

Flow cytometry
Cells were analyzed in a BD-FACS Canto II flow
cytometer, final data were processed with the help of
FlowJo flow cytometry analysis software (Treestar)
[42]. To access ROS levels cells were stained with
H2DCFDA (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, USA) after
a 72 h treatment course with DHA 5 μM or DMSO as
control.

Proliferation
LN-Z308 and LN-229 cells at 2500 cells/well and
T269 at 5000 cells/well were dissociated and plated in
quadruplicates in 96- well plates in 200 μl volumes of
medium. TMZ and n-acetyl cysteine were administered
once at the day of plating, DHA was given three times,
at the day of plating as well as after 24 and 48 hours.
After 72 h, cells were pulsed for 24 h with [methyl-3H]
thymidine (0.5 lCi), harvested (Tomtec, Hamden, CT,
USA), and incorporated radioactivity was determined in a
liquid scintillation counter (Wallac, Turku, Finland) [55].

Statistical analysis

Animal experiments

Statistical significance was assessed by Student’s
t-test (Excel, Microsoft, Seattle, WA, USA) at p < 0.05
(significant). In animal experiments, Kaplan-Meieranalysis log rank test (SPSS-statistics, IBM) was used.

All animal work was performed in accordance with
the German animal protection law (Approving institution:
Regierungspraesidium; Karlsruhe; animal proposal: 359185.81/G-99/08 G). Tumors were induced injecting 1x105
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

56722

Oncotarget

Abbreviations

6.	 Taylor BA, Zaleski AL, Capizzi JA, Ballard KD, Troyanos
C, Baggish AL, D'Hemecourt PA, Dada MR, Thompson
PD. Influence of chronic exercise on carotid atherosclerosis
in marathon runners. BMJ Open. 2014; 4:e004498.

Basic fibroblast growth factor (bFGF), extracellular
signal–regulated kinase (ERK), Catalase (CAT), C/EBP
homologous protein (CHOP), differential stress response
(DSR), dihydroartemisinin (DHA), Dimethylsulfoxide
(DMSO), differential stress response (DSR), epidermal
growth factor (EGF), fetal bovine serum (FBS), glioma
initiating cells (GIC), glioblastoma (GB), glutathione
peroxidase (GPX1 and 4), glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate
dehydrogenase (GAPDH), Hematoxylin/ Eosin (H&E),
limiting dilution assay (LDA), mitogen-activated
protein kinase (MAPK), O6-Methylguanin-DNAMethyltransferase (MGMT), magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI), N-acetyl-cysteine (NAC), N-myc downstream
regulated gene (NDRG-1), neural sphere cell medium
(NSCM), Peroxiredoxin (PRX2), physical exercises (PE),
phosphate-buffered saline (PBS), reactive oxygen species
(ROS), superoxide dismutase (SOD1 and 2), Manganese
(Mn), Temozolomide (TMZ).

7.	 Carmichael AR. Physical activity as an adjuvant treatment
for breast cancer; is it time for guidelines? Eur J Surg
Oncol. 2014; 40:137-9.
8.	 Courneya KS, Booth CM, Gill S, O'Brien P, Vardy J,
Friedenreich CM, Au HJ, Brundage MD, Tu D, Dhillon
H, Meyer RM. The Colon Health and Life-Long Exercise
Change trial: a randomized trial of the National Cancer
Institute of Canada Clinical Trials Group. Curr Oncol. 2008;
15:279-85.
9.	 Courneya KS, Vardy JL, O'Callaghan CJ, Friedenreich
CM, Campbell KL, Prapavessis H, Crawford JJ, O'Brien P,
Dhillon HM, Jonker DJ, Chua NS, Lupichuk S, et al. Effects
of a Structured Exercise Program on Physical Activity and
Fitness in Colon Cancer Survivors: One Year Feasibility
Results from the CHALLENGE Trial. Cancer Epidemiol
Biomarkers Prev. 2016; 25:969-77.
10.	 Dieli-Conwright CM, Orozco BZ. Exercise after breast
cancer treatment: current perspectives. Breast Cancer (Dove
Med Press). 2015; 7:353-62.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

11.	 Yamauchi M, Lochhead P, Imamura Y, Kuchiba A, Liao
X, Qian ZR, Nishihara R, Morikawa T, Shima K, Wu K,
Giovannucci E, Meyerhardt JA, et al. Physical activity,
tumor PTGS2 expression, and survival in patients with
colorectal cancer. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev.
2013; 22:1142-52.

GRANT SUPPORT
Supported by German Research Foundation
(SFB938 TPK) to M.P. and W.W.

12.	 Huether K, Abbott L, Cullen L, Cullen L, Gaarde A. Energy
Through Motion(c): An Evidence-Based Exercise Program
to Reduce Cancer-Related Fatigue and Improve Quality of
Life. Clin J Oncol Nurs. 2016; 20:E60-E70.

REFERENCES
1.	 Pelicano H, Martin DS, Xu RH, Huang P. Glycolysis
inhibition for anticancer treatment. Oncogene. 2006; 25:
4633-46.

13.	 Kilari D, Soto E, Mohile SG, Alibhai SM, Presley
CJ, Wildes TM, Klepin HD, Demark-Wahnefried W,
Jatoi A, Harrison R, Won E, Mustian KM. Designing
exercise clinical trials for older adults with cancer:
Recommendations from 2015 Cancer and Aging Research
Group NCI U13 Meeting. J Geriatr Oncol. 2016.

2.	 Granchi C, Fancelli D, Minutolo F. An update on therapeutic
opportunities offered by cancer glycolytic metabolism.
Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2014; 24:4915-25.
3.	 Dutheil F, Lac G, Lesourd B, Chapier R, Walther G, Vinet
A, Sapin V, Verney J, Ouchchane L, Duclos M, Obert P,
Courteix D. Different modalities of exercise to reduce
visceral fat mass and cardiovascular risk in metabolic
syndrome: the RESOLVE randomized trial. Int J Cardiol.
2013; 168:3634-42.

14.	 Bacurau AV, Belmonte MA, Navarro F, Moraes MR, Pontes
FL, Jr., Pesquero JL, Araujo RC, Bacurau RF. Effect of a
high-intensity exercise training on the metabolism and
function of macrophages and lymphocytes of walker 256
tumor bearing rats. Exp Biol Med (Maywood). 2007;
232:1289-99.

4.	 Garcia-Ortiz L, Recio-Rodriguez JI, Schmidt-Trucksass A,
Puigdomenech-Puig E, Martinez-Vizcaino V, FernandezAlonso C, Rubio-Galan J, Agudo-Conde C, PatinoAlonso MC, Rodriguez-Sanchez E, Gomez-Marcos MA.
Relationship between objectively measured physical activity
and cardiovascular aging in the general population—the
EVIDENT trial. Atherosclerosis. 2014; 233:434-40.

15.	 Bacurau RF, Belmonte MA, Seelaender MC, Costa Rosa
LF. Effect of a moderate intensity exercise training protocol
on the metabolism of macrophages and lymphocytes of
tumour-bearing rats. Cell Biochem Funct. 2000; 18:249-58.
16.	 Bjork L, Jenkins NT, Witkowski S, Hagberg JM. Nitrooxidative stress biomarkers in active and inactive men. Int
J Sports Med. 2012; 33:279-84.

5.	 Ruden E, Reardon DA, Coan AD, Herndon JE, Hornsby
WE, West M, Fels DR, Desjardins A, Vredenburgh JJ,
Waner E, Friedman AH, Friedman HS, et al. Exercise
behavior, functional capacity, and survival in adults with
malignant recurrent glioma. J Clin Oncol. 2011; 29:2918-23.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

17.	 Eickmeyer SM, Gamble GL, Shahpar S, Do KD. The role
and efficacy of exercise in persons with cancer. PM R.
2012; 4:874-81.
56723

Oncotarget

29.	 Huang XJ, Li CT, Zhang WP, Lu YB, Fang SH, Wei EQ.
Dihydroartemisinin potentiates the cytotoxic effect of
temozolomide in rat C6 glioma cells. Pharmacology. 2008;
82:1-9.

18.	 Fairey AS, Courneya KS, Field CJ, Bell GJ, Jones LW,
Martin BS, Mackey JR. Effect of exercise training on
C-reactive protein in postmenopausal breast cancer
survivors: a randomized controlled trial. Brain Behav
Immun. 2005; 19:381-8.

30.	 Cao L, Duanmu W, Yin Y, Zhou Z, Ge H, Chen T, Tan L,
Yu A, Hu R, Fei L, Feng H. Dihydroartemisinin exhibits
anti-glioma stem cell activity through inhibiting p-AKT and
activating caspase-3. Pharmazie. 2014; 69:752-8.

19.	 Pedersen L, Idorn M, Olofsson GH, Lauenborg B, Nookaew
I, Hansen RH, Johannesen HH, Becker JC, Pedersen KS,
Dethlefsen C, Nielsen J, Gehl J, et al. Voluntary Running
Suppresses Tumor Growth through Epinephrine- and IL-6Dependent NK Cell Mobilization and Redistribution. Cell
Metab. 2016.

31.	 Chen J, Chen X, Wang F, Gao H, Hu W. Dihydroartemisinin
suppresses glioma proliferation and invasion via inhibition
of the ADAM17 pathway. Neurol Sci. 2015; 36:435-40.

20.	 Raffaghello L, Lee C, Safdie FM, Wei M, Madia F, Bianchi
G, Longo VD. Starvation-dependent differential stress
resistance protects normal but not cancer cells against
high-dose chemotherapy. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008;
105:8215-20.

32.	 Zhang ZS, Wang J, Shen YB, Guo CC, Sai KE, Chen FR,
Mei X, Han FU, Chen ZP. Dihydroartemisinin increases
temozolomide efficacy in glioma cells by inducing
autophagy. Oncol Lett. 2015; 10:379-83.

21.	 Woolf EC, Scheck AC. The Ketogenic Diet for the
Treatment of Malignant Glioma. J Lipid Res. 2014.

33.	 Lu Q, Ceddia MA, Price EA, Ye SM, Woods JA. Chronic
exercise increases macrophage-mediated tumor cytolysis in
young and old mice. Am J Physiol. 1999; 276:R482-R489.

22.	 Rieger J, Bahr O, Maurer GD, Hattingen E, Franz K,
Brucker D, Walenta S, Kammerer U, Coy JF, Weller M,
Steinbach JP. ERGO: a pilot study of ketogenic diet in
recurrent glioblastoma. Int J Oncol. 2014; 44:1843-52.

34.	 Rieger J, Lemke D, Maurer G, Weiler M, Frank B,
Tabatabai G, Weller M, Wick W. Enzastaurin-induced
apoptosis in glioma cells is caspase-dependent and inhibited
by BCL-XL. J Neurochem. 2008; 106:2436-48.

23.	 Weller M, van den Bent M, Hopkins K, Tonn JC, Stupp R,
Falini A, Cohen-Jonathan-Moyal E, Frappaz D, Henriksson
R, Balana C, Chinot O, Ram Z, et al. EANO guideline
for the diagnosis and treatment of anaplastic gliomas and
glioblastoma. Lancet Oncol. 2014; 15:e395-e403.

35.	 Hegi ME, Diserens AC, Gorlia T, Hamou MF, de TN,
Weller M, Kros JM, Hainfellner JA, Mason W, Mariani
L, Bromberg JE, Hau P, et al. MGMT gene silencing and
benefit from temozolomide in glioblastoma. N Engl J Med.
2005; 352:997-1003.

24.	 Guerrieri D, van PH. Exercise-mimetic AICAR transiently
benefits brain function. Oncotarget. 2015; 6:18293-313. doi:
10.18632/oncotarget.4715.

36.	 Ericsson T, Blank A, von HC, Ashton M, Abelo
A. Population pharmacokinetics of artesunate and
dihydroartemisinin during long-term oral administration of
artesunate to patients with metastatic breast cancer. Eur J
Clin Pharmacol. 2014; 70:1453-63.

25.	 Marques-Aleixo I, Santos-Alves E, Balca MM, RizoRoca D, Moreira PI, Oliveira PJ, Magalhaes J, Ascensao
A. Physical exercise improves brain cortex and cerebellum
mitochondrial bioenergetics and alters apoptotic, dynamic
and auto(mito)phagy markers. Neuroscience. 2015;
301:480-95.

37.	 Wang Z, Hu W, Zhang JL, Wu XH, Zhou HJ.
Dihydroartemisinin induces autophagy and inhibits the
growth of iron-loaded human myeloid leukemia K562 cells
via ROS toxicity. FEBS Open Bio. 2012; 2:103-12.

26.	 Zhang S, Chen H, Gerhard GS. Heme synthesis increases
artemisinin-induced radical formation and cytotoxicity that
can be suppressed by superoxide scavengers. Chem Biol
Interact. 2010; 186:30-5.

38.	 Johnson BE, Mazor T, Hong C, Barnes M, Aihara K,
McLean CY, Fouse SD, Yamamoto S, Ueda H, Tatsuno K,
Asthana S, Jalbert LE, et al. Mutational analysis reveals the
origin and therapy-driven evolution of recurrent glioma.
Science. 2014; 343:189-93.

27.	 Kast RE, Boockvar JA, Bruning A, Cappello F, Chang WW,
Cvek B, Dou QP, Duenas-Gonzalez A, Efferth T, Focosi D,
Ghaffari SH, Karpel-Massler G, et al. A conceptually new
treatment approach for relapsed glioblastoma: coordinated
undermining of survival paths with nine repurposed drugs
(CUSP9) by the International Initiative for Accelerated
Improvement of Glioblastoma Care. Oncotarget. 2013;
4:502-30. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.969.

39.	 Weiler M, Blaes J, Pusch S, Sahm F, Czabanka M, Luger
S, Bunse L, Solecki G, Eichwald V, Jugold M, Hodecker S,
Osswald M, et al. mTOR target NDRG1 confers MGMTdependent resistance to alkylating chemotherapy. Proc Natl
Acad Sci U S A. 2014; 111:409-14.
40.	 Grimshaw SL, Taylor NF, Shields N. The Feasibility
of Physical Activity Interventions During the Intense
Treatment Phase for Children and Adolescents with Cancer:
A Systematic Review. Pediatr Blood Cancer. 2016.

28.	 Kast RE, Karpel-Massler G, Halatsch ME. CUSP9*
treatment protocol for recurrent glioblastoma: aprepitant,
artesunate, auranofin, captopril, celecoxib, disulfiram,
itraconazole, ritonavir, sertraline augmenting continuous
low dose temozolomide. Oncotarget. 2014; 5:8052-82. doi:
10.18632/oncotarget.2408.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

41.	 Kuehl R, Schmidt ME, Dreger P, Steindorf K, Bohus M,
Wiskemann J. Determinants of exercise adherence and
contamination in a randomized controlled trial in cancer
patients during and after allogeneic HCT. Support Care
Cancer. 2016.
56724

Oncotarget

42.	 Lemke D, Weiler M, Blaes J, Wiestler B, Jestaedt L, Klein
AC, Low S, Eisele G, Radlwimmer B, Capper D, Schmieder
K, Mittelbronn M, et al. Primary Glioblastoma Cultures:
Can Profiling of Stem Cell Markers Predict Radiotherapy
Sensitivity? J Neurochem. 2014.

49.	 Toler SM, Noe D, Sharma A. Selective enhancement of
cellular oxidative stress by chloroquine: implications for
the treatment of glioblastoma multiforme. Neurosurg Focus.
2006; 21:E10.
50.	 Gong A, Ye S, Xiong E, Guo W, Zhang Y, Peng W, Shao
G, Jin J, Zhang Z, Yang J, Gao J. Autophagy contributes
to ING4-induced glioma cell death. Exp Cell Res. 2013;
319:1714-23.

43.	 Lee J, Kotliarova S, Kotliarov Y, Li A, Su Q, Donin NM,
Pastorino S, Purow BW, Christopher N, Zhang W, Park JK,
Fine HA. Tumor stem cells derived from glioblastomas
cultured in bFGF and EGF more closely mirror the
phenotype and genotype of primary tumors than do serumcultured cell lines. Cancer Cell. 2006; 9:391-403.

51.	 Yan Y, Xu Z, Dai S, Qian L, Sun L, Gong Z. Targeting
autophagy to sensitive glioma to temozolomide treatment.
J Exp Clin Cancer Res. 2016; 35:23.

44.	 Shah AH, Graham R, Bregy A, Thambuswamy M, Komotar
RJ. Recognizing and correcting failures in glioblastoma
treatment. Cancer Invest. 2014; 32:299-302.

52.	 Yang W, Shen Y, Wei J, Liu F. MicroRNA-153/Nrf-2/GPx1
pathway regulates radiosensitivity and stemness of glioma
stem cells via reactive oxygen species. Oncotarget. 2015;
6:22006-27. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.4292.

45.	 Hirst TC, Vesterinen HM, Sena ES, Egan KJ, Macleod
MR, Whittle IR. Systematic review and meta-analysis of
temozolomide in animal models of glioma: was clinical
efficacy predicted? Br J Cancer. 2013; 108:64-71.

53.	 Hemmati HD, Nakano I, Lazareff JA, Masterman-Smith
M, Geschwind DH, Bronner-Fraser M, Kornblum HI.
Cancerous stem cells can arise from pediatric brain tumors.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2003; 100:15178-83.

46.	 Houghton PJ, Stewart CF, Cheshire PJ, Richmond LB,
Kirstein MN, Poquette CA, Tan M, Friedman HS, Brent
TP. Antitumor activity of temozolomide combined with
irinotecan is partly independent of O6-methylguanineDNA methyltransferase and mismatch repair phenotypes in
xenograft models. Clin Cancer Res. 2000; 6:4110-8.

54.	 Eirew P, Stingl J, Eaves CJ. Quantitation of human
mammary epithelial stem cells with in vivo regenerative
properties using a subrenal capsule xenotransplantation
assay. Nat Protoc. 2010; 5:1945-56.
55.	 Uhl M, Aulwurm S, Wischhusen J, Weiler M, Ma JY,
Almirez R, Mangadu R, Liu YW, Platten M, Herrlinger U,
Murphy A, Wong DH, et al. SD-208, a novel transforming
growth factor beta receptor I kinase inhibitor, inhibits
growth and invasiveness and enhances immunogenicity of
murine and human glioma cells in vitro and in vivo. Cancer
Res. 2004; 64:7954-61.

47.	 Kokkinakis DM, Ahmed MM, Chendil D, Moschel RC,
Pegg AE. Sensitization of pancreatic tumor xenografts
to carmustine and temozolomide by inactivation of
their O6-Methylguanine-DNA methyltransferase with
O6-benzylguanine or O6-benzyl-2'-deoxyguanosine. Clin
Cancer Res. 2003; 9:3801-7.
48.	 Kim SJ, Kim MS, Lee JW, Lee CH, Yoo H, Shin SH, Park
MJ, Lee SH. Dihydroartemisinin enhances radiosensitivity
of human glioma cells in vitro. J Cancer Res Clin Oncol.
2006; 132:129-35.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

56.	 Peters W, Fleck SL, Robinson BL, Stewart LB, Jefford CW.
The chemotherapy of rodent malaria. LX. The importance
of formulation in evaluating the blood schizontocidal
activity of some endoperoxide antimalarials. Ann Trop Med
Parasitol. 2002; 96:559-73.

56725

Oncotarget

