3047

Assessing the Burden of HPV-Associated Cancers
in the United States
Supplement to Cancer

Cancer Registries and Monitoring the Impact of
Prophylactic Human Papillomavirus Vaccines: The
Potential Role
Mona Saraiya, MD, MPH1
Marc T. Goodman, PhD2
S. Deblina Datta, MD3
Vivien W. Chen, PhD4
Phyllis A. Wingo, PhD5

The recent US Food and Drug Administration licensure of a prophylactic vaccine
against oncogenic human papillomavirus (HPV) types 16 and 18, the first of its
kind, poses unique challenges in postmarketing vaccine surveillance, especially
in measuring vaccine effectiveness against biologic endpoints of HPV infection.
Historically, the national system of population-based cancer registries in the US
has provided high-quality data on cancer incidence and mortality for the most

Division of Cancer Prevention and Control, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta,
Georgia.

important biologic endpoints, namely, anogenital cancers and some oral cavity/
oropharyngeal cancers. There also has been some data collection on cancer pre-

2

Cancer Research Center, University of Hawaii,
Honolulu, Hawaii.

Because effectiveness against HPV-associated cancers will not be measurable for

3

to collect precancer data, which are earlier manifestations of infection, must be

1

Division of Sexually Transmitted Diseases, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta,
Georgia.
4

Louisiana Tumor Registry and Epidemiology
Program, School of Public Health, Louisiana State
University Health Sciences Center, New Orleans,
Louisiana.

cursors; however, this activity has been inconsistent and of lower priority.
several decades, strengthening and possibly expanding the capacity of registries
considered. Collecting type-specific data on HPV-associated precancers and cancers. While keeping in mind the current limitations of registry operations, they
discuss resources that may be needed to implement and sustain these types of
activities. Cancer 2008;113(10 suppl):3047–57. Published 2008 by the American
Cancer Society.*

5

Independent Consultant, Division of Cancer Prevention and Control, Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention, Atlanta, Georgia.

This supplement to Cancer was supported by Cooperative Agreement Number U50 DP424071-04
from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC).
Marc Goodman has received support from Public
Health Service contract N01-PC-67001 from the
Department of Health and Human Services,
National Institutes of Health. Phyllis Wingo has
received support from the Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention for her role as a consultant on this project.
The authors thank Mark Sherman, Hannah Weir,
Lauri Markowitz, Mark Schiffman, Diane Solomon, Ken Gerlach, and Missy Jamison for
reviewing earlier versions of this article.

M

ore than 5% of cancers worldwide are attributable to human
papillomavirus (HPV) infection, and the greatest attributable
fraction is associated with cervical cancer.1 Globally, an estimated
250,000 women die each year of cervical cancer. Prophylactic vaccines against oncogenic types of HPV, which became available to
the US market in 2006, hold the promise of becoming a public
health triumph in the 21st century. It will be at least 1 to 3 decades
after the vaccine becomes available before the population targeted
The findings and conclusions of this article are
those of the authors and do not necessarily
represent the views of the Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention.
Address for reprints: Mona Saraiya, MD, MPH, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Division of
Cancer Prevention and Control, 4770 Buford Highway, Mailstop K-55, Atlanta, GA 30030; Fax: (770)
488-4693; E-mail: msaraiya@cdc.gov

Published 2008 by the American Cancer Society*
DOI 10.1002/cncr.23755
Published online 3 November 2008 in Wiley InterScience (www.interscience.wiley.com).

Received April 14, 2008; revision received June 7,
2008; accepted June 16, 2008.
*This article is a US Government work and, as
such, is in the public domain in the United States
of America.

3048

CANCER Supplement

November 15, 2008 / Volume 113 / Number 10

TABLE 1
Results From an Ad Hoc Meeting Conducted by the Pan American Health Organization on Important Biologic
Endpoints for Human Papillomavirus Vaccine Surveillance
Endpoints for HPV Surveillance and Measurement Indicators
Endpoint

Measurement Indicator

Genital HPV infections
Genital warts (depends on vaccine product being used)
Cervical cancer precursors, specifically CIN-3 based on
histologic determination
Invasive cervical cancer based on histologic determination
Invasive cervical cancer mortality
HPV type-specific changes in histologically defined CIN-3 lesions

Changes in prevalence
Changes in prevalence
Changes in the overall prevalence
Changes in the incidence profiles
Changes in mortality profiles
Changes in type-specific incidence
in CIN-3 precursor lesions

HPV indicates human papillomavirus; CIN-3, cervical intraepithelial neoplasia grade 3.
*See Pan American Health Organization, 2006.10

for vaccine (in the United States, this includes girls
ages 11-12 years) will be at risk for important endpoints of HPV infection, namely, cervical intraepithelial neoplasia 3 (CIN-3), carcinoma in situ (CIS), and
invasive cervical carcinoma (ICC).
The biology of HPV infection and its role as the
primary cause of cervical cancer is well established.2-4
Essentially all cervical carcinomas are caused by persistent infection with 1 of 13 to 15 oncogenic HPV
types.2-4 Preventing HPV type 16 (HPV-16) and HPV18 infections could eliminate >70% of all cervical
carcinomas, assuming that, as predicted, that there is
no type replacement and that other types remain
less likely to progress to carcinoma.5,6 Clinical trials
evaluating prophylactic HPV vaccines directed specifically against HPV-16 and HPV-18 have reported
nearly complete efficacy for preventing type-specific
HPV persistence and related cervical, vaginal, and
vulvar cancer precursors among adolescent and
young women who were naive to the vaccine type
and who completed the full 3-dose schedule.7-9 However, the vaccines were not effective in preventing
progression to disease among women who already
were infected. It has been estimated that vaccination
against HPV-16 and HPV-18 would reduce cytologic
reports of high-grade squamous intraepithelial
lesions by 50% and would have a more modest
impact on less severe diagnoses.4 The effectiveness
of vaccine in actual use (ie, not in clinical trials) has
yet to be determined, and many challenges exist.
These effectiveness data are needed to assess the
true public health benefit of HPV vaccination.
A key approach to determining the public health
benefit and cost-effectiveness of the prophylactic HPV
vaccine in the United States is implementation of
population-based surveillance activities. In October

2006, the Pan American Health Organization (PAHO)
convened experts to discuss the most appropriate and
effective strategies for conducting surveillance of the
HPV vaccine10 (see Table 1). Surveillance outcomes
proposed by the PAHO expert committee included
monitoring changes in ICC incidence and mortality
and determining trends in the type-specific prevalence and incidence of histologic confirmed CIN-3
lesions. In August 2006, experts convened at the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)
(Atlanta, Ga) discussed the importance in monitoring
the impact of the HPV vaccine in the United States
and judged high-grade CIN as the most important
cervical cancer precursor endpoint for monitoring
purposes. Recommendations from both meetings
included outcomes that 1) currently are being collected by US cancer registries and health departments
(ICC incidence and mortality), 2) were collected in
the past by US cancer registries (CIS; CIN-3), and 3)
have the potential to be collected through special projects (HPV type distribution associated with CIN-3,
ICC, and noncervical cancers).
The US population-based cancer registries
include the CDC’s National Program of Cancer Registries (NPCR) and the National Cancer Institute’s
(NCI’s) Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results
(SEER) Program. Together, these registries cover
100% of the US population and serve an essential
public health function through the collection and
compilation of cancer incidence data that are used
for cancer prevention and control efforts and guidance of public health policy.11 The infrastructure to
conduct population-based surveillance for the HPV
vaccine already is in place through the registries, and
they provide a unique opportunity to build upon already existing programs to conduct enhanced HPV-

HPV-Associated Cancers and Registries/Saraiya et al

associated precancer and cancer surveillance. These
efforts will require a well funded, carefully organized
national effort guided by a multidisciplinary team of
experts.
In this report, we provide a perspective on the
potential role of the US population-based cancer
registries in monitoring the effectiveness of prophylactic HPV vaccines beyond their current role of collecting data and monitoring the occurrence of
cancers. In addition to discussing the merits of and
challenges for using cancer registries for the surveillance of trends in the incidence of HPV-associated
disease, we also consider resources that will be
needed to implement and sustain these types of surveillance activities within the cancer registry system.

Enhanced Assessment of the Burden of HPV-associated
Cancers and Precancers in the United States
Optimally, all measurements used to monitor the
impact of the HPV vaccine should be populationbased and highly sensitive to early changes in the
rates of HPV-associated diseases that are likely to
result from vaccine interventions. This commentary is
not meant to be a blueprint for future HPV-associated
disease surveillance; rather, our objective is to provide
an overview of the desired surveillance activities and
the critical elements to consider for establishing the
system. For brevity and quick reference, this potential
surveillance system will be termed Enhanced Assessment of the Burden of HPV-Associated Cancers and
Precancers in the United States (E-ABHACUS).
E-ABHACUS recommendations
The overarching goal of E-ABHACUS is to monitor
the impact of the HPV vaccine on the incidence of
ICC and its precursors (defined herein as CIS, CIN-3,
and adenocarcinoma in situ [AIS]) in the United
States as the cohort of the vaccinated population
ages and vaccination coverage increases. Recommendations for establishing an enhanced surveillance
system include:
1. Systematically monitor age-specific rates of ICC
and other invasive HPV-associated carcinomas
(currently exists with the cancer registries); other
HPV-associated carcinomas include anal, penile,
vulvar, vaginal, oropharyngeal, and oral cavity
cancers.
2. Systematically monitor age-specific rates of cervical cancer precursors and precursors for other
HPV-associated cancers.
3. Identify the distribution of HPV types (eg, HPV-16
and HPV-18) associated with HPV-associated carcinoma precursors and invasive carcinoma.

3049

4. Monitor the incidence of invasive and preinvasive
carcinomas along with the prevalence of vaccination;
linkages between cancer and immunization registries
(which, like many cancer registries, are in state and
local health departments) could provide data on the
vaccine status of women with diagnoses of these
cancers.
5. Explore and evaluate methods for linking cancer
registry data with screening and risk factor data
which are already being collected by other surveillance systems.
Although some of the recommendations are
existing activities (as noted), ultimately, the identified
disparate resources need to be brought together
under a single umbrella to maximize the utility of
the aggregated information for public health surveillance. Selected scientific and logistical considerations
related to addressing these aims are discussed below.

Monitoring rates of ICC and other HPV-associated cancers
Patterns in the occurrence of ICC and other invasive
HPV-associated cancers can be monitored through
NPCR and SEER. A recent report from the International Agency for Research on Cancer concluded that
a significant percentage of several cancers, in addition to cervical cancer and including vulvar, vaginal,
anal, penile, and oropharyngeal cancers, are caused
by HPV. For these cancers, it is believed that HPV-16
and HPV-18 are responsible for the majority of HPVpositive cases.12 Thus, monitoring postvaccine trends
in HPV-associated noncervical carcinomas also appears to be a necessary important surveillance activity.
Dillner et al further propose that HPV typing of all
HPV-associated cancers will become an essential
part of the long-term evaluation and monitoring of
HPV vaccination programs13
HPV infection also is related to a subset of head
and neck cancers that occur in the oral cavity and
oropharynx. Approximately 35% of oropharyngeal
cancers and 25% of oral cavity cancers may be
related causally to HPV infection in the United
States.14 Similar to vulvar carcinomas, >90% of the
HPV-associated oropharyngeal cancers are related to
HPV-16. The importance of this potential prevention
effort is highlighted by data, including those from
this supplement, suggesting that the incidence of
HPV-associated oropharyngeal/oral cavity cancers is
increasing.15,16 These data provide a strong argument
for the inclusion of oropharyngeal and oral cavity
cancers in enhanced surveillance activities.
Monitoring only invasive carcinoma, however,
has limited ability to detect small but meaningful

3050

CANCER Supplement

November 15, 2008 / Volume 113 / Number 10

TABLE 2
Historical Rationale for Discontinuing Collection of Cervical Intraepithelial Neoplasia 3 and Cervical Carcinoma In Situ: Conclusions and
Recommendations by the American Association for Cancer Research Uniform Data Standards Committee: Subcommittee on Noninvasive
Cervix Lesions, 1993*
Conclusions
1. Data on preinvasive cervical neoplasia as currently collected by US registries are no longer comparable historically for monitoring trends over time and cannot be made to be
comparable. The problem will get worse as the Bethesda System (TBS) is adopted more widely for histopathology. Collection of only the term carcinoma in situ (CIS) yields
undercounts in recent data compared with the past. Collection of both of the terms CIS and cervical intraepithelial neoplasia 3 (CIN-3) yields over counts compared with the past.
2. In the future, it will not be possible in every case to distinguish moderate dysplasia, severe dysplasia, and CIS on pathology reports.
3. There is evidence that the relative use of the 3-tier, 4-tier, and TBS systems varies from place to place within the US. Thee comparability of current data across registries is
limited by different rates of differences in terminology used on pathology reports.
4. Data as collected presently can be used to monitor differences in subpopulations within a geographic area as long as biases in diagnostic criteria and case ascertainment
are not present. Preinvasive rates help to interpret differences in invasive rates, and in situ/invasive ratios in particular appear to have implications for prevention
activities.
5. Adjacent grades of preinvasive lesions are more difficult to distinguish from one another and are less reproducible than the distinction between invasive and noninvasive
lesions.
6. Treatment is becoming more conservative and more uniform for high-grade squamous intraepithelial lesion (HSIL) and the other equivalent terms. Because colposcopic
biopsy and loop electrosurgical excision procedures can be therapeutic as well as diagnostic, histologic diagnoses of preinvasive lesions represent cancer control
interventions. Fewer ablative procedures will be done without tissue diagnosis, so this is not expected to be a significant source of missed cases.
7. Diagnosis and treatment, as also is true to some extent for other cancer sites, are moving out of the hospital setting. It will become more and more difficult and expensive
to find cases and collect required demographic data, such as the patient’s race and place of residence. Out of area laboratories likely be a problem and will be an
increasingly important source of missed cases.
8. The Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results Program, which sets the de facto reporting standard in this area, likely will drop collection of CIS and CIN-3 in all areas
and instead, with special funds, will expand collection to include HSIL and its equivalent terms in selected areas.
Recommendations
1. The only way to collect histologic data that would be comparable over time in the future is to collect all HSIL and all of its equivalents in the 3- and 4-tier systems. This
would increase the number of preinvasive cervix uteri cases in a registry that currently collects CIS and CIN-3 by approximately 2- to 3-fold; however, the new data would
not be comparable to data collected earlier.
2. For research on the natural history of this disease, special studies that include the entire spectrum of low-grade squamous intraepithelial lesion (LSIL) and HSIL will be
necessary.
3. Population-based registries need to assess locally the anticipated uses of the data (are time trends desirable? Are comparisons to data from other areas needed? Will cancer
control programs use the data), present and future pathology practices in their areas (Will TBS be used for histopathology?), and available resources (can the registry
afford to collect substantially more cases?) and decide whether to:
a. Collect CIS, CIN-3, and severe dysplasia, which will not be possible if TBS is used for histopathology; or
b. Collect all HSIL and its equivalent terms in the 3- and 4-tier systems, which will substantially added to the caseload; or
c. Drop the collection of all data for all but invasive cervical cancers.
4. The subcommittee strongly recommends that population-based registries discontinue routine collection of data on preinvasive cervical neoplasia unless there is strong
local need and interest and sufficient resources are available to collect all HSIL and its equivalent terms.
*2008 Updates: 1) TBS categories have changed from 2-tiered (low grade and high grade) to multiple tiers (atypical squamous cells of undetermined significance [ASC-US]; ASC-US, cannot rule out HSIL; atypical granular cells; LSIL; and HSIL); 2) CIN-3 plays a larger role among the in situ cancers for the 1 registry that has continued collection of this variable (Michigan); 3) TBS is recommended for cytology and the
3-tiered system (CIN-1, CIN-2, and CIN-3) usually is reserved for histology; 4) there still may be pathologists who use the 2-tiered system (low grade and high grade) for histology; and 5) there still may be
pathologists who use the dysplasia categories (mild, moderate, severe) for histology.

changes in cancer incidence. Monitoring precancers,
which present at much higher rates than invasive
cancers, provides an opportunity to more accurately
detect impact of HPV vaccine and provides a shorter
time horizon for measuring impact.

Monitoring rates of cervical cancer precursors and
precursors for other HPV-associated cancers
The concept of collecting cervical precancers through
US cancer registries is not new. Data on CIS/CIN-3
were collected by the registries starting in 1984 until
discontinuation in 1996 based on a joint decision by
many national organizations including the NCI and
CDC (Table 2).17 Noninvasive cervical lesions display
a range of increasing severity. This range historically

has been graded by using diverse nomenclatures,
including CIN (CIN-1, CIN-2, and CIN-3) and mild
to severe dysplasia/CIS. The confusion associated
with the use of several contemporaneous histopathologic terminologies (see Fig. 1) created complexities
and raised questions regarding the quality of the cervical cancer precursor data.18,19 More recently, US
pathologists have widely accepted the ‘intraepithelial
neoplasia’ terminology. Specifically, the term CIN-3
largely has superseded the comparable terms of
severe dysplasia or CIS.20
Nosologic concerns aside, current evidence
strongly supports the designation of CIN-3 as the
most relevant precursor of squamous cell carcinoma.
Arguments for the reintroduction of cervical CIN-3/

HPV-Associated Cancers and Registries/Saraiya et al

3051

FIGURE 1. Comparison of 4 classification systems for squamous cells; Bethesda 2001 (cytology), cervical intraepitheliali neoplasia (CIN) nomenclature (histology), dysplasia nomenclature (cytology and histology), and Papanicolaou classification (cytology; the categories are not shown to scale). ASC-US indicates atypical squamous cells of undetermined significance; NILM, negative for intraepithelial lesion and malignancy; SIL, squamous intraepithelial lesion; LSIL, low-grade
SIL; HSIL, high-grade SIL; CA, invasive carcinoma; ASC-H, atypical squamous cells, cannot exclude HSIL; NOS, not otherwise specified; KA, koilocytotic atypia;
Mild, mild dysplasia; Mod, moderate dysplasia; Sev, severe dysplasia; CIS, carcinoma in situ. Reproduced with permission from Oxford University Press and the
Journal of the National Cancer Institute (Sherman ME, Lorincz AT, Scott DR, et al. Baseline cytology, human papillomavirus testing, and risk for cervical neoplasia: a 10-year cohort analysis. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2003;95:46-5219).

CIS reporting to population-based cancer registries
include 1) the acceptably high interobserver reproducibility21; 2) the reduced likelihood of regression
compared with CIN-2 and less severe lesions22; and
3) an HPV type spectrum that more closely matches
that of invasive carcinoma rather than milder squamous lesions (CIN-2).23
The nomenclature for precursors of invasive adenocarcinoma is simpler than that for squamous cell
carcinoma. The only widely accepted precursor of
invasive adenocarcinoma is AIS,24 which is a term
used consistently by pathologists.
Analogous ‘intraepithelial neoplasia’ terminology
has been developed for carcinoma precursors of
other epithelial cancer sites: anal intraepithelial neoplasia (AIN), vaginal intraepithelial neoplasia (VaIN),

vulvar intraepithelial neoplasia (VIN), and penile
intraepithelial neoplasia (PIN). Past challenges to
the achievement of consistent systematic coding of
cervical cancer precursors have been reduced as a
result of these consensus guidelines, and further simplification is possible by adoption of ‘intraepithelial
neoplasia’ terminology (eg, CIN-3, VIN-3) in the pathology community.4,20
Challenges to collecting cervical and other HPVassociated precancers exist, but some lessons learned
from the articles in this supplement of Cancer offer
some insight for future activities. Despite the 1996
decision to stop collecting cervical cancer precursor
data, the Michigan Cancer Surveillance Program
(MCSP) has continued to collect CIN-3/CIS data, and
findings have been published elsewhere in this sup-

3052

CANCER Supplement

November 15, 2008 / Volume 113 / Number 10

TABLE 3
Comparison of Reportable Human Papillomavirus-associated Cancers and Precancers: Commission on Cancer; National Program of
Cancer Registries; and Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results*
Reportable Diagnoses
on or After Jan. 1, 2005
Exceptions (not reportable)

COC (Behavior Code of 2 or 3 in ICD-O 3)
 Skin cancers (c44._) with
histology 8000-8110 (after Jan. 1, 2003);
prior to that date, AJCC stage groups 2-4 in
this group were reportable
 CIS of the cervix and CIN-3
(after Jan. 1, 1996)
 PIN-3 (after Jan. 1, 1996)
 VIN-3 (after Jan. 1, 96)
 VAIN-3 (after Jan. 1, 1996)
 AIN (after Jan. 1, 1996)

SEER (Behavior Code of 2 or
3 in ICD-O 3)

NPCR (Behavior Code
of 2 or 3 in ICD-O 3)

 Skin cancers (c44._)
with histologies 8000-8005,
8010-8046, 8050-8084,
and 8090-8110
 CIS of the cervix and CIN-3
(after Jan. 1, 1996)
 PIN-3 (after Jan. 1, 2001)

 Skin cancers (c44._)
with histologies 8000-8005,
8010-8046, 8050-8084,
and 8090-8110
 CIS of the cervix and CIN-3
(after Jan. 1, 1996)
 PIN-3 (after Jan. 1, 2001)

COC indicates Commission on Cancer; SEER, Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results; NPCR, National Program of Cancer Registries; ICD-O 3, International Classification of Diseases for Oncology, 3rd edition; AJCC, American Joint Committee on Cancer; CIS, cervical carcinoma in situ; CIN-3, cervical intraepithelial neoplasia 3; PIN-3, penile intraepithelial neoplasia 3; VIN-3, vulvar intraepithelial neoplasia 3;
VAIN-3, vaginal intraepithelial neoplasia 3; AIN, anal intraepithelial neoplasia.
*See North American Association of Central Cancer Registries, 2006.18

plement.25 The MCSP has continued to collect CIN-3
data with minimal additional resources because of
the increasing use of electronic case reporting.
Expanding outside of Michigan, the CDC is planning
a pilot program to look at the feasibility of systematically collecting cervical precancer data (CIN-3, CIS,
AIS) through the already existing NPCR infrastructure
in selected cancer registries. In the pilot study, central cancer registries will evaluate the feasibility of,
the resources required for, and the costs associated
with collecting data on cervical precancers. Although
such a system leverages the current NPCR infrastructure (data streams from cancer registrars, pathology
laboratories, hospitals), additional resources may be
needed to collect the relatively large number of precancer cases (compared with the smaller number of
invasive cancers). Clearly, evaluating the additional
burden and cost of E-ABHACUS and other
approaches must be done before large-scale adoption. In fact, large-scale adoption may not even be
needed. Findings from the pilot studies for cervical
precancers, coupled with information on expected
rates of type-specific prevalence in CIN-3 and AIS
estimated through selected cancer registries (on a
periodic basis), could provide a sentinel populationbased surveillance system for type-specific HPV-associated cervical precancer throughout much of the US
population.
After CIN-3 was no longer reportable to cancer
registries in 1996, the collection of incidence data of
high-grade intraepithelial lesions (often considered
synonymous with in situ cancer) of other cancers
(AIN-3, VIN-3, VaIN-3, but not PIN-3 after 2000)

remained a requirement for SEER and NPCR but
not for the Commission on Cancer (led by the
American College of Surgeons [ACoS]) (Table 3).
Although large percentages of these noncervical in
situ lesions are being reported by hospitals and
increasingly by nonhospital sources, an accurate
assessment of the true burden of these preinvasive
lesions will be possible only if the ACoS readopts
this reporting requirement. With the effort underway to assemble a multidisciplinary team of experts
to monitor the impact of prophylactic HPV vaccines
on the rates of cervical carcinoma and its precursors and on the rates of other HPV-associated neoplasms in the United States, key organizations like
the CDC-NPCR, NCI-SEER, and ACoS programs, as
well as the North American Association of Central
Cancer Registries, will need to come to a consensus
regarding collection of the new precancerous cases
of all HPV-associated epithelial cancers discussed in
this supplement. Out of concern regarding the completeness of VIN-3, VaIN-3, and AIN-3 reporting, the
NPCR has not required cancer registries to submit
these data since 2003, leading to an underestimation of in situ cancers coded as 8077/2 (although
cancer registries may collect these data). For the
years 1998 through 2003, SEER registries, which
continued to require the collection of these data,
this code accounts for 46% of in situ anal cancers,
63% of in situ vulvar cancers, and 77% of in situ
vaginal cancers. Before any implementation of EABHACUS, the quality of these in situ cancer data
in SEER and NPCR registries will need to be evaluated carefully.

HPV-Associated Cancers and Registries/Saraiya et al

Population-based assessment of HPV types associated with
invasive carcinoma and carcinoma precursors
An essential purpose of E-AHBACUS surveillance systems will be to monitor changes in HPV type distribution in HPV-associated cancers and precancers
that could be impacted by vaccination. In 2001, 3
SEER registries (Hawaii, Los Angeles, and Iowa)
implemented population-based formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tissue block collection within their respective geographic areas, thereby establishing an
infrastructure to conduct tissue-based research from
a population-based perspective.26 In addition, the
CDC is developing a pilot study to systematically
monitor HPV types present in tissue specimens from
cancers of the cervix, vagina, vulva, anus, penis, and
oropharynx/oral cavity obtained with the assistance
of 4 participating central cancer registries (Kentucky,
Louisiana, Michigan, and Florida) that have a high
burden of disease and racial/ethnic diversity. Such
carefully annotated population-based tissue banks
have the advantage of providing an unbiased sampling frame for the evaluation of HPV DNA in cervical, vaginal, vulvar, penile, anal, and oropharyngeal
tissue from several registries in defined communities.
By using this approach, it will be possible to monitor
changes in HPV type-specific rates for several HPVassociated diseases.
Additional resources will be required to validate
that the collected samples are representative of the
registry catchment population with regard to key histopathologic, clinical, and patient metrics. Pathologic
confirmation of tissue diagnoses, followed by HPV
testing distributed across several calendar periods,
will permit the estimation of attributable fractions of
HPV-16 and HPV-18 for cervical neoplasia and other
diseases (precursors of cervical cancer or other HPVassociated cancers) by age, racial/ethnic group, and
selected factors over time. Results of an extensive
baseline HPV typing effort should lead to the identification of an adequate sampling frame within sentinel registries that would permit selective sampling of
tissue for future HPV DNA testing to monitor vaccine
impact. The exact design of this approach would
require expert multidisciplinary collaborations and
detailed knowledge of the screening and treatment
practices within the registry’s geographic area.

Relating rates of invasive carcinoma and carcinoma
precursors to the vaccinated population
Two approaches for assessing the impact of prophylactic HPV vaccination include 1) linking cancer registry information (registry record, available tissue,
and HPV DNA typing) with an individual’s vaccine

3053

record and 2) correlating incidence of HPV-associated and/or HPV-typed lesions with vaccination
prevalence within defined geographic areas. Relating
HPV-associated cervical disease to the vaccination
record of individuals could be conducted through
existing immunization information systems. Immunization information systems contain confidential and
computerized
information
(http://www.cdc.gov/
vaccines/programs/iis/default.htm accessed on July
16, 2008) as do cancer registry data. They collect and
consolidate vaccination data from multiple healthcare providers, assess vaccination coverage within a
defined geographic area, and have linkages with electronic data sources.27,28 Most data from the immunization information system are initiated through vital
records sources at the state or city level and then
updated by vaccination providers or billing systems.
These records have been implemented widely for the
collection of infant immunization data and currently
are being expanded to collect vaccination data on all
ages with increasing emphasis on adolescent immunization, such as HPV immunization. It is noteworthy that linkages between cancer registries and
other information systems are not new; cancer registries routinely link with state and national vital statistics to determine vital status, with hospital discharge
records to describe comorbid conditions, and with
the Indian Health Services patient database to mitigate the effects of misclassification of American Indian/Alaska Native race.
Although both types of approaches are useful,
developing a system for generating population-based
summary data is more feasible and perhaps more
consistent with the usual goals and functions of cancer surveillance and registration. In addition, the
benefits of vaccination at the population level may
extend beyond the individual patient to include
unvaccinated patient contacts (‘herd immunity’).
Thus, as communities debate the various recommendations and protocols for vaccinating adolescents, the possibility exists to define cohorts in
which the prevalence of vaccination at early ages is
high and is distributed uniformly. An attractive
option for surveillance from a public health perspective would be to estimate age-specific vaccination
rates by locality (eg, county or zip code) and calendar period and to relate these statistics to the local
incidence of (preferably) HPV-typed and pathologically confirmed cancer precursors and carcinoma.
This approach would not meet the requirements of
evaluating the effectiveness of vaccination from a
clinical perspective, but it may allow assessment of
vaccination as a public health intervention at the
population level.

3054

CANCER Supplement

November 15, 2008 / Volume 113 / Number 10

Interpreting screening information from other
surveillance systems
Interpreting cancer registry data along with trends in
cervical cancer screening is another recommendation
for E-ABHACUS. The paradigm of cervical cancer
screening is changing contemporaneously with vaccine introduction, as highlighted by Castle et al29
Cervical cancer screening currently consists of cytologic screening, sometimes in combination with HPV
DNA testing and cytology or cytology alone. However, cervical screening with HPV DNA testing followed by reflex cytology30 is being evaluated
increasingly as a screening strategy, whereas others
are considering the addition of type-specific HPV
testing as a part of the screening armamentarium.31
HPV vaccine and HPV DNA testing are most costeffective in settings in which screening among a vaccinated population starts later and occurs less frequently.32,33 For these reasons, monitoring the
incidence of cervical precancers and cancers needs
to be conducted in conjunction with monitoring
screening practices. In this supplement, Tiro et al34
have described the different national behavioral surveillance systems that exist to measure screening and
vaccination practices among the population as well
as providers. It will be important to explore whether
linkages of cancer registry data to screening behavior
at the individual level can be achieved, although
community measures of screening practices also will
be informative. Population-based analyses of screening data from various national and state surveillance
systems, in conjunction with invasive carcinoma and
precursor data from cancer registries, can be used to
guide cancer control efforts and intervention
research. The interactive State Cancer Profiles website, for example, which was developed by the CDC
and NCI, provides cancer registry data and screening
information to guide decision-making for cancer
control in states and counties.35 In addition, the
CDC’s Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance website
includes basic statistical analysis tools to facilitate
public health program planning (see http://apps.
nccd.cdc.gov/s_broker/htmsql.exe/weat/index.hsql
accessed on July 16, 2008).
Considerations and Challenges
The long-term impact of the HPV vaccine on cervical
cancer is being measured with pharmaceutical-sponsored efficacy studies of cohorts in several Nordic
countries, where the health registry infrastructure
allows for active and optimal follow-up.36 Defining
vaccine-exposure cohorts and following them prospectively poses major challenges for US registrybased studies. HPV-vaccinated adolescents are likely

to be difficult to follow into adulthood, when HPV16– and HPV-18–associated cervical neoplasia and
other outcomes would be assessed. Furthermore,
ascertaining individual vaccine histories may require
informed consent, could raise serious logistical
challenges, and might be subject to recall bias or
erroneous self-reporting. In states with high HPV
vaccination rates and low in-and-out migration,
these concerns may be minimized, but they certainly
will not be eliminated.
Of further concern are changes in the treatment
of women with HPV-associated lesions less severe
than CIN-3; such treatment may reduce the incidence of cervical neoplasia, thus making it difficult
to tease out the effects of vaccination versus treatment. This concern is mitigated somewhat by
published and widely disseminated treatment guidelines,37 which endorse the follow-up of women, especially young women, with early HPV-associated
lesions. In addition to censoring through treatment,
temporal shifts in HPV cofactors, such as smoking,
oral contraceptive use, sexual activity, or a shift in
cervical cancer screening practices, could affect progression risk among HPV-infected individuals.
An important component of the surveillance
plan is the need for adequate statistical power to
detect relatively subtle changes in the rates of HPVassociated cancers. To address this concern, the development of an enhanced surveillance system
should be implemented as soon as funding and other
necessary resources become available to provide a
baseline and sufficient lead time for the surveillance
process and the inclusion of a large and representative sample. The implementation period must allow
ample opportunity to address logistical concerns,
identify study population sampling frames, and
pilot surveillance methods and the demonstration of
feasibility. Vaccination of sexually active women
(‘catch-up’) may introduce additional uncertainties
about the development of E-ABHACUS, but these
effects are likely to be minor compared with the primary effect of preadolescent vaccination. Careful
age-period–cohort analyses may permit a partial disentangling of the effects of catch-up versus presexual
initiation vaccination efforts.

Logistical Issues
Proposing a specific and comprehensive plan for
developing a surveillance system is beyond the scope
of this supplement, but possible next steps for implementing such a system include conducting pilot
studies in a few selected registries and defining populations that are suitable for baseline determinations
of rates of cervical carcinoma precursors and inva-

HPV-Associated Cancers and Registries/Saraiya et al

sive carcinoma. The desired characteristics of these
populations are 1) adequate size, 2) racial/ethnic diversity, 3) age distributions that sufficiently represent
the target population for screen-detected cervical neoplasia (roughly ages 20-50 years, capturing the rare
cancers identified in young groups to the median age
of diagnosis), 4) well defined catchments with regard
to tissue sources, and 5) potential for tissue access.
Given tissue access, representative histologically confirmed CIN-3, AIS, and cervical carcinoma tissue
blocks should be collected for HPV DNA typing.
These data could be used to provide a prevaccine
baseline of the type-specific prevalence of HPV
within these tissues by factors of interest, such as
age and ethnicity.

Legal Issues
Because all states are required to follow national and
state legislation and regulation for cancer reporting,
and because the reporting requirements include
invasive and in situ cancers, there are no legal impediments (or, otherwise, impediments are minimal)
for adopting the collection of CIN-3/CIS, especially
given expert consensus that CIN-3 and CIS are the
same entity. Collection of CIN-2 data may pose more
of a challenge because CIN-2 is less likely to predict
the risk of developing invasive cancer. Because HPV
vaccine recommendations were released in 2006, legislation has increased in various parts of the United
States regarding reporting requirements of HPV-associated conditions, some in conjunction with the cancer registries and some not. The New Mexico
Department of Health has designated HPV as a
reportable condition in New Mexico; under the auspices of HPV reporting, results from Papanicolaou
(Pap) tests, cervical pathology, and HPV test results
all are reportable (unpublished results). Since 2006,
Florida’s Sexually Transmitted Diseases (STD) Bureau
has made some HPV-associated diseases reportable
by both practitioners and laboratories (http://www.
doh.state.fl.us/Disease_ctrl/std/clinical/STD_Case_
Definitions.html accessed on July 16, 2008). Specifically, practitioners who note any HPV-associated
laryngeal papillomas or recurrent respiratory papillomatosis, HPV infection in children aged <12 years,
or any positive HPV tests should report these findings to Florida’s STD Bureau. In addition, Florida laboratories are required to report any positive HPV
DNA tests, HPV type-specific results, and abnormal
cervical cytologies and histologies. In January 2008,
Connecticut passed legislation that made CIN-2/
CIN-3 reportable by pathology laboratories and asked
laboratories to submit tissue specimens to the health

3055

department for typing. Currently, California and Tennessee are considering making CIN-2/CIN-3 reportable statewide.

Resource Issues
The primary concern of the registries will be the
added reporting burden and need for additional
resources (both staff and funds). Not only are CIS
and CIN-3 much more common than invasive cervical cancer (7-fold in the Michigan data), but the
sources of identifying these cases also are diverse.
CIS and CIN-3 often are observed and/or treated in
physician’s offices, and tissues are sent to free-standing private pathology laboratories. The burden of collecting cancer cases from these nonhospital sources
is substantially more labor-intensive and difficult.
However, with increased electronic reporting from
pathology laboratories, it is potentially feasible to
capture cases of these cervical cancer precursors; the
underlying assumption is that the registry can identify all pathology laboratories (both in-state and outof-state) that review and make diagnoses of cancer
and precancerous lesions among residents of the
catchment area. Additional costs are incurred when
cases reported by pathology laboratories are traced
back to physician’s offices to obtain other demographics, such as race or address. To determine the
cost and staff required by a registry for collecting CIS
and CIN-3 data, pilot projects will need to be funded
and implemented in selected states to assess the feasibility of the operations and the additional resources
required. These pilot projects also should assess the
extent to which these additional activities may interfere with routine cancer registry operations. Although
the burden would decrease as vaccination coverage
increases, resources and relationships that once were
used for this activity would have to be revisited. This
need to balance public health surveillance efforts
(including establishing the prevaccine HPV-associated disease burden and monitoring the impact
and effectiveness of the HPV vaccine) with limited
resources should be addressed by the national standards organizations.
Conclusions
The development and introduction of prophylactic
HPV vaccines creates a public health mandate to
monitor their ultimate impact in reducing the HPVassociated disease burden in our nation. The PAHO10
report has acknowledged that implementing the full
range of HPV surveillance strategies can be complex
and costly. The report suggests that every country

3056

CANCER Supplement

November 15, 2008 / Volume 113 / Number 10

should examine its infrastructure and capability to
determine the best course of action.
In the United States, the existing public health
infrastructure bodes well for the potentially large role
that cancer registries may play in evaluating the
effectiveness of prophylactic HPV vaccine activities.
The HPV vaccine provides a new focus for cancer
prevention activities. Clinical trials have demonstrated the tremendous potential of the vaccine for
reducing cervical cancer in the United States and
worldwide. NPCR and SEER will have major roles in
monitoring the vaccine’s impact in the United States;
the well developed nationwide cancer registry infrastructure already in place is positioned uniquely to
adopt selected recommendations proposed by
PAHO.10 NPCR and SEER already collect, for example, information regarding the histology of invasive
cervical cancers and other invasive HPV-associated
cancers. Expanded roles for monitoring the impact of
the HPV vaccine could include the collection of data
regarding cervical cancer precursors and precursors
of other HPV-associated cancers, the collection of
data regarding HPV type, and linkages to vaccine
registries. Major resource challenges exist, however,
for expanding the current work of registries (eg, the
reporting burden of precursors), and feasibility studies are needed to evaluate the resources and costs
for registries to implement these new activities. The
adoption of E-ABHACUS nationwide offers the opportunity to develop a new paradigm of an integrated partnership approach to cancer surveillance.
Accordingly, this initiative should be given careful
consideration as a logical avenue for augmenting our
existing cancer registry resources for postmarketing
HPV vaccine surveillance.

6.

7.

8.

9.

10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

15.

16.

17.

REFERENCES
1.

2.

3.

4.

5.

Parkin DM. The global health burden of infection-associated cancers in the year 2002. Int J Cancer. 2006;118:
3030-3044.
Bosch FX, Lorincz A, Munoz N, Meijer CJ, Shah KV. The
causal relation between human papillomavirus and cervical cancer. J Clin Pathol. 2002;55:244-265.
Clifford G, Franceschi S, Diaz M, Munoz N, Villa LL. Chapter 3: HPV type-distribution in women with and without
cervical neoplastic diseases. Vaccine. 2006;24(suppl 3):S26S34.
Schiffman M, Castle PE, Jeronimo J, Rodriguez AC,
Wacholder S. Human papillomavirus and cervical cancer.
Lancet. 2007;370:890-907.
Rousseau MC, Pereira JS, Prado JC, Villa LL, Rohan TE,
Franco EL. Cervical coinfection with human papillomavirus (HPV) types as a predictor of acquisition and persistence of HPV infection. J Infect Dis. 2001;184:1508-1517.

18.

19.

20.

Liaw KL, Hildesheim A, Burk RD, et al. A prospective study
of human papillomavirus (HPV) type 16 DNA detection by
polymerase chain reaction and its association with acquisition and persistence of other HPV types. J Infect Dis. 2001;
183:8-15.
Mao C, Koutsky LA, Ault KA, et al. Efficacy of human papillomavirus-16 vaccine to prevent cervical intraepithelial
neoplasia: a randomized controlled trial. Obstet Gynecol.
2006;107:18-27.
Ault KA. Effect of prophylactic human papillomavirus L1
virus-like-particle vaccine on risk of cervical intraepithelial
neoplasia grade 2, grade 3, and adenocarcinoma in situ: a
combined analysis of 4 randomised clinical trials. Lancet.
2007;369:1861-1868.
Koutsky LA, Ault KA, Wheeler CM, et al. A controlled trial
of a human papillomavirus type 16 vaccine. N Engl J Med.
2002;347:1645-1651.
Pan American Health Organization (PAHO), Immunization
Unit. Ad hoc meeting of experts on surveillance of HPVassociated diseases in the americas. PAHO Immunization
Newsletter. December 2006:1-4.
US Cancer Statistics Working Group. United States Cancer
Statistics 1999-2003 Incidence and Mortality Web-based
Report. Atlanta, Ga: US Department of Health and Human
Services, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and
National Cancer Institute; 2007.
Cogliano V. IARC Monographs on the Evaluation of Carcinogenic Risks to Humans: Human Papillomavirus [90].
Lyon, France: International Agency for Research on Cancer;
2007.
Dillner J, Arbyn M, Dillner L. Translational mini-review series on vaccines: monitoring of human papillomavirus vaccination. Clin Exp Immunol. 2007;148:199-207.
Kreimer AR, Clifford GM, Boyle P, Franceschi S. Human
papillomavirus types in head and neck squamous cell carcinomas worldwide: a systematic review. Cancer Epidemiol
Biomarkers Prev. 2005;14:467-475.
Ryerson AB, Peters ES, Coughlin SS, et al. Burden of potentially HPV-associated cancers of the oropharynx and oral
cavity in the United States, 1998-2003. Cancer. 2008;113
(suppl 6):000-000.
Sturgis EM, Cinciripini PM. Trends in head and neck
cancer incidence in relation to smoking prevalence: an
emerging epidemic of human papillomavirus-associated
cancers? Cancer. 2007;110:1429-1435.
American Association of Cancer Registries, Data Standards
Committee. Subcommittee on Noninvasive Cervix Lesions,
Working Group on Preinvasive Cervical Cancer Neoplasia
and Population-based Cancer Registries: Final Subcommittee Report Rockville, MD, April 5-6, 1993.
Havener LA, Hultstrom D, eds. Standards for Cancer Registries Volume II: Data Standards and Data Dictionary, Eleventh Edition, Version 11.1. Springfield, Ill: North American
Association of Central Cancer Registries; 2006. Available at:
http://www.naaccr.org/filesystem/pdf/Volume%20II%20
Version%2011.1.pdf. Accessed on July 16, 2008.
Sherman ME, Lorincz AT, Scott DR, et al. Baseline cytology,
human papillomavirus testing, and risk for cervical neoplasia: a 10-year cohort analysis. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2003;95:
46-52.
Carreon JD, Sherman ME, Guillen D, et al. CIN2 is a much
less reproducible and less valid diagnosis than CIN3:
results from a histological review of population-based cervical samples. Int J Gynecol Pathol. 2007;26:441-446.

HPV-Associated Cancers and Registries/Saraiya et al
21. Bosch FX, Manos MM, Munoz N, et al. Prevalence of
human papillomavirus in cervical cancer: a worldwide perspective. International Biological Study on Cervical Cancer
(IBSCC) Study Group. J Natl Cancer Inst. 1995;87:796-802.
22. Cox JT, Schiffman M, Solomon D. Prospective follow-up
suggests similar risk of subsequent cervical intraepithelial
neoplasia grade 2 or 3 among women with cervical intraepithelial neoplasia grade 1 or negative colposcopy and
directed biopsy. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 2003;188:1406-1412.
23. Zuna RE, Allen RA, Moore WE, Mattu R, Dunn ST. Comparison of human papillomavirus genotypes in high-grade
squamous intraepithelial lesions and invasive cervical carcinoma: evidence for differences in biologic potential of
precursor lesions. Mod Pathol. 2004;17:1314-1322.
24. Wright TC, Kurman RJ, Ferenczy A. Precancerous lesions of
the cervix. In: Kurman RJ, ed. Blaustein’s Pathology of the
Female Genital Tract, 5th ed. New York, NY: SpringerVerlag; 2001:253–324.
25. Copeland G, Datta SD, Spivak G, Garvin AD, Cote ML. Total
burden and incidence of in situ and invasive cervix cancer in
Michigan, 1985-2003. Cancer. 2008;113(10 suppl):2946-2954.
26. Goodman MT, Hernandez BY, Hewitt S, et al. Tissues from
population-based cancer registries: a novel approach to
increasing research potential. Hum Pathol. 2005;36:812-820.
27. Linkins RW. Immunization registries: progress and challenges in reaching the 2010 national objective. J Public
Health Manag Pract. 2001;7:67-74.
28. National Vaccine Advisory Committee. Development of Community and State-based Immunization Registries: Report of
the National Vaccine Advisory Committee (NVAC). Atlanta, Ga:
US Department of Health and Human Services, CDC; 1999.
29. Castle PE, Solomon D, Saslow D, Schiffman M.
Commentary: predicting the effect of successful human
papillomavirus vaccination on existing cervical screening

30.

31.

32.

33.

34.

35.

36.

37.

3057

programs in the United States. Cancer. 2008;113(10 suppl):
3031-3035.
Mayrand MH, Duarte-Franco E, Rodrigues I, et al.
Human papillomavirus DNA versus Papanicolaou screening tests for cervical cancer. N Engl J Med. 2007;357:15791588.
Khan MJ, Castle PE, Lorincz AT, et al. The elevated 10-year
risk of cervical precancer and cancer in women with
human papillomavirus (HPV) type 16 or 18 and the possible utility of type-specific HPV testing in clinical practice.
J Natl Cancer Inst. 2005;97:1072-1079.
Goldie SJ, Kim JJ, Wright TC. Cost-effectiveness of human
papillomavirus DNA testing for cervical cancer screening
in women aged 30 years or more. Obstet Gynecol. 2004;
103:619-631.
Goldie SJ, Kohli M, Grima D, et al. Projected clinical benefits and cost-effectiveness of a human papillomavirus 16/
18 vaccine. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2004;96:604-615.
Tiro JA, Saraiya M, Jain N, et al. Human papillomavirus
and cervical cancer behavioral surveillance in the United
States. Cancer. 2008;113(10 suppl):3013-3030.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, National Cancer Institute. State Cancer Profiles. Bethesda, Md: National
Cancer Institute; 2007. Available at: http://statecancerprofiles.cancer.gov/. Accessed on July 16, 2008.
Lehtinen M, Herrero R, Mayaud P, et al. Chapter 28: studies
to assess the long-term efficacy and effectiveness of HPV
vaccination in developed and developing countries. Vaccine. 2006;24(suppl 3):S233-S241.
Wright TC Jr, Massad LS, Dunton CJ, Spitzer M, Wilkinson
EJ, Solomon D. 2006 Consensus guidelines for the management of women with cervical intraepithelial neoplasia or
adenocarcinoma in situ. J Low Genit Tract Dis. 2007;11:
223-239.

