Review Article

Recommendations for Including Multiple Symptoms as
Endpoints in Cancer Clinical Trials
A Report From the ASCPRO (Assessing the Symptoms of Cancer Using Patient-Reported Outcomes)
Multisymptom Task Force
Charles S. Cleeland, PhD1; Jeff A. Sloan, PhD2; David Cella, PhD3; Connie Chen, PharmD4; Amylou C. Dueck, PhD5;
Nora A. Janjan, MD, MPSA, MBA6; Astra M. Liepa, PharmD7; Rajiv Mallick, PhD8; Ann O’Mara, PhD, RN9;
Jay D. Pearson, PhD10; Yasuhiro Torigoe, PhD11; Xin Shelley Wang, MD, MPH1; Loretta A. Williams, PhD, RN1;
and Jeanie F. Woodruff, ELS1

The multiple symptoms arising from cancer and its treatment impose significant distress for patients. However, in clinical research,
there is no agreed-upon way of assessing and presenting the effects of treatment on multiple symptoms, as either individual scores
or a composite score. The ASCPRO (Assessing the Symptoms of Cancer Using Patient-Reported Outcomes) Multisymptom Task
Force was established to make recommendations about measuring multiple symptoms as outcomes in cancer clinical trials. The Multisymptom Task Force addressed how to choose the symptoms to be assessed and how multiple individual symptom scores or composite scores of several symptoms might be used as clinical trial outcomes. Consensus was reached on a definition of a
multisymptom outcome, the problem of source attribution, and the need for a hypothesis-driven conceptual framework to measure
multisymptom outcomes. Validated single-item and multi-item measures currently available or that can be easily generated for oncology use were deemed sufficient for measuring multiple symptoms. The relative value of a composite score versus a set of individual
symptom scores was discussed, along with issues in developing and deploying such a composite measure. The results indicated that
more research on combining scores of different symptoms is needed. Symptom data should be a required component of cancer clinical trials. Patient-reported symptoms provide a unique patient perspective on treatment benefit and risk that goes beyond clinicianreported adverse events. A representation of changes in multiple symptoms would clarify the impact of treatment and enhance the
C 2012
interpretation of cancer clinical trials for clinicians, patients, and those who make health care policy. Cancer 2013;119:411-20. V
American Cancer Society.
KEYWORDS: cancer, symptom, outcome, composite endpoint, clinical trial, labeling claim, treatment, toxicity, recommendation,
patient report.

INTRODUCTION
Cancer produces multiple distressing symptoms that affect functioning and quality of life, especially for patients with
advanced disease. Cancer therapy can significantly reduce disease-related symptoms or prolong the time to symptom onset
or worsening; it also can damage or functionally interfere with normal tissues, thus producing new symptoms or exacerbating existing symptoms. Even targeted therapies, whether used alone or in combination with traditional chemotherapy or
radiotherapy, produce symptoms that can be dose limiting. Conversely, effective control of treatment-related symptoms
may improve patient health, minimize toxicities that impair function, and increase adherence to curative treatments—not
only maintaining or even enhancing health-related quality of life (HRQOL), but also potentially increasing survival.1
Thus, alleviating or delaying the onset of symptoms caused by cancer and cancer therapy is of paramount importance.
Reporting the symptom status of patients in oncology clinical trials provides critical information about the effects of
treatment and can be an important factor in planning treatment. Symptom reporting can also provide critical information
for pharmaceutical companies in determining the relative benefit, safety, and dosage parameters of new agents and for
Corresponding author: Charles S. Cleeland, PhD, Department of Symptom Research, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, 1515 Holcombe
Boulevard, Unit 1450, Houston, TX 77030; Fax: (713) 745-3475; ccleeland@mdanderson.org
1
Department of Symptom Research, The University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas; 2Oncology and Health Sciences Research, Mayo Clinic
College of Medicine, Rochester, Minnesota; 3Center on Outcomes, Research, and Education (CORE), Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, Evanston, Illinois; 4Pfizer Inc., New York, New York; 5Department of Biostatistics, Mayo Clinic, Scottsdale, Arizona; 6National Center for Policy Analysis, Dallas, Texas; 7Eli
Lilly and Company, Indianapolis, Indiana; 8Daiichi Sankyo, Inc., Parsippany, New Jersey; 9National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, Maryland; 10Merck & Company, Inc.,
North Wales, Pennsylvania; 11Genentech, Inc., South San Francisco, California

C. S. Cleeland, J. A. Sloan, and A. M. Liepa are ASCPRO Multisymptom Task Force chairs.
The opinions expressed in the article are those of the participants and do not constitute a policy position of the National Cancer Institute or the US government.
DOI: 10.1002/cncr.27744, Received: March 20, 2012; Revised: June 5, 2012; Accepted: June 19, 2012, Published online August 28, 2012 in Wiley Online Library
(wileyonlinelibrary.com)

Cancer

January 15, 2013

411

Review Article

those making regulatory and funding decisions that influence the economic impact of cancer on patients, the
health care system, and society. The importance of developing a pathway for assessing tumor-related signs and
symptoms within the drug-approval process has been recognized,2 and there is increasing advocacy for the inclusion of symptom measures in cancer clinical trials.3,4
Consensus on how to assess the status of multiple symptoms as clinical trial outcomes is lacking, however.
ASCPRO

To begin to establish such a consensus, an independent
working group (Assessing the Symptoms of Cancer Using
Patient-Reported Outcomes [ASCPRO]) of academic
researchers, patient advocates, pharmaceutical industry
representatives, representatives from the US National
Cancer Institute, and participant observers from the US
Food and Drug Administration (FDA) was established in
2006 to review the current use of symptom measures as
clinical trial and clinical research outcomes and to make
recommendations to facilitate the implementation of
symptom assessment.5 To date, ASCPRO has published a
background article5 and recommendations on the measurement of cancer-related fatigue in clinical trials.6
ASCPRO commissioned a Multisymptom Task
Force to address methods for representing changes in multiple symptoms that may co-occur during a trial of an
anticancer therapy, including the utility of a composite
endpoint. Although differences in symptom benefit provide meaningful information for evaluating treatments,
defining and measuring a composite multisymptom endpoint is conceptually and methodologically challenging.
These definitional and methodological issues were the
focus of the discussion and recommendations of the Multisymptom Task Force presented in this report.
Terminology

A symptom is defined as patient-observed, subjective evidence of disease or physical disturbance.7 The severity of a
patient’s symptoms (whether caused by disease or by treatment toxicity) and the impact of those symptoms upon
normal functioning constitute symptom burden. Symptom
burden is an important component of HRQOL, an inclusive concept comprising many domains. Within
HRQOL, symptom burden is most closely aligned with
the biologic and physiologic changes associated with disease and treatment.5 Because a symptom can only be
known through the patient’s subjective report, it is by definition a patient-reported outcome (PRO). Because
symptoms like pain can broadly affect other aspects of
412

HRQOL, some have identified them as causal variables
rather than indicator variables.8
SYMPTOMS AS CLINICAL OUTCOMES
Treatment Trials

The primary function of symptom measurement in a clinical study is to inform patients and clinicians about the
symptomatic impact of a treatment. Several trial scenarios
are possible, including but not limited to: 1) the treatment
reduces disease-related symptoms; 2) the treatment delays
the onset of disease-related symptoms; 3) the treatment
itself produces symptoms that need to be considered in
the overall evaluation and use of the product; and 4) 2
therapies are equally effective in treating disease, but 1 is
less toxic. Early evidence of multiple treatment-related
symptoms can serve as a warning sign to drug developers
that adherence to treatment may be compromised.
The analysis of differences in symptom severity has
played a role in numerous studies comparing active treatment arms or comparing treatments versus placebo.9,10
For example, studies of renal cell carcinoma11,12 have
demonstrated that selected, targeted therapies were associated with less-severe symptoms than cytokine-based therapies. Other studies have demonstrated that 1 arm of
combination therapies13 and some surgical approaches14
was associated with less symptom burden. In some cases,
symptomatic improvement is noted even when standard
outcomes (survival, progression-free survival) do not
improve.15
Labeling Claims

In 2009, the FDA issued Guidance for Industry. PatientReported Outcome Measures: Use in Medical Product Development to Support Labeling Claims,16 which supports the
use of patient report in trials in which symptoms are an
outcome: This guidance advises using a PRO instrument
when measuring a concept that is known best by the
patient or that is measured best from the patient’s point of
view, such as symptoms, signs, or aspects of functioning
related directly to disease status. Often, PRO measures
represent disease effects on health and functioning from
the perspective of the patient. The guidance emphasizes
rigorous evaluation of the concepts to be measured and a
clear specification of the statistical endpoint model to be
used in analyzing trial data (Fig. 1).16
The inclusion of a symptom benefit in an FDAapproved label is an important option for the pharmaceutical industry, for both anticancer and supportive-care
agents. Symptom benefit is specifically endorsed in the
FDA’s 2007 Guidance for Industry. Clinical Trial
Cancer

January 15, 2013

ASCPRO Guidance: Multisymptom Endpoints/Cleeland et al

Figure 1. This endpoint model illustrates the treatment of
symptoms associated with Disease Y. PRO indicates patientreported
outcome.
Source:
US
Food
and
Drug
Administration.16

Endpoints for the Approval of Cancer Drugs and Biologics,17
although the FDA requires a clear distinction between
improvement in tumor symptoms and lack of drug toxicity if symptom assessments are intended to serve as primary endpoints to support drug approval. Thus, it is
possible for symptom measures to support approval of an
anticancer treatment, but the regulatory hurdles are high.
Furthermore, recommended approaches for assessing specific symptoms by patient report in clinical trials have
been lacking, and barriers to the use of symptom measurement and other PROs in clinical trials have persisted.18
This has resulted in a decrease in the number of applications to the FDA that include symptom assessment.19
However, even if a symptom benefit is not included in the
label, symptom assessment in a trial provides critical information for patients and the health care team about
what to expect from treatment and which treatmentrelated supportive care measures may be needed, and it
also may provide critical information for advisory boards
that approve drugs and evaluate reimbursement and quality-of-care issues.19,20
ASCPRO RECOMMENDATIONS
The Multisymptom Task Force developed the following
recommendations addressing issues related to assessment
of the overall symptom status of patients with cancer during clinical trials and afterward (for a summary of these
recommendations, see Table 1).
1. Defining a Multisymptom Outcome

The FDA guidance16 states that a single-item PRO instrument is insufficient for capturing a general concept that
includes multiple items or domains, such as physical functioning, or disorders defined by clusters of specific symptoms and signs. A PRO instrument consisting of a single
item about improved or worsened symptoms probably
would be uninformative about the effects of a treatment
on each specific symptom or sign and would be inadCancer

January 15, 2013

equate as an endpoint to support labeling claims, although
it could be helpful for calibrating a composite score.
At the same time, the guidance recognizes potential
limitations of composite endpoints used in labeling claims
that also were acknowledged by the Multisymptom Task
Force as applicable to multisymptom outcomes. These
include the possibility of large variations in component
symptoms that would be obscured by an overall component score, and the inclusion of individual symptoms in
the component that were not prespecified in the protocol.
The guidance stipulates that the symptoms that drove the
change in the composite score should be identified in the
label and that individual symptoms should be tested only
when a statistically significant treatment benefit is demonstrated by the composite score. In short, all symptoms
that are included in a composite endpoint should have
similar clinical importance and relevance to the patient,
and no single symptom should exclusively influence the
results.17
ASCPRO recommendation

Addressing the relative merits of dealing with composite symptom domains versus individual symptoms first
requires a clear working definition of a multisymptom
outcome. The Multisymptom Task Force recommends
the following:
A multisymptom outcome is a composite endpoint
that reflects the severity and impact of symptoms reported
as relevant by patients having a particular disease or
undergoing a particular treatment. The Multisymptom
Task Force further proposes that the measurement of
symptomatic change, as a subset of HRQOL, may be a
sufficient outcome in many clinical trials, giving health
providers, patients, and regulators enough information to
make decisions about whether to use, approve, or reimburse a treatment.21
2. Attributing Symptom Source

Explicit in the FDA guidance is that, if symptomatic benefit is to be claimed for an oncology drug in regulatory
review, then the symptoms must be those of the disease
and not the toxicities of therapy. Determining the causes
of symptoms is elusive, however. Symptoms can be produced by disease, treatment, both, or neither, and
attempts at symptom attribution have been unreliable.
For example, a study of clinician attribution of adverse
events in a large number of clinical trials indicated that
half of the events attributed to study treatment were
recorded for patients who received placebo.22
For several reasons, it is practically impossible to
identify a singular source of individual symptoms in most
413

How might a composite symptom score be operationalized?

 Clinical research and clinical trials designed to evaluate symptoms as outcomes have a much
different set of measurement requirements than the management of individual patients

Need for a well designed clinical endpoint model

 Not all symptom items in an existing scale apply to a targeted patient population

 Some symptoms are only now emerging or may be unique to a disease or treatment
 Clinicians do not always recognize relevant symptoms or accurately assess symptom severity

Necessity of including all relevant symptoms

 Co-occurring symptom clusters vary over time, depending on patient factors, analytic
techniques, and interactions between disease and treatment

Symptoms may cluster together, related to various diseases and treatments

 The degree to which these symptoms are present and change over
time can differ dramatically, depending on the type and stage of cancer or the specific
treatment
 Focusing on change in a symptom cluster overall may risk losing sight of critical changes
in individual symptoms that are important for targeted patient populations

Many symptoms that could be measured

 Do new scales need to be developed?

 Can existing tools can be modified to suit a particular study?

Numerous validated instruments are available

 Symptoms may be produced by disease, treatment, both, or neither
 Comorbid conditions, previous treatment, and supportive care can be confounding factors

Possible ways forward
 Use a mean score of the most frequent and bothersome symptoms for the target population, and specify a
level of reduction in this mean that could be justified as clinically important (this helps to define a symptomatic
responder)
 Use statistical approaches to determine and weight the relative contribution of each symptom to the overall
endpoint
 Evaluate potential aggregate composite scores from large available data sets and cross-compare psychometric
properties, interpretability, and stability; develop responder definitions
 Perform sensitivity analysis to determine whether multisymptom endpoint results are consistent with the individual components of the composite endpoint

 Prespecify intent: efficacy, treatment tolerability, palliation, or a combination of effects

 The conceptual framework of a clinical trial should guide each stage of its design: choice of symptoms to be
measured, instrument(s) to use, new symptom items, if any, and structure of the analysis plan

 Symptoms identified by patients cannot be ignored
 Evidence of patient relevance can be obtained through qualitative interviews with individuals or focus groups,
prioritization by patients using questionnaires, and cognitive debriefing of existing scales
 Administer all items on an assessment tool, even those that do not directly apply to the target population
 Incorporate additional single-symptom scales to target an expected symptom if relief of such symptom may be
an outcome of the treatment being studied

 Using cluster-based scoring as a basis for representing multiple symptoms in clinical trials or for deriving any
multisymptom outcome may be premature

 Certain symptoms are common and distressing across cancers (eg, fatigue, pain, poor appetite, nausea, and
often distress and depression) and should be included in any symptom assessment

 Symptoms to be measured should adequately characterize the patient’s symptom experience, in accordance
with documented evidence of relevance to the patient, clinical or preclinical evidence, and the clinical trial
objectives

 Multiple symptoms can be measured with existing instruments as long as they are well validated, have good
psychometric properties, and are sensitive to change
 Existing symptom scales can be enriched to make them appropriate for a target population, and new symptom
items can be added to existing scales as long as the addition of these new items follows the standards for development of other self-report measures, as described herein
 The conceptual or measurement model developed for a study will influence the choice of which scale(s) to use
and which symptoms on those scales to include in the analysis

 Determine the set of symptoms reported by patients in the target population before intervention
 Track and compare symptom severity over the course of a trial to clarify the effects and relative benefits of a
treatment or treatments

 A definition for a multisymptom outcome is proposed

Need for a definition of a multisymptom (composite) outcome

Difficulties inherent in attributing symptom source (disease, treatment)

Task Force Recommendation

Issue

Table 1. Summary of Issues and Related Multisymptom Task Force Recommendations

ASCPRO Guidance: Multisymptom Endpoints/Cleeland et al

situations. First, complex underlying chemical and biologic mechanisms are involved in both illness and treatment. Second, various factors, such as comorbid
conditions and the effects of supportive care (eg, analgesics for pain, bronchodilators for dyspnea), can confound
a straightforward interpretation of a treatment’s impact
on symptom severity. Third, patients in an oncology trial
may have received cancer treatment before enrollment.
Such confounding factors also affect more accepted oncology endpoints, such as overall or progression-free survival.
Nonetheless, to assess only disease-related symptoms
when a mix of disease-related and treatment-related symptoms are to be expected does not reflect biologic reality
and denies important information about differences
among treatments.
Whether or not exact attribution is possible, symptom assessment nonetheless permits informative comparisons of symptom burden from therapies. For example, a
treatment that reduces the mass of a lung lesion may be
associated not only with a reduction in both shortness of
breath and pain but also with improved sleep. If 2 treatments reduced tumor-related symptoms to the same
extent, then a significant difference in symptoms related
to 1 treatment versus another would provide added benefit to the patient. This information may have a substantial
impact on patient-clinician choice of therapy even if it
does not meet the requirements for inclusion in labeling
information.

multiple cancer-related symptoms. Some of these measures were groups of symptom items that were subsets of
broader HRQOL assessment instruments.24,25 Other
measures asked patients to rate the severity of multiple
symptoms and other dimensions of the symptom experience, including interference, distress, and frequency.26-28
Since the Kirkova et al review was published, additional
symptom rating scales have been developed or adapted
from existing scales,29-32 and expert opinion about modifying existing PRO measurements has been
summarized.33

ASCPRO recommendation

4. Determining Which Symptoms to Measure

Determining symptom attribution in all but the
most obvious of circumstances (eg, treatment-induced
mucositis, rash, vomiting) is likely unachievable. A more
informative approach is to determine the set of symptoms
reported by patients in the target population before the
intervention and then to report changes in symptom status during and at the end of the study. Comparisons of
symptom severity over the course of a trial can provide
clear indication of the effects and relative benefits of the
treatment or treatments.

Converging evidence from both expert opinion and
patient report has identified a subset of symptoms that are
common across cancers, that increase with disease progression and shortened survival, and that are associated
with significant distress for patients. Clinicians have identified fatigue, pain, poor appetite, and nausea as sentinel
symptoms,34,35 and they often include distress and
depression.36 Patients with advanced cancer universally
rate fatigue/tiredness as the most severe symptom,27,37,38
with pain, disturbed sleep, emotional distress (distress/
anxiety/worrying), and poor appetite among the top
symptoms.39-41 One study examined symptom ratings of
cancer patients from several countries and observed little
difference in the ordering of symptoms by severity (generally: fatigue, disturbed sleep, distress, pain, and lack of
appetite), suggesting similarity across national, cultural,
and linguistic boundaries.42
The consistency of these findings across studies suggests that some symptoms are common enough across various cancers to be considered as the basis for a

3. Determining How Multiple Symptoms Should
be Measured

A primary issue for symptom researchers and clinicians is
whether existing multisymptom assessment tools can be
used to measure any multisymptom outcome, or whether
a new measure must be developed and validated for each
application or trial. In a systematic review of cancer symptom assessment instruments, Kirkova et al23 identified 21
instruments, each measuring more than 5 symptoms, as
being appropriate for clinical use in the assessment of
Cancer

January 15, 2013

ASCPRO recommendation

The Multisymptom Task Force recommends that
multiple symptoms can be measured with existing, well
validated scales (ie, those that have good psychometric
properties and sensitivity to change). Even scales that do
not specifically adhere to the FDA guidance for labeling
claims produce important data for evaluating treatment
outcomes as long as they have been developed according
to accepted validation criteria. The conceptual or measurement model developed for a study will influence the
choice of which scale(s) to use and which symptoms on
those scales to include in the analysis. Most well validated
multisymptom scales have a history of performance in
clinical research that can guide the scale selection process.23 Conversely, new multisymptom measures require a
great deal of time and expense to develop and have no history of effective usage.

415

Review Article

multisymptom outcome. Nonetheless, the degree to
which these symptoms are present and change over time
can differ dramatically, depending on the type of cancer
or treatment. For example, patients with lung cancer are
likely to experience significant pain, dyspnea, and coughing early on, and their symptoms may improve with treatment; conversely, patients with renal cell cancer can be
fairly asymptomatic until the metastasis worsens, so that
prolonging time at their baseline score is advantageous.
Similarly, sore throat is likely to be reported during radiotherapy but not chemotherapy.29 The expectation of
symptom improvement or worsening over time will be
very different for these populations, and symptom analyses must take into account the type and stage of cancer
and the expected toxicity of the therapy to be studied. The
growing literature on longitudinal assessment of cancer
symptoms can help set these expectations.43

specific symptoms were identified and used to develop a
composite score and define a symptomatic responder.52,53
ASCPRO recommendation

The Multisymptom Task Force recommends that
the symptoms to be measured should adequately characterize the patient’s symptom experience, in accordance
with documented evidence of relevance to the patient,
clinical or preclinical evidence, and the clinical trial objectives. In some cases, it may be necessary to supplement a
multisymptom measure with 1 or more focused symptom
measures. The Multisymptom Task Force believes that it
is premature to consider cluster-based scoring as a basis
for representing multiple symptoms in clinical trials or for
deriving any multisymptom outcome. An index of summative impact, however, can be and has been successfully
used.52
5. Incorporating Symptoms Specific to the
Target Population

Symptom clusters

Investigators have recently noted that certain subsets
of symptoms (for example, nausea and vomiting) are
highly likely to be rated similarly by patients. Various analytic techniques, including factor analysis, cluster analysis,
and multidimensional scaling, have been used to identify
these subgroups of symptoms, often called symptom clusters.27,44,45 How symptoms cluster together depends on
disparate factors, such as the particular symptoms rated,46
the analytic techniques used to derive the clusters,47 and
even the age and sex of the patient.48 Clusters are likely to
change over the trajectory of treatment because of interactions between disease-related and treatment-related symptoms.43,49 Some analyses, such as investigations of sickness
behavior clusters, suggest that the symptoms forming a
cluster have a similar biologic basis.49,50
Nonetheless, focusing on change in a symptom cluster overall risks losing sight of critical changes in individual symptoms that are important for targeted patient
populations.51 Specific symptoms may change in different
directions in response to an intervention (eg, treatment
may cause an increase in fatigue, whereas pain is alleviated). Other methods of choosing critical symptoms may
be more appropriate, depending on the goal of the clinical
trial and the specific patient cohort. For example, in
patients with advanced solid tumors, the co-occurrence of
particular symptoms is common enough to produce reliable indexes that aggregate relevant symptom reports, and
a significant reduction in a composite of such symptoms
or a significant prolongation of the time until they appear
seems clearly beneficial. In a recent trial, myelofibrosis416

How to deal with emerging or unique symptoms related
to disease or treatment presents a measurement dilemma.
Should an entirely new scale be developed each time a
new symptom emerges, or is it possible to append new
symptoms to existing well validated scales? If the latter is
justified, then significant efficiencies in both time to
deployment and cost of scale development are achieved.
Obtaining patient input is especially important to
ensure that relevant symptoms that are not recognized by
clinicians are nonetheless included. Evidence of patient
relevance can be obtained through a variety of methods,
such as qualitative interviews with individuals or focus
groups or prioritization by patients using questionnaires
and/or cognitive debriefing of existing scales. Cognitive
debriefing allows patients in the target population to rank
the relevance of existing scale items, suggest new symptoms that the existing scale does not capture, and rate the
ease of use and clarity of the instrument being validated.
ASCPRO recommendation

The Multisymptom Task Force recommends that
new symptom items can be added to existing scales as long
as the addition of these new items follows the standards
for development of other self-report measures, as
described herein. In the absence of patient input supporting or confirming the additional measurement precision,
using multiple and convergent approaches to establishing
item relevance should be considered.
Although many existing scales have symptoms that
are commonly reported by patients with cancer, not all
items may apply to the targeted patient population.
Cancer

January 15, 2013

ASCPRO Guidance: Multisymptom Endpoints/Cleeland et al

Nonetheless, the Multisymptom Task Force recommends
administration of all items, including both items from the
original scale and any new items. This approach augments
previously derived information about the validity and
utility of the parent scale while allowing a subset of the
most relevant symptoms for a given cohort to be analyzed
separately to verify their significance for the target population. Additional symptom scales focused on a single
symptom may be required if there is reason to expect that
relief of that symptom may be an outcome of the treatment being studied.
6. Developing a Symptom Endpoint Model

The selection of symptom assessment methods for clinical
research and clinical trials designed to evaluate symptoms
as outcomes has a much different set of requirements than
the selection of symptom measures for the management
of individual patients. Intended labeling claims, the basis
for the FDA guidance,16 provide an excellent framework
for thinking about assessment design at both the qualitative research stage and the clinical trial stage.
The symptom-related questions to be posed will dictate components of the endpoint design, including symptom assessment during the trial. At the qualitative research
stage, hypothesized treatment effects should guide patient
selection and interview criteria. For example, for reduction
of existing symptoms, the qualitative assessment should
focus on symptoms present at the outset of therapy; conversely, for delayed worsening, the qualitative assessment
must be highly sensitive to the timing of new or worsening
symptoms. The pattern of symptoms occurring over the
course of disease or treatment, as described by patients in
qualitative interviews, can be especially informative for
identifying relevant symptom items and guiding the frequency of symptom assessments in a clinical trial. For
example, when symptom effects occur rapidly, repeated
use of a limited list of single-item symptoms is probably
the only practical choice; when symptom effects occur
gradually, assessment will be less frequent and thus, if warranted psychometrically, more items can be administered.
The complexity of the concept being measured also affects
the number of items. Ways of comparing these trajectories, such as measuring the area under the curve, have
been used in the regulatory approval process for analgesics
and may apply here.54
ASCPRO recommendation

The Multisymptom Task Force recommends that a
trial’s conceptual framework guide each stage of its design,
including the choice of which symptoms should be measured
and with what instrument(s), whether new symptom items
Cancer

January 15, 2013

need to be developed, and the structure of the analysis plan.
Investigators should prespecify whether they are trying to
measure efficacy, treatment tolerability, palliation, or a combination of effects; the study design and analysis methods
should be sufficient to evaluate these prespecified objectives.
7. Developing a Composite Symptom Score

A composite symptom score could be developed to represent variations in symptom burden during a clinical trial
or to operationalize a multisymptom outcome as defined
above. For example, studies have demonstrated that fatigue, pain, dyspnea, and coughing are highly prevalent in
and distressing for patients with lung cancer, especially
those who have advanced disease.29,43,55-58 How might a
composite measure of these 4 symptoms be constructed,
considering that composite endpoints are difficult to
interpret if the improvement is not consistent among the
components of the composite? That is, if only fatigue
improved, then it would not be appropriate to conclude a
benefit in the overall composite score.
ASCPRO recommendation

The Multisymptom Task Force considers that a variety of methods are appropriate for deriving a composite
score to combine ratings of multiple symptoms. A simple
mean score of the most frequent and bothersome symptoms for the target population could be used, and a level
of reduction in this mean that would be justified as clinically important could be specified. More complex statistical approaches also may be used. For example, using
multivariate regression, it is possible to determine the relative contribution of the rankings of each symptom to
another clinical dimension, such as progression of disease,
or to other patient-reported measures, such as satisfaction
with treatment, symptom interference or function, or
global well being. Data-reduction techniques, such as
principal component analysis or cluster or factor analysis
to examine the underlying dimensionality of multiple
symptoms, also may be considered. These methods could
be used to weight the relative contribution of each symptom to the composite score. Another approach involves
defining indicator variables for each symptom or collection of symptoms that would count the number of issues
reported by the patient or record the presence of a severe
symptomatic problem on the basis of a review of multiple
symptoms.59 Patient testing and interviews also could be
used to determine the relative importance of each of these
symptoms to patients in the group targeted for the trial. A
simple arithmetic mean of the ratings of all relevant items,
together with what constitutes a meaningful reduction in
this mean, may be an adequate composite measure.
417

Review Article

Composite scores aggregated from multiple sources,
including existing clinical trial data sets from the pharmaceutical industry and National Cancer Institute collaborative groups, could be cross-compared for interpretability
by patients and by those who make judgments about
treatment benefit and also could be investigated for their
psychometric properties, effects on potential trial sample
size, and performance across time (stability). These analyses also may be helpful in developing potential responder
definitions. For a discussion of the advantages and disadvantages of composite scores, see the Initiative on Methods, Measurement, and Pain Assessment in Clinical Trials
(IMMPACT) recommendations for using multiple endpoints in pain clinical trials.60 If a composite score is used
as a multisymptom endpoint in a trial, then sensitivity
analyses should be performed to determine whether the
results are consistent with the individual components of
the composite endpoint.
CONCLUSIONS
In conclusion, many issues involved in symptom assessment for cancer clinical trials have yet to be resolved, thus
forming a rich agenda for future research. Nonetheless,
we now know that patient report reliably represents
patients’ symptoms and meets the standards of assay sensitivity that are expected of clinical assessments and laboratory tests used as trial endpoints.
Members of the Multisymptom Task Force agreed
that the assessment of changes in the status of multiple
symptoms as measured by patient report represents a set
of patient-perspective outcome measures that should be
included in all cancer treatment trials, regardless of
whether or not a labeling claim based on a symptom
reduction benefit is being sought from a regulatory
agency. A multisymptom outcome, if conceptually justified by the trial design and intent of the therapy, is critical
for the appraisal of new and existing cancer agents,
because it may provide outcomes data sufficient to make
decisions about the value of a therapy or to allow judgment about the relative value of 1 therapy versus another.
Patient-based symptom data add critical information to the drug development and approval process, even
if they do not meet the high regulatory bar for inclusion in
the product label. For instance, a symptom measure may
provide a patient’s perspective on the benefits of delayed
disease progression or on a symptom related to drug toxicity, or it may demonstrate how a patient’s symptoms
improve in response to palliative care. Whether or not
symptom ratings are used to inform labeling claims,
symptom data contribute critical information that
418

informs the evaluation of treatment benefit and risk for
consideration by prescribers, patients, and policy makers.
Quality-assurance and comparative-effectiveness research
increasingly demand the assessment of symptom status as
a representation of the patient’s experiences in a clinical
trial or clinical encounter.21 We currently have the measurement tools and analytic techniques required to deploy
a multisymptom outcome, and relatively straightforward
methods for developing additional symptom items as
needed are available. Future research, much of which
could use existing databases, should examine the potential
interpretability and utility of such a composite measure.
FUNDING SOURCES
This work was supported by funds from ASCPRO.

CONFLICT OF INTEREST DISCLOSURES
The authors made no disclosures.

REFERENCES
1. Temel JS, Greer JA, Muzikansky A, et al. Early palliative care for
patients with metastatic non-small-cell lung cancer. N Engl J Med.
2010;363:733-742.
2. Williams G, Pazdur R, Temple R. Assessing tumor-related signs
and symptoms to support cancer drug approval. J Biopharm Stat.
2004;14:5-21.
3. Bruner DW, Bryan CJ, Aaronson N, et al. Issues and challenges
with integrating patient-reported outcomes in clinical trials supported by the National Cancer Institute-sponsored clinical trials networks. J Clin Oncol. 2007;25:5051-5057.
4. Ganz PA, Gotay CC. Use of patient-reported outcomes in phase III
cancer treatment trials: lessons learned and future directions. J Clin
Oncol. 2007;25:5063-5069.
5. Cleeland CS, Sloan JA. Assessing the Symptoms of Cancer Using
Patient-Reported Outcomes (ASCPRO): searching for standards.
J Pain Symptom Manage. 2010;39:1077-1085.
6. Barsevick AM, Cleeland CS, Manning DC, et al. ASCPRO recommendations for the assessment of fatigue as an outcome in clinical
trials. J Pain Symptom Manage. 2010;39:1086-1099.
7. Merriam-Webster Inc. Webster’s Third New International Dictionary of the English Language, Unabridged. Springfield, MA: Merriam-Webster, Inc.; 2002.
8. Fayers PM, Hand DJ. Causal variables, indicator variables and measurement scales: an example from quality of life. J R Stat Soc A.
2002;165:233-253.
9. Sloan JA. Applying QOL assessments: solutions for oncology clinical practice and research, part 1—overview and introduction.
Curr Probl Cancer. 2005;29:274-277.
10. Bezjak A, Tu D, Seymour L, et al. Symptom improvement in lung
cancer patients treated with erlotinib: quality of life analysis of the
National Cancer Institute of Canada Clinical Trials Group Study
BR. 21. J Clin Oncol. 2006;24:3831-3837.
11. Cella D, Li JZ, Cappelleri JC, et al. Quality of life in patients with
metastatic renal cell carcinoma treated with sunitinib or interferon
alfa: results from a phase III randomized trial. J Clin Oncol.
2008;26:3763-3769.
12. Cella D. Beyond traditional outcomes: improving quality of life in
patients with renal cell carcinoma. Oncologist. 2011;16(suppl 2):2331.
13. Cianfrocca M, Lee S, Von Roenn J, et al. Randomized trial of
paclitaxel versus pegylated liposomal doxorubicin for advanced
human immunodeficiency virus-associated Kaposi sarcoma: evidence

Cancer

January 15, 2013

ASCPRO Guidance: Multisymptom Endpoints/Cleeland et al

14.

15.

16.

17.

18.
19.

20.

21.
22.

23.
24.

25.

26.

27.

28.

29.

30.

31.

32.

of symptom palliation from chemotherapy. Cancer. 2010;116:39693977.
Kim YW, Baik YH, Yun YH, et al. Improved quality of life outcomes after laparoscopy-assisted distal gastrectomy for early gastric
cancer: results of a prospective randomized clinical trial. Ann Surg.
2008;248:721-727.
Dooms CA, Pat KE, Vansteenkiste JF. The effect of chemotherapy
on symptom control and quality of life in patients with advanced
non-small cell lung cancer. Expert Rev Anticancer Ther. 2006;6:531544.
US Food and Drug Administration. Guidance for Industry. PatientReported Outcome Measures: Use in Medical Product Development to Support Labeling Claims. Available at: http://www.fda.gov/
downloads/Drugs/GuidanceComplianceRegulatoryInformation/Guidances/UCM071975.pdf. Accessed November 16, 2011.
US Food and Drug Administration. Guidance for Industry. Clinical
Trial Endpoints for the Approval of Cancer Drugs and Biologics.
Available at: http://www.fda.gov/downloads/Drugs/GuidanceComplianceRegulatoryInformation/Guidances/UCM071590.pdf.
Accessed November 11, 2011.
Basch E. The missing voice of patients in drug-safety reporting. N
Engl J Med. 2010;362:865-869.
Basch E, Minasian L, Burke L, et al. Symptom measurement in
clinical trials. Paper presented at: 2011 Conference on Clinical Cancer Research; Washington, DC; November 10, 2011. Available at:
http://www.focr.org/images/stories/pdf/panel3final110411.pdf
Accessed May 18, 2012.
Doward LC, Gnanasakthy A, Baker MG. Patient reported outcomes: looking beyond the label claim. Health Qual Life Outcomes.
2010;8:89.
Janjan N, Goodman J. Health-care reform and the treatment of
metastatic cancer [serial online]. ASCO Post. 2011;2:1-2.
Hillman SL, Mandrekar SJ, Bot B, et al. Evaluation of the value of
attribution in the interpretation of adverse event data: a North Central Cancer Treatment Group and American College of Surgeons
Oncology Group investigation. J Clin Oncol. 2010;28:3002-3007.
Kirkova J, Davis MP, Walsh D, et al. Cancer symptom assessment
instruments: a systematic review. J Clin Oncol. 2006;24:1459-1473.
Aaronson NK, Ahmedzai S, Bergman B, et al. The European Organization for Research and Treatment of Cancer QLQ-C30: a quality-of-life instrument for use in international clinical trials in
oncology. J Natl Cancer Inst. 1993;85:365-376.
Cella DF, Tulsky DS, Gray G, et al. The Functional Assessment of
Cancer Therapy scale: development and validation of the general
measure. J Clin Oncol. 1993;11:570-579.
Portenoy RK, Thaler HT, Kornblith AB, et al. The Memorial
Symptom Assessment Scale: an instrument for the evaluation of
symptom prevalence, characteristics and distress. Eur J Cancer.
1994;30A:1326-1336.
Cleeland CS, Mendoza TR, Wang XS, et al. Assessing symptom
distress in cancer patients: the M. D. Anderson Symptom Inventory. Cancer. 2000;89:1634-1646.
Bruera E, Kuehn N, Miller MJ, Selmser P, Macmillan K. The Edmonton Symptom Assessment System (ESAS): a simple method for
the assessment of palliative care patients. J Palliat Care. 1991;7:6-9.
Mendoza TR, Wang XS, Lu C, et al. Measuring the symptom burden of lung cancer: the validity and utility of the lung cancer module of the M. D. Anderson Symptom Inventory. Oncologist.
2011;16:217-227.
Wang XS, Williams LA, Eng C, et al. Validation and application of
a module of the M. D. Anderson Symptom Inventory for measuring multiple symptoms in patients with gastrointestinal cancer
(the MDASI-GI). Cancer. 2010;116:2053-2063.
Garcia SF, Rosenbloom SK, Beaumont JL, et al. Priority symptoms
in advanced breast cancer: development and initial validation of the
National Comprehensive Cancer Network-Functional Assessment of
Cancer Therapy-Breast Cancer Symptom Index (NFBSI-16). Value
Health. 2012;15:183-190.
Cella D, Rosenbloom SK, Beaumont JL, et al. Development and
validation of 11 symptom indexes to evaluate response to chemo-

Cancer

January 15, 2013

33.

34.

35.
36.

37.
38.

39.
40.

41.

42.
43.
44.

45.

46.
47.
48.

49.
50.
51.

therapy for advanced cancer. J Natl Compr Canc Netw. 2011;9:268278.
Rothman M, Burke L, Erickson P, Leidy NK, Patrick DL, Petrie
CD. Use of existing patient-reported outcome (PRO) instruments
and their modification: the ISPOR Good Research Practices for
Evaluating and Documenting Content Validity for the Use of Existing Instruments and Their Modification PRO Task Force Report.
Value Health. 2009;12:1075-1083.
Cella D, Paul D, Yount S, et al. What are the most important
symptom targets when treating advanced cancer? A survey of providers in the National Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN).
Cancer Invest. 2003;21:526-535.
Lorenz KA, Dy SM, Naeim A, et al. Quality measures for supportive cancer care: the Cancer Quality-ASSIST Project. J Pain Symptom
Manage. 2009;37:943-964.
Patrick DL, Ferketich SL, Frame PS, et al. National Institutes of
Health State-of-the-Science Conference Statement: symptom management in cancer: pain, depression, and fatigue, July 15-17, 2002.
J Natl Cancer Inst Monogr. 2004;(32):9-16.
Barbera L, Seow H, Howell D, et al. Symptom burden and performance status in a population-based cohort of ambulatory cancer
patients. Cancer. 2010;116:5767-5776.
Henry DH, Viswanathan HN, Elkin EP, Traina S, Wade S, Cella
D. Symptoms and treatment burden associated with cancer treatment: results from a cross-sectional national survey in the US. Support Care Cancer. 2008;16:791-801.
Bennett MI, Rayment C, Hjermstad M, Aass N, Caraceni A, Kaasa
S. Prevalence and aetiology of neuropathic pain in cancer patients: a
systematic review. Pain. 2012;153:359-365.
Fiorentino L, Rissling M, Liu L, Ancoli-Israel S. The symptom
cluster of sleep, fatigue and depressive symptoms in breast cancer
patients: severity of the problem and treatment options. Drug Discov
Today Dis Models. 2011;8:167-173.
Martinelli F, Quinten C, Maringwa JT, et al. Examining the relationships among health-related quality-of-life indicators in cancer
patients participating in clinical trials: a pooled study of baseline
EORTC QLQ-C30 data. Expert Rev Pharmacoecon Outcomes Res.
2011;11:587-599.
Wang XS, Cleeland CS, Mendoza TR, et al. Impact of cultural and
linguistic factors on symptom reporting by patients with cancer. J
Natl Cancer Inst. 2010;102:732-738.
Wang XS, Fairclough DL, Liao Z, et al. Longitudinal study of the
relationship between chemoradiation therapy for non-small-cell lung
cancer and patient symptoms. J Clin Oncol. 2006;24:4485-4491.
Cleeland CS, Mendoza TR, Wang XS, et al. Levels of symptom
burden during chemotherapy for advanced lung cancer: differences
between public hospitals and a tertiary cancer center. J Clin Oncol.
2011;29:2859-2865.
Cheville AL, Novotny PJ, Sloan JA, et al. Fatigue, dyspnea, and
cough comprise a persistent symptom cluster up to 5 years after diagnosis with lung cancer. J Pain Symptom Manage. 2011;42:202212.
Velikova G, Stark D, Selby P. Quality of life instruments in oncology. Eur J Cancer. 1999;35:1571-1580.
Skerman HM, Yates PM, Battistutta D. Multivariate methods to
identify cancer-related symptom clusters. Res Nurs Health.
2009;32:345-360.
Cheung WY, Le LW, Gagliese L, Zimmermann C. Age and gender
differences in symptom intensity and symptom clusters among
patients with metastatic cancer. Support Care Cancer. 2011;19:417423.
Kim E, Jahan T, Aouizerat BE, et al. Changes in symptom clusters
in patients undergoing radiation therapy. Support Care Cancer.
2009;17:1383-1391.
Cleeland CS, Bennett GJ, Dantzer R, et al. Are the symptoms of
cancer and cancer treatment due to a shared biologic mechanism?
Cancer. 2003;97:2919-2925.
Cheville AL, Novotny PJ, Sloan JA, et al. The value of a symptom
cluster of fatigue, dyspnea, and cough in predicting clinical outcomes in lung cancer survivors. J Pain Symptom Manage.
2011;42:213-221.

419

Review Article
52. Mesa RA, Kantarjian H, Tefferi A, et al. Evaluating the serial use of
the Myelofibrosis Symptom Assessment Form for measuring symptomatic improvement: performance in 87 myelofibrosis patients on
a JAK1 and JAK2 inhibitor (INCB018424) clinical trial. Cancer.
2011;117:4869-4877.
53. Mesa RA, Gotlib J, Gupta V, et al. Associations between improvements in myelofibrosis (MF) symptoms and quality of life measures
with splenomegaly reduction in COMFORT-I: a randomized, double-blind, phase III trial of the JAK1 and JAK2 inhibitor ruxolitinib
versus placebo in patients with MF [abstract]. Blood (ASH Annual
Meeting Abstracts). 2011;118. Abstract 3842.
54. Corey-Lisle PK, Peck R, Mukhopadhyay P, et al. Q-TWiST analysis of ixabepilone in combination with capecitabine on quality of
life in patients with metastatic breast cancer. Cancer. 2012;118:461468.
55. Wang XS, Shi Q, Lu C, et al. Prognostic value of symptom burden
for overall survival in patients receiving chemotherapy for advanced
nonsmall cell lung cancer. Cancer. 2010;116:137-145.

420

56. Cella D, Eton D, Hensing TA, Masters GA, Parasuraman B. Relationship between symptom change, objective tumor measurements,
and performance status during chemotherapy for advanced lung
cancer. Clin Lung Cancer. 2008;9:51-58.
57. Hollen PJ, Gralla RJ, Kris MG, Eberly SW, Cox C. Normative
data and trends in quality of life from the Lung Cancer Symptom
Scale (LCSS). Support Care Cancer. 1999;7:140-148.
58. Gralla RJ. Quality-of-life considerations in patients with advanced
lung cancer: effect of topotecan on symptom palliation and quality
of life. Oncologist. 2004;9(suppl 6):14-24.
59. Sloan JA, Loprinzi CL, Laurine JA, et al. A simple stratification factor prognostic for survival in advanced cancer: the good/bad/uncertain index. J Clin Oncol. 2001;19:3539-3546.
60. Turk DC, Dworkin RH, McDermott MP, et al. Analyzing multiple
endpoints in clinical trials of pain treatments: IMMPACT recommendations. Initiative on Methods, Measurement, and Pain Assessment in Clinical Trials. Pain. 2008;139:485-493.

Cancer

January 15, 2013

