www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Oncotarget, 2017, Vol. 8, (No. 13), pp: 21153-21166
Research Paper

Proteasome inhibition enhances the efficacy of volasertib-induced
mitotic arrest in AML in vitro and prolongs survival in vivo
Dominik Schnerch1, Julia Schüler2, Marie Follo1, Julia Felthaus1, Dagmar Wider1,
Kathrin Klingner2, Christine Greil1, Justus Duyster1, Monika Engelhardt1, Ralph
Wäsch1
1

Department of Hematology, Oncology and Stem Cell Transplantation, Medical Center-University of Freiburg, Faculty of
Medicine, University of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany

2

Oncotest GmbH, Freiburg, Germany

Correspondence to: Ralph Wäsch, email: ralph.waesch@uniklinik-freiburg.de
Keywords: AML, antimitotic therapy, APC/C, mitotic slippage, proteasome inhibition
Received: December 22, 2016     Accepted: February 07, 2017     Published: February 18, 2017

ABSTRACT
Elderly and frail patients, diagnosed with acute myeloid leukemia (AML) and
ineligible to undergo intensive treatment, have a dismal prognosis. The small molecule
inhibitor volasertib induces a mitotic block via inhibition of polo-like kinase 1 and has
shown remarkable anti-leukemic activity when combined with low-dose cytarabine.
We have demonstrated that AML cells are highly vulnerable to cell death in mitosis yet
manage to escape a mitotic block through mitotic slippage by sustained proteasomedependent slow degradation of cyclin B. Therefore, we tested whether interfering
with mitotic slippage through proteasome inhibition arrests and kills AML cells more
efficiently during mitosis. We show that therapeutic doses of bortezomib block the
slow degradation of cyclin B during a volasertib-induced mitotic arrest in AML cell
lines and patient-derived primary AML cells. In a xenotransplant mouse model of
human AML, mice receiving volasertib in combination with bortezomib showed
superior disease control compared to mice receiving volasertib alone, highlighting
the potential therapeutic impact of this drug combination.

INTRODUCTION

ineligible to undergo intensive treatment and suffering
from aggressive diseases, such as AML. Targeting pololike kinase 1 (Plk1) is an efficient antimitotic treatment
approach [12] with BI6727 (volasertib) demonstrating
a striking effect in AML when combined with low-dose
cytarabine [13]. While antimitotic drugs play only a
negligible role in the treatment of myeloid neoplasias,
volasertib, when combined with low-dose cytarabine,
induced significantly better clinical outcomes in patients
suffering from AML as compared to patients receiving
low-dose cytarabine alone [13].
Mechanistically, antimitotic drugs induce a mitotic
delay which triggers induction of apoptosis during mitosis
[14]. Regular mitotic exit requires activity of the anaphasepromoting complex (APC/C) in order to allow transition
into G1 phase [15–18]. Specifically, proper alignment of
all chromosomes at the metaphase plate relieves APC/C
inhibition which then triggers the rapid degradation
of mitotic B-type cyclins by the ubiquitin-proteasome
system to promote mitotic exit [19]. Since antimitotic
drugs perturb the proper line-up and attachment of

As a result of continuous therapeutic advances in
recent decades, the prognosis of acute myeloid leukemia
(AML) has improved for young and healthy individuals
eligible for intensive therapy [1, 2]. In contrast, in most
cases elderly and more unfit patients diagnosed with AML
still face a dismal prognosis and often succumb to their
disease shortly after the time of diagnosis [2–4]. The use
of low-dose cytarabine [5]. hydroxyurea [5]. azacitidine
[6]. decitabine [7] or clofarabine [8] was shown to slow
down the progressive course of AML in frail patients.
More intensive approaches, which could induce more
sustained remissions even in elderly patients, are often
limited by the occurrence of life-threatening adverse
events [9].
Small molecule inhibitors are becoming more and
more important due to a remarkable power in disease
control, comparably low side effects and good tolerability
[10, 11]. The latter characteristics hence placed these
agents into focus for use in elderly and frail patients,
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

21153

Oncotarget

chromosomes at the metaphase plate, continued APC/C
inhibition and, in turn, a high abundance of mitotic cyclin
B arrest cells in mitosis [14]. However, cancer cells find
ways to escape from mitosis and get out of this vulnerable
stage. For example, in the presence of inhibited APC/C,
cells can still exhibit slow but permanent degradation of
cyclin B [20]. This allows the cells to slip out of mitosis
once cyclin B levels have fallen below a critical level,
which is insufficient to maintain mitotic arrest. It has been
observed that slow cyclin B degradation depends on the
proteasome and proteasome inhibition blocked slow cyclin
B degradation leading to robust mitotic arrest [20, 21].
Here we address the question of whether slow cyclin
B degradation, the main driver of mitotic slippage, can
be targeted by proteasome inhibition to consolidate a
mitotic block for AML therapy. Using a combination of
live-cell imaging at the single cell level and fluorescenceactivated cell sorting, we demonstrate that interference
with slow cyclin B degradation is feasible with therapeutic
proteasome inhibitor concentrations. We focused on the
combination of volasertib with the proteasome inhibitor
bortezomib to consolidate a mitotic block. Finally, we took
advantage of a xenotransplant mouse model of humanderived AML to test the feasibility of this combination
in vivo and provided evidence that the combined use of
volasertib and bortezomib may lead to superior disease
control and longer survival.

We next analyzed the kinetics of slow cyclin B
degradation during mitotic block. Therefore, we studied
the effects of Cdh1-kd and Cdc20-kd on slow cyclin B
degradation in cells, which were treated with spindle
disruptive doses of nocodazole. Direct interference with
the APC/C by kd of the Cdc27 core subunit served as a
positive control. All three kds reduced the extent of slow
cyclin B degradation during mitotic block (Figure 2A).
These results confirmed that Cdh1 and Cdc20 are both
involved in slow cyclin B degradation during mitosis and,
in consequence, support mitotic slippage.
To further define the relative contributions of
Cdh1 and Cdc20 to slow cyclin B degradation, we
immunopurified APC/C from extracts of Cdh1- and
Cdc20-kd cells which were arrested in a nocodazole block
and measured the extent of cyclin B ubiquitinylation. A
scheme for the experimental procedure of cell harvest and
WB indicating kd efficiency is shown in Figure 2B. While
Cdh1-kd reduced cyclin B ubiquitinylation in mitosis,
Cdc20-kd strongly diminished cyclin B ubiquitinylation.
These results demonstrate that both forms of the APC/C,
APC/CCdh1 and APC/CCdc20, are active in prometaphase, with
Cdc20 exerting a stronger effect than Cdh1 (Figure 2C).

RESULTS

Next we asked whether low doses of proteasome
inhibitors, at amounts resembling therapeutic levels in
patient serum (Supplementary Figure 1) [24], are sufficient
to interfere with slow cyclin B degradation.
First, we tested the effect of the experimental
proteasome inhibitor MG132 on cyclin B-SNAPexpressing U2Os cells (clone 11 as described in [21],
which were arrested in mitosis as a consequence of spindle
disruption caused by high doses of the microtubuledestabilizing agent nocodazole. We observed that low
doses of MG132 (0.5 µM) were sufficient to induce a
decrease in slow cyclin B degradation, while MG132 at a
dose of 1 µM was able to completely abolish slow cyclin
B degradation and mimic the degradation curve which was
seen following application of high dose MG132 (10 µM)
in our previous report (Figure 3A) [21].
Both vincristine, a microtubule-destabilizing agent,
and bortezomib, a proteasome inhibitor, are frequently
used in the clinic in therapeutic regimens to treat a wide
variety of cancers. Therefore, in the next experiment we
combined vincristine (applied at high doses of 50 ng/ml
to induce a stable mitotic block) and bortezomib.
Serum concentrations of bortezomib after application of
therapeutic doses usually range between 0.5 and 2 ng/ml
for up to 72 hours [24, 25]. Thus, we studied cyclin B
degradation kinetics in vincristine-arrested cells in
the presence of 0.5 ng/ml and 2 ng/ml bortezomib.

Therapeutic doses of the proteasome inhibitor
bortezomib reduce slow cyclin B degradation
during mitotic block in U2Os cells

APC/CCdh1 and APC/CCdc20 support slow cyclin B
degradation during a mitotic block in U2Os cells
How slow cyclin B degradation is mediated in
spindle assembly checkpoint (SAC)-arrested cells with
sequestered Cdc20 remains incompletely resolved to
date. There are reports arguing that this may be APC/Cdependent [22].
To further address this question, we analyzed the
effects of Cdh1- and Cdc20-knockdown (kd) on cyclin B
degradation using a SNAP-reporter system in unperturbed
single U2Os cells undergoing mitosis as described
previously [21]. To this end, we followed individual cells
by time-lapse microscopy. A set of ten time-lapse series,
representative of the tested conditions, is shown and
the derived BG430 fluorescence intensity traces, which
indicate the stability of cyclin B, are provided below
(Figure 1A).The averaged mean fluorescence intensity
curves indicate that Cdh1-kd and Cdc20-kd both reduce
the extent of cyclin B degradation during mitotic exit
(Figure 1B). In agreement with existing evidence [23].
Cdc20-kd had a stronger effect in mitosis while Cdh1-kd
cells exhibited higher levels of cyclin B later during G1
phase. In addition, we also observed an effect of Cdh1-kd
on cyclin B earlier in mitosis (Figure 1B).

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

21154

Oncotarget

Therapeutic doses of proteasome inhibitor
prolong a mitotic delay in myeloblastic Kasumi-1
cells

In agreement with our results seen in nocodazole and
MG132-treated cells, slow cyclin B degradation was also
reduced when vincristine and bortezomib were combined
with the effect significant when 2 ng/ml of bortezomib was
used (Figure 3B).
Since we also observed cyclin B slow degradation
during a mitotic delay when we applied the Plk1inhibitior volasertib (Supplementary Figure 2), we next
combined volasertib and bortezomib. Again, cyclin B slow
degradation was significantly reduced upon proteasome
inhibition using bortezomib at a concentration of 0.5 and
2  ng/ml in volasertib-treated cells undergoing mitotic
delay (Figure 3C).
Taken together, these data provide evidence that
the combined use of therapeutic doses of the proteasome
inhibitor bortezomib during antimitotic treatment blocks
slow cyclin B degradation in vitro to support a robust
mitotic arrest.

We recently reported that the AML cell line
Kasumi-1 underwent only a transient mitotic delay
upon treatment with spindle poison [26]. In light of
this inherent limitation in inducing a robust mitotic
block, we considered Kasumi-1 cells to be an ideal tool
to test the combination of an antimitotic agent with a
proteasome inhibitor. Moreover, bortezomib has already
shown considerable antileukemic activity, especially in
myelomonocytic and FLT3-mutant leukemias [27–29].
To this end, Kasumi-1 cells stably expressing
H2B-mCherry as a chromatin marker were followed via
live-cell imaging and the time between nuclear envelope
breakdown (NEBD) and chromosomal segregation was
quantified. When challenged with 4 ng/ml vincristine, a

Figure 1: Effect of Cdh1- and Cdc20-kd on cyclin B degradation kinetics in unperturbed single cells. (A) Unperturbed

BG430-stained CYS cells were followed by live-cell imaging at the single cell level. Time-lapse series depict chromatin (in red) and
abundance of BG430-bound cyclin B-YFP-SNAP protein (in blue) in individual CYS cells during mitosis (see upper panels). Cyclin
B-YFP-SNAP degradation kinetics as derived from the shown n = 10 individual CYS cells are presented in the diagrams below the timelapse series. Time-lapse series and degradation curves to the left are derived from control cells. Time-lapse series and degradation curves
in the center are derived from CYS cells following Cdh1-kd with a calculated kd efficiency of 97.02%. Time-lapse series and degradation
curves to the right are derived from CYS cells following Cdc20-kd with a calculated kd efficiency of 98.54%. (B) The diagram shows
averaged cyclin B degradation curves (data are derived from the cells shown in (A)) of control cells (black line), Cdh1-kd cells (red line)
and Cdc20-kd cells (blue line).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

21155

Oncotarget

concentration seen in patient serum following application
of a therapeutic dose of 2 mg i.v. [30], Kasumi-1 cells
exhibited a mitotic delay, yet still managed to segregate
their chromosomes (Figure 4A, upper panel). This mitotic
delay was significantly prolonged by approximately 1.5fold when we used vincristine in combination with the
proteasome inhibitor bortezomib at the therapeutic dose
of 2 ng/ml (Figure 4A lower panel and Figure 4B).

proteasome inhibitor, we studied the extent to which
Kasumi-1 and primary patient-derived AML cells
underwent a G2/M block (dark grey) or cell death (apoptosis
- intermediate grey, necrosis -light grey) (Figure 5A).
We noted that the combined use of vincristine and
bortezomib at therapeutic doses significantly increased the
percentage of cells in the G2/M fraction of the cell cycle
(Figure 5A). When we used volasertib and bortezomib in
combination, not only was the accumulation of cells in
G2/M significantly enhanced, but also the fraction of cells
undergoing apoptosis (Figure 5B). Of note, an enhanced
accumulation in mitosis was also observed when the
antimitotic agent nocodazole was combined with low
doses of the proteasome inhibitor MG132 (Supplementary
Figure 3A), confirming that our observations are not
bortezomib-specific effects, but also reproducible with
different proteasome inhibitors.

Therapeutic doses of proteasome inhibitor
increased the efficacy of antimitotic treatments
in Kasumi-1 cells and primary patient-derived
AML blasts
To assess the response of AML cells to the
combination of an antimitotic agent combined with a

Figure 2: Slow degradation of cyclin B during a mitotic block is influenced by the activating APC/C subunits Cdc20 and
Cdh1. (A) Cyclin B-YFP-SNAP degradation kinetics in U2Os cells during a nocodazole-induced mitotic block are shown. Degradation

kinetics at the single cell level in the presence of a Cdc27-kd (squares filled in green) compared to control cells (rhombs filled in blue)
are shown in the upper diagram. Degradation kinetics in the center reveal the effect of a Cdh1 knockdown (squares filled in green) while
degradation kinetics in the lower diagram show the difference between Cdc20-kd cells (green squares) and control cells (blue diamonds).
Calculated kd efficiencies are listed in the lower right part of each diagram. The control degradation curves in the upper and center diagram
are identical since the data for the Cdc27-kd-, Cdh1-kd- and control curves are derived from the same experiment. * indicates p < 0.05 at the
indicated time point. (B) The scheme in the upper left indicates the processing of cells prior to harvest for the in vitro ubiquitination assay.
Western Blot below the scheme indicates the efficacy of the Cdh1- and Cdc20-kd. (C) Autoradiogram to the lower right shows the abundance
of ubiquitylated cyclin B at the indicated time points following incubation with APC/C, which was immunopurified from synchronized kd
and control cells during mitotic block. Calculated kd efficiencies (based on the Western Blot above) are shown below the autoradiogram.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

21156

Oncotarget

Figure 3: Therapeutic doses of bortezomib reduces slow cyclin B degradation during a mitotic block. Cyclin B degradation
slopes as determined by live-cell imaging of individual U2Os cyclin B-SNAP clone 11 cells during a mitotic block are shown. (A) U2Os
cyclin B-SNAP reporter cells were treated with 200 ng/ml nocodazole to induce a stable mitotic block and MG132 at 0 µM (white triangles),
0.5 µM (grey squares) and 1 µM (black diamonds). (B) U2Os cyclin B-SNAP reporter cells were treated with 50 ng/ml vincristine to induce
a stable mitotic block and bortezomib at 0 ng/ml (white triangles), 0.5 ng/ml (grey squares) and 2 ng/ml (black diamonds). (C) U2Os cyclin
B-SNAP reporter cells were treated with 50 nM volasertib to induce a stable mitotic block and bortezomib at 0 ng/ml (white triangles), 0.5 ng/ml
(grey squares) and 2 ng/ml (black diamonds). Degradation slopes represent mean values derived from 3 individual representative cells
undergoing a mitotic block. *p < 0.05, at t = 400 min.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

21157

Oncotarget

We next asked the question, whether a further
increase of the doses of proteasome inhibitors led to
more profound mitotic delay in Kasumi-1 cells. Quite
interestingly, the accumulation of Kasumi-1 cells in G2M
upon exposure to higher doses of MG132 and bortezomib
was lower in nocodazole-, vincristine- and volasertibtreated cells (Supplementary Figure 3A–3C) lending
support to the hypothesis that a higher number of cells
was arrested before entering mitosis.
To test the combined use of antimitotic agents and
a proteasome inhibitor at therapeutic doses in primary
patient-derived AML cells, we stimulated primary AML
blasts from three different patients with cytokines to grow
them in culture, as recently described [26]. Cells were
pre-cultured for 72 hours and challenged with the same
treatment combinations as Kasumi-1 cells for 24 hours.
Treatment with volasertib already had a marked effect on
G2/M arrest (Figure 5C). Importantly, however, combining
volasertib with 2 ng/ml bortezomib led to a further
increase in the proportion of cells accumulating in G2/M
(Figure  5C). Since overexpression of cyclin B directly
boosted the accumulation of volasertib-treated cells in
G2/M, bortezomib-induced stabilization of cyclin B may
cause the increased accumulation in G2/M (Supplementary
Figure 4). In contrast, 10nM cytarabine, mimicking
concentrations seen with low-dose cytarabine treatment,
and bortezomib, given as a monotherapy, only induced
marginal effects on accumulation in G2/M (Figure 5C).

cell lines [26]. A reduction in Mcl-1 expression levels
by targeted degradation is a trigger of cell death during
mitotic block [31]. Therefore, we asked whether low
Mcl-1 expression levels in AML cells make these cells
a priori more vulnerable to antimitotic treatment when
the application of an antimitotic agent and a proteasome
inhibitor are combined. Since Mcl1 abundance in mitotic
cells is controlled by proteasome-dependent degradation,
treatment with a proteasome inhibitor might also lead to
stabilization of Mcl1 protein levels. This could in turn lead
to resistance to cell death during mitosis in AML cells.
To address this question we engineered a Kasumi-1
cell line which allowed overexpression of Mcl1 following
induction by doxycycline. Levels of Mcl1 overexpression,
achieved in Kasumi-1 cells after three days of induction,
were reminiscent of the Mcl1 expression levels seen in
lymphoblastic DG75 cells (Figure 6A). Remarkably,
overexpression of Mcl1 caused an approximately 4-fold
decrease in the percentage of subG1 cells at day 3 under all
tested treatment conditions (Figure 6A–6D). In contrast, the
higher Mcl-1 expression levels observed following 24 hours
of proteasome inhibition (Figure 6C) were poor predictors
of cell fate. While Kasumi-1 cells treated with bortezomib
showed a profound stabilization of Mcl1 expression levels,
the subG1 fractions were even higher (Figure 6B and 6D).
However, the subG1 fraction decreased in a time-dependent
manner upon Mcl1 overexpression, both with and without
bortezomib (Figure 6A–6D).

Overexpression but not bortezomib-induced
stabilization of Mcl-1 reduced the efficacy of
antimitotic treatment and the extent of leukemia
cell death

Combined administration of a proteasome
inhibitor with volasertib leads to prolonged
survival in vivo
We then analyzed whether the combination of
bortezomib and volasertib also improves the response
in vivo. In these experiments, Kasumi-1 cells were
transplanted into recipient mice. Following engraftment

We recently demonstrated that expression levels
of the antiapoptotic regulator Mcl-1 are significantly
decreased in AML cell lines as compared to lymphoblastic

Figure 4: Concomitant application of bortezomib prolongs a vincristine-induced mitotic delay in Kasumi-1 cells. (A)

Time series of representative H2B-mCherry-expressing Kasumi-1 cells studied by live-cell imaging during a mitotic delay in the presence
of vincristine (upper time-lapse series) and vincristine combined with bortezomib (lower time-lapse series). (B) Quantification of the time
intervals from NEBD until anaphase in individual Kasumi-1 cells (n = 13) undergoing treatment with vincristine or vincristine combined
with bortezomib. *p < 0.05.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

21158

Oncotarget

Figure 5: Kasumi-1 and primary patient-derived AML cells respond more efficiently to antimitotic therapy upon
addition of bortezomib. (A, B) Response of Kasumi-1 cells to antimitotic therapy, proteasome inhibition and antimitotic therapy with

concomitant proteasome inhibition was assessed by flow cytometry. Percentage of increase in G2/M phase (dark grey), apoptosis (light
grey) and necrotic cells (white) as compared to controls. Values shown represent the mean +/− standard deviation as determined from
n = 3 independent experiments. (C) Response of cytokine-stimulated primary patient-derived AML populations to low dose cytarabine,
volasertib, bortezomib and volasertib with concomitant application of bortezomib was assessed by flow cytometry. Shown data are derived
from primary cell populations from n = 3 different AML patients. Biological characteristics are listed in the upper part of the histogram.
Data shown represent the mean of absolute percentages +/− standard deviation. Color coding of the bars was done as described in A,
B.*p < 0.05, **p < 0.01.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

21159

Oncotarget

and development of overt leukemic disease, the mice were
randomized to receive either bortezomib or volasertib
alone, the combination of bortezomib and volasertib, or
no treatment.
While mice in the control and in the bortezomib
arms died early due to progressive disease (median
survival 13 and 15.5 days, respectively), mice receiving
volasertib monotherapy exhibited longer survival (median
survival 24 days) (Figure 7A and 7B). However, the mice
treated with the bortezomib/volasertib combination had
the longest survival times: Of note, one mouse in the
combination group died as early as the untreated mice for

unknown reasons (when excluding the early death median
survival was 30 days). In further support of these results,
we also noted an improved disease control as determined
by the abundance of leukemia cells in the peripheral blood
in a pioneering experiment done in a Molm13-based
xenotransplant model (Supplementary Figure 5).

DISCUSSION
Targeting mitosis is an effective therapeutic
approach for a wide variety of cancers. While classic
antimitotic drugs, such as vinca alkaloids and taxanes,

Figure 6: Bortezomib-induced stabilization of Mcl-1 does not protect Kasumi-1 cells from therapy-induced cell
death. (A) Western Blot illustrating the protein expression levels of Mcl1 in lymphoblastic DG-75 cells, myeloblastic Kasumi-1 cells
and Mcl1-inducible Kasumi-1 cells +/− induction of Mcl1 expression by doxycycline. (B) Diagram indicating the percentage of cells
undergoing mitotic delay (G2/M phase; blue) and dead cells (subG1; red) in DG75 cells and Mcl1-inducible Kasumi-1 cells. (C) Western
Blot illustrating the expression levels of Mcl1 in Mcl-1-inducible Kasumi-1 cells. Note that the Western Blot to the left is the same one
as shown in (A), except that the bands for DG-75 and Kasumi-1 wild type cells are not shown. (D) Diagrams illustrate the extent of cell
death of Mcl1-inducible Kasumi-1 cells as determined by the percentage of subG1 events upon induction of Mcl1 overexpression for the
indicated times and in the presence of the indicated drug treatments.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

21160

Oncotarget

have proven their profound antimitotic activity for
decades, a new generation of antimitotic drugs has
been developed in recent years. These small molecule
inhibitors target key enzymes which are critical for
mitotic progression, such as polo-like kinase or kinesin
motor proteins. These inhibitors induce a strong mitotic
delay, often with lower side effects than the classic drugs.
However, mitotic slippage, which is the main limiting
factor in antimitotic therapy, allowing cells to escape from
a mitotic block, persists. In this study we addressed the
question as to whether slow cyclin B degradation, the
driver of mitotic slippage, can be targeted by proteasome
inhibition to consolidate a mitotic block for AML therapy
using therapeutic doses.
We observed additive effects when an antimitotic
drug was combined with a proteasome inhibitor. The
most striking effects were seen when the Plk1-inhibitor
volasertib was combined with the proteasome inhibitor
bortezomib. These additive effects were not restricted
to cell lines but were also seen in primary patientderived AML cells during cytokine-driven expansion in
tissue culture. In an in vivo setting, the combined use of
volasertib and bortezomib led to superior disease control
and longer survival before leukemia-associated death
compared to administration of volasertib alone.
A prerequisite for antimitotic therapy to work
efficiently is that cells have to progress to mitosis
where they are then supposed to die. However, most
cell cycle regulators are targeted for degradation by the
proteasome. For this reason, we considered the possibility
that proteasome inhibition might also block cells at
checkpoints outside of mitosis. While we cannot exclude
that low fractions of cells are arrested at checkpoints in
the G1-, S- and G2-phases, there are several arguments
which led us to conclude that the administration of low

dose bortezomib (at 2 ng/ml) could boost the accumulation
of cells primarily in mitosis:
First, Kasumi-1 cells treated with a combination
of volasertib and bortezomib were arrested for a longer
time in mitosis compared to cells that were treated with
volasertib alone. Notably, different reports have shown
that bortezomib leads to G2/M arrest and synergistic
effects with mitotic inhibitors in myeloid cells [32, 33].
However, we demonstrate here that bortezomib indeed
acts during mitosis by using live-cell imaging. In this
way, we were able to monitor chromatin behavior during
mitosis in Kasumi-1 cells expressing fluorescent proteintagged histones and measured the time spent in mitosis,
and observed a striking prolongation in the length of time
between chromatin condensation and anaphase onset.
Second, we demonstrated that therapeutic doses of
bortezomib (2 ng/ml) are sufficient to block slow cyclin
B degradation.
Third, we noted that volasertib induced a more
profound mitotic delay when we counteracted slow cyclin
B degradation by induced overexpression of cyclin B.
Consistently, a longer mitotic delay upon overexpression
of cyclin B has also been seen by others, [34] while the
fact that we observe similar responses in volasertib-treated
cells upon addition of bortezomib as compared to the
overexpression of cyclin B provides strong arguments to
claim that the combination of volasertib and bortezomib
blocks cells more efficiently in mitosis due to interference
with the mitotic degradation of cyclin B.
Moreover, we emphasize that the most striking
additive effects were seen with low doses of bortezomib.
Higher doses of bortezomib downsized the additive effects,
lending support to the notion that a relevant number of
cells became arrested at checkpoint before mitosis. Higher
doses of bortezomib might therefore protect cells from the

Figure 7: Bortezomib in combination with volasertib induces improved disease control in a xenotransplant mouse
model of human AML. (A) Kaplan Meier curves as determined for xenotransplant mice bearing human Kasumi-1-derived AML upon

treatment as indicated in the upper right. n = 4 mice per cohort. (B) Diagram shows median survival time until leukemia-associated
mortality. *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

21161

Oncotarget

collaborative action of both drugs in mitosis. Importantly,
this finding represents a nice proof of principle that, in
particular situations, lower drug concentrations exert more
powerful effects while saving dose-dependent side effects.
Mcl1 is a prominent antiapoptotic factor in mitosis
and shows reduced expression in AML [26]. Since
expression levels of Mcl1 are regulated by proteasomedependent degradation [31], we considered the possibility
that bortezomib-induced stabilization of Mcl-1 might
interfere with induction of cell death during antimitotic
therapy in AML. However, bortezomib has been shown to
induce caspase-dependent cleavage of Mcl1, which turns
wild-type Mcl1 into a Mcl1-derivative with proapoptotic
function [35]. Following bortezomib treatment we could
indeed observe a faint band below that of wild-type Mcl1.
However, due to the low overall abundance of wild-type
Mcl1 in Kasumi-1 cells, this faint band only became
apparent when cells overexpressing excessive amounts
of wild-type Mcl-1 were treated with bortezomib. A
bortezomib-specific conversion of Mcl-1 could explain
our observation that bortezomib-induced stabilization had
no apparent negative influence on therapeutic efficacy.
Overexpression of wild-type antiapoptotic Mcl1, instead,
caused a profound decrease in the number of dead cells
over time. Our data therefore favor the interpretation that
bortezomib-induced stabilization of antiapoptotic Mcl1 is
counteracted by a concomitant (also bortezomib-induced)
modification into a proapoptotic derivative, which keeps
AML cells susceptible to therapy.
The combination of bortezomib with antimitotic
agents offers a promising perspective to increase the
efficacy of antimitotic therapy by targeting mitotic
slippage. However, killing cancer cells more efficiently
only pays off if the treatment spares healthy cells of
an organism in order to allow recovery from disease.
Moreover, combining agents might result in an
amplification of specific side effects. Bortezomib is
routinely used in the treatment of multiple myeloma,
and peripheral neuropathy is a dose-limiting toxicity in
bortezomib treatment [36]. Since vincristine is known
to cause significant neuropathy [37], this drug is not an
appropriate candidate for combination with bortezomib.
Major side effects seen in patients treated with volasertib
were reversible hematological toxicities such as anemia
and neutropenia [38], while neuropathy was not seen.
Therefore, volasertib is a suitable combination partner for
bortezomib.
In our xenotransplant mouse model of human AML,
we observed that mice treated with a combination of
volasertib and bortezomib, showed longer survival before
leukemia-associated death. However, one animal died
fairly early during therapy, raising the possibility that it
might have succumbed to an enhanced early toxicity of
the drug combination. Since all animals in the volasertib
mono arm survived the period of treatment, we consider
it unlikely that the animal succumbed to a fulminant
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

progression of the transplanted AML. The three remaining
animals in the combination arm survived until days 28, 31
and 36, while all animals in the volasertib mono arm died
at or before day 28.
In summary, based on the spectra of side effects,
volasertib and bortezomib are promising combination
partners, and the combined use of both agents at adequate
doses shows superior disease control in AML in vitro and
in vivo.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Generation of expression constructs
The double-chimeric fusion protein pLNCX2
cyclin B mut5 YFP SNAP was established based
on the pLNCX2 Cyclin B mut5 SNAP construct as
described elsewhere [39]. pMXs H2B mCherry IRES
Blasticidin was based on pH2B mCherry IRES neo3
(kindly provided by Daniel Gerlich). H2B mCherry was
PCR-amplified using AAAAAAAGATCTGCCACCA
TGCCAGAGCCAGCGAAGTC as a sense primer and
AAAAAACTCGAGTTACTTGTACAGCTCGTCCA as
a reverse primer with pH2B mCherry IRES puro2 as a
template. The PCR product was processed using a BglII/
XhoI digest and introduced into the linearized pMXs IRES
Blasticidin backbone (Cell Biolabs), which was linearized
using a BamHI/XhoI digest.
For inducible overexpression of Mcl-1 the coding
sequence was PCR-amplified from Origene cDNA clone
SC315538 (NM_021960) using AAAAAAGGATCCATG
TTTGGCCTCAAAAGAAACG as a sense primer and
AAAAAAACGCGTCTATCTTATTAGATATGCCAAAC
as a reverse primer. The PCR product was processed
using a NotI/MluI digest and introduced into the NotI/
MluI-linearized pRetroX tightPur backbone (Clontech).
Kasumi-1 cells allowing inducible overexpression of Mcl1 were established as described previously [26].

Lentivirus-based knockdown plasmids
For knockdown against Cdh1 we took advantage
of the target sequence GGATTAACGAGAATGAGAA.
For knockdown against Cdc20 we took advantage of
the target sequences GCAGAAACGGCTTCGAAAT
and AGCAGCAGAAACGGCTTCG. Oligonucleotides
containing the target sequence, the complementary sequence,
a loop and linker sequences, were designed as previously
described [40] and ligated into pLentiLox 3.7 (pLL).

Lenti- and retroviral transduction
For the generation of lentivirus-containing cell
supernatant, 293T cells were transfected with the pLL
knockdown vector and packaging plasmids (pMDLg/
pRRE, pRSV-Rev, pMD.G). 293T cells were incubated for
21162

Oncotarget

10 hours in the presence of calcium phosphate-precipitated
plasmid DNA and 20 µM chloroquine. Virus-containing
supernatant was collected after 24 and 48 hours. For
transduction U2Os cells were incubated in 4 ml of viruscontaining supernatant supplemented with 2 ml of fresh
normal growth medium and 5 µg/ml hexadimethrine
bromide. For generation of retrovirus-containing cell
supernatant Phoenix ampho cells were transfected with
calcium phosphate-precipitated plasmid DNA in the
presence of 20 µM chloroquine. All of the subsequent
procedures were conducted as described for the lentiviral
transduction.

by propidium iodide and annexin staining and analyzed
using CellQuest (Becton Dickinson) (see below).

Mitotic block release and synchronization
experiments
To study proteolysis during a mitotic block
and mitotic exit, U2Os cells were presynchronized in
early S-phase for 18 hours using thymidine at a final
concentration of 2 mM in the growth medium. Cells were
washed with PBS, released in the presence of 200 ng/mL
nocodazole, and cultured for another 18 hours. The mitotic
cell fraction was collected by mitotic shake off, washed
several times, plated in normal growth medium and
collected at the indicated time points.

Cell culture and antibiotic selection
U2Os cells were a gift from Martin Trepel
(Augsburg). U2Os cells expressing Histone H2BmCherry and the double chimeric fusion protein cyclin
B mut5 YFP SNAP (CYS cells) were grown in complete
DMEM medium (supplemented with 10% FCS, penicillin/
streptomycin, sodium pyruvate, L-glutamine) in the
presence of 10 µg/ml blasticidin and 800 µg/ml geneticin
as previously described [39]. Monoclonal clone 11 cells
were described elsewhere [21] and grown in complete
DMEM medium in the presence of puromycin 0.5 µg/ml,
geneticin 800µg/ml and blasticidin 30 µg/ml.
For titration experiments addressing the biological
effects of different concentrations of antimitotic agents
and proteasome inhibitors, U2Os cells were seeded onto
6-well plates at a concentration of 0.5 × 106 per well
and grown for 24 h before challenge with substances at
different concentrations.
Kasumi-1 cells (a gift from Michael Lübbert,
Freiburg) were grown in complete RPMI1640 medium
supplemented with 20% FCS, penicillin/streptomycin,
sodium pyruvate, and L-glutamine. Mcl-1-inducible
Kasumi-1 cells were grown in the above-mentioned
complete medium in the presence of 2 µg/ml puromycin
and 2400 µg/ml geneticin (as described elsewhere [26]).
Kasumi-1 cells expressing H2B mCherry were grown in
the presence of 5 µg/ml blasticidin.
The sensitivity of Kasumi-1 cells was tested
on 6-well plates. Kasumi-1 cells were seeded at a
concentration of 1.2 × 106 per well in 4 ml complete RPMI
growth medium and grown for the indicated times under
different conditions.
Primary AML cells were isolated after written
informed consent from patients presenting with diagnosis
of AML at Freiburg University Medical Center. Primary
AML cells were grown in RPMI medium supplemented
with 20% FCS, 100 ng/ml SCF, 50 ng/ml Flt3, 50 ng/ml
TPO, 50 ng/ml IL-3, 50 ng/ml IL-6 and 100 ng/ml G-CSF
for 3 days. Vital primary AML cells were then seeded
onto 6-well plates (as described for Kasumi-1 cells) and
challenged with antimitotic agents and/or proteasome
inhibitors. Cell cycle kinetics were assessed after 24 hours
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Flow cytometry
Cell cycle distribution was assessed by DNA
staining with propidium iodide and DNA content was
measured based on fluorescence intensity using a FACS
Calibur (Becton Dickinson). Measurements were done
using CellQuest software (Becton Dickinson).
The extent to which cells induced apoptosis and
finally died was measured using an approach facilitating
the distinction between early apoptosis, late apoptosis
and necrosis (Annexin V FITC Apoptosis Detection Kit,
Calbiochem).

Western blotting
Western blot analyses were performed as previously
described [40] using anti-cyclin (Santa Cruz Biotechnology),
anti-Cdc27 (MBL International Corporation), anti-Cdc20
(Santa Cruz Biotechnology) anti-Cdh1 (Calbiochem), antiActin (Sigma-Aldrich), and anti-alpha-Tubulin (SigmaAldrich) as primary antibodies. The horseradish-peroxidaseconjugated secondary antibodies used were anti-rabbit
(Amersham Biosciences) and anti-mouse (Sigma-Aldrich).
Densitometric quantification was performed using ImageJ.

In vitro ubiquitination
In vitro ubiquitination experiments were done as
described previously [26]. In essence, the APC/C was
immunopurified from U2Os cells which were collected
by mitotic shake-off from a mitotic block using an antiCdc27 antibody (Sigma-Aldrich) and Protein G-agarose.
Ubiquitination reactions were performed in 40 mM Tris
pH7.6, 0.5 mM DTT, 5 mM MgCl, 1 mM ATP, 1.5 µM
ubiquitin aldehyde, 200 nM okadaic acid, 125 nM UBE1
(Boston Biochem), and 1 µM UbcH10 (Boston Biochem).
Cyclin B was transcribed/translated in vitro (TNT Quick
Coupled Transcription/Translation Kit, Promega) in
the presence of S35-labelled methionine and used as a
substrate.
21163

Oncotarget

Live-cell imaging

determined prior to treatment start by flow cytometry. Only
mice with > 5% of human leukemic cells in their PB were
allocated to the different treatment groups. Randomization
was performed on the first day of treatment. Before
their allocation to an experimental group, animals were
weighed and infiltration of human leukemic cells in the
murine blood was determined as described above. Based
on the body weight and the infiltration rate the animals
were stratified into the different groups aiming for a
comparable median group body weight and percentage of
human leukemic cells. The investigator was not blinded
to the group allocation during the experiment nor when
assessing the outcome. Overall survival was used as
a read-out for tumor load and antitumoral activity. All
studies were approved by the regional Committee on the
Ethics of Animal Experiments (G-12/86).

CYS cells (specified above) were seeded onto
8-well microscopy chambers (Ibidi, 80826 or 80822) at
25.000 or 50.000 per well and grown for 24 or 48 hours
under standard cell culture conditions (37°C, 5% CO2,
100% air humidity). BG 430 labeling was done as
described previously [39]. In brief, cells were stained in
8-well microscopy chambers for 25 minutes in 200 µL
of prewarmed phenol red-free DMEM supplemented
with 10% fetal bovine serum, penicillin/streptomycin,
sodium pyruvate and 1 µL BG 430 stock solution (1 mM
in DMSO) (New England Biolabs), resulting in a final
labeling concentration of 5 µM BG 430. After staining,
the samples underwent several rounds of washing in
DMEMGFP medium (Evrogen) supplemented with 10%
fetal bovine serum and L-glutamine. Image acquisition
was performed using an Olympus IX-81 inverse
microscope with climate chamber, using a UPLSAPO 20×
objective (N.A. 0.75) and the Cell^R (v.3.3) or Scan^R
Acquisition softwares (v.2.2.09). The filter set used for the
analysis of BG 430 was the CFP/YFP dual bandpass filter
set from Olympus. Picture acquisition was repeated every
6 or 8 minutes under standard climate chamber conditions
(37°C, 5% CO2, 60% air humidity). Read-outs were
performed using the Scan^R Analysis software (v.1.2.0.6)
allowing the export of image stacks from a desired cell
as well as the specific mean fluorescence intensity values.
Quantification of slow degradation in the presence
of different doses of bortezomib was done in clone 11 cells
(described elsewhere [21]). Pulse chase labeling of cyclin
B-SNAP with TMR Star and measurement of fluorescence
intensity was done as described previously [21]. During
analysis (picture acquisition every 4 minutes) the cells
were exposed to a combination of an agent which blocks
mitosis (nocodazole, vincristine, volasertib (BI6727)) and
a proteasome inhibitor (MG-132 in a nocodazole block or
bortezomib in a mitotic block induced by vincristine or
volasertib).
Myeloblastic Kasumi-1 cells were seeded onto
8-well microscope chambers that were coated with
fibrinogen (Ibidi, 80823) at a concentration of 30,000 and
60,000 cells per well 24 hours prior to start of the imaging
experiment.

Statistical analysis
For analysis of in vivo experiments student’s t-test,
two-tailed, 1-way ANOVA and log rank test were used to
calculate all reported p-values. Descriptive analyses were
assessed whenever appropriate and graphs (Kaplan Meier
plots) were obtained using GraphPrism software (www.
graphpad.com).
For analysis of live-cell imaging data, raw data
of TMR Star fluorescence intensities were exported
to Microsoft Excel 2002 for further calculation. For
assessment of degradation slopes during a mitotic arrest,
raw fluorescence intensity data from three representative
mitoses were exported and the mean fluorescence intensity
values were calculated. Raw data were normalized to
maximum fluorescence intensity. Statistical significance
was tested using a two-tailed student’s t-test and statistical
significance was assumed in case of p-values < 0.05.
For statistical analysis of flow cytometry data the
mean +/− standard deviation were calculated from the
values derived from three independent experiments. Data
are either shown as a difference in percentage compared
to control cells or as absolute percentages. Statistical
significance was tested using a two-tailed student’s t-test
and statistical significance was assumed for p-values < 0.05.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST

Xenotransplantation experiments

The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

NOD/Shi-scid/IL-2Rγnull) (NOG) mice were
obtained from Taconic, Denmark and kept under microisolators in barrier conditions. At 6–8 weeks of age, the
mice were injected intravenously with 1 × 106 Kasumi-1
and Molm-13 cells (Kasumi-1 cells were a gift from
Michael Lübbert; Molm-13 cells were purchased from
DSMZ, Braunschweig). Treatment was started 29
days after tumor cell injection. Engraftment of human
hematopoietic cells in murine peripheral blood (PB) was
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Authors’ contributions
DS designed, performed and interpreted
experiments, wrote manuscript. JS designed, performed
and interpreted experiments. MF designed and interpreted
experiments, wrote manuscript. JF performed and
interpreted experiments. DW performed and interpreted
experiments. KK performed and interpreted experiments.
21164

Oncotarget

CG interpreted experiments. JD interpreted experiments.
ME designed and interpreted experiments. RW designed
and interpreted experiments, wrote the manuscript.

13.	 Döhner H, Lübbert M, Fiedler W, Fouillard L, Haaland A,
Brandwein JM, Lepretre S, Reman O, Turlure P, Ottmann OG,
Müller-Tidow C, Krämer A, Raffoux E, et al. Randomized,
phase 2 trial of low-dose cytarabine with or without volasertib
in AML patients not suitable for induction therapy. Blood.
2014; 124:1426–1433.

REFERENCES
  1.	 Dombret H, Gardin C. An update of current treatments for
adult acute myeloid leukemia. Blood. 2016; 127:53–61.

14.	 Gascoigne KE, Taylor SS. How do anti-mitotic drugs kill
cancer cells? J Cell Sci. 2009; 122:2579–2585.

  2.	 Burnett A, Wetzler M, Löwenberg B. Therapeutic advances
in acute myeloid leukemia. J Clin Oncol. 2011; 29:487–494.

15.	 Wäsch R, Engelbert D. Anaphase-promoting complexdependent proteolysis of cell cycle regulators and genomic
instability of cancer cells. Oncogene. 2005; 24:1–10.

  3.	 Ossenkoppele G, Löwenberg B. How I treat the older patient
with acute myeloid leukemia. Blood. 2015; 125:767–774.

16.	 Wäsch R, Cross FR. APC-dependent proteolysis of the
mitotic cyclin Clb2 is essential for mitotic exit. Nature.
2002; 418:556–562.

  4.	 Krug U, Büchner T, Berdel WE, Müller-Tidow C. The
treatment of elderly patients with acute myeloid leukemia.
Dtsch Arztebl Int. 2011; 108:863–870.

17.	 Potapova TA, Daum JR, Pittman BD, Hudson JR, Jones TN,
Satinover DL, Stukenberg PT, Gorbsky GJ. The reversibility
of mitotic exit in vertebrate cells. Nature. 2006; 440:954–958.

  5.	 Burnett AK, Milligan D, Prentice AG, Goldstone AH,
McMullin MF, Hills RK, Wheatley K. A comparison of
low-dose cytarabine and hydroxyurea with or without alltrans retinoic acid for acute myeloid leukemia and high-risk
myelodysplastic syndrome in patients not considered fit for
intensive treatment. Cancer. 2007; 109:1114–1124.

18.	 Clute P, Pines J. Temporal and spatial control of cyclin B1
destruction in metaphase. Nat Cell Biol. 1999; 1:82–87.
19.	 Musacchio A, Salmon ED. The spindle-assembly checkpoint
in space and time. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2007; 8:379–393.

  6.	 Fenaux P, Mufti GJ, Hellström-Lindberg E, Santini V,
Gattermann N, Germing U, Sanz G, List AF, Gore S,
Seymour JF, Dombret H, Backstrom J, Zimmerman L,
et al. Azacitidine prolongs overall survival compared with
conventional care regimens in elderly patients with low
bone marrow blast count acute myeloid leukemia. J Clin
Oncol. 2010; 28:562–569.

20.	 Brito DA, Rieder CL. Mitotic checkpoint slippage in
humans occurs via cyclin B destruction in the presence of
an active checkpoint. Curr Biol. 2006; 16:1194–1200.

  7.	 Lübbert M, Rüter BH, Claus R, Schmoor C, Schmid  M,
Germing U, Kuendgen A, Rethwisch V, Ganser A,
Platzbecker  U, Galm O, Brugger W, Heil G, et al. A
multicenter phase II trial of decitabine as first-line treatment
for older patients with acute myeloid leukemia judged unfit for
induction chemotherapy. Haematologica. 2012; 97:393–401.

22.	 Lee J, Kim JA, Margolis RL, Fotedar R. Substrate
degradation by the anaphase promoting complex occurs
during mitotic slippage. Cell Cycle. 2010; 9:1792–1801.

21.	 Schnerch D, Follo M, Krohs J, Felthaus J, Engelhardt M,
Wäsch R. Monitoring APC/C activity in the presence of
chromosomal misalignment in unperturbed cell populations.
Cell Cycle. 2012; 11:310–321.

23.	 Pines J. Cubism and the cell cycle: the many faces of the
APC/C. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2011; 12:427–438.
24.	 Moreau P, Pylypenko H, Grosicki S, Karamanesht I,
Leleu X, Grishunina M, Rekhtman G, Masliak Z, Robak T,
Shubina A, Arnulf B, Kropff M, Cavet J, et al. Subcutaneous
versus intravenous administration of bortezomib in patients
with relapsed multiple myeloma: a randomised, phase 3,
non-inferiority study. Lancet Oncol. 2011; 12:431–440.

  8.	 Burnett AK, Russell NH, Hunter AE, Milligan D,
Knapper  S, Wheatley K, Yin J, McMullin MF, Ali S,
Bowen D, Hills RK. Clofarabine doubles the response rate
in older patients with acute myeloid leukemia but does not
improve survival. Blood. 2013; 122:1384–1394.
  9.	 Krug U, Röllig C, Koschmieder A, Heinecke A,
Sauerland MC, Schaich M, Thiede C, Kramer M, Braess J,
Spiekermann K, Haferlach T, Haferlach C, Koschmieder S,
et al. Complete remission and early death after intensive
chemotherapy in patients aged 60 years or older with acute
myeloid leukaemia: a web-based application for prediction
of outcomes. Lancet. 2010; 376:2000–2008.

25.	 Attar EC, De Angelo DJ, Supko JG, D’Amato F, Zahrieh D,
Sirulnik A, Wadleigh M, Ballen KK, McAfee S, Miller KB,
Levine J, Galinsky I, Trehu EG, et al. Phase I and
pharmacokinetic study of bortezomib in combination with
idarubicin and cytarabine in patients with acute myelogenous
leukemia. Clin Cancer Res. 2008; 14:1446–1454.
26.	 Schnerch D, Schmidts A, Follo M, Udi J, Felthaus J, Pfeifer D,
Engelhardt M, Wäsch R. BubR1 is frequently repressed in
acute myeloid leukemia and its re-expression sensitizes cells
to antimitotic therapy. Haematologica. 2013; 98:1886–1895.

10.	 Zhang J, Yang PL, Gray NS. Targeting cancer with small
molecule kinase inhibitors. Nat Rev Cancer. 2009; 9:28–39.
11.	 Gross S, Rahal R, Stransky N, Lengauer C, Hoeflich KP.
Targeting cancer with kinase inhibitors. J Clin Invest. 2015;
125:1780–1789.

27.	 Conticello C, Adamo L, Vicari L, Giuffrida R, Iannolo G,
Anastasi G, Caruso L, Moschetti G, Cupri A, Palumbo GA,
Gulisano M, De Maria R, Giustolisi R, et al. Antitumor activity
of bortezomib alone and in combination with TRAIL in human
acute myeloid leukemia. Acta Haematol. 2008; 120:19–30.

12.	 Wäsch R, Hasskarl J, Schnerch D, Lübbert M. BI_2536-targeting the mitotic kinase Polo-like kinase 1 (Plk1).
Recent Results Cancer Res. 2010; 184:215–218.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

21165

Oncotarget

28.	 Riccioni R, Senese M, Diverio D, Riti V, Buffolino  S,
Mariani G, Boe A, Cedrone M, Lo-Coco F, Foa R,
Peschle C, Testa U. M4 and M5 acute myeloid leukaemias
display a high sensitivity to Bortezomib-mediated
apoptosis. Br J Haematol. 2007; 139:194–205.

34.	 Gascoigne KE, Taylor SS. Cancer cells display profound
intra- and interline variation following prolonged exposure
to antimitotic drugs. Cancer Cell. 2008; 14:111–122.
35.	 Podar K, Gouill SL, Zhang J, Opferman JT, Zorn E, Tai YT,
Hideshima T, Amiot M, Chauhan D, Harousseau  JL,
Anderson KC. A pivotal role for Mcl-1 in Bortezomibinduced apoptosis. Oncogene. 2008; 27:721–731.

29.	 Stapnes C, Doskeland AP, Hatfield K, Ersvaer E, Ryningen A,
Lorens JB, Gjertsen BT, Bruserud O. The proteasome
inhibitors bortezomib and PR-171 have antiproliferative
and proapoptotic effects on primary human acute myeloid
leukaemia cells. Br J Haematol. 2007; 136:814–828.

36.	 Richardson PG, Briemberg H, Jagannath S, Wen PY,
Barlogie B, Berenson J, Singhal S, Siegel DS, Irwin D,
Schuster M, Srkalovic G, Alexanian R, Rajkumar SV, et al.
Frequency, characteristics, and reversibility of peripheral
neuropathy during treatment of advanced multiple myeloma
with bortezomib. J Clin Oncol. 2006; 24:3113–3120.

30.	 Sethi VS, Jackson DV, Jr., White DR, Richards F, 2nd,
Stuart JJ, Muss HB, Cooper MR, Spurr CL. Pharmacokinetics
of vincristine sulfate in adult cancer patients. Cancer Res.
1981; 41:3551–3555.

37.	 Sandler SG, Tobin W, Henderson ES. Vincristine-induced
neuropathy. A clinical study of fifty leukemic patients.
Neurology. 1969; 19:367–374.

31.	 Haschka MD, Soratroi C, Kirschnek S, Hacker G, Hilbe R,
Geley S, Villunger A, Fava LL. The NOXA-MCL1-BIM
axis defines lifespan on extended mitotic arrest. Nat
Commun. 2015; 6:6891.

38.	 Schöffski P, Awada A, Dumez H, Gil T, Bartholomeus S,
Wolter P, Taton M, Fritsch H, Glomb P, Munzert G. A
phase I, dose-escalation study of the novel Polo-like kinase
inhibitor volasertib (BI 6727) in patients with advanced
solid tumours. Eur J Cancer. 2012; 48:179–186.

32.	 Colado E, Alvarez-Fernandez S, Maiso P, Martin-Sanchez J,
Vidriales MB, Garayoa M, Ocio EM, Montero JC,
Pandiella A, San Miguel JF. The effect of the proteasome
inhibitor bortezomib on acute myeloid leukemia cells
and drug resistance associated with the CD34+ immature
phenotype. Haematologica. 2008; 93:57–66.

39.	 Schnerch D, Follo M, Felthaus J, Engelhardt M, Wäsch R.
The 3′ untranslated region of the cyclin B mRNA is not
sufficient to enhance the synthesis of cyclin B during a
mitotic block in human cells. PLoS One. 2013; 8:e74379.

33.	 Bucur O, Stancu AL, Goganau I, Petrescu SM, Pennarun B,
Bertomeu T, Dewar R, Khosravi-Far R. Combination of
bortezomib and mitotic inhibitors down-modulate Bcr-Abl
and efficiently eliminates tyrosine-kinase inhibitor sensitive
and resistant Bcr-Abl-positive leukemic cells. PLoS One.
2013; 8:e77390.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

40.	 Engelbert D, Schnerch D, Baumgarten A, Wäsch R. The
ubiquitin ligase APC(Cdh1) is required to maintain genome
integrity in primary human cells. Oncogene. 2008; 27:907–917.

21166

Oncotarget

