519

Placental Isoform Glutathione S-Transferase and
P-Glycoprotein Expression in Advanced Nonsmall
Cell Lung Cancer
Association With Response to Treatment and Survival

George S. Vlachogeorgos, MD1
Effrosini D. Manali, MD2
Ekaterini Blana, MD3
Stella Legaki, MD4
Napoleon Karagiannidis, MD5
Vlassios S. Polychronopoulos,
Charis Roussos, MD6

BACKGROUND. Increased expression of the glutathione S-transferase placental isoform (GST-pi) and of P-glycoprotein (P-gp) in tissues from patients with nonsmall cell lung cancer (NSCLC) has been associated with poor antineoplastic
drug sensitivity, response to treatment, and survival. However, the diagnosis of
advanced NSCLC often is based on cytology. The objectives of the current study
MD

5

1

Department of Pulmonary Diseases, General
Hospital of Chalkis, Greece.

were to examine GST-pi and P-gp expression in cytologic specimens from
patients with unresectable NSCLC and to determine the association of that
expression with response to chemotherapy and survival.

METHODS. Patients with unresectable, cytologically diagnosed NSCLC were eligible for the study. Diagnosis was made by fiberoptic bronchoscopy, and staging

2
Second Department of Pulmonary Diseases,
University Hospital ‘‘Attikon,’’ School of Medicine,
University of Athens, Athens, Greece.

was done according to international standards. All patients received sequential

3

chemistry of bronchial brushing/washing and bronchial tissue biopsy, respec-

4

tively. Survival was defined as the time between diagnosis and death or last
follow-up at 24 months.

Department of Cytology, Sismanoglion General
Hospital, Athens, Greece.
Department of Pathology, Sismanoglion General
Hospital, Athens, Greece.
5
Third Department of Pulmonary Diseases, Sismanoglion General Hospital, Athens, Greece.
6

Department of Critical Care and Pulmonary Services, Evangelismos General Hospital, School of
Medicine, University of Athens, Athens, Greece.

chemoradiotherapy and were re-evaluated for treatment response. GST-pi and Pgp expression levels were evaluated by immunocytochemistry and immunohisto-

RESULTS. Thirty-nine patients were included in the study. There were 35 men
and 4 women, and the mean patient age (standard deviation was 61.4 years
(9.1 years). There were 4 patients with stage IIIA NSCLC, 32 patients with stage
IIIB NSCLC, and 3 patients with stage IV NSCLC. Cytologic evaluation of GST-pi
and P-gp expression paralleled expression determined in pathology specimens.
GST-pi and P-gp expression levels were associated inversely with response to
chemotherapy and survival.
CONCLUSIONS. Cytologic evaluation of GST-pi and P-gp expression may predictor
the response to treatment and the survival of patients with advanced NSCLC.
Cancer (Cancer Cytopathol) 2008;114:519–26.  2008 American Cancer Society.

KEYWORDS: nonsmall cell lung cancer, glutathione S-transferase-pi, P-glycoprotein,
cytology, chemotherapy, prognosis.

Address for reprints: George S. Vlachogeorgos,
MD, Department of Pulmonary Diseases, General
Hospital of Chalkis, Dourma 2b Str., 341 00,
Chalkida, Greece; Fax: (011) 302221078620;
E-mail: nikaarg@otenet.gr
Received May 19, 2008; revision received July
28, 2008; accepted August 20, 2008.

ª2008 by the American Cancer Society

L

ung cancer presents an epidemic on the rise and constitutes the
leading cause of cancer-related death in men and women.1
Although surgery for early-stage nonsmall cell lung cancer (NSCLC)
is associated with survival rates up to 70%, most newly diagnosed
cases are unresectable and portend a grave prognosis.2 Chemotherapy results in 5-year survival rates of \10%, and 1 of the main
reasons for these poor results is resistance to chemotherapy and
radiotherapy.3,4

DOI 10.1002/cncr.23981
Published online 11 November 2008 in Wiley InterScience (www.interscience.wiley.com).

520

CANCER (CANCER CYTOPATHOLOGY) December 25, 2008 / Volume 114 / Number 6

Several resistance mechanisms of NSCLC cells
against commonly administered antineoplastic
agents (platinum-based compounds, vinblastine,
ifosfamide) have been documented, including glutathione S-transferase (GST) placental isoform (GST-pi)
and P-glycoprotein (P-gp).4,5 GSTs are multifunctional enzymes that are associated with cellular
detoxification, because they catalyze the conjugation
of reduced glutathione to hydrophobic electrophilic
compounds, and it is believed that they influence
mutagenesis and carcinogenesis. Among the 4 GST
isozymes, GST-pi reportedly plays an important role
in the resistance of cancer sells to alkylating agents,
including platinum-based compounds.6 P-glycoprotein is a membrane transporter encoded by the multidrug resistance 1 gene (MDR1). P-gp functions as
an energy-dependent efflux pump that reduces the
intracellular concentration of a significant number of
anticancer drugs, such as vinca alkaloids, anthracyclines, and taxanes.7
The expression of both GST-pi and P-gp has
been studied extensively in serum and tissue specimens from patients with NSCLC. The majority of the
studies done have demonstrated that overexpression
of these molecules in NSCLC is a negative predictor
of response to chemotherapy and survival.7-11 However, advanced NSCLC very commonly is diagnosed
based on cytologic examination of sputum or
bronchoscopic specimens, especially in patients with
advanced disease, in the elderly, and in the very sick.
Prediction of response to chemotherapy based on
cytologic determinations would be of great value in
this patient population, because it has the potential
to identify those patients most likely to benefit from
drug treatment. The objective of the current study
was to examine the expression of GST-pi and P-gp in
cytologic bronchoscopy specimens obtained from
patients with unresectable NSCLC. We hypothesized
that, in advanced NSCLC, 1) cytologic and histologic
evaluation of GST-pi and P-gp expression would yield
similar results, and 2) increased expression of these
molecules would be linked with a poor response to
chemotherapy and with limited survival.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Patients
All patients who had stage IIIB and IV NSCLC and
inoperable IIIA disease, had available diagnostic cytology specimens that were obtained by bronchoscopy, and were diagnosed and treated at the third
Pulmonary Department of Sismanoglion General
Hospital, Athens, Greece, between January 2000 and
February 2002 were enrolled in the study. The sole

exclusion criterion was the desire of the patient to
opt out of the study and to be treated at another
institution. The diagnosis of lung cancer was made
by endobronchial biopsy, brushing, and/or washing
performed by fiberoptic bronchoscopy. Staging was
done clinically and radiologically according to international standards.12 In select and equivocal cases,
pathologic confirmation of the stage was obtained.
The study protocol was approved by the ethics committee of the hospital, and informed consent was
obtained from all patients.
After diagnosis and staging, all patients who
were enrolled in the study received treatment
according to the then applied standards of care of
the department, which consisted of sequential chemoradiotherapy. In detail, patients received 1) firstline chemotherapy with 6 cycles of cisplatin (80 mg/
m2), ifosfamide (3 g/m2), and vinblastine (6 g/m2)
every 3 weeks followed by; 2) radiotherapy (60 grays
delivered in 30 fractions over a period of 6 weeks).
After the completion of 3 cycles of chemotherapy, all
patients were re-evaluated for treatment response,
and responses were categorized as a complete
response (CR), a partial response (PR), stable disease
(SD), or progressive disease (PD) according to the
Response Criteria in Solid Tumors.13 Briefly, a CR
was defined as the disappearance of all (target and
nontarget) lesions confirmed at 4 weeks; a PR was
defined as a decrease 30% in the greatest dimension of a single tumor or in the sum of the greatest
dimensions of multiple masses confirmed at 4 weeks;
SD was defined as a response that met the criteria
for neither PR nor PD; and PD was defined as an
increase [20% in the greatest dimension of a single
tumor or in the sum of the greatest dimensions of
multiple masses or the appearance of new lesions.
Patients with a PR and SD were grouped together for
analyses.
The expression levels of GST-pi and P-gp were
evaluated by immunocytochemistry of cytology specimens from all patients and by immunohistochemistry of histologic tumor tissue sections when
available. All patients were followed until death or
for 2 years after diagnosis. Survival was defined as
the time between diagnosis and death (actual
survival) or last follow-up at 24 months (censored
survival).

Immunodetection of Placental Isoform Glutathione
S-Transferase and P-Glycoprotein
Cytocentrifuge slides were prepared from positive cytology specimens using 50,000 cells per slide. They
were fixed in 1:1 mixture of methanol and acetone
for 10 minutes followed by acetone for 10 minutes;

GST-pi and P-gp in NSCLC/Vlachogeorgos et al

then, the slides were placed in Tris-buffered saline
for 10 minutes. Subsequently, the slides were
immune labeled for either GST-pi or P-gp using a 30minute incubation with polyclonal anti-GST-pi (dilution, 1:50) or monoclonal anti-P-gp (dilution, 1:20)
primary antibodies (YLEM Laboratories, Rome, Italy)
and a 30-minute incubation with a polyclonal goat
antirabbit secondary antibody (dilution, 1:500). Slides
without the addition of primary antibodies served as
negative controls. Color was developed using the
Kwik Kit alkaline phosphatase method (Thermo
Shandon, Pittsburg, Pa), and slides were counterstained with hematoxylin. GST-pi and P-gp immunoreactivity of cytologic specimens was determined
independently by 3 blinded readers (G.S.V., E.D.M.,
and E.B.) using sporadically expressing, normal bronchial cells as positive and negative controls. A slide
was judged immunopositive when stained cells
accounted for [20% of all cancer cells.
Next, 5-lm-thick tissue sections, which were serial to diagnostic (positive) sections, were cut from
formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tissue blocks,
placed on glass slides, deparaffinized, rehydrated,
and incubated with 3% hydrogen peroxide for antigen retrieval (15 minutes). Subsequently, tissue sections were immune labeled for GST-pi or P-gp, as
detailed above, using the avidin-biotin complex/
horseradish peroxidase color detection system (Santa
Cruz Biotechnology Inc., Santa Cruz, Calif). GST-pi
and P-gp immunoreactivity in histologic specimens
was determined independently by 3 blinded readers
(G.S.V., E.D.M., and S.L.) using sporadically expressing,
normal bronchial mucosa as positive and negative controls. Specimens with strong cytoplasmic staining in
[20% of tumor cells were considered positive.14
The 20% cutoff, which was higher than the usual
10% cutoff, was selected to avoid false-positive
results caused by the positively staining bronchial
cells that inevitably are found admixed in our samples.15 The intensity of staining in cells that
expressed GST-pi and P-gp was relatively uniform
and, thus, was not taken into account. All slides,
both for cytology and for histology, that were immunostained for the 2 proteins were evaluated side by
side with the diagnostic hematoxylin and eosinstained specimens by 3 experienced readers, including the cytologist and pathologist experts who made
the diagnoses (E.B. and S.L., respectively). In most
instances, cancer cells could be discerned from normal bronchial epithelial cells and from metaplastic/
dysplastic cells based on nuclear morphology and
cytoplasmic/nuclear ratio. In cases of ambiguity, the
cells in question were not included in the specimen
scoring.

521

TABLE 1
Baseline Characteristics of Study Population of Patients With
Advanced Nonsmall Cell Lung Cancer (n539)
Characteristic

No. of Patients

Mean age  SD, y
Sex
Men
Women
Histology
Adenocarcinoma
Squamous cell carcinoma
Undifferentiated
Stage
IIIA
IIIB
IV
Smoking status
Current
Exsmoker
Never smoker

61.4  9.1
35
4
14
18
7
4
32
3
20
16
20/16/3

SD indicates standard deviation.

Statistics
Data are presented as the mean  standard deviation, and survival is presented as the median with
95% confidence interval. Chi-square statistics were
used to detect significant differences between patients
with GST-pi- and/or P-gp-expressing and nonexpressing tumors. Kaplan-Meier analyses with log-rank tests
were used to compare the survival of patients with
GST-pi- and/or P-gp-expressing and nonexpressing
tumors. All tests done were 2-sided and probability
values \.05 were considered significant.

RESULTS
Of 138 patients with lung cancer who were evaluated
during the study period, 125 patients presented with
NSCLC, and 13 patients presented with small cell
lung cancer. Of the 125 patients with NSCLC, 39
patients provided informed consent to be enrolled in
the study and to be treated at Sismanoglion General
Hospital (Athens, Greece), whereas the remaining 86
patients opted out of the study. Of the 39 patients
who were enrolled, 4 patients presented with stage
IIIA disease, 32 patients presented with stage IIIB
disease, and 3 patients presented with stage and IV
disease. Table 1 summarizes the baseline characteristics of the study population.
Expression levels of GST-pi and P-gp were studied in tumor cell-containing cytology specimens
from all patients (n 5 39) and in tumor-containing
tissue sections when available (n 5 18) (Fig. 1). In
the latter subset of patients, the expression levels of

522

CANCER (CANCER CYTOPATHOLOGY) December 25, 2008 / Volume 114 / Number 6

FIGURE 1. Representative images of immunocytochemistry (A,B) and immunohistochemistry (C,D) from specimens obtained from diagnostic bronchoscopy
showing immunoreactivity of nonsmall cell lung cancer cells from patients with adenocarcinoma (A,C) and squamous cell carcinoma (B,D) for glutathione Stransferase placental isoform (GST-pi) (A,C) and P-glycoprotein (P-gp) (B,D). Red (A,B) or brown (C,D) staining indicates positive immunoreactivity, whereas blue
indicates hematoxylin nuclear counterstaining. Scale bars 5 20 lm in A and B, 100 lm in C and D.

both proteins were comparable in both cytologic and
histologic samples (j 5 .241 and j 5 .182 for agreement between cytologic and histologic expression of
GST-pi and P-gp, respectively). The interobserver
reproducibility of GST-pi and P-gp expression
between the 3 reviewers was 100% for both cytology
and histology because of the intense staining and the
high cutoff point that was set for positivity of the
samples. Table 2 and Figure 2 illustrate that patients
who had no GST-pi expression evident in cytologic
samples (n 5 25) were more likely to respond favorably to chemotherapy, whereas patients who had
positive GST-pi expression in cytologic samples
(n 5 14) were more likely not to respond. Similar
results were obtained with P-gp expression: Patients
who had no P-gp expression evident in cytologic
samples (n 5 25) were more likely to respond favorably to chemotherapy, whereas patients who had
positive P-gp expression in cytologic samples
(n 5 14) were more likely not to respond (Table 2,
Fig. 1). When the expression of both proteins was
examined simultaneously, a great degree of coincidence of high and low expression of both proteins
was observed: Tumor cells from 21 patients were

TABLE 2
Association of Glutathione S-Transferase Placental Isoform and
P-Glycoprotein With Response to Chemotherapy in Patients With
Nonsmall Cell Lung Cancer
Response: No. of Patients
Expression
GST-pi
2
1
P-gp
2
1
P-gp/GST-pi
2/2
1/1
1/2 and 2/1

PD

SD and PR

CR

P

5
11

16
2

4
1

.002

6
10

15
3

4
1

.015

4
9
3

13
0
5

4
1
0

.003

PD indicates progressive disease; SD, stable disease; PR, partial response; CR, complete response;
GST-pi, glutathione S-transferase placental isoform; 2, negative; 1, positive; P-gp, P-glycoprotein.

negative for both proteins, and tumor cells from
another 10 patients were positive for both proteins;
only 8 patients exhibited discordant expression of
the 2 markers (Table 2, Fig. 2).

GST-pi and P-gp in NSCLC/Vlachogeorgos et al

523

FIGURE 2. Response of 39 patients with nonsmall cell lung cancer to platinum-based chemotherapy according to immunostaining of cytologic specimens for
P-glycoprotein (P-gp) and glutathione S-transferase placental isoform (GST-pi). Bars show the percentages of patients who were positive (1) and negative (2)
for each isoform. PD indicates progressive disease; SD, stable disease; PR, partial response; CR, complete response.

Next, we sought to determine whether the
expression of GST-pi and/or P-gp was associated
with the survival of these patients with NSCLC (Fig.
3). The mean survival of patients who had cytologically GST-pi-positive NSCLC was significantly shorter
compared with the GST-pi-negative group (P \
.0001). In addition, patients who had cytologically
P-gp-positive NSCLC had a significantly shorter survival compared with patients who had P-gp-negative
NSCLC (P 5 .0027). Finally, patients who had positive
cytology for both proteins experienced significantly
shortened survival compared with patients who had
negative cytology for both GST-pi and P-gp (P \.0001).
We also entered GST-pi and P-gp expression as variables in a Cox regression analyses to generate a linear
model, and only GST-pi expression emerged as an independent prognosticator of survival (Table 3).

DISCUSSION
In this report, we present data indicating that the
expression levels of GST-pi and P-gp in cytologic specimens obtained during routine diagnostic bronchoscopy from patients with advanced NSCLC are
associated with a poor response to chemotherapy
and with shortened survival. We observed that the
expression of both proteins in tumor cells retrieved
from the airways was comparable to that determined
using tumor tissues obtained by endobronchial biopsy. It is noteworthy that all determinations were
done using diagnostic procedures and specimens
without the need for additional manipulations.

To our knowledge, this is the first report of GSTpi and P-gp expression in cytologic NSCLC specimens. The expression of both proteins has been
studied extensively in serum and tumor tissue from
patients with cancer. In neoplasms other than lung
cancer, the overexpression of GST-pi and P-gp has
been associated with decreased treatment response
and survival.16-18 In patients with lung cancer, the
link between GST-pi and P-gp expression and tumor
chemosensitivity has been documented by several
trials in advanced NSCLC.4,5,7-11 In this regard, Hida
et al observed that pretreatment serum GST-pi levels
may be a useful parameter for predicting therapeutic
response to combination chemotherapy regimens
that include platinum compounds.10 In keeping with
those observations, other investigators reported that
GST-pi expression in NSCLC tissues is related to
response to cisplatin/etoposide therapy and may
be useful as a predictor of chemotherapeutic
response.8,11 In accordance with the aforementioned
work, we observed a negative impact of GST-pi and
P-gp expression on response to chemotherapy.
In contrast to our results, which suggest that the
expression of GST-pi and P-gp may portend a poor
survival, the association between GST-pi and P-gp
expression and survival in NSCLC has been controversial.4,8,19 In the study described above by Bai et al,
there was no significant difference in survival
between patients with or without tumor GST-pi
expression, although GST-pi-negative patients had a
better response to chemotherapy.8 In addition, Miyatake et al observed nonsignificant differences in the

524

CANCER (CANCER CYTOPATHOLOGY) December 25, 2008 / Volume 114 / Number 6

FIGURE 3. (A-C) Cumulative survival of 39 patients with nonsmall cell lung cancer according to immunostaining of cytologic specimens for P-glycoprotein (Pgp) and glutathione S-transferase placental isoform (GST-pi) (2 indicates negative; 1, positive). These graphs show Kaplan-Meier survival curves, median survival (95% confidence interval), and log-rank test P values for comparison of survival between groups.

TABLE 3
Cox Regression Analysis of Glutathione S-Transferase Placental
Isoform and P-Glycoprotein Expression in Cytologic Specimens
from 39 Patients With Nonsmall Cell Lung Cancer
Variable

P

RR (95% CI)

GST-pi
P-gp

.0031
.7084

8.662 (2.073-36.205)
1.265 (0.369-4.333)

RR indicates risk ratio; CI, confidence interval; GST-pi, glutathione S-transferase placental isoform;
P-gp, P-glycoprotein.

survival of patients with GST-pi- and P-gp-expressing
versus nonexpressing lung tumors.4 This discrepancy
may be explained by the higher numbers of patients
with stage IV disease enrolled in the aforementioned
studies compared with the low numbers of patients
with stage IV disease included in our cohort. In this
regard, advanced stage may have overshadowed GSTpi and P-gp expression in the aforementioned studies, constituting the single best predictor of survival.20-23
In addition to examining the impact of GST-pi
and P-gp expression on response to treatment and

GST-pi and P-gp in NSCLC/Vlachogeorgos et al

survival, in the current study, we compared the
expression of both proteins in cytology specimens
and pathology specimens. On the basis of our
results, the expression of GST-pi and P-gp in bronchial washing and brushing specimens paralleled the
expression in biopsy specimens. This is important,
because a significant proportion of patients with
NSCLC will have a cytology-based diagnosis.1,24 In
addition, some patients with NSCLC will have contraindications to endobronchial biopsy.25
The management of advanced NSCLC remains an
issue of great importance. The results from a national
survey of patients with NSCLC in the United States
demonstrated that 67.2% of patients had stage III/IV
disease, and [33% of patients with NSCLC received
multimodality treatment, which consisted most commonly of chemotherapy and radiotherapy.1 The longterm survival rate of patients with advanced NSCLC
who receive chemoradiotherapy ranges between 10%
and 20%.9 Survival potentially might be increased and
toxicity might be limited if those patients could be
identified who are most likely to respond to a particular
treatment regimen. Platinum compounds still are used
largely in treatment protocols for patients with advanced NSCLC in combination with other regimens.26-28
Furthermore, novel treatments that target the glutathione
pathway currently are under investigation.29,30 On the basis of our results, the expression of GST-pi, P-gp, or both
proteins may contribute to a more accurate prediction of
outcome, giving the opportunity for better selection of
patient-oriented therapy.
Both GST-pi and P-gp are proteins implicated in
the resistance of cancer cells to widely used chemotherapeutic agents,31 as stated above. The current
results suggest that the easily studied expression of
GST-pi and P-gp in cytology specimens obtained by
minimally invasive bronchoscopy may serve as simple
prognostic indicators of response to therapy and survival in patients with advanced NSCLC. The current
pilot work is limited by the small number of observations and by the nonrepresentative stage distribution
of our patients with lung cancer. However, if our data
are confirmed by larger controlled studies, then our
findings may yield a valuable tool for optimal decision
making in this fragile and morbid patient population.

3.

4.

5.

6.

7.

8.

9.

10.

11.

12.
13.

14.

15.

16.

17.

18.

REFERENCES
1.

2.

Little AG, Gay EG, Gaspar LE, Stewart AK. National survey
of nonsmall cell lung cancer in the United States: epidemiology, pathology and patterns of care. Lung Cancer.
2007;57:253-260.
Scagliotti GV, Novello S. Adjuvant therapy in completely
resected nonsmall cell lung cancer. Curr Oncol Rep.
2003;5:318-325.

19.

525

De Candis D, Stani SC, Bidoli P, et al. Induction chemotherapy with carboplatin/paclitaxel followed by surgery or
standard radiotherapy and concurrent daily low-dose cisplatin for locally advanced nonsmall cell lung cancer. Am J
Clin Oncol. 2003;26:265-269.
Miyatake K, Gemba K, Ueoka H, et al. Prognostic significance of mutant p53 protein, P-glycoprotein and glutathione S-transferase pi in patients with unresectable
nonsmall cell lung cancer. Anticancer Res. 2003;23:28292836.
Kreisholt J, Sorensen M, Jensen PB, Nielsen BS, Andersen
CB, Sehested M. Immunohistochemical detection of DNA
topoisomerase IIa, P-glycoprotein and multidrug resistance
protein in small cell and nonsmall cell lung cancer. Br J
Cancer. 1998;77:1469-1473.
Ozols RF, Odwyer PJ, Hamilton TC, Young RC. The role of
glutathione in drug resistance. Cancer Treat Rev. 1990;17:
45-50.
Kawasaki M, Nakanishi Y, Kuwano K, Takayama K, Kiyohara C, Hara N. Immunohistochemically detected p53 and
P-glycoprotein predict the response to chemotherapy in
lung cancer. Eur J Cancer. 1998;34:1352-1357.
Bai F, Nakanishi Y, Kawasaki M, et al. Immunohistochemical expression of glutathione S-transferase-pi can predict
chemotherapy response in patients with nonsmall cell lung
carcinoma. Cancer. 1996;78:416-421.
Brooks KR, To K, Moore Joshi MB, et al. Measurement of
chemoresistance markers in patients with nonsmall cell
lung cancer: a novel approach for patient selection. Ann
Thorac Surg. 2003;76:187-193.
Hida T, Kuwabara M, Ariyoshi Y, et al. Serum glutathione
S-transferase pi level as a tumor marker for nonsmall cell
lung cancer. Cancer. 1994;73:1377-1382.
Arai T, Yasuda Y, Takaya T, et al. Immunohistochemical
expression of glutathione S-transferase pi in untreated primary nonsmall cell lung cancer. Cancer Detect Prev. 2000;
24:252-257.
Mountain CF. Revisions in the International System for Staging Lung Cancer. Chest. 1997;111:1710-1717.
Therasse P, Arbuck SG, Eisenhauer EA, et al. New guidelines to evaluate the response to treatment in solid tumors.
J Natl Cancer Inst. 2000;92:205-216.
Eimoto H, Tsutsumi M, Nakajima A, et al. Expression of
the glutathione S-transferase placental form in human
lung carcinomas. Carcinogenesis. 1988;9:2325-2327.
Chae YK, Woo J, Kim M-J, et al. Expression of aquaporin 5
(AQP5) promotes tumor invasion in human non small cell
lung cancer [serial online]. PLoS ONE. 2008;3:e2162.
Harpole DH, Moore MB, Herndon JE, et al. The prognostic
value of molecular analysis in patients treated with trimodality therapy for oesophageal cancer. Clin Cancer Res. 2001;
7:562-569.
Huang J, Tan PH, Thiyagarajan J, Bay BH. Prognostic significance of glutathione S-transferase-pi in invasive breast
cancer. Mod Pathol. 2003;16:558-565.
Katahira T, Takayama T, Miyanishi K, et al. Plasma glutathione S-transferase-p1-1 as a prognostic factor in patients
with advanced non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma (stages III and
IV). Clin Cancer Res. 2004;10:7934-7940.
Allen T, Granville LA, Cagle PT, Haque A, Zander DS, Barrios R. Expression of glutathione S-transferase pi and glutathione synthase correlates with survival in early stage
nonsmall cell carcinomas of the lung. Hum Pathol. 2007;
38:220-227.

526

CANCER (CANCER CYTOPATHOLOGY) December 25, 2008 / Volume 114 / Number 6

20. Cellerino R, Tummarello D, Guidi F, et al. A randomized
trial of alternative chemotherapy versus best supportive
care only in advanced non-small cell lung cancer. J Clin
Oncol. 1991;9:1453-1461.
21. Cartei G, Cartie F, Cantone A, et al. Cisplatin-cyclophosphamide-mitomycin combination chemotherapy with supportive care versus supportive care alone for treatment of
metastatic nonsmall cell lung cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst.
1993;85:794-800.
22. Cullen M, Billingham J, Woodroffe C, et al. Mitomycin,
ifosfamide, and cisplatin in unresectable nonsmall cell
lung cancer: effects on survival and quality of life. J Clin
Oncol. 1999;17:3188-3194.
23. Stephens RJ, Fairlamb D, Gower N, Maslove L, Milroy R,
Napp V, et al. The Big Lung Trial (BLT): determining the
value of cisplatin-based chemotherapy for all patients with
nonsmall cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Preliminary results in
the supportive care setting [abstract]. Proc Am Soc Clin
Oncol. 2002;21:291a.
24. Schenk DA, Bryan CL, Brower JH, Myers DL. Transbronchial needle aspiration in the diagnosis of bronchoscopic
carcinoma. Chest. 1987;92:83-85.
25. Simpson FG, Arnold AG, Purvis A, Belfield PW, Muers MF,
Cooke NJ. Postal survey of bronchoscopic practice by physicians in the United Kingdom. Thorax. 1986;41:311-317.

26. Oshita F, Saito H, Yamada K. Feasible combination chemotherapy with nedaplatin and irinotecan for patients with
nonsmall cell lung cancer and multiple risk factors. J Exp
Ther Oncol. 2007;6:251-256.
27. Zucali PA, Soto Parra HJ, Cavina R, et al. Short schedule of cisplatin and vinorelbine: a dose-finding study
in non small cell lung cancer. Oncology. 2007;71:229236.
28. Cohen M, Gootenberg J, Keegan P, Pazdur R. FDA drug approval summary: bevacizumab (Avastin) plus carboplatin
and paclitaxel as first line treatment of advanced/metastatic recurrent nonsquamous non small cell lung cancer.
Oncologist. 2007;12:713-718.
29. Chen X, Carystinos GD, Batist G. Potential for selective
modulation of glutathione in cancer chemotherapy. Chem
Biol Interact. 1998;111/112:263-275.
30. Sabatino MA, Colombo T, Geroni C, Marchini S, Broggini
M. Enhancement of in vivo antitumor activity of classical
anticancer agents by combination with the new, glutathione-interacting DNA minor groove-binder, brostallicin.
Clin Cancer Res. 2003;9:5402-5408.
31. Burg D, Mulder GJ. Glutathione conjugates and their synthetic derivatives as inhibitors of glutathione-dependent
enzymes involved in cancer and drug resistance. Drug
Metab Rev. 2002;34:821-863.

