Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No. 41

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

5-Fluorouracil-induced RNA stress engages a TRAIL-DISCdependent apoptosis axis facilitated by p53
Birce Akpinar1, Ethiene V. Bracht1, Dorin Reijnders1, Barbora Safarikova2,
Iva Jelinkova2, Alf Grandien3, Alena Hyrslova Vaculova1,2, Boris Zhivotovsky1,
Magnus Olsson1
1

Division of Toxicology, Institute of Environmental Medicine, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden

2

Department of Cytokinetics, Institute of Biophysics, Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic, v.v.i., Brno, Czech Republic

3

 epartment of Medicine, Center for Infectious Medicine, Karolinska Institutet, Karolinska University Hospital–Huddinge,
D
Stockholm, Sweden

Correspondence to:
Boris Zhivotovsky, e-mail: Boris.Zhivotovsky@ki.se
Keywords: colon cancer, apoptosis, 5-fluorouracil, p53, necrosis
Received: July 22, 2015 	Accepted: October 12, 2015 	     Published: October 24, 2015

ABSTRACT
Despite recent advances in targeted therapeutics, administration of 5-fluorouracil
(5-FU) remains a common clinical strategy for post-surgical treatment of solid
tumors. Although it has been proposed that RNA metabolism is disturbed by 5-FU
treatment, the key cytotoxic response is believed to be enzymatic inhibition of
thymidylate synthase resulting in nucleotide pool disproportions. An operating p53
tumor suppressor signaling network is in many cases essential for the efficiency of
chemotherapy, and malfunctions within this system remain a clinical obstacle. Since
the fate of chemotherapy-insensitive tumor cells is rarely described, we performed
a comparative analysis of 5-FU toxicity in p53-deficient cells and conclude that p53
acts as a facilitator rather than a gatekeeper of cell death. Although p53 can act
as a regulator of several cellular stress responses, no rerouting of cell death mode
was observed in absence of the tumor suppressor. Thus, the final death outcome
of 5-FU-treated p53-/- cells is demonstrated to be caspase-dependent, but due to
a slow pace, accumulation of mitochondrial reactive oxygen species contributes to
necrotic characteristics. The oligomerization status of the p53 target gene DR5 is
determined as a significant limiting factor for the initiation of caspase activity in
an intracellular TRAIL-dependent manner. Using several experimental approaches,
we further conclude that RNA- rather than DNA-related stress follows by caspase
activation irrespectively of p53 status. A distinct 5-FU-induced stress mechanism
is thereby functionally connected to a successive and discrete cell death signaling
pathway. Finally, we provide evidence that silencing of PARP-1 function may be an
approach to specifically target p53-deficient cells in 5-FU combinatorial treatment
strategies. Together, our results disclose details of impaired cell death signaling
engaged as a consequence of 5-FU chemotherapy. Obtained data will contribute to
the comprehension of factors restraining 5-FU efficiency, and by excluding DNA as
the main stress target in some cell types they propose alternatives to currently used
and suggested synergistic treatment regimens.

patients suffering from colorectal cancers (CRC). The
therapeutic potential of 5-FU was primarily described as an
effect of its metabolic conversion into fluorodeoxyuridine
monophosphate (FdUMP), a suicide substrate for
thymidylate synthase (TS), and as such able to starve

INTRODUCTION
Administration of 5-fluorouracil (5-FU, fluorouracil)
is a common post-surgical treatment regimen used for
several categories of solid tumors, and especially for
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

43679

Oncotarget

cells from deoxythymidine monophosphate (dTMP) [1].
By this means, a rate-limiting step obligatory for DNA
replication and repair is eliminated and a link to cell
death mechanisms provided. Fluorouridine triphosphate
(FUTP), on the other hand, can be misincorporated into
RNA. In fact, drug activity patterns derived from gene
expression profiles in 60 human cancer cell lines clustered
5-FU to RNA synthesis inhibitors [2]. Misincorporation
of 5-FU metabolites into RNA transcripts and genomic
DNA appears to occur simultaneously in tumor cells,
but no significant correlation between the magnitude
of integration into either species and the response to
5-FU therapy has yet been found [3]. Hence, despite the
extensive clinical use of 5-FU, the relative importance of
each stress target is not clearly established.
Similar to other chemotherapeutic agents, 5-FU
induces cell cycle arrest and apoptosis in sensitive tumor
cell lines. While an arrest in the G1/S cell cycle phase
boundary was reported to occur as a result of checkpoint
kinase 1 (Chk1)-mediated Cdc25A inactivation [4], the
mechanisms leading to the commencement of apoptosis
signaling are poorly understood. Since the p53 tumor
suppressor plays a central role in DNA damage responses,
including DNA repair, the cell cycle regulations and
apoptosis, a key focus has been on how these processes
relate to 5-FU toxicity. For instance, gene expression
analyses identified mitochondrial ferredoxin reductase as
a p53 target gene inducing cell death via mitochondrial
reactive oxygen species (ROS) formation [5]. In vivo and
in vitro studies also suggest that 5-FU-treated cancer cells
conform to a p53-dependent extrinsic apoptosis mechanism
directed by receptors included in the tumor necrosis
factor family (TNF) [6, 7]. Yet, although p53 status was
proposed as an accurate indicator of CRC prognosis and
5-FU therapy response in vivo and in vitro [8–10], it is still
a matter of debate. For example, a correlation between
mutations in the conserved p53 DNA binding region and
treatment efficacy indicated that this aspect of protein
function is not a clinically useful predictive marker for
the response of Dukes’ C stage colon cancers to 5-FU
chemotherapy [11]. Nevertheless, in experimental models
where p53 status has been used to explain gross differences
in 5-FU responses, it is evidently clear that cells harboring
p53-insufficiency are also affected by treatment [9, 12].
In contrast to the analysis of functional stress pathways
where the silencing of key regulatory elements mostly
serves as controls, we have explored in detail the kinetics
and underlying mechanisms of p53-independent cell death
by using parental and genetically-modified HCT116 cells,
one of the most common in vitro systems for 5-FU toxicity
analyses. By this experimental approach, we clarified the
role of the tumor suppressor in several aspects of drug
toxicity, ranging from initial stress target point to molecular
mechanisms of apoptosis and cell fate. We also provide
evidences supporting a mechanism by which tumor cells

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

lacking p53 are sensitized to 5-FU combinatorial treatment
strategies targeting PARP-1.

RESULTS
p53 facilitates the appearance of apoptotic
markers in 5-FU-treated HCT116 cells
HCT116 has been verified as type II cells [13],
stating that mitochondrial destabilization is required for
efficient apoptosis. The HCT116 parental (wt) cell line and
its derivate lacking p53 (HCT116 p53-/-) were, therefore,
treated with 5-FU and analyzed with respect to loss of
mitochondrial membrane potential (MMP, ΔΨm), release
of cytochrome c into the cytosol, DEVDase (caspase-3/-7like) activity and poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase-1 (PARP-1)
cleavage. Notably, although all markers appeared earlier and
were more pronounced in wt cells, they could also be readily
detected independently of p53 function (Figure 1A–1D).
Interestingly, although the DEVDase activity in HCT116
p53−/− cells at 48 h of treatment only reached approximately
half the intensity compared to their wt counterpart at 24 h
(Figure 1B), similar rates of overall cell death were
quantified by FACS analysis of the subG1-population in
both data sets (Figure 1E). Thus, the consequence of p53
deficiency in this context is indeed a suboptimal apoptotic
signaling cascade which, however, generates substantial cell
death in a timely delayed manner. Apart from experimental
conditions where efficient cell death was assured by using
high doses of 5-FU (768 μM), treatment for 48 h using
lower concentrations of the drug (10 μM) also generated
substantial apoptosis, both in the absence or presence of p53
(Figure 1E). Similar colony formation capacity in both cell
types over a range of 5-FU concentrations was observed
(Figure 1F). However, the presence of a pan-caspase
inhibitor (zVAD-fmk) does not rescue tumor cell colony
formation in p53-deficient cells (Supplementary figure 1A).
This indicates that during culture conditions where cells
are seeded sparse (<20 cells/cm2) 5-FU treatment does not
engage cell death pathways, as is the case in “normal culture
settings” (5 × 104 cells/cm2), but primarily follows by a p53independent cell cycle arrest. In support of this observation,
cells were arrested in a G1/S cell cycle boundary within
8 hours of treatment irrespectively of p53 (Supplementary
figure 1B).

Despite necrotic characteristics 5-FU-treated
HCT116 p53-/- cells primarily die by caspasedependent apoptosis
Previously, we identified a novel signaling route
occurring as a consequence of 5-FU-induced entry of
extracellular Ca2+, where calmodulin served as a link to
p53 phospho-activation and apoptosis [6]. Ca2+-overload

43680

Oncotarget

may also induce programmed necrosis resulting from a
calpain-dependent mitochondria-nuclei translocation
of the apoptosis-inducing factor (AIF) [14]. We,
therefore, speculated that in p53-deficient HCT116
cells where apoptosis is suboptimal, alternative cell
death modes may become more pronounced. Indeed,
5-FU-treated HCT116 p53-/- cells display several
molecular and biochemical characteristics of necrosis,
including plasma membrane disintegration, determined
by extracellular lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) and
transmission electron microscopy (TEM) (Figure
2A and 2B). These features were in sharp contrast to
treated HCT116 wt cells where plasma membranes
remained intact in apoptotic cells (Figure 2A and 2B).

Importantly, in absence of p53 cellular release of LDH
was completely abrogated by the pan-caspase inhibitor
zVAD-fmk, suggesting that the predominant cell death
mode is indeed caspase-dependent (Figure  2C). To
clarify how necrotic signatures evolve in apoptotic
HCT116 p53-/- cells, 5-FU combinatorial treatments
using chemical inhibitors to potential necrotic
conduits, including the Ca2+ chelator BAPTA (1,2-bis
(o-aminophenoxy)ethane-N,N,N’,N’-tetraacetic acid),
the RIP1-kinase inhibitor necrostatin 1 (NEC1), the
antioxidant Trolox, and the inhibitor of lysosomal acid
proteases pepstatin A were performed. As Trolox was the
only compound able to limit LDH release, we concluded
that ROS is a mediator of necrotic characteristics in

Figure 1: Comparative analysis of 5-FU-induced apoptosis in wt and p53-deficient HCT116 cells. The apoptotic

indicators, cleaved PARP and lamin A (cle PARP, cle lamin A), were analyzed at multiple time points ranging from 0 to 36 h posttreatment initiation in p53-proficient and 0 to 48 h in p53-deficient HCT116 cells using immunoblotting of SDS-PAGE-separated cell
lysates A. Caspase-3/-7-like activities were measured by monitoring the liberation of AMC from the synthetic fluoro-conjugated peptide
substrate motif DEVD (DEVD-AMC) B. Drug effects with respect to loss of mitochondrial membrane potential (ΔΨm) in live cells
were examined by FACS analysis of mitochondrial TMRE accumulation C. HCT116 wt and p53-/- cells, treated with 768 μM 5-FU
for time periods indicated, were harvested and subjected to separation into cytoplasmic and nuclear/mitochondrial fractions, enabling
immunoblotting of released cytochrome c D.

(Continued )

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

43681

Oncotarget

Figure 1: (Continued ) Cells, treated with 5-FU (10 μM, 48 h or 768 μM, 24 h), were fixed in 70% ethanol and stained with propidium

iodide before FACS determination of sub G1 populations E. Clonal survival of eighteen HCT116 wt or p53-/- cells/cm2 in response to
5-FU treatment (48 h), ranging from 10 to 50 μM F. GAPDH served as a marker for equal sample loading in (A) and (D), and also as an
indicator of fractionation efficacy in (D).

5-FU-treated cells harboring a disintegrated apoptotic
program (Figure 2D). It is important to note that zVADfmk in the absence of p53 by no means obstructs the
generation of mitochondrial ROS, nor does Trolox
inhibit 5-FU-induced apoptosis, as determined by FACS
analysis of MitoSOX™ Red-stained cells and SDSPAGE, respectively (Figure 2E and 2F). Mitochondrial
release of AIF could not be detected in organelle
fractions isolated from treated cells, thus excluding this
as being an important factor for the necrotic features
described (Supplementary figure 2). Moreover, necrotic
morphology determined by TEM and LDH-release
appears simultaneously as the initiation of cell death
and the activation of caspases-8 and -3 (Figure  2A,
Supplementary figure 3). In the presence of p53,

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

an efficient apoptotic program does not allow ROS
formation (Figure 2E). The distinct necrotic features of
treated HCT116 p53-/- cells, on the other hand, may be
an indirect consequence of suboptimal apoptosis and
mediated by mitochondrial ROS, elevated in cells by
mechanisms uncoupled from the apoptotic program.

DR5-DISC determines apoptosis efficiency in a
p53- and TRAIL-dependent manner
Chemotherapeutic agents, such as platinum
compounds and doxorubicin, have been reported to
upregulate the TNF family death receptors DR4 and
DR5 due to p53 transcriptional activity. As a result,
chemotherapy in combination with TRAIL frequently

43682

Oncotarget

augments cell death rates of cancer cells [15, 16]. Since
apoptosis in response to 5-FU was previously shown
to depend on the TNF-family receptors in vivo and in
vitro, as well as in the absence of TRAIL co-treatment,
we examined whether or not p53 is critical for DISCmediated cell death. In support of this assumption a
prominent apical caspase-8 processing was detected in
HCT116 p53−/− cells (Supplementary figure 4A). Using
a RNAi approach, we were also able to conclude that
caspase-8 is an upstream and essential factor for effector
caspase activation in these cells (Supplementary figure
4B). To verify that caspase-8-activation occurs at the
level of DISC formation, we investigated apoptotic

markers appearing in response to 5-FU in HCT116
p53-/- cells stably overexpressing either the regulatory
cellular caspase-8 (FLICE)-like inhibitory protein
(c-FLIPL) or a truncated version (dominant negative)
of the Fas-associated death domain (FADD) adaptor
protein (FADD-DN). Since both of these factors
harbor a capacity to obstruct correct DISC formation,
reduced levels of processed caspases and free cytosolic
cytochrome c in the case of ectopic c-FLIPL expression,
and a decrease in active caspase-3 in the case of FADDDN overexpression, justify our conclusion that 5-FU
also induces DISC-mediated cell death in the absence of
p53 (Figure 3A–3D). Previously, we revealed that DR5,

Figure 2: Irrespectively of p53 status, HCT116 cells die by apoptosis but characteristics of necrosis develop in the
absence of the tumor suppressor as a consequence of ROS formation. HCT116 cells with different p53 status were treated

with 5-FU (768 μM), and at time points indicated cellular LDH release and SDS-PAGE-mediated detection of active subunits relating to
caspases-3 (cle casp-3) and -8 were performed in parallel A. Representative transmission electron microscope images of sections prepared
from control and 5-FU-treated wt and p53-/- cells. An isolation of dead cells was performed in treated samples by collecting floating cells
prior to fixation and section preparation B. Analysis of LDH-release from HCT116 p53-/- cells at 24, 48 and 72 h post-5-FU treatment
(768 μM), either in the presence or absence of the pan-caspase inhibitor zVAD-fmk (10 μM) C. In D. HCT116 p53-/- cells were treated with
5-FU for 48 h, either alone or in the presence of chemical inhibitors of necrosis, inactive NEC (iNEC, 100 μM), NEC (100 μM), BAPTA
(10 μM, last 24 h only), Trolox (50 μM) or pepstatin A (7 μM), in advance of LDH-release analysis. Mitochondrial ROS was measured by
FACS analysis of control and 5-FU-treated MitoSOX™ Red stained HCT116 wt (24 h) and p53-/- (48 h) cells, cultured either in the presence
or absence of zVAD-fmk E.

(Continued )
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

43683

Oncotarget

Figure 2: (Continued ) Lysates isolated from cells treated with 5-FU, either alone or in combination with 50 μM Trolox, were subjected

to SDS-PAGE in order to investigate whether or not ROS reinforces apoptosis. Detection of cle lamin A served as an marker for apoptosis
F. GAPDH probing indicates equal sample loading in (A) and (F). In (A), processed caspase-8 fragments are indicated with asterisks.

but not the Fas receptor, is fundamental for effective
apoptosis in HCT116 wt cells [6]. Similar to their wt
counterpart, 5-FU-induced apoptosis was abrogated
by RNAi-silencing of DR5 also in HCT116 cells
lacking p53, concluding that the absence of the tumor
suppressor does not force cells to alter the death signaling
pathway (Figure 4A). By using RNAi methodology, we
also concluded DR4 as important for 5-FU-induced
apoptosis, irrespectively of p53 function (Supplementary
figure 5). Consistent with current data identifying
DR4 and DR5 as p53 transcriptional target genes [17,
18], enhanced mRNA levels and accumulation of the
corresponding proteins were more prominent in HCT116
wt cells after 24 h 5-FU treatment (Figure 4B and 4C,
Supplementary figure 5). Interestingly, immunoblotting
of cell lysates and immunoprecipitations (IP) using
DR-specific antibodies also indicated a minor increase
of the receptors independently of p53. These data were
supported by an equivalent enhancement of the DR4 and
DR5 mRNA’s and also by the localization of the DR5
to plasma membranes in treated cells (Figure 4B–4D).
Thus, DR4 and DR5 expression may be adjusted by both
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

p53-dependent and -independent mechanisms where the
latter may be a consequence of ER stress (Supplementary
figure 6) [19]. To verify that DR5 is indeed oligomerized
in response to treatment, protein lysates were isolated
under non-reducing conditions and DR5 dimer formation
analyzed by SDS-PAGE (Figure 4E). Since the presence
of p53 supported dimer establishment, DR5 activity
is established as one of the most upstream limiting
apoptotic factor in the cell system analyzed. However,
although the importance of DR4 and DR5 for 5-FUinduced apoptosis is clearly emphasized by these
results, process(es) separated from the upregulations
of DR4 and DR5 per se may contribute to activation
of the receptors. In the current literature, TRAIL is
postulated as the sole DR4/5-activating ligand. Apart
from membrane-bound TRAIL, specific antibodies used
in the study also detected a ~24 kDa protein fragment
in high exposed immunoblotting, which is similar to
the reported molecular weight of soluble TRAIL [20].
As this particular protein fragment appeared only in
samples isolated from 5-FU-treated cells, we reasoned
that there might be a connection to DR4/5 stimulation.
43684

Oncotarget

Figure 3: DISC activation is a prerequisite for caspase-dependent apoptotic signaling in p53-deficient HCT116 cells.

c-FLIPL, FADD-DN or empty expression vectors were stably introduced into wt and p53-/- HCT116 cells by retroviral transduction. SDSPAGE- analysis of c-FLIPL in lysates harvested from untreated HCT116 p53-/- cells, transduced with empty or c-FLIPL expression vectors
A. Non-transduced, empty vector-containing and c-FLIPL expressing HCT116 p53-/- cells were harvested at the indicated time after 5-FU
treatment and immunoblotting served to detect the processing of apical caspase-8 and effector caspase-3 in B. Alternatively, cells were
subjected to fractionation into cytoplasmic and mitochondrial/nuclei protein pools for analysis of cytochrome c release C. Control, empty
vector-containing and FADD-DN expressing HCT116 p53-/- cells and HCT116 wt cells harboring empty and FADD-DN expression vectors
were incubated in the presence of 768 μM 5-FU. After isolation of total protein lysates, immunoblot analysis, using a specific antibody
directed to the active p18 caspase-3 fragment, served as an indicator of apoptosis D. Probing of GAPDH was used to confirm equal loading
of the samples (A-D) or as an indicator of fractionation efficacy (C). In (B), processed caspase-8 fragments are indicated with asterisks.

Yet, among chemical inhibitors with the potential to
delimit or enhance proteolytic cleavage, only zVADfmk blocked the generation of the fragment, leading to
the conclusion that its appearance is a consequence of
caspase activity (Figure  4F). Importantly, recombinant
DR5 lacking the integral membrane domain, thus acting
as a soluble inhibitor of extracellular TRAIL, failed to
interfere with the cell death progression in 5-FU-treated
cells, while blocking TRAIL-stimulated apoptosis
completely, as shown by FACS analysis of Sub G1populations (Figure 4G), and apoptotic markers in SDSPAGE (Supplementary figure 7). In contrast, RNAi
targeting of TRAIL abrogated cell death irrespectively of
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

p53 function (Figure 4H). Hence, although mechanisms
for DR4 and DR5 activation supported by intracellular,
membrane bound TRAIL are lacking in the literature,
our results demonstrate their existence. In conclusion,
these experiments indicate 5-FU as a chemotherapeutic
drug enabling apoptosis by p53-facilitated DISC
oligomerization in a TRAIL-dependent manner.

5-FU induces apoptosis through an RNA-stressrelated pathway
In contrast to other chemotherapeutic agents,
metabolized 5-FU elicits not only damage to DNA
43685

Oncotarget

but also influences RNA metabolism. Discrimination
between these stress targets can be accomplished by
analysis of whether thymidine or uridine reverses 5-FUinduced toxicity in cells [9, 21]. 5-FU desensitization of
cells by thymidine can be explained by enhanced dTMP
production through the thymidine kinase (TK) salvage
pathway, thereby reducing the requirement for TS activity.
Adding an excess of uridine to the system, on the other
hand, reduces RNA-misincorporation of FUTP. Our
results confirm data indicating HCT116 cells as being
primarily susceptible to 5-FU-induced RNA-related
stress and consequently toxicity-liberated by the addition
of equimolar concentrations of uridine to the system
(Figure  5A) [9]. By using the same approach we also
concluded that in the absence of p53 the primary 5-FU
stress target point remained unaltered (Figure 5B). Uridine
also inhibits 5-FU-induced LDH-release in HCT116 p53−/−
cells, thus validating our data concluding that slow

apoptosis proceedings may result in necrotic cell features
(Supplementary figure 8). Together these data clearly
indicate a p53-facilitated functional link between RNA
lesions and DISC-regulated apoptosis. They also support
the idea of p53 as mainly functioning in the regulation
of apoptotic mechanisms and not being involved in
processes dictating the relative RNA/DNA-targeting of
5-FU metabolites. It is clear, however, that depending
on their origin, tumor cell types respond differentially
to 5-FU metabolites [21]. Intriguingly, levels of the p53
protein remain in 5-FU-uridine co-treatment (Figure 5A
and 5C). Phospho-activation of p53 S15, S46 and S33,
on the other hand, was reduced compared to cells treated
with 5-FU alone (Figure 5C), thus verifying that uridine is
acting upstream of p53.
We reasoned that if a cell line subjected to
5-FU suffers from the inhibition of TS, it is likely that
imbalances of the nucleotide pool would lead to DNA

Figure 4: Independently from p53, plasma membrane accumulation of DR5 occurs in response to 5-FU treatment,
and silencing of the protein reduces drug-induced apoptosis. The effect of 5-FU with respect to the processing of caspase-3,

PARP and lamin A in HCT116 wt and p53-/- cells was analyzed by immunoblotting, using total protein lysates from cells in which DR5 had
been silenced by means of RNAi (30 nmol) A. Western blot analysis of lysate input and DR5 IP generated from control and 5-FU-induced
HCT116 p53-/- and wt cells. DR5 and caspase-8 processing is shown in input samples B. cDNA from control and treated (10 and 768 μM
5-FU) HCT116 wt and p53-/- cells were generated and mRNA expression analyses with respect to DR4 and DR5 were accomplished by
RT-PCR using specific primers C. Along with control cells, HCT116 p53-/- cells induced with 5-FU for 48 h were fixed in 4% formaldehyde
and stained with a DR5-specific antibody (green). Cell nuclei were counterstained by DAPI (blue) and samples analyzed using confocal
microscopy D. Western blot analysis of DR5-dimerization using non-reduced protein lysates isolated from control and 5-FU-treated
HCT116 wt and p53-/- cells. Reduced samples were separated in SDS-PAGE for detection of p53 and cle PARP E.

(Continued )
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

43686

Oncotarget

Figure 4: (Continued ) Appearance of processed TRAIL was investigated by SDS-PAGE using HCT116 wt cell samples, either

treated with 5-FU alone or in combination with olaparib (500 nM), E64 (10 μM), leupeptin (100 μM), zVAD-fmk (10 μM), BAPTA
(10 μM) or CA074 (10 μM) F. Cells, treated either with 5-FU (30 μM, 48 h) or recombinant TRAIL (10 ng/ml) alone, or in combination
with a soluble recombinant DR5 (2 μg/ml; sDR5), were fixed in ethanol and stained with propidium iodide before FACS determination of
subG1 populations G. Cells were transfected with siRNA targeting TRAIL (30 nmol) 24 h in advance of 5-FU-treatment. Protein lysates
were isolated and separated by SDS-PAGE in order to analyze TRAIL, cle lamin A and p53 using specific antibodies H. GAPDH and Ku80
were used as a control for equal loading of samples in (A, B, E, F and H). Processed TRAIL and caspase-8 as well as the short isoforms of
DR5 are indicated with asterisks (B and F). Bars, 10 μm (D).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

43687

Oncotarget

Figure 5: Irrespectively of p53 status, induction of apoptosis in HCT116 cells occurs as a consequence of 5-FU-mediated
RNA-stress. HCT116 wt A. and p53-/- B. cells were treated with 5-FU alone for 24 and 48 h, respectively, in the absence or in the presence

of either thymidine or uridine. Total cell lysates were then separated by SDS-PAGE and analyzed by immunoblotting with respect to p53,
caspase-8 and cle PARP. In a similar experimental set-up, phospho-activation of p53 (S15 S33 and S46) was analyzed by SDS-PAGE
in HCT116 wt cells treated with 5-FU (375 μM) alone (15 or 20 h) and compared to the p53 phospho-status in lysates isolated from
cells co-treated with an equimolar concentration of uridine. Quantifications of p53 and its phospho-variants were accomplished through
normalization with GAPDH. 15 and 20 h treatments are normalized separately C. Probing of GAPDH was used to confirm equal loading
of the samples (A–C). Processed caspase-8 is indicated with asterisks (A and B).

detected in etoposide (VP16)-treated HCT116 p53-/- cells.
However, neither the apoptotic marker cle PARP nor
γH2AX appeared in wt samples harvested 24 h postetoposide induction. DNA stress results in the activation
of PARP-1 and PARP-2, which, among other things,
catalyzes the assembly of poly(ADP-ribose) (PAR) chains
onto itself and adjacent nuclear proteins, a modification
that serves to facilitate repair by attracting PAR-binding
DNA repair factors [22]. By using PAR polymers as a
marker for DNA lesions, our conclusion that DNA damage
is a secondary event to 5-FU-induced apoptosis could be
verified (Figure 6C). Similar to γH2AX, PAR remained
in the presence of zVAD-fmk when cells were treated by
the alternative chemotherapeutic agents. Finally, DNAdamage and apoptosis originating from 5-FU-mediated TS
inhibition would theoretically be augmented by leucovorin
(folinic acid), which is acting in synergy with 5-FU with
respect to TS silencing. However, any enhancement of
apoptosis was not detected by combinatorial treatment

double-strand breaks (DSB) through perturbations in the
replication and repair mechanisms. Massive phosphoactivation of the histone H2AX (γH2AX), one of the
widely used markers for DSB, were indeed detected
in HCT116 wt and p53-deficient cells but seem to
appear simultaneously with lamin cleavage (Figure 6A
and 6B). Therefore, we next investigated whether DNA
damage is a cause or consequence of 5-FU-induced
apoptosis. In the presence or absence of a functional p53,
the addition of zVAD-fmk in combination with 5-FU
reduced γH2AX to background levels, demonstrating
DNA damage to be a secondary event occurring as a
result of apoptosis (Figure 6C). In agreement with these
results, immunostaining associated γH2AX with cleaved
lamin A and condensed nuclei in treated cells (Figure 6D).
In contrast, treatment with other chemotherapeutic agents,
including doxorubicin, cisplatin and camptothecin,
generated γH2AX activity, which remained in the presence
of zVAD-fmk (Figure 6C). A similar pattern was also
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

43688

Oncotarget

Figure 6: Markers of DNA damage appear as a consequence of 5-FU-induced caspase-activity. Analysis of p53, cle lamin

A and γH2AX in SDS-PAGE separated protein lysates from HCT116 wt A. and HCT116 p53-/- cells B. harvested at multiple time points
post-5-FU-treatment. HCT116 wt and p53-/- cells were treated for 24 and 48 h, respectively, with the chemotherapeutic agents indicated,
either alone, or in the presence of 10 μM zVAD-fmk. Total cell lysates were then analyzed by immunoblotting with respect to the apoptotic
marker cle PARP and the DNA-damage indicators γH2AX and PAR C. Probing of GAPDH was used to confirm equal loading of the
samples (A–C). Along with control cells, HCT116 cells (wt and p53-/-) induced with 5-FU for 20 and 36 h, respectively, were fixed in 4%
formaldehyde immunostained using cle lamin A (green) and γH2AX (red) specific antibodies. Cell nuclei were counterstained by DAPI
(blue) and samples analyzed by confocal microscopy D. Bars, 10 μm.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

43689

Oncotarget

using leucovorin and 5-FU compared to 5-FU alone
(Supplementary figure 9). In conclusion, these results
indicate that irrespectively of p53 function and in contrast
to a panel of other anti-tumor agents, primary DNA
damage may not be the origin of 5-FU-induced apoptosis
in some cell lines.

treated with 5-FU as a single agent (Figure  7A–7C).
However, using extended incubation times with
lower 5-FU concentrations, we clearly demonstrated
that the apoptotic ratio between p53-deficient cells
treated with the olaparib combinatorial setting and
5-FU alone not only persisted but actually increased
significantly, while it remained constant in p53 wt
cells (Supplementary figure 10). In addition, to verify the
general validity of our data, p53 was suppressed by siRNA
in RKO cells, which were subsequently treated with either
5-FU or olaparib alone, or their combination. Similar to
what was concluded in HCT116 cells, a synergetic effect
of the drugs was detected only in RKO cells transfected
with p53 siRNA (Figure 7D). Although a more detailed
mechanistic explanation for this finding remains to be
established, the data may certainly be of importance for
the design of future combinatorial tumor therapies.

Sensitization of tumor cell lines to 5-FU by
chemical- and RNAi-mediated inhibition of
PARP occurs specifically in the absence of p53
Several members of the PARP protein family,
including PARP1-4 as well as tankyrase-1 and -2 have
poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation activity, enabling transfer of
ADP-ribose molecules to substrate proteins (PARylated
proteins). This posttranslational modification is associated
with several biological processes but its implication in the
recognition and repair of DNA damage has so far been
the main focus for future tumor therapies. In particular,
inhibition of PARP-1 using small molecule inhibitors
has received interest due to promising effects, both as
a single agent and in combinatorial treatment regimens
[23]. Although the marker for DNA DSB γH2AX is
activated as a consequence of apoptosis in the current
experimental system, studies using radiolabeled 5-FU
have concluded that drug metabolites are misincorporated
into DNA in a general fashion [24, 25]. At present, no
such examination has been performed using HCT116
cells, but since uridine and not thymidine reverses 5-FUinduced apoptosis, any toxicity evolving from DNA
stress might be suppressed by a shielding DNA repair
capacity, resulting in cell death as a consequence of other
stress targets such as RNA. Accordingly, manipulation
of DNA repair systems could be a feasible approach to
enhance the apoptotic 5-FU response in some tumor cells
[26]. As PARP-1 has been implicated in several modes
of single- and double-strand DNA repair, including
base excision repair (BER), homologous recombination
(HR) and non-homologous end joining (NHEJ) [23],
we examined the combinatorial treatment effects of
5-FU and olaparib (PARP1–4 inhibitor) [27]. To our
surprise, in comparison to 5-FU alone, an enhancement
of cleaved caspase-3 and the processing of caspase-8
were detected by SDS-PAGE specifically in HCT116
p53-/- cells. Moreover, γH2AX signals also remained after
the addition of zVAD-fmk to combinatory-treated cells,
indicating primary DNA damage only in the absence of
p53 (Figure 7A). With respect to apoptosis, a similar
response pattern, using lamin A cleavage as an indicator
of apoptosis and sub G1-populations of overall cell death,
was confirmed by RNAi-targeting of PARP1, thereby
identifying this particular member of the protein family
as the main contributor of the effect (Figure 7B and
7C). Even if olaparib and siRNA contributed to 5-FUinduced apoptosis in HCT116 p53−/− cells, the overall
response was still low compared to the wt  counterpart
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

DISCUSSION
The metabolic activation of 5-FU potentiates
several distinct stress conditions within cancer cells. As
TK misrecognizes FdUMP as a substrate, its enzymatic
silencing renders dTTP starvation and elevated dUTP
pools, which in turn lead to nucleotide misincorporation
and mutagenesis, as well as to defects in DNA
replication and repair processes. In addition, several
lines of evidences support a model where drug toxicity is
generated from RNA-related effects. While early works
associated tumor cell lethality with the incorporation
of 5-FU into RNA [28, 29], recent achievements have
further specified mechanisms leading to malfunctioning
rRNA processing and pre-mRNA splicing defects
as explanations for drug-induced toxicity [30, 31].
Although experimental evidences are lacking, the fast
post-transcriptional reduction of ribosomal proteins and
translational capacity in treated cells might reflect early
rRNA processing disorders [32]. Apart from apoptosis,
stress conditions resulting from 5-FU treatment include the
unfolded protein response (UPR) succeeding endoplasmic
reticulum (ER) stress and stimulation of autophagy [33,
34]. To our knowledge, a more complete view of how
these response patterns interrelate has not yet been
presented. Interestingly, however, as a way to maintain cell
homeostasis, ER stress may reduce translational capacity
via the inhibition of rRNA synthesis and stimulation of
autophagy [35], processes which are associated with 5-FU
treatment.
Our aim was to establish a functional connection
leading from a specific drug target point to a discrete cell
death mechanism and further describe how p53-deficiency
interferes with this process (Figure 8). Obtained data
supports the notion that apoptotic mechanisms induced
by 5-FU originate from RNA-related stress, at least in
selected cell types. In view of the fact that uridine but not
thymidine liberates cells from apoptotic stress stimulated
43690

Oncotarget

by 5-FU-metabolites in a p53-independent manner, the
tumor suppressor status of cells may not be an answer to
why different cell lines seem to differ with respect to drug
stress origin. Results from the functional assay using free
nucleosides were confirmed by the disclosure of γH2AXand PAR-appearances as secondary to apoptotic initiation.
Phospho-activation of H2AX occurring as a consequence

of apoptosis has been investigated in some detail by others.
In line with our findings, it has been reported that DISCmediated apoptosis may stimulate not only γH2AX but also
other factors associated with the DNA damage response
[36]. The expression pattern and the activating kinase were
shown to diverge between apoptosis- and DNA damagestimulated phosphorylation of histone H2AX. Importantly,

Figure 7: Sensitization of tumor cell lines to 5-FU by chemical and RNAi-mediated inhibition of PARP occurs
specifically in the absence of p53. HCT116 wt and p53-/- cells, incubated in the presence of 5-FU alone for 24 and 48 h, respectively,
or co-treated with 500 nM of the PARP inhibitor olaparib. Total cell lysates were then analyzed by immunoblotting with respect to p53,
processing of caspases-8 and -3, and γH2AX A. The effect of 5-FU-treatment with respect to p53 and the processing of lamin A in HCT116
wt and p53-/- cells was analyzed by immunoblotting using total protein lysates from cells in which PARP1 had been silenced by means
of RNAi (30 nmol). A non-targeting control siRNA was used to eliminate the possibility that transfections per se interfered with analysis
outcome B. The consequence of 5-FU treatment with respect to sub G1 populations in HCT116 wt and p53-/- cells was analyzed by FACS
using cells in which PARP 1 had been silenced by means of RNAi (30 nmol) C.

(Continued )
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

43691

Oncotarget

Figure 7: (Continued ) Immunoblot-detection of DNA-damaging (γH2AX) and apoptotic (cle PARP) markers in 5-FU-treated RKO
control cells, and in cells where p53 suppression was accomplished by means of RNAi. Comparisons of control, si control (sictrl) and
sip53 transfected cells are outlined in D. GAPDH and Ku80 were used as a control for equal loading of samples (A, B and D). Processed
caspase-8 is indicated with asterisks (A).

in contrast to apoptotic caspase-dependent Chk2-activity,
γH2AX did not amplify the proceedings of cell death
[36, 37], which is in line with our previous observations [6].
Instead, apoptotic H2AX activity seems to be important for
nuclear morphological changes, and especially caspaseactivated DNase (CAD)-mediated DNA-ladder formation
[37]. To what extent PAR also participates in any such
processes is currently not known. In contrast to 5-FUtreated cells, where both PAR and γH2AX were reduced
below detection level in the presence of a pan-caspaseinhibitor, signals decreased but remained measurable in
experimental conditions embracing co-treatment with
alternative chemotherapeutic agents. Apart from serving
as positive controls for primary DNA damage, diminished
γH2AX in these samples also indicate that apoptosis- and
DNA-damage-stimulated phosphorylation of the histone
may occur simultaneously in cells. PAR, on the other
hand, persisted when zVAD-fmk was combined with all
drugs except 5-FU, thus implying caspase-dependent PAR
formation as being specific to this particular treatment
regimen. The significance of the DISC for 5-FU-induced
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

apoptosis was accomplished by no less than five discrete
approaches: FLIPL and FADD-DN overexpression, as well
as RNAi-targeting of DR4, DR5 and caspase-8. Combined
with the fact that uridine hindered caspase-8 processing
and that zVAD-fmk reduced markers of DNA damage
to background levels, the current data set is indicating a
link between 5-FU-induced RNA-stress and the apoptotic
initiating point constituted by DR4 and DR5 (Figure 8).
How, then, is death receptors oligomerized? The
conclusion from our data set is that the cognate receptor
ligand TRAIL is obligatory for DISC aggregation and
initiation of the caspase cascade. However, activation of
DR4 and DR5 seems to occur via intracellular, membrane
bound TRAIL. Thereby, TRAIL, DR4 and DR5 are
specified as rate-limiting factors for 5-FU-induced toxicity,
and in agreement with previous reports, p53 contributes
to transcriptional regulation of the corresponding genes
[18, 38]. Delimitation of either factor may consequently
be the explanation for why suboptimal apoptosis occurs
in cells lacking the tumor suppressor. Since preclinical
models demonstrated that recombinant TRAIL has

43692

Oncotarget

activity

Figure 8: Schematic illustration of 5-FU-induced apoptotic signaling in HCT116 cells (for details, see text).
potent anti-tumor activity without exhibiting systemic
cytotoxicity [39], DR4 and DR5 were postulated as
potential targets for future cancer therapeutics. In fact,
agents with pronounced anti-tumorigenic potential, such
as inhibitors of histone deacetylases (HDACIs), retinoids
and interferons, depend on TRAIL expression and the
subsequent activation of death receptors for the execution
of tumor cell death [18, 38]. The conclusion from the
present work is that 5-FU may also stimulate a similar
death process. It must be noted that details regarding the
TRAIL-DR4/5-interaction requires further exploration.
In silico analysis of TRAIL using an algorithm for the
prediction of transmembrane helices and their orientation
(TMHMM; Center for Biological Sequence Analysis,
Technical University of Denmark) indicated the ligand
as a mainly cytosolic type 1 integral membrane protein.
Accordingly, soluble TRAIL (sTRAIL) is generated
within cells and then exported for subsequent receptor
oligomerization. A processed TRAIL variant was indeed
detected in treated samples by SDS-PAGE, but loss of the
band in 5-FU and zVAD-fmk co-treated cells suggests
that the appearance of this potential sTRAIL occurs as a
consequence of caspase activity. Since reduced but still
significant induction of DR4 and DR5 gene transcription
could also be detected in the absence of p53, it is clear
that transcription factors separated from the p53 protein
network support gene expression. For 5-FU-induced
apoptosis, these factors remain elusive but zerumbone
and celecoxib, two ER stress-inducing drugs, were
recently shown to activate DR5 transcription by means
of the activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4)/C/EBP
homologous protein and CHOP/ATF3 transcriptional
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

cascade in a p53-independent manner [19]. Whether p53transcriptional regulation of Bax or PUMA also contributes
to the efficiency of 5-FU-induced apoptosis has not been
investigated. However, considering their central role in
the deregulation of mitochondrial membrane potential, it
is likely. Our data verify a signaling link between RNArelated stress and DISC-mediated apoptosis. Although
RNA lesions seem to serve as a foundation for caspase
cascade initiation, we cannot exclude the possibility that
silent genomic stress is introduced by 5-FU metabolites,
for example through FdUTP misincorporation. In fact,
data revealing specific augmentation of caspase activation
by olaparib and 5-FU co-treatment in p53-deficient cells
is in support of such a scenario. Since PARP-1 has been
implicated in the BER process, stalled enzyme efficiency
induced by RNAi or chemical inhibitors may lead to a
more prominent damaging effect of 5-FU on DNA [23].
Present data only allows us to speculate regarding the
reasons why PARP-1 inhibition or RNAi silencing in
combination with 5-FU primarily affects p53-negative
HCT116 cells. One explanation could be synthetic
lethality, where the absence of p53 renders cells with
additional DNA repair defects and thus greater sensitivity
to combined treatment with PARP-inhibitors and 5-FU.
For example, it was shown that HR deficiency caused
by phosphatase and tensin homolog (PTEN) mutations
sensitizes tumor cells to PARP inhibitors, both in vitro
and in vivo [40]. Similarly, selective anti-proliferative
effects of BRCA1 or BRCA2 (breast cancer, early onset)deficient tumors have been demonstrated with olaparib
[41]. Alternatively, p53 has also been reported to stimulate
BER directly [42], thus suggesting those cells lacking
43693

Oncotarget

the tumor suppressor to be more susceptible to PARP
inhibition. In conclusion, our results show that 5-FU can
stimulate TRAIL- and DR4/5-dependent apoptosis, which
is facilitated by p53 but still proceeds in the absence of
the tumor suppressor. Although the dominant origin for
the process seems to be RNA-related, further analyses
should be designed to elucidate whether or not other stress
targets of the drug also contribute to the chemotherapeutic
response.

in Hank’s balanced salt solution (Life Technologies)
containing 0.1 μM TMRE. For assessment of
mitochondrial ROS, cells were stained with MitoSOX™
Red (Life Technologies) according to the manufacturer’s
recommendations. Analyses were accomplished by using
a FACScan Becton Dickinson flow cytometer using the
accompanying software.

Gel electrophoresis and immunoblotting

MATERIALS AND METHODS

SDS-PAGE was performed according to previously
described procedures [6].

Cell culture

DR5 dimerization assay

The HCT116 parental cell line, its variants (kindly
provided by Professor Bert Vogelstein) and RKO cells
(ATCC) were cultured in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s
medium (DMEM), supplemented with heat-inactivated
FBS (10%) (GIBCO, Invitrogen, San Diego, CA, USA) and
PenStrep (100 U/ml penicillin, 100 mg/ml streptomycin;
Sigma-Aldrich, Saint Luis, MO, USA). Cell-treatment with
the antimetabolite 5-FU (Accord Healthcare Ltd, Harrow,
UK) was performed at concentrations and incubationtimes as indicated in the figures. In selected experiments
the synthetic pan-caspase inhibitor N-benzyloxycarbonylVal-Ala-Asp(O-Me) fluoromethyl ketone (zVAD-fmk,
10 μM) (Peptide Institute, Inc., Osaka, Japan), the
PARP inhibitor olaparib (500 nM; Selleck Chemicals,
Houston, TX, USA), E64D (10 μM; Sigma-Aldrich),
pepstatin A (7 μM; Sigma-Aldrich), leupeptin (100 μM;
Sigma-Aldrich), BAPTA (10 μM; Life Technologies,
Carlsbad, CA, USA), recombinant soluble DR5 (2 μg/ml;
Sigma-Aldrich), recombinant TRAIL (10 ng/ml;
Life Technologies), leucovorin (Hospira Nordic AB,
Stockholm, Sweden) or CA074 (10 μM; Sigma-Aldrich)
were added to cell cultures 1 h prior to drug treatment.
In addition, treatments of cells using doxorubicin (2 μM;
Sigma-Aldrich), uridine (375 μM; Sigma-Aldrich),
thymidine (375 μM; Sigma-Aldrich), etoposide (20 μM;
Ebewe, Austria), cisplatin (40 μM; Ebewe, Austria) and
camptothecin (600 nM; Sigma-Aldrich) were performed
in selected experiments.

DR5 dimers were analyzed by SDS-PAGE using
lysates isolated without reducing agent. Cells were treated
with 5-FU, washed with PBS, and lysed for 20 min on ice
in 20 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5), 150 mM NaCl, 10% glycerol,
and 1% Triton X-100 supplemented with cOmplete
phosphatase/protease inhibitors (Roche Diagnostics).
After centrifuged at 16,000 × g at 4°C, the cleared lysates
were divided into two aliquots and diluted with 3 × SDS
sample buffer with or without β-mercaptoethanol. The
samples containing reducing agent were incubated at 95°C
for 5 min, whereas the non-reduced samples were kept at
RT before loading.

Expression vectors and retroviral transduction
The retroviral expression vectors pLXINhFADD
and pXINhFLIPL have been described previously
[44]. Retroviral particles were produced by transient
transfection of the Phoenix-Ampho packaging cell line
(kindly provided by Dr. GP Nolan, Stanford University,
USA). Production of viral particles and retroviral
transductions were performed as described [44].
Transduced cells were selected by treatment with 0.8 mg/
ml of Geneticin (Invitrogen).

RNA isolation and RT-PCR
Total RNA was isolated from control and 5-FUtreated HCT116 wt and p53-/- cells with RNAeasy mini
kit (Qiagen) according to the manufacturer’s instructions.
The Maxima First Strand cDNA Synthesis Kit was used
for cDNA synthesis (Life Technologies). Gene expression
was measured using Maxima SYBR Green qPCR Master
Mix (Fermentas) with Applied Biosystems 7500 Real-time
PCR (Applied Biosystems). Relative gene expression was
calculated with 2-ΔΔCt method using Actin expression for
normalization.

Mitochondrial AIF and cytochrome c release
Detection of mitochondrial AIF and cytochrome c
release was accomplished by the digitonin (Calbiochem,
San Diego, CA USA) organelle fractionation procedure
performed as described [43].

Analysis of mitochondrial membrane
potential and ROS

Primers used

Mitochondrial membrane potential (ΔΨm) was
estimated with TMRE (tetra-methyl-rhodamine-ethyl
ester, Life Technologies). Cells were incubated for 20 min
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

DR5
(F-TCAGGTGAAGTGGAGCTAAGTC,
R-GTGTACAATCACCGACCTT),
43694

Oncotarget

RNA interference

DR4 (F-ACTCGCTGTCCACTTTCGTCTCTGA,
R-AGGCATCCCCTGGGCCTGCTGTA),
actin
(F-GCTGTGCTATCCCTGTACGC,
R-GAGGGCATACCCCTCGTAGA).

Transfection of TRAIL (siTNFSF10, s16665), DR5
(siTNFSF10B, s16756), DR4 (siTNFSF10A, s16764),
negative control (siNegative Control No1) (silencer
select, Life Technologies), p53 (siTP53-9,FlexiTube),
PARP (siPARP1 HP Custom siRNA Qiagen, Hilden,
Germany), caspase-8 (L-003466-00) and negative control
(D-00120613) ONTARGET-plus SMARTpool siRNAs
(Dharmacon, CO, Lafayette, USA) was performed using
the Lipofectamine RNAiMAX transfection reagent
(Life Technologies) according to the manufacturer’s
instructions.

Transmission electron microscopy
Cells were fixed in 2.5% (w/v) glutaraldehyde in
0.1 M phosphate buffer, pH 7.4 for 30 min at RT, and fixed
in the same fixative in the refrigerator. After rinsing in 0.1 M
phosphate buffer cells were centrifuged and the pellets post
fixed in 2% (w/v) osmium tetroxide in 0.1 M phosphate
buffer (pH 7.4) at 4°C for 2 h, dehydrated in ethanol
followed by acetone, and embedded in LX-112 (Ladd).
Ultrathin sections (~40–50 nm) were cut using a Leica EM
UC 6 ultramicrotome. Sections were subsequently contrasted
with uranyl acetate followed by lead citrate and examined
in a Tecnai 12 Spirit Bio TWIN transmission electron
microscope (FEI) at 100 kV. Digital images were taken using
a Veleta camera (Olympus Soft Imaging Solutions).

Colony assay
Eighteen cells per cm2 were seeded one day in
advance of experimental onset. 5-FU at concentrations
indicated in the figures was maintained for 48 h. Cell
colonies were then allowed to form over 10 days before
staining in a 0.04% (w/v) crystal violet solution.

Immunofluorescence

Lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) measurement

Immunocytochemistry was performed according to
previously described procedures [6].

Analysis of homogeneous plasma membrane
integrity was used as an indicator of necrosis by taking
advantage of the fluorometric CytoTox-ONE™ Assay
(Promega, Madison, WI, USA) and by following the
manufacturer’s recommendations.

Antibodies
The following primary antibodies were used in
western blotting: anti-p53 monoclonal antibody, antiAIF (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Santa Cruz, CA, USA),
anti-PAR mAb, anti-GAPDH polyclonal antibody (pAb;
Trevigen, Gaithersburg, MD, USA), anti-phospho-p53
pAbs (Ser 15, 33, and 46), anti-cleaved-caspase-3 pAb,
anti-γH2AX (Ser 139) pAb; cleaved PARP mAb (Asp214),
cleaved lamin A mAb, PERK mAb (Cell Signaling, Danvers,
MA, USA), anti-tubulin mAb, anti-DR5 pAb; anti-DR4
pAb (Sigma-Aldrich), anti-PARP mAb, anti-cytochrome c,
anti-TRAIL mAb, Ku80 mAb (BD Biosciences, Franklin
Lakes, NJ, USA), anti-cFLIP mAb (Alexis, San Diego,
CA, USA) and anti-caspase-8 mAb (kindly provided by
Professor PH Krammer and Dr. I Lavrik, German Cancer
Research Center, Heidelberg, Germany). Analysis of DR5
in immunofluorescence was performed using the mAb F2/
B4 (kindly provided by Dr. L Andêra, Academy of Sciences,
Prague, Czech Republic). For other immunofluorescence
stainings, antibodies identical to those in western blotting
procedures were used. Fluorescent secondary antibodies
directed against mouse and rabbit (Alexa488 and Alexa594)
were purchased from Molecular Probes (Invitrogen).

Cell cycle and sub G1 analysis
Harvested cells were fixed in 70% ethanol for 1 h at
4°C. Repeated washes in PBS and RNase A (100 μg/ml,
Invitrogen) treatment for 1 h at 37°C were followed by
propidium iodide staining (50 μg/ml, Sigma-Aldrich).
Analysis in FL3 on DDM mode was performed using the
BD Accuri C6 system in combination with BD CSampler
software (Becton-Dickinson, San Jose, CA, USA).

Immunoprecipitation of DR5
Immunoprecipitation of DR5 was performed using
the protocol described and taking advantage of the specific
DR5 mAb (clone F2/B4, 3 μg/ml IP buffer) [43].

Statistical analysis
Results are expressed as the mean ± standard
deviation (SD). GraphPad Prism 5.02 software and t-test
were used in analysis.

Measurement of caspase-3/-7-like activities

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

Measurement of the caspase-3/-7-like substrate
Ac-DEVD-AMC (acetyl Asp-Glu-Val-Asp 7-amido4-methylcoumarin; Peptide Institute, Osaka, Japan)
cleavage was performed as described [45].
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

We thank Professors Bert Vogelstein, Peter
H. Krammer, Inna N. Lavrik, and Dr. Ladislav Anděra for
their contribution of cells and antibodies. We would also
43695

Oncotarget

like to mark our gratitude to Dr. Kjell Hultenby for his
assistance in TEM. This study was supported by grants
from the Swedish Science Foundation, the Swedish and
Stockholm Cancer Societies, the Swedish Childhood
Cancer Foundation the Czech Science Foundation (project
No. 15-06650S) and European Regional Development
Fund (CZ.1.07/2.3.00/20.0180). MO is a fellow of the
Swedish Society of Medical Research.

alters the responses to therapeutic agents. J Clin Invest.
1999; 104:263–269.
10.	 Lowe SW, Bodis S, McClatchey A, Remington L,
Ruley HE, Fisher DE, Housman DE, Jacks T. p53 status
and the efficacy of cancer therapy in vivo. Science. 1994;
266:807–810.
11.	 Elsaleh H, Powell B, Soontrapornchai P, Joseph D, Goria F,
Spry N, Iacopetta B. p53 gene mutation, microsatellite
instability and adjuvant chemotherapy: impact on survival
of 388 patients with Dukes’ C colon carcinoma. Oncology.
2000; 58:52–59.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
The authors declare no conflict of interest.

12.	 Yang B, Eshleman JR, Berger NA, Markowitz SD. Wildtype p53 protein potentiates cytotoxicity of therapeutic
agents in human colon cancer cells. Clin Cancer Res. 1996;
2:1649–1657.

REFERENCES
1.	 Longley DB, Harkin DP, Johnston PG. 5-fluorouracil:
mechanisms of action and clinical strategies. Nat Rev
Cancer. 2003; 3:330–338.

13.	 Ozoren N, Kim K, Burns TF, Dicker DT, Moscioni AD,
El-Deiry WS. The caspase 9 inhibitor Z-LEHD-FMK protects human liver cells while permitting death of cancer
cells exposed to tumor necrosis factor-related apoptosisinducing ligand. Cancer Res. 2000; 60:6259–6265.

2.	 Scherf U, Ross DT, Waltham M, Smith LH, Lee  JK,
Tanabe  L, Kohn KW, Reinhold WC, Myers TG,
Andrews  DT, Scudiero DA, Eisen MB, Sausville EA,
Pommier Y, Botstein D, Brown PO, et al. A gene expression database for the molecular pharmacology of cancer.
Nat Genet. 2000; 24:236–244.

14.	 Artus C, Boujrad H, Bouharrour A, Brunelle MN, Hoos S,
Yuste VJ, Lenormand P, Rousselle JC, Namane A,
England P, Lorenzo HK, Susin SA. AIF promotes chromatinolysis and caspase-independent programmed necrosis by interacting with histone H2AX. EMBO J. 2010;
29:1585–1599.

3.	 Noordhuis P, Holwerda U, Van der Wilt CL,
Van  Groeningen CJ, Smid K, Meijer S, Pinedo HM,
Peters GJ. 5-Fluorouracil incorporation into RNA and DNA
in relation to thymidylate synthase inhibition of human
colorectal cancers. Ann Oncol. 2004; 15:1025–1032.

15.	 Vaculova A, Kaminskyy V, Jalalvand E, Surova O,
Zhivotovsky B. Doxorubicin and etoposide sensitize small
cell lung carcinoma cells expressing caspase-8 to TRAIL.
Mol Cancer. 2010; 9:87.

4.	 Xiao Z, Xue J, Sowin TJ, Rosenberg SH, Zhang H. A novel
mechanism of checkpoint abrogation conferred by Chk1
downregulation. Oncogene. 2005; 24:1403–1411.

16.	 Duiker EW, de Vries EG, Mahalingam D, Meersma GJ,
Boersma-van Ek W, Hollema H, Lub-de Hooge MN,
van Dam GM, Cool RH, Quax WJ, Samali A, van der Zee AG,
de Jong S. Enhanced antitumor efficacy of a DR5-specific
TRAIL variant over recombinant human TRAIL in a
­bioluminescent ovarian cancer xenograft model. Clin
Cancer Res. 2009; 15:2048–2057.

5.	 Hwang PM, Bunz F, Yu J, Rago C, Chan TA, Murphy MP,
Kelso GF, Smith RA, Kinzler KW, Vogelstein B.
Ferredoxin reductase affects p53-dependent, 5-fluorouracilinduced apoptosis in colorectal cancer cells. Nat Med. 2001;
7:1111–1117.
6.	 Can G, Akpinar B, Baran Y, Zhivotovsky B, Olsson M.
5-Fluorouracil signaling through a calcium-calmodulindependent pathway is required for p53 activation and apoptosis in colon carcinoma cells. Oncogene. 2013; 32:4529–4538.

17.	 Liu X, Yue P, Khuri FR, Sun SY. p53 upregulates death
receptor 4 expression through an intronic p53 binding site.
Cancer Res. 2004; 64:5078–5083.
18.	 Wu GS, Burns TF, McDonald ER, 3rd, Jiang W,
Meng R, Krantz ID, Kao G, Gan DD, Zhou JY,
Muschel R, Hamilton SR, Spinner NB, Markowitz S,
Wu G, el-Deiry WS. KILLER/DR5 is a DNA damage-­
inducible p53-regulated death receptor gene. Nat Genet.
1997; 17:141–143.

7.	 Wang S, El-Deiry WS. Inducible silencing of KILLER/DR5
in vivo promotes bioluminescent colon tumor xenograft
growth and confers resistance to chemotherapeutic agent
5-fluorouracil. Cancer Res. 2004; 64:6666–6672.
8.	 O’Connor PM, Jackman J, Bae I, Myers TG, Fan S,
Mutoh  M, Scudiero DA, Monks A, Sausville EA,
Weinstein  JN, Friend S, Fornace AJ Jr., Kohn KW.
Characterization of the p53 tumor suppressor pathway in
cell lines of the National Cancer Institute anticancer drug
screen and correlations with the growth-inhibitory potency
of 123 anticancer agents. Cancer Res. 1997; 57:4285–4300.

19.	 Edagawa M, Kawauchi J, Hirata M, Goshima H, Inoue M,
Okamoto T, Murakami A, Maehara Y, Kitajima S. Role of
Activating Transcription Factor 3 (ATF3) in Endoplasmic
Reticulum (ER) Stress-induced Sensitization of p53-­
deficient Human Colon Cancer Cells to Tumor Necrosis
Factor (TNF)-related Apoptosis-inducing Ligand (TRAIL)mediated Apoptosis through Up-regulation of Death
Receptor 5 (DR5) by Zerumbone and Celecoxib. J Biol
Chem. 2014; 289:21544–21561.

9.	 Bunz F, Hwang PM, Torrance C, Waldman T, Zhang Y,
Dillehay L, Williams J, Lengauer C, Kinzler KW,
Vogelstein B. Disruption of p53 in human cancer cells
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

43696

Oncotarget

20.	 Mariani SM, Krammer PH. Differential regulation of
TRAIL and CD95 ligand in transformed cells of the T and
B lymphocyte lineage. Eur J Immunol. 1998; 28:973–982.

34.	 Pan X, Zhang X, Sun H, Zhang J, Yan M, Zhang H.
Autophagy inhibition promotes 5-fluorouraci-induced apoptosis by stimulating ROS formation in human non-small cell
lung cancer A549 cells. PLoS One. 2013; 8:e56679.

21.	 Petak I, Tillman DM, Houghton JA. p53 dependence
of Fas induction and acute apoptosis in response to
5-­fluorouracil-leucovorin in human colon carcinoma cell
lines. Clin Cancer Res. 2000; 6:4432–4441.

35.	 Verfaillie T, Salazar M, Velasco G, Agostinis P. Linking
ER Stress to Autophagy: Potential Implications for Cancer
Therapy. Int J Cell Biol. 2010; 2010:930509.

22.	 El-Khamisy SF, Masutani M, Suzuki H, Caldecott KW. A
requirement for PARP-1 for the assembly or stability of
XRCC1 nuclear foci at sites of oxidative DNA damage.
Nucleic Acids Res. 2003; 31:5526–5533.

36.	 Solier S, Sordet O, Kohn KW, Pommier Y. Death
­receptor-induced activation of the Chk2- and histone
H2AX-associated DNA damage response pathways. Mol
Cell Biol. 2009; 29:68–82.

23.	 Wang Z, Wang F, Tang T, Guo C. The role of PARP1 in the
DNA damage response and its application in tumor therapy.
Front Med. 2012; 6:156–164.

37.	 Lu C, Zhu F, Cho YY, Tang F, Zykova T, Ma WY,
Bode AM, Dong Z. Cell apoptosis: requirement of H2AX
in DNA ladder formation, but not for the activation of caspase-3. Mol Cell. 2006; 23:121–132.

24.	 Sawyer RC, Stolfi RL, Martin DS, Spiegelman S.
Incorporation of 5-fluorouracil into murine bone marrow
DNA in vivo. Cancer Res. 1984; 44:1847–1851.

38.	 Kuribayashi K, Krigsfeld G, Wang W, Xu J, Mayes PA,
Dicker DT, Wu GS, El-Deiry WS. TNFSF10 (TRAIL), a
p53 target gene that mediates p53-dependent cell death.
Cancer Biol Ther. 2008; 7:2034–2038.

25.	 Major PP, Egan E, Herrick D, Kufe DW. 5-Fluorouracil
incorporation in DNA of human breast carcinoma cells.
Cancer Res. 1982; 42:3005–3009.

39.	 Johnstone RW, Frew AJ, Smyth MJ. The TRAIL apoptotic
pathway in cancer onset, progression and therapy. Nat Rev
Cancer. 2008; 8:782–798.

26.	 Wyatt MD, Wilson DM. 3rd. Participation of DNA repair
in the response to 5-fluorouracil. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2009;
66:788–799.

40.	 Mendes-Pereira AM, Martin SA, Brough R, McCarthy A,
Taylor JR, Kim JS, Waldman T, Lord CJ, Ashworth A.
Synthetic lethal targeting of PTEN mutant cells with PARP
inhibitors. EMBO Mol Med. 2009; 1:315–322.

27.	 Wahlberg E, Karlberg T, Kouznetsova E, Markova N,
Macchiarulo A, Thorsell AG, Pol E, Frostell A, Ekblad T,
Oncu D, Kull B, Robertson GM, Pellicciari R, Schuler H,
Weigelt J. Family-wide chemical profiling and structural
analysis of PARP and tankyrase inhibitors. Nat Biotechnol.
2012; 30:283–288.

41.	 Bryant HE, Schultz N, Thomas HD, Parker KM, Flower D,
Lopez E, Kyle S, Meuth M, Curtin NJ, Helleday T. Specific
killing of BRCA2-deficient tumours with inhibitors of
poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase. Nature. 2005; 434:913–917.

28.	 Kufe DW, Major PP. 5-Fluorouracil incorporation into
human breast carcinoma RNA correlates with cytotoxicity.
J Biol Chem. 1981; 256:9802–9805.

42.	 Song S, Xing G, Yuan L, Wang J, Wang S, Yin Y, Tian C,
He F, Zhang L. N-methylpurine DNA glycosylase inhibits
p53-mediated cell cycle arrest and coordinates with p53 to
determine sensitivity to alkylating agents. Cell Res. 2012;
22:1285–1303.

29.	 Glazer RI, Lloyd LS. Association of cell lethality with
incorporation of 5-fluorouracil and 5-fluorouridine into
nuclear RNA in human colon carcinoma cells in culture.
Mol Pharmacol. 1982; 21:468–473.

43.	 Olsson M, Vakifahmetoglu H, Abruzzo PM, Hogstrand K,
Grandien A, Zhivotovsky B. DISC-mediated activation of
caspase-2 in DNA damage-induced apoptosis. Oncogene.
2009; 28:1949–1959.

30.	 Fang F, Hoskins J, Butler JS. 5-fluorouracil enhances
­exosome-dependent accumulation of polyadenylated
rRNAs. Mol Cell Biol. 2004; 24:10766–10776.

44.	 Djerbi M, Darreh-Shori T, Zhivotovsky B, Grien A.
Characterization of the human FLICE-inhibitory protein locus and comparison of the anti-apoptotic activity
of four different flip isoforms. Scandinavian journal of
­immunology. 2001; 54:180–189.

31.	 Zhao X, Yu YT. Incorporation of 5-fluorouracil into U2
snRNA blocks pseudouridylation and pre-mRNA splicing
in vivo. Nucleic Acids Res. 2007; 35:550–558.
32.	 Marin-Vicente C, Lyutvinskiy Y, Romans Fuertes P,
Zubarev RA, Visa N. The effects of 5-Fluorouracil on the
proteome of colon cancer cells. J Proteome Res. 2013;
12:1969–1979.

45.	 Vakifahmetoglu H, Olsson M, Orrenius S, Zhivotovsky B.
Functional connection between p53 and caspase-2 is essential for apoptosis induced by DNA damage. Oncogene.
2006; 25:5683–5692.

33.	 Yadunandam AK, Yoon JS, Seong YA, Oh CW,
Kim GD. Prospective impact of 5-FU in the induction of
­endoplasmic reticulum stress, modulation of GRP78 expression and autophagy in Sk-Hep1 cells. Int J Oncol. 2012;
41:1036–1042.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

43697

Oncotarget

