Oncotarget, Vol. 7, No. 9

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

PARP1 inhibition radiosensitizes HNSCC cells deficient in
homologous recombination by disabling the DNA replication
fork elongation response
Stephanie Wurster1,*, Fabian Hennes1,*, Ann C. Parplys1, Jasna I. Seelbach1, Wael Y.
Mansour1,2, Alexandra Zielinski1, Cordula Petersen3, Till S. Clauditz4, Adrian
Münscher5, Anna A. Friedl6,7, Kerstin Borgmann1
1

aboratory of Radiobiology and Experimental Radiooncology, Center of Oncology, University Medical Center HamburgL
Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany

2

Tumor Biology Department, National Cancer Institute, Cairo University, Cairo, Egypt

3

Department of Radiotherapy and Radiooncology, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany

4

Department of Pathology, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany

5

 epartment of Otorhinolaryngology and Head and Neck Surgery, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg,
D
Germany

6

Department of Radiation Oncology, Ludwig Maximilians University, Munich, Germany

7

 linical Cooperation Group ‘Personalized Radiotherapy of Head and Neck Cancer’, Helmholtz Center Munich, Neuherberg,
C
Germany

*

These authors have contributed equally to this work

Correspondence to: K
 erstin Borgmann, e-mail: borgmann@uke.de
Keywords: homologous recombination, PARP1 inhibition, replication stress, ionizing radiation
Received: July 07, 2015	

Accepted: December 22, 2015	

Published: January 19, 2016

ABSTRACT
There is a need to develop new, more efficient therapies for head and neck
cancer (HNSCC) patients. It is currently unclear whether defects in DNA repair
genes play a role in HNSCCs’ resistance to therapy. PARP1 inhibitors (PARPi)
were found to be “synthetic lethal” in cancers deficient in BRCA1/2 with impaired
homologous recombination. Since tumors rarely have these particular mutations,
there is considerable interest in finding alternative determinants of PARPi sensitivity.
Effectiveness of combined irradiation and PARPi olaparib was evaluated in ten HNSCC
cell lines, subdivided into HR-proficient and HR-deficient cell lines using a GFP-based
reporter assay. Both groups were equally sensitive to PARPi alone. Combined treatment
revealed stronger synergistic interactions in the HR-deficient group. Because HR is
mainly active in S-Phase, replication processes were analyzed. A stronger impact
of treatment on replication processes (p = 0.04) and an increased number of radial
chromosomes (p = 0.003) were observed in the HR-deficient group. We could show
that radiosensitization by inhibition of PARP1 strongly correlates with HR competence
in a replication-dependent manner. Our observations indicate that PARP1 inhibitors
are promising candidates for enhancing the therapeutic ratio achieved by radiotherapy
via disabling DNA replication processes in HR-deficient HNSCCs.

INTRODUCTION

the poor survival rate of patients. Current treatment
regimens using a combination of radiotherapy and
standard chemotherapeutic agents such as cisplatin,
5-Flourouracil and etoposide have proved to be
effective; however, combined modality treatments
often result in unacceptable levels of toxicity to the
patient [1].
In search for suitable alternatives, considerable
interest has recently focused on DNA repair pathways
as potential targets for novel cancer treatments [2].

Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma
(HNSCC) is the sixth leading cause of cancer,
accounting for roughly 4–6% of all new tumors
diagnosed. Overall survival rates have not significantly
changed over the past 30 years and for patients
presenting with locally invasive stage III and IV,
with only 30% long term survival. Radiotherapy has
played an increasingly important role in improving
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

9732

Oncotarget

The poly(adenosine diphosphate ribose) polymerase
(PARP) family of DNA end-binding nuclear proteins
is involved in one such pathway of DNA repair [3] and
inhibition of PARP1 (PARPi) has become a promising
therapeutic approach for the treatment of certain
types of cancers, especially breast and ovarian cancer.
It plays a critical role in the base excision repair pathway
(BER), and is a key factor in the repair of single-strand
breaks. Notably, a recent study also showed a function
of PARP1 in alternative end-joining processes [4]. The
popularity of PARP inhibitors is based on the observation
that PARP inhibitors could selectively kill homologous
recombination (HR)-deficient cancer cells [5, 6], enabling
a so-called “synthetic lethality” approach. The reason
behind the sensitivity of HR-deficient cancer cells to
PARP inhibition is thought to be the accumulation of
single-stranded DNA breaks in the absence of PAR
synthesis, leading to replication fork collapse and
double-stranded breaks, which require HR factors for
repair [7]. Apart from its direct involvement in repair
processes, PARP1 activity has also recently been reported
to play a direct role in the control of replication [8, 9].
These observations make the combination of PARPi with
irradiation attractive. Ionizing irradiation produces base
damage and single strand breaks that the replication fork
encounters and tumor cells with a defective regulation of
HR and/or replication control are selectively inactivated
through perturbed replication processes.
Radiosensitization by PARPi has been observed in
a variety of different tumor types in preclinical models
[10–16] and there is evidence that the radiosensitization
depends on the fraction of cells in S phase [17, 18].
However, in HNSCCs mutations in HR genes are rare
and not all mutation carriers with familial breast cancer
respond to PARPi [19]. On the other hand, it was recently
shown that also sporadic breast tumors which fail to form
RAD51 foci could be sensitized by PARPi treatment
although they share no common mutations in HR genes
[20]. Therefore, other processes affecting HR might be
involved in the cellular response to PARPi, influencing
the radiosensitization effect.
This idea is further supported by the observation
that haploinsufficiencies in HR genes, such as PALB2
or BRCA1 are sufficient to disturb replication processes
[21] whereas common HR functions remain unaffected
[22]. Assuming that a deficiency in HR together with an
increase in replication stress makes tumors susceptible to
radiosensitization by PARPi we performed a study in ten
HNSCC cell lines to explore its potential use in the clinic.

share no common mutations in BRCA1 or BRCA2 [23].
This also offers the opportunity to apply PARPi for the
treatment of sporadic breast tumors to intensify tumor
therapy. To evaluate if this observation is true for other
tumor entities, enabling the use of specific PARPi for
radiosensitization, HR capacity was analyzed in ten
HNSCCs. Based on our observation that HR capacity
measured by an HR-specific GFP based reporter assay
show the same trend after stable as well as transient
transfection [23] we performed only transient transfection.
We could show that also HNSCC cells differ in their
HR capacity analyzed after transient transfection of
an HR-specific GFP-reporter construct (Figure 1A).
All cell lines analyzed, except UTSCC5 cells, had a similar
fraction of G1 phase cells, thus ruling out any confounding
effects of cell cycle distribution on HR capacity
(Figure S1A). To strengthen our observation, HR was
inhibited by a RAD51-specific inhibitor RI-1 [24] which
covalently binds to the surface of the RAD51 protein and
prevents RAD51 oligomerization into filaments on DNA.
Incubation with the RI-1 inhibitor showed a concentrationdependent decrease of HR capacity up to 30 µM
(Figure S1B). Inhibition of RAD51 by 20 µM RI-1
completely abolished RAD51 foci formation (Figure 1B).
However, HR capacity was only suppressed by RI-1 in
the HR-proficient cell line UTSCC8 (Figure 1C and S1B)
whereas the already HR-deficient cell lines, XF354,
FaDu and HSC4 showed no change in HR capacity. To
confirm the differences observed in HR capacity, cellular
sensitivity after MMC treatment was determined in six
out of ten HNSCC cell lines [25, 26]. As expected, MMC
preferentially sensitized HR-deficient cells compared to
HR-proficient cells (Supplementary Figure 1C). Based on
their differences in HR capacity HNSCCs were grouped
into HR-proficient and HR-deficient cell lines (p = 0.009).
No difference in the expression patterns of relevant
proteins such as BRCA1, PARP1 or CHK1 was observable
between the two groups. Only RAD51 and FANCD2
seemed to be slightly over-expressed in most of the
HR-deficient cell lines (Figure S1D).

More effective radiosensitization by PARPi in
HNSCCs with low HR capacity
It was previously shown that cells carrying
mutations in HR genes are highly sensitive to PARPi alone
[5, 6]. Radiosensitization by PARPi seems to depend on
the fraction of cells in S-phase, the HR mutation status or
the switch to PARP-dependent end joining [4, 11, 17, 18].
To test if HR capacity can predict radiosensitization in
HNSCCs without known mutations in HR genes cellular
sensitivity to single or combined irradiation and PARPi
treatment was analyzed. No difference in survival after
single treatments was observed between HR-deficient
and HR-proficient cell lines (Figure 2A and 2B) although
PARP activity was profoundly decreased in all cell lines

RESULTS
Differences in the HR capacity in HNSCC cells
We have previously shown that breast cancer cell
lines show differences in the HR capacity although they
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

9733

Oncotarget

analyzed after treatment with PARPi (Figures 2C and S1D).
However, after combined treatment the HR-deficient
group was more effectively radiosensitized by PARPi
(Figures 2D and S2A, S2B), showing higher enhancement
ratios at 37% survival, with 1.61 ± 0.06 compared to 1.35 ±
0.09 (p = 0.05). No correlation was observed between
survival after irradiation and the enhancement ratio.

PARP activity is required for the repair of radiation
induced damage at active replication forks [7, 27, 28].
One possible mechanism could be that cells deficient in
HR fail to restart replication when PARP is inhibited [29],
causing an increase of stalled replication forks which the
cell attempts to compensate by increased origin firing.
The other possible mechanism could be that an increased
number of SSBs left unrepaired in PARP-inhibited cells
are converted to DSBs at replication forks, causing a
reduction of replication tract length and an increase in
S-Phase-specific chromosomal damage, such as radial
chromosomes.
To test if the stronger radiosensitizing effect of
PARPi in HR-deficient HNSCCs resulted from a failure

Pronounced reduction in replication fork
elongation in HR-deficient HNSCCs
It was previously shown, that the radiosensitization
by PARPi depends on the fraction of cells in S-phase
[17, 18]. A model was proposed that HR together with

Figure 1: Variation in HR capacity allows discrimination of HR-proficient and HR-deficient HNSCC cell lines. (A) HR

capacities (relative to that of FaDu cells) were analyzed after transient transfection of an HR-specific GFP-reporter construct. (B and C)
Inhibition of RAD51 by 20 µM RI-1 abolishes RAD51 foci formation and suppresses HR capacity only in HR-proficient cells (p = 0.03).
(D) Classification of HNSCC cells into HR-proficient and HR-deficient cell lines (p = 0.009). Statistical analysis of at least three different
experiments was performed using Student´s t-test.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

9734

Oncotarget

of DNA repair at replication, replication structures such as
stalled replication forks, replication origin firing as well as
replication tract length were analyzed (Figures 3, 4 and S2).
The extent of replication fork stalling did not differ between
HR-deficient and HR-proficient HNSCCs following
PARPi, irradiation or combined treatment (p = 0.27,
Figure 3C–3E). Both groups include cell lines which show
pronounced fork stalling. Also, no clear difference in the
activity of replication origins was observed between both
groups (p = 0.26, Figure S2C–S2E).

By contrast, analysis of replication tract length
allowed HR-deficient and HR-proficient cell lines to
be discriminated after combined treatment with PARPi
and irradiation (Figure 4B–4D). Single treatment with
PARPi alone provoked longer replication tracts in several
HNSCC cell lines independently of HR competence and
also irradiation alone caused longer replication tracts
in HR-proficient cells compared to untreated controls
(Figure 4B and 4C). However, after combined treatment a
stronger reduction in replication tract length was observed in

Figure 2: More effective radiosensitization by PARPi in HR-deficient compared to HR-proficient HNSCCs. (A and B)

No difference in cell survival after irradiation or PARPi (1 µM for 2 h) alone in HR-proficient and HR-deficient HNSCCs. (C and S1C)
Successful inhibition of PAR formation after PARPi in HNSCCs. (D and S1D, E) Stronger radiosensitization by PARPi in cell lines
deficient in HR with higher enhancement ratios (p = 0.05). Statistical analysis of at least three different experiments was performed using
Student´s t-test.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

9735

Oncotarget

HR-deficient compared to HR-proficient cells, with 0.6 vs.
0.95 kb/min, respectively (Figure 4B and 4C, left columns
and Figure 4D; p = 0.04). This suggests that, although the
replication complexes remain stable, indicated by a lack of
change in the number of stalled replication forks (Figure 3),
HR-deficient cells need longer to remove incoming DNA
damage or have less protection against exonuclease
activity – both possible reasons for shorter replication
tracts after combined treatment.

sister chromatid exchanges (SCE) as well as radial
chromosomes are known indicators of HR deficiencies
[30, 31], SCE do not impact on cellular survival, so we
chose radial chromosomes as a read-out of relevance to
tumor response. There is no difference in baseline levels of
radial chromosomes between HR proficient and deficient
cells (data not shown). For every cell line, we plotted
the percentage of cells with radials following single
and combined treatments after subtraction of untreated
controls (Figure 5). HR-deficient HNSCCs showed twice
as many cells with radial chromosomes compared to the
HR-proficient group after combined treatment with PARPi
and 6 Gy X-rays (Figure 5C, 5D) (p = 0.003).
Taken together, we show here that HNSCC
differ considerably in their HR capacity and that
radiosensitization by PARPi depends on HR competence
in a replication-dependent manner.

Impairment of replication processes leads to an
increase in radial chromosomes in HR-deficient
HNSCCs
To further validate the impact of decreased
replication fork elongation on cellular survival
chromosomal aberrations were measured. Whilst

Figure 3: No differences in replication fork stalling after PARPi and irradiation in HR-deficient and HR-proficient
HNSCCs. (A) Labeling protocol for single DNA fiber analysis after treatments and (B) representative examples of various types of

replication structures. (C and D) Stalled replication forks in HR-deficient and HR-proficient HNSCCs after PARPi and irradiation alone or
after combined treatments as indicated, relative to untreated controls. (E) No significant difference in stalled replication forks between both
groups (p = 0.27). Statistical analysis of at least three different experiments was performed using Student´s t-test.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

9736

Oncotarget

DISCUSSION

Very recently, FANCO/RAD51C was described as
negative prognostic in HNSCCs [33] and other repair
factors active at replication forks, like XRCC1 and
XPG, are under discussion. Gene expression patterns in
HNSCC xenografts after irradiation show a profound
up-regulation of CDC45, a regulator of replication
initiation and GADD45A, a p53 and BRCA1-regulated
stress-inducible gene [34]. Other factors, which might be
associated with the observed differences in HR capacity
(Figure 1) are mutations in p53, which are present in all
cell lines analyzed (data not shown), protein expression
of relevant DNA repair factors and cell cycle distribution.
Surprisingly, a broad variation in the HR capacity was
observed in the ten HNSCC cell lines analyzed, neither
reflected by differences in cell cycle nor by expression
levels of important proteins. Therefore it seems that minor
imbalances in the level or regulation of factors involved in

In this study we show that radiosensitization of
HNSCC cell lines by PARPi depends on the ability to
repair DNA damage via HR at replication forks. Cells
with low HR capacity form more radial chromosomes as
a consequence of replication failure and are more strongly
sensitized to irradiation than cells with high HR capacity.
To our knowledge there are only few publications
identifying germline mutations in genes related to DNA
repair in HNSCC patients and a direct association to the
common HR-deficient phenotype observed in breast and
ovarian cancer is missing. However, individuals with the
rare and inherited recessive disorder Fanconia anemia
(FA) frequently develop HNSCCs [32]. FA proteins
repair interstrand-crosslinks, a DNA damage pathway
that overlaps functionally with HR during replication.

Figure 4: Stronger reduction in replication tract length in HR-deficient compared to HR-proficient HNSCCs after
combined treatment. (A) Examples of replication tracts after different treatments in HR-proficient and -deficient cells. (B and C)
HR-proficient and HR-deficient HNSCCs were sequentially pulse-labeled with CldU followed by IdU and replication tract length (kb/min)
was calculated. Replication tract length was plotted for single as well as combined treatment, relatively to untreated controls.
(D) A stronger reduction in replication tract length was observed in the HR-deficient group (p = 0.04). Statistical analysis of at least three
different experiments was performed using Student´s t-test.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

9737

Oncotarget

HR are sufficient to influence repair capacity of the whole
HR machinery. This can also be observed for breast cancer
cell lines [23].
Most of the studies so far have shown that
radiosensitization by PARPi was S-phase-dependent.
This applies for fibroblasts with a defect in ATM and
Artemis [16], as well as human lung, breast, glioma and
HNSCC cells [10–12, 17, 18] and also for xenografts of
lung cancer and HNSCC [12–14]. However, replicationindependent sensitization was observed in Ligase IV
deficient fibroblasts [16] and in tumor cell lines of different
origins [4]. This was explained by the involvement of
the alternative or PARP1-dependent end-joining repair
pathway in the radiosensitization process.

However, besides the involvement of PARP1
in DNA repair processes it has a direct role at stalled
replication forks in response to replication stress and
block MRE11-RAD50-XRS2 resection after fork stalling
[9, 35]. Furthermore PAR, supplied by PARP1, interacts
directly with Chk1 via a PAR-binding regulatory (PbR)
motif in Chk1, allowing an ATR-independent activation
of the intra-S phase checkpoint [8]. Our data support the
direct role of PARP1 at replication forks. PARPi strongly
affected the HR-deficient group by inhibition of the DNA
replication elongation response and as a result of failed
HR these cells showed twice as many radial chromosomes.
With these data we show that also in HNSCC
profound differences exist in the HR capacity and that

Figure 5: Higher level of radial chromosomes in HR-deficient HNSCC after combined treatment. (A) HNSCC cells

were treated as indicated and 1st metaphases after treatment were analyzed. (B) Examples of chromosome preparations show more radial
chromosomes (black arrows) in HR-deficient cells after combined treatment of PARPi and irradiation. (C) Increase in the percentage of
cells with radial chromosomes after PARPi, irradiation and combined treatment in ten HNSCCs. For every cell line analyzed radials were
plotted after PARPi, irradiation and combined treatment; untreated controls were subtracted. (D) A significantly higher percentage of radial
chromosomes after combined treatment was observable in the HR-deficient compared to HR-proficient HNSCCs (p = 0.003). Statistical
analysis of at least three different experiments was performed using Student’s t-test.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

9738

Oncotarget

radiosensitization by inhibition of PARP1 depends on
HR competence in a replication-dependent manner. Our
observations indicate that PARP inhibitors are promising
candidates for enhancing the therapeutic ratio achieved by
radiotherapy via disabling DNA replication processes in
HR-deficient HNSCCs. However, a powerful tool to select
patients with an HR-deficient cancer has to be identified.
The analysis of radial chromosomes is technically not
feasible in primary biopsies and functional biomarkers in
primary tissues are necessary to stratify patients for such a
therapy. A promising tool could be the ex-vivo detection of
RAD51 foci in biopsies derived from tumors to faithfully
identify HR-deficient tumors [20].

(Licor 1:7.500 or 15.000). For chemiluminescence detection
ECL™ anti-mouse IgG (1:2000, GE Healthcare) and ECL™
anti-rabbit IgG (1:2000, GE Healthcare) were used.
For immunofluorescence staining, cells were seeded
on culture slides. After treatment as indicated cells were
fixed, permeabilized and and blocked overnight. Foci were
detected using anti-RAD51 (1:2.000) (Millipore, 1:100),
53BP1 (Novus Biochemicals, 1:250), PAR (Enzo, 1:250)
followed by fluoresceinisothiocyanate-linked anti-rabbit
IgG (Amersham) or Alexa Fluor 594 goat anti-mouse
IgG (Invitrogen) and mounted (Vector Laboratories).
Fluorescence images were captured using a Zeiss
Axioplan 2 epifluorescence microscope equipped with a
charge-coupled device camera and Axiovision software.
For quantitative analysis, foci were counted by
fluorescence microscopy using a 1,000-fold magnification.
100 cells per dose per slide and experiment were evaluated
blindly.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Cell culture and treatments
Human HNSCC cell lines UTSCC5, UTSCC8,
UTSCC14, UTSCC15, UTSCC45, FaDu, Cal33, SAS,
HSC4 and XF354 were cultivated in DMEM supplemented
with 10% FCS, 2 mM glutamine, 100 U/ mL penicillin
und 100 μg/mL streptomycin at 37°C at 10% CO2. PARPi
was achieved by 1 µM olaparib (Selleck®), and inhibition
of RAD51 by 20 µM RI-1 (Axon Medchem). For the
determination of cellular survival cells were treated
with up to 1.5 µg/ml mitomycin C (Medac) for 6 h and
for irradiation experiments cells were exposed to single
radiation doses (2–6 Gy) at a dose rate of 1.2 Gy/ min
using a Gulmay X-ray machine (GULMAY Medical).
All treatments were performed in 37°C and 10% CO2
atmosphere.

DNA fiber assay
Exponentially growing cells were pulse labeled with
25 μM CldU (Sigma) followed by 250 μM IdU (Sigma)
for 45 min each. For analysis of stalled replication forks
after irradiation, olaparib treatment or combined treatment
of olaparib and irradiation, CldU and IdU medium was
given for 45 min each and DNA damage was induced as
indicated during the last 30 min of CldU pulse. Labeled
cells were harvested and DNA fiber spreads prepared and
stained as described [28]. Fibers were examined using an
Axioplan 2 fluorescence microscope (Zeiss). CldU and
IdU tracks were measured using ImageJ and micrometer
values were converted into kilobases [21, 28]. At least
300 forks were analyzed. Different classes of labeled
tracks were classified; red-green (ongoing replication), red
(stalled forks) and green (2nd pulse origin). Labeled tracks
were counted using ImageJ.

Homologous recombination targeting assay
HR capacity was measured by transient transfection
of the I-Sce-I-linearized form of the pGC plasmid [36].
1 µg of linearized plasmid was transfected into cells using
FuGENE (Roche) in a 1:3 µg/µl ratio. After 24 h cells
were harvested and the fraction of GFP positive cells,
representing cells that have successful repaired by HR,
was determined by flow cytometry.

Metaphase spread analysis
For metaphase spreads exponentially growing
cells were treated with colcemid (0.02 µg/ml) overnight,
incubated with 0.0075 M KCl, fixed with methanol/acetic
acid (3:1), dropped onto microscope slides, stained with
5% giemsa and mounted with entellan before imaging
with a Zeiss Axioplan 2 microscope. 100 metaphases per
experiment were counted.

Western blot and immunostaining
Total protein was extracted from exponentially
growing cells and 40 µg/ml were resolved by SDS-PAGE
using a 4–15% gradient gel (Bio-Rad Laboratories). After
transfer proteins were detected by BRCA1 and FANCD2
(Santa Cruz, 1:1000, 1:2000), CHK1 [2G1D5] (Cell
Signaling, 1:750), RAD51 [14B4] (1:2.000, GeneTex),
PARP1 (BD, 1:1000) or anti-β-actin IgG (1:50.000,
Sigma), IRDYE 680 conjugated anti-mouse IgG or
IRDYE 800 conjugated anti-rabbit IgG (Licor, 1:7500)
or IRDYE 680 conjugated anti-rabbit IgG (Licor, 1:7.500
or 15.000) or IRDYE 800 conjugated anti-mouse IgG
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Cell cycle analysis
Cell cycle analysis of exponentially growing cells
was performed by flow cytometry (FACS). Cells were
fixed, washed with PBS, incubated with propidium
iodide (10 µg/ml) RNase (5 µg/ml, Serva) and data were
analyzed by flow cytometry using the ModFitLT software
on a FACScan (Becton Dickinson) from a cell population
under exclusion of debris.
9739

Oncotarget

Clonogenic survival

6.	 Farmer H, McCabe N, Lord CJ, Tutt AN, Johnson DA,
Richardson TB, Santarosa M, Dillon KJ, Hickson I,
Knights C, Martin NM, Jackson SP, Smith GC, et al.
Targeting the DNA repair defect in BRCA mutant cells as a
therapeutic strategy. Nature. 2005; 434:917–921.

For survival assays 250 cells were seeded in a
6-well plate 6 h before treatment and cells were cultured
for 14 days. Cells were fixed and stained with 1% crystal
violet (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO). Colonies with
more than 50 cells were counted and normalized to
untreated samples. Each survival curve represents the
mean of at least three independent experiments.

Statistical analysis
Statistical analysis, curve fitting and graphs were
performed using Prism 6.02 (GraphPad Software). Data
are given as mean (SE) of 3–5 replicate experiments.
Unless stated otherwise, significance was tested by
Student´s t-test.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

Petermann E, Orta ML, Issaeva N, Schultz N, Helleday T.
Hydroxyurea-stalled replication forks become progressively
inactivated and require two different RAD51-mediated pathways
for restart and repair. Molecular cell. 2010; 37:492–502.

8.	

Min W, Bruhn C, Grigaravicius P, Zhou ZW, Li F, Kruger A,
Siddeek B, Greulich KO, Popp O, Meisezahl C,
Calkhoven CF, Burkle A, Xu X, et al. Poly (ADP-ribose)
binding to Chk1 at stalled replication forks is required for
S-phase checkpoint activation. Nature communications.
2013; 4:2993.

9.	

Ray Chaudhuri A, Ahuja AK, Herrador R, Lopes M.
Poly(ADP-ribosyl) glycohydrolase prevents the accumulation
of unusual replication structures during unperturbed S phase.
Molecular and cellular biology. 2015; 35:856–865.

10.	 Bridges KA, Toniatti C, Buser CA, Liu H, Buchholz TA,
Meyn RE. Niraparib (MK-4827), a novel poly (ADP-Ribose)
polymerase inhibitor, radiosensitizes human lung and breast
cancer cells. Oncotarget. 2014; 55076–5086. doi: 10.18632/
oncotarget.2083.

The authors greatly acknowledge Prof. R. Grénman
for providing the HNSCC cell lines and Prof. K.
Rothkamm for critically reading the manuscript.

FINANCIAL SUPPORTS

11.	 Verhagen CV, de Haan R, Hageman F, Oostendorp TP,
Carli AL, O’Connor MJ, Jonkers J, Verheij M, van den
Brekel MW, Vens C. Extent of radiosensitization by the
PARP inhibitor olaparib depends on its dose, the radiation
dose and the integrity of the homologous recombination
pathway of tumor cells. Radiother Oncol. 2015 ;116:358–65.

This work was supported by Deutsche Krebshilfe
[70-1932-Di2]; Roggenbuck-Foundation, FFM University
Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf and BMU
[3610S30016].

12.	 Khan K, Araki K, Wang D, Li G, Li X, Zhang J, Xu W,
Hoover RK, Lauter S, O’Malley B, Jr., Lapidus RG, Li D.
Head and neck cancer radiosensitization by the novel
poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase inhibitor GPI-15427.
Head & neck. 2010; 32:381–391.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
The authors declare that no conflicts of interest exist.

REFERENCES

13.	 Senra JM, Telfer BA, Cherry KE, McCrudden CM,
Hirst  DG, O’Connor MJ, Wedge SR, Stratford IJ.
Inhibition of PARP-1 by olaparib (AZD2281) increases
the radiosensitivity of a lung tumor xenograft. Mol Cancer
Ther. 2011; 10:1949–1958.

  1.	 Le QT, Raben D. Integrating biologically targeted therapy
in head and neck squamous cell carcinomas. Semin Radiat
Oncol. 2009; 19:53–62.

14.	 Albert JM, Cao C, Kim KW, Willey CD, Geng L, Xiao D,
Wang H, Sandler A, Johnson DH, Colevas AD, Low J,
Rothenberg ML, Lu B. Inhibition of poly(ADP-ribose)
polymerase enhances cell death and improves tumor growth
delay in irradiated lung cancer models. Clin Cancer Res.
2007; 13:3033–3042.

 2.	 Begg AC, Stewart FA, Vens C. Strategies to improve
radiotherapy with targeted drugs. Nat Rev Cancer.
2011; 11:239–253.
  3.	 Chalmers AJ, Lakshman M, Chan N, Bristow RG.
Poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase inhibition as a model for
synthetic lethality in developing radiation oncology targets.
Seminars in radiation oncology. 2010; 20:274–281.

15.	 Guster JD, Weissleder SV, Busch CJ, Kriegs M, Petersen C,
Knecht R, Dikomey E, Rieckmann T. The inhibition of
PARP but not EGFR results in the radiosensitization of
HPV/p16-positive HNSCC cell lines. Radiother Oncol.
2014; 113:345–351.

  4.	 Kotter A, Cornils K, Borgmann K, Dahm-Daphi J, Petersen C,
Dikomey E, Mansour WY. Inhibition of PARP1dependent end-joining contributes to Olaparib-mediated
radiosensitization in tumor cells. Mol Oncol. 2014;8:1616–25.

16.	 Loser DA, Shibata A, Shibata AK, Woodbine LJ, Jeggo PA,
Chalmers AJ. Sensitization to radiation and alkylating
agents by inhibitors of poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase is
enhanced in cells deficient in DNA double-strand break
repair. Mol Cancer Ther. 2010; 9:1775–1787.

  5.	 Bryant HE, Schultz N, Thomas HD, Parker KM, Flower D,
Lopez E, Kyle S, Meuth M, Curtin NJ, Helleday T.
Specific killing of BRCA2-deficient tumours with inhibitors
of poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase. Nature. 2005; 434:913–917.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

7.	

9740

Oncotarget

17.	 Noel G, Godon C, Fernet M, Giocanti N, Megnin-Chanet F,
Favaudon V. Radiosensitization by the poly(ADP-ribose)
polymerase inhibitor 4-amino-1, 8-naphthalimide is specific
of the S phase of the cell cycle and involves arrest of DNA
synthesis. Mol Cancer Ther. 2006; 5:564–574.

26.	 Takata M, Sasaki MS, Tachiiri S, Fukushima T, Sonoda E,
Schild D, Thompson LH, Takeda S. Chromosome instability
and defective recombinational repair in knockout mutants
of the five Rad51 paralogs. Molecular and cellular biology.
2001; 21:2858–2866.

18.	 Dungey FA, Loser DA, Chalmers AJ. Replicationdependent radiosensitization of human glioma cells by
inhibition of poly(ADP-Ribose) polymerase: mechanisms
and therapeutic potential. International journal of radiation
oncology, biology, physics. 2008; 72:1188–1197.

27.	 Bryant HE, Petermann E, Schultz N, Jemth AS, Loseva O,
Issaeva N, Johansson F, Fernandez S, McGlynn P, Helleday T.
PARP is activated at stalled forks to mediate Mre11dependent replication restart and recombination. The
EMBO journal. 2009; 28:2601–2615.

19.	 Henneman L, van Miltenburg MH, Michalak EM,
Braumuller TM, Jaspers JE, Drenth AP, de KorteGrimmerink R, Gogola E, Szuhai K, Schlicker A,
Bin Ali R, Pritchard C, Huijbers IJ, et al. Selective resistance
to the PARP inhibitor olaparib in a mouse model for
BRCA1-deficient metaplastic breast cancer. Proc Natl Acad
Sci U S A. 2015; 112:8409–14.

28.	Parplys AC, Petermann E, Petersen C, Dikomey E,
Borgmann K. DNA damage by X-rays and their impact on
replication processes. Radiother Oncol. 2012; 102:466–471.
29.	 Petermann E, Keil C, Oei SL. Importance of
poly(ADP-ribose) polymerases in the regulation of DNAdependent processes. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2005; 62:731–738.
30.	 Sonoda E, Sasaki MS, Buerstedde JM, Bezzubova O,
Shinohara A, Ogawa H, Takata M, Yamaguchi-Iwai Y,
Takeda S. Rad51-deficient vertebrate cells accumulate
chromosomal breaks prior to cell death. The EMBO journal.
1998; 17:598–608.

20.	 Naipal KA, Verkaik NS, Ameziane N, van Deurzen CH,
Ter Brugge P, Meijers M, Sieuwerts AM, Martens JW,
O’Connor MJ, Vrieling H, Hoeijmakers JH, Jonkers J,
Kanaar R, et al. Functional ex vivo assay to select
homologous recombination-deficient breast tumors for PARP
inhibitor treatment. Clin Cancer Res. 2014; 20:4816–4826.

31.	 Jackson SP, Bartek J. The DNA-damage response in human
biology and disease. Nature. 2009; 461:1071–1078.

21.	 Nikkila J, Parplys AC, Pylkas K, Bose M, Huo Y,
Borgmann K, Rapakko K, Nieminen P, Xia B, Pospiech H,
Winqvist R. Heterozygous mutations in PALB2 cause
DNA replication and damage response defects. Nature
communications. 2013; 4:2578.

32.	 Kutler DI, Auerbach AD, Satagopan J, Giampietro PF,
Batish SD, Huvos AG, Goberdhan A, Shah JP, Singh B.
High incidence of head and neck squamous cell carcinoma
in patients with Fanconi anemia. Arch Otolaryngol Head
Neck Surg. 2003; 129:106–112.

22.	 Pathania S, Bade S, Le Guillou M, Burke K, Reed R,
Bowman-Colin C, Su Y, Ting DT, Polyak K, Richardson AL,
Feunteun J, Garber JE, Livingston DM. BRCA1
haploinsufficiency for replication stress suppression in
primary cells. Nature communications. 2014; 5:5496.

33.	 Scheckenbach K, Baldus SE, Balz V, Freund M, Pakropa P,
Sproll C, Schafer KL, Wagenmann M, Schipper J,
Hanenberg H. RAD51C—a new human cancer susceptibility
gene for sporadic squamous cell carcinoma of the head and
neck (HNSCC). Oral oncology. 2014; 50:196–199.

23.	 Parplys AC SJ, Becker S, Behr M, Jend C, Wrona A,
Mansour WY, Joosse SA, Stuerzbecher HW, Pospiech H,
Petersen C, Dikomey E, Borgmann K. High level of RAD51
perturbs the DNA replication elongation response and
unscheduled origin firing due to impaired CHK1 activation.
Cell Cycle. 2015; 14:3190–202.

34.	 Wilson GD, Thibodeau BJ, Fortier LE, Pruetz BL, Galoforo S,
Akervall J, Marples B, Huang J. Gene expression changes
during repopulation in a head and neck cancer xenograft.
Radiother Oncol. 2014; 113:139–145.
35.	 Ying S, Hamdy FC, Helleday T. Mre11-dependent
degradation of stalled DNA replication forks is prevented by
BRCA2 and PARP1. Cancer research. 2012; 72:2814–2821.

24.	 Budke B, Logan HL, Kalin JH, Zelivianskaia AS, Cameron
McGuire W, Miller LL, Stark JM, Kozikowski AP,
Bishop DK, Connell PP. RI-1: a chemical inhibitor of
RAD51 that disrupts homologous recombination in human
cells. Nucleic acids research. 2012; 40:7347–7357.

36.	 Mansour WY, Schumacher S, Rosskopf R, Rhein T,
Schmidt-Petersen F, Gatzemeier F, Haag F, Borgmann K,
Willers H, Dahm-Daphi J. Hierarchy of nonhomologous
end-joining, single-strand annealing and gene conversion
at site-directed DNA double-strand breaks. Nucleic acids
research. 2008; 36:4088–4098.

25.	 Parplys AC, Kratz K, Speed MC, Leung SG, Schild D,
Wiese C. RAD51AP1-deficiency in vertebrate cells impairs
DNA replication. DNA repair. 2014; 24:87–97.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

9741

Oncotarget

