www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Oncotarget, 2016, Vol. 7, (No. 51), pp: 85332-85348
Research Paper

Kallikrein-related peptidase 6 induces chemotherapeutic
resistance by attenuating auranofin-induced cell death through
activation of autophagy in gastric cancer
Tae Woo Kim1,2,*, Seon-Jin Lee1,2,*, Jong-Tae Kim1, Sun Jung Kim3, Jeong-Ki Min4,
Kwang-Hee Bae5, Haiyoung Jung1, Bo-Yeon Kim6, Jong-Seok Lim7, Young Yang7,
Do-Young Yoon8, Yong-Kyung Choe1, Hee Gu Lee1,2
1

Immunotherapy Convergence Research Center, Korea Research Institute of Bioscience and Biotechnology, Daejeon, Republic
of Korea

2

Department of Biomolecular Science, University of Science and Technology (UST), Daejeon, Korea

3

Department of Life Science, Dongguk University-Seoul, Seoul, Republic of Korea

4

Biotherapeutics Translational Research Center, Korea Research Institute of Bioscience and Biotechnology, Daejeon, Republic
of Korea

5

Research Center for Metabolic Regulation, Korea Research Institute of Bioscience and Biotechnology, Daejeon, Republic of
Korea

6

World Class Institute, Korea Research Institute of Bioscience and Biotechnology, Ochang, Cheongwon, Republic of Korea

7

Department of Biological Sciences, Sookmyung Women’s University, Seoul, Republic of Korea

8

Department of Bioscience and Biotechnology, Konkuk University, Seoul, Republic of Korea

*

These authors have contributed equally to this work

Correspondence to: Hee Gu Lee, email: hglee@kribb.re.kr
Yong-Kyung Choe, email: ykccoruk@kribb.re.kr
Keywords: kallikrein-related peptidase 6, autophagy, auranofin, cell death, chemoresistance
Received: April 14, 2016     Accepted: October 14, 2016     Published: November 15, 2016

ABSTRACT
Kallikrein-related peptidase 6 (KLK6) is a biomarker of gastric cancer
associated with poor prognosis. Mechanisms by which KLK6 could be exploited
for chemotherapeutic use are unclear. We evaluated auranofin (AF), a compound
with cytotoxic effects, in KLK6-deficient cells, and we investigated whether KLK6
expression induces autophagy and acquisition of drug resistance in gastric cancer.
Using cultured human cells and a mouse xenograft model, we investigated how KLK6
affects antitumor-reagent-induced cell death and autophagy. Expression levels of
KLK6, p53, and autophagy marker LC3B were determined in gastric cancer tissues.
We analyzed the effects of knockdown/overexpression of KLK6, LC3B, and p53 on
AF-induced cell death in cancer cells. Increased KLK6 expression in human gastric
cancer tissues and cells inhibited AF-induced cell motility due to increased autophagy
and p53 levels. p53 dependent induction of KLK6 expression increased autophagy
and drug resistance, whereas KLK6 silencing decreased the autophagy level and
increased drug sensitivity. During AF-induced cell death, KLK6 and LC3B colocalized
to autophagosomes, associated with p53, and were then trafficked to the cytosol. In
the xenograft model of gastric cancer, KLK6 expression decreased AF-induced cell
death and KLK6-induced autophagy increased AF resistance. Taken together, the
data suggest that the induction of autophagic processes through KLK6 expression
may increase acquisition of resistance to AF. Our findings may contribute to a new
paradigm for tumor therapeutics.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

85332

Oncotarget

INTRODUCTION

cancer revealed that AF overcame apoptosis resistance
mediated by an anti-cancer drug [25], suggesting that AF
may have potential for tumor chemotherapy for various
tumors as well. Accordingly, the use of AF to treat various
cancers has been explored [25, 26], and AF is currently in
clinical trials for the treatment of leukemia [27]. However,
the usability and action of AF in gastric cancer have
not yet been demonstrated. These findings suggest that
repositioning drugs for AF may be a promising approach
for cancer treatment.
We previously reported that the serine protease
kallikrein-related peptidase 6 (KLK6) is a potential
biomarker for colon and gastric cancer because it is
highly expressed in these cancers and is important in
tumorigenesis [28]. Recent reports of an association
between elevated KLK6 expression in primary ovarian
tumors and poor prognosis indicate that KLK6-positive
patients have increased risk of relapse and death [29].
KLK6 overexpression confers chemoresistance to
paclitaxel and enhances cell survival via integrins
which is regulated by cell adhesion as contributors to
chemoresistance and metastatic progression [30, 31].
Here, KLK6 may be an autophagy-related and p53dependent gene in several tumor microenvironments. Our
results suggest that modulation of KLK6 status to regulate
AF-induced autophagic cell death is a potential therapeutic
strategy for gastric cancer. We demonstrate that KLK6
overexpression via induction of autophagy may contribute
to acquired chemoresistance in gastric cancer.

Gastric cancer is widespread and among the most
lethal of cancers [1]. Advancements in biomedical science
have led to improved therapies and diagnostics [2];
however, the problem of drug resistance remains a major
obstacle to successful therapeutic approaches against
the progression of gastric cancer and indicates a critical
need for novel therapeutic approaches [3]. Increased
expression of drug pumps or detoxification enzymes [4]
and induction of autophagy contribute to treatment failure
[5]. Recently, combined chemotherapy has been found to
be a superior treatment strategy [6]. Hence, the search for
effective chemosensitizers that can augment the efficiency
of anticancer drugs and circumvent multi-drug resistance
has increased [7, 8]. Multiple reports have suggested that
autophagy is related to anticancer activity and apoptosis
of cancer cells, thus providing an attractive strategy for
improving anticancer therapy [9].
The regulation and function of autophagy in human
disease is currently not well understood. Recent reports
have identified autophagy functions associated with
cancer cell survival or death, and the concept that tumor
cells have evolved through genetic and epigenetic changes
to require autophagy under basal conditions has been
proposed [10]. Autophagy is a self-cannibalization process
in which bulk cytosolic components are sequestered in the
autophagosome for lysosomal degradation [11]. Owing to
its basic role in lysosomal degradation and recycling of
metabolic precursors, autophagy is generally considered
a cell survival pathway [12]. However, autophagy plays
a dual role in cancer, contributing to both suppression
of cancer initiation and promotion of cancer growth
[13]; thus, control of its function would be an important
therapeutic strategy [14]. Autophagy is often activated
as a survival pathway in chemotherapy-treated tumor
cells but becomes a death signal after several treatments.
Several reports have shown that apoptosis regulators can
control autophagy and that autophagy also contributes to
apoptosis in biological process such as tissue homeostasis,
development, and disease [15]. Autophagy is regulated by
oncogenes and tumor suppressors [16] such as p53 [17].
The induction of autophagy by p53 activation is regulated
by transcription-dependent and independent mechanisms
[18]. In contrast to these positive effects on autophagy, it
has been shown that depletion of p53 function is sufficient
to trigger full activation of autophagy [19]. Moreover,
autophagy is activated by nuclear, and suppressed by
cytoplasmic p53 [20].
Auranofin (AF) has been suggested to act as an
inhibitor of thioredoxin reductase, leading to modifications
of the cellular redox status resulting in overproduction of
reactive oxygen species (ROS), oxidative damage, and
apoptosis [21, 22]. AF exerts a strong cytotoxic effect on
several types of neoplastic cells both in vitro and in vivo
[23, 24]. Moreover, study of the effects of AF in gastric
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

RESULTS
KLK6 expression increases stage-dependently in
gastric cancer and is related with resistance to
AF-induced cell death
We examined the levels of KLK1–8 mRNAs
compared with GAPDH mRNA in various gastric cancer
cell lines using RT-PCR (Figure 1A). In several gastric
cancer cell lines (AGS, SNU-216, SNU668, NCI-N87,
NUGC-3, SNU-638, MKN-74, SNU-1, SNU-620, and
SNU-484), KLK6 expression was higher than that of other
KLK family members. Immunohistochemistry (IHC)
revealed higher KLK6 expression in gastric cancer tissues
than in paired normal gastric tissues, and expression was
tumor-stage-dependent (Figure 1B). KLK6 mRNA levels
in lung, pancreas, liver, breast, and colon tissues and
KLK6 mRNA and protein levels in various gastric cancer
cell lines indicated different patterns of KLK6 expression
(Supplementary Figure S1A–S1C). Especially, we
investigated KLK6 mRNA and protein levels using qPCR
and western blot analysis in normal and gastric tumor
tissues, and in gastric tumor cell lines such as AGS, SNU216, NCI-N87, SNU-620, SNU-668, SNU-638, SNU1, SNU-484, and NUGC-3 (Figure 1C and 1D). KLK6
mRNA was approximately 6-fold higher in cancer tissues
85333

Oncotarget

than in normal tissues and in NCI-N87 and SNU-620 cells
than in the other cell lines. Moreover, KLK6 levels were
approximately 5-fold higher in gastric cancer patient sera
than in normal sera (Figure 1E). Treatment with secreted
KLK6 protein did not markedly increase cell proliferation
but dose-dependently increased the autophagy level in AGS
and SNU-216 cells (Supplementary Figure S1D and S1E).
Most anticancer drugs are currently focused on
the drug repositioning for overcoming chemotherapy
resistance [32]. To investigate the relationship between
drug-induced cell death and KLK6 expression, we
performed a cell viability assay upon treatment with
various drugs in the gastric cancer cell lines. For most
drugs, the cytotoxic effect was not related to the KLK6
expression level; however, the cytotoxicity of the antileukemia drug AF was negatively related with KLK6

mRNA and protein levels (Figure 1F); i.e., KLK6
expression was higher in AF-resistant NCI-N87 and
SNU-620 than in AF-sensitive AGS and SNU-216 cells
(Figure 1D and 1F). In summary, the KLK6 expression
level was higher in gastric cancer tissue and cell lines such
as AGS, SNU-216, NCI-N87, SNU-620, SNU-638, SNU668, NUGC-3, and MKN-74 than in normal cells, and
AF-resistant gastric cancer cells (NCI-N87 and SNU-620)
exhibited the highest levels of KLK6.

Gastric cancer cell resistance to AF depends on
the KLK6 expression level and autophagy
Because high KLK6 expression seemed to
correlate with AF chemotherapy resistance in vitro, we
further investigated the relationship between KLK6

Figure 1: KLK6 expression is upregulated in vivo and in vitro in late-stage gastric cancer. A. RT-PCR analysis of KLK1–8

expression compared relative intensity with GAPDH expression in the indicated gastric cancer cell lines. The intensity of each KLK1-7
mRNA band was quantified and normalized with that of the corresponding GAPDH band (ATTO Densitograph software library).
B. Representative immunohistochemical images (left) and microarray-based quantitation (right) of KLK6 expression in normal (n = 59)
and gastric cancer tissues at indicated stages (stage I, n = 8; II, n = 14; III, n = 24; and IV, n = 3). Original magnification, 200×; scale bars,
50 µm; *P < 0.05. C. KLK6 expression in 16 pairs of normal and cancer tissues from gastric cancer patients normalized to the GAPDH
expression level as determined with qPCR. D. Western blot (top) and quantitation of real-time RT-PCR (bottom) data of KLK6 expression
in the indicated cell lines. E. Western blot analysis of KLK6 levels in serum of gastric cancer patients and normal controls (n = 18 pairs)
normalized to Ponceau S staining intensities. F. Cell viability of gastric cancer cells treated with AF (2.5 µM), 5-FU (2.5 µM), imiquimod
(2.5 µM), rapamycin (10 nM), tunicamycin (2.5 µM), chloroquine (20 µM), 3-MA (5 mM), LPS (1 µM), 5-aza-dc (1 µM), and TSA
(100 nM) for the indicated times as measured by WST-1 assay. The viability of drug-treated cells was expressed relative to that of DMSOtreated control cells, whose viability was set at 100%.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

85334

Oncotarget

expression and cell viability in AF-treated cells using
WST-1 viability and annexin-V PI staining assays,
qPCR, and nuclear fragmentation (Supplementary
Figure S2A–S2E). All cell lines, with the exception of
NCI-N87 and SNU-620, showed significantly increased
AF-induced cell mortality at concentrations from 2.5
μM in a dose-dependent manner. Lactate dehydrogenase
(LDH) release, an indicator of cell lysis, qPCR, and
WST-1 assay showed that cells with high KLK6 mRNA
and protein expression levels showed dose- and timedependent resistance to AF when compared to cells with
lower KLK6 expression (Figure 2A and Supplementary
Figure S2A-S2C). Reduced viability of the AFsensitive cells AGS and SNU-216 was due to induction
of apoptotic events, including cleavage of caspase-3,

caspase-9, and PARP (Figure 2B). After AF treatment,
AF-resistant cells contained few annexin V, PI-positive
and DAPI-positive cells, whereas AF-sensitive cells
showed an increase in annexin V and PI-positive cells
(Figure 2C and Supplementary Figure S2D and S2E).
siRNA-mediated knockdown of KLK6 in the AFresistant NCI-N87 and SNU-620 cells lowered the cell
viability, and reduced the expression of the autophagy
marker LC3B (Figure 2D, left). Conversely, KLK6
overexpression increased the cell viability and LC3B
expression in AF-sensitive AGS and SNU-216 cells
(Figure 2D, right). These experiments indicated that
KLK6 overexpression inhibits AF-induced cell death
and that the low level of autophagy might be associated
with AF-induced chemotherapy resistance.

Figure 2: KLK6 expression is attenuated by AF-induced cell death in gastric cancer cell lines. A. LDH release from

NCI-N87 and SNU-620 (AF-induced chemoresistant cell lines) and AGS and SNU-216 (AF-induced chemosensitive cell lines) cells
incubated with DMSO or the indicated concentrations of AF (top). Cells treated with AF (2.5 µM) were further incubated for the indicated
times (bottom). Values are the mean ± SD from triplicate experiments; *P < 0.05, #P < 0.01, B. Western blot analysis of cleaved caspase-3,
caspase-9, and PARP in the indicated cell types treated with AF (2.5 µM) for the indicated times. C. FACS analysis of annexin V and PI
staining in AGS (top) and NCI-N87 (bottom) cells treated with DMSO (CTL) or AF (2.5 µM). D. After transfection with control (CTL) or
KLK6 siRNA (left panel) and KLK6 overexpression or mock vector (right panel) in the presence and absence of AF (2.5 μM) treatment,
cell viability and expression of KLK6 and LC3B in AGS, SNU-216, NCI-N87, and SNU-620 cells were measured by WST-1 assay and
western blot analysis, respectively. E. Cell viability assay and western blot analysis of KLK6, and LC3B in NCI-N87 and AGS cells
following transfection with control (CTL) or KLK6 siRNA (left panels) and KLK6 overexpression plasmid or mock vector (right panels)
in the presence and absence of AF (2.5 μM) and 3-MA (5 mM) or CQ (20 μM), *P < 0.05.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

85335

Oncotarget

To confirm the involvement of autophagic cell
death in acquired resistance to chemotherapy under
AF treatment, we inhibited autophagy using 3-MA and
CQ in KLK6 overexpression and knockdown cells.
The overexpression of KLK6 in KLK6-negative AGS
cells increased AF-induced chemotherapy resistance
as compared with the mock. Blockage of autophagy
flux by 3-MA and CQ was verified by western blot
analysis of KLK6, and LC3B (Figure 2E). After KLK6
silencing in KLK6-positive NCI-N87 cells, we observed
increased cell mortality and attenuated autophagy upon
AF treatment in the presence of autophagy inhibitors,
(Figure 2E, left panel). 3-MA and CQ treatment decreased
the activation of autophagy and reversed AF-mediated
cell death and thus had a chemosensitizing effect.
KLK6 overexpression promoted KLK6 expression and
autophagy flux by LC3B activation to a greater extent
in KLK6-transfected than in mock-transfected AGS cells
(Figure 2E, right panel). These findings demonstrated a
link between KLK6 expression and autophagic cell death

that might give a clue for tumor promotion and resistance
to targeted therapy.

Increased KLK6-induced autophagy attenuates
AF-induced gastric cancer cell death
Autophagy induction is important for drug
resistance in various cancer environments [33]. A recent
report showed that LC3B is a potential prognostic marker
in breast cancer [34]. We hypothesized that LC3B may
serve a similar function in gastric cancer. We examined
basal autophagy levels based on LC3B expression in the
normal and tumor tissues such as lung, pancreas, liver,
breast, colon and lung, liver, breast, and gastric cancer cell
lines (Supplementary Figure S3A–S2C) and LC3B levels
in patients with different stages of gastric cancer (Figure
3A). LC3B was expressed at ~15% higher level in stage I
tumors than in normal tissue, but it was highly expressed
(25–40%) in stage II, III, and IV tumors. Autophagy
markers such as LC3B and Atg5, and KLK6 which

Figure 3: KLK6 expression decreases in AF-induced cell death via the activation of autophagy in gastric cancer.

A. Representative immunohistochemical images and microarray-based quantitation of LC3B expression in normal and cancer tissues at the
indicated stages used in Figure 1B. Original magnification, 200×; scale bars, 50 µm; *P < 0.05. B. Western blot analysis of expression of
indicated autophagy markers in indicated cell types treated with AF (2.5 μM) for the indicated times. C. Fluorescence microscopic analysis
and quantitation of autophagy activation, characterized by punctate LC3B staining, in indicated cell types transfected with pEGFP-LC3B
and treated with AF (2.5 μM) or DMSO for 16 h. *P < 0.05. Cell viability D. and western blot analysis of KLK6 and LC3B E. in the
indicated cell types treated with DMSO or a combination of AF and autophagy inhibitor 3-MA (5 mM) or CQ (20 µM) for 16 h. F. Western
blot analysis of KLK6 and LC3B expression (left) and cell viability (right) in the indicated cell types treated with AF (2.5 μM) in the
presence or absence of SBI-0206965 (SBI) (10 μM) for 16 hr; * P <0.05.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

85336

Oncotarget

is gastric cancer biomarker, but not beclin-1, showed
increased expression over 16 h after AF treatment (Figure
3B and Supplementary Figure S3D). Next, we examined
the presence of autophagosomes using pEGFP-LC3B
vector and cyto-ID autophagy assay, and monodansylcadaverine (MDC) staining (Figure 3C and Supplementary
Figure S3E–S3G). Increased punctated LC3B, cyto-ID,
and MDC-positive cells were detected in AF-resistant cells
NCI-N87 and SNU-620, corroborating that high-level
KLK6 expression is related with increased autophagy in
AF-treated cells. To confirm that the LC3B expression
pattern reflected autophagic processes, we investigated
whether autophagy inhibitors increased AF-induced cell
death in both of high and low KLK6 expression cell lines.
Treatment of NCI-N87 and SNU-620 cells with 3-MA and
chloroquine (CQ) significantly enhanced AF-induced cell
death and inhibited autophagic flux, while it did not affect
these parameters or LC3B punctae in AF-sensitive AGS
and SNU-216 cells (Figure 3D and 3E). This result further
supports an important role for KLK6 in the regulation
of AF-induced autophagic cell death and suggests that
combined treatment with AF and autophagy inhibitor
might increase chemotherapeutic effects in drug-resistant
gastric cancer cells.
To determine whether increases in KLK6 expression
correlated with autophagic flux during AF treatment,
we repeated these experiments, treating cells with AF in
the presence or absence of SBI-0206965 (SBI) as ULK1
inhibitor. SBI treatment further reduced LC3B-II form in
high-KLK6 cell lines under DMSO and AF treatments,
indicative of autophagic activity (Figure 3F, left). To confirm
that the LC3B expression pattern reflects the autophagic
processes, we used a WST-1 assay to determine whether
the autophagy inhibitors affected AF-induced cell viability
in high- and low-CST1 cell lines. Treatment of high-KLK6
cell lines (NCI-N87 and SNU-620) with SBI significantly
enhanced AF-induced cell death, while the presence of the
autophagy inhibitors did not affect the mortality rate of AFtreated low-KLK6 cell lines (AGS and SNU-216) (Figure
3F, right). Together, these findings suggested a crosstalk
between KLK6 and LC3B and indicate that autophagy
might protect against AF-induced cell death.

in time-dependent manner after AF treatment in NCI-N87
and SNU-620 cells, although they are higher than in control.
We hypothesized that increased KLK6 and p53 expression
contributed to acquired resistance to AF-mediated cell death
and that augmented apoptotic events in AF-sensitive cells
likely reflect low KLK6 and p53 levels. To determine whether
loss/gain of p53 function influenced AF-induced autophagic
cell death, p53 expression in tissues of gastric tumor patients
was analyzed by IHC. p53 expression was higher in tumor
than in normal tissues and associated with high-grade tumors,
similar to the KLK6 expression pattern (Supplementary
Figure S4A and S4B). Additionally, p53 was upregulated
in KLK6-overexpressing NCI-N87 and SNU-620 cells as
compared to SNU-216 cells (Supplementary Figure S4C).
NCI-N87 and SNU-620 cells, with high levels of KLK6
and p53, were transfected with control or p53 siRNA and
treated with AF. In AF-resistant p53 knockdown cells, AF
treatment decreased cell survival and KLK6 and p53 levels,
and attenuated autophagy activation (Figure 4B). Conversely,
AF-sensitive AGS and SNU-216 cells overexpressing p53
showed increased KLK6 and p53 levels and no difference
in viability after AF treatment (Figure 4C). Next, genetic
analysis of the promoter region of KLK6 revealed consensus
binding sites for the p53 transcription factor using chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP). We hypothesized that p53
might increase KLK6 expression and autophagy during AF
treatment. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays revealed
that p53 was rapidly induced to bind the KLK6 promoter
after stimulation by AF treatment in AF-resistant, but not
AF-sensitive cells (Figure 4D). To confirm the role of KLK6
promoter activity in AF-treated KLK6high and KLK6low cells,
we measured promoter activity within the region -902 to -13
upstream of KLK6 using a luciferase reporter vector in AFtreated cells. Only the promoter containing the region -902 to
-802 had higher luciferase-reporter activity in AF-treated cells
than in DSMO-treated cells, and this effect was observed
only in AF-resistant NCI-N87 cells (Figure 4E). p53 binding
to the KLK6 promoter may be involved in the regulation
of KLK6 expression and AF-induced cell death. To further
clarify the roles of KLK6 and p53 in autophagy induction, we
assayed autophagy flux after treatment with 3-MA and CQ.
Because AF-induced cell death was specifically regulated
in accordance with KLK6 and p53 status, we hypothesized
that either blockage of early- or late-phase autophagy or
KLK6 and p53 silencing would increase susceptibility to
AF-mediated cell death. To determine the effect of p53
status on AF-induced cell death, we overexpressed/knocked
down p53 and used 3-MA and CQ to increases lysosomal
pH that prevents autophagosome -lysosome fusion as well as
degradation. After p53 overexpression in AGS cells weakly
expressing p53, AF-induced cell death decreased with 3-MA
or CQ treatment, and p53 overexpression also increased
the KLK6 and autophagy levels. These results indicated
that KLK6 expression increased autophagy and attenuated
AF-induced autophagic cell death through p53 (Figure 4F).
In contrast, after p53 knockdown in NCI-N87 cells, which

p53 is important for upregulation of KLK6 and
autophagic induction
IFN-γ-induced autophagy is increased in p53+/+, but
reduced in p53-/- HCT116 colon cancer cells, suggesting
that IFN-γ-induced autophagy is p53-dependent [35]. One
of the best-known p53 target genes is p21, which regulates
cell survival [36] and protects cells against apoptosis [37].
Western blot analysis showed a time-dependent expression
of the KLK6, p21, and p53 levels after AF treatment in
NCI-N87 and SNU-620 cells when compared to AF-sensitive
cells, suggesting a role for these proteins in AF-induced cell
death (Figure 4A). The levels of p21 and p53 did not change
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

85337

Oncotarget

highly express p53, cell survival decreased most strongly
after cotreatment with AF and 3-MA or CQ, which also
downregulated the p53 and KLK6 levels compared to cells
transfected with control siRNA. Moreover, LC3B expression
was downregulated by autophagy inhibitors in the presence
of low p53 and KLK6 levels (Figure 4G).

with a tumor cell load of 1 × 107 cells to form a xenograft.
Then, mice were injected intraperitoneally (i.p.) with
AF to analyze its effects according to the KLK6 level.
Effects of differential KLK6 expression and AF treatment
on tumor volume are shown in Figure 5A. Tumors from
KLK6-overexpressing cells had larger volumes than those
from mock-transfected cells. AF treatment decreased the
tumor volume for both mock and KLK6-overexpressing
cells (Figure 5B). These results suggested that AF-induced
growth inhibition of tumor from mock-transfected cells
was associated with an increase in autophagic cell death
as compared with tumors in KLK6-overexpressing cells.
Consistent with our in vitro data, expression of KLK6,
p53, ATG5 and LC3B activation in tumor lysates from

KLK6 expression reduces AF-induced tumor
suppression in a xenograft model
Next, we tested whether our finding that KLK6
expression level is a crucial factor in AF-mediated
autophagic cell death in vitro could be reproduced in vivo.
We overexpressed KLK6 in AGS cells and injected mice

Figure 4: Enrichment of p53 is important for AF-induced KLK6 expression and autophagic activation. A. Western blot

analysis of KLK6, p53, and p21 levels in AF-induced AGS and NCI-N87 cells. B. After transfection with control or p53 siRNA in the
presence or absence of AF (2.5 μM) treatment, cell mortality and expression of p53, KLK6, and LC3B were measured by WST-1 assay
and western blot analysis in NCI-N87 and SNU-620 cells. C. After transfection with p53 overexpression or mock vector in the presence or
absence of AF treatment, cell viability and the expression level of the indicated proteins in AGS and SNU-216 cells were measured by WST-1
and immunoblot assay. D. Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) analysis of relative KLK6 promoter binding to p53 in the indicated cell
types treated with AF for the indicated times. IgG was included as a negative control. E. The 1-kb sequence upstream of KLK6 was divided
into the three indicated regions that were cloned into luciferase reporter vector pGL3. After transient transfection into AGS and NCI-N87
cells, luciferase activity was measured using a triple luciferase assay. *P<0.05. After transfection of KLK6 siRNA or control siRNA F. in
NCI-N87 (KLK6-positive) cells and p53 overexpression plasmid or mock vector G. into AGS (KLK6-negative) cells, cells were treated
with AF alone, AF plus 3-MA, or AF plus CQ. For measuring the level of autophagy flux, cell viability was detected using WST-1 assay
and expression of indicated proteins by immunoblot assay using KLK6, LC3B and p53 antibodies. *P < 0.05.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

85338

Oncotarget

AF-treated mice with tumors from KLK6-overexpressing
cells was higher than that in lysates from mock-transfected
cell tumors (Figure 5C). Western blot analysis of protein
extracts from the spleen, lungs, and kidneys of mice gave
results similar to those obtained with tumor lysates (Figure
5D and Supplementary Figure S5A and S5B). To determine
whether differential KLK6 expression affected AFinduced autophagic cell death and autophagy processes,
we analyzed tumor sections using H&E staining and IHC
for KLK6. We compared the levels of KLK6, p53, LC3B,
and cleaved caspase-3 to in vivo data (Figure 5E). IHC
analysis of tumor sections using anti-cleaved caspase-3
antibody indicated that tumors from mock-transfected
AGS cells expressed lower levels of KLK6 and p53 than
those from KLK6-overexpressing cells. The expression
levels of LC3B, KLK6, and p53 were approximately
2-fold, 4-fold, and 2-fold higher, respectively, in the
KLK6-overexpressing group than in the mock-transfected
cells (Figure 5F). Together, these findings suggested that

AF-induced autophagic cell death may depend on KLK6
and p53 expression in vivo as well as in vitro.

p53 and KLK6 localize to nucleus and interact
with LC3B
Cytoplasmic p53 inhibits autophagy by interacting
with FIP200, a protein involved in autophagy, whereas
nuclear p53 binds the promoter region of pro-autophagic
genes to induce autophagy [38]. To determine whether
subcellular localization of p53, KLK6, and LC3B
correlated with AF-induced cell death, we examined p53,
KLK6, and LC3B localization in control and AF-treated
cells (Figure 6A). We isolated cytosolic and nuclear
fractions of AGS and NCI-N87 cells. In AF-resistant NCIN87cells, high levels of p53 and KLK6 were found in the
nuclear fraction and cytosolic p53 was lowly expressed,
while LC3B was predominant in the cytosolic fraction.
We further evaluated the nuclear localization of p53 and

Figure 5: KLK6 overexpression with AF treatment decreases therapeutic effects on xenograft tumor growth in vivo.

A. Image of xenograft tumors from mice treated with mock or KLK6 expression vector, with or without AF treatment. B. Tumor volumes on
the indicated days after injection of cells transfected with indicated vectors in the presence or absence of AF treatment into mice. Values are
the mean ± SD for each group (n = 8) C. Western blot analysis of the indicated proteins in tumors from cells transfected with the indicated
vectors in the presence and absence of AF treatment of mice D. Western blot analysis (top) and quantitation (bottom) of the indicated
proteins normalized to β-actin in spleens from mice of each treatment group. *P < 0.05; #P < 0.01. E. Hematoxylin and eosin staining (top
row) and immunohistochemical analysis of the indicated proteins (lower rows) of sections of indicated types of xenograft tumors. Original
magnification, 200×; scale bars, 50 µm. F. Quantification of immunohistochemical staining in (E). *P < 0.05; #P < 0.01.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

85339

Oncotarget

KLK6 using confocal microscopy. p53, KLK6, and LC3B
localized to the cytosolic region diffused cytoplasmic
staining under control conditions. AF treatment induced
the translocation of both p53 and KLK6 from cytosol to
the nucleus in NCI-N87. Immunofluorescence analysis
confirmed that KLK6 localized more strongly with
LC3B and p53 in AF-induced resistant cells than in AFsensitive cells. However, p53–LC3B co-localization
was not observed (Figure 6B and Supplementary Figure
S6A and S6B). To examine whether LC3B is involved
in p53-induced KLK6 expression in AF treatment and in
trafficking of p53 and KLK6, and whether AF-mediated
autophagic cell death involves p53 regulation, cells
were exposed to AF and immunoprecipitated fractions
were isolated using antibodies. p53 did not interact with

either KLK6 or LC3B in AF-sensitive AGS and SNU216 cells, whereas both KLK6 and LC3B interacted
with p53 in AF-resistant NCI-N87 and SNU-620 cells.
In DMSO-treated NCI-N87 and SNU-620 cells, an
interaction between KLK6 and p53 was detected in
immunoprecipitated fractions by co-immunoprecipitation,
indicating the localization of KLK6 and p53 in association
with LC3B. Treatment of these cells with AF caused a
time-dependent disruption of this complex, although the
interaction between KLK6 and LC3B was not affected
(Figure 6C). An interaction of p53 with LC3B was also
detected in autophagosomes from AF-resistant cells under
DMSO treatment, with time-dependent dissociation of
this complex under AF treatment (Figure 6D). Similar
results were obtained by immunoprecipitation using p53

Figure 6: Interaction of KLK6, LC3B, and p53 is required for AF-induced autophagy activation. A. Western blot analysis

of the indicated proteins in cytosolic and nuclear extracts of AGS (top) and NCI-N87 (bottom) cells treated with AF or DMSO for the
indicated times. β-actin and PARP served as cytosolic and nuclear loading controls, respectively. B. Colocalization of KLK6 and LC3B
on gastric cancer cells. AGS and NCI-N87 cells were treated with AF, and stained at 4°C with KLK6 and LC3B antibody. After primary
staining, also stained with Alexa488 (green) and Alexa555 (red), and nuclear stained with DAPI. Colocalization is represented by yellow
appearance in the merge. Western blot analysis of KLK6, LC3B, and p53 co-immunoprecipitated (IP) with anti-KLK6 C. anti-LC3B D. and
anti-p53 E. from AF-induced chemosensitive (AGS and SNU-216) and chemoresistant (NCI-N87 and SNU-620) cells treated with AF for
the indicated times using p53, KLK6, and LC3B antibodies. F. Viability (top) and Western blot analysis of total and phosphorylated Akt
and p38 (bottom) in AGS and SNU-216 cells treated with Akt inhibitor VIII (10 μM), p38 inhibitor SB203580 (30 μM), MEK1, 2 inhibitor
U0126 (20 μM), and JNK inhibitor II (20 μM). *P < 0.05.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

85340

Oncotarget

antibody (Figure 6E). In brief, interactions among LC3B,
KLK6, and p53 were observed during AF treatment in AFresistant cells, and KLK6 and p53 are important factors in
AF-mediated autophagic cell death.
AF-induced cell death may be associated with a
cascade transmitted to caspase-3 and -9 through Akt
and p38 induction [39]. Therefore, we investigated the
downstream signaling pathway of AF-induced autophagic
cell death to determine molecular mechanisms underlying
AF function. We tested the effects of Akt inhibitor VIII,
p38 inhibitor SB203580, MEK1, 2 inhibitor U0126, and
JNK inhibitor II on AF treatment in AF-sensitive AGS and
SNU-216 cells. Only VIII and SB203580 protected against
AF-induced cell death and enhanced viability (Figure
6F). Western analysis of the same samples demonstrated
an increased p-AKT level upon treatment with VIII
and inhibition of p38 phosphorylation after SB203580
treatment (Figure 6F).

cells with chemoresistance that is mediated by increased
autophagy.

DISCUSSION
KLK6 expression is increased in many types of
tumors and this elevation is related with more aggressive
symptoms and poor prognosis [28, 40, 41]; however,
the role of KLK6 in the relationship between autophagy
regulation and chemotherapy resistance is currently
not well understood. Here, we describe a role of KLK6
expression in modulating autophagy, a conserved
mechanism that delivers intracellular proteins such as
p53 and organelles to the nucleus and autophagosomes.
Recent studies showed that KLK6 upregulation is a
strong marker of advanced tumor stage [42]. Analysis
of 59 human gastric tumors showed KLK6 upregulation
at stages III and IV, but low-level expression at stages
I and II. We also reported a viability screen of gastric
cancer cells using various anti-cancer drugs indicating
that AF resistance-related cell death depend on the KLK6
expression level. With the goal of potential repurposing
AF for gastric cancer treatment, we demonstrated that
AF could induce apoptosis, autophagy-induced cell
death, and the autophagy level in the gastric cancer cells.
Recently, Rebecca S et al. group reported that Caveolin-1mediated expression and secretion of kallikrein 6 in colon
cancer cells [43]. Caveolae may play an important role
in protease secretion and modulate mitogenic signaling as
well as protein trafficking, both of which are relevant to
KLK6 regulation. It may be an important role for Cav1 dependent increase in secretion applies to another
protease, KLK6, as well. Moreover, another recent report
showed that the B1R agonist acts as a functional stimulus
for the secretion of KLK1 and KLK6, an event relevant for
kinin production and cell invasion, respectively [44]. B1R
may have a potential target receptor for KLK6 secretion
in cancer.
The results of the current study imply that autophagy
induction by KLK6 contributes to the tumorigenesis and
chemoresistance in gastric cancer. This emerged from in
vitro as well as in vivo experiments. We observed increased,
stage-dependent autophagy upon KLK6 overexpression in
gastric cancer tissues and cells treated with AF. Further,
overexpression of KLK6 in a xenograft model induced
AF-induced chemoresistance, autophagosome formation,
and the synthesis and activation of LC3B in mouse
gastric tumor tissue. These observations demonstrated
that KLK6 expression induces the process of autophagy
as a general response to AF treatment in gastric cancer.
In the xenograft model using KLK6-overexpressing cells
treated with AF alone or with AF plus CQ, we observed
that the chemoresistance of KLK6-overexpressing cells was
inhibited by combining AF treatment with CQ, indicating
that inhibition of autophagy attenuates AF-induced
chemoresistance via increased KLK6 levels. Furthermore,

Autophagy induction by KLK6-overexpressing
cells with chemoresistance
To confirm the involvement of autophagic cell
death in acquired resistance to chemotherapy under AF
treatment, we inhibited autophagy using siRNA-mediated
ATG5 knockdown in NCI-N87 and SNU-620 cells resulted
in increased cell mortality statistically after AF treatment
(Figure 7A) and verified by western blot analysis of ATG5,
LC3B, p53, and KLK6 (Figure 7B). After ATG5 silencing
in KLK6-positive NCI-N87 cells, we observed increased
cell mortality and attenuated autophagy upon AF treatment
in the presence of autophagy inhibitors (Figure 7C and
7D). Interestingly, 3-MA and CQ treatment decreased
ATG5 and LC3B activation and also decreased KLK6 and
p53 protein levels and thus had a chemosensitizing effect.
These results supported the notion that KLK6-induced
autophagy activation may involve AF-induced cell death
mechanism. While the tumorigenic properties of KLK6
are well documented, its function through autophagy
regulation in chemoresistance has not been studied so far.
Therefore, we assessed the effect of autophagy inhibition
of xenograft tumor growth in vivo. First, we injected AGS
cells (1 × 107 cells) stably overexpressing KLK6 in nude
mice and divided these into 3 groups that were treated
with DMSO, 3-MA, AF alone, and AF plus 3-MA (Figure
7E and 7F) or DMSO, AF alone, and AF plus CQ (Figure
7G and 7H). Analysis of the tumor volumes and weights
in these groups indicated that the groups treated with AF
alone and with AF plus 3-MA or AF plus CQ had smaller
volumes and weights than DMSO-treated group. Notably,
the chemotherapy resistance of KLK6-overexpressing
cells was inhibited by combined AF plus 3-MA or AF plus
CQ treatment. These findings suggested that the resistance
to AF treatment is mediated by induction of autophagy
in KLK6-overexpressing cells and can be prevented by
autophagy inhibitor. This implies that KLK6 provides
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

85341

Oncotarget

Figure 7: CQ enhances AF-induced growth inhibition of tumor xenografts in KLK6-overexpressing cells. WST-1 cell
viability assay A. and western blots B. with ATG5, LC3B, and KLK6 antibodies performed after transfection of ATG5 siRNA or control
siRNA into NCI-N87 and SNU-620 cells. WST-1 assay C. and western blot analysis D. after transfection of ATG5-targeted siRNA into
NCI-N87 cells treated with AF and/or 3-MA (5 mM) or CQ (20 µM). Combined treatment with AF (4 mg/kg) in the presence or absence
with 3-MA (10 mg/kg) E. or CQ (60 mg/kg) G. (i.p) injection every other day for the indicated period inhibits tumor volume and tumor
weight in the presence or absence of 3-MA F. and CQ H. of KLK6-overexpressing human gastric cancer xenografts in nude mice (n = 6).

knockdown of LC3B enhanced the cell mortality in
AF-induced KLK6-overexpressing cells. Conversely,
overexpression of LC3B inhibited the mortality in cells with
low basal KLK6 expression. These experiments suggested
that active LC3B in gastric cancer cells may regulate the
chemotherapy resistance that drive anti-tumor drug. In
addition, loss- and gain-of-function studies of KLK6 and
p53 showed that KLK6 and nuclear p53 were involved in
the regulation of autophagy.
Recent studies reported that autophagy is related
to resistance to cancer chemotherapy, major therapeutic
molecules, and various drugs used for autophagy
regulation in cancer therapy. Additionally, autophagy
mediates nonapoptotic pathways through a protective
(oncogenic) or destructive (tumor-suppressive) role [45].
For example, beclin-1-transfected breast cancer cells have
lower sensitivity to the proliferative effects of the estrogen
receptor agonist E2 and the growth-suppressive effects of
tamoxifen, contributing to acquisition of resistance with a
concomitant increase in autophagy [46]. Autophagy can
regulate the fate of cancer cells possessing oncogenes
(Akt, Ras, and Raf) or tumor suppressor genes (Beclin-1
and p53) during tumor progression [47].
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Our results suggested that AF-induced autophagic
cell death in gastric tumors contributes to drug resistance
and cell survival in gastric cancer cell lines and patient
samples and that KLK6 and p53 status play important
roles in the chemotherapeutic mechanism, with clinical
implications for gastric cancer. The p53–autophagy
interaction is controversial. Although p53 is best known
for its pro-apoptotic function in cancer, it also performs a
prosurvival function [48, 49] and its action as a positive
or negative regulator depends on its activation status [50].
Similarly, the function of autophagy in cancer is complex,
involving both oncogenic and tumor-suppressive roles
[51]. In this study, KLK6 or p53 knockdown restored
chemosensitivity and enhanced AF-induced autophagic
cell death in gastric cancer cells, whereas KLK6 or p53
upregulation was associated with clinical chemotherapy
resistance, autophagic defense mechanism, and
tumorigenesis.
To determine whether KLK6 expression is regulated
by transcription factors in gastric tumors during the
autophagic process, we performed ChIP analysis of the
KLK6 promoter. Surprisingly, we found that nuclear p53
binds to the promoter and that overexpression of KLK6
85342

Oncotarget

and p53 activates an autophagy pathway, in contrast to
inhibition of KLK6 and p53. Importantly, p53 localization
is a determining factor in the autophagic process [52],
where it plays diverse roles. Nuclear p53 acts as an
autophagy-inducing transcription factor, while cytoplasmic
p53 has an autophagy-inhibitory function [53]. Our
microscopic analysis of gastric cancer cells revealed that
most cells exhibited nuclear p53 and activation of KLK6
as a pro-autophagic transcription factor, whereas AFsensitive cells showed increasing amounts of cytoplasmic
p53 over time, suppression of autophagy, and cell death.
When we regulated the autophagy level using siRNA and
overexpressed LC3B as an autophagy marker, KLK6
and p53 were both found to be important for AF-induced
autophagic cell death. Expression of both KLK6 and p53
was regulated by inhibition of autophagic flux and, in
particular, co-immunoprecipitation assay demonstrated a
strong KLK6-LC3B interaction.
Recent studies have reported a role of KLK6
in the regulation of membrane-dependent signaling
processes [54], and in neurodegenerative diseases such
as Alzheimer’s disease and Parkinson’s disease [55].
KLK6, a trypsin-like serine protease, is localized to
the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and then secreted [56].
Various lines of evidence have indicated that membranes
from the ER, mitochondria, Golgi, and endosomes,
and the plasma membrane could all potentially act as a
source of autophagosomal membrane in non-specialized
macroautophagy [57]. Recent investigations have
refined the localization of autophagosome formation to
ER–mitochondria contact sites [57]. We demonstrated
that KLK6 regulates the autophagosome localization
of autophagic protein LC3B and nucleus localization of
transcription factor p53, here reported to regulate KLK6
transcription. The occurrence of binding components
such as Egr-1 [58] transcription factor such as Egr-1,
membrane protein as caveolin-1 [58], and DNA binding
protein as HMGB1 [59] in autophagosomes and their
associations with LC3B under basal states imply the
regulatory role of KLK6 in the activation of autophagy.
Our observation that KLK6 overexpression mobilizes
these components from the plasma membrane and cytosol
to the nucleus, in association with autophagic activation,
suggests that these translocations represent early events
in the activation of autophagy after AF treatment.
Further, our data indicated time-dependent dissociation
of LC3B or p53 from KLK6 in the autophagosomes
or nucleus in response to AF treatment. These results
suggest an upstream regulatory switch for activation of
autophagy with AF treatment in gastric cancer cells. Our
study provides new insight into the repositioning of antirheumatoid arthritis drugs for gastric cancer treatment.
KLK6 expression increases AF-induced tumor survival
activity in gastric cancer and autophagy induction via
p53 activation. The association of KLK6 gene with
increased autophagic activity was exploited towards
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

establishing novel as well as efficient chemotherapy
resistance treatment protocols, which involve either
inhibitors of autophagy as a single agent treatment or
their rational combination with AF.
In conclusion, KLK6 may be an autophagyrelated and p53-dependent gene in several tumor
microenvironments. Modulation of the KLK6 status
regulating AF-induced autophagic cell death is a
potential therapeutic strategy for gastric cancer.
Combined treatment with AF and inhibitors of
autophagy such as CQ may yield even higher treatment
efficacy in cases that more strictly depend on autophagy
for the regulation of tumor growth. Changes in
transcription factor binding or interactions both inside
and outside the nucleus might determine which of the
dual roles of autophagy is elicited, based on the status
of KLK6 and p53. We anticipate the development of
novel chemotherapeutic strategies based on AF-induced
autophagic cell death.

EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES
Cell culture
The Stomach cancer cell lines AGS, SNU-216,
NCI-N87, SNU-620, SNU-638, SNU-668, and NUGC3 were purchased from the Korean Cell Line Bank
(Cancer Research Center, Seoul National University,
Seoul, Korea)and grown in RPMI1640 medium (Gibco)
supplemented with 5% fetal bovine serum (Gibco) and
100 μg/ml antibiotics (100 U/ml penicillin and 100 μg/
ml streptomyhcin, Gibco). Cells (1x105 cells/well) were
plated in 24-well cell culture plates and grown at 37°C in a
humidified, 5% CO2/air atmosphere. Cell viability assayed
by WST-1. Please see other experimental procedures in
Supplemental Experimental Procedures.

Cell viability assay
WST-1 assay was performed according to the
manufacturer’s instructions (Roche, Mannheim) with
10 μl of WST-1 reagent was added to each well of a
96-well plate (1 × 103 cell/well). After 1h of incubation
using CO2 incubator, the conversion of WST-1 reagent
into chromogenic formazan was monitored with a
spectrophotometer. On day 1 after plating, cells were
treated with various doses (1, 2.5, 5 and 10 µM) and times
(4, 8, and 16 hrs) of AF (Enzo, NY). A methyltransferase
inhibitor, 5’-Aza-2’-deoxycytidine (Sigma, St. Louis MO),
was added to the culture medium 1 µM for 72 hr to induce
demethylation of the cytosine residues, respectively.

Transient and stable transfection
AGS, SNU-216, NCI-N87 and SNU-620 cells
(1 × 105 cell/well) in 24-well plate were transfected with
85343

Oncotarget

these double-stranded siRNAs (30 nmol/ml) such as
siKLK6, siLC3B, and sip53 (Bioneer) for 24 hr by the
Lipofectamine 2000 (Invitrogen) method according to
the manufacturer’s protocol and recovered in RPMI1640
medium (Welgene) containing 10% fetal bovine serum for
24 hrs. After recovering, viable cells were calculated by
WST-1. pcDNA3.1-KLK6 and pEGFP-LC3B and –KLK6
made to study of target gene and pCMV-Neo-Bam p53
(addgene) purchased. KLK6 stable overexpressed cell line
was constructed by using pcDNA 3.1 – KLK6 plasmid.
In stable overexpressed cell lines, AGS cell (1x105 cell/
well) was seeded into 24-well plate. After 16 hr, KLK6expressed vector was transfected into AGS cells using
lipofectamine 2000 (Invitrogen). The following day,
the medium was changed, and G418 was added to the
culture medium to a final concentration of 800 μg/mL and
cultured in the presence of G418 for 4 weeks. Medium
was exchanged every 3 day. The expression of KLK6
to identify establishment of KLK6 stable cell line was
checked by RT-PCR and Western blot assay.

index = 1 / [1 + 2−(CTu − CTme)] × 100%, where CTu is the
average cycle threshold (CT) obtained from duplicate
quantitative PCR analyses using the unmethylated primer
pair, and CTme (Supplementary Table S1) is the average
CT obtained using the methylated primer pair.

qPCR and western analysis
KLK6 and LC3B expression levels were measured
by qPCR analysis using cDNA synthesized from 5 µg
of total RNA and a reverse transcription kit (Promega,
Madison, WI). One microliter of cDNA was used for the
PCR, and duplicate reactions were performed for each
sample using a ABI Power SYBR green PCR Master Mix
(Applied Biosystems, Warrington) with gene-specific
primers (Supplementary Table S1) on an ABI Step one
plus instrument (Applied Biosystems). RNA quantity was
normalized to GAPDH content, and gene expression was
quantified according to the 2-ΔCt method.
In Western blot analysis, to conduct western
blotting, cancer cell lines were solubilized in
radioimmunoprecipitation assay (RIPA) lysis buffer
(50 mM/L Tris-HCl (pH 7.4), 150 mM/L NaCl,
1% NP40, 0.25% sodium deoxycholate, 1 mM/L
phenylmethylsulfonylfluoride (PMSF), 1 mM/L
sodium orthovanadate, 1x sigma protease inhibitor
cocktail) and protein was measured using a standard
bicinchoninic acid assay. Equal amounts of protein (2050 μg) were size-fractionated by 10~15% SDS-PAGE
and then transferred onto PVDF membrane (Millipore
Corporation, Billerica, MA, USA). Membranes were
blocked by incubation for 1 hr with 5% skim milk/
PBS-T buffer (PBS with 5% powdered milk and 1%
Triton X-100), and incubated overnight at 4°C with
primary antibodies diluted in 1 × PBST buffer. The
following primary antibodies were used: β-actin,
KLK6, p53, MDM2, Atg5, LAMP-1, LAMP-2, LAMP3 (SantaCruz, 1:1000), LC3B, Beclin-1 (Sigma,
1:1000), cleaved caspase-3, -9, PARP, Akt, p-Akt, p38,
p-p38 and JNK (CellSignaling, 1:700). The membranes
were washed 3 times with PBST. Secondary antibodys
were diluted in PBST and were added for 40 minutes at
room temperature. The following secondary antibodies
were used: anti-rabbit IgG HRP-linked antibody and
anti-mouse IgG HRP-linked antibody (Sigma, 1:6000).
The membranes were washed 6 times with PBST for 1
hour. The blots were visualized by chemiluminescence
(Clarity Western ECL; Bio-rad).

Isolation of genomic DNA, total RNA and
protein
Chromosomal DNA from gastric cells (2 × 106
cells/well) plated in 100 mm cell culture plates and
tissues (approximately 50–100 mg) were extracted using
a genomic DNA purification kit (Promega, Madison, WI)
according to the manufacturer’s protocol. The extracted
DNA was eluted with 250 μl of distilled water. Total
RNA from gastric cells (2 × 106 cells/well) in 100mm cell
culture dish and tissues (approximately 50–100 mg) was
prepared using Trizol according to the manufacturer’s
protocols (invitrogen, Carlsbad). Genomic DNA and
total RNA from cultured cells and tissues were prepared
using an All Prep DNA/RNA Mini kit (Qiagen, Valencia)
with elution of 100 and 30 μl, respectively. Protein cell
lysates were collected in RIPA buffer containing a protease
inhibitor cocktail (Sigma) on ice for 30 min and passed
through an 18-gauge needle, and spin down. Supernatant
was analyzed for protein content using the BCA method
(Thermo scientific, Pierce BCA Protein Assay Kit).

Methylation-specific polymerase chain reaction
(MSP)
Sodium bisulfite modification of genomic DNA
was carried out using an EpiTect Bisulfite kit (Qiagen)
according to the manufacturer’s protocol using 0.1 mg of
purified DNA. Briefly, primer sequences were designed
using the Methprimer program (http://www.urogene.
org/methprimer/index1.html). Quantitative PCR was
performed using a Power SYBR Green Kit (Applied
Biosystems, Foster City) according to the manufacturer’s
protocol. A methylation index was calculated for
each sample using the following formula: methylation
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Chromatin immunoprecipitation-qPCR
(ChIP-qPCR)
ChIP assays were performed using an EZ ChIP
Chromatin Immunoprecipitation kit (Millipore,
Billerica, MA, USA) as described in the supplier’s
protocol. AGS, SNU-216, NCI-N87 and SNU-620 cells
85344

Oncotarget

DAPI staining assay

(3 × 106 cells/well) were seeded in 100 mm cell culture
plate and cultured for 24 hour. After washing with 1x
PBS, added 140 μl of 37% Formaldehyde and incubated
at room temperature for 15 minute. Following to added
740 μl Glycine (1 M), cells collected with cell scraper
(SPL) after washing with PBS. After centrifuged,
added 1 ml of SDS lysis buffer. Briefly, the crosslinked chromatin was sonicated after cell lysis and
then incubated with antibodies against p53 (SantaCruz)
at 4°C overnight. The lysates were precipitated with
Protein A-agarose (Millipore), and the beads were
washed, sequentially treated with 10 µl of RNase A
(37°C for 30 min) and 75 µl of Proteinase K (45°C
for 4 h), and incubated at 65°C overnight to reverse
cross-link the chromatin. The DNA was recovered by
phenol-chloroform extraction and coprecipitation with
glycogen, and dissolved in 50 µl of Tris-EDTA (TE)
buffer. DNA associated with the p53 was amplified by
PCR using 1 µl of the precipitated DNA. PCR primers
(Supplementary Table S2) were designed to amplify the
p53 binding sequence at the promoter of KLK6. The
qPCR conditions were 40 cycles at 94°C for 40s, 60°C
for 1 60s, and 72°C for 40s.

Morphological changes of the nuclear in AGS,
SNU-216, NCI-N87 and SNU-620 cells (1 × 105/well)
plated 6-well plate undergoing apoptosis were detected
by staining with DAPI (Sigma). Gastric cancer cells were
grown on glass coverslips and treated with the presence or
absence of AF for 8 hr. Cells were washed twice with PBS
and fixed by incubation in 4% paraformaldehyde for 30
min. Following washing with PBS, cells were incubated
in a DAPI solution (1 µg/ml) for 30 min in the dark. Cells
were then washed with PBS and subjected to fluorescence
microscopy.

Quantification of pEGFP-LC3 puncta
AGS, SNU-216, NCI-N87 and SNU-620 cells
(1x105 cell/well) were transfected with pEGFP-LC3B and
control pEGFP-N2 using lipofectamine 2000 (Invitrogen),
and then treated with AF 2.5 µM for 8 hrs. pEGFP-LC3Bpositive punctate pattern was observed by confocal
microscopy. Confocal microscopy was conducted using a
ZEISS LSM 510 META confocal microscope with 405and 488-nm excitation lasers.

Immunoprecipitation (IP)

Immunohistochemistry (IHC) using human
gastric normal/cancer tissue samples

We extracted cell lysates from AGS, SNU-216,
NCI-N87 and SNU-620 cells (2 × 106/well) on 100
mm cell culture plate in buffer containing 50 mM TrisHCl, pH 7.5, 250 mM NaCl, 5 mM EDTA, 0.5% (v/v)
NP-40 and protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma). We
incubated anti-LC3B (Sigma), anti–KLK6 (Santa Cruz)
and anti-p53 (Santa Cruz) with lysate at 4°C for 16 hrs.
We used protein A/G PLUS agarose (Santa Cruz) to pull
down immunocomplexes. We washed precipitates three
times with 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5, 250 mM NaCl, 5
mM EDTA, and 0.5% (v/v) NP-40. We resolved the
immunoprecipitated proteins by 15% SDS-PAGE and
analyzed them by immunoblot.

Tissue microarray slides for human gastric normal and
tumor were purchased from SuperBioChips (SuperBioChips
Laboratories, Seoul). Tissue sections were deparaffinized by
xylene and blocked by normal serum. Primary antibody was
diluted with anti-KLK6 (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Inc.),
anti-LC3B (Sigma) and anti-p53 (Santa Cruz Biotechnology,
Inc.) antibody with CAS blocking solution (Invitrogen) for
overnight. And slides incubated with biotinylated secondary
antibody for overnight. Using DAB substrate kit (DAB
substrate kit, vector laboratories), tissue slides stained
with substrate at room temperature until suitable staining
develops immunohistochemistry staining was performed as
the manufacturer recommended (VECTASTAIN ABC KIT,
Vector laboratories).

Immunofluorescent (IF)
After AF treatment, AGS and NCI-N87 were
fixed for 15 min with 4% paraformaldehyde and stained
by cell staining for immunofluorescence microscopy
method according to the manufacturer’s protocol (Life
technology). The slides were incubated with blocking
buffer (1% BSA in PBS) for 30 min at 37°C and exposed
overnight to anti-LC3B (Sigma), anti-KLK6 (Santa Cruz)
and anti-p53 (Santa Cruz) antibody (1:200 dilution in
blocking buffer) at 4°C. Secondary antibody was stained
using red-fluorescent Alexa Fluor 555 goat anti-rabbit and
-mouse, and green-fluorescent Alexa Fluor 488 goat antirabbit and -mouse. Nuclear DNA was stained with DAPI
(Sigma). Samples were analyzed with a ZEISS LSM 510
META confocal microscope.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Flow cytometry (FACs)
To detection apoptosis, cells were stained as
described in the FITC Annexin V Apoptosis Detection
Kit (BD Pharmingen, San diego) and counted by
flow cytometry (BD FACs Calibur). FITC Annexin V
Apoptosis Detection was perfomed as the manufacturer
recommended (BD Pharmingen).

Luciferase reporter assay
The promoter region (-0.1 - to -1 kb) of KLK6 was
amplified by PCR primers (Supplementary Table S3)
85345

Oncotarget

from human genomic DNA and cloned into the Mlu I
(New England Biolabs) and Xho I (New England Biolabs)
sites of with pGL3 luciferase vector (Promega). The PCR
(ABI2720) was carried out with 35 cycles at 94°C for 40
sec, 56°C for 40 sec, then 72°C for 1 minute. One day
before transfection, AGS and NCI-N87 cells (2 × 105
cell/well) were seeded in 6-well plate and transfected
with 2.5 μg of pGL3 luciferase vector (Promega) after
24 hr using lipofectamine 2000 (Invitrogen). Luciferase
activity was measured 36 hours after transfection in two
independent cultures using a dual-luciferase reporter
assay kit (promega) on Molecular Devices Filter Max F3
(Sunnyvale).

off). For the xenograft assay, cells were collected by
centrifugation, washed twice in phosphate-buffered
saline (PBS), 1 × 107 AGS cells were resuspended in
0.1 ml of PBS, and injected s.c. into right dorsal flank
of nude mice (eight mice per cell line) using 25-gauge
needles. When tumor volumes monitored approximately
200 mm3, treatment with AF were started and were
monitored twice weekly. Moreover, the tumor volumes
of mice were measured with calipers and calculated
using the following formula: (A × B2)/2, where A is the
largest and B is the smallest diameter.

LDH assay
AGS, SNU-216, NCI-N87 and SNU-620 cells
(1 × 104 cells/well) was seeded into 96-well plate with
growth medium. To determine the LDH (Roche) activity
in supernatants, 100 μl of Reaction mixture added and
incubated for 30 minutes in dark room. LDH activity
measured absorbance of the samples at 490 or 492 nm
using ELISA reader.

All results were confirmed in at least three
independent experiments; data from one representative
experiment are shown. All quantitative data are presented
as mean±standard deviation (SD); In vivo data are
expressed as mean±standard error of the mean (SEM).
Statistical analysis was performed using SAS 9.2 software
(SAS Institute, Cary). Student’s t-tests were used for
comparisons of means of quantitative data between groups
and p<0.05 was considered statistically significant.

Cytoplasmic and nuclear fractionation

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST

Statistical analysis

Fractionation of cytoplasmic and nuclear extracts
was carried out using Nuclear Extract kit (Active motif)
according to manufacturer’s instructions. Supernatants
used as cytoplasmic fraction, whereas pellets were
resuspended in 50 μl of complete lysis buffer and
supernatants were used as nuclear fractions by centrifuging
at 14,000 × g for 10 minutes at 4°C

The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

GRANT SUPPORT
This work was supported by the National Research
Foundation of Korea (NRF) grant funded by the Korea
government (NRF-2014R1A2A2A09052492).

Xenograft assay by AF in nude mice

REFERENCES

Female 6- to 8-week-old female athymic nu/nu
nude mice were purchased from Central Lab, Animal Inc
(Seoul) and used for the in vivo experiments. Mice were
housed in a pathogen-free barrier room in Animal Care
Facility at the Korea Research Institute of Bioscience and
Biotechnology (KRIBB). This experimental protocol was
reviewed and approved by the Institutional Animal Care
and Use Committee of the Korea Research Institute of
Bioscience and Biotechnology (KRIBB) and performed
in accordance with the guide for the Care and Use of
Laboratory Animal published by the U.S. National
Institutes of Health (NIH Publication, 8th Edition, 2011).
Two clones of AGS cells stably expressing pcDNA3.1KLK6 and control pcDNA3.1-transfected cells were
used in a xenograft assay. The mice were divided into 4
groups, with 8 mice per group: (1) AGS pcDNA3.1 stable
expressing cell, (2) AGS pcDNA3.1 stable expressing
cell and AF (4 mg/kg), (3) AGS pcDNA3.1-KLK6 stable
expression cell, and (4) AGS pcDNA3.1-KLK6 and AF
(4 mg/kg). AF was dissolved in PBS and mice were given
AF intraperitoneally (i.p.) every other day (weekends
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

1.	 Turner R. Gastric cancer gets the run-around. Nat Med.
2002; 8:449.
2.	 Fan K, Fan D, Cheng, LF, and Li C. Expression of multidrug
resistance-related markers in gastric cancer. Anticancer Res.
2000; 20:4809-14.
3.	 Zhou J, Yong WP, Yap CS, Vijayaraghavan A, Sinha RA,
Singh BK, Xiu S, Manesh S, Ngo A, Lim A, Ang C, Xie C,
et al. An integrative approach identified genes associated
with drug response in gastric cancer. Carcinogenesis 2015;
36:441-51.
4.	 Gray-Schopfer VC, Karasarides M, Hayward R, and Marais
R. Tumor necrosis factor-a blocks apoptosis in melanoma
cells when BRAF signaling is inhibited. Cancer Res. 2007;
67:122-9.
5.	 Thorburn A, Thamm DH, and Gustafson DL. Autophagy
and cancer therapy. Mol Pharmacol. 2014; 85:830-8.
6.	 Tanaka Y, Guhde G, Suter A, Eskelinen EL, Hartmann D,
Lullmann-Rauch R, Janssen PM, Blanz J, von Figura K,
and Saftig P. Accumulation of autophagic vacuoles and
85346

Oncotarget

cardiomyopathy in Lamp-2-deficient mice. Nature. 2000;
406:902-6.

21.	 Fiskus W, Saba N, Shen M, Ghias M, Liu J, Gupta SD,
Chauhan L, Rao R, Gunewardena S, Schorno K, Austin CP,
Maddocks K, et al. Auranofin induces lethal oxidative and
endoplasmic reticulum stress and exerts potent preclinical
activity against chronic lymphocytic leukemia. Cancer Res.
2014; 74:2520-32.

7.	 Marino G, Niso-Santano M, Baehrecke EH, and Kroemer
G. Self-consumption: the interplay of autophagy and
apoptosis. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2014; 15:81-94.
8.	 Ludwig JA, Szakacs G, Martin SE, Chu BF, Cardarelli C,
Sauna ZE, Caplen NJ, Fales HM, Ambudkar SV, Weinstein
JN, and Gottesman MM. Selective toxicity of NSC73306
in MDR1-positive cells as a new strategy to circumvent
multidrug resistance in cancer. Cancer Res. 2006; 66:4808-15.

22.	 Gandin V, Fernandes AP, Rigobello MP, Dani B, Sorrentino
F, Tisato F, Bjornstedt M, Bindoli A, Sturaro A, Rella R, and
Marzano C. Cancer cell death induced by phosphine gold
(I) compounds targeting thioredoxin reductase. Biochem
Pharmacol. 2010; 79:90-101.

9.	 Nakaya A, Sagawa M, Muto A, Uchida H, Ikeda Y, and
Kizaki M. The gold compound auranofin induces apoptosis
of human multiple myeloma cells through both downregulation of STAT3 and inhibition of NF-kB activity. Leuk
Res. 2011; 35:243-9.

23.	 Marzano C, Gandin V, Folda A, Scutari G, Bindoli A,
and Rigobello MP. Inhibition of thioredoxin reductase
by auranofin induces apoptosis in cisplatin-resistant
human ovarian cancer cells. Free Radic Biol Med. 2007;
42:872-81.

10.	 Sui X, Chen R, Wang Z, Huang Z, Kong N, Zhang M, Han
W, Lou F, Yang J, Zhang Q, Wang X, He C, et al. Autophagy
and chemotherapy resistance: a promising therapeutic target
for cancer treatment. Cell Death Dis. 2013; 4:e838.

24.	 Fan C, Zheng W, Fu X, Li X, Wong YS, and Chen T.
Enhancement of auranofin-induced lung cancer cell
apoptosis by selenocystine, a natural inhibitor of TrxR1 in
vitro and in vivo. Cell Death Dis. 2014; 5:e1191.

11.	 Klionsky DJ, Abdelmohsen K, Abe A, Abedin MJ,
Abeliovich H, Arozena A, Adachi H, Adams CM, Adeli K,
Adhihetty P, Adler SG, and Agam G et al. Guidelines for the
use and interpretation of assays for monitoring autophagy
(3rd edition). Autophagy 2016; 12:1-222.

25.	 Zou P, Chen M, Ji J, Chen W, Chen X, Ying S, Zhang J,
Zhang Z, Liu Z, Yang S, and Liang G. Auranofin induces
apoptosis by ROS-mediated ER stress and mitochondrial
dysfunction and displayed synergistic lethality with
piperlongumine in gastric cancer. Oncotarget. 2015;
6:36505-21. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.5364.

12.	 Wirawan E, Vanden Berghe T, Lippens S, Agostinis P, and
Vandenabeele P. Autophagy: for better or for worse. Cell
Res. 2012; 22:43-61.

26.	 Li H, Hu J, Wu S, Wang L, Cao X, Zhang X, Dai B, Cao M,
Shao R, Zhang R, Majidi M, Ji L, et al. Auranofin-mediated
inhibition of PI3K/AKT/mTOR axis and anticancer activity
in non-small cell lung cancer cells. Oncotarget 2016;
7:3548-58. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.6516.

13.	 Yang X, Yu DD, Yan F, Jing YY, Han ZP, Sun K, Liang
L, Hou J, and Wei LX. The role of autophagy induced by
tumor microenvironment in different cells and stages of
cancer. Cell Biosci. 2015; 5:14.

27.	 Debnath A, Parsonage D, Andrade RM, He C, Cobo ER,
Hirata K, Chen S, Garcia-Rivera G, Orozco E, Martinez
MB, Martinez MB, Gunatilleke SS, et al. A high-throughput
drug screen for Entamoeba histolytica identifies a new lead
and target. Nat Med. 2012; 18:956-60.

14.	 White E. Deconvoluting the context-dependent role for
autophagy in cancer. Nat Rev Cancer. 2012; 12:401-10.
15.	 Pattingre S, Tassa A, Qu X, Garuti R, Liang XH,
Mizushima N, Packer M, Schneider MD, and Levine B.
Bcl-2 antiapoptotic proteins inhibit Beclin-1-dependent
autophagy. Cell. 2005; 122:927-39.

28.	 Kim JT, Song EY, Chung KS, Kang MA, Kim JW, Kim SJ,
Yeom YI, Kim JH, Kim KH, and Lee HG. Up-regulation
and clinical significance of serine protease kallikrein 6 in
colon cancer. Cancer. 2011; 117:2608-19.

16.	 Marx J. Autophagy: is it cancer’s friend or foe? Science
2006; 312:1160-1.
17.	 Hager KM, and Gu W. Understanding the non-canonical
pathways involved in p53-mediated tumor suppression.
Carcinogenesis. 2014; 35:740-6.

29.	 White NM, Mathews M, Yousef GM, Prizada A, Popadiuk
C, and Dore JJ. KLK6 and KLK13 predict tumor recurrence
in epithelial ovarian carcinoma. Br J Cancer. 2009;
101:1107-13.

18.	 Sui X, Kong N, Wang X, Fang Y, Hu X, Xu Y, Chen W,
Wang K, Li D, Jin W, Lou F, Zheng Y, et al. JNK confers
5-fluorouracil resistance in p53-deficient and mutant
p53-expressing colon cancer cells by inducing survival
autophagy. Sci Rep 2014; 4:4694.

30.	 Jiang X, Sha X, Xin H, Xu X, Gu J, Xia W, Chen S,
Xie Y, Chen L, Chen Y, and Fang X. Integrin-facilitated
transcytosis for enhanced penetration of advanced
gliomas by poly(trimethylene carbonate)-based
nanoparticles encapsulating paclitaxel. Biomaterials.
2013; 34:2969-79.

19.	 Sui X, Jin L, Huang X, Geng S, He C, and Hu X. p53
signaling and autophagy in cancer: a revolutionary strategy
could be developed for cancer treatment. Autophagy 2011;
7:565-71.

31.	 Loessner D, Quent VM, Kraemer J, Weber EC, Hutmacher
DW, Magdolen V, and Clements JA. Combined expression
of KLK4, KLK5, KLK6, and KLK7 by ovarian cancer
cells leads to decreased adhesion and paclitaxel-induced
chemoresistance. Gynecol Oncol. 2012; 127:569-78.

20.	 Comel A, Sorrentino G, Capaci V, and Del Sal G. The
cytoplasmic side of p53’s oncosuppressive activities. FEBS
Lett 2014; 588:2600-9.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

85347

Oncotarget

32.	 Hanusova V, Skalova L, Kralova V, and Matouskova
P. Potential anti-cancer drugs commonly used for other
indications. Curr Cancer Drug Targets. 2015; 15:35-52.

45.	 Morselli E, Galluzzi L, Kepp O, Vicencio JM, Criollo A,
Maiuri MC, and Kroemer G. Anti- and pro-tumor functions
of autophagy. Biochim Biophys Acta 2009; 1793:1524-32.

33.	 Mathew R, Karantza-Wadsworth V, and White E. Role of
autophagy in cancer. Nat Rev Cancer. 2007; 12:961-7.

46.	 John S, Nayvelt I, Hsu HC, Yang P, Liu W, Das GM,
Thomas T, and Thomas TJ. Regulation of estrogen effects
by beclin-1 in breast cancer cells. Cancer Res 2008;
68:7855-63.

34.	 Chen S, Jiang YZ, Huang L, Zhou RJ, Yu KD, Liu Y, and
Shao ZM. The residual tumor autophagy marker LC3B
serves as a prognostic marker in local advanced breast
cancer after neoadjuvant chemotherapy. Clin Cancer Res.
2013; 19:6853-62.

47.	 Rubinsztein DC, Codogno P, and Levine B. Autophagy
modulation as a potential therapeutic target for diverse
diseases. Nat Rev Drug Discov. 2012; 11:709-30.

35.	 Contreras AU, Mebratu Y, Delgado M, Montano G, Hu
CA, Ryter SW, Choi AM, Lin Y, Xiang J, Chand H, and
Tesfaigzi Y. Deacetylation of p53 induces autophagy by
suppressing Bmf expression. J Cell Biol. 2013; 201:427-37.

48.	 Tasdemir E, Maiuri MC, Galluzzi L, Vitale I, DjavaheriMergny M, D’Amelio M, Criollo A, Mor selli E, Zhu C, Harper
F, Nanmark U, Samara C, et al. Regulation of autophagy by
cytoplasmic p53. Nat Cell Biol. 2008; 10:676-87.

36.	 King H, Nicholas NS, and Wells CM. Role of p21-activated
kinases in cancer progression. Int Rev Cell Mol Biol. 2014;
309:347-87.

49.	 Levine B, and Abrams J. p53: The Janus of autophagy? Nat
Cell Biol 2008; 10:637-9.
50.	 Zheng Y, Lei Y, Hu C, and Hu C. p53 regulates autophagic
activity in senescent rat mesenchymal stromal cells. Exp
Gerontol. 2016; 75:64-71.

37.	 Ehedego H, Boekschoten MV, Hu W, Doler C, Haybaeck
J, Gabler N, MullerM, Liedtke C, and Trautwein C. p21
ablation in liver enhances DNA damage, cholestasis, and
carcinogenesis. Cancer Res. 2015; 75:1144-55.

51.	 Dalby KN, Tekedereli I, Lopez-Berestein G, and Ozpolat
B. Targeting the prodeath and prosurvival functions
of autophagy as novel therapeutic strategies in cancer.
Autophagy 2010; 6:322-9.

38.	 Morselli E, Shen S, Ruckenstuhl C, Bauer MA, Marino
G, Galluzzi L, Criollo A, Michaud M, Maiuri MC, Chano
T, Maedo F, and Kroemer G. p53 inhibits autophagy by
interacting with human ortholog of yeast Atg17, RB1CC/
FIP200. Cell Cycle. 2011; 10:2763-9.

52.	 Maiuri MC, Galluzzi L, Morselli E, Kepp O, Malik SA, and
Kroemer G. Autophagy regulation by p53. Curr Opin Cell
Biol. 2010; 22:181-5.

39.	 Park SJ, and Kim IS. The role of p38 MAPK activation
in auranofin-induced apoptosis of human promyelocytic
leukemia HL-60 cells. Br J Pharmacol 2005; 146:506-13.

53.	 Maiuri MC, Tasdemir E, Criollo A, Morselli E, Vicencio
JM, Carnuccio R, and Kroemer G. Control of autophagy by
oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes. Cell Death Differ.
2009; 16:87-93.

40.	 Schrader CH, Kolb M, Zaoui K, Flechtenmacher C,
Grabe N, Weber KJ, Hielscher T, Plinkert PK, and Hess
J. Kallikrein-related peptidase 6 regulates epithelial-tomesenchymal transition and serves as prognostic biomarker
for head and neck squamous cell carcinoma patients. Mol
Cancer. 2015 14:107.

54.	 Henkhaus RS, Roy UK, Cavallo-Medved D, Sloane BF,
Gerner EW, and Ignatenko NA. Caveolin-1-mediated
expression and secretion of kallikrein 6 in colon cancer
cells. Neoplasia. 2008; 10:140-8.
55.	 Gui YX, Liu H, Zhang LS, Lv W, and Hu XY. Altered
microRNA profiles in cerebrospinal fluid exosome in
Parkinson disease and Alzheimer disease. Oncotarget. 2015;
6:37043-53. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.6158.

41.	 Drucker KL, Paulsen AR, Giannini C, Decker PA, Blaber
SI, Blaber M, Uhm JH, O’Neill BP, Jenkins RB, and
Scarisbrick IA. Clinical significance and novel mechanism
of action of kallikrein 6 in glioblastoma. Neuro Oncol.
2013; 15:305-18.

56.	 Tatebe H, Watanabe Y, Kasai T, Mizuno T, Nakagawa M,
Tanaka M, and Tokuda T. Extracellular neurosin degrades
a-synuclein in cultured cells. Neurosci Res. 2010; 67:341-6.

42.	 Ogawa K, Utsunomiya T, Mimori K, Tanaka F, Inoue
H, Nagahara H, Murayama S, and Mori M. Clinical
significance of human kallikrein gene 6 messenger RNA
expression in colorectal cancer. Clin Cancer Res. 2005;
11:2889-93.

57.	 Chen SN, and Tang BL. Location and membrane sources for
autophagosome formation - from ER-mitochondria contact
sites to Golgi-endosome-derived carriers. Mol Membr Biol.
2013; 30:394-402.

43.	 Henkhaus R, Roy U, Cavallo-Medved D, Sloane B, Gerner
E, and Ignatenko N. Caveolin-1- mediated expression and
secretion of kallikrein 6 in colon cancer cells. Neoplasia
2008; 10:140-148.

58.	 Lee SJ, Smith A, Guo L, Alastalo TP, Li M, Sawada H, Liu
X, Chen ZH, Ifedigbo E, Jin Y, Feghali-Bostwick C, Ryter
SW, et al. Autophagic protein LC3B confers resistance
against hypoxia-induced pulmonary hypertension. Am J
Respir Crit Care Med. 2011; 183:649-58.

44.	 Ehrenfeld P, Manso L, Pavicic MF, Matus CE, Borquez C,
Lizama A, Sarmiento J, Poblete MT, Bhoola KD, Naran
A, and Fiqueroa CD. Bioregulation of kallikrein-related
peptidases 6, 10 and 11 by the kinin B1 receptor in breast
cancer cells. Anticancer Res. 2014; 34:6925-38.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

59.	 Pan B, Chen D, Huang J, Wang R, Feng B, Song H, and
Chen L. HMGB1-mediated autophagy promotes docetaxel
resistance in human lung adenocarcinoma. Mol Cancer.
2014; 13:165.
85348

Oncotarget

