Original Article

Successful Treatment of Refractory
Metastatic Histiocytic Sarcoma With
Alemtuzumab
Neerav Shukla, MD1; Rachel Kobos, MD1; Thomas Renaud, MD1; Julie Teruya-Feldstein, MD2; Anita Price, MD3;
Linda McAllister-Lucas, MD, PhD4; and Peter Steinherz, MD1

BACKGROUND: Histiocytic sarcoma (HS) is an exceedingly rare tumor and carries a dismal prognosis when patients
present with advanced-stage disease. Because of the poor response rates to conventional chemotherapy and the rarity of the disease, no standard of care exists for patients with HS. The authors report the single-agent use of the antiCD52 antibody alemtuzumab in 2 patients who had advanced-stage HS. METHODS: Two patients with chemotherapy-refractory, metastatic HS with tumors that expressed the CD52 antigen received a prolonged course of treatment with the anti-CD52 monoclonal antibody alemtuzumab. RESULTS: Resected tumor samples from both patients
demonstrated CD52 expression. Both patients had marked responses to single-agent alemtuzumab. One patient had
a complete response with no evidence of disease for >5 years. The second patient had a major response to alemtuzumab and also remained alive with no evidence of disease for >4 years. CONCLUSIONS: Further studies need to be
performed to examine CD52 expression and function in HS as well as the role of alemtuzumab in a larger cohort of
patients. However, the clinical impact of single-agent alemtuzumab in the 2 patients described in this report was very
encouraging. Given the toxicity and frequent inefficacy of conventional chemotherapy, patients with incompletely
C 2011 American
resected HS should be strongly considered for alemtuzumab therapy. Cancer 2012;118:3719-24. V
Cancer Society.
KEYWORDS: histiocytic sarcoma, alemtuzumab, refractory, metastatic, antibody.

INTRODUCTION
Histiocytic sarcoma (HS) is an exceedingly rare malignancy in both children and adults. It is characterized by neoplastic cells with specific markers of histiocytic differentiation. The World Health Organization defines HS as a malignant
proliferation of cells with features similar to those of mature tissue histiocytes. Immunophenotyping reveals 1 or more histiocyte-related markers, including CD68, lysozyme, CD11c, and CD14.1 More recently, it was demonstrated that
CD163 is a specific marker for HS.2 In several previous studies, HS lesions were reclassified as non-Hodgkin lymphomas
upon further re-examination, adding to the rarity of the disease.3,4
Given the low frequency of the disease and the wide spectrum of presentations, no standard-of-care therapy exists for
HS. There is a paucity of literature addressing HS, and pediatric cases are limited to case reports.2-11 Resections usually are
attempted for surgically accessible tumors, often in conjunction with radiation and/or chemotherapy for more advancedstage tumors. Various outcomes have been reported by different studies. Vos et al reported on 5 adults patients with HS,
including 4 patients who died of disease and 1 patient who died without disease 17 years after the diagnosis. The 1 survivor
had stage I disease, which was surgically resected. Two of those patients received chemotherapy, and both died of disease.2
Hornick et al reported on 14 patients, including 13 patients who presented with stage I or II disease and 1 patient who presented with stage IV disease. Seven of those patients received lymphoma-based chemotherapy, and 6 remained alive at the
Corresponding author: Neerav Shukla, MD, Department of Pediatrics, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, 1275 York Avenue, New York, NY 10065; Fax:
(212) 717-3239; shuklan@mskcc.org
1
Department of Pediatrics, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New York; 2Department of Pathology, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center,
New York, New York; 3Department of Radiology, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New York; 4Department of Pediatrics and Communicable
Diseases, Division of Hematology and Oncology, C. S. Mott Children’s Hospital, Ann Arbor Michigan

We thank Dr. Rabah-Hammad and Ms. Mary Currie from the Department of Pathology at C. S. Mott Children’s Hospital for their assistance with the collection of
materials.
DOI: 10.1002/cncr.26712, Received: July 21, 2011; Revised: September 29, 2011; Accepted: October 24, 2011, Published online December 13, 2011 in Wiley
Online Library (wileyonlinelibrary.com)

Cancer

August 1, 2012

3719

Original Article

time of publication. However, all but 1 patient presented
with low-stage disease, and only 1 patient who developed
distant metastasis had a durable response to chemotherapy.9 Pileri et al described 18 adult patients with HS,
including 11 patients who presented with stage III or IV
disease, 9 of whom received chemotherapy as part of their
treatment. Of those 11 patients with high-stage disease, 5
died of disease, 2 remained alive with disease, 2 remained
alive in remission, and 2 were not evaluable at the time of
publication.5
In this report, we describe 2 children diagnosed with
stage IV HS who had disease that was refractory to multiple chemotherapeutic agents. Their tumor cells were positive for the cluster of differentiation 52 (CD52) protein (a
glycosylphosphatidylinositol-anchored antigen expressed
on all lymphocytes), and they demonstrated significant
responses after the administration of single-agent alemtuzumab (an anti-CD52 monoclonal antibody) therapy.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Case Reports
Patient 1

A girl aged 20 months presented to her pediatrician
with a widespread petechial rash that was most pronounced in the groin. A complete blood count at the time
revealed a platelet count of 57 K/lL, and she initially was
diagnosed with idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura.
She was admitted to an outside hospital and received 3
courses of intravenous immunoglobulin. Improvement of
the rash was noted, and the patient was discharged home
with a platelet count of 108 K/lL. Over the next 2 weeks,
her clinical picture worsened with increased agitation,
poor oral intake, and febrile episodes. She was taken to
another pediatric hematologist who noted significant
tachypnea and tachycardia, hepatosplenomegaly, pallor,
and petechiae. A complete blood count at the time
revealed a white blood cell count of 24.9 K/lL with a predominance of neutrophils and no blasts, a hemoglobin
level of 5 g/dL, and a platelet count of 30 K/lL. Her lactic
dehydrogenase level was elevated to 1236 U/L, and her
uric acid level was elevated to 9.5mg/dL. She had severe
metabolic acidosis with a bicarbonate level of 11 mmol/L.
Liver function tests and bilirubin levels were moderately
elevated. She was admitted to the pediatric intensive care
unit for management.
A computed tomography (CT) scan performed that
day revealed multiorgan involvement with heterogeneous
masses highly suspicious for malignancy (Fig. 1). Involved

3720

sites included 2 large, right hepatic lobe masses and retroperitoneal masses with extension into the pancreas and
right kidney. There also was extensive tumor involvement
of the anterior mediastinum, pleura, and lungs. Hepatic
and omental biopsies were performed by laparotomy.
The patient remained intubated after the surgical
procedure. While the pathologic diagnosis was pending in
the critically ill child, therapy was initiated with dexamethasone, doxorubicin, and vincristine—agents that
would be active in most of the diagnostic possibilities
(lymphoma, neuroblastoma, sarcoma, etc). A CT scan
performed 3 weeks later did not reveal any significant
change in the lesions. Clinically, she remained mechanically ventilated in critical condition, and she was not stable enough to receive more aggressive conventional
chemotherapy or radiation therapy.
Histiologic examination of the biopsy specimens
revealed syncytial sheets of large, oval-to-round cells with
significant pleomorphism, prominent nucleoli, eccentrically placed nuclei, and abundant eosinophilic cytoplasm
(Fig. 2). Focally, the cells contained cytoplasmic hemophagocytic debris. Immunohistochemical analysis revealed positivity for CD68, S-100, leukocyte common
antigen, and lysozyme (focal). The cells were negative for
CD1a, CD21, CD35, CD20, CD3, CD8, myeloperoxidase, CD30, cytokeratin, epithelial membrane antigen,
and activin receptor-like kinase 1 (ALK-1). After a considerable delay for multiple consultations, a diagnosis of HS
was made.
Because of the histiocytic nature of the tumor, a trial
of cladribine (2CDA) was initiated. The patient received
daily 2CDA for 3 days without any shrinkage of the
tumor.
On the basis of the knowledge that CD52 is
expressed on many histiocytic cells, the tumor was tested
for CD52 and was positive (Fig. 2). Thereafter, we initiated antibody therapy with alemtuzumab in an effort to
give targeted therapy. After 1 week of daily initial dose
escalation, she received alemtuzumab 10 mg/m2 per dose
3 days weekly.
After the initiation of alemtuzumab therapy, her
clinical status improved. She was extubated successfully 2
weeks after starting alemtuzumab. A CT scan at that
time demonstrated a decrease in size of the multiple
masses. After 1 month of thrice-weekly therapy, the
treatment frequency was decreased to twice weekly doses
for another 4 weeks, and then to weekly doses for 2 more
months. She received a total of 4.5 months of alemtuzumab treatment.

Cancer

August 1, 2012

Alemtuzumab Treatment for Metastatic HS/Shukla et al

Figure 1. These are contrast-enhanced computed tomography images of the chest and abdomen before and after alemtuzumab
therapy. (A) A large, heterogeneous anterior mediastinal mass (arrow) is observed at the level of the aortic arch (AO) extending
cephalad to the thoracic inlet. (B) The mass, which has decreased significantly (arrow), is present only at the level of the AO 6
months after the completion of alemtuzumab therapy. (C) A large necrotic mass (solid arrow) in the right lobe of the liver compresses the portal vein (asterisk), and large necrotic masses (open arrows) encase the celiac artery (arrowhead) and compress
the portal vein. (D) A follow-up image obtained 6 month after the completion of therapy reveals a significant decrease in the
mass in the right hepatic lobe (solid arrow). The left periceliac mass has resolved, and the right periceliac mass (open arrows) is
decreased and no longer compresses the portal vein (asterisk).

CT scans during therapy demonstrated gradual
decrease in her lesions. Residual, ill-defined, low-attenuation lesions remained in the lung, mediastinum, liver, and
pancreas. After she discontinued therapy, the liver lesions
were biopsied and revealed focal fibrosis with no viable tumor (Fig. 1).
Serial follow-up CT scans and positron emission tomography (PET) scans have been performed after alemtuzumab therapy. They reveal small, PET-negative areas of
scarring in the lungs; calcifications in the mediastinum;
and subcentimeter, not metabolically active areas of low
attenuation in the liver and right kidney. Currently, she
has been off therapy for >5 years with no evidence of
recurrent disease.
Patient 2
A previously healthy girl aged 14 years presented with isolated pain in her left calf. After progression of the pain, an
ultrasound was obtained, which revealed a mass in the deep
tissues. A magnetic resonance image (MRI) confirmed the

Cancer

August 1, 2012

presence of a soft tissue mass that was suspicious for a possible neural sheath tumor. She underwent a biopsy, and,
while the pathology of the biopsy specimen was being
debated, significant pain in her left groin associated with
lymphadenopathy developed. Staging evaluations with CT,
MRI, and PET studies revealed extensive metastatic disease,
including multiple pulmonary lesions; lesions throughout
the liver, spleen, and kidneys; abnormally enlarged lymph
nodes in the left inguinal, left internal iliac, left external
iliac, left obturator, and subcarinal regions; as well as a large,
presumably primary mass in the posterior compartment of
the left calf with invasion into the posterior capsule of the
knee joint and enlarged popliteal lymph nodes.
Lymph node biopsies were performed. These demonstrated tumor tissue identical to that observed in the
calf lesion. Pathology revealed diffuse, malignant histiocytic proliferation. Evaluation of the calf mass and lymph
nodes revealed that the tumor cells were stained positive
for vimentin, CD4, CD31, CD43, CD45, and
CD45RO. Subsets of the tumor cells were positive for

3721

Original Article

Figure 2. These images of tumor sections from Patients 1 and 2 depict positive CD163 and CD52 immunostaining in both tumors.
(A-C) In Patient 1, tumor sections are immunostained for (A) hematoxylin and eosin (H&E), (B) CD163, and (C) CD52. (D-F) In
Patient 2, tumor sections are immunostained for (D) H&E, (E) CD163, and (F) CD52.

lysozyme and CD68. Frequent cells were positive for the
E3 ubiquitin-protein ligaseMIB-1. The tumor cells were
negative for CD1a, CD3, CD15, CD21, CD30, CD34,
CD35, ALK-1, myeloperoxidase, clusterin, S-100, desmin, actin, myogenin, and keratin. It was believed that
these features were consistent with the diagnosis of HS.
CD52 staining of the primary tumor was positive. Bilateral bone marrow biopsies were negative for tumor
involvement.
The slides were reviewed by pathologists at the
Mayo Clinic and at Emory University. The unanimous
diagnosis was HS. The patient initially received treatment
with ifosfamide and doxorubicin and had no response on
follow-up imaging studies after 1 cycle. Then, she received
chemotherapy based on Children’s Cancer Group Protocol 5941. Induction chemotherapy included vincristine,
prednisone, cyclophosphamide, pegaspargase, and etoposide. After induction, a follow-up PET scan demonstrated
complete resolution of 2-deoxy-2-(18F)fluoro-D-glucose
(FDG) activity in the liver, spleen, and left common iliac
and internal iliac lymph node chains and persistent but
decreased FDG activity in the subcarinal, left external
iliac, and popliteal lymph nodes as well as in the left calf
soft tissue mass. She then received consolidation chemotherapy, which included vincristine, pegaspargase, etoposide, cytarabine, 6-thioguanine, and methotrexate.

3722

Unfortunately, upon completion of consolidation chemotherapy, a PET scan revealed a significant increase in the
size and FDG-avidity in the left calf mass, popliteal lymph
nodes, subcarinal lymph nodes, and left external iliac
lymph nodes, consistent with progressive disease.
After the experience with Patient 1, a decision was
made to administer a trial of alemtuzumab. After a 1week dose-escalation schedule, she continued on a schedule of alemtuzumab 10 mg 3 times per week. The patient
tolerated this dosing schedule quite well with no notable
sequelae. A follow-up PET scan obtained after 2 months
of alemtuzumab therapy revealed a slight decrease in size
and metabolic activity of the primary tumor and metastatic sites, consistent with some response to treatment.
The alemtuzumab was continued, and follow-up PET
scans were obtained at 2-month to 3-month intervals to
assess response. Continued interval decreases in FDG activity were observed over several months.
The patient did not experience any infections or
other complications during alemtuzumab therapy. She
did develop significant lymphopenia with an absolute
lymphocyte count of zero soon after starting alemtuzumab. She received prophylactic voriconazole, acyclovir,
and pentamidine during alemtuzumab therapy. She did
not require intravenous immunoglobulin supplementation during this time.

Cancer

August 1, 2012

Alemtuzumab Treatment for Metastatic HS/Shukla et al

After 9 months of alemtuzumab therapy, a PET
scan revealed an interval increase in metabolic activity in
multiple sites, and the alemtuzumab was discontinued. A
biopsy of the left calf revealed viable tumor cells. A trial of
thalidomide therapy was initiated. After 8 months of thalidomide therapy, follow-up PET scans began to demonstrate interval improvement with decreased metabolic
activity in multiple tumor sites, including the left calf. After 3 years of thalidomide therapy, a follow-up PET scan
revealed no evidence of disease. The patient has been
receiving thalidomide for 4 years and is doing well with
no evidence of disease. She is attending college.

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
HS is an exceptionally rare disease in children. The presentation can vary greatly, from isolated lymph node or
skin involvement to rapidly progressive, disseminated,
extranodal disease. Patients with low-stage disease often
can be cured with complete surgical resection. However,
patients with disseminated disease frequently die of disease despite aggressive therapy with chemotherapy, radiation, and surgery.
Alemtuzumab is a humanized monoclonal antiCD52 antibody that was developed as an immunosuppressive agent that depletes T cells, and it is a potential
therapy against lymphoid disease.12,13 The therapy has
been used successfully in various induction protocols for
solid organ transplantation.14-18 Similarly, alemtuzumab
has been used as a conditioning agent for stem cell transplantation and also as a prophylactic agent against graftversus-host disease.19-22
Alemtuzumab is currently approved by the US Food
and Drug Administration for monotherapy in chronic
lymphocytic leukemia.23 Furthermore, it has been evaluated for a myriad of adult-onset tumors, including nonHodgkin lymphoma and various T-cell malignancies.13,23-25 Very little is known about the efficacy of alemtuzumab in pediatric cancers. Williams et al reported the
successful treatment of a child with T-cell post-transplantation lymphoproliferative disease using an alemtuzumab
containing regimen.26 The Children’s Oncology Group
recently published results from a phase 2 study of alemtuzumab in relapsed/refractory childhood leukemia. Thirteen children with pre-B or T-cell leukemia were treated:
One patient achieved a complete remission, and 4 others
had stable disease.27
The CD52 antigen is expressed on a variety of peripheral blood cells, including lymphocytes, monocytes,

Cancer

August 1, 2012

and eosinophils. Although it was believed previously that
it was absent on neutrophils, recent evidence suggests neutrophilic expression of the antigen, albeit at lower levels
than in mononuclear cells.28 Peripheral blood dendritic
cells express CD52; however, tissue dendritic cells, such as
Langerhans cells, lack expression of the antigen.29,30
CD52 expression has been observed in a wide spectrum of
leukemias and lymphomas and has served as the impetus
for the numerous studies of alemtuzumab in these disease
types.31 CD52 expression also has been observed on tumor cells from specimens of Langerhans cell histiocytosis.
Because normal Langerhans cells do not express CD52,
alemtuzumab is an attractive therapeutic option for
patients with Langerhans cell histiocytosis.29,30,32
We report the successful treatment of 2 patients who
had widespread HS using single-agent alemtuzumab.
Patient 1 had multiorgan involvement, which was nonresponsive to aggressive, conventional chemotherapy. She
was critically ill with multiorgan failure, requiring mechanical ventilation. After treatment with single-agent
alemtuzumab, she achieved a complete remission. Patient
2 had chemotherapy-resistant, metastatic disease to lymph
nodes, liver, lung, kidneys, and spleen. After she progressed on aggressive, conventional chemotherapy, she
demonstrated a marked improvement of disease with
alemtuzumab. Despite a significant initial response,
Patient 2 eventually required further treatment with thalidomide to achieve a complete remission. Neither patient
suffered any significant toxicity from the antibody therapy.
In previous observations, it appeared that alemtuzumab was more effective at treating disease in blood and
bone marrow and was less effective against lymph node
and extranodal masses.33 Both patients in the current
report had a significant burden of extramedullary disease,
and 1 patient responded to alemtuzumab therapy with
long-term disease eradication. Further investigations in a
larger cohort of tumors are needed into CD52 expression
of HS. However, in light of the efficacy in these patients,
along with the lack of significant toxicity, we conclude
that frontline use of alemtuzumab should be strongly considered in patients with HS who are unable to achieve
complete surgical resection.

FUNDING SOURCES
No specific funding was disclosed.
CONFLICT OF INTEREST DISCLOSURES
The authors made no disclosures.

3723

Original Article

REFERENCES
1. Weiss LM, Crogan EM, Muller-Hermelink HK, et al. Histiocytic sarcoma. In: Jaffe ES, Harris NL, Stein H, Vardiman JW, eds. World Health Organization Classification of
Tumours. Pathology and Genetics of Tumours of Haematopoietic and Lymphoid Tissues. Lyon, France: IARC Press;
2001.
2. Vos JA, Abbondanzo SL, Barekman CL, Andriko JW, Miettinen M, Aguilera NS. Histiocytic sarcoma: a study of 5
cases including the histiocyte marker CD163. Mod Pathol.
2005;18:693-704.
3. Hanson CA, Jaszcz W, Kersey JH, et al. True histiocytic
lymphoma: histopathologic, immunophenotypic and genotypic analysis. Br J Haematol. 1989;73:187-198.
4. Lauritzen AF, Delsol G, Hansen NE, et al. Histiocytic sarcomas and monoblastic leukemias. A clinical, histologic, and
immunophenotypical study. Am J Clin Pathol. 1994;102:4554.
5. Pileri SA, Grogan TM, Harris NL, et al. Tumours of histiocytes and accessory dendritic cells: an immunohistochemical
approach to classification from the International Lymphoma
Study Group based on 61 cases. Histopathology. 2002;41:1-29.
6. Bouabdallah R, Abena P, Chetaille B, et al. True histiocytic
lymphoma following B-acute lymphoblastic leukaemia: case
report with evidence for a common clonal origin in both
neoplasms. Br J Haematol. 2001;113:1047-1050.
7. Buonocore S, Valente AL, Nightingale D, Bogart J, Souid
AK. Histiocytic sarcoma in a 3-year-old male: a case report.
Pediatrics. 2005;116:e322-e325.
8. Copie-Bergman C, Wotherspoon AC, Norton AJ, Diss TC,
Isaacson PG. True histiocytic lymphoma: a morphologic,
immunohistochemical, and molecular genetic study of 13
cases. Am J Surg Pathol. 1998;22:1386-1392.
9. Hornick JL, Jaffe ES, Fletcher CD. Extranodal histiocytic
sarcoma: clinicopathologic analysis of 14 cases of a rare epithelioid malignancy. Am J Surg Pathol. 2004;28:1133-1144.
10. Kamel OW, Gocke CD, Kell DL, Cleary ML, Warnke RA.
True histiocytic lymphoma: a study of 12 cases based on
current definition. Leuk Lymphoma. 1995;18:81-86.
11. Murarescu ED, Lighezan R, Negru D, Chiselita IR, Plamadeala P, Mihailovici MS. Histiocytic sarcoma associated
with Hodgkin’s disease. Rom J Morphol Embryol. 2005;46:
183-187.
12. Hale G, Swirsky DM, Hayhoe FG, Waldmann H. Effects
of monoclonal anti-lymphocyte antibodies in vivo in monkeys and humans. Mol Biol Med. 1983;1:321-334.
13. Hale G, Dyer MJ, Clark MR, et al. Remission induction in
non-Hodgkin lymphoma with reshaped human monoclonal
antibody CAMPATH-1H. Lancet. 1988;2:1394-1399.
14. Calne R, Friend P, Moffatt S, et al. Prope tolerance, perioperative Campath 1H, and low-dose cyclosporin monotherapy in renal allograft recipients. Lancet. 1998;351:17011702.
15. Gruessner RW, Kandaswamy R, Humar A, Gruessner AC,
Sutherland DE. Calcineurin inhibitor- and steroid-free
immunosuppression in pancreas-kidney and solitary pancreas
transplantation. Transplantation. 2005;79:1184-1189.
16. Tryphonopoulos P, Madariaga JR, Kato T, et al. The
impact of Campath 1H induction in adult liver allotransplantation. Transplant Proc. 2005;37:1203-1204.
17. Tzakis AG, Tryphonopoulos P, Kato T, et al. Intestinal
transplantation: advances in immunosuppression and surgical techniques. Transplant Proc. 2003;35:1925-1926.

3724

18. Ona ET, Danguilan RA, Africa J, et al. Use of alemtuzumab (Campath-1H) as induction therapy in pediatric kidney
transplantation. Transplant Proc. 2008;40:2226-2229.
19. Bertz H, Spyridonidis A, Wasch R, Grullich C, Egger M,
Finke J. A novel GVHD-prophylaxis with low-dose alemtuzumab in allogeneic sibling or unrelated donor hematopoietic cell transplantation: the feasibility of de-escalation. Biol
Blood Marrow Transplant. 2009;15:1563-1570.
20. Gupta V, Ball SE, Sage D, et al. Marrow transplants from
matched unrelated donors for aplastic anaemia using alemtuzumab, fludarabine and cyclophosphamide based conditioning. Bone Marrow Transplant. 2005;35:467-471.
21. Morris E, Thomson K, Craddock C, et al. Outcomes after
alemtuzumab-containing reduced-intensity allogeneic transplantation regimen for relapsed and refractory non-Hodgkin
lymphoma. Blood. 2004;104:3865-3871.
22. Ahmed N, Leung KS, Rosenblatt H, et al. Successful treatment of stem cell graft failure in pediatric patients using a
submyeloablative regimen of campath-1H and fludarabine.
Biol Blood Marrow Transplant. 2008;14:1298-1304.
23. Gribben JG, Hallek M. Rediscovering alemtuzumab: current
and emerging therapeutic roles. Br J Haematol. 2009;144:
818-831.
24. Khorana A, Bunn P, McLaughlin P, Vose J, Stewart C,
Czuczman MS. A phase II multicenter study of CAMPATH-1H antibody in previously treated patients with nonbulky non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma. Leuk Lymphoma. 2001;41:
77-87.
25. Ravandi F, Aribi A, O’Brien S, et al. Phase II study of
alemtuzumab in combination with pentostatin in patients
with T-cell neoplasms. J Clin Oncol. 2009;27:5425-5430.
26. Williams KM, Higman MA, Chen AR, et al. Successful
treatment of a child with late-onset T-cell post-transplant
lymphoproliferative disorder/lymphoma. Pediatr Blood Cancer. 2008;50:667-670.
27. Angiolillo AL, Yu AL, Reaman G, Ingle AM, Secola R, Adamson PC. A phase II study of Campath-1H in children
with relapsed or refractory acute lymphoblastic leukemia: a
Children’s Oncology Group report. Pediatr Blood Cancer.
2009;53:978-983.
28. Ambrose LR, Morel AS, Warrens AN. Neutrophils express
CD52 and exhibit complement-mediated lysis in the presence of alemtuzumab. Blood. 2009;114:3052-3055.
29. Buggins AG, Mufti GJ, Salisbury J, et al. Peripheral blood
but not tissue dendritic cells express CD52 and are depleted
by treatment with alemtuzumab. Blood. 2002;100:17151720.
30. Ratzinger G, Reagan JL, Heller G, Busam KJ, Young JW.
Differential CD52 expression by distinct myeloid dendritic
cell subsets: implications for alemtuzumab activity at the
level of antigen presentation in allogeneic graft-host interactions in transplantation. Blood. 2003;101:1422-1429.
31. Rodig SJ, Abramson JS, Pinkus GS, et al. Heterogeneous
CD52 expression among hematologic neoplasms: implications for the use of alemtuzumab (CAMPATH-1H). Clin
Cancer Res. 2006;12:7174-7179.
32. Jordan MB, McClain KL, Yan X, Hicks J, Jaffe R. AntiCD52 antibody, alemtuzumab, binds to Langerhans cells in
Langerhans cell histiocytosis. Pediatr Blood Cancer. 2005;44:
251-254.
33. Robak T. Monoclonal antibodies in the treatment of
chronic lymphoid leukemias. Leuk Lymphoma. 2004;45:205219.

Cancer

August 1, 2012

