Research Article

Atypical Protein Kinase CI Expression and Aurothiomalate
Sensitivity in Human Lung Cancer Cells
Roderick P. Regala, E. Aubrey Thompson, and Alan P. Fields
Department of Cancer Biology, Mayo Clinic Comprehensive Cancer Center, Jacksonville, Florida

Abstract
The antirheumatoid agent aurothiomalate (ATM) is a potent
inhibitor of oncogenic PKCI. ATM inhibits non–small lung
cancer (NSCLC) growth by binding PKCI and blocking
activation of a PKCI-Par6-Rac1-Pak-Mek 1,2-Erk 1,2 signaling
pathway. Here, we assessed the growth inhibitory activity
of ATM in a panel of human cell lines representing major
lung cancer subtypes. ATM inhibited anchorage-independent
growth in all lines tested with IC50s ranging from f300 nmol/
L to >100 Mmol/L. ATM sensitivity correlates positively with
expression of PKCI and Par6, but not with the PKCI binding
protein p62, or the proposed targets of ATM in rheumatoid
arthritis (RA), thioredoxin reductase 1 or 2. PKCI expression
profiling revealed that a significant subset of primary NSCLC
tumors express PKCI at or above the level associated with
ATM sensitivity. ATM sensitivity is not associated with general
sensitivity to the cytotoxic agents cis-platin, placitaxel, and
gemcitabine. ATM inhibits tumorigenicity of both sensitive
and insensitive lung cell tumors in vivo at plasma drug
concentrations achieved in RA patients undergoing ATM
therapy. ATM inhibits Mek/Erk signaling and decreases
proliferative index without effecting tumor apoptosis or
vascularization in vivo. We conclude that ATM exhibits potent
antitumor activity against major lung cancer subtypes,
particularly tumor cells that express high levels of the ATM
target PKCI and Par6. Our results indicate that PKCI
expression profiling will be useful in identifying lung cancer
patients most likely to respond to ATM therapy in an ongoing
clinical trial. [Cancer Res 2008;68(14):5888–95]

Introduction
Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer death in the United
States, exceeding mortality from breast, prostate, and colorectal
cancers combined (1). Despite advances in surgery, chemotherapy,
and radiotherapy, long term survival rates of lung cancer patients
remain poor. Recent advances in treatment have come from novel
mechanism-based therapeutics that target oncogenic signaling
pathways activated in specific subsets of lung cancers. Small
molecule inhibitors of the epidermal growth factor receptor
(EGFR) tyrosine kinase (TKI) exhibit potent antitumor activity in
lung cancers that possess specific molecular characteristics that
confer sensitivity to the drugs (reviewed in ref. 2). The presence of
mutations in EGFR , and to a lesser extent, the presence of EGFR
Note: Supplementary data for this article are available at Cancer Research Online
(http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/).
Requests for reprints: Alan P. Fields, Department of Cancer Biology, Mayo Clinic
Comprehensive Cancer Center, Griffin Cancer Research Building, Room 212, 4500 San
Pablo Road, Jacksonville, FL 32224. Phone: 904-953-6160; Fax: 904-953-0277; E-mail:
fields.alan@mayo.edu.
I2008 American Association for Cancer Research.
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-0438

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (14). July 15, 2008

amplification and elevated EGFR expression, correlates positively
with therapeutic response to the TKIs gefitinib and erlotinib (3).
TKI-sensitizing EGFR mutations are more common in neversmokers, women, Asians, and patients with adenocarcinoma (2).
These molecular and clinical characteristics have been used
successfully to guide TKI therapy to patients most likely to
respond. Clearly, there exists a need to identify effective
mechanism-based therapeutics that target prevalent molecular
characteristics in lung cancer patients who are not responsive to
currently available therapy.
We recently identified atypical PKCL as an oncogene and
therapeutic target for lung cancer therapy (4, 5). PKCL expression
is elevated in a significant subset of non–small lung cancer
(NSCLC) cell lines and primary NSCLC tumors. The PKCL gene,
PRKCI, is a critical target of frequent, tumor-specific amplification,
particularly in lung squamous cell carcinomas (LSCC; ref. 4), and
PRKCI amplification drives PKCL mRNA and protein expression in
these tumors (4).
PKCL is required for anchorage-independent growth and invasion of NSCLC cells in vitro and tumorigenicity in vivo (6, 7).
PKCL drives anchorage-independent growth of NSCLC cells by
activating a Rac1-Pak-Mek1,2-Erk1,2 signaling pathway (6). PKCL
regulates Rac1 through a conserved Phox and Bem1p (PB1)
protein interaction domain within the regulatory region of PKCL
(6). PKCL binds via PB1-PB1 domain interactions to the polarity
protein Par6 to form a complex that regulates Rac1 and drives
anchorage-independent growth (6). Given the importance of the
PKCL-Par6 interaction in NSCLC cell transformation, we screened
a library of chemical compounds approved for human use to
identify inhibitors of this interaction (5). From this screen, we
identified two antirheumatoid gold compounds aurothioglucose
and aurothiomalate (ATM) that inhibit PKCL binding to Par6
in vitro (5). These compounds block transformation of NSCLC
cells in vitro and tumorigenicity in vivo by disrupting PKCLmediated activation of Rac1 (5, 8). Based on our preclinical data,
a phase I clinical trial of ATM in advanced stage NSCLC patients
is currently ongoing to establish a maximum tolerated dose and
to evaluate patients for therapeutic response to ATM.
A critical step in the clinical development of ATM is to
determine the spectrum of ATM activity against major lung cancer
subtypes, assess whether ATM exhibits antitumor activity in
relevant preclinical lung cancer models in vivo at serum drug
concentrations achievable in humans, and identify specific
molecular characteristics of lung tumor cells that correlate with
ATM response. Here, we report that ATM exhibits broad antitumor
activity against major forms of lung cancer in vitro, and that
expression of PKCL and Par6 correlates with ATM response. PKCL
expression profiling revealed a significant subset of primary NSCLC
tumors that overexpress PKCL to levels that correlate with ATM
sensitivity in lung cancer cell lines. ATM inhibits tumor cell
proliferation at serum drug concentrations routinely achieved in
rheumatoid arthritis (RA) patients treated with ATM. Our results

5888

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

PKCi Expression and ATM Sensitivity in Lung Cancer

indicate that lung tumor PKCL expression profiling can be used to
identify lung cancer patients most likely to benefit from ATM
therapy in ongoing clinical trials.

Materials and Methods
Reagents and cell culture. Antibodies were from the following sources:
PKCL, BD PharMingen; FLAG, Sigma; BrdUrd, DakoCytomation; h-actin,
p44/42 extracellular signal-regulated kinase (Erk), and phospho-p44/42 Erk
(Thr202/Tyr204), Cell Signaling Technology, Inc.; and Pecam-1 (sc-1506) and
c-IAP2 (sc-7944), Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Inc. Terminal deoxynucleotidyl
transferase–mediated incorporation of biotinylated nucleotide at the 3¶-OH
ends of fragmented DNA of apoptotic cells was detected using the DeadEnd
Colorimetric terminal deoxynucleotidyl-transferase–mediated dUTP nickend labeling (TUNEL) System from Promega. ATM (Myochrysine; Taylor
Pharmaceuticals), Cisplatin (Bedford Laboratories), and Gemcitabine
HCl (Gemzar; Eli Lilly and Company) were diluted in PBS. Paclitaxel
(IVAX Pharmaceuticals, Inc.) was diluted in Me2SO. Cells were treated with
concentrations of these agents as indicated, and control cells were treated
with either an equivalent volume of PBS or Me2SO equal to a final
concentration of 0.1% v/v. Human A549, H1437, H2170, H460, H510, H187,
H1703, and A427 lung cancer cell lines were obtained from the American
Type Culture Collection and maintained as suggested by the supplier in a
humidified tissue culture incubator at 37jC in 5% CO2.
Anchorage-independent growth assays. Anchorage-independent
growth was assessed by the ability to grow as colonies in soft agar in the
presence of chemotherapeutic agents at the concentrations indicated in the
figures as described previously (6). Soft agar colonies were visualized and
quantified after 4 wk in culture. The concentration of chemotherapeutic
agent resulting in IC50 was calculated using SigmaPlot for Windows10.0.
Immunoblot analysis. Cell lysates were subjected to immunoblot
analysis for PKCL abundance as described previously (6). Protein concentrations were determined using the Pierce bicinchoninic acid Protein Assay
kit (Pierce Biotechnology) using bovine serum albumin as a standard.
Antigen-antibody complexes were detected using Amersham ECL-Plus
(GE Healthcare). Images were developed on Kodak BioMax MR film and
captured using the Kodak Gel Logic 100 Imaging System. Antigens were
quantified using Kodak Molecular Imaging Software v4.0.5.
RNA isolation and quantitative PCR. Total RNA was extracted using
RNAqueous (Ambion) according to the manufacturer’s protocols. RNA
quality and integrity were measured using an Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer
(Agilent Technologies) and the Agilent RNA 6000 nano kit using Agilent
2100 Expert software following the manufacturer’s protocols. Reagents for
quantitative real-time PCR (QPCR) analysis of human PKCL, Par6a, Par6h,
Par6g, p62, TrxR1, and TrxR2 mRNA abundance were purchased from
Applied Biosystems. To assess for possible associations between Par6 and

Figure 1. ATM inhibits anchorage-independent growth of human lung cancer
cell lines. A, dose response curves of eight human lung cancer cell lines to the
growth inhibitory effects of ATM. Cells were plated in soft agar in the presence of
the indicated concentration of ATM and anchorage-independent growth was
assessed by counting soft agar colonies 30 d after plating. Results are expressed
as soft agar colonies as a percent of control in the absence of ATM. Points,
mean (n = 3); bars, SE. B, cell line name, ATM sensitivity (IC50), tumor type,
KRAS mutational status, and PRKCI gene amplification (PRKCI ampl. ) status of
the panel of eight human lung cancer cell lines analyzed in this study. LAC/
LSCC, lung adenocarcinoma with squamous cell characteristics. C, PKCL mRNA
abundance correlates positively with ATM sensitivity. Box plots were used to
analyze PKCL mRNA abundance (left bars ) and ATM IC50 (right bars ) in sensitive
(sens. ) and insensitive (insens. ) cell lines. The line in each box represents the
median of values, and the box indicates the upper and lower quartiles. P values
indicate that a statistical difference exists between the sensitive and insensitive
cell lines for both variables. D, a significant subset of primary NSCLC tumors
express PKCL at levels that correlate with ATM sensitivity. Ninety-six primary
NSCLC tumors (60 LAC and 36 LSCC) were analyzed for PKCL mRNA
abundance by QPCR. Bars, individual tumors; length of the bar along the x-axis,
PKCL mRNA abundance. Red horizontal lines, LSCC; black horizontal lines,
LAC. Vertical lines, range of PKCL mRNA abundance values measured for the
sensitive lung cancer cell lines.

www.aacrjournals.org

5889

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (14). July 15, 2008

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research
PKCL expression or ATM sensitivity, total Par6 abundance was calculated by
summing the abundance of the three human Par6 isoforms Par6a, Par6h,
and Par6g. Analysis was carried out using 10 ng of cDNA on an Applied
Biosystems 7900 thermal cycler, and data were analyzed using the SDS 2.3
software package. All data were normalized to expression of 18S RNA using
2 ng of cDNA, and data were expressed as 2 (CT (target) CT (18s)).
Quantitative PCR analysis for PRKCI gene amplification. Genomic
DNA from each cell line was analyzed for PRKCI gene amplification using
Taqman technology on an Applied Biosystems 7900HT sequence detection
system. The human RNaseP1 gene was used as a DNA template control and
for normalization of results to total DNA. The primer/probe set for the
human PRKCI gene was forward primer, 5¶-GGCTGCATTCTTGCTTTCAGA3¶; reverse primer, 5¶-CCAAAAATATGAAGCCCAGTAATCA-3¶; and probe,
5¶-CAATCTTACCTGCTTTCT-3¶. The primer/probe set for the RNaseP1 gene
was designed and provided by ABI Assay on Demand. A tumor cell line was
scored positive for PRKCI gene amplification when analysis revealed a
minimum of one extra copy of the PRKCI allele.
Mutational analysis. Genomic DNA was obtained from lung cancer
cell lines using the QIAamp DNA Mini kit (Qiagen) according to the
manufacturer’s protocol. Genomic DNA was obtained from primary
NSCLC tumors using phenol/chloroform extractions. PRKCI and KRAS
exon-specific primers were designed, and DNA was subjected to PCR
amplification using the GeneAmp High Fidelity PCR System (Applied
Biosystems). Portions of the PCR reactions were run on a 2% agarose gel
to verify proper PCR amplification, and amplification products were
purified using MultiScreen PCR96 Filter Plates (Millipore). Samples were
sequenced on both strands by Mayo Clinic’s DNA Sequencing Core Facility
using Applied Biosystems BigDye terminator v1.1 cycle sequencing
chemistry and analyzed on Applied Biosystems 3730XL DNA Analyzer.
The data were analyzed using Vector NTI Advance 10 ContigExpress
Software (Invitrogen). Chromatograms for exon sequences were viewed
individually to ensure accuracy and aligned with the consensus sequence
from public databases.
Tumorigenicity in nude mice. The growth of A427 and H460 human
lung cancer cells as subcutaneous tumors in the presence and absence of
ATM was assayed in athymic nude mice (Harlan Sprague-Dawley)
maintained in a defined, pathogen-free environment as described previously
(6). Briefly, A427 and H460 cells in logarithmic growth phase were harvested
and resuspended in serum-containing growth medium. Four to 6-week-old
female nude mice were injected s.c. into the flank with either 1  107 A427
or 5  106 H460 cells in 100 AL of growth medium. Once palpable tumors
were established, mice were randomly divided into five treatment groups
that received daily i.m. injections of ATM at 2, 6, 20, or 60 mg/kg body
weight or with an equal volume of diluent (sterile PBS). Tumor dimensions
were measured using calipers, and tumor volume (mm3) was calculated as
described previously (6). The experiment was terminated when tumors in
control mice reached f2,000 mm3. Mice were injected i.p. with 100 Ag/g
BrdUrd 1 h before sacrifice. Tumors were excised and samples were
obtained for combined protein and RNA extraction, and for fixation in 10%
buffered formalin, embedding in paraffin, and sectioning (5 Am). Sections

were subjected to immunohistochemical analysis using antibodies to
expression of BrdUrd, TUNEL, and PECAM1 as described previously (6).
Total tumor extracts were prepared using the Protein and RNA Isolation
System kit (Ambion), and equal amounts of protein were subjected to
immunoblot analysis as described above.
Serum gold determinations. Serum was collected from mice treated
with ATM at 0, 2, 6, 20, and 60 mg/kg daily for 14 d. Mice were
anesthetized by CO2 inhalation, and the caudal (inferior) vena cava was
identified and dissected free of surrounding connective tissue. A 23G
needle attached to a 5-mL syringe was carefully introduced into the
inferior vena cava, and gentle suction was applied with the syringe. Drawn
blood was allowed to clot for 30 min and then centrifuged at 3,000 rpm
for 10 min. Serum was collected and stored at 20jC. All materials were
certified metal-free and clinical serum gold analysis was conducted by
Mayo Medical Laboratories.
Statistical analysis. The Student’s t test, rank sum test, and one-way
ANOVA were used to evaluate the statistical significance of the results.
Pearson Product Moment Correlation was used to evaluate the strength of
the association between pairs of variables. Statistical analyses were
performed using SigmaStat for Windows 3.5 and P values of V0.05 were
considered statistically significant.

Results
ATM inhibits anchorage-independent growth of lung cancer
cell lines. ATM is currently in a phase I dose escalation clinical
trial for NSCLC. To facilitate the clinical development of ATM, we
assessed the ability of ATM to inhibit anchorage-independent
growth of a panel of eight human lung cancer cell lines that
represent major forms of lung cancer, lung adenocarcinoma (LAC),
lung squamous cell carcinoma (LSCC), large cell carcinoma (LCC),
and small cell lung carcinoma (SCLC; Fig. 1). ATM induced dosedependent inhibition of anchorage-independent growth in all cell
lines tested (Fig. 1A). Interestingly, the cell lines clustered into two
distinct groups: ATM-sensitive cell lines (IC50 < 5 Amol/L) and
ATM-insensitive cell lines (>40 Amol/L). Figure 1B lists the eight
cell lines tested, their histopathologic class, and the calculated IC50
for ATM inhibition. No correlation between histopathologic class
and ATM sensitivity emerged; however, LSCC and SCLC cells
tended to be more sensitive and LACs less sensitive to ATM.
Endogenous PKCL and Par6 expression correlate with ATM
sensitivity in lung cancer cell lines. PKCL is a critical
downstream effector of oncogenic K-Ras and genetic disruption
of PKCL blocks K-ras–mediated transformation (9). Given the
prevalence of KRAS mutations in NSCLC, we assessed whether
tumor cells harboring activating KRAS mutations exhibit enhanced
sensitivity to ATM. Three of the eight cell lines analyzed contained
a KRAS mutation. However, KRAS mutation status did not correlate

Table 1. PKCL and Par6 expression correlate with ATM sensitivity
Correlation

Correlation coefficient

PKCL RNA vs log ATM IC50
PKCL RNA vs PKCL protein
PKCL protein vs log ATM IC50
Par6 RNA vs PKCL RNA
Par6 RNA vs log ATM IC50
p62 RNA vs log ATM IC50
TrxR1 RNA vs log ATM IC50
TrxR2 RNA vs log ATM IC50

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (14). July 15, 2008

P

0.90
0.96
0.79
0.77
0.72
021
0.18
0.31

5890

0003
<0.001
0.020
0.024
0.042
0.61
0.68
0.45

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

PKCi Expression and ATM Sensitivity in Lung Cancer

Table 2. ATM sensitivity does not correlate with response to cytotoxic therapeutics
IC50 for inhibition of anchorage independent growth
Cell line
A427
H1703
H460
A549

ATM (Amol/L)
0.3
1.3
43
107

Cisplatin (Amol/L)

Taxol (nmol/L)

Gemcitabine (nmol/L)

1.2
0.5
0.2
1.9

1.4
0.8
1.3
1.4

1.1
1.4
n.d.
4.1

Abbreviation: n.d., no data available.

with ATM sensitivity because mutations were present in both
sensitive and insensitive cell lines (Fig. 1B).
We previously showed that PRKCI is a target for frequent tumorspecific amplification in NSCLC tumors, particularly LSCCs (4).
Interestingly, PRKCI amplification was observed in the two most
ATM-sensitive cell lines in our panel, H1703 and A427 cells, both
tumors with squamous cell characteristics (Fig. 1B). However, the
H510 and H187 SCLC lines showed similar sensitivities to ATM but
do not harbor PRKCI amplification. Thus, whereas PRKCI
amplification is associated with ATM sensitivity in LSCC cells, it
does not seem to be required for ATM sensitivity.
PRKCI amplification drives PKCL mRNA and protein expression
in LSCC cell lines and primary LSCC tumors (4). Therefore, we
assessed whether PKCL expression is associated with ATM
sensitivity. QPCR analysis revealed that the four ATM-sensitive
cell lines express significantly higher PKCL levels than the four
insensitive lines (Fig. 1C; see also Supplementary Fig. S1). As
expected, ATM IC50 values were significantly different in sensitive
and insensitive lines (Fig. 1C). Rank sum analysis revealed a
statistically significant correlation between PKCL mRNA abundance
and sensitivity to ATM (log IC50 to ATM; Table 1) with high PKCL
mRNA levels correlating with ATM sensitivity (low ATM IC50). We
previously showed a strong correlation between PKCL mRNA
abundance and PKCL protein expression in primary NSCLC tumors
(4). Immunoblot analysis of PKCL protein expression (see
Supplementary Fig. S1) revealed a statistically significant correlation between PKCL protein and PKCL mRNA abundance, and
between PKCL protein abundance and ATM sensitivity (Table 1).
Thus, both PKCL mRNA abundance and PKCL protein expression
correlate with ATM sensitivity.
ATM was identified through a high-throughput drug screen for
its ability to inhibit PKCL-Par6 binding in vitro (5, 8). PKCLmediated transformation requires activation of the downstream
effector molecule, Rac1 (6). PKCL regulates Rac1 through
interaction with Par6 (6). Because ATM targets the PKCL-Par6
interaction, we reasoned that Par6 expression might also correlate
with ATM sensitivity. Quantitative PCR analysis revealed a
significant correlation between Par6 mRNA and PKCL mRNA
abundance, and between Par6 mRNA and ATM sensitivity in our
panel of eight lung cancer cell lines (Table 1). ATM also inhibits
binding of PKCL to p62, another PB1 domain binding partner of
PKCL (8). However, analysis revealed no correlation between p62
mRNA abundance and ATM sensitivity (Table 1).
ATM is a clinically approved treatment for RA. ATM has been
reported to bind and inhibit the activity of thioredoxin reductase 1
and 2 (TrxR1 and TrxR2; ref. 10), and inhibition of these enzymes

www.aacrjournals.org

may contribute to the antirheumatoid activity of ATM. TrxRs are
overexpressed in some human tumor cells and may play a role in
tumor cell proliferation (11). However, we observed no correlation
between TrxR1 or TrxR2 expression and ATM sensitivity in our
lung cancer cell lines (Table 1). Thus, ATM sensitivity in lung
cancer cells correlates specifically with expression of PKCL and
Par6, the therapeutic target of ATM in lung cancer cells (5, 8).
Our data are reminiscent of the observed correlation between
EGFR overexpression and/or EGFR mutation and sensitivity of
NSCLC cells to TKI therapy (2, 3). We therefore assessed whether
PRKCI mutations might likewise confer sensitivity to ATM. For this
purpose, we sequenced exon 2 of PRKCI from genomic DNA
prepared from our panel of cell lines. We focused on exon 2 of
PRKCI because it encodes the PB1 domain of PKCL, including
Cys69, the specific amino acid residue within PKCL targeted by
ATM (8). However, no mutations were found (data not shown). We
also sequenced the entire coding region of PRKCI from 40 primary
NSCLC tumors and found no mutations that altered amino acid
sequence (data not shown). We conclude that PRKCI mutations are
either not present or very rare in NSCLC tumors and lung cancer
cell lines. Our data do not support the hypothesis that ATM
sensitivity is caused by somatic PRKCI mutations.
NSCLC tumors that express PKCL to levels similar to those
observed in ATM-sensitive cell lines might represent a subset of
lung cancer patients likely to respond to ATM therapy. To assess
whether NSCLC patients with this molecular characteristic exist,
we analyzed 96 cases of primary NSCLC (60 LAC and 36 LSCC
cases) for PKCL mRNA abundance by QPCR (Fig. 1D). A significant
subset of tumors (41 of 96 or 43%) exhibited PKCL expression at or
above the level of expression seen in ATM-sensitive cell lines
(vertical lines indicate the lower and upper range of ATM-sensitive
lines). A higher percentage of squamous cell carcinoma cases
(23 of 36 or 64%) than LAC cases (18 of 60 or 30%) expressed high
PKCL; however, there exists a relatively small subset of LAC cases
(5 of 60 or 8%) with extremely high PKCL expression (above the
range observed in ATM-sensitive cell lines). Thus, a significant
subset of primary LSCC and LAC tumors express PKCL levels that
in lung cancer cell lines correlate with ATM sensitivity.
ATM sensitivity is not due to general sensitivity to cytotoxic
therapeutic agents. ATM sensitivity could be associated with a
general sensitivity to chemotherapeutic agents. To assess this
possibility, two ATM-sensitive cell lines (A427 and H1703) and two
insensitive cell lines (H460 and A549), were evaluated for response
to the conventional cytotoxic agents commonly used in lung
cancer treatment, cis-platin, placitaxel, and gemcitabine. Each line
was assessed for anchorage-independent growth in the presence of

5891

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (14). July 15, 2008

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

the cytotoxic drugs, and IC50 values were calculated (Table 2).
Whereas the four cell lines exhibit dramatically different sensitivities to ATM (ranging from 0.3–>100 Amol/L), their sensitivity to
cytotoxic agents did not vary widely; and the relatively small
differences observed did not correlate with ATM sensitivity. These
data indicate that ATM sensitivity is not a result of general drug
sensitivity in ATM responsive cells.
ATM sensitivity in vitro predicts responsiveness to ATM
therapy in vivo. We next assessed the effect of ATM on lung
cancer cell tumorigenicity in vivo. A427 and H460 cell lines were
chosen for analysis because they differ significantly in ATM
sensitivity and grow efficiently as subcutaneous tumors in nude
mice. To establish appropriate dosing regimens for ATM,
we administered ATM by i.m. injection at doses of 0, 2, 6, 20, and
60 mg/kg body weight daily for 2 weeks, at which time, mice were
sacrificed, blood was drawn, and serum gold levels were
determined by a clinically approved serum gold assay (Fig. 2A).
No signs of toxicity were observed in these mice. Serum gold levels
exhibited a linear relationship over this dose range, and drug levels
achieved were consistent with the range of serum gold (3–5 Ag/mL)
typically observed in RA patients undergoing ATM therapy (12).
Serum gold levels of 3 to 5 Ag/mL correspond to ATM
concentrations of 15.4 to 25.6 Amol/L, well within the range of
ATM concentrations exhibiting inhibitory effects on anchorageindependent growth of NSCLC cell lines in vitro. We next assessed
the ability of ATM to inhibit lung cancer cell tumorigenicity at
these dose levels. Subcutaneous A427 or H460 cell tumors were
established in nude mice and then treated with ATM or diluent
(PBS) daily at the indicated doses. A427 cell tumors were highly
responsive to ATM, exhibiting statistically significant inhibition of
tumor growth at all concentrations tested (Fig. 2B). These data
indicate an apparent in vivo IC50 below 2.5 Amol/L in A427 cells
consistent with the in vitro IC50 of 0.3 Amol/L. H460 tumors were
less responsive to ATM, showing a statistically significant response
(f50% reduction in tumor size) only at the 60 mg/kg dose
(Fig. 2C). These data suggest an approximate IC50 for ATM in H460
cells of f25.6 mmol/L, in line with the in vitro IC50 of 46 Amol/L.
Thus, ATM exhibits significant antitumor activity in two independent in vivo models of lung cancer at clinically relevant serum drug
concentrations. Furthermore, the relative sensitivity of A427 and
H460 cells to ATM in vitro was reflected in their response to ATM
in vivo.
ATM treatment inhibits lung tumor cell proliferation. The
inhibitory effect of ATM on tumor growth in vivo might result
from either decreased cell proliferation, decreased cell survival,
or a combination of these mechanisms. Therefore, we assessed
the effect of ATM on cellular proliferation by BrdUrd labeling
and apoptosis by TUNEL staining. Immunohistochemical
analysis showed a decrease in BrdUrd-positive staining nuclei
in both A427 and H460 tumors cells after treatment with
60 mg/kg ATM (Fig. 3A). Quantitative analysis of BrdUrd labeling showed a statistically significant decrease in BrdUrd labeling
in A427 tumors at all ATM doses, consistent with the observed
inhibition of tumor growth (Fig. 3B). In H460 tumors, a
statistically significant decrease in BrdUrd labeling was seen
only at the 60 mg/kg dose, consistent with the observed effect of
ATM on H460 cell tumor growth (Fig. 3C). Quantitative analysis
of TUNEL staining revealed that the apoptotic index (defined
as TUNEL-positive cells per total cells) was very low (<1%) in
both A427 and H460 tumors, and that ATM did not induce a
significant increase in apoptotic index in either cell line (Fig. 4A).

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (14). July 15, 2008

Consistent with this finding, A427 and H460 tumor lysates
showed no change in expression of cIAP2, an antiapoptotic
protein whose expression is commonly induced in tumor cells
exposed to apoptotic stimuli (Fig. 4C). These data indicate that
the growth inhibitory effects of ATM are due predominantly to
inhibition of cell proliferation without significant induction of
tumor cell apoptosis.
It is possible that ATM decreases tumor cell proliferation
indirectly by inhibiting tumor vascularization. To assess this
possibility, A427 and H460 cell tumors were stained for the

Figure 2. ATM inhibits lung tumor growth in vivo. A, serum gold levels in mice.
Nude mice were injected with ATM i.m. at the indicated concentration daily
for 14 d, at which time, blood was drawn and serum analyzed for drug (gold)
levels. Points, mean serum level (n = 8); bars, SE. B, effect of ATM on A427
tumor growth in vivo . Nude mice were injected s.c. with 1  107 A427 cells. Once
palpable tumors were established, mice were randomly assigned to 1 of 5
treatment groups receiving ATM at 0, 2, 6, 20, or 60 mg/kg daily in sterile PBS
(diluent). Tumors were measured and tumor volumes were calculated as
described in Materials and Methods. Points, mean tumor volume (n = 6); bars,
SE. *, statistically significant difference in tumor volume at all ATM doses
compared with diluent with P values of <0.05. C, effect of ATM on H460 tumor
growth in vivo. Nude mice were injected s.c. with 5  106 H460 cells. Once
palpable tumors were established, mice were randomly assigned to three
treatment groups receiving 0, 20, or 60 mg/kg ATM daily, and analyzed as
described in B above. Points, mean tumor volume (n = 6); bars, SE. *,
statistically significant difference from diluent with P value of <0.05.

5892

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

PKCi Expression and ATM Sensitivity in Lung Cancer

Figure 3. ATM inhibits tumor cell proliferation in vivo .
Mice harboring A427 and H460 tumors treated with
saline or ATM at the indicated doses were injected
i.p. with BrdUrd 60 min before sacrifice. Tumor tissues
were excised and processed for immunoblot and
immunohistochemical analysis as described in Materials
and Methods. A, ATM inhibits BrdUrd incorporation
into A427 and H460 tumors. Immunohistochemistry of
representative sections of A427 and H460 tumors
treated with saline (control ) or 60 mg/kg ATM. B and
C, quantitative analysis of BrdUrd labeling was
performed on A427 (B ) and H460 (C) tumors treated
with saline or ATM at the indicated doses. Data
represent BrdUrd-positive nuclei expressed as the
percent of total nuclei. Columns, mean (n = 6); bars,
SE. *, statistically significant difference (P < 0.05)
from saline-treated controls.

endothelial cell marker PECAM1 (Fig. 4B). The pattern and
intensity of PECAM1 staining in A427 and H460 tumors treated
with 60 mg/kg ATM was indistinguishable from untreated control
tumors. Immunoblot analysis of A427 and H460 cell tumors from
ATM-treated and control tumors showed no significant change in
tumor-associated PECAM1 expression (Fig. 4C). We conclude that
the antitumorigenic effects of ATM are mediated through direct
inhibition of tumor cell proliferation in vivo and not tumor cell
apoptosis or tumor vascularization.
ATM inhibits the Mek/Erk proliferative signaling axis
in vivo. Genetic disruption of PKCL signaling inhibits anchorageindependent growth of A549 NSCLC cells in vitro by blocking
activation of the PKCL-Par6-Rac1-Pak-Mek 1,2-Erk 1,2 proliferative
signaling axis (6). ATM inhibits anchorage-independent growth by
selectively targeting the PB1 domain of PKCL (8) and blocking
oncogenic PKCL signaling to Rac1 (5). To assess whether ATM
inhibits the Mek/Erk pathway in A427 and H460 tumors in vivo, we
determined phospho-Erk 1,2 and total Erk 1,2 levels in control and
ATM-treated tumors by immunoblot analysis (Fig. 4C). A427 and
H460 cell tumors from ATM-treated mice exhibited reduced levels
of phospho-Erk 1,2 when normalized to total Erk (phospho-Erk/
total Erk; Fig. 4D). A statistically significant reduction in phosphoErk 1,2 was seen in A427 tumors at all ATM doses, and in H460 cell
tumors at the 60 mg/kg ATM dose, consistent with the growth

www.aacrjournals.org

inhibitory effects of ATM in these cells. These data are consistent
with ATM-mediated inhibition of proliferative signaling through
the PKCL-activated Mek/Erk signaling axis.

Discussion
Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer mortality in the
United States. Lung cancer accounts for a third of all cancer deaths
and claims >160,000 lives annually. Despite best available treatments, prognosis for NSCLC patients is poor. This dismal clinical
outlook has prompted a search for more effective strategies to treat
NSCLC. The EGFR TKIs have emerged as a highly effective therapy
in a small subset of NSCLC patients (3, 13). Molecular analysis
revealed that TKIs are dramatically effective in the subset of lung
cancers that harbor EGFR mutation, EGFR amplification, and/or
overexpression of EGFR (3). Patients with lung tumors exhibiting
these molecular characteristics tend to be nonsmokers, Asian, and
those diagnosed with LAC (13). However, these characteristics
define a relatively small subset of total lung cancer cases, and there
is a need to identify more effective therapeutic approaches to treat
the substantial subset of lung cancers that are not responsive to
TKI therapy.
We recently showed that the atypical PKC isozyme, PKCL, is
an oncogene that drives anchorage-independent growth and

5893

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (14). July 15, 2008

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

invasion of NSCLC cells through activation of a proliferative
PKCL-Par6-Rac1-Pak-Mek-Erk signaling axis (4, 6, 7). We also
identified ATM as a potent inhibitor of oncogenic PKCL signaling
that inhibits anchorage-independent growth and tumorigenicity of
NSCLC cells (5, 8). The current studies were conducted to determine
the efficacy of ATM against major subtypes of lung cancer, identify
molecular characteristics of lung cancer cells that correlate with
ATM responsiveness, and determine whether ATM is an effective
treatment in preclinical models of lung cancer in vivo at drug
concentrations achievable in humans.
Our results show that ATM exhibits growth inhibitory activity in
cell lines representing the major forms of lung cancer. LSCC and
SCLC cell lines tended to be more sensitive to ATM than LAC and
LCC cells. Our results provide proof of principle for targeting the
oncogenic PKCL signaling pathway in a mechanism-based approach
to the treatment of lung cancer. Of particular interest, both SCLC cell
lines in our study exhibited high sensitivity to ATM. SCLC is difficult
to treat and few therapeutic options exist for the substantial number
of SCLC patients that fail standard therapy. Our results indicate that
ATM should be explored as a new mechanism-based therapy for
SCLC. Analysis of the prevalence of PKCL overexpression in SCLC

and ATM sensitivity in an expanded collection of SCLC cell lines will
be the subject of future investigation.
The overriding molecular characteristic correlating with ATM
response in our studies is expression of PKCL and Par6, the
therapeutic target of ATM. Tumor cells expressing high levels of
these proteins are very sensitivity to ATM therapy in vitro and
in vivo. PKCL and Par6 are coordinately overexpressed in lung
cancer cells, indicating that the PKCL-Par6 interaction is a critical
oncogenic signaling complex and relevant therapeutic target. It is
likely that other molecular and biological characteristics of lung
cancer cells can influence ATM response; however, our data
indicate that PKCL expression profiling could be useful in
identifying likely responders to ATM therapy. Our previous studies
showed that PKCL is overexpressed in f70% of primary NSCLC
tumors (4). In LSCC tumors, PKCL expression is driven by tumorspecific PRKCI amplification. Our current results indicate that ATM
may be particularly effective in lung tumors that harbor PRKCI
amplification because the two most ATM responsive tumor cell
lines in our study harbor PRKCI amplification. This finding has
important implications for the clinical use of ATM because PRKCI
amplification and PKCL overexpression is a frequent event in

Figure 4. ATM inhibits tumor cell proliferation without
affecting tumor cell apoptosis or tumor vascularity.
A, ATM does not induce apoptosis in lung cancer
tumors. A427 and H460 tumors treated with the
indicated doses of ATM were stained by TUNEL and
apoptotic index (% TUNEL positive nuclei ) was
calculated. Columns, mean (n = 6); bars, SE. B, ATM
does not affect tumor vascularity. Sections of fixed
and paraffin-embedded A427 and H460 tumors from
mice treated with either diluent (control ) or 60 mg/kg
ATM were subjected to immunohistochemical
analysis for the endothelial cell marker PECAM1.
Representative sections are shown. C , A427 (top )
and H460 (bottom ) tumor extracts from animals
treated with the indicated doses of ATM were
subjected to immunoblot analysis using antibodies to
phospho-Erk 1,2, Erk 1,2, cIAP2, PECAM1, PKCL,
and actin. D, ATM inhibits phosphorylation of Erk 1,2
in vivo . A427 and H460 tumor extracts from mice
treated with the indicated doses of ATM were
subjected to immunoblot analysis, and phospho-Erk
1,2 and total Erk 1,2 levels were quantitated by
densitometry. Data are expressed as the ratio of
phospho-Erk to total Erk; columns, mean (n = 3);
bars, SE. *, statistically significant difference
(P < 0.04) from saline-treated controls.

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (14). July 15, 2008

5894

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

PKCi Expression and ATM Sensitivity in Lung Cancer

squamous carcinomas of the head and neck (14), esophagus
(15, 16), ovary (17–19), and cervix (20). Thus, ATM may be an
effective therapeutic approach in these tumors.
PKCL overexpression is not confined to tumor cells harboring
PRKCI amplification. PKCL overexpression is prevalent in both
LAC and LSCC despite the fact that PRKCI amplification is largely
confined to LSCC tumors (4). Furthermore, the two SCLC cell
lines analyzed here overexpress PKCL and exhibit high ATM
sensitivity but do not harbor PRKCI amplification. These data
argue that PKCL overexpression, rather than PRKCI gene
amplification per se, is an important characteristic of ATM
response. Our analysis indicates that some 40% of primary NSCLC
tumors express PKCL at or above the levels associated with ATM
sensitivity. This observation suggests that a substantial subset of
lung cancer patients may benefit from ATM therapy. Interestingly,
when considered as a whole, LAC and LSCC tumors overexpress
PKCL to similar levels (4). However, PKCL expression profiling of
individual LAC and LSCC tumors reveals a different pattern
of PKCL overexpresssion in these tumor types. Whereas a majority
of LSCC tumors overexpress PKCL, two distinct populations of
LAC tumors emerge: a majority of LAC cases that express
relatively low PKCL and a small subset (accounting for f8% of
our patient cohort) that express extremely high PKCL. Based on

References
1. Jemal A, Siegel R, Ward E, Murray T, Xu J, Thun MJ.
Cancer statistics, 2007. CA Cancer J Clin 2007;57:43–66.
2. Sequist LV, Bell DW, Lynch TJ, Haber DA. Molecular
predictors of response to epidermal growth factor
receptor antagonists in non-small-cell lung cancer.
J Clin Oncol 2007;25:587–95.
3. Bell DW, Lynch TJ, Haserlat SM, et al. Epidermal
growth factor receptor mutations and gene amplification in non-small-cell lung cancer: molecular analysis of
the IDEAL/INTACT gefitinib trials. J Clin Oncol 2005;23:
8081–92.
4. Regala RP, Weems C, Jamieson L, et al. Atypical protein
kinase C iota is an oncogene in human non-small cell
lung cancer. Cancer Res 2005;65:8905–11.
5. Stallings-Mann M, Jamieson L, Regala RP, Weems C,
Murray NR, Fields AP. A novel small-molecule inhibitor
of protein kinase Ciota blocks transformed growth of
non-small-cell lung cancer cells. Cancer Res 2006;66:
1767–74.
6. Regala RP, Weems C, Jamieson L, Copland JA,
Thompson EA, Fields AP. Atypical protein kinase
Ciota plays a critical role in human lung cancer cell
growth and tumorigenicity. J Biol Chem 2005;280:
31109–15.
7. Frederick LA, Matthews JA, Jamieson L, et al. Matrix

www.aacrjournals.org

our current findings, this latter subset of LAC may be particularly
responsive to ATM. There are likely to be multiple factors that
influence ATM sensitivity and response in vivo. However, our
present results provide a compelling rationale for the clinical
development of ATM for the treatment of lung cancer, and
provide a molecular basis for patient stratification in ongoing
clinical trials of ATM.

Disclosure of Potential Conflicts of Interest
No potential conflicts of interest were disclosed.

Acknowledgments
Received 2/5/2008; revised 4/11/2008; accepted 5/5/2008.
Grant support: NIH CA81436, the V Foundation for Cancer Research, and the
American Lung Association/LUNGevity Lung Cancer Discovery Award (A.P. Fields),
and the Ruth L. Kirschstein National Research Service Award (NRSA) from the
National Cancer Institute (R.P. Regala).
The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of page
charges. This article must therefore be hereby marked advertisement in accordance
with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact.
We thank Capella Weems, Aaron Bungum, Dr. Eric Edell, and Dr. Andras Khoor for
assistance in acquisition, annotation, pathologic characterization, processing, and
analysis of human lung cancer tissue samples; Pam Kreinest and Brandy Edenfield for
immunohistochemical analyses; and members of the Fields laboratory for helpful
comments and critical review of the manuscript.

metalloproteinase-10 is a critical effector of protein
kinase CL-Par6a-mediated lung cancer. Oncogene. Epub
2008 April 21.
8. Erdogan E, Lamark T, Stallings-Mann M, et al.
Aurothiomalate inhibits transformed growth by targeting the PB1 domain of protein kinase Ciota. J Biol Chem
2006;281:28450–9.
9. Murray NR, Jamieson L, Yu W, et al. Protein kinase
Ciota is required for Ras transformation and colon
carcinogenesis in vivo . J Cell Biol 2004;164:797–802.
10. Sakurai A, Yuasa K, Shoji Y, et al. Overexpression of
thioredoxin reductase 1 regulates NF-n B activation.
J Cell Physiol 2004;198:22–30.
11. Becker K, Gromer S, Schirmer RH, Muller S.
Thioredoxin reductase as a pathophysiological factor
and drug target. Eur J Biochem 2000;267:6118–25.
12. Blocka KL, Paulus HE, Furst DE. Clinical pharmacokinetics of oral and injectable gold compounds. Clin
Pharmacokinet 1986;11:133–43.
13. Sequist LV, Joshi VA, Janne PA, et al. Response to
treatment and survival of patients with non-small cell
lung cancer undergoing somatic EGFR mutation testing.
Oncologist 2007;12:90–8.
14. Snaddon J, Parkinson EK, Craft JA, Bartholomew C,
Fulton R. Detection of functional PTEN lipid phosphatase protein and enzyme activity in squamous
cell carcinomas of the head and neck, despite loss

5895

of heterozygosity at this locus. Br J Cancer 2001;84:
1630–4.
15. Imoto I, Pimkhaokham A, Fukuda Y, et al. SNO is a
probable target for gene amplification at 3q26 in
squamous-cell carcinomas of the esophagus. Biochem
Biophys Res Commun 2001;286:559–65.
16. Pimkhaokham A, Shimada Y, Fukuda Y, et al.
Nonrandom chromosomal imbalances in esophageal
squamous cell carcinoma cell lines: possible involvement of the ATF3 and CENPF genes in the 1q32
amplicon. Jpn J Cancer Res 2000;91:1126–33.
17. Zhang L, Huang J, Yang N, et al. Integrative genomic
analysis of protein kinase C (PKC) family identifies
PKCiota as a biomarker and potential oncogene in
ovarian carcinoma. Cancer Res 2006;66:4627–35.
18. Eder AM, Sui X, Rosen DG, et al. Atypical PKCiota
contributes to poor prognosis through loss of apicalbasal polarity and cyclin E overexpression in ovarian
cancer. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2005;102:12519–24.
19. Weichert W, Gekeler V, Denkert C, Dietel M,
Hauptmann S. Protein kinase C isoform expression in
ovarian carcinoma correlates with indicators of poor
prognosis. Int J Oncol 2003;23:633–9.
20. Sugita M, Tanaka N, Davidson S, et al. Molecular
definition of a small amplification domain within 3q26
in tumors of cervix, ovary, and lung. Cancer Genet
Cytogenet 2000;117:9–18.

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (14). July 15, 2008

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Atypical Protein Kinase Cι Expression and Aurothiomalate
Sensitivity in Human Lung Cancer Cells
Roderick P. Regala, E. Aubrey Thompson and Alan P. Fields
Cancer Res 2008;68:5888-5895.

Updated version
Supplementary
Material

Cited articles
Citing articles

E-mail alerts
Reprints and
Subscriptions
Permissions

Access the most recent version of this article at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/68/14/5888
Access the most recent supplemental material at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/suppl/2008/07/11/68.14.5888.DC1

This article cites 19 articles, 10 of which you can access for free at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/68/14/5888.full#ref-list-1
This article has been cited by 11 HighWire-hosted articles. Access the articles at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/68/14/5888.full#related-urls

Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal.
To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications
Department at pubs@aacr.org.
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications
Department at permissions@aacr.org.

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

