Europe PMC Funders Group
Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 June 17.
Published in final edited form as:
Nature. 2015 December 17; 528(7582): 413–417. doi:10.1038/nature16140.

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Neutrophils support lung colonization of metastasis-initiating
breast cancer cells
Stefanie K. Wculek1 and Ilaria Malanchi1,*
1The

Francis Crick Institute, Lincolns Inn Fields Laboratories, 44 Lincolns Inn Fields, WC2A 3LY
London, UK

Abstract

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Despite progress in the development of drugs efficiently targeting cancer cells, treatments of
metastatic tumours are often ineffective. The now well established dependency of cancer cells on
their microenvironment1 suggests that targeting the non-cancer cell component of the tumour
might form the basis for the development of novel therapeutic approaches. However, the as yet
poorly characterised contribution of host responses during tumour growth and metastatic
progression represents a limitation to exploiting this approach. Here we identify neutrophils as the
main component and driver of metastatic establishment within the (pre-)metastatic lung
microenvironment in mouse breast cancer models. Neutrophils have a fundamental role in
inflammatory responses and their contribution to tumourigenesis is still controversial2-4. Using
various strategies to block neutrophil recruitment to the pre-metastatic site, we demonstrate that
neutrophils specifically support metastatic initiation. Importantly, we find that neutrophil-derived
leukotrienes aid the colonization of distant tissue by selectively expanding the sub-pool of cancer
cells that retain high tumorigenic potential. Genetic or pharmacologic inhibition of the
leukotriene-generating enzyme arachidonate 5-lipoxygenase (Alox5) abrogates neutrophil prometastatic activity and consequently reduces metastasis. Our results reveal the efficacy of using
targeted therapy against a specific tumour microenvironment component and indicate that
neutrophil Alox5 inhibition may limit metastatic progression.
In the presence of a growing tumour, subclinical changes in the leukocyte composition at
distant sites have been reported to favour metastatic growth5-7. Cancer cells within a tumour
are heterogeneous and retain different tumorigenic potentials. Nonetheless, metastasisinitiating cells (MICs) depend on a favourable microenvironment to efficiently grow at the
distant site8-10. We therefore reasoned that an altered presence of leukocytes within distant
tissue of tumour-bearing hosts might influence specific subsets of disseminating cancer
cells. We investigated this hypothesis using the lung metastatic MMTV-polyoma middle T
antigen (PyMT) mammary tumour mouse model, which allows monitoring of the cell sub-

*

Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to I.M. (ilaria.malanchi@crick.ac.uk).
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTION
S.K.W. organised and performed all experiments, helped design experiments, interpreted data and helped with manuscript preparation.
I.M. conceived and supervised the study, designed experiments, interpreted the data, assisted with some aspects of the experiments and
wrote the manuscript.
AUTHOR INFORMATION
The authors declare no competing financial interests.

Wculek and Malanchi

Page 2

population functionally-defined by a higher metastasis initiation ability (CD24+CD90+
MICs)8.

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

In accordance with previous reports11, we found CD11b+Ly6G+ neutrophils to be
systemically mobilised in MMTV-PyMT tumour-bearing mice and, despite their low
frequency within the primary tumour microenvironment, they they were the main immune
component that increased in metastatic lungs (Fig. 1a and Extended Data Fig. 1a-l).
Importantly, CD11b+Ly6G+ cells accumulated in the lung before cancer cells infiltrated the
tissue (pre-metastatic lung) and their numbers increased during metastatic progression
(metastatic lung) (Fig. 1a,b). We addressed the functional relevance of high CD11b+Ly6G+
neutrophil numbers by analysing metastatic progression of MMTV-PyMT tumour-bearing
mice in a neutropenic granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (Gcsf)-null background. Mice
deficient in G-CSF expression developing mammary tumours failed to accumulate
neutrophils in the lungs (Fig. 1d and Extended Data Fig. 2a). Notably, genetic neutropenia
resulted in a robust reduction of spontaneous lung metastasis, despite not affecting primary
tumour growth (Fig. 1e,g and Extended Data Fig. 2b). No differences in lung macrophages
compared to wild-type mice were detected (Extended Data Fig. 2c). Lack of G-CSF
expression by cancer cells altered neither lung neutrophil accumulation nor metastasis
(Extended Data Fig. 2d). In an alternative genetic strategy for neutrophil depletion, we
crossed MMTV-PyMT+ mice with neutrophil elastase (Ela2)-Cre and with ROSA-FloxSTOP-Flox diphtheria toxin (DTA) mice. Here, neutrophil-specific Cre expression led to
DTA-mediated reduction of lung neutrophils in tumour-bearing mice, without altering lung
macrophages and circulating myeloid cells or activating bone marrow natural killer (NK)
and cytotoxic T cells (Extended Data Fig. 2e,f,h-j). Importantly, metastatic progression was
impaired in MMTV-PyMT+-Ela2-Cre-DTA+ mice without affecting primary tumour growth
(Fig. 1f, Extended Data Fig. 2f,g).

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Since lung neutrophil increase precedes cancer cell infiltration (Fig. 1b), we focused on the
CD11b+Ly6G+ cells accumulating in the early phase of lung colonization. We established
mammary gland tumours by orthotopic transplantation to synchronize tumour growth,
distant neutrophil accumulation and metastatic progression (Extended Data Fig. 3a). The
comparison of tumour-induced CD11b+Ly6G+ cells and CD11b+Ly6G+ neutrophils from
healthy lungs revealed minor variations as messenger RNA expression of only two of seven
tested neutrophil-secreted factors showed changes (Extended Data Fig. 3b). Tumourmobilized lung neutrophils appeared morphologically mature (Fig. 1c) and the upregulation
of CD31 suggests increased lung infiltration12 (Extended Data Fig. 3b). Together, these data
indicate that, at this time point, the tumour-induced CD11b+Ly6G+ cells in the lung are
mature neutrophils similar to the ones found in healthy lungs. As neutrophils in the tumour
context are reported to act as myeloid derived suppressor cells13, we investigated the
presence of an anticancer immune environment within the pre-metastatic lung of immunecompetent mice. We used anti-Ly6G blocking antibody to deplete neutrophils during the
pre-metastatic stage (Extended Data Fig. 4a). No significant differences were found in the
frequencies and activation of various immune components as consequence of neutrophil
depletion, in particular in cytotoxic T and NK cells (Extended Data Fig. 4b-o and 5a-i). To
explore further the functional contribution of lung neutrophils to metastasis independently of
potential immunosuppression, we performed time-controlled neutrophil depletion with antiNature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 June 17.

Wculek and Malanchi

Page 3

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Ly6G antibody in immune-compromised mice (Rag1-null) harbouring primary tumours.
Remarkably, pre-metastatic neutrophil depletion during metastatic colonization caused a
decrease of spontaneous metastasis (Fig. 1h-j,l). Concomitantly, lungs of the same mice
were synchronously seeded with cancer cells isolated from MMTV-PyMT+ actin-green
fluorescent protein (GFP) tumours by intravenous injection to initiate lung colonization (Fig.
1h). Notably, GFP+ cancer cells colonizing neutrophil-depleted lungs were significantly
reduced, revealing the relevance of lung neutrophils specifically during metastatic initiation
(Fig. 1k,l). No alterations were found in extravasation efficiency of labelled cancer cells
(data not shown). Although we cannot exclude a contribution of other cells to a favourable
pre-metastatic environment5-7, such as monocytes14, these results reveal that the breast
tumour-induced systemic accumulation of neutrophils coincidentally acts as a pre-metastatic
niche in tissue targeted for metastatic dissemination.
Next, we investigated a potential direct effect of neutrophil-secreted factors on tumour cells.
Pre-metastatic lung neutrophils (Extended Data Fig. 6a,b) were used to condition cell culture
medium for 14h (LuN medium). Primary MMTV-PyMT tumour cells cultured in LuN
medium in non-adherent culture showed enhanced sphere growth (Fig. 2a,b). Furthermore,
short-term exposure to LuN medium in adherent culture boosted tumorigenic potential of
cancer cells in vivo and in vitro (Fig. 2c,d and Extended Data Fig. 6c,d). Importantly, shortterm culture in LuN medium also increased the metastatic initiation potential of total cancer
cells (Fig. 2e,f).

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Cancer cells are also heterogeneous when disseminated into the circulation15 and might
respond differently to environmental stimulations16. We therefore probed whether
neutrophil-secreted factors influence the relative amount of highly metastatic cells. We
monitored the previously described MIC population (CD24+CD90+)8 after exposing tumour
cells seeded into the lung to either LuN medium or freshly isolated pre-metastatic lung
neutrophils (Fig. 2g). Notably, both settings induced a doubling of MIC frequencies among
the total cancer cell population (Fig. 2h,i and Extended Data Fig. 6e-h) and partially
increased metastatic growth (Extended Data Fig. 6i-k). Collectively, we observe that
neutrophil-derived factors alter the heterogeneity of cancer cells favouring MICs and lead to
increased metastatic competence of total cancer cells (Fig. 2j).
We aimed to identify neutrophil-secreted factors mediating this activity. LuN medium
contains many factors (data not shown) including CCL2, MMP9, interleukin (IL)-6 and IL-1
that might alter inflammatory responses and increase pro-tumorigenic behaviour17-19.
Various cells in the tumour microenvironment can secrete these mediators, so we
concentrated on specific innate leukocyte-derived factors. We detected high levels of the
lipids leukotriene B4 (LTB4) and cysteinyl leukotrienes C4, D4 and E4 (LTC/D/E4),
products of the Alox5 enzyme20 (Fig. 3a-c). Importantly, direct leukotriene (LT) stimulation
boosted sphere formation and a short 3-day LT-exposure of total cancer cells enhanced their
tumour initiation potential (Extended Data Fig. 7a-c). Notably, cells expressing LT receptors
(LTRs; LTB4 receptor 2 (BLT2) and LTC/E/D4 receptor 2 (CysLT2))21,22 appeared to be
enriched among MICs within total MMTV-PyMT cancer cells as well as among known
tumorigenic subpopulations of breast cancer cell lines23-25 (Fig. 3d,e and Extended Data

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 June 17.

Wculek and Malanchi

Page 4

Fig. 7d-i). Indeed, LTRs themselves identified MMTV-PyMT cancer cells with high sphere
and tumour formation abilities (Extended Data Fig. 7j-l).

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

In accordance with LTR expression on MICs, we found that 3-day LT stimulation of
MMTV-PyMT tumour cells in vitro increased MIC frequency and metastatic initiation
capacity in vivo (Fig. 3f-h), similar to neutrophil-derived mediators (Fig. 2g-j). LT
stimulation also enriched the CD49fhigh sub-pool among 4T1 cells (Extended Data Fig. 8b).
Other cells such as macrophages and eosinophils respond to LTs, but no broader
inflammatory reaction was detected at this stage (Extended Data Fig. 4 and 5). In summary,
LTs appear to shift heterogeneous cancer cell populations in favour of highly metastatic cells
and enhance metastatic competence.
In line with previous reports on LTB4 signalling21,26, cancer cells responded to both LTB4
and LTC/D/E4, with increases in extracellular-signal-regulated kinases (ERK)1 and 2
phosphorylation (Fig. 3i and Extended Data Fig. 8c,d). LTR+ cells were required to detect a
LT-dependent phosphorylated (p)ERK1/2 increase (Extended Data Fig. 8e-g) and inhibitors
for BLT2 and CysLT2 interfered with ERK1/2 activation (Extended Data Fig. 8h-k). Finally,
3-day LTC/D/E4 treatment increased frequency of LTR+ cancer cells, suggesting a
functional boost in proliferation (Extended Data Fig. 8l). Indeed, LT treatment specifically
increased the proliferation of MICs in a MAPK/ERK kinases (MEK)1 and 2-mediated,
pERK1/2-dependent manner (Fig. 3j,k and Extended Data Fig. 8m). These results indicate
that LTs provide a selective proliferative advantage to cancer cells with intrinsically higher
tumorigenicity (Extended Data Fig. 8a).

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

To confirm the functional relevance of LTs in vivo, we took advantage of an Alox5-null
mouse model (Fig. 3c). We generated bone marrow chimaeric mice in which Alox5 is
genetically depleted in the radiosensitive immune cell compartment. Bone marrow Alox5null mice grafted with MMTV-PyMT cells showed unaltered primary tumour growth and
neutrophil lung accumulation (Fig. 4a and Extended Data Fig. 9a-d), yet the efficiency of
spontaneous metastasis was reduced (Fig. 4b). Next, we generated LT-deficient LuN (LuNAlox5ko) medium from Alox5-null pre-metastatic lung neutrophils. Importantly, LuNAlox5ko medium failed to boost the metastatic potential of luciferase-expressing MMTVPyMT cells after 3-day pre-treatment (Fig. 2c, Fig. 4c and Extended Data Fig. 9e,f). Taken
together, these data confirm Alox5 products to be crucial for neutrophil pro-metastatic
activity.
LTs are important mediators during inflammatory asthma and targeted by the specific Alox5
inhibitor zileuton (Zil)27. We explored Zil-mediated inhibition of LT synthesis to treat
metastatic breast cancer in mice. Zil blocked LT production in vivo, detected by decreased
LTB4 levels in LuN medium (LuN-Zil) (Extended Data Fig. 10a,b) and, consequently, LuNZil medium failed to enhance metastasis (Fig. 4c). Importantly, in a therapeutic setting (Fig.
4d), treatment of MMTV-PyMT tumour-harbouring mice with Zil reduced spontaneous
metastasis (Fig. 4e,g), without altering primary tumours or lung neutrophil levels (Extended
Data Fig. 10c,d). Additionally, colonization capacity of GFP+ MMTV-PyMT cancer cells
seeded into lungs of Zil-treated mice was reduced (Fig. 4f,g). We confirmed that metastatic
cancer cells showed reduced proliferation very early after infiltrating Zil-treated lungs

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 June 17.

Wculek and Malanchi

Page 5

(Extended Data Fig. 10e). Taken together, these data represent a potential therapeutic
approach to target this novel LT/Alox5-dependet neutrophil pro-metastatic activity.

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Importantly, similar results on the efficacy of Zil treatment in limiting metastatic progression
were confirmed in two metastatic breast cancer cell lines, mouse 4T1 cells and human
MDA-MB-231 cells (Fig. 4h-k and Extended Data Fig. 10f-i). As Zil treatment had no effect
on long-term primary tumour growth in vivo or on cancer cell behaviour in vitro (Extended
Data Fig. 10j-m), we exclude involvement of Alox5 products in a cancer-cell autocrine loop.
Clinical data correlating high neutrophil levels with poorer prognosis28,29, together with
detected LTR expression in human metastatic ductal and lobular breast carcinoma and their
lymph-node metastases (Fig. 4l-o), suggests that a similar neutrophil pro-metastatic
mechanism might boost human breast cancer progression to the lung.
We have identified a novel LT/Alox5-dependent pro-metastatic activity of neutrophils
supporting highly metastatic cells that can be targeted by Zil, offering hope for new cancer
therapeutics.

Methods
Mouse strains

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

The MMTV-PyMT mice were a gift from E. Sahai, MMTV-PyMT actin-GFP (mice
expressing green fluorescent protein under the control of the actin promoter), Gcsf-null and
Rag1-null mice were a gift from J. Huelsken, MMTV-PyMT actin-luciferase (mice
expressing firefly luciferase under the control of the actin promoter) transgenic line was a
gift from D. Bonnet, Rosa26R-eGFP-DTA mice were a gift from C. Reis e Sousa. Ela2-Cre
knock-in mice and Alox5-null mice were purchased from European Mouse Mutant Archive
(EMMA) and Jackson Laboratory, respectively. All mouse strains have been described
previously30-37. All strains of mice were in >10 generations FVB/N and/or C57BL/6
background except Gcsf-null, Ela2-Cre and Rosa26R-eGFP-DTA mice that were used in
mixed background with littermate controls. Female mice were used between 6–9 weeks of
age, except spontaneous cancer models. Breeding and all animal procedures were performed
in accordance with UK Home Office regulations under project license PPL/80/2531.
Mouse experiments
Where applicable, mice were anaesthetized with IsoFlo (isoflurane, Abbott Animal Health)
and temporally treated with the analgesics Vetergesic (Alstoe Animal Health) and/or
Rimadyl (Pfizer Animal Health). For tumour studies under the project licence PPL/80/2531,
the overruling determinant was animal welfare. The National Cancer Research Institute
(NCRI) Guidelines for the Welfare and Use of Animals in Cancer Research were followed.
When assessing primary tumour growth, a mean diameter of 1.5 cm for single tumours was
not exceeded. However, for multifocal disease such as MMTV-PyMT cancer, provided that
there were no additional adverse welfare consequences for the animal, the total superficial
tumour burden was allowed to exceed these dimensions when essential for the achievement
of the scientific objective, namely spontaneous metastasis. Mice were monitored daily for

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 June 17.

Wculek and Malanchi

Page 6

signs of adverse effects. The source data for primary tumour growth are in Supplementary
Fig. 3.
Tumour cell transplantations and induction of experimental metastasis

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

FVB/N wild-type mice were used for MMTV-PyMT tumour cell transplantations to isolate
lung neutrophils. Rag1-null mice were used when using human or mouse GFP or luciferaseexpressing tumour cells. Primary MMTV-PyMT, MMTV-PyMT actin-GFP or MMTVPyMT actin-luciferase cells (105-106 cells per injection), the unmarked or stably mouse
phosphoglycerate kinase 1 (PGK) promoter-GFP-expressing mouse mammary cancer cell
line 4T1 (105 cells per injection) and the unmarked or stably actin-GFP-expressing human
breast cancer cell line MDA-MB-231 (1-2×106 cells per injection) were used. For
experimental metastasis, tumour cells were re-suspended in 100μl PBS and tail vein injected.
For orthotopic transplantations, tumour cells were re-suspended in 50μl growth-factorreduced Matrigel (Costar) and transplanted within the fourth mammary fat pad on both
flanks (MMTV-PyMT and MDA-MB-231 cells) or one flank only (4T1 cells).
Neutrophilia and lung immune cell infiltration in MMTV-PyMT+ mice

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

MMTV-PyMT+mice that spontaneously developed a primary tumour and had visible lung
metastasis were used to determine immune cell presence in the lung and neutrophil presence
in other organs together with tumour-free littermate controls. For determination of timing
and dynamics of lung infiltration by neutrophils and cancer cells, MMTV-PyMT+ mice
harbouring 1.5-2 g spontaneously developed tumours were used. Neutrophil infiltration was
quantified by flow cytometry and histological staining of lung sections for S100A9 and
cancer cell presence by examination of six histological lung sections (100μm apart) for
PyMT staining to confirm the pre-metastatic state. The timing of neutrophil infiltration into
the pre-metastatic lung before cancer cells was confirmed in FVB/N wild-type mice carrying
two primary tumours originating from orthotopic injection of primary MMTV-PyMT cancer
cells and used for analysis (daily treated with anti-Ly6G or control IgG antibody starting 24
h before tumour cell implantation).
Analysis of MMTV-PyMT+ G-CSF and MMTV-PyMT+ Ela2-DTA mice
Mice were culled and analysed about 6 weeks after spontaneous primary tumour onset; no
differences were observed in tumour onset among the different genotypes.
Treatments with neutrophil-blocking antibody anti-Ly6G or Zil
Rat anti-Ly6G antibody38,39 (12.5 μg/mouse; clone 1A8 from BioXcell) or rat IgG isotype
control (provided by the Cell Services Unit of The Crick Institute) in 100μl saline were
administered daily via intra-peritoneal injection. Zil (LKT Laboratories) dissolved in DMSO
(Sigma) or DMSO alone was fed to mice by pipetting on the back of the tongue once a day
at a dosage of 100μg Zil per g mouse weight.
Lung colonization by cancer cells after neutrophil depletion or Zil treatment

Rag1-null mice were orthotopically transplanted with unlabelled mammary tumour cells 4
weeks before labelled tumour cell injection via the tail vein (MMTV-PyMT and 4T1 105

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 June 17.

Wculek and Malanchi

Page 7

cells, MDA-MB-231 106 cells). Anti-Ly6G or Zil treatment for 2 weeks (except 4T1, 10
days) started 1 day before intravenous injection of cancer cells. Then, total primary tumour
burden, neutrophil presence in the lung, spontaneous lung metastasis incidence from the
transplanted primary tumour and/or experimentally induced lung metastasis originating from
the intravenously injected cancer cells was analysed.

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Of note, exclusively experimental metastasis are present in lung harbouring MDA-MB-231
cells, while predominantly spontaneous metastases are visible in lung harbouring 4T1 cells
due to the high spontaneous metastasis rate of primary 4T1 tumours. Only GFP+
experimental metastasis induced by cancer cell injection was quantified in these
experiments.
Tumour/metastasis initiation potential assay in vivo
Primary MMTV-PyMT cells were either cell sorted for BLT2 and/or CysLT2 presence or
absence, or treated for 3 days on collagen-coated dishes with either neutrophil-conditioned
medium or LTB4 and LTC/D/E4. Subsequently, 103-104 cells were orthotopically
transplanted into the mammary gland or 106 cells injected via the tail vein into Rag1-null
mice and mammary tumour growth or lung metastasis incidence analysed about 3 weeks
thereafter.
MIC or metastasis quantification after neutrophil/LuN injection

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

To analyse total cancer cells at early stages, Rag1-null mice were injected with 0.5-1×106
MMTV-PyMT actin-GFP cells via the tail vein followed 12 h later by intravenous injection
of 25×106 neutrophils (freshly isolated from MMTV-PyMT tumour-transplanted mice) or
12, 24 and 36 h later by intravenous injection of 200μl lung neutrophil-conditioned or
control sphere medium (described later). Cancer cells in the lung were analysed 3 days after
the initial tumour cell injection for frequencies of CD90+ MICs among GFP+CD24+ (nonMIC) cancer cells. For determination of effects of neutrophils or neutrophil-conditioned
medium on metastatic burden, Rag1-null mice were intravenously injected with 1-10×105
MMTV-PyMT actin-GFP or actin-luciferase cells followed immediately, 2 and 4 days later,
by injection of 25×106 neutrophils or 3-5 times every 12 h by injection of 200μl lung
neutrophil-conditioned medium. Metastatic burden was determined by flow cytometric
analysis of GFP+ cancer cells 1 week or bioluminescence imaging of luciferase+ cancer cells
2-4 weeks thereafter, respectively.
Analysis of functional effects of G-CSF-deficiency in MMTV-PyMT cancer cells

Rag1-null mice were transplanted with 106 Gcsf-null primary MMTV-PyMT cancer cells
into two mammary glands and tumour growth, spontaneous metastatic incidence and
neutrophil presence in the lung were analysed 4 weeks thereafter.
Bone marrow transplantation and semi-quantitative PCR
C57BL/6 wild-type mice were lethally irradiated (dosage: 2× 600rad, 4 h apart) and 24 h
later injected via the tail vein with 2×106 bone marrow cells freshly isolated from C57BL/6
or Alox5-null donor mice. Bone marrow chimaeric mice were orthotopically transplanted
with 106 MMTV-PyMT cells into the fourth mammary fat pad on both sides 8 weeks after
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 June 17.

Wculek and Malanchi

Page 8

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

bone marrow reconstitution and primary tumour size, neutrophil infiltration into the lung
and lung metastasis analysed 6 weeks later. Chimaeric mice were generated in a pure
C57BL/6 background, therefore MMTV-PyMT cells from the same background were used
to generate primary tumours. In this lower tumorigenic background, metastasis only occurs
in about 50% of the mice. No alteration in this penetrance was observed between wild-type
and Alox5-null BM chimaeric mice. Figure 4b quantifies animals harbouring metastatic
disease.
Percentage of bone marrow reconstitution was calculated by isolating total DNA from bone
marrow of chimaeras and semi-quantitative PCR with a calibration curve from 100% wildtype DNA mixed at defined ratios with 100% Alox5-null DNA. PCR was performed using
Redtag reagents (Sigma) (primers are listed in Supplementary Information) and 25
amplification cycles before loading an agarose gel. Ratio between wild-type and Alox5-null
band was calculated for every mouse and percentage chimaerism determined by comparison
with calibration curve. Chimaerism was consistently between 80-96%.
Tumour and metastasis burden evaluation
See Supplementary Methods.
In vivo luciferase-activity detection
Mice inoculated with actin-luciferase-expressing MMTV-PyMT cells were shaved around
the chest area and injected with 3mg XenoLight D-luciferin potassium salt (PerkinElmer) in
PBS into the peritoneum 5 min before imaging for at least 45 min using the IVIS Spectrum
Pre-clinical In Vivo Imaging System (PerkinElmer). The maximum bioluminescence
intensity signal for the lung of every mouse was determined using Living Image 4.3.1
software.

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Tissue staining, immunohistochemistry and light microscopy
Mouse lung tissue was fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde in PBS for 24 h and embedded in
paraffin blocks. Four-micrometre sections were stained. The breast cancer tissue array paired
with metastatic tumours, 96 samples (1.5mm), was purchased from Abcam (ab178118).
H&E staining was performed according to standard procedures.
For immunohistochemistry, either secondary horseradish peroxidase (HRP)-conjugated
antibodies were used in combination with DAP Peroxidase substrate or the VECTASTAIN
ABC kit (all Vector Laboratories) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Specific
primary antibodies were used (see Supplementary Information), visualization of cell nuclei
was performed with haematoxylin and analysis employed the Nikon Eclipse 90i light
microscope and NIS-elements software.
Scoring of LTR expression in breast cancer tissue and lymph node metastasis
See Supplementary Methods.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 June 17.

Wculek and Malanchi

Page 9

Tissue digestion for cell isolation or analysis

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

MMTV-PyMT cell isolation was described in detail previously8. In brief, primary MMTVPyMT tumours, liver, spleen and lung were dissected, minced, digested with Liberase
(Roche) and DNaseI (Sigma) in HBSS and passed through a 100μm cell strainer. Some
tumour cells were used for cell culture at this point. Bone marrow cells were isolated by
crushing the femur and tibia and blood collected via bleeding from the tail vein with Heparin
(Sigma) as a coagulant. For flow cytometric analysis or further purification, single cell
suspensions of tumour, liver, spleen, lung, bone marrow and blood were subjected to
hypotonic lysis (Red Blood Cell Lysis Solution, Miltenyi) to remove erythrocytes and
washed with 1×PBS/2mM EDTA/0.5% BSA.
Flow cytometry and cell sorting
Prepared single cell suspensions of mouse tissues and in vitro treated cancer cells were
incubated with mouse FcR Blocking Reagent (Miltenyi) followed by incubation with (a
combination) of specific pre-labelled antibodies or in combination with fluorescentlylabelled secondary antibodies (Invitrogen) (see Supplementary Information). Dead cells
were stained with 4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI) or propidium iodide (PI; both
Sigma). The LSRFortessa cell analyser running FACSDiva software (BD Biosciences) and
FlowJo software was used. Tumour cells were flow-sorted using the Influx cell sorter
running FACS Sortware sorter software (BD Biosciences). MMTV-PyMT cells were used in
experiments immediately after sorting and sorted 4T1 cells cultured in adherent conditions
for 3 days prior to western blot analysis.
Neutrophil isolation and neutrophil-conditioned medium

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Freshly isolated lung cells from wild-type mice orthotopically transplanted with MMTVPyMT tumours were incubated with mouse FcR Blocking Reagent (Miltenyi), APC-coupled
anti-Ly6G (clone 1A8) antibody (BD Bioscience) followed by incubation with magnetic
anti-APC microbeads (Miltenyi). Magnetically labelled neutrophils were isolated using LS
columns (Miltenyi) according to manufacturers instructions. Neutrophil purity and viability
was measured by flow cytometry. Some isolated Ly6G+ cells were smeared onto a glass
slide and air-dried overnight followed by H&E staining to evaluate cell morphology.
Remaining neutrophils were kept in sphere medium at a concentration of 106 neutrophils per
150μl medium for 14 h to allow conditioning. Neutrophils and cell debris were removed by
centrifugation and conditioned medium occasionally snap-frozen before use.
Cell culture and in vitro cancer cell treatments
All used cell lines were provided by the Cell Services Unit of The Crick Institute, which
routinely tests for Mycoplasma contamination and were not further authenticated in our
laboratory. Cell lines were cultured in DMEM medium supplemented with 10% fetal bovine
serum (DMEM/FCS, both Invitrogen). Freshly isolated MMTV-PyMT cells were cultured
overnight on PureCol collagen (Advanced Biomatrix)-coated dishes in growth medium
DMEM/F12 with 2% FBS, 20 ng ml−1 EGF (Invitrogen) and 10 μg ml−1 insulin (Sigma)
before use in experiments. All in vitro and in vivo experiments involving primary MMTVPyMT cells were performed with at least two primary tumour cell preparations from

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 June 17.

Wculek and Malanchi

Page 10

different spontaneous MMTV-PyMT+ mice. Unless otherwise specified, each in vitro and in
vivo experiment was performed with a different tumour cell preparation.

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Primary MMTV-PyMT cells were cultured in sphere medium on collagen-coated dishes,
4T1 and MDA-MB-231 cells in DMEM/FCS on uncoated dishes or in non-attachment
conditions for the indicated periods of time under presence of (as indicated for every
experiment): control sphere medium, neutrophil-conditioned medium, 100% ethanol control
(EtOH, Sigma), DMSO control, 1μM LTB4, 100nM LTC/D/E4 (Cysteinyl Leukotriene
HPLC Mixture I), 3μM BLT2 inhibitor LY255283, 0.3μM CysLT2 inhibitor BAY-u9773 (all
Cayman Chemical), 1μM Zil and/or 1nM pan-MEK inhibitor PD0325901 (provided by J.
Downward) followed by further tests or analysis.
Sphere formation assay

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

The sphere formation assay was described previously8. In brief, 104 total MMTV-PyMT or
flow-sorted cells per well were plated in ultra-low-attachment 96-well plates (Costar) in
100μl sphere medium DMEM/F12 supplemented with B-27, 20 ng ml−1 EGF, 20 ng ml−1
FGF (all Invitrogen) and 4 μg ml−1 heparin (Sigma) or neutrophil-conditioned medium.
After 7-10 days, if not otherwise indicated, all formed spheres were quantified from images
taken with the inverted Leica DM IRBE light and fluorescence microscope. The area of the
plane passing through the sphere-centre was measured for every sphere (sphere size) using
ImageJ software and the areas of all formed spheres were summed up. The obtained number
was divided by total number of plated cells. This value represents the sphere formation index
(SFI) per cell for every experimental group. Freshly isolated MMTV-PyMT cells were either
only treated for 3 days in adherent conditions before sphere assay or directly treated during
the sphere assay with neutrophil-conditioned medium or LTB4 and/or LTC/D/E4 or Zil, as
indicated. When cells were passaged, cells were quantified by cell counting and re-plated in
equal numbers per well for the next passage approximately every 7 to 10 days.
In vitro and in vivo BrdU incorporation assay

Rag1-null mice carrying MMTV-PyMT tumours were treated daily for 3 days with Zil and
intravenously injected with 105 GFP-expressing MMTV-PyMT cancer cells. BrdU (1mg per
mouse) was intraperitoneally injected 18 h after GFP+ cancer cells and lungs harvested and
digested 6 h later. In vitro 3-day MMTV-PyMT or 4T1 cells treated as indicated in adherent
conditions were pulsed with 30μM BrdU (Sigma) for 3 hours and harvested. Cells were
incubated with fluorescently labelled anti-CD24 and/or anti-CD90.1 antibody if indicated.
BrdU Flow Kit (BD Bioscience) was used for staining followed by analysis by flow
cytometry.
In vitro quantification of primary MICs and sub-pools of cancer cell lines
Primary MMTV-PyMT cells were cultured on collagen-coated dishes for 3 days
supplemented with either LTB4 and LTC/D/E4 or Zil followed by incubation with
fluorescently labelled anti-CD90.1 and anti-CD24 antibodies and analysis by flow
cytometry. 4T1 and MDA-MB-231 cell lines were cultured in DMEM/FCS supplemented
with LTB4 and LTC/D/E4 for 3 days in adherent conditions followed by either staining with
fluorescently labelled anti-CD49f, anti-BLT2, anti-CysLT2 and/or anti-CD44 antibodies or

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 June 17.

Wculek and Malanchi

Page 11

using the ALDEFLUOR kit (Stemcell Technologies) according to the manufacturer’s
instructions and analysed by flow cytometry.
RNA expression/quantitative real-time PCR

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Neutrophils were freshly isolated from the lungs of wild-type or MMTV-PyMT tumourbearing mice. RNA isolation was performed using MagMAX-96 Total RNA Isolation Kit
and cDNA synthesis using SuperScript III Reverse Transcriptase. Quantitative PCR
reactions were performed using EXPRESS SYBR GreenER reagents with the Applied
Biosystems 7500 Fast Real-Time PCR System (all Invitrogen) and specific primers (see
Supplementary Information).
Enzyme immunoassay and parameter enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay
Ethanol was used to precipitate protein from cell culture medium before analysis using
either the enzyme immuno-assays (EIAs) LTC/D/E4 Biotrak EIA System (Amersham) or
the LTB4 EIA Kit (Cayman Chemical) according to the manufacturer’s instructions.
Western blot analysis and protein detection

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Primary MMTV-PyMT cells grown on collagen-coated dishes were cultured overnight in
DMEM/F12 with B-27, and 4 μg ml−1 heparin (Sigma) before treatment with 1μM LTB4 or
100nM LTC/D/E4. Unsorted or sorted LTR-reduced 4T1 cells were stimulated with LTB4,
LTC/D/E4, BLT2 inhibitor LY255283 and/or CysLT2 inhibitor BAY-u9773 as indicated.
Cells were washed and protein isolated using RIPA buffer (25mM Tris-hydrogen chloride
pH7.6, 50mM sodium chloride, 1% NP-40, 1% sodium deoxycholate, 0.1% soduim dodecyl
sulphate) freshly supplemented with 1μM sodium pyrophosphate, 1μM B-glycerophosphate,
1μM sodium vanadiumoxide, 1μM sodium fluoride, 1μM sodium molybdate (all Sigma) and
cOmplete ULTRA Tablets (Roche), and processed by standard western blot techniques.
Membranes were blocked with 5%BSA in PBS with 0.5% Tween-20 (Sigma) and incubated
with specific primary antibodies (see Supplementary Information). ECL Western Blotting
System including secondary antibodies and Hyperfilm ECL (both Amersham) were used.
Protein lysates of 3 h LTB4-stimulated MDA-MB-231 cells were analysed using the
Proteome Profiler Human Phospho-Kinase Array Kit (R&D systems) according to
themanufacturer’s instructions. Western blot quantification was performed on scanned films
using ImageJ software.
Statistical Analysis
Data analyses used GraphPad Prism version 7. The data are presented as mean ± standard
error of the mean, individual values, “scatter plot with Tukey box & whiskers” and/or
“scatter plot with column bar” graphs and were analysed using Student’s t-tests (paired or
unpaired according to the experimental setting), Mann-Whitney tests, one-sample t-tests and
two-way ANOVA as indicated in the legends. Data were pooled from at least two
experiments, except Fig. 4c,i,k and Extended Data Figs 2d, 4d-m, 5a,b,f,h, 6k, 10e in which
data are at least biological triplicates generated in parallel. Two-way ANOVA was performed
when the control groups between experiments were significantly different. Western blot in
Extended Data Fig. 8i,k, the Proteome Profiler dot blot in Extended Data Fig. 8d and BrdU

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 June 17.

Wculek and Malanchi

Page 12

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

incorporation of 4T1 cells in Extended Data Fig. 10k were performed once. Extended Data
Fig. 3b (mRNA expression) compares biological triplicates of the pre-metastatic to a
representative control (wild-type) value. The experiments were not randomized and there
was no blinding as animals or samples were marked. No statistical methods were used to
predetermine sample sizes. Sample sizes were based on previous experience with the
models8,14. n values represent biological replicates, with the exception of the sphere assays,
for which both technical and biological replicates are shown. Differences were considered
significant when P<0.05 and are indicated as NS, not significant, *P<0.05, **P<0.01,
***P<0.001.

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 June 17.

Wculek and Malanchi

Page 13

Extended Data

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Extended Data Figure 1. Mammary tumour-bearing MMTV-PyMT+ mice show specifically
neutrophilia in the metastatic lung

a–c, Flow cytometric quantification of CD11b+Ly6G+ neutrophils in the bone marrow (n = 6
(wild-type), n = 5 (MMTV-PyMT+)) (a), liver (n = 4 (wild-type), n = 5 (MMTV-PyMT+))
(b) and spleen (n = 6 (wild-type), n = 5 (MMTV-PyMT+)) (c) of wild-type (WT) and
tumour-bearing MMTV-PyMT+ mice. d, Quantification of neutrophils in the tumour and
metastatic lung of MMTV-PyMT+ mice (n = 2 per group), pre-metastatic lung neutrophil
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 June 17.

Wculek and Malanchi

Page 14

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

levels depicted in Fig. 1a are shown for comparison in dashed lines. Met., metastatic. e–l,
Flow cytometric quantification of immune cell frequencies in wild-type and metastatic lungs
of MMTV-PyMT+ mice (n = 4 (wild-type), n = 7 (metastatic) if not otherwise indicated)
including CD45+ total immune cells (e), total CD11b+F4/80+ macrophages (f) (n = 4 (wildtype), n = 4 (metastatic)), the CD11blow F4/80high alveolar macrophage subpopulation (n = 4
(wild-type), n = 4 (metastatic)) (g), the CD11bhigh F4/80low interstitial macrophage
subpopulation (n = 4 (wild-type), n = 4 (metastatic)) (h), CD45+CD11c+ dendritic cells (i),
CD45+CD49b+ NK cells (j), CD45+CD19+ B lymphocytes (k) and CD45+CD3+ T
lymphocytes (l). Statistical analysis by two-sided t-test. Data are represented as mean ±
s.e.m. NS, not significant, *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001.

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 June 17.

Wculek and Malanchi

Page 15

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Extended Data Figure 2. Analysis of MMTV-PyMT+Gcsf−/− mice, G-CSF-deficient MMTVPyMT cancer cells and MMTV-PyMT+Ela2-Cre-DTA+ mice

a, Representative flow cytometric analysis of CD11b+Ly6G+ neutrophils in the lung of wildtype and tumour-bearing MMTV-PyMT+Gcsf+/+ and MMTV-PyMT+Gcsf−/− mice. b,
Primary mammary tumour burden of MMTV-PyMT+Gcsf+/+ (n = 13) or MMTVPyMT+Gcsf−/− (n = 24) mice. c, Flow cytometric quantification of frequencies of total
CD11b+F4/80+ macrophages (left), the CD11blowF4/80high alveolar macrophage
subpopulation (middle) and the CD11bhighF4/80low interstitial macrophage subpopulation

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 June 17.

Wculek and Malanchi

Page 16

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

(right) in the lung of tumour-bearing MMTV-PyMT+Gcsf+/+ (n = 4) and MMTVPyMT+Gcsf−/− (n = 7) mice. d, MMTV-PyMT+Gcsf−/− primary cancer cells were freshly
isolated and grafted onto two mammary glands of Rag1-null mice (106 cells per injection)
and analysed 5 weeks thereafter. CD11b+Ly6G+ neutrophil presence in the lung was
assessed by flow cytometry (left), primary tumour burden was assessed by weighing
(middle) and spontaneous lung metastasis incidence was assessed by quantification of
visible surface lung metastases relative to tumour load (right) (n = 3 (Gcsf+/+), n = 4
(Gcsf−/−)). e–g, Analysis of tumour-bearing MMTV-PyMT+ control and MMTVPyMT+Ela2-Cre-DTA+ mice. Representative flow cytometric analysis of CD11b+Ly6G+
neutrophils in the lung (e). Lung neutrophil quantification (n = 8 (wild-type), n = 7 (PyMT+
control), n = 5 (PyMT+Ela2-Cre-DTA+)) (f, left) and primary mammary tumour burden (n =
14 (PyMT+ control), n = 6 (PyMT+Ela2-Cre-DTA+)) (f, right) with representative H&Estained histological lung sections (g). Scale bar, 500μm. h, Flow cytometric quantification of
frequencies of total CD11b+F4/80+ macrophages (left), the CD11blowF4/80high alveolar
macrophage subpopulation (middle) and the CD11bhighF4/80low interstitial macrophage
subpopulation (right) in the lung of tumour-bearing MMTV-PyMT+ control (n = 7) and
MMTVPyMT+Ela2-Cre-DTA+ (n = 5) mice. i, Frequencies of bone marrow (top) and blood
(bottom) CD11b+Ly6G+ neutrophils (left; blood n = 3 (wild-type), n = 6 (PyMT+ control)),
CD11b+F4/80+ macrophages (middle; blood n = 3 (wild-type), n = 6 (PyMT+ control)) and
CD11b+CD115+ monocytes (right; blood n = 3 (wild-type), n = 5 (PyMT+ control)) in wildtype, MMTV-PyMT+ control and MMTV-PyMT+Ela2-Cre-DTA+ mice analysed by flow
cytometry (n = 4 (wild type), n = 6 (PyMT+ control), n = 2 (PyMT+Ela2-Cre-DTA+) if not
otherwise indicated). j, Exclusion of immune responses against DTA expression in the bone
marrow by analysis of NK-cell (left) and cytotoxic T-cell (right) activation. Flow cytometric
quantification of activated CD69+ among total CD45+CD49b+ NK cells as well as activated
CD44+ or CD69+ among total CD45+CD3+CD8+ cytotoxic T cells in the bone marrow of
wild-type (n = 4), MMTV-PyMT+ control (n = 6) and MMTV-PyMT+Ela2-Cre-DTA+ (n =
2) mice. Statistical analysis by two-sided t-test. Data are represented as mean ± s.e.m. NS,
not significant, *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 June 17.

Wculek and Malanchi

Page 17

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Extended Data Figure 3. Comparison of wild-type lung neutrophils with tumour-induced, premetastatic lung neutrophils

a, Representation of timing and dynamics of neutrophil and cancer cell infiltration into the
lung of mice grafted with two mammary tumours by orthotopic injection of 106 MMTVPyMT tumour cells. b, Flow cytometric analysis for cell size (forward scatter (FSC)),
granularity (side scatter (SSC)) and expression of surface markers CXCR2, CD31, MHC-I,
MHC-II, ICAM1 and Fas (n is indicated) as well as mRNA expression analysis of Tnfa,
arginase 1, Vegfa, Ccl2, Ccl3, iNOS (also known as Nos2) and Ccl5 by quantitative

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 June 17.

Wculek and Malanchi

Page 18

polymerase chain reaction (PCR) of CD11b+Ly6G+ wild-type (WT) or pre-metastatic (Premet.) lung neutrophils 3 weeks after primary tumour graft (n = 3 (pre-metastatic compared
with one normal lung reference)). Statistical analysis by two-sided t-test (flow cytometry)
and one-sample t-test (mRNA). Data are represented as mean ± s.e.m. *P < 0.05, **P <
0.01, ***P < 0.001.

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Extended Data Figure 4. Immune cell frequencies and activation in the pre-metastatic lung of
MMTV-PyMT tumour-bearing mice is not dependent on neutrophil presence (part 1)

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 June 17.

Wculek and Malanchi

Page 19

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

a, Representation of timing and dynamics of neutrophil and cancer cell infiltration into the
lung of mice grafted with two mammary tumours by orthotopic injection of 106 MMTVPyMT tumour cells. b–o, Flow cytometric quantification and representative analysis of the
following immune cell types in wild-type (WT) or pre-metastatic (Pre-met.) lungs treated
daily with either control IgG or anti-Ly6G (1A8) neutrophil-blocking antibody from tumour
onset onwards (n = 4 per group if not otherwise indicated): b, f, total CD45+ immune cells
(n = 12 per group); c, g, CD11b+Ly6G+ neutrophils (n = 8 per group); d, g, CD11b+SiglecF+
eosinophils; e, g, CD11blowF4/80high alveolar macrophages and CD11bhighF4/80low
interstitial macrophages; h, j, CD45+CD11c+ dendritic cells; i, k, MHC-II+CD86+ activated
dendritic cells; l, n, CD45+CD19+ B cells; and m, o, MHC-II+CD86+ activated B cells.
Statistical analysis by two-sided t-test. Data are represented as mean ± s.e.m. NS, not
significant, *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001.

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 June 17.

Wculek and Malanchi

Page 20

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Extended Data Figure 5. Immune cell frequencies and activation in the pre-metastatic lung of
MMTV-PyMT tumour-bearing mice is not dependent on neutrophil presence (part 2)

a–i, Flow cytometric quantification and representative analysis of the following immune cell
types in wild-type (WT) or pre-metastatic (Pre-met.) lungs treated daily with either control
IgG or anti-Ly6G (1A8) neutrophil-blocking antibody from tumour onset onwards (n = 4 per
group if not otherwise indicated): a, c, CD45+CD49b+ NK cells; b, c, CD69+ activated NK
cells; d, e, CD45+CD3+CD8+ cytotoxic T cells (n = 8 per group); f, g, CD44+ or CD69+
activated T cells; and h, i, the ratio of CD4+CD25+Foxp3+ regulatory T cells per activated T

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 June 17.

Wculek and Malanchi

Page 21

cell. Statistical analysis by two-sided t-test. Data are represented as mean ± s.e.m. NS, not
significant.

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Extended Data Figure 6. Neutrophil isolation from the lung of MMTVPyMT+ mice and effect of
neutrophil-derived factors on tumour formation potential

a, Representative flow cytometric analysis of neutrophil purity after isolation from the premetastatic lung compared to total lung tissue. Only neutrophil purity of ≥90% was used for
further experiments. b, Neutrophil viability was assessed by flow cytometry for propidium
iodide (PI) negativity after isolation (n = 10). c, d, MMTVPyMT cells grown in control or
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 June 17.

Wculek and Malanchi

Page 22

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

LuN medium for 3 days in adherent conditions were plated in non-attachment conditions
followed by sphere quantification at day 10 post-seeding (technical replicate n = 17
(control), n = 21 (LuN) of biological triplicates) (c) or 104 cells grafted onto the mammary
gland of Rag1-null mice for analysis of tumour formation potential (d). Tumour burden was
determined by weighing about 3 weeks after (n = 12 per group), complementary to Fig. 2d.
e–h, Flow cytometric quantification of frequencies of total present GFP-labelled MMTVPyMT cells (e, g) and frequencies of CD24+CD90+ MICs among total GFP-labelled
MMTV-PyMT cells (f, h) in the lung of Rag1-null mice 3 days after intravenous injection of
5×105 total GFP-labelled MMTV-PyMT cells followed by either three intravenous injections
with control or LuN medium (n = 6 (PyMT+control), n = 8 (PyMT+LuN)) (e, f) or by one
intravenous injection with 25×106 neutrophils freshly isolated from a pre-metastatic lung (n
= 7 (PyMT control), n = 8 (PyMT+neutrophils) (g, h). f, h, Two independent experiments
are shown to complement Fig. 2h, i. Exp, experiment. i–k, Experimental setup (i): Rag1-null
mice were intravenously injected with 1–10×105 (j) or 0.5×106 total GFP-labelled MMTVPyMT cells (k) followed by either 3-5 intravenous injections with 200μl control or LuN
medium (j) or by three intravenous injections with 25×106 neutrophils (k) freshly isolated
from a pre-metastatic lung. Quantification of experimental metastatic incidence by
determination of bioluminescence intensity (n = 7 (control), n = 9 (LuN)) (j) or flow
cytometric analysis of GFP+ cancer cells in the lung (n = 5 (control), n = 4 (neutrophil)) (k)
is shown. Statistical analysis by two-sided t-test (c, j, k) and two-way ANOVA (d–h). Data
are represented as mean ± s.e.m. NS, not significant, *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001.

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 June 17.

Wculek and Malanchi

Page 23

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Extended Data Figure 7. LTRs are expressed on mouse and human breast cancer cells and
enriched on metastasis-initiating and highly tumorigenic cancer cell sub-pools

a, Sphere formation potential of MMTV-PyMT cells under presence of LTB4 or LTC/D/E4
(technical replicate n = 8 per group of biological triplicates). b, c, Three-day LTB4 and
LTC/D/E4-treated MMTVPyMT cells in adherent culture were analysed for primary tumour
initiation potential by orthotopic transplantation of 104 cells in Rag1-null mice (n = 14 per
group) (b). Exp, experiment; TC, tumour cell isolation. Representative image of tumours is
shown (c). d, e, Flow cytometric analysis of primary MMTV-PyMT cancer cells, the mouse

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 June 17.

Wculek and Malanchi

Page 24

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

mammary cancer cell line 4T1 and the human breast cancer cell line MDA-MB-231 for
expression of BLT1 or BLT2 (d) as well as CysLT1 or CysLT2 (e). f, Representative flow
cytometric analysis of BLT2+ and CysLT2+ cells among MMTV-PyMT non-MICs and
MICs. g–i, Flow cytometric quantification of LTR expression on Aldefluor (ALD)+ (n = 3
per group) (g) or CD44high MDA-MB-231 cells (n = 4 per group) (h) as well as CD49f+/high
4T1 cells (n = 4 per group) (i). j–l, Sorted LTR+ or LTR− MMTV-PyMT tumour cells were
plated in non-attachment conditions followed by sphere quantification at day 10 postseeding (technical replicate n = 10 per group of biological duplicates) (j) or 103 cells grafted
onto the mammary gland of Rag1-null mice for analysis of tumour formation potential.
Tumour burden was determined by weighing (n = 8 per group) after 3 weeks (k) and
representative image of tumours is shown (l). Statistical analysis by two-sided t-test (a, h–k)
and two-way ANOVA (b). Data are represented as mean ± s.e.m. NS, not significant, *P <
0.05, **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001.

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 June 17.

Wculek and Malanchi

Page 25

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Extended Data Figure 8. LTs promote stemness within the total cancer cell population by
specifically promoting proliferation of MICs

a, In vitro passaging (P indicates passage number) in non-adherent conditions of sorted
CD24+CD90+ MICs and CD24+CD90− non-MICs (n = 4 per group for P0+P1 and n = 3 per
group for P2+P3). Quantification was performed by determination of percentage of
remaining cell number after 7–10 days. b, Flow cytometric quantification of 3-day LTtreated 4T1 cells for frequency of highly tumorigenic CD49fhigh cells (n = 6). c,
Quantification of western blots for ERK1/2 phosphorylation of MMTV-PyMT cells
following LTB4 (left) or LTC/D/E4 (right) stimulation relative to α-vinculin as shown in
Fig. 3i (n = 2 per time point except n = 9 (30 min LTB4)). d, Dot blot and quantification of
ERK1/2 phosphorylation in MDA-MB-231 cells after 3 h stimulation with LTB4 measured
by R&D Proteome Profiler Human Phospho-Kinase Array (ARY003B; one-membrane
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 June 17.

Wculek and Malanchi

Page 26

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

array). e, Flow cytometric quantification of LTR expression of sorted LTR-reduced 4T1 cells
(n = 3 per group). f, g, Representative analysis and quantification of western blots for total
ERK1/2 and ERK1/2 phosphorylation relative to α-vinculin of unsorted 4T1 cells or 4T1
cells sorted for LTR negativity (n = 2 per group). h–k, Analysis and quantification of
western blot for total ERK1/2 and ERK1/2 phosphorylation relative to α-vinculin of 4T1
cells following LTB4 (h, i) or LTC/D/E4 (j, k) stimulation in the presence of BLT2 inhibitor
LY255283 or CysLT2 inhibitor BAY-u9773, respectively (one time series). Dotted lines in
indicate the control level of ERK1/2 phosphorylation. The decrease of ERK1/2
phosphorylation observed after 5–15 min when adding both leukotrienes and their receptor
inhibitors is due to the increase in ethanol concentration. Data are shown as ERK1/2
phosphorylation recovery and increase from 5 to 45 min after stimulation (i, k). l, Flow
cytometric quantification of 3-day LTC/D/E4-treated MDA-MB-231 cells for frequency of
LTR+ cells (n = 4 per group). m, Three-day LT-treated MMTV-PyMT cells in adherent
culture were analysed for BrdU incorporation of CD24+CD90− non-MICs in the additional
presence of PD0325901 MEK inhibitor (MEKi; n = 3 per group). DMSO, dimethylsulfoxide
treated; EtOH, ethanol treated. Statistical analysis by two-sided t-test (l, m) and one-sided ttest (b). Data are represented as mean ± s.e.m. NS, not significant, *P < 0.05. Blot source
data are shown in Supplementary Fig. 1.

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 June 17.

Wculek and Malanchi

Page 27

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Extended Data Figure 9. Analysis of Alox5-null bone marrow chimaeric mice transplanted with
primary mammary MMTV-PyMT tumours and failure of Alox5-null neutrophils to support
cancer cell metastatic initiation potential

a, Efficiency of chimaeric mice generation was determined by semi-quantitative PCR
analysis of DNA isolated from the bone marrow of lethally irradiated wild-type mice
reconstituted with wild-type or Alox5-null bone marrow. A calibration curve of the ratio
between the PCR band amplified from the wild-type (WT) and Alox5-null (KO) allele was
used to calculate the percentage of bone marrow reconstitution efficiency. Tests of 8
representative Alox5−/− chimaeric mice and 10 controls are shown. Only mice with >80%
Alox5-null bone marrow reconstitution were used for further experiments. b–d, Analysis of
wild-type and Alox5-null bone marrow chimaeric mice 1.5 months after transplantation with
2 mammary MMTV-PyMT tumours (106 PyMT cells) or tumour-free controls.
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 June 17.

Wculek and Malanchi

Page 28

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Representative flow cytometric analysis (b) and quantification of CD11b+Ly6G+ neutrophil
presence in the lung (c) (n = 4 (wild-type), n = 4 (Alox5−/−), n = 5 (wild-type PyMT), n = 7
(Alox5−/− PyMT) as well as primary mammary tumour burden (n = 6 (wild-type PyMT), n =
9 (Alox5−/− PyMT)) (d). e, f, 5×105 luciferase-expressing MMTV-PyMT cells treated with
control, wild-type LuN (LuN-WT) or Alox5-deficient neutrophil-derived LuN (LuNAlox5ko) medium for 3 days in adherent culture were intravenously injected into Rag1-null
mice. Quantification of cancer-cell-derived bioluminescence in the lung over time (n = 5
(control), n = 5 (LuN-WT), n = 4 (LuNAlox5ko)) (e) and representative image is shown (f).
Statistical analysis by two-sided t-test. Data are represented as mean ± s.e.m. NS, not
significant, *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01. Blot source data are shown in Supplementary Fig. 2.

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 June 17.

Wculek and Malanchi

Page 29

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Extended Data Figure 10. Breast cancer cell growth, proliferation and self-renewal are not
directly affected by treatment with the Alox5 inhibitor Zil

a, b, Neutrophils were isolated from the lungs of MMTVPyMT mammary tumour-bearing
mice treated daily with Zil and used to condition culture medium (LuN-Zil) (a). Enzymeimmunoassay analysis of LTB4 levels in control, LuN or LuN-Zil medium (n = 4 (control), n
= 4 (LuN), n = 3 (LuN-Zil)) (b). c, d, f–i, Analysis of CD11b+Ly6G+ neutrophils in the lung
by flow cytometry (c, f, h) and primary tumour burden (d, g, i) at the time of analysis of
Rag1-null mice orthotopically transplanted and intravenously injected with GFP-labelled

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 June 17.

Wculek and Malanchi

Page 30

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

105 primary MMTV-PyMT cancer cells (n = 3 (DMSO), n = 9 (PyMT DMSO), n = 7
(PyMT Zil)) (c, d), 105 mouse 4T1 cancer cells (n = 4 (DMSO), n = 5 (4T1 DMSO), n = 7
(4T1 Zil)) (f, g) or 106 human MDA-MB-231 cancer cells (n = 4 (DMSO), n = 6 (MDA231
DMSO), n = 5 (MDA231 Zil)) (h, i), and treated with Zil to complement Fig. 4d–k. e,
Determination of in vivo cancer cell proliferation 18 h after intravenous injection of 105
GFP-labelled MMTV-PyMT cancer cells into MMTV-PyMT tumour-bearing, Zil-treated
mice by 6 h BrdU pulse and flow cytometric quantification of BrdU+ among GFP+ cancer
cells in the lung (n = 3 (PyMT DMSO), n = 4 (PyMT Zil). j, Quantification of mammary
tumour load of control (DMSO) or Zil-treated wild-type mice 4–6 weeks after orthotopic
transplantation with 106 MMTV-PyMT cells onto the mammary gland. Daily Zil treatment
started 1 day prior to mammary tumour engraftment (n = 11 (DMSO), n = 8 (Zil)). k, Flow
cytometric quantification of BrdU incorporation after a 3 h pulse of two primary MMTVPyMT cell preparations and one culture of the mouse 4T1 cell line treated with 1μM Zil for
24 h in adherent conditions. l, Flow cytometric quantification of frequency of CD24+CD90+
MICs in total MMTV-PyMT cells after 3-day treatment with 1μM Zil or control DMSO in
adherent culture (n = 3 per group). m, Sphere formation of MMTV-PyMT cancer cells in the
presence of 1μM Zil after 7 days (technical replicate n = 8 per group of biological
duplicates). Statistical analysis by two-sided t-test (b–d, f–m) and one sided t-test (e). Data
are represented as mean ± s.e.m. NS, not significant, *P < 0.05, ***P < 0.001.

Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

We thank C. Reis e Sousa, E. Sahai, P. Scaffidi and J. Huelsken for scientific discussions, critical reading of the
manuscript and sharing cell lines and mouse strains. We also thank members of the tumour-stroma interactions in
cancer development (TSI) laboratory of The Crick Institute for scientific discussions, critical reading of the
manuscript and practical support. We thank L. Jones for help in analysing the human breast cancer samples. We are
grateful to R. Moore, E. Nye, B. Spencer-Dene and J. Bee for technical support with mice and mouse tissue. We
also thank the Flow Cytometry Unit, the Bioinformatics & Biostatistics Unit and the In Vivo Imaging Facility for
technical assistance. We are grateful to Cancer Research UK for the funding that has allowed this work.

REFERENCES
1. Quail DF, Joyce JA. Microenvironmental regulation of tumor progression and metastasis. Nature
medicine. 2013; 19:1423–1437.
2. Bald T, et al. Ultraviolet-radiation-induced inflammation promotes angiotropism and metastasis in
melanoma. Nature. 2014; 507:109–113. [PubMed: 24572365]
3. Galdiero MR, et al. Tumor associated macrophages and neutrophils in cancer. Immunobiology.
2013; 218:1402–1410. [PubMed: 23891329]
4. Finisguerra V, et al. MET is required for the recruitment of anti-tumoural neutrophils. Nature. 2015;
522:349–353. [PubMed: 25985180]
5. Hiratsuka S, Watanabe A, Aburatani H, Maru Y. Tumour-mediated upregulation of chemoattractants
and recruitment of myeloid cells predetermines lung metastasis. Nature cell biology. 2006; 8:1369–
1375. [PubMed: 17128264]
6. Erler JT, et al. Hypoxia-induced lysyl oxidase is a critical mediator of bone marrow cell recruitment
to form the premetastatic niche. Cancer cell. 2009; 15:35–44. [PubMed: 19111879]
7. Kaplan RN, et al. VEGFR1-positive haematopoietic bone marrow progenitors initiate the premetastatic niche. Nature. 2005; 438:820–827. [PubMed: 16341007]
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 June 17.

Wculek and Malanchi

Page 31

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

8. Malanchi I, et al. Interactions between cancer stem cells and their niche govern metastatic
colonization. Nature. 2012; 481:85–89. [PubMed: 22158103]
9. Calon A, et al. Dependency of colorectal cancer on a TGF-beta-driven program in stromal cells for
metastasis initiation. Cancer cell. 2012; 22:571–584. [PubMed: 23153532]
10. Oskarsson T, Batlle E, Massague J. Metastatic stem cells: sources, niches, and vital pathways. Cell
stem cell. 2014; 14:306–321. [PubMed: 24607405]
11. Coffelt SB, et al. IL-17-producing gammadelta T cells and neutrophils conspire to promote breast
cancer metastasis. Nature. 2015; 522:345–348. [PubMed: 25822788]
12. Luu NT, Rainger GE, Buckley CD, Nash GB. CD31 regulates direction and rate of neutrophil
migration over and under endothelial cells. Journal of vascular research. 2003; 40:467–479.
[PubMed: 14566092]
13. Condamine T, Ramachandran I, Youn JI, Gabrilovich DI. Regulation of tumor metastasis by
myeloid-derived suppressor cells. Annual review of medicine. 2015; 66:97–110.
14. Qian BZ, et al. CCL2 recruits inflammatory monocytes to facilitate breast-tumour metastasis.
Nature. 2011; 475:222–225. [PubMed: 21654748]
15. Yu M, et al. Circulating breast tumor cells exhibit dynamic changes in epithelial and mesenchymal
composition. Science. 2013; 339:580–584. [PubMed: 23372014]
16. Korkaya H, Liu S, Wicha MS. Breast cancer stem cells, cytokine networks, and the tumor
microenvironment. The Journal of clinical investigation. 2011; 121:3804–3809. [PubMed:
21965337]
17. Tsuyada A, et al. CCL2 mediates cross-talk between cancer cells and stromal fibroblasts that
regulates breast cancer stem cells. Cancer research. 2012; 72:2768–2779. [PubMed: 22472119]
18. Yan HH, et al. Gr-1+CD11b+ myeloid cells tip the balance of immune protection to tumor
promotion in the premetastatic lung. Cancer research. 2010; 70:6139–6149. [PubMed: 20631080]
19. Snoussi K, Strosberg AD, Bouaouina N, Ben Ahmed S, Chouchane L. Genetic variation in proinflammatory cytokines (interleukin-1beta, interleukin-1alpha and interleukin-6) associated with
the aggressive forms, survival, and relapse prediction of breast carcinoma. European cytokine
network. 2005; 16:253–260. [PubMed: 16464738]
20. Wang D, Dubois RN. Eicosanoids and cancer. Nature reviews. Cancer. 2010; 10:181–193.
[PubMed: 20168319]
21. Cho NK, Joo YC, Wei JD, Park JI, Kim JH. BLT2 is a pro-tumorigenic mediator during cancer
progression and a therapeutic target for anti-cancer drug development. American journal of cancer
research. 2013; 3:347–355. [PubMed: 23977445]
22. Kanaoka Y, Boyce JA. Cysteinyl leukotrienes and their receptors: cellular distribution and function
in immune and inflammatory responses. Journal of immunology. 2004; 173:1503–1510. [PubMed:
15265876]
23. Hiraga T, Ito S, Nakamura H. Side population in MDA-MB-231 human breast cancer cells exhibits
cancer stem cell-like properties without higher bone-metastatic potential. Oncology reports. 2011;
25:289–296. [PubMed: 21109989]
24. Sheridan C, et al. CD44+/CD24- breast cancer cells exhibit enhanced invasive properties: an early
step necessary for metastasis. Breast cancer research: BCR. 2006; 8:R59. [PubMed: 17062128]
25. Lo PK, et al. CD49f and CD61 identify Her2/neu-induced mammary tumor-initiating cells that are
potentially derived from luminal progenitors and maintained by the integrin-TGFbeta signaling.
Oncogene. 2012; 31:2614–2626. [PubMed: 21996747]
26. Park MK, et al. Novel involvement of leukotriene B(4) receptor 2 through ERK activation by PP2A
down-regulation in leukotriene B(4)-induced keratin phosphorylation and reorganization of
pancreatic cancer cells. Biochimica et biophysica acta. 2012; 1823:2120–2129. [PubMed:
23017243]
27. Wenzel SE, Kamada AK. Zileuton: the first 5-lipoxygenase inhibitor for the treatment of asthma.
The Annals of pharmacotherapy. 1996; 30:858–864. [PubMed: 8826571]
28. Donskov F. Immunomonitoring and prognostic relevance of neutrophils in clinical trials. Seminars
in cancer biology. 2013; 23:200–207. [PubMed: 23403174]
29. Han Y, et al. Prognostic value of chemotherapy-induced neutropenia in early-stage breast cancer.
Breast cancer research and treatment. 2012; 131:483–490. [PubMed: 21971729]
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 June 17.

Wculek and Malanchi

Page 32

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

30. Guy CT, Cardiff RD, Muller WJ. Induction of mammary tumors by expression of polyomavirus
middle T oncogene: a transgenic mouse model for metastatic disease. Molecular and cellular
biology. 1992; 12:954–961. [PubMed: 1312220]
31. Okabe M, Ikawa M, Kominami K, Nakanishi T, Nishimune Y. ‘Green mice’ as a source of
ubiquitous green cells. FEBS letters. 1997; 407:313–319. [PubMed: 9175875]
32. Lieschke GJ, et al. Mice lacking granulocyte colony-stimulating factor have chronic neutropenia,
granulocyte and macrophage progenitor cell deficiency, and impaired neutrophil mobilization.
Blood. 1994; 84:1737–1746. [PubMed: 7521686]
33. Mombaerts P, et al. RAG-1-deficient mice have no mature B and T lymphocytes. Cell. 1992;
68:869–877. [PubMed: 1547488]
34. Cao YA, et al. Shifting foci of hematopoiesis during reconstitution from single stem cells.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America. 2004;
101:221–226. [PubMed: 14688412]
35. Ivanova A, et al. In vivo genetic ablation by Cre-mediated expression of diphtheria toxin fragment
A. Genesis. 2005; 43:129–135. [PubMed: 16267821]
36. Tkalcevic J, et al. Impaired immunity and enhanced resistance to endotoxin in the absence of
neutrophil elastase and cathepsin G. Immunity. 2000; 12:201–210. [PubMed: 10714686]
37. Chen XS, Sheller JR, Johnson EN, Funk CD. Role of leukotrienes revealed by targeted disruption
of the 5-lipoxygenase gene. Nature. 1994; 372:179–182. [PubMed: 7969451]
38. Daley JM, Thomay AA, Connolly MD, Reichner JS, Albina JE. Use of Ly6G-specific monoclonal
antibody to deplete neutrophils in mice. Journal of leukocyte biology. 2008; 83:64–70. [PubMed:
17884993]
39. Bao Y, Cao X. Revisiting the protective and pathogenic roles of neutrophils: Ly-6G is key!
European journal of immunology. 2011; 41:2535–2538. [PubMed: 21952813]

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 June 17.

Wculek and Malanchi

Page 33

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Figure 1. Neutrophils infiltrate pre-metastatic lungs and favour metastasis

a, b, Analysis of wild-type (WT) or MMTV-PyMT+ mice. a, Lung neutrophils frequencies
determined by flow cytometry (n = 5 (wild-type), n = 4 (pre-metastatic lung), n = 4
(metastatic lung)). Met., metastatic. b, Lung neutrophils or cancer cells determined by
histology staining for S100A9 or PyMT (brown). Scale bars, 100 μm. Magnifications in
inserts. c, Haematoxylin & eosin (H&E)-stained neutrophil. Scale bar, 5 μm. d, Lung
neutrophil quantification by flow cytometry (n = 5 (wild-type), n = 4 (PyMT+ Gcsf+/+), n =
7 (PyMT+ Gcsf−/−)). e, f, Spontaneous metastasis of MMTV-PyMT+ Gcsf+/+ (n = 13) or

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 June 17.

Wculek and Malanchi

Page 34

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

MMTV-PyMT+ Gcsf−/− (n = 24) (e) and MMTV-PyMT+ control (n = 14) or MMTVPyMT+Ela2-Cre-DTA+ (n = 6) mice (f). g, Representative H&E-stained sections of lung.
Scale bar, 500 μm. h, Experimental setup for neutrophil depletion. i, Flow cytometric lung
neutrophil quantification (n = 4 (tumour-free), n = 12 (IgG tumour), n = 11 (Ly6G tumour)).
j, k, Spontaneous (n = 8 per group) (j) and experimental metastasis (n = 12 per group) (k).
Lin, CD45 CD31 TER119. l, Histological GFP-stained lung sections including close-up on
spontaneous (arrow) and experimental metastases (brown). Scale bar, 500μm. Statistical
analysis by two-sided t-test. Data are represented as mean ± standard error of the mean
(s.e.m.). *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001.

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 June 17.

Wculek and Malanchi

Page 35

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Figure 2. Neutrophil-derived signals promote tumorigenicity and increase the metastatic cell
sub-pool

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

a, b, Images and quantification (technical replicate n = 14 (control), n = 9 (LuN) of
biological triplicates) of primary MMTV-PyMT spheres in indicated medium. SFI, sphere
formation index. Scale bar, 10μm. c–f, Medium pre-treated luciferase+MMTV-PyMT cells
(c) grafted onto the mammary gland (d) or intravenously injected (e, f) into Rag1-null mice.
Lung metastases quantified by histological sectioning (n = 5 (control), n = 4 (LuN)). f,
Representative bioluminescence signal. g, Experimental setup. h, i, Flow cytometric
quantification of MICs in lungs of LuN-treated (n = 3 (PyMT control), n = 4 (PyMT+LuN))
(h) or neutrophil-treated mice (n = 3 (PyMT control) n = 4 (PyMT+neutrophils)) (i). j,
Representation of cell heterogeneity change. Statistical analysis by two-sided t-test (b),
Mann–Whitney test (e) and one representative experiment of two analysed by analysis of
variance (ANOVA) (h, i). Data are represented as mean ± s.e.m. *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 June 17.

Wculek and Malanchi

Page 36

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Figure 3. LTs enrich for MICs and tumorigenicity

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

a, b, Enzyme immunoassay detecting LTB4 (n = 4 per group) (a) or LTC/D/E4 (n = 2 per
group) (b). c, Overview of LTs and LTRs. d, e, Flow cytometric quantification of BLT2+ (n
= 4 tumours) (d) and CysLT2+ cells (n = 2 tumours) (e) among indicated sub-pools. f–h,
Representation of LT treatment (f): frequency of MICs (n = 8 per group) (g); and
experimental lung metastasis (n = 6 per group) with representative images of GFP+ colonies.
Scale bar, 3 mm. Lin, CD45 CD31 TER119. i, Western blot of ERK1/2 phosphorylation and
total ERK1/2 levels of LTB4- or LTC/D/E4-treated cells for indicated minutes. Loading
control: α -vinculin. j–k, 5-Bromodeoxyuridine (BrdU) incorporation comparing LT-treated
MICs with non-MICs (n = 3 (non-MICs), n = 4 (MICs)) (j) or MICs treated with LTs and/or
PD0325901 MEK inhibitor (MEKi; n = 3 per group) (k) DMSO, dimethylsulfoxide treated;
EtOH, ethanol treated. Statistical analysis by two-sided t-test (a, d, h, j, k) and one-sample ttest (g). Data are represented as mean ± s.e.m. NS, not significant. *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01.
Blot source data are in Supplementary Fig. 1.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 June 17.

Wculek and Malanchi

Page 37

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Figure 4. Alox5 inhibition decreases lung metastasis initiation

a, b, Alox5-null bone marrow (BM) chimaera experimental setup (a) and spontaneous
metastasis (n = 6 (wild-type bone marrow), n = 9 (Alox5−/− bone marrow)) (b). WT, wildtype. c, Surface metastases of medium pre-treated cancer cells (n = 10 (control), n = 9 (LuN
wild-type), n = 5 (LuN Alox5ko), n = 3 (LuN-Zil)). d, Experimental setup for Zil treatment.
e–k, Spontaneous (e) and experimental (f, i, k) metastasis of MMTVPyMT cells (n = 9
(PyMT DMSO), n = 7 (PyMT Zil)) (e–g), 4T1 cells (n = 5 (4T1 DMSO), n = 7 (4T1 Zil))
(h, i) or MDA-MB-231 cells (n = 6 (MDA231 DMSO), n = 5 (MDA231 Zil)) (j, k). Lin,

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 June 17.

Wculek and Malanchi

Page 38

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

CD45 CD31 TER119. Representative histological lung sections GFP stained with close-up
on spontaneous (arrows) and experimental metastases (brown) (g) or H&E stained (h, k).
Scale bars, 500μm. l–o, BLT2 (l, m) or CysLT2 (n, o) staining (brown) of human breast
cancer and matched lymph node (LN) metastases (n ≥ 30 per group). Quantification of
staining intensity and frequency (l, n) and representative images (m, o). Scale bar, 50μm.
Statistical analysis by two-sided t-test (b, e, f, i), Mann–Whitney test (c) and one-sided t-test
(k). Data are represented as mean ± s.e.m. NS, not significant, *P < 0.05, ***P < 0.001.

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 June 17.

