Cancer
Research

Review

Considerations for the Clinical Application of Chimeric
Antigen Receptor T Cells: Observations from a Recombinant
DNA Advisory Committee Symposium Held June 15, 2010
Hildegund C.J. Ertl1, John Zaia3, Steven A. Rosenberg4, Carl H. June2, Gianpietro Dotti7, Jeffrey Kahn9,
Laurence J.N. Cooper8, Jacqueline Corrigan-Curay5, and Scott E. Strome6

Abstract
T cells that are genetically modified to express single-chain chimeric antigen receptors (CAR) have shown
promise in early cancer immunotherapy clinical trials. Unfortunately, 2 recent deaths in cancer patients treated
with CAR T cells have created some uncertainty on how to best mitigate patient risk, while continuing to
advance this very promising therapeutic avenue. In order to address these concerns, the Recombinant DNA
Advisory Committee (RAC) held a symposium, the objectives of which were to first review the reported
treatment-associated toxicities and, second, to discuss methods for improving safety and efficacy. This report
highlights the issues raised as part of this discussion, with a specific focus on protocols infusing CAR T cells.
Because this was not a consensus conference, the opinions described should not be construed to represent those
of any individual RAC member, the RAC as a body, conference participants, the National Institutes of Health, or
the U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Cancer Res; 71(9); 3175–81. 2011 AACR.

Evolution of Chimeric Antigen Receptors
Following appropriate preconditioning regimens that
deplete circulating lymphocytes, the adoptive transfer of
tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes (TIL) into patients with
metastatic melanoma leads to objective clinical responses
in select individuals (Supplementary references S1 and S2).
Building on this approach, recent studies suggest that
autologous T cells, genetically engineered to express
tumor-associated antigen (TAA)–specific T-cell receptors
(TCR), can replace TILs in certain clinical settings (1).
Importantly, tumor regressions are observed even under
conditions of widely metastatic and bulky disease and in
patients who have failed both prior surgical extirpation and
Authors' Affiliations: 1Wistar Institute and 2University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania; 3Beckman Research Institute, City of Hope,
Duarte, California; 4National Cancer Institute and 5Office of Biotechnology
Activities, Office of the Director, NIH, Bethesda, Maryland; and 6Department of Otorhinolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, University of Maryland, Baltimore, Maryland; 7Center for Cell and Gene Therapy, Baylor
College of Medicine and 8Division of Pediatrics, MD Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, Texas; and 9Center for Bioethics, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota
Note: Supplementary data for this article are available at Cancer Research
Online (http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/).
Corresponding Author: Scott E. Strome, Department of Otorhinolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, University of Maryland, 16 South Eutaw
Street, Suite 500, Baltimore, MD, 21201. Phone: 410–328-6467; Fax: 410–
328-6192 E-mail: sstrome@smail.umaryland.edu
doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-10-4035
2011 American Association for Cancer Research.

medical therapy. Unfortunately, the potential for widespread use of adoptive transfer strategies using TILs or
T cells with recombinant TCRs is limited (Supplementary
reference S3).
In order to overcome the historic problems associated
with the cellular targeting of human leukocyte antigen
(HLA)–restricted TAA, Eshhar and colleagues developed a
strategy to redirect T-cell specificity using chimeric antigen
receptors (CAR) or T bodies (Fig. 1; ref. 2). First-generation
vectors for the production of CAR T cells contain the heavy
and light chain immunoglobulin (Ig) variable regions, fused
as a single chain to the ", g, or z signaling sequences of the
TCR or the signaling region of the Fcg domain (3–8). T cells
expressing such first-generation CARs recognize surface
TAAs, independent of HLA restriction, but cannot recognize
intracellular TAAs (Table 1). Early clinical experiences with
first-generation CAR T cells showed that (i) the survival of
adoptively transferred CAR T cells was limited in cancer
patients and (ii) few objective antitumor responses were
observed (8–10).
To enhance survival and/or increase proliferation of
transferred CAR T cells, investigators have incorporated signaling moieties from costimulatory molecules including CD28
(B7–1), CD134 (OX40), and CD137 (4–1BB), alone (second
generation) or in sequence (third generation; refs. 11–15). A
recent study comparing simultaneously infused CD19-specific
CAR T cells with or without the CD28 signaling sequence
indeed shows improved survival of CD28-modified cells (16).
Additionally, combining CD28 with 4–1BB signaling
sequences further promotes engraftment of CAR T cells (17,

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 5, 2017. © 2011 American Association for Cancer
Research.

3175

Ertl et al.

B

A

C

Figure 1. Evolution of CAR T-cell design. A, initial CAR T cells were composed of an antigen-specific scFv linked to the TCR z chain. These CARs
were expressed in nonclonal T-cell populations with diverse specificities of their endogenous TCRs. B, in subsequent strategies, investigators have
attempted to prolong gene-modified T-cell survival by expressing first-generation CARs in T cells whose endogenous TCRs recognize specific antigens of
persisting viruses, such as Epstein Barr virus (EBV), allowing for the induction of the costimulatory cascade upon cognate TCR ligation. C, because of difficulty
isolating TAA-specific T cells from most types of solid tumors, other investigators have used a modified CAR design in which the 4–1BB/CD28 intracellular
signaling domains are linked to the transmembrane region. In these CARs, scFv antigen recognition results in T-cell activation through the TCR z chain, leading
to prolonged survival secondary to appropriate costimulation. VH, heavy variable chain; VL, light variable chain.

18). As an alternative to incorporating costimulatory moieties
into the vector, some investigators express first-generation
CARs in T cells specific to endogenous viral antigens, for
example, Epstein Barr virus (EBV). In this setting, antigen

recognition by the CAR provides TCR z signaling, whereas
recognition of processed EBV peptides in the context of
appropriate HLA molecules by the physiologic ab TCR allows
for intrinsic costimulation (19).

Table 1. Limitations of gene-modified T cells by antigen recognition moiety
Limitations

Susceptible to loss and/or downregulation of HLA expression on tumor cells
Susceptible to dysfunction of the tumor cell antigen-processing machinery
Cell surface target antigen restriction
Potential for vector recombination with endogenous TCR

3176

Cancer Res; 71(9) May 1, 2011

Gene-modified T-cell type
ab TCR

CAR

þ
þ
—
þ

—
—
þ
—

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 5, 2017. © 2011 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Clinical Application of CAR T Cells

Table 2. Principles applicable to all trials in which CAR T cells are used
*

*
*
*
*

*

A clear plan for monitoring should be in place and at a minimum include provision for collection of the following:
 Physiologic data
 Cytokines, e.g., IFN-g, interleukin-6, TNF-a, and others
 Plasma and lymphocytes for cryopreservation
 Routine lab results from sera and urine
 Target organ-specific lab results as indicated
Subject screening should be provided for adequate pulmonary and cardiac function.
Early reporting of SAEs and clinical outcomes is encouraged.
Protocols that use retroviral or lentiviral vectors should monitor for the possibility of insertional mutagenesis.a
The informed consent should include the following:
 Discussion of the risk of insertional mutagenesis
 The term "gene transfer" as opposed to "gene therapy" to avoid the potential for therapeutic misconception
Special considerations requiring extra care:
 Effects of CAR expression on non–T-cell populations, e.g., natural killer cells.
 Effects of CAR expression on specific T-cell subsets, e.g., CD8þ T cells vs. all T cells or subsets of T cells, e.g., memory
vs. effector T cells.
 Novel vectors used to improve transduction efficiency
 New cytokine support regimens
 New preconditioning regimens

a

The potential for malignancy due to insertion mutagenesis is unknown. Although it has not been seen in the CAR trials to date, the
long-term follow-up is small. An analysis by the NIH Office of Biotechnology Activities in 2007 of adverse events in trials using
retroviral and lentiviral vectors in terminally differentiated cells identified 12 malignancies, none of which could be directly attributed to
the vector. (Supplementary references S16 and S17).

Focus Points for Future Consideration
Reported serious adverse events following CAR T-cell
transfer
At least 40 trials using CAR T cells for treatment of cancer
have been registered with the NIH Office of Biotechnology
Activities (OBA) and undergone NIH Recombinant DNA
Advisory Committee (RAC) review, and at least 120 subjects
have been dosed across all trials (Supplementary Table S1; ref.
20). Overall, most serious adverse events (SAE) that were
viewed as possibly related to transfer of CAR T cells have
been mild and self-limited and occurred shortly after infusion
(Supplementary Table S2). Unfortunately, 2 patients died
shortly after adoptive transfer of CAR T cells (21, 22).
Following RAC review of the death in the HER2–CAR T-cell
trial at its December 2009 meeting (available at http://oba.od.
nih.gov/rdna_rac/rac_past_meetings_2000.html), the Committee recommended holding a safety symposium to review
clinical trials using CAR T cells and then to formulate a report
both to facilitate subsequent RAC and Institutional Biosafety
Committee reviews of these trials and to assist investigators in
designing future studies. A planning committee, consisting of
RAC members, leading investigators in this field, and OBA staff,
identified key components of these trials on the basis of their
potential impact on patient safety and their role in therapy.
These issues were discussed in a panel format and are summarized in section 6 below. A paradigm for considering how to
incorporate these considerations into clinical trial design is
provided in Table 2 and Supplementary Tables S3–S5.

www.aacrjournals.org

Points to Consider in the Design and
Implementation of Clinical Trials Using CAR
T Cells

1. Unwanted on-target effects of CAR T cells
Recognition of antigen expressed on nontumor cells by CAR
T cells is emerging as the major risk factor of CAR T-cell
transfer. Such recognition may become manifest as (i)
immediate toxicity and (ii) late or sustained toxicity resulting
from long-term depletion of cells with important homeostatic
functions.
A. Mitigating the potential for early toxicity. A feared
complication after infusion of CAR T cells is their massive
activation leading to the research participant's death. This
complication is especially of concern with CARs directed
against untested and/or endogenously prevalent TAAs,
because T cells with high-avidity receptors can respond to
cells that express their targets at levels that are currently too
low for detection by conventional means. One approach to
limit such toxicity is an interpatient (and sometimes intrapatient) dose-escalation scheme. Alternatively, one could
conduct the initial dose escalation with first-generation
CAR T cells without conditioning or cytokine supplementation, under the expectation that stimulation of these adoptively transferred T cells may be suboptimal, although this is
not yet proven. Once the first generation CAR T cells are

Cancer Res; 71(9) May 1, 2011

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 5, 2017. © 2011 American Association for Cancer
Research.

3177

Ertl et al.

shown to be safe, second-, or perhaps third-generation CAR
T cells, with a potential for more pronounced responses and
prolonged persistence, could be explored in combination with
supplementary treatments (23). An important caveat to this
statement is that it is currently unclear whether lack of
toxicity using first generation CAR T cells will translate into
a similar safety profile for second or third generation CAR
T cells combined with lymphodepletion and/or cytokine
support. As an alternative approach, if second or third generation CARs targeting a new antigen are evaluated without
previous experience with a first generation CAR, a very conservative dose-escalation strategy should be adopted (see
section 6 below).
The question of whether the coexpression of conditional
suicide genes might safeguard against some of the potential
side effects of nontumor cell recognition by CAR T cells was
discussed (24). As exemplified by the fatal SAE using HER2–
CAR T cells, the CAR T cells may act within minutes after
engagement of their target antigen, and symptoms are not
expected until significant damage has occurred. Therefore,
inclusion of a suicide gene, whose benefit will necessarily take
time, was deemed to have limited potential for preventing
acute toxicity, although it may have utility in modulating late
toxicities.
A third approach to reduce risks of immediate toxicity is
splitting the T-cell dose over 2 or more days, as is being tested
in recipients of CD19-specific T cells (21). Using this scheme, it
would be desirable to monitor cytokines or chemokines in the
serum as potential indicators for toxicity after the first of the
split doses. A fourth approach using a very conservative doseescalation strategy is discussed in section 6 below. Importantly, in all trials, preclinical studies should carefully test for
expression of the TCR's target antigen in healthy tissues.
Furthermore, the use of CAR T cells against antigens that
are widely expressed on nontumor cells essential for important physiologic functions should, to the extent feasible, not be
chosen as targets, unless preclinical data show convincingly
that their expression is at low enough levels that on-target
toxicity is unlikely to occur.
B. Mitigating the potential for late toxicity. Another risk
of CAR T cells is the long-term depletion of cells that are
important for normal human function. For example, CAR
T cells for treatment of B-cell malignancies have targeted
CD19 and CD20, markers expressed on normal B cells (25).
Treatment with CAR T cells directed against either of these
antigens has the potential to deplete the patients’ B cells (26).
Furthermore, unlike the a-CD20 monoclonal antibody, rituximab, which has a defined half-life, these CAR T cells may
potentially survive and function for the life of the patient. The
lack of CD19 or CD20 expression on most plasma cells allows
the maintenance of physiologic antibody levels in the majority
of patients, following depletion of CD19þ or CD20þ cells
(Supplementary reference S4). In addition, it is expected that
B cells would rapidly be replaced from lymphoid progenitors
once the CAR T cells die or become functionally impaired.
Finally, even under conditions that would allow for long-term
persistence of functioning CD19- or CD20-specific CAR T cells,

3178

Cancer Res; 71(9) May 1, 2011

resulting in continuous depletion of B cells, this could be
managed by Ig transfer and would thus be preferable to a fatal
cancer.
A related concern is the potential for CAR T cells to
negatively impact organ function due to low levels of target
antigen expression in a nontumor site, for example, VEGF
receptor 2 (VEGFR2)–specific CARs targeting the tumor vasculature (Supplementary references S5 and S6). VEGFR2 is
expressed on endothelial cells during physiologic angiogenesis, vasculogenesis, arteriogenesis, and lymphangiogenesis
and is needed for processes such as wound healing and
embryogenesis (Supplementary reference S7). As such,
VEGFR2-specific persisting CAR T cells could interfere with
formation of indispensable vasculature. Although there is no
universal strategy for mitigating these late CAR T-cell–associated toxicities, the resultant conditions could potentially be
managed medically. Alternatively, risks of long-term toxicity
could be mitigated by the insertion of suicide genes into the
CAR T cells.
2. Effects of costimulatory signaling
Results to date show that, whereas target cell lysis by first
generation CAR T cells is independent of costimulatory signaling, their proliferation, production of cytokines, and upregulation of other effector cell molecules depend on and/or are
improved by costimulation (27). Furthermore, on the basis
of what is understood about natural functions of CD28 and
4–1BB in vivo, it is anticipated that CAR T cells bearing these
domains might be more resistant to activation-induced cell
death (Supplementary reference S8). Therefore, the majority of
participants concluded that the incorporation of CD28 and/or
4–1BB into CAR constructs offers an important potential for
therapeutic benefit. Evaluations of other cosignaling moieties,
which may enhance the proliferation and/or survival of CAR
T cells, are appropriate. In addition to modifying the CAR to
improve T-cell engraftment, it may also be possible to a priori
identify T-cell subpopulations with the capacity for sustained
proliferation. In fact, there is evidence that the starting
population of T cells used for CAR modification may affect
their ability to survive and expand (Supplementary reference
S9). For example, in nonhuman primates, effector CD8þ T cells
generated ex vivo from central rather than effector memory
populations enjoy enhanced survival following adoptive transfer (Supplementary reference S10). Because the ratios of
different T-cell subsets vary between patients, selective use
of T-cell subsets prior to genetic manipulation may provide a
more discriminating path to predict the long-term outcome of
CAR T-cell transfer. Finally, clinical experience with the
expression of CARs in non–T-cell populations, for example,
natural killer cells, is limited (28). Therefore, special care must
be taken with CAR use in T-cell subsets and non–T-cell
lymphocyte populations.
3. Systemic conditioning
Adoptive transfer of CAR T cells can be further modified by
auxiliary therapies, such as partial or complete myeloablation,
to improve preservation of the transferred T-cell populations.
The rationale behind lymphodepletion prior to T-cell infusion

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 5, 2017. © 2011 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Clinical Application of CAR T Cells

is multifactorial and includes, but is not limited to, the
elimination of "cytokine sinks," creation of space for the
expansion of adoptively transferred cells, and removal of
suppressor cell populations. In fact, depletion of lymphocytes
in melanoma patients infused with ex vivo expanded TILs is
requisite for treatment efficacy, and recent studies suggest a
correlation between the degree of lymphocyte depletion and
objective response rates (Supplementary reference S11).
Despite the recognized risks of myelosuppression, the majority of the RAC meeting participants felt that administration of
CAR T cells that do not carry an endogenous TCR to a
persisting virus is unlikely to result in significant clinical
benefit without prior conditioning.
4. Cytokine supplements
Recombinant soluble cytokines such as interleukin-2 (IL-2)
are administered upon CAR T-cell transfer, with the expectation that they will promote the expansion and survival of
transferred cells. If, and to what degree, cytokines may exacerbate the potential toxicity of second- or third-generation
CAR T cells is uncertain. It is also unclear if second- and
third-generation CAR T cells need to be supplemented with
IL-2 either at all or at the high and potentially toxic doses
used for TIL transfer (Supplementary reference S12). For
the initial evaluation of CAR T cells to novel targets,
dosing without addition of cytokines or with injection of
low to moderate amounts of cytokines may be prudent and
would facilitate differentiation of SAEs induced by CAR T
cells alone from those caused by the potential synergy
between these drugs. Furthermore, the design of later-phase
studies using second- and third-generation CAR T cells
should consider incorporating treatment arms with and
without cytokine support. Ongoing studies exploring the
use of CAR T cells genetically modified to secrete
cytokines such as IL-15 or IL-12 may eliminate the need
for systemic cytokine administration (29). If, and to what
degree, this approach will improve the potential benefit of
CAR T cells or instead pose additional risks is currently
unknown.
5. Chimeric antigen receptors expressed in T cells
targeting persisting viruses
Some groups have combined the advantages of CAR
T cells with those of traditional antigen-specific T cells
(Supplementary reference S13). Specifically, T cells to persisting viruses such as EBV have been enriched in vitro and
then genetically modified by insertion of a transgene
encoding a TAA-specific CAR. In a neuroblastoma trial,
11 individuals were treated simultaneously with EBV–
cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTL) expressing a GD2-specific
first-generation CAR and activated T lymphocytes expressing the same CAR. Only CAR EBV-CTLs showed significant
in vivo persistence, and 4 of 8 patients with evaluable
tumors had evidence of tumor necrosis or regressions,
including a sustained complete remission. Lymphodepletion did not improve CAR T-cell persistence or clinical
outcome (19). Potential deleterious effects due to virusspecific CAR T cells without a costimulatory endodomain

www.aacrjournals.org

are anticipated to be similar to those of other T cells
expressing second- or third-generation CARs.
6. Starting dose of CAR T cells in phase I trials
Phase I trials are primarily designed to assess safety and
feasibility rather than efficacy; biological activity and proof of
concept are usually secondary aims. Phase I trials for CAR
T cells typically start with reduced cell doses, which are then
gradually escalated. The starting dose should be adjusted
depending on the type of CAR; T cells with second- or
third-generation CARs should start at a lower dose than those
with a first-generation CAR. Similarly, transfer of CAR T cells
into partially preconditioned patients should commence at a
lower dose than transfer into nonmyeloablated patients.
Although one would expect that immediate toxicity owing
to transfer of CAR T cells may directly correlate with numbers
of injected cells, late adverse events may be independent of the
injected dose due to construct-dependent dynamic changes in
cell numbers.
Providing reliable guidelines for starting doses of CAR
T cells is currently not possible. To date, clinical trials have
used a fairly wide range of starting doses; some investigators
dosed according to weight, others according to body surface
area, and still others used flat dosing schedules (Supplementary Table S1). The use of unadjusted dosing should be
avoided, and a more uniform dosing scheme, such as that
based on cells/kg, should be considered. An open question is
whether cells/kg should be based on an ideal body weight
or actual weight, given that weight increases due to
obesity may not justify an increase in dose (Supplementary
reference S14).
7. Ethical considerations
One of the ethical dilemmas facing investigators is the
requirement in early-phase research to design studies that
are safe, while simultaneously hoping to show biological
activity or possibly even benefit to the individual subject,
many of whom have few if any other therapeutic or even
palliative options. In response to the unexpected death in
the trial infusing HER2-specific CAR T cells, initial starting
doses in a number of trials administering HER2-specific CAR
T cells were lowered to 104 cells/m2. RAC members were in
general agreement that a lower starting dose of 104 cells/m2
would likely be safe but would be unlikely to have potential
benefit to the subject. Therefore, the risk-benefit calculus
was such that any benefit realized from the research would
most likely be a societal benefit, that is, an increase in
generalizable knowledge with minimized risk, but little
potential benefit for the patient subject. It will be a challenge
to design early-phase studies that appropriately balance
accurate disclosure of the risks and benefits posed by this
research and appropriate informed consent among a seriously ill patient-subject population with few therapeutic
options. Although the expectation of clinical benefit must be
discouraged in clinical trials, especially those at the earliest
stages of research, selecting a dose that would be relatively
safe but have potential biologic activity is an appropriate
goal. Whether the acceptable level of risk should be adjusted

Cancer Res; 71(9) May 1, 2011

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 5, 2017. © 2011 American Association for Cancer
Research.

3179

Ertl et al.

in relation to the disease prognosis for a given patient cohort
remains a subject worthy of future debate.

Summary
CAR T cells have shown some benefit in cancer patients (19,
26, 30). The major challenge for achieving therapeutic benefit
by CAR T-cell transfer remains lack of sustained engraftment
and loss of T-cell functions. These hurdles may be overcome,
in part, by incorporation of costimulatory domains into CAR
constructs or by modifying EBV-specific T cells. Additional
studies are needed to assess the performance of EBV-specific
CAR T cells in cancer patients of diverse ages. Results to date
(excluding those based on EBV-specific T cells) suggest
that partial myeloablation is required for survival of CAR
T cells. Mechanisms that cause loss of transferred secondand third-generation CAR T cells remain poorly understood
and may relate to the differentiation status of the transduced
T-cell subsets. It is unclear if, and at what doses, cytokines
are needed to improve the clinical outcome of second- and
third-generation CAR T cells. Until this issue is clarified, the
upfront use of high doses of systemic cytokines should be
carefully justified.
The major immediate risk factor for CAR T cells remains
their activity against nontumor cells, rather than genotoxi-

city from the gene transfer event. Long-term risk factors,
such as sustained depletion of normal cell populations or
exacerbated expansion of CAR T cells, cannot yet be
assessed. Although the risk of insertional mutagenesis
remains a concern, this has neither been observed clinically
nor in recent preclinical studies that have attempted to
recreate insertional mutagenesis (Supplementary reference
S15). However, as the field moves toward the use of less
differentiated CAR T cells, the risk of insertional mutagenesis may increase.
Disclosure of Potential Conflicts of Interest
Dr. Strome is the cofounder and a major stockholder in Gliknik, Inc., a
biotechnology company. He also receives royalties through the Mayo Clinic
College of Medicine for the licensure of IP relating to 4–1BB (CD137) and B7-H1
(PD-L1).

Acknowledgments
The authors acknowledge the following staff from the Office of Biotechnology Activities: Dr. R. Jambou, Dr. E. Rosenthal, Dr. M. O’Reilly, Ms. M. Montgomery, and Ms. L. Gargiulo, for their contributions in bringing together this
symposium and in assembling the data on trials and adverse events. The authors
also thank Dr. Richard Junghans for helpful discussions.
Received December 17, 2010; revised January 14, 2011; accepted January 18,
2011; published online April 29, 2011.

References
1.

Morgan RA, Dudley ME, Wunderlich JR, Hughes MS, Yang JC, Sherry
RM, et al. Cancer regression in patients after transfer of genetically
engineered lymphocytes. Science 2006;314:126–9.
2. Eshhar Z, Waks T, Gross G, Schindler DG. Specific activation and
targeting of cytotoxic lymphocytes through chimeric single chains
consisting of antibody-binding domains and the gamma or zeta
subunits of the immunoglobulin and T-cell receptors. Proc Natl Acad
Sci U S A 1993;90:720–4.
3. Hwu P, Shafer GE, Treisman J, Schindler DG, Gross G, Cowherd R,
et al. Lysis of ovarian cancer cells by human lymphocytes redirected
with a chimeric gene composed of an antibody variable region and the
Fc receptor gamma chain. J Exp Med 1993;178:361–6.
4. Stancovski I, Schindler DG, Waks T, Yarden Y, Sela M, Eshhar Z.
Targeting of T lymphocytes to Neu/HER2-expressing cells using
chimeric single chain Fv receptors. J Immunol 1993;151:6577–82.
5. Gross G, Waks T, Eshhar Z. Expression of immunoglobulinT-cell receptor chimeric molecules as functional receptors with
antibody-type specificity. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1989;86:
10024–8.
6. Moritz D, Wels W, Mattern J, Groner B. Cytotoxic T lymphocytes with
a grafted recognition specificity for ERBB2-expressing tumor cells.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1994;91:4318–22.
7. Pinthus JH, Waks T, Kaufman-Francis K, Schindler DG, Harmelin A,
Kanety H, et al. Immuno-gene therapy of established prostate tumors
using chimeric receptor-redirected human lymphocytes. Cancer Res
2003;63:2470–6.
8. Kershaw MH, Westwood JA, Parker LL, Wang G, Eshhar Z, Mavroukakis SA, et al. A phase I study on adoptive immunotherapy using
gene-modified T cells for ovarian cancer. Clin Cancer Res 2006;12:
6106–15.
9. Park JR, Digiusto DL, Slovak M, Wright C, Naranjo A, Wagner J, et al.
Adoptive transfer of chimeric antigen receptor re-directed cytolytic T
lymphocyte clones in patients with neuroblastoma. Mol Ther 2007;
15:825–33.
10. Lamers CHJ, Sleijfer S, Vulto AG, Kruit WHJ, Kliffen M, Debets R, et al.
Treatment of metastatic renal cell carcinoma with autologous T-

3180

Cancer Res; 71(9) May 1, 2011

11.

12.

13.

14.

15.

16.

17.

18.

19.

lymphocytes genetically retargeted against carbonic anhydrase IX:
first clinical experience. J Clin Oncol 2006;24:e20–2.
Zhao Y, Wang QJ, Yang S, Kochenderfer JN, Zheng Z, Zhong X, et al.
A herceptin-based chimeric antigen receptor with modified signaling
domains leads to enhanced survival of transduced T lymphocytes and
antitumor activity. J Immunol 2009;183:5563–74.
Murphy A, Westwood JA, Teng MWL, Moeller M, Darcy PK, Kershaw
MH. Gene modification strategies to induce tumor immunity. Immunity
2005;22:403–14.
Finney HM, Akbar AN, Lawson ADG. Activation of resting human
primary T cells with chimeric receptors: costimulation from CD28,
inducible costimulator, CD134, and CD137 in series with signals from
the TCR zeta chain. J Immunol 2004;172:104–13.
re I, Sadelain M. Human TMaher J, Brentjens RJ, Gunset G, Rivie
lymphocyte cytotoxicity and proliferation directed by a single chimeric
TCRzeta /CD28 receptor. Nat Biotechnol 2002;20:70–5.
Friedmann-Morvinski D, Bendavid A, Waks T, Schindler D, Eshhar Z.
Redirected primary T cells harboring a chimeric receptor require
costimulation for their antigen-specific activation. Blood 2005;105:
3087–93.
Savoldo B, Ramos C, Bollard C, Liu E, Mims M, Keating M, et al.
Simultaneous comparison of T cells expressing 1st or 2nd
generation CARs in human subjects with B-cell malignancies: contribution of costimulatory endodomains. Abstract from the annual
meeting of the American Society of Gene and Cell Therapy;
2010. May 17–22; Washington DC.
Wang J, Jensen M, Lin Y, Sui X, Chen E, Lindgren CG, et al. Optimizing
adoptive polyclonal T cell immunotherapy of lymphomas, using a
chimeric T cell receptor possessing CD28 and CD137 costimulatory
domains. Hum Gene Ther 2007;18:712–25.
Carpenito C, Milone MC, Hassan R, Simonet JC, Lakhal M, Suhoski
MM, et al. Control of large, established tumor xenografts with genetically retargeted human T cells containing CD28 and CD137 domains.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2009;106:3360–5.
Pule MA, Savoldo B, Myers GD, Rossig C, Russell HV, Dotti G, et al.
Virus-specific T cells engineered to coexpress tumor-specific

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 5, 2017. © 2011 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Clinical Application of CAR T Cells

20.

21.

22.

23.
24.

25.
26.

receptors: persistence and antitumor activity in individuals with
neuroblastoma. Nat Med 2008;14:1264–70.
Jena B, Dotti G, Cooper LJN. Redirecting T-cell specificity by introducing a tumor-specific chimeric antigen receptor. Blood 2010;116:
1035–44.
Brentjens R, Yeh R, Bernal Y, Riviere I, Sadelain M. Treatment of
chronic lymphocytic leukemia with genetically targeted autologous T
cells: case report of an unforeseen adverse event in a phase I clinical
trial. Mol Ther 2010;18:666–8.
Morgan RA, Yang JC, Kitano M, Dudley ME, Laurencot CM, Rosenberg SA. Case report of a serious adverse event following the administration of T cells transduced with a chimeric antigen receptor
recognizing ERBB2. Mol Ther 2010;18:843–51.
Junghans RP. Strategy escalation: an emerging paradigm for safe
clinical development of T cell gene therapies. J Transl Med 2010;8:55.
 MA, Yotnda P, Dotti G, Vanin EF, Brenner MK, et al.
Straathof KC, Pule
An inducible caspase 9 safety switch for T-cell therapy. Blood
2005;105:4247–54.
Bryder D, Sigvardsson M. Shaping up a lineage—lessons from B
lymphopoesis. Curr Opin Immunol 2010;22:148–53.
Kochenderfer JN, Wilson WH, Janik JE, Dudley ME, Stetler-Stevenson M, Feldman SA. Eradication of B-lineage cells and regression of

www.aacrjournals.org

27.

28.

29.

30.

lymphoma in a patient treated with autologous T cells geneticallyengineered to recognize CD19. Blood 2010;116:4099–102.
Kowolik CM, Topp MS, Gonzalez S, Pfeiffer T, Olivares S, Gonzalez
N, et al. CD28 costimulation provided through a CD19-specific
chimeric antigen receptor enhances in vivo persistence and antitumor efficacy of adoptively transferred T cells. Cancer Res 2006;
66:10995–1004.
Altvater B, Landmeier S, Pscherer S, Temme J, Schweer K, Kailayangiri S, et al. 2B4 (CD244) signaling by recombinant antigenspecific chimeric receptors costimulates natural killer cell activation
to leukemia and neuroblastoma cells. Clin Cancer Res 2009;15:
4857–66.
Hoyos V, Savoldo B, Quintarelli C, Mahendravada A, Zhang M, Vera J,
et al. Engineering CD19-specific T lymphocytes with interleukin-15
and a suicide gene to enhance their anti-lymphoma/leukemia effects
and safety. Leukemia 2010;24:1160–70.
Brentjens RJ, Riviere I, Frattini M, Wang X, Taylor C, Olszewska M,
et al. Marked regression of adenopathy following infusion of autologous T cells genetically targeted to the CD19 antigen in a patient
with bulky CLL. Abstract from the annual meeting of the American
Society of Gene and Cell Therapy; 2010 May 17–22; Washington
DC.

Cancer Res; 71(9) May 1, 2011

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 5, 2017. © 2011 American Association for Cancer
Research.

3181

Cancer
Research

Correction

Correction: Online Publication Dates for Cancer
Research May 1, 2011 Articles
The 4 articles noted below, which were published in the May 1, 2011 issue of Cancer
Research, were published with incorrect online publication dates. Corrected versions
of these articles have been published online.
Ertl HCJ, Zaia J, Rosenberg SA, June CH, Dotti G, Kahn J, et al. Considerations for the
clinical application of chimeric antigen receptor T cells: observations from a Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee symposium held June 15, 2010. Cancer Res
2011;71:3175–81.
Ren N, Wu J-C, Dong Q-Z, Sun H-J, Jia H-L, Li G-C, et al. Association of specific
genotypes in metastatic suppressor HTPAP with tumor metastasis and clinical
prognosis in hepatocellular carcinoma. Cancer Res 2011;71:3278–86.
Jeon H-M, Sohn Y-W, Oh S-Y, Kim S-H, Beck S, Kim S, et al. ID4 imparts chemoresistance and cancer stemness to glioma cells by derepressing miR-9*–mediated
suppression of SOX2. Cancer Res 2011;71:3410–21.
Calvo V, Beato M. BRCA1 counteracts progesterone action by ubiquitination leading
to progesterone receptor degradation and epigenetic silencing of target promoters.
Cancer Res 2011;71:3422–31.
Also, the OnlineFirst date is missing from the following article; it was published
OnlineFirst on March 17, 2011.
Lou Y, McDonald PC, Oloumi A, Chia S, Ostlund C, Ahmadi A, et al. Targeting tumor
hypoxia: suppression of breast tumor growth and metastasis by novel carbonic
anhydrase IX inhibitors. Cancer Res 2011;71:3364–76.

Published OnlineFirst May 31, 2011.
Ó2011 American Association for Cancer Research.
doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-11-1396

www.aacrjournals.org

4325

Considerations for the Clinical Application of Chimeric
Antigen Receptor T Cells: Observations from a Recombinant
DNA Advisory Committee Symposium Held June 15, 2010
Hildegund C.J. Ertl, John Zaia, Steven A. Rosenberg, et al.
Cancer Res 2011;71:3175-3181.

Updated version
Supplementary
Material

Cited articles
Citing articles

E-mail alerts
Reprints and
Subscriptions
Permissions

Access the most recent version of this article at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/71/9/3175
Access the most recent supplemental material at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/suppl/2011/04/22/71.9.3175.DC1

This article cites 28 articles, 18 of which you can access for free at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/71/9/3175.full#ref-list-1
This article has been cited by 6 HighWire-hosted articles. Access the articles at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/71/9/3175.full#related-urls

Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal.
To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications
Department at pubs@aacr.org.
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications
Department at permissions@aacr.org.

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 5, 2017. © 2011 American Association for Cancer
Research.

