Correspondence

Cytologically Proven Axillary
Lymph Node Metastases Are
Eradicated in Patients Receiving
Preoperative Chemotherapy with
Concurrent Trastuzumab for
HER2-Positive Breast Cancer
We read the original article by Dominici et al1 regarding the complete eradication of axillary lymph node metastases in patients with human epidermal growth factor
receptor 2 (HER2)-positive breast cancer who were
treated with trastuzumab-containing neoadjuvant chemotherapy. The exquisite sensitivity of breast cancer to
this treatment may generate an axillary lymph node
complete pathological response that, as a counterpart,
causes the stromal and vascular changes that give rise to
the appearance of lymphedema before surgery. A patient
aged 48 years was diagnosed with an invasive ductal carcinoma of the left breast with positive estrogen receptors, negative progesterone receptors, and positive
HER2 in clinical stage IIIB (T4bN2M0). She was
treated with four 21-day cycles of doxorubicin at a dose
of 60 mg/m2 and cyclophosphamide at a dose of 600
mg/m2, both administered intravenously. After the
fourth cycle, the patient developed left arm lymphedema. Venous thrombosis was discounted by Doppler
ultrasound. The patient completed the neoadjuvant
treatment with four 21-day cycles of docetaxel at a dose
of 100 mg/m2 and trastuzumab at a dose of 6 mg/kg
(8-mg/kg loading dose), both administered intravenously. During this treatment, the clinical remission of
the mammary and axillary disease was maintained, and
the edema of the arm increased. The histopathological
result of modified radical mastectomy was the total
absence of tumor, and marked postchemotherapy
changes. During the axillary lymphadenectomy, only 3
lymphatic ganglia were recognized, all of which were
free from metastasis, with interstitial fibrosis and
lymphoid depletion. Also recognized were several foci of
fibrosis with a scarce lymphoid population, suggestive of
pre-existing lymphatic ganglia with changes produced by
the chemotherapy.
To the best of our knowledge, there are no descriptions in the literature of the appearance of lymphedema in
this context. The emergence of lymphedema before breast

Cancer

April 15, 2011

cancer surgery is a rare clinical situation.2 Neoadjuvant
chemotherapy results in a decrease in the number of ganglia isolated in the axillary lymphadenectomy, in comparison with patients who have not received neoadjuvant
therapy.3

REFERENCES
1. Dominici LS, Negron Gonzalez VM, Buzdar AU, et al. Cytologically proven axillary lymph node metastases are eradicated
in patients receiving preoperative chemotherapy with concurrent trastuzumab for HER2-positive breast cancer. Cancer.
2010;116:2884-2889.
2. Vignes S, Arrault M, Bonhomme S, Spielmann M. [Upper
limb lymphedema revealing breast cancer] [article in French].
Rev Med Interne. 2007;28:631-634.
3. Baslaim MM, Al Malik OA, Al-Sobhi SS, et al. Decreased axillary lymph node retrieval in patients after neoadjuvant
chemotherapy. Am J Surg. 2002;184:299-301.
Jose M. Baena-Canada, MD, PhD
Medical Oncology and Breast Unit
Puerta del Mar University Hospital
Cadiz, Spain

Sara Estalella, MD
Petra Rosado, MD
Medical Oncology Unit
Puerta del Mar University Hospital
Cadiz, Spain
DOI: 10.1002/cncr.25675, Published online: November 10, 2010 in
Wiley Online Library (wileyonlinelibrary.com)

Reply to Cytologically Proven
Axillary Lymph Node Metastases
Are Eradicated in Patients
Receiving Preoperative
Chemotherapy with Concurrent
Trastuzumab for HER2-Positive
Breast Cancer
We read with interest the case presented by Baena-Canada et al. Their patient was staged as having clinical N2
disease, which was presumably because of the presence of
matted axillary adenopathy. It is possible, therefore, that
lymphedema developed as a consequence of her disease
burden. These authors have suggested that her lymphedema may have developed as a result of therapy-induced
1783

Correspondence

fibrosis. The development of fibrosis of the lymphatics in
response to neoadjuvant chemotherapy has been hypothesized by other investigators to explain why fewer lymph
nodes are obtained at the time of axillary lymph node dissection after primary systemic therapy.1 This hypothesis
has recently been refuted by surgeons at the Mayo Clinic,
who reported that oncologically trained surgeons
obtained an equal number of lymph nodes at the time of
axillary lymph node dissection performed in patients who
received neoadjuvant chemotherapy as in patients undergoing upfront surgery.2
To our knowledge, there are no good data investigating the effects of neoadjuvant chemotherapy on axillary
lymphatic channels. At our institution, we treat a significant number of patients with neoadjuvant chemotherapy.
Only anecdotally have we identified a very few patients
who developed lymphedema prior to undergoing surgery.
The larger risk for developing lymphedema in this population arises from the need for axillary lymph node dissection and likely postoperative radiotherapy. We continue
to recommend preoperative systemic therapy as the preferred approach for patients such as the one presented by

1784

Baena-Canada et al, because it provides in vivo sensitivity
data for systemic therapy and important prognostic
information.

REFERENCES
1. Belanger J, Soucy G, Sideris L, et al. Neoadjuvant chemotherapy in invasive breast cancer results in a lower axillary lymph
node count. J Am Coll Surg. 2008;206:704-708.
2. Boughey JC, Donohue JH, Jakub JW, et al. Number of lymph
nodes identified at axillary dissection. Cancer. 2010;116: 33223329.

Laura S. Dominici, MD
Department of Surgical Oncology
Brigham and Women’s Hospital
Boston, Massachusetts

Elizabeth A. Mittendorf, MD
Henry M. Kuerer, MD, PhD
Department of Surgical Oncology
The University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center
Houston, Texas
DOI: 10.1002/cncr.25673, Published online: November 10, 2010 in
Wiley Online Library (wileyonlinelibrary.com)

Cancer

April 15, 2011

