Oncotarget, Vol. 7, No. 32

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Research Paper

Divergent in vitro/in vivo responses to drug treatments of
highly aggressive NIH-Ras cancer cells: a PET imaging and
metabolomics-mass-spectrometry study
Daniela Gaglio1,2,6,8, Silvia Valtorta1,2,3,4, Marilena Ripamonti1,2, Marcella Bonanomi2,
Chiara Damiani2, Sergio Todde5, Alfredo Simone Negri6, Francesca Sanvito7, Fabrizia
Mastroianni2, Antonella Di Campli8, Gabriele Turacchio8, Giuseppe Di Grigoli1,2,3,
Sara Belloli1,2,3, Alberto Luini8, Maria Carla Gilardi1,2, Anna Maria Colangelo2,9, Lilia
Alberghina2,9,*, Rosa Maria Moresco2,3,4,*
1

Institute of Molecular Bioimaging and Physiology, National Research Council (IBFM-CNR), Segrate, Italy

2

SYSBIO.IT, Centre of Systems Biology, Milano, Italy

3

Experimental Imaging Center, IRCCS San Raffaele Scientific Institute, Milan, Italy

4

Department of Medicine and Surgery, University of Milano-Bicocca, Monza, Italy

5

Tecnomed Foundation of University of Milano-Bicocca, Monza, Italy

6

Department of Agricultural and Environmental Sciences - Production, Landscape, Agroenergy University of Milan, Milan,
Italy

7

Mouse Histopathology Unit, Department of Pathology, IRCCS San Raffaele Scientific Institute, Milan, Italy

8

Institute of Protein Biochemistry, National Research Council, Naples, Italy

9

Department of Biotechnology and Biosciences, University of Milano-Bicocca, Milan, Italy

*

These authors have contributed equally to this work

Correspondence to: Daniela Gaglio, email: daniela.gaglio@ibfm.cnr.it
Rosa Maria Moresco, email: moresco.rosamaria@hsr.it
Keywords: tumor, metabolic rewiring, PET-imaging, metabolomics-mass-spectrometry, oncogenic-K-ras
Received: February 02, 2016     Accepted: June 17, 2016     Published: July 07, 2016

ABSTRACT
Oncogenic K-ras is capable to control tumor growth and progression by rewiring
cancer metabolism. In vitro NIH-Ras cells convert glucose to lactate and use glutamine
to sustain anabolic processes, but their in vivo environmental adaptation and multiple
metabolic pathways activation ability is poorly understood. Here, we show that NIHRas cancer cells and tumors are able to coordinate nutrient utilization to support
aggressive cell proliferation and survival. Using PET imaging and metabolomics-mass
spectrometry, we identified the activation of multiple metabolic pathways such as:
glycolysis, autophagy recycling mechanism, glutamine and serine/glycine metabolism,
both under physiological and under stress conditions. Finally, differential responses
between in vitro and in vivo systems emphasize the advantageous and uncontrolled
nature of the in vivo environment, which has a pivotal role in controlling the responses
to therapy.

hallmarks of cancer, stressing the fact that cellular
metabolism is substantially altered during oncogenesis and
tumor progression [1]. The enhanced glycolytic activity
and impaired oxidative phosphorylation (Warburg effect)
characterizing tumors have been known for several years
and represent the biological basis of the wide diffusion of
[18F]FDG PET in diagnostic oncology [2]. More recently, it
has been demonstrated that cancer cells can employ a large

INTRODUCTION
Decades of studies and advances in high throughput
techniques have identified the complex connection
between oncogenic signaling pathways, metabolic
reprogramming and increased nutrient uptake in cancer
cells. Recently, Hanahan and Weinberg have added a
state of “deregulated cellular energetics” to the original
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

52017

Oncotarget

investigation strategy, particularly for ras-driven tumors
that represent a strong therapeutic challenge.
Here, we used a well-characterized cellular model
to investigate the role of simultaneous multiple pathways
activation in NIH-Ras cells both in vitro and in vivo
xenografts nude mice model. In addition, we examined
metabolic changes in response to metabolic target drug
treatments.
To address these issues, we took advantage of
combined metabolomics (gas-chromatography-mass
spectrometry - GC/MS) and in vivo PET imaging ([18F]
FDG and [18F]FLT) approaches, which had the advantages
of: a) detailing, at molecular level and within the context
of environmental conditions, genetic regulation, altered
kinetic activity of enzymes and changes in metabolic
reactions [31, 32] and b) imaging macro-parameters
(glycolysis and cell proliferation), which represent the
end-stage of simultaneous activation or inhibition of
different metabolic processes and signaling.
This strategy allowed us to verify whether
information derived from PET studies had a sufficient
diagnostic power in describing lesion phenotypes
under different environmental conditions (in our case,
perturbation of glutamine metabolism) and to validate
targets for a theranostic approach of K-ras mutated cancer.
Our data indicated that gas-chromatography-mass
spectrometry and PET imaging techniques allowed
a complementary characterization of the NIH-Ras
tumor model. Specifically, in vitro NIH-Ras cells were
glutamine- and autophagy-dependent and inhibition of
both pathways led to cell death. In vivo, NIH-Ras tumors
maintained an aggressive phenotype, with high cell
proliferation and glucose uptake. Following administration
of inhibitors of autophagy and/or of glutaminase, tumors
engaged in multiple metabolic processes to overcome the
inhibition.

number of strategies to regulate cell homeostasis, which
depend on different genetic or environmental factors
(germline or somatic mutations, tissue vascularization,
ongoing treatments, nutrients availability, immune
system activity) [3–7]. In fact, activation of never-ending
metabolic rewiring strategies tunes cancer cells to the
continuous changes in environmental conditions, as it
occurs in living organisms, to sustain enhanced growth and
survival [8, 9]. Specifically, the metabolic rewiring shown
by cancer cells involves not only the Warburg effect with
enhanced glycolysis and high glutamine consumption, but
also elevated rates of lipid biosynthesis, maintenance of
redox homeostasis and limited levels of autophagy in the
first steps of oncogenesis [10–12]. Recent evidence has
shown that cancer cells can engage glutamine metabolism
enzymes, such as PEP-carboxykinase (PCK2) [13] or
pyruvate carboxylase (PC) [14], to develop metabolic
adaptation and promote enhanced cell growth when
even glucose is limited. In addition, they can activate
autophagy when glutamine is inhibited [15]. Furthermore,
metabolites, such as ATP, acetyl-CoA (AcCoA), reactive
oxygen species (ROS) and enzymes with key role in
metabolic regulation may act on different signaling
pathways controlling tumor growth [9, 16–19]. However,
the resulting effect of several cancer metabolic strategies
is an abnormal NAD(P)H/NAD(P) balance ratio, which
appears to promote glutamine utilization by reductive
carboxylation to sustain amino acids and lipids synthesis
and for ROS quenching [4, 10, 11, 20, 21].
Several findings indicated that mutations in
oncogenes like ras and myc control tumor growth and
spread by acting also on cell metabolism [22–25]. We
have recently demonstrated that NIH3T3 fibroblasts
harboring an oncogenic K-ras gene (NIH-Ras-G12V;
transformed) [26] are able to decouple glucose and
glutamine metabolism to support cancer cell growth [27].
In particular, using this simple tumor cell model, we
observed that K-ras mutation induced per se a metabolic
reprogramming that involved a decoupling of glucose
and glutamine metabolism and enabled the efficient
utilization of both carbon and nitrogen from glutamine for
biosynthetic processes. In addition, it was observed that
defects in autophagy were able to compromise survival
of cancer cells in nutrient starvation and block tumor
growth in allograft models [28, 29]. Moreover, it was
demonstrated that activating ras mutations or Ras-effector
pathways induced autophagy, which is essential for
starvation, survival and tumor growth [29]. Given these
in vitro results, oncogenic K-ras could drive metabolic
reprogramming to develop environmental adaptation and/
or resistance to drug treatments especially in vivo where
metabolic conditions are more advantageous. In fact,
experiments on cell lines cannot recapitulate the wide
heterogeneity of tumors that occurs in in vivo conditions
[30]. Therefore, targeting cancer metabolism through
both in vitro and in vivo studies represent an attractive
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

RESULTS
In vitro NIH-Ras cancer fibroblasts activate
multiple pathways to sustain enhanced
proliferation
It is well known that autophagy recycles intracellular
components into metabolic pathways to sustain demand
for growth and proliferation [33]. In accordance with
published data [24, 27–29], oncogenic K-ras could cause
multiple pathways activation, such as basal autophagy
combined with increased glutamine metabolism, in order
to sustain environmental adaptation and aggressive cell
proliferation in cancer cells in vivo.
To test the activation of basal autophagy mechanisms
in our cellular model, we performed bioimaging analyses
(Figure 1). Specifically, we found that NIH-Ras under
normal nutrient conditions (4mM glutamine -Gln- and
25mM glucose) showed both an increased number of
52018

Oncotarget

mitochondria within lysosomes (Figure 1A) and a higher
number of lysosomes, as indicated by the lysosomal
marker Lamp1 as compared to NIH3T3 (Figure 1B,
upper panels) consistent with an increase of autophagy
mechanism (Figure 1B, lower panels). These results were
confirmed by measurements of fluorescence intensity
(98.1 RSU measured in NIH-Ras, as compared to 64.18
RSU in NIH3T3) shown in Supplementary Figure S1A.

To further assess the role of basal autophagy in
tumor growth, we performed experiments in response
to glutamine starvation (0.5mM Gln) [24, 27].
Nutritional stress for 54h induced a remarkable increase
of autophagic processes only in transformed cells, as
revealed by the enhanced number of mitochondria within
lysosomes (Figure 1C) and by the lysosomial marker
Lamp1 (Figure 1D). Autophagy activation correlated

Figure 1: NIH-Ras cancer cells show autophagy activation to sustain enhanced cell proliferation. A, C. Morphological

analysis of NIH3T3 and NIH-Ras transformed cells by electron microscopy after 54h under normal growth conditions (4mM Gln) (A) or
nutrient deprivation (0.5mM Gln) (C); arrows indicate the mitochondria within lysosomes. B, D. Analysis of autophagy and lysosomes
organelles in NIH3T3 and NIH-Ras mouse fibroblasts cells under normal growth conditions (4mM Gln) (B) or nutrient deprivation (0.5mM
Gln; D) by fluorescence microscopy using Cyto-ID® Autophagy detection kit (green color) and immunostaining for Lamp1 (red color);
Hoechst was used for nuclei staining (Blue color). E. Relative AMP abundance in NIH3T3 and NIH-Ras mouse fibroblasts grown under
conditions of glutamine deprivation for 54 h. AMP was measured by GC/MS and error bars indicate SD (n=3). F. Protein expression
analysis of NIH3T3 and NIH-Ras cell lines grown in media containing 4mM glutamine (optimal growth condition) or 0.5mM glutamine
(nutrient starvation). Cells were collected 54h after treatment and 30µg proteins from the total cellular extracts were processed by SDSPAGE followed by Western blotting with the indicated antibodies.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

52019

Oncotarget

with a significant increase of relative AMP abundance
(Figure 1E) and increased levels of AMPK, P-AMPK,
ULK1, P-ULK1 and LKB1 proteins in NIH-Ras cells
both in normal (4mM) and glutamine deprived conditions
(0.5mM Gln), as compared to NIH3T3 cells (Figure 1F
and Supplementary Figure S1B-C and S1D).

In addition, the metabolic profiling of NIH-Ras
grown under glutamine deprivation displayed increased
levels of free amino acids, mainly glutamine (Figure 2A),
and TCA cycle metabolites (Figure 2B), suggesting that
replacement of metabolites at different levels could be
provided via autophagy to ensure nutrient demand under

Figure 2: Basal autophagy recycle of metabolites and alternative pathways activation in NIH-Ras cancer cells. A and

B. Relative metabolites abundance, free amino acids (A) and TCA cycle metabolites (B), measured by GC/MS in NIH3T3 and NIH-Ras
cells cultured in low glutamine (0.5mM Gln) for 54h. C. Schematic representation summarizing how cancer metabolic ability in sustaining
permanent nutrient request takes advantage of autophagy mechanisms induced by high ROS and AMP levels to provide amino acids
to the TCA cycle. D. Schematic representation of basal autophagy recycle of metabolites and alternative pathways activation. Relative
metabolites abundance performed by GC/MS in NIH-Ras cells grown in 0.5mM Gln or 0.5mM Gln plus chloroquine (CQ, 50μM) for 54h.
Error bars indicate SD (n=5). Intracellular ROS levels measured by DCFDA staining in NIH-Ras grown in medium containing 0.5mM Gln
or 0.5mM Gln plus CQ for 54h. Error bars indicate SD (n=3).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

52020

Oncotarget

stress and satisfy the permanent hungry state (Figure
2C) [29]. As expected, the metabolic profiling of NIHRas under metabolic perturbation with low glutamine
plus chloroquine (CQ), an inhibitor of autophagosomal
degradation [34, 35] showed a decreased relative
abundance of glutamine, glutamate and other amino acids,
as compared to low glutamine conditions (Figure 2D).
On the other hand, we also observed significant
increased levels of serine (Ser) and glycine (Gly) (Figure
2D), but we did not find significant changes in intracellular
relative abundance of glucose and TCA cycle metabolites
in NIH-Ras grown in low glutamine or low glutamine plus
CQ (Figure 2D). Taken together, these results suggest that
the strong metabolic stress due to low glutamine plus CQ
(Figure 2D) or CQ treatment alone (Supplementary Figure
S2A and S2B) could lead NIH-Ras cells to use glucose
(Figures 2D and S2A) in alternative pathways, such as
serine/glycine pathway (Figures 2D and S2B) [36], in the
attempt to decrease ROS levels (Figure 2D and S2C) and
trying (unsuccessfully) to survive (Figure 2D). In fact,
as shown in Figure 3, CQ treatment induced cell death
in NIH-Ras cells grown both in normal growth medium
(4mM Gln) (Figure 3A–3B) (trypan blue positive cells
53%, red diamond) and following glutamine starvation
for 54h (Figure 3C–3D) (trypan blue positive cells 97.2%,
red diamond).
However, although autophagy seemed to play an
important role in sustaining cancer growth and survival
during short glutamine deprivation (54h), we observed
that this mechanism was not able to maintain survival
when the glutamine deprivation was prolonged for 144h
(Supplementary Figure S2D, left and right panels).
Specifically, NIH-Ras transformed cells showed a larger
decreased cell number when grown under prolonged
nutritional stress (Supplementary Figure S2D, right panel),
as compared to cells grown in multi-strata in normal
growth conditions (Supplementary Figure S2D, left
panel). On the other hand, we did not observe differences
in NIH3T3 proliferation (Supplementary Figure S2D, left
panel), whose decreased cell number at 144h is known
to be due to confluence and physiological contactdependent death program (anoikis) [37]. Taken together
our results identified the key role of autophagy recycling
mechanisms and glutamine metabolism in sustaining
anabolic processes, redox balance, cancer survival and
aggressive cancer proliferation (Figure 3E). To confirm the
role of low glutamine on cell proliferation, we assessed
the effect of different concentrations of BPTES (bis-2-(5phenylacetamido-1,2,4-thiadiazol-2-yl)ethyl sulfide), an
inhibitor of glutaminase activity (Supplementary Figure
S2E). Consistent with previous results, we found that
BPTES (4, 6 or 8μM) reduced NIH-Ras cells proliferation,
as compared to CTRL (Supplementary Figure S2E),
without changing cell proliferation in NIH3T3. Finally,
to obtain a synergic effect we performed a simultaneous
perturbation of both pathways (autophagy and glutamine)
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

by using CQ and BPTES together. NIH-Ras cells treated
with CQ and BPTES showed a dramatic reduction of
proliferation (Figure 3F) with 81% of trypan blue positive
cells (Figure 3F, red diamond), as compared to cells
grown.
All together, these data suggest that the combination
of BPTES and CQ could be an interesting intervention
strategy to be tested in vivo.

PET imaging and metabolomics-massspectrometry revealed a time-dependent
metabolic shift in NIH-Ras model
To determine whether the nutrient utilization
rewiring observed in vitro reflected the same metabolic
dependencies in vivo, we evaluated NIH-Ras cells in a
mouse model of xenograft. In particular, we monitored
tumor growth (using caliper), glucose metabolism ([18F]
FDG-PET) and cell proliferation ([18F]FLT-PET). First, we
characterized in vivo tumor growth using caliper and PET
with [18F]FDG and [18F]FLT starting when tumors were
palpable. Tumor lesions rapidly grew and 100% of animals
showed palpable tumors 7 days after cells injection (Figure
4A). Ten days after cells injection, animals performed PET
scan and images showed the presence of glucose-avid and
highly proliferative cancer lesions (Figure 4B). Within 15
days tumors reached volumes of 1090 ± 456 mm3 (Figure
4A) and animals had to be sacrificed to avoid suffering.
The rapid growth of NIH-Ras cells observed, probably due
to a more advantageous in vivo environment as compared
to in vitro conditions, highlighted NIH-Ras immortalized
cancer cells as a highly aggressive in vivo model.
The time-course of lesions progression performed
in additional groups of animals confirmed the hyperproliferative phenotype that was maximum at 7 days after
tumor implantation and remained stable thereafter. On the
contrary, an abrupt increase of [18F]FDG was observed
between 7 and 9 days, which remained stable until the
13th day (Figure 4C-4D). As previously observed, tumors
rapidly grew in parallel with increased [18F]FDG or [18F]
FLT volumes (Supplementary Figure S3A and S3B);
moreover, measurements of lactate dehydrogenase (LDH)
activity in tumors collected after mice sacrifice confirmed
the presence of Warburg effect (Figure 4E). On the other
hand, we also observed a low in vivo hexokinase (HK)
activity (Supplementary Figure S3C), consistent with
our NIH-Ras cancer cells transcriptomics published data
[27], showing lower HK gene expression as compared
to normal cells, suggesting ADP-glucokinase (glucosephosphorylating enzyme) as an alternative enzymatic
source [38] to support the high glycolytic metabolism
and greater advantage in ATP production. Moreover,
consistently with the rapid growth and [18F]FLT uptake,
we found increased levels of metabolites involved in
nucleotide synthesis (Figures 4F and S3D) between
day 7 and day 9. Specifically, we observed increased
52021

Oncotarget

relative abundance of adenosine (Aden), adenine (Ade),
hypoxanthine (Hpx), xanthine (Xan), GMP and spermidine
(Spd) (Figure 4F). Furthermore, we found significant
changes in the relative abundance of various amino acids
(Figure 4G). Notably, the majority of essential and nonessential amino acids were more abundant at day 9, as
compared to day 7 and day 13 (Figure 4G).

To investigate morphological features and to
correlate in vivo data with proliferation markers, post
mortem H&E analysis and IHC confirmed the high
aggressiveness of NIH-Ras tumors. Samples displayed
high mitotic activity regardless of the time points, with
only small necrotic areas present mainly at 13 days (Figure
4H). IHC staining revealed tumors with homogeneous and

Figure 3: Aggressive proliferative K-Ras transformed fibroblasts show glutamine-dependent metabolic rewiring.

A. Morphological analysis of NIH3T3 and NIH-Ras transformed cells cultured in normal growth conditions CTRL or treatment with CQ
(50μM) for 24h. Cells were observed at phase-contrast microscopy. B. Percentage of NIH3T3 and NIH-Ras trypan blue positive cells
cultured under normal growth conditions CTRL or after treatment with CQ (50μM) for 24h. C. Morphological analysis of NIH3T3 and
NIH-Ras transformed cells cultured in 0.5mM Gln CTRL in the absence or presence of CQ (50μM) for 24h. D. Percentage of normal
and transformed trypan blue positive cells cultured in 0.5mM Gln CTRL in the absence or presence of CQ (50μM) for 24h. E. Schematic
representation of autophagy and glutamine metabolism sustaining cancer growth and their inhibition by BPTES and CQ treatments.
F. Proliferation curve of NIH-Ras mouse fibroblasts treated with BPTES, or CQ or their combination. Cells were plated at 3000/cm2. After
18h cells were treated with BPTES (6μM) or CQ (50μM) or BPTES+CQ and counted after 54 h. Error bars indicate SD (n=3).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

52022

Oncotarget

Figure 4: PET imaging and metabolomics technique identify fast growth and highly aggressive phenotype of NIH-Ras
tumor xenografts in vivo. A. NIH-Ras tumor xenografts growth curve was established by caliper measurement after s.c. injection of

NIH-Ras cancer cell fibroblasts. B. Representative [18F]FDG and [18F]FLT PET coronal and transaxial images of NIH-Ras tumors performed
at 10 days after cells injection. Color scale is expressed as SUV. C. [18F]FDG and [18F]FLT uptake expressed as T/B ratio at different time
points in NIH-Ras tumors. From day 7 to day 9 [18F]FDG uptake significantly increased (p<0.001). Error bars indicate SD (n=5-8 mice per
PET study). D. Representative [18F]FDG and [18F]FLT transaxial images of NIH-Ras tumors at different time points from cell injection.
Color scale is expressed as SUV and the white arrow indicates the tumor. E. LDH enzyme activity of NIH-Ras tumor xenografts from 7 to
13 days. LDH enzyme activity was measured by enzymatic assay and normalized to protein content. Error bars indicate SD (n=3). F and
G. Relative metabolites abundance involved in nucleotides (F) and amino acids (G) metabolism of NIH-Ras tumor xenografts from 7 to 13
days measured by GC/MS. H. Ki67 and TK1 IHC staining of NIH-Ras tumors collected from mice at 7, 9 and 13 days after cells injection.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

52023

Oncotarget

high positivity for both Ki67 and TK-1 antibodies that
slowly increased over time (Figure 4H), thus confirming
[18F]FLT PET data.
Taken together, these results indicated a metabolic
shift between 7 to 9 days (glucose uptake and amino-acid
levels), which could be a potential therapeutic window
to maximize the effects of treatments that target cell
metabolism.

panel), glycolysis and TCA cycle (Supplementary Figure
S5B, right panel). The resulting dendrogram, in which
the length of the vertical lines connecting two groups of
samples is proportional to the distance between them,
confirmed the close similarity among groups. Although
all groups are similar to each other, CTRL and combined
treatment clustered together (Supplementary Figure S5A),
whereas BPTES and CQ pertained to a separate cluster.
In addition, 6 metabolites (β-alanine, urea, glycine,
ribose, fructose and glucose) out of 85 were found to be
significantly different across samples by using one way
ANOVA (Figure 5C). Specifically, we found increased
relative abundance of glucose (Glc) and Urea in all
treatments, as compared to CTRL (Figure 5C). In addition,
we observed significant increased relative abundance of
fructose (Fru) and glycine (Gly) in BPTES and BPTES
plus CQ treatments, respectively, as compared to CTRL.
After comparison of the four groups by ANOVA, t-test was
applied in order to find out which metabolites were more
significantly expressed in single treatment groups versus
CTRL (Supplementary Figure S5C and S5D). In particular,
we found significant increased relative abundance of
glucose, urea and β-alanine (β-Ala) metabolites in BPTES
and CQ treatments versus CTRL (Supplementary Figure
S5C and S5D, respectively), suggesting a common
metabolic response of NIH-Ras tumors to single drug
treatments. At the same time, increased relative abundance
of metabolites, such as creatinine (Cr), aspartate (Asp) and
fructose (Fru) in BPTES treatment, and increased relative
abundance of uric acid and hypoxanthine (Hyp) in CQ
were found statistically significant in the two groups, as
compared to CTRL (Supplementary Figure S5C and S5D,
respectively).
To further highlight differences between treatments,
one way Anova analysis (Figure 5D) confirmed BPTES and
CQ clustering, as indicated by increased relative abundance

Highly aggressive NIH-Ras tumor response to
metabolic stress conditions detected by PET
imaging and metabolomic-mass-spectrometry
To evaluate in vivo metabolic changes in drug
treatment response and to validate PET imaging and
metabolomic-mass-spectrometry as complementary
diagnostic tools, mice with NIH-Ras tumors were treated
with BPTES and CQ, alone or in combination, using the
therapeutic windows previously identified, i.e. at 7 days.
In contrast to in vitro results, surprisingly, BPTES alone
or in combination with CQ failed to arrest tumor growth
(Figure 5A), glucose uptake ([18F]FDG-PET) and cell
proliferation ([18F]FLT-PET) (Figures 5B and S4A-B).
In addition, post mortem data revealed no significant
difference in glutamate levels between CTRL and BPTES
treated mice (Supplementary Figure S4C) and showed the
collateral effect of inducing autophagy (Supplementary
Figure S4D) [15].
Consistent with PET findings, metabolomics
analysis did not show significant changes either in
metabolite composition or in metabolite abundance across
all treatments (Supplementary Figure S5A). Hierarchical
clustering of samples was performed on normalized
intensities of 85 significant metabolites (Supplementary
Figure S5A) followed by pathways enrichment of
nucleotide metabolism (Supplementary Figure S5B, left

Figure 5: BPTES glutaminase inhibitor and CQ autophagy inhibitor do not show anti-proliferative activity in highly
aggressive NIH-Ras tumors. A. Evaluation of tumor size after treatment. Changes in tumor size were measured by caliper in mice
treated with a 2-day scheduled treatment. Mice received daily vehicle (CTRL), or CQ (50mg/kg), or BPTES (10 mg/kg), or BPTES plus CQ
(Combination). B. Representative transaxial [18F]FDG and [18F]FLT PET images of CTRL and combined treatment mice performed before
and after drugs administration. Color scale is expressed as SUV value. (Continued )
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

52024

Oncotarget

Figure 5: (Continued ) BPTES glutaminase inhibitor and CQ autophagy inhibitor do not show anti-proliferative
activity in highly aggressive NIH-Ras tumors. C. Comparison of samples by one way ANOVA statistical analysis (CTRL versus

single treatments). D. Comparison of samples by one way ANOVA statistical analysis (BPTES and CQ combined treatment versus single
treatments). ANOVA statistical analysis was performed using Mass Profiler Professional (MPP) software. The dendrogram was produced
by applying a hierarchical clustering algorithm. The color range legends was automatically generated by MPP, considering the minimum
and maximum values of most compounds identified to highlight the best differences between samples through the most suitable color scale.
Quantitative values of relative metabolites abundance are shown in the tables.

DISCUSSION

of glucose in both single treatments versus combined
treatments, and increased relative abundance of fructose
in BPTES alone versus CQ or BPTES and CQ combined
treatment (Figure 5D). On the other hand, we found
increased relative abundance of glycine in the combined
group, as compared to single treatments (Figure 5D). Taken
together, these data emphasize that multiple metabolic
pathway activation, due to advantageous environmental
conditions, could cause the reduced effect of the drugs, at
the same time sustaining aggressive cell proliferation of
NIH-Ras tumors observed in vivo experiments [39].

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Metabolic rewiring following increased nutrients
uptake sustains uncontrolled proliferation [6]. In
particular, both oncogenic ras and myc stimulate glucose
uptake and regulate glutamine metabolism, specifically
directing glutamine carbons into pathways able to
support biosynthesis, redox homeostasis, cell survival
and enhanced growth [27, 40, 41]. A recent work has
highlighted the importance of metabolic rewiring in both
cultured cells and in vivo mice models [6]. It has been

52025

Oncotarget

demonstrated that glucose deprivation, or growth in the
restricted environment of the subcutaneous space in
mice, renders transformed K-Ras cancer cells tolerant
of low glucose conditions [42]. On the other hand,
chronic exposure to low glucose still requires oxidative
phosphorylation as a means to maintain growth [43].
Therefore, the complex metabolic requirements of cancer
cells lead to greater metabolic flexibility able to activate
multiple pathways using alternative substrates that may
contribute to ATP synthesis by oxidative phosphorylation
(OXPHOS) or intermediate synthesis necessary to sustain
anabolic processes for enhanced growth and/or survival
[27, 44]. Hence, tumor cells capable of using alternative
substrates for metabolic rewiring modulation in vivo
could develop never-ending strategies also under stress
conditions.
In this study we used a well characterized rasdriven cancer cell model (NIH-Ras) both in vitro and in
vivo to evaluate the role of Ras mutation in cancer lesions
response to different environmental conditions using
a metabolomics-mass-spectrometry and PET imaging
combined approach.
Our results confirmed the glutamine addiction
and showed an activation of basal-autophagy in the
first steps of cancer cell growth (Figure 1). Under low
glutamine condition, we observed an interesting increase
of amino acids and TCA cycle metabolites, in particular
glutamine, suggesting that autophagy replenishes TCA
cycle intermediates to sustain survival (Figure 2) [29].
In agreement with this observation, blocking autophagy
by CQ caused a massive cell death, which was further
increased by the combined administration of the
glutaminase inhibitor (BPTES) (Figure 3). Taken together,
these results confirmed that in vitro NIH-Ras cancer
cells took advantage not only of enhanced glycolysis, as
depicted in the scheme in Figure 6 (red arrows), but also
of glutamine metabolism (Figure 6, light-blue arrows) and
autophagy recycling (Figure 6, blue arrows) to sustain
cellular hyper-proliferation.
Based on these in vitro results confirming that
well established multiple pathway activation sustains
enhanced growth in NIH-Ras cancer cells, in vivo studies
were performed with the purpose to provide a native
microenvironment that is metabolically advantageous.
In vivo, NIH-Ras cells gave rise to aggressive
lesions characterized by high proliferation rate ([18F]FLT)
and glucose demand ([18F]FDG), which were increased
between 7 and 9 days (Figure 4A–4D). Interestingly,
in the same time-frame we observed an increase of
metabolites involved in nucleotides synthesis (Figure
4F) and augmented relative abundances of various
essential and not essential amino acids (Figure 4G). This
metabolic shift confirmed that in vivo tumors are able to
activate multiple pathways to create a more advantageous
environment for cancer growth. In addition, as previously
observed in vitro [27], we found reduced activity of HK
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

(Supplementary Figure S2C), suggestive of the activation
ADP-glucokinase, a more efficient hexokinase able to
support a higher glycolytic demand [38]. Finally, to
evaluate modifications of in vivo metabolism under stress
conditions, BPTES and CQ, alone or in combination, were
administered to NIH-Ras tumor xenografts. In contrast to
our in vitro results, both drugs did not produce notable
effects in the rate of lesions growth and PET parameters,
particularly when CQ was given alone (Figure 5).
As for BPTES, our results are in line with the
observations in BRAF mutated cells displaying high
sensitivity to BPTES in vitro but not in vivo [45]. Probably,
differently from myc driven lesions, where BPTES was
able to suppress tumor growth [42], activation of Ras
pathway gives to cancer cells higher ability to sustain
tumor growth during metabolic stress.
It is worthy of note that metabolomics analysis
showed significant changes in glucose, urea and β-alanine
metabolites when BPTES and CQ were given alone
(Figure 5). These results confirmed the key role of
glucose (Figure 6, red arrows) and suggest the activation
of the urea cycle pathway (Figure 6, yellow arrows)
involved in ammonia removal and β-alanine involved in
metabolic rewiring, like it occurs following epithelialmesenchymal transition (EMT) [39, 46]. On the other
hand, the significant increase in glycine levels found under
a combined drugs treatment suggests that NIH-Ras tumors
could activate multiple alternative pathways, such as the
serine-glycine pathway [36], able to sustain the aggressive
cell proliferation of NIH-Ras tumors in metabolic stress
conditions (Figure 6, lilac arrows) [47, 48]. In such an
adaptive system the block of glutaminase activity, as
performed by BPTES [49], which spares other glutamine
sources, a biosynthesis-dependent process is clearly not
sufficient [39].
In addition, in vivo glutamine need is ensured
by glutamine producer organs through an inter-organ
glutamine trafficking that is modified in cancer to increase
glutamine availability. For instance, in a mice model of
fibrosarcoma, tumor lesion induces muscle expression of
glutamine synthetase and greatly increases the release of
glutamine into the circulation [50].
This
systemic
metabolic
rearrangement
characterizing cancer might also explain the lack of CQ
effect, together with a progressive loss of autophagy
dependence of NIH-Ras cells during tumor progression,
even when CQ was administered before the activation of
the alternative metabolic pathways, as previously reported
[51].
In conclusion, in this study we demonstrated
the amazing adaptation ability of ras driven tumors to
environmental modifications and metabolic stress using
metabolic rewiring and alternative pathways. Differential
responses between in vitro and in vivo systems have been
shown to be particularly evident under in vivo conditions
where nutrients supply is continuously available from
52026

Oncotarget

different body reserves and where probably systemic
anabolic processes are also adapted to sustain cancer
progression.
These observations may explain why one of
the few therapeutic options for ras driven tumors is
represented by drugs able to block angiogenesis with a
general reduction of nutrient supply. This suggests that

general metabolic sensors, which are able to regulate the
activation of alternative pathways, should be considered.
Finally, we showed that the combined use of PET imaging
and metabolomics-mass spectrometry can detail at the
molecular level the specific metabolic signature of tumors.
This information might be relevant for validating the
potential diagnostic power of metabolomics for clinical

Figure 6: Schematic representation of cancer metabolic pathways identified in in vivo NIH-Ras tumor xenografts
and the effect of metabolic interfering drugs. Metabolic Profiling was performed 9 days after cell injection and after 48h of drug
treatments.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

52027

Oncotarget

use in conjunction with the imaging parameters (in this
case glycolysis and cell proliferation), which represent the
end stage of the simultaneous activation or inhibition of
different metabolic processes and signaling.

cell injection (n=5-8 per time point and per radiotracer). At
the end of PET study, animals were sacrificed and tumors
collected for post mortem metabolomics and immunohistochemistry analyses.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Metabolic perturbation by pharmacological
therapy

Cell culture

In vivo studies were performed using BPTES
(Bis-2-[5-phenylacetamido-1,2,4-thiadiazol-2-yl]ethyl
sulphide, intraperitoneal, i.p. 10mg/kg in 2% DMSO,
Sigma-Aldrich®), an inhibitor of glutaminase enzyme and
chloroquine (CQ, i.p. 50 mg/kg in PBS, Sigma-Aldrich),
an inhibitor of autophagosomal degradation, alone or in
combination. Mice were divided into 4 groups (n=3-5) of
treatment (Vehicle, BPTES, CQ and Comb) and treated
for 2 consecutive days starting 7 days after cell injection.
Control animals received i.p. vehicle. Animals performed
[18F]FDG and [18F]FLT PET before and after therapy.

Mouse embryonic ﬁbroblast NIH3T3 cells (CRL1658; American Type Culture Collection), K-Ras
transformed NIH3T3-derived cell line 226.4.1 [52] were
routinely grown in Dulbecco’s modiﬁed Eagle’s medium
containing 4mM L-glutamine, 100U/ml penicillin and
100mg/ml streptomycin (normal growth medium)
supplemented with 10% newborn calf serum at 37° C in
a humidiﬁed atmosphere of 5% CO2. Cells were passed
using trypsin-EDTA and maintained in culture for 54h or
144h before manipulation. All reagents for media were
purchased from Life Technologies Invitrogen (Carlsbad,
CA, USA).

PET studies
PET images were obtained using a YAP-(S)-PET II
small animal scanner (ISE s.r.l., Pisa, Italy). For [18F]FLT
studies, 4.2±0.3 MBq were injected in the tail vein (i.v.).
[18F]FLT production, acquisition and images quantification
were performed as previously described [31]. [18F]FDG
was prepared for clinical use (European Pharmacopeia
VIII Edition) and i.v. injected (4.3±0.2 MBq) in animals
in fasting conditions. The same procedure of acquisition
and image analysis used for [18F]FLT was applied to [18F]
FDG scan. Radioactivity concentrations were expressed as
Standardized Uptake Value (SUVmax = (max radioactivity
measured in the ROI/injected radioactivity)*animal
weight)
and
tumor-to-background
radioactivity
concentration ratios (T/B).

Cell proliferation analysis and cell treatments
Cells were plated at the density of 3000 cells/cm2 in
complete growth medium. After 18h, cells were washed
twice with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) and incubated
in a media with different glutamine concentrations (4mM
or 0.5mM Gln).
For specific treatments, cells were treated with
50µM Chloroquine (CQ), or 4-6-8µM BPTES (SigmaAldrich Inc.). To measure cell proliferation, harvested
cells were counted by Burker chamber and live/dead count
was performed using trypan blue exclusion.

Animal model
To generate the mouse model, NIH-Ras cells
(2.5 x 105) were injected subcutaneously (s.c) on the
right flanks of 8-week old nu/nu female mice (Harlan
Laboratories). Animals were kept under specific pathogenfree conditions, handled and maintained according to San
Raffaele Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee
(IACUC) ethical regulations, which previously approved
the experiments described in this study. After cells
injection, mice were monitored twice a week for body
weight and tumor volume was measured using a digital
caliper and calculated following the formula: tumor
volume = (long side*(short side)^2)/2). At the end of
studies, mice were sacrificed by CO2 asphyxiation and
tumors collected for post mortem analysis.

Post mortem analyses
For immunohistochemistry (IHC) studies, after
sacrifice, cancer lesions were removed, dissected, fixed
in 4% PFA, cryopreserved in liquid N2 cooled isopentane
and embedded in OCT. Serial 6µm thick sections were
treated with 0.3% H2O2 to quench endogenous peroxidase
activity. Cell proliferation was evaluated using Ki67 and
TK1 antibodies (Novus Biological) to correlate results
with [18F]FLT data.

Enzymatic assays
For enzymatic assay quantification of LDH
Colorimetric Assay kit (BioVision), HK Colorimetric
Assay kit (BioVision) and glutamate Colorimetric Assay
kit (BioVision), 10mg of NIH Ras tumors were rapidly
homogenized on ice in 0.1 ml of appropriate assay buffer
and processed according to the manufacturer’s protocols.

Study design characterization
Different groups of animals were evaluated using
PET and [18F]FDG or [18F]FLT at 7, 9 and 13 days after
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

52028

Oncotarget

ROS levels measurement

Immunofluorescence microscopy

ROS levels were measured using the DCFDA
Cellular Ros Detection Assay Kit from Abcam
(Cambridge, UK). Cells were harvested and stained with
20μM dichloro-diyidro-fluoresceine-diacetate (DCFDA)
for 30 min at 37°C. Thereafter, cells were washed
and fluorescence was measured at excitation/emission
wavelengths of 485nm/535nm respectively using Cary
Eclipse Fluorescence Spectrophotometer.

Protocols and antibodies are described in the
Supplemental Experimental Procedures.

Western blotting analysis
Protocols and antibodies are described in the
Supplemental Experimental Procedures.

Statistical analysis

Metabolite profiling cell culture samples
Metabolites were extracted and analyzed by
gas chromatography-mass spectrometry (GC/MS),
as described previously [27]. Details are reported in
Supplemental Experimental Procedures.

Results are expressed as mean value ± SD.
Experimental differences were tested for significance with
the Student̕s t-test or, when possible, with the One Way
ANOVA test. A p-value of 0.05 or less was considered
statistically significant.

Metabolite profiling in tissue samples

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

For tissue metabolite extraction, 0.1 ml ice-cold
methanol was added to 10mg of tissue and incubated 5 min
on ice. An equal volume of water was added and samples
were sonicated 5 sec for 5 pulses at 70% power for three
times. After a 30 min incubation at -80°C, samples were
sonicated as described above. One volume of chloroform
was added and samples were vortexed at 4°C for 30 min and
then centrifuged at 12000g for 10 min. The aqueous phase
was recovered and evaporated under airflow at 37°C [53].
Derivatization was performed using automated
sample prep WorkBench instrument (Agilent
Technologies) as detailed in the Supplemental
Experimental Procedures.
Dried polar metabolites were dissolved in 60μl of
2% methoxyamine hydrochloride in pyridine (Pierce) and
held at 40°C for 6h. After dissolution and reaction, 90μl of
MSTFA (N-Methyl-N-(trimethylsilyl) trifluoroacetamid)
were added and samples were incubated at 60°C for 1h.
GC/MS analysis was performed using 7200
accurate-mass Q-TOF GC/MS (Agilent Technologies)
equipped with a 40-m DB-5MS capillary column
operating under electron impact (EI) ionization at 70eV.
Samples (2μl) were injected in a splitless mode at 250°C,
using helium as the carrier gas at a flow rate of 1 ml/min.
The GC oven temperature was held at 100°C for 2 min and
increased to 325°C at 10°C/min.
GC/MS data processing was performed using
Agilent Muss Hunter software and statistical analyses
were performed using Mass Profile Professional (MPP)
software [54]. Relative metabolites abundance was carried
out after normalization to internal standard norvaline and
cell number.

This work was supported by grants from the
SysBioNet project, a MIUR initiative for the Italian Roadmap
of European Strategy Forum on Research Infrastructures
(ESFRI), to L.A., M.B., C.D., F.M., G.D., A.M.C. We thank
I. Raccagni, P Simonelli, and E.A. Turolla of University of
Milano-Bicocca and M Rocchi of Mouse Histopathology
Unit, Department of Pathology, IRCCS San Raffaele
Scientific Institute for technical support. The Authors wish
to thank Agilent Technologies team for technical suggestions
and Rohit Bharat for suggestions on the manuscript.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
The authors declare that they have no conflict of
interest.

REFERENCES
1.	 Hanahan D and Weinberg RA. Hallmarks of cancer: the
next generation. Cell. 2011; 144:646-674.
2.	 Warburg O. On the origin of cancer cells. Science (New
York, NY). 1956; 123:309-314.
3.	 Quail DF and Joyce JA. Microenvironmental regulation of
tumor progression and metastasis. Nature medicine. 2013;
19:1423-1437.
4.	 Alberghina L and Gaglio D. Redox control of glutamine
utilization in cancer. Cell death & disease. 2014; 5:e1561.
5.	 Gorrini C, Harris IS and Mak TW. Modulation of oxidative
stress as an anticancer strategy. Nat Rev Drug Discov. 2013;
12:931-947.

Electron microscopy

6.	 Boroughs LK and DeBerardinis RJ. Metabolic pathways
promoting cancer cell survival and growth. Nature cell
biology. 2015; 17:351-359.

Electron microscopy experiments were performed as
described in Supplemental Experimental Procedures [55].

7.	 Pavlova NN and Thompson CB. The Emerging Hallmarks
of Cancer Metabolism. Cell metabolism. 2016; 23:27-47.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

52029

Oncotarget

8.	 Munoz-Pinedo C, El Mjiyad N and Ricci JE. Cancer
metabolism: current perspectives and future directions. Cell
death & disease. 2012; 3:e248.

Locasale JW, Longo VD, Lyssiotis CA, McDonnell E,
Mehrmohamadi M, Michelotti G, et al. Dysregulated
metabolism contributes to oncogenesis. Seminars in cancer
biology. 2015; 35:S129-150.

9.	 Galluzzi L, Kepp O, Vander Heiden MG and Kroemer G.
Metabolic targets for cancer therapy. Nat Rev Drug Discov.
2013; 12:829-846.
10.	 Schulze A and Harris AL. How cancer metabolism is tuned
for proliferation and vulnerable to disruption. Nature. 2012;
491:364-373.

22.	 Chiaradonna F, Gaglio D, Vanoni M and Alberghina
L. Expression of transforming K-Ras oncogene affects
mitochondrial function and morphology in mouse
fibroblasts. Biochimica et biophysica acta. 2006;
1757:1338-1356.

11.	 Vander Heiden MG, Cantley LC and Thompson CB.
Understanding the Warburg effect: the metabolic
requirements of cell proliferation. Science (New York, NY).
2009; 324:1029-1033.

23.	 Chiaradonna F, Sacco E, Manzoni R, Giorgio M, Vanoni
M and Alberghina L. Ras-dependent carbon metabolism
and transformation in mouse fibroblasts. Oncogene. 2006;
25:5391-5404.

12.	 White E. Deconvoluting the context-dependent role for
autophagy in cancer. Nature reviews. 2012; 12:401-410.

24.	 Gaglio D, Soldati C, Vanoni M, Alberghina L and
Chiaradonna F. Glutamine deprivation induces abortive
s-phase rescued by deoxyribonucleotides in k-ras
transformed fibroblasts. PloS one. 2009; 4:e4715.

13.	 Vincent EE, Sergushichev A, Griss T, Gingras MC,
Samborska B, Ntimbane T, Coelho PP, Blagih J, Raissi
TC, Choiniere L, Bridon G, Loginicheva E, Flynn BR,
Thomas EC, Tavare JM, Avizonis D, et al. Mitochondrial
Phosphoenolpyruvate Carboxykinase Regulates Metabolic
Adaptation and Enables Glucose-Independent Tumor
Growth. Molecular cell. 2015; 60:195-207.

25.	 Yuneva M, Zamboni N, Oefner P, Sachidanandam R and
Lazebnik Y. Deficiency in glutamine but not glucose
induces MYC-dependent apoptosis in human cells. The
Journal of cell biology. 2007; 178:93-105.
26.	 Bossu P, Vanoni M, Wanke V, Cesaroni MP, Tropea F,
Melillo G, Asti C, Porzio S, Ruggiero P, Di Cioccio V,
Maurizi G, Ciabini A and Alberghina L. A dominant
negative RAS-specific guanine nucleotide exchange factor
reverses neoplastic phenotype in K-ras transformed mouse
fibroblasts. Oncogene. 2000; 19:2147-2154.

14.	 Sellers K, Fox MP, Bousamra M, 2nd, Slone SP, Higashi
RM, Miller DM, Wang Y, Yan J, Yuneva MO, Deshpande
R, Lane AN and Fan TW. Pyruvate carboxylase is critical
for non-small-cell lung cancer proliferation. The Journal of
clinical investigation. 2015; 125:687-698. doi: 10.18632/
oncotarget.2173.

27.	 Gaglio D, Metallo CM, Gameiro PA, Hiller K, Danna
LS, Balestrieri C, Alberghina L, Stephanopoulos G and
Chiaradonna F. Oncogenic K-Ras decouples glucose and
glutamine metabolism to support cancer cell growth.
Molecular systems biology. 2011; 7:523.

15.	 Lee YZ, Yang CW, Chang HY, Hsu HY, Chen IS, Chang
HS, Lee CH, Lee JC, Kumar CR, Qiu YQ, Chao YS and
Lee SJ. Discovery of selective inhibitors of Glutaminase-2,
which inhibit mTORC1, activate autophagy and inhibit
proliferation in cancer cells. Oncotarget. 2014; 5:60876101. doi:10.18632/oncotarget.2173.

28.	 Guo JY, Chen HY, Mathew R, Fan J, Strohecker AM,
Karsli-Uzunbas G, Kamphorst JJ, Chen G, Lemons JM,
Karantza V, Coller HA, Dipaola RS, Gelinas C, Rabinowitz
JD and White E. Activated Ras requires autophagy to
maintain oxidative metabolism and tumorigenesis. Genes
& development. 2011; 25:460-470.

16.	 Locasale JW and Cantley LC. Metabolic flux and the
regulation of mammalian cell growth. Cell metabolism.
2011; 14:443-451.
17.	 Luo W and Semenza GL. Pyruvate kinase M2 regulates
glucose metabolism by functioning as a coactivator for
hypoxia-inducible factor 1 in cancer cells. Oncotarget.
2011; 2:551-556. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.299.

29.	 Mathew R and White E. Autophagy, stress, and cancer
metabolism: what doesn’t kill you makes you stronger.
Cold Spring Harbor symposia on quantitative biology. 2011;
76:389-396.

18.	 Wellen KE and Thompson CB. A two-way street: reciprocal
regulation of metabolism and signalling. Nat Rev Mol Cell
Biol. 2012; 13:270-276.

30.	 Rosa R, Monteleone F, Zambrano N and Bianco R. In vitro
and in vivo models for analysis of resistance to anticancer
molecular therapies. Current medicinal chemistry. 2014;
21:1595-1606.

19.	 Yang W, Xia Y, Ji H, Zheng Y, Liang J, Huang W, Gao X,
Aldape K and Lu Z. Nuclear PKM2 regulates beta-catenin
transactivation upon EGFR activation. Nature. 2011;
480:118-122.

31.	 Curtarello M, Zulato E, Nardo G, Valtorta S, Guzzo G,
Rossi E, Esposito G, Msaki A, Pasto A, Rasola A, Persano
L, Ciccarese F, Bertorelle R, Todde S, Plebani M, Schroer H,
et al. VEGF-targeted therapy stably modulates the glycolytic
phenotype of tumor cells. Cancer research. 2014; 75:120-133.

20.	 Daye D and Wellen KE. Metabolic reprogramming in
cancer: unraveling the role of glutamine in tumorigenesis.
Seminars in cell & developmental biology. 2012;
23:362-369.

32.	 Sauter AW, Wehrl HF, Kolb A, Judenhofer MS and Pichler
BJ. Combined PET/MRI: one step further in multimodality
imaging. Trends in molecular medicine. 2010; 16:508-515.

21.	 Hirschey MD, DeBerardinis RJ, Diehl AM, Drew JE,
Frezza C, Green MF, Jones LW, Ko YH, Le A, Lea MA,
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

52030

Oncotarget

33.	 White E. The role for autophagy in cancer. The Journal of
clinical investigation. 2015; 125:42-46.

44.	 Gross MI, Demo SD, Dennison JB, Chen L, ChernovRogan T, Goyal B, Janes JR, Laidig GJ, Lewis ER, Li J,
Mackinnon AL, Parlati F, Rodriguez ML, Shwonek PJ,
Sjogren EB, Stanton TF, et al. Antitumor activity of the
glutaminase inhibitor CB-839 in triple-negative breast
cancer. Molecular cancer therapeutics. 2014; 13:890-901.

34.	 Fan C, Wang W, Zhao B, Zhang S and Miao J. Chloroquine
inhibits cell growth and induces cell death in A549 lung
cancer cells. Bioorganic & medicinal chemistry. 2006;
14:3218-3222.

45.	 Baenke F, Chaneton B, Smith M, Van Den Broek N, Hogan
K, Tang H, Viros A, Martin M, Galbraith L, Girotti MR,
Dhomen N, Gottlieb E and Marais R. Resistance to BRAF
inhibitors induces glutamine dependency in melanoma
cells. Molecular oncology. 2015.

35.	 Jiang PD, Zhao YL, Deng XQ, Mao YQ, Shi W, Tang
QQ, Li ZG, Zheng YZ, Yang SY and Wei YQ. Antitumor
and antimetastatic activities of chloroquine diphosphate
in a murine model of breast cancer. Biomedicine &
pharmacotherapy. 2010; 64:609-614.

46.	 Bhowmik SK, Ramirez-Pena E, Arnold JM, Putluri V, Sphyris
N, Michailidis G, Putluri N, Ambs S, Sreekumar A  and
Mani SA. EMT-Induced Metabolite Signature Identifies
Poor Clinical Outcome. Oncotarget. 2015; 6:42651-60. doi:
10.18632/oncotarget.4765.

36.	 Pacold ME, Brimacombe KR, Chan SH, Rohde JM, Lewis
CA, Swier LJ, Possemato R, Chen WW, Sullivan LB,
Fiske BP, Cho S, Freinkman E, Birsoy K, Abu-Remaileh
M, Shaul YD, Liu CM, et al. A PHGDH inhibitor reveals
coordination of serine synthesis and one-carbon unit fate.
Nature chemical biology. 2016.

47.	 Amelio I, Cutruzzola F, Antonov A, Agostini M and Melino
G. Serine and glycine metabolism in cancer. Trends in
biochemical sciences. 2014; 39:191-198.

37.	 Taddei ML, Giannoni E, Fiaschi T and Chiarugi P. Anoikis:
an emerging hallmark in health and diseases. The Journal of
pathology. 2012; 226:380-393.

48.	 Jain M, Nilsson R, Sharma S, Madhusudhan N, Kitami T,
Souza AL, Kafri R, Kirschner MW, Clish CB and Mootha
VK. Metabolite profiling identifies a key role for glycine in
rapid cancer cell proliferation. Science (New York, NY).
2012; 336:1040-1044.

38.	 Ronimus RS and Morgan HW. Cloning and biochemical
characterization of a novel mouse ADP-dependent
glucokinase. Biochemical and biophysical research
communications. 2004; 315:652-658.

49.	 Yuneva MO, Fan TW, Allen TD, Higashi RM, Ferraris DV,
Tsukamoto T, Mates JM, Alonso FJ, Wang C, Seo Y, Chen
X and Bishop JM. The metabolic profile of tumors depends
on both the responsible genetic lesion and tissue type. Cell
metabolism. 2012; 15:157-170.

39.	 Davidson SM, Papagiannakopoulos T, Olenchock BA,
Heyman JE, Keibler MA, Luengo A, Bauer MR, Jha AK,
O’Brien JP, Pierce KA, Gui DY, Sullivan LB, Wasylenko
TM, Subbaraj L, Chin CR, Stephanopolous G, et al.
Environment Impacts the Metabolic Dependencies of RasDriven Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer. Cell metabolism.
2016; 23:517-528.

50.	 Hensley CT, Wasti AT and DeBerardinis RJ. Glutamine and
cancer: cell biology, physiology, and clinical opportunities.
The Journal of clinical investigation. 2013; 123:3678-3684.

40.	 Son J, Lyssiotis CA, Ying H, Wang X, Hua S, Ligorio M,
Perera RM, Ferrone CR, Mullarky E, Shyh-Chang N, Kang
Y, Fleming JB, Bardeesy N, Asara JM, Haigis MC, DePinho
RA, et al. Glutamine supports pancreatic cancer growth
through a KRAS-regulated metabolic pathway. Nature.
2013; 496:101-105.

51.	 Morgan MJ, Gamez G, Menke C, Hernandez A, Thorburn J,
Gidan F, Staskiewicz L, Morgan S, Cummings C, Maycotte
P and Thorburn A. Regulation of autophagy and chloroquine
sensitivity by oncogenic RAS in vitro is context-dependent.
Autophagy. 2014; 10:1814-1826.
52.	 Pulciani S, Santos E, Long LK, Sorrentino V and Barbacid
M. ras gene Amplification and malignant transformation.
Molecular and cellular biology. 1985; 5:2836-2841.

41.	 Weinberg F, Hamanaka R, Wheaton WW, Weinberg S,
Joseph J, Lopez M, Kalyanaraman B, Mutlu GM, Budinger
GR and Chandel NS. Mitochondrial metabolism and ROS
generation are essential for Kras-mediated tumorigenicity.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the
United States of America. 2010; 107:8788-8793.

53.	 Tian Y, Xu T, Huang J, Zhang L, Xu S, Xiong B, Wang
Y and Tang H. Tissue Metabonomic Phenotyping for
Diagnosis and Prognosis of Human Colorectal Cancer.
Scientific reports. 2016; 6:20790.

42.	 Le A, Lane AN, Hamaker M, Bose S, Gouw A, Barbi J,
Tsukamoto T, Rojas CJ, Slusher BS, Zhang H, Zimmerman
LJ, Liebler DC, Slebos RJ, Lorkiewicz PK, Higashi RM,
Fan TW, et al. Glucose-independent glutamine metabolism
via TCA cycling for proliferation and survival in B cells.
Cell metabolism. 2012; 15:110-121.

54.	 Musharraf SG, Mazhar S, Choudhary MI, Rizi N and
Atta ur R. Plasma metabolite profiling and chemometric
analyses of lung cancer along with three controls through
gas chromatography-mass spectrometry. Scientific reports.
2015; 5:8607.
55.	 Filadi R, Greotti E, Turacchio G, Luini A, Pozzan T and
Pizzo P. Presenilin 2 Modulates Endoplasmic ReticulumMitochondria Coupling by Tuning the Antagonistic Effect
of Mitofusin 2. Cell reports. 2016.

43.	 Birsoy K, Possemato R, Lorbeer FK, Bayraktar EC, Thiru
P, Yucel B, Wang T, Chen WW, Clish CB and Sabatini DM.
Metabolic determinants of cancer cell sensitivity to glucose
limitation and biguanides. Nature. 2014; 508:108-112.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

52031

Oncotarget

