Original Article

Noninvasive and Real-Time Monitoring of
the Therapeutic Response of Tumors In Vivo
With an Optimized hTERT Promoter
Song-Tao Yu, PhD1; Chuan Li, PhD1; Mu-Han Lü, PhD1; Guang-Ping Liang, PhD2; Ning Li, PhD1; Xu-Dong Tang, PhD1;
Yu-Yun Wu, MSc1; Chun-Meng Shi, PhD3; Ling Chen, PhD1; Chang-Zhu Li, PhD1; Ya-Ling Cao, PhD1;
Dian-Chun Fang, MD, PhD1; and Shi-Ming Yang, MD, PhD1

BACKGROUND: Telomerase is commonly recognized as an effective anticancer target. The human telomerase reverse
transcriptase (hTERT), the rate-limiting component of telomerase, is expressed in most malignant tumors, but it is not
found in most normal somatic cells. Here, we report a real-time and noninvasive method to monitor tumor response to a
lentivirus-based hTERT-conditional suicidal gene therapy. METHODS: In this study, we constructed a lentivirus system
in which an optimized hTERT promoter was used to drive the expression of the cytosine deaminase (CD) gene, one
of the suicide genes, and a green fluorescent protein (GFP) reporter gene (pLenti-CD/GFP). The lentivirus was used
to infect telomerase-positive or telomerase-negative cell lines. In vitro and in vivo experiments were conducted to analyze the dynamic processes of exogenous gene expression noninvasively in cell culture and living animals in real
time via optical imaging. RESULTS: The lentivirus was able to express the CD gene and GFP in telomerase-positive tumor cells and significantly decrease cell proliferation after the use of prodrug 5-flucytosine. However, it could not
express GFP and CD in telomerase-negative cell lines, nor could it induce any suicidal effect in those cells. The in vivo
study showed that telomerase-positive tumors can be visualized after intratumor injection of the lentivirus in tumorbearing nude mice via an optical imaging system. Significant tumor growth suppression was observed in telomerasepositive tumors. CONCLUSIONS: Collectively, this technology provides a valuable, noninvasive method to evaluate
C 2011 American Cancer Society.
the real-time therapeutic response of tumors in vivo. Cancer 2012;118:1884-93. V
KEYWORDS: telomerase, molecular imaging, human telomerase reverse transcriptase (hTERT), tumor, gene therapy.

INTRODUCTION
Despite the great progress that has been made in surgery, chemotherapy, and radiotherapy for malignant tumors in
the past several decades, these cancers remain a major cause of death in the world.1 Because malignant tumors are a type of
molecular disease that involves the activation of different oncogenes and/or the inactivation of different tumor suppressor
genes during the process of tumorigenesis,2 current treatments, such as surgical excision, chemotherapy, and radiotherapy,
do not reach the basic mechanism of tumor etiology. Gene therapy was introduced in the late 1970s after the development
of recombinant DNA technology, and it has emerged as a new and promising strategy for the therapy of tumors.3-5
Because such therapy administers DNA rather than a drug, many different diseases are currently being investigated as candidates for gene therapy, including malignant tumors.5,6 Although the first human clinical trials provided initial evidence
of the feasibility and safety of gene therapy, clinical trials have been rather disappointing so far.7,8 The fact that gene
expression in target tissue cannot be adequately tracked remains a major problem in clinical trials. The success of gene
therapy protocols depends primarily on the specific and adequate delivery of therapeutic genes to target tissue as well as
the temporal and spatial distribution and regulation of therapeutic gene expression. Current knowledge of the biodistribution and pharmacokinetics of gene therapy relies mainly on the results of in vitro laboratory examinations of tissues
Corresponding author: Shi-Ming Yang, MD, PhD, Institute of Gastroenterology, Third Military Medical University, Chongqing 400038, China; shimingyang@yahoo.
com
1
Institute of Gastroenterology, Southwest Hospital, Third Military Medical University, Chongqing, People’s Republic of China; 2Institute of Burn Research, Southwest Hospital, Third Military Medical University, Chongqing, People’s Republic of China; 3Institute of Combined Injure, College of Preventive Medicine, Third Military Medical University, Chongqing, People’s Republic of China

The first two authors contributed equally to this article.
DOI: 10.1002/cncr.26476, Received: March 25, 2011; Revised: June 23, 2011; Accepted: July 6, 2011, Published online August 25, 2011 in Wiley Online Library
(wileyonlinelibrary.com)

1884

Cancer

April 1, 2012

Imaging of Therapeutic Response of Tumors by hTERT Promoter/Yu et al

obtained at biopsies or autopsy. These studies provide very
little information because they do not allow assessment of
the temporal and spatial distribution of the applied gene
vectors. Thus, there is an urgent need to develop sensitive,
reproducible, and noninvasive methods that can be safely
performed. Noninvasive and clinically applicable imaging
techniques for gene therapy monitoring will enable realtime assessment of the therapeutic process.9-11 Strategies
based on molecular imaging for noninvasive and real-time
imaging of gene expression in living subjects have been
developed over the past decade. Different strategies have
been used to assess gene expression when using reporter
genes. One strategy is to place the reporter gene under the
control of a transcriptionally regulated promoter that is
active in the molecular pathway of interest.
To guarantee that reporter genes are only expressed
in tumor cells, the selection of a tumor-targeting promoter is crucial. To our knowledge, many commonly
used promoters regulate the expression of reporter genes.
However, these promoters either do not have tumor specificity (eg, cytomegalovirus and Simian virus 40 promoters) or their tissue specificity is too strong (eg, alphafetoprotein, carcinoembryonic antigen, and prostate-specific antigen promoters). Thus, monitoring reporter gene
expression in gene therapy for cancer using these promoters is impractical. It is necessary to seek a single universal tumor-targeting promoter. Under control of this
tumor-targeting promoter, the reporter gene would only
express in tumor cells and not in normal cells.
Telomerase is the enzyme that synthesizes telomeric
DNA, the terminal DNA at chromosome ends. Together
with telomere-binding proteins, it confers stability to
chromosomes.12,13 The activation of telomerase is closely
related to carcinogenesis.12-14 Soon after its discovery,
telomerase was found to be expressed in the majority of
tumors of all cancer types.12,13,15,16 More importantly,
cancer stem cells are also telomerase-positive.17 The
human telomerase complex contains a reverse transcriptase, also known as the human telomerase catalytic subunit (hTERT), as its rate-limiting component.12-16 As the
main and critical regulatory element of the telomerase
complex, the hTERT promoter is regulated by negative
regulators, such as p5318 and Mad1,19 and positive regulators, such as c-myc20 and Sp1.21 Based on these findings, we chose an hTERT promoter sequence in our
previous study and optimized its tumor specificity by
inserting several E-boxes, the binding sites of positive regulator c-myc, into its core region sequence. Using this
optimized telomerase specific promoter, we created a

Cancer

April 1, 2012

tumor-specific in vivo imaging model. In vitro and in vivo
studies have demonstrated that this telomerase-specific
lentivirus is able to express green fluorescent protein
(GFP) specifically in telomerase-positive tumors; these
studies have provided high-quality fluorescence images of
tumors using an optical camera.22 Although several successful studies using the hTERT promoter in tumor-targeting gene therapy have been conducted, using the
tumor-targeting character of the hTERT promoter in the
real-time and noninvasive assessment of tumor response
to gene therapy has not yet been reported.
In the present study, we constructed a lentivirus system in which the optimized hTERT promoter was used to
drive the expression of the cytosine deaminase (CD) gene,
one of the suicide genes, and a GFP reporter gene (pLentiCD/GFP). The lentivirus was used to infect telomerasepositive or telomerase-negative cell lines. In vitro and in
vivo experiments were conducted to analyze the dynamic
processes of exogenous gene expression noninvasively in
cell culture and living animals in real time via optical imaging, which represented the therapeutic response to gene
therapy for tumors. The result demonstrated that the
pLenti-CD/GFP lentivirus was able to express the CD protein in telomerase-positive tumor cells and significantly
decreased the cell proliferation in vitro and suppressed the
tumor growth in tumor-bearing nude mice in telomerasepositive cell lines after the use of the prodrug of the CD
protein, 5-flucytosine (5-FC). However, it could not
express GFP and CD in telomerase-negative cell lines, nor
could it induce any suicidal effect in those cells. The current
study created a real-time and noninvasive method to monitor tumor response during gene therapy. This technology
provides a valuable method to evaluate the therapeutic
response or biological reaction for tumors in vivo.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Cell Lines and Plasmids
The following 3 human malignant tumor cell lines were
purchased from the Institute of Biochemistry and Cell
Biology (Shanghai, China): HepG2 (liver cancer cells),
SGC7901 (gastric cancer cells), and SW480 (colon cancer
cells); in addition, a human embryonic kidney cell line
293FT was bought for lentivirus recombination. Two
human osteosarcoma cell lines (U2OS and SaoS2) were
purchased from the American Type Culture Collection
(Manassas VA). Telomerase expression in these cell lines
was examined and described in our previous report.22
HepG2, SGC7901, SW480, and 293FT were confirmed
as telomerase-positive, whereas U2OS and SaoS-2 were

1885

Original Article

confirmed as telomerase-negative. Medium and culturing
procedure were described in the previous report.22
Generation of Therapeutic and Monitoring
Lentiviral Vectors
pLenti-hTERTp-GFP is a telomerase-specific third generation lentiviral vector that we constructed in our previous
work.22 This vector is able to express GFP under an optimized hTERT promoter specifically in telomerase-positive
cells.22 In this study, it was used as a backbone plasmid to
build a tumor-specific therapeutic and monitoring vector.
It also served as a nontherapeutic, monitoring control vector. Plasmid pCD2, which encodes the suicidal CD gene,
was a kind gift from Dr. G. Huang from the Third Military
Medical University. Plasmid pIRES2-EGFP (purchased
from BD Biosciences [Clontech, Mountain View, CA])
encodes a multiple cloning site and an GFP gene, which are
linked by a ribosome entry site (IRES).23
The telomerase-specific therapeutic and monitoring
lentivirus Lenti-hTERTp-CD-IRES2-GFP was constructed using the following strategies. The forward primer
50 -GGACTAGTCGAATTCTGTGGTGGAGTCGAC
GCCCCTCTCCCTCCCC-30 and reverse primer 50 CGACTTCGAATTACTTGTACAGCTCGTCCATG30 were used to amplify IRES2-EGFP from pIRES2EGFP. To insert the amplified product into pLentihTERTp-GFP and replace GFP, 2 enzyme sites, SpeI and
BspT104I, were designed into the forward and reverse
primers. Another pair of enzyme sites, EcoRI and SalI,
were designed into the forward primer for the insertion of
CD, which was amplified from pCD2 by forward primer
50 -CCGGAATTCAGGCTAGCAAT-30 and reverse
primer
50 -ACGCGTCGACTCAACGTTTGTAATCGATGGC T-30 . The polymerase chain reaction (PCR)
fragment of IRES2-EGFP was ligated into pLentihTERTp-GFP to form pLenti-hTERTp-IRES2-EGFP.
The PCR fragment of CD was then digested with EcoRI
and SalI and ligated into pLenti-hTERTp-IRES2-GFP to
form pLenti-hTERTp-CD-IRES2-EGFP, which was
abbreviated as pLenti-CD/GFP. The backbone plasmid
pLenti-hTERTp-GFP was abbreviated as pLenti-GFP. The
product plasmid pLenti-CD/GFP was then sequenced.
The lentiviral vectors of Lenti-CD/GFP and LentiGFP were produced as described.22 Third-generation lentivirus packaging plasmids pRSV-Rev, pMDLg/pRRE,
pMD2.G (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA) and our transferring
plasmid pLenti-CD/GFP or Lenti-GFP were cotransfected
into 293T cells via a calcium phosphate-mediated transfection method. Ten hours after transfection, the culture

1886

medium was changed to regular Dulbecco’s modified
Eagle’s medium culture containing 10% fetal bovine serum.
Seventy-two hours after transfection, cell supernatants were
collected and filtered through 0.22-lm pore size filters.
Product vectors were concentrated 100-fold by ultracentrifugation before freezing and storing at 70 C. Lentivirus titer
was measured by a quantitative PCR method as described.22
Reverse-Transcription PCR and Western Blot
for CD Expression
CD expression in the transduced cell lines was confirmed by
reverse-transcription PCVR (RT-PCR) for CD messenger
RNA (mRNA) and western blot for CD protein. For RTPCR, total RNA of transduced cells was extracted by RNA
isolation kit RNAisoTM Plus (Takara, Dalian, China). RTPCR was performed with a PrimeScriptTM RT reagent kit
(Takara) following the standard manual. CD complementary DNAs were amplified using the forward primer 50 TTGTCGTATCCCAACGGTGA-30 and reverse primer
50 -GTCGATGAGACGGTCGTATTT TT-30 ; b-actin
was amplified using the forward primer 50 -CTTCTACAATGAGCTGCGTG-30 and reverse primer 50 -TCATGAGGTAGTCAGTCAGG-30 . RT reaction was
performed at 37 C for 30 minutes, and 85 C for 5 seconds.
CD amplification was performed at 94 C for 5 minutes, followed by 28 cycles of 94 C for 30 seconds, 60 C for 30 seconds, 72 C for 30 seconds, and a final 72 C for 5 minutes.
Western blots were performed as described.22 Proteins of transduced cells were separated by 10% polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis in the presence of sodium
dodecyl sulfate and then electrophoretically transferred
onto a polyvinylidene difluoride membrane. The membrane was hybridized with 1:200 dilutions of the sheep
polyclonal anti-CD (Novus Biologicals, Littleton, CO)
overnight at 4 C and then washed and incubated with an
alkaline phosphatase-conjugated rabbit anti-sheep immunoglobulin G antibody for 1 hour at room temperature.
Immunoreactive bands were detected using an enhanced
chemiluminescent western blot analysis system (Amersham Biosciences, Buckinghamshire, UK).
MTT Assay for Suicidal Effect of Transduced
Tumor Cells
The cell suicidal effect of the Lenti-CD/GFP transduced tumor cells was studied by a standard 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide (MTT, Sigma,
Dorset, UK) assay. Briefly, the 3 telomerase-positive cell
lines, HepG2, SGC7901, and SW480, and 2 telomerasenegative cell lines, U2OS and SaoS2, were seeded in 6-well

Cancer

April 1, 2012

Imaging of Therapeutic Response of Tumors by hTERT Promoter/Yu et al

plates at a density of 1  105 per well. Twenty-four hours
after seeding, lentivirus Lenti-CD/GFP and nontherapeutic
control Lenti-GFP were added into each well at an multiplicity of infection of 2. Seventy-two hours after transfection, prodrug 5-FC of the suicidal CD gene was added in
each plate with a concentration of 50 lg, 100 lg, 200 lg,
and 400 lg/mL medium. Each condition was performed in
triplicate. Ninety-six hours after 5-FC addition, cells were
examined for survival level by a standard MTT assay.

In Vivo Monitoring of Tumor Therapeutic
Effect by Lenti-CD/GFP
For in vivo monitoring of the therapeutic effects in tumors
treated with lentivirus Lenti-CD/GFP, we transduced tumor-bearing mice by intratumoral injection of lentivirus
and observed tumor growth pattern by an in vivo imaging
device for 1 month. Briefly, 10 BALB/c nude mice were
purchased from the Animal Department, Third Military
Medical University (Chongqing, China), and they were
used at the age of 4-6 weeks old. Animal studies were performed in agreement with the local ethics committee of the
Third Military Medical University. All nude mice were
maintained in a specific pathogen-free (SPF) environment,
and body weight was kept between 18 and 20 g. Three
groups of mice models bearing telomerase-positive tumors
(HepG2, SGC-7901 and SW480) were built. Each group
contained 3 identical mice bearing the same types of
tumors on both sides of gluteal areas. Another group of 3
mice was set as a telomerase-negative tumor control with
U2OS tumors on both sides of gluteal areas. Ten days after
the implantation, when tumors were palpable, all 4 groups
of mice were intratumorally injected with the therapeutic
and monitoring lentivirus Lenti-CD/GFP in the right side
tumors and nontherapeutic control Lenti-GFP in the left
side tumors, all at 8  106 TU viruses per tumor.
Three days after virus transduction, mice were imaged
once a week for 4 weeks under a KODAK In-Vivo Multispectral Imaging System FX (Carestream Health, New Haven, CT). Fluorescent images and regular pictures of the
tumor-bearing mice were obtained, and the long and short
diameters of the tumors were measured at the beginning of
the first week and the end of each of the following 4 weeks.
At the beginning of the first week and daily for the following
4 weeks, the CD prodrug 5-FC was intraperitoneally
injected into each mouse at 300 mg/kg body weight.
Tumors were imaged, photographed, and measured 5 times.
All the fluorescent images and regular images of tumor-bearing mice were assembled, and the recorded tumor volume

Cancer

April 1, 2012

was analyzed on broken line graph. Mice were then sacrificed
and tumors were dissected for histology experiments.
Biopsy and Histological Examination of
Proteins in Tumor Cells
To confirm the transgene expression in tumor cells, we
examined all dissected tumors for GFP protein expression by
observing frozen tumor sections under laser confocal microscope. Moreover, we examined cytosine deaminase protein
expression by immunohistochemistry. For frozen section,
dissected tumors were sliced into 0.5-lm-thick sections and
observed under a laser confocal microscope for fluorescent
signals from GFP. The residuary tumors were then fixed in
paraformaldehyde for CD protein examination. First, the
endogenous peroxidase activity was blocked by 0.3% H2O2methanol solution for 30 minutes. Tumors were then incubated with CD primary antibody (Novus Biologicals) overnight at 4 C, and then with secondary antibody for 30
minutes at 25 C. The staining was developed by immersing
the slides into a DAB/H2O2 solution.
Statistics
All experiments were run in triplicate, and the results are
given as the mean  SD of triplicate determinations. Statistical analysis was performed using the Student t test.
Differences were considered statistically significant when
the P value was less than 0.05. All statistical analyses were
performed with SPSS 11.5 software.

RESULTS
Generation and Validation of the Therapeutic
and Monitoring Lentivirus
The product plasmid pLenti-hTERTp-CD-IRES2-GFP
was theoretically 9218 bp in length, containing the 1301bp CD gene between EcoRI and SalI and 1314-bp
IRES2-EGFP sequence between SalI and BspT104I. For
plasmid validation, the plasmid was digested with EcoRI
and SalI, and a 1301-bp CD fragment was detected.
Meanwhile, the plasmid was digested with SpeI and
BspT104I, and a 1314-bp IRES2-EGFP fragment was
detected (Figure 1A). The plasmid was also sequenced,
and the result indicated that both CD and GFP were correctly inserted into the vector (data not shown). The plasmid was named pLenti-CD/GFP, and the backbone
plasmid pLenti-hTERTp-GFP was named pLenti-GFP.
After cotransfecting 293FT cells with pLenti-CD/
GFP or pLenti-GFP and the 3 packaging plasmids, viral
supernatants were collected and concentrated. Cell

1887

Original Article

Figure 1. Lentiviral vector construction and cell transduction
are shown. (A) Construction of pLenti-hTERTp-CD-IRES2-GFP
(pLenti-CD/GFP) is shown. Lane 1: marker. Lane 2: plasmid
pLenti-CD/GFP digested with EcoRI and SalI. Lane 3: plasmid
pLenti-CD/GFP digested with SpeI and BspT104I. (B) Telomerase-positive or telomerase-negative cell lines transduced with
Lenti-CD/GFP and Lenti-GFP at a multiplicity of infection of 2
are shown. Seventy-two hours after transduction, different cell
lines were imaged under a Leica TCS SP5 Confocal Laser
Scanning System at a magnification of 200. Panel 1: HepG2.
Panel 2: SGC7901. Panel 3: SW480. Panel 4: U2OS. Panel 5:
SaoS2. (C) Expression of CD messenger RNA (mRNA) in different cell lines transduced with Lenti-CD/GFP is shown. (a)
CD mRNA was detected in the 3 telomerase-positive cell lines
but not in the 2 telomerase-negative cell lines. (b) b-Actin
mRNA was detected in all 5 cell lines. Lane 1: marker. Lane 2:
HepG2. Lane 3: SGC7901. Lane 4: SW480. Lane 5: U2OS. Lane
6: SaoS2. (D) Expression of CD protein in different cell lines
transduced with Lenti-CD/GFP is shown. CD protein was
detected in the 3 telomerase-positive cell lines but not in the 2
telomerase-negative cell lines. Lane 1: HepG2. Lane 2:
SGC7901. Lane 3: SW480. Lane 4: U2OS. Lane 5: SaoS2.

transduction and quantitative PCR were performed. Lentivirus titers were calculated by the following equation:
TU/mL of LV ¼ copies (WPRE/b-actin)  cell number
(5  104)  dilution times  1000 lL/mL. The titer of
Lenti-CD/GFP and Lenti-GFP were 3.65  108 and 2.75
 108 Tu/mL, respectively.
GFP and CD Expression in LentivirusTransduced Cells
Five cell lines transduced with Lenti-CD/GFP at a multiplicity of infection of 2 were imaged 72 hours after

1888

the transduction under a Leica TCS SP5 confocal laser scanning microscope system (Leica, Mannheim, Germany). Fluorescent signals were detected in 80% of cells from the
telomerase-positive lines, whereas none were detected from
telomerase-negative cells (Figure 1B), except for 1 or 2 fluorescent cells per visual field, which were considered dead cells.
A fragment of 159 bp could be amplified from the
CD gene in the 3 telomerase-positive cell lines (HepG2,
SGC7901, and SW480) via RT-PCR, whereas nothing
was amplified in the 2 telomerase-negative cell lines
(U2OS and SaoS2) (Figure 1C).
Western blot analysis revealed that CD protein was
detected in the 3 telomerase-positive cell lines, but there
was no CD protein detected in the 2 telomerase-negative
cell lines (Figure 1D). This result proved that our therapeutic and monitoring lentivirus was able to express both
therapeutic and monitoring genes specifically in telomerase-positive cells.
To guarantee that the lentivirus successfully infected
the telomerase-negative tumor cell lines, we used a PCR
method to amplify a characteristic fragment of lentivirus
from all the infected cells and their uninfected parental
cells using forward primer (1277F) 50 -CCGTTTCAGGCAACGTG-30 and reverse primer (1361R) 50 -AGCTGACAGGTGGTGGCAAT-30 . The result demonstrated
that a characteristic fragment of 400 bp could be detected
from all the lentivirus-infected cells, whereas no fragment
was detected from the uninfected parental cells (data not
shown). This result indicated that we successfully infected
the 3 telomerase-positive cell lines and 2 telomerase-negative cell lines with our therapeutic lentivirus.
In Vitro Suicide Effect of the Therapeutic and
Monitoring Lentivirus on Tumor Cells
Tumor cells transduced with Lenti-CD/GFP and blank
control Lenti-GFP were treated with 5-FC for 3 days, and
then the transduced cells were examined with a standard
MTT assay for cell survival. Results showed that telomerase-positive cells transduced with Lenti-CD/GFP showed
significantly decreased survival, whereas no survival
decrease was observed in telomerase-negative cells transduced with Lenti-CD/GFP (P < .01 for HepG2,
SGC7901, and SW480 versus U2OS and SaoS2) (Figure
2B). All cells transduced with Lenti-GFP showed no survival decrease (Figure 2A). Furthermore, we found that in
the 3 cell lines with decreased survival, cells that were
treated with 50 lg/mL 5-FC had much higher survival
than those with 100, 200 and 400 lg/mL 5-FC. In other
words, the lethal effect of the lentivirus was 5-FC

Cancer

April 1, 2012

Imaging of Therapeutic Response of Tumors by hTERT Promoter/Yu et al

Figure 2. In vitro lethal effect in lentivirus-tranduced cells.
(A) Survival of cells transduced with Lenti-GFP. Five cell lines
transduced with Lenti-GFP were treated with 5-flucytosine
(5-FC) at 4 different concentrations. Transduced cells were
examined for absorption level at 540 nm, which indicated the
cell survival rate after 5-FC treatment. (B) Survival of cells
transduced with Lenti-CD are shown, examined using the
same strategy. **P<.01 for HepG2, SGC7901, and SW480 versus U2OS and SaoS2 at each 5-FC concentration.

concentration-dependent when 5-FC concentration was
less than 100 lg per milliliter. This dependence disappeared after concentration reached 100 lg per milliliter
(Figure 2B).
In Vivo Monitoring the Tumor Suppression
Effect of Lenti-CD/GFP
Mice models bearing different types of tumors were transduced with therapeutic and monitoring lentivirus and
treated with prodrug 5-FC throughout the 4 weeks of observation. Altogether, mice were imaged and tumors were
measured 5 times after Lenti-CD/GFP transduction. Regular images (Figure 3A) and fluorescent images (Figure 3B)
at the first to fifth imaging were collected and assembled.
Tumor volumes, measured each week, were calculated
using the following equation: Volume ¼ (a2  b)/2 (where
a refers to long diameter and b refers to short diameter).24
In all 5 batches of imaging, the group of telomerasenegative tumor-bearing mice showed no fluorescent signals in tumors on either side. For the 3 groups of telomerase-positive tumor-bearing mice, both left and right side

Cancer

April 1, 2012

tumors showed intensive fluorescent signals, contrasting
strongly with the surrounding normal tissues. The fluorescent and regular pictures showed that all the left side
tumors of the HepG2, SGC-7901 and SW480 groups
grew at the same rate as the U2OS group; tumor volume
increased from 100 mm3 to 3000 mm3 in 4 weeks. All the
right side tumors of the 3 groups that were transduced
with Lenti-CD/GFP showed significantly suppressed tumor growth, with volumes increasing from 100 mm3 to
600 mm3 during the 4 weeks of observation. The tumor
cell infiltration boundary was clearly observed on fluorescent pictures.
The contrast between left side tumors that were
transduced with Lenti-GFP and right side tumors that
were transduced with Lenti-CD/GFP was further confirmed by numeric data of measured volume (Figure 4A).
The last measurements indicated that Lenti-CD/GFP–
transduced telomerase-positive tumors were 1/5 to 1/6
the size of Lenti-GFP-transduced control tumors, with
dissected tumor shape pictures showing the same result
(Figure 4B).
GFP and CD Expression in Tumors Tissues
Fluorescent signals were detected from all telomerase-positive tumors, regardless of right or left tumors, while
U2OS tumors showed no GFP signals (Figure 5B). CD
proteins were detected only in the right side tumors of the
3 telomerase-positive groups that were transduced with
Lenti-CD/GFP, whereas none were detected in the left
side tumors, which were transduced with Lenti-GFP.
Tumors on both sides of the U2OS group showed no
expression of CD protein (Figure 5C). This result further
confirmed that 1) the therapeutic and monitoring lentivirus and blank control were able to specifically express
transgenes in telomerase-positive tumors targeted by
hTERT promoter and 2) only the growth-suppressed
tumors had CD expression, strongly suggesting that CDcontaining lentivirus induced the growth suppression.

DISCUSSION
Molecular imaging has become an important technology
to monitor gene expression in living subjects noninvasively and in real time. In recent years, strategies, such as
imaging the expression of a therapeutic transgene, have
been developed to couple and proportionally coexpress a
reporter gene with a transgene of interest to noninvasively
assess exogenous gene expression.25,26 The expression of
the gene of interest is indirectly localized and quantified

1889

Original Article

Figure 3. In vivo dynamic observation of tumor growth after intratumor injection of lentiviral vector Lenti-CD/GFP by digital camera and charge-coupled device (CCD) is shown. Four groups of mice bearing HepG2, SGC7901, SW480, and U2OS tumors on
both sides of gluteal areas were constructed by subcutaneous inoculation of cell lines. For all the mice, left side tumors were
intratumorally injected with Lenti-CD/GFP and right side tumors were injected with Lenti-GFP. Prodrug 5-flucytosine (5-FC) was
intraperitoneally injected into each mouse 10 days after lentivirus injection and then daily for 4 weeks. Mice were photographed
with a digital camera (A) and with CCD (B) at the first injection of 5-FC, and at the end of each week for 4 weeks.

by the assessment of the marker gene. Thus, in the present
study, we constructed a reporter gene, GFP, that was
coexpressed with the CD suicide gene to noninvasively
observe the real-time therapeutic response of cancer to
gene therapy.

1890

Reporter systems based on optical imaging of the
expression of GFP are widely applied in small animals.27
Furthermore, it appears that fusion of GFP to other proteins does not significantly alter its fluorescence properties
or the intracellular location of the fusion protein.28,29

Cancer

April 1, 2012

Imaging of Therapeutic Response of Tumors by hTERT Promoter/Yu et al

Figure 4. Tumor growth suppression process in vivo is shown.
(A) Dynamic observation of tumor suppression. **P<.01 for
HepG2, SGC7901, and SW480 infected with Lenti-CD/GFP
versus those infected with Lenti-GFP and U2OS and SaoS2
infected with both vectors. (B) Comparison of tumor size
among the excised tumors is shown. The upper row of each
panel shows left side tumors transduced with Lenti-GFP, and
the lower row of each panel shows right side tumors transduced with Lenti-CD/GFP.

Therefore, we constructed a lentivirus coexpressing GFP
and CD genes. We used GFP as a reporter gene to monitor the expression of CD. Endogenous autofluorescence
usually results in substantial background emission that
limits the sensitivity and specificity of this technology for
in vivo imaging in living animals. In addition, exponentially decreasing intensity of emitted light with increasing
depth of the target must also be taken into account. However, fluorescence emission is much more intense than
bioluminescence. The use of selective filters or the application of spectral analysis can significantly reduce the contribution of autofluorescence to the acquired images.
Recently, several studies have demonstrated that imaging
in the near-infrared spectrum maximizes tissue penetrance
in addition to minimizing the autofluorescence from nontarget tissue. Advances in near-infrared fluorescence imaging have permitted the development of fluorochromes
coupled to quenching peptides that are activated by specific proteases at the target site.30,31 Another defect of optical imaging is that recent charge-coupled device (CCD)

Cancer

April 1, 2012

cannot tomoscan as computed tomography or magnetic
resonance imaging. Therefore, CCD cannot provide information of intratumor structure. To overcome the lack
of volumetric information from fluorescence images, a
new technique called fluorescence molecular tomography
can account for the diffusive propagation of photons in
tissue.32 This instrument can provide a tomographical
image of fluorochrome distribution. In theory, the technique can achieve several centimeters of tissue
penetration.
The next question is how to guarantee that the coexpression gene only expresses in the tumor cells and not in
normal tissues. Previous studies have shown that telomerase is universally expressed in 85% of malignant tumors,6
whereas it is strongly repressed in most normal somatic
tissues. Telomerase-specific expression of therapeutic
genes, such as cytotoxic or proapoptotic genes, driven by
the hTERT promoter has been successfully achieved.33,34
Other modalities that use the hTERT promoter as a tumor-specific expression element have succeeded in oncolytic virotherapy,35 and tumor metastasis imaging.36 In
our previous study, we designed an optimized hTERT
promoter by insertion of several copies of a c-myc binding
sequence. The optimized promoter showed strict telomerase specificity in lentivirus-mediated transgene expression.22 In the present study, we used the same telomerasespecific hTERT promoter for coexpression of CD and
GFP genes. The in vitro experiment showed that the
expression of the CD protein in telomerase-positive tumor cells significantly decreased cell proliferation. This
result was seen further in tumor cells growing in nude
mice. Mice bearing telomerase-positive tumors were
intratumorally injected with lenti-CD/GFP. Tumor
growth was monitored by an in vivo fluorescence imaging
system, regular photographs, and tumor size measurements. All data showed significant growth ceasing in the
transduced tumors, contrasted with a duplicated control
tumor that was transduced with lenti-GFP and growing
on the same mouse. CD protein was detected in growthsuppressed tumors by histological methods, which confirmed the cytotoxicity of conditionally expressed CD
protein.
Gene transfer systems are a critical factor for successful suicide gene therapy. Adenoviruses were used as gene
transfer system in several studies of targeted tumor imaging or therapy.36 Indeed, adenovirus achieved high performance in transducing tumor cells. In some studies, it
can be combined with other conditional response elements. However, transgene imaging or therapy requires

1891

Original Article

Figure 5. Histological study of the excised tumor tissues is shown, including (A) hematoxylin and eosin staining of the excised
tumors and (B) green fluorescent protein expression in tumors. Frozen sections of each tumor were prepared and stained with 6diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI) (Roche, Mannheim, Germany). Green-colored signals are green fluorescent protein signals, and redcolored signals are DAPI-stained nucleus. (C) Expression of CD protein in tumor tissues by immunohistochemical staining is shown.

long-term expression of the target gene, and the adenovirus-mediated gene is expressed free from the host genome, therefore the target gene expression is easy to
attenuate. Moreover, most adenoviruses cannot transduce nondividing cells, such as cancer stem cells,6 which
are a possible target of gene therapy. In the present study,
a third-generation lentivirus system was adopted as a
transfer system. Third-generation lentivirus system is an
optimized gene transfer system that contains 4 plasmids:
transferring vector pLenti6/V5-D-TOPO and 3 packaging plasmids each harboring pMDLg/pRRE, pRSV-Rev,
and pMD2.G. Compared with the second-generation
lentivirus, which has 3 plasmids, this system divides all
the necessary elements into 4 plasmids, greatly improved
the incidence of recombinating into wild-type human
immunodeficiency virus. What’s more, this system is
able to transduce nondividing cells that are telomerasepositive.17,21 This provides the potential to treat tumor
cells at the very beginning of tumorigenesis. In our
previous study, tumor cells transduced with this lentivirus expressed target gene for 40 days during passaging,

1892

without GFP signal attenuation.22 In the present study,
tumors were transduced at the size of 100 mm3, and the
GFP was expressed up to a tumor size of 3000 mm3,
with increased fluorescence intensity and a clear tumor
boundary. The long-term expression of a 2.6-kb target
gene indicated that this system has promising potential
for tumor gene therapy.
In conclusion, we have demonstrated that a lentivirus system coexpressing a suicide gene, cytosine deaminase, and a reporter gene, GFP, can be specifically
expressed in telomerase-positive tumor cells in vitro
and in vivo. A significant lethal effect on cultured tumor cells was observed after the use of 5-FC. Suicidal
lentivirus-transduced tumors in living mice presented
stably progressing tumor growth suppression, monitored by a real-time, noninvasive, tumor-specific imaging system. This model provides data for preclinical
application of virus-mediated tumor gene therapy, with
the advantages of an easily monitored therapeutic
effect, broad therapeutic window, and 5-FC switchable
therapy mode.

Cancer

April 1, 2012

Imaging of Therapeutic Response of Tumors by hTERT Promoter/Yu et al

FUNDING SOURCES
This work was supported by grants from the National Nature Science Foundation of China (30871150), the Chongqing Science
Fund for Distinguished Young Scholars (CSTC, 2009BA5045).
We also thank the editors of the American Journal of Experts for editing this manuscript.

19.
20.
21.

CONFLICT OF INTEREST DISCLOSURES
The authors made no disclosures.

REFERENCES
1. Jemal A, Siegel R, Ward E, et al. Cancer statistics, 2009.
CA Cancer J Clin. 2009;59:225-249.
2. Hanahan D, Weinberg RA. The hallmarks of cancer. Cell.
2000;100:57-70.
3. Anderson WF, Blaese RM, Culver K. The ADA human
gene therapy clinical protocol: points to consider response
with clinical protocol. Hum Gene Ther. 1990;1:331-362.
4. Asano S. Gene therapy as translational research. Mol Urol.
2000;4:41.
5. Lo HW, Day CP, Hung MC. Cancer-specific gene therapy.
Adv Genet. 2005;54:235-255.
6. Fukazawa T, Matsuoka J, Yamatsuji T, et al. Adenovirusmediated cancer gene therapy and virotherapy. Int J Mol
Med. 2010;25:3-10.
7. Schenk E, Essand M, Bangma CH, et al. Clinical adenoviral
gene therapy for prostate cancer. Hum Gene Ther.
2010;21:807-813.
8. Young A, McNeish IA. Oncolytic adenoviral gene therapy
in ovarian cancer: why we are not wasting our time. Future
Oncol. 2009;5:339-357.
9. Serganova I, Ponomarev V, Blasberg R. Human reporter
genes: potential use in clinical studies. Nucl Med Biol.
2007;34:791-807.
10. Serganova I, Ponomarev V, Blasberg R. Human reporter
genes: potential use in clinical studies. Nucl Med Biol.
2007;34:791-807.
11. Waerzeggers Y, Monfared P, Viel T, et al. Methods to monitor gene therapy with molecular imaging. Methods.
2009;48:146-160.
12. de Lange T. Shelterin: the protein complex that shapes and
safeguards human telomeres. Genes Dev. 2005;19:21002110.
13. Liu D, O’Connor MS, Qin J, Songyang Z. Telosome, a
mammalian telomere-associated complex formed by multiple
telomeric proteins. J Biol Chem. 2004;279:51338-51342.
14. Kelland L. Targeting the limitless replicative potential of
cancer: the telomerase/telomere pathway. Clin Cancer Res.
2007;13:4960-4963.
15. Hiyama E, Hiyama K. Telomerase as tumor marker. Cancer
Lett. 2003;194:221-233.
16. Shay JW, Bacchetti S. A survey of telomerase activity in
human cancer. Eur J Cancer. 1997;33:787-791.
17. Armanios M, Greider CW. Telomerase and cancer stem
cells. Cold Spring Harb Symp Quant Biol. 2005;70:205-208.
18. Kusumoto M, Ogawa T, Mizumoto K, et al. Adenovirusmediated p53 gene transduction inhibits telomerase activity
independent of its effects on cell cycle arrest and apoptosis

Cancer

April 1, 2012

22.
23.

24.

25.

26.
27.
28.

29.

30.
31.
32.
33.

34.

35.
36.

in human pancreatic cancer cells. Clin Cancer Res.
1999;5:2140-2147.
Oh S, Song YH, Yim J, Kim TK. Identification of Mad as
a repressor of the human telomerase (hTERT) gene. Oncogene. 2000;19:1485-1490.
Wang J, Xie LY, Allan S, Beach D, Hannon GJ. Myc activates telomerase. Genes Dev. 1998;12:1769-1774.
Cong YS, Bacchetti S. Histone deacetylation is involved in
the transcriptional repression of hTERT in normal human
cells. J Biol Chem. 2000;275:35665-35668.
Yu ST, Yang YB, Liang GP, et al. An optimized telomerasespecific lentivirus for optical imaging of tumors. Cancer Res.
2010;70:2585-2594.
Chen L, Liang GP, Tang XD, et al. In vitro anti-tumor
immune response induced by dendritic cells transfected with
hTERT recombinant adenovirus. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2006;351:927-934.
Rabbani ZN, Spasojevic I, Zhang X, et al. Antiangiogenic
action of redox-modulating Mn(III) meso-tetrakis(N-ethylpyridinium-2-yl)porphyrin, MnTE-2-PyP(5þ), via suppression of oxidative stress in a mouse model of breast tumor.
Free Radic Biol Med. 2009;47:992-1004.
Yaghoubi SS, Wu L, Liang Q, et al. Direct correlation
between positron emission tomographic images of two reporter genes delivered by two distinct adenoviral vectors.
Gene Ther. 2001;8:1072-1080.
Yu Y, Annala AJ, Barrio JR, et al. Quantification of target
gene expression by imaging reporter gene expression in living animals. Nat Med. 2000;6:933-937.
Hoffman RM. In vivo imaging with fluorescent proteins:
the new cell biology. Acta Histochem. 2004;106:77-87.
Ponomarev V, Doubrovin M, Serganova I, et al. Cytoplasmically retargeted HSV1-tk/GFP reporter gene mutants
for optimization of noninvasive molecular-genetic imaging.
Neoplasia. 2003;5:245-254.
Ponomarev V, Doubrovin M, Serganova I, et al. A novel
triple-modality reporter gene for whole-body fluorescent,
bioluminescent, and nuclear noninvasive imaging. Eur J
Nucl Med Mol Imaging. 2004;31:740-751.
Becker A, Hessenius C, Licha K, et al. Receptor-targeted
optical imaging of tumors with near-infrared fluorescent
ligands. Nat Biotechnol. 2001;19:327-331.
Weissleder R, Tung CH, Mahmood U, Bogdanov A Jr. In
vivo imaging of tumors with protease-activated near-infrared
fluorescent probes. Nat Biotechnol. 1999;17:375-378.
Ntziachristos V, Tung CH, Bremer C, Weissleder R. Fluorescence molecular tomography resolves protease activity in
vivo. Nat Med. 2002;8:757-760.
Abdul-Ghani R, Ohana P, Matouk I, et al. Use of transcriptional regulatory sequences of telomerase (hTER and
hTERT) for selective killing of cancer cells. Mol Ther.
2000;2:539-544.
Komata T, Kondo Y, Kanzawa T, et al. Caspase-8 gene
therapy using the human telomerase reverse transcriptase
promoter for malignant glioma cells. Hum Gene Ther.
2002;13:1015-1025.
Kawashima T, Kagawa S, Kobayashi N, et al. Telomerasespecific replication-selective virotherapy for human cancer.
Clin Cancer Res. 2004;10:285-292.
Kishimoto H, Kojima T, Watanabe Y, et al. In vivo imaging of lymph node metastasis with telomerase-specific replication-selective adenovirus. Nat Med. 2006;12:1213-1219.

1893

