HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Author Manuscript

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 August 12.
Published in final edited form as:
Nature. 2015 February 12; 518(7538): 258–262. doi:10.1038/nature14184.

Homologous recombination-deficient tumors are hyperdependent on POLQ-mediated repair
Raphael Ceccaldi1, Jessica C. Liu1,2,3, Ravindra Amunugama4, Ildiko Hajdu5, Benjamin
Primack1, Mark I.R. Petalcorin6, Kevin W. O'Connor1, Panagiotis A. Konstantinopoulos7,
Stephen J. Elledge5, Simon J. Boulton6, Timur Yusufzai1,2, and Alan D. D'Andrea1

Author Manuscript

1Department

of Radiation Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical School

2Department

of Biological Chemistry & Molecular Pharmacology, Harvard Medical School

3Department

of Molecular & Cellular Biology, Harvard University, Cambridge

4Howard

Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Biological Chemistry and Molecular
Pharmacology, Harvard Medical School

5Howard
6DNA

Hughes Medical Institute, Division of Genetics, Brigham and Women's Hospital

Damage Response Laboratory, Cancer Research UK, London Research Institute, Clare

Hall
7Department

of Medical Oncology, Medical Gynecologic Oncology Program, Dana-Farber Cancer
Institute, Harvard Medical School

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Large-scale genomic studies have shown that half of epithelial ovarian cancers (EOCs) have
alterations in genes regulating homologous recombination (HR) repair1. Loss of HR
accounts for the genomic instability of EOCs and for their cellular hyper-dependence on
alternative poly-ADP ribose polymerase (PARP)-mediated DNA repair mechanisms2-5.
Previous studies have implicated the DNA polymerase POLQ6 in a pathway required for the
repair of DNA double-strand breaks7-9, referred to as the error-prone microhomologymediated end-joining (MMEJ) pathway10-13. Whether POLQ interacts with canonical DNA
repair pathways to prevent genomic instability remains unknown. Here we report an inverse
correlation between HR activity and POLQ expression in EOCs. While knockdown of
POLQ in HR-proficient cells up-regulates HR activity and RAD51 nucleofilament assembly,
knockdown of POLQ in HR-deficient EOCs enhances cell death. Consistent with these
results, genetic inactivation of an HR gene (Fancd2) and Polq in mice results in embryonic
lethality. Moreover, POLQ contains RAD51 binding motifs, and it blocks RAD51-mediated

Users may view, print, copy, and download text and data-mine the content in such documents, for the purposes of academic research,
subject always to the full Conditions of use:http://www.nature.com/authors/editorial_policies/license.html#terms
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to A.D.D (alan_dandrea@dfci.harvard.edu).
Author Contributions: R.C conceived the study, performed experiments, and wrote the manuscript. J.L. purified POLQ fragments
from insect cells and performed ATPase and gel shift assays. R.A performed D-loop formation assays. I.H. performed DNA fibers
assay. B.P. performed mice work and analyzed in vivo data. M.P and S.B performed the POLQ peptide array and the RAD51-ssDNA
filament assembly and release assays. K.W.O scored RAD51 foci. P.A.K curated TCGA datasets for Figure 3a and Extended Data
Figures 5h, 9e and provided clinical perspectives. A.D.D conceived the study and wrote the manuscript. All authors approved the final
version of the manuscript.

Ceccaldi et al.

Page 2

Author Manuscript

recombination. Our results reveal a synthetic lethal relationship between the HR pathway
and POLQ-mediated repair in EOCs, and identify POLQ as a novel druggable target for
cancer therapy.
To examine changes in polymerase activity between tumors and normal tissues, we screened
polymerase gene expression profiles in a broad number of cancers (Supplementary Table 1).
Gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) revealed specific and recurrent overexpression of
POLQ in EOCs (Extended Data Fig. 1a-c). POLQ was up-regulated in a grade-dependent
manner and its expression positively correlated with numerous mediators of HR (Extended
Data Fig. 1d-j). Since POLQ has been suggested to play a role in DNA repair7-10, we
investigated a potential role for POLQ in HR repair.

Author Manuscript

To test the relationship between POLQ expression and HR, we used a cell-based assay
which measures the efficiency of recombination of two GFP alleles (DR-GFP)14.
Knockdown of POLQ with siRNA (Extended Data Fig. 2a) resulted in an increase in HR
efficiency, similar to that observed by depleting the anti-recombinases PARI or BLM15,16.
Depletion of POLQ caused a significant increase in basal and radiation (IR)-induced RAD51
foci (Fig. 1a, b and Extended Data Fig. 2b-d), and depletion of POLQ in 293T cells
conferred cellular hypersensitivity to mitomycin C (MMC) and an increase in MMCinduced chromosomal aberrations (Extended Data Fig. 2e, f). These findings suggest that
human POLQ inhibits HR and participates in the maintenance of genome stability.

Author Manuscript

Given that POLQ shares structural homology with coexpressed RAD51-binding ATPases
(Extended Data Fig. 1k, l), we hypothesized that POLQ might regulate HR through an
interaction with RAD51. Indeed, RAD51 was detected in Flag-tagged POLQ
immunoprecipitates, and purified full-length Flag-POLQ bound recombinant human RAD51
(Fig. 1c, d). Pull-down assays with recombinant GST-RAD51 and in vitro translated POLQ
truncation mutants defined a region of POLQ binding to RAD51 spanning amino acid
847-894 (Fig. 1e, f and Extended Data Fig. 2g, h). Sequence homology of POLQ with the
RAD51 binding domain of C. elegans RFS-117 identified a second binding region (Extended
Data Fig. 2i). Peptides arrays narrowed down the RAD51 binding activity of POLQ to three
distinct motifs (Fig. 1g and Extended Data Fig. 2j). Substitution arrays confirmed the
interaction and highlighted the importance of the 847–894 POLQ region as both necessary
and sufficient for RAD51 binding (Extended Data Fig. 3a, b). Taken together, these results
indicate that POLQ is a RAD51-interacting protein that regulates HR.

Author Manuscript

In order to address the role of POLQ in HR regulation, we assessed the ability of wild-type
(WT) or mutant POLQ to complement the siPOLQ-dependent increase in RAD51 foci. Fulllength wild-type POLQ fully reduced IR-induced RAD51 foci, unlike POLQ mutated at
ATPase catalytic residues (A-dead) or POLQ lacking interaction with RAD51 (ΔRAD51)
(Fig. 2a, b). Expression of a POLQ mutant lacking the polymerase domain (ΔPol1) was
sufficient to decrease IR-induced RAD51 foci, suggesting that the N-terminal half of POLQ
is sufficient to disrupt RAD51 foci (Fig. 2b and Extended Data Fig. 3c, d). We next
measured the ability of wild-type or mutant POLQ to complement the siPOLQ-dependent
increase in HR efficiency. Again, expression of full-length POLQ or ΔPol1 decreased the
recombination frequency when compared to cells expressing other POLQ constructs,

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 August 12.

Ceccaldi et al.

Page 3

Author Manuscript

suggesting that the N-terminal half of POLQ containing the RAD51 binding domain and the
ATPase domain is needed to inhibit HR (Fig. 2c and Extended Data Fig. 3e).

Author Manuscript

A purified recombinant POLQ fragment (ΔPol2) from insect cells exhibited low levels of
basal ATPase activity, as previously reported18 (Fig. 2d, e). POLQ ATPase activity was
selectively stimulated by the addition of single-stranded DNA (ssDNA) or fork DNA (Fig.
2e and Extended Data Fig. 4a). Electrophoretic mobility gel shift assays (EMSA) showed
specific binding of POLQ to ssDNA (Fig. 2f and Extended Data Fig. 4b). We incubated
ΔPol2 with ssDNA and measured RAD51-ssDNA nucleofilament assembly. Interestingly,
RAD51-ssDNA assembly was reduced by wild-type ΔPol2 but not by A-dead or ΔRAD51,
indicating that POLQ negatively affects RAD51-ssDNA assembly through its RAD51
binding and ATPase activities (Fig. 2g and Extended Data Fig. 4c-f). Furthermore, POLQ
decreased the efficiency of D-loop formation, confirming that POLQ is a negative regulator
of HR (Fig. 2h and Extended Data Fig. 4g-j).

Author Manuscript

Since POLQ is up-regulated in subgroups of cancers associated with HR deficiency (Fig. 3a)
and POLQ activity shows specificity for replicative stress-mediated structures (ss and fork
DNA) (Fig. 2e, f), we examined the cellular functions of POLQ under replicative stress.
Subcellular fractionation revealed that POLQ is enriched in chromatin in response to
ultraviolet (UV) light; and RAD51 binding by POLQ was enhanced by UV exposure,
suggesting that POLQ regulates HR in cells under replicative stress (Extended Data Fig. 5a,
b). POLQ-depleted cells were hypersensitive to cellular stress and DNA damage along with
an exacerbated checkpoint activation and increased γH2AX phosphorylation (Fig. 3b, c).
Furthermore, the cell cycle progression of POLQ-depleted cells was impaired after DNA
damage (Fig. 3d, e). To determine the role of POLQ in replication dynamics, singlemolecule analyses were performed on extended DNA fibers19. Abnormalities in replication
fork progression were observed in POLQ-depleted cells (Fig. 3f, g and Extended Data Fig.
5c, d). These results suggest that POLQ maintains genomic stability at stalled or collapsed
replication forks by promoting fork restart.

Author Manuscript

To examine the regulation of POLQ, we quantified POLQ expression by RT-qPCR. POLQ
was selectively up-regulated in HR-deficient ovarian cancer cell lines. Complementation of
a BRCA1 or FANCD2-deficient cell lines, restored normal HR function and reduced POLQ
expression to normal levels. Conversely, siRNA-mediated inhibition of HR genes increased
POLQ expression (Extended Data Fig. 5e, f). POLQ expression was significantly higher in
subgroups of cancers with HR deficiency and a high genomic instability pattern20 (Fig. 3a
and Extended Data Fig. 5g). Patients with high POLQ expression had a better response to
platinum chemotherapy, a surrogate for HR deficiency, suggesting that POLQ expression
inversely correlates with HR activity and may be useful as a biomarker for platinium
sensitivity (Extended Data Fig. 5h, i). Together, these data indicate that increased POLQ
expression is driven by HR deficiency.
To assess the possible synthetic lethality between HR genes and POLQ, we generated an
HR-deficient ovarian tumor cell line, A2780-shFANCD2 cells (Extended Data Fig. 6a-c).
These cells, and the parental A2780 cells, were subjected to POLQ depletion, and survival
following exposure to cytotoxic drugs was measured. POLQ depletion reduced the survival

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 August 12.

Ceccaldi et al.

Page 4

Author Manuscript

of HR-deficient cells exposed to inhibitors of PARP (PARPi), cisplatin (CDDP), or MMC
(Extended Data Fig. 6d-f). POLQ inhibition impaired the survival of BRCA1-deficient
tumors (MDA-MB-436) after PARPi treatment but had no effect on the complemented line
(MDA-MB-436 + BRCA1) (Fig. 4a). POLQ-depleted cells were hypersensitive to ATM
inhibition, known to create an HR defect phenotype21. Chromosomal breakage, checkpoint
activation, and γH2AX phosphorylation in response to MMC were exacerbated by POLQ
depletion (Fig. 4b and Extended Data Fig. 6g, h). Furthermore, a whole-genome shRNA
screen performed on HR-deficient (FANCA-/-) fibroblasts showed that shRNAs targeting
POLQ impair cell survival in MMC (Extended Data Fig. 6i), suggesting that HR-deficient
cells cannot survive in the absence of POLQ.

Author Manuscript

Next, we investigated the interaction between the HR and POLQ pathways in vivo by
interbreeding Fancd2+/− and Polq+/− mice. Although Fancd2-/- and Polq-/- mice are viable
and exhibit subtle phenotypes7,22, viable Fancd2−/−Polq−/− mice were uncommon from
these matings (Extended Data Fig. 7a). The only surviving Fancd2−/−Polq−/− pups
exhibited severe congenital malformations and were either found dead or died prematurely.
Fancd2−/−Polq−/− embryos showed severe congenital malformations, and mouse embryonic
fibroblasts (MEFs) generated from Fancd2−/−Polq−/− embryos showed hypersensitivity to
PARPi (Fig. 4c and Extended Data Fig. 7b-e). These data suggest that loss of the HR and
POLQ repair pathways in vivo results in embryonic lethality.

Author Manuscript

Since xenografts of tumors cells expressing shRNAs against both FANCD2 and POLQ did
not stably propagate in mice (Extended Data Fig. 7f), we xenotransplanted A2780shFANCD2 cells expressing either doxycycline-inducible POLQ or Scr shRNA in athymic
nude mice. POLQ depletion significantly impaired tumor growth after PARPi treatment
(Fig. 4d, e and Extended Data Fig. 7g, h). Moreover, mice bearing POLQ-depleted tumors
had a survival advantage following PARPi treatment compared to control mice (Fig. 4f).
POLQ-depleted HR-deficient tumor cells also exhibited decreased survival in in vivo dualcolour competition experiments (Extended Data Fig. 7i-l). Collectively, these data confirm
that HR-deficient tumors are hypersensitive to inhibition of POLQ-mediated repair.

Author Manuscript

To understand which functions of POLQ are required for resistance to DNA-damaging
agents, we performed a series of complementation studies in HR-deficient cells. Expression
of full-length POLQ or ΔPol1, but not ΔRAD51, in HR-deficient POLQ-depleted cells
treated with PARPi or MMC was able to rescue toxicity, suggesting that the antirecombinase activity of POLQ maintains the genomic stability of HR-deficient cells (Fig.
4g, h and Extended Data Fig. 8a, b). Moreover, the toxicity induced by loss of POLQ in HRdeficient cells was rescued by depletion of RAD51 showing that, in the absence of POLQ,
RAD51 is toxic to HR-deficient cells (Fig. 4i). These results suggest a role for POLQ in
limiting toxic HR events23 (Extended Data Fig. 4c-f) and may explain why HR-deficient
cells overexpress and depend on an anti-recombinase for survival.
High mutation rates have been observed in HR-deficient tumors24. Previous studies have
shown that POLQ is an error-prone polymerase25,26 that participates in alternative endjoining (alt-EJ)10. Therefore, we assessed the role of POLQ in error-prone DNA repair in
human cancer cells. POLQ inhibition reduced alt-EJ efficiency in U2OS cells, similar to the

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 August 12.

Ceccaldi et al.

Page 5

Author Manuscript

reduction observed following depletion of PARP1, another critical factor in end-joining27,28
(Extended Data Fig. 9a). Expression of full-length POLQ, ΔRAD51, or A-dead, but not the
ΔPol1 mutant, complemented the cells, suggesting that the polymerase domain of POLQ is
required for end-joining (Extended Data Fig. 9b). GFP-tagged full-length POLQ formed foci
after UV treatment in a PARP-dependent manner (Extended Data Fig. 9c). POLQ inhibition
reduced the mutation frequency induced by UV light, and tumors with high POLQ
expression harbored more somatic point mutations than those with lower POLQ levels
(Extended Data Fig. 9d, e). These results suggest that POLQ contributes to the mutational
signature observed in some HR-deficient tumors29.

Author Manuscript

In human cancers, a deficiency in one DNA repair pathway can result in cellular hyperdependence on a second compensatory DNA repair pathway4. Here, we show that POLQ is
overexpressed in EOCs and other tumors with HR defects30. Wild-type POLQ limits
RAD51-ssDNA nucleofilament assembly (Extended Data Fig. 10a) and promotes alt-EJ
(Fig. 4j). We demonstrate that HR-deficient tumors are hypersensitive to inhibition of
POLQ-mediated repair. Therefore, POLQ appears to channel DNA repair by antagonizing
HR and promoting PARP1-dependent error-prone repair (Extended Data Fig. 10b). These
results offer a potential new therapeutic target for cancers with inactivated HR.

Methods
Bioinformatic analysis

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Gene Set Enrichment Analysis algorithm (GSEA, www.broadinstitute.org) was performed
for the datasets summarized in Supplementary Table 1. TransLesion Synthesis (TLS) and
polymerase gene sets are described in Supplementary Table 3. Row expression data were
downloaded from Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO). Quantile normalizations were
performed using the RMA routine through GenePattern. GSEA was run using GenePattern
(www.broadinstitute.org) and corresponding P values were computed using 2,000
permutations. The DNA repair gene set used in Extended Data Figure 1g has been
determined according to a list of 151 DNA genes previously used31. GSEA analysis for 151
repair genes has been performed on the ovarian serous datasets (GSE14001, GSE14007,
GSE18520, GSE16708, GSE10971). The list of 20 genes shown in Extended Data Figure 1g
represents the top 20 expressed gene in cancer samples (median of the 5 datasets). The
waterfall plot in Extended Data Figure 1h was generated as follows: the 20 genes defined in
(g) were used as a gene set; GSEA for indicated data sets was performed and the nominal P
values were plotted. Supervised analysis of gene expression for GSE9891 was performed
with respect to differential expression that differentiated the third of tumors with highest
POLQ expression from the 2 third with lowest POLQ levels. A list of the 200 most
differentially expressed probe sets between the 2 groups (Supplementary Table 2) with false
discovery rate <0.05 was analyzed for biological pathways (hypergeometrical test;
www.broadinstitute.org). TCGA datasets were accessed through the public TCGA data
portal (www.tcga-data.nci.nih.gov). Figure 3a reflects POLQ gene expression in the ovarian
carcinoma dataset GSE9891, uterine carcinoma TCGA and breast carcinoma TCGA.
Normalization of POLQ expression values across datasets was performed using z-score
transformation. POLQ expression values were subdivided in subgroups reflecting the stage

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 August 12.

Ceccaldi et al.

Page 6

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

of the disease (for GSE9891: grade 3 ovarian serous carcinoma, n=143 compared to type 1
(grade 1) ovarian cancers, n=20; for uterine: serous like tumors, n=60 compared to the rest
of the tumors, n=172; for breast: basal like breast carcinoma, n=80 compared to the rest of
the tumors, n=421). Progression-free survival curves were generated by the Kaplan-Meier
method and differences between survival curves were assessed for statistical significance
with the log-rank test. In the absence of a clinically defined cutoff point for POLQ
expression levels we divided patients into 2 groups: those with POLQ mRNA levels equal to
or above the median (POLQ high group) and those with values below the median (POLQ
low group). We then analyzed the correlation of POLQ with outcome in each group. Patients
with CCNE amplification (resistant to CDDP) were excluded from the analysis. For
mutation count, we accessed data from tumors included in the TCGA datasets for which
gene expression and whole-exome DNA sequencing was available. Data were accessed
through the public TCGA data portal and the cBioPortal for Cancer Genomics
(www.cbioportal.org). For each TCGA dataset, non-synonymous mutation count was
assessed in tumors with the highest POLQ expression (top 33%) and compared to tumors
with low POLQ expression (the remaining, 67%). In the uterine TCGA20, we curated all
tumors except the ultra and hyper-mutated group (i.e, POLE and MSI tumors). In the breast
TCGA32, all tumors were analyzed. In the ovarian TCGA1, we curated tumors harbouring
molecular alterations (via mutation and epigenetic silencing) of the HR pathway.
Plasmid construction

Author Manuscript

To facilitate subcloning, a silent mutation (A390A) was introduced into the POLQ gene
sequence to remove the unique Xho1 cutting site. Full-length or truncated POLQ cDNA
were PCR-amplified and subcloned into pcDNA3-N-Flag, pFastBac-C-Flag, pOZ-C-FlagHA, or GFP-C1 vectors to generate the various constructs. Point mutations and loop
deletions were introduced by QuikChange II XL Site-Directed Mutagenesis Kit (Agilent
Technologies) and confirmed by DNA sequencing. For POLQ rescue experiments (Fig. 4g,
h and Extended Data Fig. 3d, e), POLQ cDNA constructs resistant to siPOLQ1 were
generated into the pOZ-C-Flag-HA vector and the construct were stably expressed in
indicated cell line by retroviral transduction. The POLQ ATPase catalytically-dead mutant
(A-dead) was generated by mutating the walker A and B motifs (K121A and D216A,
E217A, respectively). pOZ-C-Flag-HA POLQ constructs were generated for retroviral
transduction, and stable cells were selected using magnetic Dynabeads (Life Technologies)
conjugated to the IL2R antibody (Millipore).
SiRNA and shRNA sequence information

Author Manuscript

For siRNA-mediated knockdown, the following target sequences were used: POLQ (Qiagen
POLQ_1 used as siPOLQ1 and Qiagen POLQ_6 used as siPOLQ2); BRCA1 (Qiagen
BRCA1_13); PARP1 (Qiagen PARP1_6); REV1 (5′-CAGCGCAUCUGUGCCAAAGAATT-3′); BRCA2 (5′-GAAGAAUGCAGGUUUAAUATT-3′); BLM (5′AUCAGCUAGAGGCGAUCAATT-3′); FANCD2 (5′GGAGAUUGAUGGUCUACUATT-3′) and PARI (5′AGGACACAUGUAAAGGGAUUGUCUATT-3′). AllStars negative control siRNA
(Qiagen) served as the negative control. ShRNAs targeting human FANCD2 was previously
generated in the pTRIP/DU3-MND-GFP vector33. ShRNAs targeting human POLQ
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 August 12.

Ceccaldi et al.

Page 7

Author Manuscript

(CGGGCCTCTTTAGATATAAAT), human BRCA2 (AAGAAGAATGCAGGTTTAATA)
or Control (Scr, scramble) were generated in the pLKO-1 vector. POLQ (V2THS_198349)
and non-silencing TRIPZ-RFP doxycycline-inducible shRNA were purchased from Open
Biosystems. All shRNAs were transduced using lentivirus.
Immunoblot analysis, fractionation and pull-down assays

Author Manuscript

Cells were lysed with 1 % NP40 lysis buffer (1 % NP40, 300 mM NaCl, 0.1 mM EDTA, 50
mM Tris [pH 7.5]) supplemented with protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche), resolved by
NuPAGE (Invitrogen) gels, and transferred onto nitrocellulose membrane, followed by
detection using the LAS-4000 Imaging system (GE Healthcare Life Sciences). For
immunoprecipitation, cells were lysed with 300 mM NaCl lysis buffer, and the lysates were
diluted to 150 mM NaCl before immunoprecipitation. Lysates were incubated with anti-Flag
agarose resin (Sigma) followed by washes with 150 mM NaCl buffer. In vitro transcription
and translation reactions were carried out using the TNT T7 Quick Coupled TranscriptionTranslation System (Promega). For cellular fractionation, cells were incubated with low salt
permeabilization buffer (10 mM Tris [pH 7.3], 10 mM KCl 1.5 mM MgCl2) with protease
inhibitor on ice for 20 minutes. Following centrifugation, nuclei were resuspended in 0.2 M
HCl and the soluble fraction was neutralized with 1 M Tris-HCl [pH 8.0]. Nuclei were lysed
in 150 mM NaCl and following centrifugation, the chromatin pellet was digested by
micrococcal nuclease (Roche) for 5 minutes at room temperature. Recombinant GSTRAD51 and GST-PCNA fusion protein were expressed in BL21 strain and purified using
glutathione-Sepharose beads (GE Healthcare) as previously described15. Beads with equal
amount of GST or GST-RAD51 were incubated with in vitro–translated Flag-tagged POLQ
variants in 150 mM NaCl lysis buffer.

Author Manuscript

Antibodies and chemicals
Antibodies used in this study included: anti-PCNA (PC-10), anti-FANCD2 (FI-17), antiRAD51 (H-92), anti-GST (B14), and Histone H3 (FL-136) and anti-vinculin (H-10) (Santa
Cruz); anti-Flag (M2) (Sigma); anti-pS317CHK1 (2344), anti-pT68CHK2 (2661) (Cell
signalling); anti-pS824KAP-1 (A300-767A) (Bethyl); anti-pS317γH2AX (05636)
(Millipore); anti-pS15p53 (ab1431) and anti-POLQ (ab80906) (abcam); anti-BrdU (555627)
(BD Pharmingen). Mitomycin C (MMC), cis-diamminedichloroplatinum(II) (Cisplatin,
CDDP), and Hydroxyurea (HU) were purchased from Sigma. The PARPi rucaparib
(AG-014699) was purchased from Selleckchem and ABT-888 from AbbVie. Rucaparib was
used for all in vitro assays and ABT-888 was used for all in vivo experiments.
Chromosomal breakage analysis

Author Manuscript

293T and Vu 423 cells were twice-transfected with siRNAs for 48 hours and incubated for
48 hours with or without the indicated concentrations of MMC. For complementation
studies on 293T shFANCD2, POLQ cDNA constructs were transfected 24 hours after the
first siRNA transfection. Cells were exposed for 2 hours to 100 ng/ml of colcemid and
treated with a hypotonic solution (0.075 M KCl) for 20 minutes and fixed with 3:1
methanol/acetic acid. Slides were stained with Wright's stain and 50 metaphase spreads were
scored for aberrations. The relative number of chromosomal breaks was calculated relative

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 August 12.

Ceccaldi et al.

Page 8

Author Manuscript

to control cells (si Scr). For clarity of the Figure 4b, radial figures were excluded from the
analysis.
Reporter assays and immunofluorescence

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

HR and alt-EJ efficiency was measured using the DR-GFP (HR efficiency) and the alt-EJ
reporter assay, performed as previously described14,27,34. Briefly, 48 hours before
transfection of SceI cDNA, U20S-DR-GFP cells were transfected with indicated siRNA or
PARPi (1 μM). The HR activity was determined by FACS quantification of viable GFPpositive cells 96 hours after SceI was transfected. For RAD51 immunofluorescence
experiments, cells were transfected with indicated siRNA 48 hours before treatment with
HU (2 mM) or IR (10 Gy). For complementation studies, POLQ cDNA constructs were
either transfected 24 hours after siRNA transfection (Fig. 2b, 2c and Extended Data Fig. 9b)
or stably expressed in indicated cell line (Extended Data Fig. 3d, e). 6 hours after HU or IR
treatment, cells were fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde for 10 minutes at room temperature,
followed by extraction with 0.3% Triton X-100 for 10 minutes on ice. Antibody staining
was performed at room temperature for 1 hour. For quantification of RAD51 foci in BrdU
positive cells, cells were transfected with indicated siRNA 48 hours before treatment with
IR (10 Gy). 2 hours after IR treatment, cells were treated with BrdU pulse (10 μM) for 2
hours and subsequently fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde and stained for RAD51 as
described above. Cells were then fixed in ethanol (4°C, over night), treated with 1.5 M HCL
for 30 minutes and stained for BrdU antibody. The relative number of cells with more than
10 RAD51 foci was calculated relative to control cells (si Scr). Statistical differences
between cells transfected with siRNAs (si POLQ1, si POLQ2, si BRCA2, si PARI or si
BLM relative to control (si Scr) were assessed. For GFP fluorescence, cells were grown on
coverslip, treated with UV (24 hours after GFP-POLQ transfection; 20 J/m2), fixed with 4%
paraformaldehyde for 10 min at 25 °C 4 hours after the UV treatment, washed three times
with PBS and mounted with DAPI-containing mounting medium (Vector Laboratories).
When indicated cells were treated with PARPi (1 μM) 24 hours before GFP-POLQ
transfection. Images were captured using a Zeiss AX10 fluorescence microscope and
AxioVision software. Cells with GFP foci were quantified by counting number of cells with
more than five foci. At least 150 cells were counted for each sample.
Cell survival assays

Author Manuscript

For assessing cellular cytotoxicity, cells were seeded into 96-well plates at a density of 1000
cells/well. Cytotoxic drugs were serially diluted in media and added to the wells. At 72
hours, CellTiter-Glo reagent (Promega) was added to the wells and the plates were scanned
using a luminescence microplate reader. Survival at each drug concentration was plotted as a
percentage of the survival in drug-free media. Each data point on the graph represents the
average of three measurements, and the error bars represent the standard deviation. For
clonogenic survival, 1000 cells/well were seeded into six-well plates and treated with
cytotoxic drugs the next day. For MMC and PARPi, cells were treated continuously with
indicated drug concentrations. For CDDP, cells were treated for 24 hours and cultured for 14
days in drug-free media. Colony formation was scored 14 days after treatment using 0.5%
(w/v) crystal violet in methanol. Survival curves were expressed as a percentage ± s.e.m.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 August 12.

Ceccaldi et al.

Page 9

Author Manuscript

over three independent experiments of colonies formed relative to the DMSO-treated
control.
Cell cycle analysis

Author Manuscript

A2780 cells expressing Scr or POLQ shRNA were synchronized by a double thymidine
block (Sigma) and subsequently exposed to MMC (1 μg/ml for 2 hours), IR (10 Gy) or HU
(2 mM, over night). At the indicated time points following drug release, cells were fixed in
chilled 70% ethanol, stored overnight at -20°C, washed with PBS, and resuspended in
propidium iodide. A fraction of those cells was analyzed by immunoblotting for DNA
damage response proteins. The immunoblot analysis of γH2AX shows staining after 0, 24,
48 and 72 hours of HU treatment. For proliferation experiments, cells were incubated with
5-ethynyl-2′-deoxyuridine (EdU) (10 μM) for 1 hour at each time point after MMC exposure
(1 μg/ml for 2 hours). Cells were washed and resuspended in culture medium for 2 hours
prior to be analyzed by flow cytometry. Edu Staining was performed using the Click-iT EdU
kit (Life Technologies).
DNA Fiber Analysis

Author Manuscript

A2780 cells expressing Scr or POLQ shRNA were incubated with 25 μM
chlorodeoxyuridine (CldU) (Sigma, C6891) for 20 minutes. Cells were then treated with 2
mM hydroxyurea (HU) for 2 hours and incubated in 250 μM iododeoxyuridine (ldU)
(Sigma, I7125) for 25 minutes after washout of the drug. Spreading of DNA fibers on glass
slides was done as reported19. Glass slides were then washed in distilled water and in 2.5 M
HCl for 80 minutes followed by three washes in PBS. The slides were incubated for 1 hour
in blocking buffer (PBS with 1% BSA and 0.1% NP40) and then for 2 hours in rat antiBrdU antibody (1:250, Abcam, ab6326). After washing with blocking buffer the slides were
incubated for 2 hours in goat anti-rat Alexa 488 antibody (1:1000, Life Technologies,
A-11006). The slides were then washed with PBS and 0.1% NP40 and then incubated for 2
hours with mouse anti-BrdU antibody diluted in blocking buffer (1:100, BD Biosciences,
347580). Following an additional wash with PBS and 0.1% NP40, the fibers were stained
for 2 hours with chicken anti-mouse Alexa 594 (1:1000, Life Technologies, A-21201). At
least 150 fibers were counted per condition. Pictures were taken with an Olympus confocal
microscope and the fibers were analyzed by ImageJ software. The number of stalled or
collapsed forks were measured by DNA fibers that had incorporated only CIdU. Stalled or
collapsed forks counted in POLQ-depleted cells is expressed as fold-change after HU
treatment relative to the fold-change observed in control cells, which was arbitrarily set to 1.
SupF mutagenesis assay

Author Manuscript

293T cells twice-transfected with siRNAs for 48 hours were then transfected with
undamaged or damaged (UVC, 1,000 J/m2) pSP189 plasmids using GeneJuice (Novagen).
After 48 hours, plasmid DNA was isolated with a miniprep kit (Promega) and digested with
DpnI. After ethanol precipitation, extracted plasmids were transformed into the βgalactosidase–MBM7070 indicator strain through electroporation (GenePulsor X Cell; BioRad) and plated onto LB plates containing 1 mM IPTG, 100 μg/ml 5-bromo-4-chloro-3indolyl-β-D-galactopyranoside and 100 μg/ml ampicillin. White and blue colonies were

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 August 12.

Ceccaldi et al.

Page 10

Author Manuscript

scored using ImageJ software, and the mutation frequency was calculated as the ratio of
white (mutant) to total (white plus blue) colonies.
POLQ gene expression
RNA samples extracted using the TRIzol Reagent (Invitrogen) were reverse transcribed
using the Transcriptor Reverse Transcriptaze kit (Roche) and oligo dT primers. The
resulting cDNA was use to analyzed POLQ expression by RT-qPCR using with QuantiTect
SYBRGreen (Qiagen), in an iCycler machine (Bio-Rad). POLQ gene expression values
were normalized to expression of the housekeeping gene GAPDH, using the ΔCT method
and are shown on a log2 scale. The primers used for POLQ are as follows: POLQ primer 1
(Forward: 5′-TATCTGCTGGAACTTTTGCTGA-3′; Reverse: 5′CTCACACCATTTCTTTGATGGA-3′); POLQ primer 2 (Forward: 5′CTACAAGTGAAGGGAGATGAGG-3′; Reverse: 5′-TCAGAGGGTTTCACCAATCC-3′).

Author Manuscript

POLQ purification from insect SF9 cells

Author Manuscript

A POLQ fragment (ΔPol2) containing the ATPase domain with a RAD51 binding site
(amino acids 1 to 1000) was cloned into pFastBac-C-Flag and purified from baculovirusinfected SF9 insect cells as previously described35. Briefly, SF9 cells were seeded in 15-cm
dishes at 80-90% confluency and infected with baculovirus. Three days post-infection, cells
were harvested and lysed in 500 mM NaCl lysis buffer (500 mM NaCl, 0.01 % NP40, 0.2
mM EDTA, 20% Glycerol, 1 mM DTT, 0.2 mM PMSF, 20 mM Tris [pH 7.6])
supplemented with Halt protease inhibitor cocktail (Thermo Scientific) and Calpain I
inhibitor (Roche) and the protein was eluted in lysis buffer supplemented with 0.2 mg/ml of
Flag peptide (Sigma). The protein was concentrated in lysis buffer using 10 kDa centrifugal
filters (Amicon). The protein was quantified by comparing its staining intensity (CoomassieR250) with that of BSA standards in a 7% tris-glycine SDS-PAGE gel. Purified protein was
flash-frozen in small aliquots in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80°C.
Radiometric ATPase assay

Author Manuscript

Each 10 μl reaction consisted of 200 nM ATP, reaction buffer (20 mM Tris-HCl [pH 7.6], 5
mM MgCl2, 0.05 mg/ml BSA, 1 mM DTT), and 5 μCi of [γ-32P]-ATP. For corresponding
reactions, ssDNA, dsDNA, and forked DNA were added to the reaction in excess at a final
concentration of 600 nM. Once all of the non-enzymatic reagents were combined,
recombinant POLQ was added to start the ATPase reaction. After incubation for 90 minutes
at room temperature, stop buffer (125 mM EDTA [pH 8.0]) was added and approximately
∼0.05 μCi was spotted onto PEI-coated thin-layer chromatography (TLC) plates (Sigma).
Unhydrolyzed [γ-32P]-ATP was separated from the released inorganic phosphate [32Pi] with
1 M acetic acid, 0.25 M lithium chloride as the mobile phase. TLC plates were exposed to a
phosphor screen and imaged with the BioRad Imager PMC. ssDNA, dsDNA, and forked
DNA were generated as previously described35. To remove any contaminating ssDNA,
dsDNA and forked DNA were gel purified after annealing. Spots corresponding to [γ-32P]ATP and the released inorganic phosphate [32Pi] were quantified (in units of pixel intensity)
and the fraction of ATP hydrolyzed calculated for each POLQ concentration.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 August 12.

Ceccaldi et al.

Page 11

Electrophoretic Mobility Gel Shift Assay (EMSA)

Author Manuscript

Binding of POLQ to ssDNA was assessed using EMSA. 60-mer single-stranded DNA
(ssDNA) or double-stranded DNA (dsDNA) oligonucleotides (5 nM) were incubated with
increasing amount of POLQ (0, 5, 10, 50, or 100 nM) in 10 μl of binding buffer (20 mM
HEPES-K+, [pH 7.6], 5 mM magnesium acetate, 0.1 μg/μl BSA, 5% glycerol, 1 mM DTT,
0.2 mM EDTA, and 0.01% NP-40) for one hour on ice. POLQ protein was added at a 10fold dilution so that the final salt concentration was approximately 50 mM NaCl. The
ssDNA probes are 5′ fluorescently-labeled with IRDye-700 (IDT). After incubation, the
samples were analyzed on a 5% native polyacrylamide/0.5 × TBE gel at 4°C. A fluorescent
imager (Li-Cor) was used to visualize the samples in the gel.
RAD51 purification

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Human GST-RAD51 was purified from bacteria as described36. Xenopus RAD51
(xRAD51) was purified as follow. N-terminally His-tagged SUMO-RAD51 was expressed
in BL21 pLysS cells. Three hours after induction with 1 mM IPTG cells were harvested and
resuspended in Buffer A (50 mM Tris-Cl [pH 7.5], 350 mM NaCl, 25% Sucrose, 5 mM βmercaptoethanol, 1 mM PMSF and 10 mM imidazole). Cells were lysed by supplementation
with Triton X-100 (0.2% final concentration), three freeze-thaw cycles and sonication (20
pulses at 40% efficiency). Soluble fraction was separated by centrifugation and incubated
with 2 mL of Ni-NTA resin (Qiagen) for 1 hour at 4°C. After washing the resin with 100 mL
of wash buffer (Buffer A supplemented with 1 M NaCl, final concentration) the salt
concentration was brought down to 350 mM. His-SUMO-RAD51 was eluted with a linear
gradient of imidazole from 10 mM - 300 mM in Buffer A. Eluted fractions were analyzed by
SDS-PAGE. His-SUMO-RAD51 containing fractions were pooled and supplemented with
Ulp1 protease to cleave the His-SUMO tag and dialyzed overnight into Buffer B (50 mM
Tris-Cl [pH 7.5], 350 mM NaCl, 25% Sucrose, 10% Glycerol, 5 mM β-mercaptoethanol, 10
mM imidazole and 0.05% Triton X-100). The dialyzed fraction was incubated with Ni-NTA
resin for 1 hour at 4°C and the RAD51 containing flow-through fraction was collected and
dialyzed overnight into Buffer C (100 mM Potassium phosphate [pH 6.8], 150 mM NaCl,
10% Glycerol, 0.5 mM DTT and 0.01% Triton-X). RAD51 was further purified by
Hydroxyapatite (Bio-Rad) chromatography. After washing with ten column volumes of
Buffer C, RAD51 was eluted with a linear gradient of Potassium phosphate [pH 6.8] from
100 mM - 800 mM. RAD51 containing fractions were analyzed by SDS-PAGE and dialyzed
into storage buffer (20 mM HEPES-KOH [pH 7.4], 150 mM NaCl, 10% Glycerol, 0.5 mM
DTT). Purified protein was flash-frozen in small aliquots in liquid nitrogen and stored at
-80°C.

Author Manuscript

D-loop assay
D-loop formation assays were performed using xRAD51 and conducted as previously
described37. Briefly, nucleofilaments were first formed by incubating RAD51 (1 μM) with
end-labeled 90-mer ssDNA (3 μM nt) at 37 °C for 10 minutes in reaction buffer containing
20 mM HEPES-KOH [pH 7.4], 1 mM ATP, 1 mM Mg(Cl)2, 1 mM DTT, BSA (100 μg/mL),
20 mM phosphocreatine and creatine phosphokinase (20 μg/mL). After the 10 minutes
incubation increasing amounts of POLQ (0, 0.1, 0.5, or 1.0 μM) and RPA (200 nM) were

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 August 12.

Ceccaldi et al.

Page 12

Author Manuscript

added and incubated for an additional 15 minutes at 37°C. Reaction was then supplemented
with 1 mM CaCl2 followed by further incubation at 37°C for 15 minutes. D-loop formation
was initiated by the addition of supercoiled dsDNA (pBS-KS (-), 79 μM bp) and incubation
at 37°C for 15 minutes. D-loops were analyzed by electrophoresis on a 0.9% agarose gel
after deproteinization. Gel was dried and exposed to a PhosphoImager (GE Healthcare)
screen for quantification.
Substitution peptide arrays and RAD51-ssDNA filament experiments

Author Manuscript

Subtitution peptide arrays were performed as previously described17. RAD51 displacement
assays were performed as follow. Binding reactions (10 μl) contained 5′-32P-end-labelled
DNA substrates (0.5 ng of 60 mer ssDNA) and various amounts of human RAD51 and/or
POLQ in binding buffer (40 mM Tris-HCl [pH 7.5], 50 mM NaCl, 10 mM KCl, 2 mM DTT,
5 mM ATP, 5 mM MgCl2, 1 mM DTT, 100 mg/ml BSA) were conducted at room
temperature. After 5 minutes incubation with POLQ and a further 5 minutes incubation with
RAD51 or vice versa, an equimolar amount of cold DNA substrate was added to the
reaction. Products were then analyzed by electrophoresis through 10% PAGE (200V for 40
min in 0.5×Tris-borate-EDTA buffer) and visualized by autoradiography.
Interbreeding of the Fancd2 and Polq mice

Author Manuscript

For the characterization of Fancd2/Polq conditional knockouts, we crossed C57BL/6J mice
(Jackson Laboratory). Fancd2+/-Polq+/+ mice, previously generated in our laboratory22,
were crossed with Fancd2+/+Polq+/- mice7 to generate Fancd2+/-Polq+/- mice. These
double heterozygous mice were then interbred, and the offspring from these mating pairs
were genotyped using PCR primers for Fancd2 and Polq. A statistical comparison of the
observed with the predicted genotypes was performed using a 2-sided Fisher's exact test.
Primary MEFs were generated from E13.5 to E15 embryos and cultured in RPMI
supplemented with 15% fetal bovine serum and 1% penicillin-streptomycin. All data
generated in the study were extracted from experiments performed on primary MEFs from
passage 1 to passage 4. The primers used for mice genotyping are as follows: Fancd2 PCR
primers OST2cF (5′-CATGCATATAGGAACCCGAAGG-3′), OST2aR (5′CAGGACCTTTGGAGAAGCAG-3′) and LTR2bF (5′GGCGTTACTTAAGCTAGCTTG-3′); Polq PCR primers IMR5973 (5′TGCAGTGTACAGATGTTACTTTT-3′), IMR 5974 (5′TGGAGGTAGCATTTCTTCTC-3′), IMR 5975 (5′-TCACTAGGTTGGGGTTCTC-3′) and
IMR 5976 (5′-CATCAGAAGCTGACTCTAGAG-3′). Specific PCR conditions are
available upon request.

Author Manuscript

Studies of xenograft-bearing CrTac:NCr-Foxn1nu mice
The Animal Resource Facility at The Dana-Farber Cancer Institute approved all housing
situations, treatments and experiments using mice. No more than five mice were housed per
air-filtered cage with ad libitum access to standard diet and water, and were maintained in a
temperature and light-controlled animal facility under pathogen-free conditions. All mice
described in this text were drug and procedure naïve before the start of the experiments. For
every xenograft study, we subcutaneously implanted approximately 1.0 × 106 A2780 cells

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 August 12.

Ceccaldi et al.

Page 13

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

(1:1 in Matrigel Matrix, BD Biosciences) into both flanks of 6-8 week old female
CrTac:NCr-Foxn1nu mice (Taconic). Doxycycline (Sigma) was added to the food (625
PPM) and bi-weekly (Tuesday and Friday) to the water (200 μg/ml) for mice bearing tumors
that reached 100-200 mm3. Roughly one week (5-6 days) after the addition of Doxycycline
to the diet, mice were randomized to twice daily treatment schedules with vehicle (0.9%
NaCl) or PARPi (ABT-888; 50 mg per kg body weight) by oral gavage administration for
the indicated number of weeks. Overall survival was determined using Kaplan-Meier
analyses performed with Log-Rank tests to assess differences in median survival for each
shRNA condition (shScr or shPOLQ) and each treatment condition (vehicle or PARPi)
(GraphPad Prism 6 Software). For competition assays, A2780 cells expressing FANCD2GFP shRNA (GFP cells) or a combination of FANCD2-GFP shRNA with (doxycycline
inducible) Scr-RFP or POLQ-RFP shRNA (GFP-RFP cells) were mixed at an equal ratio of
GFP to GFP-RFP cells, and thereafter injected into nude mice given doxycycline-containing
diets and treated with either vehicle or PARPi or CDDP. For competition assays, mice
received identical doxycycline and PARPi drug treatment. For the Cisplatin competition
assay, mice were randomized into semi-weekly treatment regimens with vehicle (0.9%
NaCl) or CDDP (5 mg per kg body weight) by intraperitoneal injection. After three to four
weeks of treatment, mice were euthanized and tumors were grown in vitro, in the presence
of doxycycline (2 μg/ml for 4 days). The relative ratio of GFP to GFP-RFP cells was
determined by FACS analysis. Tumor volumes were calculated bi-weekly using caliper
measurements (length × width2)/2. Growth curves were plotted as the mean tumor volume
(mm3) for each treatment group; relative tumor volume (RTV) indicates change in tumor
volume at a given time point relative to that at the day before initial dosing (=1). Mice were
unbiasedly assigned into different treatment groups. Drug treatment and outcome assessment
was performed in a blinded manner. Mice were monitored every day and euthanized by CO2
inhalation when tumor size (≥2 cm), tumor status (necrosis/ulceration) or body weight loss
(≥20%) reached ethical endpoint, according to the rules of the Animal Resource Facility at
The Dana-Farber Cancer Institute.
Immunohistochemical staining
We stained formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded sections of harvested xenografts with
antibodies specific for γ-H2AX (pSer139) (Upstate Biotechnology) and Ki67 (Dako). At
least two xenografts were scored for each treatment. Tumors were collected three weeks
after treatment. At least five 40× fields were scored. The mean ± s.e.m. percentage of
positive cells from five images in each treatment group was calculated.
Statistical analysis

Author Manuscript

Unless stated otherwise, all data are represented as mean ± s.e.m. over at least three
independent experiments, and significance was calculated using the Student's t test.
Asterisks indicate statistically significant (*, P < 0.05; **, P < 10-2; ***, P < 10-3) values.
All the in vivo experiments were run with at least 6 tumors from 6 mice for each condition.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 August 12.

Ceccaldi et al.

Page 14

Author Manuscript

Extended Data

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Extended Data Figure 1. POLQ is highly expressed in epithelial ovarian cancers (EOCs) and
POLQ expression correlates with expression of HR genes

Author Manuscript

Gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) for expression of TransLesion Synthesis (TLS) (a)
and polymerase (b) genes between primary cancers and control samples in 28 independent
datasets from 19 different cancers types. Enrichment values (represented as a single dot for
each gene in a defined dataset) were determined using the rank metric score to compare
expression values between cancers and control samples. Dots above the dashed line reflect
enrichment in cancer samples, whereas dots below the dashed line show gene expression
enriched in control samples. Datasets were ranked based on the amplitude of the rank metric
score and plotted as shown. c, POLQ gene expression in 40 independent datasets from 19
different cancer types. For each dataset, POLQ values were expressed as fold-change
differences relative to the mean expression in control samples, which was arbitrarily set to 1.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 August 12.

Ceccaldi et al.

Page 15

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

d, POLQ expression correlates with tumor grade and MKi67 gene expression in the ovarian
TCGA (n=494 patients with ovarian carcinoma (grade 1, n=5; grade 2, n=61; grade 3,
n=428) and control samples, n=8). e, POLQ expression correlates with tumor grade MKi67
gene expression in the ovarian dataset GSE9891 (n=251 patients with ovarian serous and
endometrious carcinoma for which grade status was available (grade 1, n=20; grade 2, n=88;
grade 3, n=143)). Statistical correlation was assessed using the Pearson test (for d: r=0.65, P
< 10-3; for e: r=0.77, P < 10-3). f, Top-ranked biological pathways differentially expressed
between samples expressing high levels of POLQ (high POLQ, 1st 33%, n=95) relative to
samples with low POLQ expression (low POLQ, 67%, n=190) on the ovarian dataset
GSE9891 (n=285 patients with ovarian carcinoma). Significance values were determined by
the hypergeometrical test using the 200 most differentially expressed probesets between the
2 groups (high POLQ and low POLQ). g, GSEA for expression of DNA repair genes
between primary cancers and control samples in 5 independent ovarian cancer datasets. A
representative heat map showing differential gene expression between ovarian cancers and
controls is shown from GSE14407. For each dataset, DNA repair genes were ranked based
on the metric score reflecting their enrichment in cancer samples. The top 20 DNA repair
genes primarily expressed in cancer samples compared to control samples is shown on the
right. h, GSEA for the top 20 DNA repair genes defined in (g) between primary cancers and
control samples in 40 independent cancer datasets. The nominal P-value was used as a
measure of the expression enrichment in cancer samples and represented as a waterfall plot.
When the gene set expression was enriched in control samples, the P-value was arbitrarily
set to 1. i, POLQ expression correlates with RAD51 and FANCD2 gene expression in 285
samples from the ovarian dataset GSE9891. Statistical correlation was assessed using the
Pearson test (r=0.71, P < 10-3). j, Top 10 genes that most closely correlated with POLQ
expression (gene neighbors analysis) for 1046 cell lines from the CCLE collection. DNA
repair activity for these genes is indicated in the table. Increased HR gene expression is
known to positively correlate with improved response to platinum based chemotherapy (a
surrogate of HR deficiency) and thus can be predictive of decreased HR activity31,38.
Conceptually, a state of HR deficiency may lead to compensatory increased expression of
other HR genes. k, Top-ranked Gene Ontology (GO) terms for the molecular functions
encoded by the top 20 DNA repair genes defined in Extended Data Figure 1g. l, Schematic
representation of POLQ domain structure with the helicases (BLM, RECQL4, RAD54B and
RAD54L) that co-expressed with POLQ (from Extended Data Figure 1g). Conserved aminoacid sequences of ATP binding and hydrolysis motifs (namely Walker A and B) are
indicated. Cox plots in c that show twenty-fifth to seventy-fifth percentiles, with lines
indicating the median, and whiskers indicating the smallest and largest values. For d and e
(top panels), each dot represents the expression value from one patient, brackets show mean
± s.e.m.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 August 12.

Ceccaldi et al.

Page 16

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Extended Data Figure 2. POLQ is a RAD51-interacting protein required for maintenance of
genomic stability

Author Manuscript

a, siRNA sequences (siPOLQ1 and siPOLQ2) efficiently down-regulate exogenously
transfected POLQ protein. POLQ levels were detected by immunoblotting with Flag or
POLQ antibody (left) and by RT-qPCR using 2 different sets of POLQ primers (right). The
asterisk on the immunoblot indicates a non-specific band. Expression was normalized using
GAPDH as a reference gene. POLQ gene expression values are displayed as fold-change
differences relative to the mean expression in control cells, which was arbitrarily set to 1. b,
Quantification of baseline and HU-induced RAD51 foci in U2OS cells transfected with
indicated siRNA. c, Quantification of baseline and HU-induced γH2AX foci in U2OS cells
transfected with indicated siRNA. d, Quantification of IR-induced RAD51 foci in BrdUpositive U2OS cells transfected with indicated siRNA. e, POLQ inhibition by siRNA
induced a decrease in the cellular survival of 293T cells treated with MMC in a 3-day
survival assay. f, Quantification of chromosomal aberrations in 293T cells transfected with
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 August 12.

Ceccaldi et al.

Page 17

Author Manuscript

indicated siRNA. g, Schematic representation of POLQ truncation proteins used for RAD51
interaction studies. h, Endogenous RAD51 co-precipitates with Flag-tagged POLQ-ΔPol1
(POLQ-1-1416) but not POLQ-1633-Cter, each stably expressed in HeLa cells. i, Sequence
alignment between the RAD51-interacting motifs of C. elegans RFS-1 and human POLQ. j,
Schematic of POLQ domain structure with its homologs HELQ and POLN. All data show
mean ± s.e.m.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Extended Data Figure 3. Characterization of RAD51-interacting motifs in POLQ

Author Manuscript

a, Substitution peptide array probed with recombinant RAD51 and analyzed by
immunoblotting. A 20-mer peptide spanning each of the RAD51 binding sites (shown in
Fig. 1g) were created in which each amino acid of the original peptide was mutated to each
of the 20 amino acids and RAD51 binding activity was tested. The amino acid change for
each of the amino acids of the RAD51 interacting domain of POLQ is shown on the right.
Ponceau staining was used to visualize position of the peptides within the array. b, GSTRAD51 pull-down with in vitro-translated POLQ proteins missing indicated amino acids. c,
Schematic of POLQ mutants used in complementation studies. d, Quantification of IRinduced RAD51 foci in U2OS cells stably integrated with empty vector (EV) or POLQΔPol1 cDNA, that is refractory to siPOLQ1. Cells were transfected with indicated siRNA
and subsequently treated with IR. The number of cells with more than 10 RAD51 foci was
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 August 12.

Ceccaldi et al.

Page 18

Author Manuscript

calculated relative to control cells (si Scr). e, DR-GFP assay in U2OS cells stably integrated
with empty vector (EV) or indicated POLQ cDNA constructs refractory to siPOLQ1 and
transfected with indicated siRNA. All data show mean ± s.e.m.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Extended Data Figure 4. POLQ is an ATPase that suppresses RAD51-ssDNA nucleofilament
assembly and formation of RAD51-dependent D-loop structures

Author Manuscript

a, Representative ΔPol2 WT radiometric ATPase assay. b, Gel mobility shift assays with
ΔPol2 WT and ssDNA. c, Coomassie-stained gel showing the purified ΔPol2-A-dead
fragment. d, Representative ΔPol2-A-dead radiometric ATPase assay. e, Quantification of
ΔPol2-A-dead ATPase activity. (ssDNA: single-stranded DNA; dsDNA: double-stranded
DNA). f, Assembly/disruption of RAD51-ssDNA filaments in the presence of increasing
amounts of ΔPol2 WT. The order in which each component was added to the reaction is
noted above. g, Schematics of the formation of RAD51-dependent D-loop structures. h
Formation of RAD51-containing D-loop structures following the addition of increasing
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 August 12.

Ceccaldi et al.

Page 19

Author Manuscript

amounts of ΔPol2 WT. i, Fraction of D-loop formed following the addition of increasing
amounts of ΔPol2 WT. j, Effect of POLQ expression levels and HR status on tumor
sensitivity to cisplatin or PARPi. Data in i shows mean ± s.e.m.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Extended Data Figure 5. POLQ functions under replicative stress and is induced by HR
deficiency

Author Manuscript

a, POLQ recruitment to the chromatin is enhanced by UV treatment. HeLa cells stably
integrated with either Flag-tagged ΔPol1 or POLQ-1633-Cter (Extended Data Fig. 2g) were
subjected to UV treatment. Cells were collected at indicated time points after UV treatment
and IPs were performed on nuclear and chromatin fractions. b, HeLa cells stably integrated
with ΔPol1 were treated with UV and harvested at indicated time points following UV
exposure. POLQ and RAD51 co-precipitation is enhanced by UV treatment. c,
Quantification of DNA fiber lengths isolated from WT or Polq-/- MEFs. d, Quantification of
DNA fiber lengths isolated from WT or Polq-/- MEFs transfected with either EV, or POLQ
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 August 12.

Ceccaldi et al.

Page 20

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

cDNA constructs. e, POLQ gene expression was analyzed by RT-qPCR in HR-deficient
ovarian cancer cell lines (PEO-1 and UWB1-289) compared with other ovarian cancer cell
lines, HeLa (cervical cancer) cells and 293T (transformed human embryonic kidney) cells.
Expression was normalized using GAPDH gene as a reference. POLQ expression values are
displayed as fold-change relative to the mean expression in HR-proficient control cells,
which was arbitrarily set to 1. f, POLQ gene expression analysis (RT-qPCR) in 293T cells
transfected with siRNA targeting FANCD2, BRCA1 or BRCA2 (left panel) and in corrected
PD20 cells (PD20 + FANCD2) relative to FANCD2-deficient cells (PD20) (right panel).
Expression was normalized using GAPDH gene as a reference. POLQ expression values are
presented as fold-change relative to the mean expression in control cells, which was
arbitrarily set to 1. g, POLQ gene expression in 5 datasets of serous epithelial ovarian
carcinoma (frequently associated with an HR deficiency) and 1 dataset of clear cell ovarian
carcinoma (subgroup not associated with HR alterations). For each dataset, POLQ
expression values are displayed as fold-change differences relative to the mean expression in
control samples, which was arbitrarily set to 1. h, Progression-free survival (PFS) after first
line platinum chemotherapy for patients with ovarian carcinoma (ovarian carcinoma
TCGA). Statistical significance was assessed by the Log-Rank test (P < 10-2). i, Effect of
siPOLQ and the different POLQ cDNA constructs on HR read-out. NA: not applicable. Box
plots in c, d, and g show twenty-fifth to seventy-fifth percentiles, with lines indicating the
median, and whiskers indicating the smallest and largest values. Data in e and f show mean
± s.e.m.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 August 12.

Ceccaldi et al.

Page 21

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Extended Data Figure 6. POLQ inhibition sensitizes HR-deficient tumors to cytotoxic drug
exposure

Author Manuscript

Clonogenic formation of A2780 cells expressing Scrambled (Scr) shRNA or shRNAs
against FANCD2 or BRCA2 with increasing amounts of MMC (a), UV (b) or IR (c).
Clonogenic formation of A2780 cells expressing Scrambled (Scr) or FANCD2 shRNA,
together with shRNA targeting POLQ, in increasing concentrations of CDDP (d), MMC (e)
or PARPi (f). g, Inhibition of POLQ reduces the survival of A2780 cells after 3 days of
continuous exposure to the ATM inhibitor Ku55933. h, Immunoblot analyses in A2780 cells
expressing FANCD2 shRNA together with siRNA targeting POLQ or Scr at 24 hours after
indicated MMC pulse treatment. i, FANCA-deficient fibroblasts (GM6418) were infected
with a whole-genome shRNA library and treated with MMC for 7 days. The fold-change
enrichment of each shRNA after MMC treatment was determined by sequencing relative to
the infected cells before treatment. TP53 depletion is known to improve survival of
FANCA-/- cells33. WRN depletion has recently been shown to be synthetically lethal with
HR deficiency39. Each column represents the mean of at least 2 independent shRNAs. All
data show mean ± s.e.m.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 August 12.

Ceccaldi et al.

Page 22

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Extended Data Figure 7. HR and POLQ repair pathways are synthetical lethal in vivo

Author Manuscript

a, Genotypes frequencies of offspring from interbred Fancd2+/−Polq+/− mice. Ψ: four
Fancd2-/-Polq-/- offsprings were observed with several congenital malformations and
premature death within 48 hours of birth. b, Description of Fancd2−/−Polq−/− offspring
generated in the study. The offspring presented congenital malformations (i.e., eye defects)
together with reduced size and body weight. The arrow shows absence of the right eye. c,
Genotypes frequencies of E13.5 to E15 embryos (13.5 to 15 days post coitum) from
interbred Fancd2+/−Polq+/− mice. d, Description of congenital malformations and their
measured frequencies observed in E13.5 to E15 Fancd2−/−Polq−/− embryos generated in
the study. e, Clonogenic formation of WT, Fancd2-/-, Polq-/- and Fancd2−/−Polq−/− MEFs
with increasing concentrations of PARPi. f, A2780 cells were transduced with indicated
shRNAs and xenotransplanted into both flanks of athymic nude mice. The tumor volumes
for individual mice were measured biweekly for 8 weeks. Each group represents n ≥ 5

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 August 12.

Ceccaldi et al.

Page 23

Author Manuscript

tumors from n ≥ 5 mice. g, Ki67 and γH2AX quantification in tumors treated with either
vehicle or PARPi. h, Representative Ki67 and γH2AX staining of A2780-shFANCD2
xenografts expressing sh Scr or sh POLQ in athymic nude mice, treated with either vehicle
or PARPi. Scale bars, 100 μM. i, In vivo competition assay design. j, Tumor chimerism post
xenotransplantation for indicated conditions. k, Representative flow cytometry analysis of
tumors before xenotransplantation (post FACS sorting) or after xenotransplantation (post
transplant, PARPi). The percentage of GFP-RFP cells is indicated. l, Tumor chimerism post
xenotransplantation for indicated conditions. For Data in j and l, each circle represents data
from one tumor and each group represents n ≥ 7 tumors from n ≥ 6 mice. Brackets show
mean ± s.e.m. Data in e-g show mean ± s.e.m. For f each group represents n ≥ 6 tumors from
n ≥ 6 mice.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Extended Data Figure 8. POLQ is required for HR-deficient cell survival and limits the
formation of RAD51 structures in HR-deficient cells

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 August 12.

Ceccaldi et al.

Page 24

Author Manuscript

a, Clonogenic formation of Fancd2-/-Polq-/- MEFs transfected with full-length POLQ cDNA
constructs in the presence of increasing concentrations of PARPi. b, Chromosome breakage
analysis of FANCD2-depleted cells that were first transfected with the indicated siRNA and
full-length POLQ cDNA constructs refractory to siPOLQ1 and then exposed to MMC. c,
DR-GFP assay in U2OS cells transfected with indicated siRNA. d, Quantification of
baseline and IR-induced RAD51 foci in U2OS cells transfected with indicated siRNA. e,
RAD51 recruitment to chromatin is enhanced by UV treatment. Vu423 cells (BRCA2-/-)
were collected at indicated time points after UV treatment and immunoblotting performed
on the cytoplasmic, nuclear and chromatin fractions. f, RAD51 recruitment to chromatin in
Vu423 cells (BRCA2-/-) transfected with indicated siRNA. Histone H3 was used as a control
for chromatin fractionation. All data show mean ± s.e.m.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Extended Data Figure 9. POLQ participates in error-prone DNA repair

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 August 12.

Ceccaldi et al.

Page 25

Author Manuscript

a, End-joining reporter assay in U2OS cells transfected with indicated siRNA and/or treated
with PARPi. b, End-joining reporter assay in U2OS cells transfected with indicated siRNA
and POLQ cDNA constructs refractory to siPOLQ1. c, UV damage-induced POLQ foci
formation in U2OS cells. POLQ foci were abolished by pre-treatment with PARPi. d,
Mutation frequency was determined in damaged supF plasmid, recovered from siRNAtreated 293T cells. e, Non-synonymous mutation count in ovarian, uterine and breast TCGA.
All data show mean ± s.e.m.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Extended Data Figure 10. Model depicting the role of POLQ in DNA repair

Author Manuscript

a, Mechanistic model for how POLQ limits RAD51-ssDNA filament assembly. According
to this model, the ATPase domain of POLQ may prevent the assembly of RAD51 monomers
into RAD51 polymers, perhaps by depleting local ATP concentrations. The RAD51 binding
domains in the central region of POLQ may then sequester the RAD51 monomers,
preventing filament assembly. b, I. Under physiological conditions, POLQ expression is low
and its impact on repqir of DNA double-strand breaks (DSB) is limited. II. When HR
deficiency occurs, POLQ is then highly expressed and channels DSB repair toward alt-EJ.
III. In the case of an HR-defect, the loss of POLQ leads to cell death through the persistence
of toxic RAD51 intermediates and inhibition of alt-EJ.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 August 12.

Ceccaldi et al.

Page 26

Author Manuscript

Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.

Acknowledgments
We thank Naoko Shima (University of Minnesota, USA), Dipanjan Chowdhury, Geoffrey Shapiro, Johannes
Walter, David Kozono, Julien Ablain, Marc Delord, Jean-Bernard Lazaro and members of the D'Andrea laboratory
for helpful discussions. We also thank Hyungjin Kim for providing DNA constructs, Lucian Moldovan for
providing GST tagged RAD51, Shawn Johnson for providing MDA-MB 436 cells, Adam Y. Li for technical
assistance, Lisa Moreau for chromosomal breakage analysis, and Kent Mouw for critical reading of the manuscript.
We thank Haojian Zhang for providing access to shRNA screening data shown in Extended Data Figure 6i. We
thank Christophe Cazaux and Jean-Sebastien Hoffmann (University of Toulouse, France) for providing pcDNA
Flag-tagged POLQ. R.C. received support from the Philippe Foundation and is a recipient of the Ovarian Cancer
Research Fellowship (OCRF). This work was supported by NIH grants P50CA168504 and R01HL52725 and by
grants from OCRF and BCRF.

Author Manuscript

References

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

1. Cancer Genome Atlas Research, N. Integrated genomic analyses of ovarian carcinoma. Nature.
2011; 474:609–615.10.1038/nature10166 [PubMed: 21720365]
2. Farmer H, et al. Targeting the DNA repair defect in BRCA mutant cells as a therapeutic strategy.
Nature. 2005; 434:917–921.10.1038/nature03445 [PubMed: 15829967]
3. Bryant HE, et al. Specific killing of BRCA2-deficient tumours with inhibitors of poly(ADP-ribose)
polymerase. Nature. 2005; 434:913–917.10.1038/nature03443 [PubMed: 15829966]
4. Kennedy RD, D'Andrea AD. DNA repair pathways in clinical practice: lessons from pediatric
cancer susceptibility syndromes. Journal of clinical oncology : official journal of the American
Society of Clinical Oncology. 2006; 24:3799–3808.10.1200/JCO.2005.05.4171 [PubMed:
16896009]
5. Bast RC Jr, Hennessy B, Mills GB. The biology of ovarian cancer: new opportunities for translation.
Nature reviews Cancer. 2009; 9:415–428.10.1038/nrc2644 [PubMed: 19461667]
6. Yousefzadeh MJ, Wood RD. DNA polymerase POLQ and cellular defense against DNA damage.
DNA repair. 2013; 12:1–9.10.1016/j.dnarep.2012.10.004 [PubMed: 23219161]
7. Shima N, Munroe RJ, Schimenti JC. The mouse genomic instability mutation chaos1 is an allele of
Polq that exhibits genetic interaction with Atm. Molecular and cellular biology. 2004; 24:10381–
10389.10.1128/MCB.24.23.10381-10389.2004 [PubMed: 15542845]
8. Yoshimura M, et al. Vertebrate POLQ and POLbeta cooperate in base excision repair of oxidative
DNA damage. Molecular cell. 2006; 24:115–125.10.1016/j.molcel.2006.07.032 [PubMed:
17018297]
9. Muzzini DM, Plevani P, Boulton SJ, Cassata G, Marini F. Caenorhabditis elegans POLQ-1 and
HEL-308 function in two distinct DNA interstrand cross-link repair pathways. DNA repair. 2008;
7:941–950.10.1016/j.dnarep.2008.03.021 [PubMed: 18472307]
10. McVey M, Lee SE. MMEJ repair of double-strand breaks (director's cut): deleted sequences and
alternative endings. Trends in genetics : TIG. 2008; 24:529–538.10.1016/j.tig.2008.08.007
[PubMed: 18809224]
11. Chan SH, Yu AM, McVey M. Dual roles for DNA polymerase theta in alternative end-joining
repair of double-strand breaks in Drosophila. PLoS genetics. 2010; 6:e1001005.10.1371/
journal.pgen.1001005 [PubMed: 20617203]
12. Yu AM, McVey M. Synthesis-dependent microhomology-mediated end joining accounts for
multiple types of repair junctions. Nucleic acids research. 2010; 38:5706–5717.10.1093/nar/
gkq379 [PubMed: 20460465]
13. Koole W, et al. A Polymerase Theta-dependent repair pathway suppresses extensive genomic
instability at endogenous G4 DNA sites. Nature communications. 2014; 5:3216.10.1038/
ncomms4216

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 August 12.

Ceccaldi et al.

Page 27

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

14. Nakanishi K, et al. Human Fanconi anemia monoubiquitination pathway promotes homologous
DNA repair. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America.
2005; 102:1110–1115.10.1073/pnas.0407796102 [PubMed: 15650050]
15. Moldovan GL, et al. Inhibition of homologous recombination by the PCNA-interacting protein
PARI. Molecular cell. 2012; 45:75–86.10.1016/j.molcel.2011.11.010 [PubMed: 22153967]
16. Ira G, Malkova A, Liberi G, Foiani M, Haber JE. Srs2 and Sgs1-Top3 suppress crossovers during
double-strand break repair in yeast. Cell. 2003; 115:401–411. [PubMed: 14622595]
17. Ward JD, et al. Overlapping mechanisms promote postsynaptic RAD-51 filament disassembly
during meiotic double-strand break repair. Molecular cell. 2010; 37:259–272.10.1016/j.molcel.
2009.12.026 [PubMed: 20122407]
18. Seki M, Marini F, Wood RD. POLQ (Pol theta), a DNA polymerase and DNA-dependent ATPase
in human cells. Nucleic acids research. 2003; 31:6117–6126. [PubMed: 14576298]
19. Jackson DA, Pombo A. Replicon clusters are stable units of chromosome structure: evidence that
nuclear organization contributes to the efficient activation and propagation of S phase in human
cells. The Journal of cell biology. 1998; 140:1285–1295. [PubMed: 9508763]
20. et al. Cancer Genome Atlas Research, N. Integrated genomic characterization of endometrial
carcinoma. Nature. 2013; 497:67–73.10.1038/nature12113 [PubMed: 23636398]
21. Morrison C, et al. The controlling role of ATM in homologous recombinational repair of DNA
damage. The EMBO journal. 2000; 19:463–471.10.1093/emboj/19.3.463 [PubMed: 10654944]
22. Parmar K, et al. Hematopoietic stem cell defects in mice with deficiency of Fancd2 or Usp1. Stem
cells. 2010; 28:1186–1195.10.1002/stem.437 [PubMed: 20506303]
23. Hu Y, et al. PARP1-driven Poly-ADP-ribosylation Regulates BRCA1 Function in Homologous
Recombination Mediated DNA Repair. Cancer discovery. 201410.1158/2159-8290.CD-13-0891
24. Yang D, et al. Association of BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations with survival, chemotherapy
sensitivity, and gene mutator phenotype in patients with ovarian cancer. JAMA : the journal of the
American Medical Association. 2011; 306:1557–1565.10.1001/jama.2011.1456 [PubMed:
21990299]
25. Seki M, et al. High-efficiency bypass of DNA damage by human DNA polymerase Q. The EMBO
journal. 2004; 23:4484–4494.10.1038/sj.emboj.7600424 [PubMed: 15496986]
26. Seki M, Wood RD. DNA polymerase theta (POLQ) can extend from mismatches and from bases
opposite a (6-4) photoproduct. DNA repair. 2008; 7:119–127.10.1016/j.dnarep.2007.08.005
[PubMed: 17920341]
27. Zhang Y, Jasin M. An essential role for CtIP in chromosomal translocation formation through an
alternative end-joining pathway. Nature structural & molecular biology. 2011; 18:80–84.10.1038/
nsmb.1940
28. Chiruvella KK, Liang Z, Wilson TE. Repair of double-strand breaks by end joining. Cold Spring
Harbor perspectives in biology. 2013; 5:a012757.10.1101/cshperspect.a012757 [PubMed:
23637284]
29. Alexandrov LB, et al. Signatures of mutational processes in human cancer. Nature. 2013; 500:415–
421.10.1038/nature12477 [PubMed: 23945592]
30. Lemee F, et al. DNA polymerase theta up-regulation is associated with poor survival in breast
cancer, perturbs DNA replication, and promotes genetic instability. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America. 2010; 107:13390–13395.10.1073/pnas.
0910759107 [PubMed: 20624954]

Author Manuscript

Additional References
31. Kang J, D'Andrea AD, Kozono D. A DNA repair pathway-focused score for prediction of
outcomes in ovarian cancer treated with platinum-based chemotherapy. Journal of the National
Cancer Institute. 2012; 104:670–681.10.1093/jnci/djs177 [PubMed: 22505474]
32. Cancer Genome Atlas N. Comprehensive molecular portraits of human breast tumours. Nature.
2012; 490:61–70.10.1038/nature11412 [PubMed: 23000897]

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 August 12.

Ceccaldi et al.

Page 28

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

33. Ceccaldi R, et al. Bone marrow failure in Fanconi anemia is triggered by an exacerbated p53/p21
DNA damage response that impairs hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells. Cell stem cell. 2012;
11:36–49.10.1016/j.stem.2012.05.013 [PubMed: 22683204]
34. Bennardo N, Cheng A, Huang N, Stark JM. Alternative-NHEJ is a mechanistically distinct
pathway of mammalian chromosome break repair. PLoS genetics. 2008; 4:e1000110.10.1371/
journal.pgen.1000110 [PubMed: 18584027]
35. Yusufzai T, Kadonaga JT. HARP is an ATP-driven annealing helicase. Science. 2008; 322:748–
750.10.1126/science.1161233 [PubMed: 18974355]
36. Barber LJ, et al. RTEL1 maintains genomic stability by suppressing homologous recombination.
Cell. 2008; 135:261–271.10.1016/j.cell.2008.08.016 [PubMed: 18957201]
37. Amunugama R, Groden J, Fishel R. The HsRAD51B-HsRAD51C stabilizes the HsRAD51
nucleoprotein filament. DNA repair. 2013; 12:723–732.10.1016/j.dnarep.2013.05.005 [PubMed:
23810717]
38. Pitroda SP, et al. DNA repair pathway gene expression score correlates with repair proficiency and
tumor sensitivity to chemotherapy. Science translational medicine. 2014; 6:229ra242.10.1126/
scitranslmed.3008291
39. Aggarwal M, Sommers JA, Shoemaker RH, Brosh RM Jr. Inhibition of helicase activity by a small
molecule impairs Werner syndrome helicase (WRN) function in the cellular response to DNA
damage or replication stress. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United
States of America. 2011; 108:1525–1530.10.1073/pnas.1006423108 [PubMed: 21220316]

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 August 12.

Ceccaldi et al.

Page 29

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 1. POLQ is a RAD51-interacting protein that suppresses HR

Author Manuscript

a, DR-GFP assay in U2OS cells transfected with indicated siRNA. b, Quantification of
RAD51 foci in U2OS cells transfected with indicated siRNA. c, Endogenous RAD51 coprecipitates in vivo with purified full-length Flag-tagged POLQ from whole cell extracts. d,
GST pull-down experiment with full-length Flag-tagged POLQ. (*: non-specific band). e,
GST-RAD51 pull-down with in-vitro translated POLQ truncation mutants. f, GST-RAD51
pull-down with in-vitro translated POLQ versions missing indicated amino acids. g, Ponceau
staining and immunoblotting of peptide arrays for the indicated POLQ motifs probed with
recombinant RAD51. The POLQ amino acids spanning RAD51-interacting motifs are
shown. Data in a and b represent mean ± s.e.m.

Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 August 12.

Ceccaldi et al.

Page 30

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 2. POLQ inhibits RAD51-mediated recombination

a, Schematic of POLQ mutants used in complementation studies and their interaction with
RAD51. b, Quantification of RAD51 foci in U2OS cells transfected with indicated siRNA
and POLQ cDNA constructs refractory to siPOLQ1. c, DR-GFP assay in U2OS cells
transfected with indicated siRNA and POLQ cDNA constructs refractory to siPOLQ1. d,
Coomassie-stained gel of the purified POLQ fragment. e, Quantification of POLQ ATPase
activity. f, Quantification of POLQ binding to ssDNA and dsDNA. g, RAD51-ssDNA
nucleofilament assembly assay. h, Assessment of RAD51-dependent D-loop formation.
Data in b, c, e and f represent mean ± s.e.m.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 August 12.

Ceccaldi et al.

Page 31

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 3. POLQ promotes S phase progression and recovery of stalled forks

Author Manuscript

a, POLQ gene expression in subtypes of cancers with HR deficiency. b, Survival assays of
A2780 cells exposed to the indicated DNA-damaging agents. Immunoblot showing silencing
efficiency. c, Immunoblot analyses following pulse treatments with DNA-damaging agents
(*γH2AX: see methods). d, Cell cycle progression of synchronized A2780 cells. A
representative cell cycle distribution. e, Fraction of cycling A2780 cells measured by EdU
incorporation. f, Quantification of DNA fiber lengths. g, Percentage of stalled forks. All
experiments shown in a-d were performed in two cell lines (A2780 and 293T). All data
represent mean ± s.e.m. except for box plots in f that show twenty-fifth to seventy-fifth
percentiles, with lines indicating the median, and whiskers indicating the smallest and
largest values.

Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 August 12.

Ceccaldi et al.

Page 32

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Figure 4. Synthetic lethality between HR and POLQ repair pathways

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

a, Clonogenic formation of BRCA1-deficient (MDA-MB-436) cells expressing indicated
cDNA together with indicated shRNA. b, Chromosome breakage analysis of HR-deficient
cells transfected with the indicated siRNA. A representative image is shown. Arrows
indicate chromosomal aberrations. c, Embryos at day 14 of gestation. d, Growth of indicated
xenografts in vivo. Immunoblot showing silencing efficiency. e, Relative tumor volumes
(RTV) for individual mice treated in (d) after three weeks of treatment. f, Overall survival
for mice treated with vehicle or PARPi. Log-rank P < 10-3. Clonogenic formation (g) and
chromosome breakage analysis (h) of BRCA2-deficient cells expressing POLQ cDNA
constructs refractory to siPOLQ1 and transfected with the indicated siRNA. i, Clonogenic
formation of BRCA2-deficient cells transfected with the indicated siRNA. j, Model for role
of POLQ in DNA repair. Data in a, b, g and i represent mean ± s.e.m. For data in d-f, each
circle represents data from one tumor and each group represents n ≥ 7 tumors from n ≥ 6
mice. Brackets show mean ± s.e.m.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 August 12.

