Oncotarget, Vol. 7, No. 36

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Research Paper

Radio-frequency plasma polymerized biodegradable carrier for
in vivo release of cis-platinum
Sudhir Bhatt1,3, Fatemeh Valamanesh2, Jerome Pulpytel1, Rea Lo Dico2, Aliby
Baiyukha1, Iman Al-dybiat2, Marc Pocard2, Farzaneh Arefi-Khonsari1, Massoud
Mirshahi2
1

Sorbonne Universités, UPMC Univ. Paris 6, CNRS, Laboratoire Interfaces et Systèmes Electrochimiques, 75005, Paris,
France

2

Sorbonne Paris Cité Universités, UMR Univ. Paris 7, INSERM U965 Carcinose, Angiogenèse et Recherche Translationnelle,
L’Hôpital Lariboisière, 75010, Paris, France

3

Current address: Frank Reidy Research Center for Bioelectrics, Old Dominion University, Norfolk, 23508, VA, USA

Correspondence to: Massoud Mirshahi, email: massoud.mirshahi@inserm.fr
Keywords: plasma polymers, biodegradable coatings, in vivo drug delivery system, anti-cancer drug, targeted therapy
Received: May 11, 2016     Accepted: July 19, 2016     Published: July 29, 2016

ABSTRACT
A low pressure plasma process based on plasma deposition has been used to
develop a drug delivery strategy. In this study, a drug delivery system based on
different layers of plasma co-polymerized Poly ε-caprolactone-Polyethylene glycol
(PCL-PEG) co-polymers was deposited on biocompatible substrates. Cis-platinum
(118 μgm/cm2) was used as an anti-cancer drug and incorporated for local delivery
of the chemotherapeutic agent. The co-polymer layers and their interaction with
cancer cells were analyzed by scanning electron microscopy. Our study showed that
the plasma-PCL-PEG coated cellophane membranes, in which the drug, was included
did not modify the flexibility and appearance of the membranes. This system was
actively investigated as an alternative method of controlling localized delivery of drug
in vivo. The loading of the anti-cancer drug was investigated by UV-VIS spectroscopy
and its release from plasma deposited implants against BALB/c mice liver tissues
were analyzed through histological examination and apoptosis by TUNEL assay. The
histological examination of liver tissues revealed that when the plasma-modified
membranes encapsulated the cis-platinum, the Glisson’s capsule and liver parenchyma
were damaged. In all cases, inflammatory tissues and fibrosis cells were observed
in contact zones between the implant and the liver parenchyma. In conclusion, low
pressure plasma deposited uniform nano-layers of the co-polymers can be used for
controlled release of the drug in vivo.

cancer treatment, cis-platinum is usually intravenously
administered but it is often unsuccessful because of the
nonselective distribution of the drug among the normal
and tumor tissue and that likely enhances the risk of dose
limiting side effects including chronic neurotoxicity,
acute nephrotoxicity and myelosuppression [5–6]. After
24 hrs of clinical administration of cis-platinum, it has
been noticed that more than 65% of the platinum in the
blood was protein bound, leading to severe side effects
of cis-platinum treatment and therefore less therapeutic
efficacy [7] and resistance over the course of medication
[8]. In order to overcome these therapeutic limitations by

INTRODUCTION
In the past several years interest in platinum drugs
has increased due to their successful administration for
the treatment of most disseminated cancers [1]. Cisplatinum (cis-diaminedichloroplatinum (II)) remains
one of the most widely used and potent anticancer
agents against many different types of cancer [2–3].
Cis-platinum exerts its anticancer effects by covalently
binding to DNA and forming various platinum-DNA
adducts which cause distortions in DNA and that leads to
final cellular outcome of apoptotic cell death [4]. For the

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

58121

Oncotarget

RESULTS

cis-platinum treatment and other anticancer drugs, there
is a clear incentive to develop new strategies for efficient,
systematic and controlled release of cis-platinum for
oncology.
Towards enhancement for the prevention of the
systematic side effects of the chemotherapy, a wide range
of strategies have been developed for a more selective
delivery. The trend in drug delivery technology has
been toward biodegradable polymer excipients requiring
no follow-up surgical removal once the drug supply
is depleted [9]. For instance, wet chemically prepared
polymer based cis-platinum loaded drug delivery
systems such as platinum encapsulated PLGA-b-PEG
nanoparticles [10], liposomes [11], PEG-b-poly (amino
acid)-based polymeric micelles [12], polymeric conjugates
of γ-PGA–cis-platinum [13], pH sensitive Bi(PEG-PLA)Pt(IV) polymer-prodrug conjugates [14] etc. The recent
advances in nanoparticle formulations of cis-platinum for
therapeutic applications have been thoroughly surveyed
and the clinical utility of cis-platinum conjugates have
been investigated [15].
As compared to the wet processes [9–16], plasma
polymerization is a catalyst and solvent free, dry, one
step, highly controllable and environmentally benign
process. Recently, the radio frequency (RF) plasma
(co-) polymerization of different organic precursors for
surface modifications of a variety of substrates have
been summarized in order to tailor the physico-chemical
properties of the substrates for mitigation of nonspecific
adsorption of proteins, tunable biomolecule-surface
interactions and controlled drug delivery applications
[17, 18]. The synergetic role of plasma generated free
radicals for tuning the surface properties of polymers and
their applications have been discussed broadly for drug
delivery, biomedical and tissue engineering [19].
The biodegradable and biocompatible PCL-co-PEG
polymers with different cell adhesion and cell-repellent
properties have been prepared on different flat substrates
by gradually varying the partial pressure ratio of the
monomers (ε-CL/DEGME) under the solvent and catalyst
free low-pressure inductively excited RF plasma reactor
[20–23]. Later, cis-platinum loaded multilayer of plasma
was studied polymerized PCL-co-PEG coatings have been
used to produce barrier layers on different flat surfaces
(glass, Si wafer, etc.) for the controlled release of drug and
the in vitro release of anticancer drug was investigated for
the apoptosis of ovarian cancer cells [22].
In our previous works [20-23], we have reported
how to develop a Drug Delivery System based on multiple
layers composed of plasma copolymers deposited on
glass, and Si wafer by the dry clean plasma process.
The controlled drug delivery of anticancer drug was
investigated in-vitro for the apoptosis of ovarian cancer
cells [22]. Here the same drug delivery system was
deposited on cellophane membranes and the controlled
release of cis-platinum was studied in vivo.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

UV-visible spectroscopic measurements for cisplatinum loading
The loading of cis-platinum on plasma copolymerized cellophane substrates was determined by
measuring the absorbance in the range of 200 – 500 nm
using UV-Vis spectrometer. The absorption spectrum
of 1mM cis-platinum in 1X PBS, pH 7, is shown in
Figure 1. Because of metal to ligand charge transfer
(MLCT) transitions in cis-platinum solution [23], a strong
band at 203 nm and a shoulder at 229 nm are appeared.
Cis-platinum compound exhibits a much weaker band at
330 nm which is assigned to the d-d transition of Pt2+ ions.

Cell-membrane contact analysis by scanning
electron microscopy
As presented in Figure 2A, uniform copolymer
layer (UCL) is intact and posed correctly on the substrate.
Ovarian cancer cell line OVCAR-3 adhered on the UCL
in the cell culture condition and do not perturbed by
culture medium. Adhered cells form the filopodias on
the membrane (Figure 2B). Incorporation of cis-platinum
strongly modified the physiological properties of UCL by
induction of cells detachment (Figure 2C). As presented
in Figure 2D, the cellular debris remained after cell death
on the UCL.

Influence of multilayer coatings membrane
implants on the liver parenchyma
In our previously published work [22], the cisplatinum loaded plasma polymerized multilayer PCLco-PEG coatings was assessed in vitro using human
ovarian carcinoma cells (NIH: OVCAR-3) where it has
been demonstrated that controlled release of cis-platinum
was effectively induced apoptosis. Herein, after 10 days
of hepatic implantation, the mice liver was extracted
by surgical resection and histological measurements
were performed (Figure 3). In Figure 3A, 1-3, the
macroscopic and representative image of cellophane
implanted animal, the position of the implant on the liver,
magnified image showing surgically removed implant
and representative image of histology are presented.
Figure 3B, 1-4, histological examination of plasma
deposited implants wrapped onto a liver, showed that
the implants were properly positioned and surrounded
by a fibrous capsule. This capsule was homogeneous
along the whole perimeter of the plasma coated implants,
with limited areas of necrosis and inflammatory cells.
Several liver sections from this region were analysed for
each case (Figure 3B, 1-4). Normal (3B-1) and the liver
exposed to bare cellophane, unloaded drug membranes
were presented in Figure 3B, 1-3. The liver is invested
58122

Oncotarget

Figure 1: UV absorption spectrum of 1 mM Cis-platinum in 1X PBS at pH 7.

Figure 2: interaction of ovarian cancer cell with uniform copolymer layer (UCL). Ovarian cancer cell line OVCAR-3 adhered
on the UCL (arrow) in the culture medium (A. X2500). This interaction is biocompatible and adhered cell form the pseudopod and nanopod
on the UCL (B. X20000). When the anti-cancer drug was incorporated, on the UCL, the cells shape changed (C. x10000) and adherent
necro-apoptotic cell organelles (arrow) were observed after cells detachments (D. X5000).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

58123

Oncotarget

Figure 3: Macroscopic and microscopic observation of hepatic implantation of cellophane inBALB/c mice sacrificed
on the 10th day. Macroscopic and representative image of cellophane implanted animal, magnified image showing surgically removed

implant and representative image of histology A. Microscopic images for the histological analysis of normal liver tissues called of control
B-1. liver exposed to untreated (uncoated) cellophane (Cello) B-2. plasma polymers + cellophane coated with copolymer without cisplatinum (4B-3) cellophane (pPCL-co-PEG-Cello) B-3. cellophane coated with copolymer + drug and plasma polymers, + Cis-platinum +
cellophane (Cisp-pPCL-co-PEG-Cello) B-4. Data are a typical microscopic imaging of liver tissue sections C. under original magnification
of 20 X, 100 X and 200 X. Nuclei: dark blue, cytoplasm: pink. CV: Central vein.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

58124

Oncotarget

by a connective tissue capsule named Glisson’s capsule.
The histological examination of the liver of the control
mice exhibited the normal architecture of the liver
whereas the parenchyma of the control liver specimens
was uniform in appearance. As presented in Figures 3B2, when untreated cellophane was used, the Glisson’s
capsule and liver parenchyma were intact after 10 days.
In case of pPCL-co-PEG-cello, no significant change
was observed in liver tissues as compared to control
Figures 3B-3. That shows the plasma polymerized PCLco-PEG coatings on cellophane implants which were in
contact with liver for 10 days, were biocompatible and
did not generate significant inflammatory response. The
histological appearance of parenchyma in pPCL-coPEG-Cello, and untreated cellophane was comparable
with that of control group. On the contrary, when the
membrane contained cis-platinum (Cisp-pPCL-co-PEGCello,), the Glisson’s capsule and liver parenchyma
were damaged (Figure 3B-4). In addition, the mice
liver treated with the Cisp-pPCL-co-PEG-Cello,
formulation did exhibit inflammatory cells as compared
to the control. As compared to control, the histological
examination of the liver tissues of the Cisp-pPCL-coPEG-Cello treated mice exhibited congestion of the
central veins and intracytoplasmic vacuolations were
observed which might be due to the cis-platinum induced
oxidative damage and lipid peroxidation of the liver
tissues [24]. In the cells around the central vein (arrow
CV), the cytoplasmic modifications were observed. As
shown in Figure 3C (magnification: 200X), the clusters
of inflammatory cells were observed in the surrounding
of portal region. In all implanted cases, the fibrosis was
observed on the zones in contact with the implant and
liver parenchyma showed by arrow (Figure 3C, 2-4).

broad ultraviolet-visible (UV-Vis) region ranging from
200 to 500 nm. Initial studies were conducted using 0.20.5 ml of blood plasma from experimental groups and
control group in a quartz cuvette. As presented in Figure
5, The UV-V of the spectrum of the blood plasma shows
a strong band at 410 nm and a less intense band at 250
nm attributed to the hemoglobin (Hb) and oxidized Hb
respectively. In the case of Cisp-pPCL-co-PEG-Cello,
a very weak peak corresponding to Pt+2 ion can be
identified at 330 nm, even though it is not completely
distinguishable from the rest of the spectra due to
the overlapping. Therefore it is difficult to assign the
absorption of platinum compounds in biological medium
such as blood. One can note in Figure 2 which shows
the UV absorption of cis-platinum in PBS, (Figure 5). It
can be pointed out that the absorption spectrum of cisplatinum in blood plasma (Figure 5) is quite different as
compared to its absorption in PBS (Figure 2). Therefore
it is difficult to assign absorption of platinum compounds
in biological media such as blood.

DISCUSSION
In this study we described the in vivo local drug
release efficacy of the low pressure plasma polymerized
PCL-co-PEG encapsulated cis-platinum implants as
biocompatible and biodegradable drug carriers. A drug
delivery system based on different layers presenting
different chemical compositions of PCL-PEC copolymers
obtained by low pressure plasma has been already
reported [22]. The total thickness of these layers is in the
order of a few hundreds of nm. However the first layers
deposited to increase the affinity of the membrane is a
few tens of nm, followed by a dense barrier deposited
at higher powers, covered again by coatings under
conditions which would be cell nonadhesive (Figure 6B).
Indeed the reason why we have used PCL-PEG(1:4) is
because the copolymers deposited under such conditions
when deposited at low power can be cell nonadhesive
while at higher powers they are dense and crosslinked
and act as a barrier for leaching out of the drugs. In this
work such multi-layer coatings have been deposited on
biocompatible cellophane substrates which were flat,
non-porous surfaces (2D). Cis-platinum loaded (118
μgm/cm2) PCL-co-PEG coatings with optimized ratios
of ε-CL/DEGME monomer feed in the plasma reactor
were prepared for controlled cell death applications.
The plasma treatments did not modify the flexibility
and appearance of the membranes. As demonstrated
by SEM, the copolymer layer was identifiable and
the cancer cells forming the pods adhered well on the
copolymer. These results suggest the biocompatibility
and non-cytotoxicity of the membrane complex in the
absence of drug. After incorporation of the drug, the
membrane becomes cytotoxic. Cis-platinum-loaded
cellophane implants were placed directly at the site of

Detection of apoptotic cells in liver tissues
In order to detect the apoptosis in the liver tissues,
the TUNEL immunohistological assay was performed
for different experimental groups (Figure 4). As shown
in stained sections (Figure 4A and 4B), no significant
morphological differences were observed in liver tissues
from mice implanted with untreated cellophane (Figure
4A) and plasma treated cellophane (Figure 4B). No
apoptotic cells were observed with untreated cellophane
(Cello) and pPCL-co-PEG-Cello. TUNEL positive (green
florescence) signals were, however observed in liver tissues
of mice wrapped with Cisp-pPCL-co-PEG-Cello implants
for 10 days (Figure 4C). The magnified image of TUNEL
positive cells in liver tissues is shown in Figure 4D.

Cis-platinum traces in blood plasma by
ultraviolet-visible spectrophotometry
Preliminary studies were carried out to determine
the traces of cis-platinum in the blood plasma in the
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

58125

Oncotarget

mice liver, offering a controlled and local release of drug
by means of polymer swelling and/ or dissolution and/or
disintegration. The UV-Vis spectroscopic measurements
were conducted on both cis-platinum solution in PBS
(drug loading) and cis-platinum release in blood plasma.
By using UV absorption measurements, we showed
that cis-platinum reacted with proteins in the blood
plasma and a derivatization technique is required for the
quantification of cis-platinum in blood stream. By the
different biochemical techniques, the reaction abilities
of the platinum complexes such as cis-platinum to
blood serum proteins have been reported before [25].
As compared to other proteins such as albumin and
immunoglobulin, higher reaction (binding) ability of
cis-platinum to hemoglobin (Hb) has been shown [26].
In our case of cis-platinum in blood plasma, a high
absorbance of Hb was obtained at 410 nm as compared
to the intensity of the cis-platinum for Pt+2 at 330 nm.
After 10 days of implantation, the detection of traces of
cis-platinum in the blood plasma might be difficult by
means of UV absorption measurements without carrying
out derivatization which result from the in vivo formation

of cis-platinum-protein adducts via strong interactions
between blood plasma and platinum ligands. Due to the
complexity of the blood plasma and the low molecular
absorptivity of cis-platinum in the UV region, the
selective derivatization for the detection of cis-platinum
in biological samples has been discussed by means of
optical measurements of the platinum-ligand drugs [27].
Our previous in vitro study using plasma
polymerized PCL-co-PEG coated cis-platinum for
controlled release has confirmed the cytotoxic effects of
cis-platinum to cancer cells [22].
Then the cellulose based polymer was covered
with the multi-layered coating according to the
procedure explained and was implanted on Glisson’s
capsule of the liver. The in vivo measurements showed
that all animals reacted against the implant and after 10
days of post-implantation, inflammatory tissues were
generated in the region of implants. Consequently,
macroscopic and microscopic analysis demonstrated
endogenous tissues containing the micro-vessels,
fibrocytes, immune inflammatory cells, tissues matrix
and fibrosis. In all experiments except when the implant

Figure 4: Apoptotic cells in liver tissue sections were detected using TUNEL assay for untreated cellophane (Cello) A.
plasma polymers + cellophane (pPCL-co-PEG-Cello) B. plasma polymers + Cis-platinum + cellophane (Cisp-pPCL-co-PEGCello) C. and magnified image showing apoptotic cells D. Data are a typical fluorescent microscopic imaging of liver tissue sections
under original magnification of × 100. Nuclei: blue, apoptosis cells: green.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

58126

Oncotarget

Figure 5: UV absorption spectrum of blood plasma for control, untreated cellophane (Cello), plasma polymers +
cellophane (pPCL-co-PEG-Cello), and plasma polymers + Cis-platinum + cellophane (Cisp-pPCL-co-PEG-Cello).

Figure 6: Schematic of plasma polymerized multilayer coatings on cellophane for in vivo release of cis-platinum. A.

Radio-Frequency Plasma Polymerization (RF-Plasma) of ε-Caprolactone and DEGDME for generation of PCL-PEG copolymer on the
membrane (cellophane). B. Schematic of the multi-stack PCL-PEG coating for a tuneable release of entrapped drug layer (cis-platinum).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

58127

Oncotarget

contained the drug, Glisson’s capsule was intact. In
contrast, when implants contained the drug, the release
induced the rupture of the Glisson’s capsule and
consequently, the liver parenchyma was destroyed. The
presence of apoptotic cells only in liver parenchyma in
the presence of the implant which encapsulated the drug
suggested the efficacy of nano thick multilayer drug
delivery membrane. These implants provided the release
of high amounts of the drug without any complication
in surrounding organs stomach, spleen, diaphragm,
and others digestive organs including renal toxicity
(Supplementary Results, Figure S-1). All the 20 mice
were alive and healthy on Day 10.
In the present work, the histological examination
of the liver tissues which were in contact with cisplatinum loaded plasma polymerized cellophane
implants were showed hepatocellular vacuolization
and cis-platinum induced inflammation of cells. As
compared to untreated cellophane implanted on liver
tissues, the apoptotic (TUNEL positive) cells were
remained in the liver tissues which were in contact
with cis-platinum loaded implants. Herein, we have
shown the advantage of the one step, dry, clean,
catalyst and solvent free soft plasma polymerized
drug delivery system which can be prepared on a wide
range of substrates and to achieve high purity materials
and interfaces for in vitro and in vivo biological and
clinical applications. In previous works, we used a
wet chemical targeting method for ganciclovir-loaded
albumin nanoparticles for intra ocular injection [28].
Co polymerization of the materials destined for
nanoparticles generation, needed catalyser and solvent.
Here, compared with traditional methods, we proposed
plasma process which allows copolymerizing by means
of a catalyst and solvent free process to regulate the drug
release from a substrate.
However, we need further investigation to
demonstrate the exact mechanism for loading and
controlled release of cis-platinum induced hepatotoxicity
and dose dependent effects on cancer tissues. In
conclusion, low pressure plasma coating technique
may be used to deposit coatings of uniform thicknesses
over a variety of substrates for biological and clinical
applications.

groups of five in an air-filtered laminar flow cabinet and
fed with irradiated food and autoclaved reverse-osmosis
treated water. All procedures were performed under
sterile conditions in a laminar flow hood. Five animals
for each group were used. The experimental protocol was
approved by the Ethics Review Committee for Animal
Experimentation of UPMC, France. All experimental
protocols were performed in accordance with the European
Convention for the protection of vertebrate animals used
for experimental and other scientific purposes (Council of
Europe, 1986, ETS No. 123).

Materials
ε-CL (Purity: 97%, MW: 114, Empirical formula:
C6H10O2) and DEGME (Purity: 99.5%, MW: 134.17, linear
formula: (CH3OCH2CH2)2O) were purchased from Sigma
Aldrich, France and used in this study without further
purifications. For the drug delivery implant applications,
a 50 μm thick sheet of Cellulose bio-polymer was
purchased from Humeau laboratories France. Cellophane
substrates were cut to sizes of approximately 2 cm2 for all
experiments.

Antineoplastic drug
Cisplatin or cis-diamminedichloroplatinum (II)
(CDDP) (linear formula: PtCl2H6N2, MW: 300.05) was
used as an antineoplastic (anticancer) drug in sterile
aqueous solution. Each mL of cisplatin solution, was used
for the current study contained 1 mg of cisplatin and 9
mg sodium chloride in water (pH 3.5-4.5). For the in vivo
drug release study, 20 μl of cisplatin solution of 1 mM
concentration in 1X PBS was dropped onto cellophane
substrates pre-coated with plasma polymerized PEG
(pDEGME) and allowed to dry at room temperature. The
cellophane slides (2 cm2) loaded with cisplatin (118 μgm/
cm2) were immersed in 1 mL of 1X PBS (pH 7.0) at 37 °C.
The sample was agitated for 5 minute with a vortex mixer,
then sonicated (Ultrasonic Cleaner, Fisher Scientific,
France) in a room temperature water bath for 5 minute,
and mixed with a vortex mixer for an additional minute.
Afterwards, the supernatant was collected and the cisplatin
loading was determined by UV Visible spectroscopic
(SAFAS UVmc2, France) measurements. Spectral data
was collected from 180-500 nm, (Supplementary Results,
Figure S-2).

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Animals

Plasma polymerization of PCL-co-PEG coatings

A total of 20 female BALB/c mice (4 weeks old)
were purchased from Charles River Laboratories (F 69592
L'Arbresle) France and body weight ranging from 20 to 30
g. All animals were maintained at the animal center for 2
weeks of adaptive feeding prior the start of experiment.
Animals were randomly divided into three experimental
groups and a control group. The mice were caged in
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

PCL and PEG (PCL-co-PEG) copolymer coatings
were fabricated in a low pressure inductively excited
radio frequency-tubular quartz plasma reactor system
(5 cm diameter, 40 cm length, base pressure of 3x10-2
mbar). The schematics of plasma deposition setup for
PCL-PEG coatings, technical details of the process and
in vitro characterization of cis-platinum release as well
58128

Oncotarget

as the cell-surface interactions have been provided in
our earlier work [26]. Briefly, prior to each experimental
run, the reactor was scrubbed and cleaned with
detergent, organic solvents and dried using compressed
air. After cleaning with solvent, the plasma reactor was
reassembled and cleaned further with 30W argon plasma
discharge at 0.5 mbar pressure for 30 min. The partial
pressure ratio of the two monomer fed in the reactor was
controlled by the flow rate of carrier gas (i.e. Ar), which
was regulated and measured by electronic mass flow
controllers (MKS instruments). The flow rate of carrier
gas was varied from 5 to 20 sccm with the increment of
5 sccm which was denoted by “1” for 5 sccm and “4” for
20 sccm respectively. The total flow rate was varied from
5 sccm to 25 sccm by keeping the operating pressure
constant. The power was generated by Dressler Cesar RF
generator which was delivered through the L-C matching
network. The substrate is placed 9.0 cm below the coil. In
the present work, we have deposited copolymer coatings
for barrier layer at 20W CW (Continuous Wave) plasma
which was then followed by deposition of a copolymer in
a 1W PW (Pulse Wave). For the pulsed plasma discharge,
the peak power (Ppk) was 25W and the duty cycle (DC =
(ton / (ton+toff), where ton and toff were the ‘plasma ON’ and
‘plasma OFF’ times respectively) was 4% to obtain the
effective plasma power (Peff) which was 1W PW (ton =
4ms and toff = 96ms). Plasma polymerization of organic
monomers was carried out on biocompatible cellophane
substrates. All the coatings were deposited for different
time duration (td). After polymer deposition, the reactor
was again evacuated to base pressure before the plasma
polymerization system was vented to atmospheric
pressure with air.

5% CO2 for 48h. The culture medium was discarded and
samples were washed. The samples were fixed in 2%
glutaraldehyde and 1X phosphate buffer saline (PBS,
pH 7.4) at room temperature for 1 hour, washed in 1X
PBS and then post fixed in 1% osmium-1X PBS for 45
min at room temperature and in dark conditions. After
a final wash in 1X PBS, the samples were dehydrated
in increasing concentrations of ethanol. Samples were
dried by the critical point method with liquid CO2 and
then sputter-coated with gold. They were observed
with a S260 CAMBRIDGE scanning electron equipped
with a LaB6 filament operating at 15kV and images
were captured with the software “Orion” from (NCH
Software).

Preparation of implants
A schematic of plasma deposited multilayer PCLco-PEG coatings on cis-platinum loaded cellophane
for hepatic implantation is illustrated in Figure 6. For
in vivo release of cis-platinum, the multilayer of plasma
polymerized PCL-PEG copolymers were prepared on
cellophane substrates as a multistep process discussed
as follows: (i) 0th layer: a hydrophilic layer of plasma
polymerized DEGME (pDEGME) coating was deposited
on 2 cm2 cellophane substrates for 5 min at 1W effective
power. (ii) Cis-platinum (118 μgm/cm2) solution was
mobilized on pDEGME coated cellophane substrates.
(iii) 1st layer: To avoid the direct exposure of the RF
plasma, PCL-co-PEG (1:4) coatings were deposited on
cis-platinum loaded cellophane substrates under mild
conditions (Ppk=25 W, DC=4%, Peff=1 W, td=5 min).
(iv) 2nd layer: The barrier layer coatings were deposited
to encapsulate the drug under 20 W CW power for 10
min. (v) 3rd layer: Finally, PCL-co-PEG (1:4) coatings
were deposited on top of the barrier layer under mild
conditions for controlled cell-surface interactions (Figure
6). All the plasma deposited implants were prepared 1
hr before the in vivo experiments. All the experimental
conditions for preparation of implants are summarized
in Table 1.

Determination of cis-platinum loading
The cis-platinum solution was dispersed on pDEGME
deposited cellophane substrates. In order to ensure cisplatinum recovery occurred from the cellophane implants,
one implant was then cut into four individual pieces and
submerged in 1 mL of 1X PBS (pH 7.0). The sample was
agitated for 5 minute with a vortex mixer, then sonicated
(Ultrasonic Cleaner, Fisher Scientific) in a room temperature
water bath for 5 minute, and mixed with a vortex mixer for an
additional minute. Afterwards, the supernatant was collected
and the cis-platinum loading was determined by UV Visible
spectroscopic (SAFAS UVmc2, France) measurements.
Spectral data was collected from 180-500 nm.

Membrane implantation
All 20 animals were anesthetized with 2%
isoflurane in oxygen with mechanical ventilation for
15 min. Each animal was fixed in a supine position.
After skin disinfection with Betadine, a xifo-umbilical
laparotomy was performed. A verification of the
peritoneum and the abdominal cavity was realized and
a self-retaining retractor was placed. If necessary, an
Allis clamp type was placed on the xiphoid cartilage to
improve exposure. The implants of cellophane (2 cm2)
were placed above the left hepatic lobe, between the
liver and the anterior face of the stomach. Untreated
(Cello), plasma polymers (pPCL-co-PEG-Cello) and
plasma polymers + Cis-platinum (Cisp-pPCL-co-PEG-

Scanning electron microscopy
105/10μl of Suspended ovarian cancer cell line
OVCAR-3 were deposited on a plasma polymerized
glass and incubated for one minute then 2ml of RPMI
medium (with 10% of Fetal Bovine Serum FBS, 1% of
L-Glutamine and 1% of Streptomycin) were added to
the well. All the samples were incubated at 37°C and
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

58129

Oncotarget

Table 1: Experimental conditions for preparation of drug delivery vehicles for in vivo implants
Implant

Description

Control

Cellophane

pDEGME
(0th layer)

Cisplatin
loading

Protective
coating
(1st layer)

Barrier
coating
(2nd layer)

Functionalized No of
coating
mice
(3rd layer)
per
group

Χ

Χ

Χ

Χ

Χ

Χ

5

Cello

Untreated
Cellophane

√

Χ

Χ

Χ

Χ

Χ

5

pPCLco-PEGCello

Cellophane
+Plasma
Polymers

√

√

Χ

√

√

√

5

CisppPCLco-PEGCello

Cellophane
+Cisplatin
+Plasma
Polymers

√

√

√

√

√

√

5

In vivo release of cis-platinum

Cello) treated cellophane were implanted into animals
in the three different experimental groups (Table 1).
In the control group, all animals were remained as
received. The absorbable compress Surgicel® (Oxidized
regenerated cellulose) was used to completely cover
the implant and avoid the displacement (migration).
The peritoneum was closed with a continuous suture of
Prolene 7/0 (Ethicon, Somerville, NJ) a non-absorbable
over lock or metal clips was placed on the skin. After
surgical procedure, the anesthetics were discontinued,
and all animals were allowed to recover for 20 minutes
in a box flushed with 100% oxygen and then placed in
their home cages. After 10 days from implantation, all
mice from both experimental and control groups were
euthanized by CO2 inhalation. General conditions of
the surrounding tissue and the implanted cellophane
substrates were observed with the naked eye. The part
of liver opposite to implant was removed, fixed in PAF
(4%) and embedded in paraffin. The slides (4 micron)
were produced and colored by hematein-eosin-safran
(HES) according to classical methods in the anatomopathogical laboratory. Histopathological study of liver
tissues was performed

The blood samples were collected from the mice retro
orbital sinus into Heparin tubes after 10 days of implantation.
The sampled blood (0.3-0.5 mL) were centrifuged at 3000
rpm for 10 min at 4°C to separate the plasma. Cis-platinum
traces in the blood plasma was investigated using UV Vis
Spectroscopic (SAFAS UV mc2, France) analysis. Spectral
data was collected from 170-500 nm.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We gratefully acknowledge University Pierre
& Marie Curie (UPMC), France for offering the PhD
financial support (SB). We acknowledge Francoise Pillier.
(SEM Platform, UPMC, Jussieu, Paris, France) for her help
in scanning electron microscopy analysis and Jean Philippe
Brouland for his help in anatomo-pathology studies.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

GRANT SUPPORT

Terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase dUTP
nick-end labeling (TUNEL) assay

This work was supported by the France national
cancer institute (INCA-2014-INSERM, CORAPLAS, a
Research proposal in physics, mathematics and engineering
sciences applied to the cancer research).

After 10 days of implantation, the apoptotic cells in
the liver tissues adjacent to the cellophane implants were
detected using TUNEL (Promega, Madison, WI) assay. In
brief, the sections of liver tissues were deparaffinined and
dehydrated, followed by permeabilization with 20 μg/mL
proteinase K and 0.2% Triton X-100 in 1X PBS. The slides
were then labeled with a TdT reaction mixture for 90 min
and were mounted with a mounting solution containing
4’, 6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI). The apoptotic
cells (green) and cell nucleus (blue) was examined using a
fluorescence microscopy.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Author contributions
SB: designed and conducted plasma deposition
experiments; analysed data; prepared figures; wrote the
manuscript
FV: conducted in vivo experiments
JP: conducted plasma deposition experiments
58130

Oncotarget

RD: conducted in vivo experiments
AB: plasma deposition experiments for SEM analysis
IA: pharmacology, cell biology and SEM analysis
MP: in vivo experiments (Director of INSER U965)
FAK: designed and conducted plasma deposition
experiments; analysed data; prepared figures; wrote the
manuscript (Director of LISE, Paris VI)
MM: designed and conducted in vivo experiments,
analysed data, prepared figures, wrote the manuscript

self-assembled polymer-metal complex micelle from cisdichlorodiammineplatinum (II) and poly (ethylene glycol)poly (α, β-aspartic acid) block copolymer in an aqueous
medium. Langmuir. 1999; 15:377–383.
13.	 Ye H, Jin L, Hu R, Yi Z, Li J, Wu Y, Xi X, Wu Z. Poly
(γ, l-glutamic acid)–cis-platinum conjugate effectively
inhibits human breast tumor xenografted in nude mice.
Biomaterials. 2006; 27:5958–5965.
14.	 Aryal S, Jack Hu CM, Zhang L. Polymer−Cis-platinum
Conjugate Nanoparticles for Acid-Responsive Drug
Delivery. ACS Nano. 2010; 4:251–258.

REFERENCES

15.	 Duan X, He C, Kron SJ, Lin W. Nanoparticle formulations
of cis-platinum for cancer therapy. Wiley Interdisciplinary
Reviews: Nanomedicine and Nanobiotechnology. 2016; doi:
10.1002/wnan.1390.

1.	 Kelland L. The resurgence of platinum-based cancer
chemotherapy. Nature Reviews Cancer. 2007; 7: 573-584.
2.	 Rosenberg B, VanCamp L, Trosko JE, Mansour VH.
Platinum compounds: A new class of potent antitumour
agents. Nature. 1969; 222:385–386.

16.	 Zhao F, Zhao Y, Liu Y, Chang X, Chen C, Zhao Y. Cellular
Uptake, Intracellular Trafficking, and Cytotoxicity of
Nanomaterials. Small. 2011; 7:1322−1337.

3.	 Jamieson ER, Lippard SJ. Structure, recognition, and
processing of cis-platinum-DNA adducts. Chemical
Reviews. 1999; 99:2467–2498.

17.	 Bhatt S, Pulpytel J, Ceccone G, Lisboa P, Rossi F, Kumar
V, Arefi-Khonsari F. Nanostructured Protein Repellant
Amphiphilic Copolymer Coatings with Optimized Surface
Energy by Inductively Excited Low Pressure Plasma.
Langmuir. 2011; 27:14570-14580.

4.	 Eastman A. Activation of programmed cell death by
anticancer agents: cis-platinum as a model system. Cancer
Cells. 1990; 2:275–280.
5.	 Sastry J, Kellie SJ. Severe neurotoxicity, ototoxicity and
nephrotoxicity following high-dose cis-platinum and
amifostine. Pediatric Hematology and Oncology. 2005;
22:441–445.

18.	 Bhatt S, Pulpytel J, Arefi-Khonsari F. Low and Atmospheric
Plasma Polymerization of Nanocoatings for Bio
Applications. Surface Innovations. 2015; 3:63-83.
19.	 Khelifa F, Ershov S, Habibi Y, Snyders R, Dubois P. FreeRadical-Induced Grafting from Plasma Polymer Surfaces,
Chemical Reviews. 2016; 116:3975-4005.

6.	 Sternberg CN, Donat SM, Bellmunt J, Millikan RE, Stadler
W, De Mulder, P, Sherif A, von der Maase H, Tsukamoto
T, Soloway, M. S. Chemotherapy for Bladder Cancer:
Treatment Guidelines for Neoadjuvant Chemotherapy,
Bladder Preservation, Adjuvant Chemotherapy, and
Metastatic Cancer. Urology. 2007;69:62-79.

20.	 Bhatt S, Pulpytel J, Mirshahi M, Arefi-Khonsari F.
Catalyst-Free Plasma-Assisted Copolymerization of
Poly(ε-caprolactone)-poly(ethylene glycol) for Biomedical
Applications. ACS Macro Letters. 2012; 1: 764–767.

7.	 Ivanov AI, Christodoulou J, Parkinson JA, Barnham KJ,
Tucker A, Woodrow J, Sadler PJ. Cis-platinum Binding
Sites on Human Albumin. The Journal of Biological
Chemistry. 1998;273: 14721–14730.

21.	 Bhatt S, Pulpytel J, Mirshahi M, Arefi-Khonsari F. Nano
thick poly (ε-caprolactone)-poly (ethylene glycol) coatings
developed by catalyst free plasma assisted copolymerization
process for biomedical applications. RSC Advances. 2012;
2:9114-9123.

8.	 Wang D, Lippard SJ. Cellular processing of platinum
anticancer drugs. Nature Reviews Drug Discovery. 2005;
4:307–320.

22.	 Bhatt S, Pulpytel J, Mirshahi M, Arefi-Khonsari F. Plasma
Co-polymerized Nano Coatings – As a Biodegradable
Solid Carrier for Controlled Drug Delivery Applications.
Polymer. 2013; 54: 4820-4829.

9.	 Cuong NV, Jiang JL, Li YL, Chen JR, Jwo SC, Hsieh
MF. Doxorubicin-loaded PEG-PCL-PEG micelle using
xenograft model of nude mice: Effect of multiple
administration of micelle on the suppression of human
breast cancer. Cancers. 2011; 3:61–78.

23.	 Canal C, Khurana K, Gallinetti S, Bhatt S, Pulpytel J, ArefiKhonsari F, Ginebra MP. Design of calcium phosphate
scaffolds with controlled simvastatin release by plasma
polymerization. Polymer. 2016; 92:170-178.

10.	 Dhar S, Kolishetti N, Lippard SJ, Farokhzad OC. Targeted
delivery of a cis-platinum prodrug for safer and more
effective prostate cancer therapy in vivo. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences. 2011; 108:1850-1855.

24.	 Housecroft CE, Sharpe AG. Inorganic Chemistry, 2nd ed.,
Pearson Education Limited, Essex, England 2004.
25.	 Koc A, Duru M, Ciralik H, Akcan R, Sogut S. Protective
agent, erdosteine, against cis-platinum-induced hepatic
oxidant injury in rats. Molecular and Cellular Biochemistry.
2005; 278:79–84.

11.	 Krieger ML, Eckstein N, Schneider V, Koch M, Royer HD,
Jaehde U, Bendas G. Overcoming cis-platinum resistance
of ovarian cancer cells by targeted liposomes in vitro. The
International Journal of Pharmaceutics. 2010; 389:10–17.

26.	 Trynda-Lemiesz L, Kozłowski H, Keppler BK. Effect of
cis-, trans-diamminedichloroplatinum(II) and DBP on

12.	 Nishiyama N, Yokoyama M, Aoyagi T, Okano T, Sakurai
Y, Kataoka K. Preparation and characterization of
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

58131

Oncotarget

human serum albumin. Journal of Inorganic Biochemistry.
1999; 77:141-146.

28.	 Merodio M, Irache JM, Valamanesh F, Mirshahi M.
Ocular disposition and tolerance of ganciclovir-loaded
albumin nanoparticles after intravitreal injection in rats.
Biomaterials. 2002; 23:1587-94.

27.	 Anilanmert B, Yalçin G, Ariöz F, Dölen E. The
spectrophotometric determination of cisplatin in urine,
using o-phenylenediamine as derivatizing agent. Analytical
Letters. 2001; 34: 113–123.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

58132

Oncotarget

