Correspondence

Acute and Late Onset Cognitive
Dysfunction Associated With
Chemotherapy in Women
With Breast Cancer
Wefel et al claim to have found cognitive decline during and immediately after chemotherapy in 65% of breast
cancer patients, and further cognitive deterioration in
61% of patients approximately 6 months later.1 Is the
reported evidence reliable?
The authors do not acknowledge any limitations despite the small sample size (42 participants), a high attrition rate (33%), and, most importantly, the lack of an
appropriate control group.
The comparison of patients’ results with published
normative data is highly questionable if cognitive change
across multiple time points is evaluated. Practice effects on
first test repetitions are largely different due to sample characteristics and test-retest intervals,2 and information regarding practice effects occurring on multiple test repetitions is
missing for many tests. In the present study, test results of
the second, third, and fourth assessments were corrected
with a constant (ie, the practice effect observed at the first
repetition of the test in a normative sample). This assumes
that test performance linearly improves with the number of
test repetitions. This expectation is unwarranted and even
absurd. Let us assume it takes 70 seconds for a participant
to complete the Trail Making Test Part B. If the results of
subsequent repetitions of the test were all corrected by, for
example, 10 seconds, the participant would be diagnosed
with cognitive decline at the seventh repetition unless she
performed the test in no time at all.
Moreover, the second and the third assessments
were treated as 1 ‘‘acute interval’’ evaluation. If a patient
demonstrated decline at 1 of these time points, apparently
only the data of this assessment were considered. Thus,
the authors selectively reported decline whereas improvement was under-reported. Furthermore, the multitude
of Reliable Change Index analyses inflated the rate of
false-positive results. Therefore, normal variability of test
performance most likely was misclassified as decline in a
substantial percentage of patients.3
There is evidence that most published research
claims are false.4 Wefel et al have failed to take some essential precautions to safeguard against false findings.
Cancer

March 1, 2011

REFERENCES
1. Wefel JS, Saleeba AK, Buzdar AU, Meyers CA. Acute and
late onset cognitive dysfunction associated with chemotherapy
in women with breast cancer. Cancer. 2010;116:3348-3356.
2. McCaffrey RJ, Duff K, Westervelt HJ. Practitioner’s Guide to
Evaluating Change with Neuropsychological Assessment Instruments. New York: Kluwer Academic/Plenum Publishers; 2000.
3. Maruff P, Falleti MG, Collie A. The cognitive sequelae of
standard-dose adjuvant chemotherapy in women with breast
carcinoma. Results of a prospective, randomized, longitudinal
trial. Cancer. 2004;101:2143-2144; author reply 2144-2145.
4. Ioannidis JP. Why most published research findings are false.
PLoS Med. 2005;2:e124.
Kerstin Hermelink, PhD
Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics
Ludwig Maximilian University of Munich
Munich, Germany

DOI: 10.1002/cncr.25708, Published online: October 19, 2010 in
Wiley Online Library (wileyonlinelibrary.com)

Reply to Acute and Late Onset
Cognitive Dysfunction Associated
With Chemotherapy in Women
With Breast Cancer
We appreciate Dr. Hermelink’s interest in our article1
and her passionate pursuit of the ‘‘truth’’ regarding chemotherapy-associated cognitive dysfunction, although she
suggests that truth is unlikely to be found because ‘‘most
published research claims are false.’’ We concede that our
study did not provide all the answers on this issue. Nevertheless, we are confident that we were dispassionate in our
analysis and interpretation and attempted to ‘‘safeguard
against false findings.’’ Dr. Hermelink asserts that we did
not acknowledge ‘‘any limitations.’’ However, in the Discussion section, we indeed acknowledged small sample
size, the marginal significance level of some analyses, and
the use of a single control sample as limitations, and
encouraged additional investigations to replicate these
findings in larger samples.
Although the practice effect-adjusted analysis we
used is imperfect, Dr. Hermelink’s example reflects a misunderstanding of its application in our study: 1) the practice effect adjustment is applied to each subsequent time

1103

Correspondence

point (eg, baseline to acute, acute to late) and not serially
subtracted from baseline; 2) all decliners exhibited worsened performance over time; and 3) the practice effectadjusted Reliable Change Index (RCI) has been reported
to be preferable to an unadjusted approach.2 However, we
re-ran the ‘‘late interval’’ analyses reported in the article
using the RCI unadjusted for practice effect, which
resulted in 54% versus 61% of patients demonstrating
late cognitive decline. This supports our assertion that the
declines were not an artifact of using the practice effectadjusted RCI.
The time course of chemotherapy-associated cognitive dysfunction is largely unknown. However, previous
research3,4 has suggested that increased exposure to more
chemotherapy is a risk factor. Thus, we allowed identification of cognitive decline at either of the acute interval
time points. We used the acute interval time point with
evidence of decline as the start point to determine whether
there was further decline at the late follow-up time point.
This biased against identifying further decline and
increased the chances of observing improvement at the
late interval.
The correspondence between our results and those
reported in the animal literature we cited provide external
support for our findings and a theoretical framework with
which to explain them. Despite Dr. Hermelink’s indictment of our study, we believe we have identified a poten-

1104

tial adverse effect associated with chemotherapy that may
be experienced by a subset of cancer patients that deserves
further attention and replication to help understand these
important survivorship needs.

REFERENCES
1. Wefel JS, Saleeba AK, Buzdar AU, Meyers CA. Acute and
late onset cognitive dysfunction associated with chemotherapy
in women with breast cancer. Cancer. 2010;116:3348-3356.
2. Ouimet LA, Stewart A, Collins B, et al. Measuring neuropsychological change following breast cancer treatment: an analysis of statistical models. J Clin Exp Neuropsychol. 2009;31:
73-89.
3. van Dam FS, Schagen SB, Muller MJ, et al. Impairment of
cognitive function in women receiving adjuvant treatment for
high-risk breast cancer: high-dose versus standard-dose chemotherapy. J Natl Cancer Inst. 1998;90:210-218.
4. Collins B, MacKenzie J, Smith A, et al. A prospective doseresponse study of the effects of chemotherapy on cognition in
early-stage breast cancer patients. Poster presented at: the
International Cognition and Cancer Task Force (ICCTF)
Meeting; March 8-9, 2010; New York, New York.
Jeffrey S. Wefel, PhD
Christina A. Meyers, PhD
Section of Neuropsychology
Department of Neuro-Oncology
The University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center
Houston, Texas
DOI: 10.1002/cncr.25703, Published online: October 19, 2010 in
Wiley Online Library (wileyonlinelibrary.com)

Cancer

March 1, 2011

