Europe PMC Funders Group
Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 December 18.
Published in final edited form as:
Nature. 2015 June 18; 522(7556): 349–353. doi:10.1038/nature14407.

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

MET is required for the recruitment of anti-tumoural neutrophils
Veronica Finisguerra1,2, Giusy Di Conza1,2, Mario Di Matteo1,2, Jens Serneels1,2, Sandra
Costa1,2,3,4, A.A. Roger Thompson5, Els Wauters6,7,8, Sarah Walmsley5,$, Hans Prenen9,
Zvi Granot10, Andrea Casazza1,2,§, and Massimiliano Mazzone1,2,§
1Laboratory

of Molecular Oncology and Angiogenesis, Vesalius Research Center, VIB, Leuven,
B3000, Belgium
2Laboratory

of Molecular Oncology and Angiogenesis, Vesalius Research Center, Department of
Oncology, KU Leuven, Leuven, B3000, Belgium

3Life

and Health Sciences Research Institute (ICVS), School of Health Sciences, University of
Minho, 4710-057 Braga, Portugal

4ICVS/3B’s

- PT Government Associate Laboratory, 4710-057 Braga/Guimarães, Portugal

5Department

of Infection and Immunity, University of Sheffield, Sheffield S10 2RX, UK

6Respiratory

Division, University Hospital Gasthuisberg, Leuven, B3000 Belgium

7Laboratory

of Translational Genetics, Vesalius Research Center, VIB, Leuven, B3000, Belgium

8Laboratory

of Translational Genetics, Vesalius Research Center, Department of Oncology, KU
Leuven, Leuven, B3000, Belgium

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

9Digestive

Oncology Unit, University Hospital Gasthuisberg, Department of Oncology, KU
Leuven, Leuven, B3000 Belgium

10Department

of Developmental Biology and Cancer Research, The Institute for Medical
Research Israel-Canada, The Hebrew University, Jerusalem, 91120 Israel

Abstract
Mutations or amplification of the MET proto-oncogene are involved in the pathogenesis of several
tumours1-4, which rely on the constitutive engagement of this pathway for their growth and
survival1,5. However, MET is expressed not only by cancer cells but also by tumour-associated

Users may view, print, copy, and download text and data-mine the content in such documents, for the purposes of academic research,
subject always to the full Conditions of use:http://www.nature.com/authors/editorial_policies/license.html#terms
§
Editorial correspondence to massimiliano.mazzone@vib-kuleuven.be and andrea.casazza@vib-kuleuven.be.
$Current affiliation: MRC/University of Edinburgh Centre for Inflammation Research, The Queen’s Medical Research Institute,
University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh EH16 4TJ, UK.
Contribution
V.F performed experimental design, all experiments, data acquisition and interpretation. G.D.C performed in vitro assays, and
measured tumour experiments. M.D.M performed ELISA assays, designed and performed cloning strategies. J.S. performed all the
BMT and in vivo tumour experiments. R.T and S.W performed neutrophil isolations and peritonitis assays. Z.G. provided the Mrp8
promoter. H.P provided data interpretation on the CRC and HCC models. A.C. performed experimental design, mouse tumour
experiments, analysis of histological stainings and FACS, data acquisition and interpretation. M.M performed experimental design,
data analysis, conducted scientific direction, wrote the manuscript.
Competing Financial Interests
No competing financial interests to declare.

Finisguerra et al.

Page 2

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

stromal cells although its precise role in this compartment is not well characterized6-11. Here, we
show that MET is required for neutrophil chemoattraction and cytotoxicity in response to its
ligand HGF. Met deletion in neutrophils enhances tumour growth and metastasis. This phenotype
correlates with reduced neutrophil infiltration to both primary tumour and metastatic site.
Similarly, Met is necessary for neutrophil transudation during colitis, skin rash or peritonitis.
Mechanistically, Met is induced by tumour-derived TNF-α or other inflammatory stimuli in both
mouse and human neutrophils. This induction is instrumental for neutrophil transmigration across
an activated endothelium and iNOS production upon HGF stimulation. Consequently, HGF/METdependent nitric oxide release by neutrophils promotes cancer cell killing, which abates tumour
growth and metastasis. Following systemic administration of a MET kinase inhibitor, we prove
that the therapeutic benefit of MET targeting in cancer cells is partly countered by the protumoural effect rising from MET blockade in neutrophils. Our work identifies an unprecedented
role of MET in neutrophils, suggests a potential “Achilles’ heel” of MET-targeted therapies in
cancer, and supports the rationale for evaluating anti-MET drugs in certain inflammatory diseases.

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

To ensure Met deletion in the immune system only, we took advantage of the Tie2:Cre
deleter that excises floxed genes in both bone-marrow (BM) and endothelial cells (EC)12
and we reconstituted lethally irradiated C57BL/6 wild-type (WT) mice with BM cells from
Tie2;Metwt/wt (WT) or Tie2;Metlox/lox (KO) mice (Extended Data Fig. 2a), producing
WT→WT or KO→WT mice, respectively. Compared to WT→WT controls, both growth
and metastatic burden of subcutaneous LLC lung carcinomas were boosted in KO→WT
mice (Fig. 1a-g), with reduced tumour apoptosis and necrosis, increased proliferation, but
comparable vessel parameters and hypoxia (Extended Data Fig. 2b-r). A similar induction in
tumour growth and metastasis was observed in non-irradiated KO versus WT mice
(Extended Data Fig. 2s-u), but tumour growth, as well as the vascular features, were
comparable in WT→WT versus WT→KO chimeras, displaying Met deletion in EC only
(Extended Data Fig. 2o-r,v). Thus, Met deletion in immune cells favours cancer growth and
metastasis.
Blood counts and percentage of circulating blood cell subsets did not change in WT→WT
and KO→WT mice, either at baseline or upon LLC tumour engraftment (Extended Data Fig.
3a-e; Extended Data Table 1,2). Notably, KO→WT mice displayed reduced numbers of
tumour-infiltrating CD45+ leukocytes and, among all the different subpopulations, only
Ly6G+ tumour-associated neutrophils (TANs) were strongly reduced in KO→WT versus
WT→WT mice at any time point (Fig. 1f-j; Extended Data Fig. 3f-k). Similarly, lungs from
KO→WT tumour-bearing mice contained fewer CD45+ leukocytes with decreased Ly6G+
neutrophil infiltration, while macrophages were comparable (Fig. 1k-m; Extended Data Fig.
3l,m). Furthermore, reconstitution of Met in neutrophils only13 (Extended Data Fig. 4a,b),
was sufficient to rescue their recruitment and to hinder tumour growth and metastasis in
KO→WT mice (Fig. 1n-q). Vice versa, restricted deletion of Met in neutrophils
(Mrp8;Metlox/lox) by the neutrophil-specific Mrp8:Cre line13 (Extended Data Fig. 4c,d) led
to enhanced tumour growth and dissemination, and marked TAN reduction, as in KO→WT
chimeras (Fig. 1r-u; Extended Data Fig. 4e). These results indicate that MET is required for
recruiting anti-tumoural neutrophils.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 December 18.

Finisguerra et al.

Page 3

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

To extend our findings to other tumour types, we proved that Met deletion in the
hematopoietic system increased the growth of i) orthotopic T241 fibrosarcomas and B16F10
melanomas, ii) spontaneous mammary tumours in MMTV-PyMT+ transgenic mice, iii) HRasG12V and c-Myc-driven hepatocellular carcinomas (HCC), and iv) chemically induced
colorectal cancers (CRC) (Fig. 2a-j; Extended Data Fig. 5a,b). Furthermore, lung
colonisation of B16F10 melanoma cells (from either the primary tumour or after cancer cell
intravenous injection) and of MMTV-PyMT+ breast tumours was boosted in Met KO
chimeras (Fig. 2k,l; Extended Data 5c). In all these tumour types, Met KO TANs were fewer
than WT TANs (Fig. 2m; Extended Data 5d,e). Interestingly, during chronic bowel
inflammation (preceding CRC formation), neutrophil but not macrophage infiltration of the
colon was also abated by hematopoietic Met deletion, but this reduction did not impinge on
colitis severity (Extended Data 5f-i). B16F10 and HCC displayed enhanced tumour growth
(and metastasization) as well as reduced TAN infiltration in Mrp8;Metlox/lox versus
Mrp8;Metwt/wt mice (Fig. 2n-q). Conversely, orthotopic Panc02 carcinomas grew and
metastasized similarly in both WT→WT and KO→WT mice, and TAN infiltration did not
change (Extended Data Fig. 5j-l). However, these tumours produced little HGF compared to
LLC tumours (Extended Data Fig. 5m,n). In general, plasma and intratumour HGF did not
differ between genotypes (Extended Data Fig. 5o,p). In sum, Met deficiency in neutrophils
promotes the progression of different (HGF-secreting) tumours.

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Systemic treatment of WT mice carrying B16F10 melanomas (which are dependent on
MET14) with three different MET tyrosine-kinase inhibitors (PF-04217903, INCB28060,
JNJ-38877605), strongly reduced TAN recruitment (Extended Data Fig. 5q). We then
compared MET silencing in cancer cells versus systemic MET inhibition. PF-04217903
decreased weight and volume of B16F10 melanomas by 36% and 54% respectively, whereas
MET knockdown in cancer cells by 58% and 75% (Fig. 2r,s; Extended Data Fig. 5r).
However, combination of these two strategies was not synergic but dampened tumour
inhibition to the same level as observed with PF-04217903 alone (Fig. 2r,s). TAN inhibition
by PF-04217903 was comparable in both Met-silenced and scramble B16F10 melanomas
(Fig. 2t). These data unveil how the therapeutic benefit of systemic MET inhibition is partly
blunted by the blockade of anti-tumoural neutrophils.
To date, MET expression in neutrophils has been poorly documented11. We thus measured
MET levels in circulating or tumour-infiltrating neutrophils. Circulating Ly6G+ cells from
healthy mice expressed low MET, but these levels were increased in circulating neutrophils
from LLC tumour-bearing mice and even further in TANs (Fig. 3a,b; Extended Data Fig.
6a). Similarly, neutrophils isolated from non-small cell lung tumours displayed much higher
MET levels than in the healthy tissue (Fig. 3c).
Co-culture with IL-1α pre-activated endothelium as well as stimulation with tumour- or
cancer cell-conditioned medium (TCM or CCM, respectively) promoted MET expression in
both mouse and human neutrophils (Fig. 3d-g). In a biased approach15-17, we found that
TNF-α and LPS (but not IL-1α HGF, or hypoxia) induced MET expression in both mouse
and human neutrophils (Fig. 3h; Extended Data Fig. 6b-e; not shown). TNF-α-mediated
MET induction required TNFR1 and subsequent NF-κB activation (Fig. 3i-k). TNF-α alone

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 December 18.

Finisguerra et al.

Page 4

was not able to trigger either MET phosphorylation or HGF release in neutrophils (Extended
Data Fig. 6f-h).

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Silencing of EC-borne TNF-α (which is 250-fold increased upon stimulation with IL-1α;
Extended Data Fig. 6i), knockout of neutrophil-borne TNFR1 (but not of TNFR2),
pharmacological blockade of TNF-α with the TNF-α-trap Enbrel, prevented MET induction
in mouse or human neutrophils upon co-culture with activated EC or exposure to
TCM/CCM (Fig. 3l; Extended Data Fig. 6j-m). Finally, systemic administration of Enbrel in
LLC tumour-bearing mice diminished MET expression in neutrophils as well, resulting in
their reduced recruitment to the tumour (Fig. 3m,n). Though MET is scarcely expressed in
naive neutrophils, it is strongly induced by inflammatory stimuli.
Mechanistically, impaired TAN accumulation after Met inactivation was not due to cell
death as assessed in LLC tumours and in culture, both at baseline and under LPS
stimulation, with or without HGF (Extended Data Fig. 7a-e), but rather to a defect in
neutrophil recruitment from the blood. Indeed, in case of acute inflammation, Met KO
neutrophils displayed reduced exudation to the skin or to the peritoneal cavity (Fig. 4a-d;
Extended Data Fig. 8a,b). Macrophage or lymphocyte recruitment did not change (Fig. 4d;
Extended Data Fig. 8c,d). Vice versa, recombinant HGF recruited WT neutrophils inside
subcutaneous air pouches with similar efficacy than the neutrophil chemoattractant CXCL1
(Fig. 4e; Extended Data Fig. 8e). Instead, Met KO neutrophils did not migrate towards HGF,
whilst their response to CXCL1 was preserved (Fig. 4e; Extended Data Fig. 8e). Mirroring
this approach, an anti-HGF blocking antibody18 prevented neutrophil infiltration to tumours
and inflamed skin (Fig. 4f).

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

We then tested the relevance of MET for neutrophil migration. Stimulation of WT
neutrophils with HGF promoted their adhesion and chemotaxis through an activated
endothelium whereas Met KO neutrophils (displaying 85% reduction in MET protein levels
compared to WT; Extended Data Fig. 2a) completely lost this response (Fig. 4g,h; Extended
Data Fig. 8f). In line with this, TCM (containing 2.6 ± 0.3 ng/ml HGF) promoted
transendothelial migration of WT neutrophils, but its effect was 43% lower on Met KO
neutrophils (Fig. 4i). Upon HGF neutralization, WT neutrophils responded to the TCM as
Met KO neutrophils (Fig. 4i). HGF or TCM did not influence neutrophil behaviour on nonactivated EC or bare membranes (Extended Data Fig. 8f-h). Hence, HGF-mediated MET
activation is required for neutrophil transendothelial migration to the inflammatory site.
Once migrated inside the tumour, N1 or N2 neutrophils can respectively inhibit or favour
tumour progression19. Amongst the N1 and N2 genes, only the expression of the N1-marker
inducible nitric oxide synthase (Nos2, otherwise iNos) was lower in Met KO versus WT
TANs but similar in macrophages (Fig. 4j; Extended Data Fig. 8i). Compared to WT→WT
mice, tumours harvested from KO→WT mice displayed reduced nitric oxide (NO)
production and 3-nitrotyrosine (3NT) formation, a sign of NO-mediated cell damage (Fig.
4k-n). In vitro, Met KO TANs had lower cancer-cell-killing capacity than WT TANs; iNOS
inhibition by L-NMMA blunted this difference (Fig. 4o; Extended Data Fig. 8j). HGFstimulated WT but not Met KO neutrophils displayed enhanced NO release and cytotoxicity,
which was abated by L-NMMA (Extended Data Fig. 8k,l).

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 December 18.

Finisguerra et al.

Page 5

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

We then hypothesized that HGF/MET pathway is key for anti-tumoural neutrophils only.
Neutrophil depletion in WT→WT chimeras did not affect LLC tumour growth, implying
that in this tumour model anti-tumoural and pro-tumoural neutrophils are in balance (Fig.
4p-r). The same treatment in KO→WT mice reduced tumour growth by 34% (Fig. 4p-r),
indicating that Met deletion inhibits recruitment and activation of cytotoxic, but not of protumoural neutrophils, which are instead blocked by the anti-Ly6G antibody (Fig. 4r;
Extended Data Fig. 8m).
In sum, we demonstrate that MET is induced by inflammatory stimuli. This receptor is then
required for neutrophil extravasation to inflamed tissues. Extravasated neutrophils respond
to HGF by producing cytotoxic nitric oxide (Extended Data Fig. 1). All these steps restrain
non-specific immune reactions to the inflammatory site, preventing damage of healthy
organs.
These findings highlight a double-edged role of MET in cancer: on one side, in METaddicted tumours, this pathway is vital for cell-cycle and survival2; on the other side, it
promotes anti-tumourigenic activities in neutrophils. Thus, alternative approaches targeting
MET on cancer cells only, and trials guided by new patient selection strategies will be
important to maximize efficacy of MET inhibition in oncological diseases3,4,20.
Finally, given the fact that MET-inhibiting drugs are not associated to overt toxicity1, METtargeted therapies might ameliorate the symptoms of inflammatory disorders wherein
neutrophils are important for disease pathogenesis21.

METHODS
Animals

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

The Met floxed mice, a gift of Dr. Snorri S. Thorgeirsson (Center for Cancer Research, NCI,
Bethesda, MD), were backcrossed in a C57BL/6 background. The Tie2:Cre and MMTVPyMT transgenic lines were obtained from our mouse facility. The Mrp8:Cre mice were a
gift of Dr. Clifford A. Lowell (UCSF, San Francisco, CA) and Dr. Pierre Bruhns (Pasteur
Institute, Paris, FR)13,22-26. C57BL/6 mice were purchased from Harlan. TNFR1 KO mice
and TNFR2 KO mice were a gift of Dr. Claude Libert (VIB, Ghent, BE). The Met floxed
mice were intercrossed for at least two generations with Tie2:Cre or Mrp8:Cre in order to
obtain Metlox/lox Cre negative (WT) or Metlox/lox Cre positive (KO) littermates for the
specific promoter. All the experimental procedures were approved by the Institutional
Animal Care and Research Advisory Committee of the KU Leuven. In all the experiments,
mice were gender and age matched (within an age range between 6 and 10 weeks).
Cell lines
Murine Lewis lung carcinoma cells (LLC), melanoma B16F10, and human non-small cell
lung carcinoma A549 cells were obtained from American Type Culture Collection (ATCC);
the murine pancreatic tumour cell line Panc02 and the murine fibrosarcoma cell line T241
were respectively a gift from Dr. Cavallaro (IEO, Milano, IT) and Dr. Claesson-Welsh
(Rudbeck Laboratory, Uppsala, SE). LLC, B16F10, A549, and T241 cells were cultured in
DMEM (Gibco) supplemented with 2 mM glutamine, 100 units/ml penicillin, 100 μg/ml

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 December 18.

Finisguerra et al.

Page 6

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

streptomycin and containing 10% FBS (DMEM 10% FBS). Panc02 cells were cultured in
RPMI (Gibco) supplemented with 2 mM glutamine, 100 units/ml penicillin, 100 μg/ml
streptomycin and containing 10% FBS. All these murine tumour cell lines are syngeneic in a
C57BL/6 background, allowing implantation in Met conditional knockout mice or chimeras.
Human Umbilical Vein Endothelial Cells (HUVEC) were isolated from human umbilical
cords and maintained in M199 (Invitrogen) supplemented with 20% FBS, 2 mM glutamine,
100 units/ml penicillin, 100 μg/ml streptomycin, 0.15% Heparin, 20 μg/ml ECGS (M199
complete). 0.1% pork gelatin was used to favour the adhesion of HUVEC to the flask
bottom. All cells were maintained in a humidified incubator in 5% CO2 and 95% air at
37°C. Three or four different short hairpin RNA lentiviral vectors (Sigma) were used to
silence Met in LLC, B16F10 or T241 (LLC shMet, B16F10 shMet or T241 shMet; see
below), or to silence TNFA in HUVEC (HUVEC shTNFA). Scramble lentiviral vectors were
used as control. Transduced cells were selected with 8 μg/ml puromycin. All cancer cell
lines and primary HUVEC underwent mycoplasma testing before their use. Negative
mycoplasma contamination status was verified using LookOut Mycoplasma PCR Kit
(Sigma) and MycoAlert Mycoplasma Detection Kit plus Assay Control (Lonza). Panc02 and
T241 cells were both authenticated by Idexx Bioresearch. All cells were passaged in the
laboratory for no longer than 6 months after receipt. Supplementary Table 1 lists the
sequences of all the shRNA constructs used in this study.
Bone marrow transplantation and blood cell count
Recipient 6-week old female mice were lethally irradiated (9.5 Gy) and then intravenously
injected with 107 bone marrow (BM) cells from WT or KO mice 16 hours later.
Experiments were initiated 5 weeks after BM reconstitution. Blood cell count was
determined using a hemocytometer on peripheral blood collected by retro-orbital bleeding.

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Hematopoietic stem/progenitor cell (HSPCs) transduction
For MET overexpression or reconstitution in respectively WT or Met KO neutrophils,
lineage negative HSPCs were enriched with the mouse hematopoietic progenitor enrichment
kit (Stem cell technologies) and checked for purity by FACS according to the
manufacturer’s protocol. 1×106 cells/ml were pre-stimulated for 5 hours with stem span
serum-free medium (Stem Cell Technologies) supplemented with IL-3 (20 ng/ml), SCF (100
ng/ml) TPO (100 ng/ml) and FLT-3L (100 ng/ml) (Promega) and transduced with 1×108
TU/ml of a lentiviral vector expressing mouse Met under the promoter of the human gene
S100A8 (Mrp8:Met), which has been engineered for neutrophil-specific transcriptional
targeting, or an empty vector (Mrp8:Empty) as control. Briefly, the promoter driving Met
expression in neutrophils only, corresponds to a 3.6 Kb DNA fragment encompassing the
natural 5′ and 3′ regulatory regions but deleted of its exon coding sequences. Hence, Met is
under the control of the 5′ and 3′ untraslated regions of the human S100A8 gene and other
proximal cis regulatory sequences present in the surrogate DNA fragment13,22-26 . Ten hours
after the first viral transduction, cells received a second round of their respective lentiviral
vector; 7 hours later 1×106 cells were injected via tail vein in lethally irradiated C57BL/6
recipient mice. A fraction of transduced HSPCs were cultured and collected after 9 days to
measure the number of integrated vector copies/cell genome (vector copy number, VCN) by
qPCR using custom TaqMan assays specific for HIV-gag sequences (Applied Biosystems),
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 December 18.

Finisguerra et al.

Page 7

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

as previously described27. Standard curves for HIV-gag (contained by both Mrp8:Empty and
Mrp8:Met lentiviral vectors) were obtained from the corresponding plasmids. Fifty ng of
genomic DNA from each sample was subjected to qPCR in quadruplicate using an ABI
Prism 7500 Fast Real-Time PCR System (Applied Biosystems). VCN was determined
comparing the amplification signal on the genomic DNA with the standard curve consisting
of serial dilutions over a 6 log range (slope ≈ −3.3, intercept ≈ 35, efficiency % ≈ 100).
Average copies per cell genome were calculated taking into account that one murine diploid
genome = 5.92 pg. The results of this analysis are shown in Supplementary Table 2.
Tumour models

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

2×106 LLC or 1×106 B16F10 were injected subcutaneously while 2×106 T241 cells were
injected intradermally in a volume of 200 μl PBS. Tumour volumes were measured 3 times a
week with a calliper. At endstage, tumours were weighed and collected for histological
examination or FACS analysis. MMTV-PyMT+ spontaneous breast tumours were measured
10 weeks after birth (6 weeks after BM transplantation), three times a week, and sacrificed
at week 16. Lung metastases were contrasted by intratracheal injection of a 15% India ink
solution, by hematoxylin eosin (H&E) staining on lung paraffin sections, or detected by
qRT-PCR for the melanoma-specific gene S100B in the models involving B16F10 cells. For
orthotopic pancreatic tumour growth, mice were anesthetized with isoflurane, the stomach
exteriorized via abdominal midline incision, and 1×106 Panc02 tumour cells in 30 μl PBS
were injected into the head of the pancreas using a 29-gauge needle. A successful
intrapancreatic injection of tumour cells was identified by the appearance of a fluid bleb
without intraperitoneal leakage. Mice displaying peritoneal leakage were immediately
sacrificed and excluded from the analysis. At day 12, primary tumours were removed and
weighed. Enlarged lymph nodes were counted under a stereoscopic microscope. For the
chemically-induced colorectal cancer model, body-weight-matched mice received one
intraperitoneal injection of 10 mg/kg of azoxymethane (AOM) followed by 3 cycles of 7
days of 1.5% (cycle I) or 1.7% (cycle II-III) dextran sodium sulphate (DSS) in drinking
water, starting from the day of AOM injection28. After 160 days, the colon was collected
and prepared for histological evaluation with the “Swiss roll” technique29. For the
oncogene-driven hepatocellular carcinoma model, mice received a 1:1 molar ratio (3 μg total
DNA) of piggyBac transposons encoding for c-Myc and H-RasG12V oncogenes, driven by
the PGK promoter, together with the hyperactive piggyBac transposase-encoding plasmid30.
DNA solutions containing transposon/transposase plasmids were diluted in 2 ml of Ringer’s
solution and hydrodynamically delivered in 7 seconds through the tail vein.
Lung colonisation assay
In the experimental metastasis assays, 0.5 × 106 B16F10 cells were injected in the tail vein
and lungs were collected after 12 days. To quantify pulmonary seeding, lungs were
homogenized in Trizol (Ambion) and RNA was purified with the RNeasy Mini kit (Ambion)
according to manufacturer’s instructions. The expression of the melanocyte specific gene
S100B was measured as readout of lung colonization by qRT-PCR following reverse
transcription to cDNA with the QuantiTect Reverse Transcription kit (Qiagen).

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 December 18.

Finisguerra et al.

Page 8

Mice treatments

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

To induce chronic colitis, mice received 3 cycles of 7 days of 1.5% (cycle I) or 1.7% (cycle
II-III) dextran sodium sulphate (DSS) in drinking water; 2 weeks after the last DSS cycle,
the colon was collected and prepared for histological evaluation as described above29. For in
vivo MET inhibition, B16F10 tumour-bearing mice received 40 mg/kg PF-04217903
(AbMole Bioscience) or the corresponding vehicle (0.5% methylcellulose in saline) via oral
gavage every day once a day starting from day 2 after tumour injection and twice a day from
day 11 until the end of the experiment; alternatively mice were treated with 50 mg/kg
INCB28060 (AbMole Bioscience) or 50 mg/kg JNJ-38877605 (Selleckchem). For TNF-α
inhibition in vivo, LLC tumour-bearing mice were randomized for comparable tumour
volumes at the endstage and i.p. injected with 10 mg/kg of Enbrel or human IgG in PBS,
three and one day before tumour collection. For HGF inhibition in vivo, LLC tumourbearing mice were randomized when average tumour volume was 300 mm3 and i.p. injected
with 0.2 mg/mouse of anti-HGF blocking antibody (AF-2207, R&D18,31) or goat IgG in
PBS. Tumours were collected 20 hours later for histological analysis; TPA ear painting was
done 5 hours after antibodies administration and ears were collected 15 hours later. For
neutrophil depletion, mice were treated with 50 μg/20 g body weight of rat anti-mouse Ly6G
antibody (clone 1A8, BioXCell) or rat IgG every second day starting from day 4 after LLC
tumour injection and every day from day 12 after tumour injection until the end of the
experiment. Efficiency of neutrophil depletion was assessed by FACS in blood and tumours.
TPA model of acute skin inflammation
Phorbol ester TPA was used to induce acute skin inflammation as described before32.
Briefly, TPA (2.5 μg in 20 μl acetone per mouse) was topically applied on the ear skin of
anaesthetized mice. The contralateral ear was painted with acetone alone as vehicle control.
Mice were sacrificed after 24 hours and ears collected in 2% PFA for histological analysis.

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Zymosan-mediated acute peritonitis model
To induce acute peritonitis, zymosan A (Sigma) was prepared at 2 mg/ml in sterile PBS.
Four hours after i.p. injection of 0.1 mg zymosan A per mouse, inflammatory exudates were
harvested by peritoneal lavage with 2 ml PBS. Cells were counted with a Burker chamber
and stained for Ly6G (1A8) and F4/80 (BM8) for FACS analysis.
Air pouch assay
To create subcutaneous air pouches, BM transplanted chimeric mice or Mrp8;Metlox/lox or
Mrp8;Metwt/wt mice were injected with 3 ml of sterile air by dorsal subcutaneous injection
with a butterfly 23G needle on day 0 and on day 3. On day 6, 200 ng/mouse of murine
CXCL1 or HGF dissolved in 0.5 ml PBS-Heparin (15 U/ml) or PBS-Heparin (15 U/ml) as
control, were injected in the newly formed dorsal camera. After 4 hours, inflammatory cells
were harvested by washing the pouch with 5 ml of PBS. Cells were stained for Ly6G (1A8),
washed and resuspended in PBS 0.1% BSA with unlabelled counting beads and quantified
by FACS.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 December 18.

Finisguerra et al.

Page 9

Mouse white blood cell (WBC) isolation

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Blood was collected from the retro-orbital vein in 10% heparin. For the isolation of WBC,
the blood was diluted in 1.25% dextran in saline to allow the sedimentation of red blood
cells (RBC). After 30′, the supernatant was collected and washed in PBS 0.1% BSA. The
remaining RBC were lysed in a hypotonic solution of 0.2% NaCl for 30 seconds and
brought in isotonic condition with 1.6% NaCl and 0.1% glucose. WBC were washed in PBS
0.1% BSA, counted and resuspended accordingly with the experimental setting.
Mouse blood neutrophil isolation
Blood was collected from the retro-orbital vein in 10% heparin and diluted in an equal
volume of PBS 0.5% BSA. Up to 5 ml of diluted blood was layered on top of a
discontinuous gradient of Histopaque 1119 (4 ml) and Histopaque 1077 (5 ml) from Sigma.
The gradient was centrifuged for 30 minutes at 700g with brake off. The neutrophil layer
between the Histopaque 1077 and 1119 was collected and washed in PBS 0.5% BSA. RBC
lysis was performed as above. Neutrophils were washed in PBS 0.5% BSA, counted and
resuspended according to the experimental condition. Alternatively, blood was sedimented
in a saline solution containing 1.25% dextran and neutrophils were negatively selected with
magnetic beads33. Neutrophil purity, as assessed by the hemocytometer, was always higher
than 93%.
Bone marrow neutrophil and mononuclear cell isolation

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

In order to reach reasonable amounts of protein, all the Western Blot analyses in mice were
performed on neutrophils isolated from bone marrows. Mice were sacrificed by cervical
dislocation. Femurs and tibias were collected in cold sterile Hank Balanced Salt Solution
(HBSS, Invitrogen) and flushed with HBSS 0.25% BSA. Cells were layered on top of a
discontinuous gradient of Percoll 81%, 62%, 55%, freshly prepared and centrifuged for 30
minutes at 2000 g with break off. Monocytes were collected at the interface between the BM
cells and the layer of Percoll 55%, whereas neutrophils were collected at the interface
between Percoll 55% and 62%. Cells were washed in HBSS 0.25% BSA and RBC lysis was
performed as described above. Neutrophils (or monocytes) were washed again, counted and
resuspended according to the experimental setting. Neutrophil (or monocyte) purity assessed
by hemocytometer was higher than 87%.
FACS analysis and flow sorting of blood or tumour-associated cells
Blood was collected in 10% heparin and stained for 20 minutes at room temperature. After
RBC lysis, cells were washed and resuspended in FACS buffer (PBS containing 2% FBS
and 2 mM EDTA). Tumours were minced in RPMI medium containing 0.1% collagenase
type I and 0.2% dispase type I (Gibco) for 30 minutes at 37°C and passed through a 70 and
40 μm cell strainer. After RBC lysis, cells were resuspended in FACS buffer and stained for
20 minutes at 4°C. Lungs were collected after 7 minutes of transcardial perfusion with saline
and processed as for the tumours. Briefly, blood or single cell suspensions were incubated
for 15 minutes at 4°C with Mouse BD Fc Block (2.4G2, BD Pharmingen) 1:100 in FACS
buffer. The antibodies were added directly in the blocking solution in the appropriate
combinations (as indicated in the figure legends). CD45 (30F-11), CD11b (M1/70), Ly6G

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 December 18.

Finisguerra et al.

Page 10

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

(1A8), CD45R (RA3-6B2), CD3 (17A2), CD4 (RM4-5), IgE (R35-72), CD49b (DX5),
Ly6C (AL-21) (all from BD Pharmingen), F4/80 (BM8), CD115 (AF598), MHCII
(M5/114.15-12) (all from eBioscience), were used 1:200 for 2×106 in 100 μl; Siglec-F
(E50-2440, BD Pharmingen) was diluted 1:750. In all the stainings 7AAD (BD Pharmingen)
was used to gate out dead cells. For intra-tumour proliferation, 1 mg of BrdU was i.p.
injected in each mouse 4 hours before tumour collection and cell proliferation was
quantified on single cell suspensions with the FITC BrdU Flow Kit (BD Bioscience)
according to manufacturer’s protocol. Tumour apoptosis was assessed by staining single cell
suspension for the apoptotic marker AnnexinV (1:40, BD Bioscience), excluding 7AAD
positive cells. For TAN apoptosis, tumour single cell suspensions were gated for CD11b
(M1/70) and Ly6G (1A8); AnnexinV and 7ADD were used to distinguish apoptotic or dead
neutrophils. In vitro neutrophil apoptosis was performed by seeding neutrophils isolated
from tumour-bearing mice at a concentration of 1×106/ml and stimulating them with or
without LPS (1μg/ml), alone or in combination with HGF (100 ng/ml) for 10 h at 37°C.
Cells were collected, washed and stained for AnnexinV and 7AAD. The combination of
CD11b (M1/70), Ly6G (1A8) and MET (eBioclone 7, eBioscience) was used to identified
triple-positive MET expressing neutrophils in blood or tumour cells 7AAD-negative.
Freshly stained samples were analysed by FACS Canto II (BD Bioscience). For tumourassociated neutrophil sorting, myeloid population was enriched by coating with CD11bconjugated magnetic beads (MACS, Miltenyi Biotec) and separation through magnetic
columns (MACS, Miltenyi Biotec), staining with Ly6G and sorting with a FACS Aria I (BD
Bioscience). Cells were collected in RLT buffer (Qiagen) for RNA extraction or
resuspended according to the experimental conditions.
Human neutrophil isolation

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

10 ml of venous blood from healthy volunteers were collected in citrate-coated tubes and
isolated by erythrocyte sedimentation with dextran and purification with a discontinuous
plasma-Percoll gradient as already described34.
Lung cancer patients
We enrolled 4 non-small cell lung carcinoma-patients with no previous history of
oncological, chronic inflammatory, or autoimmune diseases within 10 years prior to this
study. This patient list includes 2 males (61 and 71 years of age) and 2 females (64 and 68
years of age), of which 3 smokers (1 T1N0M0 adenocarcinoma, 1 T2N0M0 large cell
carcinoma, 1 T3N0M0 squamous cell carcinoma) and 1 non-smoker (T2N0M0
adenocarcinoma). The protocol was approved by the Ethics Committee of the University
Hospitals Gasthuisberg (Leuven), and all subjects consented prior to study participation.
Flow sorting of neutrophils from lung cancer patients
Lung tumour biopsies or healthy tissues were minced in RPMI medium containing 0.1%
collagenase type I, 0.2% dispase type I and DNase I 100 U/ml (60 minutes at 37°C), passed
through a 19 G needle and passed through a 70 and 40 μm cell strainer. After RBC lysis,
cells were resuspended in FACS buffer (PBS containing 2% FBS and 2 mM EDTA) and
counted. Myeloid population, enriched using CD11b-conjugated magnetic beads (MACS,
Miltenyi Biotec) and separated through magnetic column (MACS, Miltenyi Biotec), was
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 December 18.

Finisguerra et al.

Page 11

stained with anti-CD66b (G10F5, BD Pharmingen) for 20 minutes on ice and sorted with
FACS Aria I (BD Bioscience). Cells were counted and resuspended in RLT buffer (Qiagen)
for RNA extraction.
Endothelial cell isolation

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Lungs were collected and a single cell suspension was obtained as above. Endothelial cells
were obtained by performing a negative selection for CD45 (30F-11) and F4/80 (CI:A3-1)
followed by a positive selection for CD31 (MEC 13.3) by using magnetic beads
(Dynabeads, Invitrogen) according to the manufacturer’s protocol.
Peritoneal macrophages
5 ml of sterile PBS were injected in the peritoneum of anesthetized mice and collected after
3 minutes. Cells were centrifuged, washed and culture overnight.
Tumour-conditioned medium (TCM) and LLC (or A549)-conditioned medium (CCM)
preparation
Two grams of endstage LLC tumour explanted from WT mice were chopped and incubated
at 37°C in 7 ml of DMEM (supplemented with 2 mM glutamine, 100 units/ml penicillin/100
μg/ml streptomycin) FBS-free (DMEM 0% FBS). 5×104 LLC (or A549) were seeded in a 6multiwell plate in DMEM 10% FBS and incubated at 37°C. Medium alone (DMEM 0%
FBS or DMEM 10% FBS, respectively) was used to prepare mock controls. After 72 hours,
the medium was filtered, supplemented with 2 mM glutamine and 20 mM HEPES and
stored at −20°C. TCM and mock medium (DMEM 0% FBS) were diluted 1:5 in DMEM
10% FBS; CCM and mock medium (DMEM 10% FBS) were diluted 4:5 in DMEM FBSfree.

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Quantitative RT-PCR (qRT-PCR)
For mRNA analysis, 1×105 or 3×105 mouse or human blood neutrophils, respectively, were
incubated in normoxic (21% oxygen) or hypoxic (1% oxygen) conditions, or stimulated with
TCM (plus 50 μg/ml Enbrel or human IgG when indicated), CCM, A549-CCM, 100 ng/ml
of murine or human TNF-α, 50 ng/ml LPS, or mock medium in 96-multiwell for 4 hours at
37°C. For NF-κB inhibition, 0.18×106 neutrophils were pre-treated with 10 μM 6-amino-4(4-phenoxyphenylethylamino) quinazoline (Calbiochem) for 1 hour at 37°C and stimulated
with 100 ng/ml of murine TNF-α for 1 hours at 37°C. 2×105 HUVEC were seeded in 24multiwell coated with 0.1% gelatin and stimulated with 5 ng/ml IL-1α in DMEM 10% FBS
for 4 hours at 37°C. Cells were washed in PBS, collected in RLT buffer (Qiagen) and kept at
−80°C. RNA was extracted with the RNeasy Micro kit (Qiagen) according to
manufacturer’s instructions. Reverse transcription to cDNA was performed with the
SuperScript® III First Strand cDNA Synthesis Kit (Life Technologies) according to
manufacturer’s protocol. Pre-made assays were purchased from Applied Biosystem, except
for Nos2 that was provided by IDT. cDNA, primer/probe mix and TaqMan Fast Universal
PCR Master Mix were prepared in a volume of 10 μl according to manufacturer’s
instructions (Applied Biosystems). Samples were loaded into an optical 96-well Fast

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 December 18.

Finisguerra et al.

Page 12

Thermal Cycling plate (Applied Biosystems) and qRT-PCR were performed using an ABI
Prism 7500 Fast Real-Time PCR System (Applied Biosystems)
ELISA

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

To quantify plasma, intra-tumoural, tumour-released (TCM) and neutrophil-released HGF, a
murine HGF ELISA kit (R&D) was used according to manufacturer’s protocols. Blood was
collected from tumour free or tumour bearing mice and plasma was prepared according to
manufacturer’s instruction. TCM was prepared as above. Tumour proteins were extracted in
Extraction Buffer (20M Tris HCl, 150mM NaCl, 1% Triton X-100, 10% glycerol, 5 mM
EDTA). 0.2×106 neutrophils were cultured for 20 hours in DMEM complete in presence or
absence of 100 ng/ml of murine TNF-α. Medium was collected, spun down and supernatant
stored at −80°C until use. Mock medium was used as negative control. For phospho-MET
quantification, 6×106 mouse blood neutrophils isolated from tumour bearing mice were
cultured in presence or absence of 100 ng/ml of murine TNF-α; 11 hours later, cells were
stimulated or not with 100 ng/ml of mouse HGF in presence of 1 mM orthovanadate for 3
minutes at 37°C, washed in PBS supplemented with 1 mM orthovanadate and phosStop 1X
(Roche) and lysed in Extraction Buffer supplemented with 1 mM orthovanadate, 2X
phosStop and Complete Mini protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche) for 20 minutes at 4°C.
After clearance, samples were quantified and the same amount of proteins was used for
MET and phospho-MET detection using a sandwich ELISA. Briefly, 96-well microtiter
plates (MaxiSorp, Nunc) were coated with 1 μg/ml of anti-mouse MET antibody (AF527,
R&D Systems) overnight at 4°C and then incubated for 2 hours at room temperature (RT) in
blocking buffer (PBS, 0.1% Tween-20, 6% non-fat dry milk). The same amount of proteins
per sample was diluted in blocking buffer and incubated for 2 hours at RT on the ELISA
plate. After 6 washes in PBS 0.1% Tween-20, samples were incubated for 2 hours at RT
with the mouse anti-MET (3D4, Invitrogen) or the mouse anti-phosphotyrosine (4G10,
Merck Millipore) antibodies diluted 1:500 in blocking buffer, then washed 6 times in PBS
0.1% Tween-20, and incubated with goat anti-mouse immunoglobulins conjugated to
horseradish peroxidase (sc-2031, Santa Cruz Biotechnology) diluted 1:500 in blocking
buffer for 2 hours at RT. Signals was developed by 15 minutes incubation with the 3,3′,5,5′tetramethylbenzidine (TMB) substrate solution (Promega). After stopping the reaction with
H2SO4, absorbance was measured at 450 nm and corrected for 630 nm with a
spectrophotometer.
Western blot
To assess MET deletion, BM cells, neutrophils, peritoneal macrophages, monocytes (all
cultured overnight in TCM) or endothelial cells were lysed in hot Laemmli buffer (2.5%
SDS, 25% Tris-HCl pH 6.8) for 10 minutes at 96°C, sonicated, cleared and quantified.
Alternatively, 2×106 bone marrow derived neutrophils from WT mice were stimulated with
TCM, CCM, 100 ng/ml of murine TNF-α (or mock medium 0% FBS or 10% FBS as
control) for 20 hours at 37°C. For the co-culture with HUVEC, a monolayer of HUVEC was
stimulated for 4 hours with 5 ng/ml IL-1α at 37°C, and washed before neutrophil seeding.
After 20 hours of stimulation, neutrophils were collected using Cell Dissociation Buffer
Enzyme Free PBS-Based (Gibco). Cells were washed in PBS, lysed in 15 μl of a protease
inhibitor mixture and incubated for 15 minutes on ice. The protease inhibitor mixture was
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 December 18.

Finisguerra et al.

Page 13

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

obtained by dissolving one tablet of Complete Mini protease inhibitor mixture (Roche) in 5
ml of PBS with 2 mM diisopropyl fluorophosphate (DFP; Acros Organics, Morris Plains,
NJ). After addition of an equal amount of 2x SDS sample buffer supplemented with 4% 2mercaptoethanol, the lysates were boiled for 15 minutes and kept at −80°C until use. NF-κB
inhibition was achieved by pre-treating 7×106 neutrophils with 10 μM 6-amino-4-(4phenoxyphenylethylamino) quinazoline (Calbiochem) for 1 hour at 37°C; cells were then
stimulated with murine TNF-α (100 ng/ml) for 5 hours before lysis. Human MET was
assessed by stimulating 3×107 blood neutrophils isolated from the blood of healthy
volunteers with A549-CCM, 100 ng/ml human TNF-α, 50 ng/ml LPS (or mock medium
10% FBS as control) for 20 hours. Cells were incubated with 2.7 mM DFP for 15 minutes at
4°C, collected and washed in PBS supplemented with 2.7 mM DFP and Complete Mini
protease inhibitor 1X, and lysed in hot Laemmli buffer at 96°C for 10 minutes. Cell lysates
were sonicated, cleared and quantified. 6x loading buffer was added before loading on the
gel. The following primary antibodies were used: mouse anti-mouse Met (3D4, Invitrogen),
mouse anti-mouse β-actin (I-19, Santa Cruz), mouse anti-vinculin (hVIN-1, Sigma), rabbit
anti-human Met (D1C2, Cell Signaling), HRP-conjugated anti-beta-tubulin (Abcam). The
following secondary antibodies were used: HRP-conjugated goat anti-mouse and HRPconjugated goat anti-rabbit (Santa Cruz). Signal was visualized by Enhanced
Chemiluminescent Reagents (ECL, Invitrogen) or West Femto by Thermo Scientific
according to the manufacturer’s instructions.
Adhesion assay

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

4×104 HUVEC were seeded in M199 20% FBS in a 96-multiwell plate, previously coated
with 0.1% gelatin. After 12 hours, HUVEC were stimulated with 5 ng/ml IL-1α in DMEM
10% FBS at 37°C. After 4 hours the endothelial monolayer was thoroughly washed and
2.5×105 WBC isolated indistinctly from Tie2;Metwt/wt and Tie2;Metlox/lox mice or from
WT→WT and KO→WT transplanted mice, were seeded on top of it, with or without
murine HGF (50 ng/ml). After 15 minutes non-adherent cells were washed out whereas
adherent cells were detached by using a Cell Dissociation Buffer Enzyme Free PBS-Based
(Gibco). Cells were stained for Ly6G (clone 1A8), washed and resuspended in PBS-BSA
0.1% with unlabelled counting beads (BD Bioscience) and quantified by FACS Canto II
(BD Bioscience).
Transmigration and migration assay
For the transmigration assay, 2×105 HUVEC were seeded on 3 μm polycarbonate membrane
(Transwell; Costar) previously coated with 0.1% gelatin in M199 20% FBS. After 12 hours,
HUVEC were stimulated for 4 hours at 37°C in DMEM 10% FBS with 5 ng/ml IL-1α and
then washed. 5×105 WBC isolated indistinctly from Tie2;Metwt/wt and Tie2;Metlox/lox mice
or from WT→WT and KO→WT transplanted mice were seeded on top of the endothelial
monolayer, while mock medium, TCM (with or without 3 μg/ml anti-HGF antibody
AF-2207, R&D18,31) or 50 ng/ml murine HGF was added in the bottom. After 2 hours at
37°C, transmigrated cells were collected from the bottom chambers and from the lower side
of the filter with cold PBS 0.5% EDTA. Cells were stained and Ly6G+ cells quantified as
above. In the migration assays WBC were seeded directly on top of 3 μm polycarbonate
porous membranes.
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 December 18.

Finisguerra et al.

Page 14

Nitric oxide measurement by FACS

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Neutrophils isolated from the blood of WT or KO LLC-tumour bearing mice were cocultured for 4 hours with LLC shMet, washed and resuspended in 20 mM Hepes-PBS, and
incubated for 10 minutes with 5μM DAF-FM diacetate (Molecular probes) in absence or
presence of mouse HGF (100 ng/ml) at 37°C. Cells were then washed and analysed by
FACS.
Cytotoxicity assay
LLC shMet or T241 shMet were transduced with a luciferase-expressing lentiviral vector
(EX-hLUC-Lv114 from GeneCopoeia); 104 cells were then seeded in DMEM 10% FBS in a
96-multiwell plate. After 4 hours, 0.2×106 neutrophils purified from the blood of tumour
bearing mice or directly from the tumours themselves, were co-cultured with the cancer cells
in DMEM 2% FBS for 4 hours at 37°C, with or without 100 ng/ml mouse HGF or 1 mM LNMMA (Sigma). After washing, adherent cells were lysate in 0.2% Triton, 1 mM DTT.
Luciferase signal was revealed with a microplate luminometer. The use of shMet was
thought to prevent any possible confounding activity of MET on cancer cell survival and
thus to restrict the effect of HGF to neutrophils only.
Histology and immunostainings

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

To obtain serial 7-μm-thick sections, tissue samples were immediately frozen in OCT
compound or fixed in 2% PFA overnight at 4°C, dehydrated and embedded in paraffin.
Paraffin slides were firstly rehydrated to further proceed with antigen retrieval in citrate
solution (DAKO). Cryosections were thawed in water and fixed in 100% methanol. If
necessary, 0.3% H2O2 was added to methanol to block endogenous peroxidases. The
sections were blocked with the appropriate serum (DAKO) and incubated overnight with the
following antibodies: rat anti-CD45 (30F-11, BD Pharmingen), rat anti-Ly6G (1A8, BD
Pharmingen) 1:100, rat anti-CD31 (MEC 13.3, BD Pharmingen) 1:200, rabbit anti-FITC
(Serotec) 1:200, goat anti-phosphohistone H3 (Cell Signaling) 1:100, rat anti-F4/80
(CI:A3-1, Serotec) 1:100, mouse anti-NK1.1-biotin (PK136, BD Pharmingen) 1:200, rat
anti-CD45R (RA3-6B2, BD Pharmingen) 1:100, rat anti-CD4 (H129.9, BD Pharmingen)
1:100, rat anti-CD8 (53-6.72, BioXCell) 1:100, hamster anti-CD11c biotin (N418,
eBioscience) 1:100, mouse anti-3-nitrotyrosin (HM.11 Santa Cruz) 1:200. Appropriate
secondary antibodies were used: Alexa488-or Alexa568-conjugated secondary antibodies
(Molecular Probes) 1:200, HRP-labelled antibodies (DAKO) 1:100, Biotin-labelled
antibodies (Jackson ImmunoResearch) 1:100. When necessary, Tyramide Signaling
Amplification (Perkin Elmer, Life Sciences) was performed according to the manufacturer’s
instructions. Whenever sections were stained in fluorescence, ProLong Gold mounting
medium with DAPI (Invitrogen) was used. Otherwise, 3,3′-diaminobenzidine was used as
detection method followed by Harris’ haematoxilin counterstaining, dehydration and
mounting with DPX. Apoptotic cells were detected by the TUNEL method, using the
AptoTag peroxidase in situ apoptosis detection kit (Millipore) according to the
manufacturer’s instructions. For the double staining TUNEL and LY6G, TUNEL staining
was performed as described above, followed by Ly6G staining by using the Vectastain ABC
kit (Vector laboratories) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Tumour necrosis and

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 December 18.

Finisguerra et al.

Page 15

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

lung metastasis were evaluated by H&E staining. Necrotic area was defined as the area
including necrotic cancer cells, inflammatory cells and stromal cells, compared to the total
area of the field. Necrotic cells display a more glassy homogeneous appearance in the
cytoplasm with increased eosinophilia, while the nuclear changes are reflected by
karyolysis, pyknosis, and karyorrhexis. Alternatively, the necrotic tissue was visualized by
autofluorescence as previously described35. Microscopic analysis was done with an
Olympus BX41 microscope and Cell Sense imaging software or a Zeiss Axioplan
microscope with KS300 image analysis software. The morphometric analysis was performed
by acquiring 4-6 fields per sections on 5 independent sections (at a distance of 40 μm in
depth during sectioning) from the same biological tissue sample. The values in the graphs
represent the average of the means of, at least, 5 samples and the standard error indicates the
variability among the different samples.
Hypoxia assessment and tumour perfusion
Tumour hypoxia was detected by injection of 60 mg/kg pimonidazole into tumour-bearing
mice 1 hour before tumours harvesting. To detect the formation of pimonidazole adducts,
tumour cryosections were immunostained with Hypoxyprobe-1-Mab1 (Hypoxyprobe kit,
Chemicon) following the manufacturer’s instructions. Perfused tumour vessels were counted
on tumour cryosections from mice injected intravenously with 0.05 mg FITC-conjugated
lectin (Lycopersicon esculentum; Vector Laboratories).
Tumour-derived nitric oxide production
LLC tumours were collected 8 days after injection, cut in pieces of about 5×5 mm, weighted
and incubate at 37°C in 24-multiwell with 800 μl of DMEM. After 24 hours, the media was
collected, centrifuged to remove cell debris, and NO levels were measured using the Griess
reagent system kit (Promega).

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Statistics
Data entry and all analyses were performed in a blinded fashion. All statistical analyses were
performed using GraphPad Prism software. Statistical significance was calculated by twotailed unpaired t-test on two experimental conditions or two-way ANOVA when repeated
measures were compared, with P<0.05 considered statistically significant. Data were tested
for normality using the D’Agostino-Pearson omnibus test (for n>8) or the KolmogorovSmirnov test (for n≤8) and variation within each experimental group was assessed.
Detection of mathematical outliers was performed using the Grubbs’ test in GraphPad.
Sample sizes for all experiments were chosen based on previous experiences. Independent
experiments were pooled and analysed together whenever possible as detailed in figure
legends. All graphs show mean values ± s.e.m..

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 December 18.

Finisguerra et al.

Page 16

Extended Data

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Extended Data Figure 1. Scheme illustrating the role of MET in neutrophils

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

During cancer or infections, the release of cytokines such as IL-1 at the inflammatory site
will promote the expression of TNF-α on the endothelium and the surrounding tissue. When
circulating neutrophils will encounter the activated endothelium, TNF-α will unleash NF-κB
through the binding to TNFR1, which in turn will induce MET expression on neutrophil
surface. HGF, also released and proteolytically activated at the site of inflammation, will
bind to MET and stimulate the firm adhesion of neutrophils to the endothelium, likely via
integrin engagement, and thus neutrophil diapedesis. Once extravasated, HGF/MET
pathway will still function on neutrophils by reinforcing their cytotoxic response through the
induction of iNOS and NO production, ultimately favouring a bactericidal and tumouricidal
neutrophil phenotype.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 December 18.

Finisguerra et al.

Page 17

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Extended Data Figure 2. Met deletion in immune cells, but not in EC, fosters tumour growth

a, MET expression in total bone marrow (BM) cells, endothelial cells (EC) and neutrophils
harvested from Met floxed mice intercrossed with the Tie2:Cre deleter thus generating
Tie2;Metlox/lox (KO) or Tie2;Metwt/wt (WT) mice. Western blots are representative of 3
repetitions on independent biological replicates. Western blot images have been cropped for
presentation. Full scan images are shown in Supplementary Figure 1. b-d, Quantification (b)
and representative images of tumour sections’ TUNEL stainings (c,d) from subcutaneous
endstage LLC tumours in WT→WT and KO→WT mice. Data combine 2 independent

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 December 18.

Finisguerra et al.

Page 18

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

experiments; total n=10 mice/condition. e, FACS quantification of AnnexinV+ 7AAD− early
apoptotic tumour cells in WT→WT and KO→WT mice. Data combine 2 independent
experiments; total n=8 mice/condition. f-j, Tumour necrosis quantification in WT→WT and
KO→WT mice (f), assessed by histologic evaluation of H&E stained tumour sections (g,h)
and by measurement of autofluorescent tumour areas (i,j); yellow dotted lines demarcate
necrosis. Data combine 2 independent experiments; total n=10 mice/condition. k-m,
Quantification (k) and representative images of tumour sections stained for the proliferation
marker pHH3 (l,m) from subcutaneous endstage LLC tumours in WT→WT and KO→WT
mice. Data combine 2 independent experiments; total n=10 mice/condition. n, FACS
quantification of BrdU+ proliferating tumour cells in WT→WT and KO→WT mice. Data
combine 2 independent experiments; total n=10 mice/condition. o-r, CD31+ vessel area (o),
vessel density (p), lectin perfusion (q), and hypoxic (Pimo+) area (r) in LLC subcutaneous
tumours from KO→WT mice (where the hematopoietic/immune system is knocked out for
Met) or WT→KO mice (where EC only are knocked out for Met) compared to control
WT→WT mice. Data in o-r combine 2 independent experiments; total n: WT→WT=12,
KO→WT=8, WT→KO=8. s-u, Subcutaneous LLC tumour growth (s), weight (t) and lung
metastases (u) in Tie2;Metlox/lox compared to Tie2;Metwt/wt mice. Data combine 2
independent experiments; total n: Tie2;Metwt/wt=12, Tie2;Metlox/lox=10. v, Tumour growth
in endothelial cell specific Met KO (WT→KO) and control (WT→WT) mice. Data combine
2 independent experiments; total n=8/condition. *, P<0.05 versus WT→WT (b,e,f,k,n),
versus Tie2;Metwt/wt (s-u). Scale bars: 50 μm (c,d,l,m), 100 μm (g-j). All graphs show mean
± s.e.m.

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 December 18.

Finisguerra et al.

Page 19

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Extended Data Figure 3. Circulating and tumour-infiltrating immune cells upon Met deletion

a-e, FACS analysis showing percentages of circulating monocytes (a), lymphocytes (b),
neutrophils (c), eosinophils (d), and basophils (e) in tumour free or in LLC-tumour bearing
WT→WT and KO→WT mice. Data combine 2 independent experiments; total n=8 mice/
condition. f, Quantification of LLC-tumour sections stained for the pan-leukocyte marker
CD45, the macrophage marker F4/80, the NK marker NK1.1, the B lymphocyte marker
CD45R, the T helper cell marker CD4, the cytotoxic T cell marker CD8 and the dendritic
cell marker CD11c (with exclusion of F4/80+ area) in WT→WT and KO→WT mice. Data

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 December 18.

Finisguerra et al.

Page 20

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

combine 2 independent experiments; total n=8 mice/condition). g,h, FACS quantification
for tumour-associated CD45+ leukocytes (g) or CD45+ IgE+ CD49b+ CD4− CD45R−
basophils and CD45+ CD11b+ SiglecF+ Ly6Cmed F4/80low MHCII− eosinophils (h) in
WT→WT and KO→WT mice. Data combine 2 independent experiments; total n=8 mice/
condition. i,j, FACS quantification (i) and gating strategy (j) for tumour-associated
neutrophils selected from the main tumour cell population negative for 7AAD staining;
tumour-associated neutrophils were then gated as CD11b and Ly6G double positive cells.
Data combine 2 independent experiments; total n: WT→WT=11, KO→WT=10. k, Ly6G+
tumour infiltration at day 9, day 13, and day 19 after LLC subcutaneous tumour injection in
WT→WT and KO→WT mice. Data combine 2 independent experiments; total n=8 mice/
condition. l, Morphometric quantification of leukocytes and macrophages on respectively
CD45 and F480-stained lung sections from LLC tumour-bearing WT→WT or KO→WT
mice. Data combine 2 independent experiments; total n=8 mice/condition. m, FACS
quantification of CD11b+ Ly6G+ neutrophils and CD11b+ F4/80+ macrophages infiltrating
metastatic lungs from LLC tumour-bearing WT→WT or KO→WT mice. Data combine 2
independent experiments; total n=8 mice/condition. *, P<0.05 versus WT→WT (f,g,i,k-m);
#, P<0.05 versus Tumour free (a-d). All graphs show mean ± s.e.m.

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 December 18.

Finisguerra et al.

Page 21

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Extended Data Figure 4. MET in neutrophils is required for their anti-tumour activity

a,b, Western blot analysis (a) and relative densitometric analysis (b) for MET expression in
BM neutrophils and monocytes upon reconstitution of WT recipient mice by WT or KO
HSPCs transduced in vitro with an empty vector (Mrp8:Empty) or a vector expressing Met
under the neutrophil-specific promoter Mrp8 (Mrp8:Met); tubulin was used as loading
control. Western blots are representative of 3 repetitions on independent biological samples
where each sample is the pool of neutrophils or monocytes isolated from 3 mice.
Densitometric analysis has been performed on these 3 Western blots. c, FACS analysis for

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 December 18.

Finisguerra et al.

Page 22

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

GFP in circulating Ly6G+ neutrophils or CD115+ monocytes, harvested from the neutrophilspecific Mrp8:Cre line carrying separate expression of GFP because of an Internal
Ribosome Entry Site (IRES) downstream the Mrp8-driven Cre gene. Data combine 2
independent experiments; total n=10 mice/condition. d, MET expression in neutrophils,
monocytes, and macrophages harvested from Mrp8;Metwt/wt or Mrp8;Metlox/lox mice.
Western blots are representative of 3 repetitions on independent biological replicates. e,
FACS analysis for CD11b+ Ly6G+ neutrophils in subcutaneous LLC tumours from
Mrp8;Metwt/wt or Mrp8;Metlox/lox. Data combine 2 independent experiments; total n:
Mrp8;Metwt/wt=10, Mrp8;Metlox/lox=11. Western blot images in (a,d) have been cropped for
presentation. Full scan images are shown in Supplementary Figure 1. *, P<0.05 versus
Mrp8:Empty WT→WT (b), versus Mrp8;Metwt/wt (e); #, P<0.05 versus Mrp8:Empty
WT→WT; $, P<0.05 versus Mrp8:Empty KO→WT. All graphs show mean ± s.e.m.

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 December 18.

Finisguerra et al.

Page 23

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Extended Data Figure 5. Pharmacologic and genetic inhibition of MET prevents the recruitment
of anti-tumoural neutrophils to several neoplastic tissues and inflammatory sites

a, Tumour weight of subcutaneous B16F10 melanomas in WT→WT and KO→WT mice.
Data combine 2 independent experiments; total n: WT→WT=8, KO→WT=9. b,c, Total
tumour weight (b) and metastatic index (c) in MMTV-PyMT mice reconstituted with WT or
Met KO BM cells before tumour appearance (WT→PyMT and KO→PyMT mice,
respectively). Data combine 3 independent experiments; total n: WT→PyMT=13,
KO→PyMT=16. d,e, FACS quantification for CD11b+ Ly6G+ neutrophils in T241 tumours

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 December 18.

Finisguerra et al.

Page 24

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

harvested from WT→WT or KO→WT mice (d) or in in breast tumours spontaneously
grown in WT→PyMT and KO→PyMT mice (e). Data combine 2 independent experiments;
total n=10 mice/condition (d) or total n=8 mice/condition (e). f-i, Length measurement (f)
and representative image (g) of the colon, as well as quantification of neutrophils (h) and
macrophages (i) on bowel sections, from WT→WT and KO→WT mice upon induction of
chronic colitis compared to healthy control. Data combine 2 independent experiments; total
n: healthy=5, WT→WT=12, KO→WT=15. j,k, Tumour weight (j) and metastatic
mesenteric lymph nodes (k) 12 days after orthotopic injection of pancreatic Panc02 cancer
cells in WT→WT and KO→WT mice. Data combine 2 independent experiments; total
n=12/condition. l, Histological quantification of Ly6G+ infiltrates in Panc02 pancreatic
tumours harvested from WT→WT and KO→WT mice. Data combine 2 independent
experiments; total n=12 mice/condition. m, Quantification of plasma HGF in tumour (TM)free mice, in subcutaneous LLC or orthotopic Panc02 tumour-bearing mice. Data combine 2
independent experiments; total n: TM free=10, LLC=10, Panc02=8 biological replicates. n,
Quantification of HGF in subcutaneous LLC or orthotopic Panc02 tumours. Data combine 2
independent experiments; total n: LLC=10, Panc02=8 biological replicates. o,p,
Quantification of HGF in plasma (o) or in subcutaneous LLC tumours (p) from tumourbearing WT→WT and KO→WT mice. Data are representative of 2 independent
experiments using 5 mice/condition per experiment. q, Quantification of Ly6G+ area on
sections from B16F10 melanomas grown in C57BL/6 WT mice, daily treated with
PF-04217903, INCB28060, JNJ-38877605, or vehicle as control. Data combine 2
independent experiments; total n: vehicle=14, PF-04217903=9, INCB28060=6,
JNJ-38877605=4. r, Western blot analysis for MET in B16F10 melanoma cells after
transduction with a lentiviral vector encoding scramble or mouse shMet under a constitutive
promoter; vinculin was used as loading control. Western blot is representative of 3
independent repetitions. Western blot images have been cropped for presentation. Full scan
images are shown in Supplementary Figure 1. *, P<0.05 versus WT→WT (a,d,h), versus
WT→PyMT (b,e), versus LLC (m,n), versus Vehicle (q); #, P<0.05 versus Healthy (f,h,i),
versus TM free (m). Scale bar: 10 mm (g). All graphs show mean ± s.e.m.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 December 18.

Finisguerra et al.

Page 25

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Extended Data Figure 6. HGF is required for MET activation upon induction by TNF-α

a, Gating strategy related to Fig. 3b to quantify MET expression in blood neutrophils from
LLC-tumour (TM)-bearing mice and in TANs, where live cells were first gated as CD11b
positive cells; this population was finally gated for Ly6G and MET in order to identify
MET-expressing Ly6G+ neutrophils. b,c, qRT-PCR for MET in mouse (b) and human (c)
neutrophils after LPS or TNF-α stimulation. Data are representative of 3 independent
experiments using 4 biological replicates/condition per experiment. d,e, qRT-PCR for MET
expression in mouse (b) or human (c) neutrophils cultured in normoxia (21% O2) or hypoxia

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 December 18.

Finisguerra et al.

Page 26

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

(1% O2). Data combine 2 independent experiments; total n=8 biological replicates/
condition. f,g, ELISA for total MET (f) and phospho-MET (g) from mouse neutrophils
stimulated for 3 minutes with mock medium or HGF after an overnight incubation with or
without TNF-α. Data combine 3 independent experiments; total n=6 biological replicates/
condition. h, HGF release by neutrophils stimulated with mock medium or TNF-α after 20
hours in culture. Data combine 2 independent experiments; total n=6 biological replicates/
condition. i, qRT-PCR for TNFA in HUVEC upon stimulation with IL-1α compared to
mock medium. Data combine 2 independent experiments; total n=4 biological replicates/
condition. j, qRT-PCR for Met in mouse neutrophils co-cultured with HUVEC/NS or
HUVEC/IL transduced with shTNFA or scramble as control. Data are representative of 3
independent experiments where 3 different shRNA sequences were used; total n=4
biological replicates/condition per experiment. k,l, qRT-PCR for Met in WT, TNFR1 KO,
TNRF2 KO neutrophils upon co-culture with HUVEC/NS or HUVEC/IL (k), or after
stimulation with conditioned medium (TCM) from LLC tumours (l). Data are representative
of 2 independent experiments using 4 biological replicates/condition per experiment. m,
qRT-PCR for MET in human neutrophils stimulated with A549-CCM in presence or absence
of Enbrel or human IgG as control. Data are representative of 2 independent experiments
using 4 biological replicates/condition per experiment. *, P<0.05 versus Mock (b,c,i), versus
TNF-α alone (g), versus HUVEC/NS (j), versus WT (k,l), versus A549-CCM (m); #,
P<0.05 versus untreated or HGF alone (f,g), versus HUVEC/NS (k), versus Mock (l,m).
Graph shows mean ± s.e.m.

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 December 18.

Finisguerra et al.

Page 27

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Extended Data Figure 7. Met deletion in neutrophils does not affect apoptosis

a,b, Gating strategy of apoptotic WT (a) and Met KO (b) neutrophils in LLC tumours where
single cells suspensions were firstly gated for physical parameters and then for CD11b and
Ly6G in order to identify neutrophils as double positive cells; this population was finally
gated for AnnexinV and 7AAD: AnnexinV+ 7AAD− cells display early apoptotic
neutrophils whereas AnnexinV+ 7AAD+ cells display late apoptotic neutrophils. c,
Quantification of apoptotic WT and Met KO tumour-associated neutrophils measured by
FACS. Data combine 2 independent experiments; total n=7 mice/condition. d,
Quantification of apoptotic WT and Met KO neutrophils on LLC tumour sections by
immunohistochemistry. Data combine 2 independent experiments; total n: WT→WT=7,
KO→WT=6. e, FACS analysis for AnnexinV and 7AAD of WT or KO neutrophils
incubated for 10 hours in presence or absence of LPS and HGF, alone or in combination.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 December 18.

Finisguerra et al.

Page 28

Data combine 2 independent experiments; total n=6 biological replicates/condition. #,
P<0.05 versus untreated or HGF alone. Graph shows mean ± s.e.m.

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Extended Data Figure 8. MET affects neither neutrophil basal migration nor polarization but it
is required for neutrophil recruitment and cytotoxicity

a, Quantification of Ly6G staining in ear-sections upon phorbol ester (TPA)-induced
cutaneous rash in Mrp8;Metwt/wt and Mrp8;Metlox/lox mice. Data combine 2 independent
experiments; total n=8 mice/condition. b, FACS analysis on peritoneal lavages for Ly6G+
neutrophils or F4/80+ macrophages in Mrp8;Metwt/wt and Mrp8;Metlox/lox mice 4 hours after
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 December 18.

Finisguerra et al.

Page 29

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

intra-peritoneal injection of sterile zymosan A. Data are representative of 2 independent
experiments using 5 mice/condition per experiment. c,d, Quantification of F4/80 (c) and
CD3 (d) stainings in ear-sections at baseline and upon TPA-induced cutaneous rash. Data
combine 2 independent experiments; total n: WT→WT CTRL=22, KO→WT CTRL=15,
WT→WT TPA=23, KO→WT CTRL=15 (c) or total n=8 mice/condition (d). e, FACS
quantification of Mrp8;Metwt/wt and Mrp8;Metlox/lox neutrophils recruited into subcutaneous
air pouches in response to HGF, CXCL1 or PBS. Data combine 2 independent experiments;
total n=6 mice/condition. f, FACS quantification of WT neutrophil adhesion to quiescent
HUVEC (HUVEC/NS) or activated HUVEC (HUVEC/IL) in presence or absence of HGF.
Data are representative of 2 independent experiments using 4 biological replicates/condition
per experiment. g,h, FACS quantification of WT and Met KO neutrophils migrated through
a bare porous filter (i.e., in absence of HUVEC) towards HGF (g) or tumour conditioned
medium (TCM) (h). Data are representative of 2 independent experiments using 3 biological
replicates/condition per experiment. i, Gene expression profile for N1 and N2 markers in
neutrophils sorted from LLC tumours grown in WT→WT or KO→WT mice. Data are
representative of 3 independent experiments using 4 mice/condition per experiment. j,
Cytotoxicity of WT and KO tumour-associated neutrophils against T241 cells in absence or
presence of the NO synthase inhibitor L-NMMA. Data are representative of 3 independent
experiments using 3 biological replicates/condition per experiment. k, FACS quantification
of DAF-FM-positive circulating neutrophils after co-culture with LLC cancer cells as a
readout of NO production in absence or presence of HGF. Data are representative of 4
independent experiments using 3 biological replicates/condition per experiment. l,
Quantification of LLC cancer cell killing by WT and KO neutrophils (isolated from the
blood of tumour-bearing mice), stimulated with HGF alone or in presence of L-NMMA.
Data are representative of 2 independent experiments using n=12 biological replicates/
condition per experiment. m, Blood neutrophils in WT→WT and KO→WT mice treated
with neutrophil-depleting Ly6G antibody or rat IgG as control. Data combine 2 independent
experiments; total n=16/condition. *, P<0.05 versus Mrp8;Metwt/wt (a,b), versus
Mrp8;Metwt/wt + HGF (e), versus HUVEC/NS (f), versus WT→WT untreated (j), versus
WT→WT + HGF (k,l); #, P<0.05 versus CTRL (c,d), versus PBS (e), versus Mock (f,h),
versus WT→WT untreated (j-l), versus IgG (m); $, P<0.05 versus WT→WT + HGF (m).
All graphs show mean ± s.e.m.
Extended Data Table 1

Blood count in Tie2;Metwt/wt or Tie2;Metlox/lox tumour
free mice
The values show the hematological parameters (mean ± s.e.m.) in tumour free Tie2;Metwt/wt
and Tie2;Metlox/lox mice. Data combine 2 independent experiments; total n=10/condition.
Abbreviations: white blood cell (WBC), neutrophil (NEU), lymphocyte (LYM), monocyte
(MON), eosinophil (EOS), basophil (BAS), red blood cell (RBC), hematocrit (HCT), mean
cell hemoglobin concentration (MCHC), platelet (PLT).
Tumour free
WBC (k/μl)

Tie2;Metwt/wt

Tie2;Metlox/lox

5.68±1.44

5.55±1.29

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 December 18.

Finisguerra et al.

Page 30

Tie2;Metwt/wt

Tie2;Metlox/lox

NEU (%)

23.03±5.45

29.67±7.88

LYM (%)

69.72±6.46

72.03±4.89

MON (%)

1.24±0.37

2.86±1.15

EOS (%)

0.12±0.05

0.17±0.12

BAS (%)

3.38±1.32

4.47±2.1

RBC (M/μL)

5.21±1.91

4.89±1.52

HCT (%)

71.3±3.43

60.2±13.38

MCHC (g/dl)

15.83±2.65

18.3±0.26

439.73±26.64

508±55.79

Tumour free

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

PLT (K/μL)

Extended Data Table 2

Blood count in WT→WT and KO→WT tumour free or
tumour bearing mice
The values show the hematological parameters (mean ± s.e.m.) in tumour free or in LLCtumour bearing (21 days) WT→WT and KO→WT chimeric mice. Data combine 2
independent experiments; total n=10/condition. Abbreviations: white blood cell (WBC),
neutrophil (NEU), lymphocyte (LYM), monocyte (MON), eosinophil (EOS), basophil
(BAS), red blood cell (RBC), hematocrit (HCT), mean cell hemoglobin concentration
(MCHC), platelet (PLT).
Tumour free

WT→WT

KO→WT

WBC (k/μl)

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

10.03±2.05

8.66±0.93

NEU (%)

9.18±2.1

10.3±3.07

LYM (%)

85.2±2.91

83.94±3.46

MON (%)

1.41±0.48

1.3±0.4

EOS (%)

0.44±0.17

0.25±0.05

BAS (%)

3.77±0.68

4.21±0.18

RBC (M/μL)

8.21±0.54

9.3±0.21

HCT (%)

59.86±3.52

70.16±1.67

MCHC (g/dl)

18.63±0.61

13.4±0.16

589.26±134.65

758.4±50.63

Tumor bearing

WT→WT

KO→WT

WBC (k/μl)

7.97±0.63

9.12±1.22

NEU (%)

44.3±0.37

53.71±7.23

LYM (%)

27.29±8.33

33.96±2.52

MON (%)

1.79±0.75

1.9±0.64

EOS (%)

0.26±0.03

0.45±0.1

BAS (%)

1.94±0.53

1.84±0.57

PLT (K/μL)

RBC (M/μL)

5.5±0.54

6.83±0.46

HCT (%)

42.13±2.93

49.43±3.47

MCHC (g/dl)

18.27±0.5

19.24±0.05

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 December 18.

Finisguerra et al.

Page 31

Tumour free
PLT (K/μL)

WT→WT

KO→WT

566.17±109.48

805.5±88.19

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors thank: Rocco Stirparo, Marco Mambretti and Yannick Jönsson for technical assistance; Dr. Guido
Serini (IRCC, Candiolo, IT), Dr. Livio Trusolino (IRCC, Candiolo, IT), Dr. Pierre Bruhns (Pasteur Institute, Paris,
FR) for comments; Dr. Enrico Radaelli (VIB, KU Leuven, BE) for his valuable advice on histological analyses. VF
and GDC were granted by FWO, AC by the Fondazione Umberto Veronesi. SRW is supported by a Wellcome
Trust Senior Clinical Fellowship Award. MM is supported by an ERC starting-grant.

REFERENCES

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

1. Gherardi E, Birchmeier W, Birchmeier C, Vande Woude G. Targeting MET in cancer: rationale and
progress. Nat Rev Cancer. 2012; 12:89–103. [PubMed: 22270953]
2. Bertotti A, et al. Only a subset of Met-activated pathways are required to sustain oncogene
addiction. Sci Signal. 2009; 2:er11. [PubMed: 20039471]
3. Lennerz JK, et al. MET amplification identifies a small and aggressive subgroup of esophagogastric
adenocarcinoma with evidence of responsiveness to crizotinib. J Clin Oncol. 2011; 29:4803–4810.
[PubMed: 22042947]
4. Choueiri TK, et al. Phase II and biomarker study of the dual MET/VEGFR2 inhibitor foretinib in
patients with papillary renal cell carcinoma. J Clin Oncol. 2013; 31:181–186. [PubMed: 23213094]
5. Comoglio PM, Giordano S, Trusolino L. Drug development of MET inhibitors: targeting oncogene
addiction and expedience. Nat Rev Drug Discov. 2008; 7:504–516. [PubMed: 18511928]
6. Bussolino F, et al. Hepatocyte growth factor is a potent angiogenic factor which stimulates
endothelial cell motility and growth. J Cell Biol. 1992; 119:629–641. [PubMed: 1383237]
7. Liu Y, et al. Hepatocyte growth factor and c-Met expression in pericytes: implications for
atherosclerotic plaque development. J Pathol. 2007; 212:12–19. [PubMed: 17405187]
8. Chen Q, DeFrances MC, Zarnegar R. Induction of met proto-oncogene (hepatocyte growth factor
receptor) expression during human monocyte-macrophage differentiation. Cell Growth Differ.
1996; 7:821–832. [PubMed: 8780895]
9. Baek JH, Birchmeier C, Zenke M, Hieronymus T. The HGF receptor/Met tyrosine kinase is a key
regulator of dendritic cell migration in skin immunity. J Immunol. 2012; 189:1699–1707. [PubMed:
22802413]
10. Adams DH, et al. Hepatocyte growth factor and macrophage inflammatory protein 1 beta:
structurally distinct cytokines that induce rapid cytoskeletal changes and subset-preferential
migration in T cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1994; 91:7144–7148. [PubMed: 8041760]
11. Tesio M, et al. Enhanced c-Met activity promotes G-CSF-induced mobilization of hematopoietic
progenitor cells via ROS signaling. Blood. 2011; 117:419–428. [PubMed: 20585044]
12. Takeda Y, et al. Macrophage skewing by Phd2 haplodeficiency prevents ischaemia by inducing
arteriogenesis. Nature. 2011; 479:122–126. [PubMed: 21983962]
13. Elliott ER, et al. Deletion of Syk in neutrophils prevents immune complex arthritis. J Immunol.
2011; 187:4319–4330. [PubMed: 21918195]
14. Kishi Y, et al. Systemic NK4 gene therapy inhibits tumor growth and metastasis of melanoma and
lung carcinoma in syngeneic mouse tumor models. Cancer Sci. 2009; 100:1351–1358. [PubMed:
19438869]
15. Pennacchietti S, et al. Hypoxia promotes invasive growth by transcriptional activation of the met
protooncogene. Cancer Cell. 2003; 3:347–361. [PubMed: 12726861]
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 December 18.

Finisguerra et al.

Page 32

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

16. Moghul A, et al. Modulation of c-MET proto-oncogene (HGF receptor) mRNA abundance by
cytokines and hormones: evidence for rapid decay of the 8 kb c-MET transcript. Oncogene. 1994;
9:2045–2052. [PubMed: 8208549]
17. Dai JY, DeFrances MC, Zou C, Johnson CJ, Zarnegar R. The Met protooncogene is a
transcriptional target of NF kappaB: implications for cell survival. J Cell Biochem. 2009;
107:1222–1236. [PubMed: 19530226]
18. Suga H, et al. IFATS collection: Fibroblast growth factor-2-induced hepatocyte growth factor
secretion by adipose-derived stromal cells inhibits postinjury fibrogenesis through a c-Jun Nterminal kinase-dependent mechanism. Stem Cells. 2009; 27:238–249. [PubMed: 18772314]
19. Fridlender ZG, Albelda SM. Tumor-associated neutrophils: friend or foe? Carcinogenesis. 2012;
33:949–955. [PubMed: 22425643]
20. Garber K. MET inhibitors start on road to recovery. Nat Rev Drug Discov. 2014; 13:563–565.
[PubMed: 25082276]
21. Wright HL, Moots RJ, Bucknall RC, Edwards SW. Neutrophil function in inflammation and
inflammatory diseases. Rheumatology. 2010; 49:1618–1631. [PubMed: 20338884]
22. Passegue E, Wagner EF, Weissman IL. JunB deficiency leads to a myeloproliferative disorder
arising from hematopoietic stem cells. Cell. 2004; 119:431–443. [PubMed: 15507213]
23. Van Ziffle JA, Lowell CA. Neutrophil-specific deletion of Syk kinase results in reduced host
defense to bacterial infection. Blood. 2009; 114:4871–4882. [PubMed: 19797524]
24. Abram CL, Roberge GL, Pao LI, Neel BG, Lowell CA. Distinct roles for neutrophils and dendritic
cells in inflammation and autoimmunity in motheaten mice. Immunity. 2013; 38:489–501.
[PubMed: 23521885]
25. Albanesi M, et al. Neutrophils mediate antibody-induced antitumor effects in mice. Blood. 2013;
122:3160–3164. [PubMed: 23980063]
26. Lagasse E, Clerc RG. Cloning and expression of two human genes encoding calcium-binding
proteins that are regulated during myeloid differentiation. Mol Cell Biol. 1988; 8:2402–2410.
[PubMed: 3405210]
27. Hamm A, et al. PHD2 regulates arteriogenic macrophages through TIE2 signalling. EMBO Mol
Med. 2013; 5:843–857. [PubMed: 23616286]
28. Neufert C, Becker C, Neurath MF. An inducible mouse model of colon carcinogenesis for the
analysis of sporadic and inflammation-driven tumor progression. Nat Protoc. 2007; 2:1998–2004.
[PubMed: 17703211]
29. Moolenbeek C, Ruitenberg EJ. The “Swiss roll”: a simple technique for histological studies of the
rodent intestine. Lab Anim. 1981; 15:57–59. [PubMed: 7022018]
30. Chen X, Calvisi DF. Hydrodynamic transfection for generation of novel mouse models for liver
cancer research. Am J Pathol. 2014; 184:912–923. [PubMed: 24480331]
31. Schira J, et al. Significant clinical, neuropathological and behavioural recovery from acute spinal
cord trauma by transplantation of a well-defined somatic stem cell from human umbilical cord
blood. Brain. 2012; 135:431–446. [PubMed: 21903726]
32. Cramer T, et al. HIF-1alpha is essential for myeloid cell-mediated inflammation. Cell. 2003;
112:645–657. [PubMed: 12628185]
33. Cotter MJ, Norman KE, Hellewell PG, Ridger VC. A novel method for isolation of neutrophils
from murine blood using negative immunomagnetic separation. Am J Pathol. 2001; 159:473–481.
[PubMed: 11485906]
34. Haslett C, Guthrie LA, Kopaniak MM, Johnston RB Jr. Henson PM. Modulation of multiple
neutrophil functions by preparative methods or trace concentrations of bacterial
lipopolysaccharide. Am J Pathol. 1985; 119:101–110. [PubMed: 2984939]
35. Shaked Y, et al. Rapid chemotherapy-induced acute endothelial progenitor cell mobilization:
implications for antiangiogenic drugs as chemosensitizing agents. Cancer Cell. 2008; 14:263–273.
[PubMed: 18772115]

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 December 18.

Finisguerra et al.

Page 33

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Figure 1. Met deficiency inhibits neutrophil recruitment to tumour and metastatic site

a-g, LLC tumour growth (a), weight (b), lung macrometastases (c), metastatic area (d),
representative images of H&E-stained lung sections (e,f), metastatic index (g) in WT→WT
and KO→WT chimeras. Data combine 3 independent experiments; total mice:
WT→WT=23, KO→WT=26. h-m, Neutrophil quantification and representative images on
Ly6G-stained LLC tumour sections (h-j) or on lung sections from tumour-free and tumourbearing mice (k) represented in (l,m). Data in (h) are representative of 4 independent
experiments (6 mice/condition per experiment). Data in (k) combine 3 independent

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 December 18.

Finisguerra et al.

Page 34

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

experiments; total mice: Tumour-free=10/condition, Tumour-bearing=15/condition. n-q,
LLC tumour growth (n), tumour weight (o), lung macrometastases (p), TAN quantification
(q) in WT→WT and KO→WT control chimeras (Mrp8:Empty) or upon neutrophil-specific
Met reconstitution (Mrp8:Met). Data combine 2 independent experiments; total mice=10/
condition. r-u, LLC tumour growth (r), tumour weight (s), lung macrometastases (t), TAN
quantification (u) upon neutrophil-specific Met deletion (Mrp8;Metlox/lox) and controls
(Mrp8;Metwt/wt). Data combine 2 independent experiments; total mice=13/condition. *,
P<0.05. Scale bars: 100 μm (e,f), 50 μm (i,j,l,m). Graphs show mean ± s.e.m..

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 December 18.

Finisguerra et al.

Page 35

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Figure 2. Met deficiency in hematopoietic cells fosters progression of several tumour types

a-c, Growth of T241 fibrosarcomas (a), B16F10 melanomas (b), PyMT-driven breast
tumours (c). Data in (a,b) combine 2 independent experiments; total mice=14/condition (a),
8/condition (b). Data in (c) combine 3 independent experiments; total mice:
WT→PyMT=13, KO→PyMT=16. d-g, Liver weight (d), nodules (e), and images (f,g) after
H-RasG12V/c-Myc-driven HCC (n=4 mice/condition). h-j, Quantification (h) on H&Estained bowel sections (i,j) of AOM/DSS-induced colon adenomas (yellow arrowheads) or
carcinomas (red arrowheads). Data combine 2 independent experiments; total mice=10/

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 December 18.

Finisguerra et al.

Page 36

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

condition. k, Spontaneous lung metastases from B16F10 tumours or lung colonisation after
B16F10 intravenous injection. Data combine 2 independent experiments; total mice=8/
condition. l, Lung macrometastases from PyMT tumours. Data combine 3 independent
experiments; total mice: WT→PyMT=13, KO→PyMT=16. m, TAN quantification in T241,
B16F10, PyMT, HCC, CRC tumour-tissues. Total mice: T241, CRC=10/condition,
B16F10=8/condition, combining 2 experiments; WT→PyMT=13, KO→PyMT=16,
combining 3 experiments; HCC=4/condition (1 experiment). n,o, B16F10 tumour growth
(n), spontaneous metastases and lung colonisation (o) in Mrp8;Metwt/wt and Mrp8;Metlox/lox
mice. Data combine 2 independent experiments; total mice: Mrp8;Metwt/wt=12,
Mrp8;Metlox/lox=8. p, Liver nodules in Mrp8;Metwt/wt and Mrp8;Metlox/lox HCC-bearing
mice. Total mice=7/condition. q, TAN quantification in B16F10 tumours (total mice=8/
condition) or HCC (total mice=7/condition). r-t, Tumour growth (r), weight (s) and TANs
in Met-silenced (shMet) and scramble B16F10 tumours after PF-04217903 or vehicle
treatment. Data combine 2 independent experiments (total mice=11/condition for scramble,
14/condition for shMet). *, P<0.05. Scale bars: 200 μm (i,j), 0.5 cm (f,g). Graphs show
mean ± s.e.m..

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 December 18.

Finisguerra et al.

Page 37

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Figure 3. Met expression in neutrophils is induced by tumour-derived soluble factors

a-b, qRT-PCR (a) and FACS (b) analysis for MET in blood neutrophils from tumour (TM)free or LLC-tumour-bearing mice and in TANs. c, qRT-PCR for MET in human neutrophils
from lung cancer versus healthy tissue. n=4 patients. d,e, MET expression by qRT-PCR (d)
and Western blot (e) in circulating neutrophils from tumour-free mice after co-culture with
unstimulated (HUVEC/NS) or IL-1α-pre-stimulated (HUVEC/IL) HUVEC, or after
stimulation with TCM or CCM. f,g, qRT-PCR (f) or Western blot (g) for MET in circulating
human neutrophils after stimulation with A549-CCM. h, Western blot for MET in mouse

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 December 18.

Finisguerra et al.

Page 38

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

and human neutrophils after LPS or TNF-α stimulation. i, qRT-PCR for Met in WT, TNFR1
KO or TNFR2 KO neutrophils after TNF-α stimulation. j,k, qRT-PCR (j) and Western blot
(k) for MET in mouse neutrophils after TNF-α stimulation with or without NF-κB inhibitor.
l, qRT-PCR for Met in mouse neutrophils co-cultured with HUVEC/IL or stimulated with
TCM in presence or absence of Enbrel. m,n, FACS for MET in TANs (m) and
immunohistochemistry for Ly6G (n) in LLC tumours after Enbrel. Data combine 2
independent experiments; total mice=5/condition. All data in (a,b,d,f,i,j,l) are representative
of 2 independent experiments using 4 biological replicates/condition per experiment. All
Western blots were repeated 3 times on independent biological replicates. Full Western blot
images are shown in Supplementary Figure 1. Loading control in (e,h) displays tubulin or
actin according to Supplementary Figure 1. *, P <0.05; #, P <0.05 versus Mock (i,l), versus
untreated (j). Graphs show mean ± s.e.m..

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 December 18.

Finisguerra et al.

Page 39

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Figure 4. MET is required for neutrophil transendothelial migration and cytotoxicity

a-c, Neutrophils quantification (a) on TPA-painted ear skin (b,c). Data combine 2
independent experiments; total mice=10/condition for vehicle, 14/condition for TPA. d,
FACS analysis for Ly6G+ neutrophils or F4/80+ macrophages on peritoneal lavages after
zymosan-induced peritonitis. Data are representative of 2 independent experiments using 4
mice/condition per experiment. e, FACS analysis for neutrophil recruitment towards HGF or
CXCL1 in air pouch assays. Data combine 3 independent experiments; total mice=10/
condition. f, Ly6G infiltration in LLC tumours or in TPA-painted ear skin after anti-HGF.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 December 18.

Finisguerra et al.

Page 40

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Data combine 2 independent experiments; total mice: IgG=11, anti-HGF=6. g-i, Neutrophil
adhesion to HUVEC/IL (g) and transendothelial migration in response to HGF (h) or TCM
with or without anti-HGF (i). Data in (g-i) are representative of 3 independent experiments
using 3 biological replicates/condition per experiment. j,k, qRT-PCR for Nos2 in LLCtumour-associated neutrophils or macrophages (j) and tumour-derived NO production (k). ln, Quantification (l) and representative images (m,n) of 3NT and Ly6G-costained LLC
tumour sections. Data in (j-n) combine 2 independent experiments; total mice=8/condition.
o, TAN cytotoxicity against LLC cells with or without L-NMMA. Data are representative of
4 independent experiments using 3 biological replicates/condition per experiment. p-r, LLC
tumour growth (p), weight (q), TANs (r) following neutrophil-depleting anti-Ly6G
treatment. Data combine 2 independent experiments; total mice=16/condition. *, P<0.05; #,
P<0.05 versus PBS (e), versus Mock (g-i), versus WT→WT untreated (o). Scale bars: 100
μm (b,c), 20 μm (m,n). Graphs show mean ± s.e.m..

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 December 18.

