1235

Is Full Bilateral Retroperitoneal Lymph Node
Dissection Always Necessary for Postchemotherapy
Residual Tumor?
Stephen D. W. Beck, MD
Richard S. Foster, MD
Richard Bihrle, MD
John P. Donohue, MD
Lawrence H. Einhorn, MD

BACKGROUND. Traditionally, postchemotherapy (PC) surgery for metastatic nonseminomatous germ cell tumor (NSGCT) has used a full bilateral retroperitoneal
lymph node dissection (RPLND) from the crus of the diaphragm to the bifurcation of the common iliac arteries, from ureter to ureter. With the primary landing
zone well defined in low-volume retroperitoneal disease, the authors performed
modified dissections in the PC setting in a select population; and, herein, they

Department of Urology and Oncology, Indiana
University Medical Center, Indianapolis, Indiana.

report disease outcome.

METHODS. From 1991 to 2004, a retrospective review of the testicular cancer
database at the authors’ institution was performed to identify patients with
NSGCT, normal serum tumor markers after cisplatin-based chemotherapy, and
residual retroperitoneal tumor who underwent modified PC-RPLND. All patients
had metastatic disease at initial presentation that was limited to the primary
landing zone (left or right).

RESULTS. One hundred patients were identified, including 43 who underwent a
right modified template, 18 patients who underwent a left full modified template,
and 39 patients who underwent a left modified template. Pathology revealed cancer in 2% of patients, teratoma in 62% of patients, and necrosis in 36% of
patients. The 2- and 5-year disease-free survival rate was 95%, and the median
follow-up was 31.9 months (range, 1–152 months). Four patients developed
recurrent disease with a median time to recurrence of 8.25 months (range, 6–11
months). All recurrences were outside the boundaries of a full bilateral RPLND.

CONCLUSIONS. Selected patients at PC surgery can be managed with modified
PC-RPLND. Cancer 2007;110:1235–40.  2007 American Cancer Society.

KEYWORDS: testicular cancer, teratoma, retroperitoneal lymph node dissection,
modified.

R

Address for reprints: Stephen D. W. Beck, MD,
Department of Urology, Indiana Cancer Pavilion,
535 North Barnhill Drive, Suite 420, Indianapolis, IN
46202; Fax: (317) 274-0174; E-mail: sdwbeck@
iupui.edu
Received February 13, 2007; revision received
April 18, 2007; accepted May 1, 2007.

ª 2007 American Cancer Society

etroperitoneal mapping studies have accurately documented the
predictable lymphatic spread of testicular cancer, allowing for
the use of more limited surgical templates in low-volume (<5 cm)
metastatic disease.1 In the surgical management of clinical stage A
disease, surgical boundaries over the last 30 years have evolved
from a full bilateral, suprahilar dissection to a unilateral nerve-sparing template without compromising surgical cure.2 In the management of postchemotherapy retroperitoneal masses, there has been
no such consistent reduction in the retroperitoneal surgical boundaries, and a full bilateral dissection is considered standard therapy
by many investigators.
Treatment options for patients with low-volume, metastatic
germ cell cancer consist of either primary retroperitoneal lymph
node dissection (RPLND) or 3 or 4 courses of induction chemother-

DOI 10.1002/cncr.22898
Published online 30 July 2007 in Wiley InterScience (www.interscience.wiley.com).

1236

CANCER

September 15, 2007 / Volume 110 / Number 6

apy, followed by surgery if the tumor persists in the
retroperitoneum. Because of the acute toxicity of cisplatin-based chemotherapy in the 1970s and 1980s,
low-volume retroperitoneal tumors were managed
more commonly with primary RPLND in an attempt
to avoid chemotherapy. With the advent of effective
antiemetics, growth factors, and supportive care,
the acute toxicity of cisplatin-based chemotherapy
has decreased. Subsequently, a greater number of
patients with low-stage disease currently are treated
primarily with chemotherapy.3
Many patients from the 1970s and 1980s who
underwent postchemotherapy surgery had high-volume residual disease; thus, the decision to perform a
full bilateral RPLND was rational and appropriate.
Because chemotherapy currently is being administered for relatively low-volume retroperitoneal disease, and because these tumors typically are
restricted to the primary landing zone of the affected
testicle, a question has arisen about the appropriateness of full bilateral RPLND in this population.
The potential benefits to the patient from a
reduction in the postchemotherapy RPLND (PCRPLND) template include shorter operative times,
reduced fluid requirements, and maintenance of
emission and ejaculation without using nerve-sparing techniques. Of course, any modification in the
surgical template must not be accompanied by
higher local recurrence rates or decreased diseasefree survival (DFS). The objective of the current study
was to determine whether these goals have been
achieved in this retrospective cohort.

TABLE 1
Retroperitoneal Pathology After Modified Retroperitoneal Lymph
Node Dissection
Pathology: No. of patients (%)
Template

Cancer

Teratoma

Necrosis

Right modified (n 5 43)
Left full modified (n 5 18)
Left modified template (n 5 39)
Total (n 5 100)

0
1 (5.6)
1 (2.6)
2 (2)

30 (69.8)
9 (50)
23 (59)
62 (62)

13 (30.2)
8 (44.4)
15 (38.4)
36 (36)

formed. A right-sided, modified PC-RPLND included
removal of the right common iliac (medial to the
ureter), paracaval, precaval, retrocaval, and interaortocaval (IAC) lymph nodes. A left modified PCRPLND included removal of the preaortic, periaortic,
and left common iliac lymph nodes. With the additional removal of IAC lymph nodes superior to the
inferior mesenteric artery (IMA), the procedure was
denoted as ‘‘full left modified.’’ The right and left
iliac lymph nodes medial to the ureter were removed
and sent with the paracaval and periaortic lymph
node packages, respectively. The decision to perform
a left modified or a full left modified dissection was
surgeon preference.
Blood loss, perioperative complications, and hospital stay also were evaluated. Length of follow-up
was calculated from the date of surgery to the date
of last clinic visit or the date of recurrence. SPSS version 13.0 software was used for statistical analysis.

RESULTS
MATERIALS AND METHODS
The testis cancer database at our institution was
queried to identify all patients who underwent modified PC-RPLND from 1991 to 2004. The charts of
these patients were reviewed retrospectively to identify patients who presented with metastatic, nonseminomatous germ cell cancer with normal serum
tumor markers and residual retroperitoneal disease
after initial cisplatin-based chemotherapy. Only
patients with tumor limited to the primary landing
zone of the affected testis, both before and after
chemotherapy, were included. Patients with late
recurrent disease (disease recurrence >2 years after
the last treatment), desperation surgery (rising serum
tumor makers during or after chemotherapy), or
redo-resection were excluded.
The operative report for each patient was
reviewed to identify the location of tumor, extent of
surgery, and whether additional procedures or ipsilateral, efferent, sympathetic, nerve-sparing was per-

The study cohort included 100 patients. Ninety-eight
patients had good-risk disease, as defined by the
International Germ Cell Consensus Group,4 and
received induction chemotherapy only. Two patients
with poor-risk disease (defined by marker elevation)
had received second-line chemotherapy before surgery because of persistent marker elevation. Fortythree patients underwent a right modified dissection,
18 patients underwent a left full modified, and 39
patients underwent a left modified template. Ninetyfour patients had clinical stage B1 disease (lymph
node <2 cm) or B2 disease (lymph node <5 cm)
before and after chemotherapy. Six patients presented with clinical stage B3 disease (lymph
nodes >5 cm). Pathology revealed viable germ cell
cancer in 2% of patients, teratoma in 62% of
patients, and fibrosis in 36% of patients. Pathology
for each surgical template is specified in Table 1.
Thirty of 43 patients (69.8%) who underwent a
right-sided dissection had teratoma in the surgical

Modified PC-RPLND/Beck et al.
TABLE 2
Distribution of Lymph Node Metastasis (Teratoma/Cancer) After
Modified Dissection

Location

Right
modified
(n 5 30)

Left full
modified
(n 5 10)

Left
modified
(n 5 24)

Paracaval
Precaval
Right gonadal vein
Interaortocaval
Preaortic
Periaortic
Left gonadal vein

9
6
1
20
NA
NA
NA

NA
NA
NA
1
0
10
1

NA
NA
NA
NA
0
24
1

1237

TABLE 3
Perioperative Complications in 100 Patients Who Underwent a
Modified Postchemotherapy Retroperitoneal Lymph Node Dissection
Complication

No. of patients

Prolonged ventilation
Fever
Ileus
Lymphocele
Ureteral injury
Small bowel obstruction
Pancreatitis
Decreased oxygen saturation
Renal artery injury (repaired)
Incisional skin bleed

1
1
6
1
1
1
1
1
1
1

NA indicates not applicable.

specimen. Location of teratoma for right-sided dissection included the IAC in 20 patients (67%), with
14 patients having teratoma only in the IAC region.
No patient had pathologically confirmed cancer. Of
the 18 patients who underwent a left full modified
dissection, 10 patients (55.6%) had nonnecrosis pathology (9 with teratoma and 1 with active germ cell
cancer). In the left modified template group (n 5 39
patients), teratoma was identified in 23 patients
(59%), and cancer was identified in 1 patient (2.6%).
The distribution of lymph node metastases is provided in Table 2.
Nephrectomy was performed in 7 patients, all
undergoing a left modified template dissection.
Three patients had complete ureteral encasement by
tumor, 3 patients had tumor adherent to the renal
vein, and 1 patient with a deep venous thrombosis
and inferior vena caval filter had suspected tumor
thrombus in the left renal vein. Sympathetic efferent
ipsilateral nerve sparing was performed in 16
patients, on the right in 10 patients and for a full
and modified left template in 3 patients each.
Intraoperative blood loss ranged from 175 mL to
1000 mL (mean, 318 mL). Seventy percent of patients
were managed without a nasogastric tube. The mean
and median time to discharge was 4.4 days and
4.0 days, respectively (range, 2–56 days). Eighty-one
patients were discharged by Day 4. One patient with
previously undiagnosed antiphospholipid antibody
syndrome had a prolonged ventilatory course and
was discharged on Day 56. There were 16 complications, and the most common was an ileus presenting
with nausea and/or vomiting in 6 patients, all of
whom were managed conservatively (Table 3). Two
patients required re-exploration, including 1 patient
with a symptomatic lymphocele 1 month postoperatively and 1 patient who developed a small bowel
obstruction 6 weeks postoperatively.

The median follow-up for all 100 patients was
31.9 months (range, 1–152 months). The 2- and
5-year DFS rates both were 95%. The mean and median follow-up for the 62 patients who had teratoma
were 33.6 months and 25.5 months, respectively; and,
for the 36 patients who had necrosis, they were
30.5 months and 31 months, respectively. The mean
and median follow-up for the 2 patients who had cancer were both 7.5 months: Both patients received adjuvant chemotherapy and currently are free of disease.
Four patients, all presenting with clinical stage
B2 disease, developed recurrent disease at a median
of 8.25 months (range, 6–11 months) (Table 4).
Patient 1, who had poor-risk disease defined by tumor marker elevation, underwent a left full modified
dissection with teratoma in the periaortic lymph
node package. He subsequently developed recurrent
teratoma in the chest at 8 months. The remaining 3
patients (all with good-risk disease) underwent a
right modified dissection, all with teratoma in the
IAC lymph nodes. One patient developed recurrent
disease at 8 months over the right common iliac artery, lateral to the right ureter, out of the field of dissection, and underwent primary resection, which
revealed teratoma. Patient 3 developed recurrent disease at 6 months with tumor in the retrocrural and
right parapsoas region lateral to the ureter. It was
suspected that this was recurrent teratoma, and
treatment was primary resection. Pathology revealed
teratoma and yolk sac tumor. Adjuvant chemotherapy was not administered. The fourth patient developed recurrent disease at 11 months and had
teratoma identified in the right inguinal canal.
Twenty patients had follow-up <12 months.
Excluding those 20 patients, the median follow-up
for the remaining 76 patients who did not develop
recurrent disease was 40.9 months, and the 2- and
5-year DFS rates both were 95%.

1238

CANCER

September 15, 2007 / Volume 110 / Number 6

TABLE 4
Characteristics of Patients Who Underwent Modified Retroperitoneal Lymph Node Dissection With Recurrent Disease
Patient

Template

Pathology

Initial
location

Time to
recurrence, mo

Location of
recurrence

Treatment

Pathology

Current
status

1
2
3
4

Left full modified
Right modified
Right modified
Right modified

Teratoma
Teratoma
Teratoma
Teratoma

Periaortic
IAC
IAC
IAC

8
8
6
11

Chest
Right iliac artery
Retrocrural right parapsoas
Right inguinal canal

Resection
Resection
Resection
Resection

Teratoma
Teratoma
Yolk sac and teratoma
Teratoma

NED
NED
NED
NED

NED indicates no evidence of disease; IAC, interaortocaval.

DISCUSSION
There is general agreement among testis cancer
experts that residual retroperitoneal tumor after
chemotherapy should be resected. The rationale for
this is that, even in patients with serum tumor
marker normalization, residual retroperitoneal tumor
may contain teratoma or carcinoma, which ultimately may have a deleterious effect on long-term
outcome. This resection of residual retroperitoneal
tumor is not merely a biopsy or sampling. Indeed,
complete resection is necessary for an optimal outcome.5 If, by the employment of a modified template
in the postchemotherapy setting, the local recurrence
rate increases, then a more limited template should
not be used.
In a series of 113 patients who underwent full
bilateral PC-RPLND, investigators at the Memorial
Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center reported an 8% incidence of disease (cancer/teratoma) identified in the
contralateral landing zone.6 All of the men in their
cohort presented with ‘‘bulky disease’’ and were treated with cisplatin or carboplatin-based chemotherapy. The investigators concluded that a modified
dissection should be considered in patients with 1)
no palpable residual tumor mass, 2) left primary
tumors, and 3) right primary tumors that have no
evidence of cancer/teratoma on frozen section analysis of the residual mass. Rabbani et al. reported on
39 patients who underwent a bilateral PC-RPLND to
determine the incidence of teratoma/cancer identified in the contralateral landing zone if a modified
dissection was performed. One patient (2.6%) with a
left-sided primary tumor had teratoma outside the
boundaries of a modified template in the area of the
contralateral landing zone.7 This cohort differs from
the current series, in that 1) the boundaries of a
right-sided template included the periaortic lymph
nodes above the IMA, and 2) also included in this series were patients with residual tumor masses after
chemotherapy on the contralateral landing zone of
the primary tumor who would have been excluded
from the current series.

Oldenberg et al. reported the results of 87
patients who underwent PC-RPLND in a group of
patients with residual masses <20 mm.8 Pathology
revealed necrosis in 67% of patients, teratoma in
26% of patients, and cancer in 7% of patients. There
were 5 recurrences, and the 5-year DFS rate was 94%
at a medium follow-up of 80 months. Fifty of the 87
patients underwent a ‘‘unilateral RPLND,’’ and 3
recurrences were reported, all outside the retroperitoneum, indicating that the template of dissection
was adequate. Those authors did state concerns that
a modified dissection may not entirely avoid the risk
of a growing teratoma near the area of resection.
It was our hypothesis that a modified postchemotherapy dissection would adequately manage the
retroperitoneum without an increased incidence of
local recurrence in patients who presented with metastatic disease limited to the primary landing zone of
the affected testicle. The reason for the generation of
this hypothesis was the increasing use of chemotherapy to treat patients with low-volume, retroperitoneal-only, metastatic tumors.3 By selecting patients
for this modified template who had unilateral tumor
both before and after chemotherapy, we hoped to
identify patients with no residual, contralateral, microscopic tumor. In this series of a 100 patients, at a
median follow-up of 32 months, there were only 4
recurrences, all of which were outside the boundaries
of a bilateral dissection and of which 3 were subdiaphragmatic. Specifically, the iliac recurrence was
lateral to the ureter and, thus, was outside the
boundaries of a full bilateral template. The parapsoas
recurrence also was lateral to the ureter and likely
was secondary to aberrant lymphatic or venous drainage of the gonadal vein. Chang et al. and others
have hypothesized that such recurrences may be
reduced with wide excision of the spermatic cord
and surrounding lymphatic tissue.9 The third recurrence was along the inguinal canal and may have
represented an inadequate radical orchiectomy,
although the boundaries of the RPLND would have
no impact on this recurrence. Our study suggests

Modified PC-RPLND/Beck et al.

that in select patients with residual retroperitoneal
masses after chemotherapy, a modified dissection is
not associated with a higher recurrence rate than
would be expected.
The current series included only patients who
presented with low-volume, metastatic disease limited to the primary landing zone. This series of 100
patients was highly selective and represented <10%
of PC-RPLND performed during the study period.
The majority of patients who undergo postchemotherapy surgery at our university have bulky disease both before and after chemotherapy and are not
candidates for a modified template. Likewise, because low-volume, stage B disease often is cured
with primary chemotherapy alone, at Indiana University, we do not advocate PC-RPLND for patients who
have normal computed tomographic scans after
chemotherapy. In this population, retroperitoneal pathology rarely will be cancer; thus, a 2% incidence of
cancer in the current series is not surprising.
Furthermore, a higher incidence of teratoma would
be expected in a group of patients with small-volume
disease with minimal change postchemotherapy.
One concern against adopting a modified postchemotherapy template is the risk of residual microscopic teratoma in the contralateral landing zone
with subsequent development of late recurrent disease or malignant transformation. It is unknown
whether the contralateral side at initial presentation
harbored micrometastatic disease or not. Nevertheless, the ipsilateral tumor dictates therapy and is
treated (along with the radiographically normal, contralateral side) with 3 or 4 courses of platinum-based
chemotherapy. It is generally agreed that residual ipsilateral tumor should be resected, but how best to
manage the contralateral side?
This dilemma is analogous to the management
of high-risk, clinical stage A disease with adjuvant
chemotherapy. This population, which has a nearly
50% chance of harboring micrometastatic disease
(much higher than would be observed in the
‘‘normal’’ contralateral side in the current series),
almost universally is cured with 2 courses of chemotherapy (with no subsequent resection). The primary
criticism to adjuvant chemotherapy in clinical stage
A disease typically is not directed toward the efficacy
of chemotherapy in managing micrometastatic disease but, rather, toward the toxicity of treatment for
patients without metastatic disease. Cullen et al.
reported on outcomes of 114 patients with high-risk
stage A NSGCT who were treated with 2 courses of
combined bleomycin, etoposide, and cisplatin.10 At a
median follow-up of 4 years, there were 2 recurrences, 1 at 7 months in the retroperitoneum, liver,

1239

and lung and the other at 18 months in the groin.
Other series have reported similar success with longterm follow-up.11,12
Thus, by extrapolating data from clinical stage A
studies, along with emerging data from other modified postchemotherapy series,13–15 a cogent argument
can be made to limit the boundaries of dissection in
highly select patients undergoing postchemotherapy
surgery. Using a postchemotherapy modified template should result in the same decrease in patient
morbidity that was produced in the primary setting
and should include greater preservation of antegrade
emission and ejaculation with avoidance of the contralateral efferent sympathetic fibers; decreased operative time; potentially reduced perioperative ileus,
negating the need for nasogastric tubes; and shorter
hospital stay. These factors are significant for the
patient, and attempts should be made to continue to
reduce morbidity while maintaining similar oncologic efficacy.
In select patients with residual masses after
chemotherapy, a modified dissection appears to remove retroperitoneal tumor adequately. Patients with
low-volume postchemotherapy tumors are candidates for modified PC-RPLND.

REFERENCES
1.

2.

3.

4.

5.

6.

7.

8.

Donohue JP, Zachary JM, Maynard BR. Distribution of nodal
metastases in nonseminomatous testis cancer. J Urol.
1982;128:315–320.
Foster RS, Donohue JP, Bihrle R. Stage A nonseminomatous
testis carcinoma: rationale and results of nerve-sparing retroperitoneal lymphadenectomy. Urol Int. 1991;46:294–297.
Stephenson AJ, Bosl GJ, Motzer RJ, et al. Retroperitoneal
lymph node dissection for nonseminomatous germ cell
testicular cancer: impact of patient selection factors on
outcome. J Clin Oncol. 2005;23:2781–2788.
International Germ Cell Consensus Classification: a prognostic factor-based staging system for metastatic germ
cell cancers. International Germ Cell Cancer Collaborative
Group. J Clin Oncol. 1997;15:594–603.
Donohue JP, Leviovitch I, Foster RS, Baniel J, Tognoni P.
Integration of surgery and systemic therapy: results and
principles of integration. Semin Urol Oncol. 1988;16:65–71.
Wood DP Jr, Herr HW, Heller G, et al. Distribution of retroperitoneal metastases after chemotherapy in patients with
nonseminomatous germ cell tumors. J Urol. 1992;148:
1812–1815; discussion 1815–1816.
Rabbani F, Goldenberg SL, Gleave ME, Paterson RF, Murray
N, Sullivan LD. Retroperitoneal lymphadenectomy for
post-chemotherapy residual masses: is a modified dissection and resection of residual masses sufficient? Br J Urol.
1998;81:295–300.
Oldenburg J, Alfsen GC, Lien HH, Aass N, Waehre H, Fossa
SD. Postchemotherapy retroperitoneal surgery remains
necessary in patients with nonseminomatous testicular
cancer and minimal residual tumor masses. J Clin Oncol.
2003;21:3310–3317.

1240
9.

CANCER

September 15, 2007 / Volume 110 / Number 6

Chang SS, Mohseni HF, Leon A, Sheinfeld J. Paracolic
recurrence: the importance of wide excision of the spermatic cord at retroperitoneal lymph node dissection. J
Urol. 2002;167:94–96.
10. Cullen MH, Stenning SP, Parkinson MC, et al. Short-course
adjuvant chemotherapy in high-risk stage I nonseminomatous germ cell tumors of the testis: a Medical Research
Council report. J Clin Oncol. 1996;14:1106–1113.
11. Pont J, Albrecht W, Postner G, Sellner F, Angel K, Holtl W.
Adjuvant chemotherapy for high-risk clinical stage I nonseminomatous testicular germ cell cancer: long-term results
of a prospective trial. J Clin Oncol. 1996;14:441–448.
12. Albers P, Siener R, Krege S, Schmelz H, et al. One course of
adjuvant PEB chemotherapy versus retroperitoneal lymph
node dissection in patients with stage I non-seminomatous
germ-cell tumors (NSGCT): results of the German Prospec-

tive Multicenter Trial (Association of Urological Oncology
[AUO]/German Testicular Cancer Study Group [GTCSG]
Trial 01-94). Journal of Clinical Oncology, 2006 ASCO Meeting Abstracts. J Clin Oncol. 2006;24(18 suppl). Abstract 4512.
13. Ehrlich Y, Yossepowitch O, Kedar D, Baniel J. Distribution
of nodal metastases after chemotherapy in nonseminomatous testis cancer: a possible indication for limited dissection. BJU Int. 2006;97:1221–1224.
14. Pfister D, Ohlmann CH, Thuer D, Sahi D, Heidenreich A,
Post-chemotherapy retroperitoneal resection of residual
masses in germ cell cancer with modified template resection. [abstract]. J Urol. 2007;177:330.
15. Witthuhn R, Geeter PD, Albers P. Retroperitoneal residual
tumor (RTR) resection for testicular cancer-template
instead of full bilateral resection. [abstract]. J Urol. 2007;
177:331.

