HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Author Manuscript

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 24.
Published in final edited form as:
Cell. 2015 September 24; 163(1): 39–53. doi:10.1016/j.cell.2015.08.068.

Preclinical Mouse Cancer Models: A Maze of Opportunities and
Challenges
Chi-Ping Day1, Glenn Merlino1,3, and Terry Van Dyke2,3
1Laboratory

of Cancer Biology and Genetics, National Cancer Institute, NIH, Bethesda, MD, USA

2Center

Author Manuscript

for Advanced Preclinical Research, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer
Institute, NIH, Bethesda, MD, USA

Abstract
Significant advances have been made in developing novel therapeutics for cancer treatment, and
targeted therapies have revolutionized the treatment of some cancers. Despite the promise, only
about five percent of new cancer drugs are approved, and most fail due to lack of efficacy. The
indication is that current preclinical methods are limited in predicting successful outcomes. Such
failure exacts enormous cost, both financial and in the quality of human life. This primer explores
the current status, promise and challenges of preclinical evaluation in advanced mouse cancer
models and briefly addresses emerging models for early-stage preclinical development.

Author Manuscript

EXPLOSION OF CANCER THERAPIES AND CHALLENGES TO CLINICAL
SUCCESS

Author Manuscript

Ever-increasing knowledge of cancer biology has yielded countless possibilities for
diagnostic and therapeutic strategies (Fig. 1), while at the same time revealing enormous
disease complexities that challenge clinical success. Such challenges include tumor
microenvironment complexities, intra- and inter-tumor molecular and biological
heterogeneity, systemic and tumoral immune and metabolic response heterogeneity, and the
ability of drug-resistant stem-like cancer initiating cells to repopulate treated cancers
(Pattabiraman and Weinberg, 2014). Too often, experimental targeted therapies designed to
assimilate known disease complexity have proven ineffective, only to highlight the
limitations in our understanding. In contrast to most experimental targeted therapies,
encouraging advancements have been made using a number of cell-based and targeted
immunotherapies, which have produced sustained responses in patients (Page et al., 2014).
However, only a fraction of patients respond to these therapies.
Over the last decade, cancer classification has shifted from relying solely on histiopathologic
properties to including key molecular attributes that can predict therapeutic outcomes. That

3

To whom correspondence should be addressed: GM, gmerlino@helix.nih.gov; TVD, vandyket@mail.nih.gov.
Publisher's Disclaimer: This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our
customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of
the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be
discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.

Day et al.

Page 2

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

certain molecular aberrations are targets for effective therapy first led to clinical practice
when a leukemia (APL) bearing the PML-RARα translocation was shown to be sensitive to
retinoic acid (tretinoin) (Quignon et al., 1997), which targets the RARα component to effect
leukemic cell differentiation. Since that time, targeted therapies have become the standard of
care for CML [imatinib (Gleevec), which inhibits BCR-ABL] and for Her2+ breast cancer
[tratuzumab (Herceptin), which inhibits Her2). Although these successes establish the
promise of targeted therapies, most attempts to attain similar results targeting known
molecular drivers have failed, and the reasons are often elusive because of human research
limitations. Some general principles have been recognized that emphasize the need for
preclinical platforms approximating human cancers. For, example, in each of the noted
successes, single potent cancer drivers present in a significant fraction of patient
malignancies were targeted; however, when a minor fraction of patients are responsive, allcomer clinical trial data may mask the responders. This was first demonstrated in non-small
cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patient trials that initially failed to show significant
responsiveness to EGFR-targeted tyrosine kinase inhibitors; however, the ~10% of patients
whose tumors actually harbored activating EGFR mutations were uniquely sensitive (Lynch
et al., 2004) (Paez et al., 2004). Now, screening of lung cancers for such mutations prior to
therapy is routine practice. Lung cancer is the most prevalent US cancer; if limited to
clinical trials, accurate identification of therapies effective in a fraction of less-common
cancer types may not be possible. Nonetheless, when a specific target was known,
stratification of patients has identified additional effective therapies, such as inhibitors for
BRAF mutant melanomas and ALK translocation-positive NSCLCs (Pagliarini et al., 2015).
Unfortunately, patients treated with single targeted therapies inevitably relapse with cancers
that are resistant to the original drug.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Another challenge in targeting single drivers is the feedback response upon molecular
network disruption that prevents efficacy or causes increased severity. Understanding such
molecular responses can aid in the discovery of more effective combination therapies. In
addition, unbiased molecular queries are showing promise in identifying signatures that
correspond to prognosis and/or therapeutic outcomes. For example, in some cases, unique
transcriptome signatures stratify cancers into distinct therapeutic and/or prognostic
categories and thus improve patient management (e.g., (Rosenwald et al., 2002)). Thus far,
this approach has been used primarily for determining which patients require aggressive
chemotherapy treatment, hence reducing the frequency of over-treatment. Oncotype DX and
FDA-approved MammaPrint tests, both based on distinguishing transcriptome signatures,
are now utilized in the clinic to identify the low risk breast cancer patients to be excluded
from aggressive treatment. Yet, accuracy is not optimal, and numerous challenges currently
prevent broad implementation of molecular signature diagnostics (van't Veer and Bernards,
2008). Additionally, the hope is that molecular signatures can be identified via unbiased
compound or molecular screens that will dictate specific effective treatments even when the
targets are unknown.
Thus, although clearly impactful, the use of cancer molecular constitution to guide clinical
practice is in its infancy, and research to identify parameters that hone specificity and
improve accuracy is ongoing. If confined to human research, achieving maximum

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 24.

Day et al.

Page 3

Author Manuscript

effectiveness is likely impossible due to low frequencies of each molecular subtype within
most cancers and limitations associated with clinical trials. More challenging is
understanding the impact of complex and varied inherited genetic constitution on clinical
outcomes with subsequent conversion to clinical practice of (Hood and Friend, 2011). In this
regard, the sophistication of complex trait evaluation in mice using the collaborative and
diversity crosses may offer a path to discovery (Churchill et al., 2004; Svenson et al., 2012).

Author Manuscript

The above summary provides only a cross-section of the therapeutic and diagnostic
possibilities currently under investigation, and the reader is referred to current review
articles for more comprehensive information (Chin et al., 2011; Hood and Friend, 2011; Yap
et al., 2013). Ultimately, the current limitation to improving cancer patient care within
reasonable timeframes may not be the availability of potentially efficacious therapies; rather,
a major blockade is the lack of a fully developed and integrated set of reliable preclinical
technologies that can navigate complex variables in therapeutic responses and diagnostic
accuracy. To optimally develop efficacious therapies, preclinical research must utilize a
diversity of models that collectively incorporate the biology and genetics dictating
therapeutic outcomes for specific cancers, and yet achieve sufficient throughput. Here we
summarize the value and constraints of mouse cancer models, highlight recent progress
indicating promise, summarize non-mammalian and ex vivo preclinical models, and explore
the needs for, and challenges to, developing robust multi-faceted preclinical platforms for
routine use.

MOUSE CANCER MODELS IN PRECLINICAL RESEARCH

Author Manuscript

Murine cancer models designed to capture the complexities of human cancers currently offer
the most advanced preclinical opportunity for navigating diverse mechanisms that provide
rationale for therapeutic development (Van Dyke and Jacks, 2002). One approach is to probe
pathobiology mechanisms to design effective treatments by perturbation with molecularly
targeted therapies (Olive and Tuveson, 2006). Additionally, the models are being used/
developed as preclinical efficacy determination platforms to guide clinical trial designs
(Singh et al., 2012). However, the application of complex cancer models to clinical research
directives is an emerging science, currently executed in individual settings and with limited
resources. Significant research, ideally in a team-directed, multi-institutional effort, is
required to hone existing technologies into integrated preclinical workflows to optimally
accelerate positive clinical outcomes.

Author Manuscript

A variety of approaches to mouse cancer modeling are now available (Fig. 2), and each has
strengths and weaknesses (Table 1). Here, we address the limitations of standard Cell lineDerived Xenograft (CDX) models, describe genetically and biologically engineered mouse
cancer models [Genetically Engineered Mouse (GEM), GEM-Derived Allograft (GDA),
Patient-Derived Xenograft (PDX) models], review values and constraints, and highlight
recent progress. Thus far, results indicate promise in understanding cancer pathobiology and
in the enhancement of clinical efficacy prediction, but also underscore the need for further
development to achieve consistent reliability.

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 24.

Day et al.

Page 4

Traditional Mouse Models in Therapeutic Development

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Historically, preclinical mouse models have co-evolved with cancer therapy development
(Fig. 3). The earliest models were built through transplantation of murine tumors into
immunocompetent host mice (DeVita and Chu, 2008; Talmadge et al., 2007). These early
mouse-in- mouse isograft models served as workhorses for drug screening during the
1960s-70s, and were successful in identifying a number of effective cytotoxic drugs such as
vincristine and procarbazine (DeVita and Chu, 2008). During the 1980s, researchers
explored mechanisms of metastasis using selected murine and human tumor cell lines. A
series of investigations by Fidler and colleagues demonstrated that metastasis is not random
but site-selective (Fidler and Hart, 1982), and that metastatic patterns are injection sitedependent, supporting the establishment of “orthotopic” models (Talmadge et al., 2007).
Since then, cancer therapeutic development has relied upon the more tractable CDX
transplantation models, in which tumors develop after subcutaneous injection of in vitroestablished human cancer cells into immunocompromised mice (Fig. 2). The cell lines have
been selected over many passages for rapid 2-D growth on plastic in serum-containing
media. The NCI60 call line panel (DeVita and Chu, 2008; Talmadge et al., 2007) provided a
valuable resource from which most CDXs were generated, and recent efforts have greatly
expanded the repertoire (Reinhold et al., 2015). These models are easily established in a
wide variety of laboratory settings and have been successfully used to identify an abundance
of cytotoxic drugs leading to chemotherapy treatments that still dominate clinical cancer
management (Fig. 3).

Author Manuscript

Unfortunately, CDXs have failed to predict human efficacy for most therapies targeted to
cancer-driving proteins (Johnson et al., 2001), as evidenced by the low FDA approval rate of
5– 7% for targeted therapeutics (Sharpless and Depinho, 2006). With an average time from
discovery to clinical practice of 12 years, at an average estimated cost of $0.5–2.0 billion
(Adams and Brantner, 2006) and an immeasurable human price, this low yield forestalls
even a goal to chronically manage, rather than cure, cancers. The observation that most
cancer therapeutics fail in clinical phase II and III efficacy assessment indicates that current
standard preclinical practice inadequately addresses complex challenges to successful
treatment, such as host immune responses, cancer heterogeneity and drug resistance.
Consequently, the system cannot be used to optimize a multitude of variables known to
influence therapeutic outcomes, such as combinatorial therapies, dosing schedules and drug
delivery methods (Al-Lazikani et al., 2012). CDXs continue to be valuable in identifying
non-targeted cytotoxic agents and in primary assessment of drug toxicity (Teicher, 2006),
for analyzing resistance mechanisms (Garraway and Janne, 2012) and in triaging potentially
effective targeted therapies for evaluation in more representative models.

Author Manuscript

Mouse Models Designed after Patient Cancers
Mice and humans are believed to have diverged from each other ~87 million years ago
(Bailey et al., 2013), so naturally there are numerous significant similarities between the two
species, and also many marked disparities, including differences in immune systems and
drug metabolism. Based on the premise that many cancers have been cured in mice and not
in people, many argue that mice are inappropriate for use in therapeutic development (Leaf,
2004). However, it is critical to understand that “cures” have been attained only in CDX

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 24.

Day et al.

Page 5

Author Manuscript

models, thus dismissal of all mouse cancer models as irrelevant is unwarranted. Human
cancers are enormously complex, and their evolutionary etiology generates vast diversity
among and within them, thus challenging the attainment of successful treatments. However,
as knowledge of cancer complexities has increased, so has the ability to design mouse
models that better represent cancer patients. PDX and GEM models develop tumors with the
greatest similarity to human diseases yet achieved, and the past 5 years have seen an
increase in their employment in preclinical research. As with all models, each approach has
its strengths and limitations (Table 1). Early studies suggest promise for improved guidance
in the development of successful clinical treatments (Table 2), and yet also emphasize the
need for further scrutiny and refinement. The following provides a balanced consideration of
model advantages and limitations, their ramifications in obtaining optimally accurate
preclinical data, and the logistical requirements for achieving efficiency, accuracy and
reproducibility.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Patient-Derived Xenograft (PDX) Models—Relative to CDX models,
immunocompromised mice bearing subcutaneous surgically-derived clinical tumor samples
(PDX models) are better aligned with human disease, since intact tissue that preserves tumor
architecture is transferred directly to recipient mice and not compromised by in vitro
adaptation (Fig. 2). PDXs are the only models harboring bona fide tumor targets directly
from the patient, and hence their use in drug discovery is expanding rapidly. Promise for
such models, first developed by (Fiebig et al., 1984), was demonstrated when
chemotherapeutic agents, such as alkaloids and anti-metabolites, were shown to elicit similar
responses in mice and patients (Mattern et al., 1988). In contrast, a study of responses to
numerous cytotoxic agents in NCI60-based CDX models showed that the predictive value
for efficacy was much less impressive (Johnson et al., 2001). Unfortunately, early studies
utilizing PDXs were limited by difficulties in collecting clinical samples and in achieving
sufficient take rates.
The recent resurgence of PDX model use for therapeutic evaluation has been fueled by
significant improvements in clinical sample access and transplantation technology. Cancers
established as PDXs can, in early passages, retain the stromal composition and histologic
and molecular heterogeneity characteristic of those in patients (Hidalgo et al., 2014; Tentler
et al., 2012). Since these properties critically impact therapeutic responses and biomarker
specificity, PDX models provide a preclinical venue for addressing some of the most
challenging barriers to successful patient therapy. Furthermore, human target specificity
allows for direct evaluation of lead human-specific therapeutics, such as antibodies, in
clinical development.

Author Manuscript

Methodologies for PDX establishment and characterization are detailed elsewhere (Hidalgo
et al., 2014; Tentler et al., 2012; Zhang et al., 2013). For some cancers, such as certain
melanomas, lung and colorectal cancers, transplant take rates can reach ≥75%, and the time
required for tumor growth can be as little as 2–4 months. However, these attributes vary
widely depending on sample type and amount (e.g., fresh biopsy tissue, fine needle aspirate,
circulating tumor cells), tumor origin, molecular properties and recipient strain (Mattern et
al., 1988). Consequently, some cancers, such as neuroendocrine, luminal ER+ breast, and

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 24.

Day et al.

Page 6

Author Manuscript

prostate cancers (Rosfjord et al., 2014) are underrepresented. Notably, PDX engraftibility
appears to significantly correlate with clinical aggressiveness (Ilie et al., 2015 ).
Relative to subcutaneous transplants, cancers orthotopically transferred into organs of origin
are more likely to maintain tumor microenvironment characteristics that impact therapeutic
outcomes (Talmadge et al., 2007). However, orthotopic PDX production is technically
challenging, and, for most cancer types, tumor growth and responses must be monitored via
expensive and often laborious longitudinal imaging. Thus, subcutaneous models are
currently exclusively used for preclinical studies.

Author Manuscript

Production of PDX cohorts is by serial tumor transplantation, and, given the likelihood of
change with each passage, therapeutic studies are most representative in low-passage
models. Additionally, human stromal components are maintained for only 2–3 passages,
with mouse stromal elements becoming dominant thereafter (Rosfjord et al., 2014).
Unfortunately, if limited to early passage use, each model represents a limited resource.
Hence, most preclinical studies utilize models that have been expanded, banked, and
developed into significantly-sized cohorts. The extent of sacrifice in accurately predicting
efficacy is presently undefined and likely depends on the mechanism of therapeutic activity.
As such, in propagating PDXs, parental tumor traits should be routinely monitored, and
deviations must be considered in interpreting therapeutic and biomarker data.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

To circumvent immune rejection, human cancers must be transplanted into
immunocompromised mice. Commonly used recipients, such as nude, SCID, and NOD/
SCID strains, vary in the extent of immune impairment (detailed in Supplementary
Information). IL- 2Rγ-deficient NOD/SCID mice (NSG and NOG strains) are the most
severely impaired, and often yield improved take rates. Critically, the requirement for
immunocompromised hosts precludes assessment of arising therapies designed to modulate
immune function (e.g., immune checkpoint inhibitors α-CTLA-4, α-PD-1, α-PD-L1).
Moreover, therapeutic responses in general are likely influenced by preexisting cancerdependent immune phenotypes and immune responses elicited upon therapy-induced tumor
perturbation (Zitvogel et al., 2008). The extent to which compromised immune systems limit
predictive value for a given therapeutic approach will be determined as comparisons
between PDX and clinical outcomes are expanded. Technologies to “humanize” the mouse
immune system by transplanting purified human CD34+ hematopoietic stem cells into
myeloablated NSG/NOG recipients (e.g., “BLT” mice: http://jaxservices.jax.org/invivo/
humanized-BLT-mice.html) and other chimeric strategies have been developed (Legrand et
al., 2009; Shultz et al., 2014). However, the high cost of recipient mice, limitations on
human bone marrow acquisition, engraftment variability, and technical demands currently
preclude use of these models in preclinical therapeutic discovery.
Despite the challenges to routine preclinical application, several PDX studies have proven
effective in paralleling human outcomes (Malaney et al., 2014), in exploring drug resistance
mechanisms (Das Thakur et al., 2013) and in identifying targets for second-line treatment
(Girotti et al., 2015). Programs are also underway to employ PDX models in individualized
precision cancer care. To date, this approach has been most successfully applied to pediatric
patients with advanced sarcomas who have demonstrated the predicted response, sometimes

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 24.

Day et al.

Page 7

Author Manuscript

to drugs not previously associated with this indication (Tentler et al., 2012). Patient-specific
studies are currently limited by expense and relatively long and unpredictable times for
establishing test animals. Since current clinical trials generally involve patients who have
undergone prior failed treatments, results may not always be obtainable in a beneficial
timeframe.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Genetically Engineered Mouse (GEM) Cancer Models—Of all murine cancer
models, GEMs provide the most complete representation of cancer development; cancers
develop from initiation through progression, co-evolve with intrinsic stroma, and possess an
intact immune system (Figs. 1, 2). However, GEM models are the most challenging to work
with effectively, and species differences must be carefully considered in experimental
designs and interpretations. Extensive experience and infrastructure are required to ensure
the use of optimally accurate models and to achieve sufficiently populated well-controlled
preclinical studies. Yet, GEM cancer models provide the only opportunity to evaluate drug
delivery, therapeutic response and biomarker expression for cancers evolving within their
natural microenvironment (autochthonous cancers). These complex dynamic processes
contribute to overall disease properties, and in particular, constitute a source of the inter- and
intra-tumoral heterogeneity that challenges successful therapeutic development.
Additionally, the accuracy of some therapeutic interventions, such as those targeting the
immune system, may depend on the constitution of evolutionary, rather than transplanted,
disease. Indeed, overall, GEMs and GEM-derived models are currently the only preclinical
platform for evaluation and optimization of immunomodulatory therapies. Although some
immune properties differ in mouse and human, there is significant conservation (Bailey et
al., 2013); moreover, many differences can be managed via data interpretation or minimized
by using genetically engineered “humanized” models (Scheer et al., 2013). Finally,
autochthonous GEMs are the only viable models for evaluating prevention therapies.

Author Manuscript

Several reports show that well-designed GEM studies can contribute to improved clinical
trials (Table 2), not only in identifying potentially efficacious therapies but also in predicting
both positive and detrimental effects in molecular subclasses. A major power of GEM
approaches is in the flexibility to create models with precise molecular specificity. With
increasing sophistication, several strategies [summarized below and detailed elsewhere
(Abate-Shen et al., 2014)] have been employed over the past three decades to significantly
enrich our understanding of cancer mechanisms. A plethora of genes frequently altered in
human cancers have been validated as disease drivers in GEMs, thereby facilitating the
evaluation of cancer evolutionary mechanisms and kinetics, susceptible cell and molecular
targets, relative cancer cell and microenvironment roles, and mechanisms of invasion and
metastasis. Indeed, entire natural disease histories can be mapped (Stiedl et al., 2015; Van
Dyke and Jacks, 2002).
In the process of basic discovery, countless GEM cancer models representing a variety of
histiocytic cancer types driven by multiple independent drivers have been produced, and
many are currently used in preclinical evaluations. Although no model can perfectly capture
the human condition, several GEM models tractable for preclinical studies develop cancers
with remarkable molecular and pathologic similarity to their human counterparts. However,
since most established GEMs were created to address basic mechanisms, many do not
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 24.

Day et al.

Page 8

Author Manuscript

accurately model human disease and/or are intractable for effective preclinical evaluation.
Furthermore, each engineering approach can elicit untoward anomalies. Such circumstances
can be accommodated in the interpretation of mechanistic studies, but are the basis for
exclusion of many models for effective preclinical research. Thus, choosing appropriate
models as subjects for preclinical discovery requires a deep understanding of cancer biology
and genetics and also of engineering modalities. The following provides a reasonable guide
for optimizing the value of GEM-based preclinical platforms.

Author Manuscript

Germline GEMs: An extensive array of technologies is employed to engineer the mouse
germline with great precision. By editing the genome of embryonic stem (ES) cells or
zygotes, mice can be programmed for cell type-specific disruption of tumor suppressor
genes via direct mutation or expression of interfering non-coding RNAs (RNAi) (Walrath et
al., 2010), and for oncogene expression at physiological or cancer-analogous levels.
Furthermore, mice can be “humanized” by engineering the expression of drug targets in
relevant cell types (Scheer et al., 2013) so that human-specific targeted therapies, such as
antibody-based drugs, can be tested in GEM models. While traditional methods for
constructing locus-specific genetic changes require significant lead times for engineering,
the recent development of rapid sequence-targeted approaches (Mou et al., 2015) has
significantly reduced this time to weeks instead of many months. In particular, clustered
regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats (CRISPR)/Cas9 technology, which is
efficient and versatile, is accelerating germline engineering and also facilitating rapid
somatic engineering (see below).

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Depending on the strategy, expression of an engineered “event” can be constitutive or
inducible, although gene induction with cell-type and temporal specificity provides the best
possibility for accurately modeling disease development. Inducibility is achieved by
combining cell-specific expression of transcription factors (e.g., doxycycline-modulated tettransactivators) or recombinases (Cre-lox or Flp-FRT) with cognate cis elements linked to a
target gene, or by expressing proteins fused with a hormone-responsive domain (e.g., the
tamoxifen-inducible estrogen receptor domain) (see Supplementary Information). When
multiple distinct inducible systems are combined within the same cancer model, cancerspecific mutations can be induced sequentially in order to map and emulate cancer evolution
[e.g., (Young et al., 2011)] and thus to generate increasingly relevant preclinical models.
Reversible inducibility can be achieved with each of these technologies, although small
molecule-mediated modulation of transcription factors and hormone-responsive domains are
the most tractable for toggling expression on and off (Abate-Shen et al., 2014; Texido,
2013). This approach facilitates the identification of events required to sustain tumor growth
(“oncogene addiction”) [e.g., (Soucek et al., 2008)] and thus of 15 potential therapeutic
targets [e.g., (Kwong et al., 2012)]. Tumor responses to the shutdown of oncogenes or
restoration of functional tumor suppressors within tumors, or appropriate effector cells,
indicate the potential efficacy of targeted therapies, while genetic ablation in the entire
animal predicts the overall toxic effects of specific inhibitors. However, since off-target
effects will not register in this approach, results only indicate whether a given therapy is
potentially efficacious.

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 24.

Day et al.

Page 9

Author Manuscript

A critical, often overlooked, consideration when building GEM cancer models is the
incorporation of known environmental etiologies. However, there are notable examples
wherein certain environmental factors were validated as etiologic agents and thus produced
representative cancer models, including HPV E6/E7-induced cervical cancer ((Riley et al.,
2003), UV accelerated melanomas [BRAFV600E, (Cao et al., 2013), mutant HRAS
(Kannan et al., 2003) and HGF/MET (Noonan et al., 2001) models], and Helicobacterfueled gastrointestinal cancers (Rogers and Fox, 2004). Exposure of GEM cancer models to
environmental mutagens can be used to approximate the mutation load of many human
cancers (e.g., (Westcott et al., 2015)), which influences therapeutic outcomes such as in
drug-resistant relapse and neoantigen load-dependent immunomodulation.

Author Manuscript

The extent to which findings in GEMs extend to patients depends on engineering mice based
on our understanding of human cancer etiologic drivers, cellular origins, heterogeneity,
pathogenesis, and clinical properties. To recapitulate human cancer development, clinically
relevant driver gene(s) or pathways must be perturbed in relevant target cells. For adult
cancers, gene expression should be targeted to adult, rather than developing, organs.
Furthermore, for optimal modeling, cancers should progress in a relevant sequence, since the
order of events impacts properties of evolving tumors. Ideally, both initiation and
progression to aggressive cancer should be evaluated using individual and relevant
combinations of molecular aberrations thought to be causal in humans. High phenotypic
penetrance and consistency among animals within a lineage are essential for tractability.

Author Manuscript

The accuracy of disease modeling depends on actually achieving the specificity envisioned
in experimental designs, which is not always realized because of technical limitations and/or
gaps in current knowledge. Of course, engineered sequences must be validated, but it is also
critical that expected transcriptional specificities be confirmed. Unless targeted to specific
genomic locations, transgenes insert randomly, and expression can be dramatically altered
depending on insertion sites. Furthermore, transgenes may not carry all necessary regulatory
signals. Hence, several founder lines should be established and fully characterized before
selecting accurate representative lines for modeling cancers. Even targeted genetic changes
have the potential to alter gene regulation. Thus, specificity, levels, and range of expression
must be evaluated for each model; aberrant expression usually alters disease and can also
yield ectopic phenotypes that hinder tractability and invalidate data. Yet, a surprising
number of existing engineered strains, including those driving inducible expression, are not
fully characterized. Hence, when choosing cancer models for preclinical studies, it is
essential that expression and disease patterns are well established and accurately represented
(see Supplementary Information).

Author Manuscript

Non-germline GEM models: While autochthonous GEM models have great utility, most
are not tractable for large-scale screening of multiple anti-cancer drug candidates due to high
cost, long timelines, extensive complex breeding, and/or difficulties in obtaining
synchronous tumorigenesis. Preclinical analysis of metastatic lesions is particularly
challenging; primary tumors arise stochastically with no reliable timetable, as in humans,
and multiple tumors often develop. Thus, extensive longitudinal tomographic imaging is
required to enroll mice bearing similarly sized tumors for therapeutic evaluation. Such
procedures require specialized expertise and can be too expensive and time-consuming for
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 24.

Day et al.

Page 10

Author Manuscript

first-line drug screening. Several strategies to produce “non-germline” GEMs have been
developed that bypass breeding, reduce expense, and, in some cases, improve flexibility,
uniformity and timelines (Heyer et al., 2010).

Author Manuscript

GEM-Derived Allograft (GDA) Models: GDAs marry the genetic and biologic human
cancer similarities of GEM models with the relative ease of transplantation technology of
PDXs (Heyer et al., 2010). Without in vitro manipulation, tissue fragments derived from
tailor-made GEM tumors are expanded by transplantation, orthotopically or subcutaneously,
into immunocompetent syngeneic hosts (Fig. 2). Thus, tumors can be banked to facilitate
large cohort production, and efficacy studies can be performed in industry-friendly
timeframes (~3–8 weeks), allowing for increased throughput. Indeed, a battery of treatments
can be evaluated in GDAs prior to (preclinical) or parallel with (“co-clinical”) clinical trials
(Table 2). As with GEMs, immune systems are fully functional in GDAs, and interactions
among tumor cells and their intrinsic microenvironments are maintained.
GDAs are particularly amenable to the evaluation of metastatic disease, which is responsible
for most cancer-related deaths and is rarely assessed preclinically. In GDAs, metastases
occur from single primary tumors, which can be resected to allow time for metastatic
progression (Day et al., 2012). This approach also emulates clinical care standards for many
cancers and facilitates comparing therapeutic responses of both primary and metastatic
disease derived from the same GEM cancer.

Author Manuscript

As with PDXs, serial passaging increases the likelihood that tumor properties will deviate
from parental samples due to further evolution and/or selection of sub-compartment growth;
thus, transplanted tumors should be monitored for molecular and biological similarity to
founding tumors. Additionally, since transplanted tumors do not evolve in situ, GDAs
cannot legitimately be used for prevention studies, and some therapeutic outcomes may
differ between autochthonous GEMs and GDAs. Given the potential tradeoff of accuracy for
tractability, candidate therapies efficacious in GDAs should be subsequently validated in the
original GEM models prior to clinical studies.

Author Manuscript

Stem Cell-derived Chimeras and Somatic Models: Mice chimeric for genetically
engineered cells are created through implantation of GEM-derived or genetically
manipulated ES cells into pre-implantation embryos. Since oncogenic alleles are engineered
ex vivo in ES cells, many mice with the desired genetic composition can be generated in the
absence of complex, laborious and long-term breeding schemes. The potential value of this
approach was first highlighted in the production, analysis and preclinical evaluation of lung
adenocarcinoma (Zhou et al., 2010). Once constructed, ES cells harboring the desired alleles
can be derived from blastocysts produced by a penultimate cross. In turn, this bankable
resource can be used to generate mice chimeric for mutant and wild type cells (Premsrirut et
al., 2011), facilitating conditional RNAi-mediated knockdown of target expression via
manipulation of ES cells, which can then be used to generate chimeric mouse cohorts (Dow
et al., 2012).
Notably, the advent of CRISPR/Cas9 technology, and with it the ability to perform complex
gene editing with relative ease and speed, has dramatically enhanced the value of non-

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 24.

Day et al.

Page 11

Author Manuscript

germline GEM approaches. Several groups have precisely modified oncogenes and tumor
suppressor genes directly in somatic cells of adult mice, significantly improving the
feasibility and flexibility of this genetic engineering approach (Chen et al., 2015; Dow et al.,
2015; Maddalo et al., 2014; Platt et al., 2014). These models also better mimic human
cancer relative to standard germline GEMs in that tumors typically arise from fewer cells in
the context of normal stroma

Author Manuscript

In a variation of the non-germline GEM approach, genetically engineered stem or progenitor
cells can be transplanted into syngeneic mice, where they can home to appropriate tissue
targets and become the cells of origin for developing tumors (Heyer et al., 2010). These
models are especially amenable for studying hematopoietic cancers, where the stem cells are
well characterized and the host can be prepared for receiving transplanted cells by using
irradiation to create a favorable niche for the engineered hematopoietic stem/progenitor cells
to colonize. Successes have also been reported for other cancers (Heyer et al., 2010).

LOGISTICS FOR OPTIMIZING PRECLINICAL STUDIES

Author Manuscript

Extensive complexities that impede successful drug development in cancer patients dictate
that faithful murine cancer models must themselves be complex. Both PDX- and GEMbased models offer this opportunity. However, their very complexity warrants that
informative models are generated and characterized with substantial knowledge of cancer
mechanisms and modeling limitations, rigorous animal maintenance and production, routine
phenotypic and genetic monitoring, appropriate strategies for therapeutic response
evaluation, and consideration of multiple variables that impact data interpretation. To
achieve routine therapeutic and biomarker development that positively influence patient
care, preclinical studies must be (1) well-powered with significant cohort sizes and several
evaluation parameters, (2) goal-oriented and efficiently executed, and (3) highly
reproducible.
Experimental Considerations

Author Manuscript

Once models that optimally represent human disease have been selected, clinical relevance
relies on experimental parameters that are comparable and/or translatable to human practice.
These include, but are not limited to, dosing levels and schedules, drug pharmacology,
response evaluation methods, and endpoint choices. Therapeutic agents’ pharmacokinetics
(PK) and ability to modify targets when known (pharmacodynamics; PD) should be
measured in tumor-bearing mice. The fate of administered drugs is largely determined by
drug metabolizing enzymes essential for their absorption, distribution, metabolism, and
excretion (ADME). Therefore, the differences that exist between the central metabolizing
enzymes in mice and humans, the cytochrome P450 (CYP) family, constitute a confounding
factor in extrapolating drug PKs and the responses they elicit. Since the maximum tolerated
dose (MTD) of many drugs in mice is significantly higher than in humans, it is essential to
evaluate efficacy by using doses achievable in patients. However, this is possible only when
human PKs are known; for example, for repurposing FDA-approved drugs, for preclinical
evaluation of combination therapies that comprise single phase II agents, and for co-clinical
experimentation wherein mouse and human evaluations are performed in parallel, such that
clinical toxicity results are available. Even when appropriate human dosing is known, there
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 24.

Day et al.

Page 12

Author Manuscript

is no simple formula for approximating comparable doses to achieve the same PK in mice,
and instead experimental determination is required (Sparreboom et al., 1996). Yet, when
evaluating numerous agents, this approach is not possible; rather, subsequent coordination of
clinical results and further preclinical dose escalation experiments are needed for optimal
response assessment.
In an effort to apply a genetic solution to the PK problem, a number of humanized CYP
GEMs have been developed (Gonzalez, 2004; Scheer and Wolf, 2014). Despite these
advances, the humanized alleles have not yet been incorporated into GEM/PDX cancer
models. Such an undertaking will require significant resources, substantial time, and
community effort to generate and evaluate revised models. Nonetheless, the investment will
be worthwhile if the gap between laboratory mice and patients is narrowed.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

The choice of preclinical experimental endpoints to determine therapeutic responses is also
critical for achieving outcomes most representative of those in patients (Talmadge et al.,
2007). In prevention studies, efficacy is based on disease-free or minimized status. For
intervention therapy, efficacy is justified by overall survival and should not be judged solely
on tumor growth inhibition. The importance of survival endpoints is highlighted by a
pancreatic cancer clinical trial designed based on short-term GEM studies demonstrating
reduced tumor volumes in response to sonic hedgehog pathway inhibition combined with
gemcitabine (standard of care) compared to gemcitabine alone (Olive et al., 2009).
Unfortunately, the trial terminated early due to increased disease dissemination and poor
patient survival. However, subsequent survival studies in the GEM model replicated the
clinical result, demonstrating that initial drug effects did not predict survival outcomes.
Hence, the model appropriately predicted patient responses, but only with a meaningful
endpoint (Rhim et al., 2014).

Author Manuscript

Tumor growth and therapeutic responses in subcutaneous transplant models, such as CDXs,
PDXs and GDAs can be monitored by standard caliper measurement. Tumor growth in
autochthonous and orthotopic transplant models (other than skin and breast models) and in
all metastatic models must be monitored by longitudinal imaging strategies (Wang et al.,
2015). High-resolution 3-D images are compiled from sectional images generated by
tomographic scanning of signals from X-ray (CAT), magnetic field-excited atoms (MRI),
and injected radioactive tracers (SPECT; PET) (see Supplementary Information).
Tomographic imaging requires specific expertise for accurate execution and is relatively
expensive and time-consuming. Optical imaging, which detects visualized wavelengths
generated from excited fluorescent chromophores [e.g., jellyfish green fluorescent protein
(GFP)] or firefly luminescent reactions (e.g., luciferase), can be employed for detection in
real-time and is cost- and time-effective; however, these methods do not produce accurate
tomographic data and are limited by tissue absorption. Notably, traceable marker proteins
required for optical imaging are xenogeneic with respect to mammals and can induce
immune responses in immunocompetent mice, which can result in inconsistent activity, graft
rejection and/or inhibition of metastasis, confounding data interpretation. Hence, effective
employment of xenogeneic reporters is restricted to short-term studies or studies in
immunocompromised models, limiting their usefulness in preclinical science (Steinbauer et
al., 2003). However, this problem can be circumvented, at least in part, by employing host

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 24.

Day et al.

Page 13

Author Manuscript

mice genetically engineered to express respective markers at an early age, which elicits
tolerance and thus recognition as “self” (Day et al., 2014).

Author Manuscript

Several additional points associated with preclinical trial design are worth emphasizing.
Tumor mass is a critical factor in preclinical studies; vastly different outcomes can result
from initiating drug dosing when tumors are different sizes. Moreover, human tumors are
typically much larger than their mouse counterparts, which could affect how preclinical data
translates to the clinic. It is also vital to run preclinical trials with a sufficient number of
animals in each experimental arm to achieve statistically significant results; ensuring
statistical power must be considered a priority for any preclinical study. Therefore, it is
prudent to consult biostatisticians prior to finalizing study designs. Finally, the influence of
genetic background on tumor behavior can be significant, and must be considered when
designing model systems. Generation and analysis of mouse cancer models within the
collaborative cross, a large panel of inbred mouse strains (Churchill et al., 2004), could also
provide important insights into the impact of complex germline genetics on tumor
predisposition and drug response.
Infrastructure

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Critical work establishing the utility of murine cancer models in preclinical research has
taken place in independent laboratories over the last 20 years. However, because of severe
resource limitations, the absolute need to perpetuate basic investigator-driven mechanistic
discovery, and an increasingly competitive environment wherein success is measured by
individual merit, the opportunity for laboratories to execute preclinical studies beyond the
pilot level is limited. Recent reports indicate that most preclinical outcomes at this level are
not reproduced when studies are not conducted with robust experimental standards, such as
inclusion of appropriate positive and negative controls, execution with sufficient statistical
power, attention to pharmacological considerations, and implementation of blind evaluations
(Begley and Ellis, 2012; Begley and Ioannidis, 2015). Adherence to all these standards is
simply not possible in individual laboratories under current conditions. To increase
accessibility to preclinical evaluation in murine cancer models, several institutions have
established core facilities that perform studies using dedicated staff and common
methodologies. These cores represent a necessary step to improve reproducibility in
preclinical outcomes. Yet, most core facilities do not have the resources to instate the full
range of skills and technologies indicated in “Experimental Considerations” above to ensure
optimal quality and replication of clinical approaches. Additionally, conducting wellpowered blinded studies requires a sizable dedicated staff, which is generally not achievable
in academic cores. Finally, global improvement of murine preclinical research must include
the generation of an increased range of well-characterized, technically tractable and
optimally accurate models vetted for preclinical evaluation, along with the development of
exportable standard operating procedures (SOPs).
To address these needs, over the past decade several organized efforts have been established
that are dedicated to: (1) improving the accuracy and reproducibility of preclinical drug
development platforms; (2) developing and exporting SOPs and models; (3) understanding
cancer pathobiology through targeted therapeutics; and/or (4) applying the outcomes of

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 24.

Day et al.

Page 14

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

optimized preclinical therapeutic and biomarker studies to clinical research for improved
patient care. Common attributes in each case include: (1) a sufficient number of dedicated
staff covering a broad range of expertise; (2) access to sophisticated instrumentation and
technology for a full range of small animal imaging modalities, histological and molecular
pathology, genomic technologies, pharmacological methods, model generation, and
appropriate maintenance and quality control for a large “bank” of models; and (3) data
management strategies. Examples of such organizations include the Center for Advanced
Preclinical Research (CAPR; Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer Center and the
Frederick National Laboratory for Cancer Research, https://ccr.cancer.gov/capr-home);
Mouse Clinic for Cancer and Aging research (MCCA; Netherlands Cancer Institute and the
European Research Institute for the Biology of Aging, http://www.mccanet.nl/); Center for
Co-Clinical Trials (MD Anderson, http://www.cancermoonshots.org/platforms/center-forco-clinical-trials/); and the Co-Clinical Project: Informing Clinical Trials Using Preclinical
Mouse Models (Harvard Medical School). Similar efforts focused specifically on pancreatic
ductal carcinoma include the Mouse Hospitals (Columbia Medical School, http://
www.olivelab.org/mouse-hospital.html, and Cold Spring Harbor Laboratories).

EMERGING AND FUTURE PROSPECTS

Author Manuscript

This PRIMER focuses on the attributes and limitations of murine cancer models that
currently best emulate our existing understanding of human cancers, an ever-expanding
awareness of which is required to drive development of effective preclinical platforms. The
high cost and low yield of efficacious therapies, despite clinical evaluation of countless
potential therapeutics, motivate the use and development of preclinical PDX and GEM in
the guidance of clinical research. Ultimately, collective employment of a variety of model
systems will likely be required to successfully impact clinical outcomes.

Author Manuscript

Optimal mouse studies are sufficiently cumbersome so as to preclude the simultaneous
evaluation of numerous drugs and unbiased libraries; high-throughput in vitro screening
systems are essential precursors to in vivo evaluations. Despite their limitations, cancer cell
lines have proven valuable in uncovering mechanisms of acquired drug resistance for in
vitro drug screens (Torrance et al., 2001), and several technologies such as RNAi and
CRISPR/Cas9 methods have enhanced their versatility (Corcoran et al., 2013; Shalem et al.,
2014). However, cancer cell-line screens identify only drugs that target intrinsic cancer cell
functions. Targeting tumor stroma or microenvironment/tumor cell interactions requires the
use of in vitro systems that approximate the composition of cancers that preserve important
cancer constituents, cell-cell interactions, and architectural features. To this end, several ex
vivo platforms have been developed, including spheroids, organoids, microtumors (tumor
tissue in synthetic matrix), and tissue slices (Burdett et al., 2010; Mendoza et al., 2010;
Yamada and Cukierman, 2007). While optimization and validation of emerging ex vivo
models in drug screening is ongoing, many may be incorporated into early phases of drug
development, resulting in efficient triage and increased success in vivo.
In addition to ex vivo systems, non-murine whole organism drug screens have shown
promise for early triage (Gao et al., 2014). Due to their relatively small size, low cost and
high fecundity, invertebrates such as flies (Drosophila) and nematodes (C. elegans) have

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 24.

Day et al.

Page 15

Author Manuscript

shown promise. Furthermore, zebrafish (Danio rerio) are particularly well suited for high
throughput screens because of rapid extra-uterine development, embryonic transparency and
recently developed pigment deficiency to facilitate imaging (Barriuso et al., 2015). Using
automated high content and high throughput platforms, zebrafish can be used for chemical,
genetic, and pathway-based screens (Lieschke and Currie, 2007). Notably, data generated
from zebrafish models have been used in clinical trials. For example, the pyrimidine
biosynthesis enzyme DHODH was identified in zebrafish screens as a novel melanoma drug
target, and a clinical trial is underway in which patients are being treated with the DHODH
inhibitor leflunomide (Hagedorn et al., 2014; White et al., 2011). Zebrafish have also been
used as hosts for human and mouse xenografts to monitor invasiveness, angiogenesis and
drug responses in real time (Zhang et al., 2015). However, as with xenotransplantation of
human cells into mice, inappropriate tumor-host interactions could limit the relevance and
translational value of fish models.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Optimization of preclinical models that can impact clinical practice will require overcoming
challenges in several arenas (Table 3). However, achieving this goal will undoubtedly
require expansion and integration of organized efforts by many factions. The sophistication
of such preclinical studies requires expertise in many disparate fields and necessitates
involvement of scientists in the public sector, who often possess critical expertise and
mechanisms not available in the private sector. However, communication and data-sharing
among investigators and organizations, though essential for efficient optimization of
effective preclinical standard operating procedures, are limited. A future priority will be to
develop interactive web-based systems to house and mine experimental databases and SOPs
for community sharing. Such organized initiatives will begin to meet the significant and
immediate need to revolutionize the accuracy of preclinical assessment and to develop and
utilize PDX- and GEM-based disease models in research to increase the number of effective
treatments reaching clinical trials and thus, cancer patients.

Author Manuscript

In summary, we now have a wealth of model systems that show early promise in
establishing robust preclinical assessment platforms for improving clinical success. Each
system has specific and sometimes unique value, and all will undoubtedly play a significant
role in varied aspects of future preclinical studies. At this junction, systematic comparisons
in the prediction of human outcomes by distinct model systems has not been carried out and
is needed in order to construct sound preclinical operating principles. The selection of
models for a given study will undoubtedly depend on the required purpose. While 2-D cell
cultures are useful for identifying cancer cell-intrinsic vulnerabilities, 3-D ex vivo methods
incorporate assessment of multicellular interactions. Non-mammalian animals further offer
reasonable throughput in complex biological systems, while PDX and GEM models provide
the best representation of tumor microenvironments, physiological responses, and disease
pathology. GEMs further allow for evaluation of immune system interventions and of
responses unique to in situ developed disease. Ultimately, the complementary use of many
of these models and continual efforts to improve their effectiveness will propel preclinical
studies to a new era of cancer therapeutics development. This is a uniquely exciting era
wherein preclinical models, rather than serving simply to confirm clinical outcomes, have
the potential to routinely fuel optimized clinical success.

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 24.

Day et al.

Page 16

Author Manuscript

Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.

Acknowledgments
We thank Mr. Jonathan Marie (www.thefrenzybear.com) for Figure 1 artwork, Drs. James Doroshow
[Developmental Therapeutic Program (DTP), National Cancer Institute], Melinda Hollingshead (DTP), and Neal
Goodwin (Champions Oncology, Inc.) for guidance on PDX studies, and Yurong Song for contributions to Table 2.

References

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Abate-Shen, C.; Politi, K.; Chodosh, L.; Olive, K. Mouse Models of Cancer: A Laboratory Manual.
CSHL Press; 2014.
Ablain J, de The H. Retinoic acid signaling in cancer: The parable of acute promyelocytic leukemia.
International journal of cancer Journal international du cancer. 2014; 135:2262–2272. [PubMed:
25130873]
Adams CP, Brantner VV. Estimating the cost of new drug development: is it really 802 million
dollars? Health affairs (Project Hope). 2006; 25:420–428. [PubMed: 16522582]
Al-Lazikani B, Banerji U, Workman P. Combinatorial drug therapy for cancer in the post-genomic era.
Nat Biotechnol. 2012; 30:679–692. [PubMed: 22781697]
Bailey M, Christoforidou Z, Lewis MC. The evolutionary basis for differences between the immune
systems of man, mouse, pig and ruminants. Vet Immunol Immunopathol. 2013; 152:13–19.
[PubMed: 23078904]
Barriuso J, Nagaraju R, Hurlstone A. Zebrafish: A New Companion for Translational Research in
Oncology. Clin Cancer Res. 2015; 21:969–975. [PubMed: 25573382]
Beatty GL, Torigian DA, Chiorean EG, Saboury B, Brothers A, Alavi A, Troxel AB, Sun W,
Teitelbaum UR, Vonderheide RH, et al. A phase I study of an agonist CD40 monoclonal antibody
(CP-870,893) in combination with gemcitabine in patients with advanced pancreatic ductal
adenocarcinoma. Clin Cancer Res. 2013; 19:6286–6295. [PubMed: 23983255]
Begley CG, Ellis LM. Drug development: Raise standards for preclinical cancer research. Nature.
2012; 483:531–533. [PubMed: 22460880]
Begley CG, Ioannidis JPA. Reproducibility in science: improving the standard for basic and preclinical
research. Circ Res. 2015; 116:116–126. [PubMed: 25552691]
Burdett E, Kasper FK, Mikos AG, Ludwig JA. Engineering tumors: a tissue engineering perspective in
cancer biology. Tissue Eng Part B Rev. 2010; 16:351–359. [PubMed: 20092396]
Cao J, Wan L, Hacker E, Dai X, Lenna S, Jimenez-Cervantes C, Wang Y, Leslie NR, Xu GX,
Widlund HR, et al. MC1R is a potent regulator of PTEN after UV exposure in melanocytes.
Molecular cell. 2013; 51:409–422. [PubMed: 23973372]
Casanovas O, Hicklin DJ, Bergers G, Hanahan D. Drug resistance by evasion of antiangiogenic
targeting of VEGF signaling in late-stage pancreatic islet tumors. Cancer cell. 2005; 8:299–309.
[PubMed: 16226705]
Chen S, Sanjana NE, Zheng K, Shalem O, Lee K, Shi X, Scott DA, Song J, Pan JQ, Weissleder R, et
al. Genome-wide CRISPR Screen in a Mouse Model of Tumor Growth and Metastasis. Cell. 2015;
160:1246–1260. [PubMed: 25748654]
Chen Z, Akbay E, Mikse O, Tupper T, Cheng K, Wang Y, Tan X, Altabef A, Woo S-A, Chen L, et al.
Co-clinical trials demonstrate superiority of crizotinib to chemotherapy in ALK-rearranged nonsmall cell lung cancer and predict strategies to overcome resistance. Clin Cancer Res. 2014;
20:1204–1211. [PubMed: 24327273]
Chen Z, Cheng K, Walton Z, Wang Y, Ebi H, Shimamura T, Liu Y, Tupper T, Ouyang J, Li J, et al. A
murine lung cancer co-clinical trial identifies genetic modifiers of therapeutic response. Nature.
2012; 483:613–617. [PubMed: 22425996]
Chin L, Andersen JN, Futreal PA. Cancer genomics: from discovery science to personalized medicine.
Nat Med. 2011; 17:297–303. [PubMed: 21383744]

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 24.

Day et al.

Page 17

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Chiu CW, Nozawa H, Hanahan D. Survival benefit with proapoptotic molecular and pathologic
responses from dual targeting of mammalian target of rapamycin and epidermal growth factor
receptor in a preclinical model of pancreatic neuroendocrine carcinogenesis. J Clin Oncol. 2010;
28:4425–4433. [PubMed: 20823411]
Churchill GA, Airey DC, Allayee H, Angel JM, Attie AD, Beatty J, Beavis WD, Belknap JK, Bennett
B, Berrettini W, et al. The Collaborative Cross, a community resource for the genetic analysis of
complex traits. Nat Genet. 2004; 36:1133–1137. [PubMed: 15514660]
Corcoran RB, Cheng KA, Hata AN, Faber AC, Ebi H, Coffee EM, Greninger P, Brown RD, Godfrey
JT, Cohoon TJ, et al. Synthetic lethal interaction of combined BCL-XL and MEK inhibition
promotes tumor regressions in KRAS mutant cancer models. Cancer cell. 2013; 23:121–128.
[PubMed: 23245996]
Das Thakur M, Salangsang F, Landman AS, Sellers WR, Pryer NK, Levesque MP, Dummer R,
McMahon M, Stuart DD. Modelling vemurafenib resistance in melanoma reveals a strategy to
forestall drug resistance. Nature. 2013; 494:251–255. [PubMed: 23302800]
Day CP, Carter J, Bonomi C, Hollingshead M, Merlino G. Preclinical therapeutic response of residual
metastatic disease is distinct from its primary tumor of origin. International journal of cancer
Journal international du cancer. 2012; 130:190–199. [PubMed: 21312195]
Day CP, Carter J, Weaver Ohler Z, Bonomi C, El Meskini R, Martin P, Graff-Cherry C, Feigenbaum
L, Tuting T, Van Dyke T, et al. "Glowing head" mice: a genetic tool enabling reliable preclinical
image-based evaluation of cancers in immunocompetent allografts. PLoS One. 2014; 9:e109956.
[PubMed: 25369133]
DeVita VT Jr, Chu E. A history of cancer chemotherapy. Cancer research. 2008; 68:8643–8653.
[PubMed: 18974103]
Dow LE, Fisher J, O'Rourke KP, Muley A, Kastenhuber ER, Livshits G, Tschaharganeh DF, Socci
ND, Lowe SW. Inducible in vivo genome editing with CRISPR-Cas9. Nat Biotechnol. 2015;
33:390–394. [PubMed: 25690852]
Dow LE, Premsrirut PK, Zuber J, Fellmann C, McJunkin K, Miething C, Park Y, Dickins RA, Hannon
GJ, Lowe SW. A pipeline for the generation of shRNA transgenicmice. Nat Protoc. 2012; 7:374–
393. [PubMed: 22301776]
Faca VM, Song KS, Wang H, Zhang Q, Krasnoselsky AL, Newcomb LF, Plentz RR, Gurumurthy S,
Redston MS, Pitteri SJ, et al. A mouse to human search for plasma proteome changes associated
with pancreatic tumor development. PLoS Med. 2008; 5:e123. [PubMed: 18547137]
Fidler IJ, Hart IR. Biological diversity in metastatic neoplasms: origins and implications. Science.
1982; 217:998–1003. [PubMed: 7112116]
Fiebig HH, Schuchhardt C, Henss H, Fiedler L, Lohr GW. Comparison of tumor response in nude
mice and in the patients. Behring Inst Mitt. 1984:343–352. [PubMed: 6477362]
Frese KK, Neesse A, Cook N, Bapiro TE, Lolkema MP, Jodrell DI, Tuveson DA. nab-Paclitaxel
potentiates gemcitabine activity by reducing cytidine deaminase levels in a mouse model of
pancreatic cancer. Cancer discovery. 2012; 2:260–269. [PubMed: 22585996]
Gao G, Chen L, Huang C. Anti-cancer drug discovery: update and comparisons in yeast, Drosophila,
and zebrafish. Curr Mol Pharmacol. 2014; 7:44–51. [PubMed: 24993385]
Garraway LA, Janne PA. Circumventing cancer drug resistance in the era of personalized medicine.
Cancer discovery. 2012; 2:214–226. [PubMed: 22585993]
Girotti MR, Lopes F, Preece N, Niculescu-Duvaz D, Zambon A, Davies L, Whittaker S, Saturno G,
Viros A, Pedersen M, et al. Paradox-Breaking RAF Inhibitors that Also Target SRC Are Effective
in Drug-Resistant BRAF Mutant Melanoma. Cancer cell. 2015; 27:85–96. [PubMed: 25500121]
Goldstein D, El-Maraghi RH, Hammel P, Heinemann V, Kunzmann V, Sastre J, Scheithauer W, Siena
S, Tabernero J, Teixeira L, et al. nab-Paclitaxel plus gemcitabine for metastatic pancreatic cancer:
long-term survival from a phase III trial. Journal of the National Cancer Institute. 2015; 107
Gonzalez FJ. Cytochrome P450 humanised mice. Human genomics. 2004; 1:300–306. [PubMed:
15588489]
Hagedorn EJ, Durand EM, Fast EM, Zon LI. Getting more for your marrow: boosting hematopoietic
stem cell numbers with PGE2. Exp Cell Res. 2014; 329:220–226. [PubMed: 25094063]

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 24.

Day et al.

Page 18

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Hanash S, Taguchi A. Application of proteomics to cancer early detection. Cancer journal. 2011;
17:423–428.
Heyer J, Kwong LN, Lowe SW, Chin L. Non-germline genetically engineered mouse models for
translational cancer research. Nature reviews Cancer. 2010; 10:470–480. [PubMed: 20574449]
Hidalgo M, Amant F, Biankin AV, Budinska E, Byrne AT, Caldas C, Clarke RB, de Jong S, Jonkers J,
Maelandsmo GM, et al. Patient-derived xenograft models: an emerging platform for translational
cancer research. Cancer discovery. 2014; 4:998–1013. [PubMed: 25185190]
Hood L, Friend SH. Predictive, personalized, preventive, participatory (P4) cancer medicine. Nat Rev
Clin Oncol. 2011; 8:184–187. [PubMed: 21364692]
Ilie M, Nunes M, Blot L, Hofman V, Long-Mira E, Butori C, Selva E, Merino-Trigo A, Venissac N,
Mouroux J, et al. Setting up a wide panel of patient-derived tumor xenografts of non-small cell
lung cancer by improving the pre analytical steps. Cancer medicine. 2015; 4:201–211. [PubMed:
25470237]
Janne PA, Shaw AT, Pereira JR, Jeannin G, Vansteenkiste J, Barrios C, Franke FA, Grinsted L,
Zazulina V, Smith P, et al. Selumetinib plus docetaxel for KRAS-mutant advanced non-small-cell
lung cancer: a randomised, multicentre, placebo-controlled, phase 2 study. The Lancet Oncology.
2013; 14:38–47. [PubMed: 23200175]
Johnson JI, Decker S, Zaharevitz D, Rubinstein LV, Venditti JM, Schepartz S, Kalyandrug S,
Christian M, Arbuck S, Hollingshead M, et al. Relationships between drug activity in NCI
preclinical in vitro and in vivo models and early clinical trials. Br J Cancer. 2001; 84:1424–1431.
[PubMed: 11355958]
Kannan K, Sharpless NE, Xu J, O'Hagan RC, Bosenberg M, Chin L. Components of the Rb pathway
are critical targets of UV mutagenesis in a murine melanoma model. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A.
2003; 100:1221–1225. [PubMed: 12538879]
Kortmann U, McAlpine JN, Xue H, Guan J, Ha G, Tully S, Shafait S, Lau A, Cranston AN, O'Connor
MJ, et al. Tumor growth inhibition by olaparib in BRCA2 germline-mutated patient-derived
ovarian cancer tissue xenografts. Clin Cancer Res. 2011; 17:783–791. [PubMed: 21097693]
Kwong LN, Costello JC, Liu H, Jiang S, Helms TL, Langsdorf AE, Jakubosky D, Genovese G, Muller
FL, Jeong JH, et al. Oncogenic NRAS signaling differentially regulates survival and proliferation
in melanoma. Nat Med. 2012; 18:1503–1510. [PubMed: 22983396]
Leaf C. Why we're losing the war on cancer (and how to win it). Fortune. 2004; 149:76–82. 84–76, 88
passim. [PubMed: 15069734]
Legrand N, Ploss A, Balling R, Becker PD, Borsotti C, Brezillon N, Debarry J, de Jong Y, Deng H, Di
Santo JP, et al. Humanized mice for modeling human infectious disease: challenges, progress, and
outlook. Cell Host Microbe. 2009; 6:5–9. [PubMed: 19616761]
Lieschke GJ, Currie PD. Animal models of human disease: zebrafish swim into view. Nature reviews
Genetics. 2007; 8:353–367.
Lunardi A, Pandolfi PP. A co-clinical platform to accelerate cancer treatment optimization. Trends in
molecular medicine. 2015; 21:1–5. [PubMed: 25466492]
Lynch TJ, Bell DW, Sordella R, Gurubhagavatula S, Okimoto RA, Brannigan BW, Harris PL, Haserlat
SM, Supko JG, Haluska FG, et al. Activating mutations in the epidermal growth factor receptor
underlying responsiveness of non-small-cell lung cancer to gefitinib. The New England journal of
medicine. 2004; 350:2129–2139. [PubMed: 15118073]
Maddalo D, Manchado E, Concepcion CP, Bonetti C, Vidigal JA, Han Y-C, Ogrodowski P, Crippa A,
Rekhtman N, de Stanchina E, et al. In vivo engineering of oncogenic chromosomal rearrangements
with the CRISPR/Cas9 system. Nature. 2014; 516:423–427. [PubMed: 25337876]
Malaney P, Nicosia SV, Dave V. One mouse, one patient paradigm: New avatars of personalized
cancer therapy. Cancer letters. 2014; 344:1–12. [PubMed: 24157811]
Mattern J, Bak M, Hahn EW, Volm M. Human tumor xenografts as model for drug testing. Cancer
Metastasis Rev. 1988; 7:263–284. [PubMed: 3067903]
Mendoza A, Hong S-H, Osborne T, Khan MA, Campbell K, Briggs J, Eleswarapu A, Buquo L, Ren L,
Hewitt SM, et al. Modeling metastasis biology and therapy in real-time in the mouse lung. J Clin
Invest. 2010; 120:2979–2988. [PubMed: 20644255]

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 24.

Day et al.

Page 19

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Mou H, Kennedy Z, Anderson DG, Yin H, Xue W. Precision cancer mouse models through genome
editing with CRISPR-Cas9. Genome Med. 2015; 7:53. [PubMed: 26060510]
Noonan FP, Recio JA, Takayama H, Duray P, Anver MR, Rush WL, De Fabo EC, Merlino G.
Neonatal sunburn and melanoma in mice. Nature. 2001; 413:271–272. [PubMed: 11565020]
Olive KP, Jacobetz MA, Davidson CJ, Gopinathan A, McIntyre D, Honess D, Madhu B, Goldgraben
MA, Caldwell ME, Allard D, et al. Inhibition of Hedgehog signaling enhances delivery of
chemotherapy in a mouse model of pancreatic cancer. Science. 2009; 324:1457–1461. [PubMed:
19460966]
Olive KP, Tuveson DA. The use of targeted mouse models for preclinical testing of novel cancer
therapeutics. Clin Cancer Res. 2006; 12:5277–5287. [PubMed: 17000660]
Paez JG, Janne PA, Lee JC, Tracy S, Greulich H, Gabriel S, Herman P, Kaye FJ, Lindeman N, Boggon
TJ, et al. EGFR mutations in lung cancer: correlation with clinical response to gefitinib therapy.
Science. 2004; 304:1497–1500. [PubMed: 15118125]
Page DB, Postow MA, Callahan MK, Allison JP, Wolchok JD. Immunemodulation in cancer with
antibodies. Annual review of medicine. 2014; 65:185–202.
Pagliarini R, Shao W, Sellers WR. Oncogene addiction: pathways of therapeutic response, resistance,
and road maps toward a cure. EMBO reports. 2015; 16:280–296. [PubMed: 25680965]
Pandolfi PP. Oncogenes and tumor suppressors in the molecular pathogenesis of acute promyelocytic
leukemia. Human molecular genetics. 2001; 10:769–775. [PubMed: 11257111]
Pattabiraman DR, Weinberg RA. Tackling the cancer stem cells - what challenges do they pose? Nat
Rev Drug Discov. 2014; 13:497–512. [PubMed: 24981363]
Pietras K, Hanahan D. A multitargeted, metronomic, and maximum-tolerated dose" chemo-switch"
regimen is antiangiogenic, producing objective responses and survival benefit in a mouse model of
cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2005; 23:939–952. [PubMed: 15557593]
Platt RJ, Chen S, Zhou Y, Yim MJ, Swiech L, Kempton HR, Dahlman JE, Parnas O, Eisenhaure TM,
Jovanovic M, et al. CRISPR-Cas9 knockin mice for genome editing and cancer modeling. Cell.
2014; 159:440–455. [PubMed: 25263330]
Premsrirut PK, Dow LE, Kim SY, Camiolo M, Malone CD, Miething C, Scuoppo C, Zuber J, Dickins
RA, Kogan SC, et al. A rapid and scalable system for studying gene function in mice using
conditional RNA interference. Cell. 2011; 145:145–158. [PubMed: 21458673]
Quignon F, Chen Z, de The H. Retinoic acid and arsenic: towards oncogene-targeted treatments of
acute promyelocytic leukaemia. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1997; 1333:M53–61. [PubMed: 9426202]
Raymond E, Dahan L, Raoul J-L, Bang Y-J, Borbath I, Lombard-Bohas C, Valle J, Metrakos P, Smith
D, Vinik A, et al. Sunitinib malate for the treatment of pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors. The
New England journal of medicine. 2011; 364:501–513. [PubMed: 21306237]
Reinhold WC, Varma S, Rajapakse VN, Luna A, Sousa FG, Kohn KW, Pommier YG. Using drug
response data to identify molecular effectors, and molecular "omic" data to identify candidate
drugs in cancer. Hum Genet. 2015; 134:3–11. [PubMed: 25213708]
Rhim AD, Oberstein PE, Thomas DH, Mirek ET, Palermo CF, Sastra SA, Dekleva EN, Saunders T,
Becerra CP, Tattersall IW, et al. Stromal elements act to restrain, rather than support, pancreatic
ductal adenocarcinoma. Cancer cell. 2014; 25:735–747. [PubMed: 24856585]
Riley RR, Duensing S, Brake T, Munger K, Lambert PF, Arbeit JM. Dissection of human
papillomavirus E6 and E7 function in transgenic mouse models of cervical carcinogenesis. Cancer
research. 2003; 63:4862–4871. [PubMed: 12941807]
Rogers AB, Fox JG. Inflammation and Cancer. I. Rodent models of infectious gastrointestinal and
liver cancer. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2004; 286:G361–366. [PubMed: 14766534]
Romer JT, Kimura H, Magdaleno S, Sasai K, Fuller C, Baines H, Connelly M, Stewart CF, Gould S,
Rubin LL, et al. Suppression of the Shh pathway using a small molecule inhibitor eliminates
medulloblastoma in Ptc1(+/−)p53(−/−) mice. Cancer cell. 2004; 6:229–240. [PubMed: 15380514]
Rosenwald A, Wright G, Chan WC, Connors JM, Campo E, Fisher RI, Gascoyne RD, MullerHermelink HK, Smeland EB, Giltnane JM, et al. The use of molecular profiling to predict survival
after chemotherapy for diffuse large-B-cell lymphoma. The New England journal of medicine.
2002; 346:1937–1947. [PubMed: 12075054]

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 24.

Day et al.

Page 20

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Rosfjord E, Lucas J, Li G, Gerber H-P. Advances in patient-derived tumor xenografts: from target
identification to predicting clinical response rates in oncology. Biochem Pharmacol. 2014;
91:135–143. [PubMed: 24950467]
Rudin CM, Hann CL, Laterra J, Yauch RL, Callahan CA, Fu L, Holcomb T, Stinson J, Gould SE,
Coleman B, et al. Treatment of medulloblastoma with hedgehog pathway inhibitor GDC-0449.
The New England journal of medicine. 2009; 361:1173–1178. [PubMed: 19726761]
Scheer N, Snaith M, Wolf CR, Seibler J. Generation and utility of genetically humanized mouse
models. Drug Discov Today. 2013; 18:1200–1211. [PubMed: 23872278]
Scheer N, Wolf CR. Genetically humanized mouse models of drug metabolizing enzymes and
transporters and their applications. Xenobiotica. 2014; 44:96–108. [PubMed: 23845026]
Shalem O, Sanjana NE, Hartenian E, Shi X, Scott DA, Mikkelsen TS, Heckl D, Ebert BL, Root DE,
Doench JG, et al. Genome-scale CRISPR-Cas9 knockout screening in human cells. Science (New
York, N Y ). 2014; 343:84–87.
Sharpless NE, Depinho RA. The mighty mouse: genetically engineered mouse models in cancer drug
development. Nat Rev Drug Discov. 2006; 5:741–754. [PubMed: 16915232]
Shultz LD, Goodwin N, Ishikawa F, Hosur V, Lyons BL, Greiner DL. Human cancer growth and
therapy in immunodeficient mouse models. Cold Spring Harb Protoc. 2014; 2014:694–708.
[PubMed: 24987146]
Singh M, Murriel CL, Johnson L. Genetically engineered mouse models: closing the gap between
preclinical data and trial outcomes. Cancer research. 2012; 72:2695–2700. [PubMed: 22593194]
Soucek L, Whitfield J, Martins CP, Finch AJ, Murphy DJ, Sodir NM, Karnezis AN, Swigart LB, Nasi
S, Evan GI. Modelling Myc inhibition as a cancer therapy. Nature. 2008; 455:679–683. [PubMed:
18716624]
Sparreboom A, van Tellingen O, Nooijen WJ, Beijnen JH. Nonlinear pharmacokinetics of paclitaxel in
mice results from the pharmaceutical vehicle Cremophor EL. Cancer research. 1996; 56:2112–
2115. [PubMed: 8616858]
Stebbing J, Paz K, Schwartz GK, Wexler LH, Maki R, Pollock RE, Morris R, Cohen R, Shankar A,
Blackman G, et al. Patient-derived xenografts for individualized care in advanced sarcoma.
Cancer. 2014; 120:2006–2015. [PubMed: 24705963]
Steinbauer M, Guba M, Cernaianu G, Kohl G, Cetto M, Kunz-Schughart LA, Geissler EK, Falk W,
Jauch KW. GFP-transfected tumor cells are useful in examining early metastasis in vivo, but
immune reaction precludes long-term tumor development studies in immunocompetent mice. Clin
Exp Metastasis. 2003; 20:135–141. [PubMed: 12705634]
Stiedl P, Grabner B, Zboray K, Bogner E, Casanova E. Modeling cancer using genetically engineered
mice. Methods Mol Biol. 2015; 1267:3–18. [PubMed: 25636462]
Svenson KL, Gatti DM, Valdar W, Welsh CE, Cheng R, Chesler EJ, Palmer AA, McMillan L,
Churchill GA. High-resolution genetic mapping using the Mouse Diversity out bred population.
Genetics. 2012; 190:437–447. [PubMed: 22345611]
Szabova L, Bupp S, Kamal M, Householder DB, Hernandez L, Schlomer JJ, Baran ML, Yi M,
Stephens RM, Annunziata CM, et al. Pathway-specific engineered mouse allograft models
functionally recapitulate human serous epithelial ovarian cancer. PLoS One. 2014; 9:e95649.
[PubMed: 24748377]
Talmadge JE, Singh RK, Fidler IJ, Raz A. Murine models to evaluate novel and conventional
therapeutic strategies for cancer. Am J Pathol. 2007; 170:793–804. [PubMed: 17322365]
Teicher BA. Tumor models for efficacy determination. Mol Cancer Ther. 2006; 5:2435–2443.
[PubMed: 17041086]
Tentler JJ, Tan AC, Weekes CD, Jimeno A, Leong S, Pitts TM, Arcaroli JJ, Messersmith WA,
Eckhardt SG. Patient-derived tumour xenografts as models for oncology drug development. Nat
Rev Clin Oncol. 2012; 9:338–350. [PubMed: 22508028]
Texido G. Genetically engineered animal models for in vivo target identification and validation in
oncology. Methods Mol Biol. 2013; 986:281–305. [PubMed: 23436419]
Torrance CJ, Agrawal V, Vogelstein B, Kinzler KW. Use of isogenic human cancer cells for highthrough put screening and drug discovery. Nat Biotechnol. 2001; 19:940–945. [PubMed:
11581659]

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 24.

Day et al.

Page 21

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

van't Veer LJ, Bernards R. Enabling personalized cancer medicine through analysis of gene-expression
patterns. Nature. 2008; 452:564–570. [PubMed: 18385730]
Van Dyke T, Jacks T. Cancer modeling in the modern era: progress and challenges. Cell. 2002;
108:135–144. [PubMed: 11832204]
Walrath JC, Hawes JJ, Van Dyke T, Reilly KM. Genetically engineered mouse models in cancer
research. Adv Cancer Res. 2010; 106:113–164. [PubMed: 20399958]
Wang Y, Tseng J-C, Sun Y, Beck AH, Kung AL. Noninvasive imaging of tumor burden and molecular
pathways in mouse models of cancer. Cold Spring Harb Protoc. 2015; 2015:135–144. [PubMed:
25646505]
Westcott PMK, Halliwill KD, To MD, Rashid M, Rust AG, Keane TM, Delrosario R, Jen K-Y, Gurley
KE, Kemp CJ, et al. The mutational landscapes of genetic and chemical models of Kras-driven
lung cancer. Nature. 2015; 517:489–492. [PubMed: 25363767]
White RM, Cech J, Ratanasirintrawoot S, Lin CY, Rahl PB, Burke CJ, Langdon E, Tomlinson ML,
Mosher J, Kaufman C, et al. DHODH modulates transcriptional elongation in the neural crest and
melanoma. Nature. 2011; 471:518–522. [PubMed: 21430780]
Yamada KM, Cukierman E. Modeling tissue morphogenesis and cancer in 3D. Cell. 2007; 130:601–
610. [PubMed: 17719539]
Yap TA, Omlin A, de Bono JS. Development of therapeutic combinations targeting major cancer
signaling pathways. J Clin Oncol. 2013; 31:1592–1605. [PubMed: 23509311]
Young NP, Crowley D, Jacks T. Uncoupling cancer mutations reveals critical timing of p53 loss in
sarcomagenesis. Cancer research. 2011; 71:4040–4047. [PubMed: 21512139]
Zhang B, Xuan C, Ji Y, Zhang W, Wang D. Zebrafish xenotransplantation as a tool for in vivo cancer
study. Familial cancer. 2015
Zhang X, Claerhout S, Prat A, Dobrolecki LE, Petrovic I, Lai Q, Landis MD, Wiechmann L, Schiff R,
Giuliano M, et al. A renewable tissue resource of phenotypically stable, biologically and
ethnically diverse, patient-derived human breast cancer xenograft models. Cancer research. 2013;
73:4885–4897. [PubMed: 23737486]
Zhou Y, Rideout WM 3rd, Zi T, Bressel A, Reddypalli S, Rancourt R, Woo J-K, Horner JW, Chin L,
Chiu MI, et al. Chimeric mouse tumor models reveal differences in pathway activation between
ERBB family- and KRAS-dependent lung adenocarcinomas. Nat Biotechnol. 2010; 28:71–78.
[PubMed: 20023657]
Zitvogel L, Apetoh L, Ghiringhelli F, Kroemer G. Immunological aspects of cancer chemotherapy. Nat
Rev Immunol. 2008; 8:59–73. [PubMed: 18097448]

Author Manuscript
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 24.

Day et al.

Page 22

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Fig. 1. Targeting the tumor and its microenvironment

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Genetic alterations produce oncogenes that drive signaling pathways in cancer cells
facilitating survival and growth. However, tumor cells also cooperate with stromal cells,
including vessels, fibroblasts and various immune cells, to acquire growth factors, an energy
supply and protection from host defenses. These key autonomous and stromal mechanisms
constitute potential therapeutic targets both locally, and for immune cells also in the
circulating blood and distant immune organs. 1) Cancer cell growth driven by a mutated
kinase (“Driver Gene”) can be targeted by small-molecule inhibitors. 2) Oncogenic
signaling promoting uncontrolled cell cycling can be disrupted (e.g., anti-metabolites, antimicrotubule agents, DNA-damaging agents). 3 & 4) Growth of cancer cells stimulated by
release of either host-derived hormones (3, concentric purple circles from blood) or growth
factors (4, yellow arrows from myeloid-derived suppressor cells [MDSC], fibroblasts,
macrophages, blood vessels) can be targeted by hormone inhibitors (e.g., anti-hormones or
biosynthesis inhibitors) or growth factor receptor inhibitors, respectively. 5) Tumor growth
requires development of new vasculature for enhanced nutrient demands, which can be
blocked by anti-angiogenic agents. 6 & 7) Tumor cells can shift the inflammatory response
to an immunosuppressive mode (e.g., activation of CTLA-4 and PD-1 in T cells or PD-L1 in
cancer cells). The immunosuppressive environment can be reversed via treatment of
immunomodulatory cytokines (6, lightning bolt; e.g., IL-2, IL-15) or immune checkpoint
inhibitors (7, e.g., anti-CTLA-4, anti-PD-1, or anti-PD-L1), resuming anti-cancer activity of
T cells. The cellular interactions in immune responses are marked by double-headed arrows.
(Artwork by Jonathan Marie)

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 24.

Day et al.

Page 23

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Fig. 2. Current state of preclinical cancer modeling

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Preclinical mouse models can be defined according to the species source of tumor, how it is
created, and how it is manipulated. Upper Panel) Tumors derived from human patients, and
other non-murine species, can be directly transplanted into immunocompromised mice to
form Patient-Derived Xenograft (PDX) models. Alternatively, these same tumors can
produce established cell lines maintained in vitro as cell cultures, and transplanted into
immunocompromised mice to form Cell line-Derived Xenograft (CDX) models. Since the
hosts of these tumors need be immunocompromised, they are useful only for testing the
efficacy of chemotherapeutics (Chemo) and targeted small-molecule inhibitors (Targeted).
Xenograft models derived from canine patients also belong to this category, but are not
shown here. Lower Panel) Mice can be engineered to generate tumors of human relevance
with respect to histopathology, etiology and molecular wiring. Offspring of such Genetically
Engineered Mice (GEM) can serve directly as preclinical models themselves, in which case
the tumor is treated at its precise point of origin. Notably, model building can be streamlined
by using non-germline approaches, one of which is to genetically modify ES cells and study
the arising chimeric mice without time-consuming breeding schemes. Alternatively, tumors
harvested from GEMs can be transplanted and expanded into fully immunocompetent
syngeneic hosts, forming GEM-Derived Allograft (GDA) models. Syngeneic models allow
preclinical studies of not only chemotherapeutic and small-molecule drugs, but also of all
varieties of immunotherapeutic agents (Immuno).

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 24.

Day et al.

Page 24

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Fig. 3. Timeline of key preclinical cancer model developments since 1950

As the conceptual targets of cancer treatment progressed from actively dividing cells to
oncogenic signaling and immune checkpoints, preclinical models (green boxes, upper part)
and cancer therapies (pink boxes, lower part) co-evolved accordingly. This evolution was
highly dependent on technical advances, resulting in waves of activity. For example, recent
development of fully immunocompromised mice and diverse syngeneic GEM models has
significantly promoted PDX and GDA models, respectively, for preclinical cancer studies.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 24.

Day et al.

Page 25

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Fig. 4. Generation and application of metastatic GDA models

Author Manuscript

(I) GDAs are derived from tumors arising in mice genetically tailored to produce humanrelevant models. Relevance can be further enhanced by including appropriate etiological
agents (lighting bolt). Arising tumors are resected, labeled with imageable markers, and
directly transplanted into fully immunocompetent syngeneic mice at either subcutaneously
or at orthotopic. Harvested tumors can be labeled with a variety of imageable markers to
monitor growth and drug response, and to FACS purify for analysis. Once successfully
transplanted, GDAs can be expanded for banking and/or preclinical studies. Mice bearing
GDAs can be treated directly with individual or combination drugs (*) to study therapeutic
efficacy at the “primary” tumor site (II). (III and IV) Alternatively, GDAs can be resected
using survival surgery, and treatments focused on metastatic disease, simulating first-line
treatment in human patients following primary tumor resection. GDA models allow for
interventive treatment of metastatic disease once detected (III), or preventive adjuvant
treatment initiated immediately following surgical resection (IV). GDA models are thus well
suiting for studying primary or metastatic disease, with interventive or preventive
approaches using pathway-targeted small molecule and/or immunotherapeutic agents.

Author Manuscript
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 24.

Functional

Low/Variable

High/Variable (model dependent)
Expandable

Limited

Expandable/Limited

Expandable

High

Highly Limited

Standard

Tissue
Availability

Moderate

High

Moderate

Low

High

Disease
Complexity

High

Moderate/Variable

High

High

Low

Experimental
Robustness

Bypassed

Intact

Bypassed

Bypassed

Intact

Initiation/
Progression

Yes

Yes

No

Yes

Irrelevant

Feasibility in
Pathway
Engineering

Moderate

High

High

Low

Very High

Cost

*
CDX models have been shown to be limited as predictors of clinical outcome. However, they continue to be valuable for evaluating resistance mechanisms, for identifying non-targeted cytotoxic agents, for assessing drug toxicity, and as a platform to triage potentially effective
targeted therapies. In general, the longer cells are in culture, the further they drift from normal tumor evolution, and the less relevant they become.

Natural

Allogeneic

Functional

Xenogeneic

Deficient

Patient cancer-Derived Xenografts (PDX)

GEM-Derived Allografts (GDA)

Xenogeneic

Deficient

Cancer Cell Line-Derived Xenografts (CDX)

Genetically Engineered Mice (GEM)

Natural

Functional

Clinical Trials

Human
Relevance

Situational* (passage number dependent)

Author Manuscript

Microenvironment
Context

Author Manuscript

Immune
Status of
the Host

Author Manuscript

Comparison of clinical and preclinical model properties

Author Manuscript

Table 1
Day et al.
Page 26

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 24.

Author Manuscript

Author Manuscript

Pancreas (Neuro-endocrine)

Pancreas (PDA)

Pancreas (PDA)

Lung (NSCLC)

Lung (NSCLC)

Various Sarcomas

Ovarian (SEOC)

Preclinical

Co-clinical

Co-clinical

Co-clinical

Co-clinical

Co-clinical

Postclinical

Pancreas (Neuro-endocrine)

Preclinical

Medulla-blastoma

Hematopoietic (APL)

Preclinical

Preclinical

Cancer Type

Trial Design

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 24.
GDA; PDX

PDX

GEM

GEM

GEM

GEM

GEM

GEM

GEM

GEM

Model Type

Author Manuscript

Representative clinically relevant mouse trials

(Pietras and Hanahan, 2005;
Raymond et al., 2011); FDA
approved for pancreatic cancer
treatment in 2011
(Romer et al., 2004; Rudin et
al., 2009)

(Chiu et al., 2010)

(Frese et al., 2012; Goldstein et
al., 2015)

(Beatty et al., 2013)

(Chen et al., 2012; Janne et al.,
2013)

(Chen et al., 2014; Lunardi and
Pandolfi, 2015)

(Stebbing et al., 2014)

(Kortmann et al., 2011;
Szabova et al., 2014)

Demonstrated the efficacy
of an Shh pathway small
molecule inhibitor,
validated in clinic
Demonstrated efficacy of
combining drugs targeting
EGFR and mTOR
Provided mechanistic
insight into clinical
cooperation between
Gemcitabine and NabPaclitaxel
Demonstrated that
targeting stroma was
effective in treatment of
metastatic PDA
Validation of improved
response of adding
Selumetinib to Docetaxel
treatment
GEM model predicted
clinical outcome of drug
combinations
PDX testing predicted
clinical outcome of drug
combinations
Validation of treatment
efficacy in BRCA mutant
tumors in both GDA and
PDX models

GDC-0449 (SMO inhibitor)

Erlotinib
Rapamycin

Gemcitabine
Nab-Paclitaxel

CD40 monoclonal antibody
Gemcitabine

Selumetinib
Docetaxel
Crizotinib
Docetaxel
Pemetrexed

RIP1-Tag2

LSL-KrasG12D
LSL-Trp53R172H
Pdx-1-Cre
LSL-KrasG12D
LSL-Trp53R172H
Pdx-1-Cre
KRASG12D
p53fl/fl
Lkb1fl/fl

Various chemotherapies

Olaparib
Cisplatin

N/A

RB/p53-deficient
BRCA1/2-deficient

EML4-ALK fusion

Ptc1+/−
P53−/−

Sunitinib

Demonstrated the efficacy
of Sunitinib plus Imatinib,
validated in clinic

RIP1-Tag2

(Ablain and de The, 2014;
Pandolfi, 2001)

Demonstrated the efficacy
of retinoic acid plus As2O3
in specific APL subtypes,
validated in clinic

Retinoic acid

PML-RARα fusion
PLZF-RARα fusion

Relevant Publications

Significance

Drugs/Treatment

Engineered Drivers

Author Manuscript

Table 2
Day et al.
Page 27

Pancreas (Neuro-endocrine)

Lung (NSCLC)

Pancreas (PDA)

Biomarker

Biomarker

Author Manuscript

Postclinical

Author Manuscript
GEM

GEM; Carcinoge n-induced

GDA

Model Type

(Faca et al., 2008)

Used in-depth proteomic
analyses to identify
candidate markers
applicable to human cancer

N/A

(Hanash and Taguchi, 2011)

Used in-depth quantitative
MS-based proteomics to
profile plasma proteins

KrasG12D
Ink4a/Arffl/fl
Pdx-1-Cre

(Casanovas et al., 2005)

Identification of
mechanisms of resistance
to anti-angiogenic therapies

Anti-VEGFR1 & antiVEGFR2 antibodies

N/A

Relevant Publications

Significance

Drugs/Treatment

Various Models

RIP1-Tag2

Engineered Drivers

Author Manuscript

Cancer Type

Author Manuscript

Trial Design

Day et al.
Page 28

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 24.

Day et al.

Page 29

Table 3

Author Manuscript

Future challenges and possible solutions for mouse preclinical cancer trials
Issue

Model improvement

Study setting

Author Manuscript

Extrapolation to human
disease

Challenges

Possible Solutions

More precise spatial and temporal control of
genetic alterations in mouse tissues

Improve technologies for genomic editing (e.g., CRISPR) and
regulating gene activity

Human relevance of stroma, immune system
and therapeutic targets in mouse cancer
models

“Humanize” genes via genetic engineering and immune
system by reconstitution with human hematopoietic stem cells

Recapitulation of the tumor heterogeneity
found in human cancers

Introduce environmental etiological factors (e.g., UV in skin
cancer models); allow tumor evolution by avoiding
inappropriately dominant oncogenic drivers

Difficulties in diagnosis and treatment of
large cohorts of mice as individual patients

Synchronize tumorigenesis by adopting inducible GEM or
transplantable GDA systems

Disease progression and clinically relevant
endpoints in preclinical study

Improve biomarkers and imaging techniques for tumor
tracking; adopt clinically-relevant endpoints (e.g.,
progression-free survival)

Integration of pathologic, genomic,
bioinformatic, molecular and immunological
analyses

Develop/share improved and standardized protocols; organize
workflows with core facilities

Evaluating effects of life style on therapeutic
outcomes

Consider gender, diet, and exposure to environmental factors
in protocol development; consider effects of microbiota

Physiological difference between mouse and
human

“Humanize” aspects of mice; consider scaling law in PD/PK,
life span, hemodynamics, etc.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 24.

