Europe PMC Funders Group
Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 02.
Published in final edited form as:
Nature. ; 534(7605): 47–54. doi:10.1038/nature17676.

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Landscape of somatic mutations in 560 breast cancer whole
genome sequences
A full list of authors and affiliations appears at the end of the article.

Abstract
We analysed whole genome sequences of 560 breast cancers to advance understanding of the
driver mutations conferring clonal advantage and the mutational processes generating somatic
mutations. 93 protein-coding cancer genes carried likely driver mutations. Some non-coding
regions exhibited high mutation frequencies but most have distinctive structural features probably
causing elevated mutation rates and do not harbour driver mutations. Mutational signature analysis
was extended to genome rearrangements and revealed 12 base substitution and six rearrangement
signatures. Three rearrangement signatures, characterised by tandem duplications or deletions,
appear associated with defective homologous recombination based DNA repair: one with deficient
BRCA1 function; another with deficient BRCA1 or BRCA2 function; the cause of the third is
unknown. This analysis of all classes of somatic mutation across exons, introns and intergenic
regions highlights the repertoire of cancer genes and mutational processes operative, and
progresses towards a comprehensive account of the somatic genetic basis of breast cancer.

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Introduction
The mutational theory of cancer proposes that changes in DNA sequence, termed “driver”
mutations, confer proliferative advantage upon a cell, leading to outgrowth of a neoplastic
clone1. Some driver mutations are inherited in the germline, but most arise in somatic cells

Users may view, print, copy, and download text and data-mine the content in such documents, for the purposes of academic research,
subject always to the full Conditions of use:http://www.nature.com/authors/editorial_policies/license.html#terms
Corresponding authors: Gu Kong (gkong@hanyang.ac.kr), Serena Nik-Zainal (snz@sanger.ac.uk), Mike Stratton
(mrs@sanger.ac.uk), Alain Viari (Alain.Viari@inria.fr).
Accession Numbers
Raw data have been submitted to the European-Genome Phenome Archive under the overarching accession number
EGAS00001001178 (please see Supplementary Notes for breakdown by data type).
Author Contributions
S.N-Z, M.R.S designed the study, analysed data and wrote the manuscript.
H.R.M., J.S, M.Ramakrishna, D.G, X.Z. performed curation of data and contributed towards genomic and copy number analyses.
M.S., A.B.B., M.R.A., O.C.L., A.L., M.Ringner, contributed towards curation and analysis of non-genomic data (transcriptomic,
miRNA, methylation).
I.M., L.B.A., D.C.W., P.V.L., S.Morganella, Y.S.J., contributed towards specialist analyses.
G.T., G.K., A.L.R., A-L.B-D., J.W.M.M., M.J.v.d.V., H.G.S., E.B., A.Borg., A.V., P.A.F., P.J.C., designed the study, drove the
consortium and provided samples.
S.Martin was project coordinator.
S.McL., S.O.M., K.R., contributed operationally.
S-M.A., S.B., J.E.B., A.Brooks., C.D., L.D., A.F., J.A.F., G.K.J.H., S.J.J., H.-Y.K., T.A.K., S.K., H.J.L., J.-Y.L., I.P., X.P., C.P., F.G.R.G., G.R., A.M.S., P.T.S., O.A.S., S.T., I.T., G.G.V.d.E., P.V., A.V.-S., L.Y., C.C., L.v.V., A.T., S.K., B.K.T.T., J.J., N.t.U., C.S., P.N.S.,
S.V.L., S.R.L., J.E.E., A.M.T contributed pathology assessment and/or samples.
A.Butler., S.D., M.G., D.R.J., Y.L., A.M., V.M., K.R., R.S., L.S., J.T. contributed IT processing and management expertise.
All authors discussed the results and commented on the manuscript.

Nik-Zainal et al.

Page 2

during the lifetime of the cancer patient, together with many “passenger” mutations not
implicated in cancer development1. Multiple mutational processes, including endogenous
and exogenous mutagen exposures, aberrant DNA editing, replication errors and defective
DNA maintenance, are responsible for generating these mutations1–3.

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Over the past five decades, several waves of technology have advanced the characterisation
of mutations in cancer genomes. Karyotype analysis revealed rearranged chromosomes and
copy number alterations. Subsequently, loss of heterozygosity analysis, hybridisation of
cancer-derived DNA to microarrays and other approaches provided higher resolution
insights into copy number changes4–8. Recently, DNA sequencing has enabled systematic
characterisation of the full repertoire of mutation types including base substitutions, small
insertions/deletions, rearrangements and copy number changes9–13, yielding substantial
insights into the mutated cancer genes and mutational processes operative in human cancer.

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

As for many cancer classes, most currently available breast cancer genome sequences target
protein-coding exons8,11–15. Consequently, there has been limited consideration of
mutations in untranslated, intronic and intergenic regions, leaving central questions
pertaining to the molecular pathogenesis of the disease unresolved. First, the role of
activating driver rearrangements16–18 forming chimeric (fusion) genes/proteins or
relocating genes adjacent to new regulatory regions as observed in haematological and other
malignancies19. Second, the role of driver substitutions and indels in non-coding regions of
the genome20,21. Common inherited variants conferring susceptibility to human disease are
generally in non-coding regulatory regions and the possibility that similar mechanisms
operate somatically in cancer was highlighted by the discovery of somatic driver
substitutions in the TERT gene promoter22,23. Third, which mutational processes generate
the somatic mutations found in breast cancer2,24. Addressing this question has been
constrained because exome sequences do not inform on genome rearrangements and capture
relatively few base substitution mutations, thus limiting statistical power to extract the
mutational signatures imprinted on the genome by these processes24,25.
Here we analyse whole genome sequences of 560 cases in order to address these and other
questions and to pave the way to a comprehensive understanding of the origins and
consequences of somatic mutations in breast cancer.

Results
Cancer genes and driver mutations
The whole genomes of 560 breast cancers and non-neoplastic tissue from each individual
(556 female and four male) were sequenced (Fig.S1, Supplementary Table 1). 3,479,652
somatic base substitutions, 371,993 small indels and 77,695 rearrangements were detected,
with substantial variation in the number of each between individual samples (Fig.1A,
Supplementary Table 3). Transcriptome sequence, microRNA expression, array based copy
number and DNA methylation data were obtained from subsets of cases.
To identify new cancer genes, we combined somatic substitutions and indels in proteincoding exons with data from other series12–15,26, constituting a total of 1,332 breast

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 02.

Nik-Zainal et al.

Page 3

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

cancers, and searched for mutation clustering in each gene beyond that expected by chance.
Five cancer genes were found for which evidence was previously absent or equivocal
(MED23, FOXP1, MLLT4, XBP1, ZFP36L1), or for which the mutations indicate the gene
acts in breast cancer in a recessive rather than in a dominant fashion, as previously reported
in other cancer types (Supplementary Methods section 7.4 for detailed descriptions). From
published reports on all cancer types (http://cancer.sanger.ac.uk/census), we then compiled a
list of 727 human cancer genes (Supplementary Table 12). Based on driver mutations found
previously, we defined conservative rules for somatic driver base substitutions and indel
mutations in each gene and sought mutations conforming to these rules in the 560 breast
cancers. 916 likely driver mutations of these classes were identified (Fig.1B, Supplementary
Table 14, Extended Data Figure 1).

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

To explore the role of genomic rearrangements as driver mutations16,18,19,27, we sought
predicted in-frame fusion genes that might create activated, dominant cancer genes. 1,278
unique and 39 infrequently recurrent in-frame gene fusions were identified (Supplementary
Table 15). Many of the latter, however, were in regions of high rearrangement density,
including amplicons28 and fragile sites, and their recurrence is likely attributable to
chance27. Furthermore, transcriptome sequences from 260 cancers did not show expression
of these fusions and generally confirmed the rarity of recurrent in-frame fusion genes. By
contrast, recurrent rearrangements interrupting the gene footprints of CDKN2A, RB1,
MAP3K1, PTEN, MAP2K4, ARID1B, FBXW7, MLLT4 and TP53 were found beyond the
numbers expected from local background rearrangement rates, indicating that they
contribute to the driver mutation burden of recessive cancer genes. Several other recurrently
rearranged genomic regions were observed, including dominantly-acting cancer genes ETV6
and ESR1 without consistent elevation in expression levels, L1-retrotransposition sites29
and fragile sites. The significance of these recurrently rearranged regions remain unclear
(Extended Data Figure 2).
Incorporation of recurrent copy number changes, including homozygous deletions and
amplifications, generated a final tally of 1,628 likely driver mutations in 93 cancer genes
(Fig.1B). At least one driver was identifiable in 95% of cancers. The 10 most frequently
mutated genes were TP53, PIK3CA, MYC, CCND1, PTEN, ERBB2, chr8:ZNF703/FGFR1
locus, GATA3, RB1 and MAP3K1 (Fig.1B, Extended Data Figure 1) and accounted for 62%
of drivers.
Recurrent somatic mutations in non-coding genomic regions
To investigate non-coding somatic driver substitutions and indels, we searched for noncoding genomic regions with more mutations than expected by chance (Fig.2A,
Supplementary Table 16, Extended Data Figure 3). The promoter of PLEKHS1 (pleckstrin
homology domain containing, family S member 1) exhibited recurrent mutations at two
genomic positions30 (Fig.2A), the underlined bases in the sequence CAGCAAGC
TGAACA GCTTGCTG (as previously reported30). The two mutated bases are flanked on
either side by 9bp of palindromic sequence forming inverted repeats31. Most cancers with
these mutations showed many base substitutions of mutational signatures 2 and 13 that have
been attributed to activity of APOBEC DNA-editing proteins that target the TCN sequence

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 02.

Nik-Zainal et al.

Page 4

motif. One of the mutated bases is a cytosine in a TCA sequence context (shown above as
the reverse complement, TGA) at which predominantly C>T substitutions were found. The
other is a cytosine in ACA context which showed both C>T and C>G mutations.

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

The TGAACA core sequence was mutated at the same two positions at multiple locations
elsewhere in the genome (Supplementary Table 16C) where the TGAACA core was also
flanked by palindromes (inverted repeat), albeit of different sequences and lengths
(Supplementary Table 16C). These mutations were also usually found in cancers with many
signature 2 and 13 mutations (Fig.2A). TGAACA core sequences with longer flanking
palindromes generally exhibited a higher mutation rate, and TGAACA sequences flanked by
9bp palindromes exhibited a ~265-fold higher mutation rate than sequences without them
(Fig.2B, Supplementary Table 16D). However, additional factors must influence the
mutation rate because it varied markedly between TGAACA core sequences with different
palindromes of the same length (Fig.2C). Some TGAACA-inverted repeat sites were in
regulatory regions but others were intronic or intergenic without functional annotation
(examples in Supplementary Table 16C) or exonic. The propensity for mutation recurrence
at specific positions in a distinctive sequence motif in cancers with numerous mutations of
particular signatures renders it plausible that these are hypermutable hotspots32–34, perhaps
through formation of DNA hairpin structures35, which are single stranded at their tips
enabling attack by APOBEC enzymes, rather than driver mutations.

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Two recurrently mutated sites were also observed in the promoter of TBC1D12 (TBC1
domain family, member 12) (q-value 4.5e-2) (Fig.2A). The mutations were characteristic of
signatures 2 and 13 and enriched in cancers with many signature 2 and 13 mutations (Fig.
2A). The mutations were within the TBC1D12 Kozak consensus sequence
(CCCCAGATGGTGGG)) shifting it away from the consensus36. The association with
particular mutational signatures suggests that these may also be in a region of
hypermutability rather than drivers.
The WDR74 (WD repeat domain 74) promoter showed base substitutions and indels (qvalue 4.6e-3) forming a cluster of overlapping mutations (Fig.2A)20. Coding sequence driver
mutations in WDR74 have not been reported. No differences were observed in WDR74
transcript levels between cancers with WDR74 promoter mutations compared to those
without. Nevertheless, the pattern of this non-coding mutation cluster, with overlapping and
different mutation types, is more compatible with the possibility of the mutations being
drivers.
Two long non-coding RNAs, MALAT1 (q-value 8.7e-11, as previously reported12) and
NEAT1 (q-value 2.1e-2) were enriched with mutations. Transcript levels were not
significantly different between mutated and non-mutated samples. Whether these mutations
are drivers, or result from local hypermutability, is unclear.
Mutational signatures
Mutational processes generating somatic mutations imprint particular patterns of mutations
on cancer genomes, termed signatures2,24,37. Applying a mathematical approach25 to
extract mutational signatures previously revealed five base substitution signatures in breast

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 02.

Nik-Zainal et al.

Page 5

cancer; signatures 1, 2, 3, 8 and 132,24. Using this method in the 560 cases revealed 12
signatures, including those previously observed and a further seven, of which five have
formerly been detected in other cancer types (signatures 5, 6, 17, 18 and 20) and two are
new (signatures 26 and 30) (Fig.3A-B, Fig.4A, Supplementary Table 21A-C, Supplementary
Methods 15 for further details). Two indel signatures were also found2,24.

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Signatures of rearrangement mutational processes have not previously been formally
investigated. To enable this we adopted a rearrangement classification incorporating 32
subclasses. In many cancer genomes, large numbers of rearrangements are regionally
clustered, for example in zones of gene amplification. Therefore, we first classified
rearrangements into those inside and outside clusters, further subclassified them into
deletions, inversions and tandem duplications, and then according to the size of the
rearranged segment. The final category in both groups was interchromosomal translocations.
Application of the mathematical framework used for base substitution signatures2,24,25
extracted six rearrangement signatures (Fig.4B, Supplementary Table 21). Unsupervised
hierarchical clustering on the basis of the proportion of rearrangements attributed to each
signature in each breast cancer yielded seven major subgroups exhibiting distinct
associations with other genomic, histological or gene expression features (Fig.5, Extended
Data Figure 4-6).

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Rearrangement Signature 1 (9% of all rearrangements) and Rearrangement Signature 3
(18% rearrangements) were characterised predominantly by tandem duplications (Fig.4B).
Tandem duplications associated with Rearrangement Signature 1 were mostly >100kb (Fig.
4B), and those with Rearrangement Signature 3 <10kb (Fig.4B, Extended Data Figure 7).
More than 95% of Rearrangement Signature 3 tandem duplications were concentrated in
15% of cancers (Cluster D, Fig.5), many with several hundred rearrangements of this type.
Almost all cancers (91%) with BRCA1 mutations or promoter hypermethylation were in this
group, which was enriched for basal-like, triple negative cancers and copy number
classification of a high Homologous Recombination Deficiency (HRD) index38–40. Thus,
inactivation of BRCA1, but not BRCA2, may be responsible for the Rearrangement
Signature 3 small tandem duplication mutator phenotype.
More than 35% of Rearrangement Signature 1 tandem duplications were found in just 8.5%
of the breast cancers and some cases had hundreds of these (Cluster F, Fig.5). The cause of
this large tandem duplication mutator phenotype (Fig.4B) is unknown. Cancers exhibiting it
are frequently TP53-mutated, relatively late diagnosis, triple-negative breast cancers,
showing enrichment for base substitution signature 3 and a high Homologous
Recombination Deficiency (HRD) index (Fig.5) but do not have BRCA1/2 mutations or
BRCA1 promoter hypermethylation.
Rearrangement Signature 1 and 3 tandem duplications (Extended Data Figure 7) were
generally evenly distributed over the genome. However, there were nine locations at which
recurrence of tandem duplications was found across the breast cancers and which often
showed multiple, nested tandem duplications in individual cases (Extended Data Figure 8).

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 02.

Nik-Zainal et al.

Page 6

These may be mutational hotspots specific for these tandem duplication mutational
processes although we cannot exclude the possibility that they represent driver events.

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Rearrangement Signature 5 (accounting for 14% rearrangements) was characterised by
deletions <100kb. It was strongly associated with the presence of BRCA1 mutations or
promoter hypermethylation (Cluster D, Fig.5), BRCA2 mutations (Cluster G, Fig.5) and
with Rearrangement Signature 1 large tandem duplications (Cluster F, Fig.5).
Rearrangement Signature 2 (accounting for 22% rearrangements) was characterised by nonclustered deletions (>100kb), inversions and interchromosomal translocations, was present
in most cancers but was particularly enriched in ER positive cancers with quiet copy number
profiles (Cluster E, GISTIC Cluster 3, Fig.5). Rearrangement Signature 4 (accounting for
18% of rearrangements) was characterised by clustered interchromosomal translocations
while Rearrangement Signature 6 (19% of rearrangements) by clustered inversions and
deletions (Clusters A, B, C, Fig.5).
Short segments (1-5bp) of overlapping microhomology characteristic of alternative methods
of end joining repair were found at most rearrangements2,14. Rearrangement Signatures 2, 4
and 6 were characterised by a peak at 1bp of microhomology while Rearrangement
Signatures 1, 3 and 5, associated with homologous recombination DNA repair deficiency,
exhibited a peak at 2bp (Extended Data Figure 9). Thus, different end-joining mechanisms
may operate with different rearrangement processes. A proportion of breast cancers showed
Rearrangement Signature 5 deletions with longer (>10bp) microhomologies involving
sequences from short-interspersed nuclear elements (SINEs), most commonly AluS (63%)
and AluY (15%) family repeats (Extended Data Figure 9). Long segments (more than 10bp)
of non-templated sequence were particularly enriched amongst clustered rearrangements.

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Localised hypermutation: kataegis
Focal base substitution hypermutation, termed kataegis, is generally characterised by
substitutions with characteristic features of signatures 2 and 132,24. Kataegis was observed
in 49% breast cancers, with 4% exhibiting 10 or more foci (Supplementary Table 21C).
Kataegis colocalises with clustered rearrangements characteristic of rearrangement
signatures 4 and 6 (Fig.4B). Cancers with tandem duplications or deletions of rearrangement
signatures 1, 3 and 5 did not usually demonstrate kataegis. However, there must be
additional determinants of kataegis since only 2% of rearrangements are associated with it.
A rare (14/1,557 foci, 0.9%), alternative form of kataegis colocalising with rearrangements
but with a base substitution pattern characterised by T>G and T>C mutations predominantly
at NTT and NTA sequences was also observed (Extended Data Figure 10). This pattern of
base substitutions most closely matches Signature 9 (Extended Data Figure 10) (http://
cancer.sanger.ac.uk/cosmic/signatures), previously observed in B lymphocyte neoplasms and
attributed to polymerase eta activity 41.
Mutational signatures exhibit distinct DNA replication strand biases
The distributions of mutations attributable to each of the 20 mutation signatures (12 base
substitution, two indel and six rearrangement) were explored42 with respect to DNA
replication strand. We found an asymmetric distribution of mutations between leading and
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 02.

Nik-Zainal et al.

Page 7

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

lagging replication strands for many, but not all signatures42 (Fig.4A). Notably, Signatures 2
and 13, due to APOBEC deamination, showed marked lagging replication strand bias (Fig.
4A) suggesting that lagging strand replication provides single-stranded DNA for APOBEC
deamination. Of the three signatures associated with mismatch repair deficiency (Signatures
6, 20, 26), only Signature 26 exhibited replicative strand bias, highlighting how different
signatures arising from defects of the same pathway can exhibit distinct relationships with
replication.
Mutational signatures associated with BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations
Of the 560 breast cancers, 90 had germline (60) or somatic (14) inactivating mutations in
BRCA1 (35) or BRCA2 (39) or showed methylation of the BRCA1 promoter (16). Loss of
the wild-type chromosome 17 or 13 was observed in 80/90 cases. The latter exhibited many
base substitution mutations of signature 3, accompanied by deletions of >3bp with
microhomology at rearrangement breakpoints, and signature 8 together with CC>AA double
nucleotide substitutions. Cases in which the wild type chromosome 17 or 13 was retained
did not show these signatures. Thus signature 3 and, to a lesser extent, signature 8 are
associated with absence of BRCA1 and BRCA2 functions.

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Cancers with inactivating BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutations usually carry many genomic
rearrangements. Cancers with BRCA1, but not BRCA2, mutations exhibit large numbers of
Rearrangement Signature 3 small tandem duplications. Cancers with BRCA1 or BRCA2
mutations show substantial numbers of Rearrangement Signature 5 deletions. No other
Rearrangement Signatures were associated with BRCA1 or BRCA2 null cases (Clusters D
and G, Fig.5). Some breast cancers without identifiable BRCA1/2 mutations or BRCA1
promoter methylation showed these features and segregated with BRCA1/2 null cancers in
hierarchical clustering analysis (Fig.5). In such cases, the BRCA1/2 mutations may have
been missed or other mutated or promoter methylated genes may be exerting similar effects
(Please see http://cancer.sanger.ac.uk/cosmic/sample/genomes for examples of whole
genome profiles of typical BRCA1 null (e.g. PD6413a, PD7215a) and BRCA2 null tumours
(e.g. PD4952a, PD4955a)).
A further subset of cancers (Cluster F, Fig.5) show similarities in mutational pattern to
BRCA1/2 null cancers, with many Rearrangement Signature 5 deletions and enrichment for
base substitution signatures 3 and 8. However, these do not segregate together with
BRCA1/2 null cases in hierarchical clustering analysis, have Rearrangement Signature 1
large tandem duplications and do not show BRCA1/2 mutations. Somatic and germline
mutations in genes associated with the DNA double-strand break repair pathway including
ATM, ATR, PALB2, RAD51C, RAD50, TP53, CHEK2 and BRIP1, were sought in these
cancers. We did not observe any clear-cut relationships between mutations in these genes
and these mutational patterns.
Cancers with BRCA1/2 mutations are particularly responsive to cisplatin and PARP
inhibitors43–45. Combinations of base substitution, indel and rearrangement mutational
signatures may be better biomarkers of defective homologous recombination based DNA
double strand break repair and responsiveness to these drugs46 than BRCA1/2 mutations or
promoter methylation alone and thus may constitute the basis of future diagnostics.
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 02.

Nik-Zainal et al.

Page 8

Conclusions

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

A comprehensive perspective on the somatic genetics of breast cancer is drawing closer
(please see website for individual patient genome profiles: http://cancer.sanger.ac.uk/cosmic/
sample/genomes, Methods Section 10 for orientation). At least 12 base substitution
mutational signatures and six rearrangement signatures contribute to the somatic mutations
found. 93 mutated cancer genes (31 dominant, 60 recessive, 2 uncertain) are implicated in
genesis of the disease. However, dominantly-acting activated fusion genes and non-coding
driver mutations appear rare. Additional infrequently mutated cancer genes probably exist.
However, the genes harbouring the substantial majority of driver mutations are now known.
Nevertheless, important questions remain to be addressed. Recurrent mutational events
including whole chromosome copy number changes and unexplained regions with recurrent
rearrangements could harbour additional cancer genes. Identifying non-coding drivers is
challenging and requires further investigation. Although almost all breast cancers have at
least one identifiable driver mutation, the number with only a single identified driver is
perhaps surprising. The roles of viruses or other microbes have not been exhaustively
examined. Thus, further exploration and analysis of whole genome sequences from breast
cancer patients will be required to complete our understanding of the somatic mutational
basis of the disease.

Methods
1

Sample selection

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

DNA was extracted from 560 breast cancers and normal tissue (peripheral blood
lymphocytes, adjacent normal breast tissue or skin) and total RNA extracted from 268 of the
same individuals. Samples were subjected to pathology review and only samples assessed as
being composed of > 70% tumor cells, were accepted for inclusion in the study
(Supplementary Table 1).
2

Massively-parallel sequencing and alignment
Short insert 500bp genomic libraries and 350bp poly-A selected transcriptomic libraries
were constructed, flowcells prepared and sequencing clusters generated according to
Illumina library protocols47. 108 base/100 base (genomic), or 75 base (transcriptomic)
paired-end sequencing were performed on Illumina GAIIx, Hiseq 2000 or Hiseq 2500
genome analyzers in accordance with the Illumina Genome Analyzer operating manual. The
average sequence coverage was 40.4 fold for tumour samples and 30.2 fold for normal
samples (Supplementary Table 2).
Short insert paired-end reads were aligned to the reference human genome (GRCh37) using
Burrows-Wheeler Aligner, BWA (v0.5.9)48. RNA-seq data was aligned to the human
reference genome (GRCh37) using TopHat (v1.3.3) (http://ccb.jhu.edu/software/tophat/
index.shtml).

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 02.

Nik-Zainal et al.

3

Page 9

Processing of genomic data
CaVEMan (Cancer Variants Through Expectation Maximization: http://cancerit.github.io/
CaVEMan/) was used for calling somatic substitutions.

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Indels in the tumor and normal genomes were called using a modified Pindel version 2.0.
(http://cancerit.github.io/cgpPindel/) on the NCBI37 genome build 49.
Structural variants were discovered using a bespoke algorithm, BRASS (BReakpoint
AnalySiS) (https://github.com/cancerit/BRASS) through discordantly mapping paired-end
reads. Next, discordantly mapping read pairs that were likely to span breakpoints, as well as
a selection of nearby properly-paired reads, were grouped for each region of interest. Using
the Velvet de novo assembler50, reads were locally assembled within each of these regions
to produce a contiguous consensus sequence of each region. Rearrangements, represented by
reads from the rearranged derivative as well as the corresponding non-rearranged allele were
instantly recognisable from a particular pattern of five vertices in the de Bruijn graph (a
mathematical method used in de novo assembly of (short) read sequences) of component of
Velvet. Exact coordinates and features of junction sequence (e.g. microhomology or nontemplated sequence) were derived from this, following aligning to the reference genome, as
though they were split reads.
Supplementary Table 3 for summary of somatic variants. Annotation was according to
ENSEMBL version 58.

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) array hybridization using the Affymetrix SNP6.0
platform was performed according to Affymetrix protocols. Allele-specific copy number
analysis of tumors was performed using ASCAT (v2.1.1), to generate integral allele-specific
copy number profiles for the tumor cells51 (Supplementary Table 4 and 5). ASCAT was also
applied to NGS data directly with highly comparable results.
12.5% of the breast cancers were sampled for validation of substitutions, indels and/or
rearrangements in order to make an assessment of the positive predictive value of mutationcalling (Supplementary Table 6).
Further details of these processing steps as well as processing of transcriptomic and miRNA
data (Supplementary Table 7 and 8) can be found in Supplementary Methods.
4

Identification of novel breast cancer genes
To identify recurrently mutated driver genes, a dN/dS method that considers the mutation
spectrum, the sequence of each gene, the impact of coding substitutions (synonymous,
missense, nonsense, splice site) and the variation of the mutation rate across genes52,53 was
used for substitutions (Supplementary Table 9). Owing to the lack of a neutral reference for
the indel rate in coding sequences, a different approach was required (Supplementary Table
10, Supplementary Methods for details). To detect genes under significant selective pressure
by either point mutations or indels, for each gene the P-values from the dN/dS analysis of
substitutions and from the recurrence analysis of indels were combined using Fisher’s
method. Multiple testing correction (Benjamini-Hochberg FDR) was performed separately

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 02.

Nik-Zainal et al.

Page 10

for the 600+ putative driver genes and for all other genes, stratifying the FDR correction to
increase sensitivity (as described in Sun et al. 200654). To achieve a low false discovery rate
a conservative q-value cutoff of <0.01 was used for significance (Supplementary Table 11).

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

This analysis was applied to the new whole genome sequences of 560 breast cancers as well
as a further 772 breast cancers that have been sequenced previously by other institutions.
Please see Supplementary Methods for detailed explanations of these methods.
5

Recurrence in the non-coding regions
5.1 Partitioning the genome into functional regulatory elements/gene
features—To identify non-coding regions with significant recurrence, we used a method
similar to the one described for searching for novel indel drivers (Supplementary Methods
for detailed description).

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

The genome was partitioned according to different sets of regulatory elements/gene features,
with a separate analysis performed for each set of elements, including exons (n=20,245
genes), core promoters (n=20,245 genes, where a core promoter is the interval [−250,+250]
bp from any transcription start site (TSS) of a coding transcript of the gene, excluding any
overlap with coding regions), 5’ UTR (n=9,576 genes), 3’ UTR (n=19,502 genes), intronic
regions flanking exons (n=20,212 genes, represents any intronic sequence within 75bp from
an exon, excluding any base overlapping with any of the above elements. This attempts to
capture recurrence in essential splice site or proximal splicing-regulatory elements), any
other sequence within genes (n=18,591 genes, for every protein-coding gene, this contains
any region within the start and end of transcripts not included in any of the above
categories), ncRNAs (n=10,684, full length lincRNAs, miRNAs or rRNAs), enhancers
(n=194,054) 55, ultra-conserved regions (n=187,057, a collection of regions under negative
selection based on 1,000 genomes data 20.
Every element set listed above was analysed separately to allow for different mutation rates
across element types and to stratify the FDR correction 54. Within each set of elements, we
used a negative binomial regression approach to learn the underlying variation of the
mutation rate across elements. The offset reflects the expected number of mutations in each
element assuming uniform mutation rates across them (i.e. Esubs,element =
Σ j∈{1,2,…,192}Extende (t*rj*Sj), and, Eindels,element = μindel * Sindel,element ). As covariate here
we used the local density of mutations in neighbouring non-coding regions, corrected for
sequence composition and trinucleotide mutation rates, that is, the t parameter of the dN/dS
equations described in section 7.1 of Supplementary Methods. Normalised local rates were
pre-calculated for 100kb non-overlapping bins of the genome and used in all analyses. Other
covariates (expression, replication time or HiC) were not used here as they were not found to
substantially improve the model once the local mutation rate was used as a covariate. A
separate regression analysis was performed for substitutions and indels, to account for the
different level of uncertainty in the distribution of substitution and indel rates across
elements.
modelsubs = glm.nb(formula = nsubs ~ offset(log(Esubs)) + μlocal,subs )

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 02.

Nik-Zainal et al.

Page 11

modelindels = glm.nb(formula = nindels ~ offset(log(Eindels)) + μlocal,indels )

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

The observed counts for each element (nsubs,element and nindels,element) are compared to the
background distributions using a negative binomial test, with the estimated overdispersion
parameters (θsubs and θindels) estimated by the negative binomial regression, yielding Pvalues for substitution and indel recurrence for each element. These P-values were combined
using Fisher’s method and corrected for multiple testing using FDR (Supplementary Table
16A).
5.2 Partitioning the genome into discrete bins—We performed a genome-wide
screening of recurrence in 1kb non-overlapping bins. We employed the method described in
earlier section, using as covariate the local mutation rate calculated from 5Mb up and
downstream from the bin of interest and excluding any low-coverage region from the
estimate (Supplementary Table 16B, Extended Data Figure 3A for example). Significant hits
were subjected to manual curation to remove false positives caused by sequencing or
mapping artefacts.
6

Mutational signatures analysis
Mutational signatures analysis was performed following a three-step process: (i) hierarchical
de novo extraction based on somatic substitutions and their immediate sequence context, (ii)
updating the set of consensus signatures using the mutational signatures extracted from
breast cancer genomes, and (iii) evaluating the contributions of each of the updated
consensus signatures in each of the breast cancer samples. These three steps are discussed in
more details in the next sections.

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

6.1 Hierarchical de novo extraction of mutational signatures—The mutational
catalogues of the 560 breast cancer whole genome sequences were analysed for mutational
signatures using a hierarchical version of the Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute mutational
signatures framework 25. Briefly, we converted all mutation data into a matrix, M, that is
made up of 96 features comprising mutations counts for each mutation type (C>A, C>G,
C>T, T>A, T>C, and T>G; all substitutions are referred to by the pyrimidine of the mutated
Watson–Crick base pair) using each possible 5’ (C, A, G, and T) and 3’ (C, A, G, and T)
context for all samples. After conversion, the previously developed algorithm was applied in
a hierarchical manner to the matrix M that contains K mutation types and G samples. The
algorithm deciphers the minimal set of mutational signatures that optimally explains the
proportion of each mutation type and then estimates the contribution of each signature
across the samples. More specifically, the algorithm makes use of a well-known blind source
separation technique, termed nonnegative matrix factorization (NMF). NMF identifies the
matrix of mutational signature, P, and the matrix of the exposures of these signatures, E, by
minimizing a Frobenius norm while maintaining non-negativity:

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 02.

Nik-Zainal et al.

Page 12

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

The method for deciphering mutational signatures, including evaluation with simulated data
and list of limitations, can be found in ref 25. The framework was applied in a hierarchical
manner to increase its ability to find mutational signatures present in few samples as well as
mutational signatures exhibiting a low mutational burden. More specifically, after
application to the original matrix M containing 560 samples, we evaluated the accuracy of
explaining the mutational patterns of each of the 560 breast cancers with the extracted
mutational signatures. All samples that were well explained by the extracted mutational
signatures were removed and the framework was applied to the remaining sub-matrix of M.
This procedure was repeated until the extraction process did not reveal any new mutational
signatures. Overall, the approach extracted 12 unique mutational signatures operative across
the 560 breast cancers (Figure 3, Supplementary Table 21).
6.2 Updating the set of consensus mutational signatures—The 12 hierarchically
extracted breast cancer signatures were compared to the census of consensus mutational
signatures 25. 11 of the 12 signatures closely resembled previously identified mutational
patterns. The patterns of these 11 signatures, weighted by the numbers of mutations
contributed by each signature in the breast cancer data, were used to update the set of
consensus mutational signatures as previously done in ref 25. 1 of the 12 extracted
signatures is novel and at present, unique for breast cancer. This novel signature is consensus
signature 30 (http://cancer.sanger.ac.uk/cosmic/signatures).

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

6.3 Evaluating the contributions of consensus mutational signatures in 560
breast cancers—The complete compendium of consensus mutational signatures that was
found in breast cancer includes: signatures 1, 2, 3, 5, 6, 8, 13, 17, 18, 20, 26, and 30. We
evaluated the presence of all these signatures in the 560 breast cancer genomes by reintroducing them into each sample. More specifically, the updated set of consensus
mutational signatures was used to minimize the constrained linear function for each sample:

Here,
represents a vector with 96 components (corresponding to a consensus
mutational signature with its six somatic substitutions and their immediate sequencing
context) and Exposurei is a nonnegative scalar reflecting the number of mutations
contributed by this signature. N is equal to 12 and it reflects the number of all possible
signatures that can be found in a single breast cancer sample. Mutational signatures that did
not contribute large numbers (or proportions) of mutations or that did not significantly
improve the correlation between the original mutational pattern of the sample and the one
generated by the mutational signatures were excluded from the sample. This procedure
reduced over-fitting the data and allowed only the essential mutational signatures to be
present in each sample (Supplementary Table 21B).

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 02.

Nik-Zainal et al.

7

Page 13

Kataegis

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Kataegis or foci of localized hypermutation has been previously defined 25 as 6 or more
consecutive mutations with an average intermutation distance of less than or equal to 1,000
bp. Kataegis were sought in 560 whole-genome sequenced breast cancers from high-quality
base substitution data using the method described previously 25. This method likely misses
some foci of kataegis sacrificing sensitivity of detection for a higher positive predictive value
of kataegic foci (Supplementary Table 21C).
8

Rearrangement signatures
8.1 Clustered vs non-clustered rearrangements—We sought to separate
rearrangements that occurred as focal catastrophic events or focal driver amplicons from
genome-wide rearrangement mutagenesis using a piecewise constant fitting (PCF) method.
For each sample, both breakpoints of each rearrangement were considered individually and
all breakpoints were ordered by chromosomal position. The inter-rearrangement distance,
defined as the number of base pairs from one rearrangement breakpoint to the one
immediately preceding it in the reference genome, was calculated. Putative regions of
clustered rearrangements were identified as having an average inter-rearrangement distance
that was at least 10 times greater than the whole genome average for the individual sample.
PCF parameters used were γ = 25 and kmin = 10. The respective partner breakpoint of all
breakpoints involved in a clustered region are likely to have arisen at the same mechanistic
instant and so were considered as being involved in the cluster even if located at a distant
chromosomal site. Extended Data Table 4A summarises the rearrangements within clusters
(“clustered”) and not within clusters (“non-clustered”).

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

8.2 Classification – types and size—In both classes of rearrangements, clustered and
non-clustered, rearrangements were subclassified into deletions, inversions and tandem
duplications, and then further subclassified according to size of the rearranged segment
(1-10kb, 10kb-100kb, 100kb-1Mb, 1Mb-10Mb, more than 10Mb). The final category in both
groups was interchromosomal translocations.
8.3 Rearrangement signatures by NNMF—The classification produces a matrix of
32 distinct categories of structural variants across 544 breast cancer genomes. This matrix
was decomposed using the previously developed approach for deciphering mutational
signatures by searching for the optimal number of mutational signatures that best explains
the data without over-fitting the data 25 (Supplementary Table 21D-E).
8.4 Consensus clustering of rearrangement signatures—To identify subgroups
of samples sharing similar combinations of six identified rearrangement signatures derived
from whole genome sequencing analysis we performed consensus clustering using the
ConsensusClusterPlus R package 56. Input data for each sample (n=544, a subset of the full
sample cohort) was the proportion of rearrangements assigned to each of the six signatures.
Thus, each sample has 6 data values, with a total sum of 1. Proportions for each signature
were mean-centred across samples prior to clustering. The following settings were used in
the consensus clustering:

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 02.

Nik-Zainal et al.

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

9

Page 14

-

Number of repetitions: 1000

-

pItem = 0.9 (resampling frequency samples)

-

pFeature = 0.9 (resampling frequency)

-

Pearson distance metric

-

Ward linkage method

Distribution of mutational signatures relative to genomic architecture
Following extraction of mutational signatures and quantification of the exposures (or
contributions) of each signature to each sample, a probability for each mutation belonging to
each mutation signature (for a given class of mutation e.g. substitutions) was assigned42.
The distribution of mutations as signatures were assessed across multiple genomic features
including replication time, strands, transcriptional strands and nucleosome occupancy.
Please see Morganella et al for technical details, per signature results.

10

Individual patient whole genome profiles

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Breast cancer whole genome profiles were adapted from the R Circos package57. Features
depicted in circos plots from outermost rings heading inwards: Karyotypic ideogram
outermost. Base substitutions next, plotted as rainfall plots (log10 intermutation distance on
radial axis, dot colours: blue=C>A, black=C>G, red=C>T, grey=T>A, green=T>C,
pink=T>G). Ring with short green lines = insertions, ring with short red lines = deletions.
Major copy number allele (green = gain) ring, minor copy number allele ring (pink=loss),
Central lines represent rearrangements (green= tandem duplications, pink=deletions,
blue=inversions and gray=interchromosomal events. Top right hand panel displays the
number of mutations contributing to each mutation signature extracted using NNMF in
individual cancers. Middle right hand panel represents indels. Bottom right corner shows
histogram of rearrangements present in this cancer. Bottom left corner shows all curated
driver mutations, top and middle left panels show clinical and pathology data respectively.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 02.

Nik-Zainal et al.

Page 15

Extended Data

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Extended Data Figure 1. Landscape of driver mutations

(A) Summary of subtypes of cohort of 560 breast cancers
(B) Driver mutations by mutation type
(C) Distribution of rearrangements throughout the genome. Black line represents
background rearrangement density (calculation based on rearrangement breakpoints in
intergenic regions only). Red lines represent frequency of rearrangement within breast
cancer genes.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 02.

Nik-Zainal et al.

Page 16

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Extended Data Figure 2. Rearrangements in oncogenes

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

(A) Variation in rearrangement and copy number events affecting ESR1. Clear amplification
in topmost panel, transection of ESR1 in middle panel and focused tandem duplication
events in lower panel.
(B) Predicted outcomes of some rearrangements affecting ETV6. Red crosses indicate exons
deleted as a result of rearrangements within the ETV6 genes, black dotted lines indicate
rearrangement break points resulting in fusions between ETV6 and ERC, WNK1, ATP2B1
or LRP6

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 02.

Nik-Zainal et al.

Page 17

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Extended Data Figure 3. Recurrent non-coding events in breast cancers

(A) Manhattan plot demonstrating sites with most significant p-values as identified by
binning analysis. Purple highlighted sites were also detected by the method seeking
recurrence when partitioned by genomic features.
(B) Locus at chr11:65Mb which was identified by independent analyses as being more
mutated than expected by chance. In the lowermost panel, a rearrangement hotspot analysis
identified this region as a tandem duplication hotspot, with nested tandem duplications noted
at this site. Partitioning the genome into different regulatory elements, an analysis of

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 02.

Nik-Zainal et al.

Page 18

substitutions and indels identified lncRNAs MALAT1 and NEAT1 (topmost panels) with
significant p-values.

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Extended Data Figure 4. Copy number analyses

(A) Frequency of copy number aberrations across the cohort. Chromosome position along xaxis, frequency of copy number gains (red) and losses (green) y-axis.
(B) Identification of focal recurrent copy number gains by the GISTIC method
(Supplementary Methods)

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 02.

Nik-Zainal et al.

Page 19

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

(C) Identification of focal recurrent copy number losses by the GISTIC method
(D) Heatmap of GISTIC regions following unsupervised hierarchical clustering. 5 cluster
groups are noted and relationships with expression subtype (basal=red, luminal B=light blue,
luminal A=dark blue), immunohistopathology status (ER, PR, HER2 status –
black=positive), abrogation of BRCA1 (red) and BRCA2 (blue) (whether germline, somatic
or through promoter hypermethylation), driver mutations (black=positive), HRD index (top
25% or lowest 25% - black=positive).

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 02.

Nik-Zainal et al.

Page 20

Extended Data Figure 5. miRNA analyses

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Hierarchical clustering of the most variant miRNAs using complete linkage and Euclidean
distance. miRNA clusters were assigned using the Partitioning Algorithm using Recursive
Thresholding (PART) method. Five main patient clusters were revealed. The horizontal
annotation bars show (from top to bottom): PART cluster group, PAM50 mRNA expression
subtype, GISTIC cluster, rearrangement cluster, lymphocyte infiltration score and
histological grade. The heatmap shows clustered and centered miRNA expression data (log2
transformed). Details on colour coding of the annotation bars are presented below the
heatmap.

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 02.

Nik-Zainal et al.

Page 21

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Extended Data Figure 6. Rearrangement cluster groups and associated features

(A) Overall survival by rearrangement cluster group
(B) Age of diagnosis
(C) Tumor grade
(D) Menopausal status
(E) ER status
(F) Immune response metagene panel
(G) Lymphocytic infiltration score

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 02.

Nik-Zainal et al.

Page 22

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Extended Data Figure 7. Contrasting tandem duplication phenotypes

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Contrasting tandem duplication phenotypes of two breast cancers using chromosome X.
Copy number (y-axis) depicted as black dots. Lines represent rearrangements breakpoints
(green=tandem duplications, pink=deletions, blue=inversions, black=translocations with
partner breakpoint provided). Top panel, PD4841a, is overwhelmed by large tandem
duplications (>100kb, RS1) while PD4833a has many short tandem duplications (< 10kb,
RS3) appearing as “single” lines in its plot.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 02.

Nik-Zainal et al.

Page 23

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Extended Data Figure 8. Hotspots of tandem duplications

A tandem duplication hotspot occurring in 6 different patients

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 02.

Nik-Zainal et al.

Page 24

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Extended Data Figure 9. Rearrangement breakpoint junctions

(A) Breakpoint features of rearrangements in 560 breast cancers by Rearrangement
Signature.
(B) Breakpoint features in BRCA and non-BRCA cancers

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 02.

Nik-Zainal et al.

Page 25

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Extended Data Figure 10. Signatures of focal hypermutation

(A) Kataegis and alternative kataegis occurring at the same locus (ERBB2 amplicon in
PD13164a). Copy number (y-axis) depicted as black dots. Lines represent rearrangements
breakpoints (green=tandem duplications, pink=deletions, blue=inversions). Topmost panel
showing a ~10Mb region including the ERBB2 locus. Second panel from top zooms in 10fold to a ~1Mb window highlighting co-occurrence of rearrangement breakpoints, with copy
number changes and three different kataegis loci. Third panel from top demonstrates

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 02.

Nik-Zainal et al.

Page 26

kataegis loci in more detail. Log10 intermutation distance on y axis. Black arrow
highlighting kataegis. Blue arrows highlighting alternative kataegis.
(B) Sequence context of kataegis and alternative kataegis identified in this dataset.

Supplementary Material
Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.

Authors

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Serena Nik-Zainal1,2, Helen Davies1, Johan Staaf3, Manasa Ramakrishna1,
Dominik Glodzik1, Xueqing Zou1, Inigo Martincorena1, Ludmil B. Alexandrov1,4,5,
Sancha Martin1, David C. Wedge1, Peter Van Loo1,6, Young Seok Ju1, Marcel
Smid7, Arie B Brinkman8, Sandro Morganella9, Miriam R. Aure10,11, Ole Christian
Lingjærde11,12, Anita Langerød10,11, Markus Ringnér3, Sung-Min Ahn13, Sandrine
Boyault14, Jane E. Brock15, Annegien Broeks16, Adam Butler1, Christine
Desmedt17, Luc Dirix18, Serge Dronov1, Aquila Fatima19, John A. Foekens7, Moritz
Gerstung1, Gerrit KJ Hooijer20, Se Jin Jang21, David R. Jones1, Hyung-Yong Kim22,
Tari A. King23, Savitri Krishnamurthy24, Hee Jin Lee21, Jeong-Yeon Lee25, Yilong
Li1, Stuart McLaren1, Andrew Menzies1, Ville Mustonen1, Sarah O’Meara1, Iris
Pauporté26, Xavier Pivot27, Colin A. Purdie28, Keiran Raine1, Kamna
Ramakrishnan1, F. Germán Rodríguez-González7, Gilles Romieu29, Anieta M.
Sieuwerts7, Peter T Simpson30, Rebecca Shepherd1, Lucy Stebbings1, Olafur A
Stefansson31, Jon Teague1, Stefania Tommasi32, Isabelle Treilleux33, Gert G. Van
den Eynden18,34, Peter Vermeulen18,34, Anne Vincent-Salomon35, Lucy Yates1,
Carlos Caldas36, Laura van’t Veer16, Andrew Tutt37,38, Stian Knappskog39,40, Benita
Kiat Tee Tan41,42, Jos Jonkers16, Åke Borg3, Naoto T Ueno24, Christos Sotiriou17,
Alain Viari43,44, P. Andrew Futreal1,45, Peter J Campbell1, Paul N. Span46, Steven
Van Laere18, Sunil R Lakhani30,47, Jorunn E. Eyfjord31, Alastair M. Thompson24,48,
Ewan Birney9, Hendrik G Stunnenberg8, Marc J van de Vijver20, John W.M.
Martens7, Anne-Lise Børresen-Dale10,11, Andrea L. Richardson15,19, Gu Kong22,
Gilles Thomas44, and Michael R. Stratton1

Affiliations
1Wellcome

Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, Cambridge CB10 1SA, UK 2East Anglian
Medical Genetics Service, Cambridge University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust,
Cambridge CB2 9NB, UK 3Division of Oncology and Pathology, Department of
Clinical Sciences Lund, Lund University, Lund, Sweden 4Theoretical Biology and
Biophysics (T-6), Los Alamos National Laboratory, Los Alamos, New Mexico, United
States of America 5Center for Nonlinear Studies, Los Alamos National Laboratory,
Los Alamos, New Mexico, United States of America 6Department of Human
Genetics, University of Leuven, B-3000 Leuven, Belgium 7Erasmus MC Cancer
Institute and Cancer Genomics Netherlands, Erasmus University Medical Center,
Department of Medical Oncology, Rotterdam, The Netherlands 8Radboud
University, Department of Molecular Biology, Faculties of Science and Medicine,
Nijmegen, Netherlands 9European Molecular Biology Laboratory, European

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 02.

Nik-Zainal et al.

Page 27

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Bioinformatics Institute, Wellcome Trust Genome Campus,Hinxton, Cambridgeshire,
CB10 1SD 10Department of Cancer Genetics, Institute for Cancer Research, Oslo
University Hospital The Norwegian Radiumhospital 11K.G. Jebsen Centre for Breast
Cancer Research, Institute for Clinical Medicine, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway
12Department of Computer Science, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway 13Gachon
Institute of Genome Medicine and Science, Gachon University Gil Medical Center,
Incheon, South Korea 14Translational Research Lab, Centre Léon Bérard, 28, rue
Laënnec, 69373 Lyon Cedex 08, France 15Department of Pathology, Brigham and
Women’s Hospital, Boston, MA 02115 USA 16The Netherlands Cancer Institute,
1066CX Amsterdam, The Netherlands 17Breast Cancer Translational Research
Laboratory, Université Libre de Bruxelles, Institut Jules Bordet, Bd de Waterloo 121,
B-1000 Brussels, Belgium 18Translational Cancer Research Unit, Center for
Oncological Research, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, University of
Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium 19Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA 02215 USA
20Department of Pathology, Academic Medical Center, Meibergdreef 9, 1105 AZ
Amsterdam, the Netherlands 21Department of Pathology, Asan Medical Center,
College of Medicine, Ulsan University, South Korea 22Department of Pathology,
College of Medicine, Hanyang University, Seoul, South Korea 23Memorial Sloan
Kettering Cancer Center, 1275 York Ave, New York, NY 10065, United States
24Morgan Welch Inflammatory Breast Cancer Research Program and Clinic, The
University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, 1515 Holcombe Blvd., Houston,
TX 77030 25Institute for Bioengineering and Biopharmaceutical Research (IBBR),
Hanyang University, Seoul, South Korea 26Institut National du Cancer, Research
Division, Clinical Research Department, 52 avenue Morizet, 92513 BoulogneBillancourt, France 27University Hospital of Minjoz, INSERM UMR 1098, Bd
Fleming, Besançon 25000, France 28Pathology Department, Ninewells Hospital &
Medical School, Dundee DD1 9SY, UK 29Oncologie Sénologie, ICM Institut Régional
du Cancer, Montpellier, France 30The University of Queensland: UQ Centre for
Clinical Research and School of Medicine, Brisbane, Australia 31Cancer Research
Laboratory, Faculty of Medicine, University of Iceland, 101 Reykjavik, Iceland
32IRCCS Istituto Tumori “Giovanni Paolo II”, Bari, Italy 33Department of Pathology,
Centre Léon Bérard, 28 rue Laënnec, 69373 Lyon Cédex 08, France 34Department
of Pathology, GZA Hospitals Sint-Augustinus, Antwerp, Belgium 35Institut Curie,
Department of Pathology and INSERM U934, 26 rue d’Ulm, 75248 Paris Cedex 05,
France 36Cancer Research UK Cambridge Institute, University of Cambridge, Li Ka
Shing Centre, Robinson Way, Cambridge CB2 0RE, United Kingdom 37Breast
Cancer Now Toby Research Unit, King’s College London 38Breast Cancer Now Toby
Robin’s Research Centre, Institute of Cancer Research, London 39Department of
Clinical Science, University of Bergen, 5020 Bergen, Norway 40Department of
Oncology, Haukeland University Hospital, 5021 Bergen, Norway 41National Cancer
Centre Singapore, 11 Hospital Drive, Singapore 169610 42Singapore General
Hospital, Outram Road, Singapore 169608 43Equipe Erable, INRIA GrenobleRhône-Alpes, 655, Av. de l’Europe, 38330 Montbonnot-Saint Martin, France
44Synergie Lyon Cancer, Centre Léon Bérard, 28 rue Laënnec, Lyon Cedex 08,
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 02.

Nik-Zainal et al.

Page 28

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

France 45Department of Genomic Medicine, UT MD Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, TX, 77230 46Department of Radiation Oncology, and department of
Laboratory Medicine, Radboud university medical center, Nijmegen, the
Netherlands 47Pathology Queensland, The Royal Brisbane and Women’s Hospital,
Brisbane, Australia 48Department of Surgical Oncology, University of Texas MD
Anderson Cancer Center, 1400 Pressler Street,Houston, Texas 77030

Acknowledgements
This work has been funded through the ICGC Breast Cancer Working group by the Breast Cancer Somatic Genetics
Study (BASIS), a European research project funded by the European Community’s Seventh Framework Programme
(FP7/2010-2014) under the grant agreement number 242006; the Triple Negative project funded by the Wellcome
Trust (grant reference 077012/Z/05/Z) and the HER2+ project funded by Institut National du Cancer (INCa) in
France (Grants N° 226-2009, 02-2011, 41-2012, 144-2008, 06-2012). The ICGC Asian Breast Cancer Project was
funded through a grant of the Korean Health Technology R&D Project, Ministry of Health & Welfare, Republic of
Korea (A111218-SC01).
Personally funded by grants above: FGR-G, SM, KR, SM were funded by BASIS.
Recruitment was performed under the auspices of the ICGC breast cancer projects run by the UK, France and
Korea.
For contributions towards instruments, specimens and collections: Tayside Tissue Bank (funded by CRUK,
University of Dundee, Chief Scientist Office & Breast Cancer Campaign), Asan Bio-Resource Center of the Korea
Biobank Network, Seoul, South Korea, OSBREAC consortium, The Icelandic Centre for Research (RANNIS), The
Swedish Cancer Society and the Swedish Research Council, and Fondation Jean Dausset-Centre d’Etudes du
polymorphisme humain. Icelandic Cancer Registry, The Brisbane Breast Bank (The University of Queensland, The
Royal Brisbane & Women’s Hospital and QIMR Berghofer), Breast Cancer Tissue and Data Bank at KCL and
NIHR Biomedical Research Centre at Guy’s and St Thomas’s Hospitals. Breakthrough Breast Cancer and Cancer
Research UK Experimental Cancer Medicine Centre at KCL.

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

For pathology review: The Mouse Genome Project and Department of Pathology, Cambridge University Hospitals
NHS Foundation Trust for microscopes. Andrea Richardson, Anna Ehinger, Anne Vincent-Salomon, Carolien Van
Deurzen, Colin Purdie, Denis Larsimont, Dilip Giri, Dorthe Grabau, Elena Provenzano, Gaetan MacGrogan, Gert
Van den Eynden, Isabelle Treilleux, Jane E Brock, Jocelyne Jacquemier, Jorge Reis-Filho, Laurent Arnould, Louise
Jones, Marc van de Vijver, Øystein Garred, Roberto Salgado, Sarah Pinder, Sunil R Lakhani, Torill Sauer, Violetta
Barbashina.
Illumina UK Ltd for input on optimisation of sequencing throughout this project.
Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute Sequencing Core Facility, Core IT Facility and Cancer Genome Project Core IT
team and Cancer Genome Project Core Laboratory team for general support.
Personal funding: SN-Z is a Wellcome Beit Fellow and personally funded by a Wellcome Trust Intermediate
Fellowship (WT100183MA). LBA is supported through a J. Robert Oppenheimer Fellowship at Los Alamos
National Laboratory. ALR is partially supported by the Dana-Farber/Harvard Cancer Center SPORE in Breast
Cancer (NIH/NCI 5 P50 CA168504-02). DG was supported by the EU-FP7-SUPPRESSTEM project. AS was
supported by Cancer Genomics Netherlands (CGC.nl) through a grant from the Netherlands Organisation of
Scientific research (NWO). MS was supported by the EU-FP7-DDR response project. CS and CD are supported by
a grant from the Breast Cancer Research Foundation. EB was funded by EMBL. CS is funded by FNRS (Fonds
National de la Recherche Scientifique). SJJ is supported by Leading Foreign Research Institute Recruitment
Program through the National Research Foundation of Republic Korea (NRF 2011-0030105). GK is supported by
National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) grants funded by the Korean government (NRF
2015R1A2A1A10052578). John Foekens received funding from an ERC Advanced grant (No 322737).
For general contribution and administrative support: Fondation Synergie Lyon Cancer in France. Jon G Jonasson,
Department of Pathology, University Hospital & Faculty of Medicine, University of Iceland. Kaltin Ferguson,
Tissue Bank Manager, Brisbane Breast Bank and The Breast Unit, The Royal Brisbane and Women’s Hospital,
Brisbane, Australia. The Oslo Breast Cancer Consortium of Norway (OSBREAC). Angelo Paradiso, IRCCS Istituto
Tumori “Giovanni Paolo II”, Bari Italy. Antita Vines for administratively supporting to identifying the samples,

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 02.

Nik-Zainal et al.

Page 29
organizing the bank, and sending out the samples. Margrete Schlooz-Vries, Jolien Tol, Hanneke van Laarhoven,
Fred Sweep, Peter Bult in Nijmegen for contributions in Nijmegen. This research used resources provided by the
Los Alamos National Laboratory Institutional Computing Program, which is supported by the U.S. Department of
Energy National Nuclear Security Administration under Contract No. DE-AC52-06NA25396. Research performed
at Los Alamos National Laboratory was carried out under the auspices of the National Nuclear Security
Administration of the United States Department of Energy. Nancy Miller (in memoriam) for her contribution in
setting up the clinical database.

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Finally, we would like to acknowledge all members of the ICGC Breast Cancer Working Group and ICGC Asian
Breast Cancer Project.

References

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

1. Stratton MR, Campbell PJ, Futreal PA. The cancer genome. Nature. 2009; 458:719–724. DOI:
10.1038/nature07943 [PubMed: 19360079]
2. Nik-Zainal S, et al. Mutational processes molding the genomes of 21 breast cancers. Cell. 2012;
149:979–993. DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2012.04.024 [PubMed: 22608084]
3. Nik-Zainal S, et al. The life history of 21 breast cancers. Cell. 2012; 149:994–1007. DOI: 10.1016/
j.cell.2012.04.023 [PubMed: 22608083]
4. Hicks J, et al. Novel patterns of genome rearrangement and their association with survival in breast
cancer. Genome research. 2006; 16:1465–1479. DOI: 10.1101/gr.5460106 [PubMed: 17142309]
5. Bergamaschi A, et al. Extracellular matrix signature identifies breast cancer subgroups with different
clinical outcome. The Journal of pathology. 2008; 214:357–367. DOI: 10.1002/path.2278 [PubMed:
18044827]
6. Ching HC, Naidu R, Seong MK, Har YC, Taib NA. Integrated analysis of copy number and loss of
heterozygosity in primary breast carcinomas using high-density SNP array. International journal of
oncology. 2011; 39:621–633. DOI: 10.3892/ijo.2011.1081 [PubMed: 21687935]
7. Fang M, et al. Genomic differences between estrogen receptor (ER)-positive and ER-negative
human breast carcinoma identified by single nucleotide polymorphism array comparative genome
hybridization analysis. Cancer. 2011; 117:2024–2034. DOI: 10.1002/cncr.25770 [PubMed:
21523713]
8. Curtis C, et al. The genomic and transcriptomic architecture of 2,000 breast tumours reveals novel
subgroups. Nature. 2012; 486:346–352. DOI: 10.1038/nature10983 [PubMed: 22522925]
9. Pleasance ED, et al. A comprehensive catalogue of somatic mutations from a human cancer genome.
Nature. 2010; 463:191–196. DOI: 10.1038/nature08658 [PubMed: 20016485]
10. Pleasance ED, et al. A small-cell lung cancer genome with complex signatures of tobacco
exposure. Nature. 2010; 463:184–190. DOI: 10.1038/nature08629 [PubMed: 20016488]
11. Banerji S, et al. Sequence analysis of mutations and translocations across breast cancer subtypes.
Nature. 2012; 486:405–409. DOI: 10.1038/nature11154 [PubMed: 22722202]
12. Ellis MJ, et al. Whole-genome analysis informs breast cancer response to aromatase inhibition.
Nature. 2012; 486:353–360. DOI: 10.1038/nature11143 [PubMed: 22722193]
13. Shah SP, et al. The clonal and mutational evolution spectrum of primary triple-negative breast
cancers. Nature. 2012; 486:395–399. DOI: 10.1038/nature10933 [PubMed: 22495314]
14. Stephens PJ, et al. The landscape of cancer genes and mutational processes in breast cancer.
Nature. 2012; 486:400–404. DOI: 10.1038/nature11017 [PubMed: 22722201]
15. Cancer Genome Atlas N. Comprehensive molecular portraits of human breast tumours. Nature.
2012; 490:61–70. DOI: 10.1038/nature11412 [PubMed: 23000897]
16. Wu YM, et al. Identification of targetable FGFR gene fusions in diverse cancers. Cancer discovery.
2013; 3:636–647. DOI: 10.1158/2159-8290.CD-13-0050 [PubMed: 23558953]
17. Giacomini CP, et al. Breakpoint analysis of transcriptional and genomic profiles uncovers novel
gene fusions spanning multiple human cancer types. PLoS genetics. 2013; 9:e1003464.doi:
10.1371/journal.pgen.1003464 [PubMed: 23637631]
18. Robinson DR, et al. Functionally recurrent rearrangements of the MAST kinase and Notch gene
families in breast cancer. Nature medicine. 2011; 17:1646–1651. DOI: 10.1038/nm.2580

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 02.

Nik-Zainal et al.

Page 30

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

19. Karlsson J, et al. Activation of human telomerase reverse transcriptase through gene fusion in clear
cell sarcoma of the kidney. Cancer letters. 2015; 357:498–501. DOI: 10.1016/j.canlet.2014.11.057
[PubMed: 25481751]
20. Khurana E, et al. Integrative annotation of variants from 1092 humans: application to cancer
genomics. Science. 2013; 342:1235587.doi: 10.1126/science.1235587 [PubMed: 24092746]
21. West JA, et al. The long noncoding RNAs NEAT1 and MALAT1 bind active chromatin sites.
Molecular cell. 2014; 55:791–802. DOI: 10.1016/j.molcel.2014.07.012 [PubMed: 25155612]
22. Huang FW, et al. Highly recurrent TERT promoter mutations in human melanoma. Science. 2013;
339:957–959. DOI: 10.1126/science.1229259 [PubMed: 23348506]
23. Vinagre J, et al. Frequency of TERT promoter mutations in human cancers. Nature
communications. 2013; 4:2185.doi: 10.1038/ncomms3185
24. Alexandrov LB, et al. Signatures of mutational processes in human cancer. Nature. 2013; 500:415–
421. DOI: 10.1038/nature12477 [PubMed: 23945592]
25. Alexandrov LB, Nik-Zainal S, Wedge DC, Campbell PJ, Stratton MR. Deciphering signatures of
mutational processes operative in human cancer. Cell reports. 2013; 3:246–259. DOI: 10.1016/
j.celrep.2012.12.008 [PubMed: 23318258]
26. Lawrence MS, et al. Discovery and saturation analysis of cancer genes across 21 tumour types.
Nature. 2014; 505:495–501. DOI: 10.1038/nature12912 [PubMed: 24390350]
27. Natrajan R, et al. Characterization of the genomic features and expressed fusion genes in
micropapillary carcinomas of the breast. The Journal of pathology. 2014; 232:553–565. DOI:
10.1002/path.4325 [PubMed: 24395524]
28. Kalyana-Sundaram S, et al. Gene fusions associated with recurrent amplicons represent a class of
passenger aberrations in breast cancer. Neoplasia. 2012; 14:702–708. [PubMed: 22952423]
29. Tubio JM. Somatic structural variation and cancer. Briefings in functional genomics. 2015; doi:
10.1093/bfgp/elv016
30. Weinhold N, Jacobsen A, Schultz N, Sander C, Lee W. Genome-wide analysis of noncoding
regulatory mutations in cancer. Nature genetics. 2014; 46:1160–1165. DOI: 10.1038/ng.3101
[PubMed: 25261935]
31. Ussery DW, Binnewies TT, Gouveia-Oliveira R, Jarmer H, Hallin PF. Genome update: DNA
repeats in bacterial genomes. Microbiol-Sgm. 2004; 150:3519–3521. DOI: 10.1099/Mic.0.27628-0
32. Lu S, et al. Short Inverted Repeats Are Hotspots for Genetic Instability: Relevance to Cancer
Genomes. Cell reports. 2015; doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2015.02.039
33. Voineagu I, Narayanan V, Lobachev KS, Mirkin SM. Replication stalling at unstable inverted
repeats: interplay between DNA hairpins and fork stabilizing proteins. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America. 2008; 105:9936–9941. DOI: 10.1073/pnas.
0804510105 [PubMed: 18632578]
34. Wojcik EA, et al. Direct and inverted repeats elicit genetic instability by both exploiting and
eluding DNA double-strand break repair systems in mycobacteria. PloS one. 2012; 7:e51064.doi:
10.1371/journal.pone.0051064 [PubMed: 23251422]
35. Pearson CE, Zorbas H, Price GB, Zannis-Hadjopoulos M. Inverted repeats, stem-loops, and
cruciforms: significance for initiation of DNA replication. Journal of cellular biochemistry. 1996;
63:1–22. DOI: 10.1002/(SICI)1097-4644(199610)63:1<1::AID-JCB1>3.0.CO;2-3 [PubMed:
8891900]
36. Kozak M. Interpreting cDNA sequences: some insights from studies on translation. Mammalian
genome : official journal of the International Mammalian Genome Society. 1996; 7:563–574.
[PubMed: 8679005]
37. Helleday T, Eshtad S, Nik-Zainal S. Mechanisms underlying mutational signatures in human
cancers. Nature reviews Genetics. 2014; 15:585–598. DOI: 10.1038/nrg3729
38. Birkbak NJ, et al. Telomeric allelic imbalance indicates defective DNA repair and sensitivity to
DNA-damaging agents. Cancer discovery. 2012; 2:366–375. DOI:
10.1158/2159-8290.CD-11-0206 [PubMed: 22576213]
39. Abkevich V, et al. Patterns of genomic loss of heterozygosity predict homologous recombination
repair defects in epithelial ovarian cancer. British journal of cancer. 2012; 107:1776–1782. DOI:
10.1038/bjc.2012.451 [PubMed: 23047548]
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 02.

Nik-Zainal et al.

Page 31

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

40. Popova T, et al. Ploidy and large-scale genomic instability consistently identify basal-like breast
carcinomas with BRCA1/2 inactivation. Cancer research. 2012; 72:5454–5462. DOI:
10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-1470 [PubMed: 22933060]
41. Puente XS, et al. Whole-genome sequencing identifies recurrent mutations in chronic lymphocytic
leukaemia. Nature. 2011; 475:101–105. DOI: 10.1038/nature10113 [PubMed: 21642962]
42. Morganella SALB. The topography of mutational processes in breast cancer. 2015 Submitted.
43. Fong PC, et al. Inhibition of poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase in tumors from BRCA mutation
carriers. The New England journal of medicine. 2009; 361:123–134. DOI: 10.1056/
NEJMoa0900212 [PubMed: 19553641]
44. Forster MD, et al. Treatment with olaparib in a patient with PTEN-deficient endometrioid
endometrial cancer. Nature reviews Clinical oncology. 2011; 8:302–306. DOI: 10.1038/nrclinonc.
2011.42
45. Turner N, Tutt A, Ashworth A. Targeting the DNA repair defect of BRCA tumours. Current
opinion in pharmacology. 2005; 5:388–393. DOI: 10.1016/j.coph.2005.03.006 [PubMed:
15955736]
46. Waddell N, et al. Whole genomes redefine the mutational landscape of pancreatic cancer. Nature.
2015; 518:495–501. DOI: 10.1038/nature14169 [PubMed: 25719666]
47. Kozarewa I, et al. Amplification-free Illumina sequencing-library preparation facilitates improved
mapping and assembly of (G+C)-biased genomes. Nature methods. 2009; 6:291–295. DOI:
10.1038/nmeth.1311 [PubMed: 19287394]
48. Li H, Durbin R. Fast and accurate short read alignment with Burrows-Wheeler transform.
Bioinformatics. 2009; 25:1754–1760. DOI: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btp324 [PubMed: 19451168]
49. Ye K, Schulz MH, Long Q, Apweiler R, Ning Z. Pindel: a pattern growth approach to detect break
points of large deletions and medium sized insertions from paired-end short reads. Bioinformatics.
2009; 25:2865–2871. DOI: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btp394 [PubMed: 19561018]
50. Zerbino DR, Birney E. Velvet: algorithms for de novo short read assembly using de Bruijn graphs.
Genome research. 2008; 18:821–829. DOI: 10.1101/gr.074492.107 [PubMed: 18349386]
51. Van Loo P, et al. Allele-specific copy number analysis of tumors. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America. 2010; 107:16910–16915. DOI: 10.1073/
pnas.1009843107 [PubMed: 20837533]
52. Greenman C, Wooster R, Futreal PA, Stratton MR, Easton DF. Statistical analysis of pathogenicity
of somatic mutations in cancer. Genetics. 2006; 173:2187–2198. DOI: 10.1534/genetics.
105.044677 [PubMed: 16783027]
53. Lawrence MS, et al. Mutational heterogeneity in cancer and the search for new cancer-associated
genes. Nature. 2013; 499:214–218. DOI: 10.1038/nature12213 [PubMed: 23770567]
54. Sun L, Craiu RV, Paterson AD, Bull SB. Stratified false discovery control for large-scale
hypothesis testing with application to genome-wide association studies. Genetic epidemiology.
2006; 30:519–530. DOI: 10.1002/gepi.20164 [PubMed: 16800000]
55. Consortium EP. An integrated encyclopedia of DNA elements in the human genome. Nature. 2012;
489:57–74. DOI: 10.1038/nature11247 [PubMed: 22955616]
56. Wilkerson MD, Hayes DN. ConsensusClusterPlus: a class discovery tool with confidence
assessments and item tracking. Bioinformatics. 2010; 26:1572–1573. btq170 [pii]. [PubMed:
20427518]
57. Zhang H, Meltzer P, Davis S. RCircos: an R package for Circos 2D track plots. BMC
bioinformatics. 2013; 14:244.doi: 10.1186/1471-2105-14-244 [PubMed: 23937229]

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 02.

Nik-Zainal et al.

Page 32

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Figure 1. Cohort and catalogue of somatic mutations in 560 breast cancers.

(A) Catalogue of base substitutions, insertions/deletions, rearrangements and driver
mutations in 560 breast cancers (sorted by total substitution burden). Indel axis limited to
5,000(*).
(B) Complete list of curated driver genes sorted by frequency (descending). Fraction of ER
positive (left, total 366) and ER negative (right, total 194) samples carrying a mutation in the
relevant driver gene presented in grey. Log10 p-value of enrichment of each driver gene
towards the ER positive or ER negative cohort is provided in black. Highlighted in green are

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 02.

Nik-Zainal et al.

Page 33

genes for which there is new or further evidence supporting these as novel breast cancer
genes.

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 02.

Nik-Zainal et al.

Page 34

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Figure 2. Non-coding analyses of breast cancer genomes

(A) Distributions of substitution (purple dots) and indel (blue dots) mutations within the
footprint of five regulatory regions identified as being more significantly mutated than
expected is provided on the left. The proportion of base substitution mutation signatures
associated with corresponding samples carrying mutations in each of these non-coding
regions, is displayed on the right.
(B) Mutability of TGAACA/TGTTCA motifs within inverted repeats of varying flanking
palindromic sequence length compared to motifs not within an inverted repeat.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 02.

Nik-Zainal et al.

Page 35

(C) Variation in mutability between loci of TGAACA/TGTTCA inverted repeats with 9bp
palindromes.

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 02.

Nik-Zainal et al.

Page 36

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Figure 3. Extraction and contributions of base substitution signatures in 560 breast cancers

(A) Twelve mutation signatures extracted using Non-Negative Matrix Factorization. Each
signature is ordered by mutation class (C>A/G>T, C>G/G>C, C>T/G>A, T>A/A>T, T>C/
A>G, T>G/A>C), taking immediate flanking sequence into account. For each class,
mutations are ordered by 5’ base (A,C,G,T) first before 3’ base (A,C,G,T).
(B) The spectrum of base substitution signatures within 560 breast cancers. Mutation
signatures are ordered (and coloured) according to broad biological groups: Signatures 1 and
5 are correlated with age of diagnosis, Signatures 2 and 13 are putatively APOBEC-related,

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 02.

Nik-Zainal et al.

Page 37

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Signatures 6, 20 and 26 are associated with MMR deficiency, Signatures 3 and 8 are
associated with HR deficiency, Signatures 18, 17 and 30 have unknown etiology. For ease of
reading, this arrangement is adopted for the rest of the manuscript. Samples are ordered
according to hierarchical clustering performed on mutation signatures. Top panel shows
absolute numbers of mutations of each signature in each sample. Lower panel shows
proportion of each signature in each sample.
(C) Distribution of mutation counts for each signature in relevant breast cancer samples.
Percentage of samples carrying each signature provided above each signature.

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 02.

Nik-Zainal et al.

Page 38

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Figure 4. Additional characteristics of base substitution signatures and novel rearrangement
signatures in 560 breast cancers

(A) Contrasting transcriptional strand asymmetry and replication strand asymmetry between
twelve base substitution signatures.
(B) Six rearrangement signatures extracted using Non-Negative Matrix Factorization.
Probability of rearrangement element on y-axis. Rearrangement size on x-axis. Del=
deletion, tds = tandem duplication, inv = inversion, trans = translocation.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 02.

Nik-Zainal et al.

Page 39

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Figure 5. Integrative analysis of rearrangement signatures

Heatmap of rearrangement signatures (RS) following unsupervised hierarchical clustering
based on proportions of RS in each cancer. 7 cluster groups (A-G) noted and relationships
with expression (AIMS) subtype (basal=red, luminal B=light blue, luminal A=dark blue),
immunohistopathology status (ER, PR, HER2 status – black=positive), abrogation of
BRCA1 (purple) and BRCA2 (orange) (whether germline, somatic or through promoter
hypermethylation), presence of 3 or more foci of kataegis (black=positive), HRD index (top
25% or lowest 25% - black=positive), GISTIC cluster group (black=positive) and driver

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 02.

Nik-Zainal et al.

Page 40

mutations in cancer genes. miRNA cluster groups : 0=red, 1=purple, 2=blue, 3=light blue,
4=green, 5=orange. Contribution of base substitution signatures in these 7 cluster groups is
provided in the lowermost panel.

Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 02.

