Correspondence

Population-Based Case-Control
Study of Recreational Drug Use
and Testis Cancer Risk Confirms
an Association Between
Marijuana Use and
Nonseminoma Risk
In a recent issue of Cancer, Lacson et al reported the results
of a population-based case-control study that provided
evidence of an association between marijuana use and the
development of nonseminomatous testicular germ cell
tumors (NTGCT).1 The authors found a greater than 2fold increased risk of NTGCT in subjects with any history
of marijuana use compared with never-users, but there
was no such association observed between marijuana use
and the development of seminomas. These findings are
consistent with at least 2 prior reports that have demonstrated an association between marijuana use and the
development of NTGCT.2,3
The authors reported that all patients in their study
were asked about the year of their first marijuana use.
However, the results do not make any mention of the
impact of age at the time of first marijuana use on the
development of NTGCT. There are several reasons why
this variable is of interest and should be evaluated using
the data from this study.
First, because the peak incidence of NTGCT occurs
during the third decade of life, the carcinogenic insults
that may be responsible for the development of these
tumors are likely to occur at a fairly young age.4 Furthermore, because developing spermatogonia undergo particularly high rates of replication and differentiation during
puberty, there may be a higher risk of carcinogenesis from
environmental exposures during this period.5 Finally, and
perhaps most convincingly, the study by Daling et al demonstrated that the risk of developing NTGCT was
elevated for subjects who started using marijuana at age
18 years or younger, but it was not found to be elevated
for those who started using marijuana after age 18 years.2
If these data are available to be analyzed from the
current study, it would be useful to know whether the
results corroborate the findings of Daling et al regarding
the impact of age at the time of first marijuana use on the
development of NTGCT.

1284

CONFLICT OF INTEREST DISCLOSURES
The authors made no disclosures.

REFERENCES
1. Lacson JC, Carroll JD, Tuazon E, Castelao EJ, Bernstein L,
Cortessis VK. Population-based case-control study of recreational drug use and testis cancer risk confirms an association
between marijuana use and nonseminoma risk. Cancer.
2012;118:5374-5383.
2. Daling JR, Doody DR, Sun X, et al. Association of marijuana use and the incidence of testicular germ cell tumors.
Cancer. 2009;115:1215-1223.
3. Trabert B, Sigurdson AJ, Sweeney AM, Strom SS, McGlynn
KA. Marijuana use and testicular germ cell tumors. Cancer.
2011;117:848-853.
4. Manecksha RP, Fitzpatrick JM. Epidemiology of testicular
cancer. BJU Int. 2009;104(9 pt B):1329-1333.
5. Richiardi L, Pettersson A, Akre O. Genetic and environmental risk factors for testicular cancer. Int J Androl.
2007;30: 230-240; discussion 240-241.

David M. Marcus, MD
Ashesh B. Jani, MD
Peter J. Rossi, MD
Department of Radiation Oncology
Winship Cancer Institute
Emory University
Atlanta, Georgia
DOI: 10.1002/cncr.27879, Published online: December 11, 2012 in
Wiley Online Library (wileyonlinelibrary.com)

Potential Impact of Age at
First Marijuana Use on the
Development of
Nonseminomatous Testicular
Germ Cell Tumors
We concur with the suggestion of Marcus and colleagues
that age at first marijuana use may have an impact on testicular germ cell tumor (TGCT) development.1 Results
of analyses addressing this possibility were not presented
in our recently published study addressing recreational
drug use in relation to risk of TGCTs,2 because data
were too sparse to support meaningful analyses addressing this question within the subset of men who developed nonseminoma and their matched controls. We

Cancer

March 15, 2013

