www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Oncotarget, 2017, Vol. 8, (No. 9), pp: 15420-15430
Research Paper

Increased autophagy in fibroblast-like synoviocytes leads to
immune enhancement potential in rheumatoid arthritis
Ru Yang1,*, Yingzi Zhang2,*, Lin Wang3,*, Ji Hu4, Jian Wen1, Leixi Xue1, Mei Tang1,
Zhichun Liu1, Jinxiang Fu5
1

Department of Rheumatology, The Second Affiliated Hospital to Soochow University, Jiangsu, China

2

Department of Orthopaedics, The Second Affiliated Hospital to Soochow University, Jiangsu, China

3

Department of Laboratory Medicine, The First Affiliated Hospital to Soochow University, Jiangsu, China

4

Department of Endocrinology, The Second Affiliated Hospital to Soochow University, Jiangsu, China

5

Department of Hematology, The Second Affiliated Hospital to Soochow University, Jiangsu, China

*

These authors have contributed equally to this work

Correspondence to: Jinxiang Fu, email: fjx3000@126.com
Zhichun Liu, email: lzchun5190@sina.com
Keywords: rheumatoid arthritis, autophagy, fibroblast-like synoviocytes, IL-6
Received: May 23, 2016     Accepted: November 01, 2016     Published: December 28, 2016

ABSTRACT
The incidence of rheumatoid arthritis (RA) has been reported to be correlated
with a disorder of immunregulation. Rheumatoid arthritis fibroblast-like synoviocytes
(RA-FLSs) play an important role in regulating the local immune microenvironment.
However, the potential mechanism of RA-FLS in regulating the immnue response
is not clearly understood. In this study, we demonstrated that the expression of
HIF-1α was significantly up-regulated in rheumatoid arthritis tissue which indicated
that the hypoxia condition in the microenvironment. We also observed that RA-FLSs
demonstrated the potential to up-regulate immune activation. Meanwhile, the level
of autophagy increased in RA-FLSs compared with control group. Besides that, the
expression of IL-6 was up-regulated not only in RA-FLSs but also in the fibroblasts
that treated with hypoxia condition. Accordingly, we found that autophagy inhibitiors
could effectively inhibit the immune activation function of RA-FLSs medicated by
IL-6. Taken together, the results we demonstrated above indicated that the hypoxia
microenvironment could effectively induce the incidence of autophagy and then lead
to the immune activation function of RA-FLSs medicated by IL-6.

pathogenic cells such as osteoclasts and B cells [6, 7].
However, two major problems still unresolved one is up
to 30% of RA patients fail to respond to treatments, and
the other is radiographic progression of joint damage even
accompany with clinical remission of the inflammatory
component. Consequently, inhibition of inflammation may
not be sufficient to suppress the progression of RA and the
mechanisms of RA need further exploring.
Fibroblast-like synoviocytes (FLS), located in the
synovial tissue and strong correlation with the progress
of RA, has drawn many researchers’ attentions [8, 9].
Meanwhile, FLS precursors has been demonstrated could
migrate to the synovium via pores in cortical bone, as
has been demonstrated in mice with collagen-induced
arthritis [10]. Compared to healthy FLS, Rheumatoid
arthritis fibroblast-like synoviocyte (RA-FLS) has

INTRODUCTION
Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is an autoimmunemediated chronic inflammatory joint disease which affects
approximately 1% of the population with disability and
decreased quality of life in the end-stage [1, 2]. Many
investigations have indicated that RA is caused by genetic
and/or environmental factors and characteristically affect
the small joints of the hands and feet which often lead
to joint structure destruction and functional impairment
[3, 4]. Increased studies demonstrated the pathogenetic
mechanism of RA was caused by cytokine networks
and associated cells [5]. Many interventions have been
employed in treating RA and gained a great progress in
treating RA, like inhibiting interleukin (IL)-1, IL-6 and
tumor necrosis factor (TNF)αsignaling pathway, or target
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

15420

Oncotarget

acquired MHC class II and works as an antigen presenting
cell which can cause T cell activation and proliferation
in a comparable way to antigen present cells (APCs)
[11]. In addition, the mechanisms of RA-FLS inducing
the activation and proliferation of T cells by interacting
between CD47 expressed on T cell surface and its ligand
(thrombospondin-1) expressed by FLS or interacting
between CXCR4 expressed on T cell surface and its ligand
(stromal cell-derived factor-1, SDF-1) expressed by FLS
[12]. Furthermore, RA-FLS can directly aggravate the
inflammatory processes through enhancing to the local
production of cytokines, inflammatory small molecule
mediators and proteolytic enzymes that degrade the
extracellular matrix [13]. Based on the understanding
of RA-FLS biology, RA-FLS is described as a potential
targeting cell in treating RA which might improve clinical
outcomes in inflammatory arthritis without suppressing
systemic immunity. However, despite many studies
and methods were employed in inhibiting the progress
of RA by suppressing RA-FLS, the prognosis remains
unsatisfied. Thus, further study of the mechanism of RAPLS is needed.
Former studies indicated that inflammatory-related
tissue damage can lead to local blood supply deficiency
which can form a hypoxic microenvironment [14]. It
has been reported that hypoxic stress could effectively
induce the incidence of autophagy in many cells [15–17].
However, the influence and internal mechanism of RAFLS immune regulating function affected by hypoxic
microenvironment is still unclear.
In our present study, we aim to observe the effect
of RA-FLS immune regulating function influenced
by hypoxic microenvironment and further explore the
potential mechanism. The result demonstrated that
hypoxic stress can obviously increase the autophagy of
RA-PLSs and inhibition the autophagy can significantly
down-regulated the immune activation function of
RA-FLSs. Furthermore, we found that the mechanism
of autophagy increased by hypoxic stress enhanced
the immune activation function via up-regulated the
expression of IL-6.

tissues compared with normal control group. These results
indicate that the incidence of rheumatoid arthritis may
associate with hypoxia microenvironment.

RA-FLSs demonstrated the potential to
up-regulate immune activation
RA-FLSs were isolated from rheumatoid arthritis
tissues. Then the effect of RA-FLSs on the cell viability
and apoptosis of lymphocytes was detected through
cultivated with supernate of RA-FLSs. As shown in
Figure 2A, compared with control group, RA-FLSs could
effectively enhance the cell viability of lymphocytes,
whereas N-FLSs had no obvious effect on the proliferation
of lymphocytes [18]. However, the FLSs collected from
normal tissues were cultured in hypoxia condition, the
N-FLSs then could significantly promote the cell viability
of lymphocytes compared with control group (Figure 2B).
Besides, we also observed that RA-FLSs decreased the
apoptosis of lymphocytes and N-FLSs had no significant
on the apoptosis. Furthermore, the N-FLSs pretreated with
hypoxia condition could also decrease the apoptosis of
lymphocytes (Figure 2C and 2D). These results implied
that hypoxia condition may be a key factor in activating
the potential of FLSs to up-regulate immune activation.

The level of autophagy increased significantly in
RA-FLSs
It has been reported that hypoxic stress could
effectively induce the incidence of autophagy [15–17].
Then we observed the level of autophagy in RA-FLSs and
N-FLSs by using a GFP-LC3 expression vector which the
primarily diffused fluorescence changed into a punctate
fluorescence within cells undergoing autophagy. As
shown in Figure 3A, the level of autophagy in RA-FLSs is
significantly higher than N-FLSs, which exhibited a high
number of punctate GFP. Meanwhile, hypoxia condition
could effectively lead to the occurrence of autophagy in
N-FLSs. Meanwhile, the average percentages of GFP-LC3II
cells was counted and the result was consistent (Figure 3B).
Besides that, we also employed immunoﬂuorescence to
observe p62 expression in N-FLSs, RA-FLSs and N-FLSs
cultured in hypoxic condition. The results showed that the
expression of p62 in RA-FLSs and N-FLSs cultured in
hypoxic condition obviously decreased which indicated
that high level of autophagy in RA-FLSs and the N-FLSs
cultured in hypoxic condition than N-FLSs (Figure 3C). At
the same time, the average percentages of p62 cells was
also counted and the result was consistent (Figure 3D). The
results from western blot also demonstrated that LC-3II
expression was also up-regulated in RA-FLSs and N-FLSs
that treated with hypoxia condition by contrasting with
N-FLSs. And the p62 expression down-regulated in RAFLSs and N-FLSs that treated with hypoxia condition by
contrasting with N-FLSs (Figure 3E).

RESULTS
The expression of HIF-1α was significantly
up-regulated in rheumatoid arthritis tissue
Firstly, we constructed the animal model of
rheumatoid arthritis. In the tissues of rheumatoid arthritis,
we could observe that the expression of HIF-1α was
significantly up-regulated, which indicated that the
hypoxia condition in the microenvironment (Figure 1A).
Besides that, we also employed lactic acid detection assay
to confirm the hypoxia microenvironment in rheumatoid
arthritis tissues. As shown Figure 1B, we found that
hypoxia microenvironment existed in rheumatoid arthritis
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

15421

Oncotarget

Autophagy inhibitors could effectively inhibit
the immune activation function of RA-FLSs

autophagy might play an important role in the immune
activation function of RA-FLSs

In order to confirm the role autophagy in the immune
activation function of RA-FLSs, we used autophagy
inhibitor 3-methyladenine (3-MA) and Chloroquine (CQ)
to inhibit the autophagy in RA-FLSs. The results showed
that the enhancement of RA-FLSs on the cell viability of
lymphocytes was significantly decreased by 3-MA and CQ
(Figure 4A). Meanwhile, the apoptosis of lymphocytes
increased when cocultured with RA-FLSs that the
autophagy was inhibited by 3-MA and CQ compared with
control group (Figure 4B). These results suggested that

The expression of IL-6 was up-regulated not only
in RA-FLSs but also in N-FLSs that treated with
hypoxia condition
It has been reported that IL-6 is a key immune factor
which is up-regulated in the tissue of RA. Then we assess
the secretion of IL-6 in RA-FLSs and N-FLSs by ELISA.
As shown in Figure 5A, the expression of IL-6 was
significantly higher in RA-FLSs compared with N-FLSs.
Meanwhile, hypoxia condition could effectively induce the
up-regulation of IL-6 in N-FLSs. Furthermore, blockade

Figure 1: The expression of HIF-1α was significantly up-regulated in rheumatoid arthritis tissue. A. IHC was employed
to detect the expression of HIF-1α in rheumatoid arthritis tissues. B. Lactic acid detection assay was used to examine the hypoxic state
in rheumatoid arthritis tissues. Data represent three independent experiments with SD. Statistically significant differences are shown
(*P < 0.05; **P<0.01).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

15422

Oncotarget

of IL-6 expression by shRNA in RA-FLSs diminished the
ability of RA-FLSs in immune activation by cultivating
lymphocytes with the supernate of RA-FLSs (Figure 5B
and 5C). The result is also demonstrated in N-FLSs with
hypoxia condition contrasted with N-FLSs (Figure 5D and
5E). Collectively, these results confirmed that IL-6 was the
key factor that mediated the immune activation function of
RA-FLSs and hypoxia condition might play an important
role in up-regulate the expression of IL-6 in N-FLSs.

expression of IL-6 in N-FLSs (Figure 6A). As shown in
Figure 6C and 6D, inhibition of autophagy by 3-MA and
CQ could lead to the down-regulation of IL-6 in RA-FLSs.
The result suggested that the IL-6 associated immune
activation function of RA-FLSs induced by hypoxia
microenvironment may be mediated by autophagy.

DISCUSSION
In our study, we showed the effect of immune
activation function influenced by hypoxic condition
in RA-FLSs and explored the possible mechanisms.
Firstly, we found the high expression of HIF-1α by IHC
in the animal with rheumatoid arthritis which indicated
the incidence of rheumatoid arthritis is associated with
hypoxia microenvironment. Subsequently, we separated
the RA-FLS and healthy FLS from rheumatoid arthritis
tissues and normal and then treated to T cells by coculture. By detecting the cell viability and apoptosis of
lymphocytes, we found that RA-FLS could obviously
enhance the cell viability and decreased the apoptosis by

Autophagy mediated the up-regulation of IL-6 in
RA-FLSs
We have demonstrated that hypoxia condition could
induce the incidence of autophagy, meanwhile it also
lead to up-regulation of IL-6 in RA-FLSs. We employed
autophagy inhibitor 3-MA and CQ to confirm the role of
autophagy in up-regulating the expression of IL-6 not only
in N-FLSs treated with hypoxia condition but also in RAFLSs. The results demonstrated that when the autophagy
was inhibited, hypoxia condition could not enhance the

Figure 2: RA-FLSs demonstrated the potential to up-regulate immune activation. A-B. CCK-8 assay was used to detect the
cell viability of lymphocytes. C-D. PI/Annexin V-FITC assay was used to examine the apoptosis of the lymphocytes by flow cytometry.
Data represent three independent experiments with SD. Statistically significant differences are shown (*P < 0.05; **P<0.01).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

15423

Oncotarget

Figure 3: The level of autophagy increased significantly in RA-FLSs. A. N-FLSs were transfected with GFP-tagged LC3; after
24 hours transfection, the N-FLSs cultured in hypoxia condition (1% O2) for 8 hours and then were observe by a fluorescence microscope.
RA-FLSs were transfected with GFP-tagged LC3; after 24 hours transfection, the RA-FLSs were observed by a fluorescence microscope.
Arrows show the punctate GFP-LC3 in the cytoplasm (×1000). B. The average percentages of GFP-LC3II cells. C. Immunfluorescence
was employed to observe the expression of p62 in RA-FLSs and N-FLSs. N-FLSs were obtained from control rat model (×1000). D. The
average percentages of GFP-LC3II cells. E. Western blot were used to examine the expression of LC-3II and p62.

Figure 4: Autophagy inhibitors could effectively inhibit the immune activation function of RA-FLSs. A. CCK-8 assay
was used to detect the cell viability of lymphocytes B. PI/Annexin V-FITC assay was used to examine the apoptosis of the lymphocytes
by flow cytometry with or without autophagy inhibitor 3-MA and CQ. Data represent three independent experiments with SD. Statistically
significant differences are shown (*P < 0.05; **P<0.01).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

15424

Oncotarget

comparing to healthy FLS-treated. Moreover, compared to
control group, the autophagy of RA-PLS was significantly
up-regulated by analyzing the expression of LC3 and
p62 which was cultured in hypoxic condition. To further

demonstrated the relationship between autophagy and
immune activation function, autophagy inhibitors (3-MA
and CQ) were used and the results indicated that inhibition
of autophagy often accompany with down-regulation of

Figure 5: The expression of IL-6 was up-regulated not only in RA-FLSs but also in the fibroblasts that treated with
hypoxia condition. A. ELISA was employed to detect the expression of IL-6 in the conditioned mediums obtained from RA-FLSs and
N-FLSs; B and D. CCK-8 assay was used to detect the cell viability of lymphocytes with or without inhibiting the expression of IL-6 by
shRNA in RA-FLSs; C and F. PI/Annexin V-FITC assay was used to examine the apoptosis of the lymphocytes by flow cytometry with
or without inhibiting the expression of IL-6 by shRNA in RA-FLSs. Data represent three independent experiments with SD. Statistically
significant differences are shown (*P < 0.05; **P<0.01, NS means no significant).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

15425

Oncotarget

immune activation function in RA-FLS. Furthermore,
ELISA was performed and we observed that the secretion
of IL-6 in RA-FLSs treated with hypoxic condition
was obviously up-regulated. Additionally, inhibition of
autophagy by 3-MA and CQ could effectively block the
up-regulation of IL-6 caused by hypoxia condition, which
demonstrated that RA-FLS enhanced immune activation
function in hypoxic condition via increased autophagymediate the expression of IL-6.

Rheumatoid arthritis is a chronic inflammatory and
complex autoimmune disease [19]. Nowadays, many
methods have been adopted to treat it [20–22]. Through
it has got huge progress, yet up to 30% of RA patients
are failed to respond to treatments, and many of them
still have joint damage in radiographic progression even
accompanied with clinical remission of the inflammatory
component. All of above indicated that inhibition the
function of inflammatory cytokines, inflammatory

Figure 6: Autophagy mediated the up-regulation of IL-6 in RA-FLSs. A and C. Realtime PCR was used to detect the expression
of IL-6 in N-FLSs and RA-FLSs; B and D. ELISA was employed to detect the expression of IL-6 in the conditioned mediums obtained from
RA-FLSs and N-FLSs Data represent three independent experiments with SD. Statistically significant differences are shown (*P < 0.05;
**P<0.01, NS means no significant).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

15426

Oncotarget

Table 1: Sequence of the oligonucleotides for real-time PCR
Gene
β-actin
IL-6

Sequence (5’ to 3’)
F

GCCAACACAGTGCTGTCTG

R

TGATCCACATCTGCTGGAAGG

F

CCGGAGAGGAGACTTCACAG

R

ACAGTGCATCATCGCTGTTC

cells or damaged-targeting osteoclasts cannot cure RA
efficiently [23]. With the progression of studies, FLSs
has drawn many researcher’s attentions which has been
thought as a potential targeting cell in treating RA [8].
Many studies about the function and biology of FLS have
been explored, while the effect on interfering FLS is still
unsatisfied.
Former studies indicated that inflammatoryrelated tissue damage can lead to local blood supply
deficiency which can form a hypoxic microenvironment
[24, 25]. Hypoxic stress, marked as the high expression
of hypoxia-inducible factor-1α(HIF-1α), vascular
endothelial growth factor (VEGF) and carbonic
anhydrase IX (CAIX), could induce drug resistance and
down-regulate the therapeutic effect [26]. Especially, the
HIF-1αhas been demonstrated taking a relevant role in
drug-resistance [27]. In our study, we also demonstrated
that the expression of HIF-1α, which is a marker of
hypoxic stress, is significantly increased in the animal
with rheumatoid arthritis (Figure 1A and 1B). In addition,
the immune activation of RA-FLSs is obviously higher
than healthy FLSs (Figure 2A and 2B). To further explore
the mechanism, the LC3 and P62 were analyzed and
the result indicated that hypoxic can effectively induce
the incidence of autophagy in RA-FLSs. Importantly,
we found that the high incidence of autophagy in RAFLSs which can enhance the immune activation function
by increased in secretion of IL-6. Former studies have
demonstrated that IL-6 can up-regulated the immune
function by promote the proliferation of T cells. Present
result also showed that inhibiting the autophage can
suppress the secretion of IL-6. In conclusion, our study
indicated that ameliorate the hypoxic environment or
inhibit the autophagy may be an effective in treating RA
and increase the cure rate and improve prognosis.

3-methyladenine (3-MA, Cat.M9281) were purchased
from Sigma-Aldrich.

Animal model
All procedures involving animals were performed in
accordance with the institutional animal welfare guidelines
of Tongji University. Subcutaneous implantation of RAFLS cells was performed in armpit areas of nude mice.
Mice were examined three times per week.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Assessment of cell viability and apoptosis
Cell viability was assessed by Cell Counting Kit8 (CCK-8) assay. The lymphocytes were seeded in 96well plates (5000 cells per well). After 72h culturing,
CCK-8 (10μl) was added in each well. The plate was
then incubated at 37°C for another 2 hours. The optical
density (OD) value at 450nm of each well was examined
by spectrophotometer. All determinations were carried out
in sextuplicate. The lymphocytes (2×105cells/well) were
cultured in 6-well plate. According to the manufacturer’s
instruction (Keygen Biotech. Co., Ltd, Nanjing, China),
PI/Annexin V-FITC assay was used to examine the
apoptosis of the cells by flow cytometry. The lymphocytes
were collected and washed with ice cold PBS three times.
Then the cells were incubated in 300 μL of 1×binding
buffer containing 5 μL PI and 5 μL Annexin V in dark
at room temperature for 30 min. After incubation, the
apoptosis of the cells was detected by BD FACS Calibur
flow cytometer (BD FACS Calibur). The double positive
cells (PI and Annexin V positive) were concerned as
apoptotic cells [18]. And the results are expressed as the
percentage of apoptotic cells.

MATERIALS AND REAGENTS

Lactic acid detection assay

Cell lines and reagents

Firstly, same weight of Joint soft tissues was
obtained from nude mice and triturated to get the tissue
homogenate after added same volume. Subsequently, the
supernate was separated after centrifuging. Then we added
same volume supernate, substrate buffer and coenzyme,
and cultivated in 37°C, 15min after centrifuging. After
that, we added 2,4-dinitrophenylhydrazine (DNPH) and

The FLS cells were primary isolated from synovial
tissues and cultured in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s
medium (DMEM) (GIBCO, Invitrogen) with 10% fetal
bovine serum (FBS) at 37°C in a humidified atmosphere
containing 5% CO2. The 1% O2 condition was used as
hypoxia condition. Chloroquine (CQ, Cat.C6628) and
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

15427

Oncotarget

cultivated in 37°C, 15min after centrifuging. Sodium
hydroxide (NaOH) then was added and strewed 3min
for detecting the OD values in 440nm wave. The content
of lactic acid was calculated according to the stand
samples. The procedures were performed according to
the manuscript of lactic acid testing kit (A020-2, Nanjing
jiancheng, Nanjing, China).

(Roche) were used to transfect GFP-shRNA expression
plasmids into the cells. A scrambled sequence was used
as a negative control. At the end of each experiment, cells
were observed by fluorescence microscope and/or Western
Blot to determine transfection efficiency. The experiments
were conducted in triplicate.

Immunohistochemistry

Real-time RT-PCR

The paraffin-embedded tissues were cut into 4-μmthick slides and were deparaffinized and rehydrated. The
slides were blocked with 10% normal goat serum, then
rinsed in PBS and incubated for with affinity-purified
antibody (HIF-1α) in 2% normal goat serum in PBS for
overnight at 4°C. Then the primary antibody was rinsed
by PBS, biotinylated secondary antibody (1:500) was
added on the slides and incubated for 30 min. The second
antibody was omitted and bound secondary antibody
was detected by the 3,3’-diaminobenzidine (DAKO)
chromogen by standard methods.

Total mRNA was isolated from synovial tissues
or the cells by using Trizol reagent according to the
protocol offered by the manufacturer. The expression
of genes was determined by real-time PCR using the
SYBR Green Master Mix Kit. The sequences of the
primers were listed in Table 1. Thermocycler conditions
included an initial hold at 50°C for 2 minutes and then
95°C for 10 minutes, which was followed by a two-step
PCR program of 95°C for 15 seconds and 60°C for 60
seconds repeated for 40 cycles by using a Mx3000P QPCR
System (Stratagene, USA). The amount of endogenous
β-actin mRNA was used for an internal control for
qPCR in each sample. Alteration of mRNA expression
is presented as the fold change relative to an untreated
control. Primer sequences are listed in Table as follows:
IL-6 forward 5’-CCGGAGAGGAGACTTCACAG-3’
reverse5’-ACAGTGCATCATCGCTGTTC-3’, β–actin
forward 5’-GCCAACACAGTGCTGTCTG-3’ reverse
5’-TGATCCACATCTGCTGGAAGG-3’.

Immunofluorescence
The cells were fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde and
permeabilized with 0.1% Triton X-100 at room temperature
for 15 min. Then the cells were incubated with primary
antibody at 4°C overnight. Then the cells were washed
with PBS and treated with secondary antibody at 37°C for
60 min. After PBS washing, the cells were stained with
PADI to identify the nuclear. Then the cells were observed
by a fluorescence microscope (Olympus IX70).

Western blotting
All treated cells were washed with PBS and lysed
by RIPA and PMSF at a ratio of 100:1 to obtain the total
protein for Western blot. Equal amount of proteins was
separated by SDS-PAGE and transferred to polyvinylidene
fluoride membrane. After transferring, the polyvinylidene
fluoride membrane was blocked in 5% fat-free milk/1 ×
TBS/0.1% Tween-20 for 1 h at room temperature and then
incubated with primary antibodies with gentle agitation
overnight at 4°C. And then, the membrane was washed
with 1 × TBS/0.1% Tween-20 before incubated with the
secondary antibody according to the species of primary
antibody for 1 h at room temperature. Immunoblots were
performed by using the BeyoECL Plus substrate system
(Beyotime), followed by washing with 1 × TBS/0.1%
Tween-20. Western blot analyzed of LC3A/B (Abcam
ab128025) and GAPDH (AP0063, Bioworld).

Enzyme linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA)
A commercial ELISA kit (R&D Systems,
Minneapolis, MN) were used to identify the expression
of IL-6 in conditioned medium collected from FLSs. The
assay was performed accordingly to the protocol provided
by the manufacturer. Means and standard deviations of
concentrations in triplicate samples were compared by
t-test.

Statistical analysis
All data, expressed as mean ± SEM, were from at
least three separate experiments. Data sets were analyzed
by SPSS 18.0 software (SPSS, Inc., Chicago, USA).
Comparison was done with t test (unpaired or paired). All
p values presented were two-sided. P<0.05 was considered
to be statistically significant.

Short hairpin RNA (shRNA) synthesis and
transfection

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The shRNA sequences of genes were designed by
using Oligoengine software and verified by nucleotide
BLAST searches. According to the protocol from the
manufacturer, the cells were plated in 6-well plates
overnight and then Fugene HD transfection reagent
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

This project was supported by “Science and
education and health” youth science and technology
project in Suzhou city (No. kjxw2015007) and the national
youth science fund project in China (No. 81200507).
15428

Oncotarget

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST

8.	 Bartok B, Firestein GS: Fibroblast-like synoviocytes:
key effector cells in rheumatoid arthritis. Immunological
reviews. 2010; 233:233-255.

The authors have declared no conflicts of interest.

9.	 Bottini N, Firestein GS: Duality of fibroblast-like
synoviocytes in RA: passive responders and imprinted
aggressors. Nature reviews Rheumatology. 2013; 9:24-33.

Authorʼs contributions
Ru Yang, Yingzi Zhang and Lin Wang participated
in the design and performance of the study. Ru Yang,
and Yingzi Zhang carried out cell culture. Ru Yang
carried out molecular studies and analyzed the data. Ru
Yang, Ji Hu and Jian Wen did the mouse experiments.
Leixi Xue made the tissue sections. Mei Tang did the
immunohistochemistry assay. Zhichun Liu and Jinxiang
Fu conceived this study and participated in its design and
coordination. The manuscript was drafted by Ru Yang and
reviewed by all authors. All authors approved the final
version of the manuscript to be published.

10.	 Li H, Wan A: Apoptosis of rheumatoid arthritis fibroblastlike synoviocytes: possible roles of nitric oxide and
the thioredoxin 1. Mediators of inflammation. 2013;
2013:953462.
11.	 Korb A, Pavenstadt H, Pap T: Cell death in rheumatoid
arthritis. Apoptosis. 2009; 14:447-454.
12.	 Maiuri MC, Zalckvar E, Kimchi A, Kroemer G: Self-eating
and self-killing: crosstalk between autophagy and apoptosis.
Nature reviews Molecular cell biology. 2007; 8:741-752.
13.	 Fan L, Wang Q, Liu R, Zong M, He D, Zhang H, Ding
Y, Ma J: Citrullinated fibronectin inhibits apoptosis and
promotes the secretion of pro-inflammatory cytokines in
fibroblast-like synoviocytes in rheumatoid arthritis. Arthritis
research & therapy. 2012; 14:R266.

REFERENCES
1.	 Hoppe B, Haupl T, Egerer K, Gruber R, Kiesewetter
H, Salama A, Burmester GR, Dorner T: Influence of
peptidylarginine deiminase type 4 genotype and shared
epitope on clinical characteristics and autoantibody profile
of rheumatoid arthritis. Annals of the rheumatic diseases.
2009; 68:898-903.

14.	 Muz B, Khan MN, Kiriakidis S, Paleolog EM: Hypoxia.
The role of hypoxia and HIF-dependent signalling events
in rheumatoid arthritis. Arthritis research & therapy. 2009;
11:201.
15.	 Mazure NM, Pouyssegur J: Hypoxia-induced autophagy:
cell death or cell survival? Current opinion in cell biology.
2010; 22:177-180.

2.	 Anzilotti C, Pratesi F, Tommasi C, Migliorini P:
Peptidylarginine deiminase 4 and citrullination in health and
disease. Autoimmunity reviews. 2010; 9:158-160.

16.	 Bellot G, Garcia-Medina R, Gounon P, Chiche J, Roux D,
Pouyssegur J, Mazure NM: Hypoxia-induced autophagy
is mediated through hypoxia-inducible factor induction of
BNIP3 and BNIP3L via their BH3 domains. Molecular and
cellular biology. 2009; 29:2570-2581.

3.	 Viatte S, Plant D, Raychaudhuri S: Genetics and epigenetics
of rheumatoid arthritis. Nature reviews Rheumatology.
2013; 9:141-153.
4.	 Suzuki A, Yamada R, Chang X, Tokuhiro S, Sawada T,
Suzuki M, Nagasaki M, Nakayama-Hamada M, Kawaida
R, Ono M et al: Functional haplotypes of PADI4, encoding
citrullinating enzyme peptidylarginine deiminase 4, are
associated with rheumatoid arthritis. Nature genetics. 2003;
34:395-402.

17.	 Gordy C, He YW: The crosstalk between autophagy and
apoptosis: where does this lead? Protein & cell. 2012;
3:17-27.
18.	 Tasdemir E, Galluzzi L, Maiuri MC, Criollo A, Vitale
I, Hangen E, Modjtahedi N, Kroemer G: Methods for
assessing autophagy and autophagic cell death. Methods
Mol Biol. 2008; 445:29-76.

5.	 Harris ML, Darrah E, Lam GK, Bartlett SJ, Giles JT, Grant
AV, Gao P, Scott WW, Jr., El-Gabalawy H, Casciola-Rosen
L et al: Association of autoimmunity to peptidyl arginine
deiminase type 4 with genotype and disease severity in
rheumatoid arthritis. Arthritis and rheumatism. 2008;
58:1958-1967.

19.	 Kremer JM: Rheumatoid arthritis: New EULAR guidelines
for RA: a job well done. Nature reviews Rheumatology.
2014; 10:6-8.
20.	 Hou S, Gao GP, Zhang XJ, Sun L, Peng WJ, Wang HF,
Ge XJ, Huang W, Sun YH: PADI4 polymorphisms and
susceptibility to rheumatoid arthritis: a meta-analysis.
Modern rheumatology. 2013; 23:50-60.

6.	 Cha S, Choi CB, Han TU, Kang CP, Kang C, Bae SC:
Association of anti-cyclic citrullinated peptide antibody
levels with PADI4 haplotypes in early rheumatoid
arthritis and with shared epitope alleles in very late
rheumatoid arthritis. Arthritis and rheumatism. 2007;
56:1454-1463.

21.	 Iwamoto T, Ikari K, Nakamura T, Kuwahara M, Toyama
Y, Tomatsu T, Momohara S, Kamatani N: Association
between PADI4 and rheumatoid arthritis: a meta-analysis.
Rheumatology (Oxford). 2006; 45:804-807.

7.	 Suzuki T, Ikari K, Yano K, Inoue E, Toyama Y, Taniguchi
A, Yamanaka H, Momohara S: PADI4 and HLA-DRB1 are
genetic risks for radiographic progression in RA patients,
independent of ACPA status: results from the IORRA cohort
study. PloS one. 2013; 8:e61045.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

22.	 Chang X, Zhao Y, Sun S, Zhang Y, Zhu Y: The expression of
PADI4 in synovium of rheumatoid arthritis. Rheumatology
international. 2009; 29:1411-1416.
15429

Oncotarget

23.	 Fan LY, He DY, Wang Q, Zong M, Zhang H, Yang L, Sun
LS: Citrullinated vimentin stimulates proliferation, proinflammatory cytokine secretion, and PADI4 and RANKL
expression of fibroblast-like synoviocytes in rheumatoid
arthritis. Scandinavian journal of rheumatology. 2012;
41:354-358.

26.	 Ben Sahra I, Laurent K, Giuliano S, Larbret F, Ponzio
G, Gounon P, Le Marchand-Brustel Y, GiorgettiPeraldi S, Cormont M, Bertolotto C et al: Targeting
cancer cell metabolism: the combination of metformin
and 2-deoxyglucose induces p53-dependent apoptosis
in prostate cancer cells. Cancer research. 2010;
70:2465-2475.

24.	 Konisti S, Kiriakidis S, Paleolog EM: Hypoxia--a key
regulator of angiogenesis and inflammation in rheumatoid
arthritis. Nature reviews Rheumatology. 2012; 8:153-162.

27.	 Zhao C, Zhang Q, Yu T, Sun S, Wang W, Liu G: Hypoxia
promotes drug resistance in osteosarcoma cells via
activating AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) signaling.
Journal of bone oncology. 2016; 5:22-29.

25.	 Poellinger L, Johnson RS: HIF-1 and hypoxic response: the
plot thickens. Current opinion in genetics & development.
2004; 14:81-85.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

15430

Oncotarget

