Oncotarget, Vol. 7, No. 1

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Editorial

p75

NTR

in Huntington’s disease: beyond the basal ganglia

Verónica Brito and Silvia Ginés
HdhQ7/Q111:p75+/- mice correlated with a recovery of the
expression and/or phosphorylation of these molecules. On
the other, the loss of dendritic spines in CA1 pyramidal
neurons exhibited by HdhQ7/Q111 mutant mice was also
prevented by normalization of p75NTR levels. Altogether,
these data suggest that synaptic and memory deficits in
HD could be related with a reduction in proteins involved
in synaptic function and in the number and complexity of
hippocampal dendritic spines in agreement with a role of
p75NTR as a negative regulator of dendritic spine dynamics
and synaptic activity.
We further built on work showing that
p75NTRcontributes to synaptic dysfunction and memory
decline in HD by deregulation of RhoA activity, a small
GTPase with complex effects on spines and thereby
in synaptic plasticity [5]. Interestingly, such increase
was reversed in double mutant HdhQ7/Q111:p75+/- mice
suggesting a direct link between aberrant p75NTR activity,
dendritic spine loss and aberrant RhoA activity. In
agreement with our findings Plotkin and colleagues [3]
have demonstrated that plasticity in indirect pathway
spiny projection neurons (iSPNs) from BACHD mutant
mice can be rescued by inhibition of the p75NTR-RhoA
signalling suggesting that early corticostriatal dysfunction
in HD could also be attributable to a correctable defect
in BDNF signalling. Altogether, this evidence strongly
suggests that, in the early stages of the disease, p75NTR
antagonism should be considered an effective therapeutic
strategy for restoring BDNF neuroprotective and synaptic
functions. However, remains to be investigated whether
therapeutic approaches targeting p75NTR inhibition
should also integrate TrkB activation to produce the most
favourable benefits on motor and cognitive impairments.
Moreover, we have recently demonstrated that
fingolimod, a compound used as an immunomodulator
in Multiple Sclerosis patients, restores hippocampal
synaptic plasticity and improves memory function in
a mouse model of Huntington disease acting through
down-regulation of TNFα and p75NTR [6]. These last
evidence open the question whether p75NTR dysregulation
is triggered by neuroinflammation at very early stages
and whether modulation of the inflammatory response
of microglia and astroglia in HD may contribute to
antagonize the deleterious effects of aberrant p75NTRinduced RhoA activity in synaptic plasticity. So far, our
studies strongly implicates p75NTR-RhoA hippocampal
dysfunction on cognitive decline in HD stressing the

Huntington’s disease (HD) is a fatal
neurodegenerative disorder with a characteristic
phenotype including chorea and dystonia, uncoordinated
fine movements, cognitive decline and psychiatric
disturbances. Even though the clinical diagnosis of HD
relies on the manifestation of motor abnormalities, the
associated memory impairments have been growing in
prominence. Indeed, cognitive deficits are evident along
all the disease process even in the prodrome before any
motor diagnosis is given.
These clinical signs have been mainly attributed to
corticostriatal dysfunction being deficits of neurotrophic
support, caused by either reduced levels of brain-derived
neurotrophic factor (BDNF) [1] or decreased TrkB
and aberrant p75NTR signalling [2, 3], one of the major
pathogenic mechanism involved. However, in recent
years has emerged the idea that cognitive decline in
HD is likely a reflection of a widespread brain circuitry
defect rather than a basal ganglia dysfunction per se. In
this regard, in our recent studies we shed new light on the
contribution of the hippocampal circuitry to synaptic and
memory decline in HD. We demonstrated hippocampal
dysfunction in a precise genetic HD mouse model that
expresses endogenous levels of mutant huntingtin, HdhQ7/
Q111
mice, manifested as alterations in spatial, recognition
and associative memories.
To get insight into the molecular mechanisms
underlying such defects, we focused on p75NTR since
growing evidence indicate that p75NTR plays an
antagonistic role in synaptic plasticity. We demonstrated
up-regulation of p75NTR in the hippocampus of distinct
HD mouse models and in human brain without evident
changes in the cortex, which extends our previous data
showing increased p75NTR expression in the HD striatum
[4]. In agreement with a critical role of aberrant p75NTR
expression in hippocampal dysfunction we found
preserved spatial, recognition and associative memories in
new double-mutant mice expressing mutant huntingtin but
“physiological” levels of p75NTR levels (HdhQ7/Q111:p75+/mice).
How aberrant p75NTR levels may mediate synaptic
and memory deficits in HD is an intriguing question. On
one hand, our results indicated that p75NTR directly or
indirectly regulate the expression of different synapticrelated proteins previously implicated in HD synaptic
and/or cognitive deficits, such as CBP, CamKII, GluA1
or BDNF since memory improvements in double mutant

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

1

Oncotarget

need to explore therapeutic strategies that target the
identified pathways, not only in the striatum but also in
other brain areas besides the basal ganglia which has been
underestimated and are strongly involved in HD cognitive
pathology
Silvia Ginés: Departament de Biologia Cel·lular,
Immunologia i Neurociències, Facultat de Medicina,
Universitat de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain; Institut
d´Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi i Sunyer
(IDIBAPS), Barcelona, Spain; CIBERNED, Spain
Correspondence to: Silvia Ginés, email silviagines@ub.edu
Keywords: Huntington´s disease, cognitive deficits, hippocampus, p75 receptor, RhoA
Received: December 03, 2015
Published: December 17, 2015

References
1.	 Zuccato C. and Cattaneo E, et al. Prog Neurobiol. 2007;
81:294-330.
2.	

Brito V, et al. Cell Death Dis. 2013; 4:e595.

3.	

Plotkin JL, et al. Neuron. 2014; 83:178-88.

4.	

Brito, et al. J Clin Invest. 2014; 124:4411-28.

5.	

Nakayama AY, et al. J Neurosci. 2000; 20:5329-5338.

6.	

Miguez A, et al. Hum Mol Genet. 2015; 24:4958-70.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

2

Oncotarget

