Oncotarget, Vol. 7, No. 17

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Increased chemoresistance via Snail–Raf kinase inhibitor
protein signaling in colorectal cancer in response to a nicotine
derivative
Tsai-Yu Lee1,2,3, Chia-Lin Liu4, Yun-Ching Chang5, Shin Nieh5, Yaoh-Shiang Lin6,
Shu-Wen Jao3, Su-Feng Chen7, Tsung-Yun Liu1
1

Institute of Environmental and Occupational Health Sciences, School of Medicine, National Yang-Ming University, Taipei,
Taiwan, ROC

2

 ivision of Colon and Rectum Surgery, Department of Surgery, Tri-Service General Hospital Songshan Branch, National
D
Defense Medical Center, Taipei, Taiwan, ROC

3

 ivision of Colon and Rectum Surgery, Department of Surgery, Tri-Service General Hospital, National Defense Medical
D
Center, Taipei, Taiwan, ROC

4

Graduate Institute of Life Sciences, National Defense Medical Center, Taipei, Taiwan, ROC

5

 epartment and Graduate School of Pathology, National Defense Medical Center & Tri-Service General Hospital, Taipei,
D
Taiwan, ROC

6

Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Kaohsiung Veterans General Hospital, Kaohsiung, Taiwan, ROC

7

Department of Dental Hygiene, China Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan, ROC

Correspondence to: Tsung-Yun Liu, e-mail: leechoumail@gmail.com
Shin Nieh, e-mail: leechoumail@gmail.com
Shu-Wen Jao, e-mail: leechoumail@gmail.com
Su-Feng Chen, e-mail: leechoumail@gmail.com
Keywords: nicotine, NNK, chemoresistance, Snail, colorectal cancer
Received: November 17, 2015     Accepted: February 29, 2016     Published: March 14, 2016

ABSTRACT
A tobacco-specific component, 4-methylnitrosamino-1-3-pyridyl-1-butanone
(NNK), is a major risk factor for many cancers. Recent reports have demonstrated
that NNK exposure may be associated with tumor progression and chemoresistance
in certain cancers. However, the underlying NNK-induced mechanism contributing
to the aggressiveness of colorectal cancer (CRC) has not been thoroughly studied.
In this study, we used HT29 cells treated with NNK to simulate the long-term
exposure of cigarette smoke. A comparative analysis was performed to evaluate cell
proliferation, migration, and invasion as well as epithelial-mesenchymal transition
(EMT) markers and drug-resistance genes expression, cancer stem cell (CSC)
properties, and anti-apoptotic activity. Signaling pathways related to chemoresistance
were also investigated. As a result, NNK exposure dose-dependently stimulates cell
proliferation, enhance abilities of migration and invasion, induce EMT phenomenon,
and attenuate apoptosis. Furthermore, NNK exposure also promotes the capabilities
of sphere formation, upregulation of Snail, and overexpression of CD133, Nanog,
OCT4, and the drug-resistant genes. Knockdown of Snail results in upregulation of Raf
kinase inhibitor protein (RKIP), increased apoptosis, reversal of EMT phenomenon,
and reducation of expression of CSC markers, all of which contribute to a decrease
of chemoresistance. Our study demonstrates a number of related mechanisms that
mediate the effect of NNK exposure on increasing CRC therapeutic resistance via
the Snail signaling pathway. Targeting Snail may provide a feasible strategy for the
treatment of CRC.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

23512

Oncotarget

INTRODUCTION

relationship between NNK and chemoresistance in CRC
remain unclear.
Therefore, we aimed to determine the mechanisms
of the effect of NKK on CRC pathogenesis including
the contribution of NNK on EMT, CSC properties, antiapoptosis and therapeutic resistance. Investigating the
signaling pathways underlying the association between
NNK exposure and CRC may provide novel treatments
for the prevention of tumor progression in CRC.

Colorectal cancer (CRC) is a leading cause of
cancer-related mortality worldwide [1]. Approximately
20% of newly diagnosed CRC cases present with local
invasion and lymph node metastasis, and more than 50%
of patients with early-stage CRC at initial diagnosis
will develop metastatic foci [2]. Chemotherapy is used
as an adjuvant therapy for resectable CRC or palliative
therapy for advanced CRC to increase the survival time
[3]. Despite substantial progress in both the diagnosis and
the therapy in recent decades, the rate of local recurrence
and distant metastasis remains as high as 15%–20%, and
the 5-year overall survival rate remains lower than 10%
[4]. Given the high rate of resistance resulting from a
lack of complete response in a majority of CRC patients,
novel molecular strategies for the enhancement of the
conventional therapy for CRC are needed [5].
Tobacco use is a major public health issue worldwide
[6]. The tobacco-related carcinogen nitrosamine,
4-methylnitrosamino-1-3-pyridyl-1-butanone (NNK),
is a major component and the most potent carcinogen
in cigarette smoke [7]. NNK is known to be associated
with lung, oral, breast, gastric, pancreatic, and bladder
cancers [8-11]. Among CRC patients, current smokers
were found to have a 4-fold increased risk of developing
hyperplastic and adenomatous polyps compared with
people who had never smoked [12]. Ye et al. reported that
the NNK stimulation of cell proliferation is dependent
on 5-lipoxygenase and cyclooxygenase-2 expression in
human colon cancer cell line [13]. Despite these studies,
there is a lack of experimental evidence regarding the
effect of tobacco smoking on CRC pathogenesis.
Cancer stem cells (CSCs) are also termed cancerinitiating cells due to their capacity for self-renewal,
multilineage differentiation, and greater malignant
potential [14]. The generation of CRC stem cells,
involving the induction of epithelial-mesenchymal
transition (EMT), has been postulated to play a critical
role in CRC recurrence following chemotherapy [15,
16]. Therefore, EMT and CSC molecular pathways
associated with chemoradiation resistance may provide
insights into tumor survival mechanisms and identify
novel targets for improved CRC treatment strategies
[16]. NNK has been shown to activate multiple signaling
pathways including activating kinase (Akt), mammalian
target of rapamycin, extracellular signal-regulated kinase
(ERK), and janus kinase [8]. NNK has been reported to
enhance colon cancer metastasis through alpha-7 nicotinic
acetylcholine receptor (α7-nAChR) and loss of epithelial
cadherin (E-cadherin), a characteristic event in EMT,
and its transcription repressors [17]. In addition, patients
who continued cigarette smoking following surgery or
chemotherapy have poorer prognosis and higher recurrent
rates [18]. However, the mechanisms of the effect of
NNK on promotion of CSC properties via EMT and the
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

RESULTS
Pro-proliferative and anti-apoptotic effect of
NNK in CRC
To investigate the effect of NNK on the proliferation
of human CRC cells, proliferation tests in HT29 cells
were analyzed by 3-[4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl]-2,5diphenyltetrazolium bromide (MTT) assay. Cells were
seeded in 24-well plate and cultured with medium
containing varying concentrations of NNK. As shown in
Figure 1A, NNK significantly increased cell proliferation
in both a dose- and time-dependent manner. In a further
study, HT29 cells were treated with NNK for 3 weeks
to simulate long-term exposure to cigarette smoke.
Significant differences in chemosensitivity tests were
found between long-term NNK exposure (LT-NNK)treated cells and parent cells following exposure to varying
doses of Oxaliplatin for 48 h (Figure 1B). LT-NNK
exposure upregulated expression of multidrug resistance
protein 1 (MDR1) and ATP-binding cassette sub-family
G member 2 (ABCG2) (Figure 1C). Expression of B-cell
lymphoma 2 (Bcl2)-associated X protein (Bax), cleavage
caspase-9, cleavage caspase-3, and Raf kinase inhibitor
protein (RKIP) was decreased in LT-NNK-treated cells
compared with parent cells (Figure 1D). Furthermore,
NNK was found to attenuate apoptosis. These data suggest
NNK has pro-proliferative increased and antiapoptotic
effects on CRC cells and may contribute, at least in part,
to CRC chemoresistance.

NNK enhanced migration and invasion via EMT
As EMT is a fundamental pathologic event in tumor
progression [16], we further evaluated the expression
of EMT in LT-NNK-treated cells. We first noticed that
NNK exposure induced the EMT phenomenon, as shown
by cell culture (Figure 2A). To evaluate the effect of
NNK on CRC cell motility, migration and invasion
assays were performed. LT-NNK exposure significantly
increased migration and invasion properties of HT29
cells (p < 0.05) (Figure 2B). NNK exposure was found
to induce EMT, as demonstrated by characteristic
changes in cellular morphology and alterations in EMT
marker expression including decreased expression of
E-cadherin and increased the expression of vimentin and
23513

Oncotarget

Figure 1: NNK exposure promoted cell proliferation, induced chemoresistance and increased anti-apoptosis. A. NNK

exposure stimulated the cell proliferation in both a dose- (0, 10, 100 nM) and time-dependent (24, 48, 72 h) manner (Magnification 200X)
B. LT-NNK exposure induced chemoresistance with statistical significance in HT29 cells. C. LT-NNK exposure upregulated expression
of MDR1 and ABCG2. D. Western blotting analysis demonstrated LT-NNK-treated cells conceded an anti-apoptotic property with
downregulation of apoptotic-related proteins including Bax, caspase-9, caspase-3, along with decreased RKIP; and upregulation of Bcl-2
in HT29 cells.

Figure 2: NNK exposure lead to EMT and enhanced the migration and invasion in HT29 cells. A. LT-NNK exposure

induced the EMT phenomenon with morphological transformation and alterations of cellular configuration in HT29 cells. B. LT-NNK
exposure enhanced the abilities of migration and invasion. C. LT-NNK exposure altered EMT representative markers with decreased the
expression of E-cadherin, increased the expression of vimentin, and significantly upregulated Snail signaling pathway in HT29 cells.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

23514

Oncotarget

Snail (Figure 2C). Taken together, these data suggest
that NNK stimulation induces characteristic cytological
EMT changes in CRC cells leading to increased CRC cell
migration and invasion.

sphere-formation following LT-NNK exposure in
a nonadhesive culture system with morphological
transformations observed in spherical colonies. During
the first 3–5 days of culture, cell clusters appeared as
immature, floating spheroids that then transformed into
well-formed spheres around day 7. By contrast, control
cells produced irregular cell masses without a spheroid
appearance (Figure 3C). These data indicate LT-NNK
exposure induces CSC characteristics in CRC cells.

Enhanced CSC characteristics of LT-NNKtreated CRC cells
The generation of stem cell-like cancer cells is
associated with the activation of the EMT program [14,
16]. We further examined the effect of NNK on inducing
CSC characteristics in CRC cells. Western blotting
demonstrated upregulation of stem cell markers including
Nanog and octamer-binding transcription factor 4 (OCT4)
in LT-NNK-treated cells compared with parent cells
(Figure 3A). Flow cytometric analysis of representative
CSC markers demonstrated significant overexpression
of cluster of differentiation 133 (CD133), cluster of
differentiation 44 (CD44), and cluster of differentiation
24 (CD24) in LT-NNK-treated cells compared with parent
cells (p < 0.05) (Figure 3B). HT29 cells demonstrated

Snail induced the promotion of EMT, antiapoptosis, and CSC properties was induced by
NNK in CRC cells
As the previous reports, the Snail signaling pathway
has been implicated in NNK-induced EMT, reduced
apoptosis and development of CSC characteristics
[10, 19]. To determine the effects of NKK on the Snail
signaling pathway in CRC cells, Snail knockdown
was performed in LT-NNK-treated CRC cells. Snail
knockdown led to altered expression of apoptosis-related

Figure 3: LT-NNK exposure enriched CSC properties with presentation of CSC-representative markers and sphere
formation. A. Overexpression of CSC-representative markers including Nanog and OCT4 was found in NNK-treated cells in a dose
dependent manner, compared with control cells by Western blotting. B. LT-NNK exposure also demonstrates increased expression of CSCrepresentative markers including CD133, CD44 and CD24 by flow cytometry. C. Using a nonadhesive culture system, LT-NNK exposure
is prone to form sphere, compared with the control cells.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

23515

Oncotarget

proteins and attenuated expression of MDR1 and ABCG2
(Figure 4A and 4B). Increased expression of E-cadherin
and decreased expression of vimentin were observed
following treatment with sh-Snail, indicating reversal
of EMT (Figure 4C). Inhibition of Snail in LT-NNKtreated CRC cells also suppressed sphere formation and
expression of stem cell-related genes including Nanog
and Oct4 (Figure 4D and 4E). These data indicate Snail
contributes to induction of EMT, reduction in apoptosis,
and promotion of CSC characteristics in CRC cells in
response to NKK exposure.

progression of CRC were less discussed and required
further investigation. In this study, we demonstrate the
effect of long-term exposure to NNK at physiological
levels inducing pathological changes and identified a
potential therapeutic rationale by demonstrating Snail
knockdown to noncytotoxic levels effectively suppresses
tumor progression.
In this study, we found LT-NNK stimulated
increased cell proliferation in both a dose- and timedependent manner, increased cell migration and invasion,
and decreased levels of apoptosis (Figure 1A, 1D and
2B). These findings and our previous report indicate that
LT-NNK plays a critical role in tumor progression [22].
During the process of cancer invasion, detached malignant
tumor cells overcome cell-cell adhesion and invade
surrounding tissue involving a process termed EMT
[19]. We found that LT-NNK exposure induces EMT and
associated morphological changes and alters EMT marker
expression, including downregulation of E-cadherin,
overexpression of vimentin, and significantly increases the
expression of Snail. Increasing evidence suggests EMT is
fundamental mechanism underlying cancer aggressiveness
and correlates with the development of CSC characteristics

DISCUSSION
CRC is the third leading cause of cancer-related
mortality in Taiwan [20]. Metastatic disease is the major
cause of death in patients with CRC [21]. Long-term
exposure to low doses of environmental carcinogens such
as NNK contributes to increased risk of many cancers
[9]. Epidemiologic studies have demonstrated that longterm cigarette smoking also increases CRC mortality
[18]. However, the mechanisms of the effect of LTNNK exposure and signaling pathways related to tumor

Figure 4: Knockdown of Snail restrained the expression of EMT, anti-apoptosis and CSC properties. A. Knockdown

of Snail altered the expression of apoptotic-related proteins and reverses the expression of RKIP. B. Knockdown of Snail decreased the
expression of MDR1 and ABCG2. C. Knockdown of Snail increased the expression of E-cadherin, decreased the expression of vimentin,
indicating a reversal of EMT phenomenon. D. Knockdown of Snail suppressed the expression of CSC properties with decreasing the
expression of Nanog, OCT4. E. Knockdown of Snail declined the ability of sphere formation.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

23516

Oncotarget

[23]. Our study also addressed the efficacy of preventive
agents in preventing development of CSC characteristics.
The generation of CSC, involving induction of the EMT
program, has been postulated to have an important role
in carcinogenesis and cancer recurrence following
chemotherapy [24]. We demonstrated enrichment of
CD133, CD44, and CD24-positive cell populations and
increased sphere-forming capacity following cumulative
exposure to NNK in colon cancer cells (Figure 3B and
3C). Overexpression of Nanog and OCT4 was observed
in LT-NNK-treated cells compared with control cells
(Figure 3A). Our study further examined the effect
of LT-NNK exposure and demonstrated upregulation
of two of the most significant chemoresistance genes,
MDR1 and ABCG2, and increased Oxaliplatin-induced
chemoresistance (Figure 1B and 1C), suggesting LT-NNK
exposure also facilitates tumor progression. This is the first
study to demonstrate the effects of LT-NNK exposure on
the development of CSC characteristics and therapeutic
resistance in CRC.
Human colorectal carcinogenesis associated
with chronic exposure to low doses of environmental
carcinogens has been under-investigated. Our previous
study demonstrated enrichment of CSCs associated with
increased EMT characteristics in oral epithelial cells
induced by nicotine is critical for oral squamous cell

carcinoma (OSCC) tumorigenesis [22]. Downregulation
of Snail attenuated tumorigenicity and the expression of
stem cell markers in long-term nicotine-exposed OSCC
cells. In this study, we found Snail was highly expressed
in LT-NNK-exposed CRC cells (Figure 2C). The present
study demonstrated inhibitory effects of Snail siRNA
treatment on anti-apoptotic, EMT and CSC characteristics
of CRC cells (Figure 4). The efficacy of Snail siRNA
treatment in this LT-NNK exposure CRC model suggests
that similar targeted approaches may have efficacy in
CRC patients with a history of long-term smoking. This
study demonstrated efficacy of Snail siRNA treatment in
reducing the development of nicotine-stimulated CSC and
EMT characteristics and blocking oncogenic progression
in CRC cells. The effects of LT-NNK exposure or habitual
heavy smoking on the development of chemoresistance in
CRC, including alterations in Snail expression, induction
of EMT, enrichment of CSC, and summarized in a diagram
to show the major theme of our proposal by which LTNNK exposure is responsible for the progression of the
CRC (Figure 5).
In conclusion, application of the findings of this
study may increase our understanding of the effect of
chronic exposure to low doses of environmental and
dietary carcinogens on colorectal carcinogenesis and
lead to the identification of new approaches for reducing

Figure 5: Diagrammatic illustration of a proposed model in terms of chemoresistance due to LT-NNK exposure in
colon cancer cells. LT-NNK exposure simulates the condition of cigarette smoking. LT-NNK exposure induced upregulation of Snail,

with subsequent induction of EMT phenomenon characterized by alterated expressions of E-cadherin and vimentin, enrichment of CSC
properties, and increase of anti-apoptosis via the Snail–RKIP signaling pathway, ultimately leading to chemoresistance and treatment
failure.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

23517

Oncotarget

risk of CRC development. Molecular targeting of Snail
may represent a new strategy for the treatment of CRC in
patients with a history of long-term smoking. Avoidance
or cessation of cigarette smoking increases the efficacy
of chemotherapy in CRC conferring improved prognosis.

with cotton swabs carefully. The migratory or invaded
cells on the lower surface of the filter were fixed in 4%
formaldehyde and stained with hematoxylin. The number
of cells was counted using a light microscope. Data from
three independent experiments performed in triplicate are
expressed as mean ± SD.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Western blot analysis

The methods were performed following the
protocols of our laboratory as reported previously
[22, 25-31].

Western blot was performed following the standard
protocol [22, 31]. The cell lysates were separated by
sodium dodecyl sulfate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis
(SDS-PAGE) and were transferred to the polyvinylidene
fluoride membranes. After the membranes were blocked,
the diluted primary antibodies, MDR1 (MAB4163, 1:1000,
Chemicon, Temecula, CA, USA ), ABCG2 (MAB4155,
1:1000, Millipore, Billerica, MA, USA), α-Tubulin (sc5286, 1:1000, Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Santa Cruz,
CA, USA), E-cadherin (sc-7870, 1:1000, Santa Cruz
Biotechnology, Santa Cruz, CA, USA), Snail (sc-28199,
1:1000, Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Santa Cruz, CA, USA),
Nanog (sc-81961, 1:1000, Santa Cruz Biotechnology,
Santa Cruz, CA, USA), Oct4 (GTX101497, 1:1000, Gene
Tex, San Antonio, TX, USA), in Tris-buffered saline with
Tween (TBST) buffer containing 3% non-fat milk were
added to the membranes and incubated at 4°C overnight.
On the second day, the goat anti-mouse conjugated
secondary antibody was added at room temperature for
1 h. The immunoblots were developed using an enhanced
chemiluminescence system and visualized on X-ray film.

Testing reagents and drugs
The
4-(Methylnitrosamino)-1-(3-pyridyl)-1butanone (NNK) was purchased from the ChemSyn
Laboratories (Lenexa, KS, USA ) and the Oxalip®
(Oxaliplatin) was provided by the TTY Biopharm (Taipei,
Taiwan, ROC)

Preparation of cell line and cell viability
The cell line HT29 cells (HTB-38™, American
Type Culture Collection, ATCC®, Rockville, MD, USA)
were isolated from human colon adenocarcinoma.
The cells were maintained in Roswell Park Memorial
Institute (RPMI) 1640 medium supplemented with 10%
fetal bovine serum (FBS), penicillin (100 U/mL), and
streptomycin (100 μg/mL) in a humidified incubator
at 37°C and 5% CO2 [22, 29]. The cell viability was
determined by MTT assay (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO,
USA) [22]. The NNK was added at a dose rate of 0, 10, or
100 nM for 0, 24, 48, or 72 h.

Flow cytometry
The cells were suspended in 1 ml PBS by trypsin
and stained with primary antibody, CD133 (#3663, 1:200,
Cell Signaling, Danvers, MA, USA), CD44 (MS-668,
1:200, Thermo, Waltham, MA, USA) and CD24 (sc7034, 1:200, Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Santa Cruz, CA,
USA), at room temperature for 1 h. After labeling and
washed with PBS, the cells were stained with FITC- or
PE-labeled secondary antibody in the dark for 30 min and
analyzed using a BD FACSCalibur™ flow cytometer (BD
Biosciences, San Diego, CA, USA) [22, 25].

Induction of long-term NNK (LT-NNK) cells
The HT29 parent cells were plated at a density of
5×104 live cells/10-cm dish and were treated with NNK at
the concentration of 50 nM for three weeks. The medium
was changed every other day [22].

Migration and invasion assay
The migration ability was determined with a
micropore chamber assay (6.5 mm Transwell® with 8.0
μm Pore Polyester Membrane Insert, #3464, Corning
Incorporated, NY, USA) and the invasion ability was
determined with a modified Boyden chamber [22, 30].
For the invasion assay, the Matrigel–medium (1:2)
mixture was supplied onto the membrane of the upper
chamber before the cells were seeded. Then the cells
were suspended in RPMI 1640 medium and plated in
the upper chamber. The culture medium containing
0.5% serum was added in the lower chamber. The cells
were harvested in a humidified incubator at 37°C for 12
h for the migration assay or 24 h for the invasion assay.
The cells on the upper side of the filter were removed
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Sphere culture
The sphere culture was performed using a nonadhesive culture system [22, 25]. The cells were plated in
10-cm plastic wares at a density of 5×104 live cells/10-cm
dish with non-adhesive surfaces by coating with agarose
thin films. The culture medium was changed every other
day till the spheres formation.

Chemosensitivity assay
A total of 1×106 cells were seeded in a 10-cm dish
and were treated with 0, 20, 40, 60, 80, and 100 μM
23518

Oncotarget

Oxaliplatin (Oxalip®, TTY Biopharm, Tapiei, Taiwan,
ROC) for 48 h. The relative survival fraction of cells
was determined by MTS assay using the CellTiter 96®
AQueous One Solution Cell Proliferation Assay kit
(Promega, Madison, WI, USA) [22].

density in dukes a and B (t1-t4, n0, m0) colorectal
carcinomas. Gastroenterology research and practice. 2009;
2009:679830.
3.	 Grothey A. Medical treatment of advanced colorectal
cancer in 2009. Therapeutic advances in medical oncology.
2009; 1:55-68.

Lentivirus production and transfection
of target cells

4.	 Siegel R, Desantis C and Jemal A. Colorectal cancer
statistics, 2014. CA Cancer J Clin. 2014; 64:104-117.
5.	 Lynch HT, Lynch JF, Lynch PM and Attard T. Hereditary
colorectal cancer syndromes: molecular genetics, genetic
counseling, diagnosis and management. Familial cancer.
2008; 7:27-39.

The Snail expression of HT29 cells was knocked
down using the short hairpin RNA (shRNA) lentiviral
particles and shRNA-expressing U6 lentivirus system
(Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Santa Cruz, CA, USA).
Transfection of target cells was performed as described
previously [22, 32]. HT29 cells were selected with 2 μg/
ml puromycin.

6.	 Crawford TV, McGrowder DA, Barnett JD, McGaw
BA, McKenzie IF and James LG. Tobacco-related
chronic illnesses: a public health concern for Jamaica.
Asian Pacific journal of cancer prevention. 2012;
13:4733-4738.

Statistical analysis

7.	 Hecht SS. Tobacco carcinogens, their biomarkers and
tobacco-induced cancer. Nature reviews Cancer. 2003;
3:733-744.

The independent Student’s t test or ANOVA was
used to compare the continuous variables between groups,
whereas the Χ2 test was applied for the comparison of
dichotomous variable. The level of statistical significance
was set at 0.05 for all tests. The statistical analysis was
done with the software PASW Statistics v18 (Armonk,
NY, USA).

8.	 Xue J, Yang S and Seng S. Mechanisms of Cancer
Induction by Tobacco-Specific NNK and NNN. Cancers.
2014; 6:1138-1156.
9.	 Huang RY and Chen GG. Cigarette smoking,
cyclooxygenase-2 pathway and cancer. Biochimica et
biophysica acta. 2011; 1815:158-169.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

10.	 Yu CC and Chang YC. Enhancement of cancer stem-like
and epithelial-mesenchymal transdifferentiation property
in oral epithelial cells with long-term nicotine exposure:
reversal by targeting SNAIL. Toxicology and applied
pharmacology. 2013; 266:459-469.

We thank Ti-Han Zeng for her experimental
assistance.

11.	 Pluchino LA and Wang HC. Chronic exposure to combined
carcinogens enhances breast cell carcinogenesis with
mesenchymal and stem-like cell properties. PloS one. 2014;
9:e108698.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
The authors declared no conflicts of interest.

12.	 Ji BT, Weissfeld JL, Chow WH, Huang WY, Schoen RE and
Hayes RB. Tobacco smoking and colorectal hyperplastic
and adenomatous polyps. Cancer epidemiology, biomarkers
& prevention. 2006; 15:897-901.

GRANT SUPPORT
This study was supported by the grant
TSGH-C99-019, TSGH-C103-016, TSGH-C103-075, and
TSGH-C105-021 from the Tri-Service General Hospital,
National Defense Medical Center, Taipei, Taiwan, ROC
and the grant MOST 104-2314-B-016-038 from the
Ministry of Science and Technology, Republic of China.
The Oxalip® (Oxaliplatin) was provided by the TTY
Biopharm (Taipei, Taiwan, ROC).

13.	 Ye YN, Liu ES, Shin VY, Wu WK and Cho CH. The
modulating role of nuclear factor-kappaB in the action
of alpha7-nicotinic acetylcholine receptor and cross-talk
between 5-lipoxygenase and cyclooxygenase-2 in colon
cancer growth induced by 4-(N-methyl-N-nitrosamino)-1(3-pyridyl)-1-butanone. The Journal of pharmacology and
experimental therapeutics. 2004; 311:123-130.
14.	 Li S and Li Q. Cancer stem cells and tumor metastasis
(Review). International journal of oncology. 2014;
44:1806-1812.

REFERENCES
1.	 Siegel RL, Miller KD and Jemal A. Cancer statistics, 2015.
CA Cancer J Clin. 2015; 65:5-29.

15.	 Paldino E, Tesori V, Casalbore P, Gasbarrini A and Puglisi
MA. Tumor initiating cells and chemoresistance: which is
the best strategy to target colon cancer stem cells? BioMed
research international. 2014; 2014:859871.

2.	 Uribarrena AR, Ortego J, Fuentes J, Raventos N, Parra P
and Uribarrena ER. Prognostic value of microvascular

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

23519

Oncotarget

16.	 Findlay VJ, Wang C, Watson DK and Camp ER. Epithelialto-mesenchymal transition and the cancer stem cell
phenotype: insights from cancer biology with therapeutic
implications for colorectal cancer. Cancer gene therapy.
2014; 21:181-187.

23.	 Sun S and Qiu XS. Cancer stem cells and tumor metastasis.
Journal of cancer research and therapeutics. 2013;
9:S150-152.
24.	 Liao WT, Ye YP, Deng YJ, Bian XW and Ding YQ.
Metastatic cancer stem cells: from the concept to
therapeutics. American journal of stem cells. 2014; 3:46-62.

17.	 Alexandre M, Uduman AK, Minervini S, Raoof A, Shugrue
CA, Akinbiyi EO, Patel V, Shitia M, Kolodecik TR, Patton
R, Gorelick FS and Thrower EC. Tobacco carcinogen
4-(methylnitrosamino)-1-(3-pyridyl)-1-butanone initiates
and enhances pancreatitis responses. American journal of
physiology Gastrointestinal and liver physiology. 2012;
303:G696-704.

25.	 Chen SF, Chang YC, Nieh S, Liu CL, Yang CY and Lin
YS. Nonadhesive culture system as a model of rapid sphere
formation with cancer stem cell properties. PloS one. 2012;
7:e31864.
26.	 Jao SW, Chen SF, Lin YS, Chang YC, Lee TY, Wu CC,
Jin JS and Nieh S. Cytoplasmic CD133 expression is a
reliable prognostic indicator of tumor regression after
neoadjuvant concurrent chemoradiotherapy in patients
with rectal cancer. Annals of surgical oncology. 2012;
19:3432-3440.

18.	 McCleary NJ, Niedzwiecki D, Hollis D, Saltz LB, Schaefer
P, Whittom R, Hantel A, Benson A, Goldberg R and
Meyerhardt JA. Impact of smoking on patients with stage
III colon cancer: results from Cancer and Leukemia Group
B 89803. Cancer. 2010; 116:957-966.

27.	 Chen SF, Lin YS, Jao SW, Chang YC, Liu CL, Lin YJ and
Nieh S. Pulmonary Adenocarcinoma in Malignant Pleural
Effusion Enriches Cancer Stem Cell Properties during
Metastatic Cascade. PloS one. 2013; 8:e54659.

19.	 Wang Y, Shi J, Chai K, Ying X and Zhou BP. The Role
of Snail in EMT and Tumorigenesis. Current cancer drug
targets. 2013; 13:963-972.

28.	 Chang YC, Nieh S, Chen SF, Jao SW, Lin YL and Fu E.
Invasive pattern grading score designed as an independent
prognostic indicator in oral squamous cell carcinoma.
Histopathology. 2010; 57:295-303.

20.	 Chiang CJ, Chen YC, Chen CJ, You SL, Lai MS and
Taiwan Cancer Registry Task F. Cancer trends in Taiwan.
Japanese journal of clinical oncology. 2010; 40:897-904.
21.	 Andre T, Iveson T, Labianca R, Meyerhardt JA, Souglakos
I, Yoshino T, Paul J, Sobrero A, Taieb J, Shields AF,
Ohtsu A, Grothey A, Sargent DJ and for the ISC. The
IDEA (International Duration Evaluation of Adjuvant
Chemotherapy) Collaboration: Prospective Combined
Analysis of Phase III Trials Investigating Duration of
Adjuvant Therapy with the FOLFOX (FOLFOX4 or
Modified FOLFOX6) or XELOX (3 versus 6 months)
Regimen for Patients with Stage III Colon Cancer: Trial
Design and Current Status. Current colorectal cancer
reports. 2013; 9:261-269.

29.	 Chen SF, Lin CY, Chang YC, Li JW, Fu E, Chang FN,
Lin YL and Nieh S. Effects of small interfering RNAs
targeting Fascin on gene expression in oral cancer cells.
Journal of oral pathology & medicine. 2009; 38:722-730.
30.	 Lin YS, Chen SF, Liu CL and Nieh S. The chemoadjuvant
potential of grape seed procyanidins on p53-related cell
death in oral cancer cells. Journal of oral pathology &
medicine. 2012; 41:322-331.
31.	 Chen SF, Nieh S, Jao SW, Liu CL, Wu CH, Chang YC,
Yang CY and Lin YS. Quercetin suppresses drug-resistant
spheres via the p38 MAPK-Hsp27 apoptotic pathway in
oral cancer cells. PloS one. 2012; 7:e49275.

22.	 Nieh S, Jao SW, Yang CY, Lin YS, Tseng YH, Liu CL,
Lee TY, Liu TY, Chu YH and Chen SF. Regulation of
tumor progression via the Snail-RKIP signaling pathway
by nicotine exposure in head and neck squamous cell
carcinoma. Head & neck. 2015; 37:1712-1721.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

32.	 Bridge AJ, Pebernard S, Ducraux A, Nicoulaz AL and Iggo
R. Induction of an interferon response by RNAi vectors in
mammalian cells. Nat Genet. 2003; 34:263-264.

23520

Oncotarget

