Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No. 29

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

DNA double strand break repair defect and sensitivity to poly ADPribose polymerase (PARP) inhibition in human papillomavirus
16-positive head and neck squamous cell carcinoma
Alice N. Weaver1, Tiffiny S. Cooper1, Marcela Rodriguez1, Hoa Q. Trummell1, James
A. Bonner1, Eben L. Rosenthal2, Eddy S. Yang1,3,4
1

Department of Radiation Oncology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL 35249, USA

2

Department of Surgery, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL 35249, USA

3

Department of Cell, Developmental, and Integrative Biology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL 35249, USA

4

Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL 35249, USA

Correspondence to:
Eddy S. Yang, e-mail: eyang@uab.edu
Keywords: HPV, HNSCC, DNA repair, PARP inhibition,
Received: May 14, 2015      Accepted: August 12, 2015      Published: August 22, 2015

ABSTRACT
Patients with human papillomavirus-positive (HPV+) head and neck squamous
cell carcinomas (HNSCCs) have increased response to radio- and chemotherapy and
improved overall survival, possibly due to an impaired DNA damage response. Here,
we investigated the correlation between HPV status and repair of DNA damage in
HNSCC cell lines. We also assessed in vitro and in vivo sensitivity to the PARP inhibitor
veliparib (ABT-888) in HNSCC cell lines and an HPV+ patient xenograft. Repair of
DNA double strand breaks (DSBs) was significantly delayed in HPV+ compared to
HPV− HNSCCs, resulting in persistence of γH2AX foci. Although DNA repair activators
53BP1 and BRCA1 were functional in all HNSCCs, HPV+ cells showed downstream
defects in both non-homologous end joining and homologous recombination repair.
Specifically, HPV+ cells were deficient in protein recruitment and protein expression
of DNA-Pk and BRCA2, key factors for non-homologous end joining and homologous
recombination respectively. Importantly, the apparent DNA repair defect in HPV+
HNSCCs was associated with increased sensitivity to the PARP inhibitor veliparib,
resulting in decreased cell survival in vitro and a 10–14 day tumor growth delay in
vivo. These results support the testing of PARP inhibition in combination with DNA
damaging agents as a novel therapeutic strategy for HPV+ HNSCC.

HNSCCs has been replicated in vitro and corresponds with
delayed resolution of the DNA double strand break (DSB)
marker phosphorylated Histone 2AX (γH2AX) following
IR [9, 10]. Although persistence of γH2AX foci in HPV+
HNSCCs is thought to be the result of defective DNA
repair, the mechanisms underlying this defect have not
been well characterized. Nevertheless, these observations
have resulted in the design of clinical trials for de-escalated
or targeted therapy in HPV+ patients in order to avoid
unnecessary treatment-associated morbidity [11, 12].
Inhibitors of poly-ADP ribose polymerase (PARP)
are one class of targeted therapy shown to be effective
for tumors with DNA repair deficits [13]. These agents
demonstrate synthetic lethality with inherent or induced
defects in homologous recombination repair (HR), such as

INTRODUCTION
Head and neck squamous cell carcinomas (HNSCC)
are typically aggressive cancers with high recurrence
rates and poor 5-year survival. However, patients with
human papilloma virus-positive (HPV+) HNSCCs,
especially those with oropharyngeal disease (OPSCC),
have substantially better outcomes compared to their
HPV− counterparts [1–4]. HPV+ OPSCCs demonstrate
increased sensitivity to DNA damaging agents such as
radiation (IR) and platinum-based chemotherapy compared
to HPV− disease [5]. HPV is less commonly found in
HNSCCs arising from the oral cavity, hypopharynx, and
larynx, and its effect on clinical outcomes in these patients
in less clear [6–8]. The enhanced IR sensitivity of HPV+
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

26995

Oncotarget

loss of Breast Cancer 1 and 2 (BRCA1/2) protein function,
and have recently been approved for use in advanced
ovarian cancers with a “BRCAness” phenotype. Our lab
has previously shown HPV− HNSCCs to be DNA repair
proficient and insensitive to PARP inhibition alone, but
more recent work suggests in vitro sensitivity to this targeted
therapy is increased in HPV+ HNSCC cell lines [14, 15].
Based on these intriguing observations, we performed
an in-depth analysis of DNA DSB repair in HPV+ HNSCCs
and further investigated the sensitivity of these tumors to
PARP inhibition. Here, we report HPV+ HNSCC cell lines
have decreased activity of two major DSB repair pathways,
HR and canonical non-homologous end joining (NHEJ),
leading to a significant delay in the resolution of IR-induced
DSBs. Interestingly, HPV+ HNSCCs retain their ability
to sense DNA damage, as γH2AX, 53 binding protein
1 (53BP1), and BRCA1 are all recruited to sites of damage.
Instead, the deficiency in DNA repair is associated with
a loss of DNA-dependent protein kinase (DNA-Pk) and
BRCA2 activation following IR and a significant reduction
in DNA-Pk and BRCA2 protein levels as compared to
HPV− HNSCC. Importantly, these findings correlate with
increased sensitivity to PARP inhibition both in vitro and
in vivo, including a patient-derived HPV+ xenograft model.
Our results indicate HPV+ HNSCCs have a significant
defect in DNA repair that can be exploited with PARP
inhibition, which could be combined with other DNA
damaging agents to improve the treatment of this disease.

foci-positive cells was significantly delayed in both HPV+
cell lines, occurring 12–24 hours after IR as compared to
4 hours in HPV− cells (Figure 1A). As confirmation of
delayed damage resolution in HPV+ HNSCC cells, we
also measured IR-induced DNA DSBs using the neutral
comet assay, a single cell gel electrophoresis assay to
detect relative amounts of DNA strand breaks [18, 19].
In agreement with γH2AX foci staining, the baseline
mean comet tail moment was 2-fold higher in HPV+
as compared to HPV− cells (Figure 1B). IR induced an
increase in mean comet tail moment in both HPV− and
HPV+ cells, which peaked at the immediate collection
and 1 hour time points, respectively (Figure 1B). Damage
was resolved by 4 hours in HPV− cells but was delayed
until 24 hours in HPV+ cells (Figure 1B). These results
indicate that both HPV+ and HPV− HNSCC cells
experience an increase in DNA DSBs following IR and
generate the γH2AX signal thought to initiate the DNA
damage response. However, HPV+ cells experience a
significant delay in damage resolution as compared to
HPV− counterparts [20].

NHEJ repair activity and DNA-Pk recruitment
are decreased in HPV+ HNSCCs
To determine the mechanism responsible for
persistence of DSBs in HPV+ HNSCCs, we first evaluated
canonical NHEJ, the primary repair pathway for resolution
of IR-induced DSBs. We directly measured NHEJ activity
using a GFP-based chromosomal repair assay in UMSCC1 and UM-SCC47 cells with stable expression of the
NHEJ-GFP repair substrate [21], where the percent of
GFP-positive cells following endonuclease transfection
indicates NHEJ-mediated repair. HPV− UM-SCC1 cells
demonstrated a 5-fold increase in GFP-positive cells
following endonuclease treatment, indicating active
NHEJ-mediated repair (Figure 2A). In stark contrast, the
percentage of HPV+ UM-SCC47 cells expressing GFP
decreased from baseline after endonuclease exposure
(Figure 2A). This decrease may have been a result of cell
death, as nonviable cells were excluded from observation.
Next, we examined IR-induced aggregation of
53BP1, an early marker of NHEJ pathway choice [22].
As seen in Figure 2B, both HPV+ and HPV− cell lines
demonstrate a significant increase in 53BP1 foci-positive
cells following IR, peaking at 1–2 hours and resolved by
8 hours. These results indicate NHEJ pathway choice is
intact in HNSCC cells. Then, we evaluated the subsequent
recruitment of phosphorylated DNA-dependent protein
kinase (DNA-Pk), a serine/threonine kinase whose
function is necessary for execution and completion of
NHEJ repair. HPV− HNSCC cells exhibit an 4-fold
increase in pDNA-Pk foci-positive cells after IR, peaking
at 40% at 2 hours (Figure 2C). Interestingly, no significant
increase in pDNA-Pk foci-positive cells was observed in
either HPV+ HNSCC cell line (Figure 2C). Our results

RESULTS
HPV+ HNSCCs detect IR-induced DNA double
strand breaks but have delayed resolution of
damage
Previous studies suggest DNA DSBs persist in HPV+
HNSCCs following ionizing radiation (IR) [9], which may
explain the increased radiosensitivity observed in patients
with HPV+ as compared to HPV− head and neck cancer.
However, the mechanism responsible for DSB persistence
has not been fully characterized. We previously reported
robust DNA repair, both NHEJ and HR, in the HPV−
HNSCC cell lines UM-SCC1, UM-SCC6, and FaDu [14].
So, to investigate differences in DNA repair capacity
between HPV+ and HPV− HNSCCs, we used the HPV16+
UM-SCC47 and UPCI:SCC154 HNSCC cell lines, as well
as UM-SCC1 cells as a representative HPV− control.
First, we measured the kinetics of IR-induced DSB
resolution via immunofluorescent staining for the DSB
marker γH2AX. In the absence of DNA damage, the
percentage of γH2AX foci-positive cells was elevated
in HPV+ UM-SCC47 and UPCI:SCC154 cells (25%) as
compared to HPV− UM-SCC1 cells (<15%) (Figure 1A,
Supplementary Table S1) [14, 16, 17]. All three cell lines
displayed a robust increase in γH2AX foci-positive cells
following IR, peaking at 1 hour (Figure 1A). Resolution of
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

26996

Oncotarget

Figure 1: HPV+ HNSCCs exhibit delayed resolution of IR-induced DNA DSBs. Cells were subjected to 4 Gy IR and, at

the indicated time points, processed for A. immunofluorescent staining for γH2AX foci or B. neutral comet assay. Inset panels indicate
representative images for (A) γH2AX (left), DAPI (middle), and merge (right), and (B) minimal comet tail (left) and positive comet tail
(right). Shown is representative data of 2 independent experiments performed in triplicate with mean +/− SEM, with IR groups compared
to no IR controls for each cell line. ***p < 0.001, **p < 0.01, *p < 0.05.

suggest that although initiation of NHEJ repair is intact in
HPV+ HNSCCs, decreased recruitment of the important
downstream repair factor DNA-Pk severely limits NHEJmediated damage resolution.

form BRCA1 foci, the first step in HR repair signaling
[22]. All three cell lines demonstrated a significant IRinduced increase in BRCA1 foci-positive cells, with a
peak at 30 minutes and return to baseline at 1–4 hours
(Figure 3A). We then evaluated the next two steps in the
HR pathway, recruitment of BRCA2 and, subsequently,
RAD51 to sites of DNA damage. Following IR, the
percentage of foci-positive HPV− HNSCC cells increased
robustly for both BRCA2 (4-fold increase at a peak of
15 minutes) and RAD51 (4.5-fold increase at a peak of
12 hours) (Figure 3B, 3C). In contrast, IR-induced BRCA2
and RAD51 foci were strikingly absent in HPV+ cell

HPV+ HNSCCs activate HR but have decreased
recruitment of BRCA2
IR-induced DSBs can also be repaired through HR,
although activity of this pathway is limited to S- and G2phase cells. To interrogate the HR pathway, we initially
examined the ability of HPV+ and HPV− HNSCCs to
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

26997

Oncotarget

Figure 2: HPV+ HNSCCs harbor defects in NHEJ repair signaling. A. Chromosomal canonical end joining repair capacity was

directly measured in UM-SCC1 and UM-SCC47 cells stably expressing the NHEJ-GFP repair substrate. 48 hours following transfection
with ISce-1 or control vector, cells were subjected to flow cytometry for GFP expression. Shown is representative data of 2 independent
experiments performed in triplicate with mean +/− SEM, comparing Isce1 groups to empty vector controls. Cells were subjected to 4 Gy
IR and, at the indicated time points, processed for immunofluorescent staining for IR-induced B. 53BP1 or C. pDNA-Pk foci. Shown is
representative data of 2 independent experiments performed in triplicate with mean +/− SEM, with IR groups compared to no IR controls
for each cell line. ***p < 0.001, **p < 0.01, *p < 0.05.

lines (Figure 3B, 3C). As attempts to assess HR pathway
activity via a GFP-based chromosomal repair assay were
unsuccessful, we examined the sensitivity of HNSCCs
to mitomycin C (MMC)-induced interstrand crosslinks,
a type of DNA damage specifically repaired through the
HR pathway, as further indication of an HPV-associated
HR defect [23–26]. We observed significantly lower cell
survival in HPV+ as compared to HPV− cells at all doses
of MMC (Figure 3D), suggesting HPV+ cells are unable to
repair crosslinking damage. Taken together, these results
support the initial activation of HR in HPV+ HNSCCs
but an inability to recruit BRCA2 and RAD51 to DSBs
resulting in a HR defect.

expression of the NHEJ proteins 53BP1 and DNA-Pk
as compared to HPV− cells (Figure 4). Expression of
HR proteins BRCA2 and cyclin D1 was also markedly
reduced in HPV+ compared to HPV− cells, in addition
to a slight decrease in RAD51 expression (Figure 4). To
determine the level of regulation at which differential
expression occurs, we examined mRNA expression
of DSB repair genes using the NanoString nCounter
platform, a multiplexed digital gene expression system
which uses molecular barcodes to detect and count
unique transcripts in a single hybridization reaction
and which has been validated by other techniques such
as mRNA-seq, microarray, and qRT-PCR [27–32].
Interestingly, differential protein expression of DSB
repair factors cannot be explained by mRNA expression
levels (Supplementary Figure S1). Only cyclin D1 and
RAD51 were found to have corresponding differential
expression at the mRNA level, with decreased transcript
levels in HPV+ as compared to HPV− HNSCC cells
(Supplementary Figure S1). We also evaluated expression
of the DNA repair enzyme PARP1 and its product poly
(ADP-ribose) (PAR), a surrogate marker for PARP activity

Protein expression of DNA-Pk and BRCA2 is
reduced in HPV+ HNSCCs
Having observed a defect in DNA-Pk and BRCA2
protein activity in response to DNA damage in HPV+
HNSCC cells, we hypothesized that expression of these
proteins may be diminished as well. As assessed by SDSPAGE, HPV+ HNSCC cells had significantly decreased
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

26998

Oncotarget

Figure 3: HPV+ HNSCCs display defects in HR repair signaling. Cells were subjected to 4 Gy IR and, at the indicated time

points, processed for immunofluorescent staining for IR-induced A. BRCA1, B. BRCA2, or C. RAD51 foci. Shown is representative data
of 2 independent experiments performed in triplicate with mean +/− SEM, with IR groups compared to no IR controls for each cell line.
D. Cells were plated at two different densities, treated with increasing doses of mitomycin C, left undisturbed for approximately 2 weeks,
then fixed and stained for colony counting. Shown is representative data of 2 independent experiments performed in triplicate with mean
+/− SEM comparing HPV− to HPV+ cell lines. ***p < 0.001, **p < 0.01, *p < 0.05.

and a potential biomarker for sensitivity to DNA repairtargeted therapy with PARP inhibition [33–35]. While
expression of PARP1 was similar across all three cell lines
and unchanged by IR, PAR expression was marginally
elevated in the two HPV+ cell lines and increased with
IR (Figure 4). These results indicate the inability of
HPV+ HNSCC cells to form DNA-Pk and BRCA2 foci
corresponds with decreased expression of these two
proteins, potentially accounting for the observed defects
in both NHEJ and HR repair and the persistence of DSBs
in HPV+ HNSCCs. In addition, HPV+ cells may have
increased PARP1 activity, suggesting a means by which
this repair defect can be targeted therapeutically.

of these models to PARP inhibition, a class of targeted
therapies shown to be efficacious in HR-deficient tumors
[15, 36, 37]. First, we assessed in vitro cell survival by
colony formation assay in response to treatment with the
PARP inhibitor veliparib, which has been proven safe and
effective in combination with chemotherapy and radiation
in solid tumor clinical trials [38, 39]. Cells were treated
with 0–10 μM veliparib, which are known physiologic
concentrations achievable in patients. HPV− UMSCC1 cells exhibited a small but statistically significant
decrease in survival fraction at 5 and 10 μM veliparib
(Figure 5A). However, HPV+ cell lines were 1.5-fold
more sensitive to veliparib than HPV− cells at the same
doses (Figure 5A). The increased sensitivity in HPV+
HNSCC cells was magnified when 10 μM veliparib was
given in combination with low dose IR (Figure 5B). We
also compared the radiosensitizing effects of veliparib to
that of the anti-epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)
monoclonal antibody cetuximab, another targeted agent
which modifies DNA DSB repair and is FDA-approved

Decreased in vitro survival of HPV+ HNSCCs
treated with the PARP inhibitor veliparib
As HPV+ HNSCC cell lines demonstrate delayed
DSB repair, decreased NHEJ and HR activity, and slightly
increased PARP1 activity, we evaluated the sensitivity
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

26999

Oncotarget

Figure 4: HPV+ HNSCCs have decreased expression of NHEJ and HR proteins including DNA-Pk and BRCA2. Cells

were treated with mock or 4 Gy radiation, harvested and lysed at 15 minutes post-treatment, and analyzed by western blot for relative
expression of indicated proteins. β-actin was used as a loading control. Shown is a representative blot from 2 independent experiments.

for use in head and neck cancers [14, 40]. Treatment with
cisplatin alone was more effective than either veliparib
or cetuximab in HPV+ HNSCC cells (data not shown).
However, radiosensitivity was similar in HPV+ cells
pre-treated with either veliparib, cetuximab, or cisplatin
at low doses of radiation (Supplementary Figure S2).
We next evaluated the activation of cellular apoptosis
in response to veliparib by determining the percentage
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

of cells positive for Annexin V, a cell surface marker
which acts as an early indicator of apoptosis. Activation
of apoptosis was significantly greater in HPV+ UMSCC47 cells treated with 10 μM veliparib compared to
vehicle (2-fold increase at 72 hours). This effect was not
observed in HPV− UM-SCC1 (Figure 5C). To examine
the mechanism of toxicity induced by PARP inhibition, we
measured the accumulation of γH2AX foci in cells treated
27000

Oncotarget

Figure 5: HPV+ HNSCCs are sensitive to PARP inhibition in vitro. Cells were plated at two different densities and treated
with A. increasing doses of the PARP inhibitor veliparib or B. 10 μM veliparib with increasing doses of IR. After treatment, cells were
left undisturbed for approximately 2 weeks, then fixed and stained for colony counting. Dose enhancement ratio (DER) was calculated at
50% survival. C. Cells treated with 10 μM veliparib for 72 hours were labeled with Annexin V-FITC and propidium iodide and assessed
for apoptosis by flow cytometry. Early and late apoptosis were combined to reflect total population of apoptotic cells. D. Cells treated with
10 μM veliparib were processed at the indicated time points for immunofluorescent staining for γH2AX foci. Shown is the mean +/− SEM
from at least 2 independent experiments performed in triplicate with (A, B) HPV− compared to HPV+ cell lines or (C, D) treated compared
to control groups for each cell line. ***p < 0.001, **p < 0.01, *p < 0.05.

an HPV+ HNSCC lymph node metastasis [41] as in vivo
models. Consistent with our in vitro findings, veliparib
treatment corresponded to a 10-day growth delay in
the UM-SCC47 xenografts (Figure 6A) and, excitingly,
a 14-day growth delay in the HPV+ patient-derived
tumor xenografts (Figure 6B). Following completion
of treatment, tumors were harvested and HPV status
was confirmed by positive p16 staining for both models
(Figures 6A, 6B inset panels). In contrast, HPV− UMSCC1 cells were not responsive to PARP inhibition alone
in vivo (Supplementary Figure S3) [42]. These results
indicate in vivo susceptibility of HPV+ HNSCC to the
PARP inhibitor veliparib.

with vehicle or a 10 μM dose of veliparib. Consistent with
a repair deficiency in HPV+ cells, a statistically significant
increase in γH2AX foci-positive cells was observed in
HPV+ UM-SCC47 but not HPV− UM-SCC1 cells after
72 hours of veliparib (Figure 5D). Taken together, our
results suggest increased in vitro sensitivity to PARP
inhibition in HPV+ HNSCC cells, which is maximized by
the addition of IR. PARP inhibitor sensitivity is associated
with the accumulation of DNA damage and increased
apoptosis in these cells.

Veliparib causes in vivo tumor growth delay
in HPV+ HNSCC cells and a patient-derived
xenograft

DISCUSSION

With our in vitro studies showing increased
sensitivity of HPV+ HNSCC cells to PARP inhibition, we
next validated these findings in vivo by assessing tumor
growth rate in mice bearing HPV+ HNSCC xenografts.
We used an HPV+ UM-SCC47 flank xenograft as well
as a previously described patient-derived xenograft from
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

In this study, we report the nature of a DNA repair
defect in HPV+ HNSCCs encompassing both the NHEJ
and HR repair pathways. This defect corresponds with
decreased protein expression and activity of DSB repair
proteins DNA-Pk and BRCA2 in HPV+ HNSCC cell lines.
27001

Oncotarget

Figure 6: HPV+ HNSCCs are sensitive to PARP inhibition in vivo. A. 5 million UM-SCC47 cells were injected subcutaneously

or B. patient tumor explants were minced into 1–2 mm slivers and implanted subcutaneously into the right flank of NOD-SCID mice. Once
tumors reached 20 mm3 by caliper measurement, mice were randomly divided into vehicle (normal saline) or veliparib (200 mg/kg twice daily)
groups with 10 mice per group. Mice were treated by oral gavage twice per day, with tumors measured by caliper every 2–3 days. Shown is
the mean fold change in tumor volume +/− SEM. **p < 0.01. Inset panels show representative staining images of formalin fixed, paraffinembedded tumors from mice in the vehicle-treated groups. Slides were imaged for nuclear DAPI (top), p16 (middle), and merge (bottom).

Importantly, we also demonstrate sensitivity of HPV+
HNSCC to the PARP inhibitor veliparib as a single agent
both in vitro and in vivo in cell line and patient-derived
tumor xenografts, an effect magnified by low dose IR.
These findings provide further insight into the increased
sensitivity of HPV+ HNSCC to DNA damaging agents
such as radio- and chemotherapy. Furthermore, targeted
therapy with PARP inhibition may be used in combination
with other DNA damaging agents to better treat this disease.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Recently, a focus has been placed on the role of
HPV in DNA damage repair. High risk HPVs express
two oncoproteins, E6 and E7, which have a multitude of
activities at the molecular level including proteasomal
degradation of tumor suppressors p53 and retinoblastoma
protein (Rb). p16INK4A, which is significantly upregulated
by HPV E7, was reported to inhibit HR repair in HPV+
HNSCCs through downregulation of cyclin D1 and
decreased RAD51 recruitment [43]. In addition, HPV
27002

Oncotarget

E7 may directly alter HR repair in HNSCCs through
dysregulation of RAD51 expression [44]. HPV E6 has also
been implicated as a mediator of DNA repair activity, with
E6 expression corresponding to defects in error-free DNA
end joining and XRCC1-mediated nucleotide excision
repair activity in other models [45, 46]. All of these
observations support our findings that HPV+ HNSCCs
harbor defects in both NHEJ and HR, although we are
the first to implicate BRCA2 and DNA-Pk as potential
mediators of defective repair.
Previous studies have shown elevated γH2AX foci
in HPV+ HNSCC cell lines following IR [9, 10]. However,
these groups also demonstrated a radiation-induced cell
cycle arrest, for which γH2AX may be a marker, in the
same cell lines [9, 47]. Hence, it has previously been
unclear as to the source of elevated γH2AX foci. In this
study, we use a combination of γH2AX foci and the
neutral comet assay at multiple time points following IR
to identify the delayed kinetics of DNA DSB resolution,
indicating that DNA repair is, in fact, deficient in HPV+
HNSCCs.
We further evaluated the nature of the DNA repair
defect in HPV+ HNSCCs by investigating the components
of both primary DSB repair pathways, NHEJ and HR.
Surprisingly, 53BP1 and BRCA1, which compete to
determine DSB repair pathway choice [22], were both
activated by IR in HPV+ HNSCC cells. Although 53BP1
protein expression appears to be diminished in HPV+
cell lines, intact foci formation suggests the quantity is
sufficient to respond to DNA damage. In contrast, both
protein expression and foci formation of DNA-Pk and
BRCA2, key effectors of NHEJ and HR respectively,
were strikingly diminished in HPV+ compared to HPV−
HNSCCs. Expression of DNA repair proteins has been
previously analyzed with respect to HPV status in clinical
HNSCC samples, although no consistent patterns have
emerged [48, 49]. These inconsistencies may be related
to the separation of tumors based on HPV-status alone
despite reports indicating HPV+ tumors from patients
with a history of smoking behave clinically as HPV−
disease [50]. Another potential confounding factor could
be the methods and thresholds used for determining HPV
status, as these vary between pathologists. Additional
studies of protein expression in tumors categorized by
both HPV and smoking status are needed to determine
the relative influences of smoking and HPV on molecular
profile, ultimately leading to more accurate predictions
of clinical behavior. Nevertheless, our results suggest the
reduced expression of DNA repair proteins may explain
the inherent DNA repair defect and increased therapeutic
response in this disease.
While we found significantly decreased expression
of multiple NHEJ and HR repair proteins in HPV+
HNSCC cell lines, BRCA1 and RAD51, two key HR
proteins often identified as the culprits in other HRdefective cancers, appear relatively unaffected. The effects
of HPV on cell cycle, and p16INK4A specifically, provide
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

a logical explanation for altered cyclin D1 expression,
but it is difficult to conceive of a mechanism that would
account for decreased expression of 53BP1, DNA-PK,
and BRCA2 without affecting BRCA1 and RAD51. One
potential hypothesis may involve the HPV oncoprotein E7,
which has been shown to rescue expression of BRCA1
and RAD51 specifically by decreasing the activity of the
repressive E2F4 transcription factor, as shown by Hegan
et al. [51], without affecting non-E2F regulated repair
proteins. Additional studies to further elucidate the source
of the protein expression phenotype in HPV+ HNSCCs
are needed.
Given the dramatic defects in recruitment of both
NHEJ and HR repair proteins following DNA damage,
the 2-fold delay in DSB resolution time in HPV+
HNSCCs raises the question of which alternative DSB
repair pathways are functional in these cells. Previous
reports demonstrate an increase in the alternative NHEJ
pathway in the absence of key canonical NHEJ factors,
such as Ku86, XRCC4, and DNA ligase IV [52, 53]. While
alternative NHEJ has not been fully characterized, it is
known to be dependent on activity of PARP1 and DNA
ligase III [54, 55]. In this study, HPV+ HNSCCs did not
have elevated levels of PARP1, but we did find evidence
of increased PARP1 activity. High expression of PAR,
in addition to sensitivity to PARP inhibition, could be
an indicator of intact PARP1-mediated alternative NHEJ
repair. However, additional studies are needed to further
evaluate this hypothesis.
DNA repair phenotypes can serve as a potential
marker of response to therapy as well as a therapeutic
target. PARP inhibitors are a well-tolerated class of DNA
repair-targeted agents, which demonstrate significant
clinical efficacy in tumors deficient in HR repair [13]. The
need for effective treatments with low toxicity profiles
is especially apparent in HPV+ HNSCC, as patients are
often diagnosed at a relatively young age and may have a
prolonged cancer survivorship period. Current therapies
can result in debilitating side effects including speech and
swallowing dysfunction, xerostomia, PEG tube dependence,
cognitive decline, visual impairments, and secondary tumor
development, in addition to potential disease recurrence.
Here, we demonstrate a significant response to the PARP
inhibitor veliparib in both in vitro and in vivo HPV+ HNSCC
models. This response was increased in vitro by the addition
of IR. Our in vitro results are in agreement with a recent
publication by Güster et al which showed decreased cell
proliferation and increased radiosensitivity in response to the
PARP inhibitor olaparib in a panel of HPV+ HNSCC cell
lines [15]. Excitingly, we found that veliparib also caused
a significant growth delay in a patient-derived explant
from a lymph node metastasis of HPV+ HNSCC. These
results support further clinical testing of the PARP inhibitor
veliparib in HNSCC patients based on HPV and DNA repair
status. In addition, other anticancer agents targeting the DNA
damage response should be evaluated in HPV+ HNSCC to
personalize treatment planning for this disease.
27003

Oncotarget

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Chromosomal repair analysis

Cell culture and reagents

UM-SCC1 and UM-SCC47 cells were transfected
with EJGFP substrate and stable integrants were selected
with 2 μg/mL of puromycin (Sigma) for 3 weeks.
Puromycin-resistant colonies were isolated and expanded.
Cells were transfected with either empty vector, ISce1 expression vector to measure repair capacity, or GFP
expression vector to measure transfection efficiency. Cells
were collecting at the indicated time-points and subjected
to two-color fluorescence analysis, which revealed the
percentage of GFP+ cells relative to total cell number. 100,
000 cells were processed for each sample. Repair relative
to total transfected cells was determined by division of
the % GFP+ cells from each ISce-1 transfection by the %
GFP+ cells from a parallel transfection.

HPV− HNSCC cell line UM-SCC1 was obtained
courtesy of Thomas E Carey, University of Michigan.
HPV+ UM-SCC47 and UPCI:SCC154 were a gift from
Susan Golin, University of Pittsburg and John H. Lee,
Sanford Cancer Research Center. UM-SCC1-luciferase was
obtained from Eben Rosenthal, University of Alabama at
Birmingham. All cell lines have been previously described
and were not further authenticated in our laboratory [16,
17, 56]. HPV-status was confirmed by western blot for
p16 expression upon receipt and upon thaw of each
plug. UM-SCC1, UM-SCC1-luc, and UM-SCC47 were
maintained in DMEM growth medium (Sigma), and
UPCI:SCC154 in RPMI growth medium (Gibco). All media
were supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (SAFC
Biosciences) and 1% penicillin/streptomycin (Gibco). UMSCC1-luc media was also supplemented with 2.0 μg/mL
puromycin (Sigma).

Protein expression
Protein was analyzed via SDS-PAGE as previously
described [57]. The following primary antibodies were
utilized at manufacturer-recommended dilutions for
immunoblotting: PARP1 (Santa Cruz Biotechnology,
catalog #sc-8007), PAR (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, catalog
#sc-56198), ATM (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, catalog #sc73615), BRCA1 (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, catalog #sc642), BRCA2 H-300 (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, catalog
#sc-8326), RAD51 (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, catalog #sc8349), 53BP1 (Novus Biologicals, catalog #NB100-304),
Ku-86 (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, catalog #sc-9034), DNAPkCS C-19 (Santa Cruz, catalog #sc-1552). β-actin (Santa
Cruz Biotechnology, catalog #sc-47778) levels were analyzed
as a loading control. Species-specific horseradish peroxidaseconjugated secondary antibodies (Santa Cruz Biotechnology)
were used at 1:5000 dilution.

Drugs, plasmids, and transfection
The PARP inhibitor ABT-888 (Enzo Life Sciences
in vitro, AbbVie in vivo) was utilized in our study.
Cetuximab (C225, Bristol Myers Squibb), mitomycin C
(M4287, Sigma), and cisplatin (CAS 15663-27-1, Tocris
Biosciences) were also used. pimEJ5-GFP to measure
total chromosomal end joining repair capacity, ISce-1, and
empty vectors were gifts from Jeremy Stark, City of Hope,
and have been described previously [21]. All transfections
were performed using Lipfectamine 3000 (Invitrogen)
according to the manufacturer’s recommendations.

Immunofluorescence

mRNA expression

Analysis of IR-induced foci was performed as
previously described [57]. The following primary
antibodies were utilized at manufacturer-recommended
dilutions for immunofluorescence: γ-H2AX Ser139
(Cell Signaling, catalog #9718S), BRCA1 (Santa Cruz
Biotechnology, catalog #sc-642), BRCA2 H-300 (Santa
Cruz Biotechnology, catalog #sc-8326), RAD51 (Santa
Cruz Biotechnology, catalog #sc-8349), 53BP1 (Novus
Biologicals, catalog #NB100–304), phospho-DNA-Pk
Ser2056 (Cell Signaling, catalog #4215). Alexa-fluor 488
conjugated secondary antibodies (Invitrogen) and DAPI
(Invitrogen, catalog #D21490) were also used.

mRNA was analyzed using the NanoString nCounter
platform through the UAB NanoString Laboratory (http://
www.uab.edu/medicine/radonc/en/nanostring) [27]. RNA
was isolated from cell lines using the Ambion PureLink
RNA mini kit (catalog #12183018A). All RNA samples
had a concentration > 12.5 ng/μl and an A260/A280 ratio
between 1.7 and 2.3 as determined by DeNovix DS11 spectrophotometer reading. Samples were then
processed for analysis on the NanoString nCounter Flex
system using the PanCancer Pathways Plus panel as per
manufacturer’s instructions. RCC data files were imported
into NanoString nSolver 2.5 and normalized as per
manufacturer’s instructions.

Neutral comet assay

Colony forming assays

Neutral comet assay was performed using the
Trevigen CometAssay Reagent kit as per manufacturer
instructions. Cells were visualized using fluorescent
microscopy (Carl Zeiss). Images were analyzed using
Comet Assay IV System (Perceptive Instruments Ltd, UK).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Clonogenic survival was determined by the colony
formation assay as previously described [57]. Briefly,
cells were seeded, treated with indicated doses of drug,
27004

Oncotarget

and left undisturbed for two weeks. Cells were then fixed
and stained (25% glutaraldehyde, 12 mM crystal violet)
and number of colonies (>50 cells) were counted. Survival
fraction is equal to (# colonies counted in experimental
plate/# cells seeded in experimental plate)/(# colonies
counted in control plate/# cells seeded in control plate).
Experiments were performed at least in triplicate.

support from the Department of Radiation Oncology at the
University of Alabama at Birmingham School of Medicine
(ESY). Flow cytometry core support was provided by
core grants P30 AR048311 and P30 AI027767. ANW is
supported by the NIGMS MSTP T32GM008361, and MR
is supported by the UAB PREP Scholar’s Program NIH
GM086256. The funders had no role in study design, data
collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation
of the manuscript.

Apoptosis
Apoptosis was analyzed using the Annexin V-FITC
Apoptosis Detection kit (BioVision Research Products,
catalog #K101-400) according to manufacturer’s
instructions and as previously described [57].

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST

Animal studies

REFERENCES

The authors have no potential conflicts of interest
to disclose.

All animal procedures were approved and in
accordance with the UAB Institutional Animal Care
and Use Committee guidelines. 6–8 week old, 20 g,
female NOD-SCID mice (Charles River Laboratories)
bearing HNSCC xenografts were treated with 200 mg/
kg veliparib twice daily via oral gavage. Mice were
inoculated with UM-SCC47 cells and established tumors
were measured by caliper 9 days after injection and every
2–3 days thereafter. Mice bearing patient-derived HPV+
tumor xenografts had tumors measured by caliper 7 days
after implantation and every 2–3 days thereafter. Mice
inoculated with UM-SCC1-luc cells had tumors measured
biweekly using a luciferase bioluminescence assay starting
at day 7 after implantation.

1.	 Ang KK, Harris J, Wheeler R, Weber R, Rosenthal DI,
Nguyen-Tan PF, et al. Human papillomavirus and survival
of patients with oropharyngeal cancer. The New England
journal of medicine. 2010; 363:24–35.
2.	 Gillison ML, Koch WM, Capone RB, Spafford M, Westra
WH, Wu L, et al. Evidence for a causal association between
human papillomavirus and a subset of head and neck
cancers. Journal of the National Cancer Institute. 2000;
92:709–20.
3.	 Weinberger PM, Yu Z, Haffty BG, Kowalski D, Harigopal
M, Brandsma J, et al. Molecular classification identifies a
subset of human papillomavirus—associated oropharyngeal
cancers with favorable prognosis. Journal of clinical oncology : official journal of the American Society of Clinical
Oncology. 2006; 24:736–47.

Statistical analysis

4.	 Fakhry C, Westra WH, Li S, Cmelak A, Ridge JA, Pinto H,
et al. Improved survival of patients with human papillomavirus-positive head and neck squamous cell carcinoma in
a prospective clinical trial. Journal of the National Cancer
Institute. 2008; 100:261–9.

Unless otherwise specified, data were analyzed via
analysis of variance (ANOVA) followed by a Bonferroni
post-test using GraphPad Prism version 4.02 (GraphPad
Software, San Diego, CA). Data are presented as average
+/− standard error of the mean.

5.	 Gillison ML, D’Souza G, Westra W, Sugar E, Xiao W,
Begum S, et al. Distinct risk factor profiles for human papillomavirus type 16-positive and human papillomavirus type
16-negative head and neck cancers. Journal of the National
Cancer Institute. 2008; 100:407–20.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Thanks to Drs. Thomas Carey, Susan Golin, John
Lee, and Jeremy Stark for providing materials used in
these studies.

6.	 Chung CH, Zhang Q, Kong CS, Harris J, Fertig EJ, Harari
PM, et al. p16 protein expression and human papillomavirus status as prognostic biomarkers of nonoropharyngeal
head and neck squamous cell carcinoma. Journal of clinical oncology : official journal of the American Society of
Clinical Oncology. 2014; 32:3930–8.

FUNDING
This work was supported by a Translational Scholar
Award from the Sidney Kimmel Foundation for Cancer
Research (ESY), Center for Clinical and Translational
Science (CCTS) and the Council of Center Directors
(COCD) Translational Research Intramural Pilot Grant
5UL1 RR025777–04 from the NIH National Center for
Research Resources (ESY), developmental support from
the Comprehensive Cancer Center (ESY), developmental
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

7.	 Upile NS, Shaw RJ, Jones TM, Goodyear P, Liloglou T,
Risk JM, et al. Squamous cell carcinoma of the head and
neck outside the oropharynx is rarely human papillomavirus
related. The Laryngoscope. 2014; 124:2739–44.
8.	 Annertz K, Rosenquist K, Andersson G, Jacobsson H,
Hansson BG, Wennerberg J. High-risk HPV and survival
in patients with oral and oropharyngeal squamous cell
27005

Oncotarget

carcinoma - 5-year follow up of a population-based study.
Acta oto-laryngologica. 2014; 134:843–51.

low x-ray doses. Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences of the United States of America. 2003;
100:5057–62.

9.	 Rieckmann T, Tribius S, Grob TJ, Meyer F, Busch CJ,
Petersen C, et al. HNSCC cell lines positive for HPV
and p16 possess higher cellular radiosensitivity due to an
impaired DSB repair capacity. Radiother Oncol. 2013;
107:242–6.

21.	 Bennardo N, Cheng A, Huang N, Stark JM. AlternativeNHEJ is a mechanistically distinct pathway of mammalian
chromosome break repair. PLoS genetics. 2008; 4:e1000110.
22.	 Bunting SF, Callén E, Wong N, Chen H-T, Polato F, Gunn
A, et al. 53BP1 Inhibits Homologous Recombination in
Brca1-Deficient Cells by Blocking Resection of DNA
Breaks. Cell. 2010; 141:243–54.

10.	 Gupta AK, Lee JH, Wilke WW, Quon H, Smith G, Maity
A, et al. Radiation response in two HPV-infected headand-neck cancer cell lines in comparison to a non-HPVinfected cell line and relationship to signaling through AKT.
International journal of radiation oncology, biology, physics. 2009; 74:928–33.

23.	 Hinz JM. Role of homologous recombination in DNA
interstrand crosslink repair. Environ Mol Mutagen. 2010;
51:582–603.

11.	 Ang KK, Zhang QE, Rosenthal DI, Nguyen-Tan PF,
Sherman EJ, Weber RS, et al. A randomized phase III trial
(RTOG 0522) of concurrent accelerated radiation plus cisplatin with or without cetuximab for stage III-IV head and
neck squamous cell carcinomas (HNC). Journal of clinical oncology : official journal of the American Society of
Clinical Oncology. 2011; 29. abstr 5500.

24.	 Moynahan ME, Cui TY, Jasin M. Homology-directed dna
repair, mitomycin-c resistance, and chromosome stability
is restored with correction of a Brca1 mutation. Cancer
research. 2001; 61:4842–50.
25.	 Birkelbach M, Ferraiolo N, Gheorghiu L, Pfaffle HN, Daly
B, Ebright MI, et al. Detection of impaired homologous
recombination repair in NSCLC cells and tissues. Journal of
thoracic oncology : official publication of the International
Association for the Study of Lung Cancer. 2013; 8:279–86.

12.	 Marur S, Lee J, Cmelak A, Zhao W, Westra WH, Chung
CH, et al. ECOG 1308: A phase II trial of induction chemotherapy followed by cetuximab with low dose versus standard dose IMRT in patients with HPV-associated resectable
squamous cell carcinoma of the oropharynx (OP). Journal
of clinical oncology : official journal of the American
Society of Clinical Oncology. 2012; 30. abstr 5566.

26.	 Wachters FM, van Putten JW, Maring JG, Zdzienicka
MZ, Groen HJ, Kampinga HH. Selective targeting of
homologous DNA recombination repair by gemcitabine.
International journal of radiation oncology, biology, physics. 2003; 57:553–62.

13.	 Wielgos M, Yang ES. Discussion of PARP inhibitors
in cancer therapy. Pharmaceutical patent analyst. 2013;
2:755–66.

27.	 Sun Z, Asmann YW, Kalari KR, Bot B, Eckel-Passow JE,
Baker TR, et al. Integrated Analysis of Gene Expression,
CpG Island Methylation, and Gene Copy Number in
Breast Cancer Cells by Deep Sequencing. PloS one. 2011;
6:e17490.

14.	 Nowsheen S, Bonner JA, Lobuglio AF, Trummell H,
Whitley AC, Dobelbower MC, et al. Cetuximab augments
cytotoxicity with poly (adp-ribose) polymerase inhibition in
head and neck cancer. PloS one. 2011; 6:e24148.

28.	 Geiss GK, Bumgarner RE, Birditt B, Dahl T, Dowidar N,
Dunaway DL, et al. Direct multiplexed measurement
of gene expression with color-coded probe pairs. Nat
Biotechnol. 2008; 26:317–25.

15.	 Guster JD, Weissleder SV, Busch CJ, Kriegs M, Petersen
C, Knecht R, et al. The inhibition of PARP but not EGFR
results in the radiosensitization of HPV/p16-positive
HNSCC cell lines. Radiother Oncol. 2014; 113:345–51.

29.	 Malkov VA, Serikawa KA, Balantac N, Watters J, Geiss
G, Mashadi-Hossein A, et al. Multiplexed measurements of
gene signatures in different analytes using the Nanostring
nCounter Assay System. BMC Res Notes. 2009; 2:80.

16.	 Ferris RL, Martinez I, Sirianni N, Wang J, Lopez-Albaitero
A, Gollin SM, et al. Human papillomavirus-16 associated
squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck (SCCHN):
a natural disease model provides insights into viral carcinogenesis. European journal of cancer (Oxford, England :
1990). 2005; 41:807–15.

30.	 Reis PP, Waldron L, Goswami RS, Xu W, Xuan Y, PerezOrdonez B, et al. mRNA transcript quantification in archival samples using multiplexed, color-coded probes. BMC
biotechnology. 2011; 11:46.

17.	 Brenner JC, Graham MP, Kumar B, Saunders LM, Kupfer
R, Lyons RH, et al. Genotyping of 73 UM-SCC head and
neck squamous cell carcinoma cell lines. Head & neck.
2010; 32:417–26.
18.	 Olive PL, Banath JP. The comet assay: a method to measure
DNA damage in individual cells. Nat Protoc. 2006; 1:23–9.

31.	 Veldman-Jones MH, Brant R, Rooney C, Geh C, Emery H,
Harbron CG, et al. Evaluating Robustness and Sensitivity of
the NanoString Technologies nCounter Platform to Enable
Multiplexed Gene Expression Analysis of Clinical Samples.
Cancer research. 2015.

19.	 Nowsheen S, Xia F, Yang ES. Assaying DNA damage in
hippocampal neurons using the comet assay. J Vis Exp.
2012; e50049.

32.	 Kulkarni MM. Digital multiplexed gene expression analysis
using the NanoString nCounter system. Curr Protoc Mol
Biol. 2011. Chapter 25:Unit25B 10.

20.	 Rothkamm K, Lobrich M. Evidence for a lack of DNA
double-strand break repair in human cells exposed to very

33.	 Martin CL, Reshmi SC, Ried T, Gottberg W, Wilson JW,
Reddy JK, et al. Chromosomal imbalances in oral squamous

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

27006

Oncotarget

cell carcinoma: examination of 31 cell lines and review of
the literature. Oral oncology. 2008; 44:369–82.

single-strand break repair by interaction with XRCC1. The
EMBO journal. 2002; 21:4741–8.

34.	 White JS, Weissfeld JL, Ragin CC, Rossie KM, Martin CL,
Shuster M, et al. The influence of clinical and demographic
risk factors on the establishment of head and neck squamous
cell carcinoma cell lines. Oral oncology. 2007; 43:701–12.

47.	 Fragkos M, Jurvansuu J, Beard P. H2AX is required for
cell cycle arrest via the p53/p21 pathway. Molecular and
cellular biology. 2009; 29:2828–40.
48.	 Sewell A, Brown B, Biktasova A, Mills GB, Lu Y, Tyson
DR, et al. Reverse-phase protein array profiling of oropharyngeal cancer and significance of PIK3CA mutations
in HPV-associated head and neck cancer. Clinical cancer
research : an official journal of the American Association
for Cancer Research. 2014; 20:2300–11.

35.	 Gottipati P, Vischioni B, Schultz N, Solomons J, Bryant
HE, Djureinovic T, et al. Poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase
is hyperactivated in homologous recombination-defective
cells. Cancer research. 2010; 70:5389–98.
36.	 Bryant HE, Schultz N, Thomas HD, Parker KM, Flower D,
Lopez E, et al. Specific killing of BRCA2-deficient tumours
with inhibitors of poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase. Nature.
2005; 434:913–7.

49.	 Moeller BJ, Yordy JS, Williams MD, Giri U, Raju U,
Molkentine DP, et al. DNA repair biomarker profiling of
head and neck cancer: Ku80 expression predicts locoregional failure and death following radiotherapy. Clinical
cancer research : an official journal of the American
Association for Cancer Research. 2011; 17:2035–43.

37.	 Farmer H, McCabe N, Lord CJ, Tutt AN, Johnson DA,
Richardson TB, et al. Targeting the DNA repair defect in
BRCA mutant cells as a therapeutic strategy. Nature. 2005;
434:917–21.
38.	 Rugo H, Olopade O, DeMichele A, Van’t Veer L, Buxton
M, Hylton N, et al. Veliparib/carboplatin plus standard neoadjuvant therapy for high-risk breast cancer: First efficacy
results from the I-SPY 2 TRIAL. 2013. San Antonio Breast
Cancer Symposium. 2013; . Abstract S5-02.

50.	 Gillison ML, Zhang Q, Jordan R, Xiao W, Westra WH,
Trotti A, et al. Tobacco smoking and increased risk of death
and progression for patients with p16-positive and p16-negative oropharyngeal cancer. Journal of clinical oncology : official journal of the American Society of Clinical
Oncology. 2012; 30:2102–11.

39.	 Mehta M, Curran W, Wang D, Wang F, Kleinberg L, Brade
A, et al. Phase I safety and pharmacokinetic (PK) study of
veliparib in combination with whole brain radiation therapy
(WBRT) in patients (pts) with brain metastases. Journal of
clinical oncology : official journal of the American Society
of Clinical Oncology. 2012; 30. abstr 2013.

51.	 Hegan DC, Lu Y, Stachelek GC, Crosby ME, Bindra RS,
Glazer PM. Inhibition of poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase
down-regulates BRCA1 and RAD51 in a pathway mediated by E2F4 and p130. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America.
2010; 107:2201–6.

40.	 Bonner JA, Harari PM, Giralt J, Azarnia N, Shin DM,
Cohen RB, et al. Radiotherapy plus cetuximab for squamous-cell carcinoma of the head and neck. The New
England journal of medicine. 2006; 354:567–78.

52.	 Boboila C, Jankovic M, Yan CT, Wang JH, Wesemann
DR, Zhang T, et al. Alternative end-joining catalyzes robust
IgH locus deletions and translocations in the combined
absence of ligase 4 and Ku70. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America.
2010; 107:3034–9.

41.	 Rosenthal EL, Kulbersh BD, King T, Chaudhuri TR, Zinn KR.
Use of fluorescent labeled anti-epidermal growth factor receptor antibody to image head and neck squamous cell carcinoma
xenografts. Molecular cancer therapeutics. 2007; 6:1230–8.

53.	 Yan CT, Boboila C, Souza EK, Franco S, Hickernell TR,
Murphy M, et al. IgH class switching and translocations use
a robust non-classical end-joining pathway. Nature. 2007;
449:478–82.

42.	 Cooper T RM, Trummell HQ, Weaver A, Bonner JA, Yang
ES. PARP inhibition in HPV positive head and neck cancers. Cancer research. 2013; 73.

54.	 Tobin LA, Robert C, Nagaria P, Chumsri S, Twaddell W,
Ioffe OB, et al. Targeting abnormal DNA repair in therapyresistant breast cancers. Molecular cancer research : MCR.
2012; 10:96–107.

43.	 Dok R, Kalev P, Van Limbergen EJ, Asbagh LA, Vazquez I,
Hauben E, et al. p16INK4a impairs homologous recombination-mediated DNA repair in human papillomavirus-positive
head and neck tumors. Cancer research. 2014; 74:1739–51.

55.	 Tobin LA, Robert C, Rapoport AP, Gojo I, Baer MR,
Tomkinson AE, et al. Targeting abnormal DNA doublestrand break repair in tyrosine kinase inhibitor-resistant
chronic myeloid leukemias. Oncogene. 2013; 32:1784–93.

44.	 Park JW, Nickel KP, Torres AD, Lee D, Lambert PF,
Kimple RJ. Human papillomavirus type 16 E7 oncoprotein
causes a delay in repair of DNA damage. Radiother Oncol.
2014; 113:337–44.

56.	 Knowles JA, Golden B, Yan L, Carroll WR, Helman EE,
Rosenthal EL. Disruption of the AKT pathway inhibits
metastasis in an orthotopic model of head and neck squamous
cell carcinoma. The Laryngoscope. 2011; 121:2359–65.

45.	 Shin KH, Ahn JH, Kang MK, Lim PK, Yip FK, Baluda
MA, et al. HPV-16 E6 oncoprotein impairs the fidelity of
DNA end-joining via p53-dependent and -independent pathways. International journal of oncology. 2006; 28:209–15.

57.	 Nowsheen S, Cooper T, Stanley JA, Yang ES. Synthetic lethal
interactions between EGFR and PARP inhibition in human
triple negative breast cancer cells. PloS one. 2012; 7:e46614.

46.	 Iftner T, Elbel M, Schopp B, Hiller T, Loizou JI, Caldecott
KW, et al. Interference of papillomavirus E6 protein with
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

27007

Oncotarget

