Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No.5

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Dihydromyricetin prevents cardiotoxicity
anticancer activity induced by adriamycin

and

enhances

Hong Zhu*, Peihua Luo*, Yingying Fu, Jincheng Wang, Jiabin Dai, Jinjin Shao,
Xiaochun Yang, Linlin Chang, Qinjie Weng, Bo Yang, Qiaojun He
Zhejiang Province Key Laboratory of Anti-Cancer Drug Research, Institute of Pharmacology & Toxicology, College of
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310058, China
*

these authors contributed equally to this work

Correspondence to:
Prof. Qiaojun He, e-mail: qiaojunhe@zju.edu.cn
Keywords: Adriamycin, cardiotoxicity, Dihydromyricetin, ARC, anticancer
Received: June 17, 2014	

Accepted: August 28, 2014	

Published: September 05, 2014

ABSTRACT
Adriamycin, a widely used anthracycline antibiotic in multiple chemotherapy
regimens, has been challenged by the cardiotoxicity leading to fatal congestive heart
failure in the worst condition. The present study demonstrated that Dihydromyricetin,
a natural product extracted from ampelopsis grossedentat, exerted cardioprotective
effect against the injury in Adriamycin-administrated ICR mice. Dihydromyricetin
decreased ALT, LDH and CKMB levels in mice serum, causing a significant reduction
in the toxic death triggered by Adriamycin. The protective effects were also indicated
by the alleviation of abnormal electrocardiographic changes, the abrogation of
proliferation arrest and apoptotic cell death in primary myocardial cells. Further
study revealed that Dihydromyricetin-rescued loss of anti-apoptosis protein ARC
provoked by Adriamycin was involved in the cardioprotection. Intriguingly, the
anticancer activity of Adriamycin was not compromised upon the combination with
Dihydromyricetin, as demonstrated by the enhanced anticancer effect achieved
by Adriamycin plus Dihydromyricetin in human leukemia U937 cells and xenograft
models, in a p53-dependent manner. These results collectively promised the potential
value of Dihydromyricetin as a rational cardioprotective agent of Adriamycin, by
protecting myocardial cells from apoptosis, while potentiating anticancer activities
of Adriamycin, thus further increasing the therapeutic window of the latter one.

conducted in America in 2002, the risk of development
of CHF would reach up to 26% when the cumulative
doses came to 550 mg/m2, and the fatality rate would be
30%-50% approximately [6]. In order to minimize ADR
associated cardiotoxicity, several approaches could be
considered: the rigorous cardiac monitoring, the use of anthracycline analogs with lower cardiotoxicity, and modifications of the program of administration [7]. Among them,
the introduction of cardioprotective agents has been paid
extensive attention.
In the last 40 years after the first uncovering of the
serious cardiotoxicity caused by ADR, numerous efforts
have been devoted to explore the effective strategies to
ameliorate it. Several agents including amifostine [8],
phenylbutyrate [9], and glutathione [10], were found to
alleviate ADR-induced cardiotoxicity. However, only one
compound, dexrazoxane, discovered by Kurt Hellmann

INTRODUCTION
Adriamycin (ADR), which belongs to anthracyclines, is one of the most widely prescribed and effective
cytotoxic drugs used in oncology, involved in the treatment of many tumor types and associated with favorable
clinical outcomes, including multiple myeloma, neuroblastoma, leukemia, sarcoma, lymphoma and so on [1, 2].
However, coming along with that, a serious adverse effect
being life-threatening heart damage tempestuously limited
its therapeutic potential [3, 4]. Increasing studies showed
that myocardial toxicity manifested in its most severe
form by fatal congestive heart failure (CHF) may occur
either during the ADR therapy or months to years after the
termination of the therapy, and the t­oxicity wound radically increased with the accumulation of ADR in a dosedependent manner [5]. During the r­ etrospective analysis
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

3254

Oncotarget

in 1972, is used as a cardioprotective agent in clinical
[11, 12]. The mechanistic studies revealed that dexrazoxane could act as a derivative of EDTA, chelate iron and
thus reduce the superoxide radicals to decrease the apoptosis of myocardial cells [13, 14]. However, several lines
of evidences from recent clinical trials implicated the interference with anti-cancer activity of ADR, as well as the
higher latent risk for acute myeloid leukemia syndrome
and other secondary malignancies in pediatric patients
when dexrazoxane was applied [15, 16]. These findings
prompt that it is far from enough in discovering more safe
and clinical effective protectors. Thus the major challenge, accompanying with the great interest in this field
relies on the discovery of novel cardioprotective agent(s)
which could promote a selective reduction of heart damage with more safety, and importantly, without decreasing
the ­anticancer efficacy, thus achieve the optimal clinical
use of ADR.
Being served as a major source of drugs for
centuries, natural products with a broad spectrum of
applications were highly expected in finding less-toxicity
but high-efficiency pharmaceuticals. Dihydromyricetin
(DMY), also known as ampelopsin, is a type of flavonoid
extracted from ampelopsis grossedentata. The compound
is credited with hepatoprotective effects and antioxidant
activity in anterior researches [17, 18]. In the present
study, we uncovered the cardioprotective activity of
DMY in ADR-treated primary myocardial cells, H9C2
cells and mice models. Further study suggested that
DMY could accumulate ARC (apoptosis repressor with
caspase recruitment domain), an important anti-apoptotic
factor in myocardial cells, through modulating the E3
ubiquitin ligase MDM2. Intriguingly, DMY exhibited
a synergistic effect with ADR in its anticancer activity
in a p53-dependent manner both in vitro and in vivo.
Taken together, this study represents the first attempt to
characterize the dual-mode of DMY on the ADR-driven
cardiotoxicity and anticancer capacity, which highlights
the promising potential of DMY as a cardioprotective
agent in the clinical use of ADR.

ratio increased to 80%, 50% and 40% respectively (day
7). Of note is the fact that, although all the mice in ADR
treatment group were died out in the next three days,
the survival rate of 500 mg/kg DMY treated group was
still maintained at 80%. During the survival experiment,
we also monitored the serum cardiac enzyme activity of
aspartate aminotransferase (AST), lactate dehydrogenase
(LDH) and creatine kinase MB (CKMB). As expected,
the ADR treated group could induce a significant increase
in serum cardiac enzyme activity of AST, LDH and
CKMB, comparing to the control group. These enhanced
levels of cardiac enzyme activity would be significantly
ameliorated by DMY cotreatment in a dose-dependent
manner (Figure 1C). In addition, the similar effects on
these cardiac enzyme activity of DMY were also detected
in the cell supernatant of cultured primary myocardial cells
(Figure S1). These results indicated that DMY exhibited
cardio-protective activities against the acute cardiac
injury caused by ADR. Furthermore, we observed the
effect of continuous administration of DMY for 25 days
(50 mg/kg) on ADR (2 mg/kg)-driven abnormality of
electrocardiogram using ICR mice as models, to evaluate
the protection under a long-term condition. For this
prolonged experiment, the dosages of both compounds
were scaled down to prevent the animal death. The
protective effect of DMY on ADR-driven abnormality
of electrocardiogram was also observed. As shown in
Figure 1D and 1E, pretreatment with DMY could reduce
ADR conducted prolonged P-R interval, QRS duration
and decreased amplitude of R wave. Collectively, these
data clearly demonstrated that DMY could protect against
ADR-induced cardiotoxicity.

Dihydromyricetin attenuates the
adriamycin-induced rat primary cardiomyocytes
apoptosis and reactive oxygen species
Since numerous studies have demonstrated that the
cardiotoxicity caused by ADR is attributed to multiple
mechanisms eventually leading to myocardial cells
apoptosis [22], we were next encouraged to examine the
effect of DMY on ADR-induced rat primary myocardial
apoptosis. By applying the neonatal rat cardiomyocytes,
we found that the cell proliferation was inhibited after
treating with ADR in a concentration-dependent manner.
On the contrary, DMY treatment significantly abated the
inhibition effects induced by ADR (Figure 2A). To validate
the apoptosis induction caused by ADR, both the DAPI
staining and Western blot analysis were performed. As
shown in Figure 2B, ADR treatment resulted in extensive
nuclear condensation and fragmentation in neonatal rat
cardiomyocytes, while pretreatment of DMY for 24 h
developed a decrease in nuclear abnormity. Western blot
analysis revealed an increase of caspase-3, caspase-8
and PARP cleavage fragment expression caused by ADR
treatment could be blocked by the administration of DMY

RESULTS
Dihydromyricetin protects against
adriamycin-induced cardiotoxicity in vivo
As a natural product, DMY is an extract isolated
from ampelopsis grossedentata, and its chemical structure
was showed in Figure 1A. In order to test the protective
effect of DMY in ADR-induced cardiotoxicity, the
imprinting control region (ICR) mice survival experiment
was performed. As shown in Figure 1B, the mice were
first died on day 5 after a single administration of ADR at
the dose of 20 mg/kg, and the survival rate was 30% on
day 7. In the contrast, when combined with DMY at the
dosage of 500 mg/kg, 250 mg/kg, 125 mg/kg, the survival
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

3255

Oncotarget

Figure 1: Dihydromyricetin decreaseded Adriamycin-induced cardiotoxicities in vivo. (A) The chemical structure of DMY.

(B) The survival experiment of ICR mice. The ICR mice were pretreated with DMY, followed by a single dose of ADR (20 mg/kg,
ip) as described in Materials and Methods. The survival number was counted each day: control (n = 10), ADR (n = 10), ADR + DMY
125 mg/kg (n = 10), ADR + DMY 250 mg/kg (n = 10), ADR + DMY 500 mg/kg (n = 10). (C) The changes in serum cardiac enzyme
activity of AST, LDH and CKMB in drug-administered ICR mice. As described above serum cardiac enzyme activity of AST, LDH and
CKMB were detected in the sixth day by full-automatic biochemical detect machine using specific detective kits. Data are expressed as mean
± SD (n=4). (D and E) The protective effect of DMY on ADR-driven abnormality of electrocardiogram. The electrocardiogram was detected
according to the Materials and Methods in non-drug treament group, 50 mg/kg DMY treatment group, 2 mg/kg ADR treatment group and
co-administered group (n=4).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

3256

Oncotarget

(Figure 2C). As the loss of mitochondrial membrane
potential is one of the most remarkable events in early
apoptosis, JC-1 staining combined with flow cytometry
was conducted, and the results showed that DMY
preprocessing could antagonize the loss of mitochondrial
membrane potential caused by ADR (Figure 2D). In
addition, we also observed that the anti-apoptotic factor
Bcl-2 was up-regulated and the pro-apoptotic factor Bax
was down-regulated in the DMY+ADR group comparing
to ADR group (Figure 2E). Taken together, these results
further demonstrated that DMY protected the cells from
ADR-induced mitochondrial-associated apoptosis.
Given that (i) several clues of evidence suggest the
critical role of reactive oxygen species (ROS) in ADRinduced cardiotoxicity [23, 24], (ii) the presence of
phenolic hydroxyl groups in DMY implies its potential
antioxidant activity (Figure 1A), we next measured the
changes of intracellular GSH and the relative ROS level.
As shown in Figure 2F and 2G, the treatment of ADR
resulted in the decrease of intracellular GSH accompanied
with the increase of ROS level. Meanwhile, pretreatment
with DMY could reverse the intracellular redox state
triggered by single exposure of ADR, which further
indicated the decreased ROS level in DMY+ADR group
comparing with that in ADR mono-treated group, might be
involved, at least partially, in the cardio-protective effect
of DMY against ADR.

down-regulated the protein expression of ARC in both
primay cardiomyocytes and H9C2 cells. Since MDM2 is
an E3 ubiquitin ligase of ARC, we also detected the MDM2
expression in ADR-treated cells and found an accompanying
elevalation in MDM2 expression. Thus the inverse
correlation between ARC and MDM2 upon ADR exposure
implied that the ubiquitylated degradation of ARC might
be involved as the crosscurrents of MDM2. To address
this point, we firstly transfected H9C2 cells with specific
siRNA targeting MDM2, and the results indicated that
ADR failed to down-regulate the ARC protein level with
diminished MDM2 expression (Figure 3B). Importantly,
the cell proliferation assay suggested that the knockdown of
MDM2 reversed the cytotoxicity caused by ADR in H9C2
cells (Figure 3C), suggesting the critical role of MDM2ARC axis in ADR-induced cardiotoxicity.
In this context, it is intriguing to know whether the
manipulation of MDM2-ARC axis by DMY contribute
to its cardioprotective effects against ADR. We detected
the expression of ARC and MDM2 when the primary
cardiomyocytes and H9C2 cells exposed to ADR and
DMY or the combination. The western blot analysis results
showed that DMY could negatively regulate MDM2
protein level and blocked the descending expression
of ARC mediated by ADR (Figure 3D and S3B). To
further validate whether the modulation of MDM2
caused by DMY could affect the ubiquitination of ARC,
co-immunoprecipitation
was
performed
after
administration of indicated compounds in primary
cardiomyocytes. As illustrated in Figure 3E, ubiquitin
tagged ARC was remarkably increased when the
cells were exposed to ADR as a single agent while
pretreatment with DMY could reduce the ubiquitination
of ARC significantly. These data further implicated that
DMY-driven cardioprotection was dependent on MDM2mediated ubiquitylated degradation of ARC.

Dihydromyricetin-driven cardioprotection is
dependent on MDM2-mediated ubiquitylated
degradation of ARC
Although several lines of evidence indicate
the critical roles of oxidative stress in ADR-induced
cardiotoxicity, some inconsistent results were achieved
when researchers employed antioxidants trying to prevent
the cardiotoxicity [25]. In line with these evidences, our
data reveal that, although both DMY and vitamin C exhibits
the activity of scavenging the free radicals (Figure S2A),
only DMY could protect the cells from the ADR-driven
cytotoxicity (Figure S2B). Thus some mechanisms other
than oxidative stress might be involved in ADR-induced
cardiotoxicity. Given that recent evidence has emerged
that ADR could directly interact with cell death pathways
[26], the regulation of apoptotic factors might play critical
roles in the cardiotoxicity. In an attempt to further explore
the underlying molecular mechanism by which DMY to
exert cardioprotective activity, we mainly focused on the
ARC protein, because (i) our preliminary data suggested
that DMY could attenuate ADR-induced apoptosis, which
probably owing to modulation of apoptotic related factors,
(ii) ARC is an endogenous inhibitor of apoptosis which
could protect the cells from stress-induced cell death,
(iii) ARC is enriched in terminally differentiated cells and
is recognized as a heart specific protein [27] (Figure 2).
As shown in Figure 3A and Figure S3A, ADR markedly
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Dihydromyricetin enhances the anti-tumor
activity of adriamycin in a p53–dependent
manner
The search for cardioprotective agents that alleviate
ADR cardiotoxicity in the last 40 years has led only to
dexrazoxane. However, apart from the higher incidence
of myelodysplastic syndrome reported in recent years, the
negative effect on the antineoplastic activity possessed by
ADR in clinical couldn’t satisfied the medical researchers.
Hence, it would be of great importance to evaluate the
impact of cardioprotective agents on the anticancer
activities of the chemotherapy. Consequently, cytotoxicity
assay was employed using a variety of human leukemia
cells as models. Of interest, in p53-null cell line HL-60
and p53-mutant cell line K562, the inhibition ratio of
DMY+ADR groups remained unchanged, comparing to
ADR mono-treated groups; in contrast, in p53-wild-type
cell line U937, DMY augmented the cytotoxicity of ADR
3257

Oncotarget

Figure 2: Dihydromyricetin reduced primary myocardial cell apoptosis and reactive oxygen species caused by
Adriamycin. (A) Effects of DMY on ADR induced proliferation inhibition of cultured neonatal rat heart myocytes. Cells were seeded at

a density of 5×103 per well on 96 well plate and treated with DMY (DMY was pretreated 24 h earlier than ADR) and ADR as the indicated
concentrations, inhibition rate was valued by MTT assay 24 h later after ADR treatment (n=4). (B and C) Effects of DMY on ADR-induced
apoptosis in cultured neonatal rat heart myocytes. Cells were treated with or without 50 μM DMY for 24 h, followed by incubated with
2 μM ADR for another 48 h, nuclei changes were photographed with fluorescence microscope (B); whole cell lysates were analyzed by
western blot, caspase-3, caspase-8, PARP and their cleaved fragments were analyzed (C). (D) Effects of DMY on loss of mitochondrial
membrane potential in cultured neonatal rat heart myocytes. After treatment with DMY and ADR as the indicated concentrations, a loss of
mitochondrial membrane potential was detected by flow cytometry after JC-1 staining. The green fluorescence intensity indicated the cells
with low mitochondrial membrane potential, while the red fluorescence intensity indicated the cells with stable mitochondrial membrane
potential (n=4). (E) Effects of DMY on Bcl-2 and Bax protein expression induced by ADR in cultured neonatal rat heart myocytes. After
24 h of treatment with or without 50 μM DMY, cells were incubated with 2 μM ADR for 48 h and lysed, Bcl-2 and Bax were analyzed by
western blot. (F and G) Effects of DMY on ADR induced ROS in cultured neonatal rat heart myocytes. Cells were seeded into 24-well
plates (5×104/ml) and incubated with indicated drug, GSH level was measured by a spectrophotometer at 405 nm with the sample prepared
according to assay kit 24 h later after drug treatment (n=4) (F), the ROS level was measured using the oxidation sensitive fluorescent dye
Carboxy-DCFDA by fluorescence spectrometer 3 h later after drug treatment (n=4) (G).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

3258

Oncotarget

Figure 3: Dihydromyricetin accumulated ARC protein through restraining the MDM2-mediated ubiquitylated
degradation. (A) The influence of treatment of ADR on ARC and MDM2 expression. The neonatal rat heart myocytes were seeded

into 6-well plates and treated with ADR in a series concentration for 24 h. ARC and MDM2 expression were analyzed by western blot.
(B and C) MDM2 was involved in ADR-induced cardiotoxicity. The H9C2 cells were transfected with siRNA targeting MDM2 and
seeded into 6-well plates and 96-well plates respectively, ADR of 2 μM was added and the expression of MDM2 and ARC were detected
by western blot 24 h later (B) and the survival fraction was measured using MTT assay (n=4) (C). (D and E) The treatment of DMY
accumulated ARC protein by inhibiting the ubiquitylated degradation mediated by MDM2. The primary cardiomyocytes were seeded
into 6-well plates and treated with ADR (2 μM) or DMY (50 μM) or ADR (2 μM) with pretreatment of DMY (50 μM) for 24 h. ARC and
MDM2 expression were analyzed by western blot (D). The effect of DMY on interaction relationship of ARC and ubiquitin were detected
by immunoprecipitation (n=3) (E).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

3259

Oncotarget

Dihydromyricetin in combination with
adriamycin possesses synergistic antitumor
effect in vivo

in a concentration-dependent manner (Figure 4A and
4B). In addition, we further determined the cytotoxicity
when ADR was combined with dexrazoxane. As shown in
Figure S4, the co-treatment with dexrazoxane attenuated
the cytotoxicity of ADR (24 h). The inhibition ratio of
ADR at the concentrations of 1, 2, and 4 μM was 29.7%,
54.1% and 67.1%, respectively; but decreased to 2.7%,
30.9% and 48.2% when combined with dexrazoxane. This
result suggested that dexrazoxane impaired the anti-cancer
capability of ADR in U937 cells, which could be owing
to dexrazoxane-mediated interruption of ROS generation
[28] and formation of topoisomerase II cleavage
complexes caused by ADR [29].
Further studies were taken out to monitor the
apoptotic population, the mitochondrial membrane
potential and the apoptosis-related protein expression in
U937 cells, upon the treatment of ADR with or without
DMY. The results showed that when combined with DMY,
ADR-induced apoptosis would be increased, as indicated
by the enhanced apoptosis rate, decreased mitochondrial
membrane potential and activated caspase cascades with
up-regulated Bax and down-regulated Bcl-2 protein. These
findings suggested that DMY could cooperate with ADR to
increase the cytotoxicity effect in p53-wild-type cell line
U937, and the possibility was raised that the functional
p53 might be indispensable for the cooperative killing of
cancer cells (Figure 4C, 4D and 4E). Consequently, we
further examined the expression of p53 and MDM2 in
U937 cells administrated with increasing concentration of
ADR. Consistence with our data mentioned above, MDM2
was up-regulated in ADR-treated U937 cells (Figure 4F),
accompanied with the induced expression of p53 along
with the increasing concentration of ADR. Importantly,
the pretreatment of DMY could decrease the MDM2
expression and accumulate p53 expression in combination
with ADR (Figure 4F).
In addition, a p53 inhibitor Pifithrin-α (PFTα)
was introduced [30], and the cytotoxicity elicited by
DMY and ADR on U937 cells were determined, with or
without the pre-treatment of PFTα for 24 h. As shown
in Figure  4G, without pretreament of PFTα, DMY
significantly enhanced the cytotoxicity in ADR-treated
cells; whereas PFTα (10 μM) abolished the increased anticancer activity, with the cytotoxicity of the combination
group reduced from 16.74% to 0.02%. Furthermore, a
lentiviral plasmid encoding wide-type p53 (p53-pCCL)
was used to reconstitute exogenous expression of p53 in
K562 cells (Figure 4H). And the reconstitution of widetype p53 could extend the cytotoxicity in DMY+ADR
groups, as indicated by the increased inhibition ratio
from 16.2% (ADR alone) to 38.5% (ADR+DMY) in
p53 overexpressed K562 cells, which was more robust
than that in those K562 cells without wide-type p53.
Collectively, these data implied the critical role of the
activated wide-type p53 in DMY-sensitized ADR exerting
anticancer activity in human leukemia cells.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

To further characterize the anticancer efficacy
conducted by DMY combined with ADR, the nude mice
human leukemic U937 xenograft models were introduced.
DMY (ip) and ADR (ig) were administrated every day
after the tumor volumes coming to about 300 mm3. As
illustrated in Figure 5A and 5B, the inhibiting effect of
ADR on the tumor growth as a single agent at the dose
of 1 mg/kg was weak accompanied with a reduced
body weight since day 6 from the drug administration.
However, the simultaneous treatment of ADR and DMY
increased the tumor growth inhibition rate from 14.5%
to 57.1% with a decreased body weight loss at the same
time. Western blot analysis of the proteins extracted from
tumor tissues showed that there were a robustly increased
cleavage of caspase3 and PARP when combined DMY
with ADR, denoting the activation of caspase cascades
(Figure 5C). And the subsequent results corroborated that
MDM2 expression was down-regulated by DMY, and p53,
as an important target on anticancer and antitumorigenesis,
was accumulated (Figure 4D). Thus in addition to the
findings achieved from in vitro models, our in vivo
data also revealed that DMY in combination with ADR
exhibited synergistic anticancer effect, particularly, in
human leukemic cell models.

DISCUSSION
Cardiotoxicity is a serious side effect of
anthracycline chemotherapy, limiting the use of these
most effective anticancer drugs, among which, ADR is
one of the most widely used anthracycline antibiotic in a
variety of cancer models. ADR was first discovered in the
1960s as a successful operative therapy option in treatment
of acute leukemia and lymphoma. However, in the past
40 years the application of ADR was seriously limited due
to its irreversible damage on myocardial cells. Although
numerous attempts have been devoted, the mechanisms
beneath ADR-associated cardiotoxicity have not been
fully clarified. There are extensive literatures postulating
various molecular mechanisms responsible for ADRinduced cardiotoxicity such as increased oxidative stress,
direct interference with iron homeostasis, inhibition of
DNA replication and protein synthesis [31, 32].
Among these, the oxidative stress and disruption
of intracellular iron accumulation hypotheses have
been regarded as the most widely-accepted mechanisms
[33–36]. Although several lines of evidences reported
that some antioxidants and iron chelators could
exert cardioprotective effects against ADR provoked
cardiotoxicity, some other studies yielded inconsistent
results [37–41]. These negative results achieved from
iron chelators not only reveal that the intracellular iron
3260

Oncotarget

Figure 4: Dihydromyricetin sensibilized the anticancer activity of Adriamycin in p53 wild type cancer cells.

(A and B) Effects of DMY on ADR induced growth arrest in U937, HL-60 and K562 cells. P53 wild type cell line U937, p53 null cell line
HL-60 and p53 mutant cell line K562 were seeded into 96-well plates, after pretreatment with DMY for 24 h, cells were exposed to ADR
for another 24 h, the inhibition rate was detected using MTT assay (n=4) (A), and the IC50 was also valued (B). (C) Effects of DMY on
apoptosis in U937 cells. Cells with the treatment of ADR (2 μM) or DMY (25 μM) as a single agent or co-administered agent for 24 h were
harvest to analysis the apoptosis by flow cytometry using propidium iodide staining (n=3). (D) Effects of DMY on the loss of mitochondrial
membrane potential in U937 cells. Cells were treated as described above and detected the loss of mitochondrial membrane potential by
flow cytometry using JC-1 staining (n=3). (E) Effects of DMY on apoptosis-related protein expression in U937 cells. Cells were treated as
described above and whole cell lysates were analyzed, cleaved-caspase3, Bax and Bcl-2 protein expression were analyzed by western blot.
(F) The treatment of DMY accumulated p53 in U937 cells. P53 and MDM2 expression were analyzed after the treatment of ADR alone in
a serious of concentration or combined with DMY. (G) p53 inhibitor PFT-α attenuated the cytotoxicity caused by DMY combined ADR in
U937 cells (n=3). (H) K562 cells were transduced with lentiviral p53-pCCL or the empty vector. p53 overexpression increased the anticancer activity possessed by the combination of DMY and ADR in K562 cells. K562 cells transduced with lentiviral p53-pCCL or pCCL
were exposed to DMY (25 μM), ADR (0.25 μM) and the combination for 24 h, and MTT assay was utilized to detect the cytotoxicity (n=3).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

3261

Oncotarget

Figure 5: Dihydromyricetin possessed synergistic antitumor effect with adriamycin in vivo. (A) The relative tumor volume

and average body weight of BALB/C mice. ADR (ip) and DMY (ig) was administered two or three times a week. The tumor volume
and the body weight were valued every day. (B) The picture of the tumor and the T/C value with inhibition rate. The solid tumors were
removed and weighed on the twelfth day, the T/C value and the inhibition rate were also calculated. (C) The expression of cleaved-PARP
and cleased-caspase3 in tumor tissue. (D) The expression of p53 and MDM2 in tumor tissue.

As a manner of fact, despite of the multifactorial
and complicated mechanisms underlying ADR-caused
cardiotoxicity, the eventually apoptotic death of the
cardiac myocytes would directly and irreversibly lead to
the development of CHF [42]. In this context, the strategy
which could prominently reduce ADR-triggered apoptotic
cell death of myocardial cells should be able to prevent
the loss of cardiac myocytes. And the manipulation on the
apoptosis-related factors could be regarded as an efficient
way to counteract against the cardiotoxicity caused by
ADR thus maintaining the cardiac performance.

disruption might not be the only major causes for the
cardiotoxity induced by ADR, but also question the
theory that the iron-chelating activity is the mechanism
whereby dexrazoxane, the current only FDA-approved
drug for ADR caused cardiotoxicity, exerts its function.
Collectively, we have reason to speculate that in addition
to oxidative stresses and intracellular iron accumulation,
more complicated mechanisms are involved in ADRinduced cardiotoxicity, thus the exploration of novel
cardioprotective agents should not be limited to these two
targets/signaling pathways.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

3262

Oncotarget

Among the anti-apoptotic factors, ARC is one of the
most predominantly accumulated proteins in myocardial
cells, skeletal myocytes and neurons, possessing the
antagonistic property of both the extrinsic and intrinsic
cell death pathways [43]. It has been revealed by several
lines of evidences that ARC is a critical cardiomyocyte
survival switch in ADR cardiotoxicity [44]. Mounting
evidences suggest that the mechanism by which ARC
exert the anti-apoptotic effects is achieved by its function
to prevent the conformational activation and translation
of Bax, a pro-apoptotic Bcl-2 family member. In
response to ADR, Bax would translocate from cytosol
to mitochondria, accompanied with the dissipation of
the mitochondrial membrane potential, the releasing of
cytochrome c and the activation of caspase cascades,
which ultimately initiate the undergoing of apoptosis
[45, 46]. In consistent with the previous reports, in the
present study, a remarkable decreased ARC expression
was observed when the cells were exposed to ADR,
accompanied with the increased accumulation of Bax,
which might be vital to the apoptotic cell death in primary
myocardial cells. Intriguingly, this loss of ARC caused
by ADR was significantly abrogated in DMY-pretreated
primary cardiomyocyte and H9C2 cells, implicating
the involvement of ARC levels rescued by DMY in the
cardioprotective effects exerted by this agent.
ARC was reported undergoing degradation mediated
by ubiquitin-proteasome systems in response to death
stimuli [47]. This notion was validated in recent report
revealing that ADR could enhance the UPS-mediated
degradation of ARC, and the proteasomal inhibitor
partially rescued both ADR-downregulated ARC and
apoptosis induction. In some other reports, the ubiquitin
E3 ligase MDM2 has been found to directly accelerate
ARC protein turnover via ubiquitination and proteasomaldependent degradation [48]. These clues prompted us to
speculate that MDM2, the E3 ubiquitin ligase of ARC,
not only played roles in the decreased level of ARC
under the treatment of ADR, but also might be served
as a critical factor being modulated to rescue the decline
of ARC, so as to exert the cardioprotective effect. This
hypothesis was confirmed by our further study. As
demonstrated in Figure 3A, ADR robustly increased the
MDM2 protein level in primary cardiocytes, which may
resulted in the degradation of ARC as indicated by the
accompanying reduction of ARC. However, when the
cells were pretreated with DMY, the enhanced MDM2 was
antagonized, consequently, the degradation of ARC was
prevented and the protein was stabilized.
Nevertheless, in consideration of the different
destination from cardioprotection to cytotoxicity in
neoplastic cells, it is difficult but important to reserve
the anticancer effect of ADR when the cardioprotective
agents were used. About which, it is also one of the risks
of applying dexrazoxane, that probably compromise
the anticancer efficiency of ADR. In the present study,
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

we uncovered that DMY could accumulate p53 in the
cells with functional wide-type p53, and enhanced the
antitumor activity of ADR accompanying with a decline
in the protein level of its E3 ubiquitin ligase MDM2. As
a crucial cell cycle regulator and tumor suppressor, p53
has been extensively studied. Being described as “the
guardian of the genome”, p53 can activate DNA repair,
arrest growth and initiate apoptosis in response to myriad
stressors and contribute to anticancer activity both before
and after tumorigenesis [49]. In our study, the increased
anticancer activity of combining ADR and DMY were
observed in U937 cell and xenograft models which
harboring wide-type p53. It indicated that the enhanced
cytotoxicity by DMY might depend on the functional
wide-type p53. Beyond that, the further mechanism about
how DMY influencing the p53 and ARC in the given
organization was still unclarified. Even so, several lines
of evidence indicate a negative modulation relationship
between ARC and p53 [50]. It was found that the ARC
promoter contains an optimal binding site for tumor
suppressor p53, by which p53 negatively regulated the
expression of ARC. In consistent with this finding, p53
was also found possessing the ability to antagonize the
anti-apoptotic function of ARC in the cytosol by driving
apoptosis directly. On the other hand, ARC displayed
suppressive effect on p53 as well. Due to the shared E3
ubiquitin ligase MDM2, the regulatory interplay between
ARC, p53 and MDM2 was tightly interlinked and
complicated. In an attempt to examine the ARC protein
level of H9C2 and U937 cells in parallel, we found that
H9C2 cells harbored more abundant ARC than U937 cells
did (Figure S4B). In addition, the ARC protein level could
not be accumulated by DMY in U937 cells, neither with
or without the cotreatement of ADR (Figure S4B). These
observations not only implied the opposing effects of
DMY might be attributable to the diverse accumulation
of ARC in these different kinds of cells, but also
supporting the notion that the regulatory mode of ARC is
complicated, which has been shown to behave diversely
in U937 cells and H9C2 cells.
It has been reported that DMY was capable
to induce cell cycle arrest in osteosarcoma [51] and
melanoma [52], which raise the possibility that the cell
cycle arrest caused by DMY in rapid dividing cancer cells
probably associated with the inhibitory effects in these
cells. However, under our experimental conditions, little
impact of DMY on cell cycle distribution on U937 and
H9C2 cells was observed (data not shown), thus excluding
the involvement of cell cycle regulation in the differential
effects against leukemia cells and cardiomyocytes.
The “paradoxical” effects imposed by one drug
combination in cancer cells and the other cells have be
mentioned and studied previously [53–55]. Daosukho
et al found that a HDAC inhibitor phenylbutyrate
(PBA) protected the cardiac tissue from ADR-induced
ultrastructual damages, via the modulation of MnSOD.
3263

Oncotarget

Although PBA interferes with multiple cellular targets
and signaling pathways, including HDAC, ER stress, and
ammonia scavenging in urea cycle dysfunction, it seems
that the cardioprotective effects of PBA is more likely
mediated by HDAC inhibition [56]. Of note, another study
unraveled the mechanism underlying HDAC inhibitormediated protection of neurons from DNA damage caused
by topoisomerase inhibitors. In mouse primary cortical
neurons, HDAC inhibition prevents DNA damage-induced
neurodegeneration by modifying the acetylation of K382
and K381 of p53 and thus suppresses its transcriptional
activation of PUMA gene [57]. Intriguingly, a paradoxical
phenotype was observed in cancer cells: that is, although
the same lysine sites on p53 were acetylated, PUMA gene
was activated and apoptosis was induced in these cancer
cells. Taken together, because the specific outcomes of
HDAC inhibition are similar with that imposed by DMY,
to further examine whether DMY interfere with the HDAC
function and whether the acetylation pattern of p53 was
modulated by DMY in leukemia and myocardial cells
may be beneficial to fully understanding the dual modes
of action by DMY.
In summary, we have shown for the first time
that DMY, a natural product extracted from ampelopsis
grossedentata, possessed the cardioprotective effect
contrarious with ADR through restoring the expression
of anti-apoptotic factor ARC in myocardial cells. In
addition to that, the anticancer activity of ADR could
be enhanced by DMY in p53 wild-type U937 cells.
The dual-mode of DMY in ADR-driven cardiotoxicity
and anticancer activity might be attributed to the
regulation on MDM2. These finding thus favors DMY
a potential cardioprotective drug candidate to alleviate
the cardiotoxicity of ADR in clinical, and amplified the
application of ADR in oncotherapy.

under a 12-h light/dark cycle. Rats were fed sterile tap
water and chow diet ad libitum from Shanghai SLAC
Laboratory Animal Co. Ltd.

The ICR mice model of cardiac toxicity of
Adriamycin and the measurement of ALT, LDH
and CKMB leakage
The ICR mice survival experiment was conducted
(see Supplementary material) and the serum cardiac
enzyme activity of AST, LDH and CKMB were detected
by full-automatic biochemical detect machine (see
supplementary material).

Electrocardiogram recording
Echocardiography was performed in mice from
each group, mice were anesthetized (ip) with sodium
pentobarbital (0.05 mg/g) and fixed in a supine position.
Electrocardiograms were recorded using a direct inkwriting 3-channel Mingograph (Biopac Systems Inc.,
CA, USA).

Neonatal rat cardiomyocytes preparation
Neonatal rat cardiomyocytes were prepared as
described in supplementary material.

Cytotoxicity assay
The cytotoxicity was determined using MTT assay
(see supplementary material).

DAPI staining assay
Neonatal rat cardiomyocytes were cultured in 24well plates and the changes of nuclei was photographed
after DAPI staining with fluorescence microscope (see
supplementary material).

METHODS
Cell culture

Analysis of apoptosis by propidium iodide
staining

Mouse cardiac myoblast cell line H9C2, Human
leukemia cancer cell line U937, HL-60 and K-562 were
purchased from the Institute of Cell Biology in Shanghai.
The H9C2 cells were cultured in DMEM medium
(GIBCO, Grand Island, USA) and the other cells were
cultured in RPMI-1640 (GIBCO, Grand Island, USA),
supplemented with penicillin (100 U/ml), streptomycin
(100 U/ml) and 10% FBS (Hyclone, Logan, UT, USA).
All the cells were cultured at 37°C with 5% CO2 in a
humidified atmosphere.

Cells (4×105/well) were seeded into 6-well plates
and the apoptosis rate was analyzed after PI staining by
FACS-Calibur cytometer (see supplementary material).

Measurement of intracellular ROS
The neonatal rat cardiomyocytes were seeded into
24-well plates (5×104/ml) and the intracellular ROS was
measured after incubation with Carboxy-DCFDA by
fluorescence spectrometer (see supplementary material).

Animal treatment

Measurement of intracellular GSH

Neonatal Sprague-Dawley rats, ICR mice and
BALB/C mice were supplied by the Shanghai Laboratory
Animal Center, Chinese Academy of Sciences and housed
in a clean grade room at 21 ± 1°C and 60 ± 5% humidity,
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

The content of GSH was detected using an assay
kits (Nanjing Jiancheng, China) according to the
manufacturer’s protocol [19] (see supplementary material).
3264

Oncotarget

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

JC-1 stain for mitochondrial membrane
potential (∆Ψm)

This work was supported by the National Natural
Science Foundation of China (81273536); the National
Major Scientific and Technological Special Project for
“Significant New Drugs Development” during the Twelfth
Five-year Plan Period (No. 2012ZX09103101-032);
National Key Technology Research and Development
Program of the Ministry of Science and Technology
of China (2013BAD19B05); Zhejiang Provincial
Natural Science Foundation of China (LY12C12001);
Science-Technology Foundation of Zhejiang Province
(2012C33056); Fundamental Research Funds for the
Central Universities.

The neonatal rat cardiomyocytes were seeded
into 6-well plates (5×104/ml) and after incubated with
JC-1, samples were analyzed by FACS Calibur (see
supplementary material).

Western blot analysis
The western blot analysis was conducted as
described in supplementary material.

RNA interference
SiRNA against MDM2 or a non-targeting
control siRNA, complexed with oligofectamin
(Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA) following the
manufacturer’ instructions, were applied to H9C2
cells to yield a final concentration of 100 nM. After
4–6 h of transfection, cells were cultured in fresh
DMEM. The sense sequence of MDM2 siRNA was
5’-AAUGCCUCAAUUCACAUAGAUTT-3’.

REFERENCES
1.	 Bonadonn G, Monfardi S, Delena M and Fossatib F.
­Clinical Evaluation of Adriamycin, a New Antitumour
­Antibiotic. BMJ. 1969; 3:503–506.
2.	 Bonadonn G, Monfardi S, Lena MD, Fossatib F and
Beretta G. Phase-I and Preliminary Phase-Ii Evalua­
tion of Adriamycin (Nsc-123127). Cancer Res. 1970; 30:
2572–2582.

Immunoprecipitation

3.	 Praga C, Beretta G, Vigo PL, Lenaz GR, Pollini C,
Bonadonna G, Canetta R, Castellani R, Villa E,
­
Gallagher CG, von Melchner H, Hayat M, Ribaud P,
­
De Wasch G, Mattsson W, Heinz R, Waldner R, Kolaric K,
Buehner R, Ten Bokkel-Huyninck W, Perevodchikova NI,
Manziuk LA, Senn HJ and Mayr AC. Adriamycin cardiotoxicity: a survey of 1273 patients. Cancer Treat Rep. 1979;
63:827–834.

Immunoprecipitation was performed as described
previously [20] (see supplementary material).

Lentiviral transduction
Lentiviral transduction was performed as previously
described [21] (see supplementary material).

4.	 Carvalho C, Santos RX, Cardoso S, Correia S, Oliveira PJ,
Santos MS and Moreira PI. Doxorubicin: The Good, the
Bad and the Ugly Effect. Curr Med Chem. 2009; 16:
3267–3285.

Xenografts of human leukemia cancer and
drug treatment
The U937 xenograft mice were divided into different
group randomly and the drug treatments initiated when the
tumors volume came to 300 mm3. The inhibition rate was
calculated as [(average tumor weight of vehicle groupaverage tumor weight of test group)/average tumor weight
of vehicle group] × 100% (see supplementary material).

5.	 Theodoulou M and Hudis C. Cardiac profiles of liposomal
anthracyclines: greater cardiac safety versus conventional
doxorubicin?. Cancer. 2004; 100:2052–2063.
6.	 Swain SM, Whaley FS and Ewer MS. Congestive heart failure in patients treated with doxorubicin - A retrospective
analysis of three trials. Cancer. 2003; 97:2869–2879.

Statistical analysis

7.	 Vergely C, Delemasure S, Cottin Y and Rochette L.
­Preventing the cardiotoxic effects of anthracyclines: from
basic concepts to clinical data. Heart Metab. 2007; 35:1–7.

All values were expressed as mean ± s.d.
Differences in the cytotoxicity of DMY, ADR and the
combination groups in cardiomyocytes (Figure 2A) and
leukemia cells (Figure 4A), the in vivo anti-tumor activity
(Figure 5A) were evaluated by two way ANOVA analyses.
The unpaired two-sided Student’s t-test was employed
to analyze the rest of the data. For each analysis, three
independent experiments were conducted to obtain the
data. * and # indicates the values are significantly different
than the control (*p<0.05, **p<0.01, ***p<0.001,
##
p<0.01).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

8.	 Bolaman Z, Cicek C, Kadikoylu G, Barutca S, Serter M,
Yenisey C and Alper G. The protective effects of amifostine
on adriamycin-induced acute cardiotoxicity in rats. Tohoku
J Exp Med. 2005; 207(4):249–253.
9.	 Daosukho C, Chen Y, Noel T, Sompol P, Nithipongvanitch R,
Velez JM, Oberley TD and St Clair DK. Phenylbutyrate, a
histone deacetylase inhibitor, protects against Adriamycininduced cardiac injury. Free Radic Biol Med. 2007;
42(12):1818–1825.
3265

Oncotarget

10.	 Mohamed HE, El-Swefy SE and Hagar HH. The ­protective
effect of glutathione administration on adriamycininduced acute cardiac toxicity in rats. Pharmacol Res. 2000;
42(2):115–121.

23.	 Doroshow JH. Effect of Anthracycline Antibiotics on
­Oxygen Radical Formation in Rat-Heart. Cancer Res. 1983;
43:460–472.
24.	 Singal PK, Khaper N, Palace V and Kumar D. The role of
oxidative stress in the genesis of heart disease. Cardiovasc
Res. 1998; 40:426–432.

11.	 Blum RH. Clinical status and optimal use of the
cardioprotectant, dexrazoxane. Oncology (Williston Park).
1997; 11:1669–1677discussion 1677–1678, 1681.

25.	 Simunek T, Sterba M, Popelova O, Adamcova M, Hrdina R
and Gersl V. Anthracycline-induced cardiotoxicity:
overview of studies examining the roles of oxidative stress
and free cellular iron. Pharmacol Rep. 2009; 61:154–171.

12.	 Wouters KA, Kremer LCM, Miller TL, Herman EH and
Lipshultz SE. Protecting against anthracycline-induced
myocardial damage: a review of the most promising
strategies. Br J Haematol. 2005; 131:561–578.

26.	 Zhang Y-W, Shi J, Li Y-J and Wei L. Cardiomyocyte death
in doxorubicin-induced cardiotoxicity. Arch Immunol Ther
Exp (Warsz). 2009; 57:435–445.

13.	 Hasinoff BB, Hellmann K, Herman EH and Ferrans VJ.
Chemical, biological and clinical aspects of dexrazoxane
and other bisdioxopiperazines. Curr Med Chem. 1998;
5:1–28.

27.	 Tan WQ, Wang JX, Lin ZQ, Li YR, Lin Y and Li PF.
­Novel Cardiac Apoptotic Pathway The Dephosphorylation
of Apoptosis Repressor With Caspase Recruitment Domain
by Calcineurin. Circulation. 2008; 118:2268–2276.

14.	 Hasinoff BB and Herman EH. Dexrazoxane: how it works
in cardiac and tumor cells. Is it a prodrug or is it a drug?
Cardiovasc Toxicol. 2007; 7:140–144.

28.	 Lebrecht D, Geist A, Ketelsen UP, Haberstroh J, Setzer B
and Walker UA. Dexrazoxane prevents doxorubicininduced long-term cardiotoxicity and protects myocardial
mitochondria from genetic and functional lesions in rats.
Br J Pharmacol. 2007; 151(6):771–778.

15.	 Tebbi CK, London WB, Friedman D, Villaluna D,
De ­Alarcon PA, Constine LS, Mendenhall NP, Sposto R,
Chauvenet A and Schwartz CL. Dexrazoxane-Associated
risk for acute myeloid leukemia/myelodysplastic syndrome
and other secondary malignancies in pediatric Hodgkin’s
disease. J Clin Oncol. 2007; 25:493–500.

29.	 Zhu H, Huang M, Yang F, Chen Y, Miao ZH, Qian XH,
Xu YF, Qin YX, Luo HB, Shen X, Geng MY, Cai YJ and
Ding J. R16, a novel amonafide analogue, induces apoptosis
and G2-M arrest via poisoning topoisomerase II. Mol
­Cancer Ther. 2007; 6(2):484–495.

16.	 Salzer WL, Devidas M, Carroll WL, Winick N, Pullen J,
Hunger SP and Camitta BA. Long-term results of the
pediatric oncology group studies for childhood acute
lymphoblastic leukemia 1984–2001: a report from the
children’s oncology group. Leukemia. 2010; 24:355–370.

30.	 Zhang Q, Liu J, Liu B, Xia J, Chen N, Chen X, Cao Y,
Zhang C, Lu C, Li M and Zhu R. Dihydromyricetin
promotes hepatocellular carcinoma regression via a p53
activation-dependent mechanism. Sci Rep. 2014; 4:4628.

17.	 Hase K, Ohsugi M, Xiong QB, Basnet P, Kadota S and
Namba T. Hepatoprotective effect of Hovenia dulcis
Thunb on experimental liver injuries induced by carbon
tetrachloride or D-galactosamine/lipopolysaccharide. Biol
Pharm Bull. 1997; 20:381–385.

31.	 Arena E, D’Alessandro N, Dusonchet L, Geraci M, ­Rausa L
and Sanguedolce R. Repair kinetics of DNA, RNA and
proteins in the tissues of mice treated with doxorubicin.
­Arzneimittelforschung. 1979; 29:901–902.

18.	 Ye JT, Guan YY, Zeng S and Liu DY. Ampelopsin prevents
apoptosis induced by H(2)O(2) in MT-4 lymphocytes.
Planta Med. 2008; 74:252–257.

32.	 Shi Y, Moon M, Dawood S, McManus B and Liu PP.
Mechanisms and management of doxorubicin
­
­cardiotoxicity. Herz. 2011; 36:296–304.

19.	 Xue T, Luo PH, Zhu H, Zhao YQ, Wu HH, Gai RH,
Wu YP, Yang B, Yang XC and He QJ. Oxidative stress
is i­nvolved in Dasatinib-induced apoptosis in rat primary
hepatocytes. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2012; 261:280–291.

33.	 Bliznakov EG. Cardiovascular diseases, oxidative stress
and antioxidants: the decisive role of coenzyme Q(10).
­Cardiovasc Res. 1999; 43:248–249.

20.	 Wu LT, Chen P, Shum CH, Chen C, Barsky LW,
­Weinberg KI, Jong A and Triche TJ. MAT1-modulated
CAK activity regulates cell cycle G(1) exit. Mol Cell Biol.
2001; 21:260–270.

34.	 Wallace KB. Adriamycin-induced interference with cardiac
mitochondrial calcium homeostasis. Cardiovasc Toxicol.
2007; 7:101–107.

21.	 Lou S, Liu G, Shimada H, Yang X, He Q and Wu L.
The lost intrinsic fragmentation of MAT1 protein during
granulopoiesis promotes the growth and metastasis of
leukemic myeloblasts. Stem Cells. 2013; 31(9):1942–1953.

35.	 Ducroq J, Moha ou Maati H, Guilbot S, Dilly S,
­Laemmel E, Pons-Himbert C, Faivre JF, Bois P, Stücker O
and Le Grand M. Dexrazoxane protects the heart from acute
doxorubicin-induced QT prolongation: a key role for I-Ks.
Br J Pharmacol. 2010; 159:93–101.

22.	 Wu S, Ko YS, Teng MS, Ko YL, Hsu LA, Hsueh C,
Chou YY, Liew CC and Lee YS. Adriamycin-induced
cardiomyocyte and endothelial cell apoptosis: In ­
­
vitro
and in vivo studies. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2002; 34:
1595–1607.

36.	 Xiang P, Deng HY, Li K, Huang G-Y, Chen Y, Tu L, Ng PC,
Pong NH, Zhao H, Zhang L and Sung RYT. ­Dexrazoxane
protects against doxorubicin-induced cardiomyopathy:
upregulation of Akt and Erk ­phosphorylation in a rat model.
Cancer Chemother Pharmacol. 2008; 63:343–349.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

3266

Oncotarget

37.	 Vejpongsa P and Yeh ETH. Topoisomerase 2β: A
­Promising Molecular Target for Primary Prevention of
Anthracycline-Induced Cardiotoxicity. Clin Pharmacol
­
Ther. 2013; 95:45–52.

to death stimuli - Identification of a degradation-resistant
mutant. J Biol Chem. 2007; 282:5522–5528.
48.	 Foo RSY, Chan LKW, Kitsis RN and Bennett MR.
­Ubiquitination and degradation of the anti-apoptotic protein
ARC by MDM2. J Biol Chem. 2007; 282:5529–5535.

38.	 Herman EH, Ferrans VJ, Myers CE and Van Vleet JF.
Comparison of the effectiveness of (+/-)-1,2-bis
(3,5-­
dioxopiperazinyl-1-yl)propane (ICRF-187) and
N-­
acetylcysteine in preventing chronic doxorubicin
cardiotoxicity in beagles. Cancer Res. 1985; 45:276–281.

49.	 Stegh AH. Targeting the p53 signaling pathway in cancer
therapy - the promises, challenges and perils. Expert Opin
Ther Targets. 2012; 16:67–83.
50.	 Ludwig-Galezowska AH, Flanagan L and Rehm M.
­Apoptosis repressor with caspase recruitment domain, a
multifunctional modulator of cell death. J Cell Mol Med.
2011; 15:1044–1053.

39.	 Van Vleet JF, Ferrans VJ and Weirich WE. Cardiac
disease induced by chronic adriamycin administration
in dogs and an evaluation of vitamin E and selenium as
cardioprotectants. Am J Pathol. 1980; 99:13–42.
40.	 Dresdale AR, Barr LH, Bonow RO, Mathisen DJ,
Myers CE, Schwartz DE, d’Angelo T and Rosenberg SA.
Prospective randomized study of the role of N-acetyl
cysteine in reversing doxorubicin-induced cardiomyopathy.
Am J Clin Oncol. 1982; 5:657–663.

51.	 Zhao Z, Yin JQ, Wu MS, Song G, Xie XB, Zou C,
Tang Q, Wu Y, Lu J, Wang Y, Wang J, Kang T, Jia Q and
Shen J. Dihydromyricetin Activates AMP-Activated Protein
Kinase and P38MAPK Exerting Antitumor Potential
inOsteosarcoma. Cancer Prev Res (Phila). 2014; [Epub
ahead of print].

41.	 Hasinoff BB, Patel D and Wu X. The oral iron chelator
ICL670A (deferasirox) does not protect myocytes
against doxorubicin. Free Radic Biol Med. 2003;
35:1469–1479.

52.	 Zeng G, Liu J, Chen H, Liu B, Zhang Q, Li M and Zhu R.
Dihydromyricetin induces cell cycle arrest and apoptosis
in melanoma SK-MEL-28 cells. Oncol Rep. 2014;
31(6):2713–2719.

42.	 Octavia Y, Tocchetti CG, Gabrielson KL, Janssens S,
Crijns HJ and Moens AL. Doxorubicin-induced
­
cardiomyopathy: from molecular mechanisms to therapeutic
strategies. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2012; 52:1213–1225.

53.	 Apontes P, Leontieva OV, Demidenko ZN, Li F and
­Blagosklonny MV. Exploring long-term protection of normal
human fibroblasts and epithelial cells from chemotherapy in
cell culture. Oncotarget. 2011; 2(3):222–233.

43.	 McKimpson WM, Weinberger J, Czerski L, Zheng M,
Crow MT, Pessin JE, Chua SC and Kitsis RN. The
­Apoptosis ­Inhibitor ARC Alleviates the ER Stress ­Response
to Promote beta-Cell Survival. Diabetes. 2013; 62:
183–193.

54.	 Daosukho C, Chen Y, Noel T, Sompol P,
Nithipongvanitch R, Velez JM, Oberley TD and St Clair DK.
Phenylbutyrate, a histone deacetylase inhibitor, protects
against Adriamycin-induced cardiac injury. Free Radic Biol
Med. 2007; 42(12):1818–1825.

44.	 An JF, Li PF, Li JC, Dietz R and Donath S. ARC is a
critical cardiomyocyte survival switch in doxorubicin
cardiotoxicity. J Mol Med (Berl). 2009; 87:401–410.

55.	 Brochier C, Dennis G, Rivieccio MA, McLaughlin K,
­Coppola G, Ratan RR and Langley B. Specific acetylation
of p53 by HDAC inhibition prevents DNA damage-induced
apoptosis in neurons. J Neurosci. 2013; 33(20):8621–8832.

45.	 Davis J, Kwong JQ, Kitsis RN and Molkentin JD. ­Apoptosis
Repressor with a CARD Domain (ARC) Restrains
Bax-­Mediated Pathogenesis in Dystrophic Skeletal Muscle.
PLoS One. 2013; 8.

56.	 Daosukho C, Chen Y, Noel T, Sompol P,
Nithipongvanitch R, Velez JM, Oberley TD and
St Clair DK. Phenylbutyrate, a histone deacetylase inhibitor,
protects against Adriamycin-induced cardiac injury. Free
Radic Biol Med. 2007; 42(12):1818–1825.

46.	 Siu PM and Alway SE. Deficiency of the Bax gene
­attenuates denervation-induced apoptosis. Apoptosis. 2006;
11:967–981.

57.	 Brochier C, Dennis G, Rivieccio MA, M
­ cLaughlin K,
Coppola G, Ratan RR and Langley B. Specific
acetylation of p53 by HDAC inhibition prevents DNA
­damage-induced apoptosis in neurons. J Neurosci. 2013;
33(20):8621–8632.

47.	 Nam YJ, Mani K, Wu L, Peng CF, Calvert JW, Foo RSY,
Krishnamurthy B, Miao WF, Ashton AW, Lefer DJ
and Kitsis RN. The apoptosis inhibitor ARC undergoes
­ubiquitin-proteasomal-mediated degradation in response

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

3267

Oncotarget

