Research Article

Preclinical Cancer Therapy in a Mouse Model of
Neurofibromatosis-1 Optic Glioma
1

2

1,5

1

4

Balazs Hegedus, Debasish Banerjee, Tu-Hsueh Yeh, Stefan Rothermich, Arie Perry,
3
2
1
Joshua B. Rubin, Joel R. Garbow, and David H. Gutmann
Departments of 1Neurology, 2Radiology, and 3Pediatrics and 4Division of Neuropathology, Washington University School of Medicine,
St. Louis, Missouri and 5Department of Neurology, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital and University, Taipei, Taiwan

Abstract
Mouse models of human cancers afford unique opportunities
to evaluate novel therapies in preclinical trials. For this
purpose, we analyzed three genetically engineered mouse
(GEM) models of low-grade glioma resulting from either
inactivation of the neurofibromatosis-1 (Nf1) tumor suppressor gene or constitutive activation of KRas in glial cells. Based
on tumor proliferation, location, and penetrance, we selected
one of these Nf1 GEM models for preclinical drug evaluation.
After detection of an optic glioma by manganese-enhanced
magnetic resonance imaging, we randomized mice to either
treatment or control groups. We first validated the Nf1 optic
glioma model using conventional single-agent chemotherapy
(temozolomide) currently used for children with low-grade
glioma and showed that treatment resulted in decreased
proliferation and increased apoptosis of tumor cells in vivo as
well as reduced tumor volume. Because neurofibromin
negatively regulates mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR)
signaling, we showed that pharmacologic mTOR inhibition
in vivo led to decreased tumor cell proliferation in a dosedependent fashion associated with a decrease in tumor
volume. Interestingly, no additive effect of combined rapamycin and temozolomide treatment was observed. Lastly, to
determine the effect of these therapies on the normal brain,
we showed that treatments that affect tumor cell proliferation
or apoptosis did not have a significant effect on the
proliferation of progenitor cells within brain germinal zones.
Collectively, these findings suggest that this Nf1 optic glioma
model may be a potential preclinical benchmark for identifying novel therapies that have a high likelihood of success in
human clinical trials. [Cancer Res 2008;68(5):1520–8]

Introduction
Low-grade gliomas account for >50% of all brain tumors in
children from birth to 14 years of age (1). Compared with highgrade gliomas, comparatively little is known about the genetic
changes that underlie the formation of pediatric low-grade gliomas.
Some insights into the molecular pathogenesis of these tumors
have derived from the study of children with the inherited tumor
predisposition syndrome, neurofibromatosis type-1 (NF1). Young
children with NF1 (mean age at diagnosis of 4.5 years) are prone to

Note: Supplementary data for this article are available at Cancer Research Online
(http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/).
Requests for reprints: David H. Gutmann, Department of Neurology, Washington
University School of Medicine, Box 8111, 660 South Euclid Avenue, St. Louis, MO
63110. Phone: 314-362-7379; Fax: 314-362-2388; E-mail: gutmannd@wustl.edu.
I2008 American Association for Cancer Research.
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-07-5916

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (5). March 1, 2008

the development of low-grade astrocytomas that typically involve
the optic nerves and optic chiasm (2–4). Although most optic
gliomas in children with NF1 are grade I pilocytic astrocytomas,
other low-grade gliomas may also be encountered (5). In the
context of NF1, both WHO grade I and II gliomas exhibit low
proliferative indices (typically less than <1–2%), are locally invasive,
and exhibit infrequent nuclear atypia (6).
Despite the benign nature of these tumors, young children with
NF1-associated optic glioma may develop vision loss as a result of
optic nerve dysfunction or precocious puberty due to hypothalamic
involvement (7, 8), necessitating treatment. Currently, symptomatic
children are most commonly treated with either combined
carboplatin and vincristine chemotherapy (9, 10) or temozolomide
alone (11–13). Although chemotherapy results in durable responses
in many patients, additional therapies are required for those
children who exhibit clinically progressive disease.
Unlike the case of high-grade gliomas, for which multiple
genetic, xenograft, and cell culture models have supported
extensive biological and preclinical investigations, low-grade
gliomas have been considerably more challenging to model and
study. One of the major technical obstacles has been the relative
difficulty of establishing consistent low-grade glioma explant
models. These explant models have been limited by their low
engraftment rates and inconsistent growth patterns in vivo. To
circumvent these problems with explant models, advances in
mouse genetic engineering have facilitated the development of
mice in which naturally occurring human cancer-causing genetic
changes can be introduced into specific cell types (14–17).
To model human NF1-associated low-grade optic glioma in mice,
we have taken advantage of LoxP-Cre strategies to conditionally
inactivate the Nf1 gene in glial cells. The glial cell lineage was
targeted in these mice using two independently generated human
GFAP promoter constructs to express Cre recombinase. The first
GFAP-Cre line (GFAP-Cre-m), developed by Messing and colleagues
(18), results in Nf1 inactivation in GFAP+ cells beginning around
embryonic day 11.5, whereas a second GFAP-Cre line (GFAP-Cre),
developed in our laboratory, inactivates Nf1 in GFAP+ cells by
embryonic day 14.5 (19). Despite the fact that both Cre lines use
a similar human GFAP promoter, f20% of Nf1+/ mice with
conditional Nf1 gene inactivation using the GFAP-Cre-m line
(Nf1+/GFAP-mCKO mice) develop optic gliomas involving the
retro-orbital optic nerve head (20), whereas f100% of Nf1+/
mice with conditional Nf1 inactivation using our GFAP-Cre line
(Nf1+/GFAPCKO mice) develop prechiasmatic and chiasmatic
optic gliomas (21, 22). In addition, based on the observation that
the Nf1 gene product, neurofibromin, functions to preferentially
inhibit KRas activity in astrocytes (23), we generated Nf1+/ mice
in which a constitutively active KRas allele (KRas*) is expressed in
GFAP+ cells using our GFAP-Cre line. As reported for the original
Nf1+/GFAPCKO mice, these Nf1+/KRas* mice also develop

1520

www.aacrjournals.org

Preclinical Testing of Optic Glioma Chemotherapy

prechiasmatic and chiasmatic optic gliomas (23). We have
previously characterized the Nf1+/GFAPCKO optic glioma model
in terms of tumor proliferation and natural history; however, there
are no comparable data available for the other two strains.
Although the Nf1+/GFAPCKO optic glioma model has been
useful for defining the molecular and cellular pathogenesis of NF1
optic glioma formation and growth (24–27), its value in preclinical
therapeutics has been largely unexplored (16). The objective of this
study was to compare the three genetically engineered mouse
(GEM) optic glioma strains and to select the most appropriate one
for preclinical trials evaluating both conventional and biologically
targeted therapies. Based on several criteria, the Nf1+/GFAPCKO
optic glioma model was chosen. Using magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI) to identify mice with optic glioma, we show that conventional single-agent therapy with temozolomide (12, 28) results in
decreased tumor proliferation and increased apoptosis in vivo as
well as reduced tumor volume. Second, we evaluated rapamycin
as a biologically targeted therapeutic agent based on previous
studies in our laboratory showing that Nf1 inactivation in astrocytes as well as in mouse and human optic gliomas leads
to mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) pathway activation,
which can be inhibited by rapamycin treatment in vitro and in vivo
(26, 29). We show that rapamycin inhibition of mTOR pathway
activation in Nf1-deficient optic gliomas resulted in decreased
tumor proliferation in a dose-dependent fashion but had no effect
on apoptosis in vivo. Lastly, we show that treatments sufficient to
inhibit tumor cell proliferation have little effect on proliferation or
apoptosis in brain germinal zones in vivo. Collectively, these data
support the use of Nf1+/GFAPCKO mice for preclinical therapeutic
testing for NF1-associated low-grade optic glioma.

Materials and Methods
Mice. Three independent GEM models of Nf1 optic glioma were used
based on the timing and location of Nf1 inactivation as well as conditional
KRas activation. The first model (Nf1+/GFAPCKO mice; ref. 21) was generated by successive breeding of Nf1+/ mice with Nf1 flox/flox mice (30) and
GFAP-Cre mice (19). The second model (Nf1+/GFAP-mCKO mice; ref. 20)
was generated by successive breeding of Nf1+/ mice with Nf1 flox/flox mice
(30) and GFAP-Cre-m mice (18). The third model (Nf1+/KRas* mice; ref. 23)
was generated by successive breeding of Nf1+/ mice with LSL-KRasG12D
mice (31) and GFAP-Cre mice (19). All mice were maintained on a C57BL/6
background.
Chemicals. Temozolomide was purchased from the St. Louis Children’s
Hospital pharmacy. Rapamycin was purchased from Santa Cruz Biotechnology. All other chemicals were obtained from Sigma.
Manganese-enhanced MRI. MR images were collected in an Oxford
Instruments 4.7-T magnet (33 cm, clear bore) equipped with 15-cm inner
diameter, actively shielded Oxford gradient coils (maximum gradient,
18 G/cm; rise time, 100 As), and Techron Model 3020 gradient power
amplifiers. The magnet/gradients are interfaced with a Varian INOVA
console, and data were collected using a home-built 1.5-cm outer diameter
surface coil (receive) and a Varian 9-cm inner diameter Helmholtz coil
(transmit; ref. 32). Mouse body temperature was maintained at 37 F 1jC
using a heating pad formed by circulating warm water. Mice were
anesthetized with isoflurane/O2 and maintained on isoflurane/O2 [1–1.5%
(v/v)] during all imaging experiments.
For contrast enhancement, mice were injected i.p. with 140 mg/kg
manganese chloride followed by a s.c. injection of 0.5 mL saline to
maintain hydration. Transaxial, T1-weighted, spin-echo images and
diffusion-weighted MRI data were collected 16 to 48 h later (32).
Apparent diffusion coefficients (ADC) and mean ADC values (<ADC>),
describing average diffusion in three orthogonal directions, were
computed according to standard equations (33). Optic nerve cross-

www.aacrjournals.org

sectional areas were measured following manual segmentation of the
images using ImageJ software.6
Preclinical paradigm. Nf1+/GFAPCKO mice underwent manganeseenhanced MRI (MEMRI) at 10 to 12 weeks of age to confirm the presence of
an optic glioma (Fig. 1) followed by randomization to either vehicle or
temozolomide treatment (trial 1) or either vehicle or rapamycin treatment
(trial 2) or rapamycin and temozolomide treatment (trial 3). In each trial, at
least six mice were analyzed in each experimental arm. Temozolomide (42
mg/kg/d for 5 days) was given in the drinking water (n = 7 mice; ref. 34).
Water consumption was monitored daily and the dose of temozolomide
was adjusted accordingly. Controls were Nf1+/GFAPCKO mice that
consumed untreated drinking water (n = 6 mice). Three weeks later, mice
were euthanized and their optic nerves/brains were removed for analysis.
Rapamycin (5 or 20 mg/kg/d) was given as daily i.p. injections of a solution
containing 5.2% Tween 80 and 5.2% polyethylene glycol 400 (5 days per
week for 2 weeks). Vehicle-treated mice were injected daily with an identical
solution lacking rapamycin (n = 6). Four groups of treated mice were
analyzed. The first two groups (n = 7 mice) were euthanized at the end of
the second week of rapamycin treatment (rapamycin and high rapamycin),
whereas the other two groups (n = 6 mice) were euthanized 2 weeks after
the completion of rapamycin treatment (rapamycin + 2 weeks and high
rapamycin + 2 weeks). Finally, 7 mice were treated simultaneously with
temozolomide and rapamycin (5 mg/kg/d) for 5 days followed by rapamycin
(5 mg/kg/d) alone for another 5 days. These animals were analyzed 2 weeks
after the completion of the treatment.
Immunohistochemistry. Three hours before euthanasia, mice were
injected with 50 mg/kg bromodeoxyuridine (BrdUrd). Perfusion, fixation,
tissue sectioning, and immunostaining were performed as previously
described (22). Terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase–mediated dUTP nick
end labeling (TUNEL) labeling was accomplished according to the
manufacturer’s instructions (Roche Diagnostics). The number of BrdUrdimmunoreactive, Ki-67 (MIB-1)-immunoreactive, and phospho-S6–immunoreactive cells as well as TUNEL-positive cells in the tumors was
quantified by direct counting on three consecutive sections. The Ki-67
labeling indices were determined after counting the total number of nuclei
visualized by hematoxylin counterstaining. Similar methods were used to
quantitate cells in the mouse subventricular zone (SVZ) and dentate gyrus
(DG). BrdUrd (Abcam, Inc.), Ki-67 (BD PharMingen), and phospho-S6
(Ser240/244; Cell Signaling Technology) antibodies were purchased from
commercial sources.
Western blotting. Spleens were homogenized in a Dounce homogenizer
and 10 Ag of total protein, as determined using bicinchoninic acid reagents
(Fisher), were separated by SDS-PAGE before immunoblotting. Phospho-S6
(Ser240/244), phospho-Akt (Ser473), phospho–p70 S6 kinase (p70S6K; Thr389),
Akt, S6, and p70S6K antibodies were purchased from Cell Signaling
Technology. Blots were developed using chemiluminescence (Fisher) and
exposure to BioMax film (Fisher).
Optic glioma measurements. The entire optic nerve with the eye and
intact chiasm was microdissected and photographed with a scale bar.
Prechiasmatic optic nerve diameters were measured at the chiasm and at
f200, f400, and f600 Am anterior to the chiasm. To estimate the volume
of the prechiasmatic optic nerve and chiasm, the volumes (V 1, V 2, and V 3)
of the three 200-Am high truncated cones were combined using the
diameter (D 0, D 200, D 400, and D 600) values from each optic nerve
measurement. The following equation (35) was used to calculate the total
optic nerve volume:
V1 ¼

1
phðD20 þ D0 D200 þ D2200 Þ
12

Statistical analyses. The mean and SE were calculated and presented
for each condition (treatment or mouse strain). A one-way ANOVA test was

1521

6

http://rsb.info.nih.gov/ij/

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (5). March 1, 2008

Cancer Research

Figure 1. Nf1 +/GFAPCKO mice develop optic gliomas similar to those observed in children with NF1. Top row, MRI (MEMRI) shows asymmetrically enlarged
optic nerves in one representative Nf1+/GFAPCKO mouse compared with control animals. Mouse optic gliomas display limited hypercellularity with occasional nuclear
atypia and low mitotic activity. Bottom row, MRI shows asymmetrically enlarged optic nerves in a child with NF1 compared with MRI of the optic nerves from a
healthy individual. Low cellularity and parenchymal infiltration as well as low proliferation rate are characteristics of the human tumors. White arrowheads point to the
optic nerves. Black arrows point to atypical nuclei. Black arrowheads indicate MIB-1–labeled cells. Bar, 30 Am.

performed to determine whether the means were significantly different
among the various conditions. To compare individual treatment conditions
to wild-type (WT) or untreated groups, unpaired t test (with Welch’s
correction) analyses were performed. Statistical significance was set at
P < 0.05.

Results and Discussion
Analysis of mouse optic glioma models. As previously
reported by our laboratory (21–23) and by Parada’s group (20),
Nf1+/ mice with Nf1 loss or KRas activation in GFAP+ glial cells
develop optic gliomas. Similar to human NF1-associated optic

gliomas, the optic gliomas arising in Nf1+/GFAPCKO mice produce
focal expansion of the prechiasmatic optic nerves and chiasm,
which is evident as focal enlargement on small-animal MRI
(Fig. 1; ref. 32). Further, as is typical for the human disease,
Nf1+/GFAPCKO mouse optic gliomas have low proliferative
indices (Fig. 1; ref. 22), nuclear atypia (Fig. 1), microglial infiltration
(24), endothelial cell proliferation (22), as well as diffuse infiltration
of the optic nerve (Fig. 1). Moreover, similar to their human
counterparts, these tumors show a predilection for the optic nerve
and exhibit maximal growth in young mice. However, none of these
three models harbors the eosinophilic granular bodies, Rosenthal

Figure 2. Comparison of the time course of optic glioma proliferation in the three GEM mouse strains. A, the number of Ki-67 (MIB-1)-positive cells in the prechiasmatic
optic nerves and chiasm was higher in all three mouse strains compared with WT mice at 4 mo of age. At 2 mo of age, only the Nf1 +/GFAPCKO mice had a
significant increase in optic glioma proliferation compared with WT mice. By 6 mo of age, there were no significant differences in proliferation compared with WT optic
nerves. B, Ki-67 labeling indices display an identical trend for all mouse strains analyzed. At 4 mo of age, all three mouse strains exhibited a significant increase
in the Ki-67 labeling index compared with WT mice. Columns, mean; bars, SE. *, significant differences (P < 0.05).

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (5). March 1, 2008

1522

www.aacrjournals.org

Preclinical Testing of Optic Glioma Chemotherapy

fibers, or microcystic structures commonly seen in the human
counterpart, thus precluding their classification as juvenile pilocytic astrocytomas in the mouse. In this regard, these GEM optic
gliomas most likely represent low-grade gliomas that are otherwise
difficult to definitively classify further as either pilocytic (WHO
grade I) or diffuse fibrillary (WHO grade II) astrocytomas; this is in
fact similar to a subset of the astrocytomas encountered in children
with NF1 (5). These lesions are not gliotic areas because gliosis
contracts tissue and lacks the abnormal nuclei (atypia and
pleiomorphism) seen in tumor specimens.
To select an optimal model for preclinical evaluation, we
analyzed the histology and natural history of the three previously
published GEM models of optic pathway glioma. All three mouse
models exhibit thickened prechiasmatic nerves and enlarged optic
chiasms compared with age-matched WT mice, similar to children
with NF1-associated optic glioma (Fig. 1). Whereas f100% of the
Nf1+/GFAPCKO and Nf1+/KRas* mice harbored optic gliomas,
a significantly lower percentage of the Nf1+/GFAP-mCKO mice
developed optic gliomas in the prechiasmatic optic nerves and
chiasm (Supplementary Fig. S1). These results are similar to those
previously reported for the Nf1+/GFAP-mCKO mouse model, in
which only 20% of these mice had neoplastic lesions (20). In
addition, Nf1 +/GFAP CKO and Nf1 +/KRas* mice developed
gliomas involving the prechiasmatic optic nerves and chiasm,
whereas Nf1+/GFAP-mCKO mice more frequently develop retroorbital optic gliomas near the optic nerve head. The differences in
location and penetrance of the optic glioma phenotype in these
three Nf1 mutant mouse strains underscore the importance of
developing and comparing multiple mouse tumor models. Previous
studies of human NF1-associated optic gliomas have shown that
two thirds of optic gliomas involve the prechiasmatic optic nerves
and chiasm (8, 36) similar to the Nf1+/GFAPCKO and Nf1+/KRas*
mouse models, whereas 16% of tumors arise in an intraorbital/
retro-orbital location (8).
We next studied the proliferation of the optic gliomas arising in
each of the three GEM strains as a function of time. For these
experiments, three to five mice per strain and time point were
studied at 2, 4, and 6 months of age. We quantified the number of
proliferating cells using either BrdUrd (data not shown) or Ki-67
immunostaining (Fig. 2) with equivalent results. These data are
presented both as the total number of Ki-67+ cells (Fig. 2A) or the
percentage of Ki-67+ cells (Ki-67 labeling index; Fig. 2B) with
identical results. We chose to perform both measurements in these
experiments because the total number of cells in the optic nerve/
chiasm increases as a function of development in young mice.
Similar to human NF1-associated gliomas, the proliferative index
was low (f1%). The optic gliomas from all three models exhibited
increased proliferation at 4 months followed by a decline to WT
levels by 6 months. However, only the Nf1+/GFAPCKO mouse
strain exhibits increased proliferation at 2 months of age. Based on
the time course of optic glioma proliferation, the high level of
tumor penetrance, and the preferential localization to the prechiasmatic optic nerves and chiasm, the Nf1+/GFAPCKO mouse
model was chosen for the preclinical treatment studies.
We enrolled 10- to 12-week-old Nf1+/GFAPCKO mice to
approximate human clinical trials in which children are treated
following the detection of an optic glioma. Similar to human
clinical studies, we used MRI to identify tumors in living mice
before randomization. Based on previous studies showing that
maximal optic glioma proliferation in these mice occurs between
1 and 4 months of age, we elected to treat tumors detected in

www.aacrjournals.org

Figure 3. Temozolomide treatment results in decreased tumor proliferation
and increased tumor death. A, double-labeling immunofluorescence with
BrdUrd (green ) and GFAP (red) shows decreased numbers of proliferating
GFAP-immunoreactive cells (glia) in the tumors following temozolomide
treatment. Inset, BrdUrd+ nucleus associated with GFAP+ filaments.
B, immunostaining with Ki-67 (MIB-1) shows decreased proliferation in optic
nerve glioma tumors from temozolomide (TMZ )-treated mice compared with
control mice. The number of Ki-67+ cells (arrowheads ) was quantitated.
Inset, nuclear staining. C, TUNEL staining shows increased apoptosis in optic
nerve glioma tumors from temozolomide-treated mice compared with control
mice. The number of TUNEL+ cells (arrowheads ) was quantitated. WT mice are
included for comparison. Bar, 40 Am. Columns, mean; bars, SE. *, statistically
significant differences (P < 0.05).

1523

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (5). March 1, 2008

Cancer Research

10- to 12-week-old Nf1+/GFAPCKO mice and examine the effect
of treatment 4 weeks later.
Temozolomide treatment of Nf1+/GFAPCKO murine optic
glioma results in increased apoptosis and decreased proliferation in vivo. One of the important criteria for an accurate smallanimal model of human disease is showing that the disease in
the GEM model responds similarly to therapies used to treat
the human condition. Therefore, to validate the Nf1+/GFAPCKO
optic glioma mouse model as a preclinical model of human NF1associated optic glioma, we chose to determine the effect of temozolomide, as a single chemotherapeutic agent, on tumor growth.
Before treatment, we routinely observed a 2.5- to 3-fold greater
number of proliferating (BrdUrd+) GFAP-immunoreactive cells
(glia or astrocytes) using double-labeling immunohistochemistry in
the optic nerve gliomas from Nf1+/GFAPCKO mice compared
with WT optic nerves (Fig. 3A). Three weeks after treatment with
temozolomide for 5 days, there was a significant decrease in the
number of BrdUrd-immunoreactive cells (Fig. 3A) to levels similar
to those seen in normal optic nerves. Because BrdUrd is not used
to measure proliferation in human tumors, we quantified the
number of proliferating tumor cells using Ki-67 (MIB-1). For these
experiments, we present the data for the total number of Ki-67+
cells in each mouse tumor. Identical results were also obtained
when the Ki-67 labeling index was calculated (data not shown).
Following temozolomide treatment, we observed a significant
decrease in the number of Ki-67–immunoreactive (proliferating)
cells (Fig. 3B). Finally, because temozolomide treatment results
in tumor cell death, we also examined programmed cell death
(apoptosis) in treated and control optic glioma specimens. We
observed an increase in the number of TUNEL-positive (apoptotic)

cells following temozolomide treatment (Fig. 3C). WT optic nerves
lacking optic gliomas were included in Fig. 3 as reference points for
the levels of proliferation and apoptosis seen in tumors before and
after treatment.
Rapamycin treatment of Nf1+/GFAPCKO murine optic
glioma results in decreased proliferation in vivo. Neurofibromin, the NF1 gene product, regulates cell growth in part by
inhibiting the activity of the Ras proto-oncogene. Based on this
regulatory property, anti-Ras pharmaceuticals were initially used to
treat another nervous system tumor in patients with NF1 (37).
Unfortunately, these drugs failed to show efficacy (38), suggesting
that other biologically based targets need to be identified. Recent
studies from our laboratory and others have shown that neurofibromin also negatively regulates the activity of the mTOR
(26, 29, 39) and that mTOR inhibitors (e.g., rapamycin) can block
the growth of Nf1-deficient murine astrocytes in vitro (26, 29). To
determine whether this promising biologically targeted therapy
would block Nf1+/GFAPCKO mouse optic glioma growth, we
treated mice with either rapamycin (at 5 and 20 mg/kg/d) or
vehicle daily for 2 consecutive weeks. Mice were euthanized either
immediately after treatment or 2 weeks later. Rapamycin treatment
had the predicted dose-dependent effect on mTOR pathway
activation in vivo, shown by decreased activation (phosphorylation) of the downstream mTOR effector, ribosomal S6 (S6-P).
Immediately following treatment, there was robust inhibition of
S6-P in the tumors; however, this blockade became less significant
2 weeks later at the lower rapamycin dose (5 mg/kg/d; Fig. 4A).
In contrast, treatment with 20 mg/kg/d rapamycin resulted in a
sustained and durable inhibitory effect on S6 activation 2 weeks
after the cessation of treatment (Fig. 4A).

Figure 4. Rapamycin treatment results
in inhibition of mTOR activation and
decreased tumor proliferation.
A, immunostaining with activation-specific
S6 antibodies (S6-P ) shows that
vehicle-treated tumor-bearing mice have
significantly higher numbers of S6-P+ cells
(arrowheads ) in the prechiasmatic region
compared with age-matched WT mice.
Rapamycin treatment at both doses
significantly reduces S6 activation;
however, 2 wk after treatment with
5 mg/kg/d rapamycin, the percent of cells
exhibiting S6 activation is similar to
pretreatment values (rap+2w ) but is
significantly higher than observed in WT
mice. In contrast, 20 mg/kg/d rapamycin
resulted in a durable effect lasting for
at least 2 wk following the treatment
(high+2w ). Inset, representative tumor cell
with positive cytoplasmic S6-P labeling.
B, immunostaining with Ki-67 (MIB-1)
shows significantly decreased proliferation
(Ki-67+ cells; arrowheads ) in the optic nerve
gliomas from rapamycin-treated mice
compared with vehicle-treated mice after
2 wk with a return to pretreatment values
after 2 additional wk (5 mg/kg/d rapamycin).
As observed with the S6-P+ staining,
20 mg/kg/d rapamycin results in decreased
tumor proliferation after drug cessation
that is significantly lower than observed in
vehicle-treated mice. Columns, mean;
bars, SE. Bar, 40 Am.

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (5). March 1, 2008

1524

www.aacrjournals.org

Preclinical Testing of Optic Glioma Chemotherapy

Figure 5. Both temozolomide and
rapamycin decrease optic glioma size.
A, optic nerves dissected from drug-treated
animals displayed decreased tumor volume
compared with untreated controls.
Bottom, moreover, the optic chiasms were
less distended following treatment; top,
corresponding MEMRI images are included
for comparison. B, the tumor volume was
estimated by calculating the volume of
three truncated cones using the diameters
shown in the first image of A. Estimation
of prechiasmatic nerve volumes shows that
temozolomide, 20 mg/kg/d rapamycin,
or the combination of temozolomide and
5 mg/kg/d rapamycin treatment resulted
in significant tumor shrinkage (f20%
reduction). Rapamycin (5 mg/kg/d)
treatment alone failed to produce a
significant decrease when compared with
untreated (P = 0.14). WT mouse optic
nerves (without optic glioma) are included
for comparison. *, statistically significant
differences (P < 0.05). Columns, mean;
bars, SE. Bar, 200 Am.

Similarly, tumor proliferation was strongly inhibited by 5 mg/kg/d
rapamycin treatment with a return to baseline following removal
of drug (Fig. 4B). However, 20 mg/kg/d rapamycin treatment led
to a sustained reduction in proliferation (Fig. 4B). No change in
apoptosis was observed following rapamycin treatment (data not
shown). These results show that rapamycin is a potent antineoplastic during treatment, but growth suppression is dependent on
both the timing and dose of drug delivery. The lack of a sustained
effect of the lower dose of rapamycin on tumor growth suggests
tumoristatic, rather than tumoricidal, properties of this biological
therapy and is consistent with early clinical studies on human lowgrade tumors, including pilocytic astrocytoma, in which continued
rapamycin administration resulted in tumor shrinkage (40).
Lastly, we sought to determine whether the combination of
temozolomide and 5 mg/kg/d rapamycin would lead to further
decreases in tumor proliferation or increases in tumor apoptosis.
Analysis of optic nerve proliferation (Ki-67 staining) and apoptosis
(TUNEL labeling) did not reveal any additional effect of combined
therapy compared with temozolomide alone (data not shown).
These results do not support a synergistic or additive effect of
combination therapy with rapamycin and suggest that this
combination treatment may have limited utility in the short term.
It is possible that more durable responses would be observed with
combination therapy; however, the tumor proliferative profile of
the Nf1+/GFAPCKO mouse model precludes an analysis of the
effects of combinatorial therapies beyond 4 to 5 months of age.
Temozolomide and rapamycin effects on optic glioma size.
To determine whether the decrease in tumor growth was reflected

www.aacrjournals.org

in a change in the overall size of the tumor, we used two methods
to calculate optic glioma size. Using a direct measurement method,
we estimated the volume of the prechiasmatic portion of the
dissected intact optic nerve (Fig. 5A, bottom). We observed a 20%
reduction in total optic nerve volume when compared with
untreated nerves, with the largest reductions observed following
the temozolomide and 20 mg/kg/d rapamycin treatments.
However, total optic nerve volume was decreased by only 10%
following 5 mg/kg/d rapamycin treatment, which did not reach
statistical significance (Fig. 5B). No further reductions in total optic
nerve volume were observed following temozolomide plus
rapamycin treatment. However, compared with WT optic nerves,
there was a 40% increase in total optic nerve volume in untreated
Nf1+/GFAPCKO mice. Following temozolomide and 20 mg/kg/d
rapamycin treatment, this additional volume contributed by the
tumor was decreased by 45% and 60%, respectively. This degree of
tumor volume reduction is consistent with clinical responses seen
in children following successful treatment of solid tumors.
Second, we used MEMRI to estimate tumor volume; however,
there was no comparable trend when comparing pretreatment and
posttreatment prechiasmatic optic nerve cross-sectional areas
using this method (data not shown). The inability to use MEMRI
to quantify small changes in tumor area likely reflects the thickness
of the image slices (500 Am) relative to the tumor (f1 mm). Lastly,
we saw no statistically significant change in tumor <ADC> following either temozolomide, rapamycin, or temozolomide and
rapamycin treatment (data not shown). Ongoing studies aimed at
reducing the slice thickness and collecting images at higher

1525

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (5). March 1, 2008

Cancer Research

magnetic field strength (e.g., 11.7 T) may lead to improved
quantification of tumor volume in vivo.
Temozolomide and rapamycin have minimal effects on
normal brain germinal zone cells. We next assessed the effect of
systemic chemotherapy on total body weight and brain germinal
zone cell growth. First, in both temozolomide- and rapamycintreated mice, we observed a reduction in total body weight (Fig. 6A).
However, at 5 mg/kg/d rapamycin dose, the mice regained their
weight within 2 weeks. In contrast, temozolomide-treated or
20 mg/kg/d rapamycin–treated animals exhibited minimal weight
recovery 2 weeks after the completion of therapy. The combination
of rapamycin and temozolomide did not result in further weight
loss beyond what was observed with either drug alone. These
findings indicate that these anticancer drugs are associated with
significant systemic effects.

Second, we found that rapamycin treatment results in reduced
mTOR pathway activation throughout the body, as evidenced by
decreased p70S6K and S6 phosphorylation in the spleen (Fig. 6B).
However, there was no significant effect of rapamycin treatment on
the levels of Akt activation. In this regard, we found no evidence for
feedback between mTOR blockade and Akt activity as previously
reported in tumor cell lines (41, 42) or in cells or tumors lacking
expression of the tuberous sclerosis complex genes (43, 44). The
lack of feedback activation of Akt following rapamycin treatment
suggests that mTOR inhibition is unlikely to result in compensatory
changes in signaling within NF1-deficient cells that would
counteract the inhibitory effects of rapamycin on NF1-associated
optic glioma growth. Furthermore, these findings highlight differences between the consequences of NF1 and TSC gene inactivation,
which both control mTOR signaling, on cell growth control

Figure 6. Systemic effects of temozolomide and rapamycin. A, the body weight of drug-treated animals decreased during therapy. Rapamycin (20 mg/kg/d) treatment
resulted in a statistically significant decrease in body weight immediately after treatment. *, P = 0.01. However, 2 wk after drug cessation, there is full and minimal
recovery in the 5 and 20 mg/kg/d rapamycin–treated animals, respectively. B, Western immunoblotting of spleen lysates from rapamycin- and vehicle-treated mice
shows inhibition of mTOR activation using phospho-p70S6K and phospho-S6 as surrogate markers. Rapamycin treatment did not change the phosphorylation
(activation) status of Akt. Total protein levels are included as internal controls for equal protein loading. C, TUNEL staining shows no change in SVZ cell death in
temozolomide-, rapamycin-, or combination-treated mice compared with controls. Representative photomicrographs of TUNEL labeling of cells in the SVZ. D, Ki-67
immunostaining shows no change in SVZ cell proliferation following temozolomide, rapamycin, or combination treatment compared with controls. Representative
photomicrographs of Ki-67 immunostaining of cells in the SVZ. Columns, mean; bars, SE. Bar, 40 Am.

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (5). March 1, 2008

1526

www.aacrjournals.org

Preclinical Testing of Optic Glioma Chemotherapy

pathways, and suggest that loss of neurofibromin and tuberin/
hamartin may activate mTOR differently. In this regard, previous
studies from our laboratory have shown that Nf1 loss in astrocytes
has no effect on cell size, whereas Tsc loss in astrocytes leads
to increased soma size, an effect that is inhibited by rapamycin
(29, 45).
In addition to assessing the effects of these treatments on tumor
growth, we also examined the effect of chemotherapy on
proliferating cells in brain germinal zones. In 3-month-old mice,
neurogenesis largely results from proliferation within the SVZ and
hippocampus (46). Four weeks after the beginning of treatment
with temozolomide, rapamycin, or the combination of the two
drugs, we found that apoptosis in SVZ cells (Fig. 6C) and in DG
cells (data not shown) was minimally affected. Similarly, these
treatments resulted in no change in SVZ (Fig. 6D) or DG (data not
shown) cell proliferation. Collectively, these findings show that
treatments sufficient to inhibit proliferation or induce apoptosis in
tumor cells did not have a significant effect on the proliferation or
apoptosis of the cells in postnatal neurogenic regions.
The use of Nf1+/GFAPCKO mice for preclinical drug
evaluation. As we enter into an era of biologically targeted
therapeutics, it becomes increasingly important to use accurate
small-animal cancer models as preclinical benchmarks that can
accurately predict therapeutic responses in patients. There are
several advantages of the Nf1 optic glioma model. First, tumors
arise in a predictable location (prechiasmatic optic nerves and
chiasm) with near 100% penetrance, as observed in children with
NF1-associated optic gliomas (8, 36). Second, the optic gliomas are
readily detectable using small-animal MRI in 15 min and limited
image analysis time, allowing for reasonable experimental
throughput (32). Third, the mouse optic gliomas share histologic
features with the human disease and show similar growth patterns
to those seen in children with NF1. Fourth, the initiating genetic
event is known (Nf1 inactivation) without the introduction of an
oncogenic mutation, such that the Nf1/ glia in the optic gliomas
are able to respond to growth-promoting signals from the brain
microenvironment similar to human NF1-associated optic pathway
gliomas (24, 27). In this regard, these tumors do not develop escape
mechanisms and other genetic/epigenetic changes that may reflect
constitutive intracellular signaling pathway activation associated
with oncogene expression. Fifth, these tumors arise in immunocompetent mice, allowing investigators to define the role of brain
immune system cells (e.g., microglia) in gliomagenesis and growth.
Based on recent data, it is possible that future therapies might
target microglia and/or microglia-produced factors that promote
Nf1/ astrocyte growth and Nf1 glioma growth. Lastly, the
optic gliomas in the Nf1+/GFAPCKO mice exhibit increased cell
death, decreased cell proliferation, and reduced tumor volume in

References
1. Louis DN, Ohgaki H, Wiestler OD, Cavenee WK,
editors. WHO classification of tumours of the central
nervous system. Vol. 1. Geneva: WHO Press; 2007. p. 312.
2. Listernick R, Charrow J, Greenwald MJ, Esterly NB.
Optic gliomas in children with neurofibromatosis type 1.
J Pediatr 1989;114:788–92.
3. Listernick R, Charrow J, Greenwald M, Mets M.
Natural history of optic pathway tumors in children
with neurofibromatosis type 1: a longitudinal study. J
Pediatr 1994;125:63–6.

www.aacrjournals.org

response to conventional chemotherapy used for children with
optic gliomas.
We have also used the Nf1+/GFAPCKO optic glioma model to
show target inhibition (inactivation of mTOR signaling following
rapamycin treatment), mechanism of therapy effect (increased
apoptosis versus reduced proliferation), and the effect of treatments on the normal brain. The ability to study these extratumoral
effects is critical when considering chemotherapy in children
whose brains are continuing to develop. It should be recognized
that the challenges in evaluating low-grade gliomas include their
slow growth rate, the minimal shrinkage following treatment, and
optimizing tumor suppression during the periods of maximal
tumor growth. Unlike high-grade gliomas, where significant tumor
shrinkage and survival are end points for successful treatment
outcome, children with NF1-associated optic gliomas do not
typically exhibit significant tumor shrinkage following chemotherapy and rarely die as a direct result of their brain tumors. Moreover,
these tumors tend to grow for a defined period during early
childhood and uncommonly continue to grow in children older
than 7 years of age. In this regard, therapies need to be designed
that target the tumor during its period of rapid growth to avoid the
incorrect conclusion that therapy resulted in tumor stabilization
after the period of maximal tumor proliferation. For all of these
reasons, it is important to recalibrate our expectations for lowgrade glioma mouse models based on the unique behavior of
human low-grade gliomas.
The use of Nf1+/GFAPCKO mouse optic glioma model may
afford more accurate predictive information relevant to the human
condition, as it closely recapitulates most of the genetic and
cellular abnormalities seen in NF1-associated optic pathway
gliomas. In addition to this model, it will be important to develop
additional GEM that phenocopy more clinically aggressive NF1associated optic gliomas, such as those that develop in older
children (47). The availability of robust small-animal models of lowgrade glioma, such as the Nf1+/GFAPCKO optic glioma mouse
model, provides unique opportunities to examine additional
therapies alone or in combination before the treatment of children
with nervous system tumors.

Acknowledgments
Received 10/17/2007; revised 11/23/2007; accepted 1/7/2008.
Grant support: Department of Defense grant W81XWH061022 and NIH grant
NS054629 (D.H. Gutmann), NIH/National Cancer Institute Small Animal Imaging
Resource Program grant R24 CA83060, and Washington University/Alvin J. Siteman
National Cancer Institute Comprehensive Cancer Center grant P30 CA91842.
The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of page
charges. This article must therefore be hereby marked advertisement in accordance
with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact.
We thank Scott Bahr, Ryan Emnett, and Smita Vora for their technical assistance
during the execution of these experiments.

4. Listernick R, Louis DN, Packer RJ, Gutmann DH. Optic
pathway gliomas in children with neurofibromatosis 1:
consensus statement from the NF1 Optic Pathway
Glioma Task Force. Ann Neurol 1997;41:143–9.
5. Leonard JR, Perry A, Rubin JB, et al. The role of
surgical biopsy in the diagnosis of glioma in individuals with neurofibromatosis-1. Neurology 2006;67:
1509–12.
6. Gutmann DH, Donahoe J, Brown T, James CD, Perry A.
Loss of neurofibromatosis 1 (NF1) gene expression in
NF1-associated pilocytic astrocytomas. Neuropathol
Appl Neurobiol 2000;26:361–7.

1527

7. Habiby R, Silverman B, Listernick R, Charrow J.
Precocious puberty in children with neurofibromatosis
type 1. J Pediatr 1995;126:364–7.
8. Thiagalingam S, Flaherty M, Billson F, North K.
Neurofibromatosis type 1 and optic pathway gliomas:
follow-up of 54 patients. Ophthalmology 2004;111:
568–77.
9. Demaerel P, de Ruyter N, Casteels I, et al. Visual
pathway glioma in children treated with chemotherapy.
Eur J Paediatr Neurol 2002;6:207–12.
10. Kato T, Sawamura Y, Tada M, et al. Cisplatin/vincristine chemotherapy for hypothalamic/visual pathway

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (5). March 1, 2008

Cancer Research

astrocytomas in young children. J Neurooncol 1998;37:
263–70.
11. Pace A, Vidiri A, Galie E, et al. Temozolomide
chemotherapy for progressive low-grade glioma: clinical
benefits and radiological response. Ann Oncol 2003;14:
1722–6.
12. Gururangan S, Fisher MJ, Allen JC, et al. Temozolomide in children with progressive low-grade glioma.
Neuro-oncol 2007;9:161–8.
13. Khaw SL, Coleman LT, Downie PA, Heath JA, Ashley
DM. Temozolomide in pediatric low-grade glioma.
Pediatr Blood Cancer 2007;49:808–11.
14. Gutmann DH, Hunter-Schaedle K, Shannon KM.
Harnessing preclinical mouse models to inform human
clinical cancer trials. J Clin Invest 2006;116:847–52.
15. Olive KP, Tuveson DA. The use of targeted mouse
models for preclinical testing of novel cancer therapeutics. Clin Cancer Res 2006;12:5277–87.
16. Fomchenko EI, Holland EC. Mouse models of brain
tumors and their applications in preclinical trials. Clin
Cancer Res 2006;12:5288–97.
17. Sharpless NE, Depinho RA. The mighty mouse:
genetically engineered mouse models in cancer drug
development. Nat Rev Drug Discov 2006;5:741–54.
18. Zhuo L, Theis M, Alvarez-Maya I, et al. hGFAP-cre
transgenic mice for manipulation of glial and neuronal
function in vivo . Genesis 2001;31:85–94.
19. Bajenaru ML, Zhu Y, Hedrick NM, et al. Astrocytespecific inactivation of the neurofibromatosis 1 gene
(NF1) is insufficient for astrocytoma formation. Mol Cell
Biol 2002;22:5100–13.
20. Zhu Y, Harada T, Liu L, et al. Inactivation of NF1 in
CNS causes increased glial progenitor proliferation and
optic glioma formation. Development 2005;132:5577–88.
21. Bajenaru ML, Hernandez MR, Perry A, et al. Optic
nerve glioma in mice requires astrocyte Nf1 gene
inactivation and Nf1 brain heterozygosity. Cancer Res
2003;63:8573–7.
22. Bajenaru ML, Garbow JR, Perry A, Hernandez MR,
Gutmann DH. Natural history of neurofibromatosis 1associated optic nerve glioma in mice. Ann Neurol 2005;
57:119–27.
23. Dasgupta B, Li W, Perry A, Gutmann DH. Glioma
formation in neurofibromatosis 1 reflects preferential
activation of K-RAS in astrocytes. Cancer Res 2005;65:
236–45.

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (5). March 1, 2008

24. Daginakatte GC, Gutmann DH. Neurofibromatosis-1
(Nf1) heterozygous brain microglia elaborate paracrine
factors that promote Nf1-deficient astrocyte and glioma
growth. Hum Mol Genet 2007;16:1098–112.
25. Dasgupta B, Yi Y, Hegedus B, Weber JD, Gutmann
DH. Cerebrospinal fluid proteomic analysis reveals dysregulation of methionine aminopeptidase-2 expression
in human and mouse neurofibromatosis 1-associated
glioma. Cancer Res 2005;65:9843–50.
26. Dasgupta B, Yi Y, Chen DY, Weber JD, Gutmann DH.
Proteomic analysis reveals hyperactivation of the
mammalian target of rapamycin pathway in neurofibromatosis 1-associated human and mouse brain
tumors. Cancer Res 2005;65:2755–60.
27. Warrington NM, Woerner BM, Daginakatte GC, et al.
Spatiotemporal differences in CXCL12 expression and
cyclic AMP underlie the unique pattern of optic glioma
growth in neurofibromatosis type 1. Cancer Res 2007;67:
8588–95.
28. Kaloshi G, Benouaich-Amiel A, Diakite F, et al.
Temozolomide for low-grade gliomas: predictive impact
of 1p/19q loss on response and outcome. Neurology
2007;68:1831–6.
29. Sandsmark DK, Zhang H, Hegedus B, et al. Nucleophosmin mediates mammalian target of rapamycindependent actin cytoskeleton dynamics and proliferation
in neurofibromin-deficient astrocytes. Cancer Res 2007;67:
4790–9.
30. Zhu Y, Romero MI, Ghosh P, et al. Ablation of NF1
function in neurons induces abnormal development of
cerebral cortex and reactive gliosis in the brain. Genes
Dev 2001;15:859–76.
31. Johnson L, Mercer K, Greenbaum D, et al. Somatic
activation of the K-ras oncogene causes early onset lung
cancer in mice. Nature 2001;410:1111–6.
32. Banerjee D, Hegedus B, Gutmann DH, Garbow JR.
Detection and measurement of neurofibromatosis-1
mouse optic glioma in vivo . Neuroimage 2007;35:1434–7.
33. Pierpaoli C, Basser PJ. Toward a quantitative
assessment of diffusion anisotropy. Magn Reson Med
1996;36:893–906.
34. Houghton PJ, Stewart CF, Cheshire PJ, et al. Antitumor
activity of temozolomide combined with irinotecan is
partly independent of O 6-methylguanine-DNA methyltransferase and mismatch repair phenotypes in xenograft
models. Clin Cancer Res 2000;6:4110–8.

1528

35. Shen W, Wang Z, Tang H, et al. Volume estimates by
imaging methods: model comparisons with visible
woman as the reference. Obes Res 2003;11:217–25.
36. Guillamo JS, Creange A, Kalifa C, et al. Prognostic
factors of CNS tumours in neurofibromatosis 1 (NF1):
a retrospective study of 104 patients. Brain 2003;126:
152–60.
37. Packer RJ, Gutmann DH, Rubenstein A, et al.
Plexiform neurofibromas in NF1: toward biologic-based
therapy. Neurology 2002;58:1461–70.
38. Widemann BC, Salzer WL, Arceci RJ, et al. Phase I
trial and pharmacokinetic study of the farnesyltransferase inhibitor tipifarnib in children with refractory solid
tumors or neurofibromatosis type I and plexiform
neurofibromas. J Clin Oncol 2006;24:507–16.
39. Johannessen CM, Reczek EE, James MF, et al. The
NF1 tumor suppressor critically regulates TSC2 and
mTOR. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2005;102:8573–8.
40. Franz DN, Leonard J, Tudor C, et al. Rapamycin
causes regression of astrocytomas in tuberous sclerosis
complex. Ann Neurol 2006;59:490–8.
41. O’Reilly KE, Rojo F, She QB, et al. mTOR inhibition
induces upstream receptor tyrosine kinase signaling and
activates Akt. Cancer Res 2006;66:1500–8.
42. Wan X, Harkavy B, Shen N, Grohar P, Helman LJ.
Rapamycin induces feedback activation of Akt signaling
through an IGF-1R-dependent mechanism. Oncogene
2007;26:1932–40.
43. Manning BD, Logsdon MN, Lipovsky AI, et al.
Feedback inhibition of Akt signaling limits the growth
of tumors lacking Tsc2. Genes Dev 2005;19:1773–8.
44. Zhang HH, Lipovsky AI, Dibble CC, Sahin M,
Manning BD. S6K1 regulates GSK3 under conditions of
mTOR-dependent feedback inhibition of Akt. Mol Cell
2006;24:185–97.
45. Uhlmann EJ, Li W, Scheidenhelm DK, et al. Loss
of tuberous sclerosis complex 1 (Tsc1) expression
results in increased Rheb/S6K pathway signaling important for astrocyte cell size regulation. Glia 2004;47:
180–8.
46. Alvarez-Buylla A, Lim DA. For the long run:
maintaining germinal niches in the adult brain. Neuron
2004;41:683–6.
47. Listernick R, Ferner RE, Piersall L, et al. Late-onset
optic pathway tumors in children with neurofibromatosis 1. Neurology 2004;63:1944–6.

www.aacrjournals.org

