Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No. 36

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Editorial

Mitochondrial mass and DNA repair in breast cancer stem cells
Richard G. Pestell, Alesandro Fatatis and Xuanmao Jiao
Two recent studies by Lisanti and co-workers
provide new insights into the importance of mitochondria
and the cancer stem cell and its resistance to therapy.
Lisanti demonstrated that WNT1/FGF3 enhances breast
cancer stem cell (BCSC) expansion via a paracrine loop
associated with the induction of mitochondrial biogenesis
[1]. Furthermore, Lisanti showed that mitochondria are
enriched within BCSC, and that mitochondrial enriched
human BCSC are resistant to DNA damage [2]. These
finding are consistent with the prior findings that stem cells
are resistant to current therapies due to increased DNA
repair capacity. The findings by Lisanti are also consistent
with prior studies in which an RNAi screen identified Wnt
as an inducer of mitochondrial biogenesis [3]. Importantly
these studies add to the growing understanding that,
in contrast with the reduction in mitochondrial mass in
normal stem cells, mitochondrial protein abundance is
increased in cancer stem cells.
The studies by Lisanti provide important evidence
for a direct link between cancer stem cells and altered
mitochondrial metabolism within a heterogeneous
breast tumor population. CSCs preferentially perform
oxidative phosphorylation over glycolysis compared to
non-CSCs and several mechanisms have been described.
Firstly, oncogenes, including c-Myc, are sufficient for
the induction of OXPHOS and the induction of CSCs
[4, 5] . Secondly, metabolic genes are mutated in CSCs
in different cancer types. Those mutations in metabolic
enzymes may cause gain of function or loss of function.
The normal function of isocitrate dehydrogenase-1 (IDH1)
and IDH2 is to metabolize isocitrate and NADP+ to yield
α-ketoglutarate (αKG) and NADPH [6], [7]. Mutations
in IDH1 and IDH2 have recently been identified in a
number of different tumor types including prostate cancer.
These alterations are gain of function mutations because
they drive the synthesis of the ‘oncometabolite’ R-2hydroxyglutarate (2HG). 2HG-producing IDH mutants
prevent the histone demethylation that is required for
lineage specific progenitor cells to differentiate into
terminally differentiated cells.
Understanding the mechanisms by which increased
mitochondrial mass contributes to increased DNA repair
is important, as a substantial number of cancer therapies
activate DNA damage. How might DNA repair be
increased in the CSCs? Firstly, the expression of DNA
repair genes are increased in CSCs. Secondly, the induction
of the metabolic substrate fumarate, which inhibits

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

JKDM2B histone demethylase activity, may contribute to
enhanced DNA damage resistance. Epigenetic silencing
of FBP1, which occurs during EMT, decreases ROS to
promote the CSC phenotype. An increased reliance on
glucose metabolism following FBP1 silencing lowers
ROS levels by two mechanisms: decreased mitochondrial
respiration and increased NADPH synthesis through
pentose phosphate metabolism. In the current studies
a shift towards cytosolic glycolysis in the CTC was
accompanied by a reduction in ROS. Lower ROS levels
promote EMT and CSC phenotype. The reduction in ROS
within the CSC population is essential for survival of CSC.
Not all studies show oncogenic transformation reduces
ROS production, for example, when the entire population
of transformed cells was examined, Wnt increased ROS
generation and increased DNA damage in the C2C12
muscle cell line [3]. It is likely that subfractionation of
mitochondrial high vs mitochondrial low cells within the
heterogeneous tumors is necessary to define the stem cell
population with reduced ROS and increased DNA repair.
The functional interactions between cancer
metabolism and the induction of CSCs are of importance
because of the potential to target such metabolic enzymes
for cancer therapy. No doubt a dynamic process including
mitophagy, movement and thereby apportioning of aged
mitochondria into daughter cells [8] as well as local ROS
production, kinase signaling such as p38 MAPK, local
heterotypic signals from the tissue microenvironment
together with intracellular metabolic changes contribute
to the CSC phenotype. What potential mechanism
repress FBP1 in breast CSC ? As Snail is increased in
luminal and basal breast cancer, perhaps the Snail/G9a
mediated repression of FBP1 which reduces ROS, may
thereby promoting self-renewal potential of CSCs which
are exquisitely sensitive to the level of ROS. Given
the increased biogenesis of the mitochondria of tumor
initiating cancer stem cells and reduced biogenesis of
normal stem cells future studies may provide important
insights into the distinct mechanisms governing these key
cell types.
Richard G. Pestell: Department of Cancer Biology
and Sidney Kimmel Cancer Center, Thomas Jefferson
University, Philadelphia, PA, USA
Correspondence to: Richard G. Pestell, email Richard.Pestell@jefferson.edu

38442

Oncotarget

Keywords: mitochondria, cancer stem cells, cancer metabolism, OXPHOS
Received: October 23, 2015
Published: November 11, 2015

REFERENCES
1.	

Lamb R, et al. Oncotarget. 2015; 6: 30453-71.

2.	

Farnie G, Sotgia F and Lisanti MP, et al. Oncotarget. 2015;
6: 30472-86.

3.	

Yoon JC, et al. Genes Dev. 2010; 24:1507-1518.

4.	

Sancho P, et al. Cell Metab. 2015; 22:590-605.

5.	 Viale A and Draetta GF, et al. Cell Metab. 2015; 22:543545.
6.	

Sasaki M, et al. Nature. 2012; 488:656-659.

7.	

Yan H, et al. N Engl J Med. 2009; 360:765-773.

8.	

Katajisto P, et al. Science. 2015; 348:340-343.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

38443

Oncotarget

