Research Article

The Activity of Zoledronic Acid on Neuroblastoma Bone
Metastasis Involves Inhibition of Osteoclasts and
Tumor Cell Survival and Proliferation
1,5

1,5

2,5

2,5

Hongjun Peng, Yasuyoshi Sohara, Rex A. Moats, Marvin D. Nelson, Jr.,
3
3
1,5
1,4,5
Susan G. Groshen, Wei Ye, C. Patrick Reynolds, and Yves A. DeClerck

1
Division of Hematology-Oncology, Department of Pediatrics and Departments of 2Radiology, 3Preventive Medicine, and 4Biochemistry and
Molecular Biology, University of Southern California; 5The Saban Research Institute of Children’s Hospital Los Angeles,
Los Angeles, California

Abstract
Metastasis to the bone is seen in 56% of patients with
neuroblastoma and contributes to morbidity and mortality.
Using a murine model of bone invasion, we have reported
previously that neuroblastoma cells invade the bone by
activating osteoclasts. Here, we investigated the antitumoral
and antiosteolytic activities of zoledronic acid, a bisphosphonate inhibitor of osteoclasts, in combination with cytotoxic
chemotherapy in our model. We first show that zoledronic
acid given at the same time (early prevention) or 2 weeks after
tumor cell injection (late prevention) significantly prevented
the formation of severe osteolytic lesions. It also prevented
formation of these lesions when given 4 weeks after tumor cell
injection (intervention) when combined with chemotherapy
including cyclophosphamide and topotecan. The combination
of zoledronic acid + cyclophosphamide/topotecan also significantly improved survival (P < 0.001). In mice treated with
zoledronic acid, we observed a marked inhibition of osteoclasts inside the bone associated with a decrease in tumor cell
proliferation and increase in tumor cell apoptosis. In vitro,
zoledronic acid inhibited neuroblastoma cell proliferation
and induced apoptosis, and these effects were significantly
enhanced by the addition of 4-hydroxyperoxycyclophosphamide (4-HC). The proapoptotic effect of zoledronic acid and
zoledronic acid in combination with 4-HC on tumor cells was
associated with an increase in caspase-3 activity and a
decrease in phosphorylated Bcl-2, Bcl-2, and Bcl-XL expression. Zoledronic acid inhibited the association of Ras with the
plasma membrane and activation of c-Raf, Akt, and extracellular signal-regulated kinase 1/2. The data indicate that
zoledronic acid, in addition to inhibiting osteoclasts, is active
against tumor cells and suggest that zoledronic acid in
combination with cytotoxic chemotherapy may be effective
in children with neuroblastoma that has metastasized to the
bone. [Cancer Res 2007;67(19):9346–55]

Introduction
Neuroblastoma is a tumor derived from the neural crest and the
most common extracranial solid neoplasm in children (1).

Note: Supplementary data for this article are available at Cancer Research Online
(http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/).
Requests for reprints: Yves A. DeClerck, Division of Hematology-Oncology,
Children’s Hospital Los Angeles, MS#54, 4650 Sunset Boulevard, Los Angeles, CA
90027. Phone: 323-669-2150; Fax: 323-664-9455; E-mail: declerck@usc.edu.
I2007 American Association for Cancer Research.
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-06-4508

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (19). October 1, 2007

Although the event-free survival of patients with nonmetastatic
and noninvasive tumors (stage I or II) is in the range of 90% to
95%, patients with high-risk disease have only a 3-year event-free
survival of 42% when treated with intensive myeloablative
chemotherapy, radiotherapy, autologous bone marrow transplantation, and 13-cis-retinoic acid (2). Metastasis at diagnosis is
common in patients with neuroblastoma and sites most frequently
involved include bone marrow, bone, lymph nodes, liver, and
intracranial and orbital sites. Neuroblastoma rarely metastasizes
to the lungs or the brain (3).
The mechanisms involved in the formation of bone metastasis in
neuroblastoma have now begun to be elucidated. It is documented
that, as observed in breast cancer and multiple myeloma,
neuroblastoma bone metastases are predominantly osteolytic
(4, 5). The formation of osteolytic lesions by metastatic neuroblastoma cells involve the recruitment and activation of osteoclasts,
which can occur through two mechanisms (6). A first mechanism
consists of the direct activation of osteoclasts by neuroblastoma
cells. For example, when cultured in the presence of murine bone
marrow cells, neuroblastoma cells express the receptor activator
of nuclear factor-nB ligand (RANKL), a potent stimulator of RANKexpressing osteoclasts. This effect is abrogated in the presence
of the RANKL inhibitor, osteoprotegerin (soluble RANK or OPG;
refs. 7, 8). This mechanism of osteoclast activation is used by
breast cancer cells as they metastasize to the bone (9, 10). A second
mechanism reported recently by our laboratory involves the
contribution of bone marrow–mesenchymal stem cells (BMMSC), which in the presence of neuroblastoma cells express
interleukin-6 (IL-6), a potent stimulator of osteoclasts (11). This
mechanism was also reported in myeloma cells, which on contact
with bone marrow stromal cells stimulate IL-6 expression (12), but
in neuroblastoma, stimulation of IL-6 expression does not require
cell-cell contact. At the convergence of these two mechanisms are
the activation of osteoclasts and the degradation of mineralized
bone (13).
Bisphosphonates are a family of synthetic compounds, whose
structure is derived from pyrophosphoric acid, which binds with
high affinity to the bone matrix (14). These compounds are potent
inhibitors of osteoclast activity that are currently used in the clinic
for a variety of benign and malignant conditions associated with
increased bone resorption, such as postmenopausal osteoporosis
(15), malignant hypercalcemia (16), and bone metastasis (17).
Bisphosphonates have been proposed as potential therapeutic
agents in bone metastasis in patients with breast, prostate, and
myeloma tumors, and clinical trials have shown efficacy and
minimal systemic toxicity (18). Among the most potent bisphosphonate compounds are nitrogen-containing bisphosphonates

9346

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Zoledronic Acid in Neuroblastoma Bone Metastasis

(N-BP), which exert their effect on cells by inhibiting farnesyl
diphosphate synthase, a key enzyme in the prenylation of proteins
(19). Zoledronic acid is a N-BP that has been approved recently by
the Food and Drug Administration for the treatment of bone
metastases in patients with breast and prostate cancers (20).
Here, we have tested the activity of zoledronic acid given in
combination with cytotoxic chemotherapy including cyclophosphamide and topotecan, in a preclinical xenotransplanted model of
neuroblastoma bone invasion. The data show that zoledronic acid
is not only a potent inhibitor of osteoclasts but also has a direct
inhibitory activity on tumor cell proliferation and survival and that
when used in combination with chemotherapy, it significantly
prolongs survival.

Materials and Methods
Cell cultures. The human neuroblastoma cell lines CHLA-255 and SMSSAN obtained from C.P.R. were grown in Iscove’s modified Dulbecco’s
medium (Bio-Whittaker) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS),
100 units/mL penicillin G, and 100 Ag/mL streptomycin sulfate (Irvine
Scientific). Cells were passaged approximately every 5 days by trypsinization. CHLA-255 Luc20 cells were obtained after transfection of CHLA-255
cells with a lentiviral vector containing a firefly luciferase reporter gene
obtained from Dr. D. Kohn (Children’s Hospital Los Angeles, Los Angeles,
CA). This clone was derived from stable transfected cells selected first
in vitro and then in vivo after intraosseous injection into the femur of an
immunodeficient mouse (21).
Bone invasion model. BALB/c nu/nu mice purchased from Harlan
Sprague-Dawley were anesthetized with 2.5% isoflurane in 97.5% O2 and
tumor cells (2  105 cells suspended in 2 AL of serum-free culture medium)
were injected locally into the bone marrow cavity of the right femur as
described previously (6). Mice were then monitored weekly by doing
radiographs of both femurs using a Faxitron X-ray instrument (MX-20,
Faxitron X-ray Corp.). These high-resolution images were then blindly
evaluated by a radiologist (M.D.N.) and graded according to a preestablished grading system in which a grade 1 lesion represents a normal bone,
a grade 2 lesion indicates an asymmetric, nonprogressive radiolucent
lesion of the distal femur typically related to the trauma, a grade 3 lesion
represents an asymmetrical and progressive osteolytic lesion extending
beyond the distal femur, and a grade 4 lesion indicates the presence of a
pathologic fracture or a cortical breach in the bone cortex (6). Mice showing
signs of distress or developing a local extraosseous tumor were sacrificed
by CO2/O2 euthanasia. When indicated, mice were injected i.p. 1 h before
sacrifice with 2 mg bromodeoxyuridine (BrdUrd). This protocol was reviewed
and approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee of
Children’s Hospital Los Angeles.
Bioluminescence imaging. Mice were anesthetized and injected i.p.
with 0.3 mL of D-luciferin (5 mg/mL) in sterile PBS. Bioluminescence
imaging was initiated 15 min after injection using a charge-coupled device
camera (IVIS, Xenogen). Images were obtained with a 15-cm field of view,
a binning (resolution) factor of 10, 4/f stop, and open filter (21).
In vivo treatments. Zoledronic acid was obtained from Novartis Pharma
AG and maintained as a stock solution at a concentration of 40 Ag/mL in
sterile 0.9% NaCl. Mice were injected s.c. with 4 Ag (100 AL) zoledronic acid
5 days/wk. Treatment with zoledronic acid was started either at the time of
tumor cell injection (early prevention), 2 weeks after tumor cell injection
when mice showed no evidence of progressive osteolytic lesions (late
prevention), or 4 weeks after tumor cell injection when mice had developed
grade 3 or 4 osteolytic lesions (intervention). Cyclophosphamide was
diluted fresh in sterile PBS at a concentration of 31.25 mg/mL and given
i.p. daily at 156 mg/kg (3.1 mg/mouse) for 5 days. Topotecan was diluted
in sterile PBS at a concentration of 0.15 mg/mL and given i.p. daily at
0.75 mg/kg (0.015 mg/mouse) for 5 days.
Histology and histochemistry. The entire leg of the sacrificed mouse
was harvested en bloc and fixed overnight in 10% formaldehyde containing
2% sucrose and decalcified in 0.37% unbuffered formaldehyde containing

www.aacrjournals.org

5.5% EDTA (pH 6.0) for 1 to 2 weeks. When decalcified, the samples were
embedded in paraffin and 5-Am sections were obtained and stained by
H&E. Detection of osteoclasts was done by staining for tartrate-resistant
acid phosphatase (TRAP) using leukocyte acid phosphatase (Sigma) at 37jC
for 1 h and counterstaining with H&E as published previously (6). To
quantify the amount of osteoclasts present in the femur, we delineated the
surface of the bone and the surface covered by TRAP-positive cells on
digital images from histologic sections stained for TRAP. The percentage of
the bone surface covered with TRAP-positive cells was calculated using NIH
image software (version 1.62). Staining for nuclear BrdUrd was done by
immunohistochemistry on histologic sections that were treated with 0.01%
trypsin for 3 min at 37jC. Slides were incubated with a murine anti-BrdUrd
monoclonal antibody (dilution, 1:2,000; BrdUrd Labeling and Detection kit,
Roche Diagnostic Corp.) at 4jC overnight. After washing with PBS, the
slides were incubated with a biotinylated goat anti-mouse IgG secondary
antibody for 1 h at room temperature. Streptavidin peroxidase-conjugated
(ABC Elite, Vector Laboratories) was then applied and the reaction was
developed in 3,3¶-diaminobenzidine (Sigma). The percentage of BrdUrdpositive cells was determined by counting the number of cells with nuclear
stain in six fields (40 magnification) of three separate histologic sections.
Counting was done blindly by two independent investigators.
Proliferation assay in vitro. To examine the effect of zoledronic acid on
cell proliferation in vitro, cells were cultured in eight-chamber culture slides
for 48 h (Nalge Nunc International) to reach 70% confluence. The cells were
then incubated with 10 Amol/L BrdUrd for 30 min at 37jC, before being
fixed in methanol, and stained for BrdUrd using a BrdUrd Labeling and
Detection kit according to the instructions of the manufacturer. Counting of
BrdUrd-positive cells was done blindly by two independent observers.
Detection of apoptosis. Apoptosis in histologic sections was examined
by immunohistochemistry using the In situ Cell Death Detection kit (Roche
Diagnostic). Paraffin-embedded tissue sections were treated with proteinase
K (10 Ag/mL) in 10 mmol/L Tris-HCl (pH 7.5) at 37jC for 20 min followed
by blocking in 10% goat serum and 0.2% Triton X-100 for 1 h. The slides
were then incubated with terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase and a
nucleotide mixture at 37jC for 1 h before being incubated with a
horseradish peroxidase (HRP)–conjugated anti-alkaline phosphatase antibody at room temperature for 30 min. After counterstain with hematoxylin,
the number of terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase–mediated dUTP nick
end labeling (TUNEL)–positive cells in six fields (40 magnification)
of three individual histologic sections was blindly counted by two
independent investigators. For apoptosis, in vitro cells treated with
zoledronic acid for 24 h in serum-containing medium were harvested,
fixed with 1% paraformaldehyde, washed with PBS, and kept overnight in
70% ethanol at 20jC. The cells were then stained using the TUNEL
APO-Direct kit (BD Biosciences). Analysis was done by flow cytometry
using a FACScan flow cytometer (Beckman Coulter Epics Elite ESP) and
Expo 32 software for quantitative analysis (Applied Cytometry Systems).
Caspase-3 and caspase-8 activities were determined in cell lysates using
caspase-3/CPP32 and caspase-8/CPP32 colorimetric protease assay kits
(Biosource International) according to the instructions of the manufacturer.
Readings were done at 405 nm in a Synergy HT microplate reader (Bio-Tek
Instruments).
Western blot analysis. Cells were lysed in radioimmunoprecipitation
assay buffer [50 mmol/L Tris-Cl (pH 7.5), 150 mmol/L NaCl, 1% NP40, 0.5%
sodium deoxycholate, 0.1% SDS] containing a cocktail of protease inhibitors
(Roche Diagnostic). When indicated, cell membranes were separated from
the cytosol using the FOCUS Membrane Protein Extraction kit (Geno
Technology, Inc.). After incubation for 15 min and centrifugation, the
protein concentration in the supernatant was measured by a BCA Protein
Quantification kit (Pierce). Twenty micrograms of each sample were then
loaded on 0.1% SDS and 4% to 12% gradient polyacrylamide gels
(Invitrogen). After electrophoresis, gels were blotted on a nitrocellulose
membrane (Bio-Rad), and the membranes were probed with one of the
following antibodies obtained from Cell Signaling Technology, Inc.: a rabbit
polyclonal anti–phosphorylated Bcl-2 (phospho-Bcl-2) antibody (dilution,
1:1,000); a rabbit polyclonal anti-Bcl-2 antibody (dilution, 1:1,000); a rabbit
polyclonal anti-Bcl-XL antibody (dilution, 1:1,000); a rabbit polyclonal

9347

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (19). October 1, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research
anti-Bax antibody (dilution, 1:1,000); a rabbit polyclonal anti-Bad antibody
(dilution, 1:1,000); a rabbit polyclonal anti-Ras antibody (dilution, 1:1,000);
a mouse monoclonal anti–phosphorylated c-Raf (phospho-c-Raf) antibody
(dilution, 1:1,000); a mouse monoclonal anti–phosphorylated Akt (phosphoAkt) antibody (dilution, 1:1,000); a mouse monoclonal anti-Akt antibody
(dilution, 1:1,000); a mouse monoclonal anti–phosphorylated extracellular
signal-regulated kinase 1/2 (phospho-ERK1/2) antibody (dilution, 1:1,000);
a rabbit polyclonal anti-ERK1/2 antibody (dilution, 1:1,000); a rabbit
polyclonal anti–caveolin-1 antibody (dilution, 1:1,000); and a rabbit
monoclonal anti-actin antibody (dilution, 1:2,500) as control for protein
loading. After overnight incubation with the primary antibody at 4jC,
the membranes were washed thrice with TBS-Tween and blotted with a
HRP-conjugated antimouse or antirabbit IgG antibody (dilution, 1:2,000)
at room temperature for 1 h. The immunoreactive bands were detected
using an enhanced chemiluminescence plus detection system (Amersham
Biosciences).
Statistical analysis. In each of the in vivo experiments, 5 or 10 mice
were used for each experimental condition; 10 animals were evaluated if
the outcome was time to developing a grade 4 lesion or survival, except on
occasion in a control group where only 5 animals were used. The log-rank
test was used to compare the animals according to the treatment groups.
Pair-wise comparisons of the treatment groups were also done using the
log-rank test, if the overall test was significant at the 0.05 level; the Pike
estimates of relative risks were calculated with the use of observed and
expected number of events as calculated in the log-rank test. The life table
method was used to estimate the probability of remaining free of grade 4

lesions or survival, using a weekly interval. ANOVA was used to investigate
the effect of cyclophosphamide/topotecan and zoledronic acid on cell
proliferation and apoptosis in vivo. The interaction effects were also tested.
The least significant difference method was used for pair-wise comparisons,
once the overall F test was significant at the 0.05 level. The 95% confidence
interval was calculated for each treatment group. Triplicate samples were
used in each treatment group for the effect of cyclophosphamide/topotecan
and zoledronic acid on cell proliferation and apoptosis. The analysis of dose
effects of zoledronic acid on cell proliferation and apoptosis in CHLA-255
neuroblastoma cells in vitro was done using a logistic growth (nonlinear)
model. Three replicates were used at each dose. All reported P values are
two sided.

Results
Zoledronic acid inhibits the formation of osteolytic lesions
in mice locally injected with neuroblastoma cells. To test the
inhibitory effect of zoledronic acid on the formation of osteolytic
lesions by neuroblastoma cells in vivo, we injected nu/nu mice
(10 mice in each group) with 2  105 CHLA-255 or SMS-SAN
human neuroblastoma cells into the bone marrow cavity of the
femur and treated them with either zoledronic acid or PBS (control
vehicle). Mice were treated with zoledronic acid (4 Ag; 5 days/wk)
either immediately after injection (early prevention) or 2 weeks
after injection of the tumor cells (late prevention). High-resolution

Figure 1. Effect of zoledronic acid (ZOL ) on
the prevention of osteolytic lesions in mice
injected into the femur with neuroblastoma
cells. A and B, life table method was used to
estimate the percentage of mice free of grade
4 lesions in each experimental group (n = 10).
C, representative radiographs of the femur
obtained 4 wk after tumor cell implantation in
control and treated mice. D, D-luciferin–
induced bioluminescence obtained in two
mice 7, 8, and 9 wk after intrafemoral injection
of CHLA-255 Luc20 cells and treated with
zoledronic acid or 0.9% NaCl (control). The
images are representative of seven mice in
the zoledronic acid group and six mice in the
control group.

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (19). October 1, 2007

9348

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Zoledronic Acid in Neuroblastoma Bone Metastasis

Figure 2. Effect of zoledronic acid,
cyclophosphamide (CYCLO )/topotecan
(TOPO ), and their combination on the
formation of osteolytic lesions and on the
survival in mice injected with CHLA-255
cells. A, protocol for the administration of
the therapeutic agents. B, life table
estimates of the percentage of mice free
of grade 4 lesions in the three intervention
treatment groups and the control group.
C, life table estimates of the time to death
or sacrifice in the four experimental
groups. The statistical analysis of
outcomes is shown in Supplementary
Table S1.

radiographs of the femurs were obtained every week and the time
to develop severe osteolytic lesions characterized by a cortical
breach or pathologic fracture (grade 4 lesion) was the end point
used to evaluate the effect of the treatment (6). Mice were
sacrificed by CO2/O2 euthanasia when they had developed a grade
4 lesion. In the control group, 100% of the mice developed grade
4 lesions by 10 (CHLA-255 cells; Fig. 1A) or 12 (SMS-SAN cells;
Fig. 1B) weeks after injection of tumor cells. In contrast, 60% of
mice injected with CHLA-255 or SMS-SAN cells in the late
prevention groups and 90% of the mice injected with CHLA-255
in the early prevention group remained free of grade 4 lesions up
to 15 weeks after implantation of tumor cells. The radiological
evaluation of the femur of the mice treated with zoledronic acid
consistently revealed a marked increase in bone density in the
cortex and the diaphysis of the bone (Fig. 1C). The effect of
zoledronic acid on tumor cells in this model was also evaluated
using CHLA-255 Luc20 cells that express the firefly luciferase and
D-luciferin–induced bioluminescence. This experiment indicated
a marked decrease in D-luciferin–induced bioluminescence in mice
treated with zoledronic acid (early prevention) when compared
with the control group (Fig. 1D) between 7 and 9 weeks after tumor

www.aacrjournals.org

cell implantation. The data suggest that zoledronic acid has not only
a potent inhibitory activity on bone resorption but also an antitumor effect as indicated by its inhibitory activity on D-luciferin–
induced bioluminescence.
Combination of zoledronic acid and cyclophosphamide/
topotecan improves survival in mice with established osteolytic lesions. We then determined if zoledronic acid would have a
therapeutic effect when used in an intervention protocol in mice
who had developed osteolytic lesions, a situation that more closely
mimics its potential clinical use in neuroblastoma patients with
established bone metastases. We did an experiment in which the
treatment of mice injected into the femur with CHLA-255 cells was
delayed until 4 weeks after injection of tumor cells, a time when
all animals had developed at least a grade 3 lesion (radiological
evidence of osteolysis without breach in the cortex). In this
experiment, we compared treatment with zoledronic acid alone
(n = 5) with a 5-day treatment with cyclophosphamide and
topotecan (n = 10) and with a combination of both zoledronic acid
and cyclophosphamide/topotecan (n = 10; Fig. 2A). In the control
group (n = 10), mice were treated with a sterile s.c. injection of
0.9% NaCl and i.p. injection of PBS. To determine the effect of

9349

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (19). October 1, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

Figure 3. Effect of zoledronic acid on
osteoclast formation and on tumor cell
proliferation and apoptosis in mice.
A, representative histologic sections
stained for TRAP, BrdUrd, and TUNEL in
tumors obtained in mice 10 wk after
injection of CHLA-255 cells in the femur.
Treatment was started 4 wk after tumor
cell injection as shown in Fig. 2A. Black
arrows, osteoclasts; white arrows,
BrdUrd- and TUNEL-positive
neuroblastoma cells. B, quantitative
analysis of the percentage of bone
surface covered by osteoclasts. Columns,
mean percentage of the surface covered
with TRAP-positive cells from a total of
four sections examined; bars, SD.
C, quantitative analysis of the percentage
of BrdUrd-positive tumor cells inside
(black columns ) and outside (white
columns ) the bone. Columns, mean
percentage of BrdUrd-positive cells in
12 histologic sections; bars, SD.
D, quantitative analysis of apoptotic tumor
cells inside (black columns ) and outside
the bone (white columns ). Columns, mean
number of TUNEL-positive cells per
millimeter square of 12 histologic sections;
bars, SD.

these treatments on survival, in addition to an effect on the
progression of radiological lesions, the animals were kept alive,
closely monitored, and euthanized when they had developed an
extraosseous tumor that impaired movement or when they became
moribund. When examining the effect on bone degradation
(Fig. 2B), we observed that the combination treatment group
(zoledronic acid + cyclophosphamide/topotecan) had a significant
lower risk of developing grade 4 lesions than either the control
or the two single-treatment groups (all P < 0.001). The risk of
developing grade 4 lesions was not significantly different between
the two single-treatment groups (P = 0.14), although there was a
trend that cyclophosphamide/topotecan was better than zoledronic acid alone as shown by the relative hazard ratios
(Supplementary Table S1). When examining the effect on overall
survival, the effect of treatment with zoledronic acid alone was
not significantly different from control (P = 0.32; Fig. 2C), but
both cyclophosphamide/topotecan and zoledronic acid + cyclo-

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (19). October 1, 2007

phosphamide/topotecan had a significant effect on survival with
the combination having the greatest effect on overall survival
(P < 0.0011) decreasing the relative hazard ratio from 0.26 to 0.15
(Supplementary Table S1) and extending the 50% survival time
from 7 to 11 weeks since the beginning of the treatment (Fig. 2C).
In this group of mice, treated with zoledronic acid and
cyclophosphamide/topotecan, all animals had developed a tumor
outside the bone invading the adjacent muscle without radiological
evidence of a grade 4 lesion at the time of death or sacrifice. The
data indicate that treatment with zoledronic acid alone is of little
therapeutic benefit when initiated in mice with established
osteolytic lesions but has a significant effect when used in
combination with cytotoxic agents, such as cyclophosphamide
and topotecan, in preventing the progression of osteolytic lesions
and prolonging overall survival.
Zoledronic acid inhibits proliferation and increases apoptosis in tumor cells inside the bone. To assess the effect of these

9350

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Zoledronic Acid in Neuroblastoma Bone Metastasis

treatments on osteolysis, tumor cell proliferation, and apoptosis,
we did a third experiment in which mice (n = 5 in each group)
treated with the intervention protocol were sacrificed 10 weeks
after intraosseous tumor cell injection (therefore 6 weeks after
treatment was initiated) or earlier if they had to be euthanized.
The femurs were then examined by immunohistochemistry for the
presence of osteoclasts, tumor cell proliferation (BrdUrd incorporation), and apoptosis (TUNEL; Fig. 3A). At the time of sacrifice
in the majority of the mice, the tumor had directly extended
outside the bone into the adjacent muscles. This tumor was
resected en bloc with the femur and similarly examined for tumor
cell proliferation and apoptosis. Consistent with the anticipated
inhibitory activity of zoledronic acid on osteoclasts, we observed a
significant decrease in the number of osteoclasts present inside
the femoral bone of mice treated with zoledronic acid or with
zoledronic acid + cyclophosphamide/topotecan when compared
with the control group or the cyclophosphamide/topotecan group
(P < 0.001; Fig. 3B). There was also a significant decrease in the
number of BrdUrd-positive tumor cells inside the femur of mice
treated with zoledronic acid or a combination of zoledronic acid +
cyclophosphamide/topotecan when compared with the control
group or the cyclophosphamide/topotecan group (P < 0.001;
Fig. 3C). Interestingly, zoledronic acid had no effect on BrdUrd
incorporation by tumor cells outside the bone (P = 0.18). We also
observed a significant increase in the number of apoptotic tumor
cells in the femur of mice treated with zoledronic acid (alone or
in combination) when compared with mice treated with PBS
control (P = 0.002 and P < 0.001, respectively; Fig. 3D). As was
the case for proliferation, there was no difference in the number of
TUNEL-positive tumor cells among the four groups in the sections
of the tumors that had extended outside the femur (Fig. 3D, white
columns). The inhibition of tumor cell proliferation and increase
in tumor cell apoptosis observed inside the bone of mice treated
with zoledronic acid was consistent with the inhibition of
D-luciferin–induced bioluminescence observed in our previous

experiment (Fig. 1D) and suggested that zoledronic acid could have
a direct effect on tumor cell proliferation and survival. The absence
of effect of cyclophosphamide/topotecan alone on tumor cell
proliferation and apoptosis was due to the fact that the analysis
was done 6 weeks after administration of chemotherapy when
mice had recovered from cytotoxicity. This analysis therefore could
not evaluate whether the administration of cyclophosphamide/
topotecan would add to the toxic effect of zoledronic acid.
Zoledronic acid inhibits proliferation and stimulates
apoptosis in CHLA-255 neuroblastoma cells. To test the
possibility that zoledronic acid could have a direct antiproliferative
and proapoptotic effect on tumor cells, we examined the effect of
zoledronic acid on the proliferation and apoptosis of CHLA-255
neuroblastoma cells in vitro, by exposing cultured cells to
zoledronic acid and measuring the effect on BrdUrd incorporation
(proliferation) or TUNEL positivity (apoptosis). We observed a
dose-dependent inhibition of BrdUrd incorporation by CHLA-255
cells treated with zoledronic acid at concentrations between 12.5
and 50 Amol/L (P < 0.001; Fig. 4A). Treatment of the cells with
zoledronic acid also significantly increased the number of TUNELpositive cells within the same range of concentrations (P < 0.001;
Fig. 4B). The addition of 4-hydroxyperoxycyclophosphamide (4-HC;
1 Ag/mL), an active derivative of cyclophosphamide, to zoledronic
acid (12.5 Amol/L) significantly further decreased BrdUrd incorporation (Fig. 4C) and increased the percentage of apoptotic tumor
cells (Fig. 4D). In these two assays, the combination had a stronger
effect than any agent used alone, which is consistent with our
in vivo experiments (Fig. 2). These data thus show that, at micromolar concentrations, zoledronic acid inhibits tumor cell proliferation and induces apoptosis in tumor cells and that this antitumor
activity is enhanced in the presence of a cytotoxic agent like
cyclophosphamide.
Zoledronic acid increases caspase-3 activity and inhibits
Bcl-2. The effect of zoledronic acid on apoptosis was further
examined by measuring its effect on caspase-3 and caspase-8

Figure 4. Zoledronic acid alone and in
combination with 4-HC inhibits proliferation
and induces apoptosis in CHLA-255
neuroblastoma cells in vitro. A, cells were
exposed to zoledronic acid for 24 h
and BrdUrd for 30 min before being
examined. Columns, mean percentage
of BrdUrd-positive tumor cells from a
total of three separate tissue culture
dishes; bars, SD. B, cells were treated
with zoledronic acid for 24 h before
being harvested and examined by
fluorescence-activated cell sorting
(FACS) for TUNEL positivity. C and D,
similar experiments as in (A and B) were
done by exposing CHLA-255 cells to
zoledronic acid (12.5 Amol/L), 4-HC
(1 Ag/mL), or a combination of both.
Representative of two independent
experiments showing similar results.
Columns, mean percentage of tumor
BrdUrd-positive (C ) and TUNEL-positive
(D ) cells; bars, SD.

www.aacrjournals.org

9351

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (19). October 1, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

Figure 5. Zoledronic acid induces
apoptosis by activating the intrinsic
apoptotic pathway. A and B, activity of
caspase-3 and caspase-8 in lysates of
CHLA-255 (A) and SMS-SAN (B ) cells
treated for 24 h with zoledronic acid
determined by colorimetric protease
assay. Representative of three
experiments showing similar results.
Columns, mean absorbance values of
three separate samples; bars, SD.
C, activity of caspase-3 and caspase-8
in lysates of CHLA-255 cells treated for
24 h with zoledronic acid (12.5 Amol/L),
4-HC (1 Ag/mL), or a combination of both.
Representative of two experiments
showing similar data. Columns, mean
absorbance values of triplicate samples;
bars, SD. D, top, levels of phospho-Bcl-2
(pBcl-2), Bcl-2, and Bax in CHLA-255 cell
lysates were examined by Western blot
analysis. Cells were incubated with
zoledronic acid for 24 h before being
harvested and analyzed. Bottom,
quantitative measurements of the data.
Columns, mean ratios of triplicate
measurements; bars, SD.

activity. Consistent with an absence of involvement of the extrinsic
apoptotic pathway, we observed no effect of zoledronic acid treatment of CHLA-255 cells on caspase-8 activity but a stimulatory
effect on caspase-3 activity (Fig. 5A). In SMS-SAN cells, we similarly
observed an increase in caspase-3 activity but also an increase
in caspase-8 activity at zoledronic acid concentrations up to
25 Amol/L. At higher concentrations, zoledronic acid was toxic and
resulted in >80% cell death (Fig. 5B). The increase in caspase-3
activity observed in CHLA-255 cells was associated with a decrease
in expression of Bcl-2 and phospho-Bcl-2 in the absence of changes
in Bax expression, resulting in a decrease in the phospho-Bcl-2/Bax
ratio in favor of the proapoptotic Bax protein (Fig. 5D). Consistent
with a synergistic effect of zoledronic acid and 4-HC on apoptosis,
we observed a further increase in caspase-3 activity and decrease
in the antiapoptotic proteins Bcl-2 and Bcl-XL when cells were
exposed to zoledronic acid (12.5 Amol/L) and 4-HC (1 mg/mL) in
the absence of changes in the expression of the proapoptotic
proteins Bax and Bad (Supplementary Fig. S5E). These data are
consistent with zoledronic acid inducing apoptosis in neuroblastoma cells via the intrinsic apoptotic pathway and having its effect
further enhanced with 4-HC.
Zoledronic acid inhibits Ras-mediated Akt and ERK1/2
activation. N-BPs have a known inhibitory activity on protein
prenylation, farnesylation and geranylgeranylation, posttranslational modifications that promote their localization to the
plasma membrane, and subsequent activation (14, 22). We
therefore tested whether zoledronic acid could inhibit the
translocation of Ras to the plasma membrane, an event associated
with its activation. We first compared the presence of Ras in the
plasma membrane and cytosolic fractions of CHLA-255 cells 15 and
30 min after treatment with zoledronic acid (25 Amol/L). On

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (19). October 1, 2007

treatment with zoledronic acid, we found a significant decrease in
membrane-associated Ras when compared with the amount of
caveolin-1, a plasma membrane-associated protein, in the absence
of changes in cytosolic Ras (Fig. 6A–C). Consistent with this effect
being associated with inhibition of Ras activation, we observed a
simultaneous decrease in phosphorylation of c-Raf, a downstream
target of Ras. To determine the signaling pathways downstream of
Ras and c-Raf affected by zoledronic acid, we examined the effect
of zoledronic acid treatment of CHLA-255 cells on Akt and ERK1/2
phosphorylation. The data (Supplementary Fig. S6D and E)
indicated a significant inhibition of ERK1/2 phosphorylation at
15 min (P = 0.001) and 30 min (P = 0.049) after treatment with
zoledronic acid. Inhibition of Akt phosphorylation was also
significant but only 15 min after exposure to zoledronic acid. The
data suggest that zoledronic acid may inhibit proliferation and
stimulate apoptosis in tumor cells via inhibition of Ras-mediated
Akt and ERK1/2 activation.

Discussion
Current upfront treatment of high-risk metastatic neuroblastoma focuses on targeting malignant cells with a combination of
surgery, radiation therapy, high-dose myeloablative chemotherapy,
and bone marrow transplantation (2). Among these therapies, a
combination of high-dose myeloablative chemotherapy followed
by bone marrow transplantation and high-dose 13-cis-retinoic
acid improved 3-year disease-free survival from 21% to 42%. Much
less attention however has been placed on testing agents
specifically targeted toward bone metastasis, a major factor of
mortality and morbidity in patients with metastatic disease. Our
recent understanding of the mechanisms involved in bone invasion

9352

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Zoledronic Acid in Neuroblastoma Bone Metastasis

in neuroblastoma pointed to the important role played by
osteoclasts and suggested that they may be suitable target for
therapeutic intervention (4). Bisphosphonates, and in particular
N-BPs, are among the leading agents with well-demonstrated
antiosteoclastic activity and have shown promising results in
several diseases associated with increased bone remodeling like
osteoporosis, osteoarthritis, and metastatic cancer (17). Their
unique ability to bind to the bone matrix explain their short halflife in the plasma and normal tissues, their low systemic toxicity,
and their high therapeutic index (23). Among those, zoledronic
acid in particular has been studied because of its excellent
bioavailability, great efficacy, low toxicity, and convenient administration schedule in patients (4 mg i.v. every 4 weeks; refs. 24, 25).
However, the clinical activity of zoledronic acid in pediatric cancer
has not been studied.
The observation that zoledronic acid inhibits the formation of
osteolytic lesions in mice locally injected with neuroblastoma
cells is consistent with other reports in tumor models of breast,
prostate, and myeloma, where osteoclasts play an active and causal
role in the formation of osteolytic lesions. Here, we provide
evidence that zoledronic acid has also a potent antitumoral activity
by directly inhibiting tumor cell proliferation and promoting
apoptosis. In vivo, this effect was observed only inside the bone and
in vitro, it required zoledronic acid concentrations ranging from
12.5 to 50 Amol/L. In patients treated with a standard dose of
4 mg zoledronic acid, the maximum zoledronic acid concentration
achieved in the plasma is only 1 Amol/L (309 F 71 ng/mL; ref. 26).
When given to rat at 0.16 mg/kg i.v., plasma concentrations of
4.47 Amol/L were achieved after 5 min (27). Zoledronic acid plasma
disposition is multiphasic with half-lives of 0.2 and 1.4 h with 38%
of the dose being excreted in the urine within 24 h, consistent with
the extensive uptake by and slow release from bone (28). These
plasma concentrations are therefore too low to have any significant
inhibitory effect on tumor cell proliferation and apoptosis outside
the bone, and this is consistent with the absence of effect that

zoledronic acid had on tumor cell proliferation and apoptosis in
sections of tumors that had extended outside the femur of mice
treated with zoledronic acid. However, zoledronic acid accumulates in the bone where it can reach concentrations in the 10 to
50 Amol/L ranges. For example, when tested for its binding affinity
to human bone in vitro in competition binding assays, zoledronic
acid was found to have a K i of 81 Amol/L, a concentration above
the ones we used in our in vitro experiments (29), and to bind to
calcified surfaces at concentrations ranging from 1 to 50 Amol/L
(30). The concentration of zoledronic acid achieved in the bone
marrow space of mice treated with zoledronic acid in our study
could not be determined; however, based on published data and
our observation of a significant inhibition of proliferation and
increase in apoptosis in tumor cells inside the bone, one could
reasonably assume that they reached the micromole per liter range
where zoledronic acid was shown to have activity in vitro. Although
we show a direct effect of zoledronic acid on neuroblastoma cells
in vitro, we cannot rule out the possibility that, in vivo, zoledronic
acid could have an additional indirect effect on tumor cells in
the bone, through its inhibitory activity against osteoclasts. By
inhibiting osteoclast proliferation and activity, and therefore
osteolysis, zoledronic acid inhibits the release of growth factors
bound to the bone matrix (10, 17). Among these is insulin-like
growth factor-I, which has a growth stimulatory activity on
neuroblastoma cells (31, 32). And vice versa, it is also conceivable
that the antitumoral effect of zoledronic acid on neuroblastoma
cells in the bone inhibits the stimulatory effect of neuroblastoma
cells on the production of the osteoclast-activating factor IL-6
by bone marrow–derived stromal cells (11). These possibilities are
currently under investigation in our laboratory.
The cytotoxicity of NB-Ps like alendronate and zoledronic acid
in neuroblastoma cells in vitro has been reported recently (33).
Similar to our observations, the data indicated a 50% inhibition of
cell proliferation in vitro on 72 h of exposure to alendronate and
zoledronic acid at concentrations ranging from 3.97 to 34.1 Amol/L,

Figure 6. Zoledronic acid inhibits
activation of Ras, c-Raf, ERK1/2, and Akt.
CHLA-255 cells were incubated overnight
in serum-free medium before being
exposed to 10% FBS in the presence or
absence of zoledronic acid (25 Amol/L).
The cells were then washed and lysed
15 and 30 min after treatment. A, presence
of Ras in membrane and cytosol extracts
and of phospho-c-Raf in lysates of
duplicate samples taken 15 and 30 min
after zoledronic acid treatment and in
controls. B, ratio of membrane-associated
Ras/caveolin-1 in plasma membrane
extracts obtained from indicated conditions
were calculated by scanning densitometry
analysis of the Western blot data shown
in (A). C, quantitative analysis of the data
shown in (A) was done by scanning.
Columns, mean ratios from two separate
samples in three experiments; bars, SD.

www.aacrjournals.org

9353

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (19). October 1, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

depending on the cell line. These authors also reported that NB-Ps
induce differentiation and apoptosis; however, neither the mechanism of action of these agents nor their efficacy in preclinical
models was examined. In a recent article, Dickson et al. (34) also
reported that zoledronic acid inhibits proliferation and increases
apoptosis in human neuroblastoma cells exposed in vitro to
concentrations ranging from 10 to 100 Amol/L and inhibits tumor
growth in mice injected into the femur and treated weekly with
zoledronic acid starting 10 days after tumor cell inoculation. An
increased inhibition of breast cancer cell proliferation in vitro by
ibandronate and zoledronic acid at a concentration of 30 Amol/L in
combination with cytotoxic anticancer agents, such as cyclophosphamide, methotrexate, 5-fluorouracil, epirubicin, and paclitaxel,
has also been reported recently (35). At low concentrations
(1 Amol/L), zoledronic acid inhibits actin skeleton organization
and cell migration in a RhoA-dependent manner and inhibits
cyclooxygenase-2 expression (36). Induction of apoptosis in
prostate cancer cells by zoledronic acid in a caspase-dependent
mechanism involving the intrinsic apoptotic pathway has also been
reported previously (37). Here, we provide evidence that similar to
prostate cancer cells, the mechanism may involve activation of
caspase-3 and alteration in the Bcl-2/Bax ratio in favor of the
proapoptotic Bax protein. It is interesting to note that in CHLA-255
cells, zoledronic acid affects caspase-3 and not caspase-8 activity
considering that loss of caspase-8 expression has been shown
recently to potentiate neuroblastoma metastasis (38), suggesting
therefore that loss of caspase-8 activity would not prevent the
apoptotic activity of zoledronic acid on metastatic neuroblastoma
cells inside the bone. We also show that consistent with the known
inhibitory activity of N-BPs on protein prenylation, zoledronic
acid inhibits the membrane localization of Ras and consequently
Ras-dependent signaling. We also show that inhibition of Ras
activation by zoledronic acid is associated with inhibition of c-Raf
activation and ERK1/2 and Akt activation, suggesting, although
not proving, an involvement of these two signal pathways in
proliferation and apoptosis respectively (39).
In these experiments, we have used an intensive treatment with
zoledronic acid given 5 days/wk, without observing any acute
toxicity in mice. Subsequently, we have also tested a weekly
administration schedule and observed a similar effect on inhibition
of osteolysis and on mice survival (data not shown). Similarly,
Daubine et al. (40) have shown that whether zoledronic acid is
given daily or weekly, it is effective in inhibiting skeletal tumor
growth and is not toxic in a mouse model of breast cancer bone
metastasis.
Our data also point to the beneficial effect of using a
combination of chemotherapy and zoledronic acid in patients
6
R. Seeger, (Children’s Hospital Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA), personal communication.

with established bone metastases. In our experiments, we selected
a combination of cyclophosphamide and topotecan because it is
among the combinations of cytotoxic agents that have shown
efficacy in upfront treatment of phase II clinical trials in children
with metastatic neuroblastoma, is well tolerated, and has an
acceptable hematopoietic toxicity (41, 42). It is presently a combination of choice in children with recurrent metastatic disease.6
Although zoledronic acid given in a prevention regimen alone
inhibited the formation of osteolytic lesions, it failed to do so in an
intervention protocol in mice with established osteolytic lesions.
In contrast, when given in combination with cyclophosphamide/
topotecan, it inhibited the progression of these lesions to
grade 4 in 100% of the mice treated, an effect not observed with
chemotherapy alone. Combination of zoledronic acid and chemotherapy also had a significant effect on survival without disabling
morbidity. Similarly, the administration of zoledronic acid alone to
mice injected into the tibia with PC-3M12 human prostate cancer
cells produced significant bone preservation but did not inhibit
tumor progression (43). In contrast, when combined with imatinib
(Gleevec) and paclitaxel, it decreased tumor incidence and lymph
node metastasis and produced apoptosis in tumor cells as well as
tumor and bone-associated endothelial cells. An enhancement in
tumor regression in a rat model of osteosarcoma was also
observed when zoledronic acid was given in combination with
ifosfamide (44). The potential benefit of combining zoledronic acid
with a cytotoxic agent, such as cyclophosphamide, is further
shown by our in vitro data showing a significant enhancement of
the antiproliferative effect and the apoptotic effect of zoledronic
acid when combined with 4-HC, an active metabolite of cyclophosphamide.
In summary, our data show that zoledronic acid has a dual
antiosteoclastic and antitumoral activity and provide data suggesting that the antitumoral activity of zoledronic acid involves
inhibition of Ras, c-Raf, and ERK1/2 and Akt activation. The data
show that when used in combination with cytotoxic chemotherapy
to mice with established osteolytic lesions, zoledronic acid in
addition to preventing bone degradation significantly extends
survival. The data emphasize the unique effect of zoledronic acid in
the bone microenvironment and support its use in combination
with cytotoxic chemotherapy in children with neuroblastoma that
has metastasized to the bone.

Acknowledgments
Received 12/10/2006; revised 6/11/2007; accepted 7/26/2007.
Grant support: NIH grant CA81403 (Y.A. DeClerck and C.P. Reynolds).
The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of page
charges. This article must therefore be hereby marked advertisement in accordance
with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact.
We thank Dr. J. Retkwa (Novartis, Basel, Switzerland) for providing zoledronic acid,
Jerry Barnhart for processing the FACS samples, Dr. N. Keshelava (Children’s Hospital
Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA) for the gift of 4-HC, and J. Rosenberg for typing the
manuscript.

1. Maris JM, Matthay KK. Molecular biology of neuroblastoma. J Clin Oncol 1999;17:2264–79.
2. Matthay KK, Villablanca JG, Seeger RC, et al.
Treatment of high-risk neuroblastoma with intensive
chemotherapy, radiotherapy, autologous bone marrow
transplantation, and 13-cis -retinoic acid. Children’s
Cancer Group. N Engl J Med 1999;341:1165–73.
3. Dubois SG, Kalika Y, Lukens JN, et al. Metastatic sites

in stage IV and IVS neuroblastoma correlate with age,
tumor biology, and survival. J Pediatr Hematol Oncol
1999;21:181–9.
4. Sohara Y, Shimada H, DeClerck YA. Mechanisms of
bone invasion and metastasis in human neuroblastoma.
Cancer Lett 2005;228:203–9.
5. Kakonen SM, Mundy GR. Mechanisms of osteolytic
bone metastases in breast carcinoma. Cancer 2003;97:
834–9.
6. Sohara Y, Shimada H, Scadeng M, et al. Lytic bone

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (19). October 1, 2007

9354

References

lesions in human neuroblastoma xenograft involve
osteoclast recruitment and are inhibited by bisphosphonate. Cancer Res 2003;63:3026–31.
7. Granchi D, Amato I, Battistelli L, et al. In vitro
blockade of receptor activator of nuclear factor-nB
ligand prevents osteoclastogenesis induced by neuroblastoma cells. Int J Cancer 2004;111:829–38.
8. Michigami T, Ihara-Watanabe M, Yamazaki M, Ozono
K. Receptor activator of nuclear factor nB ligand
(RANKL) is a key molecule of osteoclast formation for

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Zoledronic Acid in Neuroblastoma Bone Metastasis
bone metastasis in a newly developed model of human
neuroblastoma. Cancer Res 2001;61:1637–44.
9. Bhatia P, Sanders M, Hansen MF. Expression of
RANK and RANKL is altered in invasive carcinoma
and bone metastasis of breast cancer. J Bone Miner
Res 2002;17:S411.
10. Guise TA, Kozlow WM, Heras-Herzig A, Padalecki SS,
Yin JJ, Chirgwin JM. Molecular mechanisms of breast
cancer metastases to bone. Clin Breast Cancer 2005;5
Suppl:S46–53.
11. Sohara Y, Shimada H, Minkin C, Erdreich-Epstein A,
Nolta JA, DeClerck YA. Bone marrow mesenchymal stem
cells provide an alternate pathway of osteoclast
activation and bone destruction by cancer cells. Cancer
Res 2005;65:1129–35.
12. Teoh G, Anderson KC. Interaction of tumor and host
cells with adhesion and extracellular matrix molecules
in the development of multiple myeloma. Hematol
Oncol Clin North Am 1997;11:27–42.
13. Roodman GD. Mechanisms of bone metastasis. N
Engl J Med 2004;350:1655–64.
14. Rogers MJ, Gordon S, Benford HL, et al. Cellular and
molecular mechanisms of action of bisphosphonates.
Cancer 2000;88:2961–78.
15. Miller PD. Efficacy and safety of long-term
bisphosphonates in postmenopausal osteoporosis. Expert Opinion on Pharmacotherapy 2003;4:2253–8.
16. Clines GA, Guise TA. Hypercalcaemia of malignancy
and basic research on mechanisms responsible for
osteolytic and osteoblastic metastasis to bone. Endocr
Relat Cancer 2005;12:549–83.
17. Green JR. Bisphosphonates: preclinical review. Oncologist 2004;9:3–13.
18. Diel IJ, Solomayer EF, Bastert G. Bisphosphonates
and the prevention of metastasis: first evidences from
preclinical and clinical studies. Cancer 2000;88:3080–8.
19. Green JR. Antitumor effects of bisphosphonates.
Cancer 2003;97:840–7.
20. Perry CM, Figgitt DP. Zoledronic acid: a review of its
use in patients with advanced cancer. Drugs 2004;64:
1197–211.
21. Mouchess ML, Sohara Y, Nelson MD, Jr., DeClerck YA,
Moats RA. Multimodal imaging analysis of tumor
progression and bone resorption in a murine cancer
model. J Comput Assist Tomogr 2006;30:525–34.
22. Coxon FP, Helfrich MH, Van’t Hof R, et al. Protein
geranylgeranylation is required for osteoclast formation,

www.aacrjournals.org

function, and survival: inhibition by bisphosphonates
and GGTI-298. J Bone Miner Res 2000;15:1467–76.
23. Michaelson MD, Smith MR. Bisphosphonates for
treatment and prevention of bone metastases. J Clin
Oncol 2005;23:8219–24.
24. Li EC, Davis LE. Zoledronic acid: a new parenteral
bisphosphonate. Clin Ther 2003;25:2669–708.
25. Wardley A, Davidson N, Barrett-Lee P, et al.
Zoledronic acid significantly improves pain scores and
quality of life in breast cancer patients with bone
metastases: a randomised, crossover study of community vs hospital bisphosphonate administration. Br J
Cancer 2005;92:1869–76.
26. Skerjanec A, Berenson J, Hsu C, et al. The pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of zoledronic acid in
cancer patients with varying degrees of renal function. J
Clin Pharmacol 2003;43:154–62.
27. Legay F, Gauron S, Deckert F, et al. Development and
validation of a highly sensitive RIA for zoledronic acid,
a new potent heterocyclic bisphosphonate, in human
serum, plasma, and urine. J Pharm Biomed Anal 2002;30:
897–911.
28. Chen T, Berenson J, Vescio R, et al. Pharmacokinetics
and pharmacodynamics of zoledronic acid in cancer
patients with bone metastases. J Clin Pharmacol 2002;
42:1228–36.
29. Leu CT, Luegmayr E, Freedman LP, Rodan GA,
Reszka AA. Relative binding affinities of bisphosphonates for human bone and relationship to antiresorptive
efficacy. Bone 2006;38:628–36.
30. Schindeler A, Little DG. Osteoclasts but not osteoblasts are affected by a calcified surface treated with
zoledronic acid in vitro . Biochem Biophys Res Commun
2005;338:710–6.
31. Maloney EK, McLaughlin JL, Dagdigian NE, et al. An
anti-insulin-like growth factor I receptor antibody that
is a potent inhibitor of cancer cell proliferation. Cancer
Res 2003;63:5073–83.
32. Kurihara S, Hakuno F, Takahashi S. Insulin-like
growth factor-I-dependent signal transduction pathways leading to the induction of cell growth and
differentiation of human neuroblastoma cell line SHSY5Y: the roles of MAP kinase pathway and PI 3-kinase
pathway. Endocr J 2000;47:739–51.
33. Vorotnjak M, Boos J, Lanvers-Kaminsky C. In vitro
toxicity of bisphosphonates on human neuroblastoma
cell lines. Anticancer Drugs 2004;15:795–802.

34. Dickson PV, Hamner JB, Cauthen LA, Ng CY,
McCarville MB, Davidoff AM. Efficacy of zoledronate
against neuroblastoma. Surgery 2006;140:227–35.
35. Vogt U, Bielawski KP, Bosse U, Schlotter CM. Breast
tumour growth inhibition in vitro through the combination of cyclophosphamide/metotrexate/5-fluorouracil,
epirubicin/cyclophosphamide, epirubicin/paclitaxel,
and epirubicin/docetaxel with the bisphosphonates
ibandronate and zoledronic acid. Oncol Rep 2004;12:
1109–14.
36. Denoyelle C, Hong L, Vannier JP, Soria J, Soria C. New
insights into the actions of bisphosphonate zoledronic
acid in breast cancer cells by dual RhoA-dependent and
-independent effects. Br J Cancer 2003;88:1631–40.
37. Oades GM, Senaratne SG, Clarke IA, Kirby RS,
Colston KW. Nitrogen containing bisphosphonates
induce apoptosis and inhibit the mevalonate pathway,
impairing Ras membrane localization in prostate cancer
cells. J Urol 2003;170:246–52.
38. Stupack DG, Teitz T, Potter MD, et al. Potentiation of
neuroblastoma metastasis by loss of caspase-8. Nature
2006;439:95–9.
39. Cox AD, Der CJ. The dark side of Ras: regulation of
apoptosis. Oncogene 2003;22:8999–9006.
40. Daubine F, Le Gall C, Gasser J, Green J, Clezardin P.
Antitumor effects of clinical dosing regimens of
bisphosphonates in experimental breast cancer bone
metastasis. J Natl Cancer Inst 2007;99:322–30.
41. Kretschmar CS, Kletzel M, Murray K, et al. Response
to paclitaxel, topotecan, and topotecan-cyclophosphamide in children with untreated disseminated neuroblastoma treated in an upfront phase II investigational
window: a pediatric oncology group study. J Clin Oncol
2004;22:4119–26.
42. Saylors RL III, Stine KC, Sullivan J, et al. Cyclophosphamide plus topotecan in children with recurrent or
refractory solid tumors: a Pediatric Oncology Group
phase II study. J Clin Oncol 2001;19:3463–9.
43. Kim SJ, Uehara H, Yazici S, et al. Modulation of bone
microenvironment with zoledronate enhances the
therapeutic effects of STI571 and paclitaxel against
experimental bone metastasis of human prostate
cancer. Cancer Res 2005;65:3707–15.
44. Heymann D, Ory B, Blanchard F, et al. Enhanced
tumor regression and tissue repair when zoledronic acid
is combined with ifosfamide in rat osteosarcoma. Bone
2005;37:74–86.

9355

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (19). October 1, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

The Activity of Zoledronic Acid on Neuroblastoma Bone
Metastasis Involves Inhibition of Osteoclasts and Tumor Cell
Survival and Proliferation
Hongjun Peng, Yasuyoshi Sohara, Rex A. Moats, et al.
Cancer Res 2007;67:9346-9355.

Updated version
Supplementary
Material

Cited articles
Citing articles

E-mail alerts
Reprints and
Subscriptions
Permissions

Access the most recent version of this article at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/67/19/9346
Access the most recent supplemental material at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/suppl/2007/09/21/67.19.9346.DC1

This article cites 44 articles, 11 of which you can access for free at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/67/19/9346.full#ref-list-1
This article has been cited by 5 HighWire-hosted articles. Access the articles at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/67/19/9346.full#related-urls

Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal.
To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications
Department at pubs@aacr.org.
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications
Department at permissions@aacr.org.

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

