CR 75th Anniversary Commentary
Review Article

Commentary on Folkman: "How Is Blood Vessel
Growth Regulated in Normal and Neoplastic
Tissue?"
Hellmut G. Augustin1,2,3

Abstract
Angiogenesis is a prerequisite for tumor growth and metastatic progression. The discovery of the ﬁrst speciﬁc angiogenic cytokine, VEGF, in 1989 paved the way for the clinical
approval of the ﬁrst antiangiogenic tumor drug 15 years
later. This brief commentary highlights and puts into historical perspective the 1985 G.H.A. Clowes Memorial Award

Lecture delivered by Dr. Judah Folkman. Thirty years later,
this award lecture is a lively testimony of the visionary mind
of Dr. Folkman, whose legacy continues to inspire contemporary angiogenesis research. Cancer Res; 76(10); 2854–6. 2016

Dr. Judah Folkman of Children's Hospital at Harvard Medical
School (Boston, MA) was the 25th recipient of the American
Association for Cancer Research (AACR) G.H.A. Clowes Memorial
Award. This award recognizes outstanding accomplishments
in basic cancer research and comes with the honor to deliver an
award lecture at the annual AACR meeting. Folkman delivered
the award lecture during the 76th Annual Meeting of the AACR in
Houston, TX, on May 24, 1985. An edited version of his lecture
was published in the February 1986 issue of Cancer Research (1).
The awardee summarized in this lecture 25 years of pioneering
research through which his laboratory had essentially single
handedly established the ﬁeld of angiogenesis research by establishing techniques for the culture of endothelial cells (2), developing relevant animal models (3), and purifying the ﬁrst angiogenic growth factor (4).
On the basis of the experiments in isolated perfused organs, Dr.
Folkman had published a hypothesis article in the New England
Journal of Medicine in 1971 (i) predicting that tumors would be
restricted to microscopic size in the absence of angiogenesis, (ii)
suggesting that tumors secrete diffusible angiogenic molecules,
(iii) describing a model of tumor dormancy due to blocked
angiogenesis, (iv) proposing the term antiangiogenesis for the
prevention of new capillary sprouts from being recruited into a
growing tumor, (v) envisaging the future discovery of angiogenesis inhibitors, and (vi) proposing the idea that an antibody to a
tumor angiogenic factor could be an anticancer drug (5). All of

these predictions have become a reality, but the ﬁeld of angiogenesis research was still in its infancy when Dr. Folkman delivered the Clowes lecture 14 years later (less than 100 angiogenesisrelated articles were published in 1985 compared with almost
7,000 per year today). He outlined in his lecture in some detail the
steps of the angiogenic cascade with endothelial cells in postcapillary venules degrading their surrounding extracellular matrix
and migrating toward the angiogenic stimulus to only subsequently proliferate. Outgrowing capillary sprouts eventually anastomose to form new capillary loops and networks.
The 1980s were an intense period of hunting for the ominously
hypothesized tumor angiogenesis factor (TAF; ref. 5). Shing,
Folkman, and Klagsbrun had just reported the heparin afﬁnity
of many growth factors (6). This provided a unique tool to
identify growth factors by heparin-afﬁnity chromatography.
Many new growth factors were identiﬁed at the time, including
the ﬁbroblast growth factor. Some of these were potent endothelial mitogens capable of inducing angiogenesis in cellular settings
and in vivo, yet all factors identiﬁed in the mid-1980s turned out to
be pleiotropic factors with multiple biologic functions limiting
their usefulness as therapeutic targets.
Dr. Folkman also described in his lecture early attempts to
develop antiangiogenic compounds. Combinations of heparin
with different formulations of mineralocorticoids or glucocorticoids were reported to exert potent antiangiogenic activity in
cellular assays and tumor angiogenesis experiments. Most of this
early angiogenesis inhibitor work did not stand the test of time,
but it paved the way for the subsequent identiﬁcation of speciﬁc
angiogenic factors and corresponding inhibitors.
As early as 1983, Don Senger and Harold Dvorak of Beth Israel
Hospital at Harvard Medical School had reported the isolation of
a tumor-derived factor that potently stimulates vascular permeability, called the vascular permeability factor (VPF; ref. 7), yet this
discovery was left largely unnoticed and the article was in the ﬁrst
5 years after its publication cited only 45 times (citations until
April 2016: 2,600 times). This changed only when Napoleone
Ferrara of Genentech published the discovery of the ﬁrst endothelial cell–speciﬁc growth factor in 1989 that he called VEGF (so
far, 3,700 citations; ref. 8), which turned out to be identical to

1
Division of Vascular Oncology and Metastasis (DKFZ-ZMBH Alliance),
German Cancer Research Center, Heidelberg, Germany. 2Department
of Vascular Biology and Tumor Angiogenesis (CBTM), Medical Faculty
Mannheim, Heidelberg University, Heidelberg, Germany. 3German
Cancer Consortium, Heidelberg, Germany.

Corresponding Author: Hellmut G. Augustin, Medical Faculty Mannheim
(CBTM), Heidelberg University, and German Cancer Research Center Heidelberg
(DKFZ-ZMBH Alliance), Im Neuenheimer Feld 280, Heidelberg D-69221,
Germany. Phone: 4962-2142-1500; Fax: 4962-2142-1515; E-mail:
augustin@angiogenese.de
doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-16-1123
2016 American Association for Cancer Research.

AACR.

See related article by Folkman J, Cancer Res 1986;46:467-73.

2854 Cancer Res; 76(10) May 15, 2016

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2016 American Association for Cancer Research.

Regulation of Blood Vessel Growth

VPF. This landmark discovery was made around the same time
by Folkman's laboratory and published jointly with Ferrara
only 7 months later (9). The discovery of VEGF as the ﬁrst speciﬁc
angiogenesis factor set in motion the revolution in the ﬁeld
of angiogenesis research, with the most dramatic growth in
the 1990s, that has resulted, 15 years after the discovery of
VEGF, in the clinical approval of the ﬁrst angiogenesis inhibitor,
the VEGF-neutralizing antibody bevacizumab, for the treatment of metastatic colorectal cancers (more than 6,000 citations
so far; ref. 10).
Folkman knew at the time of the award lecture that the "real"
angiogenic factors had not yet been discovered. He stated in the
concluding remarks: "In my more grandiose moments, I think
of a day to come when it may be possible to use angiogenesis
inhibitors as an adjunct to conventional therapy." He also
wrote: "Hopefully, we may eventually learn enough about the
angiogenic process so that other diseases dominated by abnormal angiogenesis, e.g., many types of ocular neovascularization, might be brought under control." Both of these statements
are a most remarkable reﬂection of Folkman's visionary mind.
Folkman had envisioned antiangiogenesis as an adjunct to
conventional therapy, not as replacing it. When antiangiogenic
tumor monotherapy turned out to be ineffective at the beginning of the millennium, the ﬁeld of antiangiogenesis research
almost collapsed. It was not until 2003 when the combination
of antiangiogenesis and chemotherapy proved to be more
effective than chemotherapy alone. The addition of an antiangiogenic drug extended median overall survival by 25%
(from 15.6 to 20.3 months) in a phase III colorectal cancer
study involving more than 800 patients (10). The second
statement of Folkman turned out to be similarly visionary:
antiangiogenesis has become part of standard ﬁrst-line tumor
therapy, yet its efﬁcacy is to this day rather limited, and the full
potential of antiangiogenic tumor therapy has not yet been
exploited. This is different for the ﬁeld of ophthalmology, in
which antiangiogenic therapy of wet age-dependent macular
degeneration has had breakthrough character.
The sales of antiangiogenic drugs in oncology are exceeding $10
billion per year, with bevacizumab alone accounting for almost
$7 billion, making it presently the drug with the seventh highest
revenues. Sales of angiogenesis inhibitors in the ﬁeld of ophthalmology are in the range of $5 billion. It is often questioned in lay
public media whether these enormous socioeconomic investments are justiﬁed in the light of the limited efﬁcacy of antiangiogenic drugs, particularly in the context of tumor progression.
Yet, this critique ignores the fact that antiangiogenesis marks the
ﬁrst clinically effective antistroma therapy and that it has only
opened the window toward a whole new biology of tumor
microenvironment–targeting therapies. Moreover, it may well be
(i) that the efﬁcacy of established anti-VEGF or anti-VEGF receptor–targeting drugs may actually be better than their performance
in the clinic and (ii) that the potential of antiangiogenic therapy is
not yet fully exploited.
Ad i: Targeted therapies require a target and targeted therapies require stratifying diagnostic procedures. This is a trivial
and self-evident statement, yet the truth of the matter is that the
ﬁeld of antiangiogenesis lacks to this day angiodiagnostic
procedures with stratifying power to identify those patients
that will beneﬁt most from antiangiogenic intervention. In
other words, antiangiogenic drugs are, to a fair degree, given
to the wrong patients. Moreover, even after more than 10 years

www.aacrjournals.org

of clinical implementation, the objectives and the mechanismof-action of antiangiogenic intervention in human tumor
patients are less clear than ever. Both vascular regression (as
postulated by Folkman) as well as vascular normalization (i.e.,
pruning of the most immature intratumoral vessels to leave
behind a more normal appearing and thereby chemotherapyfacilitating vasculature) contribute to antiangiogenic therapy,
yet the contribution of these two processes, regression and
normalization, in different types of human tumors is not at
all understood. Moreover, little is known about the temporal
effects of antiangiogenic intervention. All these limitations
severely contribute to the difﬁculties in the rational and mechanism-based advancement of antiangiogenesis.
Ad ii: VEGF comes close to the magic TAF postulated by
Folkman. VEGF stands up high in the hierarchy of events that
leads to the growth of new blood vessels, yet VEGF is not the
only speciﬁc angiogenesis factor. Combinations with factors
controlling later steps of the angiogenic cascade are in advanced
clinical development. For oncology, combinations of antiVEGF/VEGFR with anti-angiopoietin-2 are most advanced in
clinical development. For ophthalmology, the combination of
anti-VEGF with anti-PDGFRb is in phase III clinical trials.
Future developments in the ﬁeld also hold great promise that
antiangiogenic drugs contribute to remodeling the tumor
microenvironment in a way that they do not just facilitate
chemotherapy, but that they may also be key to improving
the efﬁcacy of tumor-curing immunotherapies.
The legacy of Judah Folkman is still very much alive. His
brilliant mind has left the community with a plethora of still
unanswered questions: What are the biologic consequences of
angiogenesis stimulators being short-lived and locally acting,
whereas the angiogenesis inhibitors supposedly are long-lived
and systemically acting? What are the mechanisms of tumor
dormancy and what drives the escape from dormancy (angiogenic switch)? What is the cause of and consequence of the
relationship between angiogenesis and metastasis? What is the
cause of and consequence of relationship between tumor
angiogenesis and altered tumor metabolism? Folkman has
inspired a whole generation of scientists that is still working
on many of these enigmatic questions.
Thirty years have passed since Folkman delivered the G.H.A.
Clowes Memorial lecture. Much has been learnt and many more
new questions have emerged. Notably, the ﬁeld of angiogenesis
research may right now pave the way toward the next revolution in
the biomedical sciences. The vascular endothelium has in the past
primarily been considered as a rather passive, barrier-forming cell
population that responds to exogenous cytokines, for example,
angiogenic cytokines, inﬂammation-inducing cytokines, permeability-inducing cytokines. This view has changed in recent years.
The vascular endothelium is strategically located between the
circulation and the different organ microenvironments. It thereby
exerts gatekeeper functions to not just respond to exogenous
cytokines, but to serve as a rich source of paracrine ("angiocrine")-acting growth factors, through which the endothelium
controls its microenvironment. Such angiocrine activity has been
demonstrated during embryonic development when the vascular
endothelium actively instructs organogenesis. Angiocrine activity
also contributes to maintaining tissue homeostasis, including
tissue metabolism, and it controls regenerative processes as well
as pathologic responses, such as tumor metastasis. The molecular
and functional characterization of endothelial organotypic

Cancer Res; 76(10) May 15, 2016

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2016 American Association for Cancer Research.

2855

CR 75th Anniversary Commentary
heterogeneity and of different endothelial microenvironments
and niches still holds many surprises. Such emerging knowledge
may and most likely will pave the way toward novel, presently by
and large still unimaginable stromal-targeted and stromal reprogramming therapies.

Disclosure of Potential Conﬂicts of Interest
No potential conﬂicts of interest were disclosed.
Received April 18, 2016; accepted April 20, 2016; published online May 13,
2016.

References
1. Folkman J. How is blood vessel growth regulated in normal and neoplastic
tissue? G.H.A. Clowes memorial award lecture. Cancer Res 1986;46:467–73.
2. Gimbrone MA, Cotran RS, Folkman J. Human vascular endothelial cells
in culture – growth and DNA synthesis. J Cell Biol 1974;60:673–84.
3. Gimbrone MA, Cotran RS, Leapman SB, Folkman J. Tumor growth and
neovascularization: experimental model using rabbit cornea. J Natl Cancer
Inst 1974;52:413–27.
4. Folkman J, Merler E, Abernathy C, Williams G. Isolation of a tumor factor
responsible for angiogenesis. J Exp Med 1971;133:275–88.
5. Folkman J. Tumor angiogenesis: therapeutic implications. N Engl J Med
1971;285:1182–6.
6. Shing Y, Folkman J, Sullivan R, Butterﬁeld C, Murray J, Klagsbrun M.
Heparin afﬁnity: puriﬁcation of a tumor-derived capillary endothelial cell
growth factor. Science 1984;223:1296–9.

2856 Cancer Res; 76(10) May 15, 2016

7. Senger DR, Galli SJ, Dvorak AM, Perruzzi CA, Harvey VS, Dvorak
HF. Tumor cells secrete a vascular permeabiity factor that
promotes accumulation of ascites ﬂuid. Science 1983;219:
983–5.
8. Leung DW, Cachianes G, Kuang WJ, Goeddel DV, Ferrara N. Vascular
endothelial growth factor is a secreted angiogenic mitogen. Science
1989;246:1306–9.
9. Rosenthal RA, Megyesi JF, Henzel WJ, Ferrara N, Folkman J. Conditioned
medium from mouse sarcoma 180 cells contains vascular endothelial
growth factor. Growth Factors 1990;4:53–9.
10. Hurwitz H, Fehrenbacher L, Novotny W, Cartwright T, Hainsworth J,
Heim W, et al. Bevacizumab plus irinotecan, ﬂuorouracil, and leucovorin for metastatic colorectal cancer. N Engl J Med 2004;350:
2335–42.

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2016 American Association for Cancer Research.

Commentary on Folkman: ''How Is Blood Vessel Growth Regulated
in Normal and Neoplastic Tissue?''
Hellmut G. Augustin
Cancer Res 2016;76:2854-2856.

Updated version

Access the most recent version of this article at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/76/10/2854

Cited articles

This article cites 10 articles, 6 of which you can access for free at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/76/10/2854.full#ref-list-1

E-mail alerts

Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal.

Reprints and
Subscriptions
Permissions

To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications Department at
pubs@aacr.org.
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications Department at
permissions@aacr.org.

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2016 American Association for Cancer Research.

