Published OnlineFirst November 7, 2014; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-2037

Cancer
Research

Therapeutics, Targets, and Chemical Biology

VEGF-Targeted Therapy Stably Modulates the
Glycolytic Phenotype of Tumor Cells
Matteo Curtarello1, Elisabetta Zulato1, Giorgia Nardo1, Silvia Valtorta2,3, Giulia Guzzo4,
 1, Andrea Rasola4,
Elisabetta Rossi5, Giovanni Esposito1, Aichi Msaki1, Anna Pasto
6
1
1
Luca Persano , Francesco Ciccarese , Roberta Bertorelle , Sergio Todde2,
Mario Plebani7, Henrike Schroer8, Stefan Walenta8, Wolfgang Mueller-Klieser8,
Alberto Amadori1,5, Rosa Maria Moresco2,3, and Stefano Indraccolo1

Abstract
Anti-VEGF therapy perturbs tumor metabolism, severely
impairing oxygen, glucose, and ATP levels. In this study, we
investigated the effects of anti-VEGF therapy in multiple experimental tumor models that differ in their glycolytic phenotypes to
gain insights into optimal modulation of the metabolic features
of this therapy. Prolonged treatments induced vascular regression
and necrosis in tumor xenograft models, with highly glycolytic
tumors becoming treatment resistant more rapidly than poorly
glycolytic tumors. By PET imaging, prolonged treatments yielded
an increase in both hypoxic and proliferative regions of tumors. A

selection for highly glycolytic cells was noted and this metabolic
shift was stable and associated with increased tumor aggressiveness and resistance to VEGF blockade in serially transplanted
mice. Our results support the hypothesis that the highly glycolytic
phenotype of tumor cells studied in xenograft models, either
primary or secondary, is a cell-autonomous trait conferring resistance to VEGF blockade. The ﬁnding that metabolic traits of
tumors can be selected by antiangiogenic therapy suggests insights
into the evolutionary dynamics of tumor metabolism. Cancer Res;

Introduction

derived cells, resistance has also been associated with selection
of clones resistant to hypoxia, acquisition of an invasive phenotype, and overexpression of c-Met (3, 5, 6).
Metabolism of tumors differs remarkably from that of the
tissues of their origin. Tumor cells exhibit altered pathways of
biomass and energy production that allow them to sustain
higher proliferative rates and resist some cell death signals,
such as those mediated by increased oxidative damage (7). To
divide, cells need to both increase their size and replicate DNA,
processes that are metabolically demanding and require
large quantities of proteins, lipids and nucleotides, as well as
energy in the form of ATP. Major metabolic alterations of
cancer cells are the enhanced glucose uptake and glycolysis
under aerobic conditions, increased glutamine utilization and
de novo fatty acid synthesis (7) and the more recently characterized aberrant choline phospholipid metabolism (8). Metabolic alterations in cancer cells may derive from genetic
changes associated with cell transformation such as dysregulated activity of HIF1 (9), loss of p53 or altered expression of
c-Myc or Akt (10), or be triggered by inhibition of mitochondrial respiration (11). Moreover, changes in tumor metabolism
can also follow reduction in energy sources (O2, glucose,
glutamine) in the tumor microenvironment associated with
antiangiogenic therapy (12–14).
Although in patients anti-VEGF therapy is generally combined with chemotherapy, in preclinical studies its administration as monotherapy is a strategy to better discern downstream effects of antiangiogenic drugs from cytotoxic drugs.
We recently reported that short-term anti-VEGF therapy causes
severe impairment of glucose and ATP levels in tumors (14).
In this study, we also found that the response to short-term

Among various angiogenic factors, VEGF plays a crucial role
in tumor angiogenesis (1). Neutralization of the VEGF pathway
impairs tumor growth and this notion has provided ground for
development of antiangiogenic drugs (2). However, both preclinical models and clinical trials have shown that beneﬁts from
ﬁrst-generation angiogenesis inhibitors are generally short-term,
due to the development of intrinsic as well as acquired resistance (3, 4). Apart from vascular resistance, due to bypassing of
VEGF blockade by proangiogenic factors produced by either
tumor cells, stromal cells or various types of bone marrow-

1
Istituto Oncologico Veneto, IRCCS, Padova, Italy. 2IBFM-CNR, Segrate, Italy; Tecnomed Foundation and Department of Health Sciences,
University of Milan-Bicocca, Monza, Italy. 3Experimental Imaging Center, IRCCS San Raffaele Scientiﬁc Institute, Milan, Italy. 4Department of
Biomedical Sciences, University of Padova, Padova, Italy. 5Department
of Surgery, Oncology and Gastroenterology, University of Padova,
Padova, Italy. 6Onco-hematology Laboratory, Department of Woman
and Child Health, University of Padova, Padova, Italy. 7Department of
Laboratory Medicine, University-Hospital, Padova, Italy. 8Institute of
Physiology and Pathophysiology, University Medical Center of the
Johannes Gutenberg University Mainz, Germany.

Note: Supplementary data for this article are available at Cancer Research
Online (http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/).
R.M. Moresco and S. Indraccolo contributed equally to this article.
Corresponding Author: Stefano Indraccolo, Istituto Oncologico Veneto, IRCCS,
via Gattamelata, 64-35128 Padua, Italy. Phone: 3904-9821-5875; Fax: 39049807-2854; E-mail: stefano.indraccolo@unipd.it
doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-2037
2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

75(1); 120–133. 2014 AACR.

120 Cancer Res; 75(1) January 1, 2015

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

Published OnlineFirst November 7, 2014; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-2037

Metabolic Evolution of Tumors following Antiangiogenic Therapy

VEGF blockade is strongly dependent on the glycolytic phenotype of the tumor. Speciﬁcally, highly glycolytic tumor
xenografts developed large necrotic areas following shortcourse VEGF neutralization, whereas xenografts characterized
by relatively low glycolytic activity remained substantially
viable (14). To investigate whether metabolic features could
affect the therapeutic outcome, here we analyzed long-term
effects of anti-VEGF treatment on tumor xenografts characterized by different levels of glucose addiction. The results
show that highly glycolytic tumors rapidly acquire resistance
to VEGF neutralization. Moreover, based on results of metabolic assays in four different tumor models, we report for the
ﬁrst time that anti-VEGF therapy causes stable selection of
highly glycolytic tumor cells, indicating that the metabolic
phenotype of tumors can change following administration of
antiangiogenic drugs.

Materials and Methods
Cell culture and treatments
Several tumor cell lines representative of highly glycolytic
(OC316 and MCF7) or poorly glycolytic (IGROV-1 and
SKOV3) cells were used in this study (Supplementary Fig. S1;
ref. 14). IGROV-1 and MCF-7 cells were purchased from ATCC,
OC316 cells were provided by S. Ferrini (IST, Genoa, Italy),
SKOV3 cells was kindly provided by S. Canevari (INT, Milan,
Italy). IGROV-1, OC316 and SKOV3 were grown in RPMI1640
(Euroclone) supplemented with 10% fetal calf serum (FCS; Life
Technologies), 1% HEPES (10 mmol/L, Cambrex Bioscience),
1% L-glutamine (2mmol/L), 1% sodium pyruvate (1 mmol/L),
and 1% antibiotic-antimycotic mix (Gibco-BRL). MCF-7 cells
were grown in DMEM (Euroclone) supplemented with 10%
FCS and 1% antibiotic-antimycotic mix. Cultures were maintained at 37 C in a humidiﬁed 5% CO2/95% air atmosphere.
Where speciﬁed, tumor cells were treated with 2-deoxyglucose
(2-DG; Sigma-Aldrich) at 6 g/L for 72 hours before apoptosis
evaluation. Hypoxic treatment (0.5% O2) was achieved by
incubating cells in an InVivo2 300 hypoxic chamber (Ruskinn
Technology).
In vivo experiments
Procedures involving animals and their care conformed with
institutional guidelines that comply with national and international laws and policies (EEC Council Directive 86/609, OJ L 358,
12 December, 1987). For tumor establishment, 8-week-old SCID
mice (Charles River) were subcutaneously injected into both
ﬂanks with 0.3–0.5  106 tumor cells mixed at 4 C with liquid
Matrigel (Becton Dickinson). Tumor volume (mm3) was calculated as previously reported (15).
To generate the PDOVCA37 xenograft, following informed
consent, ascitic ﬂuid of one patient with ovarian cancer
was obtained from the Medical Oncology Unit of our Institute. Tumor cells (2  106) were injected intraperitoneally
into SCID mice, as reported elsewhere (16). About 2 months
later, animals developed tumors that contained both a solid
and an ascitic component. These tumors were serially
passaged two times into SCID mice before transduction with
a luciferase-encoding lentiviral vector. For optical imaging,
bioluminescence signals were acquired on IVIS Imaging
System (Xenogen Corporation) as described elsewhere
(17).

www.aacrjournals.org

In a set of experiments, 20-week-old female BALB-neuT
mice bearing measurable mammary tumors (3 mm diameter)
were used (18). Founder BALB-neuT male mice were kindly
provided by Biogem following agreement with Dr. Guido Forni
(University of Torino, Torino, Italy). BALB-neuT mice were bred
in house with BALB/c female mice. Female offsprings were then
screened for the presence of Her2/neu oncogene as previously
described (19).
Anti-human VEGF monoclonal antibody (mAb; bevacizumab)
or anti-human/mouse VEGF mAb (B20-4.1.1; ref. 20) were
administered intraperitoneally at 100 mg/dose bi- or triweekly to
SCID and BALB-neuT mice, respectively, and mice were sacriﬁced
48 hours after the last treatment. Control mice received intraperitoneal injections of PBS.
Reverse transcription PCR and real-time PCR assay
Total RNA was extracted using the RNeasy Mini Kit
(Qiagen) according to the manufacturer's instructions. cDNA
was synthesized from 0.5 to 1 mg of total RNA using the
Superscript II reverse transcriptase (Invitrogen). Real-time
PCR was performed with SYBR Green dye and Gene AMP
5700 Sequence Detection System (PE Biosystems). Cycling
conditions were 10 minutes at 95 C, 40 cycles of 15 seconds
at 95 C, and 1 minute at 60 C. Each sample was run in
duplicate. For all genes evaluated, mRNA was normalized to
b2-microglobulin (B2M) mRNA by subtracting the cycle
threshold (Ct) value of B2M mRNA from the Ct value of the
gene of interest (DCt). Fold difference (2DDCt) was calculated
by subtracting the DCt (treated sample) to DCt (reference
sample), to generate a DDCt. PCR efﬁciency was in the range
95% to 105%. Primers used for real-time PCR are listed under
Supplementary Table SI.
Glucose and lactate measurements
Glucose and lactate concentrations in supernatants were determined by colorimetric methods on an automated analyzer
(Dimension RxL, Dade Behring). Values were normalized to cells
number at the end of the incubation period.
Oxygen consumption rate and extracellular acidiﬁcation rate
analysis
Oxygen consumption rate (OCR) and extracellular acidiﬁcation rate (ECAR) were assessed in real-time with a XF24
Extracellular Flux Analyzer (Seahorse Biosciences) as
described (11). Brieﬂy, cells (2.5  104/well) were plated in
RPMI medium supplemented with 10% FBS. The next day,
cells were placed in a running DMEM medium (supplemented
with 25 mmol/L D-glucose, 2 mmol/L glutamine, 1 mmol/L
sodium pyruvate, and without serum and bicarbonate) and
preincubated for 30 minutes at 37 C in atmospheric CO2
before starting metabolic measurements. At the end of the
experiment, OCR and ECAR values were normalized for the
protein content of each sample. Accurate titration with the
uncoupler FCCP was performed for each cell type, to utilize
the FCCP concentration (400 nmol/L) that maximally
increases OCR without being toxic.
Positron emission tomography studies
Cell proliferation and regional tissue hypoxia were investigated using [18F]-ﬂuorothymidine (FLT) and [18 F]-

Cancer Res; 75(1) January 1, 2015

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

121

Published OnlineFirst November 7, 2014; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-2037

Curtarello et al.

ﬂuoroazomycin arabinoside (FAZA) as radioligands, respectively, and YAP-(S)-PET II (ISE, Pisa, Italy) small animal
scanner (21, 22). Further details of PET studies are reported
under Supplementary Data.
Induced metabolic bioluminescence imaging
Freeze-clamped tumors were excised and cut into serial
cryosections for structural hematoxylin and eosin staining and
metabolic measurements. For quantitative measurement of
ATP, lactate and glucose, the method of metabolic imaging
with induced bioluminescence (imBI) was applied, as
described before (23–25). Further details of imBI are reported
under Supplementary Data.
Statistical analysis
Results were expressed as mean value  SD. Statistical
comparison between two sets of data was performed using
either the unpaired Student t test (two-tailed) or, in the case of
analysis of glucose and lactate levels in supernatants, the
Mann–Whitney test (two-tailed). To analyze PET data, ANOVA
followed by the Bonferroni post hoc test for multiple comparisons was used. Differences were considered statistically significant at P < 0.05.
Further experimental details are available under Supplementary Data.

Results
The glycolytic phenotype of tumors modulates resistance to
anti-VEGF therapy
Following establishment of tumor xenografts, mice were
treated with two or three weekly administrations of the antiVEGF antibody bevacizumab for 4 weeks. Results show marked
growth arrest of poorly glycolytic IGROV-1 tumors, whereas
highly glycolytic OC316 xenografts after an initial shrinkage
became substantially resistant to antiangiogenic therapy
according to measurements of tumor size, although at sacriﬁce
of the mice tumors were still smaller compared with controls
(Fig. 1). Ad interim histologic analysis performed in samples
analyzed after 7 days of treatment showed higher levels of
necrosis in highly glycolytic OC316 compared with poorly
glycolytic IGROV-1 tumors (data not shown), in line with our
previous observations (14). In contrast, analysis of tumor
samples collected at day 28 disclosed abundant necrotic areas
in all anti–VEGF-treated tumors (Supplementary Fig. S2A).
Microvessel density was signiﬁcantly lower in tumors treated
with anti-VEGF at day 28 after treatment (Supplementary Fig.
S2B), indicating that tumor angiogenesis was still partially
dependent on VEGF at the end of treatment. These results were
further validated by anti-VEGF treatment of additional tumor
xenografts. MCF7 and SKOV3 represent other examples of
relatively highly and poorly glycolytic tumor cell lines, respectively, as shown by glucose consumption and lactate

Figure 1.
Highly glycolytic tumors become rapidly
resistant to anti-VEGF therapy. Kinetics of
tumor development in SCID mice
subcutaneously injected with poorly (left)
and highly (right) glycolytic tumor cells and
effects of multiple injections of the anti-VEGF
mAb bevacizumab (arrows, 100 mg/dose
administered bi- or triweekly) on tumor size
compared with the size of controls (n ¼ 6
mice for group).  , P < 0.05, t test. Tumors
were collected and analyzed two days after
the last dose of anti-VEGF mAb or PBS for
bevacizumab and control groups,
respectively.

122 Cancer Res; 75(1) January 1, 2015

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

Published OnlineFirst November 7, 2014; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-2037

Metabolic Evolution of Tumors following Antiangiogenic Therapy

production levels in vitro (Supplementary Fig. S1A) as well as
sensitivity to glucose starvation/hypoxia and treatment with
2-DG (Supplementary Fig. S1B). Following anti-VEGF therapy,
SKOV3 tumors were almost completely starved, whereas MCF7
xenografts became rapidly resistant (Fig. 1).
Since these results could also in part depend on the different
genetic background of the various tumor cell lines, we sought
to corroborate them by using pairs of isogenic cells with
different metabolic proﬁles. To this end, we exploited tumor
cells bearing reduced expression of both AMPKa1 and a2 subunits. Ground for this experiment was provided by our previous
study, which indicated that AMPK silencing in IGROV-1 cells
leads to acquisition of highly glycolytic features (14) as well
as by a recent study that reported that AMPK is a negative
regulator of aerobic glycolysis in tumor cells (26). As expected,
double silencing of AMPKa1 and a2 by shRNA delivery
was followed by reduced AMPKa RNA and protein levels in
IGROV-1 cells (Supplementary Fig. S3A) and was associated
with signiﬁcantly increased levels of glucose consumption
and lactate production in vitro (Supplementary Fig. S3B) and
much higher cell death under glucose starvation or hypoxia
compared to control cells (Supplementary Fig. S3C). Proliferation and viability of IGROV-1 shAMPKa1/a2 cells under
standard culture conditions were similar to that of control
cells (not shown). However, tumors formed by IGROV-1
shAMPKa1/a2 cells had somewhat accelerated growth compared with control tumors (Supplementary Fig. S3D). Following treatment with bevacizumab, tumors formed by IGROV-1
cells transduced by an irrelevant shRNA regressed similarly
to parental IGROV-1 tumors; in contrast, tumors formed by
IGROV-1 cells bearing attenuated AMPK a1/a2 levels initially
regressed but subsequently became resistant to anti-VEGF
therapy (Supplementary Fig. S3D). Altogether, these ﬁndings
suggest a negative association of the glycolytic phenotype of
tumor cells with therapeutic responses to VEGF blockade in
SCID mice.
Selection of highly glycolytic tumor cells following VEGF
blockade
Our previous study indicated that the amount of tumor
necrosis following VEGF blockade in part depends on the
glycolytic phenotype of tumor cells, being much lower in
poorly glycolytic than in highly glycolytic xenografts (14). The
observation of large necrotic areas in IGROV-1 tumors following long-term anti-VEGF therapy (Supplementary Fig. S2A)
suggested that the low glycolytic phenotype of these tumor
cells could be modulated by anti-VEGF therapy. To investigate
this possibility, we stained tumor sections with anti-monocarboxylate transporter 4 (MCT4), a lactic acid transporter that
clearly distinguishes OC316 from IGROV-1 cells in vitro (27).
As shown in Fig. 2A, this glycolytic marker was expressed at
much higher levels in OC316 than in IGROV-1 tumors. The
latter had negligible MCT4 expression following short-term
(7 days) anti-VEGF therapy whereas after prolonged anti-VEGF
treatment (28 days) MCT4 expression increased compared to
control tumors (Fig. 2A). Similar results were found in SKOV-3
tumors following antiangiogenic therapy, although in this case
prominent up-regulation of MCT1 - another member of the
MCT family - was observed (Fig. 2A). Importantly, marked
MCT1 expression was also found in clinical liver metastasis
samples of colorectal cancer treated with chemotherapy plus

www.aacrjournals.org

bevacizumab (Fig. 2A), suggesting that this phenomenon
occurs also in patients treated with anti-VEGF drugs. In experimental tumors, HIF1a—a transcription factor that is strongly
stabilized under hypoxic conditions and regulates expression of
several glycolysis-associated transcripts, including MCT4
(28)—was found mainly expressed in the nuclei of tumor cells
after anti-VEGF therapy compared with prevalently cytoplasmic
expression in control samples (Fig. 2B). These data indicate a
metabolic shift in tumors treated with anti-VEGF therapy and
suggest that HIF1a-mediated up-regulation of glycolysis could
in part account for increased expression of lactate transporters
in tumors.
Anti–VEGF-treated tumors contain a highly proliferative and
hypoxic core
Since metabolic reprogramming, hypoxia and cell proliferation are strictly intertwined (9), we next investigated the
proliferative activity of tumors treated with anti-VEGF therapy. To this end, [18F]FLT PET was exploited to functionally
measure the dynamics of proliferation in IGROV-1 and
OC316 xenografts. To evaluate the extension and distribution
of cell phenotypes in tumors, we measured the volume of
distribution of [18F]FAZA, as a marker of hypoxic regions
within tumors. In both xenografts, 7 days after anti-VEGF
therapy, the volume of highly proliferative regions was similar
to pretreatment values. At the end of therapy (day 28), in
IGROV1 tumors, nevertheless a cytostatic effect in tumor
volume measured at caliper, we found increased [18F]FLT
distribution compared with previous measurements (Fig.
3A), indicating that tumors treated with bevacizumab were
composed by highly proliferative cells. This was also accompanied by a progressive increase of tumor hypoxic areas
compared with pretreatment values, as shown by results of
[18F]FAZA PET (Fig. 3A). PET analysis disclosed similar
changes in proliferation and hypoxic areas also in OC316
tumors, that acquired resistance to VEGF neutralization (Fig.
3B). We observed a signiﬁcant difference in tumor volume
measured at caliper between treated and control group at 28
days, although tumor size increased compared with baseline.
In addition, a concomitant enlargement of highly proliferative and hypoxic areas was noted.
Proliferation was further studied in tumor sections by
staining with antiphosphohistone3 (p-H3) antibody, an
in situ marker of cell proliferation. Results showed signiﬁcantly reduced numbers of p-H3þ cells in anti–VEGF-treated
IGROV-1 at 7 days after treatment, whereas numbers comparable with control IGROV-1 were found at day 28 (Supplementary Fig. S4). Altogether, these results suggest that
continuous VEGF blockade eventually selects for a population of cells with high proliferative activity embedded
in an hypoxic microenvironment, which may account for
the increased expression of glycolysis-associated markers
observed.
VEGF blockade is associated with stable modulation of aerobic
glycolysis in tumor cells
To better characterize metabolic changes observed after
prolonged (28 days) anti-VEGF therapy in tumors, we set up
ex vivo cultures of tumor cells. Measurement of glucose consumption and lactate production indicated that cultures
from anti–VEGF-treated IGROV-1 tumors had slightly but

Cancer Res; 75(1) January 1, 2015

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

123

Published OnlineFirst November 7, 2014; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-2037

Curtarello et al.

Figure 2.
Upregulation of in situ markers of the
glycolytic phenotype as a
consequence of sustained anti-VEGF
therapy. A, expression of lactic acid
transporters (MCT1 and MCT4)
in tumor xenografts treated for 7 or 28
days with anti-VEGF mAb or liver
metastatis of colorectal cancer
patients treated with chemotherapy
plus bevacizumab. Post-bevacizumab
clinical samples were collected 7 to 12
months after administration of antiVEGF therapy. Top, representative
pictures; semiquantitative analysis of
MCT1 and MCT4 expression is shown
in the bottom (in the case of
experimental tumors, 5 samples for
group). Immunoreactivity was scored
for both the intensity and the
proportion of cells staining; intensity
was given scores of 0 to 3 (0, no
staining; 1, light staining; 2, moderate
staining; 3, strong staining)
and proportion was given scores of 1
to 6 (1, 0%–4%; 2, 5%–20%; 3, 21%–
40%; 4, 41%–60%; 5, 61%–80%; 6,
81%–100%). The two scores were
multiplied to obtain the ﬁnal result of
0–18. Further details can be found in
Supplementary Materials and
Methods.   , P < 0.01, t test. B,
representative pictures of HIF1a
staining in control versus anti–VEGFtreated tumors showing increased
nuclear expression of HIF1a in IGROV1 tumors treated for 28 days with antiVEGF mAb.

signiﬁcantly higher glucose consumption and lactate production rates compared with ex vivo cultures from control tumors
(Fig. 4A), along with increased cell death under glucose
starvation, suggesting selection of glucose-addicted cells (Fig.
4B). We also found increased expression of several glycolysisassociated transcripts including GLUT3, PFK, LDHA, and
MCT4 transcript (Fig. 4C) and protein (Supplementary Fig.

124 Cancer Res; 75(1) January 1, 2015

S5). Stimulated by these ﬁndings, we performed bioenergetic
analysis of ex vivo cultures of IGROV-1 tumors. Parental
IGROV-1 cells, which were previously characterized by the
same technique (27), were used as controls. Notably, growth
in mice as tumor xenografts did not change per se the bioenergetic features of IGROV-1 cells, whereas after anti-VEGF
treatment, cells became much more glycolytic (Fig. 4D). In

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

Published OnlineFirst November 7, 2014; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-2037

Metabolic Evolution of Tumors following Antiangiogenic Therapy

Figure 3.
18
18
Effect of anti-VEGF treatment on F[ F]FLT and [ F]FAZA uptake in tumors measured by PET. Measurement of tumor volume and PET images of IGROV-1 (A)
18
18
and OC316 xenografts (B). Left, tumor volume obtained by measurement with caliper and the volume of [ F]FLT and [ F]FAZA distribution obtained
by PET before and at 7 and 28 days after anti-VEGF treatment. Data are expressed as mean  SD and were analyzed by two-way ANOVA followed
18
18
by the Bonferroni post hoc test for multiple comparisons (tables). Right, representative transaxial PET images from [ F]FLT and [ F]FAZA and the
18
18
overlay image of [ F]FLT and [ F]FAZA masks in the same mice (control and bevacizumab treated) at 7 and 28 days after therapy initiation. White lines,
18
18
tumor volume. In overlay images, green color represents [ F]FLT uptake, red color represents [ F]FAZA uptake, and yellow color represents codistribution of
both radiopharmaceuticals.

fact, OCR and ECAR did not substantially change in IGROV-1
cells after formation of tumor xenografts (compare wt and
control IGROV-1 traces in the left and right panels of Fig. 4D),
whereas treatment with bevacizumab (i) strongly inhibited
OCR, and the effect of the ATP synthase inhibitor oligomycin
indicated a speciﬁc downmodulation of coupled respiration,
i.e., the fraction of oxygen consumption coupled to ATP
synthesis; (ii) abolished any respiratory reserve, as the uncoupler FCCP, which at the reported concentration stimulates the
maximal OCR, could not further increase oxygen consumption with respect to the basal value; this observation implies
that cells acquire a Warburg phenotype, as they must utilize
glycolytic ATP for any energy demand that exceeds their basal
respiratory activity; (iii) increased ECAR, also after inhibition
of respiratory complexes by rotenone/antimycin, which indicates that glycolysis is enhanced and scarcely funneled
towards the Krebs cycle, leading to an enhancement
of pyruvate conversion into lactate. This latter observation is
in accordance with increased lactate production measured in
supernatants of cultures obtained from anti–VEGF-treated

www.aacrjournals.org

mice (Fig. 4A) and with increased LDHA and MCT4 expression levels (Fig. 4C). Overall, these results show that antiVEGF therapy selected a highly glycolytic subpopulation of
tumor cells, a conclusion further supported by bioenergetic
analysis of ex vivo cultures of OC316 tumors, which became
resistant to anti-VEGF therapy (Supplementary Fig. S7).
Mechanistically, we measured decreased expression of the
mitochondrial complex NDUFS1 in cell cultures established
from bevacizumab-treated tumors as well as reduced mitochondrial mass (Fig. 4E), which is consistent with decreased mitochondrial respiration. On the other hand, we did not detect
increased HIF1a activity in normoxic cultures of IGROV-1 cells
compared with the parental cell line (Supplementary Fig. S6A),
indicating that these metabolic changes were not caused by
persistent HIF1a signaling. Moreover, c-MYC, pAKT (Ser473
and Thr308) and pAMPK (Thr172) protein levels were comparable in ex vivo cultures from anti–VEGF-treated and control
tumors (Supplementary Fig. S6B and S6C), suggesting that
these well-established regulators of the Warburg effect (10) did
not account for increased aerobic glycolysis.

Cancer Res; 75(1) January 1, 2015

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

125

Published OnlineFirst November 7, 2014; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-2037

Curtarello et al.

Figure 4.
Stable upmodulation of the glycolytic phenotype following anti-VEGF therapy. A, measurement of glucose consumption and lactic acid production by
ex vivo cultures of IGROV-1 cells established from IGROV-1 tumors untreated (control) or treated for 28 days with anti-VEGF therapy (bevacizumab).
3
3
Average volumes of control and bevacizumab tumors at sacriﬁce were 442.29  197.19 mm and 90.83  80.00 mm , respectively. Ex vivo cultures
5
were maintained in ﬂasks at least 10 to 15 days before analysis. Cells were plated in P6 wells at 1.5  10 cells/well, incubated for 72 hours in vitro
under normoxic conditions, and metabolic parameters were quantiﬁed by an automated analyzer. Mean  SD values of ﬁve different samples for each
group is shown.  , P < 0.05, t test. B, measurements of apoptosis by Annexin V staining of ex vivo cultures of IGROV-1 cells under glucose starvation.
Columns report the mean values  SD of ﬁve different samples for each group.   , P < 0.01, t test. (Continued on the following page.)

126 Cancer Res; 75(1) January 1, 2015

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

Published OnlineFirst November 7, 2014; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-2037

Metabolic Evolution of Tumors following Antiangiogenic Therapy

Figure 5.
Resistance to anti-VEGF therapy is associated with stable upmodulation of the glycolytic phenotype in patient-derived ovarian cancer xenografts. A, In order
to track resistance to bevacizumab by optical imaging, PDOVCA37 cells were labeled with the luciferase gene and intraperitoneally injected into
6
SCID mice (110 cells/mouse; n ¼ 6 mice/group). When tumors became detectable by IVIS imaging (pre), mice were treated with bevacizumab (100 mg/dose
administered every 2–3 days) for 2 weeks, until resistance appeared. Left, representative images acquired at 7 and 14 days after anti-VEGF treatment
of six representative control and six bevacizumab-treated mice. Right, quantitative analysis of luciferase activity at various time points of measurement
(n ¼ 6 mice/group). Statistically signiﬁcant differences in average radiance in the two groups of samples are indicated ( , P < 0.05, t test). B, columns
indicate tumor weight and ascitic ﬂuid volume of control and bevacizumab-treated tumors at sacriﬁce. C, bioenergetic analysis of ex vivo
cultures of PDOVCA37 tumors. Representative OCR and ECAR traces obtained from monolayers of PDOVCA37 cells obtained from mouse xenografts
untreated (control) or treated with anti-VEGF mAb (bevacizumab). Subsequent additions of the ATP synthase inhibitor oligomycin, of the uncoupler FCCP,
of the ETC complex I inhibitor rotenone, and of the respiratory complex III inhibitor antimycin A were carried out. Data are mean  SD values of ten
replicates normalized to protein content. The experiment was repeated in ﬁve independent ex vivo cultures per group with similar results.

Anti-VEGF therapy causes a metabolic shift in clinically relevant
tumor models
To strengthen these ﬁndings, we treated with bevacizumab a
patient-derived ovarian cancer xenograft, which was tagged with
the luciferase gene to enable noninvasive monitoring of tumor
growth by optical imaging. Following an initial response, mainly
consisting of reduced tumor burden, tumors became substantially
resistant to VEGF blockade, as shown by optical imaging and
measurements of tumor weight and volume of ascitic ﬂuid at
sacriﬁce (Fig. 5A and B). As found in the subcutaneous tumor

models, metabolic ﬂux analysis of ex vivo cultures established
from these bevacizumab-treated tumors showed increased ECAR
and reduced OCR compared with cultures from control tumors
(Fig. 5C).
To rule out the possibility that these metabolic changes could
only occur in the context of xenograft models, we validated our
hypothesis in the BALB-neuT transgenic model of breast cancer
(18). To this end, we treated 20-week-old BALB-neuT mice bearing measurable breast tumors (Supplementary Fig. S8A) with
B20-4.1.1, an antibody neutralizing both human and mouse

(Continued.) C, quantitative RT-PCR analysis of glycolysis-associated transcripts in ex vivo cultures from IGROV-1 tumors. Columns show mean  SD values
of duplicate determinations of four samples for each group.  , P < 0.05, t test. Expression levels of the various transcripts in ex vivo IGROV-1 control
samples were set at 1 to calculate relative variations. D, bioenergetic analysis of ex vivo cultures of IGROV-1 tumors. Representative OCR and ECAR
traces obtained from monolayers of IGROV-1 cells either kept in culture, or obtained from mouse xenografts untreated (control) or treated with anti-VEGF
mAb (bevacizumab). Subsequent additions of the ATP synthase inhibitor oligomycin, of the uncoupler FCCP, of the ETC complex I inhibitor rotenone, and
of the respiratory complex III inhibitor antimycin A were carried out. Data are mean  SD values of ten replicates normalized to protein content. The
experiment was repeated in ﬁve independent ex vivo cultures per group with similar results. E, Western blot analysis of NDUFS1 levels in ex vivo
cultures of IGROV-1 tumors. Tubulin was used as loading control. Left, three representative tumors per group are shown. Right, columns report the mean
values  SD of NDUFS1/Tubulin in all samples analyzed (n ¼ 5 ex vivo IGROV-1 bevacizumab and n ¼ 4 control samples).  , P < 0.05, t test. F, quantiﬁcation
of mitochondrial mass by staining with NAO in ex vivo bevacizumab or ex vivo control IGROV-1 cells. Parental IGROV-1 and OC316 cells were used as
controls. Columns report the mean values  SD of four different samples for each group.    , P < 0.001, t test.

www.aacrjournals.org

Cancer Res; 75(1) January 1, 2015

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

127

Published OnlineFirst November 7, 2014; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-2037

Curtarello et al.

Figure 6.
The metabolic shift induced by anti-VEGF therapy is stable in vivo. A, quantiﬁcation of lactate and glucose levels in IGROV-1 tumor xenografts by imBI. Left,
hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining and color-coded distributions of lactate and glucose in sequential cryosections from representative tumors.
As some tumors contain large central necrosis, glucose was at background levels within these large central areas. However, high glucose concentrations are
clearly seen in the tumor periphery. This nicely illustrates the importance of structure-associated data acquisition with imBI. The concentration values
were color-coded, with each color corresponding to a deﬁned concentration range in mmol/g. (Continued on the following page.)

128 Cancer Res; 75(1) January 1, 2015

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

Published OnlineFirst November 7, 2014; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-2037

Metabolic Evolution of Tumors following Antiangiogenic Therapy

VEGF (20). Measurements of tumor volume and number of
tumors per mouse showed that in this HER-2–driven spontaneous tumor model antiangiogenic therapy delayed tumor growth
for about 24 days, followed by secondary resistance (Supplementary Fig. S8B). When ex vivo cultures of anti–VEGF-treated tumors
were analyzed, increased ECAR, and reduced OCR were measured
compared with ex vivo cultures from control tumors (Supplementary Fig. S8C).
Altogether, metabolic analysis in four different tumor models
strongly support the conclusion that anti-VEGF therapy causes
stable modulation of aerobic glycolysis in tumor cells.
Anti–VEGF-treated tumor cells maintain increased glycolysis
in vivo, are highly tumorigenic, and show resistance to antiVEGF therapy in vivo
To investigate whether upregulation of the glycolytic phenotype was stable and it was maintained in vivo, we subcutaneously
injected tumor cells from ex vivo cultures of IGROV-1 tumors into
na€ve SCID mice. Measurement of glucose and lactate levels by
imBI analysis disclosed signiﬁcantly lower glucose levels and a
trend towards higher lactate concentrations in tumors formed by
IGROV-1 cells from anti–VEGF-treated mice compared with control tumors (Fig. 6A).
To strengthen these ﬁndings, we also investigated whether
interruption of anti-VEGF therapy would affect the glycolytic
phenotype of tumor cells. To this end, 7 days after anti-VEGF
treatment mice bearing established OC316 xenografts were
randomized to either continue for additional 21 days (on
therapy group) or interrupt (off therapy group) anti-VEGF
treatment (Fig. 6B). Seahorse analysis of ex vivo cultures from
these tumors disclosed that even short-term anti-VEGF therapy
is associated with increased glycolytic activity in the OC316
model. Moreover, similar metabolic proﬁles were found in
"on therapy" versus "off therapy" samples, indicating that
interruption of anti-VEGF therapy did not reverse the highly
glycolytic phenotype associated with antiangiogenic therapy
(Fig. 6B).
Finally, we investigated whether this metabolic switch was
associated with distinctive patterns of tumor growth and response
to anti-VEGF therapy. Accelerated kinetics of tumor growth was
observed following injection of IGROV-1 cells from anti–VEGFtreated tumors (Fig. 7A), a ﬁnding that was conﬁrmed also in the
case of OC316 tumors (Fig. 7A). Notably, tumors formed by
comparatively highly glycolytic IGROV-1 or OC316 cells from
bevacizumab-treated mice were substantially less responsive to
VEGF blockade compared with control tumors (Fig. 7B), thus
indicating that these cell-autonomous metabolic traits confer
resistance to VEGF blockade.
Cell tracing studies support in vivo selection of highly glycolytic
tumor cells by anti-VEGF therapy
Finally, to determine whether tumor cells bearing highly
glycolytic features are positively selected by anti-VEGF therapy,
we performed cell tracing studies. In these experiments, we

subcutaneously injected SCID mice with mixtures of tumor cells
labeled by a ﬂuorescent reporter (EGFP). MIX1 and MIX2 were
obtained by in vitro mixing of unlabeled IGROV-1 cells in a 1:1
proportion with EGFPþ bevacizumab-treated (highly glycolytic)
or control (poorly glycolytic) IGROV-1 cells, respectively. Thirtyﬁve to 43 days later, when average tumor volume was approximately 100 mm3 (Fig. 7C), mice were either sacriﬁced or treated
with bevacizumab according to the usual schedule for 28 days.
The percentage of EGFPþ cells in tumors was measured by ﬂow
cytometry either before or after anti-VEGF therapy. As shown
in Fig. 7D, in the case of MIX2 we found 28.43%  8.36%
EGFPþ cells in pre-bevacizumab tumor samples and these
numbers changed minimally after anti-VEGF therapy (29.13%
 5.22%). The percentage of EGFPþ cells was reduced compared
with the preinjection value (50%), probably due to partial
downregulation of transgene expression. In contrast, in the case
of MIX1, the percentage of EGFPþ cells in tumors signiﬁcantly
increased after anti-VEGF therapy (37.85% 10.33%) with
respect to pretreatment values (18.95%  3.22%; Fig. 7D). This
result supports the hypothesis that anti-VEGF therapy fosters
selection of tumor cells endowed with certain metabolic
features.

Discussion
Several hypotheses have been proposed to explain resistance to
antiangiogenic therapies (3, 4). As these drugs generally lack direct
cytotoxic effects, their therapeutic activity is assumed to be due to
their indirect effects, such as depletion of oxygen and key substrates needed to sustain tumor cell proliferation and growth (29).
As tumors exhibit heterogeneous metabolic proﬁles (30), we
sought to investigate whether the metabolic phenotype of tumor
cells might inﬂuence therapeutic responses to antiangiogenic
drugs.
On the basis of our previous ﬁnding that glucose levels are
dramatically impaired in experimental tumors treated with antiVEGF therapy (14), we initially hypothesized that glucoseaddicted tumors could better respond to antiangiogenic drugs.
However, we observed that while various glucose-dependent
tumor xenografts are initially starved due to induction of large
necrotic areas, they subsequently become rapidly resistant to
VEGF blockade. This ﬁnding was conﬁrmed by analysis of
response to anti-VEGF therapy of xenografts formed by variants
of IGROV-1 cells, which selectively differ in the levels of expression of AMPK, a serine-threonine kinase implicated in the regulation of the Warburg effect (26), although it should be considered that AMPK has pleiotropic effects on cell metabolism (31), in
particular regulation of mTOR activity, which could also contribute to the results obtained.
Resistance to VEGF blockade was associated with selection of
tumor cells with increased proliferation, as shown by [18F]FLT PET
analysis (Fig. 3) and also by measurement of cell proliferation in
ex vivo cultures from bevacizumab-treated versus control tumors
(Supplementary Fig. S4). In this respect, highly proliferative

(Continued.) Right, metabolite concentrations of lactate and glucose in tumors. Lactate and glucose values were calculated from nine and seven sections from anti–
VEGF-treated or control tumors, respectively. B, interruption of anti-VEGF therapy does not reverse the highly glycolytic phenotype. Top, layout of the experiment: SCID
3
mice bearing established subcutaneously OC316 xenografts (mean volume 150 mm ) were treated for 7 days with bevacizumab (arrows) and then randomized to either
stop (off therapy group) or continue (on therapy group) anti-VEGF therapy for additional 3 weeks. Control mice received PBS. At sacriﬁce, ex vivo cultures were
established from tumors and analyzed by Seahorse. Bottom, metabolic ﬂux analysis. Representative OCR and ECAR traces of ex vivo cultures of OC316 cells established
from control, off therapy, and on therapy tumors. The experiment was repeated in ﬁve independent ex vivo cultures per group with similar results.

www.aacrjournals.org

Cancer Res; 75(1) January 1, 2015

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

129

Published OnlineFirst November 7, 2014; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-2037

Curtarello et al.

Figure 7.
Tumor cells from anti–VEGF-treated mice have increased tumorigenic capacity, are resistant to bevacizumab, and are positively selected by anti-VEGF
5
therapy. A, kinetics of tumor development following subcutaneous injection of IGROV-1 (left) or OC316 (right) tumor cells (4  10 cells/ﬂank) derived
from bevacizumab-treated tumors compared with control tumors (n ¼ 5 mice/group).  , P < 0.05, t test. B, effects of multiple injections of the anti-VEGF mAb
bevacizumab (arrows, 100 mg/dose administered every 2–3 days) on tumor size. Tumor xenografts derived from ex vivo cultures of anti–VEGF-treated
IGROV-1 or OC316 tumors are resistant to anti-VEGF therapy (right) compared with xenografts derived from control cells (left; n ¼ 5 mice for group).

, P < 0.05, t test. C, kinetics of tumor development following subcutaneous injection of a 1:1 mix of EGFP-tagged IGROV-1 cells derived from bevacizumabtreated tumors and unlabeled control tumor cells (MIX1) or a 1:1 mix of EGFP-tagged IGROV-1 cells from control tumors and unlabeled control tumor cells
(MIX2) and effects of the anti-VEGF mAb bevacizumab (100 mg/dose administered every 2–3 days) on tumor size. MIX1 and MIX2 tumors (n ¼ 4 samples/
group) were collected either before (time points 1 and 2 for MIX1 and MIX2, respectively) or after (time points 3 and 4 for MIX1 and MIX2, respectively)
þ
bevacizumab administration and the percentage of EGFP cells in tumors was quantiﬁed by ﬂow cytometry. D, tumor cells with peculiar metabolic
þ
features are positively selected by anti-VEGF therapy. Left, quantiﬁcation of EGFP IGROV-1 cells in MIX1 and MIX2 tumors before or after bevacizumab
administration. Columns report the mean values  SD of four different samples for each group.  , P < 0.05, t test. Right, representative histogram plots of
þ
EGFP cells for each of the experimental groups (1, 2, 3, and 4) described in C.

tumor rims were previously reported following treatment of
experimental tumors with vascular damaging drugs (32). Altogether, these results suggest that necrosis induced by anti-VEGF
therapy triggers proliferation in the surviving tumor cells. Metabolic features of tumors, and in particular their glycolytic phenotype, have a substantial impact on the development of tumor
necrosis following antiangiogenic treatment. This increased cellular turnover could accelerate Darwinian selection of a population of cells resistant to hypoxia and acidosis (33), thereby
inﬂuencing the kinetics of secondary resistance.
On the other hand, other factors could also contribute to
relapse, including recruitment by the necrotic tissue of circulating endothelial progenitor cells (34), macrophages, and
other specialized myeloid cells releasing proangiogenic factors that could bypass VEGF neutralization (35). Indeed,

130 Cancer Res; 75(1) January 1, 2015

some variations in tumor-associated myeloid cells, mainly
reﬂecting increased levels of CD11bþ/Gr1þ cells, were
measured in tumors treated with anti-VEGF therapy (data
not shown). Moreover, lactate, which accumulates in
highly glycolytic tumors, is a pleomorphic tumor-promoting
factor that stimulates angiogenesis by NFkB activation in
endothelial cells (36). However, it should be noted that in
our models microvessel density of anti–VEGF-resistant
tumors was signiﬁcantly reduced compared with controls,
indicating that the tumor vasculature was still dependent on
VEGF. Therefore, therapeutic resistance did not appear to be
primarily related to renewed vascularization due to recruited
myeloid cells or a switch to alternative angiogenic factors,
as reported in other models of resistance to VEGF blockade
(37–39).

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

Published OnlineFirst November 7, 2014; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-2037

Metabolic Evolution of Tumors following Antiangiogenic Therapy

We concede that the clinical relevance of these observations
remains to be established. First of all, treatment-induced necrosis may eventually trigger an immune-mediated response in
patients, which cannot be seen in immunodeﬁcient mice, and
this could restrain tumor growth. Moreover, bevacizumab is
invariably given to patients in combination with chemotherapy
and cytotoxic drugs that could potentially kill highly proliferating tumor cells resistant to anti-VEGF therapy, thus preventing tumor relapse (31).
The most important conclusion of this study, grounded on
experimental work in both tumor xenografts and a spontaneous tumor model, is that antiangiogenic therapy favors
emergence of a glucose-dependent metabolic phenotype.
This is likely promoted by chronic hypoxia and induction of
the HIF1a-driven transcriptional program, which involves
activation of glycolysis (28). Indeed, we observed a dramatic
increment in tumor hypoxic regions with [18F]FAZA PET
and also nuclear accumulation of HIF1a, which could drive
the metabolic switch in the tumor microenvironment and
favor evasive mechanisms (40). However, the stable metabolic changes measured in vitro were not due to stabilization
of HIF1a levels in tumor cells, increased c-MYC and pAKT
levels, or loss of AMPK activity (Supplementary Fig. S6).
The discrepancy between HIF1a expression levels in vivo
versus in vitro conditions indicates that accumulation of
this transcription factor in tumor cells remains hypoxiadependent.
Although increased expression of glycolysis-associated
markers following bevacizumab has been observed in other
studies (41), here we show for the ﬁrst time that anti-VEGF
therapy caused a stable modiﬁcation of the metabolic phenotype of the tumor. This was supported by (i) the ﬁnding
that ex vivo cultures from anti–VEGF-treated tumors had
different metabolic features with respect to those established
from control tumors (Fig. 4), (ii) results of imBI analysis,
which showed that xenografts formed by tumor cells from
anti–VEGF-treated mice maintained a highly glycolytic phenotype (Fig. 6A), and (iii) results of on/off therapy experiments (Fig. 6B).
These stable metabolic modiﬁcations could be due to either
selection of a pre-existing subpopulation of highly glycolytic
tumor cells or, alternatively, be accounted for by epigenetic
reprogramming of cell metabolism, as shown in the model
presented in Supplementary Fig. S9. With regard to the ﬁrst
possibility, angiogenesis inhibitors alter the environment
through increased hypoxia, glucose deprivation, and acidosis,
which produce strong Darwinian forces that rapidly promote
adaptive phenotypes (33). In this respect, it has been reported
that glucose deprivation provides a strong selection for activated oncogenes, such as KRAS (42). Moreover, Xu and colleagues recently described mitochondrial defects in ex vivo
cultures of LoVo cells from bevacizumab-treated tumors
(43), and we also found reduced mitochondrial mass and
decreased expression of NDUFS1, a component of respiratory
complex I, in ex vivo cultures of bevacizumab-treated IGROV-1
cells (Supplementary Fig. S5). In support of this possibility,
cell tracing experiments demonstrated that EGFP-labeled highly glycolytic tumor cells are positively selected by anti-VEGF
therapy (Fig. 7).
Alternatively, new ﬁndings have uncovered regulation of
glucose metabolism by sirtuins 1, 3, 4, and 6 (44), and epige-

www.aacrjournals.org

netic variations in sirtuins levels could possibly contribute to the
phenomenon observed. In preliminary experiments, however,
we found that SIRT3, SIRT4, and SIRT6 were barely expressed in
IGROV-1 and OC316 cells, whereas SIRT1 was expressed at
comparable levels in IGROV-1 and OC316 cells from bevacizumab-treated tumors compared with control cultures (not
shown). Therefore, although other epigenetic mechanisms
could be involved, dysregulated expression of sirtuins is not
likely to account for the metabolic shift observed in these tumor
models.
Metabolic evolution of tumors following antiangiogenic
therapy is a novel concept that could have relevant translational
implications. A metabolic shift involving downregulation
of genes involved in the tricarboxylic acid cycle, decreased
AMPK and PTEN protein levels, upregulation of the pentose
phosphate pathway was recently described in aggressive
renal cell carcinoma (45) and ﬁts with increased kinetics of
tumor growth by anti–VEGF-treated tumor cells observed in
this study. Moreover, as glucose-addicted tumors have dismal
prognosis (25, 46) and could be relatively resistant to cytotoxic
therapies (47, 48), this phenomenon might contribute to
explain the relatively short-term beneﬁts of antiangiogenic
therapy.

Disclosure of Potential Conﬂicts of Interest
No potential conﬂicts of interest were disclosed.

Authors' Contributions
Conception and design: M. Curtarello, M. Plebani, W. Mueller-Klieser, R.M.
Moresco, S. Indraccolo
Development of methodology: M. Curtarello, S. Todde, W. Mueller-Klieser
Acquisition of data (provided animals, acquired and managed patients,
provided facilities, etc.): M. Curtarello, E. Zulato, G. Nardo, S. Valtorta,
A. Msaki, A. Pasto, A. Rasola, L. Persano, F. Ciccarese, H. Schroer, S. Walenta,
W. Mueller-Klieser
Analysis and interpretation of data (e.g., statistical analysis, biostatistics,
computational analysis): M. Curtarello, E. Zulato, G. Nardo, S. Valtorta,
G. Guzzo, E. Rossi, G. Esposito, A. Pasto, A. Rasola, F. Ciccarese, R. Bertorelle,
M. Plebani, S. Walenta
Writing, review, and/or revision of the manuscript: M. Curtarello, E. Zulato,
G. Nardo, S. Valtorta, A. Msaki, M. Plebani, S. Walenta, W. Mueller-Klieser, R.M.
Moresco, S. Indraccolo
Administrative, technical, or material support (i.e., reporting or organizing
data, constructing databases): E. Rossi
Study supervision: A. Amadori, R.M. Moresco, S. Indraccolo

Acknowledgments
The authors thank Prof. Guido Forni for providing the BALB-neuT
mice, Dr. Isabella Raccagni for PET studies and image analysis, Dr.
Valeria Masiello and Cristina Monterisi for radiochemical production
and quality control, Dr. Paola Fogar for help in measurements of glucose
and lactate in supernatants, and Dr. Valentina Seraﬁn for assistance in
preparation of tumor samples for immunohistochemical analysis. The
authors also thank Genentech for kindly providing the anti-VEGF mAb
B20-4.1.1.

Grant Support
This work was supported by grants from AIRC (IG grants 14295 and 14032),
Progetto d'Ateneo 2010 (S. Indraccolo), Progetto d'Ateneo 2012 (A. Rasola),
PRIN (grant 2009P5JPT4_003 and 2010MCLPLB_003) and from the Deutsche
Forschungsgemeinschaft DFG (Mu 576/15-1 and SA 1749/3-1) and from
the Mainzer Forschungsfoerderungsprogramm MAIFOR (#8277000; W.
Mueller-Klieser). This project was also partially supported by grants of

Cancer Res; 75(1) January 1, 2015

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

131

Published OnlineFirst November 7, 2014; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-2037

Curtarello et al.

the Italian Minister of University: Progetto Premiale Medicina Personalizzata
and Sysbionet, (Italian Research Infrastructures of the Italian ESFRI roadmap;
R.M. Moresco).
The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the
payment of page charges. This article must therefore be hereby marked

advertisement in accordance with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate
this fact.
Received July 18, 2013; revised September 8, 2014; accepted October 13,
2014; published OnlineFirst November 7, 2014.

References
1. Heath VL, Bicknell R. Anticancer strategies involving the vasculature. Nat
Rev Clin Oncol 2009;6:395–404.
2. Ellis LM, Hicklin DJ. VEGF-targeted therapy: mechanisms of anti-tumour
activity. Nat Rev Cancer 2008;8:579–91.
3. Bergers G, Hanahan D. Modes of resistance to antiangiogenic therapy. Nat
Rev Cancer 2008;8:592–603.
4. Ellis LM, Hicklin DJ. Pathways mediating resistance to vascular endothelial
growth factor-targeted therapy. Clin Cancer Res 2008;14:6371–5.
5. Bottsford-Miller JN, Coleman RL, Sood AK. Resistance and escape from
antiangiogenesis therapy: clinical implications and future strategies. J Clin
Oncol 2012;30:4026–34.
6. Jahangiri A, De Lay M, Miller LM, Carbonell WS, Hu YL, Lu K, et al. Gene
expression proﬁle identiﬁes tyrosine kinase c-met as a targetable mediator
of antiangiogenic therapy resistance. Clin Cancer Res 2013;19:1773–83.
7. Tennant DA, Duran RV, Gottlieb E. Targeting metabolic transformation for
cancer therapy. Nat Rev Cancer 2010;10:267–77.
8. Iorio E, Ricci A, Bagnoli M, Pisanu ME, Castellano G, Di Vito M, et al.
Activation of phosphatidylcholine cycle enzymes in human epithelial
ovarian cancer cells. Cancer Res 2010;70:2126–35.
9. DeBerardinis RJ, Lum JJ, Hatzivassiliou G, Thompson CB. The biology of
cancer: metabolic reprogramming fuels cell growth and proliferation. Cell
Metab 2008;7:11–20.
10. Dang CV. Links between metabolism and cancer. Genes Dev 2012;26:
877–90.
11. Sciacovelli M, Guzzo G, Morello V, Frezza C, Zheng L, Nannini N, et al. The
mitochondrial chaperone TRAP1 promotes neoplastic growth by inhibiting succinate dehydrogenase. Cell Metab 2013;17:988–99.
12. Bohndiek SE, Kettunen MI, Hu DE, Brindle KM. Hyperpolarized (13)C
spectroscopy detects early changes in tumor vasculature and metabolism
after VEGF neutralization. Cancer Res 2012;72:854–64.
13. Keunen O, Johansson M, Oudin A, Sanzey M, Rahim SA, Fack F, et al. AntiVEGF treatment reduces blood supply and increases tumor cell invasion in
glioblastoma. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2011;108:3749–54.
14. Nardo G, Favaro E, Curtarello M, Moserle L, Zulato E, Persano L, et al.
Glycolytic phenotype and AMP kinase modify the pathologic response of
tumor xenografts to VEGF neutralization. Cancer Res 2011;71:4214–25.
15. Favaro E, Nardo G, Persano L, Masiero M, Moserle L, Zamarchi R, et al.
Hypoxia inducible factor-1alpha inactivation unveils a link between tumor
cell metabolism and hypoxia-induced cell death. Am J Pathol 2008;173:
1186–201.
16. Indraccolo S, Tisato V, Agata S, Moserle L, Ferrari S, Callegaro M, et al.
Establishment and characterization of xenografts and cancer cell cultures
derived from BRCA1/ epithelial ovarian cancers. Eur J Cancer 2006;42:
1475–83.
17. Agnusdei V, Minuzzo S, Frasson C, Grassi A, Axelrod F, Satyal S, et al.
Therapeutic antibody targeting of Notch1 in T-acute lymphoblastic leukemia xenografts. Leukemia 2014;28:278–88.
18. Cavallo F, Offringa R, van der Burg SH, Forni G, Melief CJ. Vaccination for
treatment and prevention of cancer in animal models. Adv Immunol
2006;90:175–213.
19. Boggio K, Nicoletti G, Di Carlo E, Cavallo F, Landuzzi L, Melani C, et al.
Interleukin 12-mediated prevention of spontaneous mammary adenocarcinomas in two lines of Her-2/neu transgenic mice. J Exp Med 1998;
188:589–96.
20. Bagri A, Berry L, Gunter B, Singh M, Kasman I, Damico LA, et al. Effects of
anti-VEGF treatment duration on tumor growth, tumor regrowth, and
treatment efﬁcacy. Clin Cancer Res 2010;16:3887–900.
21. Tehrani OS, Shields AF. PET imaging of proliferation with pyrimidines. J
Nucl Med 2013;54:903–12.
22. Valtorta S, Belloli S, Sanvito F, Masiello V, Di Grigoli G, Monterisi C, et al.
Comparison of 18F-Fluoroazomycin-Arabinofuranoside and 64Cu-Dia-

132 Cancer Res; 75(1) January 1, 2015

23.

24.

25.

26.

27.

28.
29.
30.
31.
32.
33.

34.

35.
36.

37.

38.

39.

40.
41.

42.

cetyl-Bis(N4-Methylthiosemicarbazone) in preclinical models of cancer.
J Nucl Med 2013;54:1106–12.
Mueller-Klieser W, Walenta S. Geographical mapping of metabolites in
biological tissue with quantitative bioluminescence and single photon
imaging. Histochem J 1993;25:407–20.
Sattler UG, Walenta S, Mueller-Klieser W. A bioluminescence technique for
quantitative and structure-associated imaging of pyruvate. Lab Invest
2007;87:84–92.
Walenta S, Wetterling M, Lehrke M, Schwickert G, Sundfor K, Rofstad EK,
et al. High lactate levels predict likelihood of metastases, tumor recurrence,
and restricted patient survival in human cervical cancers. Cancer Res
2000;60:916–21.
Faubert B, Boily G, Izreig S, Griss T, Samborska B, Dong Z, et al. AMPK is a
negative regulator of the Warburg effect and suppresses tumor growth in
vivo. Cell Metab 2013;17:113–24.
Fabian C, Koetz L, Favaro E, Indraccolo S, Mueller-Klieser W, Sattler UG.
Protein proﬁles in human ovarian cancer cell lines correspond to their
metabolic activity and to metabolic proﬁles of respective tumor xenografts.
FEBS J 2012;279:882–91.
Harris AL. Hypoxia–a key regulatory factor in tumour growth. Nat Rev
Cancer 2002;2:38–47.
Kieran MW, Folkman J, Heymach J. Angiogenesis inhibitors and hypoxia.
Nat Med 2003;9:1104
Vander Heiden MG. Targeting cancer metabolism: a therapeutic window
opens. Nat Rev Drug Discov 2011;10:671–84.
Mihaylova MM, Shaw RJ. The AMPK signalling pathway coordinates cell
growth, autophagy and metabolism. Nat Cell Biol 2011;13:1016–23.
Tozer GM, Kanthou C, Baguley BC. Disrupting tumour blood vessels. Nat
Rev Cancer 2005;5:423–35.
Gillies RJ, Verduzco D, Gatenby RA. Evolutionary dynamics of carcinogenesis and why targeted therapy does not work. Nat Rev Cancer 2012;
12:487–93.
Shaked Y, Ciarrocchi A, Franco M, Lee CR, Man S, Cheung AM, et al.
Therapy-induced acute recruitment of circulating endothelial progenitor
cells to tumors. Science 2006;313:1785–7.
Murdoch C, Muthana M, Coffelt SB, Lewis CE. The role of myeloid cells in
the promotion of tumour angiogenesis. Nat Rev Cancer 2008;8:618–31.
Vegran F, Boidot R, Michiels C, Sonveaux P, Feron O. Lactate inﬂux through
the endothelial cell monocarboxylate transporter MCT1 supports an NFkappaB/IL-8 pathway that drives tumor angiogenesis. Cancer Res 2011;71:
2550–60.
Casanovas O, Hicklin DJ, Bergers G, Hanahan D. Drug resistance by
evasion of antiangiogenic targeting of VEGF signaling in late-stage pancreatic islet tumors. Cancer Cell 2005;8:299–309.
Ebos JM, Lee CR, Christensen JG, Mutsaers AJ, Kerbel RS. Multiple circulating proangiogenic factors induced by sunitinib malate are tumor-independent and correlate with antitumor efﬁcacy. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
2007;104:17069–74.
Fernando NT, Koch M, Rothrock C, Gollogly LK, D'Amore PA, Ryeom S,
et al. Tumor escape from endogenous, extracellular matrix-associated
angiogenesis inhibitors by up-regulation of multiple proangiogenic factors. Clin Cancer Res 2008;14:1529–39.
Rapisarda A, Melillo G. Overcoming disappointing results with antiangiogenic therapy by targeting hypoxia. Nat Rev Clin Oncol 2012;9:378–90.
Kumar K, Wigﬁeld S, Gee HE, Devlin CM, Singleton D, Li JL, et al.
Dichloroacetate reverses the hypoxic adaptation to bevacizumab and
enhances its antitumor effects in mouse xenografts. J Mol Med 2013;91:
749–58.
Yun J, Rago C, Cheong I, Pagliarini R, Angenendt P, Rajagopalan H, et al.
Glucose deprivation contributes to the development of KRAS pathway
mutations in tumor cells. Science 2009;325:1555–9.

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

Published OnlineFirst November 7, 2014; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-2037

Metabolic Evolution of Tumors following Antiangiogenic Therapy

43. Xu J, Wang J, Xu B, Ge H, Zhou X, Fang JY. Colorectal cancer cells
refractory to anti-VEGF treatment are vulnerable to glycolytic blockade
due to persistent impairment of mitochondria. Mol Cancer Ther
2013;12:717–24.
44. Guarente L. The many faces of sirtuins: sirtuins and the Warburg effect. Nat
Med 2014;20:24–5.
45. Creighton CJ, Morgan M, Gunaratne PH, Wheeler DA, Gibbs RA. Comprehensive molecular characterization of clear cell renal cell carcinoma.
Nature 2013;499:43–9.

www.aacrjournals.org

46. Walenta S, Schroeder T, Mueller-Klieser W. Lactate in solid malignant
tumors: potential basis of a metabolic classiﬁcation in clinical oncology.
Curr Med Chem 2004;11:2195–204.
47. Zhao Y, Liu H, Liu Z, Ding Y, Ledoux SP, Wilson GL, et al. Overcoming
trastuzumab resistance in breast cancer by targeting dysregulated glucose
metabolism. Cancer Res 2011;71:4585–97.
48. Zhou M, Zhao Y, Ding Y, Liu H, Liu Z, Fodstad O, et al. Warburg effect in
chemosensitivity: targeting lactate dehydrogenase-A re-sensitizes taxolresistant cancer cells to taxol. Mol Cancer 2010;9:33.

Cancer Res; 75(1) January 1, 2015

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

133

Published OnlineFirst November 7, 2014; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-2037

VEGF-Targeted Therapy Stably Modulates the Glycolytic Phenotype
of Tumor Cells
Matteo Curtarello, Elisabetta Zulato, Giorgia Nardo, et al.
Cancer Res 2015;75:120-133. Published OnlineFirst November 7, 2014.

Updated version
Supplementary
Material

Cited articles
Citing articles

E-mail alerts
Reprints and
Subscriptions
Permissions

Access the most recent version of this article at:
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-2037
Access the most recent supplemental material at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/suppl/2014/11/08/0008-5472.CAN-13-2037.DC1

This article cites 48 articles, 20 of which you can access for free at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/75/1/120.full#ref-list-1
This article has been cited by 7 HighWire-hosted articles. Access the articles at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/75/1/120.full#related-urls

Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal.
To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications Department at
pubs@aacr.org.
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications Department at
permissions@aacr.org.

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

