Commentary

Cancer Drug Prices and the Free-Market Forces
Hagop Kantarjian, MD1; and Leonard Zwelling, MD2

Strange extremes coexist and blend in our great nation: extreme poverty and wealth, extreme generosity and greed, etc.
Take the example of medicinal drugs. The President’s Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief (PEPFAR), which was implemented by President George W. Bush, has to date committed $50 billion to fund therapy for the acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) in over 11 African countries; this funding is credited with saving the lives of at least 4 million
Africans to date and stabilizing the economy of several African countries, thus preventing conflicts and wars.1 Merck
donates ivermectin in perpetuity to treat and control onchocerciasis, which causes river blindness. This saves the eyesight
of 30 million people.2 Both Merck and GlaxoSmithKline recently announced they will provide their vaccines against cervical cancer for less than $5 per dose to the world’s poor.3 The Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation provides astute lowercosts high lifesaving grants to treat infectious diarrhea in children and for vaccine programs, thereby saving the lives of millions of children worldwide.4 These are all examples of extreme generosity at the government, corporate, and individual
level that many believe would deserve, depending on the perspective, a Nobel Prize in Peace or in Medicine. At the other
extreme are the high corporate profits in the drug industry, which has become an increasing trend within the last decade.
It is estimated that cancer drugs may cost as much as $173 billion in 2020, which is a significant percentage of our entire
health care expenditure (approximately 4%-6%).
When the high prices of cancer drug are discussed, some economic experts argue that free-market forces will settle
drug prices to reasonable and competitive levels. As cancer experts, we argue that the free competitive market is not working and that solutions are needed to prevent harm to our patients, our health care system, and our society. One of every 3
individuals is expected to develop cancer in their lifetime. Therefore, cancer cost and drug prices will hit close to home
and affect parents, spouses, children, close relatives, and friends, repeatedly.
In the United States, we advocate for a free-market economy as the reason for our success. One can buy artwork for
$50 (Matisse print) or for $100 million (Matisse painting). They provide similar visual artistic pleasures. The same applies
to a wide range of commodities: cars (reaching a destination), houses (roof above one’s head), clothing, etc. One is free to
pay “what the market bears.”
This may not be the situation in health care, which involves issues of life and death, or suffering. There is then a
moral imperative to provide the help needed at a morally justifiable, or fair, price. This is the case for cancer drugs, in
which free-market forces have not settled drug prices at levels that are reasonably profitable to drug companies and also accessible and affordable to patients.
There are 2 main groups of cancer drugs: generics, which are generally not expensive to date, and patented drugs,
which are very expensive. At both extremes, we believe the free-market economy has not worked well.
In the case of generics, the free-market economy may have worked too well, driving generic drug prices to such low
levels that, together with the Medicare cap of 6% on the average sales price, prevent generic prices from inching up to competitive prices for years to come. An explanation of the Medicare 6% cap and how it results in drug shortages is in order.
In simple terms, Medicare caps at 6% the amount over the average sales price (ASP) that it will reimburse physicians for
drugs used in their practices. Because of the methodology used by Medicare to calculate the ASP, there is a 6-month lag
between the time the manufacturers submit ASP data and changes in sales price reflected in reimbursement. The practical

Corresponding author: Hagop Kantarjian, MD, Department of Leukemia, Division of Cancer Medicine, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center,
1400 Holcombe Blvd, Unit 428, Houston, TX 77030; Fax: (713) 794-4297; hkantarj@mdanderson.org
1
Department of Leukemia, Division of Cancer Medicine, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas; 2Department of Experimental
Therapeutics, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas

DOI: 10.1002/cncr.28330, Received: June 12, 2013; Revised: July 24, 2013; Accepted: July 30, 2013, Published online August 26, 2013 in Wiley Online Library
(wileyonlinelibrary.com)

Cancer

November 15, 2013

3903

Commentary

effect of the Medicare plus 6% ASP rule is that it is difficult
for manufacturers to raise the price of drugs by greater than
6% in any 6-month period. In the case of generic drugs,
once they are introduced to the market, they result in a significant drop of the drug price to a bottom value that may
discourage generic companies from competing for the particular drug market. This in effect leaves a very small number of generic companies producing the particular drugs. If
there are problems with aging plants, supply of raw materials, contamination of drugs, or other problems, this causes
drug shortages. In Europe, generic drug shortages are less
common because there is no Medicare-like ASP plus 6%
rule and therefore the prices of generic drugs are on average
higher than in the United States. Consequently, more
generic companies have a better incentive to continue to
supply the generic drugs for a more reasonable profit margin. Generic companies find it is not financially worthwhile
to compete, leaving only few generic companies in the US
market. This, in addition to strict regulations of the US
Food and Drug Administration (FDA), aging manufacturing facilities, shortage of raw materials, and market manipulation by intermediary distributorships, contributes to
increasing drug shortages.5 These shortages have resulted in
inferior patient outcomes.6 The FDA, working with drug
companies, has implemented early warning signals to find
alternative sources before drug shortages occur. Directives
against the black marketeering of cancer drugs are now in
place. However, 2 years later, cancer drug shortages do not
appear to be alleviated.
The opposite is true for patented drugs. Despite the
availability of several drugs with similar efficacy and toxicity profiles for the same cancer indication, high prices persist.7,8 Pharmaceutical companies compete on everything,
except on drug prices. Approximately 20% of companies’
revenues are allocated to advertisements and “educational
activities” to argue for the better efficiency or safety of a
particular drug, and enlist the advocacy of cancer experts.
Older drug prices appear to increase rather than decrease
every year. This is a unique phenomenon to the US market and to drug prices. Last year’s cars or clothes do not
increase in price a year later. Although some economists
and lobbyists continue to advocate for a free market that
“will take care of itself,” and argue for high profits to foster
risk in innovations and discoveries, many cancer experts
believe the cancer drug prices have spiraled to levels that
may be harming our health care system and our patients.
The average cancer drug price has increased from less than
$5000 to $10,000 before 2000 to above $100,000 in
2012, a 10-fold increase over 10 to 15 years.8 Some
experts refer to this trend as “profiteering,” “price
3904

gouging,” and “price extortion.” Many parties are
involved in cancer drug prices: patients, advocates, the
FDA, the National Cancer Institute, physicians, lawyers,
pharmaceutical companies, drug distributors, insurance
companies, etc. However, only the pharmaceutical companies (and purchasing distributors) decide on the ultimate drug price. Why the free-market economy is not
settling patented cancer drug prices at reasonable levels is
a mystery. One explanation is the “ gaming theory,” an
economic doctrine that results in high prices of commodities for long periods of time despite market competition
(as a form of collective collusive behavior). Another
(unproven) explanation suggests a possible role of Pharmacy Benefit Managers in maintaining high patented
drug prices to gain better profits.
For both generic and patented cancer drugs, we
believe that the free-market economy has not worked
well. Solutions are needed to maintain reasonable drug
prices that allow for corporate profits and are affordable to
patients and to the US health care system. We suggest the
creation of a group of cancer experts and economists (perhaps in the form of a patient advocacy non-government
organization) who advocate for what would be reasonable
cancer drug prices at the extremes, or a system to rationally reach this goal. For generic drugs, a bottom price
would be proposed. For example, a generic drug may be
priced at 5% of the patented drug price if the latter costs
$50,000 or more, or 10% of that price if the cost is lower
than $50,000. This will keep more generic companies
interested in competing. For patented drugs, after FDA
approval, the group may propose a price based on objective efficacy and safety, as well as on existing similar drugs
and their prices. Such mechanisms are already functioning
well in many countries such as Canada, England, Germany, and the nations of the European Union, and have
accomplished the dual goal of being in the best interests of
both pharmaceutical companies and patients.
FUNDING SUPPORT
No specific funding was disclosed.

CONFLICT OF INTEREST DISCLOSURES
The authors made no disclosures.

REFERENCES
1. Robinson E. George W. Bush’s greatest legacy. Opinions. Washington
Post. July 26, 2012. articles.washingtonpost.com/2012-07-26/opinions/35487798_1_african-countries-pepfar-antiretroviral-treatment.
Accessed May 7, 2013.
2. Winthrop KL, Furtado JM, Silva JC, Resnikoff S, Lansingh VC.
River blindness: an old disease on the brink of elimination and control. J Glob Infect Dis. 2011;3:151-155.

Cancer

November 15, 2013

Cancer Drug Prices and the Free-Market Forces/Kantarjian and Zwelling

3. Price breaks for HPV vaccines may aid prevention. Cancer Discovery
3:OF9; 2013 ePub May 30, 2013.
4. Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation.Who We Are. Impatient Optimists. http://www.gatesfoundation.org/Who-We-Are. Accessed May 7,
2013.
5. Link MP, Hagerty K, Kantarjian HM. Chemotherapy drug shortages
in the United States: genesis and potential solutions. J Clin Oncol.
2012;30:692-694.

Cancer

November 15, 2013

6. Metzger ML, Billett A, Link MP. The impact of drug shortages on
children with cancer-the example of mechlorethamine. N Engl J Med.
2012;367:2461-2463.
7. The costly war on cancer. New cancer drugs are technically impressive. But must they cost so much? Economist:May 26, 2011.
8. Kantarjian H, Fojo T, Mathisen M, Zwelling L. Cancer drugs in the
United States. Justum Pretium-The Just Price. J Clin Oncol. 2013.
ePub May 6, 2013.

3905

