Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No. 29

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Sphere-derived tumor cells exhibit impaired metastasis by a
host-mediated quiescent phenotype
Anne-Marie Bleau1, Carolina Zandueta1, Miriam Redrado1, Susana Martínez-Canarias1,
Leyre Larzábal1, Luis M. Montuenga1,2,3, Alfonso Calvo1,2,3,*, Fernando Lecanda1,2,3,*
1

 rogram in Solid Tumors and Biomarkers, Division of Oncology, Center for Applied Medical Research (CIMA), University of
P
Navarra, Pamplona, Spain

2

Department of Histology and Pathology, School of Medicine, University of Navarra, Pamplona, Spain

3

IdiSNA, Navarra Institute for Health Research, Pamplona, Spain

*

These authors have contributed equally to this work

Correspondence to:
Fernando Lecanda, e-mail: flecanda@unav.es
Keywords: stem cell, dormancy, p27, osteolysis, p38
Abbreviations: TSC, tumor sphere cultures; AC, adherent cultures; BLI, bioluminescence imaging; i.c., intracardiac; i.t., intratibial
Received: November 04, 2014    Accepted: July 27, 2015      Published: August 07, 2015

ABSTRACT
The spread of lung cancer cells to distant sites represents a common event
associated with poor prognosis. A fraction of tumor cells named cancer stem cells (CSCs)
have the ability to overcome therapeutic stress and remain quiescent. However, whether
these CSCs have also the capacity to initiate and sustain metastasis remains unclear.
Here, we used tumor sphere cultures (TSC) isolated from mouse and human lung cancer
models to enrich for CSCs, and assessed their metastatic potential as compared to nonCSCs. As expected, TSC overexpressed a variety of stem cell markers and displayed
chemoresistance. The CSC phenotype of TSC was confirmed by their higher growth
ability in soft agar and tumorigenic potential in vivo, despite their reduced in vitro cell
growth kinetics. Surprisingly, the appearance of spontaneous lung metastases was
strongly delayed in mice injected with TSC as compared to non-TSC cells. Similarly, this
finding was confirmed in several other models of metastasis, an effect associated with
a retarded colonization activity. Interestingly, such delay correlated with a quiescent
phenotype whose underlined mechanisms included an increase in p27 protein and lower
phospho-ERK1/2 levels. Thus, these data suggest that cells enriched for CSC properties
display an impaired metastatic activity, a finding with potential clinical implications.

whether CSCs also display an increased ability to initiate
and sustain metastasis remains largely unknown [6, 7].
To study cancer stem cell functions, tumor sphere
cultures (TSC) have been widely used as a surrogate assay
[8]. These spherical structures are enriched with stem-like
properties, such as the overexpression of stem cell markers,
the capacity to undergo asymmetric cell division and to
grow in anchorage independent conditions [9–11]. Tumorderived cells grown from clinical samples are commonly
cultured and maintained as spheres for transplantation
experiments into mice [12]. They generally present a
remarkable ability to initiate and sustain the development
of tumors. In addition, they show enrichment in various
immunophenotypic markers characteristic of tumor stem
cells that usually vary among tumor types. For instance,
CD44high/CD24low markers identified breast CSCs [13],

INTRODUCTION
Lung cancer is the most lethal type of cancer
worldwide with a 5-year overall survival rate at around
15%. Lung tumors frequently metastasize to local or
distant sites such as the skeleton, an event associated with
poor prognosis. But as opposed to other tumors, lung
cancer is frequently diagnosed at advanced stages with
the detection of already established metastases [1, 2]. In
recent years, it has been suggested that a subtype of cancer
cells within tumors exhibit self-renewal, multilineage
differentiation and limitless potential capabilities [3].
Such cells have been termed cancer stem cells (CSCs),
or tumor-initiating cells (TICs), due to their ability to
generate tumors after transplantation [4]. These tumor
cells also display enhanced chemoresistance [5]. However,
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

27288

Oncotarget

whereas the CD133+ fraction was enriched in glioma cells
with stem cell-like properties [14]. High CD44 levels were
used to isolate prostate [15], pancreatic [16], colon [17] and
lung CSCs [18]. In addition, methods based on functional
properties including the side population phenotype [19] and
aldehyde dehydrogenase activity (ALDH) have also been
extensively used [20, 21].
Previous reports have suggested an association
between CSCs with the epithelial to mesenchymal transition
(EMT) as well as invasive phenotypes, some key initiating
steps in metastasis [22]. Recently, a direct link between
ALDH activity and increased metastatic potential has been
documented for breast cancer [23–25], prostate [26, 27]
and osteosarcoma [28]. Similar observations were made for
CD44 positive cells, showing a higher ability to induce bone
[29] and lung [30] metastasis. However, whether the CSC
phenotype acquired by TSC also entails metastatic traits, or
rather metastatic activity could be segregated from tumor
initiating ability, has not been addressed.
Studies that prone for a higher tumorigenic
potential of spheres as compared to monolayer cultures
are abundant. This has been demonstrated for lung cancer
[31] and other solid tumors [32–38]. Yet, their role in
metastatic processes, especially in their ability to colonize
target organs and form secondary outgrowths, remains
under debate.
In this study, we characterized the in vivo
prometastatic ability of lung tumor cells displaying cancer
stem cell properties using TSC as a method to enrich for
tumor initiating cells. Using several models of metastasis,
we found that despite their robust tumor-initiating activity,
these cells displayed a more indolent phenotype in their
colonization ability to target organs, mainly in the initial
steps of micrometastasis at the target organ.

activity by flow cytometry analysis (Figure 1C upper panel,
quantification in Supplementary Figure S1B, p < 0.01).
In the case of H460 cell line, spheres presented a more
irregular shape as compared to Lacun.3 cells but could also
be maintained during several passages (Figure 1A lower
panel and Supplementary Figure S1A). As compared to
AC, TSC showed a significant increase in the expression
of various stem cell markers such as ALDH, Oct4 and
ESA (epithelial specific antigen) (Figure 1B lower panel)
(p < 0.05). A tendency for higher ABCG2 level was also
detected, although there was inter-experimental variability.
Nonetheless, a consistent increase in ABCG2 staining and
ALDH activity were detected by flow cytometry (Figure 1B
lower panel and Supplementary Figure S1B). These data
indicate that TSC overexpress some markers associated with
the acquisition of stem cell-like phenotype as compared to
cells cultured under adherent conditions.

TSC cells exhibit lower proliferation rate and are
resistant to conventional chemotherapy
Next, we assessed the growth kinetics of TSC and
AC cells in the presence or absence of paclitaxel, a first
line treatment in lung cancer patients. We found a dramatic
decrease in cell growth for Lacun.3 TSC as compared to AC
cells, reaching a 15-fold reduction at day 4 (Supplementary
Figure S1C) (p < 0.001). Paclitaxel strongly reduced the
proliferation of AC cells, whereas sphere cell growth was
merely affected: sensitivity was 35% greater in the case
of AC (Supplementary Figure S1C) (p < 0.001). Similar
results were obtained for the human H460 cell line. TSC
harbored a 5-fold reduction in in vitro growth kinetics and a
greater resistance to paclitaxel than AC, reaching up to 65%
(Supplementary Figure S1C) (p < 0.001).
Salinomycin was identified in a drug screening
assay to specifically eradicate CSCs [41]. To better
document the stem properties of the cells grown in sphere
conditions, we measured the impact of this compound on
our cultures in parallel with paclitaxel. After 7 days of
treatment, salinomycin profoundly disturbed the growth
of TSC, producing a 76% reduction in viability (Figure
1D) (p < 0.001). Of particular note, treated cultures
presented an appearance of disaggregated spheres (Figure
1D). An opposite pattern was found for the treatment of
AC cells, which presented higher sensitivity to paclitaxel
than to salinomycin, of about 40% (Figure 1D) (p <
0.001). Similar results were obtained with H460 cells.
Consistently, salinomycin yielded strong cytotoxic effect
on spheres, leaving only 13% of cell viability at the end
of the experimental period, while producing small effect
on AC (Figure 1D, right panel) (p < 0.001). Overall, these
data underline the different growth properties of TSC and
AC cells, and confirmed the sensitivity of TSC cells to
salinomycin, a drug typically targeting cells displaying a
CSC phenotype.

RESULTS
Tumor sphere cultures (TSC) overexpress stem
cell markers
To determine the prometastatic activity of TSC, we used
two different cell models. First, murine Lacun.3 cells were
obtained from a chemically-induced lung adenocarcinoma
developed in mice; it is an aggressive cell line that forms
spontaneous metastases in different organs [39]. Second, we
used the human lung cancer cell line H460 that develops
spontaneous bone metastases in athymic nude mice [40].
We prepared TSC from both models. Lacun.3
spheres exhibited delimited spherical structures that
could be maintained over multiple generations (Figure
1A and Supplementary Figure S1A). TSC displayed a
6 to 8-fold increase in the mRNA level of the stem cell
markers Sca-1 and ALDH, as compared to matched
adherent cultures (AC) (Figure 1B, upper panel) (p <
0.05). These changes were associated with higher cell
surface expression of Sca-1 protein and greater ALDH
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

27289

Oncotarget

Figure 1: Tumor sphere cultured (TSC) cells exhibit a cancer stem-like cell phenotype and chemoresistance.

A. Representative images obtained from primary lung adenocarcinoma murine Lacun.3 cells and human lung adenocarcinoma cell line
H460 cultured under TSC conditions. B. RT-qPCR showed greater expression of the stem cell markers ALDH, ScaI in Lacun.3 and ALDH,
OCT4 and ESA in H460 TSC versus adherent cultured (AC) cells. C. Analysis by flow cytometry showed higher protein expression levels
of ScaI, ALDH and ABCG2, ALDH in Lacun.3 and H460 TSC respectively, as compared to AC cells. D. Left panel: Quantification of
cell viability of TSC and AC cells after one week treatment with salinomycin (Sal) and paclitaxel (Pac) (***, p < 0.001). Right panel:
Representative phase-contrast microscopy images of untreated (UT) and treated TSC with Sal and Pac. This experiment was repeated three
times with similar results. E. Soft agar assay showing an increased anchorage-independent growth ability of TSC versus their matched AC
cells. This experiment was repeated three times with similar results. (*p, 0.05; **p < 0.01; ***, p < 0.001), Error bars are mean ± SEM.

TSC showed a higher tumorigenic potential but
mitigated metastatic activity

(Figure 1E) (p < 0.01). Such trait for a transformed cell
reflects a greater in vitro tumorigenic capacity.
Tumor-initiating ability is a key hallmark for CSCs.
We next tested the in vivo tumorigenic potential of TSC
after subcutaneous injection into athymic nude mice.
Before the injection, a comparable luciferase signal was
detected in vitro for both cell groups (Figure 2A). We

Consistent with their ability to grow under
anchorage independent conditions, TSC harbored higher
colony formation activity in soft agar assay, reaching up
to 6-fold increase in Lacun.3 cells and 2-fold in H460 cells
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

27290

Oncotarget

Figure 2: TSC cells display higher tumorogenic potential and decreased metastatic activity. A. In vitro BLI of adherent
cultured (AC) cells and disaggregated tumor sphere cultured (TSC) cells for H460 cell line (20 000 cells per well). B. Left panels:
Representative images of BLI of total body (upper panel) and excised lungs upon necropsy, and representative H&E stained lung sections
for both groups (bottom panel). Two groups of mice were subcutaneously (s.c.) injected with H460 cells (TSC and AC). Right panels:
Quantification of BLI (Photon flux: Log PF) showing increased tumorigenic potential of TSC cells after subcutaneous injection into mice
(upper panel), while AC cells led to an increased lung tumor burden (middle panel) and the number of lung nodules (lower panel) in lung
histological sections. Error bars are mean ± SEM. (p < 0.05). C. Representative IHC for Ki67+ in resected s.c. tumors and lung metastases in
TSC versus AC-injected mice. Right panel: Quantification of proliferating cells in both s.c. tumors and lung metastases. D. Representative
vimentin staining in s.c. tumors (left panel) and quantification (right panel) for both s.c. tumors and lung metastases, showing reduced
positive area in TSC-derived tumors. E. IHC staining and quantification for CD31+ in s.c. tumors showing a trend towards a decrease in
angiogenesis but it did not reach statistical significance. *p, 0.05; **p < 0.01; ***, p < 0.001), Error bars are mean ± SEM.

found a significant increase in primary tumor growth upon
injection of H460 cells derived from disaggregated TSC
cells as compared to AC cells (p < 0.05). Representative
bioluminescence imaging (BLI) and quantification 4
weeks post-injection showed an increase in subcutaneous
tumor growth in cells derived from TSC conditions as
compared to AC cultures (Figure 2B). Since these tumors
can lead to spontaneous lung metastasis, we evaluated
BLI in resected tissues. Intriguingly, the appearance of
spontaneous lung metastases was reduced in the lungs
of animals injected with TSC as compared to AC (Figure
2B, p < 0.05). Interestingly, Ki67 staining in resected s.c.
tumors demonstrated similar proliferation index for both
conditions measured at the end of the experimental period
(Figure 2C). In contrast, lung metastases exhibited a higher
proliferation index in TSC derived metastases despite a
lower size, as compared to AC derived metastases at the
end of the experimental period (Figure 2C). However no
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

changes in active capase-3 immunostaining were detected
in both subcutaneous tumors and lung metastases (data
not shown). Of particular note, vimentin, an intermediate
filament associated with a mesenchymal phenotype, was
found strongly increased in both primary and lung tumors
that originated from AC as compared to TSC derived
tumors (Figure 2D).
The same observation was further validated using
the Lacun.3 cell line, where TSC produced larger primary
tumor volume (p < 0.001), but lower metastatic burden
in the lungs (p < 0.05) (Supplementary Figure S2, p <
0.05). In the same line, we observed a trend towards a
higher CD31+ immunostaining in subcutaneous tumors
derived from AC cells, indicating a tendency for higher
vascularization, although it did not reach statistical
significance (Figure 2E) (p = 0.07). This parameter could
not be evaluated in lung metastases because of the small
size nodules induced in TSC injected mice.
27291

Oncotarget

Finally, ALDH+ immunostaining was lower in
TSC derived tumors and lung nodules in comparison
with AC derived lesions indicating that the stem cell
population derived from TSC was not enriched in
this marker at the end of the experimental period.
The ALDH+ expression was rather uniform between
subcutaneous and lung lesions for AC and TSC derived
cells (Supplementary Figure S3).

line. Intracardiac inoculation (i.c.) of TSC cells led to
significant decrease in total BLI signal and osteolytic
lesions as compared to AC cells (Supplementary Figure
S5A, S5B).
To further substantiate whether these observations
in lung cancer-derived cells, we prepared TSC from a
cancer patient with a malignant pleural effusion (cells
were named Mai9) as previously described [43]. The
spheres presented strong increase in ALDH, Sox2 and
Oct4 mRNA levels as compared to AC (Supplementary
Figure S6A, B). As previously shown for other cells lines,
TSC displayed a delayed metastatic activity as compared
to AC (Supplementary Figure S6C) (p < 0.001). These
data indicate that TSC cells show a diminished ability to
efficiently initiate bone metastatic lesions as compared to
AC cells.

TSC harbor a lower metastatic activity than AC
cultures
These unexpected results led us to further investigate
the metastatic capacity of TSC cells using another model
of metastasis by intracardiac inoculation (i.c.), which
recapitulates later stages of metastasis, including cell
survival in the circulation, homing and colonization of
the target organ [42]. Surprisingly, we found a striking
lower metastatic potential upon injection of H460
TSC as compared to AC cells. Of note, tumor cells
reached the bone compartment and other sites at day 7.
Representative images of BLI, X-Ray and H&E for each
group are displayed in Figure 3A. Quantification of BLI
in the hind limbs during the experimental period showed
a marked decrease in BLI that was further exacerbated
from day 14 to day 21 postinjection (p < 0.01). A whole
body BLI quantification showed 5-fold decrease in total
luciferase signal in mice injected with TSC as compared
to mice injected with AC cells (Figure 3A) (p < 0.001).
Osseous metastasis assessed by X-ray image analysis
showed proportional reduction of osteolytic lesions
in the hindlimbs (Figure 3A) (p < 0.01). Histological
analysis revealed reduced tumor area vs. the total bone
area ratio in TSC and AC-inoculated mice (Figure 3A).
As additional control, we used sphere cultures that were
disaggregated and plated in AC conditions for 24–48 h
before the injection, at equal confluence than AC cells. We
found a striking lower metastatic potential upon injection
of H460 TSC and plated TSC cells as compared to AC
cells (Supplementary Figure S4A).
Analogous observations were made for the Lacun.3
cell line (Supplementary Figure S4B). The i.c. inoculation
of TSC cells led to substantially lower metastasis activity
than that of AC cells, as shown by significant reduction in
total BLI signal at day 21 (p < 0.01). X-ray quantification
and histological analysis revealed a proportional decrease
in osteolytic lesions and tumor burden (Supplementary
Figure S4B) (p < 0.001). Early time point BLI (7 days)
of TSC-injected mice confirmed that the cells reached the
target organ (not shown). As an additional group to control
for different culture media used between TSC and AC, we
cultured disaggregated TSC cells for 24–48 hours in AC
conditions before injection (plated spheres). As expected
plated spheres behaved like TSC cells (Supplementary
Figure S4C).
Similar delay in metastasis development was
encountered in TSC cells derived from the A549 cell
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

TSC have reduced bone colonization ability
We next evaluated osseous colonization activity
by intratibial injection. Consistent with previous results,
we found a 6-fold decrease in bone tumor burden upon
injection of TSC in comparison with AC, as reflected
by lower BLI and tumor area (Figure 3B). Interestingly,
as soon as 7 days post-injection, mice injected with AC
cells presented prominent signal assessed by BLI in the
lungs, which was absent in mice injected with TSC cells
(Figure 3B) (p < 0.01). Similar results were obtained using
Lacun.3 cells (Supplementary Figure S7A). The absence
of lung metastasis might have resulted from the lower
bone colonization ability of TSC: a proportional decrease
in lung BLI, tumor area and number of nodules was
detected (Supplementary Figure S7B) (p < 0.01).

TSC cells remain in a quiescent state in the bone
It is worthy to note that after i.c. inoculation of TSC
cells, all mice eventually developed metastasis, suggesting
that the cells isolated from TSC reached efficiently
the distant sites. This could be appreciated in mice i.c.
injected with Lacun.3 spheres that were kept up to 34
days (Supplementary Figure S8A). Similar observation
was performed in mice injected with H460 TSC at day 21
(Supplementary Figure S8B). Consequently, the decrease
in metastatic potential may result, at least in part, from
a delay in the ability to initiate efficient colonization.
Based on the lower in vitro proliferation rate of TSC,
we performed double immunohistochemistry for PCNA
and GFP in bone sections from mice i.c. inoculated with
H460 cells (at day 21). Quantification of double positive
cells for PCNA and GFP showed higher number of tumor
proliferating cells in mice injected with AC cells than in
mice injected with TSC cells (Figure 3C) (p < 0.001). On
the contrary, TSC-inoculated mice presented numerous
resting tumor cells (GFP-positive and PCNA-negative).
Staining for ALDH did not show any difference in the
percentage of positive cells within the bone metastasis,
27292

Oncotarget

Figure 3: Decreased prometastatic activity of cells derived from TSC conditions. A. Left panels: Representative images of

BLI in mice after intracardiac inoculation (i.c.) of H460 AC or TSC cells in two groups athymic nude mice, demonstrating reduced bone
metastasis formation in the hindlimbs and whole body. Quantification of total BLI (Photon flux: Log PF) in hind limbs (upper panel) and
whole body (lower panel). Right panels: Representative images of X-Ray and H&E. Osteolytic area of the hind limbs (upper panel) and
tumor area (lower panel) for each group are shown. White arrows point to the osteolytic lesions. Quantification of osteolytic area in X-ray
images (upper panel) and tumor metastatic area (lower panel) are shown. B. Intratibial injection of H460 cells (TSC and AC cells) in two
groups of athymic nude mice followed by BLI measurement and quantification demonstrated reduced osseous colonization in TSC-injected
mice. C. Double immunofluorescence and quantification for tumor cells (GFP, green) and proliferative cells (PCNA, red) in bone metastasis
after i.c. inoculation of H460 cells, showing lower proliferation in TSC-injected mice (at day 21). D. IHC and quantification of positive
tumor area for ALDH, E. pERK and F. Vimentin. Error bars are mean ± SEM. *p, 0.05; **p < 0.01; ***, p < 0.001.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

27293

Oncotarget

suggesting that the stem cell population was not enriched
in this marker at this time point (Figure 3D). A quiescent
state at metastatic site was further evidenced by reduced
pERK positive area in mice injected with TSC as compared
to AC (Figure 3E). Finally, lower level of vimentin was
detected in tissues derived from TSC, suggesting a loss of
a mesenchymal phenotype (Figure 3F).

has been associated with cancer cell dormancy [47]. Overall
these results indicate that a quiescent phenotype could be
involved in the delayed prometastatic activity observed in
TSC in vivo.

TSC cells present a quiescent phenotype

To determine whether the delay in colonization
observed in TSC-injected mice could result from a
difference in homing ability, mice (8 mice per group)
were i.c. inoculated with cells and sacrificed 6 days later.
At this time point, tumor circulating cells have efficiently
reached the target organ. In this experimental system, we
did not find significant change in total luciferase signal
upon injection of AC or TSC cells, indicating that a similar
amount of cells reached the remote organs (Figure 5C).
However, after bone marrow flushing, we found dramatic
lower number of single-cell derived colonies (>100 cells)
cells isolated from TSC-inoculated mice, suggesting
lower growth ability of TSC cells to induce robust colony
formation as compared to AC cells (Figure 5C). Taken
together these data indicate that TSC cells maintain their
quiescent phenotype in the target organ.

TSC display a quiescent in vivo metastatic
phenotype

The lower proliferation rate of TSC cells observed
in vitro and in vivo led us to evaluate cellular quiescence.
We first assessed the cell cycle distribution of cultured
cells. For both Lacun.3 and H460 TSC, we found a
marked cell cycle arrest in the G0/G1 phase of about 20%
(Figure 4A) (p < 0.001) as compared to AC cells. This
was accompanied by a lower percentage of cells in the
S and G2M phases in both cell lines (Figure 4B) (p <
0.001). BrdU assays confirmed this trend showing a 7-fold
reduction in the percentage of cells in S phase as well as
an increase in G0/G1 phase in H460 TSC when compared
with H460 AC cells (Supplementary Figure S9). We then
used a fluorescent-dye retention assay to further address
cellular quiescence. The PKH26 dye, which becomes
diluted after each cell division, has been previously
shown to accumulate into stem cells [44]. One week after
initial staining, TSC derived from Lacun.3 cells displayed
80% higher PKH26 staining than AC cells, as shown
by flow cytometry analysis (Figure 4B). The PKH26
signal was then reduced upon secondary and tertiary
sphere generation, leaving a remaining ~2% population
of positive cells (Figure 4B). Representative images
of spheres stained with PKH26 are displayed in Figure
4C. Comparable data were obtained for the H460 cells,
where TSC displayed higher ability to retain the PKH26
dye than AC cells, as shown by flow cytometry analysis
and fluorescent microscopy imaging (Figure 4B and 4C).
These results indicate a higher number of quiescent slow
cycling cells in TSC than in AC cells.

DISCUSSION
In this report, we showed that lung tumor cells
selected for prominent cancer stem cell-like properties
including enhanced ability to sustain tumor growth
and increased chemoresistance, paradoxically exhibit
an impaired metastatic activity. This observation was
consistently detected in different target organs (lung
and bone) and in several human and murine models of
metastasis (upon intracardiac inoculation, subcutaneous
and intratibial injections). This metastatic pattern was
mediated by ERK1/2, p38 and Akt pathways leading to a
marked metastatic quiescent phenotype as a consequence
of an arrest in G0/G1 phase in target organs. This
event was consistent with the tumor cell-autonomous
expression of p27 and a reduced pERK1/2 /phospho-p38
ratio, a mechanistic indication of cell cycle arrest and
cellular quiescence at metastatic sites [48]. This finding
demarcates distinct and independent tumor-initiating
properties (tumor growth initiation and sustainment)
displayed by TSC-derived CSC from their prometastatic
activity such as their ability to initiate robust colonization
at distant sites, an effect heavily influenced by the
hosting milieu. Remarkably, cells exhibit robust tumor
initiating properties in situ when subcutaneously injected
whereas a tumor-quiescent phenotype observed in vitro
in TSC cells was maintained in the lung and in the
osseous compartment, leading to decreased colonization
after both, intratibial or intracardiac injections. These
findings indicate that cell cycle arrest was highly
dependent on microenvironmental cues. Previous

Altered quiescence signaling pathways in TSC
We then investigated the modulation of different
signaling pathways related to cellular proliferation.
We found a strong increase in the level of pAkt in TSC
isolated from both Lacun.3 and H460 cells as compared
to AC cells (p < 0.05) (Figure 5A and 5B). Interestingly,
phosphorylation of Akt has been previously shown to
associate with the self-renewal ability of normal and cancer
stem cells [45], as well as resistance to therapy [46]. TSC
cells also presented high levels of p27 protein (p < 0.05), a
marker of cell cycle arrest and cellular quiescence [28]. We
detected a strong decrease in pErk for TSC cells, indicating
slower proliferation rate (p < 0.001). The levels of p38 were
not affected at this time point, however the ratio of pErk/
p38 for TSC cells was reduced as compared to AC cells in
both cell lines (Figure 5A and 5B). A low ratio pErk/p38
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

27294

Oncotarget

Figure 4: In vitro quiescent phenotype in cells cultured in TSC conditions. A. Left panel: Cell cycle distribution analysis after
propidium iodide staining by flow cytometry. Right panel: quantification of the percentage of cells in each phase. Cell cycle distribution
analysis and Lacun.3 cells underlined a cell cycle arrest of spheres in the G0/G1 phase of the cell cycle. B. 7 days post-staining with PKH26,
spheres presented greater dye retention ability as compared to AC cells (78% versus 1% of positive cells for Lacun.3 and 86% versus 3%
of positive cells for H460), as shown by flow cytometry analysis. C. Representative images of fluorescent microscopy showing dye dilution
upon secondary and tertiary sphere generation. All experiments were repeated at least three times with similar results.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

27295

Oncotarget

Figure 5: TSC cells express markers of quiescence in vivo. A. Representative immunoblots of cell extracts obtained from in vitro

cultures showing strong increase in the active phosphorylated form of Akt in TSC cells as compared to AC cells. A decrease in phosphoErk was detected, but with similar levels of phospho-p38. Normalization was obtained by detection of all forms (total) and β-actin. TSC
cells presented higher levels of p27 protein than AC cells. Experiment was repeated 3 times with similar results. B. Fold change in
densitometric values for AC cells as compared to TSC cells from Lacun.3 cells (Top) and H460 cells (Middle). (Bottom) Fold change in
densitometric values for AC and TSC cells showing a decreased ratio of phospho Erk/phospho-p38. Ratios correspond to the measurement
of phosphorylated proteins on total protein or actin. (*, p < 0.05; ***, p < 0.001). Error bars represent mean ± SEM. C. Left panel: Two
groups of mice (8 animals per group) were i.c. inoculated with TSC and AC cells. Animals were sacrificed 6 days post-inoculation and
tibiae were excised and cells were extracted by bone-marrow flushing and cultured in neomycin medium until the emergence of single-cell
derived colonies. Relative light units of BLI in mice injected with AC cells and TSC cells from the H460 cell line at day 6. Left panels:
Number single-cell derived colonies obtained after bone marrow “flushing” and grown during 10 days in regular medium.

studies have suggested that metastasis-initiating cells
need to overcome organ-specific anti-metastatic signals
in order to undergo reactivation [49]. A full engagement
with ECM components has been shown necessary for
tumor cells to escape from tumor quiescence [50, 51].
Such process involves in part the production of collagen
type I and fibronectin, as well as the activation of β1
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

integrin and ERK signaling to form a permissive niche
and turn on cell proliferation [52, 53]. In bone, secretion
of osteopontin (OPN), and the soluble vascular cell
adhesion protein 1 (VCAM-1) were both reported to
tightly regulate cell dormancy [54, 55]. Similarly, bonederived BMP-7 induced growth-arrest of cancer stem
cells which eventually led to tumor dormancy [56].
27296

Oncotarget

Overall, ECM proteins involved in tumor-matrix
interactions and secreted growth factors in each organ
are critical for modulating cell quiescence.
More importantly our work extends the finding
of a quiescent state to cells previously selected for their
prominent cancer-stem cell phenotype, an effect probably
exerted by signaling pathway engagement by these
organs. Similar cellular quiescence has been associated
in vivo with the dormant phenotype of solitary tumor
cells encountered in the target organs after dissemination
from the primary tumor site [48, 57]. This dormant state
was organ-dependent, since the bone marrow and lung
impose a restrictive (bone marrow) and permissive (lung)
microenvironment for metastasis in a model of a head
and neck squamous cell carcinoma [58]. This finding
underscores a non-cell autonomous effect in CSCs mediated
by the microenvironment despite their robust tumor
initiating activity observed in the subcutaneous milieu.
Interestingly, CSC properties displayed by TSC
were enriched using sphere culture conditions, a method
commonly used to derive CSCs from bulk tumor
specimens. Rather than spurious effects triggered by
culture conditions, the enrichment in CSC properties was
supported by the finding of a similar metastatic phenotype
observed in an additional control group of disaggregated
TSCs subsequently cultured in AC conditions for 24–48
hours (Supplementary Figure S4B, S4C). In agreement
with our findings, TSC isolated from a breast cancer
model were shown to express high levels of the stem
cell marker Sca-1 and to display a near complete loss of
spontaneous metastasis [59], an effect associated with
decreased expression of TGFβ2 and reduced activation
of the TGFβ signaling pathway in spheres [59]. Thus,
differences in the methods employed to isolate and enrich
for CSCs could dramatically affect the co-selection of
different expression patterns of ECM binding proteins
mediating different responses to the constraints imposed
at the target sites, resulting in dramatic differences in
metastatic properties. In this line, the finding that TSCderived tumors express less vimentin is consistent with
their low prometastatic activity, since gain in vimentin
has been shown to increase filopodia, invasiveness and
metastasis [60]. Thus, the TSC isolation method present
dissimilarities with other methods commonly used to
enrich for CSCs, such as sorting for surface markers.
For instance, slightly different medium conditions
severely impaired growth of sphere derived H460 cells in
subcutaneous xenografts [61], an observation that could be
explained by a high CD44 phenotype, unchanged in our
case. In contrast to our findings, cisplatin-resistant H460
cells grown in TSC conditions were enriched in CSCs
markers (CD133+) and displayed higher tumorigenic and
metastatic potential [62], an effect that could be explained
by the co-selection of prometastatic properties induced
by chemoresistance. Of note, slightly different stem cell
markers were enriched in different cell types using our
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

sphere culture conditions (Figure 1 and Supplementary
Figure S6). This divergence observed between studies
suggests that a main CSC phenotype acquired through
different experimental approaches could differentially coselect for prometastatic and/or chemoresistant properties.
Similarly, a subset of CD26+ expressing CSC in
colorectal cancer endowed with tumor-initiating capacity
also showed high metastatic properties to the liver [63].
Alternatively, these discrepancies could be partially
reconciled by the possibility that our isolated TSC cells
could represent a heterogeneous population containing
quiescent and a small fraction of non-quiescent cells more
prone to form metastasis.
Nevertheless, our results are consistent with
previous reports that used distinct CSC markers [31,
35, 36]. Tumor spheres formed by sorted CD133+cells
contained more quiescent cells than those derived from
CD133−cells. Moreover, the established tumor spheres
from CD133+ cells grown in 3D culture without serum
remained quiescent, whereas they exited from a quiescent
state after serum addition [64]. These data suggest that
TSC contains a pool of CSCs in a predominant quiescent
state with different sensitivities to reactivation by
microenvironmental cues. Similarly, label-retaining cells
(LRC) with self-renewal ability have been identified in
a sub-population of CD44+/CD24-/ESA+ breast cancer
cells, and these cells were endowed with resistance to
chemotherapy [65]. Interestingly, the presence of LCRs
has been shown to result from slow cycling cells as well
as cells undergoing asymmetric cell division, leading to
increased tumor-initiating ability [66, 67].
Of interest, it has been suggested that a migratory
EMT cell phenotype must first revert to an epithelial
phenotype in order to trigger colonization at distant sites,
which is made possible by a mesenchymal-to-epithelial
transition (MET) [68, 69]. However, in order to escape
from the primary tumor and thrive in the target metastatic
organ, different studies have shown that displaying a
mesenchymal phenotype confers metastatic advantage
[70]. In our study, we have found that both AC-derived
primary tumors and metastatic lesions (including both
lung and bone), express significantly higher levels of
the EMT marker vimentin, associated with increased
invasiveness and metastasis. In contrast, in a recent
study, more mesenchymal-like prostate cells were less
prone to initiate metastatic lesions [71]. Thus, different
models exhibit different features (EMT and MET) that
differ across tumors or even across different tumor
subtypes. Alternatively, cell plasticity allowing EMT/
MET might emerge independently of an intrinsic and/or
a host-mediated prometastatic phenotype. This plasticity
has also been invoked to explain the enrichment in
ALDH+ cells observed in xenograft models by AC cells
and its expression in primary and metastatic lesions
[72], a finding also detected in our experiments (See
Supplementary Figure S3).
27297

Oncotarget

Several consequences derived from our study could
be useful in the clinical setting. For instance, anti-cancer
stem cell therapies could be insufficient to eradicate
disseminated tumor cells, since other tumor cells with noncancer stem cell properties could emerge with enhanced
metastatic activity. Our observations might also help to
explain how low-growth rate tumors at the primary site
might display a marked metastatic activity, a recurrent
observation made in a fraction of lung adenocarcinoma
tumors, which are frequently diagnosed by the detection
of overt metastasis in the skeleton [73, 74]. However, our
findings need to be cautiously interpreted and extended to
other tumors and models.
In summary, the current study indicates that CSC
phenotype derived from TSCs shows a reduced metastatic
potential as compared to non-TSC, underlined by a delay
in colonization of target organs, an effect that is heavily
influenced by the host microenvironment. Mechanisms
included a quiescent in vivo phenotype of TSC at
metastatic sites, mediated by a reduction in pERK1/2 /
p38 ratio and increase p27 levels. These findings could
partially explain several clinical observations regarding
metastatic pattern and might have therapeutic implications
for the management of secondary outgrowths.

medium consisted in DMEM/F12 supplemented with B27
(Gibco-Life Technologies, Carlsbad, CA) and MEGM
SingleQuots (human epidermal growth factor, insulin,
hydrocortisone and GA-100; Lonza, Basel, Switzerland).
Tumor sphere cultured (TSC) cells were disaggregated by
incubation with the StemPro® Accutase® Cell Dissociation
Reagent (Life Technologies) until a single cell suspension
was obtained. TSC cells were subcultured every five to
seven days for up to five generations.

Quantitative real-time reverse transcriptase
PCR analysis
Purified RNA was obtained with the Qiagen RNA
isolation kit (Chatsworth, CA) and cDNA was synthesized
with the SuperScript II First-Strand Synthesis System
(Invitrogen). The PCR amplification mixture contained
cDNA, SYBR Green I Master Mix buffer (Applied
Biosystems, Forster City, CA), and forward and reverse
primers (20 nM each). Primers for amplification are shown
in Supplementary Table S1. Real time PCR was carried
out with the 7300 RT-PCR system (Applied Biosystems).
Every assay was performed in triplicate and all
experiments included analysis of GAPDH mRNA levels
as internal control. Relative expression was determined by
the Ct method and levels were expressed as percentage
relative to the GAPDH mRNA levels.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Ethics statement

Proliferation and soft agar colony formation
assay

Investigation has been conducted in accordance
with the ethical standards, according to the Declaration of
Helsinki, to national and international guidelines and has
been approved by the authors’ institutional review board.

Cell viability was determined by MTT (3-(4,
5-Dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bro­
mide) assay (Roche, Switzerland). Disaggregated TSC
and adherent cultured (AC) cells were seeded in 96-well
culture plates (500 per well) in 100 μL of their medium,
in the absence or presence of paclitaxel (10 μM) (SigmaAldrich, Madrid, Spain). Twenty four, 48, 72 and 96 h
later, 10 μL of MTT (2.5 mg/ml) was added and cells were
further incubated for 4 h, followed by addition of 100 μL
solubilization buffer overnight. To evaluate the sensitivity
to salinomycin (Sigma-Aldrich) cells were incubated
during one week with or without salinomycin (1 μg/μL).
Spectrophotometric absorbance was measured at 570 nm.
Soft agar assay for colony formation was performed
by seeding 1 × 103 cells into 0.3% agar containing RPMI
and 10% FBS over 2-ml base layers (0.6% agar). After 10
days in culture, the number of colonies was assessed by
staining with 500 μL of 10 mg/mL MTT solution. After
incubation for 4 hours, 500 μL DMSO were added, the
plates were scanned, and the cell colonies were counted.

Monolayer and tumor spheres cultures
The mouse lung adenocarcinoma cell line, Lacun.3,
was isolated and characterized at the University of
Navarra (Pamplona, Spain) from a combined silica and
N-Nitrosodimethylamine (NDMA)-induced lung cancer
model [39]. The human cell line Mai9 was also isolated
and characterized by our group from a malignant pleural
effusion (MPE) of a patient diagnosed with NSCLC [43].
Lung adenocarcinoma cell lines (H460 and A549) were
obtained from the American Type Culture Collection
(Manassas, VA). All cells were cultured in RPMI 1640
medium (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA) supplemented with
10% FBS and antibiotics at 37°C and 5% CO2. Cells were
retrovirally transduced with a luciferase reporter gene for
in vivo bioluminescence image analysis.
To obtain sphere cultures, monolayer cells were
enzymatically and manually dissociated into a single cell
suspension using Trypsin-EDTA (0.125%) followed by
passage through a 25-gauge needle. Cells were seeded
at 5000 cells/mL into non-adherent PolyHEMA-coated
plates (1.2% poly-(2-hydroxyethylmethacrylate)/95%
ethanol) (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO). Stem cell
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Flow cytometry and cell cycle analysis
For immunostaining, dissociated cells were blocked
with 1 μg human IgG/1 × 105 cells and incubated 30 min
on ice with PE anti-mouse ScaI or PE isotype control
27298

Oncotarget

(1:200, BD Biosciences, San Diego, CA); APC antihuman ABCG2 or APC isotype control (1:10).
ALDH staining was performed with the
ALDEFLUOR kit (Stem Cell Technologies, Canada)
according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, cells
were suspended at 1 × 106 cells/ml in Aldefluor assay
buffer containing ALDH substrate (BAAA, BODIPY®
aminoacetaldehyde, 1 mmol/l), with or without the specific
ALDH inhibitor diethylaminobenzaldehyde (DEAB)
(1 mmol/l) for 30 min. Analysis and sorting were
conducted on a FACSAria IIu (BD). Aldefluor and PE
were excited at 488 nm by an octagon blue laser, and
fluorescence was detected using 530/30 and 675/20 filters,
respectively. APC was excited at 633 nm, and emission
was at 660 nm. Dead cells were excluded by gating on
forward and side scatter and eliminating the 7 AADpositive population. The data were analyzed by Cell
Quest Pro and FlowJo (Ashland, OR). For sorting, cells
were separated into ALDH-bright and ALDH-low cells
according to their level of activity.
For PKH26 staining, 5 × 105 cells/ml cells were
labeled with PKH26 for 5 min following manufacturer’s
instructions (Sigma). Labeled cells were seeded in
complete medium (in regular flask) or in stem cell
medium (in non-adherent plates). After 7 days, cells were
trypsinized, filtered, and analyzed by flow cytometry in the
PE channel, or visualized by microscopy. Second and third
generation spheres were disaggregated and reanalyzed.
For cell cycle distribution analysis, disaggregated
spheres and monolayer cells were fixed in 4% paraform­
aldehyde for 5 min on ice, immersed in 70% ethanol and
kept at –20°C for 30 min or until analysis. Cells were
rehydrated in PBS, treated with RNase A (500 μg/ml)
(Qiagen, Germany) and stained with propidium iodide
(50 μg/ml).
For BrdU assay (BD), disaggregated TSC and
adherent cells were plated until attachment and 50 μM
BrdU solution was added for 3 h. Cells were then collected
and processed according to manufacturer’s instructions.
FACSCanto cytometer and FlowJo software were used for
acquisition and data analysis.

Samples were incubated with primary antibodies at 4°C
overnight. For immunohistochemistry detection, slides
were incubated for 30 min with the EnVision™ antimouse or anti-rabbit detection system (Dako). Peroxidase
activity was developed with DAB (3,3′-diaminobenzidine;
Dako). Images were captured with a Nikon microscope
Y-TSH (Japan). For immunofluorescence, fluorochromelabeled secondary antibodies conjugated to Alexa-Fluor
488 and 568 (1:500, Invitrogen) were incubated at room
temperature for 30 min. Slides were washed and then
incubated with 0.1 μg/mL DAPI for 1 min in darkness.
Images were captured with a fluorescent microscope
(Zeiss AXIO Imager Z1) equipped with Imaging System
V.5.0 software (MetaSystem GmbH, Altlussehem,
Germany). For quantifications, 30 random images (× 200)
per experimental group were used. The stained areas were
quantified with the ImageJ software (NIH, Bethesda, MD)
and data were expressed as positive immunostained area
with respect to reference area.

Western blot
Proteins were extracted in RIPA buffer and
concentrations were measured by the bicinchoninic acid
method (Pierce, IL). Total extracts were electrophoretically
fractionated on 10% or 12% Bis-Tris polyacrylamide gels
(Invitrogen) and transferred to a 0.45 μm nitrocellulose
membrane. Membranes were blocked for 1 h with 5%
nonfat dry milk in TBS-Tween and incubated overnight at
4°C with the following primary antibodies: phospho-p38,
phospho-Akt, phospho-Erk1/2, and total p27, p38, Akt
and ERK (diluted 1:1000, Cell Signaling, Danvers,
MA), p21 (Dako, 1:1000), and β-actin (Sigma, 1:5000).
Membranes were washed and incubated with peroxidaselabeled secondary antibodies at room temperature for 1 h.
Immunoreactive bands were detected with the Lumi-Light
Western Blotting Kit (Roche, Switzerland) and quantified
with ImageJ.

In vivo assays
Female athymic nude mice and Rag2−/−/ILR2γ−/−
(Harlan Ibérica, Spain) were maintained under specific
pathogen-free conditions. All the animals were sacrificed
according to the approved protocols of the Local Animal
Committee. Cells were previously transduced with a triple
modality construct containing a triple fusion protein GFPluciferase-thymidine kinase [75]. Four-week old nude
mice (8 mice/group) were inoculated in the left cardiac
ventricle with 2 × 105 cells (monolayer cells or tumor
sphere cultured cells from third generation, either freshly
disaggregated or plated in regular culture dish 24–48 h
prior to injection), in 100 μl of PBS as detailed elsewhere
[40, 76]. Subcutaneous experiments were performed on
Rag2−/−/Il2Rγ−/− mice together with the i.c. inoculation of
Lacun3, a fact that was dependent on the availability of
mice in the in-house colony.

Immunohistochemistry and immunofluorescence
Tissues were fixed in 10% buffered formalin,
embedded in paraffin, and sectioned (5 μm). For
histological analysis, slides were stained with
Heamatoxylin & Eosin. For IHC, sections were
deparaffinized, hydrated and incubated for 10 min with
3.3% H2O2 in water to block endogenous peroxidase.
Standard protocols for antigen retrieval were employed.
Dilutions of primary antibodies were as follows: 1:100
for Ki67 (Dako, Denmark), 1:50 for CD31 (Dianova,
Germany), 1:500 for Vimentin (Dako), 1:50 for pERK
(Cell Signaling, MA, USA), 1:500 for anti-PCNA (Clone
PC10, Dako); 1:1000 human anti-ALDH (BD Biosciences)
and 1:500 anti-GFP (Abcam, Cambridge, MA).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

27299

Oncotarget

For bioluminescence imaging and analysis, mice
were anaesthetized and injected intraperitoneally with
1.5 mg of D-luciferin in 100 μl of PBS. Imaging was
completed at 2 min exactly for each group of mice with a
Xenogen IVIS system coupled to Living Image acquisition
and analysis software (Xenogen Inc., CA). Photon
flux was calculated for each mouse by using a circular
region of interest for each hind limb. Background value
(from luciferin-injected mouse with no tumor cells) was
subtracted from each measurement. X-ray radiography
was performed by placing mice in the prone position on
sensitive radiographic film (MIN-R, Eastman Kodak). The
percentage of osteolytic area of femur and tibia respectively
for each animal compared to the total bone area of femur
and tibia was assessed with computerized image analysis
system, AnalySIS® (soft imaging system GmbH, Münster,
Germany). High resolution X-ray film scans with 2 ×
magnification were captured at 1200 ppi using a Epson
Expression 1680 Pro scanner (Long Beach, CA).
Bone colonization ability was evaluated after
intratibial injection into nude mice (6 per group). Briefly,
cells were suspended at 2 × 106 cells/mL in sterile PBS.
Mice were anesthetized before injection. Five microliters
containing 1 × 104 cells were injected into the tibia’s bone
marrow through femoro-tibial cartilage of the 6-week-old
mice (Harlan Ibérica) using a Hamilton syringe. For the
spontaneous lung metastasis experiment, 5 × 104 cells/
mL were injected subcutaneously (8 mice/group). After
5 weeks, mice were sacrificed and the lung analyzed by
bioluminescence imaging and H&E. All in vivo experiments
were normalized on the luciferase signal at day 0.

as mean ± SEM. Statistical significance was defined as (*)
p < 0.05, (**) p < 0.01, and (***) p < 0.001.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We warmly thank Dr. Julio Aguirre-Ghuiso and
Dr. Paloma Bragado for their invaluable suggestions.
This work was supported by the Spanish Ministry of
Economy and Competitiveness (BFU2011-22943) and
SAF2012-40056, to F.L and FIS-PI13/00093 to A.C. This
work was supported by “UTE project FIMA” agreement,
the Cancer Research Thematic Network of the Health
Institute Carlos III (RTICC RD12/0036/0066), European
Regional Development Fund (ERDF) “Una manera de
hacer Europa”. AMB was supported by a Marie Curie
Grant (PIIF-GA-2010-275877).

REFERENCES
1.	 Siegel R, Naishadham D, Jemal A. Cancer statistics. CA
Cancer J Clin. 2012; 62:10–29.
2.	 Vicent S, Perurena N, Govindan R, Lecanda F. Bone
Metastases in Lung Cancer: Potential Novel Approaches to
Therapy. American journal of respiratory and critical care
medicine. 2015. [Epub ahead of print].
3.	 Nguyen LV, Vanner R, Dirks P, Eaves CJ. Cancer stem
cells: an evolving concept. Nat Rev Cancer. 2012;
12:133–143.
4.	 Lapidot T, Sirard C, Vormoor J, Murdoch B, Hoang T,
Caceres-Cortes J, Minden M, Paterson B, Caligiuri MA,
Dick JE. A cell initiating human acute myeloid leukaemia after transplantation into SCID mice. Nature. 1994;
367:645–648.

Quantification of single cell-derived bone
colonies
To evaluate the homing ability of tumor cells at
six days post intracardiac inoculation, long bones were
excised and cleaned of all soft tissues. Marrow cells
were released by “flushing,” introducing 5 to 10 mL of
α-MEM medium containing penicillin/ streptomycin with
a 27-gauge needle in the distal epiphysis through the bone
marrow compartment. Cell clumps were disaggregated
by passing medium containing cells through 27-gauge
needle syringe. Cells were plated in 10- or 15-cm dishes
expanded for 10 days in medium containing 0.5 mg/mL
G-418. This procedure was conducted separately for each
femur and tibia of 7 mice per group. Single cell-derived
colonies (SCDC) were counted under light microscope
after crystal violet staining.

5.	 Dean M, Fojo T, Bates S. Tumour stem cells and drug resistance. Nat Rev Cancer. 2005; 5:275–284.

Statistical analysis

9.	 Gou S, Liu T, Wang C, Yin T, Li K, Yang M, Zhou J.
Establishment of clonal colony-forming assay for propagation of pancreatic cancer cells with stem cell properties.
Pancreas. 2007; 34:429–435.

6.	 Elshamy WM, Duhe RJ. Overview: cellular plasticity, cancer stem cells and metastasis. Cancer Lett. 2013; 341:2–8.
7.	 Baccelli I, Schneeweiss A, Riethdorf S, Stenzinger
A, Schillert A, Vogel V, Klein C, Saini M, Bauerle T,
Wallwiener M, Holland-Letz T, Hofner T, Sprick M,
Scharpff M, Marme F, Sinn HP, et al. Identification of a
population of blood circulating tumor cells from breast cancer patients that initiates metastasis in a xenograft assay.
Nat Biotechnol. 2013; 31:539–544.
8.	 Schatton T, Frank MH. The in vitro spheroid melanoma
cell culture assay: cues on tumor initiation? The Journal of
investigative dermatology. 2010; 130:1769–1771.

To study differences in metastatic area, proliferation
rates, analysis of bioluminescence imaging, and gene
expression levels, data were analyzed by parametric test
or non-parametric homologue Mann-Whitney U test
depending on data distribution. Values were represented
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

10.	 Ponti D, Costa A, Zaffaroni N, Pratesi G, Petrangolini G,
Coradini D, Pilotti S, Pierotti MA, Daidone MG. Isolation
and in vitro propagation of tumorigenic breast cancer cells
27300

Oncotarget

with stem/progenitor cell properties. Cancer Res. 2005;
65:5506–5511.

SH, Birnbaum D, et al. Aldehyde dehydrogenase 1-­positive
cancer stem cells mediate metastasis and poor clinical outcome in inflammatory breast cancer. Clin Cancer Res. 2010;
16:45–55.

11.	 Cao L, Zhou Y, Zhai B, Liao J, Xu W, Zhang R, Li J, Zhang
Y, Chen L, Qian H, Wu M, Yin Z. Sphere-forming cell subpopulations with cancer stem cell properties in human hepatoma cell lines. BMC Gastroenterol. 2011; 11:71.

24.	 Marcato P, Dean CA, Pan D, Araslanova R, Gillis M, Joshi M,
Helyer L, Pan L, Leidal A, Gujar S, Giacomantonio CA, Lee
PW. Aldehyde dehydrogenase activity of breast cancer stem
cells is primarily due to isoform ALDH1A3 and its expression
is predictive of metastasis. Stem Cells. 2011; 29:32–45.

12.	 Williams SA, Anderson WC, Santaguida MT, Dylla SJ.
Patient-derived xenografts, the cancer stem cell paradigm,
and cancer pathobiology in the 21st century. Lab Invest.
2013; 93:970–982.

25.	 Rosenthal DT, Zhang J, Bao L, Zhu L, Wu Z, Toy K, Kleer
CG, Merajver SD. RhoC impacts the metastatic potential
and abundance of breast cancer stem cells. PLoS One. 2012;
7:e40979.

13.	 Al-Hajj M, Wicha MS, Benito-Hernandez A, Morrison
SJ, Clarke MF. Prospective identification of tumorigenic
breast cancer cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2003;
100:3983–3988.

26.	 Yu C, Yao Z, Dai J, Zhang H, Escara-Wilke J, Zhang X,
Keller ET. ALDH activity indicates increased tumorigenic
cells, but not cancer stem cells, in prostate cancer cell lines.
In vivo. 2011; 25:69–76.

14.	 Bertolini G, Roz L, Perego P, Tortoreto M, Fontanella E,
Gatti L, Pratesi G, Fabbri A, Andriani F, Tinelli S, Roz E,
Caserini R, Lo Vullo S, Camerini T, Mariani L, Delia D, et
al. Highly tumorigenic lung cancer CD133+ cells display
stem-like features and are spared by cisplatin treatment.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009; 106:16281–16286.

27.	 van den Hoogen C, van der Horst G, Cheung H, Buijs JT,
Lippitt JM, Guzman-Ramirez N, Hamdy FC, Eaton CL,
Thalmann GN, Cecchini MG, Pelger RC, van der Pluijm
G. High aldehyde dehydrogenase activity identifies tumorinitiating and metastasis-initiating cells in human prostate
cancer. Cancer Res. 2010; 70:5163–5173.

15.	 Hurt EM, Kawasaki BT, Klarmann GJ, Thomas SB, Farrar
WL. CD44+ CD24(-) prostate cells are early cancer progenitor/stem cells that provide a model for patients with poor
prognosis. Br J Cancer. 2008; 98:756–765.

28.	 Aguirre-Ghiso JA, Bragado P, Sosa MS. Metastasis
awakening: targeting dormant cancer. Nat Med. 2013;
19:276–277.

16.	 Li C, Heidt DG, Dalerba P, Burant CF, Zhang L, Adsay V,
Wicha M, Clarke MF, Simeone DM. Identification of pancreatic cancer stem cells. Cancer Res. 2007; 67:1030–1037.

29.	 Hiraga T, Ito S, Nakamura H. Cancer stem-like cell marker
CD44 promotes bone metastases by enhancing tumorigenicity, cell motility, and hyaluronan production. Cancer Res.
2013; 73:4112–4122.

17.	 Ricci-Vitiani L, Lombardi DG, Pilozzi E, Biffoni M,
Todaro M, Peschle C, De Maria R. Identification and
expansion of human colon-cancer-initiating cells. Nature.
2007; 445:111–115.

30.	 Gvozdenovic A, Arlt MJ, Campanile C, Brennecke
P, Husmann K, Li Y, Born W, Muff R, Fuchs B. CD44
enhances tumor formation and lung metastasis in experimental osteosarcoma and is an additional predictor for poor
patient outcome. J Bone Miner Res. 2013; 28:838–847.

18.	 Leung EL, Fiscus RR, Tung JW, Tin VP, Cheng LC, Sihoe
AD, Fink LM, Ma Y, Wong MP. Non-small cell lung cancer cells expressing CD44 are enriched for stem cell-like
properties. PLoS One. 2010; 5:e14062.
19.	 Bleau AM, Hambardzumyan D, Ozawa T, Fomchenko EI,
Huse JT, Brennan CW, Holland EC. PTEN/PI3K/Akt pathway regulates the side population phenotype and ABCG2
activity in glioma tumor stem-like cells. Cell Stem Cell.
2009; 4:226–235.

31.	 Morrison BJ, Steel JC, Morris JC. Sphere culture of murine
lung cancer cell lines are enriched with cancer initiating
cells. PLoS One. 2012; 7:e49752.
32.	 Lehmann C, Jobs G, Thomas M, Burtscher H, Kubbies M.
Established breast cancer stem cell markers do not correlate
with in vivo tumorigenicity of tumor-initiating cells. Int J
Oncol. 2012; 41:1932–1942.

20.	 Serrano D, Bleau AM, Fernandez-Garcia I, FernandezMarcelo T, Iniesta P, Ortiz-de-Solorzano C, Calvo A.
Inhibition of telomerase activity preferentially targets aldehyde dehydrogenase-positive cancer stem-like cells in lung
cancer. Mol Cancer. 2011; 10:96.

33.	 Zhang S, Balch C, Chan MW, Lai HC, Matei D, Schilder
JM, Yan PS, Huang TH, Nephew KP. Identification and
characterization of ovarian cancer-initiating cells from primary human tumors. Cancer Res. 2008; 68:4311–4320.

21.	 Ho MM, Ng AV, Lam S, Hung JY. Side population in
human lung cancer cell lines and tumors is enriched with
stem-like cancer cells. Cancer Res. 2007; 67:4827–4833.
22.	 Scheel C, Weinberg RA. Cancer stem cells and epithelialmesenchymal transition: concepts and molecular links.
Semin Cancer Biol. 2012; 22:396–403.

34.	 Rajasekhar VK, Studer L, Gerald W, Socci ND, Scher HI.
Tumour-initiating stem-like cells in human prostate cancer
exhibit increased NF-kappaB signalling. Nat Commun.
2011; 2:162.

23.	 Charafe-Jauffret E, Ginestier C, Iovino F, Tarpin C, Diebel
M, Esterni B, Houvenaeghel G, Extra JM, Bertucci F,
Jacquemier J, Xerri L, Dontu G, Stassi G, Xiao Y, Barsky

35.	 Ghods AJ, Irvin D, Liu G, Yuan X, Abdulkadir IR, Tunici
P, Konda B, Wachsmann-Hogiu S, Black KL, Yu JS.
Spheres isolated from 9L gliosarcoma rat cell line possess

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

27301

Oncotarget

chemoresistant and aggressive cancer stem-like cells. Stem
Cells. 2007; 25:1645–1653.

47.	 Aguirre-Ghiso JA, Estrada Y, Liu D, Ossowski L.
ERK(MAPK) activity as a determinant of tumor growth and
dormancy; regulation by p38(SAPK). Cancer Res. 2003;
63:1684–1695.

36.	 Rappa G, Mercapide J, Anzanello F, Prasmickaite L, Xi Y,
Ju J, Fodstad O, Lorico A. Growth of cancer cell lines under
stem cell-like conditions has the potential to unveil therapeutic targets. Exp Cell Res. 2008; 314:2110–2122.

48.	 Aguirre-Ghiso JA. Models, mechanisms and clinical
evidence for cancer dormancy. Nat Rev Cancer. 2007;
7:834–846.

37.	 Mo J, Sun B, Zhao X, Gu Q, Dong X, Liu Z, Ma Y, Zhao N,
Liu Y, Chi J, Sun R. The in-vitro spheroid culture induces a
more highly differentiated but tumorigenic population from
melanoma cell lines. Melanoma Res. 2013; 23:254–263.

49.	 Gao H, Chakraborty G, Lee-Lim AP, Mo Q, Decker M,
Vonica A, Shen R, Brogi E, Brivanlou AH, Giancotti FG.
The BMP inhibitor Coco reactivates breast cancer cells at
lung metastatic sites. Cell. 2012; 150:764–779.

38.	 Chen SF, Chang YC, Nieh S, Liu CL, Yang CY, Lin YS.
Nonadhesive culture system as a model of rapid sphere formation with cancer stem cell properties. PLoS One. 2012;
7:e31864.

50.	 Naumov GN, Townson JL, MacDonald IC, Wilson SM,
Bramwell VH, Groom AC, Chambers AF. Ineffectiveness
of doxorubicin treatment on solitary dormant mammary carcinoma cells or late-developing metastases. Breast cancer
research and treatment. 2003; 82:199–206.

39.	 Bleau AM, Freire J, Pajares MJ, Zudaire I, Anton I, NistalVillan E, Redrado M, Zandueta CN, Garmendia I, Ajona D,
Blanco D, Pio R, Lecanda F, Calvo A, Montuenga LM.
New syngeneic inflammatory-related lung cancer metastatic
model harboring double KRAS/WWOX alterations. Int J
Cancer. 2014; 135:2516–2527.

51.	 Tran E, Sun H, Fang Y. Dynamic mass redistribution assays
decode surface influence on signaling of endogenous purinergic P2Y receptors. Assay and drug development technologies. 2012; 10:37–45.

40.	 Vicent S, Luis-Ravelo D, Anton I, Garcia-Tunon I, BorrasCuesta F, Dotor J, De Las Rivas J, Lecanda F. A novel lung
cancer signature mediates metastatic bone colonization by a
dual mechanism. Cancer Res. 2008; 68:2275–2285.

52.	 Barkan D, Kleinman H, Simmons JL, Asmussen H,
Kamaraju AK, Hoenorhoff MJ, Liu ZY, Costes SV,
Cho EH, Lockett S, Khanna C, Chambers AF, Green JE.
Inhibition of metastatic outgrowth from single dormant
tumor cells by targeting the cytoskeleton. Cancer Res. 2008;
68:6241–6250.

41.	 Gupta PB, Chaffer CL, Weinberg RA. Cancer stem cells:
mirage or reality? Nat Med. 2009; 15:1010–1012.

53.	 Shibue T, Brooks MW, Inan MF, Reinhardt F, Weinberg
RA. The outgrowth of micrometastases is enabled by the
formation of filopodium-like protrusions. Cancer Discov.
2012; 2:706–721.

42.	 Mani SA, Guo W, Liao MJ, Eaton EN, Ayyanan A, Zhou
AY, Brooks M, Reinhard F, Zhang CC, Shipitsin M,
Campbell LL, Polyak K, Brisken C, Yang J, Weinberg RA.
The epithelial-mesenchymal transition generates cells with
properties of stem cells. Cell. 2008; 133:704–715.

54.	 Lu X, Mu E, Wei Y, Riethdorf S, Yang Q, Yuan M, Yan J,
Hua Y, Tiede BJ, Haffty BG, Pantel K, Massague J, Kang
Y. VCAM-1 promotes osteolytic expansion of indolent
bone micrometastasis of breast cancer by engaging alpha4beta1-positive osteoclast progenitors. Cancer Cell. 2011;
20:701–714.

43.	 Ponz-Sarvise M, Nguewa PA, Pajares MJ, Agorreta J,
Lozano MD, Redrado M, Pio R, Behrens C, Wistuba
II, Garcia-Franco CE, Garcia-Foncillas J, Montuenga
LM, Calvo A, Gil-Bazo I. Inhibitor of differentiation-1 as a novel prognostic factor in NSCLC patients
with adenocarcinoma histology and its potential contribution to therapy resistance. Clin Cancer Res. 2011;
17:4155–4166.

55.	 Boyerinas B, Zafrir M, Yesilkanal AE, Price TT, Hyjek
EM, Sipkins DA. Adhesion to osteopontin in the bone marrow niche regulates lymphoblastic leukemia cell dormancy.
Blood. 2013; 121:4821–4831.

44.	 Martin-Padura I, Marighetti P, Agliano A, Colombo F,
Larzabal L, Redrado M, Bleau AM, Prior C, Bertolini F,
Calvo A. Residual dormant cancer stem-cell foci are
responsible for tumor relapse after antiangiogenic metronomic therapy in hepatocellular carcinoma xenografts. Lab
Invest. 2012; 92:952–966.

56.	 Kobayashi A, Okuda H, Xing F, Pandey PR, Watabe M,
Hirota S, Pai SK, Liu W, Fukuda K, Chambers C, Wilber
A, Watabe K. Bone morphogenetic protein 7 in dormancy
and metastasis of prostate cancer stem-like cells in bone. J
Exp Med. 2011; 208:2641–2655.

45.	 Lin Y, Yang Y, Li W, Chen Q, Li J, Pan X, Zhou L, Liu C,
Chen C, He J, Cao H, Yao H, Zheng L, Xu X, Xia Z, Ren
J, et al. Reciprocal regulation of Akt and Oct4 promotes
the self-renewal and survival of embryonal carcinoma cells.
Mol Cell. 2012; 48:627–640.

57.	 Sosa MS, Bragado P, Debnath J, Aguirre-Ghiso JA.
Regulation of tumor cell dormancy by tissue microenvironments and autophagy. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2013; 734:73–89.
58.	 Bragado P, Estrada Y, Parikh F, Krause S, Capobianco C,
Farina HG, Schewe DM, Aguirre-Ghiso JA. TGF-beta2 dictates disseminated tumour cell fate in target organs through
TGF-beta-RIII and p38alpha/beta signalling. Nat Cell Biol.
2013; 15:1351–1361.

46.	 Hambardzumyan D, Becher OJ, Rosenblum MK, Pandolfi
PP, Manova-Todorova K, Holland EC. PI3K pathway regulates survival of cancer stem cells residing in the perivascular niche following radiation in medulloblastoma in vivo.
Genes Dev. 2008; 22:436–448.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

59.	 Matilainen H, Yu XW, Tang CW, Berridge MV, McConnell
MJ. Sphere formation reverses the metastatic and cancer
27302

Oncotarget

stem cell phenotype of the murine mammary tumour 4T1,
independently of the putative cancer stem cell marker
­Sca-1. Cancer Lett. 2012; 323:20–28.

68.	 Ocana OH, Corcoles R, Fabra A, Moreno-Bueno G,
Acloque H, Vega S, Barrallo-Gimeno A, Cano A, Nieto
MA. Metastatic colonization requires the repression of the
epithelial-mesenchymal transition inducer Prrx1. Cancer
Cell. 2012; 22:709–724.

60.	 Sutoh Yoneyama M, Hatakeyama S, Habuchi T, Inoue T,
Nakamura T, Funyu T, Wiche G, Ohyama C, Tsuboi S.
Vimentin intermediate filament and plectin provide a scaffold for invadopodia, facilitating cancer cell invasion and
extravasation for metastasis. European journal of cell biology. 2014; 93:157–169.

69.	 Tsai JH, Donaher JL, Murphy DA, Chau S, Yang J.
Spatiotemporal regulation of epithelial-mesenchymal transition is essential for squamous cell carcinoma metastasis.
Cancer Cell. 2012; 22:725–736.

61.	 Lopez-Ayllon BD, Moncho-Amor V, Abarrategi A, Ibanez
de Caceres I, Castro-Carpeno J, Belda-Iniesta C, Perona
R, Sastre L. Cancer stem cells and cisplatin-resistant
cells isolated from non-small-lung cancer cell lines constitute related cell populations. Cancer medicine. 2014;
3:1099–1111.

70.	 Shibue T, Brooks MW, Weinberg RA. An integrin-linked
machinery of cytoskeletal regulation that enables experimental tumor initiation and metastatic colonization. Cancer
Cell. 2013; 24:481–498.
71.	 Celia-Terrassa T, Meca-Cortes O, Mateo F, de Paz AM,
Rubio N, Arnal-Estape A, Ell BJ, Bermudo R, Diaz A,
Guerra-Rebollo M, Lozano JJ, Estaras C, Ulloa C,
Alvarez-Simon D, Mila J, Vilella R, et al. Epithelialmesenchymal transition can suppress major attributes
of human epithelial tumor-initiating cells. J Clin Invest.
2012; 122:1849–1868.

62.	 Levina V, Marrangoni AM, DeMarco R, Gorelik E, Lokshin
AE. Drug-selected human lung cancer stem cells: cytokine
network, tumorigenic and metastatic properties. PLoS One.
2008; 3:e3077.
63.	 Pang R, Law WL, Chu AC, Poon JT, Lam CS, Chow AK,
Ng L, Cheung LW, Lan XR, Lan HY, Tan VP, Yau TC,
Poon RT, Wong BC. A subpopulation of CD26+ cancer
stem cells with metastatic capacity in human colorectal
cancer. Cell Stem Cell. 2010; 6:603–615.

72.	 Yan J, De Melo J, Cutz JC, Aziz T, Tang D. Aldehyde
dehydrogenase 3A1 associates with prostate tumorigenesis.
Br J Cancer. 2014; 110:2593–2603.
73.	 Coleman RE. Clinical features of metastatic bone disease
and risk of skeletal morbidity. Clin Cancer Res. 2006;
12:6243s–6249s.

64.	 Yano S, Tazawa H, Hashimoto Y, Shirakawa Y, Kuroda
S, Nishizaki M, Kishimoto H, Uno F, Nagasaka T, Urata
Y, Kagawa S, Hoffman RM, Fujiwara T. A Genetically
Engineered Oncolytic Adenovirus Decoys and Lethally
Traps Quiescent Cancer Stem-like Cells in S/G2/M Phases.
Clin Cancer Res. 2013; 19:6495–6505.

74.	 Vicent S, Perurena N, Govindan R, Lecanda F. Bone
Metastases in Lung Cancer: Potential Novel Approaches to
Therapy.Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2015. [Epub ahead
of print].

65.	 Fillmore CM, Kuperwasser C. Human breast cancer cell
lines contain stem-like cells that self-renew, give rise to
phenotypically diverse progeny and survive chemotherapy.
Breast Cancer Res. 2008; 10:R25.

75.	 Ponomarev V, Doubrovin M, Serganova I, Vider J, Shavrin
A, Beresten T, Ivanova A, Ageyeva L, Tourkova V,
Balatoni J, Bornmann W, Blasberg R, Gelovani Tjuvajev J.
A novel triple-modality reporter gene for whole-body fluorescent, bioluminescent, and nuclear noninvasive imaging.
European journal of nuclear medicine and molecular imaging. 2004; 31:740–751.

66.	 Xin HW, Hari DM, Mullinax JE, Ambe CM, Koizumi
T, Ray S, Anderson AJ, Wiegand GW, Garfield SH,
Thorgeirsson SS, Avital I. Tumor-initiating label-retaining
cancer cells in human gastrointestinal cancers undergo
asymmetric cell division. Stem Cells. 2012; 30:591–598.

76.	 Valencia K, Martin-Fernandez M, Zandueta C, Ormazabal C,
Martinez-Canarias S, Bandres E, de la Piedra C, Lecanda F.
miR-326 associates with biochemical markers of bone turnover
in lung cancer bone metastasis. Bone. 2013; 52:532–539.

67.	 Schillert A, Trumpp A, Sprick MR. Label retaining cells in cancer - The dormant root of evil? Cancer Lett. 2013; 341:73–79.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

27303

Oncotarget

