Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No. 23

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Editorial

Tolerogenic citrullinated peptide for arthritis
Smadar Gertel, Yehuda Shoenfeld and Howard Amital

Disease-specific autoantibodies directed against
post-translation citrullinated proteins/peptides (ACPAs)
are specific serological markers for rheumatoid arthritis
(RA) and have been accepted as one of the classification
criteria for the disease.
Beyond diagnosis these
autoantibodies have also been shown also to predict
disease severity. These autoantibodies can be detected
several years prior to the clinical onset of RA, with
increasing titers overtime, as disease onset is established.
Citrullination is a post-translational modification
of proteins in which arginine is converted into citrulline,
an unnatural amino acid which is not encoded by DNA.
The reaction is catalyzed by calcium-dependent peptidyl
arginine deiminase (PAD). Citrullinated proteins have
been detected in the synovial membranes and synovial
fluid of patients with various forms of arthritis. Protein
citrullination has been shown to be involved in immune
tolerance breakdown in experimental autoimmune
arthritis. Only small amounts of citrullinated proteins
is found in the normal synovial tissue, whereas active
citrullination has been clearly associated with RA. In
addition, ACPAs are strongly associated with increased
risk of developing RA in healthy individuals. Their
presence in RA patients is associated with a more erosive
arthritis and poorer response to therapy [1].
It is reasonable to assume that citrullinated
peptides are among the earliest arthritic autoantigens
that may be suitable as potential candidates for
specific immune tolerance induction. The finding of an
immunodominant citrullinated peptide as antigen-specific
immunomodulatory agents capable for restoration of
the altered autoimmune response in RA seems to be an
interesting target for intercepting the disease.
The possible mechanisms by which autoantigens
or their derivatives induce specific tolerance are based
on frequent administrations of low dose soluble antigens.
By these means administration of a synthetic peptide
could manipulate the interaction of antigen presenting
cells (APCs) with lymphocytes. This tolerogenic
presentation displayed on MHC class II-expressing T
cells (T-APC) induces partial signals in Ag-specific T cell
clones including deletion, anergy and suppression of the
autoreactive cells.
Administration of a citrullinated filaggrin peptide
as a prophylactic measure to prevent collagen induced
arthritis prior to induction in DBA mice has been shown
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

to be successful and to protect mice from developing
arthritis [2]. This study reasoned this finding by the ability
of the citrullinated peptide to bind ACPA and to induce
tolerance of citrullinated-peptide specific T cells.
However, one of the difficulties in developing
effective tolerogenic peptides for immune tolerance
strategies in RA is the selection of a specific antigen
since the autoimmune response is against multiple
targets; diverse citrullinated proteins in different synovial
structures. The question is, therefore, which specific
citrullinated autoantigens drives the immune response in
RA and whether those antigens are the best to be employed
for immune tolerance restoration. It was shown that the
most prevalent citrullinated autoantigens, in arthritic joints
are: citrullinated fibrinogen, vimentin, collagen type II and
α-enolase [3].
Therefore we constructed a multi-antigenic peptide
for immune tolerance specific for RA. The peptide is
composed of sequence of known citrullinated autoantigens
(filaggrin, β-fibrinogen, collagen type II and vimentin) in
analogy to the mix of citrullinated peptides that are used
currently in diagnostic sera tests. One of our peptide

Figure 1: Putative mechanisms of action of the Cit-ME
following administration to adjuvant induced arthritis
rats are shown.
19344

Oncotarget

comparator was a short filaggrin peptide composed of
five amino acid [4]. This minimal filaggrin peptide with
citrulline residue in it, still specifically recognized by RA
sera.The ability of the short peptide to recognize specific
ACPA indicated its ability to modulate citrulline specific
autoreactive T cells as well.
The multi epitope citrullinated peptide we tailored
termed Cit-ME was injected to adjuvant induced arthritis
rats and was shown to attenuate arthritis manifestations
[5]. The amelioration in clinical signs of arthritis was
related to up regulation of T regulatory cell subset and an
elevated apoptosis rate of T-cells associated with reduced
Th17 population.
The putative mechanisms of the Cit-ME peptide are
demonstrated in Figure 1.
Another option that remains to be explored is
the possibility to employ tolerance induction by oral
administration of the peptide. It was shown that oral
administration of peptide derived from collagen type II
(250-270) was able to suppress the cellular and humoral
immune response in collagen-induced arthritis [6].
Chicken type II collagen also induced oral tolerance in
RA patients and reduced the inflammatory responses [7].
Another important issue refers to the relevance of
administration of tolerogenic citrullinated peptide at initial
stages of ACPA detection prior to the clinical symptoms
of arthritis for prevention of the arthritis or even to reduce
disease severity.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

We believe that specific peptide therapy may
provide an opportunity to divert patients with an incoming
inflammatory condition from developing diseases
such as RA, furthermore such an approach seems to be
specific avoiding unnecessary exposure to nonspecific
immunomodulatory agents.
Howard Amital: Department of Medicine, Sheba Medical
Center, (Affiliated to Tel-Aviv University), Tel-Hashomer,
Israel
Correspondence to: Howard Amital, email howard.amital@
sheba.health.gov.il
Keywords: rheumatoid arthritis, tolerance
Received: July 02, 2015
Published: July 26, 2015

REFERENCES
1.	

Valesini G, et al. Autoimmun Rev. 2015; 14:490-497.

2.	

Kuhn KA, et al. J Clin Invest. 2006; 116:961-973.

3.	 Van Steendam K, et al. T. Rheumatology. 2011; 50:830837.

19345

4.	

Szarka E, et al. Immunology. 2014; 141:181-191.

5.	

Gertel S, et al.J immunol. 2015; 194:5674-5680.

6.	

Zhu P, et al. Clin immunol. 2007; 122:75-84.

7.	

Wei W, et al. Arthritis Res Ther. 2009; 11:R180.

Oncotarget

