Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No. 13

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

MicroRNA profiling of Chinese primary glioblastoma reveals a
temozolomide-chemoresistant subtype
Wei Yan1,2,*, Yanwei Liu1,3,4,*, Pei Yang1,3,4, Zheng Wang1,3,4, Yongping You2,
Tao Jiang1,3,4
1

Beijing Neurosurgical Institute, Capital Medical University, Beijing, PR China

2

Department of Neurosurgery, First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, PR China

3

Beijing Institute for Brain Disorders, Brain Tumor Center, Beijing, PR China

4

Department of Neurosurgery, Beijing Tiantan Hospital, Capital Medical University, Beijing, PR China

*

These authors have contributed equally to this work

Correspondence to:
Tao Jiang, e-mail: taojiang1964@163.com
Yongping You, e-mail: yypl9@njmu.edu.cn
Keywords: glioblastoma, microRNA, IDH1 mutation, temozolomide
Received: December 16, 2014     Accepted: January 30, 2015     Published: March 23, 2015

ABSTRACT
Accumulating evidence demonstrates that defining molecular subtypes based
on objective genetic alterations may permit a more rational, patient-specific
approach to molecular targeted therapy across various cancers. The objective
of this study was to subtype primary glioblastoma (pGBM) based on MicroRNA
(miRNA) profiling in Chinese population. Here, miRNA expression profiles from 82
pGBM samples were analyzed and 78 independent pGBM samples were used for
qRT-PCR validation. We found that two distinct subgroups with different prognosis
and chemosensitivities to temozolomide (TMZ) in Chinese pGBM samples. One
subtype is TMZ chemoresistant (termed the TCR subtype) and confers a poor
prognosis. The other subtype is TMZ-chemosensitive (termed the TCS subtype) and
confers a relatively better prognosis compared with the TCR subtype. A classifier
consisting of seven miRNAs was then identified (miR-1280, miR-1238, miR-938 and
miR-423-5p (overexpressed in the TCR subtype); and let-7i, miR-151-3p and miR-93
(downregulated in the TCR subtype)), which could be used to assign pGBM samples
to the corresponding subtype. The classifier was validated using both internal and
external samples. Meanwhile, the genetic alterations of the TCR and TCS subtypes
were also analyzed. The TCR subtype was characterized by no IDH1 mutation, and
EGFR and Ki-67 overexpression. The TCS subtype displayed the opposite situation.
Taken together, the results indicate a distinct subgroup with poor prognosis and
TMZ-chemoresistance.

radiation, and quickly invades healthy brain tissue [1].
Biotherapy and molecular targeted therapy are thought
to be breakthroughs in the future treatment of glioma
[2]. However, the current grading system, based on
histopathological diagnosis, cannot provide details for
biotherapy and molecular targeted therapy and has been

INTRODUCTION
Glioblastoma

(GBM),

which

is

the

most

lethal glioma, often proves intractable to traditional
cancer treatments such as surgery, chemotherapy and

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

11676

Oncotarget

filtering, unsupervised clustering was performed using
162 miRNAs (Supplementary Table 1) that demonstrated
highly variable expression across samples (MAD >
0.5) and were associated with survival (Univariate
Cox Regression: p < 0.1). As shown in Figure 1,
unsupervised analysis revealed two distinct subgroups
of pGBMs (the TCR and TCS subtypes). Flow chart
indicating the carryout of the present study was shown
in Supplementary Figure 1.

associated with significant intraobserver variability.
Moreover, the etiology underlying the development of
biotherapy and molecular targeted therapy is unclear.
Thus, classification based on gene profiles may offer
an objective subtype classification system, reveal the
underlying molecular mechanisms and help to identify
subtype or even patient-specific targets for biotherapy
and molecular targeted therapy. To date, classifications
of glioma based on messenger RNA (mRNA) expression
data have been attempted in the past, with varying success
and with only some concordance between studies [3–6].
Moreover, mRNA is labile and prone to degradation.
The bias caused by degradation often affects the results
of classification. Thus, the outlook for the clinical use of
classification based on mRNA expression profiles is poor.
MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are a class of small non-coding
RNA molecules that regulate the expression of multiple
target genes, affecting multiple cellular processes including
cell differentiation, stem cell maintenance, and epithelial–
mesenchymal transition. The abnormal expression of
miRNAs represents a common feature of various cancers, and
can be caused by different mechanisms such as amplification/
deletion, chromosomal rearrangements, and epigenetic
regulation [7]. Depending on the genes targeted, miRNAs
can act either as oncogenes or tumor suppressors. Many
studies have shown that the aberrant expression of miRNAs,
including miR-21, miR-221/222, miR-181s and miR-34s,
play an important role in gliomagenesis [8, 9]. MiRNAs show
characteristic expression signatures in various cancers and
can profoundly affect cancer cell behavior [10]. Importantly,
miRNA profiling represents a powerful tool to accurately
differentiate cancers from normal tissue and to classify cancer
subtypes. However, a new classification system based on
miRNA expression has not been reported in glioma.
Herein, we analyzed the miRNA expression pro­
files  from 82 Chinese primary glioblastoma (pGBM)
samples, identifying two distinct subclasses of pGBMs:
the temozolomide (TMZ) chemoresis­
tant subtype
(TCR subtype) and the TMZ chemosensitive subtype
(TCS subtype). The TCR subtype has poor prognosis
and exhibits increased chemoresistance to TMZ.
Furthermore, we propose a classifier consisting of seven
miRNAs (miR-1280, miR-1238, miR-938 and miR-4235p (overexpressed in the TCR subgroup); and let-7i,
miR-93 and mi-151-3p (downregulated in the TCR
subtype)). The classifier produced 100% prediction
accuracy when assigning internal samples to the
matching subtypes. The classifier was validated using an
independent cohort containing 78 pGBM samples.

Accurate diagnosis of TCR subtypes using
expression signatures of seven miRNAs
An objective classification scheme for clinical
applications was then developed by identifying a
classifier that can reliably assign an unknown tumor
to the defined subtypes. PAM was applied to all
the prediction data sets, resulting in a classifier set
comprising seven unique miRNAs (miR-1280, miR1238, miR-938 and miR-423-5p (overexpressed in the
TCR subtype), and let-7i, miR-93 and miR-151-3p
(downregulated in the TCR subtype). The classifier
produced 100% prediction accuracy when assigning
samples to the matching subtypes in a 10-fold crossvalidation (Figure 2A). We further validated the classifier
using 84 pGBM samples. Among the 84 samples, 78 were
new independent samples that had not been used for the
bead-based expression assay, whereas the remaining six
were included in the miRNA profiling assays and were
used for internal validation. Expression profiling of the
seven miRNAs in the 84 GBM samples was determined
by TaqMan quantitative real-time PCR. Data are
presented as ΔCt, which refers here to the difference in
threshold cycles for an miRNA and U6 RNA. Expression
data were mean-centered. Unsupervised average linkage
hierarchical clustering was performed. The internal and
independent validation samples were clearly assigned
into TCR and TCS subgroups (Figure 2B).

Clinical characteristics of TCR and TCS
subtypes
Among the samples used in our study, 33 GBM
samples were assigned to the TCR subtype, and 127
cases were assigned to the TCS subtype. In addition,
the clinical outcome and genetic alterations of TCR
and TCS were analyzed systematically. As shown in
Figure 3A, in all samples, TCR was associated with
a significantly poorer clinical outcome than TCS
samples (p = 0.0017). Samples in the TCR group
were chemoresistant to TMZ (Figure 3B; p = 0.9159).
Samples in TCS group were chemosensitive to TMZ
(Figure 3C; p < 0.0001). As shown in Table 1, samples
in the TCR subtype showed no IDH1 mutation, and
showed high expression of Ki-67 and EGFR. TCS
samples displayed the opposite results. Age at GBM

RESULTS
Molecular subtypes of in pGBM samples
In our present study, we obtained miRNA
expression profiles for 82 Chinese pGBMs. After data
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

11677

Oncotarget

Figure 1: Molecular classification of pGBMs. Eight-two Chinese pGBM samples were subjected to whole genome miRNA profiling.
Unsupervised clustering using 162 most variable miRNAs identified two main subtypes (TCR and TCS).

diagnosis, MGMT promoter methylation and protein
expression were not different between the TCR and
TCS groups.

heterogeneity of GBM. Past glioma classification
schemes have used mRNA expression data with varying
success, and with only moderate concordance between
studies. Recently, Kim et al reported a developmental
taxonomy of GBM defined and maintained by miRNAs
[17]. In the present study, two clear subtypes of pGBMs
(TCR and TCS) were defined and clinical analysis
showed that the TCR subtype has poor prognosis
and exhibits increased chemoresistance to TMZ. The
TCR subtype is characterized by no IDH1 mutation,
and by EGFR and Ki-67 overexpression. The TCS
subtype showed the opposite situation. These results
demonstrated new subtypes related to prognosis and
chemoresistance, and provide a new direction for
future molecular pathological diagnosis and prognosis
prediction in GBM.
In the present study, the Human v2.0 miRNA
Expression BeadChip was used for whole genome miRNA
profiling, in which more than 800 miRNA were detected.
Furthermore, a classifier containing seven miRNAs
that could clearly differentiate TCR and TCS samples
was identified. Then we tried to validate our miRNA
classification in The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) samples.
However, the Agilent 8 × 15 K Human miRNA microarray
used in TCGA only contained 470 miRNAs. Only two of the

DISCUSSION
The use of gene expression data from patient tumor
samples to classify them and to determine better treatment
options is becoming increasingly common in clinical practice
[13]. The instability of mRNA makes expression profiling a
challenging endeavor in routine clinical practice outside of
major hospitals or commercial laboratories [14]. The urgent
need for an objective, molecular-based classification of
GBM is exemplified by the high rate of divergent diagnoses,
the inexact prognostic capabilities, and poor therapeutic
predictive properties of the current histopathological
classification schemes. Here, we profiled miRNA expressions
in 82 pGBMs, and unsupervised analysis revealed two main
types: the TCR and TCS subtypes. Furthermore, different
clinical characteristics of the two subtypes of GBM were
defined.
Although the overall prognosis of pGBMs is
dismal, the clinical characteristics of pGBMs are very
different from each other [15, 16]. Classification based
on molecular phenotype may explain the clinical
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

11678

Oncotarget

Figure 2: Validation of TCR and TCS subgroups in an independent cohort. (A) PAM identified a classifier containing seven
miRNAs that could clearly differentiate TCR and TCS samples in the 82 samples with miRNA microarrays. (B) The classifier could
effectively reveal TCR and TCS subtypes in internal and independent validation samples.

Figure 3: Clinical outcomes of TCR and TCS subgroups. (A) Kaplan–Meier survival plots for all TCR and TCS samples.
(B) Kaplan–Meier survival plots for samples treated or not treated with TMZ in TCR samples. (C) Kaplan–Meier survival plots for samples
treated or not treated with TMZ in TCS samples.

seven miRNAs in the classifier for diagnosing TCR and TCS
subtypes are in the TCGA miRNA dataset. Thus, the TCGA
miRNA dataset could not be used as the validation cohort.
TMZ has been approved for the treatment of
GBM. Further clinical trials have been performed to
assess the activity of TMZ in GBM. MGMT promoter
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

hypermethylation is a classical marker for TMZ
chemoresistance [18]. Notably, not all patients with
GBM having MGMT promoter methylation respond
to TMZ [19]. In the present study, survival analysis
showed that the TCR subtype was TMZ-resistant,
while TCS subtype was chemosensitive to TMZ. This
11679

Oncotarget

Table 1: Clinical and molecular pathology features of TCR and TCS subtype
p value*

TCR subtype

TCS subtype

33 cases (20.6%)

127 cases (79.4%)

14/19

47/80

0.688

46.9 ± 13.8

45.6 ± 12.5

0.5884‡

IDH1 mutation (Mutated/Unmutated)

0/26

23/66

0.002

MGMT promoter methylation (Methylated/
Unmethylated)

6/14

23/39

0.604

MGMT (Low/High)

13/20

48/79

1.000

Ki-67 (Low/High)

7/26

50/77

0.066

EGFR (Low/High)

6/27

46/81

0.060

No. of cases
SEX (Female/Male)
Age at GBM diagnosis (year)

Two-sided χ2 test.
Student’s t-test.

*
‡

RNA extraction

pointed out that individualized therapy with TMZ
based on above classification should be considered
when treating GBM patients. Meanwhile, MGMT
promoter methylation and protein expression showed
no difference between TCR and TCS samples. These
results indicated that the chemoresistance of the TCR
samples might be caused by a different mechanism
associated with aberrant miRNA expression. However,
the underlying molecular mechanism remained to be
further investigated.
In summary, we identified, for the first time, a
novel TMZ-chemoresistant subtype of pGBMs based on
miRNA profiles. The new classification system provides
a predictor of prognosis and chemosensitivity to TMZ
and hints at another mechanism of TMZ resistance.
This may help in determining individualized therapy of
pGBM patients.

All the tissue samples were immediately snapfrozen in liquid nitrogen after surgery. A hematoxylin and
eosin-stained frozen section was prepared to assess the
percentage of tumor cells before RNA extraction. Only
samples with greater than 80% tumor cells were selected.
Total RNA from frozen tumor tissues was extracted by
using the mirVana miRNA Isolation kit (Ambion, Austin,
TX, USA), according to the manufacturer’s protocol.
RNA concentration and quality were measured using
a NanoDrop ND-1000 spectrophotometer (NanoDrop
Technologies, Houston, TX, USA).

MiRNA expression profiling
Eighty-two glioma tissues were randomly chosen
for miRNA microarray assays (GSE25632) [11]. Briefly,
200 ng of total RNA was polyadenylated and then converted
to cDNA using a biotin-labeled Oligo dT primer with a
universal PCR sequence. After cDNA synthesis, miRNAs
were individually amplified using specific oligonucleotides.
A single miRNA-specific Oligo (MSO) was designed
against each mature miRNA sequence, and miRNA-specific
primers were extended using DNA polymerase. Universal
primers were used to amplify the cDNA templates and
the primer complimentary to the array was fluorescently
labeled. Finally, the labeled, single-stranded PCR products
were hybridized to the Human v2.0 miRNA Expression
BeadChip (Illumina Inc., San Diego, CA, USA), which
contains 1,146 human miRNAs (97% coverage of the
miRBase 12.0  database).

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Patients and samples
One hundred and sixty pGBM cases from the
Chinese Glioma Genome Atlas (CGGA) were included
in this study. All the patients underwent surgical
resection between January 2006 and December 2008,
and subsequently received radiation therapy and/or
alkylating agent-based chemotherapy. Patients were
eligible for the study if their diagnosis was established
histologically by two neuropathologists, according
to the 2007 World Health Organization classification
guidelines. Tumor tissue samples were obtained by
surgical resection before patients underwent radiation
and/or chemotherapy treatment. The institutional
review boards of all the hospitals involved in the
study gave their approval, and all patients gave written
informed consent.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Quantitative RT-PCR
Real-time RT-PCR was performed using a standard
TaqMan PCR kit procedure on a LightCycler 480 real-time
11680

Oncotarget

PCR system (Roche). All primers and probes for TaqMan
microRNA assays were purchased from Applied Biosystems.
Real-time RT-PCR was carried out according to the
manufacturer’s recommendation and the relative expression
was calculated using the comparative Ct method.

of China (863) (No.2012AA02A508), International
Cooperation Program (No. 2012DFA30470), National
Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 81402056).

Molecular analyses

The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

ConflictS of interest

The IDH1 mutation and O6-methylguanineDNA methyltransferase (MGMT) promoter methylation
were analyzed by pyro-sequencing, as described in our
previously report [12].

REFERENCES
1.	 Kotliarova S, Fine HA. SnapShot: glioblastoma multiforme.
Cancer Cell. 2012; 21:710–710e711.

Tissue microarray and immunohistochemistry

2.	 Brandsma D, van den Bent MJ. Molecular targeted therapies and chemotherapy in malignant gliomas. Curr Opin
Oncol. 2007; 19:598–605.

The tissue microarray was constructed with
160 pGBMs using a manual tissue arrayer (MTA-1;
Beecher Instruments, Sun Prairie, WI), and used for
immunohistochemical staining of Ki67, epidermal growth
factor receptor (EGFR), and O6-methylguanine-DNA
methyltransferase (MGMT; Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Santa
Cruz, CA), according to the manufacturer’s instructions.
Appropriate positive and negative controls were run
concurrently. Two pathologists, without knowledge of clinical
information, jointly scored the staining intensity.

3.	 Li C, Feng Y, Coukos G, Zhang L. Therapeutic microRNA
strategies in human cancer. AAPS J. 2009; 11:747–757.
4.	 Gravendeel LA, Kouwenhoven MC, Gevaert O, de Rooi JJ,
Stubbs AP, Duijm JE, Daemen A, Bleeker FE, Bralten LB,
Kloosterhof NK, De Moor B, Eilers PH, van der Spek PJ,
Kros JM, Sillevis Smitt PA, van den Bent MJ, et al. Intrinsic
gene expression profiles of gliomas are a better predictor of
survival than histology. Cancer Res. 2009; 69:9065–9072.
5.	 Phillips HS, Kharbanda S, Chen R, Forrest WF, Soriano RH,
Wu TD, Misra A, Nigro JM, Colman H, Soroceanu L,
Williams PM, Modrusan Z, Feuerstein BG, Aldape K.
Molecular subclasses of high-grade glioma predict prognosis, delineate a pattern of disease progression, and resemble
stages in neurogenesis. Cancer Cell. 2006; 9:157–173.

Subtype identification and prediction
The expression data for the miRNAs were mean
centered, and the standard deviation was normalized to
1 per array. We then filtered those with low variability
in expression level (median absolute deviation (MAD)
< 0.1). We used two additional criteria to further select
a group of highly informative miRNAs. These criteria
included (i) miRNAs showing highly variable expression
(MAD ≥ 0.5; n = 66), (ii) patient survival-related miRNAs
(0.5 > MAD ≥ 0.1; Univariate Cox model p < 0.1; n = 96).
The resultant 162 miRNAs were used for unsupervised
clustering, which was performed and viewed using Cluster
3.0 and Treeview. The diagnostic classifier was identified
by prediction analysis of microarrays (PAM).

6.	 Verhaak RG, Hoadley KA, Purdom E, Wang V, Qi Y,
Wilkerson MD, Miller CR, Ding L, Golub T, Mesirov JP,
Alexe G, Lawrence M, O’Kelly M, Tamayo P, Weir BA,
Gabriel S, et al. Integrated genomic analysis identifies clinically relevant subtypes of glioblastoma characterized by
abnormalities in PDGFRA, IDH1, EGFR, and NF1. Cancer
Cell. 2010; 17:98–110.
7.	 Kong YW, Ferland-McCollough D, Jackson TJ, Bushell M.
microRNAs in cancer management. Lancet Oncol. 2012;
13:e249–258.

Statistical analysis

8.	 Yan W, Zhang W, Jiang T. Oncogene addiction in gliomas: implications for molecular targeted therapy. J Exp Clin
Cancer Res. 2011; 30:58.

Kaplan–Meier survival analysis was used to estimate
the survival distributions, and the log-rank test was used
to assess the statistical significance between stratified
survival groups, using GraphPad Prism 5.0. Student’s test
was used to determine significant differences. Qualitative
variables were analyzed using χ2 test in SPSS 13.0. All
data are presented as the means ± SE. A two-sided P value
of < 0.05 was regarded as significant.

9.	 Yan W, Li R, Liu Y, Yang P, Wang Z, Zhang C, Bao Z,
Zhang W, You Y, Jiang T. MicroRNA expression ­patterns
in the malignant progression of gliomas and a 5-microRNA
signature for prognosis. Oncotarget. 2014; 5:12908–12915.
10.	 Godlewski J, Nowicki MO, Bronisz A, Williams S, Otsuki A,
Nuovo G, Raychaudhury A, Newton HB, Chiocca  EA,
Lawler S. Targeting of the Bmi-1 oncogene/stem cell renewal
factor by microRNA-128 inhibits glioma proliferation and
self-renewal. Cancer Res. 2008; 68:9125–9130.

Funding
This work was supported by grants from the National
High Technology Research and Development Program
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

11.	 Zhang W, Zhang J, Yan W, You G, Bao Z, Li S, Kang C,
Jiang C, You Y, Zhang Y, Chen CC, Song SW, Jiang T.
11681

Oncotarget

Whole-genome microRNA expression profiling identifies a 5-microRNA signature as a prognostic biomarker in
Chinese patients with primary glioblastoma multiforme.
Cancer. 2013; 119:814–824.

16.	 Nicholas MK, Lukas RV, Chmura S, Yamini B, Lesniak M,
Pytel P. Molecular heterogeneity in glioblastoma: therapeutic opportunities and challenges. Semin Oncol. 2011;
38:243–253.

12.	 Yan W, Zhang W, You G, Bao Z, Wang Y, Liu Y, Kang C,
You Y, Wang L, Jiang T. Correlation of IDH1 mutation
with clinicopathologic factors and prognosis in primary
glioblastoma: a report of 118 patients from China. PLoS
One. 2012; 7:e30339.

17.	 Kim TM, Huang W, Park R, Park PJ, Johnson MD.
A developmental taxonomy of glioblastoma defined
and maintained by MicroRNAs. Cancer Res. 2011;
71:3387–3399.
18.	 Hegi ME, Diserens AC, Gorlia T, Hamou MF, de Tribolet N,
Weller M, Kros JM, Hainfellner JA, Mason W, Mariani L,
Bromberg JE, Hau P, Mirimanoff RO, Cairncross JG,
Janzer RC, Stupp R. MGMT gene silencing and benefit
from temozolomide in glioblastoma. N Engl J Med. 2005;
352:997–1003.

13.	 Pusztai L. Chips to bedside: incorporation of microarray data into clinical practice. Clin Cancer Res. 2006;
12:7209–7214.
14.	 Hill VK, Ricketts C, Bieche I, Vacher S, Gentle D,
Lewis C, Maher ER, Latif F. Genome-wide DNA methylation profiling of CpG islands in breast cancer identifies
novel genes associated with tumorigenicity. Cancer Res.
2011; 71:2988–2999.

19.	 Eramo A, Pallini R, Lotti F, Sette G, Patti M, Bartucci M,
Ricci-Vitiani L, Signore M, Stassi G, Larocca LM, Crino L,
Peschle C, De Maria R. Inhibition of DNA methylation
sensitizes glioblastoma for tumor necrosis factor-related
apoptosis-inducing ligand-mediated destruction. Cancer
Res. 2005; 65:11469–11477.

15.	 Bonavia R, Inda MM, Cavenee WK, Furnari FB.
Heterogeneity maintenance in glioblastoma: a social network. Cancer Res. 2011; 71:4055–4060.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

11682

Oncotarget

