Oncotarget, Vol. 7, No. 6

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Human carcinoma-associated mesenchymal stem cells promote
ovarian cancer chemotherapy resistance via a BMP4/HH
signaling loop
Lan G. Coffman1,*, Yun-Jung Choi1,*, Karen McLean2, Benjamin L. Allen3, Marina
Pasca di Magliano3,4 and Ronald J. Buckanovich1,2
1

Division of Hematology Oncology, Department of Internal Medicine, University of Michigan Medical Center, Ann Arbor,
Michigan, USA

2

Division of Gynecologic Oncology, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Michigan Medical Center, Ann
Arbor, Michigan, USA
3

Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Michigan Medical Center, Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA

4

Department of Surgery, University of Michigan Medical Center, Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA

*

These authors have contributed equally to this work and should be considered as co-first authors

Correspondence to: Lan G. Coffman, email: coffmanl@med.umich.edu
Keywords: ovarian cancer, mesenchymal stem cell, tumor microenvironment, BMP4, Hedgehog
Received: September 14, 2015	

Accepted: January 01, 2016	

Published: January 09, 2016

Abstract
The tumor microenvironment is critical to cancer growth and therapy resistance.
We previously characterized human ovarian carcinoma-associated mesenchymal stem
cells (CA-MSCs). CA-MSCs are multi-potent cells that can differentiate into tumor
microenvironment components including fibroblasts, myofibroblasts and adipocytes.
We previously reported CA-MSCs, compared to normal MSCs, express high levels of
BMP proteins and promote tumor growth by increasing numbers of cancer stemlike cells (CSCs). We demonstrate here that ovarian tumor cell-secreted Hedgehog
(HH) induces CA-MSC BMP4 expression. CA-MSC-derived BMP4 reciprocally increases
ovarian tumor cell HH expression indicating a positive feedback loop. Interruption of
this loop with a HH pathway inhibitor or BMP4 blocking antibody decreases CA-MSCderived BMP4 and tumor-derived HH preventing enrichment of CSCs and reversing
chemotherapy resistance. The impact of HH inhibition was only seen in CA-MSCcontaining tumors, indicating the importance of a humanized stroma. These results
are reciprocal to findings in pancreatic and bladder cancer, suggesting HH signaling
effects are tumor tissue specific warranting careful investigation in each tumor type.
Collectively, we define a critical positive feedback loop between CA-MSC-derived BMP4
and ovarian tumor cell-secreted HH and present evidence for the further investigation
of HH as a clinical target in ovarian cancer.

Introduction

data describing the importance of stromal components
such as adipocytes and cancer associated fibroblasts in
ovarian cancer [2-5].
Mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) are an important
component of the tumor microenvironment [6, 7]. MSCs
were first characterized from bone marrow, adipose and
embryonic tissues and are well-documented to travel to
tumor sites [8-10]. MSCs have now been reported in a
variety of other tissues including ovary, brain, spleen,
liver, kidney, lung, muscle, thymus, pancreas, eyelid, and
the peri-vasculature [11-13], suggesting MSCs may be
present in many tissues throughout tumor initiation and
growth.

Ovarian cancer is the most deadly US gynecologic
malignancy, killing over 14,000 women yearly [1]. Most
ovarian cancer cases are diagnosed as late stage disease
with diffuse peritoneal metastasis indicating an ovarian
cancer tropism for the intra-abdominal microenvironment.
Despite initial chemotherapeutic response, most ovarian
cancer patients will develop recurrent disease. Inevitably,
recurrent disease will become resistant to standard
platinum-based chemotherapy ultimately leading to patient
death. The tumor microenvironment is critical for the
growth, spread and survival of cancer cells with emerging
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

6916

Oncotarget

critical for the tumor growth promoting function of CAMSCs.

Recently our lab isolated primary human ovarian
carcinoma-associated MSCs (CA-MSCs) [14]. CAMSCs are distinct from cancer associated fibroblasts;
CA-MSCs meet all the established criteria for MSCs
[15] with appropriate surface marker expression and
multipotent differentiation potential. As a multipotent stem cell population, CA-MSCs (unlike cancer
associated fibroblasts) will passage for many months in
culture. CA-MSCs have a normal genome and do not
form tumors [16]. However, CA-MSCs are strongly
pro-tumorigenic, increasing both tumor growth and
“stemness” [14]. Importantly, as CA-MSCs are multipotent cells capable of differentiating into several critical
components of the tumor stroma including fibroblasts,
osteocytes and adipocytes [15], therapeutic targeting of
CA-MSCs could impact multiple components of the tumor
microenvironment and thereby have a powerful anti-tumor
effect.
CA-MSCs have a unique expression profile
compared to normal adipose, bone marrow or ovary
derived MSCs characterized by increased BMP expression
(particularly BMP2 and BMP4) [14, 16]. The factors
leading to the unique expression profile of CA-MSCs are
unknown; however our previous work suggests that tumorsecreted factors contribute to the CA-MSC expression
profile.
One potential tumor derived CA-MSC regulating
factor is Hedgehog (HH). HH signaling, which is critical
during development and in maintenance of the adult stem
cell pool, is a key regulator of BMP expression [17].
HH signaling also has emerging roles in tumor/stromal
signaling [18]. In ovarian cancer, increased HH signaling
is correlated with poor outcomes [19] and HH signaling
is increased in ovarian cancer at the time of disease
recurrence [20]. HH appears to be particularly important
in the tumor microenvironment as HH signaling in ovarian
tumor stroma is associated with enhanced chemoresistance
and decreased survival [3, 19, 21]. In contrast, HH
signaling appears to restrict tumor progression in bladder
cancer and HH inhibition produced negative clinical
results in pancreatic cancer. These contrasting results
highlight the complexity of the HH pathway and may
indicate tissue specific effects of HH signaling which
would be unsurprising given the divergent effects of HH
in spatiotemporal gradients during development [22, 23].
We investigated a possible role for HH signaling in
CA-MSCs. We demonstrate that tumor-derived HH drives
CA-MSC BMP4 production. CA-MSC-derived BMP4
reciprocally increases HH production in ovarian cancer
cells thus creating a positive feedback loop between
the tumor and CA-MSCs. This feedback loop promoted
chemotherapy resistance both in vitro and in vivo. In
vivo pharmacologic HH inhibition abrogated the protumorigenic effects of CA-MSCs preventing increases in
cancer stem cell-like cell (CSC) percentage and reversed
chemotherapy resistance indicating that HH signaling is
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Results
Hedgehog signaling is active in the stroma of
normal ovary and ovarian cancer
To explore the role of HH signaling in the ovarian
cancer microenvironment we first confirmed HH
signaling in normal ovarian tissue and ovarian tumors.
To confirm HH activity in normal ovaries and ovarian
tumors we used a Gli1lacZ reporter mouse [24, 25]. Gli1
is both a downstream component of HH signaling and a
transcriptional target, thus its expression indicates pathway
activation [26]. We observed strong Beta-Galactosidase
(β-Gal) activity throughout the normal murine ovarian
stroma (Figure 1Ai). β-Gal expression was not observed
in the ovarian surface epithelium, in developing follicles,
or in the epithelial lining of the oviduct (the murine
equivalent of the fallopian tube). β-Gal expression was
detected in the peri-vasculature; a reported location for
tissue associated MSCs [12].
To determine if HH signaling is active in ovarian
tumor stroma, we transplanted ID8 mouse ovarian tumor
cells into the flank of Gli1lacZ mice. β-Gal as an indicator
of HH signaling was clearly noted within the tumor stroma
with significantly less β-Gal in adjacent non-tumor stroma
(Figure 1Aii, iii). To confirm HH signaling in human
ovarian cancer, qRT-PCR of cDNA generated from
primary human ovarian tumor samples were analyzed.
Consistent with previous results [27], GLI1 and GLI3 (HH
pathway transcriptional effectors), PTCH1 (HH signaling
repressor and target gene), SMO (HH signaling activator),
IHH and SHH (HH pathway ligands) were expressed in
ovarian tumors, albeit at variable levels (Figure 1B).

Mesenchymal stem cells respond to HH ligands
produced by ovarian cancer cells
Given the largely stromal localization of HH
pathway activation, we next explored the ability of MSCs
to respond to HH signaling. We tested the ability of both
normal ovary derived MSCs (Ov-MSCs) and, given the
predilection of ovarian cancer for omental adipose, normal
adipose derived MSCs (A-MSCs) to respond to HH.
A-MSCs and Ov-MSCs treated with recombinant Sonic
Hedgehog (SHH) demonstrated increased expression
of downstream targets of the canonical HH pathway
indicating both MSC groups respond to HH signaling
(Figure 1C, 1D). CA-MSCs also demonstrated clear
response to HH treatment with induction of GLI1, SMO,
PTCH1 and GAS1 (Figure 1D).
To determine if cancer cells are a source of HH
6917

Oncotarget

Tumor-derived HH differentially induces the
expression of BMP4 in CA-MSCs

ligands, we treated CA-MSCs with conditioned media
from multiple ovarian cancer cell lines or primary
human ovarian cancer cell cultures. The induction of
HH responsive genes was analyzed via qRT-PCR. Tumor
conditioned media (TCM) lead to a similar pattern of
HH target gene induction as seen with recombinant
SHH (Figure 1E). This suggests that ovarian cancer
cells produce HH ligands that can activate HH signaling
pathways in MSCs.

Given (i) the responsiveness of MSCs to HH
signaling, (ii) the role of HH in regulating BMP expression
[17], and (iii) the differential expression of BMPs in
CA-MSCs compared to normal controls, we assessed if
HH activation could be the etiology of increased BMP

Figure 1: HH signaling is active in the normal ovary, ovarian tumor stroma and in MSCs. A. Gli1-LacZ reporter mice

demonstrate Gli1 expression (blue) in i) normal ovary stroma, and ii) ID8 ovarian tumor stroma with iii) quantification of Gli1-LacZ
positive area in tumor stroma vs non-tumor stroma demonstrating significantly higher levels in tumor stroma (quantification via ImageJ
analysis in 3 tumor and non-tumor sections). B. qRT-PCR analysis of GLI1, GLI3, SMO, PTCH, IHH and SHH in primary ovarian tumors
confirming HH signaling components are expressed in all tumors tested. C. SHH treatment of normal adipose derived MSCs demonstrate
dose dependent activation of the canonical HH signaling pathway (data are normalized to untreated adipose MSC GLI1 value). D. qRT-PCR
demonstrating treatment of A-MSCs, normal ovary (Ov-MSCs) and CA-MSCs with recombinant SHH activates HH signaling pathway.
E. qRT-PCR demonstrating tumor conditioned media (TCM) likewise activates HH signaling in CA-MSCs. Error bars=standard error of
the mean.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

6918

Oncotarget

BMP4 transcription (Figure 2C) and BMP4 protein levels
(Figure 2D) suggesting activation of BMP4 expression is
via tumor cell produced HH ligands.

signaling in CA-MSCs. qRT-PCR analysis confirmed
greater baseline expression of BMP2 and BMP4 in CAMSCs compared to normal Ov-MSCs and A-MSCs (data
not shown and Figure 2A). HH treatment of A-MSCs
and Ov-MSCs did not result in a significant (0-2.8 fold)
induction of either BMP2 or BMP4 (Supplemental Figure
1 and Figure 2B). However, treatment of CA-MSCs with
HH led to significant induction (5-30 fold) of BMP4
(Figure 2B). BMP2 expression was modestly increased in
CA-MSCs (Supplemental Figure 1).
Given the HH-mediated induction of BMP4 in
CA-MSCs, we investigated if tumor derived HH could
likewise induce BMP4 expression. CA-MSCs were
treated with TCM from three human ovarian cancer cell
lines (SKOV3, COV318, CAOV-3). BMP4 expression
was increased in response to treatment with all three TCM
(Figure 2C). Treatment with IPI-926, a SMO inhibitor,
significantly decreased the TCM-mediated induction of

A paracrine HH-BMP4 ovarian cancer cell-CAMSC positive feedback loop
We previously showed that CA-MSC-derived BMP
directly impacts ovarian cancer cells [14]. We therefore
hypothesized that CA-MSC-derived BMP4 may alter HH
expression in tumor cells though a feedback mechanism.
To investigate this possibility, we treated ovarian cancer
cells with recombinant BMP4 and analyzed SHH
expression via qRT-PCR. SHH expression was increased
in SKOV3 and CAOV-3 cell lines after 48hrs of BMP4
treatment (Figure 3A). This induction was seen at
both early (16hr) and later (48hr) time points (data not

Figure 2: CA-MSCs respond to tumor derived HH with increased BMP4. A. qRT-PCR analysis of BMP4 expression in
normal adipose MSCs (A-MSC1,2,3), normal ovary MSCs (Ov-MSC) and patient derived CA-MSCs (CA-MSC 1-4) demonstrating higher
baseline BMP4 expression in CA-MSCs, relative expression compared to A-MSC3. B. qRT-PCR analysis of BMP4 expression in A-MSC,
Ov-MSC and CA-MSCs without and with SHH demonstrating SHH-mediated BMP4 induction in CA-MSCs (expression is normalized
to untreated controls for each pair). C. qRT-PCR analysis of BMP4 expression in CA-MSCs demonstrating that tumor conditioned media
(TCM) derived from 3 ovarian cancer cell lines induces BMP4 expression and this induction can be blocked by the HH inhibitor IPI-926,
all samples normalized to CA-MSC without IPI-926. D. Western blot of BMP4 protein levels in CA-MSCs ± TCM with or without IPI-926.
Error bars=standard error of the mean.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

6919

Oncotarget

3C). The reciprocal induction of tumor derived HH
by BMP4 creates a possible signaling loop with tumor
derived HH and CA-MSC derived BMP4.To investigate
the possibility of this positive feedback loop, we next
utilized a transwell system for co-culture of CA-MSCs
and ovarian tumor cells. The transwell membrane allowed

shown) indicating that BMP4 treatment is not selecting
for a population of cells with higher SHH expression
but inducing a general increase in SHH expression. In
the COV318 ovarian cancer cell line, BMP4 treatment
induced IHH rather than SHH (Figure 3B). HH induction
was verified at the protein level via western blot (Figure

Figure 3: Ovarian tumor cells respond to BMP4 with increased HH forming a positive feedback loop interrupted
by HH inhibition. A. qRT-PCR analysis of ovarian cancer lines SKOV3 and CAOV-3 treated with BMP4 (200ng/ml) demonstrates

induction of SHH. B. qRT-PCR analysis of ovarian cancer line COV318 treated with BMP4 demonstrates induction of IHH. C. Induction
of SHH was verified at the protein level via western blot. D. qRT-PCR analysis of CA-MSCs grown in co-culture with tumor cell lines
(SKOV3, CAOV-3 and COV318) for 5 days ± IPI-926 demonstrates BMP4 induction which is abrogated by IPI-926. E. i) qRT-PCR
analysis of SKOV3 and CAOV-3 cells grown in co-culture with CA-MSCs demonstrate tumor SHH induction blocked by IPI-926, ii)
qRT-PCR analysis of COV318 cells demonstrate IHH induction with CA-MSC co-culture decreased by IPI-926. F. qRT-PCR analysis of
average BMP4 expression of CA-MSCs grown in co-culture with SKOV3 or CAOV-3 cells demonstrating decreased BMP4 induction with
the SMO inhibitor LDE225 or a BMP4 blocking antibody. G. qRT-PCR analysis of average SHH induction of SKOV3 or CAOV-3 cells
co-cultured with CA-MSCs demonstrating decreased SHH induction with LED225 or a BMP4 blocking antibody. Error bars=standard error
of the mean.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

6920

Oncotarget

only indirect cell/cell contact therefore interactions
based on secreted factors were assessed. Cells were cocultured for 5 days ± IPI-926. Cells were harvested from
their respective chambers (CA-MSCs in the upper well,
tumor cells in the lower well) and analyzed via qRTPCR to determine levels of BMP4 in CA-MSCs and HH
in tumor cells. Co-culture resulted in clear induction of
BMP4 in CA-MSCs that was decreased in the presence
of IPI-926 (Figure 3D). Likewise, SKOV3 and CAOV3 tumor cells demonstrated significant induction of SHH
while COV318 cells demonstrated significant induction
of IHH (Figure 3E). IPI-926 diminished both SHH and
IHH induction though effects on IHH induction were more
modest (Figure 3Eii). IPI-926 treatment of CA-MSCs
grown in single culture did not affect BMP4 expression
levels or cellular viability. Analogously, IPI-926 treatment
of tumor cells grown alone had no effect on tumor cell
HH expression or cellular viability (Supplemental Figure
2). Similarly, another SMO inhibitor, LDE-225, and
a BMP4 blocking antibody were used in the co-culture
system (with SKOV3 and CAOV-3 tumor cells) and both
demonstrated a reduction in CA-MSC derived BMP4 and
tumor derived HH (Figure 3F, 3G). These findings indicate
a tumor/MSC HH/BMP4 signaling loop.

with IPI-926 compared to SKOV3+CA-MSC untreated
tumors (Figure 4B). Likewise, SHH protein levels were
also reduced (4-fold) in SKOV3+CA-MSC tumors treated
with IPI-926 compared to untreated tumors.
Histologic analysis of paraffin embedded tumors
demonstrated significant differences in the amount of
stroma in CA-MSC containing tumors (~17 fold increase
compared to SKOV3 alone tumors) (Figure 4C, 4D).
This was also observed to a lesser extent with A-MSC
containing tumors (~5 fold increase). For CA-MSC
containing tumors, treatment with IPI-926 significantly
reduced the amount of tumor stroma (Figure 4C, 4D). This
suggests that HH signaling affects MSC contribution to
tumor stromal elements.

HH inhibition blocks CA-MSC mediated increase
in cancer stem cell-like cell percentage
We previously demonstrated that CA-MSCs (and to
a lesser extent A-MSCs) increase the percentage of ALDH+
cancer stem cell-like cells (CSCs) [14, 28]. Evaluation of
the tumor xenografts above demonstrated that, consistent
with previous results, there is a significant increase in
the percentage of ALDH+ cells in the SKOV3+CA-MSC
tumors compared to SKOV3 alone tumors. This increase in
ALDH+ cells is completely blocked with IPI-926 treatment
(Figure 4E). SKOV3+A-MSC tumors also demonstrate a
modest increase in the percentage of ALDH+ cells which
is blocked with IPI-926 treatment (Figure 4E). IPI-926
treated SKOV3 alone tumors demonstrated no statistically
significant change in the percentage of ALDH+ cells. The
increase in ALDH+ cells is not primarily related to ALDH+
MSCs; when dsRed labeled MSCs were co-grown with
SKOV3 cells, dsRed+ cells represented ~1.2% of all
ALDH+ cells thus MSC are not significantly impacting
the observed differences in ALDH+ cells between groups
(Supplemental Figure 3C).

Inhibition of HH signaling blocks the protumorigenic effects of CA-MSCs
We previously demonstrated that CA-MSCs
significantly promote tumor growth in a BMP2/4dependent manner. We therefore investigated whether
disruption of the HH:BMP4 signaling loop with a HH
inhibitor could alter the pro-tumorigenic effects of CAMSCs. We created xenografts using SKOV3 cells alone,
SKOV3 + A-MSCs and SKOV3 + CA-MSCs. Mice were
treated with IPI-926 (20mg/kg daily via IP injection for 21
days) or vehicle control. Mice were sacrificed when tumor
volumes reached size criteria or treatment was complete.
Consistent with our previous report [14], untreated
SKOV3+CA-MSC tumors grew significantly faster than
SKOV3+A-MSC or SKOV3 alone tumors (Figure 4A and
Supplemental Figure 3A). Surprisingly, IPI-926 treatment
completely abolished the growth advantage provided by
CA-MSCs (Figure 4A and Supplemental Figure 3B). IPI926 had no effect on the growth of SKOV3 alone tumors,
highlighting a critical role of human CA-MSCs in HH
mediated tumorigenesis (Figure 4A).
Confirming on-target effects of IPI-926, western
blot analysis demonstrated clear decreases in GLI1 levels
in IPI-926 treated tumors consistent with inhibition of
canonical HH signaling (Figure 4B). As predicted, BMP4
levels are highest in SKOV3+CA-MSC tumors. Supporting
a positive feedback loop between tumor derived HH and
CA-MSC derived BMP4, there was a 3-fold reduction in
BMP4 protein levels in SKOV3+CA-MSC tumors treated
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

HH inhibition blocks CA-MSC induced
chemotherapy resistance in ovarian tumor cells
in vitro and in vivo
Given CA-MSCs can differentiate into distinct
stromal cells (such as cancer associated fibroblasts and
adipocytes) which promote chemotherapy resistance,
and CA-MSCs increase ALDH+ CSCs which are
chemotherapy resistant [28], we hypothesized that
CA-MSCs would significantly enhance ovarian tumor
chemotherapy resistance. We therefore investigated
the role of CA-MSCs and the tumor/stromal HH/
BMP4 signaling loop in resistance to platinum based
chemotherapy, the core of ovarian cancer therapy. We
treated GFP-labeled CAOV-3 cells grown in (i) direct coculture with CA-MSCs or (ii) in single culture at equal
densities and treated for 48 hours with increasing amounts
6921

Oncotarget

Figure 4: HH inhibition blocks CA-MSC mediated tumor growth promotion and stromal deposition. A. Tumor growth

curves of SKOV3 ovarian tumor cells ± CA-MSCs treated with and without IPI-926 demonstrating HH inhibition blocks CA-MSC-mediated
increases in tumor growth. B. Western blot analysis of GLI1, SHH and BMP4 protein levels in SKOV3+CA-MSC and SKOV3+A-MSC
tumors ± IPI-926 treatment confirm on-target effects of HH inhibition and subsequent decreases in BMP4 and SHH. C. Representative
H&E stains of tumors: SKOV3, SKOV3+A-MSC or SKOV3+CA-MSC ± IPI-926 illustrating IPI-926 blocks MSC-mediated increases in
stroma. D. Quantification of stroma in tumors (4 tumors per group, 8 low power sections per tumor). E. Percent ALDH+ cells from SKOV3
± CA-MSCs or A-MSCs ± IPI-926 xenografts demonstrating IPI-926 blocks the CA-MSC-mediated increase in ALDH+ cells (each scatter
plot represents an independently analyzed tumor, at least three tumors per group). Error bars=standard error of the mean.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

6922

Oncotarget

of cisplatin. Viable cells were analyzed with FACS to
distinguish GFP-labeled cancer cells from CA-MSCs.
Co-culture of CAOV-3 cells with CA-MSCs, compared
to CAOV-3 cells alone, resulted in 3-9 fold increases
in tumor cell viability in response to cisplatin (Figure
5A). Addition of IPI-926 drastically decreased CAMSC-mediated CAOV-3 cisplatin resistance while not
significantly altering the efficacy of cisplatin in CAOV-3
cells grown in single culture (Figure 5A). In contrast, CAMSCs grown in single culture demonstrated significant
resistance to even high doses of chemotherapy (Figure
5B). The sensitivity of CA-MSCs to cisplatin was not
significantly altered by co-culture with CAOV-3 cells or
the addition of IPI-926 (Figure 5B). Interestingly, a modest
decrease in CA-MSCs was seen with IPI-926 + cisplatin
in CA-MSC/CAOV-3 co-culture. The ability of IPI-926
to block CA-MSC-mediated chemotherapy resistance was
also replicated using co-culture of CA-MSCs and GFPlabeled PEO-1 and Hey1 ovarian cancer cell lines— lines
which express both SHH and IHH (Supplemental Figure 4
and data not shown).
We next determined if the same effect on
chemotherapy resistance was observed in vivo. CAOV3 cells labeled with luciferase were grown ±CA-MSCs
in the bilateral axilla of NOD/SCID mice and treated
with cisplatin (1mg/kg weekly for 3 weeks) or vehicle
control. As expected, cisplatin significantly reduced the
growth of CAOV-3 tumors (Figure 5C).Once again the
addition of CA-MSCs to CAOV-3 tumors significantly
increased growth relative to CAOV-3 cells grown alone.
Importantly, in the presence of CA-MSCs, CAOV-3
cells no longer demonstrated a significant response to
cisplatin (Figure 5C). In fact CAOV-3/CA-MSC tumors
treated with cisplatin demonstrated greater growth
than untreated CAOV-3 cells grown alone (Figure 5C).
To ensure changes in tumor volume were not due to
overgrowth of the CA-MSC cells, bioluminescence data
was also captured to assess the luciferase labeled CAOV-3
fraction. Bioluminescence measurements were consistent
with tumor volume measurement indicating the change in
tumor size corresponds with change in tumor cell volume
(Supplemental Figure 5A).
To assess the impact of HH inhibition on CAMSC-mediated chemotherapy resistance, CAOV-3 cells
± CA-MSCs in were injected into the bilateral axilla of
NOD/SCID mice. Tumors were treated with cisplatin as
described above (starting on day 7) ± daily treatment of
IPI-926 (20mg/kg/day starting on day 5 after injection
and continuing for 21 days). Cisplatin treated CAOV-3/
CA-MSC tumors grew significantly faster than cisplatin
treated CAOV-3 alone tumors. The addition of IPI-926
to cisplatin treatment of CAOV-3 alone tumors had no
impact on tumor growth. However, IPI-926 with cisplatin
lead to a striking decrease in the growth of CAOV-3/
CA-MSC tumors with 2 out of 8 tumors failing to initiate
(engraftment rates were 100% in all other groups) (Figure
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

5D).

To assess the impact of HH inhibition on established
tumors, once tumors from mice bearing CAOV-3/CAMSC tumors treated with cisplatin reached ~300mm3 in
volume, mice were randomized and then retreated with
(i) cisplatin alone (1mg/kg weekly for up to 3 weeks)
or (ii) cisplatin with IPI-926 (starting three days prior
to the first cisplatin dose). Cisplatin treatment alone had
no impact on tumor growth indicating chemotherapy
resistance. In contrast, retreatment with cisplatin + IPI926 lead to not only cessation in tumor growth but to
tumor regression while tumors in mice retreated with
cisplatin alone continued to grow rapidly (Figure 5E). This
demonstrates that not only does blocking HH signaling
lead to prevention of CA-MSC mediated chemotherapy
resistance when tumors are small or just starting to
engraft, but also significantly impacts tumors which have
been firmly established and have been previously treated
with chemotherapy.
Analysis of tumor ALDH expression was consistent
with our previous findings with SKOV3 xenografts,
demonstrating increases in the percentage of ALDH+
cells in CA-MSC containing tumors which is decreased
in tumors treated with IPI-926 (Figure 5F). Histologic
analysis demonstrates that CA-MSC containing tumors
have significantly higher microvessel density (as
determined through quantification of human and mouse
CD31 positive vessels per high power field) (Figure 5G,
5Hii). IPI-926 treatment blocked this increase in blood
vessel density. Likewise, CA-MSC containing tumors had
significantly more alpha-smooth muscle actin (αSMA)
positive cells than CAOV-3 cells alone and this effect was
decreased with IPI-926 treatment (Figure 5G, 5Hi). Costaining with an anti-human mitochondrial antibody (antihMt) demonstrated that the majority of αSMA positive
cells within CA-MSC-containing tumors are of human
origin and therefore likely represent differentiated CAMSCs. αSMA positive cells within the CAOV-3 alone
tumors did not co-stain with anti-hMt and are therefore
likely of murine origin. Also of note, the staining pattern
of αSMA in CAOV-3 alone tumors is largely perivascular
and likely to represent vascular associated pericytes
whereas αSMA positive cells in the CA-MSC containing
tumors, in addition to being found perivascularly, were
also present in large extra-vascular bands consistent with
activated fibroblasts. This is consistent with our findings
in SKOV3 xenografts which demonstrated clear, gross
changes in the amount of tumor stroma in CA-MSC
containing tumors which is reversed with HH inhibition.
Collectively, our results demonstrate that HH
pathway inhibition prevents CA-MSC-mediated tumor
growth promotion and enhancement of chemotherapy
resistance. This points to a tumor/CA-MSC HH/BMP4
signaling loop as a critical mediator of the pro-tumorigenic
effects of CA-MSCs.

6923

Oncotarget

Figure 5: CA-MSCs promote chemotherapy resistance which can be reversed with HH inhibition. A.-B. In vitro co-culture
of GFP-CAOV-3 tumor cells ± CA-MSCs treated with cisplatin ± IPI-926, A. co-culture with CA-MSCs enhance tumor cell platinumresistance and is reversed with IPI-926, graph represents % viable GFP-CAOV-3 cells normalized to 0ug/ml cisplatin group. B. CA-MSCs
demonstrate cisplatin-resistance is not significantly altered by co-culture with tumor cells or co-treatment with cisplatin + IPI-926, graph
represents % viable CA-MSCs normalized to 0ug/ml cisplatin group. C. Growth curve of CAOV-3 and CAOV-3/CA-MSC xenografts
treated ± cisplatin demonstrating CA-MSCs promote platinum-resistance in vivo D. Growth curve of CAOV-3 and CAOV-3/CA-MSC
xenografts treated with cisplatin ± IPI-926 demonstrating IPI-926 prevents CA-MSC-mediated platinum-resistance. E. Growth curve of
CAOV-3/CA-MSC xenografts retreated with cisplatin ±IPI-926 starting on day 53 demonstrating IPI-926 reverses chemotherapy resistance
in established tumors. F. Percent ALDH+ cells from CAOV-3±CA-MSCs xenografts treated with cisplatin±IPI-926 demonstrating IPI-926
blocks CA-MSC-mediated increases in ALDH+ cells. G. IF of CAOV-3 and CAOV-3/CA-MSC xenografts with anti-alpha smooth muscle
actin (αSMA) (green), anti-αSMA (red) /anti-human mitochondrial antibody (hMT-green) demonstrating increased human stroma in CAMSC-containing tumors and IHC of anti-CD31 (human/mouse). H. i) Quantification of αSMA per high power field (HPF) demonstrating
IPI-926 blocks CA-MSC-mediated increases in fibroblasts ii) Quantification of microvessel density per HPF illustrating IPI-926 blocks
CA-MSC-mediated increase in microvessel density. Error bars=standard error of the mean.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

6924

Oncotarget

Discussion

Incorporating CA-MSC in tumor xenografts

Increased HH signaling is correlated with poor
outcomes in ovarian cancer [19]. Further, HH signaling
is increased at the time of disease recurrence indicating
the importance of this pathway in ovarian cancer [20].
Previous work indicates that HH acts primarily on the
stroma [18]. However, which cells in the stroma HH acts
upon was unclear. We now show that CA-MSCs are a
critical target for stromal HH activation. HH activation of
CA-MSCs results in the previously reported increased CAMSC expression of BMP4 [14]. BMP4 in turn increases
tumor HH expression, thus creating a positive feedback
loop (Figure 6). We find this loop is critical to CAMSC-mediated increases in tumor growth and promotes
chemotherapy resistance associated with increases in
ALDH+ ovarian cancer stem-like cells. Interruption of this
signaling loop with pharmacologic HH inhibition prevents
the growth-promoting effects of CA-MSCs in vivo,
reverses chemotherapy resistance and normalizes CSC
percentages, indicating the importance of HH signaling
to the pro-tumorigenic function of CA-MSCs. Our work
is consistent with studies indicating HH inhibition can
overcome stromal mediated chemotherapy resistance [3].
These prior studies found HH inhibition could overcome
taxane but not platinum resistance. Platinum is the
cornerstone of ovarian cancer therapy. Our work shows
that HH inhibition can overcome platinum resistance even
in well-established tumors.

Our work is unique from the prior studies of HH
as CA-MSCs create a ‘humanized’ tumor stroma. Unlike
most ovarian cancer cell line xenografts and later passage
PDX, CA-MSC containing tumors have a robust human
stroma more analogous to that seen in patient tumors.
This is important as we observed minimal effectiveness
of HH inhibition, either alone or in combination with
chemotherapy, in the standard human cell line xenograft
model. However we observed robust response in tumors
with humanized stroma. This indicates the importance of
studying therapeutics in the context of a human stroma.
We previously demonstrated human fibroblast,
adipocyte and osteoblast mRNA expression in xenografts
containing human CA-MSCs. We now use IHC analysis
with anti-human mitochondria antibodies to confirm CAMSC containing xenografts have a predominantly human
tumor stroma. CA-MSC containing xenografts have
increased numbers of αSMA+ activated myofibroblasts
which is prevented by HH inhibition. Additional studies
will be necessary to determine the mechanism whereby
HH inhibition reverses CA-MSC mediated stromal
formation. It is interesting to note that CA-MSCs by
themselves are highly chemotherapy resistant. Thus
CA-MSCs are likely preserved following chemotherapy
and could support the expansion and ultimately the drug
resistance of residual cancer cells.

Figure 6: Schematic of ovarian tumor cell:CA-MSC hedgehog:BMP4 feed forward loop. Ovarian tumor derived HH induces

increased expression of BMP4 in CA-MSCs. CA-MSC derived BMP4 feeds back and induces increased expression of tumor derived HH.
Blocking this signaling loop with the HH inhibitor IPI-926 prevents CA-MSC mediated increases in cancer stem cell-like cells, tumor
growth, tumor stroma, tumor vasculature and chemotherapy resistance.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

6925

Oncotarget

Hedgehog in malignancy

this signaling loop. A BMP4 blocking antibody mimicked
HH inhibition in vitro. Several studies have supported a
critical role for BMP4 in ovarian cancer. BMP4 promotes
migration and metastasis in ovarian cancer [42] and BMP4
stimulation of ovarian cancer cells can activate ID3 protooncogene expression [43]. We previously demonstrated,
and confirmed here, that BMP signals from CA-MSCs
increase the number of ALDH+ CSCs. We have also
recently reported BMP2 as a regulator of CSC division
increasing the proportion of ALDH+ cells [44]. Consistent
with prior studies [45] [14], our data also demonstrate a
modest increase in ALDH+ tumor cells after co-growth
with normal adipose-derived MSCs (which at baseline
have significantly lower levels of BMP4 compared to CAMSCs). This may be due to alternate signaling pathways
such as the IL6/CXCL7 loop reported in breast cancer
[45]. Alternatively, this may be due to the development
of a CA-MSC-like expression profile (with increasing
levels of BMP2 and 4) in normal adipose-derived MSCs
after long periods of tumor stimulation. Indeed, our
previous work demonstrated tumor cell conditioning over
time leads to changes in the overall expression profile of
normal tissue MSCs yielding increases in BMP family
proteins [14]. Further, IPI-926 blocks the normal MSCmediated increase of ALDH+ tumor cells arguing for the
development of a tumor:MSC HH:BMP signaling loop
over time in normal MSCs.
While clearly important in ovarian cancer, effective
clinical targeting of the BMP pathway has proven
challenging. The identification of HH as a vital modulator
of stromal BMP4 production provides a novel method to
target BMP-associated tumorigenesis.

HH inhibition is an effective therapeutic approach
in both basal cell carcinomas and meningiomas [29-31].
HH is an important tumor/stroma signaling component
in several solid tumors including prostate, colon and
pancreatic cancers [18, 32-35]. However, HH does not
promote growth in all tumor models. Studies in bladder
cancer suggest that HH:BMP tumor/stromal signaling
restricts cancer growth [23]. Similarly, recent work in a
pancreatic cancer model demonstrates a tumor growth
inhibitory role for HH signaling with concurrent increases
in tumor stromal elements [33]. Indeed, recent trials
in colon and pancreatic cancer demonstrated no benefit
and in one pancreatic trial, a possible trend toward harm
with hedgehog inhibition [22, 36, 37]. In contrast, a HH
inhibitor maintenance trial in ovarian cancer demonstrated
no evidence of detriment [38] with a trend towards
improvement in progression free survival. One potential
explanation for the differences observed for HH inhibitors
in ovarian cancer vs. colon, bladder, and pancreatic
cancers is the developmental origin of the distinct tissues;
embryologically, ovarian/fallopian tube epithelium is
mesodermal in origin. In contrast pancreatic, colon, and
bladder epithelial cells are endodermal in origin. During
development, HH signaling has widely contrasting tissuespecific functions therefore it would not be surprising that
HH signaling may act in a completely different manner
in cells derived from different primary germ layers [39].
Further highlighting the complexity of HH signaling,
we demonstrate that both tumor derived SHH and IHH
form a signaling loop with CA-MSC-derived BMP4.
Interestingly, in vitro SMO inhibition with IPI-926 more
effectively disrupted the SHH/BMP4 loop as compared to
the IHH/BMP4 loop. Additional work will be necessary to
determine if this relates to currently undefined differences
in SHH and IHH signaling or alternate pathways
promoting tumor cell IHH secretion.
As noted above, HH inhibitors have not
demonstrated significant clinical activity as single agents
in ovarian cancer [38]. It has been suggested this trial
failed as it did not select patients based on tumor HH
expression [40]; the rate of HH activation in ovarian
cancers (25-70%) remains controversial [19, 40, 41].
Our study suggests greatest potential clinical benefit in
combining HH inhibition with chemotherapy. Indeed
targeting HH may be a strategy to reverse platinumresistance, an inevitable and deadly step in the progression
of ovarian cancer.

MSCs and ovarian cancer
While controversy remains regarding the role
of MSCs and cancer in general, numerous studies in
ovarian cancer report a pro-tumorigenic role of MSCs.
MSCs can directly impact the cancer cells to increase
the growth of cancer stem cell-like cells [14], promote
an epithelial mesenchymal transition [46], and increase
resistance to apoptosis [47]. MSCs can also promote
cancer cell chemotherapy resistance, even in the setting
of hyperthermic therapy [48]. MSC are also reported to
promote ovarian cancer invasive capacity and broadly
impact the transcriptional profile of cancer cells to create
a pro-metastatic phenotype [48, 49]. Interestingly, the
impact of MSCs on cancer cells can be both via cytokine
signaling as described here, and the exchange of cellular
materials via exosomes [50, 51]. Similarly, MSCs can
impact the host cells in the tumor microenvironment
promoting ovarian cancer growth via increased
angiogenesis [52] and suppression of the anti-tumor
immune responses [53]. Taken together this data strongly
supports MSCs as a therapeutic target in ovarian cancer.
Given HH inhibition in vivo completely eliminated many

BMP4 and ovarian cancer
While a majority of the studies presented here, due
to availability of clinically relevant inhibitors, focused
on HH inhibition, BMP4 is also a critical component of
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

6926

Oncotarget

of the pro-tumorigenic effects of CA-MSCs including
increased angiogenesis, chemotherapy resistance, and
increased tumor ‘stemness’ HH signaling may be a master
regulator of CA-MSC function in ovarian cancer.

COV318, Hey1 and PEO1 were obtained from ATCC and
cultured in RPMI supplemented with 10% heat-inactivated
FBS and 1% penicillin/streptomycin (SKOV3, Hey1) and
DMEM supplemented with 10% heat-inactivated FBS and
1% penicillin/streptomycin (CAOV-3, COV318, PEO1).

Conclusion

Gli1lacZ mice

In summary, the identification of a signaling loop
with tumor derived HH and CA-MSC derived BMP4
adds further support to the importance of the tumor
microenvironment and stromal signaling. Our findings
help to elucidate the mechanism of CA-MSCs protumorigenic functions. We demonstrate the critical
importance of evaluating stromal targeted therapeutics
in the presence of a human tumor stroma. Finally, these
studies add to growing literature supporting the clinical
use of HH inhibitors in ovarian cancer particularly in
combination with chemotherapy and may specifically
help revert platinum resistant disease to platinum sensitive
disease.

Gli1lacZ reporter mice were treated for 5days with
anti-mouse CD3e (clone 2c-11, Ebioscience San Diego,
CA) antibody to reduce immune rejection of tumor
cells. ID8 xenografts were created by injecting 10x106
cells into the bilateral flanks of treated animals. ID8
xenograft tissue was obtained at time of sacrifice and
B-Galactosidase staining was performed on tissues fixed
in 4% PFA and embedded in OCT for cryosectioning
[25]. Normal ovarian tissue was obtained from non-T cell
depleted animals and processed as above. Quantification
of B-Galactosidase staining was performed using ImageJ
thresholding analysis [55]. Three independent sections of
tumor and non-tumor stroma were used for quantification.

Materials and methods

Quantitative real-time PCR
Tissue harvesting and culture

RNA was isolated with the RNeasy Mini
Kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany) and on-column
DNase treatment (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany). RNA
concentration was determined with NanoDrop ND-1000
Spectrophotometer. cDNA was synthesized with the
SuperScript III First-Strand Synthesis System for RT-PCR
(Invitrogen, Grand Island, NY) as previously described
[56]. SYBR green-based RT-PCR was performed using
the 7900HT Sequence Detection System (Applied
Biosystems, Foster City, California) and respective
primers. The comparative Ct method was used for data
analysis, HPRT or GAPDH were used as the comparator
genes.

Patients samples were obtained in accordance with
a protocol approved by the University of Michigan’s
IRB (IRB no HUM0009149). Tissue was processed for
RNA isolation as previously described [54]. MSCs were
isolated as previously described [14]. Briefly, to isolate
CA-MSCs primary patient derived tumor tissue was plated
in supplemented MEBM media and MSCs were selected
for plastic adherence. CA-MSCs were characterized
by cell surface marker expression (positive for CD105,
CD90, CD73, CD44; negative for CD34, CD24, CD45)
and their ability to differentiate into adipocytes, osteocytes
or fibroblasts (following guidelines presented by The
International Society for Cellular Therapy on the minimal
criteria for defining multipotent mesenchymal stem
cells[15]). A summary of CA-MSC cell surface marker
expression and differentiation is provided in Supplemental
Figure 6. Adipocyte and osteocyte differentiation was
stimulated using differentiation media from StemCell
technologies, (Vancover, BC). Fibroblast/myofibroblast
differentiation was performed through prolonged indirect
co-culture with ovarian tumor cells. Normal healthy
donor-derived MSCs were purchased (for adipose MSCs)
(Invitrogen, Grand Island, NY) or derived from normal
omental or normal ovary surgical samples (using the same
procedure as above for CA-MSC isolation from tumor
tissue). Adipose, normal ovary and patient derived CAMSCs were maintained in culture as previously described
[14]. Mesenchymal stem cells were used at passage 8
or below. Ovarian cancer cell lines SKOV3, CAOV-3,
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Immunoblotting
Portions of whole tumor or cell pellets were
homogenized in RIPA buffer (Pierce, Rockford, IL) with
complete protease inhibitor (Roche, Basel, Switzerland).
Insoluble material was removed by centrifugation at
16,000g at 4oC for 15mins. Protein concentrations were
determined using the Bradford Protein Assay Kit (BioRad, Hercules,CA). Equal amounts of protein were
separated on 4-12% NuPAGE SDS gel (Invitrogen, Grand
Island, NY) and transferred onto a PVDF or nitrocellulose
membrane. Antibodies for western blot analysis include
anti-BMP4 (1:1000 dilution, Abcam, Cambridge,
England), anti-SHH (1:500, 5E1, Developmental Studies
Hybridoma Bank, Iowa City, IA), anti-Gli1 (1:500, PCRPGLI1-1A1, Developmental Studies Hybridoma Bank,
6927

Oncotarget

Iowa City, IA) and anti-B-actin (1:10,000 dilution, SigmaAldrich, St. Louis, MO). Bands were visualized using the
ECL Kit (Pierce, Rockford, IL).

MSC/SKOV3 xenografts to serve as controls for FACS
analysis below. NOD-SCID mice were maintained in
accordance with institutional policies and all studies were
performed with approval of the University Committee on
Use and Care of Animals of the University of Michigan.

In vitro SHH or TCM treatment of MSCs

In vitro chemotherapy resistance assays

Adipose, normal ovary and CA-MSCs plated at
1x105 cells/6well in serum free supplemented MEBM
media were treated with recombinant SHH (10-100ng/ml)
(R&D systems, Pittsburg, PA) for 24hrs then processed
for qRT-PCR as described above. For TCM, media was
collected from tumor cell lines grown to 60% confluence
after 3 days and centrifuged for 15min at 3500rpm to
remove cellular debris. MSCs were treated with TCM ±
IPI-926 (10nM) for 3 days then cells were processed for
qRT-PCR or immunoblotting.

CAOV-3, PEO1 or Hey1 cells labeled with GFP
via lentiviral transduction were grown in co-culture with
CA-MSCs in a 1:1 ratio with a total of 20,000 cells/24
well dish or in single culture with 20,000 cells/well and
treated with cisplatin ± IPI-926 (20nM) for 24-48 hours.
The number of viable GFP-tumor cells and CA-MSCs was
analyzed via FACS using propidium iodide for viability
stain and gating on GFP positive cells (for tumor cell
analysis) or GFP negative cells (for CA-MSC analysis).

In vitro BMP4 treatment of tumor cells

In vivo chemotherapy resistance

SKOV3, CAOV-3 and COV318 cells were plated
(2x105 cells/6 well dish) in serum-free media treated with
200ng/ml recombinant BMP4 (R&Dsystems, Pittsburg,
PA) for 16 and 48hours. Cells were then processed for RTPCR or immunoblotting.

Xenografts containing luciferase labeled CAOV3 cells alone (1x106 cells), CAOV-3/A-MSCs (0.5x106
cells each) and CAOV-3/CA-MSCs (0.5x106 cells each)
with growth factor reduced matrigel were injected into
the bilateral axilla of NOD-SCID mice. After 7 days, half
of the mice were treated with cisplatin (1mg/kg weekly
x 3 weeks). Bioluminescence was measured at day 40.
Tumor volume measurement and euthanasia criteria
were followed as above. Five mice with bilateral axillary
xenografts were used per treatment group (n = 10 tumors
per group).
The experiment was repeated with CAOV-3 cells
alone and CAOV-3/CA-MSCs. After 5 days, half of
the mice were treated with IPI-926 (20mg/kg daily via
IP injection for 21 days). All mice received cisplatin
treatment (1mg/kg weekly x 3 weeks starting on day 7
after injection). When the CAOV-3/CA-MSC cisplatin
treated tumors reached ~300mm3, half of the mice were
retreated with cisplatin (1mg/kg weekly for up to 3 weeks)
and half were retreated with cisplatin + IPI-926 (20mg/
kg daily until time of sacrifice). Five mice with bilateral
axillary xenografts were used per treatment group (n =
10 tumors per group) except in the CAOV-3/CA-MSC
groups which contained 4 mice with bilateral tumors (n
= 8 tumors).

CA-MSC/tumor cell co-culture
SKOV3, CAOV-3, or COV318 were grown in coculture with CA-MSCs using 24mm polystyrene transwell
inserts, 0.4um pore (Sigma Aldrich, St. Louis, MO). CAMSCs (5x104cells) were seeded onto the top chamber in
1.5ml supplemented MEBM media and tumor cells (5x104
cells) were seeded into the lower chamber in 2.5ml RPMI
or DMEM ± 20nM IPI-926 or LDE225 (APExBIO) or
the anti-BMP4 blocking antibody (R&D systems) for 5
days. CA-MSCs and tumor cells grown alone were used
as controls.

In vivo mouse MSC/tumor xenografts
Xenografts containing SKOV3 cells alone (1x106
cells), SKOV3 + A-MSCs (0.5x106 cells each) and
SKOV3 + CA-MSCs (0.5x106 cells each) with growth
factor reduced matrigel (BD Biosciences, San Jose, CA)
were injected into the bilateral axilla of NOD-SCID
mice. After 5 days (to allow for tumor engraftment), half
of the mice were treated with IPI-926 (Active Biochem,
Hamburg, Germany) (20mg/kg daily via IP injection for
21 days as previously described by Lee et al. [57]). Mice
were sacrificed when tumor burden exceeded 1500mm3.
Tumor volume was calculated using the modified ellipsoid
formula (L*W2)/2. Five mice with bilateral axillary
xenografts were used per treatment group (n = 10 tumors
per group). Two additional mice were injected with dsRed
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Immunohistochemistry
Tumors were cryosectioned or paraffin embedded.
Paraffin-embedded tissue was H&E stained at the ULAM
Pathology Cores for Animal Research at the University of
Michigan and stroma quantified per low-power field (10x).
Cryosectioned tumors were fixed and stained with antiCD31 antibody (Dako) or permeablized and stained with
6928

Oncotarget

References

anti-αSMA antibody- Cy3 (Abcam) and co-stained with
mouse anti-human mitochondrial antibody (Life tech) with
goat anti-mouse-alexa 488 secondary. CD31 + cells were
counted to determine microvessel density per hpf (40x).
Anti-αSMA staining was quantified by determining the
area of positive staining per hpf (40x). 10 sections from 3
tumors per treatment group were analyzed [58].

1.	 Surveillance E, and End Results (SEER) Program (www.
seer.cancer.gov) Research Data (1973-2010), National
Cancer Institute, DCCPS, Surveillance Research Program,
Surveillance Systems Branch, released April 2013, based on
the November 2012 submission.
2.	 Nieman KM, Kenny HA, Penicka CV, Ladanyi A, BuellGutbrod R, Zillhardt MR, Romero IL, Carey MS, Mills GB,
Hotamisligil GS, Yamada SD, Peter ME, Gwin K, et al.
Adipocytes promote ovarian cancer metastasis and provide
energy for rapid tumor growth. Nature medicine. 2011;
17:1498-1503.

FACS
Xenograft single cell suspensions were analyzed
for ALDH expressing cells with the Aldehyde
Dehydrogenase-Based Cell Detection Kit as previously
described [28] (Stemcell Technologies, Vancouver,
Canada). FACS gating was based on live cells (via
DAPI) with DEAB control for each sample. At least 3
independent tumors were used for each analysis except
for the CAOV-3/CA-MSC+Cis+IPI-926 group in which
two tumors were analyzed due to low tumor burden in
this group. Flow cytometric analysis was performed on a
BD Biosciences FACSCalibur through the University of
Michigan Flow Cytometry Core.

3.	 Xu L, Deng Q, Pan Y, Peng M, Wang X, Song L, Xiao
M and Wang Z. Cancer-associated fibroblasts enhance
the migration ability of ovarian cancer cells by increasing
EZH2 expression. International journal of molecular
medicine. 2014; 33:91-96.
4.	 Thibault B, Castells M, Delord JP and Couderc B.
Ovarian cancer microenvironment: implications for cancer
dissemination and chemoresistance acquisition. Cancer
metastasis reviews. 2014; 33:17-39. doi: 10.1007/s10555013-9456-2.

Statistics

5.	 Yeung TL, Leung CS, Wong KK, Samimi G, Thompson
MS, Liu J, Zaid TM, Ghosh S, Birrer MJ and Mok SC. TGFbeta modulates ovarian cancer invasion by upregulating
CAF-derived versican in the tumor microenvironment.
Cancer research. 2013; 73:5016-5028.

All in vitro experiments were repeated
independently at least three times with triplicate samples
in each experiment unless otherwise stated. Statistical
significance was evaluated using a 2-sided student’s T-test.
For all experiments, α = 0.05. For animal studies, n = 10
per group based on final tumor volume of control animals
of ~1000mm3 with an expected standard deviation of 30%.
Non-linear regression analysis of tumor growth over time
was performed for each group and curves compared to
determine statistical significance. In all Figures, error bars
represent standard error of the mean of composite values
from independent experiments.

6.	

Yang X, Hou J, Han Z, Wang Y, Hao C, Wei L and Shi Y.
One cell, multiple roles: contribution of mesenchymal stem
cells to tumor development in tumor microenvironment.
Cell & bioscience. 2013; 3:5.

7.	 Barcellos-de-Souza P, Gori V, Bambi F and Chiarugi P.
Tumor microenvironment: bone marrow-mesenchymal
stem cells as key players. Biochimica et biophysica acta.
2013; 1836:321-335.
8.	

Acknowledgments
This work was supported in part by the National
Institutes of Health New Investigator Innovator Directors
Award DP200440377 and 1-R01-CA163345-01. L.
Coffman is supported by the Association of American
Cancer Institutes Fellowship and American Society of
Clinical Oncology’s Young Investigator Award. Facilities
used in this study were supported in part by the National
Institutes of Health through the University of Michigan
Cancer Center Support Grant (P30 CA046592).

Jung Y, Kim JK, Shiozawa Y, Wang J, Mishra A, Joseph J,
Berry JE, McGee S, Lee E, Sun H, Wang J, Jin T, Zhang H,
et al. Recruitment of mesenchymal stem cells into prostate
tumours promotes metastasis. Nature communications.
2013; 4:1795.

9.	 Garcia MG, Bayo J, Bolontrade MF, Sganga L, Malvicini
M, Alaniz L, Aquino JB, Fiore E, Rizzo MM, Rodriguez A,
Lorenti A, Andriani O, Podhajcer O, et al. Hepatocellular
carcinoma cells and their fibrotic microenvironment
modulate bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stromal cell
migration in vitro and in vivo. Molecular pharmaceutics.
2011; 8:1538-1548.
10.	 Birnbaum T, Roider J, Schankin CJ, Padovan CS, Schichor
C, Goldbrunner R and Straube A. Malignant gliomas
actively recruit bone marrow stromal cells by secreting
angiogenic cytokines. Journal of neuro-oncology. 2007;
83:241-247.

Conflicts of interest
The authors have no conflicts of interest to disclose.

11.	 da Silva Meirelles L, Chagastelles PC and Nardi NB.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

6929

Oncotarget

Mesenchymal stem cells reside in virtually all post-natal
organs and tissues. Journal of cell science. 2006; 119:22042213.

IB/randomized Phase-II study of gemcitabine (G) plus
placebo (P) or vismodegib (V), a hedgehog (Hh) pathway
inhibitor, in patients (pts) with metastatic pancreatic cancer
(PC): a University of Chicago Phase-II consortium study.
ASCO.

12.	 Crisan M, Yap S, Casteilla L, Chen CW, Corselli M, Park
TS, Andriolo G, Sun B, Zheng B, Zhang L, Norotte C, Teng
PN, Traas J, et al. A perivascular origin for mesenchymal
stem cells in multiple human organs. Cell stem cell. 2008;
3:301-313.

23.	 Shin K, Lim A, Zhao C, Sahoo D, Pan Y, Spiekerkoetter
E, Liao JC and Beachy PA. Hedgehog signaling restrains
bladder cancer progression by eliciting stromal production
of urothelial differentiation factors. Cancer cell. 2014;
26:521-533.

13.	 Kim SH, Bang SH, Park SA, Kang SY, Park KD, Oh
IU, Yoo SH, Kim H, Kim CH and Baek SY. Character
comparison of abdomen-derived and eyelid-derived
mesenchymal stem cells. Cell proliferation. 2013; 46:291299.

24.	 Bai CB, Auerbach W, Lee JS, Stephen D and Joyner AL.
Gli2, but not Gli1, is required for initial Shh signaling and
ectopic activation of the Shh pathway. Development. 2002;
129:4753-4761.

14.	 McLean K, Gong Y, Choi Y, Deng N, Yang K, Bai
S, Cabrera L, Keller E, McCauley L, Cho KR and
Buckanovich RJ. Human ovarian carcinoma-associated
mesenchymal stem cells regulate cancer stem cells and
tumorigenesis via altered BMP production. The Journal of
clinical investigation. 2011; 121:3206-3219.

25.	 Collins MA, Bednar F, Zhang Y, Brisset JC, Galban S,
Galban CJ, Rakshit S, Flannagan KS, Adsay NV and Pasca
di Magliano M. Oncogenic Kras is required for both the
initiation and maintenance of pancreatic cancer in mice. The
Journal of clinical investigation. 2012; 122:639-653.

15.	 Dominici M, Le Blanc K, Mueller I, Slaper-Cortenbach
I, Marini F, Krause D, Deans R, Keating A, Prockop D
and Horwitz E. Minimal criteria for defining multipotent
mesenchymal stromal cells. The International Society for
Cellular Therapy position statement. Cytotherapy. 2006;
8:315-317.

26.	 Lee J, Platt KA, Censullo P and Ruiz i Altaba A. Gli1 is a
target of Sonic hedgehog that induces ventral neural tube
development. Development. 1997; 124:2537-2552.
27.	 Chen X, Horiuchi A, Kikuchi N, Osada R, Yoshida J,
Shiozawa T and Konishi I. Hedgehog signal pathway
is activated in ovarian carcinomas, correlating with cell
proliferation: it’s inhibition leads to growth suppression and
apoptosis. Cancer science. 2007; 98:68-76.

16.	 Verardo R, Piazza S, Klaric E, Ciani Y, Bussadori G,
Marzinotto S, Mariuzzi L, Cesselli D, Beltrami AP,
Mano M, Itoh M, Kawaji H, Lassmann T, et al. Specific
mesothelial signature marks the heterogeneity of
mesenchymal stem cells from high-grade serous ovarian
cancer. Stem Cells. 2014; 32:2998-3011.

28.	 Silva IA, Bai S, McLean K, Yang K, Griffith K, Thomas
D, Ginestier C, Johnston C, Kueck A, Reynolds RK, Wicha
MS and Buckanovich RJ. Aldehyde dehydrogenase in
combination with CD133 defines angiogenic ovarian cancer
stem cells that portend poor patient survival. Cancer Res.
2011; 71:3991-4001.

17.	 Lan Y and Jiang R. Sonic hedgehog signaling regulates
reciprocal epithelial-mesenchymal interactions controlling
palatal outgrowth. Development. 2009; 136:1387-1396.

29.	 Sofen H, Gross KG, Goldberg LH, Sharata H, Hamilton
TK, Egbert B, Lyons B, Hou J and Caro I. A phase II,
multicenter, open-label, 3-cohort trial evaluating the
efficacy and safety of vismodegib in operable basal
cell carcinoma. Journal of the American Academy
of Dermatology. 2015; 73:99-105.e1. doi: 10.1016/j.
jaad.2015.03.013.

18.	 Yauch RL, Gould SE, Scales SJ, Tang T, Tian H, Ahn CP,
Marshall D, Fu L, Januario T, Kallop D, Nannini-Pepe M,
Kotkow K, Marsters JC, et al. A paracrine requirement for
hedgehog signalling in cancer. Nature. 2008; 455:406-410.
19.	 Liao X, Siu MK, Au CW, Wong ES, Chan HY, Ip PP,
Ngan HY and Cheung AN. Aberrant activation of hedgehog
signaling pathway in ovarian cancers: effect on prognosis,
cell invasion and differentiation. Carcinogenesis. 2009;
30:131-140.

30.	 Samkari A, White J and Packer R. SHH inhibitors for
the treatment of medulloblastoma. Expert review of
neurotherapeutics. 2015:1-8.

20.	 Steg AD, Bevis KS, Katre AA, Ziebarth A, Dobbin ZC,
Alvarez RD, Zhang K, Conner M and Landen CN. Stem
Cell Pathways Contribute to Clinical Chemoresistance in
Ovarian Cancer. Clin Cancer Res. 2012; 18:869-881.

31.	 Geeraert P, Williams JS and Brownell I. Targeting the
hedgehog pathway to treat basal cell carcinoma. Journal of
drugs in dermatology. 2013; 12:519-523.
32.	 Hwang RF, Moore TT, Hattersley MM, Scarpitti M, Yang
B, Devereaux E, Ramachandran V, Arumugam T, Ji B,
Logsdon CD, Brown JL and Godin R. Inhibition of the
hedgehog pathway targets the tumor-associated stroma
in pancreatic cancer. Molecular cancer research. 2012;
10:1147-1157.

21.	 McCann CK, Growdon WB, Kulkarni-Datar K, Curley MD,
Friel AM, Proctor JL, Sheikh H, Deyneko I, Ferguson JA,
Vathipadiekal V, Birrer MJ, Borger DR, Mohapatra G, et
al. Inhibition of Hedgehog signaling antagonizes serous
ovarian cancer growth in a primary xenograft model. PloS
one. 2011; 6:e28077.

33.	 Lee JJ, Perera RM, Wang H, Wu DC, Liu XS, Han S,
Fitamant J, Jones PD, Ghanta KS, Kawano S, Nagle JM,

22.	 Catenacci Dvt BN NSea. (2013). Final analysis of a Phasewww.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

6930

Oncotarget

Deshpande V, Boucher Y, et al. Stromal response to
Hedgehog signaling restrains pancreatic cancer progression.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the
United States of America. 2014; 111:E3091-3100.

and human mesenchymal stem cells promotes epithelialmesenchymal transition. Int J Oncol. 2015; 47:1451-1459.
47.	 Castells M, Milhas D, Gandy C, Thibault B, Rafii A,
Delord JP and Couderc B. Microenvironment mesenchymal
cells protect ovarian cancer cell lines from apoptosis by
inhibiting XIAP inactivation. Cell death & disease. 2013;
4:e887.

34.	 Chen M, Carkner R and Buttyan R. The hedgehog/Gli
signaling paradigm in prostate cancer. Expert review of
endocrinology & metabolism. 2011; 6:453-467.
35.	 Levina E, Chen M, Carkner R, Shtutman M and Buttyan R.
Paracrine Hedgehog increases the steroidogenic potential
of prostate stromal cells in a Gli-dependent manner. The
Prostate. 2012; 72:817-824.

48.	 Lis R, Touboul C, Mirshahi P, Ali F, Mathew S, Nolan
DJ, Maleki M, Abdalla SA, Raynaud CM, Querleu D, AlAzwani E, Malek J, Mirshahi M, et al. Tumor associated
mesenchymal stem cells protects ovarian cancer cells
from hyperthermia through CXCL12. Int J Cancer. 2011;
128:715-725.

36.	 Michelle L. Infinity Pharma halts pancreatic cancer trial.
Boston Business J. 2012.

49.	 Touboul C, Lis R, Al Farsi H, Raynaud CM, Warfa
M, Althawadi H, Mery E, Mirshahi M and Rafii A.
Mesenchymal stem cells enhance ovarian cancer cell
infiltration through IL6 secretion in an amniochorionic
membrane based 3D model. J Transl Med. 2013; 11:28.

37.	 Berlin J, Bendell JC, Hart LL, Firdaus I, Gore I, Hermann
RC, Mulcahy MF, Zalupski MM, Mackey HM, Yauch RL,
Graham RA, Bray GL and Low JA. A randomized phase
II trial of vismodegib versus placebo with FOLFOX or
FOLFIRI and bevacizumab in patients with previously
untreated metastatic colorectal cancer. Clin Cancer Res.
2013; 19:258-267.

50.	 Yang Y, Bucan V, Baehre H, von der Ohe J, Otte A and
Hass R. Acquisition of new tumor cell properties by MSCderived exosomes. Int J Oncol. 2015; 47:244-252.

38.	 Kaye SB, Fehrenbacher L, Holloway R, Amit A, Karlan
B, Slomovitz B, Sabbatini P, Fu L, Yauch RL, Chang I
and Reddy JC. A phase II, randomized, placebo-controlled
study of vismodegib as maintenance therapy in patients
with ovarian cancer in second or third complete remission.
Clin Cancer Res. 2012; 18:6509-6518.

51.	 Yang Y, Otte A and Hass R. Human mesenchymal
stroma/stem cells exchange membrane proteins and alter
functionality during interaction with different tumor cell
lines. Stem Cells Dev. 2015; 24:1205-1222.
52.	 Spaeth EL, Dembinski JL, Sasser AK, Watson K, Klopp
A, Hall B, Andreeff M and Marini F. Mesenchymal stem
cell transition to tumor-associated fibroblasts contributes
to fibrovascular network expansion and tumor progression.
PLoS One. 2009; 4:e4992.

39.	 Varjosalo M and Taipale J. Hedgehog: functions and
mechanisms. Genes & development. 2008; 22:2454-2472.
40.	 Yang L, He J, Huang S, Zhang X, Bian Y, He N, Zhang
H and Xie J. Activation of hedgehog signaling is not a
frequent event in ovarian cancers. Molecular Cancer. 2009;
8:1-5.

53.	 Stagg J and Galipeau J. Mechanisms of immune modulation
by mesenchymal stromal cells and clinical translation. Curr
Mol Med. 2013; 13:856-867.

41.	 Bhattacharya R, Kwon J, Ali B, Wang E, Patra S, Shridhar
V and Mukherjee P. Role of hedgehog signaling in ovarian
cancer. Clin Cancer Res. 2008; 14:7659-7666.

54.	 Coffman L, Mooney C, Lim J, Bai S, Silva I, Gong Y, Yang
K and Buckanovich RJ. Endothelin receptor-A is required
for the recruitment of antitumor T cells and modulates
chemotherapy induction of cancer stem cells. Cancer
biology & therapy. 2013; 14:184-192.

42.	 Theriault BL, Shepherd TG, Mujoomdar ML and Nachtigal
MW. BMP4 induces EMT and Rho GTPase activation in
human ovarian cancer cells. Carcinogenesis. 2007; 28:11531162.

55.	 Schneider CA, Rasband WS and Eliceiri KW. NIH Image to
ImageJ: 25 years of image analysis. Nature methods. 2012;
9:671-675.

43.	 Shepherd TG, Theriault BL and Nachtigal MW. Autocrine
BMP4 signalling regulates ID3 proto-oncogene expression
in human ovarian cancer cells. Gene. 2008; 414:95-105.

56.	 Lim JJ, Yang K, Taylor-Harding B, Wiedemeyer WR and
Buckanovich RJ. VEGFR3 inhibition chemosensitizes
ovarian cancer stemlike cells through down-regulation of
BRCA1 and BRCA2. Neoplasia. 2014; 16:343-353 e341342.

44.	 Choi YJ, Ingram PN, Yang K, Coffman L, Iyengar
M, Bai S, Thomas DG, Yoon E and Buckanovich RJ.
Identifying an ovarian cancer cell hierarchy regulated by
bone morphogenetic protein 2. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A.
2015;112(50):E6882-8.

57.	 Lee MJ, Hatton BA, Villavicencio EH, Khanna PC,
Friedman SD, Ditzler S, Pullar B, Robison K, White KF,
Tunkey C, LeBlanc M, Randolph-Habecker J, Knoblaugh
SE, et al. Hedgehog pathway inhibitor saridegib (IPI-926)
increases lifespan in a mouse medulloblastoma model.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the
United States of America. 2012; 109:7859-7864.

45.	 Liu S, Ginestier C, Ou SJ, Clouthier SG, Patel SH, Monville
F, Korkaya H, Heath A, Dutcher J, Kleer CG, Jung Y,
Dontu G, Taichman R, et al. Breast cancer stem cells are
regulated by mesenchymal stem cells through cytokine
networks. Cancer Res. 2011; 71:614-624.
46.	 So KA, Min KJ, Hong JH and Lee JK. Interleukin-6
expression by interactions between gynecologic cancer cells
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

58.	 Pulaski HL, Spahlinger G, Silva IA, McLean K, Kueck
6931

Oncotarget

AS, Reynolds RK, Coukos G, Conejo-Garcia JR and
Buckanovich RJ. Identifying alemtuzumab as an antimyeloid cell antiangiogenic therapy for the treatment of
ovarian cancer. Journal of translational medicine. 2009;
7:49.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

6932

Oncotarget

