645

COMMENTARY

Results of the 2006 Innsbruck
International Consensus
Conference on Intraperitoneal
Chemotherapy in Patients With
Ovarian Cancer
Christian Marth, MD1
Joan L. Walker, MD2
Richard R. Barakat, MD3
Antonio Casado, MD4
Angiolo Gadducci, MD5
Brigitte Miller, MD6
Franco Odicino, MD7
Eric Pujade-Lauraine, MD8
Jalid Sehouli, MD9
Claes Trope, MD10
Lari Wenzel, MD11
Alain G. Zeimet, MD1
1

Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Innsbruck Medical University, Innsbruck, Austria.

2

Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Oklahoma University of Health Science, Oklahoma City,
Oklahoma.
3
Department of Surgery, Gynecology Service, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York,
New York.

See related article on pages 692–702, this issue.

4

Department of Medical Oncology, University Hospital, San Carlos, Madrid, Spain.

The 2006 Innsbruck International Consensus
Conference was supported by unrestricted grants
from AESCA GmbH, AMGEN Gmbh, ARROW International, Bristol-Myers Squibb GmbH, EBEWE
Pharma GmbH, GlaxoSmithKline Pharma GmbH,
Johnson & Johnson/Ethicon, NOVARTIS Pharma
GmbH, ROCHE Austria GmbH, Sanofi Aventis
GmbH, and SMITHS Medical Osterreich GmbH.

5

Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Pisa, Pisa, Italy.

We thank the scientific secretary, Ms. Ingrid Zeimet-Kirchmair, Dr. Daniel Egle, Dr. Michael Hubalek, Dr. Nicole Concin, Dr. Julia Seeber, and Mr.
Thomas Jenewein for technical and organizational help.
Address for reprints: Christian Marth, MD,
Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology,
Innsbruck Medical University, Anichstrasse 35,
A-6020 Innsbruck, Austria; Fax: (011) 43-51250423055; E-mail: christian.marth@uibk.ac.at
Received October 17, 2006; revision received
November 13, 2006; accepted November 13, 2006.

ª 2007 American Cancer Society

6

Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology/Section of Gynecologic Oncology, Wake Forest University
School of Medicine, Winston-Salem, North Carolina.
7

Division of Gynecology and Obstetrics, University Brescia, Brescia, Italy.

8

Hopital Hotel Dieu, Paris, France.

9

Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics, University Charity Hospital, Berlin, Germany.

10

Gynecologic Department, The Norwegian Radium Hospital, Oslo, Norway.

11

Health Policy Research, College of Medicine, University of California-Irvine, Irvine, California.

I

nternational evidence-based consensus statements are important
for defining standards of care and developing guidelines for communities worldwide. For ovarian cancer, successful international
consensus meetings have been organized, and the most important
was the meeting in Baden-Baden, Germany, in September 2004,
which was organized by the Gynecological Cancer Intergroup. Its
statements still are valid and are applied in daily routine.1

DOI 10.1002/cncr.22467
Published online 19 January 2007 in Wiley InterScience (www.interscience.wiley.com).

646

CANCER

February 15, 2007 / Volume 109 / Number 4

This consensus also included the role of intraperitoneal (IP) therapy. Although randomized Phase
III clinical trials are addressing the IP route for cisplatin therapy in patients with minimal disease,
interpretations of those results remain controversial.
Thus, IP cisplatin has not been adopted widely2–4
(level of acceptance, 13 of 13 panelists).
However, published results from the Gynecologic
Oncology Group (GOG) Trial 172 indicated that
patients who received part of their chemotherapy
through the IP route had a median survival that was
16 months longer than that of women who received
intravenous (IV) chemotherapy alone (65.6 months
vs 49.7 months).5 In addition, a meta-analysis by the
Cochrane collaboration was published and included
9 clinical trials. Ultimately, 8 of those trials met the
criteria for analysis and confirmed the benefit of IP
chemotherapy over standard IV regimens. The
authors of that report described a hazard ratio of
0.79 for the time to progression and the time to
death, reflecting a significant survival advantage,
although major side effects and complications have
been reported.6 Based on these findings, the National
Cancer Institute issued an announcement encouraging the treatment of advanced ovarian cancer with
anticancer drugs after surgery, including IP therapy.7
The combined method, which delivers drugs into a
vein and directly into the abdomen, extends overall
survival for women with advanced ovarian cancer by
approximately 1 year. This announcement also was
supported by other important societies. Beth Karlan,
Society of Gynecologic Oncologists (SGO) president
and director of the Women’s Cancer Research Institute of the Division of Gynecologic Oncology at the
Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, stated that IP chemotherapy should be considered by oncologists for
women who have undergone optimal surgical resection for ovarian cancer (see http://www.ccopnet.com/
ccop/docs/IntraperitonealPressRelease_010406.pdf).
In view of these very important findings and recommendations, the statement on first-line therapy that
was made by the last ovarian cancer consensus conference should be reevaluated. For this purpose, international experts in ovarian cancer treatment met in
Innsbruck to develop a structured consensus procedure
that would allow the development of recommendations
with high acceptance. Participants were selected for
their international expertise, membership in steering
committees of important gynecologic oncologic societies, and recent publications on ovarian cancer treatment. The most relevant questions were prepared
according to suggestions from all authors.
Questions that had been prepared by discussion
participants or panelists were presented, discussed,

and voted on. They were converted to statements
and were confirmed by the panelists after reading.
IP chemotherapy should be offered as an option
for optimally debulked ovarian cancer patients (level
of acceptance, 8 of 12 panelists): IP chemotherapy in
patients with ovarian cancer who have undergone
optimal debulking has an impact on both progressionfree survival and overall survival compared with IV cisplatin and paclitaxel. Because of specific the problems
and complications involved with IP chemotherapy,
it cannot be considered the new standard, although it
should be proposed to patients as a valid alternative. It
is obvious that IP therapy can be administered only in
specialized centers that have experience with the management of typical side effects and complications.
IP therapy should be proposed for patients with
International Federation for Gynecology and Obstetrics
(FIGO) stage III disease who have undergone debulking
and have residual disease (greatest dimension, <1 cm).
Patients who have FIGO stage IV disease with pleural
effusions only and minimal residual disease also may be
good candidates for IP therapy. The presence of retroperitoneal lymph node metastasis is not a contraindication
for IP therapy (level of acceptance, 10 of 12 panelists).
Hysterectomy is a clear standard in debulking
surgery for ovarian cancer patients. However, removal of the uterus and opening of the vagina may
promote loss of IP-instilled fluid. Thus, a subtotal
hysterectomy may be an alternative. Meticulous closure of the vaginal cuff by continuous suture is sufficient in the majority of patients. The panelists
therefore recommend a total hysterectomy as surgery
of choice for patients in whom IP therapy is planned
(level of acceptance, 12 of 12 panelists).
Preclinical and clinical data strongly indicated
that, as noted previously, the optimal patient to profit
from the extremely high concentrations of cytotoxic
drugs in the peritoneal cavity would be the patient with
a small amount of bulky disease present when this
approach was initiated. Although it may be argued that
several cycles of intense, systemic chemotherapy
should be delivered to reduce residual tumor volume
before starting IP treatment, this chemical debulking
may improve the efficacy of locoregional therapy.
Markman et al reported on a trial in which the experimental arm consisted of 2 courses of single-agent,
high-dose, IV carboplatin (area under the curve, 9)
before IP cisplatin (100 mg/m2) and IV paclitaxel (135
mg/m2 for 24 hours) were initiated.8
These findings were discussed by the panel, and
there was general consensus that chemical debulking
is sometimes favorable as initial chemotherapy
before IP therapy. However, inefficient cytoreduction
by high-dose chemotherapy often was associated

IP Therapy Consensus for Ovarian Cancer/Marth et al.

with bone marrow suppression, which makes sufficient IP administration of chemotherapy impossible
and markedly reduces a patient’s quality of life and
performance status. The panel concluded that there
is no reason to initiate moderate-dose, intense, systemic chemotherapy to debulk the tumor before IP
therapy (level of acceptance, 11 of 12 panelists).
In the same context, it is very important to discuss whether patients who receive successful neoadjuvant, standard IV therapy are eligible for IP therapy
after successful surgery and optimal debulking. The
majority of panelists agreed that this is an interesting
approach, although no data are yet available to answer this question. Therefore, there was general
agreement not to exclude these patients from IP
therapy (level of acceptance, 12 of 12 panelists).
However, 45% of panelists recommended further studies in this subgroup, whereas the remaining panelists suggested that extrapolation of available data is
also sufficient to introduce IP therapy into neoadjuvant treatment strategies.
Consolidation treatment after achieving complete
remission induced by standard IV chemotherapy is an
important issue. Recent data suggest that paclitaxel IV
given for 1 additional year prolonged progression-free
survival. Conversely, no conclusive studies have been
published for IP therapy. The European Organization
for Research and Treatment of Cancer initiated a study
in which 4 cycles of cisplatin were administered IP in
patients with ovarian cancer to achieve complete
remission after platinum-based therapy.9 However,
that study was closed early because of slow recruitment, and the published results clearly were underpowered. In detail, 8-year progression-free survival and
overall survival were similar in patients who received IP
cisplatin and in patients who received no further treatment (38% vs 37% and 53% vs 48%, respectively).
Indeed, when addressing the important quality-of-life
results from GOG Trial 172, it is apparent that IP therapy may be associated with significant quality-of-life
disruption during the active treatment phase; however,
this would depend on drug, dosage, and delivery
mechanisms.10 Therefore, the majority of panelists
advised that IP therapy currently should not be used
for consolidation after the completion of standard IV
therapy (level of acceptance, 8 of 12 panelists).
The panel also discussed whether elderly patients should be eligible for IP treatment. There was
general consensus that the main issue, of course, is
not age but performance status. Patients who are
determined to be fit for IV therapy also can be treated with IP therapy.
With level of acceptance of 8/12, the panelists
agreed to treat elderly patients. Two patients would

647

no longer envisage this treatment in patients aged
>70 years, and 2 panelists would treat patients up to
age 80 years.
Another question addressed whether patients
with carcinoma of the fallopian tube also should receive treatment with IP therapy. The panelists agreed
that separate studies are not needed for this disease
because of the low number of available patients and
the fact that a clinical distinction between ovarian
cancer and fallopian tube cancer is very difficult.
Patients with cancer of the fallopian tube should be
treated with IP therapy using the same rules that are
used to treat patients with ovarian cancer (level of acceptance, 12 of 12 panelists).
In GOG Trial 172, only 42% of patients completed all 6 cycles. Nevertheless, a significant difference in survival was achieved. Although no data are
available, the majority of panelists agreed that there
should be a relation between the number of cycles
and treatment success. Therefore, 6 cycles of IP therapy should be the objective (level of acceptance, 11
of 12 panelists). One panelist suggested that 2 to 4
cycles also would be sufficient for achieving optimal
results. It was suggested that 1 cycle of IP therapy
would not have a significant effect. This recommendation, however, must await trials comparing different numbers of IP treatments.
Clinical trials did not address the role of IP therapy sufficiently in patients with recurrent disease.11
However, the panelists agreed that secondary cytoreduction after long progression-free survival may
induce a situation in which IP therapy could be considered (level of acceptance, 9 of 12 panelists).
Only 3 panelists would consider IP therapy irrespective of its role in the treatment of recurrent disease. Diffuse peritoneal carcinomatosis or bulky
recurrent disease, however, should not be an indication for IP therapy.
A remarkable number of problems associated
with IP therapy are caused by delivery.12 In particular, port systems have been known to involve catheter obstruction, skin infection, or bowel perforation.
The majority of published trials have used implantable catheter systems. Panelists recommend the use of
venous access with a large silicon tube (level of acceptance, 8 of 12 panelists). However, use of either
the venous catheter or the peritoneal catheter is acceptable until future studies indicate a preference of
1 over the other. Direct injection, for example, using
a Verres needle, was suggested by 2 of 12 panelists,
and application of peritoneal catheter systems was
also recommended by 2 of 12 panelists. The catheter
should be placed at primary surgery (level of acceptance, 10 of 12 panelists).

648

CANCER

February 15, 2007 / Volume 109 / Number 4

TABLE 1
Role of Cytotoxic Agents in Intraperitoneal Therapeutic Regimens
Level of acceptance*

Drug

Recommended
for use

Additional trials
necessary before

Not expected
to play a role

Might play a role,
but only given IV
in combination with
other drugs given IP

Cisplatin
Carboplatin
Other platinum compounds
Paclitaxel
Albumin-bound paclitaxel (ABI 007)
Docetaxel
Topotecan
Gemcitabine
Interferons/cytokines
Chemohyperthermia
Radioactive conjugates

11/12
—
—
5/12
—
—
—
—
—
—
—

1/12
12/12
12/12
7/12
12/12
12/12
12/12
12/12
11/12
7/12
2/12

—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
1/12
5/12
10/12

—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—

IV indicates intravenous; IP, intraperitoneal.
* Numbers indicate how many of 12 panelists agreed on each item.

However, because a short delay in chemotherapy
will not lessen outcome, placement of the catheter during the first 4 postoperative weeks was considered sufficient, as suggested by 2 of 12 panelists. However, with
regard to possible contamination by microorganisms,
implantation of a foreign body is regarded dangerous.
Because bowel surgery frequently is performed in
patients with ovarian cancer to achieve optimal debulking, careful evaluation of these patients is necessary.
However, panelists could not agree on this issue.
Six panelists were against placement of a catheter at the same time as colon surgery. Conversely, the
panelists did not consider small intestine surgery a
contraindication.
One important question is the time of treatment
initiation. There is no role for intraoperative IP therapy, eg, cisplatin instillation (level of acceptance, 11
of 12 panelists).
Conversely, the panelists agreed to start IP therapy after patients recover from postoperative ileus
(level of acceptance, 7 of 12 panelists) or after
approximately 2 weeks (proposed by 4 of 12 panelists). Because there is no strict correlation between
the initiation of chemotherapy and outcome, there is
no reason to start IP therapy very early considering
its known side effects.
There was great consensus of opinion that cisplatin is the substance of choice for IP therapy. It
is important to mention that, although side effects
(Table 1) would be more manageable with carboplatin, it cannot substitute for cisplatin. In the case of
paclitaxel, the majority of panelists recommended

continuing with further trials, although there is a very
good rationale for using paclitaxel, because there is a
major difference in the peritoneal plasma ratio. For
the majority of other substances there is not enough
experience to recommend application outside clinical
trials.13,14 Although there is some experimental evidence that hyperthermia may augment the efficacy of
IP-administered substances, the majority of panelists
do not see a role for this type of treatment in future.
The reasons are mainly the complicated mode of
administration and the increased toxicity.
Because IP therapy also impairs bone marrow
function, administration of colony-stimulating factors
or erythropoietins may be necessary. In the special
case of IP therapy, the consensus was to apply these
substances using the same rules that are used for IV
therapy (level of acceptance, 10 of 12 panelists).
Adhesions are a major problem in IP therapy,
because they can impede equal distribution of the cytotoxic agents throughout the whole peritoneal cavity.
Nevertheless, 6 of 12 panelists do not recommend any
diagnostic procedures concerning even distribution in
IP-treated patients if the drug is easily deliverable.
Only a minority recommends ultrasound or radioisotopes to monitor the distribution of IP medication.
Renal toxicity is among the most important side
effects of cisplatin. Therefore, it is very important to use
a prehydration protocol to prevent this toxicity. The
same protocol that is used for IV cisplatin also is applicable for IP cisplatin (level of acceptance, 12 of 12 panelists), and it is not necessary to alter or adapt the
application of fluids, because they may be resorbed in a

IP Therapy Consensus for Ovarian Cancer/Marth et al.

delayed fashion and because IP and IV cisplatin have
different pharmacokinetics. The glomerular filtration
rate (GFR), of course, is a crucial parameter in allowing
cisplatin application. In the application of IP cisplatin
therapy, a GFR 50 mL per minute is required (level of
acceptance, 8 of 12 panelists). The minority of panelists
also allow IP cisplatin therapy in patients who have
lower GFR values.
Regarding quality of life, the neurotoxicities associated with IP therapy are of great importance.10 Eleven
of 12 panelists agreed that this toxicity is of very great
or great importance and should be evaluated carefully.
It is recommended that patients be informed about
this increased toxicity to permit decision making.
Of course, the administration of IP therapy is
more complicated than the administration of IV therapy. More experience in and knowledge of gynecologic oncology are necessary for this specialized
treatment. Twelve of 12 panelists agreed that 10 IP
applications are required per year to ensure a minimal standard of care for patients. Eight of 12 panelists requested >20 treatments per year.
The tumor marker CA-125 is produced and
released by ovarian cancer cells.15 However, peritoneal
cells also contain a large amount of this protein. It is
well known that processes in the peritoneum such, as
inflammation, markedly increase CA-125 release.16
Therefore, it may be argued that CA-125 tumor marker
determination is not reliable in patients who receive
IP treatment. However, 7 of 12 panelists agreed that,
even if a blood sample is not taken immediately after
IP instillation, CA-125 still is a reliable tumor marker.
However, the CA-125 serum level should be evaluated
carefully to exclude any influence by treatment route.
In view of these overwhelming data that demonstrate a survival benefit for patients who receive IP
chemotherapy, the question is raised whether, eg, a
GOG Trial 172 IP arm should be used as a control
arm in all future clinical trials. For practical reasons,
only 6 of 12 panelists voted for an obligatory IP control arm. It is obvious that, in the future, IV therapy
will continue to play a role.
The International Consensus Conference on Intraperitoneal Chemotherapy in Ovarian Cancer Patients,
which was held in Innsbruck, Austria, from February
17 to February 28, 2006, provided the first worldwide
consensus after publication of the National Cancer
Institute alert. A consensus on important questions
regarding the standard of care in IP therapy was
obtained. It is hoped that the high level of acceptance
will help implement the consensus statement worldwide and that this is useful information on the role of
IP therapy. Further evaluation of the results of this
consensus meeting is necessary.

649

REFERENCES
1.

2.

3.

4.
5.

6.

7.

8.

9.

10.

11.

12.

13.

14.
15.

16.

du Bois A, Quinn M, Thigpen T, et al. 2004 Consensus statements on the management of ovarian cancer: final document
of the third International Gynecologic Cancer Intergroup
Ovarian Cancer Consensus Conference, GCIG OCCC 2004.
Ann Oncol. 2005;16(suppl 8):viii7–viii12.
Alberts DS, Liu PY, Hannigan EV, O’Toole R, et al. Intraperitoneal cisplatin plus intravenous cyclophosphamide versus
intravenous cisplatin plus intravenous cyclophosphamide for
stage III ovarian cancer. N Engl J Med. 1996;335:1950–1955.
Gadducci A, Carnino F, Chiara S, et al. Intraperitoneal versus intravenous cisplatin in combination with intravenous
cyclophosphamide and epidoxorubicin in optimally cytoreduced advanced epithelial ovarian cancer: a randomized
trial of the Gruppo Oncologico Nord-Ovest. Gynecol Oncol.
2000;76:157–162.
Markman M. Role of intraperitoneal chemotherapy in the
front-line setting. J Clin Oncol. 2003;21:145s–148s.
Armstrong D, Bundy B, Wenzel L, et al. Intraperitoneal cisplatin and paclitaxel in ovarian cancer. N Engl J Med. 2006;
354:34–43.
Jaaback K, Johnson N. Intraperitoneal chemotherapy for
the initial management of primary epithelial ovarian cancer. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2006;1:1–28.
National Cancer Institute. Clinical announcement – intraperitoneal chemotherapy for ovarian cancer. Available at
URL: http://ctep.cancer.gov/highlights/clin_annc_010506.pdf.
Markman M, Bundy BN, Alberts DS, et al. Phase III trial of
standard-dose intravenous cisplatin plus paclitaxel versus
moderately high-dose carboplatin followed by intravenous
paclitaxel and intraperitoneal cisplatin in small-volume stage
III ovarian carcinoma: an intergoup study of the Gynecologic
Oncology Group, Southwestern Oncology Group and Eastern
Cooperative Oncology Group. J Clin Oncol. 2001;19:1001–1007.
Piccart MJ, Floquet A, Scarfone G, et al. Intraperitoneal cisplatin versus no further treatment: 8-year results of EORTC
55875, a randomized Phase III study in ovarian cancer
patients with a pathologically complete remission after
platinum-based intravenous chemotherapy. Int J Gynecol
Cancer. 2003;13(suppl 2):196–203.
Wenzel L, Huang H, Armstrong D, et al. Quality of life (QOL)
results of randomized trial of intravenous (IV) paclitaxel and
cisplatin vs. IV paclitaxel, intraperitoneal (IP) cisplatin and
IP paclitaxel in optimal stage III epithelial ovarian cancer
(OC): a Gynecologic Oncology Group Study. [abstract]. Proc
Am Soc Clin Oncol. 2004;23:454. Abstract 5026.
Markman M, Walker JL. Intraperitoneal chemotherapy of
ovarian cancer: a review, with a focus on practical aspects
of treatment. J Clin Oncol. 2006;24:988–994.
Walker JL, Armstrong DK, Huang HQ, et al. Intraperitoneal
catheter outcomes in a Phase III trial of intravenous versus
intraperitoneal chemotherapy in optimal stage III ovarian
and primary peritoneal cancer: a Gynecologic Oncology
Group study. Gynecol Oncol. 2006;100:27–32.
Pujade-Lauraine E, Guastalla JP, Colombo N, et al. Intraperitoneal recombinant interferon gamma in ovarian cancer
patients with residual disease at second-look laparotomy. J
Clin Oncol. 1996;14:343–350.
Zeimet AG, Marth C. Why did p53 gene therapy fail in
ovarian cancer? Lancet Oncol. 2003;4:415–422.
Rustin GJS, Timmers P, Nelstrop A, et al. Comparison of CA125 and standard definitions of progression of ovarian cancer in the intergroup trial of cisplatin and paclitaxel versus
cisplatin and cyclophosphamide. J Clin Oncol. 2006;24:45–51.
Zeimet AG, Offner FA, Marth C, et al. Modulation of CA-125
release by inflammatory cytokines in human peritoneal mesothelial and ovarian cancer cells. Anticancer Res. 1997;17:3129–3132.

