Published OnlineFirst September 14, 2010; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-10-1373

Meeting Report

Cancer
Research

The Role of Telomeres and Telomerase in Cancer Research
Sheila A. Stewart1 and Alison A. Bertuch2

Abstract
The fourth AACR Special Conference on The Role of Telomeres and Telomerase in Cancer Research was
held February 27 to March 2, 2010 in Fort Worth, TX. The meeting was organized to bring together those
interested in the basic molecular mechanisms that govern telomere dynamics and stability with those interested in the clinical implications of telomere dysfunction and the use of telomeres and telomerase as
therapeutic targets. The meeting was extremely successful as evidenced by the attendance and quality of
the presentations. Indeed, several important themes emerged including (a) the intricate connection between
the DNA replication and repair machineries in basic telomere replication and stability, (b) the complex
interplay between the telomere-specific shelterin components and DNA repair proteins, (c) the nontelomeric
functions of TERT in numerous cell types including stem cells, (d) a growing appreciation for the connection that exists between telomere maintenance deficiency states and diverse conditions such as idiopathic
pulmonary fibrosis and hematopoietic malignancies, and (e) the successful progression of agents targeting
telomerase directly and immunologically to phase III clinical trials. Evident at the meeting was the vibrant
energy that permeates the telomere field and the important biological and medical findings that it continues to yield. Cancer Res; 70(19); 7365–71. ©2010 AACR.

Introduction
The telomere is a complex DNA-protein structure located
at the end of all linear eukaryotic chromosomes. The functional importance of the telomere has been recognized since
the 1940s but the mechanisms that maintain this critical
structure are still being elucidated today. The cell is exquisitely sensitive to DNA double-strand breaks and detection
of such breaks leads to a cascade of cellular responses that
culminate in DNA repair. Because the natural chromosome
terminus could be perceived as a DNA break, it was originally
proposed that the telomere “disguised” chromosome ends
from the DNA damage surveillance machinery and even excluded DNA repair factors from accessing the chromosome
end. Although this original hypothesis made some sense, observations over the last decade and a half from a wide range
of organisms have underscored the intimate connection
which telomere stability shares with the activities of the
DNA repair machinery. The importance of this connection
was highlighted at the recent AACR Special Conference on
The Role of Telomeres and Telomerase in Cancer Research
that occurred in Fort Worth, TX, February 27 to March 2,

Authors' Affiliations: 1Departments of Cell Biology and Physiology, and
Medicine, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri
and 2Hematology/Oncology Section, Department of Pediatrics, Baylor
College of Medicine, Houston, Texas
Corresponding Author: Alison A. Bertuch, Baylor College of Medicine,
Department of Pediatrics, Hematology/Oncology Section, One Baylor
Plaza, Houston, TX 77030. Phone: 832-824-4579; Fax: 832-825-4651;
E-mail: abertuch@txccc.org.
doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-10-1373
©2010 American Association for Cancer Research.

2010. The meeting brought together researchers who focus
on telomere biology and/or basic DNA replication and repair
with those interested in the role of telomere stability (or loss
thereof) in disease and how telomeres and telomerase might
be targeted in cancer therapeutics. The meeting underscored
the challenge those in the telomere field face in delineating
the molecular activities the DNA replication and repair machineries play at the telomere and how the telomere complex
modifies, modulates, and/or dampens the activities of these
proteins to ensure chromosome stability. In addition, the
meeting highlighted the role the telomere plays in cancer
and other conditions including dyskeratosis congenita and
idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis, and the various therapeutic
approaches that have emerged from our current knowledge
of telomere biology. In this short report, we attempt to review some of the key presentations from this meeting and
apologize to the numerous researchers whose work we do
not have the space to highlight.

A Role for Rap1
Telomere stability is ensured by the retention of sufficient
telomeric DNA reserves and the activities of numerous proteins including the shelterin complex (consisting of TRF1,
TRF2, TIN2, TPP1, POT1, and Rap1) and basic DNA replication and repair proteins. Although there remains a great deal
to learn, we now have a reasonable understanding of the
roles TRF1, TRF2, TIN2, TPP1, and POT1 play in mammalian
telomere stability. In contrast, the contribution of RAP1 is
just now emerging. At this meeting, two groups reported
on mice bearing conditional Rap1 alleles, which revealed
functions of Rap1 at the mammalian telomere. Titia de Lange

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 5, 2017. © 2010 American Association for Cancer
Research.

7365

Published OnlineFirst September 14, 2010; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-10-1373
Stewart and Bertuch

(Rockefeller University, New York, NY) reported that conditional loss of Rap1 alone had little effect on telomere stability
(i.e., no overt changes in telomere length, telomere DNA
damage foci, or telomeric fusions were noted; ref. 1). However, when combined with loss of Ku, there was a marked increase in telomere sister chromatid exchanges, suggesting
that Rap1 participates in inhibiting homology-directed repair at the telomere. However, as is becoming a theme with
“telomere-specific” proteins, Paula Martinez from Maria
Blasco's group (Spanish National Cancer Centre, Madrid,
Spain) went on to propose that Rap1 has extratelomeric
functions as well. Using expression array and ChIP-Seq analysis, Martinez showed that Rap1 not only localized to telomeres as expected but was also found at extratelomeric
sites. Interestingly, extratelomeric Rap1 binding sites are particularly abundant at subtelomeric regions that contain
known genes. Analysis of gene expression in Rap1-deficient
cells revealed that many of the genes located in the regions
bound by Rap1 were deregulated, suggesting that Rap1 plays
a role in subtelomeric gene silencing and/or in transcriptional control (2). These findings argue that mammalian Rap1
functions analogously to its yeast counterpart, which has
dual functions at the telomere and in transcriptional regulation. Notably, whereas neither the de Lange nor Blasco
groups found a significant role for Rap1 in inhibiting telomere fusions, a recent report by Baumann and colleagues
suggests that this may be the case in human cells (3).
The difference in these findings may be due to the species
under investigation (i.e., mouse versus human, which in the
case of Ku deletion results in drastically different phenotypes) or the experimental approaches taken by each group.
Indeed, the de Lange and Blasco groups used a loss of function approach whereas the Baumann group utilized ectopic
expression of a fusion protein, which could account for the
differences in the studies. Nonetheless, these findings raise
the interesting possibility that Rap1 has additional functions at the human telomere.

DNA Repair Factors and Telomeres
Eric Hendrickson (University of Minnesota, Minneapolis,
MN) further emphasized the point that, although the mouse
is indispensable to our work, we must keep in mind that
important differences with humans exist. Hendrickson, a
self-proclaimed “Ku-ologist,” has used recombinant adenovirus-associated virus to create a human cancer cell line that
expresses a conditional null allele of the large Ku subunit,
Ku86 (XRCC5; ref. 4). Whereas the loss of Ku in murine cells
results in relatively modest telomere phenotypes, including
increased telomere sister chromatid exchanges and equivocal
changes in telomere length, Hendrickson's group found that
conditional loss of human Ku86 resulted in complete loss of
70% to 90% of telomeres by fluorescence in situ hybridization
and a significant increase in Lig4-independent sister telomere fusions. They also observed a significant increase in extrachromosomal telomeric repeat–containing circular DNA,
so-called T circles, suggesting that Ku plays a major role in
suppressing catastrophic homologous recombination at the

7366

Cancer Res; 70(19) October 1, 2010

human telomere. Taken together with the RAP1 story and
previous work, it is clear that both shelterin components
and DNA repair proteins coordinately suppress inappropriate
homologous recombination and nonhomologous end joining
at the telomere.
Researchers focused on basic DNA repair mechanisms
including Tanya Paull (University of Texas, Austin, TX),
Frederick Alt (Children's Hospital Boston, Boston, MA), and
Andre Nussenzweig (National Cancer Institute, Bethesda,
MD) presented work highlighting the biochemical activities
of the MRE11/RAD50/XRX2 complex and the molecular
activities of XLF and BRCA1, respectively, in genomic stability. These presentations reminded the audience that the details that distinguish the activities of these proteins at the
telomere from those across the genome are of critical importance to our overall understanding of telomere biology. A
presentation from another DNA repair researcher, John
Petrini (Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York,
NY) underscored this basic idea. In his presentation, Petrini
showed that loss of the MRE11 protein in cells deleted of
TRF2 reduced the number of chromosome fusions normally
observed upon TRF2 loss (5). This finding was in agreement
with previous work demonstrating that upon telomere uncapping, the 3′ single strand overhang is processed by the
DNA repair machinery before the nonhomologous end
joining machinery could act (6). Based on the known functions of MRE11, highlighted by Tanya Paull, this finding
indicates that the MRE11 complex plays an important role
in processing the 3′ single strand overhang.

The DNA Replication Machinery and Telomeres
In addition to the activities of the DNA repair machinery,
recent published work and data presented at this meeting
also highlighted the critical interplay between the DNA replication machinery and members of the shelterin complex at
the telomere. Previous work from the de Lange and Blasco
groups showed that TRF1, whose roles were previously
thought to be restricted to the negative regulation of telomere length and sister telomere cohesion, is critical for replication fork progression through the telomere (7, 8). Indeed,
they showed that conditional loss of TRF1 led to inefficient
replication fork progression through the telomere and telomere dysfunction characterized by multiple telomere signals
referred to by some as fragile telomeres. Fuyuki Ishikawa
(Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan) presented work using the
Xenopus system to show that this central role of TRF1 may
be limited to mammals. Indeed, he showed that Xenopus
TRF1 does not bind the telomere during S phase whereas
TRF2 does. He went on to show that depletion of TRF2 led to
a 50% reduction in overall telomeric replication, arguing for a
functional importance of TRF2 rather than TRF1 in the frog for
telomere replication. Understanding the molecular determinants that lead to these differences will be of great interest.
Several posters and talks further highlighted the importance of basic replication proteins in telomere stability.
Building off previous work from the Bohr group, Avik Ghosh
(National Institute on Aging, Baltimore, MD) showed that the

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 5, 2017. © 2010 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Published OnlineFirst September 14, 2010; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-10-1373
The Role of Telomeres and Telomerase in Cancer Research

poorly characterized RECQL4 protein could resolve D loops
and stimulate the activities of the WRN protein at telomeric
D loops but not nontelomeric sequences in vitro. Given that
Jan Karlseder's group (Salk Institute for Biological Sciences)
previously found that WRN is important for telomere replication (9), these findings suggest that like WRN, RECQL4
may participate in telomere metabolism. A presentation from
Sheila Stewart (Washington University, St. Louis, MO)
showed that the Okazaki fragment processing protein FEN1
also plays a crucial role in telomere replication. Indeed,
FEN1's ability to participate in DNA repair, presumably in
the resolution or stabilization of stalled replication forks
and not its participation in basic lagging strand replication,
was necessary for telomere replication while being dispensable for genome-wide replication. Together, these talks underscored the important role that basic DNA replication
factors may play in telomere replication and maintenance.
Continuing along the theme of telomere replication,
Bradley Stohr from Elizabeth Blackburn's group (University
of California, San Francisco, CA) provided potential insight
into why telomeres evolved to be G-rich, despite the challenge they pose to replication machinery. He showed that
by sequentially changing the terminal telomeric sequences
to progressively more self-complementary sequences, cells
began to display increased levels of sister telomere fusions,
something rarely encountered even in the face of massive
telomere dysfunction. This finding leads to the intriguing
possibility that in vertebrates, evolution selected for the
non–self-complementary TTAGGG sequence to minimize
the probability of sister telomere fusions but at the cost
of difficult to replicate sequences sensitive to loss of function mutations in basic DNA replication proteins.

Timing, Coordination, and Regulation of
Telomerase
Although it has been nearly 25 years since the seminal discovery of telomerase by recent Nobel laureates Carol Greider
(Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD) and Elizabeth
Blackburn (University of California, San Francisco, CA), the
molecular details governing telomerase action continue to
emerge. A number of the meeting's presentations sought to
address some of the key outstanding questions. Virginia
Zakian (Princeton University, Princeton, NJ) reported on
her group's continued efforts to decipher the series of interactions governing the recruitment of telomerase to telomeres
in the Saccharomyces cerevisiae model system. Building on
her prior studies that indicated Xrs2 targets Tel1 [the yeast
ataxia telangiectasia mutated (ATM) orthologue] to short
telomeres, which in turn promotes the preferential association of telomerase to these ends (10), she presented data indicating that Xrs2's association with short telomeres is
facilitated by the reduced occupancy of Rif2. Thus, Rif2
may prove to be the first signal in the pathway identifying
short telomeres in the budding yeast model system.
Carolyn Price (University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, OH)
presented her group's ongoing work in the model system that

www.aacrjournals.org

first yielded telomerase, Tetrahymena thermophila. She
showed that Tetrahymena cells express a developmentally
regulated Pot1 paralogue, Pot1b, which seems to function
in the pathway of chromosome breakage and de novo telomere synthesis during macronucleus formation. Interesting
in its own regard, this work reminds us that even humans
may harbor novel telomere-associated factors or splice variants of known factors that are developmentally regulated
and missed in laboratory cell culture systems.
Joachim Lingner (Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de
Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland) reported on studies
seeking to define the proteins that receive telomerase at
mammalian telomeres. Using cells overexpressing telomerase, his group found less TERT and TERC at telomeres in
cells deficient for TPP1 or TIN2 but no change in cells deficient for POT1 (11). Because both TPP1 and TIN2 are
thought to negatively regulate telomerase, these localization
studies might ultimately lead to unexpected insights into
telomerase's association and activity at telomeres.
TPP1's role as a regulator of TERT at chromosome ends
was also revealed by studies presented by Rosa Marion
from Maria Blasco's group. The Blasco group has previously
shown that telomere elongation during nuclear reprogramming of mouse embryonic fibroblasts into induced pluripotent stem cells is mediated by telomerase (12). These
finding were expanded on at this meeting when Marion
showed that TPP1-deficient mouse embryonic fibroblasts
failed to elongate telomeres during nuclear reprogramming
into induced pluripotent stem cells, demonstrating that
TPP1 is essential for net telomere elongation by telomerase
in vivo (13).
Woodring Wright's (UT Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas, TX) talk covered many fundamental questions regarding the action, timing, and coordination of telomerase
in human cells. Previous studies in the budding yeast model
showed that telomerase acts only on the shortest telomeres,
after bulk DNA replication (i.e., in late S phase), and coordinately with the lagging strand synthesis machinery, which
is required for telomere C-strand fill-in after telomerasemediated elongation (14). The preferential elongation of
the shortest telomeres has also been shown in mouse.
Recent work in human cancer cells from his and Jerry
Shay's group has revealed a different picture. Utilizing a series of clever assays that allowed for monitoring of G-strand
elongation and C-strand fill-in, they found that, under conditions of telomere length homeostasis, telomerase acts on
most, not just the shortest, telomeres in S phase and that
C-strand fill-in is temporally dissociated from telomerase
elongation, occurring much later in S phase (15). Wright
presented their continuing studies, which indicate that
telomerase acts processively when telomere length is at
steady state or when telomerase is overexpressed, but distributively when elongating shortened telomeres. Thus, even
in human cancer cells, the action of telomerase is influenced in some way by telomere length. Wright proposed
that telomere length equilibrium conditions might underlie
the indiscriminate action of telomerase at nearly all telomeres in these cancer cell lines. Indeed, a recent study

Cancer Res; 70(19) October 1, 2010

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 5, 2017. © 2010 American Association for Cancer
Research.

7367

Published OnlineFirst September 14, 2010; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-10-1373
Stewart and Bertuch

demonstrating the preferential elongation of short telomeres in primary human fibroblast cells following the expression of telomerase supports this very proposal (16).
Although the abovementioned work illustrates how budding yeast telomere biology may display differences from human, work on S. cerevisiae will no doubt continue to provide
offerings to the study of human telomeres. Carolyn Price illustrated this point when she described her findings on human Ctc1, a recently characterized protein that interacts
with paralogues of budding yeast Stn1 and Ten1 (17, 18).
Ctc1, like Cdc13, interacts with components of the lagging
strand DNA synthesis machinery. The extent to which Ctc1
is specialized for telomere replication and function is of clear
interest to many in the field.

Nontelomeric Functions of TERT
Over the last several years, an appreciation for the extratelomeric functions of TERT has emerged. Previous work
has shown that immortal TERT-positive versus telomerasenegative cells were more resistant to several chemotherapeutic modalities, that ectopic expression of hTERT increased
the tumorigenic potential of ALT tumor cells (19) and that
transgenic expression of mTERT in otherwise telomerasepositive mice led to increased tumorigenesis (20–22), and
increased hair growth when expressed specifically in the skin
(23). In addition, TERT was recently shown to function as an
RNA-dependent RNA polymerase and participate in the
microRNA pathway (24). Together, these and other studies
indicate that TERT possesses extratelomeric functions. This
theme continued at the 2010 AACR telomere meeting. Steven
Artandi (Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford,
CA) presented a compelling story demonstrating that TERT
interacts directly with WNT transcription factors and cooperates in activating WNT responsive promoters during normal hair growth (25), adding yet another level of complexity
to the TERT story. In addition, Falk Mancke (Comprehensive
Cancer Center Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany) showed that
telomerase interacts with β-catenin in cells from late stage
adenocarcinomas of the esophagus. However, there is no
such interaction in early stages of adenocarcinomas or
squamous cell cancers, i.e., irrespective of their differentiation, arguing that this interaction may be important in tumor progression. Studies such as these have important
implications when considering the cellular consequences
of TERT upregulation in the vast majority of human cancers. Clearly, investigation into the extratelomeric roles of
TERT will remain an exciting area that will continue to
challenge our understanding of telomerase biology.

Consequences of Telomere Dysfunction
First implicated in the bone marrow predisposition syndrome dyskeratosis congenita, constitutional mutations and
single nucleotide polymorphisms in telomerase subunits
TERT and TERC are now being reported with a number
of diseases with nonsyndromic presentations. Two talks at
the meeting emphasized this point. First, Peter Lansdorp

7368

Cancer Res; 70(19) October 1, 2010

(University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada) reported a 3- to 6-fold higher frequency of the hypomorphic
A1062T TERT allele in individuals with acute myelogenous
leukemia, chronic lymphocytic lymphoma (CLL), and diffuse
large B-cell lymphoma relative to normal controls (26). He
and his group hypothesized that other variants in TERT or
TERC might be more frequent in these diseases, and indeed,
full-length sequencing of TERT in 70 individuals with CLL
revealed germ line mutations in TERT in >10% of patients.
Hypomorphic TERT variants could predispose individuals to
the development of various tumors by compromising tissue
renewal and increasing cell divisions in remaining cells.
This mechanism could explain the linkage between single
nucleotide polymorphisms mapping to the TERT locus in
cancer that has been observed in several large linkage studies in which the genome of cancer patients was compared
with that of normal controls.
Christine Garcia (UT Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas,
TX) described her group's analysis of over 100 individuals
with TERT mutations from 21 different families in which
the proband presented with idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis,
a condition that is also seen in individuals with dyskeratosis
congenita. They found that the development of idiopathic
pulmonary fibrosis was age-dependent and exacerbated by
exposures such as smoking. Only a few mutation carriers developed bone marrow failure or myelodysplastic syndrome,
however, the incidence of mild anemia, aplastic anemia,
and myelodysplastic syndrome seemed higher than would
be expected for the general population. In addition, they
found progressive telomere shortening in three large fivegeneration pedigrees, raising the possibility that mutation
carriers in later generations might exhibit more of the clinical features characteristic of DC. Hopefully, there will be
long-term follow-up of these families, which will address this
unresolved question.
The association of hypomorphic TERT alleles with malignancy lends circumstantial support to the hypothesis that
telomere dysfunction resulting from critically short telomeres might contribute to the genomic changes that drive
oncogenesis. Further evidence for this came from Duncan
Baird (Cardiff University, Cardiff, Wales) who presented data
from his group's study of chromosome-specific telomere
lengths and fusions in early to late stage CLL. They found
that mean telomere lengths were variable in early stage
CLL but were uniformly short in late stage CLL and that telomere fusions increased coincident with telomere shortening,
providing the first direct demonstration of fusion between
short dysfunctional telomeres during the progression of
cancer in humans. Furthermore, sequence analysis revealed
deletions and complex rearrangements similar to those
observed in mortal fibroblast cultures undergoing “crisis.”
Titia de Lange also presented her group's recent work demonstrating that a persistent telomere damage signal could induce tetraploidization, a phenomenon associated with early
carcinogenesis. Using p53-deficient POT1a/b double knockout
mouse embryonic fibroblasts, she showed that tetraploidization was strongly suppressed by inhibition of ATR-mediated
DNA damage signaling (27). She further showed that when

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 5, 2017. © 2010 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Published OnlineFirst September 14, 2010; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-10-1373
The Role of Telomeres and Telomerase in Cancer Research

telomere end protection was re-established after tetraploidization, normal cell cycle divisions resumed. These studies
provide new insight into how telomere dysfunction could
contribute to the generation of cancer genomes.

Alternative Lengthening of Telomeres
A continued interest in the alternative lengthening of telomeres (ALT) pathway(s), which is observed in a small subset of carcinomas, but larger numbers of mesenchymal and
neuroepithelial malignancies, was evident at the meeting. Examples of this include a presentation by Qin Yang (Washington University, St. Louis, MO), who extended his group's work
implicating the structure-specific endonuclease, Mus81, in
the maintenance of telomeres in ALT by demonstrating that
Mus81 localization to ALT-associated promyelocytic leukemia bodies was dependent on BLM. Finally, Roger Reddel
(Children's Medical Research Institute, Westmead, Australia)
reported on his group's recent efforts to determine whether
ALT-like activity occurs in nontransformed cells. To do this,
they analyzed the spread of a telomeric tag, first introduced
into murine embryonic stem cells, in the germ line and somatic tissues. Whereas the tag displayed a normal germ line
Mendelian segregation, even after numerous generations, it
was copied to the telomeres of other chromosomes in cells
from various somatic tissues. They propose that ALT, like telomerase, may be regulated in normal cells and dysregulated
in tumorigenesis.

Telomerase Takes Center Stage in Cancer
Therapeutics
Because telomerase is poorly or only transiently expressed
in human somatic cells, yet upregulated in the vast majority
of human cancers, and telomere maintenance is crucial for
long-term cellular proliferation, telomerase is an attractive
target for anticancer therapy. In the meeting's keynote address, Jerry Shay (UT Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas,
TX) gave an overview of the various approaches that have
been undertaken to exploit telomerase in cancer therapeutics
and then focused in on the development status of imetelstat
(originally known as GRN163L; Geron Corp., Menlo Park,
CA), a lipidated 13-mer oligonucleotide N3′ P5′-thiophosphoramidate that has high affinity and binding specificity for the template region of the telomerase RNA subunit
(TERC) and is a potent telomerase inhibitor in all major
cancer cell types examined in vitro. He reported that a number of phase I studies in solid and hematologic malignancies
have been completed establishing a single agent phase II
dose and an interval schedule. In addition, there is also a
phase I/II study under way that is evaluating imetelstat in
combination with paclitaxel and bevacizumab in patients
with locally recurrent or metastatic breast cancer. Finally,
phase II studies are also evaluating imetelstat in non–small
cell lung carcinoma, breast cancer, and multiple myeloma.
While the clinical trials are under way, preclinical studies
addressing important aspects of imetelstat's efficacy and

www.aacrjournals.org

potential resistance continue at the bench. Several groups
are investigating whether tumor-initiating cells or cancer
stem cells might be preferentially targeted by telomerase inhibition. For example, Shay's group showed that telomerase
activity in putative tumor-initiating cells isolated from primary human glioblastoma multiforme and prostate cancer
was inhibited by imetelstat treatment. In addition, they
observed telomere shortening following prolonged imetelstat treatment. Imetelstat-treated glioblastoma multiforme
tumor-initiating cells also exhibited decreased neurosphere
formation and tumor formation in a murine tumor explant
model, suggesting that these critical cells might be viable
in vivo targets. Similarly, Robert Tressler (Geron, Menlo
Park, CA) reported that imetelstat had a profound effect
on cancer stem cells derived from melanoma, breast and pancreatic carcinoma, multiple myeloma, low-grade glioma, and
glioblastoma multiforme. Indeed, broad in vitro and in vivo
activity was observed, however, the mechanism of inhibition
varied with tumor type. These reports support the notion
that telomerase inhibition may be particularly effective on
these crucial cells in tumor development and survival.
As with all treatments, the potential for the development
of resistance to telomerase inhibitors such as imetelstat remains a concern. To address this question, Robin Frink
(UT Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX) reported
the results of long-term treatment of non–small cell lung
carcinoma cell lines with imetelstat. As expected, telomerase inhibition and telomere shortening were uniformly observed initially, however, the effects varied; some cell lines
underwent rapid apoptosis, whereas others showed a decline in proliferation coincident with telomere shortening.
The effects of prolonged treatment with imetelstat (in
one case, over a year) on telomere length varied as well.
In one case, telomeres stabilized, whereas in another, telomere length gradually increased to parental length. Whether these effects were due to upregulation of telomerase or
secondary mutations/adaptations is unclear at this point
but they underscore the importance of further work into
the mechanisms of resistance if telomerase therapies are
to be successful.
Telomerase has also been exploited as a tumor-associated
antigen and potential immunotherapy target. Gary Middleton
(St. Luke's Cancer Centre, Guildford, England) highlighted
the progress that have been made on telomerase peptide
vaccines. Phase I and II studies have been completed with
a variety of peptides and have shown tolerability, immunologic responses, and prolonged survival in responders.
GV1001, a synthetic peptide corresponding to hTERT residues 611 to 626, is currently being evaluated in a phase III
randomized trial comparing gemcitabine and capecitabine
with or without GV1001 in patients with locally advanced
or metastatic pancreatic cancer. A phase III study evaluating optimized TERT peptide 572Y (Vx-001) in non–small
cell lung carcinoma is expected to begin this year. The
findings from these studies will be highly anticipated,
and if positive, will firmly establish the feasibility of immunologically targeting TERT in the treatment of human
cancers.

Cancer Res; 70(19) October 1, 2010

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 5, 2017. © 2010 American Association for Cancer
Research.

7369

Published OnlineFirst September 14, 2010; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-10-1373
Stewart and Bertuch

Telomere Biology and Cancer Diagnostics
Other advances that may find their way into the clinic were
also presented. For example, Roger Reddel presented his
group's recent work on telomeric C-circles, partially singlestranded closed circular DNA molecules that contain telomeric repeat tracts (28). Using a sensitive C-circle assay
they developed, >100-fold higher C-circle assay levels were
observed in a wide variety of ALT-positive compared with
ALT-negative human cell lines. Although other markers of
ALT have been described, what makes this assay particularly
promising is that it also detected higher C-circle assay levels
in blood from patients with ALT-positive compared with
ALT-negative osteosarcomas, suggesting its potential applicability to diagnosis, treatment, and disease surveillance of
ALT-positive tumors. Jerry Shay reported that the telomerase
repeat amplification protocol (commonly known as the
TRAP assay) could be used to detect limiting numbers
of telomerase-positive cells in the blood of patients with
non–small cell lung carcinoma, raising the possibility that
it could be a tool for early detection/screening modalities.
It is possible that other telomere or telomerase-based diagnostic tools will be developed in the years to come.

Summary
This Special Conference highlighted the fact that, although
research on telomeres and telomerase has partially unraveled
the complexity governing the maintenance of chromosome
ends, there remains a great deal left to better understand

such as in vivo telomerase enzymology, functions of integral
telomere-specific factors, and the contribution of repair and
recombination factors on normal telomere structure and
function. At this meeting, we found that the knowledge acquired through basic telomere biology research is being applied to the study of cancer and other disease processes. We
anticipate that an understanding of the role telomere maintenance deficiency plays in cancer development and other
conditions may ultimately lead to telomere-based risk categories for prevention and surveillance. In addition, it was encouraging to learn that telomerase-targeted therapies are
continuing along the drug development pipeline. At the current pace, how some of today's discoveries will affect our understanding of human disease may be apparent as soon as
the next biannual Special Conference on Telomeres and
Telomerase in Cancer Research.
Disclosure of Potential Conflicts of Interest
No potential conflicts of interest were disclosed.

Acknowledgments
We thank the meeting organizers, Titia de Lange, Woodring Wright, and
Virginia Zakian, for putting together an excellent meeting, the AACR for its
continued interest in telomere research, and the Series and Award
Supporters. We also thank the participants for outstanding oral and poster
presentations and engaging discussions.
Received 05/07/2010; revised 07/20/2010; accepted 07/26/2010; published
OnlineFirst 09/14/2010.

References
1.

Sfeir A, Kabir S, van Overbeek M, Celli GB, de Lange T. Loss of Rap1
induces telomere recombination in the absence of NHEJ or a DNA
damage signal. Science 2010;327:1657–61.
2. Martinez P, Thanasoula M, Carlos AR, et al. Mammalian Rap1 controls telomere function and gene expression through binding to telomeric and extratelomeric sites. Nat Cell Biol 2010;12:768–80.
3. Sarthy J, Bae NS, Scrafford J, Baumann P. Human RAP1 inhibits
non-homologous end joining at telomeres. EMBO J 2009;28:3390–9.
4. Wang Y, Ghosh G, Hendrickson EA. Ku86 represses lethal telomere
deletion events in human somatic cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
2009;106:12430–5.
5. Attwooll CL, Akpinar M, Petrini JH. The mre11 complex and the
response to dysfunctional telomeres. Mol Cell Biol 2009;29:
5540–51.
6. Deng Y, Guo X, Ferguson DO, Chang S. Multiple roles for MRE11 at
uncapped telomeres. Nature 2009;460:914–8.
7. Sfeir A, Kosiyatrakul ST, Hockemeyer D, et al. Mammalian telomeres
resemble fragile sites and require TRF1 for efficient replication. Cell
2009;138:90–103.
8. Martinez P, Thanasoula M, Munoz P, et al. Increased telomere fragility and fusions resulting from TRF1 deficiency lead to degenerative
pathologies and increased cancer in mice. Genes Dev 2009;23:
2060–75.
9. Crabbe L, Verdun RE, Haggblom CI, Karlseder J. Defective telomere
lagging strand synthesis in cells lacking WRN helicase activity.
Science 2004;306:1951–3.
10. Sabourin M, Tuzon CT, Zakian VA. Telomerase and Tel1p preferentially associate with short telomeres in S. cerevisiae. Mol Cell 2007;
27:550–61.

7370

Cancer Res; 70(19) October 1, 2010

11. Abreu E, Aritonovska E, Reichenbach P, et al. TIN2-tethered TPP1
recruits human telomerase to telomeres in vivo. Mol Cell Biol 2010;
30:2971–82.
12. Marion RM, Strati K, Li H, et al. Telomeres acquire embryonic stem
cell characteristics in induced pluripotent stem cells. Cell Stem Cell
2009;4:141–54.
13. Tejera AM, Stagno d'Alcontres M, Thanasoula M, et al. TPP1 is required for TERT recruitment, telomere elongation during nuclear reprogramming, and normal skin development in mice. Dev Cell 2010;
18:775–89.
14. Shore D, Bianchi A. Telomere length regulation: coupling DNA end
processing to feedback regulation of telomerase. EMBO J 2009;28:
2309–22.
15. Zhao Y, Sfeir AJ, Zou Y, et al. Telomere extension occurs at most
chromosome ends and is uncoupled from fill-in in human cancer
cells. Cell 2009;138:463–75.
16. Britt-Compton B, Capper R, Rowson J, Baird DM. Short telomeres
are preferentially elongated by telomerase in human cells. FEBS Lett
2009;583:3076–80.
17. Surovtseva YV, Churikov D, Boltz KA, et al. Conserved telomere
maintenance component 1 interacts with STN1 and maintains chromosome ends in higher eukaryotes. Mol Cell 2009;36:207–18.
18. Miyake Y, Nakamura M, Nabetani A, et al. RPA-like mammalian
Ctc1-1-Ten1 complex binds to single-stranded DNA and protects
telomeres independently of the Pot1 pathway. Mol Cell 2009;36:
193–206.
19. Stewart SA, Hahn WC, O'Connor BF, et al. Telomerase contributes
to tumorigenesis by a telomere length-independent mechanism.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2002;99:12606–11.

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 5, 2017. © 2010 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Published OnlineFirst September 14, 2010; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-10-1373
The Role of Telomeres and Telomerase in Cancer Research

20. Gonzalez-Suarez E, Samper E, Ramirez A, et al. Increased epidermal
tumors and increased skin wound healing in transgenic mice overexpressing the catalytic subunit of telomerase, mTERT, in basal keratinocytes. EMBO J 2001;20:2619–30.
21. Artandi SE, Alson S, Tietze MK, et al. Constitutive telomerase
expression promotes mammary carcinomas in aging mice. Proc
Natl Acad Sci U S A 2002;99:8191–6.
22. Bednarek AK, Chu Y, Slaga TJ, Aldaz CM. Telomerase and cell
proliferation in mouse skin papillomas. Mol Carcinog 1997;20:
329–31.
23. Parkinson EK, Fitchett C, Cereser B. Dissecting the non-canonical
functions of telomerase. Cytogenet Genome Res 2008;122:273–80.
24. Maida Y, Yasukawa M, Furuuchi M, et al. An RNA-dependent RNA

www.aacrjournals.org

25.

26.

27.
28.

polymerase formed by TERT, the RMRP. RNA. Nature 2009;461:
230–5.
Park JI, Venteicher AS, Hong JY, et al. Telomerase modulates Wnt
signalling by association with target gene chromatin. Nature 2009;
460:66–72.
Hills M, Lansdorp PM. Short telomeres resulting from heritable mutations in the telomerase reverse transcriptase gene predispose for a
variety of malignancies. Ann N Y Acad Sci 2009;1176:178–90.
Davoli T, Denchi EL, de Lange T. Persistent telomere damage
induces bypass of mitosis and tetraploidy. Cell 2010;141:81–93.
Henson JD, Cao Y, Huschtscha LI, et al. DNA C-circles are specific
and quantifiable markers of alternative-lengthening-of-telomeres
activity. Nat Biotechnol 2009;27:1181–5.

Cancer Res; 70(19) October 1, 2010

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 5, 2017. © 2010 American Association for Cancer
Research.

7371

Published OnlineFirst September 14, 2010; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-10-1373

The Role of Telomeres and Telomerase in Cancer Research
Sheila A. Stewart and Alison A. Bertuch
Cancer Res 2010;70:7365-7371. Published OnlineFirst September 14, 2010.

Updated version

Cited articles
Citing articles

E-mail alerts
Reprints and
Subscriptions
Permissions

Access the most recent version of this article at:
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-10-1373

This article cites 27 articles, 9 of which you can access for free at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/70/19/7365.full#ref-list-1
This article has been cited by 3 HighWire-hosted articles. Access the articles at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/70/19/7365.full#related-urls

Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal.
To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications
Department at pubs@aacr.org.
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications
Department at permissions@aacr.org.

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 5, 2017. © 2010 American Association for Cancer
Research.

