Oncotarget, Vol. 7, No. 30

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Review

The insulin-like growth factor system in multiple myeloma:
diagnostic and therapeutic potential

Liesbeth Bieghs1,2,3, Hans E. Johnsen2,4,5, Ken Maes1, Eline Menu1, Els Van
Valckenborgh1, Michael T. Overgaard6, Mette Nyegaard3, Cheryl A. Conover7, Karin
Vanderkerken1,* and Elke De Bruyne1,*
1

Department of Hematology and Immunology, Myeloma Center Brussels, Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Brussels, Belgium

2

Department of Hematology, Aalborg Hospital, Aalborg University, Denmark

3

Department of Biomedicin, Aarhus University, Aarhus, Denmark

4

Clinical Cancer Research Center, Aalborg University Hospital, Denmark

5

Department of Clinical Medicine, Aalborg University, Denmark

6

Department of Chemistry and Biotechnology, Aalborg University, Denmark

7

Division of Endocrinology, Metabolism and Nutrition, Endocrine Research Unit, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, NY, USA

*

Equal senior authors

Correspondence to: Elke De Bruyne, email: eldebruy@vub.ac.be
Keywords: multiple myeloma, insulin-like growth factor, IGF-I targeting
Received: January 04, 2016	

Accepted: April 16, 2016	

Published: April 25, 2016

ABSTRACT
Multiple myeloma (MM) is a highly heterogeneous plasma cell malignancy. The
MM cells reside in the bone marrow (BM), where reciprocal interactions with the BM
niche foster MM cell survival, proliferation, and drug resistance. As in most cancers,
the insulin-like growth factor (IGF) system has been demonstrated to play a key role
in the pathogenesis of MM. The IGF system consists of IGF ligands, IGF receptors,
IGF binding proteins (IGFBPs), and IGFBP proteases and contributes not only to the
survival, proliferation, and homing of MM cells, but also MM-associated angiogenesis
and osteolysis. Furthermore, increased IGF-I receptor (IGF-IR) expression on MM
cells correlates with a poor prognosis in MM patients. Despite the prominent role of
the IGF system in MM, strategies targeting the IGF-IR using blocking antibodies or
small molecule inhibitors have failed to translate into the clinic. However, increasing
preclinical evidence indicates that IGF-I is also involved in the development of drug
resistance against current standard-of-care agents against MM, including proteasome
inhibitors, immunomodulatory agents, and corticoids. IGF-IR targeting has been
able to overcome or revert this drug resistance in animal models, enhancing the
efficacy of standard-of-care agents. This finding has generated renewed interest in
the therapeutic potential of IGF-I targeting in MM. The present review provides an
update of the impact of the different IGF system components in MM and discusses
the diagnostic and therapeutic potentials.

INTRODUCTION

annually [1]. The incidence of MM is more common in
men and increases with age. In 2012, the number of new
cases of myeloma was 6.3 per 100,000 individuals in
the United States [2]. The incidence rate in Europe the
same year was approximately 3.9 [3]. Clinical features
of MM include hypercalcemia, renal failure, anemia,
and bone disease (frequently referred to by the acronym

Multiple myeloma (MM) is a plasma cell (PC)
malignancy characterized by the proliferation of
malignant monoclonal PCs in the bone marrow (BM).
MM is the second most diagnosed hematological
malignancy, accounting for 1% of all new cancer cases

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

48732

Oncotarget

CRAB), which represent evidence of end-organ failure
[4]. MM is consistently preceded by an asymptomatic
premalignant disease known as monoclonal gammopathy
of undetermined significance (MGUS) [5]. MGUS is
characterized by the presence of a serum monoclonal
protein (M protein, less than 3 g/dl) and the BM
containing less than 10% monoclonal PCs without any
evidence of end-organ damage [6]. MM is a genetically
highly heterogeneous disease with the lack of a universal
driver mutation and the presence of a high number of nonrecurrent genetic defects [7-9]. Common primary defects
thought to be the initiating events in MM development
are broadly classified into two categories: hyperdiploid
(multiple trisomies) and non-hyperdiploid genetic
defects. Frequently observed hyperdiploid defects are
trisomies of chromosomes 3, 5, 7, 9, 11, 15, 19, or 21.
Non-hyperdiploid defects are mostly monosomy 13 or
translocations involving the immunoglobulin heavy chain
(IgH) locus (14q32.3). Recurrent translocation partners
for this locus are t(4;14), t(6;14), t(11;14), t(14;16), and
t(14;20), affecting FGFR3/MMSET, CCND (cyclin
D family) genes, and MAF genes [10]. These primary
defects are present in both MGUS and MM cells and
uniformly lead to the overexpression of CCND genes,
resulting in deregulation of the G1/S cell cycle transition
point, a key early molecular abnormality in myeloma [11].
Progression of MGUS to MM is associated with secondary
genetic aberrations, such as mutations in KRAS, BRAF,
and NRAS, p53 mutations, and upregulation of Myc
and NF-κB [12-14]. However, overwhelming evidence
indicates that these genetic defects alone are insufficient
to induce progression from MGUS to MM, as a permissive
BM microenvironment is required for the emergence of
overt MM. In this BM microenvironment, MM cells
interact closely with hematopoietic and non-hematopoietic
cells, (including mesenchymal stromal cells (MSCs),
osteoblasts, osteoclasts, and immune cells) through
adhesion molecules and the production of different
growth factors, such as insulin-like growth factor (IGF),
interleukin-6 (IL-6), VEGF, a proliferation-inducing ligand
(APRIL), B cell activating factor (BAFF), and stromal
cell-derived factor-1α (SDF-1α). These bidirectional
interactions support the survival, proliferation, and
homing of MM cells and contribute to drug resistance.
Moreover, these interactions result in osteolysis, increased
angiogenesis, and immune suppression [15-17].
Over the last decade, the introduction of agents
targeting both MM cells and interactions with the BM
niche, such as proteasome inhibitors (PIs; e.g., bortezomib
and carfilzomib) and immunomodulatory agents (IMiDs;
e.g., thalidomide, lenalidomide, and pomalidomide), has
significantly prolonged the survival of MM patients [18,
19]. In 2015, front-line treatment of young and fit MM
patients (under 65 years of age) consisted of induction
therapy with different combinations of PIs together
with IMiDs, corticosteroids (mostly dexamethasone),
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

and/or anti-mitotic agents (e.g., cyclophosphamide or
doxorubicin) to reduce tumor burden. The induction
therapy is followed by a stem cell harvest, highdose melphalan treatment, and autologous stem cell
transplantation (ASCT) [20]. After ASCT, consolidation
(short-term) and/or maintenance (long-term) therapy are
used to improve responses after induction therapy and
increase time of remission after successful induction
therapy [21]. Both consolidation and maintenance therapy
consist mainly of PI- or IMiD-based regimens and are
beneficial for progression-free survival, and possibly
also overall survival [22-24]. For patients ineligible
for transplantation, bortezomib-melphalan-prednisone
or bortezomib-prednisone-thalidomide combination
regimens are the standard-of-care options [25]. In
addition, patients receive supportive therapy for the
management of hypercalcemia, skeletal complications,
anemia, infections, and pain [26]. However, despite the
major advances in MM therapy, MM is often incurable,
with an overall survival of 5.2 years after diagnosis
depending on age and therapy [18, 27, 28]. A major
problem in MM treatment is the development of drug
resistance against current standard-of–care agents [29].
This highlights the need to enhance our understanding of
MM biology and the occurrence of drug resistance, and
to identify novel targets and treatment options. The IGF
system plays a pivotal role in MM tumor biology [30].
Freund et al. were the first to demonstrate that IGF-I is
an important growth factor for MM cells [31]. Since that
study, we and others have demonstrated multiple roles of
the IGF system in the pathogenesis of MM, and various
strategies targeting the IGF system have been evaluated
in clinical trials [32-34]. In this review we summarize the
different components of the IGF system and discuss their
contribution to MM development. Moreover, we will also
discuss the diagnostic and therapeutic potential in MM.

THE IGF SYSTEM
The IGF system is a key regulator of growth and
energy metabolism and is composed of the following
components: IGF ligands (insulin, IGF-I, IGF-II), cell
surface receptors (insulin receptor (IR), IGF-IR, IGFIIR, and IGF-IR/IR hybrids), a family of six high-affinity
IGF binding proteins (IGFBPs), and IGFBP degrading
enzymes collectively called IGFBP proteases. The system
also includes proteins involved in intracellular signaling,
such as Akt, Shc/Grb2, and the insulin receptor substrate
(IRS) protein family (Figure 1) [35].

IGF ligands
IGF-I and IGF-II are approximately 7 kDa peptides
that share obvious sequence similarity with insulin
[36, 37]. IGFs play a crucial role in normal growth and
48733

Oncotarget

development in both mice and humans. IGF-I and IGF-II
knockout (KO) mice exhibit marked prenatal and neonatal
growth retardation. In addition, IGF-I KO mice also
show postnatal growth retardation and severely reduced
body weights dying soon after birth. Therefore, in mice,
though both IGFs are important for prenatal and neonatal
growth and development, IGF-I is primarily involved in
postnatal growth [38]. In humans, IGF-I levels increase
from birth until puberty and are known to be essential for
longitudinal bone growth [39]. However, IGF-I levels start
to decline with increasing age, and this is associated with
bone loss [40]. In the MrOS Sweden Study, researchers
demonstrated that older men with low serum IGF-I levels
have an increased fracture risk due to bone loss [41]. The

main source of postnatal IGF-I and IGF-II is the liver.
IGF-I is produced systemically after the secretion of
growth hormone (GH) into the bloodstream by the pituitary
gland, whereas the IGF-II regulatory mechanisms remain
unclear [42]. IGFs are also abundantly synthesized in local
tissues through autocrine and paracrine mechanisms [43].
Transgenic mice have been used to investigate the local
paracrine and autocrine actions of IGF-I [44]. In mice
overexpressing IGF-I in specific organs and/or tissues,
local overgrowth occurs without differences in the levels
of circulating IGF-I. For example, overexpression of
IGF-I in osteoblasts was reported to increase trabecular
bone volume [45]. Moreover, an increase in brain size
was reported in mice overexpressing IGF-I in the brain,

Figure 1: The complexity of the IGF system. The IGF system is a highly complex system composed of: IGF ligands (insulin, IGF-I,

IGF-II), cell surface receptors (IR, IGF-IR, IGF-IIR, and IGF-1R/IR hybrids), a family of six high-affinity IGFBPs, and several IGFBP
proteases, including serine proteinases, aspartic acid proteases, and metalloproteinases. In the circulation, IGFs are mostly bound to IGFBPs,
greatly prolonging their half-life. In addition, binary complexes with IGFBP-3 and IGFBP-5 can form a 150 kDa ternary complex with the
acid-labile subunit (ALS). In contrast to the binary complexes, these ternary complexes are unable to cross the endothelium. Within the BM
microenvironment, the IGFBPs in the binary complexes may be cleaved by the abundantly available IGFBP proteases, thereby releasing the
IGFs and increasing IGF bioavailability. The free IGF ligands will then bind the transmembrane receptors and activate two main signaling
pathways, PI3K/Akt and MEK/ERK. Activation of these pathways results in proliferation, survival, invasion, and angiogenesis.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

48734

Oncotarget

IGFBPs and IGFBP proteases

as evidenced by an increase in the number of neurons [46,
47]. In addition, numerous studies have shown that IGF-I
is a potent mitogen for a variety of cells by increasing
DNA synthesis and stimulating the expression of cyclin
D1, leading to the progression of cells from G1 to S phase
[48]. In addition to roles in growth-related processes, IGFs
have also been demonstrated to mediate cell migration and
prevent apoptosis by stimulating the expression of antiapoptotic Bcl proteins [49, 50].

The IGFBPs are a family of six proteins (24 to 35
kDa) with distinct functional properties but sharing high
homology [58]. Although IGFBPs are mainly produced
within the liver, many normal and malignant tissues
also express IGFBPs and they can be found in various
biological fluids [39]. In the circulation, all six IGFBPs
bind with high affinity and specificity to the IGF ligands,
forming binary complexes and serving as IGF carriers
[59]. In addition, together with acid-labile subunit
(ALS) protein, IGF-IGFBP-3 and IGF-IGFBP-5 form
high molecular weight ternary complexes [60]. These
complexes protect the IGF ligands from degradation
and greatly prolong the circulating half-life of the IGFs,
from a few minutes for the ‘free’ peptides to 16 hours or
longer for the ternary complexes [61, 62]. Most of the
circulating IGFs predominantly exist as ternary complexes
with IGFBP-3. These ternary complexes are thought to
be unable to cross the endothelium [62]. However, the
binary IGF-IGFBP complexes are able to enter the target
tissue [63]. In the target tissues, IGFBPs have complex
and multiple functions, which can be either IGF-dependent
or IGF-independent, as previously summarized by Baxter
et al. and Conover et al. [59, 64]. IGFBPs can function
as inhibitors of IGF-I and IGF-II activity by binding to
the IGFs with a higher affinity than the IGF-IR (acting
as an IGF carrier), thereby reducing IGF bioavailability.
However, IGFBPs can also serve as reservoirs that
slowly release the IGFs, increasing or prolonging IGF-IR
signaling. Several reports have also described the IGFindependent effects of IGFBPs [58, 64]. For example,
IGFBP-5 has been shown to stimulate bone formation
in vitro and in vivo without interacting with IGF-I or
IGF-IR [65]. In addition, IGFBP-2 binds to α5-integrins
and is involved in glioma cell migration and invasion
[66]. IGFBPs also regulate cell growth and survival by
interacting with several signals, such as TGF-β and p53
[67, 68]. Intranuclear IGFBPs have been suggested to
play a role in transcriptional regulation, the induction
of apoptosis, and DNA damage repair. Furthermore, 10
IGFBP-related proteins (IGFBP-rP) have been described.
These proteins have low affinity for the IGF ligands. Thus,
the biological functions of the IGFBP-rPs are thought to
be mainly IGF-independent and fall beyond the scope of
this review [58].
The activity of the IGFBPs largely depends on
posttranslational modifications, such as proteolysis and
phosphorylation. Cleavage of IGFBPs by proteases results
in increased free IGF-I bioavailability [59]. Proteases
capable of cleaving IGFBPs have been identified within
three major protease classes: serine proteinases, aspartic
acid proteases, and metalloproteinases. For example,
prostate-specific antigen (PSA), a serine proteinase, is able
to cleave IGFBP-3 and IGFBP-5 [69], whereas cathepsin
D, an aspartic acid protease, has been demonstrated

IGF-R
The cellular responses to IGFs are primarily
mediated by the IGF-IR. This cell membrane receptor
binds with higher affinity to IGF-I than IGF-II. The IGF-IR
is expressed on different cell types and is a heterotetramer
composed of two extracellular α-subunits and two
transmembrane β-subunits bound together with disulfide
bridges [51]. The IGF-IR closely resembles the IR, with
60% sequence identity [52]. The IR binds to insulin with
higher affinity then IGFs and is considered an essential
regulator of metabolism, specifically glucose transport
and the synthesis of fat and protein. In contrast, the IGFIR has a higher affinity for IGF-I and plays a major role
in both cell and whole body growth. Due to alternative
splicing of exon 11 in the IR gene, two isoforms exist:
IR-A and IR-B. IR-A is ubiquitously expressed and seems
to be involved mainly in the mitogenic and anti-apoptotic
effects of insulin and IGF-II. In contrast, IR-B expression
is limited to metabolic tissues and is only activated by
insulin, which explains its metabolic function [53, 54].
Hybrid receptors composed of a half IGF-IR and half IR
(either IR-A or IR-B depending on availability) can also
form. These hybrids retain high affinity for the IGFs,
and a lower affinity for insulin, and are often abundantly
expressed in tumor cells. The extracellular part of the
IR, IGF-IR, or IGF-IR/IR hybrid binds the ligand, and
the intracellular part contains the tyrosine kinase activity
[55]. Upon binding of the free ligand, the tyrosine kinase
activity is activated, resulting in autophosphorylation of
the receptor and the recruitment of adaptor molecules (e.g.,
IRS and Grb) that activate downstream pathways, such
as PI3K/Akt and RAS/RAF/MEK-ERK. The PI3K/Akt
pathway mainly mediates the anti-apoptotic effects of the
IGF ligands, whereas the MEK-ERK pathway is mainly
involved in regulating the cell cycle and proliferation. In
addition to these main pathways, IGF-IR is able to activate
the JAK/STAT pathway and Wnt and NF-κB signaling
[56].
IGF-II has its own specific receptor, the IGFII receptor (IGF-IIR), also known as the mannose-6phosphate receptor. In contrast to the IGF-IR and IR, the
IGFR-IIR is not a tyrosine kinase, but clears IGF-II from
the circulation by internalizing and degrading cell surface
attached IGF-II [57]. The IGF-IIR has only low binding
affinity for IGF-I and insulin.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

48735

Oncotarget

to proteolyze IGFBP-1 through IGFBP-5 [70-72].
Metalloproteinases are also involved in the cleavage of
IGFBP-2, IGFBP-3, IGFBP-4, and IGFBP-5 [73]. The
zinc metalloproteinase, pregnancy-associated plasma
protein-A (PAPP-A), has been demonstrated to be a local
regulator of IGF bioavailability through cleavage of
IGFBPs [74]. Phosphorylation can also regulate IGFBP
activity. Serine phosphorylation of IGFBP-1 enhances the
affinity for IGF-I by 6- to 8-fold, and its capacity to inhibit
IGF-I actions [75]. IGFBP-3 and IGFBP-5 also undergo
phosphorylation, thereby enhancing their IGF-I binding
capacity [76]. Finally, the binding affinity of IGFBPs for
the IGFs can be affected by the binding of IGFBPs to the
cell membrane or extracellular matrix (ECM) [77].

of cancer can be reduced to six underlying mechanisms
[78]. The key hallmarks of malignancy include sustained
proliferative signaling, evasion of growth suppressors,
resistance to cell death, replicative immortality, the
induction of angiogenesis, and activation of invasion and
metastasis. In 2011 two new hallmarks were proposed:
abnormal metabolic pathways and evasion of the immune
system [79]. Dysregulation of the IGF system has
been demonstrated to support cancer development and
progression in various cancer types, including prostate,
breast, lung, colon, and different hematological cancers,
by fostering most, if not all, of the key hallmarks [80, 81].
Below we summarize the role of the IGF system in the
pathogenesis of MM, focusing on the most prominent key
hallmarks of this specific malignancy: cell homing and
invasion, sustained proliferation, resistance to cell death,
and angiogenesis (Figure 2).

THE IGF SYSTEM IN MM
In 2000, Hanahan and Weinberg introduced
“hallmarks of cancer”, proposing that the complexity

Figure 2: Role of IGF-I in multiple myeloma-specific hallmarks. IGF-I is involved in the homing process, attracting the MM

cells from the peripheral blood (PB) into the BM microenvironment. Once in the BM, IGF-I stimulates the proliferation of MM cells.
Moreover, IGF-I up- and down-regulates the expression of anti- and pro-apoptotic molecules, respectively, protecting MM cells from (druginduced) apoptosis. Another important hallmark of MM is the induction of angiogenesis. IGF-I stimulates VEGF secretion by the MM
cells, enhancing angiogenesis. IGF-I is also involved in myeloma-associated bone disease by promoting osteoclast maturation and activity.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

48736

Oncotarget

Homing/ invasion

(OBs), adipocytes, and mesenchymal stem cells. MM cells
interact with BMSCs mainly through adhesion molecules
and cytokines. Along with IL-6, IGF-I is one of the most
important growth factors in MM [30]. IGF-I is abundantly
available in the BM microenvironment and is produced by
both BM fibroblasts and OBs [95].

Terminally differentiated monoclonal malignant
PCs home to the BM microenvironment from either
an extramedullary source or anatomically distant BM
location. In both cases, the homing process is similar to
that of lymphocytes and involves different consecutive
steps: attraction of the MM cells to the BM, adhesion to
the endothelium, and invasion through the endothelial
layer and basement membrane into the ECM of the BM
[82]. IGF-I is strongly involved in this homing process.
We showed that IGF-I serves as a chemo-attractant for
murine 5T33MM cells in vitro by activating the PI3K
pathway [83]. We also demonstrated that the IGF-IR is
upregulated in MM cells after interaction with the BM
niche [84]. This was confirmed by Tai et al. and Qiang
et al., who showed that IGF-I increases the adhesion of
human MM cells via ß1-integrin and the PI3K pathway,
and induced the migration and invasion of human MM
cells [85, 86]. Furthermore, the α4ß1 integrin inhibitor
natalizumab has been shown to inhibit IGF-I-mediated
MM cell migration on fibronectin [87]. In a recent study,
IGF-I was demonstrated to synergize with SDF-1 in
promoting the migration of MM cells, further confirming
its major role in the homing process [88]. In addition,
Pichiorri et al. demonstrated that miR-192 and miR-215
prevent the migration of malignant PCs into the BM via
indirect targeting of IGF-IR [89]. miR-192 and miR215 regulate the expression of murine double minute 2
(MDM2), a negative regulator of p53 [90]. MDM2 serves
as a ligase in ubiquitination of the IGF-IR, causing its
degradation [91]. Taken together, these results clearly
demonstrate that IGF-I is an important migration factor
in MM. As mentioned earlier, IGF-I bioavailability in
the tissues is mainly regulated by IGFBPs and IGFBP
proteases. Previously, we and others demonstrated that
matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) produced by MM cells
play a major role in the homing process [92-94]. In short,
we demonstrated for both human MM cells and murine
5TMM cells that interaction with the BM endothelium
enhances the secretion of MMP-9 by the MM cells,
increasing MM cell invasion [93, 94]. Therefore, one
could speculate that MMPs may promote homing of the
MM cells by increasing IGF-I bioavailability. However,
the bioavailability of IGF-I in relation to the activity of
MMPs in the BM niche has not yet been investigated in
MM and warrants future investigation.
After the homing of MM cells to the BM they
reside in the BM microenvironment, where they interact
with the different BM stromal cell (BMSC) types.
The BM microenvironment consists of hematopoietic
and non-hematopoietic cells. The hematopoietic cells
consist of myeloid (e.g., erythrocytes, macrophages)
and lymphoid (e.g. T cells, B cells) cells, whereas the
non-hematopoietic cells include BM fibroblasts, BM
endothelial cells (BMECs), osteoclasts (OCs), osteoblasts
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Proliferation
The first evidence of IGF-I as a mitogenic factor
for MM cells came from Freund et al. [31], but numerous
studies have confirmed the mitogenic activity of IGF-I in
MM. Georgii-Hemming et al. demonstrated that IGF-I
can act as a growth factor for human MM cell lines and
reported that an autocrine IGF-I loop may contribute to
the growth and survival of MM cells [96]. In addition,
IGF-I has been reported to enhance IL-6 activity and
induce the proliferation of both IL-6-dependent and IL6-independent cell lines [97, 98]. Later on, Sprynski et
al. showed that only a subpopulation (CD45-) of human
MM cell lines can survive through an autocrine IGF-I/
IGF-IR loop. In addition, they found that the increased
proliferation of human MM cell lines induced by IL-6 is
dependent on the presence of an autocrine IGF-I loop [30].
Furthermore, autocrine IGF-I, but not IL-6, was recently
described as being the main self-clonogenic growth factor
for myeloma cell lines [99]. Finally, Huang et al. found
that EEN, which regulates endocytosis, also regulates the
proliferation and survival of MM cells by regulating IGF-I
secretion [100]. IGF-I was shown to be able to reverse
the inhibition of proliferation caused by the knockdown of
EEN. In contrast, an IGF-I targeting antibody inhibited the
proliferative effect of EEN overexpression. Unexpectedly,
insulin is also a potent growth and survival factor for MM
cell lines and primary MM cells. This growth-stimulating
effect has been shown to be mediated through IS/IGF-I
hybrid receptor activation [101].

Cell death
Next to it, IGF-I also promotes the cell survival of
serum-starved MM cells [85, 97, 102]. The balance of
pro- and anti-apoptotic molecules determines whether a
cell will undergo apoptosis [103]. In MM, the upregulation
of anti-apoptotic molecules is associated with increased
MM cell survival and chemoresistance [104]. IGF-I
treatment has been demonstrated to upregulate Fas
apoptosis inhibitory molecule (FAIM) expression in
MM cells, leading to increased MM cell survival [105].
In addition, we demonstrated that IGF-I downregulates
the mRNA and protein expression of the pro-apoptotic
molecule Bim in human MM cell lines and murine
5T33MM cells [106]. Moreover, preclinical studies have
provided strong evidence that IGF-I protects against
various standard and novel anti-MM agents, such as
48737

Oncotarget

dexamethasone, Apo2/TRAIL, ABT-737, NF-κB inhibitor,
and bortezomib [107-110]. Concerning ABT-737, our
group demonstrated a clear synergistic anti-myeloma
effect of the IGF-IR inhibitor picropodophyllin and ABT737 [107]. In addition, in contrast to what we would
expect, lenalidomide has been shown to enhance IGF-I
mRNA levels in almost all human cell lines and primary
myeloma cells tested [111]. Consequently, the IGF-I/IGFIR loop may be involved in the progression of secondary
cancers, a strong contraindication observed after long-term
treatment of MM patients with lenalidomide [112].

similar in MM patients and healthy controls.

Bone disease
Another important clinical hallmark of MM is the
occurrence of bone lesions. Approximately 90% of MM
patients have bone lesions, and 80% of MM patients
encounter bone fractures during the course of their disease
[130, 131]. Recently, Farr et al. reported that even MGUS
patients already have an increased fracture risk compared
to healthy controls, as they were found to have increased
bone porosity and reduced bone strength [132, 133]. The
bone destruction is the result of an imbalance in bone
formation and resorption due to an increase in the number
and activity of OCs and suppressed OB formation and
functionality. Multiple factors that increase OC activity
(OC inducers) have been identified in MM, including
receptor activator of nuclear factor (NF)-κB ligand
(RANKL), macrophage inflammatory protein (MIP)-1α,
TNF-α, IL-6, IL-3, and IL-1. The binding of RANKL
to RANK receptor triggers OC activation and leads to
increased bone resorption [134]. This bone resorption is
counteracted by osteoprotegerin (OPG), which binds to
RANKL and prevents it from interacting with RANK
[135]. In MM patients, however, RANKL is overexpressed
as OPG levels decrease, leading to a disturbed RANKL/
OPG balance favoring bone resorption [136]. MM cells
also produce MIP-1α, and increased MIP-1α serum levels
correlate with lytic bone lesions in MM patients [137,
138]. In addition, the MM cells express and secrete factors
that are able to suppress OB differentiation and activity. An
important regulator of OB formation is the Wnt signaling
pathway, and a major inhibitor of OB differentiation is
the Wnt signaling antagonist Dickkopf (DKK-1). DKK-1
levels are highly elevated in MM patients with osteolytic
lesions [139]. In addition, secreted Frizzled-related
protein-2 (sFRP-2), another Wnt signaling antagonist, has
been demonstrated to suppress bone formation in MM
[140]. Furthermore, the transcription factor Runt-related
transcription factor2 (Runx2) has been demonstrated to
be involved in suppressing OB formation and to enhance
tumor growth and disease progression [141]. Although
the IGF system is known to play a crucial role in bone
metabolism, its exact role in MM bone disease is mostly
unknown [142]. In 1999, Feliers et al. reported that
human MM cells express IGFBP-4, and to a lesser extent
IGFBP-6 [143]. They demonstrated an accumulation of
IGFBP-4 within the BM microenvironment and suggested
that this may lead to a suppression of OB formation due to
a decrease in bioavailable IGF-I. In contrast, we showed
that picropodophyllin reduces the number of osteolytic
lesions and OCs in MM-bearing mice and decreases
the in vitro bone resorption activity of the OCs [144].
More recently, the glycosphingolipid GM3 produced by
MM cell lines and primary MM cells was demonstrated
to cooperate with IGF-I and RANKL to promote OC

Angiogenesis
We and others have also shown that IGF-I stimulates
MM cells to produce VEGF through the MEK/ERK
pathway, leading to increased angiogenesis in the BM
[113, 114]. Angiogenesis is a process of new blood vessel
formation from the pre-existing vasculature and plays an
essential role in development, reproduction, and repair
[115]. It is a multi-step process including endothelial cell
(EC) activation, degradation of the ECM components, EC
migration, and organization of ECs to form blood vessels.
The formation of blood vessels involves a complex
interplay between positive or pro-angiogenic factors
(e.g., VEGF, angiopoietins, members of the fibroblast
growth factor (FGF) family, and MMPs) and negative or
anti-angiogenic factors (e.g. endostatin, angiostatin, IL12, thrombospondin) controlling the survival, growth,
migration, and MMP secretion of ECs. An imbalance in the
levels of these pro- and anti-angiogenic factors contributes
to the pathogenesis of different disorders, including
cancer [116]. Angiogenesis has been demonstrated to be
essential for tumor growth, invasion, and metastasis in
various cancer types [117]. In MM, angiogenesis has been
shown to strongly increase from MGUS to MM due to
a shift in the pro- and anti-angiogenic balance towards
angiogenesis (angiogenic switch) [118-120]. Enhanced
BM angiogenesis in MM patients (as measured by the
microvessel density) has been demonstrated to correlate
with poor prognosis [121, 122]. VEGF is one of the main
pro-angiogenic factors in MM and is produced by MM
cells and BMSCs. Additional pro-angiogenic factors have
also been described in MM, including bFGF, hepatocyte
growth factor (HGF), and angiotensin 1 (Ang-1) [123].
bFGF is able to enhance angiogenesis by inducing EC
activation [124]. Ang-1 is produced by the MM cells and
upregulates the Ang-1 receptor Tie2 in human BM ECs,
increasing their angiogenic potential [125]. MMPs are also
involved in the angiogenic process in MM by degrading
the ECM [126, 127]. Using 5TMM murine models and
human MM cell lines, we have shown that targeting the
IGF-IR inhibits angiogenesis both in vitro and in vivo
[128]. However, one study failed to show a correlation
between serum IGF-I levels and angiogenic cytokines
in MM patients [129], as IGF-I serum levels were found
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

48738

Oncotarget

maturation [145]. Taken together, the data clearly suggest
a direct role of IGF-I in MM bone disease [144].
Thus far, no or limited data is available on the role
of IGF-I in the remaining key hallmarks of malignancy,
namely replicative immortality, abnormal metabolic
pathways, and evasion of the immune system. A schematic
overview illustrating the role of the IGF system in the
cross-talk between the MM cells and the relevant BM
stromal cell types is provided in Figure 3.

in the pathogenesis of MM, several research groups
have investigated the potential of using the different
components of the IGF system as biomarkers of MM
development and progression. The National Institutes of
Health has defined a biomarker as “a characteristic that
is objectively measured and evaluated as an indicator of
normal biological processes, pathogenic processes, or
pharmacologic responses to a therapeutic intervention”
[146].
Reports regarding IGF-I serum levels and MM
risk and prognosis have been contradictory. Standal et
al. were the first to examine the relationships between
the levels of circulating IGF and MM risk and prognosis.
They found no differences in the total IGF-I levels in
serum for 127 MM patients and 42 healthy controls but
detected a strong correlation with survival within the MM

DIAGNOSTIC AND PROGNOSTIC
POTENTIAL OF THE IGF SYSTEM IN
MM
Given the important role of the IGF system

Figure 3: The role of the IGF system in the bi-directional interactions of the MM cells and the different stromal cell
types. Upon interaction with the MM cells through adhesion molecules, IGF-I is abundantly produced by different BM stromal cell types,

including the BM fibroblasts (BMSCs), osteoclasts (OCs), osteoblasts (OBs) and endothelial cells (ECs). Binding of IGF-I to the IGF-IR
expressed on the surface of the MM cells will then foster MM cell survival, growth and drug resistance. The increased IGF-I secretion
will also stimulate the MM cells to produce VEGF, leading to enhanced BM angiogenesis further fostering MM cell survival and growth.
Moreover, IGF-I will also promote bone destruction by enhancing OC migration and activation. This bone destruction will in turn result in
the release of numerous growth and survival factors embedded in the bone matrix, thus further driving the vicious cycle. In the extracellular
environment, the majority of IGF is known to be bound to one of six IGF-binding proteins (IGFBP1-6), leaving only a minor fraction of
total IGF free and accessible for receptor activation. Although preliminary evidence indicates an abnormal IGFBP profile in MGUS and
MM leading to an increased IGF-I bioavailability, the exact role of the IGFBPs in the pathobiology of MM and the major source in the
BM niche remains to be investigated. Cleavage of the IGFBPs by protease, including matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs), also results in
increased IGF-I bioavailability. In MM, interaction of the MM cells with the different stromal cell types strongly enhances the production
of MMPs not only by the MM cells but also by the stromal cells.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

48739

Oncotarget

group [147], as patients with low blood IGF-I levels had
a more favorable prognosis. Similar results were found
by Pappa et al., who did not show significant differences
in serum IGF-I concentrations between MM patients
and controls [129]. In contrast, Greco et al. observed
significant, gradual reductions in the total IGF-I levels in
MGUS and MM patients compared to healthy subjects
[148]. These discrepancies may be due to methodological
issues, such as the use of different IGF-I ELISA kits,
some of which encounter analytical problems, or the lack
of a consensus for the collection and storage of samples
[149]. In addition, systemic levels of total IGF are
unlikely to tell the whole story. First, by measuring total
IGF-I levels, no discrimination is made between bound
and free (bioavailable) IGF-I. Second, MM cells are
capable of producing their own IGF-I and stimulate IGF-I
secretion by BMSCs [120]. Therefore, circulating IGF
levels are likely very different from the local IGF-I levels
and probably not directly relevant. However, regardless
of the explanation, the conflicting reports indicate that
circulating IGF-I levels are not an ideal biomarker of MM
risk and progression, and that the IGF-IR could be a better
candidate.
Bataille et al. showed that IGF-IR is aberrantly
expressed on MM cells and that increased expression is
indicative of poor prognosis [150]. Using gene expression
profiling data from two independent cohorts of previously
untreated MM patients, increased IGF-IR mRNA
expression was found to correlate with a poor prognosis
[30]. However, Chng et al. failed to find a difference
in IGF-IR mRNA expression between normal PCs and
malignant PCs from MGUS, smoldering MM (SMM),
and MM samples. Nevertheless, it was shown that the
IGF-IR is overexpressed in the subtypes of MM with poor
prognosis [151]. Taken together, the data demonstrate that
higher IGF-IR expression is linked with a worse disease
outcome in MM.
So far, very little work has addressed the diagnostic
and prognostic potential of the IGFBPs in MM. Standal
et al. found no significant difference in total IGFBP-3
levels in serum between MM and healthy patients [147].
However, despite IGFBP-3 being generally known as the
most abundant IGFBP in the circulation, other IGFBPs
could be important in MM disease. This was demonstrated
by the peripheral blood levels of IGFBP-1 positively
associating with an increased risk of progression from
MGUS to MM within 3-6 years of blood collection [152].
Moreover, Brandt et al. purified IGFBP-1 protease activity
from the urine of a MM patient, but no specific protease
activity was detected within the serum of the patient.
This could mean that the IGFBP complex remains intact
in the circulation [153]. In addition, gene expression
levels of the so-called IGFBP7 gene, also known as
MAC25, Prostacyclin-Stimulating Factor, TumorDerived Adhesion Factor, or PGI2-Stimulating Factor,
have been linked to poor prognosis [154]. IGFBP7 is not,
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

however, a high affinity IGF binding protein and is not
generally considered part of the extracellular IGF system
[155]. Similar to IGF levels, the distribution of IGFBPs
between the different fluids and tissues varies greatly [39].
Therefore, local IGFBP levels in the BM niche are likely
to be more informative regarding IGF bioavailability and
IGF signaling. Recently, we were the first to investigate
IGFBPs in paired peripheral blood and BM plasma
samples from MM, MGUS, and control individuals. We
demonstrated a strong increase in circulating levels of
IGFBP-2 in both MGUS and MM patients. Within the BM
microenvironment, however, we demonstrated a reduction
in the total IGFBP and IGFBP-2 levels in MGUS and MM
patients compared to controls (IN PRESS in PLOS ONE).
Therefore, MGUS and MM patients may have greater IGF
bioavailability within the BM microenvironment.
Thus, despite the strong involvement of IGF system
components in the pathogenesis of MM, its diagnostic and
prognostic potential in MM remains largely inconclusive,
and future studies are urgently needed to further
investigate and compare the levels of free and bound
IGF-I and IGFBPs in the circulation and BM niche during
disease progression.

THERAPEUTIC
POTENTIAL
OF
TARGETING THE IGF SYSTEM IN MM
With the large body of preclinical proof that the
IGF-I/IGF-IR axis plays a pivotal role in the pathogenesis
of MM, interest in this axis as a potential therapeutic
target has grown. Several strategies to specifically target
the IGF-IR have been developed and tested for their antimyeloma activity in preclinical myeloma models and
clinical trials [80, 156].

Preclinical myeloma models
Over 100 human MM cell lines have been generated
from patients with advanced disease, obtained mostly
from extramedullary sites [157]. The characteristics of
approximately half of these cell lines were summarized
and classified into different molecular subgroups using
gene expression profiling [158]. Although a lot of
information can be extracted from in vitro tests with
human MM cell lines and primary MM cells, these models
fail to recapitulate the complex, bidirectional interactions
with the BM niche. Moreover, in the context of the IGF-I
system it is worth mentioning that MM cell lines are
usually generated in the presence of serum containing
high levels of IGF-I. This makes the MM cell lines to
a certain extent prone to IGF-I and might thus create a
certain bias. Therefore, preclinical in vivo MM models
are crucial for testing the anti-myeloma activity of novel
therapeutic agents. Different preclinical in vivo models of
MM have been developed, each with their own specific
48740

Oncotarget

advantages and disadvantages [159, 160]. These models
can be subdivided into i) xenograft models of human MM
cells into mice (e.g., SCID-hu, NOD/SCID, and SCIDRab models), ii) models of murine MM (e.g., 5TMM
models and transgenic models), and iii) pristane-induced
plasmacytoma in BALB/c mice [161].
The most widely used preclinical MM models for
testing the anti-myeloma activity of (new) therapeutic
agents in vivo are the severe combined immunodeficient
(SCID) xenograft models. In these models, human MM
cells (either primary MM cells or human MM cell lines)
are engrafted in different ways into immunodeficient mice,
giving rise to several variants, including the (NOD)/SCID,
SCID-hu, and SCID-synth-hu xenograft models. However,
the major limitations of all of these xenograft models
are the lack of a functional immune system and a fully
compatible microenvironment [162, 163].
The 5TMM models are a series of syngeneic and
immunocompetent murine MM models representing
various de novo MM variants, ranging from smoldering
to highly aggressive MM. The 5TMM models originated
spontaneously in elderly C57BL/KaLwRij mice and were
propagated in vivo by intravenous injection of diseased
BM into young syngeneic animals [160, 164]. These
models resemble the human disease at both the molecular
and cellular level, with localization of the MM cells in the
BM, presence of an elevated serum M-spike correlating
with disease progression, and the development of MMassociated angiogenesis and bone disease [160]. As such,
the models are highly suited to studying the bidirectional
interactions between MM cells and the microenvironment
(including the immune system) and for preclinical testing
of novel agents targeting MM cells and/or the BM niche
[164]. The best characterized and most widely used
5TMM models are the 5T2MM, 5T33MM, and 5TGM1
models (the latter being a variant of the 5T33MM model).
The 5T2MM model represents a moderately growing MM,
with full blown MM in ~10 to 12 weeks, and exhibits
marked MM-associated bone disease. In contrast, the
5T33MM and 5TGM1 models are more aggressive forms
of the disease, developing MM after 4 to 6 weeks [160,
165].
In addition to the 5TMM models, genetically
engineered murine models have also been developed, such
as the Vk*MYC model [166]. In this transgenic mouse
model, the Vk*MYC transgene is introduced into the
C57/BL6 mouse strain that spontaneously develops a high
rate of monoclonal gammopathy, resulting in fast MM
progression. The Vk*MYC model has strong homology
with the human disease with similar clinical and biological
characteristics. In addition, with congenic transplantation
of Vk*MYC tumor cells, the model can also be used as
a model of relapsed human MM. Thus, the Vk*MYC
model is suited to studying MM biology and has been
demonstrated to predict the efficacy of drugs in both
untreated and relapsed patients [167]. Other examples of
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

transgenic models are the Eµ-XBP1s and Eµ-MAF models
deregulating the XBP1s and MAF oncogene, respectively
[168]. However, the use of these models is rather limited,
as maintenance is labor-intensive and time consuming. In
addition, there is often a long and heterogeneous lag time
to tumor development, making it difficult to study tumor
progression in a large cohort of mice [169].
Although mice are the most common model
organism for preclinical studies, there are well-known
quantitative and qualitative differences between mice
and humans. Therefore, the transferability of data
generated in mice to humans could be questioned [170,
171]. To overcome this issue, it has been suggested to
use whole bone marrow aspirates or ex vivo 3D models.
Concerning the latter, Ferrarini et al. developed an
innovative 3D dynamic culture model, which allows
ex-vivo culturing of primary human MM cells inside
their native microenvironment with maintenance of the
original tissue architecture (including vessels and bone
lamellae). This model was shown to be an excellent tool
to predict response to bortezomib in MM patients. It was
demonstrated that the expression levels or activity of
surrogate markers of specific functions of both MM cells
and the microenvironment (including ß2 microglobulin,
VEGF, angiopoietin-2 and MMPs) in the supernatants,
could predicted the response to bortezomib treatment
[172].

IGF therapies
Numerous therapeutic agents that selectively
target the IGF-I/IGF-IR axis have been developed and
can be roughly divided into three general categories:
monoclonal antibodies targeting the IGF-IR, small
molecule tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs), and IGF-Itargeting antibodies [173]. IGF-IR monoclonal antibodies
prevent binding of the ligand to the receptor and induce
receptor internalization and degradation, whereas TKIs
decrease receptor activity by competing with ATP for
binding the kinase domain and IGF monoclonal antibodies
prevent ligand binding and activation of the receptor
by neutralizing IGFs. Many of these agents have been
preclinically tested in MM with very encouraging results
[114, 144, 174]. Among the numerous other cancer cell
lines, human MM cell lines are the most sensitive for IGFIR inhibition [175].
Examples of IGF-IR monoclonal antibodies that
have been tested in MM and demonstrated to have
potent single agent activity in several preclinical models
are CP-751,781, AVE1642, and A12 [32, 176, 177].
Descamps et al. also demonstrated in vitro synergistic
effects for bortezomib and AVE1642 using human MM
cell lines [32]. NVP-ADW742, NVP-AEW541, and
picropodophyllin are TKIs that selectively target the
IGF-IR [178]. NVP-ADW742 and NVP-AWE541 are
both ATP-competitive inhibitors reported to potently
48741

Oncotarget

block the survival and growth of MM cells (both human
cell lines and primary MM cells), potentiating the antimyeloma activity of standard-of–care agents, including
melphalan, dexamethasone, doxorubicin, bortezomib, and
lenalidomide, and prolonging the survival of orthotopic
xenograft MM models [114, 178]. Picropodophyllin, a
non-ATP-competitive IGF-IR TKI, has also been shown
to block autophosphorylation of the IGF-IR, thereby
inhibiting growth and inducing apoptosis in human MM
cell lines and primary MM cells [179]. In addition, we
demonstrated that picropodophyllin significantly reduces
tumor burden and prolongs the overall survival of
5T33MM-inoculated mice without observing any major
IR-related toxicities [128]. We also confirmed this potent
in vivo anti-myeloma activity in a therapeutic setting using
the 5T2MM model. Continuous treatment after the onset of
disease strongly reduced the tumor burden and extensively
prolonged survival [144]. Furthermore, we demonstrated
that
picropodophyllin
inhibits
MM-associated
angiogenesis and bone disease [128, 144]. Nevertheless,
picropodophyllin-treated mice eventually relapse and
exhibit signs of morbidity. Therefore, we performed high
throughput screenings to select agents that are able to
increase the anti-myeloma activity of picropodophyllin.
One class of drugs coming out of these high throughput
screenings are the histone deacetylase inhibitors
(HDACi). In line with this, the HDACi panobinostat
was found to strongly enhance the anti-myeloma activity
of picropodophyllin both in vitro and in vivo by downregulating cell cycle and anti-apoptotic proteins [180].
In addition, our group showed that IGF-I protects human
MM cell lines against ABT-737-induced cell death, and
we hypothesized that IGF-IR targeting may overcome this
resistance. Using human MM cell lines and primary MM
cells, we observed a strong synergistic anti-myeloma effect
when MM cells were co-treated with picropodophyllin
and the Bcl-2 homology domain 3 (BH3) mimetics ABT737 and ABT-199 [107]. Mechanistically, we showed that
silencing of Bcl-2 abrogated ABT-737-induced lethality,
whereas co-treatment with picropodophyllin was able to
overcome this Bcl-2 dependency. In addition, in the 5T33
model, the combination significantly decreased tumor
burden and prolonged the overall survival of the mice.
Furthermore, we showed that the combination targeted
the CD138+ and CD138- MM subpopulations equally.
We and others previously showed that CD138- MM
cells are more resistant to most standard-of-care agents,
including PIs [181, 182]. IGF-I was also shown to be
involved in bortezomib resistance. Targeting the IGF-IR
using picropodophyllin or the clinically relevant dual IGFIR and IR TKI OSI-906 overcame this resistance both in
vitro and in vivo [108]. Finally, Liang et al. reported potent
preclinical anti-myeloma activity (both as a single agent
and when combined with lenalidomide or dexamethasone)
for yet another novel small-molecule inhibitor of IGF-IR
and IR, GTx-134 [174].
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Despite the encouraging preclinical data, only a few
clinical trials have been conducted in MM, thus far with
largely disappointing results. In a phase I trial of relapsed
MM, CP-751,871 was demonstrated to be safe and
well-tolerated when used as a single agent, but no clear
responses were observed. However, in combination with
dexamethasone, 9 of the 27 patients experienced objective
responses without observing any dose-limiting toxicities
[183]. Moreau et al. tested AVE1642 both as a single
agent and in combination with bortezomib in patients with
relapsed MM. Although the drug(s) had a good toxicity
profile, the response rates were considered insufficient to
continue with the development of this molecule [34]. A
phase I dose escalation trial was also started with MK0646 (dalotuzumab) in advanced MM [184]. Dalotuzumab
is a humanized IgG1 monoclonal antibody against the
IGF-IR and acts by inhibiting IGF-I- and IGF-II-induced
tumor cell proliferation and IGF-IR autophosphorylation
[185]. Although this trial was recently completed, no
results have yet been published. Based on the observation
that OSI-906 resensitizes MM cells to bortezomib, patients
are currently being enrolled in a new phase I/II trial testing
OSI-906 in combination with bortezomib for the treatment
of relapsed MM [108, 184].

LESSONS LEARNED FROM PREVIOUS
CLINICAL TRIALS
The preclinical evidence for the role of the IGF
system in cancer is impressive, but unfortunately has
failed to be translated into new anti-cancer therapies
[186]. Although results obtained from preclinical
studies and early clinical trials were very promising,
most large randomized phase II and III trials have been
largely disappointing in most cancer types, including
MM. Consequently, many drug development programs
targeting the IGF-IR have been discontinued. Several
possible explanations have been suggested for the failure
of IGF-IR therapy, as reviewed in [187-189]. Firstly,
most past clinical trials failed to incorporate the use
of predictive biomarkers for the selection of probable
responders. Currently, no consensus is yet available on
which biomarkers to use for selecting the ideal patient
population. Several preclinical studies and retrospective
analyses of patient materials for candidate biomarkers
are ongoing. These candidate biomarkers can include all
members of the complex IGF system (both systemic and
local/tumor expression levels) and markers connected
to the IGF system, including the downstream signaling
pathways and gene signatures indicative of increased
tumor insulin/IGF-I activity. Concerning the insulin/IGF
system biomarkers, systemic insulin levels and tumor
IR or IGF-IR/IR hybrid expression levels have been
suggested to be more predictive than the IGF and IGF-IR
homodimer levels. For the markers connected to the IGF
system, constitutive activation of the downstream PI3K/
48742

Oncotarget

Akt and MEK-ERK pathways via activating mutations
have been reported to be negative markers of drug
sensitivity [190, 191].
Secondly, most early trials, including in
MM, neglected to determine the optimal timing of
administration and/or optimal drug combinations. In
these trials, IGF-IR targeting agents were tested mostly in
heavily pre-treated relapsed/refractory patients. However,
increasing evidence indicates that previous treatment
could influence the dependency of the tumor cells on
the insulin/IGF system and/or downstream signaling
pathways. In myeloma, IGF-I was shown to be involved
in bortezomib resistance, and insulin/IGF-IR targeting was
shown to resensitize the MM cells [108]. Moreover, last
year Frassanito et al. demonstrated that BM fibroblasts
or cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs) from bortezomib
resistant patients produce high levels of different growth
factors (including IGF-I and TGFß) and protect the MM
cells from bortezomib induced apoptosis [192]. Therefore,
it may be beneficial to combine PIs and insulin/IGF-IR
targeting agents in upfront treatment. In various cancers,
IR/IGF-IR signaling has also been demonstrated to protect
cells from DNA damaging agents by activating DNA
double-strand break repair, and IGF-IR targeting has
been shown to sensitize cells to doxorubicin, cisplatin,
and ionizing radiation [193, 194]. The most effective
anti-tumor activity has been observed when the IGF-IR
targeting agent is administered after the DNA-damaging
agent. In support of this, direct contact with BMSC was
only very recently shown to counteract doxorubicin and
4-hydroxycyclophosphamide induced hypermethylation
of H3K27 in MM cells via phosphorylation-mediated
inactivation of EZH2, leading to the sustained expression
of anti-apoptotic genes (including IGF1, B cell CLL/
lymphoma 2 (BCL2), and hypoxia inducible factor 1α
subunit (HIF1A)) and hence cell adhesion–mediated
drug resistance (CAM-DR). Pharmacological and
genetic inhibition of the IGF-IR/PI3K/AKT pathway
reversed this CAM-DR [195]. Therefore, insulin/IGF-IR
targeting agents may also be considered as consolidation/
maintenance therapy in MM.
Thirdly, until now, IGF system targeting strategies
have mainly focused on inhibiting the IGF-IR and have
substantially neglected the true complexity of the IGF
system. In this regard, all IGF ligands can activate IR-A
hybrid receptors and IGF-IR monoclonal antibodies and
most first-generation TKIs are unable to neutralize these
hybrid receptors. Therefore, IGF-IR inhibitor resistance
may be driven by IR/hybrid signaling. In addition,
circulating IGF-IR can interact with the IGF-IR targeting
antibodies and prevent their interaction with the IGF-IRs
on cancer cells [196]; it was reported that only 20% of
the administrated antibody will interact with the cancer
cells. Combining IR-A/IGF-I tyrosine kinase inhibition
with IGF-targeting monoclonal antibodies may overcome
this problem. Also, as multilayered crosstalk is widely
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

accepted to exist and constitutive activation of the PI3K/
Akt and MEK-ERK pathways is a negative marker of
drug sensitivity, the potential of inhibiting the PI3K/Akt
and MEK-ERK pathways to overcome resistance to the
insulin/IGF-I system inhibitors has become the subject
of intense investigation. Moreover, the IGFBPs also
play a prominent role in regulating the actions of IGFs.
The development of mutant, protease-resistant IGFBPs
may be a promising new approach to decreasing IGF
bioavailability. Recently, protease-resistant and proteaseresistant/non-matrix-binding variants of IGFBP-2 were
designed and demonstrated to inhibit tumor growth by
inhibiting angiogenesis [197]. The lack of protease and
matrix-binding sites was suggested to block the ability of
IGFBP-2 to promote both IGF-dependent actions (through
the release of IGFs to the receptors) and IGF-independent
actions (through ECM binding).
Lastly, drug-induced reduction of IGF-IR signaling
interrupts the pituitary feedback loop regulating IGF-I
production, leading to higher IGF-I levels and, indirectly,
insulin levels [198]. Reduced IGF-IR signaling thus results
in hyperglycemia, which is the most common toxicity
[173]. Although this hyperglycemia is mild and reversible,
it is well established that long-term hyperglycemia and
hyperinsulinemia are important risk factors for cancer
onset and progression in patients with obesity and/or
type 2 diabetes. To limit these adverse effects and prevent
treatment failure it can therefore be hypothesized that next
to lifestyle changes insulin sensitizers (e.g. metformin)
should be combined with the IGF system inhibitors [187].
In addition, more efforts should be made to identify more
selective targets to improve tumor cell selectivity and
avoid IGF system related toxicity. In this regard, studies
are indicating that single nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs) in IGF system related genes modify the activity/
function of the IGF system. In addition, there is also
evidence that IGF-I splice variants are differentially
expressed between non-cancerous and cancerous cells,
implying that the expression pattern of the various IGF-I
transcripts and the respective proteins may have different
functions in cancer biology [199]. Thus, future genome
wide studies in MM should focus on the identification of
genetic variants of the IGF system as a whole.

CONCLUSION
PERSPECTIVES

AND

FUTURE

The IGF system has been demonstrated to be
involved in almost all of the MM-specific cancer
hallmarks, including MM cell proliferation, survival,
homing, and drug resistance, and MM-associated
angiogenesis and bone disease (Figure 2). Despite its
importance in the pathogenesis of MM, the therapeutic
benefit of targeting the IGF system remains rather limited.
Importantly, lessons learned from earlier clinical trials
have taught us that much more preclinical research is
48743

Oncotarget

needed to i) better understand the complexity of the
IGF system, ii) identify more selective targets and iii)
identify and validate candidate biomarker(s) using
standardized protocols to stratify the patients. Given the
system’s complexity, it seems reasonable to assume that
a combination of multiple factors will be required rather
than one single predictive biomarker. In addition, a better
understanding and characterization of the whole IGF
system will help pave the way for identifying new, more
selective targets and designing more rational combination
therapy. Only then will we know if the renewed interest
in the therapeutic potential of IGF-I targeting is justified.

5.	 Landgren O, Kyle RA, Pfeiffer RM, Katzmann JA,
Caporaso NE, Hayes RB, Dispenzieri A, Kumar S, Clark
RJ, Baris D, Hoover R and Rajkumar SV. Monoclonal
gammopathy of undetermined significance (MGUS)
consistently precedes multiple myeloma: a prospective
study. Blood. 2009; 113(22):5412-5417.
6.	 Kyle RA, San-Miguel JF, Mateos MV and Rajkumar SV.
Monoclonal gammopathy of undetermined significance
and smoldering multiple myeloma. Hematology/oncology
clinics of North America. 2014; 28(5):775-790.
7.	 Bolli N, Avet-Loiseau H, Wedge DC, Van Loo P,
Alexandrov LB, Martincorena I, Dawson KJ, Iorio F, NikZainal S, Bignell GR, Hinton JW, Li Y, Tubio JM, et al.
Heterogeneity of genomic evolution and mutational profiles
in multiple myeloma. Nature communications. 2014;
5:2997.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was sponsored by the PhD Mobility
Fellowship from Aarhus University (L. Bieghs), Fonds
voor Wetenschappelijk Onderzoek Vlaanderen (FWOVI), Belgische Federatie tegen Kanker, Vlaamse Liga
tegen Kanker, and the Multiple Myeloma Research
Foundation. E. Menu is an AXA research fellow. K. Maes,
E. Van Valckenborgh, and E. De Bruyne are postdoctoral
fellows at FWO-VI. This study was also supported by
research funding from the EU 6th FP to MSCNET (LSHCCT-2006-037602), the Danish Cancer Society, the Danish
Research Agency to CHEPRE (#2101-07-0007), and the
KE Jensen Foundation (2006-2010) to HEJ.

8.	 Neri P and Bahlis NJ. Genomic instability in multiple
myeloma: mechanisms and therapeutic implications. Expert
opinion on biological therapy. 2013; 13 Suppl 1:S69-82.
9.	 Walker BA, Wardell CP, Melchor L, Brioli A, Johnson
DC, Kaiser MF, Mirabella F, Lopez-Corral L, Humphray
S, Murray L, Ross M, Bentley D, Gutierrez NC, et al.
Intraclonal heterogeneity is a critical early event in the
development of myeloma and precedes the development of
clinical symptoms. Leukemia. 2014; 28(2):384-390.
10.	 Van Wier S, Braggio E, Baker A, Ahmann G, Levy J,
Carpten JD and Fonseca R. Hypodiploid multiple myeloma
is characterized by more aggressive molecular markers than
non-hyperdiploid multiple myeloma. Haematologica. 2013;
98(10):1586-1592.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
The authors declare no potential conflict of interest.

11.	 Bergsagel PL, Kuehl WM, Zhan F, Sawyer J, Barlogie B
and Shaughnessy J, Jr. Cyclin D dysregulation: an early
and unifying pathogenic event in multiple myeloma. Blood.
2005; 106(1):296-303.

REFERENCES
1.	 Ferlay J, Soerjomataram I, Dikshit R, Eser S, Mathers
C, Rebelo M, Parkin DM, Forman D and Bray F. Cancer
incidence and mortality worldwide: sources, methods and
major patterns in GLOBOCAN 2012. International journal
of cancer. 2015; 136(5):E359-386.

12.	 Lohr JG, Stojanov P, Carter SL, Cruz-Gordillo P, Lawrence
MS, Auclair D, Sougnez C, Knoechel B, Gould J, Saksena
G, Cibulskis K, McKenna A, Chapman MA, et al.
Widespread genetic heterogeneity in multiple myeloma:
implications for targeted therapy. Cancer cell. 2014;
25(1):91-101.

2.	 Howlader N, Noone AM, Krapcho M, Miller D, Bishop
K, Altekruse SF, Kosary CL, Yu M, Ruhl J, Tatalovich Z,
Mariotto A, Lewis DR, Chen HS, et al. 2016; SEER Cancer
Statistics Review, 1975-2013, National Cancer Institute.
(http://seer.cancer.gov/csr/1975_2013/).

13.	 Morgan GJ, Walker BA and Davies FE. The genetic
architecture of multiple myeloma. Nature reviews Cancer.
2012; 12(5):335-348.
14.	 Prideaux SM, Conway O’Brien E and Chevassut TJ. The
genetic architecture of multiple myeloma. Advances in
hematology. 2014; 2014:864058.

3.	 Ferlay J, Steliarova-Foucher E, Lortet-Tieulent J, Rosso S,
Coebergh JW, Comber H, Forman D and Bray F. Cancer
incidence and mortality patterns in Europe: estimates for 40
countries in 2012. Eur J Cancer. 2013; 49(6):1374-1403.

15.	 Hengeveld PJ and Kersten MJ. B-cell activating factor
in the pathophysiology of multiple myeloma: a target for
therapy? Blood cancer journal. 2015; 5:e282.

4.	 Rajkumar SV, Dimopoulos MA, Palumbo A, Blade J,
Merlini G, Mateos MV, Kumar S, Hillengass J, Kastritis E,
Richardson P, Landgren O, Paiva B, Dispenzieri A, et al.
International Myeloma Working Group updated criteria for
the diagnosis of multiple myeloma. The Lancet Oncology.
2014; 15(12):e538-548.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

16.	 Lemaire M, Deleu S, De Bruyne E, Van Valckenborgh
E, Menu E and Vanderkerken K. The microenvironment
and molecular biology of the multiple myeloma tumor.
Advances in cancer research. 2011; 110:19-42.

48744

Oncotarget

17.	 Zheng MM, Zhang Z, Bemis K, Belch AR, Pilarski
LM, Shively JE and Kirshner J. The systemic cytokine
environment is permanently altered in multiple myeloma.
PloS one. 2013; 8(3):e58504.

and providing the evidence. Blood. 2014; 124(20):30433051.
28.	 Rajkumar SV. Multiple myeloma: 2013 update on
diagnosis, risk-stratification, and management. American
journal of hematology. 2013; 88(3):226-235.

18.	 Kumar SK, Dispenzieri A, Lacy MQ, Gertz MA, Buadi
FK, Pandey S, Kapoor P, Dingli D, Hayman SR, Leung
N, Lust J, McCurdy A, Russell SJ, et al. Continued
improvement in survival in multiple myeloma: changes in
early mortality and outcomes in older patients. Leukemia.
2014; 28(5):1122-1128.

29.	 Abdi J, Chen G and Chang H. Drug resistance in multiple
myeloma: latest findings and new concepts on molecular
mechanisms. Oncotarget. 2013; 4(12):2186-2207. doi:
10.18632/oncotarget.1497.
30.	 Sprynski AC, Hose D, Caillot L, Reme T, Shaughnessy
JD, Jr., Barlogie B, Seckinger A, Moreaux J, Hundemer M,
Jourdan M, Meissner T, Jauch A, Mahtouk K, et al. The
role of IGF-1 as a major growth factor for myeloma cell
lines and the prognostic relevance of the expression of its
receptor. Blood. 2009; 113(19):4614-4626.

19.	 Kumar SK, Rajkumar SV, Dispenzieri A, Lacy MQ,
Hayman SR, Buadi FK, Zeldenrust SR, Dingli D, Russell
SJ, Lust JA, Greipp PR, Kyle RA and Gertz MA. Improved
survival in multiple myeloma and the impact of novel
therapies. Blood. 2008; 111(5):2516-2520.
20.	 Engelhardt M, Terpos E, Kleber M, Gay F, Wasch R,
Morgan G, Cavo M, van de Donk N, Beilhack A, Bruno B,
Johnsen HE, Hajek R, Driessen C, et al. European Myeloma
Network recommendations on the evaluation and treatment
of newly diagnosed patients with multiple myeloma.
Haematologica. 2014; 99(2):232-242.

31.	 Freund GG, Kulas DT and Mooney RA. Insulin and IGF1 increase mitogenesis and glucose metabolism in the
multiple myeloma cell line, RPMI 8226. J Immunol. 1993;
151(4):1811-1820.
32.	 Descamps G, Gomez-Bougie P, Venot C, Moreau P,
Bataille R and Amiot M. A humanised anti-IGF-1R
monoclonal antibody (AVE1642) enhances Bortezomibinduced apoptosis in myeloma cells lacking CD45. British
journal of cancer. 2009; 100(2):366-369.

21.	 Ludwig H, Sonneveld P, Davies F, Blade J, Boccadoro M,
Cavo M, Morgan G, de la Rubia J, Delforge M, Dimopoulos
M, Einsele H, Facon T, Goldschmidt H, et al. European
perspective on multiple myeloma treatment strategies in
2014. The oncologist. 2014; 19(8):829-844.

33.	Menu E, van Valckenborgh E, van Camp B and
Vanderkerken K. The role of the insulin-like growth
factor 1 receptor axis in multiple myeloma. Archives of
physiology and biochemistry. 2009; 115(2):49-57.

22.	 Ferrero S, Ladetto M, Drandi D, Cavallo F, Genuardi
E, Urbano M, Caltagirone S, Grasso M, Rossini F,
Guglielmelli T, Cangialosi C, Liberati AM, Callea V, et
al. Long-term results of the GIMEMA VEL-03-096 trial
in MM patients receiving VTD consolidation after ASCT:
MRD kinetics’ impact on survival. Leukemia. 2015;
29(3):689-695.

34.	 Moreau P, Cavallo F, Leleu X, Hulin C, Amiot M,
Descamps G, Facon T, Boccadoro M, Mignard D and
Harousseau JL. Phase I study of the anti insulin-like growth
factor 1 receptor (IGF-1R) monoclonal antibody, AVE1642,
as single agent and in combination with bortezomib in
patients with relapsed multiple myeloma. Leukemia. 2011;
25(5):872-874.

23.	 Nathwani N, Larsen JT and Kapoor P. Consolidation and
Maintenance Therapies for Newly Diagnosed Multiple
Myeloma in the Era of Novel Agents. Current hematologic
malignancy reports. 2016; 11(2):127-136.

35.	 Le Roith D. The insulin-like growth factor system.
Experimental diabesity research. 2003; 4(4):205-212.

24.	 San Miguel J. Multiple myeloma: a model for scientific and
clinical progress. Hematology. 2014; 2014(1):1-7.

36.	 Rinderknecht E and Humbel RE. The amino acid sequence
of human insulin-like growth factor I and its structural
homology with proinsulin. The Journal of biological
chemistry. 1978; 253(8):2769-2776.

25.	 Palumbo A, Rajkumar SV, San Miguel JF, Larocca A,
Niesvizky R, Morgan G, Landgren O, Hajek R, Einsele H,
Anderson KC, Dimopoulos MA, Richardson PG, Cavo M,
et al. International Myeloma Working Group consensus
statement for the management, treatment, and supportive
care of patients with myeloma not eligible for standard
autologous stem-cell transplantation. Journal of clinical
oncology. 2014; 32(6):587-600.

37.	 Rinderknecht E and Humbel RE. Primary structure of
human insulin-like growth factor II. FEBS letters. 1978;
89(2):283-286.
38.	 Powell-Braxton L, Hollingshead P, Warburton C, Dowd M,
Pitts-Meek S, Dalton D, Gillett N and Stewart TA. IGF-I is
required for normal embryonic growth in mice. Genes &
development. 1993; 7(12B):2609-2617.

26.	 Terpos E, Kleber M, Engelhardt M, Zweegman S, Gay F,
Kastritis E, van de Donk NW, Bruno B, Sezer O, Broijl
A, Bringhen S, Beksac M, Larocca A, et al. European
Myeloma Network guidelines for the management of
multiple myeloma-related complications. Haematologica.
2015; 100(10):1254-1266.

39.	 Juul A. Serum levels of insulin-like growth factor I and its
binding proteins in health and disease. Growth hormone
& IGF research : official journal of the Growth Hormone
Research Society and the International IGF Research
Society. 2003; 13(4):113-170.

27.	 Barlogie B, Mitchell A, van Rhee F, Epstein J, Morgan GJ
and Crowley J. Curing myeloma at last: defining criteria
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

40.	 Langlois JA, Rosen CJ, Visser M, Hannan MT, Harris T,
48745

Oncotarget

Wilson PW and Kiel DP. Association between insulin-like
growth factor I and bone mineral density in older women
and men: the Framingham Heart Study. The Journal of
clinical endocrinology and metabolism. 1998; 83(12):42574262.

treatment. 1998; 47(3):235-253.
53.	 Moller DE, Yokota A, Caro JF and Flier JS. Tissue-specific
expression of two alternatively spliced insulin receptor
mRNAs in man. Mol Endocrinol. 1989; 3(8):1263-1269.
54.	 Mosthaf L, Grako K, Dull TJ, Coussens L, Ullrich A
and McClain DA. Functionally distinct insulin receptors
generated by tissue-specific alternative splicing. The EMBO
journal. 1990; 9(8):2409-2413.

41.	 Ohlsson C, Mellstrom D, Carlzon D, Orwoll E, Ljunggren
O, Karlsson MK and Vandenput L. Older men with low
serum IGF-1 have an increased risk of incident fractures:
the MrOS Sweden study. Journal of bone and mineral
research. 2011; 26(4):865-872.

55.	 Belfiore A. The role of insulin receptor isoforms and
hybrid insulin/IGF-I receptors in human cancer. Current
pharmaceutical design. 2007; 13(7):671-686.

42.	 Clemmons DR. Modifying IGF1 activity: an approach to
treat endocrine disorders, atherosclerosis and cancer. Nature
reviews Drug discovery. 2007; 6(10):821-833.

56.	 Zong CS, Chan J, Levy DE, Horvath C, Sadowski HB and
Wang LH. Mechanism of STAT3 activation by insulinlike growth factor I receptor. The Journal of biological
chemistry. 2000; 275(20):15099-15105.

43.	 Jones JI and Clemmons DR. Insulin-like growth factors
and their binding proteins: biological actions. Endocrine
reviews. 1995; 16(1):3-34.

57.	 Nielsen FC. The molecular and cellular biology of insulinlike growth factor II. Progress in growth factor research.
1992; 4(3):257-290.

44.	 Yakar S, Wu Y, Setser J and Rosen CJ. The role of
circulating IGF-I: lessons from human and animal models.
Endocrine. 2002; 19(3):239-248.

58.	 Hwa V, Oh Y and Rosenfeld RG. The insulin-like growth
factor-binding protein (IGFBP) superfamily. Endocrine
reviews. 1999; 20(6):761-787.

45.	 Zhao G, Monier-Faugere MC, Langub MC, Geng Z,
Nakayama T, Pike JW, Chernausek SD, Rosen CJ, Donahue
LR, Malluche HH, Fagin JA and Clemens TL. Targeted
overexpression of insulin-like growth factor I to osteoblasts
of transgenic mice: increased trabecular bone volume
without increased osteoblast proliferation. Endocrinology.
2000; 141(7):2674-2682.

59.	 Baxter RC. IGF binding proteins in cancer: mechanistic and
clinical insights. Nature reviews Cancer. 2014; 14(5):329341.
60.	 Twigg SM, Kiefer MC, Zapf J and Baxter RC. Insulinlike growth factor-binding protein 5 complexes with the
acid-labile subunit. Role of the carboxyl-terminal domain.
The Journal of biological chemistry. 1998; 273(44):2879128798.

46.	 Chrysis D, Calikoglu AS, Ye P and D’Ercole AJ. Insulinlike growth factor-I overexpression attenuates cerebellar
apoptosis by altering the expression of Bcl family proteins
in a developmentally specific manner. The Journal of
neuroscience : the official journal of the Society for
Neuroscience. 2001; 21(5):1481-1489.

61.	 Baxter RC. Circulating binding proteins for the insulinlike
growth factors. TEM. 1993; 4(3):91-96.
62.	 Rajaram S, Baylink DJ and Mohan S. Insulin-like growth
factor-binding proteins in serum and other biological
fluids: regulation and functions. Endocrine reviews. 1997;
18(6):801-831.

47.	 Dentremont KD, Ye P, D’Ercole AJ and O’Kusky JR.
Increased insulin-like growth factor-I (IGF-I) expression
during early postnatal development differentially increases
neuron number and growth in medullary nuclei of the
mouse. Brain research Developmental brain research. 1999;
114(1):135-141.

63.	 Firth SM and Baxter RC. Cellular actions of the insulin-like
growth factor binding proteins. Endocrine reviews. 2002;
23(6):824-854.

48.	 Furlanetto RW, Harwell SE and Frick KK. Insulin-like
growth factor-I induces cyclin-D1 expression in MG63
human osteosarcoma cells in vitro. Mol Endocrinol. 1994;
8(4):510-517.

64.	 Conover CA. Insulin-like growth factor-binding proteins
and bone metabolism. American journal of physiology
Endocrinology and metabolism. 2008; 294(1):E10-14.
65.	 Miyakoshi N, Richman C, Kasukawa Y, Linkhart TA,
Baylink DJ and Mohan S. Evidence that IGF-binding
protein-5 functions as a growth factor. The Journal of
clinical investigation. 2001; 107(1):73-81.

49.	 Le Roith D, Parrizas M and Blakesley VA. The insulin-like
growth factor-I receptor and apoptosis. Implications for the
aging progress. Endocrine. 1997; 7(1):103-105.
50.	 Yu H and Rohan T. Role of the insulin-like growth factor
family in cancer development and progression. Journal of
the National Cancer Institute. 2000; 92(18):1472-1489.

66.	 Wang Y, Nishida S, Elalieh HZ, Long RK, Halloran
BP and Bikle DD. Role of IGF-I signaling in regulating
osteoclastogenesis. Journal of bone and mineral research.
2006; 21(9):1350-1358.

51.	 Adams TE, Epa VC, Garrett TP and Ward CW. Structure
and function of the type 1 insulin-like growth factor
receptor. Cellular and molecular life sciences : CMLS.
2000; 57(7):1050-1093.

67.	 Grimberg A, Coleman CM, Burns TF, Himelstein BP, Koch
CJ, Cohen P and El-Deiry WS. p53-Dependent and p53independent induction of insulin-like growth factor binding
protein-3 by deoxyribonucleic acid damage and hypoxia.
The Journal of clinical endocrinology and metabolism.

52.	 Sepp-Lorenzino L. Structure and function of the insulinlike growth factor I receptor. Breast cancer research and
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

48746

Oncotarget

2005; 90(6):3568-3574.

North America. 2012; 41(2):335-350, vi.

68.	 Huang SS, Ling TY, Tseng WF, Huang YH, Tang FM, Leal
SM and Huang JS. Cellular growth inhibition by IGFBP-3
and TGF-beta1 requires LRP-1. FASEB journal. 2003;
17(14):2068-2081.

82.	 Vande Broek I, Vanderkerken K, Van Camp B and Van
Riet I. Extravasation and homing mechanisms in multiple
myeloma. Clinical & experimental metastasis. 2008;
25(4):325-334.

69.	 Maeda H, Yonou H, Yano K, Ishii G, Saito S and Ochiai A.
Prostate-specific antigen enhances bioavailability of insulinlike growth factor by degrading insulin-like growth factor
binding protein 5. Biochemical and biophysical research
communications. 2009; 381(3):311-316.

83.	 Vanderkerken K, Asosingh K, Braet F, Van Riet I and
Van Camp B. Insulin-like growth factor-1 acts as a
chemoattractant factor for 5T2 multiple myeloma cells.
Blood. 1999; 93(1):235-241.
84.	 Asosingh K, Gunthert U, Bakkus MH, De Raeve H, Goes
E, Van Riet I, Van Camp B and Vanderkerken K. In vivo
induction of insulin-like growth factor-I receptor and
CD44v6 confers homing and adhesion to murine multiple
myeloma cells. Cancer research. 2000; 60(11):3096-3104.

70.	 Braulke T, Claussen M, Saftig P, Wendland M, Neifer K,
Schmidt B, Zapf J, von Figura K and Peters C. Proteolysis
of IGFBPs by cathepsin D in vitro and in cathepsin
D-deficient mice. Progress in growth factor research. 1995;
6(2-4):265-271.

85.	 Qiang YW, Yao L, Tosato G and Rudikoff S. Insulin-like
growth factor I induces migration and invasion of human
multiple myeloma cells. Blood. 2004; 103(1):301-308.

71.	 Claussen M, Kubler B, Wendland M, Neifer K, Schmidt
B, Zapf J and Braulke T. Proteolysis of insulin-like growth
factors (IGF) and IGF binding proteins by cathepsin D.
Endocrinology. 1997; 138(9):3797-3803.

86.	 Tai YT, Podar K, Catley L, Tseng YH, Akiyama M,
Shringarpure R, Burger R, Hideshima T, Chauhan D,
Mitsiades N, Richardson P, Munshi NC, Kahn CR, et al.
Insulin-like growth factor-1 induces adhesion and migration
in human multiple myeloma cells via activation of beta1integrin and phosphatidylinositol 3’-kinase/AKT signaling.
Cancer research. 2003; 63(18):5850-5858.

72.	 Conover CA and De Leon DD. Acid-activated insulin-like
growth factor-binding protein-3 proteolysis in normal and
transformed cells. Role of cathepsin D. The Journal of
biological chemistry. 1994; 269(10):7076-7080.
73.	 Fowlkes JL, Thrailkill KM, Serra DM, Suzuki K and
Nagase H. Matrix metalloproteinases as insulin-like growth
factor binding protein-degrading proteinases. Progress in
growth factor research. 1995; 6(2-4):255-263.

87.	 Podar K, Zimmerhackl A, Fulciniti M, Tonon G, Hainz
U, Tai YT, Vallet S, Halama N, Jager D, Olson DL,
Sattler M, Chauhan D and Anderson KC. The selective
adhesion molecule inhibitor Natalizumab decreases
multiple myeloma cell growth in the bone marrow
microenvironment: therapeutic implications. British journal
of haematology. 2011; 155(4):438-448.

74.	 Boldt HB and Conover CA. Pregnancy-associated plasma
protein-A (PAPP-A): a local regulator of IGF bioavailability
through cleavage of IGFBPs. Growth hormone & IGF
research. 2007; 17(1):10-18.

88.	 Ro TB, Holien T, Fagerli UM, Hov H, Misund K, Waage
A, Sundan A, Holt RU and Borset M. HGF and IGF-1
synergize with SDF-1alpha in promoting migration of
myeloma cells by cooperative activation of p21-activated
kinase. Experimental hematology. 2013; 41(7):646-655.

75.	 Jones JI, Busby WH, Jr., Wright G, Smith CE, Kimack
NM and Clemmons DR. Identification of the sites of
phosphorylation in insulin-like growth factor binding
protein-1. Regulation of its affinity by phosphorylation
of serine 101. The Journal of biological chemistry. 1993;
268(2):1125-1131.

89.	 Pichiorri F, Suh SS, Rocci A, De Luca L, Taccioli C,
Santhanam R, Zhou W, Benson DM, Jr., Hofmainster
C, Alder H, Garofalo M, Di Leva G, Volinia S, et al.
Downregulation of p53-inducible microRNAs 192, 194, and
215 impairs the p53/MDM2 autoregulatory loop in multiple
myeloma development. Cancer cell. 2010; 18(4):367-381.

76.	 Mishra S and Murphy LJ. Phosphorylation of insulin-like
growth factor (IGF) binding protein-3 by breast cancer cell
membranes enhances IGF-I binding. Endocrinology. 2003;
144(9):4042-4050.
77.	 Lund J, Sondergaard MT, Conover CA and Overgaard
MT. Heparin-binding mechanism of the IGF2/IGF-binding
protein 2 complex. Journal of molecular endocrinology.
2014; 52(3):345-355.

90.	 Saha MN, Micallef J, Qiu L and Chang H. Pharmacological
activation of the p53 pathway in haematological
malignancies. Journal of clinical pathology. 2010;
63(3):204-209.

78.	 Hanahan D and Weinberg RA. The hallmarks of cancer.
Cell. 2000; 100(1):57-70.

91.	 Girnita L, Girnita A and Larsson O. Mdm2-dependent
ubiquitination and degradation of the insulin-like growth
factor 1 receptor. Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences of the United States of America. 2003;
100(14):8247-8252.

79.	 Hanahan D and Weinberg RA. Hallmarks of cancer: the
next generation. Cell. 2011; 144(5):646-674.
80.	 Pollak M. The insulin and insulin-like growth factor
receptor family in neoplasia: an update. Nature reviews
Cancer. 2012; 12(3):159-169.

92.	 Dhodapkar MV, Kelly T, Theus A, Athota AB, Barlogie
B and Sanderson RD. Elevated levels of shed syndecan-1
correlate with tumour mass and decreased matrix

81.	 Weroha SJ and Haluska P. The insulin-like growth factor
system in cancer. Endocrinology and metabolism clinics of
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

48747

Oncotarget

metalloproteinase-9 activity in the serum of patients with
multiple myeloma. British journal of haematology. 1997;
99(2):368-371.

development and therapy. Oncogene. 2007; 26(9):13241337.
104.	Scarfo L and Ghia P. Reprogramming cell death:
BCL2 family inhibition in hematological malignancies.
Immunology letters. 2013; 155(1-2):36-39.

93.	Van Valckenborgh E, Bakkus M, Munaut C, Noel
A, St Pierre Y, Asosingh K, Van Riet I, Van Camp
B and Vanderkerken K. Upregulation of matrix
metalloproteinase-9 in murine 5T33 multiple myeloma
cells by interaction with bone marrow endothelial cells.
International journal of cancer. 2002; 101(6):512-518.

105.	Huo J, Xu S, Lin B, Chng WJ and Lam KP. Fas apoptosis
inhibitory molecule is upregulated by IGF-1 signaling and
modulates Akt activation and IRF4 expression in multiple
myeloma. Leukemia. 2013; 27(5):1165-1171.

94.	 Vande Broek I, Asosingh K, Allegaert V, Leleu X, Facon
T, Vanderkerken K, Van Camp B and Van Riet I. Bone
marrow endothelial cells increase the invasiveness of
human multiple myeloma cells through upregulation of
MMP-9: evidence for a role of hepatocyte growth factor.
Leukemia. 2004; 18(5):976-982.

106.	De Bruyne E, Bos TJ, Schuit F, Van Valckenborgh E,
Menu E, Thorrez L, Atadja P, Jernberg-Wiklund H and
Vanderkerken K. IGF-1 suppresses Bim expression in
multiple myeloma via epigenetic and posttranslational
mechanisms. Blood. 2010; 115(12):2430-2440.
107.	Bieghs L, Lub S, Fostier K, Maes K, Van Valckenborgh E,
Menu E, Johnsen HE, Overgaard MT, Larsson O, Axelson
M, Nyegaard M, Schots R, Jernberg-Wiklund H, et al. The
IGF-1 receptor inhibitor picropodophyllin potentiates the
anti-myeloma activity of a BH3-mimetic. Oncotarget. 2014;
5(22):11193-11208. doi:10.18632/oncotarget.1933.

95.	 Abboud SL, Bethel CR and Aron DC. Secretion of
insulinlike growth factor I and insulinlike growth factorbinding proteins by murine bone marrow stromal cells. The
Journal of clinical investigation. 1991; 88(2):470-475.
96.	 Georgii-Hemming P, Wiklund HJ, Ljunggren O and Nilsson
K. Insulin-like growth factor I is a growth and survival
factor in human multiple myeloma cell lines. Blood. 1996;
88(6):2250-2258.

108.	Kuhn DJ, Berkova Z, Jones RJ, Woessner R, Bjorklund
CC, Ma W, Davis RE, Lin P, Wang H, Madden TL, Wei
C, Baladandayuthapani V, Wang M, et al. Targeting
the insulin-like growth factor-1 receptor to overcome
bortezomib resistance in preclinical models of multiple
myeloma. Blood. 2012; 120(16):3260-3270.

97.	 Ferlin M, Noraz N, Hertogh C, Brochier J, Taylor N and
Klein B. Insulin-like growth factor induces the survival
and proliferation of myeloma cells through an interleukin6-independent transduction pathway. British journal of
haematology. 2000; 111(2):626-634.

109.	Tagoug I, Sauty De Chalon A and Dumontet C. Inhibition
of IGF-1 signalling enhances the apoptotic effect of
AS602868, an IKK2 inhibitor, in multiple myeloma cell
lines. PloS one. 2011; 6(7):e22641.

98.	 Jelinek DF, Witzig TE and Arendt BK. A role for insulinlike growth factor in the regulation of IL-6-responsive
human myeloma cell line growth. J Immunol. 1997;
159(1):487-496.

110.	Xu F, Gardner A, Tu Y, Michl P, Prager D and Lichtenstein
A. Multiple myeloma cells are protected against
dexamethasone-induced apoptosis by insulin-like growth
factors. British journal of haematology. 1997; 97(2):429440.

99.	 Chiron D, Maiga S, Surget S, Descamps G, Gomez-Bougie
P, Traore S, Robillard N, Moreau P, Le Gouill S, Bataille R,
Amiot M and Pellat-Deceunynck C. Autocrine insulin-like
growth factor 1 and stem cell factor but not interleukin 6
support self-renewal of human myeloma cells. Blood cancer
journal. 2013; 3:e120.

111.	Maiga S, Gomez-Bougie P, Bonnaud S, Gratas C, Moreau
P, Le Gouill S, Pellat-Deceunynck C and Amiot M.
Paradoxical effect of lenalidomide on cytokine/growth
factor profiles in multiple myeloma. British journal of
cancer. 2013; 108(9):1801-1806.

100.	Huang EW, Xue SJ, Li XY, Xu SW, Cheng JD, Zheng
JX, Shi H, Lv GL, Li ZG, Li Y, Liu CH, Chen XH, Liu
H, et al. EEN regulates the proliferation and survival of
multiple myeloma cells by potentiating IGF-1 secretion.
Biochemical and biophysical research communications.
2014; 447(2):271-277.

112.	Pratt G. Lenalidomide and second malignancies in myeloma
patients. The Lancet Oncology. 2014; 15(3):253-254.
113.	Menu E, Kooijman R, Van Valckenborgh E, Asosingh K,
Bakkus M, Van Camp B and Vanderkerken K. Specific
roles for the PI3K and the MEK-ERK pathway in IGF-1stimulated chemotaxis, VEGF secretion and proliferation
of multiple myeloma cells: study in the 5T33MM model.
British journal of cancer. 2004; 90(5):1076-1083.

101.	Sprynski AC, Hose D, Kassambara A, Vincent L, Jourdan
M, Rossi JF, Goldschmidt H and Klein B. Insulin is a potent
myeloma cell growth factor through insulin/IGF-1 hybrid
receptor activation. Leukemia. 2010; 24(11):1940-1950.
102.	Georgii-Hemming P, Stromberg T, Janson ET, Stridsberg
M, Wiklund HJ and Nilsson K. The somatostatin analog
octreotide inhibits growth of interleukin-6 (IL-6)-dependent
and IL-6-independent human multiple myeloma cell lines.
Blood. 1999; 93(5):1724-1731.

114.	Mitsiades CS, Mitsiades NS, McMullan CJ, Poulaki V,
Shringarpure R, Akiyama M, Hideshima T, Chauhan D,
Joseph M, Libermann TA, Garcia-Echeverria C, Pearson
MA, Hofmann F, et al. Inhibition of the insulin-like growth
factor receptor-1 tyrosine kinase activity as a therapeutic
strategy for multiple myeloma, other hematologic

103.	Adams JM and Cory S. The Bcl-2 apoptotic switch in cancer
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

48748

Oncotarget

malignancies, and solid tumors. Cancer cell. 2004;
5(3):221-230.

multiple myeloma: a study in the 5T2MM mouse model.
The American journal of pathology. 2004; 165(3):869-878.

115.	Carmeliet P. Angiogenesis in life, disease and medicine.
Nature. 2005; 438(7070):932-936.

128.	Menu E, Jernberg-Wiklund H, Stromberg T, De Raeve H,
Girnita L, Larsson O, Axelson M, Asosingh K, Nilsson K,
Van Camp B and Vanderkerken K. Inhibiting the IGF-1
receptor tyrosine kinase with the cyclolignan PPP: an
in vitro and in vivo study in the 5T33MM mouse model.
Blood. 2006; 107(2):655-660.

116.	Carmeliet P and Jain RK. Angiogenesis in cancer and other
diseases. Nature. 2000; 407(6801):249-257.
117.	Weis SM and Cheresh DA. Tumor angiogenesis: molecular
pathways and therapeutic targets. Nature medicine. 2011;
17(11):1359-1370.

129.	Pappa CA, Tsirakis G, Psarakis FE, Kolovou A, Tsigaridaki
M, Stafylaki D, Sfiridaki K and Alexandrakis MG. Lack
of correlation between angiogenic cytokines and serum
insulin-like growth factor-1 in patients with multiple
myeloma. Med Oncol. 2013; 30(1):363.

118.	Asosingh K, De Raeve H, Menu E, Van Riet I, Van Marck
E, Van Camp B and Vanderkerken K. Angiogenic switch
during 5T2MM murine myeloma tumorigenesis: role of
CD45 heterogeneity. Blood. 2004; 103(8):3131-3137.

130.	Kristinsson SY, Minter AR, Korde N, Tan E and Landgren
O. Bone disease in multiple myeloma and precursor disease:
novel diagnostic approaches and implications on clinical
management. Expert review of molecular diagnostics. 2011;
11(6):593-603.

119.	Bhutani M, Turkbey B, Tan E, Kemp TJ, Pinto LA, Berg
AR, Korde N, Minter AR, Weiss BM, Mena E, Lindenberg
L, Aras O, Purdue MP, et al. Bone marrow angiogenesis in
myeloma and its precursor disease: a prospective clinical
trial. Leukemia. 2014; 28(2):413-416.

131.	Melton LJ, 3rd, Kyle RA, Achenbach SJ, Oberg AL and
Rajkumar SV. Fracture risk with multiple myeloma: a
population-based study. Journal of bone and mineral
research : the official journal of the American Society for
Bone and Mineral Research. 2005; 20(3):487-493.

120.	Hose D, Moreaux J, Meissner T, Seckinger A, Goldschmidt
H, Benner A, Mahtouk K, Hillengass J, Reme T, De Vos J,
Hundemer M, Condomines M, Bertsch U, et al. Induction of
angiogenesis by normal and malignant plasma cells. Blood.
2009; 114(1):128-143.

132.	Farr JN, Zhang W, Kumar SK, Jacques RM, Ng AC,
McCready LK, Rajkumar SV and Drake MT. Altered
cortical microarchitecture in patients with monoclonal
gammopathy of undetermined significance. Blood. 2014;
123(5):647-649.

121.	Rajkumar SV, Leong T, Roche PC, Fonseca R, Dispenzieri
A, Lacy MQ, Lust JA, Witzig TE, Kyle RA, Gertz MA and
Greipp PR. Prognostic value of bone marrow angiogenesis
in multiple myeloma. Clinical cancer research. 2000;
6(8):3111-3116.

133.	Ng AC, Khosla S, Charatcharoenwitthaya N, Kumar
SK, Achenbach SJ, Holets MF, McCready LK, Melton
LJ, 3rd, Kyle RA, Rajkumar SV and Drake MT. Bone
microstructural changes revealed by high-resolution
peripheral quantitative computed tomography imaging and
elevated DKK1 and MIP-1alpha levels in patients with
MGUS. Blood. 2011; 118(25):6529-6534.

122.	Vacca A, Ribatti D, Roncali L, Ranieri G, Serio G,
Silvestris F and Dammacco F. Bone marrow angiogenesis
and progression in multiple myeloma. British journal of
haematology. 1994; 87(3):503-508.
123.	Jakob C, Sterz J, Zavrski I, Heider U, Kleeberg L, Fleissner
C, Kaiser M and Sezer O. Angiogenesis in multiple
myeloma. Eur J Cancer. 2006; 42(11):1581-1590.

134.	Roodman GD. Mechanisms of bone metastasis. The New
England journal of medicine. 2004; 350(16):1655-1664.

124.	Ria R, Reale A, De Luisi A, Ferrucci A, Moschetta M and
Vacca A. Bone marrow angiogenesis and progression in
multiple myeloma. American journal of blood research.
2011; 1(1):76-89.

135.	Giuliani N, Colla S and Rizzoli V. New insight in the
mechanism of osteoclast activation and formation in
multiple myeloma: focus on the receptor activator of NFkappaB ligand (RANKL). Experimental hematology. 2004;
32(8):685-691.

125.	Giuliani N, Colla S, Lazzaretti M, Sala R, Roti G, Mancini
C, Bonomini S, Lunghi P, Hojden M, Genestreti G, Svaldi
M, Coser P, Fattori PP, et al. Proangiogenic properties of
human myeloma cells: production of angiopoietin-1 and its
potential relationship to myeloma-induced angiogenesis.
Blood. 2003; 102(2):638-645.

136.	Terpos E, Szydlo R, Apperley JF, Hatjiharissi E, Politou
M, Meletis J, Viniou N, Yataganas X, Goldman JM and
Rahemtulla A. Soluble receptor activator of nuclear factor
kappaB ligand-osteoprotegerin ratio predicts survival in
multiple myeloma: proposal for a novel prognostic index.
Blood. 2003; 102(3):1064-1069.

126.	Vacca A, Ribatti D, Roccaro AM, Ria R, Palermo L and
Dammacco F. Bone marrow angiogenesis and plasma cell
angiogenic and invasive potential in patients with active
multiple myeloma. Acta haematologica. 2001; 106(4):162169.

137.	Menu E, De Leenheer E, De Raeve H, Coulton L, Imanishi
T, Miyashita K, Van Valckenborgh E, Van Riet I, Van
Camp B, Horuk R, Croucher P and Vanderkerken K. Role
of CCR1 and CCR5 in homing and growth of multiple
myeloma and in the development of osteolytic lesions:
a study in the 5TMM model. Clinical & experimental
metastasis. 2006; 23(5-6):291-300.

127.	Van Valckenborgh E, Croucher PI, De Raeve H, Carron C,
De Leenheer E, Blacher S, Devy L, Noel A, De Bruyne E,
Asosingh K, Van Riet I, Van Camp B and Vanderkerken
K. Multifunctional role of matrix metalloproteinases in
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

48749

Oncotarget

138.	Tsirakis G, Roussou P, Pappa CA, Kolovou A,
Vasilokonstantaki C, Miminas I, Kyriakaki S, Alegakis
A and Alexandrakis MG. Increased serum levels of
MIP-1alpha correlate with bone disease and angiogenic
cytokines in patients with multiple myeloma. Med Oncol.
2014; 31(1):778.

cancer research. 2009; 28:35.
149.	Frystyk J, Freda P and Clemmons DR. The current status
of IGF-I assays--a 2009 update. Growth hormone & IGF
research. 2010; 20(1):8-18.
150.	Bataille R, Robillard N, Avet-Loiseau H, Harousseau JL
and Moreau P. CD221 (IGF-1R) is aberrantly expressed
in multiple myeloma, in relation to disease severity.
Haematologica. 2005; 90(5):706-707.

139.	Tian E, Zhan F, Walker R, Rasmussen E, Ma Y, Barlogie
B and Shaughnessy JD, Jr. The role of the Wnt-signaling
antagonist DKK1 in the development of osteolytic lesions in
multiple myeloma. The New England journal of medicine.
2003; 349(26):2483-2494.

151.	Chng WJ, Gualberto A and Fonseca R. IGF-1R is
overexpressed in poor-prognostic subtypes of multiple
myeloma. Leukemia. 2006; 20(1):174-176.

140.	Oshima T, Abe M, Asano J, Hara T, Kitazoe K, Sekimoto
E, Tanaka Y, Shibata H, Hashimoto T, Ozaki S, Kido S,
Inoue D and Matsumoto T. Myeloma cells suppress bone
formation by secreting a soluble Wnt inhibitor, sFRP-2.
Blood. 2005; 106(9):3160-3165.

152.	Birmann BM, Neuhouser ML, Rosner B, Albanes D, Buring
JE, Giles GG, Lan Q, Lee IM, Purdue MP, Rothman N,
Severi G, Yuan JM, Anderson KC, et al. Prediagnosis
biomarkers of insulin-like growth factor-1, insulin, and
interleukin-6 dysregulation and multiple myeloma risk in
the Multiple Myeloma Cohort Consortium. Blood. 2012;
120(25):4929-4937.

141.	Trotter TN, Li M, Pan Q, Peker D, Rowan PD, Li J, Zhan
F, Suva LJ, Javed A and Yang Y. Myeloma cell-derived
Runx2 promotes myeloma progression in bone. Blood.
2015; 125(23):3598-3608.

153.	Brandt K, Wang J, Lundell K, Stahlberg M, Horn H,
Ehrenborg E, Hall K, Jornvall H and Lewitt M. IGFBP-1
protease activity and IGFBP-1 fragments in a patient with
multiple myeloma. Growth hormone & IGF research. 2009;
19(6):507-512.

142.	Wang GK, Hu L, Fuller GN and Zhang W. An interaction
between insulin-like growth factor-binding protein 2
(IGFBP2) and integrin alpha5 is essential for IGFBP2induced cell mobility. The Journal of biological chemistry.
2006; 281(20):14085-14091.

154.	Bolomsky A, Hose D, Schreder M, Seckinger A, Lipp S,
Klein B, Heintel D, Ludwig H and Zojer N. Insulin like
growth factor binding protein 7 (IGFBP7) expression is
linked to poor prognosis but may protect from bone disease
in multiple myeloma. Journal of hematology & oncology.
2015; 8:10.

143.	Feliers D, Woodruff K and Abboud S. Potential role
of insulin-like growth factor binding protein-4 in the
uncoupling of bone turnover in multiple myeloma. British
journal of haematology. 1999; 104(4):715-722.
144.	Menu E, Jernberg-Wiklund H, De Raeve H, De Leenheer
E, Coulton L, Gallagher O, Van Valckenborgh E, Larsson
O, Axelson M, Nilsson K, Van Camp B, Croucher
P and Vanderkerken K. Targeting the IGF-1R using
picropodophyllin in the therapeutical 5T2MM mouse model
of multiple myeloma: beneficial effects on tumor growth,
angiogenesis, bone disease and survival. International
journal of cancer. 2007; 121(8):1857-1861.

155.	Grotendorst GR, Lau LF and Perbal B. CCN proteins are
distinct from, and should not be considered members of, the
insulin-like growth factor-binding protein superfamily. The
Journal of clinical endocrinology and metabolism. 2001;
86(2):944-945.
156.	Brahmkhatri VP, Prasanna C and Atreya HS. Insulin-like
growth factor system in cancer: novel targeted therapies.
BioMed research international. 2015; 2015:538019.

145.	Ersek A, Xu K, Antonopoulos A, Butters TD, Santo AE,
Vattakuzhi Y, Williams LM, Goudevenou K, Danks L,
Freidin A, Spanoudakis E, Parry S, Papaioannou M, et al.
Glycosphingolipid synthesis inhibition limits osteoclast
activation and myeloma bone disease. The Journal of
clinical investigation. 2015; 125(6):2279-2292.

157.	Drexler HG and Matsuo Y. Malignant hematopoietic cell
lines: in vitro models for the study of multiple myeloma and
plasma cell leukemia. Leukemia research. 2000; 24(8):681703.
158.	Moreaux J, Klein B, Bataille R, Descamps G, Maiga S,
Hose D, Goldschmidt H, Jauch A, Reme T, Jourdan M,
Amiot M and Pellat-Deceunynck C. A high-risk signature
for patients with multiple myeloma established from the
molecular classification of human myeloma cell lines.
Haematologica. 2011; 96(4):574-582.

146.	Feigin A. Evidence from biomarkers and surrogate
endpoints. NeuroRx. 2004; 1(3):323-330.
147.	Standal T, Borset M, Lenhoff S, Wisloff F, Stordal B,
Sundan A, Waage A and Seidel C. Serum insulinlike growth
factor is not elevated in patients with multiple myeloma but
is still a prognostic factor. Blood. 2002; 100(12):3925-3929.

159.	Mitsiades CS, Anderson KC and Carrasco DR. Mouse
models of human myeloma. Hematology/oncology clinics
of North America. 2007; 21(6):1051-1069, viii.

148.	Greco C, Vitelli G, Vercillo G, Vona R, Giannarelli D,
Sperduti I, Pisani F, Capoluongo E, Petti MC and Ameglio
F. Reduction of serum IGF-I levels in patients affected with
Monoclonal Gammopathies of undetermined significance
or Multiple Myeloma. Comparison with bFGF, VEGF and
K-ras gene mutation. Journal of experimental & clinical
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

160.	Vanderkerken K, Asosingh K, Croucher P and Van Camp
B. Multiple myeloma biology: lessons from the 5TMM
models. Immunological reviews. 2003; 194:196-206.
161.	Potter M. Plasmacytomas in mice. Seminars in oncology.
48750

Oncotarget

1986; 13(3):275-281.

28(34):3009-3021.

162.	Mitsiades CS, Mitsiades NS, Bronson RT, Chauhan D,
Munshi N, Treon SP, Maxwell CA, Pilarski L, Hideshima
T, Hoffman RM and Anderson KC. Fluorescence imaging
of multiple myeloma cells in a clinically relevant SCID/
NOD in vivo model: biologic and clinical implications.
Cancer research. 2003; 63(20):6689-6696.

174.	Liang SB, Yang XZ, Trieu Y, Li Z, Zive J, LeungHagesteijn C, Wei E, Zozulya S, Coss CC, Dalton JT,
Fantus IG and Trudel S. Molecular target characterization
and antimyeloma activity of the novel, insulin-like growth
factor 1 receptor inhibitor, GTx-134. Clinical cancer
research. 2011; 17(14):4693-4704.

163.	Tassone P, Neri P, Carrasco DR, Burger R, Goldmacher
VS, Fram R, Munshi V, Shammas MA, Catley L, Jacob
GS, Venuta S, Anderson KC and Munshi NC. A clinically
relevant SCID-hu in vivo model of human multiple
myeloma. Blood. 2005; 106(2):713-716.

175.	Barretina J, Caponigro G, Stransky N, Venkatesan K,
Margolin AA, Kim S, Wilson CJ, Lehar J, Kryukov GV,
Sonkin D, Reddy A, Liu M, Murray L, et al. The Cancer
Cell Line Encyclopedia enables predictive modelling of
anticancer drug sensitivity. Nature. 2012; 483(7391):603607.

164.	Asosingh K, Radl J, Van Riet I, Van Camp B and
Vanderkerken K. The 5TMM series: a useful in vivo mouse
model of human multiple myeloma. The hematology
journal. 2000; 1(5):351-356.

176.	Cohen BD, Baker DA, Soderstrom C, Tkalcevic G, Rossi
AM, Miller PE, Tengowski MW, Wang F, Gualberto A,
Beebe JS and Moyer JD. Combination therapy enhances the
inhibition of tumor growth with the fully human anti-type
1 insulin-like growth factor receptor monoclonal antibody
CP-751,871. Clinical cancer research. 2005; 11(5):20632073.

165.	Dallas SL, Garrett IR, Oyajobi BO, Dallas MR, Boyce
BF, Bauss F, Radl J and Mundy GR. Ibandronate reduces
osteolytic lesions but not tumor burden in a murine model
of myeloma bone disease. Blood. 1999; 93(5):1697-1706.

177.	Wu KD, Zhou L, Burtrum D, Ludwig DL and Moore
MA. Antibody targeting of the insulin-like growth factor
I receptor enhances the anti-tumor response of multiple
myeloma to chemotherapy through inhibition of tumor
proliferation and angiogenesis. Cancer immunology,
immunotherapy. 2007; 56(3):343-357.

166.	Chesi M, Robbiani DF, Sebag M, Chng WJ, Affer M,
Tiedemann R, Valdez R, Palmer SE, Haas SS, Stewart AK,
Fonseca R, Kremer R, Cattoretti G, et al. AID-dependent
activation of a MYC transgene induces multiple myeloma
in a conditional mouse model of post-germinal center
malignancies. Cancer cell. 2008; 13(2):167-180.

178.	Maiso P, Ocio EM, Garayoa M, Montero JC, Hofmann
F, Garcia-Echeverria C, Zimmermann J, Pandiella A and
San Miguel JF. The insulin-like growth factor-I receptor
inhibitor NVP-AEW541 provokes cell cycle arrest and
apoptosis in multiple myeloma cells. British journal of
haematology. 2008; 141(4):470-482.

167.	Chesi M, Matthews GM, Garbitt VM, Palmer SE, Shortt J,
Lefebure M, Stewart AK, Johnstone RW and Bergsagel PL.
Drug response in a genetically engineered mouse model of
multiple myeloma is predictive of clinical efficacy. Blood.
2012; 120(2):376-385.
168.	Morito N, Yoh K, Maeda A, Nakano T, Fujita A, Kusakabe
M, Hamada M, Kudo T, Yamagata K and Takahashi S.
A novel transgenic mouse model of the human multiple
myeloma chromosomal translocation t(14;16)(q32;q23).
Cancer research. 2011; 71(2):339-348.

179.	Stromberg T, Ekman S, Girnita L, Dimberg LY, Larsson
O, Axelson M, Lennartsson J, Hellman U, Carlson K,
Osterborg A, Vanderkerken K, Nilsson K and JernbergWiklund H. IGF-1 receptor tyrosine kinase inhibition by
the cyclolignan PPP induces G2/M-phase accumulation
and apoptosis in multiple myeloma cells. Blood. 2006;
107(2):669-678.

169.	Richmond A and Su Y. Mouse xenograft models vs GEM
models for human cancer therapeutics. Disease models &
mechanisms. 2008; 1(2-3):78-82.

180.	Lemaire M, Fristedt C, Agarwal P, Menu E, Van
Valckenborgh E, De Bruyne E, Osterborg A, Atadja P,
Larsson O, Axelson M, Van Camp B, Jernberg-Wiklund
H and Vanderkerken K. The HDAC inhibitor LBH589
enhances the antimyeloma effects of the IGF-1RTK
inhibitor picropodophyllin. Clinical cancer research. 2012;
18(8):2230-2239.

170.	Shanks N, Greek R and Greek J. Are animal models
predictive for humans? Philosophy, ethics, and humanities
in medicine. 2009; 4:2.
171.	Vandamme TF. Use of rodents as models of human
diseases. Journal of pharmacy & bioallied sciences. 2014;
6(1):2-9.
172.	Ferrarini M, Steimberg N, Ponzoni M, Belloni D, Berenzi
A, Girlanda S, Caligaris-Cappio F, Mazzoleni G and
Ferrero E. Ex-vivo dynamic 3-D culture of human tissues
in the RCCS bioreactor allows the study of Multiple
Myeloma biology and response to therapy. PloS one. 2013;
8(8):e71613.

181.	Leung-Hagesteijn C, Erdmann N, Cheung G, Keats JJ,
Stewart AK, Reece DE, Chung KC and Tiedemann RE.
Xbp1s-negative tumor B cells and pre-plasmablasts mediate
therapeutic proteasome inhibitor resistance in multiple
myeloma. Cancer cell. 2013; 24(3):289-304.
182.	Van Valckenborgh E, Matsui W, Agarwal P, Lub S, Dehui
X, De Bruyne E, Menu E, Empsen C, van Grunsven
L, Agarwal J, Wang Q, Jernberg-Wiklund H and
Vanderkerken K. Tumor-initiating capacity of CD138- and

173.	Gualberto A and Pollak M. Emerging role of insulinlike growth factor receptor inhibitors in oncology: early
clinical trial results and future directions. Oncogene. 2009;
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

48751

Oncotarget

CD138+ tumor cells in the 5T33 multiple myeloma model.
Leukemia. 2012; 26(6):1436-1439.

Lung Cancer. 2008; 60(2):166-174.
192.	Frassanito MA, De Veirman K, Desantis V, Marzo LD,
Vergara D, Ruggieri S, Annese T, Nico B, Menu E,
Catacchio I, Ria R, Racanelli V, Maffia M, et al. Halting
pro-survival autophagy by TGFbeta inhibition in bone
marrow fibroblasts overcomes bortezomib resistance in
multiple myeloma patients. Leukemia. 2016; 30(3):640648.

183.	Lacy MQ, Alsina M, Fonseca R, Paccagnella ML, Melvin
CL, Yin D, Sharma A, Enriquez Sarano M, Pollak M,
Jagannath S, Richardson P and Gualberto A. Phase I,
pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic study of the antiinsulinlike growth factor type 1 Receptor monoclonal
antibody CP-751,871 in patients with multiple myeloma.
Journal of clinical oncology. 2008; 26(19):3196-3203.

193.	Chitnis MM, Lodhia KA, Aleksic T, Gao S, Protheroe
AS and Macaulay VM. IGF-1R inhibition enhances
radiosensitivity and delays double-strand break repair
by both non-homologous end-joining and homologous
recombination. Oncogene. 2014; 33(45):5262-5273.

184.	U.S.N.I of Health Home - ClinicalTrials.gov. 2000. https://
clinicaltrials.gov/.
185.	Scartozzi M, Bianconi M, Maccaroni E, Giampieri R,
Berardi R and Cascinu S. Dalotuzumab, a recombinant
humanized mAb targeted against IGFR1 for the treatment
of cancer. Current opinion in molecular therapeutics. 2010;
12(3):361-371.

194.	Singh RK, Gaikwad SM, Jinager A, Chaudhury S,
Maheshwari A and Ray P. IGF-1R inhibition potentiates
cytotoxic effects of chemotherapeutic agents in early stages
of chemoresistant ovarian cancer cells. Cancer letters. 2014;
354(2):254-262.

186.	Pollak M. The insulin receptor/insulin-like growth factor
receptor family as a therapeutic target in oncology. Clinical
cancer research. 2012; 18(1):40-50.

195.	Kikuchi J, Koyama D, Wada T, Izumi T, Hofgaard PO,
Bogen B and Furukawa Y. Phosphorylation-mediated EZH2
inactivation promotes drug resistance in multiple myeloma.
The Journal of clinical investigation. 2015; 125(12):43754390.

187.	Bowers LW, Rossi EL, O’Flanagan CH, deGraffenried
LA and Hursting SD. The Role of the Insulin/IGF System
in Cancer: Lessons Learned from Clinical Trials and the
Energy Balance-Cancer Link. Frontiers in endocrinology.
2015; 6:77.

196.	Janssen JA and Varewijck AJ. IGF-IR Targeted Therapy:
Past, Present and Future. Frontiers in endocrinology. 2014;
5:224.

188.	Crudden C, Girnita A and Girnita L. Targeting the IGF1R: The Tale of the Tortoise and the Hare. Frontiers in
endocrinology. 2015; 6:64.

197.	Soh CL, McNeil K, Owczarek CM, Hardy MP, Fabri
LJ, Pearse M, Delaine CA and Forbes BE. Exogenous
administration
of
protease-resistant,
non-matrixbinding IGFBP-2 inhibits tumour growth in a murine
model of breast cancer. British journal of cancer. 2014;
110(12):2855-2864.

189.	Lodhia KA, Tienchaiananda P and Haluska P.
Understanding the Key to Targeting the IGF Axis in
Cancer: A Biomarker Assessment. Frontiers in oncology.
2015; 5:142.
190.	Flanigan SA, Pitts TM, Newton TP, Kulikowski GN, Tan
AC, McManus MC, Spreafico A, Kachaeva MI, Selby
HM, Tentler JJ, Eckhardt SG and Leong S. Overcoming
IGF1R/IR resistance through inhibition of MEK signaling
in colorectal cancer models. Clinical cancer research. 2013;
19(22):6219-6229.

198.	Zhang H, Pelzer AM, Kiang DT and Yee D. Downregulation of type I insulin-like growth factor receptor
increases sensitivity of breast cancer cells to insulin. Cancer
research. 2007; 67(1):391-397.
199.	Heidegger I, Massoner P, Sampson N and Klocker H. The
insulin-like growth factor (IGF) axis as an anticancer target
in prostate cancer. Cancer letters. 2015; 367(2):113-121.

191.	Yeh J, Litz J, Hauck P, Ludwig DL and Krystal GW.
Selective inhibition of SCLC growth by the A12 anti-IGF1R monoclonal antibody correlates with inhibition of Akt.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

48752

Oncotarget

