2376

E D I T O R I A L

Targeted Therapy in Prostate
CancerAre We Our Own
Worst Enemy?
Nancy A. Dawson,

MD

Department of Medicine, Lombardi Comprehensive Cancer Center, Georgetown University,
Washington, DC.

T

See referenced original article on pages 2478–87,
this issue.
Address of reprints: Nancy A. Dawson, MD, Lombardi Comprehensive Cancer Center, Georgetown
University Hospital, Washington, DC 20007;
Fax: (202) 444-9429; E-mail: nad103@gunet.
georgetown.edu
Received June 16, 2008; accepted June 18,
2008.

ª 2008 American Cancer Society

he current management of castrate-resistant prostate cancer
(CRPC) includes second-line hormone manipulations and cytotoxic chemotherapy. Docetaxel, the only chemotherapy drug that
has been approved based on a survival beneﬁt, results in a median
prolongation of life of only 2.5 months.1 New therapies aimed at
improving overall survival clearly constitute an unmet need.
Targeted therapies are emerging as active agents in other malignancies. In just the past few years, the vascular endothelial growth
factor receptor and mammalian target of rapamycin inhibitors have
revolutionized the treatment of metastatic renal cell carcinoma. Targeted therapies currently are being assessed in CRPC, but their development is slow, and the correct targets are not always clear.
Given the propensity for prostate cancer to metastasize to bone,
therapies targeting the bone microenvironment are a logical choice.
Enothelins in the bone microenvironment not only contribute to
preservation of the vicious cycle of tumor migration to bone and its
stimulation through release of various bone-derived growth factors;
they also contribute to the sensation of pain. The endothelin receptor
antagonists primarily block the binding of endothelin-1 (ET-1) to the
endothelin A receptor (ETAR), but they also can block binding to the
endothelin B receptor (ETBR). Binding to these receptors can have
somewhat opposing effects on cancer progression, with ETBR mediating apoptosis and ETAR mediating the stimulation of mitogenesis,
angiogenesis, osteoblast formation, and nocioception.2 Atrasentan is
a selective ETAR antagonist that shows supplementary activity at the
ETBR. Nelson et al previously reported on atrasentan in CRPC in the
metastatic setting.3 In that trial, atrasentan did not reduce the risk of
disease progression relative to placebo despite evidence of biologic
effects on prostate-speciﬁc antigen (PSA) and bone alkaline phosphatase as markers of disease burden.
In their current article, these investigators report on a phase 3,
randomized, placebo-controlled trial of atrasentan in patients with
nonmetastatic CRPC.4 Given the expectation that targeted therapies
are more likely to result in disease stabilization, it is well justiﬁed to
evaluate this drug in a setting of lower tumor burden. On the surface,
the results from their study are negative. The primary endpoint of
time to progression (TTP) was 93 days longer in the atrasentan arm,

DOI 10.1002/cncr.23865
Published online 8 September 2008 in Wiley InterScience (www.interscience.wiley.com).

Editorial/Dawson

but this did not reach statistical signiﬁcance, with a P
value of .288. Nor did the survival difference of 74
days meet statistical signiﬁcance (P ¼.219).
However, on subset analysis, an interesting result
emerges based on geographic distribution. The median time to progression was 590 days in patients
who were treated in the US (US patients) and 847
days in non-US patients. The probable reason
emerges as premature discontinuation of the drug.
US patients were twice as likely to discontinue drug
early compared with non-US patients (40.8% vs
21.9%; P < .001). Although the primary reason given
was adverse events, the median increase in PSA at
the time of discontinuation in the atrasentan arm
was 12.5 ng/mL in the US patients and 20.3 ng/mL
in the non-US patients, suggesting the rising PSA
level was the real trigger to stop the drug. Although
an increase in PSA was not considered disease progression according to the protocol, the discontinuation rate based on PSA progression was 4 times
higher in the US patients (5.3% vs 1.1%). There also
is a hint from this study that atrasentan is interrupting the vicious cycle, with a greater percentage of
patients having new skeletal disease as the reason
for disease progression in the placebo arm (44.3% vs
36.2%) and a 250-day difference in the time to initial
skeletal metastases (1008 days in the atrasentan arm
vs 757 days in the placebo arm); but, again, the difference was not statistically signiﬁcant (P ¼ .103).
So, how should we interpret these results? Should
we abandon atrasentan and the endothelin receptor
antagonists in general as ineffective; or, instead,
should we try to unravel why the study was negative? I
favor the second choice. To analyze the results successfully, hurdles must be overcome if we are to move
these agents forward. Three challenges surface readily:
Would a drug that only targeted ETAR without the
antiapoptotic effects of ETBR antagonism been more
effective? Would a combination of drugs that attack
the bone microenvironment through different
mechanisms improve outcomes? Last, but not least, is
there any way to reverse the current PSA-driven decision making in the treatment of prostate cancer?
ZD4054 is a speciﬁc ETAR antagonist that
demonstrates no detectable inhibition of the ETBR.5
The mature results of a randomized phase 2 trial of
ZD4054 in men with prostate cancer and bone metastases who were pain-free or mildly symptomatic
was presented at the American Society of Clinical
Oncology 2008 Genitourinary Cancers Symposium.6
In total, 312 patients were randomized to ZD4054 at
a dose of 15 mg daily, ZD4054 at a dose of 10 mg
daily, or placebo. It is noteworthy that, in this global
trial, although there was no difference in TTP in the

2377

intent-to-treat population, a prolonged overall survival was observed in the ZD4054 treatment groups
at the time of a planned second analysis. The median overall survival was 23.5 months in the group
treated with ZD4054 at a 15–mg dose and 24.5
months in the group treated with ZD4054 at a dose
of10 mg compared with 17.3 months in the placebo
group (P ¼ .05 and P < .01, respectively, favoring the
2 ZD4054 arms). In that study, the reason for discontinuation of drug/placebo appeared to be similar in
the 3 arms. The criteria for progression in the trial
differed from the currently reported atrasentan study.
The events indicative of progressive disease in the
atrasentan trial were new skeletal or extraskeletal
lesions or an event attributed to metastatic disease
whereas in the ZD4054 trial, progression was deﬁned
as symptoms that required the initiation of a new
therapy, cancer pain that required opiates, progression of soft tissue metastases, or death in the absence of progression. An additional important
difference was that the atrasentan trial allowed
crossover from placebo to drug and the ZD4054 trial
did not, clearly masking any potential survival beneﬁt from atrasentan.
A second important consideration is that the
endothelin receptor antagonists may be more appropriate in combination with other targeted therapies.
Bisphosphonates also interrupt the vicious cycle in
the bone microenvironment by inhibiting osteoclasts
and the release of bone factors that stimulate the
local growth of migrated tumor cells. In a xenograft
model of prostate cancer cells secreting ET-1, zoledronic acid combined with atrasentan had additive
effects on the inhibition of tumor growth and lower
PSA levels compared to the effect of either drug
alone.7 The current Southwest Oncology Group
(SWOG) trial in CRPC assesses the importance of
this potential synergy by randomizing patients to
docetaxel with or without atrasentan with stratiﬁcation for the concomitant use of zoledronic acid.
The ﬁnal and most challenging issue raised by
the atrasentan trial is how to maintain patients on
treatment when PSA (also known as physician/
patient-stimulated anxiety) levels rise. If in fact a
therapy is effective in terms of prolonging survival
but requires longer drug exposure, then how can we
achieve this? What can our non-US colleagues share
in their communication with patients that will facilitate this goal? Is the reality that, in the US, targeted
therapies can be assessed only alone in patients with
end-stage disease to look for glimmers of activity
and that the only studies we can complete are goalong studies, such as the SWOG trial, in which these
agents are added to standard therapy? These ques-

2378

CANCER November 1, 2008 / Volume 113 / Number 9

tions may require global clinical trial think tanks to
answer.
We owe it to our patients to ﬁgure out how best
to help them, because we are certainly co-responsible
for the PSA psychosis that exists. One step certainly
should include mass education to inform individuals
that there are no data to support that ‘PSA only’directed changes in therapy improve patient outcome.
A delay in the initiation of an alternate effective therapy will not make it less likely to work. In the interim,
let us not abandon these targeted drugs; rather, let us
focus on how to design and complete studies that
allow these drugs a fair trial.

3.

REFERENCES

7.

1.

2.

Tannock IF, de Wit R, Berry WR, et al. Docetaxel plus prednisone or mitoxantrone plus prednisone for advanced
prostate cancer. N Engl J Med. 2004;351:1502-1512.
Kopetz ES, Nelson JB, Carducci MA. Endothelin-1 as a target for therapeutic intervention in prostate cancer. Invest
New Drugs. 2002;20:173-182.

4.

5.

6.

Carducci MA, Saad F, Abrahamsson PA, et al. A phase 3
randomized controlled trial of the efﬁcacy and safety of
atrasentan in men with metastatic hormone-refractory
prostate cancer. Cancer. 2007;110:1959-1966.
Nelson JB, Love W, Chin JL, et al. Phase 3, randomized
controlled trial of atrasentan in patients with nonmetastatic hormone-refractory prostate cancer. Cancer. 2008;
113:2478-2487.
Curwen JO, Wilson C. ZD4054: a speciﬁc endothelin A receptor antagonist with potential utility in prostate cancer
and metastatic bone disease [abstract]. Eur J Cancer.
2002;38:S102.
Dawson N, Phung D, Morris T, et al. Impact of the speciﬁc
endothelial A receptor antagonist ZD4054 on overall survival
and bone metastases in patients with hormone-resistant
prostate cancer: results of a phase II trial [abstract]. Presented at the ASCO 2008 Genitourinary Cancers Symposium,
San Francisco, California, February 14-16, 2008. Abstract 7.
Mohammad K, McKenna C, Mison A, et al. Combined
endothelin A receptor antagonist and bisphosphonate
treatment more effectively reduces prostate cancer growth
in bone than either alone [abstract]. Presented at the
American Society for Bone and Mineral Research 27th Annual Meeting, Nashville, Tennessee, September 23-27,
2005. Abstract 1213a.

