1871

COMMENTARY

An Ethical Argument in Support
of Interactions Between
Developing World Countries and
Pharmaceutical/Biotechnology
Companies Involved in Oncology
Drug Development
Maurie Markman,

MD

Clinical Research, The University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas.

A

Address for reprints: Maurie Markman, MD, Clinical Research, The University of Texas M. D.
Anderson Cancer Center, 1515 Holcombe Blvd.,
Houston, TX 77030; Fax: (713) 563-9586; E-mail:
mmarkman@ mdanderson.org
Received September 25, 2007; revision received
November 28, 2007; accepted November 30,
2007.

ª 2008 American Cancer Society

lthough not surprising, it remains both notable and distressing
that an estimated 56% of the world’s overall health burden
occurs in the world’s poorest countries, whereas only 2% of all
global health spending is devoted to these areas.1 The impact of
such disparities is evident in published figures for life expectancy in
the developed versus the developing world and in the simple, and
profoundly disquieting, fact that more than 500,000 women in
developing world countries die during pregnancy and childbirth
each year.1
A recently published highly provocative commentary attempted
to address the question of ‘‘why rich countries should care about
the world’s least healthy peoples?’’2 As noted by Gostin, several
arguments can be advanced regarding the ethical obligations of
those in the developed world to assist in reducing this overwhelming burden,2 but perhaps the most potent is a direct acknowledgment of the self-evident importance of adequate health in providing
all persons in any society with the opportunity (not guarantee) to
live a full, joyous, and productive life, and (conversely) to minimize
the risk of avoidable suffering.
In this regard, it is relevant to stress the conclusion that costeffective strategies for the prevention, early diagnosis, and treatment
of malignant disease surely have the realistic potential to exert a
highly meaningful effect on the burden of human disease (improve
survival and reduce suffering) in the world’s poorest countries.3 For
example, rapidly accumulating evidence strongly supports the utility
of human papillomavirus (HPV) vaccination for the prevention of
cervical cancer, a malignancy resulting in more than 250,000 deaths
worldwide each year, the majority of which occur in developing
nations.4 Furthermore, although several questions remain regarding
optimal use of these vaccines (eg, duration of immunity, inclusion
of both boys and girls), it is most certainly an accurate statement
that the ultimate effectiveness of this novel and potentially
profoundly relevant cancer prevention strategy will depend on the

DOI 10.1002/cncr.23385
Published online 4 March 2008 in Wiley InterScience (www.interscience.wiley.com).

1872

CANCER

May 1, 2008 / Volume 112 / Number 9

ability of governments, organizations, and individual
citizens to resolve complex nonscientific issues, such
as cost, international and local politics, and societal
and religious conflicts with the management of a
sexually transmitted disease.5
Although other arguments can be advanced to
support the involvement of richer nations in the
realm of cancer management of poorer countries, it
is critical to acknowledge that these are far less
altruistic than the previous declaration of a universal
ethical obligation of people to assist others in their
quest to have a reasonable chance to fulfill their
human potential. For example, it is well recognized
that there is currently major interest by the pharmaceutical industry in the conduct of cancer-related
trials in developing world countries. Several reasons
can be cited for this recent development, including
the availability of large patient populations and lower
costs associated with the conduct of clinical studies.6
However, the relative degree of societal benefit
for these financially poorer nations associated with
trial participation (in contrast to the potential direct
clinical benefit for the actual participants), versus
those achieved by the companies themselves and
citizens living in the world’s richer countries, may be
considered ethically problematic. For, it can be
asked, what percentage of the population within a
poor country, which participated in a study that led
to drug approval by a regulatory agency in the developed world, would ever be able to receive that agent,
and share in the documented benefits associated
with its use, outside the setting of a clinical trial?
Thus, one must be concerned that in any scenario
for interactions in the cancer arena between the
world’s richest and poorest nations there is the legitimate potential for exploitation.7
Accepting the current reality that new antineoplastic agents may be far too expensive for the vast
majority of individuals living in the developing world,
are there alternative and truly meaningful rewards
that might be made available to those societies who
participated in these pharmaceutical/biotechnology
company-sponsored studies, independent of the
degree of ultimate drug availability? The answer to
this question is almost certainly Yes because it is
rational to argue there will be no inherent reason
to believe that availability of the particular drug
in question would be the most (or even among
the most) urgent cancer-related needs within the
country.8
For example, as ‘payment’ to the hospital or regional health administration for providing assistance
in research subject recruitment, which must always
be performed in an ethically appropriate manner,

sufficient funds might be made available to buy a
desperately needed linear accelerator (for curative
and palliative radiation), or to fund medications
essential for the treatment and supportive care of
childhood acute leukemia (eg, chemotherapy, bone
marrow colony-stimulating factors, antibiotics),9 provide funding for HPV vaccination,5 or to ensure ethically acceptable terminal cancer care (eg, narcotics,
antiemetics, sedatives).
Another suggestion would be to use these funds
generated from trial participation to support unrelated but critically important local investigatorinitiated clinical cancer research that focuses on
issues directly relevant to the particular country (eg,
the development of cost-effective educational approaches for smoking cessation, cancer-related
screening, and prevention strategies for indigenous
populations). Finally, money made available could be
used to develop a robust clinical trials infrastructure
(eg, data management, Institutional Review Boards,
ongoing research education) that can be employed
across several trials, or even diseases (cancer and
noncancer).10
One could even argue that the more health organizations and personnel within a particular country
assist a pharmaceutical or biotechnology company to
successfully complete a trial in a timely manner the
greater the reward should be to the society in question. It is critical to acknowledge here that this statement does not mean that individual investigators or
the hospital administrative staff should directly benefit from overly aggressive and ethically questionable
accrual onto a trial, because that would pose a clear
and unacceptable conflict-of-interest.
It is essential to note that the rights of individuals asked to participate in a research study must
always be respected. There is a potential risk to such
individuals if there exist the promise of substantial
future funding to a hospital to support important
health initiatives based on the number of individuals
who enter and complete the trial. To ensure that the
rights of research subjects being treated in the current study are respected it may be appropriate in
certain circumstances to have formal external scientific and ethical review of a study, perhaps conducted
by a national or even a multinational oversight committee.
Furthermore, it is reasonable to argue for the
establishment of an international consensus document, similar to other important statements on the
moral conduct of clinical research (eg, Declaration of
Helsinki), which outlines ethically acceptable financial arrangements between industry sponsors and
providers, hospitals, or regional/national health

Drug Development in the Third World/Markman

authorities in the developing world. Participation in
these discussions must certainly include representation from governmental and medical organizations in
these countries; pharmaceutical, biotechnology, and
device companies; and ethicists aware of both theoretical and previously documented concerns with
any proposed strategies and arrangements.
If ethically acceptable guidelines can be developed (eg, relative amount of additional funding for
nontrial purposes based on the extent of trial participation, prioritization of the types of initiatives for
which such funding should be employed in different
regions of the world, and strategies for oversight to
ensure both human subjects’ protection and appropriate use of funds), this document can serve as the
basis for future discussions regarding financial support between industry sponsors and investigators in
developing world countries.
However, to the extent that a population in a
region or a country provides assistance to a company
by agreeing to serve as research subjects in a study
that potentially generates considerable profit for the
company’s stockholders, the citizens of that nation
should receive an appropriate and meaningful measure of benefit (as described earlier).
In summary, it can be rationally argued that ethically valid approaches can be designed to ensure that
either the general health-related or specific oncology-related needs of developing world countries are
not subjugated to the goals of current and future
patients, and pharmaceutical companies, in the
developed world. Although it is obvious that models
for successful interactions will need to be individua-

1873

lized, based on the types of studies (eg, therapeutic,
diagnostic, prevention) and both the practical needs
and political realities of particular countries, serious
and sustained efforts by the research and industry
communities of both developed and developing
countries directed to establishing these paradigms
have the potential to produce enormous benefits for
current and future cancer patients and for all people.

REFERENCES
1.

Schieber GJ, Gottret P, Fleisher LK, et al. Financing global
health: mission unaccomplished. Health Affairs. 2007;26:
921–934.
2. Gostin LO. Why rich countries should care about the
world’s least healthy people. JAMA. 2007;298:89–92.
3. Huerta E. Grey N. Cancer control opportunities in low-and
middle-income countries. CA Cancer J Clin. 2007;57:72–74.
4. Schiffman M, Castle PE, Jeronimo J, Rodriguez AC,
Wacholder S. Human papillomavirus and cervical cancer.
Lancet. 2007;370:890–907.
5. Markman M. Human papillomavirus vaccines to prevent
cervical cancer. Lancet. 2007;369:1837–1839.
6. Bruckbauer S, Theisen C. Cancer in the developing world:
how should care be delivered and research conducted?
J Natl Cancer Inst. 2003;95:1651–1653.
7. Participants in the 2001 Conference on Ethical Aspects of
Research in Developing Countries. Ethics. Fair benefits for
research in developing countries. Science. 2002;298:2133–
2134.
8. Magrath I. Building capacity for cancer control in developing countries: the need for a paradigm shift. Lancet Oncol.
2007;8:562–563.
9. Metzger ML, Howard SC, Ligia CF, et al. Outcome of childhood acute lymphoblastic leukaemia in resource-poor
countries. Lancet. 2003;362:706–708.
10. Markman M. Assuring the ethical conduct of clinical cancer research in the developing world. Cancer. 2006;106:1–3.

