Editorial

Identifying Racial Differences in Nodular
Lymphocyte-Predominant Hodgkin Lymphoma
Christopher R. Flowers, MD, MS1 and Loretta J. Nastoupil, MD2

Nodular lymphocyte-predominant Hodgkin lymphoma (NLPHL) is an uncommon, indolent lymphoma comprising
<10% of all new diagnoses of Hodgkin lymphoma (HL). In their article, Olszewski et al present what to our knowledge is
the first comprehensive analysis of racial disparities in NLPHL.1 This entity is a predominantly male disease with a maleto-female ratio of 3:1 and a ratio of 1.2:1 in African American compared with white individuals.2 NLPHL displays a bimodal age distribution with peaks in childhood and early adulthood with a median age of approximately 30 years, which
is similar to classic HL but bears more similarity clinically to many subtypes of non-HL (NHL) than to classic HL.3
Because of the low frequency of this diagnosis, there are few prospective clinical studies with which to guide clinical management, thereby producing controversies and conflicting data regarding the optimal management of this entity. This lack
of consensus complicates our understanding of whether racial differences in patient management represent variations that
may portend a worse outcome.
The indolent clinical course of NLPHL parallels indolent NHL, such as follicular lymphoma; similarly, malignant
lymphocytic and histiocytic cells are CD20 positive and lack the CD30 or CD15 expression observed in classic HL. However, the pathogenesis of NLPHL may more closely parallel that of aggressive B-cell lymphoma.3 NLPHL is characterized
by a diffuse malignant cell growth pattern notable for the prevalence of T cells and histiocytes, which makes immunohistochemistry staining essential for establishing a diagnosis and distinguishing NLPHL from other B-cell lymphomas such as
T-cell-rich variant of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL).4 NLPHL has a propensity to transform to DLBCL and
one study has demonstrated a clonal relationship between lymphocyte-predominant cells and concurrent or eventual
transformation to DLBCL, suggesting a common cell of origin.5 However, a large retrospective study from the German
Hodgkin Study Group with a median follow-up of 50 months demonstrated that freedom from treatment failure (88%
vs 82%) and overall survival (OS) (96% vs 92%) were better for patients with NLPHL than for those diagnosed with
classic HL.6
Significant variability exists in the treatment strategies used for NLPHL. As Olszewski et al note, the majority of
guidelines are based for the most part on the extrapolation of data from classic HL or retrospective case series; only a few
prospective clinical trials to date have been dedicated specifically to NLPHL.1 Approximately 80% of patients present
with early-stage disease, and several strategies produce meaningful disease control and prolong OS. Although some centers
advocate the use of combined chemotherapy and radiotherapy for patients with early-stage NLPHL, experts and guideline
consensus panels from the United States and Europe have recommended treatment with radiation alone, particularly for
patients with stage IA disease in part because single-institution retrospective studies have failed to demonstrate an
improvement in survival with combined modality therapy compared with radiotherapy alone.4 In these studies, more
intensive initial therapy was associated with greater toxicity without a survival benefit. Surgical resection followed by
observation has been commonly used in pediatric patients who achieve complete remission after surgery with high early
event-free survival and OS, and high salvage rates in patients who develop disease recurrence.4 Because NLPHL demonstrates CD20 expression, rituximab has been explored as a single-agent therapy with a response rate of nearly 100%, but
with approximately 25% of patients experiencing disease recurrence within 4 years.3,4,7 Most commonly, chemotherapy
has been used for patients with advanced-stage NLPHL with regimens similar to those used for treating patients with classic HL or DLBCL.4,8 As noted above, this heterogeneity in treatment options and intermediate outcomes complicates the

Corresponding author: Christopher R. Flowers, MD, MS, Department of Hematology and Oncology, Winship Cancer Institute, Emory University, 1365 Clifton Rd
NE, Bldg B, Ste 4302, Atlanta, GA 30322; Fax: (404) 778-3366; crflowe@emory.edu
1
Department of Hematology and Oncology, Emory University School of Medicine, Winship Cancer Institute, Atlanta, Georgia; 2Department of Lymphoma and
Myeloma, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas.

See referenced original article on pages 3472-80, this issue.
DOI: 10.1002/cncr.29526, Received: May 12, 2015; Accepted: May 20, 2015, Published online July 6, 2015 in Wiley Online Library (wileyonlinelibrary.com)

Cancer

October 1, 2015

3387

Editorial

interpretation of racial differences in the presentation and
treatment of NLPHL. For an individual patient, the selection of a particular treatment approach depends on
patient characteristics such as disease burden, performance status, and comorbid diseases.
Although to our knowledge numerous studies to
date have investigated socioeconomic and racial disparities in the patterns of presentation, treatment, and outcomes for other lymphoid malignancies,9-14 relatively
little has been published regarding racial differences in
these factors for NLPHL. Olszewski et al effectively compared and contrasted the current findings with these prior
studies.1 They used the National Cancer Data Base
(NCDB) to examine what to their knowledge is the largest
cohort of African American patients with NLPHL ever
assembled. Their study adeptly used appropriate analyses
of one of the largest available clinical data sets of patients
with NLPHL to describe the patterns of presentation and
outcome that occur by race, sex, and age. Although the
NCDB provides cancer registry information for >70% of
the new cancer cases in the United States, it is not a
population-based registry, thereby limiting the conclusions that can be drawn from this data set regarding incidence statistics, nor can these results be generalized to the
entire population. Similar to previous findings from other
investigators examining NHL subtypes, Olszewski et al1
found that black patients were on average younger than
white patients and had unfavorable socioeconomic characteristics. They also found that black patients were more
often female, and were more likely to have the axillary
lymph nodes as the primary site of disease. Although
Olszewski et al proposed hypotheses regarding how these
features may portend differences in the etiology of NLPHL
by race, at the current time these remain speculative.
Recent pooled case-control studies performed by the
International Lymphoma Epidemiology Consortium
(InterLymph) examining genome-wide associations and
epidemiological risk factors provide an enhanced understanding of lymphoma subtype-specific risk factors that
include family history, genetics, medical history, lifestyle
factors, and occupations for a variety of lymphomas.15-17
This series of studies suggests a complex interaction
between host genetics, environment, and epidemiological
risk factors that contributes to lymphomagenesis in ways
not fully understood. Large collaborative epidemiological
studies for NLPHL similar to the recently completed
InterLymph Subtypes Project for NHL are needed to
delineate what the implications of racial differences in
presentation may mean for the etiology of NLPHL. In
addition, similarities in the race-specific patterns of
3388

presentation for NLPHL and some NHL subtypes may
be important for understanding etiologic commonalities
and heterogeneity that also were recently explored by
InterLymph.18
However, patient cases and controls in the InterLymph studies and other similar analyses have been
almost entirely comprised of individuals of European
ancestry, and therefore it is unclear whether the risk factors identified are generalizable to populations with a different racial/ethnic composition. In general, risk factors
for lymphomas and NLPHL among racial and ethnic
minorities are not well described. Future analyses would
be necessary to determine the population genetics and epidemiological factors required for adequate lymphoma risk
prediction in minority populations. Such approaches also
may identify novel preventive and therapeutic targets for
NLPHL. Although population-based cancer registry data
have been useful for describing the epidemiology of lymphoma as a unified entity, identifying risk factors for individual NHL and HL subtypes has been challenging given
the relatively low number of patients affected by each subtype. Large national and international collaborations are
needed to adequately characterize the genetic and epidemiological factors associated with racial differences in
NLPHL and other lymphomas. InterLymph and other
large cohort studies involving consortia of lymphoma
investigators currently are underway to fill this void.
Also of interest is that despite the differences
observed, the authors found no significant difference by
race with regard to stage distribution or survival for
patients with NLPHL. This contrasts with the racial disparities identified for other lymphomas.9-14 Collectively,
these studies indicate that for other B-cell malignancies,
African American patients more commonly present with
advanced-stage disease, less commonly received chemoimmunotherapy, and experienced worse survival. For example, despite the high cure rates for DLBCL, outcomes
remain heterogeneous and are significantly worse for
patients who are African American, uninsured, or have an
activated B-cell-like biological subtype or a high International Prognostic Index score. Based on these and other
publications, racial/ethnic, biological, and socioeconomic
factors interact to influence survival among patients with
lymphoma. However, there currently is no unifying, comprehensive model that incorporates these parameters to
aid in assessing prognosis. For patients with NLPHL,
developing prognostic models that incorporate the differences in race described by Olszewski et al is further complicated by the indolent nature of the disease and the
heterogeneity of treatment strategies used for patients
Cancer

October 1, 2015

Racial Differences in NLP Hodgkin Lymphoma/Flowers and Nastoupil

with this lymphoma subtype. Despite these challenges,
the authors present what to our knowledge are the first
insights into the nature of racial differences in NLPHL
and provide useful inroads for future studies of epidemiology and outcomes research for this uncommon lymphoid
malignancy.
FUNDING SUPPORT
Supported in part by National Cancer Institute grant R21
CA158686 to Dr. Flowers and an American Society of Hematology
Clinical Scholars Award to Dr. Nastoupil.

CONFLICT OF INTEREST DISCLOSURES
Dr. Flowers has served as a paid consultant for Spectrum, Celgene,
Optum Rx, and Seattle Genetics and as an unpaid consultant for
Genentech, Biogen Idec, Roche, and Millennium/Takeda Pharmaceuticals for work performed outside of the current study. He has
also received research funding from AbbVie, Acerta, Celgene,
Gilead Sciences, Infinity Pharmaceuticals, Janssen Pharmaceuticals,
Millennium/Takeda Pharmaceuticals, Spectrum, and Pharmacyclics and has received payment from Clinical Care Options and
Educational Concepts for the development of educational presentations outside of the scope of the current study. Dr. Nastoupil has
served as a consultant for Celgene and has received research funding
from Janssen Pharmaceuticals and TG Therapeutics and honoraria
from Genentech/Roche for work performed outside of the current
study.

REFERENCES
1. Olszewski AJ, Shrestha R, Cook NM. Race-specific features and
outcomes of nodular lymphocyte-predominant Hodgkin lymphoma:
analysis of the National Cancer Data Base. Cancer. 2015;121:34723480.
2. Goel A, Fan W, Patel AA, Devabhaktuni M, Grossbard ML.
Nodular lymphocyte predominant hodgkin lymphoma: biology,
diagnosis and treatment. Clin Lymphoma Myeloma Leuk. 2014;14:
261-270.
3. Fanale M. Lymphocyte-predominant Hodgkin lymphoma: what is
the optimal treatment? Hematology Am Soc Hematol Educ Program.
2013;2013:406-413.

Cancer

October 1, 2015

4. Advani RH, Hoppe RT. How I treat nodular lymphocyte
predominant Hodgkin lymphoma. Blood. 2013;122:4182-4188.
5. Wickert RS, Weisenburger DD, Tierens A, Greiner TC, Chan WC.
Clonal relationship between lymphocytic predominance Hodgkin’s
disease and concurrent or subsequent large-cell lymphoma of B lineage. Blood. 1995;86:2312-2320.
6. Nogova L, Reineke T, Brillant C, et al. Lymphocyte-predominant
and classical Hodgkin’s lymphoma: a comprehensive analysis from
the German Hodgkin Study Group. J Clin Oncol. 2008;26:434-439.
7. Advani RH, Horning SJ, Hoppe RT, et al. Mature results of a
phase II study of rituximab therapy for nodular lymphocytepredominant Hodgkin lymphoma. J Clin Oncol. 2014;32:912-918.
8. Fanale MA, Younes A. Nodular lymphocyte predominant Hodgkin’s
lymphoma. Cancer Treat Res. 2008;142:367-381.
9. Flowers CR, Fedewa SA, Chen AY, et al. Disparities in the early
adoption of chemoimmunotherapy for diffuse large B-cell lymphoma
in the United States. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2012;21:
1520-1530.
10. Flowers CR, Shenoy PJ, Borate U, et al. Examining racial
differences in diffuse large B-cell lymphoma presentation and survival. Leuk Lymphoma. 2013;54:268-276.
11. Han X, Jemal A, Flowers CR, Sineshaw H, Nastoupil LJ, Ward E.
Insurance status is related to diffuse large B-cell lymphoma survival.
Cancer. 2014;120:1220-1227.
12. Nabhan C, Byrtek M, Taylor MD, et al. Racial differences in
presentation and management of follicular non-Hodgkin lymphoma
in the United States: report from the National LymphoCare Study.
Cancer. 2012;118:4842-4850.
13. Shenoy PJ, Malik N, Nooka A, et al. Racial differences in the
presentation and outcomes of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma in the
United States. Cancer. 2011;117:2530-2540.
14. Shenoy PJ, Malik N, Sinha R, et al. Racial differences in the
presentation and outcomes of chronic lymphocytic leukemia and
variants in the United States. Clin Lymphoma Myeloma Leuk. 2011;
11:498-506.
15. Cerhan JR, Kricker A, Paltiel O, et al. Medical history, lifestyle,
family history, and occupational risk factors for diffuse large B-cell
lymphoma: the InterLymph Non-Hodgkin Lymphoma Subtypes
Project. J Natl Cancer Inst Monogr. 2014;2014:15-25.
16. Cerhan JR, Berndt SI, Vijai J, et al. Genome-wide association study
identifies multiple susceptibility loci for diffuse large B cell
lymphoma. Nat Genet. 2014;46:1233-1238.
17. Linet MS, Vajdic CM, Morton LM, et al. Medical history, lifestyle,
family history, and occupational risk factors for follicular lymphoma:
the InterLymph Non-Hodgkin Lymphoma Subtypes Project. J Natl
Cancer Inst Monogr. 2014;2014:26-40.
18. Morton LM, Slager SL, Cerhan JR, et al. Etiologic heterogeneity
among non-Hodgkin lymphoma subtypes: the InterLymph NonHodgkin Lymphoma Subtypes Project. J Natl Cancer Inst Monogr.
2014;2014:130-144.

3389

