Research Article

Increased Susceptibility of Breast Cancer Cells to Stress Mediated
Inhibition of Protein Synthesis
1

1

1

2

1,3

Shehla Pervin, An H. Tran, Shaghayegh Zekavati, Jon M. Fukuto, Rajan Singh,
1,2,4
and Gautam Chaudhuri

1
Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, David Geffen School of Medicine at University of California, Los Angeles; 2Department of
Molecular and Medical Pharmacology; 3Division of Endocrinology and RCMI Molecular Medicine Core Laboratory at Charles Drew
University of Medicine and Science; and 4Jonsson Comprehensive Cancer Center, Los Angeles, California

Abstract
Protein synthesis is a tightly controlled process, and its
deregulation plays an important role in tumorigenesis.
Protein synthesis remains poorly understood with very few
well-identified validated targets for therapeutic purposes. In
this study, we use nitric oxide (NO), which suppresses protein
synthesis by inactivating eukaryotic initiation factor 2-A
(eIF2-A), to examine the mechanism by which low and high
oxidative stress inhibits protein synthesis. In breast cancer
cells, low NO stress induced heme-regulated inhibitor (HRI)
activation, which facilitated gradual decline in short half-life
proteins. High NO stress induced HRI and protein kinase R
(PKR) activation, leading to a sharp decline in protein
synthesis as accessed by a decline in short and long half-life
proteins and dramatic morphologic changes. In contrast,
human mammary epithelial (HME) and Ras transfected
untransformed HME (MCF-10A1 neo N) cells were less susceptible to NO-induced inhibition of protein synthesis and
cytostasis. Our results suggest that NO-induced cytostasis in
breast cancer cells was due to PKR activation and increased
phosphorylation of eIF2-A, whereas the reduced susceptibility
of normal mammary epithelial cells to NO could be due to
the inaccessibility of PKR, which is bound to inhibitor p58.
[Cancer Res 2008;68(12):4862–74]

Introduction
Protein synthesis is a tightly regulated process that plays a critical
role in proliferation and differentiation (1, 2). Raf/mitogen-activated
protein kinase (MAPK)/extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK)
kinase (MEK)/ERK1/2 and phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K)/
Akt are the prominent signaling cascades that deregulate mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR), a master regulator of protein
synthesis and its downstream specific translation factors, like eIF4E
and p70 S6 kinase (3, 4). Deregulation of proliferation pathways and
protein synthesis has been strongly implicated in the pathogenesis
of cancer and metastasis (5–7). In spite of intense research, protein
synthesis is poorly understood with little or no success to targeted
therapeutic intervention. It is recently becoming evident that capdependent protein synthesis pathway is an integrator and amplifier
of many essential oncogenic signals (8). Radiation therapy has
been found to act on cancer cells largely due to generation of

Requests for reprints: Shehla Pervin, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology,
David Geffen School of Medicine at University of California, Los Angeles, 13-952 Factor
Building, 650 Charles Young Drive, South, Los Angeles, CA 90095. Phone: 310-794-5793;
Fax: 310-206-5991; E-mail: spervin@mednet.ucla.edu.
I2008 American Association for Cancer Research.
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-0074

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (12). June 15, 2008

reactive oxygen species, which also induce normal tissue toxicity
(9). One of the areas that remain unexplored is the sensitivity of
initiation of protein synthesis in untransformed and cancer cells to
various oxidative stresses. In this study, we use nitric oxide (NO),
which is a potent bioactive signaling molecule (10–13), to examine
the effect of low and high oxidative stress on protein synthesis in
breast cancer and normal mammary epithelial cells. NO has been
found to inhibit the initiation steps of protein synthesis in a number
of cell types by phosphorylating and inactivating eukaryotic
initiation factor 2-a (eIF2-a; refs. 14, 15).
We have previously reported that NO (released by 1 mmol/L
DETA-NONOate) treatment of malignant breast cancer cell line
MDA-MB-231 reduces the cyclin D1/retinoblastoma signaling to
induce cytostasis (16). This NO-induced cytostasis was due to
inhibition of protein synthesis resulting in the decline of cyclin D1,
a short half-life protein. In this study, we took advantage of the
availability of DETA-NONOate because it is a soluble chemical
compound that enabled us to quantitate high and low stress levels.
The amount of high and low NO stress was kept within the range
that activated macrophages produce in vivo (17). To simulate the
range of NO (1–2 Amol/L) produced by activated macrophages,
breast cancer cells and normal mammary epithelial were treated
with 1 or 2mmol/L DETA-NONOate, a long-acting NO donor with
a half-life of 20 hours. DETA-NONOate at 1 mmol/L release
0.5 Amol/L NO, which was used to induce low stress, whereas
2 mmol/L of the donor was chosen to induce high NO stress to
cells (16, 17). We found that breast cancer cells with low NO stress
induced a small up-regulation of phosphorylated eIF2-a (p-eIF2-a)
levels, which led to the decline in short half-life proteins, whereas
high NO stress induced a prominent increase in p-eIF2-a and
induced decline of both short and long half-life proteins. In
contrast, human mammary epithelial (HME) and Ras transfected
HME (MCF-10A1 neo N) cells were less susceptible to NO-induced
inhibition of protein synthesis and cytostasis.
We conclude that protein synthesis in breast cancer cells are
more susceptible to NO-induced stress, leading to protein kinase R
(PKR) activation and inhibition of protein synthesis through
phosphorylation of eIF2-a compared with normal mammary
epithelial cells.

Materials and Methods
Materials. DETA-NONOate, SNAP, ODQ, and 2-(4-carboxyphenyl)-4,4,5,5tetramethyl-1-oxyl-3-oxide (cPTIO) were purchased from Cayman Biochemicals. Actinomycin D, hydrogen peroxide, cycloheximide, DTT,
leupeptin, aprotinin, phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride (PMSF), hemin, 2aminopurine, ponceau S solution, and protein A-Sepharose beads were
purchased from Sigma. All of the cell culture media were purchased from
Mediatech, Inc. Rabbit polyclonal anti–phosphorylated Akt (pAkt; 559029)
was from PharMingen, BD Biosciences. ERK1/2 MAPK (9102) antibody was

4862

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Breast Cancer Cytostasis and Protein Kinase R
from New England Biolabs. Cyclin D1, Akt, ornithine decarboxylase (ODC),
cyclin-dependent kinase 4 (CDK4), cyclin E, eIF2-a, and ERK1/2 antibodies
were from Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Inc. Phosphorylated mTOR, p-eIF4E,
phosphorylated p70s6k, pAkt, heme-regulated inhibitor (HRI), p-eIF2-a, p58,
and phosphorylated ERK1/2 (p-ERK1/2) were from Cell Signaling
Technology. Rabbit anti–phosphorylated PKR (pPKR; pT451) was obtained
from Invitrogen BioSource. Glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase
(GAPDH) was purchased from Chemicon. Tran 35S label was from MP
Biomedicals. PKR antibody was purchased from Sigma.
Cell culture. Human breast cancer cell lines MDA-MB-231, MDAMB-468, and MCF-7 were obtained from American Type Culture Collection.
MDA-MB-231 and MCF-7 were cultured in DMEM containing sodium
pyruvate, 10 mmol/L nonessential amino acids, 2 mmol/L L-glutamine,
1 Ag/mL insulin, and 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS). MDA-MB-468 were
cultured in DMEM containing 10 mmol/L nonessential amino acids,
2 mmol/L L-glutamine, 1 Ag/mL insulin, and 10% FBS without sodium
pyruvate. HME was obtained from Cambrex Bio Sciences. MCF-10A1(R)
cells, a spontaneously immortalized untransformed HME cell line (MCF10A transformed with H-Ras oncogene), was obtained from Robert J. Pauley
(Barbara Ann Karmanos Cancer Institute). HME and MCF-10A1(R) cells
were cultured in DMEM/Ham’s F-12 (1:1) supplemented with 5% equine
serum, 10 mmol/L HEPES, 10 Ag/mL insulin, 20 ng/mL epidermal growth
factor, 100 ng/mL cholera enterotoxin, and 0.5 Ag/mL hydrocortisone. For
experimental purposes, cells were grown in 5% FBS, allowed to seed
overnight, and treated with drugs for various time periods.
Cytostasis assay. Cells (7.5  105 per well) were seeded in six-well plates.
After overnight seeding, the medium was changed and fresh drugs were
added. The cells were collected from 0 to 24 h, viability was determined by
trypan blue exclusion method, and cells were counted on a hemocytometer.
Cell cycle analysis. Cells suspended in hypotonic DNA staining buffer
(0.1% sodium citrate/0.3% Triton X-100/0.01% propidium iodide/0.005%
RNase A) were incubated for 15 min at 4jC and subjected to fluorescenceactivated cell sorting (FACS) to analyze the percentage of cells in the
different phases of the cell cycle (16).
Measurement of total protein synthesis by metabolic labeling. MDAMB-231 cells (2  106) were plated overnight in media containing DMEM
and 5% FBS. Cells treated with or without DETA-NONOate (1 or 2mmol/L)
for 6 or 16 h were starved for 3 h in methionine-cysteine–free media (Life
Technologies-Bethesda Research Laboratories), after which they were
labeled with 100 ACi/mL of a mixture of [35S]methionine for 4 h. After
removal of the radioactive media, the cells were collected, washed twice
with PBS, and lysed on ice for 30 min in 1 mL of lysis buffer [10 mmol/L
Tris-HCl buffer (pH 7.4)/150 mmol/L NaCl/1 mmol/L EDTA (pH 8.0)/0.1%
(v/v) Triton X-100] containing 0.2 mmol/L PMSF, 1 Amol/L pepstatin A, and
1 Amol/L leupeptin. Cell lysates were clarified by centrifugation at 2,200  g
for 5 min, and the protein concentrations of the supernatant was
determined using Protein Assay Dye Reagent Concentrate (Bio-Rad
Laboratories, Inc.). Equal amounts of lysates were spotted on Whatman
3MM and washed with TCA. Proteins with incorporated [35S]methionine
were measured in a scintillation counter.
Western blot analysis. Cells were lysed in cell lysis buffer containing
50 mmol/L HEPES (pH 7.5; 1 mmol/L DTT, 150 mmol/L NaCl, 1 mmol/L
EDTA, 0.1% Tween 20, 10% glycerol, 10 mmol/L h-glycerophosphate,
1 mmol/L NaF, 0.1 mmol/L orthovanadate, 10 Ag/mL leupeptin, 10 Ag/mL
aprotinin, and 0.1 mmol/L PMSF) and incubated at 4jC for 30 min for
analysis of cytosolic proteins. Protein concentration was measured using
Bio-Rad protein assay reagent. For analysis of total cellular protein, the cells
were lysed in radioimmunoprecipitation assay (RIPA) buffer (50 mmol/L
Tris-HCl, 150 mmol/L NaCl, 1% Nonidet P-40, and 0.5% sodium
deoxycholate) containing 0.5% SDS, and protein concentrations were
measured using bicinchoninic acid dye concentrate (Pierce). For denaturing
gels, lysates (30 Ag) were boiled in Laemmli sample buffer containing hmercaptoethanol and resolved electrophoretically on 10% SDS-polyacrylamide gel. For native gels, the lysates (30 Ag) were treated with Laemmli
sample buffer without h-mercaptoethanol and loaded on 4–20% gradient
polyacrylamide gel without boiling. The gels were electrotransferred to a
polyvinylidine difluoride membrane (Bio-Rad) using a tank blot procedure

www.aacrjournals.org

(Bio-Rad Mini Protean II). The membranes were incubated with various
primary antibodies (1:1,000 dilution) and respective horseradish peroxidase–linked to secondary antibody (1:1,000 dilution; Amersham Corp.) for
1 h. Immunoreactive bands were visualized by enhanced chemiluminescence detection system (Amersham).
Immunoprecipitation assay. Cells were lysed in lysis buffer containing
50 mmol/L Tris-HCl (pH 8.0), 300 mmol/L NaCl, 10 mmol/L MgCl2,
0.5% Igepal Ca-630 (Sigma), 1 mmol/L EDTA, and antiprotease cocktail
(Roche). The supernatant (500 Ag) was precleared by incubation for 4 h at
4jC with protein A/G-agarose (Santa Cruz Biotechnology) and with
protein A/G-agarose preincubated with preimmune serum. The precleared
lysate was adjusted to 150 mmol/L NaCl and 0.25% Igepal Ca-630 and
subjected to overnight immunoprecipitation on a rotating wheel at 4jC
using rabbit antiserum or anti-HRI or PKR antibody. The mixtures were
incubated further for 4 h at 4jC with 50 AL of protein A/G-agarose.
After five washes in 50 mmol/L Tris-HCl (pH 8.0), 0.25% Igepal Ca-630,
1 mmol/L EDTA, and 150 mmol/L NaCl, the immunoprecipitates were
analyzed by Western blot.
Inhibition of PKR by small interfering RNA. Synthetic small
interfering RNA (siRNA) targeting human PKR (gene accession number
NM_002759, Gene ontology, 4694) in MDA-MB-231 cells and random oligo
VIII as a control for nonspecific siRNA effects were purchased from
Dharmacon Research. Amaxa nucleofecter was used for the transfection
(f85% efficiency) for 24 h, after which the cells were treated with and
without DETA-NONOate for another 24 h. We also used another PKR siRNA
(Dharmacon, NM_002759, Gene ontology, 6915) in some of our experiments
to confirm the specificity of PKR siRNA and rule out the possibility of
off-target siRNA effects in our experiments.
Cell fractionation. The cell fractionation was done using nuclear and
cytoplasmic extraction reagents from Pierce. The fractionation was done
according to the manufacturer’s protocol.
Statistical analysis. Each value represents the mean F SE of at least
three separate experiments in each group. Comparisons of means were
made by using Student’s t test for unpaired values. When more than two
means were compared, an ANOVA with repeated measurements was used.
If a significant P value was found, Scheffé’s test for multiple comparisons
was used to identify differences among groups. Values were considered
significant when P was <0.05.

Results
Low and high NO stresses affect protein synthesis at
different levels. It is well established that the phosphorylation
of eIF2-a, a key player in protein synthesis, attenuates the rate of
translation of capped cellular mRNAs (8, 18). NO has been found in
a few cell types to suppress protein synthesis by eliciting the
phosphorylation of eIF2-a (14). We initially assessed the effect of
low and high NO stress on eIF2-a and total protein synthesis
in breast cancer cell line MDA-MB-231. The level of cyclin D1, with
its short half-life, was used as an indicator of protein synthesis.
Low NO stress as generated by 1 mmol/L DETA-NONOate induced
f2.1-fold up-regulation of p-eIF2-a levels and f50% reduction of
cyclin D1 levels at 16 hours (Fig. 1A). However, a prominent
f5-fold increase of p-eIF2-a levels and a sharper decline of cyclin
D1 (f80%) were observed with high NO stress as generated by
2 mmol/L DETA-NONOate at 16 hours (Fig. 1A). The levels of eIF2a remained unaltered in all the above treatments (Fig. 1A). We also
found that pretreatment of cells with an NO quencher, cPTIO
(50 Amol/L), attenuated the effect of low and high NO stress of
eIF2-a (data not shown).
To determine if NO-induced stress inactivated the translational
machinery to induce a global decline of protein synthesis, cells
pretreated with DETA-NONOate (1 and 2 mmol/L) were metabolically labeled with [35S]methionine for 4 hours. Incorporation of

4863

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (12). June 15, 2008

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

Figure 1. A , high and low NO stress induced differential increase of p-eIF2-a levels and decrease in cyclin D1 levels, whereas eIF2-a levels remained unaltered.
Left, MDA-MB-231 cells were treated with DETA-NONOate (1 or 2 mmol/L) and prepared for immunoblot analysis at 24 h. The membrane was probed with cyclin D1,
p-eIF2-a, eIF2-a, and GAPDH antibodies. Results are representative of three different experiments. Right, arbitrary densitometric units (ADU ) of A ; columns,
mean of three different experiments; bars, SE. *, P V 0.02; **, P V 0.001 compared with control untreated p-eIF2-a; #, P V 0.02; ##, P V 0.001 compared with control
untreated cyclin D1 group. B, high NO stress induced sharper decline in protein synthesis. MDA-MB-231 cells were treated with DETA-NONOate (1 or 2 mmol/L)
before exposure to [35S]methionine and [35S]cysteine. The cells were harvested at 6 and 16 h, as described in Materials and Methods. The labeled proteins were
measured with a scintillation counter. Results are representative of three different experiments. *, P V 0.02; **, P V 0.005 compared with control untreated cells.
C, left, low NO stress induced decline in the levels of short half-life proteins but not long half-life proteins. MDA-MB-231 cells were treated with DETA-NONOate
(1 mmol/L) at different time points and prepared for Western blot analysis, as described in Materials and Methods. The membrane was probed with cyclin D1, c-myc,
ODC, cyclin E, CDK4, and GAPDH antibodies. Results are representative of three different experiments. Right, high NO stress induced decline in the levels of short and
long half-life proteins. MDA-MB-231 cells were treated with DETA-NONOate (2 mmol/L) at different time points and prepared for Western blot analysis. The membrane
was probed with cyclin D1, cyclin E, and GAPDH antibodies. Results are representative of three different experiments. D, high NO stresses induced morphologic
changes in MDA-MB-231 cells. Left, MDA-MB-231 cells were treated with and without DETA-NONOate (1 and 2 mmol/L). Cell numbers for 1 and 2 mmol/L NO–treated
cells were comparable. After 24 h, cells were photographed with LEICA DM IRBE microscope at 10 magnification. Results are representative of three different
experiments. Right, high NO stress induced increase in G1 phage of cell cycle. FACS analysis of control, 1, and 2 mmol/L DETA-NONOate–treated MDA-MB-231 cells
at 24 h. The cells were prepared for FACS analysis, as described in Materials and Methods, and analyzed in a FACSCalibur flow cytometer. The number of
cells in each phase of the cell cycle was obtained by MODFIT software. Results are expressed as a mean of three different experiments. *, P V 0.05 compared with
untreated control without DETA-NONOate treatment.

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (12). June 15, 2008

4864

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Breast Cancer Cytostasis and Protein Kinase R

the labeled methionine in newly synthesized protein was measured
by liquid scintillation counter. Low and high NO stress led to a
f40% and 85% decline in labeled proteins, respectively, at 16 hours
compared with untreated cells (Fig. 1B). Because the above
experiments indicated that NO induced a global decline in protein
synthesis, we assessed the levels of cyclin D1, other cyclins, CDKs
and proteins with a similar half-life. In MDA-MB-231 cells, low NO
stress induced a down-regulation of short half-life proteins, like
ODC and C-Myc, whereas levels of longer half-life proteins (cyclin E
and CDK4) remained unaltered (Fig. 1C, left). High NO stress
(2 mmol/L DETA-NONOate), however, led to a sharp decline in
cyclin D1, whereas cyclin E, a long half-life protein was also
reduced by 50% (Fig. 1C, right).
We further examined the effect of NO stress on cell proliferation.
We found that both low and high NO stress induced cytostasis, as
there was no increase in cell number, which was observed as early
as 16 hours (data not shown). However, there was a distinct
difference in the effect on the cellular morphology between the
levels of NO stress. With low levels of NO stress, the cells were
cytostatic but retained the flattened morphology of control cell,
whereas with high NO stress, the cytostatic cells changed their
flattened morphology to become round (Fig. 1D, left). In the cell
cycle analysis, we observed that with low and high NO stress, there
was a 20% to 22% increase in G1 cell cycle arrest (Fig. 1D, right).
Treatment of MCF-7 and MDA-MB-468 with low and high NO
stress also increased p-eIF2-a levels and reduced protein synthesis
(data not shown).
Low NO stress activated HRI, whereas high NO stress also
activated PKR in breast cancer cells. We further examined the
kinases that are upstream of eIF2-a to understand the mechanism
by which low and high NO stress differentially inactivates eIF2-a.
Specific stresses, such as oxidative stress, heme deprivation, or viral
infection in mammalian cells, have been found to phosphorylate
eIF2-a via four upstream kinases: double-stranded RNA-dependent
PKR, HRI, general control nonderepressible-2, and double-stranded
RNA-activated protein kinase–like ER kinase (19, 20). Because NO
has an affinity for heme, we initially examined whether HRI
contributed to NO-induced up-regulation of p-eIF2-a levels and cell
cycle arrest in breast cancer cells. HRI is reported to be present in
an inactive closed conformation under normal conditions. Stress or
appropriate stimuli induces autophosphorylation of HRI and its
maturation to an open-active configuration (21–25). Low amounts
of active HRI were detected in the cytosolic fraction of MDA-MB231 cells, and NO (low and high stress) increased these levels by
24 hours (Fig. 2A, left). Similarly, NO treatment also induced
activation of HRI in MDA-MB-468 and MCF-7 cells (data not shown).
To access the role of NO-induced activation of HRI in up-regulating
p-eIF2-a, HRI was rendered inactive with carbon monoxide (CO)
or hemin (data not shown), both of which have been shown to
inhibit HRI activation (22, 23, 26). Cells pretreated with CORM A1
(500 Amol/L), a CO-donor, attenuated the increase in p-eIF2-a and
decline in cyclin D1 by low NO stress (Fig. 2A, right). Densitometric
quantitation of increase in p-eIF2-a and decline in cyclin D1 by low
NO stress is shown in Fig. 2B. However, CORM-A1 or hemin
treatment could not attenuate the high levels of p-eIF2-a seen with
high NO stress (data not shown). This suggested an involvement of
additional kinases in high NO stress–induced stimulation of eIF2-a.
PKR, a serine/threonine protein kinase, phosphorylates eIF2-a
and is overexpressed in human breast cancer (27, 28). We assessed
the role of PKR in low and high NO-induced inhibition of cell
proliferation. PKR was analyzed on native PAGE gels, where both

www.aacrjournals.org

the inactive monomeric and active dimeric forms of PKR could be
detected in MDA-MB-231 and MDA-MB-468 cells after 16 hours of
treatment with high NO (2 mmol/L DETA-NONOate; Fig. 2C, top).
This dimeric form of PKR at high NO was associated with
phosphorylation of PKR in human breast cancer cells (Fig. 2C,
bottom), whereas phosphorylated PKR was not detected in normal
HME cells (data not shown). Low NO (1 mmol/L DETA-NONOate)
stress up-regulated the cytosolic monomeric forms of PKR by
f2-fold in MDA-MB-231 and MDA-MB-468 without significant
dimeric forms, whereas in normal mammary epithelial MCF10A1(R) cells, we were unable to detect either forms of PKR
(Fig. 2C, top). We also found that these cell lines when repeatedly
treated with SNAP, another NO donor, there was significant upregulation of dimeric forms of PKR (data not shown). We next
assessed whether PKR was associated with eIF2-a in these breast
cancer cells after NO treatment. We observed that NO treatment of
both MDA-MB-231 and MDA-MB-468 cells increased association of
PKR with eIF2-a, as determined by immunoprecipitation (Fig. 2D,
left). To determine the role of PKR activation in the phosphorylation of eIF2-a during NO treatment, PKR was inactivated by
2-aminopurine, a pharmacologic inhibitor of PKR (29). Pretreatment with 2-aminopurine attenuated high NO stress–induced
increase in p-eIF2-a levels by f55% in MDA-MB-231 cells (Fig. 2D,
right). Similar results were obtained in MCF-7 and MDA-MB-468
cells, where 2-aminopurine pretreatment also attenuated the
increase in p-eIF2-a (data not shown). In addition, we assessed
whether high NO stress–induced increase of p-eIF2-a could be
completely attenuated by inhibition of both PKR and HRI in MDAMB-231 cells. Cells were pretreated with the 2-aminopurine (PKR
inhibitor) and hemin (HRI inhibitor) before they were exposed to
NO. We found that while high NO stress up-regulated p-eIF2-a
levels, pretreatment with 2-aminopurine and hemin attenuated the
increase in p-eIF2-a levels to near control (data not shown).
These results showed that HRI was activated by both low and
high NO stress and PKR was activated only by high stress, leading
to low and high levels of p-eIF2-a, respectively.
Breast cancer cells were more susceptible to high NO stress–
induced inhibition of protein synthesis compared with normal
cells. To further validate the exclusive role of PKR in mediating the
effects of high NO stress on protein synthesis, we used PKR siRNA
to specifically reduce PKR levels in breast cancer cells. PKR siRNA
induced a f70% decline in PKR levels after 48 hours, as accessed
by immunoblot analysis (Fig. 3A). PKR siRNA-treated cells, when
further exposed to high stress, did not increase in p-eIF2-a levels,
which contrasts to f2-fold increase found with random siRNA
treatment (Fig. 3A). NO induced a sharp decline in cyclin D1 levels
in random siRNA-treated cells, which was found attenuated in PKR
siRNA-treated cells (Fig. 3A). Further examination of NO-induced
cytostasis in PKR and random siRNA-treated cells showed that NO
induced only f25% decline in proliferation of PKR siRNA-treated
cells compared with f50% decline in random siRNA-treated cells
(Fig. 3B, left). Morphologic changes associated with high NO stress
were also found attenuated with PKR siRNA treatment (data not
shown). We also examined the reversibility of NO-induced cell cycle
arrest in random and PKR siRNA-treated cells. Cells were treated
with low and high NO stress for 24 hours before the media were
changed and cells were allowed to recover for another 24 hours.
Whereas recovery of random siRNA-treated cells from low NO
stress was reversible, recovery from high NO stress was irreversible
even until 48 hours (Fig. 3B, right). In PKR siRNA cells, however,
recoveries from low and high NO stress was reversible (Fig. 3B,

4865

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (12). June 15, 2008

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

right). These results suggest that NO stress–induced PKR activation
led to a stronger and less reversible effect on protein synthesis.
It has been reported that p58 is an inhibitor of PKR and remains
tightly associated with PKR in cells that overexpresses this
inhibitor. The levels of inhibitor p58 were assessed in HME, as
well as MDA-MB-231 and MDA-MB-468 cells. We found higher
levels of inhibitor p58 in HME cells compared with MDA-MB-231
and MDA-MB-468 cells, whereas HRI levels were comparable in
both cell types (Fig. 3C, left). Although the levels of HRI was
comparable, we found that high NO stress induced lower levels of
p-eIF2-a (1-fold to 1.5-fold) in HME cells compared with the higher

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (12). June 15, 2008

levels of p-eIF2-a (2-fold to 2.5-fold) observed in breast cancer cells
(Fig. 3C, left). Due to low free PKR and p-eIF2-a levels in HME and
MCF-10A1(R) (data not shown) cells, we examined the effect of low
and high NO stress on the total cellular protein concentration and
also cell proliferation. In mammary epithelial cells, there was no
significant decline of total cellular proteins when exposed to low
and high NO stress (Fig. 3C, right). This is in sharp contrast to
breast cancer cell line MDA-MB-231, where the decline of total
cellular protein was prominent with both low and high NO stress
(Fig. 3C, right). We also compared the effect of low and high NO
stress on cell proliferation in mammary epithelial and breast

4866

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Breast Cancer Cytostasis and Protein Kinase R

cancer cells. In response to low and high NO stress, the decline in
cell proliferation was more prominent in breast cancer than
mammary epithelials (Fig. 3D, left). We also investigated the effect
of high and low NO stress on cyclin D1 and cyclin E levels in MCF10A1(R) cells. We observed that, while the decline in cyclin D1 in
MCF-10A1(R) cells was comparable with cancer cells, there was no
significant decline in cyclin E (Fig. 3D, right). These results
suggested that activated PKR in breast cancer cells led to a
prominent increase of p-eIF2-a and a strong inhibition of protein
synthesis.
NO stress potentiated PKR activation after serum starvation or hydrogen peroxide treatment. Although PKR is
overexpressed in breast cancer cells, we observed that high NO
stress was required for its activation. Because tumors are subjected
to numerous stresses in vivo, we wanted to assess whether low NO
stress in the presence of another cellular stress could potentiate
PKR activation. To determine NO-induced potentiation of PKR
activation in the presence of another stress, cells were exposed to
300 Amol/L hydrogen peroxide (H2O2), an oxidative stress, and
lower NO stress (DETA-NONOate; 300 or 500 Amol/L). We found
that, whereas H2O2 or lower NO stress did not induce PKR
activation alone, simultaneous exposure of the cells to lower NO
and H2O2 dramatically increased PKR activation when analyzed by
native gel electrophoresis (Fig. 4A). Similar potentiation of PKR
activation was observed in serum-starved cells exposed to lower NO
stress (Fig. 4A). We further examined the effect of these stresses,
alone or in combination, on eIF2-a activation. Increased levels of peIF2-a was observed in cells with a combination of NO and another
stress (Fig. 4B, left). We examined the effect of simultaneous
exposure of NO and H2O2 on cell proliferation and observed that the
two stresses led to dramatic decline in cell number compared with
either stress alone (Fig. 4B, right). We also assessed the effect of
these stresses had on protein synthesis by monitoring the levels of
total cellular protein, cyclin D1, and cyclin E in these cells. We
observed that NO exposure to H2O2 or serum-starved cells had a
lower total protein concentration (data not shown) and lower levels
of cyclin D1 and cyclin E than either stress alone. Cell cycle analysis
was also performed in cells where NO potentiated PKR activation.
The potentiation of PKR activation with NO treatment was also
found in cells pretreated with either tumor necrosis factor-a (TNFa) or wortmannin (PI3K inhibitor) compared with stress alone (data
not shown).
Most chemotherapeutic agents, like paclitaxel and tamoxifen,
when given in high concentrations, target cellular DNA replicating

machinery to induce cell cycle arrest and induce apoptosis (30, 31).
High concentrations of these agents could also induce toxicity to
normal cells (30, 31). We investigated whether NO could potentiate
PKR activation in the presence of actinomycin D, which targets
cellular DNA. While actinomycin D or NO itself could up-regulate
the monomeric forms of PKR, simultaneous exposure of these
stresses to cells dramatically increased PKR activation (Fig. 4C).
This increase was also reflected in the levels of p-eIF2-a, where
increased phosphorylation was observed in cells exposed to NO
and actinomycin D (Fig. 4D). We, therefore, concluded that lower
or low NO stress in the presence of another stress potentiated PKR
activation in breast cancer cells.
NO stress–induced inactivation of eIF2-A was independent
of p-ERK, p-AKT or cyclic guanosine 3¶,5¶-monophosphate
levels in breast cancer cells. In this study, we found that, in
breast cancer cells, low NO stress increases monomeric cytosolic
forms of PKR whereas active forms of PKR was up-regulated by
high NO stress. To further assess the mechanism by which NO
induced up-regulation of PKR, we examined the possible
involvement of p-ERK1/2 and pAkt, which have been implicated
to be responsive to NO and other stimuli (32–34). We have
reported in MDA-MB-231 cells that, with NO treatment, there was
decline in cyclin D1 levels, retinoblastoma was hypophosphorylated, and cells underwent cytostasis (16). In the present study, we
observed that, with low and high NO stress (data not shown), the
levels of p-ERK1/2 remain elevated whereas ERK remains
unchanged (Fig. 5A, top). To further access the role of p-ERK1/2
in NO-induced PKR activation, cells were treated with PD 98059,
which inhibits MEK1/2, the upstream kinase of ERK1/2. NOinduced PKR activation occurred even in the absence of ERK
activation, suggesting no role of ERK1/2 in NO-induced PKR
activation (data not shown). We also examined the levels of pAkt,
which was found high with NO treatment, whereas levels of
Akt remain unaltered. We examined the effect of NO on the
downstream targets of Akt, such as mTOR, eIF4E, and p70s6k,
which are critical for the translation of cap-dependent mRNA. We
found that in NO-treated MDA-MB-231 cells, key players mediating
the translation of cyclin D1, like p-mTOR, p-eIF4E (data not
shown), and p-p70s6k remained highly activated despite the decline
in cyclin D1 levels (Fig. 5A, top).
We also examined another cell line, MDA-MB-468, where we
have reported that NO treatment induces decline in the levels of
p-ERK1/2 due to the induction of MAPK phosphatase-1 (32).
NO treatment of MDA-MB-468 cells activated PKR although

Figure 2. A, left, NO induced increase in the levels of HRI. MDA-MB-231 cells were treated with DETA-NONOate (1 or 2 mmol/L) and harvested at 24 h. The cells
were prepared for Western blot analysis as described in Materials and Methods. The membrane was probed with HRI and GAPDH antibodies. Results are
representative of three different experiments. Right, CO attenuated NO-induced increase of p-eIF2-a levels and decrease of cyclin D1 levels. MDA-MB-231 cells
were treated as follows: lane 1, untreated cells; lane 2, cells treated with DETA-NONOate (1 mmol/L); lane 3, cells treated with CORM A1 (500 Amol); lane 4, cells
pretreated CORM A1 (500 Amol) for 1 h before exposure to DETA-NONOate (1mmol/L). The cells were harvested at 24 h and prepared for Western blot analysis.
The membranes were probed with p-eIF2-a, cyclin D1, and GAPDH antibodies. Results are representative of three different experiments. B, arbitrary densitometric
units of A (right ). Columns, mean of three different experiments; bars, SE. *, P V 0.02 compared with control p-eIF2-a group without CORM A1and DETA-NONOate
treatment; #, P V 0.01 compared with control cyclin D1 group without CORM A1 and DETA-NONOate treatment. C, high NO stress induced significant increase of
dimeric and monomeric forms of PKR. MDA-MB-231, MDA-MB-468, and MCF-10A1 cells were treated as follows: 0 h, cells untreated; 16 h, cells treated with
DETA-NONOate (1 or 2 mmol/L) for 16 h as indicated. The cells were harvested at their respective time points and prepared for Western blot analysis, as described in
Materials and Methods. The membranes were probed with PKR antibodies and Ponceau-S stained to confirm equal loading of sample in the gel. C, lower panel
shows Western blots probed with pPKR antibody. Results are representative of three different experiments. D, left, high NO stress sharply increased PKR association
with eIF2-a. MDA-MB-231 cells were treated with 1 and 2 mmol/L DETA-NONOate for 16 h. The cells were prepared for immunoblot analysis as described in Materials
and Methods. Immunoprecipitated PKR was analyzed for eIF2-a association. Results are representative of three different experiments. Right, high NO stress–
mediated up-regulation of eIF2-a levels was attenuated with 2-aminopurine. Treatment of 2-aminopurine, a PKR inhibitor, did not affect the increase of p-eIF2-a levels
with low NO stress (1 mmol/L) but did attenuate the increase of p-eIF2-a levels with high NO stress (2 mmol/L). MDA-MB-231 cells were treated as follows:
lane 1, untreated cells; lanes 2 and 3, cells treated with DETA-NONOate at 1 and 2 mmol/L respectively; lanes 4 and 5, cells pretreated with 2-aminopurine (2 mmol/L)
for 45 min before exposure to DETA-NONOate 1 and 2 mmol/L. The cells were harvested at 24 h and prepared for Western blot analysis, as described in Materials
and Methods. The membranes were probed with p-eIF2-a and GAPDH antibodies. The results are representative of three different experiments.

www.aacrjournals.org

4867

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (12). June 15, 2008

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

p-ERK was down-regulated, suggesting that activation of PKR was
independent of p-ERK levels (Fig. 5A, bottom). The levels of pAkt
were also down-regulated in this cell line, whereas Akt remain
unchanged. Thus, we conclude that NO-induced PKR activation is
independent of the levels of p-ERK and pAkt in breast cancer
cells. Because cyclic guanosine 3¶,5¶-monophosphate (cGMP) is a
well-characterized second messenger of NO-mediated signaling,
we examined whether it had a role in NO-induced PKR
activation. Treatment of cells with ODQ, an inhibitor of NOmediated cGMP generation, did not significantly affect NOinduced up-regulation of PKR (Fig. 5B). These results showed
that NO-induced PKR activation and up-regulation of p-eIF2-a

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (12). June 15, 2008

was cGMP independent and did not involve p-ERK or pAKT/
mTOR/eIF4E pathways.
We assessed PKR stability in a number of breast cancer cell lines
MCF-7, MDA-MB-468, and MDA-MB-231 and also in MCF-10A1(R)
cells using cycloheximide. There was a sustained increase in
cytosolic PKR, which was high even at 36 hours in the breast
cancer cells (Fig. 5C) with cycloheximide treatment. In MCF10A1(R) cells, cycloheximide treatment led to a slight decline in
PKR levels as early as 3 to 6 hours. This PKR decline in MCF10A1(R) cells was a sharp contrast to the stability of PKR in breast
cancer cells (Fig. 5C). The cycloheximide-induced increase of PKR
in MDA-MB-231 cells was also attenuated by MG-132 treatment

4868

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Breast Cancer Cytostasis and Protein Kinase R

(chemical inhibitor of the 26S proteosome), suggesting a possible
role of the ubiquitin proteosomal machinery in PKR up-regulation
(data not shown).
Because there was a sharp contrast in PKR stability between
breast cancer and normal mammary epithelial cells, we examined
the nuclear and cytosolic localization of PKR in these cells. In
cancer cell lines MDA-MB-231 and MDA-MB-468, PKR was
predominant in the cytosolic fraction, whereas in MCF-10A1(R)
cells, PKR was equally distributed in the cytosolic and nuclear
fractions (Fig. 5D).
Because NO-induced increase in PKR activation was independent of the protein synthesis, total cellular levels of PKR in control
and after DETA-NONOate treatment was examined. This was
accomplished by lysis of the cells in RIPA buffer, which solubilizes
all the cellular membranes, and analysis of PKR in SDS PAGE gels.
We did not observe any change in PKR levels in control and DETANONOate–treated cells, suggesting that total cellular PKR levels
remain unaltered (data not shown).

Discussion
In this study, we found that breast cancer cells overexpressing PKR
were more susceptible to NO stress–induced inhibition of protein
synthesis than HME and MCF-10A1(R) cells. PKR is a component of
the signal transduction pathways mediating cell growth and
responses to stress. It consists of two functionally distinct domains:
an NH2 terminal double-stranded RNA (dsRNA) binding regulatory
domain, which consists of two dsRNA binding motifs and a COOH
terminal kinase catalytic domain. PKR exists in a latent monomeric
state, in which dsRNA binding domains autoinhibit the kinase
domain. Binding of dsRNA ligand induces conformational changes in
PKR to promote its dimerization and autophosphorylation (28, 35).
PKR can also be activated by cytokines and stress signaling pathways
that likely operate independent of dsRNA. The most wellcharacterized role of PKR is phosphorylation of eIF2-a at Ser51,
which inhibits translation of all capped mRNA (27, 28). PKR has been
found to be a potent negative regulator of cell growth and
proliferation in yeast and mammalian cells (36).
Our model system using DETA-NONOate, in breast cancer cells,
enabled us to expose cells to different levels of stress. Adjustable

concentrations of the NO donor and use of pharmacologic
inhibitors (2-aminopurine, CO, and hemin) helped us elucidate
the sequential steps in low and high NO stress–induced inhibition
of protein synthesis, where HRI activation preceded PKR activation
(Fig. 6C). We found that NO stress in breast cancer cells upregulated the levels of cytosolic monomeric and dimeric PKR. This
activation of PKR led to high levels of p-eIF2-a, sharp decline in
protein synthesis, changed cellular morphology, and irreversible
cytostasis. Reducing the levels of PKR in these cells by PKR siRNA
treatment, however, led to only diminished effects of NO stress on
protein synthesis and reversibility of the cytostatic process. HRI
consists of two heme-binding domains: a stable heme-binding site
and a reversible heme-binding site. During activation, HRI is
phosphorylated at multiple sites by autophosphorylation and exists
as an active dimer held by noncovalent interactions (21–25). It is
reported that CO and NO compete for the stable heme-binding site
on HRI (22, 23). We found that treatment with a CO donor, CORMA1, attenuated the activation of HRI by low NO stress. High and low
NO stress activated HRI in breast cancer cells, inducing small upregulation of p-eIF2-a and inhibition of protein synthesis with a
decline in only short half-life proteins (Fig. 6C).
The effect of low and high NO stress levels mediating HRI activity
is likely the result of a direct interaction with its heme group. This is
a first-order process involving direct ligation of NO to the heme
moiety. However, the somewhat selective effect of high NO stress to
mediated PKR activity is likely due to the generation of nitrogen
oxide-mediated thiol nitrosation, leading to PKR activation. N2O3 is
a predominant nitrosating species derived from NO. Because the
generation of N2O3 exhibits higher order kinetics (second order in
NO), this chemistry is relevant only at high NO levels. Moreover,
because this process is dependent on NO concentration to the
second power, even a seemingly minor increase in NO (2-fold in this
study) can result in an exponential (and not linear) increase in the
generation of N2O3. This likely explains the large differences in
activity between low (f1 Amol/L) and high (f2 Amol/L), although
there is only a 2-fold difference in the concentration of NO.
Over the past years, there have been efforts to develop methods
of using dsRNA to activate PKR selectively in cancer cells to
efficiently kill them. One of the strategies took advantage of the
many chromosomal rearrangements, truncations, and alternative

Figure 3. A, NO exposure to PKR siRNA transfected cells compared with control had lower levels of p-eIF2-a. NO-treated control random siRNA transfected cells
up-regulated PKR and p-eIF2-a levels and down-regulated cyclin D1 levels. MDA-MB-231 cells were transfected with random siRNA or PKR siRNA using solution V
from the AMAXA nucleofector kit. At 24 h after transfection, cells were treated with DETA-NONOate (1 or 2 mmol/L) and harvested after another 24 h. The cells
were prepared for Western blot analysis. The membrane was probed with PKR, p-eIF2-a, cyclin D1, and GAPDH antibodies. Results are representative of three
different experiments. B, left, NO-induced decline in proliferation was more dramatic in cells treated with random siRNA compared with PKR siRNA. MDA-MB-231 cells
transfected with PKR siRNA or random siRNA were treated with DETA-NONOate (1 or 2 mmol/L). The cells were harvested at 24 h and counted using the trypan
blue method. Columns, mean of three experiments; bars, SE. *, P V 0.02 compared with PKR siRNA group treated with 1 mmol/L DETA-NONOate; #, P V 0.05
compared with PKR siRNA group treated with 2 mmol/L DETA-NONOate. B, right, cells with PKR siRNA had complete recovery of cyclin D1 levels after removal of NO.
MDA-MB-231 cells were treated as follows: lane 1, untreated control cells; PKR siRNA and random siRNA transfected cells were treated with DETA-NONOate
(1 mmol/L) for lanes 2, 3, 6, and 7. PKR siRNA and random siRNA transfected cells were treated with DETA-NONOate (2 mmol/L) for lanes 4, 5, 8, and 9; after 24 h of
DETA-NONOate treatment, cells were exposed to NO-free media for another 48 h in lanes 3, 5, 7, and 9. All cells were harvested and prepared for Western blot
analysis. The membrane was probed with cyclin D1 and GAPDH antibodies. Results are representative of three different experiments. C, left, HME cells had higher
levels of p58, a PKR inhibitor, and low levels of p-eIF2-a compared with breast cancer cell lines. With NO stress, breast cancer cell lines had a higher increase in PKR,
HRI, and p58 levels compared with the levels of PKR, HRI, and p58 in HME cells. HME, MDA-MB-231 (231), and MDA-MB-468 (468) cell lines were treated with
DETA-NONOate (1 mmol/L) and prepared for Western blot analysis at 24 h. The membranes were probed with p58, PKR, HRI, p-eIF2-a, and GAPDH antibodies.
Results are representative of three different experiments. C, right, NO induced sharper decline in protein concentration in breast cancer cells compared with
MCF-10A1(R) cells. MCF-10A1(R) and MDA-MB-231 cells were treated with or without DETA-NONOate (1 or 2 mmol/L). After 24 h, cells were harvested and lysed.
Protein concentrations were measured using Bradford reagent. Columns, mean of three experiments; bars, SE. *, P V 0.05; **, P V 0.001 compared with MDA-MB-231
control group without DETA-NONOate treatment. D, left, NO stress induced sharper decline in MDA-MB-231 cell proliferation compared with MCF-10A1(R). No
significant change in cell number was found between high and low NO stress–treated MCF-10A1(R) or MDA-MB-231 cells. MCF-10A1(R) and MDA-MB-231 cells were
treated with DETA-NONOate (1 or 2 mmol/L), and viable cell numbers were counted using the trypan blue method. Columns, mean of three experiments; bars, SE.
*, P V 0.02 compared with control MDA-MB-231 group without DETA-NONOate treatment. D, right, high NO stress induced decline in cyclin E levels in MDA-MB-231
cells, but not MCF-10A1(R) cells. MCF-10A1(R) and MDA-MB-231 cells were treated with or without DETA-NONOate (1 or 2 mmol/L) and prepared for Western
blot analysis. The membrane was probed with cyclin D1, cyclin E, and GAPDH antibodies. Results are representative of three different experiments.

www.aacrjournals.org

4869

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (12). June 15, 2008

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

Figure 4. A, lower NO stress (0.5 mmol/L) with either hydrogen peroxide or serum starvation stress sharply increased PKR dimerization. MDA-MB-231 cells were
treated as follows: lanes 1 and 2, cells treated with DETA-NONOate (0.3 or 0.5 mmol/L); lanes 3 and 4, cells coexposed to hydrogen peroxide (50 Amol/L) and
DETA-NONOate (0.3 or 0.5 mmol/L) exposure; lane 5, cells treated with hydrogen peroxide (50 Amol/L); lanes 6 and 7, cells were serum starved for 24 h before
DETA-NONOate (0.3 or 0.5 mmol/L) exposure; lane 8, cells were serum starved. The cells were harvested at 24 h and prepared for Western blot analysis. The
membrane was probed with PKR antibody and Ponceau-S stained to confirm equal loading of sample in the gel. Results are representative of three different
experiments. B, left, low NO (0.5 mmol/L) stress with either hydrogen peroxide or serum starvation stress sharply increased p-eIF2-a levels and decreased cyclin D1
and cyclin E levels. MDA-MB-231 cells were treated as follows: lane 1, cells treated with hydrogen peroxide (50 Amol/L); lane 2, cells were serum starved; lane 3, cells
treated with DETA-NONOate (0.5 mmol/L); lane 4, cells co-exposed to hydrogen peroxide (50 Amol/L) and NO (0.5 mmol/L); lane 5, cells were serum starved for
24 h before NO (0.5 mmol/L) exposure. The cells were harvested at 24 h and prepared for Western blot analysis. The membrane was probed with p-eIF2-a, cyclin D1,
cyclin E, and GAPDH antibodies. Results are representative of three different experiments. B, right, hydrogen peroxide with low NO stress (1 mmol/L) compared
with either stress alone induced a greater decrease in cell proliferation. MDA-MB-231 cells were treated with hydrogen peroxide (50 Amol/L) or DETA-NONOate
(1 mmol/L) alone or with both stresses. The cells were harvested and counted using the trypan blue method. Columns, mean of three different experiments; bars, SE.
H, H2O2; D1, 1 mmol/L DETA-NONOate. *, P V 0.02 compared with control untreated cells. C, low NO stress with actinomycin D induced a sharper increase of PKR
dimerization compared with NO or actinomycin D stress alone. MDA-MB-231 cells were treated as follows: lanes 1, 2, and 3, cells were treated with 1, 0.5, and
0.3 mmol/L of DETA-NONOate, respectively; lanes 4, 5, and 6, cells were pretreated with actinomycin D (10 Amol/L) before exposure to 1, 0.5, and 0.3 mmol/L of
DETA-NONOate, respectively; lane 7, cells treated with actinomycin D (10 Amol/L). The cells were harvested at 24 h and analyzed on a native PAGE. The membrane
was probed with anti-PKR antibody. Results are representative of three different experiments. D, low NO stress with actinomycin D sharply up-regulated p-eIF2-a levels
compared with either stress alone. NO induced PKR dimerization and phosphorylation of eIF2-a was dependent on NO concentration. MDA-MB-231 cells were
treated as follows: lane 1, cells untreated; lanes 2 and 3, cells treated with DETA-NONOate (1 and 0.5 mmol/L); lanes 4 and 5, cells treated with actinomycin D
(10 Amol/L); lanes 6, 7, 8, and 9, cells pretreated with actinomycin D (10 Amol/L) before exposure to DETA-NONOate (0.5 or 1 mmol/L). Cells were harvested at 24 h and
prepared for Western blot analysis. The membrane was probed with anti–p-eIF2-a and anti-GAPDH antibodies. Results are representative of three different experiments.

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (12). June 15, 2008

4870

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Breast Cancer Cytostasis and Protein Kinase R

Figure 5. A, DETA-NONOate–induced up-regulation
of PKR is independent of ERK/AKT pathways.
Top, MDA-MB-231 cells were treated with DETA
NONOate (1 mmol/L) at different time points and
prepared for Western blot analysis. The membrane
was probed with anti-PKR, p-ERK, pAkt, p-mTOR,
Akt, ERK1/2, and p70s6k antibodies. Results are
representative of three different experiments.
Bottom, MDA-MB-468 cells were treated with
DETA-NONOate (1 mmol/L) at different time points
and harvested at 24 h. The cells were prepared for
Western blot analysis, and the membrane was
probed with anti-PKR, p-ERK, ERK, pAkt, and Akt
antibodies. Results are representative of three different
experiments. B, NO-induced decline of PKR is
independent of cGMP pathway. MDA-MB-231 cells
were used as follows: lane 1, untreated cells; lane 2,
cells treated with DETA-NONOate (1 mmol/L); lane 3,
cells treated with ODQ (50 Amol/L); lane 4, cells
pretreated with ODQ (50 Amol/L) for 45 min before
exposure to NO (1 mmol/L). Cells were harvested at
24 h and prepared for Western blot analysis. The
membrane was probed with anti–cyclin D1 and
anti-GAPDH antibodies. Results are representative
of three different experiments. C, cycloheximidemediated increase of PKR monomers in human
breast cancer cells. The cells were treated with
cycloheximide (200 Ag/mL) and harvested at different
time points. The cells were prepared for Western
blot analysis, and the membrane probed with anti-PKR
antibody. Results are representative of three
different experiments. D, PKR monomers are equally
distributed in cystolic and nuclear fractions of
MCF-10A1(R) cells compared with the predominantly
cystolic PKR monomers of breast cancer cells. The
cell fractionation was done according to the
manufacturer’s protocol. The cells were treated with or
without DETA-NONOate (1 mmol/L) and harvested
at 0 and 3 h. The cells were prepared for Western blot
analysis, and the membranes probed with anti-PKR
antibody. Results are representative of three different
experiments. N, nuclear fraction; C, cytoplasmic
fraction.

splicing of pre-mRNA that produced mRNA species unique to the
cancer cells. Upon hybridization with mRNA, dsRNA molecules
were generated that caused selective death of cells through PKR
phosphorylation (37, 38). In another study, this strategy has proved
effective in inhibiting glioblastoma growth within mouse brain (38).
Activation of PKR has been found to also play a role in esophageal
cancer cell apoptosis induced by adenoviral vectors expressing

www.aacrjournals.org

TNF-a gene (39). Breast cancer cells overexpressing PKR seem to
be a strong candidate for the dsRNA therapeutic approach. Here,
we report, for the first time, a novel strategy for PKR activation. We
show that high NO stress by itself or co-exposure of low NO stress
simultaneously with another stress (H2O2 or serum deprivation)
can activate PKR selectively in breast cancer cells, whereas HME
and MCF-10A1(R) remained largely unaffected. This strategy also

4871

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (12). June 15, 2008

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

Figure 6. A, coincubation of DTT, a reducing agent,
with NO immunoprecipitated PKR monomers
attenuated the increase in PKR dimeric forms.
MDA-MB-468 cells were harvested and
immunoprecipitated with anti-PKR antibody. The
immunoprecipiated PKR was treated as follows:
lane 1, lysates treated with DETA-NONOate
(2 mmol/L) only; lane 2, lysates treated with
DETA-NONOate (2 mmol/L) and DTT (1 mmol/L). Cells
were incubated for 30 min at 37jC and run on native
PAGE. The membrane was probed with anti-PKR
antibody. Results are representative of three different
experiments. B, hydrogen peroxide treatment induced
an increase in PKR dimerization in MDA-MB-231 cells
in a concentration-dependent manner. MDA-MB-231
cells were treated with various concentrations of
hydrogen peroxide (0.3, 0.5, and 1 mmol/L) for 16 h.
The cells were harvested at respective time points and
prepared for Western blot analysis on native PAGE as
described in Materials and Methods. The membrane
was probed with anti-PKR antibodies. C, flow charts of
differential NO stress leading to inhibition of protein
synthesis and cytostasis. Low NO concentrations
(1 mmol/L DETA-NONOate) mediate HRI activation,
leading to low levels of p-eIF2-a. Phosphorylated
eIF2-a induced decline in shorter half-life proteins and
caused partial cytostasis. High NO concentration
(2 mmol/L DETA-NONOate) mediates the activation of
both PKR and HRI, leading to high levels of p-eIF2-a.
Elevated p-eIF2-a level induced sharper decline in long
and short half-life proteins, leading to cytostasis.

seems highly promising as a nontoxic modality for breast cancer
treatment, because PKR in normal mammary epithelials remains
bound to p58 inhibitor. Although we assessed only the p58
inhibitor of PKR in normal mammary and cancer cells, there are
other intracellular regulators, some of which are heat shock
proteins, mRNA of p23/TCTP, ribosome, p67, and protein
phosphatase 1 (40–44). These intracellular regulators could also
contribute to the decreased susceptibility of normal mammary
epithelials to NO. In ovarian cancer cells, it has been reported that
NO is capable of enhancing H2O2-mediated processes by inhibiting
its catalytic degradation (45).
We also find that PKR is very stable in breast cancer cells, having
a constant level even after 36 hours of cycloheximide treatment. In
examining PKR cellular localization, we find that PKR is
predominantly cytosolic in breast cancer cells, whereas in HME
cells, they are equally distributed between nuclear and cytosolic
fractions. Mammalian ribosomes have been proposed to be a
reservoir of inactive PKR monomers in which PKR is prevented
from binding to dsRNA. PKR must be displaced from the ribosomes
by dsRNA to become activated (42). We think that NO induced a
redistribution of compartmentalized PKR, leading to an increase of
the cytosolic monomers, which facilitated the formation of dimers.

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (12). June 15, 2008

Studies have shown that NO and its derivatives could influence
cellular signal transduction and modify main classes of proteins
through S-nitrosylation, the coupling of an NO moiety to a reactive
cysteine thiol (46, 47). S-nitrosylation could also promote or inhibit
disulfide linkages within or between proteins depending on thiol
proximity (47, 48). Cysteine thiols with acidic (Asp, Glu) or basic
side chains (Arg, His, Lys) nearby could readily undergo
S-nitrosylation through a concerted acid-base catalysis (47).
Because the PKR protein has two arginine and cysteine residues
in close proximity to each other (within five amino acids), we have
preliminary data where NO binds directly to PKR via S-nitrosylation to induce PKR dimerization. In our study, we immunoprecipitated PKR from control cell lysates and treated it with DTT,
a reducing agent which abolished DETA-NONOate–induced
dimerization (Fig. 6A). It has been reported that H2O2 induced
dimerization via disulfide linkages in Yap1p (49). To assess whether
H2O2 induced disulfide linkages in PKR, MDA-MB-231 cell lines
were treated with H2O2 (0.3, 0.5, and 1 mmol/L). Upon Western blot
analysis, we found H2O2-induced PKR dimerization (Fig. 6B). These
results provide preliminary evidence that NO induces disulfide
linkages between PKR monomers, leading to an increase in PKR
oligomeric and dimeric forms. Further studies are under way to

4872

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Breast Cancer Cytostasis and Protein Kinase R

consolidate these observations. Although one study has tied HRI to
NO induced cytostasis via phosphorylation of eIF2-a in neuroepithelial and myoblast cells (22), this is the first report of NO
inducing cytostasis via PKR activation.
Most therapeutic strategies against cancer use cytotoxic drugs
or gene therapies that are directed at the DNA (30, 31). However,
an increasing body of data is emerging about the involvement of
the translational processes in tumorigenesis, indicating that
protein synthesis can be an additional target for anticancer
strategies (2). Although our study and other studies consistently
show tumoricidal activity of NO in vitro, there have been
controversies regarding its effect in vivo. This is due to the fact
that macrophages, which produce NO, have been found
infiltrating high-grade breast tumors in vivo. Recently, it is
becoming clear that macrophages, which are associated with Th2
response, could be suppressing Th1-like response of NO. Thus,
strategies that would stimulate Th1 responses in vivo may help
manifest the tumoricidal effect of NO.
We have previously reported interactions between the protein
synthesis machinery and the proliferative signal transduction
pathways, where breast cancer cells are dependent on cyclin D1

References
1. Bilanges B, Stokoe D. Mechanism of translational
deregulation in human tumors and therapeutic intervention strategies. Oncogene 2007;26:5973–90.
2. Holland EC, Sonenberg N, Pandolfi PP, Thomas G.
Signaling control of mRNA translation in cancer
pathogenesis. Oncogene 2004;23:3138–44.
3. Mamane Y, Petroulakis E, Le Bacquer O, Sonenberg N.
mTOR, translation initiation and cancer. Oncogene
2006;25:6416–22.
4. Pervin S, Singh R, Hernandez E, Wu G, Chaudhuri G.
Nitric oxide in physiological concentrations targets the
translational machinery to increase the proliferation of
human breast cancer cells: involvement of mTOR/eIF4E pathway. Cancer Res 2007;67:289–99.
5. Armengol G, Rojo F, Castellvi J, et.al. 4E-binding
protein 1: a key molecular ‘‘funnel factor’’ in human
cancer with clinical implications. Cancer Res 2007;67:
7551–5.
6. Graff JR, Konicek BW, Vincent TM, et al. Therapeutic
suppression of translation initiation factor eIF4E
expression reduces tumor growth without toxicity.
J Clin Invest 2007;117:2385–8.
7. Larsson O, Li S, Issaenko OA, Avdulov S, Peterson M.
Eukaryotic translation initiation factor 4E induced
progression of primary human mammary epithelial
cells along the cancer pathway is associated with
targeted translational deregulation of oncogenic drivers
and inhibitors. Cancer Res 2007;67:6814–24.
8. Polunovsky VA, Bitterman PB. The cap-dependent
translation apparatus integrates and amplifies cancer
pathways. RNA Biol 2006;3:10–7.
9. Kuptsova N, Chang-Claude J, Kropp S, et al. Genetic
predictors of long-term toxicities after radiation therapy
for breast cancer. Int Cancer 2007. Epub ahead of print.
10. Hibbs JB Jr, Taintor RR, Vavrin Z. Iron depletion:
possible cause of tumor cell cytotoxicity induced by
activated macrophages. Biochem Biophys Res Commun
1984;123:716–23.
11. Lala PK, Orucevic A. Role of nitric oxide in tumor
progression: lessons from experimental tumors. Cancer
Metastasis Rev 1998;17:91–106.
12. Stuehr DJ, Nathan CF. Nitric oxide a macrophage
product responsible for cytostasis and respiratory
inhibition in tumor target cells. J Exp Med 1989;169:
1543–55.
13. Lavnikova N, Burdelya L, Lakhotia A, Patel N,
Prokhorova S, Laskin DL. Macrophage and interleukin-1

www.aacrjournals.org

synthesis for proliferation (3). Dependence of cancer cells on cyclin
D1, a short half-life protein, for proliferation reinforces the
emerging importance of the translational machinery to maintain
oncogenesis. Our studies strongly suggest the importance of
targeting the translational machinery for therapeutic purposes.
We can exploit the overexpression of PKR in breast cancer cells by
activating it to induce suppression of protein synthesis, cytostasis,
and possibly apoptosis.

Disclosure of Potential Conflicts of Interest
No potential conflicts of interest were disclosed.

Acknowledgments
Received 1/7/2008; revised 3/24/2008; accepted 4/10/2008.
Grant support: Palomba Weingarten, Allegra Charach Cancer Research Fund,
USPHS grant CA-78357 (G. Chaudhuri), 1R03 HD053888-01A1 (S. Pervin), and NIH/
National Institute of General Medical Sciences 1S06-GM068510-03 G12-RR03026
(R. Singh).
The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of page
charges. This article must therefore be hereby marked advertisement in accordance
with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact.
We thank Svetlana Arutyonova and Janis Cuevas for their technical assistance.

induced nitric oxide production and cytostasis in hamster
tumor cells varying in malignant potential. J Leukoc Biol
1997;61:452–8.
14. Kim YM, Son K, Hong SJ, et al. Inhibition of protein
synthesis by nitric oxide correlates with cytostatic
activity: nitric oxide induces phosphorylation of initiation factor eIF2-a. Mol Med 1998;4:179–90.
15. Clemens MJ, Bushell M, Jeffrey IW, Pain VM, Morley
SJ. Translation initiation factor modifications and the
regulation of protein synthesis in apoptotic cells. Cell
Death Differ 2000;7:603–15.
16. Pervin S, Singh R, Chaudhuri G. Nitric oxide induced
cytostasis and cell cycle arrest of a human breast cancer
cell line (MDA-MB-231): potential role of cyclin D1. Proc
Natl Acad Sci U S A 2001;98:3583–8.
17. Espey MG, Miranda KM, Pluta RM, Wink DA.
Nitrosative capacity of macrophages is dependent on
nitric-oxide synthase induction signals. J Biol Chem
2000;275:11341–47.
18. Grant CM, Miller PF, Hinnebusch AG. Requirement
for intercistronic distance and level of eukaryotic
initiation factor 2 activity in reinitiation on GCN4
mRNA vary with downstream cistron. Mol Cell Biol
1994;14:2616–28.
19. Wek RC, Jiang HY, Anthony TG. Coping with stress:
eIF2 kinases and translational control. Biochem Soc
Transact 2006;34:7–11.
20. Hinnebusch AG. eIF2a kinases provide a new
solution to the puzzle of substrate specificity. Nat Struct
Mol Biol 2005;12:835–38.
21. Igarashi J, Sato A, Kitagawa T, et al. Activation of
heme-regulated eukaryotic initiation factor 2a kinase by
nitric oxide is induced by the formation of a fivecoordinate NO-heme complex. J Biol Chem 2004;279:
15751–62.
22. Uma S, Yun BG, Matts RL. The heme-regulated
eukaryotic initiation factor 2a kinase. A potential
regulatory target for control of protein synthesis by
diffusible gases. J Biol Chem 2001;276:14875–83.
23. Yun BG, Matts JAB, Matts RL. Interdomain
interactions regulate the activation of the hemeregulated eIF2a kinase. Biochim Biophys Acta 2005;
1725:174–81.
24. Lu L, Han AP, Chen JJ. Translation initiation control
by heme-regulated eukaryotic initiation factor 2a kinase
in erythoid cells under cytoplasmic stresses. Mol Cell
Biol 2001;21:7971–80.
25. Chen JJ, London IM. Regulation of protein synthesis
by heme-regulated eIF2a kinase. TIBS 1995;20:105–8.

4873

26. Yang JM, London IM, Chen JJ. Effects of hemin and
porphyrin compounds on intersubuint disulfide formation of heme-regulated eIF2a kinase and the regulation
of protein synthesis in reticulocyte lysates. J Biol Chem
1992;267:20519–24.
27. Savinova O, Joshi B, Jagus R. Abnormal levels and
minimal activity of the dsRNA-activated protein kinase,
PKR, in breast cancer cells. Int J Biochem Cell Biol 1999;
31:175–89.
28. Kim SH, Forman AP, Matthews MB, Gunnery S.
Human breast cancer cells contain elevated levels and
activity of the protein kinase, PKR. Oncogene 2000;19:
3086–94.
29. Jarrous N, Osman F, Kaempfer R. 2-Aminopurine
selectively inhibits splicing of tumor necrosis factor a
mRNA. Mol Cell Biol 1996;16:2814–22.
30. Calaf GM. Susceptibility of human breast epithelial
cells in vitro to hormones and drugs. Int J Oncol 2006;28:
285–95.
31. Dziadyk JM, Sui M, Zhu X, Fan W. Paclitaxel-induced
apoptosis may occur without a prior G2/M-phase arrest.
Anticancer Res 2004;24:27–36.
32. Pervin S, Singh R, Chaudhuri G. Nitric oxide-induced
Bax integration into the mitochondrial membrane
commits MDA-MB-468 cells to apoptosis: essential role
of Akt. Cancer Res 2003;63:5470–79.
33. Raines KW, Cao GL, Porsuphatana S, Tsai P, Rosen
GM, Shapiro P. Nitric oxide inhibition of ERK1/2 activity
in cells expressing neuronal nitric-oxide synthase. J Biol
Chem 2004;279:3933–40.
34. Shinohara M, Mikhailov AV, Aguirre-Ghiso JA, Rieder
CL. Extracellular signal-regulated kinase 1/2 activity is
not required in mammalian cells during late G2 for
timely entry into or exit from mitosis. Mol Biol Cell
2006;17:5227–40.
35. Dey M, Cao C, Dar AC, et al. Mechanistic Link
between PKR dimerization, autophosphorylation, and
eIF2a substrate recognition. Cell 2005;122:901–13.
36. Scheuner D, Patel R, Wang F, et al. Double-stranded
RNA-dependent protein kinase phosphorylation of the
a-subunit of eukaryotic translation initiation factor 2
mediates apoptosis. J Biol Chem 2006;281:21458–68.
37. Shir A, Friedrich I, Levitzki A. Tumor specific
activation of PKR as a non-toxic modality of cancer
treatment. Semin Cancer Biol 2003;13:309–14.
38. Friedrich I, Eizenbach M, Sajman J, Ben-Bassat H,
Levitzki A. A cellular screening assay to test the ability of
PKR to induce cell death in mammalian cells. Mol Ther
2005;12:969–75.

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (12). June 15, 2008

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research
39. von Holzen U, Bocangel D, Pataer A, et al. Role for the
double-stranded RNA-activated protein kinase PKR in
Ad-TNF-a gene therapy in esophageal cancer. Surgery
2005;138:261–8.
40. Fremont M, Vaeyens F, Herst CV, De Meirleir KL,
Englebienne P. Double-stranded RNA-dependent protein kinase (PKR) is a stress-responsive kinase that
induces NFnB-mediated resistance against mercury
cytotoxicity. Life Sci 2006;78:1845–56.
41. Bommer UA, Borovjagin AV, Greagg MA, et al. The
mRNA of the translationally controlled tumor protein
P23/TCTP is a highly structured RNA, which activates
the dsRNA-dependent protein kinase PKR. RNA 2002;8:
478–96.
42. Raine DA, Jeffrey IW, Clemens MJ. Inhibition of the

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (12). June 15, 2008

double-stranded RNA-dependent protein kinase PKR by
mammalian ribosomes. FEBS Lett 1998;436:343–48.
43. Gil J, Esteban M, Roth D. In vivo regulation of the
dsRNA-dependent protein kinase PKR by the cellular
glycoprotein P67. Biochem 2000;39:16016–25.
44. Tan SL, Tareen SU, Melville MW, Blakely CM, Katz
MG. The direct binding of the catalytic subunit of
protein phosphatase 1 to the PKR protein kinase is
necessary but not sufficient for inactivation and
disruption of enzyme dimer formation. J Biol Chem
2002;277:36109–17.
45. Farias-Eisner R, Chaudhuri G, Aeberhard E, Fukuto
JM. The chemistry and tumoricidal activity of nitric
oxide/hydrogen peroxide and the implications to cell
resistance/susceptibility. J Biol Chem 1996;271:6144–51.

4874

46. Pfeilschifter J, Eberhardt W, Huwiler A. Nitric oxide
and Mechanisms of Redox Signaling. J Am Soc Nephrol
2003;14:S237–40.
47. Hess DT, Matsumoto A, Kim SO, Marshall HE,
Stamler JS. Protein S-nitrosylation: purview and parameters. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2005;6:150–66.
48. Arnelle DR, Stamler JS. NO+, NO., and NO- oonation
by S-nitrosothiols: implications for regulation of physiological functions by S-nitrosylation and acceleration of
disulfide formation. Arch Biochim Biophys 1995;318:
279–85.
49. Kuge S, Arita M, Murayama A, et al. Regulation of the
yeast Yap1p nuclear export signal is mediated by redox
signal-induced reversible disulfide bond formation. Mol
Cell Biol 2001;21:6139–50.

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Increased Susceptibility of Breast Cancer Cells to Stress
Mediated Inhibition of Protein Synthesis
Shehla Pervin, An H. Tran, Shaghayegh Zekavati, et al.
Cancer Res 2008;68:4862-4874.

Updated version

Access the most recent version of this article at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/68/12/4862

Cited articles

This article cites 48 articles, 22 of which you can access for free at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/68/12/4862.full#ref-list-1

E-mail alerts

Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal.

Reprints and
Subscriptions
Permissions

To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications
Department at pubs@aacr.org.
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications
Department at permissions@aacr.org.

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

