2682

Therapeutic Inhibition of Sp1 Expression in Growing
Tumors by Mithramycin A Correlates Directly With Potent
Antiangiogenic Effects on Human Pancreatic Cancer
Ping Yuan, MD1
Liwei Wang, MD2
Daoyan Wei, PhD3
Jun Zhang, MD3
Zhiliang Jia, MS3
Qiang Li, MD3
Xiangdong Le, MD3
Huamin Wang, MD4
James Yao, MD3
Keping Xie, MD, PhD3,5

BACKGROUND. Human pancreatic cancer over expresses the transcription factor
Sp1. However, the role of Sp1 in pancreatic cancer angiogenesis and its use as
target for antiangiogenic therapy remain unexplored.

METHODS. Archived human pancreatic cancer specimens were used to assess
gene expression and microvessel density (MVD) status by immunohistochemistry:
Small-interfering RNA (siRNA) was used to determine the impact of altered Sp1
expression on tumor growth and angiogenesis, and mithramycin A (MIT) was
used to evaluate Sp1-targeted antiangiogenic treatment of human pancreatic cancer in animal models.

RESULTS. The expression level of Sp1 was correlated directly with the MVD status
(P < .001) and the expression level of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF)

1

Department of Pathology, Ruijin Hospital,
Shanghai Jiaotong University, Shanghai, People’s
Republic of China.
2

(P < .05). Knockdown of Sp1 expression did not affect the growth of pancreatic
cancer cells in vitro but inhibited their growth and metastasis in mouse models.
This antitumor activity was consistent with the in vitro and in vivo antiangio-

Cancer Center, Tongji University Affiliated East
Hospital, Shanghai, People’s Republic of China.

genic activity resulting from Sp1 knockdown. Subcutaneous and intraperitoneal

3

Department of Gastrointestinal Medical Oncology, The University of Texas M. D. Anderson
Cancer Center, Houston, Texas.

in mouse models. This tumor suppression was correlated with the suppression of

4

Department of Pathology, The University of Texas
M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas.

VEGF, platelet-derived growth factor, and epidermal growth factor receptor.
CONCLUSIONS. Both clinical and experimental evidence indicated that Sp1 is a

5
Department of Cancer Biology, The University of
Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas.

critical regulator of human pancreatic cancer angiogenesis and the antitumor

injection of MIT significantly suppressed the growth of human pancreatic cancer
Sp1 expression in growing tumors but not in normal tissues. Moreover, treatment
with MIT reduced tumor MVD, which was consistent with the down-regulation of

activity of MIT is a result, at least in part, of the suppression of Sp1 expression
and consequent down-regulation the downstream targets of Sp1 that are key to

Supported in part by Pancreatic Cancer Specialized Program of Research Excellence (SPORE)
Grant 1P20-CA101936-01-PP4, by Grant 1R01CA093829 from the National Cancer Institute,
National Institutes of Health (to K.X.) and by the
University Startup Fund (to J.Y.).
We thank Don Norwood for editorial comments.
The first three authors contributed equally to this
work.
Address for reprints: Keping Xie, MD, PhD, Department of Gastrointestinal Medical Oncology, Unit
426, The University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer
Center, 1515 Holcombe Boulevard, Houston, TX
77030; Fax: (713) 745-1163; E-mail: kepxie@
mdanderson.org
Received May 1, 2007; revision received July 11,
2007; accepted July 24, 2007.

ª 2007 American Cancer Society

angiogenesis. Cancer 2007;110:2682–90.  2007 American Cancer Society.

KEYWORDS: Sp1, angiogenesis, mithramycin A, therapy, pancreatic cancer.

P

ancreatic cancer is currently the fourth leading cause of cancerrelated deaths in the United States.1–3 A full understanding of
the cellular and molecular mechanisms of the development and
progression of pancreatic cancer is crucial for identifying new
targets for effective treatment of this disease. Among the potential
targets are factors that regulate angiogenesis, growth, and metastasis
of pancreatic cancer.4–8 Studies have identified several proangiogenic
factors that are key to pancreatic cancer angiogenesis, including
vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), epidermal growth factor
(EGF) and EGF receptor (EGFR), insulin-like growth factor I (IGF-I)
and IGF-I receptor, hepatocyte growth factor and its receptor Met,
and fibroblast growth factor (FGF) and FGF receptor.4,6,9 The levels of
expression of proangiogenic factors generally are correlated with

DOI 10.1002/cncr.23092
Published online 31 October 2007 in Wiley InterScience (www.interscience.wiley.com).

Sp1 and Pancreatic Cancer Therapy/Yuan et al.

pancreatic cancer angiogenesis. For example, studies
have indicated that elevated expression of VEGF correlated with MVD status in human pancreatic cancer
specimens and that VEGF-targeted therapy inhibited
angiogenesis and growth of pancreatic cancer in animal models.4,6,9 However, the molecular mechanisms
by which the expression of these proangiogenic factors is up-regulated remain unclear.4,6 Previous studies by our group demonstrated that the zinc finger
transcription factor Sp1 plays an important role in
regulating the expression of VEGF in human pancreatic cancer.10–12 However, whether expression of Sp1
predicts the angiogenic phenotype of human pancreatic cancer and whether Sp1 is an effective antiangiogenic target for treatment of this disease remain
unclear.
Sp1 is important to the transcription of many
cellular and viral genes that contain GC boxes in
their promoters. Researchers have cloned transcription factors similar to Sp1 in their structural and
transcriptional properties (Sp2, Sp3, and Sp4), thus
forming the Sp1 multigene family.13 Although Sp1
has been perceived as a basal transcription factor
since its discovery, increasing evidence suggests that
it regulates a variety of biologic functions that are
critical to tumor development and progression.13–18
More recent studies have demonstrated that the
levels of expression of other Sp1 family members
also are altered in pancreatic cancer cells and tumors
compared with the levels in nontumor tissue; these
alterations play roles in the highly aggressive and
metastatic characteristics of pancreatic cancer. Evidently, Sp1 is particularly important in pancreatic
cancer pathogenesis, because a variety of oncogenic
pathways converge their signaling to Sp1.6,13 If Sp1
overexpression is critical to the angiogenic ability of
pancreatic cancer cells, then treatment with Sp1
inhibitors like mithramycin A (MIT) should have significant antiangiogenic effects in patients with pancreatic cancer.
MIT is an aureolic acid-type polyketide that is
produced by various soil bacteria of the genus Streptomyces.19,20 In the past, physicians have used MIT
to treat hypercalcemia in patients with bone metastases from various malignancies, Paget disease, and
several types of cancer, including testicular carcinoma and leukemia.21,22 Furthermore, researchers
have demonstrated that MIT acts as a neuroprotective drug.23 MIT binds to GC-rich regions in chromatin and interferes with the transcription of genes that
bear GC-rich motifs in their promoters.24 Its mechanism of action consists of a reversible interaction
with double-stranded DNA with GC-base specificity
and selectively regulating the transcription of genes

2683

that have GC-rich promoter sequences.25 In addition,
recent studies have demonstrated that MIT sensitizes
tumor cells to apoptosis induced by tumor necrosis
factor and inhibits p53-mediated transcriptional
responses.26,27 Inhibition of Sp1 activity is considered
to be a major mechanism of the antitumor activity of
MIT.
To our knowledge, the role of Sp1 in pancreatic
cancer angiogenesis and its use as a potential target
for effective antiangiogenic therapy for this disease
have not been studied to date. In this study, we
sought to determine whether Sp1 transcriptionally
regulates pancreatic cancer angiogenesis and
whether the effect of MIT on pancreatic cancer
angiogenesis is a major mechanism for its antitumor
activity.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Chemicals and Reagents
MIT (1 mg per vial crystal powder; lot 055K4011) was
purchased from Sigma Chemical Company (St. Louis,
Mo) and was diluted in sterile water. For animal
experiments, MIT (0.125–0.5 mg/kg body weight) was
administered by intraperitoneal or subcutaneous
injection twice weekly or as stated otherwise.
Cell Lines and Culture Conditions
The human pancreatic adenocarcinoma cell lines
AsPC-1, BxPC-3, and PANC-1 were purchased from
the American Type Culture Collection (Manassas, Va).
FG human pancreatic adenocarcinoma cells were
established by Vezeridis et al.28 Panc02-H7 murine
pancreatic cancer cells were established as described
previously.29 All of the cell lines were maintained in
plastic flasks as adherent monolayers in minimum
essential medium supplemented with 10% fetal bovine
serum, sodium pyruvate, nonessential amino acids, Lglutamine, and a vitamin solution (Flow Laboratories,
Rockville, Md).
Animals
Female athymic nude mice and C57BL/6 mice were
purchased from Jackson Laboratory (Bar Harbor,
Me). The mice were housed in laminar flow cabinets
under specific pathogen-free conditions and were
used when they were 8 weeks old. The animals were
maintained in facilities approved by the Association
for Assessment and Accreditation of Laboratory Animal Care in accordance with the current regulations
and standards of the U.S. Department of Agriculture,
Department of Health and Human Services, and
National Institutes of Health.

2684

CANCER

December 15, 2007 / Volume 110 / Number 12

Small-interfering RNA
Small interfering RNA (siRNA) reagents, including
transfection reagents, were obtained from Invitrogen
(Carlsbad, Calif). The Sp1 Validated Stealth RNAi
duplex oligo was used to knock down Sp1 expression
in pancreatic cancer cells, and nontargeting
scrambled Stealth RNAi Negative Control siRNAs
were used as negative controls (siCONTROL [si-Ctr])
according to the manufacturer’s instructions. In vitro
transfection was performed by using Lipofectamine
2000 transfection reagent (Invitrogen).
Western Blot Analysis
Whole-cell lysates of human pancreatic cancer cell
lines and tissues were prepared.11 Standard Western
blot analyses were performed by using polyclonal
rabbit antibodies against human and murine Sp1,
VEGF, PDGF, and EGFR (Santa Cruz Biotechnology,
Santa Cruz, Calif), and the antirabbit immunoglobulin G antibody, a horseradish peroxidase-linked
F(ab0 )2 fragment obtained from a donkey (Amersham, Arlington Heights, Ill). Equal protein-sample
loading was monitored by probing the same membrane filters with an antiglyceraldehyde 3-phosphate
dehydrogenase antibody.11 The probe proteins were
detected by using the Amersham enhanced chemiluminescence system according to the manufacturer’s
instructions.
Human Tissue Specimens and Patient Information
We used archived human pancreatic cancer tissue
specimens that were preserved in the Pancreatic
Cancer Tissue Bank at Shanghai Jiaotong UniversityAffiliated Ruijin Hospital. Primary pancreatic cancer
in these patients was diagnosed and treated at the
hospital from 2002 to 2004. None of the patients
received preoperative chemotherapy or radiation
therapy. We selected 35 patients to represent all
stages of pancreatic adenocarcinoma. Specifically,
the patients consisted of 20 men (57.1%) and 15
women (42.9%) women. Sixteen patients (45.7%)
were aged >60 years, and 19 patients (54.3%) were
aged 60 years (mean age, 60.4 years). Four patients
(11.4%) and stage I disease according to the tumor,
lymph node, metastasis (TNM) criteria, 26 patients
(74.3%) had stage II disease, 3 patients (8.6%) had
stage III disease, and 2 patients (5.7%) had stage IV
disease. All tissue specimens were obtained for the
current study with the written informed consent of
the patients, and all laboratory work that involved
the specimens was performed at Shanghai Jiaotong
University-Affiliated Ruijin Hospital and was approved by the hospital’s Institutional Review Board.

Immunohistochemical Staining of Human Normal and
Tumor Tissue Specimens
Sections (5 lm thick) of formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded pancreatic tumor specimens were prepared
and processed for immunohistochemistry to detect
Sp1 and VEGF protein expression and tumor MVD
by using anti-Sp1, anti-VEGF, and anti-CD34 antibodies. The tissues sections were scored by 2 independent investigators without knowledge of the patient
outcomes (double-blinded), and the mean values of
2 independent scores are presented herein as
described previously.12,18,30
Animal Models of Tumor Growth and Metastasis
Tumor cells (1 3 106 cells per mouse) were then
injected into the subcutis or pancreas of nude mice
in groups of from 5 to 10 mice. The animals were
killed 60 days after the tumor-cell injection or when
they had become moribund. Next, their primary pancreatic tumors were harvested and weighed. In addition, the liver from each mouse was removed and
fixed in Bouin solution for 24 hours to differentiate
the neoplastic lesions from the organ parenchyma;
metastases on the surface of the liver were counted
(double-blinded) under a dissecting microscope.
Immunohistochemical Staining of Human Pancreatic
Tumor Xenograft Specimens
For VEGF and Sp1 staining of human pancreatic xenograft specimens, sections (5 lm thick) from formalinfixed, paraffin-embedded pancreatic tumor sections
were deparaffinized in xylene and rehydrated in
graded alcohol. For CD31 staining, frozen sections (6
lm thick) of tumor specimens were fixed with acetone. Sp1 and VEGF expression and MVD status in the
sections were assessed as described previously.12,18
Endothelial Cell Tube Formation and Proliferation Assays
PANC-1 cells (3 3 106) were cultured in 1 mL of serum-free medium for 24 hours, and the medium was
collected and centrifuged to remove any cell debris
before its use as a conditioned medium. A standard
tube formation assay and a proliferation assay were
performed using human umbilical vein endothelial
cells (HUVECs) as described previously.31
Matrigel Plug Assay
Matrigel plug angiogenesis assay was performed
essentially as described previously.32 Matrigel (500
lL) containing 2 3 106 cells of each pancreatic cancer cell line described above was injected subcutaneously into nude mice (2 injection sites per mouse).
The Matrigel plugs were recovered from the mice 10
days after injection and carefully stripped of host

Sp1 and Pancreatic Cancer Therapy/Yuan et al.

2685

tissues. After photomicrography, the Matrigel plugs
were weighed and homogenized in 1 mL of distilled
water and then centrifuged at 10,000 revolutions per
minute for 5 minutes. The supernatants were collected for hemoglobin measurement using Drabkin
solution (Sigma Chemical Company) and a Microplate Manager enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay
reader at 540 nm according to the manufacturer’s
instructions. The relative hemoglobin concentrations
were calculated and further normalized according to
the weights of the plugs.32

Statistical Analysis
For studies using human specimens, the 2-tailed chisquare test was performed to determine the significance of the differences between the covariates (Sp1,
VEGF, and MVD). For in vitro and in vivo studies,
each experiment was performed independently at
least twice with similar results; 1 representative
experiment is presented. The significance of the in
vitro data was determined using the Student t test
(two-tailed), whereas the significance of the in vivo
data was determined by using the 2-tailed MannWhitney U test. P < .05 was deemed significant.

RESULTS

FIGURE 1. The level of transcription factor Sp1 expression correlates with

Correlation Between Sp1 Expression Levels and MVD in
Human Pancreatic Cancer
Although researchers have addressed the importance
of MVD in pancreatic cancer and have suggested a
role for Sp1 in pancreatic cancer, to our knowledge,
studies have yet to investigate the relation between
MVD status and Sp1 expression and the underlying
interaction between these 2 factors in pancreatic cancer pathogenesis. Therefore, we evaluated the Sp1
expression and MVD status in 35 primary pancreatic
cancer tissue specimens using immunohistochemistry. We observed that the MVD status was correlated
highly with Sp1 expression (P <.001; Person chi-square
test) (Fig. 1A1) and that Sp1 expression was correlated
significantly with VEGF expression (P <.05) (Fig. 1A2).
We confirmed these findings by analyzing a few sets of
consecutive sections of human pancreatic cancer specimens (selected from those 35 patients), in which we
observed that the pattern of Sp1 expression (Fig. 1B)
was consistent with MVD status (Fig. 1C). Therefore,
we report clinical evidence that Sp1 can regulate
human pancreatic cancer angiogenesis.

the microvessel density (MVD) status in human pancreatic cancer. (A) Tissue

Effects of Knockdown of Sp1 Expression on the
Angiogenic Potential of Human Pancreatic Cancer Cells
We transfected several pancreatic cancer cell lines
with Sp1 small-interfering RNA (siRNA (si-Sp1) or

sections were prepared from formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded pancreatic
tumors (35 patients). Immunohistochemical staining was performed by using
specific antibodies against Sp1, vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF),
and CD34 (MVD) and were scored as described in the text (see Materials
and Methods). The direct correlations between Sp1 expression and MVD status (A1) (P < .001) and between Sp1 expression and VEGF expression (A2)
(P < .05) were analyzed using the Person chi-square test. (B,C) Two sets of
consecutive tissue sections that were positive (B1) and negative (C1) for Sp1
expression also were stained for CD34 expression (B2,C2). Representative
photomicrographs are shown (original magnification, 3100). It is noteworthy
that Sp1 expression correlated directly with MVD status.

control siRNA duplexes (si-Ctr). Western blot analysis
confirmed down-regulation of Sp1 expression in
these cells (Fig. 2A1). We also determined the angiogenic potential of the supernatants of PANC-1 cells,
PANC-1 cells transfected with control with si-Ctr,
and PANC-1 cells transfected with si-Sp1 using an
endothelial cell tube formation assay. We assessed
the degree of tube formation as the percentage of
cell surface area versus the total surface area (Fig.
2A2). Representative photomicrographs were taken in
situ for tube formation of HUVECs in the supernatants (Fig. 2A3). The transfection with si-Sp1 reduced
the capacity of supernatants of PANC-1 cells to sti-

2686

CANCER

December 15, 2007 / Volume 110 / Number 12

impaired angiogenic potential was confirmed further
by in vivo Matrigel plug assay (Fig. 2B). Our data
suggested that the down-regulation of Sp1 impaired
the angiogenic potential of pancreatic cancer cells.

Suppression of In Vivo Growth of Human Pancreatic
Cancer Cells by Knockdown of Sp1 Expression Correlated
With Impaired Angiogenesis
To determine whether treatment with si-Sp1 affects
tumor cell growth in vitro, we incubated BxPC-3, FG,
and PANC-1 cells in medium alone or in medium
that contained lipofectamine with si-Ctr or si-Sp1 for
3 days. We assessed the resulting cell growth by
using a 3-(4,5-dimethiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyl tetrazolium bromide assay (Fig. 3A1), we counted the viable
cells (Fig. 3A2), and we determined the level of cell
cycle progression by using propidium iodide staining
and fluorescence-activated cell sorter analysis (Fig.
3B). We observed that Sp1 knockdown had a minimal
effect on tumor cell growth in vitro. Next, to determine the effect of knockdown of Sp1 expression on
tumor growth in vivo, we injected FG or PANC-1
cells, FG or PANC-1 cells transfected with si-Ctr, and
FG or PANC-1 cells transfected with si-Sp1 into the
pancreas of mice. The FG or PANC-1 cells transfected
with si-Ctr produced larger tumors, whereas the cells
FIGURE 2. Knockdown of transcription factor Sp1 expression impairs the
angiogenic potential of human pancreatic cancer cells. For Sp1 knockdown,
AsPC-1, BxPC-3, FG, and PANC-1 cells were transfected with Sp1 smallinterfering RNA (si-Sp1) or with control small-interfering RNA (si-Ctr). Sp1
expression in these cells was confirmed by using Western blot analysis (A1).
PBS indicates phosphate-buffered saline; NS, nonsignificant. The angiogenic
potential of the supernatants of PANC-1 cells, PANC-1 cells transfected with
si-Ctr, and PANC-1 cells transfected with si-Sp1 was determined by using an
endothelial cell tube formation assay (A2). Representative photomicrographs
were taken in situ of human umbilical vein endothelial cell tube formations
in the supernatants of PANC-1 cells treated with si-Ctr or si-Sp1 (A3). PANC1 cells were treated as described above, and total protein lysates were prepared for Western blot analysis by using specific antibodies against vascular
endothelial growth factor (VEGF), epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR),

FIGURE 3. Knockdown of transcription factor Sp1 expression does not

and platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF) (A4). For a Matrigel plug assay,

affect the in vitro growth of human pancreatic cancer cells. (A) BxPC-3, FG,

Matrigel (500 lL) that contained 2 3 106 PANC-1 cells or PANC-1 cells

and PANC-1 cells were treated for 3 days as described in the legend to Fig-

treated with si-Ctr or si-Sp1 was used as described in the text (see Materi-

ure 2, and viable cells were determined using an 3-(4,5-dimethiazol-2-yl)-

als and Methods) (B) (Hb indicates hemoglobin). It is noteworthy that the

2,5-diphenyl tetrazolium bromide assay (A1). PANC-1 cells were treated for 1

down-regulation of Sp1 expression impaired the angiogenic potential of pan-

to 5 days as described in the legend to Figure 2, and viable cells were

creatic cancer cells in vitro and in vivo.

determined by viable cell counting (A2) PBS indicates phosphate-buffered saline; si-Ctr, control small-interfering RNA; si-Sp1, Sp1 small-interfering RNA.
(B) PANC-1 cells were treated with PBS (B1), si-Ctr (B2), or si-Sp1 (B3) for

mulate tube formation of endothelial cells compared
with the capacity of supernatants of PANC-1 cells
transfected with si-Ctr. Gene expression analyses
revealed that Sp1 knockdown down-regulated the
expression of EGFR, PDGF, and VEGF (Fig. 2A4). The

48 hours as described in the legend to Figure 2. Cells were stained with
propidium iodide and were subjected to fluorescence-activated cell sorter
analysis. Percentages in M1 (G1), M2 (G2/M), M3 (S), and M4 (apoptosis)
are calculated. This was 1 representative experiment of 2 that produced
similar results.

Sp1 and Pancreatic Cancer Therapy/Yuan et al.

2687

FIGURE 4. Knockdown of transcription factor Sp1 expression effectively
attenuates the in vivo angiogenic potential and growth of human pancreatic
cancer. FG or PANC-1 cells, FG or PANC-1 cells transfected with control
small-interfering RNA (si-Ctr), and FG or PANC-1 cells transfected with Sp1
small-interfering RNA (si-Sp1) were injected into the pancreas of mice
(n 5 5). (A) Primary pancreatic tumors were weighed (A1,A2) PBS indicates

FIGURE 5. Suppression of human pancreatic cancer growth by mithramy-

phosphate-buffered saline. (B) The microvessel density status of PANC-1

cin A (MIT) in xenograft models. (A) BxPC-3 cells were injected into the sub-

pancreatic tumors formed by PANC-1 cells (B1), PANC-1 cells transfected

cutis of groups of mice (n 5 5 each). When tumors reached approximately

with si-Ctr (B2), and PANC-1 cells transfected with si-Sp1 (B2) was determined by using CD31 staining.

4 mm in greatest dimension, animals received injections of phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) (controls) or MIT (0.12 mg/kg, 0.25 mg/kg, and 0.50 mg/
kg) subcutaneously (s.c.) or intraperitoneally (i.p.) twice weekly. The resulting

transfected with si-Sp1 produced smaller tumors
(Fig. 4A). We further processed PANC-1 pancreatic
tumor tissue specimens to determine their MVD status. Clearly, tumors that were formed by PANC-1
cells transfected with si-Sp1 were less vascularized
than those transfected with si-Ctr (Fig. 4B). Therefore, Sp1 has an important function in pancreatic
cancer angiogenesis.

MIT-mediated, Sp1-targeted Treatment of Human
Pancreatic Cancer in Xenograft Models
First, we performed dose-response experiments in
which we injected BxPC-3 cells subcutaneously into
nude mice. When the resulting tumors reached 4 mm
in greatest dimension, we gave the animals different
doses of MIT (0.12 mg/kg, 0.25 mg/kg, and 0.50 mg/
kg) by subcutaneous or intraperitoneal injection
twice weekly. We administered phosphate-buffered
saline (PBS) injections into animals and used them as
controls. We observed that treatment with MIT by intraperitoneal and subcutaneous administration produced dose-dependent antitumor activity (Fig. 5A).
Next, we performed similar experiments using orthotopic mouse models. We observed that treatment
with MIT (0.25 mg/kg by intraperitoneal and subcutaneous administration) significantly inhibited the

tumors were measured once weekly; and, at each measurement, the
mean  standard deviation tumor volume was calculated in each group of
mice. (B) BxPC-3, FG, and PANC-1 cells were injected into the pancreas of
mice (n 5 5). Two weeks after tumor injection (when tumors measured
approximately 4 mm in greatest dimension), mice received i.p. or s.c. injections of MIT (0.25 mg/kg) twice weekly. PBS injection was used as a control.
The resulting primary pancreatic tumors were weighed 45 days after the
injection. (C) Sp1 expression was determined in PANC-1 tumor tissues collected from mice that received treatments with PBS (C1), MIT i.p. (C2), or
MIT s.c. (C3) using immunohistochemistry. (D) Microvessel density status
was assessed in PANC-1 tumor tissues collected from mice that received
treatment with PBS (D1), MIT i.p. (D2), or MIT s.c. (D3) by using CD34 staining. This was 1 representative experiment of 2 that produced similar results.

growth of BxPC-3, FG, and PANC-1 cells (Fig. 5B).
Furthermore, we performed a histopathologic study
using pancreatic tumor specimens that were obtained
from control mice and from mice that received low
doses of MIT, because no tumors formed in mice that
received high doses of MIT. We observed significant
inhibition of Sp1 expression in tumor specimens
from mice that received MIT compared with the
expression in the specimens obtained from control
mice (Fig. 5C), which was consistent with reduced
MVD (Fig. 5D). Thus, we have provided experimental
evidence that the inhibition of Sp1 expression by MIT
has potent antipancreatic cancer activity.

2688

CANCER

December 15, 2007 / Volume 110 / Number 12

Preferential Inhibition of Sp1 Expression in Growing
Tumors by Treatment With MIT
To determine the molecular basis for the antiangiogenic effect of MIT, we initially performed Western
blot analysis using total protein lysates extracted
from the PANC-1 tumor tissue specimens we collected from mice that received treatment with PBS or
MIT. MIT suppressed the expression of Sp1 and its
downstream molecules VEGF, EGFR, and PDGF (Fig.
6A), which was consistent with reduced MVD. It is
noteworthy that the expression of Sp1 in normal
tissues, including the liver, was not suppressed significantly (Fig. 6B). Finally, to determine whether
selective inhibition of Sp1 expression in growing
tumors was caused by the model used (eg, xenograft
model), we conducted a similar experiment using a
syngeneic mouse model (Panc02-H7 tumors growing
in C57BL/6 mice). MIT treatment inhibited tumor
growth (Fig. 6C1) and metastasis (Fig. 6C2). In addition, we observed significant inhibition of Sp1
expression in tumors but not in normal tissue (eg,
liver) (Fig. 6C3). These results suggested that MIT
preferentially inhibits Sp1 expression in growing
tumors. Thus, we demonstrated that treatment with
MIT selectively inhibits Sp1 expression and consequently down-regulates the downstream targets of
SP1 that are key to the angiogenesis of human pancreatic cancer.

FIGURE 6. Preferential inhibition of transcription factor Sp1 expression in
growing pancreatic tumors and antiangiogenic effects. When BxPC-3 pancreatic tumors reached approximately 4 mm in greatest dimension, the animals
received 2 subcutaneous (s.c.) injections of phosphate-buffered saline (PBS)
(controls) or mithramycin A (MIT) (0.25 mg/kg). Total protein lysates were
extracted from the tumors, from the livers of mice that received treatment
with PBS or MIT 24 hours after injections, and from the livers of untreated

DISCUSSION
In this study, we provided both clinical and experimental evidence that Sp1 is an important regulator
of human pancreatic cancer angiogenesis and is an
effective target of antiangiogenic therapy. Specifically,
the level of Sp1 expression was correlated directly
with MVD status and levels of VEGF expression in
human pancreatic cancer. Knockdown of Sp1 expression inhibited pancreatic cancer angiogenesis,
growth, and metastasis in vivo. Moreover, the antipancreatic cancer activity of MIT correlated directly
with suppression of the expression of Sp1 and its
downstream molecules VEGF, PDGF, and EGFR in
growing tumors. Thus, the antitumor activity of MIT
is a result, at least in part, of suppression of Sp1
expression and the consequent down-regulation of
the downstream targets of Sp1 that are key to angiogenesis. Our findings have significant implications
for better understanding pancreatic cancer angiogenesis and logically designing effective antiangiogenesis
therapies for this disease.
Angiogenesis plays critical roles in the sustained
growth and metastasis of most solid tumors, including pancreatic cancer. Previous studies demonstrated

mice (control). (A) Western blot analysis was used to determine the expression of Sp1, vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), and platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF) in tumors that
were growing in mice that had received 2 injections of PBS or MIT either intraperitoneally (MIT/i.p.) or MIT/s.c.) GAPDH indicates glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase. (B) The levels of Sp1 expression were determined in
both tumors and normal tissues by using Western blot analysis. (C) Panc02H7 cells were injected into the pancreas of C57BL6 mice, which received
i.p. or s.c. injection of PBS or MIT. Primary pancreas tumors (C1) and liver
metastasis (C2) were determined as described in the text (see Materials and
Methods). Sp1 expression levels in tumors and livers were determined by
Western blot analysis (C3). It is noteworthy that Sp1 was expressed highly in
tumor tissues and that this expression was inhibited by MIT without significantly affecting Sp1 expression in normal tissues.

that antiangiogenic therapies suppress tumor growth
in animal models of pancreatic cancer.12,33–35
Researchers have recognized that elevated angiogenesis in human pancreatic cancer involves a perturbed
local imbalance of multiple proangiogenic and antiangiogenic factors, ie, proangiogenic factors predominate over antiangiogenic factors.4,6–8,36,37 Among a

Sp1 and Pancreatic Cancer Therapy/Yuan et al.

growing list of proangiogenic factors, various isoforms of VEGF contribute to the growth and metastasis of pancreatic cancer through a variety of
mechanisms.4,6 Pancreatic cancer cells also over
express many other proangiogenic factors, such as
EGF, transforming growth factor a, hepatocyte growth
factor, FGFs (FGF-1, FGF-2, and FGF-5), PDGF b, platelet-derived endothelial cell growth factor; and the
contain mutations of K-ras and overexpression of
hypoxia-inducible factor-1a, thymidine phosphorylase, thrombospondin-1, and cathepsins B and L.4,6
Researchers have demonstrated that expression of
many of these and other factors correlate with
increased vessel formation and a poor prognosis in
patients with pancreatic cancer.4–6 Interference with
the expression and function of these factors influences
the angiogenesis and growth of human pancreatic
cancer in animal models. However, simultaneously
interfering with multiple target molecules is challenging clinically.
Recent studies have suggested that there is an
underlying mechanism of overexpression of various
proangiogenic factors that collectively regulate pancreatic cancer angiogenesis.6,38 For example, we
demonstrated that Sp1 is activated constitutively in
human pancreatic cancer cells and that constitutive
Sp1 activity is essential for constitutive, inducible
VEGF expression.6,10,11,15,16,38 We also demonstrated
that overexpression of Sp1 is correlated with MVD status in human gastric cancer tissue and that knocking
down Sp1 expression using an siRNA approach significantly inhibits the tumor angiogenic phenotype.6,38
This antiangiogenic effect of knocking down Sp1
expression is consistent with reduced expression of
several signaling molecules in the signaling pathways
that play important roles in the regulation of pancreatic cancer angiogenesis.16–18 In fact, one of our
recent studies demonstrated that inhibition of VEGF
expression and the antitumor effect of celecoxib are
mediated at least in part by the suppression of Sp1 activity.12 The current study demonstrated that knockdown of Sp1 expression had a significantly negative
impact on the angiogenic ability of human pancreatic
cancer. All of these lines of evidence indicate that Sp1
plays a critical role in the regulation of angiogenesis
in human pancreatic cancer.
Furthermore, Sp1 is an effective target of antiangiogenic therapy. In the current study, we demonstrated that MIT, an Sp1 inhibitor, has significant
antipancreatic cancer activity. It is noteworthy that,
to our knowledge, we have provided the first evidence indicating that MIT has strong antiangiogenic
activity at a given dose with no systemic side effects.
In addition, treatment with a lower dose of MIT did

2689

not inhibit tumor angiogenesis significantly in the
current study compared with treatment at a higher
dose, although it did reduce the overall level of
angiogenic protein expression in tumors. This finding
suggests that the quantity of residual angiogenic factors in the pancreatic tumor bed may be sufficient to
maintain the tumor angiogenic phenotype without
continued production of these factors in the tumor
bed. A significant antiangiogenesis effect of MIT may
require an optimized regimen in which the drug is
given as a single agent or is combined with other
antiangiogenic agents to remove the angiogenic signal produced by the residual angiogenic factors. For
example, combined use of MIT and VEGF-neutralizing antibody may be necessary to stop angiogenesis
in pancreatic cancer. Finally, the antitumor activity
of MIT treatment also may be contributed by a
direct induction of tumor cell apoptosis in vivo provided that MIT may affect tumor cell survival by
various mechanisms, including sensitization of tumor cells to apoptosis induction by tumor necrosis
factor.26
Currently, we are evaluating the impact of contemporary pancreatic cancer therapy regimens on
Sp1 expression in pancreatic tumors and nontumor
tissues to determine the ability of MIT to modify the
responses and to improve upon these regimens.
Whether MIT preferentially affects neoangiogenesis
and tumor-associated stem cells in unknown and
clearly warrants further investigation. Nonetheless,
our current findings underscore the important role of
the Sp1 pathway in pancreatic cancer angiogenesis and
the significant clinical implications of targeting Sp1 in
antiangiogenesis therapy for this deadly disease.

REFERENCES
1.
2.

3.
4.
5.
6.

7.
8.
9.

Jemal A, Murray T, Ward E, et al. Cancer statistics, 2005.
CA Cancer J Clin. 2005;55:10–30.
Kuvshinoff BW, Bryer MP. Treatment of resectable and
locally advanced pancreatic cancer. Cancer Control. 2000;
7:428–436.
MacKenzie MJ. Molecular therapy in pancreatic adenocarcinoma. Lancet Oncol. 2004;5:541–549.
Korc M. Pathways for aberrant angiogenesis in pancreatic
cancer. Mol Cancer. 2003;2:8.
Kern SE. Molecular genetic alterations in ductal pancreatic
adenocarcinomas. Med Clin North Am. 2000;84:691–695.
Xie K, Wei D, Huang S. Transcriptional anti-angiogenesis
therapy of human pancreatic cancer. Cytokine Growth Factor Rev. 2006;17:147–156.
Folkman J. Angiogenesis. Annu Rev Med. 2006;57:1–18.
Kerbel RS. Antiangiogenic therapy: a universal chemosensitization strategy for cancer? Science. 2006;312:1171–1175.
Hotz HG, Hines OJ, Masood R, et al. VEGF antisense therapy inhibits tumor growth and improves survival in experimental pancreatic cancer. Surgery. 2005;137:192–199.

2690

CANCER

December 15, 2007 / Volume 110 / Number 12

10. Mukhopadhyay D, Knebelmann B, Cohen HT, Ananth S,
Sukhatme VP. The von Hippel-Lindau tumor suppressor
gene product interacts with Sp1 to repress vascular endothelial growth factor promoter activity. Mol Cell Biol.
1997;17:5629–5639.
11. Shi Q, Le X, Abbruzzese JL, et al. Constitutive Sp1 activity
is essential for differential constitutive expression of vascular endothelial growth factor in human pancreatic adenocarcinoma. Cancer Res. 2001;61:4143–4154.
12. Wei D, Wang L, He Y, et al. Celecoxib inhibits vascular endothelial growth factor expression in and reduces angiogenesis and metastasis of human pancreatic cancer via
suppression of Sp1 transcription factor activity. Cancer Res.
2004;64:2030–2038.
13. Black AR, Black JD, Azizkhan-Clifford J. Sp1 and Kruppellike factor family of transcription factors in cell growth regulation and cancer. J Cell Physiol. 2001;188:143–160.
14. Li L, He S, Sun JM, Davie JR. Gene regulation by Sp1 and
Sp3. Biochem Cell Biol. 2004;82:460–471.
15. Mukhopadhyay D, Datta K. Multiple regulatory pathways
of vascular permeability factor/vascular endothelial growth
factor (VPF/VEGF) expression in tumors. Semin Cancer
Biol. 2004;14:123–130.
16. Abdelrahim M, Smith R 3rd, Burghardt R, Safe S. Role of
Sp proteins in regulation of vascular endothelial growth
factor expression and proliferation of pancreatic cancer
cells. Cancer Res. 2004;64:6740–6749.
17. Safe S, Abdelrahim M. Sp transcription factor family and
its role in cancer. Eur J Cancer. 2005;41:2438–2448.
18. Wang L, Wei D, Huang S, et al. Transcription factor Sp1
expression is a significant predictor of survival in human
gastric cancer. Clin Cancer Res. 2003;9:6371–6380.
19. Wohlert SE, Kunzel E, Machinek R, Mendez C, Salas JA,
Rohr J. The structure of mithramycin reinvestigated. J Nat
Prod. 1999;62:119–121.
20. Prado L, Lombo F, Brana AF, Mendez C, Rohr J, Salas JA.
Analysis of two chromosomal regions adjacent to genes for
a type II polyketide synthase involved in the biosynthesis
of the antitumor polyketide mithramycin in Streptomyces
argillaceus. Mol Gen Genet. 1999;261:216–225.
21. Hall TJ, Schaeublin M, Chambers TJ. The majority of
osteoclasts require mRNA and protein synthesis for bone
resorption in vitro. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1993;
195:1245–1253.
22. Remsing LL, Bahadori HR, Carbone GM, McGuffie EM,
Catapano CV, Rohr J. Inhibition of c-src transcription by
mithramycin: structure-activity relationships of biosynthetically produced mithramycin analogues using the c-src
promoter as target. Biochemistry. 2003;42:8313–8324.
23. Chatterjee S, Zaman K, Ryu H, Conforto A, Ratan RR.
Sequence-selective DNA binding drugs mithramycin A and
chromomycin A3 are potent inhibitors of neuronal apoptosis induced by oxidative stress and DNA damage in cortical
neurons. Ann Neurol. 2001;49:345–354.

24. Blume SW, Snyder RC, Ray R, Thomas S, Koller CA, Miller
DM. Mithramycin inhibits SP1 binding and selectively
inhibits transcriptional activity of the dihydrofolate reductase gene in vitro and in vivo. J Clin Invest. 1991;88:1613–
1621.
25. Tagashira M, Kitagawa T, Isonishi S, Okamoto A, Ochiai K,
Ohtake Y. Mithramycin represses MDR1 gene expression in
vitro, modulating multidrug resistance. Biol Pharm Bull.
2000;23:926–929.
26. Duverger V, Murphy AM, Sheehan D, et al. The anticancer
drug mithramycin A sensitises tumour cells to apoptosis
induced by tumour necrosis factor (TNF). Br J Cancer.
2004;90:2025–2031.
27. Koutsodontis G, Kardassis D. Inhibition of p53-mediated
transcriptional responses by mithramycin A. Oncogene.
2004;23:9190–9200.
28. Vezeridis MP, Meitner PA, Tibbetts LM, Doremus CM, Tzanakakis G, Calabresi P. Heterogeneity of potential for hematogenous metastasis in a human pancreatic carcinoma.
J Surg Res. 1990;48:51–55.
29. Wang B, Wei D, Crum VE, et al. A novel model system for
studying the double-edged roles of nitric oxide production
in pancreatic cancer growth and metastasis. Oncogene.
2003;22:1771–1782.
30. Weidner N, Semple JP, Welch WR, Folkman J. Tumor angiogenesis and metastasis—correlation in invasive breast carcinoma. N Engl J Med. 1991;324:1–8.
31. Huang S, Mills L, Mian B, et al. Fully humanized neutralizing antibodies to interleukin-8 (ABX-IL8) inhibit angiogenesis, tumor growth, and metastasis of human melanoma.
Am J Pathol. 2002;161:125–134.
32. Pore N, Liu S, Shu HK, et al. Sp1 is involved in Aktmediated induction of VEGF expression through an HIF-1independent mechanism. Mol Biol Cell. 2004;15:4841–4853.
33. Morabito A, De Maio E, Di Maio M, Normanno N, Perrone
F. Tyrosine kinase inhibitors of vascular endothelial growth
factor receptors in clinical trials: current status and future
directions. Oncologist. 2006;11:753–764.
34. Yazici YD, Kim S, Jasser SA, et al. Antivascular therapy of
oral tongue squamous cell carcinoma with PTK787. Laryngoscope. 2005;115:2249–2255.
35. Prox D, Becker C, Pirie-Shepherd SR, Celik I, Folkman J,
Kisker O. Treatment of human pancreatic cancer in mice
with angiogenic inhibitors. World J Surg. 2003;27:405–411.
36. Jain RK. Tumor angiogenesis and accessibility: role of
vascular endothelial growth factor. Semin Oncol. 2002;
29:3–9.
37. Blagosklonny MV. How Avastin potentiates chemotherapeutic drugs: action and reaction in antiangiogenic therapy. Cancer Biol Ther. 2005;4:1307–1310.
38. Xie K, Wei D, Shi Q, Huang S. Constitutive and inducible expression and regulation of vascular endothelial
growth factor. Cytokine Growth Factor Rev. 2004;15:297–
324.

