Oncotarget, Vol. 5, No. 23

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Bcl-xL mediates therapeutic resistance of a mesenchymal breast
cancer cell subpopulation
Ulrike Keitel1, Andreas Scheel2, Jürgen Thomale3, Rovena Halpape4, Silke Kaulfuß4,
Christina Scheel5,6, Matthias Dobbelstein1
1

Institute of Molecular Oncology, Göttingen Center of Molecular Biosciences (GZMB), Faculty of Medicine, University of
Göttingen, Göttingen 37077, Germany

2

Institute of Pathology Nordhessen, Kassel 34119, Germany

3

Institute of Cell Biology (Cancer Research), Faculty of Medicine, University Duisburg-Essen, Essen 45122, Germany

4

Institute of Human Genetics, University Medical Center Göttingen, Göttingen 37073, Germany

5

Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA

6

Institute for Stem Cell Research, Helmholz Center Munich, Neuherberg 85764, Germany

Correspondence to:
Matthias Dobbelstein, e-mail: mdobbel@uni-goettingen.de
Keywords: Bcl-xL, chemo-resistance, epithelial-mesenchymal transition, apoptosis, BH3-mimetic
Received: August 11, 2014	

Accepted: October 23, 2014	

Published: November 28, 2014

ABSTRACT
The transition from an epithelial to a mesenchymal phenotype (EMT) confers
increased invasiveness and clonogenic potential to tumor cells. We used a breast
epithelium-derived cell culture model to evaluate the impact of EMT on the cellular
sensitivity towards chemotherapeutics and apoptotic stimuli. Cells that had passed
through an EMT acquired resistance towards chemotherapeutics and death ligands.
Mechanistically, we found that the levels of the apoptosis inhibitor Bcl-xL were
strongly enhanced in mesenchymal versus epithelial cells, whereas the pro-apoptotic
proteins Bim and Puma were diminished. Clinical samples from breast cancer showed
enhanced Bcl-xL staining in cells that had dispersed into the desmoplastic stroma,
as compared to cells that were part of large tumor cell aggregates, suggesting
increased Bcl-xL expression when cells invade the stroma. Bcl-xL was necessary for
apoptotic resistance in mesenchymal cells, and its expression was sufficient to confer
such resistance to epithelial cells. To antagonize Bcl-xL, BH3-mimetics were used.
They successfully interfered with the proliferation and survival of mesenchymal cells,
and also inhibited the growth of xenograft tumors raised from the mesenchymal
subpopulation. We conclude that enhanced Bcl-xL levels confer resistance to cells
upon EMT, and that Bcl-xL represents a promising target for therapy directed against
invasive cancer cells.

initiated by Wnt ligands, TGF-beta and others. EMT
is characterized by the disappearance of epithelial
marker genes such as CD24 or E-cadherin, and by the
upregulation of mesenchymal markers, e. g. CD44,
Vimentin, and N-cadherin.
Tumors that have undergone EMT may acquire
resistance to chemotherapy. A correlation was identified
between EMT and resistance to Doxorubicin in the
human breast cancer cell lines MDA-MB-231 and
BT-549 [5]. Epithelial mouse mammary carcinoma cells
(MMC) gained resistance to Oxaliplatin, Taxol and

INTRODUCTION
Epithelial-Mesenchymal
Transition
(EMT)
describes a gene-regulatory cascade that drives epithelial
cells towards a more mesenchymal phenotype [1]. When
carcinoma cells undergo EMT, they gain the ability to
invade the adjacent healthy tissue [2]. Remarkably,
EMT also confers properties of stem cells, leading to
markedly enhanced clonogenic potential [3, 4]. EMT
can be induced by the activation of transcription factors
such as Twist and Snail and/or by signaling pathways
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

11778

Oncotarget

RESULTS

Etoposide upon EMT [6]. Other cell types, including
epithelial colon carcinoma cell lines or ovarian cancer
cells, acquired resistance to chemotherapeutic agents,
in parallel to the occurrence of mesenchymal properties
as well [7, 8]. The invasive subpopulations of MCF-7
and MDA-MB-434 cells that have undergone EMT
displayed increased levels of Twist which was associated
with Paclitaxel resistance [9]. Conversely, the reduction
of Twist in breast cancer cells resulted in a partial
chemosensitization [10, 11]. These observations all
point to the question by what mechanism EMT leads to
chemoresistance.
A model of EMT is provided by immortalized
and/or transformed human breast epithelial cells
(Human Mammary Large T-antigen immortalized
Epithelial cells; HMLEs; when expressing haRAS,
this is reflected by the designation HMLE RAS;
[12, 13]. These cells contain a mesenchymal
subpopulation (MSP) characterized by a CD44high/
CD24low-negative population [3]. Mesenchymal cells were
also derived from HMLE cells by a combination of
paracrine factors and pertubation of cell-cell adhesion
[13]. Apart from enhanced migration and invasion, some
of the MSP cells also display a stem cell-like phenotype
with enhanced clonogenicity and tumor formation [3].
Moreover, MSP cells respond poorly to a variety of
cytotoxic drugs. Only a few drugs were identified to
eliminate MSP cells with at least similar efficacy as their
epithelial counterparts, namely salinomycin [14] and a
number of inhibitors that interfere with Protein Kinase C
alpha [15]. In both cases, the exact molecular mechanism
of how these drugs confer death to the mesenchymal cell
subpopulation remains to be fully elucidated. Even more
importantly, the question remains why MSP RAS cells
are resistant to multiple cytotoxic compounds.
Here we show that MSP RAS cells contain
high levels of the anti-apoptotic protein Bcl-xL,
rendering them resistant to treatment with a panel of
chemotherapeutics (cisplatin, carboplatin, doxorubicin,
neocarzinostatin) as well as death ligands (Trail,
TNFalpha). Importantly, through knockdown in MSP
cells as well as overexpression in parental HMLE cells,
we show that Bcl-xL is necessary and sufficient for this
resistant phenotype of HMLE cells. Moreover, targeting
Bcl-xL by BH3-mimetics interferes with survival of
epithelial as well as mesenchymal cell populations and
also reduced the growth of RAS-transformed MSP cells
in tumor xenografts. Together, these results outline a
strategy to overcome tumor heterogeneity by reducing
cytotoxic resistance in both epithelial and mesenchymal
cancer cells. Importantly, Bcl-xL-overexpression
was also observed in N-Cadherin-positive, singly
migrating breast cancer cells at the invasive front in
clinical samples, suggesting that the association of
Bcl-xL overexpression and EMT might be a common
occurrence in breast carcinoma.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Upon EMT, breast epithelial cells gain resistance
towards chemotherapy and death ligands
To study the impact of EMT on the response to
cancer drugs, we used MSP cells that had been sorted
from the bulk of HMLEs (24+ HMLE and 24+ RAS) as
described previously [13]. This cell population displayed
all the characteristics of mesenchymal cells, including
the expression of mesenchymal marker genes and the
suppression of epithelial markers [13]. This was true in
native and RAS-transformed HMLEs, as revealed by array
hybridization and quantitative RT-PCR (Supplemental
Fig. S1A-B and Supplemental Table 1).
We fully transformed these cells by expression of haRAS [12] and then assessed the susceptibility of epithelial,
CD24 positive (24+) HMLE RAS cells (referred to
24+ RAS cells) and MSP RAS cells to chemotherapeutics.
Upon treatment with cisplatin, MSP RAS cells survived
to a far greater extent than their epithelial counterparts
24+ RAS cells (Fig. 1A), and they also showed a much
lower extent of PARP cleavage (indicative for caspase
activation; Fig. 1B). We determined the extent to that the
cellular DNA was modified by cisplatin by measuring the
levels of intrastrand platin adducts, but did not observe
significant differences between 24+ RAS and MSP RAS
cells (Supplemental Fig. S1C). This largely excludes
differences in drug transport or metabolism as a possible
mechanism of MSP RAS cell resistance. Moreover, similar
resistance of MSP RAS cells was found when treating
the cells with carboplatin (Fig. 1C), the topoisomerase
inhibitor doxorubicin (Fig. 1D), and the radiomimetic
neocarzinostatin (Fig. 1E). The lack of caspase activation
under these circumstances prompted us to test whether
MSP RAS cells may also be resistant to treatment with
the death receptor ligands Trail (Fig. 1F) and TNF alpha
(Supplemental Fig. S1D), and this was indeed the case.
Further, performance of cell viability assays revealed
a better overall survival for MSP RAS cells compared
to 24+ RAS cells, upon triggering cell death with
chemotherapeutics (Supplemental Fig. S1E).
We conclude that EMT renders cells resistant not
only towards chemotherapeutics, but also towards DNAdamage independent apoptotic stimuli. Thus, it appears
conceivable that cells that have passed through an EMT
are generally resistant to induction of apoptosis.

Bcl-xL levels are enhanced upon EMT
When comparing the expression patterns of 24+
and MSP cells by array hybridization (Supplemental
Table 1), we noticed enhanced expression of the BCL2L1
gene in RAS-transformed and native MSP cells. This was
confirmed by quantitative RT-PCR analysis (Fig. 2A).
BCL2L1 gives rise to the anti-apoptotic gene product
11779

Oncotarget

Figure 1: MSP RAS cells resist chemotherapeutic treatment and apoptosis induction. (A) HMLE RAS cells were treated

with 5μM or 10μM cisplatin, for 24h, followed by further incubation without chemotherapeutics. The cell number was determined daily
for 7d, using automated light microscopy with quantitative image analysis (Celigo cytometer). Non-treated cells were used as controls.
(B-F) HMLE RAS cells were treated with the indicated concentrations of cisplatin (B) or carboplatin (C), each for 16h, with doxorubicin
for 24h (D), with neocarzinostatin for 20h (E) or Trail in the presence of 20μg/ml cycloheximide for 6h (F). Controls were treated with
corresponding amounts of the respective solvent. Cell lysates were analysed by immunoblotting. β-Actin or HSC70 staining was used as
loading control.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

11780

Oncotarget

Bcl-xL, but also to the isoform Bcl-xS that antagonizes
Bcl-xL functions [16]. mRNAs corresponding to
both isoforms were augmented in MSP RAS cells
(Supplemental Fig. S2A). However, when performing
immunoblot analyses with two different antibodies
predicted to bind either both isoforms or the large one,
respectively, only one protein with a molecular weight
corresponding to Bcl-xL was detected, with stronger band
intensities in MSP RAS compared to 24+ cells (Fig. 2B).
We conclude that the Bcl-xL protein is the predominant
BCL2L1 gene product in HMLE cells and that its levels
are enhanced in the MSP cells. In contrast, other antiapoptotic regulators of the intrinsic apoptotic pathway,
Mcl-1 and Bcl-2, did not differ in their levels between
epithelial and mesenchymal cell populations (Fig. 2C).
However, the pro-apoptotic Bcl-2 family members Bim
and Puma seemed to be diminished in their protein
levels in MSP RAS cells, which can additionally sustain
apoptosis-resistance upon EMT (Fig. 2D).
The BCL2L1 gene has several transcription start
sites (Fig. 2E), giving rise to mRNAs with different
5’ ends. When performing RT-PCRs to determine the
levels of each transcript, we found the mRNA driven
by the second promoter (designated “1A” in previous
literature [17]) to be particularly enhanced in MSP cells
(Fig. 2F). Thus, we propose that the levels of Bcl-xL
are increased in MSP cells through activation of the 1A
promoter of BCL2L1.
Bcl-xL levels were also increased in MSP cells that
were isolated based on their weaker adherence (wa MSP),
and in HMLE Twist cells which have undergone EMT as a
consequence of Twist overexpression. Thus, EMT induced
Bcl-xL expression regardless of the stimulus that had led
to EMT in the first place (Fig. 2G). The up-regulation
of Bcl-xL levels protects these cell lines from apoptosis
induction upon cisplatin treatment as is was seen for MSP
RAS cells before (Supplemental Fig. S2B).

Supplemental Fig. S3A), presumably representing
the forefront of tumor cell invasion. These dispersed,
Bcl-xL enhanced cells (DBCs) not only showed strong
cytoplasmic staining for Bcl-xL, but the staining intensity
was consistently enhanced when compared to continuous
clusters of tumor cells on the same section (Fig. 3B).
Interestingly, 46% of all investigated cases of ductal
invasive carcinoma (DIC) featuring an in situ component
(ductal carcinoma in situ, DCIS) contained DBCs
compared to 16% tumors entirely consisting of invasive
carcinoma (DIC) (Fig. 3E, p = 0.036). Importantly, the
DBCs also displayed enhanced staining for N-cadherin,
a mesenchymal marker, supporting the notion that these
singly or in small clusters migrating DBCs have undergone
an EMT (Fig. 3C-D; Supplemental Fig. S3B-C).
Additionally, we noticed a significant (p = 0.004)
association between αER+/Her2- staining pattern and the
presence of DBCs (Supplemental Table 2.1). There was
no significant correlation of DBC appearance with other
parameters such as histopathological grading, tumor
size, nodal status and distant metastasis (Supplemental
Table 2.2).
In normal breast epithelium, we observed a light
staining of Bcl-xL that was restricted to the luminal
layer, supporting the notion that Bcl-xL might be
characteristic for breast cancer with luminal features
(Supplemental Fig. S3D). Taken together, these data suggest
that a distinct subpopulation of tumor cells, preferentially
in an ER+ DIC with a DCIS component, undergoes EMT,
invades the desmoplastic stroma, and simultaneously
acquires apoptotic resistance through Bcl-xL-expression.
More studies are warranted to determine the universality
of this mechanism: however, the fact that the HMLE cell
culture model reflects basal-like breast carcinoma [19]
may suggest that EMT and Bcl-xL overexpression can be
associated irrespective of tumor type.

Bcl-xL levels are critical for apoptotic
susceptibility before and after EMT

Bcl-xL levels are enhanced in breast carcinoma
cells that invade stromal tissue

Since enhanced Bcl-xL levels accompany EMT
in HMLE and HMLE RAS cells as well as in clinical
breast cancer samples, we next determined whether
Bcl-xL is actually a determinant of cell survival and
chemoresistance in this context. To test this, we depleted
both the elevated as well as lower levels of Bcl-xL in
epithelial and mesenchymal HMLE cells, respectively, by
siRNA transfection, followed by cisplatin treatment, and
we determined the onset of apoptosis by detecting cleaved
PARP and activated Caspase 3. In the control transfections
(mock or control siRNA), MSP RAS cells were again
found to resist cisplatin exposure, while the epithelial
24+ RAS cell population was highly sensitive. In
contrast, however, when depleting the cells of Bcl-xL,
this difference was completely abolished, and both cell
populations activated caspases when treated with cisplatin

Predominantly in experimental models, EMT has
been demonstrated to be a major driving force in cancer
cell invasion [18]. We therefore sought to assess whether
enhanced Bcl-xL levels can also be found in cancer cells
at the invasive front of breast carcinomas. A collection
of fifty-six breast cancer specimens was examined by
immunohistological staining of tissue sections against
Bcl-xL. Indeed, we observed moderate-to-strong
Bcl-xL staining in a majority of the samples (n = 46, 82%).
However, the strongest signal was obtained in invasive
cancer cell subpopulations that were surrounded by
stromal cells, as confirmed by quantitative morphometric
analysis of the staining pattern. Specifically, single or small
cell clusters of strongly Bcl-xL staining cells were found
within the desmoplastic stroma and its fibroblasts (Fig. 3A,
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

11781

Oncotarget

Figure 2: EMT enhances the levels of the anti-apoptotic protein Bcl-xL and diminishes the levels of the pro-apoptotic
proteins Bim and Puma. (A) mRNA encoding Bcl-xL was quantified by qRT-PCR. (B-D) Protein lysates were analysed to detect

Bcl-xL (B), other anti-apoptotic (C) or pro-apoptotic (D) Bcl2-familiy members by immunoblotting. Bands corresponding to deamidated or
unmodified Bcl-xL [39] are indicated by arrows. (E) Schematic presentation of the BCL2L1 gene with alternate promoters. (Top) The distal
(IB) and proximal (IA) non-coding exons, and part of the first coding exon (II) including the translational start site (ATG). Additionally,
the three described BCL2L1 promoters (p1B, p1A, p2) are depicted [17]. (Bottom) Major BCL2L1 transcripts starting from promoter
p1B or p1A, comprising exon IB or IA, respectively, or starting upstream from exon II. (F) BCL2L1 mRNA transcripts were analysed by
qRT-PCR using primers that specifically span exons I – II, IA – II, or II alone, respectively. These mRNA levels were normalized to that
of 36B4 mRNA. Columns and error bars represent the mean ± S.E.M. of n = 3. (G) Bcl-xL was detected in 24+ RAS and MSP RAS cells,
compared with mesenchymal cell populations that had been obtained by Twist overexpression (Twist), or by limited trypsinization based
on their weak adherence (wa MSP).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

11782

Oncotarget

Figure 3: Bcl-xL protein levels are increased in human breast cancer cells that are dispersed in the desmoplastic stroma.
Immunohistochemistry (IHC) of human tissue, fixed in PBS-buffered formalin (4%), was embedded in paraffin. 1.5μm
sections were treated with boric-acid/EDTA buffer for antigen-retrieval, followed by incubation with primary antibodies,
secondary peroxidase-coupled antibodies, and diaminobenzidine (DAB). A more extensive array of staining is shown in
Supplemental Fig. S3. (A) Detection of Bcl-xL in breast cancer samples. (B) Quantification of DAB precipitate color-intensity in the
two highlighted regions (borders green, red); boxplots of respective intensities. 1’-’4’: Magnified details as indicated. Statistical testing
was performed using Student´s T-test. (C) N-cadherin IHC (Fast Red). (D) Cytokeratin 8 IHC. B-D: 400x magnification. (E) Presence of
dispersed, Bcl-xL enhanced cells (DBCs) in correlation to the presence and absence of ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS), n = 56.

Conversely, we engineered HMLE cells to overexpress
Bcl-xL by lentiviral transduction. Doing so prevented
caspase activation by cisplatin (Fig. 4C) and Trail
(Fig. 4D) in otherwise sensitive 24+ RAS cells. In contrast,
we exclude that 24+ RAS cells with normal Bcl-xL levels
and 24+ Bcl-xL overexpressing cells displayed difference

(Fig. 4A; Supplemental Fig. S4A). Thus, elevated Bcl-xL
expression is necessary for cisplatin resistance of MSP and
MSP RAS cells. Moreover, Bcl-xL depletion by siRNA
also rendered MSP RAS cells sensitive to the death ligand
Trail, suggesting that elevated Bcl-xL levels are necessary
for general resistance to apoptotic stimuli (Fig. 4B).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

11783

Oncotarget

Figure 4: Bcl-xL levels determine apoptosis but not cell proliferation in HMLE RAS cells. (A, B) MSP RAS cells were

depleted of Bcl-xL by siRNA and treated with 20μM and 40μM cisplatin for 16h (A), or with 100ng/ml Trail in the presence of 20μg/ml
of the inhibitor of protein synthesis cycloheximide (CHX) for 6h (B). Cell lysates were analysed by immunoblotting. Untreated (mock)
and scrambled (scr) siRNA-transfected cells were used as controls (see also Supplemental Fig. S4B). An arrow is indicating the molecular
weight of cleaved caspase 3 (17kDa). A longer exposure for non-treated cells was used to ensure that cleaved Caspase 3 would have
been detected if present. (C, D) 24+ Bcl-xL and HMLE RAS cells were treated with 40μM cisplatin for 16h (C) or 100ng/ml Trail in the
presence of 20μg/ml CHX for 6h (D), followed by immunoblot analysis. (E) Proliferation of 24+ RAS and 24+ Bcl-xL overexpressing
cells was monitored for 5d. Cell confluence was determined daily using automated light microscopy with quantitative image analysis
(Celigo cytometer).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

11784

Oncotarget

in their proliferation (Fig. 4E). Therefore, taken together
we conclude that Bcl-xL is both necessary and sufficient
to determine the sensitivity of HMLE cells and their
mesenchymal derivatives towards chemotherapy as well
as death ligands.

a large variety of cytotoxic agents. A pleiotropic program
directing cell fate decisions, EMT thus determines at
least three major components of the cellular phenotype:
invasion and metastasis; stemness and clonogenicity; and
resistance towards death stimuli.
We demonstrated that our findings are not only
valid for a cell culture model, but are also applicable to
clinical samples of human breast cancer tissue. Previous
investigations of invasive breast cancer suggested the
association of Bcl-xL with higher tumor grade and
decreased overall survival, but, importantly, did not report
on the intratumoral distribution and the heterogeneity
of Bcl-xL-expressing cells that we observed and
quantified  [29]. In the present study, we have shown
that Bcl-xL protein levels are heterogenously distributed
within human breast cancer tissues, and specifically
elevated in dispersed cells, invading singly or in small
clusters into the desmoplastic stroma surrounding the
tumor. Supporting the notion that these dispersed, Bcl-xL
overexpressing cells (DBCs) have undergone an EMT, we
observed a striking correllation between the localization
of these cells in the stroma, Bcl-xL overexpression and a
strong N-Cadherin staining (as a marker of mesenchymal
differentiation). Although pathologic specimens can
only provide a snapshot-like image without immediate
functional assessment, the presence of single cancer
cells or small groups of cancer cells, surrounded by
desmoplastic stroma, at least suggests that these cells
represent the forefront of cancer invasion and may even
seed distant metastases. Hallmarks of EMT in tumor cells
at the invasive front were previously described [30–32]
and we now show that such cells increase the levels of
a key anti-apoptotic factor. The combined enhancement
of N-cadherin and Bcl-xL further supports the view that
EMT-induced Bcl-xL characterizes this particularly
aggressive subpopulation of human cancer cells.
One could speculate that the enhanced levels of
Bcl-xL in the course of EMT may actually represent
a cause of the mesenchymal or stem-like phenotype.
However, when stably overexpressing Bcl-xL in the
epithelial cell population, we did not observe enhanced
spontaneous EMT (data not shown). Though these data
suggest that Bcl-xL upregulation might be a consequence,
but not a cause of EMT, further studies are warranted to
determine whether Bcl-xL upregulation sensitizes cells to
EMT-inducing stimuli.
Out data reveal Bcl-xL inhibition as an attractive
strategy to target actively invading tumor cells. And
indeed, Bcl-xL can be targeted pharmacologically.
The most direct way of doing so consists in the use of
BH3-mimetics. Our results suggest that BH3-mimetics
may be suitable to not only target a major mechanism of
cell survival, but to overcome the resistance mechanisms
that would otherwise allow cancer stem cells to
withstand a large variety of cancer therapeutic regimens.
Several clinical phase II studies for gossypol as well as

BH3-mimetic drugs interfere with the
proliferation of epithelial as well as mesenchymal
cell populations
Finally, we interfered with Bcl-xL activity
pharmacologically, as a strategy to eliminate tumor
cells including the mesenchymal subpopulation. The
BH3-mimetic drug gossypol [20–22] and its derivative
Abt-737 [23–25] were used to treat each 24+ RAS and MSP
RAS cells. As a result, both epithelial and mesenchymal
HMLE RAS stopped proliferating (Fig. 5A-B
and Supplemental Fig. S5). Somewhat higher doses of
Abt-737 were needed to reduce the proliferation of the
mesenchymal subpopulation, perhaps reflecting the higher
levels of the drug target Bcl-xL. On the other hand, no such
difference was seen in the case of gossypol. Treatment
with BH3-mimetic drugs also reduced cell viability of
both cell populations (Fig. 5C). Interestingly, autophagy
rather than classical apoptosis appeared as the major
cause of cell death in response to BH3-mimetic treatment.
This was revealed by the accumulation of microtubuleassociated protein 1A/1B-light chain 3 II (LC3a/b II),
(Fig. 5D-E) reflecting the lipidation of cytosolic LC3
(LC3a/b I) by an ubiquitin-like system forming LC3a/b II
in association with autophagosomal membranes [26, 27].
Possibly, BH3-mimetics inhibit the interaction between
Bcl-xL and Beclin1 at the ER, thereby inducing autophagy
[28]. We then assessed the in vivo efficacy of Abt-737
in a mouse tumor model derived from MSP RAS cells.
Abt-737 treatment prolonged the survival of tumorbearing animals to a highly significant degree, compared
with DMSO-treated animals (Fig. 6A). In accordance with
our findings in vitro, xenograft tumors that were treated
with Abt-737 exhibit significantly (p = 0.0007) increased
amounts of LC3 positive cells compared to the non-treated
tumors (Fig. 6B, C and Supplemental Fig. S6A-B). In
contrast, proliferation was significantly (p = 0.013)
reduced upon Abt-737 application as determined by Ki67
staining (Fig. 6B, D). Taken together, the use of BH3
antagonists represents a promising strategy to target both
epithelial breast cancer cells and their mesenchymal,
apoptosis-resistant derivatives.

DISCUSSION
Our results strongly suggest that the upregulation of
a specific Bcl-xL transcript renders breast cancer cells that
have passed through an EMT resistant towards apoptotic
stimuli. We propose that Bcl-xL upregulation represents a
mechanism that renders invasive cancer cells resistant to
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

11785

Oncotarget

Figure 5: The BH3-mimetics gossypol and Abt-737 overcome apoptosis resistance of MSP RAS cells. (A, B) HMLE RAS

cells were treated with gossypol (A) or Abt-737 (B) for 24h, followed by further incubation without the drug. DMSO was used as control.
Cell number or cell confluence was measured daily for 8d and 7d with a Celigo cytometer, respectively. (C) HMLE RAS cells were treated
with 10μM Gossypol or 10μM Abt-737 for 48h and 72h, respectively. Cell viability upon treatment was determined by assessing the ATP
concentration in cell lysates using a luciferase assay. (D) HMLE RAS cells were exposed to gossypol, or DMSO, in the presence or absence
of 20μM cisplatin, for 16h. (E) HMLE RAS cells were treated with Abt-737 for 16h. Cell lysates were analysed by immunoblotting. LC3a/b
II served as an indicator for autophagy. During autophagy, the cytosolic LC3a/b I (16kDa) is converted to the autophagosome-associated
LC3a/b II (14kDa) through lipidation [27].
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

11786

Oncotarget

Figure 6: BH3-mimetics prolong the survival of mice carrying MSP RAS xenografts. (A) 106 MSP RAS cells were

subcutaneously injected in (Nu/Nu) mice to form a tumor xenograft. Three weeks thereafter, the mice were treated with intraperitoneal
injections of 75mg/kg/day Abt-737 (light grey line, n = 10) or vehicle (dark line, n = 9) for 21d. The mice were euthanized when a tumor
size of 15mm in diameter had been reached. The shaded area corresponds to the duration of treatment. (B) IHC and IF of xenograft tumor
tissue for detection of Ki67 or LC3, respectively, in control and Abt-737 treated mice. 600x magnification for LC3, inlet 4x zoom. 100x
magnification for Ki67. A more extensive array of stainings is shown in Supplemental Fig. S6. (C) Quantification of LC3 positive cells
across all treated vs. mock-treated tumors. (D) Quantification of Ki67 positive cells. Columns and error bars represent the mean ± S.E.M.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

11787

Oncotarget

Isolation of weakly adherent MSP

Abt-737 are registered at the NCI database, suggesting
that these reagents may be applicable for a wide range of
cancer types and thus representing promising agents for
cancer therapy.
BH3-mimetics have targets that are not unique to
tumor cells but can be found in most normal cells as well.
This raises the question why these drugs still eliminate
tumor cells without non-tolerable toxicity towards their
normal counterparts. The explanation appears to consist in
tumor-associated properties that render the cells addicted
to “non-oncogenes” [33]. For instance, most proliferative
stimuli, e. g. activation of oncoproteins belonging to
the Myc and E2F families, also sensitize these cells to
apoptosis, e. g. by activating the p14/Arf – p53 pathway.
This renders such cells more susceptible to the inhibition
of anti-apoptotic factors such as Bcl-xL, in particular
when such targeted drugs are combined with inhibitors
of tumor-supportive cellular machineries [34]. Notably,
BH3-mimetics were not “selective” for MSP RAS versus
epithelial HMLE RAS cells in our experiments. Rather,
they showed cytotoxicity against both epithelial and
mesenchymal cells. This is different from previously
described small compounds that preferentially eliminate
MSP cells, i. e. Salinomycin [14] and inhibitors of
Protein Kinase C alpha [15]. However, we propose that
it represents an advantage to target both subpopulations
of tumor cells. This is plausible by the phenomenon of
tumor cell plasticity, i. e. the intrinsic capability of tumor
cells to change from epithelial to mesenchymal and vice
versa [35]. Indeed, there is mounting evidence that the
development from cancer stem cells to their progenitors
is not unidirectional but can rather be reversed [36]. As
a consequence, a strategy targeting all tumor cells, rather
than a specific subpopulation, is predicted to have the
highest likelihood of success.

To generate MSP cells from their parental
24+HMLE, limited trypsinization of 24+HMLE was
performed. Trypsin was applied for exactly 3min at
37°C and 5% CO2. Afterwards, the cells detached by
rapping on the cell culture flask. The cell suspension
containing weakly adherent cells was transferred into a
15ml reaction tube and Trypsin was neutralized by adding
Trypsin Neutralizing Solution in the same amount. After
centrifugation (8min, 900rcf, RT) the supernatant was
removed and the pellet was resolved in supplemented
MEGM medium and completely reseeded into a new
cell culture flask. The process of limited trypsination was
repeated four times every second day to get a complete
mesenchymal subpopulation.

Cell proliferation assay
For cell proliferation analysis, cells were seeded
in duplicates into 12-well plates and, after 16h treated
with cisplatin, gossypol or Abt-737 in the respective
concentrations for 24h. Then, fresh medium without
drugs was added. Direct cell counting was performed
by defining the cell number per well on the basis of
contrast in bright field light microscopy using a Celigo
Adherent Cytometer (Brooks Automation). Cell counting
or confluence measurement was performed once a day. All
proliferation assays were performed in triplicate to ensure
the reproducibility of the results.

Immunoblot analysis
Whole cell lysates were prepared with RIPA lysis
buffer (1% Triton X; 1% Desoxycholate, 0,1% SDS;
150 mM NaCl; 10 mM EDTA; 20 mM Tris-HCl; pH 7.5;
100.000KIE Trasylol) freshly supplemented with 2M
Urea, Pefablock, 1μg/ml Leupeptin / Aprotinin, 1μg/ml
Pepstatin A and 1μM Microcystin. Protein concentration
was measured using the BCA protein assay (Thermo
Fisher Scientific) and adjusted to equal amounts for
all samples. For immunoblotting, protein lysates were
separated by SDS polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis and
transferred to nitrocellulose membranes, blocked with
5% milk / TBS Tween and incubated with the following
antibodies, each diluted in 5% BSA in Tris-buffered saline
containing 0,1% Tween20: PARP (C-2-10; Calbiochem),
Caspase 3 (8G10), cleaved Caspase 3 (5A1E), Bcl-xL
(54H6), Akt, Mcl1 (D35A5), Bcl-2 (50E3), Bax, Bim
(C34C5), and LC3a/b (all Cell Signaling Technology).
Bcl-xL (H-5) and HSC70 (B-6) (both Santa Cruz), beta
Actin (rabbit polyclonal), Noxa (EPR9735B) and Puma
(EP512Y, all Abcam). Primary antibodies were detected
with peroxidase-coupled secondary antibodies (Jackson).
All immunoblot analyses were performed in triplicate to
ensure the reproducibility of the results.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Cell culture, reagents and transfections
Human mammary epithelial cells (24+HMLE, MSP,
24 Ras, MSP Ras, HMLE Twist and self-isolated MSP)
were cultured in 50% MEGM (Bullet Kit, Lonza), 25%
DMEM high glucose and 25% F-12 (both Invitrogen™)
media supplemented with 10mg/ml human hydrocortisone,
10mg/ml human insulin and 10μg/ml human EGF
(all Sigma-Aldrich). Cisplatin (Neocorp), carboplatin
(medac), doxorubicin (diluted in DMSO; Santa Cruz),
neocarzinostatin (NCS), cycloheximide (CHX; diluted in
Ethanol; both Sigma Aldrich), Trail, TNFalpha (both R&D
systems), gossypol (SellectBio), Abt-737 (active biochem,
both diluted in DMSO). For siRNA-mediated knock down
cells were reverse transfected with 5nM Silencer Select
Pre-Designed siRNA or control siRNA (all Ambion) using
Lipofectamine 2000 (Invitrogen).
+

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

11788

Oncotarget

DNA platination assay

containing 4% formaline and then embedded in paraffin.
1.5μm sections were cut and treated with boric-acid/EDTA
buffer for antigen-retrieval. Primary antibodies, anti-BclxL clone 54H6, 1:500, (rabbit monoclonal; Cell Signaling
Technology) and anti-N-cadherin clone 6G11, 1:200,
(mouse monoclonal; Dako) and OptiView DAB IHC
detection kits (Ventana) were used. Bcl-xL specificity was
verified using MSP RAS cells treated with siRNA against
Bcl-xL [data not shown]. IHC stainings were scored by
a pathologist. Digital quantification was performed by
whole slide scanning (ScanScope XT) and ImageJ image
analysis software (http://rsb.info.nih.gov/ij). 8bit intensity
values were obtained using color deconvolution [38].
Deconvolution was used to demonstrate colocalisation in
brightfield double-IHC. Intensity values are depicted as
inverted and normalized greyscale. Statistical testing was
performed using chi squared test on R version 2.15.2.
Xenograft tumors were analysed for autophagy and
proliferation. Paraffin-embedded tumor tissue sections
(5 μm) were deparaffinized and rehydrated. For antigen
retrieval, sections were heated in 10 mM Citrat buffer
pH 6.0 (Ki67) and 0.01M EDTA pH 7.5 (LC3A/B),
respectively. After blocking with 3% hydrogen peroxide
(only for Ki67) and 10% FCS/5% BSA in TBS, the
following antibodies were applied: LC3A/B (Abcam) and
Ki67 (BD Pharmingen) (all 1:50) overnight at 4°C. For
immunohistochemical staining, sections were incubated
with Envision-peroxidase (DAKO, Hamburg, Germany),
and diaminobenzidine was used as chromogen. Finally,
tissue sections were counterstained with hemalum.
Sections were analysed with a BX60 microscope and the
CVII camera using the Cell F software (Olympus). The
percentage of Ki67 positive cells were determined by
whole slide scanning (100x) with Image J image analysis
software using color deconvolution, calculating the ratio
between nuclear and Ki67 staining.

Platin-DNA intrastrand crosslinks were detected by
immuno-slot-blotting. 100μl extracted DNA of cisplatintreated cells was denatured for 10min at 95°C cooled
on ice and diluted with 100μl ice-cold 2M ammonium
acetate. Nitrocellulose Hybond membrane was soaked in
1M ammonium acetate and 200μl sample was applied onto
the membrane. The membrane was soaked with 5xSSC
for 5min, washed with H2O, dried, heated for 2h at 80°C
and blocked with 5%milk / TBS Tween. The membrane
was incubated with the cisplatin-lesion specific antibody
R-C18 (0.2μg/ml) in 5%milk / TBS Tween for 1h at RT
[37]. The primary antibody was detected with anti-rat
HRP-linked secondary antibody for 1h. All immuno-slotblot analyses were performed in triplicate.

Apoptosis assay
Cisplatin-treated cells were stained with the Guava®
MultiCaspase FAM Kit (Millipore) to detect active
caspases and apoptotic cells by flow cytometry.

Cell viability assay
1500 cells per well were seeded in triplicate in 96well plates 1 day before treatment. Cells were treated
with drugs and cell viability was determined with the
CellTiterGlo Luminescent Cell Viability assay (Promega,
Madison, WI, USA). The luciferase assay determines the
remaining amount of cellular ATP, thus reflecting cell
viability after treatment.

RNA extraction and quantitative RT-PCR
Total RNA was isolated from cells using Trizol
(Invitrogen). 1μg of RNA were reversed transcribed with
M-MuLV Reverse Transcriptase (New England Biolabs)
and a mix of oligo dT and random hexamers for priming.
Real time analysis was implemented using a PCR master
mix (750mM Tris-HCL, 200mM (NH4)2SO4, 0,1%
Tween20, 3mM MgCl2, SYBR Green 1:80.000, 0,2mM
dNTPs, 20U/ml Taq Polymerase, 0,3M Trehalose, 0,3μM
primer). Primers are listed in Supplemental Table 3. The
RT-PCR was performed with a two-step protocol (2min at
95°C preheating, 40cycles at 95°C for 15s, followed by
60°C for 1min) monitoring SybrGreen fluorescence. Data
were normalized to reference gene 36B4. Relative gene
expression was calculated by using the ΔΔCt method.

Immunofluorescence
For immunofluorescence staining of xenograft
tumors, sections were first exposed to primary antibody
and then incubated with secondary anti-rabbit Cy3
antibody 1:1000 (Sigma) for 2h. DAPI/Vectashield was
used as mounting medium. Images were obtained with a
laser scanning microscope (Fluoview 1000, Olympus) and
the FW 10-ASW software. For negative controls, blocking
solution was used in place of the primary antibody. The
percentage of LC3 positive cells was determined by whole
slide scanning (100x) with AlphaView (ProteinSimple),
calculating the ratio between Dapi and LC3 staining.

Immunohistochemistry
Clinical samples of invasive ductal carcinoma were
classified by a board-certified pathologist. Samples of
normal breast tissue removed for cosmetic reasons were
used as references. Immunohistochemistry (IHC) was
performed on a BenchMark XT autostainer (Ventana
Medical Systems). Human tissue was first fixed in PBS
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Gene expression analysis
For comparison of mRNA expression levels of 24+
HMLE and MSP cells, a whole genome microarray was
performed. For every cell line, three independent samples
were prepared. Total RNA was isolated using Trizol and
11789

Oncotarget

delivered to the transcriptome analysis laboratory (TAL)
Göttingen. TAL controlled the RNA quality, measured
the concentration and used 200ng of total RNA for
reverse transcription into cDNA. cDNA was transcribed
into antisense RNA with a master mix containing
the sample cDNA, rNTPs, T7 RNA polymerase and
Cy3-CTP. Antisense RNA was hybridized to the
microarray slide. Array slides were read out by laser
application, measuring the fluorescence intensity of
the Cy3 dye. For analyses, data of each cell line were
combined and the MSP data were analysed relatively
to the 24+ HMLE data. The threshold of differentially
regulated mRNA expression in MSP cells compared to
24+ HMLE was set to 2, and the induction was calculated
as log2 values. Positive values indicate an up-regulation
and negative ones a down-regulation of gene expression
in MSP cells compared to 24+ HMLE.

4.	 Polyak K, Weinberg RA. Transitions between epithelial and
mesenchymal states: acquisition of malignant and stem cell
traits. Nature reviews Cancer. 2009; 9:265–273.
5.	 Tryndyak VP, Beland FA, Pogribny IP. E-cadherin
transcriptional down-regulation by epigenetic and
­microRNA-200 family alterations is related to m
­ esenchymal
and drug-resistant phenotypes in human breast cancer
cells. International journal of cancer Journal international
du cancer. 2010; 126:2575–2583.
6.	 Asiedu MK, Ingle JN, Behrens MD, Radisky DC,
Knutson KL. TGFbeta/TNF(alpha)-mediated epithelialmesenchymal transition generates breast cancer stem cells
with a claudin-low phenotype. Cancer research. 2011;
71:4707–4719.
7.	 Yang AD, Fan F, Camp ER, van Buren G, Liu W,
Somcio R, Gray MJ, Cheng H, Hoff PM, Ellis LM.
Chronic oxaliplatin resistance induces epithelialto-mesenchymal transition in colorectal c­ ancer cell lines.
Clinical cancer research : an official ­journal of the ­American
­Association for Cancer R
­ esearch. 2006; 12:4147–4153.

Statistical analysis
If not stated otherwise, data are shown as mean
± S.E.M. Unpaired Students T-test was used for the
calculation of P values. n values in figure legends indicate
the number of independent replicates.

8.	 Kajiyama H, Shibata K, Terauchi M, Yamashita M, Ino K,
Nawa A, Kikkawa F. Chemoresistance to paclitaxel
­induces epithelial-mesenchymal transition and e­nhances
metastatic potential for epithelial ovarian carcinoma
cells. International journal of oncology. 2007; 31:277–283.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

9.	 Cheng GZ, Chan J, Wang Q, Zhang W, Sun CD,
Wang LH. Twist transcriptionally up-regulates AKT2
in breast cancer cells leading to increased migration,
­invasion, and resistance to paclitaxel. Cancer research.
2007; 67:1979–1987.

We thank Robert Weinberg for providing us with
the HMLE and HMLE RAS cell systems and Sonja
Krönung for help with image analysis of xenograft
tumor sections. Our work was supported by the German
Research Foundation (DFG, FOR 942), the Wilhelm
Sander Stiftung, the Deutsche José Carreras Stiftung, and
the German Cancer Aid / Dr. Mildred Scheel Stiftung.
U. K. was supported by the Göttingen Graduate School
of Neurosciences and Molecular Biosciences (GGNB),
funding line 3 of the German excellence initiative.

10.	 Li QQ, Xu JD, Wang WJ, Cao XX, Chen Q, Tang F,
Chen ZQ, Liu XP, Xu ZD. Twist1-mediated a­ driamycininduced epithelial-mesenchymal transition relates to
multidrug resistance and invasive potential in breast
cancer cells. Clinical cancer research : an official journal
of the American Association for Cancer Research.
2009; 15:2657–2665.
11.	 Thiery JP, Acloque H, Huang RY, Nieto MA. Epithelialmesenchymal transitions in development and disease.
Cell. 2009; 139:871–890.

REFERENCES
1.	 Boyer B, Tucker GC, Valles AM, Franke WW, Thiery JP.
Rearrangements of desmosomal and cytoskeletal proteins
during the transition from epithelial to fibroblastoid organization in cultured rat bladder carcinoma cells. The Journal
of cell biology. 1989; 109:1495–1509.

12.	 Elenbaas B, Spirio L, Koerner F, Fleming MD,
Zimonjic DB, Donaher JL, Popescu NC, Hahn WC,
Weinberg RA. Human breast cancer cells generated by
oncogenic transformation of primary mammary epithelial
cells. Genes & development. 2001; 15:50–65.

2.	 Oft M, Peli J, Rudaz C, Schwarz H, Beug H,
Reichmann E. TGF-beta1 and Ha-Ras collaborate in modulating the phenotypic plasticity and invasiveness of epithelial
tumor cells. Genes & development. 1996; 10:2462–2477.

13.	 Scheel C, Eaton EN, Li SH, Chaffer CL, Reinhardt F,
Kah KJ, Bell G, Guo W, Rubin J, Richardson AL,
Weinberg RA. Paracrine and autocrine signals induce and
maintain mesenchymal and stem cell states in the breast.
Cell. 2011; 145:926–940.

3.	 Mani SA, Guo W, Liao MJ, Eaton EN, Ayyanan A,
Zhou AY, Brooks M, Reinhard F, Zhang CC, Shipitsin M,
Campbell LL, Polyak K, Brisken C, Yang J, ­Weinberg RA.
The epithelial-mesenchymal ­transition generates cells with
properties of stem cells. Cell. 2008; 133:704–715.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

14.	 Gupta PB, Onder TT, Jiang G, Tao K, Kuperwasser  C,
Weinberg RA, Lander ES. Identification of selective
­inhibitors of cancer stem cells by high-throughput screening.
Cell. 2009; 138:645–659.

11790

Oncotarget

15.	 Tam WL, Lu H, Buikhuisen J, Soh BS, Lim E,
Reinhardt F, Wu ZJ, Krall JA, Bierie B, Guo W, Chen X,
Liu XS, Brown M, Lim B, Weinberg RA. Protein kinase C
alpha is a central signaling node and therapeutic target for
breast cancer stem cells. Cancer cell. 2013; 24:347–364.

27.	 Kabeya Y, Mizushima N, Ueno T, Yamamoto A,
Kirisako T, Noda T, Kominami E, Ohsumi Y,
Yoshimori T. LC3, a mammalian homologue of yeast
Apg8p, is localized in autophagosome membranes after
processing. The EMBO journal. 2000; 19:5720–5728.

16.	 Boise LH, Gonzalez-Garcia M, Postema CE, Ding L,
Lindsten T, Turka LA, Mao X, Nunez G, Thompson CB.
bcl-x, a bcl-2-related gene that functions as a dominant
regulator of apoptotic cell death. Cell. 1993; 74:597–608.

28.	 Lian J, Wu X, He F, Karnak D, Tang W, Meng Y,
Xiang D, Ji M, Lawrence TS, Xu L. A natural BH3 ­mimetic
induces autophagy in apoptosis-resistant prostate cancer
via modulating Bcl-2-Beclin1 interaction at endoplasmic
reticulum. Cell death and differentiation. 2011; 18:60–71.

17.	 Habens F, Lapham AS, Dallman CL, Pickering BM,
Michels J, Marcusson EG, Johnson PW, Packham G.
Distinct promoters mediate constitutive and inducible
Bcl-XL expression in malignant lymphocytes.
­Oncogene. 2007; 26:1910–1919.

29.	 Olopade OI, Adeyanju MO, Safa AR, Hagos F, Mick R,
Thompson CB, Recant WM. Overexpression of BCL-x
­protein in primary breast cancer is associated with high
­tumor grade and nodal metastases. The cancer journal from
Scientific American. 1997; 3:230–237.

18.	 Yang J, Weinberg RA. Epithelial-mesenchymal
transition: at the crossroads of development and tumor
metastasis. Developmental cell. 2008; 14:818–829.

30.	 Brabletz T, Jung A, Spaderna S, Hlubek F,
Kirchner T. Opinion: migrating cancer stem cells - an
­integrated concept of malignant tumour progression. Nature
reviews Cancer. 2005; 5:744–749.

19.	 Santagata S, Thakkar A, Ergonul A, Wang B, Woo T,
Hu R, Harrell JC, McNamara G, Schwede M, Culhane AC,
Kindelberger D, Rodig S, Richardson A, Schnitt SJ,
Tamimi RM, Ince TA. Taxonomy of breast cancer based
on normal cell phenotype predicts outcome. The Journal of
clinical investigation. 2014; 124:859–870.

31.	 de Herreros AG, Peiro S, Nassour M, Savagner P. Snail
family regulation and epithelial mesenchymal transitions
in breast cancer progression. Journal of mammary gland
biology and neoplasia. 2010; 15:135–147.

20.	 Withers WA, Carruth FE. Gossypol—a Toxic
Substance in Cottonseed. A Preliminary Note.
Science. 1915; 41:324.

32.	 Roxanis I. Occurrence and significance of epithelial-­
mesenchymal transition in breast cancer. Journal of clinical
pathology. 2013; 66:517–521.

21.	 Kitada S, Leone M, Sareth S, Zhai D, Reed JC,
Pellecchia M. Discovery, characterization, and structureactivity relationships studies of proapoptotic polyphenols
targeting B-cell lymphocyte/leukemia-2 proteins. Journal of
medicinal chemistry. 2003; 46:4259–4264.

33.	 Luo J, Solimini NL, Elledge SJ. Principles of ­
cancer
therapy: oncogene and non-oncogene addiction.
Cell. 2009; 136:823–837.
34.	 Dobbelstein M, Moll U. Targeting tumour-supportive
­cellular machineries in anticancer drug development. Nature
reviews Drug discovery. 2014; 13:179–196.

22.	 Zhang M, Liu H, Guo R, Ling Y, Wu X, Li B,
Roller PP, Wang S, Yang D. Molecular mechanism of
gossypol-induced cell growth inhibition and cell death
of HT-29 human colon carcinoma cells. Biochemical
pharmacology. 2003; 66:93–103.

35.	 Chaffer CL, Brueckmann I, Scheel C, Kaestli AJ, Wiggins PA,
Rodrigues LO, Brooks M, Reinhardt F, Su Y, Polyak K,
Arendt LM, Kuperwasser C, Bierie B, Weinberg RA. Normal
and neoplastic nonstem cells can spontaneously
convert to a stem-like state. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
America. 2011; 108:7950–7955.

23.	 van Delft MF, Wei AH, Mason KD, Vandenberg CJ,
Chen L, Czabotar PE, Willis SN, Scott CL, Day CL,
Cory S, Adams JM, Roberts AW, Huang DC. The BH3
mimetic ABT-737 targets selective Bcl-2 proteins and
efficiently induces apoptosis via Bak/Bax if Mcl-1 is
neutralized. Cancer cell. 2006; 10:389–399.

36.	 Meacham CE, Morrison SJ. Tumour heterogeneity and
­cancer cell plasticity. Nature. 2013; 501:328–337.
37.	 Liedert B, Pluim D, Schellens J, Thomale J. Adductspecific monoclonal antibodies for the measurement
of cisplatin-induced DNA lesions in individual cell
nuclei. Nucleic acids research. 2006; 34:e47.

24.	 Degterev A, Lugovskoy A, Cardone M, Mulley B,
Wagner G, Mitchison T, Yuan J. Identification of
small-molecule inhibitors of interaction b
­etween the
BH3 domain and Bcl-xL. Nature cell ­biology. 2001;
3:173–182.

38.	 Ruifrok AC, Johnston DA. Quantification of histochemical
staining by color deconvolution. Analytical and
quantitative cytology and histology / the International
Academy of Cytology [and] American Society of
­Cytology. 2001; 23:291–299.

25.	 Oltersdorf T, Elmore SW, Shoemaker AR, Armstrong RC,
Augeri DJ, Belli BA, Bruncko M, Deckwerth TL,
Dinges J, Hajduk PJ, Joseph MK, Kitada S, Korsmeyer SJ,
Kunzer AR, Letai A, Li C, et al. An inhibitor of
Bcl-2 ­family proteins induces regression of solid tumours.
­Nature. 2005; 435:677–681.
26.	 Tanida I, Ueno T, Kominami E. LC3
Autophagy. Methods Mol Biol. 2008; 445:77–88.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

39.	 Deverman BE, Cook BL, Manson SR, Niederhoff RA,
Langer EM, Rosova I, Kulans LA, Fu X, Weinberg JS,
Heinecke JW, Roth KA, Weintraub SJ. Bcl-xL deamidation
is a critical switch in the regulation of the response to DNA
damage. Cell. 2002; 111:51–62.

and
11791

Oncotarget

