HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Author Manuscript

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 July 23.
Published in final edited form as:
Nature. 2014 January 23; 505(7484): 495–501. doi:10.1038/nature12912.

Discovery and saturation analysis of cancer genes across 21
tumor types
Michael S. Lawrence1, Petar Stojanov1, Craig H. Mermel1,2, Levi A. Garraway1,3,4, Todd R.
Golub1,3,4,5, Matthew Meyerson1,3,4, Stacey B. Gabriel1, Eric S. Lander1,4,6,*, and Gad
Getz1,2,4,*
1Broad

Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA, 02142, USA

Author Manuscript

2Massachusetts
3Dana-Farber

General Hospital, Cancer Center and Dept. of Pathology, MA, 02114, USA

Cancer Institute, Boston, MA, 02215, USA

4Harvard

Medical School, Boston, MA, 02115, USA

5Howard

Hughes Medical Institute, Chevy Chase, MD, 20815, USA

6Massachussetts

Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, 02139, USA

Summary

Author Manuscript

While a few cancer genes are mutated in a high proportion of tumors of a given type (>20%), most
are mutated at intermediate frequencies (2–20%). To explore the feasibility of creating a
comprehensive catalog of cancer genes, we analyzed somatic point mutations in exome sequence
from 4,742 tumor-normal pairs across 21 cancer types. We found that large-scale genomic
analysis can identify nearly all known cancer genes in these tumor types. Our analysis also
identified 33 genes not previously known to be significantly mutated, including genes related to
proliferation, apoptosis, genome stability, chromatin regulation, immune evasion, RNA processing
and protein homeostasis. Down-sampling analysis indicates that larger sample sizes will reveal
many more genes, mutated at clinically important frequencies. We estimate that near-saturation
may be achieved with 600–5000 samples per tumor type, depending on background mutation rate.
The results help guide the next stage of cancer genomics.

Author Manuscript

Users may view, print, copy, and download text and data-mine the content in such documents, for the purposes of academic research,
subject always to the full Conditions of use:http://www.nature.com/authors/editorial_policies/license.html#terms
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to E.S.L. (lander@broadinstitute.org) and G.G.
(gadgetz@broadinstitute.org).
*These authors contributed equally
Author Contributions
G.G., E.S.L., T.R.G., M.M., L.A.G., and S.B.G. conceived the project and provided leadership. M.S.L., G.G., P.S., and C.H.M.
analysed the data and contributed to scientific discussions. M.S.L., E.S.L., and G.G. wrote the paper.
Accession numbers
The data analyzed in this manuscript has been deposited in Synapse (http://www.synapse.org), accession number syn1729383, and in
dbGaP (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/gap), accession numbers phs000330.v1.p1, phs000348.v1.p1, phs000369.v1.p1,
phs000370.v1.p1, phs000374.v1.p1, phs000435.v2.p1, phs000447.v1.p1, phs000450.v1.p1, phs000452.v1.p1, phs000467.v6.p1,
phs000488.v1.p1, phs000504.v1.p1, phs000508.v1.p1, phs000579.v1.p1, phs000598.v1.p1.
The authors declare the following competing financial interest: a patent application has been filed related to this work.

Lawrence et al.

Page 2

Author Manuscript

Introduction
Comprehensive knowledge of the genes underlying human cancers is a critical foundation
for cancer diagnostics, therapeutics, clinical trial design and selection of rational
combination therapies. It is now possible to use genomic analysis identify cancer genes in an
unbiased fashion, based on the presence of somatic mutations at a rate significantly higher
than the expected background level.

Author Manuscript

Systematic studies have revealed many new cancer genes, as well as new classes of cancer
genes1,2. They have also made clear that, while some cancer genes are mutated at high
frequencies, most cancer genes in most patients occur at intermediate frequencies (2–20%)
or lower. Accordingly, a complete catalog of mutations in this frequency class will be
essential for recognizing dysregulated pathways and optimal targets for therapeutic
intervention. Yet, recent work suggests major gaps in our knowledge of cancer genes of
intermediate frequency. For example, a study of 183 lung adenocarcinomas3 found that 15%
of patients lacked even a single mutation affecting any of the ten known hallmarks of
cancer, and 38% had three or fewer such mutations.
In this paper, we analyzed somatic point mutations (substitutions and small insertion/
deletions) in nearly 5000 TN pairs across 21 tumor types. We ask: (1) Can large-scale
genomic analysis across tumor types reliably identify all known cancer genes? (2) Will it
reveal many new candidate cancer genes? (3) How far do we stand from having a complete
catalog of cancer genes – at least those of intermediate frequency? We used rigorous
statistical methods to enumerate candidate cancer genes and then carefully inspected each
gene to identify those with strong biological connections to cancer and mutational patterns
consistent with the expected function.

Author Manuscript

The analysis reveals nearly all known cancer genes and revealed 33 novel candidates,
including genes related to proliferation, apoptosis, genome stability, chromatin regulation,
immune evasion, RNA processing, and protein homeostasis. Importantly, the data show that
the catalog of cancer genes is still far from complete – with the number of candidate cancer
genes still increasing sharply with sample size. These analyses allow us to estimate the
sample sizes that will be needed to approach saturation.

Results
Cancer genome data

Author Manuscript

We collected and analyzed data from 4,742 samples, consisting primarily of whole-exome
sequence from TN pairs. The samples span 21 tumor types, which include 12 from The
Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) and 14 from non-TCGA projects at the Broad Institute, with
some overlapping tumor types (Table 1, Supplementary Table 1). The number of samples
per tumor type varied between 35 and 892.
Data were all analyzed through the Broad’s stringent filtering and annotation pipeline to
obtain a uniform set of mutation calls (Methods). The dataset consists of 3,078,483 somatic
single nucleotide variations (SSNVs), 77,270 small insertions and deletions (SINDELs), and

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 July 23.

Lawrence et al.

Page 3

Author Manuscript

29,837 somatic di-/tri-/oligonucleotide variations (DNVs/TNVs/ONVs), with an average of
672 per TN pair. The mutations include 540,831 missense, 207,144 synonymous, 46,264
nonsense, 33,637 splice-site, and 2,294,935 non-coding mutations (used to improve our
background model). The analysis has sensitivity > 90% based on the sequencing depth and
tumor purity and ploidy4,5.
Mutation frequencies vary over more than five orders of magnitude (from 0.03/Mb to
7000/Mb) within and across tumor types, consistent with our recent study of mutational
heterogeneity6 of ~3,000 samples (of which, 2,502 are included in this dataset)
(Supplementary Figure 1). Mutation spectra also vary sharply within and across tumor
types6 (Supplementary Figure 2).
Cancer genome analysis

Author Manuscript

We analyzed these data to identify candidate cancer genes – by which we shall mean genes
harboring somatic point mutations (that is, substitutions and small insertion/deletions) at a
statistically significant rate or pattern in cancer. (Such genes will ultimately need to be
verified by biological experiments to be considered validated cancer genes.) In this paper,
we do not seek to implicate genes based on other criteria (such as amplification or deletion,
translocations or epigenomic modification; but see7).
In principle, candidate cancer genes can be discovered by sequencing enough tumor-normal
pairs – based on the presence of an excess of somatic mutations compared to expectation.
However, careful analysis is required to assess statistical significance. The mere presence of
somatic mutations is insufficient to implicate a gene in cancer, inasmuch as 93% of genes
carried mutations in at least five samples.

Author Manuscript

We showed recently6 that heterogeneity of mutation rates and patterns in cancer can give
rise to false positives and described methods to overcome this problem. We applied these
methods to identify candidate cancer genes. We used the most recent version of the MutSig
suite of tools (Supplementary Figure 3a, Methods), which looks for three independent
signals: (i) high mutational burden relative to background expectation, accounting for
heterogeneity; (ii) clustering of mutations within the gene8; and (iii) enrichment of
mutations in evolutionarily conserved sites8. We combined the significance levels (p-values)
from each test to obtain a single significance level per gene (Methods).

Author Manuscript

We analyzed each tumor type separately, as well as the entire cohort (‘combined’ set), using
the same methodology to ensure that the results can be compared across types. We verified
that each analysis accurately calculates the significance level of genes, based on the fact that
the vast majority of genes fit the null hypothesis and lie on the diagonal in a Q-Q plot
(Supplementary Figure 3b). For each analysis, genes with false discovery rate (FDR) q≤0.1
were declared to be candidate cancer genes (Methods). Using an FDR of q≤0.1 ensures that
the expected fraction of false positives in each analysis does not exceed 10%. This wellestablished statistical procedure allows one to increase statistical power to detect true
positives, while controlling the proportion of false positives. We also analyzed the merged
set of gene × tumor-type pairs identified from the 22 individual analyses (here we include
the combined set as one of the ‘tumor types’), using methods discussed below.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 July 23.

Lawrence et al.

Page 4

Author Manuscript

Data and results are posted at http://www.tumorportal.org/. The site includes graphical
displays of the mutations in each of the 18,388 genes studied; see examples in Figure 1 and
Supplementary Figure 4. The site also includes tables of mutational data for each significant
gene) and Q-Q plots for each statistical test.
Candidate cancer genes across 21 tumor types
A total of 224 genes were found to be significant in one or more tumor types, and 334 gene
× tumor-type pairs were found to be significant. The number of genes detected per tumor
type varied considerably (range 1 – 58), with seven types having fewer than 10 genes and
two (breast and endometrial) having more than 30 (Figure 2; Supplementary Figure 5; Table
1). The specific genes differed substantially across tumor types, although some pairs of
tumor types showed clear similarity, such as lung squamous cancer and head and neck
squamous cancer (Methods, Supplementary Figure 6).

Author Manuscript

Strikingly, only 22 genes were declared significant in three or more tumor types. The wellestablished cancer genes TP53, PIK3CA, PTEN, RB1, KRAS, NRAS, BRAF, CDKN2A,
FBXW7, ARID1A and MLL2, as well as STAG2, were significant in four or more tumor
types. An additional 10 genes (ATM, CASP8, CTCF, ERBB3, HLA-A, HRAS, IDH1, NF1,
NFE2L2, PIK3R1) were significant in three tumor types.

Author Manuscript

Although the power to detect cancer genes varied across tumor types (based on sample size
and background mutation rate), the striking differences across tumor types do not simply
reflect differences in detection power. For example, tumor types with low mutation
frequency or many samples often show fewer cancer genes despite having greater statistical
power to detect them (Table 1). Moreover, many genes that are highly enriched in one (e.g.
VHL, WT1) or a few (e.g. HRAS, FBXW7) tumor types fail to show detectable enrichment
across the entire data set (Supplementary Table 2). Notably, most of the significant gene ×
tumor-type pairs involve only a small fraction of patients (with one half of the significant
pairs involving ≤ 6.1% of patients, and one quarter involving ≤ 3.1%).
We then analyzed the combined set, which yielded 114 genes (Supplementary Table 2).
While 84 of these genes were already identified from analysis of individual tumor types, the
remaining 30 achieved significance based only on the frequency of mutations across tumor
types – underscoring the value of cross-tumor-type analysis. Conversely, 140 of the 224
genes found in analysis of individual tumor types did not reach significance when analyzing
the combined set (Figure 3, lower right quadrant), consistent with the observation that many
genes show strong enrichment in only one or a few tumor types.

Author Manuscript

By merging the 22 lists above, we obtained a Cancer5000 set containing 254 genes.
Although the expected proportion of false positive genes in each list does not exceed 10%,
the expected proportion in the merged list is actually higher (because true positives will tend
to occur across several tumor types, while false positives will tend to be random singletons).
A rigorous solution is to analyze the gene × tumor-type pairs as ~400,000 distinct
hypotheses (~18,400 genes × 22 types) and apply an FDR of q ≤ 0.1. This analysis yielded
403 significant pairs, which involve 219 distinct genes. We refer to this set as the
Cancer5000-S (for “stringent”) genes. (All but six of the genes are contained in the

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 July 23.

Lawrence et al.

Page 5

Author Manuscript

Cancer5000 set.) Of the 403 significant pairs, at most 10% (that is ~40) are expected to be
false positives. Assuming conservatively that the 40 pairs affect 40 distinct genes, we expect
179 of the 219 genes to be true cancer genes. Below, we discuss genes from both the
Cancer5000 and Cancer5000-S sets.
Coverage of known cancer genes
We first asked whether all cancer genes that have been discovered and validated to date can
be identified by hypothesis-free genomic analysis. As a reference set, we used the Cancer
Gene Census (CGC), which is a manually curated catalog of cancer genes. The current
version (v65) contains 130 cancer genes driven by somatic point mutations (as well as
additional genes mutated by other mechanisms), of which 82 are associated with one or
more of the 21 tumor types studied here.

Author Manuscript

Of these 82 genes, 60 were identified in our Cancer5000 set. Of the remaining 22 genes, (i)
8 fell just below significance in our data set; (ii) 6 appear in the CGC based on focused
studies of the gene in very large samples (typically, >1000); and (iii) 8 genes harbored few
mutations and appear to lack adequate evidence to justify association with any of the tumor
types we studied. The first two categories would clearly be captured with larger sample
sizes.
Analysis of novel candidate cancer genes

Author Manuscript

Of the 219 genes in the Cancer5000-S set, 81 are neither listed in the CGC as affected by
point mutations in these tumor types (v65) nor discussed in papers published as of this
writing (Supplementary Table 4). (The list includes 3 genes that appear in tables in
published papers based on mutations in a handful of samples, but were not noted or
interpreted in the text.) Of the 41 additional genes in the Cancer5000 (but not Cancer5000S) set, none are in the CGC but 3 are reported in recent publications (Supplementary Table
4).
We closely analyzed these 81 ‘novel’ genes to look for connections with cancer biology,
together with a mutational pattern consistent with the biology. Where loss-of-function would
be expected, we looked for an excess of disruptive changes, such as nonsense and frameshift
mutations. Where gain-of-function, we examined whether the overall collection of mutations
included hotspots – resulting in recurrent changes at identical or nearby amino acids (often
causing precisely the same change). Conversely, where we observed distinctive mutation
patterns, we examined whether they are consistent with known biology.

Author Manuscript

As discussed above, the Cancer5000-S set is expected by design to contain ~40 false
positives. Assuming conservatively that these false positives fall exclusively in the novel set,
we expect ~41 of the novel genes to be true positives.
In fact, we identified strong and consistent connections to cancer for at least 21 of the novel
genes in the Cancer5000-S set. Among the 38 additional novel genes in the larger
Cancer5000 set, we found 12 additional strong candidates. (References supporting the
biological roles of the genes are provided in Supplementary Table 5.) We briefly describe
these 33 genes not previously been reported as significantly mutated in cancer:

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 July 23.

Lawrence et al.

Page 6

Author Manuscript

(1) Anti-proliferation—Four genes encode anti-proliferative proteins, in which loss-offunction mutations would be expected to contribute to oncogenesis. A striking example is
ARHGAP35 (previously called GRLF1), which encodes a Rho GTPase activating protein,
for which only a single tumor type reaches statistical significance on its own, but which
gives a strong signal (q = 2 × 10−12) in the combined set of ~5000 tumors (83 missense, 38
nonsense, 16 frameshift and 2 splice site). Notably, the gene resides in a small genomic
region that is focally deleted in many tumors. Other examples are MGA, whose product
competes with Myc for binding to Max and which resides in small focal deletions
(containing ≤4 genes) in ovarian and various epithelial cancers; the interferon regulatory
factor IRF6, which is known to have tumor suppressive roles in keratinocytes and is mutated
in head and neck squamous cancer; and the delta/notch-like EGF-repeat gene DNER.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

(2) Proliferation—Six additional genes encode proteins that are clearly involved in cell
proliferation: RHEB, RHOA, SOS1, ELF3, SGK1 and MYOCD. Notably RHEB and RHOA
encode small GTPases, in which recurrent mutations affect the 9-amino-acid effector
domain (ED). For RHEB, five tumors (2 endometrial and 3 kidney clear cell cancer) carry
Y35N mutations, which alter the first amino acid of the ED. For RHOA, six tumors (all head
and neck) carry mutations affecting the ED: these include five E40Q mutations and a single
Y42I mutation, which alter the seventh and ninth amino acids, respectively, of the ED. SOS1
encodes a guanine nucleotide exchange factor that promotes activation of Ras, in which
gain-of-function mutations might contribute to oncogenesis. Consistent with this notion,
SOS1 carries N233Y mutations in six tumors (four endometrial and two lung
adenocarcinoma) and R552 alterations in three tumors (two endometrial and one AML).
Strikingly, the same R522 alterations in SOS1 have been found as germline mutations
causing Noonan syndrome and been shown to cause gain-of-function resulting in Ras
activation. ELF3 encodes an ETS-domain transcription factor that functions in cell
differentiation; it carries many truncating mutations in bladder and colon cancer. Myocardin
(MYOCD), which encodes a transcriptional regulator involved in differentiation and cell
migration, has a cluster of 9 mutations at amino acids 750–770 (7 in melanoma, 1 head and
neck, 1 lung adenocarcinoma) with a hotspot of four at S763. The retinoid × receptor alpha
RXRA, which forms a heterodimer with retinoic acid receptors to regulate cell growth and
survival, shows a clear hotspot of recurrent mutations at S427 in bladder cancer and nearby
mutations in lung, head and neck, and esophageal cancers.

Author Manuscript

(3) Apoptosis—Five genes encode pro-apoptotic factors, in which loss-of-function
mutations would be expected to promote oncogenesis. These genes encode alpha kinase 2
(ALPK2); Bcl2-associated factor 1 (BCLAF1); a MAP kinase (MAP4K3) reported to posttranscriptionally regulate the apoptotic proteins Puma, Bad and Bim; a zinc-finger protein
(ZNF750, which harbors many early frameshift and nonsense mutations in head and neck
cancer and is the only known gene residing in a small current focal deletion in head and
neck and lung squamous cancers); and Tumor Necrosis Factor (TNF, which harbors
mutations in five diffuse large B-cell lymphomas that are tightly clustered in the region
encoding the membrane/cytoplasmic domain, rather than the soluble Tnf protein).

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 July 23.

Lawrence et al.

Page 7

Author Manuscript

(4) Genome stability—Six genes encode proteins related to genome stability. These
include CEP76 (encoding a centrosomal protein, whose depletion drives aberrant
amplification of centrioles), which harbors early nonsense mutations in many tumor types
and resides in a focal deletion peak in acute myeloid leukemia; RAD21 (encoding a protein
crucial for chromosome segregation and double-strand break repair), which is mutated at
significant rates in acute myeloid leukemia and also harbors mutations in other tumor types;
the p53-binding protein TP53BP1 (encoding a check-point protein that binds to doublestrand breaks), which does not reach significance in any single tumor type, but is significant
in the combined data set due to truncating mutations in many tumor types; TPX2 (encoding a
protein involved in mitotic spindle formation, whose depletion leads to aneuploidy); and
ZRANB3 (encoding a translocase that helps to rescue stalled replication forks). In addition,
STX2 encodes a protein required for cytokinesis, whose disruption may promote aneuploidy;
STX2 harbors recurrent mutations at R107 in lung and endometrial tumors.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

(5) Chromatin regulation—Five genes are associated with chromatin regulation.
SETDB1 encodes a H3K9 histone methyltransferase (SETD2, which encodes a H3K36
histone methyltransferase, has been shown previously to be mutated in cancer). MBD1
encodes a protein that binds methylated-CpG and is required for SETDB1 activity; it
contains 5 mutations in endometrial cancer in the N-terminal methyl binding domain. EZH1
encodes a H3K27 histone methyltransferase; it does not reach significance in any individual
tumor type, but is significant in the combined set due to truncating mutations in multiple
tumor types. EZH1 shows a similar pattern of mutations as seen in the well-established
cancer gene EZH2, with truncating mutations along the gene and a hotspot of mutations
within the SET domain. CHD8 encodes a chromatin helicase DNA binding protein (like the
known cancer gene CHD4) that suppresses the beta-catenin-Wnt signaling pathway. The
histone protein HIST1H4E is mutated in multiple tumor types; two other histone genes,
HIST1H1E and HIST1H3B, have previously been reported as significantly mutated in CLL
and DLBCL, respectively.
(6) Immune evasion—Three genes encode proteins whose loss is expected to help tumor
evade immune attack; they all recurrently subject to truncating mutations across several
tumor types. These include the major histocompatibility protein HLA-B (loss of the HLA-A
gene has been implicated in lung cancer), TAP1 (which processes intracellular peptides for
presentation to the immune system) and CD1D (which presents lipid antigens to natural
killer cells), the last of which shows a cluster of truncating mutations at the internalization
domain that are likely to abolish antigen presentation function.

Author Manuscript

(7) RNA processing—Three genes are associated with RNA processing and metabolism.
PCBP1, whose protein product blocks translation of certain mRNAs by binding to Poly-C
regions of mRNAs, carries two mutations in each of two nearby leucines (Leu100 and
Leu102) that mediate dimerization of the protein’s KH domains. We speculate that
disruption of PCBP1 leads to increased translation of one or more pro-oncogenic mRNAs.
QKI encodes an RNA-binding protein that regulates pre-mRNA splicing, including the
known cancer gene CDKN1B; the gene harbors C-terminal truncating mutations in several
tumor types that likely remove the nuclear localization signal; and the gene resides in a

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 July 23.

Lawrence et al.

Page 8

Author Manuscript

recurrent deletion peak in glioblastoma and ovarian cancer. Finally, the ribosomal protein
gene RPL5 contains early truncating mutations in glioblastoma and other tumor types and
resides in a focally deleted region in glioblastoma; heterozygous loss of certain ribosomal
proteins has been reported to contribute to cancer.
(8) Protein homeostasis—One gene, TRIM23, is involved in protein homeostasis. It
encodes a ubiquitin E3 ligase and harbors recurrent mutations at N93 (4 tumors) and D289
(3 tumors). Mutations in this gene may promote cancer by altering the substrate specificity
of the E3 ligase in a manner that leads to accumulation of an oncogenic protein.

Author Manuscript

Beyond these 33 genes, the set of 81 novel genes is likely to contain additional true cancer
genes. For example, we omitted genes with connections to cancer (such as HSP90AB1,
PPM1D, ITGB7) where we could not easily reconcile the function in cancer with the
observed pattern of mutations. In addition, we likely overlooked additional candidate cancer
genes because we did not identify clear connections with cancer – owing to gaps in the
literature or in our knowledge.
Saturation analysis
We next explored whether the discovery of candidate cancer genes is approaching saturation
or whether many more genes are likely to be found. An effective test is to perform “downsampling” – that is, to study how the number of discoveries increases with sample size, by
repeating the analysis on random subsets of samples of various smaller sizes.

Author Manuscript

For each tumor type (omitting those with five or fewer candidate cancer genes), the number
of genes increases roughly linearly with sample size (examples in Figure 4a; see also
Supplementary Figure 7) – indicating that the inventory for each of the tumor types is far
from complete. The number of genes also increases linearly with the number of tumor types
studied (Figure 4b), suggesting that it is valuable to increase both the sample size per tumor
type and the number of tumor types.
We also studied how the total number of candidate cancer genes varies with sample size
when applying the ‘stringent’ methodology used to create the Cancer5000-S set. Here too,
the total number of genes increases steadily with sample size (Figure 4c). Notably, the
saturation analysis varies considerably with the mutation frequency (Figure 4d). Genes
mutated in >20% of tumors are approaching saturation; those mutated at frequencies of 10–
20% are still rising rapidly, but at a decreasing rate; those at 5–10% are increasing linearly;
and those at <5% are increasingly at an accelerating rate.

Author Manuscript

We next sought to infer the nature of the genes awaiting discovery in each tumor type. One
possibility is that some of these genes are already contained in the Cancer5000 set (by virtue
of their contribution to other tumor types) but have not yet reached statistical significance in
the given tumor type due to insufficient sample size. To test this notion, we performed
restricted hypothesis testing (RHT): For each tumor type T, we (i) omitted the tumor type,
(ii) determined the set GT of genes that are significant based on the remaining tumor types,
and (iii) determined which genes in GT reached significance in the omitted tumor type when

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 July 23.

Lawrence et al.

Page 9

Author Manuscript

correcting for multiple hypothesis testing based on only the number of genes in GT (rather
than all ~18,400 genes in the genome).

Author Manuscript

The RHT analysis implicated many additional Cancer5000 genes in the individual tumor
types (median 6 per tumor type, range 0–15). The number of significant gene × tumor-type
pairs increased from 334 to 461 across the 21 tumor types. The RHT analysis indicates that,
with somewhat larger sample size, these genes will likely reach significance in an
unrestricted test (Table 1; Supplementary Table 3). For some tumor types, the number of
implicated genes more than doubled: lung squamous cell carcinoma increased from 11 to 24;
CLL from 7 to 15; and ovarian from 5 to 10. Notably, 3 genes now became significant in
four tumor types each (ARID2, ERBB2, ARHGAP35) and 7 genes in three types each
(CTNNB1, FGFR3, KRAS, PTEN, SMAD4, MLL3). While 9 of these genes are well known
cancer genes, one (ARHGAP35) is absent from the current CGC list. Notably, ARHGAP35
appears in the Cancer5000 set because it is significantly mutated in endometrial cancer
(although not discussed in the recent TCGA publication9), but our RHT analysis also finds it
to be significant in lung adenocarcinoma, lung squamous cell carcinoma, kidney clear cell,
and head and neck cancer. The genes found to be significant in additional tumor types in the
RHT analysis are mutated at a median frequency of 3.4%.
However, the data also clearly show that many new candidate cancer genes remain to be
discovered beyond those in the current Cancer5000 set. (1) Beyond genes becoming
significant in additional tumor types, the down-sampling analysis shows that the number of
novel genes is increasing sharply (using the stringent analysis used to create the
Cancer5000-S set). (2) Adding additional tumor types typically adds novel ‘tumor-typespecific’ genes, which are unique to (or at vastly higher frequency in) the tumor type.

Author Manuscript

Power Analysis
Because the cancer gene catalog remains far from complete, we explored what sample sizes
will be needed to approach saturation. The power to detect a gene as significantly mutated
depends on the properties of the tumor type—namely, (1) the average background mutation
rate for the tumor type (‘noise’), and (2) the target frequency, above the background rate,
that one wishes to detect (‘signal’). It also depends on the properties of the gene – namely,
its background mutation frequency relative to other genes (which depends on length and
local mutation rate). We set a target of having 90% power to detect 90% of all genes. In
addition, we allow for a false negative rate of 10% in detecting mutations, which increases
the sample size by slightly more than 10%.

Author Manuscript

Figure 5 shows that the current collection lacks the desired power to detect genes mutated at
5% above the background rate for 17 of the 21 tumor types and even at 10% for 7 of the
tumor types. These results are consistent with the down-sampling analysis showing that
candidate cancer genes with frequency ≥ 20% are approaching saturation, while the number
of candidate cancer genes at lower frequencies is continuing to grow rapidly with sample
size.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 July 23.

Lawrence et al.

Page 10

Author Manuscript

Creating a reasonably comprehensive catalog of candidate cancer genes mutated in ≥ 2% of
patients will require between ~650 samples (for tumors with ~0.5 mutations/Mb, such as
neuroblastoma) to ~5300 samples (for melanoma, with 12.9 mutations/Mb).

Discussion

Author Manuscript

Precision medicine for cancer will ultimately require having a comprehensive catalog of
cancer genes to allow physicians to select the best combination therapy for each patient
based on the cellular pathways disrupted in their tumor and the specific nature of the
disruptions. Such a catalog will also guide therapeutic development by identifying druggable
targets. In addition, the catalog and its underlying data will facilitate the interpretation of
cell lines, animal models and clinical observations and will reveal patterns of co-occurrence,
mutual exclusivity and lineage restriction, which may provide mechanistic insights with
profound therapeutic implications.
While a handful of cancer genes are mutated at high frequency, most cancer genes mutated
in most patients occur at intermediate frequencies (2–20%). To provide therapeutic options
for most patients, it will thus be critical to identify and understand the pathway-level
implications of all genes mutated at intermediate frequencies (2–20%).

Author Manuscript

With growing datasets across many tumor types, pan-cancer analyses are becoming of great
interest.10,11 In this paper, we studied somatic point mutations in a collection of nearly 5000
tumor-normal pairs across 21 cancer types. We identified a Cancer5000 set containing 254
genes, based on merging results from each tumor type and the combined set, and a stringent
Cancer5000-S set containing 219 genes, accounting for multiple hypothesis testing across
the types. Nearly all previously known cancer genes in these tumor types are contained
within these sets or just below statistical significance.
After eliminating genes reported in the CGC or recent papers and accounting for the
expected number of false positives, the stringent Cancer5000-S set is expected to contain
~41 novel candidate cancer genes, with additional candidate cancer genes expected in the
larger Cancer5000 set. Upon close inspection, we found 33 genes (21 in the stringent set and
12 more in the larger set) with strong functional connections to cancer and mutation patterns
consistent with the presumed function. These genes fall within known ‘hallmarks’ of
cancer3,12, including cell proliferation, apoptosis, genome stability, chromatin regulation,
immune evasion, RNA processing and protein homeostasis. Follow-up studies will be
required to confirm and understand the functional impact of the mutations in these genes.

Author Manuscript

Beyond identifying new candidate cancer genes, our study demonstrates that we are far from
having a complete catalog of cancer genes – with many genes at clinically important
frequencies within individual tumor types and across cancer as a whole still awaiting
identification. The number of such genes is still increasing steeply with the number of
samples and the number of tumor types studied. Importantly, these new candidate cancer
genes are not rare. Substantial ongoing increases are seen in each of the 10–20%, 5–10%
and 2–5% ranges (Figure 4d). Notably, of the 33 novel genes above, five are mutated at
frequencies greater than 10% and fifteen at frequencies greater than 5%.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 July 23.

Lawrence et al.

Page 11

Author Manuscript

Creating a comprehensive catalog of genes in which somatic point mutations propel cancer
at both high (>20%) and intermediate (2–20%) frequency will require analyzing an average
of ~1700 tumors for each of at least 50 tumor types. (Currently defined tumor types may be
divided, based on genomic information, into distinct subtypes, each of which should be
analyzed on its own. The ultimate number of tumor types will thus be defined iteratively by
molecular analysis.)
Analysis should include both point mutations (as studied here), as well as other types of
functional variation7. Genomic studies of such large numbers of samples is no longer
prohibitive, in light of the one-million-fold decrease in the cost of DNA sequencing over the
past decade. Given the devastating human toll of cancer, with nearly 8 million deaths
annually worldwide13, completing the genomic analysis of this disease should be a
biomedical imperative.

Author Manuscript

Full Methods
Mutation data and preprocessing

Author Manuscript

Mutation data was obtained as follows. For TCGA tumor types, mutation data was
downloaded from the Synapse website, from the following link: <https://
www.synapse.org/#!Synapse:syn1729383>. For non-TCGA tumor types, sequencing data
was downloaded from dbGaP (accession numbers listed at end of main text) and processed
through Firehose, the Broad Institute’s analysis platform <http://www.broadinstitute.org/
cancer/cga/Firehose>. For tumor types that were originally aligned to builld hg18, liftOver
(<http://genome.ucsc.edu/cgi-bin/hgLiftOver>) was used to convert the coordinates of each
mutation to build hg19. All mutation data was then combined into a single MAF file.
Duplicate patients and duplicate mutations were removed. To standardize the definition of a
“splice-site” mutation, any mutation affecting the two bases before or after a splice junction,
was labeled as a splice-site mutation. Filtering was performed as follows. In order to remove
common sequencing artifacts or residual germline variation, each mutation in the combined
MAF file was subjected to a “Panel of Normals” filtering process using a panel of over 4000
BAM files from normal samples. For each mutation, the position of the mutation was
examined in each normal BAM file. Mutations observed in the panel of normals were
removed from the MAF. The final MAF is available at http://www.tumorportal.org/.
MutSig significance calculations

Author Manuscript

Three significance metrics were calculated for each gene, using the previously described
methods MutSigCV, MutSigCL, and MutSigFN. These measure the significance,
respectively, of mutation Burden, Clustering, and Functional Impact (Fig. S3). MutSigCV
was described previously6. MutSigCV determines the p-value for observing the given
quantity of nonsilent mutations in the gene, given the background model determined by
silent (and noncoding) mutations in the same gene and the neighboring genes of covariate
space that form its “bagel”. MutSigCL and MutSigFN were used previously8 but were not
given names in that work. Here we name the methods to reflect the type of evidence of
positive selection that they are designed to detect. MutSigCL and MutSigFN measure the
significance of the positional clustering of the mutations observed, as well as the

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 July 23.

Lawrence et al.

Page 12

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

significance of the tendency for mutations to occur at positions that are highly evolutionarily
conserved (using conservation as a proxy for probably functional impact). MutSigCL and
MutSigFN are permutation-based methods and their p-values are calculated as follows: The
observed nonsilent coding mutations in the gene are permuted T times (to simulate the null
hypothesis, T=108 for the most significant genes), randomly reassigning their positions, but
preserving their mutational “category”, as determined by local sequence context. We used
the following context categories: transitions at CpG dinucleotides, transitions at other C:G
basepairs, transversions at C:G basepairs, mutations at A:T basepairs, and indels. Indels are
unconstrained in where they can move to in the permutations. For each of the random
permutations, two scores are calculated: SCL and SFN, measuring the amount of clustering
and conservation respectively. SCL is defined to be the fraction of mutations occuring in
hotspots. A hotspot is defined as a three-basepair region of the gene containing many
mutations: at least 2, and at least 2% of the total mutations. SFN is defined to be the mean of
the basepair-level conservation values for the position of each non-silent mutation, as
obtained from an alignment of 45 vertebrate genomes to the human genome, the UCSC
“phyloP46way” track, which can be downloaded from <http://hgdownload.cse.ucsc.edu/
goldenPath/hg19/phyloP46way/README.txt>. To determine a pCL, the p-value for the
observed degree of positional clustering, the observed value of SCL (computed for the
mutations actually observed), was compared to the distribution of SCL obtained from the
random permutations, and the p-value was defined to be the fraction of random permutations
in which SCL was at least as large as the observed SCL. The p-value for the conservation of
the mutated positions, pFN, was computed analogously. Finally, we noted that the gene
AJUBA was referred to in some analyses by the alternative name JUB; after reconciling this
naming difference, the gene was significant and added to the list of significant genes.

Author Manuscript

Combining MutSig statistics
The three MutSig tests described above (MutSigCV, MutSigCL, and MutSigFN) were
combined into a single final p-value as follows. First, a joint p-value (CL+FN) for the
observed clustering and conservation was calculated from the joint probability distribution
of the random permutations. Next, this was combined with the MutSigCV p-value using two
methods: (i) The Fisher method of combining p-values from independent tests <http://
en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fisher's_method>; (ii) The truncated product method (TPM) for
combining p-values, which rewards highly significant p-values in any one of the tests The
combined p-values for both methods were extremely similar. We examined the performance
of each of the three metrics separately and each pairwise combination of two metrics. The
results of these analyses are presented in Supplementary Table 1 (last tab) and summarized
in Supplementary Table 5.

Author Manuscript

Multiple hypothesis corrections
In the analysis of each tumor type, a total of 18,388 genes were analyzed. In order to correct
for these multiple hypotheses, the final MutSig p-values were converted to FDR (q-values)
using the method of Benjamini and Hochberg, and genes with q≤0.1 were declared to be
significantly mutated. This was also done for the analysis of the combined cohort. Genes
with q≤0.1 in any tumor-type analysis or in the combined-cohort analysis were declared to
be a member of the Cancer5000 list of significant cancer genes.
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 July 23.

Lawrence et al.

Page 13

Author Manuscript

To correct for the 22 analyses thus combined (corresponding to 22 chances for each gene to
become significant), a further level of multiple hypothesis correction was applied. A list was
made of the 18,388 genes × 22 analyses = 404,536 hypotheses. The Benjamini-Hochberg
method was applied to this full set, yielding new FDR q-values. Any gene involved in these
gene × tumor-type pairs was declared to be a member of the stringently corrected
Cancer5000-S list of genes.
Downsampling analyses
In order to analyze the dependence of the number of significantly mutated cancer-associated
genes upon the size of the dataset being analyzed, down-sampling was performed. Three
different down-sampling analyses are described: (1) down-sampling within each tumor type;
and (2) down-sampling of the number of different tumor types; and (3) down-sampling of
the full Cancer5000-S procedure.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

(1) Down-sampling within each tumor type (Figure 4a, Supplementary Figure 7): For each
tumor type, the MutSig analysis was repeated for a set of many smaller subsets of patients
from that tumor type. The sizes of the subsets were chosen to regularly sample the interval
from zero patients to the final total number of patients that were in the full analysis. For each
of the random subsets thus defined, we repeated the full MutSig calculation (MutSigCV +
MutSigCL + MutSigFN) and combined the results of the three tests as described above. This
allowed us to determine which genes remained significant when analyzing each smaller
subset. We counted how many of the genes remained significant at each smaller set size, and
plotted this number as a smoothed function of set size. This allowed us to demonstrate that
the number of significantly mutated genes detected is continuing to rise steeply in each
tumor type. We also repeated this same analysis for the full combined dataset (4742
patients), with similar results.

Author Manuscript

(2) Down-sampling of the number of different tumor types (Figure 4b). In order to examine
the effect of adding whole tumor types, we performed the following analysis. We
constructed 25 random orderings of the 21 tumor types, and for each ordering, we
constructed 20 subsets by sequentially adding whole tumor types according to that ordering.
Then we repeated the whole MutSig analysis for each of these subsets. This yielded a set of
curves showing how the number of significantly mutated genes increased as a function of
the number of tumor types included in the analysis. The curve depended on the exact
ordering of the tumor types as they were added, but all curves showed a steady increase in
the number of genes, even at the highest numbers of tumor types. This demonstrated the
importance of continuing to sample additional tumor types. We also repeated the analysis
with subtraction of the expected number of false positives (Supplementary Figure 8a); the
results were qualitatively unchanged.
(3) Down-sampling of the full Cancer5000-S procedure (Figure 4c): We repeated our
procedure of constructing the Cancer5000-S list by applying the stringent procedure of
correction for the ~400,000 hypothesis (18,388 genes × 22 analyses), and computed how
many genes remained significant at each smaller set size. We plotted the number of
significantly mutated genes detected as a function of set size. This yielded a similar curve to
(1), with the number of significant genes continuing to rise steeply even at the largest set
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 July 23.

Lawrence et al.

Page 14

Author Manuscript

sizes. We also repeated the analysis with subtraction of the expected number of false
positives (Supplementary Figure 8b); the results were qualitatively unchanged. Furthermore,
we stratified the genes according to their frequency (calculated as the maximal frequency
across tumor types), and plotted separate curves for each of the following frequency
categories: 20% and above, 10–20%, 5–10%, 3–5%, 2–3%, and below 2%. This clearly
demonstrated that the 20%+ genes have largely all been discovered. In contrast, genes at
lower frequencies are continuing to be discovered (Figure 4d). Note that rerunning the
analysis produces slightly different results in every run since the calculation of p-values has
a stochastic component. The genes at the edge of significance (i.e. ones with q-value close to
0.1) may be declared as significant or insignificant with respect to the cutoff of q=0.1 in
different analyses. This slight fluctuation is standard for permutation-based methods.
Power calculations

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Power analysis was performed using a binomial power model. We first calculated the
probability, p0, that a patient will have at least one non-silent mutation in a particular gene
from the background model. The calculation is based on the length of the gene, L (in coding
bases), the background mutation rate, μ, (in mutations / base), the gene-specific mutation
rate factor, fg, (calculated by MutSigCV), the 3:1 typical ratio of non-silent to silent
mutations; p0=1−(1− μ*fg)(L*3/4). We used L=1500, and fg = 3.9 (representing the 90th
percentile of fg*Lg/1500 across the ~18,000 genes and fg=1 for the 50th percentile gene). We
then calculated the signal we want to detect, p1=p0 + r * (1−m); where r is the frequency of
non-silent mutations in the population (above background) that a gene is mutated and m is
the mis-detection rate of the mutation (we took m=0.1). The power was then calculated as
the probability to obtain a p-value ≤ 0.1/20,000, calculated as the tail of the binomial of N
trials (i.e. N patients) using p0, when in fact the binomial p=p1. To obtain Figure 5 and
Supplementary Figure 9 we found the values of N that yielded 90% power as a function of μ
and r.

Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.

Acknowledgements
This work was conducted as part of TCGA, a project of the National Cancer Institute and the National Human
Genome Research Institute. We are grateful to Travis I. Zack, Steven E. Schumacher, and Rameen Beroukhim for
sharing their copy-number analyses before publication.

Author Manuscript

References
1. Garraway LA, Lander ES. Lessons from the cancer genome. Cell. 2013; 153:17–37. [PubMed:
23540688]
2. Vogelstein B, et al. Cancer genome landscapes. Science. 2013; 339:1546–1558. [PubMed:
23539594]
3. Imielinski M, et al. Mapping the hallmarks of lung adenocarcinoma with massively parallel
sequencing. Cell. 2012; 150:1107–1120. [PubMed: 22980975]
4. Carter SL, et al. Absolute quantification of somatic DNA alterations in human cancer. Nat
Biotechnol. 2012; 30:413–421. [PubMed: 22544022]

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 July 23.

Lawrence et al.

Page 15

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

5. Cibulskis K, et al. Sensitive detection of somatic point mutations in impure and heterogeneous
cancer samples. Nat Biotechnol. 2013; 31:213–219. [PubMed: 23396013]
6. Lawrence MS, et al. Mutational heterogeneity in cancer and the search for new cancer-associated
genes. Nature. 2013; 499:214–218. [PubMed: 23770567]
7. Zack TI, et al. Pan-cancer patterns of somatic copy number alteration. Nat Genet. 2013; 45:1134–
1140. [PubMed: 24071852]
8. Lohr JG, et al. Discovery and prioritization of somatic mutations in diffuse large B-cell lymphoma
(DLBCL) by whole-exome sequencing. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012; 109:3879–3884.
[PubMed: 22343534]
9. Cancer Genome Atlas Research, N. Integrated genomic characterization of endometrial carcinoma.
Nature. 2013; 497:67–73. [PubMed: 23636398]
10. Kandoth C, et al. Mutational landscape and significance across 12 major cancer types. Nature.
2013; 502:333–339. [PubMed: 24132290]
11. Tamborero D, et al. Comprehensive identification of mutational cancer driver genes across 12
tumor types. Sci Rep. 2013; 3:2650. [PubMed: 24084849]
12. Hanahan D, Weinberg RA. Hallmarks of cancer: the next generation. Cell. 2011; 144:646–674.
[PubMed: 21376230]
13. Ferlay J, et al. Estimates of worldwide burden of cancer in 2008: GLOBOCAN 2008. Int J Cancer.
2010; 127:2893–2917. [PubMed: 21351269]

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 July 23.

Lawrence et al.

Page 16

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 1.

Mutation patterns for one known and two novel cancer genes. EGFR shows distinctive
tumor-type-specific concentrations of mutations in different regions of the gene. RHEB,
which encodes a small GTPase in the RAS superfamily, shows a mutational hotspot in the
effector domain. RHOA, another a member of the RAS superfamily, also shows a
mutational hotspot in the effector domain. Colored bars after tumor type names are copyratio distributions for the gene, when available (red=amplified, blue=deleted). See also

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 July 23.

Lawrence et al.

Page 17

Author Manuscript

Supplementary Figure 4. Similar diagrams for all genes are available at http://
www.tumorportal.org.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 July 23.

Lawrence et al.

Page 18

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Figure 2.

Author Manuscript

Cancer genes in selected tumor types. Genes are arranged on the horizontal line according to
p-value (combined value for the three tests in MutSig). Yellow region contains genes that
achieve FDR q≤0.1. Orange interval contains p-values for the next 20 genes. Gene name
color indicates whether the gene is a known cancer gene (blue), a novel gene with clear
connection to cancer (red; discussed in text), or an additional novel gene (black). Circle
color indicates the frequency (percent of patients carrying non-silent somatic mutations) in
that tumor type. See also Supplementary Figure 5.

Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 July 23.

Lawrence et al.

Page 19

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 3.

Cancer genes identified in 4742-tumor dataset. X-axis indicates the q-value (FDR) in the
most significant of the 21 tumor types. Y-axis indicates the q-value when the 4742 tumors
are analyzed as a combined cohort. Genes in the upper left quadrant reached significance
only in the combined analysis. Genes in the lower right quadrant reached significance only
in one or more single-type analyses. Genes in the upper right quadrant were significant in
both the combined set and in individual tumor types. Color of gene names is as in Figure 2.

Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 July 23.

Lawrence et al.

Page 20

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Figure 4.

Author Manuscript

Down-sampling analysis shows that gene discovery is continuing as samples and tumor
types are added. a. Analysis within tumor types. Each point represents a random subset of
patients. Blue line is a smoothed fit. b. Analysis by adding tumor types. Each grey line
represents a random ordering of the 21 tumor types. c. Analysis by adding samples. Each
point is a random subset of the 4742 patients. d. Analysis in panel c broken down by
mutation frequency. Genes mutated at frequencies ≥ 20% are nearing saturation, while
intermediate frequencies show steep growth. See also Supplementary Figures 7, 8.

Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 July 23.

Lawrence et al.

Page 21

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 5.

Number of samples needed to detect significantly mutated genes, as a function of a tumor
type’s median background mutation frequency of (x-axis) and a cancer gene’s mutation rate
above background (the various curves). Y-axis shows the number of samples needed to
achieve 90% power for 90% of genes. Grey vertical lines indicate tumor type median
background mutation frequencies. Black dots indicate sample sizes in the current study. For
most tumor types, the current sample size is inadequate to reliably detect genes mutated at
5% or less above background. See also Supplementary Figure 9.

Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 July 23.

Author Manuscript

Author Manuscript

Author Manuscript

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 July 23.
PRAD
RHAB

Rhabdoid tumor

Multiple myeloma

Prostate

MM

Melanoma

NB

MEL

Medulloblastoma

OV

MED

Lung squamous cell carcinoma

Ovarian

LUSC

Lung adenocarcinoma

Neuroblastoma

KIRC
LUAD

Kidney clear cell

GBM
HNSC

Head and neck

ESO

Glioblastoma multiforme

UCEC

Colorectal

Esophageal adenocarcinoma

CRC

Chronic lymphocytic leukemia

Endometrial

CLL

Carcinoid

DLBCL

CARC

Breast

Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma

BLCA
BRCA

Bladder

LAML

Acute myeloid leukemia

Tumor type

Tumr
type
code

35

138

316

81

207

118

92

178

405

417

384

291

141

248

58

233

159

54

892

99

196

No. of
tumornormal
pairs

0.1

0.7

1.7

0.5

1.6

12.9

0.3

9.9

8.1

1.9

3.9

2.2

4.0

2.5

3.3

3.1

0.6

0.5

1.2

7.1

0.4

Median
somatic
mutation
frequency
(per Mb)

1

4

5

1

11

19

2

11

22

15

25

22

8

58

16

23

7

1

32

24

26

No. of
significantly
mutated
genes

0

2

5

0

3

9

1

13

10

6

9

4

7

15

7

12

8

0

5

10

1

No. of
additional
signif. genes
found under
RHT

List of the 21 tumor types analyzed. Listed for each tumor type is its code (as used in TCGA projects), number of tumor-normal (TN) pairs, median
somatic mutation frequency per megabase, the number of significantly mutated genes detected by the MutSig suite when analyzing the full set of genes,
and the number of additional significantly mutated genes detected under restricted hypothesis testing (RHT) on just the set of cancer genes found in all
the other tumor types. Supplementary Table 3 lists the cancer genes found in each tumor type and their frequencies (percent of patients mutated).

Author Manuscript

Table 1
Lawrence et al.
Page 22

