Research Article

Low Levels of Tumor Necrosis Factor A Increase Tumor Growth by
Inducing an Endothelial Phenotype of Monocytes Recruited
to the Tumor Site
2

2

2

3

4,5

Bin Li, Alicia Vincent, Justin Cates, Dana M. Brantley-Sieders, D. Brent Polk,
1,2,3
and Pampee P. Young
1

The Department of Veterans Affairs Medical Center and Departments of 2Pathology, 3Internal Medicine, 4Pediatrics, and
Cell and Developmental Biology, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, Tenessee

5

through adoptive transfer of immature myeloid progenitors in mice
and subsequent confirmation that myeloid cells generate recipient
vessels in the liver (8). In addition, recent reports have also
identified a myeloid/endothelial biphenotypic leukocyte population
within mouse and human tumors.
A tumor-promoting CD11c+ myeloid population that coexpresses endothelial markers, P1H12 and VE-cad, was identified
in murine cancers (9). A small portion of these cells contributed
to tumor microvessels (i.e., participate in vasculogenesis),
whereas the majority of the cells retained leukocyte morphology
(9). The myeloid/endothelial biphenotypic population has also
been characterized in human tumors (10). Another study
identified a myeloid (CD11b+)/endothelial (tie2+) population in
mice that promoted tumor vascularity and growth but without
significant contribution to mature vessels (11). We have shown
that when CD14+ human monocytes were admixed with tumor
cells and implanted s.c., a portion of the exogenously introduced
CD14+ cells up-regulated the endothelial marker, VE-cad,
suggesting that the tumor microenvironment can induce an
endothelial phenotype (6).
Taken together, these data suggest that this ‘‘biphenotypic’’
subset, which will be designated in this report as ‘‘vascular
leukocytes,’’ plays an important role in tumor progression and may,
in small numbers, directly incorporate into vessels (6, 9–15). It is
unknown which signals in the tumor microenvironment generate
this subset(s) of vascular leukocytes. We sought to show unique
tumor-promoting function of this myeloid/endothelial biphenotypic population and also to identify the tumor signal(s) that
generate vascular leukocytes. In this report, we have established a
novel role for tumor necrosis factor (TNF)a in myeloid to
endothelial differentiation in culture and, moreover, have linked
TNFa to tumor colonization by vascular leukocytes in vivo.
Direct evidence for the involvement of TNFa in cancer comes
from observations that TNFa knockout mice on 4 different
genetic backgrounds were 10-fold more resistant to chemical
carcinogenesis of the skin (16–18). Mice deficient in TNFa
receptor (TNFR)1 and R2 also showed resistance to skin cancers
(18). TNFR1 / mice showed reduced liver tumorigenesis and
liver metastasis (19). Knockdown of TNFa in ovarian cancer cell
lines led to diminished growth and vascular density (20). Hence,
although high doses of TNFa to treat cancer have antitumor
activity, there is growing data to suggest that endogenous TNFa
acts as a tumor promoter. The mechanism of TNFa-mediated
tumor promotion, however, is incompletely understood. Our data
have identified a novel role for TNFa in myeloid to endothelial
differentiation and, moreover, have linked TNFa to tumor
vasculogenesis and tumor colonization by myeloid/endothelial
biphenotypic vascular leukocytes in vivo.

Abstract
Microenvironmental cues instruct infiltrating tumor-associated myeloid cells to drive malignant progression. A subpopulation of tumor-associated myeloid cells coexpressing
endothelial and myeloid markers, although rare in peripheral
blood, are primarily associated with tumors where they
enhance tumor growth and angiogenesis. These biphenotypic
vascular leukocytes result from the endothelial differentiation
of myeloid progenitors, a process regulated by tumor necrosis
factor (TNF)A in vitro. An in vivo increase in tumor-derived
TNFA expression promoted tumor growth and vascularity of
mouse melanoma, lung cancer, and mammary tumors. Notably,
tumor growth was accompanied by a significant increase in
myeloid/endothelial biphenotypic populations. TNFA-associated tumor growth, vascularity, and generation of tumor
vascular leukocytes in mouse melanoma tumors were dependent on intact host TNFA receptors. Importantly, TNFAexpressing tumors did not exhibit increased inflammation over
control tumors, suggesting a unique action related to myeloid
to endothelial differentiation. Our studies suggest that TNFA
constitutes a tumor microenvironment signal that biases
recruited monocytes toward a proangiogenic/provasculogenic
myeloid/endothelial phenotype. [Cancer Res 2009;69(1):338–48]

Introduction
Tumor-associated myeloid cells modulate several aspects of the
malignant phenotype: invasion, tumor growth, angiogenesis, and
metastasis (1, 2). It is widely accepted that the tumor microenvironment results in the generation of unique myeloid phenotype(s),
although the nature of the phenotypes is just beginning to be
elucidated (2, 3).
Several groups, including our own, have shown that circulating
human or mouse monocytes can be induced in culture to coexpress
endothelial markers [e.g., VE-cadherin (VE-cad; CD144), flk-1
(VEGFR2/KDR), von Willebrand Factor, tie2, endothelial lectins]
and exhibit an endothelial phenotype (network formation,
synthesis of eNOS, and Weibel Palade bodies) and, when implanted
into mice, can improve neovascularization in ischemic injury (4–7).
Myeloid to endothelial plasticity in vivo was shown recently

Note: Supplementary data for this article are available at Cancer Research Online
(http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/).
Requests for reprints: Pampee P. Young, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine,
Department of Pathology, 1161 21st Avenue South, C2217A MCN, Nashville, TN 37232.
Phone: 615-936-1098; Fax: 615-343-7023; E-mail: pampee.young@vanderbilt.edu.
I2009 American Association for Cancer Research.
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-1565

Cancer Res 2009; 69: (1). January 1, 2009

338

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2009 American Association for Cancer
Research.

TNFa Promotes Myeloid to Endothelial Differentiation
done in accordance with Association for Assessment and Accreditation of
Laboratory Animal Care guidelines and with Vanderbilt University
Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee approval.
Stable transfections of tumor lines were done with pcDNA3 plasmid
encoding TNFa cDNA driven by the cytomegalovirus promoter carried out
with Lipofectamine 2000 (Invitrogen Life Technologies). After selection for
14 d with 1500 Ag/mL G418 (Sigma), individual colonies were picked and
maintained in medium containing 500 Ag/mL G418. Mouse TNFa secreted
into culture medium or in plasma was measured as described by ELISA
Quantikine kits (R&D systems). Human umbilical vascular endothelial cells
(HUVEC; ATCC) were maintained in EGM-2 with supplements.
Cell culture. Peripheral blood (PB) or BM mononuclear cells (MNC)
were isolated as previously described (6). MNCs were used to isolate CD14+
(human) or CD11b+ (mouse) myeloid cells using positive selection strategy
with antibody linked microbeads (Miltenyi Biotech) and a magnetic cell
sorter device following manufacturer protocol. To generate myeloid/
endothelial biphenotypic cells, enriched myeloid populations (human
CD14+ or murine CD11b+ of >95% purity) were plated on fibronectincoated plates or coverslips in EGM-2 Bullet kit system [Clonetics; consisting
of endothelial basal medium, 5% fetal bovine serum, hEGF, vascular
endothelial growth factor (VEGF), hFGF-B, insulin-like growth factor,
ascorbic acid, and heparin] at a density of 2  105 cells/cm2 (22, 23), in the
absence or presence of recombinant human TNFa (Cell Sciences Corp.) and
analyzed by immunofluorescence using species specific anti-flk1 (human,
Reasearch Diagnostics; mouse, clone MF1, Imclone) and anti–VE-cad
(human, Cell Sciences; mouse, Bender Medsystems). Myeloid/endothelial
biphenotypic cells (vascular leukocyte) numbers were assessed by counting
5 random 40 fields of VE-cad+/flk-1+ cells or analyzed by fluorescenceactivated cell sorting (FACS).

Materials and Methods
Mice and cell lines. NOD/LtSz-scid (NOD/SCID), C57Bl/6 (Bl/6, wildtype), flk-1/LacZ on C57Bl/6 (Bl/6) background, and the FVB/nJ strain were
purchased from Jackson Laboratory. Mice homozygous mutant for TNFR1
and R2 on a Bl/6 background were obtained from DBP. Stably transfected
1  106 B16F10 mouse melanoma cells [American Type Culture Collection
(ATCC)], Lewis Lung Carcinoma (LLC) cells (ATCC) or murine breast
cancer cells derived from mouse mammary tumor polyomavirus middle
T transgenic lines [Py-mT lines were generated by Rebecca Muraoka-Cook
(21) and maintained in DMEM, 10% FCS, 5.0 ng/mL 17-h estradiol, and
1 Ag/mL progesterone] were implanted in Bl/6 (s.c.) or FVB/nJ (under
fourth mammary fat pad) strains, respectively. Tumor volume was
calculated as length  width  height  0.52. For some studies, human
myeloid/endothelial biphenotypic cells (CD14+/VE-cad+/flk-1+) or monocytes (CD14+/flk-1 ) were admixed with B16 tumor cells and implanted s.c.
in opposing flanks of NOD/SCID mice. Also, mouse myeloid/endothelial
biphenotypic cells (CD11b+/flk-1+) or monocytes (CD11b+/flk-1 ) were
admixed with B16 tumor cells and implanted s.c. in opposing flanks of Bl/6
mice. To generate transplanted mice, Bl/6 wild-type, syngeneic littermates
received 800 rads of preconditioning irradiation and were transplanted with
bone marrow (BM) from flk-1/lacZ transgenic donors generating flk/lacZ/
BM transplants (BMT). After engraftment (2 mo), mice were implanted with
control or TNFa-producing B16F10 mouse melanoma tumor lines. Some
flk/lacZ/BMT experimental groups received tumor admixed with and
additional i.p. injections of 1 mg of anti-TNFa antibody (cV1q; Centocor,
Inc.), a rat/mouse chimeric IgG2a,k monoclonal antibody (mAb) specific for
mouse TNFa or isotype control (Centocor, Inc.). In some cases, BMT
animals were injected with Isolectin GS-IB4 (0.5 mg/mouse; Vector Labs)
before euthanasia to visualize functional vasculature. All experiments were

Figure 1. Myeloid endothelial cells
promote tumor growth and vascularity.
A, representative flow cytometric analysis
of human CD14+ monocytes before culture.
After culture in angiogenic differentiation
medium for 7 d, the resultant adherent
outgrowth cells were shown to be positive
for flk-1, VE-cad, and CD14 by indirect
immunofluorescence. n = 5 independent
CD14+ preps. B, graph shows resultant
size of tumors admixed with monocytes
versus cultured myeloid/endothelial cells.
Representative histologic sections from
these tumors show larger areas of necrosis
within tumors that were admixed with
monocytes. C, immunostaining using
anti–PECAM-1 (marker for
microvasculature) in representative tumors
generated from B16F10 cells admixed
with CD14+ monocytes versus myeloid/
endothelial cells. Columns, mean of
morphometric data of microvascular
density; bars, SE. n = 4 tumors of each
type.

www.aacrjournals.org

339

Cancer Res 2009; 69: (1). January 1, 2009

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2009 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

Figure 2. TNFa induces expression of
endothelial markers and generation of
myeloid/endothelial biphenotypic cells.
A, columns, mean of numbers of adherent
cells expressing endothelial markers
generated in the absence or presence of
40 ng/mL TNFa after 7 d in culture (n = 4
independent experiments in duplicate);
bars, SE. Statistical analysis by unpaired
Student’s t test. B, graph (fold change F
SE) shows the effects of TNFa on mRNA
expression of endothelial transcripts flk-1
and flt-1 on day 4 cultured monocytes with
increasing dose of TNFa evaluated by
real-time RT-PCR. Unpaired Student’s
t test with Bonferroni correction. Right, a
representative gel of RT-PCR analysis of
TNFa-induced endothelial transcripts tie-2
and VE-Cad of 4-d cultured CD14+
monocytes; HUVECs used as positive
control (n = 8 independent preps).
C, murine BM CD11b+ monocytes from
wild-type (WT ) and TNFR1/2 DKO were
cultured to induce endothelial
differentiation. Representative
photomicrographs of cells that were
stained with anti–VE-cad (red) and –flk-1
(green, inset ) at designated time points in
culture; TNFR1/2 DKO cells showed
significantly delayed expression of
endothelial markers (n = 3 experiments).

FACS analysis. Analysis of the tumor tissues for coexpression of
myeloid/endothelial antigens were analyzed by flow cytometry. Mice
harboring tumors were perfused with PBS for 10 min before removal of
tumors. Tumor-associated cells were obtained for analysis by mincing the
tissue to <1 mm3 and digesting at 37jC for 30 min with an enzyme cocktail
(collagenase A, Elastase, and DNase I; Roche) and filtering the resulting
suspension through with a 70 Am filter. The resulting single-cell
suspensions were separated on a density gradient, Lympholyte M, for 30
min at 1500  g. The interphase was collected, washed thrice in PBS, RBC
lysed, and analyzed. For analysis of expression of flk-1 on human CD14+
cells after culture, attached cells were detached with EDTA and washed with
PBS/0.5% bovine serum albumin before incubation with antibodies.
Nonviable cells, identified by 7-aminoactinomycin D (Molecular Probes)
staining, were excluded. Myeloid markers were assessed with the following
directly conjugated mAbs: F4/80-PE (BM8; eBioscience) and mouse CD11bPEcy7 (M1/70; R&D systems). Expression of endothelial markers was
assessed with mAbs to mouse tie2-biotin (TEK4; eBioscience), flk-1 (DC101;
ImClone), and VE-cad (11D4.1; Fitzgerald). For human cells anti–CD14-FITC
(eBioscience), or anti–flk-1-Allophycocyanin (APC; R&D), analysis was
performed on a LSMII flow cytometer and subsequently analyzed using

Cancer Res 2009; 69: (1). January 1, 2009

FACSDiva v5.02 software (Becton Dickinson). Isotype control antibodies
were used to establish quadrants.
Additional Methods are in Supplementary Data.

Results
Myeloid/endothelial (CD14+/flk-1+/VE-cad+) cells increased
tumor growth. We isolated human PB CD14+ monocytes and
characterized this population by FACS to be >99% pure and also
lacking expression of the endothelial marker, flk-1 (Fig. 1A). In
parallel, myeloid/endothelial biphenotypic cells were obtained after
7 days in culture of highly pure populations of CD14+ human PB
monocytes under angiogenic conditions as previously published
(6, 24). The in vitro generated myeloid/endothelial biphenotypic
cells were characterized by indirect immunofluorescence for
continued expression of CD14 and as well as up-regulation of
endothelial markers flk-1 and VE-cad (Fig. 1A). To test whether
myeloid/endothelial biphenotypic cells could serve as a tumorenhancing subset of myeloid cells, paired flank tumors were

340

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2009 American Association for Cancer
Research.

TNFa Promotes Myeloid to Endothelial Differentiation

and by f9-fold (P < 0.05) in cells treated with 40 ng/mL TNFa
(Fig. 2B, graph). Transcripts for VE-cad and tie-2, both endothelialenriched, were detected in cells exposed to 40 ng/mL TNFa but not
in its absence (control; Fig. 2B, gel).
TNFA promoted endothelial-enriched transcripts in CD14+
cells via TNFA/TNFR interactions. TNFa binds and signals
through two distinct receptors, TNFa-R1 (also known as p55) and
TNFa-R2 (p75 receptor; ref. 26). To establish the importance of
TNFRs on myeloid to endothelial differentiation, we isolated
CD11b+/CD45+ myeloid cells from BM of mice lacking both TNFRs
(TNFa-R1 and TNFa-R2 double knockout, TNFR1/2 DKO), and
their syngeneic (Bl/6) Wt controls. Culture of Wt CD11b+ cells
generated adherent cells expressing the endothelial markers
VE-cad and flk-1 (staining in inset) after 2 days in culture
(Fig. 2C, top). By contrast, equal numbers of CD11b+ cells isolated
from TNFR1/2 DKO mice cultured under similar conditions failed
to express either marker at that time point (Fig. 2C, bottom);
however, continued culture of the DKO-derived cells resulted in
endothelial marker expression by day 5. Taken together, the data
suggested that TNFa-mediated signaling on myeloid cells accelerated myeloid to endothelial differentiation of myeloid cells
resulting in significantly greater yield of myeloid/endothelial
biphenotypic cells from cultured monocytes. However, TNFa
receptor signaling on monocytes was not absolutely required for
endothelial differentiation.
Tumor-derived TNFA promoted local tumor growth.
Although multiple cells within the tumor microenvironment
(i.e., leukocytes) can secrete TNFa, TNFa can also be produced
by tumor epithelial cells themselves at very low, chronic levels
(20, 27). To better define the effect of tumor-derived TNFa on the
malignant phenotype and assess its role in modulating the
phenotype of tumor-associated myeloid cells, three different tumor
cell lines that expressed TNFa—B16 murine melanoma cells, LLC,
and mammary cancer line, Py-mT—were generated. From the B16
line, we isolated cell lines expressing either high or low levels of
TNFa: 3 high expressing (300 F 50 pg/mL) and 3 low expressing
(4.5 F 1.3 pg/mL) cell lines compared with control tumor lines
(undetectable TNFa levels). LLC lines generated low-level TNFa
expression, 14.1 F 0.5 pg/mL of TNFa (n = 2 clones), compared
with undetectable TNFa levels in control LLC lines. The TNFaexpressing Py-mT lines generated also expressed a very modest
increase in expression compared with control lines, 12 F 2.1 pg/mL
(n = 3 clones) versus 4.6 pg/mL (n = 2), respectively, of TNFa
protein. We assessed in vitro proliferation and apoptosis rate of
control and TNFa-overexpressing clones using the BrdUrd and
Annexin V flow cytometric assays, respectively. As shown in
Fig. 3A, TNFa-expressing B16F10 (both low and high-TNFa
expressing lines) and Py-mT cells exhibited similar in vitro growth
compared with control cell lines. By contrast, a modest increase in
TNFa expression in LLC lines actually resulted in a small but
statistically significant decrease in in vitro proliferation rate. All
TNFa-expressing cell lines tested displayed similar levels of
spontaneous apoptosis as their respective control lines. Together,
these data suggest that TNFa overexpression did not have
significant autocrine effect to promote growth or survival of tumor
cells in culture.
B16F10 low or high TNFa-expressing melanoma cells (mixture of
>2 clones) were implanted s.c. into the flank of Bl/6 strain; the same
number of control cells expressing vector only were implanted into
the contralateral flank. After 10 days, tumor volume was
determined. Tumors expressing low level TNFa were >4-fold larger

generated in immunodeficient mice with equal numbers of B16F10
melanoma cells admixed with either human CD14+ monocytes or
CD14+/flk-1+/VE-cad+ myeloid/endothelial biphenotypic vascular
leukocytes (20:1 ratio of B16F10 cells/myeloid cells). After 14 days,
the addition of CD14+/flk-1+/VE-cad+ cells resulted in tumors that
were 60% larger in volume (P < 0.05; Fig. 1B) and weight (P < 0.05;
data not shown) compared with the addition of CD14+ monocytes.
Moreover, tumors admixed with myeloid/endothelial cells
contained f2-fold greater vascular density (P < 0.05; Fig. 1C)
and less necrosis than those admixed with monocytes, 11.8% F 8%
versus 17.3% F 7%, respectively, albeit the quantified relative
necrotic area was not statistically significant between them (P =
0.07; Fig. 1B). These data provide direct evidence that myeloid cells
coexpressing endothelial surface antigens (vascular leukocytes)
represent a proangiogenic and growth promoting myeloid
subpopulation. We also assessed the ability of mouse in vitro
generated biphenotypic cells to promote tumor angiogenesis by
producing paired flank tumors in wild-type Bl/6 mice using equal
numbers of B16F10 melanoma cells admixed with mouse CD11b+/
flk-1 cells before culture versus CD11b+ cells expressing flk-1 and
VE-cad after 4 days in culture (Supplementary Fig. S1A). The
resultant tumors containing admixed myeloid/endothelial biphenotypic cells (20:1 ratio of B16F10 cells/myeloid cells) were
significantly more vascular (Supplementary Fig. S1B–C), exhibiting
a comparable proangiogenic effect as the human biphenotypic
cells.
As little is known regarding the mechanisms by which myeloid/
endothelial vascular leukocytes are generated, we performed gene
expression profiling of these cells generated after culture of human
CD14+ monocytes (i.e., CD14+/flk-1+/VE-cad+) and compared their
expression profile to uncultured CD14+ monocytes to try to identify
molecular pathways implicated in myeloid to endothelial differentiation. We identified up-regulation of a variety of key proangiogenic genes (Supplementary Table S2, top), which support a
paracrine role for this myeloid/endothelial population in mediating
tumor angiogenesis. We also identified up-regulation of multiple
genes in myeloid/endothelial biphenotypic cells that were known
to be transcriptionally up-regulated by TNFa (Supplementary
Table S2, bottom). The selective up-regulation of TNFa-inducible
transcripts in this biphenotypic population led us to formulate the
hypothesis that TNFa promotes endothelial differentiation of
myeloid cells in vitro, and more importantly, that it may constitute,
at least in part, the in vivo tumor microenvironment signal(s) to
promote myeloid to endothelial plasticity.
TNFA enhanced myeloid to endothelial differentiation. We
examined the effect of TNFa on the generation of CD14+/flk-1+/VEcad+ biphenotypic cells in vitro. CD14+ cells were cultured on
fibronectin-coated plates in medium to promote adherence and
endothelial differentiation in the absence or presence of 40 ng/mL
TNFa. There was a significant (>3.5-fold) increase with TNFa
versus control medium in total numbers of VE-cad+/flk-1+ adherent
outgrowth from human CD14+ cells by day 7 of culture (P < 0.01;
Fig. 2A). We performed real-time ( flt-1 and flk-1) and semiquantitative (VE-cad and tie-2) reverse transcription-PCR (RT-PCR) for
endothelial-specific transcripts on human CD14+ mononcytes after
4 days in culture to study if TNFa accelerated the time course
endothelial transcript expression. flt-1 (VEGFR1) transcripts,
expressed on both myeloid and endothelial cells (25), were not
affected by TNFa (P > 0.1; Fig. 2B, graph ). However,
flk-1 transcripts, which are endothelial-selective (25), were induced
f2-fold with 10 ng/mL TNFa (P > 0.05, not statistically significant)

www.aacrjournals.org

341

Cancer Res 2009; 69: (1). January 1, 2009

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2009 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

Figure 3. Low-level, chronic tumor–derived TNFa enhances local tumor growth. A, in vitro proliferation and apoptosis of control or TNFa-expressing B16F10, LLC, or
Py-mT cell lines. LTNF represents low TNFa-expressing clones. HTNF represents high TNFa-expressing clones. At least 2 clones were tested in two independent
experiments. Data of average F SE showed no statistical difference in relative proliferation or apoptosis after analysis by unpaired Student’s t test. B, tumor
volumes generated by TNFa-overexpressing and control cancer cells (B16F10, LLC and Py-mT) implanted into WT host. Points, mean are shown for each group
(n = 5 animals for each experiment), for B16F10 and LLC; bars, SE. Control/TNFa-expressing tumor pairs obtained from contralateral flanks of the same mouse are
connected by a line and show consistently larger tumors from TNFa-expressing cells. For Py-mT, the average F SE are shown for each group (n = 4 animals for each
time point). C, B16 melanoma (right ) or LLC (left ) control/TNFa–expressing clones implanted into mice lacking both TNFa receptors (DKO, n = 5 for each tumor
type) showed statistically similar tumor volumes or resulted in significantly reduced tumor growth, respectively. Data analyzed by paired Student’s t test.

Wt FVB/nJ strain, and tumor growth was monitored over time
to show increased average growth evident by day 17, as soon as
macroscopic tumors were evident (P < 0.05; Fig. 3B). Similar to
B16 melanoma tumors, mammary tumors expressing TNFa
generated significantly larger tumors relative to their paired
controls, with a >6-fold increase in tumor volume than their
paired control tumors on the contralateral mammary gland at 30
days (P < 0.05).
To test if the tumor-promoting effects of TNFa required
signaling between TNFa and its cognate receptors on host stroma
versus tumor cell-autonomous mechanisms (loss of cell polarity,
proliferation, etc.), TNFa-expressing B16 melanoma or LLC lines
and equal numbers of control B16 or LLC cells, respectively, were
implanted into opposing flanks of TNFR1/2 DKO mice. Unlike in
TNFR-competent hosts, TNFa-expressing B16 or LLC lines did not
generate larger tumors compared with their paired contralateral
control tumors in receptor-deficient mice (Fig. 3C). In fact, TNFaexpressing LLC cells produced significantly smaller tumors in

in size than control (P < 0.02; Fig. 3B, left). Importantly, control/
TNFa pairs obtained from the same mouse (data points connected
by a line) consistently showed comparatively larger tumors
resulting from TNFa overexpression compared with contralateral
control tumors. To verify our findings, we tested individual
TNFa-overexpressing clones to confirm increased growth over
control and obtained similar results (Supplementary Fig. S2A). By
contrast, high TNFa-expressing tumors did not exhibit a significant
increase in growth over control (Supplementary Fig. S2B).
Although proliferation in vitro of LLC cells was slightly lower as
a result of TNFa expression, in vivo TNFa mediated significantly
increased growth (>3-fold; Fig. 3B), similar to that observed with
melanoma cells.
To substantiate the tumor-promoting effects of TNFa in a
different mouse strain and tumor type, Py-mT mammary
carcinoma cells were evaluated. TNFa-expressing Py-mT lines
and vector only control (2–3 clones combined for each experiment)
were implanted into opposing fourth mammary fat pads of

Cancer Res 2009; 69: (1). January 1, 2009

342

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2009 American Association for Cancer
Research.

TNFa Promotes Myeloid to Endothelial Differentiation

bearing mice. PB was collected at the time of sacrifice by cardiac
puncture from TNFa-overexpressing B16 melanoma tumor bearing
mice (n = 5) and mice harboring only control tumors (n = 6). TNFa
levels were measured in plasma by ELISA; plasma levels of TNFa

TNFa receptor–deficient host and may reflect the observation that
TNFa caused slightly lower proliferation of LLC cells (Fig. 3A).
Because TNFa is a secreted protein, it was of interest to
determine if circulating TNFa levels were increased in tumor-

Figure 4. TNFa promotes tumor vascularity and proliferation in vivo. A, representative histologic images of B16 melanoma, LLC, and Py-mT mammary tumor mass
derived from tumor lines stably transfected with vector (cont ) or TNFa cDNA in opposing flanks in the same animal. Low magnification view of control B16 melanoma
tumors showed extensive necrosis compared with TNFa samples. B, columns, mean of morphometric quantification of histologic necrosis in paired control and TNFaexpressing tumors from n = 5 animals from each strain/tumor type; bars, SD. C, immunostaining using anti-Ki67 (marker for proliferation) and anti–PECAM-1 (marker
for microvasculature) in representative control and contralateral TNFa-expressing tumor pairs derived from B16F10 (top ), LLC (middle ), and Py-mT (bottom ) tumor
lines. D, graphed averages F SD of morphometric data of microvascular density and cellular proliferation in tumors. Control and TNFa-expressing tumors from n = 5
animals from each strain/tumor type were analyzed. Comparison on unpaired samples using Student’s t test.

www.aacrjournals.org

343

Cancer Res 2009; 69: (1). January 1, 2009

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2009 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

unpaired control and TNFa-expressing tumor samples from B16,
LLC, and Py-mT tumors (Fig. 4B). Although TNFa-expressing B16
and LLC tumors were much larger than control tumors, they
exhibited significantly less necrosis (P < 0.05; Fig. 4A). In contrast
to the fast growing B16 melanoma and LLC tumors, Py-mT
mammary tumors showed very low levels of necrosis in both
control and TNFa tumors (Fig. 4A and B). To examine the
mechanism by which TNFa enhanced tumor growth, we determined whether TNFa altered tumor vascular density. Control and
TNFa-expressing tumor sections from each of the tumor types
were immunostained with anti–platelet/endothelial cell adhesion
molecule 1 (PECAM-1; CD31) antibody to evaluate microvessel
density, and anti-Ki67 to assess tumor cell proliferation, respectively (Fig. 4C). TNFa-overexpressing B16 and Py-mT tumors
contained f2- to 3-fold more immunoreactivity with the Ki67
antibody than paired control tumors, consistent with the observed
increase in growth (Fig. 4D). Quantification of vascular density
showed a >2-fold increase in TNFa-overexpressing tumors
generated from all tumor lines: melanoma, lung, and mammary
(Fig. 4D).
TNFA-promoted vascular leukocytes. We postulated that
TNFa may enhance tumor growth and angiogenesis by modulating
the activity of tumor-recruited monocytes via generation of
biphenotypic vascular leukocytes. Tumor-associated cells obtained
from tumor suspensions were evaluated by flow cytometry using
the myeloid markers CD11b or F4/80 (28) in conjunction with
endothelial markers tie2, flk-1, and VE-cad (Supplementary Fig. S3;
Table 1). Tumors expressing TNFa contained significantly higher
CD11b and F4/80 myeloid populations coexpressing either flk-1 or
VE-cad (P < 0.05; Table 1) than control tumors. Although there was
a statistically significant increase in TNFa-induction of CD11b+/
Tie-2+ cells (TEM; ref. 11), no increase was observed in the
percentage of F4/80+/Tie2+ cells. To determine if an intact host
TNFa signaling was necessary for TNFa-mediated effects on tumor
vascular leukocytes, we quantified melanoma-associated myeloid/
endothelial biphenotypic cells from control and TNFa tumors
implanted in TNFR1/2 DKO animals. The overall percentage of
myeloid/endothelial populations in control tumors was reduced in
TNFR1/2 DKO mice from what was observed in wild-type Bl/6
hosts (Supplementary Fig. S3; Table 1). Importantly, there was no
increase in any myeloid/endothelial biphenotypic population
associated with tumors overexpressing TNFa compared with
control from TNFR1/2 DKO mice (Table 1). These data suggested
that tumor-derived TNFa significantly increased myeloid/endothelial biphenotypic vascular leukocytes. This effect was abrogated in
the TNFR-deficient host, suggesting that intact TNFa signaling in
the host stroma was required for this effect, and that this effect was
not mediated by secondary factors secreted from the tumor cells.
As it is often assumed that TNFa-mediated tumor promotion is
likely to be secondary to TNFa-mediated inflammation, we
quantified total tumor-associated leukocytes and leukocyte subsets
using anti-CD45, anti-CD3, anti-F4/80, and anti-B220 by morphometry (Supplementary Fig. S4A shows representative photomicrographs for melanoma only; however, morphometric data to
quantify tumor leukocyte content from both tumors are presented
in B). The leukocyte content was higher in the fast-growing
melanoma tumors compared with mammary tumors. However,
CD45 content was not significantly different between control and
TNFa-overexpressing tumors of either type. Similarly, neither T cell
nor macrophage numbers were significantly different in either
tumor type between control and TNFa. Anti-B220 immunostaining

Figure 5. Myeloid populations coexpressing myeloid/endothelial surface
markers were increased in TNFa-expressing tumors. A, representative
photomicrographs (top ) from B16 tumors in flk/lacZ/BMT showing numerous
donor-derived, h-gal–positive cells (blue ) that resembled round leukocytes in
TNFa-expressing tumors. Note their localization around the tumor periphery.
Fewer h-gal–positive cells are evident in a representative control tumor section.
Bottom, immuofluorescent colocalization of macrophage marker F4/80
(green ) and donor marker h-gal (red ), and the merge. B, the average F SE
of fold change in h-gal enzyme activity, as a marker for donor (BM-derived)
h-gal+/flk-1+ cells, between TNFa-expressing and control B16-melanoma
tumor homogenates (n = 6 for each cohort) to quantify the effect of TNFa
on BM-derived cells expressing endothelial lineage marker; a cohort of mice
harboring tumors expressing TNFa were treated with anti-TNFa blocking
antibody (n = 5) or isotype control IgG (n = 4). Data analyzed by one way
ANOVA with a Tukey post test to compare groups.

were 15 F 24pg/mL versus 22 F 18pg/mL, respectively (P = 0.8, not
statistically significant). The lack of change in systemic TNFa levels
is consistent with our observations of locally driven tumor
progression.
TNFA promoted microvascular density, proliferation of
tumor cells, and reduced necrosis in vivo. Both B16 and LLC
control tumors showed an extensive amount of necrosis compared
with their respective TNFa-expressing tumors (Fig. 4A). The
amount of necrosis was quantified within random sections from

Cancer Res 2009; 69: (1). January 1, 2009

344

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2009 American Association for Cancer
Research.

TNFa Promotes Myeloid to Endothelial Differentiation

Table 1. TNF increases tumor myeloid/endothelial biphenotypic populations
Myeloid/endothelial marker coexpression
Myeloid
CD11b

Endothelial

B16F10 in WT host (n = 6)
Control tumors (%)

TNFa tumors (%)

Control tumors (%)

TNFa tumors (%)

F
F
F
F
F
F

5.3 F 2.4 (*P = 0.03)
8.9 F 2.0 (*P = 0.01)
4.1 F 1.5 (*P V 0.05)
7.3 F 2.8 (*P V 0.01)
6.9 F 1.5 (*P = 0.02)
3.8 F 1.6 (P = NS)

1.0 F 0.3
0.3 F 0.6
0.5 F 0.6
ND
ND
ND

0.7 F 1.3 (P = NS)
0.6 F 0.8 (P = NS)
0.8 F 0.4 (P = NS)
ND
ND
ND

Flk-1
VE-cad
Tie2
Flk-1
VE-cad
Tie2

F4/80

B16F10 in TNFR-DKO host (n = 6)

0.8
2.5
2.7
1.5
1.1
4.3

3.1
3.0
0.2
1.3
1.2
2.2

Abbreviations: ND, not determined; NS, not significant.

B16 melanoma control or TNFa-expressing tumors. TNFaexpressing tumors had numerous lacZ-positive cells, most of
which morphologically resembled leukocytes (Fig. 5A, top). The
control tumors had significantly fewer lacZ-positive cells (Fig. 5A,
top). The donor-derived, lacZ-positive cells showed a predilection
to the tumor periphery in both tumor models (data not shown).
Tumors from flk/lacZ/BMT transplanted animals were analyzed by
coimmunofluorescence to show that donor BM-derived, lacZpositive cells colocalized with cells expressing the F4/80 antigen,
a mature myeloid/macrophage marker (Fig. 5A, bottom; merged
in inset). The effect of TNFa on the tumor-content of BM-derived
flk-1+ cells was quantified in melanoma tumors of transplanted
mice by measuring the fold change in tumor h-gal enzyme activity.
The average ratio of h-gal activity between TNFa and control
tumors was graphed and showed a statistically significant
>3-fold increase with TNFa. The effect of TNFa to increase
tumor-lacZ activity ( flk-1+ content) was specifically inhibited using
an anti-TNFa blocking antibody but not by the control antibody
(Fig. 5B).

revealed only rare, infiltrating B cells for both experimental groups
(data not shown). These data add to the growing evidence that low,
chronic TNFa production within tumors promote growth and
vascularity, independent of tumor leukocyte recruitment. Moreover,
TNFa greatly increased numbers of myeloid/endothelial vascular
leukocytes in mouse melanoma tumors in the absence of a
concomitant increase in overall F4/80+ macrophages.
To further quantify the specificity of TNFa-mediated generation
of BM-derived flk-1+ leukocyte population and to assess if this
population gave rise to functional vessels (vasculogenesis), we used
a BMT model using transgenic mice that constitutively expressed
h-galactosidase (lacZ) transcriptionally regulated by the flk-1
promoter (29, 30). The use of this model not only enabled clear
distinction and quantification of BM-derived flk-1–expressing cells
within the tumor but also enabled us to identify BM-derived (lacZ+)
blood vessels (i.e., vasculogenesis). flk/lacZ/BMT animals were
generated by reconstituting syngeneic Wt recipients with BM from
transgenic donors as depicted in schematic in Supplementary Fig.
S4C and, after hematopoietic engraftment, were implanted with

Figure 6. TNFa promotes tumor
vasculogenesis. Top three , X-gal staining
(blue ) of cryosections from flk/lacZ/BMT
animals implanted with TNFa-expressing
B16F10 melanoma tumor cells. Arrows,
x-gal–positive vascular structures. Bottom
three , colocalization of a BS-lectin (green ),
infused before sacrifice to mark the host
functional vasculature, and the donor marker,
h-gal (red ). Fluorescent images were
acquired by confocal fluorescent microscopy
with 40 lens. A representative Z plane
shows high degree of colocalization.
4¶,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole staining of
the same slide shows the location
of the nuclei.

www.aacrjournals.org

345

Cancer Res 2009; 69: (1). January 1, 2009

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2009 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

(also known as TEM; ref. 11). The absence of intact TNFa receptors
(TNFR1/2 DKO host) not only reduced overall numbers of tumorassociated vascular leukocytes but also abolished their induction
by tumor-derived TNFa. Our findings were further supported by
studies using the BM-transplant model. TNFa induced a large
increase in BM-derived flk-1+ tumor leukocytes that colocalized
with the late myeloid marker, F4/80. Moreover, TNFa-blocking
antibodies eliminated TNFa-induced increase in BM-derived flk-1+
cells in the BMT model. Together, our data indicate that the TNFamediated induction and acceleration of myeloid to endothelial
differentiation required intact TNFa receptor signaling on myeloid
cells. Our data suggest that there may be multiple distinct
populations of myeloid/endothelial biphenotypic cells. It is not
known if these differences translate into disparate effects on tumor
angiogenesis/vasculogenesis and/or progression. Published reports
of vascular leukocytes, such as CD11b+/VE-cad+, suggest that they
are present in very low numbers or absent in peripheral circulation
and enriched in tumor sites (6, 10). Hence, our data suggest that
TNFa acts in a paracrine manner on tumor-recruited monocytes as
a local inducer of this cellular phenotype. On the other hand, work
by De Palma and colleagues (11, 13) have shown that TEMs
(CD11b+/tie2+) in mice also exist in significant numbers in
peripheral circulation as well as within tumors, and recent work
suggests that their tumor promoting function may be regulated at
the level of recruitment to tumor sites by hypoxia and angiopoietin
2 (34). Hence, the regulation of tumor content of specific
populations of vascular leukocytes, such as TEMs, may be
multifactorial, both by modulating recruitment as well as by their
local induction by such factors as TNFa.
There are several studies that suggest that myeloid lineage cells
can also serve as endothelial progenitor cells by contributing to
functional vessels (i.e., vasculogenesis; refs. 8, 9, 14). Moreover,
myeloid/endothelial biphenotypic cells from both human PB or
purified monocytes have been identified in neovasculature after
injury and tumor growth (6, 22). Using a BMT model, we
determined that TNFa expression mediated a significant increase
in BM-derived functional vessels, albeit the overall numbers of
BM-derived vessels were relatively few. Our study does not
specifically show that TNFa-dependent tumor vasculogenesis
occurred via a myeloid intermediate and not from hematopoietic
progenitor populations (CD34+/lin ). However, the addition of
TNFa at varying concentrations (10–40 ng/mL) failed to promote
generation of endothelial-like cells from human CD34+/lin
progenitors in culture but, instead, resulted in significant cell
death (data not shown). Taken together, the data support that
TNFa-mediated vasculogenesis likely occurred through a myeloid
intermediate. The data also suggest that the mechanism of
generating endothelial phenotype from myeloid versus hematopoietic progenitor populations is distinct, and the effect of TNFa
on this process in vivo may help us discern the ‘‘origin’’ of tissue
BM-derived endothelium in specific contexts. A recent study
showed that vasculogenesis after ischemic limb injury was
significantly reduced in TNFR2-deficient mice, and this was
dependent on TNFR2 expression on BM-derived cells and further
support a role for TNFa in modulating vasculogenesis (35).
Chronic TNFa expression by tumor cells has been shown in
several model systems to play a role in tumor progression, although
the mechanisms are not yet understood (36). We used both
heterotopic and orthotopic implanted tumor models on distinct
mouse strains to show that cancer cell clones exhibiting a very
modest increase in TNFa resulted in a significant increase in tumor

TNFA overexpression induces tumor vasculogenesis.
Although the majority of the lacZ+/flk-1+ BM-derived cells within
the tumor resembled leukocytes, a small number of h-gal+
microvascular structures were evident on histologic sections
(Fig. 6, top). Recent data suggest that, in addition to hematopoietic
progenitors, more differentiated myeloid cells can also give rise to
functional vessels (8, 9). We used confocal coimmunofluorescence
to colocalize the BM marker, h-gal, with infused isolectin, as a
marker of functional vasculature (Fig. 6). Within 7 to 10 days after
tumor implantation, evidence of BM-derived cells assembled into
capillaries anastomosing with the functional host tumor vasculature was evident. The effect of TNFa on tumor vasculogenesis was
assessed by counting numbers of areas of BS1-lectin/h-gal
colocalization in 10 random sections from 3 experimental animals.
No colocalized regions resembling vascular structures were evident
in control B16 melanoma tumors. The numbers of donor-derived
isolectin+ structures were significantly higher with TNFa, albeit
comparatively few to overall numbers of vascular structures; at
least five to eight areas were identified in each TNFa-expressing
melanoma tumors. Hence, TNFa resulted in a significant increase
in tumor-associated vasculogenesis.

Discussion
Myeloid infiltrates can stimulate an antitumor response but
more often stimulate tumor development, invasion, angiogenesis,
and metastasis (3). It is widely accepted that tumor/myeloid cell
crosstalk educate recruited myeloid cells toward a tumorpromoting phenotype(s) (31, 32). Several recently published studies
have identified myeloid/endothelial biphenotypic cells in tumors
and have shown that they represent a potent tumor-promoting
population(s) (6, 9–15). Although a number of factors have been
identified that recruit myeloid cells to tumor sites (i.e., VEGF, PlGF,
MCP-1, SDF-1, h-defensins; ref. 33), little is known about local
signals that modulate the endothelial differentiation of recruited
monocytes toward the biphenotypic, myeloid/endothelial vascular
leukocytes. Because both myeloid cells and myeloid/endothelial
biphenotypic cells are implicated in proangiogenic and tumorpromoting role, we directly compared these two cell populations in
the context of tumor growth. Our findings are the first to show that
the biphenotypic myeloid/endothelial cells generated larger, more
vascular tumors than monocytes lacking endothelial markers.
Moreover, our data have identified a novel role for TNFa in myeloid
to endothelial differentiation and have linked TNFa to tumor
vasculogenesis and tumor colonization by myeloid/endothelial
cells.
Our rationale for detailed study of the role of TNFa in the
generation of biphenotypic, vascular leukocytes transpired from
our findings that TNFa mediated a significant, dose-dependent
up-regulation of endothelial antigens’ ( flk-1, tie-2, and VE-cad)
mRNA expression on cultured human monocytes. Ultimately, TNFa
resulted in almost 4-fold increase in total yield of myeloid/
endothelial biphenotypic cells from plated CD14+ PB monocytes.
Using murine monocytes from the BM, we showed that the effect of
TNFa-mediated acceleration of endothelial-like cells required the
presence of TNFRs on monocytes and was not likely to be
mediated by up-regulation of secondary factors.
Increased expression of TNFa within the tumor microenvironment resulted in a local, tumor-associated increase in populations
of myeloid/endothelial vascular leukocytes, including CD11b/VEcad and the tie2-expressing myeloid populations, tie2+/CD11b+

Cancer Res 2009; 69: (1). January 1, 2009

346

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2009 American Association for Cancer
Research.

TNFa Promotes Myeloid to Endothelial Differentiation

vascularization in vivo (38). Hence, TNFa-mediated increase in
tumor vascularity may be multifactorial.
It is frequently inferred that TNFa mediates cancer promotion
through its proinflammatory activity, resulting in increased
numbers of leukocytes (39). However, the degree of leukocyte
recruitment did not show a statistically significant difference
between TNFa expressing and control tumors. Leukocyte subpopulations detected by anti-F4/80 (macrophage), anti-CD3 (T
cell), and anti-CD45/B220 (B-cell) also were similar between
control and TNFa-expressing tumors. Although unexpected, the
absence of inflammation in response to locally elevated TNFa has
been reported. In a corneal limbus model, a potent ‘‘angiogenic’’
response in the absence of infiltrating leukocytes was observed
when hydron implants containing 3.5 ng of TNFa were implanted
in the cornea of a rat (38, 40, 41). Using PVA sponges as a model to
study granulation tissue-associated angiogenesis, it was shown that
genetic ablation of TNFR1 resulted in markedly decreased vascular
density without significant changes in leukocyte infiltrate (42).
Finally, transgenic mice that stably expressed a membrane tethered
TNFa on endothelial cells did not exhibit increased inflammation
until later time points in 7- to 8-month-old animals (43). The B16
melanoma and LLC tumors were excised between 10 to 14 days,
and the Py-MT mammary tumors were excised 28 to 30 days after
implantation. Hence, it is possible that if allowed to persist over
longer time periods, even small increases in TNFa may enhance
overall local inflammation. Based on our findings, however,
increased inflammation is an unlikely explanation for TNFamediated tumor promotion in this study.
Our study shows that TNFa significantly facilitates the
endothelial differentiation of myeloid cells in vitro and in vivo.
Because not all tumors display a convincing association between
prognosis and myeloid cell accumulation, it may be valuable to
examine specific vascular leukocyte subsets of tumor-associated
myeloid cells to better define the role of myeloid cells in tumor
progression.

volume. Importantly, this low level, chronic TNFa production by
our modified tumor cells parallels published levels in unmanipulated human malignant cells (20, 27). By contrast, B16 melanoma
clones that expressed very high TNFa levels did not mediate
enhanced growth. These findings are consistent with the
observation that high TNFa levels (e.g., pharmacologic doses) are
used as antitumor therapy, whereas endogenous, low-level TNFa in
this study as well as other recent reports were growth promoting
(36, 37).
Low-level TNFa expression by tumor cells led to increased
tumor growth characterized by reduced tumor necrosis in
melanoma tumors (despite larger tumor size), locally increased
microvascular density, and increased proliferation index in all three
cancer models. The mechanism(s) of tumor growth by TNFa are
not yet understood. An unanswered question is whether TNFa
primarily acts in a cell autonomous manner to promote cell
growth, survival, or expression of growth factors. TNFa expressing
clones of either melanoma or breast tumor type did not affect the
rate of proliferation or apoptosis in vitro. Interestingly, TNFa
caused a small but statistically significantly reduction in LLC
proliferation. These data strongly suggest that TNFa did not drive
increased in vivo growth/proliferation by a direct autocrine
mechanism via TNFa receptors on tumors. These results are
consistent with a recent study in which TNFa knockdown in
ovarian cancer lines diminished in vivo tumor xenograft growth
without altering in vitro proliferation rate (20). However, this study
identified reduced tumor-derived expression of specific chemokines/factors (e.g, CCL2, CXCL12, VEGF, IL-6, and MIF) resulting
from knockdown of TNFa expression, suggesting that a potential
mechanism of tumor promotion by TNFa may be via autocrine upregulation of tumor-promoting factors (20). However, our observation that TNFa-expressing B16 or LLC lines did not mediate
TNFa-directed growth acceleration (in fact LLC lines actually
showed reduced growth) in TNFR1/2 DKO mice suggests that a
significant aspect of the growth-promoting properties of TNFa rely
on paracrine interactions with tumor stroma requiring intact host
TNFa signaling. An earlier study that showed mice lacking TNFRs
were resistant to chemically induced skin cancers supports this
finding (18).
We observed significant increase in vascular density in TNFaexpressing tumors in both tumor models. Although our data
suggest that this is due, at least in part, to TNFa-induced increase
in myeloid/endothelial vascular leukocytes, it is important to note
that TNFa is also reported to directly modulate endothelial cells
(38). In rodent choroidal endothelial cells, TNFa increased the
expression of angiopoietin (Ang)2, Ang1, and VEGF and inhibition
of Ang2 secretion in this model blunted TNFa-induced neo-

References
1. Dirkx AE, Oude Egbrink MG, Wagstaff JG, Griffioen
AW. Monocyte/macrophage infiltration in tumors:
modulators of angiogenesis. J Leukoc Biol 2006;80:
1183–96.
2. Colombo MP, Mantovani A. Targeting myelomonocytic
cells to revert inflammation-dependent cancer promotion. Cancer Res 2005;65:605–12.
3. Lewis CE, Pollard JW. Distinct role of macrophages in
different tumor microenvironments. Cancer Res 2006;66:
605–12.

www.aacrjournals.org

Disclosure of Potential Conflicts of Interest
No potential conflicts of interest were disclosed.

Acknowledgments
Received 4/25/2008; revised 9/19/2008; accepted 10/11/2008.
Grant support: This work was supported by the National Institutes of Health grant
HL088424 and fro17-7488m the Department of Veterans Affairs (both to P.P. Young)
and DK56008 (D.B. Polk).
The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of page
charges. This article must therefore be hereby marked advertisement in accordance
with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact.

4. Rehman J, Jingling L, Orschell CM, March KL.
Peripheral blood "endothelial progenitor cells" are
derived from monocyte/macrophages and secrete angiogenic growth factors. Circ 2003;107:1164–69.
5. Romagnani P, Annunziato F, Liotta F, et al.
CD14+CD34low cells with stem cell phenotype and
functional features are the major source of circulating
endothelial progenitors. Circ Res 2005;97:314–22.
6. Sharpe EE, Teleron AA, Li B, et al. The origin and in
vivo significance of murine and human culture expanded endothelial progenitor cells (CE-EPCs). Am J Pathol
2006;168:1710–20.

347

7. Ingram DA, Mead LE, Tanaka H, et al. Identification of
a novel hierarchy of endothelial progenitor cells using
human peripheral and umbilical cord blood. Blood 2004;
104:2752–60.
8. Bailey AS, Willenbring H, Jiang S, et al. Myeloid lineage
progenitors give rise to vascular endothelium. Proc Natl
Acad Sci U S A 2006;103:13156–61.
9. Conejo-Garcia JR, Benencia F, Courreges M, et al.
Tumor-infiltrating dendritic cell precursors recruited by
a b-defensin contribute to vasculogenesis under the
influence of VEGF-A. Nat Med 2004;10:950–8.
10. Conejo-Garcia JR, Buckanovich RJ, Benencia F, et al.

Cancer Res 2009; 69: (1). January 1, 2009

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2009 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research
Vascular leukocytes contribute to tumor vascularization. Blood 2005;105:679–81.
11. De Palma M, Venneri MA, Galli R, et al. Tie2 identifies
a hematopoietic lineage of proangiogenic monocytes
required for tumor vessel formation and a mesenchymal
population of pericyte progenitors. Cancer Cell 2005;8:
211–26.
12. Coukos G. Monocytes TIE(2)d up in murky business.
Blood 2007;109:5076.
13. de Palma M, Vanneri MA, Roca C, Naldini L.
Targeting exogenous genes to tumor angiogenesis by
transplantation of genetically modified hematopoietic
stem cells. Nat Med 2003;9:789–95.
14. Yang L, DeBusk LM, Fukuda K, et al. Expansion of
myeloid immune suppressor Gr+CD11b+ cells in tumor
bearing host directly promotes tumor angiogenesis.
Cancer Cell 2004;6:409–21.
15. Venneri MA, De Palma M, Ponzoni M, et al.
Identification of proangiogenic TIE2-expressing monocytes (TEMs) in human peripheral blood and cancer.
Blood 2007;109:5276–85.
16. Arnott CH, Scott KA, Moore RJ, et al. Tumour
necrosis factor-a mediates tumour promotion via PKC
a-and AP-1 dependent pathway. Oncogene 2002;21:
4728–38.
17. Scott KA, Moore RJ, Arnott CH, et al. An anti-tumor
necrosis factor-a antibody inhibits the development of
experimental skin tumors. Mol Cancer Ther 2003;2:
445–51.
18. Arnott CH, Scott KA, Moore RJ, Robinson SC,
Thompson RG, Balkwill F. Expression of both TNF-a
receptor subtypes is essential for optimal skin tumour
development. Oncogene 2004;23:1902–10.
19. Kitakata H, Nemoto-Sasaki Y, Takahashi Y, Kondo T,
Mai M, Mukaida N. Essential roles of tumor necrosis
factor receptor p55 in liver metastasis of intrasplenic
administraiton of colon 26 cells. Cancer Res 2002;62:
6682–7.
20. Kulbe H, Thompson RG, Wilson JL, et al. The
inflammatory cytokine tumor necrosis factor-a gener-

Cancer Res 2009; 69: (1). January 1, 2009

ates an autocrine tumor-promoting network in epithelial ovarian cancer cells. Cancer Res 2007;67:585–92.
21. Brantley-Sieders DM, Zhuang G, Hicks D, et al. The
receptor tyrosine kinase EphA2 promotes mammary
adenocarcinoma tumorigenesis and metastatic progression in mice by amplifying ErbB2 signaling. J Clin Invest
2008;118:64–78.
22. Kalka C, Masuda H, Tomono T, et al. Transplantation
of ex vivo expanded endothelial progenitor cells for
therapeutic neovascularizaition. Proc Natl Acad Sci
U S A 1999;97:3422–7.
23. Teleron AA, Carlson B, Young PP. Blood donor WBC
reduction filters as a source of human peripheral bloodderived endothelial progenitor cells (EPCs). Transfusion
2004;45:21–5.
24. Schmeisser A, Garlichs CD, Zhang H, et al. Monocytes coexpress endothelial and macrophagocytic lineage markers and form cord-like structures in Matrigel
under angiogenic conditions. Cardiovasc Res 2001;49:
671–80.
25. Ferrara N, Davis-Smyth T. The biology of vascular
endothelial growth factor. Endocr Rev 1997;18:4–25.
26. Baud V, Karin M. Signal transduction by tumor
necrosis factor and its relatives. Trends Cell Biol 2001;
11:372–6.
27. Spriggs DR, Imamura K, Rodriguez C, Sariban E,
Kufe DW. Tumor necrosis factor expression in human epithelial tumor cell lines. J Clin Invest 1988;81:
455–60.
28. Nikolic T, de Braijn MF, Lutz MB, Leenen PJ.
Developmental stages of myeloid dendritic cells in the
mouse bone marrow. Int Immunol 2003;15:515–24.
29. Asahara T, Masuda H, Takahashi T, et al. Bone
marrow origin of endothelial progenitor cells responsible for postnatal vasculogenesis in physiological and
pathological neovascularization. Circ Res 1999;85:221–8.
30. Shalaby F, Rossant J, Yamaguchi TP, et al. Failure of
blood island formation and vasculogenesis in Flk-1
deficient mice. Nature 1995;376:62–6.
31. Pollard JW. Tumour-educated macrophages promote

348

tumour progression and metastasis. Nat Rev Cancer
2004;4:71–8.
32. Balkwill F, Charles KA, Mantovani A. Smoldering and
polarized inflammation in the initiation and promotion
of malignant disease. Cancer Cell 2005;7:211–7.
33. Schmid MC, Varner JA. Myeloid cell trafficking and
tumor angiogenesis. Cancer Lett 2007;250:1–8.
34. Lewis CE, De Palma M, Naldini L. Tie2-Expressing
monoctyes and tumor angiogenesis:regulation by hypoxia and angiopoietin 2. Cancer Res 2007;67:8429–32.
35. Goukassian DA, Losordo DW. Tumor necrosis factora receptor p75 is required in ischemia-induced neovascularization. Circulation 2007;115:752–62.
36. Szlosarek P, Charles KA, Balkwill F. Tumour necrosis
factor-a as a tumour promoter. Eur J Cancer 2006;42:
745–50.
37. Lejeune FJ, Lienard D, Matter M, Ruegg C. Efficiency
of recombinant human TNF in human cancer therapy.
Cancer Immun 2006;22:6.
38. Hangai M, He S, Hoffmann S, Lim JI, Ryan SJ, Hinton
DR. Sequential induction of angiogenic growth factors
by TNF-a in choroidal endothelial cells. J Neuroimmunol
2006;171:45–56.
39. Coussens LM, Werb Z. Inflammation and cancer.
Nature 2002;420:860–7.
40. Zhu T, Sennlaub F, Beauchamp MH, et al. Proangiogenic effects of protease-activated receptor 2 are tumor
necrosis-a and consecutively tie2 dependent. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol 2006;26:744–50.
41. Leibovich SJ, Polverin PJ, Shepard HM, Wiseman DM,
Shively V, Nuseir N. Macrophage-induced angiogenesis
is mediated by tumour necrosis factor-a. Nature 1987;
329:630–2.
42. Barcelos LS, Talvani A, Teizeira AS, et al. Impaired
inflammatory angiogenesis, but leukocyte influx, in mice
lacking TNFR1. J Leukoc Biol 2005;78:352–8.
43. Willuweit A, Sass G, Schoneberg A, Eisel U, Tiegs G,
Clauss M. Chronic inflammation and protection from
acute hepatitis in transgenic mice expressing TNF in
endothelial cells. J Immunol 2001;167:3944–52.

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2009 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Low Levels of Tumor Necrosis Factor α Increase Tumor
Growth by Inducing an Endothelial Phenotype of Monocytes
Recruited to the Tumor Site
Bin Li, Alicia Vincent, Justin Cates, et al.
Cancer Res 2009;69:338-348.

Updated version
Supplementary
Material

Cited articles
Citing articles

E-mail alerts
Reprints and
Subscriptions
Permissions

Access the most recent version of this article at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/69/1/338
Access the most recent supplemental material at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/suppl/2008/12/30/69.1.338.DC1

This article cites 43 articles, 19 of which you can access for free at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/69/1/338.full#ref-list-1
This article has been cited by 12 HighWire-hosted articles. Access the articles at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/69/1/338.full#related-urls

Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal.
To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications
Department at pubs@aacr.org.
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications
Department at permissions@aacr.org.

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2009 American Association for Cancer
Research.

