Research Article

A New Model for Prediction of Drug Distribution in Tumor and
Normal Tissues: Pharmacokinetics of Temozolomide in
Glioma Patients
1

1,2

4

1,3

Lula Rosso, Cathryn S. Brock, James M. Gallo, Azeem Saleem, Patricia M. Price,
1
1
Federico E. Turkheimer, and Eric O. Aboagye

1,3

1
Clinical Sciences Centre, Imperial College, Faculty of Medicine, Hammersmith Hospital Campus; 2Imperial College Healthcare NHS Trust,
London, United Kingdom; 3Academic Department of Radiation Oncology, Christie Hospital NHS Trust, Manchester, United Kingdom;
and 4Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, School of Pharmacy, Temple University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania

successful development of a new drug entity. There has also
been interest to apply pharmacokinetic models to characterize
drug disposition in target tissues, such as tumors, the site of
pharmacologic activity (reviewed in ref. 3). These efforts can reveal
important mechanisms of drug distribution and also serve as a
basis to predict the pharmacokinetic behavior of drugs in humans,
particularly in tissues in which actual measurements cannot be
readily obtained. In this regard, physiologically based and hybrid
pharmacokinetic models that use rodent-to-human scale-up
procedures have been used in an attempt to overcome the
limitation of direct measurement of drug concentrations in tissues
(4, 5). Although the effect of physicochemical properties and
plasma protein binding on tissue drug distribution can be
predicted fairly readily, these predictive pharmacokinetic models
can be limited by uncertainties in the physiologic state and
integrity of cell membranes, such as the blood-brain barrier, which
can influence drug disposition, particularly in tumors that are
known to be heterogeneous. To circumvent the issues related to the
scale-up of preclinical models, we have used a positron emission
tomography (PET) method to examine the tissue distribution of
temozolomide directly in patients in conjunction with a convolution data analysis procedure. Temozolomide is an orally administered cytotoxic drug that has shown antitumor activity in glioma
and melanoma (6–9), and in the United Kingdom, it has been
approved as the standard of care for second-line therapy of
patients with relapsed high-grade glioma and is licensed for use
concurrently with radiotherapy for the primary treatment of
glioblastoma multiforme. Although the systemic pharmacokinetics
of this drug is known (10–12), little is known about its accumulation in tumors and normal tissues.
The direct noninvasive measurement of tissue drug concentrations afforded by our PET study in brain tumor patients
suggested the use of a system analysis or convolution approach to
generate a pharmacokinetic model. The essential features of the
method require the definition of two functions: a unit impulse
response function (IRF) and an input function describing the
plasma drug concentration. The IRF expresses the drug concentration response of a given tissue region as though the drug is
immediately delivered in the tissue of interest, analogous to a
single instantaneous bolus injection (13). Under the conditions of
system linearity, the IRF can be used to predict the response (i.e.,
tissue drug concentrations) for any plasma input function. The
method can also similarly be applied to analyze and predict drug
exposures in healthy tissue and, together with target tissue
predictions, serve as an aid to design optimal dosing protocols.
We believe that the assessment of drug disposition in target and
normal tissue is sorely deficient in existing drug development

Abstract
Difficulties in direct measurement of drug concentrations in
human tissues have hampered the understanding of drug
accumulation in tumors and normal tissues. We propose a
new system analysis modeling approach to characterize drug
distribution in tissues based on human positron emission
tomography (PET) data. The PET system analysis method was
applied to temozolomide, an important alkylating agent used
in the treatment of brain tumors, as part of standard
temozolomide treatment regimens in patients. The system
analysis technique, embodied in the convolution integral,
generated an impulse response function that, when convolved
with temozolomide plasma concentration input functions,
yielded predicted normal brain and brain tumor temozolomide concentration profiles for different temozolomide
dosing regimens (75–200 mg/m2/d). Predicted peak concentrations of temozolomide ranged from 2.9 to 6.7 Mg/mL in
human glioma tumors and from 1.8 to 3.7 Mg/mL in normal
brain, with the total drug exposure, as indicated by the tissue/
plasma area under the curve ratio, being about 1.3 in tumor
compared with 0.9 in normal brain. The higher temozolomide
exposures in brain tumor relative to normal brain were
attributed to breakdown of the blood-brain barrier and
possibly secondary to increased intratumoral angiogenesis.
Overall, the method is considered a robust tool to analyze and
predict tissue drug concentrations to help select the most
rational dosing schedules. [Cancer Res 2009;69(1):120–7]

Introduction
The development of new anticancer drugs still poses a
considerable challenge. Of the many challenges, ensuring that
optimal exposures of drug are achieved in tumor versus normal
tissues is one of the most important (reviewed in refs. 1–3). The
field of pharmacokinetics, which is concerned with the absorption,
distribution, metabolism, and excretion of drugs, is instrumental to
the drug development process and is applied to both preclinical
and clinical investigations. The bulk of pharmacokinetic investigations assesses macropharmacokinetic characteristics such as
drug clearance and oral bioavailability, key attributes that affect the

Requests for reprints: Eric O. Aboagye, Molecular Therapy and PET Oncology
Research Group, Imperial College London, Faculty of Medicine, Hammersmith
Hospital, Room 240 MRC Cyclotron Building, Du Cane Road, London W12 ONN,
United Kingdom. Phone: 44-208-383-3759; Fax: 44-208-383-1783; E-mail: eric.aboagye@
imperial.ac.uk.
I2009 American Association for Cancer Research.
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-2356

Cancer Res 2009; 69: (1). January 1, 2009

120

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2009 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Prediction of Drug Distribution in Humans

where C out(t) is output function, f in(t) is input function, and C y(t) is
impulse response function (IRF).
In the context of applying the convolution integral to temozolomide
tissue concentration-time profiles, C out(t) would equal the temozolomide
brain or brain tumor concentration-time profile; f in(t) would equal the input
plasma concentration-time profile of temozolomide; and the impulse
response function (IRF), C y(t), would represent the tissue disposition of
temozolomide had the dose been delivered instantaneously to the tissue.
The convolution approach as implemented here assumes time invariance
and superposition. Time invariance means the response or output function
is the same irrespective of when the input is initiated, whereas
superposition indicates that for any constant multiple of the input [i.e.,
A  f in(t)], a corresponding multiple of the output is produced [i.e.,
A  C out(t)]. Knowledge of any two of the functions allows the third function
to be determined by performing either convolution or deconvolution, and
as such is a flexible approach to data analysis. The nature of the functions is
dictated by the shape of the curve describing actual data, and thus, when
the system involves drug disposition in plasma and tissues, exponential
functions are often appropriate to describe the three functions associated
with the convolution integral (Eq. A).
The exact form of the convolution integral used to analyze the
temozolomide data can be resolved analytically as the sum of exponential
functions as follows:
N
Rt P
Ca ðt  Þ  j expð	j tÞd j  0;   	j  1
CT ðtÞ ¼
ðBÞ

paradigms, and through the combined use of PET radiotracer
studies and pharmacokinetic modeling, we show how these
limitations can be addressed.

Materials and Methods
PET studies. Approval for the study was obtained from the Hammersmith Hospitals Research and Ethics Committee and the Administration
of Radioactive Substances Advisory Committee of the United Kingdom.
All patients gave written informed consent. The PET study was carried out
in parallel with a phase I/II study of temozolomide [75–200 mg/m2/d over
5 d every 28 d (phase II) or continuously over 6 to 7 wk (phase I)] for which
the patient eligibility criteria have previously been described (10, 14).
Patients had two scans: the first, before commencing treatment with oral
temozolomide and the second during the first cycle of drug treatment.
For the development of this method, we chose to study uniquely the second
set of scans as we wanted to image the distribution of temozolomide in
the presence of circulating ‘‘cold’’ doses of temozolomide. We analyzed a
total of seven PET scans from patients with recurrent glioma, after oral
temozolomide treatment with a phase II temozolomide regimen for five
patients and phase I temozolomide regimen for two patients. For these
patients, the [methyl-11C]temozolomide PET studies were done on the last
day of the phase I/II cycle at a median of 6 h (range, 1–16 h) after oral
dosing. PET scans were done after injection of [methyl-11C]temozolomide
(average dose, 281 MBq; range, 165–356 MBq). The average amount of stable
temozolomide injected was 1.1 Ag (range, 0.5–1.6 Ag) with an average
specific activity of 53 GBq/Amol (range, 35–66 GBq/Amol). The original data
were part of a doctoral thesis work by Dr. Cathryn Brock. [methyl-11C]
Temozolomide was prepared as previously described (15). Scanning was
carried out at the Hammersmith Hospital using an ECAT 953 CTI NeuroPET scanner (CTI/Siemens). An initial transmission scan was done using
68
Ge/Ga before tracer injection to correct for tissue attenuation. The
radiolabeled temozolomide was given as an i.v. bolus over 30 s, starting 30 s
after the start of scanning. PET data were collected in 21 time frames over
90 min (1  30 s, 1  15 s, 1  5 s, 1  10 s, 1  30 s, 4  60 s, 7  5 min,
5  10 min) with acquisition in the three-dimensional mode. The PET data
were corrected for attenuation and detector efficiency and reconstructed
into tomographic images using filtered back projection for the threedimensional images of the brain studies (16). PET image data were then
calibrated to megabecquerels per milliliter. All frames for each patient were
summed to provide a high-quality image. Regions of interest were defined
on 6 to 13 slices of whole tumor and contralateral brain with the aid of
a recent computed tomography or magnetic resonance imaging film for
each patient. Continuous online monitoring of peripheral arterial blood
radioactivity was carried out throughout the scans (17). At discrete time
points during the 90-min PET scans, blood samples were taken from
patients; an aliquot was rapidly centrifuged to obtain corresponding
plasma; and radioactivity concentration was measured in a NaI(TI) well
counter for blood and plasma separately. The continuous blood counts were
corrected using the plasma/blood ratio to derive a plasma input function.
The plasma was further analyzed for radiolabeled metabolites using highperformance liquid chromatography. The plasma input function was
corrected for the small quantity of [11C]CO2 and other unidentified
radiolabeled metabolites that were detected in plasma during the scan.
System analysis. The pharmacokinetics of [methyl-11C]temozolomide
was evaluated using a linear system analysis approach (spectral analysis)
that has been applied to PET data (13). Linear system analysis has been
used for various pharmacokinetic applications, such as depicting drug
absorption, and is viewed as an alternative to and more general than classic
compartmental modeling (see review in ref. 18). In this regard, system
analysis does not discern a compartmental structure for drug disposition as
in classic compartmental modeling but rather relies on the convolution
integral, which has the general form as follows;
Zt
Cout ðtÞ ¼ fin ðt  ÞC ðÞd
ðAÞ

0 j¼1

where C T and C a represent the output and input functions, analogous to
Eq. A, describing the measured temozolomide concentrations in tissue and
plasma, respectively. Consistent with the assumptions of linear system
analysis as mentioned above, the kinetics of temozolomide does not involve
any saturable processes. Further, specific to the measurement of radiolabeled drugs, it was assumed that there are no radiolabeled metabolites in
the organ of interest that contribute to the signal. Spectral analysis as
implemented in Eq. B is a computational method used in PET to estimate
the parameters in Eq. B, where C T(t) is the radioactivity concentration
measured in a tissue region and C a(t) is the radioactivity concentration in
the arterial plasma input. In spectral analysis, a large set of N
predetermined exponential functions, which are characterized by two sets
of coefficients, {bj }j = 1,N and {aj }j = 1,N , are fit to the actual data. The
predetermined b values are chosen to cover the entire range of expected
kinetic behavior, from k, the decay constant of the radioisotope, which
represents the slowest possible clearance detectable, to the faster
measurable dynamics (i.e., transient component through tissue vasculature;
ref. 19). The solution of Eq. B was found iteratively by optimizing the set of
a values using the nonnegative least square algorithm (20). The values of
the spectral coefficients are used to define the decay-corrected tissue IRF:
IRFðtÞ ¼

j expðð	j  ÞtÞ

ðCÞ

j¼1

and associated pharmacokinetic parameters as follows:
K1 ¼ IRFðt ¼ 0Þ ¼

N
X

j

ðDÞ

j¼1

Z1
IRFðtÞdt ¼

VD ¼
0

MRT ¼

N
X

j
	

j
j¼1

VD
K1

ðEÞ

ðFÞ

where K 1 is the rate for transport from plasma to tissue, VD is the
distribution volume, and MRT is the mean residence time of the tracer in
the tissue.

0

www.aacrjournals.org

N
X

121

Cancer Res 2009; 69: (1). January 1, 2009

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2009 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

Figure 1. Representative scan of [methyl -11C]temozolomide PET in patient 1 showing
tumor radiotracer uptake in multiple slices of brain (A) and enlarged plane showing
normal brain and tumor (B). For each patient scan, the regions of interest were defined
on multiple slices; for patient 1, tumor and contralateral brain regions were drawn on
a total of 13 slices, from T-17 to T-29. Note that the brain region contralateral to the
tumor is not homogeneous but shows different levels of [methyl -11C]temozolomide
uptake. This may be one of the causes for the greater variability found in the prediction
of temozolomide distribution in normal brain tissue with respect to tumor tissue.

themselves were not resampled and were reassigned at the appropriate time
point. In other words, the bootstrapped set of residuals were used to
generate a ‘‘new’’ data set defined as

It is then possible to predict the tissue response or output function,
C T(t), by convolving the IRF with any given plasma input function, C a(t),
via Eq. B. Note that if the IRF is determined using decaying inputs, as is
often the case in PET studies, Eq. B needs to be decay corrected before
being applied to nonradioactive plasma data.
Confidence intervals of spectral analysis parameters. Bootstrap
analysis was done to provide an estimate of the error introduced by
measurement and time extrapolation (21). This technique has been shown
to require minimal assumptions about noise in the measurements, and in
the absence of repeated measurements, it is the only consistent method for
assessing uncertainty in all detected components of the tracer kinetic.
First, the residuals, nk , are calculated as the difference between the
estimated tissue concentration C T(tk ) and the measured tissue concentration X(tk ) at each tk time point:
qﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
ðGÞ
k ¼ ðXðtk Þ  CT ðtk ÞÞ w2k k ¼ 1; 2; . . . ; M




X 
 ðtk Þ ¼ CT ðtk Þ þ pkﬃﬃﬃﬃ2
wk

ðHÞ

Taking X*(tk ) as the new ‘‘measured’’ temozolomide tissue concentrations, the spectral analysis provided a new set of N a, {aj *}j = 1,. . ., N , best
fit coefficients, based on the nonnegative least square algorithm, which
described the tissue disposition of temozolomide. The bootstrap procedure
was repeated R times, generating R sets of the N amplitudes {aj *(i )}j = 1,. . ., N ,
i = 1,. . ., R , to obtain a statistically significant estimate of their distribution
and R sets of estimated tissue concentrations C T(tk )(i), using Eq. B. Finally,
the distributions of the bootstrapped C T(tk )(i) (i = 1,. . ., R) for each scan
were then used to calculate the respective 95% confidence intervals.
Predictions of tissue exposures based on nonradioactive plasma
pharmacokinetic data. Because the PET studies were limited to 90 min,
and we preferred to predict the disposition of temozolomide over longer
time periods, we use three clinical temozolomide regimens and the
associated published plasma temozolomide data to generate unique plasma
input functions. This not only would facilitate a complete assessment of
temozolomide exposure but also would provide a means to contrast tumor
and normal tissue exposures of temozolomide under clinically relevant
conditions. The first dosing regimen consisted of temozolomide given as a
single oral dose of 100 mg/m2/d daily for 5 consecutive days every 28 d (11);
this will be referred to as protocol A. The second dosing regimen consisted

where M is the number of time points. In PET experiments, the
measurement error varies with time. wk is the weight at time k,
proportional to the SD of the measurement at time k. The residuals, {nk },
are therefore a finite sample of the error distribution. To simulate the effect
of measurement noise on the spectral analysis estimates, we generated a
new set of ‘‘measured’’ data by adding resampled residuals to the original
estimate. For a more detailed discussion, see ref. 22. The residuals {nk } were
then resampled randomly without substitution to form a new set of
residuals n
k that were added to the estimated C T(tk ) values. The weights

Cancer Res 2009; 69: (1). January 1, 2009

k ¼ 1; 2; . . . ; M

122

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2009 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Prediction of Drug Distribution in Humans
of temozolomide given as a single oral dose of 200 mg/m2/d daily for
5 consecutive days every 28 d (11); this will be referred to as protocol B. The
third regimen consisted of temozolomide given as continuous oral schedule
of 75 mg/m2/d daily for 7 wk (10); this will be referred to as protocol C.
The three unique plasma input functions were convolved with the IRF
determined by PET spectral analysis. This procedure provides a timedependent function, C T(t) (see Eq. B), of either temozolomide normal brain
or brain tumor concentrations. Subsequently, from C T(t), the total tissue
exposure to temozolomide was estimated as the area under the
concentration-time curve (AUC). The tissue AUC was computed up to
specified times, and not extrapolated to infinity, by trapezoidal numerical
integration of the predicted tissue concentration-time curve using Matlab
7.1 (MathWorks Limited).

brain tumor compared with normal brain (see VD values in
Table 1); however, the mean residence time (MRT) was essentially
equal in both tissue compartments and indicated that the efflux
of temozolomide from brain tumor to plasma was also higher than
in normal brain. The kinetic parameters calculated excluding the
blood volume in the two tissue spaces yielded similar trends for
both K 1 and VD (see Table 1). However, the MRT in normal brain
was f3-fold greater than in tumor, which may reflect the greater
contribution of the normal brain blood volume, as opposed to the
blood volume in tumor, to the overall tissue disposition of
temozolomide. In essence, the characteristics of the blood-brain
barrier, due to either breakdown or active angiogenesis, in brain
tumor facilitate rapid and greater drug penetration, yet is coupled
with a similarly rapid exit back into plasma, making the tissue
residence time no greater than that achieved in normal brain.
The variability of the IRF as determined by spectral analysis was
estimated by a bootstrapping procedure (21). We then used the
ensemble of bootstrapped solutions to estimate the 95% confidence interval of the model predicted tissue levels obtained with
the mean IRF. One advantage of the bootstrapping technique is it
allows robust statistical estimates of characteristics of a system
when actual data are limited. Given the rigor of performing PET
investigations in brain tumor patients, repeated measurements in
the same region will not be possible; thus, reliance on a bootstrap
procedure is in order. A number of iterations (R = 1,000), based on
the observed experimental error, were done in conjunction with
the bootstrap procedure. Representative bootstrapped solutions
for the normal brain and tumor IRF of patient 1 are shown in
Fig. 2A and B. In addition, we calculated the 95% confidence
interval of the bootstrapped IRF solutions averaged over all seven
patients for both tumor and brain tissue and extrapolated them
up to 24 hours (data not shown). The confidence intervals for the
IRF in tumor and normal brain were comparable and higher at
earlier times, as expected when temozolomide concentrations are
changing rapidly. From f3 hours, the 95% confidence intervals
continued to decline to very small values and became negligible
after 12 hours.
Prediction of temozolomide tissue distribution from nonradioactive plasma data. The nonradioactive plasma data were
convolved with the group average human PET temozolomide IRF
to calculate tissue concentrations of the drug under different
clinically used dosing schedules. The short elimination half-life of
temozolomide ensures that there is minimal drug accumulation

Results
PET analysis of temozolomide tumor and normal brain
radiotracer distribution. Representative transverse slices of the
cumulative [methyl-11C]temozolomide uptake over 90 minutes are
shown in Fig. 1. These types of figures served as the basis to select
regions of interest that were manually traced around tumor and
contralateral normal brain in several slices (ranging from 6 to 13,
depending on size of tumor). Given the signal intensity averaged
over the multislice regions of interest and the metabolite-corrected
[methyl-11C]temozolomide plasma input function, we used spectral
analysis to solve Eq. B iteratively to yield a small set of non-zero a
parameters, which defined the separate region of interest IRF for
each patient. The group average spectra and group average IRF
were derived by averaging all seven patients’ scans.
Typically, the convolution analysis of Eq. B required just a few
exponential terms, with three required in tumor and only two in
normal brain. These results were consistent in all scans studied, as
well as in previous [methyl-11C]temozolomide PET quantification
studies done without prior oral administration of temozolomide
(23). As anticipated and consistent with a variable and compromised blood-brain barrier in brain tumors, radiotracer uptake was
heterogeneous within tumors (Fig. 1). At the same time, normal
brain regions showed greater than expected variations in
radiotracer uptake.
The kinetic parameters associated with the disposition of
[methyl-11C]temozolomide that were derived from the IRFs are
shown in Table 1. The transport rate, K 1, of temozolomide into
brain tumor was greater than that into normal brain and is
consistent with a more permeable blood-brain barrier in tumor.
The cumulative exposure of temozolomide was also greater in

Table 1. Mean distribution volume and K 1 values of [methyl-11C]temozolomide in human tissue
ROI

n

m

VD(1)

VD(2)

K 1 (s1)

MRT (s)

Normal Brain
Tumor

7
7

58
58

0.93 (0.46)
1.41 (0.58)

0.52 (0.08)
0.92 (0.11)

0.033 (0.016)
0.052 (0.025)

39 (31)
38 (30)

0.0003 (0.0001)
0.0016 (0.0009)

3,400 (1,600)
1,000 (600)

Parameter values excluding contribution from blood volume
Normal Brain
7
58
0.90 (0.46)
Tumor
7
58
1.35 (0.58)

NOTE: VD(1), K 1, and MRT (mean residence time) were calculated using spectral analysis (12) and averaging over m slices from scans of n patients; VD(2)
was calculated using the rank-shaped estimator (28). Tissue pharmacokinetic parameters derived with and without contribution of regional blood
volume are presented. The SDs are in parentheses.
Abbreviation: ROI, region of interest.

www.aacrjournals.org

123

Cancer Res 2009; 69: (1). January 1, 2009

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2009 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

Figure 2. Representative bootstrap
analysis for the PET scan from patient 1,
with R = 1,000 iterations. A, tumor IRF
(left ) and tissue distribution (right ).
B, normal brain IRF (left ) and tissue
distribution (right ). The curves shown are
the bootstrapped unbiased solution (black
solid line ), original tissue data (cross ), and
all bootstrapped solutions (gray ), to
indicate PET scan measurement noise. As
expected, the biggest variance occurs at
the early time points. TMZ, temozolomide.

drug development due to pharmacokinetic failures has often been
attributed to either poor systemic properties of rapid drug
elimination or poor oral bioavailability. With the advent of targeted
drugs and an increasing realization that target tissue concentrations can determine the therapeutic efficacy of a drug, the ability
to predict drug exposures in tissues of drug activity and toxicity
can provide critical information on the prospects of successful
drug development. It is established that the ability to make early
decisions to terminate drug development on drugs that will
ultimately fail will significantly reduce clinical costs (25–27).
Similarly, by shifting 5% of all clinical failures from phase III/
regulatory to the phase I setting could also reduce clinical costs
by 5.5% to 7.1% (25). Thus, development of predictive pharmacokinetic models and incorporation of their results into an earlyphase clinical drug development decision paradigm should
produce significant savings. The pharmacokinetic approach offered
in the current investigation provides a means to extract important
information on drug disposition in tissues and to subsequently
develop pharmacokinetic models that can predict drug disposition
under conditions in which data have not been obtained.
The predictive method described in this article relies on
administration of trace quantities of an isotopically radiolabeled
positron-emitting drug during dosing (oral or parenteral) of the
nonradioactive drug. Injection of the radiolabeled compound is
followed by PET imaging to generate a mathematical description of
the blood and tissue kinetics of the drug. The mathematical
approach used here is governed by the doctrine of linear system
analysis that relies on the convolution integral to relate input and
output of the system. The method does not require defining the
potentially complex compartmental structure for drug distribution
but rather defines a unique IRF for the tissue using spectral
analysis. Although PET data were analyzed individually, it was
essential to estimate the mean and confidence interval for this
patient population to enable the methods to be applied to
individual patient plasma (cold temozolomide) data. The average
IRF could then be convolved with any plasma profile from separate
pharmacokinetic studies of the nonradioactive drug to determine

on successive doses for each of the three oral dosing regimens,
and supports our assumption that saturable kinetics would not be
found in tissues. We also implicitly assumed that the IRF derived
from the PET studies is the same as the IRF at full dose (i.e., principle
of superposition) in each of the clinical dosing schemes despite
the more prolonged duration (90 minutes versus 24 hours) of the
plasma input functions. The resulting predicted temozolomide
concentration profiles in brain tumor and normal brain are shown
in Fig. 3A and B, respectively, for each of the three clinical regimens.
Regardless of the temozolomide treatment regimen, peak temozolomide brain tumor concentrations were greater than peak normal
brain concentrations, and the predicted tumor and normal brain
profiles became indistinguishable within error after 6 hours. The
cumulative tissue exposures as measured by the AUC for the
different dosing regimens are reported in Table 2. The AUC,
calculated to 24 hours, in brain tumor was always greater than
the corresponding normal brain AUC, and ranged from 18.91 to
40.37 Ag/mLh, compared with a range of 12.86 to 27.47 Ag/mLh
in normal brain. For comparison, the plasma AUC (calculated up
to 24 hours) for the different dosing regimens followed the same
trend as the predicted tissue AUC: 13.96 Ag/mLh for protocol A,
30.56 Ag/mLh for protocol B, and 16.83 Ag/mLh for protocol C.
Hence, temozolomide tissue-to-plasma exposure ratios over a
24-hour period were f1.3 for glioma and f0.9 for normal brain.
Finally, brain and tumor tissue terminal half-life (t 1/2) values were
very similar in all protocols, being 3.05 hours (protocol A), 3.17
hours (protocol B), and 3.08 hours (protocol C) in brain tumor, and
3.04 hours (protocol A), 3.15 hours (protocol B), and 3.07 hours
(protocol C) in normal brain. The predicted normal brain temozolomide concentrations were more variable than those in brain
tumor as evidenced by the 95% confidence intervals (Fig. 3C and D).

Discussion
Of the several investigational new anticancer drugs being
developed, f40% fail in early clinical development because of
inappropriate pharmacokinetics (24). The decision to terminate

Cancer Res 2009; 69: (1). January 1, 2009

124

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2009 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Prediction of Drug Distribution in Humans

barrier and increased neovascularization. However, Meikle and
colleagues (23) reported a rather high tumor/normal brain VD ratio
of 7.8, whereas we found a ratio of 1.5 (Table 1). Direct comparison
may not be possible because the previous study was done in one
patient who received tracer only doses of [methyl-11C]temozolomide
and was not undergoing active treatment with oral temozolomide as
in this study. We further confirmed the VD obtained with a rankshaped estimator, which has been shown to reduce the noise in VD
estimation by optimizing the choice of the basis set (28).
Temozolomide showed little tumor selectivity beyond 6 hours with
concentration-time profiles quite similar in each tissue. This is in
keeping with previous studies in which temozolomide was radiolabeled at different positions on the ring with carbon-11 to elucidate
its mechanism of action; it was noted that ring-opening and triazine
formation was not selective to tumor (17). The more rapid
penetration of temozolomide in brain tumor early after drug
administration was sufficient to lead to greater drug exposure in
tumor compared to normal brain, with brain tumor/normal brain
AUC ratio being 1.47 for each of three clinical dosing protocols. It is
of some interest to compare the current study results to those
predicted by a hybrid pharmacokinetic model of temozolomide in
brain derived from rat studies (5), particularly because this model
was validated in brain tumor patients using only available CSF
temozolomide concentrations (29). The rat hybrid model and
extrapolated human model for temozolomide in brain tissues were
based on unbound temozolomide concentrations and not on total as
used here. A conversion from unbound to total temozolomide
concentrations can be approximated by using the ratios of the influx
to efflux rate constants previously reported (5), and yields a total
AUC for 24 hours in brain tumor of 48 Ag/mLh for protocol B, which
is quite consistent with the predicted value of 40.37 Ag/mLh (see
Table 2). Using the same conversion approach for the hybrid model–
predicted normal brain temozolomide AUC yields a value
of 123 Ag/mLh or f4-fold greater than the value predicted by the
PET-linear system approach. A simulation study was conducted in
the study of Zhou and colleagues (5) to reflect the variability in the

tissue distribution of the drug in that pharmacokinetic study,
assuming linear kinetics. In the past, we have used spectral analysis
to describe the pharmacokinetics of labeled anticancer drugs in the
absence of a full dose of the drug (23). Here we describe a general
modeling approach using a PET-IRF (generated in the presence of
the full dose of nonlabeled drug) to predict tissue distribution
kinetics from plasma pharmacokinetic data obtained in a nonimaging study.
The PET coupled linear system approach as applied here
operates within the clinical domain to make predictions of drug
disposition in tissues. A comparison can be made with predictions
of human pharmacokinetic properties from sophisticated scaled
preclinical models (4). The preclinical pharmacokinetic models are
physiologically based and often cast as hybrid pharmacokinetic
models. These models are sufficiently distinct from the linear
system–based models and warrant further consideration. The
physiologically based hybrid models represent the tissue of interest
in terms of anatomic and physiologic attributes, and when
combined with drug-specific characteristic of protein binding or
membrane transport, are considered mechanistic-based models
for drug disposition. Features of nonlinearity such as saturable
membrane transport, tissue binding, or time-dependent effects can
be accounted for in the hybrid techniques but not in the linear
system approach. Animal-based hybrid models have been extrapolated to patients, yet, as with any predictive tool, require actual
patient data for validation. Thus, the hybrid pharmacokinetic
approach is viewed as a mechanistic-based approach initiated in
a preclinical phase that can be scaled to humans, whereas the
PET coupled-linear system analysis method is directly applicable to
human pharmacokinetic data.
We have used the DNA alkylator temozolomide as the prototypical
example of the PET-IRF method (6–9). Consistent with a previous
study (23), the IRF derived from all the PET scans indicated that the
main differences between tumor and contralateral normal brain
were faster drug delivery to tumor in the first 30 minutes and a
greater total exposure, possibly due to breakdown of the blood-brain

Figure 3. Predicted temozolomide tissue distribution
for protocol A (solid line ), protocol B (dashed line ), and
protocol C (dot-dashed line ) in tumor (A) and normal
brain (B). The prediction was based on use of the
mean IRF generated from different tissue volumes of
multislice dynamic PET scans in the different regions of
interest, excluding the blood pool component in tissue.
Representation of prediction variability in tumor (C ) and
normal brain (D ) obtained with protocol B; the average
predicted tissue drug levels (solid line ) together with
the predicted 95% confidence interval (dashed line ) are
shown. Protocol A: single oral dose of 100 mg/m2/d
daily for 5 consecutive days every 28 d. Protocol B:
single oral dose of 200 mg/m2/d daily for 5 consecutive
days every 28 d. Protocol C: continuous oral schedule
of 75 mg/m2/d daily for 7 wk.

www.aacrjournals.org

125

Cancer Res 2009; 69: (1). January 1, 2009

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2009 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

0.02, 0.2, and 2 Ag/mL decreased clonogenic survival by z50% in
9%, 16%, and 35%, respectively, of 101 tumors taken directly from
patients and grown in vitro in soft agar. The response rates
achieved with temozolomide may thus be related, at least in part,
to its pharmacokinetics.
Analysis of drug accumulation in normal tissues should indicate
the likelihood of toxicity; however, most often there are no
established drug concentration-toxicity relationships in organs of
toxicity. This type of endeavor is a large undertaking even in a
rodent model, and most often blood and its cellular components
are used as surrogates to define pharmacokinetic-pharmacodynamic relationships in patients. In our study, we were able to
measure temozolomide concentrations in normal brain, which
currently do not serve as means to set dose-limiting toxicities,
but rather provide a means to assess blood-brain barrier function.
A whole-body PET scan would be required to determine drug
accumulation in all major organs, and this type of analysis may be
most warranted when preclinical studies indicate dose-dependent
organ toxicity or low therapeutic indexes. In summary, we report
the use of a flexible linear system analysis model for predicting
tumor and normal tissue pharmacokinetics derived from human
PET studies. The unique feature of the modeling technique is the
IRF to describe drug disposition in tissue, which can be linked to
any human plasma drug concentration-time profile under the
condition of system linearity. The resultant tissue drug concentration profiles can characterize drug transport rates and accumulation that can be used as a tool to evaluate different dosing schemes
in terms of drug efficacy and, possibly, drug toxicity. The PET-linear
system approach could find general application in early-phase
clinical drug development strategies to facilitate decisions about
future therapeutic potential of new anticancer drugs.

Table 2. Predicted temozolomide tissue AUC values for
the considered dosing and schedule protocols

Protocol A
Brain tumor
Normal brain
Protocol B
Brain tumor
Normal brain
Protocol C
Brain tumor
Normal brain

AUC6 h
(Ag/mLh)

AUC12 h
(Ag/mLh)

AUC24 h
(Ag/mLh)

12.50
7.79

17.57
11.80

18.91
12.86

26.82
16.81

37.38
25.12

40.37
27.47

13.67
8.66

18.62
12.53

19.92
13.55

NOTE: Protocol A: single oral dose of 100 mg/m2/d daily for
5 consecutive days every 28 d. Protocol B: single oral dose of
200 mg/m2/d daily for 5 consecutive days every 28 d. Protocol C:
continuous oral schedule of 75 mg/m2/d daily for 7 wk.
The AUC values have been derived integrating the predicted tissue
concentration-time curve from 0 to 6 h (AUC6 h), from 0 to 12 h
(AUC12 h), and from 0 to 24 h (AUC24 h). The predicted tissue
concentration was obtained by convolution analysis using the average
human PET-derived IRF and the nonradioactive plasma temozolomide
concentration in different dosing protocols, using Eq. B.

brain tumor AUC due to altered blood-brain barrier permeability
and fractional tumor blood volume. These simulations revealed that
the temozolomide brain tumor AUC could vary f6-fold, which, if
used to estimate the brain tumor to normal brain AUC ratio, would
encompass the 1.47 value found here. Thus, it seems that both the
hybrid model and linear system approaches are in general
agreement, and which method one chooses may be based on
available resources, modeling preferences, and stage of implementation in the drug development paradigm.
The PET-IRF predicted temozolomide brain tumor concentrations at a dose of 200 mg/m2 (protocol B) were z2 Ag/mL for
8 hours, z1 Ag/mL for 12 hours, and z0.04 Ag/mL within a 24-hour
period. In preclinical studies, Raymond and colleagues (30) showed
that continuous exposure to temozolomide at concentrations of

References
1. Gelmon KA, Eisenhauer EA, Harris AL, Ratain MJ,
Workman P. Anticancer agents targeting signaling
molecules and cancer cell environment: challenges for
drug development? J Natl Cancer Inst 1999;91:1281–7.
2. Rousseau A, Marquet P. Application of pharmacokinetic modelling to the routine therapeutic drug
monitoring of anticancer drugs. Fundam Clin Pharmacol 2002;16:253–62.
3. Workman P, Aboagye EO, Chung YL, et al.
Minimally invasive pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic technologies in hypothesis-testing clinical
trials of innovative therapies. J Natl Cancer Inst 2006;
98:580–98.
4. Gallo JM, Vicini P, Orlansky A, et al. Pharmacokinetic
model-predicted anticancer drug concentrations in
human tumors. Clin Cancer Res 2004;10:8048–58.

Cancer Res 2009; 69: (1). January 1, 2009

Disclosure of Potential Conflicts of Interest
No potential conflicts of interest were disclosed.

Acknowledgments
Received 6/23/2008; revised 9/16/2008; accepted 10/16/2008.
Grant support: United Kingdom Medical Research Council, Cancer Research UK
Grant C2536/A5708 (E.O. Aboagye), and NIH grant CA72937 (J.M. Gallo).
The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of page
charges. This article must therefore be hereby marked advertisement in accordance
with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact.

5. Zhou QY, Guo P, Kruh GD, Vicini PL, Wang XM, Gallo
JM. Predicting human tumor drug concentrations from
a preclinical pharmacokinetic model of temozolomide
brain disposition. Clin Cancer Res 2007;13:4271–79.
6. Mutter N, Stupp R. Temozolomide: a milestone in
neuro-oncology and beyond? Expert Rev Anticancer
Ther 2006;6:1187–204.
7. Oreilly SM, Newlands ES, Glaser MG, et al. Temozolomide—a new oral cytotoxic chemotherapeutic agent
with promising activity against primary brain-tumors.
Eur J Cancer 1993;29A:940–42.
8. Payne MJ, Pratap SE, Middleton MR. Temozolomide in
the treatment of solid tumours: current results and
rationale for dosing/scheduling. Crit Rev Oncol Hematol
2005;53:241–52.
9. Danson SJ, Middleton MR. Temozolomide: a novel
oral alkylating agent. Expert Rev Anticancer Ther 2001;
1:13–9.

126

10. Brock CS, Newlands ES, Wedge SR, et al. Phase I trial
of temozolomide using an extended continuous oral
schedule. Cancer Res 1998;58:4363–7.
11. Hammond LA, Eckardt JR, Baker SD, et al. Phase I
and pharmacokinetic study of temozolomide on a dailyfor-5-days schedule in patients with advanced solid
malignancies. J Clin Oncol 1999;17:2604–13.
12. Rudek MA, Donehower RC, Statkevich P, Batra VK,
Cutler DL, Baker SD. Temozolomide in patients with
advanced cancer: phase I and pharmacokinetic study.
Pharmacotherapy 2004;24:16–25.
13. Cunningham VJ, Jones T. Spectral analysis of
dynamic PET studies. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 1993;
13:15–23.
14. Brock CS, Young H, O’Reilly SM, et al. Early
evaluation of tumour metabolic response using [F18]fluorodeoxyglucose and positron emission tomography: a pilot study following the phase II chemotherapy

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2009 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Prediction of Drug Distribution in Humans

schedule for temozolomide in recurrent high-grade
gliomas. Br J Cancer 2000;82:608–15.
15. Brown GD, Luthra SK, Brock CS, Stevens MFG, Price
PM, Brady F. Antitumor imidazotetrazines. 40. Radiosyntheses of [4-C-11-carbonyl]- and [3-N-C-11-methyl]-8carbamoyl-3-methylimidazo[5,1-d]-1,2,3,5-tetrazin-4(3H)one (temozolomide) for positron emission tomography
(PET) studies. J Med Chem 2002;45:5448–57.
16. Kinahan PE, Rogers JG. Analytical 3D image reconstruction using all detected events. IEEE Trans Nucl Sci
1989;36:964–68.
17. Saleem A, Brown GD, Brady F, et al. Metabolic
activation of temozolomide measured in vivo using
positron emission tomography. Cancer Res 2003;63:
2409–15.
18. Zhou H. Pharmacokinetic strategies in deciphering
atypical drug absorption profiles. J Clin Pharmacol 2003;
43:211–27.
19. Turkheimer F, Moresco RM, Lucignani G, Sokoloff L,
Fazio F, Schmidt K. The use of spectral analysis to
determine regional cerebral glucose utilization with

www.aacrjournals.org

positron emission tomography and [F-18]fluorodeoxyglucose—theory, implementation, and optimization
procedures. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 1994;14:406–22.
20. Lawson CL, Hanson RJ. Solving least square problems. Englewood Cliffs (NJ): Prentice Hall; 1974.
21. Turkheimer F, Sokoloff L, Bertoldo A, et al. Estimation of component and parameter distributions in
spectral analysis. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 1998;18:
1211–22.
22. Efron B, Tibshirani R. An introduction to the
bootstrap. New York: Chapman & Hall; 1993.
23. Meikle SR, Matthews JC, Brock CS, et al. Pharmacokinetic assessment of novel anti-cancer drugs using
spectral analysis and positron emission tomography: a
feasibility study. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol 1998;42:
183–93.
24. Wang J, Urban L. The impact of early ADME profiling
on drug discovery and development. Drug Discov World
2004;5:73–86.
25. DiMasi JA. The value of improving the productivity
of the drug development process: faster times and

127

better decisions. Pharmacoeconomics 2002;20 Suppl 3:
1–10.
26. DiMasi JA, Caglarcan E, Wood-Armany M. Emerging
role of pharmacoeconomics in the research and
development decision-making process. Pharmacoeconomics 2001;19:753–66.
27. DiMasi JA, Grabowski HG. Economics of new
oncology drug development. J Clin Oncol 2007;25:209–16.
28. Turkheimer FE, Hinz R, Gunn RN, Aston JAD, Gunn
SR, Cunningham VJ. Rank-shaping regularization of
exponential spectral analysis for application to functional parametric mapping. Phys Med Biol 2003;48:
3819–41.
29. Ostermann S, Csajka C, Buclin T, et al. Plasma and
cerebrospinal fluid population pharmacokinetics of
temozolomide in malignant glioma patients. Clin
Cancer Res 2004;10:3728–36.
30. Raymond E, Izbicka E, Soda H, Gerson SL, Dugan M,
Von Hoff DD. Activity of temozolomide against human
tumor colony-forming units. Clin Cancer Res 1997;3:
1769–74.

Cancer Res 2009; 69: (1). January 1, 2009

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2009 American Association for Cancer
Research.

A New Model for Prediction of Drug Distribution in Tumor
and Normal Tissues: Pharmacokinetics of Temozolomide in
Glioma Patients
Lula Rosso, Cathryn S. Brock, James M. Gallo, et al.
Cancer Res 2009;69:120-127.

Updated version

Cited articles
Citing articles

E-mail alerts
Reprints and
Subscriptions
Permissions

Access the most recent version of this article at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/69/1/120

This article cites 28 articles, 8 of which you can access for free at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/69/1/120.full#ref-list-1
This article has been cited by 11 HighWire-hosted articles. Access the articles at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/69/1/120.full#related-urls

Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal.
To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications
Department at pubs@aacr.org.
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications
Department at permissions@aacr.org.

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2009 American Association for Cancer
Research.

